
Microbiology (1999), 145, 529–538

**Organization of genes for tetrapyrrole biosynthesis in Gram-positive bacteria**

Per Johansson and Lars Hederstedt

Author for correspondence: Lars Hederstedt. Tel: +46 46 2228622. Fax: +46 46 157839.  
e-mail: Lars.Hederstedt@mikrbiol.lu.se

Department of Microbiology, Lund University, Sölvegatan 12, S-22362 Lund, Sweden

Clusters of genes encoding enzymes for tetrapyrrole biosynthesis were cloned from *Bacillus sphaericus*, *Bacillus stearothermophilus*, *Brevibacillus brevis* and *Paenibacillus macerans*. The sequences of all *hemX* genes found, and of a 6·3 kbp *hem* gene cluster from *P. macerans*, were determined. The structure of the *hem* gene clusters was compared to that of other Gram-positive bacteria. The *Bacillus* and *Brevibacillus* species have a conserved organization of the genes *hemAXCDBL*, required for biosynthesis of uroporphyrinogen III (UroIII) from glutamyl-tRNA. In *P. macerans*, the *hem* genes for UroIII synthesis are also closely linked but their organization is different: there is no *hemX* gene and the gene cluster also contains genes, *cysG*<sup>B</sup> and *cysG*<sup>A</sup>*-hemD*, encoding the enzymes required for synthesis of sirohaem from UroIII. *Bacillus subtilis* contains genes for three proteins, NasF, YlnD and YlnF, with sequence similarity to *Escherichia coli CysG*, which is a multi-functional protein catalysing sirohaem synthesis from UroIII. It is shown that YlnF is required for sirohaem synthesis and probably catalyses the precorrin-2 to sirohaem conversion. YlnD probably catalyses precorrin-2 synthesis from UroIII and NasF seems to be specific for nitrite reduction.

Keywords: sirohaem, haem synthesis, *Bacillus*, tetrapyrrole synthesis, *hem* genes

---

### INTRODUCTION

Biosynthesis of tetrapyrroles from the common intermediate 5-aminolaevulinic acid (ALA) follows a pathway universal to all living organisms (Fig. 1). There are, however, two separate biosynthetic pathways leading to ALA (for a review see Avissar & Moberg, 1995). Uroporphyrinogen III (UroIII) is the first cyclic tetrapyrrole intermediate in the pathway and is a precursor both to oxidized tetrapyrroles, such as haem and chlorophylls, and to reduced tetrapyrroles, such as sirohaem, vitamin B<sub>12</sub> and haem *d*<sub>1</sub>.

In the Gram-positive bacteria *Bacillus subtilis*, *Clostridium josui*, *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* and *Staphylococcus aureus*, the genes for enzymes catalysing

Abbreviations: ALA, 5-aminolaevulinic acid; BGSC, Bacillus Genetic Stock Center; TBAB, Tryptose Blood Agar Base; UroIII, uroporphyrinogen III. The GenBank accession numbers for the sequences determined in this work are AF064058 (*B. stearothermophilus hemX*), AF064059 (*Br. brevis hemX*), AF064060 (*B. sphaericus hemX*) and AF064061 (*P. macerans hemA cysG*<sup>B</sup> *hemC cysG*<sup>A</sup>*-hemD*).

the biosynthesis of UroIII are organized in operons (Hansson *et al.*, 1991; Fujino *et al.*, 1995; Cole *et al.*, 1998; Kafala & Sasarman, 1997). The gene order in the *hem* operons from these species is the same, but there are some differences in the genes present. *B. subtilis* and *S. aureus* have a *hemAXCDBL* operon, encoding the enzymes for UroIII synthesis from glutamyl-tRNA (Fig. 1). The *hemX* gene is not essential for haem synthesis in *B. subtilis* (Schröder *et al.*, 1994). HemX is a polytopic membrane protein which by an unknown mechanism down-regulates the level of HemA (Schröder *et al.*, 1994). It is notable that *Escherichia coli* does not contain a *hemX* gene (Blattner *et al.*, 1997).

The *hemE*, *hemH* and *hemY* genes in Gram-positive bacteria are required for protohaem IX synthesis from UroIII and tend to be clustered, e.g. in *B. subtilis* (Hansson & Hederstedt, 1992), *Mycobacterium* (GenBank accession no. L01536; Cole *et al.*, 1998), *Propionibacterium freudenreichii* (Hashimoto *et al.*, 1997) and *Deinococcus radiodurans* (sequence data obtained through early release from The Institute for Genomic Research at www.tigr.org).

The compact organization of *hem* genes in Gram-

P. JOHANSSON and L. HEDERSTEDT

![Diagram]

Fig. 1. Overview of tetrapyrrole biosynthesis, with gene products indicated. In animals, fungi and proteobacteria of the α-subdivision, 5-aminolaevulinic acid (ALA) is synthesized from succinyl-coenzyme A and glycine. In plants, most bacteria and archaea, ALA is synthesized from glutamyl-tRNA by the action of glutamyl-tRNA reductase (HemA) and glutamate-1-semialdehyde aminotransferase (HemL). Uroporphyrinogen III (UrolIII) is formed from ALA in three steps, catalysed by ALA dehydratase (HemB), porphobilinogen deaminase (HemC) and UrolIII synthase (HemD), respectively. Synthesis of sirohaem, vitamin B₁₂ and haem d₁ involves an S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methylation of UrolIII to form precorrin-2, which is catalysed by UrolIII methyltransferase. Oxidation of precorrin-2 to sirohydrochlorin and chelation of sirohydrochlorin with iron results in sirohaem. Two of the enzymes for the synthesis of protohaem IX from UrolIII are common to all organisms: UrolIII decarboxylase (HemE) and ferrochelatase (HemH). Bacteria of the family Enterobacteriaceae have an aerobic and an anaerobic coproporphyrinogen III oxidase, HemF and HemN respectively, and protoporphyrin IX oxidase, HemG. Gram-positive bacteria and some Gram-negative bacteria have a HemY protoporphyrinogen IX oxidase but do not contain the HemF/HemN coproporphyrinogen III oxidase. The *B. subtilis* HemY protein can oxidize coproporphyrinogen III and protoporphyrinogen IX to protoporphyrin IX (Dailey et al., 1994; Hansson & Hederstedt, 1994) but does not resemble HemG (Hansson et al., 1997). A third group of Gram-negative bacteria have HemF/HemN but do not contain either HemY or HemG.

positive bacteria is probably important for regulation. It may also be of evolutionary significance and could be related to the metabolism of the different bacteria. The aim of the present work was to better understand the organization of *hem* genes and to analyse the occurrence and sequence of the *hemX* gene in Gram-positive bacteria. *hem* gene clusters from Bacillus species, *Brevibacillus brevis* and *Paenibacillus macerans* were cloned and the gene organization analysed. The bacteria chosen represent different phenotypes ranging from strictly aerobic to facultatively anaerobic and also include a thermophilic species (*Bacillus stearothermophilus*). From this work a role of the *B. subtilis* YlnF protein in sirohaem synthesis was also identified.

**METHODS**

Bacterial strains and plasmids. These are listed in Table 1.

Media and growth of bacteria. *B. subtilis* strains, *P. macerans* (previously *Bacillus macerans*: Ash et al., 1993) and *B. sphaericus* were grown on Tryptose Blood Agar Base (TBAB; Difco), in LB medium (Sambrook et al., 1989) or in Spizizen's minimal medium (Spizizen, 1958) with required amino acids added at 20 mg l⁻¹. *E. coli* strains were grown on TBAB, in LB medium or in M9 minimal medium (Sambrook et al., 1989). *B. stearothermophilus* was grown on LA plates or in LB medium modified by exclusion of NaCl. *Br. brevis* (previously *Bacillus brevis*: Shida et al., 1996) was grown on TBAB or in Todd-Hewitt Broth. *B. stearothermophilus* was grown at 55 °C, *Br. brevis* and *B. sphaericus* at 30 °C, and all other bacteria at 37 °C. The following antibiotics were used: ampicillin (75 mg l⁻¹), chloramphenicol (*E. coli*, 12·5 mg l⁻¹; *B. subtilis* 5 mg l⁻¹), erythromycin (3 mg l⁻¹), kanamycin (20 mg l⁻¹). Media containing haemin (liquid media, 0·5 mg l⁻¹; plates, 2·5 mg l⁻¹) were supplemented with cysteine (20 mg l⁻¹) and 0·5 % (w/v) bovine serum albumin fraction V (Sigma). Haemin stock solutions were prepared as described previously (Petricek et al., 1990).

Complementation of *B. subtilis* and *E. coli* mutations.

Complementation of the ALA requirement of the *B. subtilis* strain KA11 was assayed on Spizizen's minimal medium plates. The other *B. subtilis* and *E. coli hem* mutants were tested for complementation on TBAB plates. *B. subtilis ylnF* and *nasF* mutants were tested for complementation on Spizizen's minimal medium plates with nitrate as nitrogen source. *E. coli cysG* mutants were tested for complementation on M9 minimal medium plates. Chromosomal DNA isolated from *Br. brevis, B. stearothermophilus* and *P. macerans* was partially cleaved with Sau3A. DNA from *B. sphaericus* was partially cleaved with the isoschizomer *Mbol* since it was resistant to cleavage by Sau3A (indicating that the C residue of the GATC recognition sequence is methylated in *B. sphaericus*). The cleaved DNA was size-fractionated and fragments of 5–10 kbp were ligated to *BamHI*-cleaved *B. subtilis-E. coli* shuttle plasmids pHP13 or pHB201. pHB201 has a σ^A^-type promoter in front of the cloning cassette to facilitate expression of cloned genes in *B. subtilis* (Haima et al., 1990). *B. subtilis* strains were transformed with the ligation mixtures and haem prototrophs were selected. The colonies obtained were transferred to plates containing chloramphenicol to confirm that they carried the respective plasmids. Plasmid DNA was then extracted from the transformants and used in retransformation of the *B. subtilis hem* mutants. Finally, the cloned fragments were used in Southern blot analysis to verify that they represented continuous segments of the chromosome of the respective bacterial species.

Construction of *B. subtilis 168ΔYlnF*. The last part of *B. subtilis ylnF* (601 bp) was amplified by PCR, using primers Yln3.5 and Yln4 (Table 2), and cloned in pBluescript II KS(−) giving plasmid pYLN2. The *cat* gene from pHV32 was inserted in pYLN2 giving plasmid pYLN3. The first part of *B. subtilis ylnF* (277 bp) was amplified by PCR, using primers YLN10 and YLN20, and cloned in pYLN3 giving plasmid pYLN30. By transforming *B. subtilis* 168 with pYLN30 and selecting for Cm', an internal region of the *ylnF* gene (nucleotides 1635115–1635381) was replaced with the *cat* gene, as confirmed by Southern blot analysis.

DNA techniques. Plasmids were propagated in *E. coli* XL-1 Blue. Large-scale preparations of plasmid DNA were carried out as described by Ish-Horowitz & Burke (1981). Small-scale preparations of plasmid DNA were performed by the boiling method (Sambrook et al., 1989) or by using the Quantum purification system (Bio-Rad). Plasmid DNA was sequenced using the Sequenase version 2.0 kit and [³⁵S]dATPαS (Amersham). DNA amplification was achieved by PCR using *Taq* polymerase (Boehringer Mannheim). Chromosomal DNA was prepared as described by Marmur (1961). Chromosomal DNA fragments were size-fractionated by sucrose gradient centrifugation. Southern blot analysis of chromosomal DNA was performed using a random priming kit and [α-³²P]dCTP (Amersham). The programs used for sequence analysis were part of the Wisconsin Package Version 8.1 (Genetics Computer Group, Madison, WI, USA).

Other methods. SDS-PAGE was performed according to Neville (1971). Western blotting was performed according to Towbin et al. (1979) using a semi-dry electroblotter (Ancos) and Immobilon P filters. The antiserum against *B. subtilis HemA* was described by Schröder et al. (1994). Goat anti-rabbit IgG conjugated to alkaline phosphatase (Clontech) was used as secondary antibody. Protein concentrations were determined using the bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Pierce) with bovine serum albumin as standard.

---

**RESULTS AND DISCUSSION**

**Cloning of *hem* genes**

The *B. subtilis* strains 1A589 (*hemB1*) and 1A590 (*hemC33*) have a strict growth requirement for external haem and give essentially no background growth when 10⁷–10⁸ cells are spread on TBAB plates (Anderson & Ivánovics, 1967). Since the *hemB* and *hemC* genes are well conserved in many bacteria (Rhie et al., 1996; Kafala & Sasarman, 1997), the above *B. subtilis* mutant strains were used to isolate *hem* genes from other bacteria by complementation as described in Methods. DNA fragments which complemented *B. subtilis hemB1* and *hemC33* mutations were obtained from *B. sphaericus* and *P. macerans*. Only *hemB1*-complementing fragments were found for *Br. brevis* and *B. stearothermophilus* in a primary screen. However, when the *hemB1*-complementing plasmids were isolated and used to transform the *hemC33* mutant to chloramphenicol resistance, the plasmids could then complement the *hemC33* mutation (Table 3). It appears that *hemC* from these species is either not efficiently expressed in *B. subtilis* or is, for other reasons, not fully functional.

A *P. macerans* chromosomal DNA fragment that complemented *B. subtilis hemH* (strain 3G18Δ8) and a *B. sphaericus* DNA fragment that complemented *B. subtilis hemA* (strain KA11) were also isolated. Use of the various fragments cloned by complementation as probes permitted the isolation of additional fragments which cover a larger portion of the respective chromosomes.

**Organization of *hem* genes for synthesis of Uroll from glutamyl-tRNA in *Br. brevis, B. sphaericus* and *B. stearothermophilus***

A *hemAXCDBL* gene cluster with the same compact organization as in *B. subtilis* was found in *Br. brevis, B. sphaericus* and *B. stearothermophilus* as determined by sequence analysis and complementation experiments (Fig. 2, Table 3). The spacing between the proposed stop codon of one gene and the proposed start codon of the next gene ranged from 210 bp (between *hemA* and *hemX* in *B. sphaericus*) to 12 bp (for several genes).

Deletion of *hemX* in *B. subtilis* causes the steady-state amount of HemA protein to increase (Schröder et al., 1994). No other phenotype has been observed in such mutants. Expression of *hemX* from *Br. brevis*, on plasmid pXBRE411, or *B. subtilis hemX*, on plasmid pHEMX403, in the *B. subtilis HemX* deletion mutant 3G18ΔHemX in both cases led to a decrease in the amount of HemA protein, as determined by Western blot analysis (data not shown). This demonstrated that the *B. subtilis* and *Br. brevis* HemX proteins are functionally interchangeable. The HemX proteins from *B. subtilis, B. stearothermophilus, Br. brevis* and *B. sphaericus* are of the same size (272–276 residues) and show about 22% sequence identity across the entire

P. JOHANSSON and L. HEDERSTEDT

Table 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids

| Strain or plasmid | Genotype or relevant description | Source |
|-------------------|----------------------------------|--------|
| **Strains**       |                                  |        |
| B. subtilis 1A589 | trpC2 hemB1                      | BGSC   |
| B. subtilis 1A590 | trpC2 hemC33                     | BGSC   |
| B. subtilis 1A591 | trpC2 hemD11                     | BGSC   |
| B. subtilis 3G18ΔHemX | ade met trpC2 ΔhemX::ble | Schröder et al. (1994) |
| B. subtilis KA11  | ade met trpC2 hemA20             | Holmgren et al. (1979) |
| B. subtilis 3G18Δ7 | ade met trpC2 ΔhemEHY::ble      | Hansson & Hederstedt (1992) |
| B. subtilis 3G18Δ8 | ade met trpC2 ΔhemH::ble        | Hansson & Hederstedt (1994) |
| B. subtilis 168    | trpC2                           | BGSC   |
| B. subtilis 168ΔYlnF | trpC2 ΔylnF::cat            | This study |
| B. subtilis LAB1926 | trpC2 pheA1 nasEF::pML16     | Ogawa et al. (1995) |
| Br. brevis ATCC 8246 |                                | BGSC   |
| B. sphaericus ATCC 33203 |                            | BGSC   |
| B. stearothermophilus 9A14 | thr-1                   | BGSC   |
| P. macerans DSM 24 |                                 | Schirawski & Unden (1995) |
| E. coli XL-1 Blue | supE44 hsdR17 recA1 endA1 gyrA46 thi relA1 lac F'[proAB⁺ lacIq lacZΔM15Tn10(Tetʳ)] | Stratagene |
| E. coli 302Δa     | cysG                            | Griffiths & Cole (1987) |
| E. coli AN344     | hemA pro leu                    | MacGregor (1976) |
| E. coli SASZ31    | hisG1 rpsL9 xylA7 hemD31 mobA2 argH1 Δthi-1 met | Chartrand et al. (1979) |
| **Plasmids**      |                                  |        |
| pBluescript II KS/SK(−) | Apʳ lacZ′                  | Stratagene |
| pUC19             | Apʳ                             | Yanisch-Perron et al. (1985) |
| pHIP13            | Cmʳ Emʳ                         | Haima et al. (1987) |
| pHB201            | Cmʳ Emʳ                         | S. Bron, University of Groningen |
| pACYC177          | Apʳ Kmʳ                         | Chang & Cohen (1978) |
| pHV32             | Apʳ Cmʳ Tcʳ                     | Niaudet et al. (1982) |
| pLUM403           | 296 bp HindIII–EcoRI fragment containing the B. subtilis Orf4 promoter cloned in pAMB22 | Holmberg et al. (1990) |
| pHPSK             | 301 bp Pvull fragment of pHIP13 exchanged for 448 bp Pvull fragment of pBluescript II SK(−) | This study |
| pHEMX513          | B. subtilis hemX in pHIP13      | Schröder et al. (1994) |
| pHEMX403          | 259 bp PstI–BamHI fragment containing the Orf4 promoter of pLUM403 cloned in pHEMX513 | This study |
| pXBRE4            | 7·9 kbp Sau3A (partial) fragment from Br. brevis cloned in pHB201 (BamHI); complements B. subtilis 1A589 | This study |
| pXBRE47           | 3 kbp EcoRI fragment from pXBRE4 cloned in pHB201 | This study |
| pXBRE49           | 1·1 kbp EcoRI–PvuII fragment (hemX) of pXBRE47 cloned in pHIP13 | This study |
| pXBRE411          | 296 bp HindIII–EcoRI fragment containing the Orf4 promoter of pLUM403 cloned in pXBRE49 | This study |
| pXSPH1            | 4·8 kbp MboI (partial) fragment from B. sphaericus cloned in pHIP13 (BamHI); complements B. subtilis 1A589 and 1A590 | This study |
| pXSPH10           | 7·5 kbp MboI (partial) fragment from B. sphaericus cloned in pHIP13 (BamHI); complements B. subtilis 1A590 and KA11 | This study |

Tetrapyrrole biosynthesis genes

Table 1. (cont.)

| Strain or plasmid | Genotype or relevant description                                                                                   | Source       |
|-------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|
| pXSTE3           | 3·7 kbp Sau3A (partial) fragment from *B. stearothermophilus* cloned in pHIP13 (*Bam*HI); complements *B. subtilis* 1A589 | This study   |
| pHMAC1           | 6·5 kbp Sau3A (partial) fragment from *P. macerans* cloned in pHIP13 (*Bam*HI); complements *B. subtilis* 3G18Δ8          | This study   |
| pXMAC1           | 5·3 kbp Sau3A (partial) fragment from *P. macerans* cloned in pHIP13 (*Bam*HI); complements *B. subtilis* 1A590            | This study   |
| pXMAC15          | 2·8 kbp *Sal*I fragment from pXMAC1 cloned in pHIP13                                                              | This study   |
| pXMAC18          | *Pst*I deletion derivative of pXMAC1                                                                             | This study   |
| pXMAC115         | 3 kbp HindIII-*Sal*I (partial) fragment from pXMAC18 cloned in pHIP13                                              | This study   |
| pXMAC116         | 3·3 kbp *Pvu*II (partial) fragment from pXMAC115 cloned in pACYC177 (*Hinc*II)                                      | This study   |
| pXMAC3           | 6·2 kbp Sau3A (partial) fragment from *P. macerans* cloned in pHIP13 (*Bam*HI); complements *B. subtilis* 1A590          | This study   |
| pXMAC35          | 1700 bp *Pst*I fragment from pXMAC3 cloned in pBluescript II KS(−)                                                | This study   |
| pXMAC39          | 120 bp *Bam*HI-*Pst*I fragment (amplified by PCR, using MAC1 and MAC2 primers) from pXMAC3 cloned in pHPSK                 | This study   |
| pXMAC310         | 2·5 kbp *Pst*I (partial) fragment from pXMAC3 cloned in pXMAC39                                                    | This study   |
| pXMAC311         | 2·5 kbp *Pvu*II fragment from pXMAC310 cloned in pACYC177 (*Hinc*II)                                               | This study   |
| pXMAC350         | 1·7 kp *Bam*HI-*Xho*I fragment from pXMAC35 cloned in pHB201                                                       | This study   |
| pYLN2            | 601 bp *Bam*HI-*Xho*I fragment from *B. subtilis* 168 (amplified by PCR, using YLN3.5 and YLN4 primers) cloned in pBluescript II KS(−) | This study   |
| pYLN3            | HindIII-*Bam*HI fragment from pHV32 containing the *cat* gene cloned in pYLN2                                      | This study   |
| pYLN30           | 277 bp *Eco*RV-HindIII fragment from *B. subtilis* 168 (amplified by PCR, using YLN10 and YLN20 primers) cloned in pYLN3 | This study   |
| pSCW1            | *E. coli cysG* with the Gly224Ala mutation cloned in pUC19                                                        | Warren et al. (1994) |
| pSCW2            | *E. coli cysG* cloned in pSCW1                                                                                  | Warren et al. (1994) |
| pACYC177Δ*bla*   | *Bam*HI-*Hinc*II deletion derivative of pACYC177 (removes part of the *bla* gene)                                  | This study   |

Table 2. Oligonucleotides

| Oligonucleotide | Sequence (5′–3′)                          |
|-----------------|-------------------------------------------|
| MAC1            | GGATCCAGGTGAACTTGGCAATGC                 |
| MAC2            | GCCGCTCCATCGCTTCC                         |
| YLN3.5          | TACAAGCGGATCCAGT                          |
| YLN4            | GTGCCCTCTAGATTATAC                       |
| YLN10           | GCATCTCGATATCCATCAGTCC                    |
| YLN20           | GACAAGCCTTTATATCAGCTCCC                   |

protein (two single-residue gaps in the alignment only; not shown). Pairwise, the HemX proteins have approximately 40% sequence identity. HemX shows sequence similarity to the CcsA protein, which is required for cytochrome *c* biogenesis in plants (Xie et al., 1998). *A. B. subtilis hemX* deletion strain (3G18ΔHemX) is, however, not impaired in cytochrome *c* synthesis (our unpublished data). A tryptophan-rich sequence motif, invariant in CcsA and other cytochrome *c* biogenesis proteins (cf. Goldman et al., 1998; Thöny-Meyer, 1997), is not conserved in the HemX proteins.

P. JOHANSSON and L. HEDERSTEDT

![Diagram]

Fig. 2. Physical map of chromosomal DNA fragments cloned from *B. stearothermophilus*, *B. sphaericus* and *Br. brevis*. The gene map shown at the top is that of *B. subtilis* and serves to illustrate the genes present on the different cloned fragments. Segments of the cloned DNA that span the *hemX* gene and which were sequenced continuously on both strands are indicated with thicker lines.

Table 3. Complementation of different *B. subtilis* tetrapyrrole synthesis mutants with plasmids carrying chromosomal DNA from *P. macerans* (pXMAC, pHMAC), *Br. brevis* (pXBRE4), *B. sphaericus* (pXSPH) and *B. stearothermophilus* (pXSTE3)

+ , Forms single colonies; –, does not form single colonies; ND, not determined.

| Plasmid | Complementation of *B. subtilis* strain: |
| --- | --- |
|  | KA11 | 1A589 | 1A590 | 1A591 | 168AYlnF | LAB1926 | 3G18Δ7 |
|  | (*hemA*) | (*hemB*) | (*hemC*) | (*hemD*) | (*ylnF*) | (*nasF*) | (*hemEHY*) |
| pXMAC1 | ND | + | + | + | ND | ND | ND |
| pXMAC3 | + | ND | + | + | + | – | ND |
| pXMAC15 | ND | ND | + | ND | + | ND | ND |
| pXMAC115 | ND | ND | ND | + | ND | – | ND |
| pHMAC1 | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | + |
| pXBRE4 | ND | + | + | + | ND | ND | ND |
| pXSPH1 | ND | + | + | + | ND | ND | ND |
| pXSPH10 | + | ND | + | + | ND | ND | ND |
| pXSTE3 | ND | + | + | + | ND | ND | ND |

Organization of *hem* genes in *P. macerans*

An 8·1 kbp DNA segment containing genes for synthesis of UroIII and sirohaem from glutamyl-tRNA was cloned from *P. macerans*. Five complete open reading frames, ORF1 to ORF5, and the beginning of a sixth, ORF6, were identified in the cloned segment (Fig. 3). Located 59 bp upstream of the putative start codon of ORF1 is a typical σ<sup>A</sup>-type –10 promoter sequence, TATAAT. The amino acid sequence deduced from ORF1 shows 52% sequence identity to *B. subtilis* HemA (Petricek et al., 1990). pXMAC3 complemented *B. subtilis hemA*, while pXMAC311 complemented *E. coli hemA* (Fig. 3, Table 4). (The region preceding ORF1 is not tolerated in *E. coli*.) Thus, ORF1 is *hemA*, encoding glutamyl-tRNA reductase.

ORF2 shows 50% sequence similarity to the N-terminal part of *E. coli CysG* (Peakman et al., 1990) (aa 1–201) (Fig. 4), an enzyme which catalyses sirohaem synthesis from UroIII (Fig. 1). The sequence similarity, together

with experimental results presented in the next section, shows that ORF2 corresponds to the CysG<sup>B</sup> domain, which catalyses the conversion of precorrin-2 into sirohaem.

*P. macerans hem* genes were cloned by complementation of *B. subtilis hemC*, indicating that *hemC* is present in the cloned fragment. The protein encoded by ORF3 shows 59% sequence identity to *B. subtilis* HemC (Petricek et al., 1990), identifying ORF3 as *hemC*.

The N-terminal part of the protein encoded by ORF4 (aa 1–245) is similar (54% identity) to CobA of *Bacillus megaterium* (Robin et al., 1991) and the C-terminal part of *E. coli CysG*, indicating that it functions as an S-adenosylmethionine-dependent UroIII methylase, i.e. it catalyses the first step in sirohaem synthesis. The C-terminal part of the ORF4 protein (aa 246–511) shows only 27% identity to the HemD protein of *B. subtilis* (Hansson et al., 1991), but expression of ORF4, on pXMAC115, was able to complement *B. subtilis hemD*

Tetrapyrrole biosynthesis genes

Pv PSc Sc P E H Pv X/P A Sm Py Sm Sc B A S
hemA cysGβ hemC cysGα-hemD hemB hemL
pXMAC1
pXMAC3
pXMAC15
pXMAC311
pXMAC350
1 kb

Fig. 3. Physical map of a hem gene cluster for Uroll and siroheme synthesis in P. macerans. A restriction enzyme map is provided for the part that was sequenced continuously on both strands (accession no. AF064061). Restriction site abbreviations: A, AflII; B, BamHI; H, HindIII; P, PstI; Pv, PvuII; S, SalI; Sc, Scal; Sm, Smal; X, Xhol. The lines below the map indicate P. macerans DNA fragments cloned in the indicated plasmids.

Pmac : MPHYMVMLNEGRRCVIVTVARKAAALTEAVVTVISPGVTAWLQDRVREGEIAWLAREYREGDLKGAFLVFTDSRQVDSIVKE : 93
Bsu : ----MLHLHISEKKKVIAISILRRLKTIVSEADITLVSPDVEPEIKQMAEERRIKWEKRTIEKEDYLNAFFITDNAAVEKIAQS : 90
Eco : -MDHLIFCQRDRDCLIVDVDEPKARLLLLDAIRLTVNALAFIPQFTAWADAGMLTLVEGPFDESLLDTCWLAITDDDALQRVRQA : 92
Nme : -MNYFIFANAGRPVLVVAVARKISLLLLKAEEVRVAAKHLNAELSALAAENKILWLAEEFRAEHIRTVFLISSDQALRRVFHL : 92
Cjo : -YGRFLFIDSGKKLVVSEIETRRVKTLLRFADIYLVAPHLTSELQEMLNCKLINYREGYYESQDIQNMFVITNDRETSHKVYLD : 455

Pmac : EMLGIPVNDTAGRRARKFYHVVRRGKLVI-GTSAGPAAARELCREIDRRFGDTYEQYVEFLSLVRTRVKQQVEDKERRKLLARLG : 185
Bsu : SPFQL-VNCVS-AELG-NVYMKIVKRGHVTVS-TSASPKHTKELAENVDKLIDGDFAEVRPLYQMRRKK----------------- : 162
Eco : EARRIFCN-VVAPKAASFIMSIIDRSPLMVA-SGFTSPVLARLLREKLELLLPLHLGQVAKYAGQLRGRVKQQFATMGERRRFEKLF : 183
Nme : ESCQKPVN-VVDRDHCSFIFSVIDRNPVQIA-SSSAPVLARLLRERLEALLPPSLGDMAEISGRWRDAVKGKLKSVTERRRFEKQF : 183
Cjo : KEKGIQMS-IACREECSFYFAIFEFDGIVGGLQNDNHSLVKSVAEQIR-------KIGQATD------------------------ : 515

Pmac : ELDILPSIRQGGFTRGANEIAAWIEEEQRRNSG- : 218
Bsu : ------------------------------- : -
Eco : VNDRLAQSLANNDQK-AITETTEQLINEPLDHRG : 216
Nme : -NGRFAALVKNRQNTLAERELAGQLEQSRNDQG : 216
Cjo : ------------------------------- : -

Fig. 4. Sequence alignment between CysGβ proteins or domains from different bacteria. The P. macerans (Pmac) CysGβ protein was aligned to aa 1–216 of E. coli (Eco) CysG (Peakman et al., 1990), aa 1–216 of Neisseria meningitidis (Nme) CysG (GenBank accession no. Y10177), aa 364–515 of C. josui (Cjo) HemA-CysGβ (Fujino et al., 1995) and B. subtilis (Bsu) YlnF (GenBank accession no. AJ000974).

and E. coli hemD (Tables 3 and 4). These findings, together with results reported in the next section, identify ORF4 as cysGα-hemD.

The protein deduced from ORF5 shows similarity to HemB proteins from various species (Rhie et al., 1996). pXMAC1 complemented B. subtilis hemB (Fig. 3, Table 3) thus identifying ORF5 as hemB. The first part of ORF6 encodes a polypeptide which shows similarity to B. subtilis HemL.

Another P. macerans DNA fragment (plasmid pHMAC1) was isolated by complementation of B.

subtilis hemH (strain 3G18Δ8) and was found to also complement B. subtilis hemEHY (Table 3). This, together with partial sequence analysis of the cloned fragment, indicates that P. macerans contains a hemEHY operon very similar to that previously described in B. subtilis (Hansson et al., 1992).

Genes for sirohaem synthesis in B. subtilis

Sirohaem is a cofactor for assimilatory nitrite and sulphite reductases and is therefore essential for growth on nitrate or nitrite as a source of nitrogen and sulphate

P. JOHANSSON and L. HEDERSTEDT

Table 4. Complementation of different *E. coli* tetrapyrrole synthesis mutants with plasmids carrying chromosomal DNA from *P. macerans* (pXMAC) and *E. coli* (pSCW2)

+ , Forms single colonies; –, does not form single colonies; ND, not determined.

| Plasmid          | Complementation of *E. coli* strain: |
|------------------|---------------------------------------|
|                  | AN344                                 | SASZ31                                | 302Δa                               | 302Δa/pXMAC116                       | 302Δa/pSCW1                          |
|                  | (*hemA*)                              | (*hemD*)                              | (*cysG*)                            | (*cysG*<sup>B</sup>)                 | (*cysG*<sup>A</sup>)                 |
| pXMAC116         | ND                                    | +                                     | –                                   | ND                                  | +                                    |
| pXMAC311         | +                                     | ND                                    | –                                   | –                                   | ND                                   |
| pXMAC350         | ND                                    | ND                                    | –                                   | –<sup>*</sup>                      | ND                                   |
| pSCW2            | ND                                    | ND                                    | +                                   | ND                                  | ND                                   |

*Cells produce a green pigment.*

or sulphite as the sole sulphur source. *E. coli* CysG has several enzymic activities and catalyses all steps in the synthesis of sirohaem from UroIII (Warren et al., 1994). The C-terminal part of CysG, the CysG<sup>A</sup> domain, which is similar to, for example, *B. megaterium* CobA, catalyses S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methylation of UroIII to form precorrin-2, a common intermediate in sirohaem and vitamin B<sub>12</sub> synthesis (Fig. 1). The N-terminal part of CysG, the CysG<sup>B</sup> domain, catalyses the NAD-dependent dehydrogenation of precorrin-2 to sirohydrochlorin and the subsequent chelation with iron to form sirohaem.

The *B. subtilis* genome (Kunst et al., 1997) contains genes for two CysG<sup>A</sup> homologues: the YlnD and NasF proteins. UroIII methyltransferase activity of these *B. subtilis* proteins has not yet been demonstrated. YlnD is of the same size as the *E. coli* CysG<sup>A</sup> domain and *B. megaterium* CobA, while *B. subtilis* NasF has a C-terminal extension of 240 residues (Ogawa et al., 1995). The *ylnD* gene is located at 140° on the chromosome together with genes encoding enzymes for sulphate reduction. The *nasF* gene is located at 30°, clustered with genes encoding subunits of nitrite reductase. A NasF null mutant, LAB1926, does not grow with nitrate as a nitrogen source but can use sulphate as the only sulphur source (Ogawa et al., 1995), i.e. it apparently contains sirohaem. The phenotype of the mutant shows that a protein other than NasF, probably YlnD, catalyses the S-adenosylmethionine-dependent methylation of UroIII in sirohaem synthesis.

The *B. subtilis* YlnF protein shows 47% sequence similarity to the *E. coli* CysG<sup>B</sup> domain (Fig. 4) and contains in the N-terminal part a consensus dinucleotide-binding sequence (GxGxxAxxxAXxxxxxA) which most likely is involved in binding NADH (Warren et al., 1994). The *ylnF* gene is located in the same gene cluster as *ylnD*. A *ylnF* deletion mutant, strain 168AYlnF, was constructed (see Methods) in order to analyse whether or not YlnF has a role in sirohaem synthesis. The mutant was unable to grow on minimal medium plates with nitrate as nitrogen source and growth was fully restored only after addition of both cysteine and ammonia to the medium. Expression of the *P. macerans* *cysG*<sup>B</sup> gene, from plasmid pXMAC3 or pXMAC15, in strain 168AYlnF complemented the defect (Fig. 3, Table 3). These results demonstrate that YlnF in *B. subtilis* is required for sirohaem synthesis and most likely catalyses the synthesis of sirohaem from precorrin-2.

Thus, genes for sirohaem synthesis in *B. subtilis* seem to be clustered but are not linked to the two *hem* gene clusters encoding enzymes for UroIII synthesis from glutamyl-tRNA and protohaem IX synthesis from UroIII, respectively.

### Genes for sirohaem synthesis in *P. macerans*

In contrast to *B. subtilis*, genes for sirohaem synthesis in *P. macerans* are part of the gene cluster for UroIII synthesis (Fig. 3). *E. coli cysG* was not complemented by the *P. macerans* *cysG*<sup>A</sup>-*hemD* or *cysG*<sup>B</sup> or these genes together (Table 4). However, co-expression of *cysG*<sup>A</sup>-*hemD* and *cysG*<sup>B</sup> in the mutant resulted in the accumulation of a greenish pigment. The pigment is presumably derived from UroIII and some type of side-product from the sirohaem synthetic pathway. The *P. macerans* *cysG*<sup>A</sup>-*hemD* gene complemented *E. coli cysG*<sup>A</sup>, but *P. macerans cysG*<sup>B</sup>, which complemented *B. subtilis ylnF*, did not complement *E. coli cysG*<sup>B</sup>. Since the green pigment accumulated in *E. coli* only when both *P. macerans cysG* genes were present, it seems as if the *P. macerans* CysG<sup>B</sup> protein is synthesized in *E. coli* but is functionally deficient. It is noted that in *E. coli* the chelatase deficiency of a CysG<sup>B</sup> mutant can be complemented by the seemingly unrelated *S. typhimurium* and *B. megaterium* cobalt chelatases CbiX (Raux et al., 1997; Beck et al., 1997). In these two cases, precorrin-2 is probably non-enzymically oxidized to sirohydrochlorin (Raux et al., 1997).

We conclude that *P. macerans cysG*<sup>A</sup>-*hemD* encodes a protein with UroIII methylase activity while *P. macerans cysG*<sup>B</sup> probably encodes a protein for sirohaem synthesis from precorrin-2.
The gene organization in *P. macerans* is similar to the *hemA-cysG<sup>B</sup> hemC cysG<sup>A</sup>-hemD hemB* and *hemA cysG<sup>B</sup> hemC cysG<sup>A</sup>-hemD hemI. hemB* clusters found in strictly anaerobic *Clostridium* species, i.e. *C. josui* and *C. acetobutylicum* (Fujino et al., 1995; pre-release by GTC, www.genomecorp.com). Perhaps it reflects the fact that *P. macerans* is a facultative anaerobe (Schirawski & Unden, 1995).

Organization of the genes for UrolIII synthesis together with those for sirohaem synthesis in one operon ensures that the enzymes for the whole pathway from glutamyl-tRNA to sirohaem can be co-regulated at the transcriptional level. This would be especially important under conditions where most or all of the UrolIII produced in the cell is used for synthesis of the reduced metallo-tetrapyrroles, sirohaem and vitamin B<sub>12</sub>. A *cysG<sup>A</sup>-hemD* gene like that of *P. macerans* and *Clostridium* species is found in evolutionarily very distant bacteria, e.g. in green non-sulphur bacteria (sequence data obtained through early release from The Institute for Genomic Research at www.tigr.org), cyanobacteria (Kaneko et al., 1996) and *Mycobacterium* (GenBank accession no. U00018). Thus, it seems as if the *cysG<sup>A</sup>-hemD* gene is of early origin in evolution and has been split into two widely separated genes in *Bacillus* and *Staphylococcus* species.

### ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was supported by grants from the Swedish Medical Research Council and the Swedish Natural Science Research Council. We are grateful to Mrs Ingrid Ståhl for technical assistance, to Dr Michiko Nakano, Dr Gottfried Unden and Dr Martin Warren for kindly providing strains and plasmids, and to Professor Lars Rutberg for advice and generous support.

### REFERENCES

Anderson, T. J. & Ivánovics, G. (1967). Isolation and some characteristics of haemin dependent mutants of *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Gen Microbiol* 49, 31–40.

Ash, C., Priest, F. G. & Collins, M. D. (1993). Molecular identification of rRNA group 3 bacilli (Ash, Farrow, Wallbanks and Collins) using a PCR probe test. Proposal for the creation of a new genus *Paenibacillus*. *Antonie Leeuwenhoek* 64, 253–260.

Avissar, Y. J. & Moberg, P. A. (1995). The common origins of the pigments of life – early steps of chlorophyll biosynthesis. *Photosynth Res* 44, 221–242.

Beck, R., Raux, E., Thermes, C., Rambach, A. & Warren, M. (1997). CbiX: a novel metal-binding protein involved in sirohaem biosynthesis in *Bacillus megaterium*. *Biochem Soc Trans* 25, 77S.

Blattner, F. R., Plunkett, G. I., Bloch, C. A. & 14 other authors (1997). The complete genome sequence of *Escherichia coli* K12. *Science* 277, 1453–1474.

Chang, A. C. & Cohen, S. N. (1978). Construction and characterization of amplifiable multicopy DNA cloning vehicles derived from the P15A cryptic miniplasmid. *J Bacteriol* 134, 1141–1156.

Chartrand, P., Tardif, D. & Sasarman, A. (1979). Uroporphyrin and coproporphyrin I-accumulating mutant of *Escherichia coli* K12. *J Gen Microbiol* 110, 61–66.

Cole, S.T., Brosch, R., Parkhill, J. & 39 other authors (1998). Deciphering the biology of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* from the complete genome sequence. *Nature* 393, 537–544.

Dailey, T. A., Meissner, P. & Dailey, H. A. (1994). Expression of a cloned protoporphyrinogen oxidase. *J Biol Chem* 269, 813–815.

Fujino, E., Fujino, T., Karita, S., Sakka, K. & Ohmiya, K. (1995). Cloning and sequencing of some genes responsible for porphyrin biosynthesis from the anaerobic bacterium *Clostridium josui*. *J Bacteriol* 177, 5169–5175.

Goldman, B. S., Beck, D. L., Monika, E. M. & Kranz, R. G. (1998). Transmembrane heme delivery systems. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 95, 5003–5008.

Griffiths, L. & Cole, J. A. (1987). Lack of redox control of the anaerobically-induced *nirB* gene of *Escherichia coli* K12. *Arch Microbiol* 147, 364–369.

Haima, P., Bron, S. & Venema, G. (1987). The effect of restriction on shotgun cloning and plasmid stability in *Bacillus subtilis* Marburg. *Mol Gen Genet* 209, 335–342.

Haima, P., van Sinderen, D., Bron, S. & Venema, G. (1990). An improved beta-galactosidase alpha-complementation system for molecular cloning in *Bacillus subtilis*. *Gene* 93, 41–47.

Hansson, M. & Hederstedt, L. (1992). Cloning and characterization of the *Bacillus subtilis hemFHIY* gene cluster which encodes protoheme IX biosynthetic enzymes. *J Bacteriol* 174, 8081–8093.

Hansson, M. & Hederstedt, L. (1994). *Bacillus subtilis* HemY is a peripheral membrane protein essential for protoheme IX synthesis which can oxidize coproporphyrinogen III and protoporphyrinogen IX. *J Bacteriol* 176, 5962–5970.

Hansson, M., Rutberg, L., Schröder, I. & Hederstedt, L. (1991). The *Bacillus subtilis hemAXCDBL* gene cluster, which encodes enzymes of the biosynthetic pathway from glutamate to uroporphyrinogen III. *J Bacteriol* 173, 2590–2599.

Hansson, M., Gustafsson, M. C., Kannangara, C. G. & Hederstedt, L. (1997). Isolated *Bacillus subtilis* HemY has coproporphyrinogen III to coproporphyrin III oxidase activity. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 1340, 97–104.

Hashimoto, Y., Yamashita, M. & Murooka, Y. (1997). The *Propionibacterium freudenreichii hemYHBXRL* gene cluster, which encodes enzymes and a regulator involved in the biosynthetic pathway from glutamate to protoheme. *Appl Microbiol Biotechnol* 47, 385–392.

Hippler, B., Homuth, G., Hoffmann, T., Hungerer, C., Schumann, W. & Jahn, D. (1997). Characterization of *Bacillus subtilis hemN*. *J Bacteriol* 179, 7181–7185.

Holmberg, C., Beijer, L., Rutberg, B. & Rutberg, L. (1990). Glycerol catabolism in *Bacillus subtilis*: nucleotide sequence of the genes encoding glycerol kinase glpK and glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase glpD. *J Gen Microbiol* 136, 2367–2376.

Holmgren, E., Hederstedt, L. & Rutberg, L. (1979). Role of heme in synthesis and membrane binding of succinic dehydrogenase in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Bacteriol* 138, 377–382.

Ish-Horowicz, D. & Burke, J. F. (1981). Rapid and efficient cosmid cloning. *Nucleic Acids Res* 9, 2989–2998.

Kafala, B. & Sasarman, A. (1997). Isolation of the *Staphylococcus aureus hemCDBL* gene cluster coding for early steps in heme biosynthesis. *Gene* 199, 231–239.

Kaneko, T., Sato, S., Kotani, H. & 21 other authors (1996). Sequence analysis of the genome of the unicellular cyanobacterium *Synechocystis sp.* strain PCC6803. II. Sequence determination of the entire genome and assignment of potential protein-coding regions. *DNA Res* 3, 109–136.
P. JOHANSSON and L. HEDERSTEDT

Kunst, F., Ogasawara, N., Moszer, I. & 148 other authors (1997). The complete genome sequence of the gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis. Nature 390, 249–256.

MacGregor, C. H. (1976). Biosynthesis of membrane-bound nitrate reductase in *Escherichia coli*: evidence for a soluble precursor. J Bacteriol 126, 122–131.

Marmur, J. (1961). A procedure for the isolation of deoxyribonucleic acid from bacteria. J Mol Biol 3, 208–218.

Neville, D. M., Jr (1971). Molecular weight determination of protein-dodecyl sulfate complexes by gel electrophoresis in a discontinuous buffer system. J Biol Chem 246, 6328–6334.

Niaudet, B., Goze, A. & Ehrlich, S. D. (1982). Insertional mutagenesis in *Bacillus subtilis*: mechanism and use in gene cloning. Gene 19, 277–284.

Ogawa, K., Akagawa, E., Yamane, K., Sun, Z. W., LaCelle, M., Zuber, P. & Nakano, M. M. (1995). The *nasB* operon and *nasA* gene are required for nitrate/nitrite assimilation in *Bacillus subtilis*. J Bacteriol 177, 1409–1413.

Peakman, T., Crouzet, J., Mayaux, J. F., Busby, S., Mohan, S., Harborne, N., Wootton, J., Nicolson, R. & Cole, J. (1990). Nucleotide sequence, organisation and structural analysis of the products of genes in the *nirB-cysG* region of the *Escherichia coli* K12 chromosome. Eur J Biochem 191, 315–323.

Petricek, M., Rutberg, L., Schröder, I. & Hederstedt, L. (1990). Cloning and characterization of the *hemA* region of the *Bacillus subtilis* chromosome. J Bacteriol 172, 2250–2258.

Raux, E., Thermes, C., Heathcote, P., Rambach, A. & Warren, M. J. (1997). A role for *Salmonella typhimurium* *cbiK* in cobalamin (vitamin B12) and siroheme biosynthesis. J Bacteriol 179, 3202–3212.

Rhie, G., Avissar, Y. J. & Beale, S. I. (1996). Structure and expression of the *Chlorobium vibrioforme hemB* gene and characterization of its encoded enzyme, porphobilinogen synthase. J Biol Chem 271, 8176–8182.

Robin, C., Blanche, F., Cauchois, L., Cameron, B., Couder, M. & Crouzet, J. (1991). Primary structure, expression in *Escherichia coli*, and properties of S-adenosyl-L-methionine: uroporphyrinogen III methyltransferase from *Bacillus megaterium*. J Bacteriol 173, 4893–4896.

Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F. & Maniatis, T. (1989). *Molecular Cloning: a Laboratory Manual*, 2nd edn. Cold Spring Harbor NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory.

Schirawski, J. & Unden, G. (1995). Anaerobic respiration of *Bacillus macerans* with fumarate, TMAO, nitrate and nitrite and regulation of the pathways by oxygen and nitrate. Arch Microbiol 163, 148–154.

Schröder, I., Johansson, P., Rutberg, L. & Hederstedt, L. (1994). The *hemX* gene of the *Bacillus subtilis hemAXCDBL* operon encodes a membrane protein, negatively affecting the steady-state cellular concentration of HemA (glutamyl-tRNA reductase). Microbiology 140, 731–740.

Shida, O., Takagi, H., Kadowaki, K. & Komagata, K. (1996). Proposal for two new genera, *Brevibacillus* gen. nov. and *Aneurinibacillus* gen. nov. Int J Syst Bacteriol 46, 939–946.

Spizizen, J. (1958). Transformation of biochemically deficient strains of *Bacillus subtilis* by deoxyribonucleate. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 82, 8129–8133.

Thöny-Meyer, L. (1997). Biogenesis of respiratory cytochromes in bacteria. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 61, 337–376.

Towbin, H., Staehelin, T. & Gordon, J. (1979). Electrophoretic transfer of proteins from polyacrylamide gels to nitrocellulose sheets: procedure and some applications. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 76, 4350–4354.

Warren, M. J., Bolt, E. L., Roessner, C. A., Scott, A. I., Spencer, J. B. & Woodcock, S. C. (1994). Gene dissection demonstrates that the *Escherichia coli cysG* gene encodes a multifunctional protein. Biochem J 302, 837–844.

Xie, Z., Culler, D., Dreyfuss, B. W., Kuras, R., Wollman, F. A., Girard-Bascou, J. & Merchant, S. (1998). Genetic analysis of chloroplast c-type cytochrome assembly in *Chlamydomonas reinhardtii*: one chloroplast locus and at least four nuclear loci are required for heme attachment. Genetics 148, 681–692.

Yanisch-Perron, C., Vieira, J. & Messing, J. (1985). Improved M13 phage cloning vectors and host strains: nucleotide sequences of the M13mp18 and pUC19 vectors. Gene 33, 103–119.

Received 18 May 1998; revised 30 September 1998; accepted 13 November 1998.
