
Reviews

How do Protozoan Parasites Survive inside Macrophages?

C. Bogdan and M. Röllinghoff

During infections with intracellular microbes, macrophages have two roles. On the one hand, they are important effector cells for the control and killing of intracellular bacteria and protozoan parasites by oxidative and non-oxidative mechanisms. On the other hand, macrophages may also serve as long-term host cells that facilitate the replication and survival of the pathogens, for example, by protecting them against toxic components of the extracellular milieu. In this review, Christian Bogdan and Martin Rölling
Reviews

Table 1. Strategies and mechanisms of survival of protozoan parasites in macrophages$^a$

| Strategy | Mechanism | Shown for | Refs |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Generation or retreat into a safe intracellular compartment | Lack of fusion between parasitophorous vacuoles and lysosomes | Leishmania donovani, Trypanosoma gondii | 1, 6 |
|  | Inhibition of acidification of the parasitophorous vacuole | T. gondii | 1, 4 |
|  | Inhibition of phag
Reviews

Table 2. Examples of the modulation of macrophage cytokine production by protozoan parasites in vitro$^a$

| Modulatory effect | Leishmania spp | Trypanosoma cruzi | Trypanosoma gondii | Refs |
|-------------------|----------------|--------------------|--------------------|------|
| Induction of IL-12 by infection | No | Yes | No (resting mφ) | 37, 38, 50, 51, |
|                       |             |                    | Yes (activated mφ) | 52, 55, 
respective cytokines *in vivo*. Application of anti-TGF-β antibodies arrested the development of leishmanial lesions and significantly delayed the time-to-death in *T. gondii*-infected severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice, whereas treatment with TGF-β exacerbated infections with *L. amazonensis*, *T. gondii* or *T. cruzi*<sup>35,40,41</sup>. *In vitro*, anti-TGF-β antibody treatment restored the proliferative response of lymph node cells from *L. donovani*-infected hamsters, which
L. amazonensis), and the sequestration of Leishmania amastigote antigens from presentation in an endocytic compartment, which either lacks the necessary MHC molecules or does not allow the transport of the MHC– peptide complexes to the cell surface (L. mexicana, L. amazonensis, L. pifanoi and L. major) (reviewed in Refs 3, 61, 62). However, Leishmania are certainly not devoid of molecules that facilitate the interaction of macro- phages and other antigen-presenting cells (APCs) with T cells. For example, the Le
8 Andrews, N.W. (1994) From lysosomes into the cytosol: the intracellular pathway of *Trypanosoma cruzi*. Braz. J. Med. Biol. Res. 27, 471–475

9 Ming, M. *et al.* (1995) Trypanosome invasion by mammalian cells requires activation of the TGF-β signalling pathways. Cell 82, 287–296

10 Dobrowolski, J.M. and Sibley, L.D. (1996) *To
Reviews

58 Reis e Sousa, C. *et al.* (1997) *In vivo* microbial stimulation induces rapid CD40 ligand-independent production of interleukin-12 by dendritic cells and their redistribution to T cell areas. *J. Exp. Med.* 11, 1819–1829  
59 Frosch, S. *et al.* (1996) *Trypanosoma cruzi* is a potent inducer of interleukin-12 production in macrophages. *Med. Microbiol. Immunol