
Brain Research 838 (1999) 131–135

**Research report**

**Differential expression patterns of inositol trisphosphate receptor types 1 and 3 in the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus**

Toshiyuki Hamada${}^{a,c}$, Tomoko Niki${}^{a}$, Pan Zijing${}^{a}$, Tomoyasu Sugiyama${}^{b}$, Shigenori Watanabe${}^{c}$, Katsuhiko Mikoshiba${}^{d}$, Norio Ishida${}^{a,*}$

${}^{a}$ Ishida Group of Clock Gene, National Institute of Bioscience and Human Technology, AIST, MITI, 1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba Science City 305-8566, Japan  
${}^{b}$ Tokyo Research Laboratories, Kyowa Hakko Kogyo, 3-3-6 Asahimachi, Machida, Tokyo 194, Japan  
${}^{c}$ Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu University 62, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan  
${}^{d}$ Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Medical Science University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai Minato, Tokyo 108, Japan  

Accepted 8 June 1999

---

### Abstract

Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor types 1 (IP₃-R1) and 3 (IP₃-R3) were found in the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and the levels of both of IP₃-R1 and IP₃-R3 mRNA showed a reciprocal circadian rhythm. IP₃-R1 immunoreactive cells were localized in neuronal cells in the SCN. In contrast, IP₃-R3 immunoreactive cells were mainly localized in the astrocytes in the ventrolateral region of the SCN. These results suggest that IP₃-R1 and IP₃-R3 may have differential roles in the SCN in the mammalian circadian rhythm.

© 1999 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Circadian rhythm; Suprachiasmatic nucleus; Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor; Rat brain; Glial fibrillary acidic protein

---

### 1. Introduction

Synchronization between the environmental lighting cycle and the circadian clock in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) is correlated with Ca²⁺ increase. The mechanism underlying the increase of Ca²⁺ and its relation to clock resetting are unknown [7].

IP₃-R in cerebellar cells forms a tetramer to function as a Ca²⁺ channel [4,5]. Recently, the IP₃-R family including IP₃-R1, IP₃-R2 and IP₃-R3 have been isolated [1,3,16,17]. IP₃-R1 was found to play an important role in neuronal Ca²⁺ efflux from stores in the brain owing that IP₃-R1 was mainly expressed in neuron [4,5]. IP₃-R2 and IP₃-R3 have been found principally in astrocytes in the brain at a very low level, although little is known about the functional features of the IP₃-R2 and IP₃-R3 [2,16,17].

Ultradian Ca²⁺ oscillations were seen in both neurons and glia cells cultured from the SCN [13,18]. SCN glia cells have been reported to play an important role in the rhythm of neuronal activity in the SCN [10,11].

To understand the role of the IP₃-R Ca²⁺ channel in circadian timing in the SCN, we examined the temporal and spatial expression pattern of the IP₃-R family in the SCN using the reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), RNase protection assay, and immunohistochemistry with IP₃-R1, IP₃-R3 specific monoclonal antibodies.

---

### 2. Materials and methods

#### 2.1. RT-PCR analysis

Total RNA was extracted by the guanidium isothiocyanate procedure from the Wistar rat SCN region including the surrounding area and was converted to first-strand cDNA using Superscript reverse transcriptase (Gibco/BRL, Rockville, MD) and oligo (dT) primer. PCR was performed using this product as a template with primers specific for rat IP₃-R1, IP₃-R2, and IP₃-R3. The sequences

* Corresponding author. Fax: +81-298-54-6095; E-mail: nishida@ccmail.nibh.go.jp

0006-8993/99/$ - see front matter © 1999 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.  
PII: S0006-8993(99)01719-9

Fig. 1. The expression of IP₃-R in the SCN of rat hypothalamus. RT-PCR analysis of IP₃-R mRNA in rat SCN. cDNA was amplified with primers specific for IP₃-R1, IP₃-R2 and IP₃-R3 according to Blondel et al. [1]. The sizes of the IP₃-R1, IP₃-R2 and IP₃-R3 PCR products are 219, 198 and 177 bp, respectively. Lane 1, IP₃-R1; lane 2, IP₃-R2; lane 3, IP₃-R3; lane 4, marker.

of the primers are: rat IP₃-R1: 5′-TCCCTGGTCAG-CAGTGACTC-3′ and 5′-CTCATTTGCTTAGGCTGGCT-3′; IP₃-R2: 5′-TCAGCAATGAA GGTGACAGT-3′ and 5′-CGGTGGCATGTGATGGTTCT-3′; IP₃-R3: 5′-GGTGAGCGGCGAGGGCGAGG-3′ and 5′-GCAGT-TCTGCACGTCCACGA-3′. These primers amplify a 219-, 198-, and 177-bp region from the COOH terminus of IP₃-R1, IP₃-R2, and IP₃-R3 cDNAs, respectively. The

A
CT 2 8 14 20
IP₃-receptor
type1

IP₃-receptor
type3

β-actin

B

Fig. 2. Circadian expression of IP₃-R1, IP₃-R3 mRNA in the SCN. (A) Temporal expression pattern of IP₃-R1, IP₃-R3 mRNA in the SCN. Each lane contains 10 μg of total RNA. β-actin as a control. Arrows indicate protected bands. (B) Quantification of radio activities of the protected bands from Fig. 2A. The significant difference (CT14; asterisk) over CT20 was observed for IP₃-R1 mRNA level. The difference (CT8) over CT14 (n = 3, p < 0.075) was also observed for IP₃-R3 mRNA in the SCN. Each point shows the mean ± S.E.M. (n = 3, % CT20).

Fig. 3. Immunohistochemical evidence for the IP₃-R3 protein and GFAP in the serial SCN slices. (A) IP₃-R3 immunoreactivity. (B) GFAP immunoreactivity. (C) IP₃-R1 immunoreactivity.

cDNA was subjected to 50 cycles of amplification with each of above three specific primers using the AmpliTaq Gold™ (PE Applied Biosystems, Forster City, CA). The PCR was performed using the following cycle conditions: initial denaturation at 94°C for 9 min, and denaturation for 1 min at 94°C, annealing for 1 min at 55°C, and extension for 2 min at 72°C with the final extension for 7 min.

### 2.2. RNase protection assay

Rats were decapitated at a specified circadian time (CT), and the SCN were dissected. The tissues from 20 rats were pooled, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at –80°C until RNA extraction. Total RNA was extracted by the acid guanidium phenol chloroform procedure. A cDNA probe was generated from a rat IP₃-R1 fragment (0.27 kb 3′-untranslated region of IP₃-R1 cDNA) and IP₃-R3 fragment [1]. Hybridizations were performed as follows: 10 μg total RNA from the SCN was hybridized with α[³²P]UTP (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Uppsala, Sweden, 800 Ci/mmol) labeled probes at 43°C for 12–15 h. RNase digestion was followed to the instruction manual for the RPAII kit (Ambion, Austin, TX). The size of the protected IP₃-R1 and IP₃-R3 transcripts was 274 and 177 bp, respectively, and the size of the protected the β-actin cDNA transcript was 126 bp. After precipitation for 30 min at –20°C, the protected fragments were pelleted by an eppendorf centrifuge at 12,000 rpm for 20 min, dissolved in the buffer provided by Ambion and separated by a 5% urea gel. After electrophoresis, the gel was dried onto Whatman 3 MM paper and exposed to an imaging plate (Fuji Film, Tokyo, Japan) and quantified using a Fujix Bio-imaging analyzer BAS 2000 (Fuji Film).

### 2.3. Immunohistochemistry

For immunohistochemistry experiments, rats were deeply anaesthetized with Na pentobarbitone and perfused with ice-cold 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). The brains were removed and fixed with 50 ml of 4% paraformaldehyde overnight at 4°C. The brains were transferred to 15%, 20%, 30% sucrose solution in 0.1 M phosphate buffer gradually. Brains were then embedded in O.C.T. Compound, and stored at –80°C until use. Serial sections of frozen brains (8 μm) were prepared by cryostat and thaw-mounted onto gelatin-coated glass slides. They were then permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 for 2 min, and treated with PBS containing 1.5% normal horse serum for 30 min. The sections were incubated with anti-IP₃-R1, anti-IP₃-R3 monoclonal antibody (KM1112 and KM1082, respectively) [12], or anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) polyclonal antibody (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) at 4°C overnight. Immunostaining was performed with a Vectastain avidin-biotin complex system (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA) with diaminobenzidine as the chromogen.

---

### 3. Results

To confirm the mRNA expression of the IP₃-R family in the SCN of the hypothalamus, we carried out RT-PCR analysis using primers specific for the IP₃-R1, IP₃-R2, and IP₃-R3 genes [1]. We detected mRNA expression of IP₃-R1 and IP₃-R3, but not that of IP₃-R2 in the SCN (Fig. 1). RNase protection assay indicated that the mRNA level of IP₃-R1 and IP₃-R3 in the SCN showed rhythmic expression, but the phase of expression was reciprocal (Fig. 2A). The peak of IP₃-R1 and IP₃-R3 mRNA expression appeared at CT14 and CT8, respectively (Fig. 2B). The significant difference (CT14; asterisk) over CT20 was observed for IP₃-R1 mRNA level. The difference (CT8) over CT14 (*n* = 3, *p* < 0.075) was also observed for IP₃-R3 mRNA in the SCN.

IP₃-R3 specific monoclonal antibody KM1082 immunoreactivity was found in the rat SCN of the hypothalamus (Fig. 3A). However, the distribution pattern was different from that of IP₃-R1 which is exclusively present in neurons in the brain (Fig. 3C) [3,5,15]. IP₃-R3 immunoreactive cells in the SCN were mainly localized at the ventrolateral region, whereas IP₃-R1 immunoreactive cells were present throughout the SCN of the hypothalamus. In previous reports [16], IP₃-R3 were reported to be located principally in astrocytes in the brain. To confirm this, the location of the IP₃-R3 and GFAP immunoreactive cells in rat SCN were compared (Fig. 3A,B). IP₃-R3 expression was confirmed principally in astrocytes, and the localization of this protein was very similar to that of GFAP. In the cortex, the pattern of IP₃-R3 immunoreactivity was also similar to that of GFAP (data not shown). These results suggest that IP₃-R3 in the SCN glia cells may have a different role from IP₃-R1 in circadian timing in the SCN neurons.

---

### 4. Discussion

In the present study, we showed that IP₃-R1 and IP₃-R3 are expressed in the SCN in a circadian manner in constant darkness. The expression of IP₃-R3 mRNA was in a reciprocal phase from that of IP₃-R1. These results suggest that IP₃-R1 and IP₃-R3 may be involved in generating circadian rhythm in the SCN and that IP₃-R1 and IP₃-R3 have different functions.

In addition, we found that IP₃-R3 immunoreactive cells were mainly seen in the ventrolateral region of the SCN where the retinohypothalamic tract (RHT) is terminated, whereas IP₃-R1 immunoreactive cells were present throughout the SCN. The staining pattern of IP₃-R3 im-
munoreactive cells was similar to that of GFAP in the SCN, indicates that IP₃-R3 present mainly in astrocytes of the SCN. It is reported that astrocytes are extensively coupled to each other by connexin 43-positive gap junctions in the SCN [14]. Several reports suggest that cellular communication passing through the gap junction in glial cells have an important role in the SCN neuron activity rhythm [10,13,18]. Thus, the IP₃-R3 in astrocytes may have a role of the SCN neuronal activity.

Recently, a novel membrane permeable modulator, 2-amino-ethoxy diphenylborate (2APB), on IP₃-induced Ca²⁺ release was developed [8,9]. We showed that 2APB blocked optic nerve stimulation induce neuronal SCN field potentials and the glutamate-induced phase delay of the SCN firing rhythm [6]. This data considering with the expression data in the present study suggests that IP₃-R families may have a role on generating the daily firing activity rhythm in the SCN. The physiological role of the IP₃-R family in the SCN remains to be determined.

### Acknowledgements

We thank Drs. Miwa Matsui (Ibaraki Prefectural University of Health Science), Koichiro Kako (Tsukuba University) and Shigenobu Shibata (Waseda University) for encouragement, and Philip Rodley for proofreading of the manuscript. This work was supported by a project grant for the Center of Excellence Program and Competitive Research Grant from STA and AIST, MITI, Japan, respectively.

### References

[1] O. Blondel, J. Takeda, H. Janssen, S. Seino, G.I. Bell, Sequence and functional characterization of a third inositol trisphosphate receptor subtype, IP₃-R3, expressed in pancreatic islets, kidney, gastrointestinal tract, and other tissues, J. Biol. Chem. 15 (1993) 11356–11363.

[2] I. Fujino, N. Yamada, A. Miyawaki, M. Hasegawa, T. Furuichi, K. Mikoshiba, Differential expression of type 2 and type 3 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor mRNAs in various mouse tissues: in situ hybridization study, Cell Tissue Res. 280 (1995) 201–210.

[3] T. Furuichi, D. Simon-Chaxottes, I. Fujino, N. Yamada, M. Hasegawa, A. Miyawaki, S. Yoshikawa, J.-L. Guenet, K. Mikoshiba, Widespread expression of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1 gene (Insp 3r1) in the mouse central nervous system, Recept. Channels 1 (1993) 11–24.

[4] T. Furuichi, K. Mikoshiba, Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor-mediated Ca²⁺ signaling in the brain, J. Neurochem. 64 (1995) 953–960.

[5] D. Furutama, K. Shimoda, S. Yoshikawa, A. Miyawaki, T. Furuichi, K. Mikoshiba, Functional expression of the type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor promoter-lacZ fusion genes in transgenic mice, J. Neurochem. 66 (1996) 1793–1801.

[6] T. Hamada, S.-Y. Liou, T. Fukushima, T. Maruyama, S. Watanabe, K. Mikoshiba, N. Ishida, The role of inositol trisphosphate-induced Ca²⁺ release from IP₃-receptor in the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus on circadian entrainment mechanism, Neurosci. Lett. 263 (1999) 125–128.

[7] K. Kako, N. Ishida, The role of transcription factors in circadian gene expression, Neurosci. Res. 31 (1998) 257–2264.

[8] T. Maruyama, Z.J. Cui, T. Kanaji, K. Mikoshiba, T. Kano, Attenuation of intracellular Ca²⁺ and secretory responses by Ins(1,4,5)P₃-induced Ca²⁺ release modulator, 2APB, in rat pancreatic acinar cell, Biomed. Res. 18 (1997) 297–302.

[9] T. Maruyama, T. Kanaji, S. Nakade, T. Kanno, K. Mikoshiba, 2APB, 2-aminoethoxy diphenyl borate, a membrane penetrable modulator of Ins(1,4,5)P₃-induced Ca²⁺ release, J. Biochem. 122 (3) (1997) 498–505.

[10] R.A. Prosser, D.M. Edgar, H.C. Heller, S.D. Miller, A possible glial role in the mammalian circadian clock, Brain Res. 643 (1994) 296–301.

[11] S. Shinohara, S. Honma, Y. Katsuno, H. Abe, K. Honma, Two distinct oscillators in the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus in vitro, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92 (1995) 7396–7400.

[12] T. Sugiyama, A. Furuya, T. Monkawa, M. Yamamoto-Hino, S. Satoh, K. Ohmori, A. Miyawaki, N. Hanai, K. Mikoshiba, M. Hasegawa, Monoclonal antibodies distinctively recognizing the subtypes of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor: application to the studies on inflammatory cells, FEBS Lett. 354 (1994) 149–154.

[13] A.N. Van den pol, S.M. Finkbeiner, A.H. Cornell-Bell, Calcium excitability and oscillations in suprachiasmatic nucleus neurons and glia in vitro, J. Neurosci. 12 (1992) 2648–2664.

[14] D.K. Welsh, S.M. Reppert, Gap junctions couple astrocytes but not neurons in dissociated cultures of rat suprachiasmatic nucleus, Brain Res. 706 (1996) 30–36.

[15] N. Yamada, Y. Makino, R.A. Clark, D.W. Pearson, M.-G. Mattei, J.-L. Guenet, E. Ohama, I. Fujino, A. Miyawaki, T. Furuichi, K. Mikoshiba, Human inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate type-1 receptor, InsP₃R1: structure, function, regulation of expression and chromosomal localization, J. Biochem. 302 (1994) 781–790.

[16] M. Yamamoto-Hino, A. Miyawaki, H. Kawano, T. Sugiyama, T. Furuichi, M. Hasegawa, K. Mikoshiba, Immunohistochemical study of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 3 in rat central nervous system, NeuroReport 6 (1995) 273–276.

[17] M. Yamamoto-Hino, T. Sugiyama, K. Hikichi, M.G. Mattei, K. Hasegawa, S. Sekine, K. Sakurada, A. Miyawaki, T. Furuichi, M. Hasegawa, K. Mikoshiba, Cloning and characterization of human type 2 and type 3 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors, Recept. Channels 2 (1994) 9–22.

[18] S. Yamazaki, S.-I. Inouye, Y. Kuroda, TTX-resistant Ca²⁺ oscillation in cultured hypothalamus: similarity to the mammalian circadian pacemaker, NeuroReport 6 (1995) 1306–1308.