
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 1999 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**Cloning and Expression of a Proteoglycan UDP-Galactose:β-Xylose β1,4-Galactosyltransferase I**

A SEVENTH MEMBER OF THE HUMAN β4-GALACTOSYLTRANSFERASE GENE FAMILY*

(Received for publication, June 3, 1999, and in revised form, July 7, 1999)

Raquel Almeida‡§, Steven B. Levery∥, Ulla Mandel‡, Hans Kresse∥, Tilo Schwientek‡, Eric P. Bennett‡, and Henrik Clausen‡***

From the ‡School of Dentistry, University of Copenhagen, Nørre Allé 20, 2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark, the §Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of University of Porto, Rua Dr. R. Frias s/n, 4200 Porto, Portugal, the ∥University of Georgia, Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, Athens, Georgia 30602, and the ||Institute of Physiological Chemistry and Pathobiochemistry, University of Münster, 48129 Münster, Germany

---

A seventh member of the human β4-galactosyltransferase family, β4Gal-T7, was identified by BLAST analysis of expressed sequence tags. The coding region of β4Gal-T7 depicts a type II transmembrane protein with sequence similarity to β4-galactosyltransferases, but the sequence was distinct in known motifs and did not contain the cysteine residues conserved in the other six members of the β4Gal-T family. The genomic organization of β4Gal-T7 was different from previous β4Gal-Ts. Expression of β4Gal-T7 in insect cells showed that the gene product had β1,4-galactosyltransferase activity with β-xylosides, and the linkage formed was Galβ1-4Xyl. Thus, β4Gal-T7 represents galactosyltransferase I enzyme (xylosylprotein β1,4-galactosyltransferase; EC 2.4.1.133), which attaches the first galactose in the proteoglycan linkage region GlcAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xylβ1-O-Ser. Sequence analysis of β4Gal-T7 from a fibroblast cell line of a patient with a progeroid syndrome and signs of the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, previously shown to exhibit reduced galactosyltransferase I activity (Quentin, E., Gladen, A., Rodén, L., and Kresse, H. (1990) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 87, 1342–1346), revealed two inherited allelic variants, β4Gal-T7<sup>186D</sup> and β4Gal-T7<sup>206P</sup>, each with a single missense substitution in the putative catalytic domain of the enzyme. β4Gal-T7<sup>186D</sup> exhibited a 4-fold elevated *K*<sub>m</sub> for the donor substrate, whereas essentially no activity was demonstrated with β4Gal-T7<sup>206P</sup>. Molecular cloning of β4Gal-T7 should facilitate general studies of its pathogenic role in progeroid syndromes and connective tissue disorders with affected proteoglycan biosynthesis.

These six β4Gal-Ts catalyze biosynthesis of Galβ1–4GlcNAc and/or Galβ1–4Glc linkages in different glycoconjugates and free saccharides (for a review see Ref. 8). The six β4Gal-Ts have highly conserved sequence motifs in the putative catalytic domain including four conserved cysteine residues. The genomic organization of the first four genes is similar and includes conservation of spacing for five intron/exon boundaries in the coding regions (4, 7, 9, 10). This suggests that these genes arose late in evolutionary terms as a result of gene duplication and subsequent sequence divergence. Detailed analysis of the kinetic properties of these enzymes clearly show that each has a distinct function in biosynthesis of different glycoconjugates and saccharide structures, but in accordance with their close evolutionary relationships the linkages formed are similar.

In the present study, a seventh homologue of the β4Gal-T gene family was characterized. The gene was identified by sequence analysis of the EST data base. The coding region of the novel gene, designated β4Gal-T7, exhibited distinct substitutions in the sequence motifs highly conserved among β4Gal-T1 to β4Gal-T6. Notably, none of the four cysteines conserved among other β4Gal-Ts were found in the β4Gal-T7 sequence. It was predicted that the enzymatic properties of β4Gal-T7 were different from other β4Gal-Ts. Analysis of the substrate specificity of recombinant β4Gal-T7 revealed that this enzyme formed the Galβ1-4Xylβ1-R linkage found in the linkage region of proteoglycans (GlcAβ1–3Galβ1–3Galβ1–4Xylβ1-O-Ser). β4Gal-T7 was proposed to encode a galactosyltransferase I (xylosylprotein β1,4-galactosyltransferase; EC 2.4.1.133) gene (11–13).

Quentin-Hoffmann *et al.* (14, 15) showed that partial inactivation of galactosyltransferase I represented the primary defect in one patient with progeroidal appearance and symptoms of the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. As a consequence of the enzyme deficiency, only about half of the core proteins of the small proteoglycans decorin and biglycan were linked with glycosaminoglycan chains (16),<sup>2</sup> whereas no abnormality in the biosynthesis of large dermatan sulfate proteoglycans and of heparan sulfate proteoglycans could be observed (14). We sequenced the β4Gal-T7 coding region of DNA from fibroblasts established from this patient and his family. Two alleles, β4Gal-T7<sup>186D</sup> and β4Gal-T7<sup>206P</sup>, were identified in the affected patient, and each allele was shown to be derived from different parents. Expression of the variant alleles showed that one exhibited a significantly higher *K*<sub>m</sub> for the donor substrate

---

Six members of a family of human UDP-galactose:β-N-acetylglucosamine/β-glucosylceramide β1,4-galactosyltransferases (β4Gal-Ts)<sup>1</sup> have previously been characterized (1–7).

* This work was supported by the Danish Cancer Society, the Velux Foundation, the Danish Research Council, Praxis Grant XXI 2/2.1/BIA/276/94, National Institutes of Health Resource Center for Biomedical Complex Carbohydrates Grant 5 P41 RR05351, and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft Grant SFB 310, Project B2. The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* **The nucleotide sequence(s) reported in this paper has been submitted to the GenBank™/EBI Data Bank with accession number(s) AJ005382.**
* **To whom correspondence should be addressed:** School of Dentistry, Nørre Alle 20, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark. Tel.: 45-35326835; Fax: 45-35326505; E-mail: henrik.clausen@odont.ku.dk.
* <sup>1</sup> The abbreviations used are: β4Gal-T, UDP-galactose:β-N-acetylglucosamine/β-glucose/β-xylose β1,4-galactosyltransferase; EST, ex-
* <sup>2</sup> H. Kresse, unpublished observation.

This paper is available on line at http://www.jbc.org

and the other was inactive. The results show that β4Gal-T7 represents one galactosyltransferase I that is involved in proteoglycan synthesis. Identification of the molecular basis of the genetic defect in the progeroid patient with signs of the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome opens the possibility of further studies on the role of this gene in progeroid syndromes and connective tissue disorders.

# EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

## Identification and Cloning of β4Gal-T7—tBLASTn analysis of the dbEST data base at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD) with sequences from human β4Gal-T1 to β4Gal-T6, performed as described previously (4, 8), revealed several ESTs covering a total of 931 base pairs of the 3′ coding sequence of β4Gal-T7. Additional sequence was obtained by 5′-rapid amplification of cDNA ends with a fetal brain cDNA library (CLONTECH) using antisense primer EBER1218 (5′-CTGAAGTGGTCCAC-CTGGTTG-3′) and sequencing on PAC genomic DNA. ESTs from β4Gal-T7 are represented in two Unigene clusters, Hs.54702 and Hs.45208, where the latter originate from priming in the second intron of the five introns identified in β4Gal-T7. Hs.45208 was mapped to 5q35.1–5q35.3 and was flanked by D5S498 and D5S408 (stSG40105, 184.7–195.8 cM). The complete compiled cDNA sequence was confirmed by sequencing of a PAC genomic DNA clone. A human PAC genomic library (Genome Systems) was screened using the primer pairs EBER-1207 (5′-CAGAGAAACGGGTCTGTCCACAGG-3′) and EBER1215 (5′-GATGTGGTGCCGGATCTTCTT-3′). Three clones for β4Gal-T7 (99/C24, 143/B4, and 222/H10) were obtained from Genome Systems Inc. Intron/exon boundaries were determined by comparison with the cDNA sequence, optimizing for the gt/ag rule (17).

## Expression of β4Gal-T7 in Insect Cells—Expression constructs designed to encode the full coding sequence and a secreted construct encoding amino acid residues 63–327 of β4Gal-T7 were prepared by reverse transcription-PCR with fetal brain mRNA. Products were cloned initially into pBluescript KS+ (Stratagene) and subsequently into pVL1393 or pAcGP67 (Pharmingen). Expression constructs of β4Gal-T7 variants were prepared similarly using mRNA from fibroblasts of a patient with galactosyltransferase I deficiency (14). Plasmids pVL-β4Gal-T7-full and pAcGP67-β4Gal-T7-sol were co-transfected with Baculo-Gold™ DNA (Pharmingen) and virus amplified as described previously (18). The kinetic properties were determined with the secreted enzyme expressed in Sf9 or High Five™ cells. Purification of the secreted enzyme from High Five cells was performed by consecutive chromatographic steps on DEAE or Amberlite and S-Sepharose as described previously (19). Standard assays were performed in 50-μl reaction mixtures containing 25 mM cacodylate (pH 7.0), 40 mM MnCl₂, 0.25% Triton X-100, 100 μM UDP-[¹⁴C]-Gal (2,000 cpm/nmol) (Amershams Pharmacia Biotech), and the indicated concentrations of acceptor substrates (Sigma and Dextra Laboratories Ltd.) (see Table I for structures). The full-length construct was assayed with 1% Triton X-100 homogenates of cells twice washed in phosphate-buffered saline. Assays for determination of \(K_m\) for the acceptor substrates were performed with semi-purified enzyme in the standard reaction mixture modified to include 200 μM UDP-[¹⁴C]-Gal for β4Gal-T7 and 400 μM for β4Gal-T7₁₈₆D. Assays for donor substrate \(K_m\) were performed with 2.0 mM MeUmb-β-Xylose.

For product characterization 5 mg of MeUmb-β-Xylose were glycosylated to completion with semipurified β4Gal-T7, using thin layer chromatography to monitor reaction progress. The reaction product was purified on an octadecyl-silica cartridge (Bakerbond, J. T. Baker), deuterium exchanged by repeated lyophilization from D₂O, and then dissolved in 0.5 ml of D₂O for NMR analysis. One-dimensional ¹H NMR, two-dimensional ¹H-¹H TOCSY, and ¹H-detected, ¹³C-decoupled, phase-sensitive gradient ¹³C-¹H HSQC and HMBC experiments were performed as described previously (Ref. 20 and references cited therein) on a Varian Unity Inova 600 MHz spectrometer using standard acquisition software available in the Varian VNMR software package. One-dimensional reference ¹³C NMR spectra were acquired using direct detection on a Varian Unity Inova 500 MHz spectrometer. A saturated solution of Xylβ1→7MU was prepared for NMR analysis in similar manner, and spectra were acquired under identical conditions for comparison. Chemical shifts are referenced to internal acetone (2.225 and 30.00 ppm for ¹H and ¹³C, respectively).

## Northern Analysis—The cDNA fragment of soluble β4Gal-T7 was used as a probe. The probe was random priming labeled using [α³²P]dCTP and an Strip-EZ DNA labeling kit (Ambion). A multiple human tissue Northern blot, MTN I (CLONTECH), was probed as described previously (7).

## Monoclonal Antibody—A purified secreted form of β4Gal-T7 was used for immunizing BALB/c mice, and monoclonal antibodies were selected and characterized by immunocytology on Sf9 cells infected with various β4Gal-transferase expression constructs, as described previously (21). The specificity was further evaluated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis Western blot analysis using precast 8–25% gradient gels and the Phast system™ (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech).

## Analysis of β4Gal-T7 Gene in a Family with a Genetic Defect in Galactosyltransferase I—Skin fibroblast cell lines from one affected patient, the parents, and two siblings were established and grown as described previously (14). mRNA was isolated and reverse transcription-PCR products were directly sequenced and/or subcloned and sequenced. The identified sequence variations were confirmed by direct sequencing PCR products obtained from genomic DNA. One missense mutation (557CA) was also identified by restriction digestion (HinfI) of a PCR product from the mutant allele.

# RESULTS

## Identification and Cloning of Human β4Gal-T7—The EST cloning strategy produced a novel gene with an open reading frame of 327 amino acids exhibiting sequence similarity to members of the β4Gal-T gene family. The predicted coding region of β4Gal-T7 has a single initiation codon in agreement with Kozak’s rule (22), which precedes a sequence encoding a potential hydrophobic transmembrane segment (Fig. 1A) (DNA sequence available in GenBank™). β4Gal-T7 is predicted to be a type II transmembrane glycoprotein with a N-terminal cytoplasmic domain of 28 residues, a transmembrane segment of 30 residues, and a stem region and catalytic domain of 269 residues. The calculated molecular weight of the protein derived from the full coding is 37,404, and proteolytically cleaved secreted forms is predicted to be less than 31,065 (calculated from Arg⁵⁹ immediately after the hydrophobic transmembrane signal sequence). Multiple sequence alignment of the seven human β4Gal-transferases (Fig. 1A) shows that the sequence of β4Gal-T7 is distinct from other β4Gal-Ts in two potentially significant regions: the major conserved sequence motif (WG-WGG/REDDD/E) is not conserved in two positions, and none of the four cysteine residues conserved among the first six β4Gal-Ts are conserved in β4Gal-T7. β4Gal-T7 has a single N-linked glycosylation consensus site, which is different from a site conserved among β4Gal-T2 to β4Gal-T6.

The coding region of β4Gal-T7 was found in six exons (base pairs 1–50, 51–413, 414–639, 640–723, 724–828, and 829–984) similar to other β4Gal-Ts. However, in contrast to the five intron/exon boundaries conserved in β4Gal-T1 to β4Gal-T4, none of the five boundaries of β4Gal-T7 appears to be conserved (Fig. 1A). The 3′ ESTs assembled in Hs.45208 were found in the second intron sequence of β4Gal-T7 and were linked to chromosome 5q35.1 to 5q35.3.

## Expression of β4Gal-T7—Expression of full coding or secreted constructs of β4Gal-T7 in insect cells resulted in marked increase in galactosyltransferase activity with a number of βXyl containing acceptor substrates, compared with uninfected cells or cells infected with a control construct (Table I). The best acceptor substrate identified was β-MeUmb-Xyl, for which the \(K_m\) was estimated at 0.89 ± 0.29 mM. The \(K_m\) for UDP-Gal was 56 ± 12 μM using β-MeUmb-Xyl as an acceptor. Low activity was observed with βGlcNAc acceptors, but there was no activity with other mono- or disaccharide substrates tested. Structural characterization by ¹H NMR of the product formed with β-MeUmb-Xyl showed that the β4Gal-T7 forms the Galβ1-4Xylβ1-R linkage (Table II and Fig. 2). Comparison of a one-dimensional ¹H NMR spectrum of the product (Fig. 2A) with that of substrate obtained under similar conditions (in D₂O, 25 °C; not shown) clearly showed an additional H-1 resonance (4.512 ppm) from a sugar residue linked in the β-configuration \((^{3}J_{1,2}=7–9\) Hz\()\). We did not find NMR data for the specific

$\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7, Seventh Member of } \beta 4-\text { Galactosyltransferase Family }$

A

| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }$ | MFPSRKAAQLPWEDGRSGLLSGGLPRKCSVFHLFVACLSLGFFSLLWLQS |
| --- | --- |
| R10E11.4 |  |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T6 }$ | MSVLRRMMRVSNSLAFIFFSLSSSCLYFIYVAPGIANTYLFMVQARGIMLRENVKTIGHMIRLYTNKNSTLNG-TDYEGNNSSDYLVQTTTYLPE |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T5 }$ | MRARRGLRLPRRSLAAALFFSLSSSLYFVYVAPGIVNTYLFMMAQAQGILIRDNVRTIGAQVYEQVLRSAYAKRNSSVND-SDYELDLNHSEFLQTFTFLPE |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T4 }$ | MGFNLTFLHSYKFRLLLLT-LCLTVVGWATSNYFVGAIQEIPKAK-EFMANFKTLILG-K-GKTLTNEAS |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T3 }$ | MLRRLLERPCTLAALLVG-SQLAVMMYLSLGGFRSLSALFGRDQGPTFDYSHPRDVYS-N-LSHLEGAPGGP |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T2 }$ | MSRLLGGTLERVCKAVLLCLLHFLVAIVLYFDVYAQHLAFFSRSFARGPAHALHPAAASSSSSSSNCSRPN-ATASSS-GLPEVESALPGP |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T1 }$ | MRLREPLLSGSAAMPGAQLQRACRLLVAVCALHLGVTLVYYLAGRDLISRLPQLVGVSTPLQGGNSNAAAGQSSGELRTGGARPPPPLGASSQPRFGGDSSPVVDSGFGPASNLTSVVPV |
| W02B12.11 | MRTSHCIIRSFSPKRLIIFVAASTLIYVMLLRNSTLN-DERRIAATEEQVRSVNVNVOQSKNSGVAERTHDIKDVPVELEIARQTLTFLNMEEAVTKPK-PP |

| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }$ | SG-DVARAVRSGQGETSGPP-RACEPEPPPEHWEEDASWG-PHRLRVLVPFRERFELLVFVPMMRRFLSSEKKIRHHYYILNQVDHFRFNRAAINMVSELS |
| --- | --- |
| R10E11.4 | MKLKTRLIISSTILISLAACYFLVLLVLDLEITRDLMTDYVDPRLPQTSYHKLCVIVPYRDRLEELREFSPMSKFLHNINVSHHILIINQTDPLRFNRBSMINNSEN |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T6 }$ | NFTYSPYLPCP-EKLPYMRGFLNVNVSEVSFDEIHQLFSKDLLDIEPCHWRPKPRWKVAVLIPFRNRHEHLPIFFLRLPMLOKRLEFAFVVVEQTGTQPFNRAMMFNVEFKRA |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T5 }$ | DFTYFANHTCP-ERLPSMKGPIDINMSEIGMDYIHSELFSDKETIKLGHWKPDMPRWKVAILIPFRNHEBLPVLFRBLPMLOQRQFAFVEQVTQPFRNAMLFNFQEA |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T4 }$ | TKKVELDNCP-SVSEYLRGSQSKLIFKPD-LTEEVQAENKVSRG-RYRQEKCA-LQRVNILVPHRNREKLMYLLEHPFLQEQQLDYGITJHQAEGKKFRNAKELNRYLRA |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T3 }$ | PAPQGLPYCP-ERSPLVSPVSFSFP-PSIAEIVERNPVEPGRYRPAGEP-RSRTAIEPVPHAREHILLLLYRHFLQKQQAYGIYIHQABNGTFNRANKLNVRERA |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T2 }$ | TAPTLPPCP-DSPEGLVGRLLIEFTSP-MPIERVQRENGVLMSGRYTPPDCTP-AQTVAIIIPFRHREHLRYWLHYHPIILRERCRLRYGVVYIQHBEDTFNRANKLLNWGELRA |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T1 }$ | HTTALSPLACP-ESPLVPMLIEFNMP-VDELVAKQNENVKMGRYAPRDVS-PHKVAILKPRNRQBLKYWLYYHPVLQBCQDYGMVINVAGDTIFNRANKLNGEFQEA |
| W02B12.11 | VKIAEEDGSRIIVDKIRDQGALPQATLLIQNLQEGEVHAIHRELGPSSSWKDDQQA-RDKINVIIPYRERQTHLTRLIDFIERILQORREDFRFIETEYGNDLFNKGRIIMNAAEIF |

| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }$ | SN-STDIYIAMDVDIELDYGFPEAG-FHVASP-ELHPLYHYKTMYVSGILLKQHYRLCNGMSNRFNGWGREDDDEFYRRIKGASLQLFRESGI-TTGKTFRHLH-PAWR |
| --- | --- |
| R10E11.4 | DR-LGCYMVMNDVDLEVPNPEVPYDFPGIGVIHITSP-QYHPKYHYEKFIBGILMSTLKDYKLNNGMSNKNWGLEDDEFYLRIIDSKLNLTREVSLSTDSSNTRHIHGPKRKR |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T6 }$ | MKDSVWDVCVIFHDVDHLPERGRNYYGEM-PRHFAKLDKYMILPYKEFFGGVSGTVEQFRKINGPNAFNGWGSEDDOLWNRRHYAGYNVTRPEGD-LGKKSIPH-HH-RGEV |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T5 }$ | MKDLDWCLIFHDVDHIPESQRNYYGQM-PRHFAKLDKYMILPYTEFFGGVSGTVEQFRKINGPNAFNGWGSEDDOLWNRRVQAGYSVSRPEGD-TGKKSIPH-HH-RGEV |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T4 }$ | LKBEENWDCFIFHDVDLVERENDLYKSEEH-KHLVGRNSTGYRRSGYGTTADSEQFKVNGFSNNNWWGGEDDOLRLRVELQRMKISRPLPE-VKTMVFTRD-KGNE |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T3 }$ | LRDEEWDCFLHDVDLLPERNDHILYVDPRGPRHVAAMNKFGYSIPYPQYGGSAETPDQYLKMNGFPEXNWGGEDDOIATVRVLAGMAISREPTS-VGHYKVKHRGD-KGNE |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T2 }$ | LKEDAAYDCFISDVDLVPMDDRILYRGDQ-PRHFAIAMDFGFRPYAGYGGVSGSKAQFLRINGFENEWNWGGEDDIFNRILSLTUMKISRDIDR-IORMIKHDR-KHNE |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T1 }$ | LEODYDTCFVSVDLLPMHHHAYRFSQ-ESVAMDKFQFSFPYVQYFGGMSA3KQQFLTINNGFFNNMWGWGEDDINAV-VRCRMIRHSRD-KKNE |
| W02B12.11 | ES-LGVDCVVHDVDMFPQDDRIPYSPPG-PSHLGAFVSNLGYQFWYKEIVGGLAVSMADYRAVHGYSNQFMAWGGEDDBMGQRIILSLNYTIERENPE-TSRMSHLKHVKR-KRTA |

| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }$ | KRDQKRIA AQKQEQFKVDREGGDN TVKHVASRTALS VGGAPCTVLNMLDCDKTATPWCTFS327 |
| --- | --- |
| R10E11.4 | DYTPKKNDKNQWEIKRKRDHVSGHDVRILIDSRQLLDFS GTSVTIIVALHCDLNWTPYCKS289 |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T6 }$ | QFLGKYKLLRYSKERQYIDGLHNLI-RPKILVDR-LYTNJSVNL-MPELAPIEDY382 |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T5 }$ | QFLGRYALLRKSKERQGLDGLNNLN-FANITYDA-LYKNTVNL-TPELAQVNEY388 |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T4 }$ | VNAERMKLLHQVSRVWRTDGLSSCSKLVSVEHNP-LYINITDFWFGA344 |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T3 }$ | ENPHRFDLLVRTQNSWTQGMNSLTYQLLARELGP-LYTHITADIGTDBRGPAPS GPRYPPGSSQAFRQEMLQRRPPARPGPLSTANHTALRGSH393 |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T2 }$ | PNPFRTKIQNTKLTMKRPGIGSVRYQVLEVS RQP-LFTHTVDIGRPPSWP-PRG372 |
| $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T1 }$ | PNPFDRIAHTKETMLS DGLNSLTQVLDVQRYP-LYTQTTVDIGTPS397 |
| W02B12.11 | PK-LIYKLGNSANRVAYDGINETDKWTIRKAKNIFSRM387 |

B


β4Gal-T7
    |
    |--- β4Gal-T5
        |
        |--- β4Gal-T6
            |
            |--- β4Gal-T1
                |
                |--- β4Gal-T2
                    |
                    |--- β4Gal-T3
                        |
                        |--- β4Gal-T4
                            |
                            |--- W02B12.11


FIG. 1. A, multiple sequence analysis (ClustalW) of human β4Gal-Ts and two C. elegans homologues. Introduced gaps are shown as hyphens, and aligned identical residues are boxed (black for all sequences, dark gray for eight and seven sequences, and light gray for six and five sequences). The putative transmembrane domain of β4Gal-T7 is underlined with a single line. The amino acid substitutions in β4Gal-T7<sup>186D</sup> and β4Gal-T7<sup>206P</sup> are indicated above the β4Gal-T7 sequence. Positions of intron/exon boundaries in β4Gal-T7 are indicated by solid arrows below the amino acid sequence, and the conserved boundaries in β4Gal-T1 to β4Gal-T4 indicated by solid arrows below the amino acid sequence of β4Gal-T1. Intron/exon boundaries in the two C. elegans homologues are indicated by solid arrows below the respective amino acid sequences. The genomic organizations of β4Gal-T5 and β4Gal-T6 are not completed. B, phylogenetic tree of human and two C. elegans β4Gal-T homologues. The phylogenetic tree (unrooted) was produced with DNASIS software (Hitachi) based on the ClustalW multiple sequence alignment analysis presented in A using the full coding sequences of the nine genes.

expected product in the literature or in glycoconjugate NMR data bases. The substantial anisotropic effects of the 4-methylumbelliferyl group obviates direct comparison of chemical shift data with those of other glycosides, e.g. linked to L-serine (23). Thus, a *de novo* sequence analysis of the product was undertaken by consecutive application of two-dimensional <sup>1</sup>H-<sup>1</sup>H TOCSY, <sup>1</sup>H-<sup>13</sup>C HSQC, and <sup>1</sup>H-<sup>13</sup>C HMBC NMR experiments (for a review of this strategy, see Ref. 24). Although <sup>1</sup>H chemical shift data were available for the Xylβ1→7MeUmb substrate (25), these were acquired in dimethyl sulfoxide-*d*<sub>6</sub>, which is known to alter proton shifts when compared with D<sub>2</sub>O solutions (26). Therefore, direct comparison of spectral data for the product were derived from an additional series of NMR experiments on the substrate glycoside dissolved in D<sub>2</sub>O. Thus, all

<sup>1</sup>H and <sup>13</sup>C resonances were uniquely and unambiguously assigned by the TOCSY and HSQC experiments (Table II). The H-5ax and H-5eq resonances for β-Xyl were assigned on the basis of their <sup>3</sup>*J*<sub>4,5</sub> coupling constants; the trends for <sup>1</sup>H resonances and coupling constants were similar to those observed for the corresponding L-serine glycosides (24); and the linkages were unambiguously established by observation of interglycosidic H1-C1-O1-Cx and C1-O1-Cx-Hx correlations in the HMBC spectrum. As shown in Fig. 2B, evidence of the newly formed Galβ1→4Xylβ linkage in the product is clearly demonstrated by strong cross-peaks correlating β-Gal H-1 (4.512 ppm) with β-Xyl C4 (76.02 ppm) and the corresponding β-Gal C-1 (101.60 ppm) with the β-Xyl H-4 resonance (3.972 ppm). Because β-Xyl H-4 is completely resolved and unique in its cou-

TABLE I  
**Acceptor substrate specificities of the secreted forms of β4Gal-T7 variants**

Background values obtained with uninfected cells or cells infected with an irrelevant construct were subtracted. The background was not higher than 0.4 nmol/min/ml. Me, methyl; Nph, nitrophenyl; Bzl, benzyl; ND, not determined.

| Secreted enzyme activity<sup>a</sup> | **β4Gal-T7** | **β4Gal-T7<sup>186D</sup>** | **β4Gal-T7<sup>206P</sup>** |
|-------------------------------------|---------------|-----------------------------|-----------------------------|
|                                   | **1 mM**      | **5 mM**                   | **1 mM**                   | **5 mM**                   | **1 mM**                   | **2 mM**                   |
|                                   | **nmol/min/ml** | **nmol/min/ml**            | **nmol/min/ml**            |
| 4-D-MeUmb-β-xylose                | 5.0           | 5.1                        | 1.4                        | 1.4                        | 0.0                        | 0.0                        |
| 2-O-Me-xylose                     | 0.2           | 0.2                        | 0.0                        | 0.1                        | 0.0                        | 0.0                        |
| p-Nph-3-xylose                    | 1.4           | 4.9                        | 0.3                        | 1.4                        | 0.0                        | 0.0                        |
| p-Nph-α-xylose                    | 0.0           | 0.6                        | 0.0                        | 0.2                        | 0.0                        | 0.0                        |
| Me-xylose                         | 0.6           | 2.2                        | 0.2                        | 0.5                        | 0.0                        | 0.0                        |
| O-Nph-β-xylose                    | 3.6           | 7.8                        | 0.8                        | 1.6                        | 0.0                        | 0.0                        |
| 4-D-MeUmb-β-GlcNAc                | ND            | 0.0                        | ND                         | 0.0                        | ND                         | 0.0                        |
| Bzl-β-GlcNAc                      | ND            | 0.2                        | ND                         | 0.0                        | ND                         | 0.0                        |
| 4-D-MeUmb-β-GalNAc                | ND            | 0.0                        | ND                         | 0.0                        | ND                         | 0.0                        |
| 4-D-MeUmb-β-Glc                   | ND            | 0.0                        | ND                         | 0.0                        | ND                         | 0.0                        |
| Enzyme activity in cells<sup>b</sup> |              |                            |                             |                             |                             |                             |
| 4-D-MeUmb-β-xylose                | ND            | 73.3                       | ND                         | 7.5                        | ND                         | 0.0                        |

<sup>a</sup> Enzyme source was spent media of infected S19 cells harvested at day 3.  
<sup>b</sup> Enzyme source was 1% Triton X-100 homogenates of approximately \(4 \times 10^5\) infected S19 cells harvested at day 3 (the total extraction volume was 100 μl).

---

TABLE II  
**<sup>1</sup>H, <sup>13</sup>C chemical shifts (ppm) and <sup>1</sup>H-<sup>1</sup>H coupling constants (Hz) for XylβMU substrate and biosynthetic Galβ4XylβMU product in D<sub>2</sub>O at 25 °C**

Chemical shifts are referenced to internal acetone (2.225 and 30.00 ppm for <sup>1</sup>H and <sup>13</sup>C, respectively).

| XylβMU Xylβ | **Galβ4** | **Xylβ** |
|--------------|-----------|----------|
| H-1          | 5.196<sup>a</sup> | 4.512   | 5.200    |
| H-2          | 3.619<sup>a</sup> | 3.548   | 3.667    |
| H-3          | 3.595     | 3.666   | 3.763    |
| H-4          | 3.741     | 3.933   | 3.972    |
| H-5<sub>ax</sub> | 3.552     | 3.726   | 3.640    |
| H-5<sub>eq</sub> | 4.064     |         | 4.212    |
| H-6a         |           | 3.829   |          |
| H-6b         |           | 3.767   |          |
| J<sub>1,2</sub> | 7.3       | 7.9     | 7.6      |
| J<sub>2,3</sub> | 9.3       | 10.0    | 9.3      |
| J<sub>3,4</sub> | 9.2       | 3.4     | 9.0      |
| J<sub>4,5ax</sub> | 10.4      | 0.7     | 10.3     |
| J<sub>4,5eq</sub> | 5.4       |         | 5.4      |
| J<sub>5ax,5eq</sub> | –11.5     |         | –11.6    |
| J<sub>5,6a</sub> |           | 8.3     |          |
| J<sub>5,6b</sub> |           | 3.8     |          |
| J<sub>6a,6b</sub> |           | –11.7   |          |
| C-1          | 99.99     | 101.60  | 99.85    |
| C-2          | 72.40     | 70.42   | 72.26    |
| C-3          | 75.17     | 72.41   | 73.46    |
| C-4          | 68.75     | 68.41   | 76.02    |
| C-5          | 65.11     | 75.15   | 62.96    |
| C-6          |           | 60.92   |          |

<sup>a</sup> Chemical shifts of Xylβ H-1 and H-2 are somewhat concentration-dependent (H-1, 5.173 ppm; H-2, 4.609 ppm; in dilute solution). Values given are for saturated solution.

β4Gal-T7, Seventh Member of β4-Galactosyltransferase Family

A
Galβ4Xylβ7MU

Xylβ-1
Galβ4-1
Xylβ-3+
Galβ4-6'
Galβ4-6
Galβ4-4
Xylβ-4
Xylβ-5eq
Galβ4-5
Galβ4-3
+ Xylβ-2
Xylβ-5ax
Galβ4-2

B

F1
MU-C7/Xylβ-H1 (C7 folded)
Xylβ-C4/Galβ-H1
Galβ-C1/Xylβ-H4

F2 (ppm)

FIG. 2. A, sections of a one-dimensional ¹H NMR spectrum of the β4Gal-T7 product, Galβ1→4Xylβ1→7MU, showing all nonexchangeable monosaccharide ring methine and exocyclic methylene resonances. Residue designations for β-Gal (Galβ4-) and β-Xyl (Xylβ-) are followed by proton designations (1–6 and 6′ and 1–5ax/eq, for the two residues, respectively). B, section of the ¹H-detected ¹H-¹³C HMBC spectrum showing interglycosidic H1–C1–O1–Cx and C1–O1–Cx–Hx correlations. Cross-peaks marked by ovals or cross-hairs. The unmarked cross-peaks are all intraresidue correlations.

sulfate proteoglycans had been found (14). However, it is also possible that only a single galactosyltransferase I gene exists and that the active mutant allele, β4Gal-T7¹⁸⁶D, has differential catalytic efficiency for transferring galactose to proteoglycans with different densities of glycosaminoglycan attachment sites. Independent studies on chemically mutagenized Chinese hamster ovary cells are in agreement with the proposal that either only a single galactosyltransferase I exists or that, alternatively, a single auxiliary protein for these enzymes is required. Interestingly, the mutant Chinese hamster ovary

26170

$\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7, Seventh Member of } \beta 4-\text { Galactosyltransferase Family }$

FIG. 3. Northern blot analysis of human tissues. A multiple human Northern blot, MTNI, from CLONTECH was probed with the secreted expression construct of $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7. The size of the labeled transcript is approximately 2 kilobases, but the transcript in skeletal muscle may be larger (approximately 2.2 kilobases). }$

I: $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7}_{186D}$ allele

| A Patient | B Mother | C Father |
| --- | --- | --- |
| $557 \downarrow \mathrm{CA}$<br>$\mathrm{CGTGGACTCCCC}$ | $557 \downarrow \mathrm{CA}$<br>$\mathrm{CGTGGACTCCCC}$ | $557 \downarrow \mathrm{C}$<br>$\mathrm{CGTGGCCTCCCC}$ |

| D Sibling 1 | E Sibling 2 | F Control |
| --- | --- | --- |
| $557 \downarrow \mathrm{C}$<br>$\mathrm{TGCGGCTCCXXX}$ | $557 \downarrow \mathrm{CA}$<br>$\mathrm{CGTGGACTCCCC}$ | $557 \downarrow \mathrm{C}$<br>$\mathrm{GGCCTCCCC}$ |

II: $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7}_{206P}$ allele

| A Patient | B Mother | C Father |
| --- | --- | --- |
| $617 \downarrow \mathrm{TC}$<br>$\mathrm{CTGCCNCTCCAAG}$ | $617 \downarrow \mathrm{T}$<br>$\mathrm{TGCCTCTCCAAG}$ | $617 \downarrow \mathrm{TC}$<br>$\mathrm{CTGCCNCTCCAAG}$ |

| D Sibling 1 | E Sibling 2 | F Control |
| --- | --- | --- |
| $617 \downarrow \mathrm{TC}$<br>$\mathrm{CTGCCNCTCCAAG}$ | $617 \downarrow \mathrm{T}$<br>$\mathrm{GCTGCTCTCCAAG}$ | $617 \downarrow \mathrm{T}$<br>$\mathrm{TGCCTCTCCAAG}$ |

FIG. 4. Sequence analysis of position $\mathrm{C}^{557}$ and $\mathrm{T}^{617}$ in a patient with a progeroid syndrome and signs of the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, four family members, and a control blood donor. Part of coding exon III was PCR amplified, and the product was directly sequenced. $I$, sequence window of position 557. $II$, sequence window of position 617. The patient is heterozygous for both identified mutations ($557 \mathrm{CA}$ and $617 \mathrm{TC}$). The mother and sibling 2 are heterozygous for one mutation ($557 \mathrm{CA}$), whereas the father and sibling 1 are heterozygous for the other mutation ($617 \mathrm{TC}$).

cells, which exhibited only about 2% of the normal level of galactosyltransferase I activity, could prime glycosaminoglycan synthesis on exogenously added $\beta$-xylosides (30), although this activity may stem from $\beta \operatorname{Glc}(N \mathrm{Ac}) \beta 4 \text { GalTs }(7,31)$.

The catalytic properties of $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }$ resemble those of a partially purified galactosyltransferase I activity derived from embryonic chick cartilage (11). Both enzyme activities showed a $K_{m}$ for UDP-Gal of approximately $50 \mu \mathrm{M}$. Analysis of $K_{m}$ for

FIG. 5. Western blot analysis of the expression of $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }^{186D}$ and $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }^{206P}$ in Sf9 cells. A, Coomassie stain. B, immunoblotting with monoclonal anti-$\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }$ antibody, URH1. Cells were harvested 60 h postinfection. The band labeled in cells infected with pAcGP67-$\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7-sol variants is approximately 35,000, which is in agreement with the calculated mass of the recombinant secreted protein if the single N-glycosylation site is utilized. }$

the donor substrate with cell extracts appear to give higher $K_{m}$ of $100 \mu \mathrm{M}(12)$ or $170 \mu \mathrm{M}(14)$. Apparent $K_{m}$ values for different acceptor substrates tested vary around $0.5-6 \mathrm{mM}(14)$. The properties of the recombinant allelic variants of $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }$, $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }^{186D}$ and $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }^{206P}$ were not in agreement with the properties of the galactosyltransferase I activity measured in extracts of fibroblasts from a patient with galactosyltransferase I deficiency (14). The catalytically active allele, $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }^{186D}$, exhibited an approximately 2-fold lower $K_{m}$ for the acceptor substrate MeUmb-$\beta$-Xyl, whereas the extract of patient cells had a 2-fold higher $K_{m}$ for xylosyl-serine compared with control cells. Furthermore, $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }^{186D}$ had a 4-fold higher $K_{m}$ for the donor substrate, whereas extracts exhibited an almost 7-fold lower $K_{m}$ than control cells. Additionally, only about $30-70 \%$ of the secreted decorin was devoid of the glycosaminoglycan chain, whereas the mature proteoglycan even contained longer dermatan sulfate chains. These discrepancies are likely related in part to experimental variation. Analysis of glycosyltransferase activities in extracts may be influenced by a number of factors. It is possible that multiple enzymes catalyze formation of the same linkage with different kinetic properties. Other factors in extracts may interfere or bind substrates. Furthermore, the properties of recombinant secreted forms of the enzyme may be different than those found with the transmembrane enzyme in cell homogenates. The total activity assessed in the patient fibroblasts was approximately $5 \%$ compared with controls, whereas both parents showed $50 \%$ reduction in activities. The $5 \%$ activity measured in the patient is likely to originate from the $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }^{186D}$ allele. The recombinant form of this allele was comparatively more active (Table I), but its poorer kinetic properties, potentially combined with a lower stability in cells or extracts (14), may account for the reduction in activities observed in the patient and parents. One unexplained observation from the study of Quentin et al. (14) was that the $\beta 3$-galactosyltransferase II activity forming the Gal$\beta 1-3 \text { Gal }\beta 1-4 \text { Xyl }\beta 1-O$-Ser structure was also reduced in the patient and parents. Further studies of the in vivo functions of the allelic variants of $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }$ are required to fully assess their functions in proteoglycan biosynthesis.

The identified mutations in $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T7 }$ are in the putative catalytic domain and involve residues that are partly or fully conserved among members of the $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T }$ gene family (Fig. 1A). The effects of these substitutions are in agreement with predictions based on x-ray crystallography data on the catalytic unit of $\beta 4 \text { Gal-T1. }^{4}$ The region around Ala${ }^{186}$ corresponds to a

$^{4}$ Gastinel, L. N., Cambillau, C., and Bourne, Y. (1999) EMBO J. 18,

segment in β4Gal-T1 that is included in the protein core. The adjacent Pro and His residues at positions 182 and 184 in β4Gal-T7 are strictly conserved among all human β4GalT sequences. Ala<sup>186</sup> of β4Gal-T7 corresponds to Ser<sup>274</sup> in β4Gal-T1. Ser<sup>274</sup> is in a region close (less than 5 angstrom distance) to the UDP-Gal binding site and may interact with this and hence explain the poorer kinetic properties of the β4Gal-T7<sup>186D</sup> variant. The Gly<sup>201</sup>-Gly<sup>202</sup> adjacent to Leu<sup>206</sup> are strictly conserved among β4Gal-T sequences, and they are included in the catalytic pocket of β4Gal-T1. Leu<sup>206</sup> is also strictly conserved in all sequences, and the corresponding Leu<sup>296</sup> in β4Gal-T1 is included in a network of hydrophobic interactions in the protein core with aromatic residue Phe<sup>301</sup>, Phe<sup>307</sup>, Phe<sup>290</sup>, and Leu<sup>325</sup>. The Pro<sup>206</sup> substitution in β4Gal-T7<sup>206P</sup> is predicted to markedly change the fold of the protein core, which is in agreement with the observed lack of activity of this variant.

Galactosyltransferase I has been considered as a cis-Golgi located enzyme in epiphyseal cartilage (32) and is believed to be noncovalently associated with the protein xylosyltransferase (33, 34). The sequence of β4Gal-T7 predicts relatively long cytoplasmic (28 residues) and transmembrane (30 residues) domains compared with other β4Gal-Ts and Golgi-located glycosyltransferases in general. The cytoplasmic domain and the stem region are hydrophilic. We have not identified putative motifs that are predicted to mediate binding to the protein xylosyltransferase. The availability of recombinant β4Gal-T7 and antibodies thereto may provide tools for studying the interaction and possibly cloning the xylosyltransferase.

Two homologues of the β4Gal-T gene family have been identified in the nematode *Caenorhabditis elegans* (35). In a phylogenetic analysis presented by Lo et al. (36) the gene W02B12.11 (designated C. 2) (GenBank™ accession number Z66521) clustered with the β4Gal-T5 and β4Gal-T6 subgroup, while the gene R10E11.4 (designated C. elegans 1) (GenBank™ accession number Z29095) was not clustered. If β4Gal-T7 is included in this analysis, the R10E11.4 gene and β4Gal-T7 form a separate cluster (Fig. 1B). The close relationship between W02B12.11 and β4Gal-T1 to β4Gal-T6 is further supported by the finding that two of the four intron positions in W02B12.11 align with the conserved intron/exon boundaries in β4Gal-T1 to β4Gal-T4 (Fig. 1A). In addition, the predicted coding region of W02B12.11 includes the four conserved cysteine residues in β4Gal-T1 to β4Gal-T6. An evolutionary relationship between R10E11.4 and β4Gal-T7 is suggested by the sequence similarity, and this includes substitutions in the same positions in major conserved sequence motif among most β4Gal-Ts (Fig. 1). However, the substituted residues are not similar, and cysteine residues are not conserved, although two residues in the very C-terminal sequences do align between the two sequences (Fig. 1A). The coding region of R10E11.4 is organized in six exons, and none of the intron/exon boundaries align with those of β4Gal-T1 to β4Gal-T4, nor do they align with β4Gal-T7.

The R10E11.4 gene corresponds to the *sqv-3* gene found to play a critical role in vulval invagination in *C. elegans* (37). Glycosyltransferase activity of the protein encoded by either of the *C. elegans* β4Gal-T homologues have not been reported to our knowledge, but recent expression of a soluble, secreted construct of R10E11.4 in insect cells demonstrated similar activity as reported here for human β4Gal-T7.<sup>5</sup> Another gene found to play a role in vulval invagination in *C. elegans* is *sqv-8* (37), which showed high sequence similarity to the recently cloned β1,3-glucuronosyltransferase that adds the fourth residue to the proteoglycan linkage region tetrasaccharide

3546–3557.

<sup>5</sup> R. Almeida and H. Clausen, unpublished observation.
(GlcAβ1–3Galβ1–3Galβ1–4Xylβ1-O-Ser) (38). The finding that impairment of the *sqv-3* and *sqv-8* genes in nematodes produce the same defect in vulval invagination would be in agreement with the hypothesis that both of these genes were involved in synthesis of the proteoglycan linkage region tetrasaccharide, albeit at different steps. Identification of the molecular genetic basis for the defect in proteoglycan biosynthesis of the patient studied here suggests that extensive studies of genetic defects in patients with progeroid syndromes and other inherited connective tissue disorders should be undertaken.

Acknowledgments—We thank Dr. Louis Gastinel for sequence analysis of the β4Gal-T7 variants, Dr. Michael A. Hollingsworth for many helpful suggestions and critical reading of the manuscript, and Tom Caffrey and Naoaki Akisawa for technical assistance.

REFERENCES

1. Narimatsu, H., Sinha, S., Brew, K., Okayama, H., and Qasba, P. K. (1986) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **83**, 4720–4724

2. Shaper, N. L., Hollis, G. F., Douglas, J. G., Kirsch, I. R., and Shaper, J. H. (1988) *J. Biol. Chem.* **263**, 10420–10428

3. Masri, K. A., Appert, H. E., and Fukuda, M. N. (1988) *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **157**, 657–663

4. Almeida, R., Amado, M., David, L., Levery, S. B., Holmes, E. H., Merkx, G., van Kessel, A. G., Hassan, H., Bennett, E. P., and Clausen, H. (1997) *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 31979–31992

5. Sato, T., Furukawa, K., Bakker, H., Van den Eijnden, D. H., and Van Die, I. (1998) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **95**, 472–477

6. Nomura, T., Takizawa, M., Aoki, J., Arai, H., Inoue, K., Wakisaka, E., Yoshizuka, N., Imokawa, G., Dohmae, N., Takio, K., Hattori, M., and Matsuo, N. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 13570–13577

7. Schwientek, T., Almeida, R., Levery, S. B., Holmes, E., Bennett, E. P., and Clausen, H. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 29331–29340

8. Amado, M., Almeida, R., Schwientek, T., and Clausen, H. (1999) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta*, in press

9. Hollis, G. F., Douglas, J. G., Shaper, N. L., Shaper, J. H., Stafford-Hollis, J. M., Evans, R. J., and Kirsch, I. R. (1989) *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **162**, 1069–1075

10. Mengele-Gaw, L., McCoy-Haman, M. F., and Tiemeier, D. C. (1991) *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **176**, 1269–1276

11. Schwartz, N. B., and Rodén, L. (1975) *J. Biol. Chem.* **250**, 5200–5207

12. Helting, T., and Rodén, L. (1969) *J. Biol. Chem.* **244**, 2790–2798

13. Helting, T., and Rodén, L. (1968) *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **31**, 786–791

14. Quentin, E., Gladen, A., Rodén, L., and Kresse, H. (1990) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **87**, 1342–1346

15. Quentin-Hoffmann, E., Harrach, B., Robenek, H., and Kresse, H. (1993) *Pädiatr. Pädol.* **28**, 37–41

16. Kresse, H., Rosthøj, S., Quentin, E., Hollmann, J., Glossl, J., Okada, S., and Tonnesen, T. (1987) *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* **41**, 436–453

17. Breathnach, R., and Chambon, P. (1981) *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* **50**, 349–383

18. Bennett, E. P., Hassan, H., and Clausen, H. (1996) *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 17006–17012

19. Wandall, H. H., Hassan, H., Mirgorodskaya, E., Kristensen, A. K., Røepstorff, P., Bennett, E. P., Nielsen, P. A., Hollingsworth, M. A., Burchell, J., Taylor-Papadimitriou, J., and Clausen, H. (1997) *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 23503–23514

20. Schwientek, T., Nomoto, M., Levery, S. B., Merkx, G., van Kessel, A. G., Bennett, E. P., Hollingsworth, M. A., and Clausen, H. (1999) *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 4504–4512

21. Mandel, U., Hassan, H., Therkildsen, M. H., Rygaard, J., Jakobsen, M. H., Juhl, B. R., Dabelsteen, E., and Clausen, H. (1999) *Glycobiology* **9**, 43–52

22. Kozak, M. (1991) *J. Biol. Chem.* **266**, 19867–19870

23. van Halbeek, H., Dorland, L., Veldink, G. A., Vliegenthart, J. F., Garegg, P. J., Norberg, T., and Lindberg, B. (1982) *Eur. J. Biochem.* **127**, 1–6

24. Bush, C. A. (1988) *Bull. Magn. Reson.* **10**, 73–95

25. Manzi, A., Salimath, P. V., Spiro, R. C., Keifer, P. A., and Freeze, H. H. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 9154–9163

26. Dabrowski, J., Hanfland, P., and Egge, H. (1980) *Biochemistry* **19**, 5652–5658

27. Gorin, P. A. J. (1981) *Adv. Carbohydr. Chem. Biochem.* **38**, 13–104

28. Kjellen, L., and Lindahl, U. (1991) *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* **60**, 443–475

29. Shworak, N. W., Liu, J., Petros, L. M., Zhang, L., Kobayashi, M., Copeland, N. G., Jenkins, N. A., and Rosenberg, R. D. (1999) *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 5170–5184

30. Esko, J. D., Weiske, J. L., Taylor, W. H., Ekborg, G., Rodén, L., Anantharamaiah, G., and Gawish, A. (1987) *J. Biol. Chem.* **262**, 12189–12195

31. Khatra, B.S., Herries, D.G., and Brew, K. (1974) *Eur. J. Biochem.* **44**, 537–560

32. Sugumaran, G., and Silbert, J. E. (1991) *J. Biol. Chem.* **266**, 9565–9569

33. Schwartz, N. B., Rodén, L., and Dorfman, A. (1974) *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **56**, 717–724

34. Schwartz, N. B. (1975) *FEBS Lett.* **49**, 342–345

35. Wilson, R., Ainscough, R., Anderson, K., *et al.* (1994) *Nature* **368**, 32–38

36. Lo, N.-W., Shaper, J. H., Pevsner, J., and Shaper, N. L. (1998) *Glycobiology* **8**, 517–526

37. Herman, T., and Horvitz, R. H. (1999) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **96**, 974–979

38. Kitagawa, H., Tone, Y., Tamura, J., Neumann, K. W., Ogawa, T., Oka, S., Kawasaki, T., and Sugahara, K. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 6615–6618

CARBOHYDRATES, LIPIDS, AND  
OTHER NATURAL PRODUCTS:  
Cloning and Expression of a Proteoglycan  
UDP-Galactose: β-Xylose β  
1,4-Galactosyltransferase I: A SEVENTH  
MEMBER OF THE HUMAN β  
4-GALACTOSYLTRANSFERASE GENE  
FAMILY  

Raquel Almeida, Steven B. Levery, Ulla  
Mandel, Hans Kresse, Tilo Schwientek, Eric  
P. Bennett and Henrik Clausen  
J. Biol. Chem. 1999, 274:26165-26171.  
doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.37.26165  

Access the most updated version of this article at [http://www.jbc.org/content/274/37/26165](http://www.jbc.org/content/274/37/26165)

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the [JBC Affinity Sites](https://www.jbc.org/site/affinity-sites).

Alerts:
- [When this article is cited](#)
- [When a correction for this article is posted](#)

[Click here](#) to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts

This article cites 37 references, 21 of which can be accessed free at  
[http://www.jbc.org/content/274/37/26165.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/274/37/26165.full.html#ref-list-1)
