
reviews

# Bacterial Type II protein export and pilus biogenesis: more than just homologies?

David Nunn

Protein export by Gram-negative bacteria requires devoted machineries to allow for the passage of hydrolytic enzymes and toxins through the cell envelope. The Type II export machinery has a number of distinct characteristics, which include its role as an extension of Sec-dependent secretion, its ability to recognize and export fully folded substrates efficiently and, perhaps most significantly, the relationship between a subset of its gene products with the Type IV pilus-biogenesis apparatus. An important question is whether we can extrapolate our knowledge, albeit limited, of
TABLE 1 – TYPE I–IV PROTEIN-EXPORT SYSTEMS OF GRAM-NEGATIVE BACTERIA, REPRESENTATION ORGANISMS AND EXOPROTEINS SECRETED BY EACH

| Type | Number of components | Sec-dependent | Similarities to other bacterial processes | Organisms | Exoproteins |
|------|-----------------------|---------------|------------------------------------------|-----------|-------------|
| 1    | 3                     | No            | ABC transporters                        | E. coli    | Hemolysin, colicin V |
|      |                       |               | Pseudomonas aeruginosa                  |          
reviews

Q P R S T U V W X Y Z
Secretin NTPase? Pseudopilins P. aeruginosa Xcp
Prepilin peptidase

C D E F G H I J K L M N O
Secretin NTPase? Pseudopilins Preplin peptidase E. carotovora Out

C D E F G H I J K L M O
Secretin NTPase? Pseudopilins Prepilin peptidase E. chrysanthemi Out

C D E F G H I J K L
Later steps in the maturation of pilin are not clear. Dissolution of the assembled *P. aeruginosa* pilus with a mild detergent leads to the isolation of homodimers, suggesting that dimerization might be an important step in maturation³⁵. Here again, evidence suggests that, with both PilA and the pseudopilins, this process is independent of and might precede cleavage and methylation by PilD³⁶. A dramatic demonstration of the potential relatedness of the two systems is the observation that the PilA subunit is able to form mixed oligomers (most likely heterodimers)
known diameters of the phage f1 (65 Å)⁴⁵ and Type IV pili (52 Å)⁴⁶. The ID of XcpQ is about twice as large (95 Å)⁹, putatively allowing passage of fully folded proteins. It must be noted, however, that these apparent internal diameters might be a reflection of the manner in which the secretins were prepared for analysis (native vs denaturing conditions).

### Components specific to the Type II export apparatus

In addition to the subset of the Type II export proteins that are highly related to those of the Type IV pilus bi
recognition, but these have either been fairly large or require contributions of multiple areas of the protein<sup>58-60</sup>. Until we have more extensive data on crystallographic structures of various exoproteins, where we might recognize a particular shared fold or surface structure, it might be very difficult to identify a specificity determinant or domain.

Attempts to exchange homologous components of the Type II export apparatus between the various bacterial systems have been largely unsuccessful. This probably reflects the specific protein-protein interactions required for assembly and function of each. This approach also has been used to address the question of which components of the machinery are responsible
others. There are also additional genes specifically required for Type IV pilus biogenesis and function. An appreciation of both the similarities and differences between these systems will be invaluable for their complete understanding. It is also important to keep in mind that these processes do not exist in a ‘vacuum’. Evidence suggests that periplasmic disulfide isomerases, which play a multitude of roles in the cell, also affect the assembly and function of the export apparatus^{64,65} and Type IV pilus biogenesis^{66}. It also seems likely that both the export apparatus and assembling pilus must coordinate with peptidogly