
Cancer and Metastasis Reviews 18: 15–30, 1999.  
© 1999 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.

# Cadherins and catenins: Role in signal transduction and tumor progression

## Jürgen Behrens  
**Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany**

### Key words: cell adhesion, wnt signaling, metastasis formation, cadherins, catenins

### Abstract

Cadherins are transmembrane cell–cell adhesion molecules which are connected to the cytoskeleton by association with the cytoplasmic proteins, α-, β-, and γ-catenin (plakoglobin). β-catenin has an additional role in the wnt signal transduction pathway in which it transmits signals to the cell nucleus in complexes with transcription factors of the LEF-1/TCF family. The cell adhesion function of the epithelial E-cadherin is frequently disturbed in carcinomas either by downregulation or by mutation of the E-cadherin/catenin genes. The signaling function of β-catenin is activated in tumors by mutations of β-catenin or of the tumor suppressor gene product APC. In this review I will give an introduction to the structure and function of the cadherin/catenin complex and summarize findings which support a decisive role of these components in the development of cancer.

---

### 1. Structure and function of cadherins and catenins

‘Classic’ cadherins are Ca++-dependent cell–cell adhesion molecules which interact in a homophilic manner, i.e. cadherins of the same type bind to each other. Different cadherins are found in many – probably all – solid tissues [1]. Other members of the cadherin superfamily include the desmosomal cadherins (desmogleins and desmocollins) which are associated with the keratin filament network, and the protocadherins which are distantly related to the classical cadherins in their extracellular domains and differ completely in their cytoplasmic tail [2]. Classic cadherins consist of an extracellular adhesive domain, a transmembrane segment, and a cytoplasmic domain. The extracellular domain is composed of five repeated units of about 110 amino acids; the adhesive interface is located at the most amino-terminal repeat. Structural data suggest that the extracellular domains form lateral dimers on the cell surface which interact with dimers from opposing cells to create a zipper-like structure [3,4]. The highly conserved cytoplasmic domain interacts with the catenins which connect cadherins to the actin cytoskeleton. The cadherin/catenin complexes are localized to actin-based adherens junction in many cell types and the connection to the cytoskeleton is crucial for efficient cell–cell adhesion [5,6]. The carboxy-terminal part of the cytoplasmic domain associates with β-catenin or plakoglobin (also called γ-catenin) whereas the juxta-membrane part binds to p120ctn [6,7]. Originally, catenins have been identified as components which co-immunoprecipitate with cadherins. β-catenin, its *Drosophila* homologue armadillo and the closely related plakoglobin share a core domain of 12 repeats of about 40 amino acids, the so-called arm-repeat domain that form a rod-like superhelix of α-helices [8,9]. β-catenin and plakoglobin directly interact with the cytoplasmic tail of cadherins but form mutually exclusive complexes [10]. Via their amino-terminal domains both proteins associate with the vinculin-related protein α-catenin which in turn makes contact to actin filaments [10–14]. p120ctn (originally termed p120cas) was identified as a prominent substrate of the Src kinase and was subsequently shown to bind to cadherins. p120ctn contains a central arm-repeat domain but does not bind to α-catenin or other interaction partners of β-catenin [15]. Its function in

the E-cadherin/catenin complex is unclear but may involve cross-linking of cadherins and stabilization of dimers [7].

$\beta$-Catenin/armadillo also binds to numerous other partners in cadherin-independent complexes. Among these, the interactions with the tumor suppressor gene product APC, the LEF-1/TCF transcription factors, the RGS domain proteins axin and conductin, and the *Drosophila* zinc finger protein teashirt play crucial roles in the wnt-signaling pathway (see below). Further associations of $\beta$-catenin have also been reported with the actin-bundling protein fascin [16], the transmembrane glycoprotein Muc-1 [17], the Alzheimer's disease protein presenilin [18], and the TATA box binding protein pontin52 [19]. The functional relevance of these latter interactions is less well characterized.

Structurally cadherins and catenins form highly organized complexes which establish a direct connection between adjacent cells and their cytoskeletal networks. Functional studies showed that forced expression of cadherins in mammalian cells increases cell–cell adhesion [20,21], whereas disturbance of cadherin function by specific antibodies leads to loss of cell–cell contacts [22]. Furthermore mixtures of cells expressing different cadherins efficiently sort out *in vitro*, a process which resembles sorting out of tissues *in vivo* [23]. Cadherins also influence several other cellular functions including migration, invasiveness and differentiation of cells, and induce specific molecular responses, such as changes in the organization of the cytoskeleton and in the expression of proteases or other cell adhesion receptors [24].

Cadherins show characteristic tissue-specific expression patterns and have been proposed to act as morphogenetic regulators during development [1,20,24]. Some of the *in vivo* aspects of cadherin function were recently revealed by overexpression of cadherins in chimeric animals and gene ablation in ‘knock out’ animals. Forced expression of full-size cadherins or dominant-negative mutants in the intestinal epithelium elicited pleiotropic effects on cell adhesion, migration, proliferation and apoptosis [25–27]. Mutation of the epithelial E-cadherin gene leads to early embryonic lethality which is preceded by loss of cell–cell adhesion at the morula stage [28,29]. The knock-out of the neural N-cadherin gene leads to disturbances of neural structures and somites and to failures in heart development [30], and P (placental)-cadherin mutant mice show deficiencies in mammary gland differentiation [31]. Lack of catenins also results

in strong developmental defects. Mutation of $\beta$-catenin affects mesoderm formation at gastrulation [32], mutation of plakoglobin leads to cell adhesion defects in heart muscle development [33,34] and mutation of $\alpha$-catenin disturbs cell adhesion at the morula stage [35]. The results show that cadherins are indeed essential for different aspects of tissue formation, and that the connection to catenins is crucial for cadherin function *in vivo*.

---

### 2. Regulation of cadherin-mediated cell adhesion

Cell adhesion by cadherins is altered under several physiological conditions, for instance during tissue remodeling, migration of cells or cytokinesis. In some of these processes cadherins are downregulated or a switch in cadherin subtype expression occurs [36]. For instance during formation of the neural tube specific areas of the ectoderm loose expression of E-cadherin and gain expression of the neural N-cadherin. During emigration of neural crest cells N-cadherin expression is downregulated and resumed when the cells reaggregate to form ganglia [37].

Cadherins can also be transiently modulated, and several molecular mechanisms which affect cadherin function have been described. Members of the rho family of small GTPases (rho, rac, cdc42) which are regulators of the actin cytoskeleton also seem to regulate cadherins. Activation of rho and rac was shown to increase the amount of cytoskeleton-associated E-cadherin and $\beta$-catenin, while blocking of these components led to the disappearance of cadherins from adherens junctions [38,39]. Cadherin-dependent cell adhesion was also increased by the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Tiam1 which specifically activates rac [40]. A molecular link between rac1/cdc42 and the cadherin system was recently established by the finding that IQGAP1 directly associates with $\beta$-catenin and also E-cadherin [41]. IQGAP1 has characteristics of a downstream effector Rac1 and cdc42. In E-cadherin transfected cells IQGAP1 was found to localize at cell junctions, and overexpression of IQGAP1 induced dissociation of cell clusters probably through competitive displacement of $\alpha$-catenin from the E-cadherin complex. Co-expression of dominant-active Cdc42 prevented cell-dissociation indicating that Cdc42 negatively regulates IQGAP1 in this system.

Cadherin mediated cell adhesion is strongly regulated by activation of tyrosine kinases (reviewed in Ref. 42). Treatment of epithelial cells by vanadate, which blocks tyrosine phosphatases, leads to rapid and reversible loss of cell contacts. Furthermore, several non-receptor tyrosine kinases such as c-src and related proteins are localized to the cadherin-based adherens junctions. Activation of the v-src kinase leads to cell dissociation which is also observed when receptor tyrosine kinases such as c-Met or the EGF receptor are activated by their ligands. Concomitant to these effects on cell junctions, strong and reversible tyrosine phosphorylation of β-catenin was observed which in some but not all studies led to dissociation of α-catenin from the complex. It is also of interest that a number of tyrosine kinases and phosphatases have been shown to directly interact with cadherins/catenins [42]. c-erbB2 binds to the carboxy-terminal arm repeats of β-catenin, and interference with this association by N-terminally deleted β-catenin fragments suppresses invasion and metastasis of gastric cancer cells [43]. Inhibition of the protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B by a dominant-negative mutant was shown to increase the fraction of tyrosine phosphorylated β-catenin resulting in its displacement from N-cadherin [44]. Concomitantly the association of N-cadherin with actin as well as N-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion was blocked. Since PTP1B can directly associate with N-cadherin it may serve to locally counteract the anti-adhesive effects of tyrosine kinases present at the adherens junctions. From these studies it was concluded that tyrosine kinases are mainly negative regulators of cell adhesion and that oncogenic activation of these kinases in tumors contributes to invasion and metastasis by inhibiting E-cadherin function [45,46]. Recent analyses in keratinocytes, however, revealed that tyrosine phosphorylation of catenins can also have positive effects on cadherin-mediated adhesion [47]. Establishment of cell contacts by switching keratinocyte from low to high calcium medium was paralleled by an increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of β-catenin, plakoglobin and p120ctn. Members of the src family of tyrosine kinases were implicated in this effect since keratinocytes from mice genetically deficient in c-src or c-fyn showed absence of Ca++-induced tyrosine phosphorylation and, most importantly, exhibited reduced cell adhesion [47]. A possible conclusion from these studies is that normal physiological levels of tyrosine phosphorylation support the formation of cadherin-based cell contacts whereas increased levels

e.g. from oncogenically activated tyrosine kinases have the opposite effect.

## 3. Role of cadherins during cancer development

Tumor cells exhibit a variety of phenotypic alterations compared to normal cells. Among the most prominent features are changes in cellular morphology and histological differentiation which has been the basis for standard pathological examination of tumors. It has been realized quite early that changes in intercellular adhesion – often in focal areas – accompany tumor dedifferentiation and that malignant cells adhere considerably less efficient to each other than normal cells [48]. With the identification of E-cadherin as the major epithelial cell–cell adhesion molecule a potential molecular target for these alterations was found. Work from our group and others established that (i) E-cadherin was frequently downregulated in transformed epithelial cells and human carcinoma cells which correlated with a dedifferentiated phenotype and increased invasiveness in *in vitro* model systems, (ii) disturbance of E-cadherin function by monoclonal antibodies led to the induction of invasiveness in otherwise non-invasive normal epithelial cells, and (iii) forced expression of E-cadherin by cDNA transfection of E-cadherin-negative cells blocked invasiveness [49–52].

Several studies analyzed the effects of reconstitution of E-cadherin in tumor cells *in vivo*. After injection into nude mice E-cadherin transfectants of transformed epithelial cells formed well-differentiated tumors which differed from the undifferentiated tumors of the parental cells [52]. Transfectants which had lost expression of the exogenous E-cadherin again showed invasive behaviour. Transfection of E-cadherin into human mammary breast cancer cells reduced metastasis formation in the bone marrow after injection of the cells into the arterial circulation of nude mice [53], or prevented lung metastasis formation after orthotopic transplantation into the mouse mammary fat pad [54]. In a mouse model system for pancreas carcinoma formation E-cadherin expression was found to be downregulated upon transition from the well-differentiated adenoma to the invasive carcinoma stage. Most instructively, transgenic expression of E-cadherin in these mice prevented this progression step whereas expression of a dominant-negative form of E-cadherin promoted early invasion and metastasis [55].

The experimental data promoted investigations into E-cadherin’s function in ‘real’ tumors *in vivo*.

Numerous immunohistochemical studies showed alterations in E-cadherin/catenin expression in various tumor samples. Without going into details I will shortly summarize the main findings. Downregulation of E-cadherin expression was found in a variety of carcinomas (see Ref. 56, 57 for reviews). Loss of expression was predominant in tumors with a low differentiation grade and correlated with poor prognosis [56]. In some tumor types, E-cadherin was absent in the primary tumor but re-established in the metastases of the same patient suggesting that downregulation in these cases was a transient event [58]. The analysis of catenin expression in tumors revealed a similar downregulation of these components [59–62]. In some cases E-cadherin expression was preserved but cell adhesion appeared to be disturbed by absence of one of the catenins [59]. Taken together, the studies performed so far indicate that loss of E-cadherin and the catenins is a consistent event in dedifferentiated carcinomas. Whether the analysis of E-cadherin/catenin expression may serve as a diagnostic parameter in routine histopathology is still a matter of debate and might depend on the specific tumor type [63,64].

The absence of E-cadherin in tumors could be due to transcriptional downregulation or to mutations in the E-cadherin gene, and evidence for both mechanisms has been obtained. Transient modulation of E-cadherin function by one of the regulatory mechanisms described above (i.e. through the action of rho/rac proteins or tyrosine kinases) could also occur, although evidence for these events in tumors is rare. E-cadherin shows strict tissue-specificity in its expression pattern, i.e. it is largely confined to epithelial tissues [1]. During developmental processes E-cadherin is up- or downregulated in parallel to the establishment or loss of epithelial tissue structure. It is therefore conceivable that downregulation of E-cadherin in carcinomas is governed by mechanisms which act also in normal epithelial dedifferentiation processes e.g. during epithelial-mesenchymal transitions. These events are currently far from being understood and will be discussed in a different review of this issue (see article by Thiery). The E-cadherin promoter and regulatory sequences in the introns have been analysed and shown to exhibit epithelial-specific activity in vitro [65,66]. Moreover, functional binding sites for AP-2 transcription factors and negative-regulatory E-box sequences (E-Pal) were identified. Interestingly, the E-cadherin gene was shown to be downregulated after transformation of epithelial cells with SV40 large T-antigen and reexpressed after overexpression of Rb or c-myc. Both components activate the E-cadherin promoter through interaction with AP-2 indicating a possible regulatory mechanisms in the control of E-cadherin gene expression and epithelial differentiation [67]. In vivo footprinting experiments revealed binding of nuclear factors to the E-cadherin promoter in carcinoma cells which show active expression of the E-cadherin gene but not in cells in which the E-cadherin gene is repressed [68]. Likewise, several DNA methylation studies showed methylation of GC islands in E-cadherin-negative cells and absence of methylation in E-cadherin-positive cells [68–70]. Furthermore, inhibition of DNA methylation by treatment with 5-azacytidine led to the induction of E-cadherin expression in some cell types. The data indicate that the E-cadherin gene in carcinoma cell lines is silenced by gross rearrangements in chromatin structure and DNA methylation. The primary signals that lead to the switching-off of the E-cadherin gene during tumorigenesis in vivo are not known.

The general picture that emerged from these studies suggested that loss of E-cadherin function by downregulation of E-cadherin or the catenins is a late event during tumor progression mainly associated with the acquisition of invasive properties of the tumor cells. This view is now modified by more recent findings which also indicate a role for the cadherin/catenin complex in earlier steps of tumor development. It was the discovery of mutations in the E-cadherin gene mainly in lobular breast and gastric carcinomas that allowed the classification of E-cadherin as a true tumor suppressor (reviewed in Ref. 71). In both tumor types mutations mainly affect the extracellular adhesive domain of E-cadherin. In the breast carcinomas mutations result in premature translational stops and lead to secreted E-cadherin fragments [72] whereas in the gastric carcinomas mutations in splice donor-acceptor sites often result in in-frame deletions [73]. In most cases loss of heterozygosity of the wild-type allele is observed. Since these mutations were apparently not restricted to the invasive parts of the tumors but were also found in the in situ portions they probably represent an early event in tumorigenesis. The data suggest that disturbance of E-cadherin-mediated adhesion induced neoplastic growth of the mutated cells. The possible role of loss of E-cadherin in the initiation rather than progression of tumors is further supported by the finding of inherited mutations of the E-cadherin gene in cases of familial gastric cancer [74]. The mutations are
heterozygous in the normal tissues of these patients and probably become homozygous in the tumors. In one family a splice site mutation was found which leads to premature translational stops in the extracellular domain of E-cadherin, in two other families the mutations result in shortened or completely deleted cytoplasmic domains which probably also inactivate E-cadherin function. Mutations in the catenin genes which abolish cell adhesion have also been found in several tumor cell lines but not in tumor samples [75]. Given the redundant function of β-catenin and plakoglobin in tethering α-catenin to the complex and the possible similar redundancy of α-catenin genes [76,77] loss-of-function mutations in individual genes may have less severe consequences for cell adhesion. Mutations of β-catenin which activate its signaling function will be discussed below.

There is direct experimental evidence that E-cadherin suppresses cell growth *in vitro* [78]. Transfection of the E-cadherin cDNA into mouse mammary tumor cells was shown to reduce cell proliferation in three-dimensional culture, and treatment with anti-E-cadherin antibodies again stimulated proliferation. These effects might be mediated by the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27kip which was elevated in the E-cadherin transfectants. Overexpression of p27kip blocked proliferation induced by anti-E-cadherin antibodies [78]. These experiments apparently establish a connection between E-cadherin activity and the cell-cycle regulation. How might E-cadherin affect proliferation of cells? An obvious possibility is that E-cadherin sequesters oncogenic β-catenin and prevents its signaling to the cell nucleus. Conversely, downregulation of cadherins might result in release of β-catenin (see also below).

### 4. Signal transduction by β-catenin in the wnt pathway

Besides its function in the cadherin complex β-catenin has an essential role in the wnt signaling pathway. This role was first discovered by genetic approaches in *Drosophila* which showed that mutations of armadillo, the *Drosophila* homolog of β-catenin, results in phenotypes that were also observed after mutation of wingless, the *Drosophila* homolog of wnt-1. Genetic epistasis analysis proved that armadillo is activated by wingless signal transduction. Subsequently, β-catenin and homologues of it were shown to participate in wnt signaling in other organisms such as mouse, chicken, *Xenopus*, zebrafish, and *C. elegans*. The wnt pathway has been analysed through a combination of genetic and biochemical approaches and shown to be essentially similar in vertebrates and *Drosophila*. In molecular terms the net result of wnt signaling appears to be the stabilisation of cytoplasmic β-catenin which then interacts with transcription factors of the LEF-1/TCF family. The increase in β-catenin is achieved by preventing its degradation via proteasomes. The details of this pathway have recently been summarized in several excellent reviews [79–82]. I will here concentrate on the main aspects and, for simplicity, use the mammalian terms for the involved components.

#### 4.A. The β-catenin degradation machinery

I will start with a description of the β-catenin degradation machinery which normally prevents accumulation of cytosolic β-catenin. It should be noted that degradation of β-catenin is restricted to the cytosolic pool of the protein and does not involve β-catenin bound to cadherins. In the absence of the wnt signal, cytosolic β-catenin has a short half-life and is rapidly eliminated by proteasomes. β-Catenin degradation appears to be initiated by the action of a multiprotein complex which is assembled by the core components conductin (also called axil) or axin. The complex furthermore includes the serine/threonine kinase glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β), the tumor suppressor gene product APC (adenomatous polyposis coli), and β-catenin (Figure 1A, Figure 2; Refs. 83–89). Although the mechanistic details of the β-catenin degradation complex are not fully understood there is ample evidence for the importance of its components in regulating β-catenin levels. Conductin and axin show 45% identity in their amino acid sequence [83,84] and have similar structural and functional characteristics. They consist of an amino-terminal ‘regulator of G-protein signaling’ (RGS)-domain which binds to APC, separate binding domains for GSK3β and β-catenin in the center of the proteins, and a C-terminal domain related to a segment of dishevelled (Figure 2, Ref. 84, 85). APC can also bind independently to β-catenin [90]. Axin was identified as the gene mutated in the *fused* mouse strain which exhibits axis duplication during embryogenesis. Both axin and conductin have been shown to promote degradation of cytosolic β-catenin when overexpressed
Figure 1. Model of the wnt signaling pathway in differentiation and tumorigenesis.

(A) Mechanisms of degradation of cytosolic β-catenin. β-catenin is part of a multiprotein complex which is assembled by the core components conductin or axin. Further components of the complex are the tumor suppressor gene product APC, that can also bind independently to β-catenin, and the serine/threonine kinase GSK3β. In the absence of wnts, β-catenin is phosphorylated at its N-terminus by GSK3β which induces its ubiquitination and subsequent degradation in proteasomes. Phosphorylation of β-catenin by GSK3β is activated by conductin/axin. APC might act as an upstream regulator in the complex (see text) and ubiquitination might involve the E3 ubiquitin-ligase, slimb (βTrCP). It should be noted that the model of the multiprotein complex depicted here is mainly deduced from interaction studies of the individual components and not from physical characterization of the whole complex.

(B) Stabilization of β-catenin in the presence of wnt. Wnt proteins are secreted factors which bind to frizzled receptors resulting in the activation of dishevelled (dsh). Dishevelled blocks degradation of β-catenin by interfering with the conductin/axin multiprotein complex. β-catenin then interacts with transcription factors of the LEF-1/TCF family which results in regulation of gene expression and changes in differentiation during development.

(C) Stabilization of β-catenin in tumors. Mutations of APC abolish its interaction with β-catenin and conductin/axin (i). Alternatively, mutations in the N-terminal regulatory region of β-catenin prevent phosphorylation by GSK3β (ii). Both mechanisms lead to stabilization of cytosolic β-catenin and to constitutive interaction with LEF-1/TCF. Aberrant alterations in gene expression results in tumorigenesis.


APC
↑
GSK3β   β-catenin
↑       ↑
RGS     [GSK]    β-BD      DHR
        BD

Conductin

Figure 2. Structure of conductin and molecular interactions. The interactions of domains of conductin with APC, GSK3β, and β-catenin are indicated by arrows. Axin has a similar domain structure. RGS, regulator of G-protein signaling homology domain; GSKBD, GSK3β binding domain; β-BD, β-catenin binding domain; DHR, dishevelled homology region.
in mammalian cells and to block wnt-induced axis formation in *Xenopus* embryos [83, 84, 86–89].

Degradation of $\beta$-catenin is initiated by phosphorylation at specific serine and threonine residues in its N-terminus. This leads to ubiquitination of $\beta$-catenin which is a signal for proteasomal degradation [91]. GSK3$\beta$ may phosphorylate these serine and threonine residues and thereby promote ubiquitination, but it can also phosphorylate APC as well as conductin/axin [92, 93]. Functionally it was shown that (i) interference with a dominant-negative mutant of GSK3$\beta$ leads to stabilisation of $\beta$-catenin and induces phenotypes characteristic for wnt signaling in Xenopus [92]; (ii) mutations of the N-terminal serine and threonine phosphorylation sites also result in stabilisation of $\beta$-catenin [92, 94, 95], and (iii) phosphorylation of $\beta$-catenin by GSK3$\beta$ in vitro was stimulated by the presence of axin [85]. This suggests that axin (and probably conductin) either catalytically activates GSK3$\beta$ or – more plausibly – brings GSK3$\beta$ into close proximity to $\beta$-catenin [85]. The involvement of APC in the degradation process of $\beta$-catenin is indicated by the fact that APC binds to $\beta$-catenin via repeats of 15 amino acids or 20 amino acids and to conductin via so-called SAMP repeats [83, 90]. Deletions of this region of APC in carcinoma cells correlates with increased amounts of cytosolic $\beta$-catenin, and introduction of wild-type APC promotes degradation and antagonises TCF/$\beta$-catenin mediated transcriptional activation [90, 96]. Furthermore, expression of fragments of APC containing the SAMP repeats leads to stabilisation of $\beta$-catenin [83]. It is likely that the SAMP fragments interfere with the endogenous conductin (or axin)/APC association. The data indicate that conductin/axin are positioned downstream of and regulated by APC. It is of note that a human gene closely related to APC (termed APC2 or APCL) has recently been identified [97, 98]. APC2 also contains the $\beta$-catenin and conductin binding repeats. Mutations of APC2 in tumors have not yet been described. A *Drosophila* APC gene regulating armadillo has also been described [99].

Further components with a potential role in controlling $\beta$-catenin stability have been identified. A GSK3$\beta$ binding protein, GBP, was found which is related to a mouse protooncogene FRAT-1 (frequently arranged in advanced T-cells). GBP blocks activity of GSK3$\beta$ in *Xenopus* embryos and stabilizes $\beta$-catenin which leads to double-axis formation [100]. A F-box/WD40 repeat containing protein, slimb, was implicated in the degradation of armadillo and control of wingless signaling

in *Drosophila* [101]. Slimb is related to $\beta$TrCP, a component involved in mediating ubiquitination of CD4 in HIV-1 infected cells and to Cdc4p which serves as part of a E3 ubiquitin ligase complex in yeast (see Ref. 102 for a review). It is likely that slimb and its homologs in vertebrates have a similar role in $\beta$-catenin ubiquitination (Figure 1A). In fact $\beta$TrCP was recently shown to antagonize wnt signaling in Xenopus at a level below dishevelled [103] and was also identified as a component of the E3 ubiquitin ligase of $I\kappa B\alpha$ [104]. Interestingly, $\beta$-catenin and $I\kappa B$ show similarities in the regulatory serine/threonine sequences required for ubiquitination indicating that both pathways might converge at this stage [91, 105].

### 4.B. How wnts activate $\beta$-catenin

The $\beta$-catenin degradation pathway apparently operates in a constitutive manner i.e. accumulation of cytosolic free levels of $\beta$-catenin is continuously prevented by the degradation machinery. When wnts are present degradation of $\beta$-catenin is blocked, possibly at the level of the conductin/axin complexes (Figure 1B). Wnts constitute a family of secreted factors which are specifically expressed in different tissues during mammalian development. The generation of knock-out animals of some of the wnts have revealed essential functions for these factors in tissue differentiation and organogenesis [79]. A role for wnts in tumorigenesis was suggested by the original finding that the mouse wnt-1 gene (previously called int-1) is transcriptionally activated in mammary breast carcinomas by insertion of the LTR of the mouse mammary tumor virus [106].

At least some of the wnt factors bind to seven transmembrane spanning receptors of the frizzled family [107]. Again frizzleds are found in various tissues, and the relationship between these and the different wnt ligands is only beginning to be analyzed. After binding of wnts the frizzled receptors induce activation of an intermediary component, called dishevelled. Dishevelled is a cytoplasmic phosphoprotein that contains several domains found in signal transduction components of other pathways [80]. The mechanism of activation of dishevelled by frizzled is not known but may involve phosphorylation of dishevelled. From dishevelled the signal is transmitted to the conductin/axin complex which leads to inhibition of the activity of this complex (Figure 1B). It is not known how this is achieved at a molecular level but one might
speculate that dishevelled directly interacts with one of the components of the conductin/axin machinery. The inhibition of degradation of $\beta$-catenin leads to its cytosolic accumulation. The signal is further propagated to the cell nucleus through the interaction of the stabilized $\beta$-catenin with HMG box transcription factors of the LEF-1/TCF family. LEF-1 (lymphoid enhancer factor-1) and TCF (T-cell factor)-1,3,4 are related to each other and have been first identified in immune cells (reviewed in Ref. 108). The generation of knock-out mice of LEF-1 and TCF-4 has revealed functions of these factors in epithelial/mesenchymal interactions and formation of the intestinal epithelium, respectively, while the knock-out of the TCF-1 gene affects T-cell development [108–110]. $\beta$-Catenin binds to the amino-terminus of these factors via its arm repeat domain [111–113]. Binding results in nuclear translocation of the ‘free’ $\beta$-catenin; the junction-associated $\beta$-catenin appears not to be affected [111,113,114]. In the nucleus LEF-1/TCFs bind to their target sequence via the HMG box but apparently have no transcriptional activation function on their own. Rather, transcriptional regulation by the LEF/$\beta$-catenin complex is achieved through a transcriptional activation domain which is present in the carboxy-terminal part of $\beta$-catenin [112]. In addition, binding of $\beta$-catenin to LEF-1 alters the DNA bending observed when LEF-1 binds to its target sequence [111]. This indicates that $\beta$-catenin can modulate gene transcription by LEF-1 in higher order chromatin structures. Several target genes of the LEF-1/$\beta$-catenin complexes have been identified which all contain LEF/TCF binding sites. These include ultrabithorax in Drosophila, nodal related 3 and siamois in Xenopus, and c-myc in humans (115–119; see also below).

Certain members of the LEF/TCF family i.e. human TCF-1, Xenopus TCF-3, and Drosophila TCF interact with Groucho-related transcriptional repressors which blocks activation of target promoters, as well as wnt signal transduction in Xenopus and Drosophila [120,121]. It is suggested that under physiological conditions the TCF/groucho complex actively represses gene transcription which is overcome by activation of $\beta$-catenin upon wnt signaling. Interaction of Drosophila TCF was also shown with CBP (CREB-binding protein) which acetylates dTCF at its armadillo binding domain and antagonizes wingless signaling [122].

It is of interest that $\beta$-catenin can also enter the nucleus independently of LEF-1 or TCFs. In fact, in vitro nuclear import assays $\beta$-catenin behaves similar

to the nuclear transport factor importin $\beta$ which is also an arm repeat protein [123]. $\beta$-catenin might therefore regulate nuclear functions independent of LEF-1/$\beta$-catenin signaling appears to operate via the integrin-linked kinase, ILK [124]. This kinase is modulated by integrin-mediated attachment to extracellular matrix and can induce an increase in LEF-1 levels in epithelial cells, while the cytosolic levels of $\beta$-catenin are not affected.

5. Role of wnt/$\beta$-catenin signal transduction in tumorigenesis

As mentioned above, the founding member of the wnt family, wnt-1, has been described as an protooncogene activated by the mouse mammary tumor virus. Wnt-1 and other members of the family also induce morphological transforming in vitro when overexpressed in breast epithelial cells [125]. An interesting correlation was found in that all oncogenic wnts induced the stabilization of $\beta$-catenin and were active in axis formation in Xenopus whereas the non-oncogenic relatives were inactive in these assays. Therefore, two classes of wnt proteins have been distinguished which might act through different, $\beta$-catenin-dependent or independent, signal transduction pathways. However, the observed differences could also be due to variations in frizzled receptor expression [126]. Interestingly, wnt-1 and -2 transformed NIH3T3 cells failed to form tumors in nude mice which is a characteristic of 3T3 cells transformed by other oncogenes [127]. In human tumors there is little evidence that alterations in wnt activity and frizzled receptors play an essential role. In some studies elevated levels of wnts were observed in tumors compared to normal tissue. However, some of these wnts, e.g. wnt-5a which is overexpressed in breast carcinomas, do not show transforming activity in vitro [125,128].

A second clue to the role of wnt signaling pathway in tumors came from the finding that APC is involved in downregulation of $\beta$-catenin. APC is a large protein with different distinct domains [90]. The region containing the 20 amino acid and SAMP repeats appears to be essential for downregulation of $\beta$-catenin and is deleted in about 80% of sporadic colon carcinomas and in the inherited disease, familial adenomatosis polyposis [90]. As a consequence of the APC mutations $\beta$-catenin is stabilized and forms constitutive complexes
with LEF/TCF factors which activate gene expression in tumor cells (Figure 1C; Refs. 96,119). Importantly, in colon carcinomas which contain only wild-type APC, mutations in the $\beta$-catenin gene were found [94]. These were heterozygous and alter the serine and threonine residues in the amino-terminus of $\beta$-catenin which are essential for its degradation. $\beta$-Catenin is stabilised by these mutations and transcriptional active LEF/TCF/$\beta$-catenin complexes are formed. Similar mutations were also found in melanoma cell lines [95] and in tissue samples from several other tumors indicating that the aberrant activation of the wnt signaling pathway by stabilization of $\beta$-catenin is not restricted to colon cancer (Figure 3; Refs. 129–137). Both in frame deletions of larger areas as well as point mutations of the critical residues in the $\beta$-catenin regulatory region were found. The four candidate serine and threonine phosphorylation sites are mutated to a similar frequency, although serine 45 is slightly preferred (Figure 3). More importantly, mutations were also

found in aspartate 32 and glycine 34 which flank serine 33 (Figure 3). This DSG sequence is highly conserved in $\beta$-catenin from different species and also present in the phosphorylation sites required for degradation of I$\kappa$B. The mutations of the DSG motif in $\beta$-catenin in tumors might indirectly block phosphorylation of $\beta$-catenin or abrogate the interaction with the ubiquitination machinery. Mutations of $\beta$-catenin were also detected in experimental tumors induced by specific mutagens [138,139]. Importantly, in studies of human colorectal carcinomas in which the status of the APC gene was analyzed, mutations of $\beta$-catenin were exclusively found in samples with wild-type APC [130,140]. This indicates that two alternative routes which lead to activation of $\beta$-catenin signaling are taken in tumors: loss-of-function mutations of APC or gain-of-function mutations of $\beta$-catenin (Figure 1C). Obviously, other components involved in the degradation of $\beta$-catenin such as GSK3$\beta$, conductin or axin might also be targets for mutations in tumors. Similarly, downstream

|  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 1 | 3 colon (ref.94) |
| 1 | 2 | 1 colon (ref.129) |
| 1 1 |  | 3 colon (ref.130) |
| 2 | 1 | 1 colon (ref.131) |
| 5 1 1 |  | 1 hepatocellular (ref.132) |
|  | 2 | 1 hepatocellular (ref.133) |
| 1 | 1 | 4 ovarian (ref.134) |
|  | 2 | 3 uterine (ref.135) |
| 1 2 |  | 1 prostate (ref.136) |
| 2 | 1 | medulloblastoma (ref.137) |
|  | 4 | 1 melanoma (ref.95) |

| 8 | 8 | 4 | 10 | 11 | 18 | total (n=59) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| L | D | S | G | I | H | S | G | A | T | T | T | A | P | S |
| 32 | 33 | 34 |  | 37 |  |  |  | 41 |  |  |  |  | 45 |  |

Figure 3. Distribution of mutations in the regulatory region of $\beta$-catenin in human tumors. The N-terminal amino acid sequence of human $\beta$-catenin (residues 31–45) containing the GSK3$\beta$ phosphorylation sites is shown at the bottom. Numbers on top indicate how often a specific site was found to be mutated in different tumors. Data include point mutations or deletions of single codons and were collected from both tumor samples and cell lines. Larger deletions of this region have also been found (e.g. Ref. 140).
components which modulate the transcriptional activity of the LEF-1/TCF-$\beta$-catenin complexes such as CBP or groucho might be altered in tumors.

Analysis of transgenic and knock-out animals has revealed further aspects of $\beta$-catenin signaling in tumor formation. Mice deficient in the $\beta$-catenin partner TCF-4 showed abnormalities in the epithelial layers of the small intestine [110]. Specifically, the stem cell compartment in the prospective crypts was missing, indicating that TCF-4/$\beta$-catenin signaling is required for continued proliferation of these cells. Tumor formation induced by APC mutations may thus be initiated by uncontrolled growth of stem cells due to TCF-4/$\beta$-catenin activity. In line with this, mutations in APC appear early during colon carcinogenesis and are associated with the development of adenomas [141].

Deletion of parts of the amino terminus of $\beta$-catenin has been shown to increase its stability and convert it to a weak oncogene *in vitro* [142, 143]. The effects of similar deletion mutants (which retain the ability to function in adherens junctions) were also analyzed by expression in transgenic animals. In one study expression was directed to the intestinal stem cell compartment [144]. Cell proliferation was stimulated four-fold in the crypt cells and was accompanied by a similar increase in apoptosis of these cells. There was no evidence for neoplastic transformation probably because increased cell death could compensate for the increase in cell proliferation. In another study $\beta$-catenin was expressed specifically in the epidermis and hair follicles of transgenic animals [145]. Two drastic effects were observed: first, additional hair follicles were formed *de novo*, and second, proliferation of keratinocytes was induced which led to the formation of neoplasms resembling hair follicle tumors found in humans. In line with this, alterations in hair follicle patterning was also observed after transgenic expression of LEF-1, and LEF-1 null mice show reduction in follicle numbers [146, 109]. Collectively, the results indicate that stabilized versions of $\beta$-catenin have oncogenic capacity *in vivo* but also induce differentiation steps. It is likely that these effects are due to changes of transcriptional activity of LEF/TCF factors. However, one should keep in mind that specific roles in cell migration have been proposed for $\beta$-catenin/APC complexes associated with microtubules [147]. Furthermore since $\beta$-catenin appears to be a promiscuous interaction partner some of the phenotypic changes seen in the transgenic animals could be a consequence of association of $\beta$-catenin with factors other than LEF-1/TCFs.

The c-myc gene has recently been identified as a target of TCF-4/$\beta$-catenin complexes [119]. The expression of c-myc was found to be changed after induction of wild-type APC in an APC-deficient colon carcinoma cell line. Subsequent analysis showed that the c-myc promoter was activated by TCF-4/$\beta$-catenin via specific binding sites and that endogenous c-myc expression could be blocked by a dominant-negative TCF-4. Since c-myc overexpression had previously been linked to colorectal tumorigenesis it is possible that TCF-4/$\beta$-catenin induces neoplastic growth via activation of c-myc. It is further indicated in this study that several other genes which might contribute to tumorigenesis are up- or downregulated by APC [119].

### Cadherin/catenin in tumors: Prospects and problems

Research on cadherin-mediated cell adhesion and $\beta$-catenin signaling demonstrates how developmental studies contribute to our understanding of tumorigenesis and how both fields complement each other. It should be mentioned at this point that not all aspects of the wnt signaling cascade depicted in this review are undisputed. In particular, individual components of the pathway appear to play opposite roles in different species (see Ref. 81 for an excellent discussion of this issue). Nevertheless, it can be foreseen that the ongoing analysis of the developmental aspects of the system will provide additional insights in tumorigenesis, for instance by elucidating further candidate targets of the transformation process. Mutational analysis of other components of the wnt pathway may broaden the spectrum of tumors in which the system is activated.

One goal of this review was to demonstrate that $\beta$-catenin plays two, apparently opposite fundamental roles during cancer formation: on one hand, $\beta$-catenin is part of the E-cadherin/catenin complex which has a restrictive role at different stages of tumor development. On the other hand, uncontrolled activation of the $\beta$-catenin signaling capacity promotes tumorigenesis. One might therefore pose the question how these two functions are connected. It is clear that through the sequestrering of $\beta$-catenin cadherins might antagonize the wnt signaling pathway, and experimental evidence for this has been obtained in *Xenopus*. Conversely, in cadherin-deficient tumors $\beta$-catenin might be released from the junctions and activate the wnt signal. However, such a mechanism will probably operate only

efficiently in cases in which the β-catenin degradation machinery is also disturbed. Thus, downregulation of E-cadherin might contribute to β-catenin signaling by increasing the pool of available β-catenin but is probably not sufficient to activate the signal. Obviously, more work is needed to understand the interplay between cell adhesion and signaling functions of β-catenin.

An exciting possibility of the future is the application of our knowledge of the cadherin/catenin system to the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. E-cadherin is an interesting target both for diagnostic and therapeutic applications. For instance, further prospective studies will show whether expression analysis of the cadherins and catenins will help in the detection and prognosis of human tumors. In some immunohistochemical studies of colon tumors prominent nuclear staining of β-catenin was detected which might be used as a parameter for tumor classification. For tumor therapy, drugs might be found which reactive expression of E-cadherin in dedifferentiated tumors. The wnt signal transduction pathway should be also amenable to pharmacological interference, in particular at the levels of interaction between LEF/TCF and β-catenin. Low molecular weight substances that block this interaction might prevent initiation or progression of tumors. Similarly, strategies to activate the β-catenin degradation program should be considered.

### References

1. Takeichi M: Morphogenetic roles of classic cadherins. Curr Opin Cell Biol 7: 619–627, 1995
2. Suzuki ST: Structural and functional diversity of cadherin superfamily: are new members of the cadherin superfamily involved in signal transduction pathway? J Cell Biochem 61: 531–542, 1996
3. Nagar B, Overduin M, Ikura M, Rini JM: Structural basis of calcium-induced E-cadherin rigidification and dimerization. Nature 380: 360–364, 1996
4. Shapiro L, Fannon AM, Kwong PD, Thompson A, Lehmann MS, Grübel G, Legrand J-F, Als-Nielsen J, Colman DR, Hendrickson WA: Structural basis of cell-cell adhesion by cadherins. Nature 374: 327–337, 1995
5. Nagafuchi A, Takeichi M: Cell binding function of E-cadherin is regulated by the cytoplasmic domain. Embo J 7: 3679–3684, 1988
6. Ozawa M, Ringwald M, Kemler R: Uvomorulin-catenin complex formation is regulated by a specific domain in the cytoplasmic region of the cell adhesion molecule. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87: 4246–4250, 1990
7. Yap AS, Niessen CM, Gumbiner B: The juxtamembrane region of the cadherin cytoplasmic tail supports lateral clustering, adhesive strengthening, and interaction with p120ctn. J Cell Biol 141: 779–789, 1998
8. Peifer M, Berg S, Reynolds AB: A repeating amino acid motif shared by proteins with diverse cellular roles. Cell 76: 789–791, 1994
9. Huber AH, Nelson WJ, Weis WI: Three-dimensional structure of the armadillo repeat region of β-catenin. Cell 90: 871–882, 1997
10. Hülskens J, Birchmeier W, Behrens J: E-cadherin and APC compete for the interaction with β-catenin and the cytoskeleton. J Cell Biol 127: 2061–2069, 1994
11. Herrenknecht K, Ozawa M, Eckerskorn C, Lottspeich F, Lenter M, Kemler R: The uvomorulin-anchorage protein alpha catenin is a vinculin homologue. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88: 9156–9160, 1991
12. Nagafuchi A, Takeichi M, Tsukita S: The 102 kd cadherin-associated protein: similarity to vinculin and posttranscriptional regulation of expression. Cell 65: 849–857, 1991
13. Weiss EE, Kroemker M, Rüdiger AH, Jockusch BM, Rüdiger M: Vinculin is part of the cadherin-catenin junctional complex: complex formation between alpha-catenin and vinculin. J Cell Biol 141: 755–764, 1998
14. Watabe-Uchida M, Uchida N, Imamura Y, Nagafuchi A, Fujimoto K, Uemura T, Vermeulen S, van-Roy F, Adamson ED, Takeichi M: Alpha-Catenin-vinculin interaction functions to organize the apical junctional complex in epithelial cells. J Cell Biol 142: 847–857, 1998
15. Reynolds AB, Herbert L, Cleveland JL, Berg ST, Gaut JR: p120, a novel substrate of protein tyrosine kinase receptors and of p60v-src, is related to cadherin-binding factors beta-catenin, plakoglobin and armadillo. Oncogene 7: 2439–2445, 1992
16. Ying ST, Edwards RA, Tubb B, Wang S, Bryan J, McCrea PD: β-Catenin associates with the actin-bundling protein fascin in a noncadherin complex. J Cell Biol 134: 1271–1281, 1996
17. Yamamoto M, Bharti A, Li Y, Kufe D: Interaction of the DF3/MUC-1 breast carcinoma-associated antigen and β-catenin in cell adhesion. J Biol Chem 272: 12492–12494, 1997
18. Murayama M, Tanaka S, Palacino J, Murayama O, Honda T, Sun X, Yasutake K, Nihonmatsu N, Wolozin B, Takashima A: Direct association of presenilin-1 with beta-catenin. FEBS Lett 433: 73–77, 1998
19. Bauer A, Huber O, Kemler R: Pontin52, an interaction partner of β-catenin, binds to the TATA box binding protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95: 14787–14792, 1998
20. Takeichi M: Cadherins: a molecular family important in selective cell-cell adhesion. Annu Rev Biochem 59: 237–252, 1990
21. Frixen UH, Behrens J, Sachs M, Eberle G, Voss B, Warda A, Löchner D, Birchmeier W: E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion prevents invasiveness of human carcinoma cells. J Cell Biol 113: 173–185, 1991
22. Behrens J, Birchmeier W, Goodman SL, Imhof BA: Disassociation of Madin-Darby canine kidney epithelial cells by the monoclonal antibody anti-arc-1: mechanistic aspects and identification of the antigen as a component related to uvomorulin. J Cell Biol 101: 1307–1315, 1985
23. Nose A, Nagafuchi A, Takeichi M: Expressed recombinant cadherins mediate cell sorting in model systems. Cell 54: 993–1001, 1988

24. Gumbiner BM: Cell adhesion: the molecular basis of tissue architecture and morphogenesis. Cell 84: 345–357, 1996
25. Hermiston ML, Wong MH, Gordon JI: Forced expression of E-cadherin in the mouse intestinal epithelium slows cell migration and provides evidence for nonautonomous regulation of cell fate in a self-renewing system. Genes Dev 10: 985–996, 1996
26. Hermiston ML, Gordon JI: *In vivo* analysis of cadherin function in the mouse intestinal epithelium: essential roles in adhesion, maintenance of differentiation, and regulation of programmed cell death. J Cell Biol 129: 489–506, 1995
27. Hermiston ML, Gordon JI: Inflammatory bowel disease and adenomas in mice expressing a dominant negative N-cadherin. Science 270: 1203–1207, 1995
28. Larue L, Ohsugi M, Hirchenhain J, Kemler R: E-cadherin null mutant embryos fail to form a trophectoderm epithelium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91: 8263–8267, 1994
29. Riethmacher D, Brinkmann V, Birchmeier C: A targeted mutation in the mouse E-cadherin gene results in defective preimplantation development. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92: 855–859, 1995
30. Radice G, Rayburn H, Matsumani H, Knudsen KA, Takeichi M, Hynes RO: Developmental defects in mouse embryos lacking N-cadherin. Dev Biol 181: 64–78, 1997
31. Radice GL, Ferreira-Cornwell MC, Robinson SD, Rayburn H, Chodosh LA, Takeichi M, Hynes R: Precocious mammary gland development in P-cadherin-deficient mice. J Cell Biol 139: 1025–1032, 1997
32. Haegel H, Larue L, Ohsugi M, Fedorov L, Herrenknecht K, Kemler R: Lack of β-catenin affects mouse development at gastrulation. Development 121: 3529–3537, 1995
33. Ruiz P, Brinkmann V, Ledermann B, Behrend M, Grund C, Thalhammer C, Vogel F, Birchmeier C, Günthert U, Franke WW, Birchmeier W: Targeted mutation of plakoglobin in mice reveals essential functions of desmosomes in the embryonic heart. J Cell Biol 135: 215–225, 1996
34. Bierkamp C, McLaughlin KJ, Schwartz H, Huber O, Kemler R: Embryonic heart and skin defects in mice lacking plakoglobin. Dev Biol 180: 780–785, 1996
35. Torres M, Stoykova A, Huber O, Chowdhury K, Bonaldo P, Mansouri A, Butz S, Kemler R, Gruss P: An alpha-E-catenin gene trap mutation defines its function in preimplantation development. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94: 901–906, 1997
36. Takeichi M: Cadherin cell adhesion receptors as a morphogenetic regulator. Science 251: 1451–1455, 1991
37. Hynes R, Lander AD: Contact and adhesive specificities in the associations, migrations, and targeting of cells and axons. Cell 68: 303–322, 1992
38. Braga VMM, Machesky LM, Hall A, Hotchin NA: The small GTPases Rho and Rac are required for the establishment of cadherin-dependent cell–cell contacts. J Cell Biol 137: 1421–1431, 1997
39. Takaishi K, Sasaki T, Kotani H, Nishioka H, Takai Y: Regulation of cell–cell adhesion by Rac and Rho small G-proteins in MDCK cells. J Cell Biol 139: 1047–1059, 1997
40. Hordijk PL, ten Klooster JP, van der Kammen R, Michiels F, Oomen LCJM, Collard JG: Inhibition of invasion of epithelial cells by Tiam–Rac signaling. Science 278: 1464–1466, 1997
41. Kuroda S, Fukata M, Nakagawa M, Fujii K, Nakamura T, Ookubo T, Izawa I, Nagase T, Nomura N, Tani H, Shoji I, Matsuura Y, Yonehara S, Kaibuchi K: Role of IQGAP1, a target of the small GTPases Cdc42 and Rac1, in regulation of E-cadherin-mediated cell–cell adhesion. Science 281: 832–835, 1998
42. Daniel JM, Reynolds AB: Tyrosine phosphorylation and cadherin/catenin function. BioEssays 19: 883–891, 1997
43. Shibata T, Ochiai A, Kanai Y, Akimoto S, Gotoh M, Yasui N, Machinami R, Hirohashi S: Dominant-negative inhibition of the association between β-catenin and c-erbB2 by N-terminally deleted β-catenin suppresses the invasion and metastasis of cancer cells. Oncogene 13: 883–889, 1996
44. Balsamo J, Arregui C, Leung T, Lilien J: The nonreceptor protein tyrosine phosphatase PTP1B binds to the cytoplasmic domain of N-cadherin and regulates the cadherin-actin linkage. J Cell Biol 143: 523–532, 1998
45. Hirohashi S: Inactivation of the E-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion system in human cancers. Am J Pathol 153: 333–339, 1998
46. Behrens J, Vakaet L, Friis R, Winterhager E, Van Roy F, Mareel MM, Birchmeier W: Loss of epithelial differentiation and gain of invasiveness correlates with tyrosine phosphorylation of the E-cadherin/beta-catenin complex in cells transformed with a temperature-sensitive v-src gene. J Cell Biol 120: 757–766, 1993
47. Calautti E, Cabodi S, Stein PL, Hatzfeld M, Kedershda N, Dotto GP: Tyrosine phosphorylation and src family kinases control keratinocyte cell–cell adhesion. J Cell Biol 141: 1449–1465, 1998
48. Coman DR: Decreased mutual adhesiveness, a property of cells from squamous cell carcinomas. Cancer Res 4: 625–629, 1944
49. Behrens J, Mareel MM, Van-Roy FM, Birchmeier W: Dissecting tumor cell invasion: epithelial cells acquire invasive properties after the loss of uvomorulin-mediated cell–cell adhesion. J Cell Biol 108: 2435–2447, 1989
50. Frixen UH, Behrens J, Sachs M, Eberle G, Voss B, Warda A, Löchner D, Birchmeier W: E-cadherin-mediated cell–cell adhesion prevents invasiveness of human carcinoma cells. J Cell Biol 113: 173–185, 1991
51. Chen WC, Öbrink B: Cell–cell contacts mediated by E-cadherin (uvomorulin) restrict invasive behavior of L-cells. J Cell Biol 114: 319–327, 1991
52. Vleminckx K, Vakaet LJr, Mareel M, Fiers W, van Roy F: Genetic manipulation of E-cadherin expression by epithelial tumor cells reveals an invasion suppressor role. Cell 66: 107–119, 1991
53. Mbalaviele G, Dunstan CR, Sasaki A, Williams PJ, Mundy GR, Yoneda T: E-cadherin expression in human breast cancer cells suppresses the development of osteolytic bone metastasis in an experimental metastasis model. Cancer Res 56: 4063–4070, 1996

54. Meiners S, Brinkmann V, Naundorf H, Birchmeier W: Role of morphogenetic factors in metastasis of mammary carcinoma cells. Oncogene 16: 9–20, 1998
55. Perl A-K, Wilgenbus P, Dahl U, Semb H, Christofori G: A causal role for E-cadherin in the transition from adenoma to carcinoma. Nature 392: 190–193, 1998
56. Birchmeier W, Behrens J: Cadherin expression in carcinomas: role in the formation of cell junctions and the prevention of invasiveness. Biochim Biophys Acta 1198: 11–26, 1994
57. Bracke ME, Van Roy FM, Mareel MM: The E-cadherin/catenin complex in invasion and metastasis. In: Günthert U, Birchmeier W (eds) Attempts to Understand Metastasis Formation. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1996, pp 123–161
58. Schipper JH, Frixen UH, Behrens J, Unger A, Jahnke K, Birchmeier W: E-cadherin expression in squamous cell carcinomas of head and neck: inverse correlation with tumor dedifferentiation and lymph node metastasis. Cancer Res 51: 6328–6237, 1991
59. Takayama T, Hitoshi H, Inoue M, Tamura S, Oka H, Kadowaki T, Takatsuka Y, Nagafuchi A, Tsukita S, Mori T: Expression of E-cadherin and α-catenin molecules in human breast cancer tissues and association with clinicopathological features. Int J Oncology 5: 775–780, 1994
60. Zschiesche W, Schönborn I, Behrens J, Herrenknecht K, Hartveit F, Lilleng P, Birchmeier W: Expression of E-cadherin and catenins in invasive mammary carcinomas. Anticancer Res 17: 561–568, 1997
61. Valizadeh A, Karayiannakis AJ, El-Hariry, Kmiot W, Pignatelli M: Expression of E-cadherin-associated molecules (α-, β-, γ-catenins and p120) in colorectal polyps. Am J Pathol 150: 1977–1985, 1998
62. Ghadimi BM, Behrens J, Hoffmann I, Haensch W, Birchmeier W, Schlag PM: Immunohistological analysis of E-cadherin, α-, β- and γ-catenin expression in colorectal cancer: implications for cell adhesion and signaling. Europ J Cancer, 1999, in press
63. Lipponen P, Saarelainen E, Aaltomaa S, Syrjänen K: Expression of E-cadherin (E-CD) as related to other prognostic factors and survival in breast cancer. J Pathol 174: 101–109, 1994
64. Gabbert HE, Müller W, Schneiders A, Meier S, Moll R, Birchmeier W, Hommel G: Prognostic value of E-cadherin expression in 413 gastric carcinomas. Int J Cancer 69: 184–189
65. Behrens J, Löwrick O, Klein-Hitpass L, Birchmeier W: The E-cadherin promoter: functional analysis of a G.C-rich region and an epithelial cell-specific palindromic regulatory element. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88: 11495–11499, 1991
66. Hennig C, Löwrick O, Birchmeier W, Behrens J: Mechanisms identified in the transcriptional control of epithelial gene expression. J Biol Chem 271: 595–602, 1996
67. Batsche E, Muchardt C, Behrens J, Hurst HC, Cremisi C: RB and c-myc activate expression of the E-cadherin gene in epithelial cells through interaction with transcription factor AP-2. Mol Cell Biol 18: 3647–3658, 1998

68. Hennig G, Behrens J, Truss M, Frisch S, Reichmann E, Birchmeier W: Progression of carcinoma cells is associated with alterations in chromatin structure and factor binding at the E-cadherin promoter in vivo. Oncogene 11: 475–484, 1995
69. Graff JR, Herman JG, Lapidus RG, Chopra H, Xu R, Jarrard DF, Issacs WB, Pitha PM, Davidson NE, Baylin SB: E-cadherin expression is silenced by DNA hypermethylation in human breast and prostate carcinomas. Cancer Res 55: 5195–5199, 1995
70. Yoshiura K, Kanai Y, Ochiai A, Shimoyama Y, Sugimura T, Hirohashi S: Silencing of the E-cadherin invasion-suppressor gene by CpG methylation in human carcinomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92: 7416–7419, 1995
71. Berx C, Becker KF, Höfler H, van Roy F: Mutations of the human E-cadherin (CDH1) gene. Hum Mutat 12: 226–237, 1998
72. Berx C, Cleton-Jansen AM, Nollet F, de-Leeuw WJ, van-de-Vijver M, Cornelisse C, vanRoy F: E-cadherin is a tumour/invasion suppressor gene mutated in human lobular breast cancers. Embo J 14: 6107–6115, 1995
73. Becker KF, Atkinson MJ, Reich U, Becker I, Nekarda H, Siewert JR, Hofler H: E-cadherin gene mutations provide clues to diffuse type gastric carcinomas. Cancer Res 54: 3845–3852, 1994
74. Guilford P, Hopkins J, Harraway J, McLeod M, McLeod N, Harawira P, Taite H, Scoular R, Miller A, Reeve A: E-cadherin germline mutations in familial gastric cancer. Nature 392: 402–405, 1998
75. Candidus S, Bischoff P, Höfler H: No evidence for mutations in the alpha- and beta-catenin genes in human gastric and breast carcinomas. Cancer Res 56: 49–52, 1996
76. Zhang JS, Nelson M, Wang L, Liu W, Qian CP, Shridhar V, Urrutia R, Smith DI: Identification and chromosomal localization of CTNNAL1, a novel protein homologous to α-catenin. Genomics 54: 149–154, 1998
77. Hirano S, Kimoto N, Shimoyama Y, Hirohashi S, Takeichi M: Identification of a neural α-catenin as a key regulator of cadherin function and multicellular organization. Cell 70: 293–301, 1992
78. St. Croix, Sheehan C, Rak JW, Florenes VA, Slingerland JM, Kerbel RS: E-cadherin-dependent growth suppression is mediated by the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27kip1. J Cell Biol 142: 557–572, 1998
79. Cadigan KM, Nusse R: Wnt signaling: a common theme in animal development. Genes Dev 11: 3286–3305, 1997
80. Dale TC: Signal transduction by the wnt family of ligands. Biochem J 329: 209–223, 1998
81. Cox TR, Peifer M: Wingless signaling: The inconvenient complexities of life. Curr Biol 8, R140–R144, 1998
82. Bienz M: TCF: transcriptional activator or repressor? Curr Opin Cell Biol 10: 366–372, 1998
83. Behrens J, Jerchow B-A, Württele M, Asbrand C, Wirtz R, Grimm J, Wedlich D, Birchmeier W: Functional interaction of an axin homolog, conductin, with β-catenin, APC, and GSK3β. Science 280: 596–599, 1998
84. Zeng L, Fagotto F, Zhang T, Hsu W, Vasicek TJ, Perry III WL, Lee JJ, Tilghman S, Gumbiner BM, Costantini F: The mouse fused locus encodes axin, an

inhibitor of the wnt signaling pathway that regulates
embryonic axis formation. Cell 90: 181–192, 1997

85. Ikeda S, Kishida S, Yamamoto H, Murai H, Koyama S,
Kikuchi A: Axin, a negative regulator of the wnt sig-
naling pathway, forms a complex with GSK-3β and
β-catenin and promotes GSK-3β-dependent phosphoryla-
tion of β-catenin. EMBO J 17: 1371–1384, 1998

86. Yamamoto H, Kishida S, Uochi T, Ikeda S, Koyama S,
Asashima M, Kikuchi A: Axil, a member of the axin fam-
ily, interacts with both glycogen synthase kinase 3β and
β-catenin and inhibits axis formation of Xenopus embryos.
Mol Cell Biol 18: 2867–2875, 1998

87. Kishida S, Yamamoto H, Ikeda S, Kishida M, Sakamoto I,
Koyama S, Kikuchi A: Axin, a negative regulator of the
wnt signaling pathway, directly interacts with adenomatous
polyposis coli and regulates the stabilization of β-catenin.
J Biol Chem 273: 10823–10826, 1998

88. Hart M, de los Santos R, Albert IN, Rubinfeld B, Polakis P:
Downregulation of β-catenin by human axin and its asso-
ciation with the APS tumor suppressor, β-catenin and
GSK3β. Curr Biol 8: 573–581, 1998

89. Itoh K, Krupnik VE, Sokol SY: Axis determination
in Xenopus involves biochemical interactions of axin,
glycogen synthase kinase 3 and β-catenin. Curr Biol 8:
591–594, 1998

90. Polakis P: The adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor
suppressor. Biochim Biophys Acta 1332: F127–F147, 1997

91. Aberle H, Bauer A, Stappert J, Kispert A, Kemler R:
β-Catenin is a target for the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.
EMBO J 16: 3797–3804, 1997

92. Yost C, Torres M, Miller JR, Huang E, Kimelman D,
Moon RT: The axis-inducing activity, stability, and subcel-
lular distribution of beta-catenin is regulated in Xenopus
embryos by glycogen synthase kinase 3. Genes Dev 10:
1443–1454, 1996

93. Rubinfeld, B, Albert I, Porfiri E, Fiol C, Munemitsu S,
Polakis P: Binding of GSK3β to the APC-β-Catenin com-
plex and regulation of complex assembly. Science 272:
1023–1026, 1996

94. Morin PJ, Sparks AB, Korinek V, Barker N, Clevers H,
Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW: Activation of β-catenin-Tcf sig-
naling in colon cancer by mutations in β-catenin or APC.
Science 275: 1787–1790, 1997

95. Rubinfeld B, Robbins P, El-Gamil M, Albert I, Porfiri E,
Polakis P: Stabilization of β-catenin by genetic defects in
melanoma cell lines. Science 275: 1790–1792, 1997

96. Korinek V, Barker N, Morin PJ, van Wichen D, de Weger
R, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B, Clevers H: Constitutive
transcriptional activation by a β-catenin-Tcf complex in
APC−/− colon carcinoma. Science 275: 1784–1787, 1997

97. Nakagawa H, Murata Y, Koyama K, Fujiyama A,
Miyoshi Y, Monden M, Akiyama T, Nakamura Y: Identi-
fication of a brain-specific APC homologue, APCL,
and its interaction with beta-catenin. Cancer Res 58:
5176–5181, 1998

98. van Es JH, Kirkpatrick C, van de Wetering M, Molenaar M,
Miles T, Kuipers J, Destree O, Peifer M, Clevers H: APC
homologs in mammals and flies. Curr Biol, 9: 105–108,
1999

99. Ahmed Y, Hayashi S, Levine A, Wieschaus E: Regulation
of armadillo by a Drosophila APC inhibits neuronal apopto-
sis during retinal development. Cell 93: 1171–1182, 1998

100. Yost C, Farr GH, Pierce SB, Ferkey DM, Chen MM,
Kimelman D: GBP, an inhibitor of GSK-3, is impli-
cated in Xenopus development and oncogenesis. Cell 93:
1031–1041, 1998

101. Jiang J, Struhl G: Regulation of the hedgehog and wing-
less signaling pathways by the F-box/WD40-repeat pro-
tein slimb. Nature 391: 493–496, 1998

102. Patton EE, Willems AR, Tyers M: Combinatorial control
in ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis: don't Skp the F-box
hypothesis. Trends Genetics 14: 236–243, 1998

103. Marikawa Y, Elinson RP: β-TrCP is a negative regulator
of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway and dorsal axis
formation in Xenopus embryos. Mech Dev 77: 75–80, 1998

104. Yaron A, Hatzubai A, Davis M, Lavon I, Amit S,
Manning A, Andersen JA, Mann M, Mercurio F, Ben-
Neriah Y: Identification of the receptor component of the
IkBα-ubiquitin ligase. Nature 396: 590–594, 1998

105. Orford K, Crockett C, Jensen JP, Weissman AM, Byers SW:
Serine phosphorylation-regulated ubiquitination and degra-
dation of β-catenin. J Biol Chem 272: 24735–24738, 1997

106. Nusse R, van-Ooyen A, Cox D, Fung YK, Varmus H:
Mode of proviral activation of a putative mammary onco-
gene (int-1) on mouse chromosome 15. Nature 307:
131–136, 1984

107. Bhanot P, Brink M, Samos CH, Hsieh J-C, Wang Y,
Macke JP, Andrew D, Nathans J, Nusse R: A new mem-
ber of the frizzled family from Drosophila functions as a
Wingless receptor. Nature 382: 225–230, 1996

108. Clevers H, van de Wetering M: TCF/LEF factors earn their
wings. Trends Genetics 13: 485–489, 1997

109. van Genderen C, Okamura RM, Farinas I, Quo RG,
Parslow TG, Bruhn L, Grosschedl R: Development of sev-
eral organs that require inductive epithelial-mesenchymal
interactions is impaired in LEF-1-deficient mice. Genes
Dev 8: 2691–2703, 1994

110. Korinek V, Barker N, Moerer P, van Donselaar E, Huls G,
Peters PJ, Clevers H: Depletion of epithelial stem-cell com-
partments in the small intestine of mice lacking Tcf-4.
Nature Genetics 19: 379–383, 1998

111. Behrens J, von Kries JP, Kühl M, Bruhn L, Wedlich D,
Grosschedl R, and Birchmeier W: Functional interaction of
β-catenin with the transcription factor LEF-1. Nature 382:
638–642, 1997

112. Molenaar M, van de Wetering M, Oosterwegel M,
Peterson-Maduro J, Godsave S, Korinek V, Roose J,
Destree O, Clevers H: XTcf-3 transcription factor mediates
β-catenin-induced axis formation in Xenopus embryos.
Cell 86: 391–399, 1996

113. Huber O, Korn R, McLaughlin JMO, Herrmann B,
Kemler R: Nuclear localization of β-catenin by interaction
with transcription factor LEF-1. Mech Dev 59: 3–10, 1996

114. Simcha I, Shtutman M, Solomon D, Zhurinsky J, Sadot E,
Geiger B, Ben-Ze'ev A: Differential nuclear translocation
and transactivation potential of β-catenin and plakoglobin.
J Cell Biol 141: 1433–1448, 1998

115. Riese J, Yu X, Munnerlyn A, Eresh S, Hsu S-C, Grosschedl R, Bienz M: LEF-1, a nuclear factor coordinating signaling inputs from wingless and decapentaplegic. Cell 88: 777–787, 1997

116. Brunner E, Peter O, Schweizer L, Basler K: Pangolin encodes a Lef-1 homologue that acts downstream of armadillo to transduce the Wingless signal in Drosophila. Nature 385: 829–833, 1997

117. Brannon M, Gomperts M, Sumoy L, Moon RT, Kimelman D: A beta-catenin/XTcf-3 complex binds to the siamois promoter to regulate dorsal axis specification in Xenopus. Genes Dev 11: 2359–2370, 1997

118. McKendry R, Hsu S-C, Harland RM, Grosschedl R: LEF-1/TCF proteins mediate wnt-inducible transcription from the Xenopus nodal-related 3 promoter. Dev Biol 193: 420–431, 1997

119. He T-C, Sparks AB, Rago C, Hermeking H, Zawel L, da Cost LT, Morin PJ, Vogelstein B, Kinzler K: Identification of c-MYC as a target of the APC pathway. Science 281: 509–512, 1998

120. Roose J, Molenaar M, Peterson J, Hurenkamp J, Brantjes H, Moerer P, van de Wetering M, Destree O, Clevers H: The Xenopus wnt effector XTcf-3 interacts with groucho-related transcriptional repressors. Nature 395: 608–612, 1998

121. Cavallo RA, Cox RT, Moline MM, Roose J, Polevoy GA, Clevers H, Peifer M, Bejsovec A: Drosophila Tcf and Groucho interact to repress Wingless signalling activity. Nature 395: 604–608, 1998

122. Waltzer L, Bienz M: Drosophila CBP represses the transcription factor TCF to antagonize Wingless signalling. Nature 395: 521–525, 1998

123. Fagotto F, Glück U, Gumbiner BM: Nuclear localization signal-independent and importin/karyopherin-independent nuclear import of β-catenin. Curr Biol 8: 181–190, 1998

124. Novak A, Hsu SC, Leung-Hagesteijn C, Radeva G, Papkoff J, Montesano R, Roskelley C, Grosschedl R, Dedhar S: Cell adhesion and the integrin-linked kinase regulate the LEF-1 and beta-catenin signaling pathways. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95: 4374–4379, 1998

125. Shimizu H, Julius MA, Giarre M, Zheng ZZ, Brown AMC, Kitajewski J: Transformation of wnt family proteins correlates with regulation of β-catenin. Cell Growth Diff 8: 1349–1358, 1997

126. He X, Saint-Jeannet J-P, Wang Y, Nathans J, Dawid I, Varmus H: A member of the frizzled protein family mediating axis induction by Wnt-5A. Science 275: 1652–1654, 1998

127. Bafico A, Gazit A, Wu-Morgan SS, Yaniy A, Aaronson SA: Characterization of Wnt-1 and Wnt-2 induced growth alterations and signaling pathways in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. Oncogene 16: 2819–2825, 1998

128. Lejeune S, Huguet EL, Hamby A, Poulson R, Harris AL: Wnt5a cloning, expression, and up-regulation in human primary breast cancers. Clinical Cancer Res 1: 215–222, 1995

129. Kitaeva MN, Grogan L, Williams JP, Dimond E, Nkahara K, Hausner P DeNoble JW, Soballe PW,

130. Sparks AB, Morin PJ, Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW: Mutational analysis of the APC/β-catenin/Tcf pathway in colorectal cancer. Cancer Res: 1130–1134, 1998

131. Müller O, Nimmrich I, Finke U, Friedl W, Hoffmann I: A β-catenin mutation in a sporadic colorectal tumor of the RER phenotype and absence of β-catenin germline mutations in FAP patients. Genes, Chromosomes, Cancer 22: 37–41, 1998

132. de La Coste A, Romagnolo B, Billuart P, Renard CA, Buendia MA, Soubra ne O, Fabre M, Chelly J, Beldjord C, Kahn A, Perret C: Somatic mutations of the β-catenin gene are frequent in mouse and human hepatocellular carcinomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95: 8847–8851, 1998

133. Miyoshi Y, Iwao K, Nagasawa Y, Aihara T, Sasaki Y, Imaoka S, Murata M, Shimano T, Nakamura Y: Activation of the β-catenin gene in primary hepatocellular carcinomas by somatic alterations involving exon 3. Cancer Res 58: 2524–2527, 1998

134. Palacios J, Gamallo C: Mutations in the β-catenin gene (CTNNB1) in endometrioid ovarian carcinomas. Cancer Res 58: 1344–1347, 1998

135. Fukuchi T, Sakamoto M, Tsuda H, Maruyama K, Nozawa S, Hirohashi S: β-catenin mutation in carcinoma of the uterine endometrium. Cancer Res 58: 3526–3528, 1998

136. Voeller HJ, Truica CI, Gelmann EP: β-catenin mutations in human prostate cancer. Cancer Res 58: 2520–2523, 1998

137. Zurawel R, Chiappa S, Allen C, Raffel C: Sporadic medulloblastomas contain oncogenic β-catenin mutations. Cancer Res 58: 896–899, 1998

138. Takahashi M, Fukuda K, Sugimura T, Wakabayashi K: β-Catenin is frequently mutated and demonstrates altered cellular location in azoxymethane-induced rat colon tumors. Cancer Res 58: 42–46, 1998

139. Dashwood RH, Suzui M, Nakagama H, Sugimura T, Nagao M: High frequency of β-catenin (Ctnnb1) mutations in the colon tumors induced by heterocyclic amines in the F344 rat. Cancer Res 58: 1127–1129, 1998

140. Iwao K, Nakamori S, Kameyama M, Imaoka S, Kinoshita M, Fukui T, Ishiguro S, Nakamura Y, Miyoshi Y: Activation of the β-catenin gene by interstitial deletions involving exon3 in primary colorectal carcinomas without adenomatous polyposis coli mutations. Cancer Res 58: 1021–1026, 1998

141. Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B: Lessons from hereditary colorectal cancer. Cell 87: 159–170, 1996

142. Munemitsu S, Albert I, Rubinfeld B, Polakis P: Deletion of an amino-terminal sequence beta-catenin in vivo and promotes hyperphosphorylation of the adenomatous polyposis coli tumor suppressor protein. Mol Cell Biol 16: 4088–4094, 1996

143. Whitehead I, Kirk H, Kay R: Expression cloning of oncogenes by retroviral transfer of cDNA libraries. Mol Cell Biol 15: 704–710, 1995

144. Wong MW, Rubinfeld B, Gordon JI: Effects of forced expression of a NH2-terminal truncated β-catenin on

145. Gat U, DasGupta RD, Degenstein L, Fuchs E: *De novo* hair follicle morphogenesis and hair tumors in mice expressing a truncated β-catenin in skin. Cell 95: 605–614, 1998

146. Zhou P, Byrne C, Jacobs J, Fuchs E: Lymphoid enhancer factor 1 directs hair follicle patterning and epithelial cell fate. Genes Dev 9: 570–583, 1995

147. Pollack AL, Barth AIM, Altschuler Y, Nelson WJ, Mostov K: Dynamics of β-catenin regulate epithelial tubulogenesis. J Cell Biol 137: 1651–1662, 1997
