
FEMS Microbiology Reviews 23 (1999) 551–561

**Signaling during the invasion of host cells by *Toxoplasma gondii***

A. Bonhomme ${}^{a,*}$, A. Bouchot ${}^{a}$, N. Pezzella ${}^{a}$, J. Gomez ${}^{a,b}$, H. Le Moal ${}^{a}$,  
J.M. Pinon ${}^{a}$

${}^{a}$ UPRES-EA 2070, IFR53, 51, rue Cognacq Jay, 51095 Reims Cedex, France  
${}^{b}$ Grupo de Patología Infecciosa, Departamento de Medicina Interna, Hospital San Juan de Dios, Universidad Nacional de Colombia,  
Santafe de Bogota DC, Colombia  

Received 11 December 1998; revised 20 May 1999; accepted 26 May 1999

---

### Abstract

Invasion of host cells is essential for the pathogenicity of *Toxoplasma gondii*. This review examines the signal transduction pathways that lead to the internalization of *T. gondii*. We demonstrate that extra- and intracellular Ca²⁺ mobilization, Ca²⁺-calmodulin complex and phospholipase A₂ activities are required for *T. gondii* entry. *T. gondii* also causes the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase in infected cells and modifies its ionic environment during its intracellular state. Thus, many of the signaling systems found in other eukaryotes are operative in *Toxoplasma* invasion. © 1999 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

---

### Keywords: *Toxoplasma gondii*; Invasion; Ca signal; Phospholipase A₂; Element variation

---

### Contents

1. Introduction ..... 551
2. Invasion – motility ..... 552
3. Invasion – secretion ..... 553
4. Signal transduction in *T. gondii* invasion ..... 554
   4.1. Ca²⁺ and tachyzoite invasion ..... 554
   4.2. Tachyzoite calcium pools ..... 555
   4.3. Element distribution patterns in the tachyzoite and the parasitized cell ..... 555
   4.4. PLA₂ activity and tachyzoite invasion ..... 556
5. Conclusion ..... 558
References ..... 558

---

### 1. Introduction

*Toxoplasma gondii*, the etiological agent of toxoplasmosis, is an Apicomplexa obligate intracellular

* Corresponding author. Fax: +33 3.26.91.81.64.

0168-6445/99/$20.00 © 1999 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.  
PII: S0168-6445(99)00021-2

protozoan parasite with a broad host and tissue specificity. This ubiquitous pathogen has long been known to cause severe congenital infections in humans and animals and has recently attracted increased attention as an opportunistic pathogen associated with AIDS [1]. *Toxoplasma*, which can invade both phagocytic and non-phagocytic cells, requires an intracellular site for growth and replication. There are three infectious stages of *T. gondii*: the tachyzoites (in groups or clones), the bradyzoites (in tissue cysts), and the sporozoites (in oocysts). These stages are linked in a complex life cycle [2]. The tachyzoites rapidly multiply in any cell of the intermediate host and in non-intestinal epithelial cells of the definitive host [2]. Host cell invasion by the tachyzoite plays a crucial role in maintaining infection. We have identified some of the signals involved in a specific developmental process: invasion of the host cell, which is the topic of this review.

### 2. Invasion – motility

The parasite has a highly polar structure dictated by its complex cytoskeleton. Parasite motility is required for tachyzoite invasion of cells and is dependent on a pH gradient, determined by extracellular ions, in which the internal pH is higher than the external pH [3]. It probably involves actin [4], myosin [5] and microtubules [6,7].

The preliminary attachment of the parasite by its apical pole involves interactions between parasite ligands and cell surface receptors on the target cell (Fig. 1A): the plasma membrane laminin of the tachyzoite can be recognized by host cell laminin receptors, such as αβ1 integrins; SAG1, the parasite major surface protein (30 kDa), is recognized by a glycosylated host cell receptor [8–10]. It is assumed that a tight junction forms between the attached parasite and the host cell membrane, probably via surface membrane components anchored to the cytoskeletal microtubules of *T. gondii*. Fourier analysis of images from isolated frozen hydrated *Toxoplasma* microtubules and of freeze-fracture replicas of intramembranous particles (IMPs) associated with the inner membrane complex showed connections between the subpellicular microtubules and the inner membrane complex [11].

**Fig. 1.** The *T. gondii* invasion process. A: Attachment. The tachyzoite adheres to the host cell by its apical pole. The laminin and SAG1 (P30) of the parasite membrane complex are recognized by host cell membrane (HCM) receptors: integrins and glycoproteins, respectively. Micronemal proteins are released from the apical pole. DG, dense granules; R, rhoptries. B: Penetration. Protrusion of the conoid is mediated by the tachyzoite actin-myosin motor. Exocytosis of surface active factors from rhoptries (R). The host cell membrane (HCM) invaginates. A tight junction is formed with the host cell plasma membrane. Corkscrew motion of the parasite during entry. C: Internalization. The parasite glides into the parasitophorous vacuole (PV), avoiding both fusion with lysosomes and acidification. Rhoptry proteins are involved in the biogenesis of the PV. Exocytosis of dense granules (DGs) into the vacuolar space. Participation in reticular network (RN) formation. DG contents are continuously released during tachyzoite intracellular development. GRA proteins (dense granule proteins) are dispatched to various targets: the vacuolar space, reticular network (RN), parasitophorous vacuole membrane (PVM), host cell cytosol, host cell membrane. A tight association is formed between the host cell mitochondria (Mi), endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and PVM.

Microtubules seem to be the framework within which a motility system is organized. The characteristic spiraling motion during tachyzoite entry suggests that it results from movement generated by the conoid and the microtubules and may promote entry [12, 13]. Although microtubules are the most prominent morphological feature of the tachyzoite cytoskeleton, parasite invasion is blocked by substances which inhibit microfilaments, but not by those which inhibit microtubules [14–17]. The parasite actin-myosin motor provides the driving force which allows it to glide through the tight junction and extrude the conoid from its resting position in the polar ring. Myosin and actin are confined essentially to the apical end of the parasite [4, 5, 18, 19].

Using DNase I, we detected the presence of G actin essentially at the apical end of the extracellular tachyzoites, beneath the membrane complex but also in punctuate staining distributed throughout the cytoplasm, which is accentuated in intracellular parasites [18, 19]. F actin was not detected. A recent study [20] identified an actin depolymerization factor (ADF) in *Toxoplasma* that may correspond to a transient filamentous form of actin. Calmodulin (CaM), an important mediator of calcium signaling, required for the modulation of cellular calcium functions such as cell motility, Ca-dependent secretory exocytosis and enzyme activities (protein kinases, ATPases, A₂ phospholipases (PLA₂) and phosphodiesterases), was detected in the soluble protein fraction (cytoplasmic proteins) of *Toxoplasma*. CaM appeared to be essentially concentrated at the apical complex of extra- and intracellular tachyzoites [21]. The fact that CaM, actin and myosin have similar distributions suggests that CaM is involved in cytoskeletal movement and conoid extrusion and that it is therefore mobilized during cell invasion, as it is in *Plasmodium falciparum* [22, 23].

CaM is located in or on organelles of motility such as the cilia of *Tetrahymena* [24] and the flagella of *Trypanosoma rhodesiense* and *T. congolense* [25]. We have observed that CaM accumulates at the apical end prior to invasion, but becomes more diffuse in intracellular tachyzoites, where it is found beneath the membrane complex, whereas the apical distribution of actin is retained [18]. We have already shown that calmodulin antagonists (trifluoperazine (TFP), calmidazolium) reduce the invasion of KB cells (human epidermoid carcinoma epithelium cells) in a dose-dependent manner (TFP 30 μM ~34%, calmidazolium 15 μM ~30%), as they do in *Trypanosoma cruzi* [26]. TFP inhibits tachyzoite entry by preventing calmodulin interactions and the stimulation of certain calcium/calmodulin-dependent enzymes [27]. TFP and calmidazolium do not affect the subcellular distribution of calmodulin in treated tachyzoites. However, calmidazolium induces changes in cell shape, the tachyzoites becoming longer and tighter; these changes are similar to those induced by phenothiazines in *Trypanosoma brucei* [28] and are associated with reorganization of the microtubular membrane skeleton. It appears that invasion by *T. gondii* involves functional changes affecting calcium/calmodulin-dependent enzymatic processes and structural changes (cytoskeleton) that occur via calcium/calmodulin-dependent proteins (actin, tubulin). According to Morisaki et al. [29] and Dobrowolski and Sibley [16], tachyzoite penetration is actively powered by an actin-based contractile system in the parasite, without inducing host cell membrane ruffling, host actin microfilament reorganization or tyrosine phosphorylation of host proteins.

### 3. Invasion – secretion

Analysis of the molecular events involved in invasion is still at an early stage. The surface molecules are prime candidates for involvement in invasion. There are five major proteins with GPI anchors on the parasite surface [30], SAG1 (30 kDa), SAG2 (22 kDa), SAG3 (42 kDa), SAG4 (23 kDa), and SAG5 (35 kDa) [31]. SAG1 and SAG2, which are specific to the tachyzoite, are crucially important in the early stages of invasion, particularly attachment to the host cell [32, 33]. With the advent of molecular genetics, *T. gondii* surface antigen genes have been cloned and sequenced. According to Gross et al. [34] SAG1 may be a virulence factor of *T. gondii*. Surface antigen-related sequence (SRS) genes have recently been identified [35], although only three are known to be expressed in tachyzoites. The role of these SRS proteins: SRS1 (44.2 kDa), SRS2 (39.5 kDa), SRS3 (36.2 kDa) remains to be elucidated.

Once the parasite has been apically oriented, the first event of secretion to be visualized is the apical
release of the micronemal proteins MIC1, M1C2,  
MIC3 [36]. MIC1 (60 kDa) [37] and MIC2 (120  
kDa) [38] have an affinity for the cell surface and  
become attached intimately to the host cell. Epider-  
mal growth factor (EGF)-like domains have been  
identified in MIC3 (90 kDa) [39], which suggests  
that micronemes contain possible ligands for host  
cell receptors. This was rapidly followed by the dis-  
charge of rhoptries from the apical end. The rhop-  
tries excrete surface active factors that decrease the  
viscosity of the target cell membrane, initiate its in-  
vagination and enhance invasion (Fig. 1B).  

These substances may cause the vacuolization of  
the target cell around the invading pole. The tachy-  
zoite is finally enclosed in the parasitophorous vac-  
uole (PV) (Fig. 1C) that provides a highly specialized  
environment for parasite growth and development.  
The resulting vacuole differs radically from the nor-  
mal phagosome in that it avoids acidification and  
normal endocytic processing [40–42]  

One central question is whether the components of  
the rhoptry are critical only during invasion (for ex-  
ample, by altering the plasma membrane or cytoske-  
leton of the host cell) or whether these components  
play a more protective role in maintaining the PVM  
or vacuolar space. Ten proteins of *T. gondii* rhoptries  
have been identified, notably ROP1, a 61-kDa pro-  
tein, previously known as penetration enhancing fac-  
tor (PEF), and ROP2 (54 kDa), which are initially  
associated with the PVM, but disappear as the va-  
cuole matures [43,44]. Rhoptry protein release may  
be regulated by an endogenous Ca²⁺-dependent  
phospholipase [45].  

Finally, dense granule exocytosis is only detected  
in the fully formed vacuole [46] and appears to be  
calcium regulated [47]. Unlike rhoptry molecules,  
dense granule molecules continue to be secreted  
into the vacuole during the growth and development  
of the parasite, which implies that their main role is  
in modifying the vacuole [48]. The secretion of dense  
granule proteins contributes to the elaboration of an  
intravacuolar network (IN) of membranous tubules  
within the lumen of the PV which is connected to the  
vacuolar membrane (PVM). Dense granule proteins  
may be distributed either to the vacuolar membrane  
(GRA3, GRA5), or to the intravacuolar network  
(GRA1, GRA2, GRA4, GRA6) [49,50]. Our recent  
work simultaneously with two other research groups  

[51,52] led to the detection and localization of a new  
dense granule antigen, GRA7 (29 kDa).  

We used quantitative immunolabeling to show  
that this antigen is associated with the tubular ele-  
ments of the network, before being incorporated into  
the PVM and finally expanded to the host cell cyto-  
plasm and membrane [53]. The outward extension of  
anti-GRA3 label [48] and anti-GRA7 label [53] into  
the host cell cytoplasm, and even into the host cell  
membrane (for GRA7), suggests some trafficking of  
parasite molecules in the host cell, a process which is  
quite common in the case of the parasite *Plasmodium*  
*falciparum* [41]. The PVM, which surrounds the par-  
asites while they reside and grow within the host cell,  
mediates exchanges of nutrients and metabolites be-  
tween the parasite and the host cell through channels  
or pore-like structures with an exclusion limit of  
1300–1900 Da [54]. PVM functions are presumably  
mediated by specific PVM-associated proteins. Mito-  
chondria and components of the endoplasmic retic-  
ulum of the host cell concentrated around the PV  
also form tight associations with the PVM [55].  

The release of the dense granule proteins into the  
PV and PVM after invasion probably plays an im-  
portant part in allowing the parasite to replicate and  
evade the immune response. According to Asai et al.  
[56] and Sibley et al. [57], a dense granule derived  
soluble NTPase is capable of processing high energy  
phosphate nucleosides and could be involved in sal-  
vaging the purine required by the parasite to repli-  
cate.  

### 4. Signal transduction in *T. gondii* invasion  

#### 4.1. Ca²⁺ and tachyzoite invasion  

Calcium ions have long been known to play a key  
role in many cell events. Intracellular Ca²⁺ is an  
important second messenger in eukaryotic cells, me-  
diating the cell’s responses to external stimuli as well  
as playing a pivotal role in the control of many intra-  
cellular processes, including those involved in the  
regulation of the cytoskeleton and those associated  
with protein synthesis and secretion. Many of these  
Ca²⁺-regulated processes are mediated by CaM,  
which acts as a multipurpose intracellular receptor  
for Ca²⁺, and calcium/CaM complexes control a  wide range of cellular processes. We therefore examined the role of Ca²⁺ signaling in the internalization of *T. gondii*. We were able to show that invasion is critically dependent on the mobilization of Ca²⁺ from the extracellular medium and from intracellular stores, and followed the influx of calcium into the parasitized cell [21, 58]. EGTA chelation of extracellular Ca²⁺ blocked the invasive capacity of *Toxoplasma*, and prevented tachyzoite penetration into KB cells (human buccal carcinoma epithelium cells). Depleting intratachyzoite Ca²⁺ levels by adding 5 μM A23187+2 mM EGTA or adding TMB8, which blocks the release of Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores, inhibited the invasion by 55% and 20% respectively. In contrast, Ca ionophore (5 μM) and thapsigargin (5 μM) which increase host cell cytosol Ca²⁺, significantly decreased tachyzoite invasion (40% and 36% inhibition). These cells show a prolonged increase in cytosolic calcium, which cannot be compared to a current calcium signal because it is long lasting and widespread. Rodriguez et al. [59] observed that treatment of NRK cells with thapsigargin for 30 min blocked the \[Ca²⁺\]i transient induced by *Trypanosoma cruzi*. Therefore the calcium signal associated with *T. gondii* penetration could be blocked and the invasion process would decrease.

These findings [21] suggest that the initial tachyzoite host cell interaction is a Ca²⁺-dependent process and that Ca²⁺ mobilization from intratachyzoite stores is essential for successful parasite invasion. Tachyzoite infectivity is, therefore, dependent on the presence of Ca.

### 4.2. Tachyzoite calcium pools

X-ray microanalysis of freeze-dried tachyzoites has identified the median-posterior area as a calcium pool where Ca is 15 times more abundant than in other parts of the parasite. X-ray microanalysis of tachyzoite cryosections revealed amorphous black precipitates (BPs) (22×10⁻³ ± 9×10⁻³ μm²) containing two essential elements, P (48%) and Ca (26%). These granules sometimes form aggregates and may provide the Ca stores required for active penetration and replication of the parasite. We suggest that the phosphate present in *T. gondii* vacuoles may precipitate the calcium pumped by a Ca²⁺/H⁺/ATP-dependent exchanger [60]. During tachyzoite replication, the Ca content of the BPs fell, whereas their P content remained stable. This supports the hypothesis that BPs are indeed Ca stores.

### 4.3. Element distribution patterns in the tachyzoite and the parasitized cell

The intracellular development of *T. gondii* tachyzoites involves adapting to an environment with an ionic composition different from that of the external medium. Changes in the levels of ionized and non-ionized elements (sodium, potassium, chlorine, calcium, phosphorus, and sulfur) have been correlated with biochemical processes: to membrane potential and cell viability in the case of sodium, potassium and chloride, to the kinetics of calcium flux in the case of calcium, to protein content and translation activity in the case of sulfur and to cytoplasmic phosphorylation and nuclear transcription in that of phosphorus. We monitored these changes in the tachyzoite, the host cell and the parasitized cell (THP1 cell: human myelomonocytic cell line) in order to identify some of the biochemical processes that may be induced during parasite development.

When *T. gondii* enters the host cell, we observe a decrease in Na⁺ and an increase in K⁺ in the tachyzoite cytosol. Since *T. gondii* lacks a Na⁺/K⁺-ATPase [61], Na⁺ efflux and K⁺ influx are determined by their concentration gradients across the tachyzoite membrane. When the tachyzoite is extracellular, it is in an environment rich in Na⁺, and it contains more Na⁺ than K⁺; conversely, once it has entered the host cell, it contains more K⁺ than Na⁺. The influx of K⁺ into the intracellular tachyzoite from the host cell cytosol should enhance tachyzoite protein synthesis and promote multiplication. It has been shown that at the optimal concentration of 150 mM, KCl enhanced in vitro L-³H-lysine incorporation into the acid-insoluble fraction of *T. gondii* [61]. There are also fluctuations in the protein (S) content of the tachyzoite. During the first 6 h of invasion, the protein content decreases, and this could be attributable to the secretion of rhoptries and dense granule proteins during the formation of the parasitophorous vacuole membrane and of the reticular network [38, 48]. Then, the protein content increases, reflecting protein synthesis. A concomitant
increase in the P content of the tachyzoite nucleus could be associated with the transcription and duplication activities necessary for parasite multiplication and protein synthesis [60]. The increases in both P and S (respectively 41% and 15% of increase) in the THP-1 cell nucleus during infection could also be correlated with an increase in DNA transcription and protein phosphorylation. We recently showed that mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activity increases in infected cultures [62]. These events can be compared to those found to occur during the entry of the *Theileria parva* sporozoite that affects the protein kinase C and protein G of both the parasite and host cell [63].

The THP1-infected cell cytoplasm exhibits changes in the concentrations of ionized diffusible elements during infection: Na decreases, Cl and K increase and consequently the K/Na ratio increases, indicating a good cell viability [64]. Changes in the levels of these elements, and particularly that of K, could be correlated with fluctuations in the membrane potential of the infected host cell. The membrane potential mirrors the equilibrium potential of potassium. We observed that the plasma membrane of THP-1 cells became less polarized after *T. gondii* infection (unpublished observations).

Intracellular free Ca concentrations also varied. Ca²⁺ mapping performed in uninfected and infected KB cells and in the neoformed parasitophorous vacuole 24 h after infection showed a positive [Ca²⁺]i gradient (cytoplasm/PV) in 72% of infected cells. Forty-eight hours after infection, when the parasites had replicated and formed typical rosettes, cytoplasmic [Ca²⁺]i was significantly lower (39 nM) in infected cells than in uninfected cells (53 nM) (*P* < 0.05)[58]. It appears that once *T. gondii* has entered the cell, it is able to activate the pumping of Ca²⁺ from the cytoplasm of the host cell into the PV. Furthermore, the release of *Toxoplasma*, mediated by the calcium ionophore 4 Br A23187, is preceded by an increase in [Ca²⁺]i to 1 mM in the PV. The rise in [Ca²⁺]i and the release of parasites from the host appear to be linked. The increase of Ca²⁺ in the parasitophorous vacuole may be the signal that triggers the egress of *T. gondii* [58]. Calcium regulation in the host cell and in the vacuolar compartment appears to be linked to both the growth and the release of the parasite [58, 65].

### 4.4. PLA₂ activity and tachyzoite invasion

PLA₂ plays an important pathogenic role in infections caused by several microorganisms [66–68]. Parasite PLA₂ activity is involved in invasion by *T. gondii* and by other protozoan pathogens such as *Trypanosoma cruzi* and *Entamoeba histolytica*. It has been demonstrated that *T. gondii* PLA₂ increases host cell penetration [69]. The low molecular mass (20 kDa), secretory forms of PLA₂ (sPLA₂), which include type I and type II isoforms, require millimolar concentrations of Ca²⁺ [70]. The high molecular mass (95 kDa) cytosolic form (cPLA₂) of PLA₂ responds to physiological micromolar changes in intracellular Ca²⁺ by moving to membrane sites (predominantly to the nuclear membrane) [71].

On ultrathin sections, type I and II sPLA₂ were detected inside secretory organelles, dense granules and particularly in the rhoptries of tachyzoites (unpublished observation). Immunolocalization using a fluorescent probe (biotinylated antibody and streptavidin Texas red) showed labeling of the cytosol and membrane complex which disappeared during tachyzoite internalization, and became intense around the parasitophorous vacuole membrane. This suggests that sPLA₂ is secreted and could be involved not only in the invasion process, but also in PV formation. The localization of cPLA₂ in the cytosol and nucleus of extracellular tachyzoites gradually changed during successive intracellular stages, with an increase of tachyzoite membrane complex labeling. This suggests that cPLA₂ may be involved in membrane remodeling in newly-formed parasites (Gomez-Marin et al., unpublished observations).

Incubation of *T. gondii* with sPLA₂ inhibitor (LY 311727, Lilly Research Laboratories, Indianapolis, IN, USA) and cPLA₂ inhibitor (AACOCF3, Biomol Inc., Plymouth, PA, USA) before infection reduced the invasion index by 50% and 40% respectively (Gomez-Marin et al., unpublished observations). Incubating host cells with sPLA₂ inhibitors before infection reduced the number of infected cells. *T. gondii* increased the activity of sPLA₂ type II and cPLA₂ in host cell membrane fractions. The 5-fold increase in sPLA₂ activity was accompanied by a 2.5-fold increase in the amounts of sPLA₂ type II protein in membrane fractions. This suggests that the increase in PLA₂ activity is not due solely to parasite sPLA₂,

A. Bonhomme et al. / FEMS Microbiology Reviews 23 (1999) 551–561

Fig. 2. Signaling pathways during *T. gondii* invasion. A: Calcium signal and tachyzoite (Tg) penetration. The Ca/CaM complex regulates the functions required for the invasion process: motility, secretion, and enzyme activities. The mobilization of extracellular and intracellular calcium (from Ca stores) would lead to conoid extrusion mediated by the actin/myosin motor, and the activation of Ca/CaM-dependent processes (secretion of enzymes such as Ca²⁺-dependent PLA₂, sPLA₂ from the rhoptries). The cPLA₂ activated by MAP kinases releases arachidonic acid (AA) which enables sPLA₂ to hydrolyze the host cell membrane phospholipids, leading to fluidification of the membrane. AA could affect the influx of calcium into the host cell and/or the mobilization of internal Ca pools. B: Signal within the host cell and tachyzoite penetration. After MIC3 exocytosis, an EGF-like signal would activate a PLC, and the IP3 produced could lead to the release of Ca from the host cell endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Moreover, via GTP-Ras protein, this signal would induce MAP kinase phosphorylation and activate transcription (increased nuclear P and S). The sPLA₂ synthesis and activity of the parasitized host cell increase. C: Parasite development. Once the parasite has entered the parasitophorous vacuole (PV), the level of K⁺ in the host cell cytosol increases and the membrane of the host cell becomes less polarized. Tachyzoite S decreases with the exocytosis (a Ca/CaM-dependent process) of the rhoptries and dense granule proteins required to build the parasitophorous vacuolar membrane (PVM) and the reticular network (RN). Tachyzoite cytosolic K and S contents then increase, and Ca stores (BP) are mobilized, and nuclear P levels rise. These changes are related to protein synthesis following the transcription needed for tachyzoite replication. Within the PV, the increase in Ca follows tachyzoite development, and a calcium signal promotes the egress of tachyzoites. Dashed lines: hypothetical pathways.

but also to the host cell type II sPLA₂. Our results showed that *T. gondii* increased host type II sPLA₂ protein production and activity (Gomez-Marin et al., unpublished observations). In contrast, the increase in cPLA₂ activity after *T. gondii* infection is not due to the increased production of host cPLA₂. It appears that host cell cPLA₂ activity is not required for invasion by *T. gondii* (which was not prevented when host cell cPLA₂ was inhibited by AACOCF3 before infection). The higher levels of cPLA₂ activity in the membrane fractions of infected cells are due to the tachyzoite cPLA₂ (Gomez-Marin et al., unpublished observations).

We conclude that PLA₂ may be involved in host cell penetration in one or more ways. The products of enzyme activity may cause membrane lysis or affect membrane fluidity. PLA₂ may be secreted by the rhoptries or may be membrane bound and may act either independently or in conjunction with rhoptry secretion.

MAP kinases, protein kinases which phosphorylate serine and threonine residues in proteins, activate cytosolic proteins such as cytosolic PLA₂ (cPLA₂). We have shown that the infection of human monocytes by *T. gondii* is Ca²⁺-dependent and increases their MAP kinase activity, suggesting that

MAP kinase phosphorylation is involved in signal transduction in this parasite infection. The MAP kinase activity of cells was examined after 20 h in culture, when almost 40% of them had been infected and had 4–6 intracellular parasites per cell. We observed that the activity of *T. gondii* infected THP1 membrane fractions showed a mean increase to 2.5 times basal activity [62]. We also demonstrated that *T. gondii* had its own MAP kinase activity [62]. Thus, the phosphorylation of Ser 505 in cPLA₂ by parasite MAP kinase may induce its Ca²⁺-dependent translocation to the membrane sites where it hydrolyzes phospholipids [72]. The generated fatty acids may induce changes in the bilayer structure of the host cell membrane, making it susceptible to sPLA₂ [73]. As a result, this membrane becomes more fluid which facilitates tachyzoite penetration. Arachidonic acid (AA) may also affect the influx of calcium into the host cell and/or the mobilization of intracellular calcium (Fig. 2). The recent identification of distinct MAP kinase cascades (ERK, NK and p38) that are similar in all eukaryotes makes it necessary to discern the contribution of each module at each stage of the *T. gondii* infection.

The changes in levels of elements, MAP kinase activity and calcium signal were very significant. According to Fourmaux et al. [39], MIC3 contained two EGF-like domains as a tandem repeat in the COOH-terminal. In general, when EGF molecules interact with their receptors, they induce activation and phosphorylation of a PLCγ that cleaves PIP2 to form DAG and IP3 which in turn triggers the release of internal stored calcium. They also induce GNRP (guanidic nucleotide releasing protein) activation by adaptive molecule binding. GNRP induces GTP binding to Ras protein. This GTP-Ras protein interacts with MAP kinase kinase kinase, which is phosphorylated by a PKC. This phosphorylated MAP kinase kinase phosphorylates a MAP kinase which in turn phosphorylates MAP kinase twice. This MAP kinase then phosphorylates some transcription factors (like Elk-1, Jun, etc.) leading to gene transcription activation.

Observations of cell infestation by *T. gondii* reveal several similarities with this signaling pathway: a calcium signal, MAP kinase activation, a rise in nuclear P content after invasion correlated with transcription activation. The interaction between the

host cell and the parasite could result, in part, from activating this EGF signal. It is interesting to note that the MAP kinase and PLCγ pathways have been shown to participate in the entry of *Salmonella* into mammalian cells [74].

## 5. Conclusion

Fig. 2 summarizes our findings and provides a partial answer to the question of what signal transduction mechanisms are involved in *T. gondii* invasion. Penetration appears to be Ca-dependent, with cytoskeleton movement via Ca/CaM-dependent proteins such as actin, and with changes in the function of Ca and Ca/CaM-dependent enzymes, such as PLA₂ (parasite s and cPLA2 are both involved in the invasion). Internalization appears to trigger changes in the host cell nucleus and cytoplasm, with increased sPLA₂ activity and phosphorylation of MAP kinase. Understanding the signaling that takes place during *T. gondii* infestation offers a new perspective on cell biology that will provide basic knowledge about how other members of the Apicomplexa function. These novel metabolic pathways could also be potential targets for new drugs.

## References

[1] Luft, B.J. and Remington, J.S. (1992) Toxoplasmic encephalitis in AIDS. Clin. Infect. Dis. 15, 211–222.

[2] Dubey, J.P., Lindsay, D.S. and Speer, C.A. (1997) Structures of *Toxoplasma gondii* tachyzoites, bradyzoites and sporozoites and biology of development of tissue cysts. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 11, 267–299.

[3] Endo, T. and Yagita, K. (1990) Effect of extracellular ions on motility and cell entry in *Toxoplasma gondii*. J. Protozool. 37, 133–138.

[4] Endo, T., Yagita, K., Yasuda, T. and Nakamura, T. (1988) Detection and localization of actin in *Toxoplasma gondii*. Parasitol. Res. 75, 102–106.

[5] Schwartzman, J.D. and Pfefferkorn, E.R. (1983) Immunofluorescence localization of myosin at the anterior pole of coccidian *Toxoplasma gondii*. J. Protozool. 30, 657–661.

[6] Schwartzman, J.D., Krug, E.C., Payne, M.R. and Binder, L.I. (1985) Detection of the microtubule cytoskeleton of the coccidian *Toxoplasma gondii* and the hemoflagellate *Leishmania donovani* by monoclonal antibodies specific for beta-tubulin. J. Protozool. 32, 747–749.

[7] Werk, R. (1985) How does *Toxoplasma gondii* enter host cells? Rev. Infect. Dis. 7, 449–457.

[8] Furtado, G.C., Cao, Y. and Joiner, K.A. (1992) Laminin on *Toxoplasma gondii* mediates parasite binding to the β1 integrin receptor α6β1 on human foreskin fibroblasts and Chinese hamster ovary cells. Infect. Immun. 60, 4925–4931.

[9] Kasper, L.H. and Mineo, J.R. (1994) Attachment and invasion of host cells by *Toxoplasma gondii*. Parasitol. Today 10, 184–188.

[10] Mineo, J.R. and Kasper, L.H. (1994) Attachment of *Toxoplasma gondii* to host cells involves major surface protein, SAG-1 (P30). Exp. Parasitol. 79, 11–20.

[11] Morissette, N.C., Murray, J.M. and Roos, D.S. (1997) Subpellicular microtubules associate with an intramembranous particle lattice in the protozoan parasite *Toxoplasma gondii*. J. Cell Sci. 110, 35–42.

[12] Nichols, B. and Chiappino, M.L. (1987) Cytoskeleton of *Toxoplasma gondii*. J. Protozool. 34, 217–226.

[13] Frixione, E., Mondragon, R. and Meza, I. (1996) Kinematic analysis of *Toxoplasma gondii* motility. Cell. Motil. Cytoskelet. 34, 152–163.

[14] Ryning, F. and Remington, J.S. (1978) Effect of cytochalasin D on *Toxoplasma gondii* cell entry. Infect. Immun. 20, 739–743.

[15] Mondragon, R., Meza, I. and Frixione, E. (1994) Divalent cation and ATP dependent motility of *Toxoplasma gondii* tachyzoites after mild treatment with trypsin. J. Eukaryot. Microbiol. 41, 330–337.

[16] Dobrowolski, J.M. and Sibley, L.D. (1996) Toxoplasma invasion of mammalian cells is powered by the actin cytoskeleton of the parasite. Cell. 84, 933–939.

[17] Dobrowolski, J.M., Carruthers, V.B. and Sibley, L.D. (1997) Participation of myosin in gliding motility and host cell invasion by *Toxoplasma gondii*. Mol. Microbiol. 26, 163–173.

[18] Pezzella, N., Bonhomme, A., Le Moal, H., Klein, C. and Pinon, J.M. (1997) Calmoduline et cytosquelette de *Toxoplasma gondii*. Colloque de la Société Française de Parasitologie, Paris.

[19] Pezzella, N., Le Moal, H., Bonhomme, A., Klein, C., Cheutin T., Bonhomme, P. and Pinon, J.M. (1998) Confocal and TEM immunodetection of two *Toxoplasma gondii* invasive proteins. 14th International Congress on Electron Microscopy, Cancun.

[20] Allen, M.L., Dobrowolski, J.M., Müller, H., Sibley, L.D. and Mansour, T.E. (1997) Cloning and characterization of actin depolymerizing factor from *Toxoplasma gondii*. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 88, 43–52.

[21] Pezzella, N., Bouchot, A., Bonhomme, A., Pingret, L., Klein, C., Burlet, H., Balossier, G., Bonhomme, P. and Pinon, J.M. (1997) Involvement of calcium and calmodulin in *Toxoplasma gondii* tachyzoite invasion. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 74, 92–101.

[22] Matsumoto, Y., Perry, G., Scheibel, L.W. and Aikawa, M. (1987) Role of calmodulin in *Plasmodium falciparum*: implications for erythrocyte invasion by the merozoite. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 45, 36–43.

[23] Scheibel, L.W., Colombani, P.M., Hess, A.D., Aikawa, M., Atkinson, C.T. and Milhous, W.K. (1987) Calcium and calmodulin antagonists inhibit human malaria parasites (*Plasmodium falciparum*): implication for drug design. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84, 7310–7314.

[24] Schultz, J.E., Schönefeld, U. and Klump, S. (1983) Calcium/calmodulin regulated guanylate cyclase and calcium-permeability in the ciliary membrane from *Tetrahymena*. Eur. J. Biochem. 137, 89–94.

[25] Ruben, L., Egwuagu, G. and Patton, C.L. (1983) African trypanosomes contain CaM which is distinct from host CaM. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 758, 104–113.

[26] Yakubu, M.A., Majeinder, S. and Kierszenbaum, F. (1994) Changes in *Trypanosoma cruzi* infectivity by treatments that affect calcium ion levels. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 66, 119–125.

[27] Tanaka, T., Ohmura, T. and Hidaka, H. (1983) Calmodulin antagonist’s binding sites on calmodulin. Pharmacology 26, 249–257.

[28] Page, A.M. and Lagnado, J.R. (1995) Effects of phenothiazine neuroleptic drugs on the microtubular, membrane complex in bloodstream forms of *Trypanosoma brucei*. Parasitology 111, 493–504.

[29] Morisaki, J.H., Heuser, J.E. and Sibley, L.D. (1995) Invasion of *Toxoplasma gondii* occurs by active penetration of the host cell. J. Cell Sci. 108, 2457–2464.

[30] Couvreur, G., Sadak, A., Fortier, B. and Dubremetz, F.F. (1988) Surface antigens of *Toxoplasma gondii*. Parasitology 97, 1–10.

[31] Tomavo, S., Schwarz, R.T. and Dubremetz, J.F. (1989) Evidence for glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol anchor of *Toxoplasma gondii* major surface antigens. Mol. Cell. Biol. 9, 4576–4580.

[32] Smith, J.E. (1995) A ubiquitous intracellular parasite: the cellular biology of *Toxoplasma gondii*. Int. J. Parasitol. 25, 1301–1309.

[33] Grimwood, J. and Smith, J.E. (1996) *Toxoplasma gondii*: the role of parasite surface and secreted proteins in host cell invasion. Int. J. Parasitol. 26, 169–173.

[34] Windeck, T. and Gross, U. (1996) *Toxoplasma gondii* strain-specific transcript levels of SAG1 and their association with virulence. Parasitol. Res. 82, 715–719.

[35] Boothroyd, S.C., Black, M. and Bonnefoy, S. (1997) Genetic and biochemical analysis of development in *Toxoplasma gondii*. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Biol. Sci. 352, 1347–1354.

[36] Achbarou, A., Mercereau-Puijalon, O., Autheman, J.M., Fortier, B., Camus, D. and Dubremetz, J.F. (1991) Characterization of microneme proteins of *Toxoplasma gondii*. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 47, 223–230.

[37] Fourmaux, M.N., Achbarou, A., Mercereau-Puijalon, O., Biderre, C., Briche, I., Loyens, A., Odberg-Ferragurt, C., Camus, D. and Dubremetz, J.F. (1996) The MIC1 microneme protein of *Toxoplasma gondii* contains a duplicated receptor like domain and binds to host cell surface. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 83, 201–210.

[38] Carruthers, V.B. and Sibley, L.D. (1997) Sequential protein secretion from three distinct organelles of *Toxoplasma gondii* accompanies invasion of human fibroblasts. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 73, 114–123.

[39] Fourmaux, M.N., Garcia-Régue, N., Mercereau-Puijalon, O. and Dubremetz, J.F. (1996) *Toxoplasma gondii* microneme

proteins: gene cloning and possible function. Curr. Topics Microbiol. Immunol. 219, 55–58.

[40] Joiner, K.A., Fuhrman, S.A., Miettinen, H.M., Kasper, L.H. and Mellman, I. (1990) *Toxoplasma gondii*: fusion competence of parasitophorous vacuoles in FC receptor transfected fibroblasts. Science 249, 641–646.

[41] Joiner, K.A. (1994) Vacuolar membranes surrounding intracellular pathogens: where do they come from and what do they do? Infect. Agents Dis. 2, 215–219.

[42] Sibley, L.D., Poullety, C. and Boothroyd, J.C. (1993) Formation and modification of the parasitophorous vacuole occupied by *Toxoplasma gondii*. In: Toxoplasmosis (Smith, J.E. Ed.), pp. 63–72. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.

[43] Saffer, L.D., Mercereau-Puijalon, O., Dubremetz, J.F. and Schwartzman, J.D. (1992) Localization of a *Toxoplasma gondii* rhoptry protein by immunelectron microscopy during and after host cell penetration. J. Protozool. 39, 526–530.

[44] Beckers, J.M., Dubremetz, J.F., Mercereau-Puijalon, O. and Joiner, K.E. (1994) The *Toxoplasma gondii* rhoptry protein ROP2 is inserted into the parasitophorous vacuole membrane, surrounding the intracellular parasite, and is exposed to the host cell cytoplasm. J. Cell Biol. 127, 947–961.

[45] Saffer, L.D. and Schwartzman, J.D. (1991) A soluble phospholipase of *Toxoplasma gondii* associated with host cell penetration. J. Protozool. 38, 454–460.

[46] Leriche, M.A. and Dubremetz, J.F. (1990) Exocytosis of *Toxoplasma gondii* dense granules into the parasitophorous vacuole after host cell invasion. Parasitol. Res. 76, 559–562.

[47] Sibley, L.D. and Boothroyd, J.C. (1991) Calcium regulated secretion and modification of host-cell endocytic compartments by *Toxoplasma*. J. Cell Biol. 115, 5a.

[48] Dubremetz, J.F., Achbarou, A., Bermudes, D. and Joiner, K.A. (1993) Kinetics and pattern of organelle exocytosis during *Toxoplasma gondii* host cell interaction. Parasitol. Res. 79, 402–408.

[49] Cesbron-Delauw, M.F. (1994) Dense granule organelles of *Toxoplasma gondii*: their role in the host parasite relationship. Parasitol. Today 10, 293–296.

[50] Sibley, L.D., Niesman, I.R., Parmley, S.F. and Cesbron-Delauw, M.F. (1995) Regulated secretion of multi-lamellar vesicles leads to formation of a tubulovesicular network in host cell vacuoles occupied by *Toxoplasma gondii*. J. Cell Sci. 108, 1669–1677.

[51] Jacobs, D., Dubremetz, J.F., Loyens, A., Bosman, F. and Saman, E. (1998) Identification and heterologous expression of a new dense granule protein (GRA7) from *Toxoplasma gondii*. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 91, 237–249.

[52] Fischer, H.G., Stachelhaus, S., Sahm, M., Meyer, H.E. and Reichman, G. (1998) GRA7, an excretory 29kDa *Toxoplasma gondii* dense granule protein released by infected host cells. Mol. Biochem. Parasitol. 91, 251–262.

[53] Bonhomme, A., Maine, G.T., Beorchia, A., Burlet, H., Aubert, D., Villena, I., Hunt, J., Chovan, L., Howard, L., Brojanac, S., Sheu, M., Tyner, J., Pluot, M. and Pinon, J.M. (1998) Quantitative immunolocalization of a P29 protein (GRA7), a new antigen of *Toxoplasma gondii*. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 46, 1411–1421.

[54] Schwab, J.C., Beckers, C.J., Joiner, K.A., Schwartzman, J.D. and Saffer, L.D. (1994) The parasitophorous vacuole membrane surrounding intracellular *Toxoplasma gondii* functions as a molecular sieve. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 509–513.

[55] Sinai, A.P., Webster, P. and Joiner, K.A. (1997) Association of host cell endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria with the *Toxoplasma gondii* parasitophorous vacuole membrane: a high affinity interaction. J. Cell Sci. 110, 2117–2128.

[56] Asai, T., O’Sullivan, W.J. and Tatibana, M. (1983) A potent nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase from the parasite protozoa *Toxoplasma gondii*. J. Biol. Chem. 258, 6816–6822.

[57] Sibley, L.D., Niesman, I.R., Asai, T. and Takeuchi, T. (1994) *Toxoplasma gondii*: secretion of a potent nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase in the parasitophorous vacuole. Exp. Parasitol. 79, 301–311.

[58] Pingret, L., Millot, J.M., Sharonov, S., Bonhomme, A., Manfait, M. and Pinon, J.M. (1996) Relationship between intracellular free calcium concentrations and the intracellular development of *Toxoplasma gondii*. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 44, 1123–1129.

[59] Rodriguez, A., Rioult, M.G., Ora, A. and Andrews, N.W. (1995) A trypanosome-soluble factor induces IP3 formation, intracellular Ca²⁺ mobilization and microfilament rearrangement in host cells. J. Cell. Biol. 129, 1263–1273.

[60] Bouchot, A., Zierold, K., Bonhomme, A., Kilian, L., Belloni, A., Balossier, G., Pinon, J.M. and Bonhomme, P. (1999) Tachyzoite calcium changes during cell invasion by *Toxoplasma gondii*. Parasitol. Res. (in press).

[61] Takeuchi, T., Fujiwara, T. and Akao, S. (1980) Na⁺, K⁺-dependent ATPase activity and effect of K⁺ on in vitro protein synthesis and NAD pyrophosphorylase in *Toxoplasma gondii*. J. Parasitol. 66, 591–595.

[62] Gomez-Marin, J., Bonhomme, A., El’Btaouri, H., Antonicelli, F., Burlet, H., Aubert, D., Villena, I., Guenounou, M., Haye, B. and Pinon, J.M. (1998) Interferon γ signal transduction during parasite infection: modulation of MAP kinases in the infection of human monocyte cells (THP1) by *Toxoplasma gondii*. Parasite Immunol. 20, 631–635.

[63] Shaw, M.K. (1996) Mobilization of intrasporozoite Ca²⁺ is essential for *Theileria parva* sporozoite invasion of bovine lymphocytes. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 68, 78–87.

[64] Zierold, K. (1991) Cryofixation methods for ions localization in cells by electron probe microanalysis: a review. J. Microsc. 161, 357–366.

[65] Endo, T., Sethi, K.K. and Piekarski, G. (1982) *Toxoplasma gondii*: calcium ionophore A23187-mediated exit of trophozoites from infected murine macrophages. Exp. Parasitol. 53, 179–188.

[66] Walker, D.H., Firth, W.T., Ballard, J.G. and Hegarty, B.C. (1983) Role of phospholipase associated penetration mechanism in cell injury by *Rickettsia ricketsii*. Infect. Immun. 40, 840–842.

[67] Cornelly, M.C. and Kerszenbaum, F. (1984) Modulation of macrophage interaction with *Trypanosoma cruzi* by phospholipase A2-sensitive component of the parasite membrane. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 121, 931–939.

[68] Radvan, J., Murphy, C.F., Guerrant, R.L. and Long-Krug, S.

(1985) Effects of antagonists of calcium and phospholipase A2 on the cytopathogenicity of *Entamoeba histolytica*. J. Infect. Dis. 152, 542–549.

[69] Saffer, L.D., Long-Krug, S.A. and Schwartzmann, J.D. (1989) The role of phospholipase in host cell penetration by *Toxoplasma gondii*. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 40, 145–149.

[70] Dennis, E.A. (1997) The growing phospholipase A2 superfamily of signal transduction enzymes. Trends Biochem. Sci. 22, 1–2.

[71] Peters-Golden, M., Song, K., Marshall, T. and Brock, T. (1996) Translocation of cytosolic phospholipase A2 to the nuclear envelope elicits topographically localized phospholipids hydrolysis. Biochem. J. 318, 797–803.

[72] Lin, L.L., Wartmann, M., Lin, A.Y., Knofp, J.L., Seth, A. and Davis, R.J. (1993) cPLA₂ is phosphorylated and activated by MAP kinase. Cell 72, 269–278.

[73] Bell, J.D., Burnside, M., Owen, J.A., Royall, M.L. and Baker, M.L. (1996) Relationships between bilayer structure and phospholipase A2 activity: interactions among temperature, diacylglycerol, lysolecithin, palmitic acid and dipalmityl phosphatidylcholine. Biochemistry 35, 4945–4955.

[74] Galan, J.E. (1994) *Salmonella* entry into mammalian cells: different jet converging signal transduction pathways? Trends Cell Biol. 4, 196–199.
