
Experimental Cell Research 253, 157–165 (1999)
Article ID excr.1999.4695, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on IDEAL®

# Ras and Rap1: Two Highly Related Small GTPases with Distinct Function

Fried J. T. Zwartkruis and Johannes L. Bos¹

Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry and Center for Biomedical Genetics, Utrecht University, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands

---

The Ras-like family of small GTPases includes, among others, Ras, Rap1, R-ras, and Ral. The family is characterized by similarities in the effector domain. While the function of Ras is, at least in part, elucidated, little is known about other members of the family. Currently, much attention is focused on the small GTPase Rap1. Initially, this member was identified as a transformation suppressor protein able to revert the morphological phenotype of Ras-transformed fibroblasts. This has led to the hypothesis that Rap1 antagonizes Ras by interfering in Ras effector function. Recent analysis revealed that Rap1 is activated rapidly in response to activation of a variety of receptors. Rap1 activation is mediated by several second messengers, including calcium, diacylglycerol, and cAMP. Guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) have been identified that mediate these effects. The most interesting GEF is Epac, an exchange protein directly activated by cAMP, thus representing a novel cAMP-induced, protein kinase A-independent pathway. Furthermore, Rap1 is inactivated by specific GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), one of which is regulated through an interaction with Gαi. While Ras and Rap1 may share some effector pathways, evidence is accumulating that Ras and Rap1 each regulate unique cellular processes in response to various extracellular ligands. For Rap1 these functions may include the control of cell morphology.

Key Words: Ras; Rap1; GAP; GEF; Epac; cAMP.

---

These processes have been visualized for Ras in the cocrystallization studies of Ras with the catalytic domain of the RasGEF SOS [1] and of Ras with the catalytic domain of p120RasGAP [2].

The Ras-like small GTPases (Fig. 1) form a family of proteins which include Ras, Rap1, Rap2, R-ras, TC21, Ral, Rheb [3], and the recently identified M-ras (R-ras3) [4, 5]. These proteins are classified in this group based upon similarities in the effector domain, which in Ras interacts with downstream targets. While Ras is clearly the best-known and best-studied member of the family, Rap1 has recently attracted much attention. In this review we will focus on Ras and Rap1 and discuss the parallels and differences between the two relatives.

## REGULATION OF Ras ACTIVITY

A large variety of cell surface receptors with either intrinsic or associated tyrosine kinase activity are capable of activating Ras [6]. Phosphotyrosines on the receptor or its associated proteins serve as docking sites for a complex of the adaptor protein GRB2 and the Ras-specific exchange factor Sos (reviewed in [7]). Serpentine receptors that are not directly associated with tyrosine kinases may activate Ras through Src-like kinases or ligand-independent activation of receptor tyrosine kinases (reviewed in [8]). Apart from Sos, several Ras-specific GEFs, predominantly expressed in brain, have been found that are regulated via second messengers: (i) Ras GRF is an IQ motif-containing GEF whose activity is enhanced following binding of calcium-bound calmodulin [9]. (ii) RasGRP contains a calcium binding “EF hand” and a diacylglycerol (DAG) binding site and is indeed activated following the direct binding of calcium and diacylglycerol [10] (Fig. 2).

Negative regulation of Ras is mediated by p120-RasGAP and neurofibromin, but little is known about how these GAPs are regulated. p120-RasGAP can associate with tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins which may serve as docking proteins to position p120Ras-GAP proximal to Ras. Furthermore, members of the GAP1 family may act on Ras. Interestingly, stimulation of the thromboxane A2 receptor results in the association of

---

INTRODUCTION

Small GTPases of the Ras superfamily cycle between two conformations induced by the binding of either GDP or GTP. Guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) induce the dissociation of GDP to allow association of the more abundant GTP, which in its turn is hydrolyzed to GDP by the intrinsic GTPase activity in combination with GTPase-activating proteins (GAP).

¹ To whom correspondence and reprint requests should be addressed. Fax: +31-30-2538969. E-mail: J.L.Bos@med.uu.nl.

H, K, N-Ras | T I Q L I Q N H F V D E Y D P T I E D S Y R K Q V V I D G |
M-Ras      | T I Q F F Q K I F V P D Y D P T I E D S Y L K H T E I D N |
R-Ras      | T I Q F I Q S Y F V S D Y D P T I E D S Y T K I C S V D G |
TC21       | T I Q F I Q S Y F V T D Y D P T I E D S Y T K Q C V I D D |
Rap1A, 1B  | T V Q F V Q G I F V E K Y D P T I E D S Y R K Q V E V D C |
Rap2A      | T V Q F V T G T F I E K Y D P T I E D F Y R K E I E V D S |
Rap2B      | T V Q F V T G S F I E K Y D P T I E D F Y R K E I E V D S |
RalA, RalB | T L Q F M Y D E F V E D Y E P T I A D S Y R K K V V L D G |
Rheb       | T I Q F V E G Q F V D S Y D P T I E N T F T K L I T V N G |
Rin        | T M Q F I S H Q F P D Y H D P T I E D A Y K T Q V R I D N |
Rit        | T M Q F I S H R F P E D H D P T I E D A Y K I R I R I D D |

FIG. 1. Alignment of the switch I region of Ras-like GTPases. The switch I region is one of two regions undergoing a major conformational change upon binding of GTP and contains the core effector domain (indicated above). Numbers refer to amino acid residues for Ras.

GAP1<sup>m</sup> with the GTP-bound α subunit of G<sub>12</sub>, resulting in the induction of GAP activity and the inhibition of Ras [11]. These GAP proteins may serve additional functions as well, i.e., they may function as effectors of Ras signaling [12, 13], or they may function as a positional cue for RasGTP as suggested for Bud2 in yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (see below).

### Ras EFFECTORS

Ras effectors have been defined as proteins that specifically bind to and are activated by the GTP-bound form of Ras. Activation of effectors occurs as a consequence of translocation from the cytosol to the plasma membrane, but this may not in all cases be sufficient for (full) activation of the effector (e.g., [14]). The best-studied effectors are the serine-threonine kinase c-Raf1 and the closely related A-Raf and B-Raf kinases. These kinases in turn can activate the MEK-ERK pathway (reviewed in [15]). Another effector is phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI-3 kinase), which is composed of an 85-kDa regulatory and a 110-kDa catalytic subunit. The p110 catalytic subunit is directly activated by binding to GTP-bound Ras [16]. PI-3 kinase activity is required for activation of PKB [17, 18] as well as that of the Rac GTPase [19, 20]. A third class of Ras effector molecules is formed by three members of the RalGEF family: RalGDS, Rgl, and Rlf (reviewed in [21]). Interestingly, mutational analysis of the Ras effector domain led to the isolation of Ras mutants that selectively activate a single class of effector, e.g., the RasV12S35 mutant will activate Raf/ERK, but not the RalGEF or PI-3 kinase pathway [22]. These effector domain mutants are therefore useful tools to probe the relative importance of the distinct effectors in Ras-mediated processes. For example, in studies with NIH3T3 cells each of the effector domain mutants displayed comparable tumorigenic properties. However, cells in which the Raf pathway was activated showed a higher metastatic behavior [23]. Ras activation by itself is insufficient to change a normal cell into a tumor cell. Rather, activation of only Ras drives primary cells into a state of senescence and thus blocks cell proliferation [24]. Raf1 appears to be the main mediator of this Ras effect.

Finally, several other proteins specifically interact with active Ras. These proteins include, among others, AF-6 [25], Rin-1 [26], and Nore-1 [27]. Unfortunately, these proteins lack a clear enzymatic activity, which makes it difficult to prove that they are genuine Ras effectors.

Processes controlled by Ras include cell cycle progression, cytoskeletal alterations, and apoptosis. The different effectors and their downstream targets are known to play distinct roles in each of these processes (Fig. 2). For Ras there are at least three different genes, H-Ras, N-Ras, and K-Ras (encoding K-Ras4A and -B) and each of these is expressed ubiquitously. For a long time all Ras isoforms seemed to be almost identical in biochemical terms, even though it had been noticed that most types of tumors carry mutations in specific Ras genes. For example, colon tumors are strongly associated with K-Ras mutations whereas in acute myelogenous leukemias activating mutations are predominantly found in the N-Ras gene [28]. Furthermore, mice lacking functional H-Ras or N-Ras are completely viable, whereas targeted disruption of the K-Ras gene in mice leads to lethality, showing that K-Ras4B performs some unique function [29]. In a recent comparative study of the different Ras proteins (Ha-Ras, N-Ras, and Ki-Ras4A and -B) it was reported that they may differ in their relative abilities to activate Raf-1, induce transformation, and stimulate cell motility [30]. How can these differences be explained given the very high homology of the Ras proteins? The major differences between the Ras proteins can be found at their C-terminal hypervariable region, which is responsible for membrane targeting. Membrane binding is mediated in part by the presence of a farnesyl prenoid group, which becomes attached to the cysteine of the CAAX motif in the endoplasmic reticulum. This cysteine is further modified by the addition of a methyl group, following proteolytic removal of the AAX residues (reviewed by [31]). Stable membrane localization, however, depends in the case of N- and H-Ras on the subsequent S-acylation of cysteine residues in the hypervariable region, but in the case of K-Ras4B on a stretch of basic amino acids. The basic amino acids are believed to interact electrostatically with negatively charged phospholipids on the inner side of the plasma membrane. Since acetylation occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum, N- and H-Ras most likely travel to the plasma membrane via an intracellular route along the Golgi system and transport vesicles. In contrast, K-Ras4B may reach the plasma membrane in a more direct manner [32]. The pool of Ras

Ras AND Rap1 AS HIGHLY RELATED SMALL GTPases

FIG. 2. Overview of the different RasGEFs (yellow squares on the left) and RasGAPs (white squares on the right). The adaptor molecule GRB2 brings SOS to the membrane by binding to phosphorylated tyrosine on receptors or associated proteins. CaM indicates calcium-bound calmodulin. The three major Ras effectors acting downstream of Ras are indicated below, as well as their targets and some of the processes in which they are involved.

protein present on intracellular membrane compartments appears to be greater than was realized, and changes in vesicle transport may change the ratio of Ras isoforms on the plasma membrane. Importantly, H- and N-Ras, but not K-Ras4B, specifically associate with plasma membrane domains enriched in sphingolipids and cholesterol. The presence of these microdomains (also known as rafts) is dependent on a protein named caveolin and varies among different cell lines. Recently, it was shown that disturbance of these rafts by expression of truncated caveolin or extraction of cholesterol abolished H-Ras-mediated Raf1 activation, but did not affect Raf-1 activation by K-Ras4B [33]. It is clear that the differences in processing and the relative abundance of Ras proteins in for instance rafts may determine the exact function of Ras and hence its importance for tumorigenesis.

REGULATION OF Rap1 ACTIVITY

Rap1A and Rap1B (two very closely related genes that we will refer to here as Rap1) are very similar to Ras, particularly in the effector domain region. The first evidence that Rap1, as with Ras, is involved in signal transduction came from the observation that increasing intracellular cAMP levels, by activation of either the prostaglandin E1 receptor or the adenylate cyclase activator forskolin, induce an increase in the GTP-bound form of epitope-tagged Rap1 [34]. Subsequently, in many different cell types a variety of cell surface receptors were found to induce activation of Rap1. For example, stimulation of the receptors for thrombin and thromboxane A2 in platelets [35], the T-cell and B-cell receptors in lymphocytes [36–38], and the fMLP and PAF receptors in neutrophils [39] all lead to an increase in GTP-bound Rap1. Also in fibroblast Rap1 activation by EG F, PDGF, endothelin, and LPA, but not by, for instance, insulin was found [40, 41]. In a limited number of studies, downregulation of Rap1 activity following growth factor stimulation was found, e.g., after stimulation with insulin and LPA [42, 43].

In most cases Rap1 activation is very rapid, i.e., in seconds in platelets and within minutes in fibroblasts and lymphocytes, suggesting that Rap1 activation is a receptor-proximal event. Inhibition of phospholipase C (PLC) by pharmacological inhibitors largely abolishes activation of Rap1 by most signals tested in fibroblasts and platelets [35, 41]. Rap1 activation by the B-cell antigen receptor is greatly reduced in B cells deficient

for PLCγ [36]. Interestingly, both second messengers generated by PLC activation, calcium and diacylglycerol, are able to induce Rap1 activation, but in a cell type-specific way. In platelets thrombin-induced Rap1 activation is almost exclusively mediated by calcium [35], whereas in B cells diacylglycerol mediates antigen receptor-induced Rap1 activation [36]. In fibroblasts and T lymphocytes both calcium and diacylglycerol are able to induce Rap1 activation [37, 41].

Thus, at least three distinct second messenger pathways, calcium, diacylglycerol, and cAMP, and perhaps others [39] are able to induce Rap1 activation. Rap1 activation appears a surprisingly common event, which suggests a function that is central in signal transduction processes.

### Rap1 REGULATORY PROTEINS

The large number of cell surface receptors that can increase the levels of GTP-bound Rap1 appear to couple to different GEFs. The first Rap1-specific GEF that was cloned is C3G. C3G contains a proline-rich domain which interacts with the SH3 domain of members of the Crk adaptor proteins, Crk I, CrkII, and Crk L [7, 44]. In general this association is constitutive, but tyrosine phosphorylation of Crk may disrupt the interaction [43]. The SH2 domain of Crk binds directly to various activated receptor tyrosine kinases and phosphotyrosine-containing adaptor proteins [7]. The association of Crk-C3G to these complexes enhances GEF activity of C3G by a mechanism that includes tyrosine phosphorylation of a cis-acting negative regulatory domain outside the catalytic region [45].

A second exchange factor for Rap1 is CalDAG-GEFI, a protein that is structurally related to RasGRP [10] but acts on Rap1 instead of Ras [46]. It is quite likely that this CalDAG-GEFI is the major mediator of PLC-induced Rap1 activity, but formal proof that this is the case is still limited. Expression data indicate that CalDAG-GEFI expression is rather tissue-specific, being high in brain and the hematopoietic system. Given the widespread activation of Rap1 by PLC, it is possible that additional CalDAG-GEF isoforms exist.

Rap1 activation by an increase in intracellular cAMP is mediated by Rap1-specific GEFs named Epac (for exchange protein activated by cAMP) [47]. Epac is ubiquitously expressed and a close relative of Epac, Epac-2 (or cAMP-GEFII), is expressed predominantly in brain [48]. Apart from its catalytic domain this GEF contains a cAMP binding domain that is almost identical to the cAMP binding sites in the regulatory subunit of PKA. Binding of cAMP activates Epac *in vitro* and *in vivo*, proving that Epac is a direct target for cAMP. Furthermore, removal of the cAMP-binding domain from Epac results in a constitutively active GEF, showing that the cAMP binding domain serves as an inhibitory domain, which is inactivated by cAMP. This would be very similar to the activation mechanism of PKA, although here the catalytic and cAMP-binding domains are present on different subunits that dissociate upon binding of cAMP. The finding that Epac is a direct target for cAMP is interesting in itself because it represents a protein kinase A-independent cAMP pathway.

Finally, a Rap1-specific GEF, PDZ-GEF, was identified with a PDZ domain (J. De Rooij, N. Boenink, M. van Triest, R. H. Cool, A. Wittinghofer, and J. L. Bos, in press). PDZ domains are involved in protein-protein interactions, in particular with C-terminal tails of membrane proteins. How this GEF is activated is still unclear. This GEF also contains an autoinhibitory domain that is related to the cAMP-binding domain of Epac, but this domain did not interact with cAMP. Interestingly, the GEFs for Rap1 are rather specific and do not act on Ras. Recently it was established that residues 40, 61, and 70 in Ras and Rap1 help to determine specificity for the RapGEFs C3G and the RasGEF Cdc25 [49].

Apart from GEFs also various Rap1-specific GAPs play a role in the control of Rap1 activity. These GAPs may function differently from the GAPs for Ras, since one of the characteristic features of Rap1 is a threonine at position 61, while in Ras and most other GTPases this residue is a glutamine. As a consequence the intrinsic GTPase activity of Rap1 is 10-fold lower than that of Ras. Indeed, substitution of threonine for glutamine in Ras resulted in a strongly reduced intrinsic and GAP-induced GTPase activity [50]. Several RapGAPs have been identified and cloned: Rap1GAP [51], tuberin [52], Spa-1 [53], and GAP<sup>IP4BP</sup> [54]. Also the E6TP1 protein most likely encodes a Rap1GAP [55]. GAP<sup>IP4BP</sup> is special in that it has GAP activity toward both Ras and Rap1 [56]. Tuberin and GAP<sup>IP4BP</sup> are ubiquitously expressed. Spa-1 is also widely expressed, but at particularly high levels in the hematopoietic system. Rap1GAP is present in most fetal tissues, but becomes restricted to brain during adulthood. Considering the very low intrinsic GTPase activity of Rap1, these GAPs could serve an important regulatory role. An overview of the different Rap1 regulators is given in Fig. 3.

### LOCALIZATION OF Rap1

While Ras is mainly localized in the plasma membrane, the localization of Rap1 appears to be more variable and depends on the cell type. Rap1 is found in either the mid-Golgi [57] or early and late endocytic vesicles and lysosomes [58], in neutrophils in the plasma membrane and in specific granules that fuse with the plasma membrane upon stimulation [59, 60], and in platelets Rap1 on the plasma membrane and α-granules [61]. Localization of Rap1 may be regulated by protein kinase A which phosphorylates a serine residue at the C-terminal end of

Ras AND Rap1 AS HIGHLY RELATED SMALL GTPases

FIG. 3. Overview of the different Rap1GEFs (yellow squares on the left) and RapGAPs (white squares on the right). The adaptor molecule CRK brings C3G to the membrane by binding to phosphorylated tyrosine on receptors or associated proteins. Apart from Raf isoforms, Rap1 may interact with other effectors.

the protein [62]. The intracellular localization of Rap1 may explain why Rap1 is regulated predominantly by second messengers and not by the direct association of a GEF to the receptor as shown for Sos. Indeed, Epac is localized perinuclearly (F.Z. and J.L.B., unpublished results). In contrast, the GEF C3G most likely activates Rap1 at the plasma membrane by interacting with CRK adaptor molecules. Also Rap1-specific GAPs seem to be located at specific sites in the cell. GAP${}^{IP4BP}$ is solely found at the plasma membrane, most likely due to binding of its PH/BTK domain to inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate [63]. Tuberin is present in the Golgi [64] and Spa-1 has been found in the cortical cytoskeleton [65]. Recently, a novel isoform of Rap1GAP, Rap1GAPII, was cloned and implicated in serpentine receptor-mediated downregulation of Rap1 activity [42]. Rap1GAPII can bind directly to the activated $G\alpha$ subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins on the membrane and is activated as a consequence thereof. Thus, apparently there are a great variety of sites where Rap1 or Rap1-regulatory proteins are located. This opens the possibility that activation of Rap1 and the subsequent response are determined by the local environment. This may explain why Ras and Rap1 induce different responses, even though their effector domains are quite similar.

Ras AND Rap1: DO THEY COMPETE FOR OR SHARE EFFECTORS?

Rap1 was originally cloned on the basis of its high homology to Ras [66] and independently as a gene,

effector signaling, perhaps by trapping Raf1 in an inactive complex, it is unlikely that growth factor-mediated Rap1 activation solely serves repression of Ras signaling.

An alternative view is that Rap1 is involved in signaling pathways distinct from Ras, while using similar or identical effector pathways. A candidate effector for mediating the Rap1 effect is B-Raf, a close relative of Raf1. Rap1 was found to interact with B-raf, which, in PC12 cells, results in the activation of the kinase [74, 75]. However, this connection is still controversial [41]. Also, RalGEFs may belong to a class of effectors that is shared between Ras and Rap1. RalGDS, Rgl, and Rlf all associate with GTP-bound Rap1 *in vitro* and *in vivo* [76–78], and in cotransfection experiments Rlf [41], but not RalGDS [79], can mediate Rap1- and C3G-induced Ral activation. However, in fibroblasts activation of Rap1 by the phorbol ester TPA and by cAMP did not result in Ral activation [41], again demonstrating that overexpression studies may reduce specificity in signaling, perhaps due to mislocalization of proteins.

INVOLVEMENT OF Rap1 IN BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES

If the main function of Rap1 is not the control of Ras effector function, what is the alternative? One of the most striking effects of introduction of Rap1 into cells is a flat morphology suggesting that Rap1 is involved in the control of cell morphology or cell adhesion [67]. This possibility is supported by the recent observation that introduction of the RapGAP Spa-1 in 32D cells inhibits G-CSF-induced adhesion [65]. Also in RBL cells introduction of Rap1GAP results in an inhibition of IgE-mediated cell spreading (L. M'Rabet, F.Z., and J.L.B., submitted). This may imply that Rap1 controls the activity of cell adhesion molecules, such as integrins. A possible link between Rap1 and integrin-mediated cell adhesion was observed in platelets. In these cell fragments Rap1 is very abundantly expressed and rapidly activated upon stimulation [35]. However, subsequent inactivation of Rap1 depended on integrin-mediated cell adhesion and aggregation. This may suggest that Rap1 controls the onset of adhesion, after which it is rapidly downregulated (Franke *et al.*, submitted). Interestingly, Ras was found to block integrin activation [80]. However, again, these opposing effects may not simply result from competition for effectors. This is evident from studies in which R-Ras, an integrin-activating GTPase, could counteract Ras at a level that seems to be downstream of ERK activation [81]. Another connection between Rap1 and cell adhesion can be distilled from studies in Drosophila. In this organism loss-of-function mutations in Rap1 are lethal at the larval stage [71]. Embryos that lack maternally supplied Rap1 develop abnormally and display a variety of morphological abnormalities including defects in closure of the ventral furrow and head involution. In these embryos migration of the cells of the germ line (the pole cells) and the mesodermal cells is perturbed [73]. It would be interesting to know if this phenotype is caused by an altered regulation of integrins or other cell adhesion molecules.

A second putative function for Rap1 may be regulation of the cell cycle. Direct evidence comes from overexpression studies in Swiss 3T3 cells. Microinjection of wild-type Rap1 in these cells has been shown to induce DNA synthesis [82] and stable transfection of wild-type Rap1 renders these cells tumorigenic [83]. Although the stably transfected Swiss 3T3 cells do not show anchorage-independent growth, they form noninvasive tumors in nude mice. It is not known if overexpression of Rap1 in these cells activates any of the known Ras effectors. However, Swiss 3T3 cells belong to a restricted group of cells including thyroid cells for which cAMP is growth stimulatory, especially in combination with insulin. Rap1-overexpressing Swiss 3T3 cells show a decreased requirement for cAMP to proliferate if insulin is offered as a mitogen. Although there are no reports about regulation of Rap1 in Swiss cells, it is quite likely that Epac-mediated Rap1 activity is involved. Given the fact that Epac activates Rap1 in a PKA-independent manner, an interesting observation is that in primary thyroid cells activation of PKA may not be sufficient to mimic cAMP-induced cell proliferation [84]. Indirect evidence for a role of Rap1 in cell cycle regulation comes from the observation that the Rap1GAP protein is phosphorylated in a cell cycle-dependent manner. This phosphorylation did not affect GAP activity *in vitro*, but may be critical for *in vivo* activity, perhaps via translocation [85]. Finally, in the budding yeast *S. cerevisiae* a Rap1 orthologue has been described, Bud1/RSR1, which in the absence of RAS protein is required for M-phase completion [86].

Further insight into the function for Rap1 may come from studies in yeast. In the budding yeast *S. cerevisiae* daughter cells derive from buds that arise in a stereotypic fashion on the surface of mother cells. Buds are normally formed either in a region directly adjacent (in haploid cells) or opposite (in diploid cells) to the previous site of cell division. Bud1/RSR1 null cells, however, display a random bud site selection [87]. Paradoxically, the Bud1 protein is not restricted to the site of future bud emergence. Two other genes involved in the process of bud site selection are Bud5, a GEF for Bud1, and Bud2, a GAP for Bud1. Interestingly, Bud5 and Bud2 null cells have the same phenotype as Bud1 null cells, strongly indicating that Bud1 needs to cycle between the GTP- and GDP-bound state to exhibit its function [88, 89]. The function of Bud1 is to recruit polarity establishment factors to target bud formation [89–91]. These polarity establishment factors are Cdc24, a GEF for the small GTPase Cdc42, and

Bem1, an SH3 domain-containing protein. Cdc24 associates with the GTP-bound form of Bud1, whereas Bem1 appears to associate specifically with the GDP-bound form [89]. Apparently both the GDP- and GTP-bound forms of Bud1 are involved in formation of the complex and local cycling of Bud1 between the GDP- and GTP-bound conformation is essential to obtain sufficient amounts of Bem1 and Cdc24 at the target site. Cdc24 activates Cdc42, which, together with Bem1, directs actin polymerization to form the future bud. These possible functions may be mechanistically related and have in common the fact that regulation of the actin cytoskeleton plays an important role.

We thank Kris Reedquist, Rob Wolthuis, and Boudewijn Burgering for critical reading of the manuscript and helpful suggestions. The work in our laboratory is supported by the Dutch Cancer Society (KWF), the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO), the Netherlands Heart Foundation, and the Centre for Biomedical Genetics (CBG).

**REFERENCES**

1. Boriack-Sjodin, P. A., Margarit, S. M., Bar-Sagi, D., and Kuriyan, J. (1998). The structural basis of the activation of Ras by Sos. *Nature* **394**, 337–343.
2. Scheffzek, K., Ahmadian, M. R., Kabsch, W., Wiesmuller, L., Lautwein, A., Schmitz, F., and Wittinghofer, A. (1997). The Ras-RasGAP complex: Structural basis for GTPase activation and its loss in oncogenic Ras mutants [see comments]. *Science* **277**, 333–338.
3. Bos, J. L. (1998). All in the family? New insights and questions regarding interconnectivity of ras, rap1 and Ral. *EMBO J.* **17**, 6776–6782.
4. Kimmelman, A., Tolkacheva, T., Lorenzi, M. V., Osada, M., and Chan, A. M. (1997). Identification and characterization of Ras3: A novel member of the RAS gene family with a non-ubiquitous pattern of tissue distribution. *Oncogene* **15**, 2675–2685.
5. Matsumoto, K., Asano, T., and Endo, T. (1997). Novel small GTPase M-Ras participates in reorganization of actin cytoskeleton. *Oncogene* **15**, 2409–2417.
6. Pronk, G. J., and Bos, J. L. (1994). The role of p21ras in receptor tyrosine kinase signaling. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1198**, 131–147.
7. Kiyokawa, E., Mochizuki, N., Kurata, T., and Matsuda, M. (1997). Role of Crk oncogene product in physiologic signaling. *Crit. Rev. Oncog.* **8**, 329–342.
8. Luttrell, L. M., Daaka, Y., and Lefkowitz, R. J. (1999). Regulation of tyrosine kinase cascades by G-protein-coupled receptors. *Curr. Opin. Cell. Biol.* **11**, 177–183.
9. Farnsworth, C. L., Freshney, N. W., Rosen, L. B., Ghosh, A., Greenberg, M. E., and Feig, L. A. (1995). Calcium activation of Ras mediated by neuronal exchange factor Ras-GRF. *Nature* **376**, 524–527.
10. Ebinu, J. O., Bottorff, D. A., Chan, E. Y., Stang, S. L., Dunn, R. J., and Stone, J. C. (1998). RasGRP, a Ras guanyl nucleotide-releasing protein with calcium- and diacylglycerol-binding motifs. *Science* **280**, 1082–1086.
11. Jiang, Y., Ma, W., Wan, Y., Kozasa, T., Hattori, S., and Huang, X. Y. (1998). The G protein G alpha12 stimulates Bruton's

tyrosine kinase and a rasGAP through a conserved PH/BM domain. *Nature* **395**, 808–813.
12. Medema, R. H., de Laat, W. L., Martin, G. A., McCormick, F., and Bos, J. L. (1992). GTPase-activating protein SH2-SH3 domains induce gene expression in a Ras-dependent fashion. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **12**, 3425–3430.
13. Clark, G. J., Westwick, J. K., and Der, C. J. (1997). p120 GAP modulates Ras activation of Jun kinases and transformation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 1677–1681.
14. Mason, C. S., Springer, C. J., Cooper, R. G., Superti-Furga, G., Marshall, C. J., and Marais, R. (1999). Serine and tyrosine phosphorylations cooperate in Raf-1, but not B-Raf activation. *EMBO J.* **18**, 2137–2148.
15. Marshall, C. J. (1996). Cell signaling. Raf gets it together. *Nature* **383**, 127–128.
16. Rodriguez-Viciana, P., Warne, P. H., Vanhaesebroeck, B., Waterfield, M. D., and Downward, J. (1996). Activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase by interaction with Ras and by point mutation. *EMBO J.* **15**, 2442–2451.
17. Burgering, B. M., and Coffer, P. J. (1995). Protein kinase B (c-Akt) in phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase signal transduction. *Nature* **376**, 599–602.
18. Franke, T. F., Yang, S. I., Chan, T. O., Datta, K., Kazlauskas, A., Morrison, D. K., Kaplan, D. R., and Tsichlis, P. N. (1995). The protein kinase encoded by the Akt proto-oncogene is a target of the PDGF-activated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. *Cell* **81**, 727–736.
19. Hawkins, P. T., Eguinoa, A., Qiu, R. G., Stokoe, D., Cooke, F. T., Walters, R., Wennstrom, S., Claesson-Welsh, L., Evans, T., Symons, M., *et al.* (1995). PDGF stimulates an increase in GTP-Rac via activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase. *Curr. Biol.* **5**, 393–403.
20. Kotani, K., Hara, K., Yonezawa, K., and Kasuga, M. (1995). Phosphoinositide 3-kinase as an upstream regulator of the small GTP-binding protein Rac in the insulin signaling of membrane ruffling. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **208**, 985–990.
21. Wolthuis, R. M., and Bos, J. L. (1999). Ras caught in another affair: The exchange factors for Ral. *Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.* **9**, 112–117.
22. White, M. A., Nicolette, C., Minden, A., Polverino, A., Van Aelst, L., Karin, M., and Wigler, M. H. (1995). Multiple Ras functions can contribute to mammalian cell transformation. *Cell* **80**, 533–541.
23. Webb, C. P., Van Aelst, L., Wigler, M. H., and Woude, G. F. (1998). Signaling pathways in Ras-mediated tumorigenicity and metastasis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 8773–8778.
24. Serrano, M., Lin, A. W., McCurrach, M. E., Beach, D., and Lowe, S. W. (1997). Oncogenic ras provokes premature cell senescence associated with accumulation of p53 and p16INK4a. *Cell* **88**, 593–602.
25. Kuriyama, M., Harada, N., Kuroda, S., Yamamoto, T., Nakafuku, M., Iwamatsu, A., Yamamoto, D., Prasad, R., Croce, C., Canaani, E., and Kaibuchi, K. (1996). Identification of AF-6 and canoe as putative targets for Ras. *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 607–610.
26. Han, L., and Colicelli, J. (1995). A human protein selected for interference with Ras function interacts directly with Ras and competes with Raf1. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **15**, 1318–1323.
27. Vavvas, D., Li, X., Avruch, J., and Zhang, X. F. (1998). Identification of Nore1 as a potential Ras effector. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 5439–5442.
28. Bos, J. L. (1989). ras oncogenes in human cancer: A review. *Cancer Res.* **49**, 4682–4689.

29. Johnson, L., Greenbaum, D., Cichowski, K., Mercer, K., Murphy, E., Schmitt, E., Bronson, R. T., Umanoff, H., Edelmann, W., Kucherlapati, R., and Jacks, T. (1997). K-ras is an essential gene in the mouse with partial functional overlap with N-ras. *Genes Dev.* **11**, 2468–2481.

30. Voice, J. K., Klemke, R. L., Le, A., and Jackson, J. H. (1999). Four human ras homologs differ in their abilities to activate Raf-1, induce transformation, and stimulate cell motility. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 17164–17170.

31. Glomset, J. A., and Farnsworth, C. C. (1994). Role of protein modification reactions in programming interactions between ras-related GTPases and cell membranes. *Annu. Rev. Cell Biol.* **10**, 181–205.

32. Choy, E., Chiu, V. K., Silletti, J., Feoktistov, M., Morimoto, T., Michaelson, D., Ivanov, I. E., and Philips, M. R. (1999). Endo-membrane trafficking of ras: The CAAX motif targets proteins to the ER and Golgi. *Cell* **98**, 69–80.

33. Roy, S., Luetterforst, R., Harding, A., Apolloni, A., Etheridge, M., Stang, E., Rolls, B., Hancock, J. F., and Parton, R. G. (1999). Dominant-negative caveolin inhibits H-Ras function by disrupting cholesterol-rich plasma membrane domains. *Nature Cell Biol.* **1**, 98–105.

34. Altschuler, D. L., Peterson, S. N., Ostrowski, M. C., and Lapetina, E. G. (1995). Cyclic AMP-dependent activation of Rap1b. *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 10373–10376.

35. Franke, B., Akkerman, J. W., and Bos, J. L. (1997). Rapid Ca²⁺-mediated activation of Rap1 in human platelets. *EMBO J.* **16**, 252–259.

36. McLeod, S. J., Ingham, R. J., Bos, J. L., Kurosaki, T., and Gold, M. R. (1998). Activation of the Rap1 GTPase by the B cell antigen receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 29218–29223.

37. Reedquist, K. A., and Bos, J. L. (1998). Costimulation through CD28 suppresses T cell receptor-dependent activation of the Ras-like small GTPase Rap1 in human T lymphocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 4944–4949.

38. Boussiotis, V. A., Freeman, G. J., Berezovskaya, A., Barber, D. L., and Nadler, L. M. (1997). Maintenance of human T cell anergy: Blocking of IL-2 gene transcription by activated Rap1. *Science* **278**, 124–128.

39. M'Rabet, L., Coffer, P., Zwartkruis, F., Franke, B., Segal, A. W., Koenderman, L., and Bos, J. L. (1998). Activation of the small GTPase rap1 in human neutrophils. *Blood* **92**, 2133–2140.

40. Posern, G., Weber, C. K., Rapp, U. R., and Feller, S. M. (1998). Activity of Rap1 is regulated by bombesin, cell adhesion, and cell density in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 24297–24300.

41. Zwartkruis, F. J., Wolthuis, R. M., Nabben, N. M., Franke, B., and Bos, J. L. (1998). Extracellular signal-regulated activation of Rap1 fails to interfere in Ras effector signaling. *EMBO J.* **17**, 5905–5912.

42. Mochizuki, N., Ohba, Y., Kiyokawa, E., Kurata, T., Murakami, T., Ozaki, T., Kitabatake, A., Nagashima, K., and Matsuda, M. (1999). Activation of the ERK/MAPK pathway by an isoform of rap1GAP associated with Galphai. *Nature* **400**, 891–894.

43. Okada, S., Matsuda, M., Anafi, M., Pawson, T., and Pessin, J. E. (1998). Insulin regulates the dynamic balance between Ras and Rap1 signaling by coordinating the assembly states of the Grb2-SOS and CrkII-C3G complexes. *EMBO J.* **17**, 2554–2565.

44. Gotoh, T., Hattori, S., Nakamura, S., Kitayama, H., Noda, M., Takai, Y., Kaibuchi, K., Matsui, H., Hatase, O., Takahashi, H., et al. (1995). Identification of Rap1 as a target for the Crk SH3 domain-binding guanine nucleotide-releasing factor C3G. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **15**, 6746–6753.

45. Ichiba, T., Hashimoto, Y., Nakaya, M., Kuraishi, Y., Tanaka, S., Kurata, T., Mochizuki, N., and Matsuda, M. (1999). Activation of C3G guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Rap1 by phosphorylation of tyrosine 504. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 14376–14381.

46. Kawasaki, H., Springett, G. M., Toki, S., Canales, J. J., Harlan, P., Blumenstiel, J. P., Chen, E. J., Bany, I. A., Mochizuki, N., Ashbacher, A., Matsuda, M., Housman, D. E., and Graybiel, A. M. (1998). A Rap guanine nucleotide exchange factor enriched highly in the basal ganglia. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 13278–13283.

47. de Rooij, J., Zwartkruis, F. J., Verheijen, M. H., Cool, R. H., Nijman, S. M., Wittinghofer, A., and Bos, J. L. (1998). Epac is a Rap1 guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor directly activated by cyclic AMP. *Nature* **396**, 474–477.

48. Kawasaki, H., Springett, G. M., Mochizuki, N., Toki, S., Nakaya, M., Matsuda, M., Housman, D. E., and Graybiel, A. M. (1998). A family of cAMP-binding proteins that directly activate Rap1. *Science* **282**, 2275–2279.

49. van den Berghe, N., Cool, R. H., and Wittinghofer, A. (1999). Discriminatory residues in Ras and Rap for guanine nucleotide exchange factor recognition. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 11078–11085.

50. Noda, M. (1993). Mechanisms of reversion. *FASEB J.* **7**, 834–840.

51. Rubinfeld, B., Munemitsu, S., Clark, R., Conroy, L., Watt, K., Crosier, W. J., McCormick, F., and Polakis, P. (1991). Molecular cloning of a GTPase activating protein specific for the Krev-1 protein p21rap1. *Cell* **65**, 1033–1042.

52. Wienecke, R., König, A., and DeClue, J. E. (1995). Identification of tuberin, the tuberous sclerosis-2 product. Tuberin possesses specific Rap1GAP activity. *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 16409–16414.

53. Kurachi, H., Wada, Y., Tsukamoto, N., Maeda, M., Kubota, H., Hattori, M., Iwai, K., and Minato, N. (1997). Human SPA-1 gene product selectively expressed in lymphoid tissues is a specific GTPase-activating protein for Rap1 and Rap2. Segregate expression profiles from a rap1GAP gene product. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 28081–28088.

54. Cullen, P. J., Hsuan, J. J., Truong, O., Letcher, A. J., Jackson, T. R., Dawson, A. P., and Irvine, R. F. (1995). Identification of a specific Ins(1,3,4,5)P4-binding protein as a member of the GAP1 family. *Nature* **376**, 527–530.

55. Gao, Q., Srinivasan, S., Boyer, S. N., Wazer, D. E., and Band, V. (1999). The E6 oncoproteins of high-risk papillomaviruses bind to a novel putative GAP protein, E6TP1, and target it for degradation. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **19**, 733–744.

56. Bottomley, J. R., Reynolds, J. S., Lockyer, P. J., and Cullen, P. J. (1998). Structural and functional analysis of the putative inositol 1,3,4, 5-tetrakisphosphate receptors GAP1(IP4BP) and GAP1(m). *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **250**, 143–149.

57. Beranger, F., Goud, B., Tavitian, A., and de Gunzburg, J. (1991). Association of the Ras-antagonistic Rap1/Krev-1 proteins with the Golgi complex. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **88**, 1606–1610.

58. Pizon, V., Desjardins, M., Bucci, C., Parton, R. G., and Zerial, M. (1994). Association of Rap1a and Rap1b proteins with late endocytic/phagocytic compartments and Rap2a with the Golgi complex. *J. Cell Sci.* **107**, 1661–1670.

59. Maridonneau-Parini, I., and de Gunzburg, J. (1992). Association of rap1 and rap2 proteins with the specific granules of human neutrophils. Translocation to the plasma membrane during cell activation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **267**, 6396–6402.

60. Quinn, M. T., Mullen, M. L., Jesaitis, A. J., and Linner, J. G. (1992). Subcellular distribution of the Rap1A protein in human neutrophils: Colocalization and cotranslocation with cytochrome b559. *Blood* **79**, 1563–1573.

61. Berger, G., Quarck, R., Tenza, D., Levy-Toledano, S., de Gunzburg, J., and Cramer, E. M. (1994). Ultrastructural localization of the small GTP-binding protein Rap1 in human platelets and megakaryocytes. *Br. J. Haematol.* 88, 372–882.

62. Siess, W., Winegar, D. A., and Lapetina, E. G. (1990). Rap1-B is phosphorylated by protein kinase A in intact human platelets. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 170, 944–950.

63. Lockyer, P. J., Bottomley, J. R., Reynolds, J. S., McNulty, T. J., Venkateswarlu, K., Potter, B. V., Dempsey, C. E., and Cullen, P. J. (1997). Distinct subcellular localisations of the putative inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate receptors GAP1IP4BP and GAP1m result from the GAP1IP4BP PH domain directing plasma membrane targeting. *Curr. Biol.* 7, 1007–1010.

64. Wienecke, R., Maize, J. C., Jr., Shoarinejad, F., Vass, W. C., Reed, J., Bonifacino, J. S., Resau, J. H., de Gunzburg, J., Yeung, R. S., and DeClue, J. E. (1996). Co-localization of the TSC2 product tuberin with its target Rap1 in the Golgi apparatus. *Oncogene* 13, 913–923.

65. Tsukamoto, N., Hattori, M., Yang, H., Bos, J. L., and Minato, N. (1999). Rap1 GTPase-activating protein SPA-1 negatively regulates cell adhesion. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 18463–18469.

66. Pizon, V., Chardin, P., Lerosey, I., Olofsson, B., and Tavitian, A. (1988). Human cDNAs rap1 and rap2 homologous to the Drosophila gene Dras3 encode proteins closely related to ras in the ‘effector’ region. *Oncogene* 3, 201–204.

67. Kitayama, H., Sugimoto, Y., Matsuzaki, T., Ikawa, Y., and Noda, M. (1989). A ras-related gene with transformation suppressor activity. *Cell* 56, 77–84.

68. Cook, S. J., Rubinfeld, B., Albert, I., and McCormick, F. (1993). RapV12 antagonizes Ras-dependent activation of ERK1 and ERK2 by LPA and EGF in Rat-1 fibroblasts. *EMBO J.* 12, 3475–3485.

69. Sakoda, T., Kaibuchi, K., Kishi, K., Kishida, S., Doi, K., Hoshino, M., Hattori, S., and Takai, Y. (1992). smg/rap1/Krev-1 p21s inhibit the signal pathway to the c-fos promoter/enhancer from c-Ki-ras p21 but not from c-raf-1 kinase in NIH3T3 cells. *Oncogene* 7, 1705–1711.

70. Sato, K. Y., Polakis, P. G., Haubruck, H., Fasching, C. L., McCormick, F., and Stanbridge, E. J. (1994). Analysis of the tumor suppressor activity of the K-rev-1 gene in human tumor cell lines. *Cancer Res.* 54, 552–559.

71. Hariharan, I. K., Carthew, R. W., and Rubin, G. M. (1991). The Drosophila roughened mutation: Activation of a rap homolog disrupts eye development and interferes with cell determination. *Cell* 67, 717–722.

72. Li, Q., Hariharan, I. K., Chen, F., Huang, Y., and Fischer, J. A. (1997). Genetic interactions with Rap1 and Ras1 reveal a second function for the fat facets deubiquitinating enzyme in Drosophila eye development. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 94, 12515–12520.

73. Asha, H., de Ruiter, N. D., Wang, M. G., and Hariharan, I. K. (1999). The Rap1 GTPase functions as a regulator of morphogenesis in vivo. *EMBO J.* 18, 605–615.

74. Ohtsuka, T., Shimizu, K., Yamamori, B., Kuroda, S., and Takai, Y. (1996). Activation of brain B-Raf protein kinase by Rap1B small GTP-binding protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271, 1258–1261.

75. Vossler, M. R., Yao, H., York, R. D., Pan, M. G., Rim, C. S., and Stork, P. J. (1997). cAMP activates MAP kinase and Elk-1 through a B-Raf- and Rap1-dependent pathway. *Cell* 89, 73–82.

76. Kishida, S., Koyama, S., Matsubara, K., Kishida, M., Matsuura, Y., and Kikuchi, A. (1997). Colocalization of Ras and Ral on the membrane is required for Ras-dependent Ral activation

77. Spaargaren, J., Giesen, P. L., Janssen, M. P., Voorberg, J., Willems, G. M., and van Mourik, J. A. (1995). Binding of blood coagulation factor VIII and its light chain to phosphatidylserine/phosphatidylcholine bilayers as measured by ellipsometry. *Biochem. J.* 310, 539–545.

78. Wolthuis, R. M., Bauer, B., van’t Veer, L. J., de Vries-Smits, A. M., Cool, R. H., Spaargaren, M., Wittehofer, A., Burgering, B. M., and Bos, J. L. (1996). RalGDS-like factor (Rlf) is a novel Ras and Rap 1A-associating protein. *Oncogene* 13, 353–362.

79. Urano, T., Emkey, R., and Feig, L. A. (1996). Ral-GTPases mediate a distinct downstream signaling pathway from Ras that facilitates cellular transformation. *EMBO J.* 15, 810–816.

80. Hughes, P. E., Renshaw, M. W., Pfaff, M., Forsyth, J., Keivens, V. M., Schwartz, M. A., and Ginsberg, M. H. (1997). Suppression of integrin activation: A novel function of a Ras/Raf-initiated MAP kinase pathway. *Cell* 88, 521–530.

81. Sethi, T., Ginsberg, M. H., Downward, J., and Hughes, P. E. (1999). The small GTP-binding protein R-Ras can influence integrin activation by antagonizing a Ras/Raf-initiated integrin suppression pathway. *Mol. Biol. Cell.* 10, 1799–1809.

82. Yoshida, Y., Kawata, M., Miura, Y., Musha, T., Sasaki, T., Kikuchi, A., and Takai, Y. (1992). Microinjection of smg/rap1/Krev-1 p21 into Swiss 3T3 cells induces DNA synthesis and morphological changes. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 12, 3407–3414.

83. Altschuler, D. L., and Ribeiro-Neto, F. (1998). Mitogenic and oncogenic properties of the small G protein Rap1b. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 95, 7475–7479.

84. Dremier, S., Pohl, V., Poteet-Smith, C., Roger, P. P., Corbin, J., Doskeland, S. O., Dumont, J. E., and Maenhaut, C. (1997). Activation of cyclic AMP-dependent kinase is required but may not be sufficient to mimic cyclic AMP-dependent DNA synthesis and thyroglobulin expression in dog thyroid cells. *Mol. Biol. Cell.* 17, 6717–6726.

85. Janouex-Lerosey, I., Fontenay, M., Tobelem, G., Tavitian, A., Polakis, P., and de Gunzburg, J. (1994). Phosphorylation of Rap1GAP during the cell cycle. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 202, 967–975.

86. Morishita, T., Mitsuzawa, H., Nakafuku, M., Nakamura, S., Hattori, S., and Anraku, Y. (1995). Requirement of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Ras for completion of mitosis. *Science* 270, 1213–1215.

87. Chant, J., and Herskowitz, I. (1991). Genetic control of bud site selection in yeast by a set of gene products that constitute a morphogenetic pathway. *Cell* 65, 1203–1212.

88. Bender, A. (1993). Genetic evidence for the roles of the bud-site-selection genes BUD5 and BUD2 in control of the Rsr1p (Bud1p) GTPase in yeast. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 90, 9926–9929.

89. Park, H. O., Bi, E., Pringle, J. R., and Herskowitz, I. (1997). Two active states of the Ras-related Bud1/Rsr1 protein bind to different effectors to determine yeast cell polarity. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 94, 4463–4468.

90. Michelitch, M., and Chant, J. (1996). A mechanism of Bud1p GTPase action suggested by mutational analysis and immunolocalization. *Curr. Biol.* 6, 446–454.

91. Chenevert, J., Corrado, K., Bender, A., Pringle, J., and Herskowitz, I. (1992). A yeast gene (BEM1) necessary for cell polarization whose product contains two SH3 domains. *Nature* 356, 77–79.
