
letters

3D map of the plant photosystem II supercomplex obtained by cryoelectron microscopy and single particle analysis

Jon Nield, Elena V. Orlova, Edward P. Morris, Brent Gowen, Marin van Heel and James Barber

Wolfson Laboratories, Biochemistry Department, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, London SW7 2AY, UK

Here we describe the first 3D structure of the photosystem II (PSII) supercomplex of higher plants, constructed by single particle analysis of images obtained by cryoelectron microscopy. This large multisubunit membrane protein complex functions to absorb light energy and catalyze the oxidation of water and reduction of plastoquinone. The resolution of the 3D structure is 24 Å and emphasizes the dimeric nature of the supercomplex. The extrinsic proteins of the oxygen-evolving complex (OEC) are readily observed as a tetrameric cluster bound to the lumenal surface. By considering higher resolution data, obtained from electron crystallography, it has been possible to relate the binding sites of the OEC proteins with the underlying intrinsic membrane subunits of the photochemical reaction center core. The model suggests that the 33 kDa OEC protein is located towards the CP47/D2 side of the reaction center but is also positioned over the C-terminal helices of the D1 protein including its CD lumenal loop. In contrast, the model predicts that the 23/17 kDa OEC proteins are positioned at the N-terminus of the D1 protein incorporating the AB lumenal loop of this protein and two other unidentified transmembrane helices. Overall the 3D model represents a significant step forward in revealing the structure of the photosynthetic OEC whose activity is required to sustain the aerobic atmosphere on our planet.

The dimeric PSII supercomplex used for this study was isolated from spinach chloroplast thylakoid membranes. Each monomer, within the dimer, contains the reaction center proteins D1 and D2 and the inner antenna proteins, CP43 and CP47 of PS II (ref. 1). It also contains one trimer of light harvesting complex (LHCII) and a single copy each of the chlorophyll *a/b* binding proteins, CP26 and CP29, where CP indicates chlorophyll binding protein and the number is the apparent molecular mass (ref. 1). It may also contain the PsbS protein². Importantly, the isolated supercomplex retains the three major lumenal bound extrinsic proteins of the OEC; 33 kDa, 23 kDa and 17 kDa proteins (Fig. 1a). The 33 kDa protein stabilizes a cluster of four Mn atoms, which forms the catalytic site for the water oxidation reaction. The 23 and 17 kDa proteins seem to play a role in maintaining optimal levels of Ca²⁺ and Cl⁻ for the water oxidation reaction³. The light induced electron transfer processes, which drive the water splitting reaction, involve redox active cofactors associated with the D1 and D2 proteins. These reactions generate a very high oxidizing potential in the region of 1 Volt that is initially located on the special form of chlorophyll *a* known as P680. The Mn cluster donates electrons to P680⁺ via a redox active tyrosine located at position 161 on the D1 protein³. Four oxidizing equivalents are stored in this way and are used to generate one dioxygen from two water molecules. Since the isolated PSII supercomplex contains all subunits of the OEC, it is highly active in light driven oxygen evolution².

A typical focal pair of electron micrographs of the isolated PSII supercomplex preparation in vitreous ice without staining are shown in Fig. 1b,c. The particles visualized are randomly orientated. The near to focus micrographs (Fig. 1b, 1.35 μm defocus) were used for analyses, whereas the more underfocused images (Fig. 1c, 7.2 μm defocus) were used to facilitate particle identification.

Using a data set of 15,650 particles, 750 class averages were identified initially, of which 439 representing 5,300 particles were used for the 3D reconstruction of the supercomplex, exploiting a D2 point group symmetry established at the early stages of the analysis. Six characteristic class average

Fig. 1 Protein composition, electron micrographs and 3D analysis of the PSII supercomplex. *a*, SDS-PAGE of the PSII-enriched membranes (track 1) and PSII supercomplex (track 2), stained with Coomassie R250. *b,c*, Cryoelectron micrographs of a typical preparation of the PSII supercomplex showing particles randomly orientated in vitreous ice, under focused at 1.35 μm and 7.2 μm, respectively. *d*, Selection of typical class averages used for the 3D reconstruction. *e*, Reprojections of the 3D map in identical orientations with the corresponding class averages. *f*, Surface representation of the final 3D map viewed in the same orientation as the class averages.

The resolution of the structure is 24 Å as determined by fourier shell correlation (FSC) analysis⁵,⁶.

The 3D map for a single supercomplex (Fig. 2a) has dimensions of 165 Å × 330 Å × 110 Å overall width (x), length (y) and height (z), respectively, and the volume enclosed by the surface is ~3.5 × 10⁶ Å³. The thickness of the supercomplex is ~60 Å at its edges, as expected for a membrane-spanning region, and the protrusions extend maximally to 50 Å above the lumenal surface. The protrusions marked A and A' have been shown previously to be the 33 kDa manganese stabilizing protein of the OEC based on earlier studies⁷,⁸. As suggested⁴ the protrusions labeled B and B' are in part due to the 23 kDa protein and, given that the isolated supercomplex used for the present study contained, in addition, the 17 kDa protein, we conclude that this OEC subunit is also located in this protrusion. Indeed, biochemical studies have indicated that the 17 kDa protein binds to the 23 kDa protein⁹. The structure of the B/B' protrusion, with a height of 50 Å, is more extensive than that of the protrusion assigned to the 33 kDa protein which has a height of ~40 Å, and could therefore accommodate both the 23 kDa and 17 kDa proteins. It has been suggested that there may be two copies of the 33 kDa protein¹⁰ although others have argued for one¹¹. From considerations of molecular mass and volume, our 3D map indicates a single copy of this protein per reaction center. The center-to-center distances, as judged from Fig. 2e, between A and A' and B and B' are 68 Å and 109 Å, respectively, and that between A and B or A' and B' of each monomer is 65 Å.

To further aid the interpretation of the 3D map, three 10 Å thick projections of different regions within the supercomplex are presented in Fig. 2. On the stromal side (Fig. 2c) the distribution of features is relatively even throughout the section but, in contrast, on the lumenal side (Fig. 2d) the region assigned to the surface of the dimeric core, has markedly higher density as compared to the peripheral regions containing LHCII, CP29 and CP26 (refs 7, 8, 12). The dimeric core contains the D1, D2, CP47 and CP43 proteins¹³, which possess substantial lumenal loops joining their transmembrane helices. It is likely that these lumenal domains are responsible for the high density observed in this region, particularly the extensive loops belonging to the CP43 and CP47 proteins¹⁴. The view of the 33 and 23/17 kDa proteins in Fig. 2e clearly demonstrates their tetrameric organization on the surface of the dimer.

Recently the positions of the majority of transmembrane helices of the core dimer have been modelled based on electron crystallographic analyses of 2D crystals¹³,¹⁵. This model (Fig. 3a) can be used to interpret further the 3D map of the supercomplex. In order to do so we have also calculated 3D maps of two additional subpopulations identified in our original 15,650 particle data set. One 3D map derived from 1,100 particles corresponded to the core dimer and its membrane spanning region is shown in projection in Fig. 3b. Superimposed on this is a model for the transmembrane helices taken from Fig. 3a. The other 3D map corresponds to a supercomplex, missing its LHCII region on one side, derived from 3,700 particles thus giving an outline of one edge of the central dimer core. Using this information and previous images from negatively stained particles⁷ we can place, with confidence, the transmembrane helices of the core dimer within the central region of the supercomplex (Fig. 3d). The flanking regions on either side of the core dimer contain the LHCII, CP29, CP26 and perhaps PsbS. A high resolution structure of the LHCII trimer is known¹⁶ and has previously been positioned towards the outer tips of the flanking region⁷,¹². This

Fig. 2 3D map of the PSII supercomplex at 24 Å and sections 10 Å thick through the map. **a**, Half the 3D map, corresponding to a single dimeric supercomplex, is viewed from an oblique angle to visualize the lumenal surface and the extrinsic OEC proteins labeled A/A' (assigned to 33 kDa OEC protein) and B/B' (assigned to 23 kDa and 17 kDa OEC proteins). The putative location of the membrane-spanning region is indicated. Also shown are the overall dimensions, including the maximum extent of the protrusions corresponding to the OEC extrinsic proteins. **b**, Surface representation of the 3D map indicating 10 Å thick sections taken as follows: **c**, Projection map of the transmembrane region towards the stromal surface. **d**, Projection map of the region close to the lumenal surface. **e**, Projection map of the region occupied by the OEC extrinsic proteins.

views of the supercomplex are shown in Fig. 1d. The relative orientations were determined for each class average and were used to construct the 3D map (Fig. 1f) and corresponding reprojections (Fig. 1e). It can be seen that the supercomplexes aggregate to form dimers of dimers through interactions at the stromal surface and this gives rise to the D2 point group assignment. The protrusions clearly observed on the lumenal surfaces are due to the extrinsic proteins of the OEC⁴. The 3D model has been corrected for the phase contrast transfer function (CTF).

© 2000 Nature America Inc. • http://structbio.nature.com

letters

Fig. 3 Positioning of major transmembrane helices of the central dimeric core region within the PSII supercomplex. $a$, Projection map obtained from 2D crystals of the PSII core dimer complex at 9 Å showing proposed positions of its transmembrane helices taken from Hankamer et al.$^{13}$. The models for the D1 and D2 proteins (shown in yellow and orange, respectively) was constructed using the coordinates for the L and M subunits of $R$. *viridis*$^{17}$ as justified by a recent 8 Å 3D structure of the PSII CP47 RC complex$^{15}$. The six red helices in each monomer correspond to those of CP47 and the corresponding two-fold related six green helices are those of CP43. The additional seven-transmembrane helices colored in purple were identified in Rhee et al.$^{15}$ and are unknown low molecular weight proteins. $b$, Superimposition of the transmembrane helices determined by electron crystallography$^{13,15}$ onto a projection from the 3D reconstruction of the core complex from a subpopulation of 1,100 particles identified by cryoelectron microscopy (estimated resolution 32 Å). $c$, Superimposition of the transmembrane helices in $(a)$ and $(b)$ onto a projection map obtained from the 3D reconstruction (estimated resolution 28 Å) calculated from 3,700 particles of a subpopulation of supercomplexes that have lost one LHCII-containing peripheral region, thus exposing one edge of the central core dimer (also see ref. 7). $d$, Position of the core dimer transmembrane helices in the central region of the projection map from the 3D reconstruction of the intact supercomplex (estimated resolution 24 Å) based on $(a)$, $(b)$, and $(c)$. Projections $(b)$, $(c)$, and $(d)$ do not include the extrinsic proteins.

positioning is shown in Fig. 4, which also assumes that CP26 and CP29 have structures similar to those of a monomer of LHCII and are positioned as shown. It should be emphasized that precise positioning of these outer light harvesting proteins is speculative and may exclude other proteins such as PsbS. We have investigated the spatial relationship between the extrinsic OEC proteins and the underlying intrinsic proteins of the core dimer complex by removing the extrinsic proteins from the map at the level defined by the outer surface of slice $(d)$ in Fig. $2b$ and thus provide 'windows' through which the underlying helices can be identified (for example, Fig. $4c$).

### Conclusion

Within the resolution of the study, the positioning of the transmembrane helices assigned to the major proteins of the core complex$^{13,15}$ are consistent with the shape and size of the observed densities in the supercomplex. From the model shown in Fig. 4 we conclude that the 33 kDa protein is located over the D1/D2 heterodimer towards the CP47 side. The two transmembrane helices of CP47, located under the 33 kDa protein, are almost certainly helices 5 and 6 which are joined by a large lumenal loop$^{14,15}$. The lumenal ends of transmembrane helices C, D and E of the D2 protein are also covered by the 33 kDa protein. Importantly, the 33 kDa protein is also positioned near to the lumenal ends of the transmembrane helices C, D and E of the D1 protein and located over the lumenal loop joining helices C and D. This CD loop is highlighted in white in Fig. $3c$ and is modeled using the coordinates for the L subunit of the bacterial reaction center$^{17}$. It is this CD domain of the D1 protein that is likely to bind the Mn cluster involved in water oxidation based on site directed mutagenesis experiments$^{18,19}$ and on its close location to the redox active tyrosine $Y_z$ (residue 161 on D1) which mediates electron flow from the inorganic cluster to the primary oxidant P680$^+$ (refs 3, 18). Modeled on the coordinates of the M subunit of the bacterial reaction center$^{17}$ the CD loop of the D2 protein is also highlighted in Fig. $4c$ and, interestingly, like the CD loop of the D1 protein, is located under the docking site of the 33 kDa protein.

The model presented in Fig. 4 predicts that the 23/17 kDa proteins are located over the lumenal ends of transmembrane helices A and B of the D1 protein and the lumenal loop which joins them (see Fig. $4c$). Interestingly, the binding site for the 23/17 kDa extrinsic proteins seems to merge with that of the 33 kDa protein in a region close to the lumenal end of helix C of the D1 protein close to the putative Mn binding site. The model also suggests that the binding site for the 23/17 kDa proteins incorporates two as yet unidentified transmembrane helices possibly those of cytochrome b559 given that this heme protein has been shown to cross link with the 23 kDa OEC protein$^{20}$. The docking site for the 23/17 kDa proteins may also incorporate the large lumenal loop joining transmembrane helices 5 and 6 of CP43. This loop corresponds to the similar loop in CP47 and is likely to be located in the same approximate relative position in the PSII map$^{13}$.

The above assignments do not necessarily imply direct interactions with the lumenal ends of the transmembrane helices of the reaction center core proteins since the lumenal loops joining these helices are extensive and probably form an interface as suggested by the density distribution shown in Fig. $2d$.

Not only does the 3D structure of the PSII supercomplex presented here give a framework for the incorporation of the transmembrane helices of the intrinsic subunits, but it also emphasizes the tetrameric arrangement of the extrinsic OEC proteins on its lumenal surface. This arrangement is similar to that observed in earlier freeze-etching studies of intact spinach

nature structural biology • volume 7 number 1 • january 2000

thylakoid membranes²¹,²². From this comparison we can conclude that the dimeric organization of PSII is maintained *in vivo* and that the supercomplex is indeed a basic structural unit of PSII within the thylakoid membrane of higher plants²³.

### Methods

#### Preparation of the supercomplex.
PSII supercomplexes were isolated from market spinach leaves (*Spinacea oleracea*) as described¹.

#### Electron microscopy.
A Philips CM200 FEG-equipped electron microscope was used at 200 kV in combination with a Gatan liquid N₂ cryostage. To optimize the imaging conditions in terms of defocus and astigmatism, a Tietz Video Systems' fast FFT processor was used. The vitrified samples²⁴ were imaged at a calibrated magnification of 48,600x, using different defocus values of between 1.35 μm and 1.9 μm. Second images were taken at an underfocus value of 7.2 μm, in order to make focal pairs to facilitate the identification of single particles (Fig. 1b,c).

#### Image processing.
A total of 108 micrographs, showing minimal astigmatism and drift, were digitized with an 'Emil' densitometer (Image Science GmbH) to produce a pixel size corresponding to 5.76 Å per pixel at the specimen level. All image processing was performed within the Image-5 software environment²⁵, running under the UNIX operating system on a COMPAQ XP1000 computer. A data set of 15,650 single particle images was obtained by picking all discernible particles from the close-to-focus micrographs. The contrast transfer function (CTF) was calculated for each micrograph and the extracted molecular images were corrected by phase reversal in the appropriate frequency ranges. An analysis of the data set was made starting with the reference-free alignment-by-classification procedure²⁶. This identified several sub-populations of particles differing in size and shape. Each sub-population was in turn analyzed as a separate data set, with the reference-free alignment giving the initial class averages necessary for multi-reference alignment²⁷, leading to class averages with an enhanced signal-to-noise ratio. Relative orientations were determined for the class averages by angular reconstitution²⁸, resulting in an initial 3D reconstruction gained from implementation of the exact back-projection technique²⁷. Reprojections were taken from each 3D model and used to identify additional atypical views and further refine the class averages within each sub-population data set. At each stage, 40% of the class averages were discarded after assessment using cross-correlation functions. Through this iterative refinement, the data converged to give the best 3D reconstructions shown. The resolution was determined by Fourier Shell Correlation between two independent 3D reconstructions²⁷. Coordinate data sets derived from the 8 Å CP47-RC¹⁵ and 9 Å PSII core dimer¹³ cryoelectron crystallographic maps were modeled into the supercomplex and subpopulation reconstructions using O²⁹. The AVS software package³⁰ was used to visualize the 3D maps in Figs 2–4.

#### Acknowledgments
We wish to thank H. Stark for assisting with the cryoelectron microscopy. We also acknowledge M. Schatz and R. Schmidt for their input through Image Science, GmbH, Berlin. We particularly thank B. Hankamer for valuable discussions. Financial support for the work was from the BBSRC.

Correspondence should be addressed to J.B. email: j.barber@ic.ac.uk

---

**Fig. 4** Structural model of the intrinsic protein subunits within the PSII supercomplex. **a,b,** Shows a semi-transparent surface representation of the structural model, viewed from the side and lumenal surface, respectively, containing helices of the protein subunits based on detailed comparison of high and intermediate resolution structures. The positions of the transmembrane helices of the core dimer are based on Fig. 3, and the same color code has been used. The LHCII, CP24 and CP26 are derived from Kühlbrandt et al.¹⁶ and have been positioned based on internal density distribution in the supercomplex and on crosslinking data³¹,³². The region flanking the central core may also contain the PsbS protein² but no attempt has been made to model this four-transmembrane helical protein into the map. The interface between the extrinsic OEC proteins and the lumenal surface has been assumed to be at the lumenal side of slice d in Fig. 2b and this is shown as 'windows' looking into the intrinsic interior of the supercomplex. **c,** A magnification of the docking sites for the extrinsic OEC proteins emphasizing the underlying helices of the core dimer. The helices attributed to the D1 and D2 proteins (yellow and orange, respectively), are modeled using the coordinates of the L and M subunits of *R. viridis* as are the CD (in white) and AB (in red) lumenal loops.

---

1. Hankamer, B. *et al.* Eur. J. Biochem. **243**, 422–429 (1997).
2. Eshaghi, S., Andersson, B. & Barber, J. FEBS Lett. **446**, 23–26 (1999).
3. Diner, B.A. & Babcock, G.T. In *Oxygenic photosynthesis: the light reactions* (eds Ort, D.R. & Yocum, C.F.) 213–247 (Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands; 1996).
4. Boekema, E.J., Nield, J., Hankamer, B. & Barber, J. Eur. J. Biochem. **252**, 268–276 (1998).
5. Harauz, G. & van Heel, M. Optic **73**, 146–156 (1986).
6. Orlova, E.V. *et al.* J. Mol. Biol. **271**, 417–437 (1997).
7. Boekema, E.J. *et al.* Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **92**, 175–179 (1995).
8. Hankamer, B., Barber, J. & Boekema, E.J. Annu. Rev. Plant Phys. Mol. Biol. **48**, 641–671 (1997).
9. Andersson, B., Larsson, C., Jansson, C., Ljungberg, U. & Akerlund, H.-E. Biochim. Biophys. Acta **766**, 21–28 (1984).
10. Xu, Q. & Bricker, T. J. Biol. Chem. **267**, 25816–25821 (1992).
11. Murata, M., Miyao, M., Matsunami, H. & Kuwabara, T. Biochim. Biophys. Acta **765**, 363–369 (1984).
12. Barber, J., Nield, J., Morris, E.P. & Hankamer, B. Trends Biochem. Sci. **278**, 43–45 (1999).
13. Hankamer, B., Morris, E.P. & Barber, J. Nature Struct. Biol. **6**, 560–564 (1999).
14. Bricker, T.M. Photosynth. Res. **24**, 1–13 (1990).
15. Rhee, K.-H., Morris, E.P., Barber, J & Kühlbrandt, W. Nature **396**, 283–286 (1998).
16. Kühlbrandt, W., Wang, D.N. & Fujiyoshi, Y. Nature **367**, 614–621 (1994).
17. Deisenhofer, J., Epp, O., Miki, K., Huber, R. & Michel, H. Nature **18**, 618–624 (1985).
18. Debus, R.J. Biochim. Biophys. Acta **1102**, 269–352 (1992).
19. Nixon, P.J. & Diner, B.A. Biochemistry **31**, 942–948 (1992).
20. Seidler, A. Biochim. Biophys. Acta **1277**, 35–60 (1996).
21. Seibert, M., DeWit, M., & Staehelin, L.A. J. Cell Biol. **105**, 2257–2265 (1987).
22. Simpson, D.J. & Andersson B. Carlsberg Res. Commun. 51, 467–474 (1986).
23. Boekema, E.J. & van Roon, H. & Dekker, J.P. FEBS Lett. **424**, 95–99 (1998).
24. Dubochet, J. *et al.* Quart. Rev. Biophys. **21**, 129–228 (1988).
25. van Heel, M., Harauz, G., Orlova, E.V., Schmidt, R. & Schatz, M. J. Struct. Biol. **116**, 17–24 (1996).
26. Dube, P., Tavares, P., Lurz, R. & van Heel, M. EMBO J. **12**, 1303–1309 (1993).
27. Schatz, M., Orlova, E.V., Dube, P., Jäger, J. & van Heel, M. J. Struct. Biology **114**, 28–44 (1995).
28. van Heel, M. Ultramicroscopy **21**, 111–124 (1987).
29. Jones, T.A., Zou, J.Y., Cowan, S.W. & Kjeldgaard, M. Acta Crystallogr. **47**, 110–119 (1991).
30. Sheehan, B., Fuller, S.D., Pique, M.E. & Yeager, M. J. Struct. Biol. **116**, 99–106 (1996).
31. Moskalenko, A.A., Barbato, R. & Giacometti, G.M. FEBS Lett. **314**, 271–274 (1992).
32. Harrer, R., Bassi, R., Testi, M.G. & Schaefer, C. Eur. J. Biochem. **255**, 196–205 (1998).

Received 23 September, 1999; accepted 16 November, 1999.
