
Journal of Bacteriology

**Anaerobic Toluene Catabolism of Thauera aromatica: the bbs Operon Codes for Enzymes of β Oxidation of the Intermediate Benzylsuccinate**

Birgitta Leuthner and Johann Heider  
*J. Bacteriol.* 2000, 182(2):272. DOI: 10.1128/JB.182.2.272-277.2000.

---

Updated information and services can be found at:  
[http://jb.asm.org/content/182/2/272](http://jb.asm.org/content/182/2/272)

These include:

**REFERENCES**  
This article cites 27 articles, 11 of which can be accessed free at: [http://jb.asm.org/content/182/2/272#ref-list-1](http://jb.asm.org/content/182/2/272#ref-list-1)

**CONTENT ALERTS**  
Receive: RSS Feeds, eTOCs, free email alerts (when new articles cite this article), [more»](more%3E)

---

Information about commercial reprint orders: [http://journals.asm.org/site/misc/reprints.xhtml](http://journals.asm.org/site/misc/reprints.xhtml)  
To subscribe to to another ASM Journal go to: [http://journals.asm.org/site/subscriptions/](http://journals.asm.org/site/subscriptions/)

---

[Journals.ASM.org](https://journals.asm.org)

JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Jan. 2000, p. 272–277
0021-9193/00/$04.00+0
Copyright © 2000, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

# Anaerobic Toluene Catabolism of *Thauera aromatica*: the *bbs* Operon Codes for Enzymes of β Oxidation of the Intermediate Benzylsuccinate

**BIRGITTA LEUTHNER AND JOHANN HEIDER***  
*Mikrobiologie, Institut für Biologie II, Universität Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany*

Received 10 August 1999/Accepted 14 October 1999

The pathway of anaerobic toluene oxidation to benzoyl coenzyme A (benzoyl-CoA) consists of an initial reaction catalyzed by benzylsuccinate synthase, a glycyl radical enzyme adding the methyl group of toluene to the double bond of a fumarate cosubstrate, and a subsequent β-oxidation pathway of benzylsuccinate. Benzylsuccinate synthase has been studied in some detail, whereas the enzymes participating in β oxidation of benzylsuccinate are unknown. We have investigated these enzymes by analyzing substrate-induced proteins in toluene-grown cells. Toluene-induced proteins were identified and N-terminally sequenced. Nine of these proteins are encoded by an 8.5-kb operon consisting of *bbs* (beta-oxidation of benzylsuccinate) genes whose products are apparently involved in the β-oxidation pathway of benzylsuccinate. Two of the genes, *bbsE* and *bbsF*, code for the subunits of a succinyl-CoA:benzylsuccinate CoA-transferase whose activity was previously detected in toluene-grown *Thauera aromatica*. The *bbsG* gene codes for a specific benzylsuccinyl-CoA dehydrogenase, as confirmed by overexpression of the gene in *Escherichia coli* and detection of enzyme activity. The further enzymes of the pathway are probably encoded by *bbsH* (enoyl-CoA hydratase), *bbsCD* (3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase), and *bbsB* (3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase). The operon contains two additional genes, *bbsA* and *bbsI*, for which no obvious function could be derived. The *bbs* operon is expressed only in toluene-grown cells and is regulated at the transcriptional level. Promoter mapping revealed a transcription start site upstream of the *bbsA* gene. This represents the first known promoter site in *Thauera* spp.

In all aerobic organisms capable of metabolizing hydrocarbons as substrates, the initial attack of these compounds depends on molecular oxygen as a cosubstrate. Therefore, the first reports on bacterial hydrocarbon degradation under anaerobic conditions came as a surprise a decade ago (17, 30, 31). Since then, several bacterial species which are capable of metabolizing different hydrocarbons anaerobically have been isolated from various physiological groups. These bacteria use alternative, oxygen-independent pathways for hydrocarbon catabolism (for recent reviews, see references 11 to 13). Some knowledge of the biochemical reactions used in the initial attack of hydrocarbons without oxygen has recently been obtained, particularly for the model substrate toluene. Overall, toluene is anaerobically oxidized to benzoyl coenzyme A (benzoyl-CoA), which is a central intermediate in the anaerobic catabolism of most aromatic compounds. The pathway and mechanism of anaerobic toluene oxidation have been elucidated in some detail. The initial reaction is an addition reaction of the methyl group of toluene to the double bond of a fumarate cosubstrate to yield the first intermediate, benzylsuccinate (Fig. 1) (4, 5, 20). This reaction is catalyzed by a glycyl radical enzyme, benzylsuccinate synthase. Based on biochemical and molecular biological evidence, a hypothetical mechanism for benzylsuccinate formation which involves radical intermediates and constitutes a biological equivalent of the Giese-reaction, a similar reaction established in synthetic chemistry, has been suggested (9, 13, 20).

Further oxidation of benzylsuccinate to benzoyl-CoA was proposed to proceed via a modified β-oxidation pathway (5).

Biochemical evidence for the existence of specific enzymes for benzylsuccinate oxidation was recently obtained: a substrate-induced succinyl-CoA-dependent CoA-transferase for benzylsuccinate and enzymes catalyzing benzylsuccinyl-CoA oxidation to benzoyl-CoA and succinyl-CoA have been identified in toluene-grown cells of *Thauera aromatica* (22). In this report, we present the cloning and molecular characterization of a toluene-induced operon of nine genes which appears to code for all of the enzymes required for β oxidation of benzylsuccinate.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Materials.
Chemicals were obtained from Fluka, Merck, Roth, Sigma, and Bio-Rad. Synthesis of ferricenium-PF₆ was performed as described previously (19); benzylsuccinyl-CoA was prepared as described previously (22). Enzymes used for recombinant DNA techniques were obtained from MBI Fermentas or Pharmacia. Nitrocellulose membranes and nylon membranes were from Schleicher & Schuell or Amersham. ³²P- and ³⁵S-labeled compounds were from Amersham.

### Strains and culture conditions.
*T. aromatica* K172 (DSMZ6984; 2) was grown at 30°C under denitrifying conditions in mineral salt medium with toluene or benzoate as the sole substrate (5, 29). *Escherichia coli* DH5α [Δ(*argF-lac*)U169 (Φ80dlacΔM15)], K38 (*hfrC ompF267 phoA4 pit-10 relA1*), and P2392 (*hsdR514 supE44 supF58 lacY1 galK2 galT22 metB1 trpR55 mcrA*, P2 lysogen) were grown at 37°C in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium (23). The *T. aromatica* gene library used was prepared in λEMBL3 and has been described previously (7). Antibiotics were added at the following concentrations: ampicillin, 50 μg ml⁻¹; kanamycin, 40 μg ml⁻¹; and rifampin, 200 μg ml⁻¹. For λ phage propagation, liquid cultures of *E. coli* were infected by adding 5% (vol/vol) lysate and incubated for 8.5 h at 37°C.

### Recombinant DNA and DNA sequencing techniques.
Isolation of plasmid and phage DNA, PCR, and restriction, modification, and ligation of DNA fragments were performed by standard techniques (3, 25). *E. coli* DH5α was used as the host strain for plasmid manipulation; P2392 was used for phage growth. Transformation of *E. coli* strains was performed as described in reference 8 or 15. DNA sequencing was performed by cycle sequencing using fluorescein- or Cy5-labeled primers, fragment detection was performed by ALF or ALFexpress sequencers (Pharmacia). The complete DNA sequence of both strands was determined. Sequenced regions were extended by primer walking.

---

*Corresponding author. Mailing address: Mikrobiologie, Institut für Biologie II, Universität Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 1, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. Phone: 49-761-203-2774. Fax: 49-761-203-2626. E-mail: heiderj@ruf.uni-freiburg.de.*

Vol. 182, 2000

$\begin{aligned} & \text { CH }_{3} \\ & \text { HOOC } \\ & \text { COOH } \end{aligned}$

Toluene + Fumarate

$\begin{aligned} & \text { BssABC } \\ & \text { Succinate } \end{aligned}$

$\begin{aligned} & \text { COOH } \\ & \text { COOH } \end{aligned}$

Benzyl-
succinate

$\begin{aligned} & \text { COSCoA } \\ & \text { COOH } \end{aligned}$

BbsEF

$\begin{aligned} & \text { COSCoA } \\ & \text { COOH } \end{aligned}$

BbsG

$\begin{aligned} & \text { COSCoA } \\ & \text { COOH } \end{aligned}$

BbsH

$\begin{aligned} & \text { HO } \\ & \text { COSCoA } \\ & \text { COOH } \end{aligned}$

BbsCD

$\begin{aligned} & \text { O } \\ & \text { COSCoA } \\ & \text { COOH } \end{aligned}$

BbsB

$\begin{aligned} & \text { COSCoA } \end{aligned}$

Benzoyl-CoA

Succinyl-CoA

FIG. 1. Proposed pathway of anaerobic toluene oxidation to benzoyl-CoA. The enzymes involved are indicated by their gene names: (1) benzylsuccinate synthase, BssABC; (2) succinyl-CoA:benzylsuccinate CoA-transferase, BbsEF; (3) benzylsuccinyl-CoA dehydrogenase, BbsG; (4) phenylitaconyl-CoA hydratase, BbsH; (5) 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase, BbsCD; (6) benzylsuccinyl-CoA thiolase, BbsB; (7) succinate dehydrogenase, Sdh.

Protein electrophoresis. Discontinuous sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was performed in gels containing 10.5% acrylamide-bisacrylamide as described elsewhere (18). Two-dimensional (2D) gel electrophoresis was performed as described in reference 24 with $100,000 \times g$ cell extracts prepared from toluene- and benzoate-grown cells of *T. aromatica*. For each experiment, $400 \mu \mathrm{g}$ of protein was applied to the gels. The second dimension was performed with gels containing 11% acrylamide-bisacrylamide. The separated proteins were blotted on polyvinylidene membranes. The toluene-induced proteins were cut out and sequenced by gas/liquid-phase sequencing with an Applied Biosystems 473A sequencer.

Mapping of the 5' ends of mRNA. Total cellular RNA was prepared from exponentially growing toluene- and benzoate-grown cells of *T. aromatica*, using the hot phenol method (1). The 5' ends of mRNAs encoded by the bbs operon were mapped by a primer extension method with a Cy5-labeled oligonucleotide. For each experiment, $40 \mu \mathrm{g}$ of RNA and $0.2 \mathrm{pmol}$ of primer were used. The experiments were otherwise performed as described elsewhere (6). Extension products were purified by phenol extraction and analyzed with an ALFexpress sequencer.

T7 promoter-polymerase labeling of gene products. Fragments of the bbs operon were subcloned in the vector pCRScript Amp SK (+). The resulting plasmids carry the corresponding genes under the control of the phage T7 $\phi 10$ promoter and were transformed into *E. coli* K38 carrying plasmid pGP1-2. Gene products were specifically labeled with an L-[${ }^{35} \mathrm{~S}]$methionine–L-[${ }^{35} \mathrm{~S}]$cysteine mixture as described elsewhere (28). Labeled proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and detected by autoradiography.

Heterologous expression of bbsG and test of the activity of the gene product. The bbsG gene was cloned into the expression vector pTrc99A (Pharmacia) and overexpressed in *E. coli* DH5$\alpha$. A 200-ml culture of transformed cells was grown to an optical density at 578 nm of 0.5 in LB medium at $37^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$; then $1 \mathrm{mM}$ isopropyl-$\beta-\mathrm{d}$-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) was added, and incubation was continued for 4 h. Cells were harvested by centrifugation; the cell yield was $0.5 \mathrm{~g}$ (wet mass). Crude extracts were prepared by resuspending the cells in 2 volumes of basal buffer ($100 \mathrm{mM}$ Tris-HCl, $1 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{MgCl}_{2}$ [pH 7.6]), passing the suspension through a French press cell ($137 \mathrm{MPa}$), and centrifuging the lysate $1 \mathrm{~h}$ at $100,000 \times g$. The supernatant was passed over a PD10 gel permeation column to remove low-molecular-mass molecules, some of which interfere with the enzyme assay. Benzylsuccinyl-CoA dehydrogenase was assayed in basal buffer, containing $0.1 \mathrm{mM}$ ferricenium-PF$_{6}$ as an artificial electron acceptor and $10 \mu \mathrm{l}$ of PD10-treated extract (equivalent to $0.13 \mathrm{mg}$ of protein). The reaction was started by adding $0.3$ to $0.6 \mathrm{mM}$ benzylsuccinyl-CoA. Enzyme activity was monitored as decrease of absorbance of the ferricenium ion at $300 \mathrm{nm}\left(\varepsilon=4,300 \mathrm{M}^{-1} \mathrm{~cm}^{-1}\right)$.

Nucleotide sequence accession number. The sequence data reported here were submitted to the GenBank database under accession no. AF173961.

RESULTS

Analysis of toluene-induced proteins in *T. aromatica*. The enzymes catalyzing benzylsuccinate oxidation to benzoyl-CoA play an important role in anaerobic toluene oxidation. They were expected to be specifically induced in toluene-grown cells. Analysis of extracts of toluene- and benzoate-grown cells of *T. aromatica* by one- and two-dimensional PAGE showed the occurrence of at least nine toluene-induced proteins, in addition to the previously known subunits of the first enzyme of the pathway, benzylsuccinate synthase (10, 20). Eight of these proteins were resolved on 2D gels, whereas an induced protein of $15.6 \mathrm{kDa}$ was visible only on one-dimensional gels (Fig. 2). The N-terminal sequences of seven of these proteins were determined from blotted gels (Table 1). One of the determined sequences (Table 1, BbsB) showed similarity to the $\beta$-ketothiolase domain of eukaryotic sterol binding proteins (27) and some archaeal homologues. This indicated that the protein may be involved in the last step of the proposed degradation pathway of benzylsuccinate (Fig. 1, enzyme 6).

Cloning and sequencing of the bbs operon. To obtain a hybridization probe for the genes coding for toluene-induced proteins, PCR assays were performed with degenerate primers derived from the N-terminal sequence of the toluene-induced thiolase (BbsB) and from a C-terminal consensus sequence derived from an alignment of a number of known thiolases (equivalent to Prosite entry PS00737). A specifically amplified DNA fragment of $1 \mathrm{~kb}$ was obtained, as predicted from the size of the protein. Direct DNA sequencing of the fragment confirmed that it coded for the determined amino acid sequence (data not shown). This PCR product was then labeled with ${ }^{[32} \mathrm{P}] \mathrm{dCTP}$ and used as a hybridization probe to screen a $\lambda$EMBL3 gene bank of *T. aromatica* (7). Two overlapping positive clones containing inserts of 10 to $12 \mathrm{~kb}$ were obtained from 1,500 tested plaques. The insert DNAs were subcloned in pCRScript and used for sequencing. The nucleotide sequence

FIG. 2. Analysis of toluene-induced proteins. (A) SDS-PAGE of extracts of benzoate-grown (lane 2) and toluene-grown (lane 3) cells of *T. aromatica*. Molecular masses of marker proteins (lane 1) are given in the left margin; the 2D gels are aligned relative to the migration positions of these markers. Arrows point to toluene-induced proteins. (B) 2D gel of a cell extract of toluene-grown cells. Boxes indicate the positions of toluene-induced proteins. One box (4+) contains two induced proteins: the larger of these was identified as BbsH; the smaller one may be BbsC, but it could not be verified because of a blocked N terminus. (C) 2D gel of a cell extract of benzoate-grown cells. The positions of toluene-induced proteins from panel B are indicated by boxes. Numbers indicate the migration positions of the identified proteins: (1) benzylsuccinate synthase subunit BssA; (2a and 2b) BbsEF; (3) BbsG; (4) BbsH; (5a, b) BbsCD; (6) BbsB, (7) BbsA, and (8) BbsI. The correlation of the induced protein (5a) with BbsC was based on the results of T7 expression experiments. A toluene-induced protein that does not correlate to a *bbs* gene product and was not located on the 2D gels is labeled with X.

of a 9.4-kb segment was determined in both orientations from several subclones. The subclone borders were checked by PCR amplification of overlapping fragments and sequencing of the overlaps. Small segments of DNA missing at subclone borders were sequenced directly from the primary amplicons. The predicted reading frames and the operon structure of the sequenced DNA segment are shown in Fig. 3. The deduced gene products of the *bbs* operon were confirmed by specific labeling experiments using the T7 promoter-polymerase system in *E. coli*. Plasmids containing different parts of the *bbs* operon (Fig. 3) were constructed and used for labeling of the encoded gene products with \[^{35}S\]methionine–\[^{35}S\]cysteine. An SDS-gel analysis of the labeled proteins showed that most of the expected gene products were synthesized (Fig. 4). Expression of a plasmid containing the *bbsF* and *bbsG* genes yielded only a single labeled product, even when analyzed under conditions that resolved the different induced proteins of that size range in cell extracts (data not shown). Since the *bbsG* gene was shown to be expressed in labeling experiments with a shortened plasmid lacking *bbsF* (data not shown), we assume that the *bbsF* gene product was not synthesized from the T7 promoter plasmid used.

Organization of the genes and features of the derived gene products. Nine closely spaced open reading frames were identified in the sequence. They code for enzymes of a β-oxidation pathway and were therefore termed *bbsA* to *bbsI* (for beta-oxidation of benzylsuccinate) in Fig. 3. A rather long intergenic spacer of 118 bp is found between *bbsF* and *bbsG*, whereas the *bbsE* and *bbsF* genes overlap by 14 bp. The distance of the *bbs* genes to flanking genes is 340 bp at the 5′ flank (same orientation) and 146 bp at the 3′ flank (opposite orientation). With the exception of the *bbsC* gene product, the predicted N-terminal sequences of all *bbs* gene products were verified from our initial analysis of toluene-induced proteins. Table 1 shows the predicted and experimentally obtained sizes, pI values, and N-terminal sequences of the proteins. The N-terminal methionines are retained for BbsB, BbsG, and BbsI; those of the other *bbs* gene products are cleaved off. In the following paragraphs, the derived gene products of the *bbs* genes and their

TABLE 1. Features of *bbs* gene products

| Gene product | Amino acids | Predicted/observed<sup>a</sup> | N-terminal sequence |
|--------------|-------------|-----------------------------|---------------------|
|              |             | Mass (kDa)                 |                     |
| BbsA         | 143         | 16.2/15.6                  | SEQKPNKK            |
| BbsB         | 385         | 41.1/44.5                  | MKLERKVYIAGVGETKFGRT |
| BbsC         | 249         | 25.2/27.5                  | ND                  |
| BbsD         | 247         | 26.0/26.0                  | GIQNRVAL            |
| BbsE         | 409         | 45.5/45.0                  | GQDFSXFXVVDMTGELGPY |
| BbsF         | 408         | 44.8/45.0                  | PNSXXXXXEGIVVXDF    |
| BbsG         | 406         | 45.6/45.0                  | MDFSLSSEEQT         |
| BbsH         | 255         | 27.3/28.0                  | PVTLEVSN            |
| BbsI         | 209         | 23.2/25.5                  | MRLTSSFD            |

<sup>a</sup> Predicted from sequence/observed experimentally by SDS-PAGE or 2D gel electrophoresis.  
<sup>b</sup> ND, not detected.

we attribute one or both of these genes to the fourth enzyme of the proposed pathway, the 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase. Only BbsD was identified as a toluene-induced protein in our 2D gel analysis. Although the N terminus of BbsC has not been obtained from 2D gels, the *bbsC* gene product may correspond to a 27.5-kDa toluene-induced protein whose N terminus was blocked for N-terminal sequencing (Fig. 2). We have no indication yet of whether the *bbsCD* gene products are subunits of a single enzyme or represent two different isoenzymes.

(v) BbsB. The *bbsB* gene product most probably codes for the last enzyme required for the proposed metabolic pathway of benzylsuccinate oxidation, benzylsuccinyl-CoA thiolase. This can be derived from the results of database searches, which showed strong similarity of BbsB to thiolases (e.g., 37% identity with the thiolase domain of a putative lipid transfer protein of *Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum* [accession no. O26884]). Only two of three Prosite patterns for thiolases (PS0098 and PS00737) can be located in the sequence. Cys₈₄ of BbsB is conserved in all thiolases and corresponds to the site of formation of a covalent acyl-S enzyme intermediate in the reaction mechanism. A second active-site cysteine close to the C terminus of well-analyzed thiolases is missing in BbsB. Significantly, this cysteine is also absent in the thiolases in the database that exhibit the highest sequence similarity to BbsB. Some of these enzymes, such as the thiolase domain of eukaryotic sterol binding protein, were recently shown to preferentially catalyze the thiolytic cleavage of α-methyl-branched 3-oxoacyl-CoA substrates (26). This correlates well with the expected specificity of BbsB for an α-carboxymethyl-branched substrate (Fig. 1).

BbsA and BbsI. Surprisingly, the *bbs* operon contains two additional genes, which code for hypothetical proteins of unknown functions and are expressed in toluene-grown cells at approximately the same levels as the other genes of the operon. The first reading frame, *bbsA*, codes for a 16.2-kDa protein which has been identified in cell extracts separated by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE but not in 2D gels. This is probably due to the very high theoretical pI value of BbsA (Table 1), which was outside the pH range used in our study. Database

FIG. 4. Expression of the *bbs* genes by the T7 promoter-polymerase system. The autoradiogram is of a 12.5% polyacrylamide gel in which SDS lysates from equal amounts of cells were separated. Migration positions of nonlabeled standard proteins are indicated. Lanes contained lysates of *E. coli* K38 containing plasmid pGP1-2 and various T7 promoter vectors. Lane 1, vector pT7-4, containing the gene for β-lactamase in the direction of the T7 promoter. Lane 2, plasmid pH3 (*bbsABC′*). The aberrant size of the *bbsC′* gene product is caused by a gene fusion of the truncated *bbsC* gene with the vector portion, which results in a predicted product of 29.5 kDa. Lane 3, plasmid pE1 (*bbsC*). Lane 4, plasmid pDH (*bbsDE*). Lane 5, plasmid pE3 (*bbsFG*). The *bbsF* gene product is probably not synthesized from this plasmid; the labeled protein is identical to the product synthesized from a plasmid containing only the *bbsG* gene. Lane 6, plasmid pHH (*bbsH*). Lane 7, control experiment with a plasmid containing *bssA* and a part of *bssB* in inverse orientation.

Functional overexpression of the *bbsG* gene in *E. coli*. The *bbsG* gene, which is predicted to encode benzylsuccinyl-CoA dehydrogenase (enzyme 3 in Fig. 1), was overexpressed in *E. coli* by an IPTG-inducible *trc* promoter system. Significant amounts of soluble BbsG protein, corresponding to ca. 5% of the total protein, were obtained in cell extracts of overproducing cells (data not shown). These extracts were used to test for the activity of benzylsuccinyl-CoA dehydrogenase, using chemically synthesized (*R/S*)-benzylsuccinyl-CoA (22) to initiate the reaction. As shown in Table 2, benzylsuccinyl-CoA was oxidized by crude extracts of *E. coli* cells containing overproduced *bbsG* gene product. About sevenfold-lower activity was recorded in nonoverexpressing control cells of *E. coli*, probably caused by some cross-reactivity of other acyl-CoA dehydrogenases from the host cell. Substrate analogs such as free benzylsuccinate or succinyl-CoA were not accepted by the enzyme (Table 2). BbsG thus catalyzes the oxidation of benzylsuccinyl-CoA, consistent with its suggested role as a benzylsuccinyl-CoA dehydrogenase in the β oxidation of benzylsuccinate.

## DISCUSSION

Identification of the *bbs* operon increases the number of genes required for the anaerobic toluene catabolic pathway of *T. aromatica* to 13, located in the *bss* and *bbs* operons. The operons are not closely linked, as evident from the amount of analyzed flanking DNA of the obtained clones. Whereas the *bss* operon codes for the first enzyme of the pathway, benzylsuccinate synthase, plus an additional activating enzyme (20), the *bbs* operon apparently contains the remaining genes required for toluene oxidation to benzoyl-CoA. Several arguments support the notion that the encoded enzymes catalyze the β oxidation of benzylsuccinate to benzoyl-CoA. (i) Eight of the nine predicted gene products of the *bbs* operon were strongly induced by toluene, together with the *bssA* gene product, which is a subunit of benzylsuccinate synthase, the first enzyme of toluene degradation (20). (ii) A succinyl-CoA:benzylsuccinate CoA-transferase rather than a CoA ligase has been identified biochemically as the enzyme activating benzylsuccinate for β oxidation (22). This is matched by the similarity of the *bbsE* and *bbsF* gene products with CoA-transferases and the absence of a gene coding for a CoA ligase in the operon. (iii) The detected in vitro activity of heterologously produced BbsG is consistent with that of benzylsuccinyl-CoA dehydrogenase, one of the enzymes proposed to participate in the β oxidation of benzylsuccinate. (iv) The sequences of the proteins encoded by the *bbs* operon are consistent with all enzyme activities that have been proposed to constitute the benzylsuccinate β-oxidation pathway.

In addition to the genes coding for the putative enzymes

TABLE 2. Benzylsuccinyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity of recombinant BbsG protein${}^{a}$

| Substrate               | Mean activity (nmol min${}^{-1}$ mg of protein${}^{-1}$) ± SD (n = 2–5) |
|-------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| None                    | +BbsG: 8.4 ± 3, –BbsG: 6.3 ± 5                                |
| Benzylsuccinyl-CoA      | +BbsG: 188 ± 40, –BbsG: 27 ± 11                               |
| Benzylsuccinate         | +BbsG: 1.2 ± 0.8, –BbsG: 2.8 ± 2                              |
| Succinyl-CoA            | +BbsG: 7.5 ± 5, –BbsG: 7.5 ± 5                               |

${}^{a}$ Tests were performed with extracts of *E. coli* containing (+BbsG) or lacking (−BbsG) overproduced benzylsuccinyl-CoA dehydrogenase; the reactions were initiated by adding 0.6 mM (final concentration) benzylsuccinyl-CoA or other substrate as indicated.

required for the pathway of activation and β oxidation of benzylsuccinate, we found two extra genes in the *bbs* operon (*bbsA* and *bbsI*). These are expressed in toluene-grown cells at levels comparable to those of other *bbs* genes, and their possible roles cannot be predicted from sequence comparisons. Still, some clues as to the role of the *bbsA* gene product might be derived from the database searches. We observed that the *bbsA* gene product belongs to a family of hypothetical proteins from several sequenced genomes whose genes are always located immediately adjacent to thiolase genes. For example, 12 of the 15 genes coding for thiolases in the genome sequence of *Archaeoglobus fulgidus* are accompanied by genes coding for members of the BbsA family. It is therefore possible that BbsA is connected to the function of the benzylsuccinyl-CoA thiolase, BbsB.

Expression of the *bbs* and *bss* operons is induced only in cells grown on toluene. This induction is mediated at the transcriptional level for both operons, as evident from primer extension analysis of the *bbs* operon and Northern blotting of the *bss* operon, as reported previously (20). Toluene induction appears to be mediated by the gene products of the *tdiSR* operon, which codes for a regulatory two-component system and is located immediately upstream of the *bss* operon (21). Taken together, the three operons containing the genes of the toluene pathway occupy ca. 20 kb of the genome of *T. aromatica*.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft.

We thank G. Fuchs (University of Freiburg) for his constant support and encouragement. We acknowledge H. Schägger (University of Frankfurt) for N-terminal sequencing of toluene-induced proteins, C. Leutwein for the synthesis of benzylsuccinyl-CoA, and J. Alt-Mörbe (Freiburg) for help with DNA sequencing.

### REFERENCES

1. Aiba, H., S. Adhya, and B. deCombrugge. 1981. Evidence for two functional *gal* promoters in intact *Escherichia coli*. J. Biol. Chem. **256**:11905–11910.
2. Anders, A., A. Kaetzke, P. Kämpfer, W. Ludwig, and G. Fuchs. 1995. Taxonomic position of aromatic degrading denitrifying pseudomonad strains K172 and KB740 and their description as new members of the genera *Thauera*, *T. aromatica* sp. nov., and *Azoarcus*, *A. evansii* sp. nov., respectively, members of the beta subclass of Proteobacteria. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. **45**:327–333.
3. Ausubel, F. M., R. Brent, R. E. Kingston, D. D. Moore, J. G. Seidman, J. A. Smith, and K. Struhl (ed.). 1987. Current protocols in molecular biology. John Wiley & Sons, New York, N.Y.
4. Beller, H. R., and A. M. Spormann. 1997. Anaerobic activation of toluene and o-xylene by addition to fumarate in denitrifying strain T. J. Bacteriol. **179**:670–676.
5. Biegert, T., G. Fuchs, and J. Heider. 1996. Evidence that oxidation of toluene in the denitrifying bacterium *Thauera aromatica* is initiated by formation of benzylsuccinate from toluene and fumarate. Eur. J. Biochem. **238**:661–668.
6. Boorstein, W. R., and E. A. Craig. 1989. Primer extension analysis from RNA. Methods Enzymol. **180**:347–369.
7. Breese, K., and G. Fuchs. 1998. 4-Hydroxybenzoyl-CoA reductase (dehydroxylating) from the denitrifying bacterium *Thauera aromatica*. Prosthetic groups, electron donor, and genes of a member of the molybdenum-flavin-iron-sulfur proteins. Eur. J. Biochem. **251**:916–923.
8. Chung, C. T., S. L. Niemela, and R. H. Miller. 1989. One-step preparation of competent *Escherichia coli*: transformation and storage of bacterial cells in the same solution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **86**:2172–2175.
9. Giese, B., and J. Meister. 1977. Die Addition von Kohlenwasserstoffen an Olefine: eine neue synthetische Methode. Chem. Ber. **110**:2588–2600.
10. Heider, J., M. Boll, K. Breese, S. Breinig, C. Ebenau-Jehle, U. Feil, N. Gad'on, D. Laempe, B. Leuthner, M. Mohamed, S. Schneider, G. Burchhardt, and G. Fuchs. 1998. Differential induction of enzymes involved in anaerobic metabolism of aromatic compounds in the denitrifying bacterium *Thauera aromatica*. Arch. Microbiol. **170**:120–131.
11. Heider, J., and G. Fuchs. 1997. Anaerobic metabolism of aromatic compounds. Eur. J. Biochem. **243**:577–596.
12. Heider, J., and G. Fuchs. 1997. Microbial anaerobic aromatic metabolism. Anaerobe **3**:1–22.
13. Heider, J., A. M. Spormann, H. R. Beller, and F. Widdel. 1999. Anaerobic bacterial metabolism of hydrocarbons. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. **22**:459–473.
14. Hofstein, H. A., Y. Feng, V. E. Anderson, and P. J. Tonge. 1999. Role of glutamate 144 and glutamate 164 in the catalytic mechanism of enoyl-CoA hydratase. Biochemistry **38**:9508–9516.
15. Inoue, H., H. Nojima, and H. Okayama. 1990. High efficiency transformation of *Escherichia coli* with plasmids. Gene **96**:23–28.
16. Kim, J.-J. P., M. Wang, and R. Paschke. 1993. Crystal structures of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase from pig liver mitochondria with and without substrate. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **90**:7523–7527.
17. Kuhn, E. P., P. J. Colberg, J. L. Schnoor, O. Wanner, A. J. B. Zehnder, and R. P. Schwarzenbach. 1985. Microbial transformations of substituted benzenes during infiltration of river water to groundwater: laboratory column studies. Environ. Sci. Technol. **19**:961–968.
18. Laemmli, U. K. 1970. Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. Nature **227**:680–685.
19. Lehman, T. C., D. E. Hale, A. Bhala, and C. Thorpe. 1990. An acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase assay using ferricenium ion. Anal. Biochem. **186**:280–284.
20. Leuthner, B., C. Leutwein, H. Schultz, P. Hörth, W. Haehnel, E. Schiltz, H. Schägger, and J. Heider. 1998. Biochemical and genetic characterisation of benzylsuccinate synthase from *Thauera aromatica*: a new glycyl radical enzyme catalysing the first step in anaerobic toluene metabolism. Mol. Microbiol. **28**:615–628.
21. Leuthner, B., and J. Heider. 1998. A two-component system involved in regulation of anaerobic toluene metabolism in *Thauera aromatica*. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. **166**:35–41.
22. Leutwein, C., and J. Heider. 1999. Anaerobic toluene catabolic pathway in denitrifying *Thauera aromatica*: activation and β-oxidation of the first intermediate, (*R*)-(+)-benzylsuccinate. Microbiology **145**:3265–3271.
23. Miller, J. H. 1972. Experiments in molecular genetics. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
24. O'Farrell, P. H. 1975. High resolution two-dimensional electrophoresis of protein. J. Biol. Chem. **250**:4007–4021.
25. Sambrook, J., E. F. Fritsch, and T. Maniatis. 1989. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
26. Seedorf, U., M. Raabe, P. Ellinghaus, F. Kannenberg, M. Fobker, T. Engel, S. Denis, F. Wouters, K. W. A. Wirtz, R. J. A. Wanders, N. Meada, and G. Assmann. 1998. Defective peroxisomal catabolism of branched fatty acyl coenzyme A in mice lacking the sterol carrier protein-x gene function. Genes Dev. **12**:1189–1201.
27. Sidhu, H., S. D. Ogden, H.-Y. Lung, B. G. Luttge, A. L. Baetz, and A. B. Peck. 1997. DNA sequencing and expression of the formyl-coenzyme A transferase gene, *frc*, from *Oxalobacter formigenes*. J. Bacteriol. **179**:3378–3381.
28. Tabor, S., and C. C. Richardson. 1985. A bacteriophage T7 polymerase/promoter system for controlled exclusive expression of specific genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **82**:1074–1078.
29. Tschech, A., and G. Fuchs. 1987. Anaerobic degradation of phenol by pure cultures of newly isolated denitrifying pseudomonads. Arch. Microbiol. **148**:213–217.
30. Vogel, T. M., and D. Grbic-Galic. 1986. Incorporation of oxygen from water into toluene and benzene during anaerobic fermentative transformation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **52**:200–202.
31. Wilson, G. H., G. B. Smith, and J. H. Rees. 1986. Biotransformations of selected alkylbenzenes and halogenated aliphatic hydrocarbons in methanogenic aquifer material: a microcosm study. Environ. Sci. Technol. **20**:997–1002.
