
35 Spaccapelo, R. *et al.* (1995) TGF-β is important in determining the *in vivo* patterns of susceptibility or resistance in mice infected with *Candida albicans*. J. Immunol. 155, 1349–1360

36 Sayles, P.C. *et al.* (1991) A spleen is not necessary to resolve infection with *Plasmodium yoelii*. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 44, 42–48

37
Reviews

Interaction of trophozoites with fibronectin

An *in vitro* model<sup>8</sup> was developed to analyse the interaction of *E. histolytica* trophozoites with ECM proteins. The assays monitored quantitatively the adhesion of trophozoites to purified FN-covered surfaces and the breakdown of this protein under diverse experimental conditions. The data revealed not only specificity in the binding, but also the occurrence of structural and biochemical events in the amoebae that participate and promote adhesion to the substrate and its subsequent degradation. Identical results were obtained in assays with laminin or matrigel
Extracellular
Plasma
membrane

Intracellular

dcAMP = cAMP

Fig. 2. Diagrammatic representation of the signal-transduction pathways identified in *Entamoeba histolytica*. AC, adenylyl cyclase; CaM, calmodulin; cAMP, cyclic AMP; DAG, diacylglycerol; dcAMP, dibutyryl cAMP; FK, forskolin; FN, fibronectin; Gs, Gi and Gq, G-proteins; Ins(1,4,5)P3, inositol trisphosphate; MAPK,
([Ca²⁺]i) were expected to increase as a consequence of trophozoite interaction with FN and PLC activation. Ca²⁺ reservoirs have not yet been identified in amoebae, and mitochondria are absent, but some of the numerous vesicles present in the trophozoite cytoplasm might correspond to Ca²⁺ storage organelles. When amoebae were in contact with FN, measurements of Ins(1,4,5)P₃ indicated a rapid increase in the levels of this second messenger²³, and [Ca²⁺]i monitoring indicated release of stored Ca²⁺ into the cytopl
points of contact. This could be seen as the end result of
a process started by recognition of a particular substrate.

### ECM recognition in the host

In the host, where degradation of ECM proteins is a
manifestation of the infection [1,2], invasion could be trig-
gered when trophozoites reach the basal lamina at an
injured site in the mucosa and interact with ECM pro-
teins. This interaction would lead to a receptor-cou-
pled activation of one or several signaling pathways,
and the cascade of events responsible for the structural
and metabolic changes and the differential gene ex-
pression observed in the
Reviews

32 Pérez, E. *et al.* (1996) *Entamoeba histolytica*: involvement of pp125<sup>FAK</sup> in collagen-induced signal transduction. *Exp. Parasitol.* 82, 164–170  
33 Lohia, A. and Samuelson, J. (1993) Molecular cloning of a *rho* family gene of *Entamoeba histolytica*. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 58, 177–180  
34 Que