
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 2000 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**Purification and Characterization of a Neutral Ceramidase from Mouse Liver**

A SINGLE PROTEIN CATALYZES THE REVERSIBLE REACTION IN WHICH CERAMIDE IS BOTH HYDROLYZED AND SYNTHESIZED*

(Received for publication, December 30, 1998, and in revised form, October 7, 1999)

Motohiro Tani‡, Nozomu Okino‡, Susumu Mitsutake‡, Tetsuo Tanigawa§, Hiroyuki Izu§, and Makoto Ito‡¶

From the ‡Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Division of Bioresource and Bioenvironmental Sciences, Graduate School Kyushu University, 6-10-1, Hakozaki, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8581 and the §Biotechnology Research Laboratories of Takara Shuzo Co., Ltd., Seta 3-4-1, Otsu, Shiga 520-2134, Japan

We report here a novel ceramidase that was purified more than 150,000-fold from the membrane fraction of mouse liver. The enzyme was a monomeric polypeptide having a molecular mass of 94 kDa and was highly glycosylated with N-glycans. The amino acid sequence of a fragment obtained from the purified enzyme was homologous to those deduced from the genes encoding an alkaline ceramidase of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* and a hypothetical protein of the slime mold *Dictyostelium discoideum*. However, no significant sequence similarities were found in other known functional proteins including acid ceramidases of humans and mice. The enzyme hydrolyzed various N-acylsphingosines but not galactosylceramide, sulfatide, GM1a, or sphingomyelin. The enzyme exhibited the highest activity around pH 7.5 and was thus identified as a type of neutral ceramidase. The apparent \( K_m \) and \( V_{\text{max}} \) values for C12-4-nitrobenzo-2-oxa-1,3-diazole-ceramide and C16-¹⁴C-ceramide were 22.3 μM and 29.1 μmol/min/mg and 72.4 μM and 3.6 μmol/min/mg, respectively. This study also clearly demonstrated that the purified 94-kDa ceramidase catalyzed the condensation of fatty acid to sphingosine to generate ceramide, but did not catalyze acyl-CoA-dependent acyl-transfer reaction.

deficiency is responsible for Farber disease in which Cer is accumulated in lysosomes (7). Recently, an acid CDase was purified from human urine (8), and the cDNA encoding human and mouse acid CDases has been cloned (9, 10). CDases with activity at neutral to alkaline pH (neutral and alkaline CDases) were found in porcine intestine (11), guinea pig skin (12), and human fibroblasts (13). Recently, we purified a novel type of alkaline CDase from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*, which had been isolated from a patient with atopic dermatitis (14), and cloned the gene encoding the alkaline CDase from a genomic library of *P. aeruginosa* (15).

Several lines of evidence have suggested that neutral and alkaline CDases could be involved in signal transduction pathways to generate sphingosine for regulation of cell functions. It has been reported that an alkaline CDase in rat glomerular mesangial cells is up-regulated by growth factors (16). In addition, neutral CDase activity was found to be regulated by interleukin-1β in rat hepatocytes (17). However, these enzymes have not yet been purified. Furthermore, the relationship between neutral and alkaline enzymes is not clear at present.

We found a lysosphingolipid-forming enzyme, sphingolipid Cer N-deacylase, which hydrolyzes the N-acyl linkage of Cer in various glycosphingolipids and sphingomyelin (18). Interestingly, this enzyme catalyzed the condensation of a free fatty acid to a sphingosine to produce Cer, whereas the enzyme hardly hydrolyzed free Cer (18). By using this unique reaction of the enzyme, radioisotope-labeled Cer (19) and fluorescent Cer were prepared (20). We found that C12-NBD-Cer thus prepared was hydrolyzed by neutral and alkaline CDases much faster than ¹⁴C-Cer or C6-NBD-Cer (21), although CDase activity has usually been measured using ¹⁴C-Cer (3) or C6-NBD-Cer (17). In contrast, C12-NBD-Cer was relatively resistant to the acid CDase. Thus the use of this fluorescent substrate makes it possible to perform specific and sensitive assay for neutral and alkaline enzymes (21).

Gatt (3) reported that an acid CDase of rat brain condensed fatty acid to sphingosine to generate Cer and suggested that there is an alternative synthetic pathway of Cer catalyzed by reverse hydrolysis reaction of CDase. However, the question of whether a single protein can catalyze both hydrolysis and condensation reactions or if some other factors are required for ceramide synthesis by CDase remains unclear, because the enzyme has not yet been purified (22).

Here, we describe the purification and characterization of a novel type of neutral CDase, a 94-kDa glycoprotein with N-linked glycans, from the membrane fraction of mouse liver. We also report that the purified 94-kDa CDase catalyzed both

* This work was supported in part by a grant-in-aid for Scientific Research (B) from the Ministry of Education, Science, and Culture of Japan (09460051). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* The nucleotide sequence(s) reported in this paper has been submitted to the GenBank™/EBI Data Bank with accession number(s) U82513.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel.: 81-92-642-2900; Fax: 81-92-642-2907; E-mail: makotoi@agr.kyushu-u.ac.jp.
* The abbreviations used are: Cer, ceramide; CDase, ceramidase; HPLC, high performance liquid chromatography; HRP, horseradish peroxidase; NBD, 4-nitrobenzo-2-oxa-1,3-diazole; PAGE, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; TLC, thin-layer chromatography; TBS, Tris-buffered saline; Lys-C, lysylendopeptidase.

hydrolysis and condensation reactions but did not catalyze acyl-CoA-dependent acyl-transfer reaction.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Materials—<sup>14</sup>C-Fatty acids (stearic acid, palmitic acid, lauric acid, and palmitoyl-CoA) were purchased from American Radiolabeled Chemicals Inc. N-Palmitoylsphingosine, phytosphingosine, and Triton X-100 were obtained from Sigma. Precoated Silica Gel 60 TLC plates were obtained from Merck, dihydrosphingosine was from BIOMOL Research Laboratories, Inc., D-erythro sphingosine was from Wako Pure Chemicals (Osaka, Japan), and bicinchonic acid protein assay kit was from Pierce. HRP-labeled lectins (concanavalin A, *Ricinus communis* agglutinin I, and wheat germ agglutinin) and glycopeptidase F were purchased from Seikagaku Co. (Tokyo, Japan) and Takara Shuzo Co. (Otsu, Japan), respectively. Lysylendopeptidase (Lys-C) was purchased from Wako Pure Chemicals. All other reagents were of the highest purity available.

Preparation of C12-NBD-Cer and <sup>14</sup>C-Sphingolipids—Fluorescence-labeled dodecanylsphingosine (C12-NBD-Cer) was prepared by the method as described by Tani *et al.* (20). Various <sup>14</sup>C-fatty acids were condensed to sphingosine (d18:1), sphinganine (d18:0), and phytosphingosine (t18:0) to produce <sup>14</sup>C-labeled Cers by the condensation reaction of sphingolipid Cer N-deacylase as described by Mitsutake *et al.* (19). Interestingly, the enzyme efficiently condensed the free fatty acid to sphingoid base, although the enzyme hardly hydrolyzed Cer (18). <sup>14</sup>C-Cers were purified by using a Sep-Pak Plus Silica, Sep-Pak Plus C18, and a Sep-Pak Plus CM cartridge (19). <sup>14</sup>C-Glycosphingolipids were also prepared using condensation reaction of sphingolipid Cer N-deacylase and purified by HPLC using a normal phase silica column according to the method described in Ref. 23.

CDase Assay—The activity of CDase was measured using C12-NBD-Cer (NBD-C12:0, d18:1) as a substrate as described below. The reaction mixture contained 550 pmol of C12-NBD-Cer and an appropriate amount of the enzyme in 20 μl of 25 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 1% sodium cholate. Following incubation at 37 °C for 30 min, the reaction was terminated by the addition of 100 μl of chloroform/methanol (2/1, v/v), dried in a Speed Vac concentrator, and redissolved in 30 μl of chloroform/methanol (2/1, v/v), and an appropriate amount of sample was applied to a TLC plate, which was developed with chloroform, methanol, 25% ammonia (90/20/0.5, v/v, solvent I). NBD-dodecanoic acid released by the action of the enzyme and the remaining C12-NBD-Cer were separated by TLC, then analyzed, and quantified with a Shimadzu CS-9300 chromatoscanner (excitation 470 nm, emission 525 nm). One enzyme unit was defined as the amount capable of catalyzing the release of 1 μmol of NBD-dodecanoic acid/min from the C12-NBD-Cer under the conditions described above. A value of 10<sup>-3</sup> and 10<sup>-6</sup> units of enzyme was expressed as 1 milliunit and 1 microunit, respectively, in this study. Reverse hydrolysis (condensation) reaction was measured as follows: 100 pmol of NBD-dodecanoic acid and 3 nmol of sphingosine were incubated at 37 °C for 3 h with an appropriate amount of enzyme in 20 μl of 25 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 0.1% Triton X-100. C12-NBD-Cer generated by the action of the enzyme and the remaining NBD-dodecanoic acid were separated by TLC, then analyzed, and quantified with a Shimadzu CS-9300 chromatoscanner as described above.

Purification of CDase—Livers, 181 g (wet weight) from 105 mice (Sea:ddy species, female), were homogenized with 300 ml of 0.25 M sucrose containing 1 mM EDTA (sucrose-EDTA). Debris was removed by centrifuging at 600 × g for 10 min. The supernatants were centrifuged at 27,000 × g for 30 min, and the precipitates were collected (membrane fraction). The neutral CDase was solubilized from the membrane fraction as described below. The precipitates were suspended in 480 ml of sucrose-EDTA, frozen at −80 °C immediately, and then thawed under running tap water. The suspension was centrifuged at 105,000 × g for 90 min after the freeze-thawing was repeated once more, and the supernatant was obtained (extract I). The sediment was resuspended in sucrose-EDTA, immediately frozen at −80 °C, and then thawed under running tap water. The freeze-thawing was repeated three times and then centrifuged at 105,000 × g for 90 min, and the supernatant was obtained (extract II). The extracts I and II were combined and pooled (solubilized enzyme fraction). Half of the enzyme solution (260 ml) was applied to a DEAE-Sepharose FF column (100 ml), pre-equilibrated with 20 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, containing 0.1% Lubrol PX (buffer A) at a flow rate of 4.7 ml/min, using a BPLC-600FC HPLC system (Yamazen Co., Osaka, Japan). The enzyme was adsorbed onto the column and eluted with buffer A containing 1 M NaCl. The fractions containing CDase activity were pooled (160 ml) and applied to a phenyl-Sepharose 6FF column (100 ml), pre-equilibrated with 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 (buffer B), containing 2 M NaCl at a flow rate of 5.2 ml/min, using a BPLC-600FC HPLC system. The enzyme was adsorbed onto the column that was washed with a decreasing NaCl gradients from 2 to 0 M. The enzyme was then eluted with an increasing Lubrol PX gradient from 0 to 1% in buffer B. The active fractions were pooled (310 ml), and applied to a chelating Sepharose FF column (chelated with Cu<sup>2+</sup>, 25 ml), pre-equilibrated with 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 0.1% Lubrol PX (buffer C) and 0.5 M NaCl at a flow rate of 4.7 ml/min, using a BPLC-600FC HPLC system. After washing the column with the same buffer and subsequently with buffer C, the enzyme was eluted with buffer C containing 2 M NH<sub>4</sub>Cl, whereas most of the contaminating proteins were eluted with buffer C containing 0.1 M imidazole. The fractions containing CDase activity were concentrated and replaced with buffer C using an Amicon concentrator using a PM-10 membrane. The enzyme solution (30 ml) was applied to a POROS HQ packed column (4.6 × 100 mm; PerSeptive Biosystems, Inc.) equilibrated with buffer C at a flow rate of 5.0 ml/min, using the BioCAD system. The enzyme was adsorbed onto the column and eluted with an increasing NaCl gradient from 0 to 0.5 M in buffer C. The active fractions were pooled and applied to a hydroxyapatite column (7.5 × 100 mm, Pentax Co., Tokyo, Japan) equilibrated with 1 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, containing 0.1% Lubrol PX and 0.2 M NaCl at a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min, using the BioCAD system. The enzyme was passed through the column, whereas contaminating proteins were adsorbed and eluted with 300 mM phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, containing 0.1% Lubrol PX. The active fractions were pooled, and an appropriate amount of sample was applied to a Superdex 200 HR column (10 × 300 mm, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) equilibrated with 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 0.3% Lubrol PX and 0.2 M NaCl at a flow rate of 0.5 ml/min, using the BioCAD system.

Protein Assay and PAGE—Protein content was determined by the bicinchonic acid method (Pierce) or SDS-PAGE using bovine serum albumin as the standard. SDS-PAGE was carried out according to the method of Laemmli (24). The proteins on PAGE were visualized by staining with silver-staining solution (25) and determined with a Shimadzu CS-9300 chromatoscanner with the reflectance mode set at 540 nm. Triton-PAGE was performed by a 4–20% acrylamide gradient gel (NOVEX) using 0.1% Triton X-100 instead of SDS.

Lectin Blotting Analysis—For lectin blotting, the purified enzyme preparations were subjected to SDS-PAGE and then transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes. The membranes were blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin in 10 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 100 mM NaCl (TBS) for 1 h with gentle shaking and then washed three times with TBS containing 0.05% Tween 20 (T-TBS). For specific detection of glycan moieties, the membranes were treated with HRP-labeled lectins (5 μg/ml) for 1 h at room temperature. After washing 5 times with T-TBS and then twice with TBS, the membrane was incubated in staining solution (0.05% 4-chloro-1-naphthol in 17% methanol containing 0.05% H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>). The reaction was stopped by washing the membrane with distilled water.

Glycopeptidase F Treatment—The purified CDase (27 ng as protein) was denatured in a boiling water bath for 3 min in 5 μl of 0.5 M Tris-HCl buffer, pH 8.6, containing 0.5% SDS and 0.75% β-mercaptoethanol. The denatured enzyme was then incubated at 37 °C for 18 h with 0.5 milliunit of glycopeptidase F in 25 μl of 0.1 M Tris-HCl buffer, pH 8.6, containing 1% (w/v) Nonidet P-40, 0.1% SDS, and 0.15% β-mercaptoethanol.

Measurement of Exoglycosidases, Proteases, and Other Enzymes—Exoglycosidases and proteases were assayed with p-nitrophenyl glycosides (26) and Azocoll (27), respectively, as the substrate. The activities on glycosphingolipids and sphingomyelin were measured using <sup>14</sup>C-labeled glycosphingolipids and sphingomyelin as the substrate, respectively, by the method described previously (23).

Amino Acid Sequencing—For concentration of the sample, the purified CDase was applied to a MonoQ column equilibrated with 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 0.3% Lubrol PX using a SMART System (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). The enzyme was adsorbed onto the column and eluted with the same buffer containing 0.4 M NaCl. The 94-kDa CDase protein (about 30 pmol) obtained was reduced and subjected to 10% SDS-PAGE. The CDase protein was visualized with a GelCode Blue Stain regent (Pierce), and digested with Lys-C at 37 °C in 50 μl 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 9.0, for 16 h. The digest was put on a reverse-phase HPLC column (2.1 × 150 mm) and eluted with a linear gradient from 0 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 0.1 ml/min by Gloosa/Hewlett-Packard HPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Amino acid sequences of the isolated peptides were determined by automated Edman degradation (sequencer model).

Neutral Ceramidase from Mouse Liver

**TABLE I**

Distribution of CDase activity from various mouse tissues

Each tissue was homogenized with 0.25 M sucrose. Debris was removed by centrifuging at 600 × g for 10 min, and the supernatant was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 27,000 × g for 30 min. The supernatant was pooled (A). The precipitate was suspended in 0.1% Triton X-100 in 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5 (B). Membrane fractions (%) were calculated as follows: (B) × 100/(A) + (B).

| Specific activity | Total activity | Membrane fraction |
|-------------------|----------------|--------------------|
| milliunits/mg     | milliunits/mouse | %                  |
| Liver             | 0.119          | 23.9               | 80.6                |
| Kidney            | 0.315          | 11.6               | 95.5                |
| Spleen            | 0.035          | 0.648              | 58.6                |
| Brain             | 0.200          | 3.00               | 88.3                |

**RESULTS**

Distribution of Neutral CDase Activity in Various Tissues—Neutral CDase activities were shown to be distributed in various mouse tissues when the activity was measured using C12-NBD-Cer as a substrate at pH 7.5 (Table I). Interestingly, the enzyme activity was detected in both membrane and soluble fractions, although the former was predominant (Table I). The distribution of neutral CDase in rat tissues was similar to that in mice, but very weak activities were detected in porcine tissues (data not shown). In this study, we used mouse livers as a starting material for the purification of neutral CDase, because total activity of the enzyme was superior to that of other tissues (Table I). The neutral CDase was solubilized from the membrane fractions of mouse liver by the freeze-thawing method without use of detergents as described under “Experimental Procedures.” The solubilized CDase fraction increased by repeated freeze-thawing, and the maximal activity was recovered when the procedure was repeated 6 times (Fig. 1A). Use of protease inhibitors during freeze-thawing procedures did not affect the efficiency of solubilization of the CDase (data not shown), suggesting that the release of the CDase from membrane fractions was not due to proteolysis. In contrast, CDase of mouse kidney was hardly solubilized by the freeze-thawing method (Fig. 1B). The kidney enzyme was solubilized using 0.1% Triton X-100. This result suggested that the neutral CDases from different origins somewhat differ in the mode of association with the membrane. Solubilization of the enzyme by the freeze-thawing method was demonstrated to be very effective for purification of the enzyme; i.e., more than 90% activity was recovered, whereas total protein was reduced to one-quarter (Table II).

Purification of Neutral CDase from Mouse Liver—The neutral CDase was purified from the solubilized CDase fraction by sequential chromatography on DEAE-Sepharose FF, phenyl-Sepharose 6FF, chelating Sepharose FF, POROS HQ, hydroxyapatite, and Superdex 200 HR. The CDase was finally purified more than 150,000-fold with an overall yield of 27.8% (Table II). The most effective step for the purification of the enzyme was chromatography using hydroxyapatite in which most of the contaminating proteins bound to the column in the presence of 1 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7.0, whereas the CDase passed through the column. By this chromatography, specific activity of the enzyme was increased at least by 20-fold with 85% recovery (Table II).

Purity and Molecular Mass of Mouse Neutral CDase—The final preparation of the CDase was completely free from the following enzymes: α- and β-galactosidases, α- and β-glucosidases, α- and β-mannosidases, β-N-acetylhexosaminidase, α-N-acetylgalactosaminidase, α-N-acetylglucosaminidase, α-L-fucosidase, proteases, sphingomyelinase, endoglycoceramidase, and sphingolipid Cer N-deacylase, as confirmed by determination of activity using 10 microunits of CDase for each assay and

FIG. 1. Solubilization of CDase by the freeze-thawing method. The membrane fraction of each mouse tissue was prepared by the method described under “Experimental Procedures.” Each fraction (36.9 and 10.8 mg of proteins for liver and kidney, respectively) was suspended in 2 ml of 0.25 M sucrose, frozen in ethanol with dry ice, and then thawed at 37 °C in the presence or absence of protease inhibitors (3 μg/ml leupeptin and pepstatin A, 1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride). Aliquots of 100 μl were withdrawn and centrifuged at 105,000 × g for 90 min. The supernatant obtained was used as the soluble fraction. The precipitate was suspended in 100 μl of 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 0.1% Triton X-100 and then used as the membrane fraction. CDase activity was determined by the method described under “Experimental Procedures.” Values are the mean for duplicate determination in the absence of protease inhibitors. A, mouse liver; B, mouse kidney. solid bar, activity of solubilized fraction; hatched bar, activity of insoluble fraction.

incubation with an appropriate substrate for 24 h. The purified enzyme gave a single protein band corresponding to a molecular mass of 94 kDa on SDS-PAGE after staining with silver-staining solution under both reducing (Fig. 2A) and nonreducing (data not shown) conditions, indicating that no subunit was linked by disulfide bonds in the enzyme molecule. The 94-kDa protein was stained strongly with HRP-labeled concanavalin A and R. communis agglutinin I and hardly with HRP-wheat germ agglutinin (Fig. 2B). Furthermore, treatment of the 94-kDa protein with glycopeptidase F resulted in generation of a 75-kDa protein (Fig. 2A, lane 2). These results indicated that the enzyme was highly glycosylated with N-linked glycans possessing mannosyl and galactosyl residues at the nonreducing ends. The elution profile of CDase activity on chromatography of Superdex 200 HR coincided with that of the 94-kDa band on SDS-PAGE, and no other co-eluted bands were observed (Fig. 3A). The purified 94-kDa protein was also subjected to Triton-PAGE. The distribution of CDase activity on Triton-PAGE corresponded to that of the band observed on silver staining (Fig. 3B). These results indicated that the 94-kDa band was a CDase. Interestingly, the elution profile from Superdex 200 HR (Fig. 3A) and the distribution of CDase on Triton-PAGE (Fig. 3B) also coincided with the activity capable of catalyzing the condensation of NBD-dodecanoic acid to sphingenine (d18:1) to generate NBD-dodecanoylsphingosine, indicating that the 94-kDa protein catalyzed reversible reactions in which the N-acyl linkage of ceramide is cleaved or formed.

Sequence Alignment of the Peptide Derived from Lysylendopeptidase Digestion of 94-kDa CDase—The 94-kDa CDase protein was digested with Lys-C and then fractionated with reverse-phase HPLC using a C18 column. One major peak obtained was sequenced using a protein sequencer, and 25 amino acid residues were determined. As shown in Fig. 4, the sequence was found to be homologous to that deduced from the gene encoding an alkaline CDase of *P. aeruginosa* (15). Furthermore, we found a sequence homologous to the sequence of 94-kDa CDase in a hypothetical protein encoded in the slime mold *Dictyostelium discoideum* using the GenBank™ data base (accession number U82513). However, no significant sequence similarities were found in other known functional proteins including acid CDases of humans (9) and mice (10).

Neutral Ceramidase from Mouse Liver

TABLE II  
Purification of neutral CDase from mouse liver  

| Steps                     | Total activity   | Total protein | Specific activity | Recovery | Purification |
|---------------------------|------------------|---------------|--------------------|----------|--------------|
|                           | milliunits       | mg            | milliunits/mg      | %        | -fold        |
| 600×g supernatant         | 3,032            | 31,720        | 0.0956             | 100      | 1            |
| 27,000×g pellet           | 2,904            | 14,352        | 0.202              | 95.8     | 2.11         |
| Freeze-thawing            | 2,709            | 3,208         | 0.844              | 89.3     | 8.83         |
| DEAE-Sephrose FF          | 2,560            | 1,293         | 1.98               | 84.4     | 20.7         |
| Phenyl-Sephrose 6FF       | 2,325            | 403           | 5.77               | 76.7     | 60.4         |
| Chelating Sepharose FF    | 2,276            | 13.7          | 166                | 75.1     | 1,736        |
| POROS HQ                  | 1,553            | 3.42          | 454                | 51.2     | 4,749        |
| Hydroxyapatite            | 1,307            | 0.124<sup>a</sup> | 11,048             | 43.1     | 115,565      |
| Superdex200HR             | 841              | 0.0582<sup>a</sup> | 14,453             | 27.8     | 151,182      |

<sup>a</sup> Estimated by SDS-PAGE as described in the text.

**A SDS-PAGE**


1   2
94 k
67 k
43 k
30 k
20.1 k


**B Lectin Blotting**


ConA    RCA I    WGA


comparison with that in the absence of the detergent (Fig. 5C). However, this detergent had little effect on the CDase activity below 0.5%. Sodium taurodeoxycholate at 0.2% and Triton X-100 at 0.1% also enhanced the enzyme activity by about 3- and 1.5-fold, respectively, although the enzyme activity gradually decreased beyond the optimum concentration of the detergents (Fig. 5C). It was noted that the CDase activity was rather inhibited by Triton X-100 at concentrations of 0.5% or above.

Inhibitor Effects—The effects of various inhibitors on CDase activity were evaluated at pH 7.5 using C12-NBD-Cer as the substrate in the presence of 1.0% sodium cholate. Among the metal ions tested, Hg<sup>2+</sup> completely inhibited the enzyme activity at 1 mM. At this concentration, Cu<sup>2+</sup> and Zn<sup>2+</sup> inhibited the enzyme activity by 55% and 85%, respectively. However, Mn<sup>2+</sup>, Mg<sup>2+</sup> and EDTA did not affect the enzyme activity even at 10 mM. In contrast to bacterial CDase (14), the mouse neutral CDase did not require Ca<sup>2+</sup> for its activity. Sphingenine (d18:1), sphinganine (d18:0), and N-oleylethanolamine inhibited CDase activity with IC<sub>50</sub> values of 390, 610, and 900 μM, respectively, whereas the inhibition of CDase activity by phytosphingosine (t18:0) or D-erythro-2-(N-myristoylamino)-1-phenyl-1-propanol was relatively weak (Fig. 5D).

Stability—No loss of activity was observed when the purified CDase was kept at 37°C for 24 h in 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 0.1% Lubrol PX. However, 18 and 70% of the activity were lost after being kept at 60°C for 10 and 60 min, respectively. The enzyme could be stored frozen at −80°C for at least 2 months without loss of activity.

Specificity of Neutral CDase—The substrate specificity of CDase of mouse liver was examined at pH 7.5 using various <sup>14</sup>C-labeled Cers, glycosphingolipids, and sphingomyelin in the presence of 1.0% sodium cholate. As shown in Table III, CDase hydrolyzed various species of N-acylsphingosines but not Gal-Cer, sulfatide, GM1a, or sphingomyelin. Thus, the enzyme seems to be responsible for the formation of free sphingoid bases *in vivo* but not to that of other lysosphingolipids, which are known to be accumulated in some sphingolipid storage diseases (28). Cers containing sphingenine (d18:1) were hydrolyzed much faster than those containing sphinganine (d18:0). Cers containing phytosphingosine (t18:0) were strongly resistant to hydrolysis by the enzyme. Among various fatty acid moieties of Cer tested, palmitic acid (C16:0) was found to be the most highly favored by this enzyme. It should be noted that the fluorescent substrate C12-NBD-Cer, of which NBD is covalently coupled to the amino group of ω-aminododecanoic acid (20), was hydrolyzed much faster than native Cers, whereas C6-NBD-Cer was somewhat resistant to hydrolysis by the enzyme (Table III).

Kinetics of Neutral CDase—The apparent hydrolysis of Cer by the CDase was strongly affected by the nature and amount of detergents (Fig. 5C). Thus, the kinetics of the neutral CDase were examined with C12-NBD-Cer and C16-<sup>14</sup>C-Cer using dif-

Neutral Ceramidase from Mouse Liver

**FIG. 3. Gel filtration chromatography and Triton-PAGE of the purified neutral CDase.** A, gel filtration chromatography on HPLC using a Superdex 200 HR column and SDS-PAGE of each fraction. HPLC was performed as described under “Experimental Procedures.” Aliquots of each fraction were analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Proteins were stained with silver staining solution, and the content of the 94-kDa protein was determined using a Shimadzu CS-9300 chromatoscanner with the reflectance mode set at 540 nm. Both hydrolysis and condensation activities were determined as described under “Experimental Procedures.” Standard proteins (molecular masses shown on the left) were: blue dextran (2000 kDa, $V_{o}$), $\beta$-amylase (200 kDa), apo-transferin (81 kDa), ovalbumin (43 kDa), carbonic anhydrase (30 kDa), and cytochrome-c (12.4 kDa). $V_{t}$ was determined using NaCl. ○, activity for hydrolysis; ●, activity for condensation; □, elution of the 94-kDa protein (OD at 540 nm). B, Triton-PAGE of the purified enzyme. 500 microunits of enzyme were analyzed by Triton-PAGE using a 4–20% gradient acrylamide gel (NOVEX) containing 0.1% Triton X-100 instead of SDS. Protein was stained with silver staining solution. Unstained gels were cut into 3-mm slices and crushed in Eppendorf tubes with 300 $\mu$l of 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 0.1% Triton X-100. After centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 1 min, the supernatant was used to determine the activities of both hydrolysis and condensation reactions. ○, hydrolysis activity; ●, condensation activity.

Mouse  
Dictyostelium  
Pseudomonas  

GYLPGQGPFVAGFASNLGDVSPT  
SSLPGTGPFIAAFGQSNEGDSPT  
--RKSG--FVAFAQTNAGNLSPNL  
*:*.**...* *::****  

**FIG. 4. The sequence of a fragment obtained from the 94-kDa CDase by digestion with lysylendopeptidase.** The 94-kDa mouse CDase (30 pmol) was digested with Lys-C and the digestion products were separated with HPLC using a reverse-phase column. A major peak was subjected to automated Edman degradation. The details are described under “Experimental Procedures.” The sequence obtained was aligned with those of an unknown protein of $D$. discoideum (GenBank™ accession number U82513) and an alkaline CDase of $P$. aeruginosa (15). Identical amino acids are indicated by boxes, and chemically similar amino acids are indicated by dots. Asterisks indicate that amino acid residues from three different sources are identical. Gaps inserted into the sequences are indicated by dashed lines.

Mode of Action of Neutral CDase—The purified 94-kDa CDase catalyzed not only hydrolysis (Fig. 7A, lane 5) but also synthesis of Cer (Fig. 7A, lane 3). Both reactions were entirely due to the action of the enzyme, because boiling of the enzyme at 100 °C for 5 min completely abolished both activities (Fig. 7A, lanes 4 and 6). It should be emphasized that both reactions were catalyzed by the same protein (Fig. 3, A and B). Interestingly, the optimum conditions for condensation reaction by the CDase were completely different from those for hydrolysis. Sodium cholate at 1.0% was most favorable for the hydrolysis reaction of C12-NBD-Cer by the enzyme (Fig. 5C). In contrast, NBD-dodecanoic acid was hardly condensed to sphingosine under these conditions (Fig. 7B). These results may in part explain why C12-NBD-Cer is a preferential substrate for the hydrolysis reaction by the CDase in the presence of 1.0% sodium cholate. For condensation, Triton X-100 was more favorable for the enzyme (Fig. 7B). It is noteworthy that the enzyme did not catalyze the palmitic acid-transfer reaction from palmitoyl-CoA to sphingosine (Fig. 7B).

DISCUSSION

We found that the neutral CDase could be solubilized from the membrane fraction of mouse liver by freeze-thawing without any addition of detergents (Fig. 1A). This procedure was effective for removing proteins tightly bound to membranes, which could be solubilized if detergents were employed resulting in a marked increase of specific activity. The release of some lysosomal and mitochondrial enzymes from membrane fractions by freeze-thawing has also been observed (29), although the precise location of the neutral CDase of mouse liver remains to be determined.

There have been many reports on the detection and partial purification of CDases since Gatt (3) partially purified the enzyme from rat brain. However, few CDases have been com-

Neutral Ceramidase from Mouse Liver

FIG. 5. General properties of neutral CDase. A, the pH dependence of CDase activity. Aliquots of 100 pmol of C12-NBD-Cer or C16-<sup>14</sup>C-Cer were incubated with an appropriate amount of enzyme at 37 °C for 30 min in 20 μl of 150 mM GTA buffer at the indicated pH containing the indicated detergents. ●, C16-<sup>14</sup>C-Cer with 0.2% sodium taurodeoxycholate (6 microunits); ○, C12-NBD-Cer with 1% sodium cholate (2.4 microunits); △, C12-NBD-Cer with 0.1% Triton X-100 (16 microunits). B, distributions of CDase activity at different pH in Triton-PAGE. The same experiment as described in Fig. 3B was performed but 150 mM GTA buffer at the indicated pH was used for the measurement of CDase activity. ●, pH 7.5; ○, pH 9.0; □, pH 4.0. C, effects of detergents on CDase. Aliquots of 300 pmol of C12-NBD-Cer were incubated with 7.2 microunits of enzyme at 37 °C for 30 min in 60 μl of 25 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing each detergent at the concentrations indicated. ○, sodium cholate; ●, sodium taurodeoxycholate; △, Triton X-100. D, effects of inhibitors on CDase. Aliquots of 300 pmol of C12-NBD-Cer were incubated with 7.2 microunits of enzyme at 37 °C for 30 min in 60 μl of 25 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 1% sodium cholate in the absence or presence of inhibitors at the concentrations indicated. ○, sphinganine (d18:1); ●, N-oleylethanolamine; △, sphinganine (d18:0); □, phytosphingosine (t18:0); ▲, D-erythro-2-(N-myristoylamino)-1-phenyl-1-propanol.

TABLE III  
Specificity of neutral CDase from mouse liver  

<sup>14</sup>C- or NBD-labeled sphingolipids (100 pmol each) were incubated with 5 microunits of purified CDase at 37 °C for 2 or 24 h in 20 μl of 25 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 1% sodium cholate. <sup>14</sup>C- or NBD-fatty acid and substrate were separated by TLC using chloroform, methanol, 25% ammonia (90/2 0/0.5, v/v) for various Cers and chloroform, methanol, 0.02% CaCl<sub>2</sub> (5/4/1, v/v) for glycosphingolipids and sphingomyelin as the developing solvent, respectively. TLCs were analyzed with an image analyzer for <sup>14</sup>C-substrates and TLC chromatoscanner with fluorescence detector for NBD-substrates, respectively. The extent of hydrolysis (%) was calculated as follows: fatty acid released × 100 / substrate remaining + fatty acid released. ND, not determined.

| Substrate                     | Structure (fatty acid/long-chain base) | Hydrolysis (%) |
|-------------------------------|----------------------------------------|-----------------|
|                               |                                        | 2 h             | 24 h           |
| N-Lauroylsphingosine          | C12:0/d18:1                            | 7.5             | 63.1           |
| N-Palmitoylsphingosine        | C16:0/d18:1                            | 18.3            | 92.5           |
| N-Stearoylsphingosine         | C18:0/d18:1                            | 13.5            | 82.9           |
| N-Palmitoylsphinganine        | C16:0/d18:0                            | 4.6             | 58.9           |
| N-Stearoylsphinganine         | C18:0/d18:0                            | 2.3             | 39.5           |
| N-Palmitoylphytosphingosine   | C16:0/t18:0                            | 0.9             | 5.3            |
| N-Stearoylphytosphingosine    | C18:0/t18:0                            | 0.5             | 1.9            |
| NBD-N-dodecanoylsphingosine   | NBD-C12:0/d18:1                        | 62.6            | 97.3           |
| NBD-N-hexanoylsphingosine     | NBD-C6:0/d18:1                         | 1.5             | 2.2            |
| GalCer                        | Galβ1–1′Cer                            | ND              | 0              |
| Sulfatide                     | HSO3–3Galβ1–1′Cer                      | ND              | 0              |
| GM1a                          | Galβ1–3GalNAcβ1–4(NeuAca2–3)Galβ1–4Glcβ1–1′Cer | ND              | 0              |
| Sphingomyelin                 | Choline phosphate Cer                  | ND              | 0              |

FIG. 6. Lineweaver-Burk plots for neutral CDase in the presence of sodium cholate (A) and Triton X-100 (B). A, C12-NBD-Cer at the indicated concentrations was incubated with 2.4 microunits of enzyme at 37 °C for 30 min in 20 μl of 25 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 1% sodium cholate. For C16-<sup>14</sup>C-Cer, the same conditions were employed, but incubation was performed at 37 °C for 120 min. ●, C12-NBD-Cer; ○, C16-<sup>14</sup>C-Cer. B, the same experiments as described in A were performed, but 12 microunits of enzyme were used in the presence of 0.1% Triton X-100 instead of sodium cholate. ▲, C12-NBD-Cer; △, C16-<sup>14</sup>C-Cer.

FIG. 7. Mode of action of neutral CDase. A, TLC showing the hydrolysis and condensation reactions catalyzed by the CDase. Lane 1, <sup>14</sup>C-palmitic acid standard; lane 2, C16-<sup>14</sup>C-Cer standard; lane 3, <sup>14</sup>C-palmitic acid + sphingosine + CDase; lane 4, <sup>14</sup>C-palmitic acid + sphingosine + boiled enzyme; lane 5, C16-<sup>14</sup>C-Cer + CDase; lane 6, C16-<sup>14</sup>C-Cer + boiled CDase. Lanes 3 and 4, 3 nmol of sphingosine were incubated with 100 pmol of <sup>14</sup>C-palmitic acid at 37 °C for 30 min in 20 μl of 25 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 0.1% Triton X-100 in the presence of 16 microunits of CDase or boiled (100 °C × 5 min) enzyme, respectively. Lanes 5 and 6, 100 pmol of C16-<sup>14</sup>C-Cer were incubated at 37 °C for 30 min in 20 μl of 25 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 1% sodium cholate in the presence of 16 microunits of CDase or boiled (100 °C × 5 min) enzyme, respectively. After incubation, the reaction mixture was applied to a TLC plate, which was developed with solvent I, and then analyzed with an imaging analyzer. B, time course for condensation reaction by CDase under different conditions. 3 nmol of sphingosine were incubated with 100 pmol of <sup>14</sup>C-palmitic acid, <sup>14</sup>C-palmitoyl-CoA, or NBD-dodecanoic acid at 37 °C for the indicated times in 20 μl of 25 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 7.5, containing 0.1% Triton X-100 or 1% sodium cholate in the presence of 56 microunits of enzyme. Products (<sup>14</sup>C-Cer and NBD-Cer) and remaining substrates (<sup>14</sup>C-palmitic acid and NBD-dodecanoic acid) were separated by TLC using solvent I and then analyzed with an imaging analyzer for <sup>14</sup>C-substances and a TLC-chromatoscanner for NBD-substances as described under “Experimental Procedures.” Incubation of CDase with ○, <sup>14</sup>C-palmitic acid + sphingosine (0.1% Triton X-100); △, <sup>14</sup>C-palmitic acid + sphingosine (1.0% sodium cholate); ●, NBD-dodecanoic acid + sphingosine (0.1% Triton X-100); ▲, <sup>14</sup>C-palmitoyl-CoA + sphingosine (0.1% Triton X-100).

pletely purified, and the mouse neutral CDase described in this study is clearly different from those reported to date in several aspects: molecular mass, subunit structure, glycosylation, and optimum pH. Bernardo *et al.* (8) purified the 50-kDa acid CDase from human urine, which is composed of two subunits with molecular masses of 13 (α) and 40 kDa (β). In contrast, the 94-kDa neutral CDase purified in the present study seemed to be a monomeric polypeptide with no subunits linked by disulfide bonds. Both CDases are likely to be glycoproteins with N-linked glycans, whereas the 70-kDa alkaline CDase from P.

aeruginosa is not glycosylated. Glycosylation of the 60-kDa alkaline CDase from guinea pig skin has not yet been examined (12). The substrate specificity of the neutral CDase of mouse liver was found to be similar to that of bacterial alkaline CDase (14), but was not fully compared with that from other mammalian sources, because of the lack of detailed information.

Gatt (3) reported that an acid CDase of rat brain also catalyzed the synthesis of Cer, utilizing free fatty acids and sphingoid bases. Gatt (3) also showed that palmitoyl-CoA could replace the free fatty acid as a substrate for synthesis of Cer, although an activity capable of splitting the acyl-CoA to CoA and free fatty acid was also found in the CDase preparation. Yavin and Gatt (4) suggested that acyl-CoA is not a direct substrate for Cer synthesis but donates its acyl portion only after hydrolysis to a free fatty acid, because an acyl-CoA-dependent acyl-transfer activity always coexisted with an acyl-CoA splitting activity. However, the question of whether a single protein can catalyze hydrolysis, condensation, and acyl-CoA-dependent acyl-transfer reactions remains unclear, because the enzyme has not yet been purified (22). In this study, we clearly demonstrated that the purified 94-kDa CDase of mouse liver catalyzed both hydrolysis and condensation reactions (Fig. 3, A and B) but did not catalyze an acyl-CoA-dependent acyl-transfer reaction (Fig. 7B). However, the physiological significance of the condensation reaction by the CDase *in vivo* is still unclear. It was also noted that the purified bacterial CDase also catalyzed both hydrolysis and condensation reactions (14).

Recently, we cloned the gene encoding an alkaline CDase of *P. aeruginosa* (15). Surprisingly, the sequence of a fragment of the mouse neutral CDase described in this paper was homologous to that of deduced amino acids of *Pseudomonas* CDase (Fig. 4), although no homologous sequences were found in the acid CDases from humans (9) and mice (10). Furthermore, a sequence homologous to the mouse neutral CDase was found in a hypothetical protein encoded in slime mold *D. discoideum* (Fig. 4). These results strongly suggested that the genetic information of neutral/alkaline ceramidases is conserved in organisms from bacteria to mammals.

CDase is thought to be a rate-limiting enzyme in generation of sphingosine and also might be that of sphingosine-1-phosphate, because sphingosine is only produced from Cer by the action of CDase and not by *de novo* synthesis (30). Thus, CDase could have a critical role in signal transduction mediated by sphingosine and sphingosine-1-phosphate. However, a question remains regarding which isoforms of CDase participate in ceramide/sphingosine/sphingosine-1-phosphate signaling. This study provided the basic information on the novel type of neutral CDase and will aid in elucidation of its roles in various physiological processes.

Acknowledgments—We thank Dr. Tatsuya Takano of Teikyo University for valuable suggestion for lysosomal enzymes and Dr. Takashi Nakamura of Kyushu University for encouragement throughout the course of this work.

**REFERENCES**

1. Hannun, Y. A., Obeid, L. M., and Wolf, R. A. (1993) *Adv. Lipid Res.* **25**, 43–64
2. Mathias, S., and Kolesnick, R. (1993) *Adv. Lipid Res.* **25**, 65–90
3. Gatt, S. (1963) *J. Biol. Chem.* **238**, 3131–3133
4. Yavin, E., and Gatt, S. (1969) *Biochemistry* **8**, 1692–1698
5. Sugita, M., Williams, M., Dulaney, J. T., and Moser, H. W. (1975) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **398**, 125–131
6. Al, B. J. M., Tiffany, C. W., Gomes de Mesquita, D. S., Moser, H. W., Tager, J. M., and Schram, A. W. (1989) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1004**, 245–251
7. Chen, W. W., Moser, A. B., and Moser, H. W. (1981) *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **208**, 444–455
8. Bernardo, K., Hurwitz, R., Zenk, T., Desnick, R. J., Ferlinz, K., Schuchman, E. H., and Sandhoff, K. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 11098–11102
9. Koch, J., Gartner, S., Li, C.-M., Quintern, L. E., Bernardo, K., Levran, O., Schnabel, D., Desnick, R. J., Schuchman, E. H., and Sandhoff, K. (1996) *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 33110–33115
10. Li, C-M., Hong, S-B., Kopal, G., He, X., Linke, T., Hou, W-S., Koch, J., Gatt, S., Sandhoff, K., and Schuchman, E. H. (1998) *Genomics* **50**, 267–274
11. Nilson, A. (1969) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **176**, 339–347
12. Yada, Y., Higuchi, K., and Imokawa, G. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 12677–12684
13. Morell, P., and Braun, P. (1972) *J. Lipid Res.* **13**, 203–210
14. Okino, N., Tani, M., Imayama, S., and Ito, M. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 14368–14373
15. Okino, N., Ichinose, S., Omori, A., Imayama, S., Nakamura, T., and Ito, M. (1999) *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 36616–36622
16. Coroneos, E., Martinez, M., Mckenna, S., and Kester, M. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 23305–23309
17. Nikolova-Karakashian, M., Morgan, E. T., Alexander, C., Liotta, D. C., and Merrill, A. H., Jr. (1997) *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 18718–18724
18. Ito, M., Kurita, T., and Kita, K. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 24370–24374
19. Mitsutake, S., Kita, K., Okino, N., and Ito, M. (1997) *Anal. Biochem.* **247**, 52–57
20. Tani, M., Kita, K., Komori, H., Nakagawa, T., and Ito, M. (1998) *Anal. Biochem.* **263**, 183–188
21. Tani, M., Okino, N., Mitsutake, S., and Ito, M. (1999) *J. Biochem. (Tokyo)* **125**, 746–749
22. Hassler, D. F., and Bell, R. M. (1993) *Adv. Lipid Res.* **26**, 49–57
23. Mitsutake, S., Kita, K., Nakagawa, T., and Ito, M., (1998) *J. Biochem. (Tokyo)* **123**, 859–863
24. Laemmli, U. K. (1970) *Nature* **227**, 680–685
25. Ohsawa, K., and Ebata, N. (1983) *Anal. Biochem.* **135**, 409–415
26. Li, Y.-T., and Li, S.-C. (1972) *Methods Enzymol.* **28**, 702–713
27. Moore, G. L. (1969) *Anal. Biochem.* **32**, 122–127
28. Rosengern, B., Manson, J.-E., and Svennerholm, L. (1987) *J. Neurochem.* **49**, 834–840
29. Bendall, D. S., and de Duve, C. (1960) *Biochem. J.* **74**, 444–450
30. Wang, E., Norred, W. P., Bacon, C. W., Riley, T. R., and Merrill, A. H., Jr. (1991) *J. Biol. Chem.* **266**, 14486–14490

LIPIDS AND LIPOPROTEINS:

Purification and Characterization of a Neutral Ceramidase from Mouse Liver: A SINGLE PROTEIN CATALYZES THE REVERSIBLE REACTION IN WHICH CERAMIDE IS BOTH HYDROLYZED AND SYNTHESIZED

Motohiro Tani, Nozomu Okino, Susumu Mitsutake, Tetsuo Tanigawa, Hiroyuki Izu and Makoto Ito

J. Biol. Chem. 2000, 275:3462-3468.
doi:10.1074/jbc.275.5.3462

Access the most updated version of this article at [http://www.jbc.org/content/275/5/3462](http://www.jbc.org/content/275/5/3462)

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the JBC Affinity Sites.

Alerts:
- When this article is cited
- When a correction for this article is posted

Click here to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts

This article cites 29 references, 12 of which can be accessed free at [http://www.jbc.org/content/275/5/3462.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/275/5/3462.full.html#ref-list-1)
