
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 2000 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**Molecular Cloning and Analysis of Strictosidine β-D-Glucosidase, an Enzyme in Terpenoid Indole Alkaloid Biosynthesis in Catharanthus roseus**

(Received for publication, August 12, 1999, and in revised form, October 25, 1999)

Arjan Geerlings‡§, Matias Martinez-Lozano Ibañez‡, Johan Memelink§, Robert van der Heijden‡, and Robert Verpoorte‡¶

From the ‡Division of Pharmacognosy, Leiden/Amsterdam Center for Drug Research, Leiden University, Gorlaeus Laboratories, 2300 RA Leiden and the §Institute of Molecular Plant Sciences, Leiden University, Clusius Laboratory, Wassenaarseweg 64, 2333 AL Leiden, The Netherlands

Strictosidine β-D-glucosidase (SGD) is an enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of terpenoid indole alkaloids (TIAs) by converting strictosidine to cathenamine. The biosynthetic pathway toward strictosidine is thought to be similar in all TIA-producing plants. Somewhere downstream of strictosidine formation, however, the biosynthesis diverges to give rise to the different TIAs found. SGD may play a role in creating this biosynthetic diversity. We have studied SGD at both the molecular and enzymatic levels. Based on the homology between different plant β-glucosidases, degenerate polymerase chain reaction primers were designed and used to isolate a cDNA clone from a Catharanthus roseus cDNA library. A full-length clone gave rise to SGD activity when expressed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. SGD shows ~60% homology at the amino acid level to other β-glucosidases from plants and is encoded by a single-copy gene. Sgd expression is induced by methyl jasmonate with kinetics similar to those of two other genes acting prior to Sgd in TIA biosynthesis. These results show that coordinate induction of the biosynthetic genes forms at least part of the mechanism for the methyl jasmonate-induced increase in TIA production. Using a novel in vivo staining method, subcellular localization studies of SGD were performed. This showed that SGD is most likely associated with the endoplasmic reticulum, which is in accordance with the presence of a putative signal sequence, but in contrast to previous localization studies. This new insight in SGD localization has significant implications for our understanding of the complex intracellular trafficking of metabolic intermediates during TIA biosynthesis.

Terpenoid indole alkaloids (TIAs)¹ form the largest group of alkaloids with >3000 representatives. About 15 of these are of pharmaceutical interest. Catharanthus roseus (L.) G. Don (Apocynaceae) is the commercial source of three such alkaloids, which have pharmaceutical applications. Ajmalicine is used to improve cerebral circulation, and the dimeric alkaloids vinblastine and vincristine are important antitumor drugs. The biosynthesis of these alkaloids has been studied quite extensively (for a review, see Ref. 1), among others, with the aim of applying this knowledge to improve the production in plants or plant cell cultures.

Some of the early steps leading to strictosidine, the key intermediate to all TIAs and quinoline alkaloids, have been studied in detail. Strictosidine is formed by the coupling of secologanin to tryptamine in a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme strictosidine synthase (EC 4.3.3.2). This enzyme is located in the vacuole (2). Tryptamine is formed from the amino acid tryptophan by the action of the cytosolic enzyme tryptophan decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.28), and secologanin is a glucoiridoid formed from geraniol. The expression of the Str and Tdc genes is induced by the plant stress signaling hormone MeJA (3). Furthermore, MeJA increases alkaloid production in cell suspension cultures (4) and seedlings (5) of C. roseus, showing that TIA-producing plants respond to stress by increasing their alkaloid content, among others, through increased gene expression.

It is unknown how strictosidine is channeled into various pathways that lead to the different types of TIA skeletons. The first step after strictosidine formation is removal of the glucose moiety, a reaction that is catalyzed by the enzyme strictosidine β-D-glucosidase (SGD; EC 3.2.1.105). Removal of glucose results in a highly reactive dialdehyde. Depending on the conditions (e.g. solvent, pH), various products can be formed from this dialdehyde. Under mildly acidic incubation conditions, the major product of SGD from C. roseus is cathenamine (6). Better understanding of this step may lead to the development of strategies to channel the flux toward the desired type of alkaloid.

Apart from its role in the biosynthesis of TIAs, which have putative functions in plant defense, SGD may also have a more direct role in defense. In young tissue of C. roseus, where strictosidine is the major TIA, SGD in combination with strictosidine is thought to be part of a damage-inducible biochemical defense system. Strictosidine is stored in the vacuole, whereas SGD is thought to be outside the vacuole (7, 29). Upon cell damage, SGD will rapidly convert strictosidine into the aglucon, which was shown to have antimicrobial activity (8). This proposed defense mechanism shows similarity to cyanogenesis occurring as a result of the damage-induced interaction between cyanogenic glucosides and their specific glucosidases (9).

* The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* The nucleotide sequence(s) reported in this paper has been submitted to the GenBank™/EBI Data Bank with accession number(s) AF112888.
* ¶ To whom correspondence should be addressed: Div. of Pharmacognosy, Leiden/Amsterdam Center for Drug Research, Leiden University, Gorlaeus Laboratories, P.O. Box 9502, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands. Tel.: 31-71-5274528; Fax: 31-71-5274511; E-mail: Verpoort@lacdr.leidenuniv.nl.
* ¹ The abbreviations used are: TIAs, terpenoid indole alkaloids; MeJA, methyl jasmonate; SGD, strictosidine β-D-glucosidase; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; AEC, anion-exchange chromatography; BisTris, 2-[bis(2-hydroxyethyl)amino]-2-(hydroxymethyl)propane-1,3-diol; HPLC, high-performance liquid chromatography; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; bp, base pair(s).

This paper is available on line at http://www.jbc.org

3052

Strictosidine β-D-Glucosidase

In this paper, we present the cloning of the SGD cDNA and the functional expression of the encoded protein in yeast. We show that *Sgd* expression is induced by MeJA with kinetics similar to those of two other genes acting earlier in TIA biosynthesis. Finally, via an *in vivo* activity staining method, we present evidence that SGD is localized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Purification of SGD—A *C. roseus* cell suspension culture (cell line A12A2) was harvested 7 days after subculturing and used to purify SGD. This cell culture was grown in MS basal salt medium (10) containing 100 mg/liter meso-inositol, 0.4 mg/liter thiamin, 2 mg/liter 1-naphthalene acetic acid, 0.2 mg/liter kinetin, and 30 g/liter sucrose. Purification of SGD was based on the purification scheme previously described (7). After protein extraction, a concentration step was performed on a Filtron concentrator containing a 30-kDa filter, followed by size-exclusion column chromatography (Sephacryl S-300). Instead of anion-exchange chromatography (AEC), a batch procedure with AEC material (Q-Sepharose) was used. The protein solution, in 50 mM Bis-Tris (pH 6.3; Sigma), was incubated with the AEC material for 1 h at 4 °C. The AEC material was then washed with 0.1 M NaCl in 50 mM BisTris (pH 6.3) on a glass filter. The bound protein was eluted from the AEC material with 0.4 M NaCl in the same buffer. This fraction contained all the SGD activity and was used for the subsequent purification steps. After ultracentrifugation (2 h at 100,000 × g), the pellet was resuspended in 4 ml of 50 mM BisTris (pH 6.3) and further purified by fast protein liquid chromatography using a Mono-Q HR 5/5 column (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) with an increasing NaCl concentration (from 0 to 1 M NaCl in 50 mM BisTris (pH 6.3)). The fractions containing SGD activity were pooled. Protein concentrations were determined by the method of Bradford (11). Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was carried out using precast gels (12.5% SDS and 4–15% native polyacrylamide) on a PhastSystem (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). Total visualization of proteins was carried out by silver staining (12). SGD was visualized on a native gel by incubation in 2 mM strictosidine solution in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6.3) (13). Glycosylation of SGD was determined with purified enzyme using the Glycotrack™ carbohydrate detection kit from Oxford Glycosystems.

Assays—Strictosidine was prepared enzymatically using immobilized strictosidine synthase (14). Quantitative SGD activity measurements were performed by HPLC (15). Qualitative SGD activity was determined by spotting 1 μl of protein solution on nitrocellulose. The protein bound to the nitrocellulose was then incubated at room temperature in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6.3) containing 2 mM strictosidine until a yellow spot became visible. This staining procedure is based on the visualization method previously described (13). Nonspecific β-glucosidase activity was measured by incubating the protein samples at 30 °C with the substrate p-nitrophenyl-β-D-glucopyranoside (2 mM in sodium phosphate buffer (pH 6.3)). After stopping the incubation with 1 M Na₂CO₃ (1:1), the absorption was measured at 400 nm. The activity was calculated using a molar absorptivity of 10,300 liter·mole⁻¹·cm⁻¹ after correction for a blank assay.

Strains and Plasmids—Escherichia coli strain XL1-Blue (Stratagene) was used as a plasmid host. Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain YPH500 (16) was used for expression of *Sgd*. The cDNA coding for SGD was inserted in the *BamHI* and *KpnI* sites of the shuttle vector pYPGE15 (17). This recombinant plasmid containing the gene *URA3* was transformed into yeast and selected on minimal synthetic dextrose medium without amino acids (nitrogen base, Difco) supplemented with 20 mg/liter Ade, 20 mg/liter His, 30 mg/liter Leu, 30 mg/liter Lys, and 20 mg/liter Trp. A control yeast culture contained the vector pYPGE15 without an insert.

cDNA Library—Total RNA was isolated from two *C. roseus* cell suspension cultures elicited at 1 and 4 h with 0.05% yeast extract (Difco). The total RNA extracted from both cultures was mixed in a 1:1 ratio. Poly(A)+ RNA was isolated using a Promega kit. The cDNA was synthesized and inserted in λ-ZAP using the ZAP-cDNA™ kit from Stratagene.

Polymerase Chain Reaction—Based on highly conserved regions (VT(L/I)FHWD and KG(Y/F)(Y/F)AWS) of plant β-glucosidases (18), two degenerate PCR primers were designed (GTNACNHTITTYCAYTGGGA and GACCANGCRWARWAICCYTT). One-hundred ng of λ-ZAP DNA containing *C. roseus* cDNA was used as a template. PCR cycles were carried out for 5 min at 94 °C, followed by 40 cycles of 1 min at 94 °C, 1 min at 35 °C, and 2 min at 72 °C in a Hybaid thermal reactor. PCRs were carried out with Taq DNA polymerase from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech. The PCR with primers T3 (AATTAACCCTCACTAAAGGG) and SgsecI (TTCGATCACTCAAGAAGGCC) was done under the same conditions as described above, but with an annealing temperature of 50 °C instead of 35 °C.

Isolation of a Full-length cDNA Clone Coding for SGD—Approximately 500,000 cDNA-containing phages were screened on nylon filters (Hybond-N, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) using a ³²P-radiolabeled probe based on a PCR product obtained with degenerate primers. A total of seven positive phages were isolated and converted to plasmids. Sequence analysis showed that all seven clones were identical, except for their length, and the longest clone was selected for further studies. Since this clone was not full-length, a second PCR was performed using primers T3 and SgsecI. This PCR product was digested with the restriction enzyme *SacII* and inserted in pBluescript II SK⁺. This 313-bp insert was found to be identical to the 5′-end of the previously isolated cDNA clone, except for an additional 72-bp part at the 5′-end containing a start codon. Using the restriction enzyme *SacII*, the 5′-part was inserted in front of the cDNA clone, making it full-length. The predicted amino acid sequence of SGD was analyzed using several computer programs available on the Internet. Homology to other amino acid sequences from the NCBI Protein Database was checked with the BLAST program (19). The PSORT program (20) was used to analyze the amino acid sequence for putative protein localization signals. Secondary structure prediction of the amino acid sequence was analyzed by the SAPS program (21).

DNA Sequencing—DNA sequencing was done using the T7 DNA sequencing kit from Amersham Pharmacia Biotech using primers T3 and T7. The complete cDNA coding for SGD was sequenced on both strands by making subclones in pBluescript II SK⁺ with different restriction enzymes.

Southern and Northern Blot Analyses—DNA isolated from *C. roseus* was digested overnight with the restriction enzymes *BglII*, *EcoRI*, and *EcoRV*. Root, stem, flower, and leaf tissues from three mature *C. roseus* plants were pooled, and RNA was isolated. Three-day-old *C. roseus* cell suspensions (MP183L) were treated for different lengths of time with 50 μM MeJA (Bedoukian Research, Danbury, CT) diluted in Me₂SO. Total RNA was isolated from tissue ground in liquid nitrogen by phenol/chloroform extraction and precipitation with LiCl at a final concentration of 2 M. The *Rps9* probe has been described previously (3). Southern and Northern blot analyses were performed as described (22) at high stringency with the following modifications. Northern blots contain 10 μg of total RNA/lane, and Southern blots 10 μg of digested DNA/lane. Prehybridization was done for 4 h in 1 M NaCl, 10% dextran sulfate (sodium salt, Sigma), 1% SDS, and 50 μg/ml denatured salmon sperm DNA at 65 °C. After overnight hybridization, blots were washed three times at 65 °C using 0.5× SSPE (saline/sodium phosphate/EDTA) and 0.5% SDS. Finally, the blots were washed once with 0.1× SSPE and exposed at –80 °C to Fuji RX films mounted on Kyokko intensifying screens or to phosphor screens. Expression levels were quantitated using ImageQuant software.

Localization Studies—For subcellular localization studies of SGD, the *C. roseus* cell line A11 was used (23). Cells were grown in medium containing 0.1 g/liter B5 salts, 0.1 g/liter meso-inositol, 10 mg/liter thiamin, 1 mg/liter pyridoxine, 1 mg/liter niacin, 1.86 mg/liter NAA, and 20 g/liter sucrose at 25 °C and 2800 lux on a gyratory shaker (120 rpm). Protoplasts and vacuoles were prepared as described (24). The marker enzymes alcohol dehydrogenase (cytosol), cytochrome-c oxidase (mitochondria), NADPH-dependent cytochrome-c reductase (ER), and catalase (peroxisomes) were measured as described previously (24). The marker enzyme for the vacuole (*α*-mannosidase) was determined as reported (25). Relative activity was calculated using the ratios between the activities of *α*-mannosidase (Man) and any other enzyme activity (*X*) in the vacuolar (vac) and protoplast (prot) preparations (relative activity of *X* = ((Man, prot × *X*, vac)/(Man, vac × *X*, prot)) × 100%). Peroxisomes were isolated using a sucrose gradient (26). Data presented are mean values of three independent experiments. *In vivo* SGD activity staining was performed using cells and protoplasts of *C. roseus* and cells of *Tabernaemontana divaricata*, *Cinchona officinalis*, and *Nicotiana tabacum*. Cells, mounted on a microscope slide, were incubated with 2 mM strictosidine (with or without 100 mM D-gluconic acid δ-lactone) and visualized under a Nikon Diaphot-TMD-EF inverted using white light and blue light excitation. This was achieved with a B2 filter system, consisting of a DM 510 dichroic mirror block, a 450–490-nm excitation filter, and a barrier filter of 520 nm. For electron microscopy, the sample was prepared by incubating cells of *C. roseus* with strictosidine (2 mM final concentration) for 20 min, followed by fixation in 2% glutaraldehyde and 2% formaldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4). After fixation, the cells were embedded by

Strictosidine β-D-Glucosidase

FIG. 1. Analysis of purified SGD from *C. roseus*. A, silver-stained SDS-polyacrylamide gel; B, silver-stained native polyacrylamide gel; C, SGD activity-stained native polyacrylamide gel of crude protein extract from *C. roseus*; D, SGD activity-stained native polyacrylamide gel of crude protein extract from a transgenic yeast culture expressing *Sgd*. Marker proteins are indicated in kilodaltons.

spinning in 2% low melting point agar. Sections of 70 nm were prepared with a Reichert Ultracut microtome and stained with lead and uranyl. The sections were examined with a JEOL 1010 transmission electron microscope, and pictures were taken on a Fine Grain Positive film (Eastman Kodak Co.).

RESULTS

Purification of Strictosidine β-Glucosidase—A total of 192 μg of SGD was purified from 850 g of *C. roseus* cultured cells, following in part a previously reported method (7). Using SGD activity staining on nitrocellulose, the SGD-containing fractions obtained after the chromatography steps were identified within 15 min, allowing purification within 1 day. Native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in combination with SGD activity staining of crude protein extract showed that most of the activity was present in the stacking gel (Fig. 1C), suggesting that SGD is membrane-associated. After protein purification on native polyacrylamide gel, three different protein bands (~250, 500, and 630 kDa) were observed (Fig. 1B), all three of which contained SGD activity. Under denaturing conditions, only one protein band of 63 kDa was observed (Fig. 1A), indicating that the purified SGD preparation consisted of aggregates of 4, 8, or 12 monomers. These different SGD aggregate isoforms were formed only during the last purification step (fast protein liquid chromatography on a Mono-Q column). Probably the high salt strength on this column partly disrupted SGD from the membranes, resulting in smaller SGD isoforms. Like many other β-glucosidases, SGD was found to be glycosylated (data not shown). Whether glycosylation is important for activity is unknown.

cDNA Cloning of Strictosidine β-Glucosidase—Using the purified protein, antibodies were raised against SGD. Although these antibodies were able to immunoprecipitate SGD, they were not very specific (data not shown). Attempts to obtain internal amino acid sequences of SGD were not successful due to poor cleavage of the protein by chemical reagents or proteases. For cDNA cloning of *Sgd*, another strategy was followed. Alignment of several amino acid sequences of plant β-glucosidases (18) identified two highly conserved regions (VT(L/I)F-HWD and KG(Y/F)(Y/F)AWS). Degenerate PCR primers based on these conserved regions gave a PCR product of the expected size of 1 kilobase. With this PCR product as a probe, a *C. roseus* cDNA library was screened. This procedure led to a complete cDNA clone of 1875 bp encoding a protein with high homology to β-glucosidases (Fig. 2). Since an in-frame stop codon is present upstream of the start codon, this cDNA clone is full-length, which was confirmed by the estimated mRNA size of ~1900 bp. To determine whether the clone encoded SGD, the cDNA clone was expressed in *S. cerevisiae*. This yeast culture was found to have a high SGD activity (2.52 ± 0.05 millikatals/g fresh

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| 1 | gagaaattaatattcattacttaaataagaagagaatATGGGATCTAAAGATGTCAG |
| S L V V A I S P A A E P N G N H S V P I |
| 61 | TCCCTGTGTGTGGCCATTTCTCCAGCTGCTGAACCAAATGGAAATCATTCTGTCCCCATC |
| P F A Y P S I P I Q P P R K H N K P I V H |
| 121 | CCATTGCGCTACCCCAGTATCCCCATTCAACCTAGAAAGCACAAACAAGCCCATCGTTCAT |
| R R D F P S D F I L G A G G S A Y Q C E |
| 181 | CGTCGAGATTTCCCCTCAGATTTCATTTGGTGCCGGAGGATCTGCTTATCAGTGTGAG |
| G A Y N E G N R G P S I W D T F T N R Y |
| 241 | GGTGCATATAATGAAGGCAACCAGGTTCCAGTATGGGATACCTTCAACAAACCAGATAT |
| P A K I A D G S N G N Q A I N S Y N L Y |
| 301 | CCAGCCAAAATAGCTGATGGGATCTAATGGCAATCAAGCCATCAATTCTTACAATTTGTAC |
| K E D I K I M K Q T G L E S Y R F S I S |
| 361 | AAGGAAAGATATCAAGATTATGAAGCAAACAGGCTTGGAAATCATATAGGTTTCAATTTC |
| W S R V L P G G N L S G G V N K D G V K |
| 421 | TGGTCAAGAGTATGGCCAGGTTGGAATCTATCCGGTGGAATGAATAAAGATGGTGTC AAG |
| F Y H D F I D E L L A N G I K P F A T L |
| 481 | TTCTATCATGACTTTATAGATGAGCTTCTAGCCAATGGCATCAAAACCCTTGGCAACTCTC |
| F H W D L P Q A L E D E Y G G F L S D R |
| 541 | TTCCACTGGGATCTTCCCCAAGCTCTTGAAGACGAGTATGGAGGCTTCTTGAGTGATCGA |
| I V E D F T E Y A E F C F W E F G D K V |
| 601 | ATTGTTGAAAGATTTTACGGAGTATGCAGAATTTTGC TTTTGGAAATTCGGTGACA AAGTA |
| K F W T T F N E P H T Y V A S G Y A T G |
| 661 | AAATTTTGGACACTTCAATGAACCACATACTTATGTTGCAAGTGGATATGCCACTGGT |
| E F A P G R G G A D G G K G E P G K E P Y |
| 721 | GAATTGGCACCAGGAAAGAGTGGTGCAGATGGCAAAGGGGAACCTGGCAAAGAACCC TAT |
| I A T H N L L L S H K A A V E V Y R K N |
| 781 | ATAGCGACACATAATTTACTCTTTCTCACA AAGCTGCTGTGGAAGTATATAGGAAAAAT |
| F Q K C Q G G E I G I V L N S M W M E P |
| 841 | TTTCAGAAATGTCAAGGAGTGAATTTGGAATTTGTACTTAATCAATGTGGATGGAGCCT |
| L N E T K E D I D A R E R G L D F M L G |
| 901 | CTCAATGAAACCAAAGAAGATATTGATGCTCGGGAAGGGTCTTGTATTCATGCTCCGA |
| W F I E P L T T G E Y P K S M R A L V G |
| 961 | TGGTTCATAGAGCCATTAACAACGGGTGAATACCCAAATCCATGAGAGCTCTTGTAGGA |
| S R L P E F S T E V S E K L T T G C Y D F |
| 1021 | AGCCGTCTTCCAGAATTTTCAACAGAAGTTTCCGAAAAATTAACAGGATGCTATGATTT |
| I G M N Y Y T T T Y V S N A D K I P D T |
| 1081 | ATCGGAATGAATTATTATACAACACTTATGTTTCTAATGCAGACAAAATTCCC GATAC T |
| P G Y E T D A R I N K N I F V K K V D G |
| 1141 | CCGGGTTACGAAAACAGATGCTCGAATTTATAAGAATATTTTGTCAAAAAGTTGATGGG |
| K E V R I G E P C Y G G W Q H V V P S G |
| 1201 | AAGGAA GTGCGCATTGGTGAACCGTGCTATGGGGGATGGCAGCATGTTGTCCATCTGGA |
| L Y N L L V Y T K E K Y H V P V I Y V S |
| 1261 | CTCTACAATCTCTGGTTTACACTAAGGAGAAATACCATGTTCCAGTATTATGTCTCA |
| E C G V V E E N R T N I L L T E G K T N |
| 1321 | GAATGTGGTGTGGTTGAGGAAAATAGA ACCAACATATTACTACAGAAGGTTAAACCAAC |
| I L L T E A R H D K L R V D F L Q S H L |
| 1381 | ATATTACTTACAGAAGCTCGTCACGATAAAACTCAGGGTTGATTTTCTACAAAGTCATCTC |
| A S V R D A I D D G V N V K G F F V W S |
| 1441 | GCTAGCGTGCGAGATGCTAT TGATGGTGTGAATGTA AAGGATTCTTGT TTTGGTCA |
| F F D N F E W N L G Y I C R Y G I I H V |
| 1501 | TTCTCGCAACCTCGAATGGGAATTTGGGATATATGCCGTATGGAAATATCCATGTT |
| D Y K T F Q R Y P K D S A I W Y K N F I |
| 1561 | GATTATAAAACTTTTCAAAGATATCCAAAGGATTCTGCCCATATGGTACAAGAATTTCATT |
| S E G F V T N T A K K R F R E E D K L V |
| 1621 | AGTGAA GGATTTGT TACGAATACAGCTAAAAAGAGATTC CGAGAAGAAGATAAACTAGTT |
| E L V K K Q K Y stop |
| 1681 | GAGTTAGTCAAGAAGCAA AAAACTATAAgcaagcg aatttgcatctgatgac cttttcttt |
| taactttttttttcttt ttaactcattttaactagatcattagatgatctgaac |
| 1801 | cgctcttttaaggtacttcaataagcaaattgccgaataaaatttgagtttgtatgc(a)18 |

FIG. 2. Nucleotide (1875 bp) and predicted amino acid (555 amino acids) sequences of the full-length cDNA clone encoding SGD from *C. roseus*. Asparagines indicated by asterisks are possible N-glycosylation sites. The PCR primers used to clone this cDNA were based on the underlined amino acids. Possible signal sequences (SRL, SHL, and KKQKY) are shown in boldface.

weight), whereas a control culture did not have any SGD activity. Therefore, this cDNA encodes SGD since, in *C. roseus*, no other glucosidases have been found that can accept strictosidine as a substrate (6, 27). The introduction and expression of *Sgd* did not affect the nonspecific glucosidase activity of the yeast strain. This is explained by the fact that SGD does not accept p-nitrophenyl-β-D-glucopyranoside, a nonspecific substrate for certain β-glucosidases (27). SGD expressed in yeast behaved in a way similar to that of the native plant enzyme. The product of strictosidine hydrolysis catalyzed by SGD expressed in yeast was cathenamine as determined by HPLC with diode array detection. As in *C. roseus*, SGD formed large complexes in *S. cerevisiae*, as visualized on activity-stained native polyacrylamide gel of crude protein extract, part of the activity was found to be present in the stacking gel, and part was found to be present in a high molecular mass complex (Fig. 1D).

Based on the deduced amino acid sequence of SGD, the highest homology was found with plant β-glucosidases (60% with prunasin hydrolase and amygdalin hydrolase from *Prunus serotina* and cyanogenic β-glucosidase from *Trifolium repens*). SGD has a predicted molecular mass of 63.0 kDa. This theoretical mass corresponds well to the estimated mass of SGD as found after protein purification, indicating that the degree of glycosylation must be low. Furthermore, computer

3054

**Strictosidine β-D-Glucosidase**

**BglII EcoRI EcoRV**
-21.2  
-5.1  
-2.0  
-1.4  

FIG. 3. Southern blot of genomic DNA isolated from *C. roseus*. The *Sgd* cDNA clone was used as a probe. Restriction endonucleases used for the DNA digestion were BglII, EcoRI, and EcoRV. The sizes of marker fragments are indicated in kilobases.

analysis predicted a possible subcellular localization in the ER. Southern blotting was performed to estimate the gene copy number of *Sgd* (Fig. 3). The presence of one (BglII), two (EcoRI), and three (EcoRV) bands visible on this blot can be explained since the *Sgd* coding sequence contains zero, one, and two recognition sites for BglII, EcoRI, and EcoRV, respectively. EcoRV digestion yielded a band of ~1200 bp, which is similar to what would be expected based on the nucleotide sequence of *Sgd*. These results demonstrate that SGD is most likely encoded by a single-copy gene.

The *Sgd* gene expression in different parts of the plant is shown in Fig. 4. The highest *Sgd* expression was found in the leaf, followed by the root (76% compared with the leaf), the stem (34%), and the flower (3%). The mRNA expression is in accordance with the SGD enzyme activity measured in the same samples from the different tissues (leaf, 360 ± 24 picokatals/mg of protein; root, 221 ± 30 picokatals/mg; stem, 164 ± 22 picokatals/mg; and flower, 62 ± 8 picokatals/mg).

The plant stress signaling hormone MeJA coordinately induces the expression of the *Tdc* and *Str* genes (3) and leads to increased TIA production in cell suspension culture (4) and seedlings (5). Consequently, we studied the jasmonate responsiveness of *Sgd* to see if this step of the alkaloid biosynthetic pathway is similarly regulated.

The effect of the addition of 50 μM MeJA on the expression of *Sgd* is shown in Fig. 5. MeJA transiently induced *Sgd* expression with maximum expression levels at 2–8 h and decreased mRNA level at 24 h. The kinetics of mRNA accumulation for *Sgd* were similar to those of *Tdc* and *Str* in the same RNA samples. The level of *Rps9* mRNA, encoding the 40 S ribosomal protein S9, was not affected by the addition of MeJA, indicating that gene expression in general was not affected. Thus, the results presented here demonstrate that *Sgd* expression is induced by MeJA with kinetics similar to those of two other genes acting prior to *Sgd* in TIA biosynthesis.

**Subcellular Localization of Strictosidine β-Glucosidase—** Strictosidine synthase is a vacuolar protein (2), indicating that strictosidine is synthesized inside the vacuole. It has been suggested that SGD is localized outside the vacuole, loosely bound to the tonoplast (28). The predicted amino acid sequence of SGD shows a C-terminal KKXKK sequence. Jackson et al. (29) showed that lysine residues at the C terminus may act as a retention signal for type I transmembrane ER proteins. Moreover, two internal sequences (SKL and SRL) were found in the

F S L R  
2.37  
1.35  

FIG. 4. Expression of *Sgd* in *C. roseus* tissues. *F*, flower; *S*, stem; *L*, leaf; *R*, root. *Sgd* mRNA levels in the left panel were quantified and are presented in the right panel (black bars) as a percentage of the leaf mRNA level. The SGD enzyme activity in the different parts of *C. roseus* (open bars) is also presented as a percentage of the SGD activity in the leaf. The sizes of marker RNAs are indicated in kilobases.

0 0.5 1 2 4 8 24  
*Tdc*  
*Str*  
*Sgd*  
*Rps9*  

FIG. 5. Methyl jasmonate induces *Sgd* expression with kinetics similar to those of two other TIA biosynthetic genes. *C. roseus* suspension-cultured cells were treated for various times (indicated in hours) with 50 μM MeJA. Northern blots were hybridized with *Sgd*, *Tdc*, *Str*, and *Rps9* cDNAs.

**TABLE I**  
Enzyme activities in protoplast and vacuolar preparations of *C. roseus* cells  

Relative activity shows the percentage activity found in the vacuolar preparation as compared with the vacuolar marker (*α*-mannosidase).

| Enzyme (location)               | Protoplast   | Vacuole    | Relative Activity |
|----------------------------------|--------------|-------------|-------------------|
| *α*-Mannosidase (vacuoles)       | 3.3 ± 0.4    | 6.72 ± 0.4  | 100               |
| Catalase (peroxisomes)           | 1770 ± 150   | 1680 ± 128  | 47                |
| Cytochrome-c oxidase (mitochondria) | 9.5 ± 0.4    | 0           | 0                 |
| Alcohol dehydrogenase (cytosol)  | 2.6 ± 0.5    | 0           | 0                 |
| Cytochrome-c reductase (ER)      | 10.3 ± 1.5   | 0           | 0                 |
| Strictosidine β-glucosidase     | 54.9 ± 4.1   | 13 ± 0.5    | 12                |

**TABLE II**  
Ratios between total enzyme activities in fractions I and II obtained after sucrose gradient separation of isolated organelles from *C. roseus*

In both fractions, no alcohol dehydrogenase (cytosol) or *α*-mannosidase (vacuole) activity could be detected.

| Enzyme (location)               | Fraction I/enzyme activity fraction II |
|----------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Catalase (peroxisomes)           | 1.36                                   |
| Cytochrome-c oxidase (mitochondria) | 0.18                                  |
| Cytochrome-c reductase (ER)      | 0.26                                  |
| Strictosidine β-glucosidase     | 0.37                                  |

amino acid sequence of SGD that may direct proteins to the peroxisomes. Although these sequences normally are present at the C terminus, they can also be found as internal sequences (30). To experimentally test the functional significance of the predicted signal sequences, subcellular localization studies were performed with a *C. roseus* cell line. First, vacuoles were isolated to test the hypothesis that SGD is bound to the tonoplast. Table I shows the relative activities of different marker proteins and SGD found in the vacuolar preparation. *α*-Man-

D-gluconic acid δ-lactone. In these protoplasts, no strictosidine was converted, as no yellow product appeared. HPLC analysis confirmed that, under these conditions, no strictosidine was hydrolyzed (data not shown). As no other glucosidases capable of converting strictosidine are present in *C. roseus* (6, 27), our results can only be explained by an SGD-dependent strictosidine conversion resulting in one or more yellow product(s). The same results were found for cells of *T. divaricata* and *C. officinalis*, containing SGD activity of 0.14 and 0.71 nanokatals/mg of protein, respectively (data not shown). As a control, *N. tabacum* cells, which do not have any SGD activity, were incubated with strictosidine. No yellow coloration was observed in these cells (data not shown), showing the necessity for SGD activity to convert strictosidine into the yellow product.

Cells of *C. roseus*, *T. divaricata*, and *C. officinalis* treated with strictosidine showed strong signals around the nucleus and in a diffuse network throughout the cytosol. This pattern is typically observed for ER-localized proteins using fluorescent detection of proteins either via fusion to green fluorescent protein (31) or immunofluorescence (32). In the latter report, protein localization around the nucleus was shown to depend on the presence of the canonical ER retention signal HDEL (32). In addition, the use of a monoclonal anti-HDEL antibody resulted in a similar fluorescent pattern around the nucleus (32). This shows that SGD is most likely an ER resident protein, which confirms the results from the computer prediction and the sucrose gradient analysis. This also indicates that the C-terminal KKXKX sequence of SGD might be functional as a signal for retention in the ER membrane. The ER residence can also explain the presence of SGD in high molecular mass complexes, as observed during purification of the protein. Since SGD is a membrane-bound protein, it most likely is present in microsomes after cell breakage. Cells of *C. roseus* incubated with strictosidine were also analyzed by electron microscopy. Fig. 6D shows a nucleus surrounded by the insoluble product of strictosidine conversion. This insoluble product is visible as an electron-dense precipitate and was not seen in cells not fed with strictosidine. These results support a subcellular localization of SGD in the ER.

**DISCUSSION**

SGD is believed to play a role in the divergence of the biosynthesis toward the various alkaloid structures found in different plant species (1). Our results indicate that SGD is encoded by a single-copy gene in *C. roseus* and that SGD is most likely located in the ER in three plant species with different TIA structural profiles. Thus, the biosynthetic divergence is unlikely to be due to a difference in cellular compartmentation of SGD between different plant species. Strictosidine hydrolysis by SGD leads to an unstable aglycon that converts spontaneously to cathenamine, the main product of the reaction. NMR studies identified some of the intermediates and side products of the reaction toward cathenamine (6). The presence of various reaction products formed after strictosidine conversion might be the basis for the divergence of the biosynthesis. In theory, all the intermediates formed are possible substrates for enzymes downstream in the biosynthesis. Future research should now focus on the identification of all the intermediates formed after strictosidine hydrolysis and the enzymes that may convert them. These enzymes could well be located close to the ER. This idea is supported by the fact that most of the strictosidine conversion products (e.g., cathenamine) are poorly soluble and thus are difficult to transport to other sites by simple diffusion.

TIA biosynthesis involves complex trafficking of intermediate metabolites between different cellular compartments, i.e., the chloroplast, the cytosol, and the vacuole (33). The localization

FIG. 6. Protoplasts prepared from *C. roseus* cells were incubated with strictosidine. A, visualized (magnification × 400) under normal light (the arrow indicates one nucleus); B and C, visualized under blue light excitation after 10 and 30 min of incubation, respectively; D, nucleus of a suspension-cultured *C. roseus* cell incubated with strictosidine for 20 min and visualized by electron microscopy (magnification × 18,750). The product of strictosidine conversion by the enzyme SGD is visible around the nucleus as an electron-dense precipitate (indicated by arrows). In other parts of the cell or in cells not fed with strictosidine, this precipitate was not present (data not shown).

nosidase was used as a vacuolar marker. Some SGD activity was found in the vacuolar preparations, although it was only 12% of the SGD activity present in the protoplasts. No contamination with cytosolic, mitochondrial, or ER marker enzymes could be found in the vacuoles. However, catalase (peroxisomal marker) was found in the vacuolar preparations. The presence of SGD in the vacuolar preparations might be due to contamination by other organelles and in particular by peroxisomes. Peroxisomes were therefore isolated using a sucrose gradient that resulted in two protein peaks at 53% (fraction I) and 47% (fraction II) sucrose. The activities of the marker enzymes for peroxisomes, mitochondria, and ER and the SGD activities of these two protein peaks are given in Table II. Other protein peaks at lower sucrose densities did not contain any concentrated marker enzyme activities. Fractions I and II had protein characteristics of peroxisomes, mitochondria, and the ER. Based on the ratios of the occurrence in these fractions, it is obvious that the peroxisomes are more concentrated in fraction I. As SGD is more abundant in fraction II, it is concluded that it is not a peroxisomal enzyme, meaning that the internal SRL and SKL sequences are not functional signals in this protein. Fraction II was found to contain concentrated ER marker enzyme, indicating a possible association of SGD with the ER.

To clarify the SGD subcellular localization, an *in situ* localization method was used. The enzymatic degradation of strictosidine by SGD gives a product that is almost insoluble in water, yellow-colored under white light, and yellow fluorescent after blue light excitation. This reaction has been used to detect SGD activity *in vitro* (13) and was used here to detect the reaction *in vivo*. Cells and protoplasts of *C. roseus*, displaying an SGD activity of 6.65 nanokatals/mg of protein, were incubated in 2 mM strictosidine and analyzed by microscopy (Fig. 6A). After 10 min, the product of SGD appeared around the nucleus, visible as a yellow area in protoplasts treated with strictosidine (Fig. 6B). A longer incubation resulted in a more intense coloration around the nucleus and eventually throughout the whole cytosol in a less dense coloration (Fig. 6C). During incubation, several samples were taken from the incubation mixture and analyzed for strictosidine by HPLC. A linear disappearance of strictosidine from the medium was observed, indicating that the cells and protoplasts imported large amounts of strictosidine. Protoplasts of *C. roseus* were also incubated with strictosidine and the glucosidase inhibitor

tion of SGD in the ER adds even more complexity to the biosynthesis. Apparently, routing of intermediate metabolites within cells as well as between cells (34) forms an important aspect of TIA biosynthesis. Metabolite transport therefore forms a potential rate-limiting step. Our results concerning the localization of SGD in the ER have implications for the transport of strictosidine. Strictosidine is synthesized and stored in the vacuole (2). To proceed in TIA biosynthesis, strictosidine has to be transported outside the vacuole and further to the ER, where it can be hydrolyzed by SGD. In seedlings of *C. roseus* (8) and hairy roots of *C. officinalis* (35), strictosidine was found to be present in relatively high amounts together with SGD activity. The presence of both strictosidine and SGD activity can now be explained by different subcellular localization of strictosidine and SGD, making the transport of strictosidine a rate-limiting step in the biosynthesis. The complex subcellular localization of enzymes in TIA biosynthesis raises the questions of whether specific carrier proteins for metabolic intermediates exist within the cell and whether transport is a process that is regulated by environmental and/or developmental signals. Developmental regulation appears to apply to intercellular transport, as suggested by the differential expression of early and later TIA biosynthetic enzymes in different leaf cell types (34).

Analysis of the expression of *Sgd* showed that it was induced by MeJA in a coordinate manner with the *Tdc* and *Str* genes. This finding further supports the notion that MeJA induces TIA biosynthesis in *C. roseus* (4, 5) by coordinately inducing the expression of multiple biosynthetic genes. It indicates that *Sgd* is controlled by common signal transduction components, including jasmonate-responsive transcription factors. A good candidate is the jasmonate-responsive AP2 domain transcription factor ORCA2, which regulates the jasmonate-responsive transcription of the *Str* gene (36). In view of the central regulatory roles of AP2 domain transcription factors in plant stress responses (37), ORCA2 could act as a central jasmonate-responsive regulator of TIA biosynthetic gene expression.

Acknowledgment—We thank Gerda Lamers (Institute of Molecular Plant Sciences, Leiden University) for electron microscopy.

**REFERENCES**

1. Verpoorte, R., van der Heijden, R., and Memelink, J. (1998) Alkaloids **50**, 453–508
2. McKnight, T.D., Bergey, D.R., Burnett, R.J., and Nessler, C.L. (1991) Planta (Heidelb.) **185**, 148–152
3. Menke, F.L.H., Parchmann, S., Mueller, M.J., Kijne, J.W., and Memelink, J.
4. Gantet, P., Imbault, N., Thiersault, M., and Doireau, P. (1998) Plant Cell Physiol. **39**, 220–225
5. Aerts, R.J., Gisi, D., De Carolis, E., De Luca, V., and Baumann, T.W. (1994) Plant J. **5**, 635–643
6. Stevens, L.H. (1994) Formation and Conversion of Strictosidine in the Biosynthesis of Monoterpenoid Indole and Quinoline Alkaloids. Ph.D. Thesis, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands
7. Luijendijk, T.J.C., Stevens, L.H., and Verpoorte, R. (1998) Plant Physiol. Biochem. **36**, 419–425
8. Luijendijk, T.J.C., van der Meijden, E., and Verpoorte, R. (1996) J. Chem. Ecol. **22**, 1355–1366
9. Jones, D.A. (1998) Phytochemistry (Oxf.) **47**, 155–162
10. Murashige, T., and Skoog, F. (1962) Physiol. Plant. **15**, 473–497
11. Bradford, M.M. (1976) Anal. Biochem. **72**, 248–254
12. Davis, L.G., Dibner, M.D., and Battey, J.F. (1986) in Basic Methods in Molecular Biology (Davis, L.G., ed) pp. 315–317, Elsevier Science Publishing Co., Inc., New York
13. Luijendijk, T.J.C., Stevens, L.H., and Verpoorte, R. (1996) Phytochem. Anal. **7**, 16–19
14. Pfitzner, U., and Zenk, M.H. (1982) Planta Med. **46**, 10–14
15. Stevens, L.H., Schripsema, J., Pennings, E.J.M., and Verpoorte, R. (1992) Plant Physiol. Biochem. **30**, 675–681
16. Sikorski, R.S., and Hieter, P. (1989) Genetics **122**, 19–27
17. Brunelli, J.P., and Pall, M.L. (1993) Yeast **9**, 1309–1318
18. Hughes, M.A. (1992) in Am. Chem. Soc. Symp. Ser. **533**, 151–169
19. Altschul, S.F., Gish, W., Miller, W., Myers, E.W., and Lipman, D.J. (1990) J. Mol. Biol. **215**, 403–410
20. Nakai, K., and Kanehisa, M. (1992) Genomics **14**, 897–911
21. Brandel, V., Bucher, P., Nourbakhsh, I., Blaisdell, B.E., and Karlin, S. (1992) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. **89**, 2002–2006
22. Memelink, J., Swords, K.M.M., Staehelin, L.A., and Hoge, J.H.C. (1994) in Plant Molecular Biology Manual (Gelvin, S.B., and Schilperoort, R.A., eds) pp. F1–F23, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands
23. Contin, A., van der Heijden, R., Lefeber, A.W.M., and Verpoorte, R. (1998) FEBS Lett. **434**, 413–416
24. Renaudin, J.P., Brown, H., Barbier-Brygoo, H., and Guern, J. (1986) Physiol. Plant. **68**, 695–703
25. Boller, T., Kende, H. (1979) Plant Physiol. (Bethesda) **63**, 1123–1132
26. Holtman, W.L., Heistek, J.C., Mattern, K.A., Bakhuizen, R., and Douma, A. (1994) Plant Sci. (Shannon) **99**, 43–53
27. Hemscheidt, T., and Zenk, M.H. (1980) FEBS Lett. **110**, 187–191
28. Stevens, L.H., Blom, T.J.M., and Verpoorte, R. (1993) Plant Cell Rep. **12**, 573–576
29. Jackson, M.R., Nilsson, T., and Peterson, P.A. (1990) EMBO J. **9**, 3153–3162
30. Olsen, J.L., and Harada, J.J. (1995) Ann. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. **46**, 123–146
31. Saito, T., Niwa, Y., Ashida, H., Tanaka, K., Kawamukai, M., Matsuda, H., and Nakagawa, T. (1999) Plant Cell Physiol. **40**, 77–87
32. Gomord, V., Denmat, L.A., Fitchette-Laine, A.C., Satait-Jeunemaitre, B., Hawes, C., and Faye, L. (1997) Plant J. **11**, 313–325
33. Meijer, A.H., Verpoorte R., and Hoge, J.H.C. (1993) J. Plant Res. Special Issue **3**, 145–164
34. St-Pierre, B., Vazquez-Flota, F.A., and De Luca, V. (1999) Plant Cell **11**, 887–900
35. Geerlings, A., Hallard, D., Martinez Caballero, A., Lopes Cardoso, M.I., van der Heijden, R., and Verpoorte, R. (1999) Plant Cell Rep., in press
36. Menke, F.L.H., Champion, A., Kijne, J.W., and Memelink, J. (1999) EMBO J. **18**, 4455–4463
37. Reichmann, J.L., and Meyerowitz, E.M. (1998) Biol. Chem. **379**, 633–646
