
Histochem Cell Biol (2000) 113:1–18

© Springer-Verlag 2000

---

**REVIEW**

Edgardo J. Arroyo · Steven S. Scherer

# On the molecular architecture of myelinated fibers

Accepted: 25 November 1999

---

**Abstract** Schwann cells and oligodendrocytes make the myelin sheaths of the PNS and CNS, respectively. Their myelin sheaths are structurally similar, consisting of multiple layers of specialized cell membrane that spiral around axons, but there are several differences. (1) CNS myelin has a “radial component” composed of a tight junction protein, claudin-11/oligodendrocyte-specific protein. (2) Schwann cells have a basal lamina and microvilli. (3) Although both CNS and PNS myelin sheaths have incisures, those in the CNS lack the structural as well as the molecular components of “reflexive” adherens junctions and gap junctions. In spite of their structural differences, the axonal membranes of the PNS and CNS are similarly organized. The nodal axolemma contains high concentrations of voltage-dependent sodium channels that are linked to the axonal cytoskeleton by ankyrin_G. The paranodal membrane contains Caspr/paranodin, which may participate in the formation of axoglial junctions. The juxtaparanodal axonal membrane contains the potassium channels Kv1.1 and Kv1.2, their associated β2 subunit, as well as Caspr2, which is closely related to Caspr. The myelin sheath probably organizes these axonal membrane-related proteins via trans interactions.

tron microscopy (Fig. 1) and slightly greater (18 nm) in fresh nerves by X-ray diffraction. The apposed membranes form the intraperiod line; the thin space that separates the membranes is contiguous with the extracellular space. The major dense line is contiguous with the cytoplasm. Although the myelin sheaths of the CNS and PNS differ in their cellular origins, anatomical details, and molecular constituents, they are thought to function similarly (Berthold and Rydmark 1995; Peters et al. 1991; Ritchie 1995; Sandri et al. 1982; Thomas et al. 1993).

Myelinated axons are completely covered by myelin sheaths except at nodes of Ranvier, the small gaps (less than 1 μm in length) directly exposed to the extracellular milieu. By reducing the capacitance and/or increasing the resistance, myelin reduces current flow across the internodal axonal membrane, thereby facilitating saltatory conduction at nodes. As shown in Fig. 2, owing to their differential staining, Ramon y Cajal (1928) deduced that nodes, paranodes, and incisures contained different molecular components. His observations presaged the later ultrastructural studies of the myelin sheath, which, together with recent investigations of the organization of its molecular constituents, provide new insights on the molecular architecture of myelinated fibers – the subject of this review.

---

## Introduction

Myelin is a multilamellar spiral of specialized membrane that ensheathes axons larger than 1 μm in diameter. It is one of the fundamental adaptations of vertebrates, comparable to the outer segments of rods and cones as a functional macromolecular structure mainly comprised of cell membrane. The periodicity of the mature myelin sheath is about 14 nm following conventional preparation for electron microscopy (Fig. 1) and slightly greater (18 nm) in fresh nerves by X-ray diffraction. The apposed membranes form the intraperiod line; the thin space that separates the membranes is contiguous with the extracellular space. The major dense line is contiguous with the cytoplasm. Although the myelin sheaths of the CNS and PNS differ in their cellular origins, anatomical details, and molecular constituents, they are thought to function similarly (Berthold and Rydmark 1995; Peters et al. 1991; Ritchie 1995; Sandri et al. 1982; Thomas et al. 1993).

Myelinated axons are completely covered by myelin sheaths except at nodes of Ranvier, the small gaps (less than 1 μm in length) directly exposed to the extracellular milieu. By reducing the capacitance and/or increasing the resistance, myelin reduces current flow across the internodal axonal membrane, thereby facilitating saltatory conduction at nodes. As shown in Fig. 2, owing to their differential staining, Ramon y Cajal (1928) deduced that nodes, paranodes, and incisures contained different molecular components. His observations presaged the later ultrastructural studies of the myelin sheath, which, together with recent investigations of the organization of its molecular constituents, provide new insights on the molecular architecture of myelinated fibers – the subject of this review.

---

## The PNS myelin sheath

Figure 3A shows a schematic PNS myelinated fiber. It depicts two internodes, one of which has been unrolled to reveal its trapezoidal shape. Most of the cytoplasm is external to the myelin sheath. As in other cell types, the rough endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus are found in a perinuclear distribution, and newly synthesized proteins largely travel in cytoplasmic channels on the outside of the myelin sheath (Gould and Mattingly 1990). The lateral borders of the Schwann cell cytoplasm are tipped with microvilli. These contain F-actin (Trapp et al. 1989b), and their membranes appear similar to those of internodal Schwann cells by freeze-fracture and have similar numbers of voltage-sensitive sodium chan-

E.J. Arroyo · S.S. Scherer (✉)
Department of Neurology, Room 460 Stemmler Hall,
36th Street and Hamilton Walk,
The University of Pennsylvania Medical Center,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
e-mail: scherer@mail.med.upenn.edu
Tel.: +1-215-5733198, Fax: +1-215-573-2029

Fig. 1A, B Ultrastructure of a myelinated fiber in the PNS (from a 4-day-old mouse). A This electron micrograph shows an axon, its myelin sheath (m), and basal lamina (arrowheads), as well as the inner (i) and outer (o) mesaxons. B This image shows that the compact myelin sheath is composed of alternating major dense (arrows) and intraperiod lines. Note the “double nature” of the intraperiod line (Revel and Hamilton 1969)

nels (Blanchard et al. 1985; Devor et al. 1993; Ritchie et al. 1990; Waxman and Black 1987). The tips of these microvilli contact the nodal axolemma (Ichimura and Ellisman 1991; Raine 1982), and the microvilli have inwardly rectifying K⁺ channels IRK1 and IRK3, which may allow them to accumulate K⁺ during axonal activity (Mi et al. 1996). In the CNS, the processes of “perinodal astrocytes” have been postulated to have a similar function as these microvilli (Black and Waxman 1988).

The myelin sheath itself can be divided into two domains, compact and non-compact myelin, each of which contains a non-overlapping set of proteins (Fig. 3B). Compact myelin forms the bulk of the myelin sheath; non-compact myelin is found in paranodes (the lateral borders of the myelin sheath) and in Schmidt-Lanterman incisures (the funnel-shaped interruptions in the compact myelin; Fig. 2B). By analogy to epithelial cells, the basal/abaxonal surface apposes the basal lamina (Fig. 1A). The Schwann cell basal lamina contains laminin 2 (comprised of α2/merosin, β1, and γ1 laminin chains), type IV collagens, entactin/nidogen, fibronectin, N-syndecan,

Fig. 2 Ramon y Cajal’s (1928) depiction of the nodal region (A) and incisures (B). With permission of Oxford University Press

Fig. 3A, B Schematic view of a myelinated axon in the PNS and the proteins of CNS and PNS myelin sheaths. A One myelinating Schwann cell has been unrolled revealing the regions that form non-compact myelin, the incisures and paranodes. Adherens junctions are depicted as two continuous (purple) lines; these form a circumferential belt and are also found in incisures. Gap junctions are depicted as (orange) ovals; these are found between the rows of adherens junctions. The nodal, paranodal, and juxtaparanodal regions of the axonal membrane are colored blue, red, and green, respectively. From Arroyo et al. (1999), with permission of Kluwer Academic Press. B CNS and PNS myelin sheaths contain distinct sets of proteins. In the PNS, compact myelin contains protein zero (P₀), peripheral myelin protein 22 kDa (PMP22), and myelin basic protein (MBP); in the CNS, it contains proteolipid protein (PLP), oligodendrocyte-specific protein (OSP), myelin-oligodendrocyte basic protein, and MBP. In the PNS, the non-compact myelin contains E-cadherin, myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG), and connexin32 (Cx32). Note P₀ and MAG have extracellular immunoglobulin-like domains (semicircles), and that OSP, PLP, PMP-22, and Cx32 all have four transmembrane domains

and glypican (Bunge 1993; Scherer 1996). The basal/adaxonal Schwann cell membrane contains the integrin α6β4 and dystroglycan, both of which probably bind to laminin 2 (Einheber et al. 1993; Feltri et al. 1994; Rambukkana et al. 1998; Saito et al. 1999). The apical/adaxonal surface opposes the axon and is highly enriched in myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG), which may bind to molecules on the axonal surface (Sawada et al. 1999; Yang et al. 1996). The lateral borders of the trapezoid define the paranodes; they taper slightly, so that the apical/adaxonal surface is furthest from the node. The inner and outer edges of the Schwann cell membrane, which contact the adjacent layer of the myelin sheath, are called the inner and outer mesaxon, respectively (Figs. 1A, 3A).

Adherens junctions (commonly referred to as “desmosome-like” junctions in the older literature) are found in both the inner and outer mesaxons as well as in paranodes and incisures (Fannon et al. 1995). Owing to the peculiar geometry of the myelin sheath, the adherens junctions in the paranodes and incisures form a series of radially arranged junctions; these typically span many layers and are most prominent in the outer layers of the myelin sheath (Fig. 4). Adherens junctions contain E-cadherin, a Ca²⁺-dependent cell adhesion molecule that forms “strand dimers”, which bind homophilically in trans with those on the apposing membrane (Shapiro et al. 1995). The cytoplasmic domain of E-cadherin binds α-catenin and β-catenin (Fannon et al. 1995), which link E-cadherin to the actin cytoskeleton (Nagafuchi et al. 1993). Thus, the junctions of incisures and paranodes, as well as inner and outer mesaxons, although tentatively identified as tight junctions by freeze-fracture electron microscopy (Sandri et al. 1982), are probably adherens junctions.

Fig. 4A–E Adherens junctions in the PNS myelin sheath.

A Teased fibers from an adult mouse sciatic nerve stained with a monoclonal antibody against E-cadherin. At the node (double arrowheads), the two bands of E-cadherin staining of adjacent paranodes is so close that they are difficult to separate at this magnification. E-cadherin is also found in incisures (arrowheads), and in mesaxons (arrows).

B–D Immunoelectron microscopy of paranodal E-cadherin in 7-day-old rats or mice. Scale bars 0.1 μm. From Fannon et al. (1995), with permission of Rockefeller University Press.

E A schematic drawing of adherens junctions in incisures. From Hall and Williams (1970), with permission of The Company of Biologists.

Gap junctions were occasionally noted between the rows of adherens junctions by freeze-fracture electron microscopy (Sandri et al. 1982). One gap junction protein, connexin32 (Cx32, also called GJβ1), is localized to the same places (Fig. 5; Bergoffen et al. 1993; Chandross et al. 1996; Scherer et al. 1995). Dye transfer studies on acutely isolated, living myelinated fibers from mice, rats, and frogs demonstrate a radial pathway of dye diffusion across incisures, from the outer/abaxonal to the inner/adaxonal cytoplasm (Balice-Gordon et al. 1998). Small molecular mass dyes, such as 5,6-carboxyfluorescein, create a pattern of labeling similar to a pair of “train tracks.” Each track consisted of a double line of fluorescence, separated by an unstained space that corresponded precisely to the location of compact myelin (Fig. 6). In contrast, the dye remained confined to the outer/abaxonal collar of cytoplasm following injection of a high molecular mass dye, such as 3000-Da rhodamine dextran, or injection of 5,6-carboxyfluorescein in the presence of a pharmacological blocker of gap junctions, such as α-glycerrhetinic acid.

These results provide functional evidence that gap junctions mediate a radial pathway of diffusion across incisures, and by extension, across paranodes, too. The adaptive significance of a radial pathway is that it provides a much shorter pathway, owing to the geometry of the myelin sheath. For example, an unrolled myelin sheath surrounding a 7-μm-diameter axon would be expected to be about 4 mm long, but only 2.3 μm thick (Friede and Bischhausen 1980). Thus, the radial length is 1700 times shorter, and, since diffusion in a plane is proportional to the square of the distance (Balice-Gordon et al. 1998), a radial pathway for diffusion could be about 3 million times faster than diffusion through the cytoplasm. The actual length of pathway through the incisures and paranodes may be many times longer than the thickness of the myelin sheath itself, but this correction does not alter the fundamental economy of this pathway. Disruption of this radial pathway may be the reason that mutations in Cx32 cause X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTX), an inherited demyelinating neuropathy (Bergoffen et al. 1993). Because the pathway and the rate of 5,6-carboxyfluorescein diffusion in cx32-null mice did not appear to be different than in wild-type mice (Balice-Gordon et al. 1998), there appear to be functional gap junctions in the myelin sheaths formed by another connexin(s), perhaps Cx26 and/or Cx43 (Mambetisaeva et al. 1999; Nagaoka et al. 1999; Yoshimura et al. 1996; Zhao and Spray 1998). The exis-

Fig. 5A, B Cx32 is localized to incisures and inner mesaxons. These are photomicrographs of a teased myelinated fiber immunostained with a combination of a mouse monoclonal antibody against rat Cx32 (A; fluorescein) and a rabbit antiserum against MAG (B; rhodamine). Cx32 and MAG immunoreactivity colocalize at incisures (arrows). MAG also surrounds the axon at the adaxonal Schwann cell surface (between arrowheads in B), whereas only a thin line of Cx32 staining is found at the adaxonal surface, probably at the inner mesaxon (arrows in panel A). Scale bar 10 μm. From Scherer et al. (1995), with permission of The Society for Neuroscience

Fig. 6A–G Dye diffusion results in labeling of adaxonal and abaxonal cytoplasm. Shown are images taken following pressure injection (40 psi, 250 ms pulses, 2 Hz for 1–3 min) of 5,6-carboxyfluorescein into a myelinating Schwann cell. A Schwann cell perinuclear region and incisures visualized with polarized light. B Following injection, the fiber was immunostained for MAG, which is localized to incisures and colocalizes with incisures identified with polarized light. C Image taken about midway through depth of the cell shows that dye occupies the outer and inner collar of Schwann cell cytoplasm creating a double train track pattern indicative of the radial diffusion of dye through incisures. Bracket indicates region enlarged in E. D Image taken about 5 μm above plane shown in G reveals fingers of cytoplasm on the surface of the cell; these are easily distinguished from the double train track pattern. E Enlargement of region indicated by brackets in C; arrowheads indicate position of the line across which intensity was mapped. F Histogram of intensity across line perpendicular to the long axis of the fiber at location indicated by arrowhead; scale is the same as in image shown in E. Doublet of peaks on either end of the histogram is the quantitative representation of the double train track pattern evident in the image shown in E. Vertical scale is 0–255 intensity levels. Scale bars 10 μm. From Balice-Gordon et al. (1998), with permission of The Rockefeller University Press

Fig. 7A, B Tetramers of P₀ form a lattice. A The extracellular domains of three P₀ tetramers viewed from the side, as they might emanate from their respective membrane surfaces (dotted lines; the blue-colored tetramer protrudes from the blue surface; the yellow tetramers from the yellow surface). The Trp28 side chains, which may intercalate into the opposite membrane bilayer, are shown in red. B Perpendicular view of this layer of crystal lattice. From Shapiro et al. (1996), with permission of Cell Press

that forms tetramers in cis (in the plane of the membrane) (Shapiro et al. 1996). As shown in Fig. 7, these tetramers interact with each other in trans. The analysis of P₀-null mice confirms the importance of P₀, as in these mice, Schwann cells form a multilamellar spiral of membrane around axons, but the myelin does not compact (Giese et al. 1992). P₀ heterozygous mice also develop a late-onset demyelinating neuropathy, indicating that even a modest reduction in the amount of P₀ causes instability of compact myelin (Martini et al. 1995b; Shy et al. 1997; Zielasek et al. 1996). Thus, one of the ways that mutations in the human P₀ gene could cause demyelination (CMT type 1B) is by a dose-related decrease in the amount of P₀ protein (Murakami et al. 1996; Scherer 1997; Suter and Snipes 1995).

PMP22 is a hydrophobic intrinsic membrane protein of unknown function and is much less abundant than P₀. Nevertheless, the amount of PMP22 in compact myelin is critical (Murakami et al. 1996; Suter and Snipes 1995).
Three copies of the PMP22 gene lead to CMT1A, the most common form, probably because of a modest increase in PMP22 in compact myelin (Vallat et al. 1996; cf. Hanemann and Muller 1998). Further, one copy of the PMP22 gene leads in a different kind of inherited demyelinating neuropathy, hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP), probably owing to a modest decrease of PMP22 (Vallat et al. 1996). The complete absence of PMP22, which has been created in *Pmp22*-null mice but has not yet been described in humans, leads to a severe demyelinating neuropathy in mice (Adlkofer et al. 1995). Heterozygous mice (*Pmp22*+/−) have a mild demyelinating neuropathy with the structural abnormalities found in HNPP (Adlkofer et al. 1997).

MBP is a cytoplasmic protein and comprises the bulk of the major dense line of compact myelin (Figs. 1, 3B), as shown by its absence in *shiverer* mice, which completely lack MBP because of a mutation in the MBP gene (Kirschner and Ganser 1980; Rosenbluth 1980). The reason that the PNS is not affected in *shiverer* mice may owe to the basic cytoplasmic domain of P₀, which may effectively substitute for MBP (Ding and Brunden 1995; Martini et al. 1995a).

The targeted disruption of UDP-galactose ceramide galactosyltransferase gene (*cgt*) provided the unprecedented opportunity to perturb the lipid components of myelin (Bosio et al. 1996; Coetzee et al. 1996, 1998). Because CGT is necessary for the synthesis of galactocerebroside and sulfatide, these glycolipids are completely absent in *cgt*⁻/⁻ mice, although the levels of glucoceramides are elevated. *cgt*⁻/⁻ mice develop neurological signs with the onset of myelination, and most die between 18 and 30 days. Surprisingly, except for the splitting of some CNS myelin sheaths, most CNS and PNS myelin sheaths have a normal ultrastructure. In spite of this normal appearance, axonal conduction velocity is dramatically slowed, which may be related to abnormal paranodes (Bosio et al. 1998; Dupree et al. 1998).

Thus, the myelin sheath has been likened to a liquid crystal, as perturbations in the stoichiometry of any one component can alter the entire structure. In the PNS, the layers of this liquid crystal are largely held together by P₀, which has been recently shown to interact with PMP22 (D’Urso et al. 1999). How lipids, PMP22, and the other minor intrinsic membrane proteins of compact myelin such as MAL (Frank et al. 1998; Schaeren-Wiemers et al. 1995) “fit” into the lattice of P₀ tetramers remains to be determined.

---

### The CNS myelin sheath

Myelination in the CNS differs from that in the PNS in several ways. Each oligodendrocyte makes multiple myelin sheaths; the number varies from tract to tract and appears to relate to the caliber of the axons. Oligodendrocytes make fewer sheaths in tracts containing large myelinated fibers; the result of axon–oligodendrocyte interactions rather than an intrinsic trait of the oligodendrocytes themselves (Fanarraga et al. 1998). Oligodendrocytes do not have a basal lamina or microvilli, and their “incisures” (Peters et al. 1991) do not have any distinguishing molecular markers such as Cx32, MAG, or E-cadherin. “Perinodal astrocytes” contact CNS nodes (Black and Waxman 1988), and are thought to have an analogous function to Schwann cell microvilli, although these may be glial progenitors rather than astrocytes (Butt et al. 1999).

The molecular components of the CNS myelin sheaths partially overlap with those of the PNS (Hudson 1990). Both contain high amounts of lipids, especially cholesterol and sphingolipids, including galactocerebroside and sulfatide (Kirschning et al. 1998; Schiff and Rosenbluth 1995). Similarly, in both the CNS and the PNS, compact myelin contains MBP and the adaxonal surface contains MAG (Trapp et al. 1989a). Like myelinating Schwann cells, oligodendrocytes also express Cx32, but mainly on their cell bodies and proximal processes; whether there is Cx32 in the paranodal myelin is not settled (Kunzelmann et al. 1997; Li et al. 1997; Scherer et al. 1995). Unlike myelinating Schwann cells, oligodendrocytes express Cx45 and are coupled to other oligodendrocytes as well as astrocytes (Dermietzel et al. 1997; Kunzelmann et al. 1997; Pastor et al. 1998; Rash et al. 1999; Robinson et al. 1993).

Proteolipid protein (PLP) is the main protein in CNS compact myelin. Like PMP22, PLP is a highly hydrophobic, intrinsic membrane protein (Fig. 3B) of unknown function. Further, either deletion or duplication of the human PLP gene results in CNS dysmyelination (Inoue et al. 1999; Nave and Boespflug-Tangu, 1996), demonstrating again the importance of gene dosage for myelin proteins. Remarkably, CNS myelin appears largely normal in *Plp*-null mice; a finding that underscores our lack of knowledge about the function of this protein. Although PLP is expressed at low levels by myelinating Schwann cells, mainly localized to non-compact myelin, PNS abnormalities appear to be uncommon in patients and mice with PLP mutations (Anderson et al. 1997; Garbern et al. 1997).

CNS myelin has a distinctive structural feature that is not seen in PNS myelin, the so-called “radial component” (Peters et al. 1991). The radial component is a series of radially arranged intralamellar strands that span the myelin sheath, usually in a single sector (Fig. 9). These intralamellar strands look like tight junctions, and recently have been shown to contain claudin-11/oligodendrocyte-specific protein (OSP), a member of a large family of distantly related tight junction proteins (Bronstein et al. 1997; Morita et al. 1999). The functional significance of the radial component is unknown, so that the analysis of OSP-null mice should be highly informative.

Oligodendrocytes express two proteins that are not expressed by Schwann cells, myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) on their outer cell membrane (Brunner et al. 1989; Johns and Bernard 1999) and myelin-oligodendrocyte basic protein (MOBP), in the major dense line of compact myelin (Holz et al. 1996;
Yamamoto et al. 1999). CNS myelin appears to form normally in *Mobp*-null mice, although it is more susceptible to the effects of chlorohexaphene, a “myelin toxin” (Yamamoto et al. 1999). The ultrastructure of the radial component is altered in *Mobp*-null mice. P₀ and PMP22 are not present in CNS myelin.

---

### Specializations at nodes

In spite of the differences between myelinating Schwann cells and oligodendrocytes and their myelin sheaths, the organization of the axon itself is quite similar in the PNS and CNS. Electron microscopy of the nodal axolemma reveals an electron-dense undercoating and a high density of large intramembranous particles (Peters et al. 1991; Quick and Waxman 1977; Sandri et al. 1982). Ritchie and Rogart (1977) first deduced that voltage-dependent Na⁺ channels were highly concentrated in the nodal axolemma as intact and homogenized nerve had the same amount of ³H-saxitoxin binding; this conclusion was subsequently confirmed by immunohistochemistry (Fig. 11; Ellisman and Levinson 1982; Elmer et al. 1990; Haimovich et al. 1984). Voltage-dependent Na⁺ channels belong to a multigene family, but the Sca8a/PN4 channel appears to be the main one expressed at nodes (Novakovic et al. 1999). The gene encoding this channel is mutated in mice with motor endplate disease (*med*), a recessively inherited disease (Burgess et al. 1995), and their nodes have been reported to have an altered ultrastructure (Rieger et al. 1984). Sca8a is probably not the only voltage-dependent Na⁺ channel at nodes, because nerve conduction velocity is only minimally slowed in *med* mice (Duchen and Stefani 1971; Rieger et al. 1984). An isoform of Na⁺/K⁺-ATPase was localized to the nodal axolemma of CNS axons in goldfish, and subsequently to the nodal axolemma in peripheral nerve (Ariyasu et al. 1985; Mata et al. 1991; Schwartz et al. 1981; Vorbrot et al. 1982; Wood et al. 1977). The high concentrations of Na⁺ channels and Na⁺/K⁺-ATPase is in keeping with the physiological function of the nodal membrane.

Other molecules have subsequently been localized to nodal axolemma, including ankyrin_G 480/270 kDa, as well as neurofascin and Nr-cell adhesion molecule (CAM), two members of the L1 family of CAMs. Both neurofascin and Nr-CAM have complex alternatively spliced isoforms, and only neurofascin isoforms containing a mucin-like domain and lacking one of the fibronectin domains are localized to nodes. Nodes contain two alternatively spliced isoforms of the ankyrin_G gene, ankyrin_G 480 and 270 kDa (Kordeli et al. 1990, 1995); these isoforms are distinguished by their membrane-binding domain composed of ANK repeats, a spectrin-binding domain, and a serine/threonine-rich domain (Zhang and Bennett 1996). As depicted in Fig. 8A, ankyrin interacts with the cytoplasmic domains of neurofascin, Nr-CAM, and voltage-dependent Na⁺ channels (Davis and Bennett 1994; Davis et al. 1993, 1996; Srinivasan et al. 1988). The binding of ankyrin_G 480/270 kDa to neurofascin can be modulated, as phosphorylation of a highly conserved tyrosine in neurofascin abolishes binding and increases its mobility in the membrane (Garver et al. 1997). In other cell types, ankyrin_G has been shown to interact with spectrin, which appears to be concentrated at nodes and paranodes (Koenig and Repasky 1985; Trapp et al. 1989b).

These data indicate that ankyrin_G is a multivalent protein and links voltage-dependent Na⁺ channels, neurofascin, and Nr-CAM, to the spectrin cytoskeleton. In keeping with this idea, inactivation of the ankyrin_G gene in the cerebellum reduces the amount of voltage-dependent Na⁺ channels and neurofascin in the initial segments of granule cells and Purkinje cells, respectively (Zhou et al. 1998a). Although these workers were unable to visualize a reduced number of Na⁺ channels in Purkinje cell initial segments, the diminished ability of these cells to initiate axon potentials is in keeping with this idea. These mice also revealed that ankyrin_G appears to be necessary for restricting the localization of neurofascin to initial segments of Purkinje cells. Since initial segments and nodes share many molecular characteristics, one expects that the nodal membranes of Purkinje cells are similarly affected.

The roles of neurofascin and Nr-CAM at nodes have yet to be defined. They may establish the location of nodes in developing nerves, as clusters of neurofascin and Nr-CAM appear before those of ankyrin and voltage-dependent Na⁺ channels (Lambert et al. 1997). Bennett and colleagues (Bennett et al. 1997; Davis et al. 1996; Lambert et al. 1997) have proposed that neurofascin and Nr-CAM have heterophilic interactions with other CAMs on the microvilli as depicted in Fig. 8B, in accord with the ultrastructural data showing tethering of the microvilli to the nodal axolemma (Ichimura and Ellisman 1991; Raine 1982). Other molecular interactions that may serve to localize Na⁺ channels to nodes have been proposed: the extracellular domain of the Na⁺ channel β2 subunit may interact in with tenascinC or tenascinR (Xiao et al. 1999), extracellular matrix molecules that have been reported to be localized to the nodal region in the PNS and CNS (Bartsch et al. 1993; ffrench-Constant et al. 1986; Rieger et al. 1986).

---

### Specializations at paranodes

At the paranode, the lateral edge of the myelin sheath spirals around the axon, forming the axoglial junction (Ichimura and Ellisman 1991; Sandri et al. 1982; Thomas et al. 1993). As shown in Fig. 10A, the paranodal loops of the myelin sheath contain rows of large particles that are in register with a double row of smaller particles on the axolemma; these particles are thought to connect the terminal loops to the axon. These axoglial junctions have also been called septate-like junctions, as they resemble invertebrate septate junctions (Einheber et al. 1997). Septate junctions may function similarly to vertebrate tight junctions, forming intercellular junctions that prevent the diffusion of small molecules and ions. Septate-like axoglial junctions, however,

Fig. 8 A Schematic depict on  
of the node, paranode, and jux-  
taparanode. B Schematic draw-  
ing of possible *cis* and *trans* in-  
teractions between the molecu-  
lar components of nodes, para-  
nodes, and juxtaparanodes  

A  

Microvilli  
Basal lamina  

juxtapara  
Kv1.1,1.2, β2  
Caspr2  

para  
Caspr1  

node  
Na⁺ channels  
ankyrin G  

PNS  
CNS  

Perinodal astrocyte  

B  

Compact Myelin  

Adaxonal Membrane  

K⁺ Channels  

Paranodal  
Myelin Loop  

Microvilli or  
Perinodal Astrocyte  

Caspr-2  

Contactin  

?  

?  

?  

?  

Tenascin-C  

Tenascin-R  

Kv1.1  

Kv1.2  

Kvβ2  

Spectrin  

Ankyrin-G  

Na⁺ Channel  

do not prevent the diffusion of lanthanum into the periax-  
onal space (Fig. 10B); hence are not “tight” in the conven-  
tional sense (Hirano et al. 1969; MacKenzie et al. 1984).  

As shown in Fig. 12, an intrinsic membrane glycopro-  
tein called Caspr or paranodin is localized to the paran-  
odal axolemma in myelinated fibers of the PNS and CNS  
(Einheber et al. 1997; Menegoz et al. 1997). The cyto-  
plasmic domain of Caspr contains a binding site for pro-  
tein 4.1, which, in turn, can bind to the actin cytoskele-  
ton. This potential linkage of Caspr to the cytoskeleton  
may relate to the finding that filaments appear to insert  
into the paranodal axolemma (Fig. 10A). The cytoplas-  
mic domain of Caspr also contains an SH3 binding site,  
which could allow Caspr to participate in signaling path-  
ways within the axon.  

Caspr belongs to the neurexin superfamily, which in  
mammals currently consists of the neurexins I, II, and III  
as well as Caspr2 (Bellen et al. 1998; Missler et al. 1998;

Poliak et al 1999). A homologue of the neurexin super-
family in *Drosophila*, called neurexin IV (even though it
has turned out to be more closely related to Caspr2 than
to neurexins I–III), and gliotactin are both localized to
septate junctions, along with coracle, a homologue of
protein 4.1 (Bellen et al. 1998). Flies lacking either
neurexin IV or gliotactin fail to form the glial septate
junctions that constitute the blood–nerve barrier (Auld et
al. 1995; Baumgartner et al. 1996). In mammals, some
alternatively spliced forms of neurexins bind to a family
of ligands known as the neuroligins, which are related to
gliotactin (Ichtchenko et al. 1996). Although it remains
to be shown whether neurexin IV and gliotactin interact
heterophilically to form septate junctions, this kind of in-
teraction has been postulated to occur between Caspr and
a neuroligin family member expressed in the paranodal
loops (Einheber et al. 1997; Menegoz et al. 1997), as de-
picted in Fig. 8B.

## Specializations at juxtaparanodes

By freeze-fracture electron microscopy, the axolemma in
the region extending 10–15 µm from the paranode con-
tains clusters of 5 or 6 particles (Miller and Da Silva
1977; Rosenbluth 1976; Stolinski et al. 1981, 1985; Tao-
Cheng and Rosenbluth 1984). The distribution of these
juxtaparanodal particles corresponds to the distribution
of delayed rectifying K⁺ channels (Chiu and Ritchie
1980), likely comprised of Kv1.1 and Kv1.2 and their as-
sociated β2 subunit (Mi et al. 1995; Rasband et al. 1998;
Vabnick and Shrager 1998; Wang et al. 1993; Zhou et al.
1998b). The size of the particles (10 nm in diameter)
compares well to the expected size of a Shaker-type K⁺
channel (Kreusch et al. 1998). Kv1.1 and Kv1.2 subunits
can freely mix in varying proportions to form tetramers,
the functional channels (Hopkins et al. 1994). Each
Kv1.1 or 1.2 subunit is associated with a Kvβ2 subunit
(Gulbis et al. 1999). Although Kv1.1 and Kv1.2 channels
appear to be concealed under the myelin sheath (Hilde-
brand et al. 1994; Kocsis et al. 1983), juxtaparanodal K⁺
channels are thought to have an important physiological
function, dampening the excitability of myelinated fi-
bers. The finding that *Kvl.l*-null mice have abnormal
impulse generators near the neuromuscular junctions
supports this idea (Smart et al. 1998; Zhou et al. 1998b).
Similarly, mutations in the human *Kvl.l* gene cause a
form of familial episodic ataxia that is associated with
ectopic impulse generators somewhere within the periph-
eral nerve (Adelman et al. 1995; Browne et al. 1994;
Brunt and Van Weerden 1990; Van Dyke et al. 1975;
Zerr et al. 1998).

Interestingly, freeze-fracture electron microscopy has
also revealed 12-nm diameter juxtaparanodal particles in
the adaxonal Schwann cell membrane (Stolinski and
Breathnach 1982; Stolinski et al. 1981). Perhaps these
are the inwardly rectifying and delayed rectifying “par-
anodal” K⁺ channels that have been identified electro-
physiologically (Chiu 1991), but whose molecular iden-


The OCR process has been completed, and the text is now formatted in Markdown. Let me know if you need further assistance!
Fig. 10 A An artistic view of the node and paranode. The nodal axolemma has many large particles, and the paranodal axolemma has rows of particles in register with the rows of particles in the paranodal loops. Transcellular bridges connect the Schwann cell microvilli, the node, and the paranodal loops to the paranodal axolemma. From Ichimura and Ellisman (1991), with permission of Kluwer Academic Press. B Lanthanum diffuses between the septate-like junctions of CNS axons. From Hirano and Dembitzer (1982), with permission of Kluwer Academic Press.

Fig. 11 Laser scanning confocal micrograph of Na⁺ and K⁺ channels. A myelinated fiber teased from rat sciatic nerve was labeled with a rabbit antiserum against voltage-gated Na⁺ channels (rhodamine) and a monoclonal antibody against Kv1.2 (fluorescein). Na⁺ channels are restricted to the node (double arrowheads), where Kv1.2 channels are found in the juxtaparanodal region (arrowheads) and apposed to incisures (arrowhead) and the inner mesaxon (arrow)

Fig. 12A–H Laser scanning confocal analysis of Caspr and Kv1.1 in the paranodal region. This myelinated fiber was teased from an adult mouse sciatic nerve and labeled with a rabbit antiserum against Caspr (rhodamine), a mouse monoclonal antibody against Kv1.1 (fluorescein), and a rat monoclonal antibody against NF-H (cyanine 5; blue). For clarity, the labeling from each antibody is shown separately in panels A–E; panels F, G show the merged images; panels B, D, G, H are enlargements. Note the separation of Caspr and Kv1.1 staining at the paranode (large arrows) and juxtaparanode (large arrowheads), and that the spiral of Caspr staining in the juxtaparanodal region fills a void in the Kv1.1 staining. In the internodal region, the double line of Kv1.1 staining flanks the single line of Caspr staining. NF-H staining is diminished at the node (double arrowheads). Scale bars 5 μm. From Arroyo et al. (1999), with permission of Kluwer Academic Press

Fig. 13A–F Laser scanning confocal analysis of Caspr in the internodal region. This myelinated fiber was teased from an adult mouse sciatic nerve and was labeled with a rabbit antiserum against Caspr (rhodamine), a mouse monoclonal antibody against Kv1.1 (fluorescein), and a rat monoclonal antibody against NF-H (cyanine 5; blue). For clarity, the labeling from each antibody is shown separately in panels A–C; panels D–F show the merged images. Note the double line of Kv1.1 staining flanking the single line of Caspr staining, and the diminished NF-H staining at an incisure (small arrowhead). Scale bars 5 μm. From Arroyo et al. (1999), with permission of Kluwer Academic Press

Caspr
Kv1.1
NF-H

ity remains to be established. These juxtaparanodal K⁺ channels have been posited to siphon K⁺ that accumulates in the periaxonal space during neural activity (Konishi 1990). Once inside the adaxonal cytoplasm of myelinating Schwann cells, the K⁺ could diffuse through gap junctions in the paranodes and incisures (Balice-Gordon et al. 1998; Konishi 1990). Just as the spatial buffering of the K⁺ has been considered an important function of astrocytes in the CNS (Orkand et al. 1966), it may be an essential role of gap junctions in the PNS myelin sheath.

A homologue of Caspr, Caspr2, was discovered in human and mouse brain cDNA libraries (Nagase et al. 1998; Poliak et al. 1999). It has a similar domain structure to Caspr, especially in the extracellular region, but the most carboxy terminal aspect of its intracellular domain contains a PDZ domain, like neurexins. Caspr2 is localized to the juxtaparanodes of myelinated fibers in both the CNS and the PNS, colocalizing with Kv1.1/1.2/β2. Furthermore, Caspr2 appears to be complexed with Kv1.1 and Kv1.2, probably mediated by a PDZ protein. Although transcellular connections between the juxtaparanodal axonal membrane and the myelin sheath have not been described, it is possible that Caspr2 has a binding partner, as has been posited for Caspr.

In our initial analysis of myelinated CNS axons, it appears that Caspr may appose the inner mesaxon as noted by Menegoz et al. (1997), whereas Kv1.1, Kv1.2, and Kvβ2 are not focally localized in the internodal region (Arroyo and Scherer unpublished observations).

## Conclusion

In summary, the intricate localization of numerous axonal proteins is highly related to the structure of the overlying myelin sheath. The most parsimonious explanation for their precise localization is that the myelin sheath organizes them; the converse seems unlikely. These data provide strong evidence that the myelin sheath organizes the underlying axonal membrane and provide further evidence for a central role of Schwann cells in the development of axonal specializations.

## Acknowledgements

Our work was supported by the NIH (NS37100, NS34528, and NS08075) and the MDA. I thank Drs. David Colman, Mark Ellisman, Susan Hall, and Shoichiro Tsukita, for contributing figures, and especially our colleagues and collaborators, Drs. Rita Balice-Gordon, Linda Bone, Bill Chiu, Suzanne Deschênes, Kurt Fischbeck, Albee Messing, David Paul, Ori Peles, and Lei Zhou.

## References

Adelman JP, Bond CT, Pessia M, Maylie J (1995) Episodic ataxia results from voltage-dependent potassium channels with altered functions. Neuron 15:1449–1454

Adlkofer K, Martini R, Aguzzi A, Zielasek J, Toyka KV, Suter U (1995) Hypermyelination and demyelinating peripheral neuropathy in pmp22-deficient mice. Nat Genet 11:274–280

Adlkofer K, Frei R, Neuberg DH-H, Zielasek J, Toyka KV, Suter U (1997) Heterozygous peripheral myelin protein 22-deficient mice are affected by a progressive demyelinating peripheral neuropathy. J Neurosci 17:4662–4671

Anderson TJ, Montague P, Nadon N, Nave KA, Griffiths IR (1997) Modification of Schwann cell phenotype with Plp transgenes: evidence that the PLP and DM 20 isoproteins are targeted to different cellular domains. J Neurosci Res 50:13–22

Ariyasu RG, Nichol JA, Ellisman MH (1985) Localization of sodium/potassium adenosine triphosphatase in multiple cell types of the murine nervous system with antibodies raised against the enzyme from kidney. J Neurosci 5:2581–2596

Arroyo EJ, Xu Y-T, Zhou L, Messing A, Peles E, Chiu SY, Scherer SS (1999) Myelinating Schwann cells determine the internodal localization of Kv1.1, Kv1.2, Kvβ2, and Caspr. J Neurocytol 28:333–347

Auld VJ, Fetter RD, Broadie K, Goodman CS (1995) Gliotactin, a novel transmembrane protein on peripheral glia, is required to form the blood-nerve barrier in *Drosophila*. Cell 81:757–767

Balice-Gordon RJ, Bone LJ, Scherer SS (1998) Functional gap junctions in the Schwann cell myelin sheath. J Cell Biol 142:1095–1104

Bartsch U, Pesheva P, Raff M, Schachner M (1993) Expression of janusin (J1–160/180) in the retina and optic nerve of the developing and adult mouse. Glia 9:57–69

Baumgartner S, Littleton JT, Broadie K, Bhat MA, Harbecke R, Lengyel JA, Chiquet-Ehrismann R, Prokop A, Bellen HJ (1996) A *Drosophila* neurexin is required for septate junction and blood-nerve barrier formation and function. Cell 87:1059–1068

Bellen HJ, Lu Y, Beckstead R, Bhat MA (1998) Neurexin IV, Caspr and paranodin – novel members of the neurexin family: encounters of axons and glia. Trends Neurosci 21:444–449

Bennett V, Lambert S, Davis JQ, Zhang X (1997) Molecular architecture of the specialized axonal membrane at the node of Ranvier. Soc Gen Physiol 52:107–120

Bergoffen J, Scherer SS, Wang S, Oronzi-Scott M, Bone L, Paul DL, Chen K, Lensch MW, Chance P, Fischbeck K (1993) Connexin mutations in X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Science 262:2039–2042

Berthold C-H, Rydmark M (1995) Morphology of normal peripheral axons. In: Waxman SG, Kocsis JD, Stys PK (eds) The axon. Oxford University Press, New York pp 13–48

Black JA, Waxman SG (1988) The perinodal astrocyte. Glia 1:169–183

Blanchard CE, Mackenzie ML, Sikri K, Allt G (1985) Filipin-steryl complexes at nodes of Ranvier. J Neurocytol 14:1053–1062

Bosio A, Binczek E, Stoffel W (1996) Functional breakdown of the lipid bilayer of the myelin membrane in central and peripheral nervous system myelin by disrupted galactocerebroside synthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:13280–13285

Bosio A, Bussow H, Adam J, Stoffel W (1998) Galactosphingolipids and axono-glial interaction in myelin of the central nervous system. Cell Tissue Res 292:199–210

Bronstein JM, Micevych PE, Chen K (1997) Oligodendrocyte-specific protein (OSP) is a major component of CNS myelin. J Neurosci Res 50:713–720

Browne DL, Gancher ST, Nutt JG, Brunt ERP, Smith EA, Kramer P, Litt M (1994) Episodic ataxia/myokymia syndrome is associated with point mutations in the human potassium channel gene, KCNA1. Nat Genet 8:136–140

Brunner C, Lassmann H, Waehneldt TV, Matthieu J-M, Lington C (1989) Differential ultrastructural localization of myelin basic protein, myelin/oligodendrocyte glycoprotein, and 2′,3′-cyclic nucleotide 3′-phosphodiesterase in the CNS of adult rats. J Neurochem 52:296–304

Brunt ERP, Van Weerden TW (1990) Familial paroxysmal kinesigenic ataxia and continuous myokymia. Brain 113:1361–1382

Bunge MB (1993) Schwann cell regulation of extracellular matrix biosynthesis and assembly. In: Dyck PJ, Thomas PK, Low PA, Poduslo JF (eds) Peripheral neuropathy, 3rd edn, vol 1. Saunders, Philadelphia, pp 299–316

Burgess DL, Kohrman DC, Galt J, Plummer NW, Jones JM, Spear B, Meisler MH (1995) Mutation of a new sodium channel gene, Scn8a, in the mouse mutant ‘motor endplate disease’. Nat Genet 10:461–465

Butt AM, Duncan A, Hornby MF, Kirvell SL, Hunter A, Levine JM, Berry M (1999) Cells expressing the NG2 antigen contact nodes of Ranvier in adult CNS white matter. Glia 26:84–91

Chandross KJ, Kessler JA, Cohen RI, Simburger E, Spray DC, Bieri P, Dermietzel R (1996) Altered connexin expression after peripheral nerve injury. Mol Cell Neurosci 7:501–518

Chiu SY (1991) Functions and distribution of voltage-gated sodium and potassium channels in mammalian Schwann cells. Glia 4:541–558

Chiu SY, Ritchie JM (1980) Potassium channels in nodal and internodal axonal membrane of mammalian myelinated fibres. Nature 284:170–171

Coetzee T, Fujita N, Dupree J, Shi R, Blight A, Suzuki K, Popko B (1996) Myelination in the absence of galactocerebroside and sulfatide: normal structure with abnormal function and regional instability. Cell 86:209–219

Coetzee T, Dupree JL, Popko B (1998) Demyelination and altered expression of myelin-associated glycoprotein isoforms in the central nervous system of galactolipid-deficient mice. J Neurosci Res 54:613–622

Davis JQ, Bennett V (1994) Ankyrin binding activity shared by the neurofascin/L1/NrCAM family of nervous system cell adhesion molecules. J Biol Chem 269:27163–27166

Davis JQ, McLaughlin T, Bennett V (1993) Ankyrin-binding proteins related to nervous system cell adhesion molecules: candi-

dates to provide transmembrane and intercellular connections in adult brain. J Cell Biol 121:121–133

Davis JQ, Lambert S, Bennett V (1996) Molecular composition of the node of Ranvier: identification of ankyrin-binding cell adhesion molecules neurofascin (mucin+ third FNIII domain-) and NrCAM at nodal axon segments. J Cell Biol 135:1355–1367

Dermietzel R, Farooq M, Kessler JA, Althaus H, Hertzberg EL, Spray DC (1997) Oligodendrocytes express gap junction proteins connexin32 and connexin45. Glia 20:101–114

Devor M, Govrin-Lippmann R, Angelides K (1993) Na⁺ channel immunolocalization in peripheral mammalian axons and changes following nerve injury and neuroma formation. J Neurosci 13:1976–1992

Ding Y, Brunden KR (1995) The cytoplasmic domain of myelin glycoprotein P₀ interacts with negatively charged phospholipid bilayers. J Biol Chem 269:10764–10770

Duchen LW, Stefani E (1971) Electrophysiological studies of neuromuscular transmission hereditary “motor end-plate disease” of the mouse. J Physiol 212:535–548

Dupree JL, Coetzee T, Blight A, Suzuki K, Popko B (1998) Myelin galactolipids are essential for proper node of Ranvier formation in the CNS. J Neurosci 18:1642–1649

D’Urso D, Ehrhardt P, Muller HW (1999) Peripheral myelin protein 22 and protein zero: a novel association in peripheral nervous system myelin. J Neurosci 19:3396–3403

Einheber S, Milner T, Giancotti F, Salzer J (1993) Axonal regulation of Schwann cell integrin expression suggests a role for α6β4 in myelination. J Cell Biol 123:625–638

Einheber S, Zanazzi G, Ching W, Scherer SS, Milner TA, Peles E, Salzer JL (1997) The axonal membrane protein Caspr/neurexin IV is a component of the septate-like paranodal junctions that assemble during myelination. J Cell Biol 139:1495–1506

Ellisman MH, Levinson SR (1982) Immunocytochemical localization of sodium channel distributions in the excitable membranes of *Electrophorus electricus*. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 79:6707–6711

Elmer LW, Black JA, Waxman SG, Angelides KJ (1990) The voltage-dependent sodium channel in mammalian CNS and PNS: antibody characterization and immunocytochemical localization. Brain Res 532:222–231

Fanarraga ML, Griffiths IR, Zhao M, Duncan ID (1998) Oligodendrocytes are not inherently programmed to myelinate a specific size of axon. J Comp Neurol 399:94–100

Fannon AM, Sherman DL, Ilyina-Gragerova G, Brophy PJ, Friedrich VL, Colman DR (1995) Novel E-cadherin mediated adhesion in peripheral nerve: Schwann cell architecture is stabilized by autotypic adherens junctions. J Cell Biol 129:189–202

Feltri ML, Scherer SS, Nemni R, Kamholz J, Vogelbacker H, Oronzi-Scott M, Canal N, Quaranta V, Wrabetz L (1994) β4 integrin expression in myelinating Schwann cells is ab-axonally polarized, developmentally-regulated, and axonally-dependent. Development 120:1287–1301

ffrench-Constant C, Miller RH, Kruse J, Schachner M, Raff MC (1986) Molecular specialization of astrocyte processes at nodes of Ranvier in rat optic nerve. J Cell Biol 102:844–852

Frank M, Haar ME van der, Schaeren-Wiemers N, Schwab ME (1998) rMAL is a glycosphingolipid-associated protein of myelin and apical membranes of epithelial cells in kidney and stomach. J Neurosci 18:4901–4913

Friede RL, Bischhausen R (1980) The precise geometry of large internodes. J Neurol Sci 48:367–381

Funch PG, Faber DS (1984) Measurement of myelin sheath resistances: implications for axonal conduction and pathophysiology. Science 225:538–540

Garbern JY, Cambi F, Tang XM, Sima AAF, Vallat JM, Bosch EP, Lewis R, Shy M, Sohi J, Kraft G, Chen KL, Joshi I, Leonard DGB, Johnson W, Raskind W, Dlouhy SR, Pratt V, Hodes ME, Bird T, Kamholz J (1997) Proteolipid protein is necessary in peripheral as well as central myelin. Neuron 19:205–218

Garver TD, Ren Q, Tuvia S, Bennett V (1997) Tyrosine phosphorylation at a site highly conserved in the L1 family of cell adhesion molecules abolishes ankyrin binding and increases lateral mobility of neurofascin. J Cell Biol 137:703–714

Giese KP, Martini R, Lemke G, Soriano P, Schachner M (1992) Mouse P0 gene disruption leads to hypomyelination, abnormal expression of recognition molecules, and degeneration of myelin and axons. Cell 71:565–576

Gould RM, Mattingly G (1990) Regional localization of RNA and protein metabolism in Schwann cells in vivo. J Neurocytol 19:285–301

Gulbis JM, Mann S, MacKinnon R (1999) Structure of a voltage-dependent K+ channel beta subunit. Cell 97:943–952

Haimovich B, Bonilla E, Casadei J, Barchi RL (1984) Immunocytochemical localization of the mammalian voltage-dependent sodium channel using polyclonal antibodies against the purified protein. J Neurosci 4:2259–2268

Hall SM, Williams PL (1970) Studies on the ‘incisures’ of Schmidt and Lanterman. J Cell Sci 6:767–791

Hanemann CO, Muller HW (1998) Pathogenesis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth IA (CMTIA) neuropathy. Trends Neurosci 21:282–286

Hildebrand C, Bowe CM, Remahl IN (1994) Myelination and myelin sheath remodelling in normal and pathological PNS nerve fibres. Prog Neurobiol 43:85–141

Hirano A, Dembitzer HM (1982) Further studies on the transverse bands. J Neurocytol 11:861–866

Hirano A, Becker NH, Zimmerman HM (1969) Isolation of the periaxonal space of the central myelinated nerve fiber with regard to the diffusion of peroxidase. J Histochem Cytochem 17:512–516

Holz A, Schaeren N, Schaefer C, Pott U, Colello RJ, Schwab ME (1996) Molecular and developmental characterization of novel cDNAs of the myelin-associated/oligodendrocytic basic protein. J Neurosci 16:467–477

Hopkins WF, Allen ML, Mouamed KM, Tempel BL (1994) Properties of voltage-gated K+ currents expressed in Xenopus oocytes by mKv1.1, mKv1.2 and their heteromultimers as revealed by mutagenesis of the dendrotoxin-binding site in Kv1.1. Pflügers Arch 428:382–390

Hudson L (1990) Molecular biology of myelin proteins in the central and peripheral nervous systems. Semin Neurosci 2:487–496

Ichimura T, Ellisman MH (1991) Three-dimensional fine structure of cytoskeletal-membrane interactions at nodes of Ranvier. J Neurocytol 20:667–681

Ichtchenko K, Nguyen T, Sudhof TC (1996) Structures, alternative splicing, and neurexin binding of multiple neuroligins. J Biol Chem 271:2676–2682

Inoue K, Osaka H, Imaizumi K, Nezu A, Takanashi J, Ariii J, Murayama K, Ono J, Kikawa Y, Mito T, Shaffer LG, Lupski JR (1999) Proteolipid protein gene duplications causing Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease: molecular mechanism and phenotypic manifestations. Ann Neurol 45:624–632

Johns TG, Bernard CCA (1999) The structure and function of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein. J Neurochem 72:1–9

Kirschner DA, Ganser AL (1980) Compact myelin exists in the absence of basic protein in the shiverer mutant mouse. Nature 283:207–210

Kirsching E, Rutter G, Hohenberg H (1998) High-pressure freezing and freeze-substitution of native rat brain: suitability for preservation and immunoelectron microscopic localization of myelin glycolipids. J Neurosci Res 53:465–474

Kocsis JD, Ruiz JA, Waxman SG (1983) Maturation of mammalian myelinated fibers: changes in action-potential characteristics following 4-aminopyridine application. J Neurophysiol 50:449–463

Koenig E, Repasky E (1985) A regional analysis of α-spectrin in the isolated Mauthner neuron and in isolated axons of the goldfish and rabbit. J Neurosci 5:705–714

Konishi T (1990) Voltage-gated potassium currents in myelinating Schwann cells in the mouse. J Physiol 431:123–139

Kordeli E, Davis J, Trapp B, Bennett V (1990) An isoform of ankyrin is localized at nodes of Ranvier in myelinated axons of central and peripheral nerves. J Cell Biol 110:1341–1352

Kordeli E, Lambert S, Bennett V (1995) Ankyrin_G: a new ankyrin gene with neural-specific isoforms localized at the axonal initial segment and node of Ranvier. J Biol Chem 270:2352–2359

Kreusch A, Pfaffinger PJ, Stevens CF, Choe S (1998) Crystal structure of the tetramerization domain of the Shaker potassium channel. Nature 392:945–948

Kunzelmann P, Blumcke I, Traub O, Dermietzel R, Willecke K (1997) Coexpression of connexin45 and -32 in oligodendrocytes of rat brain. J Neurocytol 26:17–22

Lambert S, Davis JQ, Bennett V (1997) Morphogenesis of the node of Ranvier: co-clusters of ankyrin and ankyrin-binding integral proteins define early developmental intermediates. J Neurosci 17:7025–7036

Li J, Hertzberg EL, Nagy JI (1997) Connexin32 in oligodendrocytes and association with myelinated fibers in mouse and rat brain. J Comp Neurol 379:571–591

MacKenzie ML, Ghabriel MN, Allt G (1984) Nodes of Ranvier and Schmidt-Lanterman incisures: an in vivo lanthanum tracer study. J Neurocytol 13:1043–1055

Mambetisaeva ET, Gire V, Evans WH (1999) Multiple connexin expression in peripheral nerve, Schwann cells, and Schwannoma cells. J Neurosci Res 57:166–175

Martini R, Mohajeri MH, Kasper S, Giese KP, Schachner M (1995a) Mice doubly deficient in the genes for P0 and myelin basic protein show that both proteins contribute to the formation of the major dense line in peripheral nerve myelin. J Neurosci 15:4488–4495

Martini R, Zielasek J, Toyka KV, Giese KP, Schachner M (1995b) Protein zero (P0)-deficient mice show myelin degeneration in peripheral nerves characteristic of inherited human neuropathies. Nat Genet 11:281–285

Mata M, Fink DJ, Ernst SA, Segal GJ (1991) Immunocytochemical demonstration of Na+, K+-ATPase in internodal axolemma of myelinated fibers of rat sciatic and optic nerves. J Neurochem 57:184–192

Menegoz M, Gaspar P, Le Bert M, Galvez T, Burgaya F, Palfrey C, Ezan P, Arnos F, Girault J-A (1997) Paranodin, a glycoprotein of neuronal paranodal membranes. Neuron 19:319–331

Mi HY, Deerinck TJ, Ellisman MH, Schwarz TL (1995) Differential distribution of closely related potassium channels in rat Schwann cells. J Neurosci 15:3761–3774

Mi HY, Deerinck TJ, Jones M, Ellisman MH, Schwarz TL (1996) Inwardly rectifying K+ channels that may participate in K+ buffering are localized in microvilli of Schwann cells. J Neurosci 16:2421–2429

Miller RG, Da Silva PP (1977) Particle rosettes in the periaxonal Schwann cell membrane and particle clusters in the axolemma of rat sciatic nerve. Brain Res 130:135–141

Missler M, Fernandez-Chacon R, Sudhof TC (1998) The making of neurexins. J Neurochem 71:1339–1347

Morita K, Sasaki H, Fujimoto K, Furuse M, Tsukita S (1999) Claudin-11/OSP-based tight junctions of myelin sheaths in brain and Sertoli cells in testis. J Cell Biol 145:579–588

Murakami T, Garcia CA, Reiter LT, Lupski JR (1996) Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and related inherited neuropathies. Medline 75:233–250

Nagafuchi A, Tsukita S, Takeichi M (1993) Transmembrane control of cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion. Semin Cell Biol 4:175–181

Nagaoka T, Oyamada M, Okajima S, Takamatsu T (1999) Differential expression of gap junction proteins connexin26, 32, and 43 in normal and crush-injured rat sciatic nerves: close relationship between connexin43 and occludin in the perineurium. J Histochem Cytochem 47:937–948

Nagase T, Ishikawa K, Suyama M, Kikuno R, Hirosewa M, Miyajima N, Tanaka A, Kotani H, Nomura N, Ohara O (1998) Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes XII. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res 5:355–364

Nave K-A, Boespflug-Tanguy O (1996) Developmental defects of myelin formation: from X-linked mutations to human dysmyelinating diseases. Neuroscientist 2:33–43

Novakovic S, Tzoumaka E, Tischler A, Sangameswaran L, Eglen R, Hunter J (1999) Sodium channel isoform localization in the peripheral nerve and changes following injury. Soc Neurosci Abstr 25:1732

Orkand PM, Nicholls JG, Kuffler SW (1966) Effect of nerve impulses on the membrane potential of glial cells in the central nervous system of amphibia. J Neurophysiol 29:788–806

Pastor A, Kremer M, Moller T, Kettenmann H, Dermietzel R (1998) Dye coupling between spinal cord oligodendrocytes: differences in coupling efficiency between gray and white matter. Glia 24:108–120

Peters A, Palay SL, Webster HD (1991) The fine structure of the nervous system, 3rd edn. Oxford University Press, New York, pp 494

Poliak S, Gollan L, Martinez R, Custer A, Einheber S, Salzer JL, Trimmer J, Shrager P, Peles E (1999) Caspr2, a new member of the neurexin superfamily is localized at the juxtaparanodes of myelinated axons and associates with K+ channels. Neuron 24:1037–1047

Quick DC, Waxman SG (1977) Ferric ion, ferrocyanide, and inorganic phosphate as cytochemical reactants at peripheral nodes of Ranvier. J Neurocytol 6:555–570

Raine CS (1982) Differences between the nodes of Ranvier of large and small diameter fibres in the P.N.S. J Neurocytol 11: 935–947

Rambukkana A, Yamada H, Zanazzi G, Mathus T, Salzer JL, Yurchenco PD, Campbell KP, Fischetti VA (1998) Role of α-dystroglycan as a Schwann cell receptor for *Mycobacterium leprae*. Science 282:2076–2079

Ramón y Cajal S (1928) Degeneration and regeneration of the nervous system. May RM (ed) Oxford University Press, Oxford

Rasband M, Trimmer JS, Schwarz TL, Levinson SR, Ellisman MH, Schachner M, Shrager P (1998) Potassium channel distribution, clustering, and function in remyelinating rat axons. J Neurosci 18:36–47

Rash JE, Yasumura T, Dudek FE, Nagy JI (1999) Oligodendrocytes have gap junctions almost exclusively with astrocytes: direct demonstration by freeze-fracture immunogold labeling of connexins Cx43, Cx30, Cx32, and Cx45. Soc Neurosci Abstr 25:1506

Revel J-P, Hamilton DW (1969) The double nature of the intermediate dense line in peripheral nerve myelin. Anat Rec 163:7–16

Rieger F, Pincon-Raymond M, Lombet A, Ponzio G, Lazdunski M, Sidman RL (1984) Paranodal dysmyelination and increase in tetrodotoxin binding sites in the sciatic nerve of the motor end-plate disease (*med/med*) mouse during postnatal development. Dev Biol 101:401–409

Rieger F, Daniloff JK, Pincon-Raymond M, Crossin KC, Grumet M, Edelman GM (1986) Neuronal cell adhesion molecules and cytotoactin are colocalized at the node of Ranvier. J Cell Biol 103:379–391

Ritchie JM (1995) Physiology of axons. In: Waxman SG, Kocsis JD, Stys PK (eds) The axon. Oxford University Press, New York, pp 68–96

Ritchie JM, Rogart RP (1977) Density of sodium channels in mammalian myelinated nerve fibers and nature of the axonal membrane under the myelin sheath. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 74:211–215

Ritchie JM, Black JA, Waxman SG, Angelides KJ (1990) Sodium channels in the cytoplasm of Schwann cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:9290–9294

Robinson, SR, Hampson ECGM, Munro MN, Vaney DI (1993) Unidirectional coupling of gap junctions between neuroglia. Science 262:1072–1074

Rosenbluth J (1976) Intramembranous particle distribution at the node of Ranvier and adjacent axolemma in myelinated axons of the frog brain. J Neurocytol 5: 731–745

Rosenbluth J (1980) Peripheral myelin in the mouse mutant *shiverer*. J Comp Neurol 193:729–739

Saito F, Masaki T, Kamakura K, Anderson LVB, Fujita S, FukutaOhi H, Sunada Y, Shimizu T, Matsumura K (1999) Characterization of the transmembrane molecular architecture of the dystroglycan complex in Schwann cells. J Biol Chem 274:8240–8246

Sandri C, Van Buren JM, Akert K (1982) Membrane morphology of the vertebrate nervous system. Prog Brain Res 46:201–265

Sawada N, Ishida H, Collins BE, Schnaar RL, Kiso M (1999) Ganglioside GD1 alpha analogues as high-affinity ligands for myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG). Carbohydr Res 316: 1–5

Schaeren-Wiemers N, Valenzuela DM, Frank M, Schwab ME (1995) Characterization of a rat gene, rMAL, encoding a protein with four hydrophobic domains in central and peripheral myelin. J Neurosci 15:5753–5764

Scherer SS (1996) Molecular specializations at nodes and paranodes in peripheral nerve. Microsc Res Technique 34:452–461

Scherer SS (1997) Molecular genetics of demyelination: new wrinkles on an old membrane. Neuron 18:13–16

Scherer SS, Deschênes SM, Xu Y-T, Grinspan JB, Fischbeck KH, Paul DL (1995) Connexin32 is a myelin-related protein in the PNS and CNS. J Neurosci 15:8281–8294

Schiff R, Rosenbluth J (1995) Distribution of myelin lipid antigens in adult and developing rat spinal cord. Brain Res 686: 143–149

Schwartz M, Ernst SA, Siegel GJ, Agranoff B (1981) Immunocytochemical localization of (Na⁺, K⁺)-ATPase in the goldfish optic nerve. J Neurochem 36:107–115

Shapiro L, Fannon AM, Kwong PD, Thompson A, Lehmann MS, Grubel G, Legrand J-F, Als-Nielsen J, Colman DR, Hendrickson WA (1995) Structural basis of cell–cell adhesion by cadherins. Nature 374:327–337

Shapiro L, Doyle JP, Hensley P, Colman DR, Hendrickson WA (1996) Crystal structure of the extracellular domain from P₀, the major structural protein of peripheral nerve myelin. Neuron 17:435–449

Shy ME, Arroyo E, Sladky J, Menichella D, Jiang H, Kamholz J, Scherer SS (1997) Heterozygous P₀ knockout mice develop a peripheral neuropathy that resembles chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP). J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 56:811–821

Smart SL, Lopantsev V, Zhang CL, Robbins CA, Wang H, Chiu SY, Schwartzkroin PA, Messing A, Tempel BL (1998) Deletion of the Kv1.1 potassium channel causes epilepsy in mice. Neuron 20:809–819

Srinivasan Y, Elmer L, Davis H, Bennett V, Angelides K (1988) Ankyrin and spectrin associate with voltage-dependent sodium channels in brain. Nature 333:177–180

Stolinski C, Breathnach AS (1982) Freeze-fracture replication of mammalian peripheral nerve – a review. J Neurol Sci 57: 1–28

Stolinski C, Breathnach AS, Martin B, Thomas PK, King RMH, Gabriel G (1981) Associated particle aggregates in juxtaparanodal axolemma and adaxonal Schwann cell membrane of rat peripheral nerve. J Neurocytol 10:679–691

Stolinski C, Breathnach AS, Thomas PK, Gabriel G, King RMH (1985) Distribution of particle aggregates in the internodal axolemma and adaxonal Schwann cell membrane of rodent peripheral nerve. J Neurol Sci 67:213–222

Suter U, Snipes GJ (1995) Biology and genetics of hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies. Annu Rev Neurosci 18:45–75

Tao-Cheng J-H, Rosenbluth J (1984) Extranodal particle accumulations in the axolemma of myelinated frog optic axons. Brain Res 308: 289–300

Thomas PK, Berthold C-H, Ochoa J (1993) Microscopic anatomy of the peripheral nervous system. In: Dyck PJ, Thomas PK, Griffin JW, Low PA, Poduslo JF (eds) Peripheral neuropathy, 3rd edn. Saunders, Philadelphia, pp 28–91

Trapp BD, Andrew SB, Cootaucu C, Quarles R (1989a) The myelin-associated glycoprotein is enriched in multivesicular bodies and periaxonal membrane of actively myelinating oligodendrocytes. J Cell Biol 109:2417–2425

Trapp BD, Andrews SB, Wong A, O'Connell M, Griffin JW (1989b) Co-localization of the myelin-associated glycoprotein and the microfilament components, F-actin and spectrin, in Schwann cells of myelinated nerve fibers. J Neurocytol 18: 47–60

Vabnick I, Shrager P (1998) Ion channel redistribution and function during development of the myelinated axon. J Neurobiol 37:80–96

Vallat JM, Sindou P, Preux PM, Tabaraud F, Milor AM, Couratier P, Leguern E, Brice A (1996) Ultrastructural PMP22 expression in inherited demyelinating neuropathies. Ann Neurol 39:813–817

Van Dyke DH, Griggs RC, Murphy MJ, Goldstein MN (1975) Hereditary myokymia and periodic ataxia. J Neurol Sci 25: 109–118

Vorbrodt AW, Lossinsky AS, Wisniewski HM (1982) Cytochemical localization of ouabain-sensitive, K⁺-dependent p-nitrophenylphosphatase (transport ATPase) in the mouse central and peripheral nervous systems. Brain Res 243:225–234

Wang H, Kunkel DD, Martin TM, Schwartkroin PA, Tempel BL (1993) Heteromultimeric K⁺ channels in terminal and juxtaparanodal regions of neurons. Nature 365:75–79

Waxman SG, Black JA (1987) Macromolecular structure of the Schwann cell membrane. Perinodal microvilli. J Neurol Sci 77:23–34

Wood JG, Jean DH, Whitaker JN, McLaughlin BJ, Albers RW (1977) Immunocytochemical localization of the sodium, potassium activated ATPase in knifeﬁsh brain. J Neurocytol 6:571–581

Xiao ZC, Ragsdale DS, Malhotra JD, Mattei LN, Braun PE, Schachner M, Isom LL (1999) Tenascin-R is a functional modulator of sodium channel beta subunits. J Biol Chem 274:26511–26517

Yamamoto Y, Yoshikawa H, Nagano S, Kondoh G, Sadahiro S, Gotow T, Yanagihara T, Sakoda S (1999) Myelin-associated oligodendrocytic basic protein is essential for normal arrangement of the radial component in central nervous system myelin. Eur J Neurosci 11:847–855

Yang LJS, Zeller CB, Shaper NL, Kiso M, Hasegawa A, Shapiro RE, Schnaar RL (1996) Gangliosides are neuronal ligands for myelin-associated glycoprotein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:814–818

Yoshimura T, Satake M, Kobayashi T (1996) Connexin43 is another gap junction protein in the peripheral nervous system. J Neurochem 67:1252–1258

Zerr P, Adelman JP, Maylie J (1998) Episodic ataxia mutations in Kv1.1 alter potassium channel function by dominant negative effects or haploinsufficiency. J Neurosci 18:2842–2848

Zhang X, Bennett V (1996) Identiﬁcation of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine modiﬁcation of ankyrin_G isoforms targeted to nodes of Ranvier. J Biol Chem 271:31391–31398

Zhao S, Spray DC (1998) Localization of Cx26, Cx32 and Cx43 in myelinating Schwann cells of mouse sciatic nerve during postnatal development. In: Werner R (ed) Gap junctions. IOS Press, Amsterdam, pp 198–202

Zhou DX, Lambert S, Malen PL, Carpenter S, Boland LM, Bennett V (1998a) Ankyrin_G is required for clustering of voltage-gated Na channels at axon initial segments and for normal action potential ﬁring. J Cell Biol 143:1295–1304

Zhou L, Zhang CL, Messing A, Chiu SY (1998b) Temperature-sensitive neuromuscular transmission in Kv1.1 null mice: role of potassium channels under the myelin sheath in young nerves. J Neurosci 18:7200–7215

Zielasek J, Martini R, Toyka KV (1996) Functional abnormalities in P₀-deficient mice resemble human hereditary neuropathies linked to P₀ gene mutations. Muscle Nerve 19:946–952
