
Activation of MAPK Cascades by G-protein-coupled Receptors: The Case of Gonadotropin-releasing Hormone Receptor

Zvi Naor, Outhiriaradjou Benard and Rony Seger

G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are a large group of integral membrane receptors that transmit signals from a diverse array of external stimuli, including neurotransmitters, hormones, phospholipids, photons, odorants and taste ligands. In response to ligand binding, the GPCRs initiate diverse downstream signaling pathways through four groups of G proteins and other interacting proteins. Key components in G
Stress, UV,
cytokines

Stress,
cytokines

Mitogens,
hormones

Stress,
EGF

CDC42/
Rac/Other

MAP3Ks
MKK3/6
p38α–δ

MAP4Ks
MKK4/7
JNK1–3

Raf1
MEK1/2
ERK1/2

MAPKAPK
RSK
MSK

DNA
CHOP, ATF, Elk
Jun, ATF, Elk
Elk

Nucleus

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the
Figure 2. Schematic representation of G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) and G-protein signaling towards mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades. Dashed arrows represent indirect activation/inactivation of the MAPK cascades. Abbreviations: BTK, Bruton tyrosine kinase; Dyn, dynamin; FAK, focal adhesion kinase; GAP, GTPase-activating protein; GEF, guanine nucleotide exchange factor; GRF, guanine-specific nucleotide-releasing factor; GRK, GPCR kinase; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kin
by stimulating RAP1, which leads to inhibition, or by inactivating RAP1 activity, which leads to ERK activation as described above for αs.

**Ga12**

Although this G-protein subunit has not been studied so intensively as the other α subunits, it was recently shown that α12 operates primarily by stimulation of BTK (Ref. 33) and the inhibitory RAS-GAP through a conserved pleckstrin homology (PH) protein-protein interaction domain³³. As mentioned, BTK might then transmit the signal by activating SOS and RAS; however, the
luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH). GnRH also regulates the secretion of LH and FSH by an elaborate signaling process that involves Ca²⁺ mobilization and influx, and PKC activation 57,58. The signaling events involved in the GnRH mode of action were studied in several model systems (primarily αT3-1 cells). These signaling events included the interaction of GnRH with its heptahelical receptor 59, which involves Gq or G11; enhanced phosphoinositide turnover; sequential activation of the phospholipases PLC,
pathway connecting GnRH to ERK involves the sequential activation of Gq, PLCβ and PKC, followed by the activation of RAF1, MEK and ERK (Fig. 3). Because GnRH activates mainly PKCe and PKCδ, we postulate that both isozyms might be involved in this pathway. Although RAS might participate in ERK activation, as was suggested in other systems²⁴, its exact role has yet to be determined.

Of great interest is the role of ERK in the GnRH-stimulated expression of genes encoding gonadotropin subunits (α, LHβ, F
Depending on the method and conditions of determining activity, JNK is activated 20- to 50-fold by GnRH and TPA in αT3-1 cells (Ref. 26 and R. Seger et al., unpublished). Because this activation is much higher than that seen for ERK under similar conditions, the data suggest that the JNK cascade is important in GnRH signaling. This robust effect lagged behind ERK activation, and reached its maximum at about 30 min, after which it declined to basal levels about 150 min after treatment. In addition, the activation of JNK is PKC
12 Gutkind, J.S. (1998) Cell growth control by G protein-coupled receptors: from signal transduction to signal integration. *Oncogene* 17, 1331–1342

13 Luttrell, L.M. *et al.* (1999) Regulation of tyrosine kinase cascades by G-protein-coupled receptors. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* 11, 177–183

14 Hall, R.A. *et al.* (1999) Hept
hormone-releasing hormone. *Biochem. Soc. Trans.* 21, 357S

65 Mitchell, R. *et al.* (1994) Activation of MAP kinase associated with the priming effect of LHRH. *J. Endocrinol.* 140, R15–R18

66 Roberson, M.S. *et al.* (1995) A role for mitogen-activated protein kinase in mediating activation of the glycoprotein hormone alpha-subunit promoter by gonadotropin-releasing hormone. *Mol.