
Review

Role of the transcription factor AML-1 in acute leukemia and hematopoietic differentiation

B. Lutterbach, S.W. Hiebert*

Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University, 21st and Garland, Nashville, TN 37232, USA

Received 9 September 1999; received in revised form 21 December 1999;
B. Lutterbach, S.W. Hiebert / Gene 245 (2000) 223–235

Fig. 1. Structure of AML-1A, AML-1b, AML-1B and translocation fusion proteins that disrupt *AML-1*. Rhd is the Runt homology domain, WRPY indicates the C
and STAT proteins (Nagata et al., 1999). The AML-1/CBFβ complex activates transcription, but, as will be discussed below, it can also repress transcription.

The frequency of chromosomal translocations affecting *AML-1* suggests that it is a master regulator of hematopoiesis. A central regulatory role for AML-1 in hematopoiesis is confirmed
individually, but together they cooperated to activate transcription by threefold. p300 is also a cofactor for Myb and some Ets factors, and the mutual interaction with p300 may contribute to the cooperation observed between AML-1 and these proteins.

Yes-associated protein (YAP) (Sudol, 1994), was identified in a yeast two-hybrid screen
5. A role for AML-1 in viral enhancer function

CBFA1, the mouse homolog of AML-3 (Table 1), was identified as a DNA-binding factor for murine leukemia virus enhancers (Wang and Speck, 1992). A mutation of the AML-1 DNA binding site in the Moloney murine leukemia virus LTR site increased the latency
disease was linked to 6p21, where AML-3 is located, and an analysis of the AML-3 coding sequence uncovered mutations in this gene (Mundlos et al., 1997; Otto et al., 1997). The majority of mutations disrupted the Runt domain, resulting in an AML-3 protein that cannot bind to DNA or to CBF
by 0.5% SDS, and only boiling was able to disrupt the interaction (Lutterbach et al., 1998a). It is possible that interaction with ETO or MTGR-1 could affect AML-1/ETO function. However, transcriptional repression by AML-1/ETO in C33A cells (which contain no detectable ETO) was not significantly altered
Fig. 5. AML-1/ETO binds to mSin3A, NCoR, and histone deacetylases to repress transcription of AML-1 target genes. AML-1/ETO can also bind to Ets and C/EBP proteins and inhibit transactivation mediated by these factors.

activates UBP43 by binding to the promoter. UBP43 was
1994). In addition, enforced expression of AML-1/ETO inhibits differentiation of myeloid progenitor cells in response to G-CSF (Kitabayashi et al., 1998a; Westendorf et al., 1998). 32D.3 cells are myeloid progenitor that cease proliferation and differentiate into granulocytes upon treatment with G
Ahn, M.Y., Huang, G., Bae, S.C., Wee, H.J., Kim, W.Y., Ito, Y., 1998. Negative regulation of granulocytic differentiation in the myeloid precursor cell line 32Dcl3 by ear-2, a mammalian homolog of *Drosophila* seven-up and a chimeric leuk
AML-1B from an activator to a repressor of transcription. Mol. Cell. Biol. 16, 1349–1355.

Higashijima, S., Kojima, T., Michiue, T., Ishimaru, S., Emori, Y., Saigo, K., 1992. Dual Bar homeobox genes of D
scription factor disrupted in t(11;17) APL. Mol. Cell. Biol., in press.

Merriman, H.L., van Wijnen, A.J., Hiebert, S., Bidwell, J.P., Fey, E., Lian, J., Stein, J., Stein, G.S., 1995. The tissue-specific nuclear matrix protein, NMP-
Shurtleff, S.A., Buijs, A., Behm, F.G., Rubnitz, J.E., Raimondi, S.C., Hancock, M.L., Chan, G.C., Pui, C.H., Grosveld, G., Downing, J.R., 1995. TEL/AML1 fusion resulting from a cryptic t(12;21