
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 2000 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.
Vol. 275, No. 22, Issue of June 2, pp. 16717–16722, 2000
Printed in U.S.A.

# TatD Is a Cytoplasmic Protein with DNase Activity

NO REQUIREMENT FOR TatD FAMILY PROTEINS IN Sec-INDEPENDENT PROTEIN EXPORT*

Received for publication, February 2, 2000, and in revised form, March 10, 2000
Published, JBC Papers in Press, March 15, 2000, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M000800200

Margaret Wexler‡§∥, Frank Sargent‡§∥, Rachael L. Jack‡§, Nicola R. Stanley‡§, Erik G. Bogsch∥, Colin Robinson∥, Ben C. Berks**, and Tracy Palmer‡§**

From the ‡Centre for Metalloprotein Spectroscopy and Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, the §Department of Molecular Microbiology, John Innes Centre, Colney Lane, Norwich NR4 7UH, and the ∥Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom

The *Escherichia coli* Tat system mediates Sec-independent export of protein precursors bearing twin arginine signal peptides. Genes known to be involved in this process include *tatA*, *tatB*, and *tatC* that form an operon with a fourth gene, *tatD*. The *tatD* gene product has two homologues in *E. coli* coded by the unlinked *ycfH* and *yjjV* genes. An *E. coli* strain with in-frame chromosomal deletions in all three of *tatD*, *ycfH*, and *yjjV* exhibits no significant defect in the cellular location of five cofactor-containing enzymes that are synthesized with twin arginine signal peptides. Neither these mutations nor overproduction of the TatD protein cause any discernible effect on the export kinetics of an additional *E. coli* Tat pathway substrate. It is concluded that proteins of the TatD family have no obligate involvement in protein export by the Tat system. TatD is shown to be a cytoplasmic protein. TatD binds to immobilized Ni²⁺ or Zn²⁺ affinity columns and exhibits magnesium-dependent DNase activity. Features of the *tatA* operon that may control TatD expression are discussed.

In *Escherichia coli* four genes, *tatA*, *tatB*,² *tatC*, and *tatE*, that are required for the operation of the Tat transport system have so far been identified (7–10). Consistent with a role in transmembrane protein translocation, these *tat* genes are predicted to encode integral membrane proteins. Strains with mutations in *tatB*, *tatC*, or a combination of *tatA* and *tatE* are completely defective in the translocation of precursor proteins with twin arginine signal peptides.

The *tatA*, *tatB*, and *tatC* genes form an operon structure with a fourth promoter distal gene, *tatD* (7). The *tatD* gene is variously predicted to encode a soluble cytoplasmically located protein (8) or an integral membrane protein with a large cytoplasmic domain (7). The co-transcription of *tatD* with three genes known to encode essential components of the Tat export pathway strongly suggests an involvement of TatD in the Tat system (7). Here we have sought to experimentally test this prediction by examining the phenotype of a *tatD* mutant strain.

Two TatD homologues are coded in *E. coli* by the functionally unassigned and unlinked genes *ycfH* (29% amino acid sequence identity) and *yjjV* (24% amino acid sequence identity). Because these additional TatD homologues may be capable of functionally substituting for TatD, we have also examined the phenotype of a strain in which all three genes coding for TatD-like proteins have been inactivated. Unexpectedly, we find that TatD family proteins are not required for protein transport by the *E. coli* Tat pathway.

## EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Genetic Constructs—All mutants were derived from *E. coli* strain MC4100 (*F⁻*, ΔlacU169, *araD*139, *rpsL*150, *relA*1, *ptsF*, *rbsR*, *flbB*5301 (11)). Strain TDD1 containing an in-frame deletion of *tatD* was constructed as follows. A 551-bp fragment covering the downstream region and the last two codons of *tatD* was amplified by PCR using the primers 5′-GCGCATCGATGCGTTTAGAGTTTGCGGAACTCG-3′ and 5′-GCGGTACCCTATCCTGGGCCCCGATTAAACGG-3′. The resulting product was digested with *ClaI* and *KpnI* and cloned into the polylinker of pBluescript II KS⁺ (Stratagene) to give pFAT122. A 557-bp fragment covering the upstream region and the first two codons of *tatD* was amplified using primers 5′-GCGCTCTAGAGGCATTTATCGCCCCAG-CGCTG-3′ and 5′-GCGCGGATCCCTCCATAGACAACCGCCCCTGAC-G-3′. The resulting product was digested with *XbaI* and *BamHI* and cloned into pFAT122 to give pFAT123. DNA from pFAT123 covering the in-frame deletion of *tatD* was excised by digestion with *XbaI* and *KpnI* and cloned into the polylinker of pMAK705 (12) to give the construct pFAT124. The mutant allele was transferred to the chromosome of MC4100 as described (12) to give strain TDD1.

Introduction of in-frame *yjjV* and *ycfH* deletions into TDD1 produced the triple mutant strain TDD7. Construction of the *yjjV* and *ycfH* deletions was entirely analogous to the *tatD* deletion and used the *yjjV* primers 5′-GCGCATCGATCCCGGTAGGCCGGATAAGGCGTTCAC-3′,

---

* This work was supported by a Royal Society Research fellowship (to T. P.), project grants from the Leverhulme Trust (to T. P. and B. C. B.), and Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC) (to C. R., B. C. B., and T. P.), a Norwich Research Park Studentship (to N. R. S.), and a BBSRC Research Studentship (to E. G. B.). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* ‖ Both authors contributed equally to this work.
* ** To whom correspondence may be addressed: School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK. Tel.: 44 (0)1603 592186; Fax: 44 (0)1603 592250; E-mail: b.berks@uea.ac.uk.
* ‡‡ To whom correspondence may be addressed: John Innes Centre, Colney, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK. Tel.: 44 1603 450726; Fax: 44 1603 450018; E-mail: tracy.palmer@bbsrc.ac.uk.
* ¹ The abbreviations used are: Sec, general secretary pathway; PAGE, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; kbp, kilobase pair; bp, base pair; MOPS, 4-morpholinepropanesulfonic acid; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; trimethylamine *N*-oxide.

---

² *tatB* is also known as *mttA2* (GenBankTM accession number AF067848).

This paper is available on line at http://www.jbc.org 16717

16718

**TatD Is a DNase**

5′-GCGCGGTACCATCTTTTGCTGGCAGAGCGCGGC-3′, 5′-GCGCTCTAGACGTAGCGGAGTGTCGCTGGAAGGC-3′, and 5′-GCGCGGATCCACGGCAAATCAAGCCAGATCCTC-3′; and the *ycfH* primers 5′-GCGCATCGATCGTTGAATGAGTTTTTTAAAGCTC-3′, 5′-GCGCGGTACCGTTTAGAGGCGATTCTTCAGCAGG-3′, 5′-GCGCTCTAGACTTGCTGAAAACGCTTGAAGAGC-3′, and 5′-GCGCGGATCCAAACATGATGCTCTCTTAAAAGATG-3′.

The strain deleted for *tatABCDE* (DADE) was constructed as follows. The *tatA* upstream region was excised from plasmid pFAT4 (8) by digestion with *XbaI* and *BamHI* and cloned into pFAT122 to give plasmid pFAT125. The *tatA-tatD* deletion region was then excised by digestion with *XbaI* and *KpnI* and cloned into pMAK705 to give plasmid pFAT126. The deletion allele was transferred to the chromosome of J1M1 (MC4100Δ*tatE*) (8) to give strain DADE (Δ*tatABCD*Δ*tatE*).

All mutant strains were verified by PCR and Southern blotting, and the chromosomal PCR products were sequenced to ensure that no mismatched bases had been introduced.

Plasmid pTATD2, which contains *tatD* under the control of a *Ptac* promoter, was constructed as follows. An 837-bp PCR fragment was isolated with primers 5′-GCGGAATTCATGGAGTACAGGATGTTTG-3′ and 5′-GCGGGATCCGAAGAATACCGAGTTCCGC-3′ using pFAT65 plasmid DNA as the template. The resulting fragment was digested with *EcoRI* and *BamHI* and cloned into *EcoRI*- and *BamHI*-digested pBluescript to make pTATD1. pTATD1 was digested with *KpnI* and *XbaI* and cloned into *KpnI*- and *XbaI*-digested pACT3 (13) to make pTATD2.

Plasmid pFAT595 harbors the *tatD* gene under the control of the UV5 promoter/*lac* operator on plasmid pQE60 (Qiagen) and was constructed as follows. The *tatD* gene and flanking sequence was amplified by PCR using pFAT65 as template and primers 5′-GCGCGAATTCGTCAGGGCGGTTGTCATATGGAG-3′ and 5′-GCGCAAGCTTTCGAGTTCGCAAACACTCTAAAAACGC-3′. The resultant PCR product was digested with *EcoRI* and *HindIII* and cloned into pQE60 to yield pFAT595.

**Culture Conditions**—During all genetic manipulations, *E. coli* strains were grown aerobically in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium (14). Concentrations of antibiotics were as described previously (8). Biochemical characterizations were carried out in cultures grown routinely in supplemented Cohen and Rickenberg (CR) medium as described previously (8). Overproduction of TatD from plasmid pFAT595 was carried out in LB medium supplemented with 0.8% (w/v) glucose.

**Northern Analysis**—Total cellular RNA was isolated from MC4100 grown aerobically in CR medium supplemented with glucose (0.4%) using the Qiagen RNeasy mini kit. The isolated RNA was separated by agarose gel electrophoresis in the presence of formaldehyde and capillary-blotted onto Hybond-N nylon membrane (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). The blot was hybridized with either a 1.1-kbp DNA probe covering *tatB* and most of *tatC*, which was prepared by PCR amplification using primers 5′-GCGCATCGATGTTGTAATCCGTGTTTGATATCG-3′ and 5′-GCGCGGTACCTTGC GTAAGTCTTCTGGCGAG-3′ or an 836-bp DNA probe covering the last 12 bp of the intergenic region between *tatC* and *tatD* and all of *tatD*, which was prepared by PCR amplification using primers 5′-GCGGAATTCATGGAGTACAGGATGTTG-3′ and 5′-GCGGGATCCGAAGAATACCGAGTTCCGC-3′.

**Protein Methods**—Fractionation of cells, rocket immunoelectrophoresis, and enzyme assays were all performed as described previously (8) with the exception that formate:phenazine methosulfate oxidoreductase (formate dehydrogenase) activity was assayed as described by Enoch and Lester (15).

To determine the cellular location of TatD, expression of plasmid-encoded *tatABCD* was induced in a 100-ml culture of strain K38 (16) carrying pGP1-2, which encodes T7 RNA polymerase (17), and pFAT65 which contains *tatABCD* under the control of the phage T7 promoter (8). Cells were harvested, and a periplasmic fraction was prepared by mild osmotic shock as described previously (10). Resultant spheroplasts were lysed by sonication and separated into membrane and cytoplasmic fractions by ultracentrifugation. Membranes were washed once in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl. Samples were analyzed by autoradiography following SDS-PAGE.

PreSufI was expressed under the control of the phage T7 φ10 promoter from plasmid pNR14 (18). pNR14 and pGP1-2 were co-transformed into MC4100 or TDD7, and synthesis of plasmid-encoded gene products was induced by a temperature shift from 30 to 42°C, followed by labeling with [³⁵S]methionine for 5 min, according to the procedure described by Tabor and Richardson (17). Cells were chased with unlabeled methionine (750 μg/ml final concentration) and further incubated at 30°C for 0–60 min. The effect of TatD overproduction on the export of SufI was assessed in strain BL21(DE3) carrying pNR14 and pTATD2. Pulse-chase experiments were carried out as above with the exceptions that the cells were kept at 37°C for all steps except the heat-shock (which was retained to allow efficient uptake of rifampicin) and that 0.4 mM isopropyl-1-thio-β-D-galactopyranoside was included in the growth medium from 2 h prior to the heat-shock step to induce both T7 polymerase and TatD expression.

**Overproduction and Purification of the tatD Gene Product**—Plasmid pFAT595 was transformed into strain M15 (*F⁻, lac⁻, ara⁻, gal⁻, mtl⁻*) (19) that had been previously transformed with pREP4 (*KanR, lacI⁺*; Roche Molecular Biochemicals). Overexpression of *tatD* was achieved following the addition of isopropyl-1-thio-β-D-galactopyranoside (final concentration 2 mM) to an exponentially growing 1-liter culture of M15[pREP4] + pFAT595. Cells were harvested and resuspended in 20 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 10% glycerol, 50 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM Na₂EDTA, 1 mM 2-mercaptoethanol (Buffer A) including a protease inhibitor mixture (Complete™, Roche Molecular Biochemicals). Cytoplasmic soluble proteins were prepared essentially as described (8) except exogenous DNase I was not added to the cell suspension. The cytoplasmic extract was applied to a 5-ml HiTrap™ Q-Sephrose anion exchange column (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) equilibrated in Buffer A. Following extensive washing with Buffer A, bound proteins were eluted with Buffer A containing 150 mM NaCl. Eluted proteins were dialyzed against Buffer A before being applied to a 1-ml Mono-Q™ anion exchange column (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) previously equilibrated with Buffer A. Bound proteins were eluted with a linear 30-ml 50–150 mM NaCl gradient, and fractions containing recombinant TatD were pooled and concentrated. The TatD pool was then subjected to molecular exclusion chromatography on a Superose-12 gel filtration column (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) equilibrated in 10 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 250 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol (Buffer B). Fractions containing TatD were pooled. Typically, 2.5 mg of recombinant TatD was recovered from 2 g (wet weight) of cells.

**Protein Sequencing and Analysis**—Protein sequencing services were provided by Alta Biosciences, Birmingham, UK.

**Immobilized Metal Affinity Chromatography**—A 1-ml HiTrap™ chelating affinity column (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech), charged with cations as required, was equilibrated in Buffer B. Protein samples (250 μg) were applied in the same Buffer B, and bound polypeptides were eluted with Buffer B containing 500 mM imidazole.

**Determination of DNase Activity**—DNase assays were performed in a final volume of 25 μl, in a reaction buffer of 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6. Each reaction contained approximately 100 ng of pBluescript (II KS⁺) that had been previously linearized by digestion with *PstI* enzyme, the enzyme subsequently removed by passage through a Qiagen Qiaquick™ DNA purification system. Metal salts or EDTA, where added, were at a final concentration of 5 mM. TatD was added at a final concentration of 36 μg ml⁻¹. The reactions were incubated for 60 min at 37°C, after which 5 μl of DNA loading dye (14) was added to each reaction, and the samples were separated by electrophoresis through 1% agarose. DNA was visualized under UV illumination following ethidium bromide staining.

---

**RESULTS AND DISCUSSION**

**TatD Is a Cytoplasmic Protein**—TatA, TatB, and TatC are predicted to be integral membrane proteins (4, 7, 8), while TatD has been proposed to have either a cytoplasmic (8) or a membranous location (7). To explore the cellular location of the Tat proteins, expression of plasmid-encoded *tatABCD* was induced in the presence of [³⁵S]methionine, and the cells were fractionated into cytoplasmic, periplasmic, and membrane components. TatA, TatB, and TatC are, as expected, found in the membrane fraction (Fig. 1, lane 2). In contrast TatD is detected almost exclusively in the cytoplasmic protein fraction (Fig. 1, lane 3), strongly suggesting that it is normally cytoplasmically located.

**Correct Subcellular Localization of Tat-dependent Proteins Still Occurs in a ΔtatD ΔyjjV ΔycfH Mutant**—In order to assess the involvement of TatD in protein translocation, we constructed a strain with an in-frame deletion of the *tatD* coding region, and a second strain with in-frame deletions in all three *E. coli* genes (*tatD, yjjV* and *ycfH*) coding for TatD-like proteins. Both strains were viable under aerobic respiratory or fermentative growth conditions indicating that TatD and its homologues are not essential cellular proteins.

TatD Is a DNase

FIG. 1. TatD is a cytoplasmic protein. Plasmid-encoded Tat proteins were specifically radiolabeled by induction in the presence of \[^{35}S\] methionine as described under “Experimental Procedures” and then fractionated. Lane 1, crude cell extract; lane 2, membrane (mem) fraction; lane 3, cytoplasmic (cyto) fraction. No TatD could be detected in the periplasmic fraction (not shown). The tat gene products have been assigned previously (8) and are indicated to the side of the gel.

TMAO reductase is a soluble periplasmic enzyme containing a molybdopterin guanine dinucleotide cofactor. Me₂SO reductase and nitrate-inducible formate dehydrogenase are membrane-bound molybdopterin guanine dinucleotide-containing enzymes. The precursors of all three reductases bear twin arginine signal peptides. Correct subcellular localization of these enzymes has previously been shown to be blocked in ΔtatAΔtatE, ΔtatB, and ΔtatC strains (8–10). Both the ΔtatD and ΔtatDΔyjjVΔycfH mutants were capable of anoxic growth on the non-fermentable carbon source glycerol with TMAO or Me₂SO as sole electron acceptor, and the triple mutant showed identical patterns of TMAO and Me₂SO reductase localization to the parental strain (Table I). The absence of TatD-like proteins does not, therefore, affect targeting and maturation of TMAO and Me₂SO reductases. Enzymatic assays indicate that assembly of the Tat-dependent nitrate-inducible formate dehydrogenase is likewise unaffected in the ΔtatDΔyjjVΔycfH mutant (Table I).

E. coli hydrogenases-1 and -2 are membrane-bound enzymes with cofactor-binding subunits located at the periplasmic face of the plasma membrane. In each enzyme a large catalytic subunit binding a Ni-Fe cofactor is partnered by a small subunit containing iron-sulfur clusters. Export of both subunits is dependent on a twin arginine signal peptide on the small subunit precursor. Rocket immunoelectrophoresis demonstrates that active hydrogenase-1 and -2 are found exclusively in the membrane fraction of both parental and ΔtatDΔyjjVΔycfH mutant strains (Fig. 2, a and b, lanes 3 and 4) and thus that assembly of these enzymes does not require proteins of the TatD family.

Export Kinetics of a Tat-dependent Precursor Protein in a ΔtatDΔyjjVΔycfH Mutant—The experiments described above demonstrate that TatD-like proteins have no obligate role in the targeting of proteins with twin arginine signal peptides. Nevertheless, it remains possible that proteins of the TatD family play a non-essential role in export. Such a function might manifest itself as an effect on export kinetics in the ΔtatDΔyjjVΔycfH mutant. In order to investigate this possibility, pulse-chase experiments were undertaken using the water-soluble, periplasmic Tat substrate preSufI (10, 18). No significant differences in the export kinetics of SufI in the ΔtatDΔyjjVΔycfH background relative to the parental strain could be detected (Fig. 3). This experiment suggests that proteins of the TatD family are not required for a rate-limiting step in the export of preSufI and provides further evidence that TatD-like proteins are not essential for Tat pathway export.

TatD May be Expressed at Substantially Lower Levels Than the Other Products of the tatA Operon—On the basis of reverse

TABLE I  
Tat-dependent enzyme activity and localization in strains MC 4100  
(parental) and TDD7 (ΔtatDΔycfHΔyjjV)

One unit of activity is 1 μmol of benzyl viologen oxidized per min for TMAO and Me₂SO reductases, and 1 μmol of nitro blue tetrazolium reduced per min for formate dehydrogenase.

| Enzyme               | Fraction   | Activity     |
|----------------------|------------|--------------|
|                      |            | units/mg protein |
| TMAO reductase \(^a\) | Periplasm  | 1.8          |
| Me₂SO reductase \(^b\) | Membrane   | 1.3          |
|                      | Cytoplasm  | 0.16         |
| Formate dehydrogenase \(^c\) | Membrane | 0.93         |
|                      |            | 0.96         |

\(a\) Cells were grown anaerobically in CR medium supplemented with 0.5% glycerol and 0.4% TMAO.  
\(b\) Cells were grown anaerobically in CR medium supplemented with 0.5% glycerol and 0.4% Me₂SO.  
\(c\) Cells were grown anaerobically in CR medium supplemented with 0.5% glycerol and 0.4% sodium nitrate.

transcriptase PCR experiments, Weiner and co-workers (7) were previously able to establish that tatABCD can be transcribed as a single messenger RNA and therefore constitute an operon (Fig. 4a). Northern analysis of whole cell mRNA was undertaken using a tatBC probe to investigate the possible existence of alternative tatA operon transcripts. In addition to the expected 2.6-kbp tatABCD species, a much more abundant 1.6-kbp transcript was also identified (Fig. 4b, lane 1). Only the 1.6-kbp transcript could be detected in the ΔtatD strain TDD1 (Fig. 4b, lane 3) suggesting that this smaller mRNA corresponds to a message covering tatABC alone. This interpretation was confirmed by Northern analysis with a tatD-specific probe. The tatD probe recognized only the larger 2.6-kbp transcript and only in a tatD⁺ background (Fig. 4b, lane 4). Thus, under the growth condition tested, tatD is transcribed at a lower level than the other genes of the tatA operon.

The tatC and tatD genes are separated by 41 bp (the tatD start codon is definitively identified below), and tatD shares a 2-bp overlap at its 3′ end with the convergently transcribed rfaH gene (Fig. 4a). Fig. 4c shows that the tatC-tatD intergenic region is capable of forming a stable stem-loop structure with a predicted ΔG of −16 kJ/mol. It can be inferred from the characteristic run of uridine residues 3′ to the stem-loop structure on an rfaH (but not a tatABC) transcript (Fig. 4c) that the stem-loop structure functions primarily as a Rho-independent transcription terminator for rfaH. However, the stem-loop structure is probably also responsible for the lowered levels of tatD-containing transcripts detected by Northern analysis (Fig. 4b) either by attenuating transcriptional readthrough from tatC or, since mRNA is degraded from the 3′ end (20), by stabilizing the tatABC portion of the message. Moreover, rfaH transcripts terminating at the stem-loop structure would reduce the levels of tatD mRNA available for translation by an antisense mechanism (and vice versa). Together these various transcript features suggest that TatD is produced at considerably lower levels than the other products of the tatA operon.

In the light of this apparent regulatory complexity, it was conceivable that control of the cellular TatD to TatABC stoichiometry is important for Tat-dependent export. This possibility was assessed by investigating whether raised levels of TatD interfere with the export process. Plasmid pTATD2 in which tatD expression had been placed under the control of a strong promoter was used to overproduce TatD in the Tat⁺ strain BL21(DE3). This increase in TatD synthesis had no effect on the kinetics of preSufI export (data not shown). It is therefore unlikely that either highly regulated or deliberately low level expression of TatD is important for Tat-dependent export.

16720

**TatD Is a DNase**

A anti-Hya (activity)  
B anti-Hyb (activity)

lanes 1 2 3 4  
lanes 1 2 3 4  

FIG. 2. Localization of hydrogenases-1 and -2 is unaffected by the absence of TatD-like proteins. Subcellular fractions of strains MC4100 (parental) and TDD7 ($\Delta tatD \Delta yjjV \Delta ycfH$) were analyzed by rocket immunoelectrophoresis followed by activity staining. $a$, hydrogenase-1; $b$, hydrogenase-2. All lanes were loaded with 10 $\mu$g of protein and are as follows: lane 1, MC4100, soluble fraction; lane 2, TDD7, soluble fraction; lane 3, MC4100, Triton X-100-solubilized membrane fraction; lane 4, TDD7, Triton X-100-solubilized membrane fraction.

FIG. 3. The export kinetics of a Tat-dependent precursor protein are unaffected by the absence of TatD-like proteins. Cells expressing preSufI under the control of the $\phi T7$ promoter were pulse-labeled with ${}^{35}$S methionine for 5 min and chased with unlabeled methionine for 60 min. Samples were withdrawn at the indicated times after addition of unlabeled methionine and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and autoradiography. The mean percentage of total SufI protein remaining in precursor form in whole cells of either the parental strain MC4100 (■) or the $\Delta tatD \Delta yjjV \Delta ycfH$ mutant strain TDD7 (□) at each of the indicated time points is plotted ($n = 4$). The bars represent the standard error of the mean.

Characterization of the tatD Gene Product—In order to gain further insight into its biochemical properties, TatD was purified from the high speed supernatant of cells overexpressing the tatD gene. The N terminus of the purified protein was determined to be XFDIGV (where X was a non-definable residue) by direct sequencing. This sequence corresponds to that of TatD starting at the second of two putative tatD initiation codons (Fig. 4c). Additional positive identification of the purified protein as TatD was obtained by peptide mass fingerprinting following trypsinolysis (data not shown). The purified TatD protein was sized at 30 kDa by gel permeation chromatography under native conditions suggesting that the 28,955-Da TatD polypeptide is a monomer in solution.

TatD family proteins show significant sequence similarity to proteins assigned to the polymerase and histidinol phosphatase superfamily of metal-dependent phosphoesterases (21). For example, E. coli TatD exhibits 33% amino acid identity to the YabD protein of Chlamydophila pneumoniae. Purified TatD bound to affinity matrices bearing immobilized Ni${}^{2+}$ or Zn${}^{2+}$ ions (Fig. 5a, lanes 5 and 7) indicating that TatD has at least one high affinity metal ion-binding site. Interestingly, the TatD protein exhibited DNase activity in the presence of Mg${}^{2+}$ (Fig. 5b, lane 4) but not Ca${}^{2+}$ or Zn${}^{2+}$ (Fig. 5b, lanes 3 and 5). Thus TatD can function as a magnesium-dependent DNase.

The ability of TatD to degrade RNA was not tested. Purified TatD, with or without divalent metal cation supplementation, showed no nonspecific protein hydrolyzing activity with casein

as substrate.

Concluding Remarks—Previous research has shown that tatB, tatC, and tatA plus tatE are each required for export by the Tat pathway of E. coli (7–10). In contrast, the results presented here demonstrate that tatD and two further genes encoding TatD homologues are dispensable for Tat-dependent protein transport. In addition, neither loss of these gene functions nor overproduction of the TatD protein had any discernible effect on the export kinetics of a Tat-dependent precursor. A non-essential and indeed Tat-nonspecific role for TatD-like proteins is consistent with phylogenetic analysis of the occurrence of tat genes. Although homologues of the essential TatA/B/E and TatC proteins are encoded in all complete genomes of prokaryotes possessing proteins with twin arginine signal peptides, a TatD-like protein is missing from the genome of one such organism, the Archaeon Archaeoglobus fulgidus (22). Additionally, TatD-like proteins are coded by the genomes of the yeasts Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Swiss-Prot accession number 465514; 35% amino acid identity) and Schizosaccharomyces pombe (Swiss-Prot accession number 2257524; 36% amino acid identity), neither of which possesses proteins with twin arginine signal peptides or homologues of the essential Tat proteins. Thus no exact correlation exists between the ability of an organism to synthesize a TatD-like protein and whether that organism has a Tat protein transport pathway. Furthermore, although the TatD-coding gene forms an operon with tatABC in E. coli, suggesting a functional inter-relationship between

TatD Is a DNase

A

86.6 min  
$\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$  
$aarF$ $tatA$ $tatB$ $tatC$ $tatD$ $rfalH$ $yigC$

24.9 min  
$\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$  
$pabC$ $yceG$ $tmk$ $holB$ $ycfH$ $ptsG$

FIG. 4. The $tatA$ operon produces two transcripts. $a$, organization of the $E$. coli genomic loci encoding TatD family proteins. $aarF$ codes for a protein required for ubiquinone biosynthesis, $rfalH$ codes for a transcriptional anti-terminator involved in the regulation of among other functions hemolysin synthesis; $holB$ codes for the $\delta'$ subunit of DNA polymerase III; $tmk$ codes for deoxythymidine kinase; $pabC$ codes for 4-amino-4-deoxychorismate lyase; $ptsG$ codes for glucose permease component IIBC; $osmY$ codes for osmotically inducible protein Y. $b$, Northern blot of total cellular RNA isolated from the following: lanes 1 and 4, the parental strain MC4100; lanes 2 and 5, the $\Delta tatABCD \Delta tatE$ strain DADE; and lanes 3 and 6, the $\Delta tatD$ strain TDD1 and hybridized to a probe covering either $tatBC$ (lanes 1–3) or $tatD$ (lanes 4–6). $c$, predicted mRNA secondary structure in the $tatCD$ intergenic region for both $tatA$ (upper strand) and $rfalH$ (lower strand) transcripts. The $tatC$ stop codon, the putative $tatD$ ribosome-binding site, and the polyuridine regions that may form part of a Rho-independent terminator for the $rfalH$ transcript are indicated.

B

99.4 min  
$\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$  
$osmY$ $yjjU$ $yjjV$ $yjjW$  
$tatBC$ probe $tatD$ probe  

2.6 kbp $\rightarrow$  
1.6 kbp $\rightarrow$  

lanes 1 2 3 4 5 6

C

$tatC \longrightarrow$  
$Glu^{253}$ $Lys^{254}$ $Thr^{256}$ $Glu^{257}$ $Glu^{258}$ STOP  
$5^{\prime}-G-A-A-A-A-A-C-U-G-A-A-G-A-A-U-A-A-U-U-C==G-U-C-A-U-A-U-G-G-A-G-A-C-A-G-G-A-U-G-U-U-3^{\prime}$  
$3^{\prime}-C-U-U-U-U-U-G-A-C-U-U-C-U-U-A-U-U-U-A-A-G$  
$\underline{[} \quad \underline{]} \quad \underline{[} \quad \underline{]} \quad \underline{[} \quad \underline{]}$  
rho-independent termination motifs?  

$tatD$ RBS  
$A==U$  
$U==A$  
$G==C$  
$C==G$  
$G==C$  
$C==G$  
$G==C$  
$C==G$  
$A==U$  
$C=G$  
$G=C$  
$C=G$  
$G=C$  
$C=G$  
$A=G$  
$U=C$  

$fMet^{1}$ $Phe^{2}$  
anti-$tatD/rfalH$ transcript?

TatD and the essential Tat proteins, this genetic linkage is not maintained in bacteria other than the closely related *Salmonella typhi* and *Yersinia pestis*. An additional circumstantial argument in support of a non-essential role for TatD in Tat-dependent export is that thylakoid import by the structurally and mechanistically related $\Delta pH$-dependent transport pathway of plant chloroplasts does not require, and is not enhanced by, any water-soluble stromal factors (23, 24), yet it is shown here that TatD is a water-soluble cytoplasmic protein. Finally, we have also shown that purified TatD exhibits a magnesium-dependent DNase activity, a biochemical function that is difficult to reconcile with a role in protein transport. A possible function of TatD-like proteins in DNA metabolism is supported by linkage analysis as one $E$. coli gene coding for a TatD homologue, $ycfH$, is apparently co-transcribed with a gene encoding the $\delta'$ subunit of DNA polymerase III ($holB$, Fig. 4a), and a similar linkage is seen for the single $tatD$-like gene of *Rhodobacter capsulatus* (open reading frame RRC02703).

Given that TatD has a function unrelated to protein transport, why, as confirmed in the current work, is $tatD$ co-transcribed with $tatABC$? It is in fact not uncommon in $E$. coli for genes encoding components of the protein secretion apparatus to form operons with genes of unrelated function. For example, the gene for the Sec translocase SecE subunit is part of an operon that includes a gene, $nusG$, encoding a transcriptional anti-terminator protein (25), while the SecY subunit of the

TatD Is a DNase

A
kDa
45 →
30 →
lanes 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
B lanes 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

pBluescript + + + + + +
TatD - + + + + -
metal - Ca²⁺ Mg²⁺ Zn²⁺ - Mg²⁺
EDTA - - - - + -

FIG. 5. Purified TatD binds to immobilized divalent metal cations and exhibits DNase activity in the presence of magnesium ions. $a$, testing the ability of purified TatD to bind to chelating affinity media. Purified TatD was passed through a chelating affinity column without bound metal (lanes 2 and 3) or charged with Ni²⁺ (lanes 4 and 5) or Zn²⁺ (lanes 6 and 7). SDS-PAGE was used to analyze purified TatD (lanes 1 and 8), material that did not bind to the columns (wash through (WT), lanes 2, 4, and 6), and material that was eluted from the columns by 500 mM imidazole (IM, lanes 3, 5, and 7). $b$, linearized pBluescript plasmid was incubated in the absence (lanes 1 and 7) or presence (lanes 2–6) of TatD and a variety of metal ions for 60 min at 37 °C. DNA was visualized by agarose gel electrophoresis in the presence of ethidium bromide. Lane 1, linearized DNA only; lane 2, as lane 1 in the presence 0.9 μg of TatD; lanes 3–6, as lane 2 but with 5 mM of the following added: lane 3, CaCl₂; lane 4, MgCl₂, lane 5, ZnSO₄, lane 6, EDTA. Lane 7, DNA incubated in the absence of TatD but with an equivalent volume (1 μl) of Buffer B in the presence of 5 mM MgCl₂.

same translocase is encoded by an operon otherwise dedicated to ribosomal proteins (26). Another example is that the gene coding for the signal recognition particle receptor FtsY is part of an operon encoding two other genes, ftsE and ftsX, that are involved in cell division rather than protein transport (27). In these cases, and perhaps also that of tatD, the cell may be grouping functionally unrelated genes with similar regulatory requirements.

Acknowledgments—We thank Drs. Gary Sawers and Elizabeth Glatz for helpful discussions and Dr. Mike Naldrett for peptide mass fingerprinting of TatD.

REFERENCES

1. Fekkes, P., and Driessen, A. J. M. (1999) Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 63, 161–173
2. Berks, B. C. (1996) Mol. Microbiol. 22, 393–404
3. Berks, B. C., Sargent, F., and Palmer, T. (2000) Mol. Microbiol. 35, 260–274
4. Settles, M. A., Yonetani, A., Baron, A., Bush, D. R., Cline, K., and Martienssen, R. (1997) Science 278, 1467–1470
5. Mori, H., and Cline, K. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273, 11405–11408
6. Wexler, M., Bogsch, E. G., Klösgen, R. B., Palmer, T., Robinson, C., and Berks, B. C. (1998) FEBS Lett. 431, 339–342
7. Weiner, J. H., Bilous, P. T., Shaw, G. M., Lubitz, S. P., Frost, L., Thomas, G. H., Cole, J. A., and Turner, R. J. (1998) Cell 93, 93–101
8. Sargent, F., Bogsch, E. G., Stanley, N. R., Wexler, M., Robinson, C., Berks, B. C., and Palmer, T. (1998) EMBO J. 17, 3640–3650
9. Bogsch, E. G., Sargent, F., Stanley, N. R., Berks, B. C., Robinson, C., and Palmer, T. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273, 18003–18006
10. Sargent, F., Stanley, N. R., Berks, B. C., and Palmer, T. (1999) J. Biol. Chem. 274, 36073–36082
11. Casadaban, M. J., and Cohen, S. N. (1979) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 76,
12. Hamilton, C. M., Aldea, M., Washburn, B. K., Babitzke, P., and Kushner, S. R. (1989) J. Bacteriol. 171, 4617–4622
13. Dykxhoorn, D. M., St Pierre, R., and Linn, T. (1996) Gene (Amst.) 177, 133–136
14. Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T. (1989) Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY
15. Enoch, H. G., and Lester, R. L. (1975) J. Biol. Chem. 250, 6693–6705
16. Lyons, L. B., and Zinder, N. D. (1972) Virology 49, 45–60
17. Tabor, S., and Richardson, C. C. (1985) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 82, 1074–1078
18. Stanley, N. R., Palmer, T., and Berks, B. C. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. 275, 11591–11596
19. Villarejo, M. R., and Zabin, I. (1974) J. Bacteriol. 120, 466–474
20. Kushner, S. R. (1996) in Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium: Cellular and Molecular Biology (Neidhardt, F. C., Curtis, R., III, Ingraham, J. L., Lin, E. C. C., Low, K. B., Magasanik, B., Reznikoff, W. S., Riley, M., Schaechter, M., and Umbarger, H. E.) 2nd Ed., pp. 849–860, American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D. C.
21. Aravind, L., and Koonin, E. V. (1998) Nucleic Acids Res. 26, 3746–3752
22. Klenc, H.-P., Clayton, R.A., Tomb, J.-F., White, O., Nelson, K.E., Ketchum, K.A., Dodson, R.J., Gwinn, M., Hickey, E.K., Peterson, J.D., Richardson, D.L., Kerlavage, A.R., Graham, D.E., Kyrpides, N.C., Fleischmann, R.D., Quackenbush, J., Lee, N.H., Sutton, G.G., Gill, S., Kirkness, E. F., et al. (1997) Nature 390, 364–370
23. Mould, R. M., Shackleton, J. B., and Robinson, C. (1991) J. Biol. Chem. 266, 17286–17290
24. Cline, K., Ettinger, W. F., and Theg, S. M. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. 267, 2688–2696
25. Downing, W. L., Sullivan, S. L., Gottesman, M. E., and Dennis, P. P. (1990) J. Bacteriol. 172, 1621–1627
26. Ceretti, D. P., Dean, D., Davis, G. R., Bedwell, D. M., and Nomura, M. (1983) Nucleic Acids Res. 11, 2599–2616
27. de Leeuw, E., Graham, B., Phillips, G. J., ten Hagen-Jongman, C. M., Oudega, B., and Luirink, J. (1999) Mol. Microbiol. 31, 983–993

MEMBRANE TRANSPORT STRUCTURE
FUNCTION AND BIOGENESIS:
TatD Is a Cytoplasmic Protein with DNase
Activity: NO REQUIREMENT FOR TatD
FAMILY PROTEINS IN
Sec-INDEPENDENT PROTEIN EXPORT

Margaret Wexler, Frank Sargent, Rachael L.
Jack, Nicola R. Stanley, Erik G. Bogsch,
Colin Robinson, Ben C. Berks and Tracy
Palmer
J. Biol. Chem. 2000, 275:16717-16722.
doi:10.1074/jbc.M000800200 originally published online March 15, 2000

Access the most updated version of this article at doi: 10.1074/jbc.M000800200

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the JBC Affinity Sites.

Alerts:
- When this article is cited
- When a correction for this article is posted

Click here to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts

This article cites 0 references, 0 of which can be accessed free at
http://www.jbc.org/content/275/22/16717.full.html#ref-list-1
