
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 2000 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

NADE, a p75NTR-associated Cell Death Executor,
Is Involved in Signal Transduction Mediated by the
Common Neurotrophin Receptor p75NTR*

Received for publication, February 28, 2000, and in revised form, April 6, 2000
Published, JBC Papers in Press, April 11, 2000, DOI 10.1074/jbc.C000140200

Jun Mukai§$, Takahisa Hachiya§¶, Shisako Shoji-Hoshino§$, Makoto T. Kimura§$**, Daita Nadano‡, Petro Suvanto∥, Takaomi Hanaoka‡, Yin Li∥∥, Shinji Irie‡, Lloyd A. Greene§§, and Taka-Aki Sato§ ¶

From the ‡Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Tsukuba Life Science Center, RIKEN (Institute of Physical and Chemical Research), Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan, the ¶Division of Molecular Oncology, Department of Otolaryngology/Head & Neck Surgery and Pathology, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, the ||Ina Laboratory, Medical & Biological Laboratories Co., Ltd., Nagano 396-0002, Japan, the ††ZAIYA Inc., Kyoto 600-8815, Japan, the **Department of Molecular & Cell Genetics, School of Life Science, Tottori University, Tottori 683, Japan, and the §§Department of Pathology, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032

The low affinity neurotrophin receptor p75NTR can mediate cell survival as well as cell death of neural cells by NGF and other neurotrophins. To elucidate p75NTR-mediated signal transduction, we screened p75NTR-associated proteins by a yeast two-hybrid system. We identified one positive clone and named NADE (p75NTR-associated cell death executor). Mouse NADE has marked homology to the human HGR74 protein. NADE specifically binds to the cell-death domain of p75NTR. Co-expression of NADE and p75NTR induced caspase-2 and caspase-3 activities and the fragmentation of nuclear DNA in 293T cells. However, in the absence of p75NTR, NADE failed to induce apoptosis, suggesting that NADE expression is necessary but insufficient for p75NTR-mediated apoptosis. Furthermore, p75NTR/NADE-induced cell death was dependent on NGF but not BDNF, NT-3, or NT-4/5, and the recruitment of NADE to p75NTR (intracellular domain) was dose-dependent. We obtained similar results from PC12 cells, nmr5 cells, and oligodendrocytes. Taken together, NADE is the first signaling adaptor molecule identified in the involvement of p75NTR-mediated apoptosis induced by NGF, and it may play an important role in the pathogenesis of neurogenetic diseases.

(ICD)¹ has a C-terminal region that is highly homologous to a type-2 death domain, thus the existence of p75NTR (ICD)-binding proteins has been implicated (7). Recently, tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor (TRAF) family proteins, FAP-1, and zinc finger proteins have been reported to interact with p75NTR (ICD) (8–12), and these proteins potentially are involved in p75NTR-mediated signal transduction. However, none of them had a direct effect on NGF-dependent apoptosis. To further identify p75NTR (ICD)-binding proteins, we used rat p75NTR (ICD) as a target to screen mouse cDNA libraries by a yeast two-hybrid system. Here we report the identification of the p75NTR-associated cell death executor, NADE.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cloning of NADE—mNADE was isolated by using a yeast two-hybrid system as described previously (13); the cytosolic domain of p75NTR cDNA (amino acids 338–396) was used as a target. Briefly, we introduced mouse embryo pVP16 cDNA libraries into the LexA/p75NTR-expressing cells by using a high efficiency LiOAc transformation method (14). From a screen of 5 × 10⁷ transformants, we identified an initial set of 672 His⁺ colonies. Using a β-galactosidase colorimetric assay (15), we selected 181 clones as candidates for further analysis. One clone, which specifically reacted with the LexA/p75NTR, was selected and was named NADE. A full-length mNADE cDNA was cloned into pBluescript II KS(+) by inserting the partial NADE cDNA (nucleotides 7–524) and the 5′-rapid amplification of cDNA end product. PCR was used to replace the stop codon and to add 5′XhoI and 3′BamHI sites into the full-length NADE cDNA. pcDNA3.1/myc-His(−)A/mNADE was constructed by inserting a full-length mNADE cDNA into XhoI-BamHI-digested pcDNA3.1/myc-His(−)A (Invitrogen). Human NADE cDNA was amplified from a Jurkat T cell cDNA library; the product was then cloned into XhoI-BamHI-digested pcDNA3.1/myc-His(−)A.

Plasmids and Analysis of Subcellular Localization—Expression plasmids for green fluorescence protein (GFP)-fused mNADE proteins were made as follows: GFP cDNA was PCR-amplified from pEGFP-N2 (CLONTECH) by using the primer pair 5′-CTAGCTAGCATCATGGT-GAGCAAGGGCGAG-3′ and 5′-CCGCTCGAGTCTTGTACAGCTCGTC-CAT-3′. The product was cloned into NheI-XhoI-digested pcDNA

* This work was supported in part by the National Institutes of Health Grant R01 GM55147 and by the Ribosome Engineering Project (The Organized Research Combination) of the Japanese Science and Technology Agency. The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
§ The first four authors contributed equally to this work.
The nucleotide sequence(s) reported in this paper has been submitted to the GenBank™/EBI Data Bank with accession number(s) AF187064, AF187065, and AF187066.
¶∥ To whom correspondence and reprint requests addressed: Division of Molecular Oncology, Dept. of Otolaryngology/Head & Neck Surgery and Pathology, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, 630 West 168th St., P&S 11-451, New York, NY 10032. Tel.: 212-305-1701; Fax: 212-305-1736; E-mail: ts174@columbia.edu.

1 The abbreviations used were: ICD, intracellular domain; BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophin factor; NGF, nerve growth factor; NT, neurotrophin; RT, reverse transcription; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; p75NTR, p75 neurotrophin receptor; PARP, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase; GFP, green fluorescence protein; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; ALLN, N-acetyl-Leu-Leu-norleucinal; ALLM, N-acetyl-Leu-Leu-methioninal; PSI, Z-Ile-Glu-(OtBu)-Ala-Leu-aldehyde; MG132, Z-Leu-Leu-Leu-aldehyde; GST, glutathione S-transferase; FITC, fluorescein isothiocyanate; DMEM, Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium; PAGE, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; DAPI, 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole.

and NT-4/5 were obtained from PeproTech EC. TO-PRO-3 iodide was obtained from Molecular Probes. The anti-α-NADE polyclonal antibody was prepared by immunizing rabbits with the GST-mNADE fusion protein and was purified by using antigen-coupled Sepharose 4B (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). The anti-rat p75NTR monoclonal antibody was obtained from Chemicon. The anti-caspase-3 monoclonal antibody and the anti-PARP polyclonal were obtained from Santa Cruz. The anti-mouse IgG-Cy-5 antibody and were purchased from Jackson Immunoresearch. The anti-mouse Myc antibody, anti-FLAG antibody, and the anti-rabbit IgG-FITC conjugate were obtained from the Medical & Biological Laboratories. The anti-rat p75NTR antibody, the anti-caspase-2 polyclonal antibody, and the anti-O1 mouse monoclonal antibody were kind gifts from Drs. M. V. Chao, L. A. Greene, and S. Pfeiffer, respectively.

**Cell Culture and Transfection—**293T and PCNA cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection; PC12 and nmr5 cells were obtained from Dr. L. A. Greene. Oligodendrocytes were isolated as described previously (16). 293T and PCNA cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. PC12 and nmr5 cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% horse serum and 5% calf serum. 293T cells ($1.5 \times 10^6$/per 100-mm dish) were transiently transfected with 20 μg of plasmid according to the calcium phosphate method in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. PC12 and nmr5 cells ($4 \times 10^6$ per 100-mm dish) were transiently transfected with 12 μg of plasmid by using LipofectAMINE PLUS (Life Technologies, Inc.) in serum-free DMEM containing 100 ng/ml NGF.

**Co-immunoprecipitation—**The transfected 293T cells were lysed in 1 ml of lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 mM benzamidine, 2 μg/ml aprotinin, 2 μg/ml leupeptin, 7 μg/ml pepstatin, and 2 μM PSI) at 4 °C for 15 min, then the lysates were centrifuged at $15,000 \times g$ for 30 min. The supernatants were immunoprecipitated at 4 °C for 8 h by using 1 mg of anti-Myc antibody coupled to protein G-Sepharose 4B. The beads were washed with lysis buffer, and the proteins were separated by 12.5% SDS-PAGE and analyzed by Western blotting using the anti-p75NTR polyclonal antibody or the anti-α-NADE polyclonal antibody. For PC12 cells, cells were treated with 100 ng/ml NGF in serum-free DMEM, lysed in 1 ml of lysis buffer at 4 °C for 15 min, and centrifuged at $15,000 \times g$ for 20 min. The supernatants were immunoprecipitated by using 0.8 mg of anti-rat p75NTR monoclonal antibody (Chemicon) or anti-α-NADE polyclonal antibody, which were coupled to CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). The immunoprecipitated proteins were analyzed by Western blotting using the anti-rat p75NTR polyclonal antibody or the anti-α-NADE polyclonal antibody.

**RT-PCR—**TRIZOL Reagent (Life Technologies, Inc.) was used to isolate 5 μg of total RNA from oligodendrocytes after treatment of 10 to 100 ng/ml NGF for 3 h. NADE mRNA was amplified by using the primer pair 5′-CATTCGCCAACAGGCAGATG-3′ and 5′-GGCATAAGGCAGAATTCATC-3′. β-Actin was used as a control.

**Apoptosis Assays and Caspase Assays—**The transfected cells were washed with PBS, fixed in 3.7% paraformaldehyde, and stained with 50 μg/ml DAPI. By using a fluorescence microscopy, the number of cells that had the nuclear morphology typical of apoptosis among at least 400 cells were counted in each sample. The MEBSTAIN Apoptosis Kit Direct (Medical & Biological Laboratories) was used for TUNEL assay (17) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Western blotting analysis detected the active forms of caspase-2, caspase-3, and PARP. For PC12 cells and nmr5, the caspase-3 assay was performed with a CPP32/caspase-3 Fluorometric Protease Assay Kit (Medical & Biological Laboratories) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

**Immunocytochemistry—**Oligodendrocytes were treated with 100 ng/ml NGF for 12 h. After incubation with the anti-O1 mouse monoclonal antibody, cells were fixed with 3.7% paraformaldehyde for 60 min at room temperature, permeabilized with 0.1% sodium citrate containing 0.1% Triton X-100 for 2 min on ice, and incubated with the anti-α-NADE antibody in PBS containing 0.5 M NaCl, 1% bovine serum albumin, and 1% normal goat serum (Sigma) at room temperature for 1 h. After several rinses with PBS, cells were incubated with the anti-rabbit IgG-FITC conjugate (Medical & Biological Laboratories) and anti-mouse IgG-Cy-5 conjugate in PBS at room temperature for 30 min. For the TUNEL assay, after incubation with the anti-O1 monoclonal antibody, cells were fixed, permeabilized, and processed by using the in situ detection kit for apoptosis according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Medical & Biological Laboratory). After several rinses with PBS, cells were incubated with the anti-mouse IgG-Cy-5 conjugate in PBS at room temperature for 30 min. Glass coverslips were mounted in glycerin jelly, and the images of representative fields were captured on a Zeiss LSM 510 confocal laser-scanning microscope.

**Reagents and Antibodies—**N-acetyl-Leu-Leu-norleucinal (ALLN), N-acetyl-Leu-Leu-methioninal (ALLM), and mouse NGF were obtained from Sigma. PSI (Z-Ile-Glu-(OtBu)-Ala-Leu-aldehyde) and MG132 (Z-Leu-Leu-Leu-aldehyde) were obtained from Calbiochem. BDNF, NT-3,

17568 NADE, a p75NTR-associated Cell Death Executor

A
Interaction
TM DD 396
p75NTR WT
245-396 +
338-396 +
394-396 (SPV) -
GST 245-396 338-396 394-396
33.9 NADE

B
US
NES 124
Interaction
NADE WT +
Δ113-124 +
Δ107-124 +
Δ101-124 -
Δ1-80 +
Δ1-100 -
GST-p75NTR GST
NADE WT Δ113-124 Δ107-124 Δ101-124 Δ1-80 Δ1-100
+ + + + + +

C
Control NGF (ng/ml)
IP: Myc Ab
WB: p75NTR Ab
WB: p75NTR Ab
WB: Myc Ab
p75NTR
p75NTR
NADE monomer

D
PC12 cells
IP Ab
P75NTR Ab α-NADE Ab Mouse IgG Rabbit IgG
WB: p75NTR Ab
WB: α-NADE Ab
p75NTR
NADE

FIG. 2. Interaction of NADE with p75NTR. A, top panel: determination of the mNADE-binding domain in p75NTR in vitro. TM, transmembrane domain; DD, cytoplasmic death domain. Bottom panel, the interaction of mNADE with the cell death domain of p75NTR in vitro. GST-p75NTR fusion proteins and in vitro translated mNADE with \[^{35}S\]methionine were incubated and bound complexes were precipitated as described previously (12). B, top panel: determination of the p75NTR-binding domain in mNADE in vitro. The mNADE domains tested in the GST fusion proteins are shown schematically. NES, nuclear export signal; US, ubiquitination signal. Bottom panel, the interaction of mNADE with p75NTR was measured by using the GST fusion proteins containing the p75NTR cytoplasmic region (338–396) with either mNADE or its deletion mutants. C, mNADE associates with p75NTR in a ligand-dependent manner. Cells were transfected with pcDNA3/rat-p75NTR and pcDNA3.1/myc-His(−)A/mNADE and cultured for 10 h. After withdrawing the serum, cells were treated with 10 or 100 ng/ml NGF for 12 h. Coimmunoprecipitation was performed as described under “Materials and Methods.” Expression of p75NTR and

A
p75NTR NADE + p75NTR
Serum free
Relative cell number
NGF
BDNF
NT-3
NT-4
Log (Fluorescence)

B
Vector P75 NTR NADE NADE + P75 NTR
Intact
Caspase-2 37kDa
Intact p20
Caspase-3
PARP
α-tubulin
Intact

FIG. 3. NGF-dependent regulation of p75NTR/NADE-induced apoptosis in 293T cells. A, effect of neurotrophins on cell death initiated by the association of mNADE with p75NTR. Cells were transfected with both of an expression vector pcDNA vector pcDNA3.1/myc-His(−)A and pcDNA3/rat-p75NTR or both of pcDNA3/rat-p75NTR and pcDNA3.1/myc-His(−)A/mNADE and cultured for 10 h. After withdrawing the serum, the cells were treated with 100 ng/ml NGF, BDNF, NT-3, or NT-4/5 for 36 h. The TUNEL assay was performed as described under “Materials and Methods.” These representative histograms show the relative numbers of apoptotic cells. B, caspase activation induced by NGF-dependent p75NTR/NADE-mediated apoptosis. After serum depletion, cells were treated with 100 ng/ml NGF for 24 h. The activation of caspase-2 and caspase-3 was detected using anti-caspase-2 polyclonal and anti-caspase-3 monoclonal antibodies. The degradation of PARP was detected with the anti-PARP polyclonal antibody.

mNADE was confirmed by Western blotting using the anti-rat p75NTR and anti-mouse Myc antibodies. Anti-FLAG antibody was used as a control. D, native complex formation between NADE and p75NTR in PC12 cells as detected by co-immunoprecipitation assays. The anti-rabbit and the anti-mouse IgG antibodies were used as controls.

NADE, a p75NTR-associated Cell Death Executor

**RESULTS AND DISCUSSION**

Mouse NADE (mNADE) comprises 124 amino acids, with a predicted molecular mass of 14,532 Da; this factor seems to be a hydrophilic and acidic protein (estimated pl = 5.97). Previously uncharacterized human gene HGR74 (18) showed significant identity to mNADE (92.8%, except the histidine-asparagine-rich stretch (amino acid residues 36–48; Fig. 1A)), being an obvious human homolog of NADE. NADE proteins in mouse, rat, and human have two consensus motifs, the leucine-rich nuclear export signal (NES) (19) and two boxes for ubiquitination sequences (20) (Fig. 1A). Expression of mNADE mRNA (1.3 kilobases) was found highest in brain, heart, and lung, with lesser amounts in stomach, small intestine, and muscle and no expression in liver (data not shown). Interestingly, NADE protein was detected in PCNA and PC12 cells only after treatment with proteasome inhibitors ALLN, PSI, and MG132 for 3 h (Fig. 1B and data not shown). These data imply that native NADE is modified by the ubiquitin conjugating system, thereby leading to subsequent protein degradation by proteasome. To investigate whether the NES sequence (19) in NADE is used for protein transportation from nucleus to cytosol, subcellular localization analyses of GFP-NADE and GFP-NADE NES mutants (Leu-94 → Ala and Leu-97 → Ala) were performed in 293T cells. Wild type with intact NES localizes to cytoplasm (Fig. 1C, middle left panel), but the NES mutants remain in nucleus (Fig. 1C, bottom left panel). These data suggested that NADE protein can be exported from nucleus to cytosol and that a NADE associating protein may promote and regulate the functional interaction of NADE with p75NTR.

To assess the interaction between mNADE and p75NTR, we first performed *in vitro* binding assays using GST fusion proteins (Fig. 2A and B). The mapping studies demonstrated that mNADE strongly binds to the cell death domain of p75NTR (ICD) (amino acids 338–396) which is identical among mouse, rat, and human sequence (Fig. 2A). In addition, C-terminal portion of NADE (amino acids 81–106) is necessary for the interaction with p75NTR (ICD) (Fig. 2B). To confirm *in vivo* interaction of NADE with p75NTR and its ligand dependence, we carried out co-immunoprecipitation experiments with myc-tagged mNADE/p75NTR co-transfected 293T cells. The results clearly showed that the recruitment of mNADE to p75NTR (ICD) was increased dose-dependently by NGF (Fig. 2C). In addition, the co-immunoprecipitation assays under physiological conditions in rat pheochromocytoma PC12 and the human neuroblastoma SK-N-MC cell lines confirmed the interaction of NADE with p75NTR (Fig. 2D and data not shown). Interestingly, two NADE bands (22 and 44 kDa) were detected in SDS-PAGE under reducing conditions.

To investigate the functional role of mNADE, we tested ligand-dependent apoptosis by the interaction of mNADE with p75NTR in 293T cells. Using TUNEL assay, we detected ligand-dependent cell death in the presence of NGF, but not BDNF, NT-3, or NT-4/5 in co-transfected 293T cells (Fig. 3A). In addition, NGF-treated 293T and COS7 cells transfected with mNADE and p75NTR showed morphological changes and DNA fragmentation typical for apoptosis (data not shown). These results strongly suggest that NADE has an important role in NGF-induced cell death by transducing the signal downstream

β-Actin was used as a control. Bottom panels, immunocytochemistry was performed as described under “Materials and Methods.” Red indicates mature oligodendrocytes detected by the anti-O1 mouse monoclonal antibody and the anti-mouse IgG Cy-5-coupled secondary antibody. Green indicates NADE protein detected by using the anti-α-NADE antibody or the TUNEL assay with the FITC-dUTP. The superimposed arrows indicate positive staining of NADE protein and TUNEL.

of p75NTR. Next, we evaluated NGF-dependent caspase activation in transfected 293T cells. By Western blotting analysis, we showed that caspase-2 and caspase-3 were processed to active forms only in 293T cells that were co-transfected with mNADE and p75NTR and treated with 100 ng/ml NGF (Fig. 3B). Also under the same conditions, PARP was degraded (Fig. 3B). These data suggest that caspase-2 and caspase-3 are involved in NGF-induced cell death by p75NTR/NADE signal transduction pathway.

We used PC12 cells (p75NTR<sup>++</sup>, TrkA<sup>+</sup>) (21, 22), PC12 nmr5 cells (p75NTR<sup>+</sup>, TrkA<sup>-</sup>; these cells lack the TrkA receptor) (23) and mature oligodendrocytes (p75NTR<sup>++</sup>, TrkA<sup>-</sup>) (24) to further study the physiological functions of NADE. Transiently transfected PC12 and nmr5 cells expressed NADE protein in the presence of NGF (Fig. 4A, *top panel*). Both TUNEL assay and DAPI staining clearly showed that the transient transfection of mNADE to PC12 and nmr5 cells caused their NGF-dependent cell death (Fig. 4A, *middle panel* and data not shown). In addition, caspase-3 was activated in both cell types (Fig. 4A, *bottom panel*), suggesting that TrkA receptor does not markedly modulate p75NTR/NADE-mediated apoptosis.

RT-PCR was used to examine the NGF-dependent induction of NADE expression in mature oligodendrocytes. The results clearly showed that NADE mRNA is induced in the presence but not in the absence of NGF (Fig. 4B, *top panel*). Furthermore, NGF induced caspase-3 activation (Ref. 16 and data not shown), implying a role for NADE in NGF-dependent p75NTR-mediated apoptosis (24). To further characterize the NGF-dependent cell death of mature oligodendrocytes, confocal laser-scanning microscopy was used to detect the cells undergoing apoptosis. In NGF-treated cultures, 60% of mature oligodendrocytes were TUNEL-positive, but in control cultures, only 10% or less were TUNEL-positive. In addition, 70% of mature oligodendrocytes were stained by NADE antibodies in NGF-treated cultures, compared with 5% or less in control cultures. After NGF treatment for 12 h, both nuclear TUNEL-positive staining and NADE-positive staining could be observed in more than 50% of O1-positive mature oligodendrocytes by immunocytochemistry (Fig. 4B, *bottom panels* and data not shown).

The signal cascade mediated by p75NTR has been enigmatic for a long time. Recent evidence suggests that p75NTR bifunctionally mediates signals to induce as well as inhibit apoptosis (25, 26). Our results strongly support the hypothesis that NADE is a putative signal transducer for p75NTR-mediated apoptosis. Furthermore, co-induction of p75NTR and NADE

triggers zinc-induced neuronal cell death in the model of rat hippocampus following ischemia.<sup>2</sup> Importantly, since NADE contains NES as well as ubiquitination sequences, its protein levels and localization might be under tight control in normal cells. Taken together, our data showed that the functional interaction of NADE with p75NTR plays an important role in p75NTR-mediated signal transduction under physiological conditions.

Acknowledgments—We thank Michael L. Shelanski and Lanny G. Close for their helpful discussions and Makiko Iwai and Lydia Reveron for their excellent secretarial assistance.

REFERENCES

1. Rabizadeh, S., Oh, J., Zhong, L. T., Yang, J., Bitler, C. M., Butcher, L. L., and Bredesen, D. E. (1993) *Science* **261**, 345–348
2. Frade, J. M., Rodriguez-Tebar, A., and Barde Y. A. (1996) *Nature* **383**, 166–168
3. Barrett, G. L., and Bartlett, P. F. (1994) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **91**, 6501–6505
4. Johnson, D., Lanahan, A., Buck, C. R., Sehgal, A., Morgan, C., Mercer, E., Bothwell, M., and Chao, M. V. (1986) *Cell* **47**, 545–554
5. Chao, M. V., and Hempstead, B. L. (1995) *Trends Neurosci.* **18**, 321–326
6. Kaplan, D. R., and Miller, F. D. (1997) *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* **9**, 213–221
7. Feinstein, E., Kimchi, A., Wallach, D., Boldin, M., and Varfolomeev, E. (1995) *Trends Biochem. Sci.* **20**, 342–344
8. Khursigara, G., Orlinick, J. R., and Chao, M. V. (1999) *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 2597–2600
9. Ye, X., Mehlen, P., Rabizadeh, S., VanArsdale, T., Zhang, H., Shin, H., Wang, J. J. L., Leo, E., Zapata, J., Hauser, C. A., Reed, J. C., and Bredesen, D. E. (1999) *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 30202–30208
10. Chittka, A., and Chao, M. V. (1999) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **96**, 10705–10710
11. Casademunt, E., Carter, B. D., Benzil, I., Frade, J. M., Dechant, G., and Barde, Y. A. (1999) *EMBO J.* **18**, 6050–6061
12. Irie, S., Hachiya, T., Rabizadeh, S., Maruyama, W., Mukai, J., Li, Y., Reed J. C., Bredesen, D. E. & Sato, T. (1999) *FEBS Lett.* **460**, 191–198
13. Vojtek, A. B., Hollenberg, S. M., and Cooper, J. A. (1993) *Cell* **74**, 205–214
14. Gietz, D., Jean, A. S., Woods, R. A., and Schiestl, R. H. (1992) *Nucleic Acids Res.* **20**, 1425
15. Breeden, L., and Nasmyth, K. (1985) *Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol.* **50**, 643–650
16. Gu, C., Casaccia-Bonnefil, P., Srinivasan, A., and Chao, M. V. (1999) *J. Neurosci.* **19**, 3043–3049
17. McGahon, A. J., Martin, S. J., Bissonnette, R. P., Mahboubi, A., Shi Y., Mogil, R. J., Nishioka, W. K., and Green D. R. (1995) *Methods Cell Biol.* **46**, 153–185
18. Rapp, G., Freudenstein, J., Klaudiny, J., Mucha, J., Wempe, F., Zimmer, M., and Scheit, K. H. (1990) *DNA Cell Biol.* **9**, 479–485
19. Nakielny, S., and Dreyfuss, G. (1997) *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* **9**, 420–429
20. Ciechanover, A. (1998) *EMBO J.* **17**, 7151–7160
21. Ferrari, G., Anderson, B. L., Stephens, R. M., Kaplan, D. R., and Greene, L. A. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 3074–3080
22. Greene, L. A., and Tischler, A. S. (1976) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **73**, 2424–2428
23. Green, S. H., Rydel, R. E., Connolly, J. L., and Greene, L. A. (1986) *J. Cell Biol.* **102**, 830–843
24. Casaccia-Bonnefil, P., Carter, B. D., Dobrowsky, R. T., and Chao, M. V. (1996) *Nature* **383**, 716–719
25. Soilu-Hänninen, M., Ekert, P., Bucci, T., Syroid, D., Bartlett, P. F., and Kilpatrick, T. J. (1999) *J. Neurosci.* **19**, 4828–4838
26. Bunone, G., Mariotti, A., Compagni, A., Morandi, E., and Della Valle, G. (1997) *Oncogene* **14**, 1463–1470

<sup>2</sup>J. A. Park, J.-Y. Lee, T.-A. Sato, and J.-Y. Koh, submitted for publication.

MECHANISMS OF SIGNAL
TRANSDUCTION:
NADE, a p75NTR-associated Cell Death
Executor, Is Involved in Signal
Transduction Mediated by the Common
Neurotrophin Receptor p75NTR

Jun Mukai, Takahisa Hachiya, Shisako
Shoji-Hoshino, Makoto T. Kimura, Daita
Nadano, Petro Suvanto, Takaomi Hanaoka,
Yin Li, Shinji Irie, Lloyd A. Greene and
Taka-Aki Sato
J. Biol. Chem. 2000, 275:17566-17570.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C000140200 originally published online April 11, 2000

Access the most updated version of this article at doi: [10.1074/jbc.C000140200](http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C000140200)

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the [JBC Affinity Sites](https://www.jbc.org/site/affinity-sites).

Alerts:
- [When this article is cited](#)
- [When a correction for this article is posted](#)

[Click here](#) to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts

This article cites 26 references, 14 of which can be accessed free at
[http://www.jbc.org/content/275/23/17566.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/275/23/17566.full.html#ref-list-1)
