
Immunologic Research 2000;21/2–3:293–303

# Focal Adhesion Kinase Functions as a Receptor-Proximal Signaling Component Required for Directed Cell Migration

## Abstract

In performing host-defense functions, cells of the immune system become activated by soluble chemokine signals and must migrate through endothelial cell or solid tissue barriers to reach sites of inflammation or infection. Regulated adhesive interactions of immune cells with endothelium, extracellular matrix components, and cells of solid organs are critical control points of the overall immune response. Both the soluble chemokine and cell adhesion receptor-mediated migration signals must converge on common intracellular targets to engage the cell migration machinery. In this article, we focus on the role of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and its homolog Pyk2 as cytoplasmic mediators of motility events in multiple cell types. We introduce the overall domain structure of the FAK and Pyk2 nonreceptor protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs), highlight some of the signals that activate these PTKs, and detail the molecules that functionally interact and signal transduction pathways that may mediate cell migration responses. Emphasis is placed on the knowledge gained from studies using FAK-null cells as a model system to decipher the role of this PTK in promoting cell motility.

## Key Words

- Cell migration
- Focal adhesion kinase
- Chemokine receptors
- Integrin receptors
- Src family kinases

## Introduction

Cells of the immune system sense and migrate toward gradients of environmental factors, an ability of paramount importance to the maintenance of homeostasis and the regulation of host-defense functions. Both soluble factors and immobilized extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins can trigger changes in cell shape or directed migration events; these cues have been termed *chemotactic* and *haptotactic stimuli*, respectively. For a cell to initiate

David D. Schlaepfer  
Department of Immunology, IMM26  
The Scripps Research Institute  
10550 N. Torrey Pines Road  
La Jolla, CA 92037  
E-mail: dschlaep@scripps.edu

© 2000  
Humana Press Inc.  
0257–277X/00/  
21/2–3:293–303/$12.75

Rolling                      Attachment                  Transmigration              Migration

Lymphocyte
FAK
Chemokines
FAK-P
Endothelium
Mediated by: Selectins
Integrins
IG
Integrins
FAK (Pyk2)
FAK-P
Site of Inflammation

Fig. 1. Extravasation of lymphocytes. The shear stress regulated interaction of selectins on the lymphocytes with specific endothelial cell oligosaccharide structures leads to a rolling of the cells along the vessel wall. Stimulation of the lymphocytes by a local gradient of chemokines results in activation of integrin receptors and a firm attachment of these cells to the endothelium. In addition, engagement of chemokine receptors is known to activate members of the focal adhesion kinase family (FAK, Pyk2). Immunoglobulin superfamily (IG) receptors also stimulate FAK tyrosine phosphorylation and lymphocyte transmigration through the endothelial layer. These studies support the hypothesis that FAK activation (FAK-P) may be important in the transmigration processes of the lymphocytes to sites of inflammation.

tiate migration events, it must be able to both positively and negatively regulate adhesive interactions with either neighboring cells or matrix components in order to generate propulsive traction forces. In particular, leukocytes in the bloodstream have to interact with and traverse the endothelium, a process referred to as extravasation, before they can migrate to sites of inflammation (Fig. 1). Some of the earliest stimuli affecting circulating T lymphocytes are generated by chemokine signals, and subsequent extravasation events are modulated by signals from the selectin and integrin family of transmembrane adhesion receptor proteins (reviewed in ref. 1). In addition, these activation events are augmented by the involvement of costimulatory receptors (reviewed in ref. 2). Like the T cell receptor (TCR),

surface receptors do not possess intrinsic enzymatic activities. Therefore, they must function through the activation of other receptor-proximal signaling proteins.

### Stimulation of Focal Adhesion Kinase and Pyk2 During T Cell Activation

In the case of the TCR, the earliest detectable biochemical event is the rapid activation of several protein-tyrosine kinases (PTKs) (3). Among the PTKs that constitute the receptor-proximal components of TCR signaling are members of the Src family, the Syk/ZAP-70 family, the Csk family, and the focal adhesion kinase (FAK) family (4) that comprises FAK and Pyk2 (5) (also named related adhesion focal tyrosine kinase (6), calcium-dependent protein tyrosine kinase (7), or cell adhesion

kinase β(8)). In response to TCR stimulation, FAK and Pyk2 tyrosine phosphorylation occurs within 1 to 2 min (9–11), and this phosphorylation is augmented when cells are adherent on matrix proteins or when they are costimulated with antibodies to β1, β2, or β3 integrin receptors (12–15).

Recent evidence has emerged that the activity of FAK and Pyk2 can also be regulated by chemokine and G-protein-linked receptor activation events (reviewed in ref. 16). In human T cells, chemokines such as RANTES stimulate the tyrosine phosphorylation of FAK (17), whereas both RANTES stimulation and CCR5 receptor-mediated events enhance Pyk2 tyrosine phosphorylation (18).

Whereas the biologic role for increased Pyk2 tyrosine phosphorylation is not well defined, evidence is accumulating that increased FAK tyrosine phosphorylation is closely linked to both haptotaxis and chemotaxis cell migration in multiple cell types. In activated T cells, FAK prominently redistributes to the leading edge of the migrating cells (19), and costimulation of cells with antibodies to CD3 and CD2 potently stimulates both FAK tyrosine phosphorylation and cell migration (20). Whereas mouse gene knockout studies have yielded important information with regard to the function of various signaling molecules in T cell responses (21), the FAK gene knockout yielded an early embryonic lethal phenotype (embryonic d 8.5) prior to the development of thymocytes (22). Interestingly, introduction of *fak*+/− heterozygosity into a *fyn*−/− mouse background resulted in an impaired development of CD4+CD8+ thymocytes with atrophy of the thymic cortex (23), suggesting a role for FAK in T cell developmental processes. More recent studies have been focused on deciphering the molecular mechanisms of the migratory abnormalities displayed by FAK−/− fibroblasts. We summarize herein the current understanding for the

role of FAK in cell migration that has emerged from genetic, biochemical, as well as cell biological studies in various adherent cell types. In addition, we give a perspective on the potential use of FAK as a target to inhibit abnormal cell migration events in pathologic settings.

### Functional Domains of FAK

FAK is a 116-kDa protein that is expressed in a variety of cell types (24). The primary structure of FAK is characterized by a central kinase domain and large flanking N- and C-terminal sequences that do not contain either src-homology 2 (SH2) or SH3 domains (Fig. 2). Within the N-terminal region, sequence similarities exist to band 4.1 homology domains (25). The C-terminus contains a focal adhesion targeting (F.A.T.) domain that functions autonomously in mediating FAK localization to focal contact sites (16). Interestingly, the F.A.T. domain encompasses the binding sites for the integrin receptor binding proteins paxillin (26) and talin (27,28), implicating these two molecules in the recruitment of FAK to focal adhesions. In addition, two proline-rich stretches are located in the C-terminal region that have been shown to serve as binding sites for SH3 domain-containing proteins such as p130Cas (29) or the Rho-GTPase activating protein, Graf (30). A similar molecular architecture is conserved in Pyk2, which is highly expressed in hematopoietic cells and neurons (31).

On appropriate cell stimulation, FAK and Pyk2 become activated through undetermined mechanisms and become highly tyrosine phosphorylated on several sites in vivo. Integrin receptor activation promotes FAK tyrosine phosphorylation at more than six different tyrosine residues (32), and, in particular, phosphorylation of FAK at sites within the kinase domain leads to elevated FAK kinase activity (33). Another important FAK phosphorylation

(p85)
(c-Src)
P P
Y397 Y407
P P
Y576 Y577
FAK N Band 4.1 Kinase Domain Pro-1 Pro-2 F.A.T. C
p130Cas
Binding
Talin and
Paxillin
Binding
(Grb2)
P P
Y861 Y925

FRNK N F.A.T. C

Pyk2 N Band 4.1 Kinase Domain Pro-1 Pro-2 Y881
Src-family PTK Binding
(P)
Y402
(P) (P)
Y579 Y580
(Grb2)

FAK / Pyk2
Sequence Similarity
<10% ~40% ~60%

Fig. 2. Structural features of FAK and Pyk2 nonreceptor PTKs. FAK and Pyk2 contain a central kinase domain flanked by large N- and C-terminal domains that contain regions of sequence similarity surrounding phosphorylation sites (P) and proline-rich regions (Pro-1, Pro-2) that are binding sites for SH3 domain-containing proteins such as p130Cas and Graf. For FAK, the six sites of in vivo tyrosine phosphorylation and the residues involved in SH2 domain binding interactions are indicated. The corresponding and conserved tyrosines in Pyk2 are also indicated. Divergent band 4.1 domains are found in the N-terminal domains of both FAK and Pyk2. FAK and FRNK may interact with integrins and localize to cell-substratum contact sites through interactions with proteins such as paxillin and talin involving the F.A.T. region in the FAK C-terminal domain. The regional sequence similarities between FAK and Pyk2 are also highlighted.

site at Tyr-397 (corresponding to Tyr-402 in Pyk2) constitutes an autophosphorylation site that is also a binding site for the SH2 domain of Src family kinases. It is thought that following binding to Tyr-397, Src kinases transphosphorylate other sites on FAK, which, in turn, lead to the recruitment of additional SH2 domain-containing proteins such as the adapter protein Grb2 or the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3′-(PI3) kinase (34). Therefore, autophosphorylation of FAK at Tyr-397 regulates the formation of an active FAK/Src complex that precedes the assembly

of a larger signaling protein complex and the subsequent activation of downstream signaling pathways.

### FAK-Mediated Signaling Events

Biochemical analyses of FAK have demonstrated that this PTK is important in facilitating integrin-initiated signaling events in multiple cell types (35, 36). A key step in FAK activation events is the autophosphorylation at Tyr-397 that leads to the recruitment of Src family kinases. Src kinases are then in a posi-

Fig. 3. Role of FAK and Src family PTKs in integrin-stimulated signaling events. Integrin receptor engagement by ligands such as fibronectin or vitronectin stimulate FAK autophosphorylation at Tyr-397, creating a cSrc SH2 domain binding site (highlighted by the dashed box). Recruitment and activation of Src family PTKs can lead to enhanced phosphorylation of FAK at other sites, such as Tyr-925 (which creates a binding site for the Grb2 adapter protein). Integrin activation of both FAK and Src-family PTKs can promote Shc tyrosine phosphorylation and Grb2 binding to Shc at Tyr-317. Grb2 binding to these signaling complexes can potentiate the translocation of the guanosine 5′-diphosphate/guanosine 5′-triphosphate (GTP) exchange protein Sos to the plasma membrane, leading to enhanced GTP exchange on Ras. Activation of the ERK/MAPK cascade is one target for the actions of GTP-bound Ras. Src family association with FAK also potentiates the association and tyrosine phosphorylation of p130Cas. Crk and Nck adapter protein binding to p130Cas may lead to enhanced cell migration through the activation of pathways involving the Rac GTPase or the JNK/MAPK cascade, which may facilitate both motility and gene expression events.

tion to phosphorylate additional tyrosine residues on FAK or on FAK-associated proteins such as p130Cas. Src-mediated phosphorylation of FAK at Tyr-925 promotes the SH2-mediated binding of the small Grb2 adapter protein, which provides a direct link to the activation of the small G-protein Ras and the downstream ERK2/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway (34). Either Src family PTK or FAK-mediated phosphorylation of p130Cas (37) promotes the binding of the adapter proteins Nck and Crk to p130Cas, which, in turn, facilitate the activation of the

cJun amino terminal kinase (JNK)/MAPK pathway (38) or the serine/threonine p21-activated kinase (16). Indeed, it has been recently demonstrated that the JNK/MAPK pathway is activated in a FAK-dependent manner on adhesion of cells to fibronectin and that these signals are necessary for efficient cell-cycle progression events (39) and may also be involved in generating cell survival signals (40) (Fig. 3).

Additional connections between FAK and the p85 subunit of PI3-kinase have been established that link FAK with the activation of cell

survival pathways (41, 42). Downstream signaling connections between FAK and ERK/JNK MAPK are likely to result in altered gene transcription events, and these signals may be related to a role for FAK in promoting anchorage-dependent growth of cells (43). Moreover, it is likely that FAK connections to the ERK/JNK MAPKs are important for the generation of promigratory signaling events. ERK2/MAPK activity has been shown to be directed toward the phosphorylation of myosin light chain kinase, thereby directly modulating cell migration (44), and ERK/JNK MAPK phosphorylation of transcription factors has been shown to affect gene transcription events of various metalloproteinases (45). Treatment of ovarian cancer cells with antisense oligonucleotides to reduce FAK expression resulted in the inhibition of integrin-stimulated metalloproteinase 9 gene transcription and a dramatic reduction in carcinoma cell migration through a basement membrane barrier (46). These results support a role for FAK-mediated signaling events in the control of cell migration.

### Promotion of Integrin-Mediated Haptotaxis Cell Migration by FAK

Further evidence for an important role for FAK in cell migration comes from several in vivo studies showing that the invasiveness and metastatic potential of human tumors is directly proportional to the level of FAK protein expression (47). In cell culture, overexpression of FAK increases integrin-mediated haptotaxis cell migration (48). Genetic support for FAK function in cell migration comes from the analysis of FAK-deficient fibroblasts. FAK⁻/⁻ mouse embryos die at embryonic d 8.5 in utero owing to defective mesodermal development, a phenotype that closely resembles the embryonic lethal phenotypes observed in both fibronectin- and integrin β1–deficient mice (49). Interestingly, fibroblasts isolated from FAK⁻/⁻ embryos adhere to ECM substrates and form numerous focal contact structures. Therefore, FAK does not have an essential role in promoting cell adhesion or in the formation of focal contact structures, both events required for the initial generation of traction forces. FAK⁻/⁻ fibroblasts possess a distinct rounded morphology and exhibit motility defects when analyzed in wound-healing or modified Boyden chamber migration assays (16). Because the gastrulation stage of embryonic development is a period of prominent cell motility events, the embryonic lethality of the FAK deficiency is likely connected to the required role of FAK in the turnover or regulation of focal contact structures during migration events.

Despite their extensive similarities, reexpression of FAK but not Pyk2 in FAK⁻/⁻ fibroblasts rescues the migration defects (50). Interestingly, FAK variants with a mutated Src SH2 binding site (FAK Y397F), compromised kinase activity (FAK K454R), or altered proline-rich SH3 domain binding sequences (FAK P712/713A) only partially restore the haptotaxis response of FAK⁻/⁻ cells (51). These results suggest that multiple protein-protein interactions with FAK are required for the initiation of integrin-stimulated migration events. In contrast to the localization of FAK to focal adhesions, Pyk2 exhibits a perinuclear distribution in FAK-deficient fibroblasts. These results support the hypothesis that subcellular localization of FAK and/or Pyk2 is an important prerequisite for the promotion of cell migration. Indeed, targeting of the N-terminal and kinase domain of Pyk2 to focal adhesions by fusing these sequences to the C-terminus of FAK (which encompasses the FAT domain) results in increased FAK⁻/⁻ haptotaxis cell motility (unpublished results).

Additional support for FAK in mediating cell migration comes from studies employing
a dominant negative approach to inhibit FAK function. The FAK-related nonkinase domain (FRNK) is the autonomously expressed C-terminal domain of FAK encompassing the proline-rich sequences and the F.A.T. domain (53) (Fig. 2). Expression of FRNK interferes with cell spreading and cell migration and is accompanied by reduced tyrosine phosphorylation of FAK. Because FRNK localizes to focal adhesion sites, the dominant-negative effects of FRNK expression are presumably owing to the competitive displacement of FAK from focal contact sites. This hypothesis is supported by the finding that a point mutant of FRNK (L1034S) containing an amino acid substitution in the F.A.T. domain does not localize to focal contacts and does not inhibit cell migration events (51). Therefore, the expression of FRNK acts to inhibit the formation of an active FAK-mediated signaling complex.

### Promotion of Chemotaxis Cell Motility by FAK

In addition to integrin-stimulated signals, soluble chemokine and growth factor signals also act as potent stimulators of cell migration. Because *fak*⁻/⁻ embryos fail to develop and because gastrulation is characterized by complex morphogenic cell movements stimulated by both integrin and growth factor cues, we speculated that FAK may be a common receptor-proximal component of both haptotaxis and chemotaxis cell migration events. Using the FAK⁻/⁻, FAK reexpressing, and wild-type FAK⁺/⁺ fibroblasts, we found that FAK-deficient cells display a significantly reduced chemotaxis response to normally mitogenic concentrations of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), and basic fibroblast growth factor (52). In the FAK⁻/⁻ cells, growth factor receptor-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation events are normal. However, in FAK⁺/⁺ and FAK-reexpressing cells, FAK can be detected in a complex with the activated PDGF or EGF receptors. Whereas Pyk2 is expressed in the FAK⁻/⁻ cells, it does not detectably associate with the activated receptors. We have found that the FAK–growth factor receptor association involves the N-terminal band 4.1 homology domain of FAK, occurs within minutes after growth factor stimulation, and is most likely mediated by some type of intermediary bridging protein (Fig. 4). Deletion of the first 100 amino acids from the FAK N-terminus (FAK d1–100) abolishes the association of FAK with activated growth factor receptors. More important, FAK has to be localized in a membrane-proximal position at focal adhesions to enter in a complex with the growth factor receptor in vivo, because expression of FRNK can inhibit the association (52).

Regarding cell migration, the association of FAK with the growth factor receptor is necessary for a motility response, because expression of FAK d1–100 does not promote chemotaxis in the FAK⁻/⁻ cells. The finding that FAK is able to localize to focal contact sites via its C-terminal F.A.T. domain, where it propagates integrin-initiated signals, and also is able to associate with growth factor receptors via its N-terminus, provides an intriguing molecular explanation for a longstanding observation: signals received via growth factor receptors and extracellular matrix adhesion receptors have to synergize to fully activate cellular responses. For example, suspended fibroblasts only weakly respond to growth factor stimulation when compared to cells attached to ECM proteins or anti-integrin antibodies. Note that FAK normally is dephosphorylated and inactive in suspended cells. However, if constitutively activated FAK is expressed in cells, they are able to respond to growth factor signals while in suspension (43). FAK therefore seems to

Role of FAK in Cell Migration   299
Growth Factor  
Receptor PTKs  

EGF  
PDGF  

G-Protein  
Linked Receptors  

MIP1α / RANTES  

Integrin  
Receptors  

α5β1  
αvβ3  

RGD  

Talin  
Paxillin  

FAK  
N Band 4.1 Kinase Domain F.A.T. C  
Y397  
P  

Src-family PTKs  

Fig. 4. FAK is a receptor-proximal target for growth factor, chemokine, and integrin receptors. FAK localizes to integrin-rich focal adhesion sites via its C-terminal F.A.T. domain that encompasses binding sites for paxillin and talin. In addition, the N-terminal domain of FAK mediates the association with activated growth factor receptors. Stimulation of integrin receptors, growth factor receptors, G-protein-linked receptors, or chemokine receptors has been shown to activate FAK and to result in phosphorylation at Tyr-397. On phosphorylation at Tyr-397, FAK recruits Src family kinases into an active signaling complex that is crucial for the regulation of directed cell migration.

constitute a molecular glue that links integrin and growth factor receptors and to provide a receptor-proximal scaffold for the assembly of a signaling complex.

FAK as a Target for Intervention

Because FAK plays a central role in the migratory response of cells, it appears to be a promising target for the inhibition of aberrant cell migration events. For example, the pharmacologic control of cell movement would give clinicians a powerful tool with which to inhibit tumor metastasis or block the infiltration of immune cells during the process of inflammation. However, to date, no FAK-specific pharmacologic kinase inhibitors have been described. One promising approach is the use of antisense oligonucleotides to reduce FAK protein expression. In human A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells, antisense oligonucleotides directed toward human FAK, but not control oligonucleotides, dramatically reduced both FAK expression and EGF-stimulated chemotaxis without affecting cell viability and EGF-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation events (unpublished results). In addition, cell invasion through a reconstituted basement membrane was impaired in the FAK antisense but not control oligonucleotide-treated carcinoma cells.

An alternative approach takes advantage of the endogenous inhibitor of FAK, the C-terminal FRNK fragment. Expression of FRNK in endothelial cells inhibits their migratory response in wound-healing assays (54), and transient FRNK expression acts as a potent
inhibitor of fibroblast haptotaxis and chemotaxis motility events (51, 52). FRNK-transfected rat aortic smooth muscle cells display reduced chemotaxis in response to the growth factor PDGF-BB (unpublished results). This finding is significant because PDGF-BB-stimulated migration of vascular smooth muscle cells from the media to the intima of arteries is thought to be an underlying mechanism in restenosis, a pathologic process that limits the success of angioplasty procedures. Therefore, in addition to FAK reduction by antisense treatment, FRNK expression in target cells could be an effective means of inhibiting FAK-promoted cell migration events.

### Conclusion

We have focused on the signaling connections between FAK and a variety of cell-surface receptors. One of the best analogies to describe the role of FAK in cells is that it functions as a “scaffold” for the assembly of a signaling complex through the coordinated recruitment of other PTKs and adapter proteins. Because FAK functionally interacts with different classes of growth factor and integrin receptors, it is an important receptor-proximal position to modulate the molecular events controlling cell migration. When tools/inhibitors become available to modulate FAK in lymphocytes, the information gained from the study of FAK-deficient fibroblasts should be applicable to hematopoietic cells, in which FAK is activated by both chemotactic and haptotactic stimuli. Continued future efforts to determine and decipher both the upstream and downstream signaling connections to FAK will enhance our knowledge about the molecular mechanisms that regulate cell growth, shape, and migration.

### Acknowledgments

This work was supported by Public Health Services grant R29 CA75240 from the National Cancer Institute, by the American Cancer Society (RPG-98-109-01-TBE), and by a Grant-In-Aid from the American Heart Association (9750682N). C. R. H. was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Ha 2856/1-1).

### References

1. Hynes RO: Integrins: versatility, modulation and signaling in cell adhesion. Cell 1992;69:11–25.
2. Watts TH, DeBenedette MA: Tcell co-stimulatory molecules other than CD28. Curr Opin Immunol 1999;11:286–293.
3. Rudd CE: Adaptors and molecular scaffolds in immune cell signaling. Cell 1999;96:5–8.
4. Clements JL, Koretzky GA: Recent developments in lymphocyte activation: linking kinases to downstream signaling events. J Clin Invest 1999;103:925–929.
5. Lev S, Moreno H, Martinez R, et al.: Protein tyrosine kinase PYK2 involved in calcium-induced regulation of ion channel and MAP kinase functions. Nature 1995;376:737–745.
6. Avraham S, London R, Fu Y, et al.: Identification and characterization of a novel related adhesion focal tyrosine kinase (RAFTK) from megakaryocytes and brain. J Biol Chem 1995;270:27,742–27,751.
7. Yu H, Li X, Marchetto GS, et al.: Activation of a novel calcium-dependent protein-tyrosine kinase. J Biol Chem 1996;271:29,993–29,998.
8. Sasaki H, Nagura K, Ishino M, Tobioka H, Kotani K, Sasaki T: Cloning and characterization of cell adhesion kinase β, a novel protein-tyrosine kinase of the focal adhesion kinase subfamily. J Biol Chem 1995;270:21,206–21,219.
9. Maguire JE, Danahey KM, Burkly LC, van Seventer GA: T cell receptor- and β1 integrin-mediated signals synergize to induce tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase (pp125FAK) in human T cells. J Exp Med 1995;182:2079–2090.
10. Ganju RK, Hatch WC, Avraham H, et al.: RAFTK, a novel member of the focal adhesion kinase family, is phosphorylated and associates with signaling molecules upon activation of mature T lymphocytes. J Exp Med 1997;185:1055–1063.
11. Berg NN, Ostergaard HL: T cell receptor engagement induces tyrosine phosphorylation of FAK and Pyk2 and their association with Lck. J Immunol 1997;159:1753–1757.
12 Ma EA, Lou O, Berg NN, Oster-
gaard HL: Cytotoxic T lympho-
cytes express a β3 integrin which
can induce the phosphorylation of
focal adhesion kinase and the
related Pyk2. Eur J Immunol 1997;
27:329–335.

13 Gismondi A, Bisogno L, Mainiero
F, et al.: Proline-rich tyrosine
kinase-2 activation by β1 integrin
fibronectin receptor cross-linking
and association with paxillin in
human natural killer cells. J
Immunol 1997; 159:4729–4736.

14 Rabinowich H, Manciulea M, Her-
berman RB, Whiteside TL: β1 inte-
grin-mediated activation of focal
adhesion kinase and its association
with Fyn and Zap-70 in human
NK cells. J Immunol 1996; 157:
3860–3868.

15 Rodriguez-Fernandez JL, Gomez
M, Luque A, Hogg N, Sanchez-
Madrid F, Cabanas C: The inter-
action of activated integrin
lymphocyte function-associated
antigen 1 with ligand intercellular
adhesion molecule 1 induces acti-
vation and redistribution of focal
adhesion kinase and proline-rich
tyrosine kinase 2 in T lympho-
cytes. Mol Biol Cell 1999; 10:
1891–1907.

16 Schlaepfer DD, Hauck CR, Sieg
DJ: Signaling through focal adhe-
sion kinase. Prog Biophys Mol
Biol 1999; 71:435–478.

17 Bacon KB, Szabo MC, Yssel H,
Bolen JB, Schall TJ: RANTES
induces tyrosine kinase activity of
stably complexed p125FAK and
ZAP-70 in human T cells. J Exp
Med 1996; 184:873–882.

18 Dikic I, Schlessinger J: Identifica-
tion of a new Pyk2 isoform impli-
cated in chemokine and antigen
receptor signaling. J Biol Chem
1998; 273:14,301–14,308.

19 Entschladen F, Niggemann B,
Zanker KS, Friedl P: Differential
requirement of protein tyrosine
kinases and protein kinase C in the
regulation of T cell locomotion
in three-dimensional collagen
matrices. J Immunol 1997; 159:
3203–3210.

20 Nikolai G, Niggemann B, Werner
M, Zanker KS, Friedl P: Direct and
rapid induction of migration in
human CD4+ T lymphocytes

within three-dimensional collagen
matrices mediated by signalling
via CD3 and/or CD2. Immunology
1998; 95:62–68.

21 Chu DH, Morita CT, Weiss A: The
Syk family of protein tyrosine
kinases in T-cell activation and
development. Immunol Rev 1998;
165:167–180.

22 Ilic D, Furuta Y, Kanazawa S, et
al.: Reduced cell motility and
enhanced focal adhesion contact
formation in cells from FAK-
deficient mice. Nature 1995; 377:
539–544.

23 Kanazawa S, Ilic D, Hashiyama
M, et al.: p59fyn-p125FAK coopera-
tion in development of CD4+
CD8+ thymocytes. Blood 1996; 87:
865–870.

24 Hanks SK, Polte TR: Signaling
through focal adhesion kinase.
Bioessays 1997; 19:137–145.

25 Girault JA, Labesse G, Mormon JP,
Callebaut I: The N-termini of FAK
and JAKs contain divergent band
4.1 domains. Trends Biochem Sci
1999; 24:54–57.

26 Liu S, Thomas SM, Woodside DG,
et al.: Binding of paxillin to α4
integrins modifies integrin-
dependent biological responses.
Nature 1999; 402:676–681.

27 Calderwood DA, Zent R, Grant R,
Rees DJ, Hynes RO, Ginsberg MH:
The talin head domain binds to inte-
grin β subunit cytoplasmic tails and
regulates integrin activation. J Biol
Chem 1999; 274:28,071–28,074.

28 Patil S, Jedsadayanmata A,
Wencel-Drake JD, Wang W,
Knezevic I, Lam SC: Identifica-
tion of a talin-binding site in the
integrin β3 subunit distinct from
the NPLY regulatory motif of post-
ligand binding functions. J Biol
Chem 1999; 274:28,575–28,583.

29 Polte TR, Hanks SK: Complexes
of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and
Crk-associated substrate (p130Cas)
are elevated in cytoskeleton-
associated fractions following
adhesion and Src transformation:
requirements for Src kinase activ-
ity and FAK proline-rich motifs. J
Biol Chem 1997; 272:5501–5509.

30 Taylor JM, Macklem MM, Parsons
JT: Cytoskeletal changes induced
by GRAF, the GTPase regulator
associated with focal adhesion

kinase, are mediated by Rho. J Cell
Sci 1999; 112:231–242.

31 Menegon A, Burgaya F, Baudot P,
Dunlap DD, Girault JA, Valtorta
F: FAK+ and PYK2/CAKβ, two
related tyrosine kinases highly
expressed in the central nervous
system: similarities and differ-
ences in the expression pattern. Eur
J Neurosci 1999; 11:3777–3788.

32 Schlaepfer DD, Hunter T: Evi-
dence for in vivo phosphorylation
of the Grb2 SH2-domain bind-
ing site on focal adhesion kinase
by Src-family protein-tyrosine
kinases. Mol Cell Biol 1996; 16:
5623–5633.

33 Calalb M, Polte T, Hanks SK: Tyro-
sine phosphorylation of focal adhe-
sion kinase at sites in the catalytic
domain regulates kinase activity:
a role for the Src family kinases.
Mol Cell Biol 1995; 15:954–963.

34 Schlaepfer DD, Hanks SK, Hunter
T, van der Geer P: Integrin-medi-
ated signal transduction linked to
Ras pathway by Grb2 binding to
focal adhesion kinase. Nature
1994; 372:786–791.

35 Schlaepfer DD, Hunter T: FAK
overexpression enhances Ras-
dependent integrin signaling to
ERK2/mitogen-activated protein
kinase through interactions with
and activation of c-Src. J Biol
Chem 1997; 272:13,189–13,195.

36 Schlaepfer DD, Jones KC, Hunter
T: Multiple Grb2-mediated inte-
grin-stimulated signaling path-
ways to ERK2/mitogen-activated
protein kinase: summation of both
c-Src and FAK-initiated tyrosine
phosphorylation events. Mol Cell
Biol 1998; 18:2571–2585.

37 Schlaepfer DD, Broome MA,
Hunter T: Fibronectin-stimulated
signaling from a focal adhesion
kinase-c-Src complex: involve-
ment of the Grb2, p130Cas, and Nck
adaptor proteins. Mol Cell Biol
1997; 17:1702–1713.

38 Blaukat A, Ivankovic-Dikic I,
Gronroos E, et al.: Adaptor pro-
teins Grb2 and Crk couple Pyk2
with activation of specific mito-
gen-activated protein kinase cas-
cades. J Biol Chem 1999; 274:
14,893–14,901.

39 Oktay M, Wary KK, Dans M, Birge
RB, Giancotti FG: Integrin-


Hauck, Klingbeil, and Schlaepfer
mediated activation of focal adhesion kinase is required for signaling to Jun NH2-terminal kinase and progression through the G1 phase of the cell cycle. J Cell Biol 1999; 145:1461–1469.

40 Ilic D, Almeida EA, Schlaepfer DD, Dazin P, Aizawa S, Damsky CH: Extracellular matrix survival signals transduced by focal adhesion kinase suppress p53-mediated apoptosis. J Cell Biol 1998; 143: 547–560.

41 Sonoda Y, Watanabe S, Matsumoto Y, Aizu-Yokota E, Kasahara T: FAK is the upstream signal protein of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt survival pathway in hydrogen peroxide-induced apoptosis of a human glioblastoma cell line. J Biol Chem 1999; 274: 10,566–10,570.

42 Tamura M, Gu J, Danen EH, Takino T, Miyamoto S, Yamada KM: PTEN interactions with focal adhesion kinase and suppression of the extracellular matrix-dependent phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt cell survival pathway. J Biol Chem 1999; 274: 20,693–20,703.

43 Renshaw MW, Price LS, Schwartz MA: Focal adhesion kinase mediates the integrin signaling requirement for growth factor activation

of MAP kinase. J Cell Biol 1999; 147:611–618.

44 Klemke RL, Cai S, Giannini AL, Gallagher PJ, de Lanerolle P, Cheresh DA: Regulation of cell motility by mitogen-activated protein kinase. J Cell Biol 1997; 137: 481–492.

45 Gum R, Lengyel E, Juarez J, et al.: Stimulation of 92-kDa gelatinase B promoter activity by ras is mitogen-activated protein kinase 1-independent and requires multiple transcription factor binding sites including closely spaced PEA3/ets and AP-1 sequences. J Biol Chem 1996; 271:10,672–10,680.

46 Shibata K, Kikkawa F, Nawa A, et al.: Both focal adhesion kinase and c-Ras are required for the enhanced matrix metalloproteinase 9 secretion by fibronectin in ovarian cancer cells. Cancer Res 1998; 58: 900–903.

47 Agochiya M, Brunton VG, Owens DW, et al.: Increased dosage and amplification of the focal adhesion kinase gene in human cancer cells. Oncogene 1999; 18: 5646–5653.

48 Cary LA, Guan JL: Focal adhesion kinase in integrin-mediated signaling. Frontiers Biosci 1999; 4: D102–D113.

49 Ilic D, Damsky CH, Yamamoto T: Focal adhesion kinase: at the crossroads of signal transduction. J Cell Sci 1997; 110:401–407.

50 Sieg DJ, Ilic D, Jones KC, Damsky CH, Hunter T, Schlaepfer DD: Pyk2 and Src-family protein-tyrosine kinases compensate for the loss of FAK in fibronectin-stimulated signaling events but Pyk2 does not fully function to enhance FAK− cell migration. EMBO J 1998; 17:5933–5947.

51 Sieg DJ, Hauck CR, Schlaepfer DD: Required role of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) for integrin-stimulated cell migration. J Cell Sci 1999; 112:2677–2691.

52 Sieg DJ, Hauck CR, Ilic D, Klingdeil CK, Schaefer E, Damsky CH, Schlaepfer DD: FAK integrates growth-factor and integrin signals to promote cell migration. Nature Cell Biology 2000; in press.

53 Nolan K, Lacoste J, Parsons JT: Regulated expression of focal adhesion kinase-related nonkinase, the autonomously expressed C-terminal domain of focal adhesion kinase. Mol Cell Biol 1999; 19:6120–6129.

54 Gilmore AP, Romer LH: Inhibition of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) signaling in focal adhesions decreases cell motility and proliferation.
