
Biochem. J. (2000) 349, 385–402 (Printed in Great Britain)

---

**REVIEW ARTICLE**

**Sphingosine 1-phosphate signalling in mammalian cells**

Susan PYNE¹ and Nigel J. PYNE¹

Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Strathclyde Institute for Biomedical Sciences, University of Strathclyde, 27 Taylor Street, Glasgow G4 ONR, Scotland, U.K.

---

Sphingosine 1-phosphate is formed in cells in response to diverse stimuli, including growth factors, cytokines, G-protein-coupled receptor agonists, antigen, etc. Its production is catalysed by sphingosine kinase, while degradation is either via cleavage to produce palmitaldehyde and phosphoethanolamine or by dephosphorylation. In this review we discuss the most recent advances in our understanding of the role of the enzymes involved in metabolism of this lysolipid. Sphingosine 1-phosphate can also bind to members of the endothelial differentiation gene (EDG) G-protein-coupled receptor family [namely EDG1, EDG3, EDG5 (also known as H218 or AGR16), EDG6 and EDG8] to elicit biological responses. These receptors are coupled differentially via Gi, Gq, G12/13 and Rho to multiple effector systems, including adenylate cyclase, phospholipases C and D, extracellular-signal-regulated kinase, c-Jun N-terminal kinase, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and non-receptor tyrosine kinases. These signalling pathways are linked to transcription factor activation, cytoskeletal proteins, adhesion molecule expression, caspase activities, etc. Therefore sphingosine 1-phosphate can affect diverse biological responses, including mitogenesis, differentiation, migration and apoptosis, via receptor-dependent mechanisms. Additionally, sphingosine 1-phosphate has been proposed to play an intracellular role, for example in Ca²⁺ mobilization, activation of non-receptor tyrosine kinases, inhibition of caspases, etc. We review the evidence for both intra-cellular and extracellular actions, and extensively discuss future approaches that will ultimately resolve the question of dual action. Certainly, sphingosine 1-phosphate will prove to be unique if it elicits both extra- and intra-cellular actions. Finally, we review the evidence that implicates sphingosine 1-phosphate in pathophysiological disease states, such as cancer, angiogenesis and inflammation. Thus there is a need for the development of new therapeutic compounds, such as receptor antagonists. However, identification of the most suitable targets for drug intervention requires a full understanding of the signalling and action profile of this lysosphingolipid. This article describes where the research field is in relation to achieving this aim.

Key words: endothelial differentiation gene (EDG), lipid phosphate phosphatase, lysosphingolipid, sphingosine kinase, sphingosine 1-phosphate lyase.

---

**INTRODUCTION**

Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) is a polar sphingolipid metabolite which has been proposed to act both as an extracellular mediator and as an intracellular second messenger. Extracellular effects are mediated via a recently identified family of plasma membrane G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), whereas specific intra-cellular sites of action remain to be defined. S1P is stored and released from platelets upon their activation, but can also be synthesized in a wide variety of cell types in response to extracellular stimuli, such as growth factors and cytokines. S1P affects diverse biological processes, including cell growth, differentiation, migration and apoptosis, and may have an important role in pathophysiological disease states, such as atherosclerosis and cancer.

**SPHINGOLIPID METABOLISM**

It is beyond the scope of this review to describe sphingolipid metabolism in detail, and the reader is referred to more specific articles on this subject [1,2]. However, a brief overview is provided, with details of several useful compounds for the selective inhibition of key enzymes, which may be used to ultimately modulate S1P metabolism in cells (Schemes 1a and 1b).

Ceramide may be important in determining apoptotic responses to stress [1,2]. However, it may also serve as a precursor for the synthesis of S1P, which, in certain cell types, is implicated in cell survival. This suggests that the metabolic conversion of ceramide into S1P could switch cells from an apoptotic state to a proliferative one. Therefore inhibition of the conversion of ceramide into S1P might be usefully exploited to induce cell death in disease, such as cancer. Ceramide can be synthesized either in response to the agonist-dependent activation of sphingomyelinases or *de novo*. Agonist-dependent activation of sphingomyelinases has been observed in response to growth factors, cytokines and arachidonic acid [3]. Additionally, cellular stress and changes in the redox state of the cell can result in sphingomyelinase activation [4,5]. To date, five distinct sphingomyelinases have been identified, based on their pH optima, cellular localization and cation dependence [2,3]. Ceramidase catalyses the deacylation of ceramide to produce non-esterified fatty acid and sphingosine. Both an acidic ceramidase [6,7] (deficient in Farber's disease and inhibited by the ceramide analogue N-oleoylethanolamine) and an alkaline ceramidase [8]

---

Abbreviations used: BAPTA/AM, bis-(o-aminophenoxy)ethane-N,N',N'-tetra-acetic acid tetrakis(acetoxymethyl ester); EDG, endothelial differentiation gene; EGF, epidermal growth factor; ERK, extracellular-signal-regulated kinase; EST, expressed sequence tag; FAK, focal adhesion kinase; GPCR, G-protein-coupled receptor; IGF, insulin-like growth factor; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LPA, lysophosphatic acid; LPP, lipid phosphate phosphatase; MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; NGF, nerve growth factor; PA, phosphatidic acid; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kinase; PKC, protein kinase C; PLC/D, phospholipase C/D; SH2, Src homology 2; SPC, sphingosylphosphocholine; S1P, sphingosine 1-phosphate; SPHK, sphingosine kinase; SRE, serum response element; SRF, serum response factor; TNFα, tumour necrosis factor α.

¹ Correspondence may be addressed to either author (e-mail susan.pyne@strath.ac.uk or n.j.pyne@strath.ac.uk).

(a)

Sphingomyelin  
$\text{CH}_3(\text{CH}_2)_n \text{NH}$  
$\text{OH}$  
$\text{O}$  
$\text{CH}_2\text{OH}$  

Diaclyglycerol  
Phosphatidylcholine  

Ceramide  
$\text{Fatty acid}$  
$\text{OH}$  
$\text{CH}_2\text{OH}$  

Sphingosine  
$\text{NH}_2$  
$\text{ATP}$  
$\text{ADP}$  
$\text{OH}$  
$\text{CH}_2\text{O}-\text{OH}$  
$\text{NH}_2$  

S1P phosphatase  
Sphingosine kinase  
$N$-Oleylethanolamine  
$N,N$-Dimethylsphingosine  
$threo$-Dihydrosphingosine  

Sphingosine 1-phosphate  
$\text{CHO}$  
$\text{NH}_2$  
$\text{CH}_2\text{O}-\text{OH}$  
$\text{OH}$  

Palmitaldehyde  
Phosphoethanolamine  

(b)

Palmitoyl-CoA  
$\text{CoA}$  
$\text{CO}_2$  
Serine  
$L$-Cycloserine  
Myriocin  

3-Oxosphinganine  
$\text{NADPH}$  
$\text{NADP}^+$  
Serine  
palmitoyltransferase  
Oxosphinganine  
reductase  

Sphinganine  
$\text{Fatty acyl-CoA}$  
$\text{CoA}$  
Dihydroceramide  
synthase  
Fumonisin  

Dihydroceramide  
$\text{CH}_3(\text{CH}_2)_n \text{NH}$  
$\text{O}$  
$\text{OH}$  
$\text{CH}_2\text{OH}$  

Ceramide  
$\text{CH}_3(\text{CH}_2)_n \text{NH}$  
$\text{O}$  
$\text{OH}$  
$\text{CH}_2\text{OH}$  

Sphingomyelin synthase  
Glucosylceramide  
synthase  
PPMP/PDMP  

Sphingomyelin  
Glycosphingolipids  

De novo synthesis

---

**Scheme 1 Sphingolipid metabolism**

(a) S1P biosynthesis and degradation; (b) de novo ceramide biosynthesis. Structural formulae of the sphingolipids are shown, with enzymes denoted in green and their inhibitors in red. Abbreviations: D-MAPP, $d$-erythro-2-($N$-myristoylamino)-1-phenylpropanol; PPMP, $d$-$threo$-1-phenyl-2-palmitoylamino-3-morpholino-1-propanol; PDMP, $d$-$threo$-1-phenyl-2-decanoylamino-3-morpholino-1-propanol.

[inhibited by $d$-erythro-2-($N$-myristoylamino)-1-phenylpropanol (D-MAPP)] exist. The resulting sphingosine may act as the substrate for sphingosine kinase (SPHK) to produce S1P. This is cleaved by S1P lyase (to produce palmitaldehyde and phosphoethanolamine) or dephosphorylated by S1P phosphatase. Alternatively, ceramide can be converted back into sphingomyelin by the addition of a phosphocholine headgroup (donated by phosphatidylcholine), catalysed by sphingomyelin synthase [9] (Scheme 1a).

De novo ceramide synthesis (which occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum) is initiated by the condensation of serine and palmitoyl-CoA to produce 3-oxosphinganine and $\text{CO}_2$, catalysed by serine palmitoyltransferase. 3-Oxosphinganine is rapidly reduced to dihydrosphingosine (sphinganine) by an NAD(P)H-dependent reductase which is stereospecific for the $d$-isomer. Subsequently, dihydrosphingosine is N-acylated to dihydroceramide, catalysed by dihydroceramide synthase. Dihydroceramide desaturase catalyses the subsequent introduction of a trans double bond at C-4–C-5 to produce ceramide. De novo ceramide synthesis can be blocked at serine palmitoyltransferase by $L$-cycloserine [10] or by the fungal metabolite myriocin [11], whereas the mycotoxin fumonisin inhibits dihydroceramide synthase [12].

Ceramide produced de novo can be metabolized to glycosphingolipids, the first step of which is catalysed by a glucosylceramide synthase [13] (Scheme 1b). This enzyme is inhibited by the ceramide analogues $d$-$threo$-1-phenyl-2-palmitoylamino-3-morpholino-1-propanol (PPMP) and $d$-$threo$-1-phenyl-2-decanoylamino-3-morpholino-1-propanol (PDMP), a potential anti-cancer agent [14]. Alternatively, ceramide can be phosphorylated by a calcium-activated ceramide kinase to produce ceramide 1-phosphate [15,16].

### SPHK

SPHK was originally purified from rat kidney as a 49 kDa protein, with $K_{\text{m}}$ values of 5 $\mu$M and 93 $\mu$M for sphingosine and ATP respectively [17]. The enzyme binds calmodulin in the presence of calcium. Subsequently two SPHKs have been cloned [18]. Kohama and colleagues [18] trypsin-treated the purified kidney form and obtained amino acid sequences of eight peptides. Using tBLASTn algorithm searches they identified several expressed sequence tags (ESTs) which yielded predicted amino acid sequences similar to those of three of the peptides obtained by trypsin treatment of purified kidney SPHK. Subsequently, two clones from mouse were obtained with apparent open reading frames of 381 and 388 amino acids containing homologous sequence encoding seven of the eight peptides obtained from the rat kidney form. The enzymes were designated SPHK1a and SPHK1b. Their predicted molecular masses were 42.3 and 43.2 kDa. These isoforms differ in only a few amino acids at the N-terminus, suggesting that they may be derived by alternative splicing of the same mRNA transcript. However, since both cDNAs lacked Kozak sequences [19], the suggestion is that they may represent only partial cDNAs. Therefore, until upstream sequence at the 5′ end is obtained, the exact relationship of the two forms is unknown.

SPHK mRNA expression has been detected as a 2.4 kb mRNA species in most tissues, with abundant expression in lung and spleen, and barely detectable levels in skeletal muscle and liver.

A SPHK gene family has been identified which includes LCB4 and LCB5 from *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* [20]. Other potential SPHKs were identified in the genomic sequences of *Caenorhabditis elegans* and *Schizosaccharomyces pombe*. Five critical regions of highly conserved amino acids (C1–C5) have been identified in all the forms, including the mammalian enzymes. Regions C1 and C3 of SPHK show 35% and 58% identity with residues 296–315 and 378–389 respectively of human diacylglycerol kinase ζ [21], which are present in the conserved subdomain 1 of all diacylglycerol kinase isoforms. Subdomain 1 is believed to contain the ATP-binding site that is distinct from that present in protein-specific protein kinases [22]. Therefore, because of the close similarity with diacylglycerol kinase, Kohama et al. [18] have suggested that C1 and C3 in SPHK might also constitute an ATP-binding domain. More specifically, the invariant sequence, Gly-Gly-Lys-Gly-Lys, within the C1 domain of SPHK is suggested to form part of the ATP-binding site.

The cloned murine SPHK isoforms contain at least three calcium/calmodulin-binding consensus sequences and several potential protein kinase phosphorylation sites: one for protein kinase A, two for casein kinase II and eight for protein kinase C (PKC). The presence of the latter is of interest because SPHK in intact cells has been shown to be stimulated by PKC activators, such as PMA [23]. Furthermore, inhibition of ceramide-induced apoptosis by PKC activation is associated with the stimulation of SPHK and S1P formation [23]. The mammalian SPHKs also lack Src homology 2 (SH2), SH3 and pleckstrin homology domains, suggesting that they do not interact with phosphotyrosine-containing adaptor proteins, G-protein βγ subunits or phospholipids, such as phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate. Earlier *in vitro* studies demonstrated that the enzyme could be activated by acidic phospholipids such as phosphatidate, phosphatidylinositol, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate and especially phosphatidylserine [24], suggesting a possible relationship between S1P levels and glycerophospholipid signalling.

SPHK1a activity, measured in lysates of transiently transfected HEK 293 cells, has specificity for the *trans* isomer of D-erythro-sphingosine (*K*~m~ 2.15 μM). The enzyme can also phosphorylate D-erythro-dihydrosphingosine, but to a lesser extent. Ceramide, diacylglycerol, phosphatidylinositol and phytosphingosine were not substrates. *N,N*-Dimethylsphingosine and D,L-threo-dihydrosphingosine were confirmed as inhibitors of SPHK, with *K*~i~ values of 2.64 and 2.15 μM respectively.

Transient transfection of HEK 293, NIH 3T3 and Swiss 3T3 cells with SPHK1a resulted in a 400–800-fold increase in SPHK activity [18,25]. The transfected SPHK activity partitioned into both cytosolic and membrane fractions (approx. 70–80% cytosolic and 20–30% particulate). Indeed, the lack of hydrophobic-enriched domains and of a signal peptide in the protein are consistent with its predominantly cytosolic localization. Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) stimulated a 2-fold increase in the specific activity of cytosolic SPHK1a, but did not induce significant translocation to the membrane fraction [25]. Other studies support the presence of both membrane and cytosolic SPHK activities. Notably, in platelets, 70% of total activity was particulate and 30% cytosolic [26]. Chromatographic fractionation of the cytosol resolved two distinct SPHK activities. Therefore multiple isoforms of SPHK may exist, with different physiological roles and possibly derived from distinct genes.

Transfection of NIH 3T3 cells with SPHK1a resulted in a marked (21-fold) increase in S1P mass, with 67% and 29% decreases in sphingosine and ceramide respectively. However, the net increase in S1P (0.95 pmol/nmol of total phospholipid) did not equate with the observed decrease in ceramide and sphingosine (which totalled 6.23 pmol/nmol of total phospholipid) [18]. This suggests the concomitant removal of S1P by, for instance, S1P lyase and/or S1P phosphatase and/or efflux.

### S1P lyase

S1P lyase catalyses the cleavage of S1P at the C-2–C-3 bond to produce hexadecanal (palmitaldehyde) and phosphoethanolamine [27,28]. The enzyme requires the coenzyme pyridoxal 5′-phosphate, has a pH optimum of 7.4–7.6 and is inhibited by heavy-metal ions. Activity is specific for the D-erythro isomers (in common with SPHK) of phosphorylated sphingoid bases, including S1P, dihydrosphingosine 1-phosphate and phytosphingosine 1-phosphate, although chain length can vary. The enzyme is ubiquitously expressed with regard to species and mammalian tissues, with the notable exception of platelets, where it is absent. S1P lyase activity was present in cultured human fibroblasts to which \[^{3}\]H\]dihydroS1P (1 μM) was added [29]. \[^{3}\]H\]DihydroS1P was rapidly taken up by the fibroblasts and converted, in part, into \[^{3}\]H\]palmitaldehyde, which was further metabolized into glycerophospholipids and alk(en)yl-phospholipids.

S1P lyase was first cloned by D-erythro-sphingosine selection of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* transformed with yeast genomic library carried on the pRS202 high-copy shuttle vector [30]. The most highly represented insert was subcloned and sequenced to identify a novel gene termed *BST1* (bestower of sphingosine tolerance). BST1 (since renamed DPL1) is a 65.5 kDa protein comprising 589 amino acids, and is 23% identical with *gadA* and *gadB* of *Escherichia coli*, which encode glutamate decarboxylase, another pyridoxal 5′-phosphate-dependent enzyme that catalyses the synthesis of γ-aminobutyric acid. Deletion of *BST1/DPL1* resulted in increased sensitivity to exogenous D-erythro-sphingosine and phytosphingosine. In addition, the *bst1/dpl1Δ* deletion mutant accumulated S1P upon exposure to exogenous sphingosine.

A mammalian S1P lyase gene has also been identified [31] using a BLAST search of the Genbank EST database for sequence similarity with the S1P lyase gene of *Caenorhabditis elegans*. An EST with an open reading frame of 1707 nucleotides was found which encodes a protein of 568 amino acids and a predicted molecular mass of 63.7 kDa. Hydropathy analysis indicates that the enzyme contains a single 20-amino-acid transmembrane domain close to the N-terminus. Indeed, the enzyme is located in membranes within mammalian cells. Comparison of the deduced amino acid sequence of the mouse S1P lyase with that of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* BST1/DPL1 and *C. elegans* revealed 59%/62% similarity and 40%/39% identity respectively. Furthermore, the mouse gene encodes S1P lyase activity, confirmed by its expression in the *Saccharomyces cerevisiae bst1/dpl1Δ* deletion mutant. Under these conditions, the sphingosine-sensitive phenotype was reversed, demonstrating that the mouse gene can complement the yeast defect when expressed. Analysis of S1P lyase mRNA levels was consistent with previously reported S1P lyase activity levels, being most abundant in liver, followed by kidney, lung, heart and brain.

### S1P phosphatase

Several lipid phosphate phosphatases (LPP1/1a/2/3) have been cloned and exhibit a broad substrate specificity which includes S1P, lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), phosphatidic acid (PA) and ceramide 1-phosphate [32]. A mammalian S1P-specific phosphatase has yet to be cloned. However, a S1P phosphatase which

Table 1 S1P and sphingosine levels

Values are means, means ± S.D. or ranges

| Species         | Plasma/serum | S1P (μM)       | Sphingosine (μM)   | Ref. |
|-----------------|--------------|----------------|--------------------|------|
| Human           | Plasma       | 0.19 ± 0.08    | –                  | [39] |
| Human           | Serum        | 0.48 ± 0.08    | –                  | [39] |
| Bovine (foetal) | Serum        | 0.34           | 0.05–0.1           | [38] |
| Bovine (calf)   | Serum        | 0.11           | 0.05–0.1           | [38] |
| Bovine (calf)   | Serum*       | Negligible     | 0.05–0.1           | [38] |
| Horse           | Serum        | 0.68           | 0.05–0.1           | [38] |

| Tissue (rat)    | S1P (pmol/mg wet wt) | Sphingosine (pmol/mg wet wt) | Ref. |
|-----------------|-----------------------|-------------------------------|------|
| Testis          | 98                    | –                             | [40] |
| Testis          | 0.5                   | 6.5                           | [38] |
| Spleen          | 39                    | –                             | [40] |
| Spleen          | 2.4                   | 22                            | [38] |
| Brain           | 37                    | –                             | [40] |
| Brain           | 5.8                   | 8                             | [38] |
| Heart           | 8                     | –                             | [40] |
| Heart           | 0.6                   | 6                             | [38] |
| Liver           | 1                     | –                             | [40] |
| Liver           | 0.7                   | 9                             | [38] |
| Kidney          | 12                    | –                             | [40] |
| Kidney          | 0.6                   | 8                             | [38] |
| Eye             | 2.1                   | 1                             | [38] |
| Intestine       | 90                    | –                             | [40] |
| Lung            | 18                    | –                             | [40] |
| Muscle          | 3                     | –                             | [40] |

| Cell type       | S1P (pmol/10^8 cells) | Sphingosine (pmol/10^8 cells) | Ref. |
|-----------------|------------------------|--------------------------------|------|
| Platelets       | 141 ± 4                | 37 ± 6                         | [37] |
| Neutrophils     | 150 ± 28               | –                              | [39] |
| Erythrocytes    | 7.17 ± 1.66            | –                              | [39] |
| Swiss 3T3       | 1600 ± 200             | –                              | [43] |
| HL60            | 111 ± 10               | 2500 ± 280                     | [38] |
| Jurkat          | 40 ± 10                | 610 ± 60                       | [38] |
| U937            | 2030 ± 160             | 1380 ± 120                     | [38] |
| C6 glioma       | 1670 ± 390             | 414 ± 860                      | [38] |
| MCF7            | 1140 ± 140             | 11000 ± 570                    | [38] |
| PC12            | 860 ± 60               | 12100 ± 710                    | [38] |

* Denotes charcoal-stripped

[38]. The cytosol of Swiss 3T3 cells [24] or partially purified enzyme [17, 42] can also be used. Chain length and degree of saturation also affect activity, which can be promoted by the inclusion of phospholipids [24].

A comparison between these two methods (Table 1) shows an approximate 10-fold difference in the chemical amounts of S1P detected. The reasons for this are not clear. However, SPHK selectively phosphorylates only D-erythro-sphingosine and to a lesser extent D-erythro-dihydrosphingosine, whereas the acylation method would detect other lysolipids containing an amino group that might be present in the alkaline lipid extract.

AGONIST-STIMULATED S1P FORMATION

A wide variety of stimuli have been shown to increase SPHK activity and elevate S1P levels (Table 2). These include growth factors, GPCR agonists, cytokines, phorbol esters, vitamin D₃ and antigen.

PDGF and serum stimulated a rapid activation of SPHK (1.4–1.5-fold at 10–15 min) and transient production of S1P (maximum of 2.2–2.8-fold increase over basal at 3 min) in Swiss

Table 2 Agonist-stimulated S1P production

Abbreviations: FMLP, formyl-Met-Leu-Phe; HUVEC, human umbilical-vein endothelial cells.

(a) Acute and transient

| Cell type                     | Stimulus               | Ref. |
|-------------------------------|------------------------|------|
| Swiss3T3                      | PDGF/foetal calf serum | [43] |
| Airway smooth muscle          | PDGF                   | [44] |
| M₂/M₃-transfected HEK 293     | Carbachol             | [45] |
| RBL-2H3 mast cells            | Antigen                | [46] |
| U937                          | Antigen                | [47] |
| HL60                          | FMLP                   | [48] |
| HUVEC                         | TNFα                   | [49] |
| HEK 293                       | EGF                    | [51] |

(b) Chronic and sustained

| Cell type                     | Stimulus   | Ref. |
|-------------------------------|------------|------|
| HEL                           | PMA        | [53] |
| PC12                          | NGF        | [54] |
| HL60                          | Vitamin D₃ | [55] |
| Vascular smooth muscle        | Oxidized LDL | [56] |
| RP 11 periosteal cells        | Forskolin  | [57] |

mediated activation of phospholipase D (PLD) [47]. Furthermore, in HL60 cells, SPHK was stimulated by direct G-protein activation [48]. The mechanism underlying TNFα activation of SPHK remains undefined, but does not require prior sphingomyelinase and ceramidase activities [49].

SPHK can also be regulated chronically (hours/days), e.g. by PMA [53], nerve growth factor (NGF) [54], vitamin D₃ [55] and oxidized low-density lipoprotein (LDL) [56]. PMA-induced increases in SPHK activity in HEL cells were dependent upon both transcription and translation [53] and may be involved in differentiation. For instance, the NGF-stimulated differentiation of PC12 neuronal cells correlates with a 4-fold increase in the Vmax of SPHK, an effect which required protein kinase activity and protein synthesis [54]. In HL60 cells, SPHK activation by vitamin D₃ supports a cytoprotective role for S1P [55]. Similarly, cAMP suppression of apoptosis in RP-11 periosteal cells is mediated by activation of SPHK [57]. Stimulation of S1P production by oxidized LDL, which occurs downstream of sphingomyelinase and ceramidase, has also been implicated in smooth-muscle cell proliferation [56].

EXTRACELLULAR VERSUS INTRACELLULAR ACTIONS

A key question is whether S1P formed intracellularly in response to extracellular agonists is released from cells to act on cell-surface GPCRs. In this manner, S1P would act as either an autocrine or a paracrine factor. Alternatively, S1P may function as a second messenger for growth factors, by altering the activity of specific intracellular target proteins (Figure 1). In the following, we have reviewed the evidence for both extracellular and intracellular actions of S1P.

Identification of GPCRs for S1P

To date, five closely related GPCRs of the EDG (endothelial differentiation gene) family (EDG1, EDG3, EDG5/AGR16/H218, EDG6 and EDG8/nrg-1) have been identified as high-affinity S1P receptors [58–64]. They are integral membrane proteins that are probably glycosylated, predicted to have seven transmembrane domains and exhibit approximately 50% amino acid sequence identity.

EDG1 was identified as an immediate-early gene product in phorbol ester-differentiated human umbilical vein endothelial cells, and was suggested to play a role in the morphogenetic differentiation of vascular endothelial cells into capillary-like tubules and in angiogenesis [58]. Amino acid sequence analysis of EDG1 showed that it is a 380-amino-acid protein containing seven hydrophobic transmembrane-spanning domains and significant sequence similarity with the GPCR family [58]. Fusion of the third intracellular loop of EDG1 with glutathione S-transferase polypeptide was used to make an affinity matrix to which members of the Gi family could bind [65]. Indeed, overexpression of EDG1 in HEK 293 cells led to association with Giα₁ and Giα₃ polypeptides [65]. Furthermore, EDG1-induced activation of extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) was blocked by pertussis toxin (which ADP-ribosylates and inactivates Gi/Go) [65]. A high similarity (25%) between EDG1 and the cannabinoid receptor suggested that the EDG1 ligand may be a lipid. This was confirmed in assays of morphogenetic differentiation, which was dependent on EDG1 expression and the presence of serum-borne lipid, S1P. Further characterization studies confirmed EDG1 to be a GPCR with high affinity for S1P (measured Kd values of 8.1 nM [66] and 13.2 nM [67]). A variety of sphingolipids and lysolipids failed to significantly displace [³²P]S1P in EDG1-transfected cells [66, 67].

Agonist
↓
R
↓
SPHK
Second messenger actions
Sphingosine
S1P
S1P
Pase
S1P
lyase
Hexadecanal + phosphoethanolamine
Intracellular signals
EDG1
EDG3
EDG5
S1P release

Figure 1 Extracellular versus intracellular role of S1P

S1P produced in response to agonist stimulation may elicit second messenger actions before its removal by S1P phosphatase and/or S1P lyase. In addition, S1P may be released from cells to act in a paracrine and/or autocrine manner at EDG receptors. R, receptor.

Other studies using transfected CHO, HEL, Cos-7 and Sf9 cells have all confirmed that EDG1 functions as a high-affinity S1P receptor which couples to a number of signalling pathways via G<sub>i</sub>/G<sub>o</sub> [68,69]. More recently, EDG1-transfected Sf9 cells were used to establish that S1P binding to this receptor in fact activates several members of the G-protein family, including G<sub>i1</sub>, G<sub>i2</sub>, G<sub>i3</sub>, G<sub>o</sub> and G<sub>z</sub>, but not G<sub>s</sub>, G<sub>q</sub>, G<sub>12</sub> or G<sub>13</sub> [70]. Others have also shown that EDG1 receptors can utilize Rho-dependent signalling. For instance, S1P-stimulated morphogenetic differentiation of EDG1-transfected HEK 293 cells was shown by Lee et al. [66] to be G<sub>i</sub>-independent and blocked by the C3 exoenzyme, a specific inhibitor of the small GTPase Rho, which regulates stress fibre formation and focal adhesions [71]. Recent studies have confirmed these findings in T lymphoma cells, where Rho and Rac appear to be involved in S1P-induced migration [72].

EDG1 has also been reported to act as a low-affinity receptor for LPA (K<sub>d</sub> 2.3 μM), the binding of which induces EDG1 receptor phosphorylation [73]. However, no effects of LPA were evident in membranes of Sf9 cells co-expressing EDG1 and G<sub>i2</sub>, whereas S1P was effective [70].

EDG3 and EDG5 also have high affinity for S1P (measured K<sub>d</sub> values of 23 nM and 27 nM respectively [74] and 26.2 nM and 20.4 nM respectively [67]), which is poorly displaced by other sphingolipids and lysolipids, including LPA, sphingosylphosphocholine (SPC), cyclic S1P, C<sub>8</sub>-ceramide 1-phosphate, ceramide and sphingosine [74]. DihydroS1P (K<sub>i</sub> 15 nM [75]) and SPC are most effective. The K<sub>d</sub> for S1P binding at EDG6 is 12–19 nM [62], with SPC exhibiting an approx. 50-fold lower binding affinity, whereas LPA was ineffective. The recently cloned EDG8 has a K<sub>d</sub> of 2 nM for S1P; dihydroS1P was equipotent, whereas SPC was relatively ineffective [63].

EDG3 and EDG5 communicate not only via G<sub>i</sub>, but also through G<sub>q</sub>, G<sub>12</sub> and G<sub>13</sub> [76–78]. Interestingly, in transfected Sf9 cells, the expression of EDG3 and EDG5 also produced constitutive activation of G<sub>12</sub> and G<sub>13</sub> respectively [70]. Several studies are consistent with the use of G<sub>q</sub>, G<sub>12</sub> and G<sub>13</sub> by these EDG receptors. Co-expression of a G<sub>q</sub>/G<sub>i</sub> α subunit chimera (Gα<sub>qi</sub>) with EDG3 or EDG5 potentiated S1P-stimulated rises in intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup>. Furthermore, co-expression of Gα<sub>qi</sub> with EDG1 allowed S1P-stimulated coupling to the G<sub>q</sub> pathway [78]. In addition, it was also shown that suramin acts as a subtype-specific functional antagonist of EDG3 (IC<sub>50</sub> 22 μM) [78]. EDG6 couples via G<sub>i/o</sub>, whereas a role for G<sub>q</sub>, G<sub>12/13</sub> and/or Rho has yet to be addressed [62]. EDG8 couples via G<sub>i/o</sub>, but not through G<sub>q</sub> [63].

As a general paradigm, the role of Rho in EDG receptor signalling has still to be fully defined. For EDG3 and EDG5 receptors, coupling to G<sub>12/13</sub> may be the predominant route of Rho activation [79,80]. Indeed, Gα<sub>12/13</sub> has been shown to initiate RhoGTP regulation of serum response element (SRE)-mediated transcription, cytoskeletal rearrangement, PLD and PI3K [81]. Moreover, RhoGEF, which promotes guanine nucleotide exchange in Rho, is stimulated by G<sub>13</sub> [82,83]. The mechanism for this remains to be determined. One possibility is that the

G$\beta\gamma_{13}$ dimer may act as an adaptor for Rho. As mentioned above, EDG1 receptor signalling has also been shown to be Rho-dependent [66], e.g. S1P stimulates morphogenetic changes in EDG1-transfected HEK 293 cells. However, studies by Windh et al. [70] demonstrated that EDG1 does not functionally couple to G$_{12}$ or G$_{13}$. Therefore EDG1 must activate Rho by a different mechanism.

These observations support the conclusion that S1P-specific EDG GPCRs couple productively to different types of G-protein $\alpha$ subunits, $\beta\gamma$ subunits and Rho (Figure 2).

A second group of EDG receptors (EDG2, EDG4 and EDG7) have high affinity for LPA (35% identity with EDG1, 3, 5 and 8). EDG2 (or Vzg-1) was the first EDG family member to have its ligand identified. EDG2 overexpression in a neuronal-like cell (TSM) exaggerated LPA-stimulated cytoskeletal changes (Rho-mediated) and inhibition of adenylate cyclase (G$_i$-mediated) [84]. A sequence-based search subsequently identified EDG4 [85]. EDG2- and EDG4-transfected HTC4 hepatoma cells (which have a LPA-null background) exhibit LPA-stimulated calcium transients [86], and EDG2 expression in yeast confers LPA responsiveness [87]. EDG7-transfected Sf9 cells exhibit LPA-stimulated calcium mobilization and increased cAMP levels [88]. These effects are similar to those elicited by stimulation of S1P-specific EDG receptors, and suggest that the two lysolipids may signal via common pathways.

### Extracellular GPCR-mediated actions of S1P

Many signalling pathways are activated in response to stimulation of cells by S1P. An S1P-dependent decrease in forskolin-and cholera toxin-stimulated intracellular cAMP levels has been observed in several cell types (see Figure 2). This has been correlated with EDG1 expression [67–69, 75, 89]. The effect is blocked by pertussis toxin pretreatment and is probably mediated by a typical G$_i$/adenylate cyclase interaction. More recently, S1P has been shown to inhibit forskolin-stimulated cAMP formation in EDG3-transfected CHO cells [90] and EDG8-transfected Rh7777 hepatoma cells [63] via a pertussis toxin-sensitive mechanism. In contrast, there are a number of cell types in which stimulation by S1P produces an increase in intracellular cAMP [67, 91, 92]. For example, S1P-stimulated cAMP formation is pertussis toxin-insensitive in EDG3- and EDG5-transfected CHO cells [67, 92]. Since EDG receptors appear not to couple to G$_s$, it is probable that increased cAMP synthesis is mediated by cross-talk via the G$_q$/PLC signalling pathways. In this case the activation of calcium/calmodulin-sensitive or PKC-stimulated adenylate cyclase isoforms might be involved.

There are a number of studies in which S1P has been shown to activate PLC-catalysed inositol phosphate formation [67, 68, 91–93]. The EDG1-mediated response was blocked by pertussis toxin [68], whereas that mediated by EDG5 was only reduced by 30% [92]. For EDG1, this effect may be mediated by G$\beta\gamma_i$ subunit regulation of PLC$\beta$. More recently, EDG1-, EDG3- and EDG5-transfected CHO cells have been compared [67]. S1P-stimulated inositol phosphate production was observed in EDG3- and EDG5-transfected cells, which in both cases was moderately inhibited but not abolished by pertussis toxin. In contrast, S1P binding to EDG1 did not produce a response [67]. EDG6-transfected cells also exhibit a S1P-stimulated PLC activity that is blocked by pertussis toxin [62]. Consistent with the production of diacylglycerol and Ins(1,4,5)$P_3$-sensitive Ca$^{2+}$ mobilization, conventional isoforms of PKC ($\alpha$ and $\beta$) translocate to the membrane in response to S1P, as does the atypical PKC$\epsilon$ [93]. Regulation of other glycerophospholipid signalling pathways by S1P also appears to be mediated by both G$_i$-independent and G$_i$-dependent routes. S1P-dependent activation of PLD was reported to be independent of EDG1 expression [75] and insensitive to pertussis toxin [75, 93].

Stimulation of Ca$^{2+}$ mobilization by S1P (EC$_{50}$ 1 nM) has also been correlated with EDG1 expression [68]. High concentrations of S1P (10 $\mu$M) were required for Ca$^{2+}$ mobilization in EDG1-transfected HEK 293 cells [75] and in the rat mast cell line RBL-2H3 [46]. EDG3- and EDG5-transfected cells also exhibit pertussis toxin-sensitive S1P-stimulated Ca$^{2+}$ mobilization {reported EC$_{50}$ values of $\approx$ 2 nM and 20 nM respectively [67], and of $\approx$ 3 nM (EDG5) [92]}. However, others have shown the Ca$^{2+}$ response in EDG3- and EDG5-transfected cells to be largely pertussis toxin-insensitive [90]. In oocytes microinjected with EDG3 and EDG5 mRNA, S1P stimulated Ca$^{2+}$ mobilization via a G$_q$-dependent mechanism, although both receptors were also shown to couple to G$_i$ [78]. S1P mobilizes intracellular Ca$^{2+}$ in EDG6-transfected CHO cells in a pertussis toxin-sensitive manner [62], whereas S1P stimulation of EDG8-transfected Rh7777 cells failed to mobilize intracellular Ca$^{2+}$ [63]. Therefore EDG-receptor-dependent Ca$^{2+}$ mobilization appears to be differentially regulated by G$_i$- and G$_q$-linked pathways.

The S1P-stimulated activation of ERK1/ERK2 has been widely observed. Using cultured airway smooth muscle cells, which express EDG1 but not EDG3, we were one of the first to show that activation of ERK by S1P is pertussis toxin-sensitive [94, 95], clearly implicating the involvement of a GPCR acting via G$_i$ (airway smooth muscle cells do not express G$_o$). Several others have shown that the S1P-stimulated activation of ERK is pertussis toxin-sensitive in EDG1-transfected cells [66, 68, 69]. Studies on GPCR signalling to ERK have identified the involvement of G$\beta\gamma_i$ dimers [96, 97], which regulate non-receptor tyrosine kinase-catalysed phosphorylation of Shc and the sequential recruitment of Grb-2 and mSos. In airway smooth muscle cells, S1P activates c-Src tyrosine kinase via a pertussis toxin-sensitive mechanism. Furthermore, c-Src inhibitors abrogated the S1P-dependent activation of ERK [89]. Thus S1P signalling via EDG1 may involve the generation of free G$\beta\gamma_i$ subunits, which may stimulate c-Src to initiate activation of the ERK cascade.

G$\beta\gamma_i$ subunits have also been shown to regulate PI3K, which has been identified as playing a critical role in linking GPCRs to the stimulation of ERK [98, 99]. We have shown that the S1P-dependent activation of ERK via EDG1 was inhibited by two structurally dissimilar PI3K inhibitors (LY294002 and wortmannin). Moreover, PI3K activity was present in immunoprecipitates of Grb-2 (an intermediate in the ERK pathway) prepared from S1P-stimulated cells, an effect which was pertussis toxin-sensitive. These findings support a model whereby the EDG1 receptor is coupled via G$_i$ to Grb-2/PI3K complex-formation [89]. This is similar to observations made in Rat-1 and Cos-7 cells with LPA, which also acts via PI3K [100]. Kranenberg et al. [100] also showed that LPA stimulated the tyrosine phosphorylation of dynamin II, which binds to the C-terminal SH3 domain of Grb-2 in an agonist- and G$_i$-dependent manner. PI3K inhibitors prevented LPA-stimulated dynamin II tyrosine phosphorylation and ERK activation. The latter suggests that PI3K regulates an unidentified novel tyrosine kinase which phosphorylates dynamin II. These studies, together with those on S1P, suggest that LPA and S1P might utilize similar signalling pathways to regulate ERK.

The interaction between Grb-2 and PI3K is entirely consistent with studies demonstrating that insulin and insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) receptors stimulate ERK via a PI3K-dependent pathway involving the tyrosine phosphorylation of Gab1 (Grb-2-associated binder-1 protein), which has been shown to activate

EDG

Rho ← G₁₂/₁₃ ← Gq → Gi → Rac/Cdc42

PLC
PIP₂
IP₃ + DG
[Ca²⁺]ᵢ
PKC

AC
ATP
cAMP

c-Src
Pyk2

ERK

JNK/p38 MAPK

Caspases

Differentiation
Migration
Mitogenesis
Apoptosis

Figure 2 S1P-stimulated signal transduction

Diagram showing the known signalling pathways activated by S1P binding to EDG receptors regulating mitogenesis, chemotaxis, differentiation and apoptosis. It should be noted that this encompasses all EDG receptors. However, differential coupling to G-proteins and effectors may be apparent for EDG1, EDG3 and EDG5. Levels of cAMP can be increased indirectly via Gq or reduced via Gi to limit the mitogenic pathway. However, in some cell types (e.g. Swiss 3T3 cells), cAMP increases mitogenesis. Abbreviations: AC, adenylate cyclase; PIP₂, PtdIns(4,5)P₂; IP₃, Ins(1,4,5)P₃; DG, diacylglycerol; AP1, activator protein 1.

p85/p110 PI3K1a [101,102]. It remains to be determined whether S1P can induce stimulation of Gab1 tyrosine phosphorylation (c-Src mediated) as a possible mechanism for Grb-2-associated PI3K activation. The stimulation of certain GPCRs (e.g. β-adrenergic) induces binding of β-arrestin I and II to receptors and sequential phosphorylation of the Grb-2 adaptor protein, dynamin II (molecular mass 100 kDa), which mediates clathrin-dependent GPCR internalization by endocytosis [103]. Recent studies have shown that β-arrestin I/II- and dynamin II-mediated internalization of MEK-1 [mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/ERK kinase] is a mandatory stimulatory signal required for the GPCR-dependent activation of ERK. Thus inhibitors of clathrin-mediated endocytosis or the expression of dominant-negative mutants of β-arrestin I/II or dynamin II abrogate GPCR-stimulated activation of this kinase [104,105]. Significantly, using HEK 293 cells, Lee et al. [66] showed that expression of EDG1 fused with a C-terminal green fluorescent protein was localized primarily on the plasma membrane, but that this construct was internalized upon stimulation with 100 nM S1P for 2 h.

In general terms, the activation of the ERK pathway by S1P shows differential sensitivity to pertussis toxin [106,107]. In C6 cells, the pertussis toxin-insensitive component was abolished by inhibition of PKC, and was attributed to EDG5 linked to Gq/PLC. In contrast, S1P-induced ERK activation occurs entirely through a Gi/o-dependent pathway in EDG5-transfected CHO cells [92] and in HTC4 cells transfected with either EDG3 or EDG5 [108]. Interestingly, in the HTC4 cells, the concentration-dependence for S1P activation of ERK differs for EDG3 and EDG5, being maximal at 10 nM and 100 nM respectively [108], suggesting that the efficiency of coupling to Gi differs.

S1P can activate a number of non-receptor tyrosine kinases in order to transmit signals to well defined effector systems. For example, S1P activates Pyk2, which has been identified as a Ca²⁺-and PKC-regulated effector of GPCRs, resulting in the activation of ERKs [106,109]. However, in rat aortic smooth muscle cells, S1P-activated Pyk2 and ERK were not linked, since Pyk2 activation was pertussis toxin-sensitive, while that of ERK was not [106]. Other non-receptor tyrosine kinases which are activated by S1P include Syk [110], Crk [111] and p125FAK (where FAK is focal adhesion kinase) [75,112]. Syk requires PKC and transmits signals to Ras, PI3K and PLCγ. Crk activation correlates with increased mitogenesis, while p125FAK phosphorylation is associated with cytoskeletal changes and formation of focal adhesions. S1P-stimulated p125FAK phosphorylation is EDG1-

LPP1 : 118-KYSIGRLRP--37--SFYSGHS--38--IYVGLSRISDYKHHWSD-227
LPP1a: 121-KYSIGRLRP--37--SFYSGHS--38--IYVGLSRVSDYKHHWSD-228
LPP2 : 117-KYMIGRLRP--37--SFYSGHA--38--LYVGYTRVSDYKHHWSD-224
LPP3 : 148-KVSIGRLRP--37--SFFSGHA--38--FYTGLSRVSDHKHHPSD-255

LBP-1 : 128-KDYWCLPRP--18--GAPSSHT--36--MTLVFGRIRYCGMHGILD-214
LBP-2 : 129-KDYWCLPRP--18--GAPSSHS--36--LTLVFGRVYCGMHGMLD-215

Consensus KXXhXXXRP--X<sub>12-54</sub>-XXXSnHn-X<sub>31-54</sub>-XXXXXnRhXXXX HXXXD

Figure 3 Conserved phosphatase motif of lipid phosphate phosphatases and S1P phosphatase

Amino acid sequence alignment of mammalian LPP isoforms (LPP1, LPP1a, LPP2 and LPP3) and *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* LBP1/LBP2 (S1P phosphatases). Fully conserved residues are indicated in red in the consensus sequence. X, any amino acid; h, hydrophobic amino acid; n, neutral amino acid (Ala, Cys, Gly, Ser).

independent [75,112] and is not inhibited by suramin [75] (an EDG3 antagonist [78]), thereby implicating EDG5 (or EDG6) as the probable GPCR involved. Furthermore, S1P-stimulated p125<sup>FAK</sup> phosphorylation was inhibited by C3 exoenzyme, suggesting the involvement of Rho [75,112].

The regulation of PLD by Rho family members, such as Rho, Rac and Cdc42, is well established [113]. Therefore the S1P-dependent activation of PLD might be mediated by these low-molecular-mass G-proteins. Other effector systems which involve Rac and Cdc42 and which are activated by S1P include the stress-activated protein kinases c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 MAPK, as demonstrated in EDG5-transfected CHO cells [92]. Both p38 MAPK and JNK have been implicated in the regulation of apoptosis.

Gene transcription is also activated in response to stimulation by S1P. For example, S1P stimulates the induction of the AP1 transcription factors c-Jun and c-Fos [114]. This has recently been shown to be mediated by both EDG3 and EDG5 [108]. The induction of other immediate-early genes is mediated by the promoter SRE in a Rho-dependent manner. SRE is activated co-operatively by the transcription factors serum response factor (SRF) and Elk-1 [115,116]. Both of these transcription factors can be activated by S1P via EDG3 or EDG5 [108].

Bunemann et al. [117] have shown activation of the muscarinic K⁺ current by S1P in isolated cultured guinea-pig atrial myocytes. Desensitization of the muscarinic receptor did not affect the response to S1P, which was blocked by pertussis toxin. These results were interpreted as reflecting S1P binding to a GPCR that could activate a K⁺ channel normally linked to other GPCRs, such as muscarinic receptors. Others have shown that S1P increases the minimum stimulus current needed to induce an action potential in isolated myocytes. S1P reversibly inhibited the peak Na⁺ current by 50 pA, while the inward rectifier K⁺ current was unaffected [118].

S1P signal termination at EDG receptors

The termination of EDG receptor signal transduction has not been established. We are focusing on a mechanism that involves the dephosphorylation of S1P to sphingosine. This could be catalysed by S1P phosphatase (an integral membrane protein with seven predicted transmembrane domains) [35] and/or a lipid phosphate phosphatase [LPP1, or type 2 PA phosphatase (PAP2)], an integral membrane protein with six transmembrane domains] [32]. S1P phosphatase and members of the LPP family, including LPP1, contain a novel phosphatase motif [KXXXXXXRP(X<sub>12-54</sub>)PSGH(X<sub>31-54</sub>)SRXXXXXHXXXD] which is found in a superfamily of phosphatases [119] (Figure 3). Recently, site-directed mutagenesis has been used to establish that the conserved residues Lys, Arg, Pro, Ser, Gly, His, Arg and His are obligatory for the catalytic activity of LPP1 [120]. Significantly, the LPP1 isoform is located at the plasma membrane, with an externally oriented catalytic site [121]. Thus LPP1 may decrease extracellular S1P levels to limit its bioavailability at EDG receptors (Figure 4). This might require a co-ordinated mechanism that enables S1P to induce ‘downstream’ signalling responses before LPP1 is activated to reduce the extracellular concentration of S1P. This could involve an intracellular phosphorylation/dephosphorylation mechanism. In this regard LPP1 has putative cytoplasmic-facing phosphorylation sites for ERK, casein kinase, PKC and protein kinase A [122]. Over-expression of LPP1 has been shown to block LPA-stimulated ERK activation and DNA synthesis in Rat-1 cells [121].

Evidence for an intracellular role for S1P

A second messenger role for S1P was first proposed when a kinase-dependent sphingosine-stimulated release of Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores was observed [123,124]. In addition, mitogenesis of Swiss 3T3 cells in response to sphingosine was shown to be mimicked by S1P. The effect of sphingosine was believed to occur through its rapid conversion into S1P [125]. Furthermore, DNA synthesis in Swiss 3T3 cells was increased by microinjection of S1P [75]. Moreover, stimulation of cells with various mitogens elicits the production of S1P (see Table 2). However, many of the functions of S1P previously attributed to a second-messenger role may be due to its action at EDG receptors, especially since a large number of studies invoking intracellular actions involve the application of exogenous S1P to cells (see below; Figure 5).

Evidence to support an intracellular role for S1P has been based mainly on the stimulation of SPHK by agonists, the use of SPHK inhibitors and, more recently, transfection of SPHK.

Exogenous-S1P-stimulated activation of the ERK1/2 pathway in Swiss 3T3 cells was observed to be partially (70–80%) inhibited by pertussis toxin [95]. Thus it was proposed that S1P acts both extracellularly (pertussis toxin-sensitive) and intracellularly (pertussis toxin-insensitive) to regulate the ERK1/2 pathway [126]. In hindsight, one cannot exclude a role for G<sub>q</sub>-linked activation of ERK, which would be pertussis toxin-insensitive. In contrast with Swiss 3T3 cells, S1P-stimulated ERK1/2 activity in ASM

S. Pyne and N.J. Pyne

Figure 4 Model for signal termination at EDG receptors

S1P binding to the EDG receptor activates protein kinases which phosphorylate the ecto-lipid phosphate phosphatase (LPP). Activated LPP dephosphorylates extracellular S1P and thereby terminates its signalling and/or limits its bioavailability.

Migration
DNA synthesis
ERK
(Crk, p34Cdc2, Cdk2)
FAK
PLD
Ca2+
S1P
Caspases
JNK
NFκB
Differentiation
Apoptosis

Figure 5 Possible intracellular actions of S1P

Diagram showing possible intracellular actions of S1P affecting DNA synthesis, apoptosis, differentiation and cell motility. Abbreviation: NFκB, nuclear factor κB.

cells was completely abrogated by pertussis toxin [94]. In this case, an entirely extracellular action of S1P was corroborated by studies which showed that the addition of sphingosine to cells and its intracellular conversion into S1P failed to support ERK1/2 activation in C6 glioma cells [107]. Thus intracellular increases in S1P do not support activation of this kinase in this case.

More recently, Van Brocklyn and colleagues [75] examined the effects of exogenous S1P in HEK 293 cells transfected with EDG1. S1P-stimulated calcium mobilization, p125FAK phosphorylation and activation of PLD were shown to be independent of EDG1 expression. Furthermore, mitogenesis and the prevention of apoptosis were correlated with S1P uptake into

cells, but not with EDG1 expression. These observations were interpreted as evidence for an intracellular role for S1P. However, one cannot exclude the possibility that additional types of S1P receptor are expressed which were not detected in ligand binding assays. In this regard, An et al. [108] have correlated the expression of EDG3 and EDG5 in HTC4 hepatoma cells with S1P-induced proliferation and survival. A receptor-dependent action of S1P was supported by reporter gene assays in EDG3- and EDG5-transfected Jurkat cells. These effects were inhibited by abrogation of Gi- and Rho-dependent pathways [108]. Therefore partial pertussis toxin sensitivity can no longer be presumed to reflect a receptor-independent, intracellular site of action of S1P. However, the intracellular action is supported by

© 2000 Biochemical Society
experiments which showed that dihydroS1P (sphinganine 1-phosphate) competes with S1P for binding to EDG1 [75], EDG3 and EDG5 [74], but lacks a cytoprotective effect.

Using Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts, Rani et al. [50] proposed that S1P formed in response to PDGF can function as a second messenger. This was based upon experiments which showed that the SPHK inhibitor D,L-threo-dihydrosphingosine abrogated PDGF-stimulated S1P formation and ERK1/2, Crk, p34cdc2 and Cdk2 kinase activation. We obtained identical results for inhibition of PDGF-stimulated ERK1/2 activity with D,L-threo-dihydrosphingosine in cultured ASM cells [127,128]. However, D,L-threo-dihydrosphingosine is also a PKC inhibitor [129], and this might represent an alternative route through which ERK1/2 activation is abrogated, especially as PKC is an intermediate in the ERK1/2 cascade activated by PDGF [130,131]. This was further supported by studies which showed that other sphingoid bases, such as N,N-dimethylsphingosine and D,L-erythro-sphingosine (the substrate of SPHK), which also inhibit PKC [129], blocked ERK1/2 activation with identical concentration-dependence [130]. Thus inhibition by dihydrosphingosine or N,N-dimethylsphingosine should not be presumed to be at the level of SPHK alone. In contrast, Edsall et al. [132] reported that, in PC12 cells, 10 μM N,N-dimethylsphingosine had no effect on PMA- and NGF-stimulated PKC activity or on PMA-induced PKCa and PKCd translocation to membranes, despite competitively inhibiting SPHK. However, PKC was assayed using a commercial PKC kit which is not optimized for individual PKC isoforms. Furthermore, the PKC isoforms translocated in response to NGF and the effects of N,N-dimethylsphingosine were not established.

N,N-Dimethylsphingosine has also been used to implicate S1P as an intracellular signal involved in the inhibition of apoptosis and the promotion of cell survival. For example, Cuvillier et al. [133] showed that activation of JNK and apoptosis of promyelocytic HL60 and U937 monoblastic leukaemia cells induced by TNFa, sphingomyelinase, cell-permeable ceramide or PKC inhibitors was prevented by the addition of exogenous S1P. Similarly, the cell survival effect of la,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 in HL60 cells is via a mechanism involving activation of SPHK and S1P formation, whereas cytoprotection against ceramide-induced cell death was blocked by N,N-dimethylsphingosine [55]. Additionally, S1P inhibits various caspase activities and protects against ceramide- and Fas-induced apoptosis [23,133]. However, the sensitivity of these effects to pertussis toxin and C3 exoenzyme and, therefore, the involvement of EDG receptors was not investigated.

Inhibition of SPHK by dihydrosphingosine (Ki 5–18 μM) has also been used to support a second-messenger role for S1P in antigen clustering of FceRI and subsequent intracellular calcium mobilization in a rat mast cell line (RBL-2H3) [46]. In oligodendroglial cells, PDGF-BB stimulates SPHK and induces oscillatory and non-oscillatory calcium signals. The oscillatory signal is due to the action of sphingosine, while the non-oscillatory component is mediated by S1P. Thus dihydrosphingosine was shown to increase the percentage of cells producing Ca2+ spikes in response to PDGF-BB. This effect was correlated with a decrease in PDGF-stimulated S1P formation and elevated levels of sphingosine [134,135]. Similarly, stimulation of muscarinic M2 and M3 receptors expressed in HEK 293 cells also induced calcium signals that were blocked by dihydrosphingosine and N,N-dimethylsphingosine [45]. A general role for S1P in Ca2+ mobilization has been suggested for some, but not all, GPCRs [45]. Furthermore, microinjection of S1P induced rapid, transient Ca2+ mobilization which was not antagonized by heparin, thereby excluding a role for inositol trisphosphate and its receptor [45]. Similarly, heparin did not block the S1P-induced mobilization of

Ca2+ in a microsomal preparation [124]. However, intracellular release of caged dihydrosphingosine has also been shown to mobilize Ca2+ from ryanodine-sensitive intracellular stores in cultured neurons [136]. Moreover, SPC also releases microsomal Ca2+ [124,137], thereby questioning the specificity of the S1P effect. In addition, others have failed to detect S1P-induced mobilization of intracellular calcium [138,139].

Sphingosine-stimulated increases in intracellular Ca2+ appear to be mediated by PA. This may involve PA species derived from a PLC/diacylglycerol kinase pathway. Thus the diacylglycerol kinase inhibitor R59002 decreased both PA formation and Ca2+ mobilization [139]. S1P does not appear to activate this pathway, but instead can stimulate the formation of distinct PA species via a PLD route. Thus the effect of sphingosine on calcium mobilization is not due to its conversion into S1P. Other effects of sphingosine include a PKC-dependent action on Ca2+ dynamics [140] and blockade of ryanodine receptors [141]. Additionally, SPC releases Ca2+ from isolated sarcoplasmic reticulum in a ryanodine-receptor-dependent manner [142] and activates GPCR-mediated Ca2+ mobilization [143,144]. The advent of caged sphingolipids, including caged S1P [145,146], should progress this area of research, which remains controversial.

Cloning of SPHK [18] has led to an alternative approach to investigate the intracellular role of S1P. A 500-fold overexpression of SPHK in NIH 3T3 cells and HEK 293 cells resulted in a 4–8-fold increase in S1P levels, and promoted growth in low-serum medium, the G1/S transition, DNA synthesis and increased cell number. Overexpression of SPHK also protected against apoptosis induced by serum deprivation or ceramide in NIH 3T3 and HEK 293 cells, and reduced that in Jurkat T cells stimulated with anti-Fas. The protective effects of SPHK were blocked by N,N-dimethylsphingosine [25]. An autocrine role for S1P was not apparent, since S1P was not detected in the extracellular medium. Furthermore, the protective effect of S1P was not blocked by pertussis toxin, thereby eliminating a role for EDG1. However, signalling via pertussis toxin-insensitive pathways involving EDG3 and EDG5 receptors remains a possibility. Indeed, S1P-induced proliferation and survival have recently been demonstrated in EDG3- and EDG5-transfected HTC4 hepatoma cells [108]. Additionally, other effects of SPHK overexpression may play a role, e.g. a concomitant decrease in cellular ceramide levels.

THE CERAMIDE/S1P RHEOSTAT

The balance between cellular concentrations of ceramide and S1P has been proposed to determine the physiological fate of the cell. Generally, S1P and ceramide elicit opposing cellular fates, e.g. proliferation and survival versus growth arrest and apoptosis. However, it should be noted that there is considerable controversy as to whether ceramide is a physiological mediator of apoptosis [147,148], as most studies have either correlated increased intracellular ceramide with apoptosis or have used exogenous short-chain ceramides (which may have non-specific membrane-perturbing effects). The rheostat model is, therefore, currently based on the assumption that ceramide does indeed induce apoptosis. This is believed to be due to the differential regulation by ceramide and S1P of members of the ERK and stress-activated protein kinase families and caspase proteases [23,44,149]. Importantly, the rheostat model for controlling the ceramide/S1P balance and cell fate does not rely upon whether S1P acts intracellularly or as an EDG receptor agonist (Figure 6).
SM

**Figure 6 The rheostat model**

The conversion of ceramide into sphingosine and S1P determines cell fate, based upon data which show that, as a general rule, ceramide induces apoptosis (caspase activation), whereas S1P induces cell survival. Agonists differentially regulate the rheostat enzymes, ceramidase and SPHK. Abbreviation: SM, spingomyelin.

Cell-permeant ceramides strongly activate JNK in cultured airway smooth muscle cells, but are weak or ineffective with regard to activation of ERK1/2 [44]. Sphingosine inhibits ERK1/2 activation by PDGF, S1P and bradykinin, and is anti-proliferative in airway smooth muscle cells [128]. In contrast, exogenously applied S1P activates the ERK1/2 cascade and is co-mitogenic. Furthermore, ceramide/sphingosine and S1P elicit opposing effects on cAMP levels which might also contribute to their differential outcomes on DNA synthesis [94]. Similar observations have been made in glomerular mesangial cells [149], where cell-permeable ceramides activate JNK and inhibit PDGF-stimulated DNA synthesis. However, sphingosine stimulates ERK1/2 and proliferation. Thus the effect of sphingosine varies between cell types. This may depend on the metabolism of sphingosine, e.g. to S1P in glomerular mesangial cells.

A key piece of evidence to support the rheostat hypothesis is that ceramide-mediated programmed cell death is suppressed by the addition of S1P [23]. Thus ceramide-induced JNK activation and apoptosis were prevented by the addition of S1P. Furthermore, the PKC-mediated activation of SPHK and the concomitant increase in S1P levels were shown to have a similar inhibitory effect on ceramide-mediated apoptosis. Subsequently, Fas ligation or C₂-ceramide-mediated caspase-3/CPP32 and caspase-7/Mch3 activation and resulting poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage were shown to be blocked by PKC activation and attenuated by the addition of exogenous S1P (0.5–5 μM) [133]. Similarly, either S1P or PKC activation inhibited C₂-ceramide-mediated caspase-6/Mch2 activation and subsequent lamin B cleavage. However, neither S1P nor PKC stimulation were effective at blocking Fas-induced caspase-8/FLICE (Fas-associated death domain-like interleukin-1β converting enzyme) activation. Thus S1P/PKC activation probably acts downstream of caspase-8/FLICE activation and ceramide formation, and upstream of caspases-3 (CPP32), -6 (Mch2) and -7 (Mch3) [133]. Similarly, S1P promotes survival of neuronal cells [150].

Further support for the rheostat model comes from studies showing that growth factors and cytokines tend to differentially regulate sphingomyelinase/ceramidase and SPHK activities and, consequently, ceramide and S1P levels. For example, alkaline membrane-associated ceramidase is up-regulated (within 1 h) by growth factors, including PDGF, fibroblast growth factor, IGF and EGF, in a tyrosine kinase-dependent manner, with a concomitant increase in sphingomyelinase activity. In contrast, cytokines such as TNFα and interleukin-1 activated sphingomyelinase but not ceramidase activity, thereby resulting in the accumulation of ceramide within cells. Inhibition of ceramidase activity by N-oleylethanolamine reduced PDGF-stimulated DNA synthesis, but was without effect upon the proliferative response to endothelin, which failed to modulate ceramidase and sphingomyelinase activities [151].

Furthermore, manipulation of intracellular S1P levels can also affect the levels of ceramide and sphingosine. For example, NIH 3T3 cells transfected with SPHK1a exhibit a substantial decrease in their ceramide content [18]. This correlates with increased survival upon serum depletion, which usually induces apoptosis [25]. Therefore the concomitant removal of ceramide upon SPHK overexpression may prevent ceramide-induced apoptosis. Additionally, the subsequently formed S1P may promote cell survival by inducing mitogenic signalling pathways that counteract the effects of ceramide.

**CELL PROLIFERATION, DIFFERENTIATION, MIGRATION AND APOPTOSIS**

S1P appears to be both a full mitogen and a co-mitogen in different cell systems. For instance, in Swiss 3T3 cells it elicits a

marked increase in DNA synthesis [95], whereas in airway
smooth muscle cells S1P is co-mitogenic with PDGF and non-
mitogenic alone [89, 94]. In Swiss 3T3 cells, S1P-stimulated PLD-
derived PA [152] and Ca²⁺ mobilization [125] were proposed to
be key events in the regulation of DNA synthesis. In contrast, PA
failed to mimic the effects of S1P in thyroid FRTL5 cells, thereby
excluding a role for PLD. In that study, S1P activated the
Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger, which promotes a subsequent increase in
intracellular calcium, an important commitment step in the
stimulation of DNA synthesis [153].

The mitogenic efficacy of growth factors has been correlated
with the magnitude and kinetics of ERK activation [154].
Sustained ERK activation is thought to govern the amount of
kinase translocating to the nucleus, the extent of subsequent
transcription factor activation and, therefore, the magnitude of
DNA synthesis. We have demonstrated that a greater activation
of ERK occurs over 30 min in airway smooth muscle cells when
S1P and PDGF are applied together than is observed with either
agonist alone [89]. These results suggest that the amount of DNA
synthesis might be governed by various ‘threshold’ levels of
ERK activation throughout the 30 min stimulation. The extent
to which these levels are exceeded at each time point might
explain why combined stimulation with PDGF/S1P produced
more DNA synthesis than stimulation with PDGF alone. S1P
alone produces much weaker ERK activation via EDG1, which
is probably below the ‘threshold’ levels and is therefore non-
mitogenic.

Another possible mechanism to explain the co-mitogenic action
of S1P is its synergism with choline phosphate. This was observed
in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts, where a combination of the two lipids
elicited a synergistic increase in DNA synthesis [155]. This was
reported to involve amplification at the level of p70S6K and to a
lesser extent PI3K, based on the use of rapamycin (inhibitor of
p70S6K) and wortmannin (PI3K inhibitor) and dominant-negative
p85 PI3K, which block synergism. Choline phosphate and S1P
also elicited synergistic stimulation of DNA synthesis in Swiss
3T3 fibroblasts, an effect mediated by amplification of ERK
activation. In these experiments, high concentrations of ethanol-
amine also potentiated the synergism on DNA synthesis, via
an unidentified mechanism [156]. In contrast, low concentrations
of ethanolamine actually inhibited choline phosphate/S1P-
induced DNA synthesis [157]. Therefore the action of PLD on
phosphatidylethanolamine might result in a bimodal regulation
of S1P stimulation of DNA synthesis. In this case, the specificity
of action may be dependent upon the extent of PLD activation.
S1P can also mobilize intracellular calcium and promote activ-
ation of the transcription factor nuclear factor κB, which was
blocked by BAPTA/AM [158]. Therefore this action of S1P may
involve calcium-dependent phosphatases and redox potential
changes in the cell, which could affect mitogenesis.

S1P can both stimulate and inhibit chemotactic responses in
different cell types. For instance, high concentrations (micro-
molar) of S1P inhibited, whereas low concentrations (10–100 nM)
stimulated, the migration of EDG1-transfected HEK 293 cells
[159]. S1P also stimulated the migration of endothelial cells [159]
and CHO cells overexpressing EDG1 or EDG3 [67]. In contrast,
EDG5-transfected CHO cells were unaffected [67]. S1P also
inhibited PDGF-stimulated chemotaxis of aortic smooth muscle
cells, via a calcium- and cAMP-dependent mechanism [91].
Furthermore, S1P stimulation of p125FAK may be involved in the
inhibition of breast cancer cell motility [160]. Indeed, S1P inhibits
integrin-dependent cell motility, by affecting actin filament re-
organization. In contrast, formyl-Met-Leu-Phe stimulates SPHK
in HL60 cells, and may play a role in promoting chemotaxis of
these cells [48].

S1P is also implicated in differentiation processes. For instance,
NGF-induced neural differentiation correlates with increased
SPHK activity [54]. Both were blocked by the inhibitor K252a.
In endothelial cells, TNFα-stimulated ERK, nuclear factor κB
activation and VCAM-1 (vascular cell-adhesion molecule-1)/
E-selectin expression were mediated by SPHK activation and
S1P production. This was established using N,N-dimethyl-
sphingosine, which blocked the effects of TNFα. Furthermore,
S1P, but not ceramide or sphingosine, mimicked the effect of
TNFα [161]. Expression of E-selectin and, to a lesser extent,
VCAM were also increased by S1P in human aortic endothelial
cells [162]. S1P may also affect differentiation processes indirectly
by inducing the release of cytokines. For instance, in osteoblast-
like MC3T3-E1 cells, S1P appears to be involved in TNFα-
induced interleukin-6 synthesis [163].

S1P can both promote and protect against apoptosis in
mammalian cells. For instance, in human hepatoma cells, S1P
up-regulates Bax expression, which is a pro-apoptotic protein
belonging to the Bcl-2 family. This was shown to be independent
of p53-mediated transcription and growth arrest [164]. In
neuronal cells, neurite retraction is one of the first steps in the
apoptotic process. S1P induced neurite retraction in N1E-115
cells via a GPCR- and Rho-dependent pathway that involves
contraction of the actin cytoskeleton [165]. Others have confirmed
that the action of S1P is confined to an extracellular receptor, by
using S1P immobilized on glass beads that fail to penetrate the
cells [166]. Recent studies have shown that S1P-induced neurite
retraction involves EDG5 and, possibly, EDG3 [74]. In contrast,
agonist stimulation of SPHK protects against apoptosis, as
observed in TNFα-stimulated endothelial cells [49] and vitamin
D₃-stimulated HL60 cells [55]. In osteoblastic cells, prostaglandin
E₂ stimulates cAMP formation and inhibits apoptosis. This
appears to be mediated by a cAMP-dependent modulation of
SPHK and S1P production [57]. Furthermore, protection of T
lymphocytes from apoptosis by S1P was associated with sup-
pression of Bax expression via an EDG5- and EDG3-dependent
mechanism [167].

### S1P AND DISEASE

S1P may have an important role in a number of disease states. A
particular focus is to determine whether EDG receptor levels and
signalling via heterotrimeric G-proteins and Rho are altered in
disease. A recent study by Goetzl et al. [168] identified EDG4 as
a marker for ovarian cancer cells. A similar situation may exist
for S1P-specific EDG receptors in other cancers. S1P has also
been implicated in breast cancer. For example, S1P induces the
secretion of type H IGF (IGF-II), which increases proliferation
[169]. In contrast, S1P inhibits chemo-invasiveness of an
oestrogen-independent breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231,
through a p125FAK-dependent pathway [160].

The role of S1P in angiogenesis (the formation of new blood
vessels) is another key area. This involves endothelial-cell
differentiation and increased motility/mitogenesis of smooth
muscle cells, which may be influenced by lipoproteins, such as
oxidized LDL [56]. Several reports of the angiogenic role of S1P
have been published [159, 170, 171]. Leucocyte migration is also
affected by S1P, which may play a role in inflammation. For
example, S1P inhibits neutrophil motility [172] and modulates
adhesion molecule expression [162]. Additionally, the relative
levels of sphingosine and S1P in mast cells may determine, in
part, their allergic responsiveness [173]. Thus changes in the
phenotypic expression of EDG receptors, SPHK, S1P lyase and
LPPs may have a critical role in governing the intracellular/
extracellular concentration of S1P and its efficacy at EDG

receptors, and this may impact upon a number of disease processes.

Essential studies are required to produce gene knockouts, to establish the effect of abolishing the expression of EDG receptors, SPHK and other metabolizing enzymes. Deficiency in enzymes involved in S1P production and action may be associated with defects in important cellular processes, such as neuronal differentiation and apoptosis. It will be interesting to see whether these knockout animals exhibit neurological disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, which are associated with de-regulated apoptosis.

There are a number of potential approaches in the area of therapeutics. These include the development of selective EDG receptor antagonists, discrete inhibitors of enzymes involved in S1P metabolism and gene therapy. It may be possible to produce drugs or antisense oligonucleotides that can be delivered specifically to tumours to prevent growth and cell motility. Alternatively, it may be possible to overexpress enzymes which destroy S1P, such as LPP and S1P lyase, in order to prevent proliferation.

### FUTURE STUDIES

The biology of S1P has advanced considerably over the past 3–5 years. However, there are many questions still to be answered, promising further exciting and interesting developments in this area of lipid biology.

There are likely to be novel EDG receptors expressed in cells that remain to be identified. Whether these all conform to classical GPCR signalling will be of interest. Certain ligands can bind to both GPCRs and receptor ion channels, e.g. the 5-hydroxytryptamine receptors 5-HT₁, 5-HT₂, 5-HT₄ and 5-HT₅ are GPCRs, while 5-HT₃ is a receptor ion channel, more closely related to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. It will also be of interest to determine whether there is an intracellular S1P receptor, analogous to that for inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate. Once the entire complement of receptors has been established, the evolutionary processes that governed their biology can be defined. Identification of members of this family in lower organisms should provide details regarding their divergence and functional heterogeneity. Moreover, the structure/functional properties of identified EDG receptors need to be fully characterized. This will be achieved over the next few years and will involve site-directed mutagenesis studies to define the amino acids involved in binding S1P and the molecular basis for divergent signalling from a single receptor subtype via Gi, Gq and G12/G13. Hopefully, characterization of the functional groups in each receptor will allow rational drug design for the production of receptor antagonists.

#### Receptor signalling mechanisms

Although a large number of effector systems that are regulated by the binding of S1P to EDG receptors have been identified, the molecular organization of signalling events downstream of these receptors has not been fully defined. In this regard, a large amount of information can be borrowed from general paradigms of GPCR signalling, and future research will proceed down these lines. There are many questions to be answered. For instance, how do the different EDG receptors activate Rho-dependent signal transduction? Is this via the intermediary of G12/G13 and RhoGEF? Do EDG receptors communicate with JNK via a Rac/Cdc42-dependent mechanism? Do the Gi-linked EDG receptors utilize βγ subunits to regulate non-receptor tyrosine kinases, and how does this initiate activation of the ERK pathway? What is the role of PI3K in this pathway, and does this

involve endocytic signalling mediated by β-arrestins and dynamin II? Is there potential cross-talk with other growth factor receptors, such as the PDGF receptor? In certain cases, growth factor receptors (e.g. those for insulin, IGF-I and PDGF) appear to utilize Gi to signal downstream to ERK [101,131]. It would be very interesting to know whether Gi activated by EDG receptors can be used by growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases. This may allow the PDGF receptor, for example, to signal more efficiently, and could provide the basis for co-mitogenicity. Certain GPCR agonists have also been shown to transactivate growth factor receptors, by stimulating their tyrosine phosphorylation. These tyrosine-phosphorylated receptors can then scaffold with signalling proteins. The best example of this is LPA, which stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation and transactivation of the EGF receptor [174]. It remains to be determined whether S1P stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation and transactivation of growth factor receptors.

Another important question is: what are the factors that enable S1P binding to EDG5 receptors to elicit opposite cellular outcomes, e.g. proliferation versus apoptosis? This may be dependent upon specific localization of EDG5 with the appropriate signalling machinery. Certain, but not all, JNK isoforms have been purported to be upstream of caspases, which play a key role in cell death. Therefore the specificity of signalling from EDG5 might be achieved by co-expression of the relevant JNK isoform in these cells. It is also important to determine whether the EDG5 receptor has functional determinants, distinct from those of other EDG receptors, that allow selective activation of JNK and cell death.

Finally, Rho-dependent kinase activation plays a key role in calcium sensitization of smooth muscle contractility. It remains to be determined whether S1P binding to EDG receptors can elicit contraction of smooth muscle via this Rho-dependent mechanism. This is important because S1P is released by platelets at atherosclerotic plaques, and this might contribute to increased vasoconstriction leading to hypertension in patients with atherosclerosis.

### Intracellular versus autocrine role of S1P

Perhaps the key question is whether S1P can also function as an intracellular second messenger. This is still controversial, because of the uncertainty as to whether S1P is released from cells to act at EDG receptors. Although there are many studies which support a second messenger role, these are based upon the use of inhibitors of SPHK, which at best are only selective for this enzyme. In our opinion, the question of an intracellular role for S1P has to be redefined, especially as unequivocal proof would place S1P in a rather unique position as a signalling molecule with both intracellular and extracellular actions. In this regard, it will be necessary to develop more sensitive assays to measure extracellular S1P (e.g. in the presence of LPP inhibitors), in order to establish whether certain growth factors and cytokines can stimulate its release. The molecular cloning of SPHK offers another approach to addressing this question. Increased S1P levels have been correlated with enhanced cell growth and survival in cells transfected with SPHK. In cells with a null background for EDG receptors, this might be indicative of an intracellular action of S1P. PDGF stimulates SPHK and S1P formation. Therefore, if S1P is released, it can be predicted that PDGF-stimulated signalling might be modified by altered EDG receptor expression. These experiments would distinguish between intracellular and autocrine models. Further information on the role of SPHK in cells might also be obtained by using antisense deoxyoligonucleotides to ablate expression of the protein.

Further studies are required to clone and characterize mammalian forms of SPHK and S1P lyase. These enzymes are likely to have a very significant role in regulating the kinetics of S1P formation. Both intra- and ecto-sphingosine 1-phosphate lyase activities may be expressed in cells, and these might serve as markers for extracellularly and intracellularly acting S1P. A similar paradigm has already been established for the LPPs, which exist as a family of isoforms. Some of these enzymes have ecto-activity against S1P, LPA, PA and ceramide 1-phosphate. As explained above, these ecto-enzymes may limit S1P bioavailability at EDG receptors. The best approach here would be to evaluate the mechanisms regulating ecto-LPP and to establish a structure/function relationship. Such regulatory mechanisms could serve as a feedback route for lowering the extracellular concentration of S1P after the cellular response has occurred.

**CONCLUSION**

S1P is an important bioactive lysolipid that appears to have duality in its function, since it may act as both an extracellular and an intracellular mediator. It has profound biological activity, and aberrant regulation is implicated in certain disease states. Recent advances in this area have identified many potential targets for therapeutic intervention, such as EDG receptors and S1P-metabolizing enzymes. This suggests that further research may yield compounds that have clinical benefit.

We acknowledge the support of the Wellcome Trust and the BBSRC. S.P. is a Wellcome Trust Senior Fellow.

**REFERENCES**

1. Mathias, S., Pena, L. A. and Kolesnick, R. N. (1998) Signal transduction of stress via ceramide. Biochem. J. **335**, 465–480
2. Perry, D. K. and Hannun, Y. A. (1999) The role of ceramide in cell signalling. Biochim. Biophys. Acta **1436**, 233–243
3. Levade, T. and Jaffrezou, J.-P. (1999) Signalling sphingomyelinases: which, where, how and why? Biochim. Biophys. Acta **1438**, 1–17
4. Liu, B. and Hannun, Y. A. (1997) Inhibition of the neutral magnesium-dependent sphingomyelinase by glutathione. J. Biol. Chem. **272**, 16281–16287
5. Liu, B., Andrieu-Abadie, N., Levade, T., Zhang, P., Obeid, L. M. and Hannun, Y. A. (1998) Glutathione regulation of neutral sphingomyelinase in tumor necrosis factor-α-induced cell death. J. Biol. Chem. **273**, 11313–11320
6. Bernardo, K., Hurwitz, R., Zenk, T., Desnick, R. J., Ferlinz, K., Schuchman, E. H. and Sandhoff, K. (1995) Purification, characterization, and biosynthesis of human acid ceramidase. J. Biol. Chem. **270**, 11098–11102
7. Koch, J., Gartner, S., Li, C. M., Quintern, L. E., Bernardo, K., Levran, O., Schnabel, D., Desnick, R. J., Schuchman, E. H. and Sandhoff, K. (1996) Molecular cloning and characterization of a full-length complementary DNA encoding human acid ceramidase. Identification of the first molecular lesion causing Farber disease. J. Biol. Chem. **271**, 33110–33115
8. Sugita, M., Williams, M., Dulaney, J. T. and Moser, H. W. (1975) Ceramidase and ceramide synthesis in human kidney and cerebellum. Description of a new alkaline ceramidase. Biochim. Biophys. Acta **398**, 125–131
9. Ullman, M. D. and Radin, N. S. (1974) The enzymatic formation of sphingomyelin from ceramide and lecithin in mouse liver. J. Biol. Chem. **249**, 1506–1511
10. Sundaram, K. S. and Lev, M. (1984) Inhibition of sphingolipid synthesis by cycloserine *in vitro* and *in vivo*. J. Neurochem. **42**, 577–581
11. Miyake, Y., Kozutsumi, Y., Nakamura, S., Fujita, T. and Kawasaki, T. (1995) Serine palmitoyltransferase is the primary target of a sphingosine-like immunosuppressant, ISP-1/myriocin. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. **211**, 396–403
12. Wang, E., Norred, W. P., Bacon, C. W., Riley, R. T. and Merrill, Jr., A. H. (1991) Inhibition of sphingolipid biosynthesis by fumonisins. Implications for diseases associated with *Fusarium moniliforme*. J. Biol. Chem. **266**, 14486–14490
13. Jeckel, D., Karenbauer, A., Burger, K. N., van Meer, G. and Wieland, F. (1992) Glucosylceramide is synthesized at the cytosolic surface of various Golgi subfractions. J. Cell Biol. **117**, 259–267
14. Vunnam, R. R. and Radin, N. S. (1980) Analogs of ceramide that inhibit glucocerebroside synthetase in mouse brain. Chem. Phys. Lipids **26**, 265–278
15. Bajjalieh, S. M., Martin, T. F. and Floor, E. (1989) Synaptic vesicle ceramide kinase. A calcium-stimulated lipid kinase that co-purifies with brain synaptic vesicles. J. Biol. Chem. **264**, 14354–14360

16 Kolesnick, R. N. and Hemer, M. R. (1990) Characterization of a ceramide kinase activity from human leukemia (HL-60) cells. Separation from diacylglycerol kinase activity. J. Biol. Chem. **265**, 18803–18808
17 Olivera, A., Kohama, T., Tu, Z., Milstein, S. and Spiegel, S. (1998) Purification and characterization of rat kidney sphingosine kinase. J. Biol. Chem. **273**, 12576–12583
18 Kohama, T., Olivera, A., Edsall, L., Nagiec, M. M., Dickson, R. and Spiegel, S. (1998) Molecular cloning and functional characterisation of murine sphingosine kinase. J. Biol. Chem. **273**, 23722–23728
19 Kozak, M. (1986) Point mutations define a sequence flanking the AUG initiator codon that modulates translation by eukaryotic ribosomes. Cell **44**, 283–292
20 Nagiec, M. M., Skrzypek, M., Nagiec, E. E., Lester, R. L. and Dickson, R. L. (1998) The LCB4 (YOR171c) and LCB5 (YLR260w) genes of *Saccharomyces* encode sphingoid long chain base kinases. J. Biol. Chem. **273**, 19437–19442
21 Bunting, M., Tang, W., Zimmerman, G. A., McIntyre, T. M. and Prescott, S. M. (1996) Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel human diacylglycerol kinase ζ. J. Biol. Chem. **271**, 10230–10236
22 Schaap, D., Van der Wal, J. and Van Blitterswijk, W. J. (1994) Consensus sequences for ATP-binding sites in protein kinases do not apply to diacylglycerol kinases. Biochem. J. **304**, 661–662
23 Cuvillier, O., Pirianov, G., Kleuser, B., Vcanek, P. G., Coso, O. A., Gutkind, S. and Spiegel, S. (1996) Suppression of ceramide-mediated programmed cell death by sphingosine 1-phosphate. Nature (London) **381**, 800–803
24 Olivera, A., Rosenthal, J. and Spiegel, S. (1994) Sphingosine kinase from Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts: a convenient assay for the measurement of intracellular levels of free sphingoid bases. Anal. Biochem. **223**, 306–312
25 Olivera, A., Kohama, T., Edsall, L., Nava, V., Cuvillier, O., Poulton, S. and Spiegel, S. (1999) Sphingosine kinase expression increases intracellular sphingosine 1-phosphate and promotes cell growth and survival. J. Cell Biol. **147**, 545–557
26 Bann, Y., Kato, M., Hara, A. and Nozawa, Y. (1998) Evidence for the presence of multiple isoforms of sphingosine kinase in human platelets. Biochem. J. **335**, 301–304
27 Van Veldhoven, P. P. and Mannaerts, G. P. (1991) Subcellular localization and membrane topology of sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase in rat liver. J. Biol. Chem. **266**, 12502–12507
28 Van Veldhoven, P. P. and Mannaerts, G. P. (1993) Sphingosine-phosphate lyase. Adv. Lipid Res. **26**, 69–98
29 Van Veldhoven, P. P. and Mannaerts, G. P. (1994) Sphinganine 1-phosphate metabolism in cultured skin fibroblasts: evidence for the existence of a sphingosine phosphatase. Biochem. J. **299**, 597–601
30 Saba, J. D., Nara, F., Bielawska, A., Garrett, S. and Hannun, Y. A. (1997) The *BST1* gene of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* is the sphingosine 1-phosphate lyase. J. Biol. Chem. **272**, 26087–26090
31 Zhou, J. and Saba, J. D. (1998) Identification of the first mammalian sphingosine phosphate lyase gene and its functional expression in yeast. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. **242**, 502–507
32 Brindley, D. N. and Waggoner, D. W. (1998) Mammalian lipid phosphate phosphohydrolases. J. Biol. Chem. **273**, 24281–24284
33 Stoffel, W., LeKim, D. and Sticht, G. (1969) Distribution and properties of dihydrosphingosine-1-phosphate aldolase (sphinganine-1-phosphate alkanal-lyase). Hoppe-Seyler's Z. Physiol. Chem. **350**, 1233–1241
34 De Cuester, P., Mannaerts, G.P and Van Veldhoven, P. P. (1995) Identification and subcellular localization of sphinganine phosphatases in rat liver. Biochem. J. **311**, 139–146
35 Mao, C., Wadleigh, M., Jenkins, G. M., Hannun, Y. A. and Obeid, L. M. (1997) Identification and characterization of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* dihydrosphingosine-1-phosphate phosphatase. J. Biol. Chem. **272**, 28690–28694
36 Mandala, S. M., Thornton, R., Tu, Z., Kurtz, M. B., Nickels, J., Broach, J., Menzelev, R. and Spiegel, S. (1998) Sphingoid base 1-phosphatase: a key regulator of sphingolipid metabolism and stress response. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. **95**, 150–155
37 Yatomi, Y., Ruan, F., Ohta, H., Welch, R. J., Hakomori, S.-I. and Igarashi, Y. (1995) Quantitative measurement of sphingosine 1-phosphate in biological samples by acylation with radioactive acetic anhydride. Anal. Biochem. **230**, 315–320
38 Edsall, L. C. and Spiegel, S. (1999) Enzymatic measurement of sphingosine 1-phosphate. Anal. Biochem. **272**, 80–86
39 Igarashi, Y. and Yatomi, Y. (1998) Sphingosine 1-phosphate is a blood constituent released from activated platelets, possibly playing a variety of physiological and pathological roles. Acta Biochim. Polon. **45**, 299–309
40 Yatomi, Y., Igarashi, Y., Yang, L., Hisano, N., Qi, R., Asazuma, N., Satoh, K., Ozaki, Y. and Kume, S. (1997) Sphingosine 1-phosphate, a bioactive sphingolipid abundantly stored in platelets, is a normal constituent of human plasma and serum. J. Biochem. (Tokyo) **121**, 969–973

41 Igarashi, Y., Yatomi, Y. and Kickler, T.S (1998) Sphingosine-phosphate content in the plasma of platelet concentrates correlates with poor platelet increments after transfusion and with occurrences of transfusion reactions in patients. Am. J. Hematol. 57, 261–262

42 Buehrer, B.M. and Bell, R.M. (1992) Inhibition of sphingosine kinase in vitro and in platelets. Implications for signal transduction pathways. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 3154–3159

43 Olivera, A. and Spiegel, S. (1993) Sphingosine 1-phosphate as a second messenger in cell proliferation induced by PDGF and FCS mitogens. Nature (London) 365, 557–560

44 Pyne, S., Chapman, J., Steele, L. and Pyne, N.J. (1996) Sphingomyelin-derived lipids differentially regulate the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK-2) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signal cascades in airway smooth muscle. Eur. J. Biochem. 237, 819–826

45 Meyer zu Heringdorf, D., Lass, T., Alemany, R., Laser, K.T., Neumann, E., Zhang, C., Shmidt, M., Rauen, U., Jakobs, K.H. and Van Koppen, C.J. (1998) Sphingosine kinase-mediated Ca²⁺ signalling by G-protein-coupled receptors. EMBO J. 17, 2830–2837

46 Choi, O.H., Kim, J.H. and Kinet, J.P. (1996) Calcium mobilisation via sphingosine kinase in signalling by the FcεRI antigen receptor. Nature (London) 380, 634–636

47 Melendez, A., Floto, R.A., Gillooly, D.J., Harnett, M.M. and Allen, J.M. (1998) FcγRI coupling to phospholipase D initiates sphingosine kinase-mediated calcium mobilization and vesicular trafficking. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 9393–9402

48 Alemany, R., Meyer zu Heringdorf, D., van Koppen, C.J. and Jakobs, K.H. (1999) Formyl peptide receptor signaling in HL-60 cells through sphingosine kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 3994–3999

49 Xia, P., Wang, L., Gamble, J.R. and Vadas, M.A. (1999) Activation of sphingosine kinase by tumor necrosis factor-α inhibits apoptosis in human endothelial cells. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 34499–34505

50 Rani, C.S., Berger, A., Wu, J., Sturgill, T.W., Beitner-Johnson, D., Le Roith, D., Varticovski, L. and Spiegel, S. (1997) Divergence in signal transduction pathways of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptors: involvement of sphingosine 1-phosphate in PDGF but not EGF signalling. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 10777–10783

51 Meyer zu Heringdorf, D., Lass, H., Kuchar, I., Alemany, R., Guo, Y., Schmidt, M. and Jakobs, K.H. (1999) Role of sphingosine kinase in Ca²⁺ signalling by epidermal growth factor receptor. FEBS Lett. 461, 217–222

52 Olivera, A., Edsall, L., Poulton, S., Kazlauskas, A. and Spiegel, S. (1999) Platelet-derived growth factor-induced activation of sphingosine kinase requires phosphorylation of the PDGF receptor tyrosine residue responsible for binding of PLCγ. FASEB J. 13, 1593–1600

53 Buehrer, B.M., Bardes, E.S. and Bell, R.M. (1996) Protein kinase C-dependent regulation of human erythroleukemia (HEL) cell sphingosine kinase activity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1303, 233–242

54 Rius, R.A., Edsall, L.C. and Spiegel, S. (1997) Activation of sphingosine kinase in pheochromocytoma PC12 neuronal cells in response to trophic factors. FEBS Lett. 417, 173–176

55 Kleuser, B., Cuvillier, O. and Spiegel, S. (1998) 1α,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D₃ inhibits programmed cell death in HL60 cells by activation of sphingosine kinase. Cancer Res. 58, 1817–1824

56 Augé, N., Nikolova-Karakachian, M., Carpentier, S., Parthasarathy, S., Negre-Salvayre, A., Salvayre, R., Merrill, Jr., A.H. and Levade, T. (1999) Role of sphingosine 1-phosphate in the mitogenesis induced by oxidized low density lipoprotein in smooth muscle cells via activation of sphingomyelinase, ceramidase, and sphingosine kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 21533–21538

57 Machawate, M., Rodan, S.B., Rodan, G.A. and Harada, S.-I. (1998) Sphingosine kinase mediates cyclic AMP suppression of apoptosis in rat periosteal cells. Mol. Pharmacol. 54, 70–77

58 Hla, T. and Macaig, T. (1990) An abundant transcript induced in differentiating human endothelial cells encodes a polypeptide with structural similarities to G-protein-coupled receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 265, 9308–9313

59 Okazaki, H., Ishizaka, N., Sakurai, T., Kurokawa, K., Goto, K., Kumada, M. and Takuwa, Y. (1993) Molecular cloning of a novel putative G protein-coupled receptor expressed in the cardiovascular system. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 190, 1104–1109

60 MacLennan, A.J., Browe, C.S., Gaskin, A.A., Lado, D.C. and Shaw, G. (1994) Cloning and characterisation of a putative G-protein coupled receptor potentially involved in development. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 5, 201–209

61 Graier, M.H., Bernhardt, G. and Lipp, M. (1998) A lymphoid tissue-specific receptor, EDG6, with potential immune modulatory functions mediated by extracellular lysophospholipids. Genomics 53, 164–169

62 Yamazaki, Y., Kon, J., Sato, K., Tomura, H., Sato, M., Yoneya, T., Okazaki, H., Okajima, F. and Ohta, H. (2000) EDG6 as a putative sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor coupling to Ca²⁺ signalling pathway. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 268, 583–589

63 Im, D.-S., Heise, C.E., Ancellin, N., O'Dowd, B.F., Shei, G.-J., Heavens, R.P., Rigby, M.R., Hla, T., Mandala, S., McAllister, G. et al. (2000) Characterisation of a novel sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor, EDG8. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 14281–14286

64 Glickman, M., Malek, R.L., Kwitek-Black, A.E., Jacob, H.J. and Lee, N.H. (1999) Molecular cloning, tissue-specific expression, and chromosomal localisation of a novel nerve growth factor-regulated G-protein-coupled receptor, nrg-1. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 14, 141–152

65 Lee, M.-J., Evans, M. and Hla, T. (1996) The inducible G protein-coupled receptor edg-1 signals via the Gi/mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 11272–11279

66 Lee, M.-J., Van Brocklyn, J.R., Thangada, S., Liu, C.H., Hand, A.R., Menzelev, R., Spiegel, S. and Hla, T. (1996) Sphingosine-1-phosphate as a ligand for the G protein-coupled receptor EDG-1. Science 279, 1552–1555

67 Kon, J., Sato, K., Watanabe, T., Tomura, H., Kuwabara, A., Kimura, T., Tamama, K.-I., Ishizuka, T., Murata, N., Kanda, T. et al. (1999) Comparison of intrinsic activities of the putative sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor sub-types to regulate several signalling pathways in their cDNA-transfected Chinese hamster ovary cells. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 23940–23947

68 Okamoto, H., Takuwa, N., Gonda, K., Okazaki, H., Chang, K., Yatomi, Y., Shigematsu, H. and Takuwa, Y. (1998) EDG1 is a functional sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor that is linked via a G(i/o) to multiple signalling pathways, including phospholipase C activation, Ca²⁺ mobilization, ras-mitogen-activated protein kinase activation and adenylate cyclase inhibition. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 27104–27110

69 Zondag, G.C., Postma, F.R., Van Etten, A., Verlaan, I. and Moolenaar, W.H. (1998) Sphingosine 1-phosphate signalling through the G-protein-coupled receptor Edg-1. Biochem. J. 330, 605–609

70 Windh, R.T., Lee, M.-J., Hla, T., An, S., Barr, A.J. and Manning, D.R. (1999) Differential coupling of the sphingosine 1-phosphate receptors EDG1, EDG3 and H218/EDG5 to the G₁, Gq, and G₁₂ families of heterotrimeric G proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 27351–27358

71 Hall, A., Paterson, H.F., Adamson, P. and Ridley, A.J. (1993) Cellular responses regulated by rho-related small GTP-binding proteins. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London B Biol. Sci. 340, 267–271

72 Stam, J.C., Michiels, F., van der Kammen, R.A., Moolenaar, W.H. and Collard, J. (1998) Invasion of T-lymphoma cells: co-operation between Rho family GTPases and lysosphospholipid receptor signalling. EMBO J. 17, 4066–4074

73 Lee, M.-J., Thangada, S., Liu, C.H., Thompson, B.D. and Hla, T. (1998) Lysosphosphatidic acid stimulates the G-protein-coupled receptor EDG-1 as a low affinity agonist. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 22105–22112

74 Van Brocklyn, J.R., Tu, Z., Edsall, L., Schmidt, R.R. and Spiegel, S. (1999) Sphingosine 1-phosphate-induced cell rounding and neurite retraction are mediated by the G protein-coupled receptor H218. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 4626–4632

75 Van Brocklyn, J.R., Lee, M.-J., Menzelev, R., Olivera, A., Edsall, L., Cuvillier, O., Thomas, D.M., Coopman, P.J.P., Thangada, S., Liu, C.H. et al. (1998) Dual actions of sphingosine 1-phosphate: extracellular through the G₁-coupled receptor EDG1 and intracellular to regulate proliferation and survival. J. Cell Biol. 142, 229–240

76 An, S., Bleu, T. and Zheng, Y. (1999) Transduction of intracellular calcium signals through G protein-mediated activation of phospholipase C by recombinant sphingosine 1-phosphate receptors. Mol. Pharmacol. 55, 787–794

77 An, S., Goetzl, E.J. and Lee, H. (1998) Signalling mechanisms and molecular characteristics of G protein-coupled receptors for lysosphosphatidic acid and sphingosine 1-phosphate. J. Cell. Biochem. Suppl. 30/31, 147–157

78 Ancellin, N. and Hla, T. (1999) Differential pharmacological properties and signal transduction of the sphingosine 1-phosphate receptors EDG-1, EDG-3, and EDG-5. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 18997–19002

79 Buhl, A.M., Johnson, N.L., Dhanasekaran, N. and Johnson, G.L. (1995) Gα₁₂ and Gα₁₃ stimulate Rho-dependent stress fibre formation and focal adhesion assembly. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 24631–24634

80 Kozasa, T., Jiang, X., Hart, M.J., Sternweis, P.M., Singer, W.D., Gilman, A.G., Bollag, G. and Sternweis, P.C. (1998) p115RhoGEF, a GTPase activating protein for Gα₁₂ and Gα₁₃. Science 280, 2109–2111

81 Karnam, P., Standaert, M.L., Galloway, L. and Farese, R.V. (1997) Activation and translocation of Rho (and ADP ribosylation factor) by insulin in rat adipocytes: apparent involvement of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 6136–6140

82 Mao, J., Huan, H., Xie, W. and Wu, D. (1998) Guanine nucleotide exchange factor GEF 115 specifically mediates activation of Rho and serum response factor by the G protein α subunit Gα₁₃. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95, 12973–12976

83 Hart, M.J., Jiang, X., Kozasa, T., Roscoe, W., Singer, W.D., Gilman, A.G., Sternweiss, P.C. and Bollag, G. (1998) Direct stimulation of the guanine nucleotide exchange activity of p115RhoGEF by Gα₁₃. Science 280, 2112–2114

84 Hecht, J.H., Weiner, J.A., Post, S.R. and Chun, J. (1996) Ventricular zone gene-1 (vzg-1) encodes a lysosphosphatidic acid receptor expressed in neurogenic regions of the developing cerebral cortex. J. Cell Biol. 135, 1071–1083

85 An, S., Bleu, T., Hallmark, O. G. and Goetzl, E. J. (1998) Characterisation of a novel subtype of human G protein-coupled receptor for lysosphosphatidic acid. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 7906–7910

86 An, S., Bleu, T., Zheng, Y. and Goetzl, E. J. (1998) Recombinant human G protein- coupled lysosphosphatidic acid receptors mediate intracellular calcium mobilization. Mol. Pharmacol. 54, 881–888

87 Erickson, J. R., Wu, J. J., Goddard, J. G., Tigyi, G., Kawanishi, K., Tomei, L. D. and Kiefer, M. C. (1998) Edg-2/Vzg-1 couples to the yeast pheromone response pathway selectively in response to lysosphosphatidic acid. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 1506–1510

88 Bandoh, K., Aoki, J., Hosono, H., Kobayashi, S., Kobayashi, T., Murakami- Murofushi, K., Tsujimoto, M., Arai, H. and Inoue, K. (1999) Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel human G-protein-coupled receptor, EDG7, for lysosphosphatidic acid. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 27776–27785

89 Rakhit, S., Conway, A.-M., Tate, R., Bower, T., Pyne, N. J. and Pyne, S. (1999) Sphingosine 1-phosphate stimulation of the p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway in airway smooth muscle: role of endothelial differentiation gene-1, c-Src tyrosine kinase and phosphoinositide 3-kinase. Biochem. J. 338, 643–649

90 Okamoto, H., Takuwa, N., Yatomi, Y., Gonda, K., Shigematsu, H. and Takuwa, Y. (1999) EDG3 is a functional receptor specific for sphingosine 1-phosphate and sphingosylphosphorylcholine with signalling characteristics distinct from EDG1 and AGR16. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 260, 203–208

91 Bornfeldt, K., Graves, L. M., Raines, E. W., Igarashi, Y., Wayman, G., Yamamura, S., Yatomi, Y., Sidhu, J. S., Krebs, E. G., Hakomori, S.-I. and Ross, R. (1995) Sphingosine-1-phosphate inhibits PDGF-induced chemotaxis of human arterial smooth muscle cells: spatial and temporal modulation of PDGF chemotactic signal transduction. J. Cell Biol. 130, 193–206

92 Gonda, K., Okamoto, H., Takuwa, N., Yatomi, Y., Okazaki, H., Sakura, T., Kimura, S., Sillard, R., Harii, K. and Takuwa, Y. (1999) The novel sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor AGR16 is coupled via pertussis toxin-sensitive and -insensitive G-proteins to multiple signalling pathways. Biochem. J. 337, 67–75

93 Banno, Y., Fujita, H., Ono, Y., Nakashima, S., Ito, Y., Kuzumaki, N. and Nozawa, Y. (1999) Differential phospholipase D activation by bradykinin and sphingosine 1-phosphate in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts over-expressing gelsolin. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 27385–27391

94 Pyne, S. and Pyne, N. J. (1996) The differential regulation of cyclic AMP by sphingomyelin-derived lipids and the modulation of sphingolipid-stimulated extracellular signal regulated kinase-2 in airway smooth muscle. Biochem. J. 315, 917–923

95 Wu, J., Spiegel, S. and Sturgill, T. W. (1995) Sphingosine 1-phosphate rapidly activates the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway by a G-protein-dependent mechanism. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 11484–11488

96 Koch, W. J., Hawes, B. E., Allen, L. F. and Lefkowitz, R. J. (1994) Direct evidence that Gi-coupled receptor stimulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase is mediated by Gβγ activation of p21ras. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91, 12706–12710

97 Crespo, P., Xu, N., Simonds, W. F. and Gutkind, J. S. (1994) Ras-dependent activation of MAP kinase pathway mediated by G-protein βγ subunits. Nature (London) 369, 418–420

98 Stephens, L. R., Smrcka, A., Cooke, F. T., Jackson, T. J., Sternweis, P. and Hawkins, P. T. (1994) A novel phosphoinositide 3 kinase activity in myeloid-derived cells is activated by G protein βγ subunits. Cell 77, 83–93

99 Lopez-Illasaca, M., Crespo, P., Pellici, P. G., Gutkind, J. S. and Wetzker, R. (1997) Linkage of G protein-coupled receptors to the MAPK signalling pathway through PI 3-kinase γ. Science 275, 394–397

100 Kranenberg, O., Verlaan, I., Hordijk, P. L. and Moolenaar, W. H. (1997) Gβ-mediated activation of the Ras/MAP kinase pathway involves a 100 kDa tyrosine- phosphorylated Grb2 SH3 binding protein, but not Src nor Shc. EMBO J. 16, 3097–3105

101 Luttrell, L. M., van Biesen, T., Hawes, B. E., Koch, W. J., Tohura, K. and Lefkowitz, R. J. (1995) Gβγ subunits mediate mitogen-activated protein kinase activation by the tyrosine kinase insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 16495–16498

102 Holdago-Madruga, M., Emlet, D. R., Moscatello, D. K., Godwin, A. K. and Wong, A. J. (1996) A Grb2-associated docking protein in EGF- and insulin-receptor signalling. Nature (London) 379, 560–564

103 Lin, F. T., Kreuger, K. M., Kendall, H. E., Daaka, Y., Fredericks, Z. L., Pitcher, J. A. and Lefkowitz, R. J. (1997) Clathrin-mediated endocytosis of the β-adrenergic receptor is regulated by phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of β-arrestin 1. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 31051–31057

104 Luttrell, L. M., Daaka, Y., Della Rocca, G. J. and Lefkowitz, R. J. (1997) G protein- coupled receptors mediate two functionally distinct pathways of tyrosine phosphorylation in rat 1a fibroblasts: Shc phosphorylation and receptor endocytosis correlate with activation of ERK kinases. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 31648–31656

105 Daaka, Y., Luttrell, L. M., Ahn, S., Della Rocca, G. J., Ferguson, S. S. G., Caron, M. G. and Lefkowitz, R. J. (1998) Essential role for G protein-coupled receptor endocytosis in the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 685–688

106 Guo, C., Zheng, C., Martin-Padura, I., Bian, Z. C. and Guan, J.-L. (1998) Differential stimulation of proline-rich tyrosine kinase 2 and mitogen-activated protein kinase by sphingosine 1-phosphate. Eur. J. Biochem. 257, 403–408

107 Sato, K., Tomura, H., Igarashi, Y., Ui, M. and Okajima, F. (1999) Possible involvement of cell surface receptors in sphingosine 1-phosphate-induced activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase in C6 glioma cells. Mol. Pharmacol. 55, 126–133

108 An, S., Zheng, Y. and Bleu, T. (2000) Sphingosine 1-phosphate-induced cell proliferation, survival and related events mediated by G protein-coupled receptors EDG3 and EDG5. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 288–296

109 Dikic, I., Tokiwa, G., Lev, S., Courtneidge, S. A. and Schlessinger, J. (1996) A role for Pyk2 and Src in linking G-protein-coupled receptors with MAP kinase activation. Nature (London) 383, 547–550

110 Yang, L., Yatomi, Y., Hisano, N., Qi, R., Asazuma, N., Satoh, K., Igarashi, Y., Ozaki, Y. and Kume, S. (1996) Activation of protein-tyrosine kinase Syk in human platelets stimulated with lysosphosphatidic acid or sphingosine 1-phosphate. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 229, 440–444

111 Blakesley, V. A., Beitner-Johnson, D., Van Brocklyn, J. R., Rani, S., Shen-Orr, Z., Stannard, B., Spiegel, S. and LeRoith, D. (1997) Sphingosine 1-phosphate stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of Crk. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 16211–16215

112 Wang, F., Nobes, C. D., Hall, A. and Spiegel, S. (1997) Sphingosine 1-phosphate stimulates Rho-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase and paxillin in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts. Biochem. J. 324, 481–488

113 Exton, J. H. (1999) Regulation of phospholipase D. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1439, 121–133

114 Su, Y., Rosenthal, D., Smulson, M. and Spiegel, S. (1994) Sphingosine 1- phosphate, a novel signaling molecule, stimulates DNA binding activity of AP-1 in quiescent Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 16512–15517

115 Hill, C. S., Marais, R., John, S., Wynne, J., Dalton, S. and Treisman, R. (1993) Functional analysis of a growth factor-responsive transcription factor complex. Cell 73, 395–406

116 Hill, C. S., Wynne, J. and Treisman, R. (1995) The Rho family GTPases RhoA, Rac1, and CDC42Hs regulate transcriptional activation by SRF. Cell 81, 1159–1170

117 Bunemann, M., Brandts, B., Meyer zu Heringdorf, D., Van Koppen, C. J., Jakobs, K. H. and Pott, L. (1995) Activation of muscarinic K+ current in guinea-pig atrial myocytes by sphingosine-1-phosphate. J. Physiol. (London) 489, 701–707

118 MacDonald, K. L., Severson, D. L. and Giles, W. R. (1998) Depression of excitability by sphingosine 1-phosphate in rat ventricular myocytes. Am. J. Physiol. 275, H2291–H2299

119 Stukey, J. and Carmen, G. M. (1997) Identification of a novel phosphatase sequence motif. Protein Sci. 6, 469–472

120 Zhang, Q.-X., Pilquil, C. S., Dewald, J., Berthiaume, L. G. and Brindley, D. N. (2000) Identification of structurally important domains of lipid phosphate phosphatase-1: implications for sites of action. Biochem. J. 345, 181–184

121 Jasinska, R., Zhang, Q.-X., Pilquil, C., Singh, I., Xu, J., Dewald, J., Dillon, D. A., Berthiaume, L. G., Carman, G. M., Waggoner, D. W. and Brindley, D. N. (1999) Lipid phosphate phosphohydrolase-1 degrades exogenous glycerolipid and sphingolipid phosphate esters. Biochem. J. 340, 677–686

122 Tate, R. J., Tolan, D. and Pyne, S. (1999) Molecular cloning of magnesium- independent type 2 phosphatidic acid phosphatase from airway smooth muscle. Cell. Signalling 11, 515–522

123 Ghosh, T. K., Bian, J. and Gill, D. L. (1990) Intracellular calcium release mediated by sphingosine derivatives generated in cells. Science 248, 1653–1656

124 Ghosh, T. K., Bian, J. and Gill, D. L. (1994) Sphingosine 1-phosphate generated in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane activates release of stored calcium. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 22628–22635

125 Zhang, H., Desai, N. N., Olivera, A., Seki, T., Brooker, G. and Spiegel, S. (1991) Sphingosine-1-phosphate, a novel lipid, involved in cellular proliferation. J. Cell Biol. 114, 155–167

126 Goodermote, K. A., Mattie, M. E., Berger, A. and Spiegel, S. (1995) Involvement of a pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein in the mitogenic signalling pathways of sphingosine 1-phosphate. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 10272–10277

127 Tolan, D., Conway, A.-M., Pyne, N. J. and Pyne, S. (1997) Sphingosine prevents diacylglycerol signalling to mitogen-activated protein kinase in airway smooth muscle. Am. J. Physiol. 273, C928–C936

128 Tolan, D., Conway, A.-M., Steele, L., Pyne, S. and Pyne, N. J. (1996) The identification of DL-threo dihydrosphingosine and sphingosine as novel inhibitors of extracellular signal-regulated kinase signalling in airway smooth muscle.

129 Hannun, Y. A. and Bell, R. M. (1989) Functions of sphingolipids and sphingolipid breakdown products in cellular regulation. Science 243, 500–507

130 Tolan, D., Conway, A.-M., Rakhit, S., Pyne, N. J. and Pyne, S. (1999) Assessment of the extracellular and intracellular actions of sphingosine 1-phosphate by using the p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade as a model. Cell. Signalling 11, 349–354

131 Conway, A.-M., Rakhit, S., Pyne, S. and Pyne, N. J. (1999) Platelet-derived growth factor-stimulation of the p42/p44 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway in airway smooth muscle: role of pertussis toxin-sensitive G-proteins, c-Src tyrosine kinases and phosphoinositide 3-kinase. Biochem. J. 337, 171–177

132 Edsall, L. C., Van Brocklyn, J. R., Cuvillier, O., Kleuser, B. and Spiegel, S. (1998) *N,N*-dimethylsphingosine is a potent competitive inhibitor of sphingosine kinase but not of protein kinase C: modulation of cellular levels of sphingosine 1-phosphate and ceramide. Biochemistry 37, 12892–12898

133 Cuvillier, O., Rosenthal, D. S., Smulson, M. E. and Spiegel, S. (1998) Sphingosine 1-phosphate inhibits activation of caspases that cleave poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase and lamins during Fas- and ceramide-mediated apoptosis in Jurkat T lymphocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 2910–2916

134 Fatatis, A. and Miller, R. J. (1996) Sphingosine and sphingosine 1-phosphate differentially modulate platelet-derived growth factor-BB-induced Ca<sup>2+</sup> signalling in transformed oligodendrocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 295–301

135 Fatatis, A. and Miller, R. J. (1999) Cell cycle control of PDGF-induced Ca<sup>2+</sup> signalling through modulation of sphingolipid metabolism. FASEB J. 13, 1291–1301

136 Ayar, A., Thatcher, N. M., Zehavi, U., Trentham, D. R. and Scott, R. H. (1998) Mobilization of intracellular calcium by intracellular flash photolysis of caged dihydrosphingosine in cultured neonatal rat sensory neurones. Acta Biochim. Polon. 45, 311–326

137 Huang, W.-C. and Chueh, S.-H. (1996) Calcium mobilization from the intracellular mitochondrial and non-mitochondrial stores of the rat cerebellum. Brain Res. 718, 151–158

138 Durieux, M. E., Carlisle, S. J., Salafranca, M. N. and Lynch, K. R. (1993) Responses to sphingosine-1-phosphate in *X. laevis* oocytes: similarities with lysophosphatidic acid signaling. Am. J. Physiol. 264, C1360–C1364

139 Orlati, S., Hrelia, S. and Rugolo, M. (1997) Pertussis toxin- and PMA-insensitive calcium mobilization by sphingosine in CFPAC-1 cells: evidence for a phosphatidic acid-dependent mechanism. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1358, 93–102

140 Sabala, P., Wiktorek, M., Czarny, M., Chaban, V. and Baranska, J. (1996) Sphingosine stimulates calcium mobilization and modulates calcium signals evoked by thapsigargin in glioma C6 cells. Acta Neurol. Exp. 56, 507–513

141 Needleman, D. H., Aghdasi, B., Seryshev, A. B., Schroepfer, G. J. and Hamilton, S. L. (1997) Modulation of skeletal muscle Ca<sup>2+</sup>-release channel activity by sphingosine. Am. J. Physiol. 272, C1465–C1474

142 Betto, R., Teresi, A., Turcato, F., Salviati, G., Sabbadini, R. A., Krown, K., Glembotski, C. C., Kindman, L. A., Dettbarn, C., Pereon, Y. et al. (1997) Sphingosylphosphocholine modulates the ryanodine receptor/calcium-release channel of cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum membranes. Biochem. J. 322, 327–333

143 Orlati, S., Porcelli, A. M., Hrelia, S., Lorenzini, A. and Rugolo, M. (1998) Intracellular calcium mobilization and phospholipid degradation in sphingosylphosphorylcholine-stimulated human airway epithelial cells. Biochem. J. 334, 641–649

144 Orlati, S., Porcelli, A. M., Hrelia, S. and Rugolo, M. (1998) Sphingosylphosphorylcholine and sphingosine-1-phosphate mobilise cytosolic calcium through different mechanisms in human airway epithelial cells. Cell Calcium 23, 387–394

145 Zehavi, U. (1997) Synthesis of potentially caged sphingolipids, possible precursors of cellular modulators and second messengers. Chem. Phys. Lipids 90, 55–61

146 Qiao, L., Kozikowski, A. P., Olivera, A. and Spiegel, S. (1998) Synthesis and evaluation of a photolyzable derivative of sphingosine 1-phosphate — caged SPP. Bioinorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 8, 711–714

147 Hofmann, K. and Dixit, V. M. (1998) Ceramide in apoptosis — does it really matter? Trends Biochem. Sci. 23, 374–377

148 Kolesnick, R. J. and Hannun, Y. A. (1999) Ceramide and apoptosis. Trends Biochem. Sci. 24, 224–225

149 Coroneos, E., Wang, Y., Panuska, J. R., Templeton, D. J. and Kester, M. (1996) Sphingolipid metabolites differentially regulate extracellular signal-regulated kinase and stress-activated protein kinase cascades. Biochem. J. 316, 13–17

150 Edsall, L. C., Pirianov, G. G. and Spiegel, S. (1997) Involvement of sphingosine 1-phosphate in nerve growth factor-mediated neuronal survival and differentiation. J. Neurosci. 17, 6952–6960

151 Coroneos, E., Martinez, M., McKenna, S. and Kester, M. (1995) Differential regulation of sphingomyelinase and ceramidase activities by growth factors and cytokines. Implications for cellular proliferation and differentiation. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 23305–23309

152 Zhang, H., Desai, N. N., Murphey, J. M. and Spiegel, S. (1990) Increases in phosphatidic acid levels accompany sphingosine-stimulated proliferation of quiescent Swiss 3T3 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 265, 21309–21316

153 Tornquist, K., Saarinen, P., Vainio, M. and Ahlstrom, M. (1997) Sphingosine 1-phosphate mobilizes sequestered calcium, activates calcium entry and stimulates DNA synthesis in thyroid FRTL-5 cells. Endocrinology 138, 4049–4057

154 Marshall, C. J. (1995) Specificity of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling: transient versus sustained extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation. Cell 80, 179–185

155 Chung, T., Crilly, K. S., Anderson, W. H. and Kiss, Z. (1997) ATP-dependent choline phosphate-induced mitogenesis in fibroblasts involves activation of p70 S6 kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3′-kinase through an extracellular site. Synergistic mitogenic effects of choline phosphate and sphingosine 1-phosphate. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 3064–3072

156 Kiss, Z. and Mukherjee, J. J. (1997) Phosphocholine and sphingosine 1-phosphate synergistically stimulate DNA synthesis by a MAP kinase-dependent mechanism. FEBS Lett. 412, 197–200

157 Kiss, Z., Crilly, K. S. and Anderson, W. H. (1997) Extracellular sphingosine 1-phosphate stimulates formation of ethanolamine from phosphatidylethanolamine: modulation of sphingosine 1-phosphate-induced mitogenesis by ethanolamine. Biochem. J. 328, 383–391

158 Shatrov, V. A., Lehmann, V. and Chouaib, S. (1997) Sphingosine-1-phosphate mobilizes intracellular calcium and activates transcription factor NF-κB in U937 cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 234, 121–124

159 Wang, F., Van Brocklyn, J. R., Hobson, J. P., Movafagh, S., Zukowska-Grojec, Z., Milstien, S. and Spiegel, S. (1999) Sphingosine 1-phosphate stimulates cell migration through a G<sub>i</sub>-coupled cell surface receptor. Potential involvement in angiogenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 35343–35350

160 Wang, F., Nohara, K., Olivera, A., Thompson, E. W. and Spiegel, S. (1999) Involvement of focal adhesion kinase in inhibition of motility of human breast cancer cells by sphingosine 1-phosphate. Exp. Cell. Res. 247, 17–28

161 Xia, P., Gamble, J. R., Rye, K.-A., Wang, L., Hii, C. S. T., Cockerill, P., Khew-Goodall, Y., Bert, A. G., Barters, P. J. and Vadas, M. A. (1998) Tumor necrosis factor-alpha induces adhesion molecule expression through the sphingosine kinase pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95, 14196–14201

162 Rizza, C., Leitinger, N., Yue, J., Fischer, D. J., Wang, D.-A., Shih, P. T., Lee, H., Tigyi, G. and Berliner, J. A. (1999) Lysophosphatidic acid as a regulator of endothelial/leukocyte interaction. Lab. Invest. 79, 1227–1235

163 Kozawa, O., Suzuki, A., Kaida, T., Tokuda, H. and Uematsu, T. (1997) Tumor necrosis factor-alpha autoregulates interleukin-6 synthesis via activation of protein kinase C. Function of sphingosine 1-phosphate and phosphatidylcholine-specific phospholipase C. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 25099–25104

164 Hung, W.-C. and Chuang, L.-Y. (1996) Induction of apoptosis by sphingosine 1-phosphate in human hepatoma cells is associated with increased expression of bax gene product. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 229, 11–15

165 Postma, F. R., Jalink, K., Hengeveld, T. and Moolenaar, W. H. (1996) Sphingosine 1-phosphate rapidly induces Rho-dependent neurite retraction: action through a specific cell surface receptor. EMBO J. 15, 2388–2392

166 Sato, K., Tomura, H., Igarashi, Y., Ui, M. and Okajima, F. (1997) Exogenous sphingosine 1-phosphate induces neurite retraction possibly through a cell surface receptor in PC12 cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 240, 329–334

167 Goetzl, E. J., Kong, Y. and Mei, B. (1999) Lysosphosphatidic acid and sphingosine 1-phosphate protection of T cells from apoptosis in association with suppression of Bax. J. Immunol. 162, 2049–2056

168 Goetzl, E. J., Dolezalova, H., Kong, Y., Hu, Y.-L., Jaffe, R. B., Kalli, K. R. and Conover, C. A. (1999) Distinctive expression and functions of the type 4 endothelial differentiation gene-encoded G protein-coupled receptor for lysosphosphatidic acid in ovarian cancer. Cancer Res. 59, 5370–5375

169 Goetzl, E. J., Dolezalova, H., Kong, Y. and Zeng, L. (1999) Dual mechanisms for lysosphospholipid induction of proliferation of human breast carcinoma cells. Cancer Res. 59, 4732–4737

170 Lee, M. J., Thangada, S., Claffey, K. P., Ancellin, N., Liu, C. H., Kluk, M., Volpi, M., Sha'afi, R. I. and Hla, T. (1999) Vascular endothelial cell adheren junction assembly and morphogenesis by sphingosine 1-phosphate. Cell 99, 301–312

171 Lee, O.-H., Kim, Y.-M., Lee, Y. M., Moon, E.-J., Lee, D.-J., Kim, J.-H., Kim, K.-W. and Kwon, Y.-G. (1999) Sphingosine 1-phosphate induces angiogenesis: its angiogenic action and signalling mechanism in human umbilical endothelial cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 264, 743–750

172 Kawa, S., Kimura, S., Hakomori, S.-I. and Igarashi, Y. (1997) Inhibition of chemotactic motility and trans-endothelial migration of human neutrophils by sphingosine 1-phosphate. FEBS Lett. 420, 196–200

173 Prieschl, E. E., Csonga, R., Novotny, V. and Baumruker, T. (1999) The balance between sphingosine and sphingosine 1-phosphate is decisive for mast cell activation after Fce receptor I triggering. J. Exp. Med. 190, 1–8

174 Zwick, E., Hackel, P. O., Prenzel, N. and Ullrich, A. (1999) The EGF receptor as a central transducer of heterologous signalling systems. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 20, 408–412
