
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Aug. 2000, p. 4625–4627
0021-9193/00/$04.00+0
Copyright © 2000, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

NOTES

Role of the *yiaR* and *yiaS* Genes of *Escherichia coli* in Metabolism of Endogenously Formed L-Xylulose

ESTER IBAÑEZ, ROSA GIMENEZ, TOMAS PEDRAZA, LAURA BALDOMA, JUAN AGUILAR, AND JOSEFA BADIA*

Department of Biochemistry, School of Pharmacy, University of Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain

Received 12 February 2000/Accepted 2 June 2000

Genes *yiaP* and *yiaR* of the *yiaKLMNOPQRS* cluster of *Escherichia coli* are required for the metabolism of the endogenously formed L-xylulose, whereas *yiaS* is required for this metabolism only in *araD* mutants. Like AraD, YiaS was shown to have L-ribulose-5-phosphate 4-epimerase activity. Similarity of YiaR to several 3-epimerases suggested that this protein could catalyze the conversion of L-xylulose-5-phosphate into L-ribulose-5-phosphate, thus completing the pathway between L-xylulose and the general metabolism.

On the basis of the similarity displayed by some of the gene products of the *yiaKLMNOPQRS* (*yiaK-S*) gene cluster (accession no. U00039) Sofia et al. (14) have proposed that this cluster could be involved in the metabolism of carbohydrates, although the precise substrate has not been determined. More recently, analyses in silico of the corresponding protein sequences by Reizer et al. (11) have permitted the comparison with other known proteins and the suggestion of putative biochemical functions for some of them.

In another context, the characterization of the metabolic pathway allowing the utilization of L-lyxose by mutants of *Escherichia coli* has shown the presence of a gene encoding a new highly specific L-xylulose kinase (12). L-Xylulose was formed in these mutants by the action of L-rhamnose isomerase on L-lyxose. The restriction map of the region encompassing this gene has permitted its identification as the gene *yiaP* of the *yiaK-S* operon. To specify if some other genes among the nine belonging to the *yiaK-S* operon (Fig. 1) were involved in L-lyxose metabolism, complementation analysis of L-lyxose-negative strains with plasmids containing different fragments of this gene cluster was performed.

L-Lyxose phenotypic complementation of *yiaQ*, *yiaR*, and *yiaS* mutants. Several mutants unable to utilize L-lyxose were derived from strain JA134 (12) by ethyl methanesulfonate mutagenesis (10), growth on rich medium (3), and selection by replica plating on minimal medium (3) with L-lyxose or glucose. The presence of L-xylulose kinase activity, measured as described previously (12), in some of the mutants indicated that their negative phenotype was due to impairment of a gene function other than L-xylulose kinase. Mutations in the L-rhamnose permease or isomerase required for L-lyxose metabolism (2, 12) were ruled out by analyzing the ketose excretion (7) when grown on L-rhamnose. After this screening, strain JA192 was selected for further analysis.

Previous experiments had shown that L-lyxose utilization did not require genes of the *yiaK-S* system other than those included in plasmid pJC1 (12). Partial fragments of the insert present in pJC1 were cloned in pBR322 vector, and the derivative plasmids (Fig. 1) were used in complementation analysis of strain JA192. The mutation yielding the L-lyxose-negative phenotype was located in the *yiaR* gene, since it was complemented by every plasmid except pJC2, pJTP5, or pJTP7 (Fig. 1). To study whether the *yiaQ* and *yiaS* gene products are involved in L-lyxose metabolism and to confirm the *yiaR* participation, chromosomal null mutations in each of these genes were obtained by insertional mutation of the CAT19 cassette (8) and subsequent transference, first to strain JC7623 (15) and then to our genetic background according to the method of Winans et al. (16). When the knockout constructs of *yiaP*, *yiaQ*, and *yiaR* were transferred to the JA134 background (strains JA193, 194, and JA195, respectively), the cells became L-lyxose negative (Fig. 1). The knockout construct of *yiaS* (strain JA196) did not affect the L-lyxose phenotype.

Complementation of strain JA195 (*yiaR::cat*) by plasmids carrying the fragment in which the insertion was located confirmed the participation of *yiaR* in L-lyxose metabolism. Complementation of strain JA194 (*yiaQ::cat*) by plasmids carrying only *yiaR* indicated that chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) insertion in *yiaQ* exerted polarity effects on *yiaR* and that the *yiaQ* gene was not necessary for L-lyxose utilization. Furthermore, growth of wild-type strain ECL1 (9) on L-lyxose when transformed with plasmid pTP4 lacking *yiaQ* again showed that this gene product was not required for L-lyxose metabolism.

*yiaR* and *yiaS* gene product analysis. Computational analysis of the gene product encoded by *yiaS* yielded 76% identity over 231 amino acids with the L-ribulose-5-phosphate 4-epimerase of *Escherichia coli* (product of *araD* gene), which catalyzes an early step in L-arabinose utilization and 74% identity over 203 amino acids with that of *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium. Thus, the *yiaS* gene product is assigned to the AraD-FucA family.

Plasmids carrying *yiaS* (Fig. 1) allowed the strain MC4100 (5), reported to be an *araD* mutant, to utilize L-arabinose, indicating that the *yiaS* gene complemented *araD* function and that its product utilized L-ribulose-5-phosphate as a substrate. In addition, Northern blot experiments indicated that L-lyxose was able to induce the *ara* operon transcription in strain JA134 (not shown). For these experiments, total RNA was obtained from cultures of strain JA134 in casein acid hydrolysate in the absence or in the

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Departamento de Bioquímica, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad de Barcelona, Avda. Diagonal 643, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. Phone: 34-93-402 4521. Fax: 34-93-402 1896. E-mail: Palaciu@farmacia.far.ub.es.

A Bg V H Bs A Bs AX VVV B P Xc P VA S

---

$yiaJ \rightarrow yiaK \rightarrow yiaL \rightarrow yiaM \rightarrow yiaN \rightarrow yiaO \rightarrow yiaP(lyxK) \rightarrow yiaQ \rightarrow yiaR \rightarrow yiaS$

---

1kb

---

$yiaP (lyxk) \rightarrow yiaQ \rightarrow yiaR \rightarrow yiaS$

---

Bs AX VVV B P Xc P V A S

JA193 JA194 JA195 JA196

---

L-Lyxose phenotype

JA192 JA193 JA194 JA195 ECL1

---

pJC1 + + + + +

pJC2 - + - - -

pTP1 + + + + +

pTP2 + - + + -

pTP3 + - + + -

pTP4 + + + + +

pTP5 - + - - -

pTP6 + - + + -

pTP7 - - - - -

---

FIG. 1. Genetic map of the region encompassing the $yiaK-S$ operon and complementation analysis of different $yiaK-S$ mutants. The open bar represents the genomic DNA of strain JA134 and the arrows represent the extension and direction of the transcribed $yiaK-S$ genes. Insertions of the CAT cassette are indicated by black bars below the map and are labeled by the name of the mutant strain carrying them. Thick lines correspond to the different inserts of the plasmids used in the complementation experiments whose results are shown in the contiguous table. Thin lines show the deleted fragment in the corresponding plasmid. A, AgeI; B, BamHI; Bg, BglII; Bs, BstXI; H, HindIII; P, PstI; S, SalI; V, EcoRV; X, XhoI; Xc, XcmI.

---

presence of L-lyxose. An $araD$ gene fragment obtained by PCR with primers P1 (GGCGCTAACTGACGGCAG) and P2 (TAG AAGATCTCAAACGCC) was used as a probe.

The induction of the $ara$ system by L-lyxose and the high similarity displayed by YiaS and AraD suggest that AraD could complement the YiaS function in strain JA196. To determine whether AraD complemented YiaS function, the $araD$ mutation of strain MC4100 was transferred into the genetic background of strain JA196 ($yiaS::cat$) by the following strategy. (i) A Tn10 marker was transduced from strain CAG12095 (13) into strain MC4100, and tetracycline-resistant transductants that retained the inability to utilize L-arabinose were selected. (ii) One of these transductants (strain JA197) was subsequently used to transduce the two linked markers into strain JA196. A double mutant (strain JA198) was isolated and transformed with plasmids containing $yiaS$ or $araD$ and tested for its ability to utilize both L-lyxose and L-arabinose. None of the transformants analyzed displayed impairment in either of these metabolisms, showing that the 4-epimerase function could be supplied by either of the two YiaS and AraD proteins.

To test if L-lyxose itself or an intermediate metabolite was the inducer of the arabinose system, a Tn5 insertion mutant in the $rhaA$ gene (encoding rhamnose isomerase) was obtained from strain JA134 (strain JA199) by using phage λ 467 (b221

$cIts857 rex::Tn5 Oam29 Pam80)$ (4). This mutant was selected by its inability to utilize L-lyxose and the inability to excrete L-rhamnulose when grown in the presence of L-rhamnose. The precise location of the insertion in $rhaA$ was assessed by cloning and sequencing the chromosomal region close to the Tn5 by using an internal sequence of the transposon as a primer. Induction of the $ara$ operon by L-lyxose in strain JA199 indicated that this compound was directly activating the arabinose operon expression.

To confirm the L-ribulose-5-phosphate 4-epimerase catalytic activity encoded by the $yiaS$ gene, the experimental procedure described by Deupree and Wood (6) was set up. To this end, $araB$ (encoding L-ribulose kinase), $araD$, and $yiaS$ genes of $E$. coli were cloned into plasmid pUC19. Overexpression was determined for $araB$ and $araD$ by enzyme activity assays in extracts of strain ECL1 transformed with the corresponding plasmid grown on casein acid hydrolysate. The D-xylulose-5-phosphate formed when L-ribulose was added to a reaction mixture containing extracts of cells overexpressing $araB$ and $yiaS$ yielded an oxidation of NADH of 190 to 210 nmol/min/mg. No significant consumption of NADH was detected when $araB$ or $yiaS$ gene products were lacking. As a positive control, we have run in parallel a reaction with overexpressed $araD$ instead of $yiaS$.

To test whether the $yiaS$ gene product could recognize L-xy-

CH₂OH
| C=O
| H-C-OH
| HO-C-H
| CH₂OH

L-xylulose

CH₂OH
| C=O
| H-C-OH
| HO-C-H
| CH₂OPO₃²⁻

L-xylulose-5-phosphate

CH₂OH
| C=O
| HO-C-H
| HO-C-H
| CH₂OPO₃²⁻

L-ribulose-5-phosphate

4-epimerase (yiaS)
↓↑

CH₂OH
| C=O
| H-C-OH
| H-C-OH
| CH₂OPO₃²⁻

D-ribulose-5-phosphate

4-epimerase (yiaS)
↓↑

CH₂OH
| C=O
| HO-C-H
| H-C-OH
| CH₂OPO₃²⁻

D-xylulose-5-phosphate

FIG. 2. Proposed pathway for the conversion of L-xylulose into D-xylulose-5-phosphate in strain JA134.

L-xylulose, competition of this ketose with L-rhamnose for L-rhamnose permease was studied. The results indicate that L-rhamnose permease does not recognize L-xylulose, in contrast to the effect observed with L-lyxose, which produced a strong inhibition of the L-rhamnose transport (data not shown). Inefficient L-xylulose transport suggests that L-xylulose has to be generated endogenously from L-lyxose or in the processing of a hitherto unknown carbohydrate.

It is likely that the yiaK-S cluster evolved for the metabolism of carbohydrate(s) other than L-lyxose, since not all the genes in the operon are involved in the metabolism of this pentose. In order to establish the function of the yiaK-S operon, it is instructive to consider that of the nine gene products of the yia operon, only three, the kinase previously reported (12) and YiaR and YiaS studied in this work, catalyzed the steps required to convert L-xylulose into a D-xylulose-5-phosphate which enters the pentose phosphate pathway. The remaining yia operon genes must be responsible for the generation of this intermediate from an internal or external precursor. Although we demonstrated that L-lyxose is an inducer of the ara operon, it is unlikely that this operon could be induced by the unknown physiological substrate. Therefore, YiaS would not be complemented by AraD and would result in an essential function for its metabolism.

This work was supported by grant PB97-0920 from the Dirección General de Enseñanza Superior e Investigación Científica, Madrid, Spain, and partially by the help of the “Comissionat per Universitats i Recerca de la Generalitat de Catalunya.” E.I. is the recipient of a predoctoral fellowship from the Generalitat de Catalunya.

### REFERENCES

1. Anderson, R. L., and W. A. Wood. 1962. Pathway of xylose and L-lyxose degradation in Aerobacter aerogenes. J. Biol. Chem. 237:296–303.
2. Badia, J., R. Giménez, L. Baldomá, E. Barnes, W.-D. Fessner, and J. Aguilar. 1991. L-Lyxose metabolism employs the L-rhamnose pathway in mutant cells of Escherichia coli adapted to grow on L-lyxose. J. Bacteriol. 173:5144–5150.
3. Boronat, A., and J. Aguilar. 1979. Rhamnose-induced propanediol oxidoreductase in Escherichia coli: purification, properties, and comparison with the fucose-induced enzyme. J. Bacteriol. 140:320–326.
4. Bruijn, F. J., and J. R. Lupski. 1984. The use of transposon Tn5 mutagenesis in the rapid generation of correlated physical and genetic maps of DNA segments cloned into multicopy plasmids. Gene 27:131–149.
5. Casadaban, M. J. 1976. Transposition and fusion of the lac genes to selected promoters in Escherichia coli using bacteriophage lambda and Mu. J. Mol. Biol. 104:541–555.
6. Deupree, J., and W. A. Wood. 1966. L-ribulose-5-phosphate 4-epimerase from Aerobacter aerogenes. Methods Enzymol. IX:412–419.
7. Dische, Z., and E. Borenfreund. 1951. A new spectrophotometric method for the detection and determination of keto sugars and trioses. J. Biol. Chem. 192:583–587.
8. Fuqua, W. C. 1992. An improved chloramphenicol resistance gene cassette for site-directed marker replacement mutagenesis. BioTechniques 12:223–225.
9. Lin, E. C. C. 1976. Glycerol dissimilation and its regulation in bacteria. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 30:535–578.
10. Miller, J. H. 1992. A short course in bacterial genetics. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
11. Reizer, J., A. Reizer, and M. H. Saier, Jr. 1997. Is the ribulose monophosphate pathway widely distributed in bacteria? Microbiology 143:2519–2520.
12. Sanchez, J. C., R. Gimenez, A. Schneider, W.-D. Fessner, L. Baldomá, J. Aguilar, and J. Badia. 1994. Activation of a cryptic gene encoding a kinase for L-xylulose opens a new pathway for the utilization of L-lyxose by Escherichia coli. J. Biol. Chem. 269:29665–29669.
13. Singer, M., T. A. Baker, G. Schnitzler, S. M. Deischel, M. Goel, W. Dove, K. J. Jacks, A. D. Grossman, J. W. Erickson, and C. A. Gross. 1989. A collection of strains containing genetically linked alternating antibiotic resistance elements for genetic mapping of Escherichia coli. Microbiol. Rev. 53:1–24.
14. Sofia, H. J., V. Burland, D. L. Daniels, G. Plunkett, and F. R. Blattner. 1994. Analysis of the Escherichia coli genome. V. DNA sequence of the region from 76.0 to 81.5 minutes. Nucleic Acids Res. 22:2576–2586.
15. Wackernagel, W. 1973. Genetic transformation in E. coli: the inhibitory role of the recBC DNase. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 51:306–311.
16. Winans, S. C., S. J. Elledge, J. H. Krueger, and G. C. Walker. 1985. Site-directed insertion and deletion mutagenesis with cloned fragments in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 161:1219–1221.
