
Molecular Microbiology (2000) 37(2), 316–330

# Characterization of the O-antigen gene clusters of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis and the cryptic O-antigen gene cluster of Yersinia pestis shows that the plague bacillus is most closely related to and has evolved from Y. pseudotuberculosis serotype O:1b

**Mikael Skurnik**, Anne Peippo and Elise Ervelä  
Department of Medical Biochemistry, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, Finland.

## Summary

One of the most virulent and feared bacterial pathogens is *Yersinia pestis*, the aetiologic agent of bubonic plague. Characterization of the O-antigen gene clusters of 21 serotypes of *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* and the cryptic O-antigen gene cluster of *Y. pestis* showed that the plague bacillus is most closely related to and has evolved from *Y. pseudotuberculosis* serotype O:1b. The nucleotide sequences of both gene clusters (about 20.5 kb each) were determined and compared to identify the differences that caused the silencing of the *Y. pestis* gene cluster. At the nucleotide sequence level, the loci were 98.9% identical and, of the 17 biosynthetic genes identified from the O:1b gene cluster, five were inactivated in the *Y. pestis* cluster, four by insertions or deletions of one nucleotide and one by a deletion of 62 nucleotides. Apparently, the expression of the O-antigen is not beneficial for the virulence or to the lifestyle of *Y. pestis* and, therefore, as one step in the evolution of *Y. pestis*, the O-antigen gene cluster was inactivated.

## Introduction

*Yersinia pestis* and *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* are very closely related (Bercovier et al., 1980; Achtman et al., 1999). The basis of the vast gap in virulence between *Y. pestis* and *Y. pseudotuberculosis* is not completely understood; the known genetic differences between these two species are the presence of 9.5 kb and 110 kb plasmids and of silenced genes, such as the *yadA* and *inv* genes in *Y. pestis* (Rosqvist et al., 1988; Perry and Fetherston, 1997). One important difference that has been speculated to contribute to the high virulence of the plague bacillus is its lipopolysaccharide (LPS). *Y. pestis* LPS is of the ‘rough’ type, i.e. it is missing the O-antigen, of which 21 different serological variants are present in *Y. pseudotuberculosis* strains. Rough mutants of *Salmonella* and of other enterobacteria, including *Yersinia enterocolitica* serotype O:3 and O:8 strains, show much reduced virulence (Al-Hendy et al., 1992; Zhang et al., 1997; Skurnik, 1999; Skurnik et al., 1999); therefore, the rough phenotype of *Y. pestis* is against the virulence ‘rule’. On the other hand, the rough LPS of *Y. pestis* has been proposed as being important for the complement resistance phenotype of *Y. pestis* (Porat et al., 1995). As *Y. pestis* does not have O-antigen, there is no need for the presence of functional O-antigen biosynthetic genes in *Y. pestis*.

In other members of the genus *Yersinia*, the chromosomal location of the O-antigen gene cluster is between the *hemH* and *gsk* genes (Kessler et al., 1991; 1993; Thorson et al., 1994; Skurnik et al., 1995; Skurnik and Zhang, 1996; Zhang, 1996; Zhang et al., 1996; 1997; Skurnik, 1999). This location is different from that found in *Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella enterica*, where the O-antigen region is closely linked to the *gnd* locus, which is upstream of the *his* operon at 45 min on the chromosomal map of *E. coli* K-12 and at centisome 45 on the S. *enterica* LT2 map (Berlyn et al., 1996; Sanderson et al., 1996). In *E. coli* and *Salmonella*, the *hemH* and *gsk* genes are located at approximately 11 min on the chromosome (Berlyn et al., 1996; Sanderson et al., 1996), and a single open reading frame (ORF) of unknown function is located between the *hemH* and *gsk* genes.

Here, we provide evidence that *Y. pestis* also carries an O-antigen gene cluster between the *hemH* and *gsk* genes, that the gene cluster is silenced and that the cluster is most closely related to that of *Y. pseudotuberculosis* serotype O:1b of all the 21 known different serovariants of *Y. pseudotuberculosis*. These results indicate that one step in the evolution of *Y. pestis* from *Y. pseudotuberculosis* O:1b was the inactivation of the O-antigen gene cluster, most probably because the

Accepted 3 May, 2000. *For correspondence. E-mail mskurnik@ utu.fi; Tel. (+358) 2 333 7441; Fax (+358) 2 333 7229.*

© 2000 Blackwell Science Ltd

expression of the O-antigen was not beneficial for the virulence or the lifestyle of Y. pestis.

**Results**

Y. pestis has a cryptic O-antigen gene cluster

All studied O-antigen-expressing Yersinia species have the genes involved in its biosynthesis located between the hemH and gsk genes (Skurnik, 1999). Long-range polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with specifically designed primers was used to amplify the hemH-gsk region of different Y. pseudotuberculosis serotypes and of Y. pestis; in most reactions, fragments of >20 kb were produced (Table 1). This justified a detailed analysis of the Y. pestis region, as it was very likely that, instead of completely lacking the O-antigen gene cluster, Y. pestis had an inactivated 'cryptic' cluster present in this location. Furthermore, comparison of the Y. pestis cluster with those of different Y. pseudotuberculosis serotypes would clarify the evolutionary relationship between these two species, as it is likely that the 21 Y. pseudotuberculosis serotypes have evolved from a common ancestor and that Y. pestis has evolved later from one of them (Achtman et al., 1999).

The 20 kb PCR products of Y. pseudotuberculosis and Y. pestis strains (Table 1) were digested with different restriction enzymes, and the digestion products were analysed in agarose gels. The analysis produced banding patterns in which one or two bands were present in all strains, indicating that one end of the PCR fragments was similar (data not shown). We reasoned that this was very likely the hemH end of the fragments, as it was shown earlier by the Reeves laboratory that many different Y. pseudotuberculosis serotypes share the ddhDABC (dideoxyhexose) genes that are located downstream of the hemH gene (Hobbs and Reeves, 1995). Comparison of the restriction fragment sizes with those deduced from the Y. pseudotuberculosis O:2a sequence of the ddh region (accession no. L01777) allowed us to conclude that the restriction map until about 5 kb downstream of hemH gene was shared by all the analysed 20 kb PCR products, whereas the region further downstream was significantly different. The 5 kb region of the hemH end of the Y. pestis fragment was identical to those of the Y. pseudotuberculosis fragments.

Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b are most closely related

As the >20 kb long-range PCR was not always reproducible and to simplify the comparison of the restriction patterns of the PCR products, we designed new primers based on the ddhC gene of Y. pseudotuberculosis O:2a,

**Origin of plague: Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b 317**

**Table 1. Summary of the long-range PCR amplification results of Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis strains.**

| Serotype | Strain (Table 4) | 20 kb | 15 kb | 5 kb |
|----------|-------------------|-------|-------|------|
| Y. pestis | EV76              | X     | ND    | X    |
| Y. pestis | KIM D27           | X     | X     | X    |
| O:1a      | St.1              | ND    | X     | X    |
|           | 1                 | X     | ND    | ND   |
| O:1b      | pa3606            | ND    | X     | X    |
|           | 1B                | (–)   | ND    | ND   |
| O:1c      | Kuratani-2        | ND    | X     | X    |
| O:2a      | No.208            | ND    | X     | X    |
|           | 7                 | X     | X     | ND   |
| O:2b      | 1779              | X     | X     | X    |
| O:2c      | No.274            | X     | X     | X    |
| O:3       | No.83             | ND    | X     | X    |
|           | YPIII             | X     | ND    | ND   |
|           | 43                | X     | ND    | ND   |
| O:4a      | No.51             | ND    | X     | X    |
|           | 32                | X     | ND    | ND   |
| O:4b      | Pa3422            | ND    | X     | X    |
|           | Ikegagi           | X     | ND    | ND   |
| O:5a      | No.204            | ND    | X     | X    |
|           | 25                | X     | X     | ND   |
| O:5b      | No.197            | ND    | –     | –    |
|           | R2                | X     | ND    | ND   |
| O:6       | DD110             | –     | –     | X    |
|           | 3                 | (–)   | ND    | ND   |
| O:7       | No.257            | X     | –     | –    |
| O:8       | No.151            | X     | X     | X    |
| O:9       | R708              | X     | –     | –    |
| O:10      | 6088              | X     | –     | –    |
| O:11      | R80               | X     | –     | –    |
| O:12      | MW864-2           | X     | X     | X    |
| O:13      | N916              | X     | X     | X    |
| O:14      | CN3               | –     | –     | –    |
| O:15      | 93422             | X     | X     | X    |

X, positive; (–), weak positive; –, negative result; ND, not done.

and the hemH-ddhC regions were amplified as ≈5 kb fragments and the ddhC-gsk regions as ≈15 kb fragments (Table 1). The amplified ≈15 kb PCR products were digested with different restriction enzymes (ClaI, EcoRI, HindIII, SalI and Scal; the EcoRV digestion patterns are shown in Fig. 1), and the restriction fragment patterns of the various Y. pseudotuberculosis strains were compared with that of Y. pestis to reveal which Y. pseudotuberculosis strain was producing the most similar pattern. This analysis revealed that the serotype O:1b and Y. pestis patterns were most closely related (Fig. 1).

On the other hand, when compared with the other serotypes, the pattern of O:1b was most similar to those of serotypes O:1a and O:1c (Fig. 1). Between the other Y. pseudotuberculosis serotypes, several fragments of the same size could be recognized, e.g. the 3.4 kb fragment was present in serotypes O:1c, O:2b, O:2c, O:3, O:4a, O:5a, O:8 and O:15; the 2.6 kb fragment in O:2a, O:4a, O:4b, O:5a, O:8 and O:15; and the 1.1 kb fragment was also present in many serotypes. The patterns of O:12 and O:13 and those of O:4a and O:8 were identical, and the patterns of O:5a and O:15 and those of O:2a and O:4b

318 M. Skurnik, A. Peippo and E. Ervelä

Y. pseudotuberculosis

Fig. 1. Restriction digestion analysis of 15 kb PCR products amplified using genomic DNA of Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis strains as template. The 15 kb PCR products were digested with different restriction enzymes (ClaI, EcoRI, EcoRV, HindIII, SalI and SacI), and the restriction fragment patterns were compared to reveal which Y. pseudotuberculosis strain was most similar to Y. pestis. A gel picture of EcoRV-digested PCR products of Y. pestis KIM D27 and 14 Y. pseudotuberculosis strains is shown. The latter are indicated by their serotypes.

were very similar. These results indicated that, in Y. pseudotuberculosis similar to Salmonella, the O-antigen gene clusters of the different serotypes are mosaics of gene blocks providing the machinery for the biosynthesis of the nucleotide sugar precursors and for the corresponding glycosyltransferases (Reeves, 1993; 1994; Curd et al., 1998). In line with this, slot-blot hybridization analysis using the two largest HindIII–SalI restriction fragments of the 15 kb Y. pestis PCR product as probes resulted in positive hybridization signals with the genomic DNA of the majority of the Y. pseudotuberculosis serotypes (Table 2), indicating that highly similar genes are present in their genomes.

Restriction maps (very close to those shown in Fig. 2) of the 15 kb PCR fragments of Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b were constructed using single and double digestions with the restriction enzymes. To get detailed information, the ≈ 20 kb O-antigen clusters of Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b strain Pa3606 and Y. pestis strain EV76 were sequenced (See Experimental procedures and Fig. 2).

The Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b O-antigen gene cluster

The Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b sequence was analysed for coding sequences and sequence features. Altogether, 17 genes were recognized between the hemH and gsk genes (Table 3), the genes were named according to the bacterial polysaccharide gene nomenclature (Reeves et al., 1996), and the genetic organization of the cluster is summarized in Fig. 2 (top). The O-antigen repeat unit of Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b (Samuelsson et al., 1974; Tomshich et al., 1976) is shown in Fig. 3, with the putative

roles of the identified genes in the biosynthesis of the O-unit indicated.

The biosynthesis of the O-repeat unit structure of O:1b (Fig. 3) and its transport and polymerization to O-antigen needs at least 16 of the 17 genes identified in the gene cluster. (i) Biosynthesis of the repeat unit sugar precursors requires nine of the genes: ddhABCD and prt for CDP-paratose; manBC for GDP-mannose; and gmd and fcl for GDP-fucose. The manA gene (needed for mannose-6-P biosynthesis) as well as the biosynthetic genes of the fourth sugar of the O-unit, UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc), glmS and glmU, are located elsewhere in the genome (Berlyn et al., 1996). (ii) Only four glycosyltransferase genes are needed as, similar to other enterobacteria, the GlcNAc-transferase gene is most probably wecA located in the enterobacterial common antigen gene cluster. WbyJ and WbyK are most likely the mannosyltransferases and Wbyl and WbyL the other glycosyltransferases. (iii) The genes for flippase (wzx), the O-antigen polymerase (wzy) and the O-unit chain-length regulator (wzz) were also identified from the cluster (Fig. 2). The TMHMM analysis (Sonnhammer et al., 1998) predicted 12, 10 and two transmembrane helices for Wzx, Wzy and Wzx, respectively, characteristic of these cytoplasmic membrane-spanning proteins (Morona et al., 1995; Daniels et al., 1998; 1999; Daniels and Morona, 1999). In conclusion, only the wbyH gene product showing weak similarities to biosynthetic enzymes remained unassigned after the sequence analyses.

Other features (for details, see the sequence record; accession no. AJ251712) recognized from the sequence included (i) the JUMPstart sequence and the ops element

© 2000 Blackwell Science Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 37, 316–330

Table 2. Slot-blot hybridization and PCR analysis of Y. pseudotuberculosis DNA using Y. pestis O-cluster-specific probes and gene-specific primers.

| Serotype | Known O-sugars and linkages$^a$ (reviewed by Skurnik and Zhang, 1996) | Hybridization | Gene-specific PCR$^b$ | Predicted O-sugars |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | Probe specificity$^c$ |  |  |
|  |  | wzx-wzy | wbyK-manC | hemH | ddhC | prt | wbqH | wzz | wbqJ | wzy | wbyK | gmd | fcl | manC | wbyL | manB | wzz-gsk |  |
| O:1b | Par(1→3)Man(1→4)Man(1→3)Fuc(1→3)GlcNAc | ++++ | ++++ | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | Fuc, Man, GlcNAc |
| O:14 | – | ++ | ++ | X | – | – | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | Fuc, Man, GlcNAc |
| O:11 | – | +++ | ++ | X | – | – | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | X | – | Fuc, Man, GlcNAc |
| O:1c | – | ++++ | ++++ | X | X | X | X | X | – | – | X | X | – | X | X | – | – | Par, Man, Fuc, GlcNAc |
| O:12 | – | + | +++ | X | X | – | – | – | – | – | X | X | X | X | X | X | – | Fuc, Man, Ddh |
| O:13 | – | + | ++ | X | X | – | – | – | – | – | X | X | – | X | X | X | – | Fuc, Man, Ddh |
| O:2b | Abe, Man(α1→3)Fuc | +++ | ++++ | X | X | – | – | – | – | – | X | X | – | X | X | X | X | Fuc, Man, GlcNAc |
| O:3 | Par(β1→4)Fuc(α1→3)GalNAc, Man(α1→3)Fuc | ++++ | ++++ | X | X | X | – | – | – | – | X | X | – | X | X | X | X | Fuc, Man, GlcNAc |
| O:5a | Asc, Fuc(1→3)Man(1→4)Fuc(1→3)GalNAc | ++++ | +++ | X | X | – | – | – | – | – | X | X | – | X | X | X | X | Fuc, Man, GlcNAc |
| O:15 | – | ++ | X | X | X | X | – | – | – | X | X | – | X | X | X | X | Par or Tyv, Fuc, Man |
| O:5b | 6d-Altf, Fuc(1→3)Man(1→4)Fuc(1→3)GalNAc | +++ | +++ | X | – | X | – | – | – | – | X | X | – | X | X | X | – | Fuc, Man, GlcNAc |
| O:4a | Tyv, Man(β1→3)Man(α1→2)Man(α1→3)GalNAc | +++ | +++ | X | X | X | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | X | X | X | Man, Par or Tyv |
| O:8 | – | (+) | X | X | X | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | X | X | X | Man, Par or Tyv |
| O:2c | Abe, Man(α1→2)Man(β1→3)GalNAc | ++ | ++ | X | X | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | X | X | – | Man, Par or Tyv |
| O:1a | Par(α1→3)6d-Hep, Gal, GlcNAc | +++ | ++ | X | X | X | X | X | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | X | X | Fuc, Man, GlcNAc |
| O:2a | Abe, 6d-Hep, Gal | – | ++ | X | X | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | X | X | Fuc, Man, GlcNAc |
| O:4b | Tyv, 6d-Hep, Gal | + | ++ | X | X | X | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | X | X | Fuc, Man, GlcNAc |
| O:10 | – | (+) | X | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | X | X | Fuc, Man, GlcNAc |
| O:6 | Col, YerA, GlcNAc, GalNAc | – | – | X | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | X | – | Fuc, Man, GlcNAc |
| O:7 | Col, Glc, GalNAc | – | – | X | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | Fuc, Man, GlcNAc |
| O:9 | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | – | Fuc, Man, GlcNAc |

a. Sugar abbreviations: Abe, abequose; 6d-Altf, 6-deoxy-altrofuranose; Asc, ascarylose; Col, colitose; Ddh, dideoxyhexose; Fuc, L-fucose; Gal, D-galactose; GalNAc, N-acetylgalactosamine; Glc, D-glucose; GlcNAc, N-acetylglucosamine; 6d-Hep, 6-deoxy-manno-heptopyranose; Man, D-mannose; Par, paratose; Tyv, tyvelose; YerA, yersiniase A. The known Par, Man and Fuc linkages are indicated.

b. Primers for gene-specific PCR analysis were selected from the sequencing primers (Fig. 2) so that a 350–700 bp internal fragment from each gene was amplified. hemH >, primers amplify a 181 bp fragment from the hemH-ddhD intergenic region immediately downstream of the hemH gene. wzz-gsk, the primers amplify a 742 bp fragment covering the 3′ end of wzz and the beginning of gsk.

c. Arbitrary strength of hybridization signal: –, no signal; ++++, very strong signal.

320 M. Skurnik, A. Peippo and E. Ervelä

**Y. pseudotuberculosis serotype O:1b O-antigen gene cluster**


pO:1b-2                      pO:1b-11                     pO:1b-5
H    Sc  EC  E   H     Ev    CEV        Ev C      S       H H CE  H
hemH ddhD ddhA ddhB ddhC prt wbyH wzzx wbyI wzy wbyJ wzy gmd fcl manC wbyL manB wzz gsk


**Y. pestis gene cluster**


pEV76-H6                    pEV76-H2                    pEV76-H5                   pEV76-H3                  pEV76-H1
H    Sc  EC  E   H     Ev    CEV        Ev C      S       H H CE  H   C   E   H
hemH ddhD ddhA ddhB ddhC prt wbyH wzzx wbyI wzy wbyJ wzy gmd fcl manC wbyL manB wzz gsk


0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26

Fig. 2. The O-antigen gene clusters of Y. pseudotuberculosis serotype O:1b (top) and Y. pestis (bottom), and the genomic pUC18 clones of both organisms used in sequencing analysis. The genomic DNAs are drawn as horizontal thick lines, under which the genes are drawn as open arrows and above which relevant restriction sites are indicated (H, HindIII; Sc, Scal; E, EcoRI; C, ClaI; Ev, EcoRV; S, SalI). Thin black lines indicate the HindIII or HindIII–SalI genomic fragments of Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b strain Pa3606 or Y. pestis EV76 cloned into pUC18. Rhombi within the open arrows indicate the Y. pestis pseudogenes and the locations of the frameshifts. The kb scale is given at the bottom. For sequencing, altogether 114 primers were designed at 300–400 bp intervals based on the genomic sequence data of Y. pestis CO-92 (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Projects/Y_pestis/). The genomic pUC18 clones and, where needed, PCR products were sequenced. The nucleotide sequences, 20588 bp for Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b strain Pa3606 and 20745 bp for Y. pestis EV76, were deposited into EMBL/GenBank/DDBJ databases under accession numbers AJ251712and AJ251713 respectively.

(Hobbs and Reeves, 1994; Nieto et al., 1996) between the hemH and the ddhA genes; (ii) rho-independent terminator motifs downstream of the ddhC, wzy, fcl and wzz genes and one good terminator motif within the wbyL gene; (iii) ribosomal binding sites upstream of each gene; and (iv) repeat sequences of 5, 7 or 8 nucleotides between the wbyH and wzx genes and the fcl and manC genes (see Fig. 4). Weak promoter motifs could be seen upstream of the ddhD and downstream of the wzy and fcl genes and, together with the terminator motifs, if functional, they could divide the gene cluster into two to four transcriptional regions or units.

**The Y. pestis EV76 gene cluster and comparison with the O:1b cluster**

All the genes present in the O:1b gene cluster were recognized in the Y. pestis EV76 gene cluster, the overall genetic organization of which is shown in Fig. 2 (bottom). Comparison of the nucleotide sequences of these two organisms gave an overall sequence identity of 98.9% [223 nucleotide differences over the 20 588 bp O:1b sequence, gaps excluded; excluding the wzx gene region with 125 differences (see below) the identity increased to 99.5%] with seven gaps; five of them resulted in frame-shift mutations in the Y. pestis sequence and in inactivation of the affected genes. Four of the Y. pestis EV76 genes were inactivated by an insertion or deletion of one or two nucleotides and, in one case, by a larger deletion. In addition, two intergenic differences were found. Details of the differences are illustrated in Fig. 4. The ddhB, wzy and fcl pseudogenes were inactivated by an insertion or deletion of one or two similar nucleotides within C, T or G stretches of 6–11 nucleotides (Fig. 4), although a similar stretch was not present in the gmd pseudogene. Interestingly, the 62 bp deletion in the wbyI pseudogene has the sequence AAAGTATG, which is directly repeated in the Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b wbyI gene, such that the other repeat is exactly at the beginning of the 62 bp deletion (Fig. 4). It is plausible that these direct repeats were the target of a short-distance deletion by recombination. The comparison of the gene and the pseudogene products with those of Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b showed identities of 99–100% between all, except for the Wzx proteins, which were 90.4% identical (Fig. 5). Listed in Table 3 are the numbers of synonymous and non-synonymous nucleotide changes in the Y. pestis genes.

Only two differences were observed between the Y. pestis strains EV76 and CO92 (the wild-type strain used

© 2000 Blackwell Science Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 37, 316–330

for genomic sequencing at the Sanger Centre) gene cluster sequences, and these are shown in Fig. 4. These locations in *Y. pestis* KIM D27 were also sequenced for comparison. The cytidine stretch in the *ddhB* pseudogene was 11 nucleotides in CO92, 10 in EV76 and 10 in KIM D27 (Fig. 4). The number of ATTTGCT repeats in the *fcl* pseudogene-*manC* gene intergenic region was six in CO92, 14 in EV76, five in KIM D27 and three in *Y. pseudotuberculosis* O:1b (Fig. 4). At present, it is not known whether these repeat regions have any role in the expression of the gene clusters.

### Comparison of the genetic set-up of O-antigen clusters of different *Y. pseudotuberculosis* serotypes by *Y. pestis* gene-specific PCR

We analysed the genomic DNA of the 21 different *Y. pseudotuberculosis* serotypes by gene-specific PCR to elucidate the relationships between the serotypes. Altogether, 16 *Y. pestis*-specific PCRs were performed, of which 14 were gene-specific and two intergenic PCRs. Based on the PCR analysis results, the serotypes formed distinct groups that reflected the differences in the chemical structures of the known O-antigens, i.e. the presence or absence of dideoxyhexoses, L-fucose or mannose (Table 2). All serotypes differed from each other by at least one PCR result except for serotypes O:12 and O:13, which were identical to each other. Serotype O:1b was the only one positive in all the *Y. pestis* gene-specific PCR analyses, confirming conclusively that *Y. pestis* is most closely related to *Y. pseudotuberculosis* O:1b.

The *wzz* gene-specific PCR was positive in all serotypes, suggesting that the *wzz* gene is highly conserved among *Y. pseudotuberculosis*. We performed the *wzz-gsk* PCR to analyse whether, in all serotypes, these two genes are adjacent, similar to O:1b and *Y. pestis* but, in nine serotypes, this was not the case. On the other hand, upstream of the O-antigen gene cluster, the serotypes seem to be rather conserved; in the *hemH-ddhD* intergenic PCR (*hemH >*, Table 2), serotype O:9 was the only one that was negative. Serotypes O:5b, O:6, O:7, O:9, O:10, O:11 and O:14 were negative in *ddhC* gene-specific PCR. Serotypes O:1a, O:1b, O:1c, O:3, O:4a, O:4b, O:8 and O:15 were positive in the *prt* gene-specific PCR, reflecting the known or predicted presence of paratose or tyvelose (synthesized from paratose by epimerization) in their O-antigens.

With respect to GDP-mannose and GDP-fucose biosynthetic genes (*manB*, *manC*, *gmd* and *fcl*), three different gene-specific PCR patterns were present. Serotypes O:1a, O:2a, O:4b, O:6, O:7, O:9 and O:10 were negative for all four genes; serotypes O:2c, O:4a and O:8 were positive for *manB* only; and serotypes O:1b,

Origin of plague: *Y. pseudotuberculosis* O:1b 321

O:1c, O:2b, O:3, O:5a, O:5b, O:11, O:12, O:13, O:14 and O:15 were positive for all four genes.

Also, the glycosyltransferase, O-unit flippase and O-antigen polymerase gene-specific PCRs revealed differences between the serotypes. Serotypes O:1a, O:1c, O:11 and O:14 were *wzx* gene positive. Serotypes O:1c, O:11 and O:14 were *wbyK* positive, serotypes O:11, O:12, O:13 and O:14 were *wbyL* positive, and serotypes O:5b O:11, O:14 and O:15 were *wbyH* positive. Only serotypes O:11 and O:14 were *wbyI*, *wbyJ* and *wzy* positive.

#### Discussion

##### One step in the evolution of *Y. pestis*

Our present results show convincingly that *Y. pestis* is most closely related to and has evolved from *Y. pseudotuberculosis* serotype O:1b. During the evolution, the expression of the O-antigen gene cluster was inactivated by mutations in five genes. The generation of one or two nucleotide insertions or deletions by DNA polymerase slippage in locations in which a long stretch of a single nucleotide is present is well documented in many bacteria; some bacteria even use it as a means of phase variation, and it has also been observed earlier in *Y. pestis* whose *yadA* gene is inactivated by a frameshift mutation in a stretch of eight adenines (Rosqvist et al., 1988; Skurnik and Wolf-Watz, 1989). Indeed, in line with this, in the *ddhB* pseudogenes of two *Y. pestis* strains, the lengths of the C-stretches differed by one nucleotide but still kept the frameshift mutation.

The nature of the mutations in *Y. pestis* and the almost 100% identity of the pseudogene sequences to corresponding *Y. pseudotuberculosis* O:1b genes indicates that the mutations have taken place quite recently. This agrees with the data of a population genetics study that was based on analysis of five housekeeping gene sequences, suggesting that *Y. pestis* is a *Y. pseudotuberculosis* clone that evolved less than 20 000 years ago (Achtman et al., 1999). Our results also fully agree with and extend a study in which, based on the presence and sequences of the *fyuA* and *irp2* genes (the pesticin receptor gene and the gene for iron-repressible high-molecular-weight protein 2 respectively), it was concluded that *Y. pestis* and *Y. pseudotuberculosis* serotype O:1 and O:3 strains belong to one evolutionary lineage (Rakin et al., 1995), whereas the other *Y. pseudotuberculosis* serotype strains belong to other lineages, as they are completely lacking the genes.

Although our data elucidated the genetic basis as to why *Y. pestis* does not express O-antigen, the evolutionary need for that remains speculative. Our present hypothesis is that smooth *Y. pestis* would be less virulent. Alternatively, the loss of O-antigen could result from

Table 3. The O-antigen biosynthetic genes and gene products of Y. pseudotuberculosis serotype O:1b (Y. pstb) and Y. pestis. Comparison of the genes and gene products and the presence of synonymous and non-synonymous nucleotide changes in the coding regions. Putative functions of the gene products and similar sequences in the databases.

| Gene   | Gene product (aa)       | Y. pstb versus Y. pestis<sup>a</sup> | Putative function                          | Identity percentage | Organism, gene product                     | Accession no. |
|--------|-------------------------|-------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|---------------------|-------------------------------------------|----------------|
| ddhD   | DdhD (329)              | A = 99.7, N = 99.4 (4/1)            | CDP-6-deoxy-Δ-3,4-glucoseen reductase      | 99                  | Y. pstb O:5a DdhD                         | L33181         |
|        | DdhD (329)              |                                     |                                            | 99                  | Y. pstb O:2a DdhD                         | L01777         |
|        |                         |                                     |                                            | 51                  | S. typhimurium DdhD                       | P26395         |
|        |                         |                                     |                                            | 45                  | V. anguillarum DdhD                       | AF025396       |
| ddhA   | DdhA (261)              | A = 100, N = 99.7 (2/0)             | Glucose-1-P cytidylyltransferase           | 100                 | Y. pstb O:2a DdhA                         | L01777         |
|        | DdhA (261)              |                                     |                                            | 98                  | Y. pstb O:5a DdhA                         | L33181         |
|        |                         |                                     |                                            | 90                  | Y. enterocolitica O:8 DdhA                | U46859         |
|        |                         |                                     |                                            | 80                  | S. typhimurium DdhA                       | P26396         |
|        |                         |                                     |                                            | 76                  | V. anguillarum DdhA                       | AF025396       |
| ddhB   | DdhB (357)              | A = 100, N = 100 (0/0)              | CDP-glucose 4,6- dehydratase              | 100                 | Y. pstb O:5a DdhB                         | L33181         |
|        | DdhB-1 (43)             |                                     |                                            | 99                  | Y. pstb O:2a DdhB                         | L01777         |
|        | DdhB-2 (314)            | A = 100, N = 99.5 (3/0)             |                                            | 78                  | Y. enterocolitica O:8 DdhB                | U46859         |
|        |                         |                                     |                                            | 73                  | S. typhimurium DdhB                       | P26397         |
|        |                         |                                     |                                            | 71                  | V. anguillarum DdhB                       | AF025396       |
| ddhC   | DdhC (437)              | A = 100, N = 99.0 (11/1)            | CDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-D-glucose-3-dehydrase   | 99                  | Y. pstb O:5a DdhC                         | L33181         |
|        | DdhC (437)              |                                     |                                            | 100                 | Y. pstb O:2a DdhC                         | L01777         |
|        |                         |                                     |                                            | 87                  | S. typhimurium DdhC                       | P26398         |
|        |                         |                                     |                                            | 82                  | V. anguillarum DdhC                       | AF025396       |
| prt    | Prt (285)               | A = 99.3, N = 99.8 (0/2)            | CDP-paratose synthase                      | 100                 | Y. pstb O:1a Prt                         | U29692         |
|        | Prt (285)               |                                     |                                            | 98                  | Y. pstb O:4a Prt                         | U29691         |
|        |                         |                                     |                                            | 43                  | S. enterica Prt                          | P14168         |
| wbyH   | WbyH (427)              | A = 99.1, N = 99.2 (6/4)            | ?                                          | 25                  | P. horikoshii Orf                        | BAA29511       |
|        | WbyH (427)              |                                     |                                            | 20                  | E. coli Gif (UDP-galactopyranose mutase) | P37747         |
| wzx    | Wzx (447)               | A = 90.4, N = 90.7 (83/42)          | O-unit flippase                           | 92 (partial)        | Y. pstb O:5a Wzx                         | L33181         |
|        | Wzx (447)               |                                     |                                            | 20                  | E. coli Wzx                              | AB008676       |
|        |                         |                                     |                                            | 20                  | Y. pstb O:2a Wzx                         | L01777         |
| wbyI   | WbyI (327)              | A = 97.8, N = 97.9 (9/5)            | Glycosyltransferase?                       | 25                  | M. jannaschii Orf                        | Q58457         |
|        | WbyI-1 (227)            |                                     |                                            | 25                  | E. coli WbdL                             | AF104912       |
|        | WbyI-2 (81)             | A = 98.8, N = 99.2 (1/1)            |                                            | 25                  | Y. enterocolitica Wbck                    | Z47767         |
| wbyJ   | WbyJ (380)              | A = 100, N = 100 (0/0)              | Mannosyl transferase?                      | 25                  | S. enterica WbaO                         | X60665         |
|        | WbyJ (380)              |                                     |                                            | 22                  | K. pneumoniae CPS region Orf9            | Q48455         |

Table 3. continued

| Gene   | Y. pstb          | Y. pestis$^b$         | Y. pstb versus Y. pestis$^a$        | Putative function                          | Identity percentage | Organism, gene product                              | Accession no. |
|--------|------------------|-----------------------|--------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|---------------------|----------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| wzy    | Wzy (406)        | Wzy-1 (145)           | A = 100, N = 100 (0/0)               | Similarity to polysaccharide repeat unit polymerases and to NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase | 22            | H. pylori NQ012 subunit                             | AAD08315.1    |
|        |                  | Wzy-2 (261)           | A = 100, N = 100 (0/0)               |                                           | 22                 | Pedinomonas minor                                   | AF116775      |
|        |                  |                       |                                      |                                           | 24                 | Y. enterocolitica O:8 WbcE                         | U46859        |
|        |                  |                       |                                      |                                           | 21                 | A. Iwoffii emulsan Wzy                             | ALW243431     |
| wbyK   | WbyK (337)       | WbyK (337)            | A = 99.7, N = 99.1 (9/1)             | Mannosyl transferase                      | 36                 | Synechocystis sp. Man-transferase B                | BAA16916      |
|        |                  |                       |                                      |                                           | 30                 | S. enterica WbaW                                   | X61917        |
|        |                  |                       |                                      |                                           | 30                 | B. melitensis WbkA                                 | AF047478      |
| gmd    | Gmd (373)        | Gmd-1 (156)           | A = 100, N = 99.1 (3/0)              | GDP-mannose-4, 6-dehydratase             | 89                 | Y. enterocolitica O:8 Gmd                           | U46859        |
|        |                  | Gmd-2 (217)           | A = 99.5, N = 99.1 (3/1)             |                                           | 79                 | E. coli Gmd                                        | P32054        |
|        |                  |                       |                                      |                                           | 78                 | V. cholerae Gmd                                    | Q56598        |
| fcl    | Fcl (321)        | Fcl-1 (68)            | A = 100, N = 99.5 (1/0)              | GDP-fucose synthetase                    | 84                 | Y. enterocolitica O:8 Gmd                           | U46859        |
|        |                  | Fcl-2 (253)           | A = 100, N = 100 (0/0)               |                                           | 75                 | E. coli Gmd                                        | P32055        |
| manC   | ManC (468)       | ManC (468)            | A = 99.8, N = 99.8 (2/1)             | Mannose-1-P guanylyltransferase          | 80                 | Y. enterocolitica O:8 ManC                          | U46859        |
|        |                  |                       |                                      |                                           | 61                 | S. enterica ManC                                   | P26340        |
|        |                  |                       |                                      |                                           | 60                 | E. coli ManC                                       | P24174        |
| wbyL   | WbyL (247)       | WbyL (247)            | A = 99.6, N = 99.9 (0/1)             | Glycosyltransferase                      | 46                 | R. etli Orf4                                       | AF127522–3    |
|        |                  |                       |                                      |                                           | 40                 | B. fragilis                                        | AF048749–18   |
|        |                  |                       |                                      |                                           | 31                 | E. coli O111 WbdL                                  | AF078736–11   |
| manB   | ManB (457)       | ManB (457)            | A = 99.8, N = 99.9 (1/1)             | Phosphomannomutase                        | 81                 | Y. enterocolitica O:8 ManB                          | U46859        |
|        |                  |                       |                                      |                                           | 72                 | S. enterica ManB                                   | P26341        |
|        |                  |                       |                                      |                                           | 73                 | E. coli ManB                                       | P24175        |
| wzz    | Wzz (383)        | Wzz (383)             | A = 98.7, N = 99.0 (7/5)             | O-antigen chain length determinant        | 100                | Y. pstb O:2a Wzz                                   | U13685        |
|        |                  |                       |                                      |                                           | 36                 | E. coli FepE                                       | P26266        |

a. A, amino acid sequence identity percentage; N, nucleic acid sequence identity percentage in the gene coding region. The number of synonymous and non-synonymous changes in the coding region of the gene are given in parentheses.

b. The gene products of the inactivated Y. pestis genes are given in two parts, which are individually compared with the Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b gene products.

324 M. Skurnik, A. Peippo and E. Ervelä

Fig. 3. Schematic structure of the O-antigen of Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b and assignment of putative functions to the O-antigen gene cluster genes. A single O-unit is given within the brackets; the O-unit sugar residues and the glycosidic linkages are indicated. The genes identified in the O-antigen gene cluster are given in the black boxes; and those known to be located elsewhere in the genome are in the open dotted boxes. Genes found inactivated in Y. pestis are marked with crosses.

adaptation of the bacterium to its transmission through a new environment (flea) in which O-antigen may not be needed or could even be harmful. This mode of transmission via fleas has not been reported for Y. pseudotuberculosis. To address this question experimentally, a smooth Y. pestis strain should be engineered. However, this will not be a trivial task, because all the five mutated genes in the genomic gene cluster of Y. pestis should be exchanged for functional copies. Expression of the O-antigen from a plasmid clone in Y. pestis would not be feasible, because it is very likely that recombinations with the genomic cryptic gene cluster would take place and certainly harass the *in vivo* experiments.

**Gene inactivation strategy of Y. pestis**

The mutations in the O-antigen gene cluster of Y. pestis are located interestingly in the biosynthesis pathways of the nucleotide sugars (Fig. 3). Biosynthetic pathways to CDP-paratose and GDP-fucose are inactivated, whereas that to GDP-mannose seems to be intact. The Y. pestis genome is known to carry several copies of insertion sequence (IS) elements (Odaert et al., 1998), and Y. pestis could have used an IS insertion to inactivate the O-antigen gene cluster. As IS insertions usually have polar effects, their absence makes the transcription of the whole O-antigen gene cluster of Y. pestis possible and allows, for example, the biosynthesis of GDP-mannose. Blocking the biosynthesis of GDP-fucose and CDP-paratose seems logical from the energetic point of view. As GDP-fucose biosynthesis starts from GDP-mannose, inactivation of both genes of the GDP-fucose pathway stops the pathway at the GDP-mannose level. This suggests that Y. pestis may use mannose in some of its carbohydrate structures. Furthermore, both the predicted mannosyltransferases, WbyJ and WbyK, seemed to be functional in Y. pestis, whereas the *wbyl* gene coding for a putative glycosyltransferase was inactivated. Inactivation of the CDP-paratose biosynthesis before the DdhB stage is also logical, as the first committed step in the Ddh

pathway is catalysed by DdhB (Johnson and Liu, 1998); the glucose-1-P pool will not be depleted.

The Wzx, Wzy and Wzz proteins may form a biosynthetic protein complex in the inner membrane of Gram-negative bacteria (Whitfield, 1995; Daniels and Morona, 1999). There is no apparent reason why the *wzy* gene in Y. pestis is inactivated, but one can speculate that the presence of the Wzy protein could somehow disturb the inner membrane structure. As the Wzx and Wzz proteins can be expressed by Y. pestis and may even have an altered function (see below), the presence of a substrateless Wzy protein could block them. Altogether, 211 differences were present in the coding regions of the gene clusters (Table 3) and, of these, 125 occurred over the 1341 bp of the *wzx* genes, with 27 of the 42 non-synonymous differences in *wzx* clustered in the middle of the flippase protein (Fig. 5). Most of the amino acid changes took place in the predicted transmembrane helices V and VI and in the first half of the inside loop following helix VI (Fig. 5). The high number of differences in the flippase proteins of Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b indicates, especially when considering the otherwise almost 100% identity of the O-antigen clusters, that there has been a special evolutionary pressure to select for changes in the flippase protein of Y. pestis. This is a rather strong indication that it may function as a flippase with an altered specificity. Interestingly, in *E. coli*, it was shown that the Wzx protein can function on incomplete O-antigen subunits; even a single residue of GlcNAc could be incorporated into the LPS of *E. coli* (Feldman et al., 1999). Therefore, it is possible that Y. pestis has altered the specificity of Wzx for a truncated O-unit containing only GlcNAc and/or mannose. Future work is needed to elucidate this question.

It is also possible that the individual Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b strain that has been the direct ancestor to Y. pestis represents a substrate of Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b, for example from a restricted geographical location already carrying this altered *wzx* gene. Restriction endonuclease digestion patterns of the virulence plasmids

© 2000 Blackwell Science Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **37**, 316–330

Frame shift mutations in *Y. pestis*

### 1-2 bp insertions in *ddhB* of *Y. pestis*

...[DdhB]
G A T V K G Y S L T A P T V P S L F E
GGGCCAACGGTAAAAGTTACTCTCTG..ACCGCCCCCAGTGCCCTAGCCTATTTGAG 2660 O:1b
|||||||||||||||||||||||||| || |||||| |||||||||||||||||
GGGCCAACGGTAAAAGTTACTCTTTG.CCCCCCCCCCACGGTGCCCTAGCCTATTTGAG EV76
|||||||||||||||||||||||||| ||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
GGGCCAACGGTAAAAGTTACTCTTTGCCCCCCCCCACGGTGCCCTAGCCTATTTGAG CO 92


### 1 bp insertion in *wzy* of *Y. pestis*

...[Wzy]
A G K I F F I N V L L F V L L E L L K G W S
GCCGGAAAGATTTTTTT.ATTAATGTGCCTCTATTTGTATTACTTGAGTTATTTAAGG 11370 O:1b
||||||||||||||||||| ||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
GCCGGAAAGATTTTTTTTATTAATGTGCCTCTATTTGTATTACTTGAGTTATTTAAGG *Y. pestis*


### 62 bp deletion in *wbyl* of *Y. pestis*

...[Wbyl]
I R W I Q K Y G P I K Y N K T K V S Y Y R I L D N E S M R P
ATTAGGTGGATCAAAGTATGGACCAATAAAATAATAAAACTAAAGTCTCCTTTATAGAATTCTCGATAATGAAAATATGAGGCCA 9550 O:1b
|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
ATTAGGTGGATCA.............................................AAAGTATGAGGCCA *Y. pestis*


### 1 bp insertion in *gmd* of *Y. pestis*

...[Gmd]
H G I K R S P Y A V A K M Y A Y W I T V N
CATGGTATTAAGCGTTCTCC.TTATGCTGTTGCCAAAATGTATGCTTACTGGATTACAGTAA 13900 O:1b
|||||||||||||||||||| |||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
CATGGTATTAAGCGTTCTCCTTATGCTGTTGCCAAAATGTATGCTTACTGGATTACAGTAA *Y. pestis*


### 1 bp deletion *fcl* of *Y. pestis*

...[Fcl]
A A A K V G G I Q A N N N Y P A E F I Y Q
GCTGCGGCAAAGTGGGGGGGATTCAGGCAATAAATATCCGGCAGAGTTCATCTACCAA 14765 O:1b
|||||||||||||||||||| |||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||
GCTGCGGCAAAGTGGGGGG.ATTCAGGCAATAAATATCCGGCAGAGTTCATCTACCAA *Y. pestis*


### Intergenic 7-8 bp repeats

#### 83 bp insertion with 6 TTTAATAA- and 5 TTAAAAG- repeats in *Y. pseudotuberculosis* O:1b

...[WbyH]
Y S S I .
TATAGTTCAA TTTAATAA TTTAATAA TTTAATAA TTTAATAA TTTAATAA TTTAAG TTAAAAG TTAAAAG TTAAAAG TTAAAAG TTAAATATAC 7200 O:1b
|||||||||| |||||||| |||||||| |||||||| |||||||| |||||||| |||||||| |||||||| |||||||| |||||||| |||||||||
TATAGTTCAA TTTAATAA ............................................TTAAAAT CTAAACAG TTAAATATAC *Y. pestis*


#### 21-77 bp insertions = 3-11 extra copies of ATTTGCT in *Y. pestis* strains

...[Fc]
H Q N N F R K *
CATCAGAATAACTTCAGAAAAATAGTTTC ......................... ATTTGCT ATTTGCT ATTTGCT ATTTGGATATGGCG 15524 O:1b
|||||||||||||||||||||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| |||||||||| ||
326 M. Skurnik, A. Peippo and E. Ervelä

| I | II | III |
| --- | --- | --- |
| O:1b MKISSQMVWGLLNQGCNIFIPFVIMFSYKYLPLEMASVWVIFLSMISLITLFDGLSPAIVRNVSYVISGAQNLVKRGIDDIIIKDVISYPLLSDLFDIKRIYLILSLIAFFIIVIGGLWYFY | Y.pestis ---NY- | 126 |

| IV | V | VI |
| --- | --- | --- |
| O:1b ISPLDIKIEVAYSWVLFSALIINLIYYVPVTGLGEIENSYKANVFGRFIWFFLSLLVFIFSPSILLLSLSFVSFINRYLCYFFYIRNSHVKAIDKTEMEKKSTVPFIGHNAAKLGVVS | Y.pestis ----N--- ---L----T--------- S-----L---T-LI-T--ALTLL --I---CS---L---I----R-- F-I-NL--IDTGVV--I---------- | 250 |

| VII | VIII | IX | X |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| O:1b LGSFLINRSTTLIVGIVCPIVTAGQFVLSMQVFFALMAISNILSIKIPEISQAVAKREHYTVKILYKVVAFSSSIYLLGFVTFLLIAEYVLPTIGVSLNFLPDYLLILGLTYFLEMNHSICA | Y.pestis ---A------------------- I------------------------ | 375 |

| XI | XII |
| --- | --- |
| O:1b TIITSKNNVPFEVSLFSGGLIILLSSMLSVHFKYGVVGLILAQGTIVQLMYNNWKWPLMVYSEFIKNNIEDR 447 | Y.pestis -----A-----------I-I ---S---------R---------- | |

Fig. 5. The amino acid sequences of the Wzx proteins of *Y. pseudotuberculosis* O:1b and *Y. pestis*. The identical amino acids in the *Y. pestis* Wzx sequence are indicated by dashes. The predicted transmembrane helices are boxed and indicated by Roman numerals.

Dideoxyhexoses have thus far been found in all studied *Y. pseudotuberculosis* O-antigens, except O:5b. Based on the gene-specific PCR results, it is likely that serotypes O:9, O:10, O:11 and O:14 have no dideoxyhexose in their O-antigens. Serotypes O:6 and O:7 contain colitose as their dideoxyhexose and therefore are expected to contain a functional *ddhC* gene; apparently, their *ddhC* gene differs enough from that of the others to explain the negative gene-specific PCR result. Indeed, serotype O:6 was positive in the 5 kb PCR in which one of the primers was *ddhC* specific (Table 1) but different from the *ddhC* gene-specific primers.

Serotypes O:2c, O:4a and O:8 (*Fuc⁻ Man⁺*) had very similar restriction digestion patterns (Fig. 1), and they were positive for *manB* but negative for *manC*, *gmd* and *fcl* genes. Both O:2c and O:4a have a mannose backbone in their O-units; therefore, these three serotypes most probably have their own type of *manC* gene that remains negative in the *Y. pestis* gene-specific PCR.

Serotypes O:2b, O:3, O:5a, O:15 (*Fuc⁺ Man⁺*) have similarities in their restriction digestion patterns and, in gene-specific PCRs, all were positive for *gmd*, *fcl*, *manC* and *manB* (Table 2). Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that they all share a similar Fuc-Man biosynthetic block and possibly also share similar mannosyl- and fucosyltransferases.

The same Fuc-Man biosynthetic block is also present in serotypes O:1b, O:11 and O:14, as well as in serotypes O:1c, O:12 and O:13, but these serotypes apparently possess different sets of mannosyl- and fucosyltransferases compared with the O:2b group of serotypes. The O-antigen clusters of serotypes O:11 and O:14 are almost identical to serotype O:1b between the *wbyH* and *wzz* genes but are missing the *ddhC* and *prt* genes and, in this respect, more closely resemble serotype O:5b (Table 2). Based on the genetic set-up of serotypes O:11 and O:14,

their O-units most probably resemble that of O:1b, except that paratose may be missing or is replaced by a non-dideoxyhexose sugar. The presence of an O:1b-type O-antigen polymerase in these serotypes suggests that the four-sugar backbone of their O-unit must be identical to that of the O:1b O-unit (Fig. 3).

Interestingly, *wzx*-positive serotypes were O:1a, O:1b, O:1c, O:11 and O:14. The common denominator for O:1a and O:1b is the presence of GlcNAc in their O-antigens, whereas in many other serotypes, it is replaced by GalNAc (Table 2). The Wzx proteins are apparently not very specific for the rest of the O-unit but may be so for the first residue (Feldman et al., 1999), suggesting that, in *Y. pestis* and *Y. pseudotuberculosis*, there may be a division to GlcNAc- and GalNAc-specific Wzx proteins.

Some apparent controversies between the slot-blot hybridization and gene-specific PCR analyses became evident (Table 2). For example, positive and even strong hybridization signals were obtained from the serotype O:2b, O:3, O:4a and O:5a DNA with the *wzx-wzy* probe, even though none of these serotypes gave positive results in the gene-specific PCR (Table 2). Most probably, highly similar (> 70–80% identical) genes are present in these serotypes, which allows positive hybridization, but the similarity is not great enough for gene-specific PCR.

Our data presented in Table 2 indicate that *Y. pseudotuberculosis* serotypes fall into distinct clusters that may reflect the evolution of serotypes within this single species. Comparison of the nucleotide sequences of the O-antigen gene clusters will eventually provide a more comprehensive answer to this question.

Experimental procedures

Bacterial strains and plasmids are listed in Table 4.
© 2000 Blackwell Science Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **37**, 316–330

Table 4. Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study. All the Y. pseudotuberculosis serotype reference strains were received from Dr Fukushima via E. Carniel.

| Bacterial strains and plasmids | (Skurnik laboratory strain collection no.) Genotype or comments | References, sources or origins |
| --- | --- | --- |
| E. coli C600 | (1424) thi thr leuB tonA lacY supE | Appleyard (1954) |
| Y. pestis KIM D27 | (1418) lcr+, pgm-, pst+ | Garcia et al. (1999) |
| EV76 | (1281) pgm- | Girard and Robic (1936); Walker et al. (1953); Portnoy and Falkow (1981) |
| Y. pseudotuberculosis St.1 | (2060) serotype O:1a reference strain, human isolate | Knapp (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| 1 | (1401) serotype O:1a | Samuelsson et al. (1974) |
| pa3606 | (2061) serotype O:1b reference strain, human isolate | Fukushima (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| PB1 | (961) serotype O:1b, guinea pig mesenteric lymph node isolate | Brubaker (Burrows and Bacon, 1960) |
| 1B | (1402) serotype O:1b | Samuelsson et al. (1974) |
| Kuratani-2 | (2062) serotype O:1c reference strain, wild rat isolate | Tsubokura (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| 208 | (2063) serotype O:2a reference strain, pig isolate | Tsubokura (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| 7 | (1403) serotype O:2a | Samuelsson et al. (1974) |
| 1779 | (2064) serotype O:2b reference strain, human isolate | Knapp (Samuelsson et al., 1974) |
| 274 | (2065) serotype O:2c reference strain, pig isolate | Tsubokura (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| 83 | (2066) serotype O:3 reference strain, human isolate | Mollaret (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| 43 | (1405) serotype O:3 | Samuelsson et al. (1974) |
| MD31 | (962) serotype O:3 | Brubaker |
| 51 | (2067) serotype O:4a reference strain, pig isolate | Tsubokura (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| 32 | (1406) serotype O:4a | Samuelsson et al. (1974) |
| Pa3422 | (2068) serotype O:4b reference strain, human isolate | Fukushima (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| Ikegaki | (1407) serotype O:4b | Samuelsson et al. (1974) |
| 204 | (2069) serotype O:5a reference strain, human isolate | Tsubokura (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| 25 | (1408) serotype O:5a | Samuelsson et al. (1974) |
| 197 | (2070) serotype O:5b reference strain, pig isolate | Tsubokura (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| R2 | (1409) serotype O:5b | Samuelsson et al. (1974) |
| DD110 | (2071) serotype O:6 reference strain, dog isolate | Fukushima (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| 3 | (1410) serotype O:6 | Samuelsson et al. (1974) |
| 257 | (2072) serotype O:7 reference strain, dog isolate | Tsubokura (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| 151 | (2073) serotype O:8 reference strain, pig isolate | Tsubokura (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| R708 | (2074) serotype O:9 reference strain, wild rat isolate | Fukushima (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| 6088 | (2075) serotype O:10 reference strain, raccoon dog isolate | Inoue (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| R80 | (2076) serotype O:11 reference strain, wild rat isolate | Fukushima (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| MW864-2 | (2077) serotype O:12 reference strain, river water isolate | Fukushima (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| N916 | (2078) serotype O:13 reference strain, house rat isolate (China) | Zheng (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| CN3 | (2079) serotype O:14 reference strain, wild rat isolate (China) | Zheng (Tsubokura and Aleksic, 1995) |
| 93422 | (2080) serotype O:15 reference strain, human (Korea) | Tsubokura |
| Plasmids pUC18 | Plasmid vector, amp<sup>R</sup> | Yanisch-Perron et al. (1985) |
| pO:1b-1 | 12.7 kb HindIII fragment of Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b strain pa3606 cloned into pUC18 | This work |
| pO:1b-2 | 3.3 kb HindIII fragment of Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b strain pa3606 cloned into pUC18 | This work |
| pO:1b-5 | 1.9 kb HindIII fragment of Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b strain pa3606 cloned into pUC18 | This work |
| pO:1b-11 | 8.7 kb HindIII-SalI fragment of Y. pseudotuberculosis O:1b strain pa3606 cloned into pUC18, the plasmid carries also an additional SalI-HindIII fragment | This work |
| pEV76-H1 | 7.1 kb HindIII fragment of Y. pestis strain EV76 cloned into pUC18 | This work |
| pEV76-H2 | 4.4 kb HindIII fragment of Y. pestis strain EV76 cloned into pUC18 | This work |
| pEV76-H3 | 1.9 kb HindIII fragment of Y. pestis strain EV76 cloned into pUC18 | This work |
| pEV76-H5 | 8.6 kb HindIII fragment of Y. pestis strain EV76 cloned into pUC18 | This work |
| pEV76-H6 | 3.3 kb HindIII fragment of Y. pestis strain EV76 cloned into pUC18 | This work |

DNA manipulation

Routine techniques for plasmid isolation, restriction digestion, ligation, transformation and electroporation were used (Ausubel et al., 1987; Sambrook et al., 1989). Single-step screening of recombinant clones was performed as described previously (Beuken et al., 1998). Short-range PCR was performed as suggested by the supplier of the thermostable DNA polymerase, DynaZyme II (Finnzymes). Reaction conditions for PCR cycles were adjusted according to the oligonucleotide primers used and the length of the amplified fragment.

328 M. Skurnik, A. Peippo and E. Ervelä

### Colony, slot and Southern blotting analysis

DNA fragments were digoxigenin (DIG) labelled using the High Prime DNA labelling kit (Roche Molecular Biochemicals, Boehringer-Mannheim) according to the instructions of the manufacturer. Colonies growing on nylon membranes were lysed and processed for hybridization as described earlier (Sambrook *et al.*, 1989). Slot-blotting was performed using the Minifold II Slot-Blot Manifold (Schleicher and Schuell). Denatured genomic DNA was applied to the slots as instructed by the manufacturer. Southern blotting was carried out as described previously (Sambrook *et al.*, 1989). Hybridizations and detection of hybridization were performed using the DIG luminescence detection kit for nucleic acids (Roche Molecular Biochemicals)

### Long-range PCR

The Expand Long Template PCR system (Roche Molecular Biochemicals) was used to amplify the *hemH–gsk* region. As template in long-range PCR, chromosomal DNA of different *Yersinia* strains was isolated by the CTAB procedure (Ausubel *et al.*, 1987). Reactions were prepared on ice in two mastermixes that were mixed 1:1 just before the beginning of the PCR. For 20 kb products, mastermix 1 included dNTP (final concentration 500 µM), primers (500 nM), template (500 ng), additional MgCl₂ (3.25 mM) and water, and mastermix 2 included PCR buffer 3 (10× concentrate), DNA polymerases (2.5 units) and water. For 15 kb products, 250 ng of template was used, and the final concentration of MgCl₂ was 3.0 mM. The applied long-range PCR amplification protocol for 20 kb fragments was the following: (i) initial denaturation at 94°C for 2 min; (ii) 10 cycles of 92°C for 15 s, 62°C for 15 s and 68°C for 18 min; (iii) 20 cycles of 92°C for 15 s, 62°C for 15 s and 68°C for 18 min plus 20 s for each cycle; and (iv) final extension at 68°C for 7 min. For 15 kb fragments, the protocol was otherwise the same but, instead of 18 min extension, 12 min was used.

The long-range PCR primers used in the work were the following: *yerfb1*, specific for the *Yersinia hemH* genes and designed based on the nucleotide sequences under accession numbers Z47767, L01777 and U46859 [5′-tggaagaata(ac)aaaaatcgagag-3′] *yerfb2*, specific for the *Yersinia gsk* genes based on sequences Z47767, U13685 and U46859 [5′-ga(tc)ttgcg(tc)ttaccagaaattcattg-3′] *yerfb9* and *yerfb10*, specific for the *ddhC* gene of *Y. pseudotuberculosis* O:2a (L01777, 5′-gagtaagtttgaggattctttggtttg-3′ and 5′-caaaccaagaacttctcaaacttact-3′ respectively).

### Nucleotide sequencing and sequence analysis

HindIII and HindIII–SalI libraries of *Y. pseudotuberculosis* O:1b strain Pa3606 and *Y. pestis* EV76 were constructed into pUC18. The libraries were screened by colony blotting using individually and in combination DIG-labelled HindIII and HindIII–SalI PCR product fragments of *Y. pestis* as probes. Plasmids from hybridization-positive colonies were isolated, analysed by restriction digestions and/or by PCR and, for both strains, plasmids containing the different restriction fragments of the clusters were selected for sequencing analysis (Fig. 2). Plasmid DNA was isolated using the Qiagen Plasmid Midi kit, and PCR products were purified using the Quantum Prep PCR Kleen Spin columns (Bio-Rad). Sequencing reactions were performed using the Thermo Sequenase II Dye Terminator cycle sequencing kit (Pharmacia Amersharm Life Sciences) and the ABI Prism 377 DNA sequencer (Perkin-Elmer). Nucleotide sequence analysis was performed using the computer programs of the Wisconsin Package Version 10.0, Genetics Computer Group (GCG).

#### Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grants from the Academy of Finland, the Sigrid Juselius Foundation and the Finnish Scientific Advisory Board for Defence. Dr J.-A. Bengoechea, Dr P. Reeves and Dr H. Wolf-Watz are thanked for critical reading of the manuscript, and Dr E. Carniel and Dr H. Fukushima for the *Y. pseudotuberculosis* strains.

#### References

Achtman, M., Zurth, K., Morelli, G., Torrea, G., Guiyole, A., and Carniel, E. (1999) Yersinia pestis, the cause of plague, is a recently emerged clone of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **96**: 14043–14048.

Al-Hendy, A., Toivanen, P., and Skurnik, M. (1992) Lipopolysaccharide O side chain of *Yersinia enterocolitica* O:3 is an essential virulence factor in an orally infected murine model. *Infect Immun* **60**: 870–875.

Appleyard, R.K. (1954) Segregation of new lysogenic types during growth of doubly lysogenic strain derived from *Escherichia coli* K12. *Genetics* **39**: 440–452.

Ausubel, F.M., Brent, R., Kingston, R.E., Moore, O.D., Seidman, J.G., Smith, J.A., *et al.* (1987). *Current Protocols in Molecular Biology*. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Bercovier, H., Mollaret, H.H., Alonso, J.M., Brault, J., Fanning, G.R., Steigerwalt, A.G., *et al.* (1980) Intra- and interspecies relatedness of *Yersinia pestis* by DNA hybridization and its relationship to *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis*. *Curr Microbiol* **4**: 225–229.

Berlyn, M.K.B., Low, K.B., Rudd, K.E., and Singer, M. (1996) Linkage map of *Escherichia coli* K-12, edition 9. In *Escherichia coli and Salmonella: Cellular and Molecular Biology*. Neidhardt, F.C., Curtiss, R., III, Ingraham, J.L., Lin, E.C.C., Low, K.B., Magasanik, B., *et al.* (eds). Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology Press, pp. 1715–1902.

Beuken, E., Vink, C., and Bruggeman, C.A. (1998) One-step procedure for screening recombinant plasmids by size. *Biotechniques* **24**: 748–750.

Burrows, T.W., and Bacon, G.A. (1960) V and W antigens in strains of *Pasteurella pseudotuberculosis*. *Br J Exp Pathol* **41**: 38–44.

Curd, H., Liu, D., and Reeves, P.R. (1998) Relationships among the O-antigen gene clusters of *Salmonella enterica* groups B, D1, D2, and D3. *J Bacteriol* **180**: 1002–1007.

Daniels, C. (1999) Characterization of proteins involved in *Shigella flexneri* O-antigen biosynthesis. PhD Thesis.

Department of Microbiology and Immunology. University of Adelaide, Adelaide, pp. 183.

Daniels, C., and Morona, R. (1999) Analysis of *Shigella flexneri* Wzz (Rol) function by mutagenesis and cross-linking: wzz is able to oligomerize. *Mol Microbiol* **34**: 181–194.

Daniels, C., Vindurampulle, C., and Morona, R. (1998) Overexpression and topology of the *Shigella flexneri* O-antigen polymerase (Rfc/Wzy). *Mol Microbiol* **28**: 1211–1222.

Feldman, M.F., Marolda, C.L., Monteiro, M.A., Perry, M.B., Parodi, A.J., and Valvano, M.A. (1999) The activity of a putative polyisoprenol-linked sugar translocase (Wzx) involved in *Escherichia coli* O antigen assembly is independent of the chemical structure of the O repeat (in process citation). *J Biol Chem* **274**: 35129–35138.

Fukushima, H., Gomyoda, M., Hashimoto, N., Takashima, I., Shubin, F.N., Isachikova, L.M., *et al.* (1998) Putative origin of *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* in western and eastern countries. A comparison of restriction endonuclease analysis of virulence plasmids. *Int J Med Microbiol* **288**: 93–102.

Garcia, E., Nedialkov, Y.A., Elliott, J., Motin, V.L., and Brubaker, R.R. (1999) Molecular characterization of KatY (antigen 5), a thermoregulated chromosomally encoded catalase-peroxidase of *Yersinia pestis*. *J Bacteriol* **181**: 3114–3122.

Girard, G., and Robic, J. (1936) La vaccination de l’homme contre la peste au moyen de bacilles vivants (virus vaccin EV): son application à Madagascar. *Bull Off Int Hyg Publ* **28**: 1078.

Hobbs, M., and Reeves, P.R. (1994) The JUMPstart sequence: a 39 bp element common to several polysaccharide gene clusters. *Mol Microbiol* **12**: 855–856.

Hobbs, M., and Reeves, P. (1995) Genetic organization and evolution of *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* 3,6-dideoxyhexose biosynthetic genes. *Biochim Biophys Acta* **1245**: 273–277.

Johnson, D.A., and Liu, H.-W. (1998) Mechanisms and pathways from recent deoxysugar biosynthesis research. *Curr Opin Chem Biol* **2**: 642–649.

Kessler, A.C., Brown, P.K., Romana, L.K., and Reeves, P.R. (1991) Molecular cloning and genetic characterization of the *rfb* region from *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* serogroup IIA, which determines the formation of the 3,6-dideoxyhexose abequose. *J Gen Microbiol* **137**: 2689–2695.

Kessler, A.C., Haase, A., and Reeves, P.R. (1993) Molecular analysis of the 3,6-dideoxyhexose pathway genes of *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* serogroup IIA. *J Bacteriol* **175**: 1412–1422.

Morona, R., Vandenbosch, L., and Manning, P.A. (1995) Molecular, genetic, and topological characterization of O-antigen chain length regulation in *Shigella flexneri*. *J Bacteriol* **177**: 1059–1068.

Nieto, J.M., Bailey, M.J.A., Hughes, C., and Koronakis, V. (1996) Suppression of transcription polarity in the *Escherichia coli* haemolysin operon by a short upstream element shared by polysaccharide and DNA transfer determinants. *Mol Microbiol* **19**: 705–713.

Odaert, M., Devalckenaere, A., Trieu-Cuot, P., and Simonet, M. (1998) Molecular characterization of IS1541 insertions in the genome of *Yersinia pestis*. *J Bacteriol* **180**: 178–181.


Origin of plague: *Y. pseudotuberculosis* O:1b 329

Perry, R.D., and Fetherston, J.D. (1997) *Yersinia pestis* – etiologic agent of plague. *Clin Microbiol Rev* **10**: 35–66.

Porat, R., McCabe, W.R., and Brubaker, R.R. (1995) Lipopolysaccharide-associated resistance to killing of *Yersiniae* by complement. *J Endotoxin Res* **2**: 91–97.

Portnoy, D.A., and Falkow, S. (1981) Virulence-associated plasmids from *Yersinia enterocolitica* and *Yersinia pestis*. *J Bacteriol* **148**: 877–883.

Rakin, A., Urbitsch, P., and Heesemann, J. (1995) Evidence for two evolutionary lineages of highly pathogenic *Yersinia* species. *J Bacteriol* **177**: 2292–2298.

Reeves, P. (1993) Evolution of *Salmonella* O antigen variation involved in interspecies gene transfer on a large scale. *Trends Genet* **9**: 17–22.

Reeves, P. (1994) Biosynthesis and assembly of lipopolysaccharide. In *Bacterial Cell Wall*. Ghuyesen, J.-M., and Hakenbeck, R. (eds). Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 281–317.

Reeves, P.R., Hobbs, M., Valvano, M., Skurnik, M., Whitfield, C., Coplin, D., *et al.* (1996) Bacterial polysaccharide synthesis and gene nomenclature. *Trends Microbiol* **4**: 495–503.

Rosqvist, R., Skurnik, M., and Wolf-Watz, H. (1988) Increased virulence of *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* by two independent mutations. *Nature* **334**: 522–525.

Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E.F., and Maniatis, T. (1989). *Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual*, 2nd edn. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

Samuelsson, K., Lindberg, B., and Brubaker, R.R. (1974) Structure of O-specific side chains of lipopolysaccharides from *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis*. *J Bacteriol* **117**: 1010–1016.

Sanderson, K.E., Hessel, A., Liu, S.-L., and Rudd, K.E. (1996) The genetic map of *Salmonella typhimurium*, edition VIII. In *Escherichia coli and Salmonella: Cellular and Molecular Biology*. Neidhardt, F.C., Curtiss, R., III, Ingraham, J.L., Lin, E.C.C., Low, K.B., Magasanik, B., *et al.* (eds). Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology Press, pp. 1903–1999.

Skurnik, M. (1999) Molecular genetics of *Yersinia* lipopolysaccharide. In *Genetics of Bacterial Polysaccharides*. Goldberg, J. (ed.). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 23–51.

Skurnik, M., and Wolf-Watz, H. (1989) Analysis of the *yopA* gene encoding the Yop1 virulence determinants of *Yersinia* spp. *Mol Microbiol* **3**: 517–529.

Skurnik, M., and Zhang, L. (1996) Molecular genetics and biochemistry of *Yersinia* lipopolysaccharide. *APMIS* **104**: 849–872.

Skurnik, M., Venho, R., Toivanen, P., and Al-Hendy, A. (1995) A novel locus of *Yersinia enterocolitica* serotype O:3 involved in lipopolysaccharide outer core biosynthesis. *Mol Microbiol* **17**: 575–594.

Skurnik, M., Venho, R., Bengoechea, J.-A., and Moriyón, I. (1999) The lipopolysaccharide outer core of *Yersinia enterocolitica* serotype O:3 is required for virulence and plays a role in outer membrane integrity. *Mol Microbiol* **31**: 1143–1162.

Sonnhammer, E.L.L., von Heijne, G., and Krogh, A. (1998) A hidden Markov model for predicting transmembrane helices in protein sequences. In *Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology*. Glasgow, J., Littlejohn, T., Major, F., Lathrop,

R., Sankoff D., and Sensen, C. (eds). Menlo Park, CA: AAAL Press, pp. 175–182.

Thorson, J.S., Lo, S.F., Ploux, O., He, X.M., and Liu, H.W. (1994) Studies of the biosynthesis of 3,6-dideoxyhexoses: molecular cloning and characterization of the *asc* (Ascarose) region from *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* serogroup VA. *J Bacteriol* **176**: 5483–5493.

Tomshich, S.V., Gorshkova, R.P., Elkin, Y.N., and Ovodov, Y.S. (1976) Lipopolysaccharide from *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis*, type 1B. A structural study of O-specific chains. *Eur J Biochem* **65**: 193–199.

Tsubokura, M., and Aleksic, S. (1995) A simplified antigenic scheme for serotyping of *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis*: phenotypic characterization of reference strains and preparation of O and H factor sera. *Contrib Microb Immunol* **13**: 99–105.

Walker, D.L., Foster, L.E., Chen, T.H., Larson, A., and Meyer, K.F. (1953) Studies on immunization against plague. V. Multiplication and persistence of virulent and avirulent *Pasteurella pestis* in mice and guinea pigs. *J Immunol* **70**: 245–252.

Whitfield, C. (1995) Biosynthesis of lipopolysaccharide O antigens. *Trends Microbiol* **3**: 178–185.

Yanisch-Perron, C., Vieira, J., and Messing, J. (1985) Improved M13 phage cloning vectors and host strains: nucleotide sequences of the M13mp18 and pUC19 vectors. *Gene* **33**: 103–119.

Zhang, L. (1996) Molecular genetics of the O-antigen of *Yersinia enterocolitica* lipopolysaccharide. PhD Thesis. In Annales Universitatis Turkuensis, Series D. Turku, Finland: University of Turku.

Zhang, L., Toivanen, P., and Skurnik, M. (1996) The gene cluster directing O-antigen biosynthesis in *Yersinia enterocolitica* serotype O:8: identification of the genes for mannose and galactose biosynthesis and the gene for the O-antigen polymerase. *Microbiology* **142**: 277–288.

Zhang, L., Radziejewska-Lebrecht, J., Krajewska-Pietrasik, D., Toivanen, P., and Skurnik, M. (1997) Molecular and chemical characterization of the lipopolysaccharide O-antigen and its role in the virulence of *Yersinia enterocolitica* serotype O:8. *Mol Microbiol* **23**: 63–76.
