
Neuron, Vol. 27, 279–288, August, 2000, Copyright ©2000 by Cell Press

# NRAGE, A Novel MAGE Protein, Interacts with the p75 Neurotrophin Receptor and Facilitates Nerve Growth Factor–Dependent Apoptosis

Amir H. Salehi,* Philippe P. Roux,* Chris J. Kubu,† Christine Zeindler,* Asha Bhakar,* Laura-Lee Tannis,* Joseph M. Verdi,† and Philip A. Barker‡

*Centre for Neuronal Survival  
Montreal Neurological Institute  
McGill University  
Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B4  

†Robarts Research Institute  
London, Ontario N6A 5K8  
Canada  

### Summary

The mechanisms employed by the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) to mediate neurotrophin-dependent apoptosis are poorly defined. Two-hybrid analyses were used to identify proteins involved in p75NTR apoptotic signaling, and a p75NTR binding partner termed NRAGE (for neurotrophin receptor-interacting MAGE homolog) was identified. NRAGE binds p75NTR in vitro and in vivo, and NRAGE associates with the plasma membrane when NGF is bound to p75NTR. NRAGE blocks the physical association of p75NTR with TrkA, and, conversely, TrkA overexpression eliminates NRAGE-mediated NGF-dependent death, indicating that interactions of NRAGE or TrkA with p75NTR are functionally and physically exclusive. NRAGE overexpression facilitates cell cycle arrest and permits NGF-dependent apoptosis within sympathetic neuron precursors cells. Our results show that NRAGE contributes to p75NTR-dependent cell death and suggest novel functions for MAGE family proteins.

### Introduction

The neurotrophins are a family of growth factors whose functions include the regulation of neuronal survival, differentiation, axonal and dendritic growth, and synaptic activity (Farinas, 1999; McAllister et al., 1999). Neurotrophins exert their effects by binding two types of cell surface receptors. The Trk receptors are receptor tyrosine kinases that selectively bind different members of the neurotrophin family, with TrkA preferentially binding nerve growth factor (NGF), TrkB selectively binding brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and neurotrophin-4/5 (NT-4/5), and TrkC interacting only with neurotrophin-3 (NT-3). The second class of neurotrophin receptor contains the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR), a member of the TNF receptor superfamily that binds each of the neurotrophins (Frade and Barde, 1998).

When p75NTR and TrkA are coexpressed, p75NTR facilitates NGF binding to TrkA and thereby enhances TrkA activation and NGF-dependent survival (Barker

and Shooter, 1994; Hantzopoulos et al., 1994; Verdi and Anderson, 1994; Ryden et al., 1997). p75NTR increases Trk receptor ligand specificity by reducing binding of nonpreferred ligands (Bibel et al., 1999; Brennan et al., 1999) and by attenuating TrkA activity through intracellular signaling paths (MacPhee and Barker, 1997). The precise physical arrangement of p75NTR with the Trk receptors is not known, but p75NTR and TrkA codistribute on cell surfaces (Ross et al., 1996), and p75NTR can be immunoprecipitated with each of the three Trk receptors when both are overexpressed (Gargano et al., 1997; Bibel et al., 1999).

p75NTR is widely distributed within cells that lack catalytically active Trk receptors and is capable of autonomous signaling. Numerous studies have shown that p75NTR can mediate cell death both in vitro and in vivo (Barrett and Bartlett, 1994; Casaccia-Bonnefil et al., 1996; Frade et al., 1996; Majdan et al., 1997; Coulson et al., 1999; Frade and Barde, 1999), but the precise signaling events responsible for this effect are uncertain. p75NTR causes a neurotrophin-dependent increase of sphingomyelinase (Dobrowsky et al., 1994, 1995) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activity (Bamji et al., 1998; Yoon et al., 1998), but neither of these has been directly linked to p75NTR-dependent cell death. p75NTR can also increase NF-κB activation (Carter et al., 1996; Bha-kar et al., 1999), but this pathway appears to antagonize, rather than facilitate, cell death (Ye et al., 1999; Gentry et al., 2000). Other TNF receptor superfamily members include the apoptotic receptors fas, DR3, DR4, and DR5 and the immunomodulatory receptors CD30, CD40, and TNF-RⅡ (Baker and Reddy, 1998). The apoptotic receptors typically contain an intracellular self-associating protein-protein interaction motif known as the death domain, which allows them to couple to the caspase cascade through cytosolic adaptor proteins such as FADD and TRADD. p75NTR contains an intracellular region that resembles the death domain (Chapman, 1995), but it shows crucial structural differences compared to the fas death domain (Huang et al., 1996; Liepinsh et al., 1997) and does not self-associate or bind to FADD, TRADD, or RIP (Varfolomeev et al., 1996; Nichols et al., 1998). The p75NTR death domain not mediate apoptosis when present in the context of a fas<sup>ECD</sup>-p75<sup>ICD</sup> chimeric receptor (Liepinsh et al., 1997; Kong et al., 1999), indicating that the apoptotic signaling mechanism of p75NTR differs from that of other TNF receptor superfamily members.

Several potential p75NTR interacting proteins have recently been identified. Many TNF receptor superfamily members activate JNK and NF-κB signaling pathways through a group of interacting factors termed the TRAF proteins (Wajant et al., 1999), and several TRAF family members bind the juxtamembrane region of p75NTR when overexpressed in 293 cells (Khursigara et al., 1999; Ye et al., 1999). Two novel p75NTR interactors, SC-1 (Chittka and Chao, 1999) and NRIF (Casademunt et al., 1999), have recently been identified, and in a surprising development Barde’s group has shown that amphiphilic sequences within the p75NTR death domain bind the rhoA GTPase (Yamashita et al., 1999). Determining the contribution of each of these to p75NTR-dependent cell

‡To whom correspondence should be addressed (e-mail: mdpb@musica.mcgill.ca).

death in appropriate physiological settings remains a major challenge.

To gain insights into p75NTR function, two-hybrid analyses were used to identify p75NTR interactors and a novel p75NTR interacting protein termed NRAGE was identified. NRAGE binds p75NTR in vitro and p75NTR and NRAGE can be coimmunoprecipitated from untransfected cells that endogenously express both proteins. The subcellular distribution of NRAGE is altered by NGF binding to p75NTR, and overexpression of NRAGE disrupts the physical association of p75NTR with TrkA. NRAGE facilitates growth arrest and is required for p75NTR-dependent apoptosis in sympathetic precursor cells. These data show that NRAGE is an important mediator of p75NTR signaling and provide new insights into the physiological roles of MAGE family members.

### Results

A whole mouse E13-E15 yeast two-hybrid library was screened using the entire rat p75NTR intracellular domain as bait, and a single 0.9 kb clone that activated both LacZ and HIS3 transcription in the presence of the p75NTR bait was identified. This cDNA fragment was used to screen a rat neural crest cell cDNA library, and the largest clone identified (2.9 kb) was sequenced. This clone hybridized with a single 3.0 kb mRNA on Northern blots (data not shown) and therefore represents a near full-length cDNA. The largest open reading frame is 2328 nucleotides in length and encodes a 775 amino acid protein with a predicted molecular weight of 85,792 Da. We have named this protein NRAGE for neurotrophin receptor-interacting MAGE homolog (see below). The cDNA fragment identified in the two-hybrid screen encodes a 300 amino acid fragment and was designated NRAGE^410-709^. Human NRAGE is represented in the TIGR database by a series of overlapping clones designated THC252649. Sequencing of IMAGE cDNA clones representing full-length human NRAGE revealed that the rat and human forms of NRAGE are 87% identical overall with 97% identity in the C-terminal 315 amino acids (Figure 1A).

BLAST searches revealed that NRAGE belongs to the MAGE family, a group of ~25 proteins distinguished by the presence of a 200 amino acid MAGE homology domain. The functional roles of most of the proteins in this class are unknown, but one family member, Necdin, has been implicated in cell cycle control. Necdin and several other MAGE family members consist of little more than the MAGE homology domain but others (nM15, MAGE-like, and KIAA1114) are larger proteins and show loose homology to NRAGE across most of its length (data not shown). A dendrogram showing the relatedness of the NRAGE MAGE homology domain to others in the family is shown in Figure 1B. NRAGE shows no significant homologies to proteins outside of the MAGE family but contains an unusual interspersed repeat consisting of 25 hexameric units with a WQXPXX consensus sequence (Figure 1A).

To verify the p75NTR-NRAGE interaction biochemically, in vitro pulldown assays were performed. Figure 2A shows that the p75NTR intracellular domain fused to glutathione S-transferase (GST) efficiently bound in vitro-translated NRAGE^410-709^, whereas GST alone did not bind this protein. In separate experiments, NRAGE^410-709^ was fused to GST and used in pullouts with maltose

**Figure 1. NRAGE Amino Acid Sequence and Homologies**

(A) Alignment of rat and human NRAGE amino acid sequences. The lightly shaded area shows the interspersed repeat domain, and the darker area indicates the MAGE homology domain. The line indicates amino acids 410–709, which reflects the fragment initially identified by two-hybrid screening.

(B) Dendrogram showing the relatedness of the MAGE homology domains of NRAGE and other MAGE family members.

binding protein (MBP) fused to either the entire p75NTR intracellular domain (MBP-ICD, amino acids 276–425) or the p75NTR death domain (MBP-DD, amino acids 329–425). Figure 2B shows that NRAGE-GST readily bound the MBP-ICD fusion protein but failed to associate with MBP-DD, indicating that the critical binding determinants for NRAGE association are in the p75NTR juxtamembrane domain. To test whether full-length NRAGE interacts with intact p75NTR when both are overexpressed in vivo, full-length Myc-tagged NRAGE was transfected into COS7 cells in the presence or absence of p75NTR, and lysates were immunoprecipitated with MC192, a p75NTR-specific monoclonal antibody. Figure 2C shows that NRAGE specifically coimmunoprecipitated with MC192 but only when p75NTR was present. We were concerned that these overexpression paradigms may force nonphysiological interactions and therefore confirmed the presence of a p75NTR-NRAGE complex within untransfected PC12nnr5 cells, which express p75NTR and NRAGE but lack Trk receptor expression. Figure 2D shows that endogenous NRAGE was specifically coimmunoprecipitated with p75NTR from

NRAGE Interacts with p75NTR and Facilitates Apoptosis
281

Figure 2. NRAGE Binds p75NTR In Vitro and In Vivo

(A) GST or GST-p75NTR-ICD fusion proteins prebound to glutathione beads were incubated with ${}^{35}$S-labeled NRAGE ${}^{410-709}$ produced by in vitro transcription/translation. Pellets were precipitated and washed, and bound proteins were visualized by fluorography after SDS-PAGE. Two repeats of identical experiments are shown.

(B) Equal amounts ($\sim$10 $\mu$g) of MBP-DD (lanes 1 and 2) or MBP-ICD (lanes 3 and 4) fusion proteins were incubated with GST or GST-NRAGE ${}^{410-709}$ (denoted GST-NR) prebound to glutathione beads. Interacting proteins were detected by Western blotting using an anti-MBP antibody.

(C) COS7 cells were transfected with full-length Myc-tagged NRAGE in the presence and absence of p75NTR. Cells were lysed and immunoprecipitated with a p75NTR monoclonal antibody and immunoblotted with 9E10 to detect the Myc-tagged protein. The top panel shows that NRAGE was immunoprecipitated only when p75NTR was present. Expression of NRAGE and p75NTR in cell lysates is shown in the middle and bottom panels, respectively.

(D) p75NTR was immunoprecipitated from lysates of PC12nnr5 cells with MC 192 and immunoblotted with a polyclonal antibody against the NRAGE N terminus. MOPC21 and 9E10 were used as isotype-specific antibody controls for the immunoprecipitation. Each of the experiments shown in (A) through (D) have been repeated a minimum of three times with identical results.

PC12nnr5 cells, indicating that p75NTR and NRAGE interact under physiological conditions.

To examine the embryonic expression of NRAGE mRNA, whole-mount in situ hybridization studies were performed on rat embryos at embryonic age E11.5 using cDNA probes corresponding to the 5'-untranslated region of the rat NRAGE cDNA. Figure 3A shows that NRAGE is expressed at low levels throughout the embryo and is enriched in the developing brain and spinal cord. To examine NRAGE expression at later stages of development, affinity-purified NRAGE antibodies were used to immunoblot tissue extracts prepared from E18 rat embryos and from adult rats. Figure 3B shows that extracts from all E18 tissues show detectable levels of NRAGE expression, with highest levels within the cortex and cerebellum. However, by adulthood, NRAGE levels have decreased markedly in all tissues and are detectable only within cortex and lung.

To determine if NRAGE and p75NTR are colocalized in the developing nervous system, double-label immunofluorescence studies were performed on E14 rat. Figures 4A and 4B show staining of the developing medulla oblongata with affinity-purified NRAGE antibodies compared to control antibodies and shows NRAGE is highly expressed in the proliferating and marginal zones but excluded from the mantle zone (Figures 4A and 4C). p75NTR is not expressed within the proliferating zone but is abundant in the marginal and mantle zones (Figure 4D), and p75NTR and NRAGE are therefore initially coexpressed in the mantle zone, a region where p75NTR has been shown to mediate developmental apoptosis (Frade and Barde, 1999). p75NTR and NRAGE coexpression is also observed in many other regions of the developing nervous system, including the trigeminal and dorsal root sensory ganglia (data not shown) and within the facial motor nucleus (Figures 4E and 4F). In motoneurons, p75NTR is present on both cell bodies and processes of the cells, whereas NRAGE is detected only within cell bodies.

To examine the subcellular compartmentalization of NRAGE, biochemical fractionation studies were performed (Figure 5). In untreated PC12nnr5 cells, NRAGE is located mainly in the cytosol, with lower levels present on the plasma membrane and within nuclei. However, NGF treatment results in NRAGE accumulation in plasma membrane fractions within 30 min, and these

Figure 3. Developmental and Tissue-Specific Expression of NRAGE

(A) Whole mount in situ hybridization of E11.5 rat embryos shows that NRAGE mRNA is enriched in the developing nervous system.

(B) Twenty micrograms of tissues lysates derived from E18 rat embryos and adult rats (>3 months) were separated by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted using an affinity-purified NRAGE polyclonal antibody directed against C-terminal peptide 1 (see Experimental Procedures). Expression is particularly high in the developing CNS and is reduced in all tissues with increased age.

Neuron
282

Figure 4. NRAGE and p75NTR Are Coexpressed in the Developing Nervous System

Double-label immunocytochemistry was performed using affinity-purified antibodies directed against NRAGE (A, D, and F) and using MC192, a p75NTR-specific monoclonal antibody (E and F). (A) through (D) show NRAGE and p75NTR within E14 medulla oblongata ([C] and [D]) approximate the boxed area shown in [A]) and (E) and (F) show NRAGE and p75NTR within the E14 facial motor nucleus. (B) was stained with purified nonspecific rabbit IgG using the same conditions as for NRAGE staining. Bars in (A), (D), and (F) represent 500, 50, and 30 µM, respectively. Experiments in (A) through (H) have been repeated at least twice with identical results. Abbreviations: mn, mantle zone; mr, marginal zone; p, proliferative zone.

levels increase further with longer NGF exposures. Syntaxin 1 and Histone 3 levels were assessed to monitor the quality of the isolated organelles and revealed appropriate enrichment of the plasmalemmal and nuclear fractions. The compartmental distribution of p75NTR was identical to that of syntaxin 1 (data not shown) and neither p75NTR, syntaxin 1, or Histone 3 showed any recompartmentalization in response to NGF treatment. p75NTR and TrkA receptors are coexpressed in several neuronal populations and can be coimmunoprecipitated when overexpressed in Sf9 or 293 cells (Gargano et al., 1997; Bibel et al., 1999). To determine if p75NTR-TrkA complexes contain NRAGE, p75NTR and TrkA were transiently expressed in 293 cells in the absence and presence of NRAGE<sup>410-709</sup>, the NRAGE fragment originally identified in the yeast two-hybrid screen. p75NTR was immunoprecipitated and immune complexes were examined for the presence of TrkA by immunoblotting. When only TrkA and p75NTR were coexpressed, TrkA readily coimmunoprecipitated with p75NTR, but expression of the NRAGE fragment with the two receptors consistently prevented coimmunoprecipitation of TrkA with p75NTR (Figure 6). We made rigorous attempts to identify endogenous or epitope-tagged full-length NRAGE or NRAGE<sup>410-709</sup> within TrkA immunoprecipitates and within p75NTR-TrkA coimmunoprecipitates derived from several transfected cell lines, but NRAGE was not detected within the coimmunoprecipitates (data not shown). This indicates that p75NTR is capable of forming independent complexes with TrkA or NRAGE but that a tripartite complex containing all three molecules is not formed.

The normal cellular functions of most MAGE family members are unknown but Necdin inhibits cell cycle progression in 3T3, COS, and 293 cells (Hayashi et al., 1995; Taniura et al., 1998, 1999). To begin to dissect the mechanism by which NRAGE may affect p75NTR-dependent signaling, NRAGE was examined for effects on cell cycle progression. To address this, an enhanced green fluorescent protein NRAGE fusion protein (EGFP-NRAGE) was transfected into 293 cells, and cells were exposed to a 1 hr bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) pulse at either 24, 36, or 48 hr after transfection and then analyzed for BrdU incorporation by immunocytochemistry (Figure 7). In untransfected cells or in cells expressing a control EGFP protein, ~40% of cells incorporate BrdU, but in cells expressing the NRAGE-EGFP fusion, the BrdU labeling rate dropped below 5%–10% at each of the three time points, indicating that NRAGE overexpression strongly retards cell cycle progression.

To test if NRAGE plays a role in p75NTR-mediated cell death, we used native MAH cells, a sympathoadrenal cell line that lack p75NTR and TrkA receptors, or MAH<sup>p75NTR</sup> cells, which stably overexpress the receptor (Figure 8A). In the absence of added neurotrophin, NRAGE overexpression had no effect on the viability of MAH cells or MAH<sup>p75NTR</sup> cells, and NGF treatment of MAH cells overexpressing NRAGE did not affect survival. However, MAH<sup>p75NTR</sup> cells that were transfected with NRAGE cDNA and exposed to NGF showed a highly significant reduction in survival (Figure 8B), which was accompanied by DNA nucleosomal laddering, a biochemical hallmark of apoptosis (data not shown). BDNF and NT-3 had no effect on the survival of these cells,

NRAGE Interacts with p75NTR and Facilitates Apoptosis

283

| Treatment (hrs) |
| --- |
| 0 | 0.5 | 2.5 | 18 |

| Plasmalemma |  |
| --- | --- |
| Cytosol |  |
| Nucleus |  |

| Plasmalemma |  |
| --- | --- |
| Cytosol |  |
| Nucleus |  |

| Plasmalemma |  |
| --- | --- |
| Cytosol |  |
| Nucleus |  |

| TrkA | + | + | + | + |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| p75 | - | - | + | + |
| NRAGE<sup>410-709</sup> | - | + | - | + |

Figure 6. Overexpression of NRAGE Disrupts the p75NTR-TrkA complex

TrkA was overexpressed in 293 cells either alone, with NRAGE<sup>410-709</sup>, with p75NTR, or with NRAGE<sup>410-709</sup> and p75NTR. p75NTR was immunoprecipitated with REX, and immunoprecipitates were examined for the presence of coimmunoprecipitating TrkA by immunoblotting using a polyclonal anti-TrkA antibody (RTA). This experiment has been repeated four times with similar results.

when both are overexpressed in COS7 cells, and the two molecules form a complex in untransfected PC12nnr5 cells. NRAGE therefore meets all criteria expected for a physiologically relevant p75NTR interacting protein.

An important physiological function of p75NTR is to modulate responses of the Trk receptors to the neurotrophins (Barker, 1998; Barrett, 2000). When overexpressed, p75NTR and TrkA form a coimmunoprecipitable complex, and it is likely that formation of a p75NTR-Trk complex is necessary for the functional interactions of these two receptors (Gargano et al., 1997; Bibel et al., 1999). We have shown that NRAGE<sup>410-709</sup> antagonizes the formation of a p75NTR-TrkA complex and found that NRAGE is not present in p75NTR immunoprecipitates that contain TrkA. These experiments are important for two reasons. First, they strongly support the hypothesis that NRAGE is a bona fide p75NTR interactor. Second, they indicate that the formation of p75NTR-TrkA and p75NTR-NRAGE complexes are mutually exclusive. Our studies show that MAH cells, that overexpress NRAGE and p75NTR undergo cell death in an NGF-dependent manner, but when TrkA is present the p75NTR-NRAGE apoptotic signal is suppressed. These findings show that NRAGE can contribute to the p75NTR-mediated apoptotic response and are consistent with previous studies which have suggested that signaling functions of p75NTR and TrkA are mutually antagonistic (Majdan and Miller, 1999).

NRAGE is a member of the MAGE family, a large group of proteins that all contain a well-conserved ~200 amino acid region known as the MAGE homology domain (Itoh et al., 1996; Kirkin et al., 1998). Many of these proteins consist of little more than the MAGE homology domain

Figure 5. The Cellular Localization of NRAGE Changes with p75NTR Activation

PC12nnr5 cells were treated with NGF (100 ng/ml) for indicated times and then lysed in detergent-free buffer and fractionated by differential centrifugation. Fractions (20 μg) were analyzed by immunoblot using antibodies directed against NRAGE, syntaxin, or Histone 3. This experiment has been repeated three times with similar results.

indicating that this effect was NGF specific. Finally, we tested whether MAH<sup>p75NTR</sup> cells expressing NRAGE and TrkA exhibited NGF-mediated death. Figure 7 shows that NGF treatment of these cells did not reduce viability but instead facilitated survival, presumably through the activation of TrkA-dependent survival pathways. These data suggest that NRAGE forms part of a NGF-specific p75NTR apoptotic signaling cascade in sympathoadrenal cells and that the apoptotic effect of NRAGE is antagonized by TrkA.

Discussion

Substantial evidence supports the hypothesis that p75NTR activates autonomous signaling pathways that can result in apoptosis in a number of distinct cell types, but the mechanisms responsible remain unclear (Barrett, 2000). To identify molecules involved in p75NTR signaling, we performed yeast two-hybrid screens and identified a novel protein termed NRAGE. NRAGE associates with the cytosolic domain of p75NTR in yeast, in vitro, and in mammalian cells. The NRAGE fragment does not bind the p75NTR death domain but rather interacts with the 80 amino acid intracellular juxtamembrane domain of p75NTR. p75NTR binds full-length NRAGE

Neuron
284

Figure 7. NRAGE Overexpression Results in Cell Cycle Arrest

(A) 293 cells transfected with a GFP-NRAGE fusion protein for 36 hr were incubated with BrdU for 1 hr and then fixed for immunocytochemistry. GFP fluorescence does not withstand the conditions used for BrdU detection, and therefore the NRAGE-GFP fusion protein was detected immunocytochemically using a GFP-specific antibody. GFP-NRAGE-positive and -negative cells are indicated by right and left arrows, respectively, in all panels. The top left panel shows GFP-NRAGE, the bottom left panel shows BrdU staining, and the top right panel shows nuclear DNA stained with Hoescht 33258. The bottom right panel is an overlay of (A), (B), and (C) and shows that the GFP-NRAGE-containing cells are typically BrdU negative.

(B) Cells were scored for BrdU labeling as a function of NRAGE expression by a naïve observer (n > 200 per experiment). Results of cell counts from a representative experiment are shown. Experiments in (A) and (B) have been repeated at least three times.

|           | BrdU positive (%) | BrdU negative (%) |
|-----------|-------------------|-------------------|
| Control vector | 39                | 61                |
| GFP-NRAGE   | 4                 | 96                |

and a small amount of flanking sequence, but others have an extended domain structure which resembles that of NRAGE. Most of the MAGE genes are highly expressed during development but are present at much lower levels in the adult (Imai et al., 1995; Kocher et al., 1995; De Smet et al., 1997; Jurk et al., 1998). However, expression of many MAGE genes increases markedly in numerous cancers due to gene demethylation (De Smet et al., 1996, 1999), and cytosolic MAGE proteins that are expressed in malignant cells are proteolyzed to peptides and are transported into the endoplasmic reticulum and then presented on the cell surface as antigenic MHC-associated peptides (Traversari et al., 1992; Bueler and Mulligan, 1996; Kawakami et al., 1996; Itoh et al., 1997; Van den Eynde and Boon, 1997). The normal intracellular role of most members of this gene family remains completely unknown.

The only MAGE family member that has been functionally characterized is Necdin, which was originally identified in a screen designed to identify proteins involved in the neural differentiation of P19 cells (Maruyama et al., 1991). Overexpression of Necdin causes cell cycle arrest in NIH3T3, HEK293, and SAOS2 cells (Hayashi et al., 1995; Taniura et al., 1998) through mechanisms that may involve physical interactions with E2F-1 or p53 (Taniura et al., 1998, 1999). Necdin expression increases as neurons become postmitotic (Aizawa et al., 1992;

Figure 8. NRAGE and p75NTR Overexpression Results in Cellular Apoptosis in MAH Cells

(A) Untransfected MAH cells, MAH cells stably expressing p75NTR, or MAH cells coexpressing p75NTR and TrkA were infected with control retrovirus or with retrovirus driving NRAGE cDNA. After selection in G418, individual lines were pooled. Control MAH cells were compared to transfected MAH cells for expression of p75NTR, NRAGE, and TrkA by immunoblot.

(B) Transfected MAH cells were assayed for neurotrophin-dependent survival after exposure to 100 ng/ml neurotrophin for 48 hr.

Abbreviations: N, NGF; B, BDNF; 3', NT-3. Standard deviations shown; *p < 0.01.

Hayashi et al., 1995; Maruyama, 1996), and it has been hypothesized to facilitate the transition from a cycling cell to a postmitotic state. Mice lacking the Necdin gene appear to develop normally in utero but typically die shortly after birth due to postnatal respiratory distress (Gerard et al., 1999). Intriguingly, Necdin has been recently identified as a candidate gene for Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS), a common neurogenetic disorder that results in early transient respiratory distress and hypotonia, which is followed by mental retardation and hyperphagia (Jay et al., 1997; MacDonald and Wevrick, 1997; Sutcliffe et al., 1997).

Given the structural homology of NRAGE and Necdin, it is likely that NRAGE and Necdin mediate cell cycle effects through a shared mechanism. The effect of NRAGE on both cell cycle and apoptosis raises the intriguing possibility that the apoptotic effect of p75NTR may be secondary to cell cycle disruption. It is interesting in this regard that SC-1 produces growth arrest when overexpressed (Chittka and Chao, 1999) and that ZacI, an NRIF homolog, mediates cell cycle arrest and apoptosis (Spengler et al., 1997). It is conceivable, therefore, that p75NTR-initiated apoptotic signals are transduced through a complex of molecules that may activate a cell
cycle-related mechanism distinct from the apoptotic pathway used by other members of the TNF receptor superfamily. A link between apoptosis and cell cycle disruption has been shown in several neuronal death paradigms, and it is becoming increasingly accepted that cell cycle disruptions may be an important mechanism for initiating neuronal death (Freeman et al., 1994; Herrup and Busser, 1995; Park et al., 1997a, 1997b). Recent findings indicate that p75NTR-mediated death of retinal cells is associated with an increase in cyclin B2 levels and can be blocked using roscovitine, a CDK inhibitor (Frade, 2000), consistent with the hypothesis that p75NTR mediates apoptosis through a cell cycle-dependent pathway that may involve NRAGE. p75NTR and NRAGE are coexpressed in many central and peripheral ganglia as well as in the intermediate zone, where p75NTR has been shown to play a role in developmental apoptosis (Frade and Barde, 1999). It may be significant that p75NTR expression in the developing spinal cord occurs in the region where neurons are undergoing their terminal mitosis, since it is conceivable that p75NTR may contribute to cell cycle exit as well as apoptosis. It is likely that studies that directly address the role of p75NTR in early nervous system development will provide new insights into the physiological role of the receptor.

In conclusion, NRAGE binds p75NTR under physiological conditions, antagonizes the association of p75NTR with TrkA, inhibits cell cycle progression, and facilitates p75NTR-mediated apoptosis. The discovery that NRAGE is a p75NTR interactor is consistent with the hypothesis that p75NTR mediates neuronal apoptosis through interactions with cell cycle regulatory events.

### Experimental Procedures

#### Two-Hybrid Screening, cDNA Cloning, and Sequence Analyses
The yeast strain PJ 694A (MAT Trp1-901, Leu2-3112 ura3-52, HIS 3-200 gal4, gal80, Lys2::Gal1-HIS 3, Gal2-Ade2, Met2::Gal7-LacZ) was the gift of Philip J. James (University of Wisconsin) and was cultured as described (James et al., 1996). The bait p75NTR intracellular domain was generated by PCR amplification from full-length rat p75NTR cDNA and cloned into the XbaI sites of plasmid pGAD424 (Clontech). A rat neural crest cell cDNA library was produced in Lambda Zap (Stratagene) and was screened using the 0.9 kb NRAGE identified in the yeast two-hybrid screen using standard hybridization techniques. Several overlapping clones were identified and sequenced. The longest of these, designated MNCM20, contained the entire predicted 775 amino acid open reading frame. The NRAGE sequence was compared with known and predicted sequences using web servers operated by the National Center for Biotechnology Information and the Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR). THC #252649 on the TIGR database was identified as the human homolog of NRAGE, and full-length NRAGE human clones were obtained from Research Genetics and sequenced. Alignments of human and rat NRAGE were performed on the web server operated by the National Center for Biotechnology Information, and dendrograms were produced using the PROTDIST and BIONJ programs on the web server at http://bioweb.pasteur.fr. NRAGE sequences deposited in GenBank have been assigned accession numbers AF217963 (human) and AF217964 (rat).

#### In Vitro Translation and Pulldown Experiments
For pulldown experiments, polypeptides containing amino acids 410–709 of NRAGE (the 0.9 kb fragment identified from two-hybrid screening) were produced as \({}^{35}\)S-labeled proteins using an in vitro transcription/translation kit (Promega) and then diluted in pulldown buffer containing 10 mM Tris-OH (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 10% glycerol, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 μg/ml aprotinin,

1 μg/ml leupeptin, 5 mM DTT, and 5% dry skim milk powder. Diluents were precleared with unbound glutathione-Sephrose beads (Pharmacia) for 1 hr and then supplemented with glutathione beads coupled to 25 μg of appropriate GST fusion protein. After a 1 hr incubation at \(4^\circ\)C, samples were washed extensively in pulldown buffer lacking 5% milk and eluted from beads by boiling in SDS-PAGE sample buffer. Samples were analyzed on parallel SDS-PAGE gels, which were either Coomassie stained to confirm equivalent fusion protein loading or processed for fluorography using En3Hance (DuPont). In separate experiments, MBP-p75NTR-DD or MBP-p75NTR-ICD were diluted in pulldown buffer and then incubated for 1 hr at \(4^\circ\)C with GST or GST-NRAGE (amino acids 410–709) prebound to glutathione S-transferase beads. Samples were washed and prepared for immunoblotting as above.

#### Polyclonal Antibody Generation
Rabbit polyclonal antibodies against NRAGE were initially produced against keyhole limpet hemocyanin-coupled peptides (peptide 1: EAEARAEARNRMGIGDE, peptide 2: GPWSWDDIEFELLTWDEE) derived from the COOH-terminal region of NRAGE; these were adequate for immunoblotting only. To produce antibodies for immunocytochemistry, a PCR product representing amino acids 53–295 of rat NRAGE was cloned into pGEX1, sequenced to confirm fidelity, and then used to produce a GST-NRAGE fusion protein that was purified over glutathione columns and used to immunize rabbits. Antibodies were affinity purified as described (Sharp et al., 1993), with anti-peptide antibodies purified on GST-NRAGE\(^{410-709}\) and antibodies against the GST-NRAGE\(^{53-295}\) purified on His₆-tagged NRAGE\(^{53-295}\).

#### Transfections and Immunoprecipitations
For immunoprecipitations involving transient transfections of 293 cells, expression plasmids for TrkA (7 μg), p75NTR (3 μg), and NRAGE\(^{410-709}\) (5 μg) were cotransfected into cells on 100 mm plates by calcium phosphate precipitation. For immunoprecipitations involving COS7 cells, 5 μg of expression plasmids encoding either N-terminal Myc epitope-tagged full-length NRAGE, p75NTR, or empty vector were transfected into cells on 100 mm plates using lipofectamine (Gibco BRL) as per the manufacturer's instructions. An expression plasmid (100 ng) driving expression of enhanced GFP (pEGFP-N1, Clontech) was included to monitor transfection efficiency. Forty-eight hours after transfection, plates were placed on ice, rinsed with ice-cold Tris-buffered saline (10 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 137 mM NaCl), and then lysed with 1 ml of CHAPs lysis buffer (10 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl, 0.7% CHAPS, 10% glycerol, 1 μg/ml leupeptin, 1 μg/ml aprotinin, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and 1 mM orthovanadate). For immunoprecipitations involving PC12nnr5 cells, cells maintained in normal growth media were first rinsed with ice-cold Tris-buffered saline (10 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl) and then lysed with 1 ml of NP-40 lysis buffer (10 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 1 μg/ml leupeptin, 1ug/ml aprotinin, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and 1 mM orthovanadate). In all cases, nuclei were removed by centrifugation (10,000 × g, 5 min), and the lysates were precleared by incubation for 1 hr at \(4^\circ\)C with 30 μl of Sepharose beads. The beads were removed by centrifugation, and supernatant was incubated with either 7 μl of REX, a polyclonal antiserum directed against the p75NTR extracellular domain; with 5 μg of MC192; or with 5 μg of control antibodies, as indicated in the figure legends. After incubating for 2 hr at \(4^\circ\)C, samples were supplemented with 30 μl of protein G-Sepharose (for monoclonal primaries) or 30 μl of protein A sepharose (for polyclonal primaries) at \(4^\circ\)C for 60 min. For PC12nnr5 cells, the lysates were divided into three identical aliquots prior to the addition of three isotype-matched primary antibodies. In all cases, beads were pelleted and washed three times in lysis buffer, resuspended in SDS-PAGE sample buffer, and processed for immunoblot analyses as indicated in the figure legends.

#### Tissue Lysates and Subcellular Fractionation
Lysates were prepared from dissected embryonic or adult tissues by solubilizing in NP40 lysis buffer (1:5, w/v) and centrifuging at 10,000 × g for 30 min to remove insoluble material. For subcellular fractionation studies, PC12nnr5 cells were left untreated or treated
with NGF (100 ng/ml) for various times and then scraped from plates in ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline. Cells were centrifuged for 5 min at 2,000 × g and then resuspended in 15 ml HES buffer (20 mM HEPES [pH 7.4], 1 mM EDTA, 255 mM sucrose, and protease inhibitors). Cells were homogenized in a glass on teflon homogenizer with 10 strokes at 1,200 rpm and then triturated twice with a 25 gauge needle. The lysate was centrifuged at 19,000 × g for 20 min and the pellet (LM) was retained. The supernatant was centrifuged at 180,000 × g for 75 min, and the resulting supernatant was designated cytosol. The LM pellet was resuspended in 9 ml HES buffer, layered on top of a 3 ml 40% sucrose cushion, and centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 60 min. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 400 μl HES buffer and designated mitochondria/nuclei. The white interface at the sucrose cushion interface was collected, diluted in 15 ml HES buffer, and spun at 40,000 × g for 20 min. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 200 μl HES buffer and designated plasma membrane.

In Situ Hybridization, Immunocytochemistry, and BrdU Labeling

In situ hybridization was performed using a DIG-labeled complementary fragment representing a 5′ untranslated fragment of NRAGE (1–404 of the rat NRAGE cDNA) as previously described (Groves et al., 1995). Immunocytochemistry of embryos was performed essentially as described by Huang et al. (1999). Affinity-purified NRAGE antibodies against the N-terminal region of NRAGE were used at a concentration of 0.45 μg/ml, and purified MC 192 was used at 2 μg/ml; equivalent concentrations of purified nonspecific rabbit Ig or MOPC21 were used as negative controls on parallel slides for all immunocytochemistry. Appropriate goat FITC and Cy3 conjugates were used as secondary detection reagents together with Hoescht 33248 added at a final concentration of 200 ng/ml. EGFP-tagged NRAGE was produced by cloning Myc-tagged NRAGE into the XhoI site of pEGFP-C2. 293 cells were transfected with EGFP alone or with EGFP-NRAGE using lipofectamine (Gibco) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Two days after transfection, the cells were incubated for 60 min in 1 mM BrdU and were stained with anti-GFP (Clontech) and anti-BrdU (Boehringer Mannheim) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Immunocytochemical images were captured on a Zeiss Axioscop 2 microscope equipped with an Eclipse imaging system.

MAH Cell Transfection/Apoptosis Assay

MAH cells and MAH<sup>p75NTR</sup> cells (Verdi et al., 1994) were infected with a retrovirus driving expression of full-length rat NRAGE cDNA. Cells were selected in 500 μg/ml hygromycin for 2 weeks in the presence of 5 μM dexamethasone and then pooled and expanded. To test the effect of NRAGE on viability, cells were seeded at 1 × 10<sup>6</sup> cells/100 mm dish, dexamethasone was withdrawn on the next day, and cells were washed with Hank’s buffered salt solution and placed in media with or without neurotrophins (NGF from Cederlane Laboratories, BDNF and NT-3 from Peprotech; all resuspended in PBS) but lacking dexamethasone. Cells were scored for viability using trypan blue exclusion after 24 and 48 hr. Each data point was performed in triplicate, and experimental results were analyzed by multiple analyses of variance with statistical probabilities assigned using the Tukey test for multiple comparisons.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Louis Reichardt, C. David Allis, and Peter Macpherson for providing the REX, Histone 3, and syntaxin 1 antibodies, respectively, and to Sylvie La Boissière for careful reading of the manuscript. This work was supported by grants from the Medical Research Council of Canada (J. M. V. and P. A. B.), the Neuroscience Network (P. A. B.) and the Fond de la Recherche en Santé du Quebec (P. A. B.). A. S. was supported by an FRSQ-FCAR Studentship, and A. B. and P. R. are supported by MRC Studentships. P. A. B. is a Killam Foundation Scholar, and P. A. B. and J. M. V. are Scholars of the MRC of Canada.

Received November 30, 1999; revised July 13, 2000.

References

Aizawa, T., Maruyama, K., Kondo, H., and Yoshikawa, K. (1992). Expression of necdin, an embryonal carcinoma-derived nuclear protein, in developing mouse brain. Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res. 68, 265–274.

Baker, S.J., and Reddy, E.P. (1998). Modulation of life and death by the TNF receptor superfamily. Oncogene 17, 3261–3270.

Bamji, S.X., Majdan, M., Pozniak, C.D., Belliveau, D.J., Aloyz, R., Kohn, J., Causing, C.G., and Miller, F.D. (1998). The p75 neurotrophin receptor mediates neuronal apoptosis and is essential for naturally occurring sympathetic neuron death. J. Cell Biol. 140, 911–923.

Barker, P. (1998). p75NTR: a study in contrasts. Cell Death Differ. 5, 346–356.

Barker, P.A., and Shooter, E.M. (1994). Disruption of NGF binding to the low affinity neurotrophin receptor p75<sup>LNTR</sup> reduces NGF binding to TrkA on PC 12 cells. Neuron 13, 203–215.

Barrett, G.L. (2000). The p75 neurotrophin receptor and neuronal apoptosis. Prog. Neurobiol. 61, 205–229.

Barrett, G.L., and Bartlett, P.F. (1994). The p75 nerve growth factor receptor mediates survival or death depending on the stage of sensory neuron development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 6501–6505.

Bhakar, A.L., Roux, P.P., Lachance, C., Kryl, D., Zeindler, C., and Barker, P.A. (1999). The p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) alters tumor necrosis factor-mediated NF-kappaB activity under physiological conditions, but direct p75NTR-mediated NF-kappaB activation requires cell stress. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 21443–21449.

Bibel, M., Hoppe, E., and Barde, Y.A. (1999). Biochemical and functional interactions between the neurotrophin receptors trk and p75NTR. EMBO J. 18, 616–622.

Brennan, C., Rivas-Plata, K., and Landis, S.C. (1999). The p75 neurotrophin receptor influences NT-3 responsiveness of sympathetic neurons in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 2, 699–705.

Bueler, H., and Mulligan, R.C. (1996). Induction of antigen-specific tumor immunity by genetic and cellular vaccines against MAGE: enhanced tumor protection by coexpression of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and B7-1. Mol. Med. 2, 545–555.

Carter, B.D., Kaltschmidt, C., Kaltschmidt, B., Offenhauser, N., Bohm, M.R., Baeuerle, P.A., and Barde, Y.A. (1996). Selective activation of NF-kappa B by nerve growth factor through the neurotrophin receptor p75. Science 272, 542–545.

Casaccia-Bonnefil, P., Carter, B.D., Dobrowsky, R.T., and Chao, M.V. (1996). Death of oligodendrocytes mediated by the interaction of nerve growth factor with its receptor p75. Nature 383, 716–719.

Casademunt, E., Carter, B.D., Benzel, I., Frade, J.M., Dechant, G., and Barde, Y.A. (1999). The zinc finger protein NRIF interacts with the neurotrophin receptor p75(NTR) and participates in programmed cell death. EMBO J. 18, 6050–6061.

Chapman, B.S. (1995). A region of the 75 kDa neurotrophin receptor homologous to the death domains of TNFR-I and Fas. FEBS Lett. 374, 216–220.

Chittka, A., and Chao, M.V. (1999). Identification of a zinc finger protein whose subcellular distribution is regulated by serum and nerve growth factor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 10705–10710.

Coulson, E.J., Reid, K., Barrett, G.L., and Bartlett, P.F. (1999). p75 neurotrophin receptor-mediated neuronal death is promoted by Bcl-2 and prevented by Bcl-xL. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 16387–16391.

De Smet, C., De Backer, O., Faraoni, I., Lorquin, C., Brasseur, F., and Boon, T. (1996). The activation of human gene MAGE-1 in tumor cells is correlated with genome-wide demethylation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 7149–7153.

De Smet, C., Martelange, V., Lucas, S., Brasseur, F., Lorquin, C., and Boon, T. (1997). Identification of human testis-specific transcripts and analysis of their expression in tumor cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 241, 653–657.

De Smet, C., Lorquin, C., Lethe, B., Martelange, V., and Boon, T. (1999). DNA methylation is the primary silencing mechanism for a set of germ line- and tumor-specific genes with a CpG-rich promoter. Mol. Cell. Biol. 19, 7327–7335.

Dobrowsky, R.T., Werner, M.H., Castellino, A.M., Chao, M.V., and Hannun, Y.A. (1994). Activation of the sphingomyelin cycle through the low affinity neurotrophin receptor. Science 265, 1596–1598.

Dobrowsky, R.T., Jenkins, G.M., and Hannun, Y.A. (1995). Neurotrophins induce sphingomyelin hydrolysis. Modulation by co-expression of p75(ntr) with trk receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 22135–22142.

Farinas, I. (1999). Neurotrophin actions during the development of the peripheral nervous system. Microsc. Res. Tech. 45, 233–242.

Frade, J.M. (2000). Unscheduled re-entry into the cell cycle induced by NGF precedes cell death in nascent retinal neurones. J. Cell Sci. 113, 1139–1148.

Frade, J.M., and Barde, Y.A. (1998). Nerve growth factor: two receptors, multiple functions. Bioessays 20, 137–145.

Frade, J.M., and Barde, Y.A. (1999). Genetic evidence for cell death mediated by nerve growth factor and the neurotrophin receptor p75 in the developing mouse retina and spinal cord. Development 126, 683–690.

Frade, J.M., Rodriguez-Tebar, A., and Barde, Y.A. (1996). Induction of cell death by endogenous nerve growth factor through its p75 receptor. Nature 383, 166–168.

Freeman, R.S., Estus, S., and Johnson, E.M., Jr. (1994). Analysis of cell cycle-related gene expression in postmitotic neurons: selective induction of Cyclin D1 during programmed cell death. Neuron 12, 343–355.

Gargano, N., Levi, A., and Alema, S. (1997). Modulation of nerve growth factor internalization by direct interaction between p75 and TrkA receptors. J. Neurosci. Res. 50, 1–12.

Gentry, J.J., Casaccia-Bonnefil, P., and Carter, B.D. (2000). Nerve growth factor activation of nuclear factor kappaB through its p75 receptor is an anti-apoptotic signal in RN22 Schwannoma cells. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 7558–7565.

Gerard, M., Hernandez, L., Wevrick, R., and Stewart, C.L. (1999). Disruption of the mouse necdin gene results in early post-natal lethality. Nat. Genet. 23, 199–202.

Groves, A.K., George, K.M., Tissier-Seta, J.P., Engel, J.D., Brunet, J.F., and Anderson, D.J. (1995). Differential regulation of transcription factor gene expression and phenotypic markers in developing sympathetic neurons. Development 121, 887–901.

Hantzopoulos, P.A., Suri, C., Glass, D.J., Goldfarb, M.P., and Yanopoulos, G.D. (1994). The low affinity NGF receptor can collaborate with each of the trks to potentiate functional responses to the neurotrophins. Neuron 13, 187–201.

Hayashi, Y., Matsuyama, K., Takagi, K., Sugiura, H., and Yoshikawa, K. (1995). Arrest of cell growth by necdin, a nuclear protein expressed in postmitotic neurons. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 213, 317–324.

Herrup, K., and Busser, J.C. (1995). The induction of multiple cell cycle events precedes target-related neuronal death. Development 121, 2385–2395.

Huang, B., Eberstadt, M., Olejniczak, E.T., Meadows, R.P., and Fesik, S.W. (1996). NMR structure and mutagenesis of the Fas (APO-1/CD95) death domain. Nature 384, 638–641.

Huang, E.J., Wilkinson, G.A., Farinas, I., Backus, C., Zang, K., Wong, S.L., and Reichardt, L.F. (1999). Expression of Trk receptors in the developing mouse trigeminal ganglion: in vivo evidence for NT-3 activation of TrkA and TrkB in addition to TrkC. Development 126, 2191–2203.

Imai, Y., Shichijo, S., Yamada, A., Katayama, T., Yano, H., and Itoh, K. (1995). Sequence analysis of the MAGE gene family encoding human tumor-rejection antigens. Gene 160, 287–290.

Itoh, K., Hayashi, A., Nakao, M., Hoshino, T., Seki, N., and Shichijo, S. (1996). Human tumor rejection antigens MAGE. J. Biochem. 119, 385–390.

Itoh, K., Hayashi, A., Toh, Y., Imai, Y., Yamada, A., Nishida, T., and Shichijo, S. (1997). Development of cancer vaccine by tumor rejection antigens. Int. Rev. Immunol. 14, 153–171.

James, P., Halladay, J., and Craig, E.A. (1996). Genomic libraries and a host strain designed for highly efficient two-hybrid selection in yeast. Genetics 144, 1425–1436.

Jay, P., Rougeulle, C., Massacrier, A., Moncla, A., Mattei, M.G., Malzac, P., Roeckel, N., Taviaux, S., Lefranc, J.L., Cau, P., et al. (1997). The human necdin gene, NDN, is maternally imprinted and located in the Prader-Willi syndrome chromosomal region. Nat. Genet. 17, 357–361.

Jurk, M., Kremmer, E., Schwarz, U., Forster, R., and Winnacker, E.L. (1998). MAGE-11 protein is highly conserved in higher organisms and located predominantly in the nucleus. Int. J. Cancer 75, 762–766.

Kawakami, Y., Robbins, P.F., and Rosenberg, S.A. (1996). Human melanoma antigens recognized by T lymphocytes. Keio J. Med. 45, 100–108.

Khursigara, G., Orlinick, J.R., and Chao, M.V. (1999). Association of the p75 neurotrophin receptor with TRAF6. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 2597–2600.

Kirkin, A.F., Dzhandzhugazyan, K., and Zeuthen, J. (1998). The immunogenic properties of melanoma-associated antigens recognized by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Exp. Clin. Immunogenet. 15, 19–32.

Kocher, T., Schultz, T.E., Gudat, F., Schaefer, C., Casorati, G., Juretic, A., Willimann, T., Harder, F., Heberer, M., and Spagnoli, G.C. (1995). Identification and intracellular location of MAGE-3 gene product. Cancer Res. 55, 2236–2239.

Kong, H., Kim, A.H., Orlinick, J.R., and Chao, M.V. (1999). A comparison of the cytoplasmic domains of the Fas receptor and the p75 neurotrophin receptor. Cell Death Differ. 6, 1133–1142.

Kryl, D., Yacoubian, T., Haapasalo, A., Castren, E., Lo, D., and Barker, P.A. (1999). Subcellular localization of full-length and truncated Trk receptor isoforms in polarized neurons and epithelial cells. J. Neurosci. 19, 5823–5833.

Liepinsh, E., Ilag, L.L., Otting, G., and Ibanez, C.F. (1997). NMR structure of the death domain of the p75 neurotrophin receptor. EMBO J. 16, 4999–5005.

MacDonald, H.R., and Wevrick, R. (1997). The necdin gene is deleted in Prader-Willi syndrome and is imprinted in human and mouse. Hum. Mol. Genet. 6, 1873–1878.

MacPhee, I.M., and Barker, P.A. (1997). Brain-derived neurotrophic factor binding to the p75 neurotrophin receptor reduces trkA signaling while increasing serine phosphorylation in the trkA intracellular domain. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 23547–23551.

Majdan, M., and Miller, F.D. (1999). Neuronal life and death decisions and functional antagonism between the Trk and p75 neurotrophin receptors. Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 17, 153–161.

Majdan, M., Lachance, C., Gloster, A., Aloyz, R., Zeindler, C., Bamji, S., Bhakar, A., Belliveau, D., Fawcett, J., Miller, F.D., and Barker, P.A. (1997). Transgenic mice expressing the intracellular domain of the p75 neurotrophin receptor undergo neuronal apoptosis. J. Neurosci. 17, 6988–6998.

Maruyama, E. (1996). Biochemical characterization of mouse brain necdin. Biochem. J. 314, 895–901.

Maruyama, K., Usami, M., Aizawa, T., and Yoshikawa, K. (1991). A novel brain-specific mRNA encoding nuclear protein (necdin) expressed in neurally differentiated embryonal carcinoma cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 178, 291–296.

McAllister, K., Katz, L.C., and Lo, D.C. (1999). Neurotrophins and synaptic plasticity. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 22, 295–318.

Nichols, A., Martinou, I., Maundrell, K., and Martinou, J.C. (1998). The p75 neurotrophin receptor: effects on neuron survival in vitro and interaction with death domain containing adaptor proteins. Apoptosis 3, 289–294.

Park, D.S., Levine, B., Ferrari, G., and Greene, L.A. (1997a). Cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors and dominant negative cyclin dependent kinase 4 and 6 promote survival of NGF-deprived sympathetic neurons. J. Neurosci. 17, 8975–8983.

Park, D.S., Morris, E.J., Greene, L.A., and Geller, H.M. (1997b). G1/S cell cycle blockers and inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases suppress camptothecin-induced neuronal apoptosis. J. Neurosci. 17, 1256–1270.

Ross, A.H., Daou, M.C., McKinnon, C.A., Condon, P.J., Lachyankar,

M.B., Stephens, R.M., Kaplan, D.R., and Wolf, D.E. (1996). The neurotrophin receptor, gp75, forms a complex with the receptor tyrosine kinase TrkA. J. Cell Biol. 132, 945–953.

Ryden, M., Hempstead, B., and Ibanez, C.F. (1997). Differential modulation of neuron survival during development by nerve growth factor binding to the p75 neurotrophin receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 16322–16328.

Sharp, A.H., McPherson, P.S., Dawson, T.M., Aoki, C., Campbell, K.P., and Snyder, S.H. (1993). Differential immunohistochemical localization of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate- and ryanodine-sensitive Ca²⁺ release channels in rat brain. J. Neurosci. 13, 3051–3063.

Spengler, D., Villalba, M., Hoffmann, A., Pantaloni, C., Houssami, S., Bockaert, J., and Journot, L. (1997). Regulation of apoptosis and cell cycle arrest by Zac1, a novel zinc finger protein expressed in the pituitary gland and the brain. EMBO J. 16, 2814–2825.

Sutcliffe, J.S., Han, M., Christian, S.L., and Ledbetter, D.H. (1997). Neuronally-expressed necdin gene: an imprinted candidate gene in Prader-Willi syndrome. Lancet 350, 1520–1521.

Taniura, H., Taniguchi, N., Hara, M., and Yoshikawa, K. (1998). Necdin, a postmitotic neuron-specific growth suppressor, interacts with viral transforming proteins and cellular transcription factor E2F1. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 720–728.

Taniura, H., Matsumoto, K., and Yoshikawa, K. (1999). Physical and functional interactions of neuronal growth suppressor necdin with p53. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 16242–16248.

Traversari, C., van der Bruggen, P., Luescher, I.F., Lurquin, C., Chomez, P., Van Pel, A., De Plaen, E., Amar-Costesec, A., and Boon, T. (1992). A nonapeptide encoded by human gene MAGE-1 is recognized on HLA-A1 by cytolytic T lymphocytes directed against tumor antigen MZ2-E. J. Exp. Med. 176, 1453–1457.

Van den Eynde, B.J., and Boon, T. (1997). Tumor antigens recognized by T lymphocytes. Int. J. Clin. Lab. Res. 27, 81–86.

Varfolomeev, E.E., Boldin, M.P., Goncharov, T.M., and Wallach, D. (1996). A potential mechanism of “cross-talk” between the p55 tumor necrosis factor receptor and Fas/APO1: proteins binding to the death domains of the two receptors also bind to each other. J. Exp. Med. 183, 1271–1275.

Verdi, J.M., and Anderson, D.J. (1994). Neurotrophins regulate sequential changes in neurotrophin receptor expression by sympathetic neuroblasts. Neuron 13, 1359–1372.

Verdi, J.M., Birren, S.J., Ibanez, C.F., Persson, H., Kaplan, D.R., Benedetti, M., Chao, M.V., and Anderson, D.J. (1994). p75LNGFR regulates Trk signal transduction and NGF-induced neuronal differentiation in MAH cells. Neuron 12, 733–745.

Wajant, H., Grell, M., and Scheurich, P. (1999). TNF receptor associated factors in cytokine signaling. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 10, 15–26.

Yamashita, T., Tucker, K.L., and Barde, Y.A. (1999). Neurotrophin binding to the p75 receptor modulates Rho activity and axonal outgrowth. Neuron 24, 585–593.

Ye, X., Mehlen, P., Rabizadeh, S., VanArsdale, T., Zhang, H., Shin, H., Wang, J.J., Leo, E., Zapata, J., Hauser, C.A., et al. (1999). TRAF family proteins interact with the common neurotrophin receptor and modulate apoptosis induction. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 30202–30208.

Yoon, S.O., Casaccia-Bonnefil, P., Carter, B., and Chao, M.V. (1998). Competitive signaling between TrkA and p75 nerve growth factor receptors determines cell survival. J. Neurosci. 18, 3273–3281.
