
Chemistry and Physics of Lipids
102 (1999) 79–96

Neutral sphingomyelinase: past, present and future

Subroto Chatterjee*

The Johns Hopkins Hospital, 600 N. Wolfe Street, CMSC 6-124, Baltimore, MD 21287-3654, USA

---

### Abstract

Sphingomyelin and its metabolic products are now known to have second messenger functions in a variety of cellular signaling pathways. At the epicenter of the sphingomyelin — cell signaling pathway is a family of phospholipases called sphingomyelinases. These enzymes cleave sphingomyelin to produce ceramide and phosphocholine. Ceramide in turn serves as a lipid second messenger that induces a variety of cell regulatory phenomenon such as programmed cell death (apoptosis), cell differentiation, cell proliferation, and sterol homeostasis. Neutral sphingomyelinase (N-SMase) is a Mg²⁺ sensitive enzyme that can be activated by a host of physiologically relevant and structurally diverse molecules like tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), oxidized human low density lipoproteins (Ox-LDL), and several growth factors. Large amounts of ceramide accumulate in human fatty streaks and plaques along with Ox-LDL, growth factors, and proinflammatory cytokines in human atherosclerosis. A further role of ceramide and N-SMase in atherosclerosis was uncovered by the finding that Ox-LDL and TNF-α stimulated N-SMase activity. In turn, ceramide and/or a homolog serves as an important stress signaling molecule in signal transduction, which leads to apoptosis. Interestingly, an antibody against N-SMase can abrogate Ox-LDL and TNF-α induced apoptosis, and therefore may be useful for additional studies of apoptosis in experimental animals. Overexpression of recombinant human N-SMase in human aortic smooth muscle cells markedly stimulates apoptosis, presumably via the multimerization of the ‘death domain’. Since plaque stability is an integral aspect of atherosclerosis management, activation of N-SMase and subsequent apoptosis may be vital events in the onset of plaque rupture, stroke and heart failure. In contrast to these observations in human hepatocytes, TNF-α mediated N-SMase activation did not induce apoptosis. Rather it stimulated the maturation of sterol regulatory element (SRE) binding protein (SREBP-1). Moreover, a cell permeable ceramide was found to reconstitute the phenomenon above in a sterol-independent fashion. These findings provide alternate avenues for therapy of patients with hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis. The findings reported here suggest that N-SMase plays important cell regulatory roles and provide an exciting opportunity to further these findings to understand the pathophysiology of human disease states. © 1999 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Atherosclerosis; Apoptosis; Cell proliferation; Sterol homeostasis; Signal transduction

---

### 1. Introduction

Neutral sphingomyelinase (N-SMase) is a member of the sphingomyelinase family (E.C.3.1.4.12) that specifically catalyzes the hydrolytic cleavage

* Tel.: +1-410-614-2518; fax: +1-410-614-2826.
E-mail address: chatter@welchlink.welch.jhu.edu (S. Chatterjee)

0009-3084/99/$ - see front matter © 1999 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
PII: S0009-3084(99)00077-8

of sphingomyelin to ceramide and phosphocholine at a neutral pH optima (~7.4) (Chatterjee, 1993a; Spence, 1993; Liu et al., 1997; Pena et al., 1997).

Sphingomyelin → Ceramide + Phosphocholine

Previous interest in sphingomyelinase can be related to metabolic disorders like Niemann Pick disease, where the acid sphingomyelinase (ASMase) was found deficient. However, in the past decade there has been a renewed enthusiasm for research in this area. This is because the products of N-SMase action, namely ceramide and its breakdown product sphingosine, as well as phosphocholine, have been suggested to serve the role as 'lipid second messengers' in multiple signal transduction reactions leading to cell regulatory phenomena, such as cell proliferation, programmed cell death (apoptosis), and cell differentiation (Liu et al., 1997; Pena et al., 1997).

Additional physical/chemical studies have revealed that in Niemann-Pick disease (NPD) the level of cholesterol and sphingomyelin are increased as well. Sphingomyelin has a high affinity for cholesterol and this type of association has other physiological ramifications. For example, the activation of N-SMase not only releases the sphingomyelin from the cell surface, but it also results in the mobilization of cell membrane cholesterol to the interior of the cell surface where it is implicated in the regulation of sterol metabolism. These include regulation of cholesterol ester synthesis, cholesterol biosynthesis via hydroxymethyl glutaryl coenzyme-A (HMG-CoA) reductase, and the regulation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptors. Additional studies have revealed that sphingomyelinase may be implicated in the aggregation of LDL and thus, promote plaque formation in atherosclerosis.

This article serves as a review of N-SMase, past, present and future in regard to its function as a bio-modulator of several regulatory pathways as well as its implications in human health and disease. In this chapter, focus will be on the molecular characterization of N-SMase, its role in cholesterol homeostasis and its implication to plaque rupture in advanced atherosclerosis.

2. N-SMases: physical, chemical properties and localization

Several kinds of N-SMases have been reported (Chatterjee, 1993a; Spence, 1993; Okazaki et al., 1994; Alesenko and Chatterjee, 1995; Chatterjee et al., 1998a; Ghosh et al., 1998; Schissel et al., 1998; Simon et al., 1998). The classical N-SMase (~92 kDa) is a cell membrane associated enzyme, it has a neutral pH optima (7.4) and requires magnesium (Mg²⁺) or Mn²⁺ (5 μM) for optimal activation. EDTA (5 μM) inhibits the activity of N-SMase whereas, 5 adenosine monophosphate (10 μM) has no effect on the activity of the enzyme (Chatterjee, 1993a). This enzyme is insensitive to reducing agents such as β-mercaptoethanol and dithiothreitol (DTT). The physical, chemical properties of the recently cloned human N-SMase from the laboratory are similar to the human urinary N-SMase (Chatterjee et al., 1999a). This recombinant human N-SMase has been implicated in apoptosis and in sterol homeostasis. N-SMase has also been associated with the rat liver nuclear membrane whose physical/chemical properties are similar to the Mg²⁺ sensitive plasma membrane-bound N-SMase alone (Alesenko and Chatterjee, 1995). The function of this enzyme has not been established as yet. Another N-SMase reported cytosolic in origin, Mg²⁺ insensitive (Okazaki et al., 1994) was Mg²⁺ insensitive, however, its biological function remains to be established. The bacterial N-SMase has wide pH optima for activation and can hydrolyze a variety of phospholipids in addition to sphingomyelin. Another mammalian N-SMase not implicated in apoptosis has also been reported recently and described elsewhere in this book. N-SMase from rabbit skeletal muscle having a kDa of ~53 and insensitive to Mg²⁺ has been reported (Ghosh et al., 1998). In additional studies, macrophages (Schissel et al., 1998) and platelets treated with thrombin (Simon et al., 1998) were shown to secrete a hitherto uncharacterized sphingomyelinase. The macrophage derived SMase was shown to stimulate the aggregation of very low density lipoproteins (VLDL) and LDL. The supplementation of apoE in VLDL and LDL derived from apoE knock out

S. Chatterjee / Chemistry and Physics of Lipids 102 (1999) 79–96

| Ceramide | Phosphocholine |
| --- | --- |
| CH₃(CH₂)₁₂ | O |
| C═C | ↑ |
| H | CH |
| H | ²CH—¹CH₂—O—P—O—CH₂—CH₂—N(CH₃)₃ |
| OH | NH |
| | O⁻ |
| C═O |
| (CH₂)ₙ |
| CH₃ |

Fig. 1. Structure of sphingomyelin.

mice did not alter the in vitro aggregation of mouse lipoproteins, but sphingomyelin supplementation did (Jeong et al., 1998).

The preferred substrate for N-SMase action is sphingomyelin. This phospholipid has three components: (a) a long-chain sphingoid base backbone; (b) a fatty acid; and (c) a polar head group phosphocholine (Barenholz and Gatt, 1982). The sphingoid base in sphingomyelin is attached to the fatty acid at the carbon 2 position to form ceramide (Fig. 1). The fatty acid composition of sphingomyelin can vary from tissue to tissue and may also be dependent upon the age and diet (Frederickson and Sloan, 1972). Other studies (Bretscher, 1973) have suggested that most, if not all of the sphingomyelin is localized on the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane in most mammalian cells. This does not preclude the presence of sphingomyelin in additional internal membrane organelles, such as microsomes, nuclei, lysosomes and in mitochondria. The dietary sphingomyelin is most probably packaged with other lipids such as cholesterol in the intestine and liver and secreted as lipoprotein particles into the bloodstream. Thus, VLDL, LDL and high density lipoproteins (HDL) represent most, if not all, the sphingomyelin present in plasma (Chapman, 1980). Interestingly, lipoproteins have been shown to be associated with N-SMase and aggregate on the surface of endothelial cells that may foster the initiation as well as the progression of atherosclerosis (Schissel et al., 1998).

### 3. The isolation, physical/chemical properties of N-SMase

In this section three independent yet related procedures to isolate and purify human N-SMase will be described. The source of N-SMase can be biological fluids, solid tissues or cultured cells, and/or bacteria.

#### 3.1. Isolation and purification of human N-SMase from urine

In the past, procedures have been described in considerable detail to isolate N-SMase from human urine (Chatterjee and Ghosh, 1989). Briefly, about 10 l of fresh urine from normolipidemic males is collected in the presence of inhibitors of various proteases and sodium azide. Following centrifugation at 4°C at high speed (16 270 × g, 30 min), the supernatant is collected and subjected to concentration and to an ultrafiltration device (Millipore filter, PTG-GC-OMT) having a normal cut-off of 10 kDa. The concentrate is subject to a series of chromatography procedures, including Sephadex, isoelectric focussing and affinity chromatography employing sphingophosphocholine

Table 1  
Properties of neutral sphingomyelinase from various sources  

| Bacteria | Human urine | Recombinant human N-SMase |
|----------|-------------|---------------------------|
| **I. Physical chemical properties** |  |  |
| Molecular weight | N/A | 92500 | 44000 |
| pH optima | 4.2-8.0 | 7.4 | 7.4 |
| pI value | N/A | 6.5 | ~5.4 |
| Heat stability (50–55°C) | N/A | Unstable | Unstable |
| Effect of Mg²⁺ | Activatable | Activatable | Activatable |
| Detergent requirement | Triton X-100, Brij | Cutscum | Cutscum |
| Effect of 5'-adenosine | N/A | Ineffective | N/A |
| Monophosphate |  |  |  |
| Effects of trifluoroacetic acid | N/A | Inactive enzyme | N/A |
| Effect of EDTA, DTT | N/A | Ineffective | Ineffective |
| **II. Substrate specificity** |  |  |
| Sphingomyelin | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| Trinitrophenylamino- |  |  |  |
| Lauryl sphingomyelin | Yes | Yes | N/A |
| Phosphatidylcholine | High activity | Low activity | N/A |
| Phosphatidylglycerol | N/A | N/A | N/A |
| Saposin D | N/A | Ineffective | N/A |
| **III. Biological properties** |  |  |
| Cholesteryl ester synthesis | N/A | Increases | Increases |
| LDL receptors | N/A | Increases | N/A |
| SREBP-maturation | N/A | Increases | Increases |
| Programmed cell death (apoptosis) | N/A | Increases | Increases |

(CH-Sepharose). The properties of the soluble form of human N-SMase is compared in Table 1 with the other N-SMases.

3.2. Isolation of N-SMase from tissues

Either cultured cell pellets (~1 ml packed cell volume) and/or 1 g of freshly obtained tissue is washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) to remove red blood cells, and then homogenized in a 'Polytron' homogenizer for 10 s at 4°C in the presence of 0.2 mmol Tris glycine buffer (pH 7.4) containing 0.1% cutscum and protease inhibitors. Next, the homogenate is shaken at 4°C for 1 h, and centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 30 min. The supernatant is collected and is subjected to reextraction with the above detergent-containing buffer, centrifuged and the supernatants are pooled. It has been found that this procedure can provide solubilized preparations of N-SMase from a variety of tissues, including human brain tissue that consist of large amounts of lipid material. Such solubilized preparations of N-SMase can then be subjected to a variety of column chromatography procedures to purify or at least obtain partially purified, solubilized enzyme preparations for subsequent studies. Employing these methods, N-SMases in rabbit skeletal muscle have been partially purified and localized (Ghosh et al., 1998). These studies reveal that in rabbit skeletal muscle N-SMase was predominantly associated with the junctional transverse tubules. Activity gel analysis of the detergent-solubilized transverse tubule fractions revealed two distinct bands corresponding to molecular weight on the order of 92 and 53 kDa (Ghosh et al., 1998) proteins.

To further characterize the molecular nature of the 92 kDa protein and the 53 kDa protein, the peptide pattern following partial proteolytic digestion with SV-8 protease has been studied. Such studies revealed that the peptide maps derived from all three N-SMase, i.e., 92 kDa human urinary N-SMase, 92 and 53 kDa rabbit transverse

S. Chatterjee / Chemistry and Physics of Lipids 102 (1999) 79–96

Fig. 2. Hypothetical model depicting the role of neutral sphingomyelinase in signal transduction of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) in the stimulation of low density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor activity, synthesis of cholesteryl esters in human hepatocytes, apoptosis in human aortic smooth muscle cells and Ca²⁺ mobilization, and contraction in smooth muscle cells. TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor-α; SM, sphingomyelin; C, cholesterol; N-SMase, neutral sphingomyelinase; Cer, ceramide; ACAT, fatty acyl; CoA, cholesterol acyltransferase; HMG-CoA reductase, hydroxyl methyl glutaryl-coenzyme A reductase.

tubules of N-SMase are homologous. Similarly, phosphocholine was the major product obtained after hydrolysis of sphingomyelin with either the 92 or 53 kDa isoform of N-SMase. The effects of metal ions on altering the activity of 92 and 53 kDa N-SMase isoforms are also identical except that the 53 kDa N-SMase was insensitive to Mg²⁺ while Li²⁺ markedly stimulated the activity of the 53 kDa isoform.. These results suggest that the 53 kDa protein is presumably a proteolytic product derived from 92 kDa N-SMase in rabbit skeletal muscle T-tubule and/or share common DNA transcripts. Alternatively, these proteins may represent the first ever ortholog products. Orthologs are defined as genes evolving from a common ancestral N-SMase gene retaining common functions (Tatusov et al., 1997). The localization of N-SMase in skeletal muscle transverse tubule membrane is consistent with transverse tubule production of the sphingo-

myelin-derived second messenger, sphingosine. Since sphingosine has been shown to modulate calcium release from sarcoplasmic reticulum membranes (Chatterjee and Ghosh, 1989), the studies reveal that N-SMase/sphingosine signaling system may be a physiologically relevant regulator of calcium levels in skeletal muscle (Fig. 2). Further studies employing molecular probes developed in the laboratory recently will help elucidate structure/function relationships among the various isoforms of N-SMase (Chatterjee et al., 1999a).

Gatt (1976) and Rao and Spence (1976) simultaneously characterized N-SMase in rat liver and in human brain tissues. Gray matter was found to have the highest activity of N-SMase in addition to dopamine enriched areas in the brain. A survey of 40 human tissues has been pursued for N-SMase activity employing [¹⁴C]sphingomyelin as substrate and Western immunoblot assays. These

studies revealed that all 40 tissues had significant N-SMase activity. Human brain tissue represented the highest activity of N-SMase, which is in agreement with previous work (Rao and Spence, 1976). The studies also revealed that the N-SMases not only varied in regard to their physical/chemical characteristics, but also differed in regard to activation by metal ions such as lithium, magnesium, and copper. In addition, several N-SMase proteins were detected in animal tissues. Thus, N-SMase is an ubiquitous enzyme in mammalian tissues. The tissue specific expression of one or more ortholog of N-SMase may reflect its specific biological function for that particular tissue. The possibility has been considered that many of these orthologs of N-SMase may merely represent proteolytic products of the parent N-SMase effecting the degradation of N-SMase during post-mortem following collection of the autopsy tissue. However, freshly excised tissues from other mammals as well as human have provided similar results. These findings suggest but do not prove that several orthologs of N-SMase exist in mammalian tissues.

Previous studies on the subcellular localization of N-SMase have revealed that this enzyme is exclusively present on the external aspect of the plasma membrane in neuroblastoma cells (Das et al., 1984). The studies with cultured human proximal tubular (PT) cells (Chatterjee and Ghosh, 1989; Chatterjee, 1993a) employing: (i) fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated N-SMase antibody; (ii) subcellular fractionation; and (iii) cell surface protein ${ }^{125}$I-labeling revealed that most of the N-SMase is associated with the cell surface. However, it was not apparent as to whether the enzyme is localized on the outer aspect or the cytosolic aspect of the plasma membrane. Other investigators (Okazaki et al., 1994) have revealed that the Mg ${}^{2+}$ insensitive N-SMase in HL-60 cells may be cytosolic in origin. Since the vast majority of sphingomyelin is associated with the cell membrane, the contribution of the cytosolic N-SMase in the hydrolysis of sphingomyelin needs to be addressed further. Another N-SMase was localized with nuclear membrane in rat liver cells (Alessenko and Chatterjee, 1995) as well as rat ascites hepatoma cells (Tamiya-Koizumi et al.,

1989). A unique observation in these studies was that after hepatectomy, there was a marked increase in the activity of N-SMase in the liver cells subsequent to completion of cell proliferation (Alessenko and Chatterjee, 1995). Accompanying this observation was the transition of the nuclear membrane associated N-SMase to the nuclear chromatin, and the subsequent return following the proliferation of cells. The relevance of these preliminary findings remain to be explored. However, these studies may imply a potential role of N-SMase in cell proliferation in addition to apoptosis (see below).

### 3.3. Isolation of N-SMase from bacteria

In this study, IPTG (0.1 M) was added to induce fusion protein expression, and to express and purify GST-N-SMase fusion protein. Following induction with IPTG, the cells were harvested and the fusion protein was purified using glutathione Sepharose-4B chromatography. The N-SMase was subsequently released from the fusion protein by digestion with thrombin (Chatterjee et al., 1999a).

### 3.4. Molecular characterization of N-SMase

Employing expression cloning, a transcript size of 3.7 kB cDNA has been identified for human N-SMase having an open reading frame size of 1197 base pairs, which predicts a 397 amino acid polypeptide. The deduced amino acid sequence of N-SMase revealed several potential modification sites. For example, sites for glycosylation, tyrosine phosphorylation, cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylation, casein kinase 2 phosphorylation sites, myristoylation sites, and protein kinase C — phosphorylation sites were found. Hydropathy curve analysis of the recombinant N-SMase revealed the presence of a transmembrane domain. Moreover, the presence of the endoglycosylation site and several protein kinase C (PKC) as well as tyrosine phosphorylation sites may represent that domain of the N-SMase molecule that projects on the outside of the cell surface (Chatterjee et al., 1999a).

Interestingly, there was a lack of cystein residue in the N-SMase. This could explain the previously reported insensitivity of this enzyme towards reducing agents such as dithiothreitol and β-mercaptoethanol. The other physical/chemical properties of the recombinant N-SMase is shown in Table 1, and is similar to the properties of the N-SMase from human urine. The recombinant N-SMase, carried out the following biological activities that are similar to the N-SMase from human urine as well, these were: stimulation of cholesterol ester synthesis in cultured human skin fibroblasts; increased maturation of sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP-1) in human hepatocytes (see below) and stimulation of apoptosis in human aortic smooth muscle cells.

One of the exciting observations in regard to the molecular structure of the recombinant N-SMase was the presence of a novel ‘death domain’ that had homology to the tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) R-1 death domain and the Fas/Apo-1 death domain.

### 4. Biological function of N-SMase

In this section, the studies that lend support to several biological functions of human N-SMase in mammalian cells will be reviewed. First, it is demonstrated that this enzyme may be implicated in apoptosis. Second, it is reported that this enzyme may play a vital role in the regulation of cholesterol homeostasis. The relevance of these findings in regard to human disease, such as atherosclerosis is also discussed briefly.

#### 4.1. Biological role of N-SMase in apoptosis

Apoptosis, a form of programmed cell death that occurs when an internally encoded suicide program is activated as a result of either extrinsic or intrinsic signals, has been studied intensively in recent years (Tamiya-Koizumi et al., 1989; White, 1996). However, most of the knowledge to date still pertains, either to downstream occurrences in apoptosis (Reed, 1994) or to signal transduction pathways to apoptosis (Lazebrik et al., 1994;

Reed, 1994; Verheij et al., 1996; Wang et al., 1996a). Very little information is available on the early and most direct signal that may link extracellular stimuli to down-stream occurrences in apoptosis. Information regarding sphingomyelin hydrolysis and ceramide generation may provide such a link.

The sphingomyelin cycle has been described previously (Okazaki et al., 1989) in human leukemia (HL-60) cells, whereby early and reversible hydrolysis of sphingomyelin was observed in response to vitamin D3. This was shown to occur through activation of N-SMase and was accompanied by concomitant generation of ceramide (Okazaki et al., 1990). To date, the sphingomyelin cycle has been implicated in apoptosis in many cell systems (Jarvis et al., 1994) and in response to structurally diverse inducers such as TNF-α, anti-Fas antibody, IL-1B, and ionizing radiation (Kim et al., 1991; Obeid et al., 1993; Cifone et al., 1994; Haimovitz-Friedman et al., 1994; Hannun, 1994; Jayadev et al., 1994; Kolesnick and Golde, 1994; Jaffrezou et al., 1996). While it is now well appreciated that ceramide is an intracellular signal of TNF-α mediated apoptosis (Kim et al., 1991; Obeid et al., 1993; Kolesnick and Golde, 1994), the sphingomyelinases responsible for ceramide generation is controversial. This topic, most probably will be discussed by other authors in this series. Accordingly, this will not be discussed in detail here. The aim is to provide evidence that directly implicates N-SMase in apoptosis.

Previous studies have shown that TNF-α could activate both acid and N-SMase through different domains of the 55 kDa TNF receptor (Wiegmann et al., 1994; Adam et al., 1996a). Since investigators postulated that the A-SMase and N-SMase activation was responsible for TNF-α initiated apoptosis (Adam et al., 1996a; Santana et al., 1996), other investigators showed that A-SMase knockout mice expressed defects in radiation-induced ceramide generation and apoptosis in vivo (Santana et al., 1996). However, Higuchi et al. (1995) and Higuchi et al. (1996a) demonstrated that A-SMase-generated ceramide is needed but not sufficient for TNF-α-induced apoptosis. These data indicate that N-SMase plays an important role in apoptosis. However, there is increasing-

evidence that cytosolic N-SMase may be involved in apoptosis (Linardic and Hannun, 1994; Andrieu et al., 1996), by virtue of utilizing a hitherto cytosolic pool of sphingomyelin.

### 4.1.1. Antibody against N-SMase abrogates apoptosis

It was rationalized that if membrane-bound N-SMase is indeed involved in TNF-α-induced apoptosis in HL-60 cells, then the antibody against this enzyme (Chatterjee and Ghosh, 1989, 1993) may be able to abrogate this phenomenon. Accordingly, a series of experiments have been pursued to investigate the role of anti-N-SMase on TNF-α-induced apoptosis in HL-60 cells. The data suggest that: (1) antibody against human N-SMase abrogates TNF-α-induced apoptosis in HL-60 cells; and (2) antibody against human N-SMase blocked TNF-α-induced N-SMase activity. These data suggest that N-SMase plays an important role in TNF-α-induced apoptosis and membrane-bound N-SMase is an important positive regulator of apoptosis.

Three independent criteria were employed to assess TNF-α-induced apoptosis and its abrogation by antibody against N-SMase. First, employing the \[^3\]H]thymidine release method (Higuchi et al., 1996a,b), it was possible to detect DNA fragmentation induced employing 10 pM of TNF-α in 90 min. Second, agarose gel electrophoresis was employed to assess DNA laddering as an index of apoptosis (Reed, 1994). The latter method is considered to be a hallmark of apoptosis that involves the cleavage of DNA into 180–200 base nucleotide segments that exhibits a typical ladder pattern upon gel electrophoresis. Third, we employed the dual staining of cells with FITC conjugated annexin-V and propidium iodide (PI) and measured apoptosis by FACS analysis.

Mammalian cells have an asymmetric distribution of phospholipids across the bilayers of their plasma membranes. This asymmetry is maintained by an ATP-dependent aminophosphorylated translocase, and dissipated upon the activation of a non-specific lipid flipsite (Schlegel et al., 1996; Tang et al., 1996). In normal cells, phosphatidylserine (PS) is oriented on the inner aspect of the plasma membrane (Vermes et al., 1995). Such cells are FITC-Annexin-V stain negative but PI positive as it diffuses through the cell membrane and intercalates with the DNA. However, during the early stages in apoptosis membrane integrity is not compromised, but PS is oriented on the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane and therefore such cells can bind to annexin-Vas well as PI. In contrast, in the later stage of apoptosis, plasma membrane integrity is compromised and the DNA is fragmented. Such cells stain positively with both annexin-V and to a lesser extent with PI, which is representative of residual intact cell DNA. Using these three independent assays above a significant consistency with the studies was found. Interestingly, the antibody against N-SMase completely abrogated TNF-α-induced N-SMase activity in HL-60 cells, but not A-SMase. Although a cytosolic Mg²⁺-independent N-SMase has been reported in the literature (Okazaki et al., 1994), it is not certain as to whether N-SMase antibody would have access to this enzyme in HL-60 cells and contribute to apoptosis. Since, Chatterjee (1993a) and other investigators (Das et al., 1984) have shown that the Mg²⁺ sensitive N-SMase is located on the cell surface, the N-SMase antibody may directly bind to this enzyme and prevent apoptosis induced by TNF-α. This tenet is supported by the observation that C₂-ceramide bypassed the inhibitory effect of N-SMase antibody in regard to TNF-α-induced apoptosis with HL-60 cells. These observations indicate that N-SMase activation and ceramide generation may constitute key features in the signal transduction pathway leading to apoptosis.

Although the antibody against N-SMase completely inhibited TNF-α-induced N-SMase activity, it failed to block TNF-α-induced apoptosis completely. This may be interpreted to indicate that other isoforms of sphingomyelinase, cytosolic N-SMase or A-SMase may contribute to TNF-α-induced apoptosis. This argument is supported by the following observations. First, Zhang et al. (1997) found that when B. cereus sphingomyelinase was transfected into Molt-4 cells, N-SMase activity was increased and cell death was increased. In contrast, exogenously applied B. cereus sphingomyelinase was unable to induce cell
death. These investigators suggested that a signal transducing pool of sphingomyelin is distinct from the pool accessible to exogenous sphingomyelinase, which indicates that cytosolic N-SMase could be responsible for this pool of sphingomyelin hydrolysis (Linardic and Hannun, 1994).

Second, A-SMase can also be activated by TNF-α (Wiegmann et al., 1994; Adam et al., 1996a). A significant increase in A-SMase activity was observed many hours after incubation of cells with TNF-α. Third, additional studies have shown that T-lymphocytes from patients with A-SMase deficiency (NPD) were insensitive to UV light and/or irradiation induced apoptosis (Santana et al., 1996).

The binding of TNF-α via the 55 kDa receptor is associated with interactions between RAIDD and adaptive proteins such as (RIP) and (TRADD) due to interactions between ‘death domains’ and ‘death effective domains’. Such collective interactions may recruit procaspases such as the cpp32 cysteine aspartate proteases (caspase) (Nicholson, 1996). The proteolytic cleavage of procaspases to active caspase leads to apoptosis (Nicholson and Thornberry, 1997). In contrast, ceramide has been shown to activate cpp32 protease, but not interleukin β converting enzyme (ICE) in Jurkat cells (Mizushima et al., 1996). The preliminary studies employing site specific TNF-α mutants that specifically binds either to the 55 or to the 75 kDa TNF-α receptors (Han et al., 1999) suggest that in HL-60 cells, TNF-α is bound to the 55 and the 75 kDa receptor. However, only the 55 kDa receptor TNF-α mutant can stimulate N-SMase activity (Fig. 2). The preliminary studies also suggest that TNF-α can activate cpp32 protease in HL-60 cells that in turn may induce apoptosis. In contrast, preincubation of cells with N-SMase antibody abrogates TNF-α induced activation of cpp32. This may be explained on the basis that because the antibody against N-SMase abrogated N-SMase activity, an upstream event in the signaling cascade may have abrogated the downstream events, i.e. activation of caspases that eventually lead to apoptosis.

### 4.1.2. Overexpression of N-SMase in human aortic smooth muscle cells induces apoptosis

Human aortic smooth muscle cells transiently transfected with pHHI had a 5-fold increase in the activity of N-SMase compared to mock cDNA (pSVSPOT) transfected cells. This was accompanied by marked apoptosis as measured by FAC scanning of cells dually labeled with PI and FITC-conjugated Annexin-V. For example, cells transiently transfected with human recombinant N-SMase cDNA (pHHI) alone had a 5-fold increase in the percentage of apoptotic cells as compared to cells transfected with mock cDNA.

### 4.1.3. Oxidized low density lipoproteins, atherosclerosis, and apoptosis

Ox-LDL is defined as a modified LDL depleted of antioxidants and with extensive modification of proteins and lipid oxidation.

One of the major risk factors for coronary artery disease is hypercholesterolemia that is accompanied by elevated levels of cholesterol-rich LDL (Steinberg, 1997). The oxidation of LDL has been suggested to play a major role in atherogenesis (Steinberg, 1997). Apoptosis in human monocyte/macrophages exposed to Ox-LDL have been shown as well. This hypothesis is supported by the fact that Ox-LDL could be taken up by macrophages and A-SMC (Basu et al., 1979) that in turn can contribute to ‘foam cell’ formation as well as plaque formation. In addition, Ox-LDL compromises the barrier function of endothelial cells (Rangaswamy et al., 1997). Lipid peroxides, particularly oxysterols present in Ox-LDL, such as 7-ketocholesterol, 7-β-hydroxycholesterol, and 7-β-hydroperoxycholesterol can induce apoptosis and/or necrosis, have been recently suggested to promote the apoptotic and/or cytotoxic effects of Ox-LDL (Chisolm et al., 1994; Colles et al., 1996; Hardwick et al., 1996; Nishio et al., 1996a; Hughes et al., 1994). The apoptosis of A-SMC in a plaque can be a critical event in the initiation and/or progression of plaque rupture that in turn, can trigger the pathological sequelae leading to stroke, heart attacks, and even death. Since plaque stability is vital for the management of advanced atherosclerosis in man and because Ox-LDL was found associated with fatty streaks and
plaques in experimental animals fed high fat and cholesterol diets (Morton et al., 1986), it was sought to assess whether Ox-LDL could also induce apoptosis in A-SMC, and whether N-SMase may be implicated in this phenomenon.

As expected from previous studies (Chatterjee, 1992) and in agreement with the recent reports, Ox-LDL markedly induced apoptosis in A-SMC (Nishio et al., 1996; Kinscherf et al., 1997). This phenomenon appears to be specific as additional studies suggest that acetyl-LDL did not induce apoptosis (Cohen et al., 1992). The link between Ox-LDL induced apoptosis and the role of N-SMase was suggested by the studies employing multiple criteria. First, Ox-LDL but not LDL was found to activate N-SMase in a time and concentration-dependent fashion. Second, the levels of N-SMase and ceramide that have previously been implicated to induce apoptosis were increased in plaque intima and calcified plaque intima. Third, the antibody against N-SMase abrogated Ox-LDL induced apoptosis in A-SMC. Fourth, incubation of A-SMC with C₂-ceramide induced a significant increase in apoptosis. Previous studies have shown that C₂-ceramide can induce the activity of cpp32, protease (caspase-3), but not interleukin β converting enzyme (ICE) like protease in Jarkat cells (Mizushima et al., 1996). It was found that C₂-ceramide induced DNA fragmentation in A-SMC. These findings suggest that Ox-LDL induced apoptosis generated ceramide. Ceramide in turn activates caspases that ultimately lead to apoptosis.

When cells overexpressing N-SMase were incubated with Ox-LDL it stimulated apoptosis even further. Previously it was found that in human aortic smooth muscle cells, Ox-LDL preferentially stimulated the activity of N-SMase and subsequently apoptosis (Chatterjee et al., 1999b). Therefore, it was not surprising to observe that when cells transfected with mock cDNA were incubated with Ox-LDL, a marked increase in apoptosis occurred compared to cells transfected with mock cDNA alone. However, the finding that overexpression of N-SMase in human aortic smooth muscle cells induces apoptosis, is consistent with previous studies implicating the role of this enzyme in cell regulatory pathways leading to

apoptosis (Obeid et al., 1993; Santana et al., 1996). The findings indicate that the overexpression of N-SMase in aortic smooth muscle cells is accompanied by an increase in N-SMase enzyme activity and apoptosis without the presence of TNF-α or Ox-LDL as agonists. Previous studies suggest that multiligomerization of the death domain for Fas/Apo-1 and/or TNF-α-R1 could occur without the requirement for the respective ligands (Boldin et al., 1995). Accordingly, it is possible that a similar phenomenon occurs with human aortic smooth muscle cells overexpressing N-SMase. The identification of the death domain in N-SMase that has homology to the death domain of TNF-α-R1 and Fas/Apo-I, provides an opportunity to further study structure/function relationships in regard to agonist- (TNF-α, Fas/ Apo-I, Ox-LDL) dependent and agonist-independent induction in apoptosis.

While this manuscript was in preparation, another publication appeared in the literature claiming the cloning of a mammalian N-SMase (Tomiuk et al., 1998). The role of this N-SMase in sphingolipid signaling was also assessed. Upon comparison, several physical, chemical, and functional differences were noted between the two cloned N-SMases. First, there is no amino acid sequence homology between the two N-SMase. Second, the N-SMase has multiple sites for protein post-transcriptional modification and has a unique death domain. These features were absent in the report above (Tomiuk et al., 1998). Third, overexpression of N-SMase in human aortic smooth muscle cells stimulated apoptosis without the presence of an agonist such as Ox-LDL. However, Ox-LDL had an additive effect on apoptosis in cells overexpressing N-SMase. In comparison, the overexpression of N-SMase in HEK-cells and U937 cells did not induce apoptosis independent of the presence and/or absence of TNF-α (Tomiuk et al., 1998). There may be several reasons for the discrepancy in these two studies. One may be related to strategies in molecular cloning of these enzymes. It is possible that spontaneous apoptosis observed in cells overexpressing N-SMase in the study could be due to the oligomerization of the novel death domain absent in other reported N-SMase (Tomiuk et al., 1998). How-

ever, given the complexity of the N-SMase molecule and its vital role in regulating diverse cell signaling pathways, it is not surprising to find different molecular isoforms of N-SMase. It is predicted that in the future many additional novel N-SMases will be found that may have diverse biological functions relevant to human health and disease.

Aortic smooth muscle cells constitute the bulk of the normal vascular wall cells. In atherosclerosis, the contribution of these cells due to growth factor-induced proliferation is even higher, compared to the normal vascular wall (Ross, 1993). Therefore, apoptosis in these cells via agonist-dependent or agonist-independent N-SMase activation could constitute a novel mechanism contributing to plaque rupture. Since N-SMase activity is elevated in atherosclerotic plaque, it is tempting to speculate that N-SMase may be implicated in plaque rupture via apoptosis similar to the matrix metalloproteinases (Galis et al., 1995). A better understanding of apoptosis induced by N-SMase in vitro and in vivo may contribute significantly to the knowledge and in drug design to combat premature plaque rupture and the pathophysiological sequelae in advanced atherosclerosis.

### 4.2. Biological function of N-SMase in the regulation of cholesterol homeostasis

In mammalian systems, the homeostasis of cholesterol is controlled by human plasma LDL (Goldstein et al., 1995). LDLs are initially bound to a specific high-affinity receptor located within the coated pit on the cell surface. The receptor-bound LDL is internalized by absorptive endocytosis. Subsequently, LDL is transferred to the lysosomes where the ApoB is degraded and cholesterol is released. Cholesterol suppresses endogenous synthesis by suppressing the rate-limiting enzyme HMG-CoA reductase (EC 1.1.1.88). In addition, excess exogenous cholesterol is utilized for the endogenous synthesis of cellular membranes and cholesteryl esters by use of acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.26) (ACAT). The exogenous cholesterol may also suppress the LDL receptor, thereby completing the cycle involved in cholesterol homeostasis in the cell (Goldstein et al., 1995).

The mobilization of cholesterol from the cell surface or of exogenous LDL-derived cholesterol to the interior of the cells allows access to ACAT, a microsomal enzyme. The following discussion is aimed at providing evidence to support the notion that alteration in the cellular levels of sphingomyelin due to N-SMase action or the action of agonists, such as TNF-α and/or other agonists that stimulate N-SMase activity, can also modulate sterol and lipoprotein metabolism in cultured human fibroblasts and human hepatocytes in a sterol-independent fashion. Studies from this laboratory and others indicated that treatment of human skin fibroblasts with the bacterial and/or human sphingomyelinase markedly reduces the level of cellular sphingomyelin from 30 to 60% (Slotte and Bierman, 1988; Chatterjee, 1993b, 1994). This was accompanied by a time-dependent and N-SMase concentration-dependent increase in the synthesis of cholesteryl esters (Chatterjee, 1993b). These findings are substantiated by several additional observations. First, when the human fibroblasts were preincubated with the human urinary N-SMase and corresponding antibody, the stimulatory effects of N-SMase on the synthesis of cholesteryl esters was compromised. Second, when human hepatocytes were incubated with the recombinant N-SMase, there was a marked increase in the synthesis of cholesteryl esters presumably due to the availability of additional substrate, i.e. cholesterol, that in turn could activate ACAT (Slotte and Bierman, 1988). It was observed that the preincubation of human skin fibroblasts with an ACAT inhibitor compromised the stimulatory effects of N-SMase on the synthesis of cholesteryl esters (Galis et al., 1995). To reconstitute the effects of TNF-α and/or N-SMase in the stimulation of cholesteryl ester synthesis, skin fibroblasts were also incubated with a cell permeable ceramide, phosphocholine, and sphingosine. None of these compounds could serve as a surrogate for TNF-α and/or N-SMase in the phenomenon above. These observations imply that N-SMase activation alone may stimulate cholesteryl ester synthesis independent of the generation of ceramide. Clearly, further studies are required to elaborate on these findings.

Previous studies have also shown the direct effects of N-SMase on HMG-CoA reductase activity (Gupta and Rudney, 1991). These studies revealed that preincubation of human hepatoma cells (HEP-G2), human skin fibroblasts and rat intestinal epithelial cells resulted in a time and concentration-dependent decrease in HMG-CoA reductase activity. In contrast, the hydrolytic product of sphingomyelin, i.e. ceramide and phosphocholine had no effects on HMG-CoA reductase activity.

Previous studies revealed that (Chatterjee, 1993b) in cultured human skin fibroblasts, the N-SMase-mediated decrease in the cellular level of sphingomyelin was accompanied by an N-SMase concentration-dependent increase in the binding of \[^{125}\text{I}]\text{LDL}\), internalization and degradation (Chatterjee, 1993b). This phenomenon was abrogated by preincubation of cells with antibody against N-SMase. Moreover, heat-inactivated N-SMase was unable to induce the above effects of the native N-SMase and preincubation of cells with other phospholipases; namely phospholipase C and D did not alter the binding, internalization, and degradation of LDL. Collectively, these studies suggested that N-SMase had a specific effect in regard to LDL metabolism in cultured fibroblasts. In contrast, \(C_2\)-ceramide, phosphocholine, sphingophosphocholine, and sphingosine all failed to mimic the effects of N-SMase in regard to alteration in the binding, internalization and degradation of LDL. These studies implied that N-SMase treatment increased the number of LDL receptors in cultured human skin fibroblasts. However, it was not feasible to demonstrate the increase in the LDL receptor mRNA level or the maturation of SREBP-1 because their levels are too low in human skin fibroblasts.

Cultured human hepatocytes were therefore chosen to assess this phenomenon, further. Previous studies have shown that by virtue of binding to LDL receptor, LDL delivers cholesterol from the plasma to the cultured cells (Goldstein et al., 1995). The transcription of the LDL receptor gene is suppressed when sterols accumulate and induced when sterols are depleted. The sterol sensitivity in several mammalian cells is conferred by a 10-base pair sequences upstream of the LDL receptor gene known as the SREBP-1 (Dawson et al., 1988). The mature form of the SREBP-1 binds to the SRE and promotes transcription (Wang et al., 1994).

The activity of SREBP-1 is controlled by an extranuclear sequestration mechanism. Like nuclear factor-kB (NF-kB), SREBP-1 is synthesized as an inactive precursor that is proteolytically processed into a mature, transcriptionally active form that translocates to the nucleus. Unlike NF-kB, however, SREBP-1 proteolysis is induced by sterol depletion and suppressed by sterol accumulation. Both molecules are proteolyzed in response to treatment with TNF-α.

The importance of cholesterol homeostasis is underscored by the significant amount of redundancy that has been incorporated into its regulation. Cholesterol homeostasis is regulated at the transcriptional, translational, and enzymatic levels. The observation that feedback inhibition plays an important role in cholesterol homeostasis has stimulated much work in elucidating the role of sterols in this process (Goldstein and Brown, 1986). The data suggested a novel pathway by which SREBP-1 maturation could be effected in a sterol-independent manner (Lawler et al., 1998).

The findings indicate that TNF-α is capable of inducing SREBP-1 maturation in a sterol-independent manner in human hepatocytes. These findings are not a general response to growth factors, as they could not be recapitulated with EGF or PDGF. The maturation, nuclear translocation, and SRE binding activity of SREBP-1 in response to TNF-α closely paralleled the kinetics of N-SMase activation. Moreover, the effect of TNF-α on SREBP-1 maturation could be reconstituted with exogenously supplied bacterial and recombinant human sphingomyelinase or \(C_2\)-ceramide but could not be reconstituted with dihydroceramide, PL-A₂, or PL-D.

Preincubation with anti-N-SMase antibody effectively blocked TNF-α induced SREBP-1 maturation. Inhibition was not observed with pre-immune serum treatment and was relieved with increasing antibody dilution. Such findings are also confirmed by the ability of the antibody to inhibit TNF-α induced increases in cholesterol ester synthesis and N-SMase induced increases in

[^125I]LDL binding, internalization and degradation in human fibroblasts (Chatterjee, 1993b, 1994).

The addition of C₂-ceramide, or bacterial sphingomyelinase mimicked the effect of TNF-α on SREBP-1 maturation. In fact, C₂-ceramide and sphingomyelinase induced more extensive SREBP-1 maturation than TNF-α (Lawler et al., 1998). This may reflect the presence of a regulatory event upstream of ceramide generation that is effectively bypassed with exogenous ceramide or sphingomyelinase.

Interestingly, TNF-α, C₂-ceramide, and sphingomyelinase did not induce apoptosis in cultured human hepatocytes demonstrating that in these cells, SREBP-1 maturation is not part of the more general phenomenon of apoptotic protein hydrolysis. It has been speculated that cells undergoing apoptosis require cholesterol to maintain the integrity of their plasma membranes (Wang et al., 1996b). The 160 bp DNA ladder characteristic of cells undergoing apoptosis generally appears 4–8 h after an apoptosis initiating stimuli is introduced. The kinetics of SREBP-1 maturation presented in the study suggested that SREBP-1 proteolysis is a sufficiently early event to be involved in providing cholesterol to apoptotic cells. However, there was no evidence of apoptosis in the human hepatocyte cell line used in this study. It is possible that the sterol-independent induction of SREBP-1 maturation in hepatocytes is a physiologic process that does not require that apoptosis be induced. Alternatively, the two pathways may diverge before the cell has been committed to apoptosis suggesting a manner in which sterol-independent SREBP-1 proteolysis could be employed independent of the induction of apoptosis. Since a cell-permeable ceramide was shown to induce the proteolytic cleavage of cpp32, a ced-3 ICE like protease (Mizushima et al., 1996), the sterol-independent cleavage of SREBP-1 observed in the studies with human hepatocytes could also occur by ceramide generated by the TNF-α induced N-SMase activation. It is tempting to speculate that this pathway may represent a role for the apoptotic protease cpp32 and/or another caspase isoform in normal cellular homeostasis.

Taken together, the data implicates N-SMase in the TNF-α initiated signal transduction pathway leading to SREBP-1 maturation and provides evidence that ceramide is the second messenger employed. Further, it suggests a role for TNF-α in the regulation of cholesterol homeostasis. Additional studies are required to establish the role of cholesterol in apoptotic cells and the role of the different TNF receptors in SREBP-1 maturation. A better understanding of this pathway may yield novel targets for the pharmacological manipulation of serum cholesterol levels. Additional studies with human hepatocytes overexpressing N-SMase also reveal that there is a substantial increase in the SREBP-1 maturation, and consequently an increase in LDL receptors. Collectively, these studies suggest that the LDL receptors as well as cholesterol metabolism can be regulated independently of LDL via the N-SMase-ceramide cycle (Hamanaka et al., 1992; Lawler et al., 1998).

### 4.2.1. Future direction of research and clinical potential of N-SMase

Several studies employing cytokines, growth factors, and other agonists have revealed that activation of N-SMase may constitute a common reaction involved in a variety of situations involving human health and disease. This convergence of N-SMase activation via diverse agonists may be of great importance in the regulation of various physiological phenomena like insulin resistant diabetes, arthritis, inflammation, cancer, and atherosclerosis. The completion of the molecular cloning of a N-SMase that can induce apoptosis in cultured human aortic smooth muscle cells provides a novel avenue to investigate the structure/function relationship of N-SMase and apoptosis. In particular, the potential role of the death domain present in N-SMase and its relevance to programmed cell death can now be investigated. Since regulation of cholesterol homeostasis is one of the key events associated in cell proliferation, differentiation and cell death, a better understanding of the biochemical mechanisms involved in sterol-independent regulation of SREBP-1 maturation can open up novel avenues to treat patients who have high levels of cholesterol, such as the heterozygous form of hypercholesterolemia.

larly, judicious use of N-SMase inhibitors may be applied to abrogate premature plaque rupture in atherosclerosis. The finding that N-SMase can present itself in several isoforms opens up the opportunity to establish structure/function relationship of this enzyme in other physiological situations, like muscle relaxation and the regulation of other hormone-dependent reactions such as insulin-interaction with adipocytes, and its relevance to obesity and insulin resistant diabetes.

Efforts in the past have been to isolate and characterize the N-SMase, and assess its biological function in regards to sterol homeostasis as well as in apoptosis. The studies on apoptosis have been complicated by the fact that although ceramide has been implicated to serve as a lipid second messenger in the activation of programmed cell death via the involvement of caspases, it has not been localized and its physiological effects have not been reproducible in various laboratories. The recent molecular cloning of mammalian N-SMase that does not mimic any of the effects of N-SMase implicated in signal transduction reactions previously can serve as a control in various studies. On the other hand, the molecular cloning of the human N-SMase having a novel death domain and implicated in apoptosis may provide a valuable molecule to assess the role of this enzyme in apoptosis. This enzyme can also be effectively used to distinguish why in human hepatocytes, the overexpression of the enzyme does not cause programmed cell death (apoptosis). Rather, it induces SREBP-1 maturation.

comprising an 11 amino acid peptide called the N-SMase domain that specifically associates with N-SMase signaling has been identified (Adam et al., 1994). Adaptor protein factor activating N-SMase that binds to the TNF-α-R1 N-SMase domain motif that in turn promotes N-SMase activity has been identified (Adam et al., 1996b). Nevertheless, overexpression of factor activating N-SMase did not induce apoptosis in mammalian cells. Accordingly, the function of this molecule remains to be elucidated (Darnay and Aggarwal, 1997). Whether the TNF-α-R1 associates with the death domain of N-SMase and results in multimerization and consequently apoptosis is not known. On the other hand, a membrane distal region of the cytosolic domain of the TNF-α-R1 does associate with acid SMase. This death domain represents the 75 amino acid motif, and deletion or mutations of the death domain abolished TNF-α-induced apoptosis (Feinstein et al., 1995).

In the muscle, ceramide generated as a consequence of N-SMase activation may be degraded further via ceramidase action to form sphingosine and this molecule in turn may activate myocyte contraction (Ghosh et al., 1998) and Ca²⁺ mobilization (Ghosh et al., 1990).

The internalization of cell surface derived cholesterol due to N-SMase action may involve multiple cell regulatory phenomena such as inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase activity, stimulation of ACAT activity leading to an increase in cholesteryl ester synthesis. Additional studies have shown that N-SMase activation by TNF-α alone can stimulate the maturation of the SREBP-1 and its subsequent migration from the cytosol to the nucleus where it binds to the SRE and induces new LDL receptor synthesis. This model may be invoked to explain how sterol homeostasis can occur in the presence of increased cytosolic sterols, which would be predicted to suppress SREBP-1 maturation. The advantage conferred by the participation of N-SMase in cholesterol homeostasis is that it is capable of providing a short term solution to cholesterol starvation through mobilization of plasma membrane cholesterol and can facilitate long term compensatory mechanisms by promoting the maturation of SREBP-1.

5. Summary

Fig. 2 depicts the up-to-date understanding of N-SMase action in signal transduction reactions leading to both apoptosis, muscle contraction and the upregulation of LDL receptors via the maturation of SREBP-1. A prototype agonist such as TNF-α most probably binds to the 55 kDa receptor. Studies have shown that the cytoplasmic domain of TNF-α-R1 contains two distinct features that differentially associate with the N-SMase or A-SMase signaling. A membrane proximal region

In conclusion, the N-SMase may be a chemileon link protein that may have different physiological effects depending upon the isoform and the tissue. Therefore, it would be premature to generalize the effects of this enzyme and/or ceramide in all tissues. Additional studies on other isoforms of N-SMase will help elaborate the diverse biological effects of this molecule as well as open up new avenues of research in the near future.

# Acknowledgements

This work was supported for the past decade by NIH grants (DK31722, DK31625) and a SCOR Program Project Grant (1P50HL-47212). I would like to thank many of my collaborators, especially Dr Nupur Ghosh, Dr Joseph Lawler, Ms Hui Han, Ms Sandra Rollins, Ms Tavia Cleveland, Ms Ann Snowden, and Ms Irina Dobromilskaya. Finally, I would like to thank Mrs Tammy DeMoss for her skilful preparation of this review article and many other manuscripts that have emanated from our collaborative research efforts.

# References

Adam, D., Wiegmann, K., Adam-Klages, S., Ruff, A., Krohnke, M., 1994. A novel cytoplasmic domain of the p55 tumor necrosis factor receptor initiates the neutral sphingomyelinase pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 14617–14622.

Adam, D., Wiegmann, K., Adam-Klages, S., Ruff, A., Krohnke, M., 1996a. Functional dichotomy of neutral and acid sphingomyelinase in tumor necrosis factor signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 14617–14622.

Adam, D., Wiegmann, K., Struve, S., Kolannus, W., Schneider, S., Merzener, J., Kronke, M., 1996b. FAN is novel WDP protein, couples the p55 TNF-α-r to N-SMase. Cell 86, 937–947.

Alessenko, A., Chatterjee, S., 1995. Neutral sphingomyelinase: localization in rat liver nuclei and involvement in regeneration/proliferation. Mol. Cell Biochem. 143, 169–174.

Andrieu, N., Salvare, R., Levade, T., 1996. Comparative study of the metabolic pools of sphingomyelin and phosphatidylcholine sensitive to tumor necrosis factor. Eur. J. Biochem. 236, 738–745.

Barenholz, Y., Gatt, S., 1982. Sphingomyelin metabolism, chemical synthesis, chemical and physical properties. In:

Hawthorne, J.N., Ansel, G.D. (Eds.), Phospholipids. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 129–177.

Basu, S.D., Brown, M.S., Ho, Y.K., Goldstein, J.L., 1979. Degradation of low density lipoprotein: dextran sulfate complexes associated with deposition of cholesteryl esters in mouse macrophages. J. Biol. Chem. 254, 7141–7146.

Boldin, M.P., Mett, I.L., Varfolomeev, E.E., Chumakov, I., Shemer-Avri, Y., Camouis, J.H., Wallech, D., 1995. Association of the ‘death domain’ of the p55 tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) receptor and Fas (Apo) prompts signaling for TNF-α and Fas/Apo A-1 effects. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 387–391.

Bretscher, M.S., 1973. Membrane structure: some general principles. Science 181, 622–662.

Chapman, M.J., 1980. Comparative analysis of mammalian plasma lipoproteins. In: Segrest, J., Albers, J. (Eds.), Methods in Enzymology, vol. 128. Academic Press, New York, pp. 70–140.

Chatterjee, S., 1992. Role of oxidized low density lipoproteins in atherosclerosis: effects on smooth muscle cell proliferation. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 111, 143–147.

Chatterjee, S., 1993a. Neutral sphingomyelinase. Adv. Lipid Res. 26, 25–48.

Chatterjee, S., 1993b. Neutral sphingomyelinase stimulates human plasma low density lipoprotein receptor activity in human fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 268, 3401–3406.

Chatterjee, S., 1994. Neutral sphingomyelinase action induces signal transduction of tumour necrosis factor-a in increasing cholesteryl ester synthesis in human fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 879–882.

Chatterjee, S., Ghosh, N., 1989. Neutral sphingomyelinase from human urine: purification and preparation of monospecific antibodies. J. Biol. Chem. 264, 12534–12561.

Chatterjee, S., Ghosh, N., 1993. Neutral sphingomyelinase. Methods Enzymol. 26, 25–48.

Chatterjee, S., Han, H., Rollins, S., Cleveland, T., 1999a. Molecular cloning and expression of a novel human neutral sphingomyelinase: its potential role in apoptosis. J. Biol. Chem. (submitted).

Chatterjee, S., Gakenheimer, K., Han, H., Dey, S., Hutchins, G., Dobromilskaya, I., Snowden, A., 1999b. Oxidized low density lipoprotein stimulates apoptosis via activation of neutral sphingomyelinase in human aortic smooth muscle cells. J. Biol. Chem. (submitted).

Chisolm, G.M., Ma, G., Irwin, K.C., Martin, L.L., Gunderson, K.G., Linberg, L.F., Morel, D.W., DiCorleto, P.E., 1994. 7β-Hydroperoxycholest-5-en-3β-ol, a component of human atherosclerotic lesions, is the primary cytotoxin of oxidized human low density lipoprotein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 11452–11456.

Cifone, M.G., De Maria, R., Oncaioli, P.R., Rippor, M.R., Azuma, M., Lanier, L.L., Santoni, A., Testi, R., 1994. The sphingomyelin pathway in tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-1 signaling. J. Exp. Med. 180, 1547–1552.

Cohen, G.M., Sun, X.-M., Snowden, R.T., Dinsdale, D., Skilleter, D.N., 1992. Key morphological features of apoptosis may occur in the absence of internucleosomal DNA fragmentation. Biochem. J. 286, 331–334.

Colles, S.M., Irwin, K.C., Chisolm, G.M., 1996. Roles of multiple oxidized LDL lipids in cellular injury: dominance of 7β-hydroperoxycholesterol. J. Lipid Res. 37, 2018–2028.

Darnay, B.G., Aggarwal, B.B., 1997. Early events in TNF-α signaling: a story of associations and dissociations. J. Leuk. Biol. 61, 559–566.

Das, D.V.M., Cook, M.W., Spence, M.W., 1984. Evidence that neutral sphingomyelinase of cultured murine neuroblastoma cells is oriented externally on the plasma membrane. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 777, 339–342.

Dawson, P.A., Hofmann, S.L., van der Westhuyzen, D.R., Sudhof, T.C., Brown, M.S., Goldstein, J.L., 1988. Sterol-dependent repression of low density lipoprotein receptor promoter mediated by 16-base pair sequence adjacent to binding site for transcription factor sp1. J. Biol. Chem. 263, 3372–3379.

Feinstein, E., Kimchi, A., Wallach, D., Boldin, M., Varfolomeev, E., 1995. The death domain: a model having diverse cellular functions. TIBS 23, 342–344.

Frederickson, D.S., Sloan, H., 1972. Sphingomyelin lipidoses: Niemann-Pick disease. In: Stanbury, J.B., Wyngaarden, J.B., Frederickson, D.F. (Eds.), The Metabolic Basis of Inherited Disease, 3rd edn. McGraw Hill, New York, pp. 783–807.

Galis, Z.S., Muszynski, M., Sukhova, G.K., Simon-Morrissey, E., Libby, P., 1995. Enhanced expression of vascular matrix metalloproteinases induced by in vitro cytokines and in regions of human atherosclerotic lesions. Ann. Acad. Sci. 748, 501–507.

Gatt, S., 1976. Magnesium-dependent sphingomyelinase. Biochem. Biophys. Res.Commun. 68, 235–241.

Ghosh, T., Bian, J., Gill, D.L., 1990. Intracellular calcium release mediated by sphingosine derivatives generated in cells. Science 248, 1653–1656.

Ghosh, N., Sabbadini, R., Chatterjee, S., 1998. Identification, partial purification, and localization of a neutral sphingomyelinase in rabbit skeletal muscle: neutral sphingomyelinase in skeletal muscle. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 189, 161–168.

Goldstein, J.L., Brown, M.S., 1986. Regulation of the mevalonate pathway. Nature 343, 425–430.

Goldstein, J.L., Hopps, H.H., Brown, M.S., 1995. In: Scriver, Charles L., Beaudet, A.rthur A. (Eds.), The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, vol. 11, 7th edn. McGraw Hill, New York, pp. 1981–2030.

Gupta, A.K., Rudy, H., 1991. Plasma membrane sphingomyelin and the regulation of HMG-CoA reductase activity and cholesterol biosynthesis in cell cultures. J. Lipid Res. 32, 125–136.

Haimovitz-Friedman, A., Kan, C.-C., Ehleiter, D., Persuad, R.S., McLoughlin, M., Fuks, Z., Kolesnick, R.M., 1994. Interleukin-1 mediated PGE2 production and sphingomyelin metabolism. J. Exp. Med. 180, 525–535.

Hamanaka, R., Kohno, K., Seguchi, T., Okamura, K., Morimoto, A., Ono, M., Ogata, J., Kuwano, M., 1992. Induction of low density lipoprotein receptor and a transcription factor SP-1 by tumor necrosis factor in human microvascular endothelial cells. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 13160–13165.

Han, H., Wan, T.-C., Chatterjee, S., 1999. Antibody against N-SMase abrogates TNF-α-induced apoptosis in human leukemic (HL-60) cells. Mol. Cell. Biochem. (submitted).

Hannun, Y.A., 1994. Ionizing radiation acts on cellular membranes to generate ceramide. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 3125–3138.

Hardwick, S.J., Hegyi, L., Clare, K., Law, N.S., Carpenter, K.L.H., Mitchinson, M.J., Skepper, J.N., 1996. Apoptosis in human monocyte-macrophages exposed to oxidized low density lipoprotein. J. Pathol. 179, 294–302.

Higuchi, M., Singh, S., Jaffrezou, J.P., Aggarwal, B.B., 1996a. Acidic sphingomyelinase generated ceramide is needed but not sufficient TNF-induced apoptosis and nuclear factor-kB activation. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 23530–23537.

Higuchi, M., Singh, S., Aggarwal, B.B., 1995. Characterisation of the apoptotic effects of human tumor. Records factor: development of highly rapid and specific bioassay for human tumor records factor and lymphotoxin using human target cells.

Hughes, B., Mathews, B., Lenz, M.L., Guyton, J.R., 1994. Cytotoxicity of Ox-LDL to porcine aortic smooth muscle cells is associated with oxysterols, 7-keto-cholesterol and 7-β-hydroxycholesterol. Art. Thrombosis. 14, 1177–1185.

Jaffrezou, J.A., Levade, T., Bettails, A., Andrieu, N., Psezmkes, C., Meastre, H., Vermeeroch, S., Rouse, A., Laurent, G., 1996. Daunorubicin induced apoptosis: triggering of ceramide generation through sphingomyelin hydrolysis. EMBO J. 15, 2417–2424.

Jarvis, W.D., Kolesnick, R.N., Fornari, F.A., Traylor, R.S., Gewirtz, D.A., Grant, S., 1994. Sphingomyelin turnover induced by vitamin B3 in HL-60 cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 73–77.

Jayadev, S., Linardic, C.M., Hannun, Y.A., 1994. Identification of sphingomyelin turnover as an effector mechanism for the action of tumor necrosis factor-α and V-interferon. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 5757–5763.

Jeong, T.-S., Schissel, S.L., Tabas, I., Pownall, H.J., Tall, A.R., Jiang, X.-C., 1998. Increased sphingomyelin content of plasma lipoproteins in apolipoprotein E knockout mice reflects combined production and catabolic defects and enhances reactivity with mammalian sphingomyelinase. J. Clin. Invest. 101 (4), 905–912.

Kim, M.Y., Linardic, C., Obeid, L., Hannun, Y.A., 1991. Induction of apoptosis DNA damage and cell death by activator of the sphingomyelin pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 266, 484–489.

Kinscherf, R., Claus, R., Deigner, H.P., Nauen, O., Gehrke, C., Hermetter, A., Rußwurm, Daniel V., Hack, V., Metz, J., 1997. Modified low density lipoprotein delivers substrate for ceramide formation and stimulates the sphing-

gomyelin-ceramide pathway in human macrophages. FEBS Lett. 405, 55–59.

Kolesnick, R., Golde, D.W., 1994. The sphingomyelin cycle and the second messenger function of ceramide. Cell 77, 325–328.

Lawler, J., Ying, M. Jr, Diehl, A.M., Roberts, E., Chatterjee, S., 1998. Tumor necrosis factor-α stimulates the maturation of sterol regulatory element binding protein-1 in human hepatocytes through the action of neutral sphingomyelinase. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 5053–5059.

Lazebnik, Y.A., Kaufmann, S.H., Desnoyers, S., Poirier, G.G., Earnshaw, W.C., 1994. Cleavage of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase by a protease with properties like ICE. Nature 371, 346–347.

Linardic, C.M., Hannun, Y.A., 1994. Identification of a distinct pool of sphingomyelin involved in the sphingomyelin cycle. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 23530–23537.

Liu, B., Obeid, L.M., Hannun, Y.A., 1997. Sphingomyelinases in cell regulation. Cell Dev. Biol. 8, 311–322.

Mizushima, N., Koike, R., Kohsaka, H., Kushi, Y., Handa, S., Yagita, H., Miyasaka, N., 1996. Ceramide induces apoptosis via cpp32 activation. FEBS Lett. 395, 267–271.

Morton, R.E., West, G.A., Hoffl, H.F.L., 1986. A low density lipoprotein particle isolated from human atherosclerotic lesions is internalized by macrophages via non-scavenger-receptor mechanism. J. Lipid Res. 27, 1124–1134.

Nicholson, D.W., 1996. ICE/CED3-like proteases as therapeutic targets for the control of inappropriate apoptosis. Nat. Biotech. 14, 297–301.

Nicholson, D.W., Thornberry, N.A., 1997. Caspases: killer proteases. TIBS 2 299–306.

Nishio, A., Arimure, S., Watanabe, Y., 1996. Oxidised-LDL induces apoptosis in cultured smooth muscle cells: a possible role for 7-keto-cholesterol. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 223, 413–418.

Nishio, E., Arimua, S., Watanabe, Y., 1996. Oxidized LDL induces apoptosis in cultured smooth muscle cells: a possible role for 7-ketocholesterol. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 223, 413–418.

Obeid, L.M., Linardic, C.M., Karolak, L.A., Hannun, Y.A., 1993. Programmed cell death induced by ceramide. Science 259, 1769–1771.

Okazaki, T., Bell, R.M., Hannun, Y.A., 1989. Sphingomyelin turnover induced by vitamin D3 in HL-60 cells. Role in cell differentiation. J. Biol. Chem. 264, 19076–19080.

Okazaki, T., Bielawska, A., Bell, R.M., Hannun, Y.A., 1990. Role of ceramide as a lipid mediator of 1 α, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-induced HL-60 cell differentiation. J. Biol. Chem. 265, 15823–15831.

Okazaki, T., Bielawska, A., Domae, N., Bell, R.M., Hannun, Y.A., 1994. Characteristics and partial purification of a novel cytosolic magnesium independent neutral sphingomyelinase activated in the early signal transduction of α, 25-dihydroxy vitamin B3 induced HL-60 cell differentiation. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 4070–4077.

Pena, L.A., Fuks, Z., Kolesnick, R., 1997. Stress-induces apoptosis and the sphingomyelin pathway. Biochem. Pharm. 53, 615–621.

Rangaswamy, S., Penn, M.S., Saidel, G.M., Chisolm, G.M., 1997. Exogenous oxidized low density lipoprotein injures and alters the barrier function of endothelium in rats in vivo. Circ. Res. 80, 37–44.

Rao, B.G., Spence, M.W., 1976. Sphingomyelinase activity of pH 7.0 in human brain and a comparison to activity at pH 5.0. J. Lipid Res. 17, 506–515.

Reed, J.C., 1994. Bcl-2 and the regulation of programmed cell death. J. Cell Biol. 124, 1–6.

Ross, R., 1993. The pathogenesis of atherosclerosis: a perspective for the 1990s. Nature 362, 801–809.

Santana, P., Pena, L.A., Haimovitz-Friedman, A., Martin, S., Green, D., McLoughlin, M., Cordon-Cardo, C., Schuchmann, E.H., Fuks, Z., Kolesnick, R., 1996. A novel cytoplasmic domain of the p55 tumor necrosis factor receptor initiates the neutral sphingomyelinase pathway. Cell 86, 189–199.

Schissel, S.L., Jiang, X.-C., Tweedie-Hardman, J., Jeong, T.-S., Camejo, H.H., Najib, J., Rapp, J.H., Williams, K.J., Tabas, I., 1998. Secretory sphingomyelinase, a product of the acid sphingomyelinase gene, can hydrolyze atherogenic lipoproteins at neutral pH. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 2738–2746.

Schlegel, R.A., Callahan, M., Krahling, S., Pradhan, D., Williamson, P., 1996. Mechanisms for recognition and phagocytosis of apoptotic lymphocytes by macrophages [Review]. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 406, 21–28.

Simon, C.G., Chatterjee, S., Gear, A.R.L., 1998. Sphingomyelinase activity in human platelets. Thromb. Res. 90, 155–161.

Slotte, J.P., Bierman, E.L., 1988. Depletion of plasma-membrane sphingomyelin rapidly alters the distribution of cholesterol between plasma membranes and intracellular cholesterol pools in cultured fibroblasts. Biochem. J. 250, 653–658.

Spence, M., 1993. Sphingomyelinases. Adv. Lipid Res. 26, 1–25.

Steinberg, D., 1997. Low density lipoprotein oxidation and its pathobiological significance. Minireview. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 20963–20966.

Tamiya-Koizumi, K., Umekawa, H., Yoshida, S., Kojima, K., 1989. Existence of Mg2+-dependent, neutral sphingomyelinase in nuclei of rat ascites hepatoma cells. J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 106, 593–598.

Tang, X., Halleck, M.S., Schlegel, R.A., Williamson, P., 1996. A subfamily of P-type ATPases with aminophospholipid transporting activity [published erratum appears in Science 1996 Dec 6; 274 (5293):1597]. Science 272, 1495–1497.

Tatusov, R.L., Koonin, E.V., Lipman, D., 1997. A genomic perspective on protein families. Science 278, 631–637.

Tomiuk, S., Hofmann, K., Nix, M., Zumbansen, M., Stoffel, W., 1998. Cloned mammalian neutral sphingomyelinase: functions in sphingolipid signaling? Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 3638–3643.

Verheij, M., Bose, R., Lin, X.H., Yao, B., Jarvi, W.D., Grant, S., Birrer, M.H., Szao, E., Zon, L.I., Kyriakis, J.M., Haimovitz-Friedman, A., Fuks, Z., Kolesnick, R.N., 1996.

Requirement for ceramide-initiated SAPK/JNK signaling in
stress-induced apoptosis. Nature 380, 75–79.
Vermes, Haanen, C., Steffens-Nakken, C.H., Reutelingsperger,
C., 1995. A novel assay for apoptosis flow cytometric
detection of phosphatidylserine expression on early apoptotic cells using fluorescein labeled Annexin-V. J. Immunol.
Methods 184, 39–51.
Wang, X., Sato, R., Brown, M.S., Goldstein, J.L., 1994.
SREBP-1, a membrane-bound transcription factor released
by sterol-regulated proteolysis. Cell 77, 53–62.
Wang, H.-G., Rapp, U.R., Reed, J.C., 1996a. Bcl-2 targets the
protein kinase Raf-1 to mitochondria. Cell 87, 629–638.
Wang, X., Zelenski, N.G., Yang, J., Seakai, J., Brown, M.S.,


Goldstein, J.L., 1996b. Cleavage of sterol regulatory element
binding proteins (SREBPs) by cpp32 during apoptosis.
EMBO J. 15, 1012–1020.
White, E., 1996. Life, death, and the pursuit of apoptosis. Genes
Dev. 10, 1–15.
Wiegmann, K., Schutze, S., Machleidt, T., Witte, D., Kronke, M.,
1994. Apoptotic signaling through CD95 (Fas-apo-1)
activates an acidic sphingomyelinase. Cell 78, 1005–1015.
Zhang, P., Liu, B., Jenkins, G.M., Hannun, Y.A., Obeid, L.M.,
1997. Extension of neutral sphingomyelinase identifies distinct roles of sphingomyelin involved in apoptosis. J. Biol.
Chem. 272, 9609–9612.
