
Eur. J. Biochem. 267, 6476–6485 (2000) © FEBS 2000

# The myxochelin iron transport regulon of the myxobacterium Stigmatella aurantiaca Sg a15

**Barbara Silakowski**${}^{1,2}$, **Brigitte Kunze**${}^{1}$, **Gabriele Nordsiek**${}^{1}$, **Helmut Blöcker**${}^{1}$, **Gerhard Höfle**${}^{1}$ and **Rolf Müller**${}^{1,2}$

${}^{1}$GBF-Gesellschaft für Biotechnologische Forschung mbH, Braunschweig, Germany; ${}^{2}$Institut für Pharmazeutische Biologie, Braunschweig, Germany

The biosynthetic gene cluster of the myxochelin-type iron chelator was cloned from *Stigmatella aurantiaca* Sg a15 and characterized. This catecholate siderophore was only known from two other myxobacteria. The biosynthetic genes of 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid are located in the cluster (*mxcC–mxcF*). Two molecules of 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid are activated and condensed with lysine in a unique way by a protein homologous to nonribosomal peptide synthetases (MxcG). Inactivation of *mxcG*, which encodes an adenylation domain for lysine, results in a myxochelin negative mutant unable to grow under iron-limiting conditions. Growth could be restored by adding Fe${}^{3+}$, myxochelin A or B to the medium. Inactivation of *mxcD* leads to the same phenotype. A new type of reductive release from nonribosomal peptide synthetases of the 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid bis-amide of lysine from MxcG, catalyzed by a protein domain with homology to NAD(P) binding sites, is discussed. The product of a gene, encoding a protein similar to glutamate-1-semialdehyde 2,1-aminomutases (*mxcL*), is assumed to transaminate the aldehyde that is proposed as an intermediate. Further genes encoding proteins homologous to typical iron utilization and iron uptake polypeptides are reported.

**Keywords:** iron chelator; myxobacteria; myxochelin; peptide synthetase; *Stigmatella aurantiaca*

Myxobacteria are assigned to the gram-negative soil bacteria which belong to the δ-group of the *Proteobacteria* [1]. In comparison with most other bacteria they show some unique features: their ability to glide in swarms, to feed cooperatively, to form fruiting bodies upon starvation [2,3] and their ability to produce a wide variety of secondary metabolites with different biological activities [4,5].

The biogenesis of natural products biosynthesized by hybrids of polyketide synthases (PKSs) and nonribosomal polypeptide synthetases (NRPS) in myxobacteria has been studied recently. Biosynthetic gene clusters of the electron transport inhibitor myxothiazol [6] and the microtubulin stabilizing epothilones [7,8] have been reported to reveal a variety of unique features, which had not otherwise been reported from secondary metabolite forming microorganisms. From *Stigmatella aurantiaca* Sg a15, which produces the electron transport inhibitors myxalamid, stigmatellin and aurachin [5], fragments of the stigmatellin and the myxalamid biosynthetic gene clusters have been cloned [9].

NRPSs and/or PKSs have also been shown to be responsible for the biosynthesis of several small iron-chelating molecules, that are termed siderophores (e.g. enterobactin in *Escherichia coli* [10], yersiniabactin in *Yersinia pestis* [11] and mycobactin in *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* [12]). Siderophores are released from the cells under iron-deficient growth conditions and can subsequently be taken up as ferric siderophores by specific transport systems; they supply the iron that is essential for growth [13].

Very little is known about iron acquisition and transport in myxobacteria. Two iron chelators have been isolated, the hydroxamate-type nannochelin from *Nannocystis exedens* Na e485 [14] and the catecholate-type myxochelin A [15] and myxochelin B from *Angiococcus disciformis* An d30 and *Myxococcus xanthus* Mx x48 [16] (Fig. 1). All catecholate-type siderophores contain 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid. The biosynthesis of 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid has been studied in *E. coli*; the biosynthetic genes have been cloned and found to be encoded in a gene cluster [17], which is regulated by the ferric uptake regulation (FUR) protein [18]. In *E. coli*, the NRPS EntF has been shown to be responsible for the formation of enterobactin [10]. The complex condensation reaction follows a unique mechanism; EntF represents a NRPS harboring only one module with adenylation (A), condensation (C), peptidyl carrier protein (PCP) and thioesterase (TE) domains. Whereas in typical NRPS proteins one module is responsible for the activation, condensation and modification of each single amino-acid unit [19,20], EntF activates serine three times step by step, condenses it with 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid bound to the PCP domain of EntB and subsequently assembles enterobactin on the TE domain of the protein [10].

This study deals with the genetics and biochemistry of myxochelin biosynthesis. We report the myxochelin (*mxc*) gene cluster from *S. aurantiaca* Sg a15 encoding proteins with significant similarity to the biosynthetic proteins of 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid in *E. coli*. A NRPS, located downstream of these genes (MxcG), and the isochorismate synthase MxcD are shown to be essential for myxochelin biosynthesis by inactivation of the encoding genes. The protein domains of MxcG can be correlated with the structure of myxochelin and

**Correspondence:** R. Müller, GBF – Gesellschaft für Biotechnologische Forschung mbH, Abteilung NBI/MX, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.  
Fax: +49 531 618 1284, Tel.: +49 531 618 1420, E-mail: ROM@GBF.DE  

**Abbreviations:** FUR, ferric uptake synthases; NRPS, nonribosomal peptide synthetases; PCP, peptidyl carrier protein; PKS, polyketide synthase; TE, thioesterase.

**Note:** the novel nucleotide sequence reported here has been submitted to the GenBank database under accession number AF299336.  
(Received 17 July 2000, revised 30 August 2000, accepted 31 August 2000)

Myxochelin biosynthetic gene cluster (Eur. J. Biochem. 267) 6477

concentration of 5%. The conditions using the Eppendorf Gradient Mastercycler were as follows: 15 min 95 °C for activation of the polymerase, denaturation for 30 s at 95 °C, annealing for 30 s at 57–60 °C and extension for 45 s at 72 °C; 30 cycles and a final extension for 10 min at 72 °C. PCR products were purified with the High Pure PCR Product Purification Kit (Roche Molecular Biochemicals). Screening of the cosmid library of *S. aurantiaca* Sg a15 [9] was performed as described previously [6]. The following primer pairs were used to identify cosmid CA5: M019: 5′-CCCTGCCCCGGCTA-CCGCGGA-3′ and M020: 5′-GATTTTGTCCGCCCGGAAC-C-3′; to identify cosmid CA5a C9: 5′-GAGGCTGCCCACG-ACATTCC-3′ and C10: 5′-CGTGGCTGCCCCTCCTGAT-3′ were used. Clones giving amplification products of the expected size with primers M019/M020 were counterselected with primer pair C9/C10 to identify a cosmid with minimized overlap.

Sequencing of cosmids CA5 and CA5a was performed using a shotgun approach as follows. Sheared fragments of the two cosmids were subcloned separately into pTZ18R. At least 500 clones were selected from each cosmid library, plasmid DNA prepared (Millipore) and sequenced using DYEnamic™ ET terminator cycle sequencing premix Kit (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) and UPO/RPO-primer (MWG-BioTech). The gels were run on ABI-377 sequencers and data were assembled and edited using the xGAP program [23]. Southern analysis of DNA was performed using the standard protocol for homologous probes of the DIG High Prime DNA Labeling and Detection Starter Kit II (Roche Molecular Biochemicals). All other DNA manipulations were performed according to standard protocols [24]. Amino acid and DNA alignments were carried out using the programs CLUSTAL w [25] and the LASERGENE software package (DNASTAR Inc.).

reveal several new biosynthetic features. Additional ORFs putatively encoding proteins involved in iron chelator biosynthesis, transport and utilization are reported.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Bacterial strains and culture conditions

*E. coli* strains and *S. aurantiaca* Sg a15 and its descendants were cultured as described previously [21]. For complementation of growth of mutants CBS11 and CBS25 0.4 μM Fe³⁺-EDTA was added to tryptone medium (tryptone/Fe³⁺ medium). Alternatively, purified myxochelin A or B (1 μg·mL⁻¹) were added to the medium.

### DNA manipulations, analysis, sequencing and PCR

Chromosomal DNA of *S. aurantiaca* strains was prepared as described previously [22]. PCR was carried out using HotStarTaq Polymerase (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Dimethylsulfoxide was added to a final

Using the primers BSSEQ14: 5′-GGTCGCGCGCTGGCGCT-CTG-3′ and BSSEQ16: 5′-GGCGCACGGAAAGCCGCCAGC-3′ and pCBS4 [26] as template DNA, a fragment of *mxcG* (≈ 1.2 kbp in size) was amplified and cloned into pCR2.1-TOPO using the TOPO TA Cloning Kit (Invitrogen). The resulting plasmid pCBS11 was electroporated after denaturation of the DNA into *S. aurantiaca* Sg a15 [6] resulting in mutant CBS11. All other *S. aurantiaca* Sg a15 mutants were constructed using the same approach. The *mxcD* mutant CBS25 was obtained after electroporation with plasmid pCBS25, which is a pCR2.1-TOPO derivative harboring a 519-bp fragment, amplified by primers C9: 5′-GAGGCTGCCCACGA-CATTCC-3′ and C10: 5′-CGTGGCTGCCCCTCCTGAT-3′ from cosmid CA5.

Fig. 1. Structures of myxochelin A and B.

Myxochelin  
A: R = OH  
B: R = NH₂  

$\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$ $\rightarrow$

mx$cA$ $B$ $C$ $D$ $E$ $F$ $G$ $AroA_{A5}$ $mxCH$ $I$ $K$ $L$

Cosmid CA5a  
Cosmid CA5  

2 kbp

Fig. 2. Map of the myxochelin regulon of *S. aurantiaca* Sg a15. Localization and overlap of cosmids CA5 and CA5a are indicated by lines.

Adenylation domain of MxcG

| core A1 | core A2 | core A3 | core A4 | core A5 |
|---------|---------|---------|---------|---------|
| LSYxEL  | LKAGxAyLPID | LAYxxYTSGTTGxPKG | FDxS | NxYGPTE |
| T       | V L      | S       |         |         |
| MxcG    | MSYREL   | LFSGAGYLPLD | LAYVIYSTGSTGQPNG | NTYGPTe |
| EntF    | FSYREM   | VEAGAAYLPLD | TAYIIFTSGSTGVPKG | NLYGPTE |
| DhbF    | VNYRKL   | LKTGAAYLPLD | PAYIIYSTGSTGRPKG | NLYGPTE |
| AcmB    | LTYREL   | LKAGAAYLPLD | PAYVIYSTGSTGVPKG | NMYGITE |

| core A6 | core A7 | core A8 | core A9 | core A10 |
|----------|----------|----------|----------|-----------|
| GELxIxGxGLARGYL | YRTGDL | GRxDxQVKIRGXRIELGEIE | LPxYMVP | NGKVDR |
| V        | K        |          | I        | L         |
| MxcG     | GELYLLGGGLARGYL | YRTGDK | GRVDDEFKISGHRIDPTEIE | LPAAMVP | TGKLDR |
| EntF     | GDLYLTGIQLAQGYL | YRTGDL | GRSDDQLKIRGQRIELGEID | LPPHMVP | NGKLDR |
| DhbF     | GELYIAGTGLARGYF | YRTGDQ | GRADHQIKIRGFRIELGEID | LPDYMVP | NGKLDR |
| AcmB     | GELYVAGPGLARGYL | YRTGDL | GRADHQVKVRGFRIELGEVE | LPEHMVP | NGKLDR |

Condensation domain of MxcG

| core C1 | core C2 | core C3 | core C4 | core C5 | core C6 | core C7 |
|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|
| SxAQxRLWxL | RHexLRTxF | MHHxISDGWS | YxDFAW | VGxFVNTLQxR | NQDYPFE | RDxSRNPL |
| MY        |          | V        | Y       | I        | QA       | H Y      |
| MxcG      | SAAQHGIWLG | EAEALHVRF | IHHIAMDGFG | ELDRTFW | PCMMNIVPLR | HLRYRYE |
| EntF      | VAAQPGIWMA | QADTLRMRF | YHHLLVDGFS | QRDAAFW | TGPVLNVLPGL | HQRYDAE |
| DhbF      | TGAQTGIWFA | EAESLHVRF | IHHIAIDGFG | EKDRQFW | PAMVMNLLPLR | HHKYRHE |
| AcmB      | TAAQREIWLG | EAQALHVRF | YHHIVMDAFG | TGDRAYW | PGTASNVLPLR | HQRYRAE |
| x         | GI        | G        | EAx      | HV       | x         | xx FG    |
|           |           |          |          |          | x         | RF       |
|           |           |          |          |          | P         | xx x P   |
|           |           |          |          |          |           | xR Rx    |

Carrier protein domains

| Ppant core | core |
|------------|------|
| DxFFxLGGDSL | NATAAT |
| H I         | T     |

| MxcG | DFFELGGQSL | mxcB -36bp | CAATTA |
|------|-------------|------------|--------|
| EntF | ADFFALGGHSL | mxcB -42bp | CAATAT |
| DhbF | DSFFELGGHSL | mxcB -54bp | GATAAT |
| AcmB | DFFELGGHSL  | mxcB -60bp | GATTAT |
| MxcF | ENLLECGLDSI |            |        |

Reductase domains

| core R1 | core R2 | core R3 | core R4 | core R5 | core R6 | core R7 |
|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|----------|
| VLLTGATGYLG | VxxxVRA | GDL | VYPYxxLRxPNVxxT | GYxxSKWxxE | RPG | LExxVGFLxxp |
| MxcG | VLLTGATGFVG | VVCLVRA | ADL | VREYGSLQATNVRGT | GYQQSKWAAE | YCVGQGLLQRP |
| SafA | VLLTGATGYLG | VYCLVRA | GDL | VYPYSALRGPNVHGT | GYTGSKWVAE | n.D. | YLVDIGFLQRP |
| HetM | VFLTGGTGFLG | VYCLVRA | GDL | VFPYSALKAAANVLGT | GYSQTKWAAE | n.D. | YLIQTGFLTLA |
| Lys2 | VFVTGVTFGLG | VFAHVRA | GDL | VYPYAKLRDPNVIST | GYGQSKWAAE | n.D. | n.D. |

Consensus sequence for lysine-activation

| 235 | 236 | 239 | 278 | 299 | 301 | 322 | 330 |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| MxcG | D   | A   | E   | D   | I   | G   | T   | V   |
| BacB | D   | A   | E   | S   | I   | G   | S   | V   |
| MbtE | D   | V   | A   | H   | P   | G   | F   | I   |
| MbtF | D   | A   | Q   | D   | A   | G   | C   | V   |
| Lysine consensus | D   | A   | E   | D/S | I   | G   | T/S | V   |

© FEBS 2000

Myxochelin biosynthetic gene cluster (Eur. J. Biochem. 267) 6479

Table 1. Proteins encoded in the myxochelin regulon.

| Name and size of protein (amino acids) | Postulated function | % identity/similarity to protein | PID of protein with similarity/GC bias in 1st/2nd/3rd position |
|----------------------------------------|---------------------|---------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| MxcA                                  | NADP dependent alcohol oxidoreductase | 24/39 to NorA of *Aspergillus flavus* (norsolorinic acid reductase) | G6093525 |
|                                      |                     |                                 | 73/51/82 |
| MxcB                                  | Removal of iron from siderophore complex | 36/52 to ViuB of *Vibrio cholerae* (vibriobactin utilization protein) | G2833472 |
|                                      |                     |                                 | 68/49/75 |
| MxcC                                  | 2,3-dihydro-2,3-dihydroxy benzoic acid dehydrogenase | 39/52 to EntA of *E. coli* | G1778513 |
|                                      |                     |                                 | 67/52/82 |
| MxcD                                  | Isochorismate synthase | 36/49 to EntC of *E. coli* | G585097 |
|                                      |                     |                                 | 67/51/79 |
| MxcE                                  | 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid-AMP ligase | 48/63 to EntE of *E. coli* | G2506183 |
|                                      |                     |                                 | 67/48/79 |
| MxcF                                  | Isochorismatase – aryl carrier protein | 43/62 to EntB of *E. coli* | G119372 |
|                                      |                     |                                 | 65/45/85 |
| MxcG                                  | Peptide synthetase | Compare Fig. 3 | 73/50/80 |
| AroA<sub>A5</sub>                      | DAHP synthase | Type II DAHP synthase [26] | |
| MxcH                                  | Membrane receptor | 24/37 to BfeA of *Bordetella pertussis* (ferric enterobactin receptor) | G538279 |
|                                      |                     |                                 | 67/47/86 |
| MxcI                                  | Unknown | 34/50 to unknown protein from *D. radiodurans* | AAF11022 |
|                                      |                     |                                 | 58/49/86 |
| MxcK                                  | Efflux pump | 29/45 to CmlR of *S. lividans* (chloramphenicol resistance protein) | P31141 |
|                                      |                     |                                 | 62/52/87 |
| MxcL                                  | Aldehyde amino-transferase | 30/48 to HemL of *E. coli* (glutamate-1-semialdehyde amino transferase) | G2506179 |
|                                      |                     |                                 | 64/43/91 |

Identification of myxochelin A and B as iron chelators of *S. aurantiaca*

A 90-L fermentation of *S. aurantiaca* DW4/3-1 in the presence of 1 vol.% Amberlite XAD-16 adsorber resin for *in situ* adsorption of excreted metabolites was harvested by centrifugation. Adsorber resin and wet cell mass were extracted with methanol. The methanol was evaporated from the extract and the aqueous phase extracted with ethyl acetate. The crude extract (29 g) was first separated by chromatography on Sephadex LH 20 (MeOH) and then RP-18 silica gel (MeOH/H<sub>2</sub>O 60 : 40). Fractions containing myxochelins according to HPLC analysis were pooled and evaporated *in vacuo* to give 323 mg crude material. A portion of 56 mg was further purified by HPLC on Eurosil Bioselect 100, C-18, 10 μm, solvent system acetonitrile/water 2 : 8 with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, detection 210 nm, yielding 28 mg pure myxochelin B.

<sup>1</sup>H-NMR (300 MHz, CD<sub>3</sub>OD/10% DCl in D<sub>2</sub>O, 9 : 1): δ = 1.55 (m, 2H), 1.7 (m, 2H), 1.8 (m, 2H), 3.2 (m, 2H), 3.40 (t, J = 6.7 Hz, 2H), 4.45 (sept, J = 4.5 Hz, 1H), 6.73 (t, J = 8.0 Hz, 1H), 6.75 (t, J = 8.0 Hz, 1H), 6.98 (dd, J = 8.0,

HPLC with DAD and ESI/MS detection (Perkin-Elmer Sciex, API 100 LC/MS-System; Nucleosil 120-5, C-18, Machercy Nagel, 2 × 125 mm solvent gradient acetonitrile/water 10 : 90 to 35 : 65 in 15 min, pos. ions) R<sub>t</sub> = 11.6 min, m/z = 404 (M + H<sup>+</sup>). A small peak in the HPLC of the crude extract with R<sub>t</sub> = 14.0 was identified by UV, MS, m/z = 405 (M + H<sup>+</sup>) and comparison with an authentic sample as myxochelin A [15].

Production and analysis of myxochelins and further secondary metabolites from *S. aurantiaca* Sg a15 and its descendants

For myxochelin production cultures grown in tryptone/Fe<sup>3+</sup> medium were centrifuged, washed twice with 50 mm iron-free Hepes buffer and resuspended. Aliquots of the cell suspension were inoculated in a low-iron skim milk powder liquid medium to give a cell density of 1 × 10<sup>7</sup> cells. The production medium was composed of 0.4% iron-free skim milk powder, 0.3% iron-free soluble starch, 0.2% MgSO<sub>4</sub>x7H<sub>2</sub>O, 0.05% CaCl<sub>2</sub>x2H<sub>2</sub>O,

Fig. 3. Alignments of conserved protein domains and regulatory sites. Core regions have been defined by Konz & Marahiel [19]. Differences to the core regions are indicated in bold. In the alignment of the condensation domains in the lower line, ‘x’ indicates that amino acids differing from the core region are used in at least three of the four aligned sequences. Bold letter amino acids are used to indicate that this amino acid is used in at least three of the four aligned sequences. ND indicates that the core could not be identified. ‘x’ in the core sequences stands for any amino acid. The amino-acid positions of the specificity regions in most A domains have been defined by Stachelhaus *et al.* [28] and Challis *et al.* [29]. The FUR binding site is defined in Escolar *et al.* [33]. Nucleotide positions refer to the adenine of the start codon of *mxcB*. EntF: Enterobactin synthetase *Escherichia coli*, DhbF: probable serine activating enzyme *Bacillus subtilis*, AcmB: actinomycin synthetase II *Streptomyces chrysomallus*, SafA: saframycin synthetase *Myxococcus xanthus*, HetM: probable polyketide synthase *Anabaena* spec., Lys2: α-aminoadipic acid reductase *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*, MbtE/F: mycobactin synthetase *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*.

50 mm Hepes buffer and 1 mL·L⁻¹ of an iron-free standard trace element solution. The complete medium was adjusted to pH 7.2. The medium for the mutants additionally contained 60 μg·mL⁻¹ kanamycin. To deplete the skim milk powder and the soluble starch of their metal ions, a concentrated solution of these components was stirred with 20% (w/w) of the chelating resin Chelex 100 (Bio-Rad Laboratories) for 1 h. After removal of the chelating resin, the solution was diluted and supplemented with the other components of the medium.

One hundred milliliter batch cultures in 250-mL conical flasks were incubated at 30 °C on a gyratory shaker at 160 r.p.m. for 4–6 days. One day before harvesting, 1% of the neutral adsorber resin XAD-16 (Rohm & Haas) was added to the medium. After cultivation, myxochelins and other secondary metabolites were extracted from the cell mass together with the XAD twice, using methanol as solvent.

The myxochelins were analyzed in aliquots of concentrated methanol extracts by diode-array detection HPLC analysis using a Hewlett-Packard 1100 series instrument. The conditions for the chromatography of the extracts were as follows: column ET 125 × 2 mm and precolumn Nucleosil 120-5-C18; solvent gradient water (A)/acetonitril (B) (A and B contained 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid), 15% B at 0 min to 30% B at 12 min to 83% B at 20 min; flow rate: 0.3 mL·min⁻¹; detection at 252 nm. Aurachins and further secondary metabolites were analyzed as described previously [26].

### RESULTS

During screening for genes involved in secondary metabolite formation in *S. aurantiaca* Sg a15, we found three 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate synthases to be present in the strain [26]. One of the two type II 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate synthases (*AroA*₅) is encoded on cosmid CA5 and is involved in the biosynthesis of the electron transport inhibitors aurachines [26]. Sequencing around *aroA*₅ revealed the presence of several ORFs as indicated in Fig. 2. Sequence alignments of the deduced proteins showed that MxcA-L represent proteins with the putative functions listed in Table 1 (compare Fig. 2). The encoding genes follow the typical GC bias of GC-rich microorganisms [27].

#### 2,3-Dihydroxybenzoic acid biosynthesis

MxcCDEF are similar to proteins involved in the biosynthesis of 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid, which is a typical structural moiety of iron chelators of the catecholate type. MxcF carries an aryl carrier protein (ArCP) domain (Fig. 3). MxcE contains the AMP binding signature [LIVMFY]-x(2)-[STG]-G-[ST]-[STEI]-[SG]-x-[PASLIVM]-[KR] in position 198–209 (prosite signature sequence PS00455). The presence of MxcCDEF directly adjacent to the NRPS MxcG led us to assume that *S. aurantiaca* Sg a15 may produce an iron-chelating compound by activating 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid and subsequently condensing it with an amino acid. Because there are only two iron chelators known from myxobacteria, one of which represents a catecholate-type siderophore, we speculated that *S. aurantiaca* may produce myxochelins.

#### Myxochelin A and B are iron chelators produced by *S. aurantiaca*

*S. aurantiaca* Sg a15 and its descendants were grown in a low-iron skim milk powder liquid medium and analyzed as described above for myxochelin production by diode-array coupled HPLC (Fig. 4). Substance peaks giving typical UV-spectra for 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid were further analyzed by HPLC-MS revealing that the strain produces substances with UV-spectra and molecular masses identical to myxochelin A (*M*ᵣ = 404; minor component) and B (*M*ᵣ = 403; major component).

#### Mutagenesis of the isochorismate synthase MxcD

To prove that the gene cluster reported is the one responsible for myxochelin formation in *S. aurantiaca* Sg a15, *mxcD* was inactivated by insertional mutagenesis using plasmid pCBS25. An internal fragment of the gene was cloned into pCBS25 (position 201–719 of the 1226 bp gene), which resulted in a mutant (CBS25) with two inactive copies of *mxcD*, one of which carried a deletion at the 3′-end. The second copy harbored a deletion at the 5′-end of the gene. CBS25 was verified by Southern analysis (data not shown); it was unable to grow on tryptone medium and did not produce myxochelins (Fig. 4). Growth could be restored by feeding Fe³⁺ to the medium.

#### The nonribosomal peptide synthetase MxcG is involved in the biosynthesis of myxochelin A and B

The gene *mxcG* encodes a protein with all the hallmarks of a nonribosomal peptide synthetase. The gene is located directly downstream of *mxcF*. The encoded protein carries an A domain which needs to be specific for lysine, a C domain and a PCP (Fig. 3). The core regions of the A domain and the PCP domain fit into the published consensus sequences very well [19], whereas the condensation domain core regions are quite different. The specificity-conferring code for lysine in nonribosomal peptide biosynthesis has not yet been defined [28,29]. Therefore, amino acids located in the positions that have been proposed to confer the specificity for amino-acid binding, were analyzed in the A domains of MxcG, BacB, MbtE and MbtF (Fig. 3). BacB contains the putative lysine-activating domain of the bacitracin synthetase [30]. MbtE and MbtF have been shown to be involved in the biosynthesis of the iron chelator mycobactin from *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* and seem to adenylate 6-N-hydroxy-lysine and 6-N-acyl-6-N-hydroxyllysine [12], respectively. A consensus region for lysine activation could be defined by sequence comparison (Fig. 3).

MxcG shows most similarity to the following proteins: a putative serin-activating enzyme from *Bacillus subtilis* (DhbF, gene bank entry P45745; 41.1% identity over the first 1140 amino acids), the actinomycin synthetase II of *Streptomyces chrysomallus* (AcmB, AF047717; 37.8% identity over the first 1250 amino acids) and the enterobactin synthetase of *E. coli* (EntF, P11454; 30.4% identity over the first 1317 amino acids). We compared the core regions of the condensation domains of MxcG with those of EntF, DhbF and AcmB and found significant differences to the core motifs published (Fig. 3). Core C7 could not be identified in any of these sequences.

At the C-terminus of MxcG a reduction domain with a putative NADP(H)-binding site was identified. This type of domain has only been reported once in a NRPS, the saframycin synthetase SafA (Q50858) of *M. xanthus* [31,32]. This protein shows 31% identity to MxcG over the complete sequence (1497 amino acids), and not only over the first ≈ 1250 amino acids as the examples mentioned above, because both proteins contain similar terminal reduction domains (Fig. 3). We compared the proposed consensus sequence for reductase domains for peptide synthetases [19] with MxcG, SafA, the putative polyketide

synthase HetM of Anabaena spec. (L22883) and the α-
aminoadipic acid reductase Lys2 of Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(NC_001146). All these proteins encode a similar domain. Core
regions R1–R5 are highly conserved, whereas R6 and R7 could
not be detected in the sequences or are very different from the
proposed consensus sequences.

*mxcG* was inactivated by site-specific integration of an
internal fragment of the gene, after electroporation of plasmid
pCBS11 (harboring the DNA from bp 2205 to 3654 of the gene,
which is 4371 bp in size) into *S*. aurantiaca Sg a15. HPLC
analysis of the resulting mutant CBS11 is given in Fig. 4.
Mutant CBS11 is unable to grow in tryptone medium and
does not produce any detectable amount of myxochelin. After
supplementation with Fe³⁺, myxochelin A or B (1 μg·mL⁻¹)
growth of the mutants could be restored. In order to analyze
whether a polar effect of the integrated DNA on gene(s)
encoded downstream of *mxcG* might be responsible for the loss
of production of the iron chelator, we analyzed mutant BS103
[26] for growth on tryptone medium and myxochelin produc-
tion (Fig. 4). BS103 is an insertion mutant of *aroA₅*, which
is located directly downstream of *mxcG*. No differences to
wild-type growth and production of myxochelines could be
found.

### Other genes and regulatory sequences in the operon

*mxcA* show similarity to oxidoreductases (Table 1) and *mxcL*
encodes a protein, the sequence of which is typical for class
III amino transferases and contains (amino acids 241–277) a
PLP attachment site [LIVMFYWC](2)-x-D-E-[IVA]-x(2)-G-
[LIVMFAGC]-x(0,1)-[RSACLI]-x-[GSAD]-x(12,16)-D-
[LIVMFC]-[LIVMFYSTA]-x(2)-[GSA]-K-x(3)-[GSTADNV]-
[GSAC] (Prosite signature sequence PS00600). MxC H encodes
a putative membrane receptor and shows similarities to proteins
involved in the uptake of ferric iron chelators. The start codon
could be translationally coupled to the stop codon of *aroA₅* but
an inverted repeat sequence behind the latter gene [26]
indicates that the start codon of MxC H is located downstream of
this sequence. MxC I carries a prokaryotic membrane lipoprotein
lipid attachment site (PS00013)(DERK)(6)-[LIVMFWSTAG](2)-
[LIVMFYSTAGCQ]-[AGS]-C and shows similarity to a protein
of unknown function from *Deinococcus radiodurans*. MxC K is
similar to efflux proteins with potential transmembrane regions,
12 of which could be identified.

In front of *mxcB*, DNA sequence motifs typical of the
binding site of the FUR protein can be found [33] (Fig. 3).

### Production of aurachines by the mutants

Mutant CBS11 was analyzed for the production of aurachines
[26] because we expected that the insertion mutation in *mxcG*
affects the expression of *aroA₅*, which is located directly
downstream of *mxcG*. CBS11 was found to produce low levels
of aurachines. Other secondary metabolites produced by the
strain were also found in lower concentrations than in the
wild-type.

---

Fig. 4. HPLC analysis (of extracts) of mutant BS103 [26] (used as
reference because it can be grown under kanamycin selection as CBS11
and CBS25) in comparison to mutants CBS11 and CBS25. Only the
polar compounds are shown. Further secondary metabolites of the strains as
the myxalamids, stigmatellin or aurachins are detected under less polar
conditions.

6482 B. Silakowski et al. (Eur. J. Biochem. 267) © FEBS 2000

PEP + E4P → DAHP → aurachines

Fig. 5. Biosynthesis of 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid and aurachines. PEP: phosphoenol pyruvate, E4P: erythrose-4-phosphate.

DISCUSSION

Myxobacteria have been shown to be a valuable source of secondary metabolites with biological activity [4,5]. Recently, several biosynthetic genes for natural products from this class of microorganisms have been identified and analyzed [6–8].

Most microorganisms produce iron-chelating compounds in a way that closely resembles the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, e.g., using enzymatic systems similar to PKSs and/or NRPSs [10–12]. These systems have been characterized and the study of the biogenesis of almost all of them revealed unique biosynthetic features. Although myxobacteria have been

MxcG  
Adenylation Condensation PCP Reduction  

MxcF  
ArCP  
Adenylation Condensation PCP Reduction  

myxochelin B ← aldehyde ← MxcL  
MxA or MxcG  
myxochelin A  

Fig. 6. Hypothetical scheme for the biosynthesis of myxochelin A and B. (A) The A domain of MxcG activates lysine and loads the amino acid onto the PCP. (B) The C domain condenses activated 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid bound to the ArCP of MxcF with the amino groups of the lysine moiety. (C) The reduction domain of MxcG reduces the PCP-bound myxochelin-acid to the aldehyde or directly to myxochelin A. The intermediate aldehyde can alternatively be reduced to myxochelin A by MxcA. MxcL transaminates the aldehyde giving rise to myxochelin B (see text).
© FEBS 2000

studied extensively in terms of the production of natural products, only two siderophores have been identified. Nothing is known about the molecular biology of iron chelators from myxobacteria.

We set out to clone and analyze the genes involved in natural product formation from myxobacteria and found that there are many more gene clusters present in their genomes than there are known natural products [9,26]. In an attempt to identify secondary metabolic duplicates of shikimate pathway genes we identified three different 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate synthases of two different types from *S.* aurantiaca Sg al5 [26]. One of these genes (*aroA*~*A5*~) seems to be involved in the biosynthesis of the electron transport inhibitors aurachines which are produced by the strain. We assumed that aurachin biosynthetic genes would be located adjacent to this gene and sequenced the region. Surprisingly, no genes that one would expect for aurachin biosynthesis could be identified but ORFs were found which encoded proteins putatively involved in siderophore biosynthesis, transport and utilization. Combining the knowledge about iron chelator biosynthetic machineries and features of the deduced proteins, a hypothetical structure could be predicted and eventually turned out to be exactly what was expected. The prediction of structures hypothetically produced by secondary metabolic gene clusters will become more and more interesting as more microbial genomes are sequenced.

In this study we identified myxochelin B and A as iron chelators from *S.* aurantiaca Sg al5 and can report here the first biosynthetic gene cluster for an iron-chelating compound from myxobacteria. The biosynthesis of 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid seems to be very similar to other microorganisms (Fig. 5) but the condensation with lysine of activated 2,3-dihydroxy-benzoic acid bound to the ArCP of MxcF seems to follow an unprecedented mechanism. We propose that lysine becomes activated by the A domain of MxcG and is subsequently bound to the PCP (Fig. 6). By comparing the few known putative lysine-activating domains of NRPSs a consensus sequence for the adenylation specificity of this amino acid could be defined (Fig. 3), which fits well into the binding pocket model reported for other amino acids [28,29]. In the next biosynthetic step the C domain is able to use activated 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid bound to MxcF as a substrate in a NRPS-type reaction and condense it with the amino groups of lysine. This involves two rounds of condensation reactions catalyzed by one C domain, which is unusual, because in typical NRPS systems each domain is responsible for one reaction. The enterobactin synthetase EntF of *E.* coli carries out an even more complicated reaction using only one C domain for three cycles of condensation [10].

We have compared the core sequences proposed to be present in all NRPS C domains [19] with the C domain of MxcG and those proteins with highest similarity to MxcG (DhbF, EntF and AcmB; Fig. 3). Significant differences to the proposed core regions can be found and similarities to the sequences aligned are obvious, which may well correlate with the different reactions catalyzed. Core 7 could not be identified in any of the four proteins. DhbF is assumed to be a serine-activating enzyme and might well catalyze a reaction similar to those of MxcG or EntF.

Another interesting feature of MxcG is the terminal reductase domain. This type of termination domain has been described for only one other NRPS, SafA of *M.* xanthus [31]. It is speculated that an aldehyde is released from the enzyme and subsequently condensed with an amino group within the molecule. Similar biochemistry is performed by Lys2, the

Myxochelin biosynthetic gene cluster (*Eur.* J. *Biochem.* 267) 6483

α-aminoadipate reductase of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*: The enzyme activates its substrate with ATP and sets free α-aminoadipate semialdehyde by reducing the α-amino-adipoyl-AMP bound to the PCP [34]. The reductase domain of MxcG may either reduce the PCP bound 2,3-dihydroxy-benzoic acid-lysine bis-amide to the aldehyde or it may directly reduce it to the primary alcohol that can be found in myxo-chelin A (Fig. 6). Although no terminal reduction to an alcohol has been described for NRPS systems so far, one could assume that myxochelin A is released from MxcG, because there are other natural products from myxobacteria that terminate in an amino acid that is reduced to the alcohol; in myxalamid [35] a PKS backbone is extended by an amino acid which is finally reduced to the alcohol. We have cloned the myxalamid biosynthetic gene cluster [9] and found that a NRPS is encoded downstream of the PKS genes (B. Silakowski and R. Müller, unpublished results). We identified two genes which encode proteins that might well catalyze the last reactions leading to the formation of myxochelin A and B; MxcA encodes a protein similar to alcohol oxidoreductases and could reduce the aldehyde released from MxcG to myxochelin A (MxcG could alternatively be responsible for this reduction; Fig. 6). MxcL is highly similar to PLP-dependent type III amino transferases and seems to be responsible for the amino transfer reaction resulting in myxochelin B from the intermediate aldehyde (Fig. 6). In addition, the myxobacterium *Archangium gephyra* 3947 was found to only produce myxochelin A (F. Sasse and G. Höfle, unpublished results), which makes it likely that this strain does not carry an active copy of the amino transferase gene *mxcL*.

The type of reductive chain termination reported here, which may also be responsible for chain termination in myxalamid biosynthesis, will expand the general capacities of combinatorial biosynthesis, because the reductase domain of MxcG can be transferred into other gene clusters, which should result in new structures.

It is interesting that MxcG has to be activated by phosphopantetheinylation [34,36]. In *S.* aurantiaca DW4/3-1 we were able to identify a phosphopantetheinyl transferase (MtaA) that is required for the biosynthesis of myxothiazol and other compounds [6]. Because myxochelin could also be identified from the myxothiazol producer, and mutants of *mtaA* show no growth retardation in tryptone medium, there seems to be a second phosphopantetheinyl transferase in *S.* aurantiaca which is responsible for the activation of apo-MxcG.

Other genes with putative functions in iron uptake and utilization are encoded in the myxochelin regulon. MxcK may be an efflux pump that transports myxochelins out of the cell; MxcH could well represent the membrane receptor necessary for ferric myxochelin uptake and MxcI could also be a membrane protein involved in myxochelin uptake. After uptake of the ferric myxochelin complex, the iron has to be removed from the siderophore complex, for which MxcB might be responsible, because it is highly similar to other ferric iron chelator utilization proteins.

The regulation of iron transport regulons has been described to be dependent of the FUR protein in *E.* coli and several other microorganisms [33]. Putative FUR binding sites can be detected upstream of *mxcB* and it can be speculated that *S.* aurantiaca uses a similar regulation mechanism. The presence of the FUR binding sites upstream of *mxcB* could also help to explain why in some myxobacteria myxochelin A and in others B has been found; *mxcA* and *mxcL* may be regulated differently from the rest of the gene cluster (a putative termination sequence is located behind *aroA*~*A5*~). It is interesting
to note, that inactivation of the 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate synthase *aroA*~A5~ results in a mutant that still produces myxochelins but is impaired in aurachin biosynthesis [26]. One of the two other 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate synthases present in the strain [26] could complement this mutation during myxochelin biosynthesis. As far as we know, all other 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid biosynthetic gene clusters do not encode 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate 7-phosphate synthases. The biosynthesis of aurachines might possibly be induced by iron starvation via the expression of the myxochelin operon, an effect that has also been described for the biosynthesis of other antibiotics and virulence factors [33,37].

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We should like to thank Prof. H. Reichenbach for strain S. *aurantiaca* Sg al5 and M. Weilharter, M. Scharfe, M. Momberg, T. H. Löhner and A. Conrad for technical assistance. We would also like to thank J. Scriven and S. Beyer for valuable comments to this manuscript.

# REFERENCES

1. Reichenbach, H. (1993) Biology of the myxobacteria: ecology and taxonomy. In *Myxobacteria II* (Dworkin, M. & Kaiser, D., eds), pp. 13–62. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, DC, USA.
2. Reichenbach, H. & Dworkin, M. (1992) The myxobacteria. In *The Procaryotes* (Balows, A., Trüper, H.G., Dworkin, M., Harder, W. & Schleifer, K.-H., eds), pp. 3416–3478. Springer, New York, USA.
3. Dworkin, M. (1996) Recent advances in the social and developmental biology of the myxobacteria. *Microbiol. Rev.* **60**, 70–102.
4. Reichenbach, H. & Höfle, G. (1999) Myxobacteria as producers of secondary metabolites. In *Drug Discovery from Nature* (Grabley, S. & Thieriecke, R., eds), pp. 149–179. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany.
5. Reichenbach, H. & Höfle, G. (1993) Production of bioactive secondary metabolites. In *Myxobacteria II* (Dworkin, M. & Kaiser, D., eds), pp. 347–397. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, DC, USA.
6. Silakowski, B., Schäirer, H.U., Ehret, H., Kunze, B., Weinig, S., Nordsiek, G., Brandt, P., Blöcker, H., Höfle, G., Beyer, S. & Müller, R. (1999) New lessons for combinatorial biosynthesis from myxobacteria: the myxothiazol biosynthetic gene cluster of *Stigmatella aurantiaca* DW4/3-1. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 37391–37399.
7. Tang, L., Shah, S., Chung, L., Carney, J., Katz, L., Khosla, C. & Julien, B. (2000) Cloning and heterologous expression of the epothilone gene cluster. *Science* **287**, 640–642.
8. Molnar, I., Schupp, T., Ono, M., Zirkle, R.E., Milnamow, M., Nowak-Thompson, B., Engel, N., Toupet, C., Stratman, A., Cyr, D.D., Gorlach, J., Mayo, J.M., Hu, A., Goff, S., Schmid, J. & Ligon, J.M. (2000) The biosynthetic gene cluster for the microtubule-stabilizing agents epothilones A and B from *Sorangium cellulosum* So ce90. *Chem. Biol.* **7**, 97–109.
9. Beyer, S., Kunze, B., Silakowski, B. & Müller, R. (1999) Metabolic diversity in myxobacteria – identification of the myxalamid and the stigmatellin biosynthetic gene cluster of *Stigmatella aurantiaca* Sg al5 and a combined polyketide-(poly)peptide gene cluster from the epothilon producing strain *Sorangium cellulosum* So ce90. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1445**, 185–195.
10. Gehring, A.M., Mori, I. & Walsh, C.T. (1998) Reconstitution and characterization of the *Escherichia coli* enterobactin synthetase from EntB, EntE, and EntF. *Biochemistry* **37**, 2648–2659.
11. Gehring, A.M., DeMoll, E., Fetherston, J.D., Mori, I., Mayhew, G.F., Blattner, F.R., Walsh, C.T. & Perry, R.D. (1998) Iron acquisition in plague: modular logic in enzymatic biogenesis of yersiniabactin by *Yersinia pestis*. *Chem. Biol.* **5**, 573–586.
12. Quadri, L.E., Sello, J., Keating, T.A., Weinreb, P.H. & Walsh, C.T. (1998) Identification of a *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* gene cluster encoding the biosynthetic enzymes for assembly of the virulence-conferring siderophore mycobactin. *Chem. Biol.* **5**, 631–645.
13. Braun, V., Hantke, K. & Koste, W. (1998) Bacterial iron transport. *Metal Ions Biol. Syst.* **35**, 67–145.
14. Kunze, B., Trowitzsch Kienast, W., Hofle, G. & Reichenbach, H. (1992) Nannochelins A, B and C, new iron-chelating compounds from *Nannocystis exedens* (myxobacteria). Production, isolation, physico-chemical and biological properties. *J. Antibiot.* **45**, 147–150.
15. Kunze, B., Bedorf, N., Kohl, W., Höfle, G. & Reichenbach, H. (1989) Myxochelin A, a new iron-chelating compound from *Angiococcus disciformis* (Myxobacterales). *J. Antibiot.* **42**, 14–17.
16. Trowitzsch-Kienast, W., Kunze, B., Irshik, H., Wray, V., Reichenbach, H. & Höfle, G. (1991) Synthesis of myxochelin derivatives with biological activity (poster). The 9th DECHEMA-Jahrestagung der Biotechnologen. Berlin, Germany.
17. Walsh, C.T., Liu, J., Rusnak, R. & Sakaitani, M. (1990) Molecular studies on enzymes in chorismate metabolism and the enterobactin biosynthetic pathway. *Chem. Rev.* **90**, 1105–1129.
18. Brickman, T.J., Ozenberger, B.A. & McIntosh, M.A. (1989) Regulation of divergent transcription from the iron-responsive *fepB-entC* promoter-operator regions in *Escherichia coli*. *J. Mol. Biol.* **212**, 669–682.
19. Konz, D. & Marahiel, M.A. (1999) How do peptide synthetases generate structural diversity? *Chem. Biol.* **6**, R39–R48.
20. Kleinkauf, H. & von Döhren, H. (1997) Products of secondary metabolism. In *Biotechnology* (Kleinkauf, H. & von Döhren, H., eds), pp. 277–322. Verlag Chemie, Weinheim, Germany.
21. Silakowski, B., Ehret, H. & Schäirer, H.U. (1998) *fbfB*, a gene encoding a putative galactose oxidase, is involved in *Stigmatella aurantiaca* fruiting body formation. *J. Bacteriol.* **180**, 1241–1247.
22. Neumann, B., Pospiech, A. & Schäirer, H.U. (1992) Rapid isolation of genomic DNA from Gram negative bacteria. *Trends Genet.* **8**, 332–333.
23. Bonfield, J., Smith, K. & Staden, R. (1995) A new DNA sequence assembly program. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **23**, 4992–4999.
24. Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E.F. & Maniatis, T. (1989). *Molecular Cloning. A Laboratory Manual*, 2nd edn. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, New York, USA.
25. Thompson, J.D., Higgins, D.G. & Gibson, T.J. (1994) CLUSTAL w: improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **22**, 4673–4680.
26. Silakowski, B., Kunze, B. & Müller, R. (2000) *Stigmatella aurantiaca* Sg al5 contains genes encoding type I and type II 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate synthases: involvement of a type II synthase in aurachin biosynthesis. *Arch. Microbiol.* **173**, 403–411.
27. Shimkets, L. (1993) The myxobacterial genome. In *Myxobacteria II* (Dworkin, M. & Kaiser, D., eds), pp. 85–108. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, DC, USA.
28. Stachelhaus, T., Mootz, H.D. & Marahiel, M.A. (1999) The specificity-conferring code of adenylation domains in nonribosomal peptide synthetases. *Chem. Biol.* **6**, 493–505.
29. Challis, G., Ravel, J. & Townsend, C. (2000) Predictive, structure-based model of amino acid recognition by nonribosomal peptide synthetase adenylation domains. *Chem. Biol.* **7**, 211–224.
30. Konz, D., Klens, A., Schorgendorfer, K. & Marahiel, M.A. (1997) The bacitracin biosynthesis operon of *Bacillus licheniformis* ATCC 10716: molecular characterization of three multi-modular peptide synthetases. *Chem. Biol.* **4**, 927–937.
31. Pospiech, A., Cluzel, B., Bietenhader, H. & Schupp, T. (1995) A new *Myxococcus xanthus* gene cluster for the biosynthesis of the antibiotic saframycin Mx1 encoding a peptide synthetase. *Microbiology* **141**, 1793–1803.
32. Pospiech, A., Bietenhadeer, J. & Schupp, T. (1996) Two multifunctional peptide synthetases and an *O*-methyltransferase are involved in the biosynthesis of the DNA-binding antibiotic and antitumour agent saframycin Mx1 from *Myxococcus xanthus*. *Microbiology* **142**, 741–746.

© FEBS 2000

Myxochelin biosynthetic gene cluster (*Eur. J. Biochem.* 267) 6485

33. Escolar, L., Perez-Martin, J. & Lorenzo, V. (1999) Opening the iron box: transcriptional metalloregulation by the Fur protein. *J. Bacteriol.* 181, 6223–6229.

34. Ehmann, D., Gehring, A. & Walsh, C. (1999) Lysine biosynthesis in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*: mechanism of α-aminoadipate reductase (Lys2) involves posttranslational phosphopantetheinylation by Lys5. *Biochemistry* 38, 6171–6177.

35. Gerth, K., Jansen, R., Reifenstahl, G., Höfle, G., Irschik, H., Kunze, B., Reichenbach, H. & Thierbach, G. (1983) The myxalamids, new antibiotics from *Myxococcus xanthus* (myxobacterales). I. Production, physico-chemical and biological properties, and mechanism of action. *J. Antibiot.* 36, 1150–1156.

36. Lambalot, R.H., Gehring, A.M., Flugel, R.S., Zuber, P., LaCelle, M., Marahiel, M.A., Reid, R., Khosla, C. & Walsh, C.T. (1996) A new enzyme superfamily – the phosphopantetheinyl transferases. *Chem. Biol.* 3, 923–936.

37. Litwin, C. & Calderwood, S. (1993) Role of iron in regulation of virulence genes. *Clin. Microbiol. Rev.* 6, 137–149.
