
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS AND CHEMOTHERAPY, Nov. 2000, p. 3224–3228
0066-4804/00/$04.00+0
Copyright © 2000, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

# Genetic Characterization of vanG, a Novel Vancomycin Resistance Locus of Enterococcus faecalis

STUART J. MCKESSAR,$^{1}$ ANNE M. BERRY,$^{1}$ JAN M. BELL,$^{2}$ JOHN D. TURNIDGE,$^{2}$ AND JAMES C. PATON$^{1*}$

*Molecular Microbiology Unit*$^{1}$ *and Department of Infectious Diseases,*$^{2}$ *Women’s and Children’s Hospital, North Adelaide, South Australia 5006, Australia*

Received 20 March 2000/Returned for modification 9 June 2000/Accepted 21 August 2000

*Enterococcus faecalis* strain WCH9 displays a moderate level of resistance to vancomycin (MIC = 16 μg/ml) and full susceptibility to teicoplanin but is negative by PCR analysis using primers specific for all known enterococcal vancomycin resistance genotypes (*vanA*, *vanB*, *vanC*, *vanD*, and *vanE*). We have isolated and sequenced a novel putative vancomycin resistance locus (designated *vanG*), which contains seven open reading frames, from this strain. These are organized differently from those of all the other enterococcal *van* loci, and, furthermore, the individual *vanG* gene products exhibit less than 50% amino acid sequence identity to other *van* gene products.

---

Glycopeptides inhibit cell wall synthesis through the interaction of their N termini with the D-alanyl-D-alanine termini of peptidoglycan precursors (25). The resulting complexes prevent the transglycosylases from incorporating disaccharide pentapeptide subunits into the growing peptidoglycan chain, thereby inhibiting cell wall synthesis (4). In enterococci, both intrinsic and acquired resistance to glycopeptides occurs via a common mechanism involving modification of the peptidoglycan biosynthetic pathway (7). Six enterococcal vancomycin resistance genotypes have been described and characterized. Four of these (*vanA*, *vanB*, *vanD*, and *vanE*) are acquired mechanisms and the other two (*vanC1* and *vanC2/C3* specific to *Enterococcus gallinarum* and *Enterococcus casseliflavus/Enterococcus flavescens*, respectively [the *vanC2* and *vanC3* genotypes are closely related, with the loci containing minor sequence differences, and are therefore jointly referred to herein as *vanC2/C3*; likewise, there is debate over whether *E. casseliflavus* and *E. flavescens* are actually separate species, and they are jointly referred to herein as *E. casseliflavus/E. flavescens*]) are intrinsic properties (15, 18, 21).

The genes for the VanA vancomycin resistance phenotype are located on the 10.8-kb transposable element Tn1546, which encodes 7 polypeptides involved in resistance. These polypeptides function together to confer high-level resistance to vancomycin and teicoplanin (6, 7), as well as variable levels of resistance to all other glycopeptides (18). The VanB resistance phenotype confers variable levels of resistance to vancomycin but leaves the organism susceptible to teicoplanin (8, 13). VanD is characterized by resistance to moderate levels of vancomycin and to low levels of teicoplanin (21), while the VanE resistance phenotype exhibits low-level resistance to vancomycin but full susceptibility to teicoplanin (15).

Enterococci of the VanA, VanB, and VanD phenotypes produce a suite of functionally homologous proteins, including ligases (VanA, VanB, and VanD) resulting in the formation of peptidoglycan precursors terminating in D-Ala-D-Lac (18, 21), dehydrogenases (VanH, VanH<sub>B</sub>, and VanH<sub>D</sub>) which reduce pyruvate to D-lactate (7, 10, 11), dipeptidases (VanX, VanX<sub>B</sub>, and VanX<sub>D</sub>) which hydrolyze the glycopeptide-susceptible cell wall precursors ending in D-Ala-D-Ala (7, 11, 24), and carboxypeptidases (VanY, VanY<sub>B</sub>, and VanY<sub>D</sub>) (5, 11, 14) which cleave the C-terminal D-Ala residue of late peptidoglycan precursors (22). VanE ligase synthesizes the formation of peptides terminating in D-Ala-D-Ser, and serine racemase activity has also been detected in VanE strains (15).

VanC1 and VanC2/C3 are intrinsic enterococcal resistance phenotypes characterized by low-level resistance to vancomycin but susceptibility to teicoplanin (7). Three protein products of the *vanC1* operon have been characterized: VanC1, VanXY<sub>C</sub>, and VanT. VanC1 is a ligase that catalyzes the synthesis of cell wall precursors terminating in D-Ala-D-Ser (19). VanXY<sub>C</sub> has both D,D-dipeptidase and D,D-carboxypeptidase activities (23), while VanT is a membrane-associated serine racemase which converts L-Ser to D-Ser (3). Genes encoding a putative two-component regulator (VanR<sub>C</sub>-VanS<sub>C</sub>) are located downstream of the *vanC1* locus (2).

Recently, we have investigated the genotype of Australian isolates of vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) (9). Among the strains examined were four *Enterococcus faecalis* isolates which exhibited moderate resistance to vancomycin (MIC range, 12 to 16 μg/ml), but full susceptibility to teicoplanin (MIC = 0.5 μg/ml), a phenotype similar to that of VanB and VanE strains. The four isolates were indistinguishable by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis and were isolated from inpatients at the same hospital in Brisbane, Queensland, Australia, in 1997. However, these strains were negative by PCR using primers specific for all enterococcal vancomycin resistance genotypes known at the time (*vanA*, *vanB*, *vanC1*, *vanC2/C3*, and *vanD*) (9) and have since tested negative by PCR using primers specific for the recently described *vanE* genotype (15). In the present study, we isolated and characterized the putative vancomycin resistance locus from one of these isolates (WCH9).

Isolation of putative vancomycin resistance locus from *E. faecalis* WCH9. In order to isolate a fragment of the vancomycin resistance locus, *E. faecalis* WCH9 DNA was extracted using the Wizard genomic DNA purification kit (Promega, Madison, Wis.), and subjected to PCR amplification using the degenerate primers V1 and V2 previously described by Perichon et al. (21). These primers were designed to direct amplification of an internal fragment from genes encoding glycopeptide resistance-associated ligases from a number of gram-positive species. The resultant 1.63-kb PCR product was much larger than expected and was purified using the

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Molecular Microbiology Unit, Women’s and Children’s Hospital, North Adelaide, S.A. 5006, Australia. Phone: 61-8-8204 6302. Fax: 61-8-8204 6051. E-mail: patonj@wch.sa.gov.au.

pJCP1101

pJCP1103

pJCP1102

$\begin{array}{lllllll}\text { van } R_{\mathrm{G}} & \text { van } S_{\mathrm{G}} & \text { van } Y_{\mathrm{G}_{1}} & \text { van } W_{\mathrm{G}} & \text { van } G & \text { van } Y_{\mathrm{G}_{2}} & \text { van } T_{\mathrm{G}}\end{array}$

FIG. 1. Map of region of *E. faecalis* WCH9 chromosome containing the *vanG* locus, showing the location of the various subclones used to determine the DNA sequence. The locations and direction of transcription of the various ORFs are shown as solid pointed boxes. The locations of two putative transcription terminators are also indicated.

BRESAspin PCR purification kit (Bresatec Ltd., Adelaide, Australia) and cloned into pGEMT-easy (Promega), generating plasmid pJCP1101. The enterococcal DNA insert of this plasmid was then sequenced using dye terminator chemistry on an ABI model 373A automated DNA sequencer. Interestingly, analysis of the sequence revealed that amplification of the 1.63-kb fragment was a consequence of priming with only one of the degenerate primers (V1), presumably due to the presence of an inverted repeat of the target sequence. Nevertheless, BLASTX analysis (1) indicated that the fragment encoded a putative protein with similarities to the enterococcal VanB and VanA ligases (approximately 50 and 48% amino acid sequence identity, respectively), and another with approximately 50% identity to the VanY D,D-carboxypeptidase of the *vanA* locus.

In order to confirm that the isolated sequences were specific for non-*vanABCDE* strains such as WCH9, a variety of VRE and sensitive enterococci were subjected to PCR using primers VANG1 (5′-CGGTGTGTGCCGTACTTGCC-3′) and VANG2 (5′-GGGTAAGCCATAGTCTGGGGC-3′). These primers direct amplification of an 810-bp fragment from the portion of the pJCP1101 insert encoding the ligase homologue. The PCR amplification conditions used were the same as those previously described by Bell et al. (9) for detection of the *vanA*, *vanB*, *vanC1*, and *vanC2/C3* genotypes. The only strains that yielded 810-bp PCR products were WCH9 and the three other related non-*vanABCDE* VRE isolates. No PCR products were obtained when DNA extracts from vancomycin-sensitive *Enterococcus faecium*, *E. faecalis vanA*, *E. faecalis vanB*, *E. gallinarum vanCl*, or *vanC2/C3 E. casseliflavus/E. flavescens* strains were tested (result not shown).

In order to isolate the remainder of the apparently novel *van* locus, DNA from WCH9 was subjected to PCR using primers on the basis of preliminary sequence analysis of inverse PCR fragments. Primers SM5 (5′-GTTGACGAATTCATATTTCCC AGATAAA-3′) and SM6 (5′-CGAAAAGGAATTCTGGCAT TGATTATTTTAG-3′) directed amplification of a 1,999-bp PCR product, which was cloned into the EcoRI site of pBlue-script KS (Stratagene, La Jolla, Calif.) to generate plasmid pJCP1102. Plasmid pJCP1103 was constructed by cloning the 5,004-bp PCR product obtained using primers VANG2 and SM7 (5′-CGGGACAATAATTGGATGTC-3′) into pGEMTeasy (see Fig. 1).

DNA sequence analysis. The sequence of the complete putative vancomycin resistance locus was then determined by analysis of the recombinant plasmids, and nested deletion derivatives thereof, constructed according to the method of Henikoff (16). Sequence data in the 5′ direction of the region cloned in pJCP1103 were also obtained by direct sequence analysis of an additional inverse PCR product using primers SM30 (5′-CGATTGGAAAAATCTGATCAATG-3′) and SM31 (5′-CGTAACCTCCCGATATGAGCC-3′) on NdeI-digested, recircularized DNA. Although existing enterococcal vancomycin resistance loci have been named *vanA* through *vanE*, we designated this novel locus *vanG*, because the name *vanF* was recently used for a *vanA*-like locus in *Paenibacillus popillae* (20). Examination of the compiled sequence indicated that the *vanG* locus was 7,652 nucleotides long and contained seven complete open reading frames (ORFs), arranged as shown in Fig. 1. BLASTX analyses were performed to identify the putative functions of the proteins, and the results are summarized in Table 1. The 5′ end of the locus contains genes designated *vanR<sub>G</sub>* and *vanS<sub>G</sub>*, encoding a putative two-component regulatory system. The *vanS<sub>G</sub>* gene was immediately followed by a stem-loop structure (∆G = −28.5 kcal/mol), suggesting that these two genes may be transcribed separately from the remainder of the locus, which encodes two putative D,D-peptidases (VanY<sub>G1</sub> and VanY<sub>G2</sub>), the ligase (VanG), a racemase (VanT<sub>G</sub>), and a protein with unknown function (VanW<sub>G</sub>). Interestingly, no obvious promoter region could be found upstream of *vanY<sub>G1</sub>*, and the nearest site with similarity to consensus *Escherichia coli* promoter sequences is located near the 3′ end of *vanW<sub>G</sub>*. Thus, the ORFs designated *vanY<sub>G1</sub>* and *vanW<sub>G</sub>* may or may not be transcribed. Each of the genes in the *vanG* cluster is preceded by a potential ribosome binding site, although that for *vanY<sub>G2</sub>* is very close to the initiation codon, which may result in a low translation efficiency. An additional stem-loop structure (∆G = −23.0 kcal/mol) is located approximately 20 nucleotides downstream of the *vanT<sub>G</sub>* termination codon. BLASTX analysis of sequences downstream of this indicated a low degree of similarity to a protein of unknown function (ORF9) from the 3′ end of the *E. faecalis* conjugative transposon Tn916 (GenBank accession number U09422).

Similarities to other enterococcal *van* loci and gene products. The comparative genetic organization for the five VRE

TABLE 1. Summary of ORFs in the vanG locus

| Gene       | Putative function         | Location in sequence$^a$ | Predicted $M_r$ | No. of amino acids | % G+C content | Similar protein(s) (GenBank accession no.; gene)                                                                 | % Identity, % similarity (no. of aa) |
|------------|--------------------------|-------------------------|-----------------|--------------------|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| $vanR_G$   | Response regulator       | 1 to 706                | 26,858          | 235                | 42.3          | VanR$_D$ of E. faecium (AF 130997; vanD)                                                                        | 54, 71 (238)                       |
|            |                          |                         |                 |                    |               | VanR of Bacillus circulans (Y15706)                                                                            | 46, 63 (239)                       |
|            |                          |                         |                 |                    |               | VanR, E. faecium (M68910; vanA)                                                                                | 46, 61 (238)                       |
| $vanS_G$   | Sensor protein kinase    | 722 to 1825             | 42,027          | 367                | 27.7          | VanS$_D$ of E. faecium (AF 130997; vanD)                                                                        | 57, 69 (330)                       |
|            |                          |                         |                 |                    |               | VanS of B. circulans (Y15707)                                                                                  | 39, 56 (364)                       |
|            |                          |                         |                 |                    |               | VanS of E. faecium (M68910; vanA)                                                                              | 38, 57 (365)                       |
| $vanY_{G_1}$ | D,D-Peptidase           | 1962 to 2798            | 31,926          | 278                | 42.9          | VanY$_B$ of E. faecalis (U35369; vanB)                                                                          | 48, 63 (211)                       |
|            |                          |                         |                 |                    |               | Carboxypeptidase of Bacillus subtilis (AF015775)                                                                | 31, 47 (246)                       |
|            |                          |                         |                 |                    |               | YokZ of B. subtilis (AF006665)                                                                                 | 31, 47 (246)                       |
| $vanW_G$   | Unknown                  | 2979 to 3713            | 28,301          | 244                | 35.8          | VanW of E. faecalis (U35369; vanB)                                                                              | 45, 60 (244)                       |
| $vanG$     | Ligase                   | 3715 to 4764            | 38,727          | 349                | 39.0          | VanB of E. faecalis (U00456)                                                                                   | 46, 64 (215)                       |
|            |                          |                         |                 |                    |               | VanA of B. circulans (Y15704)                                                                                  | 49, 66 (202)                       |
|            |                          |                         |                 |                    |               | VanB2 of E. faecium (U81452)                                                                                   | 47, 64 (212)                       |
| $vanY_{G_2}$ | D,D-Peptidase           | 4761 to 5525            | 29,362          | 253                | 37.3          | VanY of B. circulans (Y17303)                                                                                  | 35, 54 (262)                       |
|            |                          |                         |                 |                    |               | VanY of E. faecium (M90647; vanA)                                                                              | 34, 53 (256)                       |
|            |                          |                         |                 |                    |               | YokZ of B. subtilis (AF006665)                                                                                 | 34, 51 (191)                       |
| $vanT_G$   | Racemase                 | 5518 to 7653            | 80,159          | 711                | 36.1          | VanT of E. gallinarum (AF077816; vanC1)                                                                         | 35, 55 (698)                       |
|            |                          |                         |                 |                    |               | Alanine racemase of Bacillus psychrosaccharolyticus (AB021683)                                                   | 36, 53 (383)                       |
|            |                          |                         |                 |                    |               | Alanine racemase of Synechocystis sp. (D64003)                                                                  | 35, 53 (362)                       |

$^a$ Nucleotide positions are given.

VanG 1 M NKK A IFGGNSTEY VS QSASA FENINTN--K DIGIT SGE-WHYTGEKE
VanA 1 MNRIKVAT FGGCSEEHDVS KSAIEIAANINKE--KY P YIGITKSGV-WK CEKP--
VanB 1 MN IKVAIIFGGCSEEHDVS KSAIEIAANINTE--K DPHYIGITKNGV-WK CKKP--
VanC1 1 --MKK AIIFGCNSPEYTVS ASATSAIEA SPYDYDSLIGIAPD DWY YTGELE
VanD 1 MFRIKVA FGGCSEEH VS KSA EIAANI TK--KYQPY YIGITKSGV-WK CEKP--

VanG 58 KILNNTWFED KNLCPVVSQ RSV GFDE ASDKYRIT VD FPVLHGKNGE GOG
VanA 56 ---CAEWE DN--CYSAVLSPD KMHGLLVKKN EYEIN VDVAFSALHGKS GEDGSIQG
VanB 56 ---CTEWRAD---SLPA ESPDRKTHGLLV KE EYETR DVAFPVLHGKC GEDG IQG
VanC1 59 NIRODTWLLD --KHKQKIQPLFEGNGFW SEEQ--TLVPDV FP HGK GEDGSIQG
VanD 56 ---CLEWE YA--GDPVVFSPDRSTHGLL QK GYEIQPVDV FP HGK GEDGSIQG

VanG 118 FEL GIPVGCDTLSA CMDKDRAHK VSLAGI VKSVTF RFNEEAA---EIEA
VanA 111 LFELSGIP VGCDIQSSA CMDKSLTYT AKNAGIATP---AFW TNKDD----PVAA
VanB 110 LFELSGTPYVGCDIQSSAACMDKSLAYI TKNAGIAVP---EFQ IEKG----PEAR
VanC1 115 LFELMK PYVGCG AGSA CM KWLLHQAAAAIG QSAP---TIL TNQ QQEQ EAFIQ
VanD 111 LLELSGIPYGCDIQSSV CMDK LAYT VKNAGITVP---GF ----EGD----LETE

VanG 175 NLTYP F KPVR GSSFG TKVIEK ELDAAIELAF HD B EETINGFEVGCAVLG-
VanA 163 TFTYPVFVKPARSGSSFGVKVNSA ELDYAIESARQYDSKILIEQA SGCEVGCAVLGN
VanB 162 TLTYPVFVKPARSGSSFGVTKVNSTEEL AAIEAAGQYDGKILIEQAI SGCEVGCAV GN
VanC1 173 THG PVFKPNE GSSKG TKVTCEE AA KEAFTYCSA L KN GVE GC LG-
vanD 163 DFVYPVFVKPARSGSSFGVNKVCKAEELQAAIEEARKYDSKILIEEA GSEVGCA LGN

VanG 234 ID LIVGRVD IELSSGFFDYT-EKYTLKSSK--IY PAR DAEEAKRIQEAAVTIY A
VanA 223 SAAL VGEVDQIRLQYQIF IHQEVPEPKGSENAVITVPADLSAEEGRIOETAKKIY A
VanB 222 EDLIVGEVDQIRLSHGIF IHQENEPEKGSENA ITVPAD PVEERNR QETAKK YRV
VanC1 232 ND SLTVGACDAISLVDGFFDFE-EKYQLIS K---ITVPAPLPETIET KEQAQL YR
VanD 223 G DL AGEVDQIELRHGFF IHQEAQPEKGSENAIVRPAALPDEVREQIOETAMKIYRI

VanG 290 LGCSGF RVD FYTPSGEIVFNEVNT PGFTSHSRYPNMNK IG FS LD LIGLY E
VanA 283 LGCRGLARVD FLQ GRIVLNEVNT PGFTSYSRYPRMMAAAG ALPEL D LIVLALK
VanB 282 LGCRGLARVD FLQEDGGIVLNEVNT PGFTSYSRYPRMAAAAG LPAL DSLITLA E
VanC1 288 LGL GLAR DFF TERGEYLNE NT PGFTSHSRYPAMMAAVG YQELLO L VLAK E
VanD 283 LGCRGLAR D FLREDGCIVLNEVNT PGFTSYSRYPRMMTAAGF LSE LD LIEL LR

VanG 350 ---
VanA 343 G--
VanB 342 R--
VanC1 348 EVK
VanD 343 R--

FIG. 3. Comparison of VanG with other enterococcal ligases. The deduced amino acid sequence of VanG was aligned with those for VanA (6), VanB (14), VanC1 (12), and VanD (11) using CLUSTAL (17). Amino acid position numbers are shown at the left of the sequences. Identical residues are shaded black; residues with similar properties are shaded grey. Gaps (dashes) have been introduced by the program to optimize the alignment.

(1.6% [wt/vol]), Bacto agar (1% [wt/vol]), L-arabinose (1% [wt/vol]), and vancomycin (5 μg/ml). However, although transmission of vancomycin resistance occurred when vanB E. faecalis ATCC 51299 was mated with the sensitive Enterococcus faecium recipient, transmission was not demonstrated when the vanG strain was used as donor. Fines et al. (15) were similarly unable to demonstrate transmission of the VanE phenotype. Transfer of vancomycin resistance from E. faecalis WCH9 to another E. faecalis strain was not attempted due to the lack of a selective marker capable of distinguishing donor and recipient strains.

Conclusions. In this study, we have isolated and characterized a novel vancomycin resistance locus, designated vanG, from E. faecalis strain WCH9, which locus displays a moderate level of resistance to vancomycin and full susceptibility to teicoplanin. The vanG locus contains seven ORFs, but these are organized differently from all the other enterococcal van loci characterized to date. Moreover, the individual vanG gene products exhibit less than 50% amino acid sequence identity to their respective homologues from the other enterococcal van loci, suggesting diverse evolutionary origins of vancomycin resistance in this genus. VanG VRE appear to be rare, at least in Australia. The four original strains were isolated from patients in a single institution over a relatively short period of time, consistent with nosocomial spread. With the exception of reisolation from one of the four original VanG VRE-carrying patients 12 months later, no further strains belonging to this genotype have been detected. However, its prevalence in other parts of the world remains to be investigated.

Nucleotide sequence accession number. The DNA sequence of the vanG locus described here has been deposited with GenBank under accession number AF253562.

TABLE 2. Sequence identity between the deduced amino acid sequence of VanG and those of other enterococcal ligases

| Sequence compared | % Sequence identity (no. of overlapping amino acids) |
|-------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| VanA              | 44 (351)                                           |
| VanB              | 47 (354)               76 (341)                    |
| VanC              | 42 (347)               38 (349)                    39 (350) |
| VanD              | 46 (347)               69 (342)                    67 (343) 38 (350) |
| VanE              | 39 (201)               44 (206)                    42 (206) 54 (202) 44 (206) |

*Based on complete sequence data published for VanA (6), VanB (14), VanC1 (12), and VanD (11), and the partial sequence published for VanE (15).
We are grateful to Graeme Nimmo for referring VRE isolates for characterization.

## REFERENCES

1. Altschul, S. F., T. L. Madden, A. A. Schäffer, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, W. Miller, and D. J. Lipman. 1997. Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res. **25**:3389–3402.
2. Arias, C. A., P. Courvalin, and P. E. Reynolds. 2000. *vanC* cluster of vancomycin-resistant *Enterococcus gallinarum* BM4174. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **44**:1660–1666.
3. Arias, C., M. Martin-Martinez, T. Blundell, M. Arthur, P. Courvalin, and P. Reynolds. 1999. Characterization and modelling of VanT: a novel, membrane-bound, serine racemase from vancomycin-resistant *Enterococcus gallinarum* BM4174. Mol. Microbiol. **31**:1653–1664.
4. Arthur, M., and P. Courvalin. 1993. Genetics and mechanisms of glycopeptide resistance in enterococci. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **37**:1563–1571.
5. Arthur, M., F. Depardieu, H. A. Snaith, P. E. Reynolds, and P. Courvalin. 1994. Contribution of VanY D,D-carboxypeptidase to glycopeptide resistance in *Enterococcus faecalis* by hydrolysis of peptidoglycan precursors. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **38**:1899–1903.
6. Arthur, M., C. Molinas, F. Depardieu, and P. Courvalin. 1993. Characterization of Tn1546, a Tn3-related transposon conferring glycopeptide resistance by synthesis of depsipeptide peptidoglycan precursors in *Enterococcus faecium* BM4147. J. Bacteriol. **175**:117–127.
7. Arthur, M., P. E. Reynolds, and P. Courvalin. 1996. Glycopeptide resistance in enterococci. Trends Microbiol. **4**:401–407.
8. Baptista, M., F. Depardieu, P. Courvalin, and M. Arthur. 1996. Specificity of induction of glycopeptide resistance genes in *Enterococcus faecalis*. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **40**:2291–2295.
9. Bell, J. M., J. C. Paton, and J. Turnidge. 1998. Emergence of vancomycin-resistant enterococci in Australia: phenotypic and genotypic characteristics. J. Clin. Microbiol. **36**:2187–2190.
10. Bugg, T. D., G. T. Wright, S. Dutka-Malen, M. Arthur, P. Courvalin, and C. T. Walsh. 1991. Molecular basis for vancomycin resistance in *Enterococcus faecium* BM4147: biosynthesis of a depsipeptide peptidoglycan precursor by vancomycin resistance proteins VanH and VanA. Biochemistry **30**:10408–10415.
11. Casadewall, B., and P. Courvalin. 1999. Characterization of the *vanD* glycopeptide resistance gene cluster from *Enterococcus faecium* BM4339. J. Bacteriol. **181**:3644–3648.
12. Dutka-Malen, S., C. Molinas, M. Arthur, and P. Courvalin. 1992. Sequence of the *vanC* gene of *Enterococcus gallinarum* BM4174 encoding a D-alanine ligase-related protein necessary for vancomycin resistance. Gene **112**:53–58.
13. Evers, S., and P. Courvalin. 1996. Regulation of VanB-Type vancomycin resistance gene expression by the VanS<sub>B</sub>-VanR<sub>B</sub> two-component regulatory system in *Enterococcus faecalis* V583. J. Bacteriol. **178**:1302–1309.
14. Evers, S., P. E. Reynolds, and P. Courvalin. 1994. Sequence of the *vanB* and *ddl* genes encoding D-alanine:D-lactate and D-alanine:D-alanine ligases in vancomycin-resistant *Enterococcus faecalis* V583. Gene **140**:97–102.
15. Fines, M., B. Perichon, P. Reynolds, D. F. Sahm, and P. Courvalin. 1999. VanE, a new type of acquired glycopeptide resistance in *Enterococcus faecalis* BM4405. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **43**:2161–2164.
16. Henikoff, S. 1984. Unidirectional digestion with exonuclease III creates targeted breakpoints for DNA sequencing. Gene **28**:351–359.
17. Higgins, D. G., and P. M. Sharp. 1988. CLUSTAL: a package for performing multiple sequence alignments on a microcomputer. Gene **73**:237–244.
18. Leclercq, R., and P. Courvalin. 1997. Resistance to glycopeptides in enterococci. Clin. Infect. Dis. **24**:545–556.
19. Navarro, F., and P. Courvalin. 1994. Analysis of genes encoding D-alanine-D-alanine ligase-related enzymes in *Enterococcus casseliflavus* and *Enterococcus flavescens*. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **38**:1788–1793.
20. Patel, R., K. Piper, F. R. Cockerill III, J. M. Steckelberg, and A. A. Yousten. 2000. The biopesticide *Paenibacillus popillae* has a vancomycin resistance gene cluster homologous to the enterococcal VanA vancomycin resistance gene cluster. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **44**:715–709.
21. Perichon, B., P. Reynolds, and P. Courvalin. 1997. VanD-type glycopeptide-resistant *Enterococcus faecium* BM4339. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **41**:2016–2018.
22. Reynolds, P. E. 1998. Control of peptidoglycan synthesis in vancomycin-resistant enterococci: D,D-peptidases and D,D-carboxypeptidases. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. **54**:325–331.
23. Reynolds, P., C. Arias, and P. Courvalin. 1999. Gene *vanXY<sub>c</sub>* encodes D,D-dipeptidase (VanX) and D,D-carboxypeptidase (VanY) activities in vancomycin-resistant *Enterococcus gallinarum* BM4174. Mol. Microbiol. **34**:341–349.
24. Reynolds, P. E., F. Depardieu, S. Dutka-Malen, M. Arthur, and P. Courvalin. 1994. Glycopeptide resistance mediated by enterococcal transposon Tn1546 requires production of VanX for hydrolysis of D-alanyl-D-alanine. Mol. Microbiol. **13**:1065–1070.
25. Sheldrick, G. M., P. G. Jones, O. Kennard, D. H. Williams, and G. A. Smith. 1978. Structure of vancomycin and its complex with acetyl-D-alanyl-D-alanine. Nature **271**:223–225.
26. Trieu-Cuot, P., C. Carlier, and P. Courvalin. 1988. Conjugative plasmid transfer from *Enterococcus faecalis* to *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. **170**:4388–4391.