
Recent advances in the study of the biosynthesis and functions of sulfated glycosaminoglycans

Kazuyuki Sugahara* and Hiroshi Kitagawa†

Recent cDNA cloning of the glycosyltransferases involved in the synthesis of the sulfated glycosaminoglycan sidechains of proteoglycans has provided important clues to answering longstanding questions concerning the mechanisms of both chain polymerization and the biosynthetic sorting of glucosaminoglycans (heparin/heparan sulfate) and galactosaminoglycans (chondroitin/dermatan sulfate). These biosynthetic mechanisms are crucial to the expression and regulation of the biological functions of glycosaminoglycans in development and pathophysiology.

**Addresses**

Kobe Pharmaceutical University, Department of Biochemistry, Higashinada-ku, Kobe 658-8558, Japan  
*e-mail*: k-sugar@kobepharma-u.ac.jp  
†e-mail: kitagawa@kobepharma-u.ac.jp  
Correspondence: Kazuyuki Sugahara  

**Current Opinion in Structural Biology** 2000, 10:518–527  
0959-440X/00/$ – see front matter  
© 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

**Abbreviations**

CS | chondroitin sulfate  
DS | dermatan sulfate  
ER | endoplasmic reticulum  
EST | expressed sequence tag  
EXT | hereditary multiple exostoses gene  
EXTL | EXT-like gene  
FGF | fibroblast growth factor  
GAG | glycosaminoglycan  
Gal | galactose  
GalNAc | N-acetylgalactosamine  
GalT | galactosyltransferase  
Glc | glucose  
GlcA | glucuronic acid  
GlcAT | glucuronltransferase  
GlcNAc | N-acetylglucosamine  
Hep | heparin  
HME | hereditary multiple exostoses  
HS | heparan sulfate  
PG | proteoglycan  
ttv | tout-velu  
Xyl | xylose  

**Introduction**

Sulfated glycosaminoglycan (GAG) sidechains of proteoglycans (PGs) have been implicated in numerous pathophysiological phenomena of vertebrates and invertebrates. The critical roles of GAGs, especially heparan sulfate (HS), in developmental processes involving the signaling of morphogens such as Wingless and Hedgehog proteins, as well as of fibroblast growth factor (FGF), in *Drosophila* have recently become evident [1**,2**]. Defects in HS biosynthesis in *Drosophila*, mice and humans have severe biological consequences. Studies of chondroitin sulfate (CS) chains have indicated their important roles in neural network formation in the developing mammalian brain. Recent advances in the study of the biosynthetic mechanisms that control these distinct functions of different GAG chains will be addressed in this review. This will be followed by a review of GAG functions in development, which were revealed by the analysis of mutants defective in GAG biosynthesis.

Linear sulfated GAGs are classified into CS/dermatan sulfate (DS) and HS/heparin (Hep), the former being galactosaminoglycans and the latter glucosaminoglycans. Both types of GAG chain are covalently attached to their respective core proteins through the so-called GAG-protein linkage region, GlcA(β1-3)Gal(β1-4)Xylβ1-O-Ser, which is common to both types of GAG chain and is formed through the stepwise addition of each monosaccharide residue by the respective specific glycosyltransferase. It has long been believed that once the first GlcNAc residue is transferred to the tetrasaccharide linkage region by GlcNAc transferase I, the repeating disaccharide region [(−4GlcAβ1-4GlcNα1-)n] of HS or Hep is synthesized by alternate additions of α-GlcNAc and β-GlcA through the respective actions of GlcNAc transferase and GlcA transferase (recently identified as HS polymerase, which comprises both the transfersases), enzymes that are specific for heparan backbone synthesis (Figure 1) [3]. In contrast, the first GalNAc transfer to the linkage region by the alleged GalNAc transferase I [4] leads to the synthesis of the repeating disaccharide region [(−4GlcAβ1-3GalNAcβ1-)n] of CS/DS through alternate additions of β-GalNAc and β-GlcA by the concerted actions of the putative GalNAc transferase II and GlcA transferase II enzymes, which are specific for chondroitin backbone synthesis (Figure 1). However, the conventional biosynthetic scheme of GAGs has not been proven by classical enzymological studies.

Recently (1998–2000), studies involving cDNA cloning of GAG glycosyltransferases have led to unexpected developments. These have provided several important clues to help solve the molecular mechanisms of the biosynthetic sorting of HS/Hep and CS/DS chains, as well as of the chain elongation and polymerization of these GAGs. A number of sulfotransferases, responsible for converting GAG backbones into active GAG chains with functional domain structures, have been cloned and reviewed recently [5**], and are therefore outside the scope of this review.

**Biosynthesis of the glycosaminoglycan-protein linkage region**

Among the four glycosyltransferases responsible for the synthesis of the linkage region, glucuronltransferase (GlcAT)-I has been cloned on the basis of its sequence homology to rat GlcAT-P, which synthesizes the HNK-1

Biosynthesis and functions of sulfated glycosaminoglycans Sugahara and Kitagawa 519

Figure 1

| EXT1/EXT2 |
| --- |
| HS polymerase |

Heparin/Heparan sulfate

- GlcNAc - GlcA-[4GlcNAc(α1-4)GlcAβ1]n-
GlNAcα1

EXTL2
GlcNAcT-I

Chondroitin synthase?
GalNAcT-II | GlcAT-II

- GalNAc - GlcA-[3GalNAc(β1-4)GlcAβ1]n-
GalNAcβ1

Chondroitin sulfate/Dermatan sulfate

Core protein

Current Opinion in Structural Biology

The biosynthesis of sulfated GAGs. Sulfated GAGs are synthesized as PGs on specific serine residues in the so-called GAG-protein linkage region, GlcA(β1-3)Gal(β1-3)Gal(β1-4)Xylβ1-O-Ser, which is common to HS, Hep, CS and DS chains [3]. Linkage region synthesis is initiated by the addition of Xyl to serine, followed by the addition of two Gal residues, and is completed by the addition of GlcA, each reaction being catalyzed by a specific glycosyltransferase (i.e. xylosyltransferase [XylT], galactosyltransferase I [GalT-I], galactosyltransferase II [GalT-II] and glucuronyltransferase I [GlcAT-I], respectively). The GAGs are built up on this linkage region by the alternating addition of N-acetylhexosamine and GlcA residues. HS/Hep is synthesized once GlcNAc is transferred to the common linkage region by GlcNAc transferase I (GlcNAcT-I/EXTL2), whereas CS/DS is formed if GalNAc is first added by GalNAc transferase I (GalNAcT-I). It is suggested that a chondroitin synthase with the activities of three enzymes, namely GalNAcT-I, GalNAcT-II and GlcAT-II, may exist (see text).

carbohydrate epitope on glycoproteins [6]. Recombinant human GlcAT-I utilizes only the linkage region trisaccharide derivatives Gal(β1-3)Gal(β1-4)Xyl and Gal(β1-3)Gal(β1-4)Xylβ1-O-Ser, and thus specifically recognizes this trisaccharide sequence [7]. This is in contrast to the report that Gal(β1-3)Galβ1-O-naphthalenemethanol and Gal(β1-3)Galβ1-O-benzyl served as acceptors of the recombinant hamster GlcAT-I obtained by expression cloning [8]. GlcAT-I is distinct from the GlcATs that synthesize the repeating disaccharide regions of CS or HS. Northern blot analysis showed ubiquitous expression of the transcript of GlcAT-I [8] and transfection of the cDNA completely restored GAG synthesis in GlcAT-I-deficient CHO mutant cells, indicating that a single GlcAT is responsible for the synthesis of the common linkage region of both HS and CS [9*]. The crystal structure of the catalytic domain of human GlcAT-I has been elucidated by X-ray crystallography and is the first example among the GAG glycosyltransferases (M Negishi et al., unpublished data; see Now in press). The conserved DXD motif of the enzyme interacts directly with the ribose of the UDP moiety of UDP-GlcA, as well as with the catalytically required divalent cation. These key residues involved in both cofactor binding and the predicted catalytic region are

Figure 2

A comparison of the five cloned members of the EXT gene family. The putative membrane-spanning domains are indicated by green bars. Conserved or highly conserved regions are indicated by purple or red bars, respectively. EXTL2, which is composed of 330 amino acids, is approximately half the size of the other EXT family members, which have 676-919 amino acids. The variation in size is due to differences in the length of the N-terminal side of the protein. The EXTL2 protein shares significant homology with the C termini of the other members of the family.

| Chromosome |
| --- |
| Expression pattern | location |
| EXT1 (746 aa) | Ubiquitous | 8q24.1 |
| EXT2 (718 aa) | Ubiquitous | 11p11-p12 |
| EXTL1 (676 aa) | Skeletal muscle, brain and heart | 1p36.1 |
| EXTL2 (330 aa) | Ubiquitous | 1p11-p12 |
| EXTL3 (919 aa) | Ubiquitous | 8p12-p22 |

N
C

Current Opinion in Structural Biology

conserved in various other glycosyltransferases, including HS polymerases and GlcNAc transferase I (which are encoded by the EXT gene family members, see below), indicating that the catalytic regions of various different transferases may have a similar tertiary structure.

Recently, human cDNA encoding a novel galactosyltransferase (GalT) was cloned, based on BLAST analysis of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) [10*, 11*]. The cDNA sequence encoded a type II transmembrane protein, identified as GalT-I, the seventh member of the human β4-GalT family. It exhibited marked β1,4-GalT activity towards various β-D-xylosides. Transfection of the cDNA restored GAG synthesis in GalT-I-deficient CHO mutant cells [10*]. Mutations of the human GalT-I gene cause progeroid-type Ehlers–Danlos syndrome [11*, 12*]. Intriguingly, the protein showed 38% sequence homology to the *Caenorhabditis elegans sqv-3* gene [10*, 11*], which is involved in vulval invagination and oocyte development. In this context, another gene, *sqv-8*, was found to play a role in vulval invagination in *C. elegans* [13**] and showed high sequence similarity to GlcAT-I, although the catalytic activity has not been demonstrated. Thus, the impairment of the *sqv-3* and *sqv-8* genes in nematodes produced the same defect.

Neither the xylosyltransferase that initiates GAG chain synthesis nor GalT-II, which catalyzes the transfer of Gal to the Gal-Xyl-Ser disaccharide that is part of the linkage region, have been cloned (see also Update).

### Chain polymerization of heparan sulfate

HS chain synthesis is associated with the EXT gene family. Using a functional assay based on the ability of herpes simplex virus to infect cells by attaching to cell-surface HS, the putative tumor suppressor *EXT1* was isolated from a Hela-cell library [14]. *EXT1* was shown to encode an ER-resident-type transmembrane glycoprotein. Transfection of mouse sog9 cells, which are mutant L cells and are unable to synthesize GAGs, with *EXT1* restored susceptibility to the virus infection, indicating the association of the expression of cell-surface HS with *EXT1*.

HME (hereditary multiple exostoses) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by cartilage-capped skeletal exostoses, which may lead to skeletal abnormalities and short stature [15*]. Genetic linkage of this disorder has been ascribed to three independent loci on chromosomes 8q24.1 (*EXT1*), 11p11-12 (*EXT2*) and 19p (*EXT3*). Although the exostoses represent osteochondromas that are benign bone tumors, malignant transformation into chondrosarcoma or osteosarcoma occurs in approximately 2% of HME patients through the loss of heterozygosity for the markers in *EXT1* and *EXT2* loci, indicating that the genes responsible for HME may encode tumor suppressors. This family of *EXT* genes has been extended by the identification of three additional EXT-like (*EXTL*) genes, *EXTL1*, *EXTL2/EXTR2* and

EXTL3/EXTR1 (Figure 2), although no disease pathology has been associated with the *EXTL* genes. A *Drosophila* homolog of *EXT1*, *tout-velu* (*ttv*), has been implicated in Hedgehog diffusion and its type II transmembrane protein product, Ttv, is 56% and 25% identical to human EXT1 and EXT2, respectively [16]. It has been proposed, based on these findings and on the known role of Indian Hedgehog (which is one of the three mammalian homologs of *Drosophila* Hedgehog) in bone morphogenesis, that the HME syndrome is associated with the abnormal diffusion of Hedgehog proteins.

Extensive purification of proteins from bovine serum revealed an approximately 70 kDa component with both GlcNAc and GlcA transferase activities towards heparan oligosaccharide acceptors [17]. The amino acid sequence of the tryptic peptide of this protein matched a human EST cDNA fragment, from which bovine cDNA encoding a type II transmembrane protein composed of 718 amino acids was obtained. The cDNA sequence was 94% identical to the sequence of human *EXT2*. The expressed protein exhibited weak, yet significant, GlcNAc and GlcA transferase activities. Human *EXT2* has strong sequence homology (31% identity, 69.5% similarity) to human *EXT1*. The overexpression of *EXT1* in the mouse mutant L cells (see above) also showed a slight, yet significant, increase in both enzyme activities, suggesting that *EXT1* also encodes both activities. However, overexpression of either *EXT1* or *EXT2* proteins interfered with the apparent catalytic activity in normal cells.

The *EXT1* and *EXT2* proteins form a hetero-oligomeric complex *in vivo*, which leads to the accumulation of both proteins in the Golgi apparatus, although overexpressed *EXT1* or *EXT2* proteins alone were predominantly localized to the ER [18**, 19*]. It has been claimed that *EXT2*, unlike *EXT1*, does not harbor significant glycosyltransferase activities in the absence of *EXT1* and that the Golgi-localized *EXT1-EXT2* complex represents the biologically relevant form of the enzyme(s) [18**]. Thus, there is still some controversy about the expression of the glycosyltransferase activities of *EXT* proteins. It has recently been confirmed, however, that both the GlcNAc transferase and GlcA transferase activities of both *EXT1* and *EXT2* were expressed in yeast and COS cells (M Kusche-Gullberg *et al.*, unpublished data; see Now in press). Thus, both *EXT1* and *EXT2* appear to have dual enzyme activities, although these enzymes cannot substitute for each other, as evident from the manifestation of the HME syndrome as a result of the mutation of either protein. Despite the individual transferase activities observed for both *EXT1* and *EXT2*, it appears to be difficult to obtain the chain polymerizing activity *in vitro*, which has not been reported for either protein. The possibility that some unidentified regulatory factors may be required for the full polymerase activities of these enzymes cannot be excluded. The direct binding of *EXT2* to other proteins was observed using

two-hybrid screens [20]. Glycosyltransferase activities have not been reported for EXTL1 or EXTL3, although they show strong sequence homology to EXT1 and EXT2, respectively (Figure 2). (For EXTL2, see below; for EXTL3, also see Update.)

It has not been clarified why the effect of mutations in EXT1 and EXT2 is observed only upon chondrocyte function, despite the ubiquitous expression of these genes. It is possible that Indian Hedgehog diffusion is specifically impaired, as suggested above. It has been reported that exostosis chondrocytes have a stellate appearance, with elongated inclusions in the cytoplasm accompanied by massive accumulation of cytoskeletal proteins, including actin and α-actinin [21•], although the relationship between these observations and deficient HS synthesis remains obscure.

### Chain polymerization of chondroitin sulfate

GlcA transferase and GalNAc transferase, which are responsible for the polymerization of the backbone structure of CS/DS chains in vertebrates, were first described in the late 1960s. Although the existence of GlcA transferases I and II was readily noticed [3], two distinct GalNAc transferases, I and II, were first described only in the mid-1980s [4]. These enzymes have attracted little attention, presumably because of the less prominent biological activities of CS/DS chains compared with HS/Hep chains. An 80 kDa GlcA transferase II found in chick tissues was implicated in the synthesis of the chondroitin backbone [22]. In contrast, GlcA transferase II and GalNAc transferase II in bovine serum were co-eluted at 160 kDa by gel filtration and were not separable through various chromatography processes [23]. Hence, they were suggested to reside in a single polypeptide, although it is possible that they form an enzyme complex. However, the serum enzyme preparation was not able to polymerize chondroitin on the chondroitin hexasaccharide (GlcA-GalNAc)₃ or on the linkage region hexasaccharide-serine (GlcA-GalNAc-GlcA-Gal-Gal-Xyl-Ser). In contrast, a partial, yet highly purified, human melanoma enzyme was able to polymerize chondroitin, to some extent, on these acceptor substrates [23] and, to a greater extent, on the naturally truncated linkage region tetrasaccharide stub covalently linked to the core protein of α-thrombomodulin (see below) [24••].

Recently, a chondroitin synthase with both GalNAc transferase and GlcA transferase activities was cloned from bacteria that produce chondroitin or chondroitin-like capsular polysaccharides [25••]. The enzyme, composed of 965 amino acid residues, is 87% identical to bacterial hyaluronan synthase at the nucleotide and amino acid sequence level. A recombinant soluble enzyme of approximately 80 kDa catalyzes the polymerase reactions, producing polymer chains of approximately 10³ sugar residues by alternate additions of GlcA and GalNAc. Until now, no similar vertebrate proteins have

been deposited in the GenBank. The bacterial chondroitin synthase appears to be associated with the plasma membrane, in view of its high homology to hyaluronic acid synthase, which is associated with the plasma membrane, and the production of capsular polysaccharides. In contrast, the vertebrate enzyme(s) is Golgi-resident(s) and both the GlcA and GalNAc transferase reactions are specifically influenced by sulfation patterns of the acceptor substrates [26,27]. In addition, vertebrate CS chains are covalently attached to core proteins, whereas bacterial chondroitin may not be. In this respect, it should be emphasized that a single GalNAc transferase has been proposed to catalyze transferase reactions, not only in CS chain elongation, but also in chain initiation (see below) [24••]. Both reactions are greatly stimulated by the α-thrombomodulin core protein, which appears to be recognized by the putative chondroitin synthase. It is tempting to speculate that a chondroitin synthase that has three enzyme activities, namely GalNAc transferases I and II and GlcA transferase II, may exist (Figure 1, also see below). Cloning of vertebrate transferase(s) is essential for clarifying this issue.

### Biosynthetic sorting of heparan sulfate and chondroitin sulfate

The biosynthetic sorting mechanism of CS/DS and HS/Hep has been a long-standing enigma. This was mainly because the two key enzymes, GlcNAc transferase I and GalNAc transferase I, had not been cloned. Recently, however, the former was cloned. While the alleged GalNAc transferase I for CS/DS chain initiation was being studied, a unique α-GalNAc transferase activity, which shared similar thermostability to the previously reported GalNAc transferase I [4], was discovered in mammalian tissues and cells that transferred GalNAc from UDP–GalNAc to the linkage tetrasaccharide-serine GlcA(β1-3)Gal(β1-3)Gal(β1-4)Xylβ1-O-Ser [28,29] through an α1,4 linkage [30]. Similar enzyme activities were also detected in various cultured cells and localized in the Golgi apparatus [31,32]. Amino acid sequencing of the enzyme purified from serum-free media of human sarcoma cells revealed its identity to the EXTL2 protein [33••]. The expressed protein showed not only α-GalNAc transferase activity towards the linkage tetrasaccharide-serine, but also α-GlcNAc transferase activity towards GlcA(β1-3)Galβ1–naphthalenemethanol, which is an authentic acceptor of previously reported GlcNAc transferase I [34]. This indicates that EXTL2 is identical to GlcNAc transferase I, which determines and initiates HS chain biosynthesis on the common tetrasaccharide linkage region (Figure 1). However, the enzyme was not able to use the linkage region tetrasaccharide-serine as an acceptor for the α-GlcNAc transferase reaction [33••], presumably because it recognizes the specific peptide sequence around the HS attachment site, as suggested previously [35]. The aglycone of GlcA(β1-3)Galβ1–naphthalenemethanol probably mimics the hydrophobic nature of the peptide sequence.

Until recently, little information was available about GalNAc transferase I for CS/DS chain initiation and sorting. Since the pioneering work of Rohrmann *et al.* [4], who reported two distinct β-GalNAc transferase activities with different thermostability, it has been believed that GalNAc transferase I exists in addition to GalNAc transferase II, which synthesizes the repeating disaccharide region. However, the alleged GalNAc transferase I, which is thermostable, appears to be identical to GlcNAc transferase I, which also exhibits α-GalNAc transferase activity [24**]. GalNAc transferase I activity was detected in the spent medium of a human melanoma cell line for the first time when α-thrombomodulin was used as an acceptor substrate. α-Thrombomodulin bears the truncated linkage region tetrasaccharide GlcA(β1-3)Gal(β1-3)Gal(β1-4)Xylβ1- [36] and accepted a β1,4-GalNAc residue on the reducing terminal GlcA of the tetrasaccharide. The partially purified enzyme preparation also showed GalNAc transferase II activity for CS/DS chain elongation. However, this activity was competitively inhibited by α-thrombomodulin, suggesting that a single enzyme catalyzes both activities. Furthermore, it has not been possible to separate GalNAc transferase II activity from GlcA transferase II activity for chain polymerization or elongation [23]. These findings suggest that a single enzyme protein is responsible for the three transferase activities of GalNAc transferases I and II, and GlcA transferase II, namely chondroitin synthase (Figure 1). However, the possibility that an enzyme complex accommodates these three activities cannot be excluded.

### Possible regulatory mechanisms for creating part-time proteoglycans

A number of PG core proteins often lack GAG sidechains and thus exist as non-PG forms as well. It is, however, not clear why a given protein containing the GAG-binding consensus amino acid sequence is not glycanated. It has been generally accepted that xylosylation of the serine residue in the GAG-binding site is the critical determining step for GAG attachment [37]. However, we recently demonstrated the presence of a linkage region tetrasaccharide [GlcA(β1-3)Gal(β1-3)Gal(β1-4)Xylβ1-] on α-thrombomodulin [36], indicating that the first GalNAc transfer to the tetrasaccharide is the regulatory step, at least in the case of converting α-thrombomodulin, which does not have a polymer CS chain, to β-thrombomodulin, which does. Although the α1,4-GalNAc transferase activity of the transferase encoded by *EXTL2* can transfer the α-GalNAc residue to the linkage region tetrasaccharide-serine and to chondroitin oligosaccharides [33**], no such natural structure capped by an α-linked GalNAc residue has been reported. Furthermore, CS chains in aggrecan, for example, from Swarm rat chondrosarcoma chondrocytes, are mainly terminated with sulfated β-GalNAc [38], suggesting that α-GalNAc capping is not involved in chain termination or in creating part-time PGs. Molecular cloning of the remaining glycosyltransferases involved in linkage region synthesis, as well as studies of the regulatory mechanisms of their expression and acceptor specificities, is required for understanding the biosynthetic mechanisms of controlling part-time PGs.

### Modification of the glycosaminoglycan-protein linkage region

A series of structural studies of the GAG–protein linkage region was initiated, based on the working hypothesis that some structural differences in the linkage region among the various GAG chains may exist and may determine the type and/or character of the GAG species to be synthesized [39]. These studies led to the identification of novel modified structures, such as GlcAβ/IdoA(α1-3)Gal(4-O-sulfate)(β1-3)Gal(±6-O-sulfate)(β1-4)Xyl, GlcA(β1-3)Gal(±6-O-sulfate)(β1-3)Gal(6-O-sulfate)(β1-4)Xyl and GlcA(β1-3)Gal(β1-3)Gal(β1-4)Xyl(2-O-phosphate), for CS/DS chains [39–41]. Remarkably, the GAG–protein linkage region of inter-α-trypsin inhibitor and urinary trypsin inhibitor, which bear a single CS chain, is structurally uniform and contains the Gal-4-O-sulfate structure [42]. Notably, sulfated Gal residues have been demonstrated to be present in the linkage region of CS/DS, but not of HS/Hep, although Xyl-2-O-phosphate has been found in both HS/Hep and CS. This indicates that the sulfate groups on the Gal residues may be biosynthetic sorting signals for CS/DS or key elements that control the glycosyltransferases involved in the formation of the linkage region, thereby controlling the maturation of part-time PGs. In this respect, it is intriguing that GlcNAc transferase I, the key enzyme of HS synthesis, which also possesses α-GalNAc transferase activity towards the linkage region tetrasaccharide–serine, was inhibited by the 4-O-sulfation of the Gal residue [28,29]. The phosphorylated Gal-Gal-Xyl-Ser is a better substrate for recombinant GlcAT-I than the unphosphorylated counterpart (Y Tone, J Nishihara, J Tamura, H Kitagawa, K Sugahara, unpublished data). It is not known whether specific sulfotransferases that modify the Gal residues in the linkage region exist or in which cellular compartments these modifications take place. The kinase that phosphorylates the Xyl residue has not been identified.

### Functions of glycosaminoglycans in development revealed by analyses of mutants defective in glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis

The critical roles of GAGs, especially HS, in developmental processes and specific signaling pathways have recently been demonstrated by the identification of mutations in biosynthetic enzymes for HS in *Drosophila* and mice [1**,2**]. Defects in HS synthesis, in particular, a complete loss of GAG chains, result in severe biological consequences. Mutations in the *Drosophila* homolog of UDP-glucose dehydrogenase (*sugarless*), which produces the UDP-GlcA required for GAG synthesis, result in impaired signaling of Wingless, a member of the Wnt family, FGF and Hedgehog, thereby causing very severe phenotypes [43**]. Mutations in the *Drosophila* homolog of

HS N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase (sulfateless), which catalyzes the initial heparan sulfation step essential for the subsequent modifications, also cause severe impairment of these signaling pathways. In mammalian cells, the latter enzyme is required specifically for the modification of HS/Hep, but not of CS/DS, indicating that HS chains are an absolute requirement for the signaling of these growth factors and morphogens [43**, 45**]. Notably, mutations in the *Drosophila* homolog of heparan polymerase (*ttv*), which transfers both GlcA and GlcNAc to heparan chains, only affect Hedgehog, not Wingless or FGF, signaling pathways, suggesting a novel and unprecedented level of specificity and regulation for these signaling pathways [46**]. *ttv* is a member of the *EXT* gene family (56% identical to human *EXT1* and 26% identical to *EXT2*) and, as mentioned, has been implicated in human HME syndrome. The function of the EXT1 and EXT2 proteins as heparan polymerases has recently been elucidated (see above). This, together with the finding that the overall HS concentration is reduced in *ttv* mutants [46**, 47**], suggests that other *Drosophila EXT* genes exist. Therefore, Hedgehog signaling is more sensitive to a reduction in HS chains than Wingless and FGF signaling. Alternatively, the specificity of *ttv* to Hedgehog signaling suggests the existence of Hedgehog-specific HS chains. In *ttv* mutants, Wingless and FGF signaling may not be affected because the HS chains, to which these factors bind, are present [46**].

In addition to these examples, it has been reported that mice lacking the HS 2-O-sulfotransferase exhibit a renal agenesis phenotype [48]. Moreover, *Drosophila* mutants in the *pipe* gene, also encoding a putative HS 2-O-sulfotransferase, show defects in the formation of embryonic dorsal/ventral polarity [49]. Furthermore, mice carrying a targeted disruption of a single gene encoding one of four identified HS N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase genes are unable to synthesize Hep, but produce HS chains [50**, 51**]. The mice are viable and fertile, but show fewer connective-tissue-type mast cells, in which the absence of Hep results in severe defects in the secretory granules.

Recent chemical analyses of GAGs from *C. elegans* and *Drosophila* indicate the presence of only nonsulfated chondroitin and 4-O-sulfated CS, respectively, in addition to sulfated HS [52*, 53*]. However, this does not necessarily mean that CS/DS PGs lack significant function in higher organisms. CS/DS PGs, in addition to HS PGs such as syndecan-2 and syndecan-3, have been implicated in neural network formation in developing mammalian brains [54**]. Numerous studies indicate that brain CS PGs, such as aggrecan, versican, neurocan, brevican, phosphacan, and neuroglycan C, show striking and distinctive changes in their expression in the developing rat brain and play pivotal roles in cell adhesion, proliferation, differentiation, neurite outgrowth, neuronal migration, pathfinding, and synaptogenesis. Neurocan and phosphacan, for example, specifically interact through their CS chains, as well as through core proteins, with matrix glycoproteins, cell adhesion molecules, and growth factors such as pleiotrophin, midkine, amphoterin, and basic FGF. These PGs exhibit overlapping localization with these ligands in the developing rat brain. Although neurocan and phosphacan have no amino acid sequence identity, they share many common ligands, and the CS moiety usually enhances or stabilizes many of these interactions [55, 56, 57**]. Several studies demonstrate that CS chains promote neurite outgrowth *in vitro*. For example, phosphacan, also designated DSD-1-PG, from developing mouse brain promotes neurite outgrowth of embryonic rat neurons [58], which is mimicked by the exogenous oversulfated CS isoforms CS-D and CS-E [59, 60]. Phosphacan is the alternatively spliced extracellular domain of the signal transducing receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatase PTPζ/RPTPβ and is secreted primarily by immature glia cells. However, subsets of neurons also express PTPζ/RPTPβ, as well as phosphacan. Recent evidence indicates that midkine, which forms a unique Hep-binding protein family with pleiotrophin (also known as Hep-binding growth-associated molecule), promotes neuronal adhesion (K Sugahara *et al.*, unpublished data; see Now in press) and migration [57**] through specific interactions with the oversulfated CS moiety of PTPζ/RPTPβ. Obtaining cDNA probes by the molecular cloning of the glycosyltransferases and sulfotransferases involved in CS/DS synthesis will facilitate the analysis of the molecular mechanisms of these functions of CS/DS chains in the brain.

### Conclusions

The current status of our understanding of the biosynthetic mechanisms of sulfated GAGs presented here illustrates the rapidly growing knowledge on chain initiation, sorting, and polymerization of polysaccharide backbones. Nevertheless, current knowledge is still immature and molecular cloning of the, to date, uncloned glycosyltransferases involved in the synthesis of the GAG backbone(s) and the common linkage region is an absolute requirement for a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which a given protein becomes a PG with specific functional GAG chains. The molecular mechanisms of the gene expression and regulation of the glycosyltransferases, as well as the sulfotransferases, including their isoforms at the transcriptional and translational levels, together with specificity studies, will give insights into the biosynthetic regulation of the diverse biological functions of GAGs. The molecular mechanisms underlying the pathology of various diseases involving GAGs will also be revealed. The gene structures that will be reported as the human genome is explored will facilitate this task.

### Update

Mice lacking N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase-1 have recently been generated by gene targeting [61**, 62**]. Unlike mice lacking N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase-2 (see above), these mice developed respiratory distress and atelectasis, which subsequently caused neonatal death.

Targeted disruption of *EXT1* has also been shown to result in embryonic lethality [63**]. The homozygous null mice showed severe developmental anomalies very early in development, around E6.5. Embryonic stem (ES) cells derived from homozygous null embryos showed no appreciable activities of either GlcNAc transferase or GlcA transferase, and completely lacked HS, indicating that *EXT1* plays the primary role in generating HS in vertebrates, as well as in flies (see above). Interestingly, heterozygous null mice had no obvious defects of cartilage-capped outgrowths, as observed for human HME. Wei *et al.* [64•] have reported that a collection of HS-deficient CHO cell mutants (pgsD) is mutated in *EXT1*, but not in *EXT2*. Generation and analysis of mice lacking both N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase-1 and -2, or both *EXT1* and *EXT2* will give more insights into the role of these biosynthetic enzymes.

Expression studies of three mouse *EXT* genes, *EXT1*, *EXT2* and *EXTL1*, throughout various stages of embryonic development have been carried out [65]. Although whole-mount *in situ* hybridization in the developing limb buds showed high levels of expression of all three *EXT* genes, *in situ* hybridization of sectioned embryos revealed remarkable differences in the expression profiles of *EXT1*, *EXT2*, and *EXTL1*.

The rat homolog of human *EXTL3/EXTR1* has been reported to encode Reg-binding protein, which has been proposed to be a cell-surface high-affinity receptor for Reg (regenerating gene) protein [66]. Rat pancreatic β cells, which were transfected with the expression vector containing the rat *EXTL3* cDNA, proliferated in response to Reg protein. Although the authors did not discuss any possible involvement of HS in the Reg protein–Reg receptor interaction, such a possibility may exist.

Xylosyltransferase, which is involved in the synthesis of PGs, has reportedly been purified to homogeneity from rat ear cartilage [67] and culture media of a choriocarcinoma cell line, the latter having been molecularly cloned (J Kuhn, C Gotting, T Brinkmann, K Kleesiek, abstract C-147, 20th International Carbohydrate Symposium, Hamburg, August 2000).

### Acknowledgements

This work was supported, in part, by grants from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture of Japan, including a grant-in-aid for Scientific Research on Priority Areas (10178102).

### References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

- • of special interest
- •• of outstanding interest

1. Perrimon N, Bernfield M: Specificities of heparan sulfate proteoglycans in developmental processes. *Nature* 2000, 404:725-728.
   This is a comprehensive review of the functions of heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycans in signaling and developmental patterning, which have been revealed by the analysis of mutant phenotypes. These phenotypes are associated with mutations in either the enzymes that synthesize the HS sidechains or the core proteins themselves (see also [2**]).

2. Lander AD, Selleck SB: The elusive functions of proteoglycans: *in vivo veritas*. *J Cell Biol* 2000, 148:227-232.
   See annotation to [1**].

3. Rodén L: Structure and metabolism of connective tissue proteoglycans. In *The Biochemistry of Glycoproteins and Proteoglycan*. Edited by Lennarz WJ. New York: Plenum Press; 1980:267-371.

4. Rohrmann K, Niemann R, Buddecke E: Two N-acetyl-galactosaminyltransferase are involved in the biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate. *Eur J Biochem* 1985, 148:463-469.

5. Habuchi O: Diversity and functions of glycosaminoglycan sulfotransferases. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 2000, 1474:115-127.
   A comprehensive review of the recent advances in the cloning of various glycosaminoglycan sulfotransferases.

6. Kitagawa H, Tone Y, Tamura J, Neumann KW, Ogawa T, Oka S, Kawasaki T, Sugahara K: Molecular cloning and expression of glucuronyltransferase I involved in the biosynthesis of the glycosaminoglycan-protein linkage region of proteoglycans. *J Biol Chem* 1998, 273:6615-6618.

7. Tone Y, Kitagawa H, Oka S, Kawasaki T, Sugahara K: Characterization of recombinant glucuronyltransferase I involved in the biosynthesis of the glycosaminoglycan-protein linkage region of proteoglycans. *FEBS Lett* 1999, 459:415-420.

8. Wei G, Bai X, Sarkar AK, Esko JD: Formation of HNK-1 determinants and the glycosaminoglycan tetrasaccharide linkage region by UDP-GlcUA:galactose β1,3-glucuronosyltransferases. *J Biol Chem* 1999, 274:7857-7864.

9. Bai X, Wei G, Sinha A, Esko JD: Chinese hamster ovary cell mutants defective in glycosaminoglycan assembly and glucuronosyltransferase I. *J Biol Chem* 1999, 274:13017-13024.
   The authors identify CHO cell mutants defective in glycosaminoglycan (GAG) glucuronyltransferase I. The mutants fail to make both heparan sulfate (HS) and chondroitin sulfate (CS). Transfection of the mutants with a GAG glucuronyltransferase I cDNA completely restored GAG synthesis. Thus, a single glucuronyltransferase I gene appears to be responsible for the biosynthesis of the common linkage region of both HS and CS in CHO cells.

10. Okajima T, Yoshida K, Kondo T, Furukawa K: Human homolog of *Caenorhabditis elegans sqv-3* gene is galactosyltransferase I involved in the biosynthesis of the glycosaminoglycan-protein linkage region of proteoglycans. *J Biol Chem* 1999, 274:22915-22918.
    This paper, together with [11•], reports the cDNA cloning of glycosaminoglycan galactosyltransferase I. The cDNA sequence shows 38% homology to the *C. elegans sqv-3* gene, which is involved in vulval invagination and oocyte development (see also [13**]).

11. Almeida R, Levery SB, Mandel U, Kresse H, Schwientek T, Bennett EP, Clausen H: Cloning and expression of a proteoglycan UDP-galactose:β-xyllose β1,4-galactosyltransferase I. A seventh member of the human β4-galactosyltransferase gene family. *J Biol Chem* 1999, 274:26165-26171.
    See annotation to [10•,12•].

12. Okajima T, Fukumoto S, Furukawa K, Urano T: Molecular basis for the progeroid variant of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Identification and characterization of two mutations in galactosyltransferase I gene. *J Biol Chem* 1999, 274:28841-28844.
    Together with [11•], this paper reveals the molecular basis for the progeroid-type Ehlers–Danlos syndrome, which was reported to be caused by defects in glycosaminoglycan galactosyltransferase I.

13. Herman T, Horvitz HR: Three proteins involved in vulval invagination are similar to components of a glycosylation pathway. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1999, 96:968-973.
    The authors describe molecular analyses of three genes, *sqv-3*, *sqv-7* and *sqv-8*, that are required for wild-type vulval invagination in *C. elegans* and present evidence that any abnormalities are likely to be caused by specific defects in glycosylation. Together with the findings described in [10•,11•], the *sqv-3* and *sqv-8* genes might be involved in the biosynthesis of the glycosaminoglycan–protein linkage region of proteoglycans.

14. McCormick C, Leduc Y, Martindale D, Mattison K, Esford LE, Dyer AP, Tufaro F: The putative tumor suppressors *EXT1* alters the expression of cell-surface heparan sulfate. *Nat Genet* 1998, 19:158-161.

15. McCormick C, Tufaro F: New perspectives on the molecular basis of hereditary bone tumours. *Mol Med Today* 1999, 5:481-486.
A comprehensive review and future perspectives on the molecular basis of the human hereditary multiple exostoses.

16. Bellaiche Y, The I, Perrimon N: Tout-velu is a *Drosophila* homologue of the putative tumour suppressor EXT-1 and is needed for Hh diffusion. *Nature* 1998, 394:85-88.

17. Lind T, Tufaro F, McCormick C, Lindahl U, Lidholt K: The putative tumor suppressors EXT1 and EXT2 are glycosyltransferases required for the biosynthesis of heparan sulfate. *J Biol Chem* 1998, 273:26265-26268.

18. McCormick C, Duncan G, Goutsos KT, Tufaro F: The putative tumor suppressors EXT1 and EXT2 form a stable complex that accumulates in the Golgi apparatus and catalyzes the synthesis of heparan sulfate. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2000, 97:668-673.
This paper, together with [19•], reports that EXT1 and EXT2 form a hetero-oligomeric complex *in vivo* that leads to the accumulation of both proteins in the Golgi apparatus. Interestingly, the Golgi-localized EXT1–EXT2 complex possesses substantially higher glycosyltransferase activity than EXT1 or EXT2 alone, which suggests that the complex represents the biologically relevant form of the enzyme(s).

19. Kobayashi S, Morimoto K, Shimizu T, Takahashi M, Kurosawa H, Shirasawa T: Association of EXT1 and EXT2, hereditary multiple exostoses gene products, in Golgi apparatus. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 2000, 268:860-867.
See annotation to [18•].

20. Simmons AD, Musy MM, Lopes CS, Hwang LY, Yang YP, Lovett M: A direct interaction between EXT proteins and glycosyltransferases is defective in hereditary multiple exostoses. *Hum Mol Genet* 1999, 8:2155-2164.

21. Bernard MA, Hogue DA, Cole WG, Sanford T, Snuggs MB, Montufar-Solis D, Duke PJ, Carson DD, Scott A, Van Winkle WB, Hecht JT: Cytoskeletal abnormalities in chondrocytes with EXT1 and EXT2 mutations. *J Bone Miner Res* 2000, 15:442-450.
Exostosis chondrocytes from three patients with hereditary multiple exostoses (HME) and from one individual with non-HME isolated exostosis were characterized. The findings suggest that mutations in the EXT genes cause abnormal processing of cytoskeletal proteins in chondrocytes.

22. Sugumaran G, Katsman M, Sunthankar P, Drake RR: Biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate. Purification of glucuronosyl transferase II and use of photoaffinity labeling for characterization of the enzyme as an 80-kDa protein. *J Biol Chem* 1997, 272:14399-14403.

23. Tsuchida K, Lind T, Kitagawa H, Lindahl U, Sugahara K, Lidholt K: Purification and characterization of fetal bovine serum N-acetyl-D-galactosaminyltransferase and glucuronyltransferase involved in chondroitin sulfate biosynthesis. *Eur J Biochem* 1999, 264:461-467.

24. Nadanaka S, Kitagawa H, Goto F, Tamura J, Neumann KW, Ogawa T, Sugahara K: Involvement of the core protein in the first β-N-acetylgalactosamine transfer to the glycosaminoglycan-protein linkage region tetrasaccharide and in the subsequent polymerization: the critical determining step for chondroitin sulfate biosynthesis. *Biochem J* 1999, 340:353-357.
This paper reports that the core protein is required for the transfer of the first GalNAc residue, through a β1,4 linkage, to the glycosaminoglycan–protein linkage region tetrasaccharide and also for the subsequent, efficient chain polymerization reactions. The critical determining step of chondroitin sulfate biosynthesis is the transfer of the first GalNAc residue. This is the first report demonstrating chondroitin polymerization *in vitro* using a soluble enzyme preparation.

25. DeAngelis PL, Padgett-McCue AJ: Identification and molecular cloning of a chondroitin synthase from *Pasteurella multocida* type F. *J Biol Chem* 2000, 275:24124-24129.
This is the first report identifying a glycosyltransferase that forms a polysaccharide composed of chondroitin disaccharide repeats [-4GlcA(β1-3)GalNAcβ1-]n. The authors have demonstrated that a single polypeptide enzyme possesses both glucuronyl and N-acetylgalactosaminyl transferase activities in this bacterium.

26. Kitagawa H, Tsutsumi K, Ujikawa M, Goto F, Tamura J, Neumann K, Ogawa T, Sugahara K: Regulation of chondroitin sulfate biosynthesis by specific sulfation: acceptor specificity of serum β-GalNAc transferase revealed by structurally-defined oligosaccharides. *Glycobiology* 1997, 7:531-537.

27. Kitagawa H, Ujikawa M, Tsutsumi K, Tamura J, Neumann K, Ogawa T, Sugahara K: Characterization of serum β-glucuronyltransferase involved in chondroitin sulfate biosynthesis. *Glycobiology* 1997, 7:905-911.

28. Kitagawa H, Tanaka Y, Tsuchida K, Goto F, Ogawa T, Lidholt K, Lindahl U, Sugahara K: N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) transfer to the common carbohydrate-protein linkage region of sulfated glycosaminoglycans. *J Biol Chem* 1995, 270:22190-22195.

29. Lidholt K, Fjelstad M, Lindahl U, Goto F, Ogawa T, Kitagawa H, Sugahara K: Assessment of glycosaminoglycan-protein linkage tetrasaccharides as acceptors for GalNAc- and GlcNAc-transferases from mouse mastocytoma. *Glycoconj J* 1997, 14:737-742.

30. Kitagawa H, Kano Y, Shimakawa H, Goto F, Ogawa T, Okabe H, Sugahara K: Identification and characterization of a novel UDP-GalNAc:GlcA β-R α1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyl-transferase from a human sarcoma cell line. *Glycobiology* 1999, 9:697-703.

31. Manzi A, Salimath PV, Spiro RC, Keifer PA, Freeze HH: Identification of a novel glycosaminoglycan core-like molecule I: 500 MHz 1H NMR analysis using a nano-NMR probe indicates the presence of a terminal α-GalNAc residue capping 4-methylumbelliferyl-β-D-xyloside. *J Biol Chem* 1995, 270:9154-9163.

32. Miura Y, Freeze HH: α-N-acetylgalactosamine-capping of chondroitin sulfate core region oligosaccharides primed on xylosides. *Glycobiology* 1998, 8:813-819.

33. Kitagawa H, Shimakawa H, Sugahara K: The tumor suppressor EXT-like gene EXTL2 encodes an α1,4-N-acetylhexosaminyltransferase that transfers N-acetylgalactosamine and N-acetylglucosamine to the common glycosaminoglycan-protein linkage region. The key enzyme for the chain initiation of heparan sulfate. *J Biol Chem* 1999, 274:13933-13937.
The authors have provided the first evidence that the multiple exostoses-like gene EXTL2/EXTR2 encodes an enzyme with the dual catalytic activities of an α-GalNAc transferase and a GlcNAc transferase I, that is, an α1,4-N-acetylhexosaminyltransferase that transfers GalNAc/GlcNAc to the core oligosaccharide representing the glycosaminoglycan–protein linkage region. Thus, the enzyme turned out to be identical to the previously described GlcNAc transferase I, which determines and initiates the biosynthesis of heparan sulfate and, most likely, heparin as well.

34. Fritz TA, Gabb MM, Wei G, Esko JD: Two N-acetyl-glucosaminyltransferases catalyze the biosynthesis of heparan sulfate. *J Biol Chem* 1994, 269:28809-28814.

35. Esko JD, Zhang L: Influence of core protein sequence on glycosaminoglycan assembly. *Curr Opin Cell Biol* 1996, 6:663-670.

36. Nadanaka S, Kitagawa H, Sugahara K: Demonstration of the immature glycosaminoglycan tetrasaccharide sequence GlcAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xyl on recombinant soluble human α-thrombomodulin. A possible mechanism generating ‘part-time’ proteoglycans. *J Biol Chem* 1998, 273:33728-33734.

37. Vertel BM, Walters LM, Flay N, Kearns AE, Schwartz NB: Xylosylation is an endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi event. *J Biol Chem* 1993, 268:11105-11112.

38. Plaas AH, Wong-Palms S, Roughley PJ, Midura RJ, Hascall VC: Chemical and immunological assay of the nonreducing terminal residues of chondroitin sulfate from human aggrecan. *J Biol Chem* 1997, 272:20603-20610.

39. Sugahara K, Yamashina I, De Waard P, Van Halbeek H, Vliegenthart JFG: Structural studies on sulfated glycopeptides from the carbohydrate-protein linkage region of chondroitin 4-sulfate proteoglycans of Swarm rat chondrosarcoma. Demonstration of the structure, Gal(4-O-sulfate) β1-3Galβ1-4Xylβ1-O-Ser. *J Biol Chem* 1988, 263:10168-10174.

40. Sugahara K, Ohi Y, Harada T, de Waard P, Vliegenthart JFG: Structural studies on sulfated oligosaccharides derived from the carbohydrate-protein linkage region of chondroitin 6-sulfate proteoglycans of shark cartilage. I. Six compounds containing 0 or 1 sulfate and/or phosphate residue. *J Biol Chem* 1992, 267:6027-6035.

41. de Waard P, Vliegenthart JFG, Harada T, Sugahara K: Structural studies on sulfated oligosaccharides derived from the carbohydrate-protein linkage region of chondroitin 6-sulfate

526 Carbohydrates and glycoconjugates

proteoglycans of shark cartilage. II. Seven compounds containing 2 or 3 sulfate residues. *J Biol Chem* 1992, 267:6036-6044.

42. Yamada S, Oyama M, Yuki Y, Kato K, Sugahara K: The uniform galactose 4-sulfate structure in the carbohydrate-protein linkage region of human urinary trypsin inhibitor. *Eur J Biochem* 1995, 233:687-693.

43. Lin X, Buff EM, Perrimon N, Michelson AM: Heparan sulfate proteoglycans are essential for FGF receptor signaling during Drosophila embryonic development. *Development* 1999, 126:3715-3723.
This paper reveals that sugarless and sulfateless mutant embryos, which encode enzymes required for the biosynthesis of heparan sulfate chains, have phenotypes similar to those of embryos lacking the functions of two Drosophila fibroblast growth factor receptors, Heartless and Breathless.

44. Tsuda M, Kamimura K, Nakato H, Archer M, Staatz W, Fox B, Humphrey M, Olson S, Futch T, Kaluza V *et al.*: The cell-surface proteoglycan Dally regulates Wingless signalling in Drosophila. *Nature* 1999, 400:276-280.
Biochemical evidence is presented that dally encodes a cell-surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan. By using RNA interference, dally is demonstrated to be required for Decapentaplegic (Dpp) signaling in some imaginal tissues, but is specifically required for Wingless, and not Dpp, signaling in the embryonic epidermis.

45. Lin X, Perrimon N: Dally cooperates with Drosophila Frizzled 2 to transduce Wingless signalling. *Nature* 1999, 400:281-284.
The authors characterized the phenotype of sulfateless and dally mutant embryos, which encode an enzyme involved in the sulfation of heparan sulfate and a GPI-linked heparan sulfate proteoglycan (glypican), respectively. Loss of function of either of these gene products impairs Wingless signaling in the embryonic ectoderm and in the wing disc. Dally is suggested to act as a co-receptor for Wingless, which functions with Drosophila Frizzled 2 in the transduction of Wingless signals.

46. The I, Bellaiche Y, Perrimon N: Hedgehog movement is regulated through tout-velu dependent synthesis of a heparan sulfate proteoglycan. *Mol Cell* 1999, 4:633-639.
The authors present evidence that ttv (tout-velu) is involved in heparan sulfate proteoglycan (HS PG) biosynthesis *in vivo* and that HS PGs play a critical role in Hedgehog distribution. In addition, surprisingly, they also show that the activity of the HS PG-dependent fibroblast growth factor and Wingless signaling pathways are not affected in ttv mutants.

47. Toyoda H, Kinoshita-Toyoda A, Fox B, Selleck SB: Structural analysis of glycosaminoglycans in animals bearing mutations in sugarless, sulfateless, and tout-velu: Drosophila homologues of vertebrate genes encoding glycosaminoglycan biosynthetic enzymes. *J Biol Chem* 2000, 275:21856-21861.
This paper complements [53•] with data on the biochemical characterization of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) in Drosophila bearing mutations in sugarless, sulfateless and tout-velu (ttv). These three genes differentially affect GAG biosynthesis.

48. Bullock SL, Fletcher JM, Beddington RSP, Wilson VA: Renal agenesis in mice homozygous for a gene trap mutation in the gene encoding heparan sulfate 2-sulfotransferase. *Genes Dev* 1998, 12:1894-1906.

49. Sen J, Goltz JS, Stevens L, Stein D: Spatially restricted expression of pipe in the Drosophila egg chamber defines embryonic dorsal-ventral polarity. *Cell* 1998, 95:471-481.

50. Humphries DE, Wong GW, Friend DS, Gurish MF, Qiu W-T, Huang C, Sharpe AH, Stevens RL: Heparin is essential for the storage of specific granule proteases in mast cells. *Nature* 1999, 400:769-772.
This paper, together with [51••], reports that the targeted disruption of the gene for glucosaminyl N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase-2 produces transgenic mice that lack heparin, revealing a physiological function for this molecule.

51. Forsberg E, Pejler G, Ringvall M, Lunderius C, Tomasini-Johansson B, Kusche-Gullberg M, Eriksson I, Ledin J, Hellman L, Kjellen L: Abnormal mast cells in mice deficient in a heparin-synthesizing enzyme. *Nature* 1999, 400:773-776.
See annotation to [50••].

52. Yamada Y, Van Die I, Van den Eijnden DH, Yokota A, Kitagawa H, Sugahara K: Demonstration of glycosaminoglycans in Caenorhabditis elegans. *FEBS Lett* 1999, 459:327-331.
This paper, together with [53•], reports the first direct evidence for the existence of glycosaminoglycans in C. elegans. A nonsulfated chondroitin and heparan sulfate are identified.

53. Toyoda H, Kinoshita-Toyoda A, Selleck SB: Structural analysis of glycosaminoglycans in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis elegans and demonstration that tout-velu, a Drosophila gene related to EXT tumor suppressors, affects heparan sulfate *in vivo*. *J Biol Chem* 2000, 275:2269-2275.
The authors provide the first direct evidence for the existence of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) in Drosophila, as well as in C. elegans. Analysis of GAGs from ttv (tout-velu) mutant larvae show marked reductions in heparan sulfate, but not chondroitin sulfate.

54. Oohira A, Matsui F, Tokita Y, Yamauchi S, Aono S: Molecular interactions of neural chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans in the brain development. *Arch Biochem Biophys* 2000, 374:24-34.
This is a comprehensive review on the putative roles of chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans in brain development, focusing on their molecular interactions with extracellular matrix glycoproteins, cell adhesion molecules and growth factors.

55. Maeda N, Noda M: Involvement of receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatase ζ/RPTPβ and its ligand pleiotrophin/heparin-binding growth-associated molecule (HB-GAM) in neuronal migration. *J Cell Biol* 1998, 142:203-216.

56. Milev P, Chiba A, Haring M, Rauvala H, Schachner M, Ranscht B, Margolis RK, Margolis RU: High affinity binding and overlapping localization of neurocan and phosphacan/protein-tyrosine phosphatase-ζ/β with tenascin-R, amphoterin, and the heparin-binding growth-associated molecule. *J Biol Chem* 1998, 273:6998-7005.

57. Maeda N, Ichihara-Tanaka K, Kimura T, Kadomatsu K, Muramatsu T, Noda M: A receptor-like protein-tyrosine phosphatase PTPζ/RPTPβ binds a heparin-binding growth factor midkine. Involvement of arginine 78 of midkine in the high affinity binding to PTPζ. *J Biol Chem* 1999, 274:12474-12479.
This paper demonstrates the specific binding of midkine to receptor-like protein tyrosine phosphatase ζ/RPTPβ (a chondroitin sulfate [CS] proteoglycan) and the importance of the binding in neuronal migration. The potent inhibition of the binding and the neuronal migration by exogenous dermatan sulfate and oversulfated CS is also shown.

58. Clement AM, Nadanaka S, Masayama K, Mandl C, Sugahara K, Faissner A: The DSD-1 carbohydrate epitope depends on sulfation, correlates with chondroitin sulfate D motifs, and is sufficient to promote neurite outgrowth. *J Biol Chem* 1998, 273:28444-28453.

59. Nadanaka S, Clement A, Masayama K, Faissner A, Sugahara K: Characteristic hexasaccharide sequences in octasaccharides derived from shark cartilage chondroitin sulfate D with a neurite outgrowth promoting activity. *J Biol Chem* 1998, 273:3296-3307.

60. Clement AM, Sugahara K, Faissner A: Chondroitin sulfate E promotes neurite outgrowth of rat embryonic day 18 hippocampal neurons. *Neurosci Lett* 1999, 269:125-128.

61. Fan G, Xiao L, Cheng L, Wang X, Sun B, Hu G: Targeted disruption of NDST-1 gene leads to pulmonary hypoplasia and neonatal respiratory distress in mice. *FEBS Lett* 2000, 467:7-11.
Mice deficient in N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase-1 developed respiratory distress and atelectasis, which subsequently caused neonatal death. Morphological examination revealed type II pneumocyte immaturity. Biochemical analysis indicated the reduction in total phospholipid and disaturated phosphatidylcholine in the mutant lung. (See also [62••].)

62. Ringvall M, Ledin J, Holmborn K, van Kuppevelt T, Ellin F, Eriksson I, Olofsson AM, Kjellen L, Forsberg E: Defective heparan sulfate biosynthesis and neonatal lethality in mice lacking N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase-1. *J Biol Chem* 2000, 275:25926-25930.
Most mice deficient in N-deacetylase/N-sulfotransferase-1 developed respiratory distress and atelectasis, which subsequently caused neonatal death. Structural alteration of heparan sulfate (HS) in lung, liver and kidney was immunologically demonstrated. It is surprising that the mutant embryos carrying the altered HS in most parts of the body are able to survive the embryonic period. A minor proportion of the homozygous null embryos died during the embryonic period. The cause of the embryonic lethality is unclear, but incompletely penetrant defects of the skull and the eyes have been observed. (See also [61••].)

63. Lin X, Wei G, Shi Z, Dryer L, Esko JD, Wells DE, Matzuk MM: Disruption of gastrulation and heparan sulfate biosynthesis in EXT1-deficient mice. *Dev Biol* 2000, 224:299-311.
The authors generated EXT1-deficient mice by gene targeting. EXT1 homozygous mutants failed to gastrulate and generally lacked organized mesoderm and extraembryonic tissues, resulting in smaller embryos compared with normal litter mates. Embryonic stem cells derived from homozygous null embryos completely lacked heparan sulfate (HS). These results

indicate that HS is critical in normal development of these tissues. It was also demonstrated that Indian Hedgehog protein, which plays an important role in tissue patterning during vertebrate development, failed to associate with the EXT1-deficient cells.

64. Wei G, Bai X, Bame KJ, Koshy TI, Spear PG, Esko JD: Location of the glucuronosyltransferase domain in the heparan sulfate copolymerase (EXT1) by analysis of Chinese hamster ovary cell mutants. J Biol Chem 2000, in press.
A collection of heparan sulfate (HS)-deficient CHO cell mutants were found to be mutated in the EXT1 locus. Analysis of the EXT1 mutant alleles revealed clustered missense mutations in a domain that included a D/EXD/E motif, which binds the sugar nucleotide. The mutations either altered GlcA transferase activity selectively or affected both GlcNAc and GlcA transferase activities. None of the mutants, which are altered in HS formation, had defects in EXT2.

65. Stickens D, Brown D, Evans GA: EXT genes are differentially expressed in bone and cartilage during mouse embryogenesis. Dev Dyn 2000, 218:452-464.

66. Kobayashi S, Akiyama T, Nata K, Abe M, Tajima M, Shervani NJ, Unno M, Matsuno S, Sasaki H, Takasawa S, Okamoto H: Identification of a receptor for reg (regenerating gene) protein, a pancreatic beta-cell regeneration factor. J Biol Chem 2000, 275:10723-10726.

67. Pfeil U, Wenzel KW: Purification and some properties of UDP-xylosyltransferase of rat ear cartilage. Glycobiology 2000, 10:803-807.

**Now in press**

The works referred to in the text as (M Negishi *et al.*, unpublished data), (M Kusche-Gullberg *et al.*, unpublished data) and (K Sugahara *et al.*, unpublished data) are now in press:

68. Pedersen LC, Tsuchida K, Kitagawa H, Sugahara K, Darden TA, Negishi M: Heparan/chondroitin sulfate biosynthesis: structure and mechanism of human glucuronyltransferase I. J Biol Chem 2000, in press.

69. Senay C, Lind T, Muguruma K, Tone Y, Kitagawa H, Sugahara K, Lidholt K, Lindahl U, Kusche-Gullberg M: The EXT1/EXT2 tumor suppressors; catalytic activities and role in heparan sulfate biosynthesis. EMBO Reports 2000, in press.

70. Ueoka C, Kaneda N, Okazaki I, Nadanaka S, Muramatsu T, Sugahara K: Inhibition of the midkine-mediated neural cell adhesion to culture substrates by chondroitin sulfate E. Specific molecular interactions of midkine with chondroitin sulfate E. J Biol Chem 2000, in press.
