
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Nov. 2000, p. 6339–6346
0021-9193/00/$04.00+0
Copyright © 2000, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

**BenR, a XylS Homologue, Regulates Three Different Pathways of Aromatic Acid Degradation in *Pseudomonas putida***

CHARLES E. COWLES, NANCY N. NICHOLS,† AND CAROLINE S. HARWOOD*

Department of Microbiology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242

Received 18 May 2000/Accepted 29 August 2000

*Pseudomonas putida* converts benzoate to catechol using two enzymes that are encoded on the chromosome and whose expression is induced by benzoate. Benzoate also binds to the regulator XylS to induce expression of the TOL (toluene degradation) plasmid-encoded *meta* pathway operon for benzoate and methylbenzoate degradation. Finally, benzoate represses the ability of *P. putida* to transport 4-hydroxybenzoate (4-HBA) by preventing transcription of *pcaK*, the gene encoding the 4-HBA permease. Here we identified a gene, *benR*, as a regulator of benzoate, methylbenzoate, and 4-HBA degradation genes. A *benR* mutant isolated by random transposon mutagenesis was unable to grow on benzoate. The deduced amino acid sequence of BenR showed high similarity (62% identity) to the sequence of XylS, a member of the AraC family of regulators. An additional seven genes located adjacent to *benR* were inferred to be involved in benzoate degradation based on their deduced amino acid sequences. The *benABC* genes likely encode benzoate dioxygenase, and *benD* likely encodes 2-hydro-1,2-dihydroxybenzoate dehydrogenase. *benK* and *benF* were assigned functions as a benzoate permease and porin, respectively. The possible function of a final gene, *benE*, is not known. *benR* activated expression of a *benA-lacZ* reporter fusion in response to benzoate. It also activated expression of a *meta* cleavage operon promoter-*lacZ* fusion inserted in an *E. coli* chromosome. Third, *benR* was required for benzoate-mediated repression of *pcaK-lacZ* fusion expression. The *benA* promoter region contains a direct repeat sequence that matches the XylS binding site previously defined for the *meta* cleavage operon promoter. It is likely that BenR binds to the promoter region of chromosomal benzoate degradation genes and plasmid-encoded methylbenzoate degradation genes to activate gene expression in response to benzoate. The action of BenR in repressing 4-HBA uptake is probably indirect.

---

*Pseudomonas putida* converts a variety of environmental pollutants and plant phenolic compounds to a small number of structurally simple aromatic compounds that are the starting points for pathways of aromatic ring fission (20). Ring fission is termed *ortho* cleavage when it occurs between two adjacent hydroxyl groups and *meta* cleavage when it occurs adjacent to a single hydroxyl group. *P. putida* can degrade the aromatic acid benzoate, after converting it to catechol, by either a *meta* ring cleavage pathway or an *ortho* ring cleavage pathway (20). The aromatic acid 4-hydroxybenzoate (4-HBA) is degraded by an *ortho* ring cleavage pathway after conversion to protocatechuate (Fig. 1).

The TOL (toluene degradation) catabolic plasmid (pWW0) from *P. putida* carries genes for the degradation of toluene and xylene (34). On the plasmid are found two operons involved in aromatic compound degradation. One of the operons encodes enzymes for the conversion of toluene and xylene to benzoate and methylated benzoates (the upper pathway), and the other encodes enzymes that catalyze a *meta* ring cleavage and subsequent reactions leading to the formation of tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates (the *meta* pathway). Transcription of the *meta* pathway genes is regulated by XylS, a protein also encoded on the TOL catabolic plasmid (34). *P. putida* will also convert benzoate to catechol using chromosomally encoded enzymes. The genes for these enzymes have not yet been sequenced or fully characterized (25). Catechol, but not methylated catechols, is then further degraded to trichloroacetic acid cycle intermediates by an *ortho* ring cleavage pathway (Fig. 1) (20).

Benzoate induces the synthesis of the TOL plasmid-encoded enzymes of the *meta* fission pathway (11, 22) as well as synthesis of the chromosomally encoded enzymes that convert benzoate to catechol. Additionally, a surprising recent finding is that benzoate represses the utilization of 4-HBA (40). When *P. putida* is given a mixture of benzoate and 4-HBA, it degrades benzoate in preference to 4-HBA. Presumably, this is a reflection of the fact that benzoate supports a slightly higher rate of growth than 4-HBA. Benzoate was found to depress the levels of 4-HBA hydroxylase and protocatechuate dioxygenase activity, as well as the level of 4-HBA transport in cells grown on benzoate plus 4-HBA. Benzoate represses 4-HBA transport by preventing transcription of *pcaK*, the gene encoding the 4-HBA permease (40).

Here we described a chromosomally encoded cluster of eight genes from *P. putida* that is involved in conversion of benzoate to catechol and that includes a new regulatory gene, *benR*. We determined that BenR activates expression of benzoate dioxygenase genes in response to benzoate. It is also necessary for benzoate-dependent repression of 4-HBA transport gene expression. In addition, we demonstrate the likeness of BenR to XylS by showing that BenR activates expression of the *meta* cleavage pathway operon of the TOL catabolic plasmid. BenR thus has roles as an activator of benzoate degradation via *ortho* ring fission, as an activator of benzoate and methylbenzoate degradation via *meta* ring fission, and in repression of 4-HBA degradation.

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242. Phone: (319) 335-7783. Fax: (319) 335-7679. E-mail: caroline-harwood@uiowa.edu.
† Present address: Fermentation Biochemistry Research Unit, National Center for Agricultural Utilization Research, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Peoria, IL 61604.

from the first-round reactions was used as template in second-round reactions with primers annealing to the 5′ end of the arbitrary primers and the respective transposon-specific primers from the first-round reactions. PCR products were sequenced using the transposon-specific primers as sequencing primers.

Colony hybridization. A 335-bp probe specific to the region flanking the transposon insertion in strain PRS4157 was labeled with [³²P]dCTP using Ready To Go DNA labeling beads (−dCTP) and purified with a ProbeQuant G-50 Micro column (Pharmacia Biotech, Piscataway, N.J.). *E. coli* colonies carrying EcoRI-generated fragments of *P. putida* genomic DNA in pUC19 were screened by colony hybridization (48) to identify wild-type DNA corresponding to the region that was indicated by transposon mutagenesis to be required for benzoate degradation. The probe hybridized to an approximately 12-kb fragment of DNA that was designated pCNN100. A 1.3-kb EcoRI-XmaI fragment containing the portion of the *benF* reading frame not contained on pCNN100 was subsequently cloned by inverse PCR (41). This clone was designated pCCH108.

DNA sequencing and analysis. DNA sequencing was performed by the University of Iowa DNA Sequencing Facility (Iowa City). Sequence assembly and analysis were done with GENE Inspector, version 1.0.1 (Textco Inc., West Lebanon, N.H.). The amino acid sequences of open reading frames were submitted to the National Center for Biotechnology Information (Bethesda, Md.) and analyzed using the BLASTp 2.0.9 algorithm (1). The sequence alignment was constructed using the CLUSTAL W multiple-sequence alignment program at the Baylor College of Medicine Human Genome Center (52), and the program BOXSHADE (version 3.21) was used to shade aligned sequences.

Cloning and DNA manipulations. Standard protocols were used for cloning and transformations. Restriction digests and ligations were performed using standard techniques. Plasmid DNA was prepared by using a QIAprep Spin Miniprep kit, and DNA restriction fragments were isolated from agarose gels using the QIAquick gel extraction kit (Qiagen Inc., Santa Clarita, Calif.).

Total RNA was isolated from PRS2000 cells grown on either glucose or glucose plus benzoate (2.5 mM) using the SV total RNA isolation system as instructed by the manufacturer (Promega Corp., Madison, Wis.). The transcription start site of *benA* was determined by primer extension analysis using the Promega AMV-RT (Avian myeloblastosis virus reverse transcriptase) primer extension system. The primer was complementary to bases 45 to 28 of *benA*. Primer extension products were analyzed on a 6% polyacrylamide gel next to a sequence ladder generated with the same primer. The Access reverse transcription-PCR system (Promega) was used to determine the transcriptional organization of the *benA*, -B, and -C genes. In each case, a reverse transcriptase-free control was included to ensure that reaction mixtures did not contain contaminating DNA.

Reporter plasmids pHNN216 and pCCH101 were constructed using a two-step cloning procedure described previously (46). The promoter regions of *benA* and *pcaK* were amplified by PCR and then directionally inserted adjacent to a Ω Spʳ/Smʳ cassette in either pHRP315 or pHRP317. Fragments containing the ΩSpʳ/Smʳ cassette and promoter region were then inserted upstream of the promoterless *lacZ* gene of pHRP309 to create pCCH101 (*benA-lacZ*) or pHNN216 (*pcaK-lacZ*). The fusions of the promoter-containing fragments and *lacZ* were confirmed by sequencing.

A 1,189-bp PCR product containing the *benR* open reading frame and suspected promoter region was cloned into the EcoRI/PstI sites of pRK415 to generate pCCH107. A 989-bp PCR product containing only the *benR* open reading frame was cloned into the NdeI/PstI sites of pT7-7 downstream of the T7 promoter to construct the BenR expression plasmid, pCCH106.

β-Galactosidase assays. β-Galactosidase activities of *P. putida* cells carrying *benA-lacZ* or *pcaK-lacZ* transcriptional fusion plasmids were assayed according to Miller (36). For analysis of *P. putida* strains carrying pCCH101, cultures were grown to an *A*₆₀₀ of 0.1 with succinate as the sole carbon source, at which time compounds to be tested for the ability to induce gene expression were added to a final concentration of 1 mM. For analysis of *P. putida* strains carrying pHNN216, cultures were grown with the indicated concentrations of compounds. β-Galactosidase activities were determined for cells harvested at an *A*₆₀₀ of 0.2. Six to eight independently grown cultures were assayed in triplicate, and the values were averaged. For analysis of gene expression in *E. coli*, cells were grown in LB at 30°C to an *A*₆₀₀ of 0.25, at which time benzoate and catechol, if added, were added to a final concentration of 1 mM. *E. coli* cells were harvested at a final *A*₆₀₀ of 0.5.

4-HBA uptake assays. Cells (50 ml) grown in BM with either 4-HBA or a mixture of benzoate (2.5 mM) and 4-HBA (2.5 mM) as carbon sources were harvested at mid-logarithmic phase, washed in 25 ml of phosphate buffer (25 mM KH₂PO₄, 25 mM Na₂HPO₄), and resuspended in 2 ml of phosphate buffer. Resuspended cells (300 μl) were added to an equal volume of reaction mixture (25 mM KH₂PO₄, 25 mM Na₂HPO₄, 4.0 mM succinate, 4.0 mM glucose, 127 μM ¹⁴C-labeled 4-HBA) to start the assay. At timed intervals, 100-μl samples were removed, filtered through Nucleopore polycarbonate membranes (0.2-μm pore size; Costar Corp., Cambridge, Mass.), and washed with 1.8 ml of phosphate buffer. Accumulated substrate was determined by scintillation counting of the cells retained on the filters.

Protein determinations. Whole cells were precipitated by addition of trichloroacetic acid to 5% and then boiled in 0.1 N NaOH for 10 min. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bio-Rad (Hercules, Calif.) protein assay, with bovine serum albumin as a standard.

TABLE 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids used

| Strain or plasmid | Relevant characteristic(s) $^{a}$ | Reference or source |
|-------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------|
| E. coli strains   |                                 |                     |
| BL21(DE3)         | Carries T7 RNA polymerase under the control of lacUV5 promoter | 51 |
| CC118Pm-lacZ      | Tc$^r$; CC118 with chromosomal mini-Tn5::Pm::lacZ insertion | 31 |
| DH5$\alpha$       | F$^{-}\lambda^{-}$recA1 $\Delta$(lacZYA-argF) U169 hsdR17 thi-1 gyrA96 supE44 endA1 relA1 $\phi$80dlacZ$\Delta$M15 | GIBCO-BRL |
| HB101             | F$^{-}\lambda^{-}$recA1 $\Delta$(lacZYA-argF) U169 hsdR17 thi-1 gyrA96 supE55 endA1 relA1 | 48 |
| S17-1$\lambda$pir | thi pro hdsR hdsM$^{+}$ recA, chromosomal insertion of RP4-2(Tc::Mu Km::Tn7) | 50 |
| P. putida strains |                                 |                     |
| PRS 2000          | Wild type                      | 44                  |
| PRS 4157          | Kmr; mini-Tn5Km insertion in benR | This work           |
| Plasmids          |                                 |                     |
| pHRP 309          | Gmr; IncQ, lacZ transcriptional fusion vector | 46 |
| pHRP 311          | Gmr, Smr, Spr; negative control plasmid ($\Omega$ cassette from cohort vector inserted into pHRP 309) | 46 |
| pHRP 315          | Apr, Smr, Spr; cohort cloning vector for use with pHRP 309 | 46 |
| pHRP 317          | Kmr, Smr, Spr; cohort cloning vector for use with pHRP 309 | 46 |
| pRK415            | Tcr; IncP1, mobilizable broad-host-range cloning vector | 29 |
| pRK2013           | Kmr; ori(ColE1), RP4 mobilization functions | 10 |
| pT7-7             | Apr; ori(ColE1), expression vector with T7 promoter | 51 |
| pUC19             | Apr; high-copy-number cloning vector | 55 |
| pUTminiTn5-Km     | Apr, Kmr; delivery plasmid for mini-Tn5-Km | 8 |
| pCCH 100          | Kmr, Smr, Spr; benA promoter region in pHRP 317 | This work |
| pCCH 101          | Gmr, Smr, Spr; benA-lacZ transcriptional fusion in pHRP 309 | This work |
| pCCH 106          | Apr; pT7-7 with the benR open reading frame inserted in the NdeI/PstI sites | This work |
| pCCH 107          | Tcr; pRK415 with benR inserted in the EcoRI/PstI sites | This work |
| pCCH 108          | Apr; 1.3-kb inverse-PCR-generated EcoRI-XmaI fragment cloned in pUC19 | This work |
| pCNN 100          | Apr; 12.2-kb EcoRI PRS 2000 genomic fragment in pUC19 | This work |
| pHNN 211          | Apr, Smr, Spr; pcaK promoter region in pHRP 315 | This work |
| pHNN 216          | Gmr, Smr, Spr; pcaK-lacZ transcriptional fusion in pHRP 309 | This work |

$^{a}$ Apr, ampicillin resistance; Kmr, kanamycin resistance; Gmr, gentamicin resistance; Smr, streptomycin resistance; Spr, spectinomycin resistance; Tcr, tetracycline resistance.

Radiochemicals. [$^{14}$C] uniformly-ring-labeled 4-HBA (33 Ci/mmol) and [$^{32}$P]dCTP were obtained from Amersham Corp. (Arlington Heights, Ill.). Nucleotide accession number. The nucleotide sequence has been assigned GenBank accession number AF218267.

RESULTS

Identification of *P. putida* genes involved in benzoate degradation. To identify genes involved in benzoate degradation, we isolated a transposon mutant, PRS 4157, that was unable to utilize benzoate as a sole carbon source but that grew at wild-type rates on succinate and 4-HBA. Sequencing of the region of DNA flanking the transposon revealed that the transposon was inserted in a gene predicted to encode a regulator with high similarity to XylS, a TOL plasmid-encoded activator of benzoate and methylbenzoate degradation (Fig. 2) (17). We named this gene benR. A 13.3-kb segment of *P. putida* DNA was subsequently cloned and sequenced and was found to include eight genes that can be inferred to be involved in benzoate degradation based on their sequence similarity to known genes (Fig. 3; Table 2).

Downstream of benR are three genes, benA, -B, and -C, that have very high deduced amino acid sequence identity to the

BenR 1 MESRLLSERSSVYHADPYAVSDYVNQHVGQHCTGLSRTTFPQASLSHRKFAELDLCRIS  
XylS 1 MDFCLLNEKSQVFVAEPYAVSDYVNQYVGTHSIRLPKGGRPAARLHHRIFGCLDLCRIS  

BenR 61 YGGSVRVTSPALETYHLQYLNGNCLWRGHKEQHLVPGEELLNPDDPVDLTYSEDCE  
XylS 61 YGGSVRVISPGLETCYHLQTLKLKGHCLWRGHGQEHYFAPGELLLENPDDQADLTYSEDCE  

BenR 121 KFIKKYPTRLLDSICDEQRWQRFDGGRFLRNHYRLDELDGFMNLLAMVCHEAEVSESEP  
XylS 121 KFIVKLEPSVVLDRAACSDNNWHKPREGTRFAARHN-LQQLDGFQNLLGVCDAAEHFKSMP  

BenR 181 RVQGHYSQIVASKLLTLMTNJRRERSLASPOAGLERHLDYIERNLKLELSAEVLAEQACM  
XylS 180 RVQEHYAGIMASKLEMLGSNVSRETFSKGNPSFERVQFIEENLKRNISLERLAELAMM  

BenR 241 SLRSLYALFEQHLSSTTPKHYYRORKLERVHACLSDPCGVRSVTEPALDYGFHLGRFSE  
XylS 240 SPRSLYNLFEEKHAGTTTPKNYRRNRKLESIRACLNDPSANVRSITETEALDYGFLHLGRFAE  

BenR 301 VYRQQFGELPSQTFRRG----  
XylS 300 NYRSAFGELPSDTLRQCKKEVA  

FIG. 2. Amino acid sequence alignment of BenR and XylS proteins. Identical residues are outlined in black. Similar residues are shaded gray.

analysis indicated that the 5′ end of *benA* lies 30 bp upstream from its predicted translational start site (Fig. 3).

To test whether BenR regulates *benA* expression, we constructed a reporter plasmid that has the *benA* promoter fused to a promoterless *lacZ* gene (pCCH101). *P*. putida wild-type cells carrying the *benA-lacZ* fusion expressed β-galactosidase activity at levels that were 15-fold higher in cells grown on succinate in the presence of benzoate compared to succinate-grown cells (Fig. 4A). The presence of catechol, the product of cis-diol dehydrogenase, did not induce expression of the *benA-lacZ* fusion. Expression of the *benA-lacZ* fusion was not induced by benzoate in *benR* mutant cells. Overexpression of BenR from a T7 promoter (plasmid pCCH106) in *E*. coli BL21(DE3) cells carrying the *benA-lacZ* fusion plasmid resulted in a 25-fold increase in β-galactosidase expression over the levels seen in the absence of *benR* (Fig. 4B). This result shows that BenR directly activates the *benA* promoter. In this system, addition of benzoate did not influence the levels of β-galactosidase expression.

BenR activates expression of the TOL plasmid-encoded meta-cleavage pathway operon. *Pm*, the promoter of the meta-cleavage operon from the TOL catabolic plasmid, is activated by the TOL plasmid-encoded regulator XylS when benzoate or methylbenzoates are present. A long-standing observation in studies of TOL plasmid gene regulation is that *Pm* can also be activated in the presence of benzoate by a chromosomally encoded regulator. The regulatory gene responsible for this activation was identified genetically in 1988 and given the name *benR* (6), but this gene was never sequenced. To determine whether the *benR* gene described here might be the regulatory gene that is responsible for XylS-independent activation of *Pm*, we expressed the BenR protein from pCCH107 in *E*. coli CC118 *Pm-lacZ*, a strain that has a *Pm::lacZ* fusion inserted in its chromosome. When BenR was present, 13,000 Miller units of β-galactosidase was expressed from *Pm* over an undetectable background. A slight increase in β-galactosidase production (17,000 Miller units) was seen when benzoate was included in the growth medium. The addition of catechol had no effect.

XylS responds to benzoate, but not 3-methylbenzoate, to modulate expression of *benA*. To determine whether XylS can restore benzoate-dependent regulation of the *benA* promoter in the absence of BenR, the TOL catabolic plasmid was introduced from *P*. putida PaW1 into the *benR* mutant (PRS4157) containing the *benA-lacZ* fusion plasmid (pCCH101). When the TOL plasmid was present, the observed level of *benA-lacZ* expression was fivefold higher when benzoate was included in the growth medium together with succinate than when cells were grown on succinate alone or on succinate plus 4-HBA or 3-methylbenzoate (Fig. 5). These results indicate that XylS, encoded on the TOL plasmid, can partially complement BenR function.

BenR is required for benzoate-mediated repression of 4-HBA degradation. When *P*. putida cells that are growing on 4-HBA as a sole carbon source are transferred to a medium that includes equal amounts of 4-HBA and benzoate, their rate of 4-HBA degradation decreases and they start to degrade benzoate at a high rate. Once all of the benzoate is depleted, rapid degradation of 4-HBA resumes (40). This preferred usage of benzoate over 4-HBA by *P*. putida can be partially explained by the observation that benzoate represses expression of *pcaK*, a gene that encodes a 4-HBA permease. To determine if BenR plays a role in this repression, we compared the levels of β-galactosidase produced by wild-type and *benR* mutant strains carrying a *pcaK-lacZ* transcriptional fusion (Fig. 6). As was previously demonstrated (40), wild-type *P*. putida

FIG. 3. (A) Map of chromosomally encoded benzoate degradation genes from *P*. putida. (B) Map of the *benA* promoter region, diagram of the region incorporated to construct the *benA-lacZ* fusion plasmid, pCCH101, and nucleotide sequence of the *benA* promoter region. The putative BenR binding sites are heavily underlined. Introduced restriction sites are lightly underlined. The transcriptional and translational start sites are in bold. (C) Determination of the 5′ end of the *benA* transcript by primer extension. RNA was isolated from glucose-grown cells (lane 1) and glucose-benzoate-grown cells (lane 2) as described in the text. A sequence ladder was generated with the same primer (lanes C, T, A, and G). The first nucleotide in the transcript is shown in bold.

terminal oxygenase and reductase components of methylbenzoate and benzoate dioxygenases. BenD is similar to cis-diol dehydrogenases involved in the conversion of 2-hydro-1,2-dihydroxybenzoates (the products of benzoate dioxygenase reactions) to catechols (Fig. 1). Following *benABCD* are three genes that may encode proteins involved in benzoate uptake. The *benK* and *benF* genes almost certainly encode a benzoate transporter and a porin, respectively. The function of *benE*, predicted to encode a membrane protein, is unknown. Each *ben* gene has a guanine-plus-cytosine content of between 60 and 67%.

BenR activates the expression of *benABC* in response to benzoate. The *benR* mutant (strain PRS4157) was able to grow on benzoate when a plasmid-borne copy of *benR* was supplied in trans on pCCH107. The complemented mutant grew on benzoate with a generation time of 2.4 h, compared to about 1.8 h for the wild-type strain. The sequence of the *benR* gene and the growth phenotype of the *benR* mutant suggested that the BenR protein is probably involved in regulating expression of the *benA*, *benB*, and *benC* genes, predicted to encode benzoate 1,2-dioxygenase. Reverse transcription-PCR amplification of the regions between *benA* and *benB* and between *benB* and *benC* showed that these three genes are cotranscribed in benzoate-grown cells (results not shown). Primer extension

TABLE 2. Benzoate degradation genes of *P. putida*

| Gene designation | Proposed function of gene product          | Size of gene product in: | Most similar gene product (species) (% amino acid identity/% amino acid similarity) (accession no.) known function of gene product (reference)                                                                 |
|------------------|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| benR            | Regulatory protein                      | Residues: 318           | kDa: 36.4                                                                                                                                                   |
|                  |                                         |                          | XylS (*P. putida*) (59/73) (P07859) meta-cleavage benzoate degradation operon transcriptional activator (23)                                                        |
|                  |                                         |                          | EutR (*Salmonella typhimurium*) (27/44) (Q9ZFU7) ethanolamine degradation operon transcriptional activator (32)                                                |
|                  |                                         |                          | RhaS (*S. typhimurium*) (25/47) (P09377) L-rhamnose degradation operon transcriptional activator (53)                                                          |
|                  |                                         |                          | ArgR (*P. aeruginosa*) (26/47) (AAC45653) arginine biosynthesis operon transcriptional activator (47)                                                         |
| benA            | Benzoate dioxygenase                    | Residues: 452           | kDa: 51.5                                                                                                                                                   |
|                  |                                         |                          | XylX (*P. putida*) (73/86) (P23099) toluate 1,2-dioxygenase α subunit (18)                                                                                 |
|                  |                                         |                          | BenA (*Acinetobacter* sp.) (68/80) (P07769) benzoate 1,2-dioxygenase α subunit (38)                                                                         |
|                  |                                         |                          | CbdA (*Burkholderia cepacia*) (59/76) (CAA55681) 2-halobenzoate 1,2-dioxygenase α subunit (16)                                                             |
|                  |                                         |                          | AntA (*Acinetobacter* sp.) (47/65) (AAC34813) anthranilate dioxygenase α-subunit (2)                                                                      |
| benB            | Benzoate dioxygenase                    | Residues: 161           | kDa: 19.1                                                                                                                                                   |
|                  |                                         |                          | XylY (*P. putida*) (76/89) (P23100) toluate 1,2-dioxygenase β subunit (18)                                                                                 |
|                  |                                         |                          | BenB (*Acinetobacter* sp.) (68/79) (P07770) benzoate 1,2-dioxygenase β subunit (38)                                                                         |
|                  |                                         |                          | CbdB (*B. cepacia*) (57/73) (CAA55682) 2-halobenzoate 1,2-dioxygenase β subunit (16)                                                                       |
|                  |                                         |                          | AntB (*Acinetobacter* sp.) (34/56) (AAC34814) anthranilate dioxygenase β subunit (2)                                                                      |
| benC            | Ferredoxin reductase                    | Residues: 336           | kDa: 36.4                                                                                                                                                   |
|                  |                                         |                          | XylZ (*P. putida*) (74/86) (P23101) methylcatechol 1,2-dioxygenase reductase component (18)                                                               |
|                  |                                         |                          | BenC (*Acinetobacter* sp.) (51/67) (S23479) benzoate 1,2-dioxygenase reductase component (37)                                                               |
|                  |                                         |                          | CbdC (*B. cepacia*) (46/64) (CAA55683) 2-halobenzoate 1,2-dioxygenase reductase component (16)                                                             |
|                  |                                         |                          | AntC (*Acinetobacter* sp.) (38/57) (AAC34815) anthranilate 1,2-dioxygenase reductase component (2)                                                           |
| benD            | cis-Diol dehydrogenase                  | Residues: 253           | kDa: 27.1                                                                                                                                                   |
|                  |                                         |                          | XylL (*P. putida*) (78/86) (P23102) 2-hydro-1,2-dihydroxymethylbenzoate dehydrogenase (37)                                                               |
|                  |                                         |                          | BenD (*Acinetobacter* sp.) (58/71) (P07772) 2-hydro-1,2-dihydroxybenzoate dehydrogenase (37)                                                               |
|                  |                                         |                          | CmtC (*P. putida*) (34/49) (AAB62287) 2,3-dihydroxy-2,3-dihydro-p-cumate dehydrogenase (9)                                                                 |
|                  |                                         |                          | TsaC (*Comamonas testosteroni*) (32/46) (AAB62287) p-sulfobenzyl alcohol dehydrogenase (27)                                                                |
| benK            | Benzoate transporter                    | Residues: 443           | kDa: 47.1                                                                                                                                                   |
|                  |                                         |                          | BenK (*Acinetobacter* sp.) (41/58) (AAC46425) benzoate transporter (5)                                                                                     |
|                  |                                         |                          | PcaK (*Acinetobacter* sp.) (29/45) (Q43975) 4-hydroxybenzoate transporter (33)                                                                           |
|                  |                                         |                          | PcaK (*P. putida*) (29/44) (Q51955) 4-hydroxybenzoate transporter (19)                                                                                   |
|                  |                                         |                          | VanK (*Acinetobacter* sp.) (24/41) (AAC27108) vanillate transporter (49)                                                                                 |
| benE            | Unknown                                 | Residues: 399           | kDa: 41.3                                                                                                                                                   |
|                  |                                         |                          | BenE (*Acinetobacter* sp.) (39/58) (P07775) membrane protein of unknown function                                                                        |
| benF            | Porin                                   | Residues: 398           | kDa: 43.2                                                                                                                                                   |
|                  |                                         |                          | PhaK (*P. putida*) (44/57) (AAC24339) porin-like phenylacetate-specific-channel-forming protein (43)                                                       |
|                  |                                         |                          | OprE (*P. aeruginosa*) (38/55) (S34969) anaerobically induced porin (54)                                                                               |
|                  |                                         |                          | OprD (*P. aeruginosa*) (37/51) (P32722) imipenem-specific channel-forming protein (21)                                                                   |
|                  |                                         |                          | OprE3 (*P. aeruginosa*) (33/49) (BAA22267) porin-like outer membrane protein (42)                                                                       |

cells grown on a mixture of benzoate and 4-HBA expressed β-galactosidase from the pcaK promoter to levels that were fivefold lower than those seen in cells grown on 4-HBA only. This repressive effect of benzoate on 4-HBA-induced pcaK expression was not seen when the pcaK-lacZ fusion was present in a benR mutant (Fig. 6). This indicates that BenR is involved in benzoate-mediated repression of pcaK expression. To determine whether BenR directly regulates pcaK, we examined the expression of the pcaK-lacZ fusion in E. coli BL 21 cells in the presence and absence of BenR and benzoate. Low

6344 COWLES ET AL.

J. BACTERIOL.

A.
![Diagram A]

B.
![Diagram B]

C.
![Diagram C]

FIG. 4. (A) β-Galactosidase activities of the benA-lacZ fusion (pCCH101) in wild-type (PRS2000) and benR mutant (PRS4157) cells. Cells were grown on succinate (white), succinate plus benzoate (black), or succinate plus catechol (gray) and assayed as described in Materials and Methods. (B) β-Galactosidase activities of E. coli cells harboring the benA-lacZ fusion (pCCH101) and/or the BenR expression construct (pCCH106) in the absence (white) or presence (black) of 1 mM benzoate. β-Galactosidase activity was assayed as described in Materials and Methods.

levels of pcaK-lacZ expression that were measured in E. coli were not influenced by BenR or benzoate (data not shown). To show that the observed repressive effects of BenR on pcaK transcription have physiological significance, we mea-

FIG. 5. β-Galactosidase activities of benR mutant (PRS4157) cells carrying the benA-lacZ fusion plasmid (pCCH101) and the TOL plasmid. Cells were grown on succinate, succinate plus 4-hydroxybenzoate, succinate plus benzoate, or succinate plus 3-methylbenzoate, as indicated, and assayed as described in Materials and Methods.

FIG. 6. (A) Map of the chromosomally encoded pcaRKF cluster of 4-HBA degradation genes. (B) Map of the pcaK-lacZ fusion, pHNN216. The putative PcaR binding site is heavily underlined. Restriction sites introduced by cloning are lightly underlined. The transcriptional and translational start sites are in bold (36). (C) β-Galactosidase activities of the pcaK-lacZ fusion in wild-type (PRS2000) and benR mutant (PRS4157) cells. Cells were grown on succinate (white), 4-HBA (black), or 4-HBA plus benzoate (gray), and β-galactosidase activity was assayed as described in Materials and Methods.

measured rates of 4-HBA uptake in wild-type and benR mutant cells grown on 4-HBA only or on a mixture of 4-HBA and benzoate. When grown on 4-HBA alone, the wild type and the benR mutant accumulated 4-HBA intracellularly from the external medium at nearly identical rates of about 25 nmol per min per mg of protein. After growth on a mixture of benzoate and 4-HBA, wild-type cells accumulated 4-HBA very poorly at a 10-fold lower rate, whereas benR mutant cells took up 4-HBA from the medium at rates equivalent to those for cells grown on 4-HBA alone (Fig. 7).

DISCUSSION

A cluster of genes similar to the P. putida ben genes described here is also present in the gram-negative, nonmotile soil bacterium Acinetobacter sp. strain ADP1. This microbe has genes in the order benP benK benM benABDE (4, 26). Biochemical evidence indicates that the Acinetobacter benA, -B, and -C genes encode benzoate 1,2-dioxygenase and the benD gene encodes 2-hydro-1,2-dihydroxybenzoate dehydrogenase (39). The Acinetobacter benK gene encodes a benzoate transporter (5). We have assigned these functions to the homologous benABCD and -K genes from P. putida (Fig. 3). The benE genes of Acinetobacter and P. putida are homologous but do not resemble any known genes in the databases. benF from P.

nucleotides –68 and –34 that matches the experimentally determined XylS binding site almost exactly (Fig. 3). In interacting with the downstream binding site that overlaps the –35 binding site for RNA polymerase, BenR may compete with RNA polymerase for binding to DNA. This is consistent with our observation of a threefold-higher basal level of β-galactosidase expression from the *benA* promoter under nonactivating conditions in the *benR* mutant compared to the wild type (Fig. 4A). Kaldalu et al. (28) have suggested that the N-terminal region of XylS interacts with its C-terminal domain to cause intramolecular repression of XylS function. On binding the benzoate effector, the N-terminal domain is proposed to undergo a change in conformation that then allows the C-terminal domain of XylS to function to allow initiation of transcription. The N-terminal regions of BenR and XylS share about 65% amino acid identity (Fig. 2), and BenR, like XylS, responds to benzoate as an effector. We found that BenR activates *Pm* expression to high levels in the absence of the benzoate effector when it is overexpressed in an *E. coli* background. A similar observation has been made with XylS (24, 28, 35). In the latter case, it has been proposed that a small amount of XylS is always present in a conformation that is active and able to stimulate transcription. When XylS is produced in large amounts, there is enough of the active form available to induce high levels of transcription in the absence of the effector (28, 35).

The effects of BenR in repressing transcription from the *pcaK* promoter may be indirect. We were unable to demonstrate an effect of BenR on *pcaK* expression in an *E. coli* background. Also, there are no detailed reports of an AraC/XylS family member responding to an effector molecule to mediate repression of gene transcription. Moreover, there is no recognizable XylS/BenR binding site in the *pcaK* promoter region. Clearly, much more study is required to determine the exact role of BenR in repressing *pcaK* transcription in response to benzoate.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by Public Health Service grant GM56665 from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences.

We thank Victor de Lorenzo for strains and for helpful discussions.

### REFERENCES

1. Altschul, S. F., W. Gish, W. Miller, E. W. Myers, and D. J. Lipman. 1990. Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol. **215**:403–410.
2. Bundy, B., A. Campbell, and E. Neidle. 1998. Similarities between the *antABC*-encoded anthranilate dioxygenase and the *benABC*-encoded benzoate dioxygenase of *Acinetobacter* sp. strain ADP1. J. Bacteriol. **180**:4466–4474.
3. Caetano-Anollés, G. 1993. Amplifying DNA with arbitrary oligonucleotide primers. PCR Methods Appl. **3**:85–94.
4. Collier, L. S., G. L. I. Gaines, and E. L. Neidle. 1998. Regulation of benzoate degradation in *Acinetobacter* sp. strain ADP1 by BenM, a LysR-type transcriptional activator. J. Bacteriol. **180**:2493–2501.
5. Collier, L. S., N. N. Nichols, and E. L. Neidle. 1997. *benK* encodes a hydrophobic permease-like protein involved in benzoate degradation by *Acinetobacter* sp. strain ADP1. J. Bacteriol. **179**:5943–5946.
6. Cuskey, S. M., and A. B. Sprenkle. 1988. Benzoate-dependent induction from the OP2 operon-promoter region of the TOL plasmid pWW0 in the absence of known plasmid regulatory genes. J. Bacteriol. **170**:3742–3746.
7. Davis, R. W., D. Botstein, and J. R. Roth. 1980. Advanced bacterial genetics. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
8. de Lorenzo, V., M. Herrero, U. Jakubzik, and K. N. Timmis. 1990. Mini-Tn5 transposon derivatives for insertion mutagenesis, promoter probing, and chromosomal insertion of cloned DNA in gram-negative eubacteria. J. Bacteriol. **172**:6568–6572.
9. Eaton, R. W. 1996. *p*-Cumate catabolic pathway in *Pseudomonas putida* F1: cloning and characterization of DNA carrying the *cmt* operon. J. Bacteriol. **178**:1351–1362.
10. Figurski, D. H., and D. R. Helinski. 1979. Replication of an origin-containing derivative of plasmid RK2 dependent on a plasmid function provided *in trans*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **76**:1648–1652.

11. Franklin, F. C. H., M. Bagdasarian, M. M. Bagdasarian, and K. N. Timmis. 1981. Molecular and functional analysis of the TOL plasmid pWW0 from *Pseudomonas putida* and cloning of genes for the entire regulated aromatic ring *meta* cleavage pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **78**:7458–7462.

12. Gaines, G. L. I., L. Smith, and E. L. Neidle. 1996. Novel nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy methods demonstrate preferential carbon source utilization by *Acinetobacter calcoaceticus*. J. Bacteriol. **178**:6833–6841.

13. Gallegos, M. T., R. Schleif, A. Bairoch, K. Hofman, and J. L. Ramos. 1997. AraC/XylS family of transcriptional regulators. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. **61**:393–410.

14. Gerhardt, P., R. G. E. Murray, R. N. Costilow, E. W. Nester, W. A. Wood, N. R. Krieg, and G. B. Phillips (ed.). 1981. Manual of methods for general bacteriology. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D.C.

15. González-Pérez, M. M., J. L. Ramos, M. T. Gallegos, and S. Marqués. 1999. Critical nucleotides in the upstream region of the XylS-dependent TOL *meta*-cleavage pathway operon promoter as deduced from analysis of mutants. J. Biol. Chem. **274**:2286–2290.

16. Haak, B., S. Fetzner, and F. Lingens. 1995. Cloning, nucleotide sequence, and expression of the plasmid-encoded genes for the two-component 2-halo- benzoate 1,2-dioxygenase from *Pseudomonas cepacia* 2CBS. J. Bacteriol. **177**:667–675.

17. Harayama, S., and M. Rekik. 1990. The *meta* cleavage operon of TOL degradative plasmid pWW0 comprises 13 genes. Mol. Gen. Genet. **221**:113–120.

18. Harayama, S., M. Rekik, A. Bairoch, E. L. Neidle, and L. N. Ornston. 1991. Potential DNA slippage structures acquired during evolutionary divergence of *Acinetobacter calcoaceticus* chromosomal *benABC* and *Pseudomonas putida* TOL pWW0 plasmid *xylXYZ* genes encoding benzoate dioxygenases. J. Bacteriol. **173**:7540–7548.

19. Harwood, C. S., N. N. Nichols, M.-K. Kim, J. L. Ditty, and R. E. Parales. 1994. Identification of the *pcaRKF* gene cluster from *Pseudomonas putida*: involvement in chemotaxis, biodegradation, and transport of 4-hydroxybenzoate. J. Bacteriol. **176**:6479–6488.

20. Harwood, C. S., and R. E. Parales. 1996. The β-ketoadipate pathway and the biology of self-identity. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. **50**:553–590.

21. Huang, H., R. J. Siehnel, F. Bellido, E. Rawling, and R. E. Hancock. 1992. Analysis of two gene regions involved in the expression of the imipenem-specific, outer membrane porin protein OprD of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. **76**:267–273.

22. Inouye, S., A. Nakazawa, and T. Nakazawa. 1981. Molecular cloning of gene *xylS* of the TOL plasmid: evidence for positive regulation of the *xylDEGF* operon by *xylS*. J. Bacteriol. **148**:413–418.

23. Inouye, S., A. Nakazawa, and T. Nakazawa. 1986. Nucleotide sequence of the regulatory gene *xylS* on the *Pseudomonas putida* TOL plasmid and identification of the protein product. Gene **44**:235–242.

24. Inouye, S., A. Nakazawa, and T. Nakazawa. 1987. Overproduction of the *xylS* gene product and activation of the *xylDLEGF* operon of the TOL plasmid. J. Bacteriol. **169**:3587–3592.

25. Jeffrey, W. H., S. M. Cuskey, P. J. Chapman, S. Resnick, and R. H. Olsen. 1992. Characterization of *Pseudomonas putida* mutants unable to catabolize benzoate: cloning and characterization of *Pseudomonas* genes involved in benzoate catabolism and isolation of a chromosomal DNA fragment able to substitute for *xylS* in activation of the TOL lower-pathway promoter. J. Bacteriol. **174**:4986–4996.

26. Jones, R. M., L. S. Collier, E. L. Neidle, and P. A. Williams. 1999. *areABC* genes determine the catabolism of aryl esters in *Acinetobacter* sp. strain ADP1. J. Bacteriol. **181**:4568–4575.

27. Junker, F., R. Kiewitz, and A. M. Cook. 1997. Characterization of the *p*-toluenesulfonate operon *tsaMBCD* and *tsaR* in *Comamonas testosteroni* T-2. J. Bacteriol. **179**:919–927.

28. Kaldalu, N., U. Toots, V. de Lorenzo, and M. Ustav. 2000. Functional domains of the TOL plasmid transcription factor XylS. J. Bacteriol. **182**:1118–1126.

29. Keen, N. T., S. Tamaki, D. Kobayashi, and D. Trollinger. 1988. Improved broad-host-range plasmids for DNA cloning in Gram-negative bacteria. Gene **70**:191–197.

30. Kessler, B., S. Marqués, T. Köhler, J. L. Ramos, K. N. Timmis, and V. de Lorenzo. 1994. Cross talk between catabolic pathways in *Pseudomonas putida*: XylS-dependent and -independent activation of the TOL *meta* operon requires the same *cis*-acting sequences within the *Pm* promoter. J. Bacteriol. **176**:5578–5582.

31. Kessler, B., K. N. Timmis, and V. de Lorenzo. 1994. The organization of the *Pm* promoter of the TOL plasmid reflects the structure of its cognate activator protein XylS. Mol. Gen. Genet. **244**:596–605.

32. Kofoid, E., C. Rappeye, I. Stojilkovic, and J. Roth. 1999. The 17-gene ethanolamine (*eut*) operon of *Salmonella typhimurium* encodes five homo-

33. Kowalchuk, G. A., G. B. Hartnett, A. Benson, J. E. Houghton, K.-L. Ngai, and L. N. Ornston. 1994. Contrasting patterns of evolutionary divergence within the *Acinetobacter calcoaceticus pca* operon. Gene **146**:23–30.

34. Marques, S., and J. L. Ramos. 1993. Transcriptional control of the *Pseudo- monas putida* TOL plasmid catabolic pathways. Mol. Microbiol. **9**:923–929.

35. Mermod, N., J. L. Ramos, A. Bairoch, and K. N. Timmis. 1987. The *xylS* gene positive regulator of TOL plasmid pWW0: identification, sequence analysis and overproduction leading to constitutive expression of *meta* cleavage operon. Mol. Gen. Genet. **207**:349–354.

36. Miller, J. H. 1972. Experiments in molecular genetics. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

37. Neidle, E. L., C. Hartnett, L. N. Ornston, A. Bairoch, M. Rekik, and S. Harayama. 1992. *Cis*-diol dehydrogenases encoded by the TOL (pWW0) plasmid *xylL* gene and the *Acinetobacter calcoaceticus* chromosomal *benD* gene are members of the short-chain alcohol dehydrogenase superfamily. Eur. J. Biochem. **204**:113–120.

38. Neidle, E. L., C. Hartnett, L. N. Ornston, A. Bairoch, M. Rekik, and S. Harayama. 1991. Nucleotide sequences of the *Acinetobacter calcoaceticus benABC* genes for benzoate 1,2-dioxygenase reveal evolutionary relationships among multicomponent oxygenases. J. Bacteriol. **173**:5385–5395.

39. Neidle, E. L., M. K. Shapiro, and L. N. Ornston. 1987. Cloning and expression in *Escherichia coli* of *Acinetobacter calcoaceticus* genes for benzoate degradation. J. Bacteriol. **169**:5496–5503.

40. Nichols, N. N., and C. S. Harwood. 1995. Repression of 4-hydroxybenzoate transport and degradation by benzoate: a new layer of regulatory control in the *Pseudomonas putida β*-ketoadipate pathway. J. Bacteriol. **177**:7033–7040.

41. Ochman, H., A. S. Gerber, and D. L. Hartl. 1988. Genetic applications of an inverse polymerase chain reaction. Genetics **120**:621–623.

42. Okamoto, K., N. Gotoh, H. Tsujimoto, H. Yamada, E. Yoshihara, T. Nakae, and T. Nishino. 1999. Molecular cloning and characterization of the *oprQ* gene coding for outer membrane protein OprE3 of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Microbiol. Immunol. **43**:297–301.

43. Olivera, E. R., B. Miñambres, B. García, C. Muñiz, M. A. Moreno, A. Ferrández, E. Díaz, J. L. García, and J. M. Luengo. 1998. Molecular characterization of the phenylacetic acid catabolic pathway in *Pseudomonas putida* U: the phenylacetyl-CoA catabolon. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **95**:6419–6424.

44. Ornston, L. N., and D. Parke. 1976. Properties of an inducible uptake system for β-ketoadipate in *Pseudomonas putida*. J. Bacteriol. **125**:475–488.

45. O'Toole, G. A., and R. Kolter. 1998. Initiation of biofilm formation in *Pseudomonas fluorescens* WCS365 proceeds via multiple, convergent signaling pathways: a genetic analysis. Mol. Microbiol. **28**:449–461.

46. Parales, R. E., and C. S. Harwood. 1993. Construction and use of a new broad-host-range *lacZ* transcriptional fusion vector, pHRP309, for Gram− bacteria. Gene **133**:23–30.

47. Park, S. M., C. D. Lu, and A. T. Abdelal. 1997. Cloning and characterization of *argR*, a gene that participates in regulation of arginine biosynthesis and catabolism in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO1. J. Bacteriol. **179**:5300–5308.

48. Sambrook, J., E. F. Fritsch, and T. Maniatis. 1989. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

49. Segura, A., P. V. Bünz, D. A. D'Argenio, and L. N. Ornston. 1999. Genetic analysis of a chromosomal region containing *vanA* and *vanB*, genes required for conversion of either ferulate or vanillate to protocatechuate in *Acinetobacter*. J. Bacteriol. **181**:3494–3504.

50. Simon, R., U. Priefer, and A. Pühler. 1983. A broad host range mobilization system for *in vivo* genetic engineering: transposon mutagenesis in gram negative bacteria. Bio/Technology **1**:784–791.

51. Studier, F. W., and B. A. Moffatt. 1986. Use of bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase to direct selective high-level expression of cloned genes. J. Mol. Biol. **189**:113–130.

52. Thompson, J. D., D. G. Higgins, and T. J. Gibson. 1994. CLUSTAL W: improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice. Nucleic Acids Res. **22**:4673–4680.

53. Tobin, J. F., and R. F. Schleif. 1987. Positive regulation of the *Escherichia coli L*-rhamnose operon is mediated by the products of tandemly repeated regulatory genes. J. Mol. Biol. **196**:789–799.

54. Yamano, Y., T. Nishikawa, and Y. Komatsu. 1993. Cloning and nucleotide sequence of anaerobically induced porin protein E1 (OprE) of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO1. Mol. Microbiol. **8**:993–1004.

55. Yanisch-Perron, C., J. Vieira, and J. Messing. 1985. Improved M13 phage cloning vectors and host strains: nucleotide sequences of the M13mp18 and pUC19 vectors. Gene **33**:103–119.
