
European Journal of Surgical Oncology 2000; 26: 635–645  
doi:10.1053/ejso.2000.0974, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on IDEAL®

---

**REVIEW**

# Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer: an updated review

S. Anwar*, C. Hall†, J. White*, M. Deakin†, W. Farrell‡ and J. B. Elder†  

*Department of Surgery, North Manchester General Hospital, Manchester, †Department of Surgery, Keele University, Staffordshire and ‡Centre for Cell and Molecular Medicine, Keele University, UK

---

**Introduction:** Colorectal cancer is the commonest cause of death due to malignancy in non-smokers in the western countries. The two main hereditary types of colorectal cancer are familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), constituting approximately 10% of all cases of colorectal cancer. The main aim of this review is to reappraise the current advances in the genetics and diagnosis of HNPCC.

**Methods:** A Medline search was carried out to identify papers published from 1970 to 1999 on HNPCC. Embase and Cochrane databases were also searched. Reference lists of retrieved articles were carefully searched for additional articles.

**Results and conclusions:** Recent technological advances in the genetics of HNPCC have refined the criteria for diagnosis and management of HNPCC, however current policies regarding the testing of pedigrees are not clearly established. We believe that with the rapid development in this area definitive clinical guidelines will need to be available in future for the management of HNPCC.

© 2000 Harcourt Publishers Ltd

**Key words:** colorectal neoplasm; hereditary cancer; polyposis coli; colonoscopy; HNPCC.

---

**Introduction**

In the late 1800s, Alfred S. Warthin, a professor of pathology in the university of Michigan, was the first to study a family, later called ‘family G’, with cancers of the stomach, endometrium and ovary and postulate a familial trait. Lynch, in 1962, observed familial cancer in two extended kindreds in the absence of colonic polyps. He presented his findings at a meeting of the American society of human genetics. The condition was named ‘Cancer Family Syndrome’, and the families were termed ‘family N’ and ‘family M’, as they were from Nebraska and Michigan, respectively. In 1984 Boland and Troncale introduced the terms Lynch I and II, on the basis of absence or presence of extracolonic malignancies, respectively. In the late 1980s families from Italy and Israel were reported with similar characteristics, and the term ‘Cancer Family Syndrome’

was replaced with the more descriptive term, ‘Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer’ (HNPCC).

In 1993, two large kindreds from New Zealand and Finland revealed a close linkage to anonymous microsatellite markers on chromosome 2p. In the same year, Ionov *et al.* reported an unusual form of somatic deletion, present in 12–15% of all colorectal cancers (CRC), and present in nearly all patients with HNPCC. They referred to these mutations as ubiquitous somatic mutations (USM). Others reported similar mutations and called them replicative errors (RER) and microsatellite instability (MIN). A short time afterwards linkage to markers on chromosome 3p was also demonstrated in kindreds meeting criteria for HNPCC.

The true incidence of HNPCC is not known, although often quoted as 3–6% of all CRC, the figures vary between 1 and 10%. HNPCC has an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance, with 70–80% penetrance (i.e. 20–30% of individuals with a predisposing mutation may never develop cancer). HNPCC comprises a well-defined series of defects of the DNA mismatch repair system (MMR), resulting in an early onset of colorectal adenocarcinoma and other extracolonic malignancies. A large proportion of tumours demonstrate microsatellite instability (MIN) and are said to be replication error positive (RER+). The prevalence

© 2000 Harcourt Publishers Ltd

Correspondence to: Mr S. Anwar (c/o sec to Prof. Elder), Department of Surgery, Centre for Cell and Molecular Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine, Keele University, North Staffordshire Hospital, Thornburrow Drive, Hartshill, Stoke on Trent, ST4 7QB, UK. Fax: +44 (0) 1782 747319; E-mail: suhail@anwar99.freeserve.co.uk

0748-7983/00/070635+11 $35.00/0

Table 1. The Amsterdam criteria

| Amsterdam criteria¹⁹ |
| --- |
| (a) Three or more relatives with histologically verified colorectal cancer, one of whom is a first degree relative of the other two |
| (a) CRC involving at least two generations |
| (b) One or more CRC cases diagnosed before age 50 |

suggestive of HNPCC in which the Amsterdam criteria were not fulfilled. Germline mutations in *hMLH1* and *hMSH2* were found in six out of 10 of these families, suggesting that HNPCC cases can occur outside the stringent Amsterdam criteria. Another series has reported positive detection of MMR defects in 50–90% of kindred who fulfil the Amsterdam criteria, depending on the technique used.²⁶ Nakahara et al.²⁷ reported that of 10 RER+ kindreds only three fulfilled the Amsterdam criteria. These studies show that focusing only on the Amsterdam criteria will lead to an under-diagnosis of HNPCC and so several groups have proposed less restrictive criteria, including the Bethesda criteria²⁸ and the Japanese criteria.²⁷ To enhance the diagnostic accuracy of the Amsterdam criteria some groups have also suggested the inclusion of RER status in the former.²⁹,³⁰

Recent data suggest that mutations in different MMR genes can give rise to different clinical scenarios. Mutations of *MSH2* for example are more often associated with cancer of the renal pelvis, ureter, stomach and ovary when compared to *MLH1* mutations.¹⁷ Similarly mutations in *MSH6* show a predilection toward endometrial and ovarian cancer.

Five-year survival in patients with HNPCC is much better than in sporadic cases of CRC (86% vs 59%).³¹ Sankila et al.³² have shown the overall 5-year cumulative, relative survival rate to be 65% for patients with HNPCC as compared to 44% for patients with sporadic CRC. This has been attributed to the specific tumorigenesis involving DNA MMR dysfunction.³¹ The theory has been termed ‘effete malignancy’,²¹ and suggests that mutations continue to accumulate in RER+ tumours even after they have become malignant, to such an extent that critical cell functions cannot be performed. This also accounts for the fact that distant metastasis is an unusual presenting symptom in HNPCC. A better 5-year survival has also been attributed to the presence of early stage cancers in HNPCC patients, but prospective controlled studies to demonstrate this are lacking.³³ An interesting observation made by Lynch and Smyrk³⁴ shows that RER+ colorectal cancers have a better prognosis than RER− tumours, regardless of whether the former occurs in a familial or sporadic setting.

### Clinical features

An International Collaborative Group on HNPCC (ICG-HNPCC) was formed in the late 1980s. Currently comprising about 100 members, in 1991 the group proposed a set of conditions necessary for diagnosis of HNPCC. This is known as the ‘Amsterdam Criteria’¹⁹ (Table 1). Patients shown to have familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) should be excluded.

Lynch syndrome I is characterized by an inherited susceptibility to CRC with early stage of onset (average 44 years), a proclivity toward the proximal colon (60–70%), an excess of synchronous and metachronous colonic cancer and a rapid progression from adenoma to carcinoma.²⁰ Recent data indicates that all RER+ colon cancers, whether hereditary or sporadic, are more common in the right side of colon.²¹

Lynch syndrome II include families with CRC with additional cancers of the endometrium, transitional cell carcinoma of the ureter and renal pelvis, adenocarcinoma of the stomach, small bowel, ovary, pancreas, biliary tract, haematological malignancies and carcinoma of the skin and larynx.²² Recent data indicate that there is no clear distinction between Lynch I and II, and that they are merely manifestations of a single syndrome.²³

Endometrial cancer is the second most common cancer seen in families after colorectal cancer. It also occurs at an earlier age, with a life-time risk of 20–40% as compared to 3% in the general population.²³,²⁴ Ovarian cancer risk in families with HNPCC is reported to be 3.5 times higher than expected, the mean age of diagnosis being 20 years earlier than in the general population.²²

The Amsterdam criteria are criticised for being too narrow, hence casting doubt on the 3–6% incidence figures quoted for HNPCC. The Amsterdam criteria will only identify large families where the gene defect is highly penetrant and therefore many small families are inappropriately excluded. Furthermore, when these criteria are loosened the prevalence of HNPCC will increase with a corresponding decrease in the apparent penetrance of the genetic defects. The true penetrance of the HNPCC genes can then be determined only through an extensive search of mutations in the colorectal families on a population basis. Beck et al.²⁵ looked at 10 families with pedigrees

### Differential diagnosis

HNPCC has to be differentiated from other similar conditions such as FAP, Peutz-Jegher polyposis, juvenile polyposis, attenuated FAP and hereditary flat adenoma syndrome. Although the colonic phenotype is crucial in the differential diagnosis of HNPCC, overlap may occur with other similar syndromes. Vogelstein has described FAP as a disease of tumour initiation and HNPCC as one of tumour progression.³⁵

The lack of apparent pathognomonic features, deficiencies in family information, adoption, early demise of relatives from unrelated deaths and possibly incomplete gene penetrance confound recognition of affected families. Therefore one may see the cancer phenotype in the paternal or maternal lineage but not in the patient’s parents. This leads us to strongly speculate that an appreciable proportion

of carriers of non-polyposis colorectal cancer genes with cancer is not recognized as such. The differentiation of familial from true hereditary cases is based on the natural history, distribution of cancer within the family, the presence of synchronous and metachronous CRC, age of cancer onset, location within the colon and association with colonic polyps and extracolonic forms of cancer.¹¹ Approximately 13–17% of sporadic CRC show microsatellite instability,⁵,⁸ however it is unlikely that sporadic RER+ tumours represent previously unrecognized HNPCC cases. The pathogenesis of RER+ non-familial CRC is considered different from that of HNPCC,³⁶ even though they share many of the same clinical features as described previously for HNPCC.

### Histopathology

Subsets of patients with HNPCC have shown a shift in the distribution of proliferating cells toward the top of the crypts,³⁷ manifesting an abnormality in the proliferative compartment of colonic epithelium³⁸ at one point in time. Other studies have suggested an abnormality in normal epithelial maturation in patients with HNPCC,³⁹ indicating that modifications in colonic glycoconjugates are early events in the evolution of the neoplastic phenotype.

Poorly differentiated carcinoma, mucinous carcinoma and signet cell carcinoma are more prevalent in individuals with HNPCC as compared to sporadic carcinoma.¹¹,¹² HNPCC cancers are more likely to have a marked host lymphocytic response (Crohn’s like reaction) in the form of dense peritumoral lymphocytes or many lymphoid aggregates in advance of the tumour margin.⁴⁰ According to Jessurun *et al.*, 10% of CRC in HNPCC form solid sheets of cells with a pushing or well-circumscribed tumour border and a marked peritumoral lymphocytic infiltrate, and such a pattern has been termed ‘medullary carcinoma’.⁴¹ Similar histology is also seen in 15% of RER+ sporadic cancers. The Mayo clinic calls this histological pattern ‘solid cribriform growth’ and ascribes a positive predictive value of 53% for RER+ status to this pattern.⁵ Similar results are shown in a recent study by Jass *et al.*⁴² who concluded that pathological examination of CRC allows assignment of RER+ status with a sensitivity of 82% and a specificity of 96% suggesting a molecular basis for the observed morphology.

Adenomas are more prevalent in the Lynch syndromes as compared to the general population¹¹,⁴³ and the adenomas of HNPCC have a greater proclivity for malignant degeneration than sporadic tumours. This is called the Aggressive Adenoma Theory.⁴⁴ HNPCC adenomas are described as multiple, large and dysplastic and have more villous histology as compared with their sporadic counterparts.⁴³,⁴⁵ Flow cytometric studies have shown that most of the HNPCC tumours are diploid in nature.⁴⁶,⁴⁷ Like sporadic polyps, adenomatous polyps in HNPCC are also precursors of CRC and in one study⁴⁸ 60% of HNPCC adenomas were RER+ as compared to 3% of sporadic adenomas. This suggests that development of MIN is an early event in formation of these adenomas.


### Genetics

#### Mismatch repair genes (Table 2)

Strand *et al.*⁴⁹ showed that microsatellite instability observed in HNPCC tumours was similar to that observed in bacteria harbouring mutations in mismatch repair genes, such as mutS and mutL. Discovery of new microsatellite alleles in HNPCC tumours⁸ and linkage analysis, which established a tight linkage between kindreds from HNPCC families and either chromosome 2p16 or 3p21,⁶,¹⁰ were the clues that helped the researchers to hypothesize that HNPCC was caused by hereditary mutations of human homologues of mutS and mutL (Table 2). These genes are commonly known as mismatch repair genes (MMR). Direct evidence that an MMR gene was involved in the disease was provided by the identification of germline mutation of hMSH2 in HNPCC kindreds.⁵¹

A new human homologue, hMSH6, called GTBP has been identified as a member of the MMR gene family.⁵³ GTBP protein forms a heterodimer with hMSH2, which is known as hMut Sα, and is essential for correcting mismatch errors.⁵⁴ To date more than 70 different germline mutations have been detected in DNA MMR genes and shown to be associated with HNPCC. The International Collaborative Group on HNPCC has established a database of DNA mismatch repair genes mutations and polymorphisms, which was published in 1997.⁵⁵ These data reveal that the majority of mutations affected the MLH1 and MSH2 genes (>80%), and were evenly distributed with some clustering on MSH2 exon 12 and MLH1 exon 16. Most MSH2 mutations consisted of frame-shift (60%) or nonsense changes (23%). Frame-shift (40%) or mis-sense alterations (31%) mainly affected the MLH1. It also appeared that mis-sense mutations produce a less severe phenotype than nonsense or frame-shift mutations. Jager *et al.*⁵⁶ have evidence to suggest that with gene silencing mutations (non-protein production) of MLH1 there is paucity of extracolonic cancers.

#### Effects of MMR dysfunction

Each of the HNPCC genes participates in DNA mismatch repair (MMR), a process carefully studied in *E. coli*. During normal DNA replication most of the replication errors are directly corrected by the 3′ to 5′ exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase. Mutations that escape this proof reading are repaired by the MMR system. This system repairs DNA replication errors of 1–5 bp in length which occur during normal cell division.⁵⁷

Defects in the MMR system result in many DNA replication errors, usually detected in the dinucleotide and trinucleotide DNA ‘repeats’ that flank certain regions.⁵⁸ These repeat sequences are called ‘microsatellites’. There are 50 000–100 000 of these dinucleotide repeat sequences, most common of which are {A}n/{T}n and {CA}n/{GT}n. These are scattered in the human genome and are prone to replication infidelity. Such errors create a microsatellite instability (MIN)⁷,⁸ and, because they can be associated with strand slippage during the replication process, they are referred to as RER+⁵⁹ tumours as opposed to the normal

Table 2. Characteristics of the mismatch repair genes

| Gene    | Chromosome | % of HNPCC | Bacteria | Base pairs | Amino acid |
|---------|-----------|------------|----------|------------|------------|
| hMSH2   | 2p21-22   | 50%        | mutS     | 2727       | 909        |
| hMLH1   | 3p21      | 30%        | mutL     | 2268       | 756        |
| hPMS1   | 2q31-33   | 5%         |          | 2795       | 932        |
| hPMS2   | 7p22      | 5%         |          | 2586       | 862        |

RER—type. At least 90% of tumours from patients with HNPCC are RER+, compared to only 10–15% of sporadic cases.¹⁶,⁴⁶ Liu et al.⁶⁰ evaluated 74 HNPCC kindreds for MIN and found it to be present in 92% of the kindreds, 70% of whom had mutations in five known MMR genes.

A further proof that mutation in hMSH2 and hMLH1 is associated with MIN (RER+ phenotype) came from the study from Umar et al.⁶¹ In this study a single chromosome 3 from normal fibroblasts was transfected into cells from the human colon tumour cell line, HCT116, carrying a homozygous mutation in hMLH1 and exhibiting MIN. The transfection resulted in a correction of mismatch repair deficiency with subsequent microsatellite stability. Defective mismatch repair leads to a microsatellite mutator phenotype (MMP), which can lead to accumulation of mutations in known oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes.⁶² The frequency of these mutations in human cells may be increased a 1000-fold as a result of MMR dysfunction.⁶³ A study of the incidence of MIN in more than 500 sporadic tumours of six differing types revealed the replication error phenotype in 16.5% of 243 colorectal cancers, 18% of 33 gastric carcinomas and 22% of 18 endometrial carcinomas. Cancers of lung, breast and testis had no evidence of MIN.⁵⁹,⁶⁴ Later studies, however, have shown the RER+ phenotype to be present in 20% of cases of breast cancer⁶⁵ and 45% of cases of small cell lung cancers.⁶⁶

Other than repairing errors, the MMR proteins are crucial in regulating recombination events, functioning as a barrier to illegitimate exchanges between quasi-homologous DNA sequences. Thus, cells deficient in MMR not only have a mutator phenotype with MIN, but also have a hyper-recombinant phenotype with chromosomal instability.⁶⁷ However, they do not have the massive chromosomal destabilization typical of many colon cancers, thus accounting for the appearance of DNA diploidy in flow cytometric studies of HNPCC.⁴⁷

Current data indicate that mutations in transforming growth factor-β (TGF β) type II receptor gene are characteristic of HNPCC.⁶⁸ This causes the cell to express an abnormal TGF β type II receptor on its surface, and thereby fail to bind TGF β, which has a potent tumour suppressor activity. The cells thus lose their responsiveness to an important aspect of growth suppression. The underlying defect is a frame-shift mutation within a repeat sequence of (A) 10 in the TGF-β type II receptor gene. In tumours without MIN, mutations of TGF-βR II (A) 10 have not been detected.⁶⁹ The role of telomerase, an enzyme involved in the synthesis of chromosomal ends, has also been investigated in HNPCC. There is evidence to suggest that reactivation of this enzyme may be associated with a predisposition to cancer.⁷⁰ Konishi et al.⁷¹ suggested that frequencies of mutations in APC, p53 and K-ras genes were considerably low compared with in FAP or sporadic CRC. Tumours with MIN also have a lower rate of loss of heterozygosity (LOH), particularly at the p53 locus.⁹

The suggested model for HNPCC development is a mutation in the MMR genes followed by a possibly unrelated event such as a mutation in the APC gene. The two events then cause growth dysregulation.⁷² This is then followed by inactivation of the wild-type allele of an MMR gene causing MIN and producing a mutator phenotype. This triggers off the rapid development of mutations in other genes, such as K-ras, DCC and p53, leading to tumour progression.²⁰ Hemminiki et al. looked for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in tumours from HNPCC patients with a germ-line mutation, and found that in every case the wild-type allele of an MMR gene was effected.⁷³ The MMR gene is functional even when one allele of the gene is compromised, for example when the defect is inherited. However, when there is an acquired defect in the remaining allele, the MMR system is rendered ineffective in accord with the Knudson two hit hypothesis (Fig. 1).⁷⁴ However, many believe that there are at least two distinct genetic pathways in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer; one involving chromosomal instability and the other involving microsatellite instability. Tumours characterized by chromosomal instability demonstrate a high frequency of allelic imbalances, the most common may involve chromosomal arms 5q, 8p, 17p and 18q. The second pathway involving microsatellite instability is directly related to mutations of the mismatch repair genes.²³,³³

Recent data suggest that there might be other MMR genes playing a part in the development of HNPCC. In a study by Yamamoto et al.,⁷⁵ 32% of the families fulfilling the Amsterdam criteria had no detectable MIN, and so the authors concluded that there might be genes other than those responsible for MMR playing a part in the tumorigenesis of HNPCC. Evidence suggests that apoptotic response genes such as BAX may contribute to the adenoma carcinoma transition in HNPCC tumorigenesis.⁷⁶ The IGF IIR gene has also been implicated.⁷⁷ Parsons et al. have found MIN to be present in non-neoplastic cells in patients with HNPCC, which they attribute to the presence of other genes participating in the MMR pathway.⁷⁸ Perucho et al.⁷⁹ have proposed a model based on ‘a mutator that mutates another mutator’ theory. They suggest that primary mutators such as hMLH1 and hMSH2 cause frame-shift mutations in secondary mutators, such as hMSH3 and hMSH6, resulting in the MMR process.

Management of HNPCC

Screening by genetic testing: who needs screening?

The ability to identify germline MMR gene mutations has radically transformed the management of patients and their

Review

Mutations in MMR, APC, other genes?
Inactivation of wild type allele (MMR)
Gene penetrance and expression

Environmental factors
Modifier genes (BAX, TGFβIIIR)

DNA
hypomethylation

APC

K-RAS
DCC
P53, other genes?

NORMAL
EPITHELIUM

DYSPLASTIC
EPITHELIUM

EARLY
ADENOMA

intermediate
ADENOMA

LATE
ADENOMAS

CARCINOMA

METASTASIS

Fig. 1. Proposed model for HNPCC tumorigenesis. The MMR genes (hMSH2, hMLH1, hPMS1, hPMS2) are believed to act at the adenoma stage of colorectal cancer formation. Oncogenes (K-ras) and tumour suppressor genes (APC, p53, DCC etc.) participate at different stages leading up to cancer progression.

relatives with HNPCC. All first degree relatives of a patient with HNPCC have a 50% risk of carrying one of the deleterious genes. It is estimated that proactive population genetic screening for genes for HNPCC would prevent an estimated 1500 cancers a year in Britain.80

Beck et al.25 have suggested that all families with a pedigree suggestive of HNPCC should be referred to a geneticist even if the Amsterdam criteria are not fulfilled. This helps with targeted surveillance and early surgical intervention. In families that fulfil the Amsterdam criteria, blood tests are carried out for detecting germ-line mutations in hMSH2 and hMLH1 initially, as these genes are responsible for the majority of the cases.60

Genetic testing of younger patients seems to be justified in the screening of HNPCC. It is estimated that in patients younger than 35 years of age, 58% of tumours are RER+ and 24% of all patients have a germ-line MMR gene mutation.81 Patients with proximal colonic tumours, familial presence of extracolonic tumours or multiple synchronous lesions should have their index tumour tested for MIN. Determination of MIN is a very helpful tool for HPNCC screening because tumours of almost all patients with proven MMR genes express the MSI phenotype. Aaltonen et al.82 examined a young group of patients with a family history of disease, who also had a previous history of cancer. They found that 16% of their patients were RER+ and these also had a detectable germ-line mutation. The authors, therefore, suggested that patients found to have RER+ tumours should undergo further analysis for germ-line mutations in DNA MMR genes. On the contrary, Lynch and Smyrk suggest that the presence of RER+ should not be used as an exclusive criterion. They recommend that all patients with a strong family history and other clinico- pathological clues should be considered for genetic testing.83 Wolfgang et al.84 have suggested 10 different primer sets for examining MSI. They also recommend that at least 40% of

these markers should display instability for the tumour to be classified as MIN. If the tumour is RER+ then the rest of the family should be tested. Ruschoff et al.85 have suggested that patients who have a family history of cancer predisposition and/or a tumour expressing the MIN phenotype should be tested for germ-line mutations within the predisposition genes. Beck et al., in their recent work,86 have proposed that in the absence of a strong personal or family history of CRC it is not worthwhile performing diagnostic or predictive genetic testing for HNPCC mutations in subjects with multiple colorectal adenomas. In their study only 4% of patients with multiple adenomas manifested germ-line HNPCC mutations. Cawkwell et al.108 have suggested that it might be possible to screen for RER status immunohistochemically, with antibodies to MSH2 and MLH1 protein products. The authors have reported this method to be highly sensitive and specific.

Current techniques for genetic testing

There are two main approaches to pre-symptomatic DNA based diagnosis. These are linkage analysis87 and direct mutational analysis.58,88,90

In linkage analysis, haplotypes (chromosomal regions) that harbour the gene of interest are examined. This method is based on the comparison of haplotypes from affected and unaffected family members. Since different genes are involved in HNPCC, linkage analysis, if feasible, is performed as a first step in identifying the gene locus involved in the family under investigation. However this method suffers from many handicaps. The analysis requires DNA from at least affected individuals in the family, which restricts this application. Early death of gene carriers and uncertain paternity within families reduces the value of linkage studies in many clinical situations. Furthermore, by its nature, linkage analysis provides only an estimation of

risk of being a gene carrier rather than a definitive diagnosis.

Direct mutational analysis focuses on the individual patient and is not dependent on family studies. It is undoubtedly the optimum means of predictive testing, as it offers a firm diagnosis in those families in whom a mutation has been characterized. The type of mutational analysis that can be performed falls into two groups:

(1) screening techniques which include denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP), chemical cleavage of mismatch method, and *in vitro* synthesis of the protein product (protein truncation test: PTT);

(2) the direct sequencing of DNA (gold standard).

The microsatellite sequences of an individual are fixed for life, are the same in every tissue, and are extremely valuable for linkage analysis and genomic mapping, and is particularly useful in determining LOH at known or putative tumour suppresser genes loci.⁸⁹ The length of microsatellites can be determined by designing primers that will flank the repeated sequence and then performing a polymerase chain reaction (PCR). A reverse transcriptase (RT-PCR) based, *in vitro* synthesized protein assay (IVSP) has been suggested for detection of the truncated protein product.⁹⁰ Complete sequence analysis can be then performed on any samples still negative for mutations.⁶⁰ This differentiates gene carriers from non-carriers and prevents unnecessary investigations and complications, and excessive financial implications.⁸⁷

### Limitation of current genetic tests

Existing tests for HNPCC are not perfect and the absence of a mutation does not mean that the person will not develop the disease. PTT, for example, has a 30% false negative rate for detecting MMR mutations in HNPCC families.⁶⁰ This technique only detects mutations that result in the translation of a pathologically foreshortened protein that is missing variable portions of its carboxy terminal. It is also useless in a family with mutations in a non-MMR gene, thus emphasizing the issue that not all the genes that can produce the HNPCC phenotype are yet identified. It will take time to establish with certainty all the genes that may result in HNPCC.

Direct sequencing can potentially miss mutations that affect gene expression, it may miss alterations at the intron-exon borders that can adversely effect splicing, and will miss large genetic lesions. Interpretation of the sequences may not be all that simple, for example certain variations in DNA sequences will be silent and will not result in any change in the protein structure, whilst others may change the amino-acid sequence of the protein and not seriously effect its function. Screening tests such as denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and SSCP are intrinsically less sensitive than direct sequencing and are more likely to result in under-diagnosis. The limitations of linkage analysis have already been described above.

Accepting the above limitations, the currently held view recommends that the most effective initial screen is with PTT for *hMSH2* and *hMLH1*. The finding of a truncated protein in either assay would focus sequencing studies on that particular gene only. Because a normal size protein

does not exclude the possibility of a subtle yet functional alteration, RT-PCR followed by SSCP can be used in these cases to identify even single base-pair changes.²⁶ If SSCP demonstrates altered mobility (signifying base change) then *hPMS1* and *hPMS2* are sequenced.⁹³ An algorithm for genetic testing of HNPCC patients is outlined in Fig. 2. Other techniques, such as the use of bacteriophage resolvase enzyme, which cuts DNA at sites of mismatched base pairs,⁹¹ and examination of protein expression by immunohistocytochemistry for pre-screening tumours,⁹² have been suggested.

The price for sequencing each gene is currently estimated to be $1175. Certain laboratories in the USA do a PTT for *hMSH2* and *hMLH1*, claiming to identify 65% of mutations by this method. They charge $700 for family members whose mutations are unknown and $500 for those with known mutations.⁹³ These costs are likely to come down but overall costs will rise as further molecular strategies come on stream.

#### Genetic counselling

A major issue regarding genetic testing is that of genetic counselling.⁹⁴ Patients need to be aware of the natural history of HNPCC and the options of surveillance versus prophylactic surgery should be discussed. A positive genetic result can have profound psychological consequences as well as repercussions on insurance and employment issues. The implications of dealing with a positive test are very much the responsibility of the physician. It requires team work on both the part of the physician and a professional genetic counsellor to deal with the emotional trauma that patients and their families will go through once a diagnosis of HNPCC is established.

#### Screening by colonoscopy

So far there have been no randomized controlled trials to show that colonoscopy decreases mortality or incidence of colorectal cancer in HNPCC-associated mutation carriers. A 10-year intervention study, with a 3-year colonoscopy interval, showed a significant reduction by 62% in the incidence of CRC in healthy at risk members from families with HNPCC. These patients had a 50% lifetime risk of developing CRC, especially if they were from a high pedigree family with three or more relatives affected by colorectal cancer. The tumour stage was more favourable in the screening group with no deaths caused by CRC.⁹⁵ Another study from Finland²¹ indicated that one cancer was prevented for every 2.8 polypectomies in HNPCC patients. This was compared with the 41–119 polypectomies per cancer death prevented in sporadic CRC, in the National Polyp Study.

Colonoscopy is mainly recommended in gene carriers as non-gene carriers show no increased risk of developing CRC.⁸⁷ Examination should begin at age 25 or 5 years younger than the earliest diagnosis of colon cancer in the family, whichever comes first. Full colonoscopy is recommended every 1–3 years⁹⁵⁻⁹⁸ until age 35 and then annually thereafter.²¹ In individuals who harbour *MSH2* mutations or show linkage to chromosome 2p or 3p, it is

Familial Cancer: Positive  
Amsterdam Criteria, HNPCC.

Direct gene testing:  
PTT or SSCP of hMSH2,  
hMLH1.

Positive  
Sequence specific exons  
of hMSH2 and hMLH1

Negative  
Sequence all exons  
of hMSH2 and hMLH1

Young patients, Fx extracolonic  
tumours, proximal, multiple and  
synchronous lesions.

Tumour testing for MIN  

Negative  
Increased risk of CRC: continue screening

Positive  
Direct gene testing

Negative  
SSCP, *sequence PMS1?  
PMS2?

Positive

Fig. 2. Flow chart for HNPCC based on currently available genetic techniques. *Sequencing for PMS1 and PMS2 is controversial, as these have only been identified in two families so far.

recommended that colonoscopy be initiated at 20 years of age and repeated annually. As compared to sporadic CRC the adenoma carcinoma sequence in HNPCC seems to transpire at an accelerated pace, and accordingly surveillance intervals need to be set at shorter intervals. In a retrospective study of patients who underwent abdominal colectomy, rectal cancer developed in patients at intervals as short as 8 and 10 months after the last endoscopy. The authors, therefore, recommended an interval of 1 year between surveillance endoscopies.

Vasen et al. calculated the cost effectiveness of screening HNPCC gene carriers. They based their model on surveillance with colonoscopy every 2–3 years as compared to no surveillance. The costs of DNA testing including genetic counselling was estimated to be $1880 per patient. Their results demonstrated that surveillance of gene carriers leads to an increase in life expectancy of 7 years. The costs of surveillance are less than the costs of no CRC screening. However, later, in a letter published in the Lancet they recommended a shortening of the interval between examinations to 1–2 years in proven gene carriers. This resulted from a high frequency of interval cancers in their series, and obviously will alter their financial calculations.

Annual screening for endometrial cancer is recommended to begin at the age of 25–35 years, however no clear guidelines are available for the optimal method and timing for endometrial screening. The current modalities for screening are transvaginal ultrasound and endometrial aspiration. Methods for ovarian cancer screening include transvaginal ultrasound and serum CA-125.

Surgical treatment of HNPCC

Prophylactic surgery versus endoscopic surveillance is a much debated issue for patients with germ-line MMR mutations. The issue becomes more complex in phenotypically normal patients, in which the genotypic identification of HNPCC has been established. The idea of prophylactic surgery is endorsed by some and rejected by others. In favour of early surgery is the fact that there is an 80% life-time risk of developing CRC in patients with germ-line mutations. Deferring prophylactic surgery means a lifetime of surveillance with its associated complications. Colonic neoplasms can originate as a plaque like flat lesion and therefore are difficult to identify by colonoscopy. Surgical intervention at a later age may mean an increased risk of complications and morbidity.

On the other hand, due to the incomplete mode of penetrance of HNPCC, not all patients with germ-line mutations develop cancer and the age at which cancer develops varies widely between 14 and 82 years. Surgery for HNPCC in young adulthood carries considerable psychological trauma and often has physical consequences. In choosing surgery, age, sphincter function, the presence of irritable bowel syndrome, sexual function, psychological makeup, etc. must all be carefully considered.

The options available to the patient are subtotal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis and restorative proctocolectomy with ileo-anal pouch anastomosis. Although the former procedure preserves sexual function and continence, there is always a risk of metachronous rectal cancer. The risk of such a metachronous cancer in the rectum after subtotal colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis was estimated to be about 11% in one study, although it was thought that the risk was underestimated. Such patients need regular sigmoidoscopic surveillance of the rectum since the risk of rectal cancer appears to be at least 3% for every 3 years for the first 12 years following colectomy. Restorative proctocolectomy with the ileo-anal pouch anastomosis involves removal of colon and proximal

rectum with mucosectomy of the distal rectal remnant in combination with restorative ileal pouch formation. The morbidity of this procedure is higher than the former procedure with risks of pelvic sepsis, incontinence, sexual dysfunction and, for some, eventual ileostomy. At present there are no studies suggesting the role of this procedure in prophylactic surgery for HNPCC. However, in theory this procedure eliminates the risk of rectal neoplasia. There is no place for segmental colectomy as the rate of development of metachronous tumours is estimated to be about 30–45% at 10 years after segmental colectomy for established carcinoma in HNPCC germ-line carriers. ${ }^{103,105,106}$

In female HNPCC, there is insufficient evidence for total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (TAH-BSO). Carriers may be offered this option and the procedure should be considered in women who have completed their families. There is no data on long-term consequences of TAH-BSO in this group of patients. No clinical evidence currently exists to suggest guidelines for surveillance of other malignancies in HNPCC.

### Need for comprehensive guidelines

Since the recognition of HNPCC as a separate entity by Lynch in 1960s, it has taken a long time for the medical community to embrace this idea. In 1994 DNA-repair enzymes were named as the ‘molecule of the year’. The discovery of the four major genes which account for almost all cases of HNPCC has had a tremendous impact on the clinical management of this condition.

Another significant breakthrough was the discovery of the fact that most of the HNPCC tumours manifest MIN. The small number of the patients who fulfil the strict Amsterdam criteria but lack the MIN profile have provoked a further search for as yet unknown genes causing HNPCC. PTT and sequencing have laid the foundation on which genetic testing is based. However, a negative genetic profile still does not exonerate a patient with a strong family history. Although a few groups have published consensus statements for the management of HNPCC and related tumours, ${ }^{18,96,107}$ there are no comprehensive guidelines available for optimal management and follow-up of these patients. The management of extracolonic malignancies for example is far from satisfactory. With the rapid development in this field, we hope that precise recommendations will become available and patients and their relatives can be much better informed about the treatment and prognosis of this condition.

### Acknowledgement

The authors wish to acknowledge the constructive and extensive contribution of one of the referees without which our paper would not be in its present form. The authors wish to thank this referee most sincerely for his efforts.

---

### References

1. Warthin AS. Heredity with reference to carcinoma. *Arch Intern Med* 1913; **12**: 546–55.
2. Warthin AS. Heredity of carcinoma in man. *Ann Int Med* 1931; **4**: 681–96.
3. Lynch HT, Shaw MW, Magnuson CW, Larsen AL, Krush AJ. Hereditary factors in cancer. Study of two large midwestern kindreds. *Arch Intern Med* 1966; **117**: 206–12.
4. Boland CR, Troncale FJ. Familial colonic cancer without antecedent polyposis. *Ann Intern Med* 1984; **100**: 700–1.
5. Lynch HT, Smyrk T, Lynch JF. Molecular genetics and clinical pathology features of hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. (Lynch syndrome). *Oncology* 1998; **55**: 103–8.
6. Peltomaki P, Aaltonen LA, Sistonen P, Pylkkänen L, Mecklin JP, Järvinen H, Green JS, Jass JR, Weber JL, Leach FS, Petersen GM, Hamilton SR, de la Chapelle A, Vogelstein B. Genetic mapping of a locus predisposing to human colorectal cancer. *Science* 1993; **260**: 810–2.
7. Ionov Y, Peinado MA, Malkhosyan S, Shibata D, Perucho M. Ubiquitous somatic mutations in simple repeated sequences reveal a new mechanism for colonic carcinogenesis. *Nature* 1993; **363**: 558–61.
8. Aaltonen LA, Peltomaki P, Leach FS, Sistonen P, Pylkkänen L, Mecklin JP, Järvinen H, Powell SM, Jen J, Hamilton SR, Petersen GM, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B, de la Chapella A. Clues to the pathogenesis of familial colorectal cancer. *Science* 1993; **260**: 812–6.
9. Thibodeau SN, Bren G, Schaid D. Microsatellite instability in cancer of proximal colon. *Science* 1993; **260**: 816–9.
10. Lindblom A, Tannergard P, Werelius B, Nordenskjold M. Genetic mapping of a second locus predisposing to hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer. *Nat Genet* 1993; **5**: 279–82.
11. Lynch HT, Smyrk TC, Watson P, Lanspa SJ, Lynch JF, Lynch PM, Boland RC. Genetics, natural history, tumour spectrum, and pathology of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: An updated review. *Gastroenterology* 1993; **104**: 1535–49.
12. Bodmer W, Bishop T, Karran P. Genetic steps in colorectal cancer. *Nat Genet* 1994; **6**: 217–9.
13. Marx J. New colon cancer gene discovered. *Science* 1993; **260**: 751–2.
14. Bailey-Wilson JE, Elston RC, Schuelke GS, Kimberling WJ, Albano WA, Lynch JF, Lynch HT. Segregation analysis of hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. *Genet Epidemiol* 1986; **3**: 27–38.
15. Cunningham C, Dunlop MG. Molecular genetic basis of colorectal cancer susceptibility. *Br J Surg* 1996; **83**: 321–9.
16. McMurrick PJ, Nelson H. Managing the patient with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. *Curr Opin Gastroen* 1998; **14**: 21–6.
17. Vasen HFA, Wijnen JT, Menko FH, *et al.* Cancer risk in families with hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer diagnosed by mutation analysis. *Gastroenterology* 1996; **110**: 1020–7.
18. Hodgson SV, Bishop DT, Dunlop MG, Evans DGR, Northover JMA. Suggested screening guidelines for familial colorectal cancer. *J Med Screen* 1995; **2**: 45–51.
19. Vasen HFA, Mecklin J-P, Meera Khan PM, Lynch HT. The international collaborative group on hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. *Dis Colon Rect* 1991; **34**: 424–5.
20. Craanen ME, Blok P, Offerhaus GJA, Tytgat GNJ. Recent development in hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. *Scand J Gastroenterol* 1996; **31** (Suppl. 218): 92–7.
21. Lynch HT, Smyrk T. Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (Lynch syndrome). *Cancer* 1996; **78**: 1149–67.
22. Watson P, Lynch HT. Extracolonic cancer in hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. *Cancer* 1993; **71**: 677–85.
23. Green SE, Bradburn DM, Varma JS, Burn J. Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. *Int J Colorect Dis* 1998; **13**: 3–12.

24. Watson P, Vasen HF, Mecklin JP, Jarvinen H, Lynch HT. The risk of endometrial cancer in hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer. *Am J Med* 1994; **96**: 516–20.
25. Beck NE, Tomlinson IP, Homfray T, Hodgson SV, Harocopos CJ, Bodmer WF. Genetic testing is important in families with a history suggestive of hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer even if the Amsterdam criteria is not fulfilled. *Br J Surg* 1997; **84**: 233–7.
26. Beck N, Tomlinson I, Homfray T, Frayling I, Hodgson S, Harocopos C, Bodmer W. Use of SSCP analysis to identify germline mutations in HNPCC families fulfilling the Amsterdam criteria. *Hum Genet* 1997; **99**: 219–24.
27. Nahkahara M, Yokozaki H, Yasui W, Dohi K, Tahara E. Identification of concurrent germline mutations in hMSH2 and/or hMLH1 in Japanese hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer kindreds. *Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev* 1997; **6**: 1057–64.
28. Rodriguez-Bigas MA, Boland CR, *et al.* A National Cancer Institute workshop on hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer syndrome: meeting highlights and Bethesda guidelines. *J Natl Cancer Inst* 1997; **89**: 1758–62.
29. Jass JR, Cottier DS, Jeevaratnum P, Pokos V, Hodaway KM, Bowden ML, Van de Water NS, Browett PJ. Diagnostic use of microsatellite instability in hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer. *Lancet* 1996; **346**: 1200–1.
30. Muta H, Noguchi M, Peruchio M, Ushio K, Sugihara K, Ochiai A, Nawata H, Hirohashi S. Clinical implication of microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer. *Cancer* 1996; **77**: 265–70.
31. Aarnio M, Mustonen H, Mecklin JP, Jarvinen HJ. Prognosis of colorectal cancer varies in different high risk conditions. *Ann of Med* 1998; **30**: 75–80.
32. Sankila R, Aaltonen LA, Jarvinen HJ, Mecklin J. Better survival rates in patients with MLH1 associated hereditary colorectal cancer. *Gastroenterology* 1996; **110**: 682–7.
33. Baba S. Recent advances in molecular genetics of colorectal cancer. *World J Surg* 1997; **21**: 678–87.
34. Lynch HT, Smyrk T. Colorectal cancer, survival advantage and hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer. *Gastroenterology* 1996; **110**: 943–7.
35. Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Lessons from hereditary colorectal cancer. *Cell* 1996; **87**: 159–70.
36. Senba S, Konishi F, Okamoto T, Kashiwagi H, Kanazawa K, Miyaki M, Konishi M, Tsukamoto T. Clinicopathological and genetic features of nonfamilial colorectal carcinomas with DNA replication errors. *Cancer* 1998; **82**: 279–85.
37. Lipkin M, Blattner WE, Fraumeni JF, Lynch HT, Deschner E, Winawar S. Tritiated thymidine (phip, phih) labelling distribution as a marker for hereditary predisposition to colon cancer. *Cancer Res* 1983; **43**: 1899–1904.
38. Boland CR. Abnormalities of colonic glycoconjugates in groups at increased risk for colorectal cancer. In: Rossini FP, Lynch HT, Winawer SJ (eds). *Recent Progress in Colorectal Cancer; Biology and Management of High Risk Patients*. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1992; 163–5.
39. Sams JS, Lynch HT, Bert RW, Lanspa SJ, Boland CR. Abnormalities of Lectin histochemistry in familial polyposis coli and hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. *Cancer* 1990; **66**: 502–8.
40. Smyrk TC, Lynch HT, Watson PA, Appelman HD. Histological features of hereditary non polyposis colorectal carcinoma. In: *Hereditary Colorectal Cancer*. (Eds) Utsunomiya J, Lynch HT. Tokyo, Springer-Verlag, 1990, pp. 357–62.
41. Jessurun MR, Manivel JC. Caecal poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas, medullary type. *Mod Pathol* 1992; **5**: 43A.
42. Jass JR, Do K-A, Simms LA, Lino H, Wynter C, Pillay SP, Searle J, Radford-Smith G, Young J, Leggett B. Morphology of sporadic colorectal cancer with DNA replication errors. *Gut* 1998; **42**: 673–79.

43. Lanspa SJ, Lynch HT, Smyrk C, Strayhorn P, Watson P, Lynch JF, Jenkins JX, Appelman HD. Colorectal adenomas in the lynch syndrome. Results of a colonoscopy programme. *Gastroenterology* 1990; **98**: 1117–1122.
44. Lynch HT, Smyrk T, Watson P, Lanspa SJ, Boman BM, Lynch PM, Lynch JF, Cavalieri J. Hereditary colorectal cancer. *Sem Onc* 1991; **18**: 337–66.
45. Mecklin JP, Sipponen P, Jarvinen HJ. Histopathology of colorectal carcinomas and adenomas in cancer family syndrome. *Dis Colon Rectum* 1986; **29**: 849–53.
46. Kim H, Jen J, Vogelstein B, Hamilton SR. Clinical and pathological characteristics of sporadic colorectal carcinoma with DNA replication errors in microsatellite sequences. *Am J Pathol* 1994; **145**: 148–56.
47. Smyrk TC. Colon Cancer Connections. Cancer syndrome meet molecular biology meet histopathology. *Am J Pathol* 1994; **145**: 1–6.
48. Aaltonen LA, Peltomaki P, Mecklin JP, *et al.* Replication errors in benign and malignant tumours from hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer patients. *Cancer Res* 1994; **54**: 1645–8.
49. Strand M, Prolla TA, Liskay RM, Petes TD. Destabilization of tracts of simple repetitive DNA in yeast by mutations effecting DNA mismatch repair. *Nature* 1993; **365**: 274–6.
50. Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N, Liu B, *et al.* Mutations of two PMS homologues in hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer. *Nature* 1994; **371**: 75–80.
51. Leach FS, Nicolaides NC, Papadopoulos N, *et al.* Mutations of a mut S homolog in hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer. *Cell* 1993; **75**: 1215–25.
52. Fishel R, Ewel A, Lee S, Lescoe MK, Griffith J. Binding of mismatched microsatellite DNA sequences by the human MSH2 protein. *Science* 1994; **266**: 1403–5.
53. Drummond JT, Li G-M, Longley MJ, Modrich P. Isolation of an hMSH2-p160 heterodimer that restores DNA mismatch repair to tumour cells. *Science* 1995; **268**: 1909–12.
54. Johnson RE, Kovvali GK, Parkash R, Parkash L. Requirement of yeast MSH3 and MSH6 gene for MSH2-dependent genomic stability. *J Biol Chem* 1996; **271**: 7285–8.
55. Peltomaki P, Vasen HFA and the International Collaborative Group on HNPCC. Mutations predisposing to hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: Database and results of a collaborative study. *Gastroenterology* 1997; **113**: 1146–58.
56. Jager AC, Bisgaard ML, Myrhøj T, Bernstein I, Rehfeld JF, Nielsen FC. Reduced frequency of extracolonic cancers in hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer families with mono allelic hMLH1 expression. *Am J Hum Genet* 1997; **61**: 129–38.
57. Burt RW. Familial risk and colorectal cancer. *Gastroenterol Clin N Am* 1996; **25**: 793–803.
58. Marra G, Boland CR. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. The syndrome, the genes, and historical perspective. *J Natl Cancer Inst* 1995; **87** 1114–45.
59. Peltomaki P, Lothe RA, Aaltonen LA, *et al.* Microsatellite instability is associated with tumours that characterize the hereditary non polyposis colorectal carcinoma syndrome. *Cancer Res* 1993; **53**: 5853–5.
60. Liu B, Parsons R, Papadopoulus N, *et al.* Analysis of mismatch repair genes in hereditary non-polyposis colorectal colon cancer patients. *Nat Med* 1996; **2**: 169–74.
61. Umar U, Boyer JC, Thomas DC, *et al.* Defective mismatch repair in extracts of colorectal and endometrial cancer cell lines exhibiting microsatellite instability. *J Biol Chem* 1994; **269**: 14367–70.
62. Chung DC, Rustgi AK. DNA mismatch repair and cancer. *Gastroenterology* 1995; **109**: 1685–99.
63. Bhattacharyya NP, Skandalis A, Ganesh A, Groden G, Meuth M. Mutator phenotypes in human colorectal carcinoma cell lines. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1994; **91**: 6319–1623.
64. Lothe RA, Peltomaki P, Meling GI, *et al.* Genomic instability in colorectal cancer: relationship to clinicopathological

variables and family history. *Cancer Res* 1993; **53**: 5849–52.

65. Yee CJ, Roodi N, Verrier CS, Parl FF. Microsatellite instability and loss of heterozygosity in breast cancer. *Cancer Res* 1994; **54**: 1641–4.

66. Merlo A, Marby M, Gabrielson E, Vollmer R, Baylin SF, Sidransky D. Frequent microsatellite instability in primary small cell lung cancer. *Cancer Res* 1994; **54**: 2098–101.

67. De Wind N, Dekker M, Berns A, Radman M, te Riele H. Inactivation of the mouse MSH2 gene result in mismatch repair deficiency, methylation tolerance, hyperrecombination, and predisposition to cancer. *Cell* 1995; **82**: 321–30.

68. Parsons R, Myeroff LV, Liu B, Willson H, Markowitz SD, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Microsatellite instability and mutations of the transforming growth factor beta type II receptor gene in colorectal cancer. *Cancer Res* 1995; **55**: 5548–50.

69. Markowitz S, Wang J, Myeroff L, *et al.* Inactivation of type II TGF β receptor in colon cancer cells with microsatellite instability. *Science* 1995; **268**: 1336–8.

70. Cheng AJ, Tang R, Wang JY, See LC, Wang TC. Possible role of telomerase activation in the cancer predisposition of patients with hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancers. *J Natl Cancer Inst* 1998; **90**: 316–21.

71. Konishi M, Kikuchi-Yanoshita R, Tanaka K, *et al.* Molecular nature of colon tumours in hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, familial polyposis and sporadic colon cancer. *Gastroenterology* 1996; **111**: 307–17

72. Lazar V, Grandjouan S, Bognel C, Couturier D, Rougier P, Bellet D, Paillerets BB. Accumulation of multiple mutations in tumour suppressor genes during colorectal tumorigenesis in HNPCC patients. *Hum Mol Gen* 1994; **3**: 2257–60.

73. Hemminiki A, Peltomaki P, Mecklin JP, Jarvinen H, Salovaara R, Nystyrom-Lahti M, de la Chapelle A, Aaltonen LA. Loss of the wild type MLH1 gene is a feature of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. *Nat Genet* 1994; **8**: 405–10.

74. Parsons R, Li GM, Longley MJ, Fang W, Papadopoulos N, Jen J, Chapelle A, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B, Modrich P. Hypermutability and mismatch repair deficiency in RER+ tumours. *Cell* 1993; **75**: 1227–36.

75. Yamamoto H, Sawai H, Weber TK, Rodriguez-Bigas MA, Perucho M. Somatic frame shift mutations in DNA mismatch repair and proapoptosis genes in hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer. *Cancer Res* 1998; **58**: 997–1003.

76. Yagi OK, Akiyama Y, Nomizu T, Iwama T, Endo M, Yuasa Y. Proapoptotic gene BAX is frequently mutated in hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancers but not in adenomas. *Gastroenterology* 1998; **114**: 268–74.

77. Souza RF, Appel R, Yin J, *et al.* The insulin like growth factor II receptor gene is a target of microsatellite instability in human gastrointestinal tumours. *Nat Genet* 1996; **14**: 255–7.

78. Parsons R, Li GM, Longley M, Modrich P, Liu B, Berk T, Hamilton SR, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Mismatch repair deficiency in phenotypically normal human cells. *Science* 1995; **268**: 738–40.

79. Perucho M. Microsatellite instability: the mutator that mutates the other mutator. *Nat Med* 1996; **2**: 630–1.

80. Dunlop MG. Colorectal cancer. *BMJ* 1997; **314**: 1882–5.

81. Dunlop M, Farrington S, Carothers A, Wyllie A, Sharp L, Burn J, Liu B, Kinzler K, Vogelstein B. Cancer risk associated with germline DNA mismatch repair gene mutations. *Hum Mol Genet* 1997; **6**: 105–10.

82. Aaltonen LA, Salovaara R, Kristo P, *et al.* Incidence of hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer and the feasibility of molecular screening for the disease. *N Engl J Med* 1998; **338**: 1481–7.

83. Lynch HT, Smyrk TC. Identifying hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer. *N Engl J Med* 1998; **338**: 1537–8.

84. Wolfgang D, Wallinger S, Boeker T, Kullmann F, Fishel R, Ruschoff J. Diagnostic microsatellite instability: Definition

and correlation with mismatch repair protein expression. *Cancer Res* 1997; **57**: 4749–56.

85. Ruschoff J, Boeker T, Schlegel J, Stumm G, Hofstaedter F. Microsatellite instability: new aspects in the carcinogenesis of colorectal carcinoma. *Virchows Archiv* 1995; **426**: 215–22.

86. Beck NE, Tomlinson IPM, Homfray TFR, Frayling IM, Hodgson SV, Bodmer WF. Frequency of germline hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer mutations in patients with multiple or early onset colorectal adenomas. *Gut* 1997; **41**: 235–8.

87. Piepoli A, Santoro R, Cristofaro G, *et al.* Linkage analysis identifies gene carriers among members of families with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. *Gastroenterology* 1996; **110**: 1404–9.

88. Xia L, Shen W, Ritacca F, Mitri A, Medlenskey L, Berk T, Cohen Z, Gallinger S, Bapat B. A truncated hMSH2 transcript occur as a common variant in the population: implications for genetic diagnosis. *Cancer Res* 1996; **56**: 2289–92.

89. Marra G, Boland CR. DNA repair and colorectal cancer. *Gastroenterol Clin N Am* 1996; **25**: 755–71.

90. Wijnen J, Khan PM, Vasen H, *et al.* Majority of hMLH1 mutations responsible for hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer cluster at the exonic region 15–16. *Am J Hum Genet* 1996; **58**: 300–7.

91. Mashal RD, Koontz J, Sklar J. Detection of mutations by cleavage of DNA heteroduplexes with bacteriophage resolvases. *Nat Gent* 1995; **9**: 177–83.

92. Thibodeau SN, French AJ, Roche PC, *et al.* Altered expression of hMSH2 and hMLH1 in tumours with microsatellite instability and genetic alteration in mismatch repair genes. *Cancer Res* 1996; **56**: 4836–40.

93. Howe JR, Guillem JG. The genetics of colorectal cancer. *Surg Clin N Am* 1997; **77**: 175–95.

94. Codori AM. Psychological opportunities and hazards in predictive genetic testing for cancer risk. *Gastro Clin North Am* 1997; **26**: 19–39.

95. Jarvinen HJ, Mecklin JP, Sistonen P. Screening reduces colorectal cancer rate in families with hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer. *Gastroenterology* 1995; **108**: 1405–11.

96. Burke W, Peterson G, Lynch P, *et al.* Recommendation for follow up care of individuals with an inherited predisposition to cancer. 1: hereditary nonpolyposis cancer. *JAMA* 1997; **277**: 915–9.

97. Brewer DA, Fung CLS, Chapuis PH, Bokey EL. Should relatives of patients with colorectal cancer be screened? A critical review of the literature. *Dis Colon Rectum* 1994; **37**: 1328–38.

98. Lynch HT, Smyrk T, Lanspa S, Lynch J. Colonoscopy in relation to the evolving genetics of familial colorectal cancer. *Endoscopy* 1995; **27**: 43–9.

99. Rodriguez-Bigas M, Vasen H, Pekka-Mecklin J, *et al.* Rectal cancer risk in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer after abdominal colectomy: International Collaborative Group on HNPCC. *Ann Surg* 1997; **225**: 202–7.

100. Vasen HFA, Ballegooijen MV, Buskens E, Kleibeuker JK, Taal BG, Griffioen G, Nagengast FM, Menko FH, Khan MP. A cost effectiveness analysis of colorectal screening of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma gene carriers. *Cancer* 1998; **82**: 1632–7.

101. Vasen HFA, Nagengast FM, Khan PM. Interval cancers in hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer (Lynch syndrome). *Lancet* 1995; **345**: 183–4.

102. Lynch HT. Is there a role for prophylactic subtotal colectomy among hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer germline mutation carriers? *Dis Colon Rectum* 1996; **39**: 109–10.

103. Church JM. Prophylactic colectomy in patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. *Ann Med* 1996; **28**: 479–82.

104. Lynch HT, Smyrk T, Lynch JF. Overview of natural history, pathology, and molecular genetics and management of HNPCC (Lynch syndrome). *Int J Cancer* 1996; **69**: 38–43.

Review

105. Moselin G, Nelson H, Thiobodeau S, Dozois R. Rectal cancer in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. *Gastroenterology* 1996; 110: A562.

106. Lynch HT, Harris RE, Lynch PM, Guirgis HA, Lynch JF, Bardawil WA. Role of heredity in multiple primary cancer. *Cancer* 1977; 40: 1849–54.

107. Burke W, Daly M, Garber J, et al. Recommendations for

follow up care of individuals with an inherited predisposition to cancer. II. BRCA1 and BRCA2. *JAMA* 1997; 277: 997–1003.

108. Cawkell L, Gray S, Murgatroyd H, et al. Choice of management strategy for colorectal cancer based on a diagnostic immunohistochemical test for defective mismatch repair. *Gut* 1999; 45: 409–15.


---

### Proteinomics

The information in the genome is ultimately expressed through protein product. The 100,000 or so human genes may produce up to one million different proteins through differential expression and post-transcriptional processing. Many of these proteins may have potential as therapeutic targets. All proteins are characterized both by their linear amino-acid sequence and by their three-dimensional structure, which defines their physical and binding properties and hence their functions.

Proteinomics is the study of the patterns of protein expression in target cells and tissues. The proteome is the entire spectrum of possible protein product of any one cell or organism. Study of the differential expression of proteins between cells and tissues and organisms will help identify the proteins critical to structure, function and regulation in many biological forms and in health and disease.

Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis is a well established technique for separating out the entire protein content of a cell or tissue by charge and size. Individual proteins can then be cut from the gel for further study. Automation of the analysis of the gel is now possible such that each protein can be selected and analysed by laser mass spectrometry, to yield a rapid profile of the entire protein spectrum in the target sample.

The structure and function of most proteins in the human proteome have still to be identified. New approaches to X-ray crystallography and binding assays will allow us to assess the properties and functional relationships of each and every protein in any target organism. These processes, combined with massive computational and data storage power, portend a transformation from the selective analytical techniques which have characterized protein biology over the past century to broad spectrum analysis of proteomes on an industrial scale. This will in turn accelerate our understanding of the contribution of each and every protein to the structure and function of the normal and diseased cell, and will open up new therapeutic strategies.

Further reading: Ezzell C. Beyond the human genome. *Scientific American* 2000; July: 52–7.

David Rew
