
Toll-like receptor 2-mediated  
NF-κB activation requires a  
Rac1-dependent pathway  

Laurence Arbibe¹*, Jean-Paul Mira¹,†, Nicole Teusch¹, Lois Kline¹, Mausumee Guha¹,  
Nigel Mackman¹, Paul J. Godowski², Richard J. Ulevitch¹ and Ulla G. Knaus¹  

Mammalian Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are expressed on innate immune cells and respond to the membrane components of Gram-positive or Gram-negative bacteria. When activated, they convey signals to transcription factors that orchestrate the inflammatory response. However, the intracellular signaling events following TLR activation are largely unknown. Here we show that TLR2 stimulation by Staphylococcus aureus induces a fast and transient activation of the Rho GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42 in the human monocytic cell line THP-1 and in 293 cells expressing TLR2. Dominant-negative Rac1N17, but not dominant-negative Cdc42N17, block nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) transactivation. S. aureus stimulation causes the recruitment of active Rac1 and phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K) to the TLR2 cytosolic domain. Tyrosine phosphorylation of TLR2 is required for assembly of a multiprotein complex that is necessary for subsequent NF-κB transcriptional activity. A signaling cascade composed of Rac1, PI3K and Akt targets nuclear p65 transactivation independently of IkBa degradation. Thus Rac1 controls a second, IkB-independent, pathway to NF-κB activation and is essential in innate immune cell signaling via TLR2.

Innate immune cells play an essential role in host defense against invading microorganisms. Detection of infectious organisms by polymorphonuclear cells or monocytes is accomplished through “pattern recognition receptors” (PRRs). A new class of PRRs, the human Toll-like receptors (TLRs), is related to the Drosophila Toll protein, which is required for ontogenesis and antimicrobial resistance. Generally, TLRs are type I transmembrane receptors with leucine-rich repeats in the extracellular domains and cytoplasmic domains that resemble the mammalian IL-1 receptor (IL-1R). The specific roles of the various TLRs in the innate immune system are just beginning to be understood. In terms of function, TLR2 and TLR4 are strongly implicated in innate immune recognition. Recent evidence suggests that TLR4 is essential for Gram-negative recognition, whereas TLR2 plays a key role in cell responsiveness to components of Gram-positive bacteria including peptidoglycans, lipoteichoic acid and bacterial lipoproteins. Initially TLR2 was also linked to responses to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) derived from Gram-negative bacteria but recent work shows that LPS preparations that appear to stimulate via TLR2 contain other bacterial products, which may be removed by phenol extraction.

**Figure 1. HKSA activates Rac1 and Cdc42 transiently. Time course of Rac1 (left) and Cdc42 (right) activation in (a) monocytic cell line THP1-CD14 or (b) 293-TLR2. Starved cells were stimulated with HKSA, 10⁷ colony-forming units (CFU) per ml, in culture medium containing 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA). At the indicated time points activation was quenched with cold PBS and cells were lysed. Lysate (900 μg) was subjected to affinity precipitation with GST-PBD. After washing, proteins bound to GST-PBD beads were separated on SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted for bound Rac1 or Cdc42, then detected by enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL). Immunoblots (IB) of the whole cell lysates used for the PBD binding analysis are shown in lower panels of a and b. (Results are representative of three independent experiments.)**

1Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. 2Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080-4990, USA. *These authors contributed equally to this work. †Present address: Medical Intensive Care Unit, Cochin University Hospital, 75014 Paris, France.

Correspondence should be addressed to R.U. (ulevitch@scripps.edu).

© 2000 Nature America Inc. • http://immunol.nature.com

ARTICLES

Figure 2. Rac1 controls NF-κB activation after TLR2 stimulation. (a) Parental 293 (open bars) and 293-TLR2 cells (shaded bars) were analyzed for NF-κB activation by cotransfection of the reporter plasmid 5×NF-κB-Luc and β-galactosidase plasmid either untreated (-) or stimulated for 6 h with HKSA (10⁷ CFU/ml) or IL-1β (10 ng/ml). Activation is expressed as relative luciferase units (RLU). (b,c) 293-TLR2 cells were transfected with vector (-) or the indicated constructs and either not stimulated (shaded bars) or stimulated with HKSA (filled bars). Cells were analyzed for NF-κB activation as reported in a. In b luciferase activities are expressed as percentage activation for each construct relative to cells transfected with vector alone.

Activation of TLR2 by bacterial products triggers several crucial intracellular signaling responses including activation of the transcription factor nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and induction of proinflammatory cytokines¹². Previous work suggested that TLRs and IL-1R initiate a similar pathway leading to NF-κB activation that involves signaling through MyD88, IRAK and TRAF6 to activate IkB kinases (IKKs) and degrade IkB¹³,¹⁴. NF-κB is composed of Rel family homo- and heterodimers such as p50 and p65. The inactive cytoplasmic NF-κB heterodimer is liberated from inhibitory subunit IkB upon cellular stimulation and translocates to the nucleus where it interacts with κB-responsive elements mediating transcriptional gene activation¹⁵,¹⁶. Phosphorylation of Rel dimer subunits positively controls NF-κB transcriptional activity by an IkB-independent pathway¹⁷⁻²⁰.

The Rho family GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42 are key regulators of various cellular functions such as cytoskeletal reorganization, cellular growth and apoptosis²¹. Rac and Cdc42 are implicated in different aspects of host defense against bacteria, including leukocyte chemotaxis²¹, pathogen phagocytosis²²,²³, production of oxygen radicals²⁴,²⁵, activation of multiple stress responses cascades²¹ and NF-κB activation²⁶,²⁷. Here we provide evidence that Rac1 is a key regulator of a second, parallel, pathway required for the transcriptional activity of the NF-κB p65 subunit in response to Gram-positive stimuli.

This pathway is initiated by Staphylococcus aureus-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of TLR2, leads to the association of TLR2 with active Rac1 and PI3K subunit p85 and involves Akt as a downstream effector. A link between bacterial stimuli, PI3K and NF-κB activation has been indirectly suggested for some time. Relevant in this regard is a report showing that B lymphocytes from knockout mice that are deficient in several PI3K regulatory subunits (p85α, p55α and p50α) fail to respond to LPS²⁸. Our findings now provide a mechanistic basis for this and a general paradigm for NF-κB transactivation by bacterial stimuli that might apply to other TLR family members as well.

### Results

#### TLR2 stimulation by HKSA activates Rac1 and Cdc42

The signaling pathways downstream of activated TLRs are still largely unknown. As RhoGTPases are regulators of multiple cell functions and might be involved in NF-κB activation, their role in pathways originating from activated TLRs was investigated. The high affinity binding of RhoGTPases to certain effector kinases is exploited in an assay that detects the activation of a specific RhoGTPase family member²⁹. To assess Rac or Cdc42 activity in lysates of stimulated cells the p21-binding domain (PBD) of p21-activated kinase 1 (Pak1), one of the prominent effectors of RhoGTPases, is used as binding partner. The identity of the bound GTPase is then determined by immunoblotting with specific antibodies. Using this approach we investigated whether Rac and Cdc42 are activated by bacteria-derived stimuli such as heat-killed S. aureus (HKSA) in TLR2-bearing cells (Fig. 1). Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and immunoblot analysis revealed that the human monocytic cell line THP1 expresses TLR2, which can be stimulated by products from Gram-positive bacteria. Stimulation of THP1-CD14 cells by HKSA led to a rapid and transient activation of endogenous Rac1 and Cdc42 with a peak of activation at 1–10 min (Fig. 1a).

Figure 3. TLR2 cytosolic domain is associated with active Rac1. (a) 293-TLR2 cells were treated for the indicated time periods with HKSA. Cell extracts (300 μg) were incubated with anti-Rac1 and immune complexes were then probed for TLR2 or Rac1 by immunoblotting (IB). (b) Cell extracts (70–100 μg) from 293 cells transfected with different Myc-Rac1 or Myc-Cdc42 plasmids (adjusted to comparable expression) were incubated with GST-TLR2cd. Proteins bound to GST-TLR2cd beads were separated on SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted with anti-Myc, followed by ECL detection. (Results represent five independent experiments.)

kinase activity was not required for NF-κB transactivation. Expression of PBD F107, which binds to active Rac1 and Cdc42 but cannot inhibit Pak kinase activity, was used to confirm the requirement for Rac1 and Cdc42 in NF-κB activation. PBD F107 coexpression decreased NF-κB activation to a similar extent as PBD.

To determine whether Rac1 or Cdc42 regulate NF-κB activation, dominant-negative mutants of these GTPases (Rac1N17 and Cdc42N17) were introduced. In 293-TLR2 cells, Rac1N17 substantially decreased (by 70%) HKSA-stimulated NF-κB activation. In contrast, Cdc42N17 did not affect HKSA-activated NF-κB-dependent gene expression. Likewise, dominant-negative Ha-Ras did not block NF-κB activation suggesting that in HKSA-stimulated 293-TLR2 cells, Rac1 regulates NF-κB-dependent gene expression by a Ras-independent pathway. The expression of dominant-negative Rac1, Cdc42 and Ha-Ras proteins in transient 293-TLR2 transfections were consistently high and similar as judged by epitope tag immunoblotting (data not shown). The role of Rac1 in HKSA-mediated NF-κB activation was emphasized by the effect of a constitutively active Rac1 mutant (Rac1V12). Only Rac1V12 potentiated HKSA-stimulated NF-κB activity in 293-TLR2 cells (18-fold increase in NF-κB activity for vector-transfected cells versus a 48-fold increase for Rac1V12).

**Active Rac1 and TLR2 form a signaling complex**

As Rac1 can be an integral part of signaling complexes at cellular membranes, we analyzed whether Rac1 and TLR2 could interact either constitutively or upon TLR2 stimulation. In 293-TLR2 cells, TLR2 and Rac1 were not associated in the absence of stimulation (Fig. 3a). However, HKSA treatment of 293-TLR2 led to a rapid and transient association of the two proteins, as detected by immunoblotting using antibody to TLR2 after immunoprecipitation of Rac1. The association of TLR2 and Rac1 was at its maximum at 3–5 min, which represents a time interval similar to maximum Rac1 activation (Fig. 1b). In contrast, no association between Cdc42 and TLR2 was detected in Cdc42 immunoprecipitates. Control experiments using an unrelated monoclonal antibody (mAb), anti-Myc, for immunoprecipitation showed no TLR2 binding.

Interaction between Rac1 and TLR2 was also analyzed by using a glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion protein that contained the cytosolic domain of TLR2 (TLR2cd). Binding experiments with cellular extracts derived from 293 cells expressing Rac or Cdc42 wild-type or mutant proteins confirmed that only the active form of Rac1, Rac1V12, bound to GST-TLR2cd (Fig. 3b). We analyzed the association between TLR2cd and active Rac1 in more detail, testing for direct binding by using recombinant Rac1, purified from Escherichia coli or Sf9 cells and labeled with GTP-γS in vitro, together with purified GST-TLR2cd in pulldown and overlay assays. Direct interaction between active Rac1 and TLR2cd could not be detected under the conditions used, which suggested that these two proteins might interact through an intermediate protein (data not shown).

**Rac1 regulates NF-κB transactivation through PI3K**

Rac1-regulated signaling can be mediated by a variety of downstream effectors²¹. We have shown that Pak, one of the major targets of Rac, is not required for HKSA-induced NF-κB activation in the 293-TLR2 cell

Figure 4. PI3K is recruited by TLR2 and acts downstream of Rac1 in NF-κB activation. (a) PI3K activity was inhibited in 293-TLR2 cells either by pretreatment for 30 min with the inhibitors wortmannin (50 nM) or LY294002 (10 μM) or by transfection with p85αDN. After stimulation with HKSA (filled bars) NF-κB-dependent luciferase expression was analyzed as reported in Fig. 2 and recorded as a percentage of the controls. DMSO pretreatment or vector transfection were the controls. (b) 293-TLR2 cells were transiently transfected with Myc-Rac1WT (100 ng) and preincubated with wortmannin (100 nM) before stimulation with HKSA (10⁷ CFU/ml). At the indicated time points activation was quenched with cold PBS and cells were lysed. Lysate (100 μg) was used for the GST-PBD binding assay and proteins bound to the beads were separated on SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted for Myc, followed by ECL detection. (Results are representative of three independent experiments.) (c) 293-TLR2 cells were transfected with vector (-) or the indicated constructs and stimulated with HKSA. Cells were analyzed for NF-κB-dependent gene expression by analyzing luciferase activity.

To confirm these results we used human embryonic kidney 293 cells stably transfected with TLR2 (293-TLR2)⁷¹. HKSA activated endogenous Rac1 and Cdc42 with a time course similar to that for THP1-CD14 cells. Stimulation of the 293 parental cell line with HKSA did not activate these GTPases, which demonstrated that TLR2 is required to transduce the signal (data not shown). Rac3, another member of the Rac family, which is present in both THP-1 and 293-TLR2 cells, was not activated after HKSA challenge, emphasizing the specificity of Rac1 and Cdc42 activation (data not shown).

**Rac1 controls NF-κB-dependent gene expression**

To evaluate whether HKSA will trigger NF-κB activation in 293-TLR2 cells we monitored the activity of a transfected luciferase reporter gene driven by five NF-κB-responsive enhancers (5×NF-κB-Luc). A 15 to 20-fold increase in reporter gene activity was observed after IL-1 treatment both in parental 293 and in 293-TLR2 cells (Fig. 2a). In contrast, HKSA stimulation resulted in a 20-fold increase in NF-κB-mediated gene activation in 293-TLR2 but not in parental 293 cells, which lacked TLR2. These results confirmed the involvement of TLR2 in recognition and signaling by Gram-positive bacteria¹. Coexpression of the NF-κB reporter gene with plasmids whose gene products inhibit Rac1 and/or Cdc42 signaling was used to establish the involvement of these GTPases in TLR2 signaling to NF-κB. Initially the PBD of Pak1 was used, which encompasses the Cdc42-Rac interactive binding (CRIB) domain and the Pak inhibitory domain (PID) and will block active Cdc42 and Rac as well as the activity of the effector Pak itself³⁰,³¹. PBD coexpression reduced NF-κB activation in HKSA-stimulated 293-TLR2 cells by 80% (Fig. 2b).

To analyze whether the PBD effect was due to Pak1 inhibition, we coexpressed 5×NF-κB-Luc and PID. Overexpression of PID did not alter HKSA-induced NF-κB activation, which indicated that Pak

a
Fold
IB pY
1 1.2 2 2.5 2 1.1
IB TLR2
HKSA
- 1 3 5 10 30 (min)

b
IB p85
IB TLR2
HKSA
- 1 3 5 10 (min)

c
IB Flag

d

e
IB p85
IB Flag
IB p85
IB Flag
IB p85
IB Flag
HKSA
- 1 3 5 10 15 (min)

Figure 5. TLR2 and PI3K form a signaling complex that is dependent on TLR2 tyrosine residues. (a) HKSA-stimulated 293-TLR2 cells were lysed at different time points to immunoprecipitate TLR2 with anti-TLR2. The precipitates were probed first with anti-phosphotyrosine (IB pY) and then with anti-TLR2 (IB TLR2). (b) Cell lysates (600 μg) from 293-TLR2 cells stimulated with HKSA were used for immunoprecipitation. After incubation with anti-TLR2, immune complexes were probed for the presence of p85 and TLR2 by immunoblot. (c) NH₂-terminal Flag-tagged TLR2 WT as well as several TLR2 mutants were transiently transfected into parental 293 cells and lysates probed for expression by anti-Flag immunoblots. (d) Parental 293 cells were transfected with either vector (pCMV6) or the indicated constructs. Cells were left either untreated (open bars) or stimulated with HKSA for 6 h (filled bars) and analyzed for NF-κB activation as described in Fig. 2. (Three independent experiments were done.) (e) After transfection with TLR2WT (upper), TLR2-A616 (middle) or TLR2-A761 (lower) parental 293 cells were stimulated with HKSA for the indicated times and lysed. Anti-Flag immunoprecipitates were probed for the presence of p85 and Flag-TLR2 by immunoblotting (IB).

line. PI3K represents another potential effector of Rac1 in TLR2 signaling. PI3K is a heterodimer consisting of a catalytic subunit (p110) associated with a regulatory polypeptide (p85). The p85 subunit can interact directly with active Rac1. To study the involvement of PI3K in TLR2 signaling to NF-κB, PI3K-specific pharmacological inhibitors and a dominant-negative form of the p85α subunit of PI3K (p85DN) were used. Both approaches have been frequently used to demonstrate the role of PI3K in various signal transduction pathways. Pretreatment of 293-TLR2 with either wortmannin or LY 294002 or expression of p85DN caused a 70–80% decline in HKSA-stimulated luciferase expression from the NF-κB-dependent reporter. This shows that PI3K activity is required for TLR2-mediated signaling to NF-κB (Fig. 4a).

PI3K can serve as an activator or effector of Rac1 in a stimulus- and cell-dependent manner. Lipid products derived from activated PI3K can activate guanine nucleotide-exchange factors for Rac1, thereby activating Rac1, or active Rac1 can regulate the activation and localization of PI3K by binding to the p85 subunit. The role of PI3K in HKSA-mediated Rac1 activation was analyzed in 293-TLR2 cells pretreated with wortmannin (Fig. 4b) or LY 294002 (data not shown). Pharmacological inhibitors of PI3K did not block Rac1 activation, as determined by PBD binding assays. As shown earlier, transfection of Rac1V12 potentiated NF-κB-dependent luciferase activity in stimulated 293-TLR2 cells (Fig. 2c). Coexpression of the dominant-negative p85 subunit (p85DN) with Rac1V12 completely inhibited this potentiation, decreasing it to

a
fold
p-Akt
(T308)
1 1 2 2 1.2 1
p-Akt
(S473)
1 1.1 1 1.9 1 0.9
p-Akt
(S473)
+ Wort
Akt IB
HKSA
- 15 30 60 120 180 (min)

b
fold
-Wort
p-Akt
(S473)
1 1.3 2.3 1.9 2.3
-Wort
p-Akt
(S473)
1 1.2 0.9 1 1
+Wort
Rac1
IB
Akt IB
HKSA
- 15 30 60 120 (min)

c
RLU
(-)
Aktwt
AktDN
Rac1V12
+ AktDN

Figure 6. Rac1 regulates Akt activation by HKSA and subsequent NF-κB activation. (a) THP-1 cells were treated with vehicle (DMSO) or wortmannin (50 nM) for 60 min and stimulated with HKSA for the indicated times. (b) 293-TLR2 cells were transfected with either vector or Myc-Rac1N17 and stimulated with HKSA for the indicated time period. To assess Akt activation 150 μg of cell extracts were separated on SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted with anti-phospho Thr³⁰⁸ (p-Akt, T308), anti-phospho Ser⁴⁷³ (p-Akt, S473), Akt and anti-Akt, followed by ECL detection. To determine Rac1 expression, 30 μg of 293-TLR2 cell lysates were separated on SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted for Myc. (c) 293-TLR2 cells were cotransfected with the reporter plasmid 5×NF-κB-Luc, the β-galactosidase plasmid, vector (-) and the indicated plasmids. Cells were left either untreated (open bars) or stimulated for 6 h with HKSA (10⁷ CfU/ml) (filled bars) and analyzed for NF-κB activation via luciferase expression. (Three independent experiments were done.)

a
(-)
EtOH
LY294002
MG132
HKSA
Wortmannin (nM)
- - + + +
- 50 100 - 50 100
HKSA - 20 40 60 120 180 (min)

b
vector
Rac1N17
AktDN
IKK2DN
Rac1IB
AktIB
IKK2IB
HKSA - 15 40 60 120 180 (min)

c
NF-κB →
d
NF-κB →
e
NF-κB →

f
Luciferase activity (%)
100
80
60
40
20
0
(-)
Rac1N17
PBD F107
Wortmannin
p85DN
AktDN

Figure 7. The Rac1 pathway regulates p65 transactivation independently of IkBa degradation. (a) THP-1 cells were either untreated or pretreated with ethanol, LY294002 (10 μM) or MG132 (10 μM) for 60 min before stimulation with HKSA for the indicated times. (b) 293-TLR2 cells were transfected with vector or dominant-negative Rac1N17, AktDN or IKK2DN and stimulated 30 h later with HKSA in 1% FBS containing medium. Each cell lysate (50 μg) was subjected to SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted for IkBa. (c) THP-1 cells were preincubated with DMSO (-) or wortmannin (50 or 100 nM) for 60 min followed by 60 min HKSA stimulation. 293-TLR2 cells transfected with (d) Rac1N17 and (e) vector, AktDN or TRAF6DN were also stimulated with HKSA for 60 min. Nuclear extracts were prepared and incubated with radiolabeled κB-dependent probe (EMSA). (Results are representative of DNA-protein complexes from three independent experiments.) (f) To analyze p65 transactivation, 293-TLR2 cells were transfected with pFR-Luc, pGAL4-p65 and vector (-) or the indicated constructs. The cells were either not stimulated (shaded bars) or stimulated for 5 h with HKSA (filled bars) and analyzed for GAL4-p65 transactivation by measuring luciferase activity. Luciferase activities are expressed as percentage activation for each construct relative to cells transfected with vector alone (100%). Wortmannin-treated cells were plotted as percentage of DMSO control (100%). (For PBD F107 two, and for all others three, independent experiments were done but one representative experiment is shown.)

the same level as p85DN expression alone (Fig. 4c). These data indicate PI3K as a Rac1 effector in the signaling pathway to NF-κB in HKSA-stimulated 293-TLR2 cells.

**TLR2 signaling dependent on phosphotyrosine residues**

Activation of PI3K induces a ligand-dependent interaction between the SH2 domains of the p85 subunit and phosphotyrosine-containing motifs present on several cytokine/growth factors receptors³². Although TLR2 by itself has no tyrosine kinase activity, it possesses several phosphotyrosine residues in the cytosolic domain. HKSA stimulation of 293-TLR2 and THP-1 cells led to transient tyrosine phosphorylation of the TLR2 cytosolic domain (Fig. 5a, THP-1 data not shown). Because the p85 subunit of PI3K associates with tyrosine phosphorylated motifs on receptors or signaling molecules, TLR2 immunoprecipitates from stimulated 293-TLR2 and THP-1 cells were probed for the presence of p85. Transient complex formation between p85 and TLR2 upon HKSA stimulation was observed (Fig. 5b, THP-1 data not shown). Probing of Rac1 immunoprecipitates that were prepared under the same conditions revealed that not only TLR2, but also the p85 subunit of PI3K, was bound (data not shown). Thus we have shown that Rac1, p85 and the cytosolic domain of TLR2 form a stimulus-dependent signaling complex.

The TLR2 cytosolic domain contains several tyrosine residues that could serve as tyrosine-phosphorylated p85 docking sites. We prepared several Y→A TLR2 single and double mutations as well as a COOH-terminal TLR2 deletion mutant (TLR2Δ) that were similarly expressed on the surface of parental 293 cells as on wild-type TLR2 cells (Fig. 5c, FACS data not shown). Mutation of Tyr⁶¹⁶ (YXXM) or Tyr⁷⁶¹ (YXXW)

alone did not alter HKSA-dependent NF-κB activation or association with p85 (Fig. 5d,e). Mutation of both residues (TLR2-A616, 761) or COOH-terminal truncation of TLR2 corresponding to a region required for IL-1 receptor signaling completely abolished NF-κB transcriptional activity (Fig. 5d) and p85 association (Fig. 5e). As anticipated, incorporation of phosphate into the TLR2-A616, 761 mutant after HKSA stimulation was diminished (data not shown). Our results indicate that tyrosine phosphorylation of TLR2 is important for signaling to NF-κB.

**TLR2 signaling involves Akt**

The phosphorylated lipid products generated by PI3K act as second messengers to activate protein kinases such as Akt (PKB)³⁵. After stimulation, Akt becomes phosphorylated at two major sites, Thr³⁰⁸ in the kinase domain and Ser⁴⁷³ in the COOH-terminal tail³⁵. We used Thr³⁰⁸ and Ser⁴⁷³ phosphospecific antibodies to analyze Akt activity after HKSA treatment in THP-1 and 293-TLR2 cells. Endogenous Akt is activated after TLR2 stimulation by HKSA in both cell lines (Fig. 6a,b). Phosphorylation of Thr³⁰⁸ precedes the enhanced autophosphorylation at Ser⁴⁷³ (THP-1). Pretreatment of THP-1 with the PI3K inhibitors wortmannin or LY294002 abolished basal and stimulated Akt autophosphorylation. Expression of dominant-negative Rac1 in 293-TLR2 cells blocked Akt activation, which showed that HKSA-activated Akt is regulated by a Rac1-PI3K pathway. The involvement of Akt in NF-κB transactivation was evaluated by using plasmid concentrations, 250–500 μg of dominant-negative Akt (AktDN), that did not interfere with cell viability. AktDN prevented NF-κB-dependent gene transcription in HKSA-stimulated 293-TLR2 cells and inhibited the potentiation of HKSA-induced NF-κB activation by Rac1V12

contrast to TRAF6DN, the dominant-negative forms of Rac1 and Akt did not alter NF-κB DNA binding in 293-TLR2 cells (Fig. 7d,e). HKSA-stimulated THP-1 cells showed no change in nuclear translocation and DNA binding of NF-κB when pretreated with wortmannin or LY294002 (Fig. 7c). This suggested that Rac1 controls a signaling pathway triggered by HKSA that is important for NF-κB transactivation but distinct from IκBα degradation, NF-κB nuclear translocation and DNA binding.

Regulation of NF-κB activation is not only dependent on phosphorylation of IκBs but is also dependent on the inducible phosphorylation and transactivation activity of p65. We tested whether HKSA-induced signaling through the Rac1 cascade leads directly to stimulated transcription from a GAL4-dependent promoter driven by the chimeric protein GAL4-p65 in 293-TLR2 cells. HKSA increased the transcriptional activity of p65 by 10–15-fold. Dominant-negative Rac1, as well as the PBD F107 fragment that binds activated Rac1 and impedes its interaction with downstream effectors, inhibited p65 transactivation by 65–80% (Fig. 7f). Similar inhibitory effects were observed for the PI3K inhibitor wortmannin and dominant-negative forms of p85α and Akt. Thus, TLR2-mediated Rac1-PI3K signaling regulates NF-κB activation by affecting the p65 transcriptional complex.

### Discussion

Human TLRs are involved in the recognition and response to Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacterial cell wall components and play a key role in innate immunity. Although certain consequences of stimulated TLR signaling, including activation of transcription factors and stress-activated mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), are known, the molecular details of intracellular pathways are largely undefined. Similarities between the signaling pathways triggered by IL-1 and microbial products have been suggested. Others have shown that activated IL-1R and TLRs share a common signaling pathway leading to NF-κB nuclear translocation involving MyD88, IL-1R-associated kinase (IRAK), tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) and IKKs [11,36]. Our results indicate that TLR2 signaling to NF-κB requires a second, parallel, pathway that is regulated by the small GTPase Rac1 (Fig. 8).

Stimulation of TLR2 with *S. aureus* results in Rac1 activation, association of active Rac1 with TLR2 and initiates NF-κB-dependent gene transcription. A role for RhoGTPases in NF-κB activation has been reported for agonists including IL-1 and TNF-α [20,37–39]. In cell types where active Rac1 induced the production of reactive oxygen intermediates, NF-κB nuclear translocation was blocked by dominant-negative Rac1 [26]. It was suggested that Rac1 might activate a redox-dependent pathway involved in IκB phosphorylation. NF-κB activation of *S. aureus*-stimulated human neutrophils was insensitive to several antioxidants [40]. Our study defines a Rac1-dependent pathway in the TLR2-mediated immune cell response that is independent of IκB degradation and NF-κB release but essential for activation of NF-κB-regulated gene transcription.

Recently, a pathway that leads to enhanced transactivation potential, once NF-κB is bound to its consensus sequence, was defined [19,20]. Phosphorylation of the p65 subunit, which promotes the interaction with the coactivator proteins p300 and CBP, is a key element. Potential kinases implicated in p65 phosphorylation include casein kinase II [41], the MAPKs p38, p42 and p44 [18] and Akt (PKB) [19,42]. However, it is unlikely that they act on p65 directly. Most likely, the Rac1→PI3K→Akt signaling cascade exerts control of the p65 transcriptional complex by inducing p65 phosphorylation thereby cooperating with the MyD88→IKK pathway in NF-κB-dependent gene transcription.
The distinct role of the Rac1 GTPase in TLR2 signaling is emphasized by the formation of a signaling complex containing Rac1, the TLR2 cytosolic domain and the p85 subunit of PI3K. With wild-type and mutant forms of Rac1, Cdc42 and RhoA in TLR2-binding experiments, only active Rac1 was bound. In cells, the association between TLR2 and Rac1 was dependent on activation of the receptor, as we did not detect complex formation in the absence of stimulation. TLR2 stimulation activates Cdc42 in addition to Rac1. Although we cannot exclude Cdc42 as potential regulator of NF-κB activation in THP-1 cells, only Rac1 controlled the PI3K→Akt pathway to NF-κB transactivation in 293-TLR2 cells. Cdc42 has been implicated in other aspects of host defense against microorganisms, including phagocytosis²³, organization of the actin cytoskeleton²¹,³⁹ or activation of MAPKs²¹.

In addition to Rac1, the p85 subunit of PI3K is recruited to the TLR2 signaling complex and PI3K activity is essential for NF-κB signaling. Lipid products generated by activated PI3K can mediate effects either upstream or downstream of Rac1. Rac1 activation in HKSA-stimulated TLR2 signaling is independent of PI3K activity. The active GTP-bound form of Rac1 can bind directly to p85 and increase PI3K activity³³,³⁴. The participation of PI3K in LPS signaling and NF-κB activation has been suggested²⁸,⁴³,⁴⁴. PI3K was implicated either in regulating nuclear translocation and DNA binding of NF-κB or NF-κB transactivation¹⁹,⁴²,⁴⁴, presumably reflecting cell type and stimulus-dependent differences. TLR2-mediated responses in 293-TLR2 cells favor PI3K-dependent up-regulation of the NF-κB transactivation potential by directly targeting p65. Additionally, Akt, a downstream effector of PI3K that has been implicated in NF-κB translocation⁴⁵,⁴⁶ or NF-κB transactivation¹⁹, is activated by Gram-positive microbial products and is involved in mediating Rac1-regulated p65 transactivation.

It is currently unknown whether other members of the TLR family signal to NF-κB via a Rac1-regulated pathway. Macrophages challenged with *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*, a Gram-negative bacteria that is thought to activate TLR4, requires Rac1 and Cdc42 for phagocytosis but not for NF-κB–dependent gene expression²³. Differences in the cytosolic TLR domains might contribute to specific signaling responses. The cytosolic domain of TLR2 contains a PI3K binding motif (YXXM), which is present in TLR1, TLR2 and TLR6 but missing in TLR3, TLR4 and TLR5. IL-1R, the IL-1R accessory protein and MyD88 also possess a putative p85-binding site. Tyrosine phosphorylation of TLR2 induced by HKSA stimulation is necessary for p85 association. As TLR2 does not have any intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity, the cytoplasmic domain has to be phosphorylated by another tyrosine kinase. This could be accomplished by activated nonreceptor tyrosine kinases or by dimerization with a tyrosine kinase receptor. Elucidating new targets within the TLR signaling cascades has important implications for anti-inflammatory strategies aimed at inhibiting NF-κB transcription in human disease states where dysregulation of the innate immune response contributes to morbidity or mortality.

### Methods

#### Cells and reagents
Human embryonic kidney 293 cells stably transfected with TLR2 (293-TLR2) or parental 293 were as described¹¹. Cells were maintained in low glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), HEPES (10 mM), L-glutamine (2 mM), penicillin (100 U/ml), streptomycin (100 μM) and puromycin (1 μg/ml). The monocytic cell line THP-1 stably transfected with human CD14 (THP1-CD14) has been described previously and was maintained thus⁴⁷. HKSA was provided by C. Fears. Contaminating LPS in HKSA preparations was determined using a quantitative Limulus Lysate Assay (BioWhittaker, Walkersville, MD) and were <1 pg/ml at final concentration. LY 294002 and wortmannin were from the Alexis Corporation (San Diego, CA), MG 132 from Calbiochem (La Jolla, CA). Protein G sepharose and glutathione agarose beads were from Pharmacia (Uppsala), Protein A agarose from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Polyclonal anti-p85, anti-Cdc42, anti-Myc and anti-IκBα were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA). Polyclonal anti-phospho-S⁴⁷³-Akt, anti-phospho T³⁰⁸ and anti-Akt were from New England Biolabs (Beverly, MA); mAbs to Myc (9E10) and HA were from Babco (Richmond, CA); mAbs to Rac1 and pY were from UBI (Lake Placid, NY) and mAb to Flag from Sigma. mAbs to 2392 for human TLR2 and mAbs5B6 that recognize the glycoprotein D (gD) epitope on stably expressed human TLR2 were as described¹¹.

#### Plasmids
Plasmids were prepared using endo-free plasmid DNA purification columns (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). DNA was eluted from the columns using LPS-free buffers and contaminating LPS was found to be <10 pg/ml. cDNAs for Rac1 wild-type (WT), Rac1N17, Rac1V12, Cdc42 WT, Cdc42N17 and Cdc42L61 were subcloned into pRK5 containing an NH₂-terminal Myc tag³¹. Dominant-negative IKK2 was as described⁴⁸. PCMV6 expression vectors encoding PBD (Pak1aa 67–150), PBD F107 and PID (Pak1aa 83–149) were as described³¹. Expression vectors encoding Akt WT, AktA308A473, Ha-RasN17 and p85αΔ(aa 478–513) were provided by C. King and G. Bokoch. Myc-tagged TRAF6Δ(aa 288–522) was subcloned into pCVM6. Human TLR2 mutants (Y616A, Y761A, Y616,761A) were obtained using the Quick Exchange Mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). TLR2Δ(aa 1–745) was generated by PCR. All TLR2 constructs were confirmed by sequencing and cloned into the expression vector pCVM6 containing an NH₂-terminal Flag tag. The control plasmid pFA-CMV expresses the GAL4 DNA-binding domain alone and was obtained from Stratagene. The plasmid pFR-Luc contained 5×GAL4 upstream of a minimal promoter that drives expression from the firefly luciferase reporter gene. The bacterial expression plasmid for GST-p65 (aa 346–551) was provided by T. Sakurai (Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Osaka)⁴⁹. PCR fragments of 600-bp were generated from this plasmid and cloned in-frame into pFA-CMV to create pGAL4-p65.

#### Transfection and reporter assays
Transient transfections were done using Lipofectamine-Plus reagent (Gibco BRL, Gaithersburg, MD) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All transfections utilized 40 ng of 5×NF-κB–Luc (the NF-κB responsive luciferase reporter) and 40 ng of β-galactosidase plasmids (Promega, Madison, WI) or 80 ng of pFR–Luc and 160 ng of pGAL4-p65 together with plasmid DNA consisting of expression vectors or vector plasmid alone. After 20 h of expression, cells were starved for 3–12 h in 1% FBS. For stimulation, individual wells were left untreated or were stimulated with HKSA as indicated. Pretreatment with PI3K inhibitors LY 294002 (10 μM) and wortmannin (50–100 nM) was initiated for 30–60 min at 37 °C before stimulation. Cells were incubated for additional 6 h before collection. Luciferase assays were done using the Luciferase Assay System (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Luciferase activity was normalized to β-galactosidase to standardize transfection efficiency. The viability of each transfected cell population was measured by Trypan blue exclusion at the time of collecting. Immunofluorescence was used to assess transfection efficiency (about 65–80%, independently of the plasmid). Transfection experiments were repeated at least three times.

#### EMSA
Transiently transfected 293-TLR2 or THP-1 cells were stimulated with HKSA for 30 or 60 min. Nuclear extracts were prepared and EMSA reactions done as described²⁰. Three independent experiments were done.

#### Immunoblotting and immunoprecipitation
Stimulation of 75–85% confluent cells was quenched with cold PBS. Cells were lysed in Tris-HCl (25 mM, pH 7.5), EDTA (1 mM), MgCl₂ (5 mM), DTT (0.1 mM), EGTA (0.1 mM), NaCl (100 mM), 10% glycerol, 1% Nonidet P-40, phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (1 Mm), leupeptin (1 μg/ml), aprotinin (1 μg/ml). Protein concentrations were quantified by Lowry assay. For immunoprecipitations, cell extracts were incubated with primary antibody for 2 h followed by incubation for 1 h with 10–25 μl of protein G sepharose or protein A agarose beads. The beads were washed four times with lysis buffer and samples analyzed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting. At least three independent experiments were done.

#### PBD assay
Cell lysates (150–900 μg), obtained from either THP1-CD14 or 293-TLR2 before or after stimulation with HKSA were incubated with 10 μg of recombinant GST-PBD (human Pak1aa 67–150) for 1 h at 4 °C as described²⁹,³¹. Immunoblotting was done with anti-Rac1, anti-Cdc42 or anti-Myc.

#### Binding analysis with GST-TLR2cd
The full-length TLR2cd (human TLR2 aa 609–784) was expressed as GST fusion protein in *E. coli* and affinity purified. Lysates derived from Rac1 and Cdc42 wild-type and mutant protein-overexpressing 293 cells (70–100 μg), adjusted to equivalent GTPase protein expression, were incubated with 5 μg of recombinant GST-TLR2cd for 2 h at 4 °C, then washed four times in lysis buffer. Immunoblotting was done with anti-Myc. Five different experiments using two independent preparations of GST-TLR2cd and GTPase lysates were done.

### Acknowledgements
We thank P. Rutledge for excellent secretarial support. Supported by NIH grants GM 37696 (to U.G.K. and to R.J.U.), GM 28485 and AI 15136 (to R.J.U.), HL 48872 (to N.M.). N.T. is the recipient of a Boehringer Ingelheim Fonds fellowship.

Received 12 September 2000; accepted 19 October 2000

1. Aderem, A. & Ulevitch, R.J. Toll-like receptors in the induction of the innate immune response. *Nature* **406**, 782–787 (2000).
2. Kopp, E.B. & Medzhitov, R. The Toll-receptor family and control of innate immunity. *Curr. Op. Immunol.* **11**, 13–18 (1999).
3. Medzhitov, R., Preston-Hurlburt, P. & Janeway, C. A. A human homologue of the *Drosophila* Toll protein signals activation of adaptive immunity. *Nature* **388**, 394–397 (1997).

4. Lemaitre, B., Reichhart, J. M. & Hoffmann, J. A. *Drosophila* host defense: differential induction of antimicrobial peptide genes after induction by various classes of microorganisms. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **94**, 14614–14619 (1997).

5. Rock, F. L., Hardiman, G., Timans, J. C., Kastelein, R. A., & Bazan, J. F.A family of human receptors structurally related to *Drosophila* Toll. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 588–593 (1998).

6. Takeuchi, O. *et al.* Differential roles of TLR2 and TLR4 in recognition of Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacterial cell wall components. *Immunity* **11**, 443–451 (1999).

7. Yoshimura, A. *et al.* Recognition of Gram-positive bacterial wall components by the innate immune system occurs via Toll-like receptor 2. *J. Immunol.* **163**, 1–5 (1999).

8. Schwandner, R., Dziarski, R., Wesche, H., Rothe, M. & Kirschning, C. J. Peptidoglycan- and lipoteichoic acid-induced cell activation is mediated by Toll-like receptor 2. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 17406–17409 (1999).

9. Brightbill, H. D. *et al.* Host defense mechanisms triggered by microbial lipoproteins through toll-like receptors. *Science* **285**, 732–736 (1999).

10. Kirschning, C. J., Wesche, H., Ayres, T. M. & Rothe, M. Human toll-like receptor 2 confers responsiveness to bacterial lipopolysaccharide. *J. Exp. Med.* **187**, 2091–2097 (1998).

11. Yang, R.-B. *et al.* Toll-like receptor-2 mediates lipopolysaccharide-induced cellular signaling. *Nature* **395**, 284–288 (1998).

12. Hirschfeld, M., Ma, Y., Weis, J. H., Vogel, S. N. & Weis, J. J. Repurification of lipopolysaccharide eliminates signaling through both human and murine Toll-like receptor 2. *J. Immunol.* **165**, 618–622 (2000).

13. Bowie, A. & O'Neill, L. A. J. The interleukin-1 receptor/Toll-like receptor superfamily: signal generators for pro-inflammatory interleukins and microbial products. *J. Leukoc. Biol.* **67**, 508–514 (2000).

14. Irie, T., Muta, T. & Takeshige, K. TAK1 mediates an activation signal from toll-like receptors to nuclear factor-κB in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated macrophages. *FEBS Lett.* **467**, 160–164 (2000).

15. Mercurio, F. & Manning, A. M. Multiple signals converging on NF-κB. *Curr. Op. Cell Biol.* **11**, 226–232 (1999).

16. Zandi, E. & Karin, M. Bridging the gap: composition, regulation, and physiological function of the IkB kinase complex. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **19**, 4547–4551 (1999).

17. Zhong, H., Sutang, H., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Tempst, P. & Ghosh, S. The transcriptional activity of NF-κB is regulated by the IkB-associated PKA subunit through a cyclic AMP-dependent mechanism. *Cell* **89**, 413–424 (1997).

18. Van der Berghe, W. *et al.* p38 and extracellular signal-regulated kinase mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways are required for nuclear factor κB p65 transactivation mediated by tumor necrosis factor. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 3285–3290 (1998).

19. Sizemore, N., Leung S. & Stark, G. R. Activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in response to interleukin-1 leads to phosphorylation and activation of the NF-κB p65/RelA subunit. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **19**, 4798–4805 (1999).

20. Jefferies, C. A. & O'Neill, L. A. J. Rac1 regulates Interleukin 1-induced nuclear factor κB activation in an inhibitory protein κB-independent manner by enhancing the ability of the p65 subunit to transactivate gene expression. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 3114–3120 (2000).

21. Van Aelst, L. & D'Souza-Schorey, C. Rho GTPases and signaling networks. *Genes Dev.* **11**, 2295–2322 (1997).

22. Chen, L.-M., Hobbie, S. & Galan, J. E. Requirement of Cdc42 for *Salmonella*-induced cytoskeletal and nuclear responses. *Science* **274**, 2115–2118 (1996).

23. Lee, D. J., Cox, D., Li, J. & Greenberg, S. Rac1 and Cdc42 are required for phagocytosis but not NF-κB-dependent gene expression, in macrophages challenged with *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 141–146 (2000).

24. Knaus, U. G., Heyworth, P. G., Evans, T., Curranute, J. T. & Bokoch, G. M. Regulation of phagocyte oxygen radical production by the GTP-binding protein Rac 2. *Science* **254**, 1512–1515 (1991).

25. Roberts, A.W. *et al.* Deficiency of the hematopoietic cell-specific Rho family GTPase Rac2 is characterized by abnormalities in neutrophil function and host defense. *Immunity* **10**, 183–196 (1999).

26. Sulciner, D. J., Irani, K., Ferrans, V. J., Goldschmidt-Clermont, P. & Finkel, T. Rac1 regulates a cytokine-stimulated, redox-dependent pathway necessary for NF-κB activation. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **16**, 7115–7121 (1996).

27. Perona, R. *et al.* Activation of the nuclear factor-κB by Rho, Cdc42, and Rac1 proteins. *Genes Dev.* **11**, 463–475 (1997).

28. Fruman, D.A. *et al.* Impaired B cell development and proliferation in absence of phosphoinositide 3-kinase p85α. *Science* **283**, 393–397 (1999).

29. Benard, V., Bohl, B. J. & Bokoch, G. M. Characterization of Rac and Cdc42 activation in chemotactic-stimulated human neutrophils using a novel assay for active GTPases. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 13198–13204 (1999).

30. Zenke, F., King, C. C., Bohl, B. P. & Bokoch, G. M. Identification of a central phosphorylation site in p21-activated kinase regulating autoinhibition and kinase activity. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 32565–32573 (1999).

31. Mira, J. -P., Benard, V., Groffen, J., Sanders, L. C. & Knaus, U. G. Endogenous hyperactive Rac3 controls proliferation of breast cancer cells by a p21-activated kinase-dependent pathway. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **97**, 185–189 (2000).

32. Carpenter, C. L. & Cantley, L. C. Phosphoinositide kinases. *Curr. Opin. Biol.* **8**, 153–157 (1996).

33. Zheng, Y., Bagrodia, S. & Cerione, R.A. Activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase activity by Cdc42Hs binding to p85. *J. Biol. Chem.* **269**, 18727–18730 (1994).

34. Bokoch, G. M., Vlahos, C. J., Wang, Y., Knaus, U. G. & Traynor-Kaplan, A. E. Rac GTPase interacts specifically with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. *Biochem. J.* **315**, 775–779 (1996).

35. Kandel, E. S. & Hay, N. The regulation and activities of the multifunctional Serine/Threonine kinase Akt/PKB. *Exp. Cell Res.* **253**, 210–229 (1999).

36. Muzio, M., Natoli G., Saccani, S., Levrero, M. & Mantovani. The human toll signaling pathway: divergence of nuclear factor κB and JNK/SAPK activation upstream of tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6). *J. Exp. Med.* **187**, 2097–2101 (1998).

37. Montaner, S., Perona, R., Saniger, L. & Lacal, J. C. Multiple signaling pathways lead to the activation of the NF-κB by the Rho family of GTPases. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 12777–12785 (1998).

38. Singh, R. *et al.* The IL-1 receptor and Rho directly associate to drive cell activation in inflammation. *J. Clin. Invest.* **103**, 1561–1570 (1999).

39. Puls, A. *et al.* Activation of the small GTPase Cdc42 by the inflammatory cytokines TNF and IL-1, and by the Epstein-Barr virus transforming protein LMP1. *J. Cell Sci.* **112**, 2983–2992 (1999).

40. Vollebregt, M., Hampton, M. B. & W interbourn, C. C. Activation of NF-κB in human neutrophils during phagocytosis of bacteria independently of oxidant generation. *FEBS Lett.* **432**, 40–44 (1998).

41. Bird, T.A., Schooley, K., Dower, S. K., Hagen, H. & Virca, G. D. Activation of the transcription factor NF-κB by interleukin 1 is accompanied by casein kinase II-mediated phosphorylation of the p65 subunit. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 32606–32612 (1997).

42. Madrid, L.V. *et al.* Akt suppresses apoptosis by stimulating the transactivation potential of the RelA/p65 subunit of NF-κB. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **20**, 1626–1638 (2000).

43. Sahl, B., W agey, R., Marotta, A., Tao, J. S. & Pelech, S. Activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, protein kinase B, and p70 S6 kinase in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated Raw 264.7 cells: differential effects of rapamycin, Ly294002, and wortmannin on nitric oxide production. *J. Immunol.* **161**, 6947–6954 (1998).

44. Reddy, S.A. G., Huang, J. H. & Liao, W. S.-L. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in interleukin 1 signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 29167–29173 (1997).

45. Ozes, O. N. *et al.* NF-κB activation by tumor necrosis factor requires the Akt serine-threonine kinase. *Nature* **401**, 82–86 (1999).

46. Romashkova, J. A. & Makarov, S.S. NF-κB is a target of Akt in anti-apoptotic PDGF signaling. *Nature* **401**, 86–90 (1999).

47. Schiff, D. E. *et al.* Phagocytosis of Gram-negative bacteria by a unique CD14-dependent mechanism. *J. Leuko. Biol.* **62**, 786–794 (1997).

48. Mercurio, F. *et al.* IKK-1 and IKK-2: cytokine-activated IkappaB kinases essential for NF-κB activation.

49. Sakurai, H., Chiba, H., Miyoshi, H., Sugita, T. & Toriumi, W. IkB kinases phosphorylate NF-κB p65 subunit on serine 536 in the transactivation domain. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 30353–30356 (1999).
