
reviews

24  Spang, A. *et al.* (1996) γ-Tubulin-like Tub4p of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* is associated with the spindle pole body substructures that organize microtubules and is required for mitotic spindle formation. *J. Cell Biol.* 134, 429–441
25  Marschall, L.G. *et al.* (1996) Analysis of Tub4p, a yeast γ-tubulin-like protein: implications for microtubule-organizing center function. *J. Cell Biol.* 134, 443–454
26  Joshi, H.C. *et al.* (1992) γ-Tubulin is a centrosomal protein required for cell cycle-dependent microtubule nucleation. *Nature* 356, 80–83
27  Ahmad, F.J. *et al.* (1994) Inhibition of microtubule nucleation at the neuronal centrosome compromises axon growth. *Neuron* 12, 271–280
28  Li, Q. and Joshi, H.C. (1995) γ-Tubulin is a minus end-specific microtubule binding protein. *J. Cell Biol.* 131, 207–214
29  Zheng, Y. *et al.* (1995) Nucleation of microtubule assembly by a γ-tubulin-containing ring complex. *Nature* 378, 578–583
30  Keating, T.J. and Borisy, G.G. (2000) Immunostructural evidence for the template mechanism of microtubule nucleation. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 2, 352–357
31  Moritz, M. *et al.* (2000) Structure of the γ-tubulin ring complex: a template for microtubule nucleation. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 2, 365–370
32  Wiese, C. and Zheng, Y. (2000) A new function for the γ-tubulin complex as a microtubule minus-end cap. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 2, 358–364
33  Erickson, H.P. (2000) γ-Tubulin nucleation: template or protofilament. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 2, E93–E96
34  Paluh, J.L. *et al.* (2000) A mutation in γ-tubulin alters microtubule dynamics and organization and is synthetically lethal with the kinesin-like protein Pkl1p. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 11, 1225–1239
35  Dutcher, S.K. and Trabuco, E.C. (1998) The *UNI3* gene is required for assembly of basal bodies of *Chlamydomonas* and encodes δ-tubulin, a new member of the tubulin superfamily. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 9, 1293–1308
36  Chang, P. and Stearns, T. (2000) δ-Tubulin and ε-tubulin: two new human

37  Smrzka, O.W. *et al.* (2000) Tissue-specific expression and subcellular localization of mammalian δ-tubulin. *Curr. Biol.* 10, 413–416
38  Vaughn, S. *et al.* (2000) New tubulins in protozoal parasites. *Curr. Biol.* 10, R258–R259
39  Gogonea, C.B. *et al.* (1999) Computational prediction of the three-dimensional structures for the *Caenorhabditis elegans* tubulin family. *J. Mol. Graph. Model.* 17, 90–100
40  Goldstein, L.S.B. and Gunawardena, S. (2000) Flying through the *Drosophila* cytoskeletal genome. *J. Cell Biol.* 150, F63–F68
41  Erickson, H.P. (1997) FtsZ, a tubulin homolog in prokaryote cell division. *Trends Cell Biol.* 7, 362–367
42  Erickson, H.P. (1995) FtsZ, a prokaryotic homolog of tubulin? *Cell* 80, 367–370
43  Osteryoung, K.W. and Vierling, E. (1995) Conserved cell and organelle division. *Nature* 376, 473–474
44  Osteryoung, K.W. *et al.* (1998) Chloroplast division in higher plants requires members of two functionally divergent gene families with homology to bacterial ftsZ. *Plant Cell* 10, 1991–2004
45  Beech, P.L. *et al.* (2000) Mitochondrial FtsZ in a chromophyte alga. *Science* 287, 1276–1279
46  Lowe, J. and Amos, L.A. (1998) Crystal structure of the bacterial cell-division protein FtsZ. *Nature* 391, 203–206
47  Burns, R.G. (1995) Identification of two new members of the tubulin family. *Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton* 31, 255–258
48  Horio, T. and Oakley, B.R. (1994) Human γ-tubulin functions in fission yeast. *J. Cell Biol.* 126, 1465–1473
49  Ruiz, F. *et al.* The *SM19* gene, required for duplication of basal bodies in *Paramecium*, encodes η-tubulin, a new member of the tubulin superfamily. *Curr. Biol.* (in press)

---

# The molecular basis of T helper 1 and T helper 2 cell differentiation

The immune system consists of a sophisticated array of cells that have developed to recognize and eradicate a wide variety of microorganisms. T cells are important players in this process. They develop in the thymus and, upon exit to the peripheral immune system, can be stimulated by peptide antigen presented on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules expressed on antigen-presenting cells (APCs). At this stage, the T cells will produce the cytokine IL-2 and clonally expand, but they can then subsequently differentiate to express new patterns of genes important for immune effector function. T helper (Th) cells express the CD4+ antigen and can differentiate into at least two subsets, Th1 and Th2 cells (Fig. 1), distinguished by the array of cytokine genes that they express<sup>1–5</sup>.

Th1 cells are important for the eradication of intracellular pathogens, including bacteria, parasites, yeasts and viruses, and the hallmark cytokines of Th1 cells include IFN-γ and lymphotoxin, which can activate microbicidal activity as well as cytokine production in macrophages<sup>1,3–5</sup>. A Th1 response is often accompanied by the production of complement-fixing antibodies of the IgG2a isotype, as well as the activation of natural killer (NK) cells and cytotoxic CD8+ T cells expressing IFN-γ and perforin<sup>1–5</sup>. If uncontrolled, Th1 cells can mediate immunopathology and have also been implicated in autoimmune diseases such as type-1 diabetes and multiple sclerosis (MS)<sup>6–8</sup>.

Th2 cells produce the cytokines IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 and can activate mast cells and eosinophils, thereby eradicating helminths and other extracellular parasites<sup>1,3,9</sup>. However, these cells also mediate allergic and atopic manifestations, which is in keeping with findings that Th2-derived cytokines can induce airway hyperreactivity as well as the production

---

Anne O’Garra and Naoko Arai

Cytokines such as interleukin 12 (IL-12) and IL-4 are dominant factors in driving the development of T helper 1 (Th1) and Th2 cells, respectively, through specific signalling pathways. In addition, it has been demonstrated more recently that T helper-cell-specific transcription factors exist that determine the commitment of Th1 and Th2 cells for the production of distinct profiles of cytokines. In addition to the expression of distinct cytokine genes and transcription factors, the molecular basis for commitment to a Th1 or Th2 phenotype can probably be explained by multiple mechanisms, including differential cytokine signalling, exclusive cytokine receptor expression, differential expression of transcription factors and/or differential chromatin remodelling of Th1- and Th2-specific genes.

---

0962-8924/00/$ – see front matter © 2000 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.  
PII: S0962-8924(00)01856-0  
trends in CELL BIOLOGY (Vol. 10) December 2000

of IgE3,10–12. Both Th1- and Th2-specific cytokines can promote growth or differentiation of their own respective T-cell subset, but additionally might inhibit the development of the opposing subset. This might explain why Th1 and Th2 responses are often mutually exclusive3–5.

In this review, we discuss the factors involved in inducing the differentiation of Th1 and Th2 subsets. We place our greatest emphasis on the role of key cytokines and transcription factors in directing this process since these are most clearly understood.

### Factors influencing Th1 and Th2 cell development

The differentiation pathway for Th1 and Th2 cell development can be influenced by a number of factors, including the dose and form of antigen, the affinity of the peptide antigen-T-cell-receptor (TCR) interaction13 and costimulatory interactions between cell-surface molecules such as B7 and CD28; ICAM-1 and LFA-1; and CD40 and CD40L14–18. The role of B7-CD28 interactions in Th cell development are unclear since they might or might not favour Th2 cell development, depending on the system under study14,15. Interestingly, ICAM-1 and LFA-1 interactions inhibit the expression of Th2 cytokines17,18. Although these factors might offer some explanation with respect to the development of distinct Th cell subsets, cytokines are major inducers of Th cell differentiation4,5,11. In addition to the expression of distinct cytokine genes, the molecular basis for commitment to a Th1 or Th2 phenotype can probably be explained by multiple mechanisms, including differential cytokine signalling, exclusive cytokine receptor expression, differential expression of transcription factors and/or differential chromatin remodelling of Th1- and Th2-specific genes5,19–24.

Two main systems have been used for studying the factors driving Th1 and Th2 development. These are the polyclonal stimulation of T cells, for example, by triggering the TCR with antibody against CD3 together with the costimulator anti-CD28, or stimulation of T cells derived from TCR-transgenic mice with specific antigen and APC4,5,11,25. Using such systems, it has been shown that cytokines such as IL-12 and IL-4 play a dominant role in inducing the differentiation of Th1 and Th2 cells, respectively (reviewed in Refs 4, 8 and 26). The differentiation of naive T cells into homogeneous populations of committed Th1 or Th2 cells displaying an exclusive cytokine pattern is achieved largely after repeated antigenic stimulation under the appropriate conditions27–30. Th1 and Th2 populations at an early stage in development are heterogeneous, contain relatively low frequencies of cytokine-producing cells and are reversible, suggesting that a number of molecular changes must occur in order to establish a committed profile of cytokine gene expression.

### Signalling pathways for Th1 differentiation and commitment

IL-12 is a dominant factor inducing the development of Th1 cells from a naive CD4+ T-cell precursor,

and Th1 commitment is enhanced by IFN-γ which upregulates the IL-12 receptor while inhibiting the growth of Th2 cells5,19,31. IL-12 production can be induced in macrophages and dendritic cells31–33 by microbial products and/or CD40 ligation34–36. The existence of distinct subsets of dendritic cells capable of driving Th1 or Th2 development has been described37–39. Human DC1 and mouse CD8α+ DC induce the development of Th1 responses to a great extent via production of IL-1237–39. IL-12-induced activation of the transcription factor STAT4 through the IL-12 receptor (IL-12R), which consists of two chains, IL-12RB1 and IL-12RB2, is crucial for Th1 responses (Fig. 2), and mice deficient in IL-12 and STAT4 have markedly reduced, but not absent, Th1 responses19,40–42. Although STAT4 has been shown to bind to non-consensus low-affinity STAT DNA-binding sites within the gene encoding IFN-γ43, differentiated T cells can produce IFN-γ in the absence of STAT444. Furthermore, IFN-α can activate STAT4 in human T cells but not mouse45. Th1 cells express IL-12RB2, which is upregulated by IFN-γ, whereas Th2 cells lose the expression of this chain of the IL-12R in part by downregulation with IL-4, and this has been hypothesized as a basis for Th1 commitment46,47. However, although ectopic expression of IL-12RB2 in developing Th2 cells results in the ability of IL-12 to activate STAT4 and proliferation in these cells, it does not lead to significant production of IFN-γ, suggesting that IL-12-driven STAT4 activation is not sufficient to maintain IFN-γ production by Th cells48,49.

More recently, IL-18 has been shown to synergize with IL-12 to stimulate the production of IFN-γ by Th1 cells5,50–52, and both chains of the IL-18 receptor are downregulated on Th2 cells but maintained on Th1 cells53–56. IL-18 signals autophosphorylation of IRAK and activation of NF-kB52. Furthermore, IL-18- as well as IL-12-deficient mice show a defect in Th1 responses40,57. Mice deficient in IRF-1 have also shown a defect in Th1 development and IFN-γ production, both at the level of IL-12 production by the APC and at the responsiveness of the Th1 cells to IL-1258,59. The latter might be explained by recent evidence showing that IRF-1 is a target gene of IL-12 (Ref. 60 reviewed in Ref. 26).

The MAP kinases c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 are activated by exposure of cells to cytokines and various environmental stresses. Targets of the p38 and JNK MAP kinase pathways include transcription factors such as c-Jun and ATF2. Activation of c-Jun and ATF2 plays an important role in activating cytokine genes in the innate and adaptive immune response20. The enhanced production of Th2-specific cytokines was observed in Jnk1−/− mice, accompanied by nuclear accumulation of NFATc61; however, this occurred under conditions where neither Th1 nor Th2 differentiation was favoured, suggesting a modulatory effect rather than a dominant effect on commitment for cytokine gene expression. In Jnk2−/− T cells, a substantial reduction in IFN-γ production was seen, which in part could be explained by a decreased expression of IL-12RB2 and thus reduced Stat4 activation required for

trends in CELL BIOLOGY (Vol. 10) December 2000

reviews

Innate immunity  
Listeria  
monocytogenes  
(HK)

MΦ  

Regulatory T cells:  
TH3, Tr1, CD45RB${}^{\mathrm{lo}}$ etc.

IL-10  
inhibits  

TGF-$\beta$  
inhibits  

Naive  
CD4+  
T cell  

DC  

IL-2  

Naive  
CD4+  
T cell  

IL-12  
(IL-1$\alpha$, IL-18, TNF)  

IFN-$\gamma$  

Th1  

IL-2  
IFN-$\gamma$  
IL-10  

Cell-mediated immunity  
Intracellular pathogens  
Immunopathology  
e.g. organ-specific  
autoimmunity  

IL-4  
inhibits  

ICAM-1  
inhibits  

IL-4  
(IL-6, MCP-1)  

TGF-$\beta$  
inhibits  

CD4+ T cells:  
memory, NK1.1,  
mast cells,  
eosinophils  

Regulatory  
T cells  

Th2  

IL-4  
IL-5  
IL-10  
IL-13  

Helminths  
Humoral immunity  
Immunopathology  
Allergy  
Atopy  

trends in Cell Biology  

FIGURE 1  

Regulation of T helper cell responses. Cytokines are major inducers of Th1 and Th2 subset development. Antigen-presenting cells (APCs) or a specific APC subset (e.g. distinct dendritic cell subsets), in part as a result of the cytokines that they produce, can induce the development of Th1 or Th2 cells. Naive CD4+ T cells can develop into Th1 cells responsible for cell-mediated immunity in response to interleukin 12 (IL-12). Th1 development is dependent on IFN-$\gamma$, and maintenance of phenotype depends on stimulation in the presence of IL-12 and IL-18. Development of Th1 responses can be antagonized directly by IL-4 and indirectly by IL-10, which inhibits the production of inflammatory mediators such as IL-12 and IL-18 from macrophages and/or dendritic cells stimulated by the innate immune response. Th2 cells, dependent on IL-4 to differentiate, have been implicated in allergic and atopic manifestations, and in addition, through their production of IL-4 and IL-10, have been suggested to play a role in tolerance: specifically, it has been suggested that a Th1-to-Th2 switch might prevent the development of organ-specific autoimmune pathologies. In the past year, it has become clear that distinct subsets of regulatory T cells are responsible for regulating both Th1 and Th2 responses and preventing the development of immune pathologies. A common feature of many of these regulatory T cells is that their function is at least in part due to the action of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-$\beta$); this would be in keeping with the ability of TGF-$\beta$ to inhibit both Th1 and Th2 development. Abbreviations: DC, dendritic cell; M$\phi$, macrophage; TNF, tumour necrosis factor.

IFN-$\gamma$ production ${}^{62}$. In addition, in one study, a dominant-negative inhibitory mutant of p38 selectively impaired Th1 responses and activation of the IFN-$\gamma$ promoter ${}^{63}$ as did specific inhibitors of p38 MAP kinase. However, in other studies, p38 MAP kinase was also implicated in Th2 cytokine production ${}^{64,65}$.

It has been demonstrated that a region of 8.6 kb of the gene encoding IFN-$\gamma$ is sufficient to confer its T-cell-specific expression ${}^{66,67}$; however, as yet, the IFN-$\gamma$ gene has not been extensively characterized with respect to its specific expression in Th1 as opposed to Th2 cells (reviewed in Refs 23 and 26). Two essential regulatory elements in the IFN-$\gamma$ gene have been described that confer inducibility and cyclosporine sensitivity, and putative binding sites for the transcription factors ATF, Jun, CREB and Oct-1 have also been described ${}^{68,69}$. Both proximal and distal elements in transgenic reporter mice direct reporter expression in memory effector CD4+ T cells ${}^{70}$. The distal sites contain a consensus GATA motif and a potential regulatory motif found in the promoter regions of other cytokine genes, and factors binding to this site included GATA-3 ${}^{68}$. This is of interest since GATA-3 expression has since been shown to be Th2 specific and crucial for differentiation of Th2 cells ${}^{71-77}$ (reviewed below). NFAT and NF-$\kappa$B have been shown to bind to similar regions in the first intron of the IFN-$\gamma$ gene and to cooperate in these events ${}^{78}$. A ubiquitous nuclear factor, Yin-Yang 1 (YY1), has been shown to bind to two regions of the IFN-$\gamma$ promoter and is proposed to act as a repressor of basal IFN-$\gamma$ transcription ${}^{79}$. Although these transcription factors have been proposed to regulate IFN-$\gamma$ expression ${}^{78,80,81}$, future detailed functional analysis is required to define their specific roles.

Transcription factors in Th1 development and commitment

Very little is known about the molecular basis of Th1 differentiation other than the signalling

trends in CELL BIOLOGY (Vol. 10) December 2000

pathways discussed above. The transcription factor Ets family member ERM, which is induced by IL-12 in a STAT4-dependent manner, is Th1 specific but does not affect the production of Th1-specific cytokines<sup>44</sup>. Szabo, Glimcher and colleagues have recently isolated a cDNA encoding a protein they term T-bet (T-box expressed in T cells, since it is selectively expressed in thymocytes and Th1 cells)<sup>82</sup>. T-bet belongs to the T box family of transcription factors that play crucial roles in diverse developmental processes (reviewed in Ref. 82). T-bet was rapidly and selectively induced in Th1 but not Th2 cells. Cotransfection of the mouse thymoma EL4 with a T-bet expression plasmid and an IFN-γ-luciferase reporter construct (containing the entire IFN-γ gene locus) results in significant T-bet-specific transactivation of the IFN-γ gene in both stimulated and unstimulated cells. By contrast, T-bet expression represses the activity of the IL-2 promoter. This might explain previous observations that, although Th1 cells express IL-2, they downregulate its expression as they differentiate. Interestingly, T-bet neither inhibited nor enhanced IL-4 promoter transactivation.

Populations of cells positive for the cell-surface molecule B220<sup>+</sup> (containing B cells and NK cells) upregulated T-bet expression upon culture with IL-12 and CD40 ligation, and T-bet expression was significantly enhanced by IL-18. Under conditions where cells were stimulated by ligation of the cell-surface molecule CD40, together with IL-12 and IL-18, significant levels of IFN-γ production were observed. By contrast, CD40 ligation with each of the cytokines alone did not induce IFN-γ production, although T-bet expression was induced by IL-12 and CD40 ligation. It is possible that IL-18 induces another factor required for IFN-γ production<sup>52</sup> or that T-bet has to be expressed above a certain threshold to achieve significant induction of IFN-γ<sup>82</sup>. Dose-dependent lineage determination has been reported previously for other transcription factors<sup>83</sup>. These results are supported by further findings that, although ectopic expression of IL-12Rβ2 in developing Th2 cells resulted in the ability of IL-12 to activate STAT4 and proliferation in these cells, it did not lead to significant production of IFN-γ<sup>48,49</sup>.

These results led to the question of whether T-bet could induce the development of Th1 cells producing IFN-γ. Retroviral infection of primary CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells with T-bet resulted in a dramatic increase in the number of IFN-γ-producing cells<sup>82</sup>. Moreover, ectopic expression of T-bet in T cells cultured to receive stimuli that would normally drive them towards a Th2 phenotype also gave rise to large numbers of IFN-γ-producing cells and led to a marked reduction in the number of IL-4-producing cells, independently of IFN-γ signalling.

Reversibility of Th1 and Th2 populations is largely abrogated after one week of culture; however, stable commitment to a Th phenotype occurs after repeated stimulation under polarizing conditions<sup>29</sup>. Remarkably, introduction of T-bet into such stably committed Th2 populations also dramatically increased the numbers of IFN-γ-producing cells and

reduced the number of IL-4- and IL-5-producing cells<sup>82</sup>. Thus, T-bet can convert Th2 into Th1 cells. However, ectopic expression of T-bet in a homogeneous Th2 clone only minimally increased the number of IFN-γ-producing cells. This might be because the chromatin configuration at the relevant loci is no longer accessible or because the array of factors necessary for inducing IFN-γ gene expression is no longer present. However, T-bet expression in the Th2 clone still resulted in a significant reduction of IL-4- and IL-5-producing cells, showing that the ability of T-bet to suppress Th2 development extends even to long-term clones. Thus, T-bet both initiates Th1 genetic programmes and represses the opposing Th2 programmes.

### Signalling pathways for Th2 differentiation and commitment

Production of IL-4 early in an immune response directs the development of a Th2 response, accompanied by production of IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13, and by the activation of mast cells and eosinophils and the production of IgE<sup>3,10,11,84</sup>. Ligation of IL-4 with its receptor (IL-4R) activates at least two signalling – JAK–STAT and IRS2 – pathways<sup>85,86</sup>. STAT6-deficient mice showed defects in Th2 responses<sup>87–89</sup>, similar to the phenotype of IL-4-deficient mice<sup>90,91</sup>, indicating a crucial role of STAT6 in inducing Th2 differentiation. The STAT6-mediated signalling cascade was further studied by using a conditionally active form of STAT6 – STAT6:ER – which mimics IL-4-mediated signalling without ligation of the IL-4 receptor<sup>92</sup>. STAT6:ER, a fusion protein of STAT6 and the hormone-binding domain of the oestrogen receptor, is activated independently of IL-4 by an oestrogen analogue, 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-HT).

When STAT6:ER was transduced retrovirally into naive T cells obtained from mice with a transgenic T-cell receptor (TCR) and driven under Th1 conditions, activation of STAT6:ER induced the production of IL-4, IL-5 and IL-10 and repressed Th1 development and production of IFNγ at least in part through inhibition of IL-12Rβ2<sup>92</sup>. In addition to a change in the cytokine profile, the induction of mRNA for the Th2-specific transcription factors GATA-3 and c-maf was also observed upon the activation of STAT6:ER, suggesting that GATA-3 and c-Maf are downstream from STAT6 in the IL-4R mediated signalling cascade in Th2 development<sup>92</sup>. Recently, Ouyang *et al.* demonstrated that STAT6-independent GATA-3 autoactivation can direct IL-4-independent Th2 development and commitment<sup>76</sup>. In addition to these dominant pathways for Th2 cell differentiation, there might be crosstalk with other signalling pathways and thus a requirement for other signalling molecules, such as the Tec (T cell-associated kinases) family kinase Itk, which is required for the development of Th2 cells<sup>93</sup>.

### Transcription factors for Th2 development and commitment

A number of transcription factors have been shown to be implicated in Th2 cell differentiation: Stat6; NF-IL-6; NFATc/2; AP-1/Jun-B; c-Maf; and

from transgenic mice expressing GATA-3 showed an increase in IL-4, IL-6 and IL-10 mRNA expression, although an effect on IFN-γ was not observed<sup>71</sup>. Furthermore, expression of antisense GATA-3 in a Th2 clone significantly inhibited the expression of Th2 cytokines upon activation<sup>71,102</sup>. Retroviral infection of naive T cells with GATA-3 when they were cultured under Th1 conditions induced the production of Th2-specific cytokines and downregulated IFN-γ production at least in part through repression of IL-12 signalling<sup>74,75</sup>. In addition to modulating cytokine production, ectopic expression of GATA-3 induced the expression of endogenous GATA-3 in developing Th1 cells but not in committed Th1 cells, suggesting autoregulation of GATA-3 in Th2 cells<sup>76,77</sup>. More recently, expression of a dominant-negative mutant of GATA-3 in transgenic mice inhibited the production of IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 and concomitantly inhibited airway inflammation in a murine model of asthma<sup>103</sup>. Thus GATA-3 might be important for the maintenance of a Th2 phenotype by maintaining GATA-3 expression. These observations indicate that GATA-3 might be a major factor that controls the production of all Th2-specific cytokines and thus maintains the Th2 phenotype.

Although GATA-3 could induce the production of Th2-specific cytokines in developing Th1 cells, it was less clear whether it could affect committed Th1 cells<sup>71,74,75</sup>. It has been shown recently that the activation of STAT6:ER did not induce Th2-specific cytokines in committed Th1 cells and that its action was restricted to an early stage during Th1 development<sup>92</sup>. Specifically, although activated STAT6:ER could induce Th2-specific cytokines and repress IFNγ production in developing Th1 cells, this effect decreased rapidly when the activation of STAT6 was delayed. This lack of effect upon delayed activation of STAT6 as all the Th1 cells within the population differentiated also correlated with a decreased level of induction of the Th2-specific transcription factors GATA-3 and c-Maf.

In accordance with these results, forced expression of GATA-3 induced a committed population of Th1 cells, and even a homogeneous Th1 clone, to express Th2-specific cytokines<sup>77</sup>. cAMP enhanced the GATA-3 effects to induce IL-4 and IL-5, although it had no effect on inducing these cytokines in Th1 cells in isolation<sup>77</sup>. It has been shown that cAMP levels are high in Th2 cells, and addition of cAMP as well as cAMP-elevating agents such as forskolin and PGE2 selectively upregulate Th2 cytokine production in Th2 clones (see Ref. 77 for review). Studies of the gene promoter for IL-5 have established independently the important roles of GATA-3 and cAMP in specific expression of the IL-5 gene in a transformed thymoma cell line EL-4 as well as Th2 clones<sup>72,73</sup>. A GATA-3-binding site was identified in the regulatory sequences that lie within 1 kbp upstream of the IL-5 gene; four cis-acting elements including the GATA-3 binding site have been mapped here<sup>72,73,104</sup>. By contrast, a role for GATA-3 in the activation of the IL-4 promoter has been elusive. Transfection and expression of GATA-3 was sufficient for transcription of the IL-5 but not the

Interleukin 12 (IL-12) and IL-4 direct the development of Th1 and Th2 subsets producing IFN-γ or IL-4, through STAT4- and STAT6-dependent pathways, respectively. Th2 cells express the transcription factors c-maf and GATA-3. Ectopic expression of GATA-3 induces the expression of Th2-specific cytokines and inhibits IFN-γ production in developing and committed Th1 cells. T-bet, a newly described Th1-specific T-box transcription factor induces IFN-γ and represses IL-4 and IL-5 in both developing and committed Th2 cells.

GATA-3<sup>5,19–21,71,72,94</sup>. Although NFAT and AP-1 proteins are important for inducing IL-4 and IL-5 transcription, they are present in both Th1 and Th2 subsets and do not appear to account for the Th2-restricted expression of IL-4 in *in vitro* systems<sup>95</sup>. However, mice bearing targeted disruptions of NFATp have increased Th2 cytokines in the late phase of the immune response, whereas NFAT4-deficient mice do not display defects in cytokine production<sup>96–98</sup>. In addition, mice lacking both NFATp and NFAT4/x have extremely high levels of IL-4 and IgE<sup>99</sup>. Thus, it appears that NFATp and NFAT4/x can exert a negative regulatory role on IL-4 expression *in vivo*, whereas NFATc apparently positively transactivates the IL-4 promoter (see Ref. 21 for review). It is not clear at this stage whether the effects are direct or indirect, or at the level of expression of different NFAT members *in vivo*. On the other hand, overexpression of a Jun-B protein has been shown to induce Th2-specific genes in Th1 cells<sup>100</sup>.

Two Th2-specific transcription factors, GATA-3 and c-Maf, have been described. c-Maf, an oncogene, is reported to activate the IL-4 promoter<sup>77,94</sup>. c-Maf-deficient mice have been shown to be defective in IL-4 production, although interestingly other Th2-specific cytokines were unaffected<sup>101</sup>. Ectopic expression of c-Maf, however, did not induce the expression of IL-4 in developing Th1 cells. The role of c-Maf in Th2 development was also examined by retrovirus infection experiments in developing Th1 cells. Introduction of a c-Maf-encoding retrovirus did not induce Th2 cytokine production in developing Th1 cells (H.J. Lee *et al.*, unpublished).

The importance of GATA-3 in Th2 cytokine gene expression and/or Th2 differentiation has been demonstrated by several investigators. Th1 cells

IL-4 promoter in spite of the presence of putative GATA-3 sites in the IL-4 promoter^{77,102,105}. Recently, an antigen-inducible GATA-3-binding enhancer was identified in the 3' flanking region of the IL-4 gene by DNase I hypersensitivity analysis^{106}.

These observations suggested that GATA-3 controls IL-4 expression through distal enhancer elements outside the IL-4 promoter, possibly by mechanisms other than transactivation. This hypothesis is further supported by structural analyses of the GATA-3 protein. GATA proteins (GATA 1–6) are members of a zinc-finger superfamily of DNA-binding proteins and recognize a common consensus motif (WGATAR) through a conserved zinc-finger DNA-binding domain^{107}. The structure of GATA proteins is well conserved between family members; they comprise discrete domains required for specific DNA-binding site recognition as well as for transactivation. To examine the mechanism(s) by which GATA-3 regulates Th2-specific cytokine induction in committed Th1 cells, a series of mutant constructs containing deletions in one of the functional domains of GATA-3 was generated and introduced into committed Th1 cells^{77}. As expected, the transactivation and C-terminal zinc-finger domains of GATA-3 were important for induction of both IL-4 and IL-5. Interestingly, a GATA-3 mutant lacking a portion of the N-terminal zinc-finger domain retained its ability to induce IL-4, despite its inability to bind to the GATA DNA site originally described for the TCR gene. However, unlike IL-4, the effect of GATA-3 on IL-5 production was reduced significantly by this N-terminal zinc-finger domain deletion, suggesting that GATA-3 might induce IL-4 and IL-5 through distinct mechanisms^{77,102}.

### Th1 and Th2 cytokine gene regulation at the chromatin level

The regulatory elements in the Th2-specific gene cluster have been better defined than those in the Th1-specific gene cluster. Genes encoding IL-5, IL-13 and IL-4 are within the Th2 cytokine gene cluster in the long arm of human chromosome 5, q23–31, syntenic mouse chromosome 11, spreading over 160 Kbp^{108,109}. The deletion of this region, del(5q), is frequently observed in patients with a myelodysplastic syndrome, and this is also referred to as 5q-syndrome^{108}. Several reports have indicated that differentiation to Th2 cells is associated with changes in chromatin structure in the IL-4 gene locus but not in the IFN-γ locus^{22–24}. The DNA within transcriptionally inactive genes is found in regions of condensed chromatin, contains unmodified histones and is often densely methylated (methylation is an epigenetic mechanism for silencing genes; reviewed in Ref. 23). However, histone acetylation and DNA demethylation favour decondensation of chromatin, which can be demonstrated by the sensitivity of sites in the DNA to cleavage by the enzyme DNase I (DNase I hypersensitive sites), and provide increased access to factors such as transcription factors. Five clusters of DNase I hypersensitive sites (I–V) have been mapped within a 19-Kb fragment, flanked by the restriction sites for the enzyme BamH1, spanning the IL-4 gene in a Th2 clone, D10, and are accompanied by CpG demethylation. By contrast, a Th1 clone, D5, exhibited a relatively 'closed' chromatin structure, with only one hypersensitive site (IV)^{22}. Similarly, differentiating Th2 cells rapidly acquired an accessible chromatin structure in the IL-13 genes as well^{22}. In addition to these hypersensitive sites observed in the IL-4 gene, three additional DNase I hypersensitive sites have been identified (HSS1, 2 and 3) in an intergenic region between the IL-4 and IL-13 genes separated by 15 Kb, both in a Th2 clone and in differentiated Th2 cells^{24}. The appearance of HSS1 and HSS2 is specific to Th2 cells but is constitutive and independent of stimulation.

Cross-species sequence comparisons between the cytokine gene cluster in human chromosome 5 and the syntenic equivalents in mouse, dog and other species were used to search for regulatory sequences. These studies revealed 90 noncoding sequences within one megabase sequence on human chromosome 5 (Ref. 110). Of these conserved noncoding sequences (CNSs), CNS-7 is located in the intergenic region between GM-CSF and IL-3, which had previously been identified experimentally as an enhancer controlling the co-regulation of these two cytokines^{111}. Interestingly, the largest conserved noncoding sequence, CNS-1, was located in the intergenic region between IL-4 and IL-13, where the Th2-specific hypersensitive sites (HSS1 and HSS2) had been mapped previously^{24}. The biological properties of CNS-1 were characterized recently by establishing transgenic mice bearing a human YAC transgene^{110}. Conditional deletion of the CNS-1 element in a 450-kb human transgene resulted in a decrease in the number of Th2 cells expressing human IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13. This indicates that CNS-1 might contain a crucial sequence controlling all cytokine genes within the IL-4 locus, which might be similar to the locus-control-region (LCR) reported for the gene encoding β-globin^{112}. Their results also suggested that GATA-3 functions as more than a sequence-specific transactivator and plays a role as a master switch in Th2 development.

Complimentary changes in chromatin occur at the IFN-γ locus in the course of Th1 commitment, but these are less well defined compared with those in Th2 cells^{22,23}. Specific DNase I hypersensitive sites were originally mapped in the IFN-γ gene^{67}. Further characterization of hypersensitive regions within the IFN-γ gene showed that Th1 cells developed these sites in the first and third introns during differentiation from a naive CD4⁺ T cell. In addition, the locus is hypomethylated in Th1 but not Th2 cells^{22,23,113}.

Thus, GATA-3 and T-bet are major inducers of Th1 and Th2 differentiation by controlling the production of their respective cytokines. In addition they are involved in the commitment and stable maintenance of the Th1 and Th2 phenotypes. GATA-3 might function not only in transactivation of genes but also by inducing epigenetic changes in the chromatin structure of the IL-4 locus.

Studies conducted during the next five years will determine how other signalling pathways link up

with the specific cytokine-driven signalling pathways, as well as with these and other Th-specific transcription factors, to direct the expression of a distinct set of cytokine genes by T helper cells. Currently, there is a debate about whether the cytokines that induce Th1 or Th2 differentiation ‘instruct’ the developmental fate of naive Th cells or ‘select’ for cells which have already undergone a stochastic process of gene activation and already produce a range of cytokines indicative of a Th1 or Th2 cell (reviewed in Ref. 114). In the past year, it has been demonstrated that naive Th cells require a specified number of cell divisions before becoming competent to produce cytokines indicative of the Th1 or Th2 subsets<sup>115,116</sup>; however, more recent studies have demonstrated greater complexities with respect to the involvement of the cell cycle in Th cell differentiation<sup>117</sup>. As discussed above, stable cytokine expression is accompanied by demethylation and increased chromatin accessibility of the cytokine genes<sup>22,24,116</sup>, and, in addition, chromatin accessibility is acquired after repeated stimulation under Th1 or Th2 conditions<sup>22</sup>, which correlates with a committed Th phenotype. Whether this reflects progression through the cell cycle as postulated by Bird *et al.*<sup>116</sup> remains to be determined. Another surprising finding is that IL-4 and possibly other cytokines are expressed from only one of two alleles in many individual Th cells, and the physiological importance of this phenomenon will undoubtedly be clarified in the next few years (Ref. 118; reviewed in Refs 26 and 114). Finally, it is very likely that other subsets of Th cells exist that produce different profiles of cytokines, and the pathways determining their development remain to be elucidated.

### References

1. Mosmann, T.R. *et al.* (1986) Two types of murine helper T cell clone. I. Definition according to profiles of lymphokine activities and secreted proteins. *J. Immunol.* 136, 2348–2357
2. Mosmann, T.R. and Sad, S. (1996) The expanding universe of T-cell subsets: Th1, Th2 and more. *Immunol. Today* 17, 138–146
3. Sher, A. and Coffman R.L. (1992) Regulation of immunity to parasites by T cells and T cell-derived cytokines. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 10, 385–409
4. Abbas, A.K. *et al.* (1996) Functional diversity of helper T lymphocytes. *Nature* 383, 787–793
5. O'Garra, A. (1998) Cytokines induce the development of functionally heterogeneous T helper cell subsets. *Immunity* 8, 275–283
6. Powrie, F. and Coffman, R.L. (1993) Cytokine regulation of T-cell function: potential for therapeutic intervention. *Immunol. Today* 14, 270–274
7. Liblau, R. *et al.* (1995) Th1 and Th2 CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells in the pathogenesis of organ-specific autoimmune diseases. *Immunol. Today* 16, 34–38
8. O'Garra, A. *et al.* (1997) CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cell subsets in autoimmunity. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 9, 872–883
9. Urban, J. *et al.* (1992) The importance of Th2 cytokines in protective immunity to nematodes. *Immunol. Rev.* 127, 205–220
10. Romagnani, S. (1994) Lymphokine production by human T cells in disease states. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 12, 227–257
11. Paul, W.E. and Seder, R.A. (1994) Lymphocyte responses and cytokines. *Cell* 76, 241–251
12. Robinson, D.S. (1992) Predominant TH2-like bronchoalveolar T-lymphocyte population in atopic asthma. *New Engl. J. Med.* 326, 298–304
13. Constant, S.L. and Bottomly, K. (1997) Induction of the Th1 and Th2 CD4<sup>+</sup> T cell responses: alternative approaches. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 15, 297–322

14 Rulifson, I.C. *et al.* (1997) CD28 costimulation promotes the production of Th2 cytokines. *J. Immunol.* 158, 658–665
15 Brown, D.R. *et al.* (1996) Limited role of CD28-mediated signals in T helper subset differentiation. *J. Exp. Med.* 184, 803–810
16 Grewal, I.S. and Flavell, R.A. (1998) CD40 and CD154 in cell-mediated immunity. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 16, 111–135
17 Luksch, C.R. *et al.* (1999) Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 inhibits interleukin 4 production by naive T cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 96, 3023–3028
18 Salomon, B. and Bluestone, J.A. (1998) LFA-1 interaction with ICAM-1 and ICAM-2 regulates Th2 cytokine production. *J. Immunol.* 161, 5138–5142
19 Murphy, K.M. *et al.* (1999) T helper differentiation proceeds through Stat1-dependent, Stat-4-dependent and Stat-4 independent phases. *Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol.* 238, 13–26
20 Rincon, M. and Flavell, R.A. (1997) T-cell subsets: transcriptional control in the Th1/Th2 decision. *Curr. Biol.* 7, R729–R732
21 Szabo, S.J. *et al.* (1997) Genes that regulate interleukin-4 expression in T cells. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 9, 776–781
22 Agarwal, S. and Rao, A. (1998) Modulation of chromatin structure regulates cytokine gene expression during T cell differentiation. *Immunity* 9, 765–775
23 Agarwal, S. and Rao, A. (1998) Long-range transcriptional regulation of cytokine gene expression. *Curr. Biol.* 10, 345–352
24 Takemoto, N. *et al.* (1998) Th2-specific DNase I-hypersensitive sites in the murine IL-13 and IL-4 intergenic region. *Int. Immunol.* 10, 1981–1985
25 Swain, S.L. (1993) IL-4 dictates T-cell differentiation. *53rd Forum Immunol. Res. Immunol.* 144, 567–651
26 Murphy, K.M. *et al.* (2000) Signaling and transcription in T helper development. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 18, 451–494
27 Perez, V.L. *et al.* (1995) Stability of Th1 and Th2 populations. *Int. Immunol.* 7, 869–875
28 Szabo, S. *et al.* (1995) Developmental commitment to the Th2 lineage by extinction of IL-12 signaling. *Immunity* 2, 665–671
29 Murphy, E. *et al.* (1996) Reversibility of T helper 1 and T helper 2 cytokine profiles is lost after long-term stimulation. *J. Exp. Med.* 183, 901–913
30 Mocci, S. and Coffman, R.L. (1995) The induction of a Th2 population from a polarized Leishmania-specific Th1 population by *in vitro* culture. *J. Immunol.* 154, 3779–3787
31 Trinchieri, G. (1995) Interleukin-12: a proinflammatory cytokine with immunoregulatory functions that bridge innate resistance and antigen-specific adaptive immunity. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 13, 251–276
32 Macatonia, S.E. *et al.* (1995) Dendritic cells produce IL-12 and direct the development of Th1 cells from naive CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells. *J. Immunol.* 154, 5071–5079
33 Scheicher, C.M. *et al.* (1995) Uptake of microparticle-absorbed protein antigen by bone marrow dendritic cells results in upregulation of interleukin-1a and interleukin-12 p40/p35 and triggers prolonged, efficient antigen presentation. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 25, 1566–1572
34 Cella, M. *et al.* (1996) Ligation of CD40 on dendritic cells triggers production of high levels of interleukin-12 and enhances T cell stimulatory capacity: T-T help via APC activation. *J. Exp. Med.* 184, 747–752
35 Koch, F. *et al.* (1996) High level IL-12 production by murine dendritic cells: upregulation via MHC class II and CD40 molecules and downregulation by IL-4 and IL-10. *J. Exp. Med.* 184, 741–746
36 Reis e Sousa, C. *et al.* (1997) *In vivo* microbial stimulation induces rapid CD40 ligand-independent production of interleukin 12 by dendritic cells and their redistribution to T cell areas. *J. Exp. Med.* 186, 1819–1829
37 Maldonado-Lopez, R. *et al.* (1999) CD8α<sup>+</sup> and CD8α<sup>-</sup> subclasses of dendritic cells direct the development of distinct T helper cells *in vivo*. *J. Exp. Med.* 189, 587–592
38 Pulendran, B. *et al.* (1999) Distinct dendritic cell subsets differentially regulate the class of immune response *in vivo*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 96, 1036–1041
39 Rissoan, M-C. *et al.* (1999) Reciprocal control of T helper cell and dendritic cell differentiation. *Science* 283, 1183–1186
40 Magram, J. *et al.* (1996) IL-12-deficient mice are defective in IFN-γ production and type 1 cytokine responses. *Immunity* 4, 471–481
41 Kaplan, M.H. *et al.* (1996) Impaired IL-12 responses and enhanced development of Th2 cells in Stat4-deficient mice. *Nature* 382, 174–177
42 Thierfelder, W.E. *et al.* (1996) Requirement for Stat4 in interleukin-12-mediated responses of natural killer and T cells. *Nature* 382, 171–174
43 Xu, X. *et al.* (1996) Cooperative DNA binding and sequence-selective recognition conferred by the STAT amino-terminal domain. *Science* 273, 794–797

44  Ouyang, W. *et al.* (1999) The Ets transcription factor ERM is Th1-specific and induced by IL-12 through a Stat4-dependent pathway. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 96, 3888–3893

45  Rogge, L. *et al.* (1998) The role of Stat4 in species-specific regulation of Th development by type I IFNs. *J. Immunol.* 161, 6567–6574

46  Szabo, S. *et al.* (1997) Regulation of the interleukin (IL)-12β2 subunit expression in developing T helper 1 (Th1) and Th2 cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 185, 817–824

47  Rogge, L. *et al.* (1997) Selective expression of an interleukin-12 receptor component by human T helper 1 cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 185, 825–831

48  Nishikomori, R. *et al.* (2000) T helper type 2 cell differentiation occurs in the presence of interleukin 12 receptor β2 chain expression and signaling. *J. Exp. Med.* 191, 847–858

49  Heath, V.L. *et al.* (2000) Ectopic expression of the IL-12 receptor-β2 in developing and committed Th2 cells does not affect the production of IL-4 or induce the production of IFN-γ. *J. Immunol.* 164, 2861–2865

50  Okamura, H. *et al.* (1995) Cloning of a new cytokine that induces IFN-γ production by T cells. *Nature* 378, 88–91

51  Okamura, H. *et al.* (1998) Regulation of interferon-γ production by IL-12 and IL-18. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 10, 259–264

52  Robinson, D. *et al.* (1997) IGIF does not drive Th1 development, but synergizes with IL-12 for IFN-γ production, and activates IRAK and NF-κB. *Immunity* 7, 571–581

53  Torigoe, K. *et al.* (1997) Purification and characterization of the human interleukin-18 receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 25737–25742

54  Yoshimoto, T. *et al.* (1998) IL-12 upregulates IL-18 receptor expression on T cells, Th1 cells, and B cells: synergism with IL-18 for IFN-γ production. *J. Immunol.* 161, 3400–3407

55  Xu, D. *et al.* (1998) Selective expression and functions of interleukin 18 receptor on T helper (Th) type 1 but not Th2 cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 188, 1485–1492

56  Debets, R. *et al.* IL-18 receptors, their role in ligand binding and function. Anti IL-1RαcPL antibody, a potent antagonist of IL-18. *J. Immunol.* (in press)

57  Takeda, K. *et al.* (1998) Defective NK cell activity and Th1 response in IL-18-deficient mice. *Immunity* 8, 383–390

58  Lohoff, M. *et al.* (1997) Interferon-regulatory-factor-1 is required for a T helper 1 immune response *in vivo*. *Immunity* 6, 681–689

59  Taki, S. *et al.* (1997) Multistage regulation of Th1-type immune responses by the transcription factor IRF-1. *Immunity* 6, 673–679

60  Coccia, E.M. *et al.* (1999) Interleukin-12 induces expression of interferon regulatory factor-1 via signal transducer and activator of transcription-4 in human T helper type 1 cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 6698–6703

61  Dong, C. *et al.* (1998) Defective T cell differentiation in the absence of Jnk1. *Science* 282, 2092–2095

62  Yang, D.D. *et al.* (1998) Differentiation of CD4⁺ T cells to Th1 cells requires MAP kinase JNK2. *Immunity* 9, 575–585

63  Rincon, M. *et al.* (1998) Interferon-γ expression by Th1 effector T cells mediated by the p38 MAP kinase signaling pathway. *EMBO J.* 17, 2817–2829

64  Zhang, J. *et al.* (1999) p38 Mitogen-activated protein kinase mediates signal integration of TCR/CD28 costimulation in primary murine T cells. *J. Immunol.* 162, 3819–3829

65  Schafer, P.H. *et al.* (1999) p38α Mitogen-activated protein kinase is activated by CD28-mediated signaling and is required for IL-4 production by human CD4+CD45RO+ T cells and Th2 effector cells. *J. Immunol.* 162, 7110–7119

66  Hardy, K.J. *et al.* (1985) Regulation of expression of the human interferon γ gene. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 82, 8173–8177

67  Hardy, K.J. *et al.* (1987) Molecular events involved in regulating human interferon-γ gene expression during T cell activation. *J. Immunol.* 138, 2353–2358

68  Penix, L. *et al.* (1993) Two essential regulatory elements in the human interferon γ promoter confer activation specific expression in T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 178, 1483–1496

69  Penix, L.A. *et al.* (1996) The proximal regulatory element of the interferon-γ promoter mediates selective expression in T cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271, 31964–31972

70  Aune, T.M. *et al.* (1997) Differential transcription directed by discrete gamma interferon promoter elements in naive and memory (effector) CD4 T cells and CD8 T cells. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 17, 199–208

71  Zheng, W-P. and Flavell, R.A. (1997) The transcription factor GATA-3 is necessary and sufficient for Th2 cytokine gene expression in CD4T cells. *Cell* 89, 587–596

72  Zhang, D.H. *et al.* (1997) Differential responsiveness of the IL-5 and IL-4 genes to transcription factor GATA-3. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 21597–21603

73  Lee, H.J. *et al.* (1998) Characterization of cis-regulatory elements and

74  Ferber, I.A. *et al.* (1999) GATA-3 significantly downregulates IFN-gamma production from developing Th1 cells in addition to inducing IL-4 and IL-5 levels. *Clin. Immunol.* 91, 134–144

75  Ouyang, W. *et al.* (1998) Inhibition of Th1 development mediated by GATA-3 through an IL-4-independent mechanism. *Immunity* 9, 745–755

76  Ouyang, W. *et al.* (2000) Stat6-independent GATA-3 autoactivation directs IL-4-independent Th2 development and commitment. *Immunity* 12, 27–37

77  Lee, H.J. *et al.* (2000) GATA-3 induces Th2 cytokine expression and chromatin remodeling in committed Th1 cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 192, 105–115

78  Sica, A. *et al.* (1997) Interaction of NF-κβ and NFAT with the interferon-γ promoter. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 30412–30420

79  Ye, J. *et al.* (1996) The nuclear factor YY1 suppresses the human gamma interferon promoter through two mechanisms: inhibition of AP1 binding and activation of a silencer element. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 16, 4744–4753

80  Sweetser, M.T. *et al.* (1998) The roles of nuclear factor of activated T cells and ying-yang 1 in activation-induced expression of the interferon-gamma promoter in T cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273, 34775–34783

81  Campbell, P.M. *et al.* (1996) Identification of a calcium-inducible, cyclosporine-sensitive element in the IFN-γ promoter that is a potential NFAT binding site. *Transplantation* 61, 933–939

82  Szabo, S.J. *et al.* (2000) A novel transcription factor, T-bet, directs Th1 lineage commitment. *Cell* 100, 655–669

83  McDevitt, M.A. *et al.* (1997) A ‘knockdown’ mutation created by cis-element gene targeting reveals the dependence of erythroid cell maturation on the level of transcription factor GATA-1. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Science. U. S. A.* 94, 6781–6785

84  Swain, S.L. *et al.* (1990) IL-4 directs the development of Th2-like helper effectors. *J. Immunol.* 145, 3796–3806

85  Hoey, J. *et al.* (1994) An interleukin-4-induced transcription factor: IL-4 Stat. *Science* 265, 1701–1706

86  Ryan, J.J. *et al.* (1996) Growth and gene expression are predominantly controlled by distinct regions of the human IL-4 receptor. *Immunity* 4, 123–132

87  Kaplan, M. *et al.* (1996) Stat6 is required for mediating responses to IL-4 and for the development of Th2 cells. *Immunity* 4, 313–319

88  Shimoda, K. *et al.* (1996) Lack of IL-4-induced Th2 response and IgE class switching in mice with disrupted Stat6 gene. *Nature* 380, 630–633

89  Takeda, K. *et al.* (1996) Essential role of Stat6 in IL-4 signalling. *Nature* 380, 627–630

90  Kuhn, R. *et al.* (1991) Generation and analysis of interleukin-4 deficient mice. *Science* 254, 707–710

91  Kopf, M. *et al.* (1993) Disruption of the murine IL-4 gene blocks Th2 cytokine responses. *Nature* 362, 245–248

92  Kurata, H. *et al.* (1999) Ectopic expression of activated Stat6 induces the expression of Th2-specific cytokines and transcription factors in developing Th1 cells. *Immunity* 11, 677–688

93  Fowell, D.J. *et al.* (1999) Impaired NFATc translocation and failure of Th2 development in Itk-deficient CD4⁺ T cells. *Immunity* 11, 399–409

94  Ho, I-C. *et al.* (1996) The proto-oncogene c-maf is responsible for tissue-specific expression of interleukin-4. *Cell* 85, 973–983

95  Rooney, J.W. *et al.* (1995) Coordinate and cooperative roles for NF-AT and AP-1 in the regulation of the murine IL-4 gene. *Immunity* 2, 473–483

96  Hodge, M.R. *et al.* (1996) Hyperproliferation and dysregulation of IL-4 expression in NF-ATp-deficient mice. *Immunity* 4, 397–405

97  Xanthoudakis, S. *et al.* (1996) An enhanced immune response in mice lacking the transcription factor NFAT1. *Science* 272, 892–895

98  Kiani, A. *et al.* (1997) Down-regulation of IL-4 gene transcription and control of Th2 cell differentiation by a mechanism involving NFAT1. *Immunity* 7, 849–860

99  Ranger, A.M. *et al.* (1998) Inhibitory function of two NFAT family members in lymphoid homeostasis and Th2 development. *Immunity* 9, 627–635

100 Li, B. *et al.* (1999) Regulation of T helper differentiation by the transcription factor JunB. *EMBO J.* 19, 420–432

101 Kim, J. *et al.* (1999) The transcription factor c-maf controls the production of IL-4 but not other Th2 cytokines. *Immunity* 10, 745–751

102 Zhang, D. *et al.* (1998) Differential responsiveness of the IL-5 and IL-4 genes to transcription factor GATA-3. *J. Immunol.* 161, 3817–3821

103 Zhang, D.H. *et al.* (1999) Inhibition of allergic inflammation in a murine model of asthma by expression of a dominant-negative mutant of GATA-3. *Immunity* 11, 473–482

Acknowledgements  
We thank Maribel Andonian for her help with graphics. DNAX Research Institute is funded by Schering Plough, NJ, USA.

104 Siegel, M.D. *et al.* (1995) Activation of the interleukin-5 promoter by cAMP in murine EL-4 cells requires the GATA-3 and CLEO elements. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 24548–24555

105 Ranganath, S. *et al.* (1998) GATA-3-dependent enhancer activity in IL-4 gene regulation. *J. Immunol.* 161, 3822–3826

106 Agarwal, S. *et al.* (2000) Cell-type-restricted binding of the transcription factor NFAT to a distal IL-4 enhancer *in vivo*. *Immunity* 12, 643–652

107 Orkin, S.H. (1992) GATA-binding transcription factors in hematopoietic cells. *Blood* 80, 575–581

108 Le Beau, M.M. *et al.* (1989) Interleukin-4 and interleukin-5 map to human chromosome 5 in a region encoding growth factors and receptors and are deleted in myeloid leukemias with a del(5q). *Blood* 73, 647–650

109 Frazer, K.A. *et al.* (1997) Computational and biological analysis of 680 kb of DNA sequence from the human 5q31 cytokine gene cluster region. *Genome Res.* 7, 495–512

110 Loots, G.G. *et al.* (2000) Identification of a coordinate regulator of interleukins 4, 13 and 5 by cross-species sequence comparisons. *Science* 288, 136–140

111 Cockerill, P.N. *et al.* (1993) The granulocyte-macrophage colony

stimulating factor/interleukin 3 locus is regulated by an inducible cyclosporine A-sensitive enhancer. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 90, 2466–2470

112 Crossley, M. and Orkin, S.H. (1993) Regulation of the β-globin locus. *Curr. Biol.* 3, 232–237

113 Young, H.A. (1996) Regulation of interferon-γ gene expression. *J. Interferon Cytokine Res.* 16, 563–568

114 Coffman, R.L. and Reiner, S.L. (1999) Instruction, selection or tampering with the odds? *Science* 284, 1283, 1285

115 Gett, A. and Hodgkin, P.D. (1998) Cell division regulates the T cell cytokine repertoire, revealing a mechanism underlying immune class regulation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 95, 9488–9493

116 Bird, J.J. *et al.* (1998) Helper T cell differentiation is controlled by the cell cycle. *Immunity* 9, 229–237

117 Richter, A. *et al.* (1999) Instruction for cytokine expression in T helper lymphocytes in relation to proliferation and cell cycle progression. *J. Exp. Med.* 190, 1439–1450

118 Bix, M. and Locksley, R.M. (1998) Independent and epigenetic regulation of the interleukin-4 alleles in CD4⁺ T cells. *Science* 281, 1352–1354

---

# Cellular organelles: how lipids get there, and back

Gerrit van Meer

During the opening reception of the 28th Steenbock Symposium*, several groups of happy scientists could be observed hugging, kissing and shaking hands – all dependent on gender and nationality. Others clustered around food and drinks. These preferential interactions and lateral segregations were to remain a central theme in the lipid half of this meeting on ‘Intracellular Protein and Lipid Traffic’. The other talks, not covered here, presented new developments in the various areas of protein translocation and traffic and in the budding, transport, docking and fusion of vesicles and organelles.

**Translocators**

It has long been known that the various organelles contain unique sets of lipids. Most notably, glycosphingolipids, sphingomyelin (SM), disaturated phospholipids and cholesterol are tenfold enriched in the plasma membrane as compared with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)¹. The ER membrane bilayer is symmetrical owing to the presence of a non-energy-requiring, ultrarapid, translocase (A. Herrmann, Berlin, Germany) for which first purification steps were presented². The ER membrane has often been compared to bacterial inner membranes. Interestingly, in pure bacterial lipids, the presence of certain, but not other, simple peptides was sufficient to induce transbilayer diffusion of lipid probes (M. Kol, Utrecht, The Netherlands). In contrast to the ER, the plasma membrane is asymmetric. Its cytosolic leaflet is enriched in aminophospholipids by the ‘aminophospholipid translocase’ (Fig. 1). Its yeast homologue Drs2p might actually be a Golgi translocase (Z. Hua, Nashville, USA). New players in the field are the ABC transporters ABCB1 (the multidrug transporter hitherto known as MDR1 P-glycoprotein), which has now been demonstrated to be responsible for translocation of natural glucosylceramide from the cytosolic leaflet and into the exoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane of fibroblasts (G. van Meer, Amsterdam, The Netherlands), and ABCA1, the Tangier disease protein ABC1, which is essential for transport of cholesterol to extracellular high-density lipoprotein. In contrast to popular belief, transverse diffusion of cholesterol across the plasma membrane is slow³ and might be speeded up by ABCA1 (A. Attie, pers. commun.). It is probable that ABCA1, ABCB1 and ABCB4 [the MDR3/mdr2 ‘phosphatidylcholine (PtdCho) translocator’] are actual translocators as they and other members of the family have been shown to pump amphiphatic drugs, fatty acyl-coenzyme A molecules, organic anions and bile acids across membranes, possibly through a flippase mechanism⁴. Nevertheless, their activity and substrate specificity can only be assessed after functional reconstitution into pure lipid membranes. This is also true for the aminophospholipid translocase, especially because, in addition to the aminophospholipids phosphatidylserine (PtdSer) and phosphatidylethanolamine (PtdEtn), an inward translocator activity for (analogues of) PtdCho was reported here by several groups (A. Herrmann; G. van Meer; W. Nichols, Atlanta, USA).

**Domains**

Virtually all sphingolipids are synthesized on the luminal aspect of Golgi membranes. Their enrichment on the cell surface has been explained by lateral segregation from phospholipids in the Golgi membrane and exclusion from retrograde transport vesicles originating from the Golgi containing less sphingomyelin and cholesterol (F. Wieland, Heidelberg, Germany)⁶. Assuming that these vesicles are responsible for retrograde transport, this supports the model. Anterograde concentration of cholesterol might be due to its preferential interaction with sphingolipids. Interestingly, the newly reported tight connection between the trans cisternae of the Golgi with ER⁷ might allow

*28th Steenbock Symposium, Intracellular Protein and Lipid Traffic; Madison, WI, USA; 12–14 August 2000. Organized by S.Y. Bednarek and A.K. Menon.

Gerrit van Meer is in the Dept of Cell Biology and Histology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, PO Box 22700, 1100 DE Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
