
11 Wang, H. *et al.* (1999) Endogenous bile acids are ligands for the nuclear receptor FXR/BAR. *Mol. Cell* 3, 543–553

12 Makishima, M. *et al.* (1999) Identification of a nuclear receptor for bile acids. *Science* 284, 1362–1365

13 Kliewer, S.A. *et al.* (1998) An orphan nuclear receptor activated by pregnanes defines a novel steroid signaling pathway. *Cell* 92, 73–82

14 Blumberg, B. *et al.* (1998) SXR, a novel steroid and xenobiotic-sensing nuclear receptor. *Genes Dev.* 12, 3195–3205

15 Baes, M. *et al.* (1994) A new orphan member of the nuclear receptor superfamily that interacts with a subset of retinoic acid response elements. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 14, 1544–1552

16 Choi, H.S. *et al.* (1997) Differential transactivation by two isoforms of the orphan nuclear hormone receptor CAR. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 23565–23571

17 Forman, B.M. *et al.* (1998) Androstane metabolites bind to and deactivate the nuclear receptor CAR. *Nature* 395, 612–615

18 McKenna, N.J. *et al.* (1999) Nuclear receptor coactivators: multiple enzymes, multiple complexes, multiple functions. *J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol.* 69, 3–12

19 Xu, L. *et al.* (1999) Coactivator and corepressor complexes in nuclear receptor function. *Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.* 9, 140–147

20 Honkakoski, P. *et al.* (1998) The nuclear orphan receptor CAR–retinoid X receptor heterodimer activates the phenobarbital-responsive enhancer module of the CYP2B gene. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 18, 5652–5658

21 Waxman, D.J. (1999) P450 gene induction by structurally diverse xenochemicals: central role of nuclear receptors CAR, PXR, and PPAR. *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* 369, 11–23

22 Poland, A. *et al.* (1980) 1,4-Bis[2-(3,5-dichloropyridyloxy)]benzene, a potent phenobarbital-like inducer of microsomal monooxygenase activity. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 18, 571–580

23 Smith, G. *et al.* (1993) 1,4-Bis[2-(3,5-dichloropyridyloxy)]benzene, an extremely potent modulator of mouse hepatic cytochrome P-450 gene expression. *Biochem. J.* 289, 807–813

24 Tzameli, I. *et al.* (2000) The xenobiotic compound 1,4-bis[2-(3,5-dichloropyridyloxy)]benzene is an agonist ligand for the nuclear receptor CAR. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 20, 2951–2958

25 Wei, P. *et al.* (2000) The nuclear receptor CAR mediates specific xenobiotic induction of drug metabolism. *Nature* 407, 920–923

26 Moore, L.B. *et al.* (2000) Orphan nuclear receptors constitutive androstane receptor and pregnane X receptor share xenobiotic and steroid ligands. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 15122–15127

27 Poland, A. *et al.* (1981) Species differences in responsiveness to 1,4-bis[2-(3,5-dichloropyridyloxy)]-benzene, a potent phenobarbital-like inducer of microsomal monooxygenase activity. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 20, 442–450

28 Romano, M. *et al.* (1986) Biochemical characterization of the hepatic effects in mice and rats of 1,4-bis[2-(3,5-dichloropyridyloxy)]benzene, a hepatic neoplasm promoter. *Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol.* 83, 379–385

29 Jones, S.A. *et al.* (2000) The pregnane X receptor: a promiscuous xenobiotic receptor that has diverged during evolution. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 14, 27–39

30 Kawamoto, T. *et al.* (1999) Phenobarbital-responsive nuclear translocation of the receptor CAR in induction of the CYP2B gene. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 19, 6318–6322

31 Renaud, J.P. *et al.* (2000) Structure–function analysis of the Rev-erbA and RVR ligand-binding domains reveals a large hydrophobic surface that mediates corepressor binding and a ligand cavity occupied by side chains. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 14, 700–717

---

# Effects of thyroglobulin and pendrin on iodide flux through the thyrocyte

Leonard D. Kohn, Koichi Suzuki, Minoru Nakazato, Ines Royaux and Eric D. Green

Iodide transport by thyrocytes involves porters on the apical and basal surfaces of the cell facing the follicular lumen and bloodstream, respectively. Recent work identifies pendrin as an apical porter and shows that follicular thyroglobulin is a transcriptional regulator of the gene encoding pendrin and other thyroid-restricted genes. For example, whereas follicular thyroglobulin suppresses the gene expression and activity of the sodium iodide symporter (NIS), it increases pendrin gene expression. A potential new dynamic for iodide flux and thyroid hormone formation in thyrocytes has thus emerged and is supported by *in vivo* data.

The lumen of the thyroid follicle is necessary for the maximal accumulation and organification of iodide, as well as the synthesis of thyroid hormones that are required for the homeostasis of all cells in terrestrial mammals. Polarized thyrocytes surround the follicular lumen; with their basal and apical surfaces facing the bloodstream and the lumen, respectively. Iodide is concentrated at the basolateral membrane by the sodium iodide symporter (NIS) and appears to be ported into the follicular lumen by pendrin, the product of the Pendred syndrome gene (*PDS*), which is located on the apical membrane. Once synthesized, thyroglobulin (TG), the major product of the thyrocyte, is vectorially transported to the apical membrane and released into the follicular lumen, where it becomes the macromolecular storage site for iodine. Thyroid peroxidase (TPO) and hydrogen peroxide, located at the apical membrane, catalyze the iodination of Tyr residues on TG, and then couple these iodotyrosine residues to form thyroxine (T₄) and triiodothyronine (T₃). Iodinated TG is resorbed through the apical membrane and degraded to form T₃/T₄ in lysosomes; the T₃/T₄ is then secreted through the basal membrane.

Thyrotropin (TSH)–cAMP are the prime regulators of concentrative iodide uptake and T₃/T₄ formation. TSH–cAMP induce the expression and activation of the three crucial genes encoding proteins involved in iodide uptake and thyroid hormone formation, namely: NIS, TG and TPO (Ref. 6); in each case, but to varying degrees, TSH–cAMP action requires the presence of insulin and/or insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) (Fig. 1a). TSH–cAMP and insulin–IGF-1 act on NIS, TG and TPO by regulating the production of three thyroid-restricted* transcription factors: thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), TTF-2 and Pax-8 (Refs 6, 7). Insulin, IGF-1 and TSH upregulate

*The term ‘thyroid-restricted’, as opposed to ‘thyroid-specific’, is used because several of the genes and transcription factors are present in a restricted set of other tissues (such as lung, kidney and adipose tissue), not only in the thyroid.

http://tem.trends.com 1043-2760/01/$ – see front matter. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. PII: S1043-2760(00)00337-4

Regulation of thyroid-restricted genes by TG: implications for NIS-increased iodide uptake

The role of follicular TG as a feedback regulator of thyroid-restricted genes and transcription factors surfaced during experiments aimed at understanding how TSH regulated TTF-1 and TG synthesis in vivo<sup>12</sup>. TG accumulated in the follicular lumen was found to be a transcriptional suppressor of TG and TTF1 gene expression, counteracting the activity of TSH-cAMP or acting additively with TSH-cAMP, respectively<sup>11–13</sup>.

Further studies in continuously cultured rat thyroid FRTL-5 cells<sup>11–13</sup>, in which NIS (Ref. 2), most thyroid functions, thyroid growth and thyroid-specific transcription factors<sup>7</sup> are largely under normal hormonal control, showed that purified 19S follicular TG added to the culture medium decreased RNA levels of all thyroid-restricted genes: TG, TPO, NIS and TSHR (Fig. 2a)<sup>11–17</sup>. TG counteracted the positive effects of TSH to induce TG, TPO and NIS gene expression, and was additive with TSH in suppressing TSHR gene expression<sup>11–17</sup>. The TG effect was specific, was not mimicked by albumin, immunoglobulins, mannitol, iodide or T<sub>3</sub>/T<sub>4</sub>, and was prevented by anti-TG neutralizing antibodies<sup>11–13</sup>.

The concentrations of TG used to elicit suppression, 0.1–10.0 mg ml<sup>-1</sup> (Fig. 2a), were physiological. Follicular TG measured by fine needle aspiration is 0.1–3.0 mg ml<sup>-1</sup> in normal human thyroids and 14.0 mg ml<sup>-1</sup> or higher in colloid nodules<sup>19</sup>. Higher TG concentrations are found adjacent to the apical surface of follicular cells, as might be expected from the multiple TG-binding proteins on the apical surface<sup>12,19–23</sup>. Multimers of TG exist, whose luminal concentration can be 100–400 mg ml<sup>-1</sup> (Ref. 24). Multimeric forms of TG, such as 27S TG and higher multimers (L.D. Kohn et al., unpublished), are better suppressors of TSHR, TG, TPO and NIS gene expression than is 19S TG.

Follicular TG suppression of TG, TPO, NIS and TSHR expression is transcriptional (Fig. 2b), and is mediated by TG suppression of thyroid-restricted transcription factors<sup>11–13,18</sup>. Thus, follicular TG decreases the levels of TTF1, TTF2 and PAX8 mRNA (Fig. 2c), but not those of the mRNAs encoding ubiquitous transcription factors—Sox-4, single-strand binding protein-1 (SSBP-1) and TSH receptor suppression element protein (TSEP-1) (a Y-box protein)—which regulate the expression of the TSHR, TG and TPO genes<sup>11</sup>. TG also decreases the binding of TTF-1, TTF-2 and Pax-8 to their specific binding sites—oligo TSHR, oligo K or oligo C, respectively<sup>11</sup>—within the promoter sequences of the TSHR and TG genes for example (Fig. 2d).

Studies of the molecular mechanism by which TG suppresses the prototypic thyroid-restricted transcription factor, TTF-1, show that the region between -264 and -153 bp within the TTF1 promoter contains two nuclear factor I (NFI) elements (Fig. 3b, c). NFI binding to these elements is crucial for constitutive expression of TTF1 (Ref. 18); TG acts to

---

Fig. 1. Northern analysis of FRTL-5 cells under different growth conditions, and in the presence or absence of follicular TG. Purified total RNA (10 μg) was subjected to northern analysis; blots were probed with radiolabeled cDNAs encoding NIS, PDS, TG or GAPDH. (a) 4H medium contains neither insulin nor TSH, 5H medium contains no TSH and 6H medium contains both TSH and insulin. Medium was supplemented with either 0.2% or 0.5% calf serum (0.2 and 0.5, respectively). When present, TSH was used at a concentration of 1 × 10<sup>-10</sup>M; MMI at 5 mM; TG at 1 mg ml<sup>-1</sup>; and IFN-γ at 100 U ml<sup>-1</sup>. All treatments were added for 48 h. (b) TG was present at 0.1, 1.0 and 10.0 mg ml<sup>-1</sup> (lanes 2–4, respectively), BSA was present at the same concentrations (lanes 5–7, respectively) and mannitol was present at 0.1 and 10.0 mg ml<sup>-1</sup> (lanes 8 and 9, respectively). (c) T<sub>3</sub> was present at 10<sup>8</sup>, 10<sup>7</sup> and 10<sup>6</sup>M (lanes 3–5, respectively); T<sub>4</sub> at 10<sup>-7</sup>, 10<sup>-6</sup> and 10<sup>-5</sup>M (lanes 6–8, respectively); and Nal at 10<sup>-4</sup>, 10<sup>-3</sup> and 10<sup>-2</sup>M (lanes 9–11, respectively). (d) FRTL-5 cells were incubated with 1 mg ml<sup>-1</sup> TG for the times indicated. Data are from Ref. 3.

Abbreviations: BSA, bovine serum albumin; GAPDH, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase; IFN-γ, interferon γ; MMI, methimazole; Nal, sodium iodide; NIS, sodium iodide symporter; PDS, pendrin; T<sub>3</sub>, thyroxine; T<sub>4</sub>, triiodothyronine; TG, thyroglobulin; TSH, thyrotropin.

TTF-2, which is crucial for the synthesis and activity of TG (Ref. 8). TSH-cAMP upregulate and activate Pax-8 (Refs 9, 10), which is crucial for the TSH-induced increase in TG, TPO and NIS<sup>+</sup> gene expression and activity. Expression of the TSH receptor is regulated by TTF-1, but not by Pax-8 nor TTF-2; TSH-cAMP decrease TTF1 gene expression, thereby reducing TSHR gene expression<sup>6,9</sup>. This might be one way of limiting TSH-cAMP-induced upregulation of NIS, TG, TPO and the T<sub>3</sub>/T<sub>4</sub> biosynthetic process.

Recent work shows that TSH-cAMP and insulin-IGF-1 are not the sole regulators of the biosynthetic process leading to thyroid hormone formation. In addition, follicular function is controlled by TG that has accumulated in the follicular lumen. This acts as a feedback regulator of (TSH-cAMP)-(insulin-IGF-1) action on the thyroid-restricted genes and transcription factors<sup>11–18</sup>. Follicular TG, rather than TSH-cAMP, appears to be the prime regulator of expression of the PDS gene<sup>3</sup>. The ability of TG to regulate the NIS and PDS genes differentially has revealed a potentially new concept of iodide flux and T<sub>3</sub>/T<sub>4</sub> formation in thyrocytes.

† The official symbol for the gene encoding NIS is SLC5A5 but to avoid confusion NIS will be used in this article.

TG-induced suppression, as does phosphorylation of the ASGP receptor, which is increased by okadaic acid (Fig. 3a)¹⁶,²⁶.

In summary, follicular TG decreases TTF1, PAX8 and TTF2 gene expression and, in turn, decreases expression of the TG, TPO, TSHR and NIS genes (Fig. 4). TG is, therefore, a feedback counter-regulator of TSH-cAMP-increased thyroid function (Fig. 4). This is particularly relevant to TSH-cAMP control of concentrative iodide uptake by the thyrocyte. First, follicular TG suppresses iodide uptake in FRTL-5 cells, as well as NIS promoter activity, RNA levels and NIS protein levels¹³. This has been documented in vivo in rat thyroids; thus, iodide uptake into thyrocytes was suppressed when TG accumulated at the apical border of the follicles¹³. Second, follicular TG suppresses the synthesis of vascular endothelial growth factor—vascular permeability factor (VEGF—VPF)¹³. VEGF—VPF increases fenestration of the endothelium, thereby increasing vascular permeability²⁷,²⁸. Thus, TG that has accumulated in the follicular lumen not only decreases TSH-cAMP-induced concentrative iodide uptake by NIS at the basal membrane, but also decreases vascular flow through the capillary basket, thereby decreasing the iodide available for concentrative uptake into the thyrocyte.

Synthesis of pendrin, an apical iodide porter of thyrocytes, is regulated by follicular TG

The Pendred syndrome is a genetic disorder characterized by sensoneural hearing loss, variable expression of a goiter and high serum TG levels²⁹–³¹. Patients inappropriately discharge iodide from the thyroid upon stimulation with perchlorate or thiocyanate²⁹, suggesting either a transport defect across the apical membrane or a defect in iodination of TG. Pendrin, the product of the PDS gene³² has a molecular mass of ~86 kDa, is present in the thyroid and is a member of a large family of anion transporters predicted to contain 11 or 12 transmembrane domains³³. Originally predicted to be a sulfate porter, pendrin, when produced in oocytes or insect cells, was more recently shown to transport iodide and chloride, but not sulfate, in a Na⁺-independent fashion³⁴.

Royaux et al.³ showed that, within the thyroid, pendrin was located exclusively at the apical membrane of the follicular cell (Fig. 5). Yoshida et al.³⁵ measured ¹²⁵I uptake and efflux in FRTL-5 thyroid cells, in COS-7 cells transfected with either the NIS gene (N-COS) or the PDS gene (P-COS) and in 4J Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells that stably express NIS but were also transiently transfected with the PDS gene (P-4J). In FRTL5 cells, which express endogenous NIS and PDS, iodide uptake was additive when compared with measurements in N-COS and P-COS cells; thus, ¹²⁵I uptake was seen at low concentrations of iodide, increased logarithmically up to 10 mM iodide, and was not

Fig. 2. Highly purified bovine 19S follicular TG added to the medium of FRTL-5 cells suppresses (a) TG, TPO, NIS and TSHR mRNA levels; (b) TG, TPO and TSHR promoter activity; (c) TTF1, TTF2 and PAX8 mRNA levels; and (d) binding of TTF-1, TTF-2 and Pax-8 to their specific elements on the TSHR or TG promoters. In (b), one or two asterisks denote a significant decrease of \(P < 0.05\) and \(P < 0.01\), respectively. Data are from Refs 11 and 13.

Abbreviations: BSA, bovine serum albumin; GAPDH, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase; NIS, sodium iodide symporter; SSBP, single-strand binding protein; TG, thyroglobulin; TPO, thyroid peroxidase; TSEP, TSH receptor suppression element protein; TSHR, thyrotropin receptor; TTF, thyroid transcription factor.

specific and not duplicated by albumin, mannitol, T₃/T₄ or sodium iodide (Fig. 1b,c)³¹³. Run-on experiments measure changes in nuclear RNA and reflect increased transcription rather than decreased degradation of mRNA. Using such experiments, it was shown that the increase in PDS gene expression induced by follicular TG was transcriptional.

Enhanced PDS gene expression induced by follicular TG is further increased by the phosphorylation of Ser and Thr residues on TG (Ref. 36) (Fig. 4). Suppression of NIS and VEGF by TG is concurrently eliminated by the phosphorylation of TG on Ser/Thr residues; NIS and VEGF expression can even be enhanced by such phosphorylation³⁶. TSH-cAMP and insulin-IGF-1, alone or together, as well as methimazole or interferon γ (Fig. 1a) do not increase PDS gene expression; however, forskolin can enhance the ability of TG to increase PDS expression³³,³⁶.

The inability of TSH-cAMP alone to regulate PDS gene expression, and the role of the apical membrane ASGP receptor in TG signaling, imply that poorly iodinated, recently synthesized TG bound to the apical membrane might be a transcriptional regulator of apical membrane iodide porter activity (Fig. 4). This possibility is supported in immunocytochemical studies of Graves' thyroid glands, which show increased PDS expression at the apical membrane³ (Fig. 5; R. Katoh and A. Kawaoi, pers. commun.). TG is not significantly accumulated in the follicular lumen of Graves' glands, but is more highly phosphorylated and has higher ASGP receptor-binding activity than does the TG associated with normal thyroid glands. Therefore, upon addition of stimulating anti-TSH receptor antibodies, the Graves' gland would be predicted to exhibit enhanced, rather than suppressed, NIS expression, because follicular TG might be low, but both phosphorylated TG levels and PDS expression are high (Fig. 5).

Concentrative iodide uptake, porting of iodide into the follicular lumen, TPO activity and TG synthesis would all be higher, and iodination of TG, as well as T₃/T₄ formation, would be maximized, despite low levels of TG in the follicular lumen as a result of high turnover (Fig. 4).

A new model of iodide flux that considers the functional paradigm of TG autoregulation

A simple model is proposed for the regulation of iodide flux in thyrocytes (Figs 4 and 6). In a follicle with a lumen rich in accumulated TG, TG would suppress NIS and VEGF gene expression (Figs 4 and 6), thereby reducing iodide uptake. PDS gene expression would be lower but activity would persist, allowing any iodide concentrated at the basal membrane to be ported to the follicular lumen to iodinate TG, even at low levels of TG and TPO gene expression and biosynthesis of the protein (Figs 4 and 6). In this follicle, TSH would act predominantly to cause resorption and degradation of follicular TG, as well as

TRENDS in Endocrinology & Metabolism Vol.12 No.1 January/February 2001

Fig. 4. TG counteracts (TSH–cAMP) – (insulin–IGF-1) - increased Pax8 and TTF2 expression and is additive in suppressing TTF1. Both TSH and TG therefore decrease TSHR expression. TG also suppresses expression of NIS, TPO and TG, whereas all three are increased by TSH. TSH decreases MHC class I, whereas TG increases MHC class I as well as the Pendrin protein. TG activity is mediated by binding to the ASGPR, and is regulated by Ser/Thr phosphorylation. Abbreviations: ASGPR, asialoglycoprotein receptor; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; NF-I, nuclear factor I; NIS, sodium iodide symporter; TG, thyroglobulin; TPO, thyroid peroxidase; TSH, thyrotropin; TSHR, TSH receptor; TTF, thyroid transcription factor.

the secretion of T₃/T₄ into the bloodstream (Figs 4 and 6). Because the rates of TG resorption from the follicle and degradation in lysosomes would exceed those of new synthesis and processing required to replace the TG in the colloid, the TG concentration in the lumen of such a follicle would decrease (Figs 4 and 6).

Decreases in follicular TG content would relieve TG-induced transcriptional suppression (Figs 4 and 6). Expression of NIS and VEGF would be re-initiated, as would TG and TPO gene expression and protein biosynthesis (Figs 4 and 6). PDS gene expression would be induced by the low TG concentration. TG or ASGP receptor could be phosphorylated, which would further decrease the suppression of TG–TPO gene expression and protein biosynthesis, as well as increase PDS gene expression and/or activity (Figs 4 and 6). The increased vascular permeability, as well as increased NIS and PDS gene expression, would increase concentrative iodide uptake and its transport into the follicular lumen (Figs 4 and 6). Increased TG and TPO levels and activity would contribute to the synthesis and storage of thyroid hormone (Figs 4 and 6). When the accumulation of follicular TG reaches a certain level, TG suppression of gene expression would again dominate TSH-stimulated gene expression and the whole process that reverses feedback suppression, described earlier in the paragraph, would be repeated (Figs 4 and 6).

Fig. 5. Immunohistochemical analysis of thyroid tissue with a pendrin-specific antibody. Immunohistochemical staining of (a) a normal human thyroid and (b) thyroid tissue from a Graves' patient; both at ×100 magnification. (c) The Graves' thyroid apical membrane at ×400 magnification. Arrowheads point to representative stained areas. Data are from Ref. 3.

The failure of physiological regulation of follicular function by follicular TG might cause thyroid disorders. Because poorly iodinated TG has stronger suppressive effects on gene expression than does highly iodinated TG¹¹,¹², poorly iodinated TG might contribute to suppressed plasma T₃/T₄ levels, which in turn might increase circulating TSH and cause goiter development in iodine deficiency. Conversely, if TG-induced suppression is weakened, either by an abnormality in TG or in the mechanism by which it suppresses gene transcription, constant activation might result in an adenomatous goiter. It is also possible that the accumulation of poorly iodinated, follicular TG could be associated with autoimmune disease because of increased major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I expression¹¹⁻¹⁷,³⁷.

In conclusion, the discovery of pendrin, its role as an apical porter of iodide, and the action of follicular thyroglobulin to suppress NIS yet enhance PDS gene expression, provide an altered understanding of iodide flux in the thyrocyte. In addition, these data provide a new level of understanding of follicular function, follicular heterogeneity and the control of thyroid hormone formation. Admittedly, some of these data — particularly those concerning follicular TG as a feedback regulator of thyroid-restricted gene expression — have yet to be confirmed in multiple laboratories and might consequently have been

http://tem.trends.com

interpreted too positively. This report certainly does not suggest that pendrin is the only apical porter, and neither is it clear why pendrin is not susceptible to TSH regulation, as suggested for iodide efflux in previous reports, even in FRTL-5 cells^{38,39}. TSH-cAMP might, however, activate function post-transcriptionally, as is now becoming apparent for NIS. It remains unclear why the same gene defect exhibits variable expression of thyroid and cochlea disease in different patients. This report does not attempt to reconcile the function of pendrin in the cochlea versus the thyroid. We hope, however, that the study of pendrin in the thyroid will contribute to our understanding of the role of pendrin in the cochlea. We recognize that aspects of this presentation will generate controversy, and we hope that this will refine the model and improve our understanding of thyroid function, thyroid hormone formation and their consequences on the metabolic homeostasis of the human organism.

Fig. 6. A proposed model for the regulation of follicular function by TG. (a) Follicular TG accumulated in the follicular lumen regulates various follicular functions. (b) Physiological cycle of follicular activity that is regulated by follicular TG; this does not depict a follicle but is a representation of the TG concentration both in a rich and a poor follicle. See text for explanation and details. Abbreviations: T₃, triiodothyronine; T₄, thyroxine; TG, thyroglobulin; TSH, thyrotropin.

### References

1. Kohn, L.D. *et al.* (1993) The synthesis and secretion of thyroid hormones: regulation by multiple hormones and signals which can be subverted by autoantibodies to the thyrotropin receptor. In *Thyroid Diseases: Basic Science, Pathology, Clinical and Laboratory Diagnosis* (Troncone, L. *et al.*, eds), pp. 59–118, CRC Press
2. Dai, G. *et al.* (1996) Cloning and characterization of the thyroid iodide transporter. *Nature* 379, 458–460
3. Royaux, I.E. *et al.* (2000) Pendrin, the protein encoded by the Pendred syndrome gene (*PDS*) is an apical porter of iodide in the thyroid and is regulated by thyroglobulin. *Endocrinology* 141, 839–845
4. Kohn, L.D. *et al.* (1985) Thyroglobulin interactions with thyroid membranes: implications for regulation of thyroid hormone formation in thyroglobulin. In *Thyroglobulin – the Prothyroid Hormone. Progress in Endocrine Research and Therapy* 2 (Eggo, M. and Burrow, G., eds), pp. 171–214, Raven Press
5. Taurog, A. (1974) Biosynthesis of iodoaminoacids. In *Handbook of Physiology* (Vol. 3) (Section 7) (Greer, M.A. and Solomon, D.H., eds), pp. 101–133, American Physiological Society
6. Kohn, L.D. *et al.* (1995) The thyrotropin receptor. *Vitam. Horm.* 50, 287–384
7. Damante, G. and Di Lauro, R. (1994) Thyroid-specific gene expression. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1218, 255–266
8. Ortiz, L. *et al.* (1997) Transcriptional control of the forkhead thyroid transcription factor TTF-2 by thyrotropin, insulin, and insulin-like growth factor 1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 23334–23339
9. Shimura, H. *et al.* (1994) Thyroid-specific expression and cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate autoregulation of the thyrotropin receptor gene involves thyroid transcription factor-1. *Mol. Endocrinol.* 8, 1049–1069
10. Medina, D.L. *et al.* (2000) Role of insulin and serum on thyrotropin regulation of thyroid transcription factor (TTF-1) and Pax-8 gene expression in FRTL-5 thyroid cells. *Thyroid* 10, 295–303
11. Suzuki, K. *et al.* (1998) Autoregulation of thyroid-specific gene transcription by thyroglobulin. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 95, 8251–8256
12. Suzuki, K. *et al.* (1999) *In vivo* expression of thyroid transcription factor-1 RNA and its relation to thyroid function and follicular heterogeneity: identification of follicular thyroglobulin as a feedback suppressor of thyroid transcription factor-1 RNA levels and thyroglobulin synthesis. *Thyroid* 9, 319–331
13. Suzuki, K. *et al.* (1999) Follicular thyroglobulin suppresses iodide uptake by suppressing expression of the sodium iodide symporter gene. *Endocrinology* 140, 5422–5430
14. Suzuki, K. *et al.* (1999) Thyroglobulin regulates follicular function and heterogeneity by suppressing thyroid-specific gene expression. *Biochimie* 81, 329–340
15. Suzuki, K. *et al.* (1999) Thyroglobulin: a master regulator of follicular function via transcriptional suppression of thyroid specific genes. *Acta Histochem.* 32, 111–119
16. Ulianich, L. *et al.* (1999) Follicular thyroglobulin (TG) suppression of thyroid-restricted genes involves the apical membrane asialoglycoprotein receptor and TG phosphorylation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 25099–25107
17. Suzuki, K. *et al.* (2000) Thyroglobulin autoregulation of thyroid-specific gene expression and follicular function. In *Reviews in Endocrine and Metabolic Disorders* (Le Roith, D., ed.), pp. 217–224, Kluwer Academic Publishers
18. Nakazato, M. *et al.* Thyroglobulin repression of thyroid transcription factor (TTF)-1 gene expression is mediated by decreased DNA binding of nuclear factor 1 proteins which control constitutive TTF-1 expression. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* (in press)
19. Salabe, G.B. *et al.* (1996) Thyroglobulin determined in thyroid fine needle aspiration biopsies by radial immunodiffusion and electroimmunodiffusion. *Eur. J. Clin. Chem. Clin. Biochem.* 34, 43–47
20. Berndorfer, U. *et al.* (1996) Multimerization of thyroglobulin (TG) during extracellular storage: isolation of highly cross-linked TG from human thyroids. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* 81, 1918–1926
21. Chaudhry, A.Z. *et al.* (1997) Expression patterns of the four nuclear factor I genes during mouse embryogenesis indicate a potential role in development. *Dev. Dyn.* 208, 313–325
22. Consiglio, E. *et al.* (1979) Thyroglobulin interactions with thyroid plasma membranes: the existence of specific receptors and their potential role. *J. Biol. Chem.* 254, 5065–5076
23. Consiglio, E. *et al.* (1981) Thyroglobulin interactions with thyroid membranes: relationship between receptor recognition of N-acetyl-glucosamine residues and the iodine content of thyroglobulin preparations. *J. Biol. Chem.* 256, 10592–10599
24. Shifrin, S. and Kohn, L.D. (1981) Binding of thyroglobulin to bovine thyroid membranes: role of specific amino acids in receptor recognition. *J. Biol. Chem.* 256, 10600–10605
25. Van den Hove, M.F. *et al.* (1982) A new mechanism for reabsorption of thyroid iodoproteins: selective fluid pinocytosis. *Eur. J. Biochem.* 122, 415–422
26. Alvino, C.G. *et al.* (1995) Evidence that thyroglobulin has an associated protein kinase activity correlated with the presence of an adenosine triphosphate binding site. *Endocrinology* 136, 3179–3185
27. Roberts, W.G. and Palade, G.E. (1995) Increased microvascular permeability and endothelial fenestration induced by vascular endothelial growth factor. *J. Cell Sci.* 108, 2369–2379
28. Esser, S. *et al.* (1998) Vascular endothelial growth factor induces endothelial fenestrations *in vitro*. *J. Cell Biol.* 140, 947–959
29. Pendred, V. (1896) Deaf mutism and goitre. *Lancet* 2, 532
30. Reardon, W. and Trembath, R.C. (1996) Pendred syndrome. *J. Med. Genet.* 33, 1037–1040
31. Fraser, G.R. (1965) Association of congenital deafness with goitre (Pendred syndrome): a study of 207 families. *Ann. Hum. Genet.* 28, 201–249
32. Everett, L.A. *et al.* (1997) Pendred syndrome is caused by mutations in a putative sulphate transporter gene (*PDS*). *Nat. Genet.* 17, 411–422
33. Everett, L.A. and Green, E.D. (1999) A family of mammalian anion transporters and their involvement in human genetic diseases. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 8, 1883–1891

http://tem.trends.com

34 Scott, D.A. *et al.* (1999) The Pendred syndrome gene encodes a chloride–iodide transport protein. Nat. Genet. 21, 440–443

35 Yoshida, A. *et al.* Pendrin, the protein encoded by the Pendred syndrome gene, is an iodide-specific apical porter which is important for iodide efflux from thyroid cells. In Proceedings 12th International Thyroid Congress (in press)

36 Suzuki, K. *et al.* (1999) Follicular thyroglobulin (TG) regulates expression of basal and

apical iodide transporters: the sodium– iodide symporter (NIS) and pendrin (PDS) genes. In Proceedings of the 81st Annual American Endocrine Meeting, p. 206

37 Schuppert, F. *et al.* (2000) Increased major histocompatibility complex (MHC) expression in non-toxic goiters is associated with iodide depletion, enhanced ability of the follicular thyroglobulin to increase MHC gene expression, and thyroid

38 Weiss, S.J. *et al.* (1984) Effect of thyrotropin on iodide efflux in FRTL-5 cells mediated by Ca²⁺. Endocrinology 114, 1108–1113

39 Nilson, M. *et al.* (1992) Polarized efflux of iodide in porcine thyrocytes occurs via a cAMP-regulated iodide channel in the apical plasma membrane. Acta Endocrinol. 126, 67–74

---

# Germ cell transplantation and the study of testicular function

Derek J. McLean, Daniel S. Johnston, Lonnie D. Russell and Michael D. Griswold

Spermatogonial stem cell transplantation is a novel technique in which donor testicular cells are transferred into recipient testes. A population of germ cells from a transgenic or mutant donor is introduced into the seminiferous tubules of recipient testes by microinjection. Following injections, spermatogonial stem cells can colonize the recipient testis, initiate spermatogenesis and produce sperm capable of fertilization. This technique will allow scientists to:

(1) investigate fundamental aspects of spermatogenesis;

(2) provide a method to regenerate spermatogenesis in infertile individuals; and

(3) genetically manipulate spermatogonial stem cells to develop transgenic animals.

Spermatogenesis is a dynamic, continuous process in which diploid spermatogonia undergo ten mitotic and two meiotic divisions to differentiate into haploid spermatozoa¹. This process generates a remarkable number of mature sperm – 200 million per day in the human male – and requires an intimate association of germinal cells and somatic Sertoli cells within the seminiferous tubules of the testis. The production of sperm is dependent on the presence of spermatogonial stem cells that reside in the basal compartment of the seminiferous tubules, and which represent a very small proportion of the cells in the testis. Spermatogonial stem cells are capable of both self-renewal and producing cells that commit to spermatogenesis. Germ cells that enter spermatogenesis are supported by Sertoli cells. These germ cells progress apically towards the lumen of the tubule, differentiate into mature sperm and are eventually released into the lumen. Thus, stem cells are essential for the production of gametes and, ultimately, species continuation. Individuals can be sterile owing to a lack of stem cells, the blockage of germ cell development or the production of nonfunctional sperm. A novel transplantation technique has afforded scientists the opportunity to investigate fundamental aspects of spermatogenesis and offer hope for some infertility patients².

The technique of testicular germ cell transplantation, pioneered in the laboratory of Ralph Brinster (University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA), involves the introduction of a mixed population of germ cells from a donor testis into the lumens of the seminiferous tubules of a recipient mouse²,³. Brinster and colleagues reported that not only do stem cells colonize the recipient testis, but they also initiate spermatogenesis and produce sperm capable of fertilization⁴. In addition, when germ cells from a rat were introduced into an immunologically-deficient mouse, rat sperm were produced within the mouse testis⁵. These results generated a great deal of interest from reproductive scientists and stimulated research in multiple areas. Experimental approaches utilizing germ cell transplantation have contributed to research in stem cell and male germ cell biology⁶,⁷, the identification of cell types contributing to infertility within specific mutants⁸,⁹, and research of cellular interactions in the testis¹⁰,¹¹. In addition, germ cell transplantation could potentially be used to treat male infertility, preserve the germ line of valuable or endangered animals and replace the germ line of patients whose endogenous stem cells have been eliminated by chemotherapy.

Germ cell transplantation and colonization

It is generally believed that donor-derived spermatogenesis in a transplanted testis originates from spermatogonial stem cells. A mixed population of germ cells, which includes a small number of spermatogonial stem cells, can be injected into the testis by several methods³. The most widely used method involves inserting a needle through the efferent ductules outside of the testis and passing the needle into the rete testis, a bundle of tubules that connects the seminiferous tubules to the epididymis. The injected cell mixture contains trypan blue so that filling of the seminiferous tubules can be monitored (Fig. 1). Mice that have no endogenous spermatogenesis, such as the W/Wᵛ mutant, can be used as germ cell recipients. This mutation affects the gene – in the White spotting (W) locus of the

Derek J. McLean  
Daniel S. Johnston  
Michael D. Griswold*  
School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA 99164, USA.  
*e-mail:*  
griswold@mail.wsu.edu  

Lonnie D. Russell  
Dept Physiology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Carbondale, IL 62901, USA.
