
MICROSCOPY RESEARCH AND TECHNIQUE 52:450–457 (2001)

# TGF-β and Colorectal Carcinogenesis

CHRISTOPHER ROMAN,¹ DEBABRATA SAHA,¹ AND R. DANIEL BEAUCHAMP¹,²*

¹Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center and the Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232  
²Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center and the Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232

**KEY WORDS** TGF-β; colorectal; carcinogenesis; Smad; adenoma

**ABSTRACT** There is substantial evidence to support the contention that the Smad portion of the TGF-β signal transduction pathway provides an important tumor-suppressor function. Mutational loss of function of Smad pathway members have been associated with the development of human cancers and appear to be causative in selected rodent carcinogenesis models. TGF-β also has multiple other actions that appear to be independent of the growth-inhibitory/tumor suppressor effects. The predominant effect of TGF-β appears to be dependent on the context of the responding cell. Once transformation has occurred, TGF-β effects may be detrimental and may actually promote tumor cell survival, invasion, and metastasis. Recent work suggests that these effects may involve TGF-β regulation of COX-2 and other pathways that may contribute to tumor cell aggressiveness. In gaining a better understanding of the mechanisms by which TGF-β may promote tumor progression, it is likely that new therapeutic strategies may be developed that preserve tumor-suppressor function of TGF-β while inhibiting the tumor-promoting effects. Microsc. Res. Tech. 52: 450–457, 2001.

© 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

## INTRODUCTION

Colorectal cancer is the second most common fatal malignancy in the western world, with approximately 150,000 new cases accounting for 55,000 deaths in the United States every year (Beachamp et al., 1996). It is estimated that 90% of these cancers arise from adenomatous polyps. Surgical resection is an effective treatment for localized disease, achieving a 5-year survival rate of 90%; however, treatment of advanced disease by any modality is ineffective in most patients. Thus, there have been significant efforts to identify risk factors associated with the development of colorectal cancer and to explore potential preventive therapies.

The adenoma-carcinoma sequence associated with a progressive increase in genetic lesions is now a widely accepted paradigm for intestinal carcinogenesis (Fearon, 1994). Clues regarding important genetic targets have come from the study of hereditary neoplastic syndromes. Inheritance of a single altered gene can result in a marked predisposition to colorectal cancer in two distinct syndromes, Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) and Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC). FAP is a syndrome in which an inherited defect in the *adenomatous polyposis coli* (*APC*) gene leads to the development of multiple benign polyps throughout the colon, some of which slowly progress to invasive cancer. Thus, the defects in *APC* initiate the tumorigenic process, but additional mutations are required for tumor progression. In contrast to FAP, HNPCC is a syndrome characterized by rapid progression of colorectal tumors due to inherited defects in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Numerous recent reviews provide a synopsis of the current body of knowledge of the molecular events involved in colorectal carcinogenesis (Eshelman and Markowitz, 1995;

Fearon, 1994; Kinzler and Vogelstein, 1996; Smith, 1994; Townsend and Beauchamp, 1995).

Transformation from the normal phenotype to invasive malignancy appears to involve a loss of normal growth inhibitory responses to TGF-β, as well as the acquisition of inappropriate proliferative signals. The increased presence of inappropriate proliferative signals has been well documented in most malignancies, and includes overexpression of peptide growth factors (TGF-α, amphoregulin, heparin-binding EGF), overexpression of growth factor receptors (e.g., HER2/neu), or mutational activation of the signal transduction pathways for the growth factors (e.g., *ras*).

The transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) family comprises a large number of structurally related polypeptide growth factors and each of these are capable of regulating a complex array of cellular processes (Engel et al., 1998; Hata et al., 1998; Massagué, 1998). These processes include cell proliferation, differentiation, motility, adhesion, and death. Because of the complexity of its actions, it plays an important role in the development, homeostasis, and repair of most tissues that comprise a given organism. The cellular responses to TGF-β are contextual. In normal epithelial cells, including intestinal epithelium, TGF-β has a predominant growth inhibitory effect and a substantial body of evidence suggests a role as tumor suppressor.

Neoplastic transformation results in loss of normal growth inhibitory responses to TGFβ. Emerging evidence points toward the importance of the TGF-β signaling pathway involvement in several malignancies.

---

*Correspondence to: R. Daniel Beauchamp, M.D., Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, D5230 MCN, 21st Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37232-2730. E-mail: daniel.beauchamp@surgery.mc.vanderbilt.edu

Received 13 March 2000; accepted in revised form 25 June 2000

© 2001 WILEY-LISS, INC.

TGF-β AND COLORECTAL CARCINOGENESIS

Fig. 1. TGF-β signal transduction pathways. TGF-βs bind to TβRII causing recruitment, phosphorylation, and activation of TβRI. Substrates of TβRI include the pathway restricted Smad2 and Smad3. The phosphorylated Smad2 and Smad3 complexed with Smad4 is transported to the nucleus where it interacts with other transcription factors. This pathway has been most closely associated with growth inhibition and tumor suppression in response to TGF-β. There may be an alternative signaling pathway for other TGF-β responses such as Ras/MAPK pathway involving cellular transformation. ERK 1, 2 phosphorylates pathway restricted Smads in the linker region and inhibits nuclear translocation and Smad-dependent transcriptional activities.

Reports of the mutational inactivation of genes involved in the TGF-β growth inhibitory signaling in some colorectal cancers (Markowitz et al., 1995; Parsons et al., 1995) and in pancreatic carcinomas (Hahn et al., 1996) have generated considerable excitement. Recent evidence suggests a significant contribution of Smad4 gene inactivation in progression to advanced stages of colorectal cancer, such as distant metastasis (Miyaki et al., 1999). These and other studies provide substantial support for the hypothesis that TGF-β plays a central role in tumor suppression in the gastrointestinal tract.

### TGF-β SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION
#### Growth Suppression, Signaling Receptors, and Activation

The TGF-β ligands bind to and signal through a heteromeric complex of type I and type II receptors that are serine/threonine kinases (reviewed by Massagué, 1998). The TGF-β type II receptor (TβRII) is necessary for specific ligand binding. Following binding of ligand to type II receptors, the ligand-bound type II receptor forms an oligomeric complex with the type I receptor, resulting in type I receptor phosphorylation. The initial identification and characterization of the signal transduction pathways downstream of the serine/threonine kinase TGF-β receptors was facilitated by observations in invertebrate models such as *Drosophila melanogaster* and *Caenorhabditis elegans* (reviewed by Massagué, 1998). Mothers against decapentaplegic (Mad) was originally implicated in the signaling cascade of *decapentaplegic* (dpp), a BMP homologue in *Drosophila* (Raftery et al., 1995; Sekelsky et al., 1995). Shortly thereafter, *sma-2*, *sma-3*, and *sma-4*, with homology to Mad were identified as signaling components of the *daf-1* and *daf-4* receptors in *C. elegans* (Savage et al., 1996).

The cloning of the deleted-in-pancreatic-cancer (DPC4) gene (Hahn et al., 1996), and the recognition that DPC4 had significant homology to Mad led to the discovery and characterization of the so-called SMAD genes in humans and other vertebrates. Mutations in DPC4 (now also known as Smad4) have been identified in ~50% of pancreatic cancers. Nine members of the vertebrate TGF-β family intracellular signaling pathways have been identified, and by consensus are now referred to as Smad1 through Smad9 (Massagué, 1998). Smads1, 5, 8, and 9 probably function to transduce signals from the bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs). (Fig. 1)

Smads2 and 3 are important substrates of the TGF-β type I receptor that may be activated by either activin or TGF-β selective type II receptors. When phosphorylated by TβRI, Smad2 and Smad3 associate with Smad4, translocate to the nucleus, associate with a DNA-binding partner, and activate transcription of specific target genes. Smads6 and 7 inhibit the signaling function of the receptor-activated Smads. Smad6 preferentially inhibits BMP signaling whereas Smad7 can inhibit both TGF-β and BMP signaling by preventing receptor-mediated phosphorylation of the receptor-activated Smad proteins (Massagué, 1998).

There is increasing evidence that the TGF-β serine threonine kinase receptors may also activate selected

members of the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) family of proteins (Massagué, 1998). A rapid increase in p44<sup>mapk</sup> activity was observed in response to TGF-β treatment although the mechanism for this activation remains unclear (Hartsough and Mulder, 1995). Many TGF-β-regulated gene promoters contain AP-1 or CRE response elements, both of which may be direct or indirect targets for activated MAPKs (Hocevar et al., 1999). A novel member of the MAP kinase family, named TAK1 (TGF-β-activated kinase 1) was cloned based on its ability to activate a MAK kinase cascade in yeast (Yamaguchi et al., 1995). TAK1 is a member of the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MAPKKK) family whose activity is increased in response to TGF-β family (e.g., TGF-β and BMP) receptor activation. TAK1 may be activated through binding with TAK1 binding proteins 1 and 2 (TAB1 and TAB2) (Shibuya et al., 1996). The human X-chromosome-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) was recently found to interact both with TAB1 and BMP type I and type II receptor complexes, and participate in activation of this MAPKKK pathway (Yamaguchi et al., 1999). Thus, there is evidence for direct signaling via a MAPKKK pathway from activated TGF-β family receptors. TAK1 has been shown to activate stress-activated protein kinases (SAPKs), p38 through MKK6 or MKK3, and JNK via MKK4. TGF-β signaling via TAK1 and p38 results in activating phosphorylation of the transcription factor ATF-2, a protein that binds directly with Smad3/4 hetero-oligomers. The Smad and TAK1 pathways thereby synergistically enhance the activity of ATF-2 to augment the activity of target gene promoters (e.g., the PAI-1 promoter) (Sano et al., 1999). Frey and Mulder (1997) reported TGF-β activation of the Jun kinase (JNK) pathway in breast cancer cells. Jun kinase catalyzes phosphorylation of the c-Jun transactivation domain, and thereby the function of the AP-1 transcription complex. Hocevar et al. (1999) recently demonstrated TGF-β-dependent induction of fibronectin through a JNK pathway in several cell lines (MDA-MB-468 breast cancer, BXPC3 pancreatic cancer, and SW480.7 colon cancer) known to have inactivating mutations of Smad4. Furthermore, dominant negative components of the JNK signaling cascade (including RhoA, Rac1, MEKK1, MKK4/SEK1, c-Jun, and JNK), have been found to inhibit the TGF-β-dependent induction of 3TP-Lux, a reporter that contains elements of the plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1) promoter (Atfi et al., 1997a; Brown et al., 1999; Keeton et al., 1991).

Rho proteins are GTPases of the Ras superfamily that serve as molecular switches between GTP-bound (active) and GDP-bound (inactive) states (Van Aelst and D'Souza-Schorey, 1997). Rho proteins regulate actin cytoskeletal structures, including stress fibers, and filopodia, in response to activation by growth factor receptors and appear to be important in the morphological transformation in response to activated oncogenes. Rho family members have also been implicated in cell growth control as regulators of the G1/S transition and transformation, both alone and in cooperation with oncogenic Ras. Rho activation may also be involved in the SAPK/JNK pathway activation by TGF-β receptors (Atfi et al., 1997b). Rho proteins (except RhoB), known agonists of the JNK pathway, also activate 3TP-Lux in the absence of TGF-β stimulation. In contrast, Engel et al. (1998) found that RhoB potently antagonizes 3TP-Lux activation and that TGF-β treatment promotes accumulation of RhoB through the inhibition of ubiquitin proteosome-mediated RhoB protein degradation in mink lung epithelial cells. These observations are particularly interesting in light of our observations showing that the increase in expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in response to TGF-β is dependent on activation of RhoB in rat intestinal epithelial (RIE-1) cells (Dr. M. Wada and R.D. Beauchamp, unpublished observations). TGF-β1 was recently shown to induce rapid polymerization and major restructuring of the actin cytoskeleton, to increase the abundance of detectable vinculin-positive focal adhesions, and to increase the levels of RhoA and RhoB in Ha-Ras transformed fibroblasts (Moustakas and Stournaras, 1999). Furthermore, the Rho GTPase inhibitor, C3 exotransferase, blocked the ability of TGF-β to induce the cytoskeletal reorganization. Thus, the ultimate phenotypic responses to TGF-β may depend upon the milieu of the signaling cascades that are prevalent in a given cell.

# ROLE OF TGF-β IN THE GUT

The TGF-β family of peptides (TGF-β) appears to have a major growth inhibitory role in intestinal epithelium. Kurokowa and colleagues (Kurokowa et al., 1987) were the first to report that TGF-β was an inhibitor of cultured rat intestinal epithelial cells. Inhibition of cultured intestinal cell proliferation by TGF-β treatment results from mid-to-late G1 cell cycle arrest, and is associated with downregulation of cyclin D1 (Ko et al., 1995) and inhibition of Cdk4-associated Rb kinase activity (Ko et al., 1998). In vivo, there is increased expression of both TGF-β1 and the TGFβ type II receptor in intestinal epithelial cells as they migrate from the proliferative compartment toward the lumen in both the small intestine and the colon (Barnard et al., 1989, 1993; Winesett et al., 1996; Zhang et al., 1997). This pattern of expression is inversely correlated with the mitotic activity in the gut epithelium. These findings suggest that TGF-β is a major autocrine or paracrine regulator of intestinal cell proliferation, and perhaps differentiation. Furthermore, in models of epithelial cell injury numerous growth factors including members of the epidermal growth factor (EGF), transforming growth factor (TGF)α, and the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) families, as well as a variety of cytokines (interleukin (IL)-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, and interferon γ), appear to promote restitution through a TGF-β-dependent pathway (Podolsky, 1997).

# LOSS OF GROWTH INHIBITORY EFFECTS OF TGF-β

TGF-β regulation of epithelial cell proliferation is altered by transformation (see Fig. 2). TGF-β inhibits growth of non-tumorigenic human colonic adenoma cells in culture; however, conversion of adenoma to a tumorigenic adenocarcinoma is associated with a decreased response to the inhibitory actions of TGF-β (Manning et al., 1991). Studies in human colon carcinoma cell lines have demonstrated a correlation between the degree of differentiation of the tumor and sensitivity to the antiproliferative and differentiation-

TGF-β AND COLORECTAL CARCINOGENESIS

AUTOCRINE/
PARACRINE
EFFECTS
Fibroblastoid
change
Altered cell
adhesion
Increased
migration

+ Growth
Factors

TGF-β

Positive
Growth
Factors

TGF-β

Positive
Growth
Factors

HOST CELL
EFFECTS
Decreased
immunosurveillance
Increased stroma
Angiogenesis

Fig. 2. The effect of the TGF-β signaling pathway on neoplastic transformation is context-dependent. While complete loss of the TGF-β receptors is expected to eliminate all autocrine (but not paracrine) effects of tumor-derived TGF-β, post-receptor mutations should not. TGF-β autocrine effects on cell morphological change, cell adhesion, and cell migration (all likely to be advantageous for tumor cells) appear to be retained along with the paracrine effects.

promoting effects of TGF-β (Hoosein et al., 1989). Loss of responsiveness to the growth-inhibitory effects of TGF-β occurs in many cancer cell types, including pancreatic (Beauchamp et al., 1990), breast (Arteaga et al., 1993; Sun et al., 1994), and colorectal carcinoma cells (Hoosein et al., 1989). Thus, loss of growth-inhibitory responses to TGF-β appears to be a common and important event that attends malignant transformation of epithelial cells. (Fig. 2).

TGF-β Receptor Mutations in Cancer

The association of colorectal cancers and pancreatic carcinomas with genetic lesions in the TGF-β signal transduction pathway underscores the importance of TGF-β in maintaining homeostasis in the digestive tract. One of the mechanisms by which tumor cells become resistant to the growth inhibitory actions of

TGF-β may be through downregulation or mutation of the TβRII. Loss of TGF-β receptor function may cause loss of negative growth regulation by TGF-β. Several studies have suggested that a decrease in expression of TβRII is a key step for the neoplastic transformation of epithelial cells (Arteaga et al., 1988,1993; Kimchi et al., 1988; Sun et al., 1994). Activation of Ras protein that occurs frequently in colorectal cancer results in a decreased expression of the TβRII (Filmus et al., 1992; Winesett et al., 1996). The TβRII is also decreased in early adenomatous epithelium in the context of Apc mutation in the Min mouse (Zhang et al., 1997). Inactivation of the TGF-β type II receptor has been detected in a subgroup of colorectal carcinomas associated with the microsatellite instability or RER (replication error) phenotype found in approximately 13% of all colorectal cancers (Lu et al., 1995; Markowitz et al., 1995; Par-

sons et al., 1995). Restoration of the TβRII by stable transfection suppresses tumorigenicity of receptor negative colon cancer cells (Wang et al., 1995 and Ye et al., 1999) recently demonstrated tumorigenicity in nontumorigenic colon cancer cells after removal of TβRII alone. Grady and colleagues (Grady et al., 1998) have also observed an increased incidence of TβRII mutations in advanced stages of colorectal adenomas, as well as, an even higher incidence as the degree of dysplasia and invasive nature of the tumors progressed. More recently, the same investigators confirmed the presence of TβRII mutations in an additional 15% of microsatellite stable (MSS) colon cancers, and TGF-β signaling abnormalities distal to TβRII in an additional 55% of these MSS colon cancers (Grady et al., 1999).

### TGF-β Signal Transduction in Cancer

Mutational loss of function of TGF-β signal transduction proteins has been observed in human colorectal cancer. Madr2 (Smad2) mutation (Eppert et al., 1996; Riggins et al., 1996) was observed in 4% and DPC4 (Smad4) mutation has been reported in up to 30% of human colorectal cancers (MacGrogan et al., 1997; Takagi et al., 1996; Thiagalingam et al., 1996). These types of mutations may have a significantly different phenotypic outcome as compared with that resulting from loss of the TβRII. Mice with a heterozygous mutation of the Apc gene (APCΔ716 mice) develop multiple adenomas in the small intestine and colon, but progression to invasive carcinomas seldom occurs before the mice die of obstruction or anemia. While homozygous deletion of Smad4 resulted in embryonic lethality, crossbreeding of APCΔ716 mice with mice bearing a heterozygous mutation in the Smad4 gene resulted in tumors that were larger and that progressed to invasive carcinomas much more quickly than those observed in APCΔ716 mice (Takaku et al., 1998). Smad4 mutation has also been found in familial juvenile polyposis, a syndrome characterized by a predisposition to hamartomatous polyps and gastrointestinal cancer (Howe et al., 1998).

Transgenic mice that are null for the Smad3 gene develop invasive and metastatic colorectal cancers at an early age (Zhu et al., 1998). Also, LOH (Loss of Heterozygosity) of Smad3 has been detected in 2 (1 sporadic and 1 HNPCC) of 17 cancers examined (Arai et al., 1998). These studies suggest that disruption of Smad signaling may be involved in either the initiation or progression of certain cancers. Smad mutations may also result in more aggressive tumors. This raises the question of whether TGF-β receptor activation in tumors may promote tumor progression and aggressiveness.

It is of interest that the subset of colorectal cancers that exhibit microsatellite instability (and TβRII mutations) tend to be proximal colon cancers and have a better prognosis (stage for stage) than the majority of sporadic colorectal cancers that do not share these genetic defects (Gryfe et al., 2000; Jass, 1999; Thibodeau et al., 1993). Mutations of TβRII appear to be rare in the majority of colorectal carcinomas that do not have the RER phenotype. While human colon cancer cells (HNPCC) expressing a mutated non-functional TβRII were found to be noninvasive, in vitro, this defect was

---

### TABLE 1. TGF-β Signaling Defects in Colorectal Cancer¹

| TGF-β signaling component | Mutation in colorectal cancer |
|---------------------------|-------------------------------|
| TGF-β                    | Loss of sensitivity of colon cancer cells to growth inhibitory effects of TGF-β <br> Antisense TGF-β increases tumorigenicity of human colon cancer |
| TGF-βRII                 | Mutated in colon cancers and in colorectal carcinoma cell lines with MSI <br> Restoration of RII expression reverses transformed phenotype |
| Smad2                     | Mutated in sporadic colorectal cancer |
| Smad3                     | Smad3−/− mice develop metastatic colorectal cancer LOH in 2 (1 sporadic and 1 HNPCC) of 17 cancers examined |
| Smad4                     | Inactivation of Smad4 in APCΔ716 mice enhances tumor progression <br> Mutated in human colorectal cancers in vivo <br> Mutated in familial juvenile polyposis |

¹Reproduced with modifications from Dumont (1999).

restored with re-expression of wild-type TβRII (Oft et al., 1998). While these observations appear to be in contradiction to those reported by Ye et al. (1999), they are, in fact, consistent with the apparently less aggressive phenotype of these types of tumors in human patients.

Prunier et al. (1999) recently reported studies of overexpression of the tumor-derived missense mutation Smad2.D450E, a form of Smad2 incapable of being phosphorylated by the TβRI. This mutation has been found in colorectal and lung cancers. Expression of this mutant in Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells did not abolish TGF-β-mediated growth arrest as evidenced by (³H) thymidine incorporation assay, but it did induce an invasive phenotype, an effect that was enhanced by TGF-β treatment. These findings suggest that a specific genetic defect in Smad2 may be sufficient to confer the invasion-promoting effect of TGF-β. Furthermore, the data suggest that TGF-β may act through Smad2 to induce cellular invasion in a manner independent of Smad2 phosphorylation by the activated TGF-β type I receptor. The exact mechanism for this effect remains unclear.

In light of the above observations, it is possible that both Smad-dependent and Smad-independent signaling by TGF-β receptors may contribute to an aggressive phenotype under certain circumstances. This is in contrast to the less aggressive phenotype of colorectal cancers in humans that have microsatellite instability and mutational inactivation of the TβRII with complete loss of TGF-β signaling (Gryfe et al., 2000; Jass, 1999; Thibodeau et al., 1993) (Table 1).

### TGF-β AS A TUMOR PROMOTING FACTOR

There are several lines of evidence that TGF-β may actually promote malignant transformation and tumor progression for several different cell types under selected circumstances. TGF-β expression tends to be increased in a wide variety of cancers (including colon cancer) relative to adjacent normal tissues (Derynck et al., 1987). Transformation of cells with dominant oncogenes (e.g., Ha-ras or v-src) activates transcription of the TGF-β1 gene (Birchenall-Roberts et al., 1990; Geiser et al., 1991). Studies of human colorectal can-
cers have demonstrated that high level expression of TGF-β1 in the primary tumor is associated with advanced stages and is an independent predictor of risk (18-fold) for recurrence (Friedman et al., 1995) and decreased survival (Robson et al., 1996).

There are several potential mechanisms for this tumor-promoting effect. For example, we reported some time ago that TGF-β may suppress tumor immunosurveillance (Torre-Amione et al., 1990). TGF-β exhibits growth-inhibitory effects on moderate to well-differentiated primary colon carcinomas, but stimulates the proliferation and invasion of poorly-differentiated and metastatic colonic carcinomas (Hafez et al., 1992; Schroy et al., 1990). TGF-β1 can induce estrogen-independent tumorigenicity of human breast cancer cells (Arteaga et al., 1993). TGF-β treatment can also substitute for wounding as a promoter of fibrosarcomas in chickens infected with the Rous sarcoma virus (Sieweke and Bissell, 1994; Sieweke et al., 1990).

Transformation of preinvasive epithelial neoplasm to the invasive phenotype with metastatic potential is characterized by several profound changes in gene expression and in cellular and tissue morphology. The changes in cellular morphology and tissue architecture can be observed histologically and are accompanied by dramatic changes in the behavior of the transformed cells. The metastatic phenotype is associated with the acquisition of fibroblastoid features and the ability of the cells to invade stroma and blood vessels. TGF-β is a potent modulator of epithelial cell phenotype for keratinocytes (Caulin et al., 1995; Zambruno et al., 1995) and mammary epithelial cells (Miettinen et al., 1994). There is mounting evidence that autocrine TGF-β expression by tumor cells plays a major role in the epithelial-to-fibroblastoid conversion in mammary cells (Oft et al., 1996) and in keratinocytes (Caulin et al., 1995; Cui et al., 1996) that accompanies malignant transformation. TGF-β1 overexpression in transgenic mouse keratinocytes tends to inhibit the appearance of carcinogen-induced benign skin tumors; but for more advanced lesions, TGF-β1 overexpression enhanced progression toward the malignant spindle-cell phenotype (Cui et al., 1996). The TGF-β-induced epithelial to mesenchymal transition in Ha-Ras transformed mammary epithelial cells involves disrupted cell-cell adhesion and the loss of epithelial cell polarity in addition to causing the cells to become more spindle-shaped and invasive (Oft et al., 1996). The loss of cell polarity appears to be the result of a disruption of ZO-1 and F-actin proteins comprising the tight junctions in mammary epithelial cells (Woo et al., 1996).

Chronic exposure to high concentrations of TGF-β1 promotes the spontaneous neoplastic transformation of cultured rat liver epithelial cells (Zhang et al., 1994). We have recently reported that chronic exposure of rat intestinal epithelial (RIE-1) cells resulted in neoplastic transformation (Sheng et al., 1999). In these RIE cells, chronic TGF-β treatment resulted in loss of the growth inhibitory response to TGF-β, loss of contact inhibition, acquisition of a fibroblast-like spindle cell morphology, anchorage-independent growth, and tumorigenicity in athymic mice. The TGF-β-resistant RIE-1 cells (called RIE-TR) also exhibited markedly increased expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and TGF-β1, while TβRII levels were reduced by 95%.

There appears to be an important regulatory interaction between the TGF-β and COX-2 pathways. Forced over-expression of COX-2 in the non-transformed RIE-1 cells results in down-regulation of the TβRII (Tsujii and Dubors, 1995), and forced over-expression of COX-2 in a human colon cancer cell line Caco-2 results in increased secretion of TGF-β1 from those cells (Tsujii et al., 1997b). Recently we observed that TGF-β synergistically enhances the expression of COX-2 in conditionally Ha-Ras transformed RIE-1 cells (Sheng et al., 2000). The increase in COX-2 expression by TGF-β in the context of Ras transformation occurs primarily through a marked increase in the stability of the COX-2 mRNA. The mRNA stabilization by activated Ras and TGF-β requires the presence of cis acting AU rich elements in the 3' untranslated region of the COX-2 mRNA. Also, there is evidence that COX-2 regulates the production of angiogenic factors by colon cancer cells as well as increasing invasive potential of these cells (Tsujii et al., 1997a; 1998).

### CONCLUSION

The predominant effect of TGF-β appears to be dependent on the context of the responding cell. Thus, the divergent effects of TGF-β in carcinogenesis may depend upon the proliferative capacity and state of differentiation of the epithelial cell, both of which may be altered during the process of neoplastic transformation. Once transformation has occurred, TGF-β effects may be detrimental and may actually promote tumor cell survival, invasion, and metastasis. Recent work suggests that these effects may involve TGF-β regulation of COX-2 and other pathways that may contribute to tumor cell aggressiveness. In gaining a better understanding of the mechanisms by which TGF-β may promote tumor progression, it is likely that new therapeutic strategies may be developed that preserve tumor suppressor function of TGF-β while inhibiting the tumor-promoting effects.

### REFERENCES

Arai T, Akiyama Y, Okabe S, Ando M, Yuasa Y. 1998. Genomic structure of the human smad3 and its infrequent alteration in colorectal cancers. Cancer Lett 122:157–163.

Arteaga CL, Tandon AK, DD, VH, Osborne CK. 1988. Transforming growth factor beta: potential autocrine growth inhibitor of estrogen receptor-negative human breast cancer cells. Cancer Res 48:3898–3904.

Arteaga CL, Carty-Dugger T, Moses HL, Hurd SD, Pietenpol JA. 1993. Transforming growth factor beta 1 can induce estrogen-independent tumorigenicity of human breast cancer cells in athymic mice. Cell Growth Differ 4:193–201.

Atfi A, Buisine M, Mazars A, Gespach C. 1997a. Induction of apoptosis by DPC4, a transcriptional factor regulated by transforming growth factor-b through stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun N-terminal Kin(SAPK/JNK) signaling pathway. J Biol Chem 272:24731–24734.

Atfi A, Djelloul S, Chastre E, Davis RR, Gespach C. 1997b. Evidence for a role of Rho-like GTPases and stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun N-terminal kinase (SAPK/JNK) in transforming growth factor β-mediated signaling. J Biol Chem 272:1429–1432.

Barnard JA, Beauchamp RD, Coffey RJ, Moses HL. 1989. Regulation of intestinal epithelial cell growth by transforming growth factor type beta. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86:1578–1582.

Barnard JA, Warwick GJ, Gold LI. 1993. Localization of transforming growth factor beta isoforms in the normal murine small intestine and colon. Gastroenterology 105:67–73.

Beauchamp RD, Peeler MO, DuBois RN. 1996. Recent advances in the management of colorectal polyps. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 12:12–17.

Birchenall-Roberts MC, Ruscetti FW, Kasper J, Lee HD, Friedman R, Geiser A, Sporn MB, Roberts AB, Kim SJ. 1990. Transcriptional
regulation of the transforming growth factor beta 1 promoter by v-src gene products is mediated through the AP-1 complex. Mol Cell Biol 10:4978–4983.

Brown JD, DiChiara MR, Anderson KR, Gimbrone MA Jr, Topper JN. 1999. MEKK-1, a component of the stress (Stress-activated protein Kinase/c-Jun N-terminal kinase) pathway, can selectively activate Smad2-mediated transcriptional activation in endothelial cells. J Biol Chem 274:8797–8805.

Caulin C, Scholl FG, Frontelo P, Gamallo C, Quintanilla M. 1995. Chronic exposure of cultured transformed mouse epidermal cells to transforming growth factor-β1 induces an epithelial-mesenchymal transdifferentiation and spindle tumoral phenotype. Cell Growth Differ 6:1027–1035.

Cui W, Fowlis DJ, Bryson S, Duffie E, Ireland H, Balmain A, Akhurst RJ. 1996. TGFβ1 inhibits the formation of benign skin tumors, but enhances progression to invasive spindle carcinomas in transgenic mice. Cell 86:531–542.

Derynck R, Goeddel DV, Ullrich A, Gutterman JU, Williams RD, Bringman TS, Berger WH. 1987. Synthesis of messenger RNA for transforming growth factors α and β and the epidermal growth factor receptor by human tumors. Cancer Res 47:707–712.

Dumont N. 1999. Genetic and epigenetic contributions to colorectal cancers. APMIS 107:711–722.

Engel ME, Datta PK, Moses HL. 1998. RhoB is stabilized by Transforming Growth Factor β and antagonizes transcriptional activation. J Biol Chem 273:9921–9926.

Eppert K, Scherer SW, Ozcelik H, Pirone R, Hoodless P, Kim H, Tsui LC, Bapat B, Gallinger S, Andrulis IL, Thomsen GH, Wrana JL, Attisano L. 1996. MADR2 maps to 18q21 and encodes a TGFbeta-regulated MAD-related protein that is functionally mutated in colorectal carcinoma. Cell 86:543–552.

Eshelman JR, Markowitz SD. 1995. Microsatellite instability in inherited and sporadic neoplasms. Curr Opin Oncol 7:83–89.

Fearon ER. 1994. Molecular genetic studies of the adenoma to carcinoma sequence. Adv Int Med 39:123–147.

Filmus J, Zhao J, Buick RN. 1992. Overexpression of H-ras oncogene induces resistance to the growth-inhibitory action of transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF-beta 1) and alters the number and type of TGF-beta 1 receptors in rat intestinal epithelial cell clones. Oncogene 7(3):521–526.

Frey RS, Mulder KM. 1997. Involvement of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 and stress-activated protein kinase Jun N-terminus kinase activation by transforming growth factor β in the negative control of breast cancer cells. Cancer Res 57:628–633.

Friedman E, Gold LI, Klimstra D, Zeng ZS, Winawer S, Cohen A. 1995. High levels of transforming growth factor beta 1 correlate with disease progression in human colon cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 4:549–554.

Geiser AG, Kim S, Roberts AB, Sporn MB. 1991. Characterization of the mouse transforming growth factor-β1 promoter and activation by the Ha-ras oncogene. Mol Cell Biol 11:84–92.

Grady WM, Rajput A, Myeroff L, Liu DF, Kwon K, Willis J, Markowitz S. 1998. Mutation of the type II transforming growth factor-β receptor is coincident with the transformation of human colon adenomas to malignant carcinomas. Cancer Res 58:3101–3104.

Grady WM, Myeroff LL, Swinler SE, Rajput A, Thiagalingam S, Lutterbaugh JD, Neumann A, Brattain MG, Chang J, Kim S-J, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B, Willson JKV, Markowitz S. 1999. Mutational inactivation of transforming growth factor β receptor type II in microsatellite stable colon cancers. Cancer Res 59:320–324.

Gryfe R, Kim H, Hsieh ET, Aronson MD, Holowaty EJ, Bull SB, Redston M, Gallinger S. 2000. Tumor microsatellite instability and clinical outcome in young patients with colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 342(2):69–77.

Hafez MM, Hsu S, Yan Z, Winawer S, Friedman E. 1992. Two roles for TGF-β1 in colon enterocytic differentiation. Cell Growth Differ 3:753–762.

Hahn SA, Schutte M, Hoque ATMS, Moskaluk CA, da Costa LT, Rozenblum E, Weinstein CL, Fischer A, Yeo CJ, Hruban RH, Kern SE. 1996. DPC4, A candidate tumor suppressor gene at human chromosome 18q21.1. Science 271:350–353.

Hartsough MT, Mulder KM. 1995. Transforming growth factor β activation of p44mapk in proliferating cultures of epithelial cells. J Biol Chem 270:7117–7124.

Hata A, Shi Y, Massague J. 1998. Tgf-β signaling and cancer: structural and functional consequences of mutations in Smads. 4:257–262.

Hocevar BA, Brown TL, Howe PH. 1999. TGF-β induces fibronectin synthesis through a c-Jun N-terminal kinase-dependent, Smad4-independent pathway. EMBO J 18:1345–1356.

Hosein NM, Mcknight MK, Levine AE, Mulder KM, Childress KE, Brattain DE, Brattain MG. 1989. Differential sensitivity in subclasses of human colon carcinoma cell lines to the growth inhibitory effects of transforming growth factor-β1. Exp Cell Res 181:442–453.

Howe JR, Roth S, Ringold JC, Summers RW, Jarvinen HJ, Sistonen P. 1998. Mutations in the Smad4/DPC4 gene in juvenile polyposis. Science 280:1086–1088.

Jass JR. 1999. Towards a molecular classification of colorectal cancer. Int J Colorect Dis 14(4-5):194–200.

Keeton MR, Curriden SA, Van Zonneveld A-J, Loskutoff DJ. 1991. Identification of regulatory sequences in the type I plasminogen activator inhibitor gene responsive to transforming growth factor β. J Biol Chem 266:23048–23052.

Kimchi A, Wang XF, Weinberg RA, Cheifetz S, Massague J. 1988. Absence of TGF-beta receptors and growth inhibitory responses in retinoblastoma cells. Science 240:196–199.

Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. 1996. Lessons from hereditary colorectal cancer. Cell 87:159–170.

Ko TC, Sheng HM, Reisman D, Thompson EA, Beauchamp RD. 1995. Transforming growth-factor-beta 1 inhibits cyclin D1 expression in intestinal epithelial cells. Oncogene 10(1):177–184.

Ko TC, Yu W, Sakai T, Sheng H, Shao J, Beauchamp RD, Thompson EA. 1998. TGF-β effects on proliferation of rat intestinal epithelial cells are due to inhibition of cyclin D1 expression. Oncogene 16:3445–3454.

Kurokowa M, Lynch K, Podolsky DK. 1987. Effects of growth factors on an intestinal epithelial cell line: transforming growth factor beta inhibits proliferation and stimulates differentiation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 142:775–782.

Lu SL, Akiyama Y, Nagasaki H, Saitoh K, Yuasa Y. 1995. Mutations of the transforming growth factor-β type II gene and genomic instability in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 216:452–457.

MacGrogan D, Pergram M, Slamon D, Bookstein R. 1997. Comparative mutational analysis of DPC4 (Smad4) in prostatic and colorectal carcinomas. Oncogene 15:1111–1114.

Manning AM, Williams AC, Game SM, Paraskeva C. 1991. Differential sensitivity of human colonic adenoma and carcinoma cells to transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta): conversion of an adenoma cell line to a tumorigenic phenotype is accompanied by a reduced response to the inhibitory effects of TGF-beta. Oncogene 6:1471–1476.

Markowitz S, Wang J, Myeroff L, Parsons R, Sun L, Lutterbaugh J, Fan RS, Zborowska E, Kinzler K, Vogelstein B, Brattain M, Willson JKV. 1995. Inactivation of the type II TGF-beta receptor in colon cancer cells with microsatellite instability. Science 268:1336–1338.

Massagué J. 1998. TGF-β Signal Transduction. Annu Rev Biochem 67:753–791.

Miyaki M, Iijima T, Konishi M, Sakai K, Ishii A, Yasuno M, Hishima T, Koike M, Shitara N, Iwama T, Utsunomiya J, Kuroki T, Mori T. 1999. Higher frequency of Smad4 gene mutation in human colorectal cancer with distant metastasis. Oncogene 18:3098–3103.

Miettinen PJ, Ebner R, Lopez AR, Derynck R. 1994. TGF-β induced transdifferentiation of mammary epithelial cells to mesenchymal cells: involvement of type I receptors. J Cell Biol 127:2021–2036.

Moustakas A, Stournaras C. 1999. Regulation of actin organisation by TGF-β in H-ras-transformed fibroblasts. J Cell Sci 112:1169–1179.

Oft M, Peli J, Rudaz C, Schwarz H, Beug H, Reichmann E. 1996. TGF-beta1 and Ha-Ras collaborate in modulating the phenotypic plasticity and invasiveness of epithelial tumor cells. Genes Dev 10:2462–2477.

Oft M, Heider K-H, Beug H. 1998. TGFβ signaling is necessary for carcinoma cell invasiveness and metastasis. Curr Biol 8:1243–1252.

Parsons R, Myeroff LL, Liu B, Willson JKV, Markowitz SD, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. 1995. Microsatellite instability and mutations of the transforming growth factor β type II receptor gene in colorectal cancer. Cancer Res 55:5548–5550.

Podolsky DK. 1997. Healing the epithelium: solving the problem from two sides. J Gastroenterol 32:122–126.

Prunier C, Mazars A, Noe V, Bruyneel E, Mareel M, Gespach C, Atfi A. 1999. Evidence that Smad2 is a tumor suppressor implicated in the control of cellular invasion. J Biol Chem 274:22919–22922.

Raftery LA, Twombley V, Wharton K, Gelbart WM. 1995. Genetic screens to identify elements of the decapentaplegic signaling pathway in Drosophila. Genetics 139:241–254.

Riggins GJ, Thiagalingam S, Rozenblum E, Weinstein CL, Kern SE, Hamilton SR. 1996. Mad related genes in the human. Nat Genet 13:347–349.

Robson H, Anderson E, James RD, Schofield PF. 1996. Transforming growth factor beta 1 expression in human colorectal tumours: an

independent prognostic marker in a subgroup of poor prognosis patients. Br J Cancer 74:753–758.

Sano Y, Harada J, Tashiro S, Gotoh-Mandeville R, Mackawa T, Ishii S. 1999. ATF-2 is a common nuclear target of Smad and TAK1 pathways in transforming growth factor-β signaling. J Biol Chem 274:8949–8957.

Savage C, Das P, Finelli AL, Townsend SR, Sun CY, Baird SE, Padgett RW. 1996. *Caenorhabditis elegans* genes *sma-2*, *sma-3*, and *sma-4* define a conserved family of transforming growth factor β pathway components. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:790–794.

Schroy P, Rikfin J, Coffey RJ, Winawer S, Friedman E. 1990. Role of TGFβ1 in induction of colon carcinoma differentiation by hexamethylene bisacetamide. Cancer Res 50:261–265.

Sekelsky JJ, Newfeld SJ, Raftery LA, Chartoff EH, Gelbart WM. 1995. Genetic characterization and cloning of Mothers against DPP, a gene required for decapentaplegic function in drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 139:1347–1358.

Sheng H, Shao J, O’Mahony CA, Lamps L, Albo D, Isakson PCHBD, DuBois RN, Beauchamp RD. 1999. Transformation of intestinal epithelial cells by chronic TGF-β1 treatment results in downregulation of the type II TGF-β receptor and induction of cyclooxygenase-2. Oncogene 18:855–867.

Sheng H, Shao J, Dixon D, Williams C, Prescott S, DuBois RN, Beauchamp RD. 2000. TGF-β1 Enhances Ha-Ras-induced Expression of Cyclooxygenase-2 in Intestinal Epithelial Cells via Stabilization of mRNA. J Biol Chem 275(9):6628–6635.

Shibuya H, Kyoko Y, Shirakabe K, Tonegawa A, Gotoh Y, Ueno N, Irie K, Nishida E, Matsumoto K. 1996. TAB1: An activator of the TAK1 MAPKKK in TGF-beta signal transduction. Science 272:1179–1182.

Sieweke MH, Bissell MJ. 1994. The tumor-promoting effect of wounding: a possible role for TGF-beta-induced stromal alterations. Crit Rev Oncogen 5:297–311.

Sieweke MH, Thompson NL, Sporn MB, Bissell MJ. 1990. Mediation of wound-related Rous-sarcoma virus tumorigenesis by TGF-β. Science 248:1656–1660.

Smith RG. 1994. Southwestern internal medicine conference: hereditary predisposition to colorectal cancer: new insights. Am J Med Sci 308:295–308.

Sun L-Z, Wu G, Willson JK, Zborowska E, Yang J, Rajkarunanayake I, Wange J, Gentry LE, Wang X-F, Brattain MG. 1994. Expression of transforming growth factor β type II receptor leads to reduced malignancy in human breast cancer MCF-7 cells. J Biol Chem 269:26449–26455.

Takagi Y, Kohmura H, Futamura M, Kida H, Tanemura H, Shimokawa K, Saji S. 1996. Somatic alterations of the DPC4 gene in human colorectal cancers in Vivo. Gastroenterology 111:1369–1372.

Takaku K, Oshima M, Miyoshi H, Matsui M, Seldin MF, Taketo MM. 1998. Intestinal tumorigenesis in compound mutant mice of both *Dpc4 (Smad4)* and *Apc* genes. Cell 92:645–656.

Thiagalingam S, Lengauer C, Leach FS, Schutte M, Hahn SA, Overhauser J, Willson JKV, Markowitz S, Hamilton SR, Kern SE, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. 1996. Evaluation of candidate tumor suppressor genes on chromosome 18 in colorectal cancers. Nat Genet 13:343–346.

Thibodeau SN, Bren G, Schaid D. 1993. Microsatellite instability in cancer of the proximal colon. Science 260:816–819.

Torre-Amione G, Beauchamp RD, Koeppen H, Park BH, Schreiber H, Moses HL, Rowley DA. 1990. A highly immunogenic tumor transfected with a murine transforming growth factor type beta 1 cDNA

escapes immune surveillance. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 87:1486–1490.

Townsend CM Jr, Beauchamp RD. 1995. New developments in colorectal cancer. Curr Opin Gastroenterol 11:36–42.

Tsujii M, DuBois R. 1995. Alterations in cellular adhesion and apoptosis in epithelial cells overexpressing prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase 2. Cell 83:493–501.

Tsujii M, Kawano S, Nagano K, Tsujii S, Sawaoka H, DuBois RN. 1997a. Induction of vascular endothelial tubular morphogenesis by Caco-2 cells programmed to overexpress cyclooxygenase-2. Gastroenterology A3610.

Tsujii M, Kawano S, DuBois RN. 1997b. Cyclooxygenase-2 expression in human colon cancer cells increases metastatic potential. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:3336–3340.

Tsujii M, Kawano S, Tsuji S, Sawaoka H, Hori M, DuBois RN. 1998. Cyclooxygenase regulates angiogenesis induced by colon cancer cells. Cell 93:705–716.

Van Aelst L, D’Souza-Schorey C. 1997. Rho GTPases and signaling networks. Genes Dev 11:2295–2322.

Wang J, Sun L-Z, Myeroff L, Wang X-f, Gentry LE, Yang J, Liang J, Zborowska E, Markowitz S, Willson JK, Brattain MG. 1995. Demonstration that mutation of the type II transforming growth factor β receptor inactivates its tumor suppressor activity in replication error-positive colon carcinoma cells. J Biol Chem 270:22044–22049.

Winesett MP, Ramsey GW, Barnard JA. 1996. Type II TGF(beta) receptor expression in intestinal cell lines and in the intestinal tract. Carcinogenesis 17:989–995.

Woo PL, Cha HH, Singer KL, Firestone GL. 1996. Antagonistic regulation of tight junction dynamics by glucocorticoids and transforming growth factor-β in mouse mammary epithelial cells. J Biol Chem 271:404–412.

Yamaguchi K, Shirakabe K, Shibuya H, Irie K, Oishi I, Ueno N, Taniguchi T, Nishida E, Matsumoto K. 1995. Identification of a member of the MAPKKKK family as a potential mediator of TGF-β signal transduction. Science 270:2008–2011.

Yamaguchi K, Nagai S, Ninomiya-Tsuji J, Nishita M, Tamai K, Irie K, Ueno N, Nishida E, Shibuya H, Matsumoto K. 1999. XIAP, a cellular member of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein family, links the receptors to TAB1-TAK1 in the BMP signaling pathway. EMBO J 18:179–187.

Ye SC, Foster JM, Li W, Liang J, Zborowska E, Venkateswarlu S, Gong J, Brattain MG, Willson JKV. 1999. Contextual Effects of Transforming Growth Factor β on the Tumorigenicity of Human Colon Carcinoma Cells. Cancer Res 59:4725–4731.

Zambruno G, Marchisio PC, Marconi A, Vaschieri C, Melchiori A, Gianetti A, De Luca M. 1995. Transforming growth factor-beta 1 modulates beta 1 and beta 5 integrin receptors and induces the de novo expression of the alpha v beta 6 heterodimer in normal human keratinocytes: implications for wound healing. J Cell Biol 129:853–865.

Zhang X, Wang T, Batist G, Tsao MS. 1994. Transforming growth factor beta 1 promotes spontaneous transformation of cultured rat liver epithelial cells. Cancer Research 54:6122–6128.

Zhang T, Nanney LB, Peeler MO, Williams CS, Lamps L, Heppner KJ, DuBois RN, Beauchamp RD. 1997. Decreased transforming growth factor beta type II receptor expression in intestinal adenomas from Min/+ mice is associated with increased cyclin D1 and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 expression. Cancer Res 57:1638–1643.

Zhu Y, Richardson JA, Parada LF, Graff JM. 1998. Smad3 mutant mice develop metastatic colorectal cancer. Cell 94:703–714.
