
tendency to random codon usage). The plot for the residuals of \( c^2/L \) also fails to indicate the predicted high CUB (not shown).

This result is further corroborated by the finding that, comparing across 18 non-overlapping blocks of 306 nucleotides, in both mouse-rat and human-dog comparisons there is no correlation between \( K_s \) and any measure of CUB (Table 2). Further, there is no correlation between \( K_a \) and \( K_s \). We conclude that we can find no evidence that the plummet in \( K_s \) is because of selection on codon usage.

A further possibility is that, at the site concerned, there is a CpG island. This might tend to be conserved owing to its regulatory functions. However, we find no evidence for CpG islands in the gene. Newcpgreport, available within EMBOSS (http://www.hgmp.mrc.ac.uk/Registered/Option/emboss.html), describes the location of CpG islands, but reports none in each of the four coding sequences (under default settings).

Finally, we conjectured that the region concerned might be one in which there is an antisense transcript. The synonymous sites in the sense transcript could then be nonsynonymous sites in the antisense transcript and hence under purifying selection. BLAST search of the region concerned against human and mouse expressed sequence tag (EST) databases fails to provide any evidence for such a transcript.

It therefore remains ambiguous as to why \( K_s \) is so low in the region concerned. A remaining possibility is selection acting either on RNA or DNA structure. Nonetheless, the dramatic and repeatable plummet in \( K_s \) in both independent comparisons and the high resulting \( K_a / K_s \)

values indicate that purifying selection is probably acting on silent mutations in BRCA1. The remarkably low rate of silent site evolution in the region concerned indicates that the putative purifying selection is stronger on these silent sites than it is on nonsynonymous changes anywhere else in the sequence. Such strong selection should be identifiable by use of polymorphism data.

### Acknowledgements

We thank the three referees, Z. Yang and A. Eyre-Walker for comments on a previous version of this article. L.D.H. is funded by the Royal Society. C.P. is funded by the TBA programme of the European Science Foundation.

### References

1. Hughes, A.L. (1991) Circumsporozoite protein genes of malaria parasites (*Plasmodium* spp.): evidence for positive selection on immunogenic regions. *Genetics* 127, 345–353
2. Hughes, A.L. *et al.* (1990) Positive Darwinian selection promotes charge profile diversity in the antigen binding cleft of class I MHC molecules. *Mol. Biol. Evol.* 7, 515–524
3. Huttley, G.A. *et al.* (2000) Adaptive evolution of the tumour suppressor BRCA1 in humans and chimpanzees. *Nat. Genet.* 25, 410–413
4. Yang, Z.H. (1998) Likelihood ratio tests for detecting positive selection and application to primate lysozyme evolution. *Mol. Biol. Evol.* 15, 568–573
5. Kreitman, M. and Akashi, H. (1995) Molecular evidence for natural selection. *Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst.* 26, 403–422
6. Sharp, P.M. *et al.* (1995) DNA-sequence evolution: the sounds of silence. *Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London Ser. B* 349, 241–247
7. Eyre-Walker, A. (1991) An analysis of codon usage in mammals: selection or mutation bias? *J. Mol. Evol.* 33, 442–449
8. Smith, N.G.C. and Hurst, L.D. (1999) The causes of synonymous rate variation in the rodent genome: can substitution rates be used to estimate the sex bias in mutation rate? *Genetics* 152, 661–673
9. Eyre-Walker, A. (1999) Evidence of selection on silent site base composition in mammals: Potential implications for the evolution of

isochores and junk DNA. *Genetics* 152, 675–683
10 Debry, R.W. and Marzluff, W.F. (1994) Selection on silent sites in the rodent H3 histone gene family. *Genetics* 138, 191–202
11 Alvarez-Valin, F. *et al.* (2000) Nonrandom spatial distribution of synonymous substitutions in the GP63 gene from Leishmania. *Genetics* 155, 1683–1692
12 Zanotto, P.M.D. *et al.* (1999) Genealogical evidence for positive selection in the nef gene of HIV-1. *Genetics* 153, 1077–1089
13 Duret, L. *et al.* (1994) HOVERGEN—a database of homologous vertebrate genes. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 22, 2360–2365
14 Thompson, J.D. *et al.* (1997) The CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence alignment aided by quality analysis tools. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 25, 4876–4882
15 Li, W-H. (1993) Unbiased estimation of the rates of synonymous and nonsynonymous substitution. *J. Mol. Evol.* 36, 96–99
16 Pamilo, P. and Bianchi, N.O. (1993) Evolution of the Zfx and Zfy genes: rates and interdependence between the genes. *Mol. Biol. Evol.* 10, 271–281
17 Yang, Z.H. *et al.* (2000) Codon-substitution models for heterogeneous selection pressure at amino acid sites. *Genetics* 155, 431–449
18 Goldman, N. and Yang, Z.H. (1994) Codon-based model of nucleotide substitution for protein-coding DNA sequences. *Mol. Biol. Evol.* 11, 725–736
19 Hughes, A.L. (1994) The evolution of functionally novel proteins after gene duplication. *Proc. R. Soc. London B Biol. Sci.* 256, 119–124
20 Bernardi, G. (2000) Isochores and the evolutionary genomics of vertebrates. *Gene* 241, 3–17
21 Alvarez-Valin, F. *et al.* (1998) Synonymous and nonsynonymous substitutions in mammalian genes: Intragenic correlations. *J. Mol. Evol.* 46, 37–44
22 Wright, F. (1990) The effective number of codons used in a gene. *Gene* 87, 23–29
23 Shields, D.C. *et al.* (1988) Silent sites in *Drosophila* genes are not neutral—evidence of selection among synonymous codons. *Mol. Biol. Evol.* 5, 704–716

L.D. Hurst*
C. Pál
Dept of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, UK BA27AY.
*e-mail*: l.d.hurst@bath.ac.uk

---

## Revisiting the chlamydial type III protein secretion system: clues to the origin of type III protein secretion

### Jihyun F. Kim

The bacterial type III secretion pathway delivers effector proteins into eukaryotic cells. Analysis of the type III system and flagellar export genes in the obligate parasites of the family Chlamydiales suggests that the type III system arose from the flagellar export system in chlamydiae or related bacteria.

Pathogenic and symbiotic bacteria of both plants and animals often inject effector proteins into the host cytoplasm through the type III secretion pathway¹. This secretion mechanism can involve as many as 20 proteins. In case of *Salmonella typhimurium* and *Yersinia enterocolitica*, gene clusters encoding two distinct type III systems are present in a single bacterium. The type III secretion system is evolutionarily related to the flagellar biogenesis system; nine protein components, most of them cytoplasmic or bound to the inner membrane, are conserved between the two. Because of this, the flagellar export system is sometimes considered as a type III secretion system. However, the two systems are distinguishable in several aspects including use of secretin² by the type III system for outer-membrane protein translocation.

http://tig.trends.com 0168-9525/01/$ – see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. PII: S0168-9525(00)02175-2

Class and location of type III genes

VI (chromosome; LEE)

II (virulence plasmid)

II (chromosome; SPI-1); VI (chromosome; SPI-2)

VI (unknown)

III (chromosome; HrpPAI)

III (unknown; plasmid-borne in Pantoea herbicola pathovars)

III (chromosome)

I (virulence plasmid; genes also present in Yersinia pestis and Yersinia pseudotuberculosis); II (chromosome)

I (chromosome)

III (chromosome; HrpPai)

IV (chromosome)

I (unknown; genes also present in Bordetella pertussis)

IV (megaplasmid)

IV (unknown)

V (unknown; plasmid-borne in Rhizobium sp. NGR 234)

O (chromosome; gene clusters scattered)


Fig. 1. A phylogenetic tree of bacteria based on 16S rDNA sequences, and the class and location of the type III secretion genes present in each bacterium. The CLUSTAL X program with default parameters was used for aligning sequences and generating trees (branch strength after bootstrapping 1000 times is shown for some branches). Bacterial species that have the type III secretion system are bold. Known type III systems can be grouped into seven classes (O to VI) on the basis of gene organization, regulation mechanism and protein similarities. Two distinct type III systems are present in Salmonella typhimurium and Yersinia enterocolitica. Whereas type III genes of Proteobacteria are usually tightly clustered in a pathogenicity island or on a plasmid, chlamydial type III genes are scattered over several locations in the genome.

Discovery of a type III system in Chlamydiae: Chlamydiales are obligate intracellular parasites of animals and form a phylogenetic group well separated from other eubacteria. A few years ago, genes for a type III system were unexpectedly uncovered from a chlamydial strain GPIC (Ref. 5); before then the type III system had not been identified other than in Proteobacteria (Fig. 1). Subsequently, type III secretion genes have been identified in other chlamydiae by genome sequencing: Chlamydia trachomatis D/UW-3/Cx (Ref. 6), Chlamydia muridarum MoPn (Ref. 7) and Chlamydophila pneumoniae CWL 029 (Ref. 8) and AR 39 (Ref. 7). In the genomes of C. trachomatis D/UW-3/Cx and C. pneumoniae CWL 029, genes associated with type III secretion were assigned the names lcr, syc and ysc (Refs 6, 8) after the Yersinia type III secretion system. Read et al. followed the sct designation after Hueck. The number of type III genes in these species is identical, the gene organization is conserved and the protein sequences are significantly similar (48–92% amino acid identity). Interestingly, the chlamydial genomes also contain several orthologs of genes involved in flagellar export.

Chlamydial genes for type III secretion and flagellar export: In the chlamydial genome, two homologs exist for each the gene families sctJ/fliF, sctL/fliH, sctN/fliI and sctV/flhA (Table 1). It is relatively easy to assign each of these gene pairs to either the type III system or the flagellar system on the basis of genetic location and salient features of the proteins. For example, CT090inC.trachomatis could be assumed to be involved in type III secretion because the next gene (CT089) is an sctW homolog specific for type III secretion (Fig. 2a) and secretion genes usually form a gene cluster or an operon. Also, the N-terminal region of the CT559 product contains a lipoprotein signal peptide characteristic of the type III secretion protein SctJ, whereas the N-terminal region of the CT719 product contains a membrane-spanning domain typical of the flagellar export protein FliF. Phylogenetic analysis of the encoded proteins gives further evidence for the assignment of each of the homologs to either the type III system or the flagellar export protein system (Fig. 2b). Only single homologs exist for the gene families sctQ/fliN, sctR/fliP, sctS/fliQ, sctT/fliR, and sctU/flhB. Among them, CT562 (sctR/fliP) and CT091 (sctU/flhB) are phylogenetically closer to type III genes and the rest appear equidistant between members of either of the two systems.

Research Update

TRENDS in Genetics Vol. 17 No. 2 February 2001

Table 1. Genes of Chlamydia trachomatis that are homologous to broadly conserved genes in the type III protein secretion system and/or the flagellar assembly system

| C. trachomatis<sup>a</sup> | CT674 | CT664 | CT559 | CT561 | CT669 | CT672 | CT562 | CT563 | CT564 | CT091 | CT090 |
|--------------------------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
|                          |       |       | CT719 | CT718 |       |       |       |       |       |       | CT060 |
| Type III system          |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
| Yersinia spp.            | yscC  | yscD  | yscJ  | yscL  | yscN  | yscQ  | yscR  | yscS  | yscT  | yscU  | lcrD(yscV) |
| Plant pathogens<sup>b</sup> | hrcC  | hrpQ  | hrcJ  | hrpE  | hrcN  | hrcQ  | hrcR  | hrcS  | hrcT  | hrcU  | hrcV  |
| Rhizobium sp.<sup>c</sup> | rhcC1/rhcC2 | y4yQ | rhcJ | nolV | rhcN | rhcQ | rhcR | rhcS | rhcT | rhcU | rhcV |
| Unified designation<sup>d</sup> | sctC | sctD | sctJ | sctL | sctN | sctQ | sctR | sctS | sctT | sctU | sctV |
| Flagellar system<sup>e</sup> | –    | –    | fliF | fliH | fliI | fliN | fliP | fliQ | fliR | flhB | flhA |

<sup>a</sup> Closely related genes exist in Chlamydophila caviae, Chlamydia muridanum and Chlamydophila pneumoniae<sup>5,7,8</sup>. The 3′ end of CT719 is similar to fliG. Homologies of the 3′ region of CT664 to sctD and CT718 to sctL/fliH were not noted in the original report.

<sup>b</sup> Unified designations of the hrp systems of plant-pathogenic Proteobacteria<sup>1</sup>. The names hrpQ and hrpE are used only in the group I hrp systems (erwinias and fluorescent pseudomonads); in the group II hrp systems, they correspond to hrpW and hrpF (Ralstonia solanacearum) and to hrpD5 and hrpB5 (xanthomonads), respectively.

<sup>c</sup> The type III system encoded by the symbiotic plasmid of Rhizobium sp. NGR 234 (Ref. 12). rhcC1 corresponds to the 5′ region of sctC and rhcC2 is homologous to the 3′ region of sctC/gspD.

<sup>d</sup> Nomenclature after a proposal by Hueck<sup>1</sup>.

<sup>e</sup> Designations of the flagellar systems of Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium<sup>13</sup>.

The CT670 product shares some characteristics with sctO/fliJ products, both of which are required for protein delivery<sup>14,15</sup>.

Evidence for the functionality of the type III system in chlamydiae is overwhelming. All of the broadly conserved genes for the type III system appear to be present, if CT672 and CT674 are included (Table 1). In addition, there are a few genes specific to the type III system: CT089 is homologous to sctW (lcrE/yopN in Yersinia spp.) and the 3′ region of CT664 is similar to sctD. CT043, CT088, CT274, CT576, CT663, CT667 and CT862 might encode chaperones, which assist stabilization or secretion of cognate proteins and are usually encoded by genes adjacent to those encoding the target proteins<sup>1,10</sup>. The genes of the type III system appear to be active as, using immunoblot analysis, Hsia and colleagues<sup>5</sup> provided strong experimental evidence that the CT090 ortholog (designated Cds2) in the GPIC strain is expressed during infection of HeLa cells.

Ultramicroscopic studies of chlamydial surfaces demonstrated needle-like projections<sup>16</sup> similar to the ones visualized for the type III system and the flagellar system<sup>13,17</sup>. Bavoil and Hsia<sup>18</sup> hypothesized that these surface projections might be the type III secretion apparatus. In favor of the theory, chlamydiae have homologs of InvG (SctC), PrgH (SctD) and PrgK (SctJ), which have been identified as structural components of the type III secretion 'needle complex' of Salmonella typhimurium<sup>17</sup>.

Besides the homologs of conserved flagellar export genes and CT102

(probable homolog of fliO), there are two more genes with fli names in the chlamydial genome: CT061 (fliA) and CT486 (fliY). Although CT486 appears not to be related to the flagellar system, CT061 encodes a putative sigma factor of the σ<sup>28</sup>/WhiG family, members of which control expression of flagellin genes. The CT061 product might have a similar function. However, chlamydiae are arguably nonmotile<sup>3</sup>, and no genes for flagellar motor, rod, hook and filament can be recognized. Furthermore, similarities between flagellar export proteins in different chlamydial species are somewhat less than those between type III counterparts (Fig. 2a), and several proteins show deletions in some of the conserved regions.

So, are the flagellar homologs in chlamydiae just dwindling remains? Perhaps. Another interesting possibility is that the flagellar system was modified to retain only the protein export function. This hypothesis assumes that the rod, hook and filament components either are undetectable due to low sequence similarities or were replaced with analogous proteins, and that the single-copy secretion genes (CT091, CT562, CT563, CT564, CT670 and CT672) are shared between the two protein delivery systems. In this context, it is worth noting that the needle-like surface projections are present in both the infectious form and the replicating form<sup>6</sup>, and two genes (CT576 and CT862) encode homologs of the chaperone (LcrH/SycD in Yersinia) that interacts with exported components of the secretion apparatus (YopB and YopD).

Did type III secretion originate in a Chlamydia-like organism?

Type III secretion genes of Proteobacteria are usually tightly clustered in a pathogenicity island or on a plasmid, suggesting that they can be horizontally transferred as a unit<sup>1,19</sup>. A surprise of the chlamydial type III system was that secretion loci are dispersed in at least three different chromosomal locations<sup>6-8</sup>. Furthermore, there is no evidence that the gene clusters were introduced recently. The G+C contents of these loci, for example, are similar to the overall G+C content of the genome. These observations suggest that the type III system has been present in chlamydiae for a long time and has been essential to their parasitic lifestyle. On the basis of this loose retention of operon organization and the significant divergence from other type III systems, Stephens et al.<sup>6</sup> postulated an ancient acquisition of the type III system by chlamydiae.

The bacterium in which the type III system first emerged, possibly from the flagellar system by gene duplication, might be one that learned how to exploit eukaryotes when they first appeared. If not extinct, it might be present today as an obligate parasite, rather than a facultative one. Can chlamydiae or their progenitor be candidates from which the type III system first evolved and from which the type III system was subsequently disseminated to other bacteria by horizontal transfer? The phylogeny of flagellar export genes could be used for inferring the origin of the type III system because it often concurs with bacterial phylogeny. Phylogenetic

http://tig.trends.com

(a)

| CT042 | CT043 |
| --- | --- |
| (glgX) |  |
| 62% | 95% |

| CT119 |  |
| --- | --- |
| (incA) |  |
| 73% |  |

| CT102 CT103 |  |
| --- | --- |
| 47% 50% |  |

| CT060 | CT061 |
| --- | --- |
| (flhA) | (fliA) |
| 49% | 70% |

| CT232 CT233 |  |
| --- | --- |
| (incB) (incC) |  |
| 39% 51% |  |

| CT273 CT274 |  |
| --- | --- |
| 66% 87% |  |

| CT087 | CT088 CT089 | CT090 | CT091 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| (malQ) | (sycE) (lcrE) | (lcrD) | (yscU) |
| 57% | 63% 48% | 91% | 82% |

| CT559 | CT560 | CT561 CT562 CT563 CT564 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| (yscJ) |  | (yscL) (yscR) (yscS) (yscT) |
| 73% | 64% | 61% 71% 74% 85% |

| CT565 CT566 | CT567 CT568 | CT569 CT570 | CT571 | CT572 | CT573 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 57% 40% | 51% 54% | (gspF) | (gspE) | (gspD) |  |
| 73% |  | 69% | 62% | 48% |  |

| CT576 | CT577 | CT578 | CT579 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| (lcrH_1) |  |  |  |
| 68% 38% | 53% | 54% |  |

| CT663 | CT664 | CT665 CT667 | CT666 CT668 | CT669 | CT670 | CT671 CT672 | CT673 | CT674 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  | (yscN) | (fliN) | (pkn5) | (yscC) |  |
| 59% | 55% | 66% 66% 63% | 93% | 92% | 84% 48% | 52% | 42% | 68% |

| CT715 CT716 | CT717 | CT718 | CT719 | CT860 | CT861 | CT862 | CT863 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| (fliI) | (fliF) |  |  | (lcrH_2) |  |  |  |
| 63% 33% | 68% | 52% | 45% | 34% | 33% | 67% | 42% |

(b)

| 968 | 767 | 816 | 645 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| FliF | FliR | FlhB | GspD/pIV and |
| CT719 | CT564 |  | CT572/CT674 |
| CT559 | SctT | SctU and |  |
| 951 | 636 | CT091 | SctV and |
| 900 |  | 998 | SctC |

Fig. 2. Protein secretion systems in *Chlamydia trachomatis*. (a) Organization of *C. trachomatis* genes potentially involved in protein secretion and the location of genes in the chromosome. Red arrows, genes that might function in the type III secretion system; blue arrows, genes that might function in the 'flagellar export' system; yellow arrows, genes that might function in the type II system; purple arrows, single-copy genes homologous to genes of both the type III system and the flagellar system (Table 1); pink arrows, candidates of chaperone genes; gray arrows, genes encoding proteins that might be secreted through the type III or flagellar pathway; open arrows, hypothetical genes of unknown function. Percent amino acid identity of the *C. trachomatis* protein products to the ones of *Chlamydophila pneumoniae* is shown below each arrow. (b) Examples of the phylogenetic relationships of *C. trachomatis* proteins with components of the type III system and the flagellar system. Protein sequences in the GenBank (as of 6 November 1998) were retrieved and analyzed. The CLUSTAL X program with default parameters was used for aligning sequences and generating trees (branch strength after bootstrapping 1000 times is shown for each branch). Trees with essentially identical topologies were obtained from PILEUP alignments (Genetics Computer Group Inc., Madison, WI, USA) and subsequent heuristic search in PAUP (D.L. Swafford, Smithsonian Institution, Washington DC, USA). Each triangular branch in the tree consists of 7–23 proteins. Gene designations are in Table 1 and the colors are the same as in (a).

analyses point to chlamydial flagellar counterparts, if present, as the closest relatives of the type III secretion proteins (Fig. 2b), suggesting that the primordial

type III system might indeed have evolved in chlamydiae or related bacteria rather than in Proteobacteria. In support of this notion, extant type III systems are found

only in limited species of Proteobacteria and *Parachlamydia acanthamoebae*, which belongs to a sister family of Chlamydiaceae, has been isolated from a lower eukaryote amoeba.

Knotty history of the type III system One could imagine that evolution of type III systems might not have been simple because the type III gene clusters in Proteobacteria could be the result of repeated gene transfers, as suggested by a striking discrepancy between the 16S rDNA-based bacterial phylogeny and the type(s) of the type III system present in each species (Fig. 1). If this occurred,

Research Update

TRENDS in Genetics Vol. 17 No. 2 February 2001

recombination of secretion genes between multiple type III systems and, especially in chlamydiae, some levels of convergent evolution between type III genes and the flagellar genes would have complicated it further.

In *C. trachomatis*, CT572 and CT674 encode secretins². The location of CT572 upstream of *gspE*, *gspF* and CT569 (*gspG* homolog) suggests that it might be involved in type II protein secretion or type IV pilus biogenesis¹. CT674 probably encodes the outer-membrane translocator for the chlamydial type III system, based on its proximity to homologs of *fliN/sctQ* and *sctN*. Enigmatically, however, sequence analysis indicates that the CT674 product neither belongs to the SctC-type secretins (Fig. 2b), nor is its N-terminal region similar to the N-terminal domain of SctC proteins. If CT674 indeed functions in type III secretion, it implies that during evolution distinct secretins have been recruited for type III secretion. In addition, although most chlamydial type III secretion proteins form the deepest branches in the phylogenetic trees and do not exhibit specific relationships with any of the other type III proteins, the CT090 protein (SctV) intriguingly shows affinity with corresponding proteins of *Bordetella*, *Yersinia* and *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*⁵. It is currently unclear whether this means more resolving power of the SctV proteins or a more recent introduction of the region containing CT090 to the chlamydial genome.

Finding a type III system in Chlamydiales and discovering its unique characteristics opened up many puzzling questions concerning the evolution and mechanism of type III secretion. More plausible explanations to these questions await further characterization of the chlamydial secretion genes, identification of more type III systems from other bacteria especially from more species in the deep branches of Chlamydiales, and in depth studies on the protein delivery structures and the mechanisms of the type III secretion and flagellar export.

**Acknowledgements**

I thank P.M. Bavoil for discussions on *Chlamydia* biology, R.J. Zagursky for encouraging publication of the idea and S.V. Beer for critically reading the manuscript. I regret that many important publications are not cited owing to space limitation.

**References**

1. Hueck, C.J. (1998) Type III protein secretion systems in bacterial pathogens of animals and plants. *Mol. Biol. Rev.* 62, 379–433
2. Russel, M. (1994) Phage assembly: a paradigm for bacterial virulence factor export? *Science* 265, 612–614
3. Stephens, R.S. (1999) *Chlamydia: Intracellular Biology, Pathogenesis, and Immunity*, ASM Press
4. Everett, K.D. *et al.* (1999) Emended description of the order Chlamydiales, proposal of Parachlamydiaceae fam. nov. and Simkaniaceae fam. nov., each containing one monotypic genus, revised taxonomy of the family Chlamydiaceae, including a new genus and five new species, and standards for the identification of organisms. *Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol.* 49, 415–440
5. Hsia, R.C. *et al.* (1997) Type III secretion genes identify a putative virulence locus of *Chlamydia*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 25, 351–359
6. Stephens, R.S. *et al.* (1998) Genome sequence of an obligate intracellular pathogen of humans: *Chlamydia trachomatis*. *Science* 282, 754–759
7. Read, T.D. *et al.* (2000) Genome sequences of *Chlamydia trachomatis* MoPn and *Chlamydia pneumoniae* AR39. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 28, 1397–1406
8. Kalman, S. *et al.* (1999) Comparative genomes of *Chlamydia pneumoniae* and *C. trachomatis*. *Nat. Genet.* 21, 385–389
9. Thompson, J.D. *et al.* (1997) The CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence alignment aided by quality analysis tools. *Nucleic Acids Res.* 25, 4876–4882
10. Cornelis, G.R. and Wolf-Watz, H. (1997) The *Yersinia Yop* virulon: a bacterial system for subverting eukaryotic cells. *Mol. Microbiol.* 23, 861–867
11. Bogdanove, A.J. *et al.* (1996) Unified nomenclature for broadly conserved *hrp* genes of phytopathogenic bacteria. *Mol. Microbiol.* 20, 681–683
12. Viprey, V. *et al.* (1998) Symbiotic implications of type III protein secretion machinery in *Rhizobium*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 28, 1381–1389
13. Macnab, R.M. (1996) Flagella and motility. In *Escherichia coli and Salmonella: Cellular and Molecular Biology* (Neidhardt, F.C. *et al.*, eds), pp. 123–145, ASM Press
14. Payne, P.L. and Straley, S.C. (1998) *YscO* of *Yersinia pestis* is a mobile core component of the *Yop* secretion system. *J. Bacteriol.* 180, 3882–3890
15. Minamino, T. and Macnab, R.M. (1999) Components of the *Salmonella* flagellar export apparatus and classification of export substrates. *J. Bacteriol.* 181, 1388–1394
16. Matsumoto, A. (1988) Structural characteristics of chlamydial bodies. In *Microbiology of Chlamydia* (Barron, A.L., ed.), pp. 21–45 CRC Press
17. Kubori, T. *et al.* (1998) Supramolecular structure of the *Salmonella typhimurium* type III protein secretion system. *Science* 280, 602–605
18. Bavoil, P.M. and Hsia, R.C. (1998) Type III secretion in *Chlamydia*: a case of déjà vu? *Mol. Microbiol.* 28, 860–862
19. Kaper, J.B. and Hacker, J. (1999) *Pathogenicity Islands and Other Mobile Virulence Elements*, ASM Press
20. Amann, R. *et al.* (1997) Obligate intracellular bacterial parasites of acanthamoebae related to *Chlamydia* spp. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* 63, 115–121
21. Pugsley, A.P. (1993) The complete general secretory pathway in Gram-negative bacteria. *Microbiol. Rev.* 57, 50–108

J.F. Kim  
Microbial Genome Research Team, Genome Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), PO Box 115, Yusong, Taejon 305-600, Republic of Korea.  
e-mail: jfk@mail.kribb.re.kr

---

Meeting Report

# Human genetic history looks to the future

David B. Goldstein

The Cold Spring Harbor Meeting on Human Origins and Disease was held in Cold Spring Harbor, USA, from 25 to 29 October 2000.

After the long frustrations of insufficient genetic resolution, human evolutionists are awash with data. Although the data promise a revolution in our understanding of human history, the significance does not end there.

It is now clear that the study of human genetic diversity will soon assume a crucial place among the core biomedical disciplines dedicated to improving human health.

Opening the floodgates

Only four years ago I used five polymorphic markers to assess the evidence for a selective sweep (strong positive selection)

of human Y chromosomes. At this meeting on human origins, Peter Underhill (Stanford University, USA) reported on the geographical distribution of 218 Y chromosome markers. The increased resolution available is revealing fascinating glimpses of our paternal genetic heritage, complementing the maternal picture provided by the matrilineal

http://tig.trends.com 0168-9525/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. PII: S0168-9525(00)02199-5
