
DNA mismatch repair and cancer

Päivi Peltomäki*

Division of Human Cancer Genetics, Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University,  
690 Medical Research Facility, 420 W. 12th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA  

Received 27 June 2000; received in revised form 1 September 2000; accepted 1 September 2000  

---

### Abstract

Five human DNA mismatch repair genes have been identified that, when mutated, cause susceptibility to hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). Mutational inactivation of both copies of a DNA mismatch repair gene results in a profound repair defect and progressive accumulation of mutations throughout the genome. Some of the mutations confer selective advantage on the cells, giving rise to cancer. Recent discoveries suggest that apart from postreplication repair, DNA mismatch repair proteins have several other functions that are highly relevant to carcinogenesis. These include DNA damage surveillance, prevention of recombination between nonidentical sequences and participation in meiotic processes (chromosome pairing). A brief overview of these different features of the human DNA mismatch repair system will be provided, with the emphasis in their implications in cancer development. © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

#### Keywords: Carcinogenesis; Colon cancer; DNA mismatch repair; HNPCC

---

### 1. DNA mismatch repair system in humans

The primary function of the postreplicative mismatch repair (MMR) is to eliminate base–base mismatches and insertion/deletion loops that arise as a consequence of DNA polymerase slippage during DNA synthesis (for recent reviews, see [1–3]). This system is highly conserved between species (Table 1). In humans, at least six different MMR proteins are required. For mismatch recognition, the MSH2 protein forms a heterodimer with two additional MMR proteins, MSH6 or MSH3, depending on whether base–base mismatches or insertion/deletion loops are to be repaired [4,5]. In the former case, MSH6 is required while in the latter case, MSH3 and MSH6 have partially redundant functions. Biochemical studies have shown that mismatched DNA induces ADP → ATP exchange, resulting in a conformational change that converts the MSH2/MSH6 complex into a sliding clamp that diffuses along the DNA backbone in a hydrolysis-independent manner [6]. A heterodimer of MLH1 and PMS2 (or MLH1 and MLH3, or possibly MLH1 and PMS1) coordinates the interplay between the mismatch recognition complex and other proteins necessary for MMR. The latter proteins presumably include at least the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), exonuclease(s) (e.g. EXO1), DNA polymerases (δ and ε), replication factors (e.g. single-stranded DNA-binding protein RPA), and possibly helicase(s).

---

### 2. Inherited cancer susceptibility associated with defective MMR

Germline alteration of any one of the five human MMR genes, *MSH2*, *MLH1*, *MSH6*, *PMS2* and *PMS1*,

*Tel.: +1-614-688-4493; fax: +1-614-688-4245.*  
*E-mail address: peltomaki-1@medctr.osu.edu (P. Peltomäki).*  

1383-5742/01/$ – see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.  
PII: S1383-5742(00)00058-2

Table 1  
DNA mismatch repair gene homologs in bacteria, yeast and humans. MSH6 and MSH3 as well as PMS2, MLH3, and (possibly) PMS1 are functionally redundant (see text)

| E. coli | S. cerevisiae | H. sapiens | Function |
|---------|---------------|-------------|----------|
| MutS    | Msh2          | MSH2<sup>a</sup> | Recognizes the mismatch |
|         | Msh6          | MSH6<sup>a</sup> | Forms a complex with Msh2 (MSH2) |
|         | Msh3          | MSH3        | Forms a complex with Msh2 (MSH2) |
|         | Msh1          | Not identified | Functions in mitochondrial MMR |
|         | Msh4          | MSH4        | Required for meiotic recombination |
|         | Msh5          | MSH5        | Required for meiotic recombination |
| MutL    | Mlh1          | MLH1<sup>a</sup> | Couples mismatch recognition and subsequent repair |
|         | Pms1          | PMS2<sup>a</sup> | Forms a complex with Mlh1 (MLH1) |
|         | Mlh2          | PMS1<sup>a</sup> | Forms a complex with Mlh1 (MLH1) |
|         | Mlh3          | MLH3        | Forms a complex with Mlh1 (MLH1) |

<sup>a</sup>Mutated in the germline in HNPCC families.

gives rise to hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (HNPCC) that accounts for 1–5% of all cases of colon cancer. Predisposed individuals from HNPCC families have a high lifetime risk of developing colorectal carcinoma (70–85%), endometrial carcinoma (50%), as well as certain other cancers (below 15%) [7, 8], collectively referred to as the “HNPCC tumor spectrum”. Germline mutations in MSH2 and MLH1 are responsible for most HNPCC families while MSH6, PMS2 and PMS1 are less frequently involved, possibly due to functional redundancy ([9, 10], Table 1). Mechanisms that determine why some mutation carriers develop colon cancer, while in others a variety of other organs are affected, are poorly understood. The predisposing defect itself may play an important role; for example, a link between MSH6 mutations and a high incidence of endometrial cancer was recently established [11]. Furthermore, different genes are rate limiting in different cancers, and by structure, some are particularly vulnerable to frameshift mutations associated with DNA mismatch repair deficiency. Illustrative examples include the transforming growth factor β receptor II (TGFβRII) gene and the T-cell transcription factor (TCF)-4 gene, both containing mononucleotide repeats as part of their coding regions. Mutations in these repeats appear to be strongly selected for in colon, but typically not in endometrial cancer [12, 13]. Finally, it has been postulated that exposure of MMR-deficient cells to endogenous or exogenous mutagens may be critical to the organ selection in HNPCC [14].

3. Causes and consequences of MSI in human tumors

Tumors from HNPCC patients show acquired variation in the number of short tandem repeat units contained within microsatellite sequences (MSI, microsatellite instability). This abnormality results from a failure to correct errors arising in these repeats during DNA replication, and occurs in approximately 15% of sporadic tumors from the colorectum and other organs as well [15]. Mutation rates in tumor cells with MMR deficiency are 100–1000-fold as compared to normal cells [16, 17]. Besides anonymous microsatellites and reporter genes such as HPRT, these mutations affect important growth-regulatory genes, including those recognized as key players in the multi-step pathway of colon tumorigenesis (e.g. adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), KRAS and p53) [18, 19]. Genes with mononucleotide repeats in their coding regions, such as TGFβRII, insulin-like growth factor II receptor (IGFIIIR), the proapoptotic gene BAX, as well as the MMR genes MSH6 and MSH3 are particular targets for frameshift mutations in the hypermutability pathway driven by DNA mismatch repair deficiency [20]. Due to the widespread mutation tendency, HNPCC is a disorder of tumor progression, where colonic adenomas, precursor lesions to colon cancer, are not more common than in the general population but significantly more prone to malignant transformation [21]. Interestingly, the mechanisms of biallelic inactivation of MMR genes and consequent MSI are differ-

Table 2  
Mechanisms and consequences of MMR gene inactivation in human colorectal tumors  

| MMR gene | Mechanism of biallelic inactivation | Microsatellite instability phenotype | References |
|----------|-------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|------------|
|          | Sporadic                            | Hereditary                           |            |
| MSH2     | Somatic mutation + LOH<sup>a</sup> or two somatic mutations | Germline mutation + LOH or germline + somatic mutation | High degree of instability of di-, mononucleotide, and other short tandem repeats | [19, 22, 23] |
| MLH1     | Promoter hypermethylation (biallelic) (or somatic mutation + LOH, or two somatic mutations) | Germline mutation + LOH | High degree of instability of di-, mononucleotide, and other short tandem repeats | [23–28] |
| MSH6     | Frequent frameshift mutations in coding C<sub>8</sub> repeat<sup>b</sup> | Germline mutation + somatic (frameshift) mutation or germline mutation + LOH | Low degree of instability with preferential involvement of mononucleotide repeats | [11, 29–33] |
| MSH3     | Frequent frameshift mutations in coding A<sub>8</sub> repeat<sup>b</sup> | None identified | Data not available<sup>c</sup> | [29] |
| PMS2     | Two somatic mutations | Germline + somatic mutation | High degree of instability of dinucleotide and other repeats | [35–37] |
| PMS1     | Data not available | Data not available | Data not available |            |
| MLH3     | Data not available | Data not available | Data not available |            |

<sup>a</sup> Loss of heterozygosity.  
<sup>b</sup> They usually arise as secondary mutations in MSI-positive cells. Homozygosity vs. heterozygosity for these mutations is unclear.  
<sup>c</sup> The mutations are associated with virtual absence of MSI in yeast [4]. Tumors from *Msh3*<sup>−/−</sup> mice show dinucleotide repeat instability [34].

ent in HNPCC and sporadic tumors (Table 2). In HN-  
PCC, MMR gene inactivation typically results from a  
germline mutation of one allele (first hit) and loss of  
heterozygosity or somatic mutation of the other allele  
(second hit). In contrast, an epigenetic mechanism ac-  
counts for a majority of sporadic tumors with MMR  
deficiency, consisting of promoter hypermethylation  
of a single MMR gene, *MLH1* [23]. Moreover, it is  
well-established that the methylation tendency char-  
acteristic of a subset of sporadic tumors has several  
other target genes besides *MLH1* [38]. Therefore, even  
though hereditary and sporadic MSI-positive tumors  
have several features in common, DNA methylation  
differences coupled with selective involvement of  
target genes can be associated with diverging devel-  
opmental pathways in these tumors despite a similar  
MSI phenotype.  

The individual MMR proteins have different sub-  
strate preferences and consequently, their defects are  
associated with somewhat different patterns of MSI  
in tumors (Table 2). Inactivation of either *MSH2*  
or *MLH1* results in a failure of correction of both  
base-base mismatches and insertion/deletion loops,  
and such cells have a strong mutator phenotype  

and high-degree instability of dinucleotide, mononu-  
cleotide, and other short tandem repeats. On the other  
hand, the loss of *MSH6* function typically results in  
elevated rates of base–base mismatches [16], whereas  
MSI is often milder and mainly affects mononu-  
cleotide repeats, because the intact *MSH3* in the cells  
can still accomplish repair of insertion/deletion loops  
of two nucleotides and more.  

4. Favorable prognosis associated with  
MMR-deficient tumors  

MSI-positive tumors show aggressive histological  
features, but paradoxically a favorable outcome. In  
particular, a recent study [39] on a large series of  
young colorectal cancer patients demonstrated that  
MSI was associated with a significant survival advan-  
tage independently of all standard prognostic factors,  
including tumor stage. Furthermore, regardless of  
the depth of tumor invasion, these tumors had a de-  
creased metastasizing potential. Enhanced immune  
surveillance offers one possible explanation: colorec-  
tal carcinomas with MSI display a high prevalence of

activated intraepithelial T-lymphocytes, possibly resulting from the accumulation of mutations to genes encoding cell surface proteins [40]. This may contribute to increased neoplastic cell apoptosis. Alternatively, spontaneous apoptosis may be increased as a consequence of reduced cell viability due to a high mutation burden. Moreover, MSI-positive tumors are often diploid or near-diploid [41], which is a good prognostic sign. Finally, even though the generalized hypermutability does not spare the p53 gene [19], the frequency of p53 mutations in MSI-positive tumors is generally lower than in MSI-negative tumors [42], possibly due to genetic selection, and this could be associated with improved prognosis.

Therefore, mice homozygous for MMR gene mutations have been used as models for HNPCC. While a majority of completely MMR-deficient mice succumb to lymphomas at an early age (probably reflecting the fact that tumor susceptibility of different organs is strongly species-dependent), those animals that survive typically develop epithelial tumors reminiscent of the HNPCC spectrum. These observations emphasize the conservation of MMR-mediated tumor avoidance functions between mice and humans. In addition to knockout mice for the individual MMR genes (Table 3), mice that are doubly-mutant relative to different genes have provided insights into synergistic effects during intestinal tumorigenesis. Thus, mice homozygous for MMR gene (PMS2 or MSH2) defect and heterozygous for a defect in the “gatekeeper” gene APC have shown that the MMR gene defect potentiates APC-mediated intestinal tumorigenesis [50, 51].

5. Mouse models for tumor development in the context of MMR deficiency

To address the relationship between MMR defects and tumorigenesis, mice with mutations in the MutS and MutL homologs have been developed (Table 3). Unlike most HNPCC patients, mice heterozygous for MMR gene mutations do not show increased tumor formation. This is probably due to their short biological lifespan—tumors typically do not develop in humans until the average age of 40–45 years, either.

6. Other functions of the MMR system with cancer relevance

Recent findings indicate an important role for the MMR proteins in damage signaling and apoptosis. Apart from biosynthetic errors, MMR proteins can act on DNA damage caused by, for example, alkylating

Table 3  
Phenotypes of MMR gene knockout mice  

| Mouse          | Median survival | Tumor spectrum                                                                 | Other abnormalities                          | References     |
|----------------|-----------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|----------------|
| *Msh2*⁻/⁻      | 5–6 months      | Lymphoma (T-cell)                                                            | Hyperrecombination                          | [14, 43, 44]   |
|                |                 | Gastrointestinal and skin cancers                                             |                                             |                |
|                |                 | in animals that do not succumb                                                |                                             |                |
|                |                 | to lymphoma                                                                  |                                             |                |
| *Mlh1*⁻/⁻      | 6 months        | Intestinal adenocarcinomas                                                   | Males and females are infertile             | [45, 46]       |
|                |                 | Lymphoma                                                                     | (reduced levels of chiasmata)               |                |
| *Msh6*⁻/⁻      | 10 months       | Lymphoma (B- and T-cell)                                                     | –                                           | [47, 48]       |
|                |                 | Gastrointestinal tumors                                                       |                                             |                |
|                |                 | Uterine tumors                                                               |                                             |                |
| *Msh3*⁻/⁻      | Normal lifespan | No tumors until late age                                                      | –                                           | [34, 48]       |
|                |                 | (gastrointestinal tumors)                                                     |                                             |                |
| *Msh6*⁻/⁻; *Msh3*⁻/⁻ | 6 months    | Gastrointestinal tumors                                                      | –                                           | [34, 48]       |
|                |                 | Non-Hodgkin lymphomas                                                        |                                             |                |
| *Pms2*⁻/⁻      | 6–9 months      | Lymphomas and sarcomas                                                       | Males are infertile (abnormal chromosome     | [46, 49]       |
|                |                 |                                                                             | synapsis in meiosis)                       |                |
| *Pms1*⁻/⁻      | Normal lifespan | No increased tumor development                                                | –                                           | [46, 49]       |

*Mice heterozygous for the mutations do not show increased tumor formation.*

agents, including those used in cancer chemotherapy [52], heterocyclic amines, many of which are of dietary origin [53], or oxidation [54]. MMR-deficient cells are more resistant to the killing effects of alkylating agents as compared to their MMR-proficient counterparts [55]. In MMR-proficient cells, repeated futile attempts to remove mismatched bases incorporated opposite the damaged base may lead to persistent DNA strand breaks, recognized by cellular damage sensors that induce subsequent apoptosis. In the absence of efficient MMR activity, alkylated base damage remains in the DNA, causing alkylation tolerance. Recent observations suggest that the MMR system may even directly sense DNA damage. Thus, in response to alkylating agents, the MMR system can initiate a damage-signaling cascade that can lead to G2/M-arrest [56] or cell death in p53-dependent [57] or p53-independent manner [58]. The persistence of mutagenic lesions generated from endogenous or exogenous sources of chemical DNA damage may enhance tumorigenesis in MMR-deficient cells, and may contribute to the “HNPCC tumor spectrum”, as discussed before [14].

Exogenous damage is usually removed more rapidly from the transcribed strands than from the nontranscribed strands of active genes (transcription-coupled repair). MMR proteins have been found to participate in this important repair mechanism together with nucleotide excision repair proteins [59, 60]. At least, as far as the removal of UV-induced and oxidative damage is concerned, the different MMR proteins may be differentially involved [61].

A further mechanism by which the MMR proteins promote genomic stability is by suppressing recombination between interspersed, diverged (homeologous) sequences (reviewed in [62]). In *MSH2*⁻/⁻ mice, heterology-dependent suppression of recombination is lost, resulting in hyperrecombination ([44], Table 3). It is somewhat unexpected that MSI-positive (MMR-deficient) human colon cancer cells are typically diploid or near-diploid, as assessed by flow cytometry [41], and seldom display DNA sequence copy number changes by comparative genomic hybridization [63]. It is presently unknown whether increased recombination is absent in these cells or alternatively, it is so subtle that it goes undetected by commonly used methods. A second type of recombination event involving the MMR proteins is gene

conversion that involves unidirectional replacement of sequence on one parental chromosome with sequence from the other. Yeast strains mutant for postmeiotic segregation (PMS) genes show a reduced frequency of meiotic gene conversion [64]. Mouse studies have demonstrated that MMR proteins are required for chromosome pairing during mammalian meiosis, and failure of this function in *PMS2*⁻/⁻ and *MLH1*⁻/⁻ mice leads to infertility ([45, 49], Table 3). However, no reduced fertility has been reported to occur in HNPCC patients who are constitutional heterozygotes for MMR gene defects.

## 7. Therapeutic implications

Alkylation tolerance characteristic of MMR-deficient cells has direct implications for chemotherapy of HNPCC patients and other patients with MSI-positive tumors. Alkylating agents are not recommended because such therapy is not only expected to be ineffective but may even lead to the enrichment of tumor cells [65]. Another therapeutic area in which a profound knowledge of the MMR system is useful involves the application of the cyclo-oxygenase 2 (COX2) enzyme inhibitors, such as aspirin for polyp prevention. Elevated levels of the COX2 protein are believed to contribute to colorectal tumorigenesis, for example based on a dramatic reduction in the number of colorectal tumors that is observed in *APC* mutant mice following the deletion of the *COX2* gene [66]. Studies on MMR-deficient human cell lines recently showed that aspirin suppresses the mutator phenotype by inducing a genetic selection for microsatellite stability, suggesting that aspirin may provide an effective prophylactic therapy for HNPCC [67]. The authors hypothesized that aspirin might exert its effect by circumventing the absence of a threshold-instability apoptotic signal, normally controlled by the MMR machinery. However, recent observations of intrinsically reduced COX2 expression in HNPCC and other MSI-positive cancers [68, 69], and the silencing of the COX2 enzyme in sporadic tumors through the hypermethylator phenotype [70] raise some concerns about the efficacy of COX2 inhibitors for polyp prevention in MMR-deficient cases. Extensive multi-center chemoprevention trials on HNPCC mutation carriers that are presently underway should shed light on this question.

8. Concluding remarks

HNPCC provides a useful model system to study tumorigenesis driven by MMR deficiency. Despite an increasing knowledge about genetic and biochemical defects associated with this cancer syndrome, little is known about mechanisms that translate HNPCC genotype into its clinical phenotype. Why do some mutation carriers develop cancer already in their teens while other carriers of the same mutations remain healthy beyond 80 years of age? Why, in some individuals, the colorectum is affected while others develop a variety of extracolonic cancers? Addressing such questions leads one to examine not only the mutational consequences of MMR deficiency, but other known or putative functions of the MMR system as well, as outlined before. Finally, the presently known HNPCC-associated MMR genes account for only two-thirds of this syndrome in its classical form, thus leaving one-third of such families unexplained. Studying families from the latter cohort is likely to result in the identification of additional human MMR genes, or other genes participating in MMR, that may turn out to play important roles in tumorigenesis and inherited cancer susceptibility.

References

[1] R.D. Kolodner, G.T. Marsischky, Eukaryotic mismatch repair, Curr. Opin. Genet. Devel. 9 (1999) 89–96.
[2] A.B. Buermeyer, S.M. Deschenes, S.M. Baker, R.M. Liskay, Mammalian DNA mismatch repair, Annu. Rev. Genet. 33 (1999) 533–564.
[3] J. Jiricny, M. Nyström-Lahti, Mismatch repair defects in cancer, Curr. Opin. Genet. Devel. 10 (2000) 157–161.
[4] G.T. Marsischky, N. Filosi, M.F. Kane, R. Kolodner, Redundancy of Saccharomyces cerevisiae MSH3 and MSH6 in MSH2-dependent mismatch repair, Genes Dev. 10 (1996) 407–420.
[5] R. Das Gupta, R.D. Kolodner, Novel dominant mutations in Saccharomyces cerevisiae MSH6, Nat. Genet. 24 (2000) 53–56.
[6] S. Gradia, D. Subramanian, T. Wilson, S. Acharya, A. Makhov, J. Griffith, R. Fishel, hMSH2–hMSH6 forms a hydrolysis-independent sliding clamp on mismatched DNA, Mol. Cell 3 (1999) 255–261.
[7] H.F.A. Vasen, J.T. Wijnen, F.H. Menko, J.H. Kleibeuker, B.G. Taal, G. Griffioen, F.M. Nagengast, E.H. Meijers-Heijboer, L. Bertario, L. Varesco, M.-L. Bisgaard, J. Mohr, R. Fodde, P. Meera Khan, Cancer risk in families with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer diagnosed by mutation analysis, Gastroenterology 110 (1996) 1020–1027.
[8] M. Aarnio, R. Sankila, E. Pukkala, R. Salovaara, L.A. Aaltonen, A. de la Chapelle, P. Peltomäki, J.-P. Mecklin, H.J. Järvinen, Cancer risk in mutation carriers of DNA mismatch repair genes, Int. J. Cancer 81 (1999) 214–218.
[9] P. Peltomäki, H.F.A. Vasen, The International Collaborative Group on HNPCC, Mutations predisposing to hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: database and results of a collaborative study, Gastroenterology 113 (1997) 1146–1158.
[10] P. Peltomäki, A. de la Chapelle, Mutations predisposing to hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, Adv. Cancer Res. 71 (1997) 93–119.
[11] J. Wijnen, W. de Leeuw, H. Vasen, H. van der Klift, P. Möller, A. Stormorken, H. Meijers-Heijboer, D. Lindhout, F. Menko, S. Vossen, G. Möslein, C. Tops, A. Bröcker-Vriends, Y. Wu, R. Hofstra, R. Sijmons, C. Cornelisse, H. Morreau, R. Fodde, Familial endometrial cancer in female carriers of MSH6 germline mutations, Nat. Genet. 23 (1999) 142–144.
[12] L.L. Myeroff, R. Parsons, S.-J. Kim, L. Hedrick, K.R. Cho, K. Orth, M. Mathis, K.W. Kinzler, J. Lutterbaugh, K. Park, Y.-J. Bang, H.Y. Lee, J.-G. Park, H.T. Lynch, A.B. Roberts, B. Vogelstein, S.D. Markowitz, A transforming growth factor β receptor type II gene mutation common in colon and gastric but rare in endometrial cancers, Cancer Res. 55 (1995) 5545–5547.
[13] A. Duval, B. Iacopetta, G.N. Ranzani, R.A. Lothe, G. Thomas, R. Hamelin, Variable mutation frequencies in coding repeats of TCF4 and other target genes in colon, gastric and endometrial carcinoma showing microsatellite instability, Oncogene 18 (1999) 6806–6809.
[14] N. de Wind, M. Dekker, A. van Rossum, M. van der Valk, H. te Riele, Mouse models for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, Cancer Res. 58 (1998) 248–255.
[15] C.R. Boland, Genetic pathways to colorectal cancer, Hosp. Pract. 32 (1997) 79–96.
[16] N.P. Bhattacharyya, A. Skandalis, A. Ganesh, J. Groden, M. Meuth, Mutator phenotypes in human colorectal carcinoma cell lines, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91 (1994) 6319–6323.
[17] J.R. Eshleman, E.Z. Lang, G.K. Bowerfind, R. Parsons, B. Vogelstein, J.K. Willson, M.L. Veigl, W.D. Sedwick, S.D. Markowitz, Increased mutation rate at the hprt locus accompanies microsatellite instability in colon cancer, Oncogene 10 (1995) 33–37.
[18] J. Huang, N. Papadopoulos, A.J. McKinley, S.M. Farrington, L.J. Curtis, A.H. Wyllie, S. Zheng, J.K. Willson, S.D. Markowitz, P. Morin, K.W. Kinzler, B. Vogelstein, M.G. Dunlop, APC mutations in colorectal tumors with mismatch repair deficiency, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 93 (1996) 9049–9054.
[19] M. Konishi, R. Kikuchi-Yanoshita, K. Tanaka, M. Muraoka, A. Onda, Y. Okumura, N. Kishi, T. Iwama, T. Mori, M. Koike, K. Ushio, M. Chiba, S. Nomizu, F. Konishi, J. Utsunomiya, M. Miyaki, Molecular nature of colon tumors in hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, familial polyposis, and sporadic colon cancer, Gastroenterology 111 (1996) 307–317.

[20] C.R. Boland, S.N. Thibodeau, S.R. Hamilton, D. Sidransky, J.R. Eshleman, R.W. Burt, S.J. Meltzer, M.A. Rodriguez-Bigas, R. Fodde, G.N. Ranzani, S. Srivastava, Development of international criteria for the determination of microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer, in: Proceedings of the National Cancer Institute Workshop on Microsatellite Instability for Cancer Detection and Familial Predisposition, Cancer Res. 58 (1998) 5248–5257.

[21] K.W. Kinzler, B. Vogelstein, Lessons from hereditary colorectal cancer, Cell 87 (1996) 159–170.

[22] Y. Wu, M. Nyström-Lahti, J. Osinga, M.W.G. Looman, P. Peltomäki, L. Aaltonen, A. de la Chapelle, R.M.W. Hofstra, C.H.C.M. Buys, *MSH2* and *MLH1* mutations in sporadic replication-error positive colorectal carcinoma as assessed by two-dimensional DNA electrophoresis, Genes Chrom. Cancer 18 (1997) 269–278.

[23] S.A. Kuusinen, M.T. Holmberg, R. Salovaara, A. de la Chapelle, P. Peltomäki, Genetic and epigenetic modification of *MLH1* accounts for a major share of microsatellite-unstable colorectal cancers, Am. J. Pathol. 156 (2000) 1773–1779.

[24] M.F. Kane, M. Loda, G.M. Gaida, J. Lipman, R. Mishra, H. Goldman, J.M. Jessup, R. Kolodner, Methylation of the hMLH1 promoter correlates with lack of expression of hMLH1 in sporadic colon tumors and mismatch repair-defective human tumor cells, Cancer Res. 57 (1997) 808–811.

[25] J.G. Herman, A. Umar, K. Polyak, J.R. Graff, N. Ahuja, J.-P. Issa, S. Markowitz, J.K.V. Willson, S.R. Hamilton, K.W. Kinzler, M.F. Kane, R.D. Kolodner, B. Vogelstein, T.A. Kunkel, S.B. Baylin, Incidence and functional consequences of hMLH1 promoter hypermethylation in colorectal carcinoma, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95 (1998) 6870–6875.

[26] M.L. Veigl, L. Kasturi, J. Olechnowicz, A.H. Ma, J.D. Lutterbaugh, S. Periyasamy, G.-M. Li, J. Drummond, P. Modrich, W.D. Sedwick, S.D. Markowitz, Biallelic inactivation of hMLH1 by epigenetic silencing, a novel mechanism causing human MSI cancers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95 (1998) 8698–8702.

[27] A. Hemminki, P. Peltomäki, J.P. Mecklin, H. Järvinen, R. Salovaara, M. Nyström-Lahti, A. de la Chapelle, L.A. Aaltonen, Loss of the wild type *MLH1* gene is a feature of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, Nat. Genet. 8 (1994) 405–410.

[28] P. Tannergård, T. Liu, A. Weger, M. Nordenskjöld, A. Lindblom, Tumorigenesis in colorectal tumors from patients with hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer, Hum. Genet. 101 (1997) 56–60.

[29] S. Malkhosyan, N. Rampino, H. Yamamoto, M. Perucho, Frameshift mutator mutations, Nature 382 (1996) 499–500.

[30] Y. Akiyama, H. Sato, T. Yamada, H. Nagasaki, A. Tsuchiya, R. Abe, Y. Yuasa, Germ-line mutation of the *hMSH6/GTBP* gene in an atypical hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer kindred, Cancer Res. 57 (1997) 3920–3923.

[31] M. Miyaki, M. Konishi, K. Tanaka, R. Kikuchi-Yanoshita, M. Muraoka, M. Yasuno, T. Igari, M. Koike, M. Chiba, T. Mori, Germline mutation of *MSH6* as the cause of hereditary

nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, Nat. Genet. 17 (1997) 271–272.

[32] R.D. Kolodner, J.D. Tytell, J.L. Schmeits, M.F. Kane, R.D. Gupta, J. Weger, S. Wahlberg, E.A. Fox, D. Peel, A. Ziogas, J.E. Garber, S. Syngal, H. Anton-Culver, F.P. Li, Germ-line msh6 mutations in colorectal cancer families, Cancer Res. 59 (1999) 5068–5074.

[33] Y. Wu, M.J.W. Berends, R.G.J. Mensink, C. Kempinga, R.H. Sijmons, A.G.J. van der Zee, H. Hollema, J.H. Kleibeuker, C.H.C.M. Buys, R.M.W. Hofstra, Association of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer-related tumors displaying low microsatellite instability with *MSH6* germline mutations, Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65 (1999) 1291–1298.

[34] W. Edelmann, A. Umar, K. Yang, J. Heyer, M. Kucherlapati, M. Lia, B. Kneitz, E. Avdievich, K. Fan, E. Wong, G. Crouse, T. Kunkel, M. Lipkin, R.D. Kolodner, R. Kucherlapati, The DNA mismatch repair genes *Msh3* and *Msh6* cooperate in intestinal tumor suppression, Cancer Res. 60 (2000) 803–807.

[35] N.C. Nicolaides, N. Papadopoulos, B. Liu, Y.-F. Wei, K.C. Carter, S.M. Ruben, C.A. Rosen, W.A. Haseltine, R.D. Fleischmann, C.M. Fraser, M.D. Adams, J.C. Venter, M.G. Dunlop, S.R. Hamilton, G.M. Petersen, A. de la Chapelle, B. Vogelstein, K.W. Kinzler, Mutations of two PMS homologues in hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, Nature 371 (1994) 75–80.

[36] S.R. Hamilton, B. Liu, R.E. Parsons, N. Papadopoulos, J. Jen, S.M. Powell, A.J. Krush, T. Berk, Z. Cohen, B. Tetu, P.C. Burger, P.A. Wood, F. Taqi, S.V. Booker, G.M. Petersen, J.A. Offerhaus, A.C. Tersmette, F.M. Giardiello, B. Vogelstein, K.W. Kinzler, The molecular basis of Turcot's syndrome, N. Engl. J. Med. 332 (1995) 839–847.

[37] A.H. Ma, L. Xia, S.J. Littman, S. Swinler, G. Lader, A. Polinkovsky, J. Olechnowicz, L. Kasturi, J. Lutterbaugh, P. Modrich, M.L. Veigl, S.D. Markowitz, W.D. Sedwick, Somatic mutation of *hPMS2* as a possible cause of sporadic human colon cancer with microsatellite instability, Oncogene 19 (2000) 2249–2256.

[38] M. Toyota, M. Ohe-Toyota, N. Ahuja, J.-P. Issa, Distinct genetic profiles in colorectal tumors with or without the CpG island methylator phenotype, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 18 (2000) 710–715.

[39] R. Gryfe, H. Kim, E.T.K. Hsieh, M.D. Aronson, E.J. Holowaty, S.B. Bull, M. Redston, S. Gallinger, Tumor microsatellite instability and clinical outcome in young patients with colorectal cancer, N. Engl. J. Med. 342 (2000) 69–77.

[40] R. Dolcetti, A. Viel, C. Doglioni, A. Russo, M. Guidoboni, E. Capozzi, N. Vecchiato, E. Macri, M. Fornasarig, M. Boiocchi, High prevalence of activated intraepithelial cytotoxic T lymphocytes and increased neoplastic cell apoptosis in colorectal carcinomas with microsatellite instability, Am. J. Pathol. 154 (1999) 1805–1813.

[41] R.A. Lothe, P. Peltomäki, G.I. Meling, L.A. Aaltonen, M. Nyström-Lahti, L. Pylkkänen, K. Heimdal, T.I. Andersen, P. Møller, T.O. Rognum, S.D. Fosså, T. Haldorsen, F. Langmark, A. Brøgger, A. de la Chapelle, A.-L. Børresen,

Genomic instability in colorectal cancer: relationship to clinicopathological variables and family history, Cancer Res. 53 (1993) 5849–5882.

[42] H. Kim, J. Jen, B. Vogelstein, S.R. Hamilton, Clinical and pathological characteristics of sporadic colorectal carcinomas with DNA replication errors in microsatellite sequences, Am. J. Pathol. 145 (1994) 148–156.

[43] A.H. Reitmair, R. Schmits, A. Ewel, B. Bapat, M. Redston, A. Mitri, P. Waterhouse, H.-W. Mittrücker, A. Wakeham, B. Liu, A. Thomason, H. Griesser, S. Gallinger, W.G. Ballhausen, R. Fishel, T.W. Mak, *MSH2* deficient mice are viable and susceptible to lymphoid tumours, Nat. Genet. 11 (1995) 64–70.

[44] N. de Wind, M. Dekker, A. Berns, M. Radman, H. te Riele, Inactivation of the mouse *Msh2* gene results in mismatch repair deficiency, methylation tolerance, hyperrecombination, and predisposition to cancer, Cell 82 (1995) 321–330.

[45] S.M. Baker, A.W. Plug, T.A. Prolla, C.E. Bronner, A.C. Harris, X. Yao, D.-M. Christie, C. Monell, N. Arnheim, A. Bradley, T. Ashley, R.M. Liskay, Involvement of mouse *Mlh1* in DNA mismatch repair and meiotic crossing over, Nat. Genet. 13 (1996) 336–342.

[46] T.A. Prolla, S.M. Baker, A.C. Harris, J.-L. Tsao, X. Yao, C.E. Bronner, B. Zheng, M. Gordon, J. Reneker, N. Arnheim, D. Shibata, A. Bradley, R.M. Liskay, Tumour susceptibility and spontaneous mutation in mice deficient in *Mlh1*, *Pms1* and *Pms2* DNA mismatch repair, Nat. Genet. 18 (1998) 276–279.

[47] W. Edelmann, K. Yang, A. Umar, J. Heyer, K. Lau, K. Fan, W. Liedtke, P.E. Cohen, M.F. Kane, J.R. Lipford, N. Yu, G.F. Crouse, J.W. Pollard, T. Kunkel, M. Lipkin, R. Kolodner, R. Kucherlapati, Mutation in the mismatch repair gene *Msh6* causes cancer susceptibility, Cell 91 (1997) 467–477.

[48] N. de Wind, M. Dekker, N. Claij, L. Jansen, Y. van Klink, M. Radman, G. Riggins, M. van der Valk, K. van’t Wout, H. te Riele, HNPCC-like cancer predisposition in mice through simultaneous loss of *Msh3* and *Msh6* mismatch-repair protein functions, Nat. Genet. 23 (1999) 359–362.

[49] S.M. Baker, C.E. Bronner, L. Zhang, A.W. Plug, M. Robatzek, G. Warren, E.A. Elliott, J. Yu, T. Ashley, N. Arnheim, R.A. Flavell, M.R. Liskay, Male mice defective in the DNA mismatch repair gene *PMS2* exhibit abnormal chromosome synapsis in meiosis, Cell 82 (1995) 309–319.

[50] A.H. Reitmair, J.-C. Cai, M. Bjerknes, M. Redston, H. Cheng, M.T.L. Pind, K. Hay, A. Mitri, B.W. Bapat, T.W. Mak, S. Gallinger, *MSH2* deficiency contributes to accelerated APC-mediated intestinal tumorigenesis, Cancer Res. 56 (1996) 2922–2926.

[51] S.M. Baker, A.C. Harris, J.-L. Tsao, T.J. Flath, C.E. Bronner, M. Gordon, D. Shibata, R.M. Liskay, Enhanced intestinal adenomatous polyp formation in *Pms2⁻/⁻;Min* mice, Cancer Res. 58 (1998) 1087–1089.

[52] M. Yamada, E. O’Regan, R. Brown, P. Karran, Selective recognition of a cis-platin-DNA adduct by human mismatch repair proteins, Nucleic Acids Res. 25 (1997) 491–495.

[53] G.-M. Li, H. Wang, L.J. Romano, Human MutSα specifically binds to DNA containing aminofluorene and acetyl-aminofluorene adducts, J. Biol. Chem. 271 (1996) 24084–24088.

[54] T.L. deWeese, J.M. Shipman, N.A. Larrier, N.M. Buckley, L.C.R. Kidd, J.D. Groopman, R.G. Cutler, H. te Riele, W.G. Nelson, Mouse embryonic stem cells carrying one or two defective *Msh2* alleles respond abnormally to oxidative stress inflicted by low-level radiation, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95 (1998) 11915–11920.

[55] P. Karran, R. Hampson, Genomic instability and tolerance to alkylating agents, Cancer Surv. 28 (1996) 69–85.

[56] M.T. Hawn, A. Umar, J.M. Carethers, G. Marra, T.A. Kunkel, C.R. Boland, M. Koi, Evidence for a connection between the mismatch repair system and the G2 cell cycle checkpoint, Cancer Res. 55 (1995) 3721–3725.

[57] D.R. Duckett, S.M. Bronstein, Y. Taya, P. Modrich, hMutSa and hMutLa-dependent phosphorylation of p53 in response to DNA methylator damage, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96 (1999) 12384–12388.

[58] M.J. Hickman, L.D. Samson, Role of DNA mismatch repair and p53 in signaling induction of apoptosis by alkylating agents, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96 (1999) 10764–10769.

[59] I. Mellon, D.K. Rajpal, M. Koi, C.R. Boland, G.N. Champe, Transcription-coupled repair deficiency and mutations in human mismatch repair genes, Science 272 (1996) 557–560.

[60] P. Bertrand, D.X. Tishkoff, N. Filosi, R. Dasgupta, R.D. Kolodner, Physical interaction between components of DNA mismatch repair and nucleotide excision repair, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95 (1998) 14278–14283.

[61] S.A. Leadon, A.V. Avrutskaya, Differential involvement of the human mismatch repair proteins, hMLH1 and hMSH2, in transcription-coupled repair, Cancer Res. 57 (1997) 3784–3791.

[62] M.S. Rhuy, Molecular mechanisms underlying hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma, J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 88 (1996) 240–251.

[63] J. Schlegel, G. Stumm, H. Scherthan, T. Bocker, H. Zirngibl, J. Rüschoff, F. Hofstädter, Comparative genomic in situ hybridization of colon carcinomas with replication error, Cancer Res. 55 (1995) 6002–6005.

[64] M.S. Williamson, J.C. Game, S. Fogel, Meiotic gene conversion mutants in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. I. Isolation and characterization of *pms-1* and *pms-2*, Genetics 110 (1985) 609–646.

[65] D. Fink, S. Nebel, P.S. Norris, R.N. Baergen, S.P. Wilczynski, J.M. Costa, M. Haas, S.A. Cannistra, S.B. Howell, Enrichment for DNA mismatch repair-deficient cells during treatment with cisplatin, Int. J. Cancer 77 (1998) 741–746.

[66] M. Oshima, J.E. Dinchuk, S.L. Kargman, H. Oshima, B. Hancock, E. Kwong, J.M. Trzaskos, J.F. Evans, M.M. Taketo, Suppression of intestinal polyposis in *ApcΔ716* knockout mice by inhibition of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2), Cell 87 (1996) 803–809.

[67] J. Rüschoff, S. Wallinger, W. Dietmaier, T. Bocker, G. Brockhoff, F. Hofstädter, R. Fishel, Aspirin suppresses the mutator phenotype associated with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer by genetic selection, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95 (1998) 11301–11306.

[68] W.E. Karnes Jr., R. Shattuck-Brandt, L.J. Burgart, R.N. DuBois, D.J. Tester, J.M. Cunningham, C.Y. Kim, S.K.

McDonnell, D.J. Schaid, S.N. Thibodeau, Reduced COX2 protein in colorectal cancer with defective mismatch repair, Cancer Res. 58 (1998) 5473–5477.

[69] F.A. Sinicrope, M. Lemoine, L. Xi, P.M. Lynch, K.R. Cleary, Y. Shen, M.L. Frazier, Reduced expression of cyclo- oxygenase 2 proteins in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal

cancers relative to sporadic cancers, Gastroenterology 117 (1999) 350–358.

[70] M. Toyota, L. Shen, M. Ohe-Toyota, S.R. Hamilton, F.A. Sinicrope, J.-P.J. Issa, Aberrant methylation of the cyclooxygenase 2 CpG island in colorectal tumors, Cancer Res. 60 (2000) 4044–4048.
