
P1: FQP/GBP  P2: FQP/LRV  QC: XXX  
February 19, 2001  15:31  Annual Reviews  AR123-15  

Annu. Rev. Immunol. 2001. 19:397–421  
Copyright © 2001 by Annual Reviews. All rights reserved  

# CHEMOKINE SIGNALING AND FUNCTIONAL  
RESPONSES: The Role of Receptor Dimerization  
and TK Pathway Activation  

Mario Mellado, José Miguel Rodríguez-Frade,  
Santos Mañes and Carlos Martínez-A.  
*Department of Immunology and Oncology, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología/CSIC,*  
*UAM Campus de Cantoblanco, E-28049 Madrid, Spain; e-mail: cmartineza@cnb.uam.es*  

Key Words JAK/STAT pathway, cell mobility, HIV-1 coreceptors  

■ **Abstract** A broad array of biological responses, including cell polarization, movement, immune and inflammatory responses, and prevention of HIV-1 infection, are triggered by the chemokines, a family of structurally related chemoattractant proteins that bind to specific seven-transmembrane receptors linked to G proteins. Here we discuss one of the early signaling pathways activated by chemokines, the JAK/STAT pathway. Through this pathway, and possibly in conjunction with other signaling pathways, the chemokines promote changes in cellular morphology, collectively known as polarization, required for chemotactic responses. The polarized cell expresses the chemokine receptors at the leading cell edge, to which they are conveyed by rafts, a cholesterol-enriched membrane fraction fundamental to the lateral organization of the plasma membrane. Finally, the mechanisms through which the chemokines promote their effect are discussed in the context of the prevention of HIV-1 infection.  

## CHEMOKINES  

The chemokines are a family of low-molecular-weight proteins involved in leukocyte activation and migration. The two main groups, the CXC or α chemokines and the CC or β chemokines, differ in their structural properties and in their chromosomal location. Most chemokines exhibit four conserved cysteines in specific positions. The CXC family is characterized by an amino acid positioned between the first and second cysteines, whereas in the CC family these two cysteines are located side by side. Two minor families have been described; one has lost the first and third cysteines, is represented by lymphotactin, and is known as C or γ chemokines. The other, the CX3C or δ family, exhibits three amino acids between the first two cysteines and is represented by fractalkine or neurotactin (1–3).

Since the description of the first chemokine (PF4) in 1961, many different chemoattractant cytokines have been characterized. Their role in migration and their specificity for various leukocyte subsets have been characterized in detail. Significant advances have been made in recent years in understanding the role of chemokines (4) in inflammatory diseases (5), hematopoiesis, angiogenesis, metastasis, tumor rejection (6), Th1/Th2 responses (7, 8), and HIV-1 infection. This last case, that is, the neutralizing effect of chemokines on HIV-1 infection and the characterization of chemokine receptors as HIV-1 coreceptors, has triggered new studies of chemokines and their mechanism of action (9–11). Future directions in chemokine research include the characterization of chemokine antagonists, which will open up therapeutic opportunities for autoimmune diseases, transplantation, and immune deficiencies (12).

## CHEMOKINE RECEPTORS

Chemokines exert their effects by interaction with seven-transmembrane, G protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) present in the membrane of the target cell. All of these receptors are comprised of approximately 350 amino acids and a molecular weight around 40 kDa. The extracellular domain consists of the N-terminus and three extracellular loops that act in concert to bind the chemokine ligand. The intracellular region is composed of three loops and the C-terminus, which also collaborate to transduce the chemokine signal. Based on their amino acid sequences, chemokine receptors belong to the class A rhodopsin-like family. Although similar to other seven-transmembrane receptors, the chemokine receptors share certain structural features, such as the highly conserved DRYLAIV amino acid sequence in the second intracellular loop (13).

As is the case for the chemokines, the receptors can also be grouped into four major families, CR, CCR, CXCR, and CX3CR, which interact with the C, CC, CXC, and CX3C chemokines, respectively. Their structural similarity has aided in the identification of new chemokine receptors, in many cases even before the ligand is described. The HIV-1 coreceptor CXCR4 was cloned several years ago, for example, and designated LESTR at the time; it was classified as a putative chemokine receptor based on its similarity to IL-8 receptors and to CCR1 and CCR2 (14).

Several caveats must be considered when chemokine signaling is being evaluated. First of all, chemokine receptor expression on the cell surface is highly variable; that is, although mRNA may be found in a cell, it does not always correspond to functional receptor expression but corresponds rather to an internal pool in many cases. Second, the use of GFP fusion proteins and tagged receptors, which substitute for the lack of appropriate receptors, have limited the study of chemokine signaling to transfected cells; their use may also alter both expression and signaling in these modified receptors. The lack of reliable chemokine-specific reagents has impeded characterization of the biochemical pathways associated

with chemokine responses, although a number of recently produced chemokine receptor-specific monoclonal antibodies are now helping to elucidate some of the chemokine-triggered intracellular signals. Much of the information we have today about chemokine signaling has been deduced mainly from available information on GPCR signaling. Known pathways for other GPCR that have been studied include G protein coupling, JAK/STAT, as well as both tyrosine and Ser/Thr kinases (15–17).

# SIGNALING THROUGH CHEMOKINE RECEPTORS

## Chemokine Receptor Dimerization and Activation of the Tyrosine Kinase Pathway

Despite substantial recent advances in our understanding of chemotaxis, the precise mechanism through which cells respond to a chemotactic gradient remains unclear. Leukocyte motion involves several phenomena, including changes in cell shape, changes in integrin affinity, and integrin recycling at the cell’s leading edge (18). These events appear to be mediated by phosphorylation signals triggered through chemokine receptors, although the signal transduction machinery implicated has only begun to be elucidated (15). Figure 1 shows a scheme illustrating the main signaling pathways described to date; these pathways are activated following ligand binding to chemokine receptors and lead to a number of important cellular consequences including gene expression, cell polarization, and chemotaxis.

All GPCR share a core domain consisting of the seven transmembrane helices; conformational changes in this domain are believed to be responsible for receptor activation. Similar conformational changes can be elicited by a wide variety of ligands including light, Ca²⁺, pheromones, and small molecules (amino acids, amines, nucleotides, prostaglandins, peptides) or proteins (glycoproteins, interleukins, chemokines), suggesting the existence of a large variety of molecular mechanisms that induce such activation (19). GPCR may exist in equilibrium between two conformational states, active and inactive; the presence of an agonist would drive this balance toward the active state, whereas an antagonist would favor the inactive form. Like other GPCR, some if not all chemokine receptors initiate their ligand-induced signaling cascades by receptor dimerization (20–22).

Our laboratory has concentrated its efforts on understanding the mechanisms behind the activation of the tyrosine kinase pathway by chemokines, as well as its biological significance. We thus focus here on the study of ligand-mediated chemokine receptor dimerization, a phenomenon that has been observed in many receptor families, including the seven-transmembrane GPCR.

Chemokine receptor dimerization was first demonstrated for CCR2, the MCP-1 receptor. The similarity among chemokine receptors, including conservation of the DRY motif, nonetheless suggests that dimerization and JAK/STAT pathway activation are not exclusive to CCR2 but are found for other chemokine receptors, including members of the CCR and CXCR families. This is the case for CCR5 and

400 MELLADO ET AL

CXCR4, both of which induce activation of different JAK/STAT family members. In the CCR5-transfected HEK-293 cell response to RANTES, CCR5 is rapidly tyrosine phosphorylated, and JAK1, but not JAK2 or JAK3, associates with the receptor (21). JAK1 association in response to RANTES promotes STAT5b transcriptional factor association to the receptor, as well as its activation. Activation of STAT transcriptional factors was also seen in T cells after RANTES and MIP-1α stimulation (23); in this case, STAT1 and STAT3 are implicated, both of which induce expression of the STAT-inducible proto-oncogene c-fos. In addition, SDF-1α promotes rapid activation and association of JAK1 and JAK2 to the CXCR4. This activation promotes STAT1, 2, 3, and 5b association to the CXCR4, followed by its activation (22).

In the CCR2, tyrosine Y139 in the DRY motif has been identified as the primary target for JAK2-mediated CCR2b receptor phosphorylation (16). A CCR2b mutant receptor in which this residue has been replaced by phenylalanine (CCR2bY139F) retains its capacity to form homodimers in response to MCP-1 stimulation, but it shows impairment of Gαi association to CCR2b and thus of Gi-mediated effects such as calcium mobilization and chemotaxis. This is a direct consequence of the lack of CCR2b phosphorylation and JAK2 activation. When CCR2bY139F is coexpressed with wild-type CCR2b in HEK-293 cells, these cells are unable to signal in response to MCP-1. This is because of the inability of the CCR2bY139F mutant to be phosphorylated on Tyr, rendering it unable to recruit and trigger JAK2 phosphorylation and association to the receptor, impeding Gi activation. This shows that CCR2bY139F acts as a CCR2b dominant negative mutant, blocking chemokine responses by its ability to form nonproductive complexes with partners containing the functional domain, demonstrating the significance of dimerization in chemokine responses. These data also show that, in the absence of JAK activation, chemokine signaling through chemokine receptors does not occur, as confirmed by the observation that G protein–mediated signaling events are blocked by JAK kinase inhibitors (16).

Although reports of chemokine receptor dimerization and chemokine-mediated JAK/STAT activation are relatively recent, several lines of evidence suggest that GPCR dimers may have an important role in signaling (24). Examples include the chimeric α2-adrenergic-m3-muscarinic receptors (25), as well as the angiotensin (AT1) (26), V2-vasopressin (27), β2-adrenergic (28), δ-opioid (29), mGluR5 (30), and calcium-sensing receptors (31). It is interesting to note that, as for the chemokine receptors, this activation is apparently independent of G protein–related events (32).

In another member of the seven-transmembrane receptor family, the response to GABA requires heterodimerization of the GBR1 and GBR2 receptors (33–35). Physical interaction between GBR1 and GRB2 appears to be essential for the activation of potassium channels. More recently, another group of GPCR, the opioid receptors, were shown to undergo heterodimerization (36). In this case, there is clear biochemical and pharmacological evidence for the heterodimerization of two functional opioid receptors, κ and δ. Heterodimerization of these two receptors

causes synergistic agonist binding and potentiates the biological signal, although there are no biochemical data to explain this heterodimer-triggered synergistic response. A similar observation has been recently made for the dopamine and the somatostatin receptors (37).

Both the dimerization of chemokine receptors and the extensive sequence identity among some of them strongly suggest that chemokine receptors may heterodimerize. In fact, chemokine receptor heterodimerization could be the mechanism by which individuals with the CCR2V64I allele show delayed AIDS progression (11). As for other GPCR, chemokine receptor heterodimerization would have important functional consequences, including increases in the sensitivity of some responses (37) or initiation of signaling events not triggered by individual chemokines, such as specific recruitment of non-Gi proteins (38).

# Activation of Chemokine Receptor-Associated G Proteins

The classical view of chemoattractant receptor signaling requires activation of the G protein pathway after chemokine binding. The majority of these responses are inhibited by PTX treatment, indicating that members of the Gi protein family are the primary transduction partners associated with the receptors (13, 39) (Figure 1). Physical association of Ga; to several chemokine receptors has been described; these include CXCR1 (40), CCR2 (16), CCR5 (21), and CXCR4 (22), following activation by IL-8, MCP-1, RANTES, and SDF-1α, respectively. Signaling studies of the CC chemokine receptors in transfected HEK-293 cells revealed potent, agonist-dependent inhibition of adenylyl cyclase and mobilization of intracellular calcium, consistent with receptor coupling to Ga; (41). In some studies, PTX did not completely block the calcium response, suggesting that chemokine receptors may couple to G proteins other than Gi, such as Gq or G16, depending on the chemokine receptor studied; this indicates that receptor/G protein pairings may be cell type-specific (42, 43). Although chemokine responses in many leukocytes require Gi activation, leukocytes express Gi-coupled receptors that are not known to induce chemotaxis (44). It thus appears that Gi activation, although necessary, is not sufficient for chemotaxis. The role of Gi may thus be due to the indirect effect of Ga; sequestration of Gβγ subunits, which has been described to prevent the chemotactic response (45–47). A direct effect of Ga; on some other signaling pathway cannot be ruled out.

Following activation by the chemokine-triggered receptor, the heterotrimeric Gaβγ protein dissociates into the Gβγ subunit complex and the GTP-bound Ga; subunit. Ga; binds the receptor, probably by interaction with one or more intracellular loop regions (42); this is a consequence of conformational changes promoted in the chemokine receptor by ligand binding, Janus kinase association, and tyrosine phosphorylation of the receptor. Both events, receptor association and subunit dissociation, initiate independent intracellular signaling responses by acting on distinct effector molecules.

The G$\beta\gamma$ subunits trigger PLC activation (48) leading to formation of inositol triphosphate [Ins(1,4,5)P₃] and diacylglycerol (DAG). Through binding to its specific receptor in the endoplasmic reticulum, Ins(1,4,5)P₃ mobilizes Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores. Acting in conjunction with Ca²⁺, DAG activates various protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms; PKC then activates a cascade of signal transduction events both intracytoplasmically and within the nucleus. G$\beta\gamma$ also acts as a docking protein, providing an interface for the GPCR, which would facilitate GPCR interaction in diverse signaling pathways. This is the case for the coupling of the G protein–coupled receptor kinases (GRK) (49), which are involved in chemokine receptor desensitization (see below).

CC chemokines also activate phospholipase A₂ (PLA₂) and the release of arachidonic acid in human monocytes (50, 51). Arachidonic acid seems to be involved in or at least closely associated with the chemotactic response; in fact, PLA₂ inhibitors decrease chemokine-induced monocyte migration in a concentration-dependent manner (52). Phospholipase D (PLD) activation by chemokines has been reported (53), although its significance is speculative and details of its regulation in leukocytes remain to be elucidated.

Shutdown of G protein–activated signals is dependent on Ga subunit GTPase activity. The slow hydrolysis of GTP to guanosine diphosphate (GDP), which remains protein-bound, promotes dissociation of the Ga subunit from effectors and reassociation with the G$\beta\gamma$ subunit. The slow intrinsic rate of GTP hydrolysis by Ga proteins is regulated by interactions with GTPase-activating proteins (GAP). There is a large, newly discovered family of GAP for Ga proteins, known as regulators of G protein signaling, or RGS proteins, which act as negative regulators of G protein signaling (54, 55) by interacting directly with Ga so that it cannot interact with effectors or with G$\beta\gamma$ (56). It is not yet known how RGS are regulated in vivo, nor has their role in chemokine signaling been demonstrated, although it has been shown that the CXCR2 receptor can specifically interact with the PDZ domain of RGS12 (55) and that RGS1 desensitizes a variety of chemotactic receptors, such as those of N-fMLP and leukotrienes B4 and C5 (57).

The classical view of chemokine signaling involving G proteins is more complex than expected. Although some chemokine-mediated responses are clearly linked to Ga proteins, other effects appear to be mediated by other G proteins or by G$\beta\gamma$ subunit release. Further studies may elucidate the role of the distinct G proteins in chemokine signaling and the functional consequences.

## Chemokines Trigger Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase (PI3K) Activation

PI3K activity is rapidly stimulated by chemoattractants (58, 59) (see also Figure 1, color insert) SDF-1$\alpha$ activates PI3K and induces p85 association to CXCR4 (60). This results in the generation of 3-phosphorylated lipids that act as second messengers for downstream effectors such as PKC, AKT, and Ras pathways (61). This activation has been implicated in integrin adhesiveness, cell migration, and

polarization (62). In PI3Kγ KO mice, it has recently been shown that migration in response to chemoattractants is impaired but not eliminated, suggesting that this specific G protein–activated PI3K subtype is important in, but not essential to, chemotaxis (63). In fact, the major effect of PI3K inhibition in neutrophils appears to be blockade of NADPH oxidase activity (63–65), although it is also involved in cytoskeletal change phenomena necessary for polarization (58, 60). Some studies suggest that the p85 subunit SH2 domain may be required for its association with the tyrosine-phosphorylated p125FAK (66). Furthermore, the association between p125FAK and the activated CCR5 receptor has been shown using CCR5-transfected cells (21). Signaling through the CCR5 receptor leads to phosphorylation and activation of a recently discovered FAK family protein kinase, Pyk2 (also known as RAFTK or CAK-β) (67, 68). This activation results in downstream modulation of the JNK/SAPK kinase system. Activation of the FAK kinases by chemokines acting through CCR5 results in phosphorylation of the cytoskeletal protein paxillin and its association to this receptor.

Recent studies in whole human PBL reveal that inhibition of PI3K activity by chemical compounds or by overexpression of its dominant negative form prevent the polarization of adhesion molecules and of several cytoskeletal elements such as the protein moesin of the ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) complex. These data indicate that PI3K activation induces polarization of adhesion molecules (60). Other PI3K effectors include the low-molecular-weight GTPases, such as Rho, Rac, and Cdc42, which participate in regulation of the actin cytoskeleton and cell adhesion through specific targets (69, 70).

In conclusion, PI3K activity is an important mediator of chemotactic responses. Although all PI3K isoforms generate intracellular messengers such as PIP3, a general signal for migration responses, further studies are required to obtain a more complete view of their individual contributions in the variety of events that lead to cell migration.

## Ser/Thr Phosphorylation of Chemokine Receptors

Lymphocyte trafficking is a complex process controlled by a vast array of molecules. These cells must be able to detect minimal changes in chemoattractant gradients; for this, cells probably employ an on-off mechanism in which chemokine receptor desensitization may be an important step. Little is known of the regulatory mechanisms in the cellular response to chemokines, or of the role of desensitization in lymphocyte migration. For a large number of related GPCRs, rapid desensitization appears to involve agonist-promoted receptor phosphorylation by members of the GRK family (71). GRK-mediated phosphorylation of Ser/Thr residues in the carboxyl tail and/or intracellular loops of GPCR increases affinity for arrestin-type proteins, the binding of which prevents any further coupling between the receptor and G proteins (72). Following chemokine stimulation, receptors of both CXC and CC chemokine families are phosphorylated at multiple serine residues in the C-terminal domain by GRK enzymes (73–78). This phosphorylation is similar

to that observed for several other GPCR and is critical in receptor function, as it mediates receptor desensitization and internalization into vesicular compartments. This phosphorylation was first described for CCR2 (73, 78) and later extended to other chemokine receptors (79–81) that, following ligand-induced activation, form a macromolecular complex with GRK and the regulatory protein β-arrestin. Variations in GRK family member use by receptors appear to reflect GRK availability in the cells employed rather than a specific GRK–chemokine receptor relationship.

During the GRK2-mediated desensitization process, both GRK2 catalytic activity and the CCR2b C-terminal domain Ser/Thr residues are critical. Coexpression of GRK2 and CCR2 blocks MCP-1-induced responses. When a CCR2 receptor mutant lacking Ser/Thr residues in the carboxyl tail was expressed, the MCP-1-induced signal was not inhibited by GRK2 coexpression (78). This critical role for GRK kinase in CCR2 deactivation was also shown when the CCR2 receptor was coexpressed with a dominant-negative mutant of GRK2 (82); the cellular response to a second MCP-1 challenge was equivalent to the original response (73). A similar response to ligand challenge was observed by expressing a truncated C-terminal form of the CXCR2 receptor or a receptor mutated in Ser and Thr residues (80, 81). The active role of β-arrestin in receptor internalization is indicated by the fact that dominant negative mutants of this protein block CXCR1 internalization (83).

Synaptic vesicle recycling and endocytosis of many receptors, including GPCR, require the GTPase activity of dynamin (84). Coexpression of CXCR2 or CXCR1 with a dominant negative dynamin mutant inhibits receptor internalization (83, 85), and RANTES promotes a transient association between dynamin and CCR5 in the clathrin vesicles that mediate internalization (79). Figure 2 shows the sequence of chemokine signaling events that leads to receptor internalization.

As for other GPCR, the turning off of chemokine receptors thus requires the participation of different molecules, including GRK, arrestin, clathrin, and dynamin; this leads to receptor internalization to the endosome, where the receptor will be dephosphorylated and either recycled to the cell surface or degraded. This process may have a more direct role, as it has been suggested for other GPCR that internalization is needed to activate specific signaling cascades (86, 87).

## Activation of the MAP Kinase Cascade

MAP kinases (MAPK), also known as extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK), are activated by phosphorylation of Tyr/Thr residues (88, 89) and regulate several different proteins, including oncogenic transcription factors and protein kinases. MAPK activation of PLA2 (90) and cytoskeletal elements (91) suggests a specific role for this signaling cascade in chemokine-induced cellular responses. Stimulation of human neutrophils with f-MLP activates Ras (92), which initiates the MAPK cascade by binding to the Ser/Thr kinase Raf. Ras translocates Raf from the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane (93), where it is activated through interactions with members of the 14-3-3 protein family (94, 95). Both Raf and MEKK, another MAP kinase, phosphorylate and activate MAPK (59, 96).

PTX treatment blocks chemokine activation of the MAPK cascade in neutrophils, indicating that the activation of this kinase is a process mediated via $G_{i}$. With COS-7-transfected cells and transient MAPK coexpression with GPCR, activated $Ga_{i}$ subunits failed to mimic receptor stimulation of MAPK activity, evidence of the active role of $G\beta\gamma$ dimers in this signaling pathway. Under different experimental conditions, MAPK activation by $G\beta\gamma$ subunits required neither PLC-$\beta$ nor PKC activation but was blocked by dominant interfering mutants of Ras (97, 98); $G\beta\gamma$ subunits induced accumulation of the GTP-bound, active form of Ras.

Chemokine activation of MAPK has a number of functional consequences. As MAPK can phosphorylate and activate transcription factors (99), chemokines may be involved in regulation of gene expression through this pathway (Figure 1). Furthermore, MAPK phosphorylates and activates cytoplasmic PLA2, leading to release of arachidonic acid and phospholipid (100). Arachidonic acid-induced leukotriene production is essential for actin polymerization (101). These data also indicate a chemokine-induced pathway involving MAPK and cPLA2 that may regulate cytoskeletal changes necessary for cell migration. In any case, this function may not be critical, as the p38-MAPK inhibitor SK&F 86002 has no significant effect on chemokine-mediated chemotaxis or chemokinesis (102).

## CHEMOKINE-TRIGGERED BIOLOGICAL RESPONSES

### Cell Polarization: Chemokine Receptor Expression at the Leading Cell Edge

Cell migration has a crucial role in a wide variety of biological phenomena. It is of particular importance for leukocyte function and in the inflammatory response. For a cell to begin to migrate, the acquisition of a polarized morphology that allows cell locomotion appears to be required. This morphology is also involved in a number of other processes, such as cell differentiation, vectorial transport of molecules across cell layers, induction of the immune response, and recognition and binding of APC by T cells. Cytolytic T lymphocytes and natural killer (NK) cells maintain a polarized phenotype when bound to their targets, and they initiate the polarized secretion of cytolytic granules, which are required for proper cell-killing function (103, 104).

Chemokines and other chemotactic cytokines induce T, B, and NK cell as well as phagocyte polarization (103–106). One of the earliest events in chemoattractant-induced leukocyte polarization is a change in cell distribution of filamentous F-actin, from a radial symmetrical pattern to concentration in specific cell regions. As a consequence, two differentiated areas are established in the cell, the leading edge and the uropod. The uropod, which is not observed in other migrating eukaryotic cells, is a pseudopod-like projection that represents a specialized structure with important motility and adhesion functions. The leading cell edge concentrates several receptors, including the $\alpha v \beta 3$ integrin, receptors for classic chemoattractants

such as the fMLP receptor, and chemokine receptors such as CCR2, CCR5, and CXCR4 in lymphocytes. The redistribution of chemokine receptors to the leading edge is triggered by several chemotactic factors and by cytokines such as IL-2 and IL-15. In migrating cells, a number of adhesion molecules are concentrated in the uropod, among them ICAM, L-selectin, PSGL-1, Mac-1, and CD43. The presence of these molecules in the uropod promotes the binding of other cells, enhancing leukocyte recruitment and transendothelial migration (18).

The presence of chemokine receptors at the leading cell edge implies the establishment of endogenous polarity but also the specialization of this cell domain to detect the chemoattractant gradient. Cell polarization thus correlates with orientation toward the chemoattractant source. The signal transduction molecules coupled to the activated chemokine receptors also localize at the advancing front of the cell. Chemokine activation of G protein signaling events at the stimulated edge of chemotactic cells has also been described in other models (107); this led to the proposal of a model in which receptor activation at the stimulated cell edge recruits molecules that signal the cytoskeleton directly. Some evidence indicates recruitment of the pleckstrin homology domain of the AKT protein kinase to the leading edge of neutrophils activated by chemoattractant molecules, in a process requiring one or more Rho guanosine triphosphatases (108). The Rho family of GTPases has a major role in regulating the actin cytoskeleton, which organizes membrane protrusion and focal adhesion, and in regulating cell polarity during leukocyte migration. The mechanisms through which Rho GTPases exert their effects have not been completely elucidated, although some actin-binding proteins may be the effectors (109, 110).

Chemokines also induce NK cell polarization and redistribution both of adhesion molecules to the uropod and of chemokine receptors to the leading cell edge. This observation assigns chemokines an important role in the NK cell cytotoxic response (104, 111). The leading edge is involved in target cell adhesion, in granule release during cytotoxic phenomena, and in directing cell migration, whereas the uropod has functions related to leukocyte recruitment. The formation of NK-target cell conjugates induces the release of chemokines responsible for NK cell migration, an effect that is mimicked by in vitro activation of NK cells.

The morphological asymmetry characteristic of polarized lymphocytes reflects the spatial rearrangement of several molecules, including cytoskeletal proteins, membrane receptors, and signaling molecules. Lymphocyte polarization is essential not only for cell migration, but also in leukocyte effector functions such as T helper cell interactions with antigen-presenting cells, as well as during target cell recognition and killing by NK and cytotoxic T cells.

## Chemokine Receptors Are Transported to the Leading Cell Edge in Rafts

The redistribution of chemokine receptors and the associated trimeric G proteins at the leading edge of the moving cell correlates with the acquisition of a migratory phenotype. The mechanisms involved in chemokine receptor transport to the

leading edge has only recently come to be understood. Cell polarization may be considered the final result of complex mechanisms that establish and maintain functionally specialized domains in the plasma membrane during cell migration. Favoring this view, the signals that trigger and maintain asymmetric chemokine receptor redistribution in leukocytes appear to be independent of the polarization-inducing agent used (103, 112). This suggests that cell asymmetry is not the consequence of chemoattractant receptor distribution but that protein redistribution is the final result of the polarization process.

Migrating cells are not the only cells that segregate proteins into specific plasma membrane regions. In polarized cell types such as neurons or epithelial cells, distinct plasma membrane domains (apical and basolateral compartments for epithelia, and axon and dendrites for neurons) differ strongly in lipid and protein composition (113, 114). It is proposed that the asymmetric distribution of membrane proteins among apical and basolateral membranes (for epithelia) or axon and dendrites (for neurons) is achieved by specific co-sorting with glycosphingolipids in vesicular carriers (114–116). According to this model, specific membrane proteins clustered with glycosphingolipids and cholesterol-enriched membrane rafts in the trans-Golgi network (TGN) would be delivered preferentially to the apical membrane or to the axon (117). In nonpolarized cells such as BHK, CHO, or 3T3 fibroblasts, several membrane proteins are also delivered with glycosphingolipids in vesicular carriers from the TGN to the cell surface (118–120). These protein-lipid complexes are conserved on the surface of living cells (121, 122), where they are viewed as moving platforms of highly ordered membrane that transport specific proteins. Because of their lateral and rotational mobility, lipid rafts are fundamental in the lateral organization of the proteins anchored to the plasma membrane (123).

Several lines of recent evidence suggest that segregation between raft and non-raft proteins in unstimulated cells is crucial in distributing specialized molecules to specific locations during cell polarization (124). First, chemokine receptors associate with membrane raft microdomains, and receptor asymmetry parallels the preferential leading edge redistribution of other raft-linked molecules, including GM1, glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored green fluorescent protein (GFP-GPI), and ephrinB1; conversely, proteins not located in rafts are distributed homogeneously over the cell surface. Second, modification of proteins such that they do not associate with rafts inhibits their asymmetric redistribution in polarized cells. Indeed, the non-raft-associated mutant ephrinB1ΔC (125) is distributed homogeneously in the plasma membrane of migrating cells, whereas raft-associated ephrinB1wt redistributes to the leading edge of polarized cells. Third, the protein redistribution is not restricted to molecules with functional significance, as redistribution of GFP-GPI and chemokine receptors to the leading edge occurs simultaneously. This result highlights that raft association is the pivotal determinant for the redistribution of proteins to the leading edge of polarized cells, and so the result supports the observation that asymmetric chemokine receptor distribution to the leading cell edge is a phenomenon that reflects the cell polarization process.

Cell asymmetry thus appears to be dependent on protein association with rafts; disruption of raft structure, and hence function, would render cells unable to achieve

a polarized phenotype. Raft function can be abrogated by chemical sequestration of cholesterol from the membrane (120). Cholesterol depletion impedes chemokine-induced cell polarization and inhibits cell chemotaxis, which can be restored by replenishing the plasma membrane with cholesterol (124). Cholesterol depletion does not, however, inhibit chemoattractant-mediated early signaling or recruitment of the signaling-associated receptor complex. Collectively, these results indicate that raft integrity is required for the acquisition of front-rear polarity and, consequently, for cell motility. Since cholesterol depletion treatment abolishes the association of chemokine receptors with raft membrane microdomains (124), these findings suggest that chemoattractants engage all the signaling machinery necessary to induce cell polarization, using the lipid rafts as platforms.

# Chemokines Prevent HIV-1 Infection

In the mid-1990s, the protective role of chemokines in HIV-1 infection was described (126), as was the fact that chemokine receptors, in conjunction with CD4, could act as HIV-1 coreceptors (127). Today we know that T-tropic HIV-1 strains use CXCR4 as a coreceptor, whereas CCR5 is the entry cofactor for M-tropic isolates (128). An important advance in understanding the role of chemokine receptors as HIV-1 receptors was the identification of a CCR5 polymorphism that renders homozygous individuals highly resistant to viral infection (129, 130). This polymorphism is a 32-base-pair deletion (ccr5-Δ32) that results in the production of a truncated receptor molecule not expressed on the cell surface; ccr5-Δ32 homozygous individuals are thus resistant to infection by M-tropic HIV-1 viral strains (129). In addition to CXCR4 and CCR5, other receptors show limited coreceptor activity, as is the case of CCR2, CCR3, CCR8, CCR9, CXCR3, or the orphans Bonzo and BOB (10, 131). This discovery provided new perspectives on fundamental aspects of HIV-1 transmission and pathogenesis, and it suggests fresh approaches for the development of anti-AIDS therapies. Nonetheless, current understanding of the events triggered by chemokine or virus interaction with chemokine receptors is based on observations made using different, not always comparable methods. This, and the variable expression of chemokine receptors depending on cell line, donor, and activation method employed, renders both chemokine signaling and its implications in HIV-1 infection a complex although promising field.

HIV-1 entry into a cell is a multistep process that involves high-affinity interaction with CD4, which is thought to trigger the conformational changes (132) needed for subsequent interaction with chemokine receptors (133). The coreceptors represent new players in the fusion process, leading to more complex models involving multiple protein-protein interactions and conformational changes. Several chemokine receptor regions have been implicated in this interaction, based on receptor chimeras, point mutation studies, comparison of chemokine receptor homologues from different species, and analysis of the blocking activity of chemokine analogues and anti-chemokine receptor antibodies. Although the results are extremely complex and sometimes contradictory, certain conclusions can

be drawn. In the CCR5, there is a clear role for the N-terminal region and one of the extracellular loops in the maintenance of viral infection (134, 135). For CXCR4, the N-terminal region does not have such a critical part in viral interaction; the extracellular loops account for most of the residues involved in binding with the viral env proteins. The transmembrane regions also influence activity, however, probably affecting the display of the extracellular regions.

Several mechanisms have been postulated by which chemokines inhibit HIV-1 infection (136–139), as illustrated in Figure 3. One, the so-called steric hindrance model, holds that chemokine binding to its receptor blocks interaction of the HIV-1-env/CD4 complex with the receptor. Results of experiments using modified chemokines that are antagonists in functional assays such as chemotaxis indicate that this may be a mode of blockage (138, 139). Nonetheless, earlier studies indicate that the CCR5 domains involved in chemokine ligand specificity and in coreceptor usage for various HIV-1 strains are not identical (140). Whereas N-terminal-specific mAb block gp120-CCR5 binding very efficiently, antibodies specific for the second extracellular loop are more potent in preventing viral infection.

Another model suggests that chemokines induce chemokine receptor desensitization and internalization, preventing viral interaction with and infection of the target cell; evidence for this mode of action has also been reported (137). This model allowed generation of potent chemokine agonists that induce receptor internalization, preventing HIV-1 infection. This is the case of an N-terminally modified RANTES protein, aminoxypropyl-RANTES (AOP-RANTES), a potent inhibitor of infection by M-tropic HIV-1 strains in monocytes and lymphocytes (139). AOP-RANTES treatment results in a rapid decrease in surface CCR5 expression in these cells (79, 139).

The third possibility is that the receptor undergoes a conformational change after chemokine binding, giving rise to a structure no longer recognized by the virus. A conformational change, dimerization, indeed follows chemokine or antibody binding; this may in turn impede the interaction between HIV-1 gp120 and the chemokine receptor (141). Indeed, monoclonal antibodies have been described that block HIV-1 infection with no detectable CCR5 activation and that trigger receptor dimerization (141).

Receptor dimerization has also been used to explain certain cases of resistance to HIV-1 infection. Thus, several studies describe CCR2V64I, a CCR2-related polymorphism (142) characterized by a conservative valine-to-isoleucine change at position 64 in the first CCR2 transmembrane domain, a region with complete amino acid sequence identity to CCR5. The allele is found in all ethnic groups tested with frequencies ranging from 10%–25% (143). Although CCR2V64I has no effect on initial HIV transmission, studies show that seroconvertors bearing the CCR2V64I allele progress to AIDS significantly more slowly (2–4 years) than do CCR2 wild-type HIV-1 seroconvertors (142). There is nonetheless substantial doubt that the CCR2V64I mechanism of action involves CCR2 directly, as this coreceptor is used by relatively few HIV-1 isolates in vitro and has not been

consistently demonstrated to mediate HIV-1 infection in primary cells (144). Although it is suggested that CCR2V64I is linked to another polymorphism that affects CCR5 expression or function, there is thus far no evidence to support this hypothesis. An association has been found between the CCR2V64I genotype and reduced CXCR4 levels on healthy donor PBMC (145). A means by which this mutation prevents disease progression has recently been proposed, as the ability of CCR2V64I to form heterodimers with CCR5 and CXCR4, impairs the ability of both R5 and X4 HIV-1 strains to infect target cells (11).

# Raft Integrity Is Required for HIV-1 Infection

HIV-1 infection depends on multiple intermolecular interactions at the cell surface that occur sequentially. Accumulated evidence indicates that membrane rafts are fundamental in the lateral organization of the plasma membrane (123). This organization is achieved because laterally diffusing lipid rafts can eventually coalesce with other rafts at the cell surface but not with other lipids encompassing a different membrane conformation. Certain membrane proteins are specifically raft-associated, whereas others are selectively excluded from these microdomains. This bulk separation of membrane-associated proteins between raft and non-raft membrane phases determines that only proteins sharing a preference for the same lipid environment will copatch into tightly associated domains, following stimulation that induces aggregation of membrane markers. This is of the utmost relevance, since HIV-1 infection activates lateral cell surface associations whose mechanisms nonetheless remain elusive. Interestingly, both HIV-1 receptors, that is, CD4 and the chemokine receptors, partition preferentially in membrane rafts (124, 146). Moreover, permissive molecules that favor HIV-1 infection, such as CD44 and CD28, are found in and mediate reorganization of lipid rafts in living cells (147). Physicochemical studies of gp120 interaction with defined glycosphingolipids (GSL) (148, 149) and inhibition of HIV-1 in vitro infection after treatment of cells with anti-GSL antibodies (149) suggest that raft components may also be important in HIV-1 infection.

Evidence suggests that raft preference by both chemokine receptors and CD4 is essential for fusion of the HIV-1 envelope and the cell membrane, probably by enabling gp120-induced lateral association of CD4 and CXCR4 (150). Functional raft disruption caused by the decrease in cellular GSL or cholesterol levels abolishes HIV-1 infection. Since GSL and cholesterol are both basic components of lipid rafts, the inhibitory effect of these lipids may be mediated by impeding lateral diffusion of the HIV-1 co-receptors CD4 and CXCR4 or CCR5, a multimolecular organization critical for viral entry. This suggests that cell envelope fusion requires integrity of rafts bearing CD4 and CXCR4 or CCR5 receptors to enable viral infection in the target cell.

This and the recently described budding of HIV-1 in rafts (151) point to chemokine receptors in membrane rafts as a possible target for new strategies to prevent and/or block HIV-1 infection. Such a therapeutic approach would be suitable for both X4 and R5 viral strains, and it would obviate the problem of resistance mutants.

generated using current treatments. The observation that chemokines trigger higher molecular organization of chemokine receptors, affecting their presence in rafts, may be an important step in this direction.

# CONCLUDING REMARKS

Chemokines are the principal chemotactic factors implicated in the regulation of leukocyte traffic as well as in establishing lymphoid organ architecture. They regulate lymphocyte precursor entry into primary lymphoid organs as well as mature lymphocyte migration to secondary lymphoid organs, where following activation, they are responsible for triggering functional immune responses. The chemokines implicated in these activities constitute the homeostatic chemokines. Another large subset of chemokines appears to provoke inflammatory cell migration into tissues: the so-called inflammatory chemokines. Both chemokine subsets mediate their function by interacting with specific receptors belonging to the family of seven-transmembrane, G protein-coupled receptors, expressed on the leukocyte surface.

Much information is available on the biochemical pathways activated by this large receptor family, but recent studies of signaling by chemokine and other ligands show that they also activate a tyrosine kinase pathway that shares many components with the biochemical pathway activated by the cytokine receptors: recruitment of the JAK and STAT transcriptional factors that trigger gene expression following nuclear translocation. As in the cytokine responses, activation of this pathway appears to depend on ligand-mediated receptor homodimerization. These findings open up a new pathway not only for intervention in chemokine responses, especially in those cases aimed at preventing tissue infiltration, but also for exploring the now obvious connection between chemokine and cytokine responses.

One of the most prominent biological functions of chemokines is to trigger chemotaxis. Chemokines elicit a chemotactic response through the activation of trimeric $G_{i}$ proteins and the subsequent $G\beta\gamma$ dimer release from the trimeric $Ga_{i}\beta\gamma$ complex. It is suggested that $G\beta\gamma$ dimers may function as a cell guidance system in eukaryotic cells. A cell moving along a chemotactic gradient acquires and maintains spatial as well as functional asymmetry between two opposite sides of the cell, the front and the rear. Chemokines may control the acquisition of front-rear polarity by triggering molecular rearrangements that lead to cellular asymmetry, such as relocalization of chemoattractant receptors to the leading cell edge and redistribution of adhesion receptors. The asymmetric distribution of chemokine receptors may thus be pivotal to the specific localization of the $G\beta\gamma$ guidance system at the cell leading edge.

An intriguing question is how cells engage these chemotactic signals at the cell front. It has been proposed that membrane proteins are selectively delivered to specialized cell surfaces in polarized neurons and epithelial cells by the clustering of specific proteins with glycosphingolipid and cholesterol-enriched membrane platforms, the raft microdomains. In nonpolarized cells, these rafts are homogeneously distributed over the cell surface; following chemoattractant stimulation,

the membrane rafts and the specific membrane proteins associated to them redistribute preferentially to the leading edge. Membrane proteins excluded from rafts remain homogeneously distributed. Raft association appears to be a general requirement for G protein-coupled chemottractant receptor migration to the leading edge; indeed, both heterotrimeric G proteins and chemokine receptors associate with membrane raft microdomains. Chemokine receptor polarization parallels the preferential redistribution to the leading edge of other raft-linked molecules, including those with no functional relevance in the polarization process. Disruption of chemokine receptor association with lipid rafts impedes cell polarization and inhibits chemotaxis. The lateral organization imposed by membrane raft microdomains is therefore fundamental to the engagement of all chemotactic signals at the proper cell location.

Finally, the identification of chemokine receptors as the HIV-1 receptors has opened up new horizons for understanding HIV-1 infection and for the development of rational approaches to its prevention. Chemokines block infection through a mechanism apparently independent of chemokine receptor signaling and downregulation, in which receptor d/oligomerization appears to cause the detachment of CD4. This process may be mediated by differential co-receptor expression on rafts, since raft disorganization also prevents HIV-1 infection. This mechanism of chemokine signaling via receptor di/oligomerization is implicated at the initial stages of many critical physiological and pathological processes. This perspective of chemokine immunobiology will provide a clearer comprehension of these conditions, possibly leading to new orientations toward the treatment of many inflammatory and infectious diseases.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Dr. Jens Stein for critical reading of the manuscript and Catherine Mark for editorial assistance. We also thank Drs. Antonio J. Vila-Coro, Emilia Mira, and Rosa Ana Lacalle, as well as Silvia Fernández, Ana M. Martín de Ana, and Concepción Gómez-Moutón for much of the work that contributed to this review. This work was partially supported by grants from the CICYT, European Union/FEDER, and the Comunidad Autónoma de Madrid. The Department of Immunology and Oncology was founded and is supported by the Spanish Research Council (CSIC) and by the Pharmacia Corporation.

Visit the Annual Reviews home page at www.AnnualReviews.org

## LITERATURE CITED

1. Baggolini M. 1998. Chemokines and leukocyte traffic. *Nature* 392:565–68
2. Rollins BJ. 1997. Chemokines. *Blood* 90: 909–28
3. Schall TJ, Bacon KB. 1994. Chemokines, leukocyte trafficking and inflammation. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 6:865–73
4. Rossi D, Zlotnik A. 2000. The biology of

chemokines and their receptors. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 18:217–42

5. Murdoch C, Finn A. 2000. Chemokine receptors and their role in inflammation and infectious diseases. *Blood* 95:3032–43

6. Wang JM, Deng X, Gong W, Su S. 1998. Chemokines and their role in tumor growth and metastasis. *J. Immunol. Methods* 220:1–17

7. Bonecchi R, Bianchi G, Panina-Bordignon P, D'Ambrosio D, Lang R, Borsatti A, Sozzani S, Allavena P, Gray PA, Mantovani A, Sinigaglia F. 1998. Differential expression of the chemokine receptors and chemotactic responsiveness of type 1 T helper clones (Th1s) and Th2s. *J. Exp. Med.* 187:129–34

8. Sallusto F, Mackay CR, Lanzavecchia A. 2000. The role of chemokine receptors in primary, effector, and memory immune responses. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 18:593–620

9. Cairns JS, D'Souza MP. 1998. Chemokines and HIV-1 second receptors: the therapeutic connection. *Nat. Med.* 4:563–68

10. Berger EA, Murphy PM, Farber JM. 1999. Chemokine receptors as HIV-1 coreceptors: roles in viral entry, tropism, and disease. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 17:657–700

11. Mellado M, Rodriguez-Frade JM, Vila-Coro AJ, Martin de Ana A, Martinez-AC. 1999. Chemokine control of HIV-1 infection. *Nature* 400:723–24

12. Baggiolini M, Moser B. 1997. Blocking chemokine receptors. *J. Exp. Med.* 186: 1189–91

13. Murphy PM. 1994. The molecular biology of leukocyte chemoattractant receptors. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 12:593–633

14. Loetscher M, Geiser T, O'Reilly T, Zwahlen R, Baggiolini M, Moser B. 1994. Cloning of a human seven-transmembrane domain receptor, LESTR, that is highly expressed in leukocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269:232–37

15. Bokoch GM. 1995. Chemoattractant signaling and leukocyte activation. *Blood* 86:1649–60

16. Mellado M, Rodriguez-Frade JM, Aragay

A, del Real G, Martin AM, Vila-Coro AJ, Serrano A, Mayor Jr F, Martinez-A C. 1998. The chemokine MCP-1 triggers JAK2 kinase activation and tyrosine phosphorylation of the CCR2b receptor. *J. Immunol.* 161:805–13

17. Pelchen-Matthews A, Signoret N, Klasse PJ, Fraile-Ramos A, Marsh M. 1999. Chemokine receptor trafficking and viral replication. *Immunol. Rev.* 168:33–49

18. Sanchez-Madrid F, del Pozo MA. 1999. Leukocyte polarization in cell migration and immune interactions. *EMBO J.* 18:501–11

19. Bockaert J, Pin JP. 1999. Molecular tinkering of G protein-coupled receptors: an evolutionary success. *EMBO J.* 18:1723–29

20. Rodriguez-Frade JM, Vila-Coro AJ, Martin de Ana A, Albar JP, Martinez-AC, Mellado M. 1999. The chemokine monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 induces functional responses through dimerization of its receptor CCR2. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 96:3628–33

21. Rodriguez-Frade JM, Vila-Coro A, Martin de Ana A, Nieto M, Sanchez-Madrid F, Proudfoot AEI, Wells TNC, Martinez-AC, Mellado M. 1999. Similarities and differences in RANTES- and (AOP)-RANTES-triggered signals: implications for chemotaxis. *J. Cell. Biol.* 144:755–65

22. Vila-Coro AJ, Rodriguez-Frade JM, Martin de Ana A, Moreno-Ortiz MC, Martinez-AC, Mellado M. 1999. The chemokine SDF-1α triggers CXCR4 receptor dimerization and activates the JAK/STAT pathway. *FASEB J.* 13:1699–1710

23. Wong M, Fish EN. 1998. RANTES and MIP-1α activate STATs in T cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:309–14

24. Salahpour A, Angers S, Bouvier M. 2000. Functional significance of oligomerization of G-protein-coupled receptors. *Trends Endocrin. Metab.* 11:163–68

25. Maggio R, Vogel Z, Wess J. 1993.

414 MELLADO ET AL

Coexpression studies with mutant mus-
carinic/adrenergic receptors provide evi-
dence for intermolecular “cross-talk” be-
tween G protein-linked receptors. *Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 90:3103–7

26. Monnot C, Bihoreau C, Conchon S,
Curnow KM, Corvol P, Clauser E. 1996.
Polar residues in the transmembrane do-
main of the type 1 angiotensin II recep-
tor are required for binding and coupling.
Reconstitution of the binding site by co-
expression of two deficient mutants. *J. Biol.
Chem.* 271:1507–13

27. Zhu X, Wess J. 1998. Truncated V2 vaso-
pressin receptors as negative regulators of
wild-type V2 receptor function. *Biochem-
istry* 37:15773–84

28. Hebert TE, Loisel TP, Adam L, Ethier
N, Ong SS, Bouvier M. 1998. Func-
tional rescue of a constitutively desensi-
tized beta2AR through receptor dimeriza-
tion. *Biochem. J.* 330:287–93

29. Cvejic S, Devi LA. 1997. Dimerization of
the delta opioid receptor: implication for
a role in receptor internalization. *J. Biol.
Chem.* 272:26959–64

30. Romano C, Yang WL, O'Malley KL. 1996.
Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 is a
disulfide-linked dimer. *J. Biol. Chem.*
271:28611–16

31. Bai M, Trivedi S, Brown EM. 1998. Dimer-
ization of the extracellular calcium-sensing
receptor (CaR) on the cell surface of CaR-
transfected HEK 293 cells. *J. Biol. Chem.*
273:23605–10

32. Williams JG. 1999. Serpentine receptors
and STAT activation: more than one way to
twin a STAT. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 24:333–
34

33. White JH, Wise A, Main MJ, Green
A, Fraser NJ, Disney GH, Barnes AA,
Emson P, Foord SM, Marshall FH. 1998.
Heterodimerization is required for the for-
mation of a functional GABA(B) receptor.
*Nature* 396:679–82

34. Kaupmann K, Malitschek B, Schuler V,
Heid J, Froestl W, Beck P, Mosbacher J,

Bischoff S, Kulik A, Shigemoto R,
Karschin A, Bettler B. 1998. GABA(B)-
receptor subtypes assemble into functional
heteromeric complexes. *Nature* 396:683–
87

35. Kuner R, Kohr G, Grunewald S, Eisen-
hardt G, Bach A, Kornau HC. 1999. Role
of heteromer formation in GABAB recep-
tor function. *Science* 283:74–77

36. Jordan BA, Devi LA. 1999. G-protein-
coupled receptor heterodimerization mod-
ulates receptor function. *Nature* 399:697–
700

37. Rocheville M, Lange DC, Kumar U, Patel
SC, Patel RC, Patel YC. 2000. Receptors
for dopamine and somatostatin: formation
of hetero-oligomers with enhanced func-
tional activity. *Science* 288:154–57

38. George SR, Fan T, Xie Z, Tse R, Tam V,
Varghese G, O'Dowd BF. 2000. Oligomer-
ization of the μ and δ-opioid receptors.
Generation of novel functional properties.
*J. Biol. Chem.* 275:26128–35

39. Frade JM, Mellado M, Lind P, Gutierrez-
Ramos JC, Martínez-A C. 1997. Charac-
terization of the CCR2 chemokine recep-
tor. Functional CCR2 receptor expression
on B cells. *J. Immunol.* 159:5576–84

40. Damaj BB, McColl SR, Neote K,
Songquing N, Ogborn KT, Hebert CA,
Naccache PH. 1996. Identification of
G protein binding sites of the human
interleukin-8 receptors by functional map-
ping of the intracellular loops. *FASEB J.*
12:1426–34

41. Myers SJ, Wong LM, Charo IF. 1995.
Signal transduction and ligand specificity
of the human monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1 receptor in transfected embry-
onic kidney cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270:5786–
92

42. Arai H, Charo IF. 1996. Differential reg-
ulation of G-protein-mediated signaling
by chemokine receptors. *J. Biol. Chem.*
271:21814–19

43. Al-Aoukati A, Schall TJ, Maghazachi
AA. 1996. Differential coupling of CC

chemokine receptors to multiple heterotrimeric G proteins in human interleukin-2-activated natural killer cells.
Blood 87:4255–60

44. Carolan EJ, Casale TB. 1993. Effects of neuropeptides on neutrophil migration through noncellular and endothelial barriers. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 92:589–98
45. Arai H, Tsou CL, Charo IF. 1997. Chemotaxis in a lymphocyte cell line transfected with C-C chemokine receptor 2B: evidence that directed migration is mediated by βγ dimers released by activation of Ga<sub>i</sub>-coupled receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94:14495–94
46. Neptune ER, Bourne HR. 1997. Receptors induce chemotaxis by releasing the βγ subunit of G<sub>i</sub>, not by activating G<sub>q</sub> or G<sub>s</sub>. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94:14489–94
47. Lin CH, Duncan JA, Kozasa T, Gilman AG. 1998. Sequestration of G protein βγ subunit complex inhibits receptor-mediated endocytosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95:5057–60
48. Jiang H, Kuang Y, Wu Y, Surcka A, Simon MI, Wu D. 1996. Pertussis toxin-sensitive activation of phospholipase C by the C5a and fMet-Leu-Phe receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 27:13430–34
49. Wu G, Benovic JL, Hildebrandt JD, Lanier SM. 1998. Receptor docking sites for G-protein βγ subunits. Implications for signal regulation. J. Biol. Chem. 273:7197–7200
50. Locati M, Zhou D, Luini W, Evangelista V, Mantovani A, Sozzani S. 1994. Rapid induction of arachidonic acid release by monocyte chemotactic protein-1 and related chemokines. Role of calcium influx, synergism with platelet-activating factor and significance for chemotaxis. J. Biol. Chem. 269:4746–53
51. Dennis EA. 1994. Diversity of group types, regulation, and function of phospholipase A2. J. Biol. Chem 269:13057–60
52. Locati M, Lamorte G, Luini W, Introna M, Bernasconi S, Mantovani A, Sozzani S.

1996. Inhibition of monocyte chemotaxis to C-C chemokines by antisense oligonucleotide for cytosolic phospholipase A2. J. Biol. Chem. 271:6010–16
53. Bacon KB, Schall TJ, Dairaghi DJ. 1998. RANTES activation of phospholipase D in Jurkat T cells: requirement of GTP-binding proteins ARF and RhoA. J. Immunol. 160:1894–1900
54. Berman DM, Gilman AG. 1998. Mammalian RGS proteins: barbarians at the gate. J. Biol. Chem. 273:1269–72
55. de Vries L, Farquhar MG. 1999. RGS proteins: more than just GAPs for heterotrimeric G proteins. Trends Cell Biol. 9:138–44
56. Sowa ME, He W, Wensel TG, Lichtarde O. 2000. A regulator of G protein signaling interaction surface linked to effector specificity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97:1483–88
57. Denecke B, Meyerdierks A, Bottger EC. 1999. RGS1 is expressed in monocytes and acts as a GTPase-activating protein for G-protein-coupled chemoattractant receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 274:26860–68
58. Turner L, Ward SG, Westwick J. 1995. RANTES-activated human T lymphocytes. A role for phosphoinositide 3-kinase. J. Immunol. 155:2437–44
59. Ganju RK, Brubaker SA, Meyer J, Dutt P, Yang Y, Qin S, Newman W, Groopman JE. 1998. The α-chemokine, stromal cell-derived factor-1α, binds to the transmembrane G-protein-coupled CXCR-4 receptor and activates multiple signal transduction pathways. J. Biol. Chem. 273:23169–75
60. Vicente-Manzanares M, Rey M, Jones DR, Sancho D, Mellado M, Rodríguez-Frade JM, del Pozo MA, Yañez-Mo M, Martín de Ana AM, Martínez-A C, Mérida I, Sánchez-Madrid F. 1999. Involvement of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in stromal cell-derived factor-1 alpha-induced lymphocyte polarization and chemotaxis. J. Immunol. 163:4001–12
61. Shimizu Y, Hunt III SW. 1996. Regulating

integin-mediated adhesion: one more function for PI3-kinase? Immunol. Today 17:565–73

62. Dekker LV, Segal AW. 2000. Signals to move cells. Science 287:982–85

63. Li Z, Jiang H, Xie W, Zhang Z, Smrcka AV, Wu D. 2000. Roles of PLC-$\beta$2 and -$\beta$3 and PI3K$\gamma$ in chemoattractant-mediated signal transduction. Science 287:1046–49

64. Sasaki T, Irie-Sasaki J, Jones R, Oliveira-dos Santos A, Standford W, Bolon B, Wakeman A, Itie A, Bouchard D, Kozier-adki I, Joza N, Mak T, Osashi P, Suzuki A, Penninger J. 2000. Function of PI3K$\gamma$ in thymocyte development, T cell activation, and neutrophil migration. Science 287:1040–46

65. Hirsch E, Katanaev V, Garlanda C, Az-zolino O, Pirola L, Silengo C, Sozzani S, Mantovani A, Altruda F, Wymann M. 2000. Central role for G protein-coupled phosphoinositide 3-kinase $\gamma$ in inflammation. Science 287:1049–53

66. Chen HC, Guan JL. 1994. Association of focal adhesion kinase with its potential substrate phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:10148–52

67. Ganju RK, Dutt P, Wu L, Newman W, Avraham H, Avraham S, Groopman J. 1998. $\beta$-chemokine receptor CCR5 signals via the novel tyrosine kinase RAFTK. Blood 91:791–97

68. Dikic I, Dikic I, Schlessinger J. 1998. Identification of a new Pyk2 isoform implicated in chemokine and antigen receptor signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 273:14301–8

69. Serrados JM, Nieto M, Sánchez-Madrid F. 1999. Cytoskeletal rearrangement during migration and activation of T lymphocytes. Trends Cell Biol. 9:228–32

70. Kaibuchi K, Kuroda S, Amano M. 1999. Regulation of the cytoskeleton and cell adhesion by the Rho family of GTPases in mammalian cells. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68:459–80

71. Lefkowitz RJ. 1993. G protein-coupled receptors. Cell 74:409–12

72. Bohm SK, Grady EF, Bunnett NW. 1997. Regulatory mechanisms that modulate signaling by G protein-coupled receptors. Biochem. J. 322:1–18

73. Aragay A, Frade JMR, Mellado M, Serrano A, Martínez-A C, Mayor Jr F. 1998. MCP-1-induced CCR2b receptor desensitization by the G protein-coupled receptor kinase-2. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95: 2985–90

74. Yang W, Wang D, Richmond A. 1999. Role of clathrin-mediated endocytosis in CXCR2 sequestration, resensitization, and signal transduction. J. Biol. Chem. 274:11328–33

75. Tardif M, Mery L, Brouchon L, Boulay F. 1993. Agonist-dependent phosphorylation of N-formylpeptide and activation peptide from the fifth component of C (C5a) chemoattractant receptors in differentiated HL60 cells. J. Immunol. 150:3534–45

76. Ali H, Richardson RM, Tomhave ED, Didsbury JR, Snyderman R. 1993. Differences in phosphorylation of formylpeptide and C5a chemoattractant receptors correlate with differences in desensitization. J. Biol. Chem. 268:24247–54

77. Prossnitz ER, Kim CM, Benovic JL, Ye RD. 1995. Phosphorylation of the N-formylpeptide receptor carboxyl terminus by the G protein-coupled kinase GRK2. J. Biol. Chem. 270:1130–37

78. Franci C, Gosling J, Tsou CL, Coughlin SR, Charo IF. 1996. Phosphorylation by a G protein-coupled kinase inhibits signaling and promotes internalization of the monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 receptor. Critical role of carboxyl-tail serines/threonines in receptor function. J. Immunol. 157:5606–12

79. Vila-Coro AJ, Mellado M, Martín de Ana A, Martínez-A C, Rodríguez-Frade JM. 1999. Characterization of RANTES- and aminoxy pentane-RANTES-triggered desensitization signals reveals differences in

recruitment of the G protein-coupled receptor complex. *J. Immunol.* 163:3037–44

80. Oppermann M, Mack M, Proudfoot AEI, Olbrich H. 1999. Differential effects of CC chemokines on CC chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) phosphorylation and identification of phosphorylation sites on the CCR5 carboxyl terminus. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:8875–85

81. Mueller SG, White JR, Schraw WP, Lam V, Richmond A. 1997. Ligand-induced desensitization of the human CXC chemokine receptor-2 is modulated by multiple serine residues in the carboxyl-terminal domain of the receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272:8207–14

82. Kong G, Penn R, Benovic JL. 1994. A β-adrenergic receptor kinase dominant negative mutant attenuates desensitization of the β2-adrenergic receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269:13084–87

83. Barlic J, Khandaker MH, Mahon E, Andrews J, De Vries ME, Mitchell GB, Rahimpour R, Tan CM, Ferguson SSG, Kelvin DJ. 1999. β-arrestins regulate interleukin-8-induced CXCR1 internalization. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:16287–94

84. Schmid S, McNiven M, De Camilli P. 1998. Dynamin and its partners: progress report. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* 10:504–2

85. Yang W, Wang D, Richmond A. 1999. Role of clathrin-mediated endocytosis in CXCR2 sequestration, resensitization, and signal transduction. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:11328–3

86. Pierce KL, Maudsley S, Daaka Y, Luttrell LM, Lefkowitz RJ. 2000. Role of endocytosis in the activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase cascade by sequestering and nonsequestering G protein-coupled receptors. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97:1489–90

87. Maudsley S, Pierce KL, Zamah AM, Miller WE, Ahn S, Daaka Y, Lefkowitz RJ, Luttrell LM. 2000. The beta(2)-adrenergic receptor mediates extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation via assembly of

a multi-receptor complex with the epidermal growth factor receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275:9572

88. Rossmando AJ, Sanghera JS, Marsden LA, Weber MJ, Pelech SL, Sturgill TW. 1991. Biochemical characterization of a family of serine/threonine protein kinases regulated by tyrosine and serine/threonine phosphorylations. *J. Biol. Chem.* 266:20270–75

89. Nel AE, Pollack S, Landreth G, Ledbetter JA, Hultin L, Williams K, Katz R, Akersley B. 1990. CD-3-mediated activation of MAP-2 kinase can be modified by ligation of the CD4 receptor. Evidence for tyrosine phosphorylation during activation of this kinase. *J. Immunol.* 145:971–79

90. Nemenoff RA, Winitz S, Qian NX, Van Putten V, Johnson GL, Heasley LE. 1993. Phosphorylation and activation of a high molecular weight form of phospholipase A2 by p42 microtubule-associated protein 2 kinase and protein kinase C. *J. Biol. Chem.* 268:1960–64

91. Gotoh Y, Nishida E, Matsuda S, Shiina N, Kosako H, Shiokawa K, Akiyama T, Ohta K, Sakai H. 1991. In vitro effects on microtubule dynamics of purified Xenopus M phase-activated MAP kinase. *Nature* 349:251–54

92. Coffer PJ, Geijzen N, M'rabet L, Schweizer RC, Maikoe T, Raaijmakers JA, Lammers JW, Koenderman L. 1998. Comparison of the roles of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signal transduction in neutrophil effector function. *Biochem. J.* 329:121–30

93. Levers SJ, Paterson HF, Marshall CJ. 1994. Requirement for Ras in Raf activation is overcome by targeting Raf to the plasma membrane. *Nature* 369:411–14

94. Freed E, Symons M, Macdonald SG, McCormick F, Ruggieri R. 1994. Binding of 14-3-3 proteins to the protein kinase Raf and effects on its activation. *Science* 265:1713–16

95. Irie K, Gotoh Y, Yashar BM, Errede B,

P1: FQP/GBP P2: FQP/LRV QC: XXX
February 19, 2001 15:31 Annual Reviews AR123-15

418 MELLADO ET AL

Nishida E, Matsumoto K. 1994. Stimulatory effects of yeast and mammalian 14-3-3 proteins on the Raf protein kinase. Science 265:1716–19

96. Venkatakrishnan G, Salgia R, Groopman JE. 2000. Chemokine receptors CXCR-1/2 activate mitogen-activated protein kinase via the epidermal growth factor receptor in ovarian cancer cells. J. Biol. Chem. 275:6868–75

97. Koch WJ, Hawes BE, Allen LF, Lefkowitz RJ. 1994. Direct evidence that Gi-coupled receptor stimulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase is mediated by Gβγ activation of p21ras. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:12706–10

98. Crespo P, Xu N, Simonds WF, Gutkind JS. 1994. Ras-dependent activation of MAP kinase pathway mediated by G-protein βγ subunits. Nature 369:418–20

99. Hill CS, Treisman R. 1995. Transcriptional regulation by extracellular signals: mechanisms and specificity. Cell 80:199–211

100. Durstin M, Durstin S, Molski TFP, Becker EL, Sha'afi RI. 1994. Cytoplasmic phospholipase A2 translocates to membrane fraction in human neutrophils activated by stimuli that phosphorylate mitogen-activated protein kinase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:3142–46

101. Peppelenbosch MP, Tertoolen LG, Hage WJ, DeLaat SW. 1993. Epidermal growth factor-induced actin remodeling is regulated by 5-lipoxygenase and cyclooxygenase products. Cell 74:565–75

102. Knall C, Worthen GS, Johnson GL. 1997. Interleukin 8-stimulated phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase activity regulates the migration of human neutrophils independent of extracellular signal-regulated kinase and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94:3052–57

103. Nieto M, Frade JMR, Sancho D, Mellado M, Martínez-A C, Sánchez-Madrid

F. 1997. Polarization of the chemokine receptors to the leading edge during lymphocyte migration. J. Exp. Med. 186:153–58

104. Nieto M, Navarro F, Pérez-Villar JJ, del Pozo MA, González-Amaro R, Mellado M, R-Frade JM, Martínez-A C, López-Botet M, Sánchez-Madrid F. 1998. Roles of chemokines and receptor polarization in NK-target cell interactions. J. Immunol. 161:3330–39

105. Vicente-Manzanares M, Montoya MC, Mellado M, Frade JMR, del Pozo MA, Nieto M, Ortiz de Landázuri M, Martínez-A C, Sánchez-Madrid F. 1998. The chemokine SDF-1α triggers chemotactic responses and induces cell polarization in human B lymphocytes. Eur. J. Immunol. 28:2197–2207

106. Alonso-Lebrero JL, Serrador JM, Domínguez-Jiménez C, Barreiro O, Luque A, del Pozo MA, Snapp K, Kansas G, Schwartz-Albiez R, Furthmayr H, Lozano F, Sánchez-Madrid F. 2000. Polarization and interaction of adhesion molecules P-selectin glycoprotein ligand I and intercellular adhesion molecule 3 with moesin and ezrin in myeloid cells. Blood 95:2413–19

107. Parent CA, Blacklock BJ, Froehlich WM, Murphy DB, Devreotes PN. 1998. G protein signaling events are activated at the leading edge of chemotactic cells. Cell 95:81–91

108. Servant G, Weiner OD, Herzmark P, Balla T, Sedat JW, Bourne HR. 2000. Polarization of chemoattractant receptor signaling during neutrophil chemotaxis. Science 287:1037–40

109. Hall A. 1998. Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton. Science 279:509–14

110. Reif K, Cantrell DA. 1998. Networking Rho family GTPases in lymphocytes. Immunity 8:395–401

111. Loetscher P, Seitz M, Clark-Lewis I, Baggiolini M, Moser B. 1996. Activation of NK cells by CC chemokines, chemotaxis,

Ca2+ mobilization, and enzyme release.
**J. Immunol. 156:322–27**

112. McKay D, Kusel J, Wilkinson P. 1991. Studies of chemotactic factor-induced polarity in human neutrophils. Lipid mobility, receptor redistribution and the time-sequence of polarization. **J. Cell Sci. 100: 473–79**

113. Rodríguez-Boulan E, Nelson WJ. 1989. Morphogenesis of the polarized epithelial phenotype. **Science 245:718–25**

114. Dotti C, Simons K. 1990. Polarized sorting of viral glycoproteins to the axon and dendrites of hippocampal neurons in culture. **Cell 62:63–72**

115. Simons K, Wandinger-Ness A. 1990. Polarized sorting in epithelia. **Cell 62:207–10**

116. Ledesma M, Brügger B, Bünning C, Wieland F, Dotti C. 1999. Maturation of the axonal plasma membrane requires upregulation of sphingomyelin synthesis and formation of protein-lipid complexes. **EMBO J. 18:1761–71**

117. Brown D, Rose J. 1992. Sorting of GPI-anchored proteins to glycolipid-enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface. **Cell 68:533–44**

118. Müsch A, Xu H, Shields D, Rodríguez-Boulan E. 1996. Transport of vesicular stomatitis virus to the cell surface is signal mediated in polarized and nonpolarized cells. **J. Cell Biol. 133:543–58**

119. Yoshimori T, Keller P, Roth M, Simons K. 1996. Different biosynthetic transport routes to the plasma membrane in BHK and CHO cells. **J. Cell Biol. 133:247–56**

120. Keller P, Simons K. 1998. Cholesterol is required for surface transport of influenza virus hemagglutinin. **J. Cell Biol. 140:1357–67**

121. Friedrichson T, Kurzchalia T. 1998. Microdomains of GPI-anchored proteins in living cells revealed by crosslinking. **Nature 394:802–5**

122. Varma R, Mayor S. 1998. GPI-anchored proteins are organized in submicron do-

mains at the cell surface. **Nature 394:798–801**

123. Harder T, Scheiffele P, Verkade P, Simons K. 1998. Lipid domain structure of the plasma membrane revealed by patching of membrane components. **J. Cell Biol. 141:929–42**

124. Mañes S, Mira E, Gómez-Moutón C, Lacalle RA, Keller P, Labrador JP, Martínez-A C. 1999. Membrane raft microdomains mediate front-rear polarity in migrating cells. **EMBO J. 18:6211–20**

125. Brückner K, Labrador J, Scheiffele P, Herb A, Seeburg P, Klein R. 1999. EphrinB ligands recruit GRIP family PDZ adaptor proteins into raft membrane microdomains. **Neuron 22:511–24**

126. Cocchi F, DeVico AL, Garzino-Demo A, Arya SK, Gallo RC, Lusso P. 1995. Identification of RANTES, MIP-1α, and MIP-1β as the major HIV-suppressive factors produced by CD8+ T cells. **Science 270:1811–15**

127. Feng Y, Broder CC, Kennedy PE, Berger EA. 1996. HIV-1 entry cofactor: functional cDNA cloning of a seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptor. **Science 272:872–77**

128. Littman DR. 1998. Chemokine receptors: keys to AIDS pathogenesis. **Cell 93:677–80**

129. Liu R, Paxton WA, Choe S, Ceradini D, Martin SR, Horuk R, MacDonald ME, Stuhlmann H, Koup RA, Landau NR. 1996. Homozygous defect in HIV-1 coreceptor accounts for resistance of some multiply-exposed individuals to HIV-1 infection. **Cell 86:367–77**

130. Samson M, Libert F, Doranz BJ, Rucker J, Liesnard C, Farber C-M, Saragosti S, Lapouméroulie C, Cognaux J, Forceille C, Muylermans G, Verhofstede C, Burtonboy G, Georges M, Imai T, Rana S, Yi Y, Smyth RJ, Collman RG, Doms RW, Vassart G, Parmentier M. 1996. Resistance to HIV-1 infection in Caucasian individuals bearing mutant alleles of the

420 MELLADO ET AL

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| CCR-5 chemokine receptor gene. *Nature* 382:722–25 | Busser R, Wells TNC, Proudfoot AEI. 1997. Potent inhibition of HIV-1 infectivity in macrophages and lymphocytes by a novel CCR5 antagonist. *Science* 276:276–79 |
| 131. Zhang L, Huang Y, Chen Z, Guo Y, Wu S, Kunstman KJ, Brown RC, Phair JP, Neumann AU, Ho DD, Wolinsky SM. 1998. Chemokine coreceptor usage by diverse primary isolates of human immunodeficiency virus type 1. *J. Virol.* 72:9307–12 | 140. Rucker J, Samson M, Doranz BJ, Libert F, Berson JF, Yi Y, Smyth RJ, Collman RG, Broder CC, Vassart G, Doms RW, Parmentier M. 1996. Regions of the β-chemokine receptors CCR5 and CCR2b that determine HIV-1 cofactor specificity. *Cell* 87:437–46 |
| 132. Wyatt R, Sodroski J. 1998. The HIV-1 envelope glycoproteins: fusogens, antigens, and immunogens. *Science* 280:1884–88 | 141. Vila-Coro AJ, Mellado M, Martín de Ana A, Lucas P, del Real G, Martínez-A C, Rodríguez-Frade JM. 2000. HIV-1 infection through the CCR5 receptor is blocked by receptor dimerization. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97:3388–93 |
| 133. Horuk R. 1999. Chemokine receptors and HIV-1: the fusion of two major research fields. *Immunol. Today* 20:89–94 | 142. Smith MW, Dean M, Carrington M, Winkler C, Huttley GA, Lomb DA, Goedert JJ, O’Brien TR, Jacobson LP, Kaslow R, Buchbinder S, Vittinghoff E, Vlahov D, Hoots K, Hilgartner MW, O’Brien SJ. 1997. Contrasting genetic influence of CCR2 and CCR5 variants on HIV-1 infection and disease progression. Hemophilia Growth and Development Study (HGDS), Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study (MACS), Multicenter Hemophilia Cohort Study (MHCS), San Francisco City Cohort (SFCC), ALIVE Study. *Science* 277:959–65 |
| 134. Horuk R. 1994. Molecular properties of the chemokine receptor family. *TIPS* 15:159–65 | 143. Smith MW, Dean M, Carrington M, Winkler C, Huttley GA, Lomb DA, Goedert JJ, O’Brien TR, Jacobson LP, Kaslow R, Buchbinder S, Vittinghoff E, Vlahov D, Hoots K, Hilgartner MW, O’Brien SJ. 1997. Contrasting genetic influence of CCR2 and CCR5 variants on HIV-1 infection and disease progression. *Nat. Med.* 277:959–66 |
| 135. Doms RW, Peiper SC. 1997. Unwelcome guests with master keys: how HIV uses chemokine receptors for cellular entry. *Virology* 235:179–90 | 144. Frade JM, Llorente M, Mellado M, Alcamí J, Gutierrez-Ramos JC, Zaballos A, del Real G, Martínez-A C. 1997. The amino-terminal domain of the CCR2 chemokine receptor acts as coreceptor for HIV-1 infection. *J. Clin. Invest.* 100:1–6 |
| 136. Amara A, Le Gall S, Schwartz O, Salamero J, Montes M, Loetscher P, Baggolini M, Virelizier J-L, Arenzana-Seisdedos F. 1997. HIV coreceptor downregulation as antiviral principle: SDF-1α-dependent internalization of the chemokine receptor CXCR4 contributes to inhibition of HIV replication. *J. Exp. Med.* 186:139–46 |
| 137. Mack M, Luckow B, Nelson PJ, Cihak J, Simmons G, Clapham PR, Signoret N, Marsh M, Stangassinger M, Borlat F, Wells TNC, Schlöndorff D, Proudfoot AEI. 1998. Aminoxy pentane-RANTES induces CCR5 internalization but inhibits recycling: a novel inhibitory mechanism of HIV infectivity. *J. Exp. Med.* 187:1215–24 |
| 138. Arenzana-Seisdedos F, Virelizier J-L, Rousset D, Clark-Lewis I, Loetscher P, Moser B, Baggolini M. 1996. HIV blocked by chemokine antagonist. *Nature* 383:400 |
| 139. Simmons G, Clapham PR, Picard L, Offord RE, Rosenkilde MM, Schwartz TW, |

145. Lee B, Doranz BJ, Rana S, Yi Y, Mellado M, Frade JMR, Martínez-A C, O'Brien SJ, Dean M, Coleman RG, Doms R. 1998. Influence of the CCR2-V64I polymorphism on HIV-1 coreceptor activity and chemokine receptor function of CCR2b, CCR3, CCR5 and CXCR4. *J. Virology* 72:7450–58

146. Xavier R, Brennan T, Li Q, McCormack C, Seed B. 1998. Membrane compartmentalization is required for efficient T cell activation. *Immunity* 8:723–32

147. Viola A, Schroeder S, Sakakibara Y, Lanzavecchia A. 1999. T lymphocyte costimulation mediated by reorganization of membrane microdomains. *Science* 283:680–82

148. Hammache D, Yahi N, Maresca M, Pieroni G, Fantini J. 1999. Human erythrocyte glycosphingolipids as alternative cofactors for human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) entry: evidence for

CD4-induced interactions between HIV-1 gp120 and reconstituted membrane microdomains of glycosphingolipids (Gb3 and GM3). *J. Virol.* 73:5244–48

149. Harouse J, Bhat S, Spitalnik S, Laughlin M, Stefano K, Silberberg D, González-Scarano F. 1991. Inhibition of entry of HIV-1 in neural cell lines by antibodies against galactosyl ceramide. *Science* 253:320–23

150. Mañes S, del Real G, Lacalle RA, Lucas P, Gómez-Moutón C, Sánchez-Palomino S, Delgado R, Alcamí J, Mira E, Martínez-A C. 2000. Membrane raft microdomains mediate lateral assemblies required for HIV-1 infection. *EMBO Rep.* 1:190–96

151. Nguyen D, Hildreth J. 2000. Evidence for budding of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 selectively from glycolipid-enriched membrane lipid rafts. *J. Virol.* 74:3264–72

Figure 1 Schematic model showing the signaling pathways activated following chemokine binding to receptors. The figure shows some of the molecules involved in these pathways and the effects they promote. Selected regulatory molecules and the steps they affect are depicted.

Figure 2 Chemokines induce receptor desensitization and internalization. Chemokine receptor desensitization is initiated by ligand binding and includes association of GRK molecules, receptor phosphorylation and association of β-arrestin. Internalization of chemokine receptors occurs in clathrin vesicles, which require the GTPase activity of dynamin.

Infection

Blocking infection

Steric hindrance

Internalization

Dimerization

Figure 3 Postulated models by which chemokines may inhibit HIV-1 infection. The figure shows a schematic representation of the current models that explain inhibition of HIV-1 infection by chemokines, steric hindrance, receptor internalization and receptor dimerization.

Annual Review of Immunology
Volume 19, 2001

CONTENTS

Specificity and Degeneracy in Antigen Recognition: Yin and Yang in the Immune System, Herman N. Eisen                                                                                          1
In Vivo Activation of Antigen-Specific CD4 T Cells, Marc K. Jenkins, Alexander Khoruts, Elizabeth Ingulli, Daniel L. Mueller, Stephen J. McSorley, R. Lee Reinhardt, Andrea Itano, Kathryn A. Pape                                                              23
Cross-Presentation, Dendritic Cells, Tolerance, and Immunity, William R. Heath, Francis R. Carbone                                                                                         47
Noncytolytic Control of Viral Infections by the Innate and Adaptive Immune Response, Luca G. Guidotti, Francis V. Chisari                                                                    65
Immunology of Tuberculosis, JoAnne L. Flynn, John Chan                                                                                                                                93
Tolerance to Islet Autoantigens in Type I Diabetes, Jean-François Bach, Lucienne Chatenoud                                                                                               131
Anti-TNFalpha Therapy of Rheumatoid Arthritis: What Have We Learned?, Marc Feldmann, Ravinder N. Maini                                                                                    163
Activating Receptors and Coreceptors Involved in Human Natural Killer Cell--Mediated Cytolysis, Alessandro Moretta, Cristina Bottino, Massimo Vitale, Daniela Pende, Claudia Cantoni, Maria Cristina Mingari, Roberto Biassoni, Lorenzo Moretta                     197
Complexities of CD28/B7: CTLA-4 Costimulatory Pathways in Autoimmunity and Transplantation, Benoît Salomon, Jeffrey A. Bluestone                                                           225
GP 120: Biologic Aspects of Structural Features, Pascal Poignard, Erica Ollmann Saphire, Paul WHI Parren, Dennis R. Burton                                                                  253
IgG Fc Receptors, Jeffrey V. Ravetch, Silvia Bolland                                                                                                                                  275
Regulation of the Natural Killer Cell Receptor Repertoire, David H. Raulet, Russell E. Vance, Christopher W. McMahon                                                                     291
Bare Lymphocyte Syndrome and the Regulation of MHC Expression, Walter Reith, Bernard Mach                                                                                                331
The Immunological Synapse, Shannon K. Bromley, W. Richard Burack, Kenneth G. Johnson, Kristina Somersalo, Tasha N. Sims, Cenk Sumen, Mark M. Davis, Andrey S. Shaw, Paul M. Allen, Michael L. Dustin                                                                                       375
Chemokine Signaling and Functional Responses: The Role of Receptor Dimerization and TK Pathway Activatipn, Mario Mellado, José Miguel Rodríguez-Frade, Santos Mañes, Carlos Martínez-A                                                                      397
Interleukin-18 Regulates Both Th1 and Th2 Responses, Kenji Nakanishi, Tomohiro Yoshimoto, Hiroko Tsutsui, Haruki Okamura                                                                   423
Multiple Viral Strategies of HTLV-1 for Dysregulation of Cell Growth Control, Mitsuaki Yoshida                                                                                           475
Calcium Signaling Mechanisms in T Lymphocytes, Richard S Lewis                                                                                                                        497
The Design of Vaccines Against Helicobacter Pylori and Their Development, Giuseppe Del Giudice, Antonello Covacci, John L. Telford, Cesare Montecucco, Rino Rappuoli                                                                                   523
CTLA-4-Mediated Inhibition in Regulation of T Cell Responses: Mechanisms and Manipulation in Tumor Immunotherapy, Cynthia A. Chambers, Michael S. Kuhns, Jackson G. Egen, James P. Allison                                                                 565
B Cell Development Pathways, Richard R. Hardy, Kyoko Hayakawa                                                                                                                       595

IRF Family of Transcription Factors as Regulators of Host Defense,  
Tadatsugu Taniguchi, Kouetsu Ogasawara, Akinori Takaoka, Nobuyuki Tanaka  
623  

X-Linked Lymphoproliferative Disease: A Progressive Immunodeficiency, Massimo Morra, Duncan Howie, Maria Simarro Grande, Joan Sayos, Ninghai Wang, Chengbin Wu, Pablo Engel, Cox Terhorst  
657  

Interleukin-10 and the Interleukin-10 Receptor, Kevin W. Moore, Rene de Waal Malefyt, Robert L. Coffman, Anne O'Garra  
683
