
Molecular Microbiology (2001) 40(2), 271–283

# MicroReview

## Biology of type II secretion

### Maria Sandkvist

Department of Biochemistry, American Red Cross,  
Jerome H. Holland Laboratory, 15601 Crabbs Branch Way, Rockville, MD 20855, USA.

### Summary

The type II secretion pathway or the main terminal branch of the general secretion pathway, as it has also been referred to, is widely distributed among Proteobacteria, in which it is responsible for the extracellular secretion of toxins and hydrolytic enzymes, many of which contribute to pathogenesis in both plants and animals. Secretion through this pathway differs from most other membrane transport systems, in that its substrates consist of folded proteins. The type II secretion apparatus is composed of at least 12 different gene products that are thought to form a multiprotein complex, which spans the periplasmic compartment and is specifically required for translocation of the secreted proteins across the outer membrane. This pathway shares many features with the type IV pilus biogenesis system, including the ability to assemble a pilus-like structure. This review discusses recent findings on the organization of the secretion apparatus and the role of its various components in secretion. Different models for pilus-mediated secretion through the gated pore in the outer membrane are also presented, as are the possible properties that determine whether a protein is recognized and secreted by the type II pathway.

### Two-step secretion process

Secretion via the type II secretion pathway occurs in two membrane translocation steps that can be separated both genetically and biochemically. Initially, proteins to be secreted are produced with N-terminal signal peptides, which allows for Sec-dependent translocation across the cytoplasmic membrane. This is followed by removal of the signal peptide and folding and release of the mature proteins into the periplasmic space. In this compartment, they may undergo further modifications, such as disulphide bond formation or subunit assembly, before they are translocated across the outer membrane via the type II secretion apparatus or secreton (Fig. 1). This apparatus is highly specific. It is able to distinguish proteins to be secreted from resident periplasmic proteins and, with a few exceptions, it discriminates between its own secreted proteins and those introduced from other species (Filloux *et al.*, 1990; Wong and Buckley, 1993; Michel *et al.*, 1995; Lindeberg *et al.*, 1996).

### Dissection of the type II secretion apparatus

Depending on the species, between 12 and 15 genes have been identified as being essential for type II secretion. The homologous genes and gene products have been designated in most systems by letters A–O and S (Table 1). In *Pseudomonas*, however, the letters P–Z and A have been used. Therefore, to indicate the relatedness, the *Pseudomonas* genes will be referred to as P<sub>C</sub>–Z<sub>M</sub> and A<sub>O</sub> in this review (Table 1). The subcellular location and topology of these components have been predicted by analysing their hydrophobicity profiles and confirmed by activity determinations of β-lactamase and alkaline phosphatase fused to the various components or by subcellular fractionation and immunoblotting (Table 1). The observation that most of the proteins are associated with the cytoplasmic membrane is not fully understood, particularly as their role is to support outer membrane translocation. Mapping of the different protein–protein interactions between the various components of the secretion apparatus has been accomplished by both genetic and biochemical techniques using suppressor mutation analysis, the yeast two-hybrid system, co-immunoprecipitation and cross-linking analysis. The ability of some of the components to stabilize reciprocally and protect each other from proteolysis has also been taken as evidence for direct associations. These techniques, in combination with biochemical analyses of some of the components in purified form, have produced the following findings and conclusions.

- The putative pore of the type II secretion apparatus is protein D, which forms a large oligomer of 12–14 subunits in the outer membrane (Fig. 1) (Kazmierczak *et al.*, 1994; Hardie *et al.*, 1996; Lindeberg *et al.*, 1996; Linderoth *et al.*,

Accepted 12 February, 2001. *For correspondence. E-mail sandkvis@usa.redcross.org; Tel. (+1) 301 738 0604; Fax (+1) 301 738 0794.*

© 2001 Blackwell Science Ltd

272 M. Sandkvist

Table 1. Distribution and subcellular location of type II secretion components.

| Species$^a$ | Type II secretion gene products and their subcellular location |
|--------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| V. cholerae eps | A$^b$ | B$^b$ | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | VcpD$_O$$^c$ |
| A. hydrophila exe | A$^b$ | B$^b$ | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | TapD$_O$$^c$ |
| E. coli gsp | A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O |
| K. oxytoca pul | S | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O |
| E. chrysanthemi out | S | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O |
| E. carotovora out | S | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O |
| P. aeruginosa xcp | P$_C$ | Q$_D$ | R$_E$ | S$_F$ | T$_G$ | U$_H$ | V$_I$ | W$_J$ | X$_K$ | Y$_L$ | Z$_M$ | A$_O$/PilD$^c$ |
| X. campestris xps | D$^d$ | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | PilD$_O$$^c$ |
| Localization$^e$ | om | im | im/om | om | c$^f$ | im | im/om$^g$ | im/om | im/om | im/om | im | im | im |

a. Bacterial species and the names of their secretion genes. Only species in which the secretion genes have been shown to support extracellular secretion and for which the secreted protein(s) has been identified have been included. Unless otherwise noted, the secretion genes are linked.
b. The V. cholerae and A. hydrophila A and B genes are linked but separated from the rest of the secretion genes.
c. These prepilin peptidase genes are not linked to the type II secretion gene cluster and are also required for type IV pilus biogenesis.
d. The xpsD is located downstream of the xpsN gene in X. campestris.
e. Outer membrane (om); inner membrane (im); cytoplasm (c).
f. Protein E appears to be associated with the inner membrane on the cytoplasmic side.
g. Proteins G, H, I, J and K are found associated with both membranes after fractionation. When the pul and xcp genes are overexpressed, protein G is present in pilus-like appendages.

Fig. 1. Assembly and secretion of cholera toxin via the type II secretion pathway Eps in V. cholerae. The cholera toxin A and B subunits are translocated as monomeric precursors across the cytoplasmic membrane (CM) via the Sec pathway. The subunits fold and assemble with the assistance of DsbA into the AB$_5$ toxin complex. The AB$_5$ then engages the type II secretion apparatus Eps via specific recognition of B$_5$, which carries the putative secretion signal. The complex is targeted to the secretion pore in the outer membrane (OM) followed by extracellular release. In this model, EpsD forms the secretion pore, and EpsE, EpsL and EpsM regulate extracellular secretion by communication of critical information through phosphorylation or ATP hydrolysis between the CM and the OM pore, possibly via EpsC. Proteins G, H, I, J and K are processed by protein O and are likely to form a pilus-like structure, with protein G as the major component. The pilus may act as a piston to push the toxin out through the OM pore by repeated extension (polymerization) and retraction (depolymerization), as represented by the white double-headed arrow. The EpsD pore also supports extrusion of the filamentous phage CTXφ. EpsD may shuttle between these two pathways (indicated by the black double-headed arrow) or may be present in excess of the other Eps components. Although not present in V. cholerae, protein S (symbol with dashed outline) supports outer membrane insertion of protein D. Protein A forms a complex in the cytoplasmic membrane with protein B, which in turn appears to interact with protein D. Protein N can be immunoprecipitated with protein D. Proteins A, B, N and S are shown in this model; however, they are not present in all organisms with a type II pathway and may not be required for secretion in every case. Protein F is not shown, as no protein-protein interaction has yet been documented for this protein in any species.

© 2001 Blackwell Science Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 40, 271–283

1997; Bitter *et al.*, 1998). Protein D belongs to a large family of homologous proteins called secretins, which also includes components that are required for type IV pilus biogenesis, filamentous phage extrusion and type III secretion (Genin and Boucher, 1994). The C-terminal domain is conserved among the secretins and is thought to be embedded in the outer membrane, whereas the N-terminus is variable and may be exposed to the periplasm, where it interacts with other components of the secretion apparatus. The secretin oligomers are, like outer membrane porins, very stable, requiring ionic detergents, boiling and, in some cases, the addition of phenol for dissociation (Hardie *et al.*, 1996; Linderoth *et al.*, 1996; Shevchik *et al.*, 1997; Koebnik *et al.*, 2000). Electron microscopic (EM) analyses of the purified secretins PulD, XcpQ<sub>D</sub> and plV show ring-like structures, large enough for the transport of folded proteins and assembling phage, with estimated inner diameters of 76, 95 and 80 Å respectively (Linderoth *et al.*, 1997; Bitter *et al.*, 1998; Nouwen *et al.*, 1999). The secretins have also been shown to exhibit ion-conducting properties in planar lipid bilayers (Brok *et al.*, 1999; Marciano *et al.*, 1999; Nouwen *et al.*, 1999), and comparison of the wild-type secretin plV with a functional mutant plV<sup>S324G</sup> indicated that the mutant pore was more conductive than the wild-type version (Marciano *et al.*, 1999). Furthermore, expression of plV<sup>S324G</sup> increased outer membrane permeability to large carbohydrates and resulted in increased sensitivity to certain antibiotics. These results were taken as evidence that the wild-type plV pore is normally gated. Consistent with this, EM analyses of PulD and XcpQ<sub>D</sub> revealed the presence of an electron-dense mass in the central cavities of their pores (Brok *et al.*, 1999; Nouwen *et al.*, 2000). Proteolysis of PulD and XcpQ<sub>D</sub> yielded a highly protease-resistant fragment composed of the C-terminal half of the proteins (Brok *et al.*, 1999; Nouwen *et al.*, 2000). This domain is likely to form the actual channel, as it too showed pore-forming activity in planar lipid bilayers, and EM analysis revealed that it remained oligomeric. Furthermore, the EM images showed that the C-terminal oligomer of PulD did not contain the central mass present in the intact protein, suggesting that the N-terminal half of the protein may fold back into the cavity of the oligomer (Nouwen *et al.*, 2000). This would explain the relatively low conductance observed with the intact PulD and suggests that the N-terminal domain may gate the pore (Nouwen *et al.*, 2000). However, simply removing the N-terminal domain is apparently not enough to open the channel fully, as the intact and the protease-resistant C-terminal oligomer of XcpQ<sub>D</sub> showed similar conductance properties in the planar lipid bilayer assay (Brok *et al.*, 1999). Instead, it is possible that the interaction between the N-terminal domain of the secretin and other components of the secretion apparatus or the secreted

proteins themselves may induce a conformational change in the C-terminal domain that opens the channel. Consistent with this hypothesis, one study has suggested that the secreted *Erwinia chrysanthemi* PelB protein binds directly to protein D during secretion (Shevchik *et al.*, 1997). In this study, OutD was stabilized and protected from proteolysis when co-expressed with PelB in *Escherichia coli*. However, OutD containing an internal deletion of the N-terminal domain was not protected from degradation. Furthermore, in ligand-blot experiments, purified PelB could bind to OutD immobilized to a nitrocellulose membrane, but only if the OutD N-terminus remained intact. Interestingly, none of these effects was observed with the homologous *Erwinia carotovora* PelC, which is not secreted by the *E. chrysanthemi* Out system, suggesting that protein D and its N-terminus may be an important factor for recognition of proteins destined for secretion via the type II pathway (Shevchik *et al.*, 1997). However, studies that are more recent contradict these findings and suggest that there is no evidence for a direct interaction between pullulanase and PulD. Instead, it has been suggested that PulC may be responsible for substrate recognition (Guilvout *et al.*, 1999).

Protein S is a small outer membrane lipoprotein that stabilizes protein D and promotes its outer membrane insertion in some species (Hardie *et al.*, 1996; Daefler *et al.*, 1997; Shevchik *et al.*, 1997). It binds to the C-terminal 65 amino acids of protein D and is present in a 1 MDa complex with protein D at a ratio of approximately 1:1 (Daefler *et al.*, 1997; Nouwen *et al.*, 1999). The requirement for protein S has only been documented for the Pul and Out secretion systems of *Klebsiella* and *Erwinia*; however, open reading frames (ORFs) encoding putative S proteins are also present on the pO157 plasmid isolated from *E. coli* O157:H7 and in *Yersinia pestis* (Schmidt *et al.*, 1997; M. Sandkvist, 2001). None of the other type II secretion systems appear to contain an S gene; however, this does not exclude the possibility that another protein is required for outer membrane insertion and stabilization of protein D in these systems. Indeed, in the related type IV pilus biogenesis system and the type III secretion pathway, outer membrane insertion of the secretins PilQ and InvG, respectively, requires the assistance of small lipoproteins that do not appear to share any sequence homology with PulS (Drake *et al.*, 1997; Crago and Koronakis, 1998; Daefler and Russel, 1998).

Protein B, although identified in only a few type II secretion systems, may be another component that interacts with protein D. A recent study has shown that OutB, which co-fractionates with the *E. chrysanthemi* outer membrane, can be cross-linked into a larger complex, but only if OutD is present (Condemine and Shevchik, 2000). Similarly, cross-linking of OutD requires

the presence of OutB. In addition, OutB and OutD can mutually stabilize each other, and the secretion defect observed in an *outB* mutant can be complemented by overproduction of OutD (Condemine and Shevchik, 2000). These findings lend some support to the suggestion that ExeB regulates secretion, possibly by transducing energy for the opening of the secretion pore in *Aeromonas hydrophila* (Howard *et al.*, 1996). This hypothesis was based on the finding that ExeB shares both sequence and structural similarity with TonB, a component that supplies energy for the uptake of iron siderophores and vitamin B12 across the outer membrane of *E. coli* (Moeck and Coulton, 1998). In addition, ExeA, which forms a stable complex with ExeB, is an inner membrane protein with a conserved ATP-binding motif that is required for secretion (Schoenhofen *et al.*, 1998). Mutations of residues thought to be required for ATP binding and catalysis adversely affect ExeAB complex formation and, as a consequence, aerolysin secretion (Schoenhofen *et al.*, 1998). A regulatory role for proteins A and B can also been inferred from the finding that expression of the endogenous *gspAB* genes in addition to the *gspC–O* genes increases the level of chitinase secretion in *E. coli* (Francetic *et al.*, 2000). To date, only a few secretion systems have been found to contain the A and B genes (Table 1). If the AB complex regulates secretion and plays such a vital role as delivering energy for outer membrane translocation, other non-homologous proteins may play this role in the systems in which these components are missing.

The cytoplasmic membrane protein N has also been suggested to interact with protein D. The *Xanthomonas campestris* XpsD protein could be immunoprecipitated with anti-XpsN antibodies and, conversely, the XpsN protein was precipitated with anti-XpsD antibodies (Lee *et al.*, 2000). An intact C-terminal domain of XpsD was suggested to be important for this interaction. Protein N is present in only half the pathways identified so far, and it is possible that protein N, as well proteins A, B and S, may play species-specific roles during secretion.

An interaction between proteins D and C may also exist. In a study with two related *Erwinia* species, the only Out proteins that could not be exchanged were the OutC and OutD components (Lindeberg *et al.*, 1996). Similarly, all *pul* genes, except the *pulC* and *pulD* genes, could be replaced by *Erwinia* homologues without affecting pullulanase secretion (Possot *et al.*, 2000). One possible explanation for these findings is that there is a species-specific interaction between proteins D and C. In another study, PulC, which co-fractionates with both cytoplasmic and outer membranes, could be cross-linked into a larger complex that required the presence of PulD (Possot *et al.*, 1999). In addition, deletion of the *xcpQ*~*P*~ gene resulted in reduced levels of XcpP~*C*~ in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* (Bleves *et al.*, 1999; Possot *et al.*, 1999).

Protein C, in turn, is likely to interact with the integral cytoplasmic membrane components L and M. This is based on the observations that inactivation of *pulC* greatly decreased the detection of PulL (Possot *et al.*, 2000) and that the level of EpsC was drastically reduced in an *epsM* mutant of *Vibrio cholerae* (M. Sandkvist and M. Bagdasarian, unpublished). These results are not in conflict; if protein C interacts with protein L, it must also interact, either directly or indirectly, with protein M, as the L and M components have been shown to form a stable complex that can be immunoprecipitated from *V. cholerae* (Sandkvist *et al.*, 1999; 2000a). The L and M proteins can also be co-immunoprecipitated when expressed in *E. coli* in the absence of other Eps proteins and, likewise, they protect each other from proteolytic degradation, suggesting that these two components interact directly. Mutual stabilization was also observed with the L and M homologues from *P. aeruginosa* and *Klebsiella oxytoca* (Michel *et al.*, 1998; Possot *et al.*, 2000).

This brings us to protein E, whose interaction with the cytoplasmic membrane is highly dependent on protein L (Sandkvist *et al.*, 1995; Ball *et al.*, 1999; Py *et al.*, 1999; Possot *et al.*, 2000). Normally associated with the cytoplasmic membrane, protein E remains in the cytoplasm and becomes sensitive to proteolysis in the absence of protein L. The EpsL-binding domain was mapped to the N-terminal 93 residues of EpsE by complementation analysis and subcellular fractionation of EpsE–ExeE hybrids expressed in a secretion-defective *V. cholerae epsE* mutant (Sandkvist *et al.*, 1995). The OutL- and PulL-binding domains were also mapped by fusion protein technology to the very N-terminus of OutE and PulE respectively (Py *et al.*, 1999; Possot *et al.*, 2000). Further support for protein E and L interaction came from the observation that overproduction of protein E could suppress and overcome the secretion defect caused by protein L overexpression (Ball *et al.*, 1999; Py *et al.*, 1999; Sandkvist *et al.*, 2000a). This observation was then used to map the protein E-binding domain to the N-terminal cytoplasmic domain of protein L (Py *et al.*, 1999). The protein E-binding domain was further mapped to residues 57–216 of protein L by determining the ability of various EpsL–ExeL hybrids to complement the secretion defect of an *epsL* mutant in the presence of EpsE or ExeE (Sandkvist *et al.*, 2000a). In the same study, the EpsM-binding domain was mapped to residues 216–296 of EpsL by functional analysis and co-immunoprecipitation of EpsL–ExeL fusions.

In addition to forming heterooligomers, proteins E, L and M are also likely to form larger homomultimers. Although purified histidine-tagged EpsE migrated as a monomer when subjected to gel filtration (Sandkvist *et al.*, 1995), protein E may function as a larger oligomer *in vivo*. This is based on the finding that XcpR~*E*~ and OutE

© 2001 Blackwell Science Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **40**, 271–283

behaved like oligomers when genetic fusions of these proteins were analysed in the lambda repressor and yeast two-hybrid systems respectively (Turner *et al.*, 1997; Py *et al.*, 1999). Identification of the oligomerization domain is not completely settled however, as it was mapped to the N-terminal domain in the case of XcpR<sub>E</sub>, whereas it was found to localize to the C-terminal domain of OutE. When OutL was analysed in the yeast two-hybrid system, it was also found to oligomerize (Py *et al.*, 1999). Finally, EpsL and EpsM each migrated as dimers during gel filtration analysis (Sandkvist *et al.*, 1999).

Purified EpsE demonstrates autophosphorylation activity that is dependent on an intact ATP binding site, suggesting that it may act as a kinase that regulates the secretion process (Sandkvist *et al.*, 1995). One possibility is that it may control the gating of the secretion pore via its interaction with proteins L and M. Support for this comes from the finding that interactions between proteins E and L on the cytoplasmic side of the cytoplasmic membrane result in conformational changes in the periplasmic domain of protein L in *E. chrysanthemi* (Py *et al.*, 1999). The conformational change in protein L may, in turn, affect its interaction with protein M and possibly protein C (Fig. 1). Alternatively, it has been speculated that protein E may not be a kinase, but rather an ATPase, whose function is to supply energy for opening of the secretion pore or for the assembly of the secretion apparatus. Some form of energy input is generally required for all membrane translocation pathways, and the proton-motive force of the inner membrane is required for type II secretion (Letellier *et al.*, 1997; Possot *et al.*, 1997; Sandkvist *et al.*, 2000b). However, one study has also found that ATP hydrolysis is important (Letellier *et al.*, 1997). Other extracellular secretion pathways, including the type I, III and IV systems, encode components with ATPase activity. The purified proteins TrwD, TrbB and cag HP00525 of three different type IV secretion systems display ATPase activity that can be stimulated by phospholipids (Rivas *et al.*, 1997; Krause *et al.*, 2000). These proteins are distantly related to the E protein of the type II secretion system, displaying homology within an internal 100-amino-acid domain of protein E that contains the ATP-binding motif. Notwithstanding, the low-level homology between these proteins may suggest that the E protein also acts as an ATPase.

One possibility is that protein E may supply energy and promote cytoplasmic membrane translocation and assembly of the pilin-like subunits G, H, I, J and K after cleavage and methylation by protein O. Support for the latter hypothesis comes from genetic suppressor mutation analysis in *P. aeruginosa*, which suggested that the E protein interacts with protein G (Kagami *et al.*, 1998). In this study, a defect in secretion caused by a point mutation in XcpR<sub>E</sub> could be suppressed and secretion

restored in the presence of a mutant form of XcpT<sub>G</sub> containing only a single amino acid substitution. That proteins E and G interact can also be inferred from the finding that overexpression of *pulG* blocks extracellular secretion and reduces the amount of PulE protein as well as the amounts of PulL, PulM, PulC and PulD (Possot *et al.*, 2000). This latter finding further supports the existence of a multiprotein complex composed of proteins G, E, L, M, C and D (Fig. 1). Finally, cross-linking analysis in *P. aeruginosa* suggests that the G protein also interacts with proteins H, I and J (Lu *et al.*, 1997). No protein–protein interaction for protein F has been reported thus far. However, topology mapping of OutF from *E. carotovora* suggests that this protein is an integral cytoplasmic membrane protein with three membrane-spanning domains (Thomas *et al.*, 1997).

Based on the above findings, it appears as though most, if not all, of the type II secretion components interact to form a multiprotein complex. However, very little is known about the nature of these interactions, and the stoichiometry of the complex is not known. Some of the interactions may be transient; all the components may not be present in the complex at the same time.

The type II secretion apparatus spans the cell envelope

It is likely that, at some stage during the secretion process, the secretion apparatus spans the entire cell envelope, forming a bridge between the inner and outer membranes, as transport across the outer membrane appears to require the proton-motive force of the inner membrane, and preliminary evidence exists for interactions between proteins located in the two membranes (Fig. 1; Letellier *et al.*, 1997; Possot *et al.*, 1997; 1999; Bleves *et al.*, 1999; Lee *et al.*, 2000). However, this structure may be transient, as the EpsD pore is used for both secretion of extracellular proteins via the type II Eps apparatus and extrusion of the filamentous phage CTXφ in *V. cholerae* (Davis *et al.*, 2000). In contrast to secreted proteins, no other Eps components are thought to be required for phage secretion, suggesting that EpsD may have to shuttle between these two pathways and, therefore, may not be permanently engaged with the Eps apparatus (Fig. 1). If this is the case, EpsD may function in a similar manner to TolC, the outer membrane component of the type I secretion complex, which shuttles between different transport complexes and interacts with different components depending on what it is transporting (Thanabalu *et al.*, 1998). Alternatively, EpsD may be present in excess relative to the other Eps components, permitting it to support simultaneous secretion of proteins via the type II pathway and phage extrusion. However, in either case, EpsD must be able to interact specifically with

both Eps proteins and phage-encoded proteins. For example, the CTXφ protein Zot, a putative ATPase located in the cytoplasmic membrane, is homologous to pl, which interacts with the D homologue plV of the filamentous phage f1 in the outer membrane (Waldor and Mekalanos, 1996; Feng *et al.*, 1999). This suggests that EpsD may interact with Zot during CTXφ secretion. Although there is no Zot homologue in the Eps operon, it may be that the trimolecular complex of EpsE–EpsL–EpsM in combination with EpsC serves a similar function during protein secretion.

### The type II secretion pilus

The G, H, I, J and K proteins are similar to the subunits of type IV pili and, like the pilin subunits, they are produced as precursor proteins that are N-terminally processed and methylated by the prepilin peptidase or O protein (Nunn and Lory, 1993; Bleves *et al.*, 1998). Several additional components of the type II secretion pathway, including the D, E and F proteins, are also homologous to proteins required for the biogenesis of type IV pili. These observations have led to the suggestion that the two systems are evolutionarily related and that some of the type II secretion components may form a pilus-like structure that supports secretion either directly or indirectly (Nunn, 1999). Such a structure was demonstrated recently by Pugsley and colleagues, who overexpressed the type II secretion genes from *K. oxytoca* in *E. coli* and demonstrated that the PulG protein was able to assemble into long pilus-like bundles (Sauvonnet *et al.*, 2000). This finding has also been confirmed with the PulG homologue XcpT from *P. aeruginosa* (D. Nunn, personal communication). However, expression of the *pul* genes from a chromosomal location or from a low-copy-number plasmid did not result in detectable pili, even when secretion of pullulanase could be observed. Thus, these pili, if present under normal conditions, may be either too short or too few to be detected. Alternatively, the growing pili may dissociate as soon as they emerge from the pore.

If a pilus-like structure is required for type II secretion, then the question is how does this structure support the secretion of folded proteins? Assuming that the secretion pilus displays similar dimensions to the type IV pilus, then the secretion pilus itself would be too narrow to allow for the passage of folded proteins (Parge *et al.*, 1995). Furthermore, a pore with an inner diameter ranging from 76 to 95 Å would not be large enough to accommodate the pilus and a folded protein simultaneously, as the secretion pilus is likely to be 60–70 Å in diameter (Parge *et al.*, 1995; Linderoth *et al.*, 1997; Bitter *et al.*, 1998; Nouwen *et al.*, 1999). Therefore, the pilus and the secreted proteins most probably do not occupy the secretion pore at the same time. However, the pilus might support secretion by acting as a piston to push secreted proteins through the secretion pore, as depicted in the model in Fig. 1 and proposed earlier (Mattick and Alm, 1995; Shevchik *et al.*, 1997; Filloux *et al.*, 1998). This could occur by extension and retraction of the cytoplasmic membrane-anchored pilus, much as actin in the cytoskeleton of eukaryotic cells polymerizes and depolymerizes to extend the membrane. Indeed, a recent study using laser tweezer technology demonstrated that extension and retraction is an inherent property of the *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* type IV pilus (Merz *et al.*, 2000). In this study, *N. gonorrhoeae* cells that were held in position by laser tweezers near an *N. gonorrhoeae* microcolony were repeatedly pulled from the laser trap towards the microcolony and then released. Furthermore, when latex beads coated with an anti-pilin antibody were placed in a laser trap, they were pulled at forces exceeding 80 pN towards the nearby immobilized bacteria-expressing pili (Merz *et al.*, 2000). These findings suggested that pilus generates a significant enough force to promote cell motility. Similarly, polymerization and retraction of the pilin-like proteins of the type II secretion apparatus could push the secreted proteins through the secretion pore or open the gated secretion pore to allow for outer membrane translocation of the secreted proteins. The polymerization and retraction of the type IV pilus requires the opposing function of two putative ATPases, PilF and PilT, which are both similar to protein E of the type II secretion apparatus. PilF is necessary for pilus biogenesis, whereas PilT is required for pilus retraction (Merz *et al.*, 2000; Wolfgang *et al.*, 2000). If the type II pathway functions in a similar manner to the type IV pilus biogenesis system, then it would be expected that the type II pathway would also have both PilF- and PilT-like proteins. However, although all type II pathways have the E protein, which may function like PilF and promote pilus formation, thus far less than a handful of species have been identified with a second putative ATPase, protein A, that might act in a PilT-like manner.

Further support for a type II secretion model in which the pilus acts like a piston to either push out the secreted proteins or to open the gated pore comes from the finding that type IV pilin subunits assemble into filaments at the cytoplasmic membrane before outer membrane translocation (Wolfgang *et al.*, 2000). Koomey and colleagues found that, in double mutants that are lacking the secretin PilQ and PilT, pilin subunits assembled into fibres that accumulated in the periplasm and localized in membrane protrusions, whereas no filaments were detected in a single *pilQ* mutant, suggesting that PilT acts as an antagonist of pilus formation (Wolfgang *et al.*, 2000). These authors speculated that PilT might influence the net growth of the pilus by forming mixed, non-functional

Fig. 2. Models for a macromolecular suprastructure of the type II secretion complex. Several individual oligomers formed by 12 D proteins assemble into a higher ordered suprastructure, thus forming an internal pore. This internal pore is decorated by another component of the secretion apparatus, thus forming a hydrophilic channel compatible with protein transport.

A. Each individual D pore extrudes a pilus, whereas the suprapore supports extracellular secretion.

B. The suprapore extrudes a bundle of pili, whereas the individual D pores transport extracellular proteins.

In both models, the pilus extension/retraction is the driving force for opening of the secretion pore to allow for extracellular secretion.

oligomers with the homologous PilF. The basis for this suggestion is the finding that the distantly related ATPases TrbB and HP0525 form hexameric toroidal structures suggested to catalyse a repetitive membrane translocation process (Krause et al., 2000).

Very recently, the crystal structure of the monomeric form of HP0525 bound to ADP has been described (Yeo et al., 2000). Modelling of this structure into a hexamer showed that the N- and C-terminal halves form two rings, which together form a chamber that is open on the side formed by the N-terminal domain, but closed on the C-terminal side. A model was proposed in which the complex functions as an inner membrane pore, where the closed ‘six-clawed grapple’ ring is present in the cytoplasm, and the open ring is localized to the cytoplasmic membrane. Opening and closing is then regulated by ATP binding and hydrolysis (Yeo et al., 2000). Based on its homology with this protein, protein E of the type II secretion system may function in an analogous manner. Maybe protein E forms the pore through which the pilin-like subunits are transported and subsequently assembled, and a ratchet mechanism requiring the repetitive ATP binding and hydrolysis process could support the growth of the pilus, allowing it to extend from the cytoplasmic membrane towards the outer membrane and the secretin.

The role for the minor pilin subunits encoded by the H–K genes in the formation of the secretion pilus is not known. However, only rare and short PulG pili could be detected in a *pilL* mutant, suggesting that the minor pilin subunit Pull may be responsible for the initiation of pilin subunit polymerization or for anchoring the pilus to the cell

envelope (Sauvonnet et al., 2000). The minor pilin subunits PulJ and PulK, on the other hand, are not required for pilus formation, as long pilus could be detected in the *pulJ* and *pulK* mutants. However, these two proteins must play a role in the secretion process, as no pullulanase secretion was observed in these mutants (Sauvonnet et al., 2000).

The idea that the pilus would not extend far beyond the outer surface in the model presented in Fig. 1 is consistent with the finding that no pilus structure was observed when the *pul* genes were expressed from a chromosomal location (Sauvonnet et al., 2000). The observation that pili could be detected when the *pul* genes were overexpressed also does not necessarily speak against this model, as it is not known whether the observed appendages were actively involved in pullulanase transport or if functional secretion machineries may have been present in the cells in addition to those that produced the long bundled pili. If, however, the very same machineries were secreting pullulanase that also produced the long pili, it would be unlikely that these appendages could retract all the way back into the periplasm to push out pullulanase. Therefore, other models for secretion by the type II secretion apparatus cannot be ruled out.

### Models for a macromolecular suprastructure

Several studies have suggested that the secretins have a tendency to aggregate and form higher ordered multimers (Linderoth et al., 1997; Brok et al., 1999; Nouwen et al., 1999). Such a higher ordered macromolecular suprastructure could suggest alternative models, in which pilus extrusion and protein secretion do not need to occur

© 2001 Blackwell Science Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **40**, 271–283

through the same pore structure. For example, several D oligomers composed of 12 individual D proteins might assemble into a higher ordered pore structure in which each oligomer supports the extrusion of a single pilus, and protein secretion occurs through the central channel formed by these oligomers (Fig. 2A). Alternatively, the suprapore formed by the D oligomers could hold several pili, and the individual D oligomers might then support secretion as shown in the model in Fig. 2B. Consistent with these models, the 150- to 200-Å-thick appendages detected when the *pul* secretion genes were over-expressed resembled bundled type IV pili (Sauvonnet *et al.*, 2000). These pili might either extend through the suprapore already in bundles, as shown in Fig. 2B, or extend through individual D pores and start bundling above the cell surface (Fig. 2A). These two models are highly hypothetical, with the exception that the secretion pores must be clustered in order for the pili to bundle. In order for these structures to assemble and function in the manner displayed in Fig. 2, additional components of the secretion apparatus are most likely needed. For instance, another component of the secretion apparatus could bring together and nucleate the individual D oligomers to form the suprastructure and then remain associated with this structure to decorate the central pore in order to give it a hydrophilic surface that would be compatible with protein transport (Fig. 2). Protein C would be a likely candidate for this job, as PulC has been shown to co-fractionate with both the inner and the outer membranes and can be cross-linked into a larger complex that requires PulD (Possot *et al.*, 1999).

In both models presented in Fig. 2, the extension and retraction of the pili may regulate the opening and closing of the pore and might also play a role in channelling secreted proteins past surface structures such as capsules (Fig. 2A; Sauvonnet *et al.*, 2000). The pili could also be required for protein secretion in bacteria present in biofilm, by transporting proteins that would otherwise be trapped among the aggregated bacteria. Alternatively, the secretion pili may serve as conventional

Fig. 3. Structures of proteins secreted via the type II secretion pathway. RASMOL ribbon drawings of *Erwinia chrysanthemi* pectate lyase C (PelC, PDB:2PEC), *Aeromonas hydrophila* proaerolysin (PDB:1PRE), *Vibrio cholerae* neuraminidase (PDB:1KIT) and cholera toxin B pentamer (PDB:1FGB), *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* elastase (PDB:1EZM) and *Burkholderia cepacia* lipase (PDB:3LIP). Co-ordinates were obtained from the NCBI Molecular Modeling Database, and the structures were visualized with RASWIN Molecular Graphics Windows, version 2.6.

pili by adhering to specific surfaces to allow for directed secretion (Sauvonnet *et al.*, 2000).

Type II secreted proteins are rich in β-sheet content

The most unique feature of the type II secretion pathway may be its ability to transport folded and apparently unrelated proteins across the outer membrane (Hirst and Holmgren, 1987; Poquet *et al.*, 1993; Bortoli-German *et al.*, 1994; Hardie *et al.*, 1995). Why the proteins are secreted in their fully or close to fully folded forms is not known but may result from the requirements for specific chaperones such as disulphide isomerase for successful folding (Fig. 1). It is also likely to be advantageous to assemble multisubunit proteins in the concentrated milieu of the periplasm rather than in the extracellular environment (Fig. 1; Hirst and Holmgren, 1987). Analysis of the primary amino acid sequence of proteins secreted through this pathway shows no obvious homology. Some of the proteins are monomeric such as elastase, whereas others, such as cholera toxin and aerolysin, are oligomeric (Fig. 3). The secreted proteins also have very different functions. Some are toxins that act inside eukaryotic cells, and others are hydrolytic enzymes with very different substrate specificities acting on proteins, lipids, chitin or complex cell wall structures. However, examination of the three-dimensional structure of several secreted proteins suggests that one potentially similar feature of these proteins is a relatively high beta-sheet content (Fig. 3), a property that is also common to outer membrane porins (Koebnik *et al.*, 2000). This is also true for *P. aeruginosa* exotoxin A, which has an amino-terminal domain that is composed primarily of antiparallel β-strands that comprise approximately half of the molecule (Allured *et al.*, 1986). Several of these proteins also display relatively elongated structures. The structures of the secreted forms of elastase and lipase display less β-sheet. However, their structures may be quite different in the periplasm. Elastase, for instance, is produced and secreted as a proform with an additional 18 kDa

© 2001 Blackwell Science Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **40**, 271–283

propeptide that is required for both folding and secretion (Mclver et al., 1995; 1998). Folding and secretion of lipase also requires a chaperone activity and, although its chaperone Lif is not secreted because it contains a membrane anchor, it is possible that the dissociation of the lipase–Lif complex occurs only after engagement of this complex with the secretion apparatus (El Khattabi et al., 1999). In these examples, it is likely that the secretion apparatus recognizes the proform of elastase and the lipase–Lif complex and that the intact secretion signal is no longer present on the mature forms of these proteins shown in Fig. 3. Similarly, it has been suggested that the secretion-competent conformation of Cel5 cellulase may be different from the structure of the mature protein once secreted (Chapon et al., 2000).

### Identification of a secretion signal

The information within secreted proteins that targets them to the secretion apparatus is thought to be created as the proteins fold in the periplasmic compartment. The secretion signal may be composed of residues from different locations in the linear polypeptide chain, which are only brought together when the proteins fold. Alternatively, the sequence may be linear, but only recognized by the secretion apparatus when it is correctly displayed on the surface of a folded protein. Some success in identifying a minimal sequence required for secretion has been obtained with fusion protein technology. For example, a protein composed of residues 60–120 of exotoxin A and the periplasmic enzyme β-lactamase was secreted when expressed in *P. aeruginosa* (Lu and Lory, 1996). Interestingly, this region, containing the putative secretion signal, is rich in antiparallel β-sheets. However, in another study, removal of residues 31–243 from exotoxin A resulted in a mutant protein that could still be translocated across the outer membrane, even though it was lacking this potential secretion signal (McVay and Hamood, 1995). The reason for these seemingly contradictory results is not clear. However, it may suggest that the secretion signal is built up of residues present at both the N- and the C-terminus of the intact exotoxin A or that there are two distinct signals that act sequentially. Correct positioning of the signal(s) is apparently important for secretion, as internal deletions of exotoxin A resulted in mutant proteins that were secretion defective, even though the N- and C-terminal domains remained intact for receptor binding and catalytic activity respectively (Voulhoux et al., 2000). Similarly, the importance of correct positioning of domains carrying information critical for Cel5 cellulase secretion has also been noted (Py et al., 1993; Chapon et al., 2000).

In another study, a fusion protein containing *K. oxytoca* pullulanase and *E. coli* β-lactamase was analysed for its ability to translocate across the outer membrane (Sauvonnet and Pugsley, 1996). By removing segments of pullulanase from this fusion protein, two non-adjacent regions of 78 and 80 amino acids, respectively, were found to be sufficient for outer membrane translocation. In yet another study, fusion proteins composed of two homologous forms of secreted pectate lyase from *E. chrysanthemi* and *E. carotovora* were constructed and analysed for species-specific secretion (Lindeberg et al., 1998) and, as with pullulanase, two non-contiguous regions were found to be required for secretion. Secretion of a fusion protein composed of PehA, another protein secreted via the *Erwinia* Out pathway, and β-lactamase was extremely sensitive to removal of residues from the PehA C-terminus (Palomaki and Saarilahti, 1995). When the C-terminal residues of the native PehA were subjected to mutagenesis in a subsequent study, it was concluded that the C-terminus is required for the formation or stabilization of a structure that carries information critical for secretion (Palomaki and Saarilahti, 1997).

The information for the secretion of cholera toxin (CT) has been shown to reside in the B-subunit pentamer, whose structure is displayed in Fig. 3, as expression of B-subunits in the absence of the A-subunit results in their assembly into pentamers in the periplasm followed by secretion across the outer membrane of *V. cholerae* (Hirst et al., 1984; Fig. 1). In this case, however, attempts to identify the targeting signal in the B pentamer by construction of fusion proteins between portions of the B-subunit and either beta-lactamase or alkaline phosphatase were unsuccessful. This was apparently because of the inability of the fusion proteins to form pentamers and supports the hypothesis that assembly of the B-subunit into a pentameric structure is a prerequisite for successful secretion.

Although all these studies suggest that folding is a prerequisite for successful secretion by the type II pathway and that even minor structural perturbations can interfere with this process, a consensus structure or signal that targets the secreted proteins to this pathway has yet to be identified. That a structural motif or a particular property of a secreted protein may be more important for secretion than the actual amino acid sequence of a secretion signal may be inferred from studies of the B-subunit of *E. coli* heat-labile enterotoxin LT-IIb (Connell et al., 1995). Unlike LT-I, which is almost identical to cholera toxin (CT), LT-IIb has a very limited homology with CT, showing only 11% sequence identity. Nonetheless, the structure of the B-subunit pentamers of LT-IIb and CT are strikingly similar and, just like CT, LT-IIb is secreted via the type II secretion pathway when expressed in *V. cholerae* (Connell et al., 1995). With this in mind, one might speculate that other proteins with a structure similar to that of CT, such as shiga-like toxin

produced by *E. coli* O157:H7, may also be secreted via a type II secretion pathway. Consistent with this suggestion, *E. coli* O157:H7 appears to have a complete set of type II secretion genes on the large virulence plasmid pO157 (Schmidt *et al.*, 1997).

### Concluding remarks

Since the initial isolation of type II secretion mutants more than 25 years ago (Holmes *et al.*, 1975), we have come a long way; however, there are still a number of questions that remain unanswered, and there are probably more to come. For example, what are the specific roles of each component of the type II apparatus? How does the pilus support secretion? How are the secreted proteins recognized by the type II apparatus? What triggers the opening of the secretion pore? Several candidates, including proteins B, C and N, have been proposed to interact directly with protein D in a TonB-like fashion to open the pore (Howard *et al.*, 1996; Bleves *et al.*, 1999; Possot *et al.*, 1999; Lee *et al.*, 2000). Do these components act in concert to fulfil this task? Also, how does EpsD in *V. cholerae* support such different processes as cholera toxin secretion and phage extrusion? It is noteworthy that the overall dimensions and structure of filamentous phage and pilus are similar. Both form long (> 1 μm) extended structures with an approximate outer diameter of 6–7 nm. In addition, both structures are composed of multiple copies of a single subunit that polymerizes into a long filament (Fig. 1).

It is likely that continued comparison of the type II secretion pathway with the type IV pilus biogenesis system will be worthwhile, as both systems apparently have the capacity to assemble a pilus and transport proteins to the extracellular environment. Recent data from Kaiser and colleagues suggest that the type IV pilus responsible for the social motility of *Myxococcus xanthus* may also be required for the secretion of several proteins to the extracellular space (Wall *et al.*, 1999). These secreted components are currently being identified. In addition, the type IV pilus complex TCP in *V. cholerae* supports the secretion of a soluble colonization factor, TcpF (T. Kirn and R. Taylor, submitted). Normally, a secreted protein, TcpF, accumulates in the periplasmic compartment in the absence of pilus biogenesis. These two examples may be exceptions to the rule, or they may suggest that pilus formation and protein secretion are traits common to both the type II secretion pathway and the type IV pilus system. A continued comparison of these two pathways is warranted, and information obtained with one system may very well be applicable to the other. In fact, these two systems may simply be variations on the same theme.

### Acknowledgements

I am grateful to Drs M. Bagdasarian, K. C. Ingham, D. A. Lawrence, M. Russel, R. Taylor and anonymous reviewers for critical reading of the manuscript and for helpful comments and suggestions. I wish to thank Drs D. Nunn and R. Taylor for providing information before publication.

### References

Allured, V.S., Collier, R.J., Carroll, S.F., and McKay, D.B. (1986) Structure of exotoxin A of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* at 3.0-Angstrom resolution. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **83**: 1320–1324.

Ball, G., Chapon-Herve, V., Bleves, S., Michel, G., and Bally, M. (1999) Assembly of XcpR in the cytoplasmic membrane is required for extracellular protein secretion in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *J Bacteriol* **181**: 382–388.

Bitter, W., Koster, M., Latijnhouters, M., De Cock, H., and Tommassen, J. (1998) Formation of oligomeric rings by XcpQ and PilQ, which are involved in protein transport across the outer membrane of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *Mol Microbiol* **27**: 209–219.

Bleves, S., Voulhoux, R., Michel, G., Lazdunski, A., Tommassen, J., and Filloux, A. (1998) The secretion apparatus of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: identification of a fifth pseudopilin, XcpX (GspK family). *Mol Microbiol* **27**: 31–40.

Bleves, S., Gerard-Vincent, M., Lazdunski, A., and Filloux, A. (1999) Structure–function analysis of XcpP, a component involved in general secretory pathway-dependent protein secretion in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *J Bacteriol* **181**: 4012–4019.

Bortoli-German, I., Brun, E., Py, B., Chippaux, M., and Barras, F. (1994) Periplasmic disulphide bond formation is essential for cellulase secretion by the plant pathogen *Erwinia chrysanthemi*. *Mol Microbiol* **11**: 545–553.

Braun, P., de Groot, A., Bitter, W., and Tommassen, J. (1998) Secretion of elastinolytic enzymes and their propeptides by *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *J Bacteriol* **180**: 3467–3469.

Brok, R., Van Gelder, P., Winterhalter, M., Ziese, U., Koster, A.J., De Cock, H., *et al.* (1999) The C-terminal domain of the *Pseudomonas* secretin XcpQ forms oligomeric rings with pore activity. *J Mol Biol* **294**: 1169–1179.

Chapon, V., Simpson, H.D., Morelli, X., Brun, E., and Barras, F. (2000) Alteration of a single tryptophan residue of the cellulose-binding domain blocks secretion of the *Erwinia chrysanthemi* cel5 cellulase (ex-EGZ) via the type II system. *J Mol Biol* **303**: 117–123.

Condemine, G., and Shevchik, V.E. (2000) Overproduction of the secretin OutD suppresses the secretion defect of an *Erwinia chrysanthemi outB* mutant. *Microbiology* **146**: 639–647.

Connell, T.D., Metzger, D.J., Wang, M., Jobling, M.G., and Holmes, R.K. (1995) Initial studies of the structural signal for extracellular transport of cholera toxin and other proteins recognized by *Vibrio cholerae*. *Infect Immun* **63**: 4091–4098.

Crago, A.M., and Koronakis, V. (1998) *Salmonella InvG*

© 2001 Blackwell Science Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **40**, 271–283

forms a ring-like multimer that requires the InvH lipoprotein for outer membrane localization. Mol Microbiol 30: 47–56.

Daefer, S., and Russel, M. (1998) The Salmonella typhimurium InvH protein is an outer membrane lipoprotein required for the proper localization of InvG. Mol Microbiol 28: 1367–1380.

Daefer, S., Guivout, I., Hardie, K.R., Pugsley, A.P., and Russel, M. (1997) The C-terminal domain of the secretin PulD contains the binding site for its cognate chaperone, PulS, and confers PulS dependence on pIVf1 function. Mol Microbiol 24: 465–475.

Davis, B.M., Lawson, E.H., Sandkvist, M., Ali, A., Sozhamannan, S., and Waldor, M.K. (2000) Convergence of the secretory pathways for cholera toxin and the filamentous phage, CTXphi. Science 288: 333–335.

Drake, S.L., Sandstedt, S.A., and Koomey, M. (1997) PilP, a pilus biogenesis lipoprotein in Neisseria gonorrhoeae affects expression of PilQ as a high-molecular-mass multimer. Mol Microbiol 23: 657–668.

El Khattabi, M., Ockhuijsen, C., Bitter, W., Jaeger, K.E., and Tommassen, J. (1999) Specificity of the lipase-specific foldases of gram-negative bacteria and the role of the membrane anchor. Mol Gen Genet 261: 770–776.

Feng, J.N., Model, P., and Russel, M. (1999) A trans-envelope protein complex needed for filamentous phage assembly and export. Mol Microbiol 34: 745–755.

Filloux, A., Bally, M., Ball, G., Akrim, M., Tommassen, J., and Lazdunski, A. (1990) Protein secretion in gram-negative bacteria: transport across the outer membrane involves common mechanisms in different bacteria. EMBO J 9: 4323–4329.

Filloux, A., Michel, G., and Bally, M. (1998) GSP-dependent protein secretion in gram-negative bacteria: the Xcp system of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. FEMS Microbiol Rev 22: 177–198.

Francetic, O., Belin, D., Badaut, C., and Pugsley, A.P. (2000) Expression of the endogenous type II secretion pathway in Escherichia coli leads to chitinase secretion. EMBO J 19: 6697–6703.

Genin, S., and Boucher, C.A. (1994) A superfamily of proteins involved in different secretion pathways in gram-negative bacteria: modular structure and specificity of the N-terminal domain. Mol Gen Genet 243: 112–118.

Guivout, I., Hardie, K.R., Sauvonnet, N., and Pugsley, A.P. (1999) Genetic dissection of the outer membrane secretin PulD: are there distinct domains for multimerization and secretion specificity? J Bacteriol 181: 7212–7220.

Hardie, K.R., Schulze, A., Parker, M.W., and Buckley, J.T. (1995) Vibrio spp. secrete proaerolysin as a folded dimer without the need for disulphide bond formation. Mol Microbiol 17: 1035–1044.

Hardie, K.R., Lory, S., and Pugsley, A.P. (1996) Insertion of an outer membrane protein in Escherichia coli requires a chaperone-like protein. EMBO J 15: 978–988.

Hirst, T.R., and Holmgren, J. (1987) Conformation of protein secreted across bacterial outer membranes: a study of enterotoxin translocation from Vibrio cholerae. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84: 7418–7422.

Hirst, T.R., Sanchez, J., Kaper, J.B., Hardy, S.J., and Holmgren, J. (1984) Mechanism of toxin secretion by Vibrio cholerae investigated in strains harboring plasmids

that encode heat-labile enterotoxins of Escherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 81: 7752–7756.

Holmes, R.K., Vasil, M.L., and Finkelstein, R.A. (1975) Studies on toxinogenesis in Vibrio cholerae. III. Characterization of nontoxinogenic mutants in vitro and in experimental animals. J Clin Invest 55: 551–560.

Howard, S.P., Meiklejohn, H.G., Shivak, D., and Jahagirdar, R. (1996) A TonB-like protein and a novel membrane protein containing an ATP-binding cassette function together in exotoxin secretion. Mol Microbiol 22: 595–604.

Kagami, Y., Ratliff, M., Surber, M., Martinez, A., and Nunn, D.N. (1998) Type II protein secretion by Pseudomonas aeruginosa: genetic suppression of a conditional mutation in the pilin-like component XcpT by the cytoplasmic component XcpR. Mol Microbiol 27: 221–233.

Kazmierczak, B.I., Mielke, D.L., Russel, M., and Model, P. (1994) pIV, a filamentous phage protein that mediates phage export across the bacterial cell envelope, forms a multimer. J Mol Biol 238: 187–198.

Koebnik, R., Locher, K.P., and Van Gelder, P. (2000) Structure and function of bacterial outer membrane proteins: barrels in a nutshell. Mol Microbiol 37: 239–253.

Krause, S., Pansegrau, W., Lurz, R., de la Cruz, F., and Lanka, E. (2000) Enzymology of type IV macromolecule secretion systems: the conjugative transfer regions of plasmids RP4 and R388 and the cag pathogenicity island of Helicobacter pylori encode structurally and functionally related nucleoside triphosphate hydrolases. J Bacteriol 182: 2761–2770.

Lee, H.M., Wang, K.C., Liu, Y.L., Yew, H.Y., Chen, L.Y., Leu, W.M., et al. (2000) Association of the cytoplasmic membrane protein XpsN with the outer membrane protein XpsD in the type II protein secretion apparatus of Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris. J Bacteriol 182: 1549–1557.

Letellier, L., Howard, S.P., and Buckley, J.T. (1997) Studies on the energetics of proaerolysin secretion across the outer membrane of Aeromonas species. Evidence for a requirement for both the protonmotive force and ATP. J Biol Chem 272: 11109–11113.

Lindeberg, M., Salmond, G.P., and Collmer, A. (1996) Complementation of deletion mutations in a cloned functional cluster of Erwinia chrysanthemi out genes with Erwinia carotovora out homologues reveals OutC and OutD as candidate gatekeepers of species-specific secretion of proteins via the type II pathway. Mol Microbiol 20: 175–190.

Lindeberg, M., Boyd, C.M., Keen, N.T., and Collmer, A. (1998) External loops at the C terminus of Erwinia chrysanthemi pectate lyase C are required for species-specific secretion through the out type II pathway. J Bacteriol 180: 1431–1437.

Linderoth, N.A., Model, P., and Russel, M. (1996) Essential role of a sodium dodecyl sulfate-resistant protein IV multimer in assembly-export of filamentous phage. J Bacteriol 178: 1962–1970.

Linderoth, N.A., Simon, M.N., and Russel, M. (1997) The filamentous phage pIV multimer visualized by scanning transmission electron microscopy. Science 278: 1635–1638.

Lu, H.M., and Lory, S. (1996) A specific targeting domain in

mature exotoxin A is required for its extracellular secretion from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. EMBO J 15: 429–436.

Lu, H.M., Motley, S.T., and Lory, S. (1997) Interactions of the components of the general secretion pathway: role of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* type IV pilin subunits in complex formation and extracellular protein secretion. Mol Microbiol 25: 247–259.

McIver, K.S., Kessler, E., Olson, J.C., and Ohman, D.E. (1995) The elastase propeptide functions as an intramolecular chaperone required for elastase activity and secretion in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Mol Microbiol 18: 877–889.

McVay, C.S., and Hamood, A.N. (1995) Toxin A secretion in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: the role of the first 30 amino acids of the mature toxin. Mol Gen Genet 249: 515–525.

Marciano, D.K., Russel, M., and Simon, S.M. (1999) An aqueous channel for filamentous phage export. Science 284: 1516–1519.

Mattick, J.S., and Alm, R.A. (1995) Common architecture of type IV fimbriae and complexes involved in macromolecular traffic. Trends Microbiol 3: 411–413.

Merz, A.J., So, M., and Sheetz, M.P. (2000) Pilus retraction powers bacterial twitching motility. Nature 407: 98–102.

Michel, L.O., Sandkvist, M., and Bagdasarian, M. (1995) Specificity of the protein secretory apparatus: secretion of the heat-labile enterotoxin B subunit pentamers by different species of gram-bacteria. Gene 152: 41–45.

Michel, G., Bleves, S., Ball, G., Lazdunski, A., and Filloux, A. (1998) Mutual stabilization of the XcpZ and XcpY components of the secretory apparatus in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Microbiology 144: 3379–3386.

Moeck, G.S., and Coulton, J.W. (1998) Ton-B dependent iron acquisition: mechanisms of siderophore-mediated active transport. Mol Microbiol 28: 675–681.

Nouwen, N., Ranson, N., Saibil, H., Wolpensinger, B., Engel, A., Ghazi, A., and Pugsley, A.P. (1999) Secretin PulD: association with pilot PulS, structure, and ion-conducting channel formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96: 8173–8177.

Nouwen, N., Stahlberg, H., Pugsley, A.P., and Engel, A. (2000) Domain structure of secretin PulD revealed by limited proteolysis and electron microscopy. EMBO J 19: 2229–2236.

Nunn, D. (1999) Bacterial type II protein export and pilus biogenesis: more than just homologies? Trends Cell Biol 9: 402–408.

Nunn, D.N., and Lory, S. (1993) Cleavage, methylation, and localization of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* export proteins XcpT-U-V, and -W. J Bacteriol 175: 4375–4382.

Palomaki, T., and Saarilahti, H.T. (1997) Isolation and characterization of new C-terminal substitution mutations affecting secretion of polygalacturonase in *Erwinia carotovora* ssp. *carotovora*. FEBS Lett 400: 122–126.

Palomaki, T., and Saarilahti, H.T. (1995) The extreme C-terminus is required for secretion of both the native polygalacturonase (PehA) and PehA-Bla hybrid proteins in *Erwinia carotovora* subsp. *carotovora*. Mol Microbiol 17: 449–459.

Parge, H.E., Forest, K.T., Hickey, M.J., Christensen, D.A., Getzoff, E.D., and Tainer, J.A. (1995) Structure of the fibre-forming protein pilin at 2.6 Å resolution. Nature 378: 32–38.

Poquet, I., Faucher, D., and Pugsley, A.P. (1993) Stable periplasmic secretion intermediate in the general secretary pathway of *Escherichia coli*. EMBO J 12: 271–278.

Possot, O.M., Letellier, L., and Pugsley, A.P. (1997) Energy requirement for pullulanase secretion by the main terminal branch of the general secretary pathway. Mol Microbiol 24: 457–464.

Possot, O.M., Gerard-Vincent, M., and Pugsley, A.P. (1999) Membrane association and multimerization of secretor component pulC. J Bacteriol 181: 4004–4011.

Possot, O.M., Vignon, G., Bomchil, N., Ebel, F., and Pugsley, A.P. (2000) Multiple interactions between pullulanase secretor components involved in stabilization and cytoplasmic membrane association of PulE. J Bacteriol 182: 2142–2152.

Py, B., Chippaux, M., and Barras, F. (1993) Mutagenesis of cellulase EGZ for studying the general protein secretary pathway in *Erwinia chrysanthemi*. Mol Microbiol 7: 785–793.

Py, B., Loiseau, L., and Barras, F. (1999) Assembly of the type II secretion machinery of *Erwinia chrysanthemi*: direct interaction and associated conformational change between OutE, the putative ATP-binding component and the membrane protein OutL. J Mol Biol 289: 659–670.

Rivas, S., Bolland, S., Cabezon, E., Goni, F.M., and de la Cruz, F. (1997) TrwD, a protein encoded by the IncW plasmid R388, displays an ATP hydrolase activity essential for bacterial conjugation. J Biol Chem 272: 25583–25590.

Sandkvist, M. (2001) Type II secretion and pathogenesis. Infect Immun (in press).

Sandkvist, M., Bagdasarian, M., Howard, S.P., and DiRita, V.J. (1995) Interaction between the autokinase EpsE and EpsL in the cytoplasmic membrane is required for extracellular secretion in *Vibrio cholerae*. EMBO J 14: 1664–1673.

Sandkvist, M., Hough, L.P., Bagdasarian, M.M., and Bagdasarian, M. (1999) Direct interaction of the EpsL and EpsM proteins of the general secretion apparatus in *Vibrio cholerae*. J Bacteriol 181: 3129–3135.

Sandkvist, M., Keith, J.M., Bagdasarian, M., and Howard, S.P. (2000a) Two regions of EpsL involved in species-specific protein-protein interactions with EpsE and EpsM of the general secretion pathway in *Vibrio cholerae*. J Bacteriol 182: 742–748.

Sandkvist, M., Bagdasarian, M., and Howard, S.P. (2000b) Characterization of the multimeric Eps complex required for cholera toxin secretion. Int J Med Microbiol 290: 345–350.

Sauvonnet, N., and Pugsley, A.P. (1996) Identification of two regions of *Klebsiella oxytoca* pullulanase that together are capable of promoting beta-lactamase secretion by the general secretary pathway. Mol Microbiol 22: 1–7.

Sauvonnet, N., Vignon, G., Pugsley, A.P., and Gounon, P. (2000) Pilus formation and protein secretion by the same machinery in *Escherichia coli*. EMBO J 19: 2221–2228.

Schmidt, H., Henkel, B., and Karch, H. (1997) A gene cluster closely related to type II secretion pathway operons of gram-negative bacteria is located on the large plasmid of enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* O157 strains. FEMS Microbiol Lett 148: 265–272.

Schoenhofen, I.C., Stratilo, C., and Howard, S.P. (1998) An

© 2001 Blackwell Science Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 40, 271–283

ExeAB complex in the type II secretion pathway of Aeromonas hydrophila: effect of ATP-binding cassette mutations on complex formation and function. Mol Microbiol 29: 1237–1247.

Shevchik, V.E., Robert-Baudouy, J., and Condemine, G. (1997) Specific interaction between OutD, an Erwinia chrysanthemi outer membrane protein of the general secretory pathway, and secreted proteins. EMBO J 16: 3007–3016.

Thanabalu, T., Koronakis, E., Hughes, C., and Koronakis, V. (1998) Substrate-induced assembly of a contiguous channel for protein export from *E. coli*: reversible bridging of an inner-membrane translocase to an outer membrane exit pore. EMBO J 17: 6487–6496.

Thomas, J.D., Reeves, P.J., and Salmond, P.C. (1997) The general secretion pathway of Erwinia carotovora subsp. carotovora: analysis of the membrane topology of OutC and OutF. Microbiology 143: 713–720.

Turner, L.R., Olson, J.W., and Lory, S. (1997) The XcpR protein of Pseudomonas aeruginosa dimerizes via its N-terminus. Mol Microbiol 26: 877–887.

Voulhoux, R., Taupiac, M.P., Czjzek, M., Beaumelle, B., and

Filloux, A. (2000) Influence of deletions within domain II of exotoxin A on its extracellular secretion from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J Bacteriol 182: 4051–4058.

Waldor, M.K., and Mekalanos, J.J. (1996) Lysogenic conversion by a filamentous phage encoding cholera toxin. Science 272: 1910–1914.

Wall, D., Kolenbrander, P.E., and Kaiser, D. (1999) The *Myxococcus xanthus pilQ* (*sglA*) gene encodes a secretin homolog required for type IV pilus biogenesis, social motility, and development. J Bacteriol 181: 24–33.

Wolfgang, M., van Putten, J.P., Hayes, S.F., Dorward, D., and Koomey, M. (2000) Components and dynamics of fiber formation define a ubiquitous biogenesis pathway for bacterial pili. EMBO J 19: 6408–6418.

Wong, K.R., and Buckley, J.T. (1993) Aeromonas spp. can secrete *Escherichia coli* alkaline phosphatase into the culture supernatant, and its release requires a functional general secretion pathway. Mol Microbiol 9: 955–963.

Yeo, H.J., Savvides, S.N., Herr, A.B., Lanka, E., and Waksman, G. (2000) Crystal structure of the hexameric traffic ATPase of the *Helicobacter pylori* type IV secretion system. Mol Cell 6: 1461–1472.
