
Oncogene (2001) 20, 188–197

© 2001 Nature Publishing Group All rights reserved 0950-9232/01 $15.00

www.nature.com/onc

# A novel potential effector of M-Ras and p21 Ras negatively regulates p21 Ras-mediated gene induction and cell growth

Götz RA Ehrhardt¹, Christian Korherr¹, James S Wieler¹, Michèle Knaus¹ and John W Schrader*,¹

¹The Biomedical Research Centre, 2222 Health Sciences Mall, University of British Columbia, Vancouver BC, V6T 1Z3 Canada

Here, we report the identification and characterization of a new member of the RalGDS-family, which is widely expressed and interacts strongly and selectively with the GTP-bound forms of M-Ras and p21 Ras. This Ras pathway modulator (RPM), also termed RGL3, exhibited Ras-binding and catalytic domains typical of the RalGDS-family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors, and was most similar to Rlf (RalGDS-like factor), but was distinguished by a unique proline-rich region with multiple candidate SH3-domain binding sites. RPM/RGL3 resembled AF-6 and Norel1 in interacting strongly with constitutively active M-Ras and p21 Ras. In contrast to Rlf, transiently expressed RPM/RGL3 did not activate an Elk-1-inducible reporter gene alone or in combination with activated p21 Ras, but strongly inhibited induction of this reporter gene by co-expression of activated H-Ras or MEKK-1. This inhibitory effect was independent of the Ras binding domain and required a second signal provided by p21 Ras or MEKK-1, but not Raf-1 or M-Ras. Expression of RPM/RGL3 also strongly inhibited cell growth of fibroblasts transformed by an activated Src Y527F. Thus, RPM/RGL3 is a novel potential effector of both p21 Ras and M-Ras with the novel function of negatively regulating Elk-1-dependent gene induction downstream of p21 Ras or MEKK-1. Oncogene (2001) 20, 188–197.

Keywords: Ras; exchange factor; negative regulation; Elk-1

---

## Introduction

The Ras superfamily of small GTPases has been implicated in a wide variety of cellular functions, ranging from proliferation and differentiation (Egan and Weinberg, 1993; Moodie and Wolfman, 1994) to cell death (Trent et al., 1996). They are located at the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane and shuttle between an active, GTP-bound state, and an inactive, GDP-bound state. The transition from the inactive to the active forms are mediated by proteins belonging to the family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). The reverse transition is promoted by GTPase activating proteins (GAPs) which greatly increase the very low intrinsic GTPase activity of Ras proteins (Lowy and Willumsen, 1993).

The best studied family members are the p21 Ras proteins H-, N- and K-Ras. These have been reported to be activated by a large number of stimuli, including growth factors and most cytokines (Duronio et al., 1992; Satoh et al., 1991). When activated, p21 Ras proteins undergo an allosteric change in two regions termed ‘switch 1’ corresponding to residues 32–40 and ‘switch 2’ corresponding to residues 60–76, respectively and interact with a series of downstream effector proteins (Milburn et al., 1990). Among the best characterized are the serine/threonine kinases of the Raf-family (Leevers et al., 1994; Stokoe et al., 1994), the p110 catalytic subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI3K) (Rodriguez-Viciana et al., 1994) and RalGDS (Hofer et al., 1994). In addition to RalGDS, the RalGDS-family members Rlf (Wolthuis et al., 1996) and Rgl (Kikuchi et al., 1994) also interact with p21 Ras proteins whereas the members of a different branch of the RalGDS-family consisting of Rgr (D'Adamo et al., 1997) and the recently identified RalGPS (Rebhun et al., 2000) lack a Ras-interaction domain. Other proteins that have been reported to bind specifically to the activated GTP-bound form of p21 Ras include the Mitogen Activated Protein/Extracellular Signal Regulated Kinase Kinase 1 (MEKK1) (Russell et al., 1995), PKCζ (Diaz-Meco et al., 1994), Rin1 (Han and Colicelli, 1995), Norel (Vavvas et al., 1998) and AF-6 (Kuriyama et al., 1996).

Much less is known about other members of the Ras superfamily, among which are R-Ras, Tc21 and the recently described M-Ras (Kimmelman et al., 1997; Matsumoto et al., 1997). We recently reported that a constitutively active mutant of M-Ras transformed NIH3T3 fibroblasts and led to factor-independent growth of an IL-3-dependent cell line (Ehrhardt et al., 1999). Unlike activated p21 Ras proteins, activated M-Ras bound only weakly to the Ras-binding domains of Raf-1 and RalGDS, suggesting that it utilizes a distinct set of downstream effectors. Since the levels of expression of M-Ras in NIH3T3 fibroblasts exceed those of p21 Ras (Ehrhardt et al., 1999), we employed the yeast two-hybrid system in a screen of a library prepared from NIH3T3

*Correspondence: JW Schrader  
Received 12 June 2000; revised 19 October 2000; accepted 23 October 2000

cells for proteins that bound to an activated mutant of M-Ras. Here we report the identification and characterization of RPM/RGL3, a novel member of the RalGDS-family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors with the properties of an effector of both, p21 Ras and M-Ras and with a novel inhibitory action on signals downstream of p21Ras.

**Results**

**RPM/RGL3 is a novel member of the RalGDS-family**

A yeast two-hybrid screen was carried out in order to identify proteins that bound to activated, GTP-bound M-Ras G22V. Since we have shown previously that levels of M-Ras protein exceed those of p21Ras in NIH3T3 cells, we screened a library prepared from NIH3T3 fibroblasts. 45 His+/LacZ+ colonies were identified. Sequencing of the cDNA plasmids derived from these clones revealed six known Ras effectors and one clone with a novel sequence (Table 1). This cDNA encoded the 3' untranslated region (UTR) and 590 nucleotides (nt) of a novel protein. After two rounds of 5'RACE, a clone was obtained which encoded an open reading frame of 2127 nt, which translated into a 709 amino acid protein with a predicted molecular weight of 78 kDa. Three independently amplified clones contained 58 nt upstream of an in-frame methionine that was preceded by a Kozak-consensus sequence and a fourth clone contained 52 nt upstream of this methionine. The overall length of this cDNA, including 5' UTR and 3' UTR corresponded to the size of the signal obtained from northern blotting of poly(A)+ mRNA (Figure 2). Thus we believe this represented a full-length clone.

Analysis of the translated cDNA sequence indicated that it belonged to the RalGDS-family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors, with 31–36% identity and 45–51% homology with RalGDS (Albright et al., 1993), Rlf (Wolthuis et al., 1996) and Rgl (Kikuchi et al., 1994). We termed this protein RPM (for Ras Pathway Modulator). The same cDNA was identified

**Table 1 M-Ras interacts with different Ras effectors in the yeast two-hybrid system**

| Clone                | LacZ-activity |
|----------------------|---------------|
| RPM/RGL3 (nt 1537-stop) | +++           |
| Norel (nt 382-stop)   | +++           |
| AF-6 (full length)    | +++           |
| Rin1 (nt 205-stop)    | +++           |
| RalGDS (nt 528-stop)  | ++            |
| Raf-1 (nt 71-stop)    | +             |
| A-Raf (full length)   | +             |

LacZ-activity was assayed by intensity of the LacZ signal and by the time the signal appeared. +++ strong interaction, ++ medium interaction, + weak interaction, numbers indicate the most 5' nucleotide of the coding sequence, stop indicates the termination signal

---

and termed RGL3 by Shao and co-workers (Shao and Andres, 2000) in an approach to identify proteins binding to an activated mutant of the small GTPase Rit. Analysis of the evolutionary relatedness of the different RalGDS-family members suggested that RPM/RGL3 is most closely related to Rlf (Figure 1b). The regions of RPM/RGL3 exhibiting the most amino acid similarity with the other RalGDS-family members were the Ras-binding domain (RBD), the structurally conserved regions scr1, scr2 and scr3 which are conserved in the catalytic regions of guanine nucleotide exchange factors of the cdc25 family, and the N-terminal scr-0 region (Figure 1a). We noticed however that, unlike other RalGDS-family members, RPM/RGL3 was distinguished by multiple prolines between residues 539 and 591 which formed potential binding sites for SH3-domains.

**Tissue distribution of RPM/RGL3 mRNA**

To investigate the pattern of expression of RPM/RGL3, we performed northern blot analysis of multiple murine tissues using a probe corresponding to nt 1584–2060 of RPM/RGL3. We observed a signal corresponding to 3 kb in kidney, liver, lung, spleen, heart and brain tissues. The size of the observed signal corresponded well with the overall length of the cloned RPM/RGL3 cDNA, including 5' UTR and 3' UTR. Additional signals corresponding to approximately 1.4 and 7.2 kb were detected in heart and in kidney. These may reflect the existence of alternatively spliced isoforms of RPM/RGL3 (Figure 2).

**RPM/RGL3 interacts with M-Ras and p21Ras**

To confirm and extend our observation of an interaction between M-Ras G22V and RPM/RGL3 in the yeast two-hybrid system, we investigated the ability of full-length RPM/RGL3 to co-immunoprecipitate with wild-type M-Ras or the constitutively active mutants of M-Ras or H-Ras. Transiently overexpressed RPM/RGL3 was co-precipitated with M-Ras G22V and, more efficiently, with a second constitutively active mutant of M-Ras, M-Ras Q71L, or with H-Ras G12V (Figure 3c). As expected, RPM/RGL3 did not co-precipitate with M-Ras wt. A mutant of RPM/RGL3 that was membrane localized by addition of a CAAX-motif at the C-terminus (RPM/RGL3 CAAX) could also be co-precipitated with constitutively active mutants of M-Ras and H-Ras. This ability to co-precipitate was abolished by deleting the 143 C-terminal residues of RPM/RGL3 (Figure 3c). Also, neither RPM/RGL3 nor any of the mutants of RPM/RGL3 co-precipitated with an activated mutant of the small GTPase Cdc42 (Figure 3c). The converse experiment, in which RPM/RGL3 was precipitated and the precipitates analysed for M-Ras or H-Ras yielded the same results (data not shown). Thus, RPM/RGL3 bound selectively to GTP-bound Ras proteins and the C-terminal 143 residues encoding the putative

RPM/RGL3 is a novel potential Ras effector protein

GRA Ehrhardt et al

---

**a**

| RPM/RGL3 | MERTAGK---------ELALAPLQDWGEETED---GAVYSVSLRR---QRSQRSTPERSG |
| RaIGDS   | M--MV----------DCQSSTQEIGEELIN---GVLYSISLRKVQLHGATKGQRWLG |
| Rlf      | MLPRPLRLLLDTTPPGGVVLSSFRSRDPBEGGDPGGRAVGGGQEEDEEEEAESVSWDE |
| Rgl      | M--KLLW--------QAKMSSIQDWGEEVEE---GAVYHVTLKRVQIQOANKGARWLG |

| RPM/RGL3 | EGQTPI---------PATDTFLHYRTSKV-RALRAARIERLVHELVSG-DREQDGFVPAF |
| RaIGDS   | CENES----------ALNLYETCKV-RTVJAGTJEKLEHLVPA-FQGSILSYVTVF     |
| Rlf      | EEDGATFTVTSRQYRPLDLAPLPPP RSSRLRKAGTLZALVRHLLDARTAGADMMFTPAL |
| Rgl      | VEGDQL--------PFPGHTVSQYETCKI-RTIKAGTLEKLVENLLTA-FGDNDPTYISIF |

| RPM/RGL3 | LATHRAFVPVARVLGFILPP---PPAAAPPSAGVDSKRTEGQDLNFSKNLRAVVSVLGS |
| RaIGDS   | LCTYRAFTTJQQVLDLLFKRYGRCDALTASSRVGCLPYSSEDGGPQDQLKNAISSJLGT |
| Rlf      | DATHRAFTSPALFGLVADR-----LEALESY-------PPGELERTTGVAISVAST    |
| Rgl      | LSTYRGFASTKEVLELLDRYGN---LTGPN---CEDDGQSPESEKAVIRNAATSTLRA |

| RPM/RGL3 | WLRNHFPQFRDPDHQNGLGNVRIFLGWAAPGGAEREAEKILLEDFF-LKEAKGE------ |
| RaIGDS   | WLDQYSEDECQPDDFCLKQLIVAYVQLNMPEGSDLERRAHLALLAQLEDLESEAESEALSP |
| Rlf      | WLASHPED-----------------------------GSEYKGQLDRLES----------- |
| Rgl      | WLDQCAEDEREPPHFFCLQKILLEYLKQMMPGSDPERRAQNLLLEQFO------------ |

| RPM/RGL3 | --------QTEEEKRL------------------------AWSGPPRIAQTQPGSEFAEDCVE |
| RaIGDS   | APVLSLKPASQLEPALLLTPSQVVSTPVREPAAAFVPVLA SSPVVA PAPELEPVEPPQ |
| Rlf      | ---FLRLTGYAAREGVVGGSADLIRNLRAR----------VD                     |
| Rgl      | --------KQDVDSDNGLLNNTSS-----------------                      |

| RPM/RGL3 | EECP------------------------------------SEGPELLDSVPDV        |
| RaIGDS   | EPEPSLALAPELJPAVSQSLELESAPVPTPALEPSWSLPEATENGLTEKPHELLFPPDLV |
| Rlf      | PRAPDLP----------------KPLALPGDSPADPT------------------------- |
| Rgl      | --------------------------------FSLEEEEELESGGSAEFTNFSEDLV    |

| RPM/RGL3 | AEQLTLMDEVLEFLRVRSCCELGSMWSQRDRPGAAGISFTVRATVAQFNTVTGCVLGSVLA |
| RaIGDS   | AEQFTLMDAELFKKVVPYHCIGSIWSQRARKGKEHLAPTIRATVAQFNNVANCITTCIG   |
| Rlf      | AEQLALLDAELFLNLIBSQCILGLWGHRDRPGHSHLCSVSVRATVTQFNKVAGAVSSVIG  |
| Rgl      | AEQLTYMDAQLEKKVVPHHCLGCIWSQRDKKENKHLAETIRATISQFNTLTKCWSTVLG   |

| RPM/RGL3 | A---------------PGLAASQAORIEKWJRIAQCRELNRFFSLRAILSALQSNPTYRLK |
| RaIGDS   | D--------------OSMKAPDKARVYHWHEVARECRALKNFSSLYAITLSNOSNAIHRJK |
| Rlf      | ATSIGEGPREVTVRPLRPQPARLLBEKWRIVAEBCRLRNFFSSVYAVSALDQSSFHRRLR  |
| Rgl      | S--------------KELKTQQRARVIEKWINIAHEGRLKKNFSSLRAIVSRLQNSIYRLK |

| RPM/RGL3 | RSWGAVSREBLSVFRKJSQIFSDEDNHLSSRAILLQSQEETT---------EDDDCPSGSL |
| RaIGDS   | KTWEEVSRDSFRVFKLSEIKSDENNYSLIRELIKETSKFATEM---NPRRAQRR-         |
| Rlf      | AAWGETTRDSLVRVFSSLCQIFSBEDNYSQRELITQEVKPQ-PPVEPHSKKAPRSGFEG-  |
| Rgl      | KAAAVPKDRMIMFEELSDZFSHDHNHLTBSREILMKECTSKFANLDSSVKENQKTQRLR   |

| RPM/RGL3 | PSK-----LPFGPVBYLGFELTDLEVMDTALPDTLKGNLINFEBBRKEWEILARIQQLQQR |
| RaIGDS   | --QKETGVIQGTVBYLGTFELTBVMELDTAMKDYLYGRLINEEKKRKEFEVIAQIKLLQSA |
| Rlf      | ---------GGVVFYLGFTELKDLVMLDAASKDELENGYINFDKRRKEFAILSELLRLQKE |
| Rgl      | QLQKDMGVMQGTVPYLGTFLTDLTMIDTAIODYIEGGLINFEBRRREFEVIAQIKLLQSA  |

| RPM/RGL3 | CORYSLSBRPPIALAARAQOLSEEOSYRVSRVIEPPAAACPSSPRIRRISLTKRLS--    |
| RaIGDS   | CNNYSIAPEEHFGTWFRAMERLSEAESTYLSCELFPPSESASNTRLRSKKSTAIVRWSDR  |
| Rlf      | ERGYDLRNSDIQQWLQGLQPLTEAQSHRVSCVEBPFGTSDSPAARTPRPTLVITQTEV    |
| Rgl      | CNSYCMGPDQKFIOWFQRQQLISEEFSYALSCETEAAAADANTISPKPRKS--MVKRLSSL|

| RPM/RGL3 | -----------------AKLSREKNSSPGGSPGDFSSPTSSVS------------------PG |
| RaIGDS   | Q--APSTELSTSSSAHKSCDQLRCSPYLGSQDITDALSVHAGCSSSDVEEINMSFVPBE   |
| Rlf      | LGSVGPTTPLVSWDRPSVGGDEVPGPAPLLTRLAQHMKBVSSLDALSESSPLLIISPA   |
| Rgl      | F--LGSDIIPGSTPTK----EQPKSAASGSSGEEMDSVSVSSCESNHSEABEGVPTPM-D  |

| RPM/RGL3 | SPPSSPRNRBPPFGSPASPGRPQSPTKLSLTMDPPGB----------------WPVTLTPSSS |
| RaIGDS   | SPDGQEKFWESAQSSEPETSIGTASSSSTSSSSASTTPVS---TTTRHKRSVSGCVSYS   |
| Rlf      | DPGLSPPASSPRPSGRHRASACGSPILSCNGTECTSRASACGGGVSS---------------- |
| Rgl      | TBDEFQKKLSESSSCSCSITHMDTNSSGMSSLINPLSSPPTCNNPKIHKRSVSVTSITS    |

| RPM/RGL3 | RV--PLLGQQTSEARVRTVSIN-NNHGNLXRSILLLTCQDKAFSVVORALEKHNVQPWAR   |
| RaIGDS   | SSLP-LYNQQVGDCCTIRVSLD-VDNGNMKKSILVTSEQKAETVIIRKAMDKHNLDBEPE  |
| Rlf      | -------GPCSSDCRIIRVQMELGEDGSVJKSILVTSEQKAESVISVLKKQNRDSAVAS  |
| Rgl      | TVLPPVYNOQNEFTCIIRISVE-DNNGHMXKSIMLTSGDKTPAVIORAMSXHNLESDFAE  |

| RPM/RGL3 | DYQLFQVLPQDRELLIFDCANVFYAMSPPAAPGDFLLRRKEGTGHTLSASPT---------- |
| RaIGDS   | DYELVGVISEDHKLKIPENANVKYAMNSTANYDEILKKR-TFTKGAKVKHGASST------- |
| Rlf      | EFELVQLLFCDREWTPHSANVPYANDGASH-DFFRQRRRPSAATPGSHGSPASGTPP     |
| Rgl      | EYELVQVISBKELVTPDSANVFHAMNSQVNFDEILRKKNSVEEQVKLRSRTSLT-------- |

| RPM/RGL3 | ----------LPRMKQKG---LRIAKAGIF                                 |
| RaIGDS   | SEGGGGSFPRIKATG---RKIARALF                                      |
| Rlf      | ----------LPRTAKRGCSNRHSKITL                                   |

---

**b**

Figure 1 (a) Alignment of the protein sequences of RPM/RGL3, RaIGDS, Rlf and Rgl. Regions scr-0 to scr-3 are underlined. Double underlining indicates the Ras-binding domains. Conserved residues are shaded light gray and identical residues medium gray. Prolines in a proline-rich stretch of RPM/RGL3 that form potential SH-3 domain binding sites are indicated by an asterisk. Gaps are indicated by a hyphen (-). (b) Evolutionary relatedness of RaIGDS-family members. The dendrogram was generated using a Clustal V alignment and the Phylips distance method algorithm. (m) indicates murine sequences, (Ce) indicates *C. elegans*. Accession number for the *C. elegans* ortholog is CE04456

---

Ras binding domain (RBD) were necessary for this binding.

Next, we investigated whether the RBD of RPM/RGL3 was sufficient for binding to GTP-bound Ras. We also compared the binding of M-Ras and H-Ras to the RBDs of Norel, AF-6 and RaIGDS, which interacted with activated M-Ras in the yeast two-hybrid system (see Table 1). Lysates of HEK-293 cells over-expressing mutants of M-Ras and H-Ras were incubated with the various GST-RBD-fusion proteins, thus allowing us to directly compare the relative affinities of the co-expressed mutants of M-Ras and H-Ras for a given RBD. Both, M-Ras G22V and H-Ras G12V bound to the RBDs of RPM/RGL3, Norel and AF-6, indicating that the RBDs of RPM/RGL3, Norel and AF-6 were sufficient for binding to M-Ras or H-Ras (Figure 4a,b). Since in the absence of a stimulus only a very small proportion of Ras is in the active GTP-bound form, only a very weak signal for Ras wt was detected after prolonged exposure (Figure 4a,b, lane Norel*). We had noted that M-Ras Q71L bound more strongly to RPM/RGL3 than did M-Ras G22V (Figure 3c). Therefore we used the M-Ras Q71L mutant to directly compare the strength of the binding of activated M-Ras and activated H-Ras to these effector proteins. Analysis of the signals obtained within each lane using these Ras mutants indicated that the RBD of RPM/RGL3, like those of Norel and AF-6, bound with comparable strength to M-Ras Q71L and H-Ras G12V (Figure 4c). In contrast, the RBD of RaIGDS, despite its sequence similarities with the RBD of RPM/RGL3 bound activated H-Ras G12V much more strongly than activated M-Ras Q71L (Figure 4c). Pre-incubation of the cell lysates with the monoclonal anti-Ras antibody Y13-259 completely abolished binding of

---

Figure 2 Tissue-distribution of RPM/RGL3 mRNA. A murine multiple tissue Northern blot of 2 μg of poly(A)+-purified mRNA for each indicated tissue was probed with a radio-labeled probe corresponding to nt 1584–2060. The signal corresponding to RPM/RGL3 mRNA is indicated by an arrowhead

| heart | brain | spleen | lung | liver | skeletal muscle | kidney | testis |
|-------|-------|--------|------|-------|-----------------|--------|--------|
| - 9.5 |       |        |      |       |                 |        |        |
| - 7.5 |       |        |      |       |                 |        |        |
| - 4.4 |       |        |      |       |                 |        |        |
| - 2.4 |       |        |      |       |                 |        |        |
| - 1.35|       |        |      |       |                 |        |        |

size [kb]

either M-Ras Q71L or H-Ras G12V to all of these GST-RBD-fusion proteins, confirming that the observed interactions were specific (data not shown).

a

| RPM | m | scr-0 | scr-1 | scr-2 | scr-3 | PRR | RBD |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

| RPMΔRBD | m | scr-0 | scr-1 | scr-2 | scr-3 | PRR |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

| RPMΔRBD-CAAX | m | scr-0 | scr-1 | scr-2 | scr-3 | PRR | CAAX |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

| RPM-CAAX | m | scr-0 | scr-1 | scr-2 | scr-3 | PRR | RBD | CAAX |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

b

**RPM-**
**CAAX**

m c m c

c

| RPM | RPM | RPM |
| --- | --- | --- |
| CAAX | ΔRBD | CAAX |

| IP: α HA | wcl | wcl |
| IB: α myc | IB: α myc | IB: α HA |

Figure 3 RPM/RGL3 binds to constitutively active M-Ras and H-Ras. (a) Schematic of the RPM/RGL3 constructs used in the reporter gene assays. scr-0–3 indicate the structurally conserved regions 0–3, PRR indicates the proline-rich region, RBD the Ras binding domain, CAAX the CAAX-motif of H-Ras and m the C-terminally fused c-myc epitope tag. (b) Cell-fractionation of wt and membrane-localized RPM/RGL3. Cell-fractions were performed as described and equal volumes of cytoplasmic (c) and membrane (m) fractions were separated by SDS-PAGE. RPM/RGL3 proteins were detected by western blotting using the α-myc antibody 9E10. (c) HEK-293 cells were co-transfected with the indicated myc-tagged RPM/RGL3 constructs and HA-tagged Ras- and Cdc42-constructs. The Ras- and Cdc42-constructs were immunoprecipitated with 2 μg of the monoclonal anti-HA antibody 12CA5, the immunoprecipitate (IP) and whole cell lysate (wcl) separated by SDS-PAGE and blotted against the myc-epitope on RPM/RGL3 using the monoclonal antibody 9E10 (top and middle panel) or the HA-epitope on the indicated Ras constructs using the antibody 12CA5 (bottom panel), respectively.

RPM/RGL3 is a novel potential Ras effector protein
GRA Ehrhardt et al

RPM/RGL3 inhibits activation of the Elk-1 transcription factor mediated by p21Ras- and MEKK1-, but not Raf-1

RalGDS, Rgl and Rlf have been reported to synergize with constitutively active p21Ras proteins in activating the c-fos promoter (Murai et al., 1997; Okazaki et al., 1997; Wolthuis et al., 1997). To investigate whether RPM/RGL3 displayed the same properties, we co-transfected HEK-293 cells with an Elk-1-dependent reporter gene, H-Ras G12V and RPM/RGL3. We also investigated the activity in these assays of mutants of RPM/RGL3 (see Figure 3a) with a C-terminal CAAX motif, mimicking their recruitment to the membrane by activated Ras. Attachment of a CAAX-motif resulted in a protein that was predominantly membrane-bound whereas the non-modified RPM/RGL3 was predominantly cytoplasmic (Figure 3b). As control, we replaced the RPM/RGL3-constructs with an expression vector encoding Rlf. When expressed alone, neither Rlf nor any of the RPM/RGL3 constructs induced activation of the reporter gene (Figure 5a). Whereas co-expression of Rlf and H-Ras G12V resulted in synergistic activation of the Elk-1 dependent reporter gene, co-expressed RPM/RGL3 or the membrane-localized RPM/RGL3 mutants not only failed to synergize with H-Ras G12V, but dramatically inhibited induction of reporter gene activity (Figure 5a). A similar inhibitory activity of RPM/RGL3 on activation of the c-fos promoter was observed in experiments in which NIH3T3 fibroblasts were co-transfected with RPM/RGL3 and activated H-

A

B

C

Figure 4 The Ras-binding domains of RPM/RGL3, Norel, RalGDS and AF-6 are sufficient for the binding of constitutively active M-Ras and p21Ras. (a) Whole cell lysates of transiently transfected 293-cells expressing H-Ras wt (myc) and M-Ras G22V (myc), (b) H-Ras G12V (myc) and M-Ras wt (myc) and (c) H-Ras G12V (myc) and M-Ras Q71L (myc) were incubated with 1 μg GST-fusion protein of the indicated Ras-binding domain. Ras proteins binding to the GST-fusion proteins were eluted of the beads by boiling in SDS, separated by SDS-PAGE, transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes and blotted against the myc-epitope with the monoclonal antibody 9E10. M-Ras proteins are indicated by an open arrowhead and H-Ras proteins by a closed arrow head. The lane labeled ‘Nore-1*’ represents a longer exposure of lane ‘Nore-1’

RPM/RGL3 is a novel potential Ras effector protein
GRA Ehrhardt et al

Figure 5 RPM/RGL3 strongly inhibits Ras- and MEKK-1 induced activation of the Elk-1 transcription factor, but does not affect Raf-1 induced Elk-1 activation. HEK-293-cells were transiently transfected with 0.5 μg of the reporter gene (5 × gal4-luciferase/gal4-elk-1), 0.2 μg of the indicated RPM/RGL3-constructs and (a) 50 ng of H-Ras G12V, (b) 3 μg of MEKK-1, (c) 3 μg of Raf-1 CAAX or (d) 3 μg of M-Ras G22V. Empty vector (pcDNA3.1) was added where necessary to ensure equal transfection efficiency. Cells were harvested after 40 h and the luciferase activity determined. All samples were normalized to total protein and values are shown as fold-induction over ‘reporter-gene alone’. All experiments were repeated at least four times. Error bars indicate standard deviation

Ras G12V (data not shown). The ability of membrane-localized RPM/RGL3 mutants to block H-Ras G12V mediated reporter gene induction was consistent with the notion that this inhibitory activity was a genuine effector function, normally initiated by translocation of RPM/RGL3 to activated Ras and thus the membrane. Western blotting of the cell lysates revealed that the observed decrease in reporter gene activity was not

A

| no. of colonies |
| --- |
| 75 | T |
| 50 |  |
| 25 | T |
| 0 | T |

empty vector   RPM   RPM ΔRBD-CAAX   RPM-CAAX

B

| OD<sub>550</sub> |
| --- |
| 1.5 |  |
| 1 |  |
| 0.5 |  |
| 0 |  |

time [days]   2   4   6

Figure 6 RPM/RGL3 inhibits growth of NIH3T3 fibroblasts expressing activated src Y527F. (a) Cells were infected with the indicated constructs that expressed in addition to RPM/RGL3 the EGFP-protein downstream of an IRES-element. 1000 GFP-positive cells were plated into 1.1% methylcellulose in triplicate and incubated for 9 days. The experiment was repeated 3 times. Values represent mean ± s.d. (b) 1000 GFP-positive cells were plated into 96-well plates (10 replicates per construct) and MTT was added at the indicated times for 4 h. Cells infected with 'empty vector' are indicated by open squares (□), cells infected with RPM wt by closed diamonds (◆), cells infected with RPM ΔRBD-CAAX by closed circles (●) and cells infected with RPM-CAAX by closed triangles (▲). Values represent mean ± s.d.

RPM/RGL3 is a novel potential Ras effector protein
GRA Ehrhardt et al

caused by lower expression levels of the activating protein in the presence of RPM/RGL3.

In further experiments we observed that RPM/RGL3 exerted a similar inhibitory effect on MEKK-1-mediated activation of the reporter gene, not only with the membrane-bound mutants of RPM/RGL3 but also the non-modified RPM/RGL3 proteins (Figure 5b). In contrast, co-transfected Rlf synergized strongly with MEKK-1 to activate the reporter gene. In some of the reporter gene assays described above, we co-transfected an expression vector encoding the green fluorescent protein (GFP) under control of the CMV-promoter. Analysis of an aliquot of the cells for GFP-expression by flow cytometry indicated that expression of the RPM/RGL3 mutants did not affect the percentage of GFP-expressing cells or in the levels of GFP-expression of the transfected cells (data not shown). Thus the observed inhibitory function of RPM/RGL3 was not merely a result of cytotoxic effects.

RalGDS has also been reported to synergize with activated Raf-1 in activating the c-fos promoter (Okazaki et al., 1997), whereas Rlf appears to have no synergistic effects in this system (Wolthuis et al., 1997). To investigate the effects of RPM/RGL3 on Raf-1 mediated activation of the Elk-1 transcription factor, we co-transfected HEK-293 cells with constitu-

| RPM | - | + | - |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| MEKK-1 | + | + | - |
| empty vector | - | - | + |

α myc

α (P)-Erk

α Erk

α (P)-JNK

α JNK

α (P)-p38

α p38

Figure 7 RPM/RGL3 does not inhibit activation of the MAP-kinases Erk, JNK and p38. HEK-293 cells were transiently transfected with the indicated constructs, the cell lysates separated by SDS-PAGE and immuno-blotted with the indicated phospho-specific antibodies or α-myc antibody 9E10. Blots were stripped and re-probed with non-phospho-specific antibodies (bottom panels) to verify equal loading

tively active Raf-1-CAAX, various mutants of RPM/
RGL3 and a luciferase reporter gene under control of
the Elk-1 transcription factor. Co-expression of RPM/
RGL3 or the membrane localized mutants of RPM/
RGL3 had no effect on Raf-1-CAAX mediated
activation of the reporter gene (Figure 5c). As it is
conceivable that the CAAX-motifs of M-Ras and H-
Ras could direct the RPM/RGL3 mutants to different
localizations within the plasma membrane, we investigated whether the CAAX-motif of M-Ras or H-Ras
would have a different influence on RPM/RGL3.
However, we did not observe any difference between
RPM/RGL3 fused to the CAAX-motifs of M-Ras or
of H-Ras (data not shown) in any of the described
experiments.

Finally, we investigated the effects of RPM/RGL3
on M-Ras-mediated activation of the Elk-1 transcription
factor. It was shown previously, that activated
mutants of M-Ras weakly activated a co-expressed
luciferase reporter gene under control of the c-fos
promoter or the serum response element (SRE)
(Ehrhardt et al., 1999; Kimmelman et al., 1997). M-
RasG22V-mediated activation of the Elk-1 dependent
reporter gene was partially inhibited by RPM/RGL3
and completely inhibited by membrane localized RPM/
RGL3. However, co-expression of the mutants of
RPM/RGL3 lacking the RBD failed to inhibit reporter
gene activation (Figure 5d). This RBD-dependent
inhibition of Elk-1 was also observed with the mutant
MRasQ71L (data not shown).

RPM/RGL3 inhibits anchorage-independent growth of
NIH3T3 fibroblasts expressing an activated SrcY527F

Since RPM/RGL3 had a strong influence on Elk-1
dependent reporter gene expression, we were interested
to see if this effect was reflected on cell growth. To
investigate the effects of RPM/RGL3 in vivo, we
transduced NIH3T3 fibroblasts that expressed an
activated src Y527F with retroviral constructs that
encoded the various mutants of RPM/RGL3 upstream
of an IRES-element and the GFP protein. The infected
cells were sorted to greater than 99% purity and plated
into semi-solid medium to assay anchorage independent
growth. Whereas cells that were infected with the
empty vector gave rise to growth in semi-solid medium,
this colony formation was greatly reduced by cells
expressing the various mutants of RPM/RGL3 (Figure
6a). This reduced ability to form colonies correlated
well with a reduced cell growth of these cells as assayed
by their ability to metabolize MTT (Figure 6b).

RPM/RGL3 does not affect the phosphorylation state of
MAP-kinases Erk, JNK and p38

MEKK-1 is an activator of Erk- and JNK-kinases,
and, more weakly, p38 MAP-kinase (Lange-Carter et
al., 1993; Minden et al., 1995; Winzen et al., 1999). We
had observed a strong inhibitory effect of RPM on
MEKK-1 mediated activation of the Elk-1 reporter
gene (Figure 5b). To investigate if this observed

inhibition of reporter gene activity was caused by a
loss of MAP-kinase activation, we transiently transfected 293-cells with MEKK-1 with or without RPM
and used phospho-specific antibodies to detect activated MAP-kinases in lysates from these cells. Despite
strong inhibition of reporter gene activity, expression of
RPM/RGL3 had no effect on the phosphorylation state
of the MAP-kinases Erk, JNK and p38 (Figure 7).

Discussion

In the present report we describe a novel member of
the RalGDS-family with the unique ability to inhibit
signals downstream of p21Ras. Although RPM/RGL3
interacted selectively with GTP-bound M-Ras and p21
Ras, the inhibitory action required signals provided by
p21Ras or MEKK-1, but not M-Ras or Raf-1. Thus
RPM/RGL3 provides a novel mechanism for inhibition
of gene induction and cell growth.

RPM/RGL3 was most closely related to Rlf. The
regions most highly conserved between RPM/RGL3
and other members of the RalGDS-family were the
C-terminal Ras binding domain (RBD), the scr1, 2
and 3 regions that form the catalytic core of Cdc25
family members of GEFs and the N-terminal scr-O
domain. Consistent with these structural features,
Shao and Andres (2000) showed that RPM/RGL3 is
a specific GEF for the small GTPase Ral. Although
the RBDs of RalGDS and RPM/RGL3 were very
similar, the RBD of RPM/RGL3 bound comparably
to constitutively active mutants M-RasQ71L and H-
RasG12V, whereas the RBD of RalGDS showed
strong preference for constitutively active H-Ras
G12V and bound only weakly to constitutively active
M-Ras Q71L. These data obtained from in vitro
precipitations of Ras proteins from cell lysates using
the Ras-binding domains of various Ras effectors are
consistent with the data obtained from our yeast two-
hybrid screen (Table 1). They suggest that Norel,
AF-6, Rin1 and RPM/RGL3 form a subset of
potential p21Ras effectors which are also used by
M-Ras. They also indicate that the C-terminal 143
residues of RPM/RGL3 are necessary and sufficient
for Ras-binding.

In other experiments we confirmed the interaction of
full length RPM/RGL3 with constitutively active M-
Ras. Again, full length RPM/RGL3 co-precipitated
equally well with M-RasQ71L or H-RasG12V. We
noted however that the binding of RPM/RGL3 to M-
RasG22V was much weaker than to M-RasQ71L. This
might reflect conformational differences between the two
mutants or differences in the residual intrinsic GTPase
activity of the two mutants. In separate experiments we
have shown that RPM/RGL3 binds to GTP-bound
wild-type M-Ras after activation by co-expression of an
exchange factor (Korherr et al., manuscript in preparation). We have shown binding of RPM/RGL3 to
activated but not inactive forms of M-Ras or H-Ras
by three different means; the yeast two-hybrid system,
co-immunoprecipitation and affinity-purification. Col-

lectively, these data indicate that RPM/RGL3 is a potential effector of both M-Ras and p21Ras.

The previously described members of the RalGDS-family RalGDS, Rlf and Rgl synergize with p21Ras in activating the c-fos promoter whereas membrane localization of these proteins by fusing them to the CAAX-motif of p21Ras rendered them constitutively active (Murai et al., 1997; Okazaki et al., 1997; Wolthuis et al., 1997). Likewise, RalGDS and Rgl, synergize with Raf-1 in activating the c-fos promoter (Murai et al., 1997; Okazaki et al., 1997) although Rlf, which is most closely related to RPM/RGL3 does not (Wolthuis et al., 1997). These synergistic effects of RalGDS and Rlf on activation of the c-fos promoter are not solely related to their GEF-activity for Ral, since a constitutively active RalG23V could not substitute for RalGDS or Rlf in these experiments (Okazaki et al., 1997; Wolthuis et al., 1997). Our data, however, indicate that RPM/RGL3 differs markedly from the other RalGDS-family members in this respect. Thus, RPM/RGL3 not only failed to synergize with H-RasG12V and MEKK-1 in activating the Elk-1 transcription factor, but potently inhibited this activation. This observed inhibition was not the result of lack or decrease of expression of the activating construct. Moreover, it was not due to toxic effects of over-expression of RPM/RGL3, as over-expression of RPM/RGL3 or any of the RPM/RGL3 mutants had no effect on Raf-1 mediated reporter gene activation and did not influence expression of co-transfected GFP. Nor was the inhibitory effect the result of blockade of p21H-Ras by the formation of inactive RPM/RGL3-Ras complexes as the mutant of RPM/RGL3, which lacked the RBD and was thus no longer able to bind to Ras, still strongly inhibited H-Ras-dependent activation of Elk-1. In contrast, the presence of the RBD of RPM/RGL3 was necessary for inhibition of M-Ras-mediated Elk-1 activation. This suggests that the inhibition of M-Ras-mediated reporter gene activation was solely due to blockade of M-Ras by the formation of RPM/RGL3/M-Ras complexes that cannot activate Elk-1. There was compelling evidence that a second signal, provided by activated p21Ras or MEKK-1, but not by Raf-1 or activated M-Ras, was required for RPM/RGL3 to exert its negative effects on Elk-1 activation. Our data indicate that this might be provided by either MEKK-1, or proteins downstream of MEKK-1, which lead to the activation of the stress activated protein kinases (SAPK/JNK) and p38. The fact that M-Ras mediated activation of Elk-1 could not be inhibited by RPM/RGL3 that lacked the RBD argues that PI3-kinase could not provide this second signal as M-Ras interacts with and activates PI3-kinase (Kimmelman et al., 2000).

Recently, another inhibitory Ras effector, RASSF1, has been described (Dammann et al., 2000). RASSF1 acts as tumor suppressor and induces apoptosis (Vos et al., 2000). In contrast, the inhibitory effects of RPM/RGL3 on cell growth and Ras-mediated gene induction occur without causing inducing cell death.

The mechanism of this inhibitory action of RPM/RGL3 requires further investigation. Our data demonstrate that the phosphorylation state of the MAP-

---

RPM/RGL3 is a novel potential Ras effector protein  
GRA Ehrhardt et al

kinases Erk, JNK and p38 is not affected. It remains possible that activation of RPM/RGL3 uncouples Elk-1 activation from MAP-kinase phosphorylation. Inhibition of Elk-1-dependent reporter gene activity without inhibition of MAP-kinase phosphorylation has recently been reported. Thus the Kinase Suppressor of Ras (KSR) inhibits EGF-induced Elk-1 phosphorylation without affecting Erk activity (Sugimoto et al., 1998). Inhibition of activation of Elk-1 or the c-fos promoter without affecting Erk-activity has also been reported as a result of an overexpressed Gab2 mutant in Ba/F3 cells stimulated with IL-3 (Gu et al., 1998). The fact that RPM/RGL3 not only inhibited reporter gene activity but also led to decreased colony formation of src-transformed fibroblasts in semi-solid medium suggests that RPM/RGL3 might have important regulatory roles in cell physiology.

The clones we obtained from our yeast two-hybrid screen with M-RasG22V fell into three groups, based on the strength of their interaction with M-RasG22V. The group most strongly interacting with M-RasG22V comprised RPM/RGL3, AF-6, Norel and Rinl. These studies define a subset of p21 Ras effectors as candidate effectors for M-Ras. Our results obtained from the yeast two-hybrid system contrast with those of Quilliam et al. (1999), who failed to see any interaction in the yeast two-hybrid system between constitutively active M-RasQ71L and RalGDS, A-Raf and particularly Rinl. This could be related to differences in the two-hybrid systems, as we used a Gal4-based two-hybrid system whereas Quilliam et al. (1999) used a LexA-based system (Mendelsohn and Brent, 1994). Co-immunoprecipitation studies with full-length proteins should resolve these discrepancies. Interestingly, we noted that all of the potential effectors which showed strong binding to constitutively active M-Ras in both the yeast two-hybrid system and co-precipitation assays were distinguished by the presence of proline rich regions in which a four proline 'PPPP'-motif (residues 31–34 in Norel, residues 1396–1399 in AF-6, residues 287–290 in Rinl, residues 563–566 in RPM/RGL3) is flanked by other 'PxxP'-motifs that could form potential SH3-domain binding sites. The significance of these poly-proline motifs in regulating interactions with other signaling molecules or scaffolds is currently under investigation.

In conclusion, we report the identification and characterization of a novel RalGDS-family member which is a potential effector protein of both M-Ras and p21Ras and which has novel inhibitory effects on p21 Ras-mediated gene induction and cell growth in the presence of signals provided by p21Ras or MEKK-1 but not M-Ras or Raf-1.

Materials and methods

Materials

The cDNAs for Raf-1 and H-Ras were provided by Dr I Sadowski (University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada) and Dr A Ambrosini (DiBiT, H. San Raffaele,

RPM/RGL3 is a novel potential Ras effector protein
GRA Ehrhardt et al

Milan, Italy), respectively. Plasmids encoding Rlf and the GST-fusion protein GST-RalGDS RBD were kindly provided by Dr J Bos (Utrecht, The Netherlands). The retroviral vector pMX-PIE which encodes the EGFP protein downstream of an IRES-element was a generous gift of Dr Alice Mui (Jack Bell Research Centre, Vancouver, Canada). The anti-HA antibody 12CA5 was purchased from Roche Diagnostics, Laval, Quebec, Canada) and the anti-myc antibody 9E10 was a gift from Dr H Ziltener, Vancouver, Canada). Antibodies recognizing phosphorylated MAP-kinases were purchased from New England Biolabs (Mississauga, Ontario, Canada).

**Tissue culture**

HEK-293 cells were grown in DMEM/10% fetal calf serum/2 mM L-glutamine/100 U penicillin/50 U streptomycin (Stem Cell Technologies, Vancouver, Canada). NIH3T3 cells were grown under the same conditions, except that fetal calf serum was replaced by calf serum. For colony formation assays 1000 GFP-positive cells per plate were plated in 1.1% methylcellulose (Stem Cell Technologies, Vancouver, Canada) containing 10% calf serum. For MTT-assays, 1000 GFP-positive cells/well were plated into 96-well plates and MTT was added at the indicated times for 4 h. The assays were performed as described earlier (Orchansky *et al.*, 1999). For retroviral infections NIH3T3 cells were incubated for 10 h with retroviruses produced as described (Shaw *et al.*, 1997), in the presence of 10 μg/ml polybrene. Twenty-four hours after infection, GFP-positive cells were sorted using a FACS-Vantage SE (Becton-Dickinson, Oakville, Ontario, Canada) before plating in methylcellulose or 96-well plates.

**Two-hybrid Screen**

An oligo dT primed NIH3T3 library (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA, USA) was screened with constitutively active M-RasG22V that was lacking the C-terminal CAAX-motif cloned into the 'bait' vector pAS2-1 downstream of the Gal-4 DNA binding domain. The 'prey' plasmids of 45 LacZ+/His+ colonies that interacted with constitutively active M-Ras G22V but not with dominant negative M-Ras S27N were analysed. They contained (partial) cDNAs of several known Ras-effector proteins as well as the 3′ UTR and the C-terminus of one novel protein. To obtain a full length cDNA of this protein, we used the SMART RACE cDNA Amplification Kit (Clontech). Two rounds of 5′ RACE with the nested oligonucleotides CTCGGGACAGCTTCG-CACTGAGACG, GGCTGATGCGTGCCGGATACGAG and GGCTCTCGGTTTCTAGGGCTGGATGG, GACA-CACTGGAGGTAGGTGAGGAC yielded the missing 5′ coding sequence as well as 58 nucleotides (nt) of 5′ UTR. For each round of 5′ RACE four independently amplified clones were sequenced. A membrane localized mutant of RPM/RGL3 was generated by attaching the sequence coding for the C-terminal 27 amino acids of H-Ras and M-Ras, respectively, to the C-terminus of RPM/RGL3 and a mutant deficient in binding to Ras was generated by deleting the C-terminal 143 residues of RPM/RGL3. The constructs were epitope-tagged at the N-terminus with the c-myc or the HA epitope and cloned into the expression vector pcDNA3.1 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) or the retroviral vector pMX-PIE.

**Northern Blot**

A multi-tissue Northern blot (Clontech) of 2 μg of poly(A)+ purified mRNA of various murine tissues was probed with a radio-labeled probe corresponding to nt 1584–2060 of the

RPM/RGL3 coding sequence according to the manufacturer's manual. The hybridized probe was detected by autoradiography after overnight exposure at –80°C using an intensifying screen.

**Cell-fractionations**

Cell-fractionations were performed by suspending cells in homogenization-buffer (10 mM TRIS-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA, 10 μg/ml each of leupeptin, aprotinin, soybean trypsin inhibitor, 0.7 μg/ml pepstatin and 40 μg/ml PMSF). Cells were broken by brief sonication, the nuclei were pelleted and the supernatant subjected to ultra-centrifugation for 20 min at 150,000 g. The membrane fraction was resuspended in an equal volume of homogenization buffer. The resulting supernatant was designated cytosolic fraction (c) and the pelleted fraction membrane enriched fraction (m).

**Transient transfection and reporter gene assays**

For transient transfections, HEK-293 cells were plated at a density of 2 × 10^6^ cells per 6 cm dish 24 h prior to transfection. The cells were transfected with a total of 3.5 μg of DNA using the Lipofectamine reagent (Gibco BRL, Burlington, ON, Canada). For luciferase assays, HEK-293 cells were transfected with 0.5 μg of the reporter gene expression plasmids Gal-4/Elk and 5×Gal4/luciferase (Path-Detect, Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA) at a ratio of 1:2 and 3 μg of the indicated constructs. Empty vector was added where necessary to transfect equal amounts of DNA. Cells were harvested 40 h after transfection and lysed in 250 μl lysis buffer (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Luciferase activity was determined using a luminometer (Dynex, Chantilly, VA, USA) and the values normalized to total protein using the BCA Protein Reagent A (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Protein expression was verified by western blotting. In some experiments, 100 ng of a GFP-expressing vector (Clontech) was included as control to examine potential cytotoxic effects of RPM/RGL3.

**Western blot and immunoprecipitations**

Cells were lysed in 500 μl of 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.25% Na-deoxycholate, 10 mM MgCl₂ 1 mM EDTA in the presence of a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Diagnostics, Laval, Quebec, Canada) and phosphatase inhibitors (0.2 mM Na₃VO₄, 10 mM NaF, 1 mM MoO₄). Denatured proteins were subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies as described (Duronio *et al.*, 1992).

**Affinity precipitation assays**

GST-fusion constructs were generated by PCR-amplifying the Ras-binding domains of Nore1 (nt 570–1245), AF-6 (nt 1–646), and RPM/RGL3 (nt 1750–2127) and cloning them into the vector pGEX 4T2 (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Quebec, Canada). Affinity precipitations to assay the binding of M-Ras and p21 Ras to various Ras-binding domains were essentially performed as described (Taylor and Shalloway, 1996). Briefly, lysates of HEK-293 cells expressing the indicated myc-tagged Ras proteins were incubated for 30 min at 4°C with 1 μg recombinant GST-fusion protein of various Ras-binding domains pre-coupled to glutathione beads. The beads were washed three times with lysis buffer, boiled and the eluted proteins separated by SDS-PAGE and

detected by immunoblotting with the anti-myc antibody 9E10.

Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Dr A Ambrosini (DiBiT, H San Raffaele, Milan, Italy) for H-Ras constructs and Dr J Bos (Utrecht, The Netherlands) for the Rlf expression con-

References

Albright CF, Giddings BW, Liu J, Vito M and Weinberg RA. (1993). *EMBO J.*, 12, 339–347.
D'Adamo DR, Novick S, Kahn JM, Leonard P and Pellicer A. (1997). *Oncogene*, 14, 1295–1305.
Dammann R, Li C, Yoon JH, Chin PL, Bates S and Pfeifer GP. (2000). *Nat. Genet.*, 25, 315–319.
Diaz-Meco MT, Lozano J, Municio MM, Berra E, Frutos S, Sanz L and Moscat J. (1994). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 269, 31706–31710.
Duronio V, Welham MJ, Abraham S, Dryden P and Schrader JW. (1992). *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, 89, 1587–1591.
Egan SE and Weinberg RA. (1993). *Nature*, 365, 781–783.
Ehrhardt GR, Leslie KB, Lee F, Wieler JS and Schrader JW. (1999). *Blood*, 94, 2433–2444.
Gu H, Pratt JC, Burakoff SJ and Neel BG. (1998). *Mol. Cell.*, 2, 729–740.
Han L and Colicelli J. (1995). *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 15, 1318–1323.
Hofer F, Fields S, Schneider C and Martin GS. (1994). *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, 91, 11089–11093.
Kikuchi A, Demo SD, Ye ZH, Chen YW and Williams LT. (1994). *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 14, 7483–7491.
Kimmelman A, Tolkacheva T, Lorenzi MV, Osada M and Chan AM. (1997). *Oncogene*, 15, 2675–2685.
Kimmelman AC, Osada M and Chan AM. (2000). *Oncogene*, 19, 2014–2022.
Kuriyama M, Harada N, Kuroda S, Yamamoto T, Nakafuku M, Iwamatsu A, Yamamoto D, Prasad R, Croce C, Canaani E and Kaibuchi K. (1996). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 271, 607–610.
Lange-Carter CA, Pleiman CM, Gardner AM, Blumer KJ and Johnson GL. (1993). *Science*, 260, 315–319.
Leevers SJ, Paterson HF and Marshall CJ. (1994). *Nature*, 369, 411–414.
Lowy DR and Willumsen BM. (1993). *Annu. Rev. Biochem.*, 62, 851–891.
Matsumoto K, Asano T and Endo T. (1997). *Oncogene*, 15, 2409–2417.
Mendelsohn AR and Brent R. (1994). *Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.*, 5, 482–486.
Milburn MV, Tong L, deVos AM, Brunger A, Yamaizumi Z, Nishimura S and Kim SH. (1990). *Science*, 247, 939–945.
Minden A, Lin A, Claret FX, Abo A and Karin M. (1995). *Cell*, 81, 1147–1157.
Moodie SA and Wolfman A. (1994). *Trends Genet.*, 10, 44–48.

RPM/RGL3 is a novel potential Ras effector protein
GRA Ehrhardt et al

struct. We would like to thank Annette Y Schallhorn for helpful discussions and critical reading of the manuscript. This work was supported by a grant from the Medical Research Council, Canada. The nucleotide sequence reported in this paper has been submitted to GenBank with the accession number AF239661.

Murai H, Ikeda M, Kishida S, Ishida O, Okazaki-Kishida M, Matsuura Y and Kikuchi A. (1997). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 272, 10483–10490.
Okazaki M, Kishida S, Hinoi T, Hasegawa T, Tamada M, Kataoka T and Kikuchi A. (1997). *Oncogene*, 14, 515–521.
Orchansky PL, Kwan R, Lee F and Schrader JW. (1999). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 274, 20818–20825.
Quilliam LA, Castro AF, Rogers-Graham KS, Martin CB, Der CJ and Bi C. (1999). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 274, 23850–23857.
Rebhun JF, Chen H and Quilliam LA. (2000). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 275, 13406–13410.
Rodriguez-Viciana P, Warne PH, Dhand R, Vanhaesebroeck B, Gout I, Fry MJ, Waterfield MD and Downward J. (1994). *Nature*, 370, 527–532.
Russell M, Lange-Carter CA and Johnson GL. (1995). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 270, 11757–11760.
Satoh T, Nakafuku M, Miyajima A and Kaziro Y. (1991). *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, 88, 3314–3318.
Shao H and Andres DA. (2000). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 275, 26914–26924.
Shaw MK, Lorens JB, Dhawan A, DalCanto R, Tse HY, Tran AB, Bonpane C, Eswaran SL, Brocke S, Sarvetnick N, Steinman L, Nolan GP and Fathman CG. (1997). *J. Exp. Med.*, 185, 1711–1714.
Stokoe D, Macdonald SG, Cadwallader K, Symons M and Hancock JF. (1994). *Science*, 264, 1463–1467.
Sugimoto T, Stewart S, Han M and Guan KL. (1998). *EMBO J.*, 17, 1717–1727.
Taylor SJ and Shalloway D. (1996). *Curr. Biol.*, 6, 1621–1627.
Trent II JC, McConkey DJ, Loughlin SM, Harbison MT, Fernandez A and Ananthaswamy HN. (1996). *EMBO J.*, 15, 4497–4505.
Vavvas D, Li X, Avruch J and Zhang XF. (1998). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 273, 5439–5442.
Vos MD, Ellis CA, Bell A, Birrer MJ and Clark GJ. (2000). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 275, 35669–35672.
Winzen R, Kracht M, Ritter B, Wilhelm A, Chen CY, Shyu AB, Muller M, Gaestel M, Resch K and Holtmann H. (1999). *EMBO J.*, 18, 4969–4980.
Wolthuis RM, Bauer B, van't Veer LJ, de Vries-Smits AM, Cool RH, Spaargaren M, Wittinghofer A, Burgering BM and Bos JL. (1996). *Oncogene*, 13, 353–362.
Wolthuis RM, de Ruiter ND, Cool RH and Bos JL. (1997). *EMBO J.*, 16, 6748–6761.
