
Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 175 (2001) 57–66

**Metabolic and functional studies on isolated islets in a new rat model of type 2 diabetes**

M. Novelli${}^{a}$, M.E. Fabregat${}^{b}$, J. Fernandez-Alvarez${}^{b}$, R. Gomis${}^{b}$, P. Masiello${}^{a,*}$

${}^{a}$ Dipartimento di Patologia Sperimentale, Tecnologie Biomediche, Infettivologia e Epidemiologia, University of Pisa, Via Roma 55, Scuola Medica 56126 Pisa, Italy  
${}^{b}$ Endocrinology and Diabetes Unit, Hospital Clinic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain  

Received 10 July 2000; accepted 18 January 2001

---

### Abstract

In a new experimental type 2 diabetic syndrome, a 40% reduction of pancreatic β cells was observed by morphometric analysis. In diabetic islets, as compared to control islets, insulin release was decreased in response to high glucose but not to other stimuli, and total glucose oxidation and utilization were unchanged or slightly reduced. The extent of metabolic and functional impairment appeared proportional to the β-cell loss. However, a substantial decrease was found in protein level and activity (by 77 and 60%, respectively, versus controls) of mitochondrial FAD-glycerophosphate dehydrogenase (mGDH), the key enzyme of the glycerophosphate shuttle. Interestingly, in diabetic islets, as recently reported for mGDH-deficient transgenic mice, definite functional alterations (mainly in response to D-glyceraldehyde) were only obtained upon pharmacological blockade of the second shuttle (i.e. malate-aspartate) responsible for mitochondrial transfer of reducing equivalents. In conclusion, in this diabetes model with reduction of β-cell mass, the islets, despite decreased mGDH amount and activity, appear metabolically and functionally active in vitro, likely through the intervention of adaptive mechanisms, yet prone to failure in challenging situations. © 2001 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

**Keywords:** Experimental diabetes; Insulin secretion; Islet metabolism; Isolated islets

---

### 1. Introduction

We have recently described a new experimental diabetic syndrome in adult rats administered streptozotocin (STZ) and partially protected with a suitable dose of nicotinamide (Masiello et al., 1998). This syndrome shares a number of features with human type 2 diabetes, and is characterized by moderate stable hyperglycaemia, glucose intolerance, altered but significant glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, in vivo and in vitro responsiveness to tolbutamide.

The available information on this interesting diabetic syndrome, which is more responsive to glucose and tolbutamide than other established animal models of type 2 diabetes (e.g. neonatally STZ-injected rats, GK rats) and has been already utilized to test the antidiabetic properties of a novel compound of vegetal origin (Broca et al., 1999), is still limited. The present work was carried out in order: (a) to quantify the reduction of the β-cell mass induced by STZ administration under nicotinamide protection and investigate for possible β-cell regeneration; (b) to assess the insulin secretory function of islets isolated from diabetic rats, since most functional in vitro data were previously obtained in perfused pancreas preparations; (c) to provide insight into the possible mechanism(s) responsible for the functional alterations. For these purposes, morphometric studies were carried out on the pancreas of diabetic rats, and freshly isolated islets were used to assess their secretory responsiveness to various stimuli as well as some relevant biochemical and metabolic features. In

---

**Abbreviations:** mGDH, mitochondrial FAD-glycerophosphate dehydrogenase; GK, Goto-Kakizaki rats; STZ, streptozotocin; NA, nicotinamide; n0-STZ rats, rats injected streptozotocin on the day of birth; AOA, aminoxyacetate; α-KIC, α-ketoisocaproate; IBMX, 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine; BrdU, 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine; D-GA, D-glyceraldehyde.

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +39-50-560506; fax: +39-50-560496.  
E-mail address: rinomasiello@hotmail.com (P. Masiello).

0303-7207/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.  
PII: S0303-7207(01)00400-2

particular, the protein content and activity of FAD-linked mitochondrial glycerophosphate dehydrogenase (mGDH), the key enzyme of the glycerol phosphate shuttle, were investigated, since STZ, either administered in vivo (Rasschaert and Malaisse, 1993b) or used in vitro (Rasschaert et al., 1992, 1993a), has been reported to reduce substantially the activity of this enzyme in β cells. Furthermore, we thought that this study could contribute to clarify the still uncertain role of mGDH alterations in the pathogenesis of diabetes. Indeed, although it has been suggested that mGDH deficiency may account for a preferential alteration of glucose metabolism (and hence glucose-stimulated insulin release) in some animal models (Giroix et al., 1991; Østenson et al., 1993; Sener et al., 1993) and in a few patients with type 2 diabetes (Fernandez-Alvarez et al., 1994), a recent report on mGDH-deficient transgenic mice questioned this assumption (Eto et al., 1999).

### 2. Materials and methods

#### 2.1. Animals

Male Wistar rats of 2–3 months of age were administered intraperitoneally 290 mg/kg of nicotinamide (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) dissolved in saline, 15 min before an intravenous injection of 60 mg/kg STZ (Sigma, St. Louis, MO), dissolved in citrate buffer (pH 4.5) immediately before use. Each set of treated animals was paralleled by one group of controls receiving the vehicles of both substances. A high percentage (80%) of treated animals showed a stable hyperglycaemia (range 150–180 mg/dl) as measured periodically at least in three different occasions. These animals were used for the experiments 3–5 weeks after diabetes was induced. Blood was sampled from the tail vessels of conscious non-fasting animals in EDTA-containing chilled tubes. After centrifugation at 4°C, plasma was stored at –20°C until assayed.

#### 2.2. Morphometric analysis of the islets

The pancreases used for morphometry were dissected from six control and six diabetic rats killed by decapitation and were immediately frozen in liquid N₂. Serial sections were cut from each pancreas block and immunostained for insulin using the indirect immunofluorescence technique. Anti-insulin serum (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) was used at a dilution of 1/10 and anti-glucagon serum (INC Biomedicals, Inc., Ohio, USA) at dilution 1/50; second antibodies were rhodamine-isothiocyanate-labelled anti-guinea pig IgG (Sigma, St. Louis, Mo, USA) at dilution 1/10 for insulin and rhodamine-isothiocyanate-labelled anti-rabbit IgG (Sigma, St. Louis, Mo, USA) at dilution 1/100 for glucagon. The islet surface was calculated after toluidine staining. Morphometry was performed using a manual optical picture image analyzer (Model MOP-01, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) on a projected image of the histological sections of the pancreas (Clark et al., 1988).

#### 2.3. Islets isolation

Pancreatic islets were isolated by the collagenase method using the procedure of pancreatic duct cannulation and density gradient purification as described elsewhere (Malaisse-Lagae and Malaisse, 1984). Isolated islets, washed several times with buffer, were either immediately used for experiments on insulin release and glucose metabolism or suitably prepared for analysis of DNA, mGDH protein and enzymatic activity, as detailed below.

#### 2.4. Islet DNA content

DNA content was determined on groups of 20 islets according to the fluorimetric assay of Labarca and Paigen (1980), using bisbenzimidazole (compound Hoechst 33258, Aldrich Chimica, Milan, Italy) as fluorochrome and calf thymus DNA (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) as standard.

#### 2.5. Insulin release

Groups of 8–10 freshly isolated islets were first preincubated for 60 min at 37°C in 1 ml of Krebs-Ringer bicarbonate buffer supplemented with 0.5% bovine serum albumine (fraction V, Sigma) and 2.8 mM glucose. At the end of the preincubation period, the buffer was discarded and replaced by 1 ml fresh buffer containing different glucose concentrations or test substances (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) as appropriate: 35 mM KCl, 1 mM isobutylmethylxanthine (IBMX), 10 mM α-ketoisocaproate (α-KIC), 10 mM D-glyceraldehyde (D-GA), 2–10 mM aminooxyacetate (AOA). When 35 mM KCl was used, the Na⁺ concentration of the buffer was correspondently reduced to maintain osmolarity. The islets were incubated for 60 min at 37°C. At the end of this period, the buffer was collected for insulin determination. Finally, 1 ml of cold acidified ethanol (150:47:3 v/v absolute ethanol:H₂O:concentrate HCl) was added to the islets in order to extract their insulin content.

#### 2.6. Islet glucose metabolism

In all metabolic studies, groups of 15–20 islets each were incubated for 120 min at 37°C in 40 μl of the same bicarbonate-buffered medium containing, as required, both D-[5-³H]glucose and D-[U-¹⁴C]glucose. The incubation

bation was stopped by addition of 20 μl of a citrate-
NaOH buffer (400 mM, pH 4.9) containing antimycin
A (0.01 mM), rotenone (0.01 mM) and KCN (5 mM)
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO). The oxidation of ^{14}C-glucose
was measured as described by Carpinelli et al. (1980),
the ^{14}CO_2 being trapped in hyamine hydroxide over 60
min incubation at room temperature. The recovery of
^3H_2O in 0.5 ml of HCl (0.1 M) was then completed over
a further incubation of 20 h at room temperature
(Malaisse and Sener, 1988).

### 2.7. mGDH protein and enzymatic activity analysis

For Western blot analysis, groups of 200 islets were
homogenized in a Tris-HCl buffer (50 mM, pH 8)
containing 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Nonidet
P-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.02% sodium azide,
1 μg/ml aprotinin and 100 μg/ml phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride. Proteins were resolved by electrophoresis on a
10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel and transferred into nitro-
cellulose filters (Bio-Rad, CA, USA). The filters were
blocked in 7% non-fat dry milk/0.2% Nonidet P-40 in
Tris-buffered saline (pH 7.4), for 60 min at 20°C. The
membranes were incubated with a polyclonal rabbit
antiserum against a mGDH recombinant protein
(Novials et al., 1996). Detection of the bound antibody
was performed using peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit
IgG (Sigma ImmunoChemicals, St. Louis, MO, USA)
and the ECL chemiluminescence system (Amersham
Life Science, Buckinghamshire, UK) (Fabregat et al.,
1996).
The membranes were then submerged in a stripping
buffer (100 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, 2% SDS and 62.5
mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8) for 30 min at 50°C and then
blocked in 5% non-fat dry milk/0.2% Nonidet P-40 in
Tris-buffered saline (pH 7.4), for 45 min at 20°C. The
antibody used for detection of actin was a polyclonal
rabbit anti-actin (Sigma ImmunoChemicals, St. Louis,
MO, USA). Detection of the bound antibody was
performed as described above. The intensities of the
mGDH and actin bands were quantified by computer-
ized image analysis (Cive-2, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).
The activity of mGDH was measured with a ra-
dioisotopic procedure as described elsewhere (Rass-
chaert et al., 1991).

### 2.8. Assays

Plasma glucose was measured by the glucose-oxidase
method using commercially available kits (Glu-cinet,
Sclavo diagnostics, Siena, Italy).
Insulin was measured by radioimmunoassay accord-
ing to Herbert et al. (1965), using rat insulin as a
standard. The sensitivity and the coefficient of variation
of the radioimmunoassay were as follows: detection
limit 0.13 ng/ml, intra-assay variation 3.3%, inter-assay
variation 10.5%.

---

### 2.9. Data presentation and statistical methods

All results are expressed as mean ± SEM. Statistical
significance was evaluated by analysis of variance
(ANOVA), followed by unpaired Student's *t*-test as
method of post-hoc analysis. Statistical analysis in-
cluded determination of regression lines and corre-
sponding correlation coefficients.

### 3. Results

#### 3.1. Metabolic status

The in vivo features of diabetic and normal Wistar
rats used in the present study are shown in Table 1.
Body weights were similar in the two groups of rats.
Plasma glucose concentrations were significantly higher
in diabetic than in control animals (*P* < 0.01), whereas
plasma insulin levels were not significantly different in
the two groups.
In Table 1, islet insulin, DNA and protein content
are also reported. In islets isolated from diabetic rats
both insulin and DNA content were decreased (by 42
and 31%, respectively) with respect to control animals.
When the islet insulin content was expressed on the
basis of DNA content, it remained significantly lower in
diabetic than in control rats (Controls 3.5 ± 0.12; STZ-
NA 2.7 ± 0.08 ng/ng islet DNA, *P* < 0.01). The islet
protein content was the same in the two groups of
animals.

#### 3.2. Morphometric data

As shown in Table 2, the islet surface was similar in
control and diabetic animals. Upon incubation with
anti-insulin serum, islets from diabetic rats showed a

**Table 1**
Metabolic status of control and diabetic rats^a^

| Animals           | Control               | Diabetic              |
|-------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
| Body wt (g)       | 350 ± 13 (22)         | 345 ± 8 (35)          |
| Plasma glucose    | 128 ± 3 (22)          | 161 ± 4^c^ (35)       |
| concentration (mg/dl) |                     |                       |
| Plasma insulin    | 3.9 ± 0.4 (22)        | 3.3 ± 0.3 (35)        |
| concentration (ng/ml) |                    |                       |
| Islet insulin content | 62.9 ± 0.1 (116)     | 36.3 ± 1.2^b^ (101)   |
| (ng/islet)        |                       |                       |
| Islet DNA         | 19.2 ± 1.97 (9)       | 13.3 ± 1.38^b^ (7)    |
| content (ng/islet) |                      |                       |
| Islet protein content | 0.31 ± 0.03 (12)     | 0.29 ± 0.03 (8)       |
| (μg/islet)        |                       |                       |

^a^ Results are expressed as means ± SEM of the number of observa-
tions indicated in parentheses.
^b^ *P* < 0.05.
^c^ *P* < 0.01 versus control rats (unpaired Student's *t*-test).

Table 2  
Beta and alpha cell density in pancreatic islets isolated from control and diabetic rats$^a$

| Rats       | Islet surface ($\mu$m²) | Beta-cells/exocrine tissue (%) | Alpha-cells/exocrine tissue (%) | Beta-cells (% of islet surface) | Alpha-cells (% of islet surface) |
|------------|-------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Control    | $4512 \pm 480$          | $2.55 \pm 0.35$ (131)           | $0.62 \pm 0.15$ (32)             | $93.0 \pm 10.7$ (91)             | $4.27 \pm 0.43$ (32)              |
|            | (169)                   |                                 |                                  |                                  |                                   |
| Diabetic   | $4293 \pm 342$          | $0.67 \pm 0.06^b$ (164)         | $0.70 \pm 0.18$ (40)             | $59.8 \pm 2.5^b$ (164)           | $4.24 \pm 0.71$ (40)              |
|            | (226)                   |                                 |                                  |                                  |                                   |

$^a$ Results are expressed as means $\pm$ SEM of the total number of islets examined (indicated in parentheses), isolated from six control and six diabetic animals.

$^b P < 0.01$ versus control rats (unpaired Student's $t$-test)

36% decrease ($P < 0.01$) in the number of immunofluorescent $\beta$ cells (Table 2) and a reduced intensity of the fluorescent signal with respect to controls (Fig. 1, B and A). In diabetic rats, the $\beta$ cell/exocrine tissue ratio was decreased by 73% in the average (Table 2). Since the decrease in $\beta$ cell/exocrine tissue ratio is larger than the decrease observed in $\beta$ cell number, it can be assumed that the number of pancreatic islets in diabetic rats is also decreased. Based on 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU) immunostaining, no evidence of increased replication was found in $\beta$ cells of diabetic islets (data not shown). Preliminary data also indicate that a moderate increase in $\beta$ cell neogenesis occurred in diabetic animals with respect to controls, as detected by mouse monoclonal anti-human cytokeratin 20 antibody immunostaining co-expressed with insulin (not shown).

Glucagon-immunoreactive cells occupied their normal position at the periphery of the islet both in control and diabetic rats (Fig. 1, C and D) and their number was similar to that of controls (Table 2). The $\alpha$ cell/exocrine tissue ratio and the relative contribution of $\alpha$ cells to the total islet mass were not different in the two groups.

### 3.3. Secretory data

As shown in Fig. 2A, at non-stimulating glucose concentration (2.8 mM), the insulin release of islets freshly isolated from diabetic rats was significantly ($P < 0.01$) reduced with respect to controls. Exposure of islets to increasing glucose concentrations caused a dose-dependent increase of insulin release in both control and diabetic islets, but at 16.7 mM glucose values were significantly lower in diabetic than in control islets ($P < 0.01$). Some variability was observed in the response of diabetic islets to 8.3 mM glucose: whereas in most cases insulin release was similar to that of control islets (Fig. 2A), occasionally it was found significantly reduced (as shown in Table 4 below). In any case, it should be noticed that if the insulin secretion is expressed on the basis of the islet DNA content, no difference occurs between the two groups of rats.

Incubation of islets with 10 mM $\alpha$-KIC in the presence of 2.8 mM glucose significantly increased insulin release in both groups to a similar extent (Fig. 2A).

One millimolar IBMX, in the presence of 2.8 mM glucose, increased insulin release more in diabetic than in control islets, particularly with respect to basal values (Fig. 2B), but potentiated glucose-stimulated insulin secretion to a larger extent in control than in diabetic islets ($P < 0.01$).

Challenged with non-metabolic stimuli such as 35 mM KCl (Fig. 2B), diabetic islets showed an increased insulin release in the presence of either 2.8 or 16.7 mM glucose; at both these glucose concentrations, there was no significant difference with respect to control islets.

#### 3.4. Islet glucose metabolism

The conversion of D-[5-$^3$H]glucose to $^3$HOH and the oxidation of D-[U-$^{14}$C]glucose were measured during a 120-min incubation of freshly isolated islets in the presence of 5.5 and 16.7 mM glucose (Fig. 3). As judged from the conversion of D-[5-$^3$H]glucose to $^3$HOH, the rate of glycolysis was not significantly different in control and diabetic rats at 5.5 mM glucose. At high glucose concentration, diabetic islets used 22% less glucose than control islets ($P < 0.05$); the difference is not significant when data are expressed on the basis of islet DNA.

The generation of $^{14}$CO$_2$ from D-[U-$^{14}$C] glucose, currently used to assess the global oxidation of the sugar, was similar in islets of control and diabetic rats at 5.5 mM glucose. High glucose concentration stimulated glucose oxidation in both groups: 3.1-fold in control and 2.5-fold in diabetic islets, the difference being not significant.

#### 3.5. Enzymatic activity and protein levels of mGDH

Fig. 4 illustrates a representative Western blot for mGDH as compared to actin in islet homogenates. As shown in Table 3, in the islets of diabetic rats the relative content of mGDH based on densitometric comparison of mGDH and actin values, was markedly decreased with respect to controls ($-77\%$).

Fig. 2. Insulin release from isolated islets of control (□) and diabetic (■) rats. Islets were incubated for 60 min in the presence of the indicated substances. Results are given as means ± SEM of 8–15 observations, pooled from at least two separate experiments. **P < 0.01 versus controls (unpaired Student’s *t*-test). α-KIC, α-ketoisocaproate; IBMX, 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine

The enzymatic activity of mGDH was also found significantly (*P* < 0.01) lower in diabetic than in control islets (−60%).

Fig. 3. Glucose metabolism in isolated islets of control (□) and diabetic (■) rats. Groups of 15–20 islets were incubated for 2 h at 37°C at 5.5 or 16.7 mM glucose in the presence of 5-[³H] glucose and U-[¹⁴C] glucose, to measure glucose utilization (panel A) or oxidation (panel B), respectively. Results are given as means ± SEM of 10 observations from two separate experiments. **P < 0.01 versus controls (unpaired Student’s *t*-test).

Fig. 1. Representative histological sections of islets of control (A, C) and diabetic (B, D) rats, incubated with *anti*-insulin (A, B) and *anti*-glucagon (C, D) antibodies conjugated with a fluorescent dye (magnification × 250).

D C D
mGDH ▶ 72KD
actin ▶ 42KD

Fig. 4. Autoradiography from a representative Western blot of homogenates of pancreatic islets isolated from control (C) and diabetic (D) rats, sequentially hybridized with anti-mGDH and anti-actin antibodies.

The differences between the two groups remain significant for both content and activity of mGDH if expressed on the basis of islet DNA.

### 3.6. Effects of aminooxyacetate

Table 4 shows glucose- and glyceraldehyde-induced insulin release in the presence or absence of aminooxyacetate (AOA), a well characterized inhibitor of the malate-aspartate shuttle. In both control and diabetic islets, 5 mM AOA slightly decreased insulin release in the presence of various glucose concentrations, this reduction being significant only in diabetic islets exposed to 16.7 mM glucose. On the other hand, in the presence of 5 mM AOA, D-GA-induced insulin release was completely blocked in diabetic islets, whereas no significant inhibition occurred in control islets. The inhibitory effect of AOA on D-GA-induced insulin secretion in diabetic islets was dose-dependent, as shown in Fig. 5, where it can be observed that the highest AOA concentration (10 mM) was also effective on control islets. However, 10 mM AOA probably exerted toxic effects since insulin release was lowered below basal values.

---

### Table 3
Mitochondrial glycerophosphate dehydrogenase (mGDH) protein content and activity in pancreatic islets of control and diabetic rats$^a$

| Control islets | Diabetic islets |
|----------------|-----------------|
| mGDH/actin protein content (% of controls) | 100 (5) | $23 \pm 1.9^b$ (8) |
| mGDH activity (fentomol/islet min) | $378 \pm 64.9$ (6) | $152 \pm 26.1^c$ (6) |

$a$ Data are means $\pm$ SEM of the number of observations indicated in parentheses. Protein content was determined by densitometric quantitation of three separate Western blots, as detailed in Materials and Methods; activity was measured by radioenzymatic assay.  
$b$ $P < 0.05$.  
$c$ $P < 0.01$ versus control rats (unpaired Student's $t$-test).

---

### 4. Discussion

In order to further characterize the diabetic syndrome induced by the combined injection of streptozotocin and nicotinamide in adult rats, our study has been focused on the morphometric analysis of islet tissue and on some aspects of the metabolic and functional behaviour of pancreatic islets isolated from diabetic rats. As a premise, it is worthy to comment that this diabetic syndrome was confirmed to be highly reproducible in terms of glycaemic changes, reduction of insulin stores, yield of diabetic animals.

In the STZ-NA diabetic rats, islet insulin and DNA content were found to be 58 and 69%, respectively, of the corresponding control values. These findings were consistent with the decrease in $\beta$-cell number resulting from morphometric measurements (64% of the control value). The reduction in islet insulin stores after the STZ-NA treatment was less marked than that observed in other experimental models, namely STZ injected rats on the day of birth (n0-STZ) (Portha et al., 1989) and GK rats (Giroix et al., 1993), whereas the effect on the islet DNA content was comparable (Dachicourt et al., 1996). On the other hand, it should be noticed that in n0-STZ and GK rats the actual $\beta$-cell mass was found to be 50% of normal (Giroix et al., 1992; Movassat et al., 1997), i.e. higher than expected on the basis of the islet insulin content. These discrepancies between the islet residual $\beta$-cell mass and islet insulin content may be most likely attributed, at least in n0-STZ rats, to regeneration of $\beta$ cells with incomplete differentiation. The comparative analysis of these data supports the idea that following STZ and NA administration a partial loss of $\beta$-cell mass occurs by necrosis and/or apoptosis, induced by the relatively specific cytotoxic effect of STZ only partially counteracted by NA. The residual $\beta$ cells (about 60% of the original mass) are most likely those which escaped irreversible damage and maintained the differentiation of mature $\beta$ cells. Indeed, in diabetic islets no increase in $\beta$-cell replication was observed by BrdU immunostaining with respect to controls. Furthermore, limited signs of regeneration were detected in the pancreatic ducts of diabetic animals, mainly as a result of $\beta$-cell neogenesis (data not shown). Although we have no direct evidence, it is likely that fibrous tissue might take the place of lost $\beta$ cells, as observed in other diabetic models (Shima et al., 1993; Movassat et al., 1997).

Because of the consistent reductions in $\beta$-cell mass and insulin stores in the islets of STZ and NA-treated diabetic rats, the defective glucose-stimulated insulin response observed could be simply attributed to these quantitative abnormalities of the islets. However, additional alterations are likely to have occurred in $\beta$-cell, contributing to the abnormal kinetics of glucose-stimulated insulin release or the hypersensitivity to arginine

Table 4  
Effect of aminoxyacetate (AOA) on glucose- and D-glyceraldehyde-stimulated insulin secretion in control and diabetic islets$^a$

| Insulin release (ng/islet h) | Control islets | Diabetic islets |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  | $-$ AOA | + AOA(5 mM) | Average decrease versus incubation without AOA (%) | $-$ AOA | + AOA(5 mM) | Average decrease versus incubation without AOA (%) |
| Glucose 2.8 mM | $0.46 \pm 0.03(5)$ | $0.41 \pm 0.04(5)$ | $-11$ | $0.31 \pm 0.05(5)$ | $0.21 \pm 0.02(5)$ | $-32$ |
| Glucose 8.3 mM | $1.08 \pm 0.14(5)$ | $0.76 \pm 0.06(5)$ | $-30$ | $0.58 \pm 0.09(5)$ | $0.45 \pm 0.08(5)$ | $-22$ |
| Glucose 16.7 mM | $1.38 \pm 0.17(11)$ | $0.87 \pm 0.17(9)$ | $-37$ | $0.86 \pm 0.08(8)$ | $0.62 \pm 0.05^b(8)$ | $-30$ |
| Glucose 2.8 mM | $0.86 \pm 0.06(9)$ | $0.76 \pm 0.15(7)$ | $-12$ | $0.74 \pm 0.07(8)$ | $0.33 \pm 0.03^c(10)$ | $-55$ |
| + D-GA 10 mM$^d$ |  |  |  |  |  |  |

$a$ Results are expressed as means $\pm$ SEM of the number of observations indicated in parentheses.  
$b$ $P < 0.05$.  
$c$ $P < 0.01$ versus corresponding incubation without AOA (unpaired Student's $t$-test).  
$d$ D-GA, D-glyceraldehyde.

Fig. 5. Effect of various concentrations of aminoxyacetate (AOA) on D-glyceraldehyde (D-GA)-stimulated insulin release in isolated islets of control (□) and diabetic (■) rats. Incubations were performed in the presence of 2.8 mM glucose. Results are given as means ± SEM of five observations. **P < 0.01** versus corresponding incubation with D-GA alone (unpaired Student’s *t*-test). The insert shows that the effect of AOA in diabetic islets is dose-dependent (*r* = −0.924, *P* < 0.01).

observed in the perfused pancreas (Masiello et al., 1998).

Interestingly, islets from diabetic rats did not exhibit a generalized impairment in insulin secretion, since they responded normally to stimulation by other fuel secretagogues such as α-KIC or D-GA. Also IBMX, an inhibitor of phosphodiesterase activity, enhanced both basal and glucose-stimulated insulin release, confirming the good sensitivity of diabetic islets to the elevation of intracellular cAMP, previously reported for diabetic n0-STZ rats (Dachicourt et al., 1996). Furthermore, non-metabolic stimuli such as depolarizing concentrations of K⁺ induced an insulin secretory response similar to that observed in control islets. This response, larger at high glucose than at low glucose, was not affected by opening the K<sub>ATP</sub> channels with 250 μM diazoxide (data not shown), suggesting that a K<sub>ATP</sub> channel-independent pathway is operative in diabetic islets as well.

There is a general consensus that in order to stimulate insulin release, glucose enters β cells via facilitated transport involving GLUT-2 transporter, is phosphorylated by glucokinase and subsequently metabolized through glycolytic and mitochondrial oxidative pathways. It is also well documented that the cytosolic reduced equivalents derived from glycolysis are transferred to the mitochondrial respiratory chain by two NADH shuttles, i.e. the glycerol phosphate and the malate-aspartate shuttle. Mitochondrial FAD-linked glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase is the key enzyme of the glycerol phosphate shuttle. The activity of this enzyme is especially high in the pancreatic islets of rodents (MacDonald, 1981) and man (MacDonald et al., 1983) and has been shown to decrease in the islets of rodent models of type 2 diabetes, such as GK rats (Östenson et al., 1993), n0-STZ rats (Giroix et al., 1991), db/db mice (Sener et al., 1993), fa/fa rats (Rasschaert et al., 1994), and also in human diabetic islets (Fernandez-Alvarez et al., 1994). These data support the hypothesis that decreased mGDH activity may be responsible, at least in part, for the impaired insulin secretion in type 2 diabetes. Thus, we explored whether in STZ-NA-diabetic rats an alteration in mGDH activity and/or protein levels would possibly interfere with islet glucose metabolism.

Actually, in the islets of diabetic rats, the mGDH enzyme activity and mGDH protein levels were found reduced to 40 and 23%, respectively, of the normal values. The decrease remains significant if expressed as a function of islet DNA content. In other diabetic models (n0-STZ or GK rats), mGDH activity was reported to be reduced to a similar extent as in our model (Giroix et al., 1992; Östenson et al., 1993), whereas mGDH protein was found much more reduced (Fabregat et al., 1996). It is worthwhile to mention that in STZ-NA diabetic rats preliminary data showed that

islet glucokinase protein levels were unchanged, whereas GLUT-2 levels were moderately decreased (data not shown), in substantial agreement with other rodent models (Liang et al., 1994).

Our data regarding glucose utilization, combined with the results of the GA-stimulated insulin secretion, indicate that the rate of glycolysis in the islets of diabetic rats does not appear grossly impaired. Furthermore, the glucose oxidative rate was similar between control and diabetic islets, suggesting that the reduced mGDH activity in the latter does not affect total glucose oxidation, in agreement with recent observations in mGDH-deficient transgenic mice (Eto et al., 1999).

On the other hand, we should remind that also the malate-aspartate shuttle is operative in β cells and might effectively transfer reducing equivalents into mitochondria. Therefore, we used AOA, an inhibitor of aspartate aminotransferase, to explore whether the blockade of the malate-aspartate shuttle would functionally impair diabetic islets more than control islets. This was indeed the case, since in diabetic islets, differently from control islets, 5 mM AOA induced a remarkable inhibition of insulin secretion in response to 10 mM D-glyceraldehyde, which is metabolized by glycolysis and generates NADH in the cytosol. Insulin secretion stimulated by either 10 mM methyl pyruvate or α-KIC, which are only metabolized in mitochondria (Prentki, 1996), was not affected by AOA in diabetic islets (data not shown). These findings are again in agreement with the recent data obtained in islets isolated from mGDH knockout mice (Eto et al., 1999).

However, the islets isolated from our diabetic rats retained a good responsiveness to glucose stimulation in the presence of AOA, since only a slight decrease in insulin release was observed. The maintenance of the secretory response to glucose could be dependent on the fact that in our animals mGDH activity is reduced, but not abolished. Actually, islets of heterozygote mGDH+/− transgenic mice were normally responsive to glucose, but were not challenged with glyceraldehyde (Eto et al., 1999). We may also speculate that in STZ-NA-treated rats, a relative impairment in the coupling of glycolytic metabolites with activation of mitochondrial energy could trigger compensatory mechanisms, perhaps based on activation of lipid and phospholipid biosynthetic pathway (Newgard and McGarry, 1995) or generation of a putative mitochondrial factor enhancing exocytosis (Maechler et al., 1997), which has been recently supposed to be glutamate (Maechler and Wollheim, 1999).

In conclusion, in our experimental model of type 2 diabetes, the pathophysiological alterations could be mainly attributed to a quantitative reduction of β cells. The residual β cells appear to remain well differentiated and maintain most of their metabolic functions. However, these β cells carry a number of abnormalities, such

as reduced amount and activity of mGDH enzyme, which apparently do not result in any major impairment in metabolic function 'in vitro', but could limit secretory response in challenging situations and play a role in the alteration of glucose metabolism in vivo.

## Acknowledgements

Part of this work has been performed by M. Novelli in Barcelona as a recipient of the EASD-Bayer fellowship for young scientist.

## References

Broca, C., Gross, R., Petit, P., Sauvaire, Y., Manteghetti, M., Tournier, M., Masiello, P., Gomis, R., Ribes, G., 1999. 4-Hydroxyisoleucine: experimental evidence of its insulinotropic and antidiabetic properties. Am. J. Physiol. 277, E617–E623.

Carpinelli, A.R., Sener, A., Herchuelz, A., Malaisse, W.J., 1980. Stimulus-secretion coupling of glucose-induced insulin release. Effect of intracellular acidification upon calcium efflux from islet cells. Metabolism 29, 540–545.

Clark, A., Wells, C.A., Buley, I.D., Cruickshank, J.K., Vanhegan, R.I., Mathews, D.R., Cooper, G.J., Holman, R.R., Turner, R.C., 1988. Islet amyloid, increased A-cells, reduced B-cells and exocrine fibrosis: quantitative changes the pancreas in type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Research 9, 151–158.

Dachicourt, N., Serradas, P., Giroix, M.H., Gangnerau, M.N., Portha, B., 1996. Decreased glucose-induced cAMP and insulin release in islets of diabetic rats: reversal by IBMX, glucagon, GIP. Am. J. Physiol. 271, E725–E732.

Eto, K., Tsubamoto, Y., Terauchi, Y., Sugiyama, T., Kishimoto, T., Takahashi, N., Yamauchi, N., Kubota, N., Murayama, S., Aizawa, T., Akanuma, Y., Aizawa, S., Kasai, H., Yazaki, Y., Kadowaki, T., 1999. Role of NADH shuttle system in glucose-induced activation of mitochondrial metabolism and insulin secretion. Science 283, 981–985.

Fabregat, M.E., Novials, A., Giroix, M.H., Sener, A., Gomis, R., Malaisse, W.J., 1996. Pancreatic islet mitochondrial glycerophosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in two animal models of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 220, 1020–1023.

Fernandez-Alvarez, J., Coget, I., Rasschaert, J., Sener, A., Gomis, R., Malaisse, W.J., 1994. Enzymatic, metabolic and secretory patterns in human islets of Type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetic patients. Diabetologia 37, 177–181.

Giroix, M.H., Baetens, D., Rasschaert, J., Leclercq-Meyer, V., Sener, A., Portha, B., Malaisse, W.J., 1992. Enzymic and metabolic anomalies in islets of diabetic rat: relationship to B-cell mass. Endocrinology 130, 2634–2640.

Giroix, M.H., Rasschaert, J., Bailbe, D., LeClercq-Meyer, V., Sener, A., Portha, B., Malaisse, W.J., 1991. Impairment of glycerol phosphate shuttle in islets from rats with diabetes induced by neonatal streptozotocin. Diabetes 40, 227–232.

Giroix, M.H., Vesco, L., Portha, B., 1993. Functional and metabolic perturbations in isolated pancreatic islets from the GK rat, a genetic model of non-insulin-dependent diabetes. Endocrinology 132, 815–822.

Herbert, V., Lau, K.S., Gottlieb, C.W., Bleicher, S.J., 1965. Coated charcoal immunoassay of insulin. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 25, 1375–1384.

Labarca, C., Paigen, K., 1980. A simple, rapid and sensitive DNA assay procedure. Anal. Biochem. 102, 344–352.

Liang, Y., Bonner-Weir, S., Wu, Y.J., Berdanier, C.D., Berner, D.K., Efrat, S., Matschinsky, F.M., 1994. In situ glucose uptake and glucokinase activity of pancreatic islets in diabetic and obese rodents. J. Clin. Invest. 93, 2473–2481.

MacDonald, M.J., 1981. High content of mitochondrial glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase in pancreatic islets and its inhibition by diazoxide. J. Biol. Chem. 256, 8287–8290.

MacDonald, M.J., Warner, T.F., Penet, J.R., 1983. Increased mitochondrial glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase activity in insulinomas of two hypoglycaemic infants. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 57, 662–664.

Maechler, P., Kennedy, E.D., Pozzan, T., Wollheim, C.B., 1997. Mitochondrial activation directly triggers the exocytosis of insulin in permeabilized pancreatic β-cells. EMBO J. 16, 3833–3841.

Maechler, P., Wollheim, C.B., 1999. Mitochondrial glutamate acts as a messenger in glucose-induced insulin exocytosis. Nature 402, 685–689.

Malaisse, W.J., Sener, A., 1988. Hexose metabolism in pancreatic islets. Feedback control of D-glucose oxidation by functional events. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 971, 246–254.

Malaisse-Lagae, F., Malaisse, W.J., 1984. Insulin release by pancreatic islets. In: Larner, J., Pohl, S.L. (Eds.), Methods in Diabetes Research, vol. 1. Wiley, New York, pp. 147–152.

Masiello, P., Broca, C., Gross, R., Roye, M., Manteghetti, M., Hillaire-Buys, D., Novelli, M., Ribes, G., 1998. Experimental NIDDM. Development of a new model in adult rats administered streptozotocin and nicotinamide. Diabetes 47, 224–229.

Movassat, J., Saulnier, C., Serradas, P., Portha, B., 1997. Impaired development of pancreatic beta-cell mass is a primary event during the progression to diabetes in the GK rat. Diabetologia 40, 916–925.

Newgard, C.B., McGarry, J.D., 1995. Metabolic coupling factors in pancreatic B-cell signal transduction. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 64, 689–719.

Novials, A., Fabregat, M.E., Benito, C., Fernandez-Alvarez, J., Galart, T., Malaisse, W.J., 1996. Immunodetection of mitochondrial glycerophosphate dehydrogenase (mGDH) by a polyclonal antibody raised against a recombinant mGDH fragment product.

Biochem. Mol. Med. 59, 187–191.

Östenson, C.G., Abdel-Halim, S.M., Rasschaert, J., Malaisse-Lagae, F., Meuris, S., Sener, A., Efendic, S., Malaisse, W.J., 1993. Deficient activity of FAD-linked glycerophosphate dehydrogenase in islets of GK rats. Diabetologia 36, 722–726.

Portha, B., Blondel, O., Serradas, P., Mc Evory, R., Giroix, M.H., Kergoat, M., Bailbe, D., 1989. The rat models of non-insulin dependent diabetes induced by neonatal streptozotocin. Diabetes Metab. 15, 61–75.

Prentki, M., 1996. New insights into pancreatic β-cell metabolic signaling in insulin secretion. Eur. J. Endocrinol. 134, 272–286.

Rasschaert, J., Eizirik, D.L., Malaisse, W.J., 1992. Long term in vitro effects of streptozotocin, interleukin-1, and high glucose concentration on the activity of mitochondrial dehydrogenases and the secretion of insulin in pancreatic islets. Endocrinology 130, 3522–3528.

Rasschaert, J., Ling, Z., Malaisse, W.J., 1993a. Effect of streptozotocin and nicotinamide upon FAD-glycerophosphate dehydrogenase activity and insulin release in purified pancreatic B-cells. Mol. Cell Biochem. 120, 135–140.

Rasschaert, J., Malaisse, W.J., 1993b. Streptozotocin-induced FAD-glycerophosphate dehydrogenase suppression in pancreatic islets. Relationship with the severity and duration of hyperglycaemia and resistance to insulin or riboflavin treatment. Acta Diabetol. 30, 6–10.

Rasschaert, J., Malaisse-Lagae, F., Malaisse, W.J., 1991. Pancreas islet FAD-glycerophosphate dehydrogenase. Biochem. J. 278, 335–340.

Rasschaert, J., Malaisse-Lagae, F., Sener, A., Leclercq-Meyer, V., Herberg, L., Malaisse, W.J., 1994. Impaired FAD-glycerophosphate dehydrogenase activity in islet and liver homogenates of fa/fa rats. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 135, 137–141.

Sener, A., Herberg, L., Malaisse, W.J., 1993. FAD-linked glycerophosphate dehydrogenase deficiency in pancreatic islets of mice with hereditary diabetes. FEBS Lett. 316, 224–227.

Shima, A., Shi, K., Sano, T., Iwami, T., Mizuno, A., Noma, Y., 1993. Is exercise training effective in preventing diabetes mellitus in the Otsuka-Long-Evans-Tokushima-Fatty rat, a model of spontaneous non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus? Metabolism 42, 971–977.
