
# RAP1 SIGNALLING: ADHERING TO NEW MODELS

**Johannes L. Bos, Johan de Rooij and Kris A. Reedquist**

Ras-like GTPases are ubiquitously expressed, evolutionarily conserved molecular switches that couple extracellular signals to various cellular responses. Rap1, the closest relative of Ras, has attracted much attention because of the possibility that it regulates Ras-mediated signalling. Rap1 is activated by extracellular signals through several regulatory proteins, and it might function in diverse processes, ranging from modulation of growth and differentiation to secretion, integrin-mediated cell adhesion and morphogenesis.

The Ras superfamily is a large group of proteins that cycle between GDP- and GTP-bound forms, and interact with proteins depending on the nucleotide that is bound. Members of the family — at least 13 at present (FIG. 1) — are characterized by extensive similarities in their effector domains, and one of their main functions is to assemble or activate proteins at the cytoplasmic surface of membranes. The most notable member of the family is Ras, with one of the three *ras* genes mutated in 15% of all human tumours. But attention has also recently focused on its closest relative, *Rap1*.

The story began with a landmark paper in 1989. Noda and co-workers<sup>1</sup> described a screen for proteins that can suppress the transformed phenotype of fibroblasts oncogenically transformed by one of the mutated Ras genes, *K-ras*. One of the complementary DNAs that induced reversion of this phenotype encoded a protein called *Krev-1*, which turned out to be identical to Rap1. At that time, the authors raised the possibility that Krev-1 might either antagonize the activity of Ras by competing for a common target (or regulatory protein) or function independently of Ras and mediate growth-inhibitory signals.

The proposal that Krev-1 might function as an antagonist of Ras signalling provided both the impetus and the context for the analysis of Rap1 over much of the next ten years, as the original paper both showed it to be a suppressor of oncogenic transformation and indicated a mechanism by which it might act. Several papers then provided evidence for a model in which Rap1 antagonizes Ras signalling, supporting the idea that Rap1 might trap one of the effectors of Ras — in particular the serine/threonine kinase *Raf* — in an inactive complex<sup>2</sup>. However, recent analysis has shown that there is much more to learn about the function of Rap1.

### Regulating the switch

Rap1 has two isoforms, *Rap1a* and *Rap1b*, that differ in only a few amino acids. Rap1 binds either GDP or GTP, and the change between the two states represents a molecular switch — the GTP-bound form is 'on' and the GDP-bound form is 'off'. The GDP–GTP cycle is regulated by guanine nucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs), which facilitate release of the bound nucleotide and allow the more abundant GTP to rebind. GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) induce the hydrolysis of the bound GTP to complete the cycle. The crystal structures of the GDP- and GTP-bound forms of Ras or Rap1 show that the conformation of two regions — the switch 1 and switch 2 regions — differs. These regions, which are similar in Ras and Rap1 (FIG. 1), allow effector proteins to discriminate between the GDP- and the GTP-bound forms, and so represent the 'business end' of small guanine-nucleotide-binding (G) proteins.

One of the breakthroughs in Rap1 research was the development of an assay to monitor the activation of endogenous Rap1 (REF. 3). Using this assay, endogenous Rap1 was found to be activated through stimulation of various transmembrane receptors, including receptor tyrosine kinases, heterotrimeric G-protein-coupled receptors, cytokine receptors and cell-adhesion molecules (FIG. 2). Pharmacological studies revealed that

**Department of Physiological Chemistry and Centre for Biomedical Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.**

Correspondence to J.L.B.  
e-mail: j.l.bos@med.uu.nl

the catalytic region *in vitro*. Epac1 also contains a DEP domain that is responsible for membrane localization.

Another family member is Epac2, which contains an additional amino-terminal cAMP-binding site with a much lower affinity^{15,16}. The third member is Repac (related to Epac; GFR, MR-GEF), which contains only a catalytic region^{15,17,18}, indicating either that it might be constitutively active or that its regulatory sequence might be on a separate, as-yet-unidentified subunit. Repac can also interact with Ras-like small GTPases through its Ras-binding domain (RBD), and co-expression with a constitutively active form of M-ras (where M stands for muscle) — a poorly characterized Ras homologue — results in partial inactivation of Repac^{18}. The RBD region of Repac shares homology with Epac1 and Epac2, so these GEFs might also be regulated by Ras-like GTPases.

**CD-GEFs.** Members of the CD-GEF (CalDAG-GEF, where Cal stands for Ca²⁺) family have putative Ca²⁺- and DAG-binding sites, so may be regulated by one or both molecules. They have different GTPase specificities: CD-GEFI activates Rap1 and R-ras; CD-GEFII or RasGRP activates Ras and R-ras; and CD-GEFIII activates Ras, Rap1, Rap2 and R-ras^{19–21}. CD-GEFII and III both translocate to membranes on addition of the DAG mimetic 12,13-tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate (TPA), but are insensitive to increased levels of Ca²⁺. By contrast, CD-GEFI does not translocate in response to TPA, but is regulated allosterically by Ca²⁺ *in vitro* (J. de R., unpublished observations). This might indicate that CD-GEFI is the main mediator of Rap1 activation by Ca²⁺, and CD-GEFIII of Rap1 activation by DAG.

**PDZ-GEFs.** The PDZ-GEFs (Ras/Rap1a-associating GEF, nRap-GEP) contain a PDZ DOMAIN, and a domain that, although related to the cAMP-binding domain of Epac, has a very low affinity for cAMP^{22–24} (J. de R., unpublished observations). PDZ-GEF1 seems to be regulated in a similar way to Epacs; that is, negative regulation of the catalytic activity by the (related) cAMP-binding domain^{22}. Like Repac, PDZ-GEF1 also contains a putative RBD and it can bind to GTP-bound Rap1 (REF. 24). Also, several other proteins have been found to interact with PDZ-GEF1, including the PDZ-domain-containing S-SCAM adaptor proteins^{23,25}.

**Other GEFs.** Nsp2 (AND-34/BCAR-3), a protein with a GEF domain and an amino-terminal SH2 domain, when overexpressed, was found to regulate the small GTPase Ras-like protein (Ral) and, to a lesser extent, Rap1 and R-ras^{26}. However, *in vitro* Nsp2 did not activate Rap1 (J. de R., unpublished observations), so it is not clear whether this protein is a genuine Rap1 GEF.

**'Off' switches**

**Rap1GAP.** Rap1 has a very low intrinsic GTPase activity because, unlike all other small GTPases, it does not contain a conserved glutamine residue at position 61. Therefore, GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) are important in the GDP–GTP cycle because they induce

Figure 1 | **Ras-like small GTPases.** Comparison of the switch 1 and switch 2 regions of small GTPases most similar to Ras and Rap1. These two regions differ in conformation between the GDP- and GTP-bound forms. Arrows indicate the amino-acid residues of Ras that interact with one of its effectors, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase γ (PI3Kγ), as determined by X-ray crystallography^{99}. The asterisk indicates residue 61 which, in Rap1 family members, is characteristically not a glutamine (Q). The yeast orthologue of Rap1, Bud1, is shown in green. Dashes indicate identity with Rap1.

common second messengers such as cyclic AMP, Ca²⁺ and diacylglycerol (DAG) are involved in transducing the extracellular signal to Rap1 (REFS 3–6). For certain stimuli, such as nerve growth factor (NGF), internalization of the cognate receptor is required for Rap1 activation^{7}. This is compatible with the localization of Rap1, predominantly at internal membranes (BOX 1).

This seeming plethora of signals and pathways that funnel into Rap1 is also reflected by a remarkable variety of evolutionarily conserved GEFs and GAPs that regulate Rap1 (FIG.3)

**'On' switches**

**C3G.** The first Rap GEF to be identified, C3G (Crk SH3-domain-binding guanine-nucleotide-releasing factor, where SH3 stands for Src homology region 3 domain), mediates activation of Rap1 induced by receptor tyrosine kinases and, presumably, non-receptor tyrosine kinases^{8}. C3G contains a catalytic region that is responsible for the exchange reaction and several proline-rich sequences that associate with the first SH3 domain of Crk adaptor proteins. Binding of the Crk-C3G complex to phosphoryrosine-containing proteins probably facilitates the phosphorylation of Tyr504 on C3G^{9}, and if the formation of this complex is inhibited, receptor-tyrosine-kinase-induced Rap1 activation is also blocked^{10}. C3G also activates R-ras^{11} (related to Ras), and some of the biological effects induced by Crk-C3G might be mediated by this GTPase^{12}.

**Epacs.** The finding that Rap1 is activated through cAMP indicated the possible involvement of protein kinase A (PKA), a target for cAMP. Surprisingly, however, in several cell types PKA did not seem to be required, and the result was the identification of Epac1 (exchange protein directly activated by cAMP) or cAMP GEFI. Epac1 is activated both *in vitro* and *in vivo* by direct binding of cAMP^{13,14}. Its cAMP-binding domain is an auto-inhibitory region that, as a separate domain, can inhibit

DEP DOMAIN  
(Dishevelled, Egl-10 and Pleckstrin). Domain of unknown function that is present in signalling proteins.

RBD  
Ras association domain (RA) or Raf-like Ras-binding domain (RBD).

PDZ DOMAIN  
(PSD-95,Dlg and ZO-1/2). Protein-protein interaction domain that binds particularly to carboxy-terminal polypeptides.

SH2 DOMAIN  
(Src homology domain 2). Domain that interacts with phosphoryrosine-containing polypeptides.

REVIEW

Other RapGAPs. Spa1 family members of Rap1GAPs are characterized by the presence of a PDZ domain³¹. One of the members of this family, E6TP1, was identified as a binding partner and target for degradation by the human papillomavirus E6 oncoprotein³². Tuberin, a protein with no obvious protein domains except a GAP domain, is the product of a familial tuberous sclerosis gene which, when deleted, causes benign tumours. This protein has in vitro Rap1GAP activity³³, but it has also been implicated as a GAP for Rab5 (REF. 34), so its significance as a Rap1GAP remains to be established. Finally, GAPIP4BP, which binds the second messenger inositol-1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate, has been implicated as a Rap1GAP, as well as being a RasGAP³⁵. However, others did not find any activity of the bovine homologue of GAPIP4BP on Rap1 (REF. 36).

Why do so many different signals and mechanisms regulate Rap1? Does this imply that Rap1 directs many extracellular signals into a single downstream biological response, or is Rap1 a 'conserved' mediator in several cellular responses and consequently different effectors? An answer to these questions might be given by the various putative effectors for Rap1, including the Ras effectors Raf1, B-raf and RalGDS.

Rap1 effectors

Control of the ERK pathway. Rap1 binds to the serine/threonine kinase Raf1 in vitro, through an interaction with both the RBD and the adjacent cysteine-rich region of Rap1 (REFS 37, 38) and, in addition, the two proteins co-immunoprecipitate³⁹–⁴¹. But is it a real function of Rap1 to modulate Ras/extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) signalling (FIG. 2) by trapping Raf1 in an inactive complex? Many reports indeed show that mutants of Rap1 can inhibit the ERK pathway. For instance, lysophosphatidic acid (LPA)- and epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced activation of ERK was inhibited by an activating mutant of Rap1 (REF. 42), and interleukin-1-induced activation of Rap1 seems to blunt Ras-mediated activation of ERK signalling⁴³. Also, in ANERGIC T CELLS, constitutively active Rap1 inhibits Ras-ERK-mediated induction of interleukin-2 expression⁴⁰, whereas in normal T cells overexpression of a Rap GAP results in increased ERK activation²⁸,⁴¹.

However, in none of these studies has activation of endogenous Rap1 by an extracellular stimulus been shown to result in the inactivation of the Raf1 kinase activity. In fibroblasts, pre-activation of endogenous Rap1 by external stimuli fails to antagonize subsequent Ras-dependent activation of ERKs, indicating that Rap1 activation does not always result in the inactivation (or activation) of ERK⁶. This implies that the inhibition of Raf1-ERK signalling by Rap1 activation is cell-context-dependent. One attractive candidate stimulus for Rap1-induced Raf inactivation is cAMP. In certain cells, cAMP activates Rap1 and inhibits Ras-mediated activation of ERK. However, experimental evidence for this model is still lacking⁶. In addition, cAMP might inhibit Raf activation through direct phosphorylation of Raf1 by PKA⁴⁴,⁴⁵, although this result is also still controversial⁴⁶. So, despite correlative evidence, the connection

Figure 2 | The Rap1 signalling network. Rap1 is activated by various extracellular stimuli, mediated by, among others, second messengers (blue). Various guanine nucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs; blue) and GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs; purple) are involved in the regulation of Rap1, whereas several proteins have been implicated as downstream effectors of Rap1 (green). (A-cyclase, adenyl cyclase; C3G, Crk SH3-domain-binding guanine-nucleotide-releasing factor; cAMP, cyclic AMP; Crk, SH2- and SH3-domain-containing adaptor protein; DAG, diacylglycerol; GEF, guanine nucleotide-exchange factor; Gq, Gs, Gi, Gz, Go, α subunits of various heterotrimeric G proteins; PtdIns(4,5)P₂, phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate; PLC, phospholipase C; Ins(1,4,5)P₃, inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate; PKA, protein kinase A; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; R, receptor; RTK, receptor tyrosine kinase; S-SCAM, synaptic scaffolding molecule.)

ANERGIC T CELLS  
T cells that are proliferatively unresponsive to antigenic restimulus.

FLUORESCENCE-RESONANCE ENERGY TRANSFER  
Method to identify close neighbourhood of two proteins, each labelled with a different fluorescent group.

PAROTID GLAND  
Salivary gland near the ear.

Box 1 | Subcellular localization of Rap1  

Rap1 is bound to the membrane through a geranylgeranyl group, which is added post-translationally to the processed Rap1 carboxyl terminus. Rap1 is found predominantly at intracellular membranes in the perinuclear region and at endocytic and exocytic vesicles, but also at the plasma membrane⁸¹. Matsuda and co-workers report⁷⁹ an elegant FLUORESCENCE-RESONANCE ENERGY TRANSFER procedure to measure Rap1 activation in single cells, in real time, and find that epidermal-growth-factor-induced activation of Rap1 also occurs mainly in the perinuclear region.

In certain cell types, such as neutrophils and PAROTID GLAND cells, Rap1 is associated with specialized secretory granules. Upon secretion, Rap1 redistributes to the plasma membrane⁸²–⁸⁴. This might indicate that Rap1 is involved in either signalling processes that control the formation of these granules or the regulation of exocytosis.

Human
| C3G | P | Y504 | P | REM | GEF | 1077 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Epac1 | cAMP | DEP | cAMP | REM | RBD | GEF | 881 |
| Epac2 | 1011 |
| Repac | 580 |
| CD-GEFI | REM | GEF | P EFC1 | 609 |
| CD-GEFII (RasGRP) | 797 |
| CD-GEFIII | 689 |
| PDZ-GEF1 | RCBD | REM | PDZ | RBD | GEF | P | 1499 |
| PDZ-GEF2 | 1601 |
| Rap1GAP | GAP | 663 |
| Spa1 | GAP | PDZ | 1041 |
| E6TP1 | 1783 |

Caenorhabditis elegans
| Y34b4 | T20g5.5 | F25b3.3 | Cel-RA-GEF25 | F53a10 | T27f2 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| DC3G93 | AE003789 | AE003613 | DRapGAP194 | AE003758 |

The cAMP-mediated activation of Rap1 and B-raf is not the only mechanism by which cAMP activates the ERK pathway (FIG. 4). For instance, cAMP-induced ERK activation is mediated by Ras rather than by Rap1 in melanocytes<sup>56</sup>, and PKA-mediated phosphorylation of a negative regulatory phosphatase of ERK is required for agonist-induced activation of ERK in T cells<sup>57</sup>. To add to the complexity, PKA phosphorylates B-raf directly, depending on the relative expression levels of 14-3-3 PROTEINS. This phosphorylation might be inhibitory rather than activating<sup>58</sup>. How can we account for the apparent discrepancies between PKA-dependent activation of B-raf and PKA-independent activation of Rap1 and the observation that cAMP-induced Rap1 activation correlates with B-raf-mediated ERK activation? One explanation might be that Rap1 is required, but not sufficient, and that direct phosphorylation by PKA of another factor, which might be B-raf, is essential to activate the complex. Alternatively, the direct phosphorylation by PKA of Rap1 at the carboxyl terminus<sup>59</sup> might also be involved in this process<sup>48</sup>. Moreover, Rap1GAP is phosphorylated by PKA, but the physiological relevance of this phosphorylation is unclear<sup>60</sup>.

**Other putative effectors of Rap1.** The Ras-related small GTPase Ral regulates several cellular processes including cellular transformation, and regulation of **phospholipase D** and transcription factors<sup>2</sup>. Ral-specific GEFs, including RalGDS, **Rlf** and **Rgl**, contain RBDs that bind to activated Ras and Rap1 *in vitro*. Overexpression studies showed that Rap1 can activate Ral<sup>6</sup> and, *in vitro*, Rap1 can stimulate RalGDS-dependent exchange on Ral<sup>61</sup>. Moreover, in platelets, activation of Rap1 — but not Ras — correlated with the activation of Ral. However, direct regulation of RalGEFs by Rap1 has not been established. For instance, RalGDS is readily detectable in T cells and fibroblasts, but selective activation of Rap1 in the absence of Ras activation fails to activate Ral<sup>6,62</sup>.

Another putative Rap1 effector is **AF-6**, which contains PDZ domains, binds actin filaments and is found in ADHERENS JUNCTIONS. AF-6 contains two amino-terminal RBDs, the most amino terminal of which binds with high affinity to activated Ras and Rap1 (REF. 63). AF-6 binds to several other proteins, including **zonula occludens 1-1**, **profilin** and the Fam-deubiquitylating enzyme, indicating that AF-6 might mediate the formation or stability of cellular adherens junctions<sup>64-66</sup>. Overexpression of active Ras, but not Rap1, disrupts AF-6 localization, suggesting that Ras rather than Rap1 might be a genuine regulator of AF-6 (REF. 67).

Finally, activated Rap1 was found to interact directly with other proteins, including the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) catalytic subunit p110, RasGAP, Nore1 (novel Ras effector) and Krit (Krev interaction trapped)<sup>2</sup>. The biological relevance of these interactions is still largely unclear. Recently, however, Rap1 was implicated in cAMP-induced, PI3K-mediated activation of protein kinase B (**PKB/Akt**)<sup>54</sup> in thyroid cells, indicating that Rap1 might indeed be able to activate PI3K. Intriguingly, the activation of Rap1 is independent of

Figure 3 | Regulatory proteins of Rap1. Schematic representation of domain structure of guanine nucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs) and GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) of Rap1. CD-GEFII is indicated in dark blue, as this GEF is specific for Ras. Light blue background indicates that the activity for Rap1 still needs to be tested. For almost all protein subfamilies, a single orthologue has been found in *Caenorhabditis elegans* and *Drosophila melanogaster*. Indicated are either the name or the genomic clone of the orthologue in *C. elegans* and *Drosophila*. (C1, protein kinase C conserved region 1 domain, a cysteine-rich domain that may bind diacylglycerol; EF, domain that binds Ca<sup>2+</sup>; P, proline-rich sequence; Y504, tyrosine phosphorylation site; REM, domain present in most GEFs for Ras-like proteins, the precise function of which is unclear; RCBD, domain related to a cAMP-binding domain. Other domains are indicated in the text.)

between the activation of endogenous Rap1, the direct inactivation of Raf1, and the subsequent inhibition of Ras-mediated ERK activation, is not yet firmly established. Perhaps (some of) the observed inhibitory effects of Rap1 on ERK signalling are indirect and/or independent of Raf1.

In some cell types, Rap1 is implicated in activation — rather than inhibition — of the ERK pathway. The model is that Rap1 binds to and activates the Raf family member B-raf. The evidence for this interaction includes the direct binding of Rap1 to, and activation of, B-raf *in vitro*<sup>47</sup>, and the fact that inhibitors of Rap1, such as Rap1GAP and Rap1N17, abolish the activation of the B-raf-ERK pathway<sup>48,49</sup>. In addition, B-raf was found to precipitate together with Rap1, although the anti-Rap1 antibody (Rap1<sup>121-136</sup>) used to precipitate Rap1 is questionable, and might not precipitate native Rap1 protein<sup>50</sup>. The reason for the different effect of Rap1 on B-raf (activating) and Raf1 (inactivating) resides in the interaction of Rap1 with the cysteine-rich region of the two kinases, as swapping the two domains reverses the effect of Rap1 on the two proteins<sup>38</sup>.

The coupling of Rap1 to B-raf is found in a subset of B-raf-expressing cells — in particular, neuronal cells — and seems to be restricted to Rap1 activated by cAMP in a PKA-dependent manner<sup>6,48,51,52</sup>. This PKA-dependent activation of Rap1 (and, subsequently, ERK) might occur through elevated levels of intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> (REF. 53). In other cell types, Rap1 is activated in a PKA-independent mechanism through Epac<sup>13,54,55</sup>. In at least some of these cells, cAMP does not induce ERK activity<sup>6</sup>.

14-3-3 PROTEINS
Proteins that bind to two phosphoserine/threonine-containing polypeptides to form crosslinks.
ADHERENS JUNCTIONS
Cadherin-dependent cell-cell contacts.

Box 2 | Lessons from lower eukaryotes

**Yeast.** In the budding yeast *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*, Bud1 (Rsr1) is the most likely orthologue of Rap1 — it lacks a glutamine at position 61, and Rap1 can partially complement the *bud1* defect<sup>85</sup>. Bud1 recruits polarity-establishment factors — including the small GTPase Cdc42, Cdc24 (a GEF for Cdc42) and the scaffold protein Bem1 — to assemble the actin cytoskeleton for bud formation<sup>86</sup> (FIG. 5). *Bud5* (a GEF for Bud1) and *Bud2* (a GAP for Bud1) are also involved in this process and might recognize a positional landmark to select the bud site<sup>87</sup> (for a review, see REF. 88). The Rap1 orthologue CaRSR1 in *Candida albicans* is also involved in bud-site selection in the yeast stage. In addition, disruption of CaRSR1 affects GERM-TUBE formation and cell elongation during hyphae formation, indicating that CaRSR1 controls cell morphogenesis<sup>89</sup>.

**Dictyostelium discoideum.** Rap1 is involved in regulating cortical actin-based morphological changes, as revealed by membrane ruffling and the formation of lamellipodia. It also positively regulates phagocytosis of bacteria and negatively regulates MACROPINOCYTOSIS, and it has been proposed to regulate endocytic processes through control of the actin cytoskeleton<sup>94,90</sup>. No evidence, however, has been found for a role of Rap1 in exocytosis.

**Drosophila melanogaster.** The Roughened mutation is a gain-of-function mutation in Rap1. The dominant F157L mutation disrupts eye development. In particular, the ommatidia of the adult eye often lack one of the photoreceptor cells, usually the R7 cell<sup>91</sup>. Development of the R7 cell is regulated by the Ras–Raf–ERK pathway, but the Roughened mutation does not interfere directly with Ras proximal signalling. This indicates that the apparent effect of Rap1 on Ras signalling is indirect<sup>92</sup>. Expression of membrane-targeted Drosophila GEF C3G in the eye also results in a rough-eye phenotype that can be rescued not only by reducing the gene dose for Rap1, but also by reducing the dose for genes in the Ras–ERK pathway. These results indicate either that Rap1 is upstream from the Ras–ERK pathway, or that it acts in parallel to this pathway<sup>93</sup>.

Loss-of-function mutations in Rap1 are lethal at the larval stage, and embryos that lack maternally supplied Rap1 show abnormalities, including defects in closure of the ventral furrow and head involution. The migration of germline cells (pole cells) and mesodermal cells is perturbed<sup>92</sup>, indicating a possible function for Rap1 in regulating cell migration and morphogenesis. Surprisingly, however, deletion of Rap1GAP has no obvious phenotype<sup>94</sup>.

---

PKA, whereas the activation of Akt/PKB is inhibited by inhibitors of PKA. Phosphorylation of Rap1 at a serine in the carboxyl terminus by Rap1 seems to be a key step in this activation.

**Cellular processes involving Rap1**

In lower eukaryotes, Rap1 is implicated in processes that involve either the polarity of cells or the proper functioning of cells, rather than processes that are related to cell proliferation and differentiation (BOX 2). In mammalian cells, Rap1 has also been implicated in various cellular processes (BOX 3).

**Integrin-mediated cell adhesion.** Several arguments have been put forward to show that Rap1 is crucial for control of integrin-mediated cell adhesion. First, transient overexpression of activated Rap1 stimulates strong αLβ2-dependent adhesion in human T-cell and mouse pre-B cell leukaemia lines<sup>62,67</sup>. Second, T-cell receptor (TCR)-induced adhesion is blocked by inactive Rap1N17, and CD31-induced adhesion is inhibited by RapN17, RapGAP and RBD. Third, although inhibitory Ras also blocks TCR- and CD31-induced adhesion, the failure of CD31 to induce activation of Ras points to Rap1 signalling as a crucial signal. And last, Rap1 and H-ras stimulate adhesion by distinct mechanisms — whereas H-ras-induced adhesion requires an intact actin cytoskeleton and is sensitive to inhibitors of mitogen-activated protein kinase, PI3K and phospholipase C function, none of these is required for Rap1-induced adhesion<sup>67-69</sup> (K.A.R., unpublished observations).

Rap1 is also crucial in CD31- and cytokine-induced haematopoietic cell adhesion that uses α1 integrins (VLA4 and VLA5)<sup>62,70</sup>. But regulation of cell adhesion by Rap1 is probably not limited to haematopoietic cells: overexpression of the Rap GAP signal-induced proliferation-associated gene 1 (Spa-1) blocked the attachment of HeLa cells to fibronectin-coated plates<sup>71</sup>; and dominant-negative C3G blocked hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-induced activation of Rap1 and reattachment of 293 cells to tissue-culture dishes<sup>10</sup>.

These studies predict that Rap1 might regulate a multitude of integrin-dependent processes such as morphogenesis, haematopoiesis, leukocyte migration and tumour invasion. Indeed, Rap1 is clearly required in agonist-induced, integrin-dependent phagocytosis of OPSONIZED PARTICLES in mouse macrophages<sup>72,73</sup>. Rap1 function is also required in phagocytosis in *Dictyostelium discoideum*<sup>74</sup>. Perturbation of Rap1 activation by transfected wild-type and inhibitory Crk and C3G proteins correlates with alterations in cellular migratory responses to HGF and stromal-cell-derived factor 1 (SDF-1; REFS 10,75).

The observation that Rap1 mediates the activation of integrins by stimulation of cell surface receptors, such as CD31 and the TCR, shows that Rap1 functions in ‘inside-out’ signalling to integrins. But how does Rap1 regulate integrin function? The answer awaits the identification of the relevant Rap1 effector. Interestingly, inhibition of Rap1 function seems to confer a physical restraint on integrins, as direct activation of lymphocyte-function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1) by the binding of Mn<sup>2+</sup> to extracellular integrin-binding sites is also inhibited by Rap1-inhibitory proteins<sup>62</sup>. So Rap1 activation might not signal directly to integrins, but it might induce a more general change in cellular architecture that is reflected in integrin function.

Rap1 is also reported to be involved in ‘outside-in’ signalling of integrins, although this is controversial. In platelets, activation of the major integrin αIIbβ3 seems to result in the activation of Rap1. However, in these cells, integrin-mediated adhesion is also required for the subsequent inactivation of Rap1 (REF. 76). In addition, cell-type-specific regulation of Rap1 activity has been reported in adherent cells after attachment, but no difference was observed whether the cells were plated on fibronectin (integrin-dependent) or polylysine (integrin-independent)<sup>77</sup>, indicating that this increase in Rap1 activity might be independent of outside-in signalling by integrin. Similarly, Mn<sup>2+</sup>-induced integrin activation did not result in the activation of Rap1, but did activate ERK (K. de Bruyn and J.L.B., unpublished observations). Cell adhesion might also result in a reduction of Rap1 activity<sup>78</sup>.

GERM TUBE  
Membrane extension used for mating.

MACROPINOCYTOSIS  
Uptake of extracellular fluid by endocytosis.

αLβ2  
Heterodimeric cell surface protein consisting of the integrin αL and β2 chains.

CD31 OR PLATELET-  
ENDOTHELIAL CELL ADHESION  
MOLECULE (PECAM)  
Cell surface protein that can form homotypic interactions.

OPSORIZED PARTICLES  
Particles covered with proteins that enhance uptake by phagocytosis.

NADH OXIDASE COMPLEX  
Enzyme complex responsible  
for the respiratory burst to  
breakdown phagocytosed  
particles.

Conclusions and future prospects  
The identification of the many signalling processes that  
can be regulated by Rap1, as well as an exponential  
increase in our knowledge of how Rap1 activation is  
regulated, places us on the brink of rapid advancement  
in deciphering its biological functions. However, these  

Box 3 | Cellular processes in which Rap1 is implicated  
Rap1 has been implicated in several cellular processes, for instance:  
- Rap1 is often found associated with secretory vesicles, implicating a possible function  
  in exocytosis. Although there is little evidence that Rap1 regulates secretion, the Rap1  
  GEF Epac2 (cyclic AMP–GEFII) has been linked to cAMP-regulated exocytosis —  
  particularly Ca²⁺-dependent secretion of growth hormone¹⁶. This link was established  
  through the association of Epac2 with Rim1 and Rim2, two putative effectors of Rab3.  
  Indeed, cAMP-induced secretion was mediated, at least in part, by a protein kinase A  
  (PKA)-independent pathway that required both Epac2 and Rim.  
- Rap1 has been found in a complex with cytochrome b₅ (REF. 58), a component of the  
  NADH OXIDASE COMPLEX. Rap1 localizes with cytochrome b in the specialized granules of  
  monocytes, and it translocates to the phagosome membrane where the oxidase  
  complex is assembled⁸². But this story has not been followed up recently.  
- Rap1 can be co-immunoprecipitated with the sarcoplasmic reticulum  
  Ca²⁺ATPase (SERCA) 3b from lysates of purified human platelets⁹⁵, although direct  
  association between the two proteins has yet to be shown. Indirect evidence indicates  
  that active Rap1 might inhibit the ATPase, thereby modulating intracellular levels of  
  Ca²⁺.  
- Rap1 is involved in regulating cAMP-induced — but not nerve growth factor (NGF)-  
  induced — neurite outgrowth⁴⁹. Rap1 probably acts in a pathway that can cooperate  
  with NGF or cAMP to induce differentiation⁶,⁹⁶,⁹⁷.  
- Rap1 has been implicated in the control of cell proliferation and, when overexpressed,  
  even induces oncogenic transformation, for instance, in Swiss-3T3 cells⁹⁸.

developments have also increased the complexity of the  
questions to be asked and the techniques needed to  
answer them.  
The most striking finding is how common Rap1  
activation is in response to various extracellular stimuli.  
Moreover, evolutionarily conserved GEFs link Rap1  
activation to a wide repertoire of common signalling  
pathways and messengers, including tyrosine-kinase-  
dependent protein–protein signalling modules, Ca²⁺,  
DAG, cAMP and other, as-yet-unidentified pathways.  
Downstream from Rap1, several putative effectors have  
been identified — including genuine effectors of Ras.  
For most of them, however, clear proof is still lacking.  
Finally, Rap1 has been implicated in several cellular  
responses, including cell differentiation, exocytosis and  
integrin-mediated cell adhesion.  
The role of PKA in the regulation of Rap1 is still not  
settled. Rap1 is phosphorylated by PKA, but the func-  
tion of this phosphorylation is still unclear. It might be  
involved in the inactivation of Rap1 (REF. 54) or the acti-  
vation of B-raf by Rap1 (REF. 48). Similarly, the role of  
PKA in cAMP-mediated activation of Rap1 — that is,  
the increase of Rap1GTP — is not yet clear. Both PKA-  
dependent and PKA-independent pathways have been  
described. PKA-independent pathways were unexpect-  
ed, but this has been solved by the discovery of novel,  
ubiquitously expressed cAMP targets, Epacs¹³,¹⁴. PKA-  
dependent activation of Rap1 might be indirect through  
a pathway that involves elevated levels of Ca²⁺ (REF. 53).  
Also, the complex mechanism by which cAMP regulates  
the ERK pathway and the role of Raf1, B-raf and Rap1  
in this process is still controversial, with many effects  
that seem to be cell-context-dependent. In general, the  
role of Rap1 in the regulation of ERK is not yet resolved.  
Notably, there is a complete lack of evidence for a role of  
Rap1 in Raf1/B-raf-ERK signalling in lower eukaryotes  
(BOX 2). For instance, *Caenorhabditis elegans* and  
*Drosophila melanogaster* have only a single orthologue  
for the Raf kinases, which is linked to Ras signalling.  
Could it be that part of the observed effects of Rap1 on  
ERK signalling is indirect and, for instance, mediated  
through the effect of Rap1 on cell adhesion?  
The role of Rap1 on integrin-mediated cell adhe-  
sion also needs further attention. The evidence so far  
indicates that Rap1 has a role in inside-out signalling  
to integrins, but the molecular mechanism of this reg-  
ulation is elusive. Both the effector of Rap1 that is  
responsible for this regulation, as well as the targeted  
restraint that prevents integrins from being activated is  
unknown. We need to ask whether the various Rap1-  
induced processes are the outcome of a single bio-  
chemical event, or whether Rap1 uses completely dif-  
ferent mechanisms to regulate them. In that light, why  
is most of Rap1 localized in perinuclear membrane  
structures, including endocytic and exocytic vesicles  
(BOX 2)? Does it have a function in vesicular transport?  
If so, how does that affect cell adhesion and/or the reg-  
ulation of the ERK pathway? To answer all these ques-  
tions, effectors that mediate the Rap1 effects should be  
identified. One of the problems in Rap1 research is that  
reliable biochemical readouts to monitor signalling

Figure 4 | Rap1 as a mediator of cyclic AMP signalling. Rap1 is strongly connected with  
cAMP signalling through Epacs (exchange protein directly activated by cAMP), guanine  
nucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs) that are directly regulated by cAMP. In addition, Rap1 is a  
target for phosphorylation by protein kinase A (PKA). (cAMP, cyclic AMP; MEK, mitogen-  
activated protein kinase and ERK kinase; ERK, extracellular-signal regulated kinase; PTP,  
protein tyrosine phosphatase.)

One important new avenue, made possible by the development of assays for monitoring Rap1 activation in a single cell, will be the analysis of the position at which Rap1 is activated after a specific signal<sup>79</sup>. Another aspect for future analysis is the molecular mechanisms by which the various GEFs and GAPs are regulated. This includes the regulation by second messengers and protein–protein interactions. The function of the RBDs in several Rap1GEFs indicates that these GEFs are regulated by binding of other small GTPases or, as suggested for PDZ-GEF, by Rap1 itself.

So far we have seen little evidence for a role of Rap1 in human disease. However, the Rap GAP E6TP1 has been identified as a target of the E6 oncoprotein of high-risk human papillomaviruses, indicating that Rap1 could be involved in papillomavirus-induced neoplasia<sup>32</sup>. Moreover, CD-GEFI is a target for retroviral insertions inducing mouse leukaemia<sup>80</sup>. These findings, and the possible role of Rap1 in cell adhesion and exocytosis, indicate that Rap1-regulated processes might impinge on various diseases, including tumour formation and metastasis, and chronic inflammation.

downstream from Rap1 are still limited. This makes the validation of putative effectors difficult. Genetic analysis of Rap1 signalling in lower eukaryotes might be a tool to pave the way.

A possible connection between Rap1 and the actin cytoskeleton originates from the analysis of Bud1 in yeast (FIG. 5). Bud1 interacts directly with Cdc24, an exchange factor for Cdc42 (which is a GTPase involved in the recruitment of the actin cytoskeleton to the bud site). Such a function implies that Rap1 helps to determine the position of certain cellular processes, with its GEFs and GAPs as proteins that can recognize positional landmarks.

---

**Figure 5 | Role of Bud1 in bud site selection.** A positional landmark is recognized by the guanine nucleotide-exchange factor (GEF) Bud5 and/or the GTPase-activating protein (GAP) Bud2, resulting in the activation of the yeast homologue of Rap1, Bud1. Bud1 binds to and activates Cdc24, a GEF for the small GTPase Cdc42. Cdc42 triggers the recruitment of the actin cytoskeleton to the bud site. (Adapted from REFS 86–88.)

---

### Links

DATABASE LINKS Rap1 | Krev-1 | Raf | Rap1a | Rap1b | NGF | C3G | Crk | R-ras | Epac1 | M-ras | CalDAG-GEF | Rap2 | Ras/Rap1a-associating-GEF | Nsp2 | Ral | Tuberin | Rab5 | GAP1P4BP | B-raf | RalGDS | EGF | interleukin-1 | interleukin-2 | phospholipase D | Rlf | Rgl | AF-6 | zonula occludens 1 | profilin | protein kinase B/Akt | CD31 | H-ras | mitogen-activated protein kinase | phospholipase C | VLA5 | Spa-1 | HGF | SDF-1 | LFA-1 | Bud1 | Cdc24 | Cdc42 | Bem1 | Bud5 | Bud2 |

FURTHER INFORMATION Bos lab | SMART database ENCYCLOPEDIA OF LIFE SCIENCES G proteins

---

1. Kitayama, H., Sugimoto, Y., Matsuzaki, T., Ikawa, Y. & Noda, M. Aras-related gene with transformation suppressor activity. *Cell* **56**, 77–84 (1989).  
   Classic paper with the first description of a biological effect of Rap1 in the reversion of K-ras transformation.
   
2. Bos, J. L. All in the family? New insights and questions regarding interconnectivity of Ras, Rap1 and Ral. *EMBO J.* **17**, 6776–6782 (1998).
   
3. Franke, B., Akkerman, J. W. & Bos, J. L. Rapid Ca<sup>2+</sup>-mediated activation of Rap1 in human platelets. *EMBO J.* **16**, 252–259 (1997).  
   Paper describing a novel procedure for the detection of activated Rap1, which is now the method of choice.
   
4. Altschuler, D. L., Peterson, S. N., Ostrowski, M. C. & Lapetina, E. G. Cyclic AMP-dependent activation of Rap1b. *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 10373–10376 (1995).  
   First paper to show activation of Rap1 by cyclic AMP.
   
5. McLeod, S. J., Ingham, R. J., Bos, J. L., Kurosaki, T. & Gold, M. R. Activation of the Rap1 GTPase by the B cell antigen receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 29218–29223 (1998).
   
6. Zwartkruis, F. J., Wolthuis, R. M., Nabben, N. M., Franke, B. & Bos, J. L. Extracellular signal-regulated activation of Rap1 fails to interfere in Ras effector signalling. *EMBO J.* **17**, 5905–5912 (1998).
   
7. York, R. D. *et al.* Role of phosphoinositide 3-kinase and endocytosis in nerve growth factor-induced extracellular

8. Gotoh, T. *et al.* Identification of Rap1 as a target for the Crk SH3 domain-binding guanine nucleotide-releasing factor C3G. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **15**, 6746–6753 (1995).

9. Ichiba, T. *et al.* Activation of C3G guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Rap1 by phosphorylation of tyrosine 504. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 14376–14381 (1999).

10. Sakkab, D. *et al.* Signaling of hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor (HGF) to the small GTPase Rap1 via the large docking protein Gab1 and the adapter protein CRKL. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 10772–10778 (2000).

11. Gotoh, T. *et al.* Activation of R-Ras by Ras-guanine nucleotide-releasing factor. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 18602–18607 (1997).

12. Mochizuki, N. *et al.* Crk activation of JNK via C3G and R-Ras. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 12667–12671 (2000).

13. de Rooij, J. *et al.* Epac is a Rap1 guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor directly activated by cyclic AMP. *Nature* **396**, 474–477 (1998).

References 13 and 14 were the first papers to show that a Rap1GEF is a genuine target for cAMP.

14. Kawasaki, H. *et al.* A family of cAMP-binding proteins that directly activate Rap1. *Science* **282**, 2275–2279 (1998).

15. de Rooij, J. *et al.* Mechanism of regulation of the Epac family of cAMP-dependent RapGEFs. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 20829–20836 (2000).

16. Ozaki, N. *et al.* cAMP-GEFI is a direct target of cAMP in regulated exocytosis. *Nature Cell Biol.* **2**, 805–811

17. Ichiba, T., Hoshi, Y., Eto, Y., Tajima, N. & Kuraishi, Y. Characterization of GFR, a novel guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Rap1. *FEBS Lett.* **457**, 85–89 (1999).

18. Rebhun, J. F., Castro, A. F. & Quilliam, L. A. Identification of guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) for the Rap1 GTPase. Regulation of MR-GEF by M-Ras-GTP interaction. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 34901–34908 (2000).

19. Kawasaki, H. *et al.* A Rap guanine nucleotide exchange factor enriched highly in the basal ganglia. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 13278–13283 (1998).

20. Yamashita, S. *et al.* CalDAG-GEFIII activation of Ras, R-Ras, and Rap1. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 25488–25493 (2000).

21. Ebisu, J. O. *et al.* RasGRP, a Ras guanyl nucleotide-releasing protein with calcium- and diacylglycerol-binding motifs. *Science* **280**, 1082–1086 (1998).

22. de Rooij, J. *et al.* PDZ-GEF1, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor specific for Rap1 and Rap2. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 38125–38130 (1999).

23. Ohtsuka, T. *et al.* nRap GEP: a novel neural GDP/GTP exchange protein for rap1 small G protein that interacts with synaptic scaffolding molecule (S-SCAM). *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **265**, 38–44 (1999).

24. Liao, Y. *et al.* RA-GEF, a novel Rap1A guanine nucleotide exchange factor containing a Ras/Rap1A-associating domain, is conserved between nematode and humans. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 37815–37820 (1999).

25. Kawajiri, A. *et al.* Identification of a novel β-catenin-

interacting protein. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 273, 712–717 (2000).

26. Gotoh, T., Cai, D., Tian, X., Feig, L. A. & Lerner, A. p130Cas regulates the activity of AND-34, a novel Ral, Rap1, and R-Ras guanine nucleotide exchange factor. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 30118–30123 (2000).

27. Polakis, P. G., Rubinfeld, B., Evans, T. & McCormick, F. Purification of a plasma membrane-associated GTPase-activating protein specific for rap1/Krev-1 from HL60 cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 88, 239–243 (1991).

28. Mochizuki, N. *et al.* Activation of the ERK/MAPK pathway by an isoform of rap1GAP associated with Gα(i). *Nature* 400, 891–894 (1999).

29. Meng, J., Glick, J. L., Polakis, P. & Casey, P. J. Functional interaction between Gα(z) and Rap1GAP suggests a novel form of cellular cross-talk. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 36663–36669 (1999). References 28 and 29 show that Rap1GAP interacts with the α-subunit of Gi/Gz family members, resulting in the activation of Rap1GAP.

30. Jordan, J. D., Carey, K. D., Stork, P. J. & Iyengar, R. Modulation of Rap activity by direct interaction of Gα(o) with Rap1 GTPase-activating protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 21507–21510 (1999).

31. Kurachi, H. *et al.* Human SPA-1 gene product selectively expressed in lymphoid tissues is a specific GTPase-activating protein for Rap1 and Rap2. Segregate expression profiles from a rap1GAP gene product. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 28081–28088 (1997).

32. Gao, Q., Srinivasan, S., Boyer, S. N., Wazer, D. E. & Band, V. The E6 oncoproteins of high-risk papillomaviruses bind to a novel putative GAP protein, E6TP1, and target it for degradation. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 19, 733–744 (1999). This paper shows a potential link between the Rap1 signalling pathway and papilloma-induced neoplasia.

33. Wienecke, R., Konig, A. & DeClue, J. E. Identification of tuberin, the tuberous sclerosis-2 product. Tuberin possesses specific Rap1GAP activity. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 16409–16414 (1995).

34. Xiao, G. H., Shoarinejad, F., Jin, F., Golemis, E. A. & Yeung, R. S. The tuberous sclerosis 2 gene product, tuberin, functions as a Rab5 GTPase activating protein (GAP) in modulating endocytosis. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 6097–6100 (1997).

35. Cullen, P. J. *et al.* Identification of a specific Ins(1,3,4,5)P₄-binding protein as a member of the GAP1 family. *Nature* 376, 527–530 (1995).

36. Ohba, Y. *et al.* Rap2 as a slowly responding molecular switch in the Rap1 signaling cascade. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 20, 6074–6083 (2000).

37. Herrmann, C., Horn, G., Spaargaren, M. & Wittinghofer, A. Differential interaction of the ras family GTP-binding proteins H-Ras, Rap1A, and R-Ras with the putative effector molecules Raf kinase and Ral-guanine nucleotide exchange factor. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271, 6794–6800 (1996).

38. Okada, T. *et al.* The strength of interaction at the Raf cysteine-rich domain is a critical determinant of response of Raf to Ras family small GTPases. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 19, 6057–6064 (1999).

39. Okada, S., Matsuda, M., Anafi, M., Pawson, T. & Pessin, J. E. Insulin regulates the dynamic balance between Ras and Rap1 signaling by coordinating the assembly states of the Grb2-SOS and CrkII-C3G complexes. *EMBO J.* 17, 2554–2565 (1998).

40. Boussiotis, V. A., Freeman, G. J., Berezovskaya, A., Barber, D. L. & Nadler, L. M. Maintenance of human T cell anergy: blocking of IL-2 gene transcription by activated Rap1. *Science* 278, 124–128 (1997).

41. Carey, K. D. *et al.* CD28 and the tyrosine kinase lck stimulate mitogen-activated protein kinase activity in T cells via inhibition of the small G protein rap1. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 20, 8409–8419 (2000).

42. Cook, S. J., Rubinfeld, B., Albert, I. & McCormick, F. RapV12 antagonizes Ras-dependent activation of ERK1 and ERK2 by LPA and EGF in Rat-1 fibroblasts. *EMBO J.* 12, 3475–3485 (1993).

43. Palsson, E. M., Popoff, M., Thelestam, M. & O'Neill, L. A. Divergent roles for Ras and Rap in the activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase by interleukin-1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 7818–7825 (2000).

44. Wu, J. *et al.* Inhibition of the EGF-activated MAP kinase signaling pathway by adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate. *Science* 262, 1065–1069 (1993).

45. Ramstad, C., Sundvold, V., Johansen, H. K. & Lea, T. cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) inhibits T cell

activation by phosphorylating ser-43 of raf-1 in the MAPK/ERK pathway. *Cell Signalling* 12, 557–563 (2000).

46. Sidovar, M. F. *et al.* Phosphorylation of serine 43 is not required for inhibition of c-Raf kinase by the cAMP-dependent protein kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 28688–28694 (2000).

47. Ohtsuka, T., Shimizu, K., Yamamori, B., Kuroda, S. & Takai, Y. Activation of brain B-Raf protein kinase by Rap1B small GTP-binding protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271, 1258–1261 (1996).

48. Vossler, M. R. *et al.* cAMP activates MAP kinase and Elk-1 through a B-Raf- and Rap1-dependent pathway. *Cell* 89, 73–82 (1997). First article to show that B-raf is a downstream target of Rap1.

49. York, R. D. *et al.* Rap1 mediates sustained MAP kinase activation induced by nerve growth factor. *Nature* 392, 622–626 (1998).

50. Okada, S. & Pessin, J. E. Insulin and epidermal growth factor stimulate a conformational change in Rap1 and dissociation of the CrkII-C3G complex. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 28179–28182 (1997).

51. Schmitt, J. M. & Stork, P. J. β2-adrenergic receptor activates extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) via the small G protein Rap1 and the serine/threonine kinase B-Raf. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 25342–25350 (2000).

52. Grewal, S. S. *et al.* Neuronal calcium activates a Rap1 and B-Raf signaling pathway via the cyclic adenosine monophosphate-dependent protein kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 3722–3728 (2000).

53. Zanassi, P. *et al.* Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase induces CREB phosphorylation via an intracellular calcium release/ERK-dependent pathway in striatal neurons. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 11487–11495 (2001).

54. Tsygankova, O. M., Saavedra, A., Rebhun, J. F., Quilliam, L. A. & Meinkoth, J. L. Coordinated regulation of Rap1 and thyroid differentiation by cAMP and protein kinase A. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 21, 1921–1929 (2001).

55. Dremier, S. *et al.* Activation of the small G protein Rap1 in dog thyroid cells by both cAMP-dependent and-independent pathways. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 267, 7–11 (2000).

56. Busca, R. *et al.* Ras mediates the cAMP-dependent activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) in melanocytes. *EMBO J.* 19, 2900–2910 (2000).

57. Saxena, M., Williams, S., Tasken, K. & Mustelin, T. Crosstalk between cAMP-dependent kinase and MAP kinase through a protein tyrosine phosphatase. *Nature Cell Biol.* 1, 305–311 (1999).

58. Qiu, W., Zhuang, S., von Lintig, F. C., Boss, G. R. & Pilz, R. B. Cell type-specific regulation of B-Raf kinase by cAMP and 14-3-3 proteins. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 31921–31929 (2000).

59. Lerosey, I., Pizon, V., Tavitian, A. & de Gunzburg, J. The cAMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylates the rap1 protein *in vitro* as well as in intact fibroblasts, but not the closely related rap2 protein. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 175, 430–436 (1991).

60. Polakis, P., Rubinfeld, B. & McCormick, F. Phosphorylation of rap1GAP *in vivo* and by cAMP-dependent kinase and the cell cycle p34cdc2 kinase *in vitro*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 267, 10780–10785 (1992).

61. Kishida, S. *et al.* Colocalization of Ras and Ral on the membrane is required for Ras-dependent Ral activation through Ral GDP dissociation stimulator. *Oncogene* 15, 2899–2907 (1997).

62. Reedquist, K. A. *et al.* The small GTPase, Rap1, mediates CD31-induced integrin adhesion. *J. Cell Biol.* 148, 1151–1158 (2000). Together with references 67 and 72, the first paper to show that Rap1 functions in the regulation of integrin activation.

63. Linnemann, T. *et al.* Thermodynamic and kinetic characterization of the interaction between the Ras binding domain of AF6 and members of the Ras subfamily. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 13556–13562 (1999).

64. Taya, S. *et al.* The Ras target AF-6 is a substrate of the fam deubiquitinating enzyme. *J. Cell Biol.* 142, 1053–1062 (1998).

65. Boettner, B., Govek, E. E., Cross, J. & Van Aelst, L. The junctional multidomain protein AF-6 is a binding partner of the Rap1A GTPase and associates with the actin cytoskeletal regulator profilin. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 97, 9064–9069 (2000).

66. Yamamoto, T., Harada, N., Kawano, Y., Taya, S. & Kaibuchi, K. *In vivo* interaction of AF-6 with activated Ras and ZO-1. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 259, 103–107 (1999).

67. Katagiri, K. *et al.* Rap1 is a potent activation signal for leukocyte function-associated antigen 1 distinct from protein kinase C and phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 20, 1956–1969 (2000). Together with references 62 and 72, the first paper to show that Rap1 regulates integrin activation.

68. O'Rourke, A. M., Shao, H. & Kaye, J. A role for p21ras/MAP kinase in TCR-mediated activation of LFA-1. *J. Immunol.* 161, 5800–5803 (1998).

69. Tanaka, Y. *et al.* H-Ras signals to cytoskeletal machinery in induction of integrin-mediated adhesion of T cells. *J. Immunol.* 163, 6209–6216 (1999).

70. Arai, A. *et al.* Rap1 is activated by erythropoietin or interleukin-3 and is involved in regulation of β1 integrin-mediated hematopoietic cell adhesion. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 10453–10462 (2001).

71. Tsukamoto, N., Hattori, M., Yang, H., Bos, J. L. & Minato, N. Rap1 GTPase-activating protein SPA-1 negatively regulates cell adhesion. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 18463–18469 (1999).

72. Caron, E., Self, A. J. & Hall, A. The GTPase Rap1 controls functional activation of macrophage integrin αMB2 by LPS and other inflammatory mediators. *Curr. Biol.* 10, 974–978 (2000). Together with references 62 and 67, the first paper to show that Rap1 regulates integrin activation.

73. Schmidt, A., Caron, E. & Hall, A. Lipopolysaccharide-induced activation of β2-integrin function in macrophages requires irak kinase activity, p3
are involved in recognizing positional landmarks.
87. Park, H. O., Sanson, A. & Herskowitz, I. Localization of
    bud2p, a GTPase-activating protein necessary for
    programming cell polarity in yeast to the presumptive
    bud site. *Genes Dev.* **13**, 1912–1917 (1999).
88. Gulli, M.-P. & Peter, M. Temporal and spatial regulation
    of Rho-type guanine nucleotide exchange factors: the
    yeast perspective. *Genes Dev.* **15**, 365–379 (2001).
    Excellent review on the role of small GTPases in
    determining cell polarity.
89. Yaar, L., Mevarech, M. & Koltin, Y. A. *Candida albicans*
    RAS-related gene (CaRSR1) is involved in budding, cell
    morphogenesis and hypha development. *Microbiology*
    **143**, 3033–3044 (1997).
90. Rebstein, P.J., Cardelli, J., Weeks, G. & Spiegelman, G.
    B. Mutational analysis of the role of Rap1 in regulating
    cytoskeletal function in *Dictyostelium*. *Exp. Cell Res.*
    **231**, 276–283 (1997).
91. Hariharan, I.K., Carthew, R. W. & Rubin, G. M. The
    *Drosophila roughened* mutation: activation of a rap
    homolog disrupts eye development and interferes with
    cell determination. *Cell* **67**, 717–722 (1991).
92. Asha, H., de Ruiter, N. D., Wang, M. G. & Hariharan, I.K.

The Rap1 GTPase functions as a regulator of
morphogenesis *in vivo*. *EMBO J.* **18**, 605–615 (1999).
Paper describing the possible function of
*Drosophila melanogaster* Rap1 in morphogenesis,
independently of Ras-mediated signalling.
93 Ishimaru, S., Williams, R., Clark, E., Hanafusa, H. &
    Gaul, U. Activation of the *Drosophila* C3G leads to cell
    fate changes and overproliferation during development,
    mediated by the RAS-MAPK pathway and RAP1. *EMBO*
    *J.* **18**, 145–155 (1999).
94. Chen, F., Barrett, M., Ram, K.T., Quintanilla, A. &
    Hariharan, I.K. Biological characterization of *Drosophila*
    RapGap1, a GTPase activating protein for Rap1. *Proc.*
    *Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **94**, 12485–12490 (1997).
95. Lacabaratz-Porret, C. *et al.* Platelet sarcoplasmic
    reticulum Ca²⁺ATPase isoform 3b and Rap1b:
    interrelation and regulation in physiopathology. *Biochem.*
    *J.* **332**, 173–181 (1998).
96. Anneren, C., Reedquist, K.A., Bos, J.L. & Welsh, M.
    GTK, a Src-related tyrosine kinase, induces nerve
    growth factor-independent neurite outgrowth in PC12
    cells through activation of the Rap1 pathway.
    Relationship to Shb tyrosine phosphorylation and

elevated levels of focal adhesion kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.*
**275**, 29153–29161 (2000).
97. Lu, L., Anneren, C., Reedquist, K.A., Bos, J.L. &
    Welsh, M. NGF-dependent neurite outgrowth in PC12
    cells overexpressing the Src homology 2-domain protein
    shb requires activation of the Rap1 pathway. *Exp. Cell*
    *Res.* **259**, 370–377 (2000).
98. Altschuler, D.L. & Ribeiro-Neto, F. Mitogenic and
    oncogenic properties of the small G protein Rap1b.
    *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 7475–7479 (1998).
99. Pacold, M.E. *et al.* Crystal structure and functional
    analysis of ras binding to its effector phosphoinositide
    3-kinase γ. *Cell* **103**, 931–943 (2000).

Acknowledgements
We thank F. Wittinghofer, M. Peter, C. Buckley and M. Matsuda
for many discussions and for sharing unpublished results, F.
Zwartkruis en Boudewijn Burgering for discussions and critically
reading the manuscript, and the other members of the lab for
support. The work on Rap1 in our lab is supported by the
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (C.W. and
A.L.W.), the Dutch Cancer Society, the Royal Academy of
Sciences and the Netherlands Heart Foundation.
