
Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics  
Vol. 384, No. 2, December 15, pp. 351–360, 2000  
doi:10.1006/abbi.2000.2067, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on IDEAL®

---

**Expression, Purification, and Characterization of BioI: A Carbon-Carbon Bond Cleaving Cytochrome P450 Involved in Biotin Biosynthesis in *Bacillus subtilis***

Jeanette E. Stok and James J. De Voss¹  
Department of Chemistry, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia  

Received June 13, 2000, and in revised form August 22, 2000  

---

Pimelic acid formation for biotin biosynthesis in *Bacillus subtilis* has been proposed to involve a cytochrome P450 encoded by the gene *bioI*. We have subcloned *bioI* and overexpressed the encoded protein, BioI. A purification protocol was developed utilizing ion exchange, gel filtration, and hydroxyapatite chromatography. Investigation of the purified BioI by UV-visible spectroscopy revealed spectral properties characteristic of a cytochrome P450 enzyme. BioI copurifies with acylated *Escherichia coli* acyl carrier protein (ACP), suggesting that in vivo a fatty acid substrate may be presented to BioI as an acyl-ACP. A combination of electrospray mass spectrometry of the intact acyl-ACP and GCMS indicated a range of fatty acids were bound to the ACP. A catalytically active system has been established employing *E. coli* flavodoxin reductase and a novel, heterologous flavodoxin as the redox partners for BioI. In this system, BioI cleaves a carbon-carbon bond of an acyl-ACP to generate a pimeloyl-ACP equivalent, from which pimelic acid is isolated after base-catalyzed saponification. A range of free fatty acids have also been explored as potential alternative substrates for BioI, with C16 binding most tightly to the enzyme. These fatty acids are also metabolized to dicarboxylic acids, but with less regiospecificity than is observed with acyl-ACPs. A possible mechanism for this transformation is discussed. These results strongly support the proposed role for BioI in biotin biosynthesis. In addition, the production of pimeloyl-ACP explains the ability of BioI to function as a pimeloyl CoA source in *E. coli*, which, unlike *B. subtilis*, is unable to utilize free pimelic acid for biotin production.

---

Key Words: biotin biosynthesis; *Bacillus subtilis*; P450; enzyme characterization; carbon-carbon bond cleavage.

Cytochrome P450 enzymes (P450s)² are the most powerful and versatile biological oxidative catalysts known. They occur widely throughout nature and recent genome sequencing programs have revealed both their ubiquity and the extent to which certain organisms have invested evolutionarily in them (1). *Arabidopsis*, believed to be typical of plants, which have developed extraordinarily complex chemistries, is predicted to have 350 different P450 genes. *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*, another organism reliant upon complex chemical defenses, encodes 20 different P450s. Interestingly, none were found in the *Escherichia coli* genome.

These proteins contain a cysteine-ligated heme with which they activate molecular oxygen, producing a molecule of water and an equivalent of an Fe(V) oxo species that is responsible for the vast array of oxidative reactions that they perform. The reaction typically catalyzed by a P450 can be written in general form as follows, where RH is the substrate and ROH is the monooxygenated product:

\[
\text{RH + NAD(P)H + H}^+ + \text{O}_2 \rightarrow
\]

\[
\text{NAD(P)}^+ + \text{H}_2\text{O} + \text{ROH}.
\]

² Abbreviations used: P450, cytochrome P450; ACP, acyl carrier protein; Pd, putidaredoxin; PdR, putidaredoxin reductase; FdR, *E. coli* flavodoxin reductase; cFld, cindoxin; PMSF, phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride; IPTG, isopropyl β-D-thiogalactopyranoside; EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; TFA, trifluoroacetic acid. BioI has been systematically named as CYP107H1 (see http://drnelson.utmem.edu/CytochromeP450.html).

---

¹ To whom correspondence should be addressed. Fax: 61-7-3365 4299. E-mail: devoss@chemistry.uq.edu.au.

0003-9861/00 $35.00  
Copyright © 2000 by Academic Press  
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

The activation of oxygen requires two electrons, which are ultimately derived from NADH or NADPH and are usually supplied by cytochrome P450 reductase in eukaryotes and an iron-sulfur reductase in prokaryotes (2). The reactions catalyzed range from simple heteroatom oxidations and double-bond epoxidations to oxidative insertion into unactivated C-H bonds to C-C bond cleavage.

Biotin (vitamin H) is an essential cofactor for a variety of important carboxylation reactions (3). The biosynthesis of biotin has been extensively studied in a variety of organisms and essentially a common path is followed in both microorganisms and higher plants (4, 5). This starts from a pimelic acid equivalent (symmetrical C7 dicarboxylic acid) with incorporation of alanine to eventually yield dethiobiotin. Two remarkable insertions of sulfur into C-H bonds then occur to give biotin, utilizing the 39-kDa protein biotin synthase as a reagent rather than a catalyst (6). Pimelic acid itself has been implicated as an intermediate in biotin biosynthesis in plants and some microorganisms, but pimeloyl CoA rather than free pimelic acid is required by *E. coli* (7). Recent directed sequencing of the *Bacillus subtilis* genome, which has subsequently been sequenced in its entirety (8), revealed an operon which encoded homologues of the genes previously identified as being involved in biotin biosynthesis in other organisms (9). In addition, two additional genes were found that were unrelated to any that had previously been associated with biotin formation. One of these, *bioI*, encoded a protein (BioI) which was highly homologous to a number of bacterial P450s. For example, BioI displayed 33% amino acid identity (50% similarity) with P450<sub>eryF</sub>, a P450 from *Saccharopolyspora erythaea* involved in erythromycin biosynthesis, and 26% identity (45% similarity) with the archetypal bacterial P450<sub>cam</sub>.

The function of BioI was investigated and it was shown that mutations of *bioI* caused *B. subtilis* to grow slowly in the absence of exogenous pimelic acid (9). It was thus proposed that BioI catalyzed the formation of pimelic acid. However, the exact function of BioI remained unclear, as *bioI* was also able to complement *E. coli* mutants which lacked the ability to synthesize pimeloyl CoA and whose growth was not restored by free pimelic acid.

What role could a P450 play in the biosynthesis of a pimelic acid equivalent? There are two obvious possibilities (Fig. 1). Fatty acids are known to be hydroxylated at the ω position by P450s and this is in fact the oldest and best characterized role of microsomal P450s in fatty acid metabolism (10). Such a reaction on an odd-chain fatty acid followed by rounds of β-oxidation would yield pimelic acid. Another possible mechanism is that a longer chain fatty acid is cleaved by BioI to yield pimelic acid and a short-chain fatty acid directly.

FIG. 1. Two possible routes by which a P450 could produce pimelic acid for biotin biosynthesis. Free acids are shown for convenience but intermediates may be thioesters rather than the free acids.

This is an attractive pathway as the substrate fatty acid need not be an odd-chain fatty acid, odd-chain fatty acids being somewhat unusual in themselves. Cleavage of a carbon-carbon bond, while rare, is a well-precedented reaction for a P450. Ironically, the P450s known to catalyze C-C bond cleavage are all involved in biosynthetic and not degradative pathways (11). CYP11A1, which catalyzes the conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone by cleavage of an internal C-C bond, would have a role most analogous to that proposed for BioI in the conversion of a long-chain fatty acid to pimelic acid.

We report here the subcloning and overexpression of the putative P450 BioI.<sup>3</sup> We have gathered definitive spectral evidence that this protein is indeed a P450. In addition, we have established a catalytically active system and our evidence suggests that the substrate for BioI is an acyl carrier protein (ACP) bound fatty acid. It thus appears that turnover involves carbon-carbon bond cleavage and that the product of oxidation is a pimeloyl-ACP equivalent. This appears to be the first example of a P450 oxidizing a protein-bound substrate.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Materials and methods. All chemicals, unless otherwise stated, were analytical grade reagents. The pBIO211A plasmid (a pUC9 derivative) was obtained from OmniGene. pUC19 was obtained from GIBCO-BRL and pCW from Prof. Paul R. Ortiz de Montellano (University of California, San Francisco). PCR primers were synthesized by the Biomolecular Resource Center of the University of California, San Francisco. DNA sequencing was performed at the automated

<sup>3</sup> A preliminary account of some of this work has appeared (32).

facility of the Pathology Department, University of Queensland. A SMART system (Amrad Pharmacia) was used for small-scale protein purification. GCMS data for methyl esters were obtained on a QP5050A GCMS (Shimadzu) containing a J &W DB-5 column (0.25 mm x 30 m) and employing the following temperature program: 40°C for 2 min; 16°C/min to 250°C; 250°C for 20 min. To ascertain cytochrome P450 content during the purification, difference spectra were measured by adding dithionite to the protein solution and comparing a carbon monoxide saturated sample to the dithionite/BioI reference. The $A_{410}/A_{280}$ of the protein gave some indication of the purity of BioI during the purification. The Bradford protein assay (12) was used to determine total protein content of each stage of the protein purification. A standard curve was constructed using cytochrome c as the protein standard. Mass spectrometry was done using 25 $\mu$M BioI in 5 mM ammonium acetate at the Centre for Drug Design and Development, University of Queensland. BioI, at a concentration of 100 pmol/30 $\mu$L in 5 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, was N-terminally sequenced in the Biochemistry Department, University of Queensland.

**Subcloning bioI into pCW.** The *bioI* gene was contained in pBIO211A with three other genes, *orf2*, *bioB*, and *bioD*. PCR was used to introduce an EcoRI and NdeI site at the 5′ end and an EcoRI and a HindIII site at the 3′ end of *bioI* using primers that carried these restriction sites as well as part of the coding sequence (5′ primer, 5′-GGGAATTCATATGACAATTGCATCGTCAA-3′; 3′ primer, 5′-GGAATTCAGCTTTATTCAAAAGTCACCGG-3′). The 5′ primer also changed the native GTG start codon to ATG to facilitate expression. The amplified *bioI* gene was purified using a QIAquick PCR purification kit, digested with EcoRI, and then ligated into similarly cut pUC19 to give the construct pbioI. This was then digested with XmaI and the 3′-terminal *bioI* fragment replaced with that from an XmaI/NgoMI digest of pBIO211A. The orientation of the inserted fragment was confirmed by a SacI/HindIII digest. The resultant construct had a wild-type sequence from bp 111 to the end of the *bioI* gene and the first 111 bp were verified by sequencing. *bioI* was then excised from pbioI via an NdeI/HindIII digest and ligated into similarly cut pCW to generate pCWbioI.

**Expression and purification of BioI-ACP.** TB broth containing 50 $\mu$g/mL ampicillin was inoculated with pCWbioI-transformed *E. coli* DH5$\alpha$ cells. The culture was incubated at 37°C with shaking until an OD$_{600}$ of 0.6 was attained. IPTG (1 M, 1 mL) was then added, the temperature was lowered to 30°C, and the cells were grown for a further 17 h. All subsequent procedures unless otherwise stated were performed at 4°C. The cells were harvested by centrifugation at 6000g for 20 min and resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, buffer containing 50 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM PMSF, 0.5 mM DTT, and 100 mg/L lysozyme. The resuspended cells were stirred for 2 h before being lysed by sonication (Branson sonifier 450) on ice for six 1-min intervals (50% output). Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation (15,000g, 1 h). The supernatant was loaded onto a DEAE-Sephrose column (3 × 25 cm) and the column washed with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, buffer containing 50 mM KCl and 0.5 mM DTT (Buffer A). The protein was eluted by running a linear salt gradient (50–500 mM KCl) in Buffer A. The fractions which contained BioI-ACP (150–200 mM KCl) were detected by $A_{410}$, combined, and concentrated by ultrafiltration through a YM-30 membrane in an Amicon cell. The concentrated protein was loaded onto a Sephacryl S-300 gel filtration column (1.5 × 100 cm) and run in Buffer A. Again the BioI-ACP-containing fractions were combined and loaded onto a second DEAE column (1.5 × 15 cm). The protein was eluted and collected in the same manner as for the earlier ion exchange column. The pooled fractions were then loaded onto a hydroxyapatite column (1.5 × 2 cm) in 5 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7, and eluted with a linear phosphate gradient (5–300 mM KP). BioI-ACP was collected and stored at –70°C.

**Production of BioI.** BioI-ACP was loaded onto a Q-Sepharose column (1.5 × 15 cm) and the protein eluted with a linear salt gradient (50–500 mM KCl) in Buffer A. The fractions which contained BioI (approximately 80–100 mM KCl) were detected by $A_{417}$, combined, and concentrated in an Amicon ultrafiltration cell through a YM-30 membrane. The concentrated protein was loaded onto a Sephacryl S-300 gel filtration column (1.5 × 100 cm) and run in Buffer A to obtain BioI.

**Fatty acid cleavage from BioI-ACP.** The method followed was adapted from Jackowski and Rock (13). NaOH (0.1 M) was added to a solution of BioI-ACP (3 $\mu$M) until pH 12.1 was reached. After 2 h, HCl (1 N) was added dropwise until the pH had dropped to approximately 2. The solution was then extracted with diethyl ether, and the combined extracts were dried over MgSO₄, filtered, and concentrated under nitrogen. Diazomethane was added dropwise to the solution until a yellow color persisted. The fatty esters thus obtained were analyzed by GCMS.

**Turnover with cindoxin and flavodoxin reductase.** BioI-ACP (1 $\mu$M) (or BioI plus 100 $\mu$M fatty acid), flavodoxin reductase (2 $\mu$M), cindoxin (8 $\mu$M), and catalase (1 $\mu$M) were combined in a Wheaton reaction vial. NADPH (5 mM) was added to the proteins and left to incubate overnight. The reaction was acidified with HCl (1 M) and extracted with ethyl acetate, and the resultant fatty acids were esterified with diazomethane. For BioI-ACP, the sample was initially treated with NaOH for 2 h (as above for cleavage of ACP fatty acids) and then acidified, extracted, and esterified before analysis by GCMS. Hydroxy fatty acids were derivatized as their TFA esters by reaction with trifluoroacetic anhydride for 30 min at room temperature.

**Binding constants.** Increasing amounts of fatty acid (C14, C16, C16:1(9c), C18, or C18:1(9c) in ethanol were added to the sample cuvette, and an equal amount of ethanol was added to the matched reference cuvette. Both cuvettes contained BioI (3–7 $\mu$M) in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 (500 $\mu$L). The ethanol concentration did not exceed 1%. The observed change in absorbance, measured from peak to trough (392 to 417 nm), was used to calculate the binding constant ($K_s$). The assumptions (14) made for this calculation are as follows: (a) The concentration of free BioI is equal to the total concentration of BioI minus the BioI-fatty acid complex. (b) The concentration of free fatty acid is equal to the total amount of fatty acid added minus the BioI-fatty acid complex. (c) Molar absorptivity ($\Delta \epsilon$) values for BioI are assumed to be the same as those reported for other bacterial P450s. (d) The concentration of the BioI-fatty acid complex was calculated from $\Delta A$ after the addition of the fatty acid using the difference in the molar absorptivity ($\Delta \epsilon$) (14). For % high spin calculations, the molar absorptivity ($\epsilon$) values for low and high spin were assumed to be the same as for P450$_{\text{cam}}$ (15) and P450$_{\text{terp}}$ (14).

---

**RESULTS**

**Cloning and expression of bioI.** The pCW vector has been used previously to express successfully a range of eucaryotic and procaryotic P450s and thus we investigated *bioI* expression using this plasmid (16, 17). The *bioI* gene was originally contained in pBIO211A (a generous gift from OmniGene Inc.), which was constructed from a 3.6-kb *B. subtilis* chromosomal fragment cloned into pUC9. PCR was used to amplify *bioI* specifically, employing primers that incorporated an NdeI and a HindIII restriction site at the 5′ and 3′ ends of the gene, respectively, and altered the native GTG start codon to ATG to facilitate overexpression. The PCR-generated fragment was subcloned into pUC19 to generate pbioI. The absence of any PCR-generated mutations was ensured by a combination of sequencing and specific replacement of the majority of the gene

TABLE I  
Purification of BioI after Overexpression in E. coli$^a$

| Step             | Total protein (mg) | Specific content$^b$ (pmol/µg) | $A_{410}/A_{280}$$^c$ | Purification (fold$^d$) |
|------------------|--------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------|-------------------------|
| Crude            | 3153               | 0.25                            | —                   | —                       |
| DEAE-Sephrose    | 150                | 1.05                            | 0.33                | 4.2                     |
| S-300 Sephacryl  | 35                 | 1.5                             | 0.65                | 6.0                     |
| DEAE-Sephrose    | 24                 | 1.83                            | 0.97                | 7.32                    |
| Hydroxyapatite   | —                  | 13.71                           | 1.48                | 58.8                    |

$a$ Details averaged over several purifications.  
$b$ Number of picomoles of P450 per microgram of protein. P450 content measured by CO difference spectroscopy.  
$c$ Indication of purity via the heme ($A_{410}$) to protein ($A_{280}$) ratio.  
$d$ A measure of the purity of BioI compared to the initial crude preparation.

with restriction fragments from pBIO211A. Finally, pbioI was digested with NdeI and HindIII and the resultant bioI-containing fragment was ligated into a similarly cut pCW vector to generate pCWbioI. This vector was transformed into E. coli and protein expression was induced with 1 mM IPTG. A range of conditions were explored for expression (temperature, media) and the best expression was obtained at 30°C in Terrific Broth. Approximately 200 nmol of cytochrome P450 per liter of original culture was obtained as determined by CO difference spectroscopy.

**Purification of BioI-ACP.** BioI was found in the soluble portion of the crude cell lysate and was purified in a simple four-step procedure, based largely on those developed for P450$_{cam}$ and P450$_{cin}$ (18) (Table I). The progress of the purification was monitored by both PAGE and UV-visible spectroscopy. The latter generates an R/Z value ($A_{410}/A_{280}$ for BioI), which is a measure of heme ($A_{410}$) to protein content ($A_{280}$) of the sample. This is highly indicative of the purity of bacterial P450s and has been found to be in the range of approximately 1.4–1.9 for homogenous P450$_{cin}$, P450$_{cam}$, and P450$_{terp}$ (14, 15). Thus, an initial DEAE cation exchange column was followed by concentration (Amicon filtration) and size exclusion chromatography. A second cation exchange column gave BioI with an R/Z of approximately 1.0. A final polishing step utilizing hydroxyapatite column chromatography gave BioI with an R/Z of 1.5, which was characterized by UV-visible spectroscopy (Fig. 2).

**E. coli ACP copurifies with BioI.** Despite its high R/Z, the BioI isolated was clearly a mixture of two proteins as shown by SDS-PAGE analysis. One had a molecular weight of approximately 45 kDa, expected for BioI, and one appeared to be approximately 15 kDa. N-Terminal sequencing of the mixture revealed two amino acids per cycle, one of which was that expected

for BioI that had lost the N-terminal methionine (TIASSTAS). The other amino acids (STIEERVK) formed the N-terminal sequence of E. coli acyl carrier protein (ACP). The molecular weight of holoACP is 8.9 kDa but it is known to run on SDS-PAGE with an apparently higher molecular weight, as we observed (19). Electrospray mass spectral analysis of the mixture was consistent with the presence of acyl-ACP. The molecular weights of the loaded ACPs seen were approximately 28 amu higher than that expected for proteins carrying C14, C16, and C18 fatty acids (20). Two explanations were possible for this discrepancy in molecular weights. The first was that the fatty acids were not the expected C14–C18 range and the second was that the ACP was a mutant of the reported E. coli form. Mutant ACPs have been reported from E. coli (19) and a number of possible conservative mutations could explain a mass difference of 28 amu. To distinguish between these possibilities, we hydrolyzed the fatty acids from the BioI-ACP complex under basic conditions and then analyzed them as their methyl esters by GCMS (Fig. 3A). The major esters seen were those of the C14, C16, C16:1, C18, and C18:1 fatty acids as expected, suggesting that the ACP we isolated indeed had a slightly different sequence from that reported previously (21).

**Characterization of BioI.** Subsequently, we discovered that ion exchange chromatography utilizing MonoQ caused the partial separation of the BioI-ACP complex, allowing us to isolate pure BioI. In fact, this was a highly effective purification step, as the absence of the ACP from the complex, with its preponderance of negatively charged residues, resulted in the elution of BioI at a much earlier stage of the salt gradient than the BioI-ACP complex. With this knowledge of the chromatographic properties of BioI, we were able to determine that a significant amount of BioI was also

FIG. 2. Absorbance spectra of BioI (-) and BioI-ACP (—) in Buffer A. The CO difference spectrum (· · ·) of BioI was produced as described under Materials and Methods. The region from 500 to 700 nm of the BioI and BioI-ACP spectra has been amplified by a factor of five for clarity.

from Pd. However, experiments with a variety of potential substrates under different conditions uniformly failed to yield any products of catalytic turnover.

We then explored the potential of a flavodoxin as a redox partner for BioI. It has previously been shown that eucaryotic P450s expressed in *E. coli* can utilize the endogenous flavodoxin and flavodoxin reductase to create a catalytically active system (24). Little is known about the interactions of flavodoxins with procaryotic P450s, although the bacterial P450<sub>BM-3</sub> utilizes a flavin located in a domain highly homologous to eucaryotic P450 reductases (25). In addition, we have recently discovered a flavodoxin (cindoxin) as a redox partner of the novel bacterial P450, P450<sub>cin</sub> (unpublished results). P450<sub>cin</sub> is found in *Citrobacter brakii* and catalyzes the hydroxylation of the terpene cineole, presumably initiating a cascade of biodegradative reactions that allows the bacteria to live on cineole as its sole carbon and energy source. Despite the obvious differences in P450 function and distribution, we attempted to utilize cindoxin (cFld) to mediate the transfer of electrons from NADPH to BioI via *E. coli* flavodoxin reductase (FdR). Somewhat surprisingly, this worked well and we could generate an NADPH-dependent CO difference spectrum with a small excess of redox partners (BioI:FdR:cFld 1:2:8) identical to those employed with P450<sub>cam</sub> and its redox partners. More importantly, we also found that this system supported catalytic turnover (*vide infra*).

Turnover of BioI-ACP complex. Initially, we incubated the BioI-ACP complex, FdR, and cFld (1:2:8) with NADPH. Simple extraction of the reaction mixture followed by GCMS analysis yielded no identifiable product of oxidation. However, treatment with base, designed to liberate any ACP-bound product, followed by acidification, extraction, methyl ester formation, and GCMS analysis revealed the production of pimelic acid, which had a retention time and mass spectrum identical to those of authentic material (Fig. 3B). Formation of pimelic acid was dependent on the presence of NADPH and all three enzymes. It could not be extracted from the reaction mixture except after base treatment, strongly suggesting that it was formed bound to ACP. Fatty acids that were not oxidized were also liberated from ACP by the base-catalyzed hydrolysis and were observed by GCMS as their methyl esters along with pimelic acid methyl ester. Integration of the GCMS traces (corrected for different detector response factors) indicated that approximately 5% of the bound fatty acids were converted to pimelic acid.

Alternative substrates for BioI. Because of the difficulty associated with obtaining acyl-ACP as a substrate for BioI, we surveyed a variety of free fatty acids to see if they would also act as (much more accessible) substrates. When substrate binds to a P450, this can

FIG. 3. Gas chromatographs of products from (A) BioI-ACP after base-catalyzed saponification, extraction, and esterification with diazomethane and (B) catalytic turnover of BioI-ACP and treatment as in A. Dimethyl pimelate from oxidative cleavage of acyl-ACP and the fatty acid methyl esters arising from unreacted acyl-ACP are indicated.

present in our crude cell lysate along with the BioI-ACP that we purified. The BioI obtained via BioI-ACP separation was analyzed by electrospray MS, which revealed a molecular weight (45348 Da) agreeing with that expected for a BioI-heme complex that had lost the N-terminal methionine (45,349 Da). The UV-visible spectrum (Fig. 2) of the protein was exactly that expected of a low-spin procaryotic P450 with λ<sub>max</sub> of 418 nm and clear α/β bands at 538 and 566 nm. Reduction with dithionite and exposure to CO gave the distinctive CO complex spectrum characteristic of P450s with a λ<sub>max</sub> of 448 nm. This spectral characterization provided the first physical evidence that BioI was in fact a P450.

Redox partners for BioI. To study the catalytic function of BioI, we required appropriate redox partners to allow generation of the activated oxygen species and catalytic turnover. P450<sub>cam</sub>, the archetypal bacterial P450, uses putidaredoxin (Pd), an iron-sulfur protein, and putidaredoxin reductase (PdR), a flavoprotein that transfers electrons one at a time from NADH to putidaredoxin. This motif is repeated in other bacterial P450s with characterized redox partners such as P450<sub>terp</sub> (14) and P450<sub>lin</sub> (22). It is also known that Pd and PdR will function with other bacterial P450s as redox partners, albeit less efficiently (23). We thus explored the use of this redox system with BioI. With a large excess of Pd and PdR (BioI:PdR:Pd 1:8:40), we were able to observe formation of a CO complex, indicating that electrons were being transferred to BioI

resultant TFA esters exhibited a peak at m/e 269 (M⁺ - OTFA).

DISCUSSION

The purification of BioI was based on existing protocols employed for other bacterial P450s. Although hydroxyapatite is often used as one of the final steps in the purification of human P450s, to remove added detergent, it has had limited application in the purification of bacterial P450s (26). We have found, however, that it provides not only an extremely effective polishing step in the purification of BioI but it is also invaluable as the final purification step of another recently isolated bacterial P450, P450cin (unpublished results). Although the BioI obtained had an R/Z (A₄₁₀/A₂₈₀) of 1.5, comparable to values for other homogeneous bacterial P450s, it was found by SDS-PAGE analysis and N-terminal sequencing to be associated with another protein: E. coli ACP. Electrospray mass spectrometry revealed that the ACP was loaded with a range of fatty acids. The molecular weights of the loaded ACPs seen were approximately 28 amu higher than that expected for proteins carrying C14, C16, and C18 fatty acids. The fatty acids were cleaved from the BioI-ACP complex under basic conditions and then analyzed as their methyl esters by GCMS (Fig. 3A). The major esters seen were those of the C14, C16, C16:1, C18, and C18:1 fatty acids, suggesting that the isolated ACP had a slightly different sequence from that reported previously. Although there were slight discrepancies, for example in the amount of vaccenic acid (C18:1(11c)) observed, these fatty acids reflected the range of fatty acids that are typically found in E. coli membranes (27). Mutant ACPs have been previously reported from E. coli and a number of possible conservative mutations could explain a mass difference of 28 amu. ACP is one of the most abundant proteins in E. coli and is responsible for supporting the growing alkyl chain during fatty acid biosynthesis (27). The ACP from B. subtilis is strongly homologous with E. coli ACP (61% identity, 71% similarity), which suggests that this association between BioI and an acyl-ACP is also likely to occur in B. subtilis. Such an association is not entirely surprising as BioI is postulated to be involved in the

FIG. 4. UV-visible difference spectra of BioI with increasing amounts of myristic acid (C14) versus BioI alone. Protein concentration was 3 μM in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4. These data were used to calculate percentage spin state changes and dissociation constants (Table II).

usually be detected by a change in the UV-visible absorbance, where the Soret bands moves from 417 to 392 nm (26). This shift is caused by a spin state change of the heme iron and is often associated with a change in redox potential of the enzyme that allows it to be reduced from Fe(III) to Fe(II) and begin the catalytic cycle. Using UV-visible difference spectroscopy, we examined C14 and C16 saturated fatty acids as well as Δ-9 C16 and C18 unsaturated fatty acids (Fig. 4). All appeared to bind to BioI and cause a spin state change (Table II). We subsequently further characterized these fatty acids by obtaining their Kₛ values (Table II). These are close to those seen for substrates of other bacterial P450s. The spectral changes caused by the C16 fatty acid were somewhat anomalous at higher concentrations (>5 μM fatty acid, 3 μM BioI) in that the difference in absorbance between 392 nm (high spin) and 417 nm (low spin) began to decrease after the expected initial increase. The observed binding curves also indicated that only a portion of the BioI present was binding the fatty acid.

Turnover of C16 free fatty acid by BioI. We preliminarily investigated the turnover of palmitic acid (C16) by BioI. Although the products vary with conditions (relative concentration of the BioI to redox partners and palmitic acid concentration), we have observed by GCMS the production of undecanedioic acid as well as pimelic acid and compounds with MS behavior consistent with hydroxy fatty acids (results not shown). In contrast to turnovers with BioI-ACP alone, products were isolated by simple acidification and extraction. Pimelic and undecanedioic acids were identified by comparison with authentic standards. The putative hydroxy fatty acids were seen to change retention time after treatment with trifluoroacetic anhydride and the

TABLE II  
Binding Constants and Spin State Change for a Variety of Fatty Acids with BioI  

| Fatty acid           | High spin (%) | Kₛ (μM) |
|----------------------|---------------|----------|
| Myristic acid (C14)  | 26            | 1.00     |
| Palmitic acid (C16)  | 16            | 0.24     |
| Palmitoleic acid (16:1(9c)) | 22 | 0.35     |
| Oleic acid (C18:1(9c)) | 27 | 0.35     |

biosynthesis of pimelic acid, the seven-carbon diacid from which biotin is derived. We hypothesize, therefore, that the acyl-ACP is the substrate for BioI and this is reason for the strong association between the two proteins.

It was found in the course of purifying BioI-ACP that when it was subjected to ion exchange utilizing MonoQ resin, (partial) separation of the BioI-ACP complex occurred, allowing isolation of BioI by itself. This step was advantageous in that it allowed us to characterize BioI fully without interference from acyl-ACP. At present, it is uncertain why MonoQ and not DEAE causes this separation, but the interaction between the strongly acidic acyl-ACP (pI = 4.1) and the relatively basic BioI (pI = 6.9 (calculated)) is presumably mediated partially by ionic interactions. Thus, the charge of quaternary ammonium side chains present in MonoQ may be able to disrupt these interactions more effectively than the (partially) protonated tertiary amines present in DEAE. BioI has very different mobility on ion exchange compared with BioI-ACP, as would be expected after loss of the strongly acidic acyl-ACP (pI = 4.1). Examination of our crude cell lysates fractionated by DEAE chromatography indicated that a significant amount of BioI was present in addition to the BioI-ACP isolated. This is consistent with our hypothesis that the ACP complex is turned over within *E. coli*.

Initial characterization of BioI-ACP by UV-visible spectroscopy revealed the presence of an unusual Soret peak at 408 nm (Fig. 2) rather than the expected 417 nm for low-spin or 392 nm for high-spin P450 (26). CO difference spectral experiments confirmed, however, that BioI was indeed a P450, since reduction with dithionite followed by exposure to carbon monoxide resulted in the formation of the characteristic 450-nm band (Fig. 2). Comparison with the spectra of P450<sub>cam</sub> revealed that in BioI-ACP the α/β bands were intermediate between those seen for high- and low-spin P450s and that a significant band at λ<sub>max</sub> 639 nm, typical of high-spin P450s, was present (26). In contrast, the spectrum of BioI alone was exactly that typically observed for a low-spin P450 (Fig. 2). Adding fatty acids to BioI produced difference spectra (Fig. 4) characteristic of the conversion of low- to high-spin P450s and allowed measurements of binding constants (*vide infra*). Interestingly, the mixtures of high- and low-spin P450s produced in these experiments did not give UV-visible spectra with a single Soret at 408 nm; rather peaks at both 392 and 417 nm characteristic of a mixture of high- and low-spin P450s were observed (results not shown). Thus it appears that association with the ACP significantly affects the spectral characteristics of BioI.

Two immediate problems presented themselves in the investigation of the function of BioI. The first was that there was no apparent redox partner, required for

TABLE III  
Possible Redox Partners for BioI in *B. subtilis* (8)

| Gene | Protein product (amino acids) | Identity<sup>a</sup> (%) | Similarity<sup>a</sup> (%) |
|------|--------------------------------|------------------------|--------------------------|
| yetO | Putative P450 reductase (1061) | 30                     | 48                       |
| yvgR | Sulfite reductase (605)        | 33                     | 45                       |
| ykuN | Putative flavodoxin 1 (138)    | 27                     | 46                       |
| ykuP | Putative flavodoxin 2 (178)    | 28                     | 43                       |

<sup>a</sup> Percentage identity and similarity to cindoxin calculated over the area of significant similarity using the BLAST algorithm (28).

oxygen activation, in the operon with BioI. The second was that enzymes of biotin biosynthesis have notoriously low catalytic activity because so little biotin is required by the cell. In fact, the final "enzyme" in the biosynthetic pathway has been shown to be a reagent and not a catalyst as it can participate in only a single turnover (6).

Since no redox partners had been isolated with *bioI*, substitute redox partners were employed to investigate the reaction catalyzed by BioI. Initially, putidaredoxin and its reductase, the redox partners for P450<sub>cam</sub>, were tested and found not to support catalytic turnover. It was subsequently found that cindoxin and *E. coli* flavodoxin reductase were able to produce a catalytically active BioI. Since this flavodoxin was the preferred redox partner for BioI rather than the commonly found ferredoxin system, it raised the question of what redox partners BioI would normally employ *in vivo*. Initial searching (28) of the *B. subtilis* genome (8) revealed that it contains no ferredoxins which have significant similarity to putidaredoxin and it is therefore not surprising that the putidaredoxin system failed to produce a catalytically active P450. There are, however, a number of proteins homologous to cindoxin (Table III), two of which are identified as putative flavodoxins. One interesting possibility is that the flavodoxin/flavodoxin reductase system known to be required for the final step in biotin biosynthesis (29) may also be employed in the first step as the redox partners for BioI.

Using cindoxin and *E. coli* flavodoxin reductase as redox partners, we attempted to turn over the BioI-ACP complex. No product was observed in simple extracts of the reaction mixture. However, NADPH-dependent production of pimelic acid was observed by GCMS analysis if the extraction was preceded by a basic hydrolysis step (Fig. 3B). (We also observed unreacted fatty acids liberated from ACP after this hydrolysis reaction.) This strongly suggests that a pimelic acid equivalent is formed bound to the ACP and then liberated by basic hydrolysis. Such a role for BioI, i.e., production of pimeloyl-ACP, is consistent with its observed biological properties. Experiments in *B. subtilis* have shown that *bioI* mutants grow poorly in the

absence of exogenous pimelic acid, indicating a role for BioI in pimelic acid biosynthesis (9). *E. coli* is known to be incapable of employing free pimelic acid for the formation of biotin (7). However, *E. coli* mutants deficient in pimeloyl CoA formation are complemented by *bioI* but not free pimelic acid, suggesting that the latter is not the product of BioI catalytic activity. Pimeloyl-ACP, however, could serve as a biotin precursor in both *B. subtilis* and *E. coli*. Interestingly, *B. subtilis* is known to be able to utilize free pimelic acid to synthesize pimeloyl CoA, which is subsequently incorporated into biotin. This is consistent with experimental results which suggest that *bioI* is not absolutely necessary for biotin production as *bioI*-deficient mutants still grew, albeit poorly, in biotin (and pimelic acid) free media. The pimeloyl-ACP formed by BioI may be acting as a second pimelic acid equivalent for biotin biosynthesis in *B. subtilis*.

Only approximately 5% of the ACP-bound fatty acids appear to be oxidized to pimeloyl-ACP in our experiments. The reasons for this poor conversion are unclear. It is possible that it is a function of conditions with an unnatural substrate (*E. coli* rather than *B. subtilis* acyl-ACP) and redox partner. With respect to the latter, we have observed significant uncoupling of NADPH consumption from product formation for this system (data not shown). In addition, the enzymes of the biotin biosynthetic pathway, exemplified by BioB, which appears to be a stoichiometric reagent rather than a catalyst, have low rates of turnover. This would be expected of BioI and so limit the amount of pimelic acid formed.

Since the ACP of the BioI-ACP complex carries a range of fatty acids ranging in length from C14 to C18, pimelic acid must be produced by cleavage of a C–C bond within the fatty acid. CYP11A1, a mitochondrial P450 involved in lysis of the C20–C22 bond of cholesterol to produce pregnenolone and the 4-methylpentanal, catalyzes a similar bond-cleaving reaction. This is achieved in three sequential oxidative reactions, with the final reaction breaking the C–C bond. The proposed mechanism for this reaction proceeds via two sequential hydroxylation reactions to produce a diol intermediate. A third oxidative reaction then produces either a peroxide or a peroxy radical, which subsequently decomposes with C–C bond cleavage to yield the two carbonyl compounds (11). It is expected that the cleavage of a fatty acid to produce pimelic acid would follow a mechanism similar to that proposed for CYP11A1 (Fig. 5).

However, if the mechanism of C–C bond cleavage is analogous to that seen with CYP11A1, then two aldehydes would be expected as products, one a pimeloyl semialdehyde derivative of ACP. Aldehydes are known to be labile toward autoxidation and indeed we found that exogenous aldehyde was converted to the corre-

FIG. 5. Proposed mechanism for the oxidative cleavage of ACP-bound long-chain fatty acids catalyzed by BioI. The mechanism proposed is analogous to that for the cleavage of cholesterol to pregnenolone catalyzed by CYP11A1 (11).

sponding acid under standard incubation conditions in the absence of NADPH. In addition, P450s have also been shown to catalyze the oxidation of aldehydes to carboxylic acids (30). The conversion of the pimeloyl semialdehyde derivative to pimeloyl-ACP may have been either via autoxidation, P450 catalyzed oxidation, or both. A variety of factors could contribute to our failure so far to observe the aldehyde derived from the methyl terminus of the fatty acid. The volatility of some of these aldehydes and their potential to (auto)oxidize make isolation difficult. In addition, the fact that a variety of acyl-ACPs are converted to pimeloyl-ACP and a corresponding variety of aldehydes coupled with the small extent of turnover makes detecting them difficult. (We did observe short-chain fatty acids corresponding to these aldehydes, but these were also present in the control incubations.)

The potential of free fatty acids, much more readily available than acyl-ACPs, to act as substrates for BioI was also explored. We measured *K*<sub>s</sub> values for a range of C14–C18 fatty acids (Table II), employing UV-visible difference spectroscopy, monitoring the shift in

Soret from 417 to 392 nm as the P450 changed from low to high spin with the addition of fatty acid (Fig. 4). All of the fatty acids examined bound well to BioI and caused a moderate spin state change. Because the concentration of free fatty acid was not significantly greater than that of BioI during \( K_s \) determination, we employed the method outlined by Peterson for its calculation (14). Interestingly, higher concentrations of palmitic acid (>5 μM) caused a change in the spectral characteristics of the complex away from the classical low to high spin difference spectrum. This suggests an additional binding site/mode for the fatty acid at higher concentrations, perhaps one in which the carboxylate can coordinate to the iron (15). In addition, comparison of the calculated \( K_s \) values with the observed concentrations of fatty acid at which half of the enzyme is bound to substrate indicates that only a portion of the protein present binds the fatty acid. This perhaps indicates that BioI is unstable in the absence of acyl-ACP.

The turnover of free palmitic acid by BioI was also briefly investigated. We observed the production of a small amount of pimelic acid but also of larger amounts of undecanedioic acid and compounds which exhibited GCMS behavior consistent with hydroxy fatty acids. Since undecanedioic acid or any hydroxy fatty acid was not observed in the turnover of the BioI-ACP complex, ACP seems to be involved in dictating the correct binding conformation of the fatty acid within the binding site that leads to pimeloyl-ACP production. Although the hydroxy acids produced from palmitate are yet to be identified, they represent the intermediates which would be expected for a mechanism analogous to that seen with CYP11A1 (Fig. 5). Again, since they were not detected in BioI-ACP reactions, their presence also indicates that ACP is an essential anchor for fatty acid binding.

### CONCLUSION

We have cloned and overexpressed BioI and obtained evidence to support its characterization as a P450. Our results suggest that it catalyzes a carbon–carbon bond cleavage of an ACP-bound fatty acid to produce a pimeloyl-ACP that is capable of providing the seven-carbon diacid precursor to the biotin biosynthetic pathways of both *B. subtilis* and *E. coli*. This appears to be a unique example, to date, of a P450 utilizing a protein-bound substrate. BioI will also utilize a range of free fatty acids as substrates in this carbon–carbon bond cleaving reaction. Interestingly, the redox partner for BioI in the catalytically active system we have established is a flavodoxin, which may suggest that *B. subtilis* uses the same redox partners for the first and last steps in biotin biosynthesis. The turnover of acyl-ACP by BioI is poor and may reflect the use of a heterologous redox partner or a heterologous ACP. An attractive alternative possibility is suggested by the fact that branched-chain fatty acids make up over 90% of the fatty acids found in *B. subtilis* (31) and may provide the natural substrates for BioI. We are currently investigating this possibility and the detailed mechanism of the bond cleavage reaction.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Dr. E. M. J. Gillam for helpful discussions and Dr. R. Yocum, OmniGene Inc., for the kind gift of pBIO211A. This work was supported in part by ARC Grant ARCS202G (J. J. D.V.) and a University of Queensland Graduate School Scholarship (J. E.S.).

### REFERENCES

1. Nelson, D. R. (1999) Arch. Biochem. Biophys. **369**, 1–10.
2. Mueller, E. J., Loida, P. J., and Sligar, S. G. (1995) *in Cytochrome P450: Structure, Mechanism, and Biochemistry* (Ortiz de Montellano, P. R., Ed.), pp. 83–124, Plenum, New York.
3. Walsh, C. (1979) Enzymatic Reaction Mechanisms, Freeman, San Francisco.
4. Eisenberg, M. (1987) *in Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium: Cellular and Molecular Biology* (Neidhardt, F., Ed.), pp. 544–550, Am. Soc. Microbiol., New York.
5. Baldet, P., Gerbling, H., Axiotis, S., and Douce, R. (1993) Eur. J. Biochem. **217**, 479–485.
6. Begley, T. P., Xi, J., Kinsland, C., Taylor, S., and McLafferty, F. (1999) Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. **3**, 623–629.
7. Sanyal, L., Lee, S.-L., and Flint, D. H. (1994) J. Am. Chem. Soc. **116**, 2637–2638.
8. Kunst, F., Ogasawara, N., Moszer, I., Albertini, A. M., Alloni, G., Azevedo, V., Bertero, M. G., Bessieres, P., Bolotin, A., Borchert, S., *et al.* (1997) Nature **390**, 249–256.
9. Bower, S., Perkins, J. B., Yocum, R. R., Howitt, C. L., Rahaim, P., and Pero, J. (1996) J. Bacteriol. **178**, 4122–4130.
10. Lu, A. Y. H., Junk, K., and Coon, M. J. (1969) J. Biol. Chem. **244**, 3714–3721.
11. Ortiz de Montellano, P. R. (1995) *in Cytochrome P450: Structure, Mechanism, and Biochemistry* (Ortiz de Montellano, P. R., Ed.), pp. 245–303, Plenum, New York.
12. Deutscher, M. P., Abelson, J. N., and Simon, M. I. (1990) Methods Enzymol. **182**, 62–63.
13. Jackowski, S., and Rock, C. O. (1987) J. Bacteriol. **169**, 1469–1473.
14. Peterson, J. A., Lu, J.-Y., Geisselsoder, J., Graham-Lorence, S., Carmona, C., Witney, F., and Lorence, M. C. (1992) J. Biol. Chem. **267**, 14193–14203.
15. Dawson, J. H., Andersson, C. A., and Sono, M. (1982) J. Biol. Chem. **257**, 3606–3617.
16. Barnes, H. J., Arlotto, M. P., and Waterman, M. R. (1991) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **88**, 5597–5601.
17. De Voss, J. J., Sibbesen, O., Zhang, Z., and Ortiz de Montellano, P. R. (1997) J. Am. Chem. Soc. **119**, 5489–5498.
18. Gunsalus, I. C., and Wagner, G. C. (1978) Methods Enzymol. **52**, 166–188.
19. Issartel, J.-P., Koronakis, V., and Hughes, C. (1991) Nature **351**, 759–761.
20. Rock, C. O., and Cronan, J. E. (1980) Anal. Biochem. **102**, 362–364.

360

STOK AND DE VOSS

21. Rawlings, M., and Cronan, J. E. (1992) *J. Biol. Chem.* 267, 5751–5754.

22. Ullah, A. J. H., Murray, R. I., Bhattacharyya, P. K., Wagner, G. C., and Gunsalus, I. C. (1990) *J. Biol. Chem.* 265, 1345–1351.

23. Fruetel, J. A., Mackman, R. L., Peterson, J. A., and Ortiz de Montellano, P. R. (1994) *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 28815–28821.

24. Jenkins, C. M., and Waterman, M. R. (1994) *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 27401–27408.

25. Ravichandran, G., Boddupalli, S. S., Hasemann, C. A., Peterson, J. A., and Deisenhofer, J. (1993) *Science* 261, 731–736.

26. Yu, C.-A., Gunsalus, I. C., Katagiri, M., Suhara, K., and Takke-mori, S. (1974) *J. Biol. Chem.* 249, 94–101.

27. Cronan, J. E., and Rock, C. O. (1987) *in Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium: Cellular and Molecular Biology*

28. Altschul, S. F., Madden, T. L., Schäffer, A. A., Zhang, J., Zhang, Z., Miller, W., and Lipman, D. J. (1997) *Nucleic Acids Res.* 25, 3389–3402.

29. Birch, O. M., Fuhrmann, M., and Shaw, N. M. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 19158–19165.

30. Davis, S. C., Sui, Z., Peterson, J. A., and Ortiz de Montellano, P. R. (1996) *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* 328, 35–42.

31. de Mendoza, D., Grau, R., and Cronan, J. E. (1993) *in Bacillus subtilis and Other Gram-Positive Bacteria: Biochemistry, Physiology, and Molecular Genetics* (Sonenshein, A. L., Hoch, J. A., and Losick, R., Eds.), pp. 411–421, Am. Soc. Microbiol., Washington, DC.

32. De Voss, J. J., and Stok, J. E. (1997) *FASEB J.* 11, A812–A812.
