
CELLULAR
SIGNALLING

Cellular Signalling 13 (2001) 299–310

# Signalling for survival and death in neurones
## The role of stress-activated kinases, JNK and p38

### Sarah J. Harper${}^{a,*}$, Philip LoGrasso${}^{b}$

${}^{a}$Department of Pharmacology, Merck Sharp and Dohme Research Laboratories, Neuroscience Research Centre, Terlings Park, Harlow, Essex CM20 2QR, UK  
${}^{b}$Department of Neuroinflammation, MRL San Diego, 505 Coast Boulevard South, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA  

Received 7 November 2000; accepted 9 January 2001

---

### Abstract

The pathways involved in neuronal survival or death have been extensively studied mainly in cell lines. Recent evidence has suggested that activation of the stress activated pathways, jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 may play important roles in neuronal cell death or regeneration. In this review we will discuss these pathways in detail. We will examine the evidence that these pathways are important in neuronal cell death. Finally we will review the evidence that inhibitors of these pathways have a neuroprotective effect both in vitro and in vivo. © 2001 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.

#### Keywords: JNK; p38; CEP1347; Neurone; Cell death; Kinase

---

### 1. Introduction

The signal transduction molecules involved in neuronal survival or death have been extensively studied, initially in the PC12 cell line and more recently in primary neurones (for review see Ref. [1]). One of the most extensively used models has been the nerve growth factor (NGF)-activated signal transduction pathway [2]. This model has been useful for determining the signalling pathways that are activated on NGF binding to its high affinity TrkA receptor and a low affinity p75 receptor. Recent studies have demonstrated that in addition to these positive effects of NGF binding to its receptor, NGF also inhibits signalling through the p38 and c-jun N-terminal kinase or stress-activated kinase (JNK/SAPK) pathways. These pathways are activated on growth factor withdrawal [3]. Generally, activation of the ERK forms of MAPK causes survival responses, whereas activation of the SAPKs, JNK, and p38 promote cell death. In this review, we will focus on the early signal transduction pathways involved in signalling for cell death, particularly the SAPKs, JNK, and p38, and examine the evidence for each kinase’s role in cell death.

Following receptor activation, neurotrophins promote survival via at least two pathways, the Ras-PI3K-Akt pathway to suppress the activation of apoptotic proteins and the MEK/MAPK pathway to activate anti-apoptotic proteins (see Fig. 1). Evidence for the involvement of Ras is extensive. Inhibition of Ras activity decreases neuronal survival in sympathetic neurones [4,5]. Conversely, increasing Ras activity by deleting the Ras inhibitory protein, NF-1, allows peripheral neurones to survive in the absence of neurotrophins [6]. Both the MEK/MAPK and PI3K/Akt pathways lie downstream of Ras activation. PI3K is probably activated by both Ras and Gab-1, an adaptor protein, which binds to Trk and directly stimulates PI3K [7]. Gab-1, when overexpressed in PC12 cells, promotes survival in the absence of NGF [8]. Downstream, PI3K activates the serine-threonine kinase Akt. Akt has been shown to be important in survival of both sympathetic [9–11] and cerebellar granule neurones [12]. Other potential targets of PI3K are the inhibitors of apoptosis family (IAP). Members of the family include X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP), neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP), and human inhibitor of apoptosis protein (HIAP, also known as inhibitor of T-cell apoptosis, ITA) [13]. Suppression of

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +44-1279-440475; fax: +44-1279-440369.
E-mail address: sarah_harper@merck.com (S.J. Harper).

0898-6568/01/$ – see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
PII: S0898-6568(01)00148-6

STRESS

Receptor  
e.g. TRK / p75  

NGF, BDNF or NT-3  
-TrkA, B or C  

Rac  
GTP  

Sr  

PLC  

Grb2  

Sos  

Ras  
GTP  

14-3-3  

PKC  

?  

PI3K  

?  

Raf-1  

B-Raf  

Mos  

AKT  

MAPKK  
(MEK)  

S6K  

MAPK  
(ERK)  

P90<sub>rsk</sub>  

GSK-3  

ATF2  

Jun  

Fos  

Elk  

FasL  

Fas  

Cell death ?  

MKK3  

CDC42/RAC  

Ask1/MKK1  

p38  

MKK4/7  

JNK  

p53  

Bax  

Developmental apoptosis  
Injury induced death  

Cystolic  
targets  

Nuclear  
targets  

neuritogenesis,  
cell survival  

Stress induced death  

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of potential neurotrophin-activated pathways and pathways activated in response to stress. The major pathways that are activated on neurotrophin binding are the PI3K/Akt pathway and the MAPK pathway. Activation of these pathways leads to survival and neurite outgrowth responses. Stress can take many forms, including lack of occupancy of a receptor, such as Trk or p75. This leads to activation of the JNK and or p38 pathways, which can lead to death. See text for further details.

XIAP decreases NGF-induced survival in chick sensory and sympathetic neurones and overexpression supports neurones in the absence of NGF [14]. Akt is involved in mediating survival effects and has no effect on neurite outgrowth. Thus, all the potential targets of Akt are proteins involved in neuronal survival. These include Bad, an inhibitor of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2, pro-caspase 9, and forkhead, a transcription factor that induces apoptosis by increasing levels of Fas ligand (for reviews see Refs. [15–17]).

The other major pathway believed to be important in mediating NGF-induced survival responses is the MEK/MAPK pathway. NGF induces strong and sustained activation of MAPK in both PC12 cells and sympathetic neurones [18–21]. However, inhibition of MEK has only a

modest effect on neuronal survival, suggesting that activation of MEK is sufficient but not essential for neurotrophin-mediated survival. Downstream targets of MEK include the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 and CREB (cAMP response element binding protein). Sympathetic neurones treated with NGF show an increased level of Bcl-2 [22], suggesting a role for this protein in mediating the survival promoting effects of NGF. CREB has also been shown to have a key role in survival responses. Dominant negative forms of CREB, expressed in sympathetic neurones, induce apoptosis in the presence of NGF [23]. Other pathways, such as the PLCγ and SNT, are also activated following NGF binding to its receptor but are more important in promoting neurite outgrowth [24]. In this review, the evidence for a role for p38 and JNK in neuronal cell death will be critically discussed.

### 2. Isoforms of JNK

Ten isoforms of JNK are expressed in human adult brain [25]. These ten isoforms are encoded by three genes: *jnk1*, *jnk2*, and *jnk3*. The *jnk1* and *jnk2* genes are expressed in most tissue, whereas *jnk3* is expressed primarily in brain with extremely low level of expression in the kidney and testis [26]. Alternative splicing of the genes yields four JNK1 isoforms, four JNK2 isoforms, and two JNK3 isoforms [25]. The various isoforms within a gene are designated, for example, JNK1α1, JNK1α2, JNK1β1, and JNK1β2. The primary difference between α1 and α2 isoforms is found in the 3′ coding region resulting in proteins of ~55 kDa (α2) and 46 kDa (α1) [25]. To date, no functional differences have been ascribed to these isoforms. In contrast, alternate splicing, giving rise to α and β isoforms in *jnk1* and *jnk2*, has been shown to have significant functional differences particularly in regard to substrate binding [25]. The *jnk3* on the other hand, is unique compared to *jnk1* and *jnk2* in that it does not have this type of alternate splicing. The primary difference between the *jnk3* gene and *jnk1* and *jnk2* genes is that the protein product for JNK3 has 39 amino acids at the N-terminus that are not present in JNK1 and JNK2. The functional role for this N-terminal difference has not been ascribed. Overall amino acid identity between JNK1α1 and JNK2α1 is 73%, between JNK1α1 and JNK3α1 is 75%, and between JNK2α1 and JNK3α1 is 77%.

### 3. Regulation of JNK signalling pathway

The JNKs are members of the mitogen-activated kinase (MAP) family. In a variety of mammalian cell types the JNKs are activated by a number of extracellular stimuli, including cytokines, such as tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) and interleukin-1 (IL-1) [27–29]. In addition, the JNKs are activated by a variety of cellular stress stimuli including UV light [30], cyclohexamide, anisomysin, and heat shock [31]. The extracellular regulation of JNK in neuronal cells has been shown to be cell type as well as stimuli dependent [32–34]. Indeed, Mielke and coworkers [32] have shown that PC12, Neuro2A, and SHSY5Y cells show different levels of JNK activation in response to different stimuli. For example, SHSY5Y cells exhibited a much stronger JNK1 activation in response to H₂O₂ than did PC12 or Neuro2A cells [32], whereas Kumagae and colleagues [33] showed that JNK was modestly activated in Neuro2A cells by anisomycin, but not ceramide, UV irradiation, or heat shock. One of the initial studies implicating the JNK pathway in neuronal apoptosis was by Xia and colleagues [3], where they showed activation of JNK in PC12 cells upon NGF withdrawal. A similar result was seen by Virdee and coworkers [34], where they showed an activation of JNK in primary rat sympathetic neurones in the absence of NGF. Collectively, all of these studies link JNK activation to different external stress or growth factor stimulation, further illustrating the role JNK may play in neuronal apoptosis.

### 4. Upstream regulation of JNK

The immediate upstream activators of JNK are the MAP kinase kinases (MKKs), known alternatively as the JNKKs. These kinases are believed to be dual-specificity kinases in that they are capable of phosphorylating JNK on both Thr and Tyr [35–37]. Indeed, it has been shown that for JNK to be fully active it must be phosphorylated on both Thr and Tyr [25, 38, 39]. A number of studies, utilising either targeted gene disruption of MKK4 [40] or immunoprecipitation of either MKK4 [35] or MKK7 [36, 37] and subsequent activation of JNK1 or JNK2, have shown that either of these upstream activators is essential for JNK activation. In a more detailed analysis, Lawler and colleagues [41], utilizing purified MKK4, MKK7, and JNK1 have shown that both MKK4 and MKK7 are needed in vitro for maximal activation of JNK1. Recently, Lisnock and coworkers [39], utilizing a combination of western analysis, mass spectrometry, and steady-state kinetics, have shown in vitro that both MKK4 and MKK7 are required for bisphosphorylation and maximal activity of JNK3. Moreover, the data showed that MKK7 phosphorylated Thr, and once Thr was phosphorylated, MKK4 could phosphorylate Tyr. No studies have yet determined which upstream stimuli affect which MKKs to ultimately activate JNK3 in neuronal cells. The extracellular stimuli and activation pathways that control MKK activation and, consequently, JNK activation are indeed different for the different MKKs [36] and may be cell dependent as well. Further upstream from the MKKs lie other kinases, such as MLK3 [42] and MEKK1 [43], that have been shown to be activators of the MKKs and, consequently, JNK. Again, it is likely that activation of these kinases will be both cell type and stimuli dependent.

5. JNK interacting proteins (JIPs)

An additional level of control of the JNK signalling pathway is provided by the JIPs. Murine JIP-1 was identified by Dickens and colleagues in 1997 [44] as a cytoplasmic protein that bound to JNK, regulating its activity. JIP-2 was identified shortly after as a member of the same family [45]. These are scaffold proteins that mediate the signal transduction through MLK, MKK, and JNK pathway, perhaps by sequestering all of the necessary kinases [46]. JIP-1 contains a phosphotyrosine-binding domain (PTB), as well as a JNK-binding domain and a src homology 3 domain (SH3) [47]. Co-expression of JIP-1 with components of the JNK pathway enhances the activation of JNK [46]. However, overexpression of JIP-1 inhibits the JNK signal transduction, possibly by sequestering the components of the pathway into separate complexes, thereby inhibiting signalling.

JIP-1 mRNA is widely expressed in murine tissues, including testes, kidney, lung, and is particularly highly expressed in brain [44]. JIP-2 and JIP-1 mRNA are both highly expressed throughout the nervous system, and low levels of JIP-2 are seen in a limited number of other tissues [45]. Recently, rat and human homologues of JIP-1 have been identified and termed islet-brain 1 (IB-1) [48]. Rat and human IB-1 are 97% identical to mouse JIP-1, with an insertion of 47 amino acids forming a putative helix loop helix and a phosphotyrosine interaction domain. IB-1 expression is localised to the synaptic region of the olfactory bulb, hippocampus, cortex, cerebellar cortex, and retina in the adult mouse [48]. Expression levels peak at around 2 weeks postnatal. The neuronal expression and synaptic localisation suggest that IB-1 may be involved in cell signalling both during development and in the adult.

Kim and coworkers [49] have also reported novel splice variants of JIP-1 that have putative PTB, a helix loop helix domain and an SH3 homology region in the C-terminus. These isoforms have been termed mJIP-1a (JIP-1), mJIP-1b, mJIP-2a, mJIP-2b, and mJIP-3 in the mouse and rJIP-1b, rJIP-1c, rJIP-2a in the rat. These authors also report high levels of mRNA expression of all isoforms in the brain (hippocampus, cortex, and cerebellum) and expression of JIP-1 in the kidney as well. JIP-1 expression has been reported in a number of neuronal cell lines. In the human neuroblastoma cell line SK-N-F1, a JIP-1 isoform, consistent with the IB-1 form, migrating at 115 kDa, can be detected [47]. Naive PC12 cells do not express JIP-1, but on differentiation with NGF, two proteins can be detected, one of 115 kDa and an additional protein of 180 kDa. In the mouse neuroblastoma cell line N1E-115, JIP-1 proteins are expressed in both naive and differentiated cells, with the differentiated cells also expressing a phosphorylated form [47].

Experimental evidence is accumulating to show that overexpression of JIPs prevent activation of both JNKs and cell death. In neuroglioma cells (N18TG), overexpression of JIP2a suppresses both JNK activation and cell death caused by etoposide [49]. In vivo, in transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) in the rat, both phosphorylated JNK and JIP-1 are expressed at 8 h reperfusion, suggesting a possible attempt by the cells to avoid cell death [50]. Gillardon and coworkers [51] also report that JNK is up-regulated following transient global ischaemia, being detectable in the nuclei of hippocampal CA1 neurones within 24 h. However, JIP-1 was unchanged. In the hippocampus, JIP-1 has been identified using microarrays as a gene that is upregulated following fimbria-fornix lesion [52]. These data suggest that JIPs play an important role in the regulation of JNK signalling and that modifying levels of expression of JIPs may prevent cell death.

6. Substrates for JNK

Many substrates are phosphorylated by the JNKs, including the transcription factors c-jun [30,31,53], ATF2 [54], Elk-1 [55], NFAT [56], as well as tumour suppressor p53 [57,58] and a cell death domain protein, MADD [58]. In addition, the neurofilament heavy subunit (NFH) has been proposed to be a substrate for JNK [59,60], strengthening the case for JNK being involved in neurite outgrowth or regeneration. Most measures of JNK substrate specificity have been qualitative. For example, Gupta and coworkers [25] showed that JNK isoforms immunoprecipitated from IL-1-stimulated CHO cells phosphorylated c-jun, ATF2, and Elk-1 to a similar extent. In similar experiments, these authors also showed that c-jun is a much better substrate than Jun D, while Jun B was not a substrate at all for JNK2α2. The most quantitative study for determining the Michaelis constant for a JNK substrate was published recently by Lisnock and colleagues [39]. Utilizing purified GST-ATF2 and JNK3α1 and steady-state kinetic analysis, they demonstrated that GST-ATF2 had a Michaelis constant (Km) = 0.4 μM for bisphosphorylated JNK3α1 and 0.7 μM for Thr 221 monophosphorylated JNK3α1, suggesting minimal effect for Tyr phosphorylation on ATF2 substrate binding. Kallunki et al. [28] found the Km for GST-c-jun to be 0.35 μM for JNK2, and reported that JNK1 has a Km for GST-c-jun = 2.5 μM. The approximate sevenfold difference in Km for GST-c-jun between JNK1 and JNK2 in the Kallunki et al. study may be due in part to the lack of c-jun saturation, thereby making it difficult to accurately determine a proper Km value, or it may in turn reflect true differences in c-jun binding between JNK1 and JNK2.

7. Downstream signalling of the JNK pathway

Once phosphorylated, transcription factors, such as ATF2 and c-jun help regulate gene expression in response to cytokines, growth factors, and other cellular stress
stimuli. ATF2 and c-jun, along with other transcription factors comprise the AP-1 transcriptional activator complex. It is this AP-1 transcriptional activator that has been shown to effect apoptosis in mouse brain [61]. In this study, JNK3 -/- mice were shown, using a luciferase reporter gene assay, to exhibit a defect in AP-1 reporter gene expression and concurrent decrease in neuronal apoptosis in response to excitotoxic stress. These data suggested that inhibition of JNK3 phosphorylation of c-jun and subsequent AP-1 transcriptional activity would have an effect on neuronal apoptosis and hence survival. Inhibition of c-jun phosphorylation by a specific JNK3 inhibitor will be needed to prove this hypothesis.

### 8. Expression of JNK isoforms in the nervous system

JNKs are widely expressed in the nervous system. By in situ hybridisation, *jnk1* mRNA is highly expressed in the adult rat brain in the following locations: the hippocampus, the granular layer of the cerebellum, the medial habenula, the anterodorsal thalamic nucleus, the red nucleus, the pontine nucleus, the facial nucleus, the motor and mesencephalic nuclei of the trigeminal nerve, the hypoglossal and vestibular nuclei, and the nucleus ambiguus [62]. The mRNA expression is higher in the early postnatal period compared with the adult. The *jnk2* mRNA is expressed in a similar pattern to *jnk1*, and both isoforms are also widely expressed in the immune system [63]. JNK3 is the only member of the family to be exclusively expressed in the brain. High levels of expression are seen in the medial habenula and the endopiriform cortex and at lower levels in the hippocampus [64]. JNK3 is developmentally regulated, being expressed at higher levels in the postnatal period compared with the adult rat suggesting a possible role in programmed cell death.

Knockout studies have yielded important information on the functions of JNK isoforms, particularly during development. Deletion of each individual isoform of Jnk from the genome has no detrimental effect on the animals. All are apparently normal and there are no gross differences between wild-type animals and nulls [61, 65]. However, when the JNK3 null mice are treated with kainic acid, they show both reduced seizure activity and a reduction in the hippocampal neuronal cell apoptosis, compelling evidence for a role for JNK in mediating responses to stressful stimuli [61]. Double knockouts of both JNK1 and JNK3 or JNK2 and JNK3 are also apparently normal. Mice lacking JNK1 and JNK2, however, are embryonically lethal at E11-12, showing severe abnormalities in the brain. By E10.5 the animals show abnormal hindbrain encephaly due to a reduction in cell death at the leading edges of the converging hindbrain. This results in the hindbrain remaining open [65]. Conversely, in the forebrains of these animals, at E10.5, there is a 10-fold increase in the number of Tunel positive cells

compared to the wild type. These results suggest that JNK1 and JNK2 regulate region-specific apoptosis during development and that JNK3 may mediate neuronal responses to stress.

JNK isoforms are also reported to be expressed in a number of cell lines. PC12 cells express only JNK1 and JNK2, whereas the mouse cell line Neuro2a and the human cell line SHSY5Y cells express all three isoforms [32]. These data would suggest that the PC12 cell is not a good model for studying JNK in a neuronal system, as they do not express the ‘neuronal’ JNK3 isoform. Embryonic DRG neurones cultured in NGF also express SAPKγ (JNK1) [60], suggesting that JNK activation may play a role in stress-induced cell death in DRG neurones.

### 9. The p38 isoforms

Evidence for the role of p38 in neuronal cell death has come largely from PC12 cell experiments [3] and the effects of the SmithKline Beecham inhibitors (SB203580 and SB202190). There are four primary isoforms of p38 that have been described: p38α [66, 67], p38β [68], p38γ [69], and p38δ [70, 71]. A fifth isoform, nearly identical to p38β and named p38-2, has also been described [72]. Overall amino acid identity between p38α and p38β is 74%, 60% between p38α and p38δ, and 60% between p38α and p38γ. The p38δ and p38γ also share 60% homology to p38β and each other. The p38α and p38β are ubiquitously expressed showing very high levels of expression in the brain [68]. These are the only two p38 isoforms that are expressed in brain. The p38γ is expressed exclusively in skeletal muscle [69], whereas p38δ is found only in lung and kidney [70]. To date, there are no definitive reports that have ascribed a unique function to any of these isoforms, particularly regarding their function in brain, although it has been speculated that the predominant expression of p38γ in skeletal muscle may link that isoform to regulation of muscle-specific metabolism and/or function [69]. It has been speculated, however, that the different isoforms do have different functions, particularly with regard to their substrate specificity [68–71]. This, in turn, could effect what genes are regulated by each of the p38 isoforms and consequently what functional response is associated with the different genes.

### 10. Regulation of the p38 signalling pathway

A seemingly endless number of extracellular stimuli has been shown to activate the p38 pathway in non-neuronal cells [73]. For neuronal cells, or cell lines a number of stimuli have been reported to activate the p38 pathway. NGF-withdrawal in PC12 cells has been shown to stimulate p38 [3, 74, 75], whereas NGF-withdrawal did not
show an effect on p38 activation in sympathetic neurones [76] or other central neurones [77]. As two final examples, glutamate has been shown to activate p38 in rat cerebellar granule neurones [78], and insulin growth factor-I was shown to activate p38 in SHSY5Y neuroblastoma cells, thereby exerting its neuroprotective effects by activating p38 and deactivating JNK [79]. Thus, as for JNK activation, many different stimuli will affect different cell types differently.

### 11. Upstream regulation of p38

Activation of p38, like JNK, follows a distinct protein kinase cascade, in which the upstream activator of p38 is classified as an MKK. MKK6, MKK4, MKK3, and MKK3-b are dual-specificity kinases that phosphorylate p38 on both Thr and Tyr in the activation loop and have been shown in vivo and in vitro to be direct upstream activators of p38 [80–84]. In a series of COS-7 cell co-transfection studies, Enslen and colleagues [85] showed that MKK3 caused strong activation of p38α, modest activation of p38γ, and no activation of p38β-2. Qualitatively, similar results for these isoforms were seen with MMK4. In contrast, MKK6 caused strong activation of all isoforms. As a follow-on study, Enslen and colleagues [86] demonstrated that the presence of a MAPK docking site in the N-terminus of the MKK4 and selective recognition of the activation loop in the p38 isoforms determine selective activation of different p38 isoforms by different MKKs. In vitro, MKK6 activates p38 300-fold better than MKK3 [82]. Qualitatively, Enslen and colleagues [85] indicated MKK3 is a better activator of p38 than MKK4.

Many of the above studies are centred around either in vitro activation of p38 by the MKKs or co-transfection studies in COS-7 cells. With regard to p38 activation in primary neurones and brain tissue, the data need to be interpreted in the context of MKK expression. It has been shown that neither MKK6 [81] nor MKK3 [83] is expressed in brain. This fact leaves only MKK4, which is expressed in the brain [84], as the only possible known upstream activator for p38. Thus, if p38 is indeed stress-activated in the brain it is likely that the upstream activator is MKK4 or some yet unidentified p38 activator. Like JNK, activators upstream of the MKKs for p38 are many and it is likely that these kinases will be cell type and stimuli dependent.

### 12. Substrates for p38

A number of substrates for p38 have been identified, including the transcription factors ATF2 [80, 87], PHAS-I [88], CHOP-I [89], and kinases, such as MAPKAP2 [90–92], MAPKAP3 [90], MAPKAP5 [93], and Mnk1 [94, 95]. It has been proposed that some of the functional differences for the p38 isoforms revolve around their substrate specificity [69, 70]. For example, it has been shown that p38γ can phosphorylate all of the above mentioned substrates [80, 87–91, 93–95], whereas p38δ phosphorylates ATF2 and PHAS-I, but not MAPKAP2 or MAPKAP3 [71]. More strikingly, p38γ does not phosphorylate ATF2 or MAPKAP2, but will phosphorylate MBP [69].

In 1997, LoGrasso and coworkers [87] showed that GST-ATF2 had K<sub>m</sub> = 6.2 μM. Interestingly, the kinetic mechanism for p38α for this substrate was ordered sequential with ATF2 binding before ATP. Moreover, the data revealed interacting binding sites between GST-ATF2 and ATP. It is interesting to speculate that if this mechanism is also true in vivo, some substrates such as ATF2 may help bind ATP and/or be in complexes with p38. It has been suggested that MAPKAP2 also binds p38 prior to ATP binding [92], further emphasising the interactive nature for substrate and ATP binding in p38. Recently, Hawkins and coworkers [96] showed the substrate specificity preferences for p38, utilising four purified p38 substrates. Steady-state kinetics revealed that MAPKAP3 and MAPKAP2 had k<sub>cat</sub>/K<sub>m</sub> = 27,510 and 34,000 M<sup>-1</sup>s<sup>-1</sup>, respectively. This is approximately 2-fold greater than ATF2 and 13-fold greater than PHAS-1 [96]. Which, if any, of these substrates is the preferred substrate in brain remains to be determined.

### 13. Downstream signalling of the p38 pathway

Like JNK, p38 gets phosphorylated and activated in response to a variety of cellular stress stimuli. As a result of p38 activation, transcription factors, such as ATF2 and CHOP-I, are phosphorylated and then act to regulate gene expression [89, 97].

Furthermore, as described, p38 phosphorylates MAPKAP2 and MAPKAP3 that in turn phosphorylate Hsp-27 [90]. As a consequence, p38 influences production and responds to pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α and IL-1β [98]. Indeed, genetic knockout of p38 in embryonic stem cells shows a decreased production of IL-6 [99]. This result is in agreement with Lee and coworkers [67], who showed that inhibition of p38 by SB203580 could decrease TNF-α and IL-1β production in monocytes, and Liverton and coworkers [100], who showed a decrease in TNF-α from whole blood upon treatment with selective p38 inhibitors. These data are further supported by the fact that a knockout of MAPKAP2 shows a 90% decrease in TNF-α production [101]. These, and many other examples, are strong evidence for the significant role for p38 in cytokine signalling and production. Little has been reported with regard to the direct downstream molecules for p38 signalling in the brain. Thus, more data will be needed to elucidate the signalling pathways in the brain that involve p38 MAP kinase and the role in neuronal survival.

14. Expression of p38

The p38α and p38β are the only isoforms expressed in the brain [68], thus any function for p38 in the brain should be ascribed to either of these isoforms. Studies on the expression of p38 in the brain are few. Mielke and coworkers [77, 102] report that p38 is expressed in the rat brain although there is no detailed information on regional variation. By Western analysis, p38 is expressed in hippocampus and cortex [77], and these authors report that expression levels are high. Studies of aged human brain using an antibody raised against the dually phosphorylated form of p38 detected only isolated cells in the cortex expressing active p38 [103]. In AD brain, the antibody recognises features characteristic of the disease, namely neuritic plaques, neuropil threads, and neurofibrillary tangles in the hippocampus and parahippocampal gyrus. Evidently, further studies are required to determine whether p38 is constitutively active in normal brain, and whether there are major changes in activation or expression following injury or disease states.

Neurones can be protected by microinjection of neutralising antibodies against c-jun [106], or by transfection of a dominant negative form of c-jun [107]. NGF deprivation causes an increase in JNK activity in these neurones, and suppression of this activity rescues the neurones [34]. Conversely, expression of a constitutively active form of MEKK1, which activates the JNK pathway, increases expression of c-jun expression and phosphorylation and causes apoptosis in the presence of NGF [76]. However, during development, onset and timing of c-jun phosphorylation do not correlate with death commitment, and c-jun is expressed in a greater number of neurones than actually die [34], suggesting that c-jun expression may be necessary but not sufficient for developmental cell death. Most of the evidence for JNK activation being involved in apoptosis in sympathetic neurones has been obtained by depriving the neurones of NGF. In a different model, where sympathetic neurones are induced to die by treating with nucleoside analogue cytosine arabinoside, Anderson and Tolkovsky [108] report that cell death is independent of JNK activation. These data again suggest that different stimuli elicit death using different pathways.

In cerebellar granule neurones deprived of the survival factors, serum and 25 mM potassium, c-jun mRNA is increased [109], and the neurones die by apoptosis. Expression of a dominant negative form of c-jun protects these neurones. However, these neurones express high basal levels of JNK that do not change following serum and potassium deprivation, suggesting that there is an alternative pathway responsible for up-regulating c-jun. Shimoke and coworkers [110] report that apoptosis induced by treatment with PI3K inhibitor LY294002 involves both suppression of Akt and elevation of JNK activity, indicating that there is both inhibition of the ‘survival’ pathway and activation of the ‘death’ pathway in these neurones.

In slice cultures of medial septum, c-jun is not expressed but can be induced by treatment of the cultures with neutralising NGF antibodies [111], suggesting that target-derived NGF may have a role in suppressing c-jun expression. In primary striatal cultures, treatment with glutamate causes both increased phosphorylation of c-jun and increased activity of JNK, an effect mediated by NMDA receptors [112]. Studies using antisense oligonucleotides to suppress c-jun expression have shown an increase in sprouting and cell number in hippocampal neurones [113], suggesting that the JNK pathway is active in this model of cell death.

Until recently, there has not been any inhibitor of JNK available. CEP-1347, a K252a derivative, inhibits the JNK pathway with no effect on p38. CEP-1347 has ‘neurotrophic’ activity on a number of populations of neurones, including rat spinal motoneurones [114], chick sympathetic neurones, dorsal root sensory neurones, chick motoneurones [115], and rat sympathetic neurones [116]. In addition, CEP-1347 causes an increase in ChAT activity in cultured basal forebrain neurones and spinal motoneurones [117, 118].

15. Experimental evidence for a role for JNK in cell death

15.1. In vitro

There is a great deal of evidence in support of a role for the JNK pathway in regulating cell death in neurones. One of the initial studies implicating the JNK pathway in neuronal apoptosis was by Xia and coworkers [3], who demonstrated activation of JNK in PC12 cells upon NGF withdrawal. Mielke and colleagues [32] have shown that PC12, Neuro 2A, and SHSY5Y cells show different levels of JNK activation in response to different stimuli. For example, SHSY5Y cells exhibited a much stronger JNK1 activation in response to H₂O₂ than did PC12 or Neuro 2A cells [32], whereas Kumagae and coworkers [33] showed that JNK was modestly activated in Neuro 2A cells by anisomycin, but not ceramide, UV irradiation, or heat shock [33]. In a dopaminergic cell line, MN9D, 6-hydroxydopamine induces activation of JNK and apoptosis, whereas treatment of the cells with MPP⁺ does not activate JNK and cells die by necrosis [104]. These authors suggest that JNK is playing a role in apoptotic death and not necrotic death. There is much debate as to whether MPP⁺ causes apoptosis or necrosis in cultures of primary ventral mesencephalon (for example see Lotharius et al. [105]) and it is likely that cell culture conditions will play a role in determining the type of cell death elicited.

Many of the earlier studies relied on looking at phosphorylation of the substrate c-jun to evaluate JNK activity. In sympathetic neurones induced to die by NGF deprivation, c-jun mRNA [106] and protein [107] are both increased. In addition, there is increased phosphorylation of c-jun [107].
These data suggest that JNK activation is important in neurotrophin deprivation in a number of populations of neurones, and that neurotrophins may inhibit activation of this pathway.

### 15.2. In vivo

The c-jun is expressed in a number of in vivo models of neurodegeneration; however, its role is still not clear. There is evidence that c-jun expression may be related to the regenerative capacity of neurones [119–122]. Following sciatic nerve crush injury, c-jun immunoreactivity is increased in the DRG. This increase can be prevented by intrathecal administration of NGF. Conversely, in intact DRGs, treatment with neutralising NGF antibodies also causes an increase in c-jun immunoreactivity [123], suggesting that the lack of NGF from the target causes increased expression of c-jun. There is also chronic activation of JNK and phosphorylation of c-jun in L4/5 DRGs following a transection injury [124, 125] with levels returning to normal after regeneration is complete.

In the streptozotocin model of diabetes, Fernyhough and coworkers [126] have shown that diabetes causes increased phosphorylation of the 54 kDa form of JNK in both DRG and sural nerve, but no change in the 56 and 46 kDa forms. These changes were correlated with elevated c-jun and neurofilament phosphorylation. Kogawa [127] and coworkers have performed sciatic nerve transections on streptozotocin-treated rats and have shown that both phosphorylated JNK and c-jun were increased following axotomy. In control animals, JNK and c-jun levels of phosphorylation returned to normal within 7 days, but in diabetic animals, JNK and c-jun phosphorylation persist. In control animals, there was no cell death in the DRGs, but in diabetic animals, there was a significant amount of cell death in the DRG. These data suggest that JNK phosphorylation is not directly correlated with cell death but may be an indicator of regeneration.

Several studies have implicated JNK activation in the processes leading to neuronal death following ischaemia. Early studies report that c-jun is up-regulated after carotid artery occlusion followed by a period of hypoxia (HI) [128] in the rat. In a gerbil model of transient global ischaemia, Kiessling and coworkers [129] report that c-jun is expressed in control brain in the dentate gyrus, but is up-regulated following ischaemia. In addition, c-jun is induced in CA3 but not in CA1 of the hippocampus. More recent studies have utilised antibodies raised against phosphorylated forms of c-jun and JNK. Herdegen and coworkers [125] report prolonged c-jun phosphorylation post-MCAO in the rat. Phosphorylated c-jun is present in neurones in the necrotic infarct areas of the striatum, piriform, and entorhinal cortex, and is present at 3 h post-infarct and sustained until at least 72 h. At 12 h post-infarct, the majority of phospho-c-jun positive neurones are also TUNEL positive, suggesting that these neurones are destined to die.

In the same study, JNK1 activity was increased over basal in extracts of hippocampus and cortex at 24 h post-infarct. Hayashi and coworkers [50] have also shown that JNK is expressed as early as 1 h, and is phosphorylated at 8 h following MCAO. Gillardon et al. [51] also report that JNK is phosphorylated at 24 h post-global forebrain ischaemia. Interestingly, a growth factor, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP), has been demonstrated to prevent ischaemia-induced apoptosis via inhibiting JNK and p38 [130], suggesting that inhibitors of JNK may be neuroprotective in models of ischaemia.

JNK is also involved in cell death associated with seizures. Mielke et al. [77] have shown that JNK1 is activated in the cortex and hippocampus of rats that have been treated with kainic acid to induce seizures, and Dragunow et al. [128] have shown that c-jun is expressed following electrically induced status epilepticus. Several studies have shown changes in c-jun and JNK in the fimbria-fornix model of cholinergic cell death. In the medial septum, c-jun is expressed following axotomy [111] in both cholinergic and GABAergic neurones. Maximum expression is seen at 5 days, and thereafter declines as the neurones die [131]. However, Butterworth [132] and Dragunow et al. [128] report that c-jun is still highly expressed after 2 months following fimbria-fornix lesion, suggesting that c-jun expression alone is not sufficient to elicit the death of these neurones [119, 132] and other signalling molecules may need to be co-expressed.

In the nigro-striatal pathway, developmental programmed cell death occurs in the substantia nigra in the early postnatal period. The c-jun expression is both temporally and regionally correlated with cell death and co-localises with apoptotic morphology [133]. In addition, JNK and phosphorylation of c-jun are also increased and associated with apoptotic cell death suggesting that in the nigro-striatal pathway JNK and c-jun do play a role in developmental cell death.

The most compelling evidence for the function of JNK in neuronal cell death comes from the in vivo studies carried out using the JNK pathway inhibitor CEP-1347. CEP-1347 is neuroprotective in a number of in vivo models, attenuating the loss of cortical ChAT activity and the loss of ChAT immunoreactive and retrogradely labelled FluoroGold-labelled neurones in the nucleus basalis following ibotenic acid infusion into the nucleus basalis magnocellularis [134]. Animals treated with CEP-1347 commit fewer errors in the T-maze compared to animals treated with vehicle [135], indicating that preserved neurones are functional. In animals where the fimbria-fornix has been transected, CEP-1347 is partially neuroprotective [118]. In the MPTP model of dopaminergic neurone loss, CEP-1347 attenuates the loss of striatal dopaminergic terminals and reduces the loss of dopaminergic cell bodies in the substantia nigra [136]. These data show the importance of JNK activation in neuronal cell death, and inhibiting JNK activation prevents cell death in a number of animal models of neurodegeneration. CEP-1347 is now in Phase I trials for Parkinson’s disease and it remainsto be seen whether this JNK pathway inhibitor is successful in preventing further death of nigral neurones in man.

16. Experimental evidence for a role for p38 in neuronal cell death

16.1. In vitro studies

The strongest evidence for a role for p38 in neuronal cell death comes from studies in PC12 cells. NGF treatment of PC12 cells causes sustained activation of the MAPK pathway and inhibition of the p38 and JNK pathways. Withdrawal of NGF causes apoptosis in these cells and induces activation of both p38 and JNK pathways and inhibits activation of the MAPK pathway [3]. This was confirmed by Kummer and coworkers [137], who reported that p38 activity was increased on NGF withdrawal in PC12 cells, and that this elevation and the accompanied cell death could be inhibited by either insulin or the p38 inhibitor PD169316. These authors also showed that Rat-1 fibroblasts deprived of serum could also be rescued by insulin or PD169316. These results suggest, along with data from chick forebrain neurones [74], that activation of the p38 pathway may be inhibited by the growth factor insulin.

There is also a large body of data supporting a role for p38 in cell death that has utilised inhibitors of p38. Results to date with inhibitors have centred around two compounds initially believed to be specific p38 inhibitors. SB203580 and SB202190 are now known to be inhibitory for JNK as well [39, 100]. A third compound is now available, PD169316, but is of the same structural class as SB203580 and SB202190. Both of these compounds are reported to promote survival of chick sensory [138], sympathetic, ciliary, and motor neurones in a dose-dependent manner [75].

Evidence from cerebellar granule neurones indicates that activation of p38 is probably stimulus dependent. For example, Kawasaki and coworkers [78] report that p38 is activated in cerebellar granule neurones treated with glutamate and is dependent on NMDA-receptor activation. Watson and coworkers [109] report that there are only low levels of active p38 in cerebellar neurones, and that there is no change in activation on deprivation of serum and potassium. Harada and Sugimoto [139] report that p38 is activated in cerebellar neurones on deprivation of the high concentration of potassium required for survival. These authors also report that JNK is activated and that SB203580 was neuroprotective, inhibiting caspase 3. The fact that SB203580 also inhibits JNK means that either or both of these pathways may be important. In a third model of cerebellar neurone death, Gunn-Moore and Tavare [140] report that withdrawal of serum or treatment with glutamate or β-amyloid in cerebellar granule neurones does not activate either JNK or p38, although cell death was seen in these cultures. This suggests that there may be a pathway for apoptosis, which is independent of both JNK and p38. Evidently, there are some differences in basal levels of p38 activation and effects of deprivation of survival factors in these neurones and all of these studies illustrated the problems associated with variable cell culture conditions.

In other culture systems, there have also been mixed results in experiments designed to determine whether p38 has a role in cell death. In cortical cultures treated with calyculin, an inhibitor of serine/threonine phosphatases I and IIa, to induce apoptosis, there is an increase in p38 activity. Neurones can be partially rescued with the p38 inhibitor PD169316. However, cultures treated with NMDA to induce an excitotoxic cell death cannot be rescued by this inhibitor [141] again, suggesting that different stresses cause different responses in the same cells.

Maas and coworkers [142] report that SB203580 at concentrations up to 100 μM does not rescue rat retinal ganglion neurones deprived of neurotrophins. This high concentration of SB203580 would seem to indicate that neither p38 nor JNK is involved in cell death resulting from neurotrophin deprivation in retinal ganglion neurones. However, Kikuchi and coworkers [143] report that retinal ganglion neurones treated with NMDA in vitro to induce cell death do respond to SB203580 with increased survival, again indicating that different methods of inducing cell death do so utilising different pathways. In sympathetic neurones, a cell type often used for studies on NGF signalling p38 is not activated on NGF withdrawal [76], suggesting that alternative pathways are used in these neurones.

Recent evidence suggests that p38 may be involved in neurite outgrowth. In PC12 cells, NGF causes activation of the ERK pathway, which is important for survival and neurite outgrowth. Recently it has been shown that NGF is capable of activating p38 in PC12 cells [144]. NGF activates p38 and its downstream effector MAPKAP [145]. Inhibition of either pathway partially inhibits NGF-induced CERB phosphorylation and neurite outgrowth. Inhibition of both pathways completely inhibits these responses. However, activation of p38 alone is not sufficient to induce neurite outgrowth, and a combination of sustained activation of p38 in combination with a transient activation of ERK/MAPK may be required. EGF also causes a transient activation of p38 in these cells. A member of the TGFβ family, bone morphogenic protein-2 (BMP-2) induces neuronal differentiation in PC12 cells, not through the MAPK pathway but by activating p38 [146]. Treatment of PC12 cells with SB203580 inhibits the neurite outgrowth elicited by BMP-2. Activation of the upstream kinases MKK3/6 also causes neurite outgrowth in the absence of BMP-2, suggesting that activation of p38 alone is sufficient to induce neurite outgrowth.

16.2. In vivo studies

To date there are few reports of in vivo effects of p38 inhibitors. In a pig model of cardiac ischaemic cell death, application of SB203580 by local infusion for 60 min priorto a 60-min period of cardiac occlusion and 60 min of reperfusion, resulted in a significant reduction in infarct size [147]. In the CNS, Irving and coworkers [148] report that phosphorylated p38 expression is increased in astrocyte-like cells in the core and penumbra region following focal cerebral ischaemia (transient or permanent) in the rat. Other workers report expression of phosphorylated p38 in the hippocampus following global forebrain ischaemia in the gerbil, but suggest that expression is within microglia and not the dying neurones [149]. These authors suggest that p38 may be involved in activation of microglia. Finally, in the kainic acid model of seizure induction and cell death, Mielke and coworkers [77] report a high basal activity of p38 in the hippocampus and cortex by Western analysis in the rat brain, and a large reduction following kainic acid treatment. Levels of phosphorylated p38 were reported to still be depressed up to 10 days following kainic acid treatment.

In the visual system of the rat, axotomy of the optic nerve leads to phosphorylation of p38 and death of the retinal ganglion cells [143]. Treatment with SB203580, intravitreally, leads to increased neuronal survival both in the rat [143], and in a similar model in the chick embryo [150]. Results from these small number of in vivo studies suggests that, as in the in vitro studies, different stresses may result in activation of different pathways to elicit cell death. The different results in control brain indicate that further studies are required to determine basal levels of expression and the cell types that express phosphorylated p38.

### 17. Conclusions

The roles of JNK and p38 in neuronal cell death remain to be established. Results in vitro have shown that different cell types respond to the same stress in different ways, and different stressors in the same cell elicit different signalling pathways. To date, the evidence for a role in cell death is stronger for JNK than for p38, but the availability of specific inhibitors for both of these signalling molecules will help to clarify which pathways are important in animal models that relate to human neurological diseases. Neuroprotective effects of CEP-1347 in vivo have established that JNK does play a role in cell death in a number of animal models, and it remains to be seen whether the compound is specific enough to survive clinical trials and whether it will be efficacious in man.

### Acknowledgments

We thank Scott Pollack for critically reading the manuscript.

### References

[1] Kaplan DR, Miller FD. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2000;10:381–91.

[2] Gunn-Moore FJ. Cell Signalling 1998;10:151–7.

[3] Xia Z, Dickens M, Raingeaud J, Davis RJ, Greenberg ME. Science 1995;270:1326–31.

[4] Borasio GD, Markus A, Wittinghofer A, Barde YA, Heumann R. J Cell Biol 1993;121:665–72.

[5] Nobes CD, Tolkovsky AM. Eur J Neurosci 1995;7:344–50.

[6] Vogel KS, Brannan CI, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Parada LF. Cell 1995;82:733–42.

[7] Holgado MM, Moscatello DK, Emlet DR, Dieterich R, Wong AJ. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997;94:12419–24.

[8] Korhonen JM, Said FA, Wong AJ, Kaplan DR. J Biol Chem 1999;274:37307–14.

[9] Crowder RJ, Freeman RS. J Neurosci 1998;18:2933–43.

[10] Vaillant AR, Mazzoni I, Tudan C, Boudreau M, Kaplan DR, Miller FD. J Cell Biol 1999;146:955–66.

[11] Virdee K, Xue L, Hemmings BA, Goemans C, Heumann R, Tolkovsky AM. Brain Res 1999;837:127–42.

[12] Dudek H, Datta SR, Franke TF, Birnbaum MJ, Yao R, Cooper GM, Segal RA, Kaplan DR, Greenberg ME. Science 1997;275:661–5.

[13] LaCasse EC, Baird S, Korneluk RG, MacKenzie AE. Oncogene 1998;17:3247–59.

[14] Wiese S, Digby MR, Gunnersen JM, Gotz R, Pei G, Holtmann B, Lowenthal J, Sendtner M. Nat Neurosci 1999;2:978–83.

[15] Datta SR, Brunet A, Greenberg ME. Genes Dev 1999;13:2905–27.

[16] Chan TO, Rittenhouse SE, Tsichlis PN. Annu Rev Biochem 1999;68:965–1014.

[17] Vanhaesebroeck B, Alessi DR. Biochem J 2000;346:561–76.

[18] Mazzoni IE, Said FA, Aloyz R, Miller FD, Kaplan D. J Neurosci 1999;19:9716–27.

[19] Creedon DJ, Johnson EM, Lawrence JC. J Biol Chem 1996;271:20713–8.

[20] Virdee K, Tolkovsky AM. J Neurochem 1996;67:1801–5.

[21] Klesse LJ, Meyers KA, Marshall CJ, Parada LF. Oncogene 1999;18:2055–68.

[22] Aloyz RS, Bamji SX, Pozniak CD, Toma JG, Atwal J, Kaplan DR, Miller FD. J Cell Biol 1998;143:1691–703.

[23] Riccio A, Ahn S, Davenport CM, Blendy JA, Ginty DD. Science 1999;286:2358–61.

[24] Greene LA, Kaplan DR. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1995;5:579–87.

[25] Gupta S, Barrett T, Whitmarsh AJ, Cavanagh J, Sluss HK, Derijard B, Davis RJ. EMBO J 1996;15:2760–70.

[26] Mohit AA, Martin JH, Miller CA. Neuron 1995;14:67–78.

[27] Minden A, Lin A, Smeal T, Derijard B, Cobb M, Davis R, Karin M. Mol Cell Biol 1994;14:6683–8.

[28] Kallunki T, Su B, Tsigelny I, Sluss HK, Derijard B, Moore G, Davis R, Karin M. Genes Dev 1994;8:2996–3007.

[29] Sluss HK, Barrett T, Derijard B, Davis RJ. Mol Cell Biol 1994;14:8376–84.

[30] Derijard B, Hibi M, Wu IH, Barrett T, Su B, Deng T, Karin M, Davis RJ. Cell 1994;76:1025–37.

[31] Kyriakis JM, Banerjee P, Nikolakaki E, Dai T, Rubie EA, Ahmad MF, Avruch J, Woodgett JR. Nature 1994;369:156–60.

[32] Mielke K, Damm A, Yang DD, Herdegen T. Brain Res 2000;75:128–37.

[33] Kumagae Y, Zhang Y, Kim OJ, Miller CA. Mol Brain Res 1999;67:10–7.

[34] Virdee K, Bannister AJ, Hunt SP, Tolkovsky AM. J Neurochem 1997;69:550–61.

[35] Deacon K, Blank JL. J Biol Chem 1997;272:14489–96.

[36] Lu X, Nemoto S, Lin A. J Biol Chem 1997;272:24751–4.

[37] Holland PM, Suzanne M, Campbell JS, Noselli S, Cooper JA. J Biol Chem 1997;272:24994–8.

[38] Xie X, Gu Y, Fox T, Coll JT, Fleming MA, Markland W, Caron PR, Wilson KP, Su MS. Structure 1998;6:983–91.

[39] Lisnock J, Griffin P, Calaycay J, Frantz B, Parsons J, O’Keefe SJ, LoGrasso P. Biochemistry 2000;39:3141–8.

[40] Yang D, Tournier C, Wysk M, Lu HT, Xu J, Davis RJ, Flavell RA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997;94:3004–9.
[41] Lawler S, Fleming Y, Goedert M, Cohen P. Curr Biol 1998; 8: 1387–90.
[42] Tibbles LA, Ing YL, Kiefer F, Chan J, Woodgett JR, Lassam NJ. EMBO J 1996; 15: 7026–35.
[43] Lin A, Minden A, Martinetto H, Claret FX, Lange CC, Mercurio F, Johnson GL, Karin M. Science 1995; 268: 286–90.
[44] Dickens M, Rogers JS, Cavanagh J, Raitano A, Xia Z, Halpern JR, Greenberg ME, Sawyers CL, Davis RJ. Science 1997; 277: 693–6.
[45] Yasuda J, Whitmarsh AJ, Cavanagh J, Sharma M, Davis RJ. Mol Cell Biol 1999; 19: 7245–54.
[46] Whitmarsh AJ, Cavanagh J, Tournier C, Yasuda J, Davis RJ. Science 1998; 281: 1671–4.
[47] Meyer D, Liu A, Margolis B. J Biol Chem 1999; 274: 35113–8.
[48] Pellet JB, Haefliger JA, Staple JK, Widmann C, Welker E, Hirling H, Bonny C, Nicod P, Catsicas S, Waeber G, Riederer BM. Eur J Neurosci 2000; 12: 621–32.
[49] Kim IJ, Lee KW, Park BY, Lee JK, Park J, In YC, Eom SJ, Chang TS, Myung JK, Young IY, Sung KC, Lee YD, Choi EJ, Han PL. J Neurochem 1999; 72: 1335–43.
[50] Hayashi T, Sakai KI, Sasaki C, Zhang WR, Warita H, Abe K. Neurosci Lett 2000; 284: 195–9.
[51] Gillardon F, Spranger M, Tiesler C, Hossmann KA. Mol Brain Res 1999; 73: 138–43.
[52] Anguelova E, Boularand S, Nowicki JP, Benavides J, Smirnova T. J Neurosci Res 2000; 59: 209–17.
[53] Hibi M, Lin A, Smeal T, Minden A, Karin M. Genes Dev 1993; 7: 2135–48.
[54] Van Dam H, Wilhelm D, Herr I, Steffen A, Herrlich P, Angel P. EMBO J 1995; 14: 1798–811.
[55] Whitmarsh AJ, Shore P, Sharrocks AD, Davis RJ. Science 1995; 269: 403–7.
[56] Chow CW, Rincon M, Cavanagh J, Dickens M, Davis RJ. Science 1997; 278: 1638–41.
[57] Hu MC, Qui WR, Wang YP. Oncogene 1997; 15: 2277–87.
[58] Zhang Y, Zhou L, Miller CA. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998; 95: 2586–91.
[59] Giasson BI, Mushynski WE. J Biol Chem 1996; 271: 30404–9.
[60] Giasson BI, Mushynski WE. J Neurosci 1997; 17: 9466–72.
[61] Yang DD, Kuan CY, Whitmarsh AJ, Rincon M, Zheng TS, Davis RJ, Rakic P, Flavell RA. Nature 1997; 389: 865–70.
[62] Carboni L, Tacconi S, Carletti R, Bettini E, Ferraguti F. Neuroscience 1997; 80: 147–60.
[63] Dong C, Yang DD, Tournier C, Whitmarsh AJ, Xu J, Davis RJ, Flavell RA. Nature 2000; 405: 91–4.
[64] Carboni L, Carletti R, Tacconi S, Corti C, Ferraguti F. Mol Brain Res 1998; 60: 57–68.
[65] Kuan CY, Yang DD, Roy D-RS, Davis RJ, Rakic P, Flavell RA. Neuron 1999; 22: 667–76.
[66] Han J, Lee JD, Bibbs L, Ulevitch RJ. Science 1994; 265: 808–11.
[67] Lee JC, Laydon JT, McDonnell PC, Gallagher TF, Kumar S, Green D, McNulty D, Blumenthal MJ, Heys JR, Landvatter SW. Nature 1994; 372: 739–46.
[68] Jiang Y, Chen C, Li Z, Guo W, Gegner JA, Lin S, Han J. J Biol Chem 1996; 271: 17920–6.
[69] Li Z, Jiang Y, Ulevitch RJ, Han J. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1996; 228: 334–40.
[70] Jiang Y, Gram H, Zhao M, New L, Gu J, Feng L, Di Padova F, Ulevitch RJ, Han J. J Biol Chem 1997; 272: 30122–8.
[71] Wang XS, Diener K, Manthey CL, Wang SW, Rosenzweig B, Bray J, Delaney J, Cole CN, Hui PY, Mantlo N, Lichenstein HS, Zukowski M, Yao Z. J Biol Chem 1997; 272: 23668–74.
[72] Stein B, Yang MX, Young DB, Janknecht R, Hunter T, Murray BW, Barbosa MS. J Biol Chem 1997; 272: 19509–17.
[73] Ono K, Han J. Cell Signalling 2000; 12: 1–13.
[74] Heidenreich KA, Kummer JL. J Biol Chem 1996; 271: 9891–4.
[75] Horstmann S, Kahle PJ, Borasio GD. J Neurosci Res 1998; 52: 483–90.
[76] Eilers A, Whitfield J, Babij C, Rubin LL, Ham J. J Neurosci 1998; 18: 1713–24.
[77] Mielke K, Brecht S, Dorst A, Herdegen T. Neuroscience 1999; 91: 471–83.
[78] Kawasaki H, Morooka T, Shomohama S, Kimura J, Hirano T, Gotoh Y, Nishida E. J Biol Chem 1997; 272: 18518–21.
[79] Cheng HL, Feldman EL. J Biol Chem 1998; 273: 14560–5.
[80] Raingeaud J, Gupta S, Rogers JS, Dickens M, Han J, Ulevitch RJ, Davis RJ. J Biol Chem 1995; 270: 7420–6.
[81] Han J, Lee JD, Jiang Y, Li Z, Feng L, Ulevitch RJ. J Biol Chem 1996; 271: 2886–91.
[82] Raingeaud J, Whitmarsh AJ, Barrett T, Derijard B, Davis RJ. Mol Cell Biol 1996; 16: 1247–55.
[83] Han J, Wang X, Jiang Y, Ulevitch RJ, Lin S. FEBS Lett 1997; 403: 19–22.
[84] Derijard B, Raingeaud J, Barrett T, Wu IH, Han J, Ulevitch RJ, Davis RJ. Science 1995; 267: 682–5.
[85] Enslen H, Raingeaud J, Davis RJ. J Biol Chem 1998; 273: 1741–8.
[86] Enslen H, Brancho DM, Davis RJ. EMBO J 2000; 19: 1301–11.
[87] LoGrasso PV, Frantz B, Rolando AM, Keefe SJ, Hermes JD, O'Neill EA. Biochemistry 1997; 36: 10422–7.
[88] Haystead TAJ, Haystead CMM, Hu C, Lin TA, Lawrence JC. J Biol Chem 1994; 269: 23185–91.
[89] Wang XZ, Ron D. Science 1996; 272: 1347–9.
[90] McLaughlin MM, Kumar S, McDonnell PC, Van Horn S, Lee JC, Livi GP, Young PR. J Biol Chem 1996; 271: 8488–92.
[91] Cuenda A, Rouse J, Doza YN, Meier R, Cohen P, Gallagher TF, Young PR, Lee JC. FEBS Lett 1995; 364: 229–33.
[92] Gum RJ, Young PR. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1999; 266: 284–9.
[93] Ni H, Wang XS, Diener K, Yao Z. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1998; 243: 492–6.
[94] Han J, Jiang Y, Li Z, Kravchenko VV, Ulevitch RJ. Nature 1997; 386: 296–9.
[95] Waskiewicz AJ, Flynn A, Proud CG, Jonathan A. EMBO J 1997; 16: 1909–20.
[96] Hawkins J, Zheng S, Frantz B, LoGrasso P. Arch Biochem Biophys 2000; 382: 310–3.
[97] Livingstone C, Patel G, Jones N. EMBO J 1995; 14: 1785–97.
[98] Perregaux DG, Dean D, Cronan M, Connelly P, Gabel CA. Mol Pharmacol 1995; 48: 433–42.
[99] Allen M, Svensson L, Roach M, Hambor J, McNeish J, Gabel CA. J Exp Med 2000; 191: 859–69.
[100] Liverton NJ, Butcher JW, Claiborne CF, Claremon DA, Libby BE, Nguyen KT, Pitzenberger SM, Selnick HG, Smith GR, Tebben A, Vacca J-P, Varga SL, Agarwal L, Dancheck K, Forsyth AJ, Fletcher DS, Frantz B, Hanlon WA, Harper CF, Hofsess SJ, Kostura J, Lin J, Luell S, Neill EA, Keefe SJ. J Med Chem 1999; 42: 2180–90.
[101] Kotlyarov A, Neininger A, Schubert C, Eckert R, Birchmeier C, Volk H, Gaestel M. Nat Cell Biol 1999; 1: 94–7.
[102] Mielke K, Herdegen T. Prog Neurobiol 2000; 61: 45–60.
[103] Hensley K, Floyd RA, Zheng NY, Nael R, Robinson KA, Nguyen Q-N, Pye Q-N, Stewart CA, Geddes J, Markesbery WR, Patel E, Johnson GV, Bing G. J Neurochem 1999; 72: 2053–8.
[104] Choi WS, Yoon SY, Oh TH, Choi EJ, O'Malley KL, Oh YJ. J Neurosci Res 1999; 57: 86–94.
[105] Lotharius J, Dugan LL, O'Malley KL. J Neurosci 1999; 19: 1284–93.
[106] Estus S, Zaks WJ, Freeman RS, Gruda M, Bravo R, Johnson EM. J Cell Biol 1994; 127: 1717–27.
[107] Ham J, Babij C, Whitfield J, Pfarr CM, Lallemand D, Yaniv M, Rubin LL. Neuron 1995; 14: 927–39.
[108] Anderson CNG, Tolkovsky AM. J Neurosci 1999; 19: 664–73.
[109] Watson A, Eilers A, Lallemand D, Kyriakis J, Rubin LL, Ham J. J Neurosci 1998; 18: 751–62.
[110] Shimoke K, Yamagishi S, Yamada M, Ikeuchi T, Hatanaka H. Brain Res Dev Brain Res 1999; 112: 245–53.

[111] Haas CA, Bach A, Heimrich B, Linke R, Otten U, Frotscher M. Neuroscience 1998;87:831–44.
[112] Schwarzschild MA, Cole RL, Hyman SE. J Neurosci 1997; 17: 3455–66.
[113] Schlingensiepen KH, Schlingensiepen R, Kunst M, Klinger I, Gerdes W, Seifert W, Brysch W. Dev Genet 1993;14:305–12.
[114] Maroney AC, Glicksman MA, Basma AN, Walton KM, Knight EJ, Murphy CA, Bartlett BA, Finn JP, Angeles T, Matsuda Y, Neff NT, Dionne CA. J.Neurosci 1998;18:104–11.
[115] Borasio GD, Horstmann S, Anneser JM, Neff NT, Glicksman MA. NeuroReport 1998;9:1435–9.
[116] Maroney AC, Finn JP, Bozyczko-Coyne D, O’Kane TM, Neff NT, Tolkovsky AM, Park DS, Yan CY, Troy CM, Greene LA. J Neurochem 1999;73:1901–12.
[117] Kaneko M, Saito Y, Saito H, Matsumoto T, Matsuda Y, Vaught JL, Dionne CA, Angeles TS, Glicksman MA, Neff NT, Rotella DP, Kauer JC, Mallamo JP, Hudkins RL, Murakata C. J Med Chem 1997;40:1863–9.
[118] Harper SJ, Saporito MS, Hewson L, Young L, Smith D, Rigby M, Jackson P, Curtis N, Swain C, Hefti F, Vaught JL, Sirinathsinghji D. NeuroReport 2000;11:2271–6.
[119] Haas CA, Deller T, Naumann T, Frotscher M. J Neurosci 1996;16: 1894–903.
[120] Herdegen T, Fiallos-Estrada CE, Bravo R, Zimmermann M. Mol Brain Res 1993;17:147–54.
[121] Hull M, Bahr M. Neurosci Lett 1994;178:39–42.
[122] Jenkins R, McMahon SB, Bond AB, Hunt SP. Eur J Neurosci 1993;5:751–9.
[123] Gold BG, Storm DT, Austin DR. Neurosci Lett 1993;154:129–33.
[124] Kenney AM, Kocsis JD. J Neurosci 1998;18:1318–28.
[125] Herdegen T, Claret FX, Kallunki T, Martin-Villalba A, Winter C, Hunter T, Karin M. J Neurosci 1998;18:5124–35.
[126] Fernyhough P, Gallagher A, Averill SA, Priestley JV, Hounsom L, Patel J, Tomlinson DR. Diabetes 1999;48:881–9.
[127] Kogawa S, Yasuda H, Terada M, Maeda K, Kikkawa R. NeuroReport 2000;11:563–7.
[128] Dragunow M, Young D, Hughes P, MacGibbon G, Lawlor P, Singleton K, Sirimanne E, Beilharz E, Gluckman P. Mol Brain Res 1993;18:347–52.

[129] Kiessling M, Stumm G, Xie Y, Herdegen T, Aguzzi A, Bravo R, Gass P. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1993;13:914–24.
[130] Shioda S, Ozawa H, Dohi K, Mizushima H, Matsumoto K, Nakajo S, Takaki A, Zhou CJ, Nakai Y, Arimura A. Ann NY Acad Sci 1998;865:111–7.
[131] Brecht S, Martin-Villalba A, Zuschatter W, Bravo R, Herdegen T. Exp Neurol 1995;134:112–25.
[132] Butterworth NJ. Mol Brain Res 1996;43:1–12.
[133] Oo TF. J Neurochem 1999;72:557–64.
[134] Saporito MS, Brown ER, Carswell S, DiCamillo AM, Miller MS, Murakata C, Neff NT, Vaught JL, Haun FA. Neuroscience 1998; 86:461–72.
[135] DiCamillo AM, Neff NT, Carswell S, Haun FA. Neuroscience 1998;86:473–83.
[136] Saporito MS, Brown EM, Miller MS, Carswell S. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1999;288:421–7.
[137] Kummer JL, Rao PK, Heidenreich KA. J Biol Chem 1997; 272: 20490–4.
[138] Skaper SD, Walsh FS. Mol Cell Neurosci 1998;12:179–93.
[139] Harada J, Sugimoto M. Jpn J Pharmacol 1999;79:369–78.
[140] Gunn-Moore FJ, Tavare JM. Neurosci Lett 1998;250:53–6.
[141] Ko HW, Han KS, Kim EY, Ryu BR, Yoon WJ, Jung YK, Kim SU, Gwag B-J. J Neurochem 2000;74:2455–61.
[142] Maas JWJ, Horstmann S, Borasio GD, Anneser JM, Shooter EM, Kahle PJ. J Neurochem 1998;70:1401–10.
[143] Kikuchi M, Tenneti L, Lipton SA. J Neurosci 2000;5044.
[144] Morooka T, Nishida E. J Biol Chem 1998;273:24285–8.
[145] Xing J, Kornhauser JM, Xia Z, Thiele EA, Greenberg ME. Mol Cell Biol 1998;18:1946–55.
[146] Iwasaki S, Iguchi M, Watanabe K, Hoshino R, Tsujimoto M, Kohno M. J Biol Chem 1999;274:26503–10.
[147] Barancik M, Htun P, Strohm C, Kilian S, Schaper W. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 2000;35:474–83.
[148] Irving EA, Barone FC, Reith AD, Hadingham SJ, Parsons AA. Mol Brain Res 2000;77:65–75.
[149] Walton KM, DiRocco R, Bartlett BA, Koury E, Marcy VR, Jarvis B, Schaefer EM, Bhat RV. J Neurochem 1998;70:1764–7.
[150] Castagne V, Clarke PG. Brain Res 1999;842:215–9.
