
Trk receptors: mediators of neurotrophin action

Ardem Patapoutian* and Louis F Reichardt†

The four mammalian neurotrophins —NGF, BDNF, NT-3 and NT-4—each bind and activate one or more of the Trk family of receptor tyrosine kinases. Through these receptors, neurotrophins activate many intracellular signaling pathways, including those controlled by Ras, the Cdc42/Rac/RhoG protein family, MAPK, PI3K and PLC-γ, thereby affecting both development and function of the nervous system. During the past two years, several novel signaling pathways controlled by Trk receptors have been characterized, and it has become clear that membrane transport and sorting controls Trk-receptor-mediated signaling because key intermediates are localized to different membrane compartments. Three-dimensional structures of the Trk receptors, in one instance in association with a neurotrophin, have revealed the structural bases underlying specificity in neurotrophin signaling.

and Miller's excellent review. Because of space constraints, we will focus on signaling and will not describe recent work on the roles of Trk signaling in formation and function of the nervous system [2, 3*, 4*].

The first member of the Trk family was discovered as an oncogene in which tropomyosin is fused to the kinase domain of TrkA. The corresponding protooncogene was quickly shown to be a transmembrane protein whose structure suggested that it was a receptor tyrosine kinase. Two additional putative members of this family were quickly isolated, and all of these genes were shown to be expressed in interesting patterns in the nervous system [3*, 5, 6*]. About a decade ago, these orphan receptors were shown to be activated by the neurotrophins and to mediate almost all of the survival-promoting activities of this important class of trophic factors, with nerve growth factor (NGF) activating TrkA, brain-derived growth factor (BDNF) and NT-4/5 activating TrkB, and NT-3 activating TrkC [1]. In addition, NT-3 can also activate TrkA and TrkB in certain cellular contexts.

Usually, expression of a Trk receptor confers responsiveness to individual neurotrophins; however, differential splicing of each Trk receptor gene results in synthesis of proteins with functionally important differences in their extracellular domains (e.g., see [7]). Differential splicing also generates an isoform of TrkC with a modified kinase domain that has altered substrate specificity, and isoforms of TrkB and TrkC that lack kinase domains (reviewed in [1]). Finally, in some CNS neurons, Trk receptors appear to be largely sequestered in intracellular vesicles [8]. A second signal, such as cAMP or Ca²⁺, is required for efficient insertion of receptors into the surface membrane. For Trk responsiveness, these neurons may have to be incorporated into a signaling network that, through induction of second messengers, makes possible the transport of Trk receptors to the cell surface.

Structures of Trk receptors

Trk receptors contain an interesting combination of cell-adhesion motifs in their extracellular domains, with three tandem leucine-rich motifs flanked by two cysteine clusters in their amino termini and two immunoglobulin-like domains in the more membrane-proximal region. Past work has shown that Trk receptors interact with their ligands through the second immunoglobulin-like domain (e.g., see [9]). Recently, the crystal structures of the ligand-binding domains of each of the Trk receptors have been solved by Ultsch *et al.* [10*]. In addition, Wiesmann *et al.* [11**] have published the structure of NGF in complex with the ligand-binding domain of TrkA. The ligand-receptor interface consists of two patches: one appears to be a conserved binding motif shared among all neurotrophins; the other is specific for the interaction between NGF and TrkA.

Addresses

*Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute and Genomics Institute, Novartis Research Foundation, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; e-mail: ardem@scripps.edu  
†Department of Physiology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; e-mail: lfr@cgl.ucsf.edu  

Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2001, 11:272–280  
0959-4388/01/$ —see front matter  
© 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

Abbreviations

BAD | Bcl-2/Bcl-x-associated death promoter  
BDNF | brain-derived growth factor  
CREB | CRE-binding protein  
ERK | extracellular signal-regulated kinase  
FRS | fibroblast growth factor receptor substrate  
IRS | insulin receptor substrate  
MAPK | mitogen-activated protein kinase  
NGF | nerve growth factor  
NT | neurotrophin  
PDK | 3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinase  
PI3K | phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase  
PKC | protein kinase C  
PLC | phospholipase C  
RSK | ribosomal S6 kinase  
SH | Src homology  
SH-PTP | Src homology protein tyrosine phosphatase-2  
SOS | son of Sevenless  
Trk | tropomyosin-related kinase  

Introduction

Neurotrophins activate two different receptor classes, the tropomyosin-related kinase (Trk) family of receptor tyrosine kinases and the p75 receptor, a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor superfamily. As neurotrophin signaling through the p75 receptor is covered in depth by Lee *et al.* in this issue (pp 281–286), we will not discuss it here. Neurotrophin signaling has been reviewed previously in the *Current Opinion in Neurobiology* series [1]; therefore, we will concentrate on the recent advances in the field that have occurred since composition of Kaplan

The structures of neurotrophin (NT)-3 and NT-4/5 have also been solved and are, as expected, highly homologous to the structure of NGF (reviewed in [1]). The data are completely consistent with past studies in which domain swapping and mutagenesis were used to identify receptor-binding epitopes on neurotrophins, but those data were interpreted to indicate that different neurotrophins use very different mechanisms for binding to their receptors. In contrast, the structural analyses indicate that each of the neurotrophins binds to its respective Trk receptor(s) in the same conserved manner.

Usually endogenous expression of a Trk receptor confers neurotrophin responsiveness; however, differential splicing of the TrkA, TrkB and TrkC mRNAs results in expression of proteins with differences in their extracellular domains that affect ligand interactions. The presence or absence of short amino-acid sequences in the juxtamembrane domains of each receptor affects the ability of some neurotrophins to activate these receptors. These short polypeptide sequences were not localized in the three-dimensional structure of the NGF–TrkA ligand-binding domain complex, but the organization of the interface between the two proteins suggests that the residues may participate directly in binding [11**].

The elegant work of Chao and co-workers has shown that the TrkA and p75 receptors collaborate to generate high-affinity binding sites for NGF (reviewed in [3*, 4*]; see also Lee *et al.*, this issue [pp 281–286]). In addition, the p75 receptor regulates negatively the abilities of NT-3 to activate TrkA, and of NT-3 and NT-4/5 to activate TrkB (e.g. see [7]). Two domains on neurotrophins important for binding to the p75 receptor have been identified by mutagenesis [11**]. The location of these domains in the structure of the NGF–TrkA complex suggests that a neurotrophin may bind to a Trk and a p75 receptor simultaneously, providing a possible physical basis for these biological interactions.

### Trk-mediated signaling

Neurotrophin binding to Trk receptors results in receptor dimerization and kinase activation. There are 10 conserved tyrosines in the cytoplasmic domain of each Trk receptor, three of which are present in the autoregulatory loop of the kinase domain. Phosphorylation of these amino acids further activates the kinase. Phosphorylation of the other residues promotes signaling by creating docking sites for adaptor proteins that couple these receptors to intracellular signaling cascades, including the Ras/extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) protein kinase pathway, the phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI3K)/Akt kinase pathway and phospholipase C-γ1 (PLC-γ1) (reviewed in [1, 12]).

Most research has focused on the functions of two tyrosines (Y490 and Y785) that are not located in the kinase activation domain; after phosphorylation, these tyrosines mediate interactions with the adaptor protein Shc and PLC-γ1, respectively (see Figure 1). Five of the remaining seven conserved tyrosines contribute to NGF-induced neurite outgrowth (e.g. see [13]).

In recent work, additional adaptor proteins have been identified, some of which interact with different tyrosines. In addition, transfer of Trk receptors to various membrane compartments has been shown to control the efficiency of Trk receptor interaction with these proteins and the subsequent activation of intracellular signaling pathways (e.g. see [14, 15, 16**]).

#### Signaling through Ras

Ras regulates neuronal differentiation. In many neurons, Ras also promotes neuronal survival, either through the PI3K or the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/ERK pathways. Whether neurotrophin application results in a proliferation- or differentiation-inducing response seems to depend on whether there is transient or prolonged activation of the ERK pathway (e.g. see [17]). In PC12 cells, at least, different adaptors appear to mediate transient versus prolonged activation of ERK signaling. In each case, phosphorylation of Y490 initiates recruitment of an adaptor protein, initiating a cascade of signaling events.

Shc recruitment and phosphorylation results in recruitment to the membrane of a complex of the adaptor Grb-2 and the Ras exchange factor son of Sevenless (SOS), thereby stimulating transient activation of Ras. Ras activates in turn PI3K, the p38 MAPK/MAPK-activating protein kinase 2 pathway and the c-Raf/ERK pathway [18]. Among the targets of ERK are the ribosomal S6 kinases (RSKs). Both RSK and MAPK-activating protein kinase 2 phosphorylate CRE-binding protein (CREB) and other transcription factors [19]. Recent work has shown that CREB regulates genes that are essential for survival *in vitro* of cerebellar granule cells and sympathetic neurons [20*, 21*].

In PC12 cells, prolonged activation of ERK signaling and differentiation depend on a distinct signaling pathway initiated through binding to phosphorylated Y490 of the adaptor protein fibroblast growth factor receptor substrate (FRS)-2 (e.g. see [22, 23]). Several tyrosines on FRS-2 are phosphorylated by Trk and then function as binding sites for several additional proteins, including the adaptor proteins Grb-2 and Crk, the protein phosphatase Src homology protein tyrosine phosphatase-2 (SH-PTP), the cyclin-dependent kinase substrate p13suc1 and Src. In a cascade initiated by binding to FRS-2, Crk binds and activates the exchange factor C3G, which in turn activates the small G protein Rap-1. Rap-1 activates B-raf and Erk signaling [16**, 22, 24]. Activation of Erk is also facilitated by SH-PTP-2, which appears to inactivate an inhibitor, perhaps Ras-GAP or MAPK phosphatase [25]. FRS-2 also provides a link to the Src family tyrosine kinases, which are involved in receptor endocytosis as well as other cellular responses [26, 27].

#### Signaling through PI3K

Trk receptors can activate PI3K through at least two distinct pathways, whose importance differs between neuronal subpopulations. In many neurons, Ras-dependent activation of PI3K is the most important pathway through which

274 Signalling mechanisms

Figure 1

Diagram of neurotrophin signal transduction pathways mediated by Trk receptors. The different pathways are described in the text. The nomenclature for tyrosine residues of Trk receptors is based on the sequence of human TrkA. In the diagram, adapter proteins are colored orange, kinases pink, small G proteins green, and transcription factors blue. APS, adaptor molecule containing PH and SH2 domains; CHK, Csk homologue kinase; MEK, MAPK/ERK; P, serine/threonine (filled, phosphorylated); SNT, suc-1-associated neurotrophic factor target.

neurotrophins promote cell survival (e.g. see [28•]). In some cells, however, PI3K can also be activated through three adaptor proteins, Shc, Grb-2 and Gab-1. Binding to phosphorylated Y490 of Shc results in recruitment of Grb-2. Phosphorylated Grb-2 provides a docking site for Gab-1, which in turn is bound by PI3K [29]. In other neurons, the insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 is also phosphorylated after neurotrophin application and recruits and activates PI3K [30]. In addition to providing a linker for activation of PI3K, Gab-1 also nucleates formation of a complex including the protein phosphatase Shp-2 [31,32]. Shp-2 enhances activation of the Ras/ERK signaling pathway by mechanisms that are not well understood.

Lipid products generated by PI3K recruit many proteins containing pleckstrin-homology domains to the membrane, including the Akt kinases and 3-phosphoinositide-dependent kinases (PDKs). Akt is activated at the membrane by PDK, after which it phosphorylates several proteins important in controlling cell survival (see [33,34]). These include BAD (Bcl-2/Bcl-x-associated death promoter), IkB, the forkhead transcription factor FKHRL1, glycogen synthase kinase (GSK) 3-β, and human, but not mouse caspase-9 [35•]. BAD is a Bcl-2 family member, which, when not phosphorylated, promotes apoptosis by binding to Bcl-xL. The bcl-2 family of proteins are involved in pro- and anti-apoptotic signaling cascades. Phosphorylation of BAD by Akt or by MAPKs result in its association with 14-3-3 proteins, preventing binding to Bcl-xL [20•,36]. 14-3-3 proteins are a group of evolutionarily conserved proteins that bind to phosphorylated proteins and thereby regulate signal transduction. A targeted deletion of BAD does not alter neuronal apoptosis during CNS development, suggesting this pathway is not essential during development [37].

Phosphorylation of IkB activates the transcription factor NF-kB. Transcription activated by NF-kB has been shown recently to promote neuronal survival (e.g. see [38]). The transcription factor FKHRL1 controls the expression of apoptosis-promoting genes, such as FasL [35•]. Elevated GSK 3-β has been shown to promote apoptosis in cultured neurons [39]. Neurotrophin withdrawal increases, whereas phosphorylation by Akt decreases GSK 3-β activity. Many additional proteins involved in control of apoptosis also have consensus sites for phosphorylation by Akt, but have not been shown to be direct substrates of this kinase [33]. Thus, PI3K acting through Akt may promote survival by many mechanisms, and it will be a major challenge of the future to determine the importance of each as a read-out of neurotrophin signaling.

### Signaling through PLC-γ1

Phosphorylated Y785 on TrkA and similarly placed residues on other Trk receptors recruit PLC-γ1. The Trk kinase then phosphorylates and activates PLC-γ1, which acts to hydrolyze phosphatidylinositides to generate diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol 1,4,5 triphosphate (IP₃). IP₃ induces the release of Ca²⁺ stores, increasing levels of cytoplasmic Ca²⁺ and thereby activating many pathways controlled by Ca²⁺. In recent work, it has been shown that NGF activates a DAG-regulated protein kinase, protein kinase C (PKC)-δ, which is required for activation of the ERK cascade and for neurite outgrowth [40•]. PKC-δ appears to act between Raf and MAPK/ERK in this signaling cascade.

# Regulation of signaling by membrane transport and sorting

The ability of Trk receptors to activate specific signaling pathways is regulated by membrane trafficking because some of the adaptors and other signaling molecules described above are localized to specific membrane compartments. In the first experiments to suggest the involvement of membrane transport [15], PC12 cells were exposed to a complex of NGF and a monoclonal antibody (mAb) that does not prevent interactions of NGF with its receptors. Saragovi *et al.* [15] found that the receptor-ligand-mAb complex is internalized much more rapidly than a receptor-ligand complex. The NGF–mAb complex supports survival of these cells, but they do not differentiate normally; although there is normal phosphorylation of Shc and transient ERK activation, FRS-2 is not phosphorylated. These results suggest that FRS-2 can only be recruited efficiently by receptors before endocytosis, and that recruitment of FRS-2 seems to proceed comparatively slowly compared with recruitment of Shc. FRS-2 is myristoylated, so it may be segregated into a membrane compartment that is not immediately accessible to activated Trk receptors.

Zhang *et al.* [41•] have shown that inhibition of endocytosis, using a thermosensitive dynamin, also disrupts responses to NGF in PC12 cells. Survival responses appear normal, but differentiation is strongly inhibited by the reduction in endocytosis. As FRS-2 signaling through Crk, C3G and Rap-1 is essential for prolonged ERK activation and differentiation, Zhang *et al.*’s data suggest that efficient activation of this pathway requires endocytosis of the neurotrophin-receptor complex. Indeed, York *et al.* [16••] have shown recently that activation of Rap-1 and B-raf, and sustained activation of ERK require internalization. PI3K activity is also required, probably because, like in yeast [42], PI3K activity is required for normal endocytosis [16••, 43•]. There is prominent expression of Ras on the cell surface, but expression of Rap-1 is localized to small intracellular vesicles [16••]. Thus, the receptor-ligand complex must be transported to a compartment containing Rap-1 for sustained activation of the ERK cascade and differentiation. The exciting conclusion of this recent work is that Trk-mediated signaling is controlled by the specificity and kinetics of membrane transport.

## Complexities in Trk signaling

Klein and co-workers [44] have shown that mice homozygous for a TrkB Y490 mutation — a residue thought to be involved in control of the Ras and PI3K signaling pathways — has a surprisingly mild phenotype that resembles the phenotype of mice lacking NT-4, and that is milder than that of a TrkB mutant lacking the kinase domain. Clearly, other sites on Trk receptors must be able to activate survival and differentiation-promoting pathways. Of particular interest, the phosphorylated tyrosines in the activation loop of the Trk kinase domain seem likely to mediate adaptor binding in addition to controlling kinase activity.

---

Two adaptors not discussed above, rAPS and SH2-B, interact with phosphorylated tyrosines in the activation loops of all three Trk receptors [14]. They may also bind to other phosphorylated residues in these receptors. rAPS and SH2-B are similar proteins with a pleckstrin-homology domain, an SH2 domain and tyrosines that are phosphorylated as a response to Trk activation. Each has been shown to bind to Grb-2, providing a potential link to the PI3K and Ras pathways. Inhibition of rAPS function negatively regulates MAPK activation and NGF-dependent survival and neurite outgrowth by sympathetic neurons [14]. Grb-2 also appears to interact directly with a phosphorylated tyrosine in the activation loop [45].

The c-Abl tyrosine kinase is involved in many aspects of neuronal differentiation (e.g. see [46]) and recent work by Yano *et al.* [47•] suggests that it binds to the juxtamembrane domain of TrkA, whether or not tyrosines in this region are phosphorylated. A deletion of this region prevents differentiation of PC12 cells without inhibiting phosphorylation of Shc or FRS-2 or mitotic responses [48]. Taken together, the results suggest that c-Abl plays an important, if poorly defined role in differentiative responses mediated by Trk receptors.

### Control by Trk receptors of the cytoskeleton

Neurotrophin application induces rapid responses in both the growth cone and cell soma. In PC12 cells, rapid ruffling is seen similar to that observed after application of other growth factors to fibroblasts. Small G proteins of the Cdc42/Rac/Rho family are involved in these rapid cytoskeletal responses of cells to growth factors. These small G proteins control many facets of cell metabolism, but their rapid effects on morphology reflect their regulation of the actin cytoskeleton (reviewed in [49, 50]).

Several exchange factors for these G proteins are expressed in neurons, and their activities have been shown to be regulated by tyrosine phosphorylation and phosphatidylinositol products of PI3K (e.g. see [51•]). In addition, SOS functions as an exchange factor for Rac in addition to Ras [52]. Active Ras seems to activate the exchange factor of SOS in a PI3K mechanism. It seems very likely that the many observed effects of neurotrophins on growth cones and dendritic trees are mediated through these G proteins [2, 53•].

### Regulation of p75 signaling by Trk receptors

The other neurotrophin receptor p75 has several important roles in the nervous system (see Lee *et al.*, this issue [pp 281–286]). The p75 receptor refines the ligand specificity of Trk receptors, regulates axon growth, mediates retrograde transport of neurotrophins, and helps regulate survival and apoptosis of different neuronal populations. It seems particularly important in promoting the elimination of neurons in which Trk receptor signaling is not activated. On the cellular level, neurotrophin binding to the p75 receptor results in the activation of several intracellular signaling pathways, including stimulation of

NF-κB, Jun kinase and acidic sphingomyelinase, and suppression of RhoA activation. The NF-κB pathway appears to promote survival, whereas the Jun kinase pathway and sphingomyelin hydrolysis promote apoptosis.

Activating Trk receptors has strong effects on p75 receptor-mediated signaling. Trk signaling suppresses activation through the p75 receptor of the Jun kinase cascade and sphingomyelin hydrolysis, but not induction of the NF-κB cascade (e.g. see [54, 55]). In sympathetic neurons, Kaplan and co-workers [56•] have shown that Ras activation suppresses the Jun kinase cascade, preventing activation of a p53-dependent apoptosis pathway (see also [57]). Activation of PI3K by Ras is essential for this effect. In non-neural cells, c-Raf has been shown to bind, phosphorylate and inactivate ASK-1—an important activator of the Jun kinase cascade [58]. Kanamoto *et al.* [59•] have shown that ASK-1 is essential for normal activation of the Jun kinase cascade in PC12 cells. The negative regulation by Raf of ASK-1 seems likely to be important in neurons as well. Thus, in the presence of Trk signaling, pro-apoptotic responses to the p75 receptor are largely suppressed, whereas p75 receptor activation of NF-κB makes a synergistic contribution to survival [60, 61].

There are also effects of p75 receptor-mediated signaling on Trk receptors. In PC-12 cells, BDNF binding to the p75 receptor reduces NGF-dependent TrkA autophosphorylation, possibly by stimulating a serine kinase that phosphorylates TrkA [62]. p75 receptor-stimulated sphingolipid hydrolysis generates ceramide. In turn, ceramide has been shown to inhibit PI3K and Akt [63, 64•].

### Specificity in signaling by Trk receptors

Trk receptor-mediated signaling has quite different consequences in different cells. In most neurons, ligand engagement of Trk receptors promotes survival (e.g. see [3•, 4•, 5]). In other cells, however, neurotrophins acting through these receptors promote mitosis or differentiation without detectably affecting survival. In some tumor cells, neurotrophin activation of Trk receptor signaling has even been shown to induce apoptosis (e.g. see [65]). It is important to note that in this review we have described the Trk receptor interactions with adapter proteins and signaling pathways as though all signaling molecules are present in all cells, but this is certainly not the case. For example, in cultured cortical neurons, IRS-1 and IRS-2 are phosphorylated in response to BDNF, promoting their sustained association with PI3K and sustained activation of this kinase [32]. But ligand engagement of Trk receptors in PC12 cells does not result in phosphorylation of the IRS proteins. Clearly something is different between these cell populations, perhaps the presence and absence of a critical linker. A recent analysis of mice lacking one or more Shc homologues provides additional evidence that signaling pathways differ significantly between neuronal subpopulations [66•], and that the two adaptor proteins appear to have both overlapping and specific functions in development of these different populations of cells.

There are also examples where the different Trk receptors convey quite distinct signals within the same cell. For example, slowly adapting mechanoreceptors depend on NT-3 for survival postnatally [67] but BDNF regulates their mechanical sensitivity [68]. These two neurotrophins seem to have non-redundant actions on this population of sensory neurons, indicating that there must be some specificity in their signaling mechanisms. Analyses of the mechanisms controlling chemotropic responses to neurotrophins provides an even more striking example. In assays *in vitro*, whether a neurotrophin acts as a chemoattractant or a chemorepellent depends on cyclic nucleotide levels within neurons (e.g. see [69•]). The chemoattractive activities of NGF and BDNF are converted to chemorepellent activities by inhibitors of cAMP signaling, whereas the chemoattractive activity of NT-3 acting through TrkC is not affected by cAMP inhibitors; instead, cGMP antagonists convert the NT-3 response from attractive to repulsive. In developing *Xenopus* neuromuscular cultures, both BDNF and NT-3 potentiate spontaneous and action potential-evoked neurotransmitter release [70•]. A cAMP agonist synergizes with BDNF to potentiate transmitter release, but has no effect on potentiation by NT-3. There must be fundamental differences in the signaling mediated by different Trk receptors to explain these observations.

Finally, the phenotype of the Y490F TrkB mutant mouse provides an example where signaling by two different neurotrophins through the same receptor TrkB has different consequences [44]. As mentioned above, the phenotype of this mouse is much milder than that of a mouse lacking the kinase domain of TrkB, despite observations showing that phosphorylated Y490 mediates recruitment of Shc and FRS-2, thereby activating both the Ras/ERK and PI3K pathways. The Y490F TrkB mouse has a phenotype that seems to be indistinguishable from that of a mouse lacking NT-4 with a loss of D-hair afferents (rapid adapter mechanosensory fibers) and of the NT-4-dependent population of Nodose-Petrosal ganglion neurons [44, 71]. In culture, responses of neurons to NT-4 are severely reduced, whereas responses to BDNF are comparatively normal. There are several possible mechanistic explanations for these observations, which argue that two neurotrophins can have different effects on signaling although they activate the same receptor.

### Consequences of Trk receptor signaling

Neurotrophins were discovered as survival-promoting agents and, as discussed above, the Trk receptors mediate most neurotrophin-mediated survival responses (reviewed in [3•, 4•]). There is reduced apoptosis of neurons in murine mutants lacking Caspase-9 (a protease) or Bax (a Bcl-2 family member), while increased apoptosis is observed in animals lacking Bcl-x-L (reviewed in [34]). Trk receptor signaling controls the expression and activity of these and other proteins in the apoptosis pathway, favoring a balance that promotes neuronal survival. Neurotrophins have also been shown to promote and direct growth cone motility (e.g. see [69•]). There are numerous examples where

overexpression or absence of a neurotrophin results in perturbations in innervation (e.g. see [72,73]). Of particular interest are recent studies in culture showing that NGF acting through TrkA can desensitize chemotactic responses to gradients of netrin or BDNF [74**]. The most likely explanation for cross-desensitization is that these factors share some signaling pathways.

In some instances, neurotrophins have been shown to regulate pathways of differentiation selected by neural precursors or to regulate irreversibly the differentiation process. For example, classic studies by Anderson [75] have shown that NGF promotes the differentiation of sympathetic precursors into sympathetic neurons as opposed to adrenal chromaffin cells. NGF induces irreversible changes in these cells that become permanently dependent on this neurotrophin. Because of space limitations, we will describe only a few additional recent examples of effects on sensory neurons.

Essentially all peripheral sensory neurons express one of the Trk receptors at some point in development. Mutants lacking individual Trk receptors lack specific subpopulations of these neurons. For example, TrkA knockout mice lack nociceptive and thermoceptive neurons, whereas TrkC knockout mice lack proprioceptive neurons (reviewed in [3*,5]). Many studies on these cells suggest that Trk receptor signaling has roles beyond control of survival, and that some of these roles are instructive, not simply permissive. For example, NGF/TrkA-responsive sensory neurons primarily convey nociceptive information and extend unmyelinated C fibers or thinly myelinated Aδ fibers. They express CGRP (calcitonin gene-related peptide), substance P, the capsaisin receptor and distinct Na⁺ channel gene products [76].

Although loss of NGF-to-TrkA signaling during embryogenesis results in apoptosis, reduction at later times results in phenotypic changes. For example, NGF reduction during the early postnatal period changes the properties of Aδ fibers, which are converted from high-threshold mechanoreceptors that are responsive to pain to D-hair fibers that are responsive to touch (reviewed in [76]). This phenotypic conversion does not result in inappropriate innervation in the substantia gelatinosa of the separate termination zones of these two populations of sensory fibers, so central projections must be modified to reflect the altered modality of these fibers.

Meanwhile, Bax deficiency in NGF or TrkA knockouts completely rescues dorsal root ganglion neurons, but interestingly the rescued neurons do not maintain expression of nociceptive markers and do not make correct peripheral connections [77*]. The interpretation of these results are complicated, because Bax knockout mice (in the presence of wild-type NGF/TrkA signaling) exhibit some alterations in sensory neuron phenotypes as well [78]. Nevertheless, these studies suggest a role for Trk receptors in specification or development, in addition to cell survival.


As a final example, overexpression of NGF in skin increases the survival of both the C and Aδ neurons and also changes their functional properties [76,79**,80]. Most notably, NGF overexpression increases the percentage of C fibers that are responsive to heat from 42 to 96%, an effect too large to be accounted for by changes in survival. Heat-sensitive C fibers also have increased thermal and decreased mechanical sensitivity. In part, these changes may be explained by regulation of the capsaisin receptor. In addition to these changes induced by prolonged exposure to a neurotrophin, acute exposure to NGF has striking effects on nociceptive neurons. NGF application to skin has been shown to sensitize C and Aδ fibers to heat within 10 minutes [81]. NGF seems to act largely by activation of mast cells that secrete serotonin, histamine and other neuroactive agents. Acute NGF can also sensitize cultured sensory neurons to capsaisin application, indicating that there are also direct effects on the sensory neurons [82]. These few examples illustrate a rapidly growing literature on the roles of neurotrophins in regulating synaptic function and plasticity (reviewed in [2,3*]).

# Conclusions

Ten years ago, the discovery that neurotrophins are the ligands of Trk receptors had a dramatic impact on studies on neurotrophic factors. In particular, it focused attention on the role of tyrosine phosphorylation in the development and function of neurons. Recent work has shown that Trk receptors control the activity of several intracellular signaling pathways, including those of the Ras/ERK and PI3K/Akt kinase cascades. Many of the intermediates through which Trk receptors activate these signaling cascades and their targets (involved in gene transcription, cytoskeletal organization and apoptosis) have been identified.

One unresolved issue in neurotrophin research is how specificity is generated in Trk signaling. How are Trks distinct from other receptor tyrosine kinases, and how are Trks distinct from each other? It is particularly exciting that membrane transport controls both accessibility of Trk receptors to their ligands and specificity in their signaling pathways. Proteomic approaches will be needed to understand the molecular differences that underlie the differences in signaling between Trk receptors and other receptor tyrosine kinases. They will also be essential for understanding why activation of the same Trk receptor can have distinct consequences in different types of neurons and why there are differences in signals conveyed by different Trk receptors within the same cell.

# Acknowledgements

We thank Eric Huang for stimulating discussions on Trk receptor signaling and for providing the initial draft of Figure 1.

# References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

- of special interest
- of outstanding interest

1. Kaplan DR, Miller FD: Neurotrophin signal transduction in the nervous system. *Curr Opin Neurobiol* 2000, 10:381-391.

278 Signalling mechanisms

2. McAllister AK, Katz LC, Lo DC: Neurotrophins and synaptic plasticity. Annu Rev Neurosci 1999, 22:295-318.

3. Huang EJ, Reichardt LF: Neurotrophins: roles in neuronal development and function. Annu Rev Neurosci 2001, 24:in press.
   - An in-depth review that covers areas of Trk signaling relevant to formation and function of the nervous system that we did not review here owing to limitations of space.

4. Sofroniew MV, Howe CL, Mobley WC: Nerve growth factor signaling, neuroprotection and neural repair. Annu Rev Neurosci 2001, 24:in press.
   - This review is largely complementary to [3•], and includes an up-to-date discussion of mechanisms by which neurotrophins affect disease and degenerative processes.

5. Reichardt LF, Fariñas I: Neurotrophic factors and their receptors. Roles in neuronal development and function. In Molecular and Cellular Approaches to Neural Development. Edited by Cowan WM, Jessell TM, Zipursky SL. New York: Oxford University Press; 1997:220-263.

6. Hallbook F: Evolution of the vertebrate neurotrophin and Trk receptor gene families. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1999, 9:616-621.
   - This review describes the evolution of neurotrophins and of Trk receptors during evolution of chordates. A series of genomic duplications gave rise to neurotrophins and Trk receptors. In fish, additional duplications have generated larger numbers of neurotrophin and Trk genes than are present in mammals.

7. Bibel M, Hoppe E, Barde YA: Biochemical and functional interactions between the neurotrophin receptors trk and p75NTR. EMBO J 1999, 18:616-622.

8. Meyer-Franke A, Wilkinson GA, Kruttgen A, Hu M, Munro E, Hanson MG Jr, Reichardt LF, Barres BA: Depolarization and cAMP elevation rapidly recruit TrkB to the plasma membrane of CNS neurons. Neuron 1998, 21:681-693.

9. Urfer R, Tsoulfas P, O'Connell L, Hongo JA, Zhao W, Presta LG: High resolution mapping of the binding site of TrkA for nerve growth factor and TrkC for neurotrophin-3 on the second immunoglobulin-like domain of the Trk receptors. J Biol Chem 1998, 273:5829-5840.

10. Ultsch MH, Wiesmann C, Simmons LC, Henrich J, Yang M, Reilly D, Bass SH, de Vos AM: Crystal structures of the neurotrophin-binding domain of TrkA, TrkB and TrkC. J Mol Biol 1999, 290:149-159.
    - This paper presents the three-dimensional structures of each of the three human Trk receptors. From the data in this paper and in [11••], it is possible to model with confidence main features of the interactions of neurotrophins with Trk receptors.

11. Wiesmann C, Ultsch MH, Bass SH, de Vos AM: Crystal structure of nerve growth factor in complex with the ligand-binding domain of the TrkA receptor. Nature 1999, 401:184-188.
    - This paper describes the structure of NGF with the ligand-binding domain of the TrkA receptor. This study provides structural insights into the function of differential splicing of Trk receptor genes and of interactions between Trk and p75 receptors.

12. Pawson T, Nash P: Protein-protein interactions define specificity in signal transduction. Genes Dev 2000, 14:1027-1047.

13. Inagaki N, Thoenen H, Lindholm D: TrkA tyrosine residues involved in NGF-induced neurite outgrowth of PC12 cells. Eur J Neurosci 1995, 7:1125-1133.

14. Qian X, Riccio A, Zhang Y, Ginty DD: Identification and characterization of novel substrates of Trk receptors in developing neurons. Neuron 1998, 21:1017-1029.

15. Saragovi HU, Zheng W, Maliartchouk S, DiGuglielmo GM, Mawal YR, Kamen A, Woo SB, Cuello AC, Debeir T, Neet KE: A TrkA-selective, fast internalizing nerve growth factor-antibody complex induces trophic but not neuritogenic signals. J Biol Chem 1998, 273:34933-34940.

16. York RD, Mollivar DC, Grewal SS, Steinberg PE, McCleskey EW, Stork PJ: Role of phosphoinositide 3-kinase and endocytosis in NGF induced extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation via Ras and Rap1. Mol Cell Biol 2000, 20:18069-18083.
    - This important paper presents evidence indicating that membrane sorting is important in determining which signaling pathways are activated by Trk receptors. Specificity appears to be regulated by localization in specific membrane compartments of intermediates in these signaling pathways.

17. Grewal SS, York R, Stork PJ: Extracellular signal-regulated kinase signalling in neurons. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1999, 9:544-553.

18. Xing J, Ginty DD, Greenberg ME: Coupling of the RAS-MAPK pathway to gene activation of RS K2, a growth factor-regulated CREB kinase. Science 1996, 273:959-963.

19. Xing J, Kornhauser JM, Xia Z, Thiele EA, Greenberg ME: Nerve growth factor activates extracellular signal-regulated kinase and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways to stimulate CREB serine 133 phosphorylation. Mol Cell Biol 1998, 18:1946-1955.

20. Bonni A, Brunet A, West AE, Datta SR, Takasu MA, Greenberg ME: Cell survival promoted by the Ras-MAPK signaling pathway by transcription-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Science 1999, 286:1358-1362.
    - This paper describes pathways downstream of the MAPK cascade that help control survival of neurons.

21. Riccio A, Ahn S, Davenport CM, Blendy JA, Ginty DD: Mediation by a CREB family transcription factor of NGF-dependent survival of sympathetic neurons. Science 1999, 286:2358-2361.
    - In this paper, CREB is identified as a transcription factor whose targets promote sympathetic neuron survival.

22. York RD, Yao H, Dillon T, Ellig CL, Eckert SP, McCleskey EW, Stork PJ: Rap1 mediates sustained MAP kinase activation induced by nerve growth factor. Nature 1998, 393:622-626.

23. Meakin SO, MacDonald JIS, Gryz EA, Kubu CJ, Verdi JM: The signaling adapter FRS-2 competes with Shc for binding to the nerve growth factor receptor TrkA. J Biol Chem 1999, 274:9861-9870.

24. Nosaka Y, Arai A, Miyasaka N, Miura O: CrkL mediates ras-dependent activation of the Raf/ERK pathway through the guanine nucleotide exchange factor C3G in hematopoietic cells stimulated with erythropoietin or interleukin-3. J Biol Chem 1999, 274:30154-30162.

25. Wright JH, Drueckes P, Bartoe J, Zhao Z, Shen SH, Krebs EG: A role for the SHP-2 tyrosine phosphatase in nerve growth-induced PC12 cell differentiation. Mol Biol Cell 1997, 8:1575-1585.

26. Wilde A, Beattie EC, Lem L, Riethof DA, Liu SH, Mobley WC, Soriano P, Brodsky FM: EGF receptor signaling stimulates SRC kinase phosphorylation of clathrin, influencing clathrin redistribution and EGF uptake. Cell 1999, 96:677-687.

27. Beattie EC, Howe CL, Wilde A, Brodsky FM, Mobley WC: NGF signals through TrkA to increase clathrin at the plasma membrane and enhance clathrin-mediated membrane trafficking. J Neurosci 2000, 20:7325-7333.

28. Vaillant AR, Mazzoni I, Tudan C, Boudreau M, Kaplan DR, Miller FD: Depolarization and neurotrophins converge on the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt pathway to synergistically regulate neuronal survival. J Cell Biol 1999, 146:955-966.
    - This paper describes synergies between signals induced by depolarization of cells and neurotrophin signaling that affect survival of sympathetic neurons. PI3K seems to be regulated by both pathways.

29. Holgado-Madruga M, Moscatello DK, Emlet DR, Dieterich R, Wong AJ: Grb2-associated binder-1 mediates phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase activation and the promotion of cell survival by nerve growth factor. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997, 94:12419-12424.

30. Yamada M, Ohnishi H, Sano SI, Nakatami A, Ikeuchi T, Hatanaka H: Insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-2 and IRS-2 are tyrosine-phosphorylated and associated with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in response to brain-derived neurotrophic factor in cultured cerebral cortical neurons. J Biol Chem 1997, 48:30334-30339.

31. Shi ZQ, Yu DH, Park M, Marshall M, Feng GS: Molecular mechanism for the Shp-2 tyrosine phosphatase function in promoting growth factor stimulation of Erk activity. Mol Cell Biol 2000, 20:1526-1536.

32. Yamada M, Ohnishi H, Sano SI, Araki T, Nakatami A, Ikeuchi T, Hatanaka H: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor stimulates interactions of Shp2 with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and Grb2 in cultured cerebral cortical neurons. J Neurochem 1999, 73:41-49.

33. Datta SR, Brunet A, Greenberg ME: Cellular survival: a play in three Akts. Genes Dev 1999, 13:2905-2927.

34. Yuan J, Yankner BA: Apoptosis in the nervous system. Nature 2000, 407:802-809.

35. Brunet A, Bonni A, Zigmond MJ, Lin MZ, Juo P, Hu LS, Anderson MJ, Arden KC, Blenis J, Greenberg ME: Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a forkhead transcription factor. *Cell* 1999, **96**:857-868.

This very interesting paper describes a pathway conserved from *C. elegans* to vertebrates that provides a molecular mechanism for the transcriptional control of cell survival.

36. Datta SR, Dudek H, Tao X, Masters S, Fu H, Gotoh Y, Greenberg ME: Akt phosphorylation of BAD couples survival signals to the cell-intrinsic death machinery. *Cell* 1997, **91**:1-20.

37. Shindler KS, Yunker AM, Cahm R, Zha J, Korsmeyer SJ, Roth KA: Trophic support promotes survival of bcl-x-deficient telencephalic cells *in vitro*. *Cell Death Differ* 1998, **5**:901-910.

38. Middleton G, Hamanoue M, Enokido Y, Wyatt S, Pennica D, Jaffray E, Hay RT, Davies AM: Cytokine-induced nuclear factor kappa B activation promotes the survival of developing neurons. *J Cell Biol* 2000, **148**:325-332.

39. Hetman M, Cavanaughe JE, Kimelman D, Xia Z: Role of glycogen synthase kinase-3β in neuronal apoptosis induced by trophic withdrawal. *J Neurosci* 1999, **20**:2567-2574.

40. Corbit KC, Foster DA, Rosner MR: Protein kinase Cδ mediates neurogenic but not mitogenic activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase in neuronal cells. *Mol Cell Biol* 1999, **19**:4209-4218.

An interesting mechanism by which Ca²⁺ mobilization can synergize with the MAPK pathway is described in this paper. In neuronal cells, there appear to be interactions between different signaling pathways at almost every step.

41. Zhang Y, Moheban DB, Conway BR, Bhattacharyya A, Segal RA: Cell surface Trk receptors mediate NGF-induced survival while internalized receptors regulate NGF-induced differentiation. *J Neurosci* 2000, **20**:5671-5678.

This paper presents evidence indicating that neurotrophin application to surface Trk receptors can promote cell survival, but induction of differentiation requires internalization of these neurotrophin-Trk receptor complexes.

42. Wendland B, Emr SD, Riezman H: Protein traffic in the yeast endocytic and vacuolar protein sorting pathways. *Curr Opin Cell Biol* 1998, **10**:513-522.

43. Kuruvilla R, Ye H, Ginty DD: Spatially and functionally distinct roles of the P13-K effector pathway during NGF signaling in sympathetic neurons. *Neuron* 2000, **27**:499-512.

This paper uses Campenot chambers to characterize two distinct roles for PI3K in NGF-dependent signaling in sympathetic neurons. The first function of PI3K appears to be to promote an early step in membrane trafficking, almost certainly endocytosis.

44. Minichiello L, Casagranda F, Tatche RS, Stucky CL, Postigo A, Lewin GR, Davies AM, Klein R: Point mutation in trkB causes loss of NT4-dependent neurons without major effects on diverse BDNF responses. *Neuron* 1998, **21**:335-345.

45. MacDonald JI, Gryz EA, Kubu CJ, Verdi JM, Meakin SO: Direct binding of the signaling adapter protein Grb2 to the activation loop tyrosines on the nerve growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase, TrkA. *J Biol Chem* 2000, **275**:18225-18233.

46. Hu S, Reichardt LF: From membrane to cytoskeleton: enabling a connection. *Neuron* 1999, **22**:419-422.

47. Yano H, Cong F, Birge RB, Goff SP, Chao MW: Association of the Abl tyrosine kinase with the Trk nerve growth factor receptor. *J Neurosci Res* 2000, **59**:356-364.

The full implications of this study are not known, but given all the data implicating Abl in regulation of axonal growth and steering, this paper should provoke much future work. This is also an interesting example of an interaction with a receptor tyrosine kinase that is not regulated directly by phosphorylation of a docking site on the receptor. Mechanisms of Abl regulation are poorly understood.

48. Meakin SO, MacDonald JI: A novel juxtamembrane deletion in rat TrkA blocks differentiative but not mitogenic cell signaling in response to nerve growth factor. *J Neurochem* 1998, **71**:1875-1888.

49. Kjoller L, Hall A: Signaling to Rho GTPases. *Exp Cell Res* 1999, **253**:166-179.

50. Bishop AL, Hall A: Rho GTPases and their effector proteins. *Biochem J* 2000, **348**:241-255.

51. Liu BP, Burridge K: Vav2 activates rac1, cdc42, and RhoA downstream from growth factor receptors but not beta1 integrins. *Mol Cell Biol* 2000, **20**:7160-7169.

This paper demonstrates that a ubiquitously expressed exchange factor for a small family of G proteins involved in control of the actin cytoskeleton is activated by growth factors. This pathway is very likely to be important in neurons as well as in the cells used in this study.

52. Nimnual AS, Yatsula BA, Bar-Sagi D: Coupling of Ras and Rac guanosine triphosphatases through the Ras exchanger Sos. *Science* 1998, **279**:560-563.

53. Nakayama AY, Harms MB, Luo L: Small GTPases Rac and Rho in the maintenance of dendritic spines and branches in hippocampal pyramidal neurons. *J Neurosci* 2000, **20**:5329-5338.

This is an interesting paper that demonstrates the roles in regulating dendritic morphology of the small family of G proteins known to regulate the actin cytoskeleton. The paper uses a novel method to introduce genes into cells in tissue slices that should be of widespread interest to neuroscientists.

54. Dobrowsky RT, Jenkins GM, Hannun YA: Neurotrophins induce sphingomyelin hydrolysis. Modulation by co-expression of p75 with Trk receptors. *J Biol Chem* 1995, **270**:22135-22142.

55. Yoon SO, Carter BD, Cassaccia-Bonnefil P, Chao MV: Competitive signaling between TrkA and p75 nerve growth factor receptors determines cell survival. *J Neurosci* 1998, **18**:3273-3281.

56. Mazzoni IE, Said FA, Aloyz R, Miller FD, Kaplan D: Ras regulates sympathetic neuron survival by suppressing the p53-mediated cell death pathway. *J Neurosci* 1999, **19**:9716-9727.

An important study from the Miller and Kaplan laboratories showing that apoptosis of sympathetic neurons involves p53.

57. Aloyz RS, Bamji SX, Pozniak CD, Toma JG, Atwal J et al.: P53 is essential for developmental neuron death as regulated by the TrkA and p75 neurotrophin receptors. *J Cell Biol* 1998, **143**:1691-1703.

58. Chen J, Fu H: Regulation of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase (ASK) 1-induced cell death by Raf-1 [abstract]. *Mol Biol Cell Suppl* 2000, **11**:1807.

59. Kanamoto T, Mota MA, Takeda K, Rubin LL, Miyazopo K, Ichijo H, Bazenet CE: Role of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase in regulation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway and apoptosis in sympathetic neurons. *Mol Cell Biol* 2000, **20**:196-204.

This paper is complementary to [58]. It clarifies some steps in the pathway by which neurotrophin engagement of the p75 receptor results in activation of the Jun kinase pathway.

60. Maggiwar SDB, Sarriere PD, Dewhurst S, Freeman RS: Nerve growth factor-dependent activation of NF-κB contributes to survival of sympathetic neurons. *J Neurosci* 1998, **18**:10356-10365.

61. Hamanoue M, Middleton G, Wyatt S, Jaffray E, Hay RT, Davies AM: p75-mediated NF-κB activation enhances the survival response of developing sensory neurons to nerve growth factor. *Mol Cell Neurosci* 1999, **14**:28-40.

62. MacPhee I, Barker PA: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor binding to the p75 neurotrophin receptor reduces TrkA signaling whereas increasing serine phosphorylation in the TrkA intracellular domain. *J Biol Chem* 1997, **272**:23547-23551.

63. Zhou H, Summers S, Birnbaum MJ, Pittman RN: Inhibition of Akt kinase by cell-permeable ceramide and its implications for ceramide-induced apoptosis. *J Biol Chem* 1998, **273**:16568-16575.

64. Zundel W, Swiersz LM, Giaccia A: Caveolin 1-mediated regulation of receptor tyrosine kinase-associated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity by ceramide. *Mol Cell Biol* 2000, **20**:1507-1514.

This very interesting paper presents evidence indicating that ceramide directly regulates the activity of PI3K through perturbations of the structure of caveoli, specialized lipid domains in membranes.

65. Kim JYH, Sutton ME, Lu DT, Cho TA, Goumnerova LC, Goritchenko L, Kaufman JR, Lam KK, Billet AL, Tarbell NJ et al.: Activation of neurotrophin-3 receptor TrkC induces apoptosis in medulloblastomas. *Cancer Res* 1999, **59**:711-719.

66. Sakai R, Henderson JT, O'Bryan JP, Elia AJ, Saxton TM, Pawson T: The mammalian ShcB and ShcC phosphotyrosine docking proteins function in the maturation of sensory and sympathetic neurons. *Neuron* 2000, **20**:819-833.

Both ShcB and ShcC are co-expressed in almost all sympathetic neurons, where they appear to have overlapping essential functions. ShcB and ShcC are both widely expressed in dorsal root ganglia sensory neurons. This study shows that absence of ShcB results in the loss of many TrkA-expressing nociceptive neurons and some neurons that generate large-caliber myelinated fibers; but absence of ShcC has no detectable effect on survival of neurons in these sensory ganglia, either in the presence or absence of ShcB. Thus, these two adaptor proteins seem to have both overlapping and specific functions in the development of different populations of cells.

280 Signalling mechanisms

67. Airaksinen MS, Koltzenburg M, Lewin GR, Masu Y, Helbig C, Wolf E, Brem G, Toyka KV, Thoenen H, Meyer M: Specific subtypes of cutaneous mechanoreceptors require neurotrophin-3 following peripheral target innervation. *Neuron* 1996, **16**:287-295.

68. Carroll P, Lewin GR, Koltzenburg M, Toyka KV, Thoenen H: A role for BDNF in mechanosensation. *Nat Neurosci* 1998, **1**:42-46.

69. Song HJ, Poo MM: Signal transduction underlying growth cone guidance by diffusible factors. *Curr Opin Neurobiol* 1999, **9**:355-363.
- The Poo laboratory has done pioneering work on signaling mechanisms involved in axon guidance. Surprisingly, there appear to be fundamental differences in signaling through TrkA and TrkB, compared with TrkC, as assessed by application of cyclic nucleotides that convert responses from chemoattractive to chemorepulsive or vice versa.

70. Boulanger L, Poo MM: Gating of BDNF-induced synaptic potentiation by cAMP. *Science* 1999, **284**:1982-1984.
- This paper describes interactions between cAMP and neurotrophin-dependent signaling pathways in controlling exocytosis. As found in [69], there appear to be surprising and fundamental differences in signaling by BDNF and NT-3 through their respective Trk receptors.

71. Stucky CL, Koltzenburg M, DeChiara T, Lindsay RM, Yancopoulos GD: Neurotrophin 4 is required for the survival of a subclass of hair follicle receptors. *J Neurosci* 1998, **18**:7040-7046.

72. Guidry G, Landis SC, Davis BM, Albers KM: Overexpression of nerve growth factor in epidermis disrupts the distribution and properties of sympathetic innervation in footpads. *J Comp Neurol* 1998, **393**:231-243.

73. Ringstedt T, Ibáñez CF, Nosrat CA: Role of brain-derived neurotrophic factor in target invasion in the gustatory system. *J Neurosci* 1999, **19**:3507-3518.

74. Ming G, Song H, Berninger B, Inagaki N, Tessier-Lavigne M, Poo MM:
- Phospholipase C-gamma and phosphoinositide 3-kinase mediate cytoplasmic signaling in nerve growth cone guidance. *Neuron* 1999, **23**:139-148.
- A collaboration between the Poo and Tessier-Lavigne laboratories aimed at understanding signaling mechanisms involved in growth cone guidance. The results implicate PI3K. This kinase has also been shown to mediate chemotactic responses in *Dictyostelium* and in non-neural mammalian cells.

75. Anderson DJ: Cell fate determination in the peripheral nervous system: the sympathoadrenal progenitor. *J Neurobiol* 1993, **24**:185-198.

76. Mendell LM, Albers KM, Davis BM: Neurotrophins, nociceptors, and pain. *Microsc Res Tech* 1999, **45**:252-261.

77. Patel TD, Jackman A, Rice FL, Kucera J, Sneider WD: Development of sensory neurons in the absence of NGF/TrkA signaling *in vivo*. *Neuron* 2000, **25**:345-357.
- This presents elegant work *in vivo* that shows that TrkA has important roles during development other than survival. The authors take advantage of the fact that apoptosis in sensory neurons is largely prevented in mice lacking Bax. By crossing this Bax allele into mice lacking NGF or TrkA, it is possible to examine the consequences of absence of Trk signaling in neurons that would normally undergo apoptosis without NGF. The results indicate that TrkA signaling has important roles in the development of these cells, in addition to a role in survival.

78. White FA, Keller-Peck CR, Knudson CM, Korsmeyer SJ, Sneider WD: Widespread elimination of naturally occurring neuronal death in Bax-deficient mice. *J Neurosci* 1998, **18**:1428-1439.

79. Stucky CL, Koltzenburg M, Schneider M, Engle MG, Albers KM, Davis BM: Overexpression of nerve growth factor in skin selectively affects the survival and functional properties of nociceptors. *J Neurosci* 1999, **19**:8509-8516.
- The authors present a detailed analysis of mice that overexpress NGF in the skin. The mice show, among other phenotypes, an increase from 42 to 96% in heat-responsive neurons within dorsal root ganglia. Interestingly, this change cannot be accounted for simply by selective survival. These studies imply that NGF selectively determines the receptive properties of nociceptors.

80. Stucky CL, Lewin GR: Isolectin B4-positive and -negative nociceptors are functionally distinct. *J Neurosci* 1999, **19**:6497-6505.

81. Shu XQ, Mendell LM: Neurotrophins and hyperalgesia. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1999, **96**:7693-7696.

82. Shu XQ, Mendell LM: Nerve growth factor acutely sensitizes the response of adult rat sensory neurons to capsaicin. *Neurosci Lett* 1999, **274**:159-162.
