
Plant Cell Physiol. 42(6): 650–656 (2001)  
JSPP © 2001

# Lipoic Acid Metabolism in *Arabidopsis thaliana*: Cloning and Characterization of a cDNA Encoding Lipoyltransferase

**Miho Wada**¹, **Rie Yasuno**¹, **Sean W. Jordan**², **John E. Cronan Jr.**²,³ and **Hajime Wada**¹,⁴  

¹ Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Kyushu University, Ropponmatsu, Fukuoka, 810-8560 Japan  
² Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, U.S.A.  
³ Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, U.S.A.

Lipoic acid is an essential coenzyme required for activity of several key enzyme complexes, such as the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, in the central metabolism. In these complexes, lipoic acid must be covalently attached to one of the component proteins for it to have biological activity. We report the cloning and characterization of *Arabidopsis thaliana* LIP2 cDNA for lipoyltransferase that catalyzes the transfer of the lipoyl group from lipoyl-acyl carrier protein to lipoate-dependent enzymes. This cDNA was shown to code for lipoyltransferase by its ability to complement an *Escherichia coli lipB* null mutant lacking lipoyltransferase activity. The expressed enzyme in the *E. coli* mutant efficiently complemented the activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, but less efficiently than that of 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex. Comparison of the deduced amino acid sequence of LIP2 with those of *E. coli* and yeast lipoyltransferases showed a marked sequence similarity and the presence of a leader sequence presumably required for import into mitochondria. Southern and northern hybridization analyses suggest that LIP2 is a single-copy gene and is expressed as an mRNA of 860 nt in leaves. Western blot analysis with an antibody against lipoyltransferase demonstrated that a 29 kDa form of lipoyltransferase is located in the mitochondrial compartment of *A. thaliana*.

**Key words:** *Arabidopsis thaliana* — Fatty acid synthesis — Lipoic acid — Lipoyltransferase — Pyruvate dehydrogenase.

Abbreviations: ACP, acyl carrier protein; IPTG, isopropyl-1-thio-β-D-galactoside; OGDH, 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase; ORF, open reading frame; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase; 5′-RACE, 5′-rapid amplification of cDNA ends.

The nucleotide sequence reported in this paper (*LIP2* cDNA for lipoyltransferase of *A. thaliana*) has been submitted to the DDBJ, EMBL, GenBank under accession number AB020975.

---

### Introduction

Lipoic acid (6,8-thioctic acid or 1,2-dithiolane-3-pentanoic acid) is a sulfur-containing coenzyme that is required for activity of enzyme complexes involved in the oxidative decarboxylation of 2-oxoacids (Reed and Hackert 1990, Perham 1991, Mattevi et al. 1992) and the glycine cleavage (glycine decarboxylase) system (Fujiwara et al. 1990, Kim and Oliver 1990, Macherel et al. 1990). Five proteins are known as lipoylated proteins: the dihydrolipoamide acyltransferase (E2) subunits of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) and branched chain 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase complexes, protein X of the PDH complex, and H-protein of the glycine cleavage system. Lipoic acid is covalently bound to these proteins via an amide linkage to the ε-amino group of specific lysine residues in a conserved protein domain (Reed and Hackert 1966). The attached lipoyl moiety functions as a carrier of reaction intermediates among the active sites of the components of the complexes (Douce et al. 1994, Yeaman 1989).

The transfer of lipoic acid to apoproteins is catalyzed by two classes of enzymes in *Escherichia coli* (Morris et al. 1994, Morris et al. 1995). Lipoyl ligase, encoded by a *lplA* gene, is an ATP-requiring enzyme that forms lipoyl-AMP as an intermediate for lipoyl transfer. In contrast, lipoyl-acyl carrier protein (ACP): Nε-lysine lipoyltransferase, encoded by a *lipB* gene, transfers a lipoyl group from lipoyl-ACP to apoproteins. The LplA ligase functions in utilization of exogenously supplied lipoic acid for protein modification (Morris et al. 1994, Morris et al. 1995), whereas the LipB lipoyltransferase transfers lipoic acid synthesized de novo (Jordan and Cronan 1997a). In the yeast *Kluyveromyces lactis*, a *LIPB* gene has been cloned (Chen 1997). The deduced amino acid sequence of the LIPB polypeptide is homologous to that of *E. coli* LipB, but not to that of LplA. The growth of *K. lactis LIPB* disruptant strains is severely compromised on a glycerol medium, because it requires functioning of the citric acid cycle and hence active PDH and OGDH. The strains are also unable to utilize glycine as a sole nitrogen source due to lack of the glycine cleavage enzyme. These findings suggest that the *LIPB* gene is a major determinant in lipoylation of enzymes in this yeast. In mammals the situation is unclear. An enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of the lipoyl group from lipoyl-AMP to apoH-protein is well characterized and is present in two isoforms (Fujiwara et al. 1994, Fujiwara et al. 1996). However, in contrast to the *E. coli* LplA ligase, neither of these isoforms is able to activate lipoate to lipoyl-AMP, and no mammalian enzyme capable of catalyzing lipoyl-AMP synthesis has yet been demonstrated.

Despite the importance of the lipoyl prosthetic group in the function of several key enzyme complexes of central metabolism, little is known about the enzymes involved in the transfer of lipoic acid in higher plants. None of the cDNAs and genes for lipoate attachment enzymes have been cloned or characterized in higher plants. In this study, we report an *Arabidopsis thaliana* cDNA, designated *LIP2*, for lipoyltransferase that is functionally and structurally homologous to the LipB lipoyltransferase of *E. coli*. We demonstrate that expression of this cDNA complements an *E. coli lipB* null mutant and results in lipoate attachment to the *E. coli* PDH complex. We also show that the *LIP2*-encoded lipoyltransferase is a mitochondrial protein. To our knowledge, this is the first report to describe the cloning and characterization of a cDNA for a lipoate attachment enzyme from higher plants or other higher eukaryotes.

### Materials and Methods

#### Plant material
*Arabidopsis thaliana* (Columbia ecotype) was grown on vermiculite in trays under continuous light at a photon flux density of 40 μmol m⁻²s⁻¹ at 25°C.

#### Cell fractionation of *A. thaliana* rosette leaves
Cytosolic, microsomal and mitochondrial fractions were prepared from leaves of 2-week-old *A. thaliana* plants as previously described (Yasuno and Wada 1998). Chloroplast fractions were prepared from the same plant material as described below. Plants were placed in the dark for 12 h before harvesting leaves. All procedures described below were carried out at 4°C. The leaves (30 g) were homogenized with a grinder in 120 ml of a medium containing 50 mM TES-NaOH pH 7.2, 0.3 M mannitol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM MgCl₂, 0.1% (w/v) BSA, 0.5% (w/v) polyvinyl pyrrolidone-40, 4 mM cysteine and 10 mM 2-mercaptoethanol. The brei was filtered through three layers of gauze and centrifuged at 1,200 × g for 10 min. The resulting pellet was suspended in 2 ml of medium A containing 0.3 M mannitol, 20 mM TES-NaOH pH 7.2, 2 mM K₂HPO₄, 1 mM EDTA, 2 mM MgCl₂, 0.1% BSA and 14 mM 2-mercaptoethanol, applied onto a stepwise Percoll gradient composed of 2.5 ml of 10%, 4 ml of 40% and 2.5 ml of 70% (w/v) Percoll solutions, and centrifuged at 6,000 × g for 15 min in a swinging bucket rotor (RPS-40T; Hitachi, Tokyo). All the Percoll solutions used in the gradient centrifugation were made in 10 mM TES-NaOH pH 7.2, 0.25 M sucrose and 0.1% BSA. After centrifugation the chloroplasts were present as a green band at the interface between the 40 and 70% Percoll layers. The chloroplast fraction was recovered from the gradient and diluted 7-fold with medium B, which is medium A with 2 mM DTT in place of 14 mM mercaptoethanol, and then centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 10 min. The resulting chloroplast fraction pellets were suspended in medium B and used for western blot analysis.

#### cDNA cloning and analysis
A fragment of the *A. thaliana LIP2* cDNA was amplified by PCR. An *A. thaliana* cDNA library was constructed with λgt11 and cDNA synthesized from poly(A)⁺ RNAs of leaves and roots, and lambda phage DNAs were used as templates. Primers 1 and 2 (Table 1), which anneal to the cloning site of λgt11 and a part of *LIP2* cDNA, respectively, were used for the PCR. The amplified cDNA was subcloned into pCR2.1 (Original TA Cloning Kit; Invitrogen, Carlsbad,

#### Table 1 Oligonucleotide sequences used as primers in this study
| Primer | Sequence |
|--------|----------|
| 1      | 5′-TTGACACCAGACCAACTGGTAATG-3′ |
| 2      | 5′-TATTTAAGGCCAAAACCATGACT-3′ |
| 3      | 5′-GCCAAACCATGACTAGT-3′ |
| 4      | 5′-TTGGTGGATGCTGAAGCGAG-3′ |
| 5      | 5′-GCTTCGATTTATGGCGTGAA-3′ |
| 6      | 5′-TTTCTCCTGCAGTTTAAGGG-3′ |
| 7      | 5′-GATAGGAAGATCGGGTGCTAT-3′ |
| 8      | 5′-CGAAGCTTATGAGATCCCTTAGAACCTTGG-3′ |
| 9      | 5′-CGAAGCTTTTATTTCTTTATCTTGGGTGTCC-3′ |
| 10     | 5′-GGGATCCATGAGATCCCTTAGAACCTTGG-3′ |

CA, U.S.A.) and its nucleotide sequence was determined. The 5′-terminus region of *A. thaliana LIP2* cDNA was amplified by the 5′-rapid amplification of cDNA ends (5′-RACE) method (5′-Full RACE Core Set; Takara, Shiga). A phosphorylated primer 3 was used for synthesis of cDNA using total RNAs isolated from *A. thaliana* leaves. The following two sets of primers were used for first and second PCR in the 5′-RACE, respectively: a primer 4 and 5 set, and another set of primers 6 and 7. The amplified DNA was subcloned into the pCR2.1 vector and its nucleotide sequence was determined. The 3′-terminus region of *LIP2* was also amplified by PCR. Lambda DNAs containing cDNAs from the *A. thaliana* cDNA library were used as templates. Primers 1 and 5 annealing to the cloning site of λgt11 and the internal region of *LIP2* cDNA, respectively, were used for PCR amplification as described above. The amplified cDNA was subcloned into pCR2.1 and its nucleotide sequence was determined. The sequences of 5′-, internal and 3′-regions were combined and the total sequence (828 bp) of *A. thaliana LIP2* cDNA was obtained.

DNA sequence reactions were done using a DNA sequencing kit (Thermo Sequenase Sequencing Kit; Amersham, Buckinghamshire, U.K.). DNA was sequenced using a DNA sequencer (ALF Red DNA Sequencer; Pharmacia Biotech, Tokyo). Double-stranded DNAs were used as templates and the sequence of both strands was determined. Nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequences were analyzed with GENETYX-MAC Software (Software Development; Tokyo).

#### Nucleic acid extraction and analyses
Genomic DNA used for Southern blot analysis was extracted from leaves of 4-week-old *A. thaliana* using a DNA extraction kit (ISOPLANT; Nippon Gene, Tokyo). Genomic DNA was digested with appropriate restriction enzymes, separated by electrophoresis in a 0.8% (w/v) agarose gel, and transferred to a nylon membrane (Hybond-N+; Amersham). Hybridization of the probe with the membrane-bound DNA was performed using a DNA labeling and detection system (ECL kit; Amersham).

Poly(A)⁺ RNA used for northern blot analysis was extracted from leaves of 3-week-old *A. thaliana* plants by an RNA extraction kit (mRNA purification kit; Pharmacia Biotech).

#### Functional complementation of an *E. coli lplA lipB* strain
The coding region of *LIP2* cDNA was amplified by PCR with primers 8 and 9. An 8 nt sequence 5′-CGAAGCTT-3′ including a HindIII site was added to the 5′-end of each primer. The PCR product was digested with HindIII and ligated into the HindIII site of an expression vector pKK233-2 (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA, U.S.A.) to

give the desired in-frame product. This plasmid was designated pKK-LIP2 and was used to transform the E. coli lplA lipB strain TM136 (Reed and Cronan 1993). The transformants were plated on an LB medium supplemented with 50 μg ml⁻¹ ampicillin, 50 μg ml⁻¹ kanamycin, 10 μg ml⁻¹ tetracycline, 0.4% (w/v) glucose, 5 mM acetate and 5 mM succinate. Transformant colonies were then streaked onto four kinds of plates containing different supplements. One plate contained an M9 medium supplemented with 50 μg ml⁻¹ ampicillin, 50 μg ml⁻¹ kanamycin, 10 μg ml⁻¹ tetracycline, 0.4% glucose, 1 mM MgSO₄, 5 mM succinate, 5 mM acetate, 5 × 10⁻⁵ % (w/v) vitamin B1 and 0.4 mM isopropyl-1-thio-β-D-galactoside (IPTG). The other plates contained the same components, except that acetate was omitted from the second plate, succinate from the third plate, and both acetate and succinate from the fourth plate. After streaking, the plates were incubated at 37°C for 2 days and growth of the transformants on the plates was scored. Transformants of the strain TM136 with the vector pKK233-2 were used as negative controls in these experiments.

Assay for PDH and OGDH activities

PDH and OGDH activities were measured as previously described (Jordan and Cronan 1997a). The reactions were assayed in a total volume of 1 ml with 3-acetylpyridine adenine dinucleotide as the electron acceptor and either 4 mM pyruvate or 4 mM 2-oxoglutarate as the substrate.

V8 protease digestion of the PDH E2 subunit

PDH complex was purified from 500 ml cultures grown in RB supplemented with 0.2% glucose, 15 μg ml⁻¹ tetracycline, 50 μg ml⁻¹ kanamycin and 100 μg ml⁻¹ ampicillin as previously described (Jordan and Cronan 1997b). The PDH complexes were digested according to the methods of Packman and Perham (1987). The resulting digested complexes were analyzed on a native polyacrylamide gel (20%T, 0.6%C) to separate the six species of domains (apo- and modified-forms of the three different lipoyl domains of the PDH complex).

Overexpression of LIP2 in E. coli and antibody production

The region of LIP2 cDNA encoding a precursor protein was amplified by PCR using primers 9 and 10. The 8 nt sequences, 5′-CGAAGCTT including a HindIII site and 5′-CGGGATCC-3′ including a BamHI site, were added to the 5′-ends of primers 9 and 10, respectively. The amplified DNA fragment was digested with BamHI and HindIII, and ligated into the BamHI and HindIII sites of the expression vector pET-30a(+) (Novagen, Madison, WI, U.S.A.). The resultant plasmid, designated pET-LIP2, was used for transformation of E. coli BL21(DE3) (Studier et al. 1990). The pET-LIP2 transformant of BL21(DE3) was grown at 37°C in an LB medium supplemented with 50 μg ml⁻¹ kanamycin. When the optical density at 600 nm of the E. coli culture reached 0.5, IPTG was added to the medium at a final concentration of 0.4 mM to induce expression of LIP2, and the culture was incubated for a further 5 h at 37°C.

The overexpressed LIP2 fusion protein, which contains an N-terminal hexa-histidine tag, was purified by Ni-affinity chromatography (His-Bind Resin and Buffer Kit; Novagen). Polyclonal antibody was generated by injecting the purified LIP2 fusion protein into a rabbit. The resulting antiserum was used for western blot analysis.

SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis

SDS-PAGE was performed according to the method of Laemmli (1970) using 12% (w/v) polyacrylamide gels. Protein concentration was determined by the method of Bradford (1976) using BSA as the standard. Western blot analysis was carried out according to Post-Beittenmiller et al. (1991).

Results

Identification of the cDNA coding for A. thaliana lipoyltransferase

A BLAST search (Pearson and Lipman 1988) of the GenBank database using the amino acid sequence of E. coli LipB lipoyltransferase detected a gene of A. thaliana encoding a homologous polypeptide. The gene was included in a BAC clone (BACt1G11, accession number AC002376) from chromosome 1. In the database it was predicted that the gene encodes a polypeptide of 333 amino acids (molecular mass of 37,366 Da). As described below, this prediction gave a longer amino acid sequence at the N-terminus of the polypeptide compared to that deduced from the nucleotide sequence of an open reading frame (ORF) in the LIP2 cDNA, suggesting that the computer predicted the wrong splice donor site.

The nucleotide sequence of the gene contained in the BAC clone was used to synthesize primers to clone and assemble an A. thaliana lipoyltransferase cDNA by PCR. The cloned LIP2 cDNA contains an ORF of 705 bp encoding a polypeptide of 235 amino acids (molecular mass of 26,421 Da) with overall homology to E. coli LipB (see below). However, this ORF probably does not encode the primary translation product in A. thaliana since the first 78 bp part of the cDNA is the product of splicing to a sequence located several hundred bases upstream in the genomic DNA. This splicing event results in addition of 26 residues to the N-terminus of the ORF. However, since no initiation codon was found in the 78 bp segment, we used the genomic sequence to further extend the sequence to include the first codon that can initiate protein synthesis in plants. An AUU codon was found as a candidate (Fütterer et al. 1996).

The deduced amino acid sequence of LIP2 protein was compared with those of E. coli LipB (Reed and Cronan 1993) and yeast K. lactis LIPB (Chen 1997) (Fig. 1). It should be noted that recent results indicate that E. coli LipB is a protein of 214 residues (23,900 Da) rather than the previously deduced protein of 191 residues (21,300 Da). Instead of initiating at the methionine previously proposed, lipB translation begins at a UUG codon. This was deduced from alignment of lipB gene sequences from a large number of bacteria both closely and distantly related to E. coli, which showed that upon translation into protein a region located upstream of the former initiation codon was strongly conserved. Moreover, upon overexpression of the 214 residue LipB protein is stable in E. coli whereas the 191 residue protein is extremely unstable (Reed and Cronan 1993), consistent with defective folding of a truncated protein.

The amino acid sequence identities between the Arabidopsis LIP2 protein and the lipoyltransferases of E. coli and K. lactis were 27 and 26%, respectively, suggesting that the A. thaliana cDNA encodes a lipoyltransferase. As discussed below, we expect that the part of the A. thaliana LIP2 N-terminal extension relative to E. coli LipB is a transit peptide that is cleaved during mitochondrial import.

Lipoic acid metabolism in Arabidopsis

Arabidopsis 1 ILKLLINPKFL
Yeast 1 MSKMLLIGTNYWPSKFGCTIFRKVRFQSTLKCTSTARTQPIDPSAKTIRHLQFVKEIPF

Arabidopsis 12 IWREPISEVOTLRWRRRTETEMRSPRTLEVWKLGTVNYLKSLKLEKLVSERKAHQIPDT
E. coli 1 LYQDKILVRQLGLQPYEPISQAMHEFTDTRDDDTLDE
Yeast 61 ETGIDIQEKFVRAHLDIKOLQSKIKREMTNLQKEHNAEIQLNFHEQMILDNINQMKPNPI

Arabidopsis 72 LLSLQHPPTYTLGKRRTDH--NLLIP--ESEL-TKI-GA-ELHYTQ--RGGDITFHGPHQ
E. coli 38 IWLEVHPVFTQG-QAGK--A-EHI----LMPG-D-I---P-VIQSDRGGQVTYHGPGQ
Yeast 121 VLTFQFEPTYTGGKRVKKQITDEQIARYEGFIPSKQKYNKPKFVQAERGGQVTFHGPQ
...*..*.*...*............*********

Arabidopsis 123 AILYPIISLRSI-GFGARNYVETLERSMIE-FASI--Y-GV-KA-R--AGNKCETGVWVG
E. coli 83 QVMYVLLNLKR-RKLGVRELVTILLEQTVVNTL---AEL-GI-EA-H---PRADAPGVYVG
Yeast 181 IVAYIIJDLKTFQNLPACKLVSTIDNAAMNALKVVPKFQGSDEPLNLITQKTNDTGVWVS
.*...*.......*......*........**.*.

Arabidopsis 174 D-RKIGAIGVRISSGITSHGLALNIDPDMK-YFEHIVPCGIADKEVTSLRRETDTLLPSE
E. coli 133 -EKKICSLGLRIRRGCSFHGLALNVNMDLSPFL-RINPCGYAGMEMAKISQWKPE-ATT-
Yeast 241 NQEKIASIGIHVRRSVTSHGICINVDPDLSYMNSFTMCGLSEKKATSIREQVPDSSTSVN
**.....*......**.....*...........

Arabidopsis 232 EVIHEQLVSCLAKAFSYDDVWWKEDPSLIILDTQDKE
E. coli 189 NNIAPRILLENILALLNNPDFEYITA
Yeast 301 DVAVAFVNQLAKLLGITVERIQLDDLPIYTD
... ... ... ...

Fig. 1 Comparison of the amino acid sequences of lipoyltransferases. The deduced amino acid sequence of the lipoyltransferase encoded by *A. thaliana LIP2* cDNA is compared to those of the *LIPB* lipoyltransferase of *K. lactis* (yeast) (Chen 1997) and the *LipB* lipoyltransferase of *E. coli* (Reed and Cronan 1993). The underlined amino acid sequence of *A. thaliana* is deduced from the genomic DNA sequence. In the amino acid sequence of *E. coli*, a methionine residue previously proposed (Reed and Cronan 1993) as an initiation site is also underlined. The amino acid residues conserved in all sequences and those conserved in two sequences are indicated by asterisks and dots, respectively. Hyphens represent gaps to maximize the alignment of the sequences.

Complementation of the *E. coli lipB lplA* mutant

To confirm that *A. thaliana LIP2* cDNA encodes a lipoyltransferase, the *LIP2* cDNA was expressed in the *E. coli lplA lipB* mutant strain TM136 lacking both lipoyltransferase and lipoate ligase (Reed and Cronan 1993). The strain TM136 lacks activity of all lipoate-dependent enzyme complexes due to a lack of lipoate attachment (Morris et al. 1995). Due to the lack of active PDH and OGDH complexes, growth of strain TM136 requires acetate (to bypass the PDH deficiency), succinate (to bypass the OGDH deficiency) and glucose (as an energy source). When strain TM136 was transformed with the vector plasmid pKK233-2 and plated on the various media, growth of the transformants was observed only on medium C, which contained glucose, acetate and succinate (Fig. 2). In contrast, the pKK-LIP2 transformants carrying the *A. thaliana LIP2* cDNA grew on medium B, which contained glucose and succinate, and thus these transformants no longer required acetate for growth. Thus *A. thaliana LIP2* cDNA complements the acetate requirement and allows growth of the *E. coli lplA lipB* strain. These findings indicated that PDH activity, but not OGDH activity, was recovered in the presence of pKK-LIP2 by LIP2-catalyzed lipoylation of the E2 subunit of the PDH complex, and thus *LIP2* cDNA encodes a lipoyltransferase. For the complementation of the *E. coli* mutant we used *A. thaliana* cDNA containing an ORF, which corresponds to the region from Met-33 to the C-terminus, Glu-268.

The complementation of strain TM136 with *LIP2* was confirmed at the enzyme level. Cell-free extracts of the pKK-LIP2 transformant showed higher levels of PDH activities than the wild-type strain, whereas the activity in extracts of the cells transformed with the vector pKK233-2 was almost undetectable (Table 2). In the case of OGDH, the activity in the transformants with pKK233-2 was almost absent, whereas significant activity was recovered in the presence of pKK-LIP2.

Fig. 2 Complementation of an *E. coli lplA lipB* mutant by expression of *A. thaliana LIP2* cDNA. The *E. coli lplA lipB* strain (TM136), which is completely defective in lipoic acid attachment (Reed and Cronan 1993), was transformed with either plasmid pKK233-2 (control) or plasmid pKK-LIP2. Colonies from each transformation were streaked onto plates containing glucose and acetate (A), glucose and succinate (B) or glucose, acetate and succinate (C), and the plates were incubated at 37°C for 2 days. 1 and 2 represent the transformants with pKK233-2 (control) and pKK-LIP2, respectively.

Lipoic acid metabolism in Arabidopsis

Fig. 3 Products of V8 protease digestion of partially-purified PDH complexes. The digestion products were analyzed by native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of lipoyl domains (Packman and Perham 1987). Modification of a lipoyl domain causes an increase in electrophoretic mobility due to the increase in negative charge due to modification of the lysine residue. Equal amounts of PDH complex were loaded in each lane. However, modified domains appeared to be more resistant to cleavage by V8 protease than apo-domains resulting in less intense bands. Lane 1, TM136/pKK233-2; lane 2, TM136/pKK-LIP2; lane 3, TM136/pKR111; lane 4, undigested control of TM136/pKR111.

Fig. 4 Southern and northern hybridization analyses of the A. thaliana LIP2 gene. (A) Southern hybridization analysis. Genomic DNA was extracted from A. thaliana leaves and digested with EcoRI (lane 1), HindIII (lane 2), BamHI (lane 3) or SalI (lane 4). Three micrograms of DNA was applied to each lane. The 705 bp coding region of the LIP2 cDNA was used as a probe. The positions of DNA size markers are indicated on the left. (B) Northern hybridization analysis. Poly(A)+ RNA was prepared from A. thaliana leaves and used for analysis. About 2 μg of poly(A)+ RNA was applied to the gel. The probe was identical to that used for the Southern blot analysis. The positions of RNA size markers are indicated on the left.

cant activity was detected in extracts of the pKK-LIP2 transformant, although the activity was only 25% of that of the wild-type strain. These results demonstrate that expression of the LIP2 cDNA restored normal PDH activity, but only partially restored the activity of OGDH, suggesting that the LIP2 expressed in the mutant efficiently lipoylated the E2 subunit of the PDH complex, but less efficiently modified the OGDH E2 subunit. It should be noted that normal E. coli PDH activity does not indicate full lipoylation of the E2 subunits, since each subunit contains three lipoyl domains and a single lipoylated domain is sufficient for full activity (Guest et al. 1985).

To confirm that the E. coli PDH activity detected in vitro resulted from modification of the lipoyl domains of the PDH complex, we purified the PDH complex from strain TM136 carrying various plasmids. To examine the modification status of the individual lipoyl domains of the PDH complex, we subjected partially-purified PDH complex to proteolysis with Staphylococcus V8 protease, which cleaves the three lipoyl domains from the E2 subunits (Packman and Perham 1987). When strain TM136 carried the vector pKK233-2, no modified lipoyl domain was detected (Fig. 3, lane 1). When strain TM136 carried the plasmid pKR111, which encodes E. coli lipB, nearly all of the lipoyl domains were modified (Fig. 3, lane 3). However, when strain TM136 carried the plasmid pKK-LIP2, only a small proportion of the lipoyl domain was modified (Fig. 3, lane 2). These results indicate that A. thaliana LIP2 modifies E. coli E2 subunits, albeit to a much lesser extent than E. coli LipB.

Expression and organization of A. thaliana LIP2

Figure 4A shows the genomic Southern blot analysis of the A. thaliana LIP2 gene using LIP2 cDNA as a probe. When the genomic DNA was digested with EcoRI, HindIII, BamHI or SalI, a single hybridizing band was detected in all cases. This result indicates that this lipoyltransferase is encoded by a single-copy gene of the A. thaliana genome.

The size of the transcript of the LIP2 gene was checked by northern blot analysis using poly(A)+ RNA prepared from

Table 2 Recovery of PDH and OGDH activities by expression of A. thaliana LIP2 cDNA

| Strain           | Activity (units. mg protein⁻¹) |
|------------------|-------------------------------|
|                  | PDH                           | OGDH                          |
| Wild-type        | 20.7                          | 7.8                           |
| TM136            | <0.2                          | <0.2                          |
| TM136/pKK233-2   | <0.2                          | <0.2                          |
| TM136/pKK-LIP2   | 31.8                          | 2.0                           |

The E. coli lplA lipB mutant (TM136), which is completely defective in lipoic acid attachment, was transformed with plasmids pKK233-2 (control) and pKK-LIP2. Activities of PDH and OGDH in the homogenates prepared from each strain were measured as described in “Materials and Methods”.

Lipoic acid metabolism in Arabidopsis

43.0 —
30.0 —
20.1 —
20.1 —
14.4 —
(kDa)

Fig. 5 Intracellular localization of lipoyltransferase in *A. thaliana*. Proteins prepared from cytosol (lane 1), microsomal (lane 2), chloroplast (lane 3) and mitochondrial (lane 4) fractions were applied to SDS-PAGE, blotted to nitrocellulose membranes and used for western blot analysis with the *LIP2* antibody (upper panel) or with an antibody against pea H-protein (lower panel). Arrowheads indicate the positions of LIP2 and H-protein. The positions of protein molecular mass markers are indicated on the left. Fifty micrograms of protein was applied to each lane.

As described above, *A. thaliana* lipoyltransferase has a putative mitochondrial targeting transit peptide, raising the possibility that lipoyltransferase is located in mitochondria. To check this possibility we performed western blot analysis on cytosolic, microsomal, chloroplast and mitochondrial fractions from *A. thaliana* leaves (Fig. 5, upper panel). A strong band at 29 kDa corresponding to lipoyltransferase was detected only in the mitochondrial fraction (lane 4). To confirm the mitochondrial localization of lipoyltransferase, the same fractions were analyzed with an antibody against pea H-protein, the lipoylated subunit of the glycine decarboxylase (glycine cleavage) complex, and shown to be present in the mitochondrial matrix (Oliver 1994). As shown in the lower panel of Fig. 5, the H-protein was detected only in the mitochondrial fraction. Together, these results demonstrate that lipoyltransferase is located in *A. thaliana* mitochondria as a 29 kDa polypeptide.

### Discussion

Jordan and Cronan (1997a) reported that pea mitochondria possess a lipoyl-ACP-dependent LipB type of lipoyltransferase demonstrated to transfer lipoate from lipoyl-ACP to the E2 subunit of the *E. coli* PDH complex. Since the *A. thaliana* *LIP2* lipoyltransferase cloned in this study is homologous to LipB and complements *lipB* mutant of *E. coli*, it seems clear that *LIP2* encodes a lipoyl-ACP-dependent lipoyltransferase. In eukaryotes excepting plants, all of the known lipoic acid-containing proteins are located in mitochondria (Fujiwara et al. 1990, Kim and Oliver 1990, Macherel et al. 1990, Reed and Hackert 1990, Perham 1991, Mattevi et al. 1992). In plants, the PDH complex, a lipoyl enzyme, is present both in mitochondria and plastids (Lernmark and Gardestrom 1994). Thus, it is reasonable to assume that both mitochondria and plastids contain lipoyltransferase activity. In this study, we prepared a polyclonal antibody against LIP2 protein and investigated the intracellular localization of lipoyltransferase in *A. thaliana* cells. Our results demonstrated that the lipoyltransferase encoded by the *LIP2* gene is present only in mitochondria. This finding raises the question of how the plastid PDH E2 subunit becomes lipoylated. Is there a different lipoyltransferase located in plastids? We have recently searched a database of the *A. thaliana* genome and found that, in addition to *LIP2*, there are two genes encoding polypeptides similar to the lipoyltransferase characterized in this study. It will be interesting to investigate if these genes encode plastid-localized lipoyltransferases that lipoylate the E2 subunit of the plastidal PDH complex. Cloning and characterization of the cDNAs corresponding to these genes are now in progress in our laboratory.

Escherichia coli has two types of lipoate attachment enzymes, LplA and LipB, that use lipoate plus ATP or lipoyl-ACP as substrates, respectively. An enzyme capable of transferring lipoate from lipoyl-AMP has been purified from bovine mitochondria. Although this protein has strong homology with LplA (but only within the N-terminal halves of the proteins), the mammalian enzyme cannot make lipoyl-AMP from lipoate and ATP (Fujiwara et al. 1994). It seems reasonable that mam-

mals might possess an LplA-like enzyme, since lipoate from
intestinal bacteria and digestion of food could be salvaged for
lipoylation of mitochondrial lipoate-dependent enzymes. How-
ever, mammals may also have an enzyme dependent on lipoyl-
ACP, since several sequences encoding putative proteins hav-
ing strong homology with LIP2 and LipB are found in the data-
bases. In addition, since plants lack an exogeneous source of
lipoate, an LplA-like enzyme would seem to be of little value.
We previously showed that pea mitochondrial extracts are
capable of synthesizing fatty acids and that a major portion of
the de novo synthesized fatty acids appear to be used for bio-
synthesis of lipoic acid (Wada et al. 1997). These findings have
recently been confirmed by Gueguen et al. (2000). Further-
more, we have recently demonstrated that lipoic acid synthase
involved in the biosynthesis of lipoic acid is localized in mito-
chondria (Yasuno and Wada 1998). These findings together
with those of the present study suggest that a full set of
enzymes involved in lipoic acid synthesis and transfer of lipoic
acid to lipoate-dependent enzymes is present in mitochondria.

**Acknowledgements**

We thank Dr. David J. Oliver (Iowa State University) for provid-
ing the antibody against pea H-protein. This work was supported by a
NIH grant (AI15650 to J.E.C.), a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research
(no. 10640636) and a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Priority
Areas (11151225) from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and
Culture, and a grant from the Asahi Glass Foundation to H.W.

**References**

Bradford, M.M. (1976) A rapid and sensitive method for the quantification of
microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of dye-binding. *Anal.
Biochem.* 72: 248–254.

Chen, X.J. (1997) Cloning and characterization of the lipoyl-protein ligase gene
*LIPB* from the yeast *Kluyveromyces lactis*. Synergistic respiratory deficiency
due to mutations in *LIPB* and mitochondrial F₁-ATPase subunits. *Mol. Gen.
Genet.* 255: 341–349.

Douce, R., Bourguignon, J., Macherel, D. and Neuburger, M. (1994) The gly-
cine decarboxylase system in higher plant mitochondria: structure, function
and biogenesis. *Biochem. Soc. Trans* 22: 184–188.

Fujiwara, K., Okamura-Ikeda, K. and Motokawa, Y. (1990) cDNA sequence, in
vitro synthesis, and intramitochondrial lipoylation of H-protein of the glycine
cleavage system. *J. Biol. Chem.* 265: 17463–17467.

Fujiwara, K., Okamura-Ikeda, K. and Motokawa, Y. (1994) Purification and
characterization of lipoyl-AMP: Nε-lysine lipoyltransferase from bovine liver
mitochondria. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269: 16605–16609.

Fujiwara, K., Okamura-Ikeda, K. and Motokawa, Y. (1996) Lipoylation of acyl-
transferase components of α-ketoacid dehydrogenase complexes. *J. Biol.
Chem.* 271: 12932–12936.

Fütterer, J., Potrykus, I., Bao, Y., Li, L., Burns, T.M., Hull, R. and Hohn, T.
(1996) Position-dependent ATT initiation during plant pararetrovirus rice tun-
gro bacilliform virus translation. *J. Virol.* 70: 2999–3010.

Gueguen, V., Macherel, D., Jaquinod, M., Douce, R. and Bourguignon, J. (2000)
Fatty acid and lipoic acid biosynthesis in higher plant mitochondria. *J. Biol.
Chem.* 275: 5016–5025.

Guest, J.R., Lewis, H.M., Graham, L.D., Packman, L.C. and Perham, R.N.
(1985) Genetic reconstruction and functional analysis of the repeating lipoyl
domains in the pyruvate dehydrogenase multienzyme complex of *Escherichia*
coli. *J. Mol. Biol.* 185: 743–754.

Jordan, S.W. and Cronan, J.E., Jr. (1997a) A new metabolic link. The acyl car-
rier protein of lipid synthesis donates lipoic acid to the pyruvate dehydroge-
nase complex in *Escherichia coli* and mitochondria. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272:
17903–17906.

Jordan, S.W. and Cronan, J.E., Jr. (1997b) Biosynthesis of lipoic acid and post-
translational modification with lipoic acid in *Escherichia coli*. *Methods Enzy-
mol.* 279: 176–183.

Kim, Y. and Oliver, D.J. (1990) Molecular cloning, transcriptional characteriza-
tion, and sequencing of cDNA encoding the H-protein of the mitochondrial
glycine decarboxylase complex in peas. *J. Biol. Chem.* 265: 848–853.

Laemmli, U.K. (1970) Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of
the head of bacteriophage T4. *Nature* 227: 680–685.

Lernmark, U. and Gardeström, P. (1994) Distribution of pyruvate dehydroge-
nase complex activities between chloroplasts and mitochondria from leaves
of different species. *Plant Physiol.* 106: 1633–1638.

Macherel, D., Lebrun, M., Gagnon, J., Neuburger, M. and Douce, R. (1990)
cDNA cloning, primary structure and gene expression for H-protein, a com-
ponent of the glycine-cleavage system (glycine decarboxylase) of pea (*Pisum
sativum*) leaf mitochondria. *Biochem. J.* 268: 783–789.

Mattevi, A., de Kok, A. and Perham, R.N. (1992) The pyruvate dehydrogenase
multienzyme complex. *Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.* 2: 877–887.

Morris, T.W., Reed, K.E. and Cronan, J.E., Jr. (1994) Identification of the gene
encoding lipoate-protein ligase A of *Escherichia coli*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269:
16091–16100.

Morris, T.W., Reed, K.E. and Cronan, J.E., Jr. (1995) Lipoic acid metabolism in
*Escherichia coli*: the *lplA* and *lipB* genes define redundant pathways for liga-
tion of lipoyl groups to apoprotein. *J. Bacteriol.* 177: 1–10.

Oliver, D.J. (1994) The glycine decarboxylase complex from plant mitochon-
dria. *Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol.* 45: 323–337.

Packman, L.C. and Perham, R.N. (1987) Limited proteolysis and sequence of
the 2-oxo acid dehydrogenase complexes from *Escherichia coli*. Cleavage
sites and domains in the dihydrolipoamide acyltransferase components. *Bio-
chem. J.* 242: 531–538.

Pearson, W.R. and Lipman, D.J. (1988) Improved tools for biological sequence
comparison. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 85: 2444–2448.

Perham, R.N. (1991) Domains, motifs, and linkers in 2-oxo acid dehydrogenase
multienzyme complexes: a paradigm in the design of a multifunctional pro-
tein. *Biochemistry* 30: 8501–8512.

Post-Bittemiller, D., Jaworski, J.G. and Ohlrogge, J.B. (1991) In vivo pools of
free and acylated acyl carrier proteins in spinach: evidence for sites of regula-
tion of fatty acid biosynthesis. *J. Biol. Chem.* 266: 1858–1865.

Reed, K.E. and Cronan, J.E., Jr. (1993) Lipoic acid metabolism in *Escherichia*
coli: sequencing and functional characterization of the *lipA* and *lipB* genes. *J.
Bacteriol.* 175: 1325–1336.

Reed, L.J. and Hackert, M.L. (1966) Chemistry and function of lipoic acid. *In*
Comprehensive Biochemistry. Edited by Florkin, M. and Stotz, E.M. Vol. 14.
pp. 99–126. Elsevier, New York, U.S.A.

Reed, L.J. and Hackert, M.L. (1990) Structure-function relationship in dihydrol-
ipoamide acyltransferase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 265: 8971–8974.

Studier, F.W., Rosenberg, A.H., Dunn, J.J. and Dubendorff, J.W. (1990) Use of
T7 RNA polymerase to direct expression of cloned genes. *Methods Enzymol.*
185: 60–89.

Wada, H., Shintani, D. and Ohlrogge, J. (1997) Why do mitochondria synthe-
size fatty acids? Evidence for involvement in lipoic acid production. *Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 94: 1591–1596.

Yasuno, R. and Wada, H. (1998) Biosynthesis of lipoic acid in Arabidopsis:
cloning and characterization of the cDNA for lipoic acid synthase. *Plant
Physiol.* 118: 935–943.

Yeaman, S.J. (1989) The 2-oxo acid dehydrogenase complexes: recent advances.
*Biochem. J.* 257: 625–632.

(Received January 24, 2001; Accepted April 1, 2001)
