
articles

# PAR-1 is a Dishevelled-associated kinase and a positive regulator of Wnt signalling

Tian-Qiang Sun*, Bingwei Lu†, Jia-Jia Feng†, Christoph Reinhardt†, Yuh Nung Jan‡, Wendy J. Fantl† and Lewis T. Williams*†§

*Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, California, USA  
†Chiron Corporation, 4560 Horton Street, 4.6, Emeryville, California 94608, USA  
‡Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, University of California, San Francisco, California 94143-0725, USA  
E-mail: rusty_williams@cc.chiron.com  

Wnt signalling regulates β-catenin-dependent developmental processes through the Dishevelled protein (Dsh). Dsh regulates two distinct pathways, one mediated by β-catenin and the other by Jun kinase (JNK). We have purified a Dsh-associated kinase from *Drosophila* that encodes a homologue of *Caenorhabditis elegans* PAR-1, a known determinant of polarity during asymmetric cell divisions. Treating cells with Wnt increases endogenous PAR-1 activity coincident with Dsh phosphorylation. PAR-1 potentiates Wnt activation of the β-catenin pathway but blocks the JNK pathway. Suppressing endogenous PAR-1 function inhibits Wnt signalling through β-catenin in mammalian cells, and *Xenopus* and *Drosophila* embryos. PAR-1 seems to be a positive regulator of the β-catenin pathway and an inhibitor of the JNK pathway. These findings show that PAR-1, a regulator of polarity, is also a modulator of Wnt–β-catenin signalling, indicating a link between two important developmental pathways.

The Wnt pathway has crucial roles in the development of various species¹². Aberrant regulation of the Wnt pathway in mammals results in cancer³⁴. Wnt interacts with receptors of the Frizzled family to enhance the ability of the Dishevelled (Dsh) protein to antagonize the activity of glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β)¹². The net effect of this pathway is to stabilize cytosolic β-catenin, which then moves to the nucleus and forms a heterodimer with the LEF1/TCF transcription factor to regulate expression of genes¹²⁴.

Dsh is also required in a separate pathway that controls planar cell polarity⁵⁶. Recent studies on the planar cell polarity pathway have shown that Dsh acts through small GTPases such as RhoA and Rac, and that Jun kinase (JNK) is an important component of the pathway⁵⁷. Dsh, originally identified in *Drosophila*, has homologs in other species⁸⁻¹⁰. These modular proteins are composed of an amino-terminal DIX domain, a PDZ domain in the middle and a carboxy-terminal DEP domain. Both the Wnt–β-catenin and the planar cell polarity pathways depend on Dsh for their function, but the Dsh domain requirements differ. The Wnt–β-catenin pathway seems to require all three domains but the planar cell polarity pathway requires only the DEP domain and not the DIX and PDZ domains⁵⁶. Little is known about the mechanism by which Dsh activates either of these pathways.

Wnt stimulates Dsh phosphorylation and β-catenin stabilization in *Drosophila* and mammalian cells¹¹¹², indicating that the kinase that phosphorylates Dsh is an important regulator of Dsh function. Here, we identify *Drosophila* PAR-1 as a Dsh-associated kinase. The *par-1* gene was initially identified in *Caenorhabditis elegans* as being required for anterior–posterior (A–P) polarity at the one-cell stage during embryonic development¹³. Like its counterpart in *C. elegans*, the *Drosophila par-1* gene is also required for A–P polarity during *Drosophila* oocyte differentiation¹⁴⁻¹⁶. However, the role of PAR-1 in Wnt signalling has never been explored. Neither the substrate nor the mechanism of PAR-1 activity in regulating A–P polarity is known. Our data show that PAR-1 is in a protein complex with Dsh and that Wnt signalling stimulates endogenous PAR-1 kinase activity. PAR-1 is required for Dsh phosphorylation, β-catenin stabilization and downstream transcriptional activation during Wnt signalling. However, PAR-1 suppresses Dsh-mediated JNK activation. Thus, PAR-1 potentiates Dsh function in the Wnt–β-catenin pathway but inhibits its function in the JNK pathway. This work indicates that PAR-1, an important regulator of polarity, is also a modulator of the Wnt–β-catenin and JNK pathways.

## Results

We found that Dsh was progressively phosphorylated in *Drosophila* during embryonic development (Fig. 1a, upper panel). To identify this kinase that phosphorylates Dsh, various domains of Dsh were expressed as glutathione S-transferase (GST)-fusion proteins and tested for their ability to bind the kinase from *Drosophila* embryos. Only the GST fusion protein containing the middle domain, DM, but not the N-terminal or C-terminal domain of Dsh, had a high affinity for the kinase (data not shown). The Dsh-associated kinase activity that was precipitated with GST–DM increased as Dsh became progressively phosphorylated during development (Fig. 1a, middle panel). Similarly, we found that there is a kinase activity present in Dsh immunoprecipitates (see Supplementary Information). An in-gel kinase experiment showed that the kinase activity, eluted from Dsh immunoprecipitates, was associated with two major bands and a minor band on a polyacrylamide gel as these bands phosphorylated the Dsh substrate impregnated in the gel (Fig. 1b). These bands of 110 kDa, 64 kDa and 130 kDa (minor band) were ultimately shown to be the kinase and its major fragment (see Supplementary Information). The region on Dsh that interacted with the kinase was mapped more precisely to a 36 amino acid segment, DM5, that is N-terminal to the PDZ domain (Fig. 1c). Importantly, this region in Dsh is well conserved among *Drosophila*, *C. elegans*, *Xenopus* and mammals.

Using GST-DM5 precipitation and in vitro phosphorylation as an assay to monitor the Dsh-associated kinase activity, the kinase was purified 60,000-fold from *Drosophila* embryos (see

628                                                                                                      NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 3 | JULY 2001 | http://cellbio.nature.com

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

Figure 1 Identification and cloning of *Drosophila* and human PAR-1 as encoding a Dishevelled-associated kinase.

**a**, Phosphorylation of Dsh by an associated kinase during embryonic development. Lysates from staged embryos were subjected to SDS-PAGE and blotted with Dsh antibody (upper panel). Dsh phosphorylation was confirmed by phosphatase treatment (data not shown). Dsh-associated kinase was precipitated by GST-DM (amino acids 172–395 of Dsh) from equal amounts of lysates and assayed by an in vitro kinase assay, in which GST-DM protein was the substrate (middle panel) and was shown by Ponceau S staining (lower panel).

**b**, The associated kinase was analysed by an in-gel kinase assay. The kinase eluted from Dsh immunoprecipitates (from embryos) was subjected to SDS-PAGE, renatured, and incubated with \[^{32}P\]-ATP to allow the kinase to phosphorylate its substrate, GST-DM5 (**c**), imbedded in the gel.

**c**, Fine mapping of the Dsh-associated kinase binding site on Dsh. Dsh-associated kinase was precipitated by GST fusion proteins containing Dsh fragments as indicated and subjected to in vitro kinase assay in which the GST fusion protein was the substrate. The ‘+’ signs indicate binding and phosphorylation by Dsh-associated kinase. The sequence of the Dsh-associated kinase binding region on Dsh is compared with Xenopus, mouse and *C. elegans* Dsh homologues.

**d**, Domain structure of *Drosophila* dPAR-1α and three human PAR-1 proteins. Percentage identity (similarity in parenthesis) to dPAR-1α is shown. dPAR-1α is the most abundant isoform in fly embryos. hPAR-1Bα and β are two distinct isoforms produced from the same gene; hPAR-1Bα lacks the N-terminal region (yellow box). UBA, ubiquitin-associated domain.

**e**, Dsh and dPAR-1 complex formation in vivo. Dsh was immunoprecipitated from *Drosophila* wing imaginal disc Clone-8 cells (no Wg treatment) with affinity-purified Dsh immune serum (I) or with preimmune serum (P). After SDS-PAGE, western-blot analysis was with anti-dPAR-1 (raised against a C-terminal fragment of dPAR-1α (ref. 16)) and anti-Dsh immune sera.

Supplementary Information) and several peptide sequences were then used to clone the cDNA of this kinase. The cDNA clones encoded a protein kinase that is highly homologous to the *C. elegans* protein PAR-1 (85% identity in the kinase domain and 42% identity overall), which is known to regulate embryo polarity but whose function in Wnt signalling has not been explored^13^. Therefore, we refer to the Dsh-associated kinase as dPAR-1. In searching databases for the human homologue(s) of dPAR-1, two uncharacterized putative kinases, p78 and EMK (ref. 17), were found with significant homology to dPAR-1. A human expressed

NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 3 | JULY 2001 | http://cellbio.nature.com
© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd

Figure 2 Wnt stimulates PAR-1 activity and suppression of PAR-1 blocks Wnt signalling.

a, Wingless increased dPAR-1 activity, Dsh phosphorylation and Arm stabilization. Clone-8 cells were treated with Wg conditioned medium or control medium for 2 h (in triplicate). dPAR-1 was precipitated with GST-DM5 from equal amounts of cell lysates and subjected to an in vitro kinase assay as in Fig. 1a. After SDS-PAGE, the products were transferred to a membrane and visualized by autoradiography (upper panel). The same membrane was blotted with anti-dPAR-1 antibody (second panel). Equal amounts of cell lysates were separated by SDS-PAGE and blotted with antibodies to Dsh and Arm (two lower panels).

b, Kinase-negative (KN) hPAR-1 blocked Wnt-induced Dvl phosphorylation. CHO cells transfected with cDNAs for Wnt1 and hPAR-1Bα KN or GST were lysed after 20 h, separated by SDS-PAGE and blotted with monoclonal antibodies against Dvl1, Dvl2 and Dvl3 (Santa Cruz Biotech) or with anti-tubulin antibody (Sigma). Similar results were obtained in three independent experiments.

c, PAR-1 KN blocked Wnt1-induced β-catenin stabilization. CHO cells were transfected with cDNAs for Wnt1, hPAR-1 KN

or dPAR-1α KN from *Drosophila* and GST as indicated. 24 h after transfection, uncomplexed β-catenin was precipitated from total cell lysate with the GST-Ecadherin cytoplasmic domain²⁰, and blotted with anti-β-catenin antibody. d, hPAR-1 KN suppressed Wnt1-induced transcriptional activation measured using LEF1 reporter assays²⁷. CHO cells were transfected in duplicate with LEF1 cDNA, LEF1 reporter, different amounts (0.1 μg and 0.8 μg) of hPAR-1 KN and other cDNAs as indicated. Reporter activities were measured as described in Methods. Averages of duplicate transfections are shown with the standard deviation as error bars. e, hPAR-1 KN or WT did not affect transcriptional activation induced by over-expression of β-catenin (S37A), measured as described in (d). f, Interference with PAR-1 and Dvl interaction blocked Wnt signalling. CHO cells were co-transfected with constructs for LEF1, LEF1 reporter, a GST-fusion protein of the 36 amino acid PAR-1-binding fragment from Dvl3 (amino acids 211–246 of mDvl3) and either Wnt1 or β-catenin (S37A).

To determine whether dPAR-1 and Dsh form a complex *in vivo*, endogenous Dsh was immunoprecipitated from *Drosophila* cells with an affinity-purified anti-Dsh antibody, and dPAR-1 was detected in the immunocomplex by western blot using anti-dPAR-1 antibody (Fig. 1e). These data indicate that dPAR-1 is the kinase responsible for the activity that co-purified with Dsh in the GST pull-down experiment (Fig. 1a–c). The PAR-1 protein, prepared by *in vitro* translation, strongly phosphorylated the middle region of Dsh *in vitro* (see Supplementary Information). Co-expression of Dsh with wild-type dPAR-1, but not kinase-negative dPAR-1 (dPAR-1 KN), in NIH3T3 cells resulted in a reduction in Dsh mobility on SDS-PAGE (see Supplementary Information). These data indicate that dPAR-1 directly phosphorylates Dsh *in vitro* and *in vivo*.

The Wnt pathway has been well characterized in a number of species, and the essential elements of the pathway seem to be highly conserved. To document whether PAR-1 was a conserved regulator of the pathway, we used several experimental systems. For example, we measured biochemical responses of cultured *Drosophila* or mammalian cells to either Wnt protein or transfection by signaling molecules in the Wnt pathway. We used Xenopus embryos, which are known to manifest Wnt-mediated developmental effects, and we also used *Drosophila* embryos to measure the developmental effects of altered PAR-1 expression.

If PAR-1 acts in Wnt signaling, PAR-1 activity might be expected to change in response to Wnt. We stimulated *Drosophila* clone-8 cells with conditioned medium containing Wingless (Wg; a *Drosophila* homologue of Wnt) and confirmed that Dsh became phosphorylated, and Armadillo (Arm, the *Drosophila* homologue of β-catenin) was stabilized (Fig. 2a). The kinase activity of dPAR-1 was also measured under the same conditions. Several experiments showed that soluble Wg stimulated dPAR-1-specific activity (Fig. 2a, upper panel). Wg treatment did not increase the amount of dPAR-1 protein that interacted with GST-DM5 (Fig. 2a, second panel). The increased dPAR-1 activity correlated with enhanced Dsh phosphorylation and elevation of Arm levels in Clone-8 cells (Fig. 2a, two lower panels). It is unlikely that the kinase activity detected here is from other kinases, because anti-dPAR-1 antibody treatment of lysates before the assay depleted the kinase activity of Clone-8 cell lysates (data not shown).

To examine whether PAR-1 is required in the Wnt pathway, endogenous PAR-1 activity was suppressed by expressing a kinase-negative PAR-1 (hPAR-1Bα KN). We used Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells because good expression from transfected DNA can be achieved, and these cells have a well-characterized response to Wnt. Three hallmarks of Wnt activity were measured: Dsh phosphorylation, β-catenin stabilization, and transcriptional activation [11, 12, 18–24]. Wnt treatment of CHO cells retarded the mobility of Dvl proteins (mammalian homologues of Dsh) on SDS-PAGE, and phosphatase treatment increased the mobility of the Dvl band, thereby confirming that Dvl was phosphorylated in response to Wnt (see Supplementary Information). The hPAR-1Bα KN suppressed Wnt-mediated phosphorylation of endogenous Dvl proteins, as shown by the reduced amount of a retarded Dvl band (upper arrowhead, upper panel in Fig. 2b). This result is consistent with the data that PAR-1 phosphorylated Dsh *in vitro* and in cells (see Supplementary Information). Furthermore, both human and *Drosophila* PAR-1 KN strongly suppressed Wnt-induced β-catenin stabilization (Fig. 2c). The kinase-negative forms of hPAR-1A, hPAR-1B, and hPAR-1C all strongly suppressed the Wnt-mediated transcriptional activation (measured by LEF1/TCF reporters [25–27]) in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 2c, left panel), whereas the same amount of overexpressed control protein (GST) had no effect. Importantly, co-expression of wild-type hPAR1 could override the suppression mediated by hPAR-1 KN (Fig. 2c, right panel), indicating that hPAR-1 KN affects Wnt signaling by specifically blocking the effects of endogenous PAR-1 in cells. However, hPAR-1 KN was unable to inhibit the transcriptional activation induced by overexpression of Wnt receptors.

Figure 3 **PAR-1 antisense oligonucleotides decrease the response to Wnt in human cells.**  
a, Reduced hPAR-1B protein levels mediated by an antisense oligonucleotide. HT1080 cells transfected with hPAR-1B-specific antisense (AS) or control oligonucleotides (RC, reverse sequence of the antisense) were lysed 44 h after oligonucleotide transfection, and applied to SDS-PAGE followed by western blot analysis with anti-hPAR-1B antibody (raised against a C-terminal fragment of hPAR-1Bα; recognizes both hPAR-1Bα and hPAR-1Bβ) (upper panel) or anti-tubulin antibody (Sigma) (lower panel).  
b, Reduced hPAR-1 activity after transfection with antisense oligonucleotides. HT1080 cells were transfected with oligonucleotides as indicated. After lysis, 30 h after transfection, hPAR-1 activity was measured by an *in vitro* kinase assay after pull-down with the 36 amino acid PAR-1-binding fragment from Dvl3 (amino acids 211–246 of mDvl3 expressed as a GST fusion protein).  
c, hPAR-1 antisense oligonucleotides suppress the Wnt-induced downstream response. HT1080 cells, in duplicate wells, were transfected with oligonucleotides as indicated. Wnt1, LEF1 (these cells do not express endogenous LEF1) and LEF1 reporter plasmids were transfected 24 h later. The reporter activities were measured as described in Fig. 2.

sequence tag sequence with homology to dPAR-1 was also identified, and the entire coding region of this gene was cloned. We have named the three human dPAR-1 homologues hPAR-1A (p78), hPAR-1B (EMK), and hPAR-1C (Fig. 1d). All three hPAR-1s are widely expressed in various tissues (see Supplementary Information).

Figure 4 PAR-1 potentiates the canonical Wnt pathway at a step upstream of Axin and β-catenin, and inhibits the JNK pathway.

**a**, All three hPAR-1 kinases potentiated the Wnt downstream response induced by Wnt1 or Dvl3. The downstream response induced by Wnt signalling was measured using LEF1 reporter assays. CHO cells in 12-well plates were transfected in duplicate with luciferase reporters and the cDNAs as indicated. 24–26 h later, cells were lysed and luciferase activities were measured as described in Fig. 2.

**b**, Axin suppressed the effects of hPAR-1 on the Wnt pathway. CHO cells were transfected with the LEF1

pression of β-catenin (Fig. 2e), consistent with its role in regulation of Dsh function upstream of β-catenin.

As described above, dPAR-1 binds to a conserved 36 amino acid fragment of Dsh. Thus, overexpression of the corresponding fragment from Dvl3 should disrupt the interaction between Dvl and mammalian PAR-1, and thereby impair Wnt signalling. Indeed, when overexpressed in mammalian cells, this peptide inhibited the Wnt-induced transcriptional activation and had no effect on the response induced by overexpression of β-catenin (Fig. 2f).

To complement the studies with kinase-negative PAR-1 and the inhibitory peptide, we used antisense oligonucleotides to reduce endogenous hPAR-1 mRNA levels in the human cell line HT1080. This cell line was chosen because antisense oligonucleotides can be delivered to these cells with relative ease and also HT1080 has a very robust transcriptional response to Wnt (data not shown). This set of experiments was complicated by the fact that all three hPAR-1 genes are expressed in HT1080 cells. Antisense oligonucleotides but not control oligonucleotides specifically reduced the target mRNA of each form of hPAR-1 by 75–90% (data not shown); protein levels were also reduced (Fig. 3a). A cellular protein unrelated to PAR-1 (tubulin) was not affected by the antisense oligonucleotides

reporter, LEF1 and other cDNAs as indicated and the luciferase assays were performed as described. **c**, hPAR-1 suppressed Dvl3-mediated JNK activation. NIH3T3 cells were transfected with cDNAs for c-Jun (0.3 μg), Flag-tagged Dvl3 (0.3 μg) and increasing amounts (0.3 μg, 0.6 μg) of wild-type (WT) or kinase-negative (KN) Myc-tagged hPAR-1Bα. 22–24 h after transfection, samples of whole cell lysates were subjected to SDS-PAGE and blotted with antibodies against phosphorylated c-Jun (S63), c-Jun, Flag and Myc, as indicated.

(Fig. 3a, lower panel). After treating cells with an individual hPAR-1 antisense oligonucleotide, hPAR-1 kinase activity was reduced (Fig. 3b), and this was accompanied by a 25–40% reduction in the Wnt-induced reporter activity (Fig. 3c); control oligonucleotides had minimal effects. Further, simultaneous reduction of two hPAR-1s had an additional effect (Fig. 3d) and inhibition by >50% was achieved, indicating that the three endogenous hPAR-1s have redundant roles in the Wnt pathway. For these and other studies, we have found that we can add a maximum of two sets of oligonucleotides to cells without incurring toxicity. We were therefore unable to test the condition of three hPAR-1 antisense oligonucleotides combined.

We also investigated whether PAR-1 could mimic the signalling response induced by Wnt in mammalian cells. All three human PAR-1 homologues strongly potentiated the responses to Wnt or Dvl3 in CHO cells (Fig. 4a). The hPAR-1 proteins alone did not activate the signalling pathway but required co-expression of either Wnt or Dvl, indicating that there is synergy between hPAR-1 and other components of the Wnt pathway. The specificity of these responses was verified by their dependency on the co-expression of the LEF1 transcription factor (Fig. 4a), which is required for Wnt

Normal (H₂O)                                                                 Xwnt 8

Table 1 Quantification of Xenopus injection experiments as shown in Fig 5.

| Sample                          | n   | Mean axis duplication |
|---------------------------------|-----|-----------------------|
| H₂O                             | 60  | 0.0                   |
| Xwnt 8 (1.2 pg)                 | 62  | 1.5                   |
| Xwnt 8 + GFP (1.0 ng)           | 59  | 1.5                   |
| Xwnt 8 + hPAR-1Bα KN (0.2 ng)   | 61  | 0.9                   |
| Xwnt 8 + hPAR-1Bα KN            |     |                       |
| + hPAR-1Bα WT (0.2 ng)          | 64  | 1.2                   |
| hPAR-1Bα KN                     | 62  | 0.0                   |

| H₂O                             | 80  | 0.0                   |
| Xwnt 8 (1.0 pg)                 | 82  | 1.6                   |
| Xwnt 8 + dPAR-1α KN (0.2 ng)    | 85  | 0.7                   |
| Xwnt 8 + dPAR-1α KN (1.0 ng)    | 89  | 0.6                   |
| dPAR-1α KN (1.0 ng)             | 82  | 0.0                   |

Suppression of PAR-1 function by injecting RNAs for kinase negative human or *Drosophila* PAR-1 inhibits Wnt signaling in *Xenopus*. RNAs for kinase negative human PAR-1 (upper rows) or *Drosophila* PAR-1 (lower rows) were injected alone or together with Xwnt8 TNAs into the ventral side of the four-cell stage *Xenopus* embryos. Injected embryos were scored for axis duplication at 72 hours. To evaluate the magnitude of the suppressive effect of kinase negative Par-1, injected embryos were scored as no duplication (0), partial duplication (1.0), or second axis with a head and cement gland (2.0) as described<sup>37</sup>; *n* is the number of embryos injected.

Figure 5 Suppression of PAR-1 inhibits Wnt signalling in *Xenopus*. For the dominant negative study, four-cell stage *Xenopus* embryos were injected on the ventral side with water (upper left panel), Xwnt8 RNA (upper right panel) or Xwnt8 + dPAR-1α KN (kinase negative) RNAs (bottom panel). Xwnt8 RNA injection caused axis duplication but this phenotype was suppressed when dPAR-1 KN RNA was co-injected (see Table 1 for quantification).

signalling<sup>27</sup>. Furthermore, the effects of hPAR-1 were suppressed by Axin, a negative regulator of the Wnt pathway that acts downstream of Dsh (Fig. 4b)<sup>28–30</sup>. As predicted, hPAR-1 overexpression did not alter the gene response induced by overexpression of β-catenin (Fig. 2e), consistent with the idea that PAR-1 regulates Wnt signalling at a step upstream of Axin and β-catenin.

Dsh also activates an alternative pathway that culminates in the stimulation of JNK in mammalian cells and controls of cell polarity in *Drosophila* and in vertebrates<sup>5–7,31,32</sup>. Expression of Dvl in NIH3T3 cells induced JNK activation<sup>5,7</sup>. Interestingly, we found that hPAR-1 strongly suppressed the ability of Dvl3 to activate JNK in NIH3T3 cells (Fig. 4c). This inhibitory effect depended on the kinase activity of hPAR-1, because a mutation in *hPAR-1*, which was expected to inactivate its kinase activity (*hPAR-1 KN*), led to a loss of its inhibitory effect on JNK activation. Together, these data indicate that PAR-1 promotes the participation of Dsh in the Wnt-β-catenin pathway but suppresses its function in the JNK pathway, thereby acting as a switch for the downstream responses mediated by Dsh protein.

Several studies have shown that Wnt signalling controls axis specification during *Xenopus* embryogenesis<sup>33</sup>. Ectopic ventral expression of Wnt before the onset of zygotic transcription results in duplication of dorsal axis<sup>34</sup>, which can be blocked by dominant-negative forms of Frizzled, Dsh and CKIε (refs 35–37). Likewise, interference with negative regulators of the Wnt pathway, such as GSK3β or Axin, by ventral expression of dominant negatives also induces axis duplication<sup>28,38,39</sup>. In order to further our understanding of the function of PAR-1 in vertebrates, we investigated whether PAR-1 KN could alter Wnt signalling by injecting PAR-1 RNA into *Xenopus* embryos. Ventral blastomere injection of XWnt8 RNA (1 pg or 1.2 pg) into four-cell embryos resulted in significant axis duplication, as expected<sup>34</sup> (Fig. 5 and Table 1). Co-injection of human or *Drosophila* kinase-negative PAR-1 RNA (0.2 ng or 1.0 ng) significantly inhibited XWnt8-induced axis duplication in injected embryos, but co-injection of a similar dose of GFP (green fluorescent protein)-RNA (1 ng) had no effect (Fig. 5 and Table 1). The specificity of this dominant-negative effect was validated by co-expression of additional wild-type hPAR-1Bα, which reversed the inhibition of double axis formation seen with the kinase-negative hPAR-1Bα. The conservative nature of

the PAR-1 family in the Wnt pathway was emphasized by showing that both human and *Drosophila* kinase-negative PAR-1 could exert functional effects on the Wnt pathway in *Xenopus* axis duplication experiments. These results are consistent with the studies in mammalian cells described above.

To examine the function of dPAR-1 in Wg signalling in *Drosophila* embryos, double-stranded RNA-mediated interference (RNAi) was used to generate a *dpar-1* loss-of-function phenotype<sup>40</sup>. The ventral epidermis of a wild-type embryo is covered with alternating smooth cuticle and denticle belts (Fig. 6a). The Wg pathway is required to specify the fate of the epidermal cells that secrete smooth cuticle<sup>41</sup>. RNAi of *dpar-1* caused localized ectopic denticle formation and fusion of denticle belts (Fig. 6b), resembling the wg RNAi phenotype previously described<sup>40</sup>. A similar wg phenotype was also generated with RNAi using double-stranded RNAs derived from different regions of the *dpar-1* transcript. As a control for specificity of *dpar-1* RNAi, when *kp78* (accession number AF023484), a gene with homology to *dpar-1* (87% identity in the kinase domain and 47% identity overall), was inhibited by RNAi, no change in cuticle pattern was observed. Thus, *dpar-1* RNAi specifically produced a wg phenotype.

To corroborate the RNAi data, we used the GAL4-UAS system to express the kinase-negative *dpar-1* (*dpar-1 KN*) during embryogenesis<sup>42</sup>. The V32A-GAL4>UAS-*dpar-1 KN* (to overexpress *dpar-1 KN*) embryos showed localized ectopic denticle formation and fusion of denticle belts (Fig. 6c), analogous to the wg phenotype observed in *dpar-1* RNAi embryos. We also examined the effect of overexpressing wild-type *dpar-1* during embryogenesis. In most cases, V32A-GAL4>UAS-*dpar-1* embryos exhibited a cuticle phenotype in which the fourth or fifth abdominal denticle belt was replaced by naked cuticle (Fig. 6e,f). These observations resemble those seen upon ectopic activation of the Wg pathway in V32A-GAL4>UAS-*dsh* embryos (Fig. 6d). As a control, we showed that V32A-Gal4 alone or V32A-Gal4-directed expression of an unrelated protein such as PON-GFP had no effect on cuticle patterning (data not shown).

Figure 6 Effects of loss of function and overproduction of dPAR-1 during Drosophila development. a–f, Ventral views of cuticle preparation from wild-type (a), *dpar-1* RNAi (b), V32A–GAL4>UAS–dpar-1 KN (c), V32A–GAL4>UAS–dsh (d) and V32A–GAL4>UAS–dpar-1 (e,f) embryos are shown. The ventral epidermis of a wild-type embryo shows an alternating pattern of smooth cuticle and denticle belts (a). In *dpar-1* RNAi embryos (b), there is a fusion of denticle belts (arrows), similar to that in *wg* RNAi embryos⁴⁰. Overexpression of dPAR-1 KN using UAS–dpar-1 KN

and V32A–GAL4 (c) resulted in the fusion of denticle belts (arrow), similar to that observed in *dpar-1* RNAi embryos. By contrast, activation of the Wg signalling pathway by overproduction of Dsh using UAS–dsh and V32A–GAL4 (d) resulted in the omission of denticles and expansion of smooth cuticles (arrows). Similarly, overproduction of dPAR-1 (e,f) resulted in the omission of denticles and expansion of smooth cuticles (arrows).

### Discussion

In this report, we have identified, purified and cloned a Dsh-associated kinase from *Drosophila* and found that it is a homologue of *C. elegans* PAR-1. We have also cloned three human homologues of PAR-1. We showed that PAR-1 formed a complex with and phosphorylated Dsh. In response to Wnt signalling, endogenous PAR-1 activity increased concomitantly with Dsh phosphorylation and Arm stabilization in cells. When PAR-1 function was inhibited by a number of approaches in multiple systems, Wnt signalling was reduced. This was the case for cell culture experiments with kinase-negative PAR-1 or with PAR-1 antisense oligonucleotides. In *Xenopus*, kinase-negative PAR-1 also inhibited Wnt-induced double axis formation, and *par-1* RNAi inhibited smooth cuticle formation in *Drosophila* embryos. Furthermore, PAR-1 potentiated Dsh-induced activation of the Wnt pathway and suppressed Dsh-mediated JNK activation, a separate pathway that also involves Dsh. The consistency of the data, from both gain-of-function and loss-of-function studies, in cell culture and in *Xenopus* and *Drosophila* embryos, strengthens the conclusion that PAR-1 has an important role in the Wnt pathway.

Taken together, our data show, first, that PAR-1 is in a complex with Dsh and that PAR-1 acts as a switch for Dsh, enhancing the stimulation of the β-catenin pathway and inhibiting the activation of the JNK pathway. Second, PAR-1 is a serine/threonine kinase that is known to determine asymmetric segregation of cell fate determinants in *C. elegans* and *Drosophila*¹³⁻¹⁶, and is shown here, for the first time, to be involved in Wnt signalling. *C. elegans par-1* mutants have a terminal phenotype similar to that observed in embryos defective in the MOM-2 (*C. elegans* homologue of Wnt) signalling pathway⁴³,⁴⁴. It has not been clear however, whether these Wnt-like defects in *par-1* mutants reflect a specific role for PAR-1 in Wnt signalling or in some other upstream activity required for establishing the initial polarity of the embryo. Our findings in *Drosophila* and vertebrates might explain the similarity of PAR-1 and MOM-2 phenotypes, in that PAR-1 seems to be involved in Wnt signalling and might act through a *C. elegans* protein analogous to Dsh. This might help to explain how the initial A–P polarity of the embryo (which is PAR-1 dependent) established at sperm entry is coupled to later A–P polarity induced by downstream signalling mechanisms (which are Wnt dependent). It will be of further interest to examine the possibility that PAR-1 might have other upstream activities that might aid in the establishment of the initial embryonic axis in vertebrates. The link of PAR-1 as a common element in the Wnt pathway and polarity determination during early asymmetric division indicates that these pathways might have mechanistic similarities at a molecular level. The biochemical function of PAR-1 in making cell fate decisions is not understood but the determination of cell fate is a binary event and must include regulators that act as ‘switches’.

Whether Dsh itself or perhaps other proteins bound to Dsh are the most important substrates of PAR-1 remains to be determined. Previous reports showed that CKIε, a positive regulator of the Wnt pathway, also interacts with Dsh³⁷,⁴⁵. However, CKIε seems to exert its major effect on more downstream components of the pathway (ref. 45). GBP/Frat (GSK3-binding protein) also interacts with Dsh and has a positive role in the Wnt pathway⁴⁶,⁴⁷. Detailed biochemical studies will be required to elucidate the precise function(s) of PAR-1 and its functional interactions with Dsh and other regulators of Dsh in Wnt signalling.

### Methods

#### Kinase assay

Embryos or cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.6), 100 mM NaCl, 0.5% Nonidet P-40, 10 mM NaF, 5 mM NaPPi, 1.5 mM MgCl₂, 1 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol and protease inhibitors).
Dsh-associated kinase was precipitated with GST fusion proteins containing various fragment from Dsh or Dvl3, as indicated. Cell lysates were incubated with GST fusion proteins immobilized on glutathione agarose beads for 2–4 h at 4 °C. The glutathione beads were washed three times with lysis buffer and once with kinase buffer (50 mM Tris (pH 7.6), 10 mM MgCl₂). The kinase reactions were carried out at room temperature for 30 min in a reaction volume of 20 μl containing 5 μl GST beads, 1 μl [γ-³²P]ATP (10 μCi at 5000 Ci mmol⁻¹, Amersham) and 14 μl kinase buffer. 20 μl 1? SDS sample buffer was added to stop reactions and samples were heated for 5 min at 100 °C. The samples were subjected to 10% SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. The membranes were exposed to X-ray films.

### Cloning.
Dsh-associated kinase was purified and cloned from *Drosophila* embryos (details available upon request). All human PAR-1s were PCR amplified from cDNAs of human fetal and adult brain. hPAR-1A and hPAR-1Bα were PCR amplified based on sequences of p78 and EMK. hPAR-1β was identified from human genomic sequence in a database and was PCR amplified from cDNA. They were cloned into pcDNA3.1 (Invitrogen) with a Myc tag added at the C terminus. The kinase-negative mutants were generated by converting the conserved lysine to alanine at the ATP binding site in the kinase domain. Mouse Dvl3 (ref. 48) was PCR amplified and cloned into pcDNA3.1 with Flag tag added at the C terminus. Reverse-transcription PCR reactions were performed using Marathon-Ready cDNA (Clontech) as templates for 30 cycles. The following primers were used: 5′-TCTTTCACTTGG-TAAGGTTAGG and 5′-CATCTTCTTTGAGGTCACTATC for hPAR-1A; 5′-CTCTGGCCCTTGA-GAAGCCAGC and 5′-GAATAGTTTCTGGAGGCTGGAGGAG for hPAR-Bα; 5′-GGTTC CCTCCCCCCC-GAGATACC G and 5′-GAATAGTTTCTGGAGGCTGGAGGAG for hPAR-Bβ; 5′-GTGTATTCTGGAG-GTAGCATG and 5′-GTGTGACTTTAATAGGATGACC for hPAR-1C. PCR products were analysed on 2% agarose gels.

### Wg treatment of Clone-8 cells.
The *Drosophila* wing imaginal disc cell line Clone-8 (provided by M. Milner) was cultured as described¹⁸. Wingless conditioned medium was prepared from S2-HSwg cells (provided by S. Cumberlege) as described¹⁸,⁴⁹.

### LEF1 assay.
Active grown CHO cells were seeded into 12-well plates the day before transfection. Duplicate transfections were carried out using Superfect (Qiagen). Cells in each well were transfected with 0.1 μg 7LEF-fosluc, 0.0125 μg LEF1 expression plasmid, 0.01 μg pRL-TK (Promega), cDNAs as indicated and the vector DNA to total 1.5 μg DNA²⁷. 24–26 h after transfection, the luciferase activities were determined using a dual luciferase assay system (Promega). The LEF1 reporter’s luciferase activity was normalized by *Renilla* luciferase activities for transfection efficiency. Fold stimulation was obtained by comparing with vector alone (defined as 1). HT1080 cells, seeded into 12-well plates, were transfected with 0.1 μg 7LEF-fosluc, 0.05 μg LEF1 expression plasmid, 0.01 μg pRL-TK, 0.1 μg *Wnt1* and vector DNA to total 1.5 μg DNA per well. Transfection was carried out using FuGene 6 (Roche). LEF1 reporter activity was measured 24 h after transfection as described above.

### Antisense treatment.
Antisense oligonucleotides were designed against hPAR-1A (5′-CGTATGGAGGACTGCCA-CAAACGT) or control oligonucleotide (5′-TGCAAAACACC GTCA GGAGG TATGC, which is the reverse sequence of the antisense), against hPAR-1B (5′-TGAGGTCTGAGCGTCTCCACTCGG) or control oligonucleotide (5′-GGCTCACCTCTGGGAGTCTGGAGT-3′), and against hPAR-1C (5′-GAGAATGACGCCCA GACTCCACACA) or control oligonucleotide (5′-ACACACCTCAGACC-CGCAGTAAGAG). Antisense or control oligonucleotides (final concentration of 100–200 nM) were transfected into HT1080 cells using cationic peptoid reagents⁵⁰.

### Frog injection.
For *Xenopus* RNA injection, hPAR-1Bα WT, hPAR-1Bα KN, dPAR-1α KN and GFP were cloned into pCS2 vector. Xwnt8/pCS2 (ref. 34?) was provided by D. Kessler and P. Klein. mRNAs were synthesized by using a mMESSAGE mMACHINE kit (Ambion). RNAs were injected into ventral side of the four-cell stage blastomere. Embryos were examined for axis duplication 72 h after injection.

### *Drosophila* work.
Double-stranded RNAs were synthesized from PCR products containing T7 promoter sequence at their 5′ ends and injected into fly embryos as described⁴⁰. RNAs were complementary to contiguous cDNA sequence spanning from nucleotides 2743–3648 and 4138–4760 of *dpar-1* (these sequences are common to both α and β forms of *dpar-1*). RNA-injected embryos were aged for 24 h at room temperature and washed off the glass cover slips with heptane. After fixation with glycerol:acetic acid (1:4) for 3–6 h at a 60 °C oven, the embryos were mounted in Hoyer’s mountant and baked at 60 °C for 2 h to overnight. The full-length α form cDNA of *dpar-1* and kinase-negative *dpar-1* (*dpar-1* KN) were cloned into the pUAST vector to generate pUAST-*dpar-1* and pUAST-*dpar-1* KN constructs. Each of these constructs was injected together with the Δ2-3 helper plasmid into wild-type embryos to generate UAS-*dpar-1* and UAS-*dpar-1* KN transgenic flies. For overexpression in the embryos, UAS-*dpar-1*, UAS-*dpar-1* KN and UAS-*dsh* (a gift from R. Carthew) male flies were crossed with V32A–GAL4 females. Embryos derived from the above crosses were aged for 24 h and their cuticles were prepared as described above.

RECEIVED 13 DECEMBER 2000; REVISED 14 MARCH 2001; ACCEPT 9 APRIL 2001; PUBLISHED 6 JUNE 2001

1. Cadigan, K. M. & Nusse, R. Wnt signalling: a common theme in animal development. *Genes Dev.* 11, 3286–3305 (1997).
2. Brown, J. D. & Moon, R. T. Wnt signalling: why is everything so negative? *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* 10, 182–187 (1998).
3. Kinzler, K. W. & Vogelstein, B. Lessons from hereditary colorectal cancer. *Cell* 87, 159–170 (1996).

4. Peifer, M. & Polakis, V. Wnt signalling in oncogenesis and embryogenesis – a look outside the nucleus. *Science* 287, 1606–1609 (2000).
5. Boutros, M., Paricio, N., Strutt, D. I. & Mlodzik, M. Dishevelled activates JNK and discriminates between JNK pathways in planar polarity and *wingless* signalling. *Cell* 94, 109–118 (1998).
6. Axelrod, J. D., Miller, J. R., Shulman, J. M., Moon, R. T. & Perrimon, N. Differential recruitment of Dishevelled provides signalling specificity in the planar cell polarity and Wingless signalling pathways. *Genes Dev.* 12, 2610–2622 (1998).
7. Li, L. *et al.* Dishevelled proteins lead to two signalling pathways: regulation of LEF1 and cJun N-terminal kinase in mammalian cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 129–134 (1999).
8. Klingensmith, J., Nusse, R. & Perrimon, N. The *Drosophila* segment polarity gene *dishevelled* encodes a novel protein required for response to the *wingless* signal. *Genes Dev.* 8, 118–130 (1994).
9. Theisen, H. *et al.* *dishevelled* is required during *wingless* signalling to establish both cell polarity and cell identity. *Development* 120, 347–360 (1994).
10. Sokol, S. Y., Klingensmith, J., Perrimon, N. & Itoh, K. Dorsalizing and neuralizing properties of Xdsh, a maternally expressed *Xenopus* homolog of *dishevelled*. *Development* 121, 1637–1647 (1995).
11. Yanagawa, S., van Leeuwen, F., Wodarz, A., Klingensmith, J. & Nusse, R. The Dishevelled protein is modified by *wingless* signalling in *Drosophila*. *Genes Dev.* 9, 1087–1097 (1995).
12. Lee, J.-S., Ishimoto, A. & Yanagawa, S.-I. Characterization of mouse Dishevelled (Dvl) proteins in Wnt/Wingless signalling pathway. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 21464–21470 (1999).
13. Guo, S. & Kemphues, K. J. *par-1*, a gene required for establishing polarity in *C. elegans* embryos, encodes a putative Ser/Thr kinase that is asymmetrically distributed. *Cell* 81, 611–620 (1995).
14. Shulman, J. M., Benton, R. & Johnston, D. S. The *Drosophila* homolog of *C. elegans* PAR-1 organizes the oocyte cytoskeleton and directs oskar mRNA localization to the posterior pole. *Cell* 101, 377–388 (2000).
15. Tomancak, P. *et al.* A *Drosophila melanogaster* homologue of *Caenorhabditis elegans par-1* acts at an early step in embryonic-axis formation. *Nature Cell Biol.* 2, 458–460 (2000).
16. Cox, D. N., Lu, B., Sun, T.-Q., Williams, L. T. & Jan, Y. N. *Drosophila par-1* is required for oocyte differentiation and microtubule organization. *Curr. Biol.* 11, 75–87 (2001).
17. Espinosa, L. & Navarro, E. Human serine/threonine protein kinase EMK1: genomic structure and cDNA cloning of isoforms produced by alternative splicing. *Cytogenet. Cell Genet.* 81, 278–282 (1998).
18. van Leeuwen, F., Samos, C. H. & Nusse, R. Biological activity of soluble wingless protein in cultured *Drosophila* imaginal disc cells. *Nature* 368, 342–344 (1994).
19. Peifer, M., Sweeton, D., Casey, M. & Wieschaus, E. Wingless signal and zeste-white 3 kinase trigger opposing changes in the intracellular distribution of armadillo. *Development* 120, 369–380 (1994).
20. Papkoff, J., Rubinfeld, B., Schryver, B. & Polakis, P. Wnt-1 regulates free pools of catenins and stabilizes APC-catenin complexes. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 16, 2128–2134 (1996).
21. Salic, A., Lee, E., Mayer, L. & Kirschner, M. W. Control of β-catenin stability: reconstitution of the cytoplasmic steps of the wnt pathway in *Xenopus* egg extracts. *Mol. Cell* 5, 523–532 (2000).
22. Molenaar, M. *et al.* XTcf-3 transcription factor mediates β-catenin-induced axis formation in *Xenopus* embryos. *Cell* 86, 391–399 (1996).
23. Behrens, J. *et al.* Functional interaction of β-catenin with the transcription factor LEF-1. *Nature* 382, 638–642 (1996).
24. Huber, O. *et al.* Nuclear localization of β-catenin by interaction with transcription factor LEF-1. *Mech. Dev.* 59, 3–10 (1996).
25. Korinek, V. *et al.* Constitutive transcriptional activation by a β-catenin-Tcf complex in APC⁻/⁻ colon carcinoma. *Science* 275, 1784–1787 (1997).
26. Morin, P. J. *et al.* Activation of β-catenin-Tcf signalling in colon cancer by mutations in β-catenin or APC. *Science* 275, 1787–1790 (1997).
27. Hsu, S. C., Galceran, J. & Grosschedl, R. Modulation of transcriptional regulation by LEF-1 in response to Wnt-1 signalling and association with β-catenin. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 18, 4807–4818 (1998).
28. Zeng, L. *et al.* The mouse *Fused* locus encodes Axin, an inhibitor of the Wnt signalling pathway that regulates embryonic axis formation. *Cell* 90, 181–192 (1997).
29. Sakanaka, C., Weiss, J. H. & Williams, L. T. Bridging of β-catenin and glycogen synthase kinase-3β by Axin and inhibition of β-catenin mediated transcription. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 95, 3020–3023 (1998).
30. Ikeda, S. *et al.* Axin, a negative regulator of the Wnt signalling pathway, forms a complex with GSK-3β and β-catenin and promotes GSK-3β-dependent phosphorylation of β-catenin. *EMBO J.* 17, 1371–1784 (1998).
31. Wallingford, J. B. *et al.* Dishevelled controls cell polarity during *Xenopus* gastrulation. *Nature* 405, 81–85 (2000).
32. Heisenberg, C.-P. *et al.* Silberblick/Wnt11 mediates convergent extension movements during zebrafish gastrulation. *Nature* 405, 76–81 (2000).
33. Moon, R. T. & Kimelman, D. X. From cortical rotation to organizer gene expression: toward a molecular explanation of axis specification in *Xenopus*. *BioEssays* 20, 536–545 (1998).
34. Christian, J. L., McMahon, J. A., McMahon, A. P. & Moon, R. T. *Xwnt-8*, a *Xenopus wnt-1/int-1*-related gene responsive to mesoderm inducing growth factors, may play a role in ventral mesodermal patterning during early development. *Development* 111, 1045–1055 (1991).
35. Deardorff, M. A., Tan, C., Conrad, L. J. & Klein, P. S. *Frizzled-8* is expressed in the Spemann organizer and plays a role in early morphogenesis. *Development* 125, 2687–2700 (1998).
36. Sokol, S. Y. Analysis of Dishevelled signalling pathways during *Xenopus* development. *Curr. Biol.* 6, 1456–1467 (1996).
37. Peters, J. M., McKay, R. M., McKay, J. P. & Craff, J. M. Casein kinase I transduces Wnt signals. *Nature* 401, 345–350 (1999).
38. He, X., Saint-Jeannet, J.-P., Woodgett, J. R., Varmus, H. E. & Dawid, I. Glycogen synthase kinase-3 and dorsoventral patterning in *Xenopus* embryos. *Nature* 374, 617–622 (1995).
39. Pierce, S. B. & Kimelman, D. Regulation of Spemann organizer formation by the intracellular kinase Xgsk-3. *Development* 121, 755–765 (1995).
40. Kennedell, J. R. & Carthew, R. W. Use of dsRNA-mediated genetic interference to demonstrate that frizzled and frizzled 2 act in the Wingless pathway. *Cell* 95, 1017–1026 (1998).
41. Baker, N. E. Embryonic and imaginal requirements for wg, a segment polarity gene in *Drosophila*. *Dev. Biol.* 125, 96–108 (1988).
42. Brand, A. H. & Perrimon, N. Targeted gene expression as a means of altering cell fates and generating dominant phenotypes. *Development* 118, 401–415 (1993).

NATURE CELL BIOLOGY | VOL 3 | JULY 2001 | http://cellbio.nature.com   635

© 2001 Macmillan Magazines Ltd
ing dominant phenotypes. *Development* 118, 401–415 (1993).

43. Rocheleau, C. E. *et al.* Wnt signalling and an APC-related gene specify endoderm in early *C. elegans* embryos. *Cell* 90, 707–716 (1997).

44. Thorpe, C. J., Schlesinger, A., Carter, J. C. & Bowerman, B. Wnt signalling polarizes an early *C. elegans* blastomere to distinguish endoderm from mesoderm. *Cell* 90, 695–705 (1997).

45. Sakanaka, C., Leong, P., Xu, L., Harrison, S. D. & Williams, L. T. Casein kinase Iε in the Wnt pathway: regulation of β-catenin function. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 96, 12548–12552 (1999).

46. Yost, C. *et al.* GBP, an inhibitor of GSK-3, is implicated in *Xenopus* development and oncogenesis. *Cell* 93, 1031–1041 (1998).

47. Li, L. *et al.* Axin and Frat1 interact with dvl and GSK, bridging Dvl to GSK in Wnt-mediated regulation of LEF-1. *EMBO J.* 18, 4233–4240 (1999).

48. Tsang, M. *et al.* Isolation and characterization of mouse *dishevelled-3*. *Dev. Dynam.* 207, 253–262 (1996).

49. Reichsman, F., Smith, L. & Cumberlege, S. Glycosaminoglycans can modulate extracellular localization of the Wingless protein and promote signal transduction. *J. Cell Biol.* 135, 819–827 (1996).

50. Murphy, J. E. *et al.* A combinatorial approach to the discovery of efficient cationic peptoid reagents for gene delivery. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 95, 1517–1522 (1998).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

We thank J. Fernandez at Rockefeller University for protein sequencing. We are grateful to R. Grossschedl, S. Cumberlege, P. Klein, D. Kessler, R. Zuckermann, M. Milner, R. Carthew and Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank for critical reagents. We appreciate helpful discussions with C. Mello, T. H. Shin, C. Sakanaka, K. Ramer, and D. Yan. We thank M. Wu for the *Xenopus* injection assay, S. Harrison for critical reading of the manuscript, C. Turk for technical assistance and B. Cheung for administrative assistance. This work was supported partially by funds from the National Institutes of Health—Program of Excellence in Molecular Biology (PO HL43821) and by an unrestricted award from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to L.T.W.

Supplementary Information is available on *Nature Cell Biology*'s website (http://cellbio.nature.com).

Figure S1 Identification of a Dsh-associated kinase from *Drosophila* embryos and cultured cells. **a**, Endogenous Dishevelled (Dsh) complexes with an associated kinase. Dsh was immunoprecipitated from *Drosophila* embryos and Clone-8 cells from wing imaginal discs with preimmune serum (P) and affinity-purified Dsh immune serum (I), and subjected to in vitro kinase assay in which the kinase activities phosphorylated the Dsh in the immune complexes. The phosphorylation products were subjected to SDS-PAGE, transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane and visualized by autoradiography (left panel). This membrane was also blotted with Dsh immune serum (right panel). **b**, Recovery of a Dsh-associated kinase from Dsh immunoprecipitates(IP). An associated kinase was eluted from the Dsh IP (Clone-8 cells) with 700 mM NaCl, diluted, precipitated with GST-fusion proteins, and subjected to in vitro kinase assays, in which the kinase activities phosphorylated the GST-fusion proteins in the precipitates.

---

Figure S2 Purification and cloning of Dsh-associated kinase from *Drosophila* embryos. **a**, Scheme for purification of Dsh-associated kinase. **b**, Fractions from the Mono-S column (the final step of purification) were subjected to SDS-PAGE and silver staining. The kinase activities for each fraction were measured by GST-DM5 precipitation and an in vitro kinase assay. A 64K band purified together with the kinase activity. **c**, Fraction 14 from Mono-S column was analyzed by in-gel kinase assay with GST-DM5 imbedded as substrate. The 64K band phosphorylated GST-DM5 in this assay. **d**, Cloning of Dsh-associated kinase, dPAR-1. Peptide sequences (P1 to P5) from the purified Dsh-associated kinase were compared with amino acid sequences deduced from isolated cDNA clones of dPAR-1α and β isoforms. The lower panel shows two isoforms of dPAR-1. In vitro translation of cDNAs for these two isoforms showed that they encode two polypeptides of 110K and 130K, respectively (data not shown here). The 64K polypeptide may represent a proteolytic product from dPAR-1, and could explain why a 64K protein kinase was found in our final purification step after lengthy procedures. These data are consistent with an earlier experiment (Fig. S1b), in which three polypeptides of 110K, 130K and 64K have Dishevelled-associated kinase activity.

supplementary information

**Figure S3. In vitro and in vivo phosphorylation of Dsh by dPAR-1.**  
a, dPAR-1 strongly phosphorylated the middle region of Dsh in vitro. Equal amounts of GST-fusion proteins DN, DM or DC were phosphorylated in vitro by dPAR-1α (generated by in vitro transcription and translation in reticulocyte lysate). b, In vivo phosphorylation of Dsh by dPAR-1. NIH3T3 cells were transfected with AU1-tagged Dsh (Dsh-AU1), and increasing amounts of wild-type or kinase-negative dPAR-1α. After transfection (22–24 h), whole cell lysates were prepared, subjected to SDS-PAGE, and blotted with epitope-specific antibodies AU1. The appearance of slow migrating Dsh-AU1 indicated that Dsh was phosphorylated by wild-type (WT) but not kinase-negative (KN) dPAR-1.

**Figure S4. RT-PCR analysis showing expression of three hPAR-1 genes in different human tissues.**

**Figure S5. Dvl phosphorylation induced by Wnt is sensitive to phosphatase treatment.** CHO cells were stimulated with Wnt. Dvl proteins were immunoprecipitated from cells stimulated with Wnt, treated with alkaline phosphatase, subjected to SDS-PAGE and blotted with Dvl antibodies. The mobility of the Dvl band increased after phosphatase treatment, thereby confirming that Dvl was phosphorylated in response to Wnt.
