
Review

TRENDS in Endocrinology & Metabolism Vol.12 No.7 September 2001

63 Gomez-Sanchez, C.E. (1998) Primary aldosteronism and its variants. *Cardiovasc. Res.* 37, 8–13  
64 Conn, J.W. *et al.* (1964) Clinical characteristics of primary aldosteronism from an analysis of 145 cases. *Am. J. Surg.* 107, 159–172  
65 Beevers, D.G. *et al.* (1976) Renal abnormalities and vascular complications in primary aldosteronism: evidence of tertiary hyperaldosteronism. *Q. J. Med.* 45, 401  
66 Nishimura, M. *et al.* (1999) Cardiovascular complications in patients with primary aldosteronism. *Am. J. Kidney Dis.* 33, 261–266  
67 Grady, R.W. *et al.* (1996) Renal pathology in patients with primary hyperaldosteronism  

secondary to an adrenal cortical adenoma. *Urology* 48, 369–372  
68 Halimi, J-M. and Mimram, A. (1995) Albuminuria in untreated patients with primary aldosteronism or essential hypertension. *J. Hypertens.* 13, 1801–1802  
69 Takeda, R. *et al.* and the Research Committee of Disorders of Adrenal Hormones in Japan (1995) Vascular complications in patients with aldosterone producing adenoma in Japan: comparative study with essential hypertension. *J. Endocrinol. Invest.* 18, 370–373  
70 Rossi, G.P. *et al.* (1996) Changes in left ventricular anatomy and function in hypertension and primary aldosteronism. *Hypertension* 27, 1039–1045  

71 Litchfield, W.R. *et al.* (1998) Intracranial aneurysm and hemorrhagic stroke in glucocorticoid remediable aldosteronism. *Hypertension* 31, 445–450  
72 Denolle, T. *et al.* (1993) Left ventricular mass and geometry before and after etiologic treatment in renovascular hypertension, aldosterone-producing adenoma, and pheochromocytoma. *Am. J. Hypertens.* 6, 907–913  
73 Pitt, B. *et al.* (1999) The effect of spironolactone on morbidity and mortality in patients with severe heart failure. Randomized Aldactone Evaluation Study Investigators. *New Engl. J. Med.* 341, 709–717  

---

# Dietary cholesterol absorption; more than just bile

Kangmo Lu, Mi-Hye Lee and Shailendra B. Patel

Absorption of dietary cholesterol from the intestine is an important part of cholesterol homeostasis and represents the first step that allows dietary cholesterol to exert its metabolic effects. Although the role of bile salts in the initial absorption of dietary cholesterol, by the formation of emulsions, is readily appreciated, the recognition that other molecular mechanisms might govern this process is only recently gaining momentum. Not only does the intestine regulate the amount of dietary cholesterol that enters the body; it is very selective with regard to the sterols that are allowed in. The human intestine is responsible for absorbing a significant amount of cholesterol each day. In addition to ~0.5 g d⁻¹ of dietary cholesterol, many other sterols are also present in almost equal abundance in the normal diet. Approximately 0.4 g of plant sterols, such as sitosterol, brassicasterol and avanesterol, are also present. However, the human body seems to allow only cholesterol to enter and remain in the body, with almost negligible amounts of plant sterols being retained. That specific molecular mechanisms are responsible for this behavior is supported by the identification of the genetic defect(s) in a rare disorder, β-sitosterolemia (MIM 210250), where this process is disrupted. Such studies are now beginning to throw light on sterol absorption and excretion and elucidate the molecular mechanisms that govern these processes.

Elevated plasma cholesterol level is a risk factor for atherosclerosis. The net effects of dietary cholesterol absorption, endogenous cholesterol synthesis and biliary cholesterol excretion regulate whole body cholesterol balance, either by breakdown to bile or via direct cholesterol excretion¹⁻⁴. Because most of the cholesterol can only be disposed of via the biliary system, the enterohepatic circulation plays a crucial role in whole body sterol balance. Within the intestinal lumen, dietary cholesterol is presented to the brush border of mucosal enterocytes as a micelle formed by the action of bile salts, cholesterol and fatty acids. The initial point of contact between these micelles and the intestinal cells that absorb cholesterol occurs at the surface of the enterocyte brush border in the intestine. Cholesterol appears to be specifically removed from the micelles as part of the absorption process: cholesterol is absorbed principally in the duodenum and jejunum, but bile acids are not absorbed to an appreciable degree at these sites. Rather, specific bile acid transporters located in the ileum subsequently absorb bile acids, delivering these back to the liver and thus completing the enterohepatic circulation⁵,⁶. In addition, non-cholesterol sterols do not appear to be absorbed during this process. Thus, sitosterol, the major plant sterol, might be presented at the brush border membrane but appears to be largely excluded from entry and esterification, although a small amount (<2%) might be absorbed¹,⁷,⁸. Because cholesterol moves into enterocytes from bile acid micelles, it is probable that cholesterol monomers, not cholesterol aggregates, are the species taken up. In addition, cholesterol synthesis contributes two to three times more cholesterol to the total body pool than does the absorption of dietary cholesterol, which occurs predominantly in the jejunum. In the intestinal mucosa, as in other tissues, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase (EC 1.1.1.34) is the rate-limiting step in cholesterol synthesis, and its activity correlates with the cholesterol synthetic rate. However, in this review, the role of intestinal cholesterol synthesis, although important, will not be discussed.

After absorption, free cholesterol and fatty acids are re-esterified in the enterocytes by the action of acyl-coenzyme A:cholesterol acyl-transferase

Kangmo Lu  
Mi-Hye Lee  
Shailendra B. Patel*  
Division of  
Endocrinology, Diabetes  
and Medical Genetics,  
Medical University of  
South Carolina, STR 541,  
114 Doughty Street,  
Charleston, SC 29403,  
USA.  
*e-mail:*  
patelsb@musc.edu  

http://tem.trends.com 1043-2760/01/$ – see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. PII: S1043-2760(01)00433-7

(ACAT), packaged with triglyceride, phospholipids and apolipoprotein B-48 into chylomicrons, and finally secreted from the basolateral aspect of the enterocytes; from here they enter the lymphatic channels to be transported into the peripheral circulation. The triglycerides in the chylomicrons are primarily off-loaded into the peripheral tissues and most of the dietary cholesterol is then delivered to the liver by receptor-mediated remnant chylomicron uptake. The liver responds to the bulk of dietary and biliary cholesterol returned in the chylomicron remnants by decreasing hepatic cholesterol synthesis. Hepatic cholesterol can then be re-packaged into lipoproteins and secreted into plasma or catabolized to bile acids and secreted into bile, completing the enterohepatic circulation. Any traces of non-cholesterol sterols are rapidly excreted, almost unmetabolized, by the liver into bile, the net result of which is to ensure that almost no non-cholesterol sterols from the diet are retained by the body.

It is well understood that micelle formation in cholesterol absorption is required to absorb this hydrophobic molecule. The availability of sufficient lumenal bile acid is an important factor because incorporation of cholesterol into micelles is an essential step for absorption. For example, the antibiotic neomycin significantly blocks cholesterol absorption and is thought to act by disrupting cholesterol-bile acid micelles. Plant sterols, when administered in pharmacological doses, also compete with cholesterol for micelle formation and thus inhibit cholesterol absorption. However, the following questions have defied a molecular explanation: (1) how is cholesterol absorbed when other sterols (such as plant or shellfish sterols) are not? (2) How is dietary cholesterol absorption regulated? (3) What is the mechanism whereby only cholesterol, and not the bile acids, is extracted from the micelles? Investigators have taken several different approaches that now seem to be converging on this basic process. These approaches utilize the power of mouse genetics (involving quantitative trait mapping, gene knockouts, or transgenic mice or candidate gene investigation), direct biochemical characterization of the cholesterol absorption process or investigation of human genetic diseases, where this process can be disrupted.

Mouse genetic studies

There are no studies that have examined the role of genetics in cholesterol absorption in humans (except for rare monogenic disorders such as sitosterolemia, see below). Many studies have examined the role both of high fat and high cholesterol, in addition to mixed fat diets, on plasma lipoproteins in humans and several animal models. Most of these studies involve examining the role of genetics on complex phenotypes, such as steady-state plasma lipoprotein levels, or the generation of atherosclerosis or gall

stones after being fed ‘atherogenic’ diets, and not on cholesterol absorption *per se*. Nevertheless, even with the caveat that cholesterol absorption was not the focus of these studies, several genetic loci have been identified. Paigen and her colleagues, using recombinant inbred strains, have shown that both the processes of gall stone formation, and ‘atherosclerosis’ in mice fed a high fat/high cholesterol diet are genetically influenced. Although these studies did not directly address the specific role of cholesterol absorption, they opened the field for the use of mice in quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping for such processes. Studies involving inbred mouse strains fed a high fat diet showed that the DBA/2 strain showed a significantly reduced dietary cholesterol absorption, relative to several other strains, such as C3H/HeJ, C57BL/6J and 129/J (Ref. 11). These studies were confirmed and extended by Carter *et al.*, who specifically examined the effect of strain differences on cholesterol absorption. In their screen, C57L/J mice showed the lowest cholesterol absorption on a chow diet, and upon feeding of a high fat/high cholesterol diet, showed the lowest cholesterol absorption rates. Jolley *et al.* compared C57BL/6 with 129/Sv mice and found that the latter had a higher dietary cholesterol absorption rate. In all of these studies there are methodological differences that might account for differences in absolute values, although perhaps not in the qualitative results. Although it can be argued that QTL mapping for gall stone formation on a high fat/high cholesterol diet might not be directly relevant to the molecular mechanisms involved in dietary cholesterol absorption, given that the enterohepatic circulation is key for both processes, such studies will probably yield candidate genes, the role of which can be more closely scrutinized. Interestingly, a lithogenic bile, predisposing to cholesterol gallstones, requires excess excretion of cholesterol into bile (see below). Bile rich in cholesterol might in turn affect the amount of cholesterol taken up from the diet.

Specific candidate genes and proteins

Cholesterol de-esterification and esterification

Evidence that another set of proteins is involved in dietary cholesterol absorption comes from the study of specific genes. Carboxyl ester lipase (CEL), also called pancreatic cholesterol esterase or bile salt-stimulated lipase, is a lipolytic enzyme capable of hydrolyzing triacylglycerol, phospholipid, lysophospholipid and cholesteryl esters. It is synthesized in the acinar cells of the pancreas and is stored in zymogen granules. Cholesterol esterase is released into the intestinal lumen upon food ingestion and constitutes 1–2% of total protein in pancreatic juice. The incubation of rat intestinal sacs with cholesterol-containing micelles in the presence of CEL resulted in a three- to fivefold enhancement of intracellular cholesterol and cholesteryl ester accumulation compared with

intestinal sacs incubated in the absence of the
enzyme. However, Howles *et al.* found that
disruption of the *Cel* gene did not affect the ability of
mice to absorb unesterified cholesterol from the
gastrointestinal tract, which demonstrated that CEL
was not necessary for cholesterol flux across the
intestinal epithelium, but was necessary for
intestinal absorption of esterified cholesterol<sup>20</sup>.

After absorption, free cholesterol is re-esterified in
the enterocytes by the action of ACAT (Ref. 21).
Therefore, inhibition of ACAT might lead to reduced
cholesterol absorption. There are at least two genes
that encode ACAT and, based upon knockout mice, the
loss of *Acat2* leads to reduced dietary cholesterol
absorption and resistance to diet-induced
hypercholesterolemia in mice<sup>22</sup>. Inhibitors of ACAT
activity similarly reduce dietary cholesterol
absorption<sup>23</sup>. Thus, esterification of cholesterol in the
enterocytes is an important step. To date, genetic
variation in the genes encoding ACAT that could
account for variability in sterol absorption has not been
demonstrated.

Enterocyte bile-acid transporters
Intestinal bile acid-binding protein (I-BABP) is a small
cytoplasmic protein (14–15 kDa) that belongs to the
fatty acid-binding protein family. I-BABP binds bile
acids with a high affinity and might be involved in
cellular bile acid uptake and trafficking because it is
transiently associated with the intestinal bile acid
transporter (IBAT, officially SLC10A2) in the ileum
brush border membrane. The physiological importance
of IBAT for the maintenance of the enterohepatic
circulation of bile acids, and hence, cholesterol
homeostasis, is supported by the observation that
patients with mutations in the *IBAT* gene fail to absorb
bile acids efficiently and have reduced low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol levels<sup>6,24,25</sup>.

Dietary cholesterol, in the form of chylomicron
remnants, is cleared from the circulation mainly by
the liver through the interaction of apolipoprotein E
(ApoE) with liver lipoprotein receptors. Sehayek *et*
*al*. used ApoE-deficient mice to study the regulation
of dietary cholesterol absorption and biliary
cholesterol excretion<sup>26</sup>. These studies suggest that, in
response to dietary cholesterol, ApoE-deficient mice
have a defect in suppressing the percentage dietary
cholesterol absorption and in stimulating biliary
cholesterol excretion.

Enterocyte cell-surface 'receptors'
The scavenger receptor class B type 1 (SR-B1) is a
membrane protein. It catalyzes the movement of
cholesteryl esters from high-density lipoprotein
(HDL) particles into the plasma membrane of
hepatocytes and cells of steroidogenic tissues<sup>27</sup>. SR-
B1 is responsible for the 'selective uptake' of
cholesteryl esters from lipoprotein particles without
endocytosis or degradation of the apolipoproteins of
the HDL particle. SR-B1 is found in the liver and

intestine. Whereas hepatic SR-B1 controls HDL
cholesterol metabolism, intestinal SR-B1 has been
proposed to facilitate cholesterol absorption. Hauser
and colleagues have proposed that SR-B1 is involved
in intestinal cholesterol absorption<sup>28</sup>. They
demonstrated that: (1) the gene encoding SR-B1 was
expressed on the apical surface of rabbit enterocytes,
and (2) SR-B1 ligands and anti-SR-B1 antibodies
inhibited the uptake of unesterified and esterified
cholesterol from bile salt mixed micelles and
phospholipid vesicles into intestinal brush border
membrane preparations and CaCo-2 cells *in*
*vitro*<sup>28,29</sup>. Furthermore, *in vitro* studies have shown
that SR-B1 can facilitate both cellular uptake of non-
lipoprotein unesterified cholesterol and cellular
efflux of unesterified cholesterol. However, Mardones
*et al*. studied intestinal cholesterol absorption using
*Srb1*-knockout mice and found no impairment of
dietary cholesterol absorption, suggesting that
SR-B1 might not be necessary for sterol absorption<sup>30</sup>.
Moreover, transgene-induced overexpression of *Srb1*
resulted in a stimulation of excretion of cholesterol
into the bile and suppressed percentage dietary
cholesterol absorption<sup>31,32</sup>. This result showed that
hepatic *Srb1* expression is important in the
utilization of HDL cholesterol for biliary secretion.
By contrast, *Srb1* expression is not essential for
intestinal cholesterol absorption. It is interesting to
note that HDL-derived sterols are preferred for
biliary excretion in humans<sup>33,34</sup>, and that alteration
of HDL-derived cholesterol might therefore affect the
amounts of sterols excreted into bile and delivered to
the intestine.

The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters are
a large family of evolutionarily conserved
transmembrane proteins<sup>35</sup>. Mutations in the human
*ABC1* gene (officially *ABCA1*) are now known to
cause Tangier disease and familial HDL
deficiency<sup>36–39</sup>. Recently, Repa *et al.*<sup>40</sup> proposed that
*ABC1* was also involved in dietary cholesterol
absorption, based upon a series of experiments
involving upregulation of *Abc1* in mice treated with
rexinoids, which activated the transcription of *Abc1*
and inhibited dietary cholesterol absorption.
Rexinoids are molecules that activate transcriptional
factors such as LXR-α and LXR-β. *ABC1* was
proposed to lead to efflux of cholesterol from the
enterocyte back into the lumen, thereby restricting
net sterol absorption<sup>40</sup>. In support of their data,
*Abc1*-knockout mice showed a moderate but
statistically significant increase in the absorption of
cholesterol compared with their wild-type
littermates in one study<sup>41</sup>, but showed a decrease in
cholesterol absorption in another study<sup>42</sup>. More
recently, the cellular localization of ABC1 seems to
suggest that enterocytes do not synthesize
significant amounts of ABC1, although the
surrounding intestinal wall tissue does<sup>41</sup>. Thus, the
role of this receptor in direct cholesterol absorption
remains to be clarified.

and none purport to explain the biochemical features such as selectivity of sterol absorption. Because changes in bulk flow of cholesterol can affect both the amount of bile acids secreted into the enterohepatic circulation and intestinal cholesterol synthesis, none of the above candidates identify 'the' enterocyte cholesterol transporter.

### Biochemical characterization

The above studies suggest that several proteins can be involved in influencing dietary cholesterol absorption. Thurnhofer, Hauser and colleagues have proposed that a protein mediates cholesterol absorption and they have presented biochemical evidence in support of this<sup>28,49–51</sup>. More recently, several partially purified, but as yet unidentified, proteins have been shown to mediate specific binding to cholesterol<sup>52</sup>. In further support, Sparrow and his colleagues, using cholesterol absorption inhibitors, have demonstrated that cholesterol absorption is receptor mediated and saturable, although no specific receptor was identified<sup>53,54</sup>. Thus, there is sufficient evidence that a specific protein(s) mediates specific cholesterol absorption, although its identity has not been elucidated. It is not known whether this putative protein can distinguish between sitosterol and cholesterol, or whether it is only responsible for sterol uptake in general.

Therefore, all of the above has set the scene for a discovery that could explain the molecular mechanisms involved in dietary cholesterol absorption.

### Sitosterolemia is a genetic disorder that disrupts normal dietary sterol absorption

Sitosterolemia (also known as phytosterolemia) is a rare autosomal, recessively inherited metabolic disorder, which was first discovered in 1974 in two sisters<sup>55</sup>. Sitosterolemic patients develop tendon and tuberous xanthomas, hemolytic episodes, arthralgias and arthritis, and premature coronary and aortic atherosclerosis, leading to cardiac fatalities<sup>56,57</sup>. Affected individuals have very high levels of plasma plant sterols (e.g. sitosterol, campesterol, stigmastanol and avenosterol) and 5α-saturated stanols, particularly sitostanol, although their blood cholesterol levels can be normal or only moderately increased. Not only do affected individuals show very high levels of dietary cholesterol absorption, but they also absorb all types of sterols and retain them in the body. Thus, in contrast to normals, affected individuals absorb and retain plant sterols and shellfish sterols<sup>58</sup>. Sterols of lower molecular weight, such as C-26, are well absorbed by the normal human intestinal tract (50% of absorption compared with about 80% absorption in sitosterolemics). However, the liver also rapidly excretes most of these sterols, and their retention by normal individuals is minimal, relative to affected individuals<sup>56,57</sup>. Clinical studies show that affected individuals have an

---

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of sterolin-1 (ABCG5) and sterolin-2 (ABCG8). Sterolin-1 and -2 are predicted to be six-transmembrane domain-containing proteins and, based upon the genetics, probably operate as heterodimers. Positions of the 'ABC' (ATP-binding cassette) signature domains are as indicated on each of these proteins. Red circles (mark-stop codon) and green circles (missense) indicate mutations known to cause sitosterolemia; yellow circles indicate polymorphic changes that alter coding, which are not associated with disease. Potential N-glycosylation sites are indicated by branched symbols.

### Miscellaneous proteins

Other proteins implicated in dietary cholesterol absorption are ones that might affect synthesis, secretion and composition of bile by the liver. Cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase is recognized as the rate-limiting step for bile acid synthesis. In mice deficient for *Cyp7a1* (the mouse gene encoding cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase), bile acid synthesis is greatly reduced and dietary cholesterol absorption is reduced to 1% (Ref. 43), confirming that bile salts are necessary for cholesterol absorption. Thus, the flow and content of bile might have both a facilitative and a regulatory role in cholesterol absorption. Bile salts themselves are potent stimulators of bile flow<sup>44</sup> so that transporters, which are involved in their uptake and secretion, might be important. Several of these transporters have been recently identified and characterized<sup>45,46</sup>. These include the bile-salt export pump (BSEP, also known as the product of the sister gene of P-glycoprotein, SPGP), multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2) and multidrug resistance 3 (MDR3). Although defects of these proteins lead to disruption of the bile acid pathway and metabolism, their effect on dietary cholesterol absorption appears to be indirect<sup>43,47</sup>. Disruption of *Mdr2* (officially *PGY2*) in mice (homologous to human *MDR3*; officially *ABCB4*) leads to impairment of phospholipid transfer into bile, and a delay in lipid absorption<sup>48</sup>. In this context, because cholesterol is absorbed in the proximal small bowel, but bile acids are not absorbed until the terminal ileum, one speculative role for these transporters might be to pump bile acids taken into the enterocytes with the dietary lipids back out into the lumen. MRP2 has been localized to the apical membrane of enterocytes.

Apart from the QTLs identified, almost all of the proteins implicated above affect bulk cholesterol flow

Review TRENDS in Endocrinology & Metabolism Vol.12 No.7 September 2001

Dietary cholesterol and sitosterol
Micelles
SR-B1
Cholesterol + Sitosterol
PL and triglycerides
Lymphatics
Sitosterol
Sterols
P-gp
MRP2
Chol-ester
ACAT
MTP
apoB-48
Enterocytes
Chylomicrons
Free cholesterol, sitosterol,
bile acids and PL
Cholesterol
Bile
acids
PL
Apical surface
Sterols BSEP MDR2/3
Bile
acids
PL
Ntcp
Bile acid
conjugates
Cholesterol
Chol-ester
LDL-R
Hepatocytes
Basolateral surface
apoB
apoE
HDL particles
Circulation

TRENDS in Endocrinology & Metabolism

Fig. 2. A summary of the key pathways involved in dietary cholesterol absorption. After digestion of cholesterol esters in the diet by enzymes such as pancreatic cholesterol esterase (also known as bile salt-stimulated lipase), free cholesterol and sitosterol are solubilized into micelles formed from bile acids, BL and free sterols. Micelles absorb to the apical surface of the enterocytes, and free sterols and PL are transferred into the cell, perhaps mediated by proteins, such as SR-B1 or sterolins. This process has not been characterized and it is not known whether any bile acids enter the enterocyte to be pumped back out again via MRP2 or other similar transporters. Bile acids are not taken up at this stage, but are removed from the intestine in the terminal ileum. Within the enterocyte, cholesterol is re-esterified (by ACAT) and, mediated by MTP, is packaged into chylomicron particles with PL, triglycerides and apoB-48. Chylomicrons are secreted from the basolateral surface into the lymphatic channels and eventually pass into the circulation. We speculate that most of the sitosterol and other non-cholesterol sterols are excluded from this pathway and pumped back out into the intestinal lumen by sterols. The liver clears chylomicron remnants, containing dietary cholesterol and a small amount of non-cholesterol sterols. The remnant cholesterol is de-esterified, metabolized by the liver into bile acids and secreted at the apical surface. Non-cholesterol sterols are preferentially and rapidly excreted by the liver into bile. Other ABC proteins, such as BSEP and MDR2/3, are involved in the secretion of bile acids and PL. In this model, sterols are responsible for pumping out sterols both from enterocytes and hepatocytes. Abbreviations: ABC, ATP-binding cassette; ACAT, acyl-coenzyme A:cholesterol acyl-transferase; Apo, apolipoprotein; BSEP, bile salt excretion pump or sister of P glycoprotein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; LDL-R, low-density lipoprotein receptor; MDR2/3, multidrug resistance 2/3; MRP2, multidrug resistance-associated protein 2; MTP, microsomal triglyceride transfer protein; Ntcp, sodium-dependent bile acid cotransporter; P-gp, P glycoprotein; PL, phospholipids; SR-B1, scavenger receptor class B type 1.

inability to excrete sterols into bile^{59,60}. Infusion of sitosterol and cholesterol into normal individuals leads to a rapid and preferential excretion of sitosterol into bile. However, affected individuals fail to excrete infused sitosterol into bile and also are unable to excrete cholesterol into bile. Although the bile acid pathway is normal in affected individuals, the bile is sterol-poor^{59,60}. Thus, the disruption of a single gene leads to loss of sterol specificity, increased sterol absorption and absent sterol excretion into bile.

ABCG5 and ABCG8; a novel sterol pump?
The gene defect had been previously mapped to human chromosome 2p21 (Ref. 61). Two groups have now identified the molecular defect in sitosterolemia^{62–64}. By using positional cloning, Lee et al.^{62} identified mutations in ABCG5, which encodes a protein they termed sterolin. Interestingly, not all probands had mutated ABCG5 genes and, surprisingly, an immediately adjacent gene, a homolog of ABCG5, termed ABCG8, encoding sterolin-2, was mutated in the remaining families^{64}. Thus mutations in two genes, located immediately adjacent to each other, are now known to cause sitosterolemia. Because probands had mutations in either ABCG5 or ABCG8, but not both, and had identical phenotypes, sterolin-1 and -2 probably function as a heterodimer and thus disrupt a common pathway when mutated. Berge et al.^{63}, when screening for genes induced by exposure to rexinoids, after observations made by Repa et al.^{40}, identified two transcripts that mapped to chromosome 2p21 and hypothesized that these genes might be mutated in sitosterolemia. This hypothesis is interesting, because Repa et al.^{40} had used a similar strategy, but implicated ABC1 in the response to reduced cholesterol absorption. Sterolin-1 and -2 are six-transmembrane (thus termed 'half-transporters')-containing ABC transporters (Fig. 1). Although many half-transporters, such as TAP1 and TAP2, are localized within cells, given that sterolin-1 and -2 might heterodimerize, they would form a 12-transmembrane protein and could be expressed

http://tem.trends.com

at the cell surface. Clearly, further studies are needed to confirm these speculations.

Both sterolins are expressed only in the liver and the intestine<sup>62–64</sup>. Based upon the clinical defects in sitosterolemia, these proteins are therefore expected to play a pivotal role in the selective absorption of cholesterol from the intestinal lumen and in the selective excretion of non-cholesterol sterols into bile. Are sterolins the missing connectors linking both the enterohepatic circulation and sterol entry into the body? We propose the following model shown in Fig. 2. In the liver, sterolins might act to excrete cholesterol into bile. Under normal circumstances, this excretion is small, because the major pathway by which cholesterol is lost from the body is by breakdown into bile acids. Sterolins might have a higher affinity for apical excretion of non-cholesterol sterols, but because the normal hepatocyte should not have any significant quantities, cholesterol might be preferred. In the enterocyte, however, upon association of the micelle with the apical surface of the enterocyte, perhaps SR-B1, or an as yet unidentified protein, facilitates the transfer of sterols, but not bile acids into the cell. Sterolins would ‘see’ a higher level of their preferred substrates, non-cholesterol sterols, and promptly pump these back out into the intestinal lumen. Naturally, sterolins can also excrete cholesterol and therefore might regulate the final amounts of cholesterol absorbed.

### Conclusion

The only way to rid the body of cholesterol is by excreting it directly into bile or by breakdown into bile acids and their eventual loss in stool. Inhibition of cholesterol synthesis with the highly effective statin drugs is an excellent method of treating the chronic effects of raised plasma cholesterol, although absorption of cholesterol from the diet continues. For a net loss of whole body cholesterol, both the absorption of cholesterol, or the increased loss of bile in stool needs to be affected, in addition to synthesis inhibition. A better understanding of the molecular pathways involved in the first two processes might lead to the discovery of newer and more effective therapies for atherosclerotic disease, still the major cause of death in the affluent nations. The identification of the molecular players in sterol excretion by the liver and in selective sterol absorption, namely sterolin-1 and -2, could lead to a more detailed characterization of these pathways and identification of other key players.

### Acknowledgements

The National Institutes of Health award HL 60613 supported this work and additional funding was provided by the Health Science Foundation, Medical University of South Carolina.

### References

1. Gould, R.G. *et al.* (1969) Absorbability of beta-sitosterol in humans. *Metabolism* 18, 652–662
2. Schoenheimer, R. and Breusch, F. (1933) Synthesis and destruction of cholesterol in the organism. *J. Biol. Chem.* 103, 439–448
3. Dietschy, J.M. *et al.* (1993) Role of liver in the maintenance of cholesterol and low density lipoprotein homeostasis in different animal species, including humans. *J. Lipid Res.* 34, 1637–1659
4. Jolley, C.D. *et al.* (1998) Centripetal cholesterol flux to the liver is dictated by events in the peripheral organs and not by the plasma high density lipoprotein or apolipoprotein A-I concentration. *J. Lipid Res.* 39, 2143–2149
5. Weiner, I.M. and Lack, L. (1968) Bile salt absorption; enterohepatic circulation. In *Handbook of Physiology* (Vol. III) (Code, C.F. and Heidel, W., eds), pp. 1439–1455, American Physiological Society
6. Love, M.W. and Dawson, P.A. (1998) New insights into bile acid transport. *Curr. Opin. Lipidology* 9, 225–229
7. Salen, G. *et al.* (1970) Metabolism of beta-sitosterol in man. *J. Clin. Invest.* 49, 952–967
8. Salen, G. *et al.* (1992) Increased sitosterol absorption is offset by rapid elimination to prevent accumulation in heterozygotes with sitosterolemia. *Arterioscler. Thromb.* 12, 563–568
9. Paigen, B. (1995) Genetics of responsiveness to high-fat and high-cholesterol diets in the mouse. *Am. J. Clin. Nutr.* 62, 458S–462S
10. Khanuja, B. *et al.* (1995) *Lith1*, a major gene affecting cholesterol gallstone formation among inbred strains of mice. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 92, 7729–7733
11. Kirk, E.A. *et al.* (1995) Hyper- and hypo-responsiveness to dietary fat and cholesterol among inbred mice: searching for level and variability genes. *J. Lipid Res.* 36, 1522–1532
12. Carter, C.P. *et al.* (1997) Genetic variation in cholesterol absorption efficiency among inbred strains of mice. *J. Nutr.* 127, 1344–1348
13. Bottger, A. *et al.* (1998) A genetic and correlation analysis of liver cholesterol concentration in rat recombinant inbred strains fed a high cholesterol diet. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 246, 272–275
14. Jolley, C.D. *et al.* (1999) Genetic differences in cholesterol absorption in 129/Sv and C57BL/6 mice: effect on cholesterol responsiveness. *Am. J. Physiol.* 276, G1117–G1124
15. Lammert, F. *et al.* (1999) Phenotypic characterization of *Lith* genes that determine susceptibility to cholesterol cholelithiasis in inbred mice: integrated activities of hepatic lipid regulatory enzymes. *J. Lipid Res.* 40, 2080–2090
16. Mu, J.L. *et al.* (1999) Quantitative trait loci analysis for the differences in susceptibility to atherosclerosis and diabetes between inbred mouse strains C57BL/6J and C57BLKS/J. *J. Lipid Res.* 40, 1328–1335
17. Mouzeyan, A. *et al.* (2000) A locus conferring resistance to diet-induced hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis on mouse chromosome 2. *J. Lipid Res.* 41, 573–582
18. Keelan, M. *et al.* (2000) Variability of the intestinal uptake of lipids is genetically determined in mice. *Lipids* 35, 833–837
19. Treadwell, C.R. and Vahouny, G.V. (1968) Cholesterol absorption. In *Handbook of Physiology* (Vol. III) (Code, C.F. and Heidel, W., eds), pp. 1407–1438, American Physiological Society
20. Howles, P.N. *et al.* (1996) Dietary free and esterified cholesterol absorption in cholesterol esterase (bile salt-stimulated lipase) gene-targeted mice. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271, 7196–7202
21. Buhman, K.F. *et al.* (2000) Mammalian acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferases. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1529, 142–154
22. Buhman, K.K. *et al.* (2000) Resistance to diet-induced hypercholesterolemia and gallstone formation in ACAT2-deficient mice. *Nat. Med.* 6, 1341–1347
23. Heider, J.G. *et al.* (1983) Role of acyl CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase in cholesterol absorption and its inhibition by 57-118 in the rabbit. *J. Lipid Res.* 24, 1127–1134
24. Wong, M.H. *et al.* (1995) Identification of a mutation in the ileal sodium-dependent bile acid transporter gene that abolishes transport activity. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 27228–27234
25. Oelkers, P. *et al.* (1997) Primary bile acid malabsorption caused by mutations in the ileal sodium-dependent bile acid transporter gene (SLC10A2). *J. Clin. Invest.* 99, 1880–1887
26. Sehayek, E. *et al.* (2000) Apolipoprotein E regulates dietary cholesterol absorption and biliary cholesterol excretion: studies in C57BL/6 apolipoprotein E knockout mice. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 97, 3433–3437
27. Krieger, M. (1999) Charting the fate of the ‘good cholesterol’: identification and characterization of the high-density lipoprotein receptor SR-BI. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* 68, 523–558
28. Hauser, H. *et al.* (1998) Identification of a receptor mediating absorption of dietary cholesterol in the intestine. *Biochemistry* 37, 17843–17850
29. Schulthess, G. *et al.* (2000) Intestinal sterol absorption mediated by scavenger receptors is competitively inhibited by amphipathic peptides and proteins. *Biochemistry* 39, 12623–12631
30. Mardones, P. *et al.* (2001) Hepatic cholesterol and bile acid metabolism and intestinal cholesterol absorption in scavenger receptor class B type I-deficient mice. *J. Lipid Res.* 42, 170–180
31. Kozarsky, K.F. *et al.* (1997) Overexpression of the HDL receptor SR-BI alters plasma HDL and bile cholesterol levels. *Nature* 387, 414–417

http://tem.trends.com

32 Sehayek, E. *et al.* (1998) Biliary cholesterol  
deficient mice does not lead to diminished tissue  
excretion: a novel mechanism that regulates  
cholesterol turnover or to hypercholesterolemia.  
dietary cholesterol absorption. *Proc. Natl. Acad.*  
*J. Lipid Res.* 39, 1833–1843  

Sci. U.S.A. 95, 10194–10199  

33 Robins, S.J. and Fasulo, J.M. (1997) High density  
ATP-binding cassette transporter 1 (ABC1) in  
lipoproteins, but not other lipoproteins, provide a  
normal and atherosclerotic tissues. *Arterioscler.*  
vehicle for sterol transport to bile. *J. Clin. Invest.*  
*Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* 21, 378–385  

99, 380–384  

34 Robins, S.J. and Fasulo, J.M. (1999) Delineation  
45 Kullak-Ublick, G.A. *et al.* (2000) Hepatic  
of a novel hepatic route for the selective transfer of  
transport of bile salts. *Semin. Liver Dis.*  
unesterified sterols from high-density  
20, 273–292  

lipoproteins to bile: studies using the perfused rat  
46 Oude Elferink, R.P. and Groen, A.K. (2000)  
liver. *Hepatology* 29, 1541–1548  
Mechanisms of biliary lipid secretion and their  
role in lipid homeostasis. *Semin. Liver Dis.*  
20, 293–305  

35 Klein, I. *et al.* (1999) An inventory of the human  
47 Foster, M.G. *et al.* (1919) Metabolism of bile acids:  
ABC proteins. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1461,  
III. Administration by stomach of bile, bile acids,  
237–262  
taurine and cholic acid to show the influence upon  
bile acid elimination. *J. Biol. Chem.* 38, 379–392  

36 Brooks-Wilson, A. *et al.* (1999) Mutations in *ABC1*  
48 Voshol, P.J. *et al.* (2000) Postprandial chylomicron  
in Tangier disease and familial high-density  
formation and fat absorption in multidrug  
lipoprotein deficiency [see comments]. *Nat. Genet.*  
resistance gene 2 P-glycoprotein-deficient mice.  
22, 336–345  
*Gastroenterology* 118, 173–182  

37 Marcil, M. *et al.* (1999) Mutations in the *ABC1*  
49 Thurnhofer, H. *et al.* (1991) Cholesterol-transfer  
gene in familial HDL deficiency with defective  
protein located in the intestinal brush-border  
cholesterol efflux. *Lancet* 354, 1341–1346  
membrane. Partial purification and  
characterization. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1064,  
275–286  

38 Rust, S. *et al.* (1999) Tangier disease is caused by  
50 Compassi, S. *et al.* (1995) Cholesteryl ester  
mutations in the gene encoding ATP-binding  
absorption by small intestinal brush border  
cassette transporter 1 [see comments]. *Nat.*  
membrane is protein-mediated. *Biochemistry*  
*Genet.* 22, 352–355  
34, 16473–16482  

39 Bodzioch, M. *et al.* (1999) The gene encoding ATP-  
51 Lipka, G. *et al.* (1995) Characterization of lipid  
binding cassette transporter 1 is mutated in  
exchange proteins isolated from small intestinal  
Tangier disease [see comments]. *Nat. Genet.*  
brush border membrane. *J. Biol. Chem.*  
22, 347–351  
270, 5917–5925  

40 Repa, J.J. *et al.* (2000) Regulation of absorption  
52 Kramer, W. *et al.* (2000) Identification of binding  
and ABC1-mediated efflux of cholesterol by RXR  
proteins for cholesterol absorption inhibitors as  
heterodimers. *Science* 289, 1524–1529  
components of the intestinal cholesterol  
transporter. *FEBS Lett.* 487, 293–297  

41 McNeish, J. *et al.* (2000) High density lipoprotein  
53 Hernandez, M. *et al.* (2000) Intestinal absorption  
and foam cell accumulation in mice with targeted  
of cholesterol is mediated by a saturable,  
disruption of ATP-binding cassette transporter-1.  
inhibitable transporter [in process citation].  
*Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 97, 4245–4250  
*Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1486, 232–242  

42 Drobnik, W. *et al.* (2001) ATP-binding cassette  
transporter A1 (ABCA1) affects total body sterol  
metabolism. *Gastroenterology* 120, 1203–1211  

43 Schwarz, M. *et al.* (1998) Marked reduction in bile  
acid synthesis in cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase-  


54 Detmers, P.A. *et al.* (2000) A target for cholesterol  
absorption inhibitors in the enterocyte brush  
border membrane [in process citation]. *Biochim.*  
*Biophys. Acta* 1486, 243–252  

55 Bhattacharyya, A.K. and Connor, W.E. (1974)  
Beta-sitosterolemia and xanthomatosis. A newly  
described lipid storage disease in two sisters.  
*J. Clin. Invest.* 53, 1033–1043  

56 Bjorkhem, I. and Boberg, K.M. (1995) Inborn  
errors in bile acid biosynthesis and storage of  
sterols other than cholesterol. In *The Metabolic*  
*Basis of Inherited Disease* (Vol. 2) (Scriver, C.R.  
*et al.*, eds), pp. 2073–2102, McGraw-Hill  

57 Salen, G. *et al.* (1992) Sitosterolemia. *J. Lipid Res.*  
33, 945–955  

58 Gregg, R.E. *et al.* (1986) Abnormal metabolism of  
shellfish sterols in a patient with sitosterolemia  
and xanthomatosis. *J. Clin. Invest.* 77, 1864–1872  

59 Salen, G. *et al.* (1989) Increased sitosterol  
absorption, decreased removal, and expanded  
body pools compensate for reduced cholesterol  
synthesis in sitosterolemia with xanthomatosis.  
*J. Lipid Res.* 30, 1319–1330  

60 Bhattacharyya, A.K. *et al.* (1991) Sluggish sitosterol  
turnover and hepatic failure to excrete sitosterol  
into bile cause expansion of body pool of sitosterol in  
patients with sitosterolemia and xanthomatosis.  
*Arterioscler. Thromb.* 11, 1287–1294  

61 Patel, S.B. *et al.* (1998) Mapping a gene involved  
in regulating dietary cholesterol absorption. The  
sitosterolemia locus is found at chromosome 2p21.  
*J. Clin. Invest.* 102, 1041–1044  

62 Lee, M-H. *et al.* (2001) Identification of a gene,  
*ABCG5*, important in the regulation of dietary  
cholesterol absorption. *Nat. Genet.* 27, 79–83  

63 Berge, K.E. *et al.* (2000) Accumulation of dietary  
cholesterol in sitosterolemia caused by mutations in  
adjacent ABC transporters. *Science* 290, 1771–1775  

64 Lu, K. *et al.* (2001) Two genes that map to the STSL  
locus cause sitosterolemia: genomic structure and  
spectrum of mutations involving sterolin-1 and  
sterolin-2 encoded by *ABCG5* and *ABCG8*  
respectively. *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* 69, 278–290  



Estrogens and cell-cycle regulation in  
breast cancer  

James S. Foster, Donald C. Henley, Shamila Ahamed and Jay Wimalasena  

Clinical and experimental data have established that the leading cause of  
A variety of clinical and epidemiological observations,  
sporadic female breast cancer is exposure to estrogens, predominantly  
with support from cell-culture studies, has shown  
17β-estradiol. Recent advances in the understanding of cell-cycle control  
that 17β-estradiol (E₂) plays a crucial role in the  
mechanisms have been applied to outline the molecular mechanisms through  
development of female breast cancer (breast Ca). This  
which estrogens regulate the cell cycle in cultured breast cancer cells, in  
is supported by the results of clinical trials of  
particular, in MCF-7 cells. Here, we discuss how estrogens exert control over  
antiestrogens in the USA, in which both tamoxifen  
several key G₁ phase cell-cycle regulators, namely cyclin D1, Myc, Cdk2, Cdk4,  
and raloxifene reduced the incidence of estrogen  
Cdk inhibitors and Cdc25A. Although the molecular mechanisms underlying  
receptor (ER)-positive tumors in high-risk  
estrogenic regulation of G₁ phase regulators are far from clear, current evidence  
populations by ~50% (Refs 1–3). For reasons that are  
indicates that estrogens might regulate several key molecules required for  
not clear, these studies do not agree, however, with  
S phase entry, this regulation being independent of cell-cycle transit *per se*.  
results from similar trials held in Europe⁴,⁵. In the  

http://tem.trends.com 1043-2760/01/$ - see front matter © 2001 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. PII: S1043-2760(01)00436-2
