
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Sept. 2001, p. 5358–5363
0021-9193/01/$04.00+0   DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.18.5358–5363.2001
Copyright © 2001, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

**Functional Analysis of OleY L-Oleandrosyl 3-O-Methyltransferase**
**of the Oleandomycin Biosynthetic Pathway in**
**Streptomyces antibioticus**

LETICIA RODRÍGUEZ, DAVID RODRÍGUEZ, CARLOS OLANO, ALFREDO F. BRAÑA,
CARMEN MÉNDEZ AND JOSÉ A. SALAS*

Departamento de Biología Funcional e Instituto Universitario de Oncología del Principado de Asturias (I.U.O.P.A),
Universidad de Oviedo, 33006 Oviedo, Spain

Received 12 April 2001/Accepted 14 June 2001

Oleandomycin, a macrolide antibiotic produced by *Streptomyces antibioticus*, contains two sugars attached to the aglycon: L-oleandrose and D-desosamine. *oleY* codes for a methyltransferase involved in the biosynthesis of L-oleandrose. This gene was overexpressed in *Escherichia coli* to form inclusion bodies and in *Streptomyces lividans*, producing a soluble protein. *S. lividans* overexpressing *oleY* was used as a biotransformation host, and it converted the precursor L-olivosyl-erythronolide B into its 3-O-methylated derivative, L-oleandrosyl-erythronolide B. Two other monoglycosylated derivatives were also substrates for the OleY methyltransferase: L-rhamnosyl- and L-mycarosyl-erythronolide B. OleY methyltransferase was purified yielding a 43-kDa single band on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The native enzyme showed a molecular mass of 87 kDa by gel filtration chromatography, indicating that the enzyme acts as a dimer. It showed a narrow pH range for optimal activity, and its activity was clearly stimulated by the presence of several divalent cations, being maximal with Co²⁺. The *S. antibioticus* OleG2 glycosyltransferase is proposed to transfer L-olivose to the oleandrolide aglycon, which is then converted into L-oleandrose by the OleY methyltransferase. This represents an alternative route for L-oleandrose biosynthesis from that in the avermectin producer *Streptomyces avermitilis*, in which L-oleandrose is transferred to the aglycon by a glycosyltransferase.

---

Oleandomycin (Fig. 1A) is a clinically important 14-membered macrolide antibiotic produced by *Streptomyces antibioticus*. Structurally it contains a macrolactone ring (oleandrolide) which is synthesized by the assembly of one starter acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) and six extender methylmalonyl CoA units. These reactions are catalyzed by a modular type I polyketide synthase comprising three large polypeptides, named OleA1, OleA2, and OleA3 (24, 25). The oleandomycin biosynthetic gene cluster has been fully sequenced and characterized (1, 15, 16, 18, 19, 24, 25) (Fig. 1B). Two DNA regions flanking the genes encoding the three multifunctional polypeptides of the polyketide synthase contain a number of genes that code for other enzymatic functions required for the biosynthesis of the two sugars and their transfer to the aglycon (1, 16, 18), genes encoding an ABC transporter system responsible for secretion (15), genes encoding an inactivating-reactivating enzymatic system that confers self-resistance to the producer organism (18, 26), and a gene encoding a cytochrome P-450 oxygenase involved in epoxidation of the macrolactone ring at carbon 8 (19, 24). The oleandomycin macrolactone ring is glycosylated by two 6-deoxysugars (L-oleandrose and D-desosamine). Two glycosyltransferases (OleG1 and OleG2) are responsible for sugar transfer. Insertional inactivation of *oleG1* produced a mutant that accumulates the macrolactone 8,8a-deoxyoleanodolide, because both OleG1 and OleG2 glycosyltransferases were affected in this mutant by a polar effect (16). Complementation experiments using *eryBV*- and *eryCIII-minus* mutants of the erythromycin producer *Saccharopolyspora erythraea* showed that *oleG1* complemented an *eryCIII-minus* mutant and *oleG2* complemented an *eryBV-minus* mutant (6). Therefore, it was concluded that D-desosamine and L-oleandrose were the substrates for the OleG1 and OleG2 glycosyltransferases, respectively. Further support for OleG2 as the L-oleandrose transferase came from biotransformation experiments. By feeding erythronolide B (EB) to a *Streptomyces albus* clone expressing the *oleG2* gene and harboring pOLE, a plasmid containing all the genes necessary for the biosynthesis of L-oleandrose, L-oleandrosyl-erythronolide B (OLE-EB) was formed (1). One of the genes in pOLE (*oleY*) was proposed to encode a 3-O-methyltransferase responsible for the conversion of dTDP-L-olivose into dTDP-L-oleandrose during the biosynthesis of L-oleandrose (1).

Here we report the *oleY* expression, purification of the OleY methyltransferase, and evidence demonstrating that methylation occurs at the C-3-O position of the neutral sugar to generate L-oleandrose during biosynthesis of oleandomycin by *S. antibioticus*. This methylation event occurs once the sugar is attached to the aglycon. Also we show that this methyltransferase can use as substrates at least two other monoglycosylated derivatives, L-rhamnosyl-erythronolide B (RHA-EB) and L-mycarosyl-erythronolide B (MYC-EB).

---

*MATERIALS AND METHODS*

Microorganisms, culture conditions, and plasmids. *S. antibioticus* ATCC 11891, an oleandomycin producer, was used as a donor of chromosomal DNA. *S. lividans* TK21 and *S. albus* NAG2 (1) were used as hosts for subcloning and for biotransformation experiments. *E. coli* XL1-Blue (4) was also used as a host for

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Departamento de Biología Funcional e Instituto Universitario de Oncología del Principado de Asturias (I.U.O.P.A), Universidad de Oviedo, 33006 Oviedo, Spain. Phone: 34-985-103652. Fax: 34-985-103652. E-mail: jasf@sauron.quimica.uniovi.es.

of 15 s each with intermittent cooling on ice water). Soluble and insoluble fractions were separated by centrifugation.

For expression in *S. lividans*, the clone harboring pLR14b-4 was incubated for different time intervals in YEME medium containing 5 μg of thiostrepton/ml. The mycelia were recovered by centrifugation, washed twice in distilled water, and subjected to ultrasonic disruption (5 pulses of 5 s each with intermittent cooling on ice water). Soluble and insoluble fractions were separated by centrifugation.

Purification of the OleY methyltransferase. *S.* lividans LR14b-4, a recombinant strain that overexpresses *oleY* (see Results), was used as a source of OleY methyltransferase for enzyme purification. A spore suspension of this strain was used to inoculate a 250-ml Erlenmeyer flask containing 25 ml of TSB (Trypticase soy broth; Oxoid) liquid medium in the presence of 5 μg of thiostrepton/ml. This culture was incubated for 24 h at 30°C on an orbital shaker incubator (200 rpm) and used to inoculate several 2-liter Erlenmeyer flasks containing 500 ml of TSB medium each (also supplemented with 5 μg of thiostrepton/ml) at a 1:100 dilution. After 48 h of incubation at 30°C in an orbital shaker, the mycelia were collected by centrifugation and washed twice with distilled water. The sample was suspended in buffer A (50 mM Tris-HCl buffer, pH 8.0, 1 mM dithiothreitol) and disrupted by two passes through a French press at a pressure of 1,500 lb/in². DNA was broken by ultrasonic disruption (3 pulses of 15 s each with intermittent cooling on ice water) at 150 W and 20 kHz. Unbroken cells and cellular debris were removed by centrifugation at 30,000 × g for 15 min. Nucleic acids were precipitated with streptomycin sulfate (1% final concentration), and the precipitates were removed by centrifugation. The supernatant was fractionated by precipitation with ammonium sulfate. Fractions precipitating between 25 and 50% saturation were recovered by centrifugation and diluted into buffer A to reach an ammonium sulfate final concentration of 0.8 M. This fraction was applied to a Phenyl-Sepharose 6 Fast Flow (High Sub) column (Pharmacia) previously equilibrated with buffer A plus 0.8 M ammonium sulfate at a flow rate of 3 ml/min. Elution took place with a decreasing linear gradient (0.8 to 0 M), active fractions were concentrated by ammonium sulfate precipitation (95% saturation), and after centrifugation, the precipitates were resuspended in 4 ml of buffer B (50 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.0], 20% glycerol, 150 mM NaCl). The sample was applied to a Sephacryl S-200 column (2.6 by 90 cm) at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min. Active fractions were pooled, extensively dialyzed against buffer C (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 20% glycerol), and applied to a Q-Sepharose column (20-ml volume) at a flow rate of 3 ml/min. The column was eluted with a linear gradient of NaCl (0 to 0.6 M followed by a quick salt increase to 1 M) in buffer C. Fractions containing the desired enzymatic activity were pooled and kept in aliquots at −70°C until use.

Enzyme assays. Methylation of different substrates by OleY methyltransferase was carried out in a reaction mixture containing (for a 50-μl final volume) 1 μl of S-adenosyl-l-[methyl-³H]methionine (0.1 mCi/ml; specific activity, 68 Ci/mmol), 1 μl of different macrolide substrates (100 μM final concentration), and 48 μl of extract or purified protein. After different time incubations at 30°C, the reactions were extracted with 50 μl of ethyl acetate. The radioactivity in 25-μl samples was determined after evaporation, resuspension in 100 μl of methanol, and addition of scintillation cocktail.

Protein determinations and PAGE. Protein concentration in the different samples was determined by the protein-dye binding assay (3). Expression of *oleY* in *E. coli* and in *S. lividans* was followed by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) as described previously (14). Gel staining was carried out with Coomassie blue.

Biotransformation experiments. Spores of the appropriate recombinant strains were used to inoculate agar plates with solid R5A medium (9), supplemented with 25 μg of thiostrepton/ml and 100-μg/ml concentrations of different macrolides (spiramycin, niddamycin, carbomycin) or glycosylated derivatives (EB, l-olivosyl-erythronolide B[OLV-EB], RHA-EB, and MYC-EB). After 5 days of incubation at 28°C, 2-cm² pieces of agar were extracted with 2 ml of ethyl acetate and the extracts were evaporated under vacuum and redissolved in 20 μl of methanol.

Chromatographic techniques. Analysis by thin-layer chromatography (TLC) and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) of the EB-related compounds were performed as described previously (1).

---

**RESULTS**

Expression of the OleY methyltransferase gene. The OleY methyltransferase gene was expressed using different expression systems both in *E. coli* and in *S. lividans*. After induction by IPTG of the *E. coli* strain containing pLR14b-3, a derivative

TABLE 1. Purification of OleY methyltransferase activity

| Purification step                | Sp act (pmol·min⁻¹·mg⁻¹) | Purification (fold) |
|----------------------------------|--------------------------|---------------------|
| Cell extraction                  | 0.03                     | 1                   |
| (NH₄)₂SO₄ precipitation          | 0.04                     | 1.52                |
| Phenyl-Sepharose elution         | 0.05                     | 1.52                |
| Sephacryl S-200 elution          | 0.99                     | 29.77               |
| Q-Sepharose elution              | 2.56                     | 76.89               |

FIG. 2. TLC analysis of the reaction products of biotransformation of OLV-EB by *S. lividans* containing cosAB35 (lane 1) or pLR14b-4 (lane 2). The arrows indicate the mobility of OLV-EB and OLE-EB.

Methylation activity was stimulated by the presence of different divalent cations (100 μM final concentrations), such as Co²⁺ (11-fold), Mn²⁺ (7-fold), Zn²⁺ (5-fold), Mg²⁺ (3.5-fold), and Fe²⁺ (1.5-fold), whereas the enzyme activity was strongly inhibited by the presence of Hg²⁺ and Cu²⁺ or 1 mM EDTA. Different glycosylated substrates were used for methylation. OLV-EB and RHA-EB were good substrates for the enzyme, but MYC-EB was a poor substrate (Fig. 4B). No methylation was found when niddamycin, carbomycin, or spiramycin was used as substrate.

## DISCUSSION

Seven genes have been identified to be involved in the biosynthesis of the sugar L-oleandrose in the oleandomycin gene cluster in *S. antibioticus* (1, 16). Five of these genes (*oleV*, *oleW*, *oleL*, *oleU*, and *oleY*) code for L-oleandrose-specific enzymes, and two of them (*oleS* and *oleE*) code for enzymes catalyzing early common steps in the biosynthesis of the two deoxysugars in oleandomycin, L-oleandrose and D-desosamine. L-Olean-drose is a 2,6-dideoxysugar that possesses a 3-O-methyl group. Comparison of *oleY*-deduced product with proteins in databases showed similarities with two other proteins proposed to encode sugar O-methyltransferases: TylE from *Streptomyces fradiae*, a tylosin producer (10), and SnogY from *Streptomyces nogalater*, a nogalamycin producer (28). OleY was suggested to be responsible for catalyzing the 3-O-methylation step during L-oleandrose biosynthesis (1, 16). It was assumed that this methylation, converting L-olivose into L-oleandrose, would occur during the biosynthesis of the sugar, with L-oleandrose being transferred to the oleandomycin macrolactone ring. This assumption was supported by the isolation of this neutral sugar in its activated form (dTDP-L-oleandrose) from *S. avermitilis*, a producer of the antihelmintic avermectin that also contains L-oleandrose (as a disaccharide) attached to the aglycon (22). Evidence reported in this paper indicates that the OleG2 glycosyltransferase transfers the unmethylated derivative, L-olivose, which is then converted into L-oleandrose once attached to the oleandomycin aglycon. In vivo biotransformation experiments and in vitro enzymatic assays show that *oleY* codes for a methylating enzyme able to convert the L-olivose-containing monoglycosylated aglycon (OLV-EB) into its 3-O-methylated derivative, OLE-EB. Only a few other examples of sugar methylation taking place once the sugars have been attached to the aglycon have been reported. TylE and TylF are two O-methyltransferases catalyzing final steps in tylosin biosynthesis in *S. fradiae* by successively methylating the hydroxy groups at C-2 and C-3 positions of the 6-deoxyallose sugar moiety, thus converting demethylmacrocin into macrocin and then into tylosin (10, 23). These two enzymes act once the three sugars in tylosin have been incorporated into the tylactone. In erythromycin biosynthesis by *S. erythraea*, *eryG* codes for a 3-O-methyltransferase that converts L-mycarose into L-cladinose (and therefore erythromycin C into erythromycin A). This is the final step in erythromycin biosynthesis and occurs once both sugars, L-mycarose and D-desosamine, are attached to the aglycon (17). The action of the OleY methyltransferase differs from that of these three methyltransferases. Thus, TylE, TylF, and EryG methylate fully glycosylated intermediates catalyzing final steps in tylosin and erythromycin biosynthesis, respectively. In contrast,

RODRÍGUEZ ET AL.

5362

J. BACTERIOL.

FIG. 5. Proposed pathway for the post-polyketide steps in oleandomycin biosynthesis.

OleY acts on a monoglycosylated intermediate that is further converted into a diglycosylated derivative by the transfer of D-desosamine by the OleG1 glycosyltransferase. EryG and OleY methylate sugars (L-mycarose and L-olivose, respectively) attached to the same position of 14-membered aglycons, and they act on a hydroxy group attached to the same carbon atom of the sugar. However, their similarity at the protein level is quite low (18% identical amino acids). This can be due to the fact that the two enzymes act on different sugar substrates and at different steps in the biosynthesis of the corresponding macrolide antibiotic. However, EryG is also able to methylate OLV-EB as OleY does. When a S. erythraea mutant lacking the polyketide synthase genes (JC2 mutant) (20) was grown in the presence of either OLV-EB or OLE-EB, an identical diglycosylated erythronolide B derivative was found in both cases after the biotransformation experiment (A. F. Braña, unpublished results). This should be the result of the incorporation of the D-desosamine moiety by the EryCIII glycosyltransferase (in both OLV-EB and OLE-EB experiments) followed by a 3-O-methylation event (mediated by the EryG enzyme in the case of the OLV-EB experiment). It is noticeable that methylation of L-olivose by EryG occurs in a hydroxy group that shows different stereochemistry than the hydroxy group at L-mycarose (usual substrate for EryG).

OleY methyltransferase was purified to near homogeneity in a four-step procedure and quite efficiently converted OLV-EB and also RHA-EB into 3′-O-methylated derivatives. However, methylation of MYC-EB was less efficient. Some structural features that differentiate L-mycarose from L-olivose and L-rhamnose are the presence of a methyl group at C-3 of L-mycarose and the different stereochemistry of the hydroxy group at C-3. These differences could account for the low methylating activity of OleY on MYC-EB. The native OleY enzyme was found to be a dimer, which is in agreement with two other macrolide sugar O-methyltransferases previously characterized, TylE and TylF, which were found to be a trimer and a dimer, respectively (2, 13).

L-Oleanrose is not a sugar frequently found in nature. As far as we know it is present in only two macrolide bioactive compounds: the antibacterial oleandomycin and the antihelminthic avermectin. Interestingly, the producer organisms of these two compounds seem to have evolved two different pathways for synthesis and incorporation of the same sugar into the aglycon. In *S. avermitilis*, L-oleanrose is synthesized as a nucleotide-activated sugar that is transferred to the aglycon by a glycosyltransferase which incorporates two successive L-oleandrose moieties (12, 27). In contrast, the oleandomycin producer *S. antibioticus* synthesizes the unmethylated derivative, L-olivose, which is transferred to the aglycon by the OleG2 glycosyltransferase and then converted into L-oleanrose by the OleY methyltransferase (Fig. 5). This intermediate is subsequently glycosylated with D-desosamine by the OleG1 glycosyltransferase, thus generating the final compound, oleandomycin. Data shown in this paper demonstrate that OleG2 cannot transfer L-oleanrose if it is present in the cytoplasm in its nucleotide-activated form, thus excluding a role for OleG2 as an L-oleanrose glycosyltransferase. Another difference between the two sugar pathways resides in the 2-deoxygenation step. Two enzymes are required to catalyze this deoxygenation, a dehydratase and a reductase. Experimental biochemical evidence for the activity of these two enzymes has been reported for the biosynthesis of granaticin and oleandomycin in *Streptomyces violaceoruber* Tü22 and in *S. antibioticus* Tü99, respectively (8), and for the biosynthesis of tylosin in *S. fradiae* (5). 2,3-Dehydration is first catalyzed by a small family of Zn²⁺-dependent dehydratases (5) that share a high degree of similarity at the protein level. Two mechanisms exist for catalyzing the C-3 reduction step. In one way, exemplified by the Graorf26 or the Tü99-orf11, the reduction forms a sugar in which the C-3 hydroxy group is equatorial (8). In the other approach, exemplified by TylC2, the resulting hydroxy group is axial (5). The reduction step in the biosynthesis of L-olivose in *S. antibioticus* is carried out by OleW. This protein is identical at the protein level to the Tü99-orf11 reductase, and therefore the hydroxy group at C-3 should be equatorial. On the other hand, in L-oleanrose biosynthesis in *S. avermitilis* the enzyme re-

responsible for the reduction step, AveBVIII, shows a high similarity to TylC2 (60% identical amino acids), and therefore it should produce a sugar intermediate with an axial hydroxy group at C-3.

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by grants from the European Union (BIO4-CT96-0080 and QLK3-CT-1999-00095).

We thank Glaxo Smithkline Beecham (Stevenage, United Kingdom) for providing EB, MYC-EB, and RHA-EB, Peter F. Leadlay for providing the *S. erythraea* JC2 mutant, and S.-E. Wohlert and C. R. Hutchinson for providing plasmid pWHM2109.

# REFERENCES

1. Aguirrezabalaga, I., C. Olano, N. Allende, L. Rodriguez, A. F. Braña, C. Méndez, and J. A. Salas. 2000. Identification and expression of genes involved in L-oleandrose biosynthesis and its intermediate L-olivose in the oleandomycin producer *Streptomyces antibioticus*. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **44**:1266–1275.
2. Bauer, N. J., A. J. Kreuzman, J. E. Dotzlaf, and W. K. Yeh. 1988. Purification, characterization, and kinetic mechanism of S-adenosyl-L-methionine: macrocin O-methyltransferase from *Streptomyces fradiae*. J. Biol. Chem. **263**:15619–15625.
3. Bradford, M. M. 1976. A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding. Anal. Biochem. **72**:248–254.
4. Bullock, W. O., J. M. Fernández, and J. M. Short. 1987. XL1-Blue: a high efficiency plasmid transforming *recA Escherichia coli* strain with β-galactosidase selection. BioTechniques **5**:376.
5. Chen, H., G. Agnihotri, Z. Guo, N. L. S. X. H. Que Chen, and H.-W. Liu. 1999. Biosynthesis of mycarose: isolation and characterization of enzymes involved in the C-2 deoxygenation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. **121**:8124–8125.
6. Doumith, M., R. Legrand, C. Lang, J. A. Salas, and M. C. Raynal. 1999. Interspecies complementation in *Saccharopolyspora erythraea*: elucidation of the function of *oleP1*, *oleG1* and *oleG2* from the oleandomycin biosynthetic gene cluster of *Streptomyces antibioticus* and generation of new erythromycin derivatives. Mol. Microbiol. **34**:1039–1048.
7. Doumith, M., P. Weingarten, U. F. Wehmeier, K. Salah-Bey, B. Benhamou, C. Capdevila, J. M. Michel, W. Piepersberg, and M. C. Raynal. 2000. Analysis of genes involved in 6-deoxyhexose biosynthesis and transfer in *Saccharopolyspora erythraea*. Mol. Gen. Genet. **264**:477–485.
8. Draeger, G., S.-H. Park, and H. G. Floss. 1999. Mechanism of the 2-deoxygenation step in the biosynthesis of the deoxyhexose moieties of the antibiotics granaticin and oleandomycin. J. Am. Chem. Soc. **121**:2611–2612.
9. Fernández, E., U. Weiβbach, C. Sánchez Reillo, A. F. Braña, C. Méndez, J. Rohr, and J. A. Salas. 1998. Identification of two genes from *Streptomyces argillaceus* encoding two glycosyltransferases involved in the transfer of a disaccharide during the biosynthesis of the antitumor drug mithramycin. J. Bacteriol. **180**:4929–4937.
10. Fouces, R., E. Mellado, B. Diez, and J. L. Barredo. 1999. The tylosin biosynthetic cluster from *Streptomyces fradiae*: genetic organization of the left region. Microbiology **145**:855–868.
11. Hopwood, D. A., M. J. Bibb, K. F. Chater, T. Kieser, C. J. Bruton, H. M. Kieser, D. J. Lydiate, C. P. Smith, J. M. Ward, and H. Schrempf. 1985. Genetic manipulation of *Streptomyces*. A laboratory manual. The John Innes Foundation, Norwich, England.
12. Ikeda, H., T. Nonomiya, M. Usami, T. Ohta, and S. Omura. 1999. Organization of the biosynthetic gene cluster for the polyketide anthelmintic macrolide avermectin in *Streptomyces avermitilis*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **96**:9509–9514.
13. Kreuzman, A. J., J. R. Turner, and W. K. Yeh. 1988. Two distinctive O-methyltransferases catalyzing penultimate and terminal reactions of macrolide antibiotic (tylosin) biosynthesis. Substrate specificity, enzyme inhibition, and kinetic mechanism. J. Biol. Chem. **263**:15626–15633.
14. Laemmli, U. K. 1971. Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. Nature **227**:680–685.
15. Olano, C., A. M. Rodriguez, C. Méndez, and J. A. Salas. 1995. A second ABC transporter is involved in oleandomycin resistance and its secretion by *Streptomyces antibioticus*. Mol. Microbiol. **16**:333–343.
16. Olano, C., A. M. Rodriguez, J. M. Michel, C. Méndez, M. C. Raynal, and J. A. Salas. 1998. Analysis of a *Streptomyces antibioticus* chromosomal region involved in oleandomycin biosynthesis that contains two glycosyltransferases responsible for glycosylation of the macrolactone ring. Mol. Gen. Genet. **259**:299–308.
17. Paulus, T. J., J. S. Tuan, V. E. Luebke, G. T. Maine, J. P. DeWitt, and L. Katz. 1990. Mutation and cloning of *eryG*, the structural gene for erythromycin O-methyltransferase from *Saccharopolyspora erythraea*, and expression of *eryG* in *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. **172**:2541–2546.
18. Quirós, L. M., I. Aguirrezabalaga, C. Olano, C. Méndez, and J. A. Salas. 1998. Two glycosyltransferases and a glycosidase are involved in oleandomycin modification during its biosynthesis by *Streptomyces antibioticus*. Mol. Microbiol. **28**:1177–1186.
19. Rodriguez, A. M., C. Olano, C. Méndez, C. R. Hutchinson, and J. A. Salas. 1995. A cytochrome P450-like gene possibly involved in oleandomycin biosynthesis by *Streptomyces antibioticus*. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. **127**:117–120.
20. Rowe, C. J., J. Cortés, S. Gaisser, J. Staunton, and P. F. Leadlay. 1998. Construction of new vectors for high-level expression in actinomycetes. Gene **216**:215–223.
21. Sambrook, J., E. F. Fritsch, and T. Maniatis. 1989. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
22. Schulman, M. D., S. L. Acton, D. L. Valentino, and B. H. Arison. 1990. Purification and identification of dTDP-oleandrose, the precursor of the oleandrose units of the avermectins. J. Biol. Chem. **265**:16965–16970.
23. Seno, E. T., and R. Balz. 1981. Properties of S-adenosyl-L-methionine: macrolin O-methyltransferase in extracts of *Streptomyces fradiae* strains which produce normal or elevated levels of tylosin and in mutants blocked in specific O-methylations. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **20**:370–377.
24. Shah, S., Q. Xue, L. Tang, J. R. Carney, M. Betlach, and R. McDaniel. 2000. Cloning, characterization and heterologous expression of a polyketide synthase and P-450 oxidase involved in the biosynthesis of the antibiotic oleandomycin. J. Antibiot. **53**:502–508.
25. Swan, D. G., A. M. Rodriguez, C. Vilches, C. Méndez, and J. A. Salas. 1994. Characterisation of a *Streptomyces antibioticus* gene encoding a type I polyketide synthase which has an unusual coding sequence. Mol. Gen. Genet. **242**:358–362.
26. Vilches, C., C. Hernández, C. Méndez, and J. A. Salas. 1992. Role of glycosylation and deglycosylation in the biosynthesis of and resistance to oleandomycin in the producer organism *Streptomyces antibioticus*. J. Bacteriol. **174**:161–165.
27. Wohlert, S.-E., N. Lomovskaya, K. Kulowski, L. Fonstein, J. L. Occi, K. M. Gewain, D. J. MacNeil, and C. R. Hutchinson. 2001. Insights about the biosynthesis of the avermectin deoxysugar L-oleandrose through heterologous expression of *Streptomyces avermitilis* deoxysugar genes in *Streptomyces lividans*. Chem. Biol. **8**:681–700.
28. Ylihonko, K., J. Tuikkanen, S. Jussila, L. Cong, and P. Mäntsälä. 1996. A gene cluster involved in nogalamycin biosynthesis from *Streptomyces nogalater*: sequence analysis and complementation of early-block mutations in the anthracycline pathway. Mol. Gen. Genet. **251**:113–120.
