
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Oct. 2001, p. 5529–5534
0021-9193/01/$04.00+0 DOI: 10.1128/JB.183.19.5529–5534.2001
Copyright © 2001, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

**Promoter Specificity Elements in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* Quorum-Sensing-Controlled Genes**

MARVIN WHITELEY AND E. P. GREENBERG*

Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242

Received 12 April 2001/Accepted 26 June 2001

The LasR-dependent and RhlR-dependent quorum-sensing systems are global regulators of gene expression in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Previous studies have demonstrated that promoter elements of the quorum-sensing-controlled genes *lasB* and *hcnABC* are important in density-dependent regulation. We have identified LasR- and RhlR-dependent determinants in promoters of quorum-sensing-controlled genes *qsc102*, *qsc117* (*acpP*), and *qsc131* (*phzA* to -G) by in silico, deletion, point-mutational, and primer extension analyses. Each of these genes (in addition to *lasI* and *rsaL*) is activated by LasR, and *qsc117* and *qsc131* also respond to RhlR. Point mutations in the promoters of the LasR-specific gene, *qsc102*, relax specificity so that this promoter can respond to RhlR in addition to LasR. Our findings indicate that quorum-sensing-controlled promoters in *P. aeruginosa* are either specific for LasR or respond to both LasR and RhlR and that critical bases in the promoter elements determine specificity.

The opportunistic human pathogen *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* possesses two quorum-sensing systems: the LasR-LasI system and the RhlR-RhlI system. These systems are global regulatory elements that control the expression of approximately 50 to 200 genes (26). LasI catalyzes the synthesis of *N*-(3-oxododecanoyl)-*L*-homoserine lactone (3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL) (16), and LasR is a 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL-dependent transcriptional activator (11). RhlI catalyzes the synthesis of the signal *N*-butyryl-*L*-homoserine lactone (C<sub>4</sub>-HSL) (17), and RhlR is a C<sub>4</sub>-HSL-dependent transcriptional activator (3). These two quorum-sensing systems are interrelated in that LasR activates the expression of the *rhlR* and *rhlI* genes (13, 19, 26).

RhlR and LasR are members of a family of transcription factors that influence expression of genes with specific palindromic sequences in their promoter regions. These sequences have been called *lux*-box-like sequences. The *lux* box is a 20-bp inverted repeat centered at –41.5 bp from the start of the *Vibrio fischeri lux* operon (6). Inverted repeats similar to the *lux* box have been identified in the promoter regions or putative promoter regions of a number of quorum-sensing-controlled (*qsc*) genes of *P. aeruginosa*. *Lux*-box-like elements have been shown to be involved in *P. aeruginosa* quorum sensing in only two cases. One case is *lasB*, which is controlled primarily by RhlR but which is also influenced by LasR (15, 26). Mutational analyses have demonstrated that there are two *lux*-box-like elements involved in LasR control of *lasB* (1, 22). The other case is the promoter of the hydrogen cyanide (*hcn*) operon (20). Both LasR and RhlR can exert control over this operon (20, 26). There are genes that appear to be controlled solely by 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL–LasR but not C<sub>4</sub>-HSL–RhlR, and there are genes that appear to be controlled primarily by C<sub>4</sub>-HSL, but these genes also respond to 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL (5, 24, 26). We do not understand the promoter specificity determinants for 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL–LasR versus those for C<sub>4</sub>-HSL–RhlR.

Some *P. aeruginosa* *qsc* genes are regulated by additional factors. Although they require acyl-HSL signals for activation, they are repressed until stationary phase even in the presence of acyl-HSLs (26). These are termed late *qsc* genes. Other genes, early *qsc* genes, show activation upon addition of acyl-HSL signals even in early logarithmic phase. We have analyzed the promoters of several *P. aeruginosa* early *qsc* genes. These promoters all possess *lux*-box-like elements that we show are involved in *qsc* transcription. Furthermore, we show that two bases in *lux*-box-like elements define LasR-specific promoters.

---

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Bacterial strains, plasmids, growth conditions, and media. The bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table 1. *P. aeruginosa* and *Escherichia coli* were grown at 37°C in Luria-Bertani (LB) broth or LB agar (23) unless otherwise indicated. We used *E. coli* DH5α for cloning and plasmid propagation, and *E. coli* JM109 was used as a heterologous host for *P. aeruginosa* gene expression studies. For plasmid selection and maintenance, antibiotics were added to growth media at the following concentrations: ampicillin, 100 μg/ml; carbenicillin, 300 μg/ml; chloramphenicol, 30 μg/ml; HgCl<sub>2</sub>, 15 μg/ml; tetracycline, 20 μg/ml for *E. coli* and 50 μg/ml for *P. aeruginosa*. Acyl-HSLs were added at concentrations of 10 μM for C<sub>4</sub>-HSL and 2 μM for 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL for *P. aeruginosa* and 100 nM 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL for *E. coli*.

DNA manipulations. Standard methods were used to manipulate plasmids and DNA fragments (2). Restriction endonucleases and DNA modification enzymes were purchased from New England Biolabs (Beverly, Mass.). Plasmids were isolated using spin miniprep kits (Qiagen, Chatsworth, Calif.), and DNA fragments were purified using Qiaquick PCR purification kits (Qiagen). Chromosomal DNA from *P. aeruginosa* was prepared using a DNeasy tissue kit (Qiagen). DNA fragments were excised and purified from agarose gels using GeneClean spin kits (Bio 101, La Jolla, Calif.), and PCR was performed with an Expand Long Template PCR system (Roche, Indianapolis, Ind.). DNA was sequenced at the University of Iowa DNA core facility by standard automated-sequencing technology.

Primer extension analysis. Primer extension analysis of the genes *qsc102*, *qsc117*, and *qsc131* was according to standard methods (2). RNA was prepared from *P. aeruginosa* PAO1 and PAO-MW1 using the Trizol reagent (Life Technologies, Grand Island, N.Y.). RNA was extracted from cultures at an optical density at 600 nm (OD<sub>600</sub>) of 2.0. The initial culture OD<sub>600</sub> was 0.1. The extension primers for *qsc102*, *qsc117*, and *qsc131* were 5′-GTCAGGC GTGGATAGCTTGTC-3′, 5′-TCGCATT CCTCCACGCCGAAC-3′, and 5′-GTTAAGGTGC GACAGACGAGG-3′, respectively. Each primer was 5′ end labeled using [γ<sup>32</sup>P]dATP and a KinaseMax kit (Ambion, Austin, Tex.). <sup>32</sup>P-labeled primers were annealed to 5 to 10 μg of *P. aeruginosa* RNA and extended using a First-Strand

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242. Phone: (319) 335-7775. Fax: (319) 335-7949. E-mail: everett-greenberg@uiowa.edu.

TABLE 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids used

| Strain or plasmid | Relevant characteristics | Reference or source |
|-------------------|-------------------------|---------------------|
| $P. aeruginosa$   |                         |                     |
| PAO1              | Wild type               | 12                  |
| PAO-R1            | $\Delta lasR$ derivative of PAO1; Tc<sup>r</sup> | 10                  |
| PDO111            | $\Delta rhlR$ derivative of PAO1; Hg<sup>r</sup> | 3                   |
| PAO-JP3           | $\Delta lasR \Delta rhlR$ derivative of PAO1; Hg<sup>r</sup>Tc<sup>r</sup> | 18                  |
| PAO-MW1           | $\Delta lasI \Delta rhlII$ derivative of PAO1; Hg<sup>r</sup>Tc<sup>r</sup> | 26                  |
| $E. coli$         |                         |                     |
| DH5$\alpha$       | F<sup>–</sup>$\phi$80dlacZ$\Delta$M15 $\Delta$(lacZYA-argF)U169 endA1 recA1 hsdR17 deoR gyrA96 thi-1 relA1 supE44 | 23                  |
| JM109             | F<sup>–</sup>(traD36 proAB<sup>+</sup> lacI<sup>q</sup> lacZ$\Delta$M15) endA1 recA1 hsdR17 (rK<sup>–</sup>mK<sup>+</sup>) supE44 thi-1 gyrA96 relA1 $\Delta$(lac-proAB) | 28                  |
| Plasmids          |                         |                     |
| pQF50             | lacZ transcriptional fusion vector; Ap<sup>r</sup> | 7                   |
| pACYC 184         | General cloning vector; Cm<sup>r</sup>Tc<sup>r</sup> | 4                   |
| pECP11            | pACYC 184 carrying ptac-rhlR; Cm<sup>r</sup> | E.C. Pesci |
| pPCS11            | pACYC 184 carrying ptac-lasR; Cm<sup>r</sup> | 22                  |
| pMW302D           | pQF50 carrying qsc117 with partial deletion of the NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW302E           | pQF50 carrying wild-type qsc117 promoter from –54 to +88 relative to the primary transcriptional start site; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW302F           | pMW302E with A-to-C change at NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN position 8; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW302G           | pMW302E with T-to-G change at NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN position 13; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW302H           | pMW302E with A-to-C change at NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN position 8 and T-to-G change at position 13; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW302I           | pMW302E with C-to-T change at NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN position 3; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW308C           | pQF50 carrying wild-type qsc102 promoter from –58 to +196 relative to the transcriptional start; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW308D           | pQF50 containing wild-type qsc102 promoter with partially deleted NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW308E           | pMW308C with C-to-A mutation at position 8; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW308F           | pMW308C with G-to-T mutation NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN at position 13; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW308G           | pMW308C with C-to-A mutation at NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN position 8 and G-to-T mutation at position 13; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW308I           | pMW308C with C-to-T mutation at NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN position 3; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW303C           | pQF50 carrying qsc131 promoter from –59 to +326 relative to the transcriptional start site; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW303D           | pQF50 carrying qsc131 promoter with partially deleted NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW303F           | pMW303C with C-to-T mutation at NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN position 3; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW312            | pQF50 carrying rsaL promoter from –82 to +29 relative to the translational start of rsaL; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW312B           | pMW312 with a C-to-T mutation at NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN position 3; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW313            | pQF50 carrying the lasI promoter from –57 to +55 relative to the transcriptional start site; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |
| pMW313B           | pMW313 with a C-to-T mutation at NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN position 3; Ap<sup>r</sup> | This study |

cDNA synthesis kit (Amersham, Piscataway, N.J.). DNA sequences were obtained using plasmid templates, and the oligonucleotides were used for the primer extension. Sequencing was with $\alpha$-<sup>35</sup>S-dATP and a Sequenase, version 2.0, DNA sequencing kit (U.S. Biochemicals, Cleveland, Ohio). DNAs were resolved on 8M urea–8% polyacrylamide gels.

Plasmid constructions. The parent plasmid for all lacZ fusions was pQF50. Promoter fragments were generated from *P. aeruginosa* genomic DNA or plasmid templates by using PCR. Specific nucleotide changes within promoter fragments were incorporated into the oligonucleotide primers used in PCR amplification. For cloning, promoter fragments were end polished with T4 polymerase and 5' phosphorylated with T4 polynucleotide kinase. The resulting fragments were blunt end cloned into SmaI-digested, phosphatase-treated pQF50, and correct orientations were identified by PCR analysis. After cloning, PCR-generated promoter fragments were verified by DNA sequencing.

Monitoring promoter activity in *P. aeruginosa* and *E. coli*. Transformation of *P. aeruginosa* was as described previously (27). For lacZ expression studies, mid-logarithmic-phase cultures (OD<sub>600</sub> of 0.2 to 0.5) were diluted 1:1, 000 in LB broth and allowed to grow for 17h at 37°C, at which point β-galactosidase activity was measured as described by Miller (14). With the acyl-HSL signal generation mutant *P. aeruginosa* PAO-MW1, cultures were grown in the presence and absence of 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL and C<sub>4</sub>-HSL. The starting OD<sub>600</sub> was 0.1, and β-galactosidase activity was measured after 7h at 37°C.

To monitor expression of qsc promoters in a heterologous host, we used a two-plasmid system in *E. coli* JM109. Overnight cultures grown in supplemented A medium (23) were diluted to an OD<sub>600</sub> of 0.1 in fresh A medium. Cultures were grown to an OD<sub>600</sub> of 0.2. At this culture density, 1mM isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) was added, and bacteria were grown in the presence and absence of 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL or C<sub>4</sub>-HSL. β-Galactosidase activities were assayed using a luminescent microtiter dish assay (26).

RESULTS

Primer extension analysis of three qsc genes. To begin our study of qsc promoter elements, we determined the transcript start sites for three early genes by primer extension. These genes were qsc102, which responds only to 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL, and qsc117 and phzA, which respond to either 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL or C<sub>4</sub>-HSL but which require both for full activation in *P. aeruginosa* (26). Primer extension products were obtained with RNA isolated from the parent strain, PAO1 (Fig. 1), and with acyl-HSL signal generation mutant strain PAO-MW1 grown in the presence of 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL.

FIG. 1. Primer extension analysis of three qsc transcripts. (Top) Polyacrylamide gels of qsc102 (A), qsc117 (B), and phzA (C). Sequencing ladders are shown on the left, and primer extension products from *P. aeruginosa* PAO1 RNA are on the right. (Bottom) DNA sequences of the promoter regions. Transcription start sites are in boldface, putative –10 regions are underlined, and lux-box-like elements are boxed.

TABLE 2. Activities of the qsc102, qsc117, phzA, and qsc1028A-13T promoters in *P. aeruginosa* quorum-sensing mutants

| Strain (relevant genotype or acyl-HSL[s] added) | qsc102          | qsc117           | phzA            | qsc1028A-13T     |
|------------------------------------------------|-----------------|------------------|-----------------|------------------|
| PAO1 (wild type)                                | 94 ± 8          | 1,479 ± 59       | 1,210 ± 50      | 862 ± 82         |
| PAO-R1 (∆lasR)                                  | 9 ± 3 (10)      | 54 ± 10 (4)      | 12 ± 3 (1)      | 19 ± 4 (2)       |
| PDO111 (∆rhlR)                                  | 117 ± 3 (124)   | 163 ± 16 (11)    | 61 ± 6 (5)      | 164 ± 15 (19)    |
| PAO-JP3 (∆lasR ∆rhlR)                           | 7 ± 1 (7)       | 63 ± 9 (4)       | <1 (<1)         | 19 ± 8 (2)       |
| PAO-MW1 (∆lasI ∆rhlI)                           | 4 ± 1           | 63 ± 14          | 15 ± 2          | 5 ± 1            |
| PAO-MW1 (3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL)                  | 81 ± 3          | 329 ± 15         | 278 ± 13        | 146 ± 17         |
| PAO-MW1 (3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL + C<sub>4</sub>-HSL) | 68 ± 2          | 1,360 ± 23       | 632 ± 14        | 592 ± 37         |

<sup>a</sup> Expressed as Miller units.

5532 WHITELEY AND GREENBERG

Plasmid

| A | -58 |
| --- | --- |
| pMW308C | ACCTGCCCGGAAGGGCAGGT |
|  | +196 |
| pMW308I | T |
|  | +196 |
| pMW308D | GT |
|  | +196 |

β-Galactosidase activity ± SE (% parent)

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
|  | 94±8 |
|  | 48±4 (50%) |
|  | 4±1 (4%) |

B

| -54 |
| --- |
| pMW302E | CACTGCCAGATCTGGCAGTT |
|  | +141 |
| pMW302I | T |
|  | +141 |
| pMW302D | TGCCAGTT |
|  | +141 |

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
|  | 1479±59 |
|  | 128±42 (9%) |
|  | 4±2 (<1%) |

C

| -58 |
| --- |
| pMW303E | ACCTACCAGATCTTGTAGTT |
|  | +326 |
| pMW303F | T |
|  | +326 |
| pMW303D | GATCTTGTAGTT |
|  | +326 |

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
|  | 1210±50 |
|  | 157±12 (13%) |
|  | 137±26 (9%) |

FIG. 2. Effects of deletions and point mutations on the expression of qsc102 (A), qsc117 (B), and phzA (C) in P. aeruginosa PAO1. The starting bases with respect to the transcript start site are shown at the left (for phzA the number is for the longest transcript). The sites of lacZ insertion are given on the right, also with respect to the transcription start sites. β-Galactosidase activities are in Miller units (means ± standard errors of the means [SE]). Numbers in parentheses are percentages of wild-type promoter activity (pMW308C, pMW302E, and pMW303E in PAO1). In lasI rhlI signal synthesis mutant P. aeruginosa PAO-MW1, the activities of the wild-type qsc promoters (Table 2) were indistinguishable from the activities of the promoters with point mutations or deletions and were <10% of the activities in wild-type P. aeruginosa PAO1. Thus the differences in promoter strengths shown are not a reflection of changes in the basal transcription levels as monitored in the signal synthesis mutant.

lux-box-like sequence motif (Fig. 3). The palindromic sequences of other class III promoters for which transcript start site information exists also show the 8A-13T motif (1, 20, 22).

To test the hypothesis that the bases at positions 8 and 13 are specificity determinants for class I promoters, we used site-directed mutagenesis to construct reporter plasmids. We constructed a plasmid with base 8 of the qsc102 lux-box-like element converted from a C to an A, a plasmid with the base at position 13 converted from a G to a T, and a plasmid with an A at position 8 and a T at position 13. Neither of the promoters with single base substitutions showed an altered specificity. Induction depended solely on LasR (data not shown). The promoter with both the 8A and 13T mutations (called qsc102 8A-13T) responded in a fashion similar to class III promoters such as the qsc117 promoter (Table 2). The promoter was stronger than the parent qsc102 promoter, and activity was reduced not only in a lasR mutant but also in an rhlR mutant.

---

TABLE 3. Activation of qsc102, qsc117, and qsc102 8A-13T promoter-lacZ fusions by the las and rhl systems in E. coli

| Activator<sup>b</sup> | β-Galactosidase activity<sup>a</sup> ± SEM of: |
| --- | --- |
|  | qsc102 | qsc117 | qsc102 8A-13T |
| LasR | 4 ± 1 | 35 ± 5 | 12 ± 3 |
| LasR + 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL | 140 ± 5 | 107 ± 7 | 128 ± 2 |
| Vector + 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL | 2 ± 1 | 15 ± 2 | 20 ± 2 |
| RhlR | 3 ± 1 | 30 ± 4 | 9 ± 1 |
| RhlR + C<sub>4</sub>-HSL | 4 ± 1 | 132 ± 5 | 97 ± 2 |
| Vector + C<sub>4</sub>-HSL | 2 ± 2 | 16 ± 5 | 21 ± 2 |

<sup>a</sup> Expressed as relative light units/OD<sub>660</sub>.

<sup>b</sup> The control vector was pACYC184, and lasR and rhlR were supplied on pPCS11 and pECP11, respectively.

We monitored qsc102, qsc117, and qsc102 8A-13T promoter activity in E. coli to test two hypotheses. The first hypothesis is that quorum sensing controls qsc102, qsc117, and qsc102 8A-13T directly, and the second hypothesis is that qsc102 responds to LasR but not RhlR, whereas qsc117 and qsc102 8A-13T are less specific and can respond to either LasR or RhlR. We monitored promoter activity in E. coli containing a ptac-lasR plasmid (pPCS11) or a ptac-rhlR plasmid (pECP11) plus the qsc102-lacZ reporter plasmid. The qsc102 promoter was activated by LasR and 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL but was not activated by RhlR and C<sub>4</sub>-HSL (Table 3). The qsc117 and qsc102 8A-13T promoters were activated by either LasR and 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL or RhlR and C<sub>4</sub>-HSL (Table 3). The LasR- or RhlR-dependent activation in recombinant E. coli supports the conclusion that activation is direct. The lack of qsc102 activation by RhlR supports the conclusion that the qsc102 promoter responds to LasR but not RhlR. The activation of qsc117 and qsc102 8A-13T by both LasR and RhlR further substantiates that these promoters are less specific than qsc102 and that the 8C→A and 13G→T mutations in the qsc102 promoter converted it from a class I (LasR-controlled) to a class III (LasR- and RhlR-controlled) qsc gene.

We were unable to convert the class III qsc117 promoter into a class I promoter. Changes in the lux-box-like element base 8 from an A to a C or base 13 from a T to a G resulted in very low promoter activity. In fact, when we modified the qsc117 promoter in pMW302E by site-specific mutagenesis so that the 20-bp inverted repeat matched that of qsc102, the promoter was inactive (data not shown).

Predictive value of the minimal consensus sequences for lux-box-like elements in P. aeruginosa early qsc genes. Previous studies have established that lasI, which codes for the 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL synthase, is positively autoregulated by 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL and LasR and is a class I gene (24). The lasI gene is adjacent to and divergently transcribed from rsaL, another qsc gene (5). Prior to our ability to define a minimal consensus for the lux-box-like element of P. aeruginosa qsc promoters, NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN, with 16 or more bases showing dyad symmetry, LasR-binding elements were predicted for lasI and rsaL, but they did not match the consensus. We hypothesized that there should be at least one NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN motif in the lasI-rsaL intergenic region, and a search of the region revealed such a sequence (Fig. 3). This element is centered at −40.5 from the lasI transcription start site (24). The sequence does not show the 8A-13T motif characteristic of promoters that respond to both

qsc102 rsaL lasI qsc117 phzA lasB OP1 hcnA

| A C | C T | G C C | C | G G A A | G | G G C | A G | G T |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| A A | C T | A G C | A | A A T G | A | G A T | A G | A T |
| A T | C T | A T C | T | C A T T | T | G C T | A G | T T |
| C A | C T | G C C | A | G A T C | T | G G C | A G | T T |
| A C | C T | A C C | A | G A T C | T | T G T | A G | T T |
| A C | C T | G C C | A | G T T C | T | G G C | A G | G T |
| A C | C T | A C C | A | G A A T | T | G G C | A G | G G |

FIG. 3. An alignment of the NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN elements of qsc102, rsaL, lasI, qsc117, phzA, lasB, and hcnA. Nucleotides in black background represent bases present in all qsc elements, and those boxed are putative specificity determinants.

VOL. 183, 2001 PSEUDOMONAS AERUGINOSA QUORUM-SENSING PROMOTERS 5533

TABLE 4. Activation of *lasI* and *rsaL* in a *P. aeruginosa lasI rhlI* double mutant by addition of acyl-HSL

| Fusion (plasmid) | β-Galactosidase activity (Miller units)<sup>a</sup> ± SEM with: |
|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | No addition | 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL | 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL + C<sub>4</sub>-HSL |
| *lasI-lacZ* (pMW313) | 5 ± 1 | 19 ± 1 (4-fold) | 18 ± 1 (4-fold) |
| *rsaL-lacZ* (pMW312) | 231 ± 31 | 5,668 ± 165 (25-fold) | 5,755 ± 546 (25-fold) |

<sup>a</sup> β-Galactosidase activities of the *lasI-lacZ* and *rsaL-lacZ* fusions were 17 and 5,272 miller units, respectively, in wild-type *P. aeruginosa* PAO1. Values in parentheses are fold increases over activity with no addition.

LasR and RhlR. Thus we predict that the promoter is LasR specific.

The transcription start site of *rsaL* has not been mapped, but the *lux*-box-like element is nearly equidistant from the *rsaL* and *lasI* open reading frames (56 and 55 bp, respectively). Thus it is quite conceivable that the *lux*-box-like element that we have identified serves in the bidirectional quorum activation of both *lasI* and *rsaL*. To test our hypothesis that the predicted *lux*-box-like sequence serves in quorum activation of both *lasI* and *rsaL*, we constructed *lacZ* reporter plasmids. One plasmid, pMW312, contains a *rsaL-lacZ* fusion and begins 63 bp upstream of the *rsaL* coding region. The other plasmid, pMW313, contains a *lasI-lacZ* fusion and begins 62 bp upstream of the *lasI* coding region. The *lacZ* gene was induced by addition of 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL, but not C<sub>4</sub>-HSL, to the *lasI rhlI* signal generation mutant PAO-MW1, containing either the *lasI* reporter (4-fold) or the *rsaL* reporter (25-fold) (Table 4). Thus the minimal promoter elements present on pMW312 and pMW313 are sufficient for activation by quorum-sensing signal 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL. The experiment is also a confirmation that *rsaL* and *lasI* do not respond to C<sub>4</sub>-HSL–RhlR.

To test the hypothesis that the *lux*-box-like sequence in the *lasI-rsaL* intergenic region is involved in the activation of *lasI* and *rsaL*, we generated a point mutation in the third base of the element with respect to *lasI* (pMW313B) and a point mutation in the third base with respect to *rsaL* (pMW312B). The point mutations severely decreased 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL–LasR-dependent expression of the *rsaL-lacZ* and *lasI-lacZ* fusions to 4 and 30% of parental levels, respectively. Thus we believe that there is now sufficient information to make predictions about promoter elements of early qsc genes and whether these genes will respond to LasR specifically or to either RhlR or LasR.

DISCUSSION

qsc genes have been grouped depending on whether they are fully activated by 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL, whether they require both 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL and C<sub>4</sub>-HSL for full activation, and whether the acyl-HSL signals can activate them in logarithmic phase (early genes) or stationary phase (late genes) (26). To begin to understand promoter elements of qsc genes, we have examined several early genes. We studied highly activated 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL-dependent early gene qsc102, and we studied two highly activated genes that require both signals for full induction, qsc117 and *phzA*. The transcript start sites were mapped by primer extension (Fig. 1), and we identified palindromic *lux*-box-like sequences in the –40 to –50 regions with respect to the start sites of the promoters (Fig. 3). Our genetic dissections of the promoter regions of these genes indicate that DNA including the palindromic region and a few base pairs upstream is sufficient for quorum signal activation. They also indicate that the specific sequences of the palindromic regions are important for quorum control (Fig. 2; Tables 1 and 2). We refer to the quorum control element as the NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN element to signify the minimal conserved unit.

The positions of the NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN elements, centered in the –40 regions, suggest that they serve as activator binding sites and that the activators are the ambidextrous type, functioning at these promoters by making contact with the RNA polymerase α C-terminal domain and with some other part of RNA polymerase (6, 8, 21, 25). We cannot conclude that all *P. aeruginosa* qsc genes contain NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN elements in the –40 region. We suspect that some of the qsc genes showing small signal responses (for example, qsc104, which shows about 8-fold induction compared to qsc102, which shows about 400-fold induction) (26) may have different promoter arrangements.

Our promoter analysis revealed that the qsc117 and *phzA* NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN elements showed an additional similarity, an A at position 8 and a T at position 13. These genes require both acyl-HSL signals for full induction, and we have shown that they can respond to either of signal receptors LasR and RhlR (Tables 2 and 3). The qsc102 gene responds only to LasR and does not have the 8A-13T motif (Tables 2 and 3; Fig. 3). When we placed an 8A-13T motif in the qsc102 promoter, its behavior was altered such that it responded to either LasR or RhlR. Activity was similar to the activity of the *phzA* and qsc117 promoters (Tables 2 and 3). The 8A-13T element appears to relax the specificity of the qsc102 promoter so that it will respond to either LasR or RhlR. Our attempt to convert qsc117 into a LasR-specific promoter failed. Even replacement of the NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN element of qsc117 with that of qsc102 did not yield a LasR-specific promoter. Rather it resulted in the inactivation of the promoter. Thus it is clear that there are elements that remain to be defined in *P. aeruginosa* qsc promoters.

The analysis of qsc102, qsc117, and *phzA* afforded us an ability to learn about other promoters. We tested the predictive power of our analysis by examining the *rsaL-lasI* intergenic region. These two genes are early qsc genes activated solely by 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL (5, 24). Previous examinations of the intergenic region between *rsaL* and *lasI* were prior to the definition of the NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN minimal consensus. The previous studies suggested that another region might represent the LasR-binding region (5). There is a sequence matching the NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN consensus, and, as expected of a LasR-specific promoter, it does not possess an 8A-13T element (Fig. 3). Our genetic analysis of the promoter region suggests that the NNCT-(N)<sub>12</sub>-AGNN motif is in fact an element required for bidirectional qsc control of *rsaL* and *lasI* by LasR. This is very similar to the bidirectional quorum-sensing control of the divergently transcribed *traA* and *traC* genes in *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* (9).

Our current view is that early qsc genes can respond to LasR. Some of these genes, for example, qsc102, are LasR specific, and, if there is a response to RhlR, we cannot detect it. Other genes, for example, qsc117 and *phzA*, respond to ei-

other RhlR or LasR. We believe these less-specific genes respond primarily to RhlR in *P. aeruginosa*. LasR is required for induction of the RhlR system (19, 26). Thus both systems are required for full induction of genes such as qsc117 and *phzA*, but, because of the loose specificity, there is some response to either LasR or RhlR alone. We believe that there may be RhlR-specific genes, for example, qsc132, which unlike qsc117 and *phzA* show no detectable response to 3OC<sub>12</sub>-HSL alone (26). The qsc132 gene is a late gene, and a detailed analysis of its promoter has not been carried out.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported by a grant from the National Institutes of Health (GM59026). M.W. was supported by a National Science Foundation Research Training grant (DBI9602247) and by a United States Public Health Service Training grant (732 GM8365).

### REFERENCES

1. Anderson, R. M., C. A. Zimprich, and L. Rust. 1999. A second operator is involved in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* elastase (*lasB*) activation. J. Bacteriol. 181:6264–6270.
2. Ausubel, F., R. Brent, R. E. Kingston, D. D. Moore, J. G. Seidman, J. A. Smith, and K. Struhl (ed.). 1997. Short protocols in molecular biology, 3rd ed., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, N.Y.
3. Brint, J. M., and D. E. Ohman. 1995. Synthesis of multiple exoproducts in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* is under control of RhlR-RhlI, another set of regulators in strain PAO1 with homology to the autoinducer-responsive LuxR-LuxI family. J. Bacteriol. 177:7155–7163.
4. Chang, A. C., and S. N. Cohen. 1978. Construction and characterization of amplifiable multicopy DNA cloning vehicles derived from the P15A cryptic miniplasmid. J. Bacteriol. 134:1141–1156.
5. de Kievit, T., P. C. Seed, J. Nezezon, L. Passador, and B. H. Iglewski. 1999. RsaL, a novel repressor of virulence gene expression in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Bacteriol. 181:2175–2184.
6. Egland, K. A., and E. P. Greenberg. 1999. Quorum sensing in *Vibrio fischeri*: elements of the *luxI* promoter. Mol. Microbiol. 31:1197–1204.
7. Farinha, M. A., and A. M. Kropinski. 1990. Construction of broad-host-range plasmid vectors for easy visible selection and analysis of promoters. J. Bacteriol. 172:3496–3499.
8. Fuqua, W. C., S. C. Winans, and E. P. Greenberg. 1996. Census and consensus in bacterial ecosystems: the LuxR-LuxI family of quorum-sensing transcriptional regulators. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 50:727–751.
9. Fuqua, W. C., and S. C. Winans. 1996. Conserved *cis*-acting promoter elements are required for density-dependent transcription of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* conjugal transfer genes. J. Bacteriol. 178:435–440.
10. Gambello, M. J., and B. H. Iglewski. 1991. Cloning and characterization of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa lasR* gene, a transcriptional activator of elastase expression. J. Bacteriol. 173:3000–3009.
11. Gambello, M. J., S. Kaye, and B. H. Iglewski. 1993. LasR of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* is a transcriptional activator of the alkaline protease gene (*apr*) and an enhancer of exotoxin A expression. Infect. Immun. 61:1180–1184.
12. Holloway, B. W., V. Krishnapillai, and A. F. Morgan. 1979. Chromosomal genetics of *Pseudomonas*. Microbiol. Rev. 43:73–102.
13. Latifi, A., M. Foglino, K. Tanaka, P. Williams, and A. Lazdunski. 1996. A hierarchical quorum-sensing cascade in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* links the transcriptional activators LasR and RhlR to expression of the stationary-phase sigma factor RpoS. Mol. Microbiol. 21:1137–1146.
14. Miller, J. H. 1972. Experiments in molecular genetics, p. 352–355. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
15. Ochsner, U. A., and J. Reiser. 1995. Autoinducer-mediated regulation of rhamnolipid biosurfactant synthesis in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92:6424–6428.
16. Pearson, J. P., K. M. Gray, L. Passador, K. D. Tucker, A. Eberhard, B. H. Iglewski, and E. P. Greenberg. 1994. Structure of the autoinducer required for expression of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* virulence genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:197–201.
17. Pearson, J. P., L. Passador, B. H. Iglewski, and E. P. Greenberg. 1995. A second N-acylhomoserine lactone signal produced by *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92:1490–1494.
18. Pearson, J. P., E. C. Pesci, and B. H. Iglewski. 1997. Roles of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa las* and *rhl* quorum-sensing systems in control of elastase and rhamnolipid biosynthesis genes. J. Bacteriol. 179:5756–5767.
19. Pesci, E. C., J. P. Pearson, P. C. Seed, and B. H. Iglewski. 1997. Regulation of *las* and *rhl* quorum-sensing systems in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Bacteriol. 179:3127–3132.
20. Pessi, G., and D. Haas. 2000. Transcriptional control of the hydrogen cyanide biosynthetic genes *hcnABC* by the anaerobic regulator ANR and the quorum-sensing regulators LasR and RhlR in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Bacteriol. 182:6940–6949.
21. Rhodius, V. A., and S. J. Busby. 1998. Positive activation of gene expression. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 1:152–159.
22. Rust, L., E. C. Pesci, and B. H. Iglewski. 1996. Analysis of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* elastase (*lasB*) regulatory region. J. Bacteriol. 178:1134–1140.
23. Sambrook, J., E. F. Fritsch, and T. Maniatis. 1989. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
24. Seed, P. C., L. Passador, and B. H. Iglewski. 1995. Activation of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa lasI* gene by LasR and the *Pseudomonas* autoinducer PAI: an autoinduction regulatory hierarchy. J. Bacteriol. 177:654–659.
25. Stevens, A. M., N. Fujita, A. Ishihama, and E. P. Greenberg. 1999. Involvement of the RNA polymerase alpha-subunit C-terminal domain in LuxR-dependent activation of the *Vibrio fischeri* luminescence genes. J. Bacteriol. 181:4704–4707.
26. Whiteley, M., K. M. Lee, and E. P. Greenberg. 1999. Identification of genes controlled by quorum sensing in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96:13904–13909.
27. Whiteley, M., M. R. Parsek, and E. P. Greenberg. 2000. Regulation of quorum sensing by RpoS in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Bacteriol. 182:4356–4360.
28. Yanisch-Perron, C., J. Vieira, and J. Messing. 1985. Improved M13 phage cloning vectors and host strains: nucleotide sequences of the M13mp18 and pUC19 vectors. Gene. 33:103–119.
