
# Advanced Glycation End Product–Induced Proliferation in NRK-49F Cells Is Dependent on the JAK2/STAT5 Pathway and Cyclin D1

Jinn-Yuh Guh, MD, Jau-Shyang Huang, PhD, Hung-Chun Chen, MD, Wen-Chun Hung, PhD, Yung-Hsiung Lai, MD, and Lea-Yea Chuang, PhD

- Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) are important in the pathogenesis of diabetic nephropathy, which leads to renal fibrosis. Previously, we found that the janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) signaling pathway is necessary for AGE-induced cellular proliferation in normal rat kidney interstitial fibroblast (NRK-49F) cells. However, a direct link between JAK/STAT and cell-cycle progression has not been well established. In this regard, STAT5 has been found to induce cyclin D1 and proliferation in hematopoietic cells. Therefore, we examined effects of AGE on STAT5 and cell-cycle–dependent mitogenesis in NRK-49F cells. We found that AGE increased cyclin D1 expression and cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk)4 activity while decreasing p21<sup>WAF1/CLIP1</sup> expression. We also found that AGE (100 μg/mL) induced STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation. Meanwhile, AGE induced STAT5 protein-DNA binding activity, which was reversed by AG-490 (a specific JAK2 inhibitor) and STAT5 decoy oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN). In addition, STAT5 decoy ODN reversed AGE-induced cell-cycle–dependent cellular proliferation and cyclin D1 protein expression. We concluded that AGE induced cell-cycle–dependent cellular proliferation by inducing the JAK2-STAT5-cyclin D1 and cdk4 pathways in NRK-49F cells.

© 2001 by the National Kidney Foundation, Inc.

INDEX WORDS: Advanced glycation end product (AGE); diabetic nephropathy (DN); fibroblast; janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT); cyclin D1.

THE HALLMARK OF diabetic nephropathy (DN) is renal hypertrophy and increased accumulation of extracellular matrix proteins, culminating in renal fibrosis (glomerulosclerosis and tubulointerstitial fibrosis).<sup>1</sup> Recently, the role of fibroblast proliferation in tubulointerstitial fibrosis has been noticed.<sup>2</sup> Moreover, advanced glycation end products (AGEs) are important in the pathogenesis of DN.<sup>3</sup> In this regard, we have been studying the effects of AGEs on renal interstitial fibroblasts. For example, we have shown that AGE induced cellular proliferation in normal rat kidney interstitial fibroblast (NRK-49F) cells.<sup>4</sup> However, molecular mechanisms governing the regulation of mitogenesis by AGE are not well defined.

Diabetic renal hypertrophy is cell-cycle dependent and composed of glomerular and/or tubular enlargement and interstitial expansion.<sup>1,5</sup> Glomerular and/or tubular cellular hyperplasia in early DN is followed by cellular hypertrophy.<sup>5,6</sup> Conversely, tubulointerstitial fibroblasts undergo sustained proliferation during the entire course of DN.<sup>5</sup> The role of renal hypertrophy in DN is well known,<sup>5</sup> whereas the role of cell proliferation in DN deserves new consideration. For example, it recently was shown that renal enlargement precedes renal hyperfiltration in early experimental DN.<sup>7</sup> Given that hyperfiltration is an important pathogenic factor in DN,<sup>1</sup> glomerular hyperplasia (which increases glomerular filtration surface area) in early DN may injure the kidney by causing glomerular hyperfiltration. A recent study also suggested the role of tubular enlargement (hyperplasia) in inducing glomerular hyperfiltration in early DN.<sup>8</sup> Moreover, interstitial expansion and fibroblast proliferation in DN may be as important as glomerulopathy in terms of renal prognosis in DN.<sup>9,10</sup>

Normal renal cells have a very low turnover rate and remain in the dormant G<sub>0</sub> phase of the cell cycle.<sup>5</sup> After stimulation, cells enter G<sub>1</sub> phase, in which cells increase protein and messenger RNA synthesis.<sup>5,11</sup> If conditions are satisfied, cells pass the G<sub>1</sub>/S checkpoint and enter S phase, in which cells replicate DNA.<sup>5,11</sup> Cells then enter G<sub>2</sub> phase. If conditions are satisfied, cells pass the G<sub>2</sub>/M checkpoint and enter M phase for

From the Departments of Internal Medicine and Biochemistry and School of Technology for Medical Science, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Received March 13, 2001; accepted in revised form May 25, 2001.

Supported in part by research grants no. NSC-89-2316-B037-001 (L.-Y.C.) and NSC-89-2314-B037-008 (J.-Y.G.) from the National Science Council, Republic of China.

Address reprint requests to Lea-Yea Chuang, PhD, Department of Biochemistry, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC. E-mail: jiyugu@kmu.edu.tw

© 2001 by the National Kidney Foundation, Inc.

0272-6386/01/3805-0023$35.00/0

doi:10.1053/ajkd.2001.28616

JAK/STAT/CYCLIN D IN CELL PROLIFERATION BY AGE

mitosis.⁵,¹¹ Regulators of G₁ progression include cyclins D1, D2, D3, and E.¹¹ Cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) are catalytic partners of cyclins. D-type cyclins are associated with either cdk4 or cdk6, whereas cyclin E is associated with cdk2.⁵,¹¹ Cyclin/cdk phosphorylates retinoblastoma protein to enable the cell to enter S phase. In this regard, we have shown that phosphorylated retinoblastoma protein is involved in high glucose-induced proliferation in cultured renal cells.¹²

There are two families of cdk inhibitors⁵,¹¹: (1) the CIP/Kip family (p21<sup>WAF1/CIP1</sup>, p27<sup>Kip1</sup>, and p57<sup>Kip2</sup>), and (2) INK4 family (p16<sup>INK4a</sup>, p15<sup>INK4b</sup>, p18<sup>INK4c</sup>, and p19<sup>INK4d</sup>). Interestingly, p21<sup>WAF1/CIP1</sup> and p27<sup>Kip1</sup> have been associated with diabetic renal hypertrophy.⁵

Janus kinase (JAK) is a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase, and signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) are tyrosine-phosphorylated by activated JAKs to be translocated into the nucleus to become a transcription factor.¹³-¹⁵ The JAK/STAT pathway is an important mediator of many cellular responses.¹³-¹⁵ There are at least four JAKs (JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, and TYK2) and seven STATs (STAT1 to STAT4, STAT5a, STAT5b, and STAT6). For example, we showed that AGE-induced cellular mitogenesis in NRK-49F cells was mediated by the JAK2/STAT1/STAT3 signaling pathway.⁴ We also suggested that STAT3-dependent activation of cyclins D2, D3, and A might be responsible for cell-cycle progression.⁴

However, we found that cyclin D1, not cyclins D2, D3, or A, was upregulated by AGEs in further studies. In this regard, STAT5 was found to induce cyclin D1 and proliferation in hematopoietic cells.¹⁶ Moreover, STAT5 also is activated by many DN-related factors,¹,¹⁷ including growth hormone, insulin, platelet-derived growth factor, epidermal growth factor, and angiotensin II.¹⁸-²⁰ Therefore, we hypothesized that STAT5 may be responsible for AGE-induced cell-cycle-dependent mitogenesis in these cells.

On this study, we examined AGE-treated NRK-49F cells to address four questions. (1) Which cyclin/cdk is induced by AGE? (2) Does AGE activate STAT5? (3) Is AGE-induced cyclin D1 dependent on the JAK2/STAT5 pathway? (4) Is AGE-induced cell-cycle-dependent cellular proliferation dependent on the JAK2/STAT5/cyclin D1 pathway?

MATERIALS AND METHODS

**Reagents**

Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), fetal calf serum (FCS), antibiotics, lipofectin, molecular weight standards, trypsin-EDTA, trypan blue stain, and all medium additives were obtained from Life Technologies Inc (Rockville, MD). Antibodies and glutathione S-transferase retinoblastoma protein (GST-RB) were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc (Santa Cruz, CA). Protein A/G-coupled agarose beads and AG-490 were purchased from Calbiochem Corp (San Diego, CA). Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat antirabbit or antimouse secondary antibody, γ-<sup>32</sup>P-labeled adenosine triphosphate ([γ-<sup>32</sup>P]ATP), and the enhanced chemiluminescence kit were obtained from Amersham Corp (Amersham, Buckinghamshire, UK). N,N'-methylenebisacrylamide, acrylamide, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), ammonium persulfate, Temed, and Tween 20 were purchased from Bio-Rad Laboratories (Hercules, CA). Bovine serum albumin (BSA), dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), and other chemicals were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Co (St Louis, MO).

**Cell Culture**

NRK-49F cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). Cells were grown in culture flasks and maintained in DMEM (5.5 mmol/L of D-glucose) supplemented with 100 U/mL of penicillin, 100 μg/mL of streptomycin, and 5% FCS in a humidified 5% carbon dioxide incubator at 37°C. In some experiments, cells were exposed to serum-free (0.1% FCS) DMEM supplemented with the specific JAK2 inhibitor AG-490 for 16 hours before timed exposure to FCS and AGE. AG-490 was dissolved in DMSO.

**Preparation of AGE**

BSA (1 mmol/L of BSA fraction V) was glycated by incubation with 0.5 mol/L of glucose in 50 mmol/L of potassium phosphate (pH 7.3) and 1 mmol/L of EDTA under sterile conditions at 37°C for 8 weeks, as one of our previous studies.⁴ Control nonglycated BSA consisted of the same initial preparations of albumin incubated at 37°C in the same manner, except glucose was not present.

**Preparation of Nuclear Extracts**

This procedure was used to prepare nuclear proteins (containing transcription factors) for the electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Briefly, cells were maintained in 5% FCS medium for 1 day. After fasting (0.1% FCS) for 48 hours, fresh DMEM (5% FCS) with different concentrations of AGE or BSA were added. After stimulation, cells were harvested and vigorously vortexed. Next, cell lysates were centrifuged, and nuclear pellets were resuspended in nuclear extraction buffer. Nuclear proteins were measured for protein by using a Bio-Rad protein assay kit. Extracts were stored at –70°C for further use.

**Western Blot Analysis**

This procedure was used for the identification and semiquantitation of cell-cycle proteins and STAT5. Briefly, 1.5 ×

107 serum-deprived cells were treated with BSA or AGE, as described. This was performed as one of our previous studies. Total cell lysates were harvested, resolved by 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), and transferred to Protran membranes (0.45 μm; Schleicher & Schuell, Keene, NH). Membranes were blocked in blocking solution and subsequently probed with primary antibodies (1 μg/mL). The membrane was incubated in 4,000× diluted horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat antirabbit or anti-mouse secondary antibody. Protein bands were detected using the enhanced chemiluminescence system, and the relative amount of protein was determined by using a scanning densitometer.

### Immunoprecipitation and Kinase Assays

This procedure was used to immunoprecipitate cdk4 and STAT5 by specific antibodies. cdk4 activity was then determined by detecting phosphorylation (labeled ATP) of the substrate GST-RB. Conversely, activated (ie, tyrosine-phosphorylated) STAT5 was determined by antiphosphotyrosine (PY20) antibody. Briefly, cells were washed twice with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), harvested in cdk4 lysis buffer (50 mmol/L of N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-propanesulfonic acid [HEPES; pH 7.5], 10% glycerol, 150 mmol/L of NaCl, 1 mmol/L of EDTA, 2.5 mmol/L of egtazic acid [EGTA], 1 mmol/L of dithiothreitol, and 0.1% Tween 20, supplemented with phosphatase and protease inhibitors, 5 mmol/L of NaF, 0.1 mmol/L of sodium orthovanadate, 5 μg/mL of leupeptin, 10 μg/mL of aprotinin, 50 μg/mL of phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, and 5 μg/mL of pepstatin A), and lysed by repeated passages through a 25 G needle. Cellular debris was removed from soluble extracts by centrifugation at 16,000g for 10 minutes at 4°C. After normalization of protein content, lysates were precleared by incubation with protein A/G-agarose beads and preimmune rabbit serum for 30 minutes at 4°C. Endogenous cdk4-containing complexes were immunoprecipitated for 3 hours at 4°C, using a rabbit polyclonal antihuman cdk4 antibody. Immunoprecipitates were washed twice with cdk4 lysis buffer and four times with GST-RB kinase buffer (50 mmol/L of HEPES [pH 7.5], 10 mmol/L of MgCl₂, 1 mmol/L of dithiothreitol, 2.5 mmol/L of EGTA, 10 mmol/L of β-glycerophosphate, 0.1 mmol/L of orthovanadate, and 1 mmol/L of NaF) and then resuspended in 50 μL of GST-RB kinase buffer.

Kinase activity associated with anti-cdk4 immunocomplexes was assayed in 50 μL of GST-RB kinase buffer containing 2 μg of GST-RB substrate and, in each case, supplemented with 2 mmol/L of EGTA and 2 μCi of [γ-³²P]ATP. Reactions were performed for 30 minutes at room temperature. Cold ATP (final concentration, 30 μmol/L) was then added to each reaction mixture to reduce background signal. Reactions were stopped by the addition of Laemmli (Bio-Rad Laboratories) sample buffer, and reaction products were electrophoresed in 12% SDS-PAGE. Gels were then dried, visualized by autoradiography, and quantitated with a scanning densitometer.

For STAT activation assays, 2 × 10⁷ serum-deprived cells were stimulated with BSA or AGE and harvested. Cellular extracts were immunoprecipitated with anti-STAT5 monoclonal antibodies and protein A/G-agarose beads. Samples were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred to Protran membranes. Membranes were probed with anti-PY20 (0.5 μg/mL) and anti-STAT5 (1:1000) antibodies. Immunoreactive proteins were detected with the enhanced chemiluminescence system, as described.

### Synthesis of Oligodeoxynucleotides

Sequences of phosphorothioate double-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) used in this study were synthesized using a DNA/RNA synthesizer (Applied Biosystems Division, Perkin Elmer, Foster City, CA). A cis-element decoy ODN is able to alter gene transcription because it contains the consensus-binding sequence of a transcription factor. As such, a decoy ODN can be used for gene therapy, as well as for the study of endogenous gene regulation. On this study, an ODN containing the STAT5 binding, interferon-γ–activated sequence-like element from the β-casein promoter was used as the probe or decoy. STAT5 decoy ODN (mutant substitutions are underlined), 5′-TGCTTCTTGAATT-3′, 3′-ACGAAAGAACCTTAA-5′, and mismatched decoy ODN5, 5′-TGCTTCTCTTAATT-3′, 3′-ACGAA-GAGAATTAA-5′. Single-stranded ODNs were annealed for 2 hours while the temperature descended from 80°C to 25°C.

### Transfection of Decoy ODNs Into Cells

This was performed as one of our previous studies. Briefly, decoy ODNs dissolved in DMEM were mixed with lipofectin at a ratio of 1 nmol/μg. ODN-liposome complexes were added to flasks or 24-well plates. We determined the specific conditions under which cationic liposomes could be used to successfully transfect decoy ODN into NRK-49F cells without causing cellular toxicity.

### Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay

This procedure was used to determine DNA-binding activities of transcription factors (proteins) by different molecular weights and charges of free probes (ODNs) and protein-ODN complexes in electrophoresis, according to one of our previous studies. Briefly, ³²P-labeling of STAT5 ODNs was performed using T4-polynucleotide kinase and [γ-³²P]ATP (3,000 Ci/mmol). Labeled DNA was separated from the unincorporated radioactivity. Binding reactions were performed by adding 5 μg of nuclear protein to 20 μL of binding buffer and [γ-³²P]ATP-labeled STAT5 ODN probes. When indicated, cold competitive oligonucleotides or antibodies were included during the preincubation periods. Samples were incubated at room temperature for 25 minutes and fractionated by electrophoresis. After electrophoresis, gels were transferred to 3 MM paper (Whatman Inc, Clifton, NJ), dried, and exposed to X-ray Hyperfilm-MP (Amersham Corp) at –70°C using an intensifying screen. Results were quantified by a scanning densitometer.

### Flow Cytometry

This procedure was used to determine cell-cycle distribution by a FACScan flow cytometer (Becton-Dickinson, Paramus, NJ) according to one of our previous studies. Briefly, 2 × 10⁶ cells were trypsinized, washed once with PBS, and

JAK/STAT/CYCLIN D IN CELL PROLIFERATION BY AGE

fixed in 70% ethanol for 30 minutes. Fixed cells were washed with PBS, incubated with 1 μg/mL of ribonuclease A for 30 minutes at 37°C, and stained with propidium iodide. Stained cells were analyzed for relative DNA content based on red fluorescence levels. Doublets were excluded from DNA histograms by using a double-discrimination method. Percentages of cells in various cell-cycle compartments were determined.

### Statistics

Results are expressed as mean ± SEM. Unpaired Student's *t*-tests were used for comparison between two groups. One-way analysis of variance followed by unpaired *t*-test was used for comparison among more than three groups. *P* less than 0.05 is considered statistically significant.

---

### RESULTS

#### Time Course of Effects of AGE on Expression of Cell-Cycle Regulatory Proteins in NRK-49F Cells

The blot was normalized to actin. As shown in Figs 1 and 2, compared with BSA, AGE (100 μg/mL) more rapidly (2 versus 4 hours) increased cyclin D1 protein expression. Conversely, AGE decreased p21<sup>WAF1/CIP1</sup> protein expression, and the expression of cyclin D2, cyclin D3, cyclin E, cyclin A, cdk2, cdk4, p16<sup>INK4</sup>, and p27<sup>Kip1</sup> proteins was not affected by AGE.

| Control | BSA | AGE |
|---------|-----|-----|
| 0       | 2   | 4   | 8   | 12  | 0   | 2   | 4   | 8   | 12  | 0   | 2   | 4   | 8   | 12  | (hr) |
| ---     | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ---     | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ---     | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ---     | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ---     | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ---     | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ---     | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ---     | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

- cyclin D1
- cyclin D2
- cyclin D3
- cyclin E
- cyclin A
- cdk2
- cdk4
- p16<sup>INK4</sup>
- p21<sup>WAF1/CIP1</sup>
- p27<sup>Kip1</sup>
- actin

**Fig 1.** Time course of effects of BSA and AGE on the expression of cell-cycle regulatory proteins in NRK-49F cells. Serum-deprived cells were treated with 5% FCS (control), BSA (100 μg/mL), and AGE (100 μg/mL) and harvested at the indicated times. Total cell lysates prepared from cells were electrophoresed on a polyacrylamide gel and immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies. The blot was washed and reincubated with an antibody against actin to account for small variations in protein loading and transfer. This is representative of three independently performed experiments.

**Fig 2.** Densitometry of Fig. 1. Density was normalized to that of actin. The relative density of each AGE band (■) was compared with that of each respective BSA band (□). The density of BSA bands at 0 hour was assumed to be 1. Results are expressed as mean ± SEM of three independently performed experiments. *P < 0.05* versus BSA.

---

#### Time Course of Effects of AGE on cdk4 Activity in NRK-49F Cells

As shown in Fig 3, AGE (100 μg/mL) time-dependently (maximal, 8 hours; *P < 0.05* versus BSA) increased GST-RB kinase (cdk4) activity. Thus, activation of cyclin D1 (2 hours) preceded that of cdk4 activity (8 hours).

---

#### Time Course of Effects of AGE Tyrosine Phosphorylation of STAT5 in NRK-49F Cells

As shown in Fig 4, compared with BSA, AGE (100 μg/mL) more rapidly increased STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation at 5 minutes.

Fig 3. Time course of effects of AGE on cdk4 kinase activity in NRK-49F cells. Serum-deprived cells were treated with BSA (100 μg/mL) and AGE (100 μg/mL) and harvested at the indicated times. Total cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-cdk4 antibody. Immune complexes were assayed using GST-RB and [γ-32P]ATP as substrates. This is representative of three independently performed experiments.

### Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay of STAT5 Protein-DNA Binding Activities in NRK-49F Cells

As shown in Fig 5A, AGE increased STAT5 protein DNA-binding activity at 5 and 15 minutes (*P* < 0.05 versus BSA). As shown in Fig 5B, pretreatment with AG-490 (5 μmol/L) for 16 hours reversed AGE-induced STAT5 DNA-binding activity at 15 minutes (*P* < 0.05 versus control). Similarly, STAT5 (2 μmol/L) decoy

Fig 4. Time course of effects of AGE on STAT5 tyrosine phosphorylation in NRK-49F cells. Total cell lysates from NRK-49F cells treated with 5% FCS (control), BSA (100 μg/mL), and AGE (100 μg/mL) for the indicated times were immunoprecipitated (IP) with anti-STAT5. Immune complexes were separated by a polyacrylamide gel and immunoblotted (IB) with either (top) antiphosphotyrosine (PY20) or (bottom) anti-STAT5 antibodies. This is representative of three independently performed experiments. Results are expressed as the mean of these three experiments in arbitrary units. *P* < 0.05 versus BSA.

Fig 5. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay of STAT5 protein-DNA binding activities in NRK-49F cells. (A) Time course of effects of BSA and AGE on STAT5 protein-DNA binding activities in NRK-49F cells. Serum-deprived cells were treated with 100 μg/mL of BSA or AGE for the indicated times. Nuclear extracts were prepared and assayed for STAT5 activities, described in Materials and Methods. (B) Effects of AG-490, STAT5 decoy ODN (2 μmol/L), and the mismatched ODN (MIS5; 2 μmol/L) on AGE-induced STAT5 protein-DNA binding activity at 15 minutes. Cells were pretreated with DMSO or AG-490 (5 μmol/L) for 16 hours before exposure to 100 μg/mL of AGE. Binding complexes were characterized by incubation with a 100-fold molar excess of unlabeled STAT5 consensus ODNs (comp). DMSO was used to dissolve AG-490. This is representative of three independently performed experiments.

ODN also reversed AGE-induced STAT5 DNA-binding activity at 15 minutes (*P* < 0.05 versus control). Conversely, mismatched ODN had only minimal effects.

### Effects of STAT5 Decoy ODN on AGE-Induced Cyclin D1 Protein Expression in NRK-49F Cells

As shown in Fig 6, AGE-induced cyclin D1 protein expression was reversed by STAT5 decoy ODN at 2 hours. Conversely, mismatched ODN had only minimal effects. Thus, STAT5

JAK/STAT/CYCLIN D IN CELL PROLIFERATION BY AGE

Control    MIS5    STAT5 Decoy

Fig 6. Effects of STAT5 decoy ODN and the mismatched ODN on cyclin D1 synthesis in AGE-treated NRK-49F cells. Serum-deprived cells were treated with 100 μg/mL of AGE alone (control; lanes 1 to 3), AGE plus mismatched ODN (MIS5; 2 μmol/L; lanes 4 to 6), and AGE plus STAT5 decoy ODN (2 μmol/L; lanes 7 to 9) and harvested at 2 hours. Total cell lysates prepared from cells were electrophoresed on a polyacrylamide gel and immunoblotted with anti-cyclin D1 antibodies. This is representative of three independently performed experiments.

mediates AGE-induced cyclin D1 protein expression.

AG-490 and STAT5 Decoy ODN Reversed AGE-Induced Cellular Proliferation and Cell-Cycle Progression in NRK-49F Cells

We have already shown that AG-490 reversed AGE-induced cellular proliferation in one of our previous studies.⁴ As listed in Table 1, STAT5 decoy (but not mismatched) ODN also reversed AGE-induced cellular proliferation. Because AGE induced JAK2/STAT5 cascade and cyclin D1/cdk4, required for G₁/S cell-cycle progression, we speculated that AGE-induced cellular proliferation might be cell-cycle dependent. Thus, as listed in Table 2, AGE increased the percentage of cells in S phase at 12 to 24 hours. Moreover, AG-490 (but not DMSO) and STAT5 decoy (but not mismatched) ODN reversed AGE-induced entry into S phase at 12 to 24 hours.

DISCUSSION

The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial and UK Prospective Diabetes Study proved that strict glycemic control decreases the risk for DN by 39% to 54% and 22.6%, respectively.²³ Thus, additional pathogenic mechanisms must be sought to help design novel therapies for DN. In this regard, tissue AGE level has been shown to correlate with serum hemoglobin A₁c level and severity of DN.³ Exogenous AGE in vitro or in vivo induces renal damage in DN.³ Moreover, aminoguanidine (an inhibitor of AGE formation), effective in experimental DN,³ is being used in a clinical trial of patients with DN.²⁴

The role of renal interstitial fibroblast proliferation in the pathogenesis of DN has not been noticed until recently.⁵,⁹,²⁵ The present study extends one of our previous studies⁴ by showing that AGE-induced cellular proliferation in NRK-49F cells is cell-cycle dependent and requires the JAK2/STAT5/cyclin D1 signaling cascade. This is the first demonstration of AGE-induced molecular cascades leading to cell-cycle-dependent mitogenesis in renal cells.

AGE binds to various cell-surface receptors, including the receptor for AGE (RAGE).²⁶ RAGE triggers various intracellular signaling pathways, including ras, mitogen-activated protein kinase, oxidative stress, and nuclear factor-κB.²⁶,²⁷ In addition, we were the first to show that AGE-induced JAK2/STAT1,3 activation in NRK-49F cells also was dependent on RAGE.²⁸ In this study, we found that AGE also increased tyrosine phosphorylation (at 5 minutes) and DNA-binding activity (at 15 minutes) of STAT5. In addition, AGE-induced STAT5 DNA-binding activity was dependent on JAK2 based on the experiment of AG-490. Because we have shown that AGE-induced JAK2 is dependent on RAGE,²⁸ we speculate that, like JAK2-STAT1,3, the JAK2/STAT5 pathway is also involved in AGE/RAGE-induced signaling in NRK-49F cells.

We found that AGE induced cyclin D1 protein expression and cdk4 activity at 2 and 8 hours in NRK-49F cells, respectively. Cell-cycle analysis showed that AGE increased entry into S phase at 12 to 24 hours. These events were followed by AGE-induced cellular proliferation at 7 days, shown in one of our previous studies.⁴ It is

Table 1. Effects of STAT5 Decoy ODNs on AGE-Induced Cellular Proliferation in NRK-49F Cells

| Treatment | ³H-Thymidine Incorporation (% of AGE) | Cell No. (% of AGE) |
|-----------|---------------------------------------|---------------------|
| AGE (100 μg/mL) | 100 | 100 |
| + STAT5 decoy ODN (2 μmol/L) | 70 ± 4.2* | 63 ± 3.8* |
| + Mismatched ODN5 (2 μmol/L) | 98 ± 8.3 | 101 ± 2.2 |
| Medium alone | 53 ± 3.1* | 57 ± 1.5* |
| BSA (100 μg/mL) | 54 ± 5.6* | 51 ± 1.6* |

NOTE. NRK-49F cells were exposed to BSA (100 μg/mL) or AGE (100 μg/mL) for 7 days. ³H-Thymidine incorporation and cell number analysis were determined as described in Materials and Methods. Each value is the mean of three independent experiments.

*P < 0.05 versus AGE.

Table 2. Effects of AG-490 and STAT5 Decoy ODNs on AGE-Induced Cell-Cycle Progression in NRK-49F Cells

| Time After | Phase | Control | BSA | AGE | AG-490 | DMSO | STAT5 | Mismatched |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Stimulation (h) |  |  |  |  |  |  | Decoy | ODN |
| 0 | G₁ | 76.4 | 76.0 | 78.2 | 80.5 | 80.1 | 79.7 | 78.0 |
|  | S | 11.2 | 10.5 | 10.7 | 9.3 | 9.8 | 9.3 | 12.5 |
|  | G₂/M | 12.4 | 13.5 | 11.1 | 10.2 | 10.1 | 11 | 9.5 |
| 12 | G₁ | 56.3 | 57.4 | 44.1 | 60.4 | 47.4 | 60.8 | 44.8 |
|  | S | 32.8 | 30.3 | 45.6 | 28.1 | 42.8 | 26.5 | 42.6 |
|  | G₂/M | 10.9 | 12.3 | 10.3 | 11.5 | 9.8 | 12.7 | 12.6 |
| 16 | G₁ | 49.3 | 45.5 | 30.8 | 51.7 | 32.2 | 49.3 | 35.3 |
|  | S | 37.5 | 39.2 | 56.0 | 38.5 | 52.5 | 41.3 | 55.8 |
|  | G₂/M | 13.2 | 15.3 | 13.2 | 9.8 | 15.3 | 9.4 | 8.9 |
| 20 | G₁ | 39.4 | 35.7 | 19.8 | 31.1 | 20.7 | 28.9 | 23.0 |
|  | S | 51.3 | 53.0 | 71.0 | 54.6 | 67.1 | 58.0 | 69.5 |
|  | G₂/M | 9.3 | 11.3 | 9.2 | 14.3 | 12.2 | 13.1 | 7.5 |
| 24 | G₁ | 29.5 | 33.0 | 19.3 | 41.0 | 20.5 | 39.7 | 26.6 |
|  | S | 49.6 | 50.2 | 62.2 | 52.5 | 65.6 | 50.9 | 59.3 |
|  | G₂/M | 20.9 | 16.8 | 18.5 | 6.5 | 13.9 | 9.4 | 14.1 |

NOTE. NRK-49F cells were exposed to 5% FCS (control), BSA (100 μg/mL), or AGE (100 μg/mL) for the indicated times. The cell-cycle distribution in G₁, S, or G₂/M phase was determined as described in Materials and Methods. This is a representative experiment performed at least three times.

and STAT5 DNA-binding activity. Experiments with AG-490 and STAT5 decoy ODN proved that JAK2/STAT5 is responsible for AGE-induced cyclin D1 expression, whereas STAT5 is responsible for AGE-induced cell-cycle-dependent cellular proliferation.

---

**REFERENCES**

1. Cooper ME: Pathogenesis, prevention, and treatment of diabetic nephropathy. Lancet 352:213-219, 1998
2. Zeisberg M, Strutz F, Muller GA: Renal fibrosis: An update. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 10:315-320, 2001
3. Raj DS, Choudhury D, Melbourne TC, Levi M: Advanced glycation end products: A nephrologist's perspective. Am J Kidney Dis 35:365-380, 2000
4. Huang JS, Guh JY, Hung WC, Yang ML, Lai YH, Chen HC, Chuang LY: Role of the janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) cascade in advanced glycation end-product-induced cellular mitogenesis in NRK-49F cells. Biochem J 342:231-238, 1999
5. Wolf G: Cell cycle regulation in diabetic nephropathy. Kidney Int 58:S59-S66, 2000 (suppl 77)
6. Huang HC, Preisig PA: G1 Kinases and transforming growth factor-beta signaling are associated with a growth pattern switch in diabetes-induced renal growth. Kidney Int 58:162-172, 2000
7. Bak M, Thomsen K, Christiansen T, Flyvbjerg A: Renal enlargement precedes renal hyperfiltration in early experimental diabetes in rats. J Am Soc Nephrol 11:1287-1292, 2000
8. Thomson SC, Deng A, Bao D, Satriano J, Blantz RC, Vallon V: Ornithine decarboxylase, kidney size, and the tubular hypothesis of glomerular hyperfiltration in experimental diabetes. J Clin Invest 107:217-224, 2001
9. Gilbert RE, Cooper ME: The tubulointerstitium in progressive diabetic kidney disease: More than an aftermath of glomerular injury? Kidney Int 56:1627-1637, 1999
10. Bohle A, Wehrmann M, Bogenschutz O, Batz C, Muller CA, Muller GA: The pathogenesis of chronic renal failure in diabetic nephropathy. Investigation of 488 cases of diabetic glomerulosclerosis. Pathol Res Pract 187:251-259, 1991
11. Johnson DG, Walker CL: Cyclins and cell cycle checkpoints. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 39:295-312, 1999
12. Yang YL, Guh JY, Yang ML, Lai YH, Tsai JH, Hung WC, Chang CC, Chuang LY: Interaction between high glucose and transforming growth factor-β in cell cycle protein regulations in MDCK cells. J Am Soc Nephrol 9:182-193, 1998
13. Ransohoff RM: Cellular responses to interferons and other cytokines: The JAK-STAT paradigm. N Engl J Med 338:616-618, 1998
14. Darnell JE: STATs and gene regulation. Science 277:1630-1635, 1997
15. Takeda K, Akira S: STAT family of transcription factors in cytokine-mediated biological responses. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 11:199-207, 2000
16. Matsumura I, Kitamura T, Wakao H, Tanaka H, Hashimoto K, Albanese C, Downward J, Pestell RG, Ka-

nakura Y: Transcriptional regulation of the cyclin D1 promoter by STAT5: Its involvement in cytokine-dependent growth of hematopoietic cells. EMBO J 18:1367-1377, 1999
17. Flyvbjerg A: Putative pathophysiological role of growth factors and cytokines in experimental diabetic kidney disease. Diabetologia 43:1205-1223, 2000
18. Grimley PM, Dong F, Rui H: Stat5a and Stat5b: Fraternal twins of signal transduction and transcriptional activation. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 10:131-157, 1999
19. Chen J, Sadowski HB, Kohanski RA, Wang LH: Stat5 is a physiological substrate of the insulin receptor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94:2295-2300, 1997
20. McWhinney CD, Dostal D, Baker K: Angiotensin II activates Stat5 through Jak2 kinase in cardiac myocytes. J Mol Cell Cardiol 30:751-761, 1998
21. Tomita N, Morishita R, Higaki J, Ogihara T: A novel strategy for gene therapy and gene regulation analysis using transcription factor decoy oligonucleotides. Exp Nephrol 5:429-434, 1997
22. Pircher TJ, Petersen H, Gustafsson JA, Haldosen LA: Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) interacts with signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 5a. Mol Endocrinol 13:555-565, 1999
23. Chuang LY, Guh JY: Extracellular signals and intracellular pathways in diabetic nephropathy. Nephrology 6:165-172, 2001
24. Freedman BI, Wuerth JP, Cartwright K, Bain RP, Dippe S, Hershon K, Mooradian AD, Spinowitz BS: Design and baseline characteristics for the Aminoguanidine Clinical Trial in Overt Type 2 Diabetic Nephropathy (ACTION II). Control Clin Trials 20:493-510, 1999
25. Essawy M, Soylemezoglu O, Muchaneta, Kubara EC, Shortland J, Brown CB, el Nahas AM: Myofibroblasts and the progression of diabetic nephropathy. Nephrol Dial Transplant 12:43-50, 1997
26. Schmidt AM, Yan SD, Yan SF, Stern DM: The biology of the receptor for advanced glycation end products and its ligands. Biochim Biophys Acta 1498:99-111, 2000
27. Lander HM, Tauras JM, Ogiste JS, Hori O, Moss RA, Schmidt AM: Activation of the receptor for advanced glycation end products triggers a p21(ras)-dependent mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway regulated by oxidant stress. J Biol Chem 272:17810-17814, 1997
28. Huang JS, Guh JY, Chen HC, Hung WC, Lai YH, Chuang LY: Role of receptor for advanced glycation end-product (RAGE) and the JAK/STAT-signaling pathway in AGE-induced collagen production in NRK-49F Cells. J Cell Biochem 81:102-113, 2001
29. Hitomi M, Stacey DW: Cyclin D1 production in cycling cells depends on ras in a cell-cycle-specific manner. Curr Biol 9:1075-1084, 1999
30. Resnitzky D: Ectopic expression of cyclin D1 but not cyclin E induces anchorage-independent cell cycle progression. Mol Cell Biol 17:5640-5647, 1997
31. Lavoie JN, Rivard N, L'Allemain G, Pouyssegur J: A temporal and biochemical link between growth factor-activated MAP kinases, cyclin D1 induction and cell cycle entry. Prog Cell Cycle Res 2:49-58, 1996
32. Nagata D, Suzuki E, Nishimatsu H, Satonaka H, Goto A, Omata M, Hirata Y: Transcriptional activation of the cyclin D1 gene is mediated by multiple cis-elements includ-

ing SP1 sites and a cyclic AMP responsive element in
vascular endothelial cells. J Biol Chem 276:662-669, 2000
33. Williams JG: STAT signaling in cell proliferation and
in development. Curr Opin Genet Dev 10:503-537, 2000
34. Mizuguchi R, Noto S, Yamada M, Ashizawa S, Higashi H, Hatakeyama M: Ras and signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) are essential and sufficient
downstream components of janus kinases in cell proliferation.
Jpn J Cancer Res 91:527-533, 2000
35. Ward AC, Touw I, Yoshimura A: The Jak-Stat pathway in normal and perturbed hematopoiesis. Blood 95:19-
29, 2000
36. De Fraja C, Conti L, Govoni S, Battaini F, Cattaneo
E: STAT signalling in the mature and aging brain. Int J Dev
Neurosci 18:439-446, 2000
37. Baetta R, Soma M, De Fraja C, Comparato C, Teruzzi
C, Magrassi L, Cattaneo E: Upregulation and activation of
Stat6 precede vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation in
carotid artery injury model. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
20:931-939, 2000
38. Lang S, Hartner A, Sterzel RB, Schocklmann HO:
Requirement of cyclin D1 in mesangial cell mitogenesis.
J Am Soc Nephrol 11:1398-1408, 2000
39. Hung WC, Huang JS, Chuang LY: Antisense oligode-
oxynucleotides targeted against different regions of cyclin

D1 mRNA may exert different inhibitory effects on cell
growth and gene expression. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 220:719-723, 1996
40. Niu G, Shain KH, Huang M, Ravi R, Bedi A, Dalton
WS, Jove R, Yu H: Overexpression of a dominant-negative
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 variant in
tumor cells leads to production of soluble factors that induce
apoptosis and cell cycle arrest. Cancer Res 61:3276-3280,
2001
41. Clarke HC, Cook HT, Hendry BM: Gene therapy for
renal fibroblasts. Nephrol Dial Transplant 14:1615-1617,
1999
42. Tsujie M, Isaka Y, Ando Y, Akagi Y, Kaneda Y, Ueda
N, Imai E, Hori M: Gene transfer targeting interstitial
fibroblasts by the artificial viral envelope-type hemagglutinating virus of Japan liposome method. Kidney Int 57:1973-
1980, 2000
43. Wardle EN: Renal collagen synthesis and its control.
Nephron 83:106-110, 1999
44. Iwano M, Fischer A, Okada H, Plieth D, Xue C,
Danoff TM, Neilson EG: Conditional abatement of tissue
fibrosis using nucleoside analogs to selectively corrupt DNA
replication in transgenic fibroblasts. Mol Ther 3:149-159,
2001
