
Differentiation (2001) 68:13–21

© Blackwell Wissenschafts-Verlag 2001

**ORIGINAL ARTICLE**

Ken Hayashi · Hiroshi Yokozaki · Steve Goodison  
Naohide Oue · Tetsuo Suzuki · Reuben Lotan  
Wataru Yasui · Eiichi Tahara  

**Inactivation of retinoic acid receptor β by promoter CpG hypermethylation in gastric cancer**

Accepted in revised form: 21 March 2001

Abstract Inactivation of nuclear retinoic acid receptor β (RARβ) expression is implicated in tumorigenesis. We hypothesized that loss of RARβ in gastric cancer cells may occur as a result of multiple factors, including epigenetic modifications which alter RARβ promoter chromatin structure. We examined hypermethylation of CpG islands present in the RARβ promoter by methylation-specific PCR and the expression of RARβ in gastric cancer cell lines and tissues. Three (MKN-28, -45 and -74) out of eight gastric cancer cell lines had a loss of RAR expression associated with promoter methylation. RARβ expression was retrieved in these cell lines by treatment with 5-azacytidine or by the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A. Promoter hypermethylation was detected in 64% (7/11) of gastric carcinoma tissues with reduced expression of RARβ, whereas it was detected in 22% (2/9) of tumors with retained RARβ expression. To investigate the functions of exogenous RARβ in gastric cancer cells, we transfected a retroviral RARβ expression vector (LNSβ) into MKN-28 cells that have hypermethylation of the RARβ promoter. Overexpression of RAR in MKN-28 cells appeared to regulate the expression of DNA methyltransferase and DNA demethylase and the acetylation of histone H4. These results suggest that the transcriptional inactivation of the RARβ by promoter CpG hypermethylation is frequently associated with gastric carcinoma. Our data also suggests that DNA methylation plays a pivotal role in establishing and maintaining an inactive state of RARβ by rendering the chromatin structure inaccessible to the transcription machinery.

Key words retinoic acid receptor-β · partial methylation · 5-azacytidine · TSA

---

### Introduction

The effects of retinoids are mainly mediated by the retinoic acid receptors (RARs), which act as retinoic acid (RA)-dependent transcriptional activators in their heterodimeric forms with the retinoid X receptors (RXRs) and in conjunction with multiple co-repressors (Chambon, 1994). These receptor subtypes display distinct patterns of expression during development and differentiation (Gudas et al., 1994), suggesting that each of them may have specific function. RARs, especially RARβ, induce local chromatin changes at levels of target genes containing RA responsive elements (RAREs) by recruiting multiprotein complexes with histone acetyltransferase (HAT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) activities that dynamically alter chromatin structure and regulate gene expression (Chambon, 1996; Minucci and Pellici, 1999). A RARE is also located in the RARβ promoter region and mediates RARβ induction in response to RA in several cell lines and tissues (de The et al., 1990). Auto regulation of the RARβ gene may play a critical role in amplifying the RA response. Lack of RARβ expression has been observed in a number of malignant tumors, including carcinomas of the lung (Gebert et al., 1991), head and neck (Lotan et al,

K. Hayashi (✉) · H. Yokozaki · N. Oue · T. Suzuki · W. Yasui · E. Tahara  
First Department of Pathology  
Hiroshima University School of Medicine  
1–2–3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, 734–8551, Japan  
e-mail: etahara@cisnet.or.jp  
Tel.: +81 82 257 5147, Fax: +81 82 257 5149  

K. Hayashi · S. Goodison · E. Tahara  
University of California, San Diego, Cancer Center and  
Department of Pathology, 9500 Gilman Drive, MC0912,  
La Jolla, CA 92093–0912  

R. Lotan  
Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical Oncology  
The University of Texas  
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA  

U.S. Copyright Clearance Center Code Statement: 0301–4681/2001/6801–13$15.00/0
1995) and breast (Seewaldt et al, 1995). In addition, our previous study showed that the overexpression of retinoic acid receptor β induced growth arrest and apoptosis in oral cancer cell lines (Hayashi et al, 2001). Similar findings on the role of RARβ in the inhibition of growth have been reported in other cancer cell lines (Seewaldt et al, 1995; Wan et al, 1999). These results suggest that RARβ might function as a tumor suppressor.

DNA methylation is involved in long-term silencing of certain genes during mammalian development (Li et al, 1993) and in the repression of viral genomes (Beard et al, 1995). Aberrant DNA hypermethylation in carcinomas usually occurs at CpG islands located in the 5′ regulatory regions of genes (Baylin et al, 1998). The CpG islands of tumor suppressor genes, normally unmethylated, are potential targets of aberrant hypermethylation during tumorigenesis (Merlo et al, 1995). In addition, DNA hypermethylation can inhibit the transcription of tumor suppressor and mismatch repair genes (Herman et al, 1998). Two global mechanisms of gene regulation, DNA methylation and histone deacetylation, are linked by MeCP2 (Methyl-CpG-binding Protein 2) (Nan et al, 1998; Ng et al, 1999; Wade et al, 1999). In this study, we decided to investigate whether the RARβ promoter was affected by DNA methylation in gastric cancer cell lines and in primary gastric carcinomas. In order to further understand the role of RARβ, we transfected MKN-28 cells, which show a hypermethylation of the RARβ promoter, with a RARβ expression vector and evaluated the relationship between RARβ gene expression and epigenetic changes in gastric cancer cells.

---

### Methods

#### Cell culture

Eight human gastric cancer cell lines were used in this study. TMK-1 (poorly differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma) was established in our laboratory (Ochiai et al, 1985). KATO-III and HSC-39 (signet ring cell carcinoma) were kindly provided by Dr. M. Sekiguchi (University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan) (Sekiguchi et al, 1978) and Dr. K. Yanagihara (Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan) (Yanagihara et al, 1991), respectively. The other five human gastric cancer cell lines of MKN series (MKN-1, adenosquamous carcinoma; MKN-7, -28 and -74, well differentiated adenocarcinoma; MKN-45, poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma) were kindly provided by Dr. T. Suzuki (Fukushima Medical College, Fukushima, Japan) (Motoyama et al, 1986). Human DLD-1 colon adenocarcinoma cell line was obtained from the American Type Tissue Culture Collection (Rockville, MD). They were routinely grown in RPMI 1640 (Nissui Co., Tokyo, Japan) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS; Whittaker M. A. Bioproducts Inc., MD, USA), 1 mM glutamine (Nissui Co., Tokyo, Japan), 100 U/ml penicillin G (Meiji Seika Kaisha, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) and 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin sulfate (Meiji Seika Kaisha, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), in an atmosphere consisting of 5% CO₂ in air at 37°C in a humidified incubator.

A stock solution of trichostatin A (TSA) at the concentration of 1 mg/ml was prepared in ethanol. The cells were exposed to medium containing 0, 10, 50, 100, 500, and 1000 ng/ml TSA for 72 h. It was clear that TSA inhibited the cells' growth dose-dependently up to the concentration of 500 ng/ml. Subsequently, the TSA solution was added directly to the culture medium to the final concentration of 500 ng/ml. The cells were treated for 0 and 48 h, and total RNA and proteins were extracted.

The RARβ-negative gastric carcinoma cell line (MKN-28) was treated with 10 mM 5-azacytidine (Sigma Chemical Co., Ltd., St. Louis, MO). After culture for 14, 30, 40, and 53 days, total RNA was extracted.

#### Transfection of RARβ expression vector

Stable transfection of the RARβ expression vector and an empty vector (LNSX) was carried out using the lipofection method (Lipofectin, Life Technologies, Inc., MD) (Wan et al, 1999). The RARβ expression vector was constructed by inserting the cDNA of a modified human RARβ into the HindIII site of the retroviral vector LNSX (). The 5′ untranslated region of wild-type human RARβ cDNA was deleted, and the original Kozak sequence was replaced with a modified optimal one to enhance the translation efficiency. Cells were plated at a density of 0.5–1 × 10⁵ cells/100-mm dish, and were grown for 24 h. The cells were transfected for 6 h with 6.0 μg of vector using 60 μl of Lipofectin in 6.0 ml of RPMI 1640 media without FBS and antibiotics. The cells were recovered in non-selective media for 48 h, following the selection by 300–800 μg/ml G418 (GIBCO BRL, Grand Island, NY) in the culture media. Finally, individual G418-resistant clones were isolated and expanded.

#### Tissue samples of human gastric carcinomas

A total of 20 gastric carcinoma tissues, surgically obtained at Hiroshima University Hospital and other related facilities, were subjected to this study. Tumor tissues and their corresponding non-neoplastic mucosa were surgically removed, frozen immediately thereafter in liquid nitrogen, and stored at –80°C until use. We confirmed microscopically that the tumor-tissue specimen consisted mainly of carcinoma tissue and that non-neoplastic mucosa did not exhibit any tumor-cell invasion or show significant inflammatory involvement.

#### DNA preparation and Southern blot analysis

Genomic DNA was extracted using the phenol-chloroform method after treatment with SDS and protein K as described previously (Sano et al, 1991). DNA samples were digested with HindIII, and 10 μg of completely digested DNA were electrophoresed on 0.8% agarose gel. DNA was transferred to a nitrocellulose filter according to the methods of Southern (Yoshida et al, 1989). Hybridization, using ³²P-labeled RARβ cDNA probe, and washing were performed as described (Wan et al, 1999). The filters were autoradiographed on Fuji RX-U films at –80°C. A GAPDH cDNA probe (Clontech Laboratories, Inc., Palo Alto, CA) was applied as an internal control. The autoradiographic signals were semi-quantitated by densitometric scanning normalized by internal control.

#### RNA preparation and RT-PCR

Expression of RARβ mRNA was analyzed by semi-quantitative RT-PCR method. Semi-quantitative data of PCR products were obtained using the human β-actin as internal control and comparing the intensity of the PCR band (under conditions of linearity) of RARs and dMTase, DNMT1, DNMT3α, and DNMT3β with that of the internal control using a densitometer (Bio Rad)
GS-670, Milan, Italy). Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini Kit RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). Total RNA of 1 μg was converted to cDNA using a first strand cDNA synthesis kit (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Uppsala, Sweden). For RARβ, the PCR conditions were set for 1 min at 95°C, 40 s at 94°C for denaturation, 30 s at 60°C for annealing, and 1 min at 72°C for extension for 45 cycles. For beta-actin, RT-PCR was performed for one cycle 94°C for 10 min followed by 24 cycles of 94°C for 30 s, 55°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 30 s, followed by one cycle of 72°C for 4 min, using Ampli Taq Gold (Perkin Elmer, Norwalk, CT). Buffer contained 1.5 mM MgCl₂, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM KCl and 200 μM of each deoxynucleotide triphosphate (dNTP). The primers used for amplification were: RARβ specific primer set (sense 5′-AGGAGACTTCGAAGCAAG-3′ (nt 822–839) and antisense 5′-GTCAAGGGTTCATGTCCTTC-3′ (nt 1593–1574). The resulting amplification products were then analyzed by 1% agarose gel electrophoresis with ethidium bromide and examined under UV light. For semi-quantitative analysis of dMTase, DNMT1, DNMT3α, and DNMT3β, RT-PCR was performed for one cycle 94°C for 10 min followed by 27 cycles of 94°C for 2 min, 51°C /dMTase, 55°C /DNMT1, 60°C /DNMT3α, 55°C /DNMT3β for 2 min, and 72°C for 3 min, followed by one cycle of 72°C for 10 min. For semi-quantitative analysis of beta-actin, RT-PCR was performed for one cycle 94°C for 10 min followed by 24 cycles of 94°C for 30 sec, 55°C for 30 sec, and 72°C for 30 sec, followed by one cycle of 72°C for 4 min, using Ampli Taq Gold (Perkin Elmer, Norwalk, CT). Buffer contained 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 50 mM KCl and 200 μM of each deoxynucleotide triphosphate (dNTP). The primers used for amplification were:dMTase, 5′-AAGGGTAAACCAGACTTGAA-3′ (forward), 5′-AGGGGTTGAGATGTGTTAAG-3′ (reverse), product size 312bp; DNMT1, 5′-CGGGAACCAAGCAAGAAGTG-3′ (forward), 5′-CCGGCTCCTCCTTCAGTTTC-3′ (reverse), product size 461bp; DNMT3α, 5′-GCGGGCAAAGAACAGAAGGA-3′ (forward), 5′-GCGGCATCAGCTTCTCAACA-3′ (reverse), product size 595bp; DNMT3β, 5′-CGCCCCTCTGAAGGACTACT-3′ (forward), 5′-GGGCCCTTAAAAATGTCCCTG-3′ (reverse), product size 537bp; β-actin, 5′-CTGTCTGGCGGGCACACCACAT-3′ (forward), 5′-GCAACTAAGTCATAGTCCGC-3′ (reverse), product size 254bp. The resulting amplification products were then analyzed by 1% agarose gel electrophoresis with ethidium bromide and examined under UV light. The β-actin PCR products from the same RNA samples were amplified as internal controls (Nakajima et al, 1985).

### Methylation specific PCR

To determine the DNA methylation pattern in the promoter region of the RARβ gene, we performed genomic DNA extraction by using a genomic DNA purification kit (Promega, Madison, USA) and chemical treatment of genomic DNA with sodium bisulfite as described (Herman et al., 1996). For methylation specific PCR analysis for RARβ, PCR was performed as described (Sirchia et al., 2000) and each PCR product (15 μg) was loaded onto 8% non-denaturing polyacrylamide gels, ethidium bromide-stained and visualized under UV light. We confirmed the specificity of methylation specific PCR by restriction analysis. 20 μl of PCR products was digested with 10 units of BstUI (New England Biolabs, Inc., Beverly, MA) for 8 hours, according to conditions specified by the manufacturer. The primer pairs selected to detect the unmethylated DNA were as follows: U sense 5′-TTA GTA GTT TGG GTA GGG TTT ATT-3′ and U antisense 5′-CCA AAT CCT ACC CCA ACA-3′ (at 55°C); M sense 5′-GGT TAG TAG TTC GGG TAG GGT TTA TC-3′ and M antisense 5′-CCG AAT CCT ACC CCG ACG-3′ (at 64°C). This fragment M (position 773–1007) contains the βRARE (792–808) and the transcription start site (position 844). DLD-1 cells were used as a methylation-positive control (Cote’s and Momparler, 1997).

---

Immunofluorescence analysis

For the detection of exogenous RARβ, RARβ transfected MKN-28 cells were cultured on glass coverslips, and immunofluorescence was detected as follows. After fixing in 70% methanol for 30 min, cells were incubated with a rabbit anti-RARβ polyclonal antibody (diluted 1:20 in PBS) for 120 min, washed twice with PBS, and incubated with a fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibody for 30 min. After several washes with PBS, cells were analyzed using fluorescent microscopy (×200).

### Protein extraction and Western blot analysis

The cells were lysed in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 125 mM NaCl, 0.1% (v/v) Nonidet P-40 (NP-40; Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, Mo, USA), 5 mM EDTA, 0.1 M NaF, 10 μg/ml leupeptin (Sigma), 0.1 μg/ml trypsin inhibitor (Sigma), 0.1 μg/ml aprotinin (Sigma), and 50 μg/ml phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (WAKO Inc., Osaka, Japan). The protein concentration was determined by the Bradford protein assay (Bio-Rad, Richmond, CA) using bovine serum albumin (Sigma) as a standard. Western blotting was carried out as described previously by Kameda et al, 1990. Fifty or one hundred micrograms of protein were solubilized in Laemmli's sample buffer by boiling and subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) followed by electro-transfer ring onto nitrocellulose filter (Schleicher & Schuell, Dasse, Germany). The filters were incubated first with an appropriate primary antibody and then with peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody. The immune complex was visualized using the ECL Western blot detection system (Amersham, Aylesbury, UK).

### Antibodies

Anti-RARα (C-20; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) rabbit polyclonal antibody (PAb) recognizes a denaturation resistant epitope between amino acids 443–461 mapping at the carboxyl terminus of RARα of human origin. Anti-RARβ (C-19; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) rabbit PAb recognizes an epitope between amino acids 430–447 mapping at the carboxy terminus of human RARβ. Anti-RARγ (C-19; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) rabbit PAb recognizes an epitope between amino acids 436–454 mapping at the carboxyl terminus of human RARγ. Anti-RXRα (D-20; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) rabbit PAb recognizes an epitope between amino acids 328–346 mapping at the carboxy terminus of human RXRα. Anti-Acetylated Histone H4 (Upstate biotechnology) PAb, anti-HDAC1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) PAb, anti-p300 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) MAb were used, respectively, as immunogens. Anti-alpha tubulin (Zymed Laboratories, San Francisco, CA) MAb was used for normalization of Western blot analysis. We used peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit and peroxidase conjugated anti-mouse IgG in the secondary reaction.

---

### Results

#### Basal expression levels of RARβ in gastric carcinoma cell lines

We first analyzed the basal expression levels of RARβ proteins (Fig. 1A) and RNAs (Fig. 1B) in eight human gastric cancer cells. MKN-28, -45 and -74 cells did not express RARβ at both proteins and RNA levels. When levels of RAR were particularly high (as in TMK1 and

RARβ promoter region CpG island in gastric cancer cell lines (Fig. 1D). The genomic DNAs from MKN-28, MKN-45 and MKN-74 revealed both methylated and unmethylated PCR products, suggesting partial methylation of RARβ (Myogamen et al, 1998). The DLD-1 cells line was used as a methylation-positive control in order to confirm correct procedural technique.

5-Azacytidine or TSA induce demethylation at the RARβ CpG island and reactivation of RARβ gene expression

In order to determine whether DNA methylation affects RARβ gene expression, we treated MKN-28 cells, showing methylation at the RARβ promoter, with the modified nucleotide 5-azacytidine or the HDAC inhibitor TSA. Fig. 2 shows the chronological changes of RARβ mRNA expression level after treatment with 5-azacytidine or TSA as determined by RT-PCR analysis. After culture for 14 days with 5-azacytidine or 2 days with TSA, MKN-28 expressed RARβ mRNA. On the other hand, MSP analysis of MKN-28 showed that there was no demethylation of the βRARE containing region in cells treated with 5-azacytidine or TSA.

Relationship between basal expression levels of RARβ and promoter methylation status in gastric carcinoma tissues

Next, we analyzed the basal expression of both RARβ protein (Fig. 3A) and mRNA levels (Fig. 3B) in gastric cancer tissues and the corresponding non-neoplastic mucosas by Western blot and a semi-quantitative RT-PCR method. Moreover, we examined the RARβ promoter methylation status by MSP in the same cases (Fig. 3C). A summary and representative results are shown in Tables 1, 2 and Fig. 3, respectively. Eleven

HCS-39), as evidenced by PCR, some weak auxiliary bands were also observed. Southern blot hybridization revealed no gross alteration of the RARβ gene in all the cells examined (Fig. 1C).

The RARβ promoter is methylated in gastric cancer cell lines

We used methylation specific PCR (MSP) to specifically amplify unmethylated and methylated alleles of the

Fig. 2 Re-expression of RARβ and the DNA methylation status of the RARβ promoter in MKN-28 cells treated with 5-azacytidine or TSA. (A) RARβ negative gastric carcinoma MKN-28 cells were treated with 10 μM 5-azacytidine or 500 nM TSA. After culture for 14 days with 5-azacytidine or 2 days with TSA, the MKN-28 cells express RARβ mRNA. (B) Methylation specific PCR (MSP) in MKN-28 cells treated and untreated with 5-azacytidine or TSA. MSP was performed as described in Methods. Both methylated (M) and unmethylated (U) alleles were found in MKN-28 cells treated with 5-azacytidine or TSA.

Fig. 3 Expression levels of RARβ and promoter DNA methylation status in representative gastric carcinoma tissues. Western blot (A), RT-PCR (B) and methylation specific PCR (C) were performed as described in Methods. G107, G108 and J110 show low expression of RARβ protein and mRNA, associated with promoter hypermethylation. In cases G103 and G104, tumors express RARβ protein and mRNA at lower levels than the corresponding non-neoplastic mucosa, while promoter regions of RARβ are not hypermethylated. On the contrary, in cases K106 and K107, although the expression of RARβ is relatively high, the RARβ promoter regions are hypermethylated.

(55%) of 20 gastric carcinomas expressed RARβ mRNA and protein at lower levels than the corresponding non-neoplastic mucosas. Among the eleven, seven (63.6%) demonstrated hypermethylation of the RARβ promoter. Hypermethylation was detected in only two of 9 (22%) carcinomas with increased expression of RARβ. Moreover, we found a tendency that the promoter hypermethylation of the RARβ preferentially occurred in the intestinal type gastric carcinomas (Intestinal type 60%; 9/15, Diffuse type 0%; 0/5) and carcinomas invasive to the serosa or exposed to the serosal surface (66.7%; 6/9). However, in some cases, RARβ promoter methylation status was not correlated with the expression levels of RARβ. For example, in

Table 1 mRNA expression levels and promoter methylation status of RARβ

| Case       | Age | Sex | Hist.b) | Depthb) | Tc) | Nc) | T/N ratio | Methylationd) status |
|------------|-----|-----|---------|---------|-----|-----|-----------|----------------------|
| Intestinal typea) |     |     |         |         |     |     |           |                      |
| G103       | 70  | M   | pap     | se      | 0.36 | 1.08 | 0.34      | U                    |
| G109       | 90  | M   | pap     | ss      | 1.11 | 9.85 | 0.11      | M                    |
| J112       | 53  | F   | pap     | ss      | 1.59 | 1.25 | 1.27      | U                    |
| K105       | 66  | M   | tub1    | se      | 0.44 | 1.01 | 0.43      | M                    |
| G104       | 74  | M   | tub2    | mp      | 0.48 | 1.24 | 0.39      | U                    |
| G105       | 67  | M   | tub2    | ss      | 1.23 | 0.05 | 20.9      | U                    |
| G107       | 61  | F   | tub2    | se      | 0.09 | 0.53 | 0.16      | M                    |
| G108       | 69  | M   | tub2    | se      | 0.03 | 0.11 | 0.27      | M                    |
| K101       | 72  | M   | tub2    | se      | 2.37 | 1.99 | 1.19      | U                    |
| K106       | 50  | M   | tub2    | se      | 0.74 | 0.32 | 2.36      | M                    |
| K107       | 53  | M   | tub2    | ss      | 0.51 | 0.10 | 5.09      | M                    |
| K110       | 72  | M   | tub2    | se      | 0.33 | 6.73 | 0.05      | M                    |
| J103       | 71  | M   | tub2    | ss      | 6.41 | 0.93 | 6.91      | U                    |
| J110       | 70  | M   | tub2    | mp      | 0.09 | 0.47 | 0.19      | M                    |
| J111       | 81  | M   | tub2    | se      | 0.31 | 1.06 | 0.29      | M                    |
| Diffuse typea) |     |     |         |         |     |     |           |                      |
| G102       | 77  | M   | por1    | ss      | 0.86 | 0.54 | 1.59      | U                    |
| K104       | 64  | F   | por1    | ss      | 0.82 | 0.35 | 2.35      | U                    |
| G106       | 57  | M   | por2    | ss      | 0.71 | 0.60 | 1.18      | U                    |
| K102       | 73  | F   | por2    | ss      | 0.19 | 0.17 | 1.11      | U                    |
| K103       | 64  | M   | por2    | se      | 1.58 | 0.61 | 2.60      | U                    |

a) Histology (Hist.) was classified according to the criteria of Lauren (1965).

b) Histology (Hist.) and depth of tumor invasion (Depth) were classified according to the criteria of the Japanese Classification of Gastric Cancer (13th Edition, 1999).

c) The mRNA expression of RARβ were normalized to beta-actin. The units are arbitrary, and calculated based on the amount of RARβ in 1 μg total RNA of the TMK1 cell line, taken as 1.0. T, Tumor tissue; N, Normal mucosa.

d) M, Methylated allele was detected; U, Unmethylated allele was detected.

Table 2 The frequencies of methylation of RARβ in gastric carcinomas

| Histology          | Methylation of RARβ* |
|--------------------|---------------------|
| Intestinal type    | 9/15 (60.0%)        |
| pap                | 1/3 (33.3%)         |
| tub                | 8/12 (66.7%)        |
| Diffuse type       | 0/5 (0.00%)         |
| por                | 0/5 (0.00%)         |

| Depth of tumor invasion | Methylation of RARβ* |
|--------------------------|---------------------|
| ss                       | 2/9 (22.2%)         |
| se                       | 6/9 (66.7%)         |
| mp                       | 1/2 (50.0%)         |

* Methylation detected by methylation specific PCR

Cases G103 and G104, tumors expressed RARβ protein and mRNA at lower levels than the corresponding non-neoplastic mucosas, but promoter regions of RARβ were not hypermethylated. On the contrary, in Cases K106 and K107, although the expression of RARβ was relatively high, their RARβ promoter regions were hypermethylated.

Transfection of RARβ and morphological changes observed in RARβ transfected MKN-28 clones

Western blot and RT-PCR analyses were performed on the RARβ transfected MKN-28 cells to determine the levels of RARβ protein and RNA expression (Fig. 4A). The expected single Mr 53,000 band of RARβ protein was detected in the cellular lysate from MKN-28 LNSβ cells but not in those transfected with the control vector alone. Similarly, RARβ mRNA was observed in the LNS-RARβ transfected cells but not in those with control vector (LNSX) only. Moreover, we observed that MKN-28 LNSβ cells underwent morphological changes (Fig. 4B). These changes included nuclear condensation, cytoplasmic vacuolization, and cell shrinkage. These cells with morphological changes demonstrated positive immunoreaction to RARβ polyclonal antibody. These changes did not occur in the cells transfected with the control vector.

Expression of retinoic acid receptors, co-activators and DNA methyltransferase molecules in RARβ transfectants

The expression of RARα and RARγ protein was reduced in RARβ transfectants, whereas the expression of RXRα was not altered in the transfectants (Fig. 5). We then determined whether RARβ could regulate known transcriptional co-activators (Kwok et al., 1994; Lundbald et al., 1995; Avany et al., 1995; Peter et al., 1998)

Fig. 4 Expression of RARβ in MKN-28 LNSβ cells. (A) The levels of RARβ protein expression were determined by Western blot using RARβ specific polyclonal antiserum. The 50 KDa RARβ protein is observed in the LNS-RARβ transfected cells but not in the cells transfected with control vector alone. In addition, the 771 bp RARβ mRNA is observed in the LNS-RARβ transfected cells but not in those transfected with control vectors. (B) MKN-28 LNSβ cells were observed by phase contrast microscopy and immunofluorescence. MKN-28 LNSβ cells reveal morphological changes including nuclear condensation, cytoplasmic vacuolization, and cell shrinkage. The cells with these morphological changes were positive immunoreactive for RARβ.

including both p300 and CREB-binding protein (CBP), and histone acetyltransferases (HATs) (Fig. 5). We found that p300 and CBP were dramatically induced in MKN-28 LNSβ. Conversely, HDAC1 was slightly reduced in MKN-28 LNSβ. Interestingly, the expression of acetylated histone H4 was dramatically induced in MKN-28 LNSβ. Moreover, we examined mRNA expression of DNA methyltransferase (DNMT1, DNMT3α and DNMT3β) and demethylase (dMTase) in

pression of gastric carcinoma tissues as well as gastric cancer cell lines. Hypermethylation of RARβ promoter was seen in 60% of the intestinal type gastric carcinomas and in 67% of tumors with invasion to the serosa or exposure to the serosal surface, regardless of nodal metastasis and tumor stage. Therefore, our results suggest that hypermethylation of the RARβ promoter might confer the progression of gastric carcinomas. However, some cases had no relationship between DNA methylation status and the down regulation/loss of RARβ expression. Therefore, other mechanisms, such as gene mutation (Zhang et al., 1996), might be responsible for the down regulation of RARβ gene expression in these gastric cancers. In addition, some cases showed hypermethylation of the RARβ promoter region, but the expression of RARβ was relatively high. From these observations, we may assume that DNA methylation is not the only factor influencing RARβ silencing. Future studies will reveal the specific relationship between multiple epigenetic changes of RARβ promoter and the increased RARβ promoter methylation found in some gastric cancers.

When the RAR/RXR heterodimer binds to βRARE, the chromatin structure undergoes dynamic changes in the RARβ promoter (Bhattacharya et al., 1997). reported that TSA increases endonuclease sensitivity within the RARβ promoter, suggesting that TSA treatment may alter a local chromatin environment which can enhance the assembly of RXR/RAR heterodimers. Treatment of MKN-28 with TSA reduced the expression of HDAC1 and slightly induced the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) and acetylated histone H4 (Suzuki et al., 2000). We also observed that methylation of the RARβ promoter persisted in MKN-28 cells, even where RARβ expression was restored in the presence of TSA. These results suggest that global alterations of HDAC activity might result in RARβ expression.

A mechanistic bridge between DNA methylation and histone deacetylation might regulate the gene expression (; Ng et al., 1999; Wade et al., 1999). Therefore, we hypothesized that a RARβ may be regulated by both DNA methylation and histone acetylation. We transfected RARβ expression vector into MKN-28 cells and examined the expression levels of acetylated histone associated proteins, induction of DNA methyltransferases (Besto, 1992; Okano et al., 1998) and DNA demethylases (Bhattacharya et al., 1999) in MKN-28 LNSβ. Our present data shows that DNA methyltransferases and dMTase as well as histone acetylation associated proteins might be consistent with inactivation of the RARβ promoter. Ng and Bird (Ng and Bird, 1999) propose that DNA methyltransferase may be capable of reading the histone acetylation pattern on the chromatin, and its *de novo* methyltransferase activity can respond to different states of chromatin modification. Moreover, Blanco *et al.* (Blanco et al., 1998) suggested that the RXR/RAR heterodimer directly recruited the histone acetyltransferase from mammalian cells and that increased expression

Fig. 5 Expression of retinoic acid receptors and retinoic acid receptor co-activators in RARβ transfected MKN-28 cells. (Left panel, Western blot analysis) In MKN28 LNSβ cells, the expression of RARα and RARγ protein levels are reduced. On the other hand, the expression of RXRα does not alter in MKN-28 LNSβ cells. p300/CBP and acetylated histone H4 are significantly induced in MKN-28 LNSβ cells. α-tubulin was used as an internal loading control. (Right panel, RT-PCR) dMTase and DNMT3α are slightly reduced in MKN28 LNSβ cells. β-actin was used as an internal control.

MKN28 LNSβ by the semi-quantitative RT-PCR method and found that dMTase and DNMT3α were reduced in MKN-28 LNSβ.

---

### Discussion

Decreased expression of RARβ has been reported in head and neck cancers (Xu et al., 1994; Castille et al., 1997), breast cancers (Xu et al., 1997a), and non-small cell lung cancers (Xu et al., 1997b). In this study, we found that MKN-28, -45 and -74 gastric cancer cell lines did not express RARβ protein or mRNA. Moreover, the partial methylation of RARβ was detected in MKN-28, -45 and -74 by MSP. In addition, treatment of MKN-28 cells with loss of RARβ expression, with the demethylating agent 5-azacytidine (Jones and Taylor, 1979) and the deacetylase inhibitor, trichostatin A (Nan et al., 1998) restored the gene expression. However, after treatment of 5-azacytidine and trichostatin A, both methylated and unmethylated alleles could still be found in MKN-28 cells by MSP. These results clearly indicate that hypermethylation of the RARβ promoter region may play an important role in silencing of the RARβ in the gastric cancer cells, but 5-azacytidine or trichostatin A treatment did not completely demethylate the GC rich region of RARβ gene.

In addition, we analyzed the relationship between promoter methylation status and basal expression levels of RARβ in gastric cancer tissues. Our data clearly shows that methylation in the promoter region of RARβ gene is correlated with down regulation/loss of RARβ gene ex-

of HAT leads to enhanced retinoid-responsive transcription. Thus, both histone deacetylation and DNA methylation influence the activity of the RXR/RAR heterodimer, which is in line with the observed interaction between the heterodimer and HAT presented elsewhere. Our results suggest that stable transfection of RARβ causes alterations in a local chromatin environment to enhance RXR/RAR heterodimer action. In addition, our studies are expected to shed light on the mechanistic link between DNA methylation, histone deacetylation and transcriptional silencing.

In conclusion, we provide evidence that DNA methylation of the RARβ promoter in gastric carcinomas affects RARβ transcription. Our findings indicate that methylation of the RARβ gene may have clinical applications for therapy and risk assessment in gastric carcinomas.

Acknowledgements This work was supported in part by a Grant-Aid from the Ministry of Education, Science, Culture and Sports of Japan and Grant p101-CA52051 from NCI and Grant DE11906 from the National Institutes of Dental and Craniofacial Research (R. L.).

---

### References

Arany, Z., Newsome, D., Oldread, E., Livingston, D.M. and Eckner, R. (1995) A family of transcriptional adapter proteins targeted by the E1A oncoprotein. Nature (London) 374:81–84.

Baylin, S.B., Herman, J.G., Graff, J.R., Vertino, P.M. and Issa, J.P. (1998) Alterations in DNA methylation: a fundamental aspect of neoplasia. Adv Cancer Res 72:141–196.

Beard, C., Li, E. and Jaenisch, R. (1995) Loss of methylation activates Xist in somatic but not in embryonic cells. Genes Dev 9:2325–2334.

Bestor, T.H. (1992) Activation of mammalian DNA methyltransferase by cleavage of a Zn binding regulatory domain. EMBO J 11:2611–2617.

Bhattacharya, N., Dey, A., Minucci, S., Zimmer, A., John, S., Hager, G. and Ozato, K. (1997) Retinoid-induced chromatin structure alterations in the retinoic acid receptor β 2 promoter. Mol Cell Biol 17:6481–6490.

Bhattacharya, S.K., Ramchandani, S., Cervoni, N. and Szyf, M. (1999) A mammalian protein with specific demethylase activity for mCpG DNA. Nature (London) 397:579–583.

Blanco, J.C., Minucci, S., Lu, J., Yang, X.J., Walker, K.K., Chen, H., Evans, R.M., Nakatani, Y. and Ozato, K. (1998) The histone acetylase PCAF is a nuclear receptor coactivator. Genes Dev 12:1638–51.

Brand, N., Petkovich, M., Kurst, A., Chambon, P., de, The, H., Marchio, A., Tiollais, P. and Dejean, A. (1988) Identification of a second human retinoic acid receptor. Nature (London) 332:850–853.

Castille, L., Milano, G., Santini, J. and Pierrefite, V. (1997) Analysis of retinoic acid receptor β expression in normal an malignant laryngeal mucosa by a sensitive and routine applicable reverse transcription-polymerase chain enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay method. Clin Cancer Res 3:2137–2147.

Chambon, P. (1994) The retinoid signaling pathway: molecular and genetic analyses. Semin Cell Biol 5:115–125.

Chambon, P. (1996) A decade of molecular biology of retinoic acid receptors. FASEB J 10:940–954.

Cote, S. and Momparler, R.L. (1997) Activation of the retinoic acid receptor β gene by 5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine in human DLD-1 colon carcinoma cells. AntiCancer Drugs, 8:56–61.

de The, H., Vivanco-Ruiz, M.M., Tiollais, P., Stunnenberg, H.A. and Dejean, A. (1990) Identification of a retinoic acid response element in the retinoic acid receptor β gene. Nature (London), 343:177–180.

Gebert, J.F., Moghal, N., Frangioni, J.V., Sugarbaker, D.J. and Neel, B.G. (1991) High frequency of retinoic acid receptor β abnormalities in human lung cancer. Oncogene 6:1859–1868.

Gudas L.J., Sporn, M.B. and Roberts, A.B. (1994) Cellular biochemistry of the retinoids. In: Sporn MB, Roberts AB and Goodman DS (eds) The Retinoids, (2nd edn). Raven Press, New York, pp 443–520

Hayashi, K., Yokozaki, H., Naka, K., Yasui, W., Lotan, R. and Tahara, E. (2001) Overexpression of retinoic acid receptor induces growth arrest and apoptosis in oral cancer cell lines. Jpn J Cancer Res 92:42–50.

Herman, J.G., Umar, A., Polyak, K., Graf, J.R., Ahuja, N., Issa, J.P., Markowitz, S., Willson, J.K., Hamilton, S.R., Kinzler, K.W., Kane, M.F., Kolodner, R.D., Vogelstein, B., Kunkel, T.A. and Baylin, S.B. (1998) Incidence and functional consequences of hMLH1 promoter hypermethylation in colorectal carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:6870–6875.

Herman, J.G., Graff, J.R., Myohanen, S., Nelkin, B.D. and Baylin, S.B. (1996) Methylation specific PCR: a novel PCR assay for methylation status of CpG islands. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:9821–9826.

Japanese Gastric Cancer Association (1999) Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma. The 13th Edition, June

Jones, P.A. and Taylor, S.M. (1979) Cellular differentiation, cytidine analogs and DNA methylation. Cell 20:1324–1333.

Kameda, T., Yasui, W., Yoshida, K., Tsujino, T., Nakayama, H., Ito, M., Ito, H. and Tahara, E. (1990) Expression of ERBB2 in human gastric carcinomas: relationship between p185 expression and the gene amplification. Cancer Res 50:8002–8009.

Kwok, R.P.S., Lundblad, J.R., Chrivia, J.C., Richards, J.P., Bachinger, H.P., Brennan, R.G., Roberts, S.G.E., Green, M.R. and Goodman, R.H. (1994) Nuclear protein CBP is a coactivator for the transcription factor CREB. Nature (London) 370:223–226.

Lauren, P. (1965) The two histological main types of gastric carcinoma: diffuse and so-called intestinal-type carcinoma. Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand 64:31–49.

Li, E., Beard, C. and Jaenisch, R. (1993) Role for DNA methylation in genomic imprinting. Nature (London) 366:362–365.

Lotan, R., Xu, C., Lippman, S.M., Ro, J.Y., Lee, J.S., Lee, J.J. and Hong, W.K. (1995) Suppression of retinoic acid receptor β in premalignant oral lesions and its upregulation by isotretinoin. N Eng J Med 332:1405–1410.

Lundbald, I.R., Kwok, R.P.S., Laurence, M.E., Harter, M.L. and Goodman, G.H. (1995) Adenovirus E1A associated prote in P300 as a functional homologue of the transcriptional co-activator CBP. Nature (London) 374:85–88.

Merlo, A., Herman, J.G., Mao, L., Lee, D.J., Gabrielson, E., Burger, P.C., Baylin, S.B. and Sidransky, D. (1995) 5′ CpG island methylation is associated with transcriptional silencing of the tumour suppressor p16/CDKN2/MTS1 in human cancers. Nature Med 7:686–692.

Minucci, S. and Pelicci, P. (1999) Retinoid receptors in health and disease: co-regulators and the chromatin connection. Semin Cell Dev 9:158–163.

Minucci, S., Horn, V., Bhattacharya, N., Russanova, V., Ogryzko, V.V., Gabriele, L., Howard, B.H. and Ozato, K. (1997) A histone deacetylase inhibitor potentiates retinoic acid receptor promoter. Mol Cell Biol 17:6481–6490.

Motoyama, T., Hojo, H. and Watanabe, H. (1986) Comparison of seven cell lines derived from human gastric carcinomas. Act Pathol Jap 36:65–83.

Myohanen, S.K., Baykin, S.B. and Herman, J.G. (1998) Hypermethylation can selectively silence individual p16/ink4a alleles in neoplasia. Cancer Res 58:591–593.

Nan, X., Ng, H.-H., Johnson, C.A., Laherty, C.D., Turner, B.M., Eisenman, R.N. and Bird, A (1998) Transcriptional repression by the methyl-CpG-binding protein MeCP2 involves a histone deacetylase complex. Nature (London) 393:386–389.

Nakajima, S.I., Hamada, H., Reddy, P. and Kakunaga, T. (1985) Molecular structure of the human cytoplasmic β actin gene: interspecies homology of sequences in introns. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 82:6133–6137.

Ng, H-H. and Bird, A. (1999) DNA methylation and chromatin modification. Curr Opin Genet Dev 9:158–163.

Ng, H-H., Zhang, Y., Hendrich, B., Johnson, C.A., Turner, B.M., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Tempst, P., Reinberg, D. and Bird, A. (1999) MBD2 is a transcriptional repressor belonging to the MeCP1 histone deacetylase complex. Nature Genet 23:58–61.

Ochiai, A., Yasui, W. and Tahara, E. (1985) Growth-promoting effect of gastrin in human gastric carcinoma cell line TMK-1. Jpn J Cancer Res 76:1064–1071.

Okano, M., Xie, S. and Li, E. (1998) Cloning and characterization of a family of novel mammalian DNA (cytosine-5) methyltransferases. Nat Genet 19:219–220.

Peter, S., Antonio, D.L., Luigi, B. and Antonio, G. (1998) The COOH-terminal region of pRb2/p130 binds to Histone Deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), enhancing transcriptional repression of the E2F1-dependent cyclinA promoter. Cancer Res 58:5049–5052.

Sano, T., Tsujino, T., Yoshida, K., Nakayama, H., Haruma, K., Ito, H., Nakayama, Y., Kajiyama, G. and Tahara, E. (1991) Frequent loss of heterozygosity on chromosomes 1q, 5q, and 17p in human gastric carcinomas., Cancer Res 51:2926–2931.

Seewaldt, V.L., Johnson, B.S., Parker, M.B., Collins, S.J. and Swisshelm, K. (1995) Expression of retinoic acid receptor-β mediates retinoic acid-induced growth arrest and apoptosis in breast cancer cells. Cell Growth Differ 6:1077–1088.

Sekiguchi, M., Sakakibara, K. and Fujii, G. (1978) Establishment of cultured cell lines derived from a human gastric carcinoma. Jpn J Exp Med 48:61–68.

Sirchia, S.M., Ferguson, A.T., Sironi, E., Subramanyan, S., Orlan-

di, R., Sukumar, S. and Sacchi, N. (2000) Evidence of epigenetic changes affecting the chromatin state of the retinoic acid receptor β promoter in breast cancer cells. Oncogene 19:1556–1563.

Suzuki, T., Yokozaki, H., Kuniyasu, H., Hayashi, K., Naka, K., Ono, S., Ishikawa, E., Tahara, E. and Yasui, W. (2000) Effect of trichostatin A on cell growth and expression of cell cycle- and apoptosis-related molecules in human gastric and oral carcinoma cell lines. Int J Cancer 88:992–997.

Wan, H., Oridate, N., Lotan, D., Hong, W.K. and Lotan, R. (1999) Overexpression of retinoic acid receptor β in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma cells increases their sensitivity to retinoid-induced suppression of squamous differentiation by retinoids. Cancer Res 59:3518–3526.

Wade, P.A., Gegonne, A., Jones, P.L., Ballestar, E., Aubry, F. and Wolff, A.P. (1999) Mi-2 complex couples DNA methylation to chromatin remodelling and histone deacetylation. Nature Genet 23:62–66.

Xu, X-C., Ro, J.Y., Lee, J.S., Shin, D.M., Hong, W.K. and Loan, R. (1994) Differential expression of nuclear retinoid receptors in normal, premalignant and malignant head and neck tissues. Cancer Res 54:3580–3587.

Xu, X-C., Sneige, N., Liu, X., Nandagiri, R., Lee, J.J., Lukmanji, F., Hortobagyi, G., Lippmann, S.M., Dhingra, K. and Lotan, R. (1997a) Progressive decrease in nuclear retinoic acid receptor β messenger RNA levels during breast carcinogenesis. Cancer Res 57:4992–4996.

Xu, X-C., Sozzi, G., Lee, J.S., Pastorino, U., Pilotti, S., Jurie, J.M., Hong, W.K. and Lotan, R. (1997b) Suppression of retinoic acid receptor beta in non small cell lung cancer in vivo: implication for lung cancer development. J Natl Cancer Inst 89:624–629.

Yanagihara, K., Seyama, T., Tsumuraya, M., Kamada, N. and Yokoro, K. (1991) Establishment and characterization of human signet ring cell gastric carcinoma cell lines with amplification of the c-myc oncogene. Cancer Res 51:381–386.

Yoshida, K., Tsuda, T., Matsumura, T., Tsujino, T., Hattori, T., Ito, H. and Tahara, E. (1989) Amplification of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene and oncogenes in human gastric carcinomas. Virchows Arch B cell Pathol 57:285–290.

Zhang, X-K., Liu, Y. and Lee, M-O. (1996) Retinoid receptors in human lung cancer and beast cancer. Mutation Res 350:267–277.
