
British Journal of Dermatology 2001; 145: 771–777.

# Immunohistochemical detection for nuclear β-catenin in sporadic basal cell carcinoma

F.YAMAZAKI, Y.ARAGANE, A.KAWADA AND T.TEZUKA  
*Department of Dermatology, Kinki University School of Medicine, 377-2 Ohnohigashi, Osakasayama-shi, 589-8511 Osaka, Japan*

Accepted for publication 19 July 2001

## Summary

**Background** Despite the increasing incidence of basal cell carcinoma (BCC), its pathogenesis has remained largely unknown. Recently, it was reported that genes involved in tissue morphogenesis, such as *sonic hedgehog* or *patched*, were found to be mutated in BCC, suggesting the involvement of those molecules in the pathogenesis of this tumour. Furthermore, there is evidence that the Wnt-mediated signalling pathway may be one of the downstream targets of *sonic hedgehog*-mediated signalling, which has led us to focus on molecular events on the Wnt pathway in BCC. Among the signal transducers involved in the Wnt pathway, it is clear that β-catenin plays a pivotal role in the promotion of morphogenesis and cell growth. In respect to this, it has been reported that, in particular circumstances, as in colorectal cancers, β-catenin migrates to the nuclei, where it exerts an ability to activate the transcription of various genes.

**Objectives** To investigate the cellular distribution of β-catenin in skin tumours, in particular, in BCC.

**Methods** Twenty skin biopsy specimens derived from BCC, 10 from inflammatory skin diseases and five from squamous cell carcinomas were immunostained with an antibody directed against β-catenin.

**Results** Fourteen of the 20 BCC samples tested showed nuclear localization of β-catenin, while none of the other samples gave rise to positive nuclear staining.

**Conclusions** Nuclear localization of β-catenin is a characteristic feature of BCC; this suggests its tumorigenic role in this tumour. This gives us a further insight into the molecular pathogenesis of BCC.

**Key words:** basal cell carcinoma, β-catenin, nuclear localization, tumorigenesis

The incidence of basal cell carcinoma (BCC) has risen exceptionally fast during the past decades. In Japan, this increase was approximately 4·7-fold between 1977 and 1992. This might be, in part, due to the prolongation of the human life-span and/or extensive, chronic sunlight exposure. However, as those predisposing factors also apply to other cutaneous malignancies, they do not sufficiently explain the pathogenesis of this tumour. In addition to the progressive increase in its incidence, the pathogenesis of this tumour is still largely unknown. Recently, it was reported that genes related to morphogenesis, such as *patched* (*ptc*, human homologue *PTCH*)<sup>1</sup> or *sonic

Correspondence: Yoshinori Aragane, MD.  
E-mail: nori@med.kindai.ac.jp

hedgehog* (*shh*, human homologue *SHH*)<sup>2</sup> are mutated in sporadic BCC. Interestingly, overexpression of *SHH* or loss-of-function mutations of *PTCH*, both of which may be followed by generation of experimental BCC in animals, result in transcriptional activation of downstream targets, such as Wnt.<sup>3</sup>

Upon binding of Wnt to its receptor, Frizzled, a critical downstream signalling intermediate, β-catenin, is dephosphorylated,<sup>4</sup> which then migrates to nuclei and functions as a component of the transcription factor complex capable of transcriptional activation of numerous genes.<sup>5</sup> β-Catenin was originally identified as a molecule capable of epithelial cell–cell adhesion by supporting the connection of actin bundles with cytoplasmic tails of E-cadherin.<sup>6</sup> In this case, β-catenin localizes inside cells in close proximity to the plasma

membrane. In general, it might be possible to estimate its biological function by monitoring its cellular distribution either near the plasma membrane or in nuclei. Based on these findings, we investigated the cellular distribution of β-catenin in skin tumours. To do so, we employed immunohistochemical analysis using an antibody directed against β-catenin, and checked for the localization of β-catenin in nuclei.

Here, we present the first evidence that most specimens derived from sporadic BCC gave rise to positive signals of nuclear β-catenin. In contrast, no other samples derived from inflammatory dermatoses, taken as disease controls, such as atopic dermatitis and psoriasis, and from another representative skin malignancy, squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), showed nuclear signals of β-catenin, suggesting nuclear β-catenin localization as a characteristic feature of BCC. Together, these findings may expand our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms involved in the tumorigenesis of BCC.

### Materials and methods

#### Specimens

Twenty biopsy specimens derived from BCC, 10 specimens from inflammatory dermatoses (six atopic dermatitis and four psoriasis vulgaris) and 10 from SCC were used in this study. One-half of each specimen was embedded in paraffin, sectioned, stained with haematoxylin and eosin, and examined using a light microscope to make the histological diagnosis. In parallel, the other half of each specimen was soaked in an OCT compound (Tissue-Tek: Miles Inc., Elkhart, IN, U.S.A.) and snap-frozen.

#### Immunohistochemistry

Frozen specimens were first sliced into 5 μm sections and reacted with non-immune calf serum at 23 °C for 5 min to inhibit non-specific signals. Specimens were then incubated with a 1 : 50 diluted mouse monoclonal IgG1 directed against human β-catenin (E-5, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, U.S.A.) at 4 °C overnight, and after extensive washing with phosphate buffered saline [130 mmol L⁻¹ sodium chloride, 5 mmol L⁻¹ sodium phosphate (monobasic) (WAKO, Osaka, Japan), 5 mmol L⁻¹ sodium phosphate (dibasic) (WAKO)], FITC-conjugated rabbit IgG against mouse IgG was undertaken and then incubated at 23 °C for 30 min. To orientate the samples better under fluorescence microscopy, the samples were counterstained with 1 μg mL⁻¹ propidium iodide. Negative controls were taken by staining specimens after incubation with non-immune mouse IgG as a primary antibody, and following the same procedures.

#### Evaluation of immunostaining

To evaluate the localization of β-catenin, a two-step procedure was employed. The first estimation of its localization was conducted based on the observation of green fluorescence (β-catenin localization) either on membrane or in nuclei. Thereafter, the image was overlaid with red fluorescence derived from nuclear staining with propidium iodide. If green fluorescence, estimated as nuclear localization at the first step, turned yellow as a consequence of the overlay, it was interpreted as real nuclear localization of β-catenin. Similarly, membrane staining of β-catenin was only validated when green fluorescence, estimated as membrane localization at the first step, did not change to yellow after the overlay with nuclear propidium iodide. As the present study was designed mainly to observe the nuclear translocation of β-catenin in BCC, its localization in cytoplasm was not scored and was omitted (Table 1).

| **Table 1. Summary of the β-catenin staining of various skin conditions** |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **Intracellular localization of β-catenin**                             |
| **Membrane**<sup>c,d</sup>                                              | **Nuclei**<sup>e,f</sup> |
| Basal cell carcinoma (n = 20)                                           | 6                          | 14                         |
| Squamous cell carcinoma (n = 10)                                        | 10                         | 0                          |
| Atopic dermatitis (n = 6)                                               | 6                          | 0                          |
| Psoriasis vulgaris (n = 4)                                              | 4                          | 0                          |

<sup>a</sup>To evaluate intracellular localization of β-catenin in tissue sections, immunostaining using the antibody directed against β-catenin was performed. <sup>b</sup>The data were interpreted as valid only when interpretation of the data with single staining with anti-β-catenin antibody were confirmed with those after overlay with nuclear staining with propidium iodide. <sup>c</sup>Green fluorescence observed at the membrane in β-catenin staining that was not modified to yellow fluorescence after overlay with nuclear propidium iodide staining, was interpreted as membrane staining. <sup>d</sup>Predominant staining patterns of the samples as membrane with partial nuclear staining of β-catenin were recorded as membrane staining. <sup>e</sup>Green fluorescence observed in β-catenin staining at nuclei modified to yellow fluorescence after overlay with nuclear staining with propidium iodide was interpreted as nuclear staining. <sup>f</sup>Predominant staining patterns as nuclear with partial membrane staining of β-catenin were included as nuclear staining.

NUCLEAR β-CATENIN IN BASAL CELL CARCINOMA 773

Results

Staining patterns of β-catenin in normal skin

To examine the expression patterns of β-catenin protein in skin, we first immunostained specimens derived from the skin of normal healthy individuals using an antibody directed against β-catenin. As shown in Figure 1(a), the epidermis of the skin sample was markedly exclusively positive for β-catenin staining with green fluorescence. To orientate the samples better for histopathology, staining with propidium iodide was performed simultaneously (Fig. 1b), to show that nuclei were labelled with red fluorescence. When these two fluorescences were overlaid, we could more easily identify the staining pattern of β-catenin as membranous (Fig. 1c), suggesting that it is compatible with the known function of this molecule in supporting cell adhesion.⁶

Preferential nuclear staining of β-catenin in basal cell carcinoma, but not in squamous cell carcinoma or inflammatory dermatoses

Recently, it was reported that β-catenin, possessing the transactivating domain, may function as a transcription factor upon binding to lymphoid cells enhancer factor/T cell factors (Lef-1/Tcfs), which possess a DNA binding motif.⁷ Nuclear translocation of transcription factors, such as NFκB or AP-1, may reflect ongoing transcriptional activation,⁸ which thus may be an analytical way to estimate the activity of transcription factors in tissue sections. To examine the function of β-catenin in BCC, we next studied the expression pattern of β-catenin in samples derived from sporadic BCC. Therefore, immunostaining using the antibody to β-catenin was performed. Consequently, it was found that β-catenin appeared to be present in nuclei (Fig. 2a), which differs from membrane staining, as shown in Figure 1(a). To analyse these findings more objectively, the two images (Fig. 2a,b) were overlaid. If

Figure 1. Preferential membrane staining of β-catenin in normal skin. Staining of β-catenin (a), of nuclei (b) and their overlay image (c) in normal epidermis at the upper portion of a hair follicle (original magnification × 400). Note almost exclusive staining of β-catenin on the membrane in epidermal cells (a), which is further confirmed with the overlay image with nuclear propidium iodide staining, demonstrating no colour modification of green fluorescence derived from β-catenin staining by propidium iodide in nuclei (c). In addition, the colour modification from green to yellow fluorescence seen in (c) (at the right part of epidermis) is due to folding of the sample.

© 2001 British Association of Dermatologists, *British Journal of Dermatology*, **145**, 771–777

the tumour cells of BCC (Fig. 2c), indicating that β-catenin localizes in the nuclei of cells constituting BCC, and thus suggested the role of β-catenin as a transcriptional activator. To examine if nuclear staining of β-catenin is characteristic of BCC, samples derived from inflammatory dermatoses (*n* = 10) were immunostained with the anti-β-catenin antibody. As shown in Figure 3a, samples from atopic dermatitis included in the present study as an irrelevant disease control showed β-catenin staining in the membrane of epidermal cells almost exclusively (Fig. 3a). This was further confirmed by the overlay with nuclear propidium iodide staining (Fig. 3b), which failed to yield yellow fluorescence (Fig. 3c). These findings are readily distinguishable from those observed in BCC (Fig. 2c). Furthermore, biopsy specimens from another skin malignancy, SCC, were immunostained for β-catenin, resulting in weak membrane staining of this molecule, but not in preferential staining in the nuclei (Fig. 4a–c). As summarized in Table 1, 14 of 20 specimens of BCC, including partial positivity, gave rise to positive nuclear signals of β-catenin, whereas the other dermatoses tested only showed membranous, but not nuclear, staining for β-catenin, suggesting that nuclear β-catenin expression is a unique feature in BCC, and thus might possibly play a causative role in the pathogenesis of this tumour.

## Discussion

Cellular homeostasis has a fragile balance controlled by the functional interplay of essential gatekeeping genes in qualitative and structural contexts. This is well exemplified in carcinogenesis, in which mutations of an array of genes have been observed. In this respect, mutations known to be involved in the tumorigenesis of BCC include those of the *PTCH* (*patched*) gene,¹ of the *SHH* (*sonic hedgehog*) gene² or the *SMOH* (human homologue of *smoothened*, *smo*) gene.⁹ In tumorigenesis of BCC, the *PTCH* gene was found to be mutated in a loss-of-function way in tumour nests of BCC in sporadic cases and in basal cell naevus syndrome.¹ In contrast, activating mutations of *SMOH* were detected in sporadic BCC.⁹ Furthermore, in murine studies, enforced overexpression of SHH (the protein derived from the *smo* gene) by transgenic technologies resulted in the formation of BCC in addition to the occurrence of medulloblastoma and breast carcinoma.² Interestingly, the above-mentioned mimics of those molecules may mediate signalling to common downstream pathways, leading to transcriptional activation of various genes,

Figure 2. Nuclear localization of β-catenin in basal cell carcinoma (BCC). Staining of β-catenin (a), of nuclei (b) and their overlay image (c) in a tumour nest of BCC (original magnification × 400). Note that nuclear staining of β-catenin in tumour cells (a) was further confirmed with the overlay image with nuclear propidium iodide staining, yielding yellow fluorescence modified from green fluorescence derived from β-catenin staining (a) on propidium iodide red in nuclei (b).

NUCLEAR β-CATENIN IN BASAL CELL CARCINOMA 775

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3. Membrane, but not nuclear, localization of β-catenin in epidermis of an atopic patient. Staining of β-catenin (a), of nuclei (b) and their overlay image (c) in skin specimens derived from patients with atopic dermatitis (original magnification × 100). Note that no nuclear, but preferential membrane staining is observed in overlay image (c).

Figure 4. Weak, membrane localization of β-catenin in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Staining of β-catenin (a), of nuclei (b) and their overlay image (c) in skin specimens derived from patients with SCC (original magnification × 100). Note that no nuclear, but preferential membrane staining is observed in the overlay image (c).

© 2001 British Association of Dermatologists, *British Journal of Dermatology*, **145**, 771–777

776 F.YAMAZAKI *et al.*

one of which is those encoding the Wnt family of signalling molecules³ (Fig. 5a). Therefore, analysis for molecular disorders on Wnt-signalling pathways may be of particular importance in analysing the molecular pathogenesis of BCC.

Based on this notion, we investigated whether β-catenin, a critical signalling intermediate of the Wnt pathway, was deregulated in BCC. Here, we demonstrated the first evidence that significant

(a)

**In the absence of Shh**

Ptc → Smo  
Signalling inhibited  

**In the presence of Shh**

Shh  
Ptc → Smo  
Signalling activated  

Wnt mRNA  
Transcriptional activation of target genes (*i.e.* Wnt)  

(b)

**In the absence of Wnt**

Frizzled  
GSK-3β  
β-catenin  
APC  
Ubiquitin-proteasome dependent proteolysis  

**In the presence of Wnt**

Wnt  
Frizzled  
Dishevelled  
GSK-3β  
APC  
β-catenin  
Migration to nuclei  
Binding to Lef1/Tcf  
Transcriptional activation of target genes  

Figure 5. The scheme of the signalling pathways of Shh and Wnt. (a) In the absence of Shh, Ptc inhibits downstream signalling derived from Smo. Upon the Shh binding to Ptc, Smo, in turn, becomes capable of transducing signals to its downstream, leading to the transcriptional activation of target genes, one of which is the Wnt gene. (b) In the absence of Wnt, GSK3β phosphorylates and ubiquitinates β-catenin, resulting in the binding to APC. Ubiquitinated β-catenin is then proteolytically cleaved by proteasomes. Upon the Wnt ligation to its receptor Frizzled, a signalling intermediate, Dishevelled is activated, which inactivates GSK-3β. Consequently, free β-catenin migrates to nuclei, binds to the Lef1/Tcf transcription factor complex, and finally activates transcription. Ptc; Patched, Smo; Smoothened, Shh; sonic hedgehog, GSK; glucose synthase kinase, APC; the gene product of the adenoma polyposis coli gene, P; phosphorylation, Ub; ubiquitination.

numbers of sporadic BCC showed nuclear localization of β-catenin protein, whereas only membrane, but not nuclear staining of β-catenin was observed in samples derived from inflammatory dermatoses (atopic dermatitis, psoriasis) and from SCC. Together with the finding that nuclear localization is a prerequisite for β-catenin to promote cell division,¹⁰ this strongly suggests that β-catenin may play, at least in part, a crucial role in the tumorigenesis of BCC.

Impairment of Wnt signalling may result in the onset of cancers. For instance, overexpression of Wnt activated by the mouse mammary tumour virus may cause the onset of murine breast cancer.¹¹ Loss-of-function mutations of APC, the adenoma polyposis coli gene, result in human colon cancer.⁵ Furthermore, activating mutations of β-catenin, detected in human colon cancer and melanomas, were found at specific β-catenin residues important for GSK-3β phosphorylation and stability.¹² Similarly, at least 75% of pilomatrixomas tested possessed mutations affecting the amino-terminal segment of β-catenin, which is normally involved in phosphorylation-dependent, ubiquitin-mediated degradation of this protein.¹³ As we have only tested the protein localization of β-catenin in patient samples, it is presently not possible to draw any conclusion regarding the underlying molecular events indicative of the nuclear localization of β-catenin. However, according to the signalling pathway of Wnt (Fig. 5b), which is activated by signalling derived from the SHH/SMOH pathway, molecular disorders should result in: (i) overexpression of Wnt; (ii) inactivation of GSK-3β; (iii) loss-of-function mutations of APC; and/or (iv) stabilization of β-catenin by mutations of recognition sequences of GSK-3β. These factors remain unclear, but are currently under investigation in our laboratory.

While preparing this paper, it was reported that β-catenin only localizes in the cytoplasm and plasma membrane, but not in the nuclei in BCC.¹⁴ With these observations, the authors concluded that β-catenin appeared to play a role in BCC as a cell adhesion molecule but is not involved in nuclear signalling. Although their findings are entirely in contrast with the present observations showing nuclear localization in BCC at higher frequency, we anticipate that this discrepancy may be caused by differences in the methods of immunohistochemical staining. While Boonchai *et al.*¹⁴ immunostained paraffin-embedded sections with immunochromical substrates as a colour developer, we examined frozen non-fixed samples with an immunofluorescence method. During preliminary

experiments, we also performed immunostaining using paraffin-embedded sections as they did, but this process resulted either in faint staining or in overstaining of β-catenin, and therefore we were unable to evaluate the findings. In contrast, the immunofluorescence method with frozen sections allowed us to evaluate the cellular localization of β-catenin more analytically. Indeed, when nuclear localization of β-catenin is the case, colour shifts from green to yellow fluorescence after nuclear staining overlay with propidium iodide were observed.

In the present study, we demonstrated, for the first time, that β-catenin localizes in nuclei in sporadic BCC. Together with its known activity in promoting cell growth and morphogenesis, the present findings strongly suggest that β-catenin, at least in part, may function in BCC as a signalling molecule, thereby playing a tumorigenic role in this malignancy.

### Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to Ms K.Aisu and Ms M.Nakamura for their professional technical assistance. We thank Drs K.Matsushita and A.Maeda for critically reading the manuscript. This work was supported, in-part, by a grant from the Ministry for Education, Sports, Science and Culture of Japan (Y.A.).

### References

1  Johnson RL, Rothman A, Xie J *et al.* Human homolog of patched, a candidate gene for the basal cell nevus syndrome. *Science* 1996; **272**: 1668–71.
2 Oro AE, Higgins KM, Hu Z *et al.* Basal cell carcinoma in mice overexpressing sonic hedgehog. *Science* 1997; **276**: 817–21.
3 Hammerschmidt M, Brook A, McMahon AP. The world according to hedgehog. *Trends Genet* 1997; **13**: 14–21.
4 Ikeda S, Kishida S, Yamamoto H *et al.* Axin, a negative regulator of the Wnt signaling pathway, forms a complex with GSK-3β and β-catenin and promotes GSK-3β-dependent phosphorylation of β-catenin. *EMBO J* 1998; **17**: 1371–84.
5 Morin PJ, Sparks AB, Korinek V *et al.* Activation of β-catenin-Tcf signaling in colon cancer by mutation in β-catenin or APC. *Science* 1997; **275**: 1787–90.
6 Wijnhoven BP, Dinjens WN, Pignatelli M. E-cadherin-catenin cell-cell adhesion complex and human cancer. *Br J Surg* 2000; **87**: 992–1005.
7 Roose J, Clevers H. TCF transcription factors: molecular switches in carcinogenesis. *Biochem Biophys Acta* 1999; **1424**: M23–37.
8 Ward NL, Hagg T. SEK1/MKK4, c-jun and NFκB are differentially activated in forebrain neurons during postnatal development and injury in both control and p75NGFR-deficient mice. *Eur J Neurosci* 2000; **12**: 1867–81.
9 Xie J, Murone M, Luoh SM *et al.* Activating Smoothened mutations in sporadic basal-cell carcinoma. *Nature* 1998; **391**: 90–2.
10 Nüsslein-Volhard C, Wieschaus E. Mutations affecting segment number and polarity in Drosophila. *Nature* 1980; **287**: 795–801.
11 Nusse R, Varmus HE. Many tumors induced by the mouse mammary tumor virus contain a provirus integrated in the same region of the host genome. *Cell* 1982; **31**: 99–109.
12 Li L, Yuan H, Weaver CD *et al.* Axin and Frat1 interact with Dvl and GSK, bridging Dvl to GSK in Wnt-mediated regulation of LEF-1. *EMBO J* 1999; **18**: 4233–40.
13 Chan EF, Gat U, McNiff JM, Fuchs E. A common human skin tumor is caused by activating mutation in β-catenin. *Nat Genet* 1999; **21**: 410–3.
14 Boonchai W, Walsh M, Cummings M, Chenevix-Trench G. Expression of β-catenin, a key mediator of the WNT signaling pathway, in basal cell carcinoma. *Arch Dermatol* 2000; **36**: 937–8.
