
# Crystal structure of the macrocycle-forming thioesterase domain of the erythromycin polyketide synthase: Versatility from a unique substrate channel

Shiou-Chuan Tsai*†, Larry J. W. Miercke*, Jolanta Krucinski*, Rajesh Gokhale†, Julian C.-H. Chen*, Paul G. Foster*, David E. Cane‡, Chaitan Khosla†§¶, and Robert M. Stroud*∥

*Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143; Departments of †Chemical Engineering, §Chemistry, and ¶Biochemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305; and ‡Department of Chemistry, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912

Edited by James A. Wells, Sunesis Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Redwood City, CA, and approved October 16, 2001 (received for review July 30, 2001)

As the first structural elucidation of a modular polyketide synthase (PKS) domain, the crystal structure of the macrocycle-forming thioesterase (TE) domain from the 6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase (DEBS) was solved by a combination of multiple isomorphous replacement and multiwavelength anomalous dispersion and refined to an R factor of 24.1% to 2.8-Å resolution. Its overall tertiary architecture belongs to the α/β-hydrolase family, with two unusual features unprecedented in this family: a hydrophobic leucine-rich dimer interface and a substrate channel that passes through the entire protein. The active site triad, comprised of Asp-169, His-259, and Ser-142, is located in the middle of the substrate channel, suggesting the passage of the substrate through the protein. Modeling indicates that the active site can accommodate and orient the 6-deoxyerythronolide B precursor uniquely, while at the same time shielding the active site from external water and catalyzing cyclization by macrolactone formation. The geometry and organization of functional groups explain the observed substrate specificity of this TE and offer strategies for engineering macrocycle biosynthesis. Docking of a homology model of the upstream acyl carrier protein (ACP6) against the TE suggests that the 2-fold axis of the TE dimer may also be the axis of symmetry that determines the arrangement of domains in the entire DEBS. Sequence conservation suggests that all TEs from modular polyketide synthases have a similar fold, dimer 2-fold axis, and substrate channel geometry.

The TE domain of DEBS catalyzes the cyclization and release of a highly functionalized heptaketide chain via lactonization (Fig. 1). This domain is covalently linked to the rest of DEBS via the acyl carrier protein on the sixth module (ACP6), which transfers the final linear form of the polyketide substrate to the TE via a phosphopantethenyl arm attached to ACP6. DEBS TE is a homodimer with a molecular mass of 66 kDa. At least 12 other modular PKSs are known to harbor homologous terminal TE domains, with 29–75% sequence identity compared with DEBS TE. Chain release by modular PKS TEs involves regioselective cleavage of an acyl-enzyme intermediate by a specific hydroxyl group on the polyketide substrate, leading to the formation of a macrocyclic product (Fig. 1). Although the natural product of DEBS TE is a 14-membered ring, this enzyme has been shown to support the formation of alternatively functionalized 6-, 8-, 12-, 14-, and 16-membered ring systems (5, 6). These observations underscore the tolerance of DEBS TE for the generation of a spectrum of cyclic products. Given the importance of this reaction in synthetic chemistry (and natural product chemistry in particular), understanding the mechanism and substrate specificity of DEBS TE presents new opportunities for chemoenzymatic synthesis of complex molecules by modification of the enzyme and substrates.

To date, four crystal structures of hydrolytic TEs (involved in fatty acid synthesis and metabolism) have been solved (7–10). These enzymes have only 2–8% sequence identity with macrocycle-forming TEs such as DEBS TE. The crystal structure of the DEBS TE reported here reveals an unusual hydrophobic leucine-rich dimer interface and an open substrate channel that passes through the entire enzyme. The structure provides a basis for understanding the substrate specificity of this enzyme (11, 12), as well as the pathway by which polyketide chains are channeled into its active site. It also defines specific amino acids that could be mutated in attempts to generate novel polyketides. Lastly, docking studies between the TE dimer and the preceding domain, ACP6, suggest that the 2-fold axis of the TE dimer and the entire DEBS homodimeric assembly coincides. The implications of this architecture for interdomain chain transfer are discussed.

Modular polyketide synthases (PKSs) are a family of multienzyme complexes that synthesize the polyketide cores of biologically active compounds, including natural products that have become important pharmaceuticals, such as erythromycin, rifamycin, FK506, rapamycin, and avermectin (1). Their remarkable combination of substrate tolerance and selectivity is largely because of their modular architecture, in which different catalytic domains are combined into “modules” (Fig. 1), such that each module contains several enzymes and adds one additional building block to a growing polyketide chain. 6-Deoxyerythronolide B synthase (DEBS) is a modular PKS that catalyzes the biosynthesis of 6-deoxyerythronolide B (6-dEB, 1, Fig. 1), the macrocyclic core of the antibiotic erythromycin (2, 3). The entire DEBS is a homodimer containing two copies each of 28 catalytic domains organized into a loading didomain, six extension modules (each composed of several domains), and a terminal thioesterase (TE) that cyclizes and releases the final product, 6-dEB (1, Fig. 1). Combinatorial substitution of enzymes of DEBS, by others from rapamycin PKS, gave rise to over 100 novel compounds at varying yields (4). To date, no structure of a modular PKS component has been reported. When the structures of individual domains are determined, there will be opportunity to apply structure-based principles of protein engineering in next-generation efforts to rationally design novel polyketide products.

This paper was submitted directly (Track II) to the PNAS office.

Abbreviations: TE, thioesterase; DEBS, 6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase; PKS, polyketide synthase; MAD, multiwavelength anomalous dispersion; MIR, multiple isomorphous replacement; 6-dEB, 6-deoxyerythronolide B.

Data deposition: The atomic coordinates reported in this paper have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank, www.rcsb.org (PDB ID code 1KEZ). They can also be obtained directly from C.K. or R.M.S.

To whom reprint requests may be addressed. E-mail: stroud@msg.ucsf.edu or ck@chemeng.stanford.edu.

The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge payment. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. §1734 solely to indicate this fact.

Fig. 1. The modular architecture of DEBS, its intermediates, and its final product as the 14-membered ring of 6-dEB. AT, acyltransferase; ACP, acyl carrier protein; KS, ketosynthase; KR, ketoreductase; DH, dehydratase; ER, enoylreductase; TE, thioesterase.

---

### Methods

#### Expression, Purification, and Crystallization
Recombinant DEBS TE was expressed in *Escherichia coli* and purified as described (11). Selenomethionine-substituted DEBS TE was generated by using the method of Van Duyne (13) and purified as above. TE eluted from a Ni-agarose column was further purified by using a Poros HQ column (PerSeptive Biosystems, Framingham, MA) and eluted at 0.8 M NaCl.

Crystals of DEBS TE were grown in hanging drops at 4°C by vapor diffusion. The well buffer was 30% polyethylene glycol 400/100 mM Hepes, pH 7.5/2 mM DTT/100 mM MgCl₂. Protein concentration was 10 mg/ml in 20 mM Hepes, pH 7.5/2 mM DTT. Drops were generated by mixing 4 μl of the purified protein solution with 4 μl of well buffer. Trigonal TE crystals, 300 × 300 × 200 μm, grew in several weeks.

#### Data Collection
Crystals were flash cooled to −170°C. Native data to 2.8-Å resolution were collected on an ADSC Quantum-4 charge-coupled device detector at beamline 5.0.2 of the Advanced Light Source (Berkeley, CA). The space group was P3₁21 with unit cell dimensions a = 130.5 Å, c = 208.5 Å. The density as measured by flotation in a Ficoll gradient (14) shows 76% solvent content, corresponding to three TE monomers per asymmetric unit. Intensities were integrated and scaled by using the HKL package (15) with no σ cutoff. The data from Sm³⁺- (4.0 Å) and Ni²⁺- (4.3 Å) soaked crystals were collected on a MAR-Research (Hamburg, Germany) image plate at beamline 9–1 of the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (SSRL). Multiwavelength anomalous dispersion (MAD) data of Sm³⁺-soaked (4.0 Å) and Se-derivatized (4.0 Å) crystals were collected on an ADSC Quantum-4 charge-coupled device detector at beamline 9–2 of SSRL. Statistics are shown in Table 1.

#### MIR and MAD Phasing, Model Building, and Refinement
Phases were calculated by a combination of multiple isomorphous replacement (MIR) and MAD. Two derivatives were identified from 250 heavy atom soaks. Ni²⁺ (a = 131.0, c = 209.0 Å) was found to bind to the TE at its C-terminal His₆ tag; Sm³⁺ (a = 131.4, c = 209.5 Å) was also found to bind to the TE and was used to collect both isomorphous and MAD data. The MIR derivative data sets were scaled to the native and were isomorphous with the native data; the MAD derivative data sets were scaled to the far remote wavelength, and heavy atom parameters were refined with the program CNS (16). Seven sites in the Sm³⁺ derivative were identified in difference Patterson maps and used to phase all other derivatives, revealing five Ni sites, six Sm sites in the MAD data set of Sm³⁺ derivative, and 21 Se sites in the MAD data set of Se derivative. The 21 Se sites correspond to seven sites per monomer that account for all methionines except the first methionine (Met-1), which is disordered. The phases from MIR and MAD were combined by using CNS, and the initial 4.3-Å MIR-MAD map was used as a starting point for “solvent flipping” in CNS, followed by phase extension (0.0025 Å per cycle of density modification) to 2.8 Å (Table 1).

The initial map showed a single continuous density for the main chain with strong side-chain features that allowed unambiguous sequence assignment for 90% (residues 15–281) of the 294 residues in DEBS TE. The model was built by using QUANTA, and the initial model gave an R factor of 42.2% over the resolution range 20–2.8 Å. Refinement in CNS by a combination of simulated annealing, energy minimization, and B factor refinement reduced the Rcryst and Rfree values to 27.3 and 29.4%, respectively, without including any solvent. Water molecules were added and edited based on F₀ – Fc maps. Subsequent refinement resulted in Rcryst and Rfree values of 24.1 and 25.1%, respectively.

Two of the three monomers in the asymmetric unit (monomers A and C) are almost identical, with a rms deviation for backbone atoms of <0.5 Å. Monomers A and C each interact with three other surrounding monomers. The density for monomer B is much less well defined, indicating its relative disorder, reflected in the much higher B factors than for A and C (Table 1). For this reason, noncrystallographic symmetry averaging was not used. We tested whether this is because monomer B interacts only with monomer A, which leads to a higher rigid-body displacement of monomer B in the lattice. The displacement parameters of the three monomers were parameterized by allowing separate relative rigid-body displacements of each monomer separately, as being a component of the individual B factors within each monomer. This was carried out by using REFMAC 5 in the CCP4 suite with additional refinements on the T, L, and S displacement tensors (17). The T, L, and S displacements for monomer B are 10–20 times larger than for A and C, and the rigid body approximation supported an R factor of 23.9% (Rfree = 27.6%) to 2.8 Å. Correction of the TLS-refined model for the underlying rigid body displacement resulted in an ordered model of monomer B that has comparable B factors to monomers A and C (Table 1). Therefore, the high B factors of monomer B are because of high displacement instead of high thermal disorder. Water molecules were then reinspected and edited after TLS refinement.

---

### Results and Discussion

#### Overall Structure
The overall structure of the DEBS TE offers the first structural observation of a modular PKS domain. Each TE monomer has the features of the α/β hydrolase fold (18, 19); however, this TE has an unusual substrate channel that passes through the entire protein, with the active site (Asp-169–His-259–Ser-142) located in the middle of the substrate channel (Fig. 2). DEBS TE consists of a central seven-stranded β-sheet with the second strand (β₂) antiparallel to the remaining strands (Fig. 2A). The β₇ strand is shorter than β₈, and the C terminus of β₇ is twisted 90° to form part of the substrate channel (Fig. 2A). The β strands

Table 1. Structure determination and refinement

**Data collection statistics**

| Crystal     | Wavelength, Å | Resolution, Å | Observations | Unique   | Completeness, %* | $R_{\text{sym}}$, %* | $I/\sigma I$* |
|-------------|---------------|---------------|--------------|-----------|-------------------|--------------------|----------------|
| Native      | 1.0000        | 2.8           | 190,617      | 50,859    | 99.1 (93.1)       | 3.1 (61.7)         | 22.4 (1.6)     |
| SmCl₃       | 1.0800        | 3.8           | 389,060      | 20,793    | 99.0 (100)        | 8.6 (30.8)         | 20.8 (6.9)     |
| NiCl₂       | 0.9800        | 4.3           | 206,467      | 14,966    | 98.6 (99.7)       | 8.9 (38.7)         | 11.3 (3.4)     |
| SeMet w1    | 0.9794        | 4.0           | 582,831      | 17,970    | 100               | 17.2⁺ (64.2)       | 12.0 (3.2)     |
| SeMet w2    | 0.9792        | 4.0           | 582,987      | 17,970    | 100               | 17.4⁺ (60.1)       | 11.0 (2.7)     |
| SeMet w3    | 0.9566        | 4.0           | 582,596      | 17,970    | 100               | 16.2⁺ (59.5)       | 11.7 (2.7)     |
| SmCl₃ w1    | 1.8465        | 4.0           | 518,279      | 18,738    | 100               | 18.5⁺ (39.5)       | 11.8 (4.5)     |
| SmCl₃ w2    | 1.8451        | 4.0           | 517,367      | 18,689    | 100               | 19.1⁺ (41.7)       | 10.1 (4.4)     |
| SmCl₃ w3    | 1.2398        | 4.0           | 518,525      | 18,914    | 100               | 15.1⁺ (27.6)       | 12.3 (5.2)     |

**Phasing statistics**

| Derivative     | Resolution cutoff, Å | Number of sites | Phasing power (iso) | Phasing power (ano) | $R_{\text{Cullis}}$ | Figure of merit |
|----------------|-----------------------|------------------|---------------------|---------------------|----------------------|-----------------|
| SmCl₃          | 4.3                   | 7                | 1.5                 | 1.6                 | 0.7                  | 0.4             |
| NiCl₂          | 4.3                   | 5                | 0.8                 | 0.8                 | 0.9                  | 0.2             |
| SeMet MAD      | 4.0                   | 15               | 1.08, 0.96, 0.22    | 1.03, 0.93, 0.23    | 0.77, 0.79, 0.94     | 0.5             |
| SmCl₃ MAD      | 4.0                   | 9                | 1.66, 1.66, 0.77    | 1.57, 1.59, 0.74    | 0.62, 0.62, 0.88     | 0.5             |
| Combined figure of merit | — | — | (MIR/MAD) = 0.8 | (DM) = 0.9 | — | — |

**Refinement statistics**

| No. of reflections | Protein atoms | Water atoms | Resolution, Å | $R_{\text{cryst}}$, % | $R_{\text{free}}$, % | Average B factor, Å² |
|--------------------|---------------|-------------|---------------|------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| By CNS            | 50,859 (2,542) | 5,988       | 439           | 30–2.8                | 24.1                | 76.9, 160.3, 68.9    |
| By REFMAC5 (TLS)  | 48,255 (2,573) | 5,988       | 418           | 30–2.8                | 23.9                | 52.9, 42.1, 52.5     |
| rms bond lengths, Å = ±0.02 | — | rms bond angles, ° = ±1.95 | — | Luzzati coordinate error, Å = 0.43 | — | — |
| Ramachandran | Core 84.3% | Allowed 14.3% | Generous 1.4% | — | — | — |

*Statistics for the highest-resolution bin are in parentheses.
⁺Values are presented without averaging the Friedel pairs.
*For monomers A, B, and C.

Fig. 2. (A) Overall structures of DEBS TE dimer. (B) The hydrophobic leucine-rich dimer interface of DEBS TE, monomer A in red (residues labeled in black), monomer B in blue (residues labeled in purple). (C) Molecular surface of DEBS TE dimer, monomer A in green, monomer B in yellow, the electropositive groove (proposed ACP6-binding site) in blue. (D) The most favorable geometry between a homology model of ACP6 and DEBS TE, predicted by FRDOC. A global view shows that the arginine groove is the primary docking site for ACP6. A monomer of ACP6 (red) was docked against the TE dimer (green). It forms a dimer with the ACP6 dimer partner (brown), generated by rotation of the docked ACP6 around the TE dimer 2-fold axis. This suggests that the 2-fold axis of TE dimer may be the 2-fold axis of the entire modular PKS. The proposed overall quaternary structure of DEBS based on the coincidence of 2-fold axes for the TE and modeled ACP6 domains are shown as a miniature blue and red dimer (Left). The direction of the DEBS polypeptide chains from N- to C-terminal as indicated suggests that adjacent reactions may be specified to take place from either one of the polypeptide chains. (E) The docked ACP–TE interface shows Asp-45, Ser-46, Glu-71, His-72, and Pro-73 (purple) of ACP6 interacting with the Arg-19, Arg-23, Arg-193, and Arg-197 (blue) of TE. Hydrogen bonds are colored in green. The figure was generated by using GRASP (27) and SWISS PDB VIEWER rendered with POV-RAY (21).

three observations. First, in this configuration, extensive protein–protein interactions covering a surface area of 1,147 Å² are predicted at the ACP6–TE interface, in which negatively charged residues of ACP6 interact extensively with the arginine groove of TE (Fig. 2E). Second, in the crystal structure of the TE, the arginine groove is located close to the N terminus (~5 Å to residue 15, Fig. 2C and D). Because the C-terminal end of ACP6 is connected to the N-terminal end of the TE without an intervening linker region, the docking sites in the TE and ACP6 should bring these two close to each other. Third, the 2-fold axis of the TE dimer is used to generate the dimeric partner of the docked ACP6 monomer (Fig. 2D), and the two ACP6 monomers themselves reveal a complementary interface. This result is consistent with the DLS measurements of an isolated ACP domain from DEBS, showing that it exists as a dimer. Thus, the observed 2-fold axis of the TE dimer may be the 2-fold axis of the entire DEBS dimer with adjacent catalytic domains arranged sequentially along the axis (Fig. 2D Left).

**A Unique Substrate Channel.** The substrate channel of DEBS TE is unique not only in its openness on both sides but also in its shape, which must contribute to the observed substrate specificity of DEBS TE. None of the four fatty acid synthase TE structures previously solved has a substrate channel. It is rare to observe such an open substrate channel for an enzyme belonging to the α/β hydrolase family (19). This unique substrate channel is lined by highly conserved hydrophobic residues (Fig. 3, purple S) and nine nonconserved hydrophilic residues.

The active side triad, His-259–Asp-169–Ser-142, is located in the middle (7.5 Å from the N-terminal surface) of the substrate channel. The site of the covalent attachment of the acyl chain to the active site during catalysis is at catalytic residue Ser-142, located in the nucleophilic elbow between β₆ and α₅, a feature that is characteristic of α/β hydrolases (18). Asp-169, His-259, and Ser-142 form the hydrogen-bonded catalytic triad. This catalytic triad agrees with the general mechanism for TEs of this family, in which His-259, stabilized by Asp-169, acts as the catalytic base that accepts the proton from Ser-142, as it attacks the ACP6-bound thioester substrate, to yield an acyl-O-serine intermediate. The NH of Ala-143 may serve as the oxyanion stabilizing residue. The enzyme-bound intermediate is subsequently attacked either by water (hydrolysis) or in this case by a hydroxyl group on the polyketide chain (cyclization) (Fig. 1).

The substrate channel runs through the protein over a distance of ~20 Å, with a mouth diameter of 8 Å on the side containing the N terminus (referred to as the N-side) and 5.5 Å on the side containing the C terminus (referred as the C-side). From the exterior (Fig. 2C), the substrate channel appears to be a long narrow channel that can accommodate only a linear polyketide chain. However, the interior of the substrate channel reveals a flat wide cavity around the catalytic triad, with a maximum diameter of 15 Å (Fig. 4A). Manual docking of the product 6-dEB (Fig. 1) into this cavity, followed by energy minimization, demonstrates that 14-membered macrolides can fit into the cavity without altering the protein conformation. When the C-1 carbonyl carbon of 6-dEB is constrained to be covalently bonded to the hydroxyl group of Ser-142, as must occur in the acyl-O-serine intermediate, the macrocycle can be accommodated in only one stereochemical orientation within the active site (Fig. 4). The validity of this model for TE–macrocycle association is reinforced by two observations. First, in this orientation, the C-13 ethyl side chain of 6-dEB points

DEBS 1 MASQLDSGTP AREASSALRD GYRQAGVSGR VRSYLDDLAG LSDFREHF DG SDGFS—LDL 58
OLEANDO SGMLAD LYRRSAELGR SREFIGLLAD TAAFRPVFHG PADLDAPLEA
METHY SGAD TGAGAGMFRA LFRQAVEDDR YGEFLDVLAE ASAFRPQFAS PEACSERLDP
TYLACTON TGAA PADAGSGLPA LYREAVRTGR AAEMAELLAA ASRFRPAFGT AD--RQFVAL
AVERMEC R IEESMALLSA ASFFRPAFTD PSDIPBPT-F

Consensus Function #β2# #β3# #β4#
DEBS 59 VDMADG----- ----P------G EVTVICCA GT AAIISGPHEFT RLAGALRG-- -IAPVRAPV PQ 103
OLEANDO VPLADG----- ----V------R KPQLICCST APVGGPHEFA RLASFFRG-- -TRAVSALPL
METHY VLLAGG----- ----PTDRAEG RAVLVGCTGT AANGGPHEFL RLSTSFQE-- -ERDFLAVPL
TYLACTON VPLADG----- ----AEDT---G LPLLVGCA GT AVASGPVEFT AFAQALADLP AAAPMDALPQ
AVERMEC VRLAQGEARA QGEALARGET RPALICLPTV AAVSsvyqys RFAAGLNG-- -HRDVWYVPA

Consensus Function V.$A.G..... ...a...r,eg rp.l!cc.gt Aa.sgp.#%. rfa..l.g... ..rdv.avP.

β5 #β6### #β7### #β9###
DEBS 104 PGYKEGEP-- ---LPS S MAA VAAVQADAVI RTQGDKPFVV AGHSAGALMA YALATEL-LD 157
OLEANDO PGYLPGEQ-- ---LPADLDA VLAAQAEAVE KQTGGAPFVL VGYSAggLMA HALACHL-AG
METHY PGYGTTGTG TALLPADLDT ALDAQARAIL RJAGDAPVVL LGHSGGALLA HELAFRLERA
TYLACTON PGFLPGER-- ---VPATPEA LFEAQAEALL RYAAGRPFVL LGHSAGANMA HALTRHLE-A
AVERMEC PGFLEGEP-- ---LPSGIGA VTRMPDAIV RFTDGAPFA L AGHSAGGW FV YAVTSHLERL

Consensus Function PG%l.Ge.... ...lPa...a v...aqA.Ai. r...gaPfv l .GhSaGa..a halt.hler.
PS F

DEBS 158 RGHPPRGVVL IDVYPPGHQD AMNAALEELT ATLFDRETVR MDDTRLTALG AYDRLTGQWR 217
OLEANDO RGTPPSGEVL DVYPPGRQE PVFGWQKELT EGMFAQDFVP MDDTRLTALG TYDRLMGQWR
METHY HGAPPAGIVL VDPYPPGHQE PIEVWSRQLG EGLFA GELEP MSDARRLLAMG RYARFLAGPR
TYLACTON NGGPGALVL MDIYTPADPG AMGVWRNDMF QWVWRSDDIP PDDHRLTAMG AYHLLLLDWS
AVERMEC -GVRPEAVVT MDAYLPDDGI APVASALTSE IFDRVTFQVD VDYTRLVAMG GYFRIFSGWS

Consensus Function .G..P.g.Vl m.D.Y.P.d.. a...w...... ...........vp.ddtRL.A$G .Y.R...gws
F SASS S S R R FFS F F

DEBS 218 PRETGLPTLL VSAGEPMGPW PDD--SWKPT WPFEHDTVAV PGDHFTMVQE HADAIARHID 275
OLEANDO PAPSGLPTLL IRATEPMAEW TGAI-DWRAS WEYDHTAVDM PGNHFTIMRE HAEDAARHID
METHY PGRSSAPVLL VRASEPLGDW QEERGDWRAH WDLPHTVADV PGDHFTMMRD HAPAVAEAVL
TYLACTON PTPVRAPVLH LRAAEPMGDW PP GDTGWQSH WDGAHTTAGI PGNHFTMMTE HASAAARLVH
AVERMEC PP DITTPALF LRGRD--GEQ MP-------PP WGVPHTVLDI QGNHFTMLEQ FADSTARHVD

Consensus Function P.....P.L. lra.#p.g.w .p....w... w..phtv.di pG#HFTmm.# hA.a.Arh:d
FA


Fig. 3. Sequence alignment among PKS TE s. Abbreviations indicate the final macrolide product for the corresponding modular PKSs. DEBS, 6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase; OLEANDO, oleandolid e; METHY, 10-deoxymethynolide; TYLACTON, tylactone aglycone; AVERMEC, avermycin aglycone. Symbols: @, helix and #, β sheets above the alignment indicate secondary structures. Purple symbols under the alignment indicate homologous residues of the following nature: R, proposed arginine-rich ACP-binding site; D, hydrophobic leucine-rich dimer interface; S, substrate channel lining; F, fold maintenance. Sequence alignment was prepared by MULTALIN (28).


(A)
(B)

Fig. 4. (A) The molecular surface of DEBSTE sliced at the open substrate channel (entrance on the left, exit on the right), indicating the link between the unique substrate specificity and the unique shape of the channel. The product 6-dEB was docked in the channel. Residues forming hydrogen bonds with the product are labeled on the surface. (B) Manual docking followed by CNS energy minimization between 6-dEB (purple) and the DEBS TE. Hydrogen bonds between the active site residues and 6-dEB are indicated in green. Figures were prepared by INSIGHTII and SWISS PDB VIEWER rendered with POV-RAY (21).

that His-259 promotes deprotonation of the corresponding hydroxyl group in the acyl-enzyme intermediate. Several key residues in the substrate channel are within hydrogen-bonding distance of nonreactive functional groups on the polyketide backbone and are likely to influence its substrate specificity. In particular, C-3—OH hydrogen bonds to Asn-180 and the backbone carbonyl of Tyr-171, C-5—OH hydrogen bonds to Asn-180 and Glu-184, and both C-9═O and C-11—OH hydrogen bond to the side-chain of Thr-76 and the backbone NH of Ala-77 (Fig. 4B). These extensive hydrogen-bonding interactions steer the polyketide chain such that only C-13—OH is close to C-1═O for lactonization to take place.

Consistent with our prediction, earlier studies have shown that simple analogs of the natural substrate of the DEBS TE that lack these functional groups can be hydrolyzed but not cyclized by the TE (11, 25), presumably because of the lack of hydrogen bonds to steer the substrate in a conformation and orientation favorable for cyclization. Further, DEBS TE has a marked preference for the

toward the channel opening (Fig. 4) and should therefore tolerate other substituents, and DEBS TE can generate erythronolide derivatives with an extremely broad range of C-13 substituents (24). Second, the cavity is wide enough to accommodate a slightly larger macrocycle, a feature that is consistent with the proven ability of DEBS to catalyze the biosynthesis of 16-membered macrocycles (6).

By probing the substrate channel with the docking simulation, several predictions can be made. The model suggests that the backbone NH of Ala-143 lines the oxyanion hole and acts as a hydrogen bond donor to the C-1 carbonyl in the presence of an attacking nucleophile. Second, the bridging oxygen in the lactone (O-13) is within hydrogen-bonding distance of His-259, suggesting


(A)
(B)
(C)


Fig. 5. The proposed mechanism of the chain termination reaction catalyzed by DEBS TE. (A) ACP6, which binds to the TE on the N-side via the arginine groove, and a covalent linkage at the N terminus, presents the full-length polyketide as a phosphopentathienyl-bound acyl chain. (B) The functional groups C-1═O, C-3—OH, C-5—OH, C-9═O, C-11—OH, and C13—OH on the polyketide chain anchor the polyketide chain in the active site by forming seven hydrogen bonds with the protein. Upon nucleophilic attack of Ser-142, a covalently bound intermediate is formed. (c) Subsequent attack on C-1═O by C13—OH, which is anchored near C-1═O by the hydrogen-bonding scheme and whose nucleophilicity is enhanced by His-259, results in the formation of the macrolactone. Product can then be released out of the C-side exit.


14812 | www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.011399198 Tsai et al.
(2R, 3S) diastereomer of a 2-methyl-3-hydroxy-acyl chain substrate over its (2S, 3R) diastereomer (11). This is consistent with the hydrogen-bonding pattern at C-3—OH (Fig. 4B), because the C3—OH—Asn-180 hydrogen bond can form only between TE and the (2R, 3S) diastereomer. Lastly, the higher hydrolysis turnover for longer polyketide substrates versus shorter ones (11) can also be rationalized as a result of the hydrophobic interactions that could be expected to occur between a long alkyl chain and the active site.

Two key residues in the hydrogen-bonding scheme (Fig. 4B), Asn-180 and Glu-184, are located on the $\alpha_{6}$ helix, which has the highest $B$ factors. Not only does this helix influence the shape of the substrate channel, but it is also the least conserved region among TEs from different modular PKSs (Fig. 3, residues 177–190). It is possible that this $\alpha$ helix may be flexible and adapt to different polyketide substrates. The analysis of the substrate channel therefore offers strategies to systematically alter the substrate specificities of TEs by mutation of residues involved in defining the substrate channel.

### The Mechanism and Its Implications.
On the basis of the crystal structure of the DEBS TE, associated modeling studies, and available experimental data, the following mechanism is proposed for the TE-catalyzed release of 6-deoxyerythronolid B from DEBS (Fig. 5). ACP6 binds to TE on the N-side via the assistance of a covalent linkage and interactions at the arginine groove of the TE. The polyketide chain is inserted into the long substrate channel of the TE, where it is transacylated from the phosphopantetheinyl arm of ACP6 to the nucleophilic Ser-142 in the active site of the TE. The accurate orientation of the polyketide chain in the active site residues and several functional groups (C-1═O, C-3—OH, C-5—OH, C-9═O, C-11—OH, C13—OH) on the polyketide chain (Fig. 5A). This results in positioning the C-13—OH next to the acyl-O-serine linkage. The active site is shielded from external water molecules as the competing nucleophile, on the N-side (diameter 8.0 Å) by the entire modular DEBS and on the C-side (diameter 5.5 Å) by the anchored polyketide chain (diameter 7.0 Å, Fig. 5B). Deprotonation of C-13—OH is facilitated by the basic His-259, leading to the displacement of the enzyme to yield the final product,

6-dEB (Fig. 5C). The hydrogen-bonding scheme in the active site also ensures that a unique 14-membered ring product is formed between C-1═O and C-13—OH instead of other hydroxyl groups on the substrate. The product may dissociate from the substrate channel via the C-side, in which case protein conformational change to widen the C-side may occur, possibly via the movement of helix-$\alpha$6, which has the highest $B$ factors of TE and is held by only two loops on either side of the helix (Fig. 2A). Subsequent enzyme turnover can then continue by the binding of substrate from the N-side.

The mechanism, based on the crystal structure of DEBS TE, can be used for three purposes. First, it allows the design of libraries of acyclic substrates that, on presentation to the DEBS TE, should undergo regioselective cyclization to generate conformationally constrained products. Efficient synthesis of such macrocycles is an important objective in synthetic chemistry, and the resulting small molecule libraries could provide clinically useful leads. Second, it provides a rational basis for the choice of DEBS TE (or any of its homologs) as a terminal TE in the design of engineered modular PKSs. Given the enormous potential of PKS modules to process natural and unnatural substrates (26), the installation of terminal TE domains that are kinetically competent for chain release (especially if it involves concomitant cyclization) is important for future efforts in combinatorial biosynthesis by using modular PKSs. Finally, it is possible that the polyketide chain may be processed by passing from ACP6 to the N-side for cyclization and may exit through the C-side of DEBS TE. This hypothesis, coupled with the common 2-fold axis of the TE and the modeled ACP6 dimer, suggests a quaternary structure of DEBS (Fig. 2D), in which the covalently linked domains are arranged predominantly as homodimers around a common 2-fold axis that may run through the entire DEBS homodimer. Such an arrangement would allow successive catalytic events to be carried out by domains that may lie on either of the 2-fold related chains.

We thank Janet Finer-Moore, Demetri Moustakas, Christopher Reyes, and Kinkead Reiling for advice and assistance during the course of this work. This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health to R.M.S. (CA 63081), C.K. (CA 66736), and D.E.C. (GM22172).

1. Cane, D. E., Walsh, C. T. & Khosla, C. (1998) *Science* **282**, 63–68.
2. Donadio, S., Staver, M. J., McAlpine, J. B., Swanson, S. J. & Katz, L. (1991) *Science* **252**, 675–679.
3. Cortes, J., Wiesmann, K. E. H., Roberts, G. A., Brown, M. J., Staunton, J. & Leadlay, P. F. (1995) *Science* **268**, 1487–1489.
4. McDaniel, R., Thamchaipenet, A., Gustafsson, C., Fu, H., Betlach, M. & Ashley, G. (1999) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **96**, 1846–1851.
5. Kao, C. M., Luo, G., Katz, L., Cane, D. E. & Khosla, C. (1995) *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **117**, 9105–9106.
6. Jacobsen, J. R., Hutchinson, C. R., Cane, D. E. & Khosla, C. (1997) *Science* **277**, 367–369.
7. Bellizzi, J. J., III, Widom, J., Kemp, C., Lu, J. Y., Das, A. K., Hofmann, S. L. & Clardy, J. (2000) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **97**, 4573–4578. (First Published April 18, 2000; 10.1073/pnas.080508097)
8. Devedjiev, Y., Dauter, Z., Kuznetsov, S. R., Jones, T. L. & Derewenda, Z. S. (2000) *Structure Folding Des.* **8**, 1137–1146.
9. Lawson, D. M., Derewenda, U., Serre, L., Ferri, S., Szittner, R., Wei, Y., Meighen, E. A. & Derewenda, Z. S. (1994) *Biochemistry* **33**, 9382–9388.
10. Li, J., Derewenda, U., Dauter, Z., Smith, S. & Derewenda, Z. S. (2000) *Nat. Struct. Biol.* **7**, 555–559.
11. Gokhale, R. S., Hunziker, D., Cane, D. E. & Khosla, C. (1999) *Chem. Biol.* **6**, 117–125.
12. Rowe, C. J., Bohm, I. U., Thomas, I. P., Wilkinson, B., Rudd, B. A., Foster, G., Blackaby, A. P., Sidebottom, P. J., Roddis, Y., Buss, A. D., *et al.* (2001) *Chem. Biol.* **8**, 475–485.
13. Van Duyne, G. D., Standaert, R. F., Karplus, P. A., Schreiber, S. L. & Clardy, I. (1993) *J. Mol. Biol.* **229**, 105–124.
14. Matthews, B. W. (1985) *Methods Enzymol.* **114**, 176–187.
15. Otwinowski, Z. & Minor, W. (1997) *Methods Enzymol.* **276**, 307–326.
16. Brünger, A. T., Adams, P. D., Clore, G. M., Delano, W. L., Gros, P., Grosse-Kunstleve, R. W., Jiang, J.-S., Kuszewski, J., Nilges, N., Pannu, N. S., *et al.* (1998) *Acta Crystallogr. D* **54**, 905–921.
17. Winn, M., Isupov, M. & Murshudov, G. N. (2001) *Acta Crystallogr. D* **57**, 122–133.
18. Nardini, M. & Dijkstra, B. W. (1999) *Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.* **9**, 732–737.
19. Schrag, J. D. & Cygler, M. (1997) *Methods Enzymol.* **284**, 85–107.
20. Crump, M. P., Crosby, J., Dempsey, C. E., Parkinson, J. A., Murray, M., Hopwood, D. A. & Simpson, T. J. (1997) *Biochemistry* **36**, 6000–6008.
21. Guex, N. & Peitsch, M. C. (1997) *Electrophoresis* **18**, 2714–2723.
22. Holak, T. A., Kearsley, S. K., Kim, Y. & Prestegard, J. H. (1988) *Biochemistry* **27**, 6135–6142.
23. Jackson, R. M., Gabb, H. A. & Sternberg, M. J. E. (1998) *J. Mol. Biol.* **176**, 265–285.
24. Jacobsen, J. R., Keatinge-Clay, A. T., Cane, D. E. & Khosla, C. (1998) *Bioorg. Med. Chem.* **6**, 1171–1177.
25. Aggarwal, R., Caffrey, P., Leadlay, P. F., Smith, C. J. & Staunton, J. (1995) *J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun.* **N15**, 1519–1520.
26. Wu, N., Tsuji, S., Cane, D. E. & Khosla, C. (2001) *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, **123**, 6465–6474.
27. Nicholls, A. & Honig, B. (1991) *J. Comp. Chem.* **12**, 435–445.
28. Corpet, F. (1998) *Nucleic Acids Res.* **16**, 10881–10890.