
Journal of Industrial Microbiology & Biotechnology (2001) 27, 170–176  
© 2001 Nature Publishing Group 1367-5435/01 $17.00  

www.nature.com/jim

# Organization of biosynthetic gene cluster for avermectin in Streptomyces avermitilis: analysis of enzymatic domains in four polyketide synthases

H Ikeda${}^{1,2}$, T Nonomiya${}^{2}$ and S Ōmura${}^{1,2}$

${}^{1}$School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kitasato University, Tokyo 108-8641, Japan; ${}^{2}$Research Center for Biological Function, The Kitasato Institute, Tokyo 108-8642, Japan

The analysis of the incorporation of ${}^{13}$C-labeled precursors into avermectins indicates that the avermectin aglycons are synthesized by head-to-tail condensation of various acyl groups, which is similar to the biosynthesis of other polyketides. Polyketide synthases (PKS) use the appropriate CoA ester as a primer and add acetate units from malonyl-CoA and propionate units from methylmalonyl-CoA to assemble the polyketides. Avermectin aglycons are formed by addition to the starter unit (2-methylbutyrate or isobutyrate) of 12 acyl condensations in the order P–A–A–A–P–P–A–P–A–P–A (P, propionyl; A, acetyl). Within the 90-kb gene cluster for avermectin biosynthesis, the central 65-kb segment was found to be required for aglycon biosynthesis by phenotypic analysis of strains containing deletion or insertion mutations in this region. A complete sequence analysis of the 65-kb segment indicated that this segment encodes avermectin PKS. The avermectin PKS genes are organized into two converging blocks of ORFs. From the results of sequencing analysis, a feature of the two regions, aveA1/aveA2 and avea3/aveA4, is that they encode four kinds of large multifunctional polypeptides containing 55 domains which possess putative fatty acid synthase-like activities. The avermectin PKS (AVES 1–4) appear to contain two, three, or four modules. AVES 1 and 2 contain two and four modules, respectively, whereas AVES 3 and AVES 4 each contains three modules. The 12 modules correspond to the 12 cycles required for synthesis of the avermectin aglycon. Journal of Industrial Microbiology & Biotechnology (2001) 27, 170–176.

Keywords: avermectin; anthelmintic; *Streptomyces avermitilis*; polyketide synthase; biosynthetic gene cluster

## Introduction

Avermectins [5,12] and the closely related milbemycins [25] are 16-membered macrocyclic polyketides that are currently attracting great interest for veterinary health because the compounds have potent antiparasitic and broad-spectrum activity against nematode and arthropod parasites. A semisynthetic derivative of avermectins, ivermectin (C22, C23 dihydroavermectin B1), has been used as an antiparasitic agent since 1981, and as an agricultural pesticide and an antiparasitic agent since 1985. Ivermectin has become a major animal health agent and is also being used as a human health agent in the program to eradicate onchocerciasis [3,7].

Avermectins are produced by *Streptomyces avermitilis* which was isolated from a soil sample collected in Shizuoka Prefecture, Japan. They are pentacyclic polyketide-derived compounds linked to a disaccharide of the methylated deoxysugar oleandrose. Eight major compounds result from structural differences at three positions — C5, C22–C23, and C26 (Figure 1) [5]. Among these components, the B1 component has the most effective antiparasitic activity. Avermectin biosynthesis can be classified into three-stage formation of the polyketide-derived initial aglycons (6,8a-seco-6,8a-deoxy-5-oxoavermectin aglycons), modification of the initial aglycons to generate avermectin aglycons, and glycosylation of avermectin aglycons with a methylated deoxysugar nucleotide, TDP-L-oleandrose, to generate avermectins [8,13,14]. After the presumptive aliphatic polyketide-derived precursors are lactonized to generate initial aglycons, post-polyketide modifications including oxidative cyclization, reduction, and/or methylation occur to form the avermectin aglycons. In the terminal biosynthetic steps, O-glycosylation at C13 and C4′ involving dTDP-L-oleandrose yields avermectins [15].

Labeling studies have shown that avermectin aglycons are formed by extension of the starter unit (2-methylbutyrate or isobutyrate) with seven acetate and five propionate units [6]. The biosynthesis of initial aglycons requires a complex polyketide synthase (PKS) that carries out a total of 12 successive cycles of elongation that resemble the steps in long-chain fatty acid biosynthesis. Following each condensation, the β-keto group is reduced to a hydroxyl group by a specific ketoreductase (KR) and the hydroxyl group is dehydrated to generate a double bond by a specific dehydrase (DH). Enoylreductase (ER), which reduces a double bond, is not required during polyketide chain elongation to form the avermectin aglycons because no fully saturated β-carbon chain is found in the avermectin aglycons [20].

We report here a detailed analysis of the modular and domain organization of the avermectin PKS, which differs

**Abbreviations:** ORF, open reading frame; PKS, polyketide synthase; FAS, fatty acid synthase; AVES, 6,8a-seco-6,8a-deoxy-5-oxoavermectin aglycon synthase; DEBS, 6-deoxyerythronolide B synthase; RAPS, rapamycin polyketide synthase; ACP, acyl carrier protein; AT, acyltransferase; DH, dehydratase; KR, β-ketoacyl-ACP reductase; KS, β-ketoacyl-ACP synthase; TE, thioesterase; kb, kilobase pairs(s); aa, amino acid.

Correspondence: Dr S Ōmura, Research Center for Biological Function, The Kitasato Institute, 5-9-1 Shirokane, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8642, Japan

Received 21 September 1999; accepted 14 September 2000

Biosynthetic gene cluster for avermectin in streptomyces avermitilis  
H Ikeda et al  

---

packaging, and gel electrophoresis were performed by standard procedures. pOCUS-2, a derivative of pUC19, or pUC19 was the routine cloning vector, and pKU402 [18] was the cosmid vector used for genomic DNA library construction. The cosmid library was made using the sonic extract and freeze–thaw lysate of *E. coli* strain SMR10. The primary clones containing *aveD* [17] were extended by genomic walking using the cosmid library to obtain the entire gene cluster for avermectin biosynthesis.

### DNA sequencing and analysis

Transposon (γδ)-facilitated DNA sequencing [18] was employed to sequence the avermectin biosynthetic gene cluster. Subclones containing a 1- to 3-kb segment were introduced into *E. coli* HB101 F⁺ and their transformants were mated with *E. coli* JM108 to transpose γδ into target recombinant plasmids. After selection of transconjugants containing the transposition, each transconjugant was screened by polymerase chain reaction using vector and transposon primers to confirm the transposition and to determine the position of the priming site caused by the transposition. DNA segments amplified using vector and transposon primers were used as double-stranded DNA templates. DNA sequencing reactions were performed using a Thermo Sequenase™ kit (Amersham) and a vector or transposon primer labeled with the fluorescence dye IRD40 at the 5′ terminus of each oligonucleotide (Aloka, Japan). The nucleotide sequences were read from a LI-COR Model 4000L sequencer on both DNA strands. DNA and deduced protein sequence homology searches of databases were performed using the BLAST [1], FASTA [22], and FramePlot [19] programs. Multiple alignment and phylogenetic analyses were performed using ClustalW version 1.7 [26].

### Results and discussion

#### The region encoding avermectin PKS in the gene cluster for avermectin biosynthesis

The entire avermectin biosynthetic gene cluster was identified by genomic walking using a cosmid library and a DNA segment containing *aveD* [16,17,21]. A total of 82.0 kb of contiguous DNA was cloned and sequenced, and the deduced gene organization within this region was determined [18]. The nucleotide sequence of the avermectin biosynthetic gene cluster was shown to contain 18 ORFs spanning a distance of 82 kb [18]. The organization of the *ave* modules encoding the multifunctional PKS was complex, with the 12 modules encoding avermectin PKS organized as two groups, *aveA1/aveA2* and *aveA3/aveA4*, six of which are convergently transcribed (Figure 2). The region involving biosynthesis of the initial aglycons is located in the central 65-kb segment of the gene cluster for avermectin biosynthesis. The sequence analysis suggested that *aveC* gene is translationally coupled with *aveA2*. On the other hand, *aveE* is transcribed in the same direction as *aveA3–aveA4*. These two converging transcription units share one transcriptional terminator (∆G = −38.9 kcal/mol) which is in between *aveC* and *aveE* (Figure 2).

#### KS domain

The 12 modules of avermectin PKS are organized within four large polypeptides (Figure 2): AVES 1 (414 kDa) contains modules 1–2, AVES 2 (666 kDa) modules 3–6, AVES 3 (575 kDa) modules 7–9, and AVES 4 modules 10–12 [18]. Each module contains one

---

| R₁ | R₂ | X-Y |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Avermectin A1a | CH₃ | C₂H₅ | CH=CH |
| A1b | CH₃ | CH₃ | CH=CH |
| A2a | CH₃ | C₂H₅ | CH₂-CH(OH) |
| A2b | CH₃ | CH₃ | CH₂-CH(OH) |
| B1a | H | C₂H₅ | CH=CH |
| B1b | H | CH₃ | CH=CH |
| B2a | H | C₂H₅ | CH₂-CH(OH) |
| B2b | H | CH₃ | CH₂-CH(OH) |
| Ivermectin B1a | H | C₂H₅ | CH₂-CH₂ |
| B1b | H | CH₃ | CH₂-CH₂ |

---

**Figure 1** Structural formulae for avermectins and ivermectins. Both sugars are α-L-oleandrose. Ivermectin is chemically synthesized from avermectin B1 components (B1a and B1b) by selective hydrogenation, and commercial product of ivermectin consists of more than 80% of ivermectin B1a and less than 20% of ivermectin B1b.

significantly from that of other type I PKS of macrolide-producing streptomycetes, both in the constitution of modules and in the mode of polyketide chain initiation, elongation, and termination.

### Materials and methods

#### Bacterial strains and media

*S. avermitilis* K139 was used as the source of DNA for construction of the genomic libraries. *Escherichia coli* strain NM522 F⁻ Δ(*srlA-recA*)::Tn10 was used as a host for cosmid recombinant derivatives and for plasmid subcloning. *E. coli* strain HB101 F⁺ and strain JM108 were used as transposon (γδ) donor and recipient, respectively. Luria–Bertani medium was used in *E. coli* propagation and mating.

#### Vectors, DNA manipulation

Cosmid and plasmid preparations, DNA restriction digestion, size fractionation, DNA fragment isolation, ligation reactions, lambda

Biosynthetic gene cluster for avermectin in streptomyces avermitilis

H Ikeda et al

---

$\begin{array}{lllllllllllll}
\text { aveR } & \text { aveD } & \text { aveA1 } & \text { aveC } & \text { aveE } & \text { aveA3 } & \text { aveA4 } & \text { aveB1-VIII }
\end{array}$

$\begin{array}{lllllllllllll}
\text { loading module 1 } & \text { module 2 } & \text { module 3 } & \text { module 4 } & \text { module 5 } & \text { module 6 } & \text { module 9 } & \text { module 8 } & \text { module 7 } & \text { module 12 } & \text { module 11 } & \text { module 10 }
\end{array}$

$\begin{array}{lllllllllllll}
\text { AT ACP } & \text { KS AT KR ACP } & \text { KS AT DH KR ACP } & \text { KS AT ACP } & \text { KS AT KR ACP } & \text { KS AT DH KR ACP } & \text { ACP KR DH AT KS } & \text { ACP KR DH AT KS } & \text { ACP KR DH AT KS } & \text { TE } & \text { ACP KR DH AT KS } & \text { ACP AT KS } & \text { ACP KR AT KS }
\end{array}$

---

### AVES 1
**Loading Domain**
- **module 1**: AT ACP KS AT
- **module 2**: ACP KS AT KR
- **module 3**: ACP KS AT
- **module 4**: ACP KS AT
- **module 5**: ACP KS AT
- **module 6**: ACP KS AT

### AVES 2
- **module 3**: KS AT ACP
- **module 4**: KS AT KR ACP
- **module 5**: KS AT KR ACP
- **module 6**: KS AT DH KR ACP

### AVES 3
- **module 7**: KS AT ACP
- **module 8**: KS AT ACP
- **module 9**: KS AT ACP

### AVES 4
- **module 10**: KS AT ACP
- **module 11**: KS AT ACP
- **module 12**: KS AT ACP

---

Figure 2 Model for 6,8a-seco-6,8a-deoxy-5-oxoavermetin aglycon formation and predicted domain structure of the avermectin PKS. The central four genes, *aveA1*, *aveA2*, *aveA3*, and *aveA4*, encode multifunctional PKS, AVES 1, AVES 2, AVES 3, and AVES 4, respectively. Each circle represents an enzymatic domain in the PKS multifunctional polypeptide. Abbreviations: ACP, acyl carrier protein; AT, acyltransferase; DH, dehydratase; KR, β-ketoacyl-ACP reductase; KS, β-ketoacyl-ACP synthase; TE, thioesterase. The reaction order from modules 7 to 9 and 10 to 12 in *aveA3* and *aveA4*, respectively, is drawn in the direction opposite to the gene order on the genome. The crossed-out domain in module 7 is nonfunctional. The shaded domain in module 10 does not function in polyketide chain elongation.

of the following domain organizations: KS, AT, and ACP; KS, AT, KR, and ACP; KS, AT, DH, KR, and ACP. The first module in AVES 1 encodes the initial AT and ACP domains which function to load the starting acyl group onto the AVES 1 and last module in AVES 4 encodes a final domain (TE) which releases the completed aliphatic polyketide chain to form a lactone. In each case, the order of the modules along the polypeptides reflects the order in which each module is used for polyketide chain extension. The order of the domains within each module is KS, AT (DH, KR where applicable), ACP, exactly as for other type I PKS and FAS.

The KS domains of type I PKS and FAS are the most highly conserved (about 30–50% sequence identity over the whole domain) of all the constituent domains in these multifunctional enzymes [4,9,10]. Among the KS domains in avermectin PKS, there is high (71–81%) deduced amino acid sequence similarity over the whole domain and the nucleotide sequence of each domain also has high similarity (~85%). Although the guanosine plus cytosine (GC) contents of the *S. avermitilis* genome are about 73 mol%, which is similar to that of other streptomycetes, the region encoding all KS domains has a relatively high GC content of about 80%. Analysis of multiple sequence alignments of KS domains in all modules revealed that two histidine residues, respectively, 135 - and 175-aa C-terminal of the active site cysteine, are invariant in all these domains (Figure 3A). The positions of these two histidines are very similar to those in the other type I PKS modules [2,10]. It has been speculated that one of these histidine residues acts as a general base to increase the nucleophilicity of the active site cysteine [2].

#### AT domain
All the AT domains in avermectin PKS, as with other type I PKS and FAS, contain the conserved motif sequence GHSXG, in which the serine residue is the active site (Figure 3B). In addition, four other recently proposed invariant residues are conserved in all AT domains [2] except the AT domain (ATload) in the N-terminus of AVES 1. Alanine and histidine residues in the sequence motif yAsHs about 105-aa C-terminal of the active site, a glutamine residue in the N-terminus, and an arginine residue 25-aa C-terminal of the active site serine are invariant in AT1 to 12 domains. Polyketide-derived compounds are composed of a variety of acyl building blocks. The AT domains of avermectin PKS appear to have diverged among themselves more than the other domains. The AT1 shows

Biosynthetic gene cluster for avermectin in streptomyces avermitilis

H Ikeda et al

---

### A.

| KS1 | PSGHG GTA AAD PIA IIG MAC RFP GG VRS PKDL WEL AAS GGD AIG PFT DRG WPT EQR H AQD PT QPG T FYP QGG FL HD AAH FDA GFF GIS PRE AL AMD PQ QR LLL LET SWEA FER AGI DPLS VRG SRT GV FAG ALS FD YG PR MD TAS SEG AAD VEG HIL TGT GSV LS GR |
| KS7 | EQLAA ME AS SEPIA IVG MAC RFP GG VCS PE EL WE LVAS GG DA IGE FP AGR GWD LEG LFD SDPDR GST YAR YGG FLY EAGE FD AD FF GIS PRE AL AMD PQ QR LL LET SWEA FER AGI DPLS MR GS RTG VFAG VM HYD GS RL GT TP EG -- FE GY IGN SS GAV AS GR |
| KS2 | AAAVTAE AS VTEPIA IVG MAC RFP GG VT SADD FWD LIS SEQ DA IGG FPT DRG WD LD TL YDP DP DH PG TCY TRN GG FL YDA GH FDA EFF GIS PRE AL AMD PQ QR LL LET AWE TI EH AG IN PHT LH GT PT GV FT GT NCQ DV AL RV H NAG --- QS TD GF AL JTG AC VS IGR |
| KS5 | TPLPR PAEL DEPIA IVG MAC RFP GG VT SADD FWD LI SSE QDA IGG FPT DRG WDL DL TL YDP DP DH PG TCY TRN GG FL YDA GH FDA EFF GIS PRE AL AMD PQ QR LL LET AWE TI EH AG IN PHT LH GT PT GV VF GT NG QD HAA HR QA P --- SG TE GF VL JGA ATS IA SGR |
| KS3 | RRLYE VER EQEPIA IVG MAC RYP GG AT SPT RL WH LV KS QT DA IG EF PT DRG WN LE QL YDP DDR GST YTS RG GL FY DAG FD AA FF ELS PRE AL AMD PQ QR LL LET WET FE QGG ID PRS MR GS RTG VF VG IN PED YT GT YTH QPS --- NA VE GYL LT GS AAS IA SGR |
| KS4 | TRLP LIA VPA DEPIA IVG MAC RYP GD VT VDDL QW VS CH DA IGG FPT NRK GWD LDT LY NP DP DH GTS YTRS CG FL YD AG NF DP FFG IS PRE AL AMD PQ QR LLL LET AWE SI EH AC IN PDS LR GPT PV FAG LTY HD YA RF TAP --- AG FE GYL GH CS AGS IA SGR |
| KS8 | PRAAA VP ADQ DEPVA II GMAC RYP GG VTS AE EL WE LLA SC RD TV GE FPT DRG WD LE ALF DP EPG RPG TS YTR CGS FL YDA GE FD AG FF GIS PRE AL AMD PQ QR LL LET SWE AM EQ AG ID PT TV RG SQ IV VF AG LI FQ AYG PR LHE NAA --- AD TE GY VL TG TSG SV AS GR |
| KS6 | FQVAH RTVE DEPIA II GMAC RFP GG VRS ADD LW ELL AS GK DA IGV FPT ORG WDL DTL YDP DP DH PG TCY TRN GG FL YGA GH FDA EFF GIS PRE AL AMD PQ QR LL LET AWE TI EH AG IN PHT LH GT PT GV VF AG IN AQD HAA HR QS RDV --- ET IE GYA LG SS GS VA SGR |
| KS9 | SQUAL HQ VA AD EPIA IVG MAC RFP GG VCS PE EL WE LVAS GG DA IGE FP AGR GWD LEG LFD SDPDR GST YAR YGG FLY EAGE FD AD FF GIS PRE AL AMD PQ QR LL LET SWEA FER AGI DPLS MR GS RTG VFAG VM HYD YA RL HH VP --- BG FE GLIANG SAS AGS VAT GR |
| KS11 | PFVPAS RVD DEPIA IVG MAC RFP GG VESA EDL WE LVAS GRD AVGE FP VDRG WDE AFY DPEP GRAG SSY TRRG FLE GAA EFD AG FF GIS PRE AL AMD PQ QR LM LE VS WE AL ER AG ID PAT LR GST TG VF AG MCS QDY ADL VR AT --- ED LE GYA MT GLSS SVT SGR |
| KS10 | RRLQQIES GEQEP IAVGMAC RFP GG VESA ED FW ELIAS GRD AVGE FP VDRG WDE AFY DPEP GRAG SSY TRRG FLE GAA EFD AG FF GIS PRE AL AMD PQ QR LM LE VS WE AL ER AG ID PAT LR GST TG VF AG MS QDY AT RLLS VP --- DD LA GYL GNC NAG SIL SGR |
| KS12 | LRAPA PRVD DEPIA IVG MAC RFP GG VESA ED FW ELIAS GRD AVGE FP VDRG WDE AFY DPEP GRAG TSY TRCG GFL QG AA EFD AG FF GIS PRE AL AMD PQ QR LM LE VS WE AL ER AG ID PAT LH GST TTG VF AG VS QQ DY AE LL RR GT --- QD HE GY ALT GVS NS VV SGR |

| KS1 | IAY SFL EG PA IT VDG CSS SLVAL HL AC QS ILR SG ECT LA LAG GV SM ST LG MIE FS RQR GLS VD GR CK AYS AA AD GT GW GE GV ML LVER LSD AVR LGH RV LA VRG SAV NQ DG AS NGL TAP NG PA OERV IR QAL ANA GLS VAD DV VEG HT GT TLT LG DPI EA QALL A |
| KS7 | VAY T LG LE GP AV SVD TA CSS SLVAL HL AC QS ILR SG ECT LA LAG GV TM ST PH LF VE FS RQR GLS VD GR CK SFA G AD GT GM GE GV ML LVER LSD AVR LGH RV LA VRG SAV NQ DG AS NGL TAP NG PS QQR VIR QAL ANA GLS VAD DV VEG HT GT TLT LG DPI EA QALL A |
| KS2 | ISY TF GE FG PA VS VDT AG CSS SLVAL HL AC QAL RAG ECS MAL AG GV TM SS PG AF VE FS RQR GLA AD GC HK AFS AA AD GT GW GE GV ML LVER LSD AR NH GR VL AV VRG SAV NQ DG AS NGL TAP NG PS QQR VIR QAL ANA GLS VAD DV VEG HT GT TLT LG DPI EA QALL A |
| KS5 | ISY ILG LE GP AV TLD TA CSS SLVAL HL AC QS ILR SG ECT MA LAG GA VT MT TP IT FTE FAR QR GLA PD GR CK AFS AA AD GT GW GE GV ML LVER LSD AR NH GR VL AV VRG SAV NQ DG AS NGL TAP NG PS QQR VIR QAL ANA DLT PAD VD VA EAH CT GT TLT LG DPI EA QAIL A |
| KS3 | ISYN FL GE GP AIT ID TA CSS SLVAL HL AC QAL RSG ECS MA LAG GAS VM AT PF VE FS RQR GLA AD GR CK AFS AA AD GT GW SE GV ML LVER LSD AR NH GR VL AV VRG SAV NQ DG AS NGL TAP NG RS QV KIR QAL ANA HLS PAD VD VA EAH CT GT TLT LG DPI EA QAIL VE |
| KS4 | VAY ALG LE GP AL TV DT AG CSS SLVAL HL AC QAL RSG ECS MA LAG GV VM ST PA GF VE FS RQR GLA VD GR CK AFS AA AD GT GW SE GV ML LVER LSD ARR LGH R IL AV VRG SAV NQ DG AS NGL TAP NG PS QEV IR IRL ANA DLT PAD VD VA EAH CT GT TLT LG DPI EA QAIL A |
| KS8 | ISY TF GE FG PA VS VDT AG CSS SLVAL HL AC QAL RAG ECS MA LAG GV TM SS PG AF VE FS RQR GLA AD GC HK AFS AA AD GT GW GE GV ML LVER LSD AR NH GR VL AV VRG SAV NQ DG AS NGL TAP NG PS QQR VIR QAL ANA GLS AG DV DA VE AH CT GT TLT LG DPI EA QALL A |
| KS6 | VAY TLG LE GP AV SVD TA CSS SLVAL HL WA AQ AL RAG ECS MA LAG GV TM SS PG TF VE FS RQR GLA AD GR CK AYS AA AD GT GW AE GV ML LVER LSD AR NH GR VL AV VRG SAV NQ DG AS NGL TAP NG PS QQR VIR QAL ANA GLT PAD VD VA EG CT GT TLT LG DPI EA QALL A |
| KS9 | VAY SF GL EG PA VT VDT AG CSS SLVAL HL AC QAL RSG ECS LA LAG GV VM ST PG AF VE FS RQR GLS PD GR CK AY AS AA AD GT GSM SE VG ILL ER LSEA ERR GRH VL AV VRG SAV NQ DG AS NGL TAP NG PS QQR VIR QAL AC ACL GSL S VAD DV VEG HT GT TLT LG DPI EA QALL A |
| KS11 | VAY TLG LE GP AV TDT AG CSS SLVAL HL AC QAL RSG ECS LA LAG GV VM ST PG AF VE FS RQR GLS PD GR CK AYG SGD AV GW AB VG VLL VER LSEA ERR GRH VL AV VRG SAV NQ DG AS NGL TAP NG PS QQR VIR QAL AC ACL GSL S VAD DV VEG HT GT TLT LG DPI EA QALL A |
| KS10 | VAY TF GE FG PA VT VDT AG CSS SLVAL HL AC QS ILR TG ES S PAL AG GV MST PG MF VE FS RQR GLS PD GR CK AYS AA AD GT GSM SE VG ILL ER LSEA ERR GRH VL AV VRG SAV NQ DG AS NGL TAP NG PS QQR VIR QAL AC ACL GSL S VAD DV VEG HT GT TLT LG DPI EA QALL A |
| KS12 | LSY TF GE FG PA VT VDT AG CSS SLVAL HL AC QAL RSG ECS LA LAG GV TM ST PG AF VE FS RQR GLS PD GR CK AYG SGA DVG WA B VG VLL VER LSEA ERR GRH VL AV VRG SAV NQ DG AS NGL TAP NG PS QQR VIR QAL AC ACL GSL S VAD DV VEG HT GT TLT LG DPI EA QALL A |

| KS1 | TYGQ-RAG DR PL WL GS KS NI GH TMAA AG VGV IKM VM AL RE GVL PRTL HD VK PS PQV DW SAGA VR LL TE AV PPG DA AGR LRA GVS SF GIG GT NA HV ILEE PA AGG CV AGG SVL -------- |
| KS7 | TYGQ-RAG NR PL WL GS KS NI GH AQ AA AG VGV IKM VM AL RE GVL PRTL HD VE PS PQV DW SAGA VR LL TE AV PPG DA AGR LRA GVS SF GIG GT NA HV ILEE PA AGG CV AGG VLE G -------- |
| KS2 | TYGQ-DR AG EP LW GS KS NV GH TO AA AG VAG VIKM M AL RH LL PRTL HD VE PS PHV DW SAGA VR LL TE TV PW PG EG RL RR AG VS SF GV GT NA HV ILEE PA DD VPG PP AGE -------- |
| KS5 | TYGQ-DR PG NG PL WL GS KS NV GH TO AA AG VAG VIKM M AL RH RT LP TTL HA DE PS PHV DW SAGA VR LL TE TV PW PG EG RL RR AG VS SF GV GT NA HV ILEE PA DD VPG PP ADE -------- |
| KS3 | AYGQ-DR PN GR PL WL GT LKS NI GH SMAA AG VGV IKM VM AL RN LL PRTL HD VE PS PHV DW SAGA VR LL TE TV PW PG EG RL RR AG VS SF GV GT NA HV ILEE PA AN NI PSD TP ADD -------- |
| KS4 | TYGQ-DR FG NE PL WL GS MKS NI GH AQ AA AG VGV IKM VM AL RN LL PRTL HD VE PS PHV DW SAGA VR LL TE TV PW PG EG RL RR AG VS SF GV GT NA HV ILEE PA AN NI PSD TP ADD -------- |
| KS8 | TYGQ-RA GE PL WL GS KS NV GH TO AA AG VAG VIKM M AL RN LL PRTL HD VE PS PHV DW SAGA VR LL TE TV PW PG EG RL RR AG VS SF GV GT NA HV ILEE PA AN NI PSD TP ADD -------- |
| KS6 | AYGQ-HR PHH RP LW GS LKS NI GH AQ AA AG VGV IKM VM AL RN LL PQT LH VE DE PT PQV DW STI GAV QLL TQ PV WP AD PA GR PR HAG VS SF GV GT NA HI ILEE AP TP QD SD TD DE -------- |
| KS9 | AYGQ-HR PHH RP LW GS LKS NI GH AQ AA AG VGV IKM VM AL RN LL PQT LH VE DE PT PQV DW STI GAV QLL TQ PV WP AD PA GR PR HAG VS SF GV GT NA HV ILEE AP AA AG GA AGG GSVG -------- |
| KS11 | TYGQ-RS GER FV WL GS KS NI GH AQ AA AG VAG VIKM M AL RA GVL PRTL HD VE PS SQV DW SSG SV RV LA DE VE WPG EG RL RR AG VS AF GV ST NA HV ILEEA -------- SGG AD GG AG RL QEL |
| KS10 | TYGQ-RAG DT PW WL GS KS NI GH AQ AG -VAG VIKM M AL RA GVL PRTL HD VE PS SQV DW SSG SV RV LA DE VE WPG EG RL RR AG VS AF GV ST NA HV ILEEA -------- SGG AG GG AG RL QEL |
| KS12 | TYGQ-RS GER FV WL GS VKS NI GH AQ AA AG VAG VIKM M AL NH ELL PTS LHI DE PS PHI DW SSG VV RL LTE PVP WQ-Q-N GR PR RAG VS AF GV ST NA HV VIEQ AF VE AH VISE PV PA EA H VIVE Q |

---

### B.

| AT4 | EAAGKTAFICSGQTQRPGMAHGLYHTHPVF AALNDICTHLDPHLDHPLLPLTTQDPNTQDTTLEEAA LJOOTPYAQPALFAFQVALHRLLT DGYHITPHYYACHSLCEITA AHALGILTLTLDATTLLITQRATLMQTMPPG-TMTTLHTTPHHITHHLT AHEN -------- |
| AT8 | EAAGKTAFICSGQTQRPGMAHGLYHTHPVF AALNDICTHLDPHLDHPLLPLTTQDPNTQDTTLEEAA LJOOTPYAQPALFAFQVALHRLLT DGYHITPHYYACHSLCEITA AHALGILTLTLDATTLLITQRATLMQTMPPG-TMTTLHTTPHHITHHLT AHEN -------- |
| AT3 | EAAGKTAFICSGQTQRPGMAHGLYHTHPVF AALNDICTHLDPHLDHPLLPLTTQDPNTQDTTLEEAA LJOOTPYAQPALFAFQVALHRLLT DGYHITPHYYACHSLCEITA AHALGILTLTLDATTLLITQRATLMQTMPPG-TMTTLHTTPHHITHHLT AHEN -------- |
| AT2 | EAAGKTAFICSGQTQRPGMAHGLYHTHPVF AALNDICTHLDPHLDHPLLPLTTQNDNDN--------EDAA ALLQOTRYAQPALFAFQVALHRLLT DGYHITPHYYACHSLCEITA AHALGILTLTLDATTLLITQRATLMQTMPPG-TMTTLHTTPHHITHHLT AHEN -------- |
| AT5 | EAAGKTAFICSGQTQRPGMAHGLYHTHPVF AALNDICTHLDPHLDHPLLPLTTQNDNDN--------EDAA ALLQOTPYAQPALFARQVALHRLLT DGYHITPHYYACHSLCEITA AHALGILTLTLDATTLLITQRATLMQTMPPG-TMTTLHTTPHHITHHLT AHEN -------- |
| AT12 | RRRGTKTAMLFAQQTQRVMGQRQLYAAHPAYA DALDQVLAELDGHLDQPLRPLIHASADLADV--------ADAADVLDRTRYAQPALFAVQVALFRHLER-LGVRADFAGHSCELA AHAVGVLPLAAAACRLVAARGRLMEQ LAPGGAMAVARASEAEARQALDGREA-------- |
| AT10 | TTSGRALVLFAGQQTQRPGMCRELVEAYPVFAQAIDEICAEADARTDETPGAPGLRDFLP AQD--------SPEGRLIEDIGFAQPALFAFEVALFRLELT-WGLTPDVLCGSHSCELA AHAVGMLCLADAVLVAARGRLMQ LPSGGAMAJEASEDEILPLPDEYAS-------- |
| ATload | FAAGGVVVFPGQPGQMWGRELLDASIVFRESVACEAFAFVYDWVSVEVLRDSPAP--------GLRDVWDWQPTLEFAVMISLAALWRSCQVEPCALHSCCEIAAHAVGGLSIADAARVVTJLWSQA QTTLAGT GALVSVAATEDEILPRIAWPTEIDNA |
| AT11 | AADGKIAMLFGQGTHWEMAOQELIGSSPVFAQQMSDCQAQLEPYLDWSLLDVLRGAPDAP--------PLQV DVVQPVLFAMVSILAALWRS-YGVHPDAVACHSCCEIAAAYAGALSLLDDAARVTALRSQALAAALA CQGAMASVGLPVEKLEPRLATWGD-------- |
| AT1 | GDRGGVVVFPGQGGVRLASSPVFARRMQACEEALAPWDWSVVDILRRDAGDA--------VWERADVVQPVLF SVMVSI AALWRS-YGIEPDAVLGHSCEIAAAHVCGALSILKDAAKTVALRSRALAAVRGGMASVPLPAQEVEQLIGERWAG-------- |
| AT7 | GDRGGVVVFPGQGWAGVRLASSPVFARRMQACEEALAPWDWSVVDILRRDAGDA--------VWERADVVQPVLESVMVSI AALWRS-YGIEPDAVLGHSCEIAAAHVCGALSILKDAAKTVALRSRALAAVRGGMASVPLPAQEVEQLIGERWAG-------- |
| AT6 | GDRGGVVVFPGQGWAGILTLLTSSPVFAEHIDACEKALTWPWPSLTDILHRDPDP--------AWQQADVVQPVLESIMVSILAALWRS-YGIEPDAVLGHSCEIAAAHICGALSILKDAAKTVALRSQALAAVRG RGAMVSLPLPAQDVQQLISERWEG-------- |
| AT9 | SDRGGVVVFPGQGGQWAGMLTLLTSSPVFAEHIDACEKALTWPWPSLTDILHRDPDP--------AWQQADVVQPVLSIMVSILAALWRS-YGIEPDAVLGHSCEIAAAHICGALSILKDAAKTVALRSQALAAVRG RGAMVSLPLPAQDVQQLISERWEG-------- |

| AT4 | DLAI AAIN TPTSLVISGTPHTVQHITTLCCQQGIKT KTLPTKNABISPHTNPILNQLHQHTQTLLTYHPHTPLITANT--------PPDQLLTPHYWIQQARNTVDYATTQTLHQGVTTYIELGP DNTLTTLTHHNLPNPTPT--------TTLT LHPHHFPQTHL |
| AT8 | DLAI AAIN TPTSLVISGTPHTVQHITTLCCQQGIKT KTLPTNHABISPHTNPILNQLHQHTQTLLTYHPHTPLITANT--------PPDQLLTPHYWIQQARNTVDYATTQTLHQGVTTYIELGP DNTLTTLTHHNLPNPTPT--------TTLT LHPHHFPQTHL |
| AT3 | DLAI AAIN TPTSLVISGTPHTVQHITTLCCQQGIKT KTLPTNHABISPHTNPILNQLHQHTQTLLTYHPHTPLITANT--------PPDQLLTPHYWIQQARNTVDYATTQTLHQGVTTYIELGP DNTLTTLTHDNLPNPTPT--------TTLT LHPHHFPQTHL |
| AT2 | DLAI AAIN TPTSLVISGTPHTVQHITTLCCQQGIKT KTLPTNHABISPHTNPILNQLHQHTQTLLTYHPHTPLITANT--------PPDQLLTPHYWIQQARNTVDYATTQTLHQGVTTYIELGP DNTLTTLTHHNLPNPTPT--------TTLT LHPHHFPQTHL |
| AT5 | DLAI AAIN TPTSLVISGTPHTVQHITTLCCQQGIKT KTLPTNHABISPHTNPILNQLHQHTQTLLTYHPHTPLITANT--------PPDQLLTPHYWIQQARNTVDYATTQTLHQGVTTYIELGP DNTLTTLTHHNLPNPTPT--------TTLT LHPHHFPQTHL |
| AT12 | RVSVAANVGPAVSVEFGAEDEVGNMADWPAERGRRVKRLRTC HAFSPMDPMLEEFQVAASILTYSEPAIPMVSTLTDIVAAGELS DPEWVRQVRTVRGDAISRLLTDGVRTFMEILPGDTLSALAEECLEATADSHPADDDTGTPQENLLIPLLRPDSPERGTL |
| AT10 | RVAHAANVGPRSVISLGQEDAVALDAQQWAARGRRTRRLRTSHAFSPMDAMLGDFRAAEQVTFSA RIPVSVNVTGALPAETMCTPDYWVEHASTVRFADGISWLQE QVTTCLIEIGDTLSALAQDSL SAPAR-A----------IPA LRPDQFEARSV |
| ATload | RLAVAANVGPRSTVSGRAEAVADLVAIAQVTRMI PVDVPAISPPLYAIERRVSGLLPITPRPSRIFHSSVTG-GRLDTRELDA AWYRNMSSTVRFEEP AARLLLQQPKT FVEMSPHVLTMGLQELAPDLGDTTGT----------ADTIVMGTLRRGQTLDHF |
| AT11 | RLVAAANVGARSAVVGPEPAVDALVEELSHEDVPARRIMVDWASNPQVEAIQGRILLEAPARIGDVFYSTVIG-ERIDGTELADADYWRNLROVVRFDATQALVRAGHTVFEACPHEAVGVQETLDEMCGD----------LD SLVVGSLRRGEOGLRRF |
| AT1 | RLWAAANVGPRSTAVSGDAEAVDEVLAYCAGTVGVARRI PVDYASICPHVQPLREELLGLDISPQPSGVFFFSTVEG-TWLDTTTLDAAWWYRNLHQPVRFSDAVALADDGHRVFVEVSPHPTLVAIEDTTEDTAE----------DVT AIGSLRRGDNDTTRF |
| AT7 | RLWAAANVGPRSTAVSGDAEAVDEVLAYCAGTVGVARRI PVDYASICPHVQPLREELLGLDISPQPSGVFFFSTVEG-TWLDTTTLDAAWWYRNLHQPVRFSDAVALADDGHRVFVEVSPHPTLVAIEDTTEDTAE----------DVT AIGSLRRGDNDTTRF |
| AT6 | QLWVAALNGPHSTTVSGDTKA VDEVLAHCTDIGLRAKRIPVDYASICPHVQPLHDELLHLLGDITPQPSTVFFSTVEG-TWLDTTTLDAAWWYRNLHQPVRFSHAIQTLDIGHRAFIEISPHTLVAIEDTTENTTE----------NITATGSLRRGDNDTHRF |
| AT9 | QLWVAALNGPHSTTVSGDTTAVEELLTHCADTGLRAKRIPVDYASICPHVQPLHDELLHLLGDITPQPSTMFFSTVGH LWYTTTLDAAWWYRNLHQPVRFSHAIQTLDIGHRPFIEISPHTLVAIEDTTENTTE----------NITATGSLRRGDNDTHRF |

| AT4 | LTNLAKTTTT-------- |
| AT8 | LTNLAKTTTT-------- |
| AT3 | LTNLAKTTTT-------- |
| AT2 | LTNLAKTTTT-------- |
| AT5 | LTNLAKTTTT-------- |
| AT12 | LTGLARLTHGAAAVN |
| AT10 | MTALAELFVAG-------- |
| ATload | LTSIAQLRGH-------- |
| AT11 | LMSVAELFVG-------- |
| AT1 | LTALAHTHTT-------- |
| AT7 | LTALAHTHTT-------- |
| AT6 | LTALAHTHTT-------- |
| AT9 | LTALAHTHTT-------- |

---

### C.

| ACP9 | ADNGAQLHGRIAGQTHEQQHT-TLLALVRSHIATVLGH--------TP PDT--------IPPDRAFRDLGFDSLTAVELRNRLSHTTGLRLPTTIAFDHNPPTTLLTHHLHTQLV---SKGLTAAAEPDAA |
| ACP7 | ADNGAQLHARLAGQTHEQQHT-TLLALVRSHIATVLGH--------TP PDT--------IPPDRAFRDLGFDSLTAVELRNRLSRTTGLRLPTTIAFDHNPPTTLLTHHLHTQLL---GSDST-------- |
| ACP2 | ADNGAQLHARLAGQTHEQQHT-TLLALVRSHIATVLGH--------TP PDT--------IPPDRAFRDLGFDSLTAVELRNRLSRTTGLRLPTTIAFDHNPPTTLLTHHLHTQLQ---PQPDNA-------- |
| ACP8 | ADNGAQLHARLAGQTHEQQHT-TLLALVRSHIATVLGH--------NAPEM--------IPVDSAFRDLGFDSLTAVELRNRLGEATGLRLPTSLVFDPQNAATLARHLRREIM---GDDAE-------- |
| A
Biosynthetic gene cluster for avermectin in streptomyces avermitilis Hlkeda et al

D.

DH2 NQPHPTHTHLDLPTYPFQHHYWLESTQPGAGNVSAAGLDPTEHPLLGATLELATDGGALLAGRSLRSHPWLADEAVGCTVLLSGATFLELALHAGTYVGCDRVDELTLHAPLVVFVDGGVSVQGVAAA-------DGEGRRLSVYARG--GSACGGGASGGWITCHA
DH7 THPHNH-HLDLPYPFQRQHYWLDAPT-GAGDVAAAGLEPAEHPLLAATVQLADTDGCLLTGRLSLRSHPWLGHDYEVGGAVLLSGSAFVELAVQGERVGCTRIEQLTVHAPLVVFVGGGVSVQGVAAA-------DGEGRRLSVYARG--GSACGGGASGGWITCHA
DH8 NQPHTHTHLDLPTYPFQHHYWLESTQPGAGNVSAAGLDPTEHPLLGATLELAEGDCLLTGRLSLRTHFWLAHGAVGGVLLPGTAFAEELALHAGESVGCDHVDELTILHTPLVIPEVGDVTLQVAIAAP------DESRRMMTIHSRG--EGGSGGADASAASAWTRHA
DH6 PHFPNPTHHLDLPTYPFQHYWLQPTT-TTTDLTTTGLTPTHHPLLTATLTLADNNTQLLLTGRLSLRTHFWLTDHIVAGMVLLPGTALLEELALQAGERVDCPRVEELTLHAPLVIPTEDVILQVTVRAA------DESGRHALAIHSY------SGTASSADREWTRHA
DH9 PHPHNH-HLDLPYPFQHQYWLCPTT-TTTDLTTTGLTPTHHPLLTATLTLANNTIQLLLTGRLSLRTHFWLTDHIVWGTILVPGTALLEELAQ----TTTDHLEELALHTPLVIPREGAVDVQVHINPP------DDTDRSLTIYSR------SENAPAAA-FWRHHA
DH12 ------ARHLDLPTYAFDDHRYWVDTSAAGHPGDLSSAAGLTGACHPLLGSAAVALAESQELLFTGRLSLRTHFWLADHAIIGTVLLPGTAILELAVRAGDEVDCGIVEELTLRTPVLVPEQGSVILQLSVGAPQGFQTPEEPERRTFALYAREDDGLSSSSAAATGTEWTCHA

DH2 SGVL--VEAAAGG-VVVDGLA
DH7 SGVL--VEAAAGGVVVDGLA
DH8 AGVL--SPAKDDTASYELLA
DH6 TGLL----THHADTDHRADTHT
DH9 TAVLGTKTSRIETGRSHDDLS
DH12 TGVLT-GTARPAEEHTQEP--

E.

KR2 -------VPARRSVDVSGREVL PWLSGGSVLVTGCTGVLCAAVRHLAGVCGVRDLLLVSRRGPDA PGAEGLRAFLAALGAEVRIVACDVGERREVVRLLEG-VPAGCPLIGVVHAAGVLDDATIASLTPERL GTVFAAKVDAALLLDELTRGMELSAFVLFSSAAGI
KR7 TRLESSVDVPAQRSDVAGREVL PWLSGGSVLVTGCTGVLCAAVRHLAGVCGVRDLLLVSRRGPDA PGAEGLRAFLAALGAEVRIVACDVGERREVVRLLEG-VPAGCPLIGVVHAAGVLDDATIASLTPERL GTVFAAKVDAALLLDELTRGMELSAFVLFSSAAGI
KR9 -------TRLESPVDVSGREVL PWLSGGSVLVTGCTGVLCAAVRHLAGVCGVRDLLLVSRRGPDA PGAEGLRAELAALGAEVRIVACDVGERREVVRLLEG-VPAGCPLIGVVHAAGVLDDATIASLTPERL GTVFAAKVDAALLLDELTRGMELSAFVLFSSAAGI
KR8 -------TRLESPVDVSGREVL PWLSGGSVLVTGCTGVLC6AAVRHLAGVCGVRDLLLVSRRGPDA PGAEGLRAFLAALGAEVRIVACDVGERREVVRLLEG-VPAGCPLIGVVHAAGVLDDATIASLTPERL GTVFAAKVDAALLLDELTRGMELSAFVLFSSAAGI
KR6 -------VPSAGHAUVAAG----PFLPGGTVLITGCTGVLCPLVSRHLVEAHGVRHLLLAGR RPGDAEGAPELRAELGGLGATVEVACDAADRQQLADLLTR-IPDDRPLIGVVHSAGILDDGVITSLSPER LGAVLRKADAALLLDELTRGAELSAFVMFSSASAV
KR12 ------TRVPVRQPSTTADWD PEATVLITGCTGVLCPLVARHIATAHGVRHLLLATRRGTAADGA ADLVAELAGLGAEATVAACDIGDRAAVAALLDQ-VP AQHPLKAVIHTAGVDDDIGILTSLT PERMEAVLHAKAFGAAHLHDLT-RDAGLTTTVFSSAAAS
KR10 ------VRAPLEEAVAER----EWRPRGTVLVTGCHGELCAHAVARWMARR-GAEHLLLVSRRG ESAQGVVEELRADLMGLGARVSVVACDAADREALAEV LRSAPAECPLGVVHAAGVDDGVLEGLSSEVRTGVLRAKALAAWN LHELTRGADLSGFVVFSSAAAT
KR1 -------TPTTLTPTHQPTTP----TPHGTTLITGCTGAIATHLJUHHLTTHQPTQHLLLTSRTG PHTPHAQHLTTOQLQQKGIGHLTTTTCDTSNPDQLQQLLNT-I PPQHPLITTVIHTAGILDADATLTNLTPQLNNVLRAKAHSAHLLHQLT-QHTPLTAFVLYSSAAAT
KR4 -------TPTTLTPTHQPTTP----TPHGTTLITGCTGAIATHLJUHHLTTHQPTQHLLLTSRTG PHTPHAQHLTTOQLQQKGIGHLTTTTCDTSNPDQLQQLLNT-I PPQHPLITTVIHTAGILDADATLTNLTPQLNNVLRAKAHSAHLLHQLT-QHTPLNAFVLYSSAAAT
KR5 -------TPTTLTPTHQPTTP----TPHGTTLITGCTGAIATHLJUHHLTTHQPTQHLLLTSRTG PHTPHAQHLTTOQLQQKGIGHLTTTTCDTSNPDQLQQLLNT-I PPQHPLITTVIHTAGVNLFAPVSETDAESFSSVTAAKATGAAILHEL LDHETLEHTLFSSGAGA

KR2 LGSAGQGNYAAAAAALDALAYRRAAAGLPGVSLAWGLWEEASGMTGHLAGTDHRIIIRSQLHPMSTPDALALFDAALAL---DRPVLLPA---DLR---------PAPPLPPLLQD
KR7 LGSAGQGNYAAAAAALDALAYRRAAAGLPGVSLAWGLWEEASGMTGHLAGTDHRIIIRSQLHPMSTPDALALFDAALAL---DRPVLLPA---DLR---------PAPPLPPLLQD
KR9 LGSAGQGNYAAAAAALDALAYRRAAAGLPGVSLAWGLWEEASGMTGHLAGTDHRIIIRSQLHPMSTPDALALFDAALAL---DRPVLLPA---DLR---------PAPPLPPLLQD
KR8 LGSAGQGNYAAAAAALDALAYRRAAAGLPGVSLAWGLWEEASGMTGHLAGTDHRIIIRSQLHPMSTPDALALFDAALAL---DRPVLLPA---DLR---------PAPPLPPLLQD
KR6 VGSPGQGNYAAAAAVLDFAHRRRAEGLPAVSLAWGLEESTGMTGHLDVDHARISFRAGMRPLPTAEALALFDAALAD---GEPFLMPARLDDTAVRS-GAASAFPVPLLQG
KR12 FGSPGQGNYTAANAFILDALMQHRHTQALPGRSAWLWGEADMTRNILAGTDFARMARGGLLPSNAQGLALLDTADRLGPF GDGLLLATRLDAATLHA-QATAGALPRILHG
KR10 FGPAQGGSYAANANYVEATVRHRRGEGLPGLAVAWGPWAGG-GMAEGAVG----QMRRGLAAMTPETALVALGQALDH---DETCTVADIDWDRFTANSLPGSRSLPLISD
KR1  FGAPGQANYAAAAANYLDALAAHHRTHHLPATSIAWGTWQGN-GLADSKARAYLDRR--GFRMSPSELATAAVTQAIDTERPY--VVIADIDWSKI---EHTSQ-TSDLVSA
KR4  FGAPGQANYAAAAANYLDALAAHHRTHHLPATSIAWGTWQGN-GLATG-QVSEHLRRR--GMFAMPPELAVTAVDGAIAS-GRPS--LLVADIDWKKLGP-VLSSK-SSVLLLED
KR5  WGSQNQCAYSAANAYLDALATHRQTHGLPGASIAWGPWAGK-GMSAGDAAHGYLEKR--GILPMEPRMALAAFHARAQQ--RPNSNLIIDADWERFVP-AFTARRHSPLIED

F.

OLE-TE -------APLEAVPLADGVRK---PQLICCSGTA PVGGPHEFARLASFFR---GTRAVSALPLPGYL-PGEQLPADLDAVLAAQAEAVEKQTGGAPFVLVCBAAGLMAHALACHLAGR GTPPSGEVLVDVYPPGRQEPVFGWQKELTBCGMFAQ--DFVPMDDTRLTALG
ERY-TE -------LDLVDMADGPGE---VTVICCAGTAA ISGPEFTRLAGALR---GIAFVRAVPQPGYE-EGEPLPSSMAAAVQADAVIRTQGDKPFVVAC-SACALMAYALATELLDRGHPPRGVVLIDVYPPGHQDAMNAWLEELJATLFDR--ETVRMDDTRLTALG
TYL-TE -------VALVPLADGAEDTGL PLLVGCA GTAVASGPVEFTAFAGALADLPAAAPMAALPQPGFL-PGERVPATPEALFEAQAEALLRYAAGRPFVLLG-SACANMAHALTRHLEANGGPA GLVMLMDIYTPADPGAMGVWRNDMFQWWRR--SDIPPDDHRLLTAMG
NID-TE -------GLPAPVGLATG TAR---PRLYCCAGTAATSNPREYAHFADALR---GRRDTVVLPLPGFDPAEPLPASLDALLADRADALLEHC GGEPFALACFSACANVAYALAAYLESRGSGPAAVVLMDMYFPDDPGAMGVWRDDL LRWSLER--SPVPLAEHRLTAMA
AVE-TE VRLAQGEARAOQEALARGETR---PALICLPTVA AVSSVYQYSRFAAGLN---GHRDWYWVPAGFL-EGEPLPSGIGAVTRMFADAIVRFTDGAPFALACHSACGWFEYAVTSHLERLGV RPEAVVTMDAYLPDD-G-IAPVASALTSEIFDRVTFVDVYTRLVAMG

OLE-TE TYDRLMG EWRPA PSGLP TLLIR ATEPMAEW TG---AIDWRASWEYDHTAVDMF GNFFTIMREHAEDAARHIDVWLKGLTP-----------------
ERY-TE AYDRLTG QWRPRETGLPTLLV SAGEPMGPWP---DDSWKPTWPFEHDTVAVP GDEFTMVQEHADAIARHIDAWLGGNS-------------------
TYL-TE AYHRLLLD WSPTPVRAFVHLR AEPMGDWPP---GDTGWQS HWDGAHTTAGIPCNHFTMMTEHASAAARLVHGWL AERTPSGQGGSPSRAAGREERP-
NID-TE GYHRLLLG SHFTALRAPVLLA RASEPLREWSGDGPDGWRSVPGVTSVTDVG NEFTMLTEYAADTASAVHDWLASTVRDNHDTPTERSPEDADVHR
AVE-TE GYFRIFS GWSPPDITTPAL FLRGRDGEQMPPP----------WGVPHTVLDIQNHFTMLEQFADSTARHDEWLTEIASVRR-----------------

Figure 3 (continued).

26.1%, 26.0%, 26.2%, 26.3%, 34.0%, and 33.9% aa identity to AT2, AT3, AT4, AT5, AT8, AT10, and AT12, respectively, while the AT1 shows 82.7%, 100%, 79.1%, 53.9%, and 50.8% aa identity to AT6, AT7, and AT9, and AT11, and ATload, respectively. Sequence alignment generated by a number of programs that perform pairwise comparisons showed that several AT domains of type I PKS are clustered into at least three groups [18,23]. The first group contains only the proposed malonate loading functions, the second group contains methylmalonyl loading functions, and the third group contains an acyl residue derived from the monocarboxylic acid loading function. The sequence alignment of AT domains in avermectin PKS coincides in this manner (AT1, 6, 7, 9, 11 and AT2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 12 possess methylmalonyl and malonyl loading functions, respectively). The ATload is somewhat different from the other 12 AT domains. Two of four invariant residues in regular AT domains, which are 25- and 105-aa C-terminal of the active site serine, respectively, were not conserved in the ATload. Interestingly, ATload clustering the third group is found in the N-terminal of the first module of DEBS and AVES only [11,18]. The actual assignment of the substrate specificity for each domain will have to await identification of the polyketide encoded by this pathway.

ACP domain

There is an ACP domain associated with each of the 12 modules in the avermectin PKS, and an additional ACP (ACPload) is located immediately upstream of the first KS domain (Figure 2). Similarities between all ACP domains range from 41.2% to 59.2% aa identity. Although the sequence homology among the all ACP domains is not high compared to that of KS domains, the sequence around the phosphopantheteine binding site, the serine residue in the LGFDS motif, is relatively conserved (Figure 3C). Remarkably, ACP10 has the active site sequence LGFVS where all previously identified ACPs in type I PKS possess aspartate adjacent to the serine. A similar observation was also found in ACP11 of RAPS, in which the active site sequence was LGINS [2].

DH domains

In avermectin PKS, all modules encoded putative KS, AT, and ACP domains responsible for all of the acyl condensation processes, but this was not the case for functions involved in the processing of β-carbons. Modules 1, 4, 5, and 10 encoded a KR domain only. Modules 3 and 11 lacked a KR domain. Modules 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 12 carried DH and KR domains (Figure 2). In modules, 2, 6, 8, 9, and 12, where DH activity is predicted to be required for initial

Biosynthetic gene cluster for avermectin in streptomyces avermitilis  
H Ikeda et al  

TE shows 37.7%, 39.2%, 34.8%, and 35.3% aa identity to the erythromycin, niddamycin, oleandomycin, and tylosin PKS and TEs, respectively. Analysis of alignment of these sequences revealed the invariant GXHXG and GXH motifs, which are considered to be essential for TE activity (Figure 3F) [10].

## Conclusions

(1) A type I PKS cluster for avermectin aglycon biosynthesis was isolated and sequenced from an avermectin-producing strain of *S. avermitilis*. It comprises four ORFs, AVES 1, AVES 2, AVES 3, and AVES 4, which encode two, four, three, and three modules, respectively. Analysis of deduced aa sequences of these four AVES containing 55 domains indicates that almost all domains in the 12 modules contain the invariant active sites conserved among type I PKS. Five AT domains, AT1, AT6, AT7, AT9, and AT11, are homologous to ATs specific for malonyl CoA, while the other seven, AT2, AT3, AT4, AT5, AT8, AT10, and AT12, are homologous to those ATs specific for methylmalonyl CoA.

(2) The NADP(H) binding motif of three KR domains, KR1, 4, and 5, are different from the motif conserved in type I PKS. These KR domains contain the motif sequence, GXGXXAXXXT, in the NADP(H) binding site. The dehydratase active site motif of DH2, containing the sequence of HXXXGXXXXS, is also different from that of the motif conserved in type I PKS.

(3) In module 10, there is a predicted active site for reduction (KR) which is not reflected in the ultimate structure of avermectin and which may be nonfunctional. A nonfunctional DH domain is found in module 7, and contains YXXXGXXXXS in the corresponding dehydratase-conserved motif. This replacement of histidine to tyrosine in the motif sequence is caused by a one-base change in the corresponding nucleotide sequence, in which CAC (H) is replaced by TAC (Y).

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid of the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture Japan no. 10680573 (to H.I.) and “Research for the Future” program of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, JSPS-RFTF96I00304 (to S.O. and H.I.).

## References

1. Altschul SF, W Gish, W Miller, EW Myers and DJ Lipman. 1990. Basic local alignment search tool. *J Mol Biol* 215: 403–410.
2. Aparicio JF, I Molnar, T Schwecke, A König, SF Haydock, LE Khaw, J Staunton and PF Leadlay. 1996. Organization of biosynthetic gene cluster for rapamycin in *Streptomyces hygroscopicus*: analysis of the enzymatic domains in the modular polyketide synthase. *Gene* 169: 9–16.
3. Aziz MA, S Diallo, IM Diop, M Lariviere and M Parta. 1982. Efficacy and tolerance of ivermectin in human onchocerciasis. *Lancet* 2: 171–173.
4. Bevitt DJ, J Corts, SF Haydock and PF Leadlay. 1992. Deoxyerythronolide B synthase 2 from *Saccharopolyspora erythraea*. Cloning of the structural gene, sequence analysis and inferred domain structure of the multifunctional enzyme. *Eur J Biochem* 204: 39–49.
5. Burg RW, BM Miller, EE Baker, J Birnbaum, SA Currie, R Hartman, Y-L Kong, RL Monaghan, G Olson, I Putter, JB Tunac, H Wallick, EO Stapley, R Oiwa and S Omura. 1979. Avermectins, new family of potent anthelmintic agents: producing organism and fermentation. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother* 15: 361–367.

6 Cane DE, T-C Liang, LK Kaplan, MK Nallin, MD Schulman, OD Hensens, AW Douglas and G Albers-Schönberg. 1983. Biosynthetic origin of the carbon skeleton and oxygen atoms of the avermectins. *J Am Chem Soc* 105: 4110–4112.

7 Chabala JC, H Mrozik, RL Tolman, P Eskola, LH Peterson, MF Woods, MH Fisher and WC Campbell. 1980. Ivermectin, a new broad-spectrum antiparasitic agent. *J Med Chem* 23: 1134–1136.

8 Chen TS, OD Hensens and MD Schulman. In: Campbell WC (Ed.), Ivermectin and Avermectin. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1989, p 55.

9 Cortés J, SF Haydock, GA Roberts, DJ Bevitt and PF Leadlay. 1990. An unusually large multifunctional polypeptide in the erythromycin-producing polyketide synthase of *Saccharopolyspora erythraea*. *Nature* 348: 176–178.

10 Donadio S and L Katz. 1992. Organization of the enzymatic domains in the multifunctional polyketide synthase involved in erythromycin formation in *Saccharopolyspora erythraea*. *Gene* 111: 51–60.

11 Donadio S, MJ Staver, JB McAlpine, SJ Swanson and L Katz. 1991. Modular organization of the genes required for complex polyketide biosynthesis. *Science* 252: 675–679.

12 Egerton JR, DA Ostling, LS Blair, CH Eary, D Suhayda, S Cifelli, RF Riek and WC Campbell. 1979. Avermectins, new family of potent anthelmintic agents: efficacy of the B1a component. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother* 15: 372–378.

13 Ikeda H and S Ōmura. 1993. Genetic aspects of the selective production of useful components in the avermectin producer *Streptomyces avermitilis*. *Actinomycetology* 7: 133–144.

14 Ikeda H and S Ōmura. 1995. Control of avermectin biosynthesis in *Streptomyces avermitilis* for the selective production of a useful component. *J Antibiot* 48: 669–682.

15 Ikeda H and S Ōmura. 1997. Avermectin biosynthesis. *Chem Rev* 97: 2591–2609.

16 Ikeda H, Y Takada, C-H Pang, H Tanaka and S Ōmura. 1993. Transposon mutagenesis by Tn4560 and its applications in

17 Ikeda H, R-L Wang, T Ohta and S Ōmura. 1998. Cloning of the gene encoding avermectin B 5-O-methyltransferase in avermectin-producing *Streptomyces avermitilis*. *Gene* 206: 175–180.

18 Ikeda H, T Nonomiya, M Usami, T Ohta and S Ōmura. 1999. Organization of the biosynthetic gene cluster for the polyketide anthelmintic macrolide avermectin in *Streptomyces avermitilis*. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 96: 9509–9514.

19 Ishikawa J and Hotta K. 1999. FramePlot: a new implementation of the frame analysis for predicting protein-coding regions in bacterial DNA with a high G+C content. *FEMS Microbiol Lett* 174: 251–253.

20 MacNeil DJ, JL Occi, KM Gewain, T MacNeil, PH Gibbons, CL Ruby and SJ Danis. 1992. Complex organization of the *Streptomyces avermitilis* genes encoding the avermectin polyketide synthase. *Gene* 115: 119–125.

21 MacNeil T, KM Gewain and DJ MacNeil. 1993. Deletion analysis of the avermectin biosynthesis genes of *Streptomyces avermitilis* by gene cluster displacement. *J Bacteriol* 175: 2552–2563.

22 Pearson WR. 1990. Rapid and sensitive sequence comparison with FASTP and FASTA. *Methods Enzymol* 183: 63–98.

23 Ruan X, D Stassi, SA Lax and L Katz. 1997. A second type-I PKS gene cluster isolated from *Streptomyces hygroscopicus* ATCC 29253, a rapamycin-producing strain. *Gene* 203: 1–9.

24 Scrutton NS, A Berry and RN Perham. 1990. Redesign of the coenzyme specificity of a dehydrogenase by protein engineering. *Nature* 343: 38–43.

25 Takiguchi Y, H Mishima, M Okuda and M Terao. 1980. Milbemycins, a new family of macrolide antibiotics. Fermentation, isolation and physico-chemical properties. *J Antibiot* 33: 1120–1127.

26 Thompson JD, Higgins DG, Gibson TJ. 1994. Improved sensitivity of profile searches through the use of sequence weights and gap excision. *Comput Appl Biosci* 10: 19–29.
