
**Trypanosome hydrolases and the blood-brain barrier**

John D. Lonsdale-Eccles and Dennis J. Grab

African trypanosomes cross the blood-brain barrier, but how they do so remains an area of speculation. We propose that proteases, such as the trypanopains and oligopeptidases that are released by trypanosomes, could mediate in this process. The trypanosomes also possess cell-surface-associated acid phosphatases that could play a role in invasion similar to that in advancing cancer cells. Such enzymes, perhaps acting in concert, have the potential to cause tissue degradation and ease the passage of the trypanosomes through various tissues in the host, including the blood-brain barrier.

Infection with African trypanosomes starts when an infected tsetse injects metacyclic forms of the parasites into the skin during blood feeding. The parasites mature into bloodstream forms. By 1–2 weeks, the bloodstream forms disperse throughout the body. In classical human sleeping sickness, the parasites invade the central nervous system (CNS) and the patients suffer from neurologic degeneration and psychiatric disorders. Death is the final outcome.

### A complex pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of African trypanosomiasis is complex, and varies with different species of hosts and parasites. The precise causes for the symptoms of human sleeping sickness are often difficult to define but usually include an altered blood volume and disruption of the thyroid, gonads, hormonal and neurological systems. Human trypanosomiasis and the experimental diseases caused by *Trypanosoma brucei* have been compared to inflammatory conditions. Support for this comes from studies which indicated that *Trypanosoma congolense* do not harm cells to which they are attached, unless in the presence of antibody or complement [1].

Although African trypanosomes are considered to be hematophagous parasites, they are found outside the bloodstream. *Trypanosoma b. brucei* is particularly noteworthy because of its predisposition to colonize the interstitial connective tissue, including heart muscle, pancreas and choroid plexus [2]. What attracts the parasites to different ecological niches in the body and how the parasites penetrate through various tissues are unclear issues. However, some clues can be found from literature. For example, electron micrograph examinations suggest that *T. congolense* penetrate through the dermis of the

skin between the collagen bundles in the plane of the collagen fibrils [3]. Thus, the parasites appear to tease apart the inter-fibril connections rather than degrade the entire collagen fibrils. But how African trypanosomes cross the interface of the blood-brain barrier still remains an unresolved issue.

#### Crossing the blood-brain barrier

The blood-brain barrier (BBB; Fig. 1) allows the passage of certain substances (e.g. glucose and essential amino acids) but denies access to other moieties, including pathogens and several drugs [4]. This barrier comprises tightly apposed cerebral-endothelial capillary cells held together by tight junctions. These tight junctions hold the brain microvascular endothelial cells of the BBB together in intimate contact thereby eliminating the gaps that usually occur between endothelial cells elsewhere in the body. The important components of the tight junctions are transmembrane proteins such as occludin and claudins, in addition to various membrane-associated guanylate kinases including ZO-1, ZO-2 and ZO-3. These membrane-associated guanylate kinases are attached to the occludin and claudins on the cytoplasmic cell surface [5]. The integrity of tight junctions is impaired by proteolysis [6].

A variety of mechanisms by which trypanosomes might enter the brain have been proposed, the most popular of which is that the parasites enter the brain indirectly through specialized areas where the endothelial barrier is incomplete (e.g. the choroid plexus) [7,8]. However, even this barrier-deficient area is not fully permeable, and the trypanosomes must bypass epithelial cells in order to penetrate the CNS through the choroid plexus (Fig. 1). Furthermore, the surface area of the BBB at the cerebral capillary endothelium is more extensive compared with areas such as the choroid plexus [4], thus increasing the likelihood that trypanosome passage could occur through the BBB. It seems unlikely that BBB traversal occurs by an intracellular route, but rather via transient leaks in a damaged barrier [9]. Nevertheless, the BBB remains impermeable to several trypanocidal drugs after the trypanosomes have gained access to the brain, suggesting that any damage to the barrier is either minimal or temporary.

The picture is further complicated by the fact that trypanosomes react differently with different host species. When African trypanosomes gain access to the human brain, little or no damage to the barrier is observed. By contrast, chronic trypanosomiasis in the rat is accompanied by extensive BBB damage [10]. However, recent evidence demonstrated the direct translocation of *T. b. brucei* across the BBB in rats during the early stages of infections [11]. Although extravascular trypanosomes were observed near capillaries, a generalized loss of the proteins in the tight-junction was not seen [11].

John D. Lonsdale-Eccles  
Center for Biophysical Sciences and Engineering, University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Dennis J. Grab*  
Dept of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 600 N. Wolfe Street/Park 256, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.  
*e-mail: dgrab@jhmi.edu*

are released by the parasites, or could be present on  
the surface of parasites [22]. These enzymes are in a  
prime position to cause pathology. Trypanopains and  
oligopeptidase B degrade immunoglobulins and  
peptide hormones, respectively, and can potentially  
destroy or disrupt intercellular protein junctions, the  
intercellular matrix and basement membranes.  
Trypanopains from *T. brucei* (called trypanopain-Tb  
or bruceipain) and *T. congolense* (called trypanopain-  
Tc or congopain) are cysteine proteases similar to  
mammalian cathepsin L [23, 24]. Although the  
cysteine proteases are susceptible to inhibition by  
serum-derived protease inhibitors such as  
plasma-derived kininogens, there is evidence that  
these inhibitors are not always effective against  
trypanopains [23]. By contrast to trypanopains,  
however, the oligopeptidases released from *T. brucei*  
(OP-Tb) [23, 25] and *T. congolense* (OP-Tc) [26] are  
not inhibited by host serum-derived protease  
inhibitors. OP-Tb is a serine protease with similar  
properties to several hormone-processing enzymes.  
Thus, host-peptide hormones are candidates for  
cleavage by the parasite oligopeptidases. Indeed,  
OP-Tb and OP-Tc are active against several hormones  
including atrial natriuretic factor [23]. It has been  
proposed that the tissues in the BBB are the end  
organs of atriopeptin control for water balance in the  
CNS [27], and high-affinity receptors for atrial  
natriuretic factors have been identified on the cells  
that constitute the BBB [27]. Thus, the observations  
that trypanosome oligopeptidase B can degrade the  
ligands of these receptors could be an important link  
in the localized disruption of this barrier. Reports  
have shown trypanosome-induced damage to the  
BBB, and vasogenic oedema (an increase in water and  
other plasma constituents in the brain caused by  
damage to the vascular elements in the brain), in the  
late stages of infection [10]. At day 35 post-infection,  
signs of vasogenic oedema were observed in the rat  
hypothalamus and thalamus. At this time, scattered  
small clumps or single trypanosomes were observed  
occasionally in the brain parenchyma.

Concerted interactions  
However, trypanosome-derived molecules might not  
be the only players in the tissue penetration story.  
The presence of trypanosomes in a particular  
environment results in the migration of host defense  
cells to the infected area [28]. These defense cells  
generate an inflammatory response with concomitant  
release of many different mediators, including host  
cytokines and proteases. In this scenario, a concerted  
interaction between host and trypanosomal enzymes  
could lead to the degradation of the intercellular  
matrix that then permits the parasites to penetrate  
through the tissue and to migrate to other sites.  
Hence, foci of inflammatory cells could be formed  
wherever trypanosomes are found. Furthermore,  
in vitro studies suggest that unhealthy parasites  
could release more protease than healthy parasites [29],

Proteases and pathology  
Trypanosomal hydrolases, such as proteases, are  
potential mediators of trypanosomiasis pathology  
(for review see Ref. [19]). Several proteolytic enzymes,  
including trypanopains and oligopeptidase B [20, 21],

and localized inflammatory responses could result in parasites through various tissue and matrix
an increased release of parasite proteases and environments. This could be accomplished by
peptidases, which could exacerbate localized tissue degrading and dephosphorylating the proteins in the
destruction.

For example, acid phosphatases have long been intercellular tight-junctions [34–36].

Acknowledgements Perspective
We thank Kwang-Sik Kim Looking to the future, we now have a variety of new
and Monique Stins (Johns tools for addressing some of the above ideas
Hopkins School of regarding the role of proteases in trypanosome
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, traversal of the BBB. Artificial *in vitro* models of the
USA), Arthur J. Cooper BBB are currently available in addition to specific
(Weil Medical College of protease inhibitors and protease-knockout
Cornell University, Ithaca, trypanosomes, which are being developed. We should
NY, USA) and Toshihide be able to test the role of specific hydrolases in the
Fukuma (Kurume penetration of tissue barriers.
University, Kurume,
Japan) for their
comments. We apologize
to authors we have not
referred to owing to space
limitations.

References

1 Banks, K.L. (1980) Injury induced by 13 Banks, K.L. (1978) Binding of Trypanosoma 25 Morty, R.E. *et al.* (1999) Oligopeptidase B
Trypanosoma congolense adhesion to cell congolense to the walls of small blood vessels. from Trypanosoma brucei, a new member
membranes. *J. Parasitol.* 66, 34–37 *J. Protozool.* 25, 241–245 of an emerging subgroup of serine
2 Bungener, W. (1983) Behavior of a Trypanosoma 14 Hemphill, A. and Ross, C.A. (1995) Flagellum- oligopeptidases. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274,
brucei strain (STIB 348C) in mice. 3. mediated adhesion of Trypanosoma congolense to 26149–26156
Histopathological findings in the terminal bovine aorta endothelial cells. *Parasitol. Res.* 81,
stage of infection. *Tropenmed. Parasitol.* 34, 412–420
213–219 15 Bungener, W. and Muller, G. (1976) [Adherence 26 Morty, R.E. *et al.* (1999) Purification and
3 Rudin, W. *et al.* (1984) Electron-microscopic phenomena in Trypanosoma congolense characterisation of a trypsin-like serine
localization of Trypanosoma brucei gambiense (author's transl.)]. *Trop. Med. Parasitol.* 27, digopeptidase from Trypanosoma
transmitted by Glossina morsitans centralis in 370–371 congolense. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 102,
Microtus montanus. *Acta Trop.* 41, 325–334 27 Chabrier, P.E. (1987) Specific binding of atrial
4 Tuomanen, E. (1996) Entry of pathogens into the natriuretic factor in brain microvessels. *Proc.
central nervous system. *FEMS Microbiol. Rev.* 18, 16 Abolarin, M.O. *et al.* (1982) Cryptic stage of Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 84, 2078–2081
289–299 sleeping-sickness trypanosome developing in 28 Dwinger, R.H. *et al.* (1987) Potential value of
5 Tsukita, S. and Furuse, M. (2000) The structure choroid plexus epithelial cells. *Br. Med. J.* 285, localized skin reactions (chancres) induced by
and function of claudins, cell adhesion molecules 1380–1382 Trypanosoma congolense transmitted by Glossina
at tight junctions. *Ann. New York Acad. Sci.* 915, 17 Stoppini, L. *et al.* (2000) Infection of organotypic morsitans centralis for the analysis of metacyclic
129–135 slice cultures from rat central nervous tissue with trypanosome populations. *Parasite Immunol.* 9,
18 Burleigh, B.A. and Andrews, N.W. (1995) 353–362
6 Anderson, J.M. and Van Itallie, C.M. (1995) Tight A 120-kDa alkaline peptidase from 29 Lonsdale-Eccles, J.D. and Grab, D.J. (1987)
junctions and the molecular basis for regulation of Trypanosoma cruzi is involved in the Purification of African trypanosomes can cause
paracellular permeability. *Am. J. Physiol.* 269, generation of a novel Ca²⁺-signaling factor biochemical changes in the parasites. *J. Protozool.*
G467–G475 for mammalian cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 34, 405–408
7 Poltera, A.A. *et al.* (1980) Trypanosoma brucei 5172–5180 30 Schenk, P. and Konrad, K. (1980) Ultrastructural
brucei: a model for cerebral trypanosomiasis in 19 McKerrow, J.H. *et al.* (1999) Cysteine protease localization of acid phosphatase in human
mice—an immunological, histological and inhibitors as chemotherapy for parasitic laryngeal carcinoma. *Arch. Otorhinolaryngol.*
electronic microscopic study. *Clin. Exp. Immunol.* infections. *Bioorg. Med. Chem.* 7, 639–644 226, 213–218
40, 496–507 20 Morty, R.E. *et al.* (2001) Trypanosome-derived 31 Tosomba, O.M. *et al.* (1996) Localisation of acid
8 Schultzberg, M. *et al.* (1988) Spread of oligopeptidase B is released into the plasma phosphatase activity on the surface of
Trypanosoma brucei to the nervous system: of infected rodents, where it persists and retains *Exp. Parasitol.* 84, 429–438
early attack on circumventricular organs full catalytic activity. *Infect. Immun.* 69, 32 McLoughlin, J. (1986) The association of
and sensory ganglia. *J. Neurosci. Res.* 21, 2757–2761 distinct acid phosphatases with the flagella
56–61 21 Authie, E. *et al.* (1992) Identification of a pocket and surface membrane fractions
9 Schmidt, H. and Bafort, J.M. (1987) African 33-kilodalton immunodominant antigen of obtained from bloodstream forms of
trypanosomiasis: haematogenic brain parasitism Trypanosoma congolense as a cysteine Trypanosoma rhodesiense. *Mol. Cell. Biochem.*
early in experimental infection through bypassing protease. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 56, 70, 177–184
the blood-brain barrier, with considerations on 103–116 33 Bakalara, N. *et al.* (2000) Purification,
brain trypanosomiasis in man. *Parasitol. Res.* 73, 22 Bangs, J.D. *et al.* (2001) In vitro cytotoxic effects cloning, and characterization of an acidic
15–21 on Trypanosoma brucei and inhibition of ectoprotein phosphatase differentially expressed
10 Philip, K.A. *et al.* (1994) Blood-brain Leishmania major GP63 by peptidomimetic in the infectious bloodstream form of
barrier damage in experimental African metalloprotease inhibitors. *Mol. Biochem.* Trypanosoma brucei. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275,
trypanosomiasis. *Ann. Trop. Med. Parasitol.* 88, *Parasitol.* 114, 111–117 8863–8871
607–616 23 Troeberg, L. *et al.* (1996) Proteases from 34 Steardo, L. and Nathanson, J.A. (1987) Brain
11 Mulenga, C. *et al.* (2001) Trypanosoma brucei Trypanosoma brucei brucei. Purification, barrier tissues: end organs for atriopeptides.
brucei crosses the blood-brain barrier while tight characterisation and interactions with host *Science* 235, 470–473
junction proteins are preserved in a rat chronic regulatory molecules. *Eur. J. Biochem.* 238, 35 Rubin, L.L. and Staddon, J.M. (1999) The cell
disease model. *Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol.* 27, 728–736 biology of the blood-brain barrier. *Annu. Rev.*
77–85 24 Fish, W.R. *et al.* (1995) Primary structure *Neurosci.* 22, 11–28
12 Masake, R.A. *et al.* (1984) Cerebral and partial characterization of a life-cycle- 36 Leroy, A. *et al.* (2000) *Entamoeba histolytica*
trypanosomiasis in cattle with mixed regulated cysteine protease from Trypanosoma disturbs the tight junction complex in
Trypanosoma congolense and T. brucei brucei (Nannomonas) congolense. *Gene* 161, human enteric T84 cell layers. *FASEB J.* 14,
infections. *Acta Trop.* 41, 237–246 125–128 1139–1146

http://parasites.trends.com
