
RANK-L AND RANK: T Cells, Bone Loss, and Mammalian Evolution

Lars E. Theill${}^{1}$, William J. Boyle${}^{2}$, and Josef M. Penninger${}^{3*}$

${}^{1}$Inflammation Drug Discovery Research, ${}^{2}$Discovery Research Amgen Inc., One Amgen Center Drive, Thousand Oaks, California 91320-1789; e-mail: jpenning@amgen.com  
${}^{3}$The Amgen Institute, Ontario Cancer Institute, and the Departments of Medical Biophysics and Immunology, University of Toronto, 620 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 2C1, Canada

Key Words T cell-dendritic cell interaction, osteoimmunology, TNF/TNFR super family molecules, osteoclast

■ Abstract TNF and TNFR family proteins play important roles in the control of cell death, proliferation, autoimmunity, the function of immune cells, or the organogenesis of lymphoid organs. Recently, novel members of this large family have been identified that have critical functions in immunity and that couple lymphoid cells with other organ systems such as bone morphogenesis and mammary gland formation in pregnancy. The TNF-family molecule RANK-L (RANK-L, TRANCE, ODF) and its receptor RANK are key regulators of bone remodeling, and they are essential for the development and activation of osteoclasts. Intriguingly, RANK-L/RANK interactions also regulate T cell/dendritic cell communications, dendritic cell survival, and lymph node formation; T cell-derived RANK-L can mediate bone loss in arthritis and periodontal disease. Moreover, RANK-L and RANK are expressed in mammary gland epithelial cells, and they control the development of a lactating mammary gland during pregnancy and the propagation of mammalian species. Modulation of these systems provides us with a unique opportunity to design novel therapeutics to inhibit bone loss in arthritis, periodontal disease, and osteoporosis.

INTRODUCTION

More than three decades ago, lymphotoxin and tumor necrosis factor were identified as products of lymphocytes and macrophages that caused the lysis of certain types of cells, especially tumor cells (1–3). Large-scale sequencing efforts allowed for the identification of many related proteins, collectively referred to as TNF- and TNFR-related superfamily proteins. The receptors and ligands in this superfamily have unique structural attributes that couple them directly to signaling pathways for cell proliferation, survival, and differentiation (4).

*To whom correspondence should be addressed.

TNF family members are type 2 (carboxy-terminus outside the cell) transmembrane proteins that assemble into functional trimers. The trimeric ligands, either membrane bound or proteolytically cleaved to a soluble form, bind their specific receptors and elicit either growth or cell death. TNF receptors (TNFR) are type 1 transmembrane glycoproteins with a characteristic cysteine-rich extracellular domain. Two subgroups of TNFR homologues, Fas, TNFR1, DR3, DR4, DR5, and DR6, contain intracellular death domain that bind TRADD or FADD. This leads to activation of caspase 8 and apoptosis (4). However, signaling through death-receptors can also be required for proliferation of hepatocytes and T cells (5, 6). The other group including TNFR2, CD40, or CD30 bind TNF-receptor associated factors (TRAFs), molecular adapters that couple these surface receptors to downstream signaling cascades. This leads to activation of JNK/SAPK and NFκB, which can promote cell growth and survival. These proteins therefore play critical roles in morphogenesis, the control of apoptosis, differentiation, or proliferation. TNF/TNFR superfamily proteins are now extensively studied as targets for therapies against many human diseases such as atherosclerosis, allograft rejection, arthritis, and cancer. For excellent recent reviews see References (4, 7).

Members of the tumor necrosis factor superfamilies of ligands and cell-surface receptors regulate immune function, and most TNF/TNFR superfamily proteins, such as FASL/FAS, CD40L/CD40, TNF/TNFR, or LTβ/LTβR, to name a few, are expressed in the immune system, where they coordinate immune cell homeostasis, activation-induced cell death, T cell priming, functions, and survival of dendritic cells, or the formation of germinal centers and lymphoid organs such as Peyer's patches and lymph nodes (4, 8, 9). Recently, novel members of this large family have been identified that have critical functions in immunity and couple lymphoid cells with other organ systems such as bone morphogenesis and mammary gland formation in pregnancy. In this review we discuss the biological functions of RANK-L, its receptor RANK (receptor activator of NFκB ligand), and the decoy receptor OPG. These proteins have become principal targets in development of new therapies for osteoporosis, tooth loss, arthritis, or bone metastases in cancer.

## RANK-L, RANK, OPG: Molecular Links Between Bone Remodeling, Immunity, and Pregnancy

The TNF-family molecule RANK-L [ligand to receptor activator of NFκB ligand; also known as osteoprotegerin-ligand (OPG-L); TNF-related activation-induced cytokine (TRANCE), osteoclast differentiation factor (ODF), and TNFSF11] and its receptor RANK (TNFRSF11A) are key regulators of bone remodeling and essential for the development and activation of osteoclasts. RANK-L also regulates T cell/dendritic cell communications, dendritic cell survival, and lymph node organogenesis. Production of RANK-L by activated T cells can directly regulate osteoclastogenesis and bone remodeling, and it explains why autoimmune diseases, cancers, leukemias, asthma, chronic viral infections, and periodontal disease result in systemic and local bone loss. In particular, RANK-L appears to be the pathogenic principle that causes bone and cartilage destruction in arthritis.

Inhibition of RANK-L function via the natural decoy receptor osteoprotegerin (OPG, TNFRSF11B) prevents bone loss in postmenopausal osteoporosis and cancer metastases and completely blocks crippling in a rat model of arthritis. Intriguingly, RANK-L and RANK play essential roles in the formation of a lactating mammary gland in pregnancy and lactating. Thus, this system provided an unexpected molecular paradigm that links bone morphogenesis, T cell activation, and the organization of lymphoid tissues, with mammary gland formation required for the survival of mammalian species.

## Remodeling of Bone

Morphogenesis and remodeling of bone involve the synthesis of bone matrix by osteoblasts and the coordinate resorption of bone by osteoclasts (10). In fact, it has been estimated that ~10% of the total bone mass in humans is being remodeled per year. Osteoblasts and osteoclasts arise from distinct cell lineages and maturation processes, i.e., osteoclasts arise from mesenchymal stem cells, whereas osteoclasts differentiate from hematopoietic monocyte/macrophage precursors (Figure 1) (11). Imbalances between osteoclast and osteoblast activities can arise from a wide variety of hormonal changes or perturbations of inflammatory and growth factors, resulting in skeletal abnormalities characterized by decreased (osteoporosis) or increased (osteopetrosis) bone mass.

Increased osteoclast activity is seen in many osteopenic disorders, including postmenopausal osteoporosis, Paget's disease, lytic bone metastases or rheumatoid arthritis, leading to increased bone resorption and crippling bone damage (10). Various factors have been described including CSF-1 (M-CSF), IL-1, TGF-$\beta$, TGF-$\alpha$, TNF$\alpha$, TNF$\beta$, IL-6, vitamin 1,25-hydroxyvitamin D3, IL-11, calcitonin, PGE2, or parathyroid hormone (PTH), all of which affect osteoclastogenesis at distinct stages of development (11). However, genetic ablation experiments have shown that these factors are not essential for osteoclast development in vivo. Due to the enormous social and economic impacts of bone loss, the crippling effects to human health, as well as the search to increase the human life-span without the side-effects of old age, it was of paramount importance to identify essential factors involved in osteoclast development and bone remodeling. These factors are the TNF-TNFR superfamily proteins RANK-L and RANK. We first discuss the genetic and functional links between bone metabolism and the immune system that explain bone loss associated with multiple diseases. Inhibition of RANK-L function via its natural decoy receptor osteoprotegerin (OPG) or small molecules might be the future treatment of choice to abolish osteoporosis, tooth loss, or crippling in arthritis.

RANK-L—IDENTIFICATION OF THE CRITICAL OSTEOCLAST DIFFERENTIATION FACTOR RANK-L/RANKLTRANCE/ODF was cloned simultaneously by four independent groups (12–15). The *rankl* gene encodes a TNF superfamily molecule of 316 amino acids (38 kDa), and three RANK-L subunits assemble to form the functional trimeric molecule. Trimeric RANK-L is initially made as a membrane

anchored molecule and can be subsequently released from the cell surface as soluble homotrimeric molecules following proteolytic cleavage by the metalloprotease-disintegrin TNFα convertase (TACE) (16). It remains to be seen whether TACE is indeed the critical protease required for the release of RANK-L from the cell surface. Although slight functional differences may exist, in our hands both soluble and membrane-bound RANK-L can function as potent agonistic ligands for osteoclastogenesis in vitro (13, 16, 17). However, other authors have suggested that membrane-bound RANK-L may work more efficiently than soluble RANK-L (18).

RANK-L is extensively expressed in osteoblast/stromal cells, primitive mesenchymal cells surrounding the cartilaginous anlagen and hypertrophied-chondrocytes. RANK-L expression can be upregulated by bone resorbing factors such as glucocorticoids, vitamin D3, IL-1, IL-6, IL-11, IL-17, TNFα, PGE₂, or PTH (Table 1) (13, 15). Using in vitro culture systems, it has been shown that RANK-L can both activate mature osteoclasts and mediate osteoclastogenesis in the presence of CSF-1 (13, 15). rankl⁻/⁻ mice display severe osteopetrosis, stunted growth, and a defect in tooth eruption, and rankl⁻/⁻ osteoblasts cannot support osteoclastogenesis. However, these mice contain hematopoietic precursors that can differentiate into phenotypically and functionally mature osteoclasts in vitro in the presence of recombinant RANK-L and CSF-1. Importantly, osteoblast cell lines derived from rankl⁻/⁻ mice do not support osteoclast formation, indicating that the defect

TABLE 1 Molecules that regulate RANK-L and OPG levels

| RANKL | OPG |
|-------|-----|
| Hormones |  |
| Vitamin-D3 | Increased | Increased |
| PTH | Increased | Decreased |
| PTHrP | Increased | Decreased |
| Estradiol | No change | Increased |
| Cytokines |  |
| TNF-α | Increased | Increased |
| IL-1 | Increased | Increased |
| IL-6 | Increased | n.t. |
| IL-11 | Increased | n.t. |
| IL-17 | Increased | n.t. |
| Growth factors |  |
| TGF-β | Decreased | Increased |
| BMP-2 | n.t. | Increased |
| Others |  |
| Prostaglandin E2 | Increased | Decreased |
| Glucocorticoid | Increased | Decreased |
| CD40L | Increased | n.t. |
in osteoclastogenesis observed in $rankl^{-/-}$ mice is due to an intrinsic defect in osteoblastic stroma. Whereas csf-1 mutant $op/op$ mice display a developmental arrest in both monocyte/macrophage and osteoclast lineages, $rankl^{-/-}$ mice display normal monocyte/macrophage differentiation and normal differentiation of dendritic cells (DCs). The osteoclast defect in $csf-1$ mutant $op/op$ mice is not absolute and older $op/op$ mice do have, albeit only few, osteoclasts. Moreover, the defect in $op/op$ mice can be reversed by transgenic overexpression of Bcl-2 in the osteoclast/monocyte lineage indicating that—in contrast to RANK-L—CSF-1 expression is not essential for osteoclast development (19). Thus, RANK-L is a specific and essential differentiation factor for osteoclast precursors and an activation factor for mature osteoclasts (Figure 2).

## RANK

The receptor for RANK-L is RANK (receptor activator of NF$\kappa$B ligand, also known as TRANCE-R, or TNFRSF11A), a member of TNF-R superfamily. RANK is expressed as a transmembrane heterotrimer on the surface of hematopoietic osteoclast progenitors, mature osteoclasts, chondrocytes, and mammary gland epithelial cells (12, 20). In vitro ligation of RANK with RANK-L results in osteoclastogenesis from progenitor cells and the activation of mature osteoclasts (20–22). Mice with a genetic mutation of RANK are exact phenocopies of $rankl^{-/-}$ mice and have a complete block in osteoclast development that can be restored by reintroduction of RANK into bone marrow progenitor cells (23, 24). The osteopetrosis observed in these mice can be reversed by transplantation of bone marrow from $rag1^{-/-}$ mice, indicating that $rank^{-/-}$ mice have an intrinsic defect in osteoclast function (24). Thus, the interaction between RANK-L expressed by stromal cells/osteoblasts and its receptor RANK expressed on osteoclast precursors is essential for osteoclastogenesis (Figure 2). In human familial expansile osteolysis, a rare autosomal dominant bone disorder characterized by focal areas of increased bone remodeling (25), a heterozygous insertion mutation in exon 1 of RANK has been noted that appears to increase RANK-mediated NF$\kappa$B activation and thus might be causal for the disease. These genetic results in humans and mutant mice established the absolute dependency of osteoclast differentiation and activation of mature osteoclasts on the expression of RANK-L and RANK.

When RANK on osteoclasts is activated, it sends signals into the cells through adapter proteins (Figure 3). RANK contains 383 amino acids in its intracellular domain (residues 234–616), which contains three putative binding domains (termed I, II, and III) for tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factors (TRAFs) (26). Indeed, RANK interacts with TRAFs 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 both in vitro and in cells (27). Mapping of the structural requirements for TRAF/RANK interaction revealed multiple TRAF binding sites clustered in two distinct domains in the RANK cytoplasmic tail. These TRAF binding domains were shown to be functionally important for the RANK-dependent induction of NF-$\kappa$B andc-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) activities. In particular, TRAF6 interacts with membrane-proximal determinants distinct from those binding TRAFs 1, 2, 3, and 5. When this membrane-proximal TRAF6 interaction domain was deleted, RANK-mediated NF-$\kappa$B signaling was completely inhibited, whereas JNK activation was only partially inhibited (26–29), suggesting that interaction with TRAFs is necessary for NF-$\kappa$B activation but not essential for activation of the JNK pathway. Indeed mice lacking TRAF6 have bone phenotypes similar to that of $rankl^{-/-}$ and $rank^{-/-}$ mice due to a partial block in osteoclastogenesis and defective activation of mature osteoclasts (30–32). It should be noted that TRAF6 mutant mice still have TRAP$^{+}$ osteoclasts (31), whereas NF-$\kappa$B1/NF-$\kappa$B2 double mutant mice lack TRAP$^{+}$ osteoclasts (33, 34). Thus, TRAF6 is a critical factor involved in the activation of mature osteoclasts, but other TRAF6s (and possibly other molecules) appear to be able to partially substitute for the loss of TRAF6 during osteoclast development. In line with these data, osteoclastogenesis can be initiated in $rank^{-/-}$ mice by transfer of mutant RANK that lacks the TRAF6 binding site (24, and unpublished).

RANK-L also activates the anti-apoptotic serine/threonine kinase Akt/PKB through a signaling complex involving c-Src and TRAF6 (35). c-Src and TRAF6 interact with each other and with RANK following receptor engagement, and a deficiency in c-Src or the addition of Src family kinase inhibitors blocks TRANCE-mediated Akt/PKB activation in osteoclasts. TRAF6, in turn, enhances the kinase activity of c-Src leading to tyrosine phosphorylation of downstream signaling molecules such as c-Cbl (35). Moreover, RANK can recruit TRAF6, Cbl family scaffolding proteins, and the phospholipid kinase PI3-K in a ligand- and Src-dependent manner. RANK-L mediated Akt/PKB activation is defective in $cbl-b^{-/-}$ dendritic cells (36). These findings implicate Cbl family proteins not only as negative regulators of signaling, but also as positive modulators of TNFR superfamily signaling. Moreover, these data provided the first evidence of a cross-talk between TRAF proteins and Src family kinases. In addition, it should be noted that inhibition of p38 kinases using SB203580 and overexpression of dominant negative p38$\alpha$ or MKK6 inhibit RANK-L-induced differentiation of the osteoclast-like cell line RAW264 (37).

## Osteoprotegerin—Protector of the Bone

Osteoprotegerin (OPG, “protector of the bone”; also known as osteoclastogenesis inhibitory factor, OCIF) is a secreted protein with homology to members of the TNF receptor family (13, 15, 38, 39). The $opg$ gene encodes a 44-kDa protein that is posttranslationally modified to a 55-kDa molecule through N-linked glycosylation. Although OPG is a member of the TNFR-family, whose membrane normally assembles as molecular trimers, OPG is secreted as a 110-kDa homodimer. OPG functions as a soluble decoy receptor to RANK-L and competes with RANK for RANK-L binding. Consequently, OPG is an effective inhibitor of osteoclast maturation and activation in vitro (13, 38). High systemic levels of osteoprotegerin(OPG) in OPG transgenic mice cause osteopetrosis with normal tooth eruption and bone elongation, and these levels also inhibit the development and activity of endosteal, but not periosteal, osteoclasts (38). By contrast, OPG-deficient mice display severe osteoporosis associated with a high incidence of fractures (40, 41), indicating that the level of bone mass correlates with the levels of OPG in mice.

Expression of OPG in ST2 stromal cell line and human bone marrow stromal cells is downregulated by bone-resorbing factors such as vitamin D3 [1,25(OH)2D3], prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), or glucocorticoids and is upregulated by Ca²⁺ ions and TGFβ (42, 43, 39). OPG is also expressed in follicular dendritic cells (identified as FDCR-1) and is upregulated following CD40 ligation (44). In addition to osteoporosis, some but not all OPG mutant mice develop calcification of their large arteries (40), and RANK-L and RANK transcripts are detected in the calcified arteries of OPG⁻/⁻ mice (45). Transgenic OPG delivered from mid-gestation through adulthood does prevent the formation of arterial calcification in *opg*⁻/⁻ mice by blocking a process resembling osteoclastogenesis (45). These data indicate that the OPG/RANK-L/RANK signaling pathway may play an important role in both pathological and physiological calcification processes. Such findings may also explain the observed high clinical incidence of vascular calcification in the osteoporotic patient population (46). Since women with osteoporosis have increased incidence of strokes (47, 48), OPG, RANK-L, and RANK may play, similar to the CD40 and CD40L system (49), a role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, strokes, or heart attacks via a yet unknown regulation of endothelial cells.

All genetic and functional experiments by many different groups indicate that the balance between RANK-L-RANK signaling and the levels of biologically active OPG regulate development and activation of osteoclasts and bone metabolism (Figure 2). Intriguingly, all factors that inhibit or enhance bone resorption via osteoclasts act via regulation of RANK-L-RANK and/or OPG. Thus, it appears that the complex system of osteoclast-regulated bone-remodeling is only controlled by these three molecules. However, although RANK-L is also expressed in many other tissues than the bone, osteoclast development is restricted to the bone microenvironment suggesting that another tissue-specific factor may exist that acts in concert with RANK-L/RANK. It has recently been shown in vitro that TNFα and IL-1 can apparently induce the development of TRAP⁺ osteoclasts in the absence of RANK/RANK-L (50, 51). However, in our own genetic experiments using RANK-deficient osteoclast progenitors, TNFα as well as IL-1-dependent osteoclastogenesis are strictly dependent on RANK expression. Thus, whereas TNFα and IL-1 appear to potentiate the development of osteoclasts (52), presumably via activation of common second messenger systems such as NFκB activation, both of these molecules rely on the expression of RANK-L/RANK. It should be also noted that mutations of TNFα, TNFR1, or TNFR2 do not cause any alterations in bone metabolisms or osteoclast development/activation in vivo.

In addition to the association between RANK-L and OPG, OPG can also bind to the TNF-family molecule TRAIL at low stoichiometry (~10,000 times less binding to TRAIL than to RANK-L) (53). OPG-Fc binds TRAIL with an affinity of 3.0 nM,which is slightly weaker than the interaction of TRID-Fc or DR5-Fc with TRAIL. Functionally, high doses of OPG inhibit TRAIL-induced apoptosis of Jurkat cells and TRAIL can block the anti-osteoclastogenic activity of OPG (53). These data suggest potential cross-regulatory mechanisms by OPG and TRAIL. However, it is still not known whether OPG-TRAIL interactions have any functional relevance in vivo. Importantly, OPG expression is induced by estrogen in cell lines and in vivo (54, 55), which might explain postmenopausal osteoporosis in women: That is, reduced ovarian function leads to reduced estrogen levels and hence reduced OPG levels, which release RANK-L from the inhibition by the decoy receptor. Injection of OPG into ovariectomized female rats blocks bone loss and osteoporosis normally associated with the loss of ovarian function (38). Thus, OPG and/or modulation of RANK-L-RANK function via small molecules are promising avenues to prevent postmenopausal osteoporosis. In essence, OPG appears to function in bone loss similar to insulin in diabetes: Injection of OPG prevents osteoclast activation and osteopenia in essentially every model system of osteoclast-mediated bone loss.

## The Role of RANK-L and RANK in the Immune System

At around the same time we had the first evidence that RANK-L might play a role in osteoclast development, RANK-L (TRANCE) was independently cloned by two other groups as a molecule expressed on the surface of activated T cells (12, 14). Both soluble and membrane-bound RANK-L is produced by activated CD4⁺ and CD⁸⁺ T cells (14, 17). RANK-L is also expressed in lymph nodes, spleen, thymus and intestinal lymphoid patches (13), and immature CD4⁻CD8⁻ thymocytes (12). RANK-L expression in T cells is induced by antigen receptor engagement and is regulated by calcineurin, ERK1/ERK-2, and PKC-regulated signaling pathways (14, 17). RANK is expressed on the surface of dendritic cells (DCs), mature T cells, and hematopoietic precursors; RANK-L-RANK interactions can induce cluster formation, Bcl-XL expression, survival, CD40 expression, and IL-12 production in DC (Figure 4) (12, 14, 56). In addition, OPG was found in a screen to identify novel genes expressed in follicular dendritic cells. OPG can be found on the cell surface of DCs probably by capturing of soluble OPG the cell membrane via binding of a hyaluronic acid binding region present in OPG (44). Thus, like the interactions between CD40-L and CD40, or CD28 and CD80/CD86, the binding of RANK-L to RANK can regulate DC functions, T cell activation, and T cell-DC communication in vitro (12, 57). Moreover, OPG may modulate this interaction.

## Lymph Node Organogenesis

During the initial analyses of *rankl*⁻/⁻ and later of *rank* mutant mice, a completely unexpected phenotype became evident: *rankl*⁻/⁻ and *rank*⁻/⁻ mice displayed complete absence of all lymph nodes (23, 24, 58). Recent studies of mice deficient for lymphotoxin-α (LTα) (59, 60), LTβ (61, 62), TNF-R1 (TNFRp55) (63), LTβ receptor (LTβR) (64, 65), or Id2 (66) have revealed important roles for each of these
molecules in the development and organization of secondary lymphoid tissues. For example, TNFα activation of the TNF-R1 is required for the formation of splenic B lymphocyte follicles, follicular dendritic networks, and germinal center formation (63, 67). Mice with disrupted LTα, LTβ, or LTβR genes lack lymph nodes, Peyer’s patches, and follicular dendritic cells; such mice show altered splenic architecture (59, 61, 62, 65). Thus, it was assumed that lymph node organogenesis and the development of Peyer’s patches are always genetically linked. Surprisingly, *rankl*⁻/⁻ and *rank*⁻/⁻ mice lack all lymph nodes but display intact splenic architecture and develop Peyer’s patches normally, suggesting that RANK-L and RANK have a specific and essential role in lymph node organogenesis. Importantly, RANK-L disruption provided the first evidence that development of lymph nodes and Peyer’s patches can be genetically uncoupled.

The concerted activity of several cell lineages including fibroblasts, macrophages, reticular cells, and endothelial cells is required for the morphogenesis of primordial lymph nodes (8). These primordial lymph nodes are subsequently seeded by T and B cells and CD4⁺CD3⁻LTβ⁺ cells that differentiate into NK cells, antigen presenting cells, and follicular cells to form mature compact nodes (68). In situ hybridization of normal lymph nodes has shown that RANK-L- and RANK-expressing cells are present in lymph nodes, located mainly in the cortical areas adjacent to subcapsular sinuses (38). The identity of these cells has yet to be determined. Since RANK and RANK-L are also expressed in the spleen and Peyer’s patches, restricted RANK-L-RANK expression cannot account for the selective lack of lymph nodes. Moreover, because defective homing of *rankl*⁻/⁻ lymphocytes was excluded as the cause of defective lymph node formation and normal bone marrow cells cannot rescue the lymph node defect in *rankl*⁻/⁻ mice in chimeric transfer experiments, we speculated that RANK-L may act as a growth and/or survival factor on a lymph node organizing cell during embryonic development (58). Recently it has been shown that the defective lymph node development in *rankl*⁻/⁻ mice correlates with a significant reduction in lymphotoxin LTαβ⁺α4β7⁺CD45⁺CD4⁺CD3⁻ cells and their failure to form clusters in rudimentary mesenteric (69). Transgenic RANK-L-mediated restoration of lymph node development required LTαβ expression on CD45⁺CD4⁺CD3⁻ cells as lymph node formation could not be induced in *LTα*⁻/⁻ mice. The authors proposed that both RANK-L and LTαβ regulate the colonization and cluster formation by CD45⁺CD4⁺CD3⁻ cells during lymph node organogenesis (69).

Similar to *rankl*⁻/⁻ and *rank*⁻/⁻ mice, TNF-R1⁻/⁻ mice exhibit retained but small Peyer’s patches (63, 67), which suggests that both TNF-R1 and RANK-L may have a potential, albeit not essential, role in the formation of Peyer’s patches. We have recently generated *rankl-tnfr1* double knockout mice, and these mice completely lack Peyer’s patches in the small intestine without further affecting the defects in splenic architecture observed in *tnfr1* single mutant mice (Y. Kong and J. M. Penninger, unpublished). Thus, RANK-L is essential for lymph node formation and cooperates with the TNFR1 in the formation of Peyer’s patches. The exact cellular and molecular mechanisms of RANK-L-RANK-regulated lymph node

morphogenesis and the linkage between lymph node and Peyer's patch formation need to be tested.

# RANK-L-RANK and Dendritic Cells—In Search of a Function?

Similar to the CD40L/CD40 system, interactions between RANK-L expressed on activated T cells and RANK expressed on dendritic cells can mediate DC survival via Bcl-XL induction and upregulation of the costimulatory molecule CD40 on DCs (Figure 4) (12, 56, 57). Recently it has also been shown that RANK-L activates the anti-apoptotic serine/threonine kinase Akt/PKB through a signaling complex involving TRAF6 and c-Src on mature DCs and osteoclasts (35). In addition to Akt/PKB activation, NF-κB and ERK are activated by RANK-L. Because NK-κB, ERK, and Akt/PKB promote cell survival by inhibiting apoptosis-inducing pathways, activation of these anti-apoptotic molecules seems to be at least partially responsible for the RANK-L-mediated DC survival. In addition to these in vitro studies, it has been shown that treatment of antigen-pulsed mature DCs with soluble RANK-L in vitro enhances the number and persistence of antigen-presenting DCs in the draining lymph nodes in vivo (56). Furthermore, RANK-L treatment increased antigen-specific primary T cell responses. Interestingly, significant memory responses were observed only in mice injected with RANK-L-treated DCs (56). The increase in primary and memory T cell responses following vaccination with RANK-L-treated DCs could be due to enhanced/altered cytokine production such as expression of IL-12 and/or an increased number of antigen-pulsed DCs.

Both CD40L and RANK-L have functional similarity, are expressed on activated T cells, and enhance the activation and survival of DCs (12, 57). However, in contrast to CD40L/CD40, RANK-L/RANK signaling does not alter the expression of cell surface molecules such as MHC class II, CD80, CD86, and CD54. Whereas CD40L is primarily expressed on activated CD4⁺ T cells, RANK-L is expressed on activated CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ T cells (70, 17). Moreover, the maximal level of RANK-L following the initial T cell activation event occurs at 48 h, and high levels of RANK-L expression are sustained until 96 h, while CD40L is rapidly expressed and downregulated (71). Thus, CD40L-CD40 interactions may primarily control the initial priming stage, whereas RANK-L-RANK may act at later times than does CD40L during the immune response. For example, CD40L is essential for the T cell-dependent B cell responses such as germinal center formation, affinity maturation, and class switching (72, 73). By contrast, in *rankl*⁻/⁻ mice, germinal center formation, Ig class-switching, and the production of neutralizing antiviral Abs are not overtly affected, and all the B cell defects could be explained by the absence of lymph nodes (Y.-Y. Kong and J. M. Penninger, unpublished).

Inhibition of RANK-L in vivo using a soluble RANK-Fc molecule does not block the priming of LCMV-specific T cells, but it does impair proliferation of CD4⁺ T cells to the viral antigen at later time points after infection (74). This impaired CD4⁺ T cell response in RANK-Fc treated mice was especially apparent
in the absence of CD40-expression. Thus, at later stages of the immune response, RANK-L can regulate CD40L-independent activation of CD4<sup>+</sup> T helper cells (74). These observations suggest that although CD40L and RANK-L have functional similarity and may cooperate, RANK-L and CD40-L may also have fundamentally different functions in the control of immune responses: CD40L regulates T/B responses, and RANK-L appears to have a role in memory T cell responses. However, in our laboratory using OPG transgenic mice and bone marrow chimeric mice that have normal lymph nodes but lack RANK-L expression on lymphocytes, we noted modulation of RANK-L does not impair the generation of cytotoxic T cells (P. Ohashi, J. N. Penninger, unpublished).

Only activated T cells, but not resting T cells, express RANK-L, which promotes dendritic cell survival (57). DCs reside in tissues as immature cells and are specialized to capture and process antigens that lead to maturation of DCs in response to inflammatory stimuli. Mature DCs that have captured antigens migrate to T cell zones of secondary lymphoid organs by afferent lymphatics in order to present antigen to antigen-specific T cells. The T cell areas of secondary lymphoid organs represent the microenvironment that allows interactions between DCs, T cells, and B cells to initiate adaptive immune responses (reviewed in 75). Antigen-bearing DCs are in direct contact with naive antigen-specific T cells within the T cell areas of lymph nodes, and after interaction with T cells these DCs are eliminated rapidly (76). Activated T cells induce apoptosis of DCs by producing the TNF-family molecules TRAIL, FasL, and TNFα. Accumulation and prolonged survival of DCs were reported in patients with human autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome type II. These patients had a caspase-10 mutation that rendered DCs resistant to TRAIL-induced cell death (77). Thus, it appears that mature DCs have short life-spans and that mature DCs presenting antigens to T cells must be effectively eliminated to avoid excessive immune responses. The lifespan of DCs may be an important checkpoint to control for the induction of tolerance, priming, and chronic inflammation (78).

Since both TRAIL and RANK-L are produced by activated T cells, the balance between RANK-L and TRAIL may influence DC survival (79–81). Both RANK-L and TRAIL can bind to OPG (53) and OPG is made by DCs (44), which suggests that these factors control the fate of DCs. Based on these studies, various groups are currently trying to control the DC fate via RANK-L-RANK and OPG to modulate in vivo DC survival and to enhance the efficiency of DC-based vaccinations for anti-tumor therapy or the treatment of autoimmune diseases. In the final analyses of all the published genetic and functional studies on RANK-L, RANK, and OPG, it appears that although these molecules can influence some aspects of lymphocyte and DC functions, none of these molecules plays an essential function in T cells, B cells, or DCs that cannot be compensated for by other molecules such as CD40L/CD40.

Thus, the essential and true function of RANKL/RANK in the immune system and communication between DCs and T cells need to be elucidated. For example, since expression of these molecules can be controlled by sex hormones (54, 82),
we speculate that this system may control gender specific differences in immunity and could be involved in the higher incidence of autoimmune diseases like arthritis in women.

# Lymphocyte Differentiation

Two principal genetic checkpoints regulate thymocyte differentiation. The first checkpoint, at the CD44⁻CD25⁺ stage of development, depends on the expression of the pre-TCR on CD4⁻CD8⁻ thymocyte precursors, which regulates expansion of these precursor cells. The second checkpoint regulates progression from CD4⁺CD8⁺ immature to mature CD4⁺ or CD8⁺ thymocytes and correlates with positive thymocyte selection. Various mutations that arrest thymocyte development at the stage of pre-TCR expression have been reported (83). All of these mutations either affect the pre-TCR complex directly or affect signaling molecules thought to be downstream of the pre-TCR. RANK-L expression has been detected on CD4⁻CD8⁻ early thymocyte precursors (12). RANK-L-deficient mice showed the block in the progression of CD4⁻CD8⁻CD44⁻CD25⁺ precursors to CD4⁻CD8⁻CD44⁻CD25⁻ thymocytes. This developmental defect does not reside in the thymic environment but is intrinsic to bone marrow-derived cells. These data suggested that the TNF-family cytokine RANK-L is important for the progression of CD25⁺CD44⁻ precursors to CD25⁻CD44⁻ thymocytes at the stage of pre-TCR expression.

However, thymuses of newborn *rankl*⁻/⁻ mice and differentiation of *rankl*⁻/⁻ thymocytes in fetal thymic organ cultures appear normal, and the defects of thymocyte development in *rankl*⁻/⁻ mice are only apparent at around 2 weeks of age, a phenotype reminiscent of thymic defects in mice lacking the pro-apoptotic bcl-2 family molecule bim (84). Age-dependent interactions between RANK-L-expressing thymocyte precursors and as-yet-unknown thymic stromal cells expressing RANK could contribute to early thymocyte development and thymocyte expansion, whereas later stages appear to be RANK-L independent. However, although RANK mRNA can be found in the thymus using in situ hybridization (58), *rank*⁻/⁻ mice do not display any obvious defects in thymocyte maturation (23, 24). This difference in thymocyte differentiation is the only discernable distinction between *rankl* and *rank* mutant mice, and it suggests that RANK-L might act on another, yet unidentified, receptor during early thymocyte development. Additional work in the future should provide evidence of whether RANK-L and RANK indeed play a role in thymocyte development in a cell-autonomous fashion. For example, since RANK-L and OPG expression can be controlled by sex hormones, it would be interesting to test whether the thymocyte differentiation defects observed in *rankl*⁻/⁻, but not *rank*⁻/⁻ mice, are dependent on sex hormone levels, a scenario that could explain age-related differences.

In addition to T cells, *rankl* and *rank* knockout mice have reduced numbers of mature B220⁺IgD⁺ and B220⁺IgM⁺B cells in the spleen and lymph nodes and slightly disorganized B cell areas in primary splenic follicles (20, 23, 58). Since

rankl and rank-null mice have no bone marrow cavities, the reduced cellularity of B cells could be due to an altered microenvironment or to changes in the composition of stromal cells outside the bone marrow cavity that affect B cell differentiation. For example, $rankl^{-/-}$ mice form an ectopically organized extramedullary hematopoietic tissue localized at the outer surfaces of vertebral bodies (58). This tissue exhibits morphological and phenotypic features characteristic of hematopoiesis and proliferating precursor cells. Whether these hematopoietic islands in $rankl^{-/-}$ mice represent a defect in the homing of precursors during the switch from hepatic to bone marrow haematopoiesis, or an event secondary to osteopetrosis that interferes with the seeding of bone marrow cavities, remains to be determined.

In fetal liver cell chimeras, RANK-L regulates early B cell differentiation from the B220<sup>+</sup>CD43<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>-</sup> pro-B cell to the B220<sup>+</sup>CD43<sup>-</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup> pre-B cell stage of development, which indicates that the TNF-family cytokine RANK-L is indeed a regulator of early B lymphocyte development (58). Recent evidence in a new $opg$ mutant mouse strain confirms the notion that the interplay of RANK-L-RANK and the molecular decoy receptor OPG may regulate the development and possibly the function of B lymphocytes (85). Ex vivo, $opg^{-/-}$ pro-B cells have enhanced proliferation to IL-7, and type 1 transitional B cells accumulate in the spleens of $opg^{-/-}$ mice. Thus, loss of OPG may control B cell maturation. Moreover, it should be noted that OPG is a CD40-regulated gene in B cells and dendritic cells (85) and that prostaglandin E2 treatment can increase the amount of RANK-L messenger RNA in B220<sup>+</sup> B cells in an estrogen-dependent manner (86). Whether RANK-L acts as a survival factor required for early B and T cell development or whether RANK-L directly affects antigen receptor-driven lymphocyte maturation also remains to be seen.

## T Cells and Bone—The Emergence of Osteoimmunology

Bone remodeling and bone loss are controlled by a balance between RANK-L/RANK and the RANK-L decoy receptor OPG. Since RANK-L is made by T cells following antigen-receptor stimulation, we asked the question whether T cell–derived RANK-L can indeed regulate the development and activation of osteoclasts, that is, whether activated T cells can modulate bone turnover via RANK-L. In an in vitro cell culture system, activated T cells can directly trigger osteoclastogenesis via RANK-L (17). Importantly, systemic activation of T cells in vivo leads to a RANK-L-dependent increase in osteoclastogenesis followed by bone loss. All in vitro and in vivo effects of T cells on osteoclasts could be blocked by the administration of the decoy receptor OPG (17). Moreover, in a recent elegant study it has been shown that transgenic overexpression of RANK-L in T cells restores osteoclastogenesis in a $rankl^{-/-}$ background and partially restores normal bone marrow cavities (87). These data showed that systemic activation of T cells leads to bone loss, indicating that, through their production of RANK-L, T cells are crucial mediators of bone loss in vivo. The results also provided a novel paradigm for T cells as regulators of bone physiology.

Because mutant mice that lack T cells still have normal bone cavities and tooth eruption, T cells are probably not required for normal bone homeostasis. However, chronic systemic T cell activation such as in autoimmune diseases, viral infections, or local inflammation within the bone due to metastasis, infections, and fractures, or joint inflammation in arthritis all probably attract T cells that then actively participate in bone remodeling via production of RANK-L. Moreover, glucocorticoids, which are used to treat autoimmune diseases and allergic disorders, strongly induce RANK-L expression and decrease OPG (15, 88). Interestingly, our own unpublished results indicate that glucocorticoids and the TCR induce RANK-L expression in T cells. Thus, in certain diseases such as asthma, primary activation of T cells together with immunosuppressive treatment may in fact exacerbate osteopenia via synergistic activation of RANK-L expression on T cells. These findings provide a molecular explanation for bone loss associated with diseases having immune system involvement, such as adult and childhood leukemias, cancer metastasis, autoimmunity, and various viral infections. Inhibition of RANK-L function via OPG or a related molecule may therefore prevent bone destruction in multiple diseases.

## RANK-L is a Critical Mediator of Crippling in Arthritis

One disease in which osteoclasts are a critical factor for disease progression is arthritis; bone loss results in life-long crippling. Arthritis in humans is characterized by synovial inflammation, erosion of bone and cartilage, severe joint pain and ultimately life-long crippling (89). In Lewis rats, experimental induction of arthritis by subcutaneous injection of bacterial products in adjuvant leads to severe inflammation in the bone marrow and soft tissues surrounding joints, accompanied by extensive local bone and cartilage destruction, loss of bone mineral density, and crippling (90). This condition in rats, called adjuvant-induced arthritis (AdA), mimics many of the clinical and pathological features of human RA. Lesions in rat AdA are dependent on T cell activation (91), and T cells in the inflamed joints and draining lymph nodes of affected rats produce many pro-inflammatory cytokines (89).

In this model system of severe arthritis that mimics many of the clinical and pathological features of human RA, RANK-L protein is expressed on the surface of synovial effector T cells isolated at the clinical onset of arthritis (17). Inhibition of RANK-L via OPG had no effect on the severity of inflammation. However, OPG treatment completely abolished the loss of mineral bone density in the inflamed joints of these animals, in a dose-dependent manner. Histologically, OPG-treated arthritic rats exhibited minimal loss of cortical and trabecular bone, whereas untreated arthritic animals developed severe bone lesions characterized by partial to complete destruction of cortical and trabecular bone, and erosion of the articular cartilages. Bone destruction in untreated arthritic rats correlated with a dramatic increase in osteoclast numbers, whereas OPG treatment prevented the accumulation of osteoclasts (17). These results showed that RANK-L is a key mediator of
joint destruction and bone loss in adjuvant arthritis. Importantly, whereas untreated rats experienced severe crippling, rats treated with OPG at the onset of disease—similar to a patient consulting a doctor at the onset of joint swelling—did not show any signs of clinical crippling.

Alteration of cartilage structures leading to cartilage collapse constitutes a critical step in arthritic joint destruction. Controversy exists whether cartilage destruction occurs independently of bone loss, or whether damage to the subchondral bone indirectly causes cartilage deterioration (92). In untreated arthritic rats, partial or complete erosion of the cartilage in both the central and peripheral regions of joint surfaces is observed. In striking contrast, the integrity of cartilage was preserved in OPG-treated arthritic rats. Neither cartilage erosion nor matrix degeneration in the centers of joint surfaces occurred in OPG-treated animals (17). OPG could protect the cartilage by maintaining the underlying subchondral bone and insulating the overlying cartilage from the inflammatory cell infiltrates in the bone marrow. Since both RANK-L and RANK are expressed on chondrocytes (13, 20), and *rankl* (58) as well as *rank* mutant mice (24) exhibit significant changes in the columnar alignment of chondrocytes at the growth plate, it is possible that RANK-L/RANK play a direct role in cartilage growth and cartilage homeostasis. These data provided the first evidence that inhibition of RANK-L activity by OPG can prevent cartilage destruction, a critical, irreversible step in the pathogenesis of arthritis.

It has become evident that the development of arthritis can occur in the absence of T cells (93). Using in situ hybridization of inflamed rat joints and isolation of different cell populations from these joints, we could show that RANK-L is indeed expressed in lymphocytes, macrophages, and especially in synoviocytes (17). In line with these findings, genetic ablation of RANK-L also does not prevent inflammation in an antibody-mediated model of arthritis using the K/BxN serum transfer model (94). Multinucleated TRAP-positive osteoclast-like cells were abundant in resorption lacunae in areas of bone erosion in arthritic control mice, and they were completely absent in arthritic TRANCE/RANK-L knockout mice, demonstrating the absolute requirement for TRANCE/RANK-L in osteoclastogenesis in this serum transfer model of inflammatory arthritis (95). Cartilage damage was still observed in both arthritic TRANCE/RANK-L knockout mice and arthritic control mice, but a trend toward milder cartilage damage in the TRANCE/RANK-L knockout mice was noted. Thus, TRANCE/RANK-L apparently is not required for cartilage destruction, but clearly plays an as-yet-unidentified modulatory role (95). Moreover, inhibition of RANK-L via OPG prevents bone loss without affecting inflammation in a TNFα-induced arthritis model (96), indicating that TNFα-triggered bone loss is critically dependent on RANK-L expression (S. Smolen, Vienna, personal communication). Whether OPG prevents bone in other animal models of arthritis needs to be tested.

To investigate whether RANK-L is implicated in human RA, we collected inflammatory cells from the synovial fluid of patients with adult or juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and patients with osteoarthritis, and we evaluated OPG and RANK-L expression. All RA and osteoarthritis patients ever tested (*n* > 40)exhibited RANK-L expression in inflammatory cells, whereas OPG expression was not detectable (17). Thus, the correlation between RANK-L expression in inflamed joints and arthritis appears to be absolute. To distinguish which cells were producing RANK-L, inflammatory synovial fluids were separated into T and non-T cell populations. Consistent with our results in rats, both synovial T and non-T cell populations from RA patients expressed RANK-L, but not OPG. Fibroblasts isolated from the same adult RA joints failed to express RANK-L. These data confirm the findings in rodent adjuvant arthritis and suggest that RANK-L is the principal mediator of bone destruction in human arthritis.

# A Molecular Scenario of T Cell–Regulated Bone Loss

In inflammatory or autoimmune disease states, activated T cells produce RANK-L and pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNFα, IL-1, or IL-11, all of which can induce RANK-L expression in osteoblasts and bone marrow stromal cells (97). Thus, it appears that T cells promote bone resorption directly via RANK-L expression and indirectly via expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines that mediate RANK-L expression in non-T cells (Figure 5). These results are in line with the findings that T cells and non-T cell populations express RANK-L in arthritic joints. Inhibition of RANK-L has no effect on inflammation but completely prevents bone loss and protects cartilage (17). Bone resorption induced by local injection of IL-1β or TNFα over the calvaria of mice can be blocked by concurrent systemic injection of OPG, which indicates that RANK-L is the mediator of the bone-damaging effects of TNFα and IL1-β in vivo (98). Although inhibition of TNFα and IL-1 using soluble receptor antagonists to some extent prevents inflammation and bone loss in arthritis (7, 99, 100), inhibition of RANK-L function via OPG might therefore prevent bone destruction and cartilage damage in arthritis irrespective of the initial trigger.

Reduced bone mineral densities can also be seen in many human diseases such as adult and childhood leukemia (101), chronic infections such as hepatitis C or HIV (102), autoimmune disorders such as diabetes mellitus (103) and lupus erythematosus (104), allergic diseases such as asthma (105), lytic bone metastases in multiple cancers such as breast cancer (106), and of course arthritis (89). These osteopenic disorders can cause irreversible crippling, thereby severely disrupting the lives of significant numbers of patients. For example, many patients with lupus require hip replacement surgery, and essentially all children that survive leukemia experience severe bone loss and growth retardation. In North America and Europe, 1 in 100 people develop RA and 1 in 10 people develop osteoarthritis. In addition, T cell–derived RANK-L contributes to alveolar bone resorption and tooth loss in an animal model that mimics human periodontal disease. The alveolar bone resorption around the teeth can be inhibited with OPG (107). Moreover, it should be noted that OPG can prevent cancer cell–induced bone destruction (108–110), cancer metastases–associated bone pain, and pain-related neurochemical reorganization of the spinal cord (111). In most of theseosteopenic disorders, disease pathogenesis correlates with the activation of T cells (Figure 5).

However, short-term activation of T cells does not result in any detectable bone loss, not even in some chronic T cell and TNFα-mediated diseases such as ankylosis spondylitis (112). Moreover, T cells are working constantly to fight off the universe of foreign particles in which we live, so, at any point in time, some T cells are activated (113). What is it that prevents these T cells from causing extensive bone loss every time we have an infection? A crucial counter-regulatory mechanism, by which activated T cells can inhibit the RANK-L-induced maturation and activation of osteoclasts has been recently discovered (Figure 3) (114). It turns out that interferon-γ blocks RANK-L-induced osteoclast differentiation in vitro. Moreover, *interferon-γ receptor* knockout mice develop more bone destruction in inflammatory arthritis than do normal mice. Mechanistically, interferon-γ can activate the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway within the osteoclasts, resulting in the degradation of TRAF6. Thus, it appears that interferon-γ can prevent uncontrolled bone loss during inflammatory T cell responses. Moreover, T cell–derived IL-12 alone, and IL-12 in synergy with IL-18, inhibits osteoclast formation in vitro (115), and IL-4 can abrogate osteoclastogenesis through STAT6-dependent inhibition of NF-κB signaling (116, 117). Thus, multiple T cell–derived cytokines might be able to interfere with RANK signaling and therefore with osteoclastogenesis and osteoclast functions. In the future it will be interesting to determine the mechanisms that control the balance between T cell–mediated bone loss and inhibition of osteoclastogenesis. Nonetheless it has become clear now that inhibition of RANK-L-mediated activation of RANK via OPG or a related molecule ameliorates many osteopenic conditions. RANK-L inhibition appears to be the most rational and advisable strategy to prevent bone destruction in multiple diseases, to possibly eradicate major human diseases such as osteoporosis, to curtail crippling, and to limit tooth loss, diseases that affect millions of people.

## Bone Loss, Mammary Gland Formation, and Mammalian Evolution

The expression of RANK-L and OPG is regulated by multiple hormones and cytokines shown to affect the development and activation of osteoclasts, including 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3, IL-1, IL-11, PGE₂, calcitonin, and TNFα (11). Intriguingly, expression of RANK-L and OPG is also strongly influenced by the female sex hormones progesterone and estrogen, and by hormones involved in reproduction and lactation such as prolactin and parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) (118). Reduction of ovarian function following menopause in women, and ovariectomy in animal models, result in osteoporosis and fractures, conditions that can be completely reversed at least in animals by treatment with OPG (38). However, the evolutionary and functional rationale for RANK-L/OPG regulation by reproductive hormones and the prevalence of hormonally regulated and gender-biased osteoporosis in older females were not known.
In mammals, sex and pregnancy hormones control mammary gland morphogenesis and formation of a lactating mammary gland. Mammary gland morphogenesis proceeds in distinct steps, beginning with a fetal mammary anlage that undergoes ductal elongation and branching (119). During pregnancy, increased ductal side branching and development of lobulo-alveolar structures result from the expansion and proliferation of ductal and alveolar epithelium (120). Formation of a lactating mammary gland provides essential nourishment to mammalian newborns in the form of milk. Calcium is an important component of milk, and the main source of calcium for a newborn mammal is its mother’s breast milk (121). Calcium transport from mothers to the fetus and neonates is a vital process to preserve species. Deficits in maternal calcium transfer or calcium handling in the offspring have severe consequences for newborns, ranging from rickets to heart and brain defects (122). Mothers meet the increased requirements for calcium during pregnancy and lactation by doubling their intestinal calcium absorption and demineralizing their skeletons via activation of bone-resorbing osteoclasts (123).

Surprisingly, mice lacking RANK-L or its receptor RANK fail to form lobulo-alveolar mammary gland structures during pregnancy and show a complete block in the formation of a lactating mammary gland, leading to the death of newborn pups. RANK-L expression in mammary epithelial cells is induced by pregnancy hormones, whereas the RANK is constitutively expressed on these cells. Transplantation and local RANK-L-rescue experiments in *rankl*⁻/⁻ and *rank*⁻/⁻ pregnant females showed that RANK-L acts directly on RANK-expressing mammary epithelial cells. The effects of RANK-L are autonomous to epithelial cells. The mammary gland defect in female *rankl*⁻/⁻ mice is characterized by enhanced apoptosis and by failures in proliferation and Akt/PKB activation in lobulo-alveolar buds that can be reversed by recombinant RANK-L treatment. Thus, RANK-L and RANK, the master regulators of skeletal calcium release, are essential for the formation of the lactating mammary gland, the organ required for transmission of maternal calcium to neonates in mammalian species. Importantly, these data provided a novel function for TNF and TNFR family proteins and a new paradigm in the formation of a lactating mammary gland.

In phylogenetic evolution, the formation of lactating mammary glands is a relatively recent event, occurring when the first mammals appeared about 200 million years ago. Thus, mammals took a gene product that is the master regulator of bone metabolism and calcium turnover in the whole organism and subverted it to stimulation of mammary gland development during pregnancy. The balance between RANK-L, RANK, and the decoy receptor OPG is critical for the regulation of bone loss in osteoporosis, arthritis, and lytic bone metastases (118). Osteoporosis affects hundreds of millions of people, particularly postmenopausal women. Intriguingly, genetic and functional models have shown that osteoclast-regulated bone remodeling is under the control of powerful sex and pregnancy hormones (11). When estrogen production falls, such as occurs in ovariectomy models in animals or in postmenopausal women, induction of OPG is decreased, allowing uncontrolled demineralization of bone by RANK-L-stimulated osteoclasts (38). Osteoporosis is

strongly associated with increased morbidity and premature death in older women. The evolutionary question then arises, why has the RANK-L/RANK/OPG system, a key regulator of a structural organ such as the skeleton, come under the regulatory umbrella of reproductive hormones? Our results provided an unexpected molecular and evolutionary explanation for gender bias and the high incidence of osteoporosis in females. The strong bias toward bone loss in postmenopausal women may be due to the fact that the RANK-L/RANK/OPG system is essential for reproduction and the survival of mammalian offspring.

The transcription of the decoy receptor OPG is also regulated by pregnancy hormones, particularly estrogen (54). Thus, local or systemic OPG may contribute to mammary gland formation during pregnancy. However, *opg*⁻/⁻ females (40) and females from three different OPG-overexpressing transgenic lines (38) showed normal breeding and mammary gland formation (our own unpublished data). Moreover, implantation of soluble OPG pellets into wild-type pregnant females at day 13.5 of pregnancy did not affect any aspect of mammary gland development (J. Tata, Y. Y. Kong, J. M. Penninger, unpublished). Thus, high systemic or local levels of OPG apparently cannot inhibit RANK-L and RANK interaction, implying that RANK-L acts locally on the same or neighboring epithelial cells. The action of OPG and the connection of RANK-L/RANK with pregnancy hormones also provide further insights into the regulation of bone loss during pregnancy. The binding of RANK-L to RANK on mature osteoclasts triggers their activation that then leads to release of calcium from the skeleton. OPG competes with RANK-L for binding to RANK and thus is a potent inhibitor of osteoclast differentiation and activity. Since estrogen enhances OPG expression on osteoblasts, we suggest that increased estrogen levels may protect the maternal skeleton via OPG during pregnancy. After giving birth, maternal estrogen levels rapidly decline, leading to decreased OPG and permitting the mobilization of calcium from the bones for lactation. Although this hypothesis explains clinical and experimental observations in animal models and humans, e.g., calcium-release from the bone due to osteoclasts activation is predominant in the third trimester of gestation and during lactating (121, 123), it awaits proper testing.

During osteoclast development, CSF-1 and RANK-L cooperate to stimulate the differentiation of hematopoietic progenitors into mature multinucleated osteoclasts (13). CSF-1 provides the survival signal, whereas RANK-L is the critical factor for osteoclast lineage determination. In contrast to the synergy between CSF-1 and RANK-L in osteoclastogenesis, CSF-1 appears to act independently of RANK-L/RANK during mammary gland formation. Unlike *rankl*⁻/⁻ and *rank*⁻/⁻ mice, *csf-1*⁻/⁻ mice show increased lobulo-alveolar development of mammary epithelium during pregnancy and ovarian defects (124). Thus, it appears that RANK-L/RANK has a specific and unique role in mammary gland development that is regulated by pregnancy hormones. Mice deficient for the *stat5a*, *cyclin D1*, or *prolactin receptor* genes have defects in mammary gland development similar to those observed in *rankl*⁻/⁻ and *rank*⁻/⁻ females (119, 125, 126), which suggests that RANK-L/RANK, Cyclin D1, Stat5a and/or prolactin might cooperate to
stimulate lobulo-alveolar development. The exact functional and genetic relationships between RANK-L/RANK and pregnancy hormones, signaling molecules, and cell cycle regulatory molecules await elucidation.

These data have another intriguing implication. Both RANK-L and RANK are required for lymph node organogenesis, and RANK-L expressed on T cells provides activation and survival signals to dendritic cells. DCs, which express OPG, are specialized antigen-presenting cells that initiate and integrate immune responses. Like calcium uptake, immune responses must be modified during pregnancy so that a mother does not reject her allogeneic fetus, although the same mother can still reject an allogeneic skin transplant. Other examples of immune system alterations include the observed amelioration of clinical symptoms of multiple sclerosis during pregnancy, and the onset of severe T cell–regulated food allergies in some pregnant women (127, 128). Thus, pregnancy is associated with alterations to the immune system that do not impair the general response to infections but lead to selective immunological adjustments (127). Moreover, like osteoporosis, the development of autoimmunity shows a gender bias, and various sex/pregnancy hormones such as estrogen and prolactin influence the function and development of various lymphocyte populations (129, 130). Since RANK-L, RANK, and OPG provide a genetic interface between the immune system, bone remodeling, and formation of a lactating mammary gland, this system is an intriguing starting point to address these questions at the genetic level.

## CONCLUSIONS

RANK-L, its receptor RANK, and the decoy receptor OPG are the key regulators for osteoclast development and the activation of mature osteoclasts (Figure 5). Surprisingly, the same molecules that regulate osteoclastogenesis were identified as a key factor in early differentiation of thymocytes and B cell precursors and the development of lymph nodes and Peyer's patches. In the immune system, RANK-L is produced by activated T cells and acts as a potent survival factor of DCs. The understanding and manipulation of DC fate by RANK-L/RANK provides a new avenue for anti-tumor vaccination and the treatment of autoimmune diseases. RANK-L produced by activated T cells can directly induce osteoclastogenesis. Systemic or local activation of T cells triggers bone loss via expression of RANK-L. These findings provide the molecular explanation for bone loss associated with diseases having immune system involvement, such as adult and childhood leukemias, autoimmunity, and various viral infections. Inhibition of RANK-L function via OPG or a related molecule might therefore ameliorate many osteopenic conditions and prevent bone destruction and cartilage damage that ultimately cause crippling in arthritis. Moreover, RANK-L and RANK, the master regulators of skeletal calcium release, are essential for the morphogenesis of a lactating mammary gland, and they provide an evolutionary rationale for hormonal regulation of osteoporosis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are supported by Amgen Inc. J. M. P. holds a Canadian Research Chair in Cell Biology and is supported by the Premiers Research Excellence Award, The National Cancer Institute of Canada (NCIC), and the Canadian Institute for Health Research (CIHR). We thank all the members of our laboratories for vital contributions and discussion.

Visit the Annual Reviews home page at www.annualreviews.org

LITERATURE CITED

1. Carswell EA, Old LJ, Kassel RL, Green S, Fiore N, Williamson B. 1975. An endotoxin-induced serum factor that causes necrosis of tumors. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 72:3666–70
2. Granger GA, Shacks SJ, Williams TW, Kolb WP. 1969. Lymphocyte in vitro cytotoxicity: specific release of lymphotoxin-like materials from tuberculin-sensitive lymphoid cells. *Nature* 221:1155–57
3. Wallach D. 1996. Suicide by order: some open questions about the cell-killing activities of the TNF ligand and receptor families. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.* 7:211–21
4. Locksley RM, Killeen N, Lenardo MJ. 2001. The TNF and TNF receptor superfamilies: integrating mammalian biology. *Cell* 104:487–501
5. Strasser A, Newton K. 1999. FADD/MORT1, a signal transducer that can promote cell death or cell growth. *Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol.* 31:533–37
6. Yamada Y, Kirillova I, Peschon JJ, Fausto N. 1997. Initiation of liver growth by tumor necrosis factor: deficient liver regeneration in mice lacking type I tumor necrosis factor receptor. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 94:1441–46
7. Williams RO, Feldmann M, Maini RN. 2000. Cartilage destruction and bone erosion in arthritis: the role of tumour necrosis factor alpha. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* 59:75–80
8. Fu YX, Chaplin DD. 1999. Development
   and maturation of secondary lymphoid tissues. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 17:399–433
9. Grewal IS, Flavell RA. 1998. CD40 and CD154 in cell-mediated immunity. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 16:111–35
10. Roodman GD. 1999. Cell biology of the osteoclast. *Exp. Hematol.* 27:1229–41
11. Ross FP. 2000. RANKing the importance of measles virus in Paget's disease. *J. Clin. Invest.* 105:555–58
12. Anderson DM, Maraskovsky E, Billingsley WL, Dougall WC, Tometsko ME, Roux ER, Teepe MC, DuBose RF, Cosman D, Galibert L. 1997. A homologue of the TNF receptor and its ligand enhance T-cell growth and dendritic-cell function. *Nature* 390:175–79
13. Lacey DL, Timms E, Tan HL, Kelley MJ, Dunstan CR, Burgess T, Elliott R, Colombero A, Elliott G, Scully S, Hsu H, Sullivan J, Hawkins N, Davy E, Caparello C, Eli A, Qian YX, Kaufman S, Sarosi I, Shalhoub V, Senaldi G, Guo J, Delaney J, Boyle WJ. 1998. Osteoprotegerin ligand is a cytokine that regulates osteoclast differentiation and activation. *Cell* 93:165–76
14. Wong BR, Rho J, Arron J, Robinson E, Orlinick J, Chao M, Kalachikov S, Cayani E, Bartlett FS 3rd, Frankel WN, Lee SY, Choi Y. 1997. TRANCE is a novel ligand of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family that activates c-Jun N-terminal kinase in T cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272:25190–94

15. Yasuda H, Shima N, Nakagawa N, Yamaguchi K, Kinosaki M, Mochizuki S, Tomoyasu A, Yano K, Goto M, Murakami A, Tsuda E, Morinaga T, Higashio K, Udagawa N, Takahashi N, Suda T. 1998. Osteoclast differentiation factor is a ligand for osteoprotegerin/osteoclastogenesis-inhibitory factor and is identical to TRANCE/RANKL. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 95:3597–602

16. Lum L, Wong BR, Josien R, Becherer JD, Erdjument-Bromage H, Schlondorff J, Tempst P, Choi Y, Blobel CP. 1999. Evidence for a role of a tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha)-converting enzyme-like protease in shedding of TRANCE, a TNF family member involved in osteoclastogenesis and dendritic cell survival. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:13, 613–18

17. Kong YY, Feige U, Sarosi I, Bolon B, Tafuri A, Morony S, Capparelli C, Li J, Elliott R, McCabe S, Wong T, Campagnuolo G, Moran E, Bogoch ER, Van G, Nguyen LT, Ohashi PS, Lacey DL, Fish E, Boyle WJ, Penninger JM. 1999. Activated T cells regulate bone loss and joint destruction in adjuvant arthritis through osteoprotegerin ligand. *Nature* 402:304–9

18. Nakashima T, Kobayashi Y, Yamasaki S, Kawakami A, Eguchi K, Sasaki H, Sakai H. 2000. Protein expression and functional difference of membrane-bound and soluble receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand: modulation of the expression by osteotropic factors and cytokines. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 275:768–75

19. Lagasse E, Weissman IL. 1997. Enforced expression of Bcl-2 in monocytes rescues macrophages and partially reverses osteopetrosis in op/op mice. *Cell* 89:1021–31

20. Hsu H, Lacey DL, Dunstan CR, Solovyev I, Colombero A, Timms E, Tan HL, Elliott G, Kelley MJ, Sarosi I, Wang L, Xia XZ, Elliott R, Chiu L, Black T, Scully S, Capparelli C, Morony S, Shima

moto G, Bass MB, Boyle WJ. 1999. Tumor necrosis factor receptor family member RANK mediates osteoclast differentiation and activation induced by osteoprotegerin ligand. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.* USA 96:3540–45

21. Burgess TL, Qian Y, Kaufman S, Ring BD, Van G, Capparelli C, Kelley M, Hsu H, Boyle WJ, Dunstan CR, Hu S, Lacey DL. 1999. The ligand for osteoprotegerin (OPGL) directly activates mature osteoclasts. *J. Cell Biol.* 145:527–38

22. Nakagawa N, Kinosaki M, Yamaguchi K, Shima N, Yasuda H, Yano K, Morinaga T, Higashio K. 1998. RANK is the essential signaling receptor for osteoclast differentiation factor in osteoclastogenesis. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 253:395–400

23. Dougall WC, Glaccum M, Charrier K, Rohrbach K, Brasel K, De Smedt T, Daro E, Smith J, Tometsko ME, Maliszewski CR, Armstrong A, Shen V, Bain S, Cosman D, Anderson D, Morrissey PJ, Peschon JJ, Schuh J. 1999. RANK is essential for osteoclast and lymph node development. *Genes Dev.* 13:2412–24

24. Li J, Sarosi I, Yan XQ, Morony S, Capparelli C, Tan HL, McCabe S, Elliott R, Scully S, Van G, Kaufman S, Juan SC, Sun Y, Tarpley J, Martin L, Christensen K, McCabe J, Kostenuik P, Hsu H, Fletcher F, Dunstan CR, Lacey DL, Boyle WJ. 2000. RANK is the intrinsic hematopoietic cell surface receptor that controls osteoclastogenesis and regulation of bone mass and calcium metabolism. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97:1566–71

25. Hughes AE, Ralston SH, Marken J, Bell C, MacPherson H, Wallace RGH, van H-W, Whyte MP, Nakatsuka K, Hovy L, Anderson DM. 2000. Mutations in TNFRSF11A, affecting the signal peptide of RANK, cause familial expansile osteolysis. *Nat. Gen.* 24:45–48

26. Darnay BG, Haridas V, Ni J, Moore PA, Aggarwal BB. 1998. Characterization of the intracellular domain of receptor

activator of NF-kappaB (RANK). Interaction with tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factors and activation of NF-kappab and c-Jun N-terminal kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:20,551–55

27. Galibert L, Tometsko ME, Anderson DM, Cosman D, Dougall WC. 1998. The involvement of multiple tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)-associated factors in the signaling mechanisms of receptor activator of NF-kappaB, a member of the TNFR superfamily. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:34,120–27

28. Lee ZH, Kwack K, Kim KK, Lee SH, Kim HH. 2000. Activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase and activator protein 1 by receptor activator of nuclear factor kappaB. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 58:1536–45

29. Wong BR, Josien R, Lee SY, Vologodskaia M, Steinman RM, Choi Y. 1998. The TRAF family of signal transducers mediates NF-kappaB activation by the TRANCE receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:28355–59

30. Kobayashi N, Kadono Y, Naito A, Matsumoto K, Yamamoto T, Tanaka S, Inoue J. 2001. Segregation of TRAF6-mediated signaling pathways clarifies its role in osteoclastogenesis. *Embo J.* 20:1271–80

31. Lomaga MA, Yeh WC, Sarosi I, Duncan GS, Furlonger C, Ho A, Morony S, Caparelli C, Van G, Kaufman S, van der Heiden A, Itie A, Wakeham A, Khoo W, Sasaki T, Cao Z, Penninger JM, Paige CJ, Lacey DL, Dunstan CR, Boyle WJ, Goeddel DV, Mak TW. 1999. TRAF6 deficiency results in osteopetrosis and defective interleukin-1, CD40, and LPS signaling. *Genes Dev.* 13:1015–24

32. Naito A, Azuma S, Tanaka S, Miyazaki T, Takaki S, Takatsu K, Nakao K, Nakamura K, Katsuki M, Yamamoto T, Inoue J. 1999. Severe osteopetrosis, defective interleukin-1 signalling and lymph node organogenesis in TRAF6-deficient mice. *Genes Cells* 4:353–62

33. Franzoso G, Carlson L, Xing LP, Poljak L, Shores EW, Brown KD, Leonardi A,

Tran T, Boyce BF, Siebenlist U. 1997. Requirement for NF-kappa B in osteoclast and B-cell development. *Genes Dev.* 11:3482–96

34. Iotsova V, Caamano J, Loy J, Yang Y, Lewin A, Bravo R. 1997. Osteopetrosis in mice lacking NF-kappa B1 and NF-kappa B2. *Nat. Med.* 3:1285–89

35. Wong BR, Besser D, Kim N, Arron JR, Vologodskaia M, Hanafusa H, Choi Y. 1999. TRANCE, a TNF family member, activates Akt/PKB through a signaling complex involving TRAF6 and c-Src. *Mol. Cell* 4:1041–49

36. Arron JR, Vologodskaia M, Wong BR, Naramura M, Kim N, Gu H, Choi Y. 2001. A positive regulatory role for Cbl family proteins in TRANCE and CD40L-mediated Akt activation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 13:13

37. Matsumoto M, Sudo T, Saito T, Osada H, Tsujimoto M. 2000. Involvement of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway in osteoclastogenesis mediated by receptor activator of NF-kappa B ligand (RANKL). *J. Biol. Chem.* 275:31155–61

38. Simonet WS, Lacey DL, Dunstan CR, Kelley M, Chang MS, Luthy R, Nguyen HQ, Wooden S, Bennett L, Boone T, Shimamoto G, DeRose M, Elliott R, Colombo A, Tan HL, Trail G, Sullivan J, Davy E, Bucay N, Renshaw-Gegg L, Hughes TM, Hill D, Pattison W, Campbell P, Boyle WJ, et al. 1997. Osteoprotegerin: a novel secreted protein involved in the regulation of bone density. *Cell* 89:309–19

39. Yasuda H, Shima N, Nakagawa N, Mochizuki SI, Yano K, Fujise N, Sato Y, Goto M, Yamaguchi K, Kuriyama M, Kanno T, Murakami A, Tsuda E, Morinaga T, Higashio K. 1998. Identity of osteoclastogenesis inhibitory factor (OCIF) and osteoprotegerin (OPG): a mechanism by which OPG/OCIF inhibits osteoclastogenesis in vitro. *Endocrinology* 139:1329–37

40. Bucay N, Sarosi I, Dunstan CR, Morony

S, Tarpley J, Capparelli C, Scully S, Tan HL, Xu W, Lacey DL, Boyle WJ, Simonet WS. 1998. Osteoprotegerin-deficient mice develop early onset osteoporosis and arterial calcification. *Genes Dev.* 12: 1260–68

41. Mizuno A, Murakami A, Nakagawa N, Yasuda H, Tsuda E, Morinaga T, Higashio K. 1998. Structure of the mouse osteoclastogenesis inhibitory factor (OCIF) gene and its expression in embryogenesis. *Gene* 215:339–43

42. Brandstrom H, Jonsson KB, Ohlsson C, Vidal O, Ljunghall S, Ljunggren O. 1998. Regulation of osteoprotegerin mRNA levels by prostaglandin E2 in human bone marrow stroma cells. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 247:338–41

43. Brandstrom H, Jonsson KB, Vidal O, Ljunghall S, Ohlsson C, Ljunggren O. 1998. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha and -beta upregulate the levels of osteoprotegerin mRNA in human osteosarcoma MG-63 cells. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 248:454–57

44. Yun TJ, Chaudhary PM, Shu GL, Frazer JK, Ewings MK, Schwartz SM, Pascual V, Hood LE, Clark EA. 1998. OPG/FDCR-1, a TNF receptor family member, is expressed in lymphoid cells and is upregulated by ligating CD40. *J. Immunol.* 161:6113–21

45. Min H, Morony S, Sarosi I, Dunstan CR, Capparelli C, Scully S, Van G, Kaufman S, Kostenuik PJ, Lacey DL, Boyle WJ, Simonet WS. 2000. Osteoprotegerin reverses osteoporosis by inhibiting endosteal osteoclasts and prevents vascular calcification by blocking a process resembling osteoclastogenesis. *J. Exp. Med.* 192:463–74

46. Parhami F, Demer LL. 1997. Arterial calcification in face of osteoporosis in aging: Can we blame oxidized lipids? *Curr. Opin. Lipidol.* 8:312–14

47. Jorgensen L, Engstad T, Jacobsen BK. 2001. Bone mineral density in acute stroke patients: low bone mineral density may predict first stroke in women. *Stroke* 32:47–51

48. Walker-Bone K, Dennison E, Cooper C. 2001. Epidemiology of osteoporosis. *Rheum. Dis. Clin. North Am.* 27:1–18

49. Mach F, Schonbeck U, Sukhova GK, Atkinson E, Libby P. 1998. Reduction of atherosclerosis in mice by inhibition of CD40 signalling. *Nature* 394:200–3

50. Azuma Y, Kaji K, Katogi R, Takesita S, Kudo A. 2000. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha induces differentiation of and bone resorption by osteoclasts. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275:4858–64

51. Kobayashi K, Takahashi N, Jimi E, Udagawa N, Takami M, Kotake S, Nakagawa N, Kinosaki M, Yamaguchi K, Shima N, Yasuda H, Morinaga T, Higashio K, Martin TJ, Suda T. 2000. Tumor necrosis factor alpha stimulates osteoclast differentiation by a mechanism independent of the ODF/RANKL-RANK interaction. *J. Exp. Med.* 191:275–85

52. Zhang YH, Heulsmann A, Tondravi MM, Mukherjee A, Abu-Amer Y. 2001. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) stimulates RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis via coupling of TNF type 1 receptor and RANK signaling pathways. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:563–68

53. Emery JG, McDonnell P, Burke MB, Deen KC, Lyn S, Silverman C, Dul E, Appelbaum ER, Eichman C, DiPrinzio R, Dodds RA, James IE, Rosenberg M, Lee JC, Young PR. 1998. Osteoprotegerin is a receptor for the cytotoxic ligand TRAIL. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:14363–67

54. Hofbauer LC, Khosla S, Dunstan CR, Lacey DL, Spelsberg TC, Riggs BL. 1999. Estrogen stimulates gene expression and protein production of osteoprotegerin in human osteoblastic cells. *Endocrinology* 0:4367

55. Saika M, Inoue D, Kido S, Matsumoto T. 2001. 17beta-estradiol stimulates expression of osteoprotegerin by a mouse stromal cell line, ST-2, via estrogen receptor-alpha. *Endocrinology* 142:2205–2

56. Josien BR, Li HL, Ingulli E, Sarma S, B RW, Vologodskaia M, Steinman RM, Choi Y. 2000. TRANCE, a tumor necrosis factor family member, enhances the longevity and adjuvant properties of dendritic cells In vivo. *J. Exp. Med.* 191:495–502

57. Wong BR, Josien R, Lee SY, Sauter B, Li HL, Steinman RM, Choi Y. 1997. TRANCE (tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-related activation-induced cytokine), a new TNF family member predominantly expressed in T cells, is a dendritic cell-specific survival factor. *J. Exp. Med.* 186:2075

58. Kong YY, Yoshida H, Sarosi I, Tan HL, Timms E, Capparelli C, Morony S, Oliveira-dos-Santos AJ, Van G, Itie A, Khoo W, Wakeham A, Dunstan CR, Lacey DL, Mak TW, Boyle WJ, Pninger JM. 1999. OPGL is a key regulator of osteoclastogenesis, lymphocyte development and lymph-node organogenesis. *Nature* 397:315–23

59. De Togni P, Goellner J, Ruddle NH, Streeter PR, Fick A, Mariathasan S, Smith SC, Carlson R, Shornick LP, Strauss-Schoenberger J, et al. 1994. Abnormal development of peripheral lymphoid organs in mice deficient in lymphotoxin. *Science* 264:703

60. Rennert PD, Browning JL, Hochman PS. 1997. Selective disruption of lymphotoxin ligands reveals a novel set of mucosal lymph nodes and unique effects on lymph node cellular organization. *Int. Immunol.* 9:1627–39

61. Alimzhanov MB, Kuprash DV, Kosco-Vilbois MH, Luz A, Turetskaya RL, Tarakhovsky A, Rajewsky K, Nedospasov SA, Pfeffer K. 1997. Abnormal development of secondary lymphoid tissues in lymphotoxin beta-deficient mice. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 94:9302

62. Koni PA, Sacca R, Lawton P, Browning JL, Ruddle NH, Flavell RA. 1997. Distinct roles in lymphoid organogenesis for lymphotoxins alpha and beta revealed in

lymphotoxin beta-deficient mice. *Immunity* 6:491–500

63. Matsumoto M, Mariathasan S, Nahm MH, Baranyay F, Peschon JJ, Chaplin DD. 1996. Role of lymphotoxin and the type I TNF receptor in the formation of germinal centers. *Science* 271:1289

64. Futterer A, Mink K, Luz A, Kosco-Vilbois MH, Pfeffer K. 1998. The lymphotoxin beta receptor controls organogenesis and affinity maturation in peripheral lymphoid tissues. *Immunity* 9:59–70

65. Rennert PD, James D, Mackay F, Brown-ing JL, Hochman PS. 1998. Lymph node genesis is induced by signaling through the lymphotoxin beta receptor. *Immunity* 9:71–79

66. Yokota Y, Mansouri A, Mori S, Sugawara S, Adachi S, Nishikawa S, Gruss P. 1999. Development of peripheral lymphoid organs and natural killer cells depends on the helix-loop-helix inhibitor Id2. *Nature* 397:702–6

67. Pasparakis M, Alexopoulou L, Grell M, Pfizenmaier K, Bluethmann H, Kollias G. 1997. Peyer’s patch organogenesis is intact yet formation of B lymphocyte follicles is defective in peripheral lymphoid organs of mice deficient for tumor necrosis factor and its 55-kDa receptor. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 94:6319–23

68. Mebius RE, Rennert P, Weissman IL. 1997. Developing lymph nodes collect CD4+CD3-LTbeta+ cells that can differentiate to APC, NK cells, and follicular cells but not T or B cells. *Immunity* 7:493–504

69. Kim D, Mebius RE, MacMicking JD, Jung S, Cupedo T, Castellanos Y, Rho J, Wong BR, Josien R, Kim N, Rennert PD, Choi Y. 2000. Regulation of peripheral lymph node genesis by the tumor necrosis factor family member TRANCE. *J. Exp. Med.* 192:1467–78

70. Josien R, Wong BR, Li HL, Steinman RM, Choi Y. 1999. TRANCE, a TNF family member, is differentially expressed on T cell subsets and induces cytokine

production in dendritic cells. *J. Immunol.* 162:2562–68

71. Roy M, Waldschmidt T, Aruffo A, Ledbetter JA, Noelle RJ. 1993. The regulation of the expression of gp39, the CD40 ligand, on normal and cloned CD4+ T cells. *J. Immunol.* 151:2497–2510

72. Kawabe T, Naka T, Yoshida K, Tanaka T, Fujiwara H, Suematsu S, Yoshida N, Kishimoto T, Kikutani H. 1994. The immune responses in CD40-deficient mice: impaired immunoglobulin class switching and germinal center formation. *Immunity* 1:167–78

73. Xu J, Foy TM, Laman JD, Elliott EA, Dunn JJ, Waldschmidt TJ, Elsemore J, Noelle RJ, Flavell RA. 1994. Mice deficient for the CD40 ligand. *Immunity* 1:423–31

74. Bachmann MF, Wong BR, Josien R, Steinman RM, Oxenius A, Choi Y. 1999. TRANCE, a tumor necrosis factor family member critical for CD40 ligand-independent T helper cell activation. *J. Exp. Med.* 189:1025–31

75. Banchereau J, Steinman RM. 1998. Dendritic cells and the control of immunity. *Nature* 392:245–52

76. Ingulli E, Mondino A, Khoruts A, Jenkins MK. 1997. In vivo detection of dendritic cell antigen presentation to CD4(+) T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 185:2133–41

77. Wang J, Zheng L, Lobito A, Chan FK, Dale J, Sneller M, Yao X, Puck JM, Straus SE, Lenardo MJ. 1999. Inherited human Caspase 10 mutations underlie defective lymphocyte and dendritic cell apoptosis in autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome type II. *Cell* 98:47–58

78. Sauter B, Albert ML, Francisco L, Larson M, Somersan S, Bhardwaj N. 2000. Consequences of cell death. Exposure to necrotic tumor cells, but not primary tissue cells or apoptotic cells, induces the maturation of immunostimulatory dendritic cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 191:423–34

79. Kayagaki N, Yamaguchi N, Nakayama M, Kawasaki A, Akiba H, Okumura

K, Yagita H. 1999. Involvement of TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand in human CD4+ T cell-mediated cytotoxicity. *J. Immunol.* 162:2639–47

80. Martinez-Lorenzo MJ, Anel A, Gamen S, Monlen I, Lasieria P, Larrad L, Pineiro A, Alava MA, Naval J. 1999. Activated human T cells release bioactive Fas ligand and and APO2 ligand in microvesicles. *J. Immunol.* 163:1274–81

81. Thomas WD, Hersey P. 1998. TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) induces apoptosis in Fas ligand-resistant melanoma cells and mediates CD4 T cell killing of target cells. *J. Immunol.* 161: 2195–200

82. Fata JE, Kong YY, Li J, Sasaki T, Irie-Sasaki J, Moorehead RA, Elliott R, Scully S, Voura EB, Lacey DL, Boyle WJ, Khokha R, Penninger JM. 2000. The osteoclast differentiation factor osteoprotegerin-ligand is essential for mammary gland development. *Cell* 103:41–50

83. von Boehmer H, Fehling HJ. 1997. Structure and function of the pre-T cell receptor. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 15:433–52

84. Bouillet P, Metcalf D, Huang DCS, Tarlinton DM, Kay TWH, Kontgen F, Adams JM, Strasser A. 1999. Proapoptotic Bcl-2 relative bim required for certain apoptotic responses, leukocyte homeostasis, and to preclude autoimmunity. *Science* 286:1735–38

85. Yun TJ, Tallquist MD, Aicher A, Rafferty KL, Marshall AJ, Moon JJ, Ewings ME, Mohaupt M, Herring SW, Clark EA. 2001. Osteoprotegerin, a crucial regulator of bone metabolism, also regulates B cell development and function. *J. Immunol.* 166:1482–91

86. Kanematsu M, Sato T, Takai H, Watanabe K, Ikeda K, Yamada Y. 2000. Prostaglandin E2 induces expression of receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B ligand/osteoprotegrin ligand on pre-B cells: implications for accelerated osteoclastogenesis in estrogen deficiency. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* 15:1321–29

87. Kim N, Odgren PR, Kim DK, Marks SC Jr, Choi Y. 2000. Diverse roles of the tumor necrosis factor family member TRANCE in skeletal physiology revealed by TRANCE deficiency and partial rescue by a lymphocyte-expressed TRANCE transgene. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97:10,905–10

88. Vidal NO, Brandstrom H, Jonsson KB, Ohlsson C. 1998. Osteoprotegerin mRNA is expressed in primary human osteoblast-like cells: down-regulation by glucocorticoids. *J. Endocrinol.* 159:191–95

89. Feldmann M, Brennan FM, Maini RN. 1996. Role of cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 14:397–440

90. Bendele A, McComb J, Gould T, McAbee T, Sennello G, Chlipala E, Guy M. 1999. Animal models of arthritis: relevance to human disease. *Toxicol. Pathol.* 27:134–42

91. Panayi GS, Lanchbury JS, Kingsley GH. 1992. The importance of the T cell in initiating and maintaining the chronic synovitis of rheumatoid arthritis. *Arth. Rheum.* 35:729–35

92. Conway JG, Wakefield JA, Brown RH, Marron BE, Sekut L, Stimpson SA, McElroy A, Menius JA, Jeffreys JJ, Clark RL, McGeehan GM, Connolly KM. 1995. Inhibition of cartilage and bone destruction in adjuvant arthritis in the rat by a matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor. *J. Exp. Med.* 182:449–57

93. Benoist C, Mathis D. 2000. A revival of the B cell paradigm for rheumatoid arthritis pathogenesis? *Arthritis Res.* 2:90–94

94. Kouskoff V, Korganow AS, Duchatelle V, Degott C, Benoist C, Mathis D. 1996. Organ-specific disease provoked by systemic autoimmunity. *Cell* 87:811–22

95. Pettit AR, Ji H, von Stechow D, Müller R, Choi Y, Goldring SR, Benoist C, Gravallese EM. 2001. TRANCE/RANKL knockout mice are protected from bone erosion in the K/BxN serum transfer model of arthritis. *Am. J. Pathol.* In press

96. Keffer J, Probert L, Cazlaris H, Georgopoulos S, Kaslaris E, Kioussis D, Kollias G. 1991. Transgenic mice expressing human tumour necrosis factor: a predictive genetic model of arthritis. *EMBO J.* 10:4025–31

97. Hofbauer LC, Lacey DL, Dunstan CR, Spelsberg TC, Riggs BL, Khosla S. 1999. Interleukin-1beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha, but not interleukin-6, stimulate osteoprotegerin ligand gene expression in human osteoblastic cells. *Bone* 25:255–59

98. Morony S, Capparelli C, Lee R, Shimamoto G, Boone T, Lacey DL, Dunstan CR. 1999. A chimeric form of osteoprotegerin inhibits hypercalcemia and bone resorption induced by IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, PTH, PTHrP, and 1,25(OH)2D3. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* 14:1478–85

99. Fye KH. 1999. New treatments for rheumatoid arthritis. Available and upcoming slow-acting antirheumatic drugs. *Postgrad. Med.* 106:82–85

100. Graninger WB, Smolen JS. 2001. One-year inhibition of tumor necrosis factor-alpha: a major success or a larger puzzle? *Curr. Opin. Rheumatol.* 13:9–13

101. Oliveri MB, Mautalen CA, Rodriguez Fuchs CA, Romanelli MC. 1991. Vertebral compression fractures at the onset of acute lymphoblastic leukemia in a child. *Henry Ford Hosp. Med.* 39:45–48

102. Stellon AJ, Davies A, Compston J, Williams R. 1985. Bone loss in autoimmune chronic active hepatitis on maintenance corticosteroid therapy. *Gastroenterology* 89:1078–83

103. Piepkorn B, Kann P, Forst T, Andreas J, Pfutzner A, Beyer J. 1997. Bone mineral density and bone metabolism in diabetes mellitus. *Hormone Metab. Res.* 29:584–91

104. Seitz M, Hunstein W. 1985. Enhanced prostaglandin release from monocytes of patients with rheumatoid arthritis and active systemic lupus erythematosus. *Ann. Rheum. Dis.* 44:438–45

105. Ebeling PR, Erbas B, Hopper JL, Wark JD, Rubinfeld AR. 1998. Bone mineral density and bone turnover in asthmatics treated with long-term inhaled or oral glucocorticoids. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* 13: 1283–89

106. Coleman RE. 1998. How can we improve the treatment of bone metastases further? *Curr. Opin. Oncol.* 10 (Suppl.) 1:7–13

107. Teng YT, Nguyen H, Gao X, Kong YY, Gorczynski RM, Singh B, Ellen RP, Penninger JM. 2000. Functional human T-cell immunity and osteoprotegerin ligand control alveolar bone destruction in periodontal infection. *J. Clin. Invest.* 106:59–67

108. Atkins GJ, Bouralexis S, Haynes DR, Graves SE, Geary SM, Evdokiou A, Zannettino AC, Hay S, Findlay DM. 2001. Osteoprotegerin inhibits osteoclast formation and bone resorbing activity in giant cell tumors of bone. *Bone* 28:370–77

109. Morony S, Capparelli C, Sarosi I, Lacey DL, Dunstan CR, Kostenuik PJ. 2001. Osteoprotegerin inhibits osteolysis and decreases skeletal tumor burden in syngeneic and nude mouse models of experimental bone metastasis. *Cancer Res.* 61:4432–36

110. Zhang J, Dai J, Qi Y, Lin DL, Smith P, Strayhorn C, Mizokami A, Fu Z, Westman J, Keller ET. 2001. Osteoprotegerin inhibits prostate cancer-induced osteoclastogenesis and prevents prostate tumor growth in the bone. *J. Clin. Invest.* 107:1235–44

111. Honore P, Luger NM, Sabino MAC, Schwei MJ, Rogers SD, Mach DB, O'Keefe PF, Ramnaraine ML, Clohisy DR, Mantyh PW. 2000. Osteoprotegerin blocks bone cancer-induced skeletal destruction, skeletal pain and pain-related neurochemical reorganization of the spinal cord. *Nat. Med.* 6:521–28

112. Brandt J, Haibel H, Cornely D, Golder W, Gonzalez J, Reddig J, Thiene W,

113. Arron JR, Choi Y. 2000. Bone versus immune system. *Nature* 408:535–36

114. Takayanagi H, Ogasawara K, Hida S, Chiba T, Murata S, Sato K, Takaoka A, Yokochi T, Oda H, Tanaka K, Nakamura K, Taniguchi T. 2000. T-cell-mediated regulation of osteoclastogenesis by signalling cross-talk between RANKL and IFN-gamma. *Nature* 408:600–5

115. Horwood NJ, Elliott J, Martin TJ, Gillespie MT. 2001. IL-12 alone and in synergy with IL-18 inhibits osteoclast formation in vitro. *J. Immunol.* 166:4915–21

116. Abu-Amer Y. 2001. IL-4 abrogates osteoclastogenesis through STAT6-dependent inhibition of NF-kappaB. *J. Clin. Invest.* 107:1375–85

117. Bendixen AC, Shevde NK, Dienger KM, Willson TM, Funk CD, Pike JW. 2001. IL-4 inhibits osteoclast formation through a direct action on osteoclast precursors via peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 1. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 98:2443–48

118. Karsenty G. 1999. The genetic transformation of bone biology. *Genes Dev.* 13:3037–51

119. Robinson GW, Karpf AB, Kratochwil K. 1999. Regulation of mammary gland development by tissue interaction. *J. Mammary Gland Biol. Neoplasia* 4:9–19

120. Robinson GW, Hennighausen L, Johnson PF. 2000. Side-branching in the mammary gland: the progesterone-Wnt connection. *Genes Dev.* 14:889–94

121. Kovacs CS, Kronenberg HM. 1997. Maternal-fetal calcium and bone metabolism during pregnancy, puerperium, and lactation. *Endocrinol. Rev.* 18:832–72

122. Pereira GR, Zucker AH. 1986. Nutritional deficiencies in the neonate. *Clin. Perinatol.* 13:175–89

123. Cross NA, Hillman LS, Allen SH, Krause GF, Vieira NE. 1995. Calcium homeostasis and bone metabolism during pregnancy, lactation, and postweaning: a longitudinal study. *Am. J. Clin. Nutr.* 61:514–23

124. Pollard JW, Hennighausen L. 1994. Colony stimulating factor 1 is required for mammary gland development during pregnancy. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 91:9312–16

125. Brisken C, Kaur S, Chavarria TE, Binnart N, Sutherland RL, Weinberg RA, Kelly PA, Ormandy CJ. 1999. Prolactin controls mammary gland development via direct and indirect mechanisms. *Dev. Biol.* 210:96–106

126. Fantl V, Edwards PA, Steel JH, Vanderhaar BK, Dickson C. 1999. Impaired mammary gland development in Cyl-

1(−/−) mice during pregnancy and lactation is epithelial cell autonomous. *Dev. Biol.* 212:1–11

127. Buyon JP. 1998. The effects of pregnancy on autoimmune diseases. *J. Leuk. Biol.* 63:281–87

128. Whitacre CC, Reingold SC, O’Looney PA. 1999. A gender gap in autoimmunity. *Science* 283:1277–78

129. Ahmed SA, Hissong BD, Verthelyi D, Donner K, Becker K, Karpuzoglu-Sahin E. 1999. Gender and risk of autoimmune diseases: possible role of estrogenic compounds. *Environ. Health Perspect.* 107: 681–86

130. Rider V, Abdou NI. 2001. Gender differences in autoimmunity: molecular basis for estrogen effects in systemic lupus erythematosus. *Int. Immunopharmacol.* 1:1009–24

Hematopoietic  
progenitor  

Myeloid  
progenitor  

Monocyte  

Macrophage  

Pre-  
osteoclast  

Osteoclast  

Active osteoclast  

PU.1  

TRAF6  
NF-κB1/NF-κB2  
c-fos  
RANKL  

TRAP  

c-Src  
Carbonic anhydrase II  
TRAF6  

Figure 1 Osteoclast lineage development. Mutations that affect osteoclastogenesis and activation of mature osteoclasts are indicated. For details see text.

Myeloid
progenitor

Osteoclast precursor

Mature
Osteoclast

CSF-1

RANKL

1,25(OH)₂D₃
PGE₂, PTHrP
IL-1, 11, 17, TNFα
Dexamethasone

RANK

OPG

TGF-β
17-β-estradiol

OPG

TRAIL

Osteoblast/Stromal cell

Figure 2 Regulation of osteoclast formation in bone tissues. Calcitropic factors such as vitamin-D3, prostaglandin E2, IL-1, IL-11, TNFα and glucocorticoid induce RANKL expression on osteoblasts. RANKL binding to the RANK expressed on haematopoietic progenitors activates a signal transduction cascade that leads to osteoclast differentiation in the presence of the survival factor CSF-1. Moreover, RANKL stimulates bone resorbing activity in mature osteoclasts via RANK. OPG produced by osteoblasts acts as a decoy receptor for RANKL and inhibits osteoclastogenesis and osteoclast activation by binding to RANKL. TGFβ released from bone during active bone resorption has been suggested as a feedback mechanism by upregulating OPG level. Estrogen can enhance OPG production on osteoblasts which is a possible explanation of postmenopausal osteoporosis following estrogen withdrawal.

T cell

IFNγ
RANKL
RANK
OPG

Cbl
TRAF1,2,3,5
TRAF6
TRAF6

IFNγ-R

Osteoclast &
Progenitors

IKK
c-Src
?
?

NFkB
AKT
JNK
p38

Bone resorption, Survival,
Differentiation, Activation

Figure 3 RANK signaling pathways. When RANK is activated it sends signals into the cells through tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factors (TRAFs) 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6. In addition, c-Src and Cbl proteins associate with the cytoplasmic tail of RANK. These RANK-associated molecules relay RANK-dependent stimulation to downstream pathways such as NF-kB, JNK/SAPK, p38, and Akt/PKB that regulate bone resorption, activation, survival, and differentiation of osteoclasts and dendritic cells. IFNγ can inhibit RANKL-mediated osteoclastogenesis presumably via induction of TRAF6 ubiquitination and proteolytic TRAF6 degradation. The scheme is based on ref. (113).

T cell                                                                 DC
OPG
OPGL          RANK
TCR
CD40L         CD40
TRAIL
?             TRAIL-R
OPG

Figure 4 RANKL promotes DC survival via binding to RANK. This function is similar to that of CD40L-CD40 interactions. TRAIL produced by activated T cells and DCs induces apoptosis of DCs. The balance between RANKL and TRAIL levels at late stages of immune responses might determine the fate of DCs. Manipulation of DC fate via TRAIL, CD40L, RANKL, and OPG, could be used to optimize DC-based anti-tumor vaccination protocols and to treat autoimmune diseases. It should be noted that DC development and in vitro functions for T-cell activation appear normal in rankl and rank mutant mice. The functional capacity and longevity of rankl and rank mutant DCs in vivo needs to be addressed.

Activated T-cell
Osteoclast
Progenitor

OPGL
RANK
OPG
RANK

Hormones
Cytokines
TNFα, IL1

Osteoblasts
Osteoclast

Addition of bone
Resorption of bone

Osteoporosis
Arthritis
Tooth loss
Bone metastases

Figure 5 Activated T cells affect bone physiology. Activated T cells produce cytokines such as TNFα, IL-1, IL-11, and IL-17 that lead to RANKL expression on osteoblasts. Moreover, activated T cells directly express and produce RANKL that induces osteoclast formation and activation. The soluble decoy receptor for RANKL, OPG, blocks both pathways. Inhibition of RANKL via OPG might be useful to treat osteoporosis, crippling in arthritis, osteopenic disorders such as Paget's disease, and bone loss and pain associated with bone metastases.

P1: FRK  
February 1, 2002 12:47 Annual Reviews AR152-FM  

$\mathbf{A R}$ Annual Review of Immunology  
Volume 20, 2002  

# CONTENTS  

FRONTISPICE, Charles A. Janeway, Jr. xiv  
A TRIP THROUGH MY LIFE WITH AN IMMUNOLOGICAL THEME,  
Charles A. Janeway, Jr. 1  
THE B7 FAMILY OF LIGANDS AND ITS RECEPTORS: NEW PATHWAYS  
FOR COSTIMULATION AND INHIBITION OF IMMUNE RESPONSES,  
Beatriz M. Carreno and Mary Collins 29  
MAP KINASES IN THE IMMUNE RESPONSE, Chen Dong, Roger J. Davis,  
and Richard A. Flavell 55  
PROSPECTS FOR VACCINE PROTECTION AGAINST HIV-1 INFECTION  
AND AIDS, Norman L. Letvin, Dan H. Barouch, and David C. Montefiori 73  
T CELL RESPONSE IN EXPERIMENTAL AUTOIMMUNE  
ENCEPHALOMYELITIS (EAE): ROLE OF SELF AND CROSS-REACTIVE  
ANTIGENS IN SHAPING, TUNING, AND REGULATING THE  
AUTOPATHOGENIC T CELL REPERTOIRE, Vijay K. Kuchroo,  
Ana C. Anderson, Hanspeter Waldner, Markus Munder, Estelle Bettelli,  
and Lindsay B. Nicholson 101  
NEUROENDOCRINE REGULATION OF IMMUNITY, Jeanette I. Webster,  
Leonardo Tonelli, and Esther M. Sternberg 125  
MOLECULAR MECHANISM OF CLASS SWITCH RECOMBINATION:  
LINKAGE WITH SOMATIC HYPERMUTATION, Tasuku Honjo, Kazuo  
Kinoshita, and Masamichi Muramatsu 165  
INNATE IMMUNE RECOGNITION, Charles A. Janeway, Jr. and Ruslan  
Medzhitov 197  
KIR: DIVERSE, RAPIDLY EVOLVING RECEPTORS OF INNATE AND  
ADAPTIVE IMMUNITY, Carlos Vilches and Peter Parham 217  
ORIGINS AND FUNCTIONS OF B-1 CELLS WITH NOTES ON THE ROLE  
OF CD5, Robert Berland and Henry H. Wortis 253  
E PROTEIN FUNCTION IN LYMPHOCYTE DEVELOPMENT, Melanie  
W. Quong, William J. Romanow, and Cornelis Murre 301  
LYMPHOCYTE-MEDIATED CYTOTOXICITY, John H. Russell and  
Timothy J. Ley 323  
SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION MEDIATED BY THE T CELL ANTIGEN  
X

CONTENTS

RECEPTOR: THE ROLE OF ADAPTER PROTEINS, Lawrence E. Samelson 371  
INTERACTION OF HEAT SHOCK PROTEINS WITH PEPTIDES AND ANTIGEN PRESENTING CELLS: CHAPERONING OF THE INNATE AND ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSES, Pramod Srivastava 395  
CHROMATIN STRUCTURE AND GENE REGULATION IN THE IMMUNE SYSTEM, Stephen T. Smale and Amanda G. Fisher 427  
PRODUCING NATURE'S GENE-CHIPS: THE GENERATION OF PEPTIDES FOR DISPLAY BY MHC CLASS I MOLECULES, Nilabh Shastri, Susan Schwab, and Thomas Serwold 463  
THE IMMUNOLOGY OF MUCOSAL MODELS OF INFLAMMATION, Warren Strober, Ivan J. Fuss, and Richard S. Blumberg 495  
T CELL MEMORY, Jonathan Sprent and Charles D. Surh 551  
GENETIC DISSECTION OF IMMUNITY TO MYCOBACTERIA: THE HUMAN MODEL, Jean-Laurent Casanova and Laurent Abel 581  
ANTIGEN PRESENTATION AND T CELL STIMULATION BY DENDRITIC CELLS, Pierre Guermonprez, Jenny Valladeau, Laurence Zitvogel, Clotilde Théry, and Sebastian Amigorena 621  
NEGATIVE REGULATION OF IMMUNORECEPTOR SIGNALING, André Veillette, Sylvain Latour, and Dominique Davidson 669  
CPG MOTIFS IN BACTERIAL DNA AND THEIR IMMUNE EFFECTS, Arthur M. Krieg 709  
PROTEIN KINASE Cθ IN T CELL ACTIVATION, Noah Isakov and Amnon Altman 761  
RANK-L AND RANK: T CELLS, BONE LOSS, AND MAMMALIAN EVOLUTION, Lars E. Theill, William J. Boyle, and Josef M. Penninger 795  
PHAGOCYTOSIS OF MICROBES: COMPLEXITY IN ACTION, David M. Underhill and Adrian Ozinsky 825  
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF NATURAL KILLER CELL RECEPTORS: MULTIPLE MOLECULAR SOLUTIONS TO SELF, NONSELF DISCRIMINATION, Kannan Natarajan, Nazzareno Dimasi, Jian Wang, Roy A. Mariuzza, and David H. Margulies 853  

INDEXES  
Subject Index 887  
Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 1–20 915  
Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles, Volumes 1–20 925  

ERRATA  
An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Immunology chapters (if any, 1997 to the present) may be found at http://immunol.annualreviews.org/
