INVITED REVIEW

ABSTRACT: The increasing complexity of the pathways implicated in the pathogenesis of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) has stimulated intensive research in many directions. Genetic analysis of familial ALS has yielded six loci and one disease gene (SOD1), initially suggesting a role for free radicals in the disease process, although the mechanisms through which the mutant exerts toxicity and results in selective motor neuron death remain uncertain. Numerous studies have focused on structural elements of the affected cell, emphasizing the role of neurofilaments and peripherin and their functional disruption in disease. Other topics examined include cellular homeostasis of copper and calcium, particularly in the context of oxidative stress and the processes of protein aggregation, glutamate excitotoxicity, and apoptosis. It has become evident that there is considerable interplay between these mechanisms and, as the role of each is established, a common picture may emerge, enabling the development of more targeted therapies. This study discusses the main areas of investigation and reviews the findings.

© 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. *Muscle Nerve* **25**: 135–159, 2002  
DOI 10.1002/mus.10000

---

# FAMILIAL AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS

COLLETTE K. HAND, PhD, and GUY A. ROULEAU, MD, PhD

Centre for Research in Neuroscience, McGill University, and Montréal General Hospital Research Institute (L7-224), 1650 Cedar Avenue, Montréal, Quebec H3G 1A4, Canada

*Accepted 2 August 2001*

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an adult-onset degenerative disorder characterized by the death of motor neurons in the cortex, brainstem, and spinal cord. The result is progressive muscle weakness, atrophy, and death from respiratory paralysis, usually within 3–5 years of symptom onset. The age-adjusted worldwide incidence of ALS is 0.5–3 per 100,000 without obvious race-related differences, and the prevalence is 4–6 per 100,000. Approximately 10% of ALS cases are familial (FALS), with the majority of cases deemed to be sporadic (SALS) in the absence of a positive family history. With the exception of some familial cases with clearly distinct features, the majority of FALS and SALS cases are clinically indistinguishable. A distinct ALS phenotype is seen in the Pacific islands of Guam, where the Chamorro people have an unusually high incidence of parkinsonism-dementia (PD) ALS.

ALS may present as a predominantly lower motor neuron (LMN) form designated progressive muscular atrophy (PMA), a predominantly upper lower motor neuron (UMN) form called primary lateral sclerosis (PLS), or more commonly with mixed UMN and LMN deficits. In addition, ALS may primarily involve the bulbar muscles (progressive bulbar palsy, or PBP), or the limbs (spinal ALS). Due to the progressive nature of the disease, the clinical picture may be incomplete at the onset of symptoms.

The El Escorial system, which has recently been

---

**Abbreviations:** ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; AMPA, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid; AOX, aldehyde oxidase; APOE, apolipoprotein E; BMAA, β-methylamino-L-alanine; CBP, calcium-binding protein; CCS, copper chaperone for SOD; cdk5, cyclin-dependent kinase 5; cox, cytochrome c oxidase; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; EAAC, excitatory amino acid carrier; EAAT, excitatory amino acid transporter; EC, extracellular; EST, expressed sequence tag; FALS, familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; FTD, frontotemporal dementia; GLAST, rat glial glutamate and aspartate transporter; GLT-1, rat glial glutamate transporter; HNE, 4-hydroxynonenal; ICE, interleukin-1 converting enzyme; IGF, insulin growth factor; KA, kainic acid; KARS, lysyl-tRNA synthase; lif, leukemia inhibitory factor; LMN, lower motor neuron; mGluR, metabotropic glutamate receptor; MND, motor neuron disease; mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; NAIP, neuronal apoptosis inhibitor; NF, neurofilament; NF-H, heavy neurofilament subunit; NF-L, light neurofilament subunit; NF-M, medium neurofilament subunit; NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate; NO, nitric oxide; NOS, nitric oxide synthase; O₂⁻, superoxide anion; OH, hydroxyl radical; ONOO⁻, peroxynitrite; PBP, progressive bulbar palsy; PD, parkinsonism-dementia; PLS, primary lateral sclerosis; ROS, reactive oxygen species; SALS, sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; SBMA, spinobulbar muscular atrophy; SMA, spinal muscular atrophy; SMN, survival motor neuron; SOD1, CuZn superoxide dismutase; TRAP, translocon-associated protein; UMN, upper motor neuron

**Key words:** amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; glutamate excitotoxicity; motor neuron disease; neurofilaments; superoxide dismutase

**Correspondence to:** G. A. Rouleau; e-mail: mi32@musica.mcgill.ca

© 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Familial ALS   MUSCLE & NERVE   February 2002   135
revised (http://www.wfnals.org/Articles/elescorial1998.htm), 42 outlines the criteria required for the diagnosis of suspected, possible, probable, and definite ALS based on clinical, electrophysiological, and neuropathological examination. Diagnosis of ALS requires the presence of both upper and lower motor neuron features with disease progression, in the absence of evidence of another disease that may explain these signs. A recent review stated that dementia is found in 3–5% of ALS patients,2 although an earlier study had a figure as high as 15%.119

Although the majority of sporadic and familial ALS cases are clinically identical, some minor features distinguish the types: the average age of symptom onset of SALS is 56 years, compared to 46 years for FALS.50 No genetic anticipation has been observed. The male:female ratio is 1:1 in FALS50 and 1.7:1 in SALS, although this value decreases with increasing age at presentation, approaching 1:1 after 70 years of age.108 The duration of FALS is bimodal; a small percentage of patients have very poor prognosis, with an average survival of <2 years, whereas the remainder have a better prognosis than sporadic cases, with survival usually >5 years.50 The site of onset is variable, but bulbar onset is rare. Survival is not affected by age or gender, but rather by the site of symptom onset. Longer survival is seen when the arms are affected first, compared to onset in the legs or oropharyngeal muscles.162 At present, there is no cure for ALS and treatment is primarily with the drug riluzole, which acts primarily by blocking glutamate release,157 although it has been demonstrated that treatment with this drug in rats may increase motor neuron survival by stimulating trophic activity in astrocytes.180

The underlying cause of ALS remains unknown and, although it comprises only 10% of cases, the familial form of ALS is commonly used as the basis of study due to the obvious genetic factors, with the aim of mapping and identifying gene(s) that cause or predispose to ALS. Identification of FALS genes may lead to a greater understanding of the mechanisms of cell death in all forms of ALS. This, in turn, may lead to more effective treatments and therapies. The focus of this review is on the familial form of ALS and the current research and approaches to its understanding.

LINKAGE

Linkage analysis in familial ALS is problematic due to the late onset and age-dependent penetrance of the disease and the relatively short survival of affected individuals. Thus, large pedigrees with several

affected individuals available for study are not encountered frequently. Despite these challenges, six ALS loci have been identified to date (Table 1). Two loci were mapped using autosomal dominant pedigrees: ALS1 is an adult-onset disease, whereas ALS4 presents in a juvenile form. Two recessive loci, ALS2 and ALS5, are both juvenile-onset diseases. One X-linked, dominant locus has been suggested. A genetic locus that is linked to dominant ALS with frontotemporal dementia has recently been identified.

**ALS1: OMIM 105400.** A 1991 study of 23 families of European ancestry with autosomal dominant FALS established linkage to a 10-cM region on chromosome 21q.214 Evidence of genetic heterogeneity was demonstrated, allowing the definition of at least two genetic subgroups of families. This was supported by a study of eight British FALS pedigrees that failed to detect linkage to this ALS1 locus.130 Tight linkage was then reported between FALS and the gene that encodes Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) on chromosome 21q22.1.195 Subsequent single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis of the SOD1 gene detected a number of mutations in the FALS samples.195 These mutations were associated with the disease and were not detected in controls or families in which linkage to the ALS1 locus had been excluded. Twelve additional pedigrees, too small for linkage studies, were also tested. In total, 11 mutations were detected, in two exons of SOD1.195 Families with adult-onset autosomal dominant ALS that are neither linked to chromosome 21 nor associated with mutations in the SOD1 gene are designated ALS3.214

**ALS2: OMIM 205100.** In one study of a large Tunisian pedigree with several consanguineous matings, a juvenile-onset, autosomal recessive form of FALS was linked to chromosome 2.111 In this form of ALS, symptoms occur in the first or second decade and progress slowly for 10–15 years.110 There are three distinct clinical subtypes. Type 1 displays weakness and atrophy of muscles associated with mild spasticity of all limbs, type 2 displays spasticity of lower limbs and is more severe, and type 3 has a predominance of spasticity of facial and limb muscles. A type 3 family was used to establish linkage to chromosome 2q33.110 Based on tissue localization, linkage data, and its biochemical role in the free radical pathway, the aldehyde oxidase 1 (AOX1) gene was proposed as a candidate gene for ALS2.31 No mutations have yet been reported and the candidate interval has been refined to a 1.7-cM locus that con-

Glutamate
↓
EAAT2 *
glutamate
receptor subtypes
extracellular

intracellular

Mitochondrial
damage
↑ [Ca²⁺]
CBP deficiency
Mitochondrion
Arginine → NOS → NO
ONOO⁻
high energy
requirement
e⁻
O₂⁻
Oxidative
damage
SOD1*
Cu²⁺
H₂O₂
Catalase
Fe²⁺
CCS
H₂O + O₂
•OH
Peripherin
NF*
high NF
content
NF damage

FIGURE 1. Pathways implicated in motor neuron cell death in ALS. Asterisk denotes molecules with mutations associated with ALS. Shaded boxes indicate factors that may contribute to the selectivity of death of motor neurons. Glutamate released from the presynaptic terminal activates the glutamate receptor on the postsynaptic cell membrane and is then cleared from the synaptic cleft by specific glutamate transporters such as EAAT2. Alterations in this protein may interfere with normal clearance, allowing the glutamate to remain in the environment and continue to activate the receptor. Once activated, the receptors cause a Ca²⁺ influx, which the cell does not have the capacity to buffer efficiently due to deficiency in calcium-binding proteins (CBPs). This results in disturbances in mitochondrial metabolism and also the activation of a number of enzymes such as NOS. Neurons have high energy requirements and thus contain many mitochondria that generate O₂⁻ through normal metabolism. It is a function of SOD1 to detoxify this free radical to H₂O₂, which is then reduced to H₂O and O₂ by catalase. Thus, mutations in SOD1 may lead to increased oxidative damage. The NO produced by NOS reacts spontaneously with O₂⁻ to generate peroxynitrite, which nitrosylates proteins leading to damage. Excess NO may also cause an increase in O₂⁻ production by inhibition of mitochondrial electron flow, resulting in further generation of ONOO⁻. The nitrosylation reaction is copper-dependent and the source of free copper may be mutant SOD1, which cannot accept the ion from CCS. The target proteins for nitrosylation include the neurofilament subunits, which may result in abnormal NF accumulation and subsequent disruption of the neurofilament network and axonal transport. The high NF content of motor neurons may contribute to the effects of this damage. The reaction is enhanced in the presence of increased peripherin. Mutant SOD1 has increased copper-dependent peroxidase activity, which leads to formation of hydroxyl radical that can also alter the NF network. It is reasonable to assume that disturbances of any of the molecules at any point of this complicated, and as yet incomplete, pathway may contribute to the cell death observed in ALS.

contains 5 identified genes and 34 expressed sequence tags (EST).¹¹⁶

ALS4: OMIM 602433. A genome-wide search on a large pedigree with autosomal dominant juvenile-onset ALS yielded strong evidence for linkage to chromosome 9q34, which is thus genetically distinct

from other ALS loci.⁵⁵ The average age of onset is 17 years, with slow progression of the disease. The disease gene interval is 5 cM, flanked by markers D9S1831 and D9S164. A detailed clinical account of several of the family members, plus two autopsy reports, determined that individuals fulfilled the ALS criteria, but displayed some additional pathological

Familial ALS                                                                 MUSCLE & NERVE February 2002 137

Table 1. Genetics of familial ALS.

| Acronym | OMIM    | Inheritance | Chromosomal location | Onset     | Gene      | Reference |
|---------|---------|-------------|---------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|
| ALS 1   | 105400  | Dominant     | 21q22               | Adult     | SOD1       | 195,214   |
| ALS 2   | 205100  | Recessive    | 2q33                | Juvenile 3 | Unknown    | 110       |
| ALS 3   | —       | Dominant     | Unknown             | Adult     | Unknown    | —         |
| ALS 4   | 602433  | Dominant     | 9q34                | Juvenile  | Unknown    | 55        |
| ALS 5   | 602099  | Recessive    | 15q15-q21           | Juvenile 1 | Unknown    | 112       |
| —       | —       | Recessive    | Unknown             | Juvenile 2 | Unknown    | —         |
| ALS-FTD | 105550  | Dominant     | 9q21-q22            | —         | Unknown    | 117       |
| —       | —       | X-linked     | Unknown             | —         | Unknown    | 215       |

Known ALS loci and genes are listed. For each, the OMIM number, inheritance pattern, chromosomal location, and type of onset are indicated. When known, the name of the gene involved has been included.

dimerization doubles the dismutase activity. Super-
oxide is guided to the active site containing the Cu²⁺
atom through a positively charged channel.²¹³ The
Zn²⁺ is involved in maintaining pH stability of the
dismutation reaction and in the rapid dissociation of
the H₂O₂ produced, which can slowly inactivate
SOD1.⁹ Access to the active site is limited by size and
charge, favoring O₂⁻ and excluding larger mol-
ecules.²¹³ In addition to dismutase activity, SOD1
can function as a peroxidase, catalyzing oxidative re-
actions of substrates by hydrogen peroxide.⁴⁰

ALS Mutations. The initial study to establish a cau-
sal link between the SOD1 gene and FALS identified
a total of 11 missense mutations in two exons studied
in 13 autosomal dominant ALS families.¹⁹⁵ This find-
ing led to an explosion of SOD1 gene screening in
ALS pedigrees. A recent review described 63 differ-
ent mutations at 43 codons, with three intronic sites
and two in the 3′ untranslated region.¹⁶⁸ There is a
database that details all the SOD1 ALS mutations
described (www.alsod.org) and at present this data-
base cites 74 mutations at 53 codons, indicating the
rapid pace at which these numbers are increasing.
Mutations exist in all five exons of the gene;²⁰⁹ most
are autosomal dominant in inheritance, although
some sporadic ALS cases also carry mutations. One
confirmed autosomal recessive mutation has been
recognized. The D90A mutation in exon 4 is unique
in that it exists in dominant families in a heterozy-
gous state, but in a number of pedigrees, specifically
those of Scandinavian ancestry, homozygous muta-
tions are required for disease.¹⁰ A 1998 study by hap-
lotype analysis established that all recessive D90A
families have a common founder, whereas the dom-
inant families have a number of ancestors.³ Our
laboratory has recently reported an ALS family with
affected individuals carrying a single copy of the
SOD1 D90A recessive mutation and also a copy of a
novel D96N mutation. This is the first description of
compound heterozygosity in ALS and SOD1, and it
has been proposed that D96N may be another reces-
sive mutation.¹⁰⁶ An affected individual homozygous
for an L84F mutation has been described, although
further evidence that this is a recessive mutation has
not yet been reported.³⁸

Of the alterations in the SOD1 gene so far identi-
fied, the majority are base substitutions leading to
missense mutations. Three exonic insertions¹¹,¹²¹,¹²⁹
and one exonic deletion,¹⁸³ resulting in premature
termination of the protein, have been reported.
Structurally, the earliest of these alterations occurs at
the last codon of exon 4,¹²¹ and the others lie within
exon 5, so although the protein is truncated, only

the last exon is lost. Most importantly, exon 3, which
encodes the active site, remains intact. In addition to
the ALS-associated mutations, several variants and
polymorphisms have been identified.¹⁶⁸ Initially, the
failure to detect mutations in exon 3 led to specula-
tion that, as it encoded the active site, it was privi-
leged from mutations and, to date, only three have
been reported.¹¹,³⁸,¹⁷¹ Approximately 10–20% of
ALS families carry an SOD1 mutation,⁵⁰ reflecting
the existence of families that do not link to chromo-
some 21 (ALS3). Mutations have also been detected
in sporadic ALS cases, although it is unclear whether
all of these are truly sporadic. No mutations have
been detected in individuals with the form of ALS
seen in Guam.⁸⁵

Clinical Differences of Different Mutations. The
most common FALS mutation seen is, coinciden-
tally, the first within the SOD1 gene: an alanine to
valine shift at codon 4 (A4V), which accounts for
50% of all mutations in North America.²⁰⁶ This mu-
tation results in the most aggressive form of FALS,
with an unusually short survival of only 1.5 years,
whereas the histidine to arginine shift at position 46
(H46R) has an average life expectancy of 18 years
after disease onset.¹⁸⁹

A comprehensive study of the SOD1 mutations in
FALS by Cudkowicz et al.⁶⁷ established a number of
findings. First, SOD1 mutations are specific to FALS.
FALS with or without SOD1 mutations are, in gen-
eral, clinically similar but the age of onset is slightly
earlier in FALS with a SOD1 mutation, with a mean
age of 46.9 years compared to 50.5 years for non-
SOD1 patients.⁶⁷ However, some clinical character-
istics of SOD1 FALS cases vary with the specific mu-
tation, for instance, upper motor neuron signs are
always absent in SOD1 A4V cases.⁶⁶ Mutations are
detected in 23% of families, again underlining the
point that at least one more disease gene exists. The
A4V mutation is the most frequent mutation det-
ected (50%) followed by the I113T mutation
(11.7%). There is a large variation in disease severity
as measured by age at symptom onset and disease
duration. In SOD1 FALS patients, the age at onset is
younger than in non-SOD1 FALS. Of all the clinical
variables tested, bulbar onset and two specific muta-
tions were shown to modulate age of onset or sur-
vival. In general, bulbar-onset patients are older
when their illness begins, whereas the G37R and
L38V mutations predict an earlier age of onset. In
terms of survival, A4V correlated with shorter sur-
vival, whereas G37R, G41D, and G93A mutations
predicted longer disease duration. It is important to
note that the mutations that predict earlier disease
onset (G37R and L38V) are not the same as those that correlate with shorter duration of disease (A4V). This suggests that the factors that modulate timing of disease differ from those involved in rate of progression of the disease.⁶⁷ Age of onset varies with mutations: L106V is associated with the earliest onset (mean 35.5 years) and I113T with the latest onset (mean 58.9 years).⁶⁷ The fact that I113T was found to have the latest age of onset may in part explain the finding of this mutation in many seemingly sporadic ALS cases.⁷³,¹²⁴,¹²⁵ It is quite possible that relatives of these apparently sporadic cases died prior to reaching this late age of onset, thereby eliminating any family history. However, other SOD1 mutations have also been identified in SALS.¹⁶⁸

The first study of the structural location of FALS mutations within SOD1 indicated that the 12 mutations studied altered conserved interactions critical to structural folding and dimer contact, rather than catalysis.⁷² To date, the majority of mutations affect the backbone of the protein or regions involved in dimerization of the two subunits. The position and type of amino acid change may determine the potential effect on the protein and its function. Two mutations have been detected in highly conserved residues within the copper binding domain, producing interesting results. The H46R mutation has been described in Japanese ALS families and the associated phenotype is slowly progressive with long survival (mean 17.3 years).¹⁵ The nearby residue 48 is mutated in a British ALS family and this H48Q shift results in a severe phenotype with rapid progression and a survival of only 8 months.⁷⁹,²¹⁰ The distinctly different effect of these two mutations emphasizes the point that SOD1 mutations have quite varied effects on phenotype and prognosis.⁷⁹,¹⁷⁰

## OTHER GENES INVESTIGATED IN ALS

Accumulation of neurofilaments (NF) in cell bodies and axons of motor neurons is a pathological hallmark of early stages in many neurodegenerative diseases. Neurofilaments are composed of light (NF-L), medium (NF-M), and heavy (NF-H) subunits and are the major intermediate filament proteins found in neurons.²⁵¹ Mutations in NF-H have been identified in sporadic ALS cases,⁸⁶ and in one ALS family.⁴ These mutations lie in a region of the protein involved in crosslinking and thus may disrupt normal aggregation of filaments. Other investigators have failed to detect variants in familial cases,¹⁹³,²³⁹ suggesting that the role for NF-H mutations in ALS may be uncommon.⁴ Analysis of the NF-H locus on chromosome 22 failed to detect linkage in ALS families.⁸⁶

The role of neurofilaments in ALS will be discussed further in a later section.

Because approximately 80% of FALS cases cannot be explained by SOD1 mutations, there have been great efforts to identify other causative genes. One approach is to examine candidate genes that may have a function similar to SOD. Two obvious genes for investigation are the other isoforms of SOD. MnSOD (SOD2) maps to chromosome 6q25, and extracellular SOD (SOD3) maps to chromosome 4p15. Neither of these genes are linked to FALS.⁷⁰,²¹³ Other important free radical detoxifying enzymes, such as glutathione peroxidase and catalase, would also be interesting loci to investigate. Transgenic mice with the G93A SOD1 mutation and a partial deletion of the SOD2 gene showed a significant decrease in survival and exacerbation of motor defects compared to mice with G93A alone.¹² Also, lack of SOD2 in mice causes early postnatal lethality or severe mitochondrial disease, suggesting the importance of this enzyme for normal function.¹⁴²,¹⁵² A SOD mimetic can rescue the mice from the systemic pathology but animals develop a movement disorder.¹⁵⁴

Hexosaminidase A deficiency is associated with Tay-Sachs disease, an autosomal recessive, progressive, neurodegenerative disease. However, ALS patients with hexosaminidase A deficiency have been described, implicating the enzyme in degeneration of the nervous system.¹⁰³,¹⁵⁸ The gene for hexosaminidase A maps to chromosome 15q23–q24.

A motor neuron degeneration (*Mnd*) gene was mapped in a mouse model of ALS to chromosome 8, which is syntenic to human chromosome 8.¹⁵⁵ Although many features of the disease in these animals were consistent with ALS, there was a distinct phenotype in homozygotes. At the time of this study no neurological disorders mapped to this region in humans, but in 1994 an autosomal recessive form of hereditary spastic paraplegia was localized to the region,¹¹³ although as yet no responsible gene has been identified.

Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is characterized by the loss of motor neurons and maps to chromosome 5q11-q13. Analysis of this locus in FALS found no evidence of linkage.⁷⁰ SMA is caused by deletions in two genes in this region, neuronal apoptosis inhibitor (NAIP) and survival motor neuron (SMN). No mutations in these genes have been detected in ALS patients.¹⁶⁹,¹⁷³

Spinobulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA; Kennedy's disease) is an X-linked neurodegenerative disorder, characterized by the loss of lower motor neurons and caused by a polyglutamine expansion in theandrogen receptor. Although, unlike ALS, upper motor neurons remain unaffected, given the clinical similarity between these disorders, particularly in the early stages of ALS, there have been reports of clinical misdiagnoses in these two disorders.¹⁷² Individuals with ALS who carried the expansion were reassessed and deemed to have SBMA and not ALS; the mutation was not seen in true ALS cases. The distinction is very important given the differing prognoses.

The association of apolipoprotein E (APOE) alleles with Alzheimer’s disease prompted the study of these alleles in ALS. Four major studies have been described and, although the results from two did not show an association between APOE alleles and ALS,¹⁶¹,²²⁰ the other two did indicate a protective role of APOE2 and negative effect of APOE4.⁵,¹⁵⁹ The findings have recently been reviewed and suggest that APOE alleles may influence ALS presentation and progression.²⁸

The apurinic/apurimidinic exonuclease (APEX nuclease) gene encodes a multifunctional DNA repair enzyme, levels of which are reduced in brains from sporadic ALS patients. A study of a common polymorphism in the APEX gene found a significant difference in allele frequency among the sporadic cases compared to controls, suggesting that APEX may contribute to ALS etiology.¹⁰⁹

Persyn is a member of the synuclein family of cytosolic proteins that have been implicated in neurodegeneration. Both Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease are associated with α-synuclein at some point. The five exons of persyn were examined in a cohort of sporadic and familial ALS cases and controls, but the polymorphisms detected had no significant association with disease state.⁸⁷

### MECHANISMS

Many mechanisms for the degeneration of motor neurons in ALS have been postulated, so this review focuses on those most relevant to familial ALS. In particular, SOD1 mutations, neurofilaments, oxidative stress, glutamate excitotoxicity, copper toxicity, apoptosis, and the basis of selectivity of cell death are discussed. Other mechanisms investigated include autoimmunity, growth factors, infection, and environmental influences.

An immunological basis for ALS was proposed following the detection of increased levels of antibodies to certain types of calcium channels in sporadic ALS patients.¹⁶ The theory was that these antibodies alter the function of the channels and activate calcium influx, which may play a role in motor neuron degeneration. However, subsequent studies have failed to reproduce these results,¹⁷ and conclusions of the initial study have been brought into question by the suggestion of protease contamination.¹⁶⁵,²⁴¹ So, although there may yet be a function for antibodies in the pathogenesis of some sporadic ALS cases, it is unlikely to have a primary role in FALS.

Growth factors have been examined in the context of ALS therapy due to their profound abilities to promote motor neuron survival during development.⁷⁸ Motor neuron death that normally follows axotomy can be prevented by treatment with neurotrophic factors.⁹⁶ Levels of insulin growth factor (IGF)-binding proteins are significantly increased in ALS patients, whereas serum IGF-1 and insulin are reduced, suggesting involvement of the IGF system in ALS.²³⁰ The leukemia inhibitory factor (lif) is a potent survival factor for motor neurons and analysis of this gene in ALS patients has identified a mutation in the region of the protein that interacts with its receptor. The mutation was found in 4 of 104 patients and in 0 of 338 control subjects, suggesting that the lif gene could act as a modifier gene in the pathway of ALS.⁹⁵

Chronic viral infection is another hypothesis proposed to explain the etiology of ALS, particularly sporadic cases. However, no virus has been successfully cultivated from ALS samples. Recently, the most sensitive technique utilized thus far detected enterovirus RNA sequences in over 88% of ALS spinal cords compared to 3% of controls.³⁰ Furthermore, reverse transcriptase activity not attributable to known retroviruses was discovered in a significant proportion of ALS patients and further work is required to determine the source of the activity.¹³ Exposure to environmental toxins, such as aluminum and food toxins like those found in the cycad plants consumed in Guam, have also been investigated as causes of ALS. The recent decline in incidence rates of PD ALS attributed to dietary habits suggests a strong environmental basis with a limited genetic influence.⁸⁵,¹⁶²

### SOD1 MUTATIONS

Despite the interval of over 6 years since the association of mutant SOD1 and FALS, and the extensive investigations into the numerous mechanisms of pathogenesis proposed, the pathway through which mutated SOD causes selective motor neuron death still remains undetermined.

The discovery of SOD1 mutations associated with ALS led to much speculation as to the mechanism by which the mutated enzyme could be responsible for ALS. At first, given the vital role of SOD1 in detoxi
fying free radicals, it was attractive to suggest that mutations in the enzyme resulted in reduced activity, thereby allowing the cellular accumulation of harmful superoxide.¹⁹⁵ Decreased SOD1 activity in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of ALS patients has been reported³⁹ and free radicals have been implicated in neuronal injury in a number of neurological disorders.¹⁹⁵ Another possibility was that overactive mutant SOD might produce excessive hydrogen peroxide, which may be rapidly converted to the more toxic hydroxyl radical in the presence of ferrous ions.⁹¹,¹²⁰ A dominant negative effect means that not only would the mutant be dysfunctional, but it could also impair the activity of the normal enzyme leading to a reduction of more than 50%.⁷² Alternatively, the mutation could cause the enzyme to gain a function. None of these hypotheses addressed how a ubiquitously expressed gene could bring about such selective motor neuron death.

The first approach to answer these questions was to measure the activity of the mutant SOD1. Study of red blood cell enzyme activity in six individuals with distinct SOD1 mutations found that average mutant activity was less than half (41%) that of controls, supporting the dominant negative theory.⁷² Rosen et al.¹⁹⁴ studied the A4V SOD1 mutation, which causes a clinically very severe FALS phenotype, and found that in lymphoblastoid cell lines, the SOD1 enzyme activity was 50% that of normal. Protein levels in the A4V lines were reduced compared to normals, but not to 50%. Activities were normal in sporadic ALS cases and FALS cases without SOD1 mutations.⁹³ However, individuals heterozygous for the H46R mutation were found to have 80% normal activity,¹⁵ and the G4lS mutation caused just a 27% reduction in activity.²³⁵ Not all FALS mutations cause a decrease in SOD1 activity, as shown by the study of the G37R mutation which retains full specific activity, but displays a twofold reduction in polypeptide stability, leading to an overall reduction to 40–60% of normal enzyme activity.³⁶ Meanwhile, the G85R SOD1 mutation is inactive. SOD1 mutants with reduced half-life and reduced free radical scavenging abilities were expressed with normal SOD1 to assess the influence of the mutant on the stability or activity of the normal enzyme. Normal subunits were unaffected in activity or half-life.³⁵

In general, enzymes are present in excess amounts and, especially in the case of SOD when there are three isoforms of the enzyme found, one wonders how such a slight reduction is sufficient to produce disease. Commonly, loss of function mutations produces autosomal recessive phenotypes, and even in heterozygous carriers of recessive mutation

where 50% reduction of enzyme may be detected, individuals are clinically unaffected.

However, erythrocyte and CSF enzyme activity results are sometimes difficult to reproduce²⁰⁵ and thus transgenic mice expressing wild-type and mutant forms of human SOD1 were developed as models for ALS. Mice with SOD1G93A developed motor neuron disease that was not seen in mice expressing normal SOD1 at comparable levels.¹⁰⁵ A G86R mouse SOD1 mutation, which corresponds to human G85R, caused development of motor neuron degeneration, although there was no reduction in SOD activity.¹⁹¹ Wong and colleagues²⁴⁹ showed that, although transgenic mice expressing human G37R SOD1 develop severe motor neuron disease, mice with the wild-type human SOD1 gene expressed at similar and higher levels do not show disease. Another important study created mice completely deficient for the enzyme by deletion of the entire coding sequence of mouse SOD1 gene.¹⁹⁰ These animals develop normally and show no signs of motor neuron disease, although they exhibit increased vulnerability to motor neuron loss after axonal injury, suggesting that SOD1 may have a larger role in situations of injury rather than development and function.²¹² Motor neuron death arises from mutant-mediated toxicity as shown by the development of disease in transgenic mice with mutant SOD1 in the absence or elevation of wild-type SOD1.⁴⁹ Yeast mutants null for SOD1 were rescued as efficiently by FALS-associated SOD1 mutants as by wild-type, confirming the activity of the mutant enzyme.¹⁸⁶ In neuronal cells, overexpression of wild-type SOD1 inhibits apoptosis, whereas FALS mutants promote apoptosis, supporting a gain-of-function effect.¹⁸⁶ In addition, it was observed that no SOD1 null mutations had been detected in FALS patients as would be expected if loss of activity had been the cause of the disease.⁴³ All this observed and experimental evidence gave support to the theory that FALS is caused not by loss or reduction in SOD1 activity, but rather by the acquisition of an adverse toxic property by the mutant enzyme.

**Proposed Toxic Property of Mutant SOD1.** At least three properties of mutant SOD1 have been investigated: altered substrate reactivity, metal toxicity, and aberrant interactions with proteins. It has been observed that the mutant SOD1 enzyme has altered reactivity with certain substrates. FALS-associated SOD1 mutations have normal dismutase activity but enhanced peroxidase activity.²⁴⁵,²⁵² This reaction is copper-dependent as the mutant reaction is more sensitive to inhibition by copper chelators than the
wild-type enzymes. X-ray crystallographic studies have shown that the active channel of FALS mutant is slightly larger than that of the wild-type, supporting the theory that H₂O₂ has access to the mutant enzyme.²⁵² The generated hydroxyl radical has a number of possible fates: it may react with a histidine residue within the active site, thereby inactivating the enzyme, react with molecules within the active site, or exit the active site and react with other molecules.⁴⁰

Soon after the discovery of FALS mutations in the SOD1 gene, it was pointed out that, as a dominant disorder, mutations would cause at most a 50% reduction in SOD1 activity, thereby doubling the steady-state concentration of superoxide in the cell. Superoxide reacts with nitric oxide three times faster than with wild-type SOD1 and leads to the formation of peroxynitrite, which can then form nitronium-like intermediates capable of nitrating tyrosine residues.²⁷ Increased nitrotyrosine levels in sporadic and familial ALS cases and in animals have been reported.¹,²³,⁸⁴

It has been shown that mutant SOD has reduced stability³⁶ and so it is possible that there may be less buffering of copper and zinc, both of which can be neurotoxic.⁴³ The H46R and H48Q SOD1 mutations directly affect copper-binding ligands and therefore cannot bind any copper.⁵³,²¹³ FALS mutants can dramatically alter the zinc-binding site of the enzyme, and thereby influence the redox behavior of the enzyme.¹⁴⁷ Interestingly, mutations throughout the protein may have this same effect on the zinc-binding site, explaining how so many different mutations can yield a common toxic property. Affinity for zinc in mutant enzyme can be reduced by 30-fold compared to wild-type.⁶⁵ However, measurements of concentrations of total copper and zinc in both sporadic and familial ALS cases with various controls did not find any correlation between free Zn and Cu with disease, severity, age of disease onset, or SOD1 activity.¹⁸⁷

The mutated protein may be sufficiently unstable that it precipitates to form toxic aggregates.⁴³ This is important when considering that SOD1 represents approximately 1% of cytosolic protein. Alterations in folding, solubility, or degradation of such an abundant protein could potentially result in aggregates, consistent with the finding of SOD1 immunoreactive inclusion bodies in motor neurons expressing mutant SOD1 but not with wild-type SOD1.⁴⁰,⁴⁹,⁷⁷ A recent study has shown that, in a mutant SOD1 mouse model of ALS, the aggregation and formation of inclusion bodies are distinct processes.¹²³ Moreover, aggregation is an early event in disease pathogenesis

and may be used as a biochemical marker, whereas inclusion-body formation occurs later via microtubule retrograde transport and is detectable only after disease is evident.

Mutant SOD1 displays at least two novel protein interactions detected by a yeast interaction trap system.¹³⁵ Lysyl-tRNA synthase (KARS) is involved in protein synthesis and translocon-associated protein-delta (TRAP-δ) is involved in transport of newly synthesized proteins into the endoplasmic reticulum. Interaction between mutant SOD1 and either of these proteins could result in abnormal localization or function.

In summary, there is evidence for a number of possible toxic properties acquired by mutant SOD1. Increased copper-dependent peroxidase activity would lead to formation of hydroxyl radicals and subsequent cellular damage. A reduction in protein stability may have several effects, specifically aggregate formation and metal toxicity. Finally, abnormal protein interactions may provide an explanation for mutant SOD1 toxicity.

### NEUROFILAMENTS

Aberrant accumulation of neurofilaments in perikarya and proximal axons of motor neurons is one of the most commonly reported pathological findings in ALS, although whether this has a central role in the disease process or is merely a harmless byproduct remains unclear.⁵⁹ The first experimental evidence that neurofilaments are involved in the pathogenesis of ALS came through the generation of mouse models expressing high levels (three to four times normal) of wild-type mouse NF-L²⁵¹ and wild-type human NF-H.⁶¹ In these animals, NF accumulation was accompanied by axonal degeneration, proximal swelling, and severe skeletal muscle atrophy, suggesting that the NF accumulation in motor neurons can trigger neurodegeneration. However, there was no significant loss of motor neurons and the extent of overexpression caused some concerns about the specificity of the toxic effect and the rate of protein degradation. Thus, a mouse model was created expressing a modest level of mutant NF-L, and this resulted in selective degeneration of motor neurons accompanied by NF accumulation.¹³⁸ Description of severe neurofilamentous pathology in association with an SOD1 mutation in an ALS individual further supported the role of NF in the disease.²⁰⁴

Mice with a deleted NF-L gene plus a G85R SOD1 mutation have slower onset and reduced progression of the disease,²⁴⁷ leading to the conclusion that less NF reduces neuronal vulnerability to SOD1 mutant toxicity. However, overexpression of human NF-H in

Familial ALS MUSCLE & NERVE February 2002 143
G37R SOD1 mutant mice leads to a surprising 65% increase in lifespan of the G37R animals.⁶³ These findings were confirmed by a study overexpressing both NF-L and NF-H with another SOD1 mutant.¹³³ Overexpression of human NF-L with G37R in mice leads to excess NF in motor axons but does not accelerate the mutant SOD1-mediated disease, suggesting that the increase of NF may even protect motor neurons from SOD1 toxicity.⁶² One mechanism to explain this finding is that extra NF proteins could act as a sink for toxic oxygen radicals, although no differences in pattern or amount of nitrotyrosine or carbonyl modifications are seen, suggesting that nitration occurs normally in neurons.²²⁵ Selective suppression of NF-L mRNA has been observed in sporadic ALS cases without any alteration to mRNA levels of other NF subunits or neuronal nitric oxide synthase (NOS), suggesting that the motor neurons are incapable of buffering reactive nitrating species.²²⁵

NFs are obligate heteropolymers, but peripherin, another neuronal intermediate filament (IF) protein, can form heterodimers with each of the three NF subunits and is a component of the IF inclusion bodies seen in ALS. In the absence of NF-L, the expression of peripherin with NF-H and NF-M prevents IF formation in cells.²⁶ Further study of the role of peripherin in ALS shows that sustained overexpression of wild-type peripherin in mice provokes massive and selective degeneration of motor axons during aging. Onset of peripherin-mediated disease was precipitated by a deficiency of NF-L protein.²⁵ Overexpression of NF-L in mice can rescue the NF-H phenotype.¹⁵⁰ However, NF-L null mice with NF-H overexpression develop protein aggregates, but this does not lead to motor neuron death, whereas animals with overexpression of peripherin have toxic inclusions resulting in death.²⁴ These data suggest that the type and location of the IF aggregates may play a role in its toxicity.

Another possible hypothesis for how neurofilaments participate in the mechanism and selectivity of motor neuron disease comes from the neurofilament-dependent slowing of axonal transport as neurofilaments accumulate.²⁴⁸ The first indication that SOD1 mutations altered the NF network came from an SOD1 G93A mouse model in which axonal transport was impaired.²⁵³ Proteins synthesized in the neuron cell body are delivered to the axon by axonal transport, which has fast and slow components. Slow transport may be divided again, according to the speed of the movement: slow component a (SCa ~0.5 mm day⁻¹) transports NF proteins, tubulin, and actin, and slow component b (SCb ~1–2 mm day⁻¹), which also carries tubulin, actin, and other proteins.²⁴⁸ Examination of rate and composition of slow axonal transport in transgenic mice expressing human SOD1 G37R or G85R showed that reduced slow transport was evident months before clinical features of disease.²⁴⁸ Transport of all three subunits of NF was markedly reduced, by a factor of two in the G37R mice, whereas fast transport was not affected.

Neurofilaments are a major component of the axonal cytoskeleton and, as motor neurons have very large NF-rich axons, this structural characteristic is one of the strongest clues to the selective vulnerability of motor neurons in ALS. Neurofilaments have a role in maintaining axon structure and caliber.¹²⁶ Axonal loss in ALS is size-dependent, with predominant loss of large fibers.²²² However, by restricting the expression of NF within cells and preventing localization of NF in the axon, SOD1 mutant-mediated diseases in mice with or without axonal neurofilaments are indistinguishable, implying that axonal NF is not required for disease pathology.⁸¹ This suggests that the NF disruptions observed in ALS are secondary. A recent study reduced NF content by disruption of each of the three NF genes and studied this effect in the context of a SOD1 FALS mutation. The large decrease in NF resulted in a considerable reduction in axonal caliber but did not prevent motor neuron loss.¹⁶⁴ The conclusions drawn from the study were that neither high NF burden nor large-caliber axons account for the selective degeneration of motor neurons in ALS.

Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (cdk5) is expressed at high levels in neurons, where it phosphorylates tau and NF-H, generating the same epitopes found in NF accumulations in ALS. Also, cdk5 is present in affected motor neurons in ALS and thus may be implicated in the disease process.²¹ Downregulation of cdk5 activity leads to neurodegeneration.¹⁷⁶

The possibility that motor neuron degeneration could be due to expression of mutant mRNA rather than mutant protein by NF-L transgene implicates RNA processing in neurodegenerative disorders.⁵¹ Recent studies have implicated the neuronal Golgi apparatus in the NF pathway of pathogenesis of ALS.²²³ The fragmentation of the Golgi apparatus seen in ALS is observed in G93A mice, but not in mice expressing NF-H.

In summary, although neurofilament accumulation is a common pathological feature of ALS, NF content does not appear to be responsible for the selective death of motor neurons. The development of many animal models with NF transgenes has provided insight into the role of these elements in ALS. Recent evidence has highlighted the interactions of

various filament proteins and the levels of expression of each protein type as having a strong influence on the course of the disease. Moreover, it is becoming clear that the cellular location of NF accumulation, that is, perikaryal versus axonal, may be vital to the disruption of cellular function, specifically the axonal transport system. Mutations in the heavy NF subunit may be a risk factor in sporadic ALS cases, but they are not common.

**OXIDATIVE STRESS**

Oxidative stress is defined as the cytotoxic consequences of oxygen radicals, superoxide anion (O₂⁻), hydroxyl radical (·OH), and hydrogen peroxide (H₂O₂), which are generated in normal metabolism of molecular oxygen.⁶⁴ The brain derives almost all its energy from oxidative metabolism of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Mitochondrial DNA has a mutation rate ten times greater than that of nuclear DNA and does not have efficient repair mechanisms; brain mitochondria are particularly susceptible to oxidative damage given the extensive generation of cellular oxidants by this organ. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) have also been implicated in aging and overexpression of SOD1, and SOD/catalase mimetics dramatically extend lifespan in *Drosophila*¹⁷⁴ and *C. elegans*.¹⁵³ Evidence indicates that there is an age-related accumulation in oxidative damage to DNA, particularly mitochondrial DNA, in the brain.¹⁴⁹ The oxidative stress theory is attractive as the explanation of ALS, because it allows for cumulative damage in a late-onset, progressive disease and places the major target for damage as the central nervous system. The finding of mutations in the SOD1 gene in a number of FALS cases strengthened the argument for oxidative stress as a mechanism of disease. Although it became clear that a reduction in SOD1 activity was not the cause of ALS, some SOD1 FALS mutants have reduced free radical scavenging ability,³⁵ and chronic inhibition of SOD1 activity results in motor neuron degeneration, which is reversed by antioxidant treatment.¹⁹⁷

Superoxide reacts spontaneously with nitric oxide to form peroxynitrite and, subsequently, highly reactive nitronium intermediates capable of nitrating tyrosine groups of proteins and forming the stable 3-nitrotyrosine compound.²⁷,⁵⁴ Nitric oxide is not thought to be present in motor neurons, but NOS is induced after injury.⁴⁷ Increased nitrotyrosine levels in sporadic and familial ALS cases and animals have been reported.¹,²³,⁸⁴,²²⁷,²²⁸ Studies of 3-nitrotyrosine levels in a SOD1G37R mouse yielded in vivo evidence that tyrosine nitration is elevated and coincident with earliest pathological abnormalities. However, no increase in protein-bound nitrotyrosine was found at any stage.⁴⁷

Neurofilaments are attractive candidates for nitration; NF-L has 20 tyrosines, including 9 in the head domain required for filament assembly.⁴⁷ Colocalization of NF aggregates with SOD1 and brain NOS in ALS (familial, with and without SOD1 mutations, and sporadic) motor neurons supports the theory that NF phosphorylation and assembly is altered by nitrated tyrosine residues. Impaired NF phosphorylation may affect axonal transport, leading to the accumulation of NF and progressive motor neuron death.⁵⁶ However, in another study, measurable levels of nitrotyrosine on NF subunits were not detected, suggesting that either NF proteins are not targets for damage by SOD1 mutants or levels are below detection.⁴⁷ No evidence for increased oxidative stress was seen in fibroblasts from non-SOD1 mutant FALS patients.¹²² Alterations in metal-binding ability of SOD1 mutants have been reported and proposed to enhance nitration by peroxynitrite.⁶⁵,⁹⁹,¹⁴⁷ Inhibition or deletion of neuronal NOS in a FALS SOD1 mutant mouse did not extend survival, suggesting that if NOS plays a role in the disease, it is downstream of the main initiator.⁸²,²³⁶

In addition to elevated levels of nitrosylated proteins, there is other evidence of oxidative pathology in the disease, including an increase in damage to protein,²¹¹ DNA, and phospholipids.³³,⁸³,²²¹ Also, there is an increase in metallothionein immunoreactivity in ALS.²¹⁷ Metallothionein functions in metal (particularly Zn²⁺) homeostasis and detoxification and in scavenging free radicals. The increases in ALS are thought to be local, possibly due to slower breakdown.³²,¹⁸⁷

Alternatively, the ability of mutants to use H₂O₂ as a substrate, probably due to increased availability of the Cu²⁺ site, may lead to generation of hydroxyl radicals and cellular damage. The hydroxyl radical, the most reactive species, is not generated directly by any known enzymatic reaction, but H₂O₂ slowly decomposes to ·OH, a reaction accelerated in the presence of Fe²⁺.⁶⁴ Several SOD1 mutations have shown enhanced copper-dependent peroxidase activity,³⁴,¹⁴⁵,²⁴⁵,²⁵² although some reports have disputed this finding.²¹⁸ Structural alterations in SOD1 mutants suggest that H₂O₂ has access to the mutant enzyme.²⁵² ALS mutant SOD1 has reduced affinity for zinc, whereas NF subunits have high affinity, sufficient to remove zinc from SOD. This may result in reduced superoxide scavenging and increased catalysis of tyrosine nitration by peroxynitrite.⁶⁵

There are a number of defense mechanisms dedicated to reducing the levels of oxidants: SOD, catalase

in ALS,²⁰² although not all studies concur.¹⁸¹ Abnormal transport or metabolism was put forth as the underlying problem based on the findings of ratios of the amino acids and products of metabolism.²⁰² In addition, the fact that extracellular glutamate and aspartate are cleared by the same protein, and levels of both amino acids are altered in ALS, suggested a defective or inefficient transport mechanism.¹⁹⁶ A defect in high-affinity glutamate transport with disease, region, and chemical specificity has been identified in ALS patients.²⁰¹ In spinal cord cultures, chronic inhibition of glutamate transport results in slow neurotoxicity, supporting the implication of defective glutamate transport in ALS.²⁰⁰ Neuronal cell death due to chronic inhibition of SOD1 is enhanced by blockage of glutamate transport and prevented by treatment with a glutamate receptor antagonist.¹⁹⁷

The identification of three glutamate transporters — EAAC1 (excitatory amino acid carrier-1), GLT-1 (rat glial glutamate transporter), and GLAST (rat glial glutamate and aspartate transporter) — allowed for study of the specificity and localization of these transport proteins and the role of each subtype in ALS. EAAC1 is neuron-specific, whereas GLT-1 and GLAST are restricted to astrocytes.²⁰³ Using antiligo peptide antibodies, it was established that GLT-1 is significantly reduced in ALS; EAAC1 is modestly decreased, probably accounted for by motor neuron loss; and levels of GLAST are unchanged.²⁰³ Importantly, the reduction in GLT-1 was found in some, but not all, ALS specimens, possibly explaining the absence of alterations in amino acid concentrations in some samples.¹⁸¹ No change was found in the levels of mRNA for each of these transporters, suggesting the reduction in GLT-1 protein may be the result of a translational or posttranslational alteration.⁴¹ Loss of GLT-1 or GLAST through inhibition of synthesis by antisense oligonucleotides resulted in increased extracellular glutamate, excitatory neurodegeneration, and paralysis. Loss of neuronal EAAC1 did not reduce extracellular glutamate but produced mild toxicity.¹⁹⁹ This highlighted glial transporters as the main glutamate transporters and vital in preventing neurotoxicity.

Abnormal GLT-1 (also known as EAAT2: excitatory amino acid transporter 2) mRNA was identified in non-SOD1 familial and sporadic ALS cases,¹⁴⁴ offering an explanation for the reduction in functional protein. Up to 60–70% of sporadic ALS patients have a 30–95% loss of the EAAT2 protein in motor cortex and spinal cord.¹⁴³ Several abnormal EAAT2 mRNAs have been identified in abundance in affected areas but not in other brain areas of ALS

GLUTAMATE EXCITOTOXICITY

Glutamate is the principal excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain. It is released from vesicles in the presynaptic terminals by a Ca²⁺-dependent mechanism and then diffuses across the synaptic cleft where it activates specific receptors. Two types of glutamate receptors exist: ionotropic and metabotropic. There are three families of ionotropic receptors: kainic acid (KA), N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), and α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA). There are also three groups of metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) of which a total of eight (1–8) subunits have been identified.¹⁵¹ As elevated levels of glutamate may be neurotoxic, it is vital that the glutamate be cleared quickly from the synaptic and extracellular environment, a function of specific glutamate transporters in the surrounding astrocytes and neurons. Stimulation of the glutamate receptors initiates a cascade of intracellular events such as calcium and sodium influx and results in activation of oxidant-generating pathways. Elevated activity is thought to be responsible for neurotoxic effects.¹⁹⁶ Activation of the ion-gated receptors results in an influx of Ca²⁺ into the cell, which exerts many effects, including cell swelling¹³⁹ and activation of a number of enzymes such as NOS. This may lead to the formation of NO, which is then available to react with superoxide to form harmful peroxynitrite, resulting in nitrosylation and inactivation of a number of proteins.

The first indication that glutamate excitotoxicity may play a role in ALS came from the observation of reduced glutamate and aspartate levels in spinal cord and brain of patients.¹⁸² CSF studies identified a dramatic increase in glutamate and aspartate levels

patients. These aberrant mRNAs are present in approximately 65% of sporadic cases. Studies suggest that the proteins synthesized from these abnormal mRNAs are prone to rapid degradation and may exert a dominant negative effect on the normal EAAT2 protein, resulting in a loss of activity.¹⁴³ Nonpathogenic alternative splice forms of EAAT2 mRNA have also been identified.¹⁶³

How does this abnormal mRNA arise? There are several possible causes. The fact that multiple aberrant mRNAs have been identified suggests a defect in mRNA processing. Alternatively, there may be mutations in the EAAT2 gene.²⁰,¹⁴³ To elucidate this, the EAAT2 gene on chromosome 11p was studied by linkage and mutation analysis. Linkage was not detected in 16 ALS pedigrees, but mutation screening identified one novel mutation in a SALS patient and two novel mutations in two affected FALS siblings.¹⁴ The SALS mutation may be functionally important, but those found in the FALS cases do not alter the amino acid. It was concluded that mutations in the EAAT2 gene are infrequent and do not explain the high level of abnormal mRNA detected. A later study identified three novel EAAT2 transcripts, although none was found to be disease-specific, suggesting that the role of abnormally spliced RNA is unlikely to be a primary factor in the pathogenesis of ALS.¹⁵⁶ Recently, EAAT2 splice variants were found not only in ALS patients but also among controls and individuals with Alzheimer's disease, suggesting that qualitatively the presence of the variants may not explain the pathology of ALS, but that there may be some quantitative changes that affect motor neuron degeneration.¹¹⁵

SOD1 G93A mice have increased extracellular levels of glutamate and aspartate and a reduced capacity to clear glutamate from the extracellular space.⁶ This supports the proposal that glutamate transport is affected by oxidative stress.²³² Furthermore, it has been shown that GLT1 (EAAT2) is selectively inactivated by FALS SOD1 mutants through an oxidative reaction that can be prevented by treatment with antioxidants and copper chelators.²³³

Another mechanism by which glutamate transport may be impaired in ALS is through modification by 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE), a product of membrane lipid peroxidation. Studies have shown that one of the proteins modified by HNE is EAAT2.¹⁷⁸ Further investigation of this process demonstrates that, as the protein modification by HNE is primarily on cysteine residues, the isoforms of apoE differ in their ability to detoxify HNE based on their number of cysteine residues: apoE2 has two residues, apoE3 has one, and apoE4 has none. Therefore, it would be expected that apoE4 has least capacity to neutralize free HNE. This is believed to be the basis of the protective role observed with the APOE2 allele and negative effect of the APOE4 allele.²⁸,¹⁷⁷

To date, the only effective approved treatment for ALS is riluzole, which has a neuroprotective role, possibly due to presynaptic inhibition of glutamate release.⁷⁵ Treatment with riluzole prolongs survival in ALS patients and animal models.¹⁰⁴,¹³⁷ Studies have described extended survival among treated patients.²⁹,¹³⁷,¹⁹² Another potential treatment may be the use of carboxyfullerenes. These antioxidants exhibit neuroprotective properties by blocking glutamate receptor-mediated excitotoxicity.⁷⁶

A glutamate analog, β-N-oxalyl-L-α, β-diaminopropionate (β-ODAP or BOAA), is found in chickpeas and is thought to be responsible for the degeneration of upper motor neurons in lathyrism.²⁰¹ A related toxin, β-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA), found in the cycad fruit, has been implicated in the Guam ALS syndrome, although the low level of consumption and long latent period have recently brought this theory into question.¹⁵¹ These data support the glutamate toxicity model.

Although there is strong evidence for a connection between glutamate excitotoxicity and ALS it is difficult to resolve the fast action of the glutamate receptors and transporters with the very slow and progressive damage to motor neurons, which is characteristic of the disease. Perhaps a process exists by which the glutamate release is chronically triggered.²¹⁹ Alternatively, the EAAT2-expressing astrocytes may have a role in mediating this damage. Astrocytic inclusions that stain with SOD1 and ubiquitin antibodies are early indicators of disease in ALS and increase with the decrease of EAAT2.⁴⁸ In transgenic mouse models, SOD1 mutants mediate damage to astrocytes, which may result in a reduction of EAAT2 and explain the degeneration of motor neurons.⁴⁸ Supporting this, it has been shown that astrocytes interact directly with degenerating motor neurons through a process in which the mitochondrial vacuolation observed in the motor neurons at an early stage of disease is implicated.¹⁴⁰ A recent study looked further into the active participation of astrocytes in ALS by selectively expressing mutant SOD1 in astrocytes in a mouse model of disease. This restriction of mutant SOD1 was sufficient to cause astrogliosis but not motor neuron degeneration.⁹⁷

### COPPER TOXICITY

Each subunit of the SOD1 dimer contains one atom of both Cu²⁺ and Zn²⁺.²¹³ As copper may be neuro-

toxic, one avenue of investigation was the affinity with which the mutant SOD1 molecules might bind the copper atom. Conformational alterations in the molecule such as relaxed folding may expose the copper atom or allow it to interact with other molecules. The importance of copper in ALS is supported by the observation that copper chelators prevent the abnormal effect of SOD1 mutants.¹⁹,⁹²,⁹⁴,²⁴⁵ Examination of the D90A SOD1 mutation showed normal binding of copper.¹⁴⁸ A study of a number of SOD1 mutants identified a common property, the ability to bind copper, which is achieved through the function of the copper chaperone for SOD (CCS). This suggested a mechanism for SOD1 mutant-mediated disease involving aberrant copper chemistry and possibly a therapeutic approach through the use of CCS inhibitors.⁶⁰

CCS specifically delivers copper to SOD1, and yeast cells with a null mutation in the yeast equivalent (LYS7) have normal levels of SOD1 but fail to incorporate copper and thus have no superoxide scavenging activity.⁶⁸ The CCS and SOD1 molecules have strong homology with conservation of the amino acids essential for mediating SOD1 homodimerization and it is through this region that CCS interacts with both wild-type SOD1 and FALS SOD1 mutants.⁵³ Importantly, this region of homology also contains most of the copper and zinc ligands and most of the amino acids mutated in FALS.⁵³ The H46R and H48Q SOD1 mutations contain no copper due to absence of an essential ligand, but both interact with CCS. Thus, it was proposed that the chaperone interacts with these mutants and might attempt to deliver copper, even if the enzyme is unable to accept it, leading to release of copper into the cell and subsequent toxicity.⁵³

This model is consistent with the absence of an ALS phenotype in SOD1 null mice, because if there is no SOD1–CCS interaction there cannot be copper transfer. In support of this theory, mice with targeted disruption of the CCS gene display a similar phenotype to SOD1 null mice.²⁵⁰ These mice are viable and have normal levels of SOD1 protein, but reduced activity. This decrease in activity is due to a defect in copper incorporation into SOD1, and other copper manipulations such as uptake, distribution, or incorporation into other enzymes remain unaffected.²⁵⁰ The free intracellular copper concentration is very low, implying that the cell has high copper chelating activity and that the CCS is required to deliver copper to SOD1.¹⁸⁸ The absence of CCS in yeast does not alter the number of SOD1 molecules, but reduces the ratio of active, copper-containing enzymes to inactive, copper-less molecules (apo form). Colocalization of CCS and SOD1 within cells that degenerate in ALS further supports a role for CCS in the disease mechanism.⁵³,¹⁹⁸ Potential therapeutic approaches may include inhibition of CCS⁶⁰ or disruption of the CCS–SOD1 interaction to prevent copper-mediated toxicity.⁵³ The only reported study of the CCS gene on chromosome 11 in two ALS pedigrees failed to detect linkage.¹⁶⁷

**APOPTOTIC CELL DEATH**

There are, generally speaking, two mechanisms of cell death, apoptosis and necrosis. Necrosis is a passive type of cell death in which the stimulus alters the cell metabolism, resulting in death. Apoptosis is a more active death pathway, where the stimulus does not cause death directly, but activates a pathway that leads to cell death.⁸⁸ The mutant SOD1-mediated cell death observed in ALS is apoptotic.¹⁹⁷,²³⁴ Several proteins involved in the apoptosis, such as Bcl-2 and interleukin-1β converting enzyme (ICE), have been studied in an attempt to understand the pathway involved. Immunocytochemically, the distribution of Bcl-2 does not differ between ALS and control samples.²³¹ FALS SOD1 mutations in cells and transgenic mice promote apoptosis, which is delayed in the presence of overexpressed Bcl-2.⁹⁴,¹³⁴ This effect is not seen in NF-L mutant mice, suggesting that the protective mechanism of Bcl-2 is based on an oxidative stress model rather than NF accumulation.¹¹⁸ Cultured motor neurons display dose-dependent apoptosis when treated with oxidants.⁵⁷,¹²⁷ Also, the antioxidant properties of carboxyfullerenes block apoptotic neuronal death in culture models.⁷⁶ The proapoptotic characteristic of mutant SOD1 is not seen with the native enzyme, which is normally anti-apoptotic in neurons.¹⁰¹,¹⁸⁶,¹⁹⁷

ICE has a vital role in the activation of programmed cell death pathways and its inhibition prevents neuronal damage in a number of in vivo models.⁸⁹,⁹⁰,¹⁰⁷ Furthermore, it has been shown that mutant SOD1-induced apoptosis is achieved through the activation of ICE (Caspase-1). However, although mutant SOD1 is required for ICE cleavage, it is not sufficient to activate the cell death process and an additional stimulus, such as oxidative stress, is necessary.¹⁷⁵

Alterations in expression of a number of Bcl-2 family proteins are seen in mutant SOD1 transgenic mouse spinal cord samples. These changes are specific to symptomatic animals, affected brain regions, and mutant SOD1.⁹⁸,¹⁶⁰,²⁴² The differences in expression may promote cell death. In particular, Bax upregulation may exert its effects through alteration of mi-

tochondrial function, a theory that is supported by the mitochondrial localization of Bax and its ability to alter mitochondrial membrane potential.²⁴² Mutant SOD1 transgenic mice have impaired mitochondrial function⁴⁵ that can be improved by supplementing cellular energy supplies.¹³¹ Results from studies of the p53 molecule, also heavily associated in apoptosis, have been conflicting. Two studies have reported no significant involvement in mutant SOD1-mediated ALS,¹³⁶,¹⁸⁴ whereas another has provided evidence that the p53 pathway is activated and may play a role in cell death.⁹⁸ The prostate apoptosis response-4 protein (Par-4) has been implicated in ALS motor neuron death as it is expressed at increased levels in spinal cord samples of ALS patients and SOD1 FALS mice.¹⁷⁹ Treatment of cells with Par-4 antisense oligonucleotides prevents oxidative stress-induced apoptosis and also reverses the resulting mitochondrial dysfunction.

The pattern of expression of cdk5 is similar to lipofuscin whose synthesis has been associated with oxidative stress and increases with age.²¹ Studies have described a role for cdk5 in development and apoptosis.²⁵⁴

The loss of Zn from native or mutant SOD1 is sufficient to induce NO-dependent apoptosis in motor neurons. Requirements include copper bound to SOD and endogenous NO production.⁸⁰ The light-chain subunit of NF is a candidate Zn chelator.

Investigation of the molecules involved in the process of apoptosis and their role in motor neuron death may lead to effective therapies. Bcl-2 overexpression and caspase inhibition have been shown to prevent cell death, and other proteins such as Bax have been proposed as potential targets for therapy.⁸⁹,⁹⁴,¹³⁴,¹⁴¹ In a recent study, recombinant adeno-associated virus was employed to deliver Bcl-2 to spinal cord motor neurons of FALS transgenic mice, resulting in protection from cell degeneration and delayed motor deficits.¹⁸

### SELECTIVITY OF CELL DEATH

One of the unanswered questions in the study of ALS involves the highly selective cell death of motor neurons. More recently, studies have shown that with extended patient care there may be degeneration of the cortex,²²⁶ and some ALS cases have displayed astrocytic damage,⁴⁸ suggesting a more broad-ranging degeneration than previously seen. However, most research has focused on the characteristics of motor neurons that may put them at increased susceptibility to damage. Several of the current mechanisms have been reviewed recently.⁵⁸ SOD1 is a ubiquitously expressed protein and there is no alteration in its abundance in motor neurons. However, in SOD1 mutant cells there is a reduction in the activity of molecular chaperones resulting in the accumulation and inefficient removal of mutant SOD1.⁴⁶ The formation of mutant SOD1 aggregates is prevented by induction of stress-inducible heat-shock proteins, suggesting that the reduction in the pool of available chaperones render mutant SOD1 cells particularly vulnerable to physiological and environmental stress.⁴⁶ Due to their large size and the ratio of cell body to axonal length, the high level of mitochondrial activity required and the high neurofilament content in motor neurons may highlight them for selective targeting. Analysis of several physiochemical properties of NF in sporadic ALS cases and controls failed to find distinctions in the purified protein.²²⁵ Collagen abnormalities in the spinal cord of ALS patients have been described and implicated in selective vulnerability.¹⁶⁶

There is evidence for an increase in calcium levels, mitochondrial volume, and numbers of synaptic vesicles within the motor nerve terminal of ALS patients.²¹⁶ The fact that motor neurons are deficient in calcium-binding proteins such as calbindin D28k, and parvalbumin specific to cells damaged early in ALS has been postulated to underlie their particular vulnerability.⁷ The toxicity of SOD1 mutants is calcium-dependent and the selection of motor neurons has been suggested to be based on a combination of calcium entry during neurotransmission and the deficiency of Ca-binding proteins.²⁰⁷ Increased expression of calbindin D28k by viral infection⁹⁴,¹¹⁴ or vitamin D₃ treatment⁸ of motor neuron cells increases resistance to cell death caused by a number of mechanisms, for example, mutant SOD1, antibody-induced calcium influx, and oxidative injury. This suggests that rectifying calcium-buffering properties of motor neurons may be an effective therapy for ALS regardless of process of cell death. Neurofilaments have multiple calcium-binding sites and may play a role in calcium homeostasis.¹²⁶ The elevation of free Ca²⁺ levels within a cell activates Ca-dependent enzymes including xanthine oxidase and phospholipase A2, which may elevate levels of superoxide anion, NOS, which leads to formation of NO,⁶⁴ and the prostate apoptosis response-4 protein (Par-4), which promotes apoptosis.¹⁷⁹

The AMPA glutamate receptor subunit GluR2 confers calcium impermeability to the receptor. Studies have shown that human spinal motor neurons lack detectable levels of GluR2 mRNA, suggesting that the AMPA receptors on these particular cells are calcium-permeable.²⁴⁶ However, recent reports have established that, rather than complete lack of

GluR2, a subset of AMPA receptors has intermediate calcium permeability levels.¹⁰² Thus there is no overall difference in the relative levels of GluR2 or Ca²⁺ permeability of AMPA receptors between motor neurons and neuronal cells not affected by ALS.²³⁸ Moreover, in vitro studies comparing the effects of brief AMPA and kainate exposures in motor neurons and other cells that also express AMPA/KA Ca²⁺ channels demonstrates the specificity of the stimulant and the reaction of the cell is distinct in motor neurons.⁵² The variation in motor neuron AMPA receptor desensitization cannot explain the selective sensitivity to injury. Instead, motor neuron susceptibility appears to be a result of higher density of functional AMPA receptors, which, when reduced pharmacologically to levels seen in other cell types, eliminates the selective vulnerability to AMPA receptor agonists.²³⁷

The main target of this calcium-mediated cellular damage is the mitochondria. This organelle generates a large proportion of the cell's free radicals and it is estimated that, during electron transfer to molecular oxygen, approximately 1–5% of electrons are lost and proceed to form superoxide anions.¹⁰⁰ Mitochondria play a critical role in the regulation of apoptosis and there is a correlation between increases in mitochondrial calcium and increases in free radicals associated with cell death.²²,²²⁴ In sporadic ALS cases, a decrease in the activity of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)-encoded cytochrome c oxidase (cox) has been described. The same observation has been made in muscle biopsies from individuals with mtDNA defects, suggesting that mitochondrial-encoded genes may have a role in the disease. The reduction in cox activity may play a role in neuronal death and result from oxidative damage to mtDNA.³⁷ Alterations in mtDNA associated with decreased levels of membrane-associated mitochondrial SOD was shown to account for the cox activity reduction, suggesting that defects in mtDNA are significant in sporadic ALS cases.⁷⁴,²⁴⁰ Chronic inhibition of mitochondria by complex II and IV blockers results in selective motor neuron death. In this in vitro model, cell death is prevented by treatment with free radical scavengers, AMPA/kainate receptor blockers, riluzole, and caspase inhibitors.¹²⁸ Although the basal levels of oxidative metabolism are unaltered in ALS patients, when challenged with a stressful condition, the ability to compensate is depressed.⁶⁹ During neurotransmission, Zn²⁺ is also released at the presynaptic terminal. The AMPA receptors are also Zn²⁺-permeable, allowing entry into the cell where it can cause ROS generation.²⁰⁸ Mitochondria metabolism is sensitive to Zn²⁺ levels and

may even have a more potent effect than calcium.²⁴⁴ This is potentially an avenue of further investigation.

Mitochondrial DNA is more sensitive than nuclear DNA to oxidative damage due to the absence of protective histones and efficient repair mechanisms. Neurons are more susceptible to mtDNA damage as they have very high energy requirements and the possible accumulation of damage to mtDNA may in part explain the progressive nature of the disease. A reduction in the integrity of the mitochondria may trigger the apoptotic cascade leading to cell death.

In a recent review of the advances in ALS research, the possibility of a pathway that combines many of the proposed mechanisms in motor neuron death was put forward.² Briefly, glutamate transport can be affected by oxidative stress, alterations in EAAT2, or antibodies to voltage-gated calcium channels. Once activated, receptors cause a Ca²⁺ influx, aggravated by the absence of calcium-binding proteins, resulting in disturbances in mitochondrial metabolism and also the activation of a number of enzymes such as NOS. Nitric oxide reacts spontaneously with superoxide anion to generate peroxynitrite, which nitrosylates and hence damages proteins.² Excess NO may also cause an increase in O₂⁻ production by inhibition of mitochondrial electron flow, resulting in further generation of ONOO⁻.²²⁹ The nitrosylation reaction is copper-dependent and the source of free copper may be mutant SOD1, even in the presence of CCS. The target proteins for nitrosylation include the neurofilament subunits, which may result in abnormal NF accumulation and subsequent disruption of the neurofilament network and axonal transport. This reaction is enhanced in the presence of increased peripherin and decreased NF-L.² Mutant SOD1 has increased copper-dependent peroxidase activity, which leads to formation of hydroxyl radical that can also act on the NF network. It is reasonable to assume that disturbances of any of the molecules at any point in this complicated and as yet incomplete pathway might lead to the cell death observed in ALS.

### FUTURE DIRECTIONS

One of the most anticipated avenues of investigation is the search for additional causative genes among ALS kindreds. Not only would this provide another opportunity to screen and identify individuals at risk but, through investigation of the mechanisms involved, would perhaps aid the understanding of the overall pathways of motor neuron degeneration seen in all forms of ALS. For example, the association with SOD1 led to the study of oxidative damage as a
mechanism of disease. It has been over 7 years since mutations in the SOD1 gene were first identified in ALS cases and the long delay in finding another gene is most likely due to the limitations of suitable families with sufficient power for linkage analysis.

It is quite likely that all these mechanisms and pathways implicated in ALS will play a role in pathogenesis to differing degrees. Studying each in isolation can be quite frustrating as seen by the number of conflicting studies for many aspects of the disease. There is known genetic heterogeneity and it is thus quite likely that, although the disease phenotype is very similar in all cases, there will also be differences in the disease mechanism involved between patients. Thus, it is important to establish the roles played in pathogenesis by each of the implicated factors and cell types to determine the common pathways leading to the disease. This may be achieved by the development of more animal models looking at specific pathological changes in disease and establishing the order of events and cells involved.

The identification of the underlying mechanisms will hopefully lead to the design of more effective therapies. Investigations into the apoptosis pathway in ALS have highlighted Bcl-2 overexpression and caspase inhibition as potential treatments. Similarly, investigations into mitochondrial disturbances have indicated that creatine supplementation shows promise as a therapy. Interestingly, the finding in a mouse model that motor neuron death generally does not occur until the terminal stages opens the possibility that a significant fraction of motor neurons could be rescued after clinical diagnosis.^[132]

### CONCLUDING REMARKS

As sporadic and familial ALS are clinically indistinguishable, it seems prudent to use familial cases to study ALS in order to exploit the evident genetic aspect. Through this approach the SOD1 gene and its mutations in ALS individuals were identified. However, we are still awaiting the identification of a second gene for pure dominant ALS. It has been several years since the first description of linkage and the subsequent identification of mutations in the SOD1 gene in ALS, so why the long delay in finding another locus? Are the appropriate families not available? Could it be some characteristic of SOD1 toxicity that allows large families to be found? SOD1 mutations account for at most 20% of familial disease. But clinically, SOD1 families do not differ from non-SOD1 families and there is no evidence of a difference in disease severity or penetrance. Even among all SOD1 mutations, patients present with essentially the same disease, and only a few mutations are distinguishable, such as the severe phenotype seen with A4V mutation and the long survival demonstrated by H46R patients. Similarly, the differences between familial and sporadic disease are minor, such as age and site of onset. It is possible that at least a portion of the sporadic cases are indeed familial cases that have no apparent family history. Alternatively, it is possible that some of the smaller families are not inherited cases but result from shared environmental factors. Likewise, the earlier age of onset seen among familial compared to sporadic cases could be due, at least in part, to closer monitoring of individuals at risk and more rapid diagnosis when there is an affected relative. However, ultimately there is likely to be a common pathway in which different alterations lead to essentially the same disease, irrespective of background.

If there is a pathway of many connected elements and one mutation can lead to disease, does the disease look the same with mutations at different points? ALS caused by SOD1 mutation, NF mutation, or aberrant EAAT2 processing all appear the same. The D90A mutation is the only recognized recessive mutation in ALS and, as such, it has been intensively investigated. The demonstration of a common founder among all recessive D90A families provides further support for the proposal that there is an additional genetic factor associated with this disease haplotype, modifying the effect of the mutation.^[3] Unexpectedly, individuals homozygous for this recessive mutation have a milder, less severe form of the disease, with extended survival. Heterozygotes for the dominant D90A mutation present the classic ALS phenotype. We have recently described a family with affected individuals being compound heterozygotes for the recessive D90A mutation, as determined by haplotype analysis, and a novel D96N mutation.^[106] As with homozygous D90A patients, these individuals have mild symptoms and a long disease duration, which again suggests that the recessive haplotype carries a modifying factor that reduces the effect of the recessive D90A mutation.

One question in ALS is how mutations in a ubiquitously expressed protein such as SOD1 can result in highly selective motor neuron death. SOD1 is a relatively small molecule, consisting of only 153 amino acids, and over 60 mutations, affecting at least 40 amino acids, have been described. Detoxifying free radicals is a vital function for all cells and particularly in motor neurons, as they are especially sensitive to oxidative damage and are not replaced. These cells have high energy requirements and, as the majority of this energy comes from mitochondrial oxidative metabolism, the cell is in close proximity to sources of reactive oxygen species.
imity to a large source of free radicals. However, as
free radicals are extremely noxious and removal is
crucial, it seems extraordinary that a single mutation
in a complex pathway can have such a debilitating
effect. Thus, many mechanisms appear to be inter-
dependent, and disruption of the entire process by a
single hit seems unreasonable. Reactive oxygen spe-
cies have been implicated in many neurological and
degenerative diseases and it is possible that the dam-
age suffered by the cell is cumulative. Of the SOD
genes, deficiency of mitochondrial SOD2 causes the
most dramatic phenotype, resulting in a systemic dis-
order with accumulation of oxidative DNA dam-
age.

Another pertinent question in ALS is the highly
selective cell death of motor neurons. Many theories
have been proposed on this topic, particularly the
lack of calcium-binding proteins (CBPs), abundance
of NF, unusual collagen types, atypical calcium-
permeable AMPA receptors, and the distribution of
metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) within
these cells. It is most likely that a combination of
these factors, for example, reduced CBPs and AMPA
receptor characteristics, are responsible for the se-
lective vulnerability observed. However, it appears
that, although the degeneration seen occurs primar-
ily in motor neurons, there may be more widespread
effects with time, and thus it may be important to
consider a more general neuronal degeneration as
opposed to specific motor neuron degeneration.

It is apparent that there are many interacting
pathways and molecules involved in the death of mo-
tor neuron cells in ALS. Intensive research into all
areas of ALS at an accelerated pace will hopefully
lead to a better understanding of the mechanisms
involved and permit the development of effective
therapies.

The authors would like to thank Dr. André Toulouse and Mr.
François Gros-Louis for carefully reading the manuscript and pro-
viding helpful comments. This work was supported by the Mus-
cular Dystrophy Association (USA) and the ALS association
(USA). G.A.R. is supported by the Canadian Institutes for Health
Research (CIHR).

---

**REFERENCES**

1. Abe K, Pan LH, Watanabe M, Kato T, Itoyama Y. Induction
   of nitrotyrosine-like immunoreactivity in the lower motor
   neuron of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurosci Lett 1995;
   199:152–154.
2. Al Chalabi A, Leigh PN. Recent advances in amyotrophic
   lateral sclerosis. Curr Opin Neurol 2000;13:397–405.
3. Al-Chalabi A, Andersen PM, Chioza B, Shaw C, Sham PC,
   Robberecht W, Matthijs G, Camu W, Marklund SL, Forsgren
   L, Rouleau G, Laing NG, Hurse PV, Siddique T, Leigh PN,
   Powell JF. Recessive amyotrophic lateral sclerosis families
   with the D90A SOD1 mutation share a common founder:
   evidence for a linked protective factor. Hum Mol Genet
   1998;7:2045–2050.
4. Al-Chalabi A, Andersen PM, Nilsson P, Chioza B, Andersson
   JL, Russ C, Shaw CE, Powell JF, Leigh PN. Deletions of the
   heavy neurofilament subunit tail in amyotrophic lateral scler-
   osis. Hum Mol Genet 1999;8:157–164.
5. Al-Chalabi A, Enayat ZE, Bakker MC, Sham PC, Ball DM,
   Shaw CE, Lloyd CM, Powell JF, Leigh PN. Association of
   apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele with bulbar-onset motor
   neuron disease. Lancet 1996;347:159–160.
6. Alexander GM, Deitch JS, Seeburger JL, Del Valle L,
   Heiman-Patterson TD. Elevated cortical extracellular fluid
   glutamate in transgenic mice expressing human mutant
   (G93A) Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase. J Neurochem 2000;
   74:1666–1673.
7. Alexianu ME, Ho B-K, Mohamed AH, La Bella V, Smith RG,
   Appel SH. The role of calcium-binding proteins in selective
   motoneuron vulnerability in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
   Ann Neurol 1994;36:846–858.
8. Alexianu ME, Robbins E, Carswell S, Appel SH. 1Alpha,25
   dihydroxyvitamin D3-dependent up-regulation of calcium-
   binding proteins in motoneuron cells. J Neurosci Res 1998;
   51:58–66.
9. Andersen PM. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and CuZn-
   superoxide dismutase. PhD thesis, University of Umeå,
   Umeå, Sweden, 1997.
10. Andersen PM, Nilsson P, Ala-Hurula V, Keranen ML, Tar-
    vainen I, Haltia T, Nilsson L, Binzer M, Forsgren L, Mark-
    lund SL. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis associated with homo-
    zygosity for an Asp90Ala mutation in CuZn-superoxide dis-
    mutase. Nat Genet 1995;10:61–66.
11. Andersen PM, Nilsson P, Keranen ML, Forsgren L, Hag-
    glund J, Karlsborg M, Ronnevi LO, Gredal O, Marklund SL.
    Phenotypic heterogeneity in motor neuron disease patients
    with CuZn-superoxide dismutase mutations in Scandinavia.
    Brain 1997;120:1723–1737.
12. Andreassen OA, Ferrante R, Klivenyi P, Klein AM, Shinobu
    LA, Epstein CJ, Beal MF. Partial deficiency of manganese su-
    peroxide dismutase exacerbates a transgenic mouse model
    of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 2000;47:
    447–455.
13. Andrews WD, Tuke PW, Al-Chalabi A, Gaudin P, Ijaz S, Par-
    ton MJ, Garson JA. Detection of reverse transcriptase activity
    in the serum of patients with motor neurone disease. J Med
    Virol 2000;61:527–532.
14. Aoki M, Lin C-LG, Rothstien JD, Geller BA, Hosler BA, Mun-
    sat TL, Horvitz R, Brown RH Jr. Mutations in the glutamate
    transporter EAAT2 gene do not cause abnormal EAAT2
    transcripts in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol
    1998;43:645–653.
15. Aoki M, Ogasawara M, Matsubara Y, Narisawa K, Nakamura
    S, Itoyama Y, Abe K. Mild ALS in Japan associated with novel
    SOD mutation. Nat Genet 1993;5:323–324.
16. Appel SH, Smith RG, Engelhardt JI, Stefani E. Evidence for
    autoimmunity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Sci
    1993;118:169–174.
17. Arsac C, Raymond C, Martin-Moutot N, Dargent B, Courand
    F, Pouget J, Seagar M. Immunoassays fail to detect antibod-
    ies against neuronal calcium channels in amyotrophic lateral
    sclerosis serum. Ann Neurol 1996;40:695–700.
18. Azzouz M, Hottinger A, Paterna J-C, Zurn AD, Aebischer P,
    Bueler H. Increased motorneuron survival and improved
    neuromuscular function in transgenic ALS mice after intra-
    spinal injection of an adeno-associated virus encoding Bcl-2.
    Hum Mol Genet 2000;9:803–811.
19. Azzouz M, Poindron P, Guettier S, Leclerc N, Andres C,
    Warter JM, Borg J. Prevention of mutant SOD1 motoneuron
    degeneration by copper chelators in vitro. J Neurobiol 2000;
    42:49–55.
20. Bai G, Lipton SA. Aberrant RNA splicing in sporadic amy-
    trophic lateral sclerosis. Neuron 1998;20:363–366.

21. Bajaj NPS, Al-Sarraj ST, Leigh PN, Anderson V, Miller CCJ. Cyclin dependent kinase-5 (cdk-5) phosphorylates neurofilament heavy (NF-H) chain to generate epitopes for antibodies that label neurofilament accumulations in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and is present in affected motor neurons in ALS. Progr Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 1999;23:833–850.

22. Beal MF. Mitochondria and the pathogenesis of ALS. Brain 2000;123:1291–1292.

23. Beal MF, Ferrante RJ, Browne SE, Matthews RT, Kowall NW, Brown RH Jr. Increased 3-nitrotyrosine in both sporadic and familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1997;42:644–654.

24. Beaulieu J-M, Jacomy H, Julien J-P. Formation of intermediate filament protein aggregates with disparate effects in two transgenic mouse models lacking the neurofilament light subunit. J Neurosci 2000;20:5321–5328.

25. Beaulieu J-M, Nguyen MD, Julien J-P. Late onset death of motor neurons in mice overexpressing wild-type peripherin. J Cell Biol 1999;147:531–544.

26. Beaulieu J-M, Robertson J, Julien J-P. Interactions between peripherin and neurofilaments in cultured cells: disruption of peripherin assembly by the NF-M and NF-H subunits. Biochem Cell Biol 1999;77:41–45.

27. Beckman JS, Carson M, Smith CD, Koppenol WH. ALS, SOD and peroxynitrite. Nature 1993;364:584.

28. Bedlack RS, Strittmatter WJ, Morgenlander JC. Apolipoprotein E and neuromuscular disease: a critical review of the literature. Arch Neurol 2000;57:1561–1565.

29. Bensimon G, Lacomblez L, Meininger V. A controlled trial of riluzole in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. ALS/Riluzole study group. N Engl J Med 1994;330:585–591.

30. Berger MM, Kopp N, Vital C, Redl B, Aymard M, Lina B. Detection and cellular localization of enterovirus RNA sequences in spinal cord of patients with ALS. Neurology 2000;54:20–25.

31. Berger R, Mezey E, Clancy KP, Harta G, Wright RM, Repine JE, Brown RH, Brownstein M, Patterson D. Analysis of aldehyde oxidase and xanthine dehydrogenase/oxidase as possible candidate genes for autosomal recessive familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Somat Cell Mol Genet 1995;21:121–131.

32. Blauwgeers HGT, Chand MA, van der Berg FM, Vianney de Jong JMB, Troost D. Expression of different metallothionein messenger ribonucleic acids in motor cortex, spinal cord and liver from patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Sci 1996;142:39–44.

33. Bogdanov M, Brown RH Jr, Matson W, Smart R, Hayden D, O’Donnell H, Beal MF, Cudkowicz M. Increased oxidative damage to DNA in ALS patients. Free Radic Biol Med 2000;29:652–658.

34. Bogdanov MB, Ramos LE, Xu Z, Beal MF. Elevated “hydroxyl radical” generation in vivo in an animal model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 1998;71:1321–1324.

35. Borchelt DR, Guarnieri M, Wong PC, Lee MK, Slunt HS, Xu ZS, Sisodia SS, Price DL, Cleveland DW. Superoxide dismutase 1 subunits with mutations linked to familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis do not affect wild-type subunit function. J Biol Chem 1995;270:3234–3238.

36. Borchelt DR, Lee MK, Slunt HS, Guarnieri M, Xu ZS, Wong PC, Brown RH Jr, Price DL, Sisodia SS, Cleveland DW. Superoxide dismutase 1 with mutations linked to familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis possesses significant activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994;91:8292–8296.

37. Borthwick GM, Johnson MA, Ince PG, Shaw PJ, Turnbull DM. Mitochondrial enzyme activity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: implications for the role of mitochondria in neuronal cell death. Ann Neurol 1999;46:787–790.

38. Boukaftane Y, Khoris J, Moulard B, Salachas F, Meininger V, Malafosse A, Camu W, Rouleau GA. Identification of six novel SOD1 gene mutations in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Can J Neurol Sci 1998;25:192–196.

39. Bracco F, Scarpa M, Rigo A, Battistin L. Determination of superoxide dismutase activity by the polarographic method of catalytic currents in the cerebrospinal fluid of aging brain and neurologic degenerative diseases. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1991;96:36–41.

40. Breeden DE, Wiedau-Pazos M, Goto JJ, Rabizadeh S, Roe JA, Gralla EB, Ellerby LM, Valentine JS. Cell death mechanisms in ALS. Neurology 1996;47(suppl 2):S36–S39.

41. Bristol LA, Rothstein JD. Glutamate transporter gene expression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis motor cortex. Ann Neurol 1996;39:676–679.

42. Brooks BR. El Escorial World Federation of Neurology criteria for the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Sci 1994;124(suppl):96–107.

43. Brown RH Jr. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: recent insights from genetics and transgenic mice. Cell 1995;80:687–692.

44. Brown RH Jr. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Insights from genetics. Arch Neurol 1997;54:1246–1250.

45. Browne SE, Bowling AC, Bak MJ, Gurney M, Brown RH Jr. Metabolic dysfunction in familial, but not sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 1998;71:281–287.

46. Bruening W, Roy J, Giasson B, Figlewicz DA, Mushynski WE, Durham HD. Up-regulation of protein chaperones preserves viability of cells expressing toxic Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase mutants associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 1999;72:693–699.

47. Brujin LI, Beal MF, Becher MW, Schulz JB, Wong PC, Price DL, Cleveland DW. Elevated free nitrotyrosine levels, but not protein-bound nitrotyrosine or hydroxyl radicals, throughout amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)-like disease implicate tyrosine nitration as an aberrant in vivo property of one familial ALS-linked superoxide dismutase 1 mutant. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997;94:7606–7611.

48. Brujin LI, Becher MW, Lee MK, Anderson KL, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Sisodia SS, Rothstein JD, Borchelt DR, Price DL, Cleveland DW. ALS-linked SOD1 mutant G85R mediates damage to astrocytes and promotes rapidly progressive disease with SOD1-containing inclusions. Neuron 1997;18:327–338.

49. Brujin LI, Houseweart MK, Kato S, Anderson KL, Anderson SD, Ohama E, Reaume AG, Scott RW, Cleveland DW. Aggregation and motor neuron toxicity of an ALS-linked SOD1 mutant independent from wild-type SOD1. Science 1998;281:1851–1854.

50. Camu W, Khoris J, Moulard B, Salachas F, Briolotti V, Rouleau GA, Meininge V. Genetics of familial ALS and consequences for diagnosis. French ALS research group. J Neurol Sci 1999;165(suppl 1):S21–S26.

51. Cañete-Soler R, Silberg DG, Gershon MD, Schlaepfer WW. Mutation in neurofilament transgene implicates RNA processing in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disease. J Neurosci 1999;19:1273–1283.

52. Carriedo SG, Sensi SL, Yin HZ, Weiss JH. AMPA exposures induce mitochondrial Ca2+ overload and ROS generation in spinal motor neurons in vitro. J Neurosci 2000;20:240–250.

53. Casareno RL, Waggoner D, Gitlin JD. The copper chaperone CCS directly interacts with copper/zinc superoxide dismutase. J Biol Chem 1998;273:23625–23628.

54. Cha CI, Chung YH, Shin CM, Shin DH, Kim YS, Gurney ME, Lee KW. Immunocytochemical study on the distribution of nitrotyrosine in the brain of the transgenic mice expressing a human Cu/Zn SOD mutation. Brain Res 2000;853:156–161.

55. Chance PF, Rabin BA, Ryan SG, Ding Y, Scavina M, Crain B, Griffin JW, Cornblath DR. Linkage of the gene for an autosomal dominant form of juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis to chromosome 9q34. Am J Hum Genet 1998;62:633–640.

56. Chou SM, Wang HS, Taniguchi A. Role of SOD-1 and nitric

oxide/cyclic GMP cascade on neurofilament aggregation in  
ALS/MND. J Neurol Sci 1996; 139(suppl): 16–26.  

57. Ciriolo MR, De Martino A, Lafavia E, Rossi L, Carri MT,  
    Rotilio G. Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase-dependent apoptosis  
    induced by nitric oxide in neuronal cells. J Biol Chem 2000;  
    275:5065–5072.  

58. Cleveland DW. From Charcot to SOD1: mechanisms of selective motor neuron death in ALS. Neuron 1999; 24:  
    515–520.  

59. Cleveland DW, Bruyn LI, Wong PC, Marszalek JR, Vechio  
    JD, Lee MK, Xu XS, Borchelt DR, Sisodia SS, Price DL.  
    Mechanisms of selective motor neuron death in transgenic  
    mouse models of motor neuron disease. Neurology  
    1996; 47(suppl 2): S54–S62.  

60. Corson LB, Strain JJ, Culotta VC, Cleveland DW. Chaperone-  
    facilitated copper binding is a property common to several  
    classes of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked superoxide dis-  
    mutase mutants. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998; 95:  
    6361–6366.  

61. Cote F, Collard JF, Julien J-P. Progressive neuronopathy in  
    transgenic mice expressing the human neurofilament heavy  
    gene: a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Cell  
    1993; 73:35–46.  

62. Couillard-Després S, Meier J, Julien J-P. Extra axonal neuro-  
    filaments do not exacerbate disease caused by mutant Cu,Zn  
    superoxide dismutase. Neurobiol Dis 2000; 7:462–470.  

63. Couillard-Després S, Zhu Q, Wong PC, Price DL, Cleveland  
    DW, Julien J-P. Protective effect of neurofilament heavy gene  
    overexpression in motor neuron disease induced by mutant  
    superoxide dismutase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998; 95:  
    9626–9630.  

64. Coyle JT, Puttfarcken P. Oxidative stress, glutamate and neurodegenerative disorders. Science 1993; 262:689–695.  

65. Crow JP, Sampson JB, Zhuang Y, Thompson JA, Beckman JS.  
    Decreased zinc affinity of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-  
    associated superoxide dismutase mutants leads to enhanced  
    catalysis of tyrosine nitration by peroxynitrite. J Neurochem  
    1997; 69:1936–1944.  

66. Cudkowicz ME, McKenna-Yasek D, Chen C, Hedley-Whyte  
    ET, Brown RH Jr. Limited corticospinal tract involvement  
    in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis subjects with the A4V mutation in the copper/zinc superoxide dismutase gene. Ann  
    Neurol 1998; 43:703–710.  

67. Cudkowicz ME, McKenna-Yasek D, Sapp PE, Chin W, Geller  
    B, Hayden DL, Schoenfeld DA, Hosler BA, Horvitz HR,  
    Brown RH Jr. Epidemiology of mutations in superoxide dis-  
    mutase in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1997;  
    41:210–221.  

68. Culotta VC, Klomp LWJ, Strain J, Casareno RLB, Krems B,  
    Gitlin JD. The copper chaperone for superoxide dismutase.  
    J Biol Chem 1997; 272:23469–23472.  

69. Curti D, Malaspina A, Facchetti G, Camana C, Mazzini L,  
    Tosca P, Zerbi F, Ceroni M. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis:  
    oxidative energy metabolism and calcium homeostasis in peripheral blood lymphocytes. Neurology 1996; 47:1060–1064.  

70. de Belloche J, Orrell R, King A. Familial amyotrophic lateral  
    sclerosis/motor neurone disease (FALS): a review of  
    current developments. J Med Genet 1995; 32:841–847.  

71. Delanty N, Dichter MA. Antioxidant therapy in neurologic  
    disease. Arch Neurol 2000; 57:1265–1270.  

72. Deng HX, Hentati A, Tainer J, Iqbal Z, Cayabyab A, Hung  
    WY, Getzoff ED, Hu P, Hertzfeld B, Roos RP, Warner C,  
    Deng G, Soriano E, Smyth C, Parge HE, Ahmed A, Roses AD,  
    Hallewell RA, Pericak-Vance MA. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and structural defects in Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase.  
    Science 1993; 261:1047–1051.  

73. Deng HX, Tainer JA, Mitsumoto H, Ohnishi A, He X, Hung  
    WY, Zhao Y, Juneja T, Hentati A, Siddique T. Two novel  
    SOD1 mutations in patients with familial amyotrophic lateral  
    sclerosis. Hum Mol Genet 1995; 4:1113–1116.  

74. Dhaliwal GK, Grewal RP. Mitochondrial DNA deletion mu-  

tation levels are elevated in ALS brains. Neuroreport 2000;  
11:2507–2509.  

75. Doble A. The pharmacology and mechanism of action of  
    rizule. Neurology 1996; 47(suppl 4): S233–S241.  

76. Dugan LL, Turetsky DM, Du C, Lobner D, Wheeler M, Almli  
    CR, Shen CK, Luh TY, Choi DW, Lin TS. Carboxyfullerenes  
    as neuroprotective agents. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997; 94:  
    9434–9439.  

77. Durham HD, Roy J, Dong L, Figlewicz DA. Aggregation of  
    mutant Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase proteins in a culture  
    model of ALS. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1997; 56:523–530.  

78. Elliot JL, Snider WD. Motor neuron growth factors. Neurology 1996; 47(suppl 2): S47–S53.  

79. Enayat ZE, Orrell RW, Claus A, Ludolph A, Bachus R, Brock-  
    muller J, Ray-Chaudhuri K, Radunovic A, Shaw C, Wilkinson  
    J, King A, Swash M, Leigh PN, de Belleroche J, Powell J. Two  
    novel mutations in the gene for copper zinc superoxide dis-  
    mutase in UK families with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.  
    Hum Mol Genet 1995; 4:1239–1240.  

80. Estévez AG, Crow JP, Sampson JB, Reiter C, Zhuang Y, Richardson GJ, Tarpey MM, Barbeito L, Beckman JS. Induc-  
    tion of nitric oxide-dependent apoptosis in motor neurons  
    by zinc-deficient superoxide dismutase. Science 1999; 286:  
    2498–2500.  

81. Eyer J, Cleveland DW, Wong PC, Peterson AC. Pathogenesis  
    of two axonopathies does not require axonal neurofila-  
    ments. Nature 1998; 391:584–587.  

82. Facchinetti F, Sasaki M, Cutting FB, Zhai P, Macdonald JE,  
    Reif D, Beal MF, Huang PL, Dawson TM, Gurney ME, Daw-  
    son VL. Lack of involvement of neuronal nitric oxide syn-  
    thase in the pathogenesis of a transgenic mouse model of  
    familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neuroscience 1999; 90:  
    1483–1492.  

83. Ferrante RJ, Browne SE, Shinobu LA, Bowling AC, Baik MJ,  
    MacGarvey U, Kowall NW, Brown RH Jr, Beal MF. Evidence  
    of increased oxidative damage in both sporadic and familial  
    amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 1997; 69:  
    2064–2074.  

84. Ferrante RJ, Shinobu LA, Schulz JB, Matthews RT, Thomas  
    CE, Kowall NW, Gurney ME, Beal MF. Increased 3-nitroty-  
    rosine and oxidative damage in mice with a human copper/  
    zinc superoxide dismutase mutation. Ann Neurol 1997; 42:  
    326–334.  

85. Figlewicz DA, Garruto RM, Yanagihara RY, Rouleau G. The  
    Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase in ALS and Parkinsonism-  
    dementia of Guam. NeuroReport 1994; 5:557–560.  

86. Figlewicz DA, Krizus A, Martinoli MG, Meininge V, Dib M,  
    Rouleau GA, Julien J-P. Variants of the heavy neurofilament  
    subunit are associated with the development of amyotrophic  
    lateral sclerosis. Hum Mol Genet 1994; 3:1757–1761.  

87. Flowers JM, Leigh PN, Davies AM, Ninkina NN, Buchman  
    VL, Vaughan J, Wood NW, Powell JF. Mutations in the gene  
    encoding human persyn are not associated with amyotrophic  
    lateral sclerosis or familial Parkinson’s disease. Neurosci Lett 1999; 274:21–24.  

88. Friedlander RM. Role of caspase 1 in neurologic disease.  
    Arch Neurol 2000; 57:1273–1276.  

89. Friedlander RM, Brown RH Jr, Gagliardini V, Wang J, Yuan  
    J. Inhibition of ICE slows ALS in mice. Nature 1997; 388:31.  

90. Friedlander RM, Gagliardini V, Hara H, Fink KB, Li W, Mac-  
    Donald G, Fishman MC, Greenberg AH, Moskowitz MA,  
    Yuan J. Expression of a dominant negative mutant of interleukin-1 converting enzyme in transgenic mice prevents neuronal cell death induced by trophic factor withdrawal and ischemic brain injury. J Exp Med 1997; 185:933–940.  

91. Fullerton HJ, Ditelberg JS, Chen SF, Sarco DP, Chan PH,  
    Epstein CJ, Ferriero DM. Copper/zinc superoxide dismutase  
    transgenic brain accumulates hydrogen peroxide after peri-  
    natal hypoxia ischemia. Ann Neurol 1998; 44:357–364.  

92. Gabbianelli R, Ferri A, Rotilio G, Carri MT. Aberrant copper  
    chemistry as a major mediator of oxidative stress in a human  

cellular model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 1999;73:1175–1180.

93. Garofalo O, Figlewicz DA, Thomas SM, Butler R, Lebuis L, Rouleau G, Meininge V, Leigh PN. Superoxide dismutase activity in lymphoblastoid cells from motor neurone disease/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (MND/ALS) patients. J Neurol Sci 1995;129(suppl):90–92.

94. Ghadge GD, Lee JP, Bindokas VP, Jordan J, Ma L, Miller RJ, Roos RP. Mutant superoxide dismutase-1-linked familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: molecular mechanisms of neuronal death and protection. J Neurosci 1997;17:8756–8766.

95. Giess R, Beck M, Goetz R, Nitsch RM, Toyka KV, Sendtner M. Potential role of LIF as a modifier gene in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurology 2000;54:1003–1005.

96. Giménez y Ribotta M, Revah F, Pradier L, Loquet I, Mallet J, Privat A. Prevention of motoneuron death by adenovirus-mediated neurotrophic factors. J Neurosci Res 1997;48:281–285.

97. Gong YH, Parsadanian AS, Andreeva A, Snider WD, Elliott JL. Restricted expression of G86R Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase in astrocytes results in astrocytosis but does not cause motoneuron degeneration. J Neurosci 2000;20:660–665.

98. González de Aguilar J-L, Gordon JW, René F, de Tapia M, Lutz-Bucher B, Gaiddon C, Loeffler J-P. Alteration of the Bcl-x/Bax ratio in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: evidence for the implication of the p53 signaling pathway. Neurobiol Dis 2000;7:406–415.

99. Goto JJ, Zhu H, Sanchez RJ, Nersissian A, Gralla EB, Valentine JS, Cabelli DE. Loss of in vitro metal ion binding specificity in mutant copper-zinc superoxide dismutases associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Biol Chem 2000;275:1007–1014.

100. Green DR, Reed JC. Mitochondria and apoptosis. Science 1998;281:1309–1312.

101. Greenlund LJ, Deckwerth TL, Johnson EMJ. Superoxide dismutase delays neuronal apoptosis: a role for reactive oxygen species in programmed neuronal death. Neuron 1995;14:303–315.

102. Greig A, Donevan SD, Mujtaba TJ, Parks TN, Rao MS. Characterization of the AMPA-activated receptors present on motoneurons. J Neurochem 2000;74:179–191.

103. Gudesblatt M, Ludman MD, Cohen JA, Desnick RJ, Chester S, Grabowski GA, Caroscio JT. Hexosaminidase A activity and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Muscle Nerve 1988;11:227–230.

104. Gurney ME, Cutting F, Zhai P, Doble A, Taylor CP, Andrus PK, Hall ED. Benefit of vitamin E, riluzole, and gabapentin in a transgenic model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1996;39:147–157.

105. Gurney ME, Pu H, Chiu AY, Dal Canto MC, Polchow CY, Alexander DD, Caliendo J, Hentati A, Kwon YW, Deng HX, Chen W, Zhai P, Sufit RL, Siddique T. Motor neuron degeneration in mice that express a human Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase mutation. Science 1994;264:1772–1775.

106. Hand CK, Mayeux-Portas V, Khoris J, Briolotti V, Clavelou P, Camu W, Rouleau GA. Compound heterozygous D90A and D96N SOD1 mutations in a recessive ALS family. Ann Neurol 2001;49:267–271.

107. Hara H, Friedlander RM, Gagliardini V, Ayata C, Fink K, Huang Z, Shimizu-Sasamata M, Yuan J, Moskowitz MA. Inhibition of interleukin 1 converting enzyme family proteases reduces ischemic and excitotoxic neuronal damage. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997;94:2007–2012.

108. Haverkamp LJ, Appel V, Appel SH. Natural history of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in a database population. Validation of a scoring system and a model for survival prediction. Brain 1995;118:707–719.

109. Hayward C, Colville S, Swinger RJ, Brock DJH. Molecular genetic analysis of the APEX nuclease gene in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurology 1999;52:1899–1901.

110. Hentati A, Bejaoui K, Pericak-Vance MA, Hentati F, Speer MC, Hung WY, Figlewicz DA, Haines J, Rimmler J, Ben Hamida C, Ben Hamida M, Brown RH Jr, Siddique T. Linkage of recessive familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis to chromosome 2q33–q35. Nat Genet 1994;7:425–428.

111. Hentati A, Bejaoui K, Pericak-Vance MA, Hentati F, Yen-Hung W, Figlewicz DA, Ben Hamida C, Ben Hamida M, Brown RH Jr, Siddique T. The gene for one form of juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis maps to chromosome 2. Am J Hum Genet 1992;51(suppl):A33.

112. Hentati A, Ouahchi K, Pericak-Vance MA, Nijhawan D, Ahmed A, Yang Y, Rimmler J, Hung W-Y, Schlotter B, Ahmed A, Ben Hamida M, Hentati F, Siddique T. Linkage of a comoner form of recessive amyotrophic lateral sclerosis to chromosome 15q15–q22 markers. Neurogenetics 1998;2:55–60.

113. Hentati A, Pericak-Vance MA, Hung W-Y, Belal S, Laing N, Boustany R-M, Hentati F, Ben Hamida M, Siddique T. Linkage of 'pure' autosomal recessive familial spastic paraplegia to chromosome 8 markers and evidence of genetic locus heterogeneity. Hum Mol Genet 1994;3:1263–1267.

114. Ho B-K, Alexianu ME, Colom LV, Mohamed AH, Serrano F, Appel SH. Expression of calbindin-D28K in motoneuron hybrid cells after retroviral infection with calbindin-D28K cDNA prevents amyotrophic lateral sclerosis IgG-mediated cytotoxicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;93:6796–6801.

115. Honig LS, Chambliss DD, Bigio EH, Carroll SL, Elliott JL. Glutamate transporter EAAT2 splice variants occur not only in ALS, but also in AD and controls. Neurology 2000;55:1082–1088.

116. Hosler BA, Sapp PC, Berger R, O'Neill G, Bejaoui K, Ben Hamida M, Hentati F, Chin W, McKenna-Yasek D, Haines JL, Patterson D, Horvitz HR, Brown RH Jr, Day CB. Refined mapping and characterisation of the recessive amyotrophic lateral sclerosis locus (ALS2) on chromosome 2q33. Neurogenetics 1998;2:34–42.

117. Hosler BA, Siddique T, Sapp PC, Sailor W, Huang MC, Hossain A, Daube JR, Nance M, Fan C, Kaplan J, Hung W-Y, McKenna-Yasek D, Haines JL, Pericak-Vance MA, Horvitz HR, Brown RH Jr. Linkage of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with frontotemporal dementia to chromosome 9q21–q22. JAMA 2000;284:1664–1669.

118. Houseweart MK, Cleveland DW. Bcl-2 overexpression does not protect neurons from mutant neurofilament-mediated motor neuron degeneration. J Neurosci 1999;19:6446–6456.

119. Hudson AJ. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and its association with dementia, parkinsonism and other neurological disorders: a review. 1981;104:217–247.

120. Imlay JA, Chin SM, Linn S. Toxic DNA damage by hydrogen peroxide through the Fenton reaction in vivo and in vitro. Science 1988;240:640–642.

121. Jackson M, Al Chalabi A, Enayat ZE, Chioza B, Leigh PN, Morrison KE. Copper/zinc superoxide dismutase 1 and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: analysis of 155 and identification of a novel insertion mutation. Ann Neurol 1997;42:803–807.

122. Jansen GA, Wanders RJ, Jobsis GJ, Bolhuis PA, de Jong JM. Evidence against increased oxidative stress in fibroblasts from patients with non-superoxide-dismutase-1 mutant familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Sci 1996;139(suppl):91–94.

123. Johnston JA, Dalton MJ, Gurney ME, Kopito RR. Formation of high molecular weight complexes of mutant Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase in a mouse model for familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:12571–12576.

124. Jones CT, Brock DJH, Chancellor AM, Warlow CP, Swingler RJ. Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) mutations and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Lancet 1993;342:1050–1051.

125. Jones CT, Swingler RJ, Brock DJ. Identification of a novel

SOD1 mutation in an apparently sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patient and the detection of Ile113Thr in three others. Hum Mol Genet 1994;3:649–650.

126. Julien J-P, Couillard-Després S, Meier J. Transgenic mice in the study of ALS: the role of neurofilaments. Brain Pathol 1999;8:759–769.

127. Kaal ECA, Veldman H, Sodaar P, Joosten EAJ, Bär PRD. Oxidant treatment causes a dose-dependent phenotype of apoptosis in cultured motoneurons. J Neurosci Res 1998;54:778–786.

128. Kaal ECA, Vlug AS, Versleijen MWJ, Kuilman M, Joosten EAJ, Bär PRD. Chronic mitochondrial inhibition induces selective motoneuron death in vitro: a new model for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 2000;74:1158–1165.

129. Kato S, Shimoda M, Watanabe Y, Nakashima K, Takahashi K, Ohama E. Familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with a two base pair deletion in superoxide dismutase gene: multisystem degeneration with intracytoplasmic hyaline inclusions in astrocytes. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1996;55:1089–1101.

130. King A, Houlden H, Hardy J, Lane R, Chancellor A, de Belleroche J. Absence of linkage between chromosome 21 loci and familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Med Genet 1993;30:318.

131. Klivenyi P, Ferrante RJ, Matthews RT, Bogdanov MB, Klein AM, Andreassen OA, Mueller G, Werner M, Kaddurah-Daouk R, Beal MF. Neuroprotective effects of creatine in a transgenic mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Med 1999;5:347–350.

132. Kong J, Xu Z. Massive mitochondrial degeneration in motor neurons triggers the onset of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in mice expressing a mutant SOD1. J Neurosci 1998;18:3241–3250.

133. Kong J, Xu Z. Overexpression of neurofilament subunit NF-L and NF-H extends survival of a mouse model for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurosci Lett 2000;281:72–74.

134. Kostic V, Jackson-Lewis V, de Bilbao F, Dubois-Dauphin M, Przedborski S. Bcl-2: prolonging life in a transgenic mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Science 1997;277:559–563.

135. Kunst CB, Mezey E, Brownstein MJ, Patterson D. Mutations in SOD1 associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis cause novel protein interactions. Nat Genet 1997;15:91–94.

136. Kuntz C, 4th, Kinoshita Y, Beal MF, Donehower LA, Morris RS. Absence of p53: no effect in a transgenic mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Exp Neurol 2000;165:184–190.

137. Lacomblez L, Bensimon G, Leigh PN, Guillet P, Meiningerv. Dose-ranging study of riluzole in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Lancet 1996;347:1425–1431.

138. Lee MK, Marszalek JR, Cleveland DW. A mutant neurofilament subunit causes massive, selective motor neuron death: implications for the pathogenesis of human motor neuron disease. Neuron 1994;13:975–988.

139. Leigh PN, Meldrum BS. Excitotoxicity in ALS. Neurology 1996;47(suppl 4):S221–S227.

140. Levine JB, Kong J, Nadler M, Xu Z. Astrocytes interact intimately with degenerating motor neurons in mouse amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Glia 1999;28:215–224.

141. Li M, Ona VO, Guégan C, Chen M, Jackson-Lewis V, Andrews LJ, Olszewski AJ, Steig PE, Lee JP, Przedborski S, Friedlander RM. Functional role of caspase-1 and caspase-3 in an ALS transgenic mouse model. Science 2000;288:335–339.

142. Li Y, Huang TT, Carlson EJ, Melov S, Ursell PC, Olson JL, Noble LJ, Yoshimura MP, Berger C, Chan PH, Wallace DC, Epstein CJ. Dilated cardiomyopathy and neonatal lethality in mutant mice lacking manganese superoxide dismutase. Nat Genet 1995;11:376–381.

143. Lin C-LG, Bristol LA, Jin L, Dykes-Hoberg M, Crawford T, Clawson L, Rothstein JD. Aberrant RNA processing in a neurodegenerative disease: the cause for absent EAAT2, a glutamate transporter, in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neuron 1998;20:589–602.

144. Lin G, Bristol LA, Rothstein JD. An abnormal mRNA leads to downregulation of glutamate transporter EAAT2 (GLT-1) expression in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1996;40:540–541.

145. Liu R, Althaus JS, Ellerbrock BR, Becker DA, Gurney ME. Enhanced oxygen radical production in a transgenic mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1998;44:763–770.

146. Louwerse ES, Weverling GJ, Bossuyt PM, Meyjes FE, de Jong JM. Randomized, double-blind, controlled trial of acetylcysteine in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Arch Neurol 1995;52:559–564.

147. Lyons TJ, Liu H, Goto JJ, Nersissian A, Roe JA, Graden JA, Cafe C, Ellerby LM, Bredesen DE, Butler Gralla E, Silverstone Valentine J. Mutations in copper-zinc superoxide dismutase that cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis alter the zinc binding site and the redox behaviour of the protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;93:12240–12244.

148. Marklund SL, Anderson PM, Forsgren L, Nilsson P, Ohlsson P-I, Wikander G, Öberg A. Normal binding and reactivity of copper in mutant superoxide dismutase isolated from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients. J Neurochem 1997;69:675–681.

149. Mecocci P, MacGarvey U, Kaufman AE, Koontz D, Shoffner JM, Wallace DC, Beal MF. Oxidative damage to mitochondrial DNA shows marked age-dependent increases in human brain. Ann Neurol 1993;34:609–616.

150. Meier J, Couillard-Després S, Jacomy H, Gravel C, Julien J-P. Extra neurofilament NF-L subunits rescue motor neuron disease caused by overexpression of the human NF-H gene in mice. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1999;58:1099–1110.

151. Meldrum BS. Glutamate as a neurotransmitter in the brain: review of physiology and pathology. J Nutr 2000;130(suppl):1007S–1015S.

152. Melov S, Coskun P, Patel M, Tuinstra R, Cottrell B, Jun AS, Zastawny TH, Dizdaroglu M, Goodman SI, Huang T-T, Miziorko H, Epstein CJ, Wallace DC. Mitochondrial disease in superoxide dismutase 2 mutant mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999;96:846–851.

153. Melov S, Ravenscroft J, Malik S, Gill MS, Walker DW, Clayton PE, Wallace DC, Malfroy B, Doctrow SR, Lithgow GJ. Extension of life-span with superoxide dismutase/catalase mimetics. Science 2000;289:1567–1569.

154. Melov S, Schneide JA, Day BJ, Hinerfeld D, Coskun P, Mirra SS, Grapo JD, Wallace DC. A novel neurological phenotype in mice lacking mitochondrial manganese superoxide dismutase. Nat Genet 1998;18:159–163.

155. Messer A, Plummer J, Maskin P, Coffin JM, Frankel WN. Mapping of the motor neuron degeneration (Mnd) gene, a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Genetics 1992;18:797–802.

156. Meyer T, Fromm A, Munch C, Schwalenstocker B, Fray AE, Ince PG, Stamm S, Gron G, Ludolph AC, Shaw PJ. The RNA of the glutamate transporter EAAT2 is variably spliced in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and normal individuals. J Neurosci 1999;170:45–50.

157. Miller R, Swash M. Therapeutic advances in ALS. Neurology 1996;47(suppl 4):S217.

158. Mitsumoto H, Sliman RJ, Schafer IA, Sternick CS, Kaufman B, Wilbourn A, Horwitz SJ. Motor neuron disease and adult hexosaminidase A deficiency in two families: evidence for multisystem degeneration. Ann Neurol 1985;17:378–385.

159. Moulard B, Sefiani A, Laamri A, Malafosse A, Camu W. Apolipoprotein E genotyping in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: evidence for a major influence on the clinical presentation and prognosis. J Neurol Sci 1996;139(suppl):34–37.

160. Mu X, He J, Anderson DW, Trojanowski JQ, Springer JE. Altered expression of bcl-2 and bax mRNA in amyotrophic

156 Familial ALS
MUSCLE & NERVE February 2002

lateral sclerosis spinal cord motor neurons. Ann Neurol 1996;40:379–386.
161. Mui S, Rebeck GW, McKenna-Yasek D, Hyman BT, Brown RH Jr. Apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele is not associated with earlier age at onset in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1995;38:460–463.
162. Mulder DW, Kurland LT, Offord KP, Beard CM. Familial adult motor neuron disease: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurology 1986;36:511–517.
163. Nagai M, Abe K, Okamoto K, Itoyama Y. Identification of alternative splicing forms of GLT-1 mRNA in the spinal cord of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients. Neurosci Lett 1998; 244:165–168.
164. Nguyen MD, Lariviere RC, Julien J-P. Reduction of axonal caliber does not alleviate motor neuron disease caused by mutant superoxide dismutase 1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:12306–12311.
165. Nyormoi O. Proteolytic activity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis IgG preparations. Ann Neurol 1996;40:701–706.
166. Ono S, Imai T, Munakata S, Takahashi K, Kanda F, Hashimoto K, Yamano T, Shimizu N, Nagao K, Yamauchi M. Collagen abnormalities in the spinal cord from patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Sci 1998;160:140–147.
167. Orlacchio A, Kawarai T, Massaro AM, St George-Hyslop PH, Sorbi S. Absence of linkage between familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and copper chaperone for the superoxide dismutase gene locus in two Italian pedigrees. Neurosci Lett 2000;285:83–86.
168. Orrell RW. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: copper/zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1) gene mutations. Neuromusc Disord 2000;10:63–68.
169. Orrell RW, Habgood JJ, de Belleroche JS, Lane RJ. The relationship of spinal muscular atrophy to motor neuron disease: investigation of SMN and NAIP gene deletions in sporadic and familial ALS. J Neurol Sci 1997;145:55–61.
170. Orrell RW, Habgood JJ, Malaspina A, Mitchell J, Greenwood J, Lane RJ, de Belleroche JS. Clinical characteristics of SOD1 gene mutations in UK families with ALS. J Neurol Sci 1999; 169:56–60.
171. Orrell RW, Marklund SL, de Belleroche JS. Familial ALS is associated with mutations in all exons of SOD1: a novel mutation in exon 3 (Gly72Ser). J Neurol Sci 1997;153:46–49.
172. Parboosingh JS, Figlewicz DA, Krizus A, Meininge V, Azad NA, Newman DS, Rouleau GA. Spinobulbar muscular atrophy can mimic ALS: the importance of genetic testing in male patients with atypical ALS. Neurology 1997;49:568–572.
173. Parboosingh JS, Meininge V, McKenna-Yasek D, Brown RH Jr, Rouleau GA. Deletions causing spinal muscular atrophy do not predispose to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Arch Neurol 1999;56:710–712.
174. Parkes TL, Elia AJ, Dickinson D, Hilliker AJ, Phillips JP, Boulianne GL. Extension of Drosophila lifespan by overexpression of human SOD1 in motorneurons. Nat Genet 1998; 19:171–174.
175. Pasinelli P, Borchelt DR, Houseweart MK, Cleveland DW, Brown RH Jr. Caspase-1 is activated in neural cells and tissue with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-associated mutations in copper-zinc superoxide dismutase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998;95:15763–15768.
176. Patrick GN, Zukerberg L, Nikolic M, de la Monte S, Dikkes P, Tsai L-H. Conversion of p35 to p25 deregulates Cdk5 activity and promotes neurodegeneration. Nature 1999;402: 615–622.
177. Pedersen WA, Chan SL, Mattson MP. A mechanism for the neuroprotective effect of apolipoprotein E: isoform-specific modification by the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal. J Neurochem 2000;74:1426–1433.
178. Pedersen WA, Fu W, Keller JN, Markesbery WR, Appel S, Smith RG, Kasarskis E, Mattson MP. Protein modification by the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal in the spinal cords of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients. Ann Neurol 1998;44:819–824.
179. Pederson WA, Luo H, Kruman I, Kasarskis E, Mattson M. The prostate apoptosis response-4 protein participates in motor neuron degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. FASEB J 2000;14:913–924.
180. Peluffo H, Estevez A, Barbeito L, Stutzmann JM. Riluzole promotes survival of rat motoneurons in vitro by stimulating trophic activity produced by spinal astrocyte monolayers. Neurosci Lett 1997;228:207–211.
181. Perry TL, Krieger C, Hansen S, Eisen A. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: amino acid levels in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid. Ann Neurol 1990;28:12–17.
182. Plaitakis A, Constantakakis E, Smith J. The neuroexcitotoxic amino acids glutamate and aspartate are altered in the spinal cord and brain in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1988;24:446–449.
183. Pramatarova A, Goto J, Nanba E, Nakashima K, Takahashi K, Takagi A, Kanazaw I, Figlewicz DA, Rouleau GA. A two base-pair deletion in the SOD1 gene causes familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Hum Mol Genet 1994;3:2061–2062.
184. Prudlo J, Koenig J, Graser J, Burckhardt E, Mestres P, Menger M, Roemer K. Motor neuron cell death in a mouse model of FALS is not mediated by the p53 cell survival regulator. Brain Res 2000;879:183–187.
185. Rabin BA, Griffin JW, Crain B, Scavina M, Chance PF, Cornblath DR. Autosomal dominant juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain 1999;122:1539–1550.
186. Rabizadeh S, Gralla EB, Borchelt DR, Gwinn R, Valentine JS, Sisodia S, Wong P, Lee M, Hahn H, Bredesen DE. Mutations associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis convert superoxide dismutase from an antiapoptotic gene to a proapoptotic gene: studies in yeast and neural cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995;92:3024–3028.
187. Radunovic A, Delves HT, Robberecht W, Tilkin P, Enayat ZE, Shaw CE, Stevic Z, Apostolski S, Powell JF, Leigh PN. Copper and zinc levels in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients with CuZn SOD gene mutations. Ann Neurol 1997;42:130–131.
188. Rae TD, Schmidt PJ, Pufahl RA, Culotta VC, O’Halloran TV. Undetectable intracellular free copper: the requirement of a copper chaperone for superoxide dismutase. Science 1999; 284:805–808.
189. Ratovitski T, Corson LB, Strain J, Wong P, Cleveland DW, Culotta VC, Borchelt DR. Variation in the biochemical/biophysical properties of mutant superoxide dismutase 1 enzymes and the rate of disease progression in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis kindreds. Hum Mol Genet 1999;8: 1451–1460.
190. Reaume AG, Elliott JL, Hoffman EK, Kowall NW, Ferrante RJ, Siwek DF, Wilcox HM, Flood DG, Beal MF, Brown RH Jr, Scott RW, Snider WD. Motor neurons in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase-deficient mice develop normally but exhibit enhanced cell death after axonal injury. Nat Genet 1996;13: 43–47.
191. Ripps ME, Huntley GW, Hof PR, Morrison JH, Gordon JW. Transgenic mice expressing an altered murine superoxide dismutase gene provide an animal model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995;92:689–693.
192. Riviere M, Meininge V, Zeisser P, Munsat T. An analysis of extended survival in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis treated with riluzole. Arch Neurol 1998;55:526–528.
193. Rooke K, Figlewicz DA, Han FY, Rouleau GA. Analysis of the KSP repeat of the neurofilament heavy subunit in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurology 1996;46:789–790.
194. Rosen DR, Bowling AC, Patterson D, Usdin TB, Sapp P, Mezey E, McKenna-Yasek D, O’Regan J, Rahman Z, Ferrante RJ, Brownstein MJ, Kowall NW, Beal MF, Horvitz HR, Brown RH Jr. A frequent ala 4 to val superoxide dismutase-1 mutation is associated with a rapidly progressive familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Hum Mol Genet 1994;3:981–987.

195. Rosen DR, Siddique T, Patterson D, Figlewicz DA, Sapp P, Hentati A, Donaldson D, Goto J, O'Regan JP, Deng H-X, Rahman Z, Krizus A, McKenna-Yasek D, Cayabyab A, Gaston SM, Berger R, Tanzi RE, Halperin JJ, Hertzfeld B, Van der Bergh R, Hung W-Y, Bird T, Deng G, Mulder DW, Smyth C, Laing NG, Soriano E, Pericak-Vance MA, Haines J, Rouleau GA, Gusella JS, Horvitz HR, Brown RH, Jr. Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature 1993;362:59–62.

196. Rothstein JD. Excitotoxicity hypothesis. Neurology 1996;47(suppl 2):S19–S26.

197. Rothstein JD, Bristol LA, Hosler B, Brown RH Jr, Kuncl RW. Chronic inhibition of superoxide dismutase produces apoptotic death of spinal neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994;91:4155–4159.

198. Rothstein JD, Dykes-Hoberg M, Corson LB, Becker M, Cleveland DW, Price DL, Culotta VC, Wong PC. The copper chaperone CCS is abundant in neurons and astrocytes in human and rodent brain. J Neurochem 1999;72:422–429.

199. Rothstein JD, Dykes-Hoberg M, Pardo CA, Bristol LA, Jin L, Kuncl RW, Kanai Y, Hediger MA, Wang Y, Schielke JP, Welty DF. Knockout of glutamate transporters reveals a major role for astroglial transport in excitotoxicity and clearance of glutamate. Neuron 1996;16:675–686.

200. Rothstein JD, Jin L, Dykes-Hoberg M, Kuncl RW. Chronic inhibition of glutamate uptake produces a model of slow neurotoxicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993;90:6591–6595.

201. Rothstein JD, Martin LJ, Kuncl R. Decreased glutamate transport by the brain and spinal cord in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. N Engl J Med 1992;326:1464–1468.

202. Rothstein JD, Tsai G, Kuncl RW, Clawson L, Cornblath DR, Drachman DB, Pestronk A, Stauch BL, Coyle JT. Abnormal excitatory amino acid metabolism in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1990;28:18–25.

203. Rothstein JD, Van Kammen M, Levey AI, Martin LJ, Kuncl RW. Selective loss of glial glutamate transporter GLT-1 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1995;38:78–84.

204. Rouleau GA, Clark AW, Rooke K, Pramatarova A, Krizus A, Suchowersky O, Julien J-P, Figlewicz D. SOD1 mutation is associated with accumulation of neurofilaments in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1996;39:128–131.

205. Rowland LP. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: human challenge for neuroscience. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995;92:1251–1253.

206. Rowland LP. What's in a name? Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, motor neuron disease and allelic heterogeneity. Ann Neurol 1998;43:691–694.

207. Roy J, Minotti S, Dong L, Figlewicz DA, Durham HD. Glutamate potentiates the toxicity of mutant Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase in motor neurons by postsynaptic calcium-dependent mechanisms. J Neurosci 1998;18:9673–9684.

208. Sensi SL, Yin HZ, Carriedo SG, Rao SS, Weiss JH. Preferential Zn2+ influx through Ca2+-permeable AMPA/kainate channels triggers prolonged mitochondrial superoxide production. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999;96:2414–2419.

209. Shaw CE, Enayat ZE, Chioza BA, Al-Chalabi A, Radunovic A, Powell JF, Leigh PN. Mutations in all five exons of SOD1 may cause ALS. Ann Neurol 1998;43:390–394.

210. Shaw CE, Enayat ZE, Powell JF, Anderson VE, Radunovic A, Al-Sarraj S, Leigh PN. Familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Molecular pathology of a patient with a SOD1 mutation. Neurology 1997;49:1612–1616.

211. Shaw PJ, Ince PG, Falkous G, Mantle D. Oxidative damage to protein in sporadic motor neuron disease spinal cord. Ann Neurol 1995;38:691–695.

212. Shefner JM, Reaume AG, Flood DG, Scott RW, Kowall NW, Ferrante RJ, Siwek DF, Upton-Rice M, Brown RH Jr. Mice lacking cytosolic copper/zinc superoxide dismutase display a distinctive motor axonopathy. Neurology 1999;53:1239–1246.

213. Siddique T, Deng HX. Genetics of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Hum Mol Genet 1996;5:1465–1470.

214. Siddique T, Figlewicz DA, Pericak-Vance MA, Haines JL, Rouleau G, Jeffers AJ, Sapp P, Hung W-Y, Bebout J, McKenna-Yasek D, Deng G, Horvitz HR, Gusella JF, Brown RH Jr, Roses AD. Linkage of a gene causing familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis to chromosome 21 and evidence of genetic locus heterogeneity. N Engl J Med 1991;324:1381–1384.

215. Siddique T, Hong S, Brooks BR, Hung W-Y, Siddique NA, Rimmler J, Karplan JP, Haines JL, Brown RH Jr, Pericak-Vance MA. X-linked dominant ALS. Presented at the 50th Annual Meeting of the American Academy of Neurology, Minneapolis, 1998.

216. Siklos L, Engelhardt J, Harati Y, Smith RG, Joo F, Appel SH. Ultrastructural evidence for altered calcium in motor nerve terminals in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1996;39:203–216.

217. Sillevis Smitt PA, Blaauwgeers HG, Troost D, de Jong JM. Metallothionein immunoreactivity in the spinal cord of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurosci Lett 1992;144:107–110.

218. Singh RJ, Karoui H, Gunther MR, Beckman JS, Mason RP, Kalyanaraman B. Reexamination of the mechanism of hydroxyl radical adducts formed from the reaction between familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-associated Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase mutants and H₂O₂. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998;95:6675–6680.

219. Smith RG, Appel SH. Molecular approaches to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Rev Med 1995;46:133–145.

220. Smith RG, Haverkamp LJ, Case S, Appel V, Appel SH. Apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 in bulbar-onset motor neuron disease. Lancet 1996;348:334–335.

221. Smith RG, Henry YK, Mattson MP, Appel SH. Presence of 4-hydroxynonenal in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1998;44:696–699.

222. Sobue G, Hashizume Y, Mitsuma T, Takahashi A. Size-dependent myelinated fiber loss in the corticospinal tract in Shy–Drager syndrome and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurology 1987;37:529–532.

223. Stieber A, Gonatas JO, Collard J, Meier J, Julien J, Schweitzer P, Gonatas NK. The neuronal golgi apparatus is fragmented in transgenic mice expressing a mutant human SOD1, but not in mice expressing the human NF-H gene. J Neurol Sci 2000;173:63–72.

224. Stout AK, Raphael HM, Kanterewicz BI, Klann E, Reynolds IJ. Glutamate-induced neuron death requires mitochondrial calcium uptake. Nat Neurosci 1998;1:366–373.

225. Strong MJ. Neurofilament metabolism in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Sci 1999;169:170–177.

226. Takahashi T, Yagishita S, Amano N, Yamaoka K, Kamei T. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with numerous axonal spheroids in the corticospinal tract and massive degeneration of the cortex. Acta Neuropathol 1997;94:294–299.

227. Tohgi H, Abe T, Yamazaki K, Murata T, Ishizaki E, Isobe C. Increase in oxidized NO products and reduction in oxidized glutathione in cerebrospinal fluid from patients with sporadic form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurosci Lett 1999;260:204–206.

228. Tohgi H, Abe T, Yamazaki K, Murata T, Ishizaki E, Isobe C. Remarkable increase in cerebrospinal fluid 3-nitrotyrosine in patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1999;46:129–131.

229. Torrellles F, Salman-Tabcheh S, Guerin M, Torrellles J. Neurodegenerative disorders: the role of peroxynitrite. Brain Res Brain Res Rev 1999;30:153–163.

230. Torres-Aleman I, Barrios V, Berciano J. The peripheral insulin-like growth factor system in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and in multiple sclerosis. Neurology 1998;50:772–776.

231. Troost D, Aten J, Morsink F, de Jong JM. Apoptosis in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is not restricted to motor neurons.

232. Trotti D, Danbolt NC, Volterra A. Glutamate transporters are oxidant-vulnerable: a molecular link between oxidative and excitotoxic neurodegeneration? Trends Pharmacol Sci 1998;19:328–334.

233. Trotti D, Rölfs A, Danbolt NC, Brown RH Jr, Hediger MA. SOD1 mutants linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis selectively inactivate a glial glutamate transporter. Nat Neurosci 1999;2:427–433.

234. Troy CM, Shelanski ML. Down-regulation of copper/zinc superoxide dismutase causes apoptotic death in PC12 neuronal cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994;91:6384–6387.

235. Tsuda T, Munthasser S, Fraser PE, Percy ME, Rainer I, Vaula G, Pinessi L, Bergamini L, Vignocchi G, Crapper McLachlan DR, Tatton WG, George-Hyslop PS. Analysis of the functional effects of a mutation in SOD1 associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neuron 1994;13:727–736.

236. Upton-Rice MN, Cudkowicz ME, Mathew RK, Reif D, Brown RH Jr. Administration of nitric oxide synthase inhibitors does not alter disease course of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis SOD1 mutant transgenic mice. Ann Neurol 1999;45:413–414.

237. Vandenberghe W, Ihle EC, Patneau DK, Robberecht W, Brorson JR. AMPA receptor current density, not desensitization, predicts selective motoneuron vulnerability. J Neurosci 2000;20:7158–7166.

238. Vandenberghe W, Robberecht W, Brorson JR. AMPA receptor calcium permeability, GluR2 expression, and selective motoneuron vulnerability. J Neurosci 2000;20:123–132.

239. Vechio JD, Bruyn LI, Xu Z, Brown RH Jr, Cleveland DW. Sequence variants in human neurofilament proteins: absence of linkage to familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1996;40:603–610.

240. Vielhaber S, Kunz D, Winkler K, Wiedemann FR, Kirches E, Feistner H, Heinze H-J, Elger CE, Schubert W, Kunz WS. Mitochondrial DNA abnormalities in skeletal muscle of patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain 2000;123:1339–1348.

241. Vincent A, Drachman DB. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and antibodies to voltage-gated calcium channels—new doubts. Ann Neurol 1996;40:691–692.

242. Vukosavic S, Dubois-Dauphin M, Romero N, Przedborski S. Bax and Bcl-2 interaction in a transgenic mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 1999;73:2460–2468.

243. Vyth A, Timmer JG, Bossuyt PM, Louwerse ES, de Jong JM. Survival in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, treated with an array of antioxidants. J Neurol Sci 1996;139(suppl):99–103.

244. Weiss JH, Sensi SL. Ca2+–Zn2+ permeable AMPA or kainate receptors: possible key factors in selective neurodegeneration. Trends Neurosci 2000;23:365–371.

245. Wiedau-Pazos M, Goto JJ, Rabizadeh S, Gralla EB, Roe JA, Lee M, Valentine JS, Bredesen DE. Altered reactivity of superoxide dismutase in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Science 1996;271:515–518.

246. Williams TL, Day NC, Ince PG, Kamboj RK, Shaw PJ. Calcium-permeable alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptors: a molecular determinant of selective vulnerability in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1997;42:200–207.

247. Williamson TL, Bruyn LI, Zhu Q, Anderson KL, Anderson SD, Julien J-P, Cleveland DW. Absence of neurofilaments reduces the selective vulnerability of motor neurons and slows disease caused by a familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked superoxide dismutase 1 mutant. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998;95:9631–9636.

248. Williamson TL, Cleveland DW. Slowing of axonal transport is a very early event in the toxicity of ALS-linked SOD1 mutants to motor neurons. Nat Neurosci 1999;2:50–56.

249. Wong PC, Pardo CA, Borchelt DR, Lee MK, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Sisodia SS, Cleveland DW, Price DL. An adverse property of a familial ALS-linked SOD1 mutation causes motor neuron disease characterized by vacuolar degeneration of mitochondria. Neuron 1995;14:1105–1116.

250. Wong PC, Waggoner D, Subramaniam JR, Tessarollo L, Barankikas TB, Culotta VC, Price DL, Rothstein J, Gitlin JD. Copper chaperone for superoxide dismutase is essential to activate mammalian Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:2886–2891.

251. Xu Z, Cork LC, Griffin JW, Cleveland DW. Increased expression of neurofilament subunit NF-L produces morphological alterations that resemble the pathology of human motor neuron disease. Cell 1993;73:23–33.

252. Yim MB, Kang JH, Yim HS, Kwak HS, Chock PB, Stadtman ER. A gain-of-function of an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-associated Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase mutant: An enhancement of free radical formation due to a decrease in Km for hydrogen peroxide. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;93:5709–5714.

253. Zhang B, Tu P-H, Abtahian F, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM-Y. Neurofilaments and orthograde transport are reduced in ventral root axons of transgenic mice that express human SOD1 with a G93A mutation. J Cell Biol 1997;139:1307–1315.

254. Zhang Q, Ahuja HS, Zakeri ZF, Wolgemuth DJ. Cyclin-dependent kinase 5 is associated with apoptotic cell death during development and tissue remodeling. Dev Biol 1997;183:222–233.
