
Arch Microbiol (2002) 177:313–321  
DOI 10.1007/s00203-001-0393-z  

---

**ORIGINAL PAPER**

Sibylle Kaspar · Michael Bott  

**The sensor kinase CitA (DpiB) of *Escherichia coli* functions as a high-affinity citrate receptor**

Received: 18 October 2001 / Revised: 27 November 2001 / Accepted: 13 December 2001 / Published online: 31 January 2002  
© Springer-Verlag 2002  

---

**Abstract** For the CitA-CitB (DpiB-DpiA) two-component signal transduction system from *Escherichia coli*, three diverse functions have been reported: induction of the citrate fermentation genes *citCDEFXGT*, repression of the regulator gene *appY*, and destabilization of the inheritance of iteron-containing plasmids such as pSC101. This poses the question of the principal biological role of this system. Here it is shown that the periplasmic domain of the *E. coli* sensor kinase CitA functions as a high-affinity citrate receptor. Two CitA derivatives were purified by affinity chromatography and subjected to binding studies using isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC). One of them, termed CitA215MBP, comprised the N-terminal part of CitA (amino acid residues 1–215), including the two transmembrane helices, and was fused to the amino terminus of the *E. coli* maltose-binding protein lacking its signal peptide. The second CitA derivative, designated CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>, encompassed only the periplasmic domain (amino acid residues 38–177). CitA215MBP bound citrate at 25°C with a *K*<sub>d</sub> of 0.3 μM and a binding stoichiometry of up to 0.9 in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7. Binding was driven by the enthalpy change (*ΔH* of –95.7 kJ mol<sup>−1</sup>), whereas the entropy change was not favorable for binding (*TΔS* of –58.6 kJ mol<sup>−1</sup>). ITC experiments with CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> yielded similar *K*<sub>d</sub> values for citrate (0.15–1.0 μM). Besides citrate, also isocitrate (*K*<sub>d</sub> ~15 μM) and tricarballylate (*K*<sub>d</sub> ~50 μM), but not malate were bound by CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>. The results favor the assumption that the primary biological function of the CitA-CitB system is the regulation of the citrate fermentation genes.

**Keywords** Citrate fermentation · Citrate receptor · *Escherichia coli* · Isothermal titration calorimetry · Ligand binding · Response regulator · Sensor kinase · Two-component system

---

**Abbreviations** IPTG Isopropyl β-*d*-thiogalactoside · ITC Isothermal titration calorimetry · MBP Maltose-binding protein · NTA Nitrilotriacetic acid · TKMD Buffer consisting of 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 200 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl<sub>2</sub>, and 5 mM dithiothreitol · TMH Transmembrane helix · TNIx Buffer consisting of 20 mM Tris, 500 mM NaCl, and the mM imidazole concentration indicated by x, adjusted to a final pH of 7.9 with HCl

---

**Introduction**

In bacteria, adaptive responses to changing environmental conditions are often accomplished by two-component regulatory systems, which in their simplest form consist of two modular proteins, a sensor kinase and a response regulator. The sensor kinase responds to a certain stimulus by autophosphorylation of a conserved histidine residue, and the phosphoryl group is subsequently transferred to a conserved aspartate residue of the response regulator, which then mediates changes in gene expression or cell behavior (for review see Stock et al. 1989; Bourret et al. 1991; Parkinson and Kofoid 1992). In *Escherichia coli*, about 30 of these His-Asp phosphotransfer signaling systems have been identified (Mizuno 1997), one of which is encoded by the *citAB* genes located at 14.1 min on the chromosome.

An interesting aspect of the CitA-CitB two-component system are the diverse functions reported for it. The gene encoding the response regulator CitB was identified in a screen for genes that when overexpressed destabilized the inheritance of iteron-containing plasmids such as pSC101 (Ingmer et al. 1998). Therefore, the alternative gene designation *dpiA* (*destabilizer of plasmid inheritance*) was introduced for *citB* and *dpiB* for the sensor kinase gene *citA*. In addition to its effect on plasmid stability, overexpression of *citB* was shown to inhibit expression of *appY*, a transcriptional regulator involved in anaerobic metabolism, and to stimulate expression of a transcriptional *citC-lacZ* fusion (Ingmer et al. 1998).

---

S. Kaspar · M. Bott (✉)  
Institut für Biotechnologie 1, Forschungszentrum Jülich,  
52425 Jülich, Germany  
e-mail: m.bott@fz-juelich.de,  
Tel.: +49-2461-615515, Fax: +49-2461-612710

Fig. 1 Organization of the citrate fermentation genes of *Escherichia coli*. The function of the derived proteins is indicated below the respective genes. The genes *rna* and *dcuC* shaded in white are presumably not involved in citrate fermentation. TPRdCoA synthase 2′-(5″-triphosphoribosyl)-3′-dephospho-CoA synthase (systematic name ATP:dephospho-CoA 5′-triphosphoribosyl transferase). The systematic name of holo-citrate lyase synthase is 2′-(5″-triphosphoribosyl)-3′-dephospho-CoA:apo-citrate lyase 2′-(5″-phosphoribosyl)-3′-dephospho-CoA transferase

The *citC* gene is the promoter-proximal gene of the *citCDEFXGT* gene cluster that is located divergent to *citAB* (Fig. 1). The *citCDEFXG* genes are required for the synthesis of active holo-citrate lyase (Bott and Dimroth 1994; Schneider et al. 2000a, 2000b), an enzyme that splits citrate into acetate and oxaloacetate, whereas *citT* encodes a citrate carrier, presumably a citrate-succinate antiporter (Pos et al. 1998). CitT and citrate lyase are involved in citrate fermentation (Bott 1997). Most *E. coli* strains are unable to utilize citrate aerobically due to the lack of a citrate transport system, but they can catabolize it under anoxic conditions in the presence of an oxidizable co-substrate to acetate and succinate as end-products (Lütgens and Gottschalk 1980). After uptake into the cell, citrate is cleaved by citrate lyase to acetate and oxaloacetate, and the latter is subsequently reduced to succinate using the reducing equivalents provided by the co-substrate, e.g. lactate.

An involvement of the *E. coli* CitA-CitB two-component system in the regulation of the citrate fermentation genes is not only suggested by the observation that overexpression of *citB* stimulates expression of a *citC-lacZ* fusion (Ingmer et al. 1998), but also by the fact that these proteins show 42% and 49% sequence identity to the sensor kinase CitA and the response regulator CitB from *Klebsiella pneumoniae* (Pos et al. 1998). The *K. pneumoniae* CitA-CitB two-component system is essential for the induction of the citrate fermentation enzymes, i.e. the Na⁺-dependent citrate transporter CitS, citrate lyase, and oxaloacetate decarboxylase (Bott et al. 1995). The corresponding genes are organized in the divergently oriented operons *citCDEFG* and *citS-oadGAB-citAB* (Bott 1997). CitA phosphorylates its cognate response regulator CitB, thereby increasing the binding affinity of CitB to its DNA target sites at the *citC* and *citS* promoters 10- to 100-fold (Meyer et al. 1997, 2001). The periplasmic domain of *K. pneumoniae* CitA functions as a highly specific citrate receptor (Kaspar et al. 1999).

Considering the different functions reported for the *E. coli* CitA-CitB system, it is hard to find an obvious link between the regulation of the chromosomally encoded citrate fermentation genes and the regulation of plasmid inheritance. Therefore, the question of the principal biological function of this system arises (Ingmer et al. 1998). We strongly favor the assumption that the primary role is the induction of the citrate fermentation genes, and in support of this view it is shown here that the periplasmic domain of the *E. coli* sensor kinase CitA functions as a citrate receptor.

---

### Materials and methods

#### Bacterial strains and plasmids

For all cloning procedures *E. coli* DH5α (Bethesda Research Laboratories) was used. For overproduction of proteins *E. coli* BL21(DE3) or its derivative *E. coli* C43(DE3) served as host. These strains contain the phage T7 RNA polymerase gene under the control of the *lacUV5* promoter (Studier and Moffatt 1986), which allows selective overexpression of genes with a T7 promoter. Strain C43(DE3) contains mutations that result in an improved overproduction of membrane proteins (Miroux and Walker 1996). The *E. coli* strains were routinely grown at 37°C in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium (Sambrook et al. 1989).

For overproduction of the entire CitA protein supplemented with a C-terminal hexahistidine tag, the *citA* gene was amplified from chromosomal DNA of *E. coli* DH5α using primers that introduced an *NdeI* restriction site (underlined) at the start codon (*EcCitA*-for: 5′-CGCCGCCCATAATGTTGCAGCTTAACGAGAATAAAC-3′) and an *XhoI* site in place of the stop codon (*EcCitA*-rev: 5′-ATAATACTCGAGACGATCAATAGGGTTAATGGAGCT-3′). The PCR fragment obtained with Pwo DNA polymerase (Roche Diagnostics) was digested with *NdeI* and *XhoI* and cloned into the expression vector pET24b (Novagen), resulting in plasmid pET-*EcCitA*. The cloning strategy resulted in a protein of 560 amino acids (calculated molecular mass 62.7 kDa) termed CitA<sub>Ec</sub> (Fig. 2) which comprised the entire CitA protein supplemented with eight additional residues (LEHHHHHH) at its C-terminus.

For overproduction and purification of a fusion protein composed of the N-terminal part of *E. coli* CitA and the *E. coli* maltose-binding protein, the expression plasmid pET-CitA215MBP was constructed. The region of the *citA* gene encoding amino acids 1–215 was amplified from chromosomal DNA of *E. coli* DH5α using primers *EcCitA*-for (see above) and *EcCitA*215-rev (5′-ATAATAGGATCCCTTTGGCTCCATGCCCATCAT-3′), which introduced a *BamHI* restriction site after codon 215. The PCR product obtained with Pwo DNA polymerase was restricted with *NdeI* and *BamHI* and cloned into a pET24 derivative containing a modified *E. coli malE* gene for the maltose-binding protein. The modified *malE* gene lacked codons 2–26 for the signal peptide and was placed immediately behind a sequence with a *BamHI* restriction site followed by four codons encoding an endoprotease factor Xa cleavage site (M. Bott, unpublished data). The cloning strategy resulted in a protein of 592 amino acids (calculated molecular mass 65.9 kDa) termed CitA215-MBP (Fig. 2).

For overproduction and purification of the periplasmic domain of the *E. coli* sensor kinase CitA, the expression plasmid pET-*EcCitAP* was constructed. The region of the *citA* gene encoding the periplasmic domain (amino acids 38–177) was amplified from chromosomal DNA of the *E. coli* strain JM83 (Yanisch-Perron et al. 1985) using primers that introduced an *NdeI* restriction site (underlined) in front of codon 38 (*Ec-CitAP*-for: 5′-CGCCGC

Synthesis of CitA<sub>Ec</sub>, CitA215MBP, and CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> was controlled by a T7 promoter and the translation initiation signals were those of the gene 10 protein of T7. The PCR-derived parts of pET-EcCitA, pET-CitA215MBP and pET-EcCitAP and the cloning sites were controlled by DNA sequencing using the dideoxynucleotide chain-termination method (Sanger et al. 1977), the Thermosequenase sequencing kit (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) and protocols and equipment for automated DNA sequencing (LI-COR 4200 DNA-sequencer, MWG-Biotech).

Overproduction and purification of CitA215-MBP and CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>

For the synthesis of CitA215-MBP, *E. coli* C43(DE3) containing plasmid pET-CitA215MBP was grown in LB medium containing 50 µg kanamycin ml<sup>-1</sup> at 30°C and 170 rpm until an optical density at 600 nm (OD<sub>600</sub>) between 0.6 and 0.8 was reached. The expression of the desired gene was induced by the addition of 1 mM IPTG and the culture was then incubated overnight at 20°C. Subsequently, the cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed once in TKMD buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 200 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl<sub>2</sub> and 5 mM dithiothreitol), and stored at –20°C. For the overproduction of CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>, *E. coli* BL21(DE3) containing plasmid pET-EcCitAP was grown in LB medium containing 50 µg kanamycin ml<sup>-1</sup> at 37°C and 170 rpm until an OD<sub>600</sub> between 0.6 and 0.8 was reached. Then the expression of the desired gene was induced by the addition of 1 mM IPTG, and the culture was incubated for another 3 h at 30°C. Subsequently, cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed once in TNI5 buffer (the number indicates the millimolar imidazole concentration; 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.9, 500 mM NaCl and 5 mM imidazole), and stored at –20°C.

For disruption, the cells were resuspended in the respective washing buffer [4 ml buffer (g wet weight)<sup>-1</sup>] supplemented with 0.25 mg DNase I ml<sup>-1</sup> and 2 mM of the protease inhibitor phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride. After passing the cell suspension twice through a French pressure cell (SLM Aminco) at 108 MPa, intact cells and cell debris were removed by centrifugation for 30 min at 27,000×g and 4°C. The cell-free extract was subjected to ultracentrifugation for 90 min at 150,000×g and 4°C to sediment the membranes.

CitA215-MBP was purified by affinity chromatography on amylose resin (NEB). The membranes obtained by ultracentrifugation of the cell-free extract were resuspended in the same volume of TKMD buffer used for the suspension of the cells before disintegration. Triton X-100 was then added to a final concentration of 4%. The suspension was stirred on ice for 30 min and subsequently subjected to ultracentrifugation again (90 min at 150,000×g and 4°C). The CitA215-MBP-containing supernatant was diluted fivefold with TKMD buffer and then loaded onto a column containing 5 ml (bed volume) amylose resin (NEB) equilibrated with TKMD buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100. Unspecifically bound proteins were removed by washing with 25 ml of this buffer. CitA215-MBP was eluted with TKMD buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100 and 10 mM maltose and then either dialyzed immediately or stored at 4°C.

CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> was purified by Ni<sup>2+</sup>-chelate affinity chromatography (Hochuli et al. 1987). The supernatant of the ultracentrifugation step was applied to a column with 2 ml (bed volume) of Ni-NTA resin (Qiagen) that had been equilibrated with TNI5 buffer. Unspecifically bound proteins were removed by washing with 10 ml TNI30 buffer and CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> was eluted with TNI400 buffer. The purified protein was dialyzed overnight with the desired buffer and then used for ITC studies. In some cases, the protein was stored in TNI400 buffer at 4°C.

Purification of the proteins was monitored by SDS-PAGE (Laemmli 1970) and staining of the gels with GelCode Blue stain reagent (Pierce). Protein concentrations were determined spectrophotometrically at 280 nm (Gill and von Hippel 1989) using an extinction coefficient at 280 nm (*ε*<sub>280</sub>) of 86.34 mM<sup>-1</sup> cm<sup>-1</sup> for CitA215-MBP and 15.93 mM<sup>-1</sup> cm<sup>-1</sup> for CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>.

Fig. 2 A The *E. coli* sensor kinase CitA and the derivatives CitA<sub>Ec</sub>-His, CitA215MBP, and CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> used in this work. The two transmembrane helices (TMH) and the five signature amino-acid segments of the kinase domain (named H-, N-, G1-, F- and G2-box according to the most characteristic amino acids) are indicated, as well as the endoprotease factor Xa cleavage site, which separates the CitA portion and the MalE portion in the CitA215MBP fusion protein. The position of the different features within the primary structure is indicated by the numbers. The kinase domain is preceded by a PAS domain (Taylor and Zhulin 1999). B Proposed topology of CitA and its derivatives in intact cells

CATATGGCAATATTTTACGGGCCAGTTTGAG-3′) and an XhoI restriction site after codon 177 (Ec-CitAP-rev: 5′-ATAAT- ACTCGAGAGCCC GCCAAGGCTATCGATTACTC-3′). PCR was carried out with Pfu DNA polymerase (Stratagene). After restriction with NdeI and XhoI, the PCR product was ligated into the NdeI/XhoI-restricted expression vector pET24b (Novagene). The cloning strategy resulted in a 16.9-kDa protein, designated CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>, that contained, besides amino acids 38–177 of CitA, an N-terminal methionine residue and eight additional amino acids at the carboxy terminus (LEHHHHHH). To introduce a mutation in CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> that results in the replacement of the glycine residue at position 138 of CitA (position 102 in CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>) by arginine, the QuickChange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Stratagene) was used. The reaction was carried out with the oligonucleotides EcG102R- for (5′-AGCTACTTCATTACC CGGAAAGGATCCATGGGA- TGGCGATG-3′) and EcG102R-rev (5′-CATCGCCATCCCCAT- GGATCCTTCCGGGTAATGAAGTAGCT-3′) and pET-EcCitAP as template (altered codon in italics). The desired plasmid pET-EcCitAP-G102R was identified by the BamHI restriction site introduced by the primers and verified by sequencing. The corresponding protein was designated CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>-G102R.

Western blotting

Proteins separated by SDS-PAGE were electroblotted onto nitrocellulose membranes (Hybond-C extra, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). For the detection of CitA215MBP, the blots were incubated with rabbit antiserum prepared by immunizing against affinity-purified *E. coli* maltose-binding protein (NEB). For the detection of CitA<sub>Ec</sub>, the blots were incubated with a mouse penta-His antibody (Qiagen). Bound immunoglobulins were probed either with goat anti-rabbit IgG alkaline phosphatase conjugate or with goat anti-mouse IgG alkaline phosphatase conjugate (Bio-Rad) and visualized with nitrotetrazolium blue and 5-bromo-4-chloroindolyl phosphate.

Isothermal titration calorimetry

Isothermal titration calorimetry measures binding interactions by detecting the heat absorbed or released during a binding event (Wiseman et al. 1989; Ladbury and Chowdry 1996). Deconvolution of the binding isotherm yields the number of binding sites, the enthalpy of binding (∆H) and the equilibrium dissociation constant (*K*<sub>d</sub>). From these parameters, the Gibbs free energy (∆G) and the entropy of binding (∆S) can be calculated. The ITC measurements were carried out essentially as described previously (Kaspar et al. 1999), except that a VP-ITC instrument (Microcal) was used for all experiments. Before the measurements, the proteins were dialyzed against the desired buffer. In the case of CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>, usually 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, was used, and in the case of CitA215-MBP the same buffer supplemented with 0.1% Triton X-100. The ligand solutions were always prepared in the buffer used for dialysis in order to prevent enthalpic contributions from the buffer during the binding experiment. All ITC experiments reported in this work were done at 25 °C and the protein solution was stirred at 375 rpm. The heat of dilution for all ligands was concentration-independent and corresponded well to the heat observed from the last injections after the protein was saturated. Data collection and deconvolution were carried out using the MicroCal ORIGIN software.

---

Results

Ligand binding properties of a CitA derivative comprising amino acid residues 1–215

The *E. coli* sensor kinase CitA is implicated in the regulation of the citrate fermentation genes and therefore suggested to be a citrate sensor, like its homologue from *K. pneumoniae* (Kaspar et al. 1999). The two proteins share a similar topology (Fig. 2) with 42% overall sequence identity, but within the periplasmic domain the sequence identity is only 36%, which certainly does not allow the *E. coli* CitA protein to be defined as a citrate receptor. In order to clarify its sensory potential, two CitA derivatives were constructed that included the transmembrane helices (Fig. 2). The CitA<sub>Ec</sub> protein encoded by plasmid pET-EcCitA comprised the entire CitA protein supplemented with a COOH-terminal hexahistidine tag. The CitA215MBP protein encoded by plasmid pET-CitA215MBP encompassed only the N-terminal part of CitA (amino acid residues 1–215), whereas the linker and the kinase domain were replaced by the *E. coli* maltose-binding protein lacking its signal peptide.

The host strains *E. coli* BL21(DE3) and C43(DE3) carrying either pET-EcCitA or pET-CitA215MBP were cultivated under a variety of different conditions in order to

Fig. 3 Coomassie-stained SDS-12%-polyacrylamide gel showing the purification of Triton X-100 solubilized CitA215MBP by affinity chromatography with amylose resin. Lane 1 Membrane proteins solubilized with 4% (v/v) Triton X-100, lane 2 flow-through fraction of the amylose resin, lane 3 wash fraction obtained by washing the amylose resin with TKMD buffer supplemented with 0.1% Triton X-100, lane 4 protein standard, lanes 5–7, different fractions (3–5 μg protein/lane) eluted from the amylose resin with TKMD buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100 and 10 mM maltose

find one in which CitA<sub>Ec</sub> or CitA215MBP was located in the cytoplasmic membrane. In order to determine the localization, the cells were disrupted and separated by two centrifugation steps, yielding fractions with inclusion bodies, soluble proteins, and membrane-bound proteins. The different fractions were separated by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by Western blotting either for CitA<sub>Ec</sub> with an anti-His antibody or for CitA215MBP with an MBP antisera. Under all conditions tested, CitA<sub>Ec</sub> was exclusively present in inclusion bodies and not further studied. In the case of CitA215MBP, a significant portion of the protein was located in the membrane fraction when *E. coli* C43(DE3) harboring pET-CitA215MBP was cultivated for 15 h at 20 °C after addition of 1 mM IPTG when the culture was at an OD<sub>600</sub> of ~0.8.

In order to purify CitA215MBP, it was solubilized from the membranes with Triton X-100 and isolated by amylose affinity chromatography. The purified protein had an apparent molecular mass of about 58 kDa when analyzed by a Coomassie-stained SDS-polyacrylamide gel (Fig. 3). The discrepancy with the calculated molecular mass of 65.9 kDa might be caused by the hydrophobicity of the two transmembrane helices, which could result in a reduced SDS/protein ratio. The contaminating protein with an apparent molecular mass of about 40 kDa was identified as the maltose-binding protein portion of CitA215MBP, which tends to be split off in many fusion proteins. About 0.2 mg protein was obtained from 1 g cells (wet weight) and the CitA215MBP concentration typically was in the range of 3–7 μM.

Before CitA215MBP was used for binding studies by ITC, it was dialyzed extensively against 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, containing 0.1% Triton X-100. A representative microcalorimetric experiment is depicted in Fig. 4. The raw data in the upper panel show the tem-

Ligand binding properties of a CitA derivative comprising only the periplasmic domain (amino acid residues 38–177)

In order to compare the properties of the *E. coli* CitA sensor domain with and without the flanking transmembrane helices, plasmid pET-EcCitAP was constructed, which encoded a CitA derivative that contained only the periplasmic domain of CitA (amino acids 38–177) supplemented with an N-terminal methionine residue and a C-terminal hexahistidine tag (Fig. 2). The corresponding protein, designated CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>, was overproduced in *E. coli* BL21(DE3). After cell fractionation, a large part of CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> was found in the soluble protein fraction. Ni<sup>2+</sup>-NTA affinity chromatography of this fraction led to a CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> preparation with >95% homogeneity when analyzed by a Coomassie-stained SDS-polyacrylamide gel (Fig. 5). Typically, 1–5 mg protein was obtained from 1 g cells (wet weight).

For ITC studies, CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> was dialyzed against 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0. In Fig. 6A, a representative ITC experiment is shown in which 18 times 5 μl of a 1.84 mM citrate solution were titrated into 1.40 ml of a 122 μM solution of CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0 at 25°C. Similar to CitA215MBP, a saturable, exothermic binding process was obtained. In Table 1B, the results of this and five additional experiments are summarized, in which the CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> concentration was varied 13-fold, between 9.6 μM and 122 μM. Similar to CitA215MBP, binding of citrate was driven by the enthalpy change (ΔH of –85.7 kJ mol<sup>−1</sup>) and the entropy change (ΔS of –0.16 kJ mol<sup>−1</sup> K<sup>−1</sup>) was not favorable for binding. The *K*<sub>d</sub> varied seven-fold, between 0.15 μM and 1.01 μM, and there was a tendency towards an increase with increasing protein concentrations, an observation also reported by Wiseman et al. (1989). Nevertheless, the average *K*<sub>d</sub> of 0.5 μM obtained for citrate binding to CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> was very similar to the one obtained for CitA215MBP.

The most striking difference between the two proteins was the significantly lower binding stoichiometry observed for CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> (0.3 mol citrate per mol CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>), which most likely was caused by precipitation of CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> in the sodium phosphate buffer used. The additional presence of 0.1% Triton X-100 in this buffer did not positively influence the binding stoichiometry and also had no significant effect on the other binding parameters (Table 1C). If the ITC experiments were carried out in TNI400 buffer, pH 7.9, in which CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> remains in solution, the binding stoichiometry increased to 0.6 (Table 1D). The lower affinity of CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> for citrate in this buffer is due to the higher salt concentration and the higher pH.

The same preparation of CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> that was used for the experiment shown in Fig. 6A was also tested for the binding of isocitrate, tricarballylate and malate using the same protein and ligand concentrations. Titration of isocitrate and tricarballylate indicated that they were bound (Fig. 6B, C), albeit much weaker than citrate, whereas in the case of malate no binding was observed (Fig. 6D). The binding parameters obtained after fitting the data for iso-

Table 1 Thermodynamic data obtained by isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) for the binding of citrate, isocitrate, and tricarboxylate to CitA215MBP or CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>. The experiments were carried out at 25°C in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, with or without 0.1% Triton X-100 or in TNI 400 buffer, pH 7.9 (20 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl, 400 mM imidazole). The values for the binding stoichiometry, K<sub>d</sub>, and ΔH were derived from a non-linear least squares fit according to a single-site binding model.

| Experiment number | Protein (µM) | Ligand (µM) | Binding stoichiometry | K<sub>d</sub> (µM) | -ΔH (kJ mol<sup>-1</sup>) | -TΔS (kJ mol<sup>-1</sup>) | -ΔG (kJ mol<sup>-1</sup>) |
|-------------------|--------------|-------------|-----------------------|------------------|-------------------------|--------------------------|------------------------|
| A. CitA215MBP, citrate as ligand, sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, with 0.1% Triton X-100 | 1 | 3.5 | 52.5 | 0.88 | 0.28 | 93.5 | 56.2 | 37.4 |
| 2 | 6.2 | 92.5 | 0.85 | 0.34 | 102.4 | 65.5 | 36.9 |
| 3 | 6.8 | 102.5 | 0.57 | 0.35 | 91.1 | 54.3 | 36.8 |
| Average value |  |  | 0.77 ± 0.17 | 0.32 ± 0.04 | 95.7 ± 5.9 | 58.6 ± 6.0 | 37.0 ± 0.3 |
| B. CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>, citrate as ligand, sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0 | 4 | 9.6 | 192 | 0.41 | 0.24 | 82.4 | 44.6 | 37.8 |
| 5 | 30.0 | 300 | 0.31 | 0.15 | 84.8 | 45.6 | 39.2 |
| 6 | 36.0 | 720 | 0.26 | 0.25 | 83.4 | 45.7 | 37.7 |
| 7 | 48.0 | 480 | 0.28 | 0.37 | 85.1 | 48.3 | 36.8 |
| 8 | 122.0 | 1840 | 0.27 | 0.92 | 88.9 | 54.4 | 34.5 |
| 9 | 122.0 | 1840 | 0.28 | 1.01 | 89.8 | 55.5 | 34.3 |
| Average value |  |  | 0.30 ± 0.06 | 0.49 ± 0.38 | 85.7 ± 3.0 | 49.0 ± 4.8 | 36.7 ± 2.0 |
| C. CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>, citrate as ligand, sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, with 0.1% Triton X-100 | 10 | 124 | 620 | 0.21 | 0.52 | 89.8 | 53.9 | 35.9 |
| 11 | 124 | 1240 | 0.20 | 0.44 | 87.3 | 51.0 | 36.3 |
| 12 | 124 | 2480 | 0.22 | 0.45 | 87.0 | 50.7 | 36.3 |
| Average value |  |  | 0.21 ± 0.01 | 0.47 ± 0.04 | 88.0 ± 1.5 | 51.9 ± 1.8 | 36.2 ± 0.3 |
| D. CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>, citrate as ligand, TNI 400 buffer, pH 7.9 | 13 | 51.1 | 225 | 0.62 | 2.67 | 73.8 | 42.0 | 31.8 |
| 14 | 51.1 | 1021 | 0.60 | 2.17 | 73.2 | 40.9 | 32.4 |
| 15 | 51.1 | 2042 | 0.59 | 2.01 | 71.3 | 38.8 | 32.5 |
| Average value |  |  | 0.60 ± 0.02 | 2.28 ± 0.34 | 72.8 ± 1.3 | 40.5 ± 1.6 | 32.2 ± 0.4 |
| E. CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>, isocitrate as ligand, sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0 | 16 | 122.0 | 1840 | 0.27 | 13.71 | 40.0 | 12.2 | 27.8 |
| 17 | 122.0 | 1840 | 0.28 | 15.64 | 42.2 | 14.7 | 27.5 |
| Average value |  |  | 0.28 ± 0.01 | 14.68 ± 1.4 | 41.1 ± 1.6 | 13.5 ± 1.8 | 27.6 ± 0.2 |
| F. CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>, tricarboxylate as ligand, sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0 | 18 | 122.0 | 1840 | 0.26 | 49.75 | 31.2 | 6.6 | 24.6 |
| 19 | 122.0 | 1840 | 0.22 | 51.87 | 39.1 | 14.6 | 24.5 |
| Average value |  |  | 0.24 ± 0.03 | 50.81 ± 1.5 | 35.1 ± 5.6 | 10.6 ± 5.6 | 24.5 ± 0.1 |

citrate and tricarboxylate are summarized in Table 1E, F. Whereas the binding stoichiometry was almost identical to the one obtained with citrate, the K<sub>d</sub>s were significantly higher, i.e., 15 µM for isocitrate and 51 µM for tricarboxylate.

Influence of a Gly-138 → Arg mutation on the citrate-binding properties of CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>

Studies with the periplasmic domain of the K. pneumoniae sensor kinase CitA showed that an Arg-141 → Ala exchange resulted in a six-fold increase of the binding affinity (Gerharz and Bott, unpublished results). An alignment indicated that Arg-141 of K. pneumoniae CitA corresponds to Gly-138 of E. coli CitA. In order to analyze whether a Gly-138 → Arg exchange in E. coli CitA has an effect opposite of that of the Arg-141 → Ala exchange in K. pneumoniae CitA, i.e., a six-fold decrease of the binding affinity, a CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> derivative was constructed in which the corresponding glycine residue was replaced by arginine. The resulting protein, CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>-G138R, was overproduced and purified as described for “wild-type” CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>. Initial attempts to carry out ITC studies in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7, failed because after dialysis against this buffer most of the protein precipitated and the residual concentration was too low to obtain reliable results. Therefore, the ITC studies were done with TNI 400 buffer, in which the protein was stable. In experiments with a 55 µM CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>-G138R solution and 0.23 mM, 1.02 mM or 2.04 mM citrate solutions, only the enthalpy changes caused by the heat of dilution were observed (data not shown). Thus, the effect of the G138R mutation was much stronger than expected and resulted in a drastically decreased binding affinity, which was no longer measurable by ITC. One possible explanation for

this result is a blockage of the citrate-binding site by the bulky arginine residue.

---

## Discussion

In this work, the periplasmic domain of the *E. coli* sensor kinase CitA was shown to function as a high-affinity citrate receptor. Two different CitA derivatives were analyzed, one of which comprised only the periplasmic domain (CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>), whereas the other also included the flanking transmembrane helices (CitA215MBP). Both of them bound citrate with very similar *K*<sub>d</sub> values (~0.3 μM in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0 at 25°C), indicating that the ligand-binding properties are determined by the periplasmic domain and that the flanking transmembrane helices are not necessary for binding, but perhaps for the transmission of the binding signal to the cytoplasmic kinase domain. In contrast to *K*<sub>d</sub>, Δ*H*, and Δ*S*, the binding stoichiometry of the two CitA derivatives differed significantly. With CitA215MBP, *n* values up to 0.9 were obtained, clearly indicating that one monomeric CitA215MBP molecule binds one citrate molecule. The deviation from a stoichiometry of one is caused, at least in part, by the presence of degradation products in the preparation encompassing the maltose-binding protein portion of CitA215MBP (Fig. 3). In the case of CitAP<sub>Ec</sub>, the maximal *n* value was only 0.4 in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, presumably caused by the precipitation of the protein during the ITC experiment. If instead of phosphate buffer TNI400 buffer was used, in which CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> does not visibly precipitate, a stoichiometry of 0.6 was measured. Since the CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> preparations used for ITC were highly pure, the value of 0.6 must be due to the fact that about 40% of the protein was in a binding-incompetent state, e.g., due to aggregation. Besides citrate, CitAP<sub>Ec</sub> also bound isocitrate and tricarballylate with approximate *K*<sub>d</sub> values of 15 μM and 51 μM, respectively, whereas the dicarboxylate malate was not bound (Fig. 6). It has to be noted that the *c* value, which is defined as [M<sub>T</sub>]/K<sub>d</sub>, with [M<sub>T</sub>] being the total protein concentration, was below 10

in the experiments with isocitrate and tricarballylate. Whereas Wiseman et al. (1989) claimed that accurate \( K_{\mathrm{d}} \) values can be determined in the range of \( c \) values between 1 and 1,000, Indyk and Fisher (1998) reported that \( c \) values >10 are required to obtain useful information. Thus, the data reported in Table 1E, F may represent good estimates rather than accurate data. Assuming that the \( K_{\mathrm{d}} \) values obtained for the binding of isocitrate and tricarballylate to CitAP\(_{\mathrm{Ec}}\) also hold true for CitA215MBP, the concentration of CitA215MBP used in the ITC experiments (~6 μM) was much too low to analyze the binding of these ligands (\( c \) values below 1).

When comparing the binding properties of the two *E. coli* CitA derivatives with those reported recently for *K. pneumoniae* CitA (Kaspar et al. 1999), many similarities, but also a number of differences emerge. Like CitAP\(_{\mathrm{Ec}}\), the *K. pneumoniae* CitA derivative (CitAP\(_{\mathrm{Kp}}\)) comprised only the periplasmic domain with a C-terminal hexahistidine tag. However, in contrast to CitAP\(_{\mathrm{Ec}}\), it was very stable in sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, and a binding stoichiometry of 0.9 was obtained, comparable to that of CitA215MBP. The \( K_{\mathrm{d}} \) of CitAP\(_{\mathrm{Kp}}\) (5.5 μM) was about ten-fold higher than that of the *E. coli* derivatives. In contrast to CitAP\(_{\mathrm{Ec}}\), CitAP\(_{\mathrm{Kp}}\) did not bind isocitrate and tricarballylate.

We have previously postulated that the common function of the CitA subfamily of histidine kinases is to detect the presence of tricarboxylates or dicarboxylates in the environment and to induce the synthesis of transporters required for the uptake of these compounds (Kaspar et al. 1999). This proposal was meanwhile shown to be correct for several family members besides CitA, e.g., the dicarboxylate sensor DcuS from *E. coli* (Zientz et al. 1998; Golby et al. 1999) and the citrate sensor CitS from *Bacillus subtilis* (Yamamoto et al. 2000). It seems meaningful that the ligand-binding properties of the sensor kinases are adapted to the substrate-binding properties of the carriers regulated by them. Therefore, the differences in the ligand specificity of *E. coli* and *K. pneumoniae* CitA might reflect differences in the substrate specificity of the carriers they induce, i.e., *E. coli* CitT and *K. pneumoniae* CitS. CitS is highly specific for citrate and does not transport isocitrate, tricarballylate, succinate, malate, or tartrate (Bandell et al. 1997). Therefore, it would make no sense physiologically to induce the synthesis of CitS by compounds that are not substrates of the carrier. In the case of CitT, the substrate specificity is less stringent (Pos et al. 1998), and it appears quite possible that CitT is capable of transporting tricarballylate and isocitrate. Whereas the latter substrate is easily converted to citrate by aconitase, it is not known whether tricarballylate can be metabolized by *E. coli*.

The finding that the *E. coli* sensor kinase CitA is a citrate receptor fits perfectly with a function of the CitA-CitB two-component system in the induction of the citrate fermentation genes *citCDEFXGT* (Fig. 1), whereas a direct link to the other roles proposed for CitB, i.e., repression of *appY* and destabilization of plasmid inheritance, is not evident. In our opinion, the physiological rel-

evance of CitA-CitB function in *appY* repression and plasmid inheritance has yet to be demonstrated, because these effects were observed only in strains expressing *citB* from a multicopy plasmid (Ingmer et al. 1998). The same argument holds true for the proposal that the *Shigella flexneri* CitB homologue CriR functions as a positive regulator of *ipaBCD* (*invasion plasmid antigen*) expression (Qi et al. 1996). The *criR* gene, whose sequence (GenBank accession number U29654) is identical with that of *citB* from *E. coli*, was identified in a screen for genes in a *S. flexneri* genomic library (created with the multicopy plasmid pACYC184) that stimulated expression of an *ipaB-lacZ* fusion located on a second plasmid in the *E. coli* host.

*E. coli* *citA* and *citB* mutants were unable to grow anaerobically with citrate and glycerol as carbon sources (E. Zientz and G. Unden, Universität Mainz, unpublished results), which would be expected if CitA and CitB are essential for expression of the *citCDEFXGT* genes. This phenotype, along with: (1) the results on CitA-CitB function in *K. pneumoniae*, (2) the fact that all *E. coli* strains analyzed so far contain the *citC* operon (whereas many strains do not harbor iteron-containing plasmids), and (3) the finding that *E. coli* CitA functions as a citrate sensor strongly supports the view that the primary biological function of the *E. coli* CitA-CitB two-component system is the regulation of the citrate fermentation genes.

Acknowledgements The authors thank H. Sahm (Forschungszentrum Jülich) for continuous support, and E. Zientz and G. Unden (Universität Mainz) for helpful discussions and provision of unpublished results. In its initial phase, this work was supported by a grant from the Swiss National Foundation for Scientific Research to M.B.

---

### References

Bandell M, Ansanay V, Rachidi N, Dequin S, Lolkema JS (1997) Membrane potential-generating malate (MleP) and citrate (CitP) transporters of lactic acid bacteria are homologous proteins. J Biol Chem 272:18410–18146

Bott M (1997) Anaerobic citrate metabolism and its regulation in enterobacteria. Arch Microbiol 167:78–88

Bott M, Dimroth P (1994) *Klebsiella pneumoniae* genes for citrate lyase and citrate lyase ligase: localization, sequencing, and expression. Mol Microbiol 14:347–356

Bott M, Meyer M, Dimroth P (1995) Regulation of anaerobic citrate metabolism in *Klebsiella pneumoniae*. Mol Microbiol 18:533–546

Bourret RB, Borkovich KA, Simon MI (1991) Signal transduction pathways involving protein phosphorylation in prokaryotes. Annu Rev Biochem 60:401–441

Gill SC, von Hippel PH (1989) Calculation of protein extinction coefficients from amino acid sequence data. Anal Biochem 182:319–326

Golby P, Davies S, Kelly DJ, Guest JR, Andrews SC (1999) Identification and characterization of a two-component sensor-kinase and response-regulator system (DcuS-DcuR) controlling gene expression in response to C4-dicarboxylates in *Escherichia coli*. J Bacteriol 181:1238–1248

Hochuli E, Dobeli H, Schacher A (1987) New metal chelate adsorbent selective for proteins and peptides containing neighbouring histidine residues. J Chromatogr 411:177–184

Indyk L, Fisher HF (1998) Theoretical aspects of isothermal titration calorimetry. Methods Enzymol 295:350–364

Ingmer H, Miller CA, Cohen SN (1998) Destabilized inheritance of pSC101 and other *Escherichia coli* plasmids by DpiA, a novel two-component system regulator. Mol Microbiol 29:49–59

Kaspar S, Perozzo R, Reinelt S, Meyer M, Pfister K, Scapozza L, Bott M (1999) The periplasmic domain of the histidine autokinase CitA functions as a highly specific citrate receptor. Mol Microbiol 33:858–872

Ladbury JE, Chowdry BZ (1996) Sensing the heat: the application of isothermal titration calorimetry to thermodynamic studies of biomolecular interactions. Chem Biol 3:791–801

Laemmli UK (1970) Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. Nature 227:680–685

Lütgens M, Gottschalk G (1980) Why a co-substrate is required for anaerobic growth of *Escherichia coli* on citrate. J Gen Microbiol 119:63–70

Meyer M, Dimroth P, Bott M (1997) In vitro binding of the response regulator CitB and of its carboxy-terminal domain to A+T-rich DNA target sequences in the control region of the divergent *citC* and *citS* operons of *Klebsiella pneumoniae*. J Mol Biol 269:719–731

Meyer M, Dimroth P, Bott M (2001) Catabolite repression of the citrate fermentation genes in *Klebsiella pneumoniae*: evidence for involvement of the cyclic AMP receptor protein. J Bacteriol 183:5248–5256

Miroux B, Walker JE (1996) Over-production of proteins in *Escherichia coli*: mutant hosts that allow synthesis of some membrane proteins and globular proteins at high levels. J Mol Biol 260:289–298

Mizuno T (1997) Compilation of all genes encoding two-component phosphotransfer signal transducers in the genome of *Escherichia coli*. DNA Res 4:161–168

Parkinson JS, Kofoid EC (1992) Communication modules in bacterial signaling proteins. Annu Rev Genet 26:71–112

Pos KM, Dimroth P, Bott M (1998) The *Escherichia coli* citrate carrier CitT: a member of a novel eubacterial transporter family related to the 2-oxoglutarate/malate translocator from spinach chloroplasts. J Bacteriol 180:4160–4165

Qi MS, Yoshikura H, Watanabe H (1996) Identification of a *Shigella flexneri criR* gene increasing *ipa* genes expression: a novel member of response regulators of the two-component signal transduction family. Jpn J Med Sci Biol 49:219–239

Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T (1989) Molecular cloning. A laboratory manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York

Sanger F, Nicklen S, Coulson AR (1977) DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 74:5463–5467

Schneider K, Dimroth P, Bott M (2000a) Biosynthesis of the prosthetic group of citrate lyase. Biochemistry 39:9438–9450

Schneider K, Dimroth P, Bott M (2000b) Identification of triphosphoryl-dephospho-CoA as precursor of the citrate lyase prosthetic group. FEBS Lett 483:165–168

Stock JB, Ninfa AJ, Stock AM (1989) Protein phosphorylation and regulation of adaptive responses in bacteria. Microbiol Rev 53:450–490

Studier FW, Moffatt BA (1986) Use of bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase to direct selective high-level expression of cloned genes. J Mol Biol 189:113–130

Taylor BL, Zhulin IB (1999) PAS domains: internal sensors of oxygen, redox potential, and light. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 63:479–506

Wiseman T, Williston S, Brandts JF, Lin LN (1989) Rapid measurement of binding constants and heats of binding using a new titration calorimeter. Anal Biochem 179:131–137

Yamamoto H, Murata M, Sekiguchi J (2000) The CitST two-component system regulates the expression of the Mg-citrate transporter in *Bacillus subtilis*. Mol Microbiol 37:898–912

Yanisch-Perron C, Vieira J, Messing J (1985) Improved M13 phage cloning vectors and host strains: nucleotide sequence of the M13mp18 and pUC19 vectors. Gene 33:103–119

Zientz E, Bongaerts J, Unden G (1998) Fumarate regulation of gene expression in *Escherichia coli* by the DcuSR (*dcuSR* genes) two-component regulatory system. J Bacteriol 180:5421–5425
