
Reviews in Endocrine & Metabolic Disorders 2002;3:33–46

© 2002 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Manufactured in The Netherlands.

# Multiple Signal Transduction Pathways Regulate Ovarian Steroidogenesis

**Jennifer R. Wood and Jerome F. Strauss III**

Center for Research on Reproduction and Women’s Health, University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA

**Key Words.** steroid synthesis, signal transduction, folliculogenesis, growth factors and gonadotropins

## Introduction

The ovarian steroids, 17β-estradiol (E₂) and progesterone (P₄), are critical for normal uterine function, establishment and maintenance of pregnancy, and mammary gland development [1–3]. Furthermore, follicle growth, differentiation, maturation and release of a viable oocyte, and formation and regression of the corpus luteum are dependent on the endocrine, paracrine, and autocrine actions of E₂, P₄, and androgens [3–7]. Given the important actions of E₂, P₄, and androgens, there is considerable interest in understanding the regulation of these ovarian steroids.

Within an individual follicle, androgen and E₂ production is regulated spatially with androgen synthesis occurring in theca cells, followed by androgen metabolism to estrogens in the granulosa cells [6]. As a follicle grows from a small antral to a dominant preovulatory follicle, synthesis of E₂ also increases temporally [6]. Likewise, P₄ synthesis is regulated temporally with low levels produced in theca and granulosa cells of growing follicles and large levels synthesized by the terminally differentiated luteal cells after the ovulatory surge of luteinizing hormone (LH; [8]). This regulation of ovarian steroid synthesis is dependent on the expression and activity of several proteins. Cholesterol is the common substrate for steroid biosynthesis. LDL and HDL represent the major source of cholesterol, in the human and rodent, respectively and are transported into ovarian cells via the LDL receptor (LDL-R) or the scavenger receptor class B type I (SRB1) which serves as the HDL-R [9, 10]. However, LDL cannot cross the blood-follicle barrier or enter into the follicular fluid limiting the supply of cholesterol substrate until ovulation when neovascularization results in a pathway for LDL delivery to the lutein cells [8, 10]. Once inside the cell, cholesterol is trafficked between cellular vesicles or membranes to the outer membrane of the mitochondria [9, 11] and is subsequently translocated to the inner mitochondrial membrane by the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR, [11, 12]). The movement of cholesterol from the outer to inner mitochondrial membrane by StAR is the rate-limiting step in steroidogenesis [11, 13]. After cholesterol is delivered to the inner mitochondrial membrane, the first enzymatic step of steroidogenesis, cleavage of cholesterol to pregnenolone, is carried out by the P450 side chain cleavage enzyme system (P450scc, [14, 15]). In theca cells of a growing follicle and luteal cells of the corpus luteum, pregnenolone is converted to P₄ by 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3β-HSD, [16]). Conversely, theca cells synthesize androgens from pregnenolone by reactions carried out by the P450 17α-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase (P450₁₇α) enzyme [15]. P450 aromatase (P450 arom) which is expressed in granulosa cells converts androstenedione (A) or testosterone (T) to estrone (E₁) and E₂, respectively [15]. Conversion of E₁ to E₂ in the granulosa cells is carried out by the estrogenic 17β-HSD type I enzyme [16]. In agreement with the spatial regulation of androgen and E₂ synthesis previously described, P450₁₇α and P450 arom enzymes are expressed only in the theca and granulosa cells, respectively, of the growing follicle [15]. Since these steroidogenic enzymes have been the subject of several comprehensive reviews [11, 12, 14–16], the details of their molecular structures and biochemical actions will not be discussed further here.

In the last decade, investigators have demonstrated that the coordinated synthesis of A, T, E₂, and P₄ by the theca, granulosa and luteal cells is dependent on the cooperative actions of gonadotropins, growth factors, and pro-inflammatory cytokines. Although most of these factors have been shown to interact with membrane receptors resulting in the activation of multiple signal transduction pathways, their mechanism of action and cross-talk in the ovary is still poorly understood ([17–19]

Address correspondence to: Jerome F. Strauss, III  
E-mail: jfs3@mail.med.upenn.edu

and ref. therein). Thus, this review will focus on recent literature, which has defined the signaling cascades activated by the gonadotropins, growth factors, and cytokines in granulosa, theca, and luteal cells. Furthermore, the effect of these signal transduction pathways on the expression or activity of the steroidogenic machinery and/or the modulation of ovarian steroidogenesis will be discussed.

### Gonadotropin-Stimulated Signaling Pathways

The importance of the pituitary gonadotropins for theca and granulosa cell steroidogenesis is well documented. For example, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) increases the expression and activity of P450<sub>arom</sub> in granulosa cells while LH enhances P450<sub>scc</sub> expression in luteal cells resulting in increased synthesis of E<sub>2</sub> and P<sub>4</sub>, respectively ([20, 21], and ref. therein). After the LH surge, the abundance of P450<sub>arom</sub> mRNA declines as the granulosa cells change from proliferating, E<sub>2</sub>-producing cells to differentiated, P<sub>4</sub>-producing cells [22]. In theca cells of a growing follicle both P450<sub>scc</sub> and P450<sub>17α</sub> expression is increased in a LH-dependent manner resulting in augmented androgen synthesis ([21, 23] and ref. therein). Thus, both LH and FSH are essential for generating the appropriate environment for steroid synthesis by the growing follicle.

#### cAMP-and protein kinase A (PKA)-mediated stimulation of steroidogenesis

The actions of LH and FSH are mediated through their cognate seven-transmembrane receptors, which are coupled to the stimulatory G-protein (Gs, [21, 24] and ref. therein). In the classically described mechanism of LH- and FSH-receptor (R) action (Fig. 1), ligand binding induces a conformational change in the receptors resulting in release of the Gsα subunit, activation of adenylate cyclase, increased production of cAMP, and activation of protein kinase A (PKA, [21] and ref. therein). Protein kinase A, in turn, can directly influence the expression and/or activity of components of the steroidogenic machinery. For example, when adenylate cyclase is activated by FSH, LH, or forskolin, which is a synthetic adenylate cyclase activator, the transcriptional activity of the StAR promoter is enhanced ([11] and ref. therein). The increased expression of StAR is associated with cAMP-dependent increases in steroidogenic factor-1 activity and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-β expression [25–27]. Activation of PKA also promotes phosphorylation of the StAR protein at serine 195, resulting in greater steroidogenic activity [28]. The importance of this acute regulation of StAR activity on steroidogenesis was recently emphasized in a study by Christenson et al.,

which demonstrated that cAMP treatment of MA-10 Leydig cells enhances steroid synthesis prior to the stimulation of StAR gene transcription [29]. Although StAR expression is increased by FSH- and LH-dependent elevations in cAMP levels *in vitro*, tonic exposure of macaque granulosa cells to FSH *in vivo* does not stimulate transcriptional activity of the StAR promoter [29]. This observation may indicate that cAMP regulation of StAR expression is dose-dependent, or that LH activates unique signaling pathways to drive StAR expression or conversely that FSH activates signaling pathways that inhibit the stimulatory actions of cAMP on StAR expression and granulosa cell steroidogenesis. Indeed, there is growing evidence that tropic hormone regulation of steroid synthesis and folliculogenesis involves other signaling pathways [17, 18].

#### FSH- and LH-R isoforms

One mechanism for activation of alternate signaling pathways by FSH and LH is through interaction of these gonadotropins with different receptor isoforms. Studies carried out in sheep and mouse granulosa cells indicate that the FSH-R gene is alternatively spliced resulting in the expression of four different isoforms [30, 31]. In the sheep, Touyz et al. have demonstrated that FSH binding to the FSH-R3 isoform, which contains only a single transmembrane domain, results in an increase in intracellular calcium levels [30]. However, it is not clear how this change in intracellular calcium levels affects steroidogenesis in granulosa cells. Although studies in sheep, cow, rodent, and human luteal cells indicate that the LH-R gene is also alternatively spliced resulting in the production of multiple receptor isoforms [32–35], the signaling cascades activated by these alternate receptor types have not been defined.

#### cAMP-independent activation of signal transduction pathways

LH and FSH may also stimulate multiple signal transduction pathways via the classical gonadotropin receptors. *In vitro* and *in vivo* experiments demonstrate that coupling of the LH-R to the G<sub>i</sub> protein activates the phospholipase C (PLC) signal transduction pathway, resulting in the synthesis of the second messenger signals, inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate (IP<sub>3</sub>) and diacylglycerol (DAG), which bring about changes in intracellular calcium levels and activation of protein kinase C (PKC), respectively [36–38]. In addition, ligand binding to the rat FSH-R results in increased production of IP<sub>3</sub> suggesting that the PLC signal transduction pathway can be activated by this gonadotropin receptor [39]. In the mouse, DAG-activated PKC and calcium can act together to inhibit cAMP production by adenylate cyclase and thereby negatively impact steroidogenesis (Fig. 1, [21]).

The extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK) proteins, which belong to the MAPK family of signaling factors, are also activated by cAMP [45–47]. Seger et al. found that ERK1, ERK1b, and ERK2 are phosphorylated by a cAMP-dependent process after treatment of rat granulosa cells with LH, FSH, or forskolin, which was correlated to decreased P₄ production and StAR expression (Fig. 1; [45]). Conversely, Cameron et al. indicated that cAMP-dependent activation of ERK1 and ERK2 in porcine granulosa cells is associated with increased P₄ production [47]. Although this study did not provide direct evidence that activation of ERK1 and ERK2 results in increased steroidogenesis, work by Gyles et al. suggests that activation of ERK1 and ERK2 by cAMP enhances SF-1 phosphorylation, StAR expression, and steroidogenesis in Y1 adrenal cells [46]. Additionally, Babu et al. reported that ligand-bound FSH-R3 stimulates cAMP-independent activation of the ERK pathway, which is associated with a modest but significant increase in E₂ production [31]. The apparent discrepancies in the literature may reflect receptor-, cell-, and/or species-specific differences in the activation of the ERK signaling pathway, which will require further investigation for resolution and clarification of the role of ERK signaling in the control of steroidogenesis.

**Activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways by gonadotropins**

cAMP-dependent phosphorylation of other signaling molecules can lead to activation of divergent signaling cascades. For example, *in vivo* gonadotropin stimulation of growing follicles in the rat leads to the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase (MKK) 3, MKK6, and MAPK p38 (Fig. 1, [40, 41]). Furthermore, FSH treatment of isolated rat granulosa cells leads to PKA-dependent phosphorylation of p38 with subsequent phosphorylation of the downstream targets, protein kinase B (PKB/Akt) and serum and glucocorticoid-induced kinase (Sgk), as well as increased expression of the Sgk transcript [41–43]. Conversely, Gonzalez-Robayna et al. have shown that cAMP-dependent phosphorylation of p38 and PKB/Akt phosphorylation is mediated by phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3-K) rather than PKA [44]. One proposed explanation for these contrasting results is that acute phosphorylation of p38 is PKA-dependent while sustained phosphorylation of p38 is mediated through a PKA-independent mechanism. Although it is not clear from these studies in rats what role the phosphorylation of p38 and its downstream targets play on expression of the steroidogenic machinery, there is evidence in human theca cells that increased p38 phosphorylation is correlated with increased androgen synthesis (J. McAllister, personal communication).

**Gonadotropin receptor desensitization**

The action of FSH and LH on theca, granulosa, and luteal cells can be terminated through desensitization of the LH- and FSH-Rs. Similar to other G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), cellular desensitization to chronic gonadotropin stimulation involves receptor phosphorylation, uncoupling from the Gs protein, and internalization [48]. Desensitization of the FSH-R is mediated by G-protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) which phosphorylate the receptor resulting in FSH-R interaction with β-arrestin, which effectively blocks the Gs-dependent signaling pathway and promotes receptor internalization [49]. Studies by Lazari et al. indicate that LH-R desensitization occurs by a similar mechanism [50]. However, Mukherjee et al. provide evidence that β-arrestin can associate with the LH-R in the absence of GRK-mediated phosphorylation [51, 52]. Although these two contrasting studies provide alternate mechanisms for β-arrestin association with the LH-R, both groups demonstrate that formation of the β-arrestin/LH-R complex results in uncoupling of the receptor from the Gs protein as well as receptor internalization.

Recent work in the field of GPCRs suggests that β-arrestins not only contribute to the desensitization of the β2-adrenergic receptor (β-AR) but also act as scaffolding proteins to bring about activation of MAPK signaling pathways by this GPCR ([53] and ref. therein).

complex containing β-arrestin 2, c-Jun NH₂-terminal kinase 3, MKK4, and a MAPK kinase kinase (ASK1) is formed when cells which are transiently transfected with the β-AR are stimulated with ligand [54]. In addition, this β-AR/β-arrestin complex can activate the ERK signaling cascade [55]. Given the similarities in receptor signaling and desensitization within the GPCR family, it will be interesting to determine how β-arrestin binding to the LH- and FSH-Rs influences signaling by these receptors.

### Growth Factor Modulation of Gonadotropin-Stimulated Steroidogenesis

#### Insulin
While it is clear that FSH and LH are necessary for appropriate regulation of steroidogenesis in granulosa and theca cells, there are several growth factors that modulate the actions of these gonadotropins (Table 1). Insulin mimics the actions of the gonadotropins on production of E₂, P₄, and A, T in granulosa and theca cells, respectively ([56, 57] and ref. therein). In addition, insulin augments FSH-stimulated E₂ and P₄ synthesis additively, while it acts synergistically with LH to bring about increased steroidogenesis ([57] and ref. therein). These insulin-mediated increases in steroidogenesis have been correlated to enhanced expression of components of the steroidogenic machinery. For example, insulin augments cAMP-stimulated increases in StAR mRNA and/or protein levels in pig, bovine, and human granulosa cells [58–60]. Furthermore, the synergistic action of LH and insulin on pig and bovine granulosa cells leads to increased expression of the P450ₛcc and/or LDL-R [58]. Finally, several studies have demonstrated that insulin enhances FSH-stimulated P450 arom activity in granulosa cells ([56, 57] and ref. therein). Similarly, in bovine, pig, and human luteal cells, insulin enhance gonadotropin-dependent increases in P450ₛcc and StAR mRNA transcript levels [59–61] while in pig theca cells, insulin acting alone or synergistically with LH enhances the expression of StAR and P450₁₇α transcript [62].

Although granulosa, theca, and luteal cells express receptors for insulin and insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I), the affinity of insulin for the IGF-IR in the ovarian follicle is low and therefore activation of the IGF-IR only occurs at superphysiological doses of insulin [63, 64]. Thus, insulin signaling in these cells is carried out predominantly through the insulin receptor [57]. However, there is no consensus as to how insulin acts to augment steroidogenesis. Upon insulin binding, the IR obtains tyrosine kinase activity resulting in the phosphorylation of the IR itself as well as downstream targets including insulin receptor substrate-1, (IRS-1), which subsequently activates the PI3-K and MAPK signaling cascades (Fig. 2, [56, 65, 66] and ref. therein). Sekar and Veldhuis demonstrated that activation of PI3-K and MAPK by IRS-1 enhances LH-dependent transcriptional activity of the LDL-R promoter [61]. However, studies carried out by Poretsky et al. suggested that insulin-mediated increases in steroidogenesis are independent of activation of the PI3-K pathway [67].

---

**Table 1. Growth factor modulation of ovarian**

| Factor    | Effect on FSH-mediated signaling | Effect on LH-mediated signaling | Effect on steroid production |
|-----------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Insulin   | +                                | +                                | ↑E₂, P₄, A                   |
| IGF I     | +                                | +                                | ↑E₂, P₄, A                   |
| IGF II    | +                                | +                                | ↑E₂, P₄, A                   |
| EGF       | ±                                | ±                                | ↓E₂, T↓↑P₄                   |
| TGF-β     | +                                | +                                | ↑E₂, P₄, A                   |
| Inhibin   | –                                | +                                | ↑A↓E₂                        |
| Activin   | +                                | –                                | ↑P₄, E₂↓A                    |
| BMP 4     | ±                                | NK                               | ↑↓P₄↑E₂↓17OH-P₄, A           |
| BMP 6     | ±                                | NK                               | ↓P₄, E₂ = no effect           |
| BMP 7     | ±                                | NK                               | ↑E₂, ↓                       |
| BMP 15    | +                                | NK                               | ↓P₄, E₂ = no effect           |
| GDF 9     | ±                                | NK                               | ↑P₄↓A                        |
| TNFα      | –                                | –                                | ↓E₂, P₄, A                   |
| IL-1      | –                                | –                                | ↓E₂, P₄, A                   |

---

**Abbreviations:** Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), 17β-estradiol (E₂), progesterone (P₄), androstenedione (A), insulin-like growth factor (IGF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), transforming growth factor (TGF), bone morphogenic protein (BMP), growth differentiation factor (GDF), tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα), interleukin-1 (IL-1), stimulatory (+), inhibitory (−), increase (↑), decrease (↓), not known (NK).

granulosa and luteal cells increases basal and cAMP dependent levels of StAR transcript and protein [60]. While IGF-I and IGF-II increase P450<sub>arom</sub> activity and mRNA abundance in both human and rat granulosa cells ([56], and ref. therein), IGF-I synergizes with FSH to enhance P450<sub>scc</sub>, 3β-HSD and LH-R expression in rat and pig granulosa cells [70,71]. Likewise, in rat theca cells IGF-I increases P450<sub>scc</sub> mRNA levels and P450<sub>17α</sub> hydroxylase activity [57].

The actions of both IGF-I and IGF-II in granulosa, theca, and luteal cells are mediated by the IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR), which has tyrosine kinase activity and is structurally similar to the IR [56,64]. Given the similarities between the two receptors, it is not surprising that the IGF-IR and IR stimulate many of the same signaling cascades. For example, activation of the IGF-IR leads to phosphorylation of IRS-1 and the subsequent activation of PI3-K and MAPK (Fig. 2, [64], and ref. therein). Interestingly, co-treatment of rat luteal cells with IGF-I and the human chorionic gonadotropin, which binds the LH-R results in the synergistic enhancement of IRS-1 phosphorylation [72] suggesting that phosphorylation of IRS-1 plays an important role in IGF-dependent modulation of steroidogenesis. Furthermore, in vascular smooth muscle cells, IGF-I mediated activation of PI3-K leads to phosphorylation of PKB/Akt while IGF-I dependent activation of MAPK results in phosphorylation of the downstream targets ERK1 and ERK2 [73]. Given the importance of PKB/Akt and ERK1/2 phosphorylation in gonadotropin-dependent ovarian steroidogenesis, these data suggest that IGF-I-dependent modulation of ovarian steroidogenesis is mediated through the activation of the PI3-K and MAPK signaling cascades. However, there is no direct evidence that PKB or ERK are phosphorylated as a result of IGF-I treatment of granulosa, theca, or luteal cells. Also in agreement with studies carried out using insulin, there is evidence that activation of the IGF-IR enhances gonadotropin-dependent signaling through the cAMP/PKA pathway [70,74,75]. For example, IGF-I synergistically enhances LH-dependent accumulation of cAMP in pig granulosa cells [75]. Hirakawa et al. have shown that the synergistically enhanced expression of the LH-R by cAMP and IGF-I is due to increased stability of the LH-R transcript rather than enhanced transcriptional activation of the LH-R promoter by cAMP [71]. The many discrepancies in these IGF-IR signaling studies suggest that further research is required in order to clearly define IGF-I/II-mediated enhancement of gonadotropin-dependent ovarian steroidogenesis.

**Epidemal growth factor**

Epidemal growth factor (EGF) suppresses LH- and FSH-dependent E<sub>2</sub> and T production by the proliferating

granulosa and theca cells, respectively (Table 1, [23,76]). In addition, the related growth factor, transforming growth factor (TGF)-α, has similar actions on granulosa and theca cell steroidogenesis [21]. As was described for the other growth factors, modulation of ovarian E₂ and T synthesis by EGF or TGF-α can be correlated to altered regulation of steroidogenic enzyme expression and activity. For example, EGF inhibits cAMP-dependent accumulation of StAR, P450<sub>scc</sub>, and LH-R transcripts in rat granulosa-lutein cells [77]. Furthermore, EGF suppresses LH- and FSH-stimulated P450<sub>arom</sub> activity to basal levels in human granulosa-lutein cells [78].

Although EGF-dependent suppression of FSH- and LH-dependent E₂ and T production has been clearly documented, the effect of EGF on gonadotropin-dependent P₄ production by the granulosa and luteal cells is variable. There are several apparently conflicting reports which indicate that EGF either inhibits or enhances P₄ production by these cells [23,79–82]. Upon closer examination of these studies, it appears that the actions of EGF are dependent on the developmental stage of the cells studied. That is, before the LH-surge, P₄ synthesis in granulosa cells is inhibited by EGF while after the LH-surge, P₄ production in the luteal cells is enhanced by EGF [82].

The actions of EGF as well as TGF-α are mediated through the EGF-R, which is expressed in the granulosa, theca, and luteal cells of the bovine and human ovary [83–85]. Like the receptors for insulin and IGF, the EGF-R has tyrosine kinase activity, which on activation phosphorylates the EGF-R itself resulting in the initiation of several signaling cascades including PI3-K and MAPK [86]. Although the activation of the PI3-K pathway by EGF has not been characterized in granulosa or theca cells, signaling by EGF through the MAPK family members ERK1 and ERK2 has been examined. In two complementary studies using pig granulosa cells, *in vitro* EGF treatment enhances basal and gonadotropin-dependent phosphorylation of ERK1 and ERK2 [47,87]. While Keel et al. imply that the phosphorylation of ERK is correlated with increased proliferation and therefore decreased steroidogenesis of the granulosa cells [87], Cameron et al. suggest that phosphorylation of this MAPK cascade leads to increased FSH-dependent P₄ production [47]. The discrepancy in these two interpretations emphasizes that EGF/ERK signaling exhibits cell-specific and temporal differences in the mammalian ovary. Like insulin and IGF-I, there is also evidence that EGF modulates gonadotropin-dependent adenylate cyclase activity [23,78,82,88]. However, there are species- and cell-specific differences in EGF modulation of adenylate cyclase as well. For example, while EGF enhances gonadotropin- and forskolin-stimulated adenylate cyclase activity in human luteal cells [82], EGF treatment of rat

granulosa and luteal cells results in desensitization of the LH-R and decreased adenylate cyclase activity [88]. Therefore, the state of cell differentiation must be considered when interpreting the effects of EGF on ovarian steroidogenesis. Taken together, the effects of EGF on ovarian steroidogenesis are complex with different responses related to the cell type, state of cell differentiation, and species under investigation.

### The TGF-β family of proteins

Several members of the TGF-β superfamily of disulfide-linked dimeric glycoproteins are important for modulation of ovarian steroidogenesis ([23,89,90], and ref. therein). Interestingly, each member of this superfamily differentially influences the gonadotropin-dependent expression and activity of select components of the steroidogenic machinery and thereby uniquely regulates the synthesis of specific steroids in granulosa and theca cells (Table 1).

TGF-β1 and TGF-β2 are expressed in the mammalian ovary ([91–94], and ref. therein). In rat granulosa cells, TGF-β enhances E₂ and P₄ synthesis as well as expression of LH- and FSH-Rs ([23], and ref. therein). In rat theca cells, TGF-β1 enhances FSH- and forskolin-stimulated P₄ production and decreases FSH- and forskolin-dependent A production [93]. In addition, TGF-β1 inhibited forskolin-induced accumulation of A while it enhanced forskolin-dependent increases in P₄ synthesis in the human ovarian theca tumor (HOTT) cell culture line [95]. Again, these effects on ovarian steroidogenesis can be correlated to altered expression and activity of the steroidogenic machinery. For example, when HOTT cells were co-treated with TGF-β and forskolin, P450<sub>17α</sub> and StAR mRNA and protein levels were reduced to basal levels of expression [94]. Furthermore, in an adrenal cell line system, TGF-β1 inhibits cAMP-dependent transcriptional activity of the StAR promoter [96].

The actions of TGF-β are mediated through a type I (TβR-I) and a type II (TβR-II) receptor complex. Both TβR-I and TβR-II are expressed in granulosa and theca cells of the mammalian ovary and this expression is either regulated by FSH and EGF or is constitutive, respectively [92]. TGF-β binds to TβR-II, which contains constitutive serine/threonine kinase activity resulting in association of TβR-II and TβR-I and phosphorylation of TβR-I [89]. The phosphorylated TβR-I then associates with the receptor specific signaling molecules Smad-2 or -3 (Fig. 3, [97]). Smad-2 and -3 interact with Smad-4 resulting in a complex of phosphorylated signaling proteins that are translocated to the nucleus and interact with transcription factors such as p300/CBP [97]. Although, the details of this signaling pathway have been defined, it is still unclear how this

phosphorylation of ALK-4, which is also homologous to the TβR-I [100]. Once phosphorylated, the ActRII/ALK-4 heterocomplex interacts with Smad-2 and -3, and thereby activates a cascade similar to the one described for TGF-β (Fig. 3, [97]). Although this mechanism of activin signaling has been well established, the mechanism of inhibin action is more complex. This is due, in large part, to the difficulties in establishing a definitive inhibin receptor. There is evidence that inhibin binds ActRII to block activin signaling [89,98]. However, inhibin has an approximately 20-fold lower affinity for ActRII than activin. Recently, Lewis et al. has demonstrated that the interaction of inhibin with betaglycan enhances the affinity of inhibin for ActRII and also suppresses ActRII interaction with ALK4 providing a more plausible mechanism for disruption of activin signaling [101]. While these experiments provide a mechanism for inhibin-dependent suppression of steroidogenesis, it does not predict a signaling pathway by which inhibin enhances LH-dependent steroid production. To this end, Bernard et al. recently described an inhibin binding protein (InhBP) in rat pituitary, which exhibits the characteristics of an inhibin specific receptor [102]. A related study indicates that the InhBP interacts with ALK-4 in rat pituitary providing a mechanism of action for inhibin signaling [103]. While these studies have provided important clues to the mechanisms of inhibin’s stimulatory actions, they were carried out in rat pituitary model systems and thus inhibin activation of InhBP must be demonstrated in granulosa and theca cells.

**Inhibin and activin**

The most extensively studied members of the TGF-β superfamily that play a role in modulating ovarian steroidogenesis are activin and inhibin ([89,98], and ref. therein). The structurally related activin and inhibin were originally discovered due to their opposing actions on FSH secretion. Inhibin, acting by an endocrine mechanism, suppresses FSH secretion and activin, acting by an autocrine mechanism, enhances FSH secretion from the anterior pituitary [89]. Thus, from these data, it is clear that these two growth factors directly impact FSH-stimulated steroidogenesis.

Although the ability of activin and inhibin to regulate FSH secretion is well documented, there is also evidence that these factors act locally in the follicle to modulate gonadotropin-stimulated ovarian steroidogenesis (Table 1). In proliferating granulosa cells, activin enhances FSH-R expression resulting in synergistically enhanced P450<sub>arom</sub> activity and E<sub>2</sub> and P<sub>4</sub> production ([98], and ref. therein). Although a report in rat granulosa cell suggests that inhibin reduces FSH-dependent P450<sub>arom</sub> activity, it is unclear if this action of inhibin occurs in other species [98]. In theca cells, the roles of activin and inhibin are reversed with inhibin increasing and activin decreasing LH-dependent androgen synthesis [98,99]. In addition the modulation of ovarian steroidogenesis by activin can be reversed by the binding protein follistatin which limits the bioavailability of activin ([98], and ref. therein).

Activin-mediated effects on steroidogenesis are accomplished through binding ActRII, which is homologous to the TβR-II resulting in association with and

**The bone morphogenic proteins and growth differentiation factor (GDF)-9**

The largest group of factors within the TGF-β superfamily is the bone morphogenic proteins BMPs ([90,97], and ref. therein). Recently, several studies have demonstrated that a subset of these proteins including BMP-4, -6, -7, and -15 are expressed in the granulosa, theca, and/or oocyte of an individual ovarian follicle and selectively modulate follicular steroidogenesis [90,104,105]. Specifically, BMP-4 decreases FSH-dependent A and 17OH-P<sub>4</sub> production and enhances FSH-stimulated P<sub>4</sub> production in HOTT cells [104]. In contrast, BMP-4 inhibits FSH-stimulated P<sub>4</sub> production and enhance FSH-dependent E<sub>2</sub> production in rat and sheep granulosa cells [90,106] suggesting that BMP-4 has cell-specific effects on steroidogenesis. Ovarian-derived BMP-7 also inhibits P<sub>4</sub> and enhances E<sub>2</sub> synthesis by the gonadotropins in rat granulosa cells [90] while pituitary-synthesized BMP-7 increases FSH secretion [107]. Finally, both BMP-6 and BMP-15 (GDF-9B), which are expressed predominately in the oocyte ([108,109], and ref. therein) inhibit FSH-dependent stimulation of P<sub>4</sub> synthesis in granulosa cells but do not effect FSH-induced E<sub>2</sub> synthesis [110,111].

BMP-4 inhibition of LH-induced A production can be correlated to a suppression of forskolin-stimulated P450<sub>17α</sub> protein and mRNA levels in HOTT cells [104]. Furthermore, the effects of BMP-6 and BMP-15 on P<sub>4</sub> production in rat granulosa cells is associated with a decrease in FSH-stimulated StAR and P450<sub>scc</sub> transcript levels [110, 111]. Interestingly, Otsuka et al. have shown that the BMP-15 mediated reduction of StAR and P450<sub>scc</sub> expression is due to downregulation of the FSH-R expression [111] while BMP-6 mediated changes in StAR and P450<sub>scc</sub> levels occurs at a point distal to adenylate cyclase activity [110]. Several related studies have also shown that BMP-4 does not effect FSH-stimulated StAR, P450<sub>scc</sub>, or 3β-HSD expression in the HOTT cells [104] and BMP-6 and -15 do not alter FSH-stimulated expression of P450<sub>arom</sub> in rat granulosa cells [110, 111] providing further evidence that the BMP proteins selectively alter steroidogenesis in a cell-specific manner.

Another member of the TGF-β superfamily, which is expressed exclusively in the mammalian oocyte and exhibits high homology to BMP-15, is GDF-9 [108, 109]. Like the BMPs, the oocyte-derived GDF-9 acts on the granulosa and theca cells to modulate ovarian steroidogenesis. For example, GDF-9 inhibits forskolin-dependent increases in P<sub>4</sub> synthesis but augments forskolin-stimulated A production in immature rat theca cells [112]. Furthermore, the GDF-9 dependent increase in A synthesis has been correlated to increased expression of P450<sub>17α</sub> protein [113]. In rat and human granulosa cells, GDF-9 suppresses FSH-dependent enhancement of E<sub>2</sub> and/or P<sub>4</sub> synthesis [114], L. Christenson and N. Yamamoto, personal communication). Consistent with these results, our laboratory has shown that gonadotropin-dependent StAR expression is reduced by *in vitro* treatment of human granulosa cells with GDF-9 (L. Christenson and N. Yamamoto, personal communication). Conversely, Elvin et al. have demonstrated that *in vitro* treatment of mouse granulosa cells with recombinant GDF-9 results in increased basal and FSH-dependent levels of P<sub>4</sub> production [115]. Although this finding is somewhat surprising given the role of GDF-9 in granulosa cell proliferation, these same authors have demonstrated that basal and FSH-induced StAR expression is enhanced by recombinant GDF-9 [115] providing a mechanism for increased P<sub>4</sub> production in this model system and suggesting species-dependent differences in GDF-9 function in granulosa cells.

The ability of the BMPs to bring about changes in follicular steroidogenesis is mediated by two membrane receptors, which activate the Smad signaling cascade. Shimasaki et al. have shown that two type I BMP receptors, BMPR-IA and BMPR-IB, and one type two BMP receptor, BMPR-II, are expressed in the rat ovary

and that these receptors mediate the actions of the BMPs [90]. Like the other TGF-β receptor family members, ligand-bound BMPR-II interacts with either BMPR-IA or -IB resulting in the association of the type I receptors with Smad-1, -5, or -8 and activation of downstream targets (Fig. 3, [97]). Although it is likely that GDF-9 actions are mediated through a similar cell surface receptor, a specific receptor for GDF-9 has not yet been identified. However, given the high homology between GDF-9 and BMP-15 ([105, 109], and ref. therein), it is reasonable to speculate that GDF-9 interacts with the BMP receptors and thereby activates the Smad signaling pathway.

Although the regulation of ovarian steroidogenesis by the BMPs and GDF-9 is a relatively new area of research, the importance of these TGF-β superfamily members and in particular of the oocyte-derived factors GDF-9 and BMP-15 on folliculogenesis and ovulation has been emphasized by several *in vivo* model systems. For example, when the GDF-9 gene is disrupted in the mouse, folliculogenesis is arrested at the primary stage ([109] and ref. therein). In related studies, disruption of the BMP-15 gene or the disruption of both BMP-15 and GDF-9 in mice also leads to subfertility or infertility, respectively in these mice [116]. Thus, these studies provide additional evidence that GDF-9 and BMP-15 play an important role in the proliferation and differentiation of follicular cells. Interestingly, in the Inverdale sheep there is a natural mutation in the BMP-15 gene, which results in infertility in animals which are homozygous for this mutation but leads to increased ovulation rates in animals which are heterozygous for the gene mutation [117]. In addition, a natural point mutation in the BMPR-IB gene in the Booroola Merino sheep leads to increased ovulatory rates in animals containing a mutation in either one or both alleles of this gene [106]. These dose-dependent effects of BMP-15 and BMPR-IB indicate that BMP-15 and possibly GDF-9 not only influence the early stages of folliculogenesis but also regulate the timing and extent of follicular maturation and ovulation. Taken together, these studies underscore the importance of understanding the signaling pathways activated by these oocyte-derived factors and emphasize the important roles that growth factor-stimulated signaling pathways play in regulating steroidogenesis and fertility.

## Proinflammatory Cytokines on Modulate Gonadotropin-Dependent Steroidogenesis

Although cytokines have traditionally been associated with the inflammatory response, the expression of several
cytokines including tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) and interleukin-1 (IL-1) in the ovaries of multiple species suggests that they play an important role in normal ovarian function ([118], and ref. therein). Since TNFα and IL-1 are expressed in the granulosa cells, theca cells, luteal cells, and/or oocytes of the mammalian ovary, the roles of these factors on folliculogenesis and steroidogenesis have been characterized [118]. In addition, proinflammatory cytokines released by immune cells have been implicated in the process of luteolysis [3]. The suppression of steroidogenic protein synthesis may account in part for the decline in luteal steroidogenesis in the absence of conception.

In general, TNFα and IL-1 influence proliferation of granulosa and theca cells during folliculogenesis, differentiation of granulosa cells to luteal cells after the LH surge, and regression of the corpus luteum [118, 119]. Subsequently, these factors also bring about changes in gonadotropin-dependent steroidogenesis. Specifically, TNFα decreases hCG- or LH-stimulated but not basal androsterone or androstenedione biosynthesis, respectively in rat theca cells [120–122]. In immature rat granulosa cells TNFα decreases FSH-dependent P450 arom activity and E₂ and P₄ production [123]. Similarly, IL-1 inhibits gonadotropin-stimulated androgen synthesis in rat and human theca cells ([118, 124] and ref. therein) and E₂ and P₄ synthesis in rat, human, pig, and cow granulosa cells [118]. Studies by Andreani et al. and Donesky et al. indicate that theca cells treated with TNFα or IL-1β metabolize pregnenolone to forms of androgens and/or progestins which exhibit reduced bioactivity [120, 125] providing a unique and easily reversible mechanism for cytokine regulation of steroid levels in the growing follicle. In addition to this method of TNFα and IL-1 suppression of gonadotropin-dependent A, T, E₂, and P₄ synthesis, Li et al. have shown that TNFα and IL-1 also inhibit cAMP-mediated expression of P450₁₇α in MA-10 Leydig cells ([126], and ref. therein). However, the effect of TNFα and IL-1 on expression of the steroidogenic machinery in granulosa, theca, and luteal cells is not well defined.

The actions of TNFα and IL-1 on follicular cells are mediated through membrane receptors. Both the type I (TNFRI) and type II (TNFRII) TNFα receptors and the IL-1R are expressed in the mammalian ovary [127, 128]. In the mouse the TNFRI gene has been disrupted resulting in an animal, which exhibits increased basal P₄ synthesis and an inability to attenuate LH-dependent increases in E₂ or P₄ production compared to wild type animals [129]. Interestingly, the TNFRI null mice have an increased ovulatory rate but a decreased fertility rate suggesting that TNFα prevents premature ovulation of immature oocytes.

Although the signaling pathways utilized by IL-1 to

bring about changes in cell function have not been described, there are limited reports of TNFα activation of several signal transduction cascades. In rat theca cells, TNFα modestly inhibited LH- or hCG-dependent cAMP accumulation indicating that this is not the primary signaling pathway altered by TNFα [120, 122]. Furthermore, Zachow et al. suggest that decreased accumulation of cAMP by gonadotropin and TNFα treated cells is due to decreased LH-R numbers. In addition, TNFα seems to activate the MAPK cascade in bovine luteal cells [130]. However, the effect of MAPK activation on steroidogenesis was modest suggesting that, like cAMP, this is not a primary pathway of TNFα action. Alternatively, PKC inhibitors block the suppressive effects of TNFα on P450₁₇α transcription in MA-10 cells indicating that the TNFα/TNFR complex may activate this pathway in theca cells to bring about similar effects [126]. Furthermore, Zachow and Terranova imply that TNFα-dependent activation of PKC requires EGFR tyrosine kinase activity [121]. This activation of PKC seems to be important for morphological changes in theca cells and could be correlated to decreased androgen biosynthesis. TNFα also activates the nitric oxide–cGMP pathway in bovine theca cells [131]. However, the effect of cGMP generation on signaling pathways in the ovary or the exact role of cGMP in TNFα modulation of steroidogenesis has not been defined.

### Conclusions

As molecular biology techniques become more advanced, the mechanisms of gonadotropin and growth factor regulation of ovarian steroidogenesis are unfolding. It is evident from the collection of data presented here that numerous signaling pathways are required to bring about the appropriate balance of ovarian steroid synthesis. Furthermore, the activation of additional signaling cascades such as the Wnt signaling pathway and small GTPases may play a role in ovarian function and steroidogenesis [17, 18, 132]. Although these multiple signaling pathways have been shown to regulate ovarian steroidogenesis individually, the interaction or cross-talk between these pathways which is also essential for the modulation of steroid synthesis remains poorly understood. Furthermore, the expression of ligands, receptors, and signaling molecules within the ovary is regulated spatially providing an additional layer of complexity to the regulation of steroidogenesis by these signaling pathways [19]. These multiple levels of complexity provide several points of regulation to this critical function of steroidogenesis by the ovary. As we begin to understand the importance of these signaling pathways in normal ovarian function, it is also becoming
clear that disruption or dysregulation of gonadotropin-
and/or growth factor-stimulated signaling cascades may
lead to disorders related to infertility. For example, in
women with polycystic ovary syndrome, which is
characterized by hyperandrogenism and anovulation,
insulin signaling appears to be abnormal with peripheral
tissues such as muscle and fat exhibiting insulin
resistance, while theca cells exhibit insulin hypersensi-
tivity [65, 133, 134]. Thus, the elucidation of the signaling
mechanisms mediating insulin's effects on steroido-
genesis represents an important topic of inquiry as it may
disclose the underlying molecular pathology of poly-
cystic ovary syndrome. The studies described in this
review indicate that there is still much to be learned
about the regulation of ovarian steroidogenesis by these
multiple signal transduction pathways.

### Acknowledgment

We would like to thank Lane Christenson for his helpful
comments during the writing of this manuscript. Research
conducted in the author's laboratory was supported by
NIH grants HD 34449, HD 06274, and HD 07305.

### References

1. McGee EA, Hsueh AJ. Initial and cyclic recruitment of ovarian
   follicles. *Endocr Rev* 2000; 21: 200–214.
2. Stocco DM, Clark BJ. Regulation of the acute production of
   steroids in steroidogenic cells. *Endocr Rev* 1996; 17: 221–244.
3. Devoto L, Vega M, Kohen P, Castro A, Castro O, Christenson LK,
   Carvallo P, Strauss JF, III. Endocrine and paracrine-autocrine
   regulation of the human corpus luteum during the mid-luteal
   phase. *J Reprod Fertil Suppl* 2000; 55: 13–20.
4. Mahesh VB, Brann DW. Regulation of the preovulatory gonado-
   tropin surge by endogenous steroids. *Steroids* 1998; 63: 616–629.
5. Chryssikopoulos A. The potential role of intraovarian factors on
   ovarian androgen production. *Ann NY Acad Sci* 2000; 900: 184–192.
6. Fauser BC, Van Heusden AM. Manipulation of human ovarian
   function: physiological concepts and clinical consequences.
   *Endocr Rev* 1997; 18: 71–106.
7. Vendola KA, Zhou J, Adesanya OO, Weil SJ, Bondy CA. Androgens
   stimulate early stages of follicular growth in the
   primate ovary. *J Clin Invest* 1998; 101: 2622–2629.
8. Yong EL, Baird DT, Yates R, Reichert, LE Jr, Hillier SG. Hormonal
   regulation of the growth and steroidogenic function of human
   granulosa cells. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 1992; 74: 842–849.
9. Reaven E, Tsai L, Azhar S. Intracellular events in the ‘‘selective’’
   transport of lipoprotein-derived cholesteryl esters. *J Biol Chem*
   1996; 271: 16208–16217.
10. Strauss JF, III, Paavola LG, Rosenblum MF, Tanaka T, Gwynne JT.
    Utilization of lipoprotein-carried cholesterol for steroidogenesis by
    rat luteal tissue. In: *Regulation of Target Cell Responsiveness*.
    Plenum Publishing Corporation, 1984: 361–390.
11. Strauss JF, III, Kallen CB, Christenson LK, Watari H, Devoto L,
    Arakane F, Kiriakidou M, Sugawara T. The steroidogenic acute
    regulatory protein (StAR): a window into the complexities of
    intracellular cholesterol trafficking. *Recent Prog Horm Res*
    1999; 54: 369–394.
12. Stocco DM. StAR protein and the regulation of steroid hormone
    biosynthesis. *Annu Rev Physiol* 2001; 63: 193–213.
13. Christenson LK, Strauss JF, III. Steroidogenic acute regulatory
    protein (StAR) and the intramitochondrial translocation of
    cholesterol. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 2000; 1529: 175–187.
14. Miller WL. Molecular biology of steroid hormone synthesis.
    *Endocr Rev* 1988; 9: 295–318.
15. Hanukoglu I. Steroidogenic enzymes: Structure, function, and
    role in regulation of steroid hormone biosynthesis. *J Steroid
    Biochem Molec Biol* 1992; 43: 779–804.
16. Penning TM. Molecular endocrinology of hydroxysteroid dehy-
    drogenases. *Endocr Rev* 1997; 18: 281–305.
17. Richards JS. New signaling pathways for hormones and cyclic
    adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate action in endocrine cells. *Mol
    Endocrinol* 2001; 15: 209–218.
18. Richards JS. Perspective: The ovarian follicle—a perspective in
    2001. *Endocrinology* 2001; 142: 2184–2193.
19. Amsterdam A, Gold RS, Hosokawa K, Yoshida Y, Sasson R, Jung
    Y, Kotsuji F. Crosstalk among multiple signaling pathways
    controlling ovarian cell death. *Trends Endocrinol Metab*
    1999; 10: 255–262.
20. Yong EL, Hillier SG, Turner M, Baird DT, Ng SC, Bongso A,
    Ratnam SS. Differential regulation of cholesterol side-chain
    cleavage (P450<sub>sc</sub>) and aromatase (P450<sub>arom</sub>) enzyme mRNA
    expression by gonadotrophins and cyclic AMP in human
    granulosa cells. *J Mol Endocrinol* 1994; 12: 239–249.
21. Leung PC, Steele GL. Intracellular signaling in the gonads.
    *Endocr Rev* 1992; 13: 476–498.
22. Richards JS, Fitzpatrick SL, Clemens JW, Morris JK, Alliston T,
    Sirois J. Ovarian cell differentiation: A cascade of multiple
    hormones, cellular signals, and regulated genes. *Recent Prog
    Horm Res* 1995; 50: 223–254.
23. Moley KH, Schreiber JR. Ovarian follicular growth, ovulation and
    atresia. *Endocrine, paracrine and autocrine regulation*. *Adv Exp
    Med Biol* 1995; 377: 103–119.
24. Simoni M, Gromoll J, Nieschlag E. The follicle-stimulating
    hormone receptor: Biochemistry, molecular biology, physiology,
    and pathophysiology. *Endocr Rev* 1997; 18: 739–773.
25. Christenson LK, Johnson PF, McAllister JM, Strauss JF, III.
    CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins regulate expression of the
    human steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) gene. *J Biol
    Chem* 1999; 274: 26591–26598.
26. Sugawara T, Holt JA, Kiriakidou M, Strauss JF, III. Steroidogenic
    factor 1-dependent promoter activity of the human steroidogenic
    acute regulatory protein (StAR) gene. *Biochemistry*
    1996; 35: 9052–9059.
27. Sugawara T, Kiriakidou M, McAllister JM, Holt JA, Arakane F,
    Strauss JF, III. Regulation of expression of the steroidogenic acute
    regulatory protein (StAR) gene: a central role for steroidogenic
    factor 1. *Steroids* 1997; 62: 5–9.
28. Arakane F, King SR, Du Y, Kallen CB, Walsh LP, Watari H,
    Stocco DM, Strauss JF, III. Phosphorylation of steroidogenic
    acute regulatory protein (StAR) modulates its steroidogenic
    activity. *J Biol Chem* 1997; 272: 32656–32662.
29. Christenson LK, Stouffer RL, Strauss JF, III. Quantitative analysis
    of the hormone-induced hyperacetylation of histone H3 associated
    with the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene promoter.
    *J Biol Chem* 2001; 276: 27392–27399.
30. Touyz RM, Jiang L, and Sairam MR. Follicle-stimulating
    hormone mediated calcium signaling by the alternatively spliced
    growth factor type I receptor. *Biol Reprod* 2000; 62: 1067–1074.

31. Babu PS, Krishnamurthy H, Chedrese PJ, Sairam MR. Activation of extracellular-regulated kinase pathways in ovarian granulosa cells by the novel growth factor type 1 follicle-stimulating hormone receptor. Role in hormone signaling and cell proliferation. *J Biol Chem* 2000;275:27615–27626.

32. Nishimori K, Dunkel L, Hsueh AJ, Yamoto M, Nakano R. Expression of luteinizing hormone and chorionic gonadotropin receptor messenger ribonucleic acid in human corpora lutea during menstrual cycle and pregnancy. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 1995;80:1444–1448.

33. Kawate N, Okuda K. Coordinated expression of splice variants for luteinizing hormone receptor messenger RNA during the development of bovine corpora lutea. *Mol Reprod Dev* 1998;51:66–75.

34. Bacich DJ, Rohan RM, Norman RJ, Rodgers RJ. Characterization and relative abundance of alternatively spliced luteinizing hormone receptor messenger ribonucleic acid in the ovine ovary. *Endocrinology* 1994;135:735–744.

35. Aatsinki JT, Pietila EM, Lakkakorpi JT, Rajaniemi HJ. Expression of the LH/CG receptor gene in rat ovarian tissue is regulated by an extensive alternative splicing of the primary transcript. *Mol Cell Endocrinol* 1992;84:127–135.

36. Herrlich A, Kuhn B, Grosse R, Schmid A, Schultz G, Gudermann T. Involvement of Gs and Gi proteins in dual coupling of the luteinizing hormone receptor to adenylyl cyclase and phospholipase C. *J Biol Chem* 1996;271:16764–16772.

37. Kuhn B, Gudermann T. The luteinizing hormone receptor activates phospholipase C via preferential coupling to Gi2. *Biochemistry* 1999;38:12490–12498.

38. Flores JA, Aguirre C, Sharma OP, Veldhuis JD. Luteinizing hormone (LH) stimulates both intracellular calcium ion ([Ca2+]) mobilization and transmembrane cation influx in single ovarian (granulosa) cells: Recruitment as a cellular mechanism of LH-[Ca2+]i dose response. *Endocrinology* 1998;139:3606–3612.

39. Quintana J, Hipkin RW, Sanchez-Yague J, Ascoli M. Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and a phorbol ester stimulate the phosphorylation of the FSH receptor in intact cells. *J Biol Chem* 1994;269:8772–8779.

40. Maizels ET, Cottom J, Jones JC, Hunzicker-Dunn M. Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) activates the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, inducing small heat shock protein phosphorylation and cell rounding in immature rat ovarian granulosa cells. *Endocrinology* 1998;139:3353–3356.

41. Maizels ET, Mukherjee A, Sithanandam G, Peters CA, Cottom J, Mayo KE, Hunzicker-Dunn M. Developmental regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated kinases-2 and -3 (MAPKAPK-2/-3) in vivo during corpus luteum formation in the rat. *Mol Endocrinol* 2001;15:716–733.

42. Alliston TN, Maiyar AC, Buse P, Firestone GL, Richards JS. Follicle stimulating hormone-regulated expression of serum/glucocorticoid-inducible kinase in rat ovarian granulosa cells: A functional role for the Sp1 family in promoter activity. *Mol Endocrinol* 1997;11:1934–1949.

43. Alliston TN, Gonzalez-Robayna IJ, Buse P, Firestone GL, Richards JS. Expression and localization of serum/glucocorticoid-inducible kinase in the rat ovary: Relation to follicular growth and differentiation. *Endocrinology* 2000;141:385–395.

44. Gonzalez-Robayna IJ, Falender AE, Ochsner S, Firestone GL, Richards JS. Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) stimulates phosphorylation and activation of protein kinase B (PKB/Akt) and serum and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase (Sgk): Evidence for A kinase-independent signaling by FSH in granulosa cells. *Mol Endocrinol* 2000;14:1283–1300.

45. Seger R, Hanoch T, Rosenberg R, Dantes A, Merz WE, Strauss JF III, Amsterdam A. The ERK signaling cascade inhibits

gonadotropin-stimulated steroidogenesis. *J Biol Chem* 2001;276:13957–13964.

46. Gyles SL, Burns CJ, Whitehouse BJ, Sugden D, Marsh PJ, Persaud SJ, Jones PM. ERKs regulate cyclic AMP-induced steroid synthesis through transcription of the steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) gene. *J Biol Chem* 2001;15:15.

47. Cameron MR, Foster JS, Bukovsky A, Wimalasena J. Activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases by gonadotropins and cyclic adenosine 5'-monophosphates in porcine granulosa cells. *Biol Reprod* 1996;55:111–119.

48. Ascoli M. Functional consequences of the phosphorylation of the gonadotropin receptors. *Biochem Pharmacol* 1996;52:1647–1655.

49. Troispoux C, Guillou F, Elalouf JM, Firsov D, Iacovelli L, De Blasi A, Combarous Y, Reiter E. Involvement of G protein-coupled receptor kinases and arrestins in desensitization to follicle-stimulating hormone action. *Mol Endocrinol* 1999;13:1599–1614.

50. Lazari MF, Bertrand JE, Nakamura K, Liu X, Krupnick JG, Benovic JL, Ascoli M. Mutation of individual serine residues in the C-terminal tail of the lutropin/choriogonadotropin receptor reveal distinct structural requirements for agonist-induced uncoupling and agonist-induced internalization. *J Biol Chem* 1998;273:18316–18324.

51. Mukherjee S, Palczewski K, Gurevich V, Benovic JL, Banga JP, Hunzicker-Dunn M. A direct role for arrestins in desensitization of the luteinizing hormone/choriogonadotropin receptor in porcine ovarian follicular membranes. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1999;96:493–498.

52. Mukherjee S, Casanova JE, Hunzicker-Dunn M. Desensitization of the luteinizing hormone/choriogonadotropin receptor in ovarian follicular membranes is inhibited by catalytically inactive ARNO(+). *J Biol Chem* 2001;276:6524–6528.

53. Pierce KL, Luttrell LM, Lefkowitz RJ. New mechanisms in heptahelical receptor signaling to mitogen activated protein kinase cascades. *Oncogene* 2001;20:1532–1539.

54. McDonald PH, Chow CW, Miller WE, Laporte SA, Field ME, Lin FT, Davis RJ, Lefkowitz RJ. β-arrestin 2: a receptor-regulated MAPK scaffold for the activation of JNK3. *Science* 2000;290:1574–1577.

55. Maudsley S, Pierce KL, Zamah AM, Miller WE, Ahn S, Daaka Y, Lefkowitz RJ, Luttrell LM. The β(2)-adrenergic receptor mediates extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation via assembly of a multi-receptor complex with the epidermal growth factor receptor. *J Biol Chem* 2000;275:9572–9580.

56. Poretsky L, Cataldo NA, Rosenwaks Z, Giudice LC. The insulin-related ovarian regulatory system in health and disease. *Endocr Rev* 1999;20:535–582.

57. Franks S, Gilling-Smith C, Watson H, Willis D. Insulin action in the normal and polycystic ovary. *Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am* 1999;28:361–378.

58. Sekar N, Garney JC, Veldhuis JD. Mechanisms underlying the steroidogenic synergy of insulin and luteinizing hormone in porcine granulosa cells: joint amplification of pivotal sterol-regulatory genes encoding the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor, steroidogenic acute regulatory protein and cytochrome P450 side-chain cleavage (P450scc) enzyme. *Mol Cell Endocrinol* 2000;159:25–35.

59. Mamluk R, Greber Y, Meidan R. Hormonal regulation of messenger ribonucleic acid expression for steroidogenic factor-1, steroidogenic acute regulatory protein, and cytochrome P450 side-chain cleavage in bovine luteal cells. *Biol Reprod* 1999;60:628–634.

60. Devoto L, Christenson LK, McAllister JM, Makrigiannakis A, Strauss JF III. Insulin and insulin-like growth factor-I and -II

modulate human granulosa-lutein cell steroidogenesis: Enhancement of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) expression. Mol Hum Reprod 1999;5:1003–1010.

61. Sekar N, Veldhuis JD. Concerted transcriptional activation of the low density lipoprotein receptor gene by insulin and luteinizing hormone in cultured porcine granulosa-luteal cells: possible convergence of protein kinase A, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways. Endocrinology 2001;142:2921–2928.

62. Zhang G, Garney JC, Veldhuis JD. Interactive stimulation by luteinizing hormone and insulin of the steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein and 17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17) genes in porcine theca cells. Endocrinology 2000;141:2735–2742.

63. Willis D, Franks S. Insulin action in human granulosa cells from normal and polycystic ovaries is mediated by the insulin receptor and not the type-I insulin-like growth factor receptor. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:3788–3790.

64. Blakesley VA, Scrimgeour A, Esposito D, Le Roith D. Signaling via the insulin-like growth factor-I receptor: Does it differ from insulin receptor signaling? Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 1996;7:153–159.

65. Dunaif A, Segal KR, Shelley DR, Green G, Dobrjansky A, Liccholai T. Evidence for distinctive and intrinsic defects in insulin action in polycystic ovary syndrome. Diabetes 1992;41:1257–1266.

66. Dunaif A. Insulin action in the polycystic ovary syndrome. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1999;28:341–359.

67. Poretsky L, Seto-Young D, Shrestha A, Dhillon S, Mirjany M, Liu HC, Yih MC, Rosenwaks Z. Phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase-independent insulin action pathway(s) in the human ovary. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001;86:3115–3119.

68. Nestler JE, Jakubowicz DJ, de Vargas AF, Brik C, Quintero N, Medina F. Insulin stimulates testosterone biosynthesis by human thecal cells from women with polycystic ovary syndrome by activating its own receptor and using inositolgycan mediators as the signal transduction system. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998;83:2001–2005.

69. Giudice LC. Insulin-like growth factor family in Graafian follicle development and function. J Soc Gynecol Investig 2001;8:S26–S29.

70. deMoura MD, Choi D, Adashi EY, Payne DW. Insulin-like growth factor-I-mediated amplification of follicle-stimulating hormone-supported progesterone accumulation by cultured rat granulosa cells: Enhancement of steroidogenic enzyme activity and expression. Biol Reprod 1997;56:946–953.

71. Hirakawa T, Minegishi T, Abe K, Kishi H, Ibuki Y, Miyamoto K. A role of insulin-like growth factor I in luteinizing hormone receptor expression in granulosa cells. Endocrinology 1999;140:4965–4971.

72. Talavera F, Chen Z, Menon KM. IRS-I expression on the luteinized rat ovary: IGF-I and cyclic AMP effects on IRS-I tyrosine phosphorylation. Biochim Biophys Acta 1996;1310:10–18.

73. Duan C, Liimatta MB, Bottum OL. Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I regulates IGF-binding protein-5 gene expression through the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, protein kinase B/Akt, and p70 S6 kinase signaling pathway. J Biol Chem 1999;274:37147–37153.

74. Balasubramanian K, Lavoie HA, Garney JC, Stocco DM, Veldhuis JD. Regulation of porcine granulosa cell steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) by insulin-like growth factor I: Synergism with follicle-stimulating hormone or protein kinase A agonist. Endocrinology 1997;138:433–439.

75. LaVoie HA, Garney JC, Veldhuis JD. Mechanisms of insulin-

like growth factor I augmentation of follicle-stimulating hormone-induced porcine steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene promoter activity in granulosa cells. Endocrinology 1999;140:146–153.

76. Tonetta SA, diZerega GS. Intragonal regulation of follicular maturation. Endocr Rev 1989;10:205–229.

77. Pescador N, Stocco DM, Murphy BD. Growth factor modulation of steroidogenic acute regulatory protein and luteinization in the pig ovary. Biol Reprod 1999;60:1453–1461.

78. Misajon A, Hutchinson P, Lolatgis N, Trounson AO, Almahbobi G. The mechanism of action of epidermal growth factor and transforming growth factor alpha on aromatase activity in granulosa cells from polycystic ovaries. Mol Hum Reprod 1999;5:96–103.

79. Murray JF, Downing JA, Evans G, Findlay JK, Scaramuzzi RJ. Epidermal growth factor acts directly on the sheep ovary in vivo to inhibit oestradiol-17β and inhibin secretion and enhance progesterone secretion. J Endocrinol 1993;137:253–264.

80. Li Z, Johnson AL. Regulation of P450 cholesterol side-chain cleavage messenger ribonucleic acid expression and progesterone production in hen granulosa cells. Biol Reprod 1993;49:463–469.

81. Haynes-Johnson D, Lai MT, Campen C, Palmer S. Diverse effects of tyrosine kinase inhibitors on follicle-stimulating hormone-stimulated estradiol and progesterone production from rat granulosa cells in serum-containing medium and serum-free medium containing epidermal growth factor. Biol Reprod 1999;61:147–153.

82. Budnik LT, Mukhopadhyay AK. Modulatory action of epidermal growth factor on differentiated human granulosa lutein cells: Cross-talk between ligand activated receptors for EGF and gonadotropin. Mol Cell Endocrinol 1996;124:141–150.

83. Tamura M, Sasano H, Suzuki T, Fukaya T, Funayama Y, Takayama K, Takaya R, Yajima A. Expression of epidermal growth factors and epidermal growth factor receptor in normal cycling human ovaries. Hum Reprod 1995;10:1891–1896.

84. Qu J, Nisolle M, Donnez J. Expression of transforming growth factor-alpha, epidermal growth factor, and epidermal growth factor receptor in follicles of human ovarian tissue before and after cryopreservation. Fertil Steril 2000;74:113–121.

85. Maruo T, Ladines-Llave CA, Samoto T, Matsuo H, Manalo AS, Ito H, Mochizuki M. Expression of epidermal growth factor and its receptor in the human ovary during follicular growth and regression. Endocrinology 1993;132:924–931.

86. Carpenter G, Cohen S. Epidermal growth factor. J Biol Chem 1990;265:7709–7712.

87. Keel BA, Hildebrandt JM, May JV, Davis JS. Effects of epidermal growth factor on the tyrosine phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinases in monolayer cultures of porcine granulosa cells. Endocrinology 1995;136:1197–1204.

88. Lamm ML, Rajagopalan-Gupta RM, Hunzicker-Dunn M. Epidermal growth factor-induced heterologous desensitization of the luteinizing hormone/choriogonadotropin receptor in a cell-free membrane preparation is associated with the tyrosine phosphorylation of the epidermal growth factor receptor. Endocrinology 1999;140:29–36.

89. Gaddy-Kurten D, Tsuchida K, Vale W. Activins and the receptor serine kinase superfamily. Recent Prog Horm Res 1995;50:109–129.

90. Shimasaki S, Zachow RJ, Li D, Kim H, Iemura S, Ueno N, Sampath K, Chang RJ, Erickson GF. A functional bone morphogenetic protein system in the ovary. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999;96:7282–7287.

91. May JV, Turzynski CJ, Ramos L, Mau YH. Differential involvement of protein kinase C in the regulation of transforming

growth factor-β (TGF-β) secretion by porcine theca and granulosa cells in vitro. *Endocrinology* 1995;136:1319–1322.

92. Roy SK, Kole AR. Ovarian transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) receptors: In-vitro effects of follicle stimulating hormone, epidermal growth factor and TGF-beta on receptor expression in human preantral follicles. *Mol Hum Reprod* 1998;4:207–214.

93. Hernandez ER, Hurwitz A, Payne DW, Dharmarajan AM, Purchio AF, Adashi EY. Transforming growth factor-beta 1 inhibits ovarian androgen production: gene expression, cellular localization, mechanisms(s), and site(s) of action. *Endocrinology* 1990;127:2804–2811.

94. Attia GR, Dooley CA, Rainey WE, Carr BR. Transforming growth factor beta inhibits steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein expression in human ovarian thecal cells. *Mol Cell Endocrinol* 2000;170:123–129.

95. Carr BR, McGee EA, Sawetawan C, Clyne CD, Rainey WE. The effect of transforming growth factor-beta on steroidogenesis and expression of key steroidogenic enzymes with a human ovarian thecal-like tumor cell model. *Am J Obstet Gynecol* 1996;174:1109–1116; discussion 1116–1117.

96. Brand C, Nury D, Chambaz EM, Feige JJ, Bailly S. Transcriptional regulation of the gene encoding the StAR protein in the human adrenocortical cell line, H295R by cAMP and TGFβ1. *Endocr Res* 2000;26:1045–1053.

97. Itoh S, Itoh F, Goumans MJ, Ten Dijke P. Signaling of transforming growth factor-β family members through Smad proteins. *Eur J Biochem* 2000;267:6954–6967.

98. Knight PG. Roles of inhibins, activins, and follistatin in the female reproductive system. *Front Neuroendocrinol* 1996;17:476–509.

99. Knight PG, Glister C. Potential local regulatory functions of inhibins, activins and follistatin in the ovary. *Reproduction* 2001;121:503–512.

100. Pangas SA, Woodruff TK. Activin signal transduction pathways. *Trends Endocrinol Metab* 2000;11:309–314.

101. Lewis KA, Gray PC, Blount AL, MacConell LA, Wiater E, Bilezikjian LM, Vale W. Betaglycan binds inhibin and can mediate functional antagonism of activin signalling. *Nature* 2000;404:411–414.

102. Bernard DJ, Woodruff TK. Inhibin binding protein in rats: Alternative transcripts and regulation in the pituitary across the estrous cycle. *Mol Endocrinol* 2001;15:654–667.

103. Chapman SC, Woodruff TK. Modulation of activin signal transduction by inhibin B and inhibin-binding protein (InhBP). *Mol Endocrinol* 2001;15:668–679.

104. Dooley CA, Attia GR, Rainey WE, Moore DR, Carr BR. Bone morphogenetic protein inhibits ovarian androgen production. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 2000;85:3331–8337.

105. Otsuka F, Yao Z, Lee T, Yamamoto S, Erickson GF, Shimasaki S. Bone morphogenetic protein-15. Identification of target cells and biological functions. *J Biol Chem* 2000;275:39523–39528.

106. Mulsant P, Lecerf F, Fabre S, Schibler L, Monget P, Lanneluc I, Pisselet C, Riguet J, Monniaux D, Callebaut I, Cribiu E, Thimonier J, Teyssier J, Bodin L, Cognié Y, Chitowr N, Elsen J-M. Mutation in bone morphogenetic protein receptor-IB is associated with increased ovulation rate in Booroola Merino ewes. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2001;98:5104–5109.

107. Huang HJ, Wu JC, Su P, Zhironov O, Miller WL. A novel role for bone morphogenetic proteins in the synthesis of follicle-stimulating hormone. *Endocrinology* 2001;142:2275–2283.

108. Aaltonen J, Laitinen MP, Vuojolainen, K, Jaafinen R, Horelli-Kuitanen N, Seppä L, Luohi H, Tuuri T, Sjöberg J, Bützow R, Horatta O, Dale L, Rituous O. Human growth differentiation factor 9 (GDF-9) and its novel homolog GDF-9B are expressed in oocytes during early folliculogenesis. *J Clin Endocrinol Metab* 1999;84:2744–2750.

109. Elvin JA, Yan C, Matzuk MM. Oocyte-expressed TGF-β superfamily members in female fertility. *Mol Cell Endocrinol* 2000;159:1–5.

110. Otsuka F, Moore RK, Shimasaki S. Biological function and cellular mechanism of bone morphogenetic protein-6 in the ovary. *J Biol Chem* 2001;10:10.

111. Otsuka F, Yamamoto S, Erickson GF, Shimasaki S. Bone morphogenetic protein-15 inhibits follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) action by suppressing FSH receptor expression. *J Biol Chem* 2001;276:11387–11392.

112. Solovyeva EV, Hayashi M, Margi K, Barkats C, Klein C, Amsterdam A, Hsueh AJ, Tsafriri A. Growth differentiation factor-9 stimulates rat theca-interstitial cell androgen biosynthesis. *Biol Reprod* 2000;63:1214–1218.

113. Vitt UA, McGee EA, Hayashi M, Hsueh AJ. In vivo treatment with GDF-9 stimulates primordial and primary follicle progression and theca cell marker CYP17 in ovaries of immature rats. *Endocrinology* 2000;141:3814–3820.

114. Vitt UA, Hayashi M, Klein C, Hsueh AJ. Growth differentiation factor-9 stimulates proliferation but suppresses the follicle-stimulating hormone-induced differentiation of cultured granulosa cells from small antral and preovulatory rat follicles. *Biol Reprod* 2000;62:370–377.

115. Elvin JA, Clark AT, Wang P, Wolfman NM, Matzuk MM. Paracrine actions of growth differentiation factor-9 in the mammalian ovary. *Mol Endocrinol* 1999;13:1035–1048.

116. Yan C, Wang P, DeMayo J, DeMayo FJ, Elvin JA, Carino C, Prasad SV, Skinner SS, Dunbar BS, Dube JL, Celeste AJ, Matzuk MM. Synergistic roles of bone morphogenetic protein 15 and growth differentiation factor 9 in ovarian function. *Mol Endocrinol* 2001;15:854–866.

117. Galloway SM, McNatty KP, Cambridge LM, Laitinen MPE, Juengel JL, Jokiranta TS, McLaren RJ, Luiro K, Dodds KG, Montgomery GN, Beattie AF, Daris GH, Ritros O. Mutations in an oocyte-derived growth factor gene (BMP15) cause increased ovulation rate and infertility in a dosage-sensitive manner. *Nat Genet* 2000;25:279–283.

118. Terranova PF, Rice VM. Review: Cytokine involvement in ovarian processes. *Am J Reprod Immunol* 1997;37:50–63.

119. Spaczynski RZ, Arici A, Duleba AJ. Tumor necrosis factor-α stimulates proliferation of rat ovarian theca-interstitial cells. *Biol Reprod* 1999;61:993–998.

120. Andreani CL, Payne DW, Packman JN, Resnick CE, Hurwitz A, Adashi EY. Cytokine-mediated regulation of ovarian function. Tumor necrosis factor α inhibits gonadotropin-supported ovarian androgen biosynthesis. *J Biol Chem* 1991;266:6761–6766.

121. Zachow RJ, Terranova PF. Involvement of protein kinase C and protein tyrosine kinase pathways in tumor necrosis factor-α-induced clustering of ovarian theca-interstitial cells. *Mol Cell Endocrinol* 1993;97:37–49.

122. Zachow RJ, Tash JS, Terranova PF. Tumor necrosis factor-α attenuation of luteinizing hormone-stimulated androstenedione production by ovarian theca-interstitial cells: Inhibition at loci within the adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate-dependent signaling pathway. *Endocrinology* 1993;133:2269–2276.

123. Adashi EY, Resnick CE, Packman JN, Hurwitz A, Payne DW. Cytokine-mediated regulation of ovarian function: Tumor necrosis factor α inhibits gonadotropin-supported progesterone accumulation by differentiating and luteinized murine granulosa cells. *Am J Obstet Gynecol* 1990;162:889–896; discussion 896–899.

124. Hurwitz A, Payne DW, Packman JN, Andreani CL, Resnick CE, Hernandez ER, Adashi EY. Cytokine-mediated regulation of ovarian function: interleukin-1 inhibits gonadotropin-induced androgen biosynthesis. *Endocrinology* 1991;129:1250–1256.

125. Doneksy BE, Dias de Moura M, Tedeschi C, Hurwitz A, Adashi EY, Payne DW. Interleukin-1 β inhibits steroidogenic bioactivity in cultured rat ovarian granulosa cells by stimulation of progesterone degradation and inhibition of estrogen formation. Biol Reprod 1998;58:1108–1116.

126. Li X, Youngblood GL, Payne AH, Hales DB. Tumor necrosis factor-α inhibition of 17 α-hydroxylase/C17–20 lyase gene (Cyp17) expression. Endocrinology 1995;136:3519–3526.

127. Balchak SK, Marcinkiewicz JL. Evidence for the presence of tumor necrosis factor alpha receptors during ovarian development in the rat. Biol Reprod 1999;61:1506–1512.

128. Terranova PF, Hunter VJ, Roby KF, Hunt JS. Tumor necrosis factor-α in the female reproductive tract. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1995;209:325–342.

129. Roby KF, Son DS, Terranova PF. Alterations of events related to ovarian function in tumor necrosis factor receptor type I knockout mice. Biol Reprod 1999;61:1616–1621.

130. Sakumoto R, Murakami S, Okuda K. Tumor necrosis factor-α

stimulates prostaglandin F2α secretion by bovine luteal cells via activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase and phospholipase A2 pathways. Mol Reprod Dev 2000;56:387–391.

131. Brunswig-Spickenheier B, Mukhopadhyay AK. Stimulation of nitric oxide-cyclic guanosine monophosphate pathway in bovine ovarian theca cells by tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF α). Is this pathway implicated in the TNF α-induced inhibition of luteinizing hormone-stimulated prorenin production? Biol Reprod 1997;57:700–706.

132. Sassoon D. Wnt genes and endocrine disruption of the female reproductive tract: a genetic approach. Mol Cell Endocrinol 1999;158:1–5.

133. Dunaif A, Segal KR, Futterweit W, Dobrjansky A. Profound peripheral insulin resistance, independent of obesity, in polycystic ovary syndrome. Diabetes 1989;38:1165–1174.

134. Dunaif A. Insulin resistance and the polycystic ovary syndrome: mechanism and implications for pathogenesis. Endocr Rev 1997;18:774–800.
