
# AUTOIMMUNE THYROID DISEASE: NEW MODELS OF CELL DEATH IN AUTOIMMUNITY

**Giorgio Stassi* and Ruggero De Maria†**

Autoimmunity to thyroid antigens leads to two distinct pathogenic processes with opposing clinical outcomes: hypothyroidism in Hashimoto's thyroiditis and hyperthyroidism in Graves' disease. The high frequency of these diseases and easy accessibility of the thyroid gland has allowed the identification of key pathogenic mechanisms in organ-specific autoimmune diseases. In early investigations, antibody- and T-cell-mediated death mechanisms were proposed as being responsible for autoimmune thyrocyte depletion. Later, studies on apoptosis have provided new insights into autoimmune target destruction, indicating the involvement of death receptors and cytokine-regulated apoptotic pathways in the pathogenesis of thyroid autoimmunity.

Classically, autoimmune diseases are characterized by the activity of autoreactive lymphocytes, which cause tissue or organ damage through the formation of antibodies that react against host tissues, or effector T cells, which are specific for endogenous self-peptides¹. Environmental and genetic factors cooperate in the induction of autoimmunity. Although several genes, including certain major histocompatibility complex (MHC) genotypes, are clearly associated with increased susceptibility to autoimmunity, monozygotic twins do not show complete concordance²,³. So, a disease-prone genetic background might not be sufficient for the clinical onset of autoimmunity.

Responses to self-tissue antigens result from ineffective control mechanisms that allow survival and expansion of autoreactive lymphocyte clones. The activation of autoreactive T cells that have escaped CENTRAL TOLERANCE mechanisms in the thymus is prevented through peripheral tolerance mechanisms that include the elimination of autoreactive lymphocytes⁴,⁵ and the inhibitory activity of CD4⁺CD25⁺ regulatory T cells⁶,⁷. In some circumstances, autoimmunity can arise following protective T- and B-cell responses against foreign antigens that cross-react with self-antigens expressed by normal tissues. This phenomenon, which is known as molecular mimicry, has been implicated in the pathogenesis of *myasthenia gravis* and rheumatic fever, but might also have a role in other common autoimmune conditions, such as *type 1 diabetes* and *multiple sclerosis*⁸,⁹. Moreover, a transient viral infection might initiate an autoimmune response that could subsequently be amplified through the exposure of CRYPTIC EPITOPES that are released by dying cells, a phenomenon known as epitope spreading¹⁰.

Autoimmune diseases are broadly classified as organ specific or systemic¹. Organ-specific autoimmunity involves chronic T-cell or antibody targeting of a particular organ. By contrast, systemic autoimmunity is often the result of the breakdown of immunological tolerance to ubiquitous self-molecules, which generates immune-complex-mediated damage in several body sites¹¹,¹². Thyroid autoimmune diseases represent more than 30% of all organ-specific autoimmunity. *Hashimoto's thyroiditis* is the first described and most common organ-specific autoimmune disease, which affects about 3% of the population and represents the archetype for other T-cell-mediated degenerative diseases, such as type 1 diabetes and multiple sclerosis¹³–¹⁵. However, the concept of cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)-mediated target destruction in thyroid autoimmunity has recently been challenged¹⁶–¹⁹. Progress in apoptosis research and studies of *Graves' disease*, a

---

**CENTRAL TOLERANCE**  
Autoreactive T cells that react strongly with self-ligands are eliminated during development in the thymus by a process that is known as negative selection.

**CRYPTIC EPITOPES**  
Antigenic peptides that are generated at sub-threshold levels. When cryptic epitopes become visible to the immune system, they might elicit an immune response that is responsible for the autoimmune disease.

---

**\***Department of Surgical and Oncological Sciences, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.  
**†**Laboratory of Haematology and Oncology, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.  
Correspondence to R.D.M.  
email: rdemaria@tin.it  
DOI: 10.1038/nri750

NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY  
© 2002 Macmillan Magazines Ltd  
VOLUME 2 | MARCH 2002 | 195

a Hashimoto's thyroiditis

b Graves' disease

Figure 1 | Thyroid autoimmunity produces two opposite pathogenetic processes and clinical outcomes. a | During Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, self-reactive CD4⁺ T lymphocytes recruit B cells and CD8⁺ T cells into the thyroid. Disease progression leads to the death of thyroid cells and hypothyroidism. Both autoantibodies and thyroid-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) have been proposed to be responsible for autoimmune thyrocyte depletion. b | In Graves’ disease, activated CD4⁺ T cells induce B cells to secrete thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins (TSI) against the thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR), resulting in unrestrained thyroid hormone production and hyperthyroidism.

non-destructive form of thyroid autoimmunity, have led to a new model of autoimmune target destruction in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.

**Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and Graves’ disease**

Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and Graves’ disease are the most common forms — and the two extremes — of a wide spectrum of mixed thyroid autoimmune conditions that lead to thyrocyte death or hyperfunction¹⁵.

Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is characterized by an inflammatory infiltrate of immunocytes that replace the parenchyma and induce thyroid enlargement, which eventually leads to gland fibrosis. Progressive thyrocyte depletion results in impaired thyroid hormone production and clinical hypothyroidism, a condition that involves a marked reduction of metabolic activity in various cells and tissues¹⁵. Hashimoto’s thyroiditis has been suggested to be a largely genetic disorder of cell-mediated immunity that promotes inflammation and leads to autoantibody formation²⁰. After initiation of the autoreactive immune response by CD4⁺ T cells, thyroid cells are induced to express MHC class II molecules by interferon-γ (IFN-γ)-producing activated lymphocytes, possibly contributing to the expansion of autoreactive T-cell populations and prolonging the inflammatory response²¹,²². As a result, massive lymphocyte accumulation is the main histopathological feature in glands of patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Activated CD8⁺ and CD4⁺ T cells, B cells, plasma cells and macrophages (sometimes with the formation of ectopic GERMINAL CENTRES) constitute the immunocyte infiltrate. Thyroid autoantibodies have been proposed to participate in clinical hypothyroidism by blocking the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor or by directly contributing to thyrocyte destruction¹⁵ (FIG. 1).

In patients with Graves’ disease, the production of anti-TSH-receptor antibodies promotes thyrocyte growth and unrestrained thyroid hormone secretion, resulting in the opposite clinical outcome to Hashimoto’s thyroiditis — hyperthyroidism with increased gland vascularity, mild lymphocytic infiltration, OPHTHALMOPATHY and GOITRE¹⁵. The autoimmune process that leads to Graves’ disease is believed to begin with the activation of thyroid-specific CD4⁺ T cells, with subsequent recruitment into the thyroid of autoreactive B cells and production of anti-thyroid antibodies (FIG. 1). Although the pathogenic mechanisms that are responsible for hyperthyroidism have been extensively characterized, the aetiology of Graves’ disease remains unclear.

**Animal models of thyroid autoimmunity.** Although a spontaneous animal model of Graves’ disease is not

GERMINAL CENTRES  
Secondary lymphoid follicles that contain reactive B cells which undergo intense proliferation, maturation and death after encountering their specific antigens.

ENDOCRINE  
OPHTHALMOPATHY  
A complex eye disease that is characterized by lymphocyte and chronic inflammatory-cell infiltration in orbital tissues, oedema and proliferation of connective tissue.

GOITRE  
Diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland.

a

Plasma
cell

Thyroid
cell

Complement
activation

Necrosis

b

CTL

Apoptosis

c

Death
receptor

Suicide

Death
ligand

Apoptosis

Figure 2 | Three different mechanisms of thyrocyte depletion in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis have been sequentially proposed. **a** | Autoantibodies deposited as immune complexes on the follicular basement membranes might activate complement and mediate thyrocyte necrosis. **b** | After a T-cell receptor/peptide–MHC interaction, cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) might kill target thyrocytes through the release of granules that contain perforin and granzyme B. **c** | Autocrine or paracrine interactions between death receptors and their ligands might result in thyrocyte apoptosis. MHC, major histocompatibility complex.

available, immunization of selected strains of mice with either MHC-class-II-positive fibroblasts that express the TSH receptor²³,²⁴, or with an expression vector that contains the TSH receptor complementary DNA²⁵, results in hyperthyroidism in female mice. Although the genetic immunization model has a lower frequency of hyperthyroidism compared with fibroblast immunization, it relates more closely to the human disease owing to the presence of lymphocytic infiltration and ophthalmopathy. However, this model has become available only recently and, so far, has made only a limited contribution to the understanding of the pathogenesis of Graves’ disease.

Several experimental models of autoimmune thyroiditis have been established on the basis of genetic predisposition²⁶–²⁸, thyroid-antigen immunization²⁹ or transfer of cells primed with thyroid antigen³⁰,³¹. Studies of these animals have confirmed the central role of CD4⁺ T cells in the induction³² and suppression³³ of experimental autoimmune thyroiditis (EAT), whereas B-cell responses and autoantibody production might not have a primary role in thyrocyte targeting, but seem to contribute to the amplification of the inflammatory response³⁴.

Although experimental models of thyroiditis have provided considerable insights, significant thyrocyte destruction is not observed during EAT, unless thyroglobulin-reactive T cells are treated *in vitro* with anti-CD25 and interleukin-12 (IL-12) before injection. However, this induces a granulomatous form of thyroiditis³⁵, which is histologically distinct from Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. So, high disease frequency and easy accessibility of the thyroid gland make

human studies, at present, the primary source of information for understanding the pathogenesis of thyroid autoimmunity.

### Mechanism of thyrocyte destruction

Three different mechanisms have been sequentially proposed to be responsible for autoimmune thyrocyte depletion (FIG.2).

#### Antibodies

The cytotoxic activity of antibodies against thyrocytes, as a result of immune-complex deposition in follicular basement membranes and complement activation, was first suggested in 1977 (REF.36; FIG.2). In subsequent experiments, terminal complement complexes that produce the membrane-attack complexes were found around thyroid follicles¹⁵,³⁷. Antibodies against **thyroid peroxidase** in thyroiditis have the ability to fix complement and have been proposed to promote antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity against thyroid cells *in vitro*³⁸–⁴⁰. These findings gave support to the hypothesis that antibodies against the main thyroid antigens, such as **thyroglobulin** and thyroid peroxidase, were directly responsible for the autoimmune destruction of thyrocytes. Moreover, thyrocytes that were attacked by complement were shown to release proinflammatory molecules, such as prostaglandin E₂, IL-1 and IL-6, which might cause infiltration and activation of lymphocytes, and direct injury of thyroid cells during Hashimoto’s thyroiditis⁴¹. However, the presence and titre of autoantibodies in euthyroid individuals and in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis patients are variable and scarcely correlate with the extent of thyrocyte depletion¹⁵. Therefore, it is possible that the pathogenic role

Figure 3 | Two independent pathways mediate T-cell cytotoxicity. **a** | After specific recognition of peptide–MHC complexes, cytotoxic T lymphocytes release lytic granules that contain perforin and granzyme B. Perforin polymerizes and forms pores in the target cell membrane, while mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor II receptor (man-6-P/IGF II R) allows granzyme B — a serine protease able to directly activate effector caspases and apoptosis — to enter the cell. Caspase activation is amplified by granzyme-mediated cleavage and activation of BID, a pro-apoptotic member of the BCL2 family that leads to cytochrome c release from mitochondria, allowing the formation of a high-molecular-weight complex that contains cytochrome c, APAF-1 and caspase-9, which activates downstream caspases (mitochondrial apoptotic pathway). This process is antagonized by BCL2 and BCL-X<sub>L</sub>. **b** | Binding of ligands to death receptors, such as CD178 to CD95 and TRAIL (tumour-necrosis factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand) to TRAIL receptors, induces the recruitment of the adaptor molecule FADD/MORT-1 and procaspase-8 to form the death-inducing signalling complex, which results in caspase-8 activation. Active caspase-8 migrates to the cytoplasm to cleave caspase-3 and BID and amplify the apoptotic cascade. Ceramide (Cer) accumulation participates in this process by increasing the GD3 ganglioside levels and targeting mitochondria. Although BCL2 and BCL-X<sub>L</sub> can antagonize this signal, a more effective inhibition of the apoptotic process is mediated by cellular FLICE/caspase-8 inhibitory protein (cFLIP), which is recruited into the death-receptor signalling complex and prevents caspase-8 activation. GD3, disialoganglioside 3.

of thyroid-specific antibodies is essentially confined to their potential ability to amplify inflammation.

**CTL activity.** Later, attention was focused on the role of T lymphocytes as effector cells responsible for thyrocyte destruction. The engagement of death receptors and the release of cytotoxic granules mediate effector-T-cell cytotoxicity against target cells during the immune response<sup>42,43</sup>. These two events are independent, but exploit similar biochemical pathways to induce target-cell apoptosis, which involves proteolytic cleavage of key cellular substrates by caspases or granzymes<sup>44,45</sup> (FIG. 3).

The exocytosis of **perforin**-containing granules by CTLs on cognate recognition of target cells, and the engagement of death receptors on cognate or neighbouring target cells by effector T cells, mediates CTL activity<sup>42,43</sup>. Similar to normal peripheral lymphocytes, a discrete portion of intrathyroidal T cells that are isolated from the thyroids of patients with Hashimoto’s

thyroiditis contain perforin<sup>46</sup>. During autoimmune inflammation, thyrocytes express MHC class II molecules, and are therefore potential targets of both CD4<sup>+</sup> and CD8<sup>+</sup> cytotoxic T cells<sup>47,48</sup> (FIG. 2). T-cell lines and CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cell clones obtained from Hashimoto’s thyroiditis glands have shown specific cytotoxic activity against autologous human thyroid cells<sup>49–51</sup>. However, freshly isolated autoreactive T cells that are infiltrating the thyroid gland do not show any spontaneous cytotoxic activity against thyroid cell targets<sup>15</sup>. Therefore, it is not clear whether or not these cells contribute directly to thyrocyte depletion by acting as cytotoxic effector cells.

**Death receptors.** Death receptors are a subgroup of the tumour-necrosis-factor receptor (**TNFR**) superfamily, which is characterized by a cytoplasmic death domain that is responsible for the transmission of the apoptotic signal. The interaction of death receptors with their ligands activates apoptotic pathways in several

Table 1 | Expression of apoptosis-related proteins in thyrocytes

| Name                | Type               | Control | GD   | HT   | References                          |
|---------------------|--------------------|---------|------|------|-------------------------------------|
| CD95 (Fas/APO-1)    | Death receptors    | +       | ++   | +++  | 16,17,19,54,57–60,94               |
| TRAILR1 (DR4)       |                    | +       | ++   | ++   | 68, our unpublished data            |
| TRAILR2 (DR5)       |                    | +       | ND   | ND   | 68, our unpublished data            |
| CD178 (FasL/CD95L)  | Death ligands      | +       | ++   | +++  | 16–19,57,59,60                     |
| TRAIL               |                    | +       | ND   | +++  | 67,68                              |
| FAP-1               | Death inhibitors   | ++      | ND   | ND   | 70                                 |
| cFLIP               |                    | +       | +++  | +    | 19                                 |
| Caspase-3           | Pro-apoptotic     | +       | +    | +++  | 19                                 |
|                     | molecules          |         |      |      |                                     |
| Caspase-8           |                    | +       | +    | +++  | 19                                 |
| BAX                 |                    | –       | ND   | ++   | 95, our unpublished data            |
| BAK                 |                    | +       | ND   | ++   | 95, our unpublished data            |
| BCL2                | Anti-apoptotic     | ++      | +++  | +    | 62,95                              |
|                     | molecules          |         |      |      |                                     |
| BCL-X<sub>L</sub>   |                    | ++      | +++  | +    | 19                                 |

The table summarizes absent (–), low (+), high (++) and very high (+++) expression of pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic proteins in control, Graves’ disease (GD) and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT) thyroid follicular cells. cFLIP, cellular FLICE/caspase-8 inhibitory protein; FAP-1, Fas-associated phosphatase-1; FasL, Fas ligand; ND, not determined; TRAIL, tumour-necrosis factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand; TRAILR, TRAIL receptor.

physiological and pathological cell-death processes. Triggering of death receptors transduces apoptotic signals through the activation of caspases, a family of fourteen (known) proteases that induce proteolytic cleavage of several cellular targets<sup>52</sup>. Activation of initiator caspases, such as **caspase-8** and **caspase-9**, triggers a cascade of biochemical signals that results in the activation of downstream caspases and apoptotic cell death<sup>52</sup> (FIG. 3). BCL2 family members show pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic activity by acting on mitochondria. The pro-apoptotic members, such as **BAX**, **BAK** and **BID**, induce mitochondrial membrane permeabilization and **cytochrome c** release. This promotes the formation of the apoptosome, a high-molecular-weight complex that consists of apoptosis protease-activating factor 1 (**APAF-1**) and caspase-9, which activates executioner caspases. By contrast, **BCL2** and **BCL-X<sub>L</sub>** antagonize this process by preventing the generation of apoptotic signals by mitochondria<sup>53</sup> (FIG. 3).

Inappropriate **CD95** (Fas/APO-1)-mediated apoptosis has been proposed to be a common pathogenetic mechanism in organ-specific autoimmune diseases<sup>17,54–56</sup>. In the past few years, several reports have investigated the expression and function of CD95 and its ligand (**CD178**, also known as Fas ligand) in normal and pathological tissues that are frequent targets of destructive autoimmune responses, such as the thyroid, pancreas and brain<sup>16,55,56</sup>. The results of these studies indicate a potential involvement of CD95/CD178-mediated apoptosis in the pathogenesis of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, type 1 diabetes and multiple sclerosis.

The pattern of CD95 and CD178 expression in normal and Graves’ disease thyrocytes is controversial. Whereas some authors reported the absence of CD95 and presence of CD178 in control thyrocytes, others showed the opposite (reviewed in REF. 57). Analysis of

CD95 expression in normal thyrocytes is hindered by the low sensitivity of immunohistochemistry and by the spontaneous upregulation of CD95 that is observed in thyrocytes cultured ex vivo. Also, the absence of reliable anti-CD178 antibodies in the earlier studies generated controversy between different groups<sup>16,58–60</sup>. A further setback derives from the minimal availability of normal thyroid specimens and the use of samples from non-toxic goitre or the contralateral lobe of tumour glands<sup>57</sup> — which might have abnormal expression of CD95 and CD178 — as a source of control thyrocytes. Although it is not possible to draw a conclusive evaluation from data in the literature, we have analysed normal thyroid tissues from two laringectomy patients. We found that both CD95 and, to a lesser extent, CD178 are expressed at low levels in normal cells (G.S. and R.D.M., unpublished observations). By contrast, there is general agreement that both CD95 (REFS 19,61) and CD178 (REFS 19,62) are substantially upregulated and simultaneously expressed by thyrocytes during Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.

Although the expression of CD178 in the thyroid inhibits the development of experimental autoimmune thyroiditis by inducing the death of infiltrating T cells<sup>63,64</sup>, implying a protective role for CD178 in this model, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis thyrocytes are sensitive to CD95 stimulation and probably die by autocrine or paracrine expression of CD178 (REF 19; FIG. 2; also see later discussion).

Other death-receptor ligands might participate in thyrocyte killing, including **TNF-α** and the TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (**TRAIL**) (TABLE 1). TNF-α is produced by immunocytes and possibly by thyrocytes during autoimmune thyroiditis<sup>65</sup>. The ability of TNFR1 to promote CD95-induced thyrocyte apoptosis indicates that TNF-α and CD178 might act in concert to produce thyrocyte depletion in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis<sup>66</sup>.

Although there is no experimental evidence as yet, TRAIL and its receptors (TRAILR1 and TRAILR2) might contribute to thyrocyte apoptosis in autoimmune thyroiditis in a similar way to CD95 and CD178 (REFS 67, 68 and G.S. and R.D.M., unpublished results).

**Regulation of thyrocyte survival**

It is becoming increasingly clear that the rate of thyrocyte apoptosis dictates the clinical outcome of thyroid autoimmunity. The balance between the activities of pro-apoptotic and anti-apoptotic proteins regulates thyrocyte survival. The best-characterized apoptosis-related genes that are expressed in thyrocytes are death receptors and their ligands, caspases and BCL2 family members (TABLE 1).

After complete thyroid formation, normal thyrocytes have a very slow turnover rate and are supposed to undergo very few divisions. Accordingly, apoptosis has been observed only occasionally in normal thyroid *in vivo*. By contrast, thyrocyte apoptosis is a common finding during the active phases of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis^{19,61,69}. Analysis of thyrocytes purified from Hashimoto’s thyroiditis glands has shown that a variable percentage of these cells undergoes spontaneous apoptosis *ex vivo*, indicating that a substantial number of thyrocytes are committed to cell death by some apoptogenic factors during autoimmune thyroiditis^{19,61}. The duration of the autoimmune process, which lasts several years, indicates that thyrocyte depletion is slow and partially counterbalanced by the capacity of thyroid replacement. In line with the clinical course of the disease, thyrocyte apoptosis is not detectable in glands from most patients with Graves’ disease, unless they undergo persistent treatment with antithyroid drugs.

Normal thyrocytes constitutively express low levels of several death receptors (TABLE 1). Thyrocyte priming by cytokines or the use of cyclohexamide are required for obtaining sensitivity to death-receptor ligands^{19,54,66}. So, low production of death-receptor ligands by normal thyrocytes is not harmful. However, after pathological modifications of the thyroid microenvironment, thyrocytes might increase their susceptibility to apoptosis and acquire sensitivity to death-receptor stimulation. The mechanisms responsible for the refractoriness of normal thyrocytes to CD95 stimulation might involve high expression of Fas-associated phosphatase-1 (FAP-1), a protein that interacts with the negative regulatory domain of CD95 and blocks thyrocyte apoptosis^{70}.

The activity of apoptotic and anti-apoptotic genes during thyroid autoimmunity is a key determinant of thyrocyte fate. A correlation between thyrocyte destruction and decreased expression of BCL2 has been proposed as a pathogenetic factor that regulates the survival of autoimmune thyrocytes^{62}. Moreover, increased expression of other anti-apoptotic genes in Graves’ disease thyrocytes, such as cellular FLICE/caspase-8 inhibitory protein (FLIP) and BCL-XL, could help to prevent thyrocyte apoptosis during autoimmune aggression^{19}. Expression and activation of caspases could represent an important event leading to thyrocyte

destruction in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, as the extent of thyrocyte apoptosis *in vivo* strictly correlates with the intensity of caspase activation. In line with the apoptosis pattern that is observed in thyroid autoimmune diseases, caspase-3 and caspase-8 are upregulated and activated in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis thyrocytes, whereas they seem to be normal in Graves’ disease^{19}.

**T cells and thyrocytes: who kills whom?**

It has been proposed that CD178 expression in selected tissues, such as the anterior chamber of the eye, contributes to the formation of immune-privileged sites through the CD95-mediated killing of potentially harmful lymphocytes^{71,72}. Similarly, CD178 expression in cancer cells might contribute to tumour immune privilege by inducing the deletion of T lymphocytes that approach the tumour^{73–75}. These hypotheses have been challenged by some investigators, who believe that CD178 expression does not promote immune privilege or tumour escape^{76,77}. Using CD178-transgenic mice or exogenous CD178 expression in transplanted cells, several studies reported accelerated destruction rather than protection of tissues that express CD178 (REFS 76, 78). These experiments indicate that CD178-mediated immune privilege might be restricted to very few cell types, such as corneal epithelial cells^{72}.

Normal thyrocytes are not sensitive to CD95 stimulation and constitutively express low levels of CD178 (REFS 19, 54). During autoimmune thyroiditis, simultaneous receptor and ligand upregulation in thyrocytes could have remarkable effects on the survival of these cells and neighbouring lymphocytes. In Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, T cells that are located in proximity to thyroid follicles are apoptotic or seem committed to apoptosis, as shown by DNA fragmentation and cytoplasmic accumulation of the pro-apoptotic GD3 (disialoganglioside 3) ganglioside^{18}. In agreement with this, the killing of infiltrating T cells by thyrocytes that are ectopically or spontaneously expressing CD178 has been shown in mouse models of EAT^{63,79}. It is likely that those intrathyroidal T lymphocytes that interact during Hashimoto’s thyroiditis with thyroid follicular cells that are producing large amounts of CD178 do not survive and are gradually replaced by new infiltrating T cells^{18}. As a consequence of CD178 expression, thyroid epithelium might constitute an immune-privileged site^{80}. However, increased CD95 expression and sensitivity during human autoimmune thyroiditis might result in thyrocyte death by autocrine or paracrine CD95–CD178 interactions^{16,19,62}. Opposing this hypothesis, ectopic expression of CD178 in the mouse thyroid was not accompanied by autocrine or paracrine CD95-mediated death^{63,64}. In these animal models, thyrocyte survival in the presence of CD178 might result from the strong inhibition of the inflammatory response^{64}, which is required for promoting thyrocyte sensitivity to CD95 stimulation^{19,66}. In humans, however, both thyrocytes^{19} and lymphocytes^{18} that are resident in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis glands are susceptible to CD95-induced apoptosis *ex vivo* and probably die *in vivo* after intense thyrocyte CD178 production (FIG. 4).

Figure 4 | Infiltrating T cells might be killed by thyrocytes during Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Activated T lymphocytes in autoimmune thyroiditis are extremely sensitive to CD95 stimulation and probably die after an interaction with CD178-expressing thyrocytes. However, because Hashimoto’s thyroiditis thyrocytes acquire sensitivity to CD95 stimulation, they might also die through suicide or fratricide mechanisms.

The rate of apoptosis in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis glands seems higher for lymphocytes than for thyrocytes both *in vitro* and *in vivo*<sup>18</sup>. However, dying T cells are continuously replaced during the inflammatory process and infiltrating T cells probably have an important role in the amplification and perpetuation of the autoimmune response through the production of cytokines.

**Cytokines and thyroid autoimmunity**

Cytokines drive thyroid autoimmune responses by influencing both immune and target cells at several levels. T-cell-derived cytokines are the key regulators of the autoimmune processes. They provide essential support for the cell-mediated and humoral immune response and dictate thyrocyte fate.

**Cytokine expression in thyroid autoimmunity.** Two functionally distinct subsets of T-helper (T<sub>H</sub>) cells have been characterized on the basis of cytokine production. T<sub>H</sub>1 cells secrete IFN-γ and other cytokines that are associated with inflammation and cell-mediated immune responses, whereas T<sub>H</sub>2 cells promote the humoral immune response and inhibit T<sub>H</sub>1 responses by the release of IL-4, IL-5 and IL-10 (REF. 81). In fact, T<sub>H</sub>2 cytokines have been shown to inhibit target destruction in organ-specific autoimmunity<sup>82,83</sup>.

In line with their pathogeneses, analysis of cytokine expression in autoimmune thyroid diseases has shown, with a few exceptions<sup>84</sup>, a prevalence of T<sub>H</sub>2 cytokines in Graves’ disease and T<sub>H</sub>1 cytokines in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis<sup>19,85</sup>, particularly at the level of activated intrathyroidal T cells<sup>86</sup>. During the active phase of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, infiltrating T cells produce IL-2 (REF. 86),

which acts as an autocrine and paracrine T-cell growth factor and dictates the extent of the T-cell response. IL-2 also stimulates the synthesis of other T-cell-derived cytokines, such as IFN-γ<sup>87</sup>. This cytokine is a potent macrophage activator and promotes inflammation and effector CD8<sup>+</sup> T-cell cytotoxicity. Moreover, IFN-γ contributes to the amplification of the immune response by inducing the expression of MHC class II molecules on thyroid cells, an effect that is probably potentiated by thyroid-stimulating antibodies in Graves’ disease and by high TSH levels in hypothyroidal Hashimoto’s thyroiditis patients<sup>21,22</sup>. On the other hand, in Graves’ disease, IL-4 and IL-10 might protect thyrocytes from T<sub>H</sub>1 responses by inducing T-cell ANERGY, suppression of cytotoxic responses and T<sub>H</sub>1 to T<sub>H</sub>2 switching<sup>88,89</sup>. Intrathyroidal IL-4 and IL-10 production in Graves’ disease might inhibit macrophage activation and block most of the activating effects of IFN-γ, including increased production of IL-1, nitric oxide and prostaglandins<sup>90,91</sup>. In support of this model, after promising experimental evidence in transgenic mice, IL-10 has been proposed as a potential therapeutic factor for preventing autoimmune thyrocyte destruction<sup>92</sup>. It remains to be determined whether CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup> regulatory T cells have a role in thyroid autoimmunity. These professional suppressor cells produce IL-10 (REF. 93) *in vivo* and might therefore influence the behaviour of both immune and target cells.

**Cytokines and thyrocyte apoptosis.** There is extensive evidence that cytokines modify the expression of several genes that are involved in the survival or death of autoimmune target cells. In type 1 diabetes, the production of IL-1β by infiltrating macrophages induces CD95

ANERGY  
A condition of complete unresponsiveness to antigens that can affect both T and B cells.

a Hashimoto's thyroiditis
b Graves disease

IFN-γ
IL-4
IL-10

Thyroid cell
Caspases
and CD95
upregulated
cFLIP and
BCL-X<sub>L</sub>
upregulated

Death
ligand
Death
receptor

Cell death
Cell survival

Figure 5 | Model of thyrocyte fate in thyroid autoimmune diseases. a | Infiltrating CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells seem to preferentially produce T-helper type 1 cell (T<sub>H</sub>1) cytokines in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and T<sub>H</sub>2 cytokines in Graves’ disease. Interferon-γ (IFN-γ) primes thyrocytes for CD95-mediated destruction by inducing massive upregulation of CD95 and pro-apoptotic caspases in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. b | By contrast, interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-10 production might protect Graves’ disease thyrocytes from CD95-mediated apoptosis through the upregulation of cellular FLICE/caspase-8 inhibitory protein (cFLIP) and BCL-X<sub>L</sub>.

expression in pancreatic β-cells through the activation of **inducible nitric-oxide synthase**, resulting in a specific destruction of insulin-producing cells in the presence of CD178<sup>+</sup> T lymphocytes<sup>55</sup>. Similarly, IFN-γ released by autoreactive T cells might contribute to autoimmune oligodendrocyte destruction in multiple sclerosis by increasing CD95 expression and susceptibility to CD178-mediated apoptosis<sup>17,56</sup>. Although accurate analysis is hampered by early spontaneous CD95 upregulation in cultured thyrocytes, both IL-1β and IFN-γ have been shown to increase CD95 expression in thyrocytes *in vitro*<sup>94</sup>. However, IFN-γ is more effective than IL-1β in promoting CD95 expression and thyrocyte apoptosis, and is therefore the most likely candidate for priming CD178-mediated thyrocyte destruction in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis<sup>19,66</sup>. Altered expression of apoptosis-related proteins, as a result of different cytokine expression profiles, could explain the opposite fates of thyrocytes in Graves’ disease and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. The susceptibility or resistance of thyrocytes to CD95-induced apoptosis depend on the thyroid microenvironment and are only temporary in thyrocytes analysed *ex vivo*<sup>19</sup>. So, the role of cytokines in the determination of thyrocyte survival or death has been comparatively investigated in Graves’ disease and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.

Increased sensitivity of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis thyrocytes to apoptosis might depend on the IFN-γ-mediated upregulation of key pro-apoptotic genes. IFN-γ treatment increases caspase-3 and caspase-8 expression and primes Hashimoto’s thyroiditis thyrocytes for CD95-mediated destruction. By contrast, IL-4 and IL-10 upregulate BCL-X<sub>L</sub> and cFLIP, two key anti-apoptotic proteins that can prevent CD95-induced apoptosis in Graves’ disease thyrocytes<sup>19</sup> (FIG. 5).

According to this model, the predominance of T<sub>H</sub>1 or T<sub>H</sub>2 cytokines in the autoimmune microenvironment of the thyroid dictates the outcome of both destructive and non-destructive immune-mediated processes by acting at two levels. First, they orchestrate the immune response, and second, they directly regulate the balance between pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and Graves’ disease thyrocytes.

### Future prospects

The mechanisms that are responsible for initiating thyroid autoimmune responses remain to be determined. However, the high disease frequency and easy accessibility of the thyroid gland have allowed substantial advances in the definition of the immune mechanisms that are involved in the survival or death of thyrocytes. The relative contributions of individual death receptors in thyrocyte destruction are not known at present. In this context, it would be of great interest to determine how CD178 and TRAIL production by thyrocytes is regulated, and whether the death receptor–ligand systems have a role in normal thyroid homeostasis. Weak autocrine or paracrine interactions between CD178 or TRAIL and their receptors might, for example, explain the absence of thyrocyte growth observed *in vivo*, which is rapidly reversed *in vitro* after thyroid follicle disaggregation.

In addition, the role of CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup> regulatory T cells in the pathogenesis of thyroid autoimmunity remains to be determined. These cells could markedly influence both the extent of the autoimmune response and the survival of thyrocytes through the release of anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic cytokines such as IL-10 and transforming growth factor-β (**TGF-β**).

Although it is not clear whether the anti-apoptotic activity of T<sub>H</sub>2 cytokines is a general phenomenon or restricted to limited cell types, the model of cell death versus cell survival presented in this article is not necessarily confined to organ-specific autoimmune diseases. Information on molecules and pathways that are involved in destructive and non-destructive thyroid autoimmunity could contribute to the understanding of the regulation of cell death in both effector and target cells, explaining the success or failure of cytotoxic immune processes, such as antiviral and antitumour responses. In this regard, the possibility of modulating the production of T<sub>H</sub> cytokines in selected anatomical sites might yield new hopes for improving therapeutic intervention in various diseases that involve excessive or insufficient immune-mediated target destruction.

1. Sinha, A. A., Lopez, M. T. & McDevitt, H. O. Autoimmune diseases: the failure of self tolerance. *Science* **248**, 1380–1388 (1990).
2. Metcalfe, K. A. *et al.* Concordance for type 1 diabetes in identical twins is affected by insulin genotype. *Diabetes Care* **24**, 838–842 (2001).
3. Brix, T. H., Kyvik, K. O. & Hegedus, L. A population-based study of chronic autoimmune hypothyroidism in Danish twins. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **85**, 536–539 (2000).
4. Wesselborg, S., Janssen, O. & Kabelitz, D. Induction of activation-driven death (apoptosis) in activated but not resting peripheral blood T cells. *J. Immunol.* **150**, 4338–4345 (1993).
5. Klas, C., Debatin, K. M., Jonker, R. R. & Krammer, P. H. Activation interferes with the APO-1 pathway in mature human T cells. *Int. Immunol.* **5**, 625–630 (1993). The first demonstration that activated T cells become susceptible to CD95-induced apoptosis.
6. Sakaguchi, S., Sakaguchi, N., Asano, M., Itoh, M. & Toda, M. Immunologic self-tolerance maintained by activated T cells expressing IL-2 receptor α-chains (CD25). Breakdown of a single mechanism of self-tolerance causes various autoimmune diseases. *J. Immunol.* **155**, 1151–1164 (1995). Identification of a key population of regulatory T cells.
7. Suri-Payer, E., Amar, A. Z., Thornton, A. M. & Shevach, E. M. CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup>T cells inhibit both the induction and effector function of autoreactive T cells and represent a unique lineage of immunoregulatory cells. *J. Immunol.* **160**, 1212–1218 (1998).
8. Wucherpfennig, K. W. & Strominger, J. L. Molecular mimicry in T cell-mediated autoimmunity: viral peptides activate human T cell clones specific for myelin basic protein. *Cell* **80**, 695–705 (1995).
9. Olson, J. K., Croxford, J. L., Calenoff, M. A., Dal Canto, M. C. & Miller, S. D. A virus-induced molecular mimicry model of multiple sclerosis. *J. Clin. Invest.* **108**, 311–318 (2001).
10. Lehmann, P. V., Forsthuber, T., Miller, A. & Sercarz, E. E. Spreading of T-cell autoimmunity to cryptic determinants of an autoantigen. *Nature* **358**, 155–157 (1992).
11. Bachmaier, K. *et al.* Negative regulation of lymphocyte activation and autoimmunity by the molecular adaptor Cbl-b. *Nature* **403**, 211–216 (2000).
12. Robey, E. & Urbain, J. Tolerance and immune regulation. *Immunol. Today* **12**, 175–177 (1991).
13. Wucherpfennig, K. W. & Eisenbarth, G. S. Type 1 diabetes. *Nature Immunol.* **2**, 767–768 (2001).
14. Steinman, L. Multiple sclerosis: a two-stage disease. *Nature Immunol.* **2**, 762–764 (2001).
15. Weetman, A. P. & McGregor, A. M. Autoimmune thyroid disease: further developments in our understanding. *Endocr. Rev.* **15**, 788–830 (1994). A comprehensive review on thyroid autoimmunity.
16. Giordano, C. *et al.* Potential involvement of Fas and its ligand in the pathogenesis of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. *Science* **275**, 960–963 (1997).
17. De Maria, R. & Testi, R. Fas–FasL interactions: a common pathogenic mechanism in organ-specific autoimmunity. *Immunol. Today* **19**, 121–125 (1998).
18. Stassi, G. *et al.* Fas/Fas ligand-driven T cell apoptosis as a consequence of ineffective thyroid immunoprivilege in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. *J. Immunol.* **162**, 263–267 (1999). Unexpected findings indicating that thyrocytes kill infiltrating T cells in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.
19. Stassi, G. *et al.* Control of target cells survival in thyroid autoimmunity by T helper cytokines via regulation of apoptotic proteins. *Nature Immunol.* **1**, 1–6 (2000). A demonstration that production of T-helper cytokines promotes survival or death of thyrocytes during the autoimmune response.
20. Davies, T. F., Roti, E., Braverman, L. E. & DeGroot, L. J. Thyroid controversy — stimulating antibodies. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **83**, 3777–3785 (1998).

21. Todd, I., Pujol-Borrell, R., Hammond, L. J., Bottazzo, G. F. & Feldmann, M. Interferon-γ induces HLA-DR expression by thyroid epithelium. *Clin. Exp. Immunol.* **61**, 265–273 (1985).
22. Hamilton, F., Black, M., Farquharson, M. A., Stewart, C. & Foulis, A. K. Spatial correlation between thyroid epithelial cells expressing class II MHC molecules and interferon-γ-containing lymphocytes in human thyroid autoimmune disease. *Clin. Exp. Immunol.* **83**, 64–68 (1991).
23. Shimojo, N. *et al.* Induction of Graves-like disease in mice by immunization with fibroblasts transfected with the thyrotropin receptor and a class II molecule. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **93**, 11074–11079 (1996). The first experimental model of Graves’ disease.
24. Kita, M. *et al.* Regulation and transfer of a murine model of thyrotropin receptor antibody mediated Graves’ disease. *Endocrinology* **140**, 1392–1398 (1999).
25. Costagliola, S. *et al.* Genetic immunization of outbred mice with thyrotropin receptor cDNA provides a model of Graves’ disease. *J. Clin. Invest.* **105**, 803–811 (2000). Description of a new model of Graves’ disease that shows lymphocytic infiltration and ophthalmopathy.
26. Dietrich, H. M., Oliveira-dos-Santos, A. J. & Wick, G. Development of spontaneous autoimmune thyroiditis in Obese strain (OS) chickens. *Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol.* **57**, 141–146 (1997).
27. Wright, J. R., Jr, Senhauser, D. A., Yates, A. J., Sharma, H. M. & Thibert, P. Spontaneous thyroiditis in BB Wistar diabetic rats. *Vet. Pathol.* **20**, 522–530 (1983). Description of a spontaneous model of autoimmune thyroiditis in mammals.
28. Rasooly, L., Burek, C. L. & Rose, N. R. Iodine-induced autoimmune thyroiditis in NOD-H-2h4 mice. *Clin. Immunol. Immunopathol.* **81**, 287–292 (1996).
29. Tomazic, V. & Rose, N. R. Autoimmune murine thyroiditis. VIII. Role of different thyroid antigens in the induction of experimental autoimmune thyroiditis. *Immunology* **30**, 63–68 (1976). One of the concluding papers of the initial description of the experimental autoimmune thyroiditis model.
30. Romball, C. G. & Weigle, W. O. Transfer of experimental autoimmune thyroiditis with T cell clones. *J. Immunol.* **138**, 1092–1098 (1987). Demonstration that thyroid-specific T-cell clones can transfer autoimmune thyroiditis.
31. Knight, S. C. *et al.* Induction of autoimmunity with dendritic cells: studies on thyroiditis in mice. *Clin. Immunol. Immunopathol.* **48**, 277–289 (1988).
32. Flynn, J. C., Conaway, D. H., Cobbold, S., Waldmann, H. & Kong, Y. C. Depletion of L3T4<sup>+</sup> and Lyt-2<sup>+</sup> cells by rat monoclonal antibodies alters the development of adoptively transferred experimental autoimmune thyroiditis. *Cell. Immunol.* **122**, 377–390 (1989).
33. Parish, N. M., Roitt, I. M. & Cooke, A. Phenotypic characteristics of cells involved in induced suppression to murine experimental autoimmune thyroiditis. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **18**, 1463–1477 (1988).
34. Vladutiu, A. O. Experimental autoimmune thyroiditis in mice chronically treated from birth with anti-IgM antibodies. *Cell. Immunol.* **121**, 49–59 (1989).
35. Braley-Mullen, H. *et al.* Interleukin-12 promotes activation of effector cells that induce a severe destructive granulomatous form of murine experimental autoimmune thyroiditis. *Am. J. Pathol.* **152**, 1347–1358 (1998). Description of a destructive model of experimental autoimmune thyroiditis.
36. Kalderon, A. E. & Bogaars, H. A. Immune complex deposits in Graves’ disease and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. *Am. J. Med.* **63**, 729–734 (1977). First demonstration of immune-complex deposits in thyroid autoimmunity.
37. Weetman, A. P., Cohen, S. B., Oleesky, D. A. & Morgan, B. P. Terminal complement complexes and C1/C1 inhibitor complexes in autoimmune thyroid disease. *Clin. Exp. Immunol.* **77**, 25–30 (1989).

38. Khoury, E. L., Hammond, L., Bottazzo, G. F. & Doniach, D. Presence of the organ-specific ‘microsomal’ autoantigen on the surface of human thyroid cells in culture: its involvement in complement-mediated cytotoxicity. *Clin. Exp. Immunol.* **45**, 316–328 (1981).
39. Bogner, U., Schleusener, H. & Wall, J. R. Antibody-dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity against human thyroid cells in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis but not Graves’ disease. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **59**, 734–738 (1984).
40. Guo, J., Jaume, J. C., Rapoport, B. & McLachlan, S. M. Recombinant thyroid peroxidase-specific Fab converted to immunoglobulin G (IgG) molecules: evidence for thyroid cell damage by IgG1, but not IgG4, autoantibodies. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **82**, 925–931 (1997).
41. Weetman, A. P., Tandon, N. & Morgan, B. P. Antithyroid drugs and release of inflammatory mediators by complement-attacked thyroid cells. *Lancet* **340**, 633–636 (1992).
42. Kagi, D. *et al.* Fas and perforin pathways as major mechanisms of T cell-mediated cytotoxicity. *Science* **265**, 528–530 (1994).
43. Lowin, B., Hahne, M., Mattmann, C. & Tschopp, J. Cytolytic T-cell cytotoxicity is mediated through perforin and Fas lytic pathways. *Nature* **370**, 650–652 (1994). References 42 and 43 were the first to show that both perforin and death-receptor pathways mediate T-cell cytotoxicity.
44. Darmon, A. J., Nicholson, D. W. & Bleackley, R. C. Activation of the apoptotic protease CPP32 by cytotoxic T-cell-derived granzyme B. *Nature* **377**, 446–468 (1995). The first demonstration that granzyme B activates the apoptotic caspase cascade.
45. Thornberry, N. A. *et al.* A combinatorial approach defines specificities of members of the caspase family and granzyme B. Functional relationships established for key mediators of apoptosis. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 17907–17911 (1997).
46. Wu, Z., Podack, E. R., McKenzie, J. M., Olsen, K. J. & Zakaria, M. Perforin expression by thyroid-infiltrating T cells in autoimmune thyroid disease. *Clin. Exp. Immunol.* **98**, 470–477 (1994).
47. Pujol-Borrell, R., Hanafusa, T., Chiovato, L. & Bottazzo, G. F. Lectin-induced expression of DR antigen on human cultured follicular thyroid cells. *Nature* **304**, 71–73 (1983).
48. Londei, M., Lamb, J. R., Bottazzo, G. F. & Feldmann, M. Epithelial cells expressing aberrant MHC class II determinants can present antigen to cloned human T cells. *Nature* **312**, 639–641 (1984). References 47 and 48 were the first to show that thyrocytes can express MHC class II molecules and act as antigen-presenting cells.
49. Mackenzie, W. A. & Davies, T. F. An intrathyroidal T-cell clone specifically cytotoxic for human thyroid cells. *Immunology* **61**, 101–103 (1987).
50. MacKenzie, W. A., Schwartz, A. E., Friedman, E. W. & Davies, T. F. Intrathyroidal T cell clones from patients with autoimmune thyroid disease. *J. Clin. Endocrinol
55. Stassi, G. *et al.* Nitric oxide primes pancreatic β cells for Fas-mediated destruction in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. *J. Exp. Med.* **186**, 1193–1200 (1997).  
Describes a new pathway that is responsible for autoimmune β-cell destruction in human diabetes.

56. Zipp, F., Krammer, P. H. & Weller, M. Immune (dys)regulation in multiple sclerosis: role of the CD95-CD95 ligand system. *Immunol. Today* **20**, 550–554 (1999).

57. Borgerson, K. L., Bretz, J. D. & Baker, J. R. Jr. The role of Fas-mediated apoptosis in thyroid autoimmune disease. *Autoimmunity* **30**, 251–264 (1999).

58. Leithauser, F. *et al.* Constitutive and induced expression of APO-1, a new member of the nerve growth factor/tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily, in normal and neoplastic cells. *Lab. Invest.* **69**, 415–429 (1993).  
An extensive analysis of CD95 expression in human tissues.

59. Stokes, T. A. *et al.* Constitutive expression of FasL in thyrocytes. *Science* **279**, 2015A (1998).

60. Stassi, G. & De Maria, R. Response to 'Thyrocytes — not innocent bystanders in autoimmune disease'. *Nature Immunol.* **2**, 183 (2001).

61. Hammond, L. J. *et al.* Analysis of apoptosis in relation to tissue destruction associated with Hashimoto's autoimmune thyroiditis. *J. Pathol.* **182**, 138–144 (1997).

62. Mitsiades, N. *et al.* Fas/Fas ligand up-regulation and Bcl-2 down-regulation may be significant in the pathogenesis of Hashimoto's thyroiditis. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **83**, 2199–2203 (1998).

63. Batteux, F., Tourneur, L., Trebeden, H., Charreire, J. & Chiocchia, G. Gene therapy of experimental autoimmune thyroiditis by *in vivo* administration of plasmid DNA coding for Fas ligand. *J. Immunol.* **162**, 603–608 (1999).

64. Batteux, F., Lores, P., Buccini, D. & Chiocchia, G. Transgenic expression of Fas ligand on thyroid follicular cells prevents autoimmune thyroiditis. *J. Immunol.* **164**, 1681–1688 (2000).

65. Aust, G. *et al.* Expression of tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) mRNA and protein in pathological thyroid tissue and carcinoma cell lines. *Clin. Exp. Immunol.* **105**, 148–154 (1996).

66. Bretz, J. D., Arscott, P. L., Myc, A. & Baker, J. R. Jr. Inflammatory cytokine regulation of Fas-mediated apoptosis in thyroid follicular cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 25433–25438 (1999).

67. Bretz, J. D. *et al.* TRAIL death pathway expression and induction in thyroid follicular cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 23627–23632 (1999).  
Demonstration of a new potential pathway for thyrocyte apoptosis.

68. Bretz, J. D. & Baker, J. R. Jr. Apoptosis and autoimmune thyroid disease: following a TRAIL to thyroid destruction? *Clin. Endocrinol. (Oxf.)* **55**, 1–11 (2001).

69. Kotani, T. *et al.* Apoptosis in thyroid tissue from patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis. *Autoimmunity* **20**, 231–236 (1995).

70. Myc, A., Arscott, P. L., Bretz, J. D., Thompson, N. W. & Baker, J. R. Jr. Characterization of FAP-1 expression and function in thyroid follicular cells. *Endocrinology* **140**, 5431–5434 (1999).  
A possible explanation for the refractoriness to CD95-induced apoptosis that is observed in normal thyrocytes.

71. Griffith, T. S., Brunner, T., Fletcher, S. M., Green, D. R. & Ferguson, T. A. Fas ligand-induced apoptosis as a mechanism of immune privilege. *Science* **270**, 1189–1192 (1995).

72. Stuart, P. M. *et al.* CD95 ligand (FasL)-induced apoptosis is necessary for corneal allograft survival. *J. Clin. Invest.* **99**, 396–402 (1997).

73. Bennett, M. W. *et al.* The Fas counterattack *in vivo*: apoptotic depletion of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes associated with Fas ligand expression by human esophageal carcinoma. *J. Immunol.* **160**, 5669–5675 (1998).

74. Hahne, M. *et al.* Melanoma cell expression of Fas(Apo-1/CD95) ligand: implications for tumor immune escape. *Science* **274**, 1363–1366 (1996).

75. O'Connell, J., O'Sullivan, G. C., Collins, J. K. & Shanahan, F. The Fas counterattack: Fas-mediated T cell killing by colon cancer cells expressing Fas ligand. *J. Exp. Med.* **184**, 1075–1082 (1996).

76. Allison, J., Georgiou, H. M., Strasser, A. & Vaux, D. L. Transgenic expression of CD95 ligand on islet β-cells induces a granulocytic infiltration but does not confer immune privilege upon islet allografts. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **94**, 3943–3947 (1997).

77. Restifo, N. P. Not so Fas: re-evaluating the mechanisms of immune privilege and tumor escape. *Nature Med.* **6**, 493–595 (2000).

78. Kang, S. M. *et al.* Immune response and myoblasts that express Fas ligand. *Science* **278**, 1322–1324 (1997).

79. Wei, Y., Chen, K., Sharp, G. C., Yagita, H. & Braley-Mullen, H. Expression and regulation of Fas and Fas ligand on thyrocytes and infiltrating cells during induction and resolution of granulomatous experimental autoimmune thyroiditis. *J. Immunol.* **167**, 6678–6686 (2001).

80. Tourneur, L. *et al.* Transgenic expression of CD95 ligand on thyroid follicular cells confers immune privilege upon thyroid allografts. *J. Immunol.* **167**, 1338–1346 (2001).

81. Abbas, A. K., Murphy, K. M. & Sher, A. Functional diversity of helper T lymphocytes. *Nature* **383**, 787–793 (1996).

82. Van der Veen, R. C. & Stohlman, S. A. Encephalitogenic T<sub>H</sub>1 cells are inhibited by T<sub>H</sub>2 cells with related peptide specificity: relative roles of interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-10. *J. Neuroimmunol.* **48**, 213–220 (1993).

83. Gallichan, W. S., Balasa, B., Davies, J. D. & Sarvetnick, N. Pancreatic IL-4 expression results in islet-reactive T<sub>H</sub>2 cells that inhibit diabetogenic lymphocytes in the nonobese diabetic mouse. *J. Immunol.* **163**, 1696–1703 (1999).

84. Paschke, R., Schuppert, F., Taton, M. & Velu, T. Intrathyroidal cytokine gene expression profiles in autoimmune thyroiditis. *J. Endocrinol.* **141**, 309–315 (1994).

85. Heuer, M., Aust, G., Ode-Hakim, S. & Scherbaum, W. A. Different cytokine mRNA profiles in Graves' disease, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, and nonautoimmune thyroid disorders determined by quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). *Thyroid* **6**, 97–106 (1996).

86. Roura-Mir, C. *et al.* Single-cell analysis of intrathyroidal lymphocytes shows differential cytokine expression in Hashimoto's and Graves' disease. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **27**, 3290–3302 (1997).  
The first analysis of cytokine production at a single-cell level in activated T cells that infiltrate the thyroid.

87. Lombardi, G. *et al.* Antigen presentation by interferon-γ-treated thyroid follicular cells inhibits interleukin-2 (IL-2) and supports IL-4 production by B7-dependent human T cells. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **27**, 62–71 (1997).

88. Racke, M. K. *et al.* Cytokine-induced immune deviation as a therapy for inflammatory autoimmune disease. *J. Exp. Med.* **180**, 1961–1966 (1994).

89. Buer, J. *et al.* Interleukin 10 secretion and impaired effector function of major histocompatibility complex class II-restricted T cells anergized *in vivo*. *J. Exp. Med.* **187**, 177–183 (1998).

90. Fiorentino, D. F., Zlotnik, A., Mosmann, T. R., Howard, M. & O'Garra, A. IL-10 inhibits cytokine production by activated macrophages. *J. Immunol.* **147**, 3815–3822 (1991).

91. Cunha, F. Q., Moncada, S. & Liew, F. Y. Interleukin-10 (IL-10) inhibits the induction of nitric oxide synthase by interferon-γ in murine macrophages. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **182**, 1155–1159 (1992).

92. Batteux, F., Trebeden, H., Charreire, J. & Chiocchia, G. Curative treatment of experimental autoimmune thyroiditis by *in vivo* administration of plasmid DNA coding for interleukin-10. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **29**, 958–963 (1999).

93. Asseman, C., Mauze, S., Leach, M. W., Coffman, R. L. & Powrie, F. An essential role for interleukin 10 in the function of regulatory T cells that inhibit intestinal inflammation. *J. Exp. Med.* **190**, 995–1004 (1999).

94. Kawakami, A. *et al.* Thyroid-stimulating hormone inhibits Fas antigen-mediated apoptosis of human thyrocytes *in vitro*. *Endocrinology* **137**, 3163–3169 (1996).

95. Koga, M. *et al.* Immunohistochemical analysis of Bcl-2, Bax, and Bak expression in thyroid glands from patients with subacute thyroiditis. *J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **84**, 2221–2225 (1999).

Acknowledgements  
G.S. and R.D.M. are supported by the Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro.

---

### Online links

#### DATABASES  
The following terms in this article are linked online to:  
LocusLink: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/  
APAF-1 | BAK | BAX | BCL2 | BCL-X<sub>L</sub> | BID | caspase-3 | caspase-8 | caspase-9 | CD95 | CD178 | cFLIP | cytochrome c | FAP-1 | IFN-γ | IL-1 | IL-1β | IL-2 | IL-4 | IL-5 | IL-6 | IL-10 | IL-12 | inducible nitric-oxide synthase | perforin | TGF-β | thyroglobulin | thyroid peroxidase | TNF-α | TNFR superfamily | TRAIL | TRAILR1 | TRAILR2 | TSH receptor  

OMIM: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim/  
Graves' disease | Hashimoto's thyroiditis | multiple sclerosis | myasthenia gravis | type 1 diabetes  

#### FURTHER INFORMATION  
Encyclopedia of Life Sciences: http://www.els.net/ autoimmune disease  
Access to this interactive links box is free online.
