
THE B7–CD28 SUPERFAMILY

**Arlene H. Sharpe* and Gordon J. Freeman†**

The B7-1/B7-2–CD28/CTLA-4 pathway is crucial in regulating T-cell activation and tolerance. New B7 and CD28 molecules have recently been discovered and new pathways have been delineated that seem to be important for regulating the responses of previously activated T cells. Several B7 homologues are expressed on cells other than professional antigen-presenting cells, indicating new mechanisms for regulating T-cell responses in peripheral tissues. Some B7 homologues have unknown receptors, indicating that other immunoregulatory pathways remain to be described. Here, we summarize our current understanding of the new members of the B7 and CD28 families, and discuss their therapeutic potential.

---

**TOLERANCE**  
Unresponsiveness of the adaptive immune system to antigens owing to inactivation or death of antigen-specific lymphocytes induced by exposure to the antigen.

**ANERGIC**  
Rendered unresponsive to antigenic stimulation. The failure of T cell clones to respond to antigen might be a mechanism of maintaining self-tolerance.

---

The ‘two-signal’ concept of lymphocyte activation was proposed to explain discrimination of self from non-self<sup>1,2</sup> and has provided a useful model of T-cell activation and TOLERANCE<sup>3</sup>. According to the two-signal model, optimal activation of antigen-specific lymphocytes requires specific antigen recognition by lymphocytes (‘signal 1’) and additional signals (called ‘signal 2’ or co-stimulatory signals). In the absence of signal 2, lymphocytes fail to respond effectively and are rendered ANERGIC. Signal 1 is provided by the interaction of the peptide–major-histocompatibility-complex (MHC) complex with the T-cell receptor (TCR). Signal 2 is delivered to T cells by co-stimulatory cell surface molecules expressed on antigen-presenting cells (APCs). Co-stimulation is of therapeutic interest because the manipulation of co-stimulatory signals might provide a means either to enhance or to terminate immune responses.

The two-signal model oversimplifies the contribution of each signal because the strength of the TCR signal has a quantitative influence on T-cell activation and differentiation<sup>4,5</sup>. T-cell activation might occur in the absence of signal 2 if the TCR signal is very strong. In addition, both positive and negative second signals can be delivered to T cells. The balance of stimulatory and inhibitory signals is crucial to maximize protective immune responses while maintaining immunological tolerance and preventing autoimmunity. Negative second signals seem to be needed to induce T-cell tolerance, whereas positive second signals promote T-cell activation. Although the two-signal model was developed for naive lymphocytes, the immune response is a dynamic process and co-stimulatory signals can also be delivered to antigen-experienced T cells. The growing number of T-cell co-stimulatory molecules and the dynamic nature of the immune response indicate that there might be a functional hierarchy of co-stimulatory molecules for regulating the responses of naive, EFFECTOR and memory T cells.

The **B7-1/B7-2–CD28/CTLA-4** pathway is the best-characterized T-cell co-stimulatory pathway and is crucial in T-cell activation and tolerance<sup>6–10</sup>. This article focuses on new members of the B7–CD28 superfamily (**FIG. 1**). Two new pathways have recently been delineated — one involves the CD28 family member **ICOS** (inducible T-cell co-stimulator; REF.11), which interacts with a ligand that we will refer to as **ICOSL** (also known as KIAA0653 (REF.12), B7h (REF.13), GL50 (REF.14), B7RP-1 (REF.15), LICOS (REF.16) and B7-H2 (REF.17)), and the second involves the **PD-1** receptor<sup>18</sup>, which interacts with two new B7 family members, **PD-L1** (REF. 19) (also known as B7-H1; REF. 20) and PD-L2 (REF. 21) (also known as B7-DC; REF.22). Here, we briefly summarize the salient features of the B7–CD28/CTLA-4 pathway to facilitate comparisons with new B7–CD28 family members, before discussing the ICOS–ICOSL and PD-1–PD-L pathways. Finally, we summarize our current knowledge of additional B7 homologues.

---

**B7-1/B7-2–CD28/CTLA-4 pathway**

The B7-1/B7-2–CD28/CTLA-4 pathway includes two B7 family members, B7-1 (CD80)<sup>23–25</sup> and B7-2 (CD86)<sup>26–28</sup>, that have dual specificity for two CD28 family members, the stimulatory receptor CD28 (REFS 29, 30)

---

*Immunology Research Division, Department of Pathology, Brigham, and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 221 Longwood Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA  
†Department of Adult Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney Street, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA  

Correspondence to A.H.S.  
e-mail: asharpe@rics.bwh.harvard.edu  
DOI: 10.1038/nri727

antigen-receptor signalling, by promoting T-cell survival and thereby enabling cytokines to initiate T-cell clonal expansion and differentiation ${ }^{42-46}$. CD28 also optimizes the responses of previously activated T cells, promoting interleukin 2 (IL-2) production and T-cell survival. Some responses are CD28 independent and it is not yet clear whether these responses are co-stimulation independent because of strong antigenic stimuli or whether they depend on other co-stimulatory pathways.

CTLA-4 engagement delivers a negative signal, inhibiting TCR- and CD28-mediated signal transduction (FIG.2). CTLA-4 inhibits IL-2 synthesis and progression through the cell cycle and terminates T-cell responses ${ }^{47-51}$. The fatal lymphoproliferative disease ${ }^{52,53}$ that develops in $C t l a-4^{-/}$ mice owing to uncontrolled B7-1/B7-2 co-stimulation ${ }^{54}$ underscores the importance of CTLA-4 as a negative regulator of T-cell responses. CTLA-4 has a crucial role in regulating PERIPHERAL T-CELL TOLERANCE ${ }^{51,55}$, which might be induced not because of the absence of B7-1/B7-2 mediated co-stimulation but as a consequence of CTLA-4–B7-1/B7-2 interactions ${ }^{51,55}$. CTLA-4 blockade in vivo augments antitumour immunity ${ }^{56}$ and exacerbates autoimmune responses ${ }^{6,57}$. Several studies have found that the response of $C t l a-4^{-/}$ T cells is not enhanced in the presence of wild-type T cells, indicating that CTLA-4 functions in a non-T-cell-autonomous fashion, but this is an area of controversy. Other studies find that $C t l a-4^{-/}$ T cells show greater cell expansion and cytokine production, and altered cell cycle progression after adoptive transfer into wild-type mice. The outcome of an immune response involves a balance between CD28-mediated T-cell activation and CTLA-4-mediated inhibition. It is not clear how signals through CD28 and CTLA-4 are coordinated. CTLA-4 might inhibit T-cell responses by out-competing CD28 for binding to B7, by inducing immunosuppressive cytokines or by directly antagonizing CD28-mediated signalling and/or TCR-mediated signalling. These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive.

Structure and expression of ICOS and ICOSL

ICOS (also known as H4 and AILIM) was first reported on activated human T cells ${ }^{11,58,59}$ (FIG.3). The MYPPPY motif, which is essential for the binding of CD28 and CTLA-4 to B7-1/B7-2 ligands ${ }^{33}$, is not conserved in ICOS but is instead FDPPPF, which is probably important for ICOSL binding ${ }^{11}$. There is no detectable binding of B7-1 or B7-2 to ICOS (REFS 14,15,60). However, there is very weak binding of ICOSL to CD28 and CTLA-4 at 25°C but not at 37°C (REF.16). The ICOS cytoplasmic tail contains a YMFM motif that binds the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase analogous to the YNMN motif of CD28 (REF.61). CD28 has a consensus SH3-kinase binding site (PYAP) that is crucial for proliferation and IL-2 production ${ }^{62}$, but ICOS lacks this consensus site, indicating a structural basis for the distinct functions of these receptors.

In contrast to CD28, ICOS is not expressed constitutively on naive T cells but is induced rapidly on T cells after TCR engagement ${ }^{11,15,60,61,63,64}$, which indicates that ICOS might provide co-stimulatory signals to activated

and the inhibitory receptor CTLA-4 (CD152) ${ }^{31,32}$ (FIG.2).

CTLA-4 is the higher-affinity receptor for B7-1 and B7-2 (REFS 33–35). CD28 is constitutively expressed on the surface of T cells ${ }^{36}$, whereas CTLA-4 expression is rapidly upregulated following T-cell activation ${ }^{37}$. On most APC populations, B7-2 is expressed constitutively at low levels and is rapidly upregulated, whereas B7-1 is inducibly expressed later after activation ${ }^{26,38}$. The earlier expression of B7-2 indicates that B7-2 is the more important co-stimulator for initiating immune responses and this has been confirmed by analysis of knockout mice. B7-1 and B7-2 have largely overlapping functions ${ }^{39}$. Differences in B7-1 and B7-2 function seem mainly to reflect distinct expression on different cell types or at different times during an immune response, but there might be some intrinsic functional differences.

B7-1 and B7-2 provide important co-stimulatory signals to augment and sustain a T-cell response via an interaction with CD28 (REF.40; FIG.2). CD28 transmits a signal that synergizes with the TCR signal to promote T-cell activation ${ }^{41}$. CD28 engagement does not usually have a physiological effect in the absence of TCR signalling. CD28 signalling regulates the threshold for T-cell activation and significantly decreases the number of TCR engagements needed for effective T-cell activation ${ }^{4}$. The main effects of CD28 co-stimulation are to augment and sustain T-cell responses initiated by

Figure 1 | Structures of the B7-1/B7-2-CD28/CTLA-4 superfamily members. CD28 family members are IMMUNOGLOBULIN SUPERFAMILY members with a single immunoglobulin V-like domain. CD28 and CTLA-4 have a MYPPPY motif that is essential for binding B7-1 and B7-2, whereas ICOS has a FDPPPF motif and binds ICOSL but not B7-1 and B7-2. PD-1 is a receptor for both PD-L1 and PD-L2, which might also bind to other, as yet unidentified, receptors on T cells (indicated by the dotted arrows and the question mark). B7 family members are immunoglobulin superfamily members with immunoglobulin-V-like and immunoglobulin-C-like domains. Although one form of human B7-H3 has one V-like and one C-like domain, the most common form is a four-immunoglobulin extracellular domain consisting of IgV-IgC-IgV-IgC, and this is the version shown. Abbreviations: CTLA-4, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4; ICOS, inducible T-cell co-stimulator; ICOSL, ICOS ligand; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; PD-1, programmed death 1; PD-L1, PD-L2, PD-1 ligands 1 and 2; TCR, T-cell receptor.

EFFECTOR  
Lymphocyte that performs  
functions during the effector  
phases of immune responses,  
such as producing cytokines  
(helper T cells), killing cells  
infected with microorganisms  
(cytotoxic T cells) or secreting  
antibodies (differentiated B cells).

IMMUNOGLOBULIN  
SUPERFAMILY  
Share a globular structure called  
an immunoglobulin (Ig)  
domain, which was originally  
described in antibodies. This  
domain is ~110 amino acids  
long with an internal disulphide  
bond and two layers of β-pleated  
sheet. Ig domains are called  
V-like or C-like, with IgV  
domains having two extra  
β-strands and a characteristic  
DxYxGxC motif at the second  
Ig cysteine. The B7 and CD28  
superfamilies are subsets of the  
Ig superfamily.

both T-helper type 1 and 2 (T<sub>H</sub>1 and T<sub>H</sub>2) cells during the initial phase of differentiation, but levels remain high on T<sub>H</sub>2 cells and decrease on T<sub>H</sub>1 cells<sup>61,64</sup>. ICOS expression has also been reported on rat B cells<sup>59</sup>, but not on B cells from other species. The expression pattern of ICOS on T cells in germinal centres<sup>60,63</sup> indicates a role for ICOS in T-cell help for B cells, and functional studies have confirmed this<sup>67–70</sup>.

In contrast to B7-1 and B7-2, ICOSL is expressed not only on haematopoietic cells but also on other cell types<sup>13–17,71,72</sup>. The stimuli that regulate ICOSL expression are not well understood but seem to be distinct from those that regulate B7-1 and B7-2. Staining with monoclonal antibodies shows that ICOSL is expressed at low levels on resting B cells, some macrophages and dendritic cells<sup>13–15,65</sup>. ICOSL has also been observed on a small subset of CD3<sup>+</sup> T cells<sup>14</sup>. Ig or **CD40** crosslinking does not strongly upregulate ICOSL expression on human B cells, in contrast to B7-1 and B7-2 (REF. 65). **Interferon-γ** (IFN-γ) induces ICOSL expression on B cells, monocytes and some dendritic cells<sup>15,65</sup>. B7-1 and B7-2 can also be upregulated by IFN-γ, but the mechanisms seem to be distinct: B7-1/B7-2 induction by IFN-γ depends on nuclear factor κB (NF-κB), whereas ICOSL induction is NF-κB independent<sup>65</sup>. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (**GM-CSF**) and tumour necrosis factor α (**TNF-α**) induce ICOSL expression on CD34<sup>+</sup> progenitor cells before B7-1/B7-2 induction<sup>72</sup>. TNF-α induces ICOSL mRNA expression in 3T3 and embryonic fibroblasts<sup>13</sup>. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a potent inducer of TNF-α, induces *Icosl* mRNA in non-lymphoid tissues but not in spleens of mice given LPS<sup>13</sup>. IFN-γ inhibits ICOSL expression on embryonic fibroblasts<sup>13</sup>. Taken together, these data suggest that ICOSL production might be regulated by inflammatory signals in peripheral sites. The functional significance of ICOSL production on non-lymphoid cells is not yet clear. Further studies are needed to determine which stimuli are most important for regulating ICOSL production and which cell types are most important for delivering the ICOSL co-stimulatory signal.

### Functions of ICOS and ICOSL

#### Effects on T-cell proliferation and differentiation
During the initial activation of naive T cells, the effects of ICOS on T-cell proliferation and IL-2 production are modest in comparison to those of CD28. An ICOS-Ig fusion protein does not inhibit the proliferation of naive DO.11.10 TCR transgenic T cells in response to peptide<sup>64</sup>. Naive *Icos*<sup>−/−</sup> T cells show only modest defects in T-cell proliferation in most studies<sup>67,70</sup>. Crosslinking of ICOS on human or mouse T cells *in vitro* can stimulate T-cell proliferation in the presence of suboptimal anti-CD3-antibody concentrations, but CD28 is much more potent than ICOS<sup>11,15,17,61,63,64</sup>. ICOS co-stimulation can produce the low levels of IL-2 that are needed for initial proliferation but are not sufficient for sustained proliferative responses<sup>73</sup>. Therefore, one key difference between ICOS and CD28 is that there are unique roles for CD28 in the initial co-stimulation of IL-2 production by naive T cells and in sustained expansion of recently activated T cells.

cytokines can be suppressed by an ICOS–Ig fusion protein upon reactivation in vitro. When ICOS–Ig is given at the time of infection with the gastrointestinal nematode Nippostrongylus brasiliensis, a model for studying T<sub>H</sub>2 responses in vivo, levels of both T<sub>H</sub>1 (IFN-γ) and T<sub>H</sub>2 (IL-4 and IL-5) cytokines are reduced, indicating that the ICOS pathway can enhance the production of both T<sub>H</sub>1 and T<sub>H</sub>2 cytokines in vivo<sup>66</sup>. In a T<sub>H</sub>1-mediated cardiac allograft rejection model, blockade or elimination of ICOS co-stimulation prolongs acute cardiac allograft survival and suppresses upregulation of intragraft cytokine production, particularly IFN-γ and IL-10 (REF. 78). ICOS blockade also can prevent the transplant arteriosclerosis that develops when the CD40–CD40L pathway is blocked<sup>78</sup>. B7–CD28 blockade similarly prevents graft arteriosclerosis<sup>79,80</sup>. Both ICOS and CD28 therefore promote inflammation underlying graft arteriopathy. The crucial role of both pathways in regulating antibody responses<sup>67,68,70,81</sup> might contribute to inflammatory responses in graft arteriosclerosis.

ICOS in autoimmune diseases. Studies of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE; an animal model for multiple sclerosis), a T<sub>H</sub>1 disease mediated by myelin-specific CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells, further show the influence of ICOS on T<sub>H</sub>1 responses and indicate that the outcome of ICOS blockade might be distinct when ICOS co-stimulation is blocked during T-cell priming than during the effector phase of EAE<sup>68,82,83</sup>. EAE induced by myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) is greatly exacerbated in *Icos*<sup>−/−</sup> mice, with increased IFN-γ production compared with wild-type mice<sup>68</sup>. Similarly, ICOS blockade during induction of EAE exacerbated disease and resulted in enhanced IFN-γ production<sup>82</sup>. Therefore, ICOS blockade during priming leads to T<sub>H</sub>1 polarization of the response. Such T<sub>H</sub>1 polarization might occur because of the blockade of ICOS-mediated co-stimulation of T<sub>H</sub>2 cells and therefore reflect impaired IL-4, IL-13 and/or IL-10 production. Mice deficient in CD28 or in both B7-1 and B7-2 are resistant to the induction of EAE<sup>84,85</sup>, in contrast to the exacerbated EAE that develops in *Icos*<sup>−/−</sup> mice. These differences might reflect the predominant role of CD28 in stimulating T-cell clonal expansion: elimination or blockade of CD28 or ICOS during priming skews T<sub>H</sub> cells to T<sub>H</sub>1 but, because T-cell expansion is markedly impaired without CD28, the effects of skewing to T<sub>H</sub>1 are only evident when ICOS is blocked.

Interestingly, priming of myelin-specific TCR transgenic T cells in vitro in the presence of ICOS–Ig inhibited their ability to induce EAE, in contrast to studies of ICOS–Ig blockade during T-cell priming in vivo<sup>83</sup>. Priming of myelin-specific TCR transgenic T cells in vitro in the presence of ICOS–Ig reduced T-cell proliferation, increased T-cell apoptosis and suppressed IFN-γ and IL-10 (but not IL-2) production. The reason for the opposing outcomes of ICOS blockade during T-cell priming in vitro and in vivo is not yet clear but might reflect a role for ICOS on IL-10-producing REGULATORY T CELLS as well as effector T cells during ICOS blockade in vivo. Co-stimulation through ICOS is very effective at

Figure 3 | ICOS–ICOSL pathway. ICOS engagement promotes T-helper-cell differentiation and effector function, and is particularly important for interleukin 10 (IL-10) production but has a modest role in regulating T-cell expansion and IL-2 production. ICOS engagement can upregulate CD40L, and this pathway has a key role in promoting immunoglobulin isotype switching. Little is known about signalling pathways downstream of ICOS. ICOS has a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase motif in its cytoplasmic tail. Abbreviations: ICOS, inducible T-cell co-stimulator; ICOSL, ICOS ligand; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; Y, tyrosine.

Signals through ICOS seem to be more important for regulating cytokine production by recently activated and effector T cells<sup>11,61</sup>. Stimulatory anti-ICOS monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) or an ICOSL–Ig fusion protein can enhance production of IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, IFN-γ, TNF-α and GM-CSF<sup>11,64</sup>. Blockade of ICOS during initial stimulation of naive T cells enhances T<sub>H</sub>1 differentiation<sup>64</sup>. When restimulated, differentiated *Icos*<sup>−/−</sup> T cells can produce IFN-γ but fail to produce IL-4 (REFS 67, 68, 70). This defect in T<sub>H</sub>2 cytokine production is not due to an obligatory role for ICOS for T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation but rather results from a crucial role for ICOS in regulating IL-4 and IL-13 production by effector cells.

ICOS in T<sub>H</sub>1 and T<sub>H</sub>2 effector responses. In studies of allergic airway disease, T<sub>H</sub>2 effector function, but not T<sub>H</sub>2 differentiation, is prevented by ICOS blockade<sup>74</sup>. ICOS blockade at the time of antigen priming has little effect upon subsequent airway challenge in normal mice<sup>75</sup>. *Icos*<sup>−/−</sup> mice are susceptible to induction of inflammatory lung disease by airway challenge with ovalbumin (OVA) in primed mice<sup>68</sup>, but produce less IL-4 and IL-13 (REF. 68). ICOS blockade reduces lung inflammation and airway hyper-reactivity after adoptive transfer of highly polarized T<sub>H</sub>2 cells to naive mice<sup>61</sup>. Blockade of ICOS 21 days after priming significantly reduces lung inflammation after airway antigen challenge<sup>75</sup>, whereas blockade of the B7–CD28 pathway after priming does not inhibit T<sub>H</sub>2 effector cytokine production. CD28 and ICOS co-stimulation therefore have distinct roles in regulating T<sub>H</sub>2 responses: CD28 has a dominant role at the time of antigen priming, whereas ICOS regulates effector T<sub>H</sub>2 responses<sup>75</sup>.

Recent studies show that ICOS also regulates T<sub>H</sub>1 effector responses<sup>76,77</sup>. Production of both T<sub>H</sub>1 and T<sub>H</sub>2

REGULATORY T CELLS  
Block the function and/or activation of other T cells. They might exert their effects by secreting cytokines or by cell–cell contact. There are no markers that definitively identify regulatory T cells.

REVIEWs

Table 1 | Comparison of CD28 and inducible T-cell co-stimulator (ICOS)

| Property                     | CD28                                                                                   | ICOS                                                                 |
|------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Ligands                      | B7-1, B7-2                                                                             | ICOSL                                                                |
| **Receptor expression**      |                                                                                        |                                                                      |
| Naive T cells                | Almost all mouse T cells; 95% of human CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells; 50% of human CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells | No                                                                  |
| Activated T cells            | Yes                                                                                    | Yes, T<sub>H</sub>2 > T<sub>H</sub>1 cells                              |
| Memory T cells               | Yes                                                                                    | Yes                                                                  |
| Tissue location of receptor   | Thymus and peripheral lymphoid organs                                                 | Human foetal and new-born thymus; thymic medulla and cortico-medullary junction in mice; germinal centres in lymphoid tissues |
| **Ligand expression in**     |                                                                                        |                                                                      |
| **lymphoid tissues**         |                                                                                        |                                                                      |
| Location                     | Expressed on B cells, monocytes, DCs and T cells                                       | Expressed on B cells, monocytes, DCs and T cells                       |
| Kinetics and regulation      | B7-2 constitutively at low levels, rapidly induced by a variety of stimuli including LPS, Ig and CD40 crosslinking, cytokines. B7-1 expressed only inducibly and later than B7-2 | Induced by IFN-γ on B cells, monocytes and DCs; induced by GM-CSF/TNF-α on CD34<sup>+</sup> cells earlier than B7-1/B7-2; not induced by progenitor Ig or CD40 crosslinking on B cells or CD3<sup>+</sup> T cells |
| **Ligand expression in**     |                                                                                        |                                                                      |
| **nonlymphoid tissues**      |                                                                                        |                                                                      |
| Location                     | Not constitutive                                                                       | Variety of tissues including kidney, liver, peritoneum, lung, testes, embryonic fibroblasts |
| Kinetics and regulation      | Induced by IFN-γ on some fibroblasts and epithelial cells                               | Induced by TNF-α, LPS and IFN-γ on fibroblasts and nonlymphoid tissues |
| **Function**                 |                                                                                        |                                                                      |
| Activation of naive T cells  | Yes                                                                                    | No                                                                   |
| Proliferation and IL-2 production | Main role                                                                           | Minor role                                                          |
| T<sub>H</sub>-cell differentiation | Yes, T<sub>H</sub>2 > T<sub>H</sub>1                                              | Yes                                                                  |
| Isotype-class switching      | Yes                                                                                    | Yes                                                                  |
| T-effector-cell function     | No (indirect effects related to role in T-cell expansion)                             | Yes                                                                  |
| T-cell survival              | Yes                                                                                    | Not clear                                                            |
| Defects in gene-knockout mice | Activation of naive T cells                                                           | Effector T-cell function                                             |
|                              | T<sub>H</sub>-cell differentiation                                                     | T<sub>H</sub>-cell differentiation                                   |
|                              | Isotype-class switching                                                               | Isotype class switching                                              |
|                              | T-cell survival                                                                       |                                                                      |

Abbreviations: DCs, dendritic cells; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; IFN-γ, interferon γ; Ig, immunoglobulin; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; T<sub>H</sub>, T-helper cell; T<sub>H</sub>1, CD4<sup>+</sup>T<sub>H</sub> type 1 cells; T<sub>H</sub>2, CD4<sup>+</sup>T<sub>H</sub> type 2 cells; TNF-α, tumour necrosis factor α.

enhancing IL-10 production and is more effective than co-stimulation through CD28 (REF.11). The IL-10–IL-12 regulatory loop is crucial in regulating EAE<sup>86</sup>, because Il10<sup>−/−</sup> but not Il4<sup>−/−</sup> mice develop exacerbated EAE<sup>87</sup>. Further studies are needed to investigate the role of ICOS on IL-10-producing regulatory T cells and tolerance.

Studies of the role of ICOS during the effector phase have shown that ICOS blockade after EAE induction inhibits EAE progression and ameliorates EAE after disease onset<sup>82,83</sup>, indicating that ICOS co-stimulation has a key role in sustaining effector T<sub>H</sub>1 cells. When B7–CD28 interactions are blocked during the effector phase, EAE is transient and mild, indicating that B7–CD28 interactions also are needed to sustain effector T-cell responses<sup>84</sup>. However, the effects of CD28 signalling are primarily on T-cell expansion, whereas the effects of ICOS are mainly on effector cytokine production.

ICOS in T-cell–B-cell collaboration. ICOS has an important role in enhancing T-cell-dependent B-cell help. Transgenic mice producing a secreted form of

ICOSL-Ig develop lymphoid hyperplasia and high serum levels of IgG (REF.15). Icos<sup>−/−</sup> mice exhibit profound deficits in immunoglobulin isotype class switching and germinal centre formation after immunization with model protein antigens under most conditions<sup>67–70</sup>. This deficit can be overcome by CD40 co-stimulation, suggesting that ICOS promotes isotype switching by regulating the CD40–CD40L pathway<sup>67</sup>. ICOS can upregulate CD40L but its production is not absolutely dependent upon ICOS signalling<sup>67,70</sup>. The defect in class switching and germinal centre formation observed in Icos<sup>−/−</sup> mice is similar to that in B7-1<sup>−/−</sup>/B7-2<sup>−/−</sup> mice but differs in that B7-1<sup>−/−</sup>/B7-2<sup>−/−</sup> mice are unable to switch class or to form germinal centres irrespective of the immunization route or adjuvant used<sup>81</sup>, whereas Icos<sup>−/−</sup> mice can class switch and form germinal centres under strong inflammatory conditions<sup>67</sup>. This indicates that B7-1 and B7-2 elicit class switching in the absence of ICOS. Therefore, there are overlapping and distinct crucial roles for ICOS and B7–CD28 interactions in T-cell–B-cell collaboration.

ICOS in CD8⁺ T-cell responses. ICOS also influences CD8⁺ T-cell responses. ICOSL co-stimulation of CD8⁺ T cells can enhance IL-2 and IFN-γ production predominantly in recall responses compared with naive responses. ICOSL expression in an immunogenic, MHC class I⁺ tumour led to enhanced tumour rejection in mice. CD8⁺ lytic effector function does not seem to be ICOS dependent. ICOSL does not enhance cytotoxic T-cell effector function, nor does inhibition of the ICOS pathway impair cytotoxic T-cell responses to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) or vesicular stomatitis virus infection in mice.

ICOS–CD28/CTLA-4 interactions. In vivo studies have indicated synergies between ICOS and CD28 co-stimulation (for comparisons of CD28 and ICOS, see TABLE 1). Inhibition of ICOS in Cd28⁻/⁻ mice further reduced Tₕ1/Tₕ2 polarization in murine viral and parasitic infection models. ICOS-Ig can abrogate IFN-γ production by virus-specific T cells from LCMV-infected Cd28⁻/⁻ mice. ICOS can regulate both CD28-dependent and CD28-independent CD4⁺ subset responses. CTLA-4 engagement can oppose T-cell activation via either CD28 or ICOS.

### Structure and expression of PD-1 and PD-L

PD-1 lacks the MYPPPY motif found in CD28 and CTLA-4, and the additional cysteine that allows these structures to homodimerize. The cytoplasmic domain of PD-1 contains two tyrosines, one of which forms part of an IMMUNORECEPTOR TYROSINE-BASED INHIBITION MOTIF (ITIM) motif (V/IxYxxL/V). Two novel B7 homologues, PD-L1 and PD-L2, have been identified as ligands for PD-1 (REFS 19–22). PD-1 only binds PD-L1 and PD-L2, and the PD-1 ligands do not bind to additional CD28 superfamily members (FIG.4).

PD-1 is expressed by activated, but not by unstimulated, human CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ T cells, B cells and myeloid cells, in contrast to the more restricted expression of CD28 and CTLA-4 (predominately in T cells). PD-1 was isolated by subtractive hybridization of a T-cell hybridoma undergoing programmed cell death, hence the name PD-1 (programmed death 1). Further studies have shown that expression is associated with cellular activation, not death. Transfection of PD-1 into cells or crosslinking of PD-1 by mAbs did not affect programmed cell death. PD-1 is expressed in the thymus primarily on CD4⁻CD8⁻ (double negative) T cells, late in the transition from double negative to double positive (REFS 92,93). Double negative γδ thymocytes express high levels of PD-1, and natural killer T cells express low levels of PD-1 (REF.93). PD-L1 and PD-L2 mRNAs are produced moderately in the thymus, and PD-L1 protein is found on the cell surface of thymic epithelial cells (D. Dorfman and G. Freeman, unpublished observations). Mutations in the winged-helix transcription factor Whn, which is lacking in the nude mouse, result in the loss of production of Pd-l1 mRNA in thymic epithelial cells.

**IMMUNORECEPTOR TYROSINE-BASED INHIBITION MOTIF (ITIM)**  
Six-amino-acid motif (V/IxYxxL/V) found in the cytoplasmic tails of some inhibitory receptors in the immune system. The tyrosine is phosphorylated by Src tyrosine kinases and subsequently binds protein tyrosine phosphatases, which inhibit signal transduction pathways.

---

Figure 4 | PD-1 contains two tyrosines in its cytoplasmic tail, forming ITIM and ITSM motifs. Mutation of the ITSM tyrosine but not the ITIM tyrosine abolishes PD-1-mediated inhibitory activity. The signalling pathways by which PD-1 exerts its effects are just beginning to be understood. Ligation of TCR and PD-1 can lead to tyrosine phosphorylation (P) and activation of SHP-2, resulting in dephosphorylation of signalling molecules and reduced cytokine mRNA synthesis. Ligation of both PD-1 and the BCR can inhibit tyrosine phosphorylation of effector signalling molecules.

and B7-2 mRNAs, which are restricted to haematopoietic cells. PD-L1 and PD-L2 are upregulated upon activation or IFN-γ treatment of human monocytes and dendritic cells. Human and murine T cells express PD-L1 after TCR or mitogen stimulation. PD-L1 is highly expressed on placental syncytiotrophoblasts, the cells at the mother–foetus interface, suggesting a role in immune suppression by the foetus (D. Dorfman and G. Freeman, unpublished observations). Immunohistochemistry shows that human PD-L1 is expressed on endothelial cells in the myocardium and at lower levels on cardiomyocytes. PD-L1 protein is expressed constitutively on the cell surface of a microvascular endothelial cell line and is strongly upregulated by IFN-α, β or γ (REF.95). PD-L1 upregulation on endothelial cells is abolished in IFN-γ-deficient mice, although constitutive expression is unchanged. PD-L1 and PD-L2 mRNA expression are upregulated in a variety of tumour cell lines, and cell surface expression of PD-L1 has been shown on some human breast cancer cell lines. Immunohistochemical studies indicate that PD-L1 is expressed on most lung and breast tumour tissues and many ovarian tumour tissues (D. Dorfman and G. Freeman, unpublished observations).

### Functions of PD-1 and PD-L

PD-1 deficient mice. Pd-1⁻/⁻ mice were generated by deletion of the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domain exons, and show the inhibitory role of PD-1 in vivo. Pd-1⁻/⁻ mice exhibit splenomegaly, with a marked increase in myeloid cell numbers and a moderate increase in B-cell numbers. B cells from these mice respond more vigorously to anti-IgM crosslinking, but T-cell responses to anti-CD3 antibody are unchanged. Pd-1⁻/⁻ myeloid cells have an augmented response to
GM-CSF<sup>96</sup>. PD-1 influences thymic selection modestly after TCR-β rearrangement in CD4<sup>+</sup>CD8<sup>-</sup>T cells<sup>93</sup>. Pd-1<sup>-/-</sup> mice exhibit an increase in double positive T cells but a reduced number of single-positive CD8 T cells, suggesting a role for this pathway in setting thresholds for thymocyte differentiations<sup>93,94</sup>.

Pd-1<sup>-/-</sup> mice of the C57BL/6 strain develop a late onset, progressive arthritis and lupus-like glomerulonephritis with high levels of IgG3 deposition<sup>97</sup>. Introduction of the *lpr* (*fas* gene) mutation into Pd-1<sup>-/-</sup> mice accelerates disease progression and most mice have symptoms by 6 months of age. By contrast, Pd-1<sup>-/-</sup> mice of the Balb/c strain develop an early onset dilated cardiomyopathy, with 50% dead by 20 weeks of age<sup>98</sup>. Pd-1<sup>-/-</sup>Rag-2<sup>-/-</sup>Balb/c mice do not develop the disease, implicating T and/or B cells in the process. The affected hearts do not have significant mononuclear infiltrates but have IgG and complement deposition. Affected mice develop high titres of an autoantibody that recognizes a heart-specific 33 kDa protein on the surface of cardiomyocytes but do not have other common autoantibodies.

Pd-1<sup>-/-</sup> mice also show that PD-1 has a role in regulating CD8<sup>+</sup>T-cell responses. In wild-type, H-2L<sup>d</sup>-reactive 2C-TCR mice (H-2<sup>b/d</sup> genotype), the 2C-TCR is negatively selected in the thymus and only a few 2C-TCR-positive cells are found in the periphery, where they do not become activated or cause disease<sup>93,97</sup>. By contrast, in Pd-1<sup>-/-</sup>2C-TCR H-2<sup>b/d</sup> mice, the 2C-TCR is negatively selected in the thymus but the few 2C-TCR cells that progress to the periphery become activated and cause a lethal graft-versus-host-like disease. *In vitro*, previously activated 2C-TCR T cells from Pd-1<sup>-/-</sup>C57BL/6 mice proliferated more vigorously in response to H-2<sup>d</sup>splenocytes than did wild-type 2C-TCR T cells, consistent with a role for PD-1 as a negative regulator of immune responses. These results indicate that potentially autoreactive T cells in the periphery can become activated in the absence of PD-1 and implicate PD-1 in regulating peripheral T and/or B cell tolerance. It is not clear whether there is an intrinsic dysfunction of Pd-1<sup>-/-</sup> B cells, a B-cell dysfunction that is secondary to the dysregulation of Pd-1<sup>-/-</sup> T cells or both. PD-1 on activated B cells and PD-L1 on normal tissues, follicular dendritic cells or activated T cells might allow regulatory interactions to occur.

**In vitro studies of PD-L1 and PD-L2 function.** Because PD-1 is induced on activated T cells, the roles of PD-L1 or PD-L2 in regulating the responses of previously activated T cells have been examined. Previously activated DO.11 TCR transgenic CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells were stimulated with peptide and CHO cells transfected with MHC class II and either PD-L1 or PD-L2, with or without B7-2. Engagement of PD-1 by PD-L1 or PD-L2 inhibits TCR-mediated proliferation and cytokine production by previously activated T cells<sup>19,21,99</sup>. PD-L1 and PD-L2 strongly inhibit both T-cell proliferation and cytokine production at low antigen concentrations, even in the presence of strong B7–CD28 signals. By contrast, at high antigen concentrations, PD-L1 and

PD-L2 do not inhibit T-cell proliferation but markedly reduce the production of multiple cytokines.

T-cell proliferation and cytokine production by both resting and previously activated CD4 and CD8 T cells, and even naive T cells from umbilical-cord blood, are inhibited by PD-L1–Ig or PD-L2–Ig fusion proteins coupled to beads with an anti-CD3 mAb<sup>19,21,99</sup>. No inhibition was observed when Pd-1<sup>-/-</sup> T cells were stimulated with anti-CD3 mAb plus PD-L1–Ig, indicating that the inhibitory signal was transduced by PD-1. Using 2C-TCR transgenic, naive CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells and transfectants expressing MHC class I and PD-L1, the PD-L–PD-1 pathway was found strongly to inhibit CD8<sup>+</sup>T-cell proliferation<sup>99</sup>. This inhibition could be overcome by the addition of exogenous IL-2 but not by a co-stimulatory signal provided by anti-CD28 mAb. By contrast, PD-1-mediated inhibition of CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells could be overcome by a strong CD28 signal, probably because of higher IL-2 production by CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells<sup>19,21,99</sup>. PD-L–PD-1 interactions lead to cell cycle arrest in G<sub>0</sub>–G<sub>1</sub> but do not increase cell death<sup>21,99</sup>. These results show the capacity of the PD-L–PD-1 pathways to antagonize a strong B7–CD28 signal when antigenic stimulation is weak or limiting, demonstrate overlapping functions for PD-L1 and PD-L2, and indicate a key role for the PD-L–PD-1 pathway in downregulating T-cell responses. Downregulation of growth factor production is probably an important mechanism of PD-1-mediated inhibition.

The inhibitory effects of PD-L–PD-1 interactions have prompted studies investigating whether this pathway is used by CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup> regulatory T cells<sup>100</sup>. CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup> regulatory T cells do not constitutively express PD-L1. CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup> regulatory T cells inhibited CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>-</sup>T-cell proliferation and IFN-γ and IL-13 production in response to anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 antibodies and accessory cells. The inhibitory effect of CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup> regulatory T cells on this proliferation was prevented by a blocking anti-PD-L1 mAb at low ratios of regulatory CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup>:CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>-</sup> cells. However, when more regulatory cells were added, suppression was restored. These results suggest that the PD-L–PD-1 pathway might have a role in CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup> regulatory cells but is not the major inhibitory pathway.

Not all studies support an inhibitory role for PD-L1 and PD-L2. Two studies indicate that these B7 homologues can co-stimulate T-cell proliferation<sup>20,22,101</sup>. Resting T cells stimulated with low levels of anti-CD3 antibody and immobilized PD-L1–Ig exhibited moderately enhanced proliferation, strongly upregulated IL-10 production and modestly upregulated IFN-γ and GM-CSF production, but had little effect on IL-2 or IL-4 production. CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells were more strongly stimulated than CD8<sup>+</sup>T cells. Stimulation was observed with Cd28<sup>-/-</sup>T cells. Neither cytotoxic T-cell generation nor lysis were enhanced by PD-L1. Similarly, when resting CD4<sup>+</sup>T cells were stimulated with immobilized anti-CD3 antibody plus PD-L2–Ig, proliferation and IFN-γ production were strongly enhanced but there was little effect on IL-2, IL-4 or IL-10 production. Little effect was observed on CD8<sup>+</sup>T-cell proliferation.The reasons for the contradictory results of studies with PD-1 ligands are not known. One important difference is the use of resting T cells in most of the studies indicating a co-stimulatory function for PD-1 ligands, and the use of previously activated T cells in studies pointing to an inhibitory role. However, some experiments with resting T cells also show inhibition. One possible explanation might be that there is, in parallel to the B7–CD28/CTLA4 pathway, a second receptor for PD-1 ligands with the capacity to deliver a stimulatory signal like CD28. The observation that PD-L1–Ig and anti-CD3 mAb do not stimulate $Pd-1^{-/-}$ T cells militates against this possibility; only a loss of inhibition compared with wild-type T cells is observed in $Pd-1^{-/-}$ T cells$^{19}$. In addition, binding of PD-L1–Ig to unstimulated T cells has not been detected (G. Freeman, unpublished observations). Studies using blocking antibodies and knockout mice are needed to resolve these differences.

**PD-1 signalling.** The signalling pathways by which PD-1 mediates its effects are beginning to be elucidated. Like other members of the CD28 family, PD-1 does not transduce a signal when crosslinked alone but does so in the context of B- or T-cell antigen–receptor crosslinking. In a Jurkat T-cell model, ligation of both the TCR and PD-1 resulted in rapid tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of SHP-2, which dephosphorylates signalling molecules in the membrane-proximal TCR signalling cascade, resulting in a diminished signal and reduced cytokine mRNA synthesis$^{21}$.

In a B-lymphoma cell line model, chimeric molecules containing the extracellular domain of Fc$\gamma$RIIB were fused to the PD-1 cytoplasmic domain$^{102}$. Ligation of the chimeric PD-1 molecule with the B-cell receptor (BCR) inhibited BCR-mediated growth retardation, Ca$^{2+}$ mobilization and tyrosine phosphorylation of effector molecules including Syk, phospholipase C$\gamma$2, phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase, Vav and ERK1/ERK2, but not Lyn or Dok. Both tyrosines in the PD-1 cytoplasmic domain were phosphorylated, resulting in the rapid recruitment and activation of SHP-2 but not SHP-1 or SHIP (SH2-containing inositol phosphatase). Surprisingly, it is not the ITIM-motif tyrosine that has the greatest role in mediating the inhibitory signals of PD-1, but the more carboxy (C)-terminal tyrosine. Mutation of the C-terminal tyrosine to phenylalanine abolishes recruitment of SHP-2 and inhibitory activity. This more C-terminal tyrosine of PD-1 forms an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based switch motif (ITSM), with the consensus sequence TxYxxV/I, recently identified in CD150 (SLAM)$^{103}$. The ITSM motif switches the association of the CD150 cytoplasmic domain with different phosphatases via SAP (SH2D1A adaptor protein). In the presence of SAP, SHIP preferentially binds the CD150 cytoplasmic domain but, in the absence of SAP, SHP-2 preferentially binds. Because CD150 has been reported to transduce both positive and negative signals, this motif might be relevant to the function of PD-1 ligands, which have also been reported to deliver either positive or negative signals.

### Other B7 homologues

**B7-H3.** B7-H3 is the newest member of the B7 superfamily. In conjunction with anti-CD3 mAb, B7-H3–Ig fusion protein co-stimulates CD4$^+$ and CD8$^+$ T-cell proliferation, although less than B7-1–Ig, and stimulates IFN-$\gamma$ production and CD8$^+$ lytic activity$^{104}$. B7-H3 is not expressed on resting B or T cells, monocytes, or dendritic cells, but it is induced on dendritic cells by IFN-$\gamma$ and on monocytes by GM-CSF. Cells transfected with B7-H3 do not bind to CD28–Ig, CTLA4–Ig, ICOS–Ig or PD-1–Ig fusion proteins. A B7-H3–Ig fusion protein binds to activated but not to resting T cells, indicating the expression of a receptor on activated T cells. Although human B7-H3 DNA sequence was published with an extracellular domain consisting of an IgV and an IgC domain$^{104}$, most expressed sequence tags indicate that a four-Ig-domain extracellular region (IgV–IgC–IgV–IgC) is the common form. Mouse B7-H3, however, is predicted to have a two-domain structure owing to stop mutations in two of the four Ig domains (G. Freeman, unpublished observations).

**Butyrophilins.** The butyrophilin (BTN) family is related to the B7s and is located in the MHC locus on human chromosome 6 (REFS 105–110). The prototype butyrophilin (BTN1A1), named from the Greek *butyros* and *philos*, meaning ‘having an affinity for butterfat’, is expressed only in lactating breast and makes up 20% of the protein in the membrane of milk fat globules. BTN1A1 contains a B30.2 domain of $\sim$170 amino acids in its cytoplasmic tail. The B30.2 domain is predicted to fold into a globular structure resembling two Ig folds, providing a structure for intracellular interactions$^{111,112}$. The B30.2 domain interacts with xanthine oxidase in the membrane of breast milk fat globules and might, with other proteins, form a scaffold for assembly of the milk fat globule membrane and expulsion of lipid droplets$^{112}$. BTN1A1 is rapidly degraded in the gastric tract$^{113}$.

Immediately adjacent to *BTN1A1* in the human MHC locus are six additional BTN-like genes$^{106}$. They are not breast specific and mRNA is widely but weakly produced in all tissues$^{106}$. An eighth BTN-like gene, *BTNL2* (*BTL-II*), is located near *HLA-DR* (REF. 107). No immunological function has yet been found for the butyrophilins. MOG is also related to the BTN and B7s$^{108}$, and its gene is in the MHC locus, but it is expressed only in the nervous system. In rodents, a CD4$^+$ T-cell response to BTN1A1 can lead to EAE through antigenic mimicry with MOG. Furthermore, BTN1A1 peptides can be used to suppress MOG-induced EAE$^{114}$.

Several other genes outside the MHC have been described as butyrophilin-like$^{108,115}$. Indeed, PD-L1 and PD-L2 were first annotated in the NCBI database as butyrophilin-like genes and were subsequently shown to have immunological functions. Additional searches of the database reveal genes more distantly related to the B7/BTN gene family, and a summary of their structures and homologies is shown in ONLINE TABLES 1, 2 (REF. 115).
Table 2 | Comparison of CTLA-4 and PD-1

| Property                     | CTLA-4                                                                                   | PD-1                                                                                          |
|-----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Ligands                     | B7-1, B7-2                                                                               | PD-L1, PD-L2                                                                                  |
| **Receptor expression**     |                                                                                          |                                                                                              |
| T cells                     | Rapidly upregulated after activation                                                     | Rapidly upregulated after activation                                                         |
| B cells                     | No                                                                                      | Upregulated after activation                                                                  |
| Myeloid cells                | No                                                                                      | Upregulated after activation                                                                  |
| **Ligand expression in**    |                                                                                          |                                                                                              |
| **lymphoid tissues**        |                                                                                          |                                                                                              |
| Location                    | Expressed on B cells, monocytes, DCs and T cells                                          | PD-L1 expressed on B cells, monocytes and DCs; PD-L2 expressed on DCs. PD-L1 but not PD-L2 expressed on T cells; PD-L1 and PD-L2 expressed on thymic epithelial cells, in the spleen and in lymph nodes |
| Kinetics and regulation     | B7-2 constitutively at low levels and rapidly induced by variety of stimuli including LPS, Ig and CD40 crosslinking, cytokines<br>B7-1 expressed only inducibly and later than B7-2 | PD-L1 and PD-L2 induced by activation or IFN-γ treatment of monocytes and DCs                                                                           |
| **Ligand expression in**    |                                                                                          |                                                                                              |
| **non-lymphoid tissues**    |                                                                                          |                                                                                              |
| Location                    | Not constitutive                                                                         | PD-L1 and PD-L2 expressed on placenta and heart (PD-L1 on placental syncytiotrophoblasts at high levels and cardiac myocytes and endothelium). PD-L1 but not PD-L2 expressed on pancreas, lung, liver and foetal liver. PD-L1 expressed in a variety of tumour cell lines including breast and ovarian tumours |
| Kinetics and regulation     | Induced by IFN-γ on some fibroblasts and epithelial cells                                 | PD-L1 induced on endothelial cells by IFN-α, -β and -γ                                                                                                  |
| Function                    |                                                                                          |                                                                                              |
| Proliferation and IL-2 production | Inhibits                                                                              | Inhibits                                                                                     |
| Effector cytokine production | Inhibits                                                                                | Inhibits                                                                                     |
| Cell cycle                  | Blocks G1-S progression                                                                  | Blocks G1-S progression                                                                      |
| Tolerance                   | Role in CD4+ peripheral T-cell tolerance                                                | Small role in central T-cell tolerance. Role in peripheral B-and/or T-cell tolerance needs to be clarified |
| Defects in gene-knockout mice | Early onset of phenotype (within days of birth)<br>Early lethality (2–3 weeks), associated with multiorgan T-cell infiltrates and tissue destruction, particularly myositis, myocarditis and pancreatitis<br>Defects in the regulation of:<br>• T-cell proliferation (severe)<br>• T<sub>H</sub> cytokine production<br>• T-cell-cycle progression | Late onset of phenotype (weeks to months after birth)<br>Late lethality (5–30 weeks, with incomplete penetrance and earlier in Balb/c than C57BL/6 mice) associated with glomerulonephritis, arthritis and cardiomyopathy<br>Defects in the regulation of:<br>• T-cell proliferation (mild)<br>• B-cell proliferation<br>• Myeloid-cell proliferation |

Abbreviations: DCs, dendritic cells; IFN, interferon; Ig, immunoglobulin; IL-2, interleukin 2; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; T<sub>H</sub>, T-helper cell

**Therapeutic manipulation**

Because of the crucial role of ICOS in regulating effector T-cell responses, this pathway might be a particularly attractive target for inhibiting ongoing inflammatory responses with T<sub>H</sub>1- or T<sub>H</sub>2-mediated pathologies. The role for ICOS in isotype switching also indicates that targeting this pathway might be useful in therapeutics for antibody-mediated diseases. CD28 and ICOS seem to have synergistic, overlapping effects (TABLE 1) and combination therapy might be advantageous, particularly for inhibiting established immune responses. Blockade of both the CD40 and the ICOS pathways might also be useful, as shown by the amelioration of graft arteriosclerosis when both pathways are blocked but not when the CD40 pathway alone is blocked. The contribution of ICOS to T-cell-mediated immune responses and the functional consequences of ICOS inhibition might be crucially influenced by both the nature of the immune response and the timing of ICOS blockade. The role of ICOS in regulating T-cell tolerance is not yet clear. Because ICOS co-stimulation is important for IL-10 production<sup>11</sup>, ICOS might be important in the development of T-cell tolerance in autoimmune diseases and in specific microenvironments, such as the respiratory mucosa via IL-10 producing T regulatory cells. Further work is needed to determine how optimally to manipulate this pathway for therapeutic purposes.

The PD-L1/PD-L2-PD-1 pathway has revealed a new means by which T- and B-cell responses are regulated. The expression of PD-L1 and PD-L2 on non-lymphoid tissues indicates that they might downregulate
self-reactive T- or B-cell responses in peripheral tissues. Increased expression on tumours might assist in immune evasion. The expression of PD-1 ligands on tumours gives impetus to investigations into whether the expression of PD-1 ligands on tumours attenuates anti-tumour responses. Blockade of PD-1 signals might enhance anti-tumour responses, in a similar way to CTLA-4 blockade. In order to manipulate this pathway effectively, further studies are needed to clarify: (1) the functions of PD-L1 and PD-L2 as stimulatory or inhibitory ligands; (2) whether PD-L1 and PD-L2 have overlapping or unique functions; (3) whether PD-1 and CTLA-4 have distinct or overlapping functions in downregulating T-cell activation and tolerance *in vivo* (TABLE 2); and (4) the functional interactions between the B7–CD28, B7–CTLA-4 and PD-1–PD-L1/PD-L2 pathways.

### Concluding remarks

The B7–CD28 superfamily provides key second signals that can regulate the activation, inhibition and fine tuning of T-cell responses. CD28 predominates in regulating the activation of naive T cells, whereas the new pathways within this superfamily seem to be particularly important in regulating previously primed T cells rather than antigen-inexperienced T cells. The expression patterns of ICOS and PD-1 ligands in non-lymphoid tissues indicate new means by which effector T cells and self-reactive T cells that escape into the periphery might be regulated by co-stimulatory signals. Further study of the functions of the pathways within the B7–CD28 superfamily individually and their interplay should provide insights into mechanisms of T-cell activation and tolerance, and has great therapeutic potential for controlling the fate of T cells.

---

1. Bretscher, P. & Cohn, M. A theory of self-nonself discrimination. *Science* **169**, 1042–1049 (1970).
2. Bretscher, P.A. A two-step, two-signal model for the primary activation of precursor helper T cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **96**, 185–190 (1999).
3. Jenkins, M.K. & Schwartz, R.H. Antigen presentation by chemically modified splenocytes induces antigen-specific T cell unresponsiveness *in vitro* and *in vivo*. *J. Exp. Med.* **165**, 302–319 (1987).
4. Viola, A. & Lanzavecchia, A. T cell activation determined by T cell receptor number and tunable thresholds. *Science* **273**, 104–106 (1996).
5. Sloan-Lancaster, J., Evavold, B.D. & Allen, P.M. Induction of T-cell anergy by altered T-cell-receptor ligand on live antigen-presenting cells. *Nature* **363**, 156–159 (1993).
6. Karandikar, N.J., Vanderlugt, C.L., Bluestone, J.A. & Miller, S.D. Targeting the B7/CD28:CTLA-4 costimulatory system in CNS autoimmune disease. *J. Neuroimmunol.* **89**, 10–18 (1998).
7. Oosterwegel, M.A., Greenwald, R.J., Mandelbrot, D.A., Lorsbach, R.B. & Sharpe, A.H. CTLA-4 and T cell activation. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* **11**, 294–300 (1999).
8. Salomon, B. & Bluestone, J.A. Complexities of CD28/B7:CTLA-4 costimulatory pathways in autoimmunity and transplantation. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **19**, 225–252 (2001).
9. Sansom, D.M. CD28, CTLA-4 and their ligands: who does what and to whom? *Immunology* **101**, 169–177 (2000).
10. Chambers, C.A., Kuhns, M.S., Egen, J.G. & Allison, J.P. CTLA-4-mediated inhibition in regulation of T cell responses: mechanisms and manipulation in tumor immunotherapy. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **19**, 565–594 (2001).
11. Hutloff, A. *et al.* ICOS is an inducible T-cell co-stimulator structurally and functionally related to CD28. *Nature* **397**, 263–266 (1999). Identifies ICOS as a CD28 homologue on activated human T cells and shows that, in conjunction with a TCR signal, ICOS crosslinking upregulates cytokine production, particularly of IL-10 but not of IL-2.
12. Isikawa, K. *et al.* Prediction of the coding sequence of unidentified human genes. X. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large proteins *in vitro*. *DNA Res.* **5**, 169–176 (1998).
13. Swallow, M.M., Wallin, J.J. & Sha, W.C. B7h, a novel costimulatory homolog of B7.1 and B7.2, is induced by TNFα. *Immunity* **11**, 423–432 (1999).
14. Ling, V. *et al.* Cutting edge: identification of GL50, a novel B7-like protein that functionally binds to ICOS receptor. *J. Immunol.* **164**, 1653–1657 (2000).
15. Yoshinaga, S.K. *et al.* T-cell co-stimulation through B7RP-1 and ICOS. *Nature* **402**, 827–832 (1999). Identifies a B7 homologue as the ligand for ICOS and shows an important role for the ICOS pathway in regulating T-cell help for antibody production.
16. Brodie, D. *et al.* LICOS, a primordial costimulatory ligand? *Curr. Biol.* **10**, 333–336 (2000).
17. Wang, S. *et al.* Costimulation of T cells by B7-H2, a B7-like molecule that binds ICOS. *Blood* **96**, 2808–2813 (2000).
18. Ishida, Y., Agata, Y., Shibahara, K. & Honjo, T. Induced expression of PD-1, a novel member of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily, upon programmed cell death. *EMBO J.* **11**, 3887–3895 (1992).
19. Freeman, G.J. *et al.* Engagement of the PD-1 immunoinhibitory receptor by a novel B7 family member leads to negative regulation of lymphocyte activation. *J. Exp. Med.* **192**, 1–9 (2000). Identifies a B7 homologue as the receptor for PD-1 and shows that, in conjunction with a TCR signal, this ligand can inhibit T-cell activation and cytokine production.
20. Dong, H., Zhu, G., Tamada, K. & Chen, L. B7-H1, a third member of the B7 family, co-stimulates T cell proliferation and interleukin-10 secretion. *Nature Med.* **5**, 1365–1369 (1999). Identifies a B7 homologue, shows that it is expressed on activated T cells and APCs, and reports the stimulation of T-cell proliferation and cytokine production, particularly of IL-10.
21. Latchman, Y. *et al.* PD-L2 is a second ligand for PD-1 and inhibits T cell activation. *Nature Immunol.* **2**, 261–268 (2001). Identifies a B7 homologue as a second receptor for PD-1 and shows expression on activated APCs, some non-lymphoid tissues and breast tumours. Shows inhibition of T-cell activation and cytokine production in an antigen-specific system via recruitment of SHP-2.
22. Tseng, S.Y. *et al.* B7-DC, a new dendritic cell molecule with potent costimulatory properties for T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* **193**, 839–846 (2001).
23. Freeman, G.J. *et al.* Structure, expression, and T cell costimulatory activity of the murine homologue of the human B lymphocyte activation antigen B7. *J. Exp. Med.* **174**, 625–631 (1991).
24. Freeman, A.S. *et al.* B7, a B cell restricted antigen which identifies pre-activated B cells. *J. Immunol.* **137**, 3260–3267 (1987).
25. Yokochi, T., Holly, R.D. & Clark, E.A. Lymphoblastoid antigen (BB-1) expressed on Epstein-Barr virus-activated B cell blasts, B lymphoblastoid lines, and Burkitt's lymphomas. *J. Immunol.* **128**, 823–827 (1982).
26. Freeman, G.J. *et al.* Cloning of B7-2: a CTLA4 counter-receptor that costimulates human T cell proliferation. *Science* **262**, 909–911 (1993).
27. Freeman, G.J. *et al.* Murine B7-2, an alternative CTLA4 counter-receptor that costimulates T cell proliferation and interleukin-2 production. *J. Exp. Med.* **178**, 2185–2192 (1993).
28. Azuma, M. *et al.* B70 antigen is a second ligand for CTLA-4 and CD28. *Nature* **366**, 76–79 (1993).
29. Aruffo, A. & Seed, B. Molecular cloning of a CD28 cDNA by a high-efficiency COS cell expression system. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **84**, 8573–8577 (1987).
30. Gross, J.A., St John, T. & Allison, J.P. The murine homologue of the T lymphocyte antigen CD28. Molecular cloning and cell surface expression. *J. Immunol.* **144**, 3201–3210 (1990).
31. Brunet, J.F. *et al.* A new member of the immunoglobulin superfamily — CTLA-4. *Nature* **328**, 267–270 (1987).
32. Linsley, P. *et al.* CTLA-4 is a second receptor for the B
33. Peach, R.J. *et al.* Complementarity determining region 1 (CDR1)- and CDR3-analogous regions in CTLA-4 and CD28 determine the binding to B7-1. *J. Exp. Med.* **180**, 2049–2058 (1994).
34. Linsley, P.S. *et al.* Coexpression and functional cooperation of CTLA-4 and CD28 on activated T lymphocytes. *J. Exp. Med.* **176**, 1595–1604 (1992).
35. Linsley, P.S. *et al.* Human B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86) bind with similar avidities but distinct kinetics to CD28 and CTLA4 receptors. *Immunity* **1**, 793–801 (1994).
36. Gross, J., Callas, E. & Allison, J. Identification and distribution of the costimulatory receptor CD28 in the mouse. *J. Immunol.* **149**, 380–388 (1992).
37. Linsley, P. *et al.* Intracellular trafficking of CTLA4 and focal localization towards sites of TCR engagement. *Immunity* **4**, 535–543 (1996).
38. Hathcock, K.S., Laszlo, G., Pucillo, C., Linsley, P. & Hodes, R.J. Comparative analysis of B7-1 and B7-2 costimulatory ligands: expression and function. *J. Exp. Med.* **180**, 631–640 (1994).
39. McAdam, A., Schweitzer, A. & Sharpe, A.H. The role of B7 costimulation in activation and differentiation of CD4 and CD8 T cells. *Immunol. Rev.* **165**, 231–247 (1998).
40. Lenschow, D.J., Walunas, T.L. & Bluestone, J.A. CD28/B7 system of T cell costimulation. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **14**, 233–258 (1996).
41. Lanzavecchia, A., Lezzi, G. & Viola, A. From TCR engagement to T cell activation: a kinetic view of T cell behavior. *Cell* **96**, 1–4 (1999).
42. Thompson, C.B. *et al.* CD28 activation pathway regulates the production of multiple T-cell-derived lymphokines/cytokines. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **86**, 1333–1337 (1989).
43. Lucas, P.J. *et al.* Naive CD28-deficient T cells can initiate but not sustain an *in vitro* antigen-specific immune response. *J. Immunol.* **154**, 5757–5768 (1995).
44. Shahinian, A. *et al.* Differential T cell costimulatory requirements in CD28-deficient mice. *Science* **261**, 609–612 (1993).
45. Sperling, A.I. *et al.* CD28/B7 interactions deliver a unique signal to naive T cells that regulates cell survival but not early proliferation. *J. Immunol.* **157**, 3909–3917 (1996).
46. Boise, L., Minn, A., Noel, P. & Thompson, C. CD28 costimulation can promote T cell survival by enhancing the expression of Bcl-xL. *Immunity* **3**, 87–98 (1995).
47. Walunas, T.L. *et al.* CTLA-4 can function as a negative regulator of T cell activation. *Immunity* **1**, 405–413 (1994).
48. Walunas, T.L., Bakker, C.Y. & Bluestone, J.A. CTLA-4 ligation blocks CD28-dependent T cell activation. *J. Exp. Med.* **183**, 2541–2550 (1996).
49. Krummel, M. & Allison, J. CD28 and CTLA-4 have opposing effects on the response of T cells to stimulation. *J. Exp. Med.* **182**, 459–466 (1995).
50. Brunner, M., Chambers, C. & Allison, J. CTLA-4 mediates inhibition of early events of T cell proliferation. *J. Immunol.* **162**, 5813–5820 (1999).
51. Greenwood, R.J., Boussiotis, V.A., Lorsbach, R.B., Abbas, A.K. & Sharpe, A.H. CTLA-4 regulates induction of anergy *in vivo*. *Immunity* **14**, 145–155 (2001).
52. Waterhouse, P. *et al.* Lymphoproliferative disorders with early lethality in mice deficient in CTLA-4. *Science* **270**, 985–988 (1995).

53. Tivol, E. *et al.* Loss of CTLA-4 leads to massive lymphoproliferation and fatal multiorgan destruction, revealing a critical negative regulatory role of CTLA-4. *Immunity* **3**, 541–547 (1995).

54. Mandelbrot, D. A., McAdam, A. J. & Sharpe, A. H. B7-1 or B7-2 is required to produce the lymphoproliferative phenotype in mice lacking cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4). *J. Exp. Med.* **189**, 435–440 (1999).

55. Perez, V. *et al.* Induction of peripheral T cell tolerance *in vivo* requires CTLA-4 engagement. *Immunity* **6**, 411–417 (1997).

56. Leach, D. R., Krummel, M. F. & Allison, J. P. Enhancement of antitumor immunity by CTLA4 blockade. *Science* **271**, 1734–1736 (1996).

57. Perrin, P. J., Maldonado, J. H., Davis, T. A., June, C. H. & Racke, M. K. CTLA-4 blockade enhances clinical disease and cytokine production during experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. *J. Immunol.* **157**, 1333–1336 (1996).

58. Buonfiglio, D. *et al.* The T cell activation molecule H4 and the CD28-like molecule ICOS are identical. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **30**, 3463–3467 (2000).

59. Tezuka, K. *et al.* Identification and characterization of rat AILIM/ICOS, a novel T-cell costimulatory molecule, related to the CD28/CTLA 4 family. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **276**, 335–345 (2000).

60. Beier, K. C. *et al.* Induction, binding specificity and function of human ICOS. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **30**, 3707–3717 (2000).

61. Coyle, A. J. *et al.* The CD28-related molecule ICOS is required for effective T cell-dependent immune responses. *Immunity* **13**, 95–105 (2000).

62. Holdorf, A. D., Kanagawa, O. & Shaw, A. S. CD28 and T cell co-stimulation. *Rev. Immunogenet.* **2**, 175–184 (2000).

63. Mages, H. W. *et al.* Molecular cloning and characterization of murine ICOS and identification of B7h as ICOS ligand. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **30**, 1040–1047 (2000).

64. McAdam, A. J. *et al.* Mouse inducible costimulatory molecule (ICOS) expression is enhanced by CD28 costimulation and regulates differentiation of CD4⁺T cells. *J. Immunol.* **165**, 5035–5040 (2000).

65. Aicher, A. *et al.* Characterization of human inducible costimulator ligand expression and function. *J. Immunol.* **164**, 4689–4696 (2000).

66. Kopf, M. *et al.* Inducible costimulator protein (ICOS) controls T helper cell subset polarization after virus and parasite infection. *J. Exp. Med.* **192**, 53–61 (2000). Shows that ICOS co-stimulates both Tₕ₁ and Tₕ₂ responses, and can regulate both CD28-dependent and CD28-independent CD4⁺T-cell responses in parasite-induced Tₕ₂ and virus-induced Tₕ₁ models.

67. McAdam, A. *et al.* ICOS is critical for CD40 mediated antibody class switching. *Nature* **409**, 102–105 (2001). Shows a crucial role for ICOS in regulating immunoglobulin isotype class switching and germinal centre formation, by evaluating ICOS-deficient mice (similar to REFS 68,70). Shows that the defects in class switching in ICOS-deficient mice could be overcome by CD40 stimulation, indicating important interactions between these pathways

68. Dong, C. *et al.* ICOS co-stimulatory receptor is essential for T cell activation and function. *Nature* **409**, 97–101 (2001).

69. Dong, C., Temann, U. A. & Flavell, R. A. Cutting edge: critical role of inducible costimulator in germinal center reactions. *J. Immunol.* **166**, 3659–3662 (2001).

70. Tafuri, A. *et al.* ICOS is essential for effective T helper cell responses. *Nature* **409**, 105–109 (2001).

71. Yoshinaga, S. K. *et al.* Characterization of a new human B7-related protein: B7RP-1 is the ligand to the co-stimulatory protein ICOS. *Int. Immunol.* **12**, 1439–1447 (2000).

72. Richter, G. *et al.* Tumor necrosis factor-α regulates the expression of ICOS ligand on CD34⁺ progenitor cells during differentiation into antigen presenting cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 45686–45693 (2001).

73. Riley, J. L. *et al.* ICOS costimulation requires IL-2 and can be prevented by CTLA-4 engagement. *J. Immunol.* **166**, 4943–4948 (2001).

74. Tesciuba, A. G. *et al.* Inducible costimulator regulates Tₕ₂-mediated inflammation, but not Tₕ₂ differentiation, in a model of allergic airway disease. *J. Immunol.* **167**, 1996–2003 (2001).

75. Gonzalo, J. A. *et al.* ICOS is critical for T helper cell-mediated lung mucosal inflammatory responses. *Nature Immunol.* **2**, 597–604 (2001). Shows differences in the roles of CD28 and ICOS in an allergic lung inflammation model: CD28 is required for priming whereas ICOS is needed for Tₕ effector responses.

76. Sporici, R. A. & Perrin, P. J. Costimulation of memory T-cells by ICOS: a potential therapeutic target for autoimmunity? *Clin. Immunol.* **100**, 263–269 (2001).

77. Sperling, A. I. ICOS costimulation: is it the key to selective immunotherapy? *Clin. Immunol.* **100**, 261–262 (2001).

78. Ozkaynak, E. *et al.* Importance of ICOS–B7RP-1 costimulation in acute and chronic allograft rejection. *Nature Immunol.* **2**, 591–596 (2001). Identifies a role for ICOS in acute and chronic rejection using cardiac allograft models. Shows that a combination of anti-ICOS antibody and cyclosporin can lead to long-term graft survival.

79. Furukawa, Y., Mandelbrot, D. A., Libby, P., Sharpe, A. H. & Mitchell, R. N. Association of B7-1 co-stimulation with the development of graft arterial disease. Studies using mice lacking B7-1, B7-2, or B7-1/B7-2. *Am. J. Pathol.* **157**, 473–484 (2000).

80. Kim, K. S. *et al.* CD28-B7-mediated T cell costimulation in chronic cardiac allograft rejection: differential role of B7-1 in initiation versus progression of graft arteriosclerosis. *Am. J. Pathol.* **158**, 977–986 (2001).

81. Borriello, F. *et al.* B7-1 and B7-2 have overlapping, critical roles in immunoglobulin class switching and germinal center formation. *Immunity* **6**, 303–313 (1997).

82. Rottman, J. B. *et al.* The costimulatory molecule ICOS plays an important role in the immunopathogenesis of EAE. *Nature Immunol.* **2**, 605–611 (2001).

83. Sporici, R. A. *et al.* ICOS ligand costimulation is required for T-cell encephalitogenicity. *Clin. Immunol.* **100**, 277–288 (2001). Shows an important role for ICOS in regulating the Tₕ₁-mediated disease EAE and that ICOSL blockade after the onset of EAE can ameliorate clinical disease.

84. Chang, T. C., Jabs, C., Sobel, R. A., Kuchroo, V. K. & Sharpe, A. H. Studies in B7-deficient mice reveal a critical role for B7 costimulation in both the initiation and effector phases of EAE. *J. Exp. Med.* **190**, 733–740 (1999).

85. Perrin, P. J., Lavi, E., Rumbley, C. A., Zekavat, S. A. & Phillips, S. M. Experimental autoimmune meningitis: a novel neurological disease in CD28-deficient mice. *Clin. Immunol.* **91**, 41–49 (1999).

86. Segal, B. M., Dwyer, B. K. & Shevach, E. M. An interleukin (IL)-10/IL-12 immunoregulatory circuit controls susceptibility to autoimmune disease. *J. Exp. Med.* **187**, 537–546 (1998).

87. Bettelli, E. *et al.* IL-10 is critical in the regulation of autoimmune encephalomyelitis as demonstrated by studies of IL-10- and IL-4-deficient and transgenic mice. *J. Immunol.* **161**, 3299–3306 (1998).

88. Wallin, J. J., Liang, L., Bakardjiev, A. & Sha, W. C. Enhancement of CD8⁺T cell responses by ICOS/B7h costimulation. *J. Immunol.* **167**, 132–139 (2001).

89. Shinohara, T., Taniwaki, M., Ishida, Y., Kawaihi, M. & Honjo, T. Structure and chromosomal localization of the human PD-1 gene (PPCP1). *Genomics* **23**, 704–706 (1994).

90. Vibhakar, R., Juan, G., Traganos, F., Darzynkiewicz, Z. & Finger, L. R. Activation-induced expression of human programmed death-1 gene in T-lymphocytes. *Exp. Cell Res.* **232**, 25–28 (1997).

91. Agata, Y. *et al.* Expression of the PD-1 antigen on the surface of stimulated mouse T and B lymphocytes. *Int. Immunol.* **8**, 765–772 (1996).

92. Nishimura, H. *et al.* Developmentally regulated expression of the PD-1 protein on the surface of double-negative (CD4⁻CD8⁻) thymocytes. *Int. Immunol.* **8**, 773–780 (1996).

93. Nishimura, H., Honjo, T. & Minato, N. Facilitation of β selection and modification of positive selection in the thymus of PD-1 deficient mice. *J. Exp. Med.* **191**, 891–898 (2000).

94. Bleul, C. C. & Boehm, T. Laser capture microdissection-based expression profiling identifies PD1-ligand as a target of the nude locus gene product. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **31**, 2497–2503 (2001).

95. Eppliher, M. *et al.* Expression and regulation of the PD-L1 immuno-inhibitory molecule on microvascular endothelial cells. *Microcirculation* (in the press).

96. Nishimura, H., Minato, N., Nakano, T. & Honjo, T. Immunological studies on PD-1 deficient mice: implication of PD-1 as a negative regulator for B cell responses. *Int. Immunol.* **10**, 1563–1572 (1998).

97. Nishimura, H., Nose, M., Hiai, H., Minato, N. & Honjo, T. Development of lupus-like autoimmune diseases by disruption of the PD-1 gene encoding an ITIM motif-carrying immunoreceptor. *Immunity* **11**, 141–151 (1999). Shows that PD-1-deficient mice have a defect in peripheral tolerance with the late-onset development of lupus-like autoimmune disease. Shows that CD8⁺TCR transgenic mice that escape thymic deletion become activated in the periphery and cause graft-versus-host-like disease.

98. Nishimura, H. *et al.* Autoimmune dilated cardiomyopathy in PD-1 receptor deficient mice. *Science* **291**, 319–322 (2001).

99. Carter, L. L. *et al.* PD-1:PD-L inhibitory pathway affects both CD4⁺ and CD8⁺T cells and is overcome by IL-2. *Eur. J. Immunol.* (in the press).

100. Baecher-Allan, C., Brown, J. A., Freeman, G. J. & Hafler, D. A. CD4⁺CD25(high) regulatory cells in human peripheral blood. *J. Immunol.* **167**, 1245–1253 (2001).

101. Tamura, H. *et al.* B7-H1 costimulation preferentially enhances CD28-independent T-helper cell function. *Blood* **97**, 1809–1816 (2001).

102. Okazaki, T., Nishimura, H. & Honjo, T. PD-1 immunoreceptor inhibits B cell receptor-mediated signaling by recruiting Src homology 2-domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase 2 to phosphotyrosine. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **98**, 13866–13871 (2001).

103. Shlapatska, L. M. *et al.* CD150 association with either the SH2-containing inositol-phosphate or the SH2-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase is regulated by the adaptor protein SH2D1A. *J. Immunol.* **166**, 5480–5487 (2001).

104. Chapoval, A. *et al.* B7-H3: a costimulatory molecule for T cell activation and IFN-γ production. *Nature