
Review Article

**Digestive Diseases**

Dig Dis 2001;19:269–278

---

### Pathology and Pathogenesis of Hepatocellular Carcinoma

#### Christoph Röcken Stacy Carl-McGrath

Department of Pathology, Otto-von-Guericke-University of Magdeburg, Germany

---

#### Key Words
Liver · Hepatocellular carcinoma

---

#### Abstract
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common primary malignant tumor of the liver and among the most common cancers worldwide. The distribution pattern of HCC shows geographical variation and its pathogenesis is multifactorial. Environmental, infectious, nutritional, metabolic, and endocrine factors contribute directly or indirectly to hepatocarcinogenesis. The synchronous occurrence of different risk factors, such as chronic viral hepatitis B and C, aflatoxin exposure, alcohol consumption or iron overload, in a single patient or patient population further increases the risk. HCC is commonly associated with chronic hepatitis and liver cirrhosis. Different genes have been implicated in the pathogenesis of HCC, and may be divided into four major groups: genes regulating DNA damage response; genes involved in cell cycle control; genes involved in growth inhibition and apoptosis, and genes responsible for cell-cell interaction and signal transduction. Hepatocarcinogenesis is mediated by loss of heterozygosity, somatic mutation, de novo methylation, and/or functional inactivation. As yet, there is no evidence for an ordered sequence of genomic events leading to hepatocarcinogenesis. The pattern of genomic alterations shows great variability, often between two different HCCs from a single patient. HCC evolves from precancerous lesions, and well-differentiated HCC further progresses to a less differentiated form. However, there is still great need for the definition of objective morphological, phenotypic and genetic markers for the progression of HCC.

---

#### Definition

Primary malignant epithelial tumors of the liver are classified as follows [1]: hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC; M 8170/3) is defined as a malignant tumor derived from hepatocytes; intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (CC; M 8160/3) is composed of cells resembling those of bile ducts; bile duct cystadenocarcinoma (M 8161/3) is a cystic tumor lined by serous or mucinous epithelium with papillary infoldings; combined hepatocellular and cholangiocarcinoma (M 8180/3) is a rare tumor containing recognizable elements of both hepatocellular (e.g. expression of α-fetoprotein) and cholangiocarcinoma (e.g. ductular phenotype and expression of cytokeratins 7 and 19) and has to be separated from collision of synchronously occurring HCC and CC; hepatoblastoma (M 8970/3) is a malignant embryonal tumor with divergent patterns of

---

© 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

Dr. med. habil. Christoph Röcken, PD  
Department of Pathology, Otto von Guericke University  
Leipziger Strasse 44, D–39120 Magdeburg (Germany)  
Tel. +49 391 67 13179, Fax +49 391 67 190188  
E-Mail christoph.roecken@medizin.uni-magdeburg.de

KARGER  
Fax +41 61 306 12 34  
E-Mail karger@karger.ch  
www.karger.com  

Accessible online at: www.karger.com/journals/ddi
differentiation, and finally, undifferentiated carcinoma (M 8020/3), which does not fit into any of the above-mentioned categories. The present review will focus only on the pathology and pathogenesis of HCC.

## Epidemiology

HCC is the most common primary malignant tumor of the liver [1, 2]. It ranks fifth in frequency in the world. Men are affected more commonly than women. The global number of new cases was estimated at 316,000 for males and 121,100 for females, accounting for 7.4% (males) and 3.2% (females) of all malignancies, excluding skin cancer [1]. The distribution pattern of HCC varies geographically ranging from an annual incidence rate of <3.6 per 100,000 in North and South America, south-central Asia, northern Europe, Australia and New Zealand to more than 20.1 per 100,000 in sub-Saharan, South Africa, east Asia, and Melanesia [1]. The incidence has remained stable or decreased over time in most countries. However, in countries with a low or moderate incidence the number of HCCs has increased, probably attributable to infection with hepatitis C virus (see below) [2]. The regional age-specific incidence rates differ significantly. Generally, it can be perceived that in high risk areas, HCC occurs in young to middle aged patients (20–34 years), and in low risk areas, HCC generally affects patients aged 55–59 years of age [1, 2].

## Pathology

The macroscopic appearance of HCC varies depending on the size of the tumor and the presence or absence of liver cirrhosis. HCC may occur as a single mass, multinodular, with many tumors scattered throughout the liver, or as a diffusely growing lesion. Multinodular HCCs in cirrhotic livers most commonly represent multicentric HCCs, whilst multinodular HCCs in non-cirrhotic liver are often related to intrahepatic metastases [3]. Multicentric HCCs are particularly common in patients with chronic hepatitis C and tend to grow in more damaged segments of the liver [4, 5]. The color of the cut surface may be green (due to bile production), yellow (due to fatty change), tan-brown, or grey-white (fig. 1). HCCs are almost always soft tumors, except for the rare fibrolamellar variant. HCC may be associated with invasion of the hepatic vein, bile ducts and portal vein thrombosis. The incidence of extrahepatic metastases ranges between 50

and 80% [6]. Hematogenic tumor spread most frequently affects the lungs (47.6%), followed by adrenal glands (8.3%), bone (5.6%), gastrointestinal tract (4.7%), gallbladder (3.5%) and pancreas (3.0%) [6]. Lymphatic metastases are found in approximately one forth of the cases, and usually occur in hilar, peripancreatic, perigastric and periaortic nodes, and only in advanced disease at distant lymph nodes [6]. The current TNM classification and stage grouping of HCCs is given in tables 1 and 2. Tumor volume doubling time ranges from 1 to 20 (median 6) months.

The histological appearance of HCC is variable, with different architectural and cytological patterns. The trabecular pattern is the most common architectural variant [7]. The pseudo-glandular and acinar pattern is characterized by dilated bile canaliculus-like structures, often filled with bile (fig. 1). In the compact variant, sinusoid-like blood spaces are inconspicuous and slit-like. The scirrhous HCC is an uncommon type and is characterized by marked fibrosis. Cytologically, tumor cells of HCCs may show fatty or clear cell change, Mallory hyaline bodies, globular hyaline bodies (which may be deposits of α-antitrypsin), pale bodies, pleomorphic cells, and sarcomatous changes. Often HCCs exhibit different cytological variants within the same tumor (fig. 1). The most important differential diagnosis of well-differentiated HCCs is liver cell adenoma and dysplastic nodules (DNs; see below). Moderately differentiated HCCs rarely pose diagnostic problems, whereas poorly differentiated HCCs have to be distinguished from other solid, growing, poorly differentiated carcinomas that are metastatic to the liver. Diagnosis can be achieved by the identification of bile production (approximately 50% of HCCs) [7], and application of special stains. Plates more than three cells in thickness and the lack of reticulin separates HCC from liver cell adenoma. HCC can be distinguished from other solid growing tumors metastatic to the liver by examining the production of bile, the expression of α-fetoprotein and

Fig. 1. Macroscopic and histological characteristics of HCC. A Cross-section of a well-differentiated HCC with bile production. B Cross-section of a multinodular HCC in a cirrhotic liver. The tumor infiltrated the portal vein. C Histologically, most HCCs show a trabecular growth pattern and occasionally a pseudoglandular pattern (D). Special stains help to distinguish HCC from solid growing tumors metastatic to the liver. HCCs express α-fetoprotein (E) and show a canalicular staining pattern with antibodies directed against biliary glycoprotein-1 (F). C, D Hematoxylin and eosin. E Anti-AFP. F Anti-p-CEA. C–F Original magnifications: × 40.
Pathology and Pathogenesis of  
Hepatocellular Carcinoma

Dig Dis 2001;19:269–278

Table 1. TNM classification of tumors of the liver and intrahepatic bile ducts [33]

| T | Primary tumor |
| TX | Primary tumor cannot be assessed |
| T1 | Solitary tumor 2 cm or less in greatest dimension without vascular invasion |
| T2 | Solitary tumor 2 cm or less in greatest dimension with vascular invasion; or multiple tumors limited to one lobe, none more than 2 cm in greatest dimension without vascular invasion |
| T3 | Solitary tumor more than 2 cm in greatest dimension with vascular invasion; or multiple tumors limited to one lobe, none more than 2 cm in greatest dimension with or without vascular invasion |
| T4 | Multiple tumors in more than one lobe; or tumor(s) involve(s) a major branch of the portal or hepatic vein(s); or tumor(s) with direct invasion of adjacent organs other than the gallbladder; or tumor(s) with perforation of visceral peritoneum |

| N | Regional lymph nodes |
| NX | Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed |
| N0 | No regional lymph node metastasis |
| N1 | Regional lymph node metastasis |

| M | Distant metastasis |
| MX | Distant metastasis cannot be assessed |
| M0 | No distant metastasis |
| M1 | Distant metastasis |

and polygonal cells that have an eosinophilic, coarsely granular cytoplasm. This variant differs from other HCCs in that it shows a female preponderance, usually occurs in the absence of chronic liver disease, and patients usually present at a young age (mean age 23 years) [7].

Precancerous Lesions

It is now generally accepted that HCC associated with cirrhosis evolves from precancerous lesions, and well-differentiated HCC further progresses to a less differentiated form. 'Intraepithelial neoplasia' [1] has become a generally adopted term for lesions, which differ from the normal epithelium by the occurrence of cellular and architectural dysplasias. Intraepithelial neoplasia is categorized either by an alphanumeric score (such as in pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia: PanIN-IA, PanIN-IB; PanIN-II, PanIN-III) or into low-grade and high-grade [1]. Carcinomas either evolve from these precursor lesions, particularly high-grade intraepithelial neoplasias, or the lesions may represent continuous intraductal or intraepithelial extension of a carcinoma. The term 'intraepithelial neoplasia' is now widely used in many different organs and epithelial types. The only exception to this rule is the liver [1, 2, 14, 15].

Dysplastic Nodule (syn.: Macroregenerative Nodule, Adenomatous Hyperplasia)

A DN is defined as a nodular region of hepatocytes at least 1 mm in diameter with dysplasia, but without definitive histologic criteria of malignancy [14]. DNs are usually identified macroscopically and measure on average 15–20 mm in greatest dimension. However, smaller DNs do occur and may be distinguished by color or texture from the surrounding liver. The DNs may or may not be surrounded by a fibrous rim and they tend to bulge on the cut surface. Attempts have been made to divide DN into low grade and high grade. Low-grade DNs are usually devoid of architectural and cytological atypia and may enclose portal tracts, terminal hepatic veins, and unpaired arteries. High-grade DNs are characterized by the presence of a variable number of cellular and architectural atypias, including diffuse or focal small cell changes (see below), pseudoacinar, or scirrhouss growth patterns, liver cell plates greater than three cells in thickness, and nodule-in-nodule lesions (fig. 2). These subnodules may have further changes, including Mallory bodies, or fatty change (fig. 2). Some of these nodule-in-nodule lesions are difficult to separate from HCC or are, in fact, overt HCCs. Distinction of low-grade DNs from regenerative nodules can be difficult at times, and the size and number of unac-

Table 2. Stage grouping of tumors of the liver and intrahepatic bile ducts [33]

| Stage I | T1 | N0 | M0 |
| Stage II | T2 | N0 | M0 |
| Stage IIIA | T3 | N0 | M0 |
| Stage IIIB | T1 | N1 | M0 |
|  | T2 | N1 | M0 |
|  | T3 | N1 | M0 |
| Stage IVA | T4 | any N | M0 |
| Stage IVB | any T | any N | M1 |

HepPar1 (between 17 and 62% of the HCCs show immunostaining for α-fetoprotein [8–12]), the canalicular expression pattern of biliary glycoprotein 1 and CD10, as well as the presence of albumin mRNA (evidenced by in situ hybridization) [13].

The rare fibrolamellar HCC differs from the scirrhouss type and is characterized by distinctive fibrous lamellae

Fig. 2. Precancerous lesions of the liver. **A, B** Dysplastic nodule with a nodule-in-nodule lesion (asterisk) showing a 'pushing' growth pattern (arrowheads). Large cell change (**C**) and small cell change (**D**) at the same magnification, showing nuclear crowding in small cell change. **A, C, D** Hematoxylin and eosin. **B** Reticulin stain. Original magnifications: **A, B ×20; C, D ×40.**

companied arteries may help in the differentiation [15]. Separating high grade DN from HCC can occasionally be difficult or even impossible and depends on the amount of material available (e.g., biopsy or resection specimen). The diagnosis of HCC is favored by a lesion size of >2.0 cm in greatest dimension, and the presence of vascular invasion and extensive capillarization (as shown by CD34-positivity of endothelial cells). However, it has to be kept in mind that HCC also arises without evidence of a DN and in non-cirrhotic livers. Thus, DNs are not a necessary prerequisite for the development of HCC.

### Large Cell Dysplasia

Large cell dysplasia (LCD) is characterized by cellular enlargement, nuclear pleomorphism, hyperchromasia, and multinucleation of hepatocytes, which occur in groups or sometimes occupy whole cirrhotic nodules (fig. 2). The occurrence of LCD is associated with an increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhotic livers (odds ratio 3.3–3.8) and recognition in liver biopsy specimens may help identify patients at risk [2, 16–18]. However, it is still a matter of debate whether LCD is truly a precursor lesion of HCC or simply a marker of liver cell injury [2].

---

Pathology and Pathogenesis of  
Hepatocellular Carcinoma  

Dig Dis 2001;19:269–278  
273

Small Cell Dysplasia

Small cell dysplasia (SCD) is characterized by a high nucleo-cytoplasmic ratio, cytoplasmic basophilia and a tendency to form small round foci (fig. 2). It has been proposed that SCD is more likely to represent a premalignant condition of hepatocytes than LCD (odds ratio 6.3) [1, 2, 19]. LCD and SCD may occur in the same liver and tend to be more frequent and extensive in mixed or macronodular cirrhosis [20].

Iron-Free Foci

Hepatic iron-free foci are defined as nodules of hepatocytes that are found in genetic hemochromatosis. The foci contain significantly less or no iron compared with the surrounding parenchyma [7]. Iron-free foci may be single or multiple and have been shown to be preneoplastic in nature. The detection of iron-free foci in liver biopsies from a patient with genetic hemochromatosis should lead to regular screening for HCC in this patient [7].

Adenoma

HCCs occasionally do arise in hepatocellular adenomas and it could be presumed that an adenoma-carcinoma sequence, as occurs in the colorectum, is also present in the liver. However, a few things have to be kept in mind. Hypothetically, adenomas, like focal nodular hyperplasia, may occur in cirrhotic livers, but it appears almost impossible to separate these lesions from regenerative nodules, DN or surrounding cirrhosis. HCCs occur in non-cirrhotic livers without evidence of a preexisting adenoma, and liver cell adenomas preferentially effect women [7], whereas HCCs are more common in men. Thus, as yet, there is not enough epidemiological and pathological evidence to postulate an adenoma-carcinoma sequence as a common trait in hepatocarcinogenesis.

Pathogenesis

The pathogenesis of HCC is multifactorial. Environmental, infectious, nutritional, metabolic, and endocrine factors contribute directly or indirectly to hepatocarcinogenesis. The importance of individual factors varies geographically depending on environmental and socioeconomic influences. The synchronous occurrence of different risk factors, such as chronic viral hepatitis and aflatoxin burden or iron overload, in a single patient or patient population increases the risk of developing HCC.

Chronic Hepatitis and Liver Cirrhosis

Chronic hepatitis and liver cirrhosis have been recognized as important risk factors for the development of HCC. Hepatitis is associated with liver cell necrosis, inflammation, regeneration, and fibrosis, which may proceed to cirrhosis. Following liver cell necrosis, quiescent hepatocytes start to proliferate. The local inflammation induces oxidative stress and may cause DNA damage. Chronic hepatitis is characterized by repetitive cycles of necrosis and regeneration, which facilitate successive acquisition of genomic alterations. These may escape repair mechanisms, which ultimately leads to the development of HCC through monoclonal expansion. It has recently been shown that irregular regeneration of hepatocytes is an important factor for hepatocarcinogenesis, even in non-cirrhotic livers [21]. Fibrosis disrupts the normal cell-to-cell and cell-to-extracellular matrix interaction and leads to further loss of control over cell growth. More than 80% of the patients with HCC have liver cirrhosis.

HCC in Non-Cirrhotic Livers

In the West, there is a small number of cases in which HCC occurs in the absence of liver cirrhosis. This group of patients shows no male preponderance; and patients with HCC and without fibrosis are significantly younger than those with HCC and minimal fibrosis [22]. However, HCC in non-cirrhotic livers is associated with similar risk factors compared with HCC occurring in cirrhotic livers, such as chronic hepatitis B and C, alcohol consumption, and hemochromatosis [22, 23].

Hepatitis B Virus

Epidemiological studies have convincingly demonstrated that chronic infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a major risk factor for the development of HCC. In fact, chronic infection with HBV, hepatitis C virus (HCV), or both is the most common cause of HCC worldwide. Integration of HBV DNA into the cellular DNA of HCC and chronic hepatitis is frequently encountered and is considered to be a hallmark of HBV-related hepatocarcinogenesis. Integration of viral DNA is generally random and not directed. However, a trend has been recognized that HBV DNA shows high levels of integration into chromosomes 11 and 17. Viral DNA insertion occurs during liver cell proliferation, secondary to necrosis/apoptosis of adjacent hepatocytes, and may induce chromosomal rearrangements, including deletions and translocations. The genome of human HBV does not contain oncogenes and it probably exerts its effect on hepatocarcinogenesis through trans-activation or trans-repression of cellular genes or

factors by HBV-related gene products. The X gene and its transcript (HBx) are encoded by the integrated HBV DNA. HBx activates a wide variety of cellular and viral genes, including genes controlling cell growth and apoptosis. HBx acts in the nucleus, but the majority is localized in the cytoplasm [Rabe et al., pp. 279–287]. HBx induces late G1 cell cycle arrest, followed by induction of apoptosis. Mutations of the HBx gene have been identified in HCCs and abolished its growth-suppressive and apoptotic effects. Thus, the putative pleiotropic effect of HBx is further modified by naturally occurring mutations of the HBx gene.

Liver cell transformation may also be influenced by truncated forms of the PreS2/S envelope protein and the spliced HBV transcript coding for the new HBV spliced protein. Insertion of viral DNA into a cellular host gene with subsequent modification (*cis* activation) of its expression, i.e. insertional mutagenesis, has been described to occur in HCCs related to chronic HBV infection. However, this generally appears to be rare and does not account for the majority of HBV-associated HCCs.

Integration of viral DNA may also be responsible for hepatocarcinogenesis in HBsAg-negative patients. However, the number of DNA copies in this particular patient population is commonly low and contributing factors, such as concurrent infection with hepatitis C or alcoholic liver disease, may be involved. Thus, the absence of HBV DNA in serum and HBsAg negativity do not rule out HBV infection being a contributory factor of hepatocarcinogenesis in a particular patient.

**Hepatitis C Virus**

HCV is a single positive-stranded RNA virus of approximately 9,500 nucleotides without transcriptase activity. At present, there is no evidence that viral RNA is integrated into the host genome, and in this respect, hepatocarcinogenesis related to chronic infection with HCV differs from HBV. Chronic hepatitis on its own is a major risk factor for HCC (see above) and is found in about 60–80% of the cases with HCV and in less than 10% of the cases with HBV. Approximately 20% of HCV carriers develop HCC, while the incidence of HCC in HBV carriers is about 5%. Patients suffering from chronic hepatitis C have a 2.7-fold increased risk of HCC compared with patients suffering from chronic hepatitis B [24]. Inflammation in chronic viral hepatitis is related to clearance of hepatocytes by cytotoxic T cells (CTLs) and mononuclear cells. During inflammation, hepatocytes may be exposed to genotoxic agents, such as oxygen radicals, perforin and granzyme secreted by inflammatory cells, leading to DNA damage. Thus, induction of chronic hepatitis is one major driving force of hepatocarcinogenesis related to infection with HCV. However, this effect is indirect and nonspecific.

A direct effect of HCV on hepatocarcinogenesis may be mediated by viral proteins, which influence regulation of cell growth and apoptosis. A single open-reading frame of the viral genome encodes a polyprotein of approximately 3,000 amino acid residues [25]. This polyprotein is cleaved by viral and host proteases into putative structural and nonstructural proteins. In the processed HCV polyprotein, a core protein of 191 amino acids is a central component of the virion and is necessary for nucleocapsid formation. Viral proteins were shown to interact with various cellular proteins, including 14-3-3 protein, apolipoprotein AII, TNF receptor, lymphotoxin-β receptor, DEAD domain of RNA helicase, nuclear ribonucleoprotein, PKR, p53 and SNARE-like protein [25, 26]. The core protein of HCV exerts an anti-apoptotic effect by activating NF-κB mainly in the perinuclear region [26]. Apoptosis in chronic hepatitis is induced by CTLs. CTLs express Fas ligand, which binds to Fas on hepatocytes and induces apoptosis. HCV-infected hepatocytes may escape CTL-induced and Fas-mediated apoptosis. However, the core protein may also be able to generate a pro-apoptotic effect by binding to the TNF receptor and the lymphotoxin-β receptor. Further studies are necessary to clarify these contradicting observations [25, 26]. Core protein binds to p53 and promotes cell growth. It appears to be able to modify the activity of genes and/or proteins involved in cell cycle control, cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis (such as cyclin E, p21(waf1), Rb1, TGF-β, FADD, insulin-like growth factor 2, Elk1, and many others) [25]. Core protein and v-Ha-ras gene cooperatively transform BALB/3T3 A31-I-1 cells. Other viral proteins may also be involved in hepatocarcinogenesis: truncates of viral NS3 protease were able to transform murine fibroblasts. In summary, infection with HCV may mediate hepatocarcinogenesis via chronic hepatitis and a plethora of putative interactions between viral proteins and host genes and proteins. This modulation of cell growth, differentiation, apoptosis, and immune function is currently an active field of investigation (for a detailed review see [26]).

**Chemicals**

Epidemiological and experimental evidence indicates that exposure to chemicals also contributes to the development of HCC. Hepatotoxic chemicals may be divided into genotoxic and non-genotoxic. Genotoxic chemicals

Pathology and Pathogenesis of  
Hepatocellular Carcinoma

Dig Dis 2001;19:269–278

directly interact with DNA, forming covalent adducts, and induce genetic changes upon cell replication. Non-genotoxic chemicals stimulate tumor formation by altering kinetics of cell proliferation, cell death and cell differentiation through a variety of epigenetic pathways.

Aflatoxin B₁ (AFB), high-dose oral contraceptives, azathioprine, vinyl chloride, polychlorinated biphenyls, arsenic, and alcohol contribute to hepatocarcinogenesis in humans [27, 28].

AFB is the best studied human hepatocarcinogen. Aflatoxins are toxic metabolites of certain spoilage molds that contaminate food and feed crops. AFB is genotoxic and forms adducts with proteins and DNA. Exposure to AFB is associated with a specific mutation in codon 249 of the p53 gene leading to an exchange G:C to T:A [28]. The incidence of HCC correlates highly significantly and directly with AFB intake. In third-world countries with high levels of AFB exposure, AFB is more significant than HBV infection for hepatocarcinogenesis, as many more individuals are exposed to AFB than to HBV infection [28]. However, in individuals with both AFB exposure and HBV infection the relative risk for developing HCC is 59.4, as compared for AFB (relative risk 3.4) or HBV (relative risk 7.3) alone. These values demonstrate that coinciding risk factors may multiply the risk of developing HCC manifold.

Metabolic Disorders

HCC occurs regularly in patients suffering from inherited metabolic disorders, including glycogen storage disease type 1, α₁-antitrypsin deficiency (AAT), porphyria cutanea tarda, and hemochromatosis. Cirrhosis may be the main predisposing risk factor for liver carcinoma in patients with severe AAT deficiency and even in heterozygous PiZ carriers, cirrhosis seems to bear a higher risk for hepatocarcinogenesis. However, liver cancer may occur in patients suffering from AAT deficiency in the absence of cirrhosis and is probably not related to a lack of antiprotease activity, but rather to intracellular aggregation of AAT [29].

The relative risk for the development of HCC in hemochromatosis has been calculated as being greater than 200 and is also not only related to cirrhosis [1, 30]. The risk of HCC after adjustment for alcohol abuse, smoking and family history of cancer was 1.9 in patients with hemochromatosis [30]. The intracellular accumulation of iron that occurs due to hemochromatosis may cause oxidative stress and damage to DNA [31]. Non-inherited iron overload is also considered to be a contributing factor for hepatocarcinogenesis [31].

---

Table 3. Gene mutations in hepatocellular carcinomas (adapted from [32])

| Mutated gene                                      | Mutation % of cases | Additional references |
|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------|-----------------------|
| p51                                               | 0                   | 34                    |
| c-myc                                             | 0–50                |                       |
| N-myc                                             | 0                   |                       |
| p53                                               | 28                  |                       |
| p73                                               | 0–13                | 35, 36                |
| Mannose 6-phosphate/insulin-like growth factor 2 receptor gene (M6P/1GF2R) | 18–33                 |                       |
| TGFRβ₂                                            | 0                   |                       |
| Smad 2                                            | 0–2                 |                       |
| Smad 4                                            | 0–6                 |                       |
| Smad 6                                            | 0                   | 37                    |
| Smad 7                                            | 0                   | 37                    |
| Retinoblastoma gene (RB1)                         | 15                  |                       |
| p15INK4B                                          | 0                   |                       |
| p16INK4A                                          | 0–55                |                       |
| Cyclin D                                          | 11–13               |                       |
| Cyclin A                                          | 19                  |                       |
| p21                                               | 5                   |                       |
| β-Catenin (CTNNB1)                                | 19–26               |                       |
| AXIN1                                             | 5                   | 38                    |
| Adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC)             | p.u.                |                       |
| E-Cadherin                                        | p.u.                |                       |
| MET proto-oncogene                               | 11                  | 39                    |
| Human MutL homolog-1 (hMLH1)                      | p.u.                |                       |
| Human MutS homolog-2 (hMSH2)                      | <30                 | 40                    |
| K-ras                                             | 0–17                |                       |
| N-ras                                             | 0–16                |                       |
| H-ras                                             | 0–10                |                       |
| Breast cancer susceptibility gene 2 (BRCA2)       | 5                   |                       |
| BCL10                                             | 57                  | 41                    |
| PTEN/MMAC1                                        | 3                   | 42, 43                |
| TRα₁                                              | 65                  | 44                    |
| TRβ₁                                              | 76                  | 44                    |

p.u. = Prevalence unknown.

---

Genetics

Cancer proceeds through accumulation of mutations in genes that govern cell proliferation and death, and it is believed that this process also accounts for hepatocarcinogenesis. The absence of an obviously inherited predisposition to liver cancer has hampered the identification of specific critical genes in hepatocarcinogenesis. However, HCCs display various genomic alterations, including DNA rearrangements, loss of heterozygosity (LOH), chromosomal amplifications, loss of imprinting, and mutations.

Hepatocarcinogenesis is mediated by loss of heterozygosity (RB1, M6P/IGF2R gene, E-cadherin gene, BRCA2), somatic mutation (p53, RB1, p16INK4A, M6P/IGF2R, SMAD2, SMAD4, β-catenin, APC, BRCA2), de novo methylation (p16INK4A, E-cadherin gene), and/or functional inactivation (p53). Table 3 lists some of the genes, for which mutations have been found in HCCs. The pattern of genomic alterations shows great variability, even between two different HCCs from a single patient. As yet, there is no evidence for an ordered sequence of genomic events leading to hepatocarcinogenesis.

---

**References**

1. Hamilton SR, Aaltonen LA (eds): Pathology and Genetics of Tumours of the Digestive System. Lyon, IARC Press, 2000.
2. Anthony PP: Hepatocellular carcinoma: An overview. Histopathology 2001;39:109–118.
3. Tannapfel A, Benicke M, Markwarth A, Kataianic A, Wittekind Ch: Multicentric or metastatic origin of hepatocellular carcinoma. Pathol Res Pract 2001;197:314.
4. Shimada M, Hamatsu T, Yamashita Y, Rikimaru T, Taguchi K, Utsunomiya T, Shirabe K, Sugimachi K: Characteristics of multicentric hepatocellular carcinomas: Comparison with intrahepatic metastasis. World J Surg 2001;25:991–995.
5. Ariizumi S, Takasaki K, Yamamoto M, Ohtsu-bo T, Saito A, Nakano M: Multicentric hepatocellular carcinomas tend to grow in more damaged segments of the liver. J Gastroenterol 2000;35:441–444.
6. Kojiro M: Pathology of hepatocellular carcinoma; in Okuda K, Tabor E (eds): Liver Cancer. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1997, pp 165–187.
7. Ishak KG, Goodman ZD, Stocker JT: Tumors of the liver and intrahepatic bile ducts. Washington, Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, 2001.
8. D'Errico A, Baccarini P, Fiorentino M, Cecarelli C, Bonazzi C, Ponzetto A, Scoazec JY, Mancini AM, Grigioni WF: Histogenesis of primary liver carcinomas: Strengths and weaknesses of cytokeratin profile and albumin mRNA detection. Hum Pathol 1996;27:599–604.
9. Hurlimann J, Gardiol D: Immunohistochemistry in the differential diagnosis of liver carcinomas. Am J Surg Pathol 1991;15:280–288.
10. Ma CK, Zarbo RJ, Frierson HF Jr, Lee MW: Comparative immunohistochemical study of primary and metastatic carcinomas of the liver. Am J Clin Pathol 1993;99:551–557.
11. Minervini MI, Demetris AJ, Lee RG, Carr BI, Madariaga J, Nalesnik MA: Utilization of hepatocyte-specific antibody in the immunocytochemical evaluation of liver tumors. Mod Pathol 1997;10:686–692.
12. Oliveira AM, Erickson LA, Burgart LJ, Lloyd RV: Differentiation of primary and metastatic clear cell tumors in the liver by in situ hybridization for albumin messenger RNA. Am J Surg Pathol 2000;24:177–182.
13. Borscheri N, Roessner A, Rocken C: Canalicular immunostaining of Neprilysin (CD10) as a diagnostic marker for hepatocellular carcinomas. Am J Surg Pathol 2001;25:1297–1303.
14. International Working Party: Terminology of nodular hepatocellular lesions. Hepatology 1995;22:983–993.
15. Hytiroglou P, Theise ND: Differential diagnosis of hepatocellular nodular lesions. Semin Diagn Pathol 1998;15:285–299.
16. Lee RG, Tsamandas AC, Demetris AJ: Large cell change (liver cell dysplasia) and hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis: Matched case-control study, pathological analysis, and pathogenetic hypothesis. Hepatology 1997;26:1415–1422.
17. Borzio M, Bruno S, Roncalli M, Mels GC, Ramella G, Borzio F, Leandro G, Servida E, Podda M: Liver cell dysplasia is a major risk factor for hepatocellular carcinoma in cirrhosis: A prospective study. Gastroenterology 1995;108:812–817.
18. Ganne-Carrie N, Chastang C, Chapel F, Munz C, Pateron D, Sibony M, Deny P, Trinchet JC, Callard P, Guettier C, Beaugrand M: Predictive score for the development of hepatocellular carcinoma and additional value of liver large cell dysplasia in Western patients with cirrhosis. Hepatology 1996;23:1112–1118.
19. Kondo Y: Pathology of early hepatocellular carcinoma and preneoplastic lesions in the liver; in Okuda K, Tabor E (eds): Liver Cancer. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1997, pp 135–154.
20. Le Bail B, Bernard PH, Carles J, Balabaud C, Bioulac-Sage P: Prevalence of liver cell dysplasia and association with HCC in a series of 100 cirrhotic liver explants. J Hepatol 1997;27:835–842.
21. Ueno Y, Moriyama M, Uchida T, Arakawa Y: Irregular regeneration of hepatocytes is an important factor in the hepatocarcinogenesis of liver disease. Hepatology 2001;33:357–362.
22. Bralet MP, Regimbeau JM, Pineau P, Dubois S, Loas G, Degos F, Valla D, Belghiti J, Degott C, Terris B: Hepatocellular carcinoma occurring in nonfibrotic liver: Epidemiologic and histopathologic analysis of 80 French cases. Hepatology 2000;32:200–204.
23. Grando-Lemaire V, Guettier C, Chevret S, Beaugrand M, Trinchet JC: Hepatocellular carcinoma without cirrhosis in the West: Epidemiological factors and histopathology of the nontumorous liver. Groupe d'Etude et de Traitement du Carcinome Hepatocellulaire. J Hepatol 1999;31:508–513.
24. Colombo M: Hepatitis C virus and hepatocellular carcinoma. Semin Liver Dis 1999;19:263–269.
25. Ray RB, Ray R: Hepatitis C virus core protein: Intriguing properties and functional relevance. FEMS Microbiol Lett 2001;202:149–156.
26. Shimotohno K: Hepatitis C virus and its pathogenesis. Semin Cancer Biol 2000;10:233–240.
27. Bannasch P, Zerban H: Experimental chemical hepatocarcinogenesis; in Okuda K, Tabor E (eds): Liver Cancer. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1997, pp 213–253.
28. Wogan GN: Impacts of chemicals on liver cancer risk. Semin Cancer Biol 2000;10:201–210.
29. Zhou H, Ortiz-Pallardo ME, Ko Y, Fischer HP: Is heterozygous alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency type PIZa a risk factor for primary liver carcinoma? Cancer 2000;88:2668–2676.
30. Fracanzani AL, Conte D, Fraquelli M, Taioli E, Mattioli M, Losco A, Fargion S: Increased cancer risk in a cohort of 230 patients with hereditary hemochromatosis in comparison to matched control patients with non-iron-related chronic liver disease. Hepatology 2001;33:647–651.
31. Deugnier Y, Turlin B: Iron and hepatocellular carcinoma. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2001;16:491–494.

32 Ozturk M: Genetic aspects of hepatocellular carcinogenesis. Semin Liver Dis 1999; 19: 235–242.

33 Sobin LH, Wittekind Ch (eds): TNM Classification of Malignant Tumours, ed 5. New York, Wiley, 1997.

34 Hamada K, Koyama T, Shimizu K, Ikawa S, Kawate S, Yokota J, Ohwada S, Morishita Y: Absence of p51 mutation in human hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer Lett 2000; 148: 161–164.

35 Mihara M, Nimura Y, Ichimiya S, Sakiyama S, Kajikawa S, Adachi W, Amano J, Nakagawara A: Absence of mutation of the p73 gene localized at chromosome 1p36.3 in hepatocellular carcinoma. Br J Cancer 1999; 79: 164–167.

36 Peng CY, Tsai SL, Yeh CT, Hung SP, Chen MF, Chen TC, Chu CM, Liaw YF: Genetic alternations of p73 are infrequent but may occur in early stage hepatocellular carcinoma. Anticancer Res 2000; 20: 1487–1492.

37 Kawate S, Ohwada S, Hamada K, Koyama T, Takenoshita S, Morishita Y, Hagiwara K: Mutational analysis of the Smad6 and Smad7 genes in hepatocellular carcinoma. Int J Mol Med 2001; 8: 49–52.

38 Satoh S, Daigo Y, Furukawa Y, Kato T, Miwa N, Nishiwaki T, Kawasoe T, Ishiguro H, Fujita M, Tokino T, Sasaki Y, Imaoka S, Murata M, Shimano T, Yamaoka Y, Nakamura Y: AXIN1 mutations in hepatocellular carcinomas, and growth suppression in cancer cells by virus-mediated transfer of AXIN1. Nature Genet 2000; 24: 245–250.

39 Park WS, Dong SM, Kim SY, Na EY, Shin MS, Pi JH, Kim BJ, Bae JH, Hong YK, Lee KS, Lee SH, Yoo NJ, Jang JJ, Pack S, Zhuang Z, Schmidt L, Zbar B, Lee JY: Somatic mutations in the kinase domain of the Met/hepatocyte growth factor receptor gene in childhood hepatocellular carcinomas. Cancer Res 1999; 59: 307–310.

40 Yano M, Asahara T, Dohi K, Mizuno T, Iwamoto KS, Seyama T: Close correlation between a p53 or hMSH2 gene mutation in the tumor and survival of hepatocellular carcinoma patients. Int J Oncol 1999; 14: 447–451.

41 Jihua C, Xisheng L, Shengli C, Zongxian C, Guang C, Ruyu D: Detection of point mutations of BCL10 gene in hepatocellular carcinoma tissues: Report of 46 cases. Hum Mutat 2000; 15: 482–483.

42 Fujiwara Y, Hoon DS, Yamada T, Umeshita K, Gotoh M, Sakon M, Nishisho I, Monden M: PTEN/MMAC1 mutation and frequent loss of heterozygosity identified in chromosome 10q in a subset of hepatocellular carcinomas. Jpn J Cancer Res 2000; 91: 287–292.

43 Yao YJ, Ping XL, Zhang H, Chen FF, Lee PK, Ahsan H, Chen CJ, Lee PH, Peacocke M, Santella RM, Tsou HC: PTEN/MMAC1 mutations in hepatocellular carcinomas. Oncogene 1999; 18: 3181–3185.

44 Lin KH, Shieh HY, Chen SL, Hsu HC: Expression of mutant thyroid hormone nuclear receptors in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Mol Carcinog 1999; 26: 53–61.
