
Regulation of flagellar assembly
Phillip Aldridge and Kelly T Hughes*

Research on the molecular mechanism of bacterial flagellar assembly has been an ongoing study that spans three decades. Early work showed that regulation of flagellar gene transcription was coupled to the assembly process. Recent advances in the understanding of the regulation of flagellar assembly have shown that translational and post-translational regulation also plays a significant role in flagellar assembly. In both *Salmonella* and *Caulobacter crescentus*, translational regulation influences the secretion of the anti-σ²⁸ factor FlgM and the flagellin *fljK*, respectively. Post-translational regulatory mechanisms also control the length of the hook and the ability of the type III secretion system to discriminate between middle and late secretion substrates. The flagellum provides a model system for understanding how gene regulation functions to ensure the efficient assembly of a complex structure and fundamental mechanisms common to all type III secretion systems.

**Addresses**

Department of Microbiology, Box 357242, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA  
*e-mail*: hughes@u.washington.edu

**Current Opinion in Microbiology** 2002, 5:160–165  
1369-5274/02/$ – see front matter  
© 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

**Abbreviations**

HAP     hook-associated protein  
HBB     hook-basal-body  
TTSC    type III secretion chaperone  
TTSS    type III secretion system  

**Introduction**

The temporal secretion of proteins from a bacterial cell and their assembly into complex macromolecular structures such as the bacterial flagellum is a complex and intriguing process. The flagellum spans the bacterial membrane and distal components are secreted through the base of the structure via a type III secretion system [1]. Over 50 genes are required for the assembly and function of the bacterial flagellum, including structural subunits, regulatory proteins, motor force generators and the chemosensory machinery [2]. Bacterial species vary in the number and localization of flagella (Table 1). For example, *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium possesses 6–8 peritrichous flagella, whereas *Caulobacter crescentus* utilizes a single, polar flagellum. Our understanding of flagellar structure and assembly is primarily based on studies from model Gram-negative bacterial systems. This review concentrates on recent discoveries that have further elucidated the layered complexity of the regulation of flagellar assembly.

The flagellum can be subdivided into two substructures: a hook-basal-body (HBB) that spans the bacterial membranes and the external filament (Figure 1). Assembly of the structure is a sequential process that begins with the insertion of the MS-ring into the inner membrane. The individual extracytoplasmic flagellar subunits are secreted through the MS-ring after assembly of an associated type III secretion system (TTSS). Rotation of the HBB structure is achieved via the motor force generators, which are proton pumps that act as stators against the C-ring, a ring comprised of three structural proteins associated with the cytoplasmic face of the MS-ring (Figure 1). Regulation of flagellar assembly involves a combination of transcriptional, translational and post-translational regulatory mechanisms. A model depicting the major stages of flagellar assembly and the regulatory mechanisms involved is provided in Figure 2 to help the reader visualize the implications of these regulatory pathways.

**Transcriptional regulation**

Genes from all the characterized *fla* regulons can be categorized into groups that correspond to their temporal requirement during the assembly process [2]. The early genes are regulatory proteins that control the expression of the entire regulon. Middle gene products include structural components of the HBB, the TTSS as well as the regulatory proteins that couple late gene expression to HBB completion. Late gene products include the filament, motor force generators and chemosensory machinery. Irrespective of the bacterial species, transcription of the *fla* regulon is hierarchical and controlled by the activity of a group of transcriptional regulators that can include alternative sigma factors and anti-sigma factors [2]. Each tier of the hierarchy is sensitive to the previous stage of flagellar assembly, allowing for positive and negative feedback loops to control expression of the regulon. The transcriptional hierarchies of the motile bacteria *Salmonella*, *C. crescentus* and *Vibrio parahaemolyticus* contain many similarities (Table 1). For example, one common feature of all these hierarchies is the presence of three different promoter classes [2,3,4•]. In *Salmonella*, HBB completion is the major structural intermediate that corresponds to a regulatory checkpoint for transcription of genes needed after HBB assembly, whereas, in *C. crescentus*, MS-ring and C-ring assembly and HBB completion act as two distinct checkpoints [3]. Owing to the presence of two assembly checkpoints in *C. crescentus*, the structural genes have been grouped into four categories: classes I–IV. They should not be confused with the promoter classes present that drive transcription of the genes (Table 1). A study of the hierarchy in *Escherichia coli*, which is identical to that in *Salmonella*, using green fluorescent protein (GFP)-promoter fusions, has shown that, within each hierarchical class, there is an ordered induction of each promoter that reflects assembly of the individual subunits [5••]. Typically, early genes possess class I promoters, middle genes possess class II promoters and late genes possess class III promoters. To achieve differential expression of each promoter class,

Table 1

Comparison of the fla regulon hierarchies in Salmonella, Vibrio parahaemolyticus and Caulobacter crescentus.

| Bacteria                     | Flagellation               | Promoter*          | Class I                          | Class II                         | Class III                        | Reference |
|------------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------|-----------------------------------|----------------------------------|----------------------------------|-----------|
| Salmonella enterica          | Peritrichous               | Gene groups       | Early                            | Middle                           | Late                             | [2]       |
| serovar Typhimurium          | (6–8 flagella)            | Gene products     | Transcriptional                  | MS-ring                          | HAPs                              |           |
|                              |                            |                    | activators                       | C-ring                           | Filament cap                     |           |
|                              |                            |                    |                                   | Rod                              | Flagellins                       |           |
|                              |                            |                    |                                   | Hook                             |                                  |           |
|                              |                            |                    |                                   | HAPs                             |                                  |           |
|                              |                            |                    |                                   | FlgM and $\sigma^{28}$           |                                  |           |
|                              |                            | Sigma factor      | $\sigma^{70}$                    | $\sigma^{70}$                    | $\sigma^{28}$                    |           |
|                              |                            | Positive regulation| FlhDC                            | FlhDC                            | HBB completion                   |           |
|                              |                            | Negative regulation| –                                | FliT                             | FlgM                             |           |
| Vibrio parahaemolyticus      | Polar monotrichous         | Gene groups       | Early                            | Middle                           | Late                             | [4•]      |
|                              |                            | Gene products     | Transcriptional                  | MS-ring                          | HAPs                              |           |
|                              |                            |                    | activators                       | C-ring                           | Filament cap                     |           |
|                              |                            |                    |                                   | Rod                              | Flagellins                       |           |
|                              |                            |                    |                                   | Hook                             |                                  |           |
|                              |                            |                    |                                   | HAPs                             |                                  |           |
|                              |                            |                    |                                   | FlgM and $\sigma^{28}$           |                                  |           |
|                              |                            | Sigma factor      | $\sigma^{54}$                    | $\sigma^{54}$                    | $\sigma^{28}$                    |           |
|                              |                            | Positive regulation| FlaK                             | FlaLM                            | HBB completion                   |           |
|                              |                            | Negative regulation| –                                | –                                | FlgM                             |           |
| Caulobacter crescentus       | Polar monotrichous         | Gene groups†      | Class I                          | Class II                         | Class III                        | [6]       |
|                              |                            | Gene products     | Transcriptional                  | MS-ring                          | Class IV                         |           |
|                              |                            |                    | activators                       | C-ring                           | Rod                              |           |
|                              |                            |                    |                                   | Hook                             | Flagellins                       |           |
|                              |                            |                    |                                   | HAPs                             |                                  |           |
|                              |                            |                    |                                   | Filament cap                     |                                  |           |
|                              |                            | Sigma factor      | $\sigma^{73}$                    | $\sigma^{73}$                    | $\sigma^{54}$                    |           |
|                              |                            | Positive regulation| CtrA                             | CtrA                             | MS/C-ring                        |           |
|                              |                            |                    |                                   |                                  | HBB completion                   |           |
|                              |                            |                    |                                   |                                  | FlbDE                             |           |
|                              |                            |                    |                                   |                                  | FlbT                             |           |
|                              |                            | Negative regulation| –                                | FlbDE                            | –                                |           |

*The promoter classes listed here are those that have been defined in [2]. †The gene groups in C. crescentus are not to be confused with the promoter classes. By the definition in [2], there are only three promoter classes in C. crescentus, as both class III and class IV genes are expressed from promoters that require $\sigma^{54}$ and FlbDE.

membrane-anchored protein Flk has been shown to positively regulate class III FlgM translation in P- or L-ring mutants [18]. Flk shares weak similarity to translation initiation factors, suggesting a possible role in coupling the initiation of translation from class III transcripts to HBB completion. A second mechanism involves the protein FlgN, initially characterized as a secretion chaperone (see later). FlgN positively regulates FlgM class III translation but only in HBB mutants [17**]. This suggests that regulation of at least *flgM* translation by FlgN and Flk is redundant and that translation in HBB-competent cells is also dependent upon a third component. It is also likely that Flk and FlgN function as general translational regulators of all class III transcripts rather than specifically for *flgM* translation.

Similar to the observations made in *Salmonella*, translational control of late gene products is also evident in *C. crescentus*. FlbT, as mentioned earlier, is known to negatively regulate translation of at least one flagellin in *C. crescentus* by destabilizing the *fljK* flagellin-encoding class III transcript prior to HBB completion (Stage IV in Figure 2) [14]. Translation of *fljK* is only observed once a second factor can interact with either FlbT or the mRNA after HBB completion (Stage VI; Figure 2) [19**]. It is possible that the action of FlbT has evolved as a counteractive mechanism for the absence of FlgM/σ²⁸ regulation in *C. crescentus*. Translational control of late gene products in both *Salmonella* and *C. crescentus* has led to the proposal that translation of type III secretion substrates could be localized to actively assembling structures or even coupled to secretion [17**,20*]. Furthermore, it implies that the translation of late secretion substrates is also influenced by the intermediate stages of assembly. Localized translation would allow for a tighter control on protein synthesis of substrates like the flagellins, so that translation would immediately precede secretion. Assembly of peritrichous flagella is asynchronous. The ability to direct late-gene product translation, via localized translation, to sites at which it is required is energy-efficient and increases efficiency of assembly.

### Regulatory role of type III secretion chaperones

A further mode of regulation of flagellar assembly involves the type III secretion chaperones (TTSCs). These small proteins play an important role in the secretion of late substrates. TTSCs have been shown to prevent degradation and aggregation of their cognate substrates prior to secretion [21]. Once secretion of the bound substrate is initiated, the TTSCs are thought to donate the substrates to the secretion apparatus. Unlike chaperones associated with virulent TTSSs, all flagella-associated TTSCs bind the carboxy-terminal region of their partners [21]. All but one late secretion substrate has a known chaperone partner. The hook-associated proteins (HAPs) associate with FlgN [22], the filament cap with FliT [23*], and flagellin with FliS [24**]. The only late secretion substrate not to have a defined chaperone is FlgM.

Figure 2

| OM | PG | IM |
| --- | --- | --- |

FliK secreted  
FlgM secreted  

Hook cap  

Capillary action  

Chaperones  
'sense' overflow  

P Class 3  

P Class 2  

P Class 2  

FlhDC  

I II III IV V VI VII  

△ FliK □ FlgM Ⓒ σ28 Ⓝ FlbT<sub>cc</sub> ▶ FlgN ▷ FliT ● Hook ◆ Filament ○ HAP ● HAP O Filament cap  

Class 2 transcript Class 3 transcript Ⓝ Ribosome  

Schematic diagram of flagellar assembly. The assembly of the flagellum can be divided into at least seven distinct stages: stage I, site selection and MS-ring formation; stage II, assembly of the C-ring and secretion apparatus; stage III, rod formation; stage IV, assembly of the P- and L-rings, leading to hook synthesis; stage V, hook completion; stage VI, upon hook completion, a middle-to-late substrate-specificity switch in secretion; and stage VII, filament elongation. During stages I–III, class II promoters are fully on and, in σ<sup>28</sup>-containing bacteria, FlgM associates with σ<sup>28</sup>, inhibiting its function. With the initiation of rod and hook assembly in *C. crescentus*, FlbT negatively regulates flagellin expression by destabilizing at least one flagellin-encoding class III transcript. Localization of late secretion substrate translation is proposed to occur during stages V and VI. Completion of filament elongation is sensed by the secretion chaperones, leading to downregulation of late secretion substrate expression. The flagellar subunits and regulatory proteins discussed in this review are indicated in colour. IM, inner membrane; OM, outer membrane; PG, peptidoglycan layer.

Recent work with virulent TTSSs and flagellar assembly has shown that many, if not all, chaperones have a secondary transcriptional or translational regulatory role [17**, 25**]. Two examples from *Salmonella* are FlgN and FliT [17**, 26]. FlgN not only acts as a TTSC for the HAPs but also regulates the translation of FlgM from the σ<sup>28</sup>-dependent class III transcript. FliT, as well as being the TTSC for the filament cap, has recently been defined as a negative regulator of class II promoter activity [26]. Thus, both FlgN and FliT seem to have dual roles. FlgN can act as a sensor for late gene product expression by actively promoting FlgM translation from its class III transcript (Stages V and VI in Figure 2), thus maintaining a low concentration of cellular FlgM. Upon flagellar completion, reassociation of FlgN with the HAPs would inhibit its translational function (Stage VII in Figure 2). Whereas FlgN maintains late gene translation, secretion of the filament cap would free FliT, enabling a downregulation of middle gene transcription coupling HBB gene repression to HBB completion, and also preventing middle secretion substrates from competing with late gene products (Stage VI in Figure 2). Flagellar completion would result in an accumulation of the filament cap in the cell, allowing for a reassociation with FliT, restoring middle gene expression to initiate synthesis of another flagellum and allowing a corresponding increase in cellular FlgM. This would inhibit σ<sup>28</sup> activity and late gene transcription at the onset of a new round of assembly (Stage VII in Figure 2). Such feedback loops are not only present for flagellar assembly but also other TTSSs [25**, 27]. The idea of the TTSCs role as sensory modules that aid the temporal assembly of flagella or secretion of effector proteins in other TTSSs exemplifies proteins that have dual roles in regulating both secretion and gene expression.

### Other regulatory mechanisms

Transcriptional and translational regulation are not the only mechanisms that control flagellar assembly. There is one

regulatory mechanism that controls secretion physically. Loss-of-function mutations of *fliK* result in a polyhook phenotype in both *Salmonella* and *C. crescentus* [28, 29**]. This has led to the hypothesis that FliK regulates hook length. Besides FlgM, FliK is the only other non-structural component of the flagellum to be secreted by the flagellar TTSS in *Salmonella* [30]. Unlike FlgM, however, FliK is secreted during hook assembly (Stage IV in Figure 2) and is then retained in the cell via interactions with the secretion apparatus on hook completion (Stage V in Figure 2) [31]. Interaction of FliK with the secretion apparatus could potentially be the signal for the middle-to-late substrate specificity switch of the associated TTSS [31].

Hook length is not only affected by loss of *fliK*. Makishima *et al.* [32**] have described the isolation of point mutations in the C-ring components that gave rise to short hooks. From this observation, it has been proposed that the C-ring can influence hook length by acting as a molecular “measuring cup” [32**]. As hook assembly reaches an optimal length, the C-ring space empties, allowing FliK to interact with the secretion apparatus, signaling a stop to HBB substrate secretion (Stage V in Figure 2). In agreement with this model is the observation that the hook subunit is also subject to post-transcriptional regulation. Prior to rod assembly, hook subunits are detected inside the cell, but during rod assembly, they are not (Stages II and III in Figure 2) [33]. Only towards completion of the rod does the hook subunit reappear. This regulation does not involve mRNA stability or protein degradation, suggesting that, again, translational regulation is occurring [33]. The fluctuation in hook subunit concentration prior to initiation of hook assembly would prevent premature hook assembly and allow the C-ring space to be filled with a defined amount of hook subunits on initiation of hook synthesis.

### Conclusions

In this review, we cover many of the recent advances in our understanding of the regulation of flagellar assembly. Although flagellar regulatory mechanisms seemed to be unique to the bacterial species when they were first identified, the continual study of flagellar assembly and secretion of effector proteins by virulent TTSS shows us that many, if not all, of these regulatory mechanisms are employed to some degree by all type III secretion systems. The importance of transcriptional regulation to the process of flagellar assembly has been known for over a decade, but it is only in recent years that translational regulation has been recognized to play a significant role during the assembly process. It remains to be elucidated how extensive post-transcriptional regulation is involved in the assembly and function of TTSSs.

### References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

- of special interest
- **of outstanding interest**

1. Macnab RM: The bacterial flagellum: reversible rotary propeller and type III export apparatus. *J Bacteriol* 1999, 181:7149-7153.
2. Chilcott GS, Hughes KT: Coupling of flagellar gene expression to flagellar assembly in *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium and *Escherichia coli*. *Microbiol Mol Biol Rev* 2000, 64:694-708.
3. Jenal U: Signal transduction mechanisms in *Caulobacter crescentus* development and cell cycle control. *FEMS Microbiol Rev* 2000, 24:177-191.
4. McCarter LL: Polar flagellar motility of the *Vibrionaceae*. *Microbiol Mol Biol Rev* 2001, 65:445-462.
   - This review covers many aspects of transcriptional regulation of *fla* regulon hierarchies in bacteria other than *Salmonella* and *C. crescentus*. This discussion allows the reader, for the first time, to realize that the well-studied mechanisms present in *Salmonella* and *Caulobacter* are not the only transcriptional regulatory mechanisms controlling flagellar assembly.
5. Kalir S, McClure J, Pabbaraju K, Southward C, Ronen M, Leibler S, Surette MG, Alon U: Ordering genes in a flagella pathway by analysis of expression kinetics from living bacteria. *Science* 2001, 292:2080-2083.
   - The authors of this paper use an innovative method to show that there is a defined order of promoter activation in each hierarchy tier in *E. coli* that reflects the assembly process.
6. Gober JW, England JC: Regulation of flagellum biosynthesis and motility in *Caulobacter*. In *Prokaryotic Development*. Edited by Brun YV, Schimkets LJ. Washington, DC: American Society of Microbiology Press; 2000:319-340.
7. Chadsey MS, Karlinsky JE, Hughes KT: The flagellar anti-sigma factor FlgM actively dissociates *Salmonella typhimurium σ²⁸* RNA polymerase holoenzyme. *Genes Dev* 1998, 12:3123-3136.
8. Kim YK, McCarter LL: Analysis of the polar flagellar gene system of *Vibrio parahaemolyticus*. *J Bacteriol* 2000, 182:3693-3704.
9. Hughes KT, Gillen KL, Semon MJ, Karlinsky JE: Sensing structural intermediates in bacterial flagellar assembly by export of a negative regulator. *Science* 1993, 262:1277-1280.
10. Chadsey MS, Hughes KT: A multipartite interaction between *Salmonella* transcription factor σ²⁸ and its anti-sigma factor FlgM: implications for σ²⁸ holoenzyme destabilization through stepwise binding. *J Mol Biol* 2001, 306:915-929.
    - The authors of this paper used the surface plasma resonance method to determine that FlgM interacts and destabilizes Eσ²⁸ complexes.
11. Colland F, Rain JC, Gounon P, Labigne A, Legrain P, De Reuse H: Identification of the *Helicobacter pylori* anti-σ²⁸ factor. *Mol Microbiol* 2001, 41:477-487.
12. Josenhans C, Niehaus E, Amersbach S, Betz C, Drescher B, Hughes KT, Suerbaum S: Functional characterization of the antagonistic flagellar late regulators FliA and FlgM of *Helicobacter pylori* and their effects on the *H. pylori* transcriptome. *Mol Microbiol* 2001, 43:307-322.
    - This paper describes an analysis of FlgM/σ²⁸ interactions in *H. pylori* and the identification of σ²⁸-dependent genes by microarray analysis. The authors also show that *H. pylori* FlgM can act as a σ²⁸ inhibitor in *Salmonella*.
13. Prouty MG, Correa NE, Klose KE: The novel σ⁵⁴- and σ²⁸-dependent flagellar gene transcription hierarchy of *Vibrio cholerae*. *Mol Microbiol* 2001, 39:1595-1609.
14. Mangan EK, Malakooti J, Caballero A, Anderson P, Ely B, Gober JW: FlbT couples flagellum assembly to gene expression in *Caulobacter crescentus*. *J Bacteriol* 1999, 181:6160-6170.
15. Sourjik V, Muschler P, Scharf B, Schmitt R: VisN and VisR are global regulators of chemotaxis, flagellar, and motility genes in *Sinorhizobium (Rhizobium) meliloti*. *J Bacteriol* 2000, 182:782-788.
16. Muir RE, Gober JW: Regulation of late flagellar gene transcription and cell division by flagellum assembly in *Caulobacter crescentus*. *Mol Microbiol* 2001, 41:117-130.
17. Karlinsky JE, Lonner J, Brown KL, Hughes KT: Translation/secretion coupling by type III secretion systems. *Cell* 2000, 102:487-497.
    - In this paper, the translational regulation of FlgN upon *flgM* translated from a σ²⁸-dependent class III transcript is described. Analysis of FlgM secretion also showed that it was *flgM* translated from the FlgN-regulated transcript that was primarily secreted.
18. Karlinsky JE, Tsui HCT, Winkler ME, Hughes KT: Flk couples *flgM* translation to flagellar ring assembly in *Salmonella typhimurium*. *J Bacteriol* 1998, 180:5384-5397.

19. Anderson PE, Gober JW: FlbT, the post-transcriptional regulator of flagellin synthesis in *Caulobacter crescentus*, interacts with the 5′ untranslated region of flagellin mRNA. *Mol Microbiol* 2000, 38:41-52.

This is a very interesting paper in which the authors show that FlbT directly binds the *fljK* flagellin-encoding class III transcript, but only when *C. crescentus* cell extracts are used. Mutation of the putative binding site of FlbT altered the stability of the transcript and FlbT binding.

20. Aldridge P, Hughes KT: How and when are substrates selected for type III secretion? *Trends Microbiol* 2001, 9:209-214.

In this opinion piece, the plausibility of localized translation and the coupling of translation to secretion of substrates is discussed.

21. Bennett JC, Hughes C: From flagellum assembly to virulence: the extended family of type III export chaperones. *Trends Microbiol* 2000, 8:202-204.

22. Fraser GM, Bennett JC, Hughes C: Substrate-specific binding of hook-associated proteins by FlgN and FliT, putative chaperones for flagellum assembly. *Mol Microbiol* 1999, 32:569-580.

23. Bennett JC, Thomas J, Fraser GM, Hughes C: Substrate complexes and domain organization of the *Salmonella* flagellar export chaperones FlgN and FliT. *Mol Microbiol* 2001, 39:781-791.

This paper further characterizes the interaction of FlgN and FliT with their substrates. The authors show that the amino termini of these proteins are required for dimerization, and that the carboxy-terminal domains are required for substrate binding.

24. Auvray F, Thomas J, Fraser GM, Hughes C: Flagellin polymerization control by a cytosolic export chaperone. *J Mol Biol* 2001, 308:221-229.

The authors of this paper demonstrate binding of the flagellin FliC with its chaperone, FliS, and prevention of filament assembly *in vitro*.

25. Darwin KH, Miller VL: Type III secretion chaperone-dependent regulation: activation of virulence genes by SicA and InvF in *Salmonella typhimurium*. *EMBO J* 2001, 20:1850-1862.

This paper is the first to describe a chaperone with a dual role in a virulent TTSS. The authors clearly show that the chaperone SicA can interact with a secretion substrate and the transcriptional activator InvF.

26. Kutsukake K, Ikebe T, Yamamoto S: Two novel regulatory genes, *fliT* and *fliZ*, in the flagellar regulon of *Salmonella*. *Genes Genet Syst* 1999, 74:287-292.

27. Francis MS, Lloyd SA, Wolf-Watz H: The type III secretion chaperone LcrH co-operates with YopD to establish a negative, regulatory loop for control of Yop synthesis in *Yersinia psuedotuberculosis*. *Mol Microbiol* 2001, 42:1075-1093.

28. Muramoto K, Makishima S, Aizawa S, Macnab RM: Effect of hook subunit concentration on assembly and control of length of the flagellar hook of *Salmonella*. *J Bacteriol* 1999, 181:5808-5813.

29. Mullin DA, Ohta N, Mullin AH, Newton A: Organization, expression, and function of *Caulobacter crescentus* genes needed for assembly and function of the flagellar hook. *Mol Genet Genomics* 2001, 265:445-454.

This paper describes the characterization of FliK and the hook operon in *C. crescentus*. The authors also propose that FliK plays a role in the initiation of hook synthesis as well as in control of hook length.

30. Minamino T, Gonzalez-Pedrajo B, Yamaguchi K, Aizawa SI, Macnab RM: FliK, the protein responsible for flagellar hook length control in *Salmonella*, is exported during hook assembly. *Mol Microbiol* 1999, 34:295-304.

31. Minamino T, Macnab RM: Domain structure of *Salmonella* FlhB, a flagellar export component responsible for substrate specificity switching. *J Bacteriol* 2000, 182:4906-4914.

32. Makishima S, Komoriya K, Yamaguchi S, Aizawa SI: Length of the flagellar hook and the capacity of the type III export apparatus. *Science* 2001, 291:2411-2413.

The authors describe the isolation of mutations, which alter the length of the hook, in the C-ring subunits. From their observations, they propose a model for determining hook length.

33. Bonifield HR, Yamaguchi S, Hughes KT: The flagellar hook protein, FlgE, of *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium is post transcriptionally regulated in response to the stage of flagellar assembly. *J Bacteriol* 2000, 182:4044-4050.

34. Yonekura K, Maki S, Morgan DG, DeRosier DJ, Vonderviszt F, Imada K, Namba K: The bacterial flagellar cap as the rotary promoter of flagellin self-assembly. *Science* 2000, 290:2148-2152.

This paper describes the determination of the three-dimensional structure of the filament tip. Analysis of the structure provided insight into the process of self-assembly of the filament and the role of the filament cap in this process.
