
Current Biology, Vol. 12, 689–694, April 16, 2002, ©2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. PII S0960-9822(02)00768-6

# Identification of Tah11/Sid2 as the Ortholog of the Replication Licensing Factor Cdt1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

Alain Devault,$^{1}$ Elizabeth A. Vallen,$^{3}$ Tina Yuan,$^{3}$ Stephen Green,$^{3}$ Aaron Bensimon,$^{2}$ and Etienne Schwob$^{1,4}$

$^{1}$Institute of Molecular Genetics  
CNRS UMR 5535 and  
Université Montpellier II  
1919, Route de Mende  
34293 Montpellier cedex 5  

$^{2}$Structure et Dynamique des Génomes  
Institut Pasteur  
75724 Paris  
France  

$^{3}$Swarthmore College  
Swarthmore, Pennsylvania 19081  

## Summary

Faithful duplication of the genetic material requires that replication origins fire only once per cell cycle. Central to this control is the tightly regulated formation of prereplicative complexes (preRCs) at future origins of DNA replication [1]. In all eukaryotes studied, this entails loading by Cdc6 of the Mcm2-7 helicase next to the origin recognition complex (ORC) [2]. More recently, another factor, named Cdt1, was shown to be essential for Mcm loading in fission yeast and Xenopus [3–5] as well as for DNA replication in Drosophila and humans [6, 7]. Surprisingly, no Cdt1 homolog was found in budding yeast, despite the conserved nature of origin licensing. Here we identify Tah11/Sid2, previously isolated through interactions with topoisomerase and Cdk inhibitor mutants [8, 9], as an ortholog of Cdt1. We show that sid2 mutants lose minichromosomes in an ARS number-dependent manner, consistent with ScCdt1/Sid2 being involved in origin licensing. Accordingly, cells partially depleted of Cdt1 replicate DNA from fewer origins, whereas fully depleted cells fail to load Mcm2 on chromatin and fail to initiate but not elongate DNA synthesis. We conclude that origin licensing depends in S. cerevisiae as in other eukaryotes on both Cdc6 and Cdt1.

## Results and Discussion

### Multiple Alignment Unveils a Cdt1-Related Sequence in Budding Yeast

In contrast to other eukaryotic replication initiation factors that are well conserved, standard BLAST searches with either S. pombe or Xenopus Cdt1 failed to detect a good homolog in the S. cerevisiae genome database. This led to the idea that budding yeast may not need this second licensing factor, perhaps due to the more rigid nature of its replication origins [4, 6]. Intrigued by this, we performed more sensitive BLAST analyses. When the Xenopus sequence was used as a query, we found that the second best match in the yeast database (YJR046w; p = 0.096) displayed two stretches of homology (aa 266–371 and aa 482–604) within domains that were conserved in Cdt1 proteins from other species. Despite the poor overall identity between SpCdt1, XICdt1, and YJR046w, multiple alignment with sequences from C. elegans, fly, and humans suggested that YJR046w was the likely Cdt1 ortholog of budding yeast (Figure 1A).

YJR046w is an essential gene previously identified in two separate genetic screens. One was based on synthetic lethality with a DNA topoisomerase I mutant (Top1-T722A) that increases the stability of the covalent DNA-protein intermediate. Mutants were called *tah* (for Topo-A hypersensitive), and *TAH11* corresponds to YJR046w [8]. It is not yet evident why mutants defective in origin licensing are sensitive to lesions or damage generated by this topoisomerase allele, but it is worth noting that two other genes, *CDC45* and *DPB11*, required for the initiation of DNA replication or an early step in elongation were also recovered [10]. An allele of YJR046w was independently isolated as synthetic lethal with a deletion of the Cdk inhibitor *SIC1*, hence its second name, *SID2* (Sic1 Indispensable) [9]. In that work, two mutations were characterized: one (*sid2-1*) that causes a severe growth defect in conjunction with *sic1Δ* and one (*sid2-21*) that is temperature sensitive for growth on its own. *SIC1* helps to inactivate mitotic CDKs at M exit [11, 12] and prevents the precocious activation of S phase CDKs [13, 14]. Thus, Sic1 reinforces the period of low CDK activity needed for origin licensing, and this may explain why *sic1Δ* and *sid2-1* mutants are synthetic lethal. For clarity, we will hereafter refer to YJR046w/TAH11/SID2 as ScCDT1.

Despite their relatedness, Cdt1 proteins diverge notably both in size and sequence, ranging from 444 residues in S. pombe to 743 in Drosophila. Pairwise alignments reveal 49% identity between human and Xenopus Cdt1 but only about 30%, 21%, and 18% with their Drosophila, C. elegans, and yeast counterparts, respectively (Figure 1B). The poor similarity of Cdt1 proteins was somewhat unexpected from the strong conservation of preRC formation in all eukaryotes and probably explains why ScCdt1 escaped earlier detection. Cdc6 proteins in contrast benefit from 5%–15% higher interspecies scores. It is currently unclear why Cdt1 proteins are less conserved, but the presence of species-specific interactors is a likely reason. For instance, Cdt1 proteins from frog, human, and fruit fly bind Geminin, an inhibitor of licensing that has been found so far only in metazoans [5, 7, 15].

### Minichromosome Loss in *sid2* Mutants

Minichromosomes with a single autonomous replication sequence (ARS) require efficient firing of that origin to be stably maintained during cell proliferation. Cells mutated for origin licensing factors, such as Orc, Cdc6, and Mcm proteins, lose minichromosomes at high frequency [16–

Current Biology
690

A

| Hs | 1 | MEQRRVTDFARRR... ...PGPPRIAPPKIACRTPSPARPAIRAPAS... ...AISGSRKPARPPAAPGRDQAIPP. | 65 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Dm | 1 | MAQPSVAAFTNRRAALDDAISIKNRLVEPAETSPASAPSOLPAGDDADLDTLKAAAIGMRTRSGRTARLIVTAQESKKKTPAAAKMEPHIKQPK | 100 |
| Ce | 1 | MSSRVTRSRSQTPOAVTDDFFKTTRKPRARGEKKIDESITKTTTIKEVIPAAPIVENKSERRARTPSRQAEELSSSTPFKKAREABEAPELPKIHE | 100 |
| Sp | 1 | ... |  |
| Sc | 1 | MSGTANSRRKEVLVPVIDLNRVSDEEQLLPVVRALLLQHDTFLIKNYAKAVLDATLAGLTKKDLPDTSQGFDAFSTLPLEDDVWLEQYIFDTD PQL | 100 |

| Hs | 65 | ...ARRILRLSVDEVSSPSTPEAPDIPACPSPGCKKKSTPAAGQP... ...FHLTSAQDQDTISPLASCTQRARELGA | 135 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Dm | 101 | LVQFI...KKGTLSPRKQAOQSSEELQQSSAISEHTPKVNFTITSQCNADNVQGLRPTFKQILKDASEIKADLRRQLFDVKTKWSRAKLQE | 195 |
| Ce | 101 | DIILENPAPQKSAIDKLMEASGPAAKAGIRTVAIDLQARIAAKGAAKAIHECINKNKTKQVDDHVELLKSPKKEVIVEHHKSPQKSKAARNFPSPKKPV | 200 |
| Sp | 1 | ...MKCRALYSHDNNILIFGFCVQIMSAGSQTKUNFSVRKTRSS... ...SKRSNAAIIEPPKNPED | 58 |
| Sc | 101 | R...FDRKCRNESLCSIYSRLFKLGLFFAQLCVKSVSSAELQDCISTSHYATKLTRYFNNGSTHDGADAATWLPTGDDFQ | 180 |

| Hs | 136 | RVRALKASAQDAGESCTPEAEGPEEPCG... ...EKAPAYQRHAIAQPGLLG.VLFYKYQVLAEMFRSMDTVGMLHNREPTFAKVQRG | 222 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Dm | 196 | LKAVLALKAALEQKRKEQBERNIRDAGP-(68 aa)-KLVEVPAYKRYASVESSRAGQELPYKYRHILDVFKGILDSVVAMFHRKEITFKKLKPA | 354 |
| Ce | 201 | DYIPCFNVLKSAEKVRGEQDDAHEEEGKR... ...MTAEFLKSSRLIDEVKESARQBLEPTAYEHIAEFTRKIDTYAIFIGQNRCVVPDLIKN | 291 |
| Sp | 59 | SQIIPAVKRLKENLDTESLEQNEVPPVKN... ...ESVLFLEKFNAVDICVKPHLSINTKPTFVLLLENK | 123 |
| Sc | 181 | YLFERDYVTFPLTGVLTIFFPCAMRYKPS... ...TMATTDNSAVSDEPDCLLFHGTLLARWSQMHTTSPLQDPRAIVSLTIPPLTTP | 269 |

| Hs | 223 | VQDVMMRRFEERNVGQIKTVYPASYRFREQERSWPTFKDGARRS... ...DYQLTIEPPLLEQBADG... ...AAPQITASRRL | 292 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Dm | 287 | VQRMLRKNFTETHLAIQIKHIYPDARIFSQVKTR.NFGSVSKA... ...YFQLIIAPNVEPLPEQQQSEKPQHFTKINEDDVLASAQSTSMNPHVM | 444 |
| Ce | 292 | VKNTSGKDFSNEHLSQILHVYPQSHIEMREQRKAFGQGSKYELVRPNLVBLRGYYEKSPTGDTEDLPLVCPSKLLSPKKSPRKQVPAIRKPEID | 391 |
| Sp | 124 | VSGTKISLKITHLAQILTWWPESBAITPCFTHQGKRVITYELS... ...YPRNANLPEAFS | 180 |
| Sc | 270 | ISSKGEGTIANHILECQIKAFPKVAQQYYPESILRLQDAMFKVELFTVCETVLINALSRSTGVP... ...PELHVLLLPQIS | 348 |

| Hs | 293 | Q...RRQIFSQKLMEHKKEHHKAFIASLSPAMVPEDQLTRWHERRNVDE.VPDEEPAALQPBATEKLLTTACBVVARANLISPR..MEKA | 378 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Dm | 377 | A...RMORFQSLLIDRAMRAHDQFIRSQDPIIEBK.ALTRWHERQDES.CBEVELSPLPQENVEKYSSAKILSTARNEFNCA TPMERA | 531 |
| Ce | 392 | GRIRLDAARQRDRAHFRYKLASIVTKCHTEFLBSQ... ...GLCASSNIKRMHPRLRDKHCBSIPQVKLBERLQLKSSIHIGMKEALDKYMDQVSLPSFVQ | 488 |
| Sp | 181 | R...SIEFKRRLKWLLEHCSETEDPAQLQALSLSKNTVNESSLVRKLNLEKSTSRELRIPTQLEPKFTTNTAKYANEIVSCSMLDSSS | 269 |
| Sc | 349 | S...MMRKIVQDDIKULLTIWSDAYVVELNSRGETMNLPKRDNLITTLNK..SRTLAFVERAESWYQQVIASKBIMTDVPAFKINKRRSSS | 437 |

| Hs | 379 | LSQALAR...AAPSSPGSPRPALPATPPA...TPP.AASPAAKGVSQDLLERIRAKEAQQLAQMTRCECQRLQRLERIP.ELARVIR | 462 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Dm | 464 | MDRYEAKL-(45 aa)-TVPETTNQTEATAKPTVKD...CTVPDASSNLKGLPKSLIEKIRAKQAAKALEAMTRRPSQDEATKYSKIP.ELARHIR | 660 |
| Ce | 489 | KAYODLKS...PIKSTTGASGTVBISP...KKFSEMQKEQSQGAMSLLERIRAKEAIKKAEEACIDKDLERRKQRLTHIRDRYVRIVC | 571 |
| Sp | 270 | TLSKSUNS...KINLKSHQSSSSVQ...NSSRKLTSQTLRQSSLFRVKKCKAMEAKKAEEFKN.NLVVHTLAKEKVSFVRIDD | 349 |
| Sc | 438 | NSKTVLSS...KVQTKSSANALNNSRYLANSKENFMYEKUPDSQANLMDRERERRSSAA...LLSQRQKRYQQFHAMKMTQVFD | 518 |

| Hs | 463 | SVFVSE...RKPALSMEEVACARMVGSCCTISEGEMEKHILLILSELLELPDWMSLHRIRRTDTYVKEDKAAALAITTARLAHQTRAEEGL... | 546 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Dm | 548 | NVFVTE...RKGVLTLEVIIKKIQNSFRANLIEQTEAHLKLLAKELPSWASFHERKTMYDKKAKDMNKKIEKLESVANA KSN... | 743 |
| Ce | 572 | NHMTAK...RAOTMEIDVICKFVQESSSNSSSIPDIMDHURLLICEVARMXISEASLMNKKKQQISKKKISEBLQKWFESENSTFFLKIKK-(83 aa)- | 741 |
| Sp | 350 | LIFVQLSTWPTKRESMESEIVTSQCMSISSSSSEDCQCAKIELLSKALPAMCITNILIGNIQVVTFSRIVNGKPYLRSQLIBELQT KASITILSNS... | 444 |
| Sc | 519 | ILFSILTRGQPYTECYLSSSIMDSIQDSN.NPAGTKBASEIAGCGQTLPMDISVHVQVDGGLKVYRWNSLDKNFSKLQIHKSKQQD... | 604 |

B

| % Ident. | X.l | D.m | C.e | S.p | S.c |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| H.s (546) | 49.0 | 27.9 | 20.4 | 18.7 | 18.2 |
| X.l (620) | 30.8 | 21.3 | 18.3 | 17.6 |  |
| D.m (743) | 20.6 | 16.5 | 18.0 |  |  |
| C.e (741) |  | 17.0 | 17.3 |  |  |
| S.p (444) |  |  |  | 18.5 |  |

Figure 1. Alignment of Cdt1 Proteins from Different Species

(A) Multiple alignment of human (Hs; BAB61878), fruit fly (Dm; AAF99080), nematode (Ce; NP_491126), fission yeast (Sp; T40470), and budding yeast (Sc; NP012580 or YJR046w) Cdt1 proteins using ClustalW and manual correction. Residues identical or similar in ≥3/5 sequences are shaded in black or gray, respectively.

(B) Pairwise identity scores generated using Lipman and Pearson’s ALIGN with gap penalties of −12/−2. Accession number for Xenopus Cdt1 is CAB87836. Numbers in parentheses indicate polypeptide length. *Candida albicans* (Stanford Genome Technology Center; http://www-sequence.stanford.edu/group/candida) and *Arabidopsis thaliana* (AAD20672) Cdt1 sequences are also available.

20]. Moreover, minichromosome loss in this class of mutants is suppressed when extra ARS elements are present on the minichromosome [16]. We showed previously that sid2-1 sic1Δ and sid2-21 mutants have a delay in completing DNA replication [9]. To see whether this is due to a defect in ARS function, we compared the mitotic loss rates of minichromosomes containing either one or eight ARSs [16] in wild-type, sid2-1, and sid2-21 cells grown at 30°C. Table 1 shows that mini-

chromosome maintenance is severely affected in both sid2 mutants. Strikingly, plasmids carrying multiple ARSs are maintained much more efficiently, suggesting that sid2 mutants suffer from defects in origin function rather than in the elongation of DNA synthesis. The plasmid loss rates of cdc6-1 [20] and sid2-21 mutants at semipermissive temperature are similar, suggesting that ScCdt1 might have a role for preRC formation as important as Cdc6.

Table 1. Minichromosome Loss Rates

| Percent Loss/Cell Division (SD) |
| --- |
| WT | sid2-1 | sid2-21 |
| 1 ARS (pDK398-7) | 0.2 (0.3) | 23.7 (3.0) | 21.1 (4.4) |
| 1+7 ARSs (pDK368-7) | 0.02 (0.1) | 2.0 (1.6) | 0.7 (0.3) |

Wild type (LY1036) and sid2 mutant strains (LY1037; LY1118) were transformed with plasmids that contained either one or eight functional origins of replication [16]. Stability assays were performed basically as described [20]. Colonies from selective media were suspended in water. An aliquot was used to inoculate YPD, and cultures were grown with aeration for five to nine generations at 30°C. Dilutions of the original suspension and the final culture were plated onto YPD plates, and colonies were counted to determine the concentration of viable cells. Plates were replica plated to media lacking leucine to determine the number of plasmid-bearing cells. The percent loss/cell division was calculated as (1 – [final percentage of plasmid-bearing cells/initial percentage of plasmid bearing cells]^n) × 100, where n is generation number. The number in parentheses is the standard deviation for each measurement, which was obtained from four to eleven independent trials.

Depletion of ScCdt1 by Transcriptional Shut-Off

The plasmid loss data of sid2 mutants are consistent with a requirement of Cdt1 for origin loading. It is therefore surprising that both sid2-1 sic1Δ and sid2-21 mutant strains were able to replicate most of their DNA before arresting prior to mitosis [9]. We hypothesized that these alleles might be hypomorphs rather than complete loss of function. As Cdt1 is an unstable protein in S. pombe and humans [3, 21], we decided to fuse ScCDT1 to the regulatable GAL1 promoter in an attempt to deplete Cdt1 from cells before the initiation of DNA replication. The GAL-CDT1 construct was integrated at the CDT1 locus of haploid yeast cells, thereby replacing the endogenous protein. GAL-CDT1 cells grown in the presence of galactose proliferated and had phenotypes indistinguishable from wild-type. Thus, overexpression of Cdt1 alone is neither toxic nor induces overreplication in S. cerevisiae, similar to what has been observed in S. pombe [22, 23]. However, when these cells were transferred to glucose-containing medium, they accu-

Brief Communication
691

Figure 2. Depletion of Cdt1 Prevents Origin Licensing and DNA Replication

(A) A strain (E1291) containing GAL1-HA3-CDT1 as the sole source of Cdt1 was constructed by integrating a GAL1-HA3 DNA fragment obtained by PCR with primer pair D941/D942 (see Supplementary Material) and pFA6a-His3MX6-PGAL1-3HA upstream of the CDT1 ORF in E001 (WT, W303-1a). Cells of E1291 and E001 pregrown in YEPGal at 30°C were transferred to YEPD medium to shut off the GAL promoter. Aliquots were removed at the indicated times and analyzed by Western using an anti-HA antibody (16B12, BabCo, 1:10,000); untag: E001 strain grown in YEPGal. Lanes 1 through 4 are a shorter exposure of lanes 5 through 8. Asterisk indicates a cross-reacting band that is used as loading control.

(B) After 3 hr in YEPD, nocodazole (15 μg/ml) was added and the culture left for another 3 hr. Cells were then released from nocodazole by filtration and arrested for 2.5 hr in G1 in YEPD medium containing 2 μg/ml α factor. Pronase (50 μg/ml) was added and aliquots taken at the indicated times for DNA content analysis (FACS) and budding index (BI). Asyn, cells grown in YEPGal; αF, G1-arrested cells.

(C) Cultures of strain E986 (WT) and E1621 (GAL-CDT1) were treated as in (B). Whole-cell extracts were fractionated in soluble (S, 1 equivalent) and chromatin-bound fractions (P, 2.5 equivalent) as described in [29] with slight modifications. Orc2-myc9 and Mcm2 were detected using anti-myc (9E12, 1:2000) and anti-Mcm2 (sc-6680 from SantaCruz, 1:10,000), respectively. (Bottom panel) Ponceau staining as loading control.

mulated as large dumbbell cells that ceased division between 4 and 6 hr later, with DNA content between 1C and 2C (data not shown). This confirmed that ScCdt1 is essential but also indicated that its depletion, though not immediate, could be achieved within reasonable time. Because Cdt1 was tagged with a triple HA epitope, we were able to confirm this by Western analysis (Figure 2A). A signal specific for HA-Cdt1 was abundant in the galactose-grown cells, decreased rapidly within 2 hr (compare lanes 1 and 3), and became very weak 4.5 hr (lane 9) after transcriptional shut-off. The signal was undetectable by 6 hr, at the same time cells stopped proliferating. This shows that ScCdt1 turns over quite rapidly, yet not enough to cause first-cycle arrest. The biological significance of this instability is unclear, since ScCDT1 mRNA and protein do not fluctuate during the cell cycle (http://genome-www.stanford.edu/cellcycle/) (Figure S1 in the Supplementary Material available with this article online), unlike in fission yeast and fruit fly, where Cdt1 is regulated transcriptionally and the protein is absent during S, G2, and early M [3, 6]. Human Cdt1, on the other hand, seems regulated at the level of proteolysis rather than transcription [21]. Instead, budding yeast Cdt1 might be regulated predominantly by localization, as a functional Sid2-PrA fusion protein was found to distribute both to cytoplasmic (90%) and nucleoplasmic (10%) fractions in extracts from asynchronous growing cells [9]. Origin refiring is prevented in budding yeast by multiple CDK-dependent mechanisms [24], and Cdt1 localization could represent still an additional level of regulation [22, 23].

ScCdt1 Is Required for DNA Replication

We next addressed whether Cdt1 is required for DNA replication. Because we assumed that Cdt1 is involved in preRC assembly, which begins at the exit of mitosis, we sought to deplete the protein before cells were allowed to proceed into G1. To this end, wild-type and GAL-CDT1 cells were first grown for 3 hr in glucose-containing medium to initiate depletion, then nocodazole was added for another 3 hr to further deplete Cdt1 while arresting cells in G2/M. Given the data presented in Figure 2A, no Cdt1 must remain at this stage (6 hr after shut-off) in the GAL-CDT1 strain. The cultures were then released from nocodazole arrest and arrested in G1 using α factor pheromone. Both strains exited M and accumulated in G1 equally well, indicating that ScCdt1 is dispensable for mitosis and cytokinesis (Figure 2B). Finally, cells were released from α factor arrest, and their progression through the cell cycle was monitored by flow cytometry (FACS) and microscopy. Strikingly, while the wild-type control reached 2C DNA content within 30 min after release, no replication took place for at least 160 min in the GAL-CDT1 strain (Figure 2B),

Current Biology
692

A
WT
(min)
GAL-CDT1
3 hr Glu
(min)

B
WT
GAL-CDT1 3 hr Glu

C
WT
Signals
Mean (SD)
55.6 kb (30.3)
Size (kb)
GAL-CDT1 3 hr Glu
Mean (SD)
99.6 kb (59.5)


Figure 3. Lowering Cdt1 Levels Slows S Phase and Increases Interorigin Distances
(A) Wild-type (E1000) and GAL1-CDT1 (E1479) cells were transferred for 3 hr in glucose-containing medium, followed by another 2.5 hr with α factor. A fraction of both cultures was released by pronase addition, and DNA synthesis was monitored by FACS.
(B) BrdU (0.4 mg/ml) and hydroxyurea (0.2 M) were added to the remainder of the cultures 20 min before release from α factor and incubated at 30°C for a further 90 min. Genomic DNA was extracted from cells and combed on silanized glass slides [28]. BrdU-substituted regions flanking origins activated in early S phase were revealed with an anti-BrdU antibody (BU-75, SeraLab) and fluorescence microscopy. Scale bar, 20 kb.
(C) Histogram plot of interorigin distances (n = 234 for E1000; n = 278 for E1479), defined as the distance between the middle of two successive colinear BrdU tracks.

confirming that Cdt1 had been thoroughly depleted from these cells. Both cultures budded equally well, indicating that Cdt1 is not required for Start but rather specifically for S phase. Furthermore, no elongated or multiple buds were observed, suggesting that Clb-Cdk1 kinases, which trigger S phase onset and repress polarized bud growth [13, 25], were activated normally in the absence of Cdt1.

ScCdt1 Is Required for Loading Mcm2 on Chromatin
Next, we addressed whether the failure to initiate DNA replication in the Cdt1-depleted cells was due to a failure to load Mcm proteins on chromatin, as expected from a true Cdt1 ortholog [3, 4]. To this end, extracts from cells depleted or not of Cdt1 were separated in soluble and chromatin-associated fractions, and the part of Mcm2 bound to chromatin was determined in cells arrested either in G2/M (nocodazole) or in G1 (α factor). Orc2, which binds chromatin throughout the cell cycle, was used as a control (Figure 2C). As described previously, Mcm2 was found partly associated with chromatin in G1 (lanes 2, 6, and 8) but little or not in G2/M cells (lane 4) when Cdt1 is present. In contrast, no Mcm2 was associated with chromatin in the Cdt1-depleted cells arrested in G1 (lane 12), despite the presence of Orc2. This demonstrates that ORC can bind DNA in the absence of Cdt1 but that Cdt1 is required for loading Mcm2 on chromatin and to license origins for DNA replication, as shown previously in S. pombe and Xenopus [3, 4].

DNA Replication Initiates from Fewer Origins When Cdt1 Is Limiting
To see whether low Cdt1 levels cause origins to fire less frequently, we set out to directly visualize replication origins on single DNA molecules stretched on a glass coverslip by a method called DNA combing [26, 27]. To this end, the GAL-CDT1 allele was introduced in a yeast strain that can incorporate bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) into nascent DNA [28]. Wild-type and GAL-CDT1 cells were transferred to YEPD medium for 3 hr, a time sufficient to substantially lower the amount but not entirely deplete Cdt1 from cells (see Figure 2A). α factor was then added to arrest these cells in G1. Shortly before release, BrdU was added to the cultures, which were then split in two, one part receiving hydroxyurea (HU) to block the elongation of DNA synthesis, the other not. The latter culture was used to monitor DNA replication by FACS. As expected, the cells partially depleted of Cdt1 replicated their DNA more slowly than the control. Both cultures initiated DNA synthesis at about the same time, but S phase was almost three times longer in the GAL-CDT1 strain, probably because fewer origins were activated (Figure 3A).

To show that this was the case, genomic DNA fibers from the HU-arrested cells were analyzed by DNA combing [26, 28]. Newly synthesized DNA substituted with BrdU was detected using specific antibodies and fluorescence microscopy. The linearity and uniform extension (2 kb/μm) of DNA molecules are unique properties of DNA combing that allow direct and quantitative measurements of distances between signals on single DNA molecules [26, 27]. Hydroxyurea, which deprives cells of dNTPs and induces fork stalling shortly after initiation, was used to facilitate the analysis. In these conditions, signals are uniform in size and early-firing origins are easily detected [28]. Fluorescence microscopy showed that BrdU tracks, which witness origin firing, were at larger distance of each other when the amount of Cdt1 was limiting (Figure 3B). This was confirmed by statistical measurement of center-to-center distances of BrdU

tracks (origins are assumed to reside at center of BrdU tracks) on a large number of molecules from both cultures (Figure 3C). Interorigin distances (IODs) were much larger under conditions of partial Cdt1 depletion (99.6 kb ± 59.5) than in wild-type cells (55.6 kb ± 30.3), indicating that many origins do not fire when Cdt1 is limiting. Thus, Cdt1 is a dose-dependent origin-licensing factor. Two lines of evidence rule out that Cdt1 might also be involved in the elongation of DNA synthesis: first, the length of BrdU tracks is not shorter (rather longer) under conditions of Cdt1 depletion (Figure 3B); second, when Cdt1 was depleted only after initiation (in HU-arrested cells, see Figure S2), wild-type and Cdt1-depleted cells finished S phase with similar kinetics upon release from HU arrest. Altogether, our results show that ScCdt1 is required for the initiation, not elongation, of DNA replication, at the level of forming competent origins.

**Conclusion**

Because it escaped earlier detection, it had been argued that Cdt1 might be absent in budding yeast, due to the rather simple makeup of its replication origins and the lack of developmental regulation. This does not seem to be the case. Both the functional and sequence similarity of ScCdt1 with Cdt1 proteins from other organisms that we show here demonstrate that YJR046w, also known as TAH11/SID2, codes for the true Cdt1 ortholog of *S. cerevisiae*. Thus, the double dependence of origin licensing on both Cdc6 and Cdt1 is probably a universal feature of replication control in all eukaryotes. Interestingly, the regulation of these two essential factors seems to have evolved quite distinctly in different organisms.

**Supplementary Material**

Supplementary Material including figures that show that Cdt1 levels do not fluctuate during the cell cycle and that Cdt1 is not required for the elongation of DNA synthesis as well as a table showing the primers for tagging *CDT1* with GAL-HA3 and a table showing the yeast strains can be found at http://images.cellpress.com/supmat/ supmatin.htm.

**Acknowledgments**

We are grateful to J. Diffley for sharing data prior to publication and to P. Pasero for help with DNA combing and chromatin-binding assays. We thank F. Cross and M.-A. Bjornsti for helpful discussions; L. Dirick and P. Pasero for critical reading of the manuscript; C.X. Muñoz, J. Tashjian, and G. Rivnak for technical assistance; E. Vives for α factor synthesis; as well as K. Nasmyth, D. Koshland, and M. Longtine for strains or plasmids. This work was supported by grants to E.S. from CNRS (Physique et Chimie du Vivant) and Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer (ARC 9064) as well as by grants from U.S. Public Health Service Grant GM-54300-01 and Swarthmore College Faculty Research Funds to E.A.V.

Received: January 14, 2002  
Revised: February 27, 2002  
Accepted: February 28, 2002  
Published online: March 13, 2002

**References**

1. Diffley, J.F. (1996). Once and only once upon a time: specifying and regulating origins of DNA replication in eukaryotic cells. Genes Dev. 10, 2819–2830.
2. Kelly, T.J., and Brown, G.W. (2000). Regulation of chromosome replication. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69, 829–880.
3. Nishitani, H., Lygerou, Z., Nishimoto, T., and Nurse, P. (2000).
The Cdt1 protein is required to license DNA for replication in fission yeast. Nature 404, 625–628.
4. Maiorano, D., Moreau, J., and Méchali, M. (2000). XCDT1 is required for the assembly of pre-replicative complexes in Xenopus laevis. Nature 404, 622–625.
5. Tada, S., Li, A., Maiorano, D., Méchali, M., and Blow, J.J. (2001). Repression of origin assembly in metaphase depends on inhibition of RLF-B/Cdt1 by geminin. Nat. Cell Biol. 3, 107–113.
6. Whittaker, A.J., Royzman, I., and Orr-Weaver, T.L. (2000). Drosophila double parked: a conserved, essential replication protein that colocalizes with the origin recognition complex and links DNA replication with mitosis and the down-regulation of S phase transcripts. Genes Dev. 14, 1765–1776.
7. Wohlschlegel, J.A., Dwyer, B.T., Dhar, S.K., Cvetic, C., Walter, J.C., and Dutta, A. (2000). Inhibition of eukaryotic DNA replication by geminin binding to Cdt1. Science 290, 2309–2312.
8. Fiorani, P., and Bjornsti, M.A. (2000). Mechanisms of DNA topoisomerase I-induced cell killing in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 922, 65–75.
9. Jacobson, M.D., Muñoz, C.X., Knox, K.S., Williams, B.E., Lu, L.L., Cross, F.R., and Vallen, E.A. (2001). Mutations in *SID2*, a novel gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, cause synthetic lethality with *sic1* deletion and may cause a defect during S phase. Genetics 159, 17–33.
10. Reid, R.J., Fiorani, P., Sugawara, M., and Bjornsti, M.A. (1999). *CDC45* and *DPB11* are required for processive DNA replication and resistance to DNA topoisomerase I-mediated DNA damage. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 11440–11445.
11. Jaspersen, S.L., Charles, J.F., Tinker-Kulberg, R.L., and Morgan, D.O. (1998). A late mitotic regulatory network controlling cyclin destruction in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol. Biol. Cell 9, 2803–2817.
12. Calzada, A., Sacristan, M., Sanchez, E., and Bueno, A. (2001). Cdc6 cooperates with Sic1 and Hct1 to inactivate mitotic cyclin-dependent kinases. Nature 412, 355–358.
13. Schwob, E., Böhm, T., Mendenhall, M.D., and Nasmyth, K. (1994). The B-type cyclin kinase inhibitor p40<sup>SIC1</sup> controls the G1 to S transition in *S. cerevisiae*. Cell 79, 233–244.
14. Schneider, B.L., Yang, Q.H., and Futcher, A.B. (1996). Linkage of replication to start by the Cdk inhibitor Sic1. Science 272, 560–562.
15. Quinn, L.M., Herr, A., McGarry, T.J., and Richardson, H. (2001). The Drosophila Geminin homolog: roles for Geminin in limiting DNA replication, in anaphase and in neurogenesis. Genes Dev. 15, 2741–2754.
16. Hogan, E., and Koshland, D. (1992). Addition of extra origins of replication to a mini-chromosome suppresses its mitotic loss in *cdc6* and *cdc14* mutants of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89, 3098–3102.
17. Loo, S., Fox, C.A., Rine, J., Kobayashi, R., Stillman, B., and Bell, S. (1995). The origin recognition complex in silencing, cell cycle progression, and DNA replication. Mol. Biol. Cell 6, 741–756.
18. Maine, G.T., Sinha, P., and Tye, B.K. (1984). Mutants of *S. cerevisiae* defective in the maintenance of minichromosomes. Genetics 106, 365–385.
19. Tye, B.K. (1999). Minichromosome maintenance as a genetic assay for defects in DNA replication. Methods 18, 329–334.
20. Feng, L., Wang, B., Driscoll, B., and Jong, A. (2000). Identification and characterization of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Cdc6 DNA-binding properties. Mol. Biol. Cell 11, 1673–1685.
21. Nishitani, H., Taraviras, S., Lygerou, Z., and Nishimoto, T. (2001). The human licensing factor for DNA replication Cdt1 accumulates in G1 and is destabilized after initiation of S-phase. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 44905–44911.
22. Gopalakrishnan, V., Simancek, P., Houchens, C., Snaith, H.A., Frattini, M.G., Sazer, S., and Kelly, T.J. (2001). Redundant control of rereplication in fission yeast. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 13114–13119.
23. Yanow, S.K., Lygerou, Z., and Nurse, P. (2001). Expression of Cdc18/Cdc6 and Cdt1 during G2 phase induces initiation of DNA replication. EMBO J. 20, 4648–4656.
24. Nguyen, V.Q., Co, C., and Li, J.J. (2001). Cyclin-dependent kinases prevent DNA re-replication through multiple mechanisms. Nature 411, 1068–1073.
25. Lew, D.J., and Reed, S.I. (1993). Morphogenesis in the yeast

cell cycle: regulation by Cdc28 and cyclins. J. Cell Biol. 120, 1305–1320.

26. Michalet, X., Ekong, R., Fougerousse, F., Rousseaux, S., Schurra, C., Hornigold, N., van Slegtenhorst, M., Wolfe, J., Povey, S., Beckmann, J.S., et al. (1997). Dynamic molecular combing: stretching the whole human genome for high-resolution studies. Science 277, 1518–1523.

27. Herrick, J., Stanislawski, P., Hyrien, O., and Bensimon, A. (2000). Replication fork density increases during DNA synthesis in X. laevis egg extracts. J. Mol. Biol. 300, 1133–1142.

28. Lengronne, A., Pasero, P., Bensimon, A., and Schwob, E. (2001). Monitoring S phase progression globally and locally using BrdU incorporation in TK(+) yeast strains. Nucleic Acids Res. 29, 1433–1442.

29. Schepers, A., and Diffley, J.F. (2001). Mutational analysis of conserved sequence motifs in the budding yeast Cdc6 protein. J. Mol. Biol. 308, 597–608.

Note Added in Proof

A paper by Tanaka and Diffley (2002) describing the identification and regulation of ScCdt1 appeared on the Nature Cell Biology website (February 11, 2002, DOI:10.1038/ncb757) while this paper was in revision.
