
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, May 2002, p. 2620–2625
0021-9193/02/$04.00+0 DOI: 10.1128/JB.184.10.2620–2625.2002
Copyright © 2002, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

# The O-Antigen Gene Cluster of *Escherichia coli* O55:H7 and Identification of a New UDP-GlcNAc C4 Epimerase Gene

Lei Wang,† Sandy Huskic, Adam Cisterne, Deborah Rothemund, and Peter R. Reeves*

Department of Microbiology, The University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia

Received 23 October 2001/Accepted 18 February 2002

*Escherichia coli* O55 is an important antigen which is often associated with enteropathogenic *E. coli* clones. We sequenced the genes responsible for its synthesis and identified genes for O-antigen polymerase, O-antigen flippase, four enzymes involved in GDP-colitose synthesis, and three glycosyltransferases, all by comparison with known genes. Upstream of the normal O-antigen region there is a *gne* gene, which encodes a UDP-GlcNAc epimerase for converting UDP-GlcNAc to UDP-GalNAc and is essential for O55 antigen synthesis. The O55 *gne* product has only 20 and 26% identity to the *gne* genes of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* and *E. coli* O113, respectively. We also found evidence for the O55 gene cluster’s having evolved from another gene cluster by gain and loss of genes. Only three of the GDP-colitose pathway genes are in the usual location, the other two being separated, although nearby. It is thought that the *E. coli* O157:H7 clone evolved from the O55:H7 clone in part by transfer of the O157 gene cluster into an O55 lineage. Comparison of genes flanking the O-antigen gene clusters of the O55:H7 and O157:H7 clones revealed one recombination site within the *galF* gene and located the other between the *hisG* and *amn* genes. Genes outside the recombination sites are 99.6 to 100% identical in the two clones, while most genes thought to have transferred with the O157 gene cluster are 95 to 98% identical.

---

*Escherichia coli* is a clonal species, with clones normally identified by their combination of O and H (and sometimes K) antigens. *E. coli* O55:H7 and O157:H7 are important pathogenic clones causing serious diseases in humans (20, 33). Multilocus enzyme electrophoresis of a large number of *E. coli* strains has shown that *E. coli* O157:H7 isolates belong to a distinct group which also contains *E. coli* O55:H7 (9, 26, 43, 44). The H7 *fliC* genes of O55:H7 and O157:H7 strains are almost identical but differ from those of strains with other O antigens (29, 41). Thus, it has been proposed that transfer of O157 O-antigen genes into an O55:H7 strain was one of the events resulting in the origin of the O157:H7 enterohemorrhagic *E. coli* clone (34).

The O antigen contributes major antigenic variability to the cell surface, and on the basis of this antigenic variation, 166 O forms have been recognized in *E. coli* (not including Shigella strains). The surface O antigen is subject to intense selection by the host immune system, which may account for maintenance of the many different O-antigen forms within species such as *E. coli*. The genes specific to O-antigen synthesis in *E. coli* are commonly clustered adjacent to the *gnd* gene between the colanic acid (CA) and *his* operons (28).

Lateral transfer of large DNA segments is thought to have played an important role in the evolution of bacterial pathogens. The evidence is usually the presence of genes with atypical GC content and/or the distribution of pathogenicity islands or other gene clusters. We, among others, have undertaken extensive studies on O-antigen genes by sequencing and identifying the O-antigen genes, mostly in *Salmonella enterica* and

---

*E. coli*, and found evidence for lateral gene transfer at all levels of O-antigen variation (see Reeves [27] for a review). There is evidence for gene transfer in assembly of O-antigen gene clusters (5, 45) and also for transfer of O-antigen gene clusters between clones of a species involving homologous recombination in adjacent genes (35). Finally there is evidence for interspecies transfer of the entire O-antigen gene cluster from *Plesiomonas shigelloides* to *E. coli* (31). Tarr et al. (34) showed by sequence comparison that the O157 gene cluster and adjacent *gnd* gene of the O157:H7 clone cotransferred into an *E. coli* O55:H7 organism to generate the O157:H7 clone.

It is thought that *E. coli* and *S. enterica* diverged from a common ancestor about 140 million years ago (21, 22). It is noteworthy that only three forms of O antigen are common to both species, and in *E. coli* all three (O55, O111, and O157) are associated with enteropathogenic (and sometimes enterohemorrhagic) *E. coli* strains. O55 and O111 are the only two colitose-containing O antigens in *E. coli*. For *E. coli* O111 and identical *S. enterica* O35, the organization and sequences of the gene clusters support their derivation from a gene cluster in the common ancestral species, but data are not available for the other cases.

To better understand the genetics of the O55 antigen and the genetic basis of the shift from O55 to O157 in the evolution of *E. coli* O157:H7, we sequenced the O55 antigen genes and flanking sequence. The O55 O unit is atypical in that two of five colitose biosynthesis pathway genes are located downstream of the *gnd* gene and a newly described UDP-GlcNAc epimerase (*gne*) gene is upstream of *galF*, suggesting formation by addition of genes adjacent to an ancestral gene cluster.

---

*MATERIALS AND METHODS*

**Bacterial strains and plasmids.** *E. coli* O55:H7 (isolate TB182, laboratory number M1685) and O157:H7 (isolate K3557, laboratory number M2136) were kindly provided by Phillip Tarr of the University of Washington School of Medicine and Vicki Bennett-Wood of the Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville,

---

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Department of Microbiology (GO8), The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. Phone: (612) 9351 2536. Fax: (612) 9351 4571. E-mail: reeves@angis.org.au.
* Present address: Department of Microbiology, College of Life Science, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, People’s Republic of China.

VOL. 184, 2002                                                                 E. COLI O55 GENE CLUSTER 2621

1 kb

| wbgM | gmd | manC | manB | wbgN | wzy | wzx | wbgO | wbgP | wbdJ | wbdK |
|------|-----|------|------|------|-----|-----|------|------|------|------|

O55

A B C

| gne | galF | gnd | ugd | wzz | hisI | hisF | hisA | hisH | hisB | hisC | hisD | hisG' | amn' |
|-----|------|-----|-----|-----|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|-------|------|
| 99.6 | 97.3 | 81.9 | 96.7 | 97.2 | 95.8 | 97.3 | 97.2:98.0 | 95.9 | 97.5 | 95.1 | 97.6 | 100 |

O157

| wbdN | wzy | wbdO | wzx | per | wbdP | gmd | fcl | manC | manB | wbdR |
|------|-----|------|-----|-----|------|-----|-----|------|------|------|

gmm

Remnant H-repeat

FIG. 1. Maps of the E. coli O55:H7 and E. coli O157 O-antigen genes (top and bottom) and respective flanking regions, including the *gne* gene (center). Differences between the DNA sequences are given for each gene in the flanking regions. Proposed recombination sites for transfer of the O157 gene cluster into an O55:H7 strain are indicated by vertical arrows. A, B, and C indicate the binding sites for primers used in PCR of *gne* (primers at sites A and B for detection of *gne* were inside the primers for cloning *gne*).

Australia, respectively. *E. coli* type strains for other O antigens are those described before (39). Plasmid pKD20 was kindly provided by N. Patrick Higgins, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham.

Construction of random DNase I bank for sequencing DNA fragments. Chromosomal DNA used as the template for PCR was prepared by using Wizard DNA preparation kits from Promega. Long PCR was carried out using the Expand Long Template PCR system from Boehringer, and products were subjected to DNase I digestion and cloned into pGEM-T to make banks for sequencing by the method described previously (39). Products of 12 individual PCRs were pooled to make each bank in order to limit the effect of PCR errors.

Sequencing and analysis. A total of 27,730 bp of DNA sequence, from the end of the CA gene cluster to *hisG*, was obtained from the O55:H7 strain (Fig. 1) in three overlapping segments. We sequenced the *galF* to *gnd* region and from *gnd* to the distal end of the *his* operon regions using random DNase I banks constructed from DNA amplified by long PCR using primer pairs 1523 (5'-ATTGTGGCTGCAGGGATCAAAGAAATC) and 1524 [tag-TC(A,G)CGCTG(A,C,T,G)GCCTG(A,G)AT(C,T)ARGTT(A,C)GC] and 3380 (5'-GATATTGCACCTGCTCAAGCGTTATCTCGACCAG), respectively (bases in parentheses for 1524 indicate redundancy). The region upstream of *galF* was PCR amplified using primers 3667 (5'-GGATTAATCACCATATTGT) and 3432 (5'-ATAAGAGGTGTTCGAAGTG) and sequenced by primer walking.

DNA template for sequencing was prepared using the 96-well format plasmid DNA miniprep kit from Advanced Genetic Technologies Corp and the procedure developed at the Institute for Genomic Research (36). Sequencing was performed with an Applied Biosystems 377 automated DNA sequencer at the Sydney University and the Prince Alfred Macromolecular Analysis Centre. Sequence data were assembled using the Phred/Phrap package of the University of Washington Genome Center, and sequence annotation was done using the program Artemis from the Sanger Centre. We used the algorithm described by Eisenberg et al. (7) to identify potential transmembrane segments from the amino acid sequence.

Cloning of the *gne* gene. The *gne* gene was PCR amplified from strain M1685 using primers 3859 (5'-ATATAGAGCTCATGAACGATAACGTTTGGCTC) and 3860 (5'-CGGGATCCTTACTCAGACAAAAATGCTAT), which bind to the 5' and 3' ends, respectively, of the *gne* gene (shown as A and B in Fig. 1) and have *SacI* and *BamHI* restriction sites, respectively, incorporated at their 5' ends. The PCR product was cloned into the *SacI* and *BamHI* sites of pTRC99A (from Pharmacia) to make plasmid pPR2062. In plasmid pPR2062, the cloned *gne* gene is under the control of a *trc* promoter, which is repressed by the LacI protein encoded by a gene in the same plasmid. We used 2.5 mM IPTG (isopropylthiogalactopyranoside) to induce expression of the cloned gene.

Deletion of *gne* gene from O55:H7 and O157:H7 strains. The *gne* genes of both strains were replaced by a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene using the RED recombination system of phage lambda (6, 46). The CAT gene was PCR amplified from plasmid pKK232-8 (Pharmacia) using primers binding to the 5' and 3' ends of the gene, with each primer carrying 36 bp based on the O55:H7 DNA which flanks *gne*. The PCR product was transformed into M1685 and M2136 carrying pKD20, and chloramphenicol-resistant transformants were selected after induction of the RED genes according to the protocol described by Datsenko and Wanner (6). PCR using primers specific to the CAT gene and O55:H7 or O157:H7 DNA flanking the *gne* gene was carried out to confirm the replacement.

Assay for UDP-GlcNAc epimerase. We used the assay first described by Glaser (12) and recently used by others (4, 8) for UDP-GlcNAc epimerase. UDP-GlcNAc is used as the substrate, and after removal of the UDP moiety by acid hydrolysis, the product is measured by the Morgen-Elson reaction (23), in which GlcNAc yields a threefold-higher color reading than GalNAc. Reactions were performed at 37°C for 10 min with a total volume of 0.5 ml (pH 9.0) which contains 10 mM glycine, 1 mM MgCl₂, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM UDP-GalNAc, and 50 μl of cell extract. The reaction was stopped by addition of 1 μl of 10 M

Nucleotide sequence accession numbers. The O55:H7 amn sequence and the sequence covering wcaM to hisG have been deposited in GenBank under accession numbers AF461121 and AF461122, respectively.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Sequencing. We sequenced 27,730 bp of DNA of the O55:H7 strain, from the end of the CA gene cluster to hisG, starting with the galF to gnd region and extending it in both directions in a search for recombination sites.

O55 O-antigen genes. The structure of the O55 O unit is known (Fig. 2), and we expect genes for the synthesis of GDP-colitose, an O-antigen flippase gene (wzx), an O-antigen polymerase gene (wzy), an O-antigen chain length determinant gene (wzz), and transferase genes for two galactose residues, N-acetyl-galactosamine and colitose. Note that O55 antigen synthesis is initiated by transfer of GlcNAc-1-phosphate (GlcNAc-1-P) to undecaprenyl-1-P by WecA, encoded in the enterobacterial common antigen gene cluster (1, 18).

GDP-colitose pathway genes. We identified previously in the O111 gene cluster the genes thought to be involved in synthesis of GDP-colitose and proposed a biosynthetic pathway (2, 37). The O55 manB, manC, and gmd genes of this pathway were found as expected between galF and gnd (see Table 1 for details of all genes). However, wbdK and wbdJ, for the last two steps of the proposed GDP-colitose pathway, were found

TABLE 1. Summary of O55 antigen genes

| Gene   | Location in sequence | No. of amino acids | Similar proteins (accession no.)                                                                 | % Identity/% similarity (no. of amino acids) | Putative function of O55 protein                          |
|--------|----------------------|--------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
| gne    | 204–1199             | 331                | GalE, S. enterica serovar Typhi (GALE_SALTI)                                                    | 29/47 (331)                                   | UDP-GlcNAc 4-epimerase                                  |
| galF   | 1442–2335            | 297                | GalF, E. coli K-12 (D90842)                                                                     | 98/99 (297)                                   | UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase                           |
| wbgM   | 2716–3810            | 364                | WbbP, S. dysenteriae 1 (M96064) WbnE, E. coli O113 (AF172324)                                     | 28/46 (316)                                   | Galactosyltransferase                                   |
|        |                      |                    |                                                                                               | 40/60 (364)                                   |                                                        |
| gmd    | 3831–4949            | 372                | Gmd, E. coli K-12 (AE000295)                                                                    | 90/95 (372)                                   | GDP-mannose dehydratase                                 |
| manC   | 5588–7045            | 485                | ManC, E. coli O157 (AF061251)                                                                   | 72/84 (485)                                   | Mannose-1-P guanosyltransferase                         |
| manB   | 6993–8420            | 475                | ManB, E. coli O157 (AB008676)                                                                   | 85/92 (455)                                   | Phosphomannomutase                                      |
| wbgN   | 8417–9289            | 290                | FUT2, human (AAC24453)                                                                          | 23/47 (290)                                   | Fucosyltransferase                                      |
| wzy    | 9301–10278           | 325                | See text                                                                                       |                                               | O-antigen polymerase                                    |
| wzx    | 10296–11573          | 425                | See text                                                                                       |                                               | O-antigen flippase                                      |
| wbgO   | 11570–12367          | 265                | WbcG, Yersinia enterocolitica O8 (U46859)                                                       | 34/55 (212)                                   | Glycosyltransferase                                     |
| wbgP   | 12372–13127          | 251                | WbdN, E. coli O157 (AF061251)                                                                   | 31/56 (160)                                   | Glycosyltransferase                                     |
| gnd    | 13211–14617          | 468                | Gnd, E. coli strain ECOR4 (M64324)                                                              | 94/97 (468)                                   | 6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase                        |
| wbdJ   | 14729–15652          | 307                | WbdJ, E. coli O111 (AAC44884)                                                                   | 67/82 (307)                                   | GDP-colitose biosynthesis pathway gene                  |
| wbdK   | 15649–16815          | 388                | WbdK, E. coli O111 (AAC44885)                                                                   | 80/89 (388)                                   | GDP-colitose biosynthesis pathway gene                  |
| ugd    | 18730–19896          | 388                | Ugd, E. coli O157:H7 (AB008676)                                                                  | 99/99 (388)                                   | UDP-glucose-6-dehydrogenase                             |
| wzz    | 19986–21023          | 345                | Wzz, E. coli O157:H7 (AE000294)                                                                  | 98/98 (331)                                   | O-antigen chain length determinant                       |

downstream of *gnd*, as also reported by Tarr et al. (34), after we had finished the sequencing work. The presence of the five genes of the proposed pathway in both the O157 and O55 gene clusters provides strong support for their involvement in GDP-colitose synthesis.

**Transferase genes.** WbgM is 27% identical to WbbP (13) of *Shigella dysenteriae* 1 and has a similar hydrophobic profile. WbbP is a galactosyltransferase forming an α(1-3) linkage to GlcNAc (13), and we suggest that WbgM is the transferase for the α(1-3) galactosyl linkage to GalNAc. WbgN shows 23% identity (47% similarity) with the FUT2 protein, a human secretor blood group fucosyltransferase forming an α(1-2) linkage to β-galactose (15). WbgN may well form the α-colitose-(1-2)-β-galactose linkage. WbgO and WbgP show similarity with many other putative bacterial polysaccharide transferases, and they are likely to be the remaining two transferases.

**O-antigen processing genes.** The *wzz* gene was easily identified, as it is 98% identical to that of *E. coli* K-12 (GenBank entry AE000294) and is in the usual location between *gnd* and *hisI*. A presumptive *wzx* gene was identified as encoding an integral inner membrane protein with 12 predicted transmembrane segments and confirmed by a motif search using the method described by Jiang et al. (14). The gene we consider to be *wzy* encodes a protein with 10 predicted transmembrane segments and one loop of 52 amino acid residues, a characteristic topology for O-antigen polymerases (19). No motifs were shared by this protein and other known Wzy proteins. However, given that this gene, *wzx*, and *wzy* are the only genes with inferred products having multiple predicted transmembrane segments and that it has the expected topology, we conclude that it is the *wzy* gene.

**The *gne* gene.** In *E. coli* K-12 and *S. enterica* LT2, *wcaL*, the last gene of the colanic acid gene cluster, is separated by one gene of unknown function from *galF* (32). In the O55:H7 strain, there is an additional gene upstream of *galF*, also found in O157:H7, that shows 48% identity to an *Edwardsiella ictaluri* gene of unknown function (GenBank AAL25633) and 22% or lower identity with a range of putative or characterized UDP-galactose 4-epimerase genes. We suspected that this gene might encode a UDP-GlcNAc 4-epimerase, responsible for conversion of UDP-GlcNAc to UDP-GalNAc, as GalNAc is present in both the O55 and O157 antigens. Deletion of the gene from either an O55 or O157 strain (to make strains M2313 and M2311, respectively) led to loss of O-antigen production, which was restored when plasmid pPR2062 was present (Fig. 3). We also showed that strain M2313 was devoid of UDP-GlcNAc 4-epimerase activity, while the parent strain (M1685) and M2313 carrying plasmid pPR2062 (M2318) both had the function (Table 2). *E. coli* K-12 strain P4971 was negative for the epimerase activity but positive after transfer of plasmid pPR2062 (data not shown). The gene upstream of *galF* is clearly a UDP-GlcNAc 4-epimerase gene essential for synthesis of O55 and O157 O antigens, and it was named *gne*. *gne* genes have been identified in the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* O6 (4) and *E. coli* O113 (24) gene clusters. The *P. aeruginosa* gene, identified by biochemical activity, is homologous throughout its length to the O55 gene, but the encoded proteins have only 20% amino acid identity. The *E. coli* O113 gene was previously believed to be a *galE* gene, but the evidence for its being a UDP-GlcNAc epimerase gene was convincing, although indirect (25). The O113 Gne protein is 26.7 and 18.6% identical to the Gne proteins of O55 and *P. aeruginosa* O6, respectively. This is the first time that we have believed it was not sufficient to use sequence similarity for assignment of function for nucleotide sugar pathway genes.

In summary, four putative transferase genes, five GDP-colitose synthesis genes, a *gne* gene, an O-antigen polymerase gene, a flippase gene, and a chain length determinant gene were identified. They account for all the genes needed for the synthesis and processing of the O55 O unit. In addition, an H repeat and remnant *gmm* gene were found, as discussed below.

The *gne* gene of *E. coli* O55 and O157 is present in many other *E. coli* strains. There are 62 *E. coli* O-antigen forms with reported structures, of which 22 include GalNAc. We carried out PCR on the type strains for the 62 O antigens using primers based on the *E. coli* O55 and O157 *gne* genes (5′-ACAGATTGGTGATGTTCG and 5′-ATCAAAGCAATATCCACC, indicated in Fig. 1 by arrows A and B). Fourteen of the 22 strains with GalNAc-containing structures gave a positive result, whereas only 4 of the other 40 strains were positive. PCR with one primer in *gne* and the other in *galF* (indicated by C in Fig. 1) gave a positive result for 12 of the 14 previously positive strains and for two additional strains with GalNAc-containing structures. The 16 strains positive in one or both experiments must have the *gne* gene found in the O55 and O157 strains, and of these 14 were confirmed to be at the same site upstream of *galF*. PCR with the same 22 strains and primers appropriate to

FIG. 3. Requirement of the *gne* gene for expression of the *E. coli* O55 and O157 antigens. Membrane extracts were run on SDS-PAGE gels and stained by silver staining. Lanes: A, M1685 (wild-type O55: H7); B, M2313 (M1685 missing the *gne* gene); C, M2313 carrying plasmid pPR2062; D, M2136 (wild-type O157:H7); E, M2311 (M2136 missing the *gne* gene); and F, M2311 carrying plasmid pPR2062.

TABLE 2. UDP-GlcNAc 4-epimerase activity in cell extracts of *E. coli* strains

| Strain | GlcNAc<sup>a</sup> (μM) | Sp act<sup>b</sup> [U (mg of protein)<sup>-1</sup>] | % of wild-type activity |
|--------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|--------------------------|
| M1685  | 1.822                   | 0.0048                                        | 100                      |
| M2313  | 0                        | 0                                             | 0                        |
| M2318  | 2.151                   | 0.0057                                        | 118                      |

<sup>a</sup> Concentration of UDP-GlcNAc after the reaction.  
<sup>b</sup> One unit of enzyme is defined as the amount which catalyzes the formation of 1 μmol of UDP-GlcNAc in 1 min under the conditions of our assay.

the O113 *gne* gene previously described by Paton et al. (25) revealed no additional strains carrying this gene. It seems that the form of the *gne* gene found in O55 and O157 is the most common in *E. coli*.

The presence of *gne* in some strains with O antigens reported to lack GalNAc is not surprising, as a strain carrying a *gne* gene as part of its required O-antigen gene set would retain the gene if its O antigen were replaced by homologous recombination involving recombination within *galF*, even if the incoming O antigen lacked GalNAc.

Origins of the O55 gene cluster. The O55 gene cluster is atypical in that while most of its O-antigen genes are in the usual O-antigen gene cluster site between *galF* and *gnd*, two of the GDP-colitose pathway genes (*wbdJ* and *wbdK*) and the *gne* gene are outside of, although close to, this region.

In the *E. coli* O111 gene cluster, the GDP-colitose pathway genes are contiguous in the order *gmd*, *gmm*, *manC*, *manB*, *wbdJ*, and *wbdK*. Gmm, a GDP-mannose mannosyl hydrolase (11), would remove GDP-mannose from the pathway and has no obvious role. However, *gmm* is treated as part of the GDP-sugar pathway, as it has been found only in association with GDP-fucose, GDP-colitose, or GDP-perosamine pathway genes (37, 39, 40).

The O55 gene cluster has a 620-bp remnant *gmm* gene between *gmd* and *manC* (57% identity to the O157 gene at the amino acid level). The presence of only part of *gmm* indicates a deletion in the O55 gene cluster. The simplest hypothesis is that an ancestral gene cluster included a pathway for a GDP-sugar derived from 4-keto-6-deoxy-GDP-mannose. One can envisage such an ancestral gene cluster’s gaining the ability to synthesize GDP-colitose by incorporation of genes *wbdJ* and *wbdK* by lateral transfer. If colitose were incorporated into the O antigen, the change in O antigen could have been beneficial in specific circumstances and selected.

It would not be necessary for the additional genes to be close to the main gene cluster for synthesis of colitose. However, Lawrence and Roth (16) have pointed out that close proximity of genes is important if a biosynthetic pathway is to be readily transferred by homologous recombination and proposed that selection for transferability may drive operon formation and maintenance. O-antigen gene clusters are subject to high levels of lateral transfer within *E. coli* and *S. enterica*, and the situation observed for O55 represents what one would expect as an intermediate in gene cluster assembly. The current locations of *wbdJ* and *wbdK*, probably mediated by the H repeat, as proposed by Tarr et al. (34), would suffice to enable cotransfer with the other O55 genes.

GDP-4-keto-6-deoxy-mannose, the product of Gmd action, is a branch point for synthesis of GDP-fucose, GDP-perosamine, GDP-colitose, and GDP-D-rhamnose. The post-*gmd* part of the original GMD-sugar pathway has been lost, presumably in the same event that deleted part of *gmm* and presumably also after gain of the two genes that complete the GDP-colitose pathway. The deletion event also could be driven by selection, as colitose and the original sugar would confer different antigenic specificities on the O antigen and the presence of two specificities may be undesirable. The sequence of events is speculative, but such processes are the most likely means by which the remarkable diversity of the O antigens was generated, and the O55 gene cluster has the hallmarks of an

intermediate form, with all genes assembled in close proximity but not yet fully integrated. The O55 antigen is identical to the O50 antigen of *S. enterica*, and it is possible that assembly occurred in the common ancestor of the two species, as postulated (40) for the *E. coli* O111 and *S. enterica* O35 antigens, but this can only be assessed by sequencing the *S. enterica* O50 gene cluster.

*wbgN* is thought to be the colitose transferase because of its similarity to a transferase for the related sugar fucose. It is between *manB* and *wzy*, which are probably part of the ancestral gene cluster, so *wbgN* most likely evolved as the transferase using the original GDP-sugar as the substrate, but had sufficient cross specificity to function with GDP-colitose.

The *gne* gene is also an essential part of the O55 gene cluster, but located upstream of the traditional O-antigen locus between *galF* and *gnd*. The portion of the chromosome that transfers O55 synthesis between lineages is presumably the *gne* to *wbdJ* segment, although, as we saw for O157 of the O157:H7 clone, this can be reduced if the recipient includes a *gne* gene. However, we do not see it as useful to give a specific name to such an extended group of genes, as proposed by Tarr et al. (34).

Transfer of O157 gene cluster to an O55:H7 strain to generate the O157:H7 clone. It is proposed that the O157:H7 clone was derived from the O55:H7 clone by replacement of the O-antigen genes (10, 34). We sequenced DNA flanking the O-antigen genes to seek confirmation of this proposal. A convincing recombination site was found within the *galF* gene, but the other is more distant, between *hisG* and *amn* (about 35 kb apart in *E. coli* K-12 [3]). Genes located outside of the two recombination points are almost identical in the two clones (Fig. 1), *gne*, *amn*, and half of *galF* fitting the expectation for housekeeping genes in clones that are nearly identical by multilocus enzyme electrophoresis. The housekeeping genes between the two points are mostly from 95.1 to 98% identical in the two clones, showing a much higher level of sequence difference. Our data thus provide some detail of the recombination event proposed for the origin of the O157:H7 clone. The difference for the *his*, *wzz*, and *ugd* genes represents the level of divergence between the O157 donor strain and the O55:H7 clone and is within the range expected for unrelated *E. coli* clones (42).

The divergence for the *gnd* gene and the 3′ half of the *galF* gene is higher than found for other housekeeping genes within the transferred segment (Fig. 1). The *gnd* gene is known to be more variable than housekeeping genes in general and this is thought to be due to proximity to the O-antigen gene cluster and maintenance of a large number of O-antigen forms (35). The *galF* gene is also highly variable (R. Lan, D. M. Ryan, P. BouAntoun, and P. R. Reeves, unpublished data), and the same arguments apply.

It should be noted that the genes common to the O55 and O157 gene clusters, *manB*, *manC*, *gmd*, *wzx*, *wzy*, and part of *gmm*, have substantially divergent sequences and were clearly not involved in the recent recombination event.

General conclusions. The O55 gene cluster is particularly interesting in that its origin by addition to and loss of genes from an earlier gene cluster is quite clear. The changes to give the GDP-colitose pathway presumably occurred under selection for replacement of the original O antigen by the then-

novel O55 antigen. For this to occur, there is no necessity for the additional genes to be located near the other O-antigen genes, and this is most unlikely to have been the case when the two groups of genes first occurred within one cell. In addition to *wbdJ* and *wbdK* for GDP-colitose synthesis, the *gne* gene for UDP-GalNAc synthesis is also outside of the main gene cluster, but again very close to it. In O55 we see what appears to be an intermediate stage in bringing all the genes into a single cluster, presumably a result of selection for intraspecies transfer of the O55 antigen gene cluster

# ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This study was supported by the Australian Research Council.

## REFERENCES

1. Alexander, D. C., and M. A. Valvano. 1994. Role of the *rfc* gene in the biosynthesis of the *Escherichia coli* O7-specific lipopolysaccharide and other O-specific polysaccharides containing N-acetylglucosamine. J. Bacteriol. 176: 7079–7084.
2. Bastin, D. A., and P. R. Reeves. 1995. Sequence and analysis of the O-antigen gene (*rfb*) cluster of *Escherichia coli* O111. Gene 164:17–23.
3. Blattner, F. R., G. I. Plunkett, C. A. Bloch, N. T. Perna, V. Burland, M. Riley, J. Collado-Vides, J. D. Glasner, C. K. Rode, G. F. Mayhew, J. Gregor, M. W. Davis, K. H. A., M. A. Goeden, D. J. Rose, B. Mau, and Y. Shau. 1997. The complete genome sequence of *Escherichia coli* K-12. Science 277:1453–1474.
4. Creuzenet, C., M. Belanger, W. W. Wakarchuk, and J. S. Lam. 2000. Expression, purification, and biochemical characterization of WbpP, a new UDP-GlcNAc C4 epimerase from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* serotype O6. J. Biol. Chem. 275:19060–19067.
5. Curd, H., D. Liu, and P. R. Reeves. 1998. Relationships among the O-antigen gene clusters of *Salmonella enterica* groups B, D1, D2, and D3. J. Bacteriol. 180:1002–1007.
6. Datsenko, K. A., and B. L. Wanner. 2000. One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in *Escherichia coli* K-12 using PCR products. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97:6640–6645.
7. Eisenberg, D., E. Schwarz, M. Komaromy, and R. Wall. 1984. Analysis of membrane and surface protein sequences with the hydrophobic moment plot. J. Mol. Biol. 179:125–142.
8. Estrela, A. I., H. M. Pooley, H. de Lencastre, and D. Karamata. 1991. Genetic and biochemical characterization of *Bacillus subtilis* 168 mutants specifically blocked in the synthesis of the teichoic acid poly(3-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-N-acetylgalactosamine 1-phosphate): *gneA*, a new locus, is associated with UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 4-epimerase activity. J. Gen. Microbiol. 137:943–950.
9. Feng, P. 1993. Identification of *Escherichia coli* O157:H7 by DNA probe specific for an allele of *uidA* gene. Mol. Cell. Probes 7:151–154.
10. Feng, P., K. A. Lampel, H. Karch, and T. S. Whittam. 1998. Genotypic and phenotypic changes in the emergence of *Escherichia coli* O157:H7. J. Infect. Dis. 177:1750–1753.
11. Frick, D. N., B. D. Townsend, and M. J. Bessman. 1995. A novel GDP-mannose mannosyl hydrolase shares homology with the MutT family of enzymes. J. Biol. Chem. 270:24086–24091.
12. Glaser, L. 1959. The biosynthesis of N-acetylgalactosamine. J. Biol. Chem. 234:2801–2805.
13. Gohmann, S., P. A. Manning, C. A. Alpert, M. J. Walker, and K. N. Timmis. 1994. Lipopolysaccharide O-antigen biosynthesis in *Shigella dysenteriae* serotype1: analysis of the plasmid-carried *rfp* determinant. Microb. Pathog. 16:53–64.
14. Jiang, S.-M., L. Wang, and P. R. Reeves. 2001. Molecular characterization of *Streptococcus pneumoniae* type 4, 6B, 8, and 18C capsular polysaccharide gene clusters. Infect. Immun. 69:1244–1255.
15. Kelly, R. J., S. Rouquier, D. Giorgi, G. G. Lennon, and J. B. Lowe. 1995. Sequence and expression of a candidate for the human secretor blood group α(1,2)fucosyltransferase gene (FUT2). Homozygosity for an enzyme-inactivating nonsense mutation commonly correlates with the nonsecretor phenotype. J. Biol. Chem. 270:4640–4649.
16. Lawrence, J. G., and J. R. Roth. 1996. Selfish operons: horizontal transfer may drive the evolution of gene clusters. Genetics 143:1843–1860.
17. Lindberg, B., F. Lindh, J. Longren, A. A. Lindberg, and S. B. Svenson. 1981. Structural studies of the O-specific side-chain of the lipopolysaccharide from *Escherichia coli* O55. Carbohydr. Res. 97:105–112.
18. Meier, U., and H. Mayer. 1985. Genetic location of genes encoding enterobacterial common antigen. J. Bacteriol. 163:756–762.
19. Morona, R., M. Mavris, A. Fallarino, and P. A. Manning. 1994. Characterization of the *rfc* region of *Shigella flexneri*. J. Bacteriol. 176:733–747.
20. Nataro, J. P., and J. B. Kaper. 1998. Diarrheagenic *Escherichia coli*. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 11:142–201.
21. Ochman, H., and A. C. Wilson. 1987. Evolution in bacteria: evidence for a universal substitution rate in cellular genomes. J. Mol. Evol. 26:74–86.
22. Ochman, H., and A. C. Wilson. 1987. Evolutionary history of enteric bacteria, p. 1649–1654. In F. C. Neidhardt et al. (ed.), *Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella typhimurium*: cellular and molecular biology, vol. II. American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D.C.
23. Oguchi, M., and M. Oguchi. 1979. Tetraborate concentration on Morgan-Elson reaction and an improved method for hexosamine determination. Anal. Biochem. 98:433–437.
24. Paton, A. W., and J. C. Paton. 1999. Molecular characterization of the locus encoding biosynthesis of the lipopolysaccharide O-antigen of *Escherichia coli* serotype O113. Infect. Immun. 67:5930–5937.
25. Paton, A. W., J. C. Paton, and R. Morona. 2001. Neutralization of Shiga Stx1, Stx2c, and Stx2e by recombinant bacteria expressing mimics of globotriose and globotetraose. Infect. Immun. 69:1967–1970.
26. Pupo, G. M., D. K. R. Karaolis, R. Lan, and P. R. Reeves. 1997. Evolutionary relationships among pathogenic and nonpathogenic *Escherichia coli* strains inferred from multilocus enzyme electrophoresis and *mdh* sequence studies. Infect. Immun. 65:2685–2692.
27. Reeves, P. R. 1993. Evolution of *Salmonella* O-antigen variation by interspecific gene transfer on a large scale. Trends Genet. 9:17–22.
28. Reeves, P. R., M. Hobbs, M. Valvano, M. Skurnik, C. Whitfield, D. Coplin, N. Kido, J. Klena, D. Maskell, C. Raetz, and P. Rick. 1996. Bacterial polysaccharide synthesis and gene nomenclature. Trends Microbiol. 4:495–503.
29. Reid, S. D., R. K. Selander, and T. S. Whittam. 1999. Sequence diversity of flagellin (*fliC*) alleles in pathogenic *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. 181:153–160.
30. Reissig, J. L., J. L. Strominger, and L. F. Leloir. 1955. A modified colorimetric method for the estimation of N-acetylaminosugars. J. Biol. Chem. 217:959–966.
31. Shepherd, J. G., L. Wang, and P. R. Reeves. 2000. Comparison of O-antigen gene clusters of *Escherichia coli* (Shigella) Sonnei and *Plesiomonas shigelloides* O17: Sonnei gained its current plasmid-borne O-antigen genes from *P. shigelloides* in a recent event. Infect. Immun. 68:6056–6061.
32. Stevenson, G., K. Andrianopoulos, H. Hobbs, and P. R. Reeves. 1996. Organization of the *Escherichia coli* K-12 gene cluster responsible for production of the extracellular polysaccharide colanic acid. J. Bacteriol. 178:4885–4893.
33. Tarr, P. I. 1995. *Escherichia coli* O157:H7: clinical, diagnostic, and epidemiological aspects of human infection. Clin. Infect. Dis. 20:1–8.
34. Tarr, P. I., L. M. Schoening, Y. L. Yea, T. R. Ward, S. Jelacic, and T. S. Whittam. 2000. Acquisition of the *rfb-gnd* cluster in evolution of *Escherichia coli* O55 and O157. J. Bacteriol. 182:6183–6191.
35. Thampapillai, G., R. Lan, and P. R. Reeves. 1994. Molecular evolution in the *gnd* locus of *Salmonella enterica*. Mol. Biol. Evol. 11:813–828.
36. Utterback, T. R., L. A. McDonald, and R. A. Fuldner. 1995. A Reliable, efficient protocol for 96-well plasmid DNA miniprep with rapid DNA quantification for high-throughput automated DNA sequencing. Genome Sci. Technol. 1:1–8.
37. Wang, L., H. Curd, W. Qu, and P. R. Reeves. 1998. Sequencing of *Escherichia coli* O111 O-antigen gene cluster and identification of O111-specific genes. J. Clin. Microbiol. 36:3182–3187.
38. Wang, L., and P. R. Reeves. 1994. Involvement of the galactosyl-1-phosphate transferase encoded by the *Salmonella enterica rfbP* gene in O-antigen subunit processing. J. Bacteriol. 176:4348–4356.
39. Wang, L., and P. R. Reeves. 1998. Organization of *Escherichia coli* O157 O-antigen gene cluster and identification of its specific genes. Infect. Immun. 66:3545–3551.
40. Wang, L., and P. R. Reeves. 2000. The *Escherichia coli* O111 and *Salmonella enterica* O35 gene clusters: gene clusters encoding the same colitose-containing O-antigen are highly conserved. J. Bacteriol. 182:5256–5261.
41. Wang, L., D. Rothemund, H. Curd, and P. R. Reeves. 2000. Sequence diversity of the *Escherichia coli* H7 *fliC* genes: implication for a DNA based typing scheme for *E. coli* O157:H7. J. Clin. Microbiol. 38:1786–1790.
42. Whittam, T. S. 1996. Genetic variation and evolutionary processes in natural populations of *Escherichia coli*, p. 2708–2720. In F. C. Neidhardt, R. Curtiss, J. L. Ingraham, E. C. C. Lin, K. B. Low, B. Magasanik, W. S. Reznikoff, M. Riley, M. Schaechter, and H. E. Umbarger (ed.), *Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella*: cellular and molecular biology, 2nd ed., vol. 2. ASM Press, Washington, D.C.
43. Whittam, T. S., and R. A. Wilson. 1988. Genetic relationships among pathogenic *Escherichia coli* of serogroup O157. Infect. Immun. 56:2467–2473.
44. Whittam, T. S., M. L. Wolfe, I. K. Wachsmuth, F. Ørskov, I. Ørskov, and R. A. Wilson. 1993. Clonal relationships among *Escherichia coli* strains that cause hemorrhagic colitis and infantile diarrhea. Infect. Immun. 61:1619–1629.
45. Xiang, S. H., M. Hobbs, and P. R. Reeves. 1994. Molecular analysis of the *rfb* gene cluster of a group D2 *Salmonella enterica* strain: evidence for its origin from an insertion sequence-mediated recombination event between group E and D1 strains. J. Bacteriol. 176:4357–4365.
46. Yu, D., H. M. Ellis, E. C. Lee, N. A. Jenkins, N. G. Copeland, and D. L. Court. 2000. An efficient recombination system for chromosome engineering in *Escherichia coli*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:5978–5983.
