
JACS
COMMUNICATIONS
Published on Web 04/20/2002

# Functional Expression of Genes Involved in the Biosynthesis of the Novel Polyketide Chain Extension Unit, Methoxymalonyl-Acyl Carrier Protein, and Engineered Biosynthesis of 2-Desmethyl-2-Methoxy-6-Deoxyerythronolide B

Yasuo Kato,$^{\dagger}$ Linquan Bai,$^{\dagger}$ Qun Xue,$^{\ddagger}$ W. Peter Revill,$^{\ddagger}$ Tin-Wein Yu,$^{*,\dagger}$ and Heinz G. Floss$^{*,\dagger}$

Department of Chemistry, Box 351700, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195-1700, and Kosan Biosciences, Inc., 3832 Bay Center Place, Hayward, California 94545

Received December 21, 2001

The assembly of macrolides, ansamycins, and other polyketides on type I modular polyketide synthases (PKSs) involves chain extension of an acyl starter unit by sequential addition of malonyl-CoA, methylmalonyl-CoA, or ethylmalonyl-CoA with simultaneous decarboxylation in the carbon–carbon bond-forming step to add “acetate”, “propionate”, or “butyrate” units, respectively.$^{1}$ In rare cases, isotopic tracer experiments have revealed the presence of another extender unit, a “glycolate” unit, consisting of two carbons in the chain which are not labeled by acetate but by glucose or glycerol, with an oxygen substituent on the α-carbon.$^{2-8}$ Such “glycolate” units are seen at C9+10 of maytansinoids$^{3}$ and C13+14 and C15+16 of FK506 and FK520 (Figure 1),$^{5}$ as well as, for example, in geldanamycin,$^{2}$ leucomycin,$^{4}$ and soraphen.$^{6}$ In most cases, the α-oxygen of these extender units is methylated,$^{2-6}$ although there are exceptions to this rule, as in the aflastatins.$^{7}$

Analogy to the other chain extension reactions would predict that the substrate for the incorporation of these “glycolate” units should be a thioester of 2-hydroxymalonate or 2-methoxymalonate. Recently, similar sets of five genes, $asm13-17$ $^{9}$ and $fkbG-K$, have been identified in the biosynthetic gene clusters for ansamitocin from *Actinosynnema pretiosum*$^{10,11}$ and FK520 from *Streptomyces hygroscopicus*,$^{12}$ respectively. Inactivation of $asm15$ led to the formation of 10-desmethoxy-ansamitocin P-3 instead of ansamitocin P-3 in A. pretiosum,$^{11}$ implicating at least this gene in the formation of the “glycolate” extender unit. The presence of genes encoding an acyl carrier protein (ACP), $asm14$ and $fkbJ$, and an O-methyltransferase, $asm17$ and $fkbG$, suggests$^{11,12}$ that this subcluster is responsible for the synthesis of a 2-methoxymalonyl moiety on the activated$^{13}$ ACP, which then delivers the chain extension substrate to the PKS. To examine the validity of this hypothesis we decided to express $asm13-17$ heterologously in *Streptomyces* and test for the formation of methoxymalonyl- or hydroxymalonyl-ACP.

An expression plasmid, pHGF 9251, was constructed from the *Escherichia coli-Streptomyces* shuttle vector pHGF7505$^{14}$ to express $asm13-17$, with $asm14$ carrying a C-terminal His$_{6}$-tag, under the control of the pactI/pactIII promoter and actII-ORF4 regulator. The plasmid was passed through the $dam^{-} dcm^{-} E$. coli strain, SCS-110, and introduced into *S. lividans* ZX7 or *S. coelicolor* Yu105 by PEG-mediated protoplast transformation.$^{15}$ Although the transformant strains were grown on several media (YE/M, TSB, R5, and MM) for incubation periods up to 14 days, no significant band at about 10 kDa, corresponding to His-tagged methoxymalonyl- or hydroxymalonyl-ACP or uncharged ACP, was detected by SDS-PAGE of their cell-free extracts.$^{16}$ Apparently, the

---

* Authors for correspondence. E-mail: (T.Y.) yu@u.washington.edu; (H.G.F.) floss@chem.washington.edu.
$^{\dagger}$ University of Washington.
$^{\ddagger}$ Kosan Biosciences.

5268 ■ J. AM. CHEM. SOC. 2002, 124, 5268–5269
10.1021/ja0127483 CCC: $22.00 \quad \text { © } 2002 \text { American Chemical Society }$

Supporting Information Available: Construction and maps of pHGF9251 and pHGF9263, and quantitation of 6-DEB and analogues (PDF). This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http:// pbs.acs.org

References

(1) (a) Khosla, C.; Gokhale, R. S.; Jacobsen, J. R.; Cane, D. E. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* **1999**, 68, 219–253. (b) Bentley, R.; Bennett, J. W. *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.* **1999**, 53, 411–446. (c) Rawlings, B. J. *Nat. Prod. Rep.* **1999**, 16, 425–484. (d) Rawlings, B. J. *Nat. Prod. Rep.* **2001**, 18, 190–227. (e) Rawlings, B. J. *Nat. Prod. Rep.* **2001**, 18, 231–281.

(2) Haber, A.; Johnson, R. D.; Rinehart, K. L., Jr. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **1977**, 99, 3541–3542.

(3) Hatano, K.; Mizuta, E.; Akiyama, S.-I.; Higashide, E.; Nakao, N. *Agric. Biol. Chem.* **1985**, 49, 327–335.

(4) Omura, S.; Tsuzuki, K.; Nakagawa, A.; Lukacs, G. *J. Antibiot.* **1983**, 36, 611–613.

(5) Byrne, K. M.; Shafiee, A.; Nielsen, J. B.; Arison, B.; Monaghan, R. L.; Kaplan, L. *Dev. Ind. Microbiol.* **1993**, 32, 29–45.

(6) Hill, A. M.; Harris, J. P.; Siskos, A. P. *J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun.* **1998**, 2361–2362.

(7) Ono, M.; Sakuda, S.; Ikeda, H.; Furihata, K.; Nakayama, J.; Suzuki, A.; Isogai, A. *J. Antibiot.* **1998**, 51, 1019–1028.

(8) Bindseil, K. U.; Zeeck, A. *Liebigs Ann. Chem.* **1994**, 305–312.

(9) Genes asm13, -14, -15, -16, and -17 show homology with 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase of *Clostridium acidobutylicum* (Gene Bank accession number P45856), D-alanyl carrier protein of *Streptococcus pyogenes* M1 GAS (T34915), a short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase of *S. coelicolor* A3 (T36802), part of CO dehydrogenase of *C. thermoaceticum* (B41670), and an O-methyltransferase of *S. mycarofaciens* (B42719), respectively.

(10) Yu, T.-W.; Bai, L.; Clade, D.; Hoffmann, D.; Toelzer, S.; Trinh, K. Q.; Xu, J.; Moss, S. J.; Leistner, E.; Floss, H. G. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **2002** In press.

(11) Carroll, B. J.; Moss, S. J.; Bai, L.; Kato, Y.; Toelzer, S.; Yu, T.-W.; Floss, H. G. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **2002**. In press.

(12) Wu, K.; Chung, L.; Revill, W. P.; Katz, L.; Reeves, C. D. *Gene* **2000**, 251, 81–90.

(13) Lambalot, R. H.; Gehring, A. M.; Flugel, R. S.; Zuber, P.; LaCelle, M.; Marahiel, M. A.; Khosla, C.; Walsh, C. T. *Chem. Biol.* **1996**, 3, 923–936.

(14) Yu, T.-W.; Müller, R.; Müller, M.; Zhang, Z.; Draeger, G.; Kim, C.-G.; Leistner, E.; Floss, H. G. *J. Biol. Chem.* **2001**, 276, 12546–12555.

(15) Kieser, T.; Bibb, M. J.; Buttner, M. J.; Chater, K. F.; Hopwood, D. A. *Practical Streptomyces Genetics*; The John Innes Foundation: Norwich, U.K., 2000.

(16) Attempts to separate the His-tagged protein on Ni-NTA columns also gave no proteins in the expected molecular-weight range upon elution with various concentrations of imidazole.

(17) Reeves, C. D.; Chung, L. M.; Liu, Y.; Xue, Q.; Carney, J. R.; Revill, W. P.; Katz, L. *J. Biol. Chem.* **2002**. In press.

(18) The plasmid is derived from pCK7,^{19} an *E. coli–Streptomyces* shuttle vector carrying all three eryA genes, by replacing the eryAIII AT6 domain with the AT8 domain of fkbA from the FK520 gene cluster.^{17}

(19) Lu, L.; Thamchaipenet, A.; Fu, H.; Betlach, M.; Ashley, G. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **1997**, 119, 10553–10554.

(20) Kao, C. M.; Katz, L.; Khosla, C. *Science* **1994**, 265, 509–512.

(21) The transformants were grown in liquid R5 or R6 medium, supplemented with thiostrepton (50 mg/L) and kanamycin (200 mg/L), for 6–10 days at 28–30 °C and 200 rpm. The culture broths were extracted with EtOAc and the extracts analyzed by TLC and ES-MS. Titers were determined by LC−MS, using 13-propyl-6-DEB as an internal standard.

(22) The crude extract (135 mg) from 2 L of culture was separated on silica gel (5 mL, elution with hexane/EtOAc 2:1, then 1:1). The main product (15 mg) was further subjected to preparative TLC (silica gel, hexane/ EtOAc 1:1, twice), followed by HPLC (Beckman) on an ODS-AQ column (10 × 250 mm) with an increasing linear gradient of MeOH/water (50–100% MeOH), flow rate 3 mL/min, detection at 215 nm.

(23) 2-Desmethyl-2-methoxy-6-DEB: ^{1}H NMR (CDCl₃, 500 MHz) δ (ppm) 5.41 (dd, 1H, *J* = 4.7, 10.5 Hz), 3.87 (t, 1H, *J* = 9.4 Hz), 3.87 (dd, 1H, *J* = 4.3, 10.3 Hz), 3.83 (t, 1H, *J* = 9.2 Hz), 3.59 (d, 1H, *J* = 10.7 Hz), 3.43 (s, 3H), 2.87 (m, 1H), 2.52 (m, 1H), 1.63–1.89 (m, 7H), 1.13 (d, 3H, *J* = 6.8 Hz), 1.09 (d, 3H, *J* = 6.6 Hz), 1.07 (d, 3H, *J* = 7.0 Hz), 1.02 (d, 3H, *J* = 6.7 Hz), 0.96 (t, 3H, *J* = 7.3 Hz), 0.93 (d, 3H, *J* = 6.9 Hz); HRMS (ESI): Calcd for C₂₁H₃₈O₇Na 425.2515, found 425.2526.

(24) Carbon–carbon bond formation in the ketosynthase reaction involves an intermediate carbanion at C-2 of the chain extension unit. In the presence of a free OH-group at C-2 this carbanion would be prone to rearrangement to the nonproductive oxyanion.
