
CBP

ELSEVIER
Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology Part B 132 (2002) 141–150
www.elsevier.com/locate/cbpb

Research progress in the stimulatory inputs regulating growth hormone (GH) secretion*

F. Gracia-Navarro${}^{a,*}$, J.P. Castaño${}^{a}$, M.M. Malagon${}^{a}$, A. Sánchez-Hormigo${}^{a}$, R.M. Luque${}^{a}$,
G.J. Hickey${}^{b}$, J.R. Peinado${}^{a}$, E. Delgado${}^{a}$, A.J. Martínez-Fuentes${}^{a}$

${}^{a}$Department of Cell Biology, Edificio C-6, 3a Planta, Campus Universitario de Rabanales, University of Córdoba, E-14071 Córdoba, Spain  
${}^{b}$Department of Basic Animal Science Research, Merck Research Laboratories, Rahway, NJ 07065, USA  

Received 27 January 2001; received in revised form 27 June 2001; accepted 3 July 2001

---

### Abstract

A review is presented on progress in the research of stimulatory inputs that regulate growth hormone secretion, including recent results on the action of the hypothalamic peptides growth-hormone releasing factor (GHRH) and pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP), as well as that of both peptidic (growth hormone-releasing hexapeptide; GHRP-6) and non-peptidyl (L-163,255) synthetic GHSs on somatotrope cell function. © 2002 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.

#### Keywords: Somatotropes; Growth hormone; Secretion; Second messengers; Signaling enzymes; Growth hormone-releasing factor (GHRH); Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP); Synthetic growth hormone secretagogues

---

### 1. Introduction

It is becoming increasingly clear that the previously accepted model proposed to explain the hypothalamic regulation of growth hormone (GH) release from pituitary somatotropes, that is, the dual regulation by one stimulatory factor, growth-hormone releasing factor (GHRH), and one inhibitory, somatostatin (SRIF), is becoming obsolete and has to be expanded to include novel players (Frohman et al., 1992; Giustina and Veldhuis, 1998; Peter and Chang, 1999; McMahon et al.,

* This paper was submitted as part of the proceedings of the 20th Conference of European Comparative Endocrinologists, organized under the auspices of the European Society of Comparative Endocrinology, held in Faro, Portugal, 5–9 September 2000.
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +34-957-218594; fax: +34-957-218634.
E-mail address: fgracia@uco.es (F. Gracia-Navarro).

2001). In particular, two classes of compounds are emerging as likely candidates to regulate GH secretion. Namely, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP; Miyata et al., 1989; Arimura and Shioda, 1995; Vaudry et al., 2000) and the family of synthetic GH secretagogues (GHSs; Smith et al., 1996a,b; Bowers, 1999), of which a probable endogenous counterpart, a peptide termed ghrelin, has recently been identified, cloned and characterized (Kojima et al., 1999). There is also increasing evidence that in addition to these new extracellular regulators, the mechanisms that operate inside the somatotrope to interpret and respond to the instructions conveyed by such multiple regulatory inputs also include signaling pathways that were previously considered unimportant for this cell type (French et al., 1990; Bluet-Pajot et al., 1993). In our laboratory, we use the porcine somatotrope as a model to investigate the complexity of the control of GH secretion and

1096-4959/02/$ - see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.
PII: S1096-4959(01)00544-9

cells, although activated through different intermediary GTP-binding proteins (presumably of the Gs and Gq type, respectively), ultimately results in net increases in the concentration of free cytosolic calcium ([Ca²⁺]i), which in turn lead to GH release (Chen et al., 1994; Herrington and Hille, 1994). In particular, PKA activation induces extracellular Ca²⁺ entry through voltage-sensitive Ca²⁺ channels (VSCC) (Takei et al., 1996), which in the case of somatotropes, are of the L- and T-type (Chen et al., 1990; Chen and Clarke, 1995). Furthermore, the activity of these channels is closely related to the function of other ion channels, such as K⁺ and Na⁺ channels, which are also regulated by a variety of factors acting on somatotrope cells (Kato and Suzuki, 1989; Ohlsson and Lindstrom, 1989; Kato and Sakuma, 1999). Regarding the IP/PLC/PKC system, both the inositol triphosphate (IP₃) and diacylglycerol (DAG) generated by PLC-mediated hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol biphosphate (PIP₂) can contribute, through different mechanisms, to the [Ca²⁺]i increases observed in somatotropes in response to different stimuli (Herrington and Hille, 1994; Breson-Brépoldin and Dufy-Barbe, 1996; Smith et al., 1996a,b). Thus, IP₃ induces Ca²⁺ mobilization from the endoplasmic reticulum, whereas PKC, activated by DAG, can directly or indirectly stimulate extracellular Ca²⁺ influx. Finally, other signaling molecules, such as arachidonic acid and its metabolites, also seem to participate in the secretory response of somatotropes (Roudbaraki et al., 1996).

Attempts to elucidate the participation of specific transduction pathways in the response of somatotropes to a secretagogue can involve diverse experimental strategies. In our studies, two complementary approaches have been combined to delineate the intracellular mechanisms mediating the effects of PACAP, GHRH, GHRP-6 and L-163,255 on porcine somatotropes (Fig. 1). In the first approach, we assessed the direct effect of these substances on the levels of different second messengers, such as cAMP and IPs, in cultures of porcine pituitary cells, as well as the [Ca²⁺]i in single immunoidentified somatotropes, after the administration of the corresponding secretagogue. In the second type of approach, we sought to ascertain the relative contribution of different intracellular signaling molecules to the secretory response of somatotropes. To this end, the effect of the secretagogues on GH release was evaluated

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram summarizing the main signaling pathways involved in the response of porcine somatotropes to regulatory factors and showing the points at which the different routes were blocked in our studies. Abbreviations: AC, adenylate cyclase; Ca²⁺, cytosolic free calcium; DAG, diacylglycerol; Gs, Gq, heterotrimeric G proteins; IP₃, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate; VSCC-L, L-type voltage-sensitive Ca²⁺ channels; PKA, protein kinase A; PKC, protein kinase C; PLC, phospholipase C; RER, rough endoplasmic reticulum.

the mechanisms underlying such control. Here, we review our recent results on the action of the hypothalamic peptides GHRH and PACAP, as well as that of both peptidic (growth hormone-releasing hexapeptide; GHRP-6) and non-peptidyl (L-163,255) synthetic GHSs on somatotrope cell function.

2. Major signaling pathways involved in somatotrope response to regulatory inputs

Functional responses of somatotropes to stimulatory factors can be mediated by the activation of several signaling systems, which can vary depending on the specific factor (Fig. 1). Classically, the adenylate cyclase (AC)/adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (cAMP)/protein kinase A (PKA) pathway has been considered as the main mechanism activated in this cell type in response to a number of stimuli, including GHRH (Frohman, 1996). On the other hand, the route of phospholipase C (PLC)/inositol phosphate (IP)/protein kinase C (PKC) was initially thought to play only a minor role in somatotrope function, yet recent studies have revealed this system as an important mediator in the secretory response of this cell type to certain secretagogues (Chen and Clarke, 1999). The action of both the AC/cAMP/PKA system and the PLC/IP/PKC pathway on somatotrope

in cultures of dispersed adenohypophyseal cells
after selectively blocking key enzymes, such as
AC (by MDL 12,330A), PLC (by U73122), and
PKA and PKC (by H-89 and phloretin, respectively),
and also after blockade of extracellular Ca²⁺
influx (by EGTA or by the specific L-type VSCC
blockers nifedipine or verapamil), or after depletion
of intracellular Ca²⁺ stores (by thapsigargin).

two enzymes completely blocked GH release
induced by both PACAPs (Martínez-Fuentes et al., 1998a). In addition, blockade of PKA significantly
reduced the ability of the two peptides to increase
[Ca²⁺]i in single porcine somatotropes (Martínez-
Fuentes et al., 1998b). Similarly, removal of extracellular Ca²⁺ and blockade of Ca²⁺ influx through
L-type channels markedly diminished the response
of somatotropes to PACAP38 and PACAP27, both
in terms of Ca²⁺ responses and GH release
(Martínez-Fuentes et al., 1998a,b).

In clear contrast, blockade of PLC reduced the
stimulatory effect caused by PACAP38, but not
that of PACAP27, indicating the participation of
this enzyme in the action of PACAP38 on GH
release by porcine somatotropes (Martínez-Fuentes
et al., 1998a). Interestingly, the two signaling
routes initiated by PLC, DAG-induced PKC activation
and IP₃-dependent mobilization of Ca²⁺
from internal stores, seemed to differentially contribute
to the effect of PACAP38. PKC depletion
by long-term exposure to the phorbol ester TPA
did not prevent PACAP38-induced GH release,
whereas depletion of thapsigargin-sensitive endoplasmic
reticulum Ca²⁺ stores partially reduced
the effect of this peptide (Martínez-Fuentes et al., 1998a). In addition, and as would be expected,
neither of these blockers modified the stimulatory
action of PACAP27 on porcine GH release. In
keeping with these findings, [Ca²⁺]i response to
PACAP38, but not to PACAP27, was partially
diminished in conditions of PLC inhibition or after
depletion of the endoplasmic reticulum-associated
intracellular Ca²⁺ pool (Martínez-Fuentes et al., 1998b).

Identical results to those found for hormone
release were observed for GH mRNA accumulation
in somatotropes (Martínez-Fuentes et al., 1998a), thereby reinforcing our notion that
PACAP38 and PACAP27 employ different molecular
pathways to stimulate porcine somatotropes.
The diagram shown in Fig. 2 outlines the major
components of each pathway proposed. Both
PACAP38 and PACAP27 stimulate GH synthesis
and release in porcine somatotropes mainly by
activating the AC/cAMP/PKA system, which in
turn induces the required extracellular Ca²⁺ entry
through L-type Ca²⁺-channels. However, PLC
activation and intracellular Ca²⁺ mobilization also
partially contribute to PACAP38-, but not to
PACAP27-induced stimulatory effects on porcine
somatotropes. In summary, our results demonstrate

Such differences between PACAP27 and
PACAP38 cannot be attributed to the AC/cAMP/
PKA system, because inhibition of either of the

releasing peptides, GHRPs) and non-peptidic compounds that shared the ability of releasing GH, and were therefore termed growth hormone secretagogues or GHSs (Deghenghi, 1996; Smith et al., 1996a,b; Wyvratt, 1996). The availability of non-peptidic GHSs that, like L-163,255, possess high oral bioactivity and low toxicity (Gertz et al., 1993; Chang et al., 1996) enhanced the possible clinical significance of these compounds, thereby attracting more interest to this research field. Moreover, the discovery in 1996 of the receptor specific for GHSs and its abundance in the pituitary and hypothalamus in human, pig and rat (Howard et al., 1996; McKee et al., 1997; Yokote et al., 1998) strongly suggested the existence of a natural analogue of the synthetic GHSs. Indeed, in December 1999, a 28-amino-acid-residue peptide that appears to be the endogenous ligand for this heretofore orphan receptor was isolated, cloned and characterized from rat and human stomach and was named ghrelin (Kojima et al., 1999).

In our laboratory, we have employed the dual strategy mentioned earlier to investigate the in vitro response of porcine somatotropes to both peptidic (GHRP-6) and non-peptidyl (L-163,255) GHSs, as well as to elucidate the intracellular systems mediating these responses. Specifically, in the first set of studies, we found that GHRP-6 potently and rapidly stimulates porcine GH secretion in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, we observed that combined administration of GHRP-6 and GHRH induces an additive stimulation of GH release in vitro (Sánchez-Hormigo et al., 1998). These latter results contrast with the marked synergistic interaction found in vivo in pigs after co-administration of non-peptidyl GHSs and GHRH (Chang et al., 1993; Hickey et al., 1996), which can be observed even in animals previously subjected to hypophyseal stalk transection (Hickey et al., 1996), thus suggesting that the interaction between both compounds is directly exerted at the pituitary level. In view of these and our in vitro results, it is tempting to speculate that in the animal in vivo, there exists some type of factor or mechanism, of extrahypothalamic origin, that contributes to enhance the additive interaction observed in vitro between GHRH and GHS to a true synergistic stimulation of GH release.

The additive interaction effected by GHRH and GHRP-6 in our in vitro system also suggested that, as reported in other species (reviewed by Smith et al., 1996a,b), these peptides may act through

Fig. 2. Diagram showing the model proposed to explain the intracellular mechanisms employed by PACAP27 and PACAP38 to activate GH synthesis and secretion in porcine somatotropes. PACAP 27 would only activate the cAMP pathway shown in the left, whereas PACAP38 would require the activation of both the cAMP route and the PLC/IP₃ (right) cascade to exert its full action. PVR, PACAP/VIP receptor. See Fig. 1 for further abbreviations.

that these two molecular forms of PACAP act on porcine somatotropes by activating both common and distinct signaling mechanisms. Although the mechanisms underlying these differences are still unknown, it seems reasonable to propose that they likely relate to differential coupling of the PACAP receptor(s) expressed in porcine somatotropes to specific signaling pathways upon binding of each PACAP molecular form, as has been shown to occur in other cellular systems (Spengler et al., 1993; Pantaloni et al., 1996; Vaudry et al., 2000).

4. Response of porcine somatotropes to peptidic and non-peptidic GHSs

More than two decades ago, Cyril Bowers and his group synthesized a series of enkephalin-derived peptides that stimulated GH release in vitro, but lacked in vivo activity (Bowers et al., 1977). Bowers' group further modified these peptides based on conformational energy studies and structure-activity relationship 2 years before the isolation of the hypothalamic peptide GHRH, thus enabling the synthesis of a GH-releasing hexapeptide, termed GHRP-6, with a neat ability to specifically release GH in vivo and in vitro in a number of species, including rat, pig and human (Bowers et al., 1984, 1990; Doscher et al., 1984). The hexapeptide subsequently served as a model to design and synthesize a series of peptidic (GH-
distinct signaling pathways within pig somatotropes. To examine this issue, we first measured phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis in porcine pituitary cells in response to GHRP-6 and/or GHRH. As previously reported for human and rat pituitary cells (Lei et al., 1995; Mau et al., 1995), GHRP-6 increased phosphatidylinositol turnover in porcine pituitary cells. In contrast, GHRH did not cause a significant rise in this activity, nor did it modify the effect caused by GHRP-6 (Sánchez-Hormigo et al., 1999). Consistent with these results, inhibition of PLC completely abolished GHRP-6-induced GH release and suppressed the additive effect evoked by the hexapeptide and GHRH, whereas it did not modify the stimulation caused by GHRH alone. Furthermore, similar results were obtained when activation of PKC, a subsequent step in the PLC signaling pathway, was prevented by phloretin, thus demonstrating that these enzymes play a requisite role for GHRP-6 to stimulate GH release from porcine somatotropes, and to additively interact with GHRH.

Having established the importance of the PLC/IP/PKC system in the response of porcine somatotropes to GHRP-6, we carried out a similar series of experiments to investigate the possible involvement of the AC/cAMP/PKA pathway in the response of this cell type to the hexapeptide and/or to GHRH. Contrary to results reported for other species (Cheng et al., 1989; Adams et al., 1996; Wu et al., 1996), we found that GHRP-6 significantly increased cAMP levels in porcine pituitary cells, yet to a minor extent than GHRH. Moreover, we observed that co-administration of GHRP-6 and GHRH caused an additive stimulation of cAMP production, thus suggesting that the increases evoked by each peptide are mediated through distinct mechanisms (Sánchez-Hormigo et al., 1999). Our results indicate the existence of dissimilarities among the mechanisms that can be activated by GHRP-6 in pituitary cells of different species, which may arise from the distinct coupling of the same receptor to different signaling pathways in each species. Nevertheless, the discovery of novel GHS receptors in the pituitary (Muccioli et al., 1998), coupled with the distinct actions of peptidic and non-peptidyl GHSs in somatotropes from pig (see below) and other species (Chen, 2000), would also support the notion that the response of this cell type to GHSs involves multiple receptors, which may differ depending upon the species and the GHS considered (Chen, 2000).

However, despite the ability of GHRP-6 to increase cAMP levels in porcine pituitary cells, we found that the activation of this pathway does not seem to be required for its stimulatory action on GH release. Indeed, blockade of AC or PKA did not affect GHRP-6-induced GH release, whereas in contrast, it abolished the stimulatory effect of GHRH (Sánchez-Hormigo et al., 1999). Furthermore, it is noteworthy that blockade of these enzymes inhibited the additive stimulation of GH release evoked by the combined administration of both peptides and in particular, inhibition of AC fully eliminated the GHRH/GHRP-6-induced GH release. Thus, although the activation of the cAMP pathway caused by GHRP-6 alone in porcine somatotropes is not necessary for the action of the hexapeptide on GH release, future studies should test its possible contribution to other cellular processes activated by GHRP-6, such as GH gene transcription (Castano et al., 1998). On the other hand, our results underscore the crucial importance of the activation of the cAMP cascade for the interplay established between GHRH and GHRP-6 within porcine somatotropes to stimulate GH release. Consistent with this notion, in human (adenoma), rat or sheep pituitary cells, it has been shown that although GHRP-6 alone is unable to increase cAMP levels, it does enhance the GHRH-stimulated increase of cAMP (Cheng et al., 1989; Adams et al., 1996; Wu et al., 1996), thereby suggesting that in these species, this cascade would also play an important role in the additive interaction between both peptides.

Given the importance of the Ca²⁺ ion in the secretory response of somatotropes to diverse stimuli, we also tested the effect of GHRP-6 on [Ca²⁺]ᵢ in single somatotropes by means of the indo-1 technique and the subsequent immunoidentification of measured cells. Using this methodology, we observed that the hexapeptide increased [Ca²⁺]ᵢ in 83.3% of immunoidentified somatotropes by inducing three distinct patterns of [Ca²⁺]ᵢ rise: a predominant Type I, or plateau-type response; a Type II, spike or transient response; and Type III, a biphasic or peak-plateau response (Sánchez-Hormigo et al., 1999). In rat somatotropes, where similar GHRP-6-induced [Ca²⁺]ᵢ augmentation profiles have been reported, the predominant type of response corresponds to the type III or biphasic profile (Bresson-Brépoldin and Dufy-Barbe, 1994, 1996; Herrington and Hille, 1994). Furthermore, the use of specific inhibitors
has shown that extra- and intracellular Ca²⁺ selectively account for the different phases of such [Ca²⁺]ᵢ rises. To be more specific, whereas the initial peak is due to the mobilization of Ca²⁺ from intracellular, thapsigargin-sensitive stores, and occurs in the absence of external Ca²⁺, the second, plateau phase is sustained through the influx of extracellular Ca²⁺ via L-type VSCC (Bresson-Brépoldin and Dufy-Barbe, 1994). In pig somatotropes, we found that both the blockade of L-type VSCC by nifedipine and the depletion of intracellular Ca²⁺ pools by thapsigargin reduced the number of somatotropes responsive to GHRP-6, but did not cause a selective disappearance of the initial rise or the secondary phase in any of the response patterns. In fact, the three patterns of Ca²⁺ profiles were still observable, and retained an essentially identical morphology under such inhibitory conditions. Thus, in contrast with the mechanism observed in rat somatotropes, it seems that in pig somatotropes, both extracellular Ca²⁺ entry and Ca²⁺ mobilization from intracellular stores simultaneously contribute to the entire Ca²⁺ response induced by GHRP-6.

On the other hand, nifedipine and thapsigargin differentially affected the stimulatory action of GHRP-6 on GH secretion from pig somatotropes. Thus, the presence of nifedipine in the incubation medium clearly reduced the release of GH caused by GHRP-6 or GHRH alone, as well as by a combination of both peptides. Conversely, depletion of intracellular Ca²⁺ stores by thapsigargin did not affect the stimulation caused by the hexapeptide alone, whereas it decreased the effect of GHRH, as has been previously shown to occur in porcine somatotrope subpopulations (Ramírez et al., 1999), and it also substantially diminished the additive effect of both peptides. The effects of nifedipine on GHRP-6-induced GH release are in accordance with those found in rat somatotropes (Sartor et al., 1985; Bresson-Brépoldin and Dufy-Barbe, 1996) and with the reduction in the Ca²⁺-response observed previously in single porcine somatotropes. On the other hand, the lack of an inhibitory effect of thapsigargin on GHRP-6-induced GH secretion contrasted with the data in rat (Bresson-Brépoldin and Dufy-Barbe, 1996) and with its effect on the Ca²⁺ response to the hexapeptide in single somatotropes. These latter results demonstrate again the existence of interspecies differences in the mechanism of action of GHRP-6. Moreover, they indicate that the mobilization of

Fig. 3. Proposed working model of the possible signaling pathways and interactions underlying the response of porcine somatotropes to GHRH and GHRP-6. Dashed arrow indicates putative cross-talk between PKC and AC. See text for details. GHRH-R, receptor for GHRH; GHS-R, receptor for GHSs; other abbreviations as in Fig. 1.

Ca²⁺ from internal stores evoked by the hexapeptide in pig somatotropes is not required for its stimulatory effect on GH release when acting alone, although it seems to be important for its additive interaction with GHRH.

When taken together, the results obtained on the effects of GHRP-6 and GHRH in porcine somatotropes enable outline of a working model of the mechanism of action employed by these secretagogues to stimulate GH secretion in this cell type, which we have illustrated in the diagram in Fig. 3. Specifically, we propose that GHRP-6 stimulates GH release from porcine somatotropes through the sequential activation of the PLC/IP/PKC system, which in turn causes an extracellular Ca²⁺ influx through L-type VSCC. This mechanism of action clearly differs from that primarily employed by GHRH in this cell type, namely the AC/cAMP/PKA pathway. As a matter of fact, the ability of the hexapeptide to stimulate this latter pathway does not seem to be a requisite for its action on GH release when acting alone. On the other hand, most of the signaling molecules investigated here-in, including cAMP, seem to be required for GHRP-6 and GHRH to additively stimulate GH release. In summary, our results suggest that the combined action of both peptides on porcine somatotropes involves a complex set of interlinked, cross-talking mechanisms, which likely converge at the cAMP level.

In addition to GHRP-6, the leading peptide model of GHSs, we have investigated the effects

and mechanisms of action of the non-peptidyl
analogue developed by Merck, L-163,255, on por-
cine somatotropes (Chang et al., 1996). Similar to
that found for the hexapeptide, L-163,255 potently
and rapidly stimulated porcine GH secretion in a
dose-dependent manner (Luque et al., 1998). Like-
wise, the analogue additively interacted with
GHRH to stimulate GH release from cultured
porcine somatotropes. This observation shows that
the differences between the type of stimulatory
interaction of GHRH and GHSs found in vivo
(synergistic; Chang et al., 1993; Hickey et al.,
1996) and in vitro (additive; Luque et al., 1998;
Sánchez-Hormigo et al., 1999) are independent of
the nature of the GHS considered (i.e. peptic or
non-peptic). Furthermore, the use of the specific
blockers U-73122 and phloretin also demonstrated
that the action of the analogue was totally depend-
ent on the activation of the PLC/IP/PKC trans-
duction pathway, since inhibition of these enzymes
severely reduced the GH release stimulated by the
secretagogue, and also suppressed its additive
interaction with GHRH. Interestingly, PLC activity
not only appears to be important, but also essential
for the interaction between GHRH and L-163,255,
as its blockade fully abolished GH release above
control levels.

In marked contrast with results previously found
for GHRP-6, its non-peptidyl analogue did not
stimulate cAMP production in cultures of porcine
pituitary cells when applied alone (Luque et al.,
1998). This finding reinforces our notion that
multiple receptors could be involved in the porcine
somatotrope response to distinct GHSs. Neverthe-
less, co-incubation of L-163,255 and GHRH poten-
tiated the stimulatory action of the peptide on this
parameter in a comparable manner to that found
for other non-peptidyl GHSs (Cheng et al., 1993;
Smith et al., 1993). Consistent with these findings,
we observed that inhibition of AC did not modify
the L-163,255-induced GH release, whereas in
contrast, it reduced its additive stimulatory inter-
action with GHRH, thus confirming that the cAMP
signaling pathway participates in the interplay
established between GHSs and GHRH within por-
cine somatotropes.

Analysis of the Ca²⁺ dynamics in single cells
demonstrated that L-163,255 increases [Ca²⁺]i in
somatotropes by inducing three types of profile,
which are of similar morphology to those induced
by GHRP-6, with the Type I or plateau being the
predominant response profile. In spite of the sim-

Fig. 4. Diagram outlining the working model proposed to
explain the intracellular signaling pathways and possible inter-
actions involved in the stimulatory response induced by the
GHS L-163,255 and GHRH in porcine somatotropes. Dashed
arrow indicates potential cross-talk between PLC and AC. See
text for details. Abbreviations as in Figs. 1 and 3.

ilarities between the Ca²⁺ response induced by
GHRP-6 and L-163,255, the contribution of extra-
and intracellular Ca²⁺ sources to the GH release
induced by the non-peptide analogue did not
entirely correspond to that found for GHRP-6.
Thus, both intracellular Ca²⁺ influx through L-
type VSCC and mobilization of Ca²⁺ from internal
stores contributed to the secretory response of
porcine somatotropes to L-163,255, whereas, as
mentioned earlier, the stimulatory effect of the
hexapeptide on GH release is only partially
dependent on extracellular Ca²⁺ and totally inde-
pendent on Ca²⁺ from thapsigargin-sensitive intra-
cellular stores. In summary, although the
non-peptide analogue shares the main mechanisms
employed by GHRP-6 to stimulate GH release in
porcine somatotropes, namely the activation of the
PLC/IP/PKC pathway, our present results indicate
the existence of marked divergences between the
signaling pathways underlying the effects induced
by each secretagogue alone, as well as those
activated when the synthetic compounds act in
concert with GHRH. Such differences, which are
summarized in the diagram shown in Fig. 4,
include the relative importance of AC and PLC
activity, and the contribution of the different
Ca²⁺ sources in these responses.

5. Concluding remarks

When viewed together, our results and those
reported for other species (Chen and Clarke, 1999;

Chen, 2000) strongly support the increasingly accepted view that the diverse members of the GHS family act on somatotropes through multiple receptors and signaling mechanisms, which also markedly differ between species. Similarly, the response of somatotropes to the distinct forms of PACAP appears to be more complex than initially envisioned. This view, despite increasing the already complex picture of the intracellular mechanisms controlling GH release, will surely enhance our understanding on the functioning of this cell type. In conclusion, we believe that the GH axis is under a complex regulatory system that comprises multiple stimulatory and inhibitory factors, which by acting in the somatotrope through an intricate web of interlinked signaling cascades, ensure that GH secretion can be precisely regulated under diverse physiological circumstances.

### Acknowledgments

This study was supported by Dirección General de Investigación Científica y Técnica (Grant PB 97-0454).

### References

Adams, E.F., Lei, T., Buchfelder, M., Bowers, C.Y., Fahlbusch, R., 1996. Protein kinase C-dependent growth hormone-releasing peptides stimulate cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate production by human pituitary somatotropinomas expressing gsp oncogenes: evidence for cross-talk between transduction pathways. Mol. Endocrinol. 10, 432–438.

Arimura, A., Shioda, S., 1995. Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) and its receptors: neuroendocrine and endocrine interaction. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 16, 53–88.

Bluet-Pajot, M.T., Bertherat, J., Epelbaum, J., Kordon, C., 1993. Neural and pituitary mechanism involved in growth hormone regulation. J. Pediatr. Endocrinol. Metab. 6, 357–369.

Bowers, C.Y., 1999. GHRP: unnatural toward the natural. In: Ghigo, E., Boghen, M., Casanueva, F.F., Diéguez, C. (Eds.), Growth Hormone Secretagogues. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 5–18.

Bowers, C.Y., Chang, J., Momany, F.A., Folkers, K., 1977. Effects of the enkephalins and enkephalin analogs on release of pituitary hormones in vitro. In: MacIntyre, I. (Ed.), Molecular Endocrinology. Elsevier/North Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 287–292.

Bowers, C.Y., Momany, F.A., Reynolds, G.A., Hong, A., 1984. On the in vitro and in vivo activity of a new synthetic hexapeptide that acts on the pituitary to specifically release growth hormone. Endocrinology 114, 1537–1545.

Bowers, C.Y., Reynolds, G.A., Durham, D., Barrera, C.M., Pezzoli, S.S., Thorner, M.O., 1990. Growth hormone (GH)-releasing peptide stimulates GH release in normal men and

acts synergistically with GH-releasing hormone. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 70, 975–982.

Bresson-Brépoldin, L., Dufy-Barbe, L., 1994. GHRP-6 induces a biphasic calcium response in rat pituitary somatotrophs. Cell Calcium 15, 247–258.

Bresson-Brépoldin, L., Dufy-Barbe, L., 1996. GHRP6-stimulated hormone secretion in somatotrophs: involvement of intracellular and extracellular calcium sources. J. Neuroendocrinol. 8, 309–314.

Castaño, J.P., Sánchez-Hormigo, A., Torronteras, R., Malagón, M.M., Gracia-Navarro, F., 1998. Growth hormone (GH)-releasing hexapeptide (GHRP-6) and GH-releasing factor (GRF) stimulate GH secretion from porcine somatotropes through common and distinct intracellular signaling mechanisms. 80th Annual Meeting of the Endocrine Society, New Orleans, USA.

Chang, C.H., Rickes, E.L., Marsilio, F., et al., 1993. L-692,429, a novel non-peptidyl growth hormone (GH) secretagogue, stimulates GH release in swine. J. Anim. Sci. 59, 218.

Chang, C.H., Rickes, E.L., McGuire, L., et al., 1996. Growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor I responses after treatments with an orally active GH secretagogue L-163,255 in swine. Endocrinology 137, 4851–4856.

Chen, C., 2000. Growth hormone secretagogue actions on the pituitary gland: multiple receptors for multiple ligands? Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 27, 323–329.

Chen, C., Clarke, I.J., 1995. Modulation of Ca²⁺ influx in the ovine somatotroph by growth hormone-releasing factor. Am. J. Physiol. 268, E204–E212.

Chen, C., Clarke, I.J., 1999. Intracellular GHRP signalling. In: Ghigo, E., Boghen, M., Casanueva, F.F., Diéguez, C. (Eds.), Growth Hormone Secretagogues. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 53–63.

Chen, C., Zhang, J., Vincent, J.D., Israel, J.M., 1990. Two types of voltage-dependent calcium currents in rat somatotropes are reduced by somatostatin. J. Physiol. (Lond.) 425, 29–42.

Chen, C., Vincent, J.D., Clarke, I.J., 1994. Ion channels and the signal transduction pathways in the regulation of growth hormone secretion. Trends Endocr. Metab. 5, 227–233.

Cheng, K., Chan, W.W.S., Barreto, A., Convey, E.M., Smith, R.G., 1989. The synergistic effects of His-dTrp-Ala-dPhe-Lys-NH₂ on growth hormone (GH)-releasing factor-stimulated GH release and intracellular adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate accumulation in rat primary pituitary cell culture. Endocrinology 124, 2791–2798.

Cheng, K., Chan, W.W.S., Butler, B., et al., 1993. Stimulation of growth hormone release from rat pituitary cells by L-692,429, a novel non-peptidyl GH secretagogue. Endocrinology 132, 2729–2731.

Deghenghi, R., 1996. Growth hormone-releasing peptides. In: Bercu, B.B., Walker, R.F. (Eds.), Growth Hormone Secretagogues. Springer Verlag, New York, pp. 85–102.

Doscher, M.E., Baker, P.K., Kraft, L.A., Ricks, C.A., 1984. Effect of a synthetic growth hormone releasing hexapeptide (BI679) and growth hormone-releasing factor (GRF) on serum growth hormone levels in barrows. J. Anim. Sci. 59, 218. Abstract.

French, M.B., Lussier, B.T., Moor, B.C., Kraicer, J., 1990. Effect of growth hormone-releasing factor on phosphoinositide hydrolysis in somatotrophs. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 72, 221–226.

Frohman, L.A., 1996. Cellular physiology of growth hormone-releasing hormone. In: Bercu, B.B., Walker, R.F. (Eds.), Growth Hormone Secretagogues. Springer Verlag, New York, pp. 137–146.

Frohman, L.A., Downs, T.R., Chomczynski, P., 1992. Regulation of growth hormone secretion. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 13, 344–405.

Gertz, B.J., Barrett, J.S., Eisenhandler, R., et al., 1993. Growth hormone response in man to L-692,429, a novel non-peptide mimic of growth hormone-releasing peptide-6. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 77, 1393–1397.

Giustina, A., Veldhuis, J.D., 1998. Pathophysiology of the neuroregulation of growth hormone secretion in experimental animals and the human. Endocr. Rev. 19, 717–797.

Goth, M.Y., Lyons, C.E., Canny, B.J., Thorner, M.O., 1992. Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide, growth hormone (GH)-releasing peptide and GH-releasing hormone stimulate GH release through distinct pituitary receptors. Endocrinology 130, 939–944.

Hart, G.R., Gowing, H., Burrin, J.M., 1992. Effects of a novel hypothalamic peptide, pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide, on pituitary hormone release in rats. J. Endocrinol. 134, 33–41.

Hashizume, T., Soliman, E.B., Kanematsu, S., 1994. Effects of pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP), prostaglandin E₂ (PGE₂) and growth hormone releasing factor (GRF) on the release of growth hormone from cultured bovine anterior pituitary cells in vitro. Domestic Anim. Endocrinol. 11, 331–337.

Herrington, J., Hille, B., 1994. Growth hormone-releasing hexapeptide elevates intracellular calcium in rat somatotropes by two mechanisms. Endocrinology 135, 1100–1118.

Hickey, G., Drisko, J., Faidley, T., et al., 1996. Mediation by the central nervous system is critical to the in vivo activity of the GH secretagogue L-692-585. J. Endocrinol. 148, 371–380.

Howard, A.D., Feighner, S.D., Cully, D.F., et al., 1996. A receptor in pituitary and hypothalamus that functions in growth hormone release. Science 273, 974–977.

Kato, M., Sakuma, Y., 1999. The effect of GHRP-6 on the intracellular Na⁺ concentration of rat pituitary cells in primary culture. J. Neuroendocrinol. 11, 795–800.

Kato, M., Suzuki, M., 1989. Growth hormone-releasing factor depolarizes rat pituitary cells in Na⁺-dependent mechanism. Brain Res. 476, 145–148.

Kojima, M., Hosoda, H., Date, Y., Nakazato, M., Matsuo, H., Kangawa, K., 1999. Ghrelin is a growth hormone-releasing acylated peptide from stomach. Nature 402, 656–660.

Lei, T., Buchfelder, M., Fahlbusch, R., Adams, E.F., 1995. Growth hormone releasing peptide (GHRP-6) stimulates phosphatidylinositol (PI) turnover in human pituitary somatotroph cells. J. Mol. Endocrinol. 14, 135–138.

Luque, R.M., Sánchez-Hormigo, A., Malagón, M.M., Hickey, G.J., Gracia-Navarro, F., Castaño, J.P., 1998. Direct effects of non-peptidyl growth hormone (GH) secretagogues on GH secretion from cultured porcine somatotropes. IIIRD International Conference on Farm Animal Endocrinology, Brussels, Belgium.

Martínez-Fuentes, A.J., Castaño, J.P., Gracia-Navarro, F., Malagón, M.M., 1998a. Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) 38 and PACAP27 activate both com-

mon and distinct intracellular signaling pathways to stimulate growth hormone secretion from porcine somatotropes. Endocrinology 139, 5116–5124.

Martínez-Fuentes, A.J., Castaño, J.P., Malagón, M.M., Gracia-Navarro, F., 1998b. Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) 38 and PACAP27 increase cytosolic free Ca²⁺ concentration in porcine somatotropes through common and distinct mechanisms. Cell Calcium 23, 369–378.

Martínez-Fuentes, A.J., Malagón, M.M., Castaño, J.P., Garrido-Gracia, J.C., Gracia-Navarro, F., 1998c. Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) 38 and PACAP27 differentially stimulate GH release and mRNA accumulation in porcine somatotropes. Life Sci. 62, 2379–2390.

Mau, S.E., Witt, M.R., Bjerrum, O.J., Saermark, T., Vilhardt, H., 1995. Growth hormone-releasing hexapeptide (GHRP-6) activates the inositol (1,4,5)-trisphosphate/diacylglycerol pathway in rat anterior pituitary cells. J. Recept. Signal Transduct. Res. 15, 311–323.

McKee, K.K., Palyha, O.C., Feighner, S.D., et al., 1997. Molecular analysis of rat pituitary and hypothalamic growth hormone secretagogue receptors. Mol. Endocrinol. 11, 415–423.

McMahon, C.D., Radcliff, R.P., Lookingland, K.J., Tucker, H.A., 2001. Neuroregulation of growth hormone secretion in domestic animals. Domestic Anim. Endocrinol. 20, 65–87.

Miyata, A., Arimura, A., Dahl, D.H., et al., 1989. Isolation of a novel 38 residue hypothalamic peptide which stimulates adenylate cyclase in pituitary cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 164, 567–574.

Miyata, A., Dahl, R.D., Jiang, L., et al., 1990. Isolation of a neuropeptide corresponding to the N-terminal 27 residues of the pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide with 38 residues (PACAP38). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 170, 643–648.

Muccioli, G., Ghe, C., Ghigo, M.C., et al., 1998. Specific receptors for synthetic GH secretagogues in the human brain and pituitary gland. J. Endocrinol. 157, 99–106.

Ohlsson, L., Lindstrom, P., 1989. Growth hormone-releasing factor induces a biphasic modulation of K⁺ permeability in perfused cultured rat somatotrophs. Acta Physiol. Scand. 137, 237–241.

Pantaloni, C., Brabet, P., Bilanges, B., et al., 1996. Alternative splicing in the N-terminal extracellular domain of the pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) receptor modulates receptor selectivity and relative potencies of PACAP-27 and PACAP-38 in phospholipase C activation. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 22146–22151.

Peter, R.P., Chang, J.P., 1999. Brain regulation of growth hormone secretion and food intake in fish. In: Rao, P., Peter, R.E. (Eds.), Neural Regulation in the Vertebrate Endocrine System. Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, pp. 55–67.

Ramírez, J.L., Castaño, J.P., Torronteras, R., et al., 1999. Growth hormone (GH)-releasing factor differentially activates cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate- and inositol phosphate-dependent pathways to stimulate GH release in two porcine somatotrope subpopulations. Endocrinology 140, 1752–1759.

Rawlings, S.R., Hezareh, M., 1996. Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) and PACAP/vasoactive

intestinal polypeptide receptors: actions on the anterior
pituitary gland. Endocr. Rev. 17, 4–29.
Roudbaraki, M.M., Drouhault, R., Bacquart, T., Vacher, P.,
1996. Arachidonic acid-induced hormone release in somatotropes: involvement of calcium. Neuroendocrinology 63,
244–256.
Sánchez-Hormigo, A., Castaño, J.P., Torronteras, R., et al.,
1999. Intracellular signaling mechanisms mediating GHRP-6 effects on porcine somatotropes. 9th Meeting of the European Neuroendocrine Association, Odense, Denmark.
Sánchez-Hormigo, A., Castaño, J.P., Torronteras, R., Malagón, M.M., Ramírez, J.L., Gracia-Navarro, F., 1998. Direct effects of growth hormone (GH)-releasing hexapeptide (GHRP-6) and GH-releasing factor (GRF) on GH secretion from cultured porcine somatotropes. Life Sci. 63, 2079–2088.
Sartor, O., Bowers, C.Y., Chang, D., 1985. Parallel studies of His-DTrp-Ala-DPhe-Lys-NH2 and human pancreatic growth hormone-releasing factor-44-NH2 in rat primary cell monolayer culture. Endocrinology 116, 952–957.
Sawangjaroen, K., Anderson, S.T., Curlewis, J.D., 1997. Effects of pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP) on hormone secretion from sheep pituitary cells in vitro. J. Neuroendocrinol. 9, 279–286.
Sherwood, N.M., Krueckl, S.L., McRory, J.E., 2000. The origin and function of the pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP)/glucagon superfamily. Endocr. Rev. 21, 619–670.
Smith, R.G., Cheng, K., Schoen, W.R., et al., 1993. A nonpeptidyl growth hormone secretagogue. Science 260, 1640–1643.

Smith, R.G., Cheng, K., Pong, S.S., et al., 1996a. Mechanism of action of GHRP-6 and non-peptidyl growth hormone secretagogues. In: Bercu, B.B., Walker, R.F. (Eds.), Growth Hormone Secretagogues. Springer Verlag, New York, pp. 47–63.
Smith, R.G., Van der Ploeg, L.H., Howard, A.D., et al., 1996b. Peptidomimetic regulation of growth hormone secretion. Endocr. Rev. 18, 621–645.
Spengler, D., Waeber, C., Pantaloni, C., et al., 1993. Differential signal transduction by five splice variants of the PACAP receptor. Nature 365, 170–175.
Takei, T., Takano, K., Yasufuku-Takano, J., Fujita, T., Yamashita, N., 1996. Enhancement of Ca²⁺ currents by GHRH and its relation to PKA and [Ca²⁺]i in human GH-secreting adenoma cells. Am. J. Physiol. 271, E801–E807.
Vaudry, D., Gonzalez, B.J., Basille, M., Yon, L., Fournier, A., Vaudry, H., 2000. Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide and its receptors: from structure to functions. Pharmacol. Rev. 52, 269–324.
Wu, D., Chen, C., Zhang, J., Bowers, C.Y., Clarke, I.J., 1996. The effects of GH-releasing peptide-6 (GHRP-6) and GHRP-2 on intracellular adenosine 3′-5′-monophosphate (cAMP) levels and GH secretion in ovine and rat somatotrophs. J. Endocrinol. 148, 197–205.
Wyvratt, M.J., 1996. Non-peptidyl growth hormone secretagogues. In: Bercu, B.B., Walker, R.F. (Eds.), Growth Hormone Secretagogues. Springer Verlag, New York, pp. 103–117.
Yokote, R., Sato, M., Matsubara, S., et al., 1998. Molecular cloning and gene expression of growth hormone-releasing peptide receptor in rat tissues. Peptides 19, 15–20.
