
APPLIED AND ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY, June 2002, p. 2843–2848  
0099-2240/02/$04.00+0 DOI: 10.1128/AEM.68.6.2843–2848.2002  
Copyright © 2002, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

# Functional Analysis of *Sinorhizobium meliloti* Genes Involved in Biotin Synthesis and Transport

Plamena Entcheva,$^{1}$ Donald A. Phillips,$^{2}$ and Wolfgang R. Streit$^{1*}$

Institut für Mikrobiologie und Genetik der Universität Göttingen, 37077 Göttingen, Germany,$^{1}$ and Department of Agronomy and Range Science, University of California, Davis, California 95616$^{2}$

Received 3 December 2001/Accepted 29 March 2002

External biotin greatly stimulates bacterial growth and alfalfa root colonization by *Sinorhizobium meliloti* strain 1021. Several genes involved in responses to plant-derived biotin have been identified in this bacterium, but no genes required for biotin transport are known, and not all loci required for biotin synthesis have been assigned. Searches of the *S. meliloti* genome database in combination with complementation tests of *Escherichia coli* biotin auxotrophs indicate that biotin synthesis probably is limited in *S. meliloti* 1021 by the poor functioning or complete absence of several key genes. Although several open reading frames with significant similarities to genes required for synthesis of biotin in gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria were found, only *bioB*, *bioF*, and *bioH* were demonstrably functional in complementation tests with known *E. coli* mutants. No sequence or complementation evidence was found for *bioA*, *bioC*, *bioD*, or *bioZ*. In contrast to other microorganisms, the *S. meliloti bioB* and *bioF* genes are not localized in a biotin synthesis operon, but *bioB* is cotranscribed with two genes coding for ABC transporter-like proteins, designated here *bioM* and *bioN*. Mutations in *bioM* and *bioN* eliminated growth on alfalfa roots and reduced bacterial capacity to maintain normal intracellular levels of biotin. Taken together, these data suggest that *S. meliloti* normally grows on exogenous biotin using *bioM* and *bioN* to conserve biotin assimilated from external sources.

Microorganisms from the gram-negative genera *Rhizobium*, *Sinorhizobium*, *Bradyrhizobium*, *Mesorhizobium*, and *Azorhizobium*, collectively termed rhizobia, are well known for their capacity to establish N₂-fixing symbioses with legume plants (2). Although the molecular basis of rhizobial N₂ reduction is defined (17) and a foundation has been constructed for understanding other bacterial genes expressed in the plant (25), our knowledge of how rhizobia grow on plant roots is less complete. Good growth of *S. meliloti* strain 1021 (Rm1021) on alfalfa roots requires external biotin (33), often supplied by plant roots (27), which regulates a gene, *bioS*, that helps *S. meliloti* compete under such conditions (13, 34). Whether biotin is essential or simply stimulatory for rhizobial growth has been long debated (36–38), but clearly, cell densities of Rm1021 and many other rhizobia under biotin-limiting conditions are increased greatly by small amounts of biotin (8). Growing *S. meliloti* serially under biotin-limited conditions produces several physiological and metabolic changes, including the accumulation of polyhydroxybutyrate and a significant reduction in cell size (8, 14). Biotin-dependent enzymes such as pyruvate carboxylase are also affected under biotin-limited conditions, and several tricarboxylic acid cycle auxiliary enzymes show decreased activities (4, 5).

Biotin is formed in bacteria by a well-defined pathway (Fig. 1) (6, 7, 15, 16, 23, 26). Many microorganisms, including *Mesorhizobium loti*, have biotin synthesis genes organized in operons (1, 18, 19, 21, 28, 35), but neither the organization of *bio*

---

*MATERIALS AND METHODS*

Bacterial strains, plasmids, and growth conditions. Microbiological materials used in the present work are listed in Table 1. *Escherichia coli* was grown at 37°C on Luria-Bertani (LB) or M9 medium (29) supplemented with appropriate antibiotics, and *S. meliloti* 1021 was grown in GTS medium (20). Tests for rhizosphere growth and colonization of alfalfa roots were done as reported previously (33).

Construction of *bio* clones and complementation tests. DNA was cloned with standard methods (29), and DNA-modifying enzymes were used as specified by the manufacturer. To amplify the different open reading frames (ORFs) from *S. meliloti*, *M. loti*, *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*, and pCosHE2, PCRs with standard conditions (29) were employed. Complementation tests in *E. coli* biotin auxotrophs were initiated in liquid medium, and then possible transformants carrying the various *bio* constructs were selected on M9 agar medium supplemented with avidin (0.056 U/ml) and vitamin-free Casamino Acids (0.2%, wt/vol; Difco). If required, additional amino acids were supplied at 5 to 10 mM. For complementation studies with Rm1021, cells were grown in GTS liquid medium lacking biotin and rinsed twice with fresh medium before generating and selecting the transformants as specified for *E. coli*.

Biotin measurements in culture supernatants. Biotin was measured by *Lactobacillus* growth and with a competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (9). For the latter, microtiter plates were coated for 2 h with anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G diluted 1:5,000 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), washed

---

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Institut für Mikrobiologie und Genetik, Universität Göttingen, Grisebachstr. 8, 37077 Göttingen, Germany. Phone: (49) 551-393775. Fax: (49) 551-393793. E-mail: wstreit@gwdg.de.

Gram-positive: B. sphaericus and B. subtilis

Mesorhizobium loti

biol  
bioW  

HOOC - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - COOH  
Pimelic Acid  

bioZ  

CoAS - C - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - COOH  
Pimeloyl CoA  

Alanine  

S-Adenosylmethionine  
(amino-donor)  

H₂N - C - C - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - COOH  
H₃C     H       7-keto-8-Aminopelargonic Acid  

H₂N - C - C - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - COOH  
H₃C     H       7,8-Diaminopelargonic Acid  

S  

HN - C - NH  
CH₃ - CH - CH - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - COOH  
d-Dethiobiotin  

HN - C - NH  
CH - CH - CH - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - CH₂ - COOH  
H₂C     S       d-Biotin  

bioC, bioH  
S. meliloti  

bioF, KAPA Synthase  

bioA, DAPA Aminotransferase  

bioD, Dethiobiotsynthase  

bioB, biotinsynthase  

Gram-negative: E.coli  

FIG. 1. Biotin synthesis pathways in gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, with emphasis on rhizobia. M. loti R7A carries a bioZ gene for pimeloyl-CoA synthesis, but no bioC and bioH genes have been identified (35). The three S. meliloti bio genes shown to be functional are underlined. No possible bioD gene was detected in BlastX and BlastP searches. In gram-positive bacteria, the first steps of biotin biosynthesis require the bioW and biol genes, and in gram-negative microbes, the bioC and bioH genes are required for this step. The last step requires bioB in gram-negative microbes and bioY in gram-positive microbes. DAPA, 7,8-diaminopelargonic acid; KAPA, 7-keto-8-aminopelargonic acid.

and treated for 1 h with blocking solution (vitamin-free casein), and washed with PBS. Extravidin-alkaline phosphatase conjugate (Sigma, Heidelberg, Germany) was added to the plates in a 1:20,000 dilution in PBS-Tween (0.025%, vol/vol); then 100-μl aliquots of samples were added to the wells, and plates were incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Serial dilutions of the various samples were performed prior to the tests, and a standard with known biotin concentrations was included in each microtiter plate. After repeated washing of the microtiter plates with PBS, substrate buffer was added (100 mM Tris-HCl, 100 mM NaCl, 50 mM MgCl₂, 2 mg of para-nitrophenylphosphate per ml, pH 9.5), and the color development was recorded at 405 nm in a microplate reader.

Biotin uptake studies. Rhizobial cells were grown to late log phase in GTS medium containing 40 nM [¹²C]biotin, centrifuged, and washed twice in fresh medium lacking biotin. Cells were then depleted of biotin for 2 h by shaking at 150 rpm in fresh medium at 30°C. Biotin uptake by the depleted cells was measured with [¹⁴C]biotin (34). To determine the affinity (Kₘ) and velocity (Vₘₐₓ) of S. meliloti, biotin uptake data were collected after incubating biotin-depleted bacteria for 2 min with either [¹⁴C]biotin or [³H]biotin.

Nucleotide sequence accession numbers. The M. loti Gö1 bioB and bioD genes were submitted to GenBank (accession numbers AF416911 and AF416912), and functionality of the S. meliloti bio genes (e.g., bioB and bioF) was communicated to the S. meliloti genome server.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Identification and functional tests of S. meliloti biotin synthesis genes. Results from this study show that S. meliloti 1021 clearly has part of the pathway required for biotin synthesis. Detailed Blast searches of the S. meliloti genome database (http://sequence.toulouse.inra.fr/rhime/public/Access/Rhime FormRA.html) identified seven ORFs with significant similarities to bio genes in other microorganisms (Table 2). The bioF gene was highly similar to the corresponding protein from the gram-positive bacterium Kurthia sp. S. meliloti bioB was similar to the gram-positive Deinococcus radiodurans biotin synthase gene, and only the other putative bio genes showed high similarities to bio genes in closely related gram-negative bacteria. Observed similarities and identities for putative S. meliloti bio genes with corresponding genes derived from other microbes were significant but highly variable. The overall identities observed ranged from 73% for the putative bioZ to only

TABLE 1. Biological materials

| Strain or plasmid | Relevant characteristics | Source$^a$ or reference |
|------------------|-------------------------|------------------------|
| E. coli          |                         |                        |
| ATCC 33767       | K-12ΔH1 derivative carrying a deletion in the bio region, Δ(bio-uvrB) | ATCC                   |
| DH5α             | recA1ΔlacZ              | Gibco-BRL              |
| S17-1            | Modified RP4 plasmid integrated into genome | 31                     |
| R872             | E.coli bioF 3 mutant    | 3                      |
| R875             | E.coli bioB 17 mutant   | 3                      |
| R877             | E.coli bioD 19 mutant   | 3                      |
| R878             | E.coli bioC 18 mutant   | 3                      |
| R879             | E.coli bioA 24 mutant   | 3                      |
| BM7086           | E.coli bioH mutant Δ(mal-bioH) gal | 12                    |
| S. meliloti      |                         |                        |
| Rm1021           | S.meliloti 1021 parent strain, Sm$^r$ | 24                    |
| Rm1021-B3        | Rm1021 carrying Tn5-B30inY 00962, Tet$^r$Neo$^r$, requires biotin | 33                    |
| Rm1021-B6        | Rm1021 carrying aTn5-B30inY 00963, Tet$^r$Neo$^r$, requires biotin | 33                    |
| M. loti Göl     | Wild type               | This study             |
| Lactobacillus plantarum ATCC 8014 | Biotin auxotroph | DSMZ                  |
| Plasmids, cosmids, etc. |                         |                        |
| pBBR1MCS 2       | Broad-host-range cloning vector, Km$^r$ | 22                    |
| pBSK+            | pBluescript SK+ multicopy cloning vector, Amp$^r$ | Stratagene           |
| pBKS+            | pBluescript KS+ multicopy cloning vector, Amp$^r$ | Stratagene           |
| pHSG 399         | Low-copy-number cloning vector, Cm$^r$ | 11                    |
| pCosHE 2         | pWE 15 containing a 30-kb insert with bio genes from a microbial consortium | 9                      |
| pbioB-MLGöl     | M.loti Göl bioD in pBBR1MCS 2 under P tac in the EcoRV site | This study           |
| pbioBD-HE2-trp   | pCosHE 2 bioBD in pBBR1MCS 2 under control of Ptrp | This study           |
| pbioBD-HE2-nodD3 | pCosHE 2 bioBD in pBBR1MCS 2 under control of NodD 3 | This study           |
| pbioABC FD       | pBBR1MCS 2 carrying the pCosHE 2 bio operon as an EcoRI fragment | This study           |
| pY20277-Rm1021   | Rm1021 ORF Y 20277 in pBSK+ in lacZ direction of transcription | This study           |
| pY1426-Rm1021    | Rm1021 ORF Y 1426 possible bioC in pBSK+ in lacZ direction of transcription | This study           |
| pbioF-Rm1021b    | Rm1021 ORF Y 01565 in pHSG 399 in lacZ direction of transcription | This study           |
| ppcaD-Rm1021b    | Rm1021 ORF pcaD in pHSG 399 in lacZ direction of transcription | This study           |
| pfabH-Rm1021     | Rm1021 ORF fabH in pBKS+ in lacZ direction of transcription | This study           |
| Tn5-B30          | pSup 102 with transposable nptII promoter probe, Tet$^r$ | 32                    |

$^a$ ATCC, American Type Culture Collection; DSMZ, Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen and Zellkulturen.

15% for the possible bioC. Surprisingly, no bioD gene was found in BlastX and BlastP searches using homologues from a diverse range of other microbes, and only the ORF identified as possible bioB was organized in an operon (Fig. 2 and Table 2). Genetic and biochemical tests of putative ORFs established the functionality of several bio genes in S. meliloti (Table 2). When S. meliloti bioF was expressed under control of the tac promoter, it conferred growth on E.coli R 872. Unexpectedly, ORF Y 20277, which showed significant similarities to various bioA genes, did not restore growth in the E.coli bioA mutant, nor did other possible bio gene homologues of S. meliloti re- store growth of the corresponding E.coli bioH and bioC mutants (Table 2). In further tests, the parent strain Rm1021 was complemented with a complete bio operon by using a plasmid carrying bioABC FD, and this transconjugant grew as a clear biotin prototroph (data not shown). This observation suggests that Rm1021 carries a bioH homologue which is required for the synthesis of pimelyl coenzyme A (CoA). Because the ORF identified as a putative bioH in Rm1021 did not complement the corresponding E.coli mutant, it is possible that a different, as yet unidentified gene is involved in this early step in rhizobial biotin biosynthesis.

TABLE 2. S. meliloti strain 1021 ORFs with highest significant similarities to known bio genes and their tested function in E. coli and RM 1021 biotin biosynthesis$^a$

| S. meliloti ORF | Length (amino acids) | % Identity/% similarity/ E value$^b$ by Blast | Organism                | Putative function in S. meliloti biotin biosynthesis$^c$ | Functionality                                      |
|-----------------|----------------------|-----------------------------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| Y20277          | 447                  | 143/217/2e-54(430)                             | Bacillus sphaericus     | DAPA amino transferase, bioA                          | No complementation of E.coli R 879                  |
| Y00964          | 187                  | 63/84/2e-14(187)                               | Deinococcus radiodurans | Biotin synthase, bioY                                | Desthiobiotin utilization in Rm1021 but not in mutants B3 and B6 |
| Y01426          | 242                  | 38/53/9e-09(93)                                | Escherichia coli        | Synthesis of pimelyl-CoA, bioC                       | No complementation of E.coli R 878                  |
| Y01565          | 395                  | 136/219/4e-65(385)                             | Kurthia sp.             | KAPA synthase, bioF                                  | Complements E.coli R 872                           |
| pcaD            | 268                  | 76/117/3e-16(254)                              | Kurthia sp.             | Pimelyl-CoA synthesis, bioH                          | No complementation of E.coli BM 7086                |
| Y01812          | 415                  | 123/223/3e-48(404)                             | Bacillus subtilis       | Pimelic acid synthesis, bioI                         | Not tested                                          |
| fabH            | 323                  | 236/261/e-127(323)                             | Mesorhizobium loti      | 3-Oxoacyl-(acyl-carrier protein) synthase, bioZ      | No complementation of E.coli BM 7086                |

$^a$ bio genes were tested for complementation (Table 1) on agar and liquid M 9 medium.
$^b$ Numbers of amino acids used to determine percent identities and similarities are indicated in parentheses.
$^c$ DAPA, 7,8-diaminopelargic acid; KAPA, 7-keto-8-aminopelargic acid.

Two novel genes linked to *S. meliloti bioB*. Further analysis of the mutations in Rm1021-B3 and Rm102-B6 indicated their close relationship to *bioB*. Nucleotide sequencing showed that the transposon in Rm1021-B3 and Rm1021-B6 inserted immediately upstream of the *bioB* gene (Fig. 2) and interrupted two adjacent ORFs (Y00962 and Y00963), which are designated here *bioM* and *bioN*, respectively, because their mutation eliminates growth under biotin-limited conditions. Blast analyses suggest that *bioM* is similar to *cbiO*, an ATP-binding protein in an ABC transporter from *D. radiodurans*, but *bioN* shows no significant homology to known proteins or genes. Weak similarities (>0.001%) hint that *bioM* may also be part of an ABC transporter, and both *bioM* and *bioN* show weak relationships to cobalt transporters in other microbes (data not shown).

The failure of Rm1021-B3 and Rm1021-B6 to grow on desthiobiotin suggests that *bioB* is cotranscribed with the mutated genes *bioM* and *bioN*. This assumption was validated by demonstrating that *bioB* from *M. loti* Göl in the self-replicating pbioB-MLGöl stimulates growth of both Rm1021-B3 and Rm1021-B6 in the presence of exogenous desthiobiotin (data not shown). Additional growth studies, however, suggested that the lack of *bioB* in the original Rm1021-B3 and Rm1021-B6 mutants was only of minor importance for the observed growth phenotypes. This conclusion is based on the fact that Rm1021-B3/pbioB-MLGöl and Rm1021-B6/pbioB-MLGöl did not grow under biotin-limited conditions, while the parent strain grew under these conditions (data not shown).

The possibility that poor expression of the *M. loti bioB* in *S. meliloti* caused this problem was eliminated by fusing the heterologous *bioB* to different promoters, including *Ptrp* and *PnodD3*, which are expressed in *S. meliloti*. In those experiments, constructs in Rm1021-B3 and Rm1021-B6 containing *bioBD* controlled by either a *trp* or *nodD3* promoter did not restore growth under biotin-limited conditions (data not shown). These results with additional BioB protein in the cells support the conclusion that the growth phenotypes of Rm1021-B3 and Rm1021-B6 result primarily from the mutation in *bioM* and *bioN* rather than from any downstream effect on the cotranscribed copy of *bioB*.

The possible homology between *bioM* and genes involved in cobalt transport in other microbes encouraged us to test whether the mutation in Rm1021-B3 affects synthesis of the Co-containing vitamin B₁₂ or pathways directly requiring vitamin B₁₂, such as methionine synthesis. Supplementing cultures with vitamin B₁₂, additional cobalt, or methionine did not restore growth in Rm1021-B3 or Rm1021-B6 (data not shown). We conclude, therefore, that mutations affecting a cobalt transporter, vitamin B₁₂ synthesis, or a B₁₂-dependent metabolic activity are not responsible for the failure of these mutants to grow under biotin-limited conditions. Finally, no major influence on growth of the parent strain was observed in the defined medium when small amounts of B₁₂ or methionine were added.

BioM and BioN help retain cellular biotin. Because growth of wild-type *S. meliloti* is so responsive to exogenous biotin (33, 36) and because transcription of *bioM* and *bioN* showed weak similarities to that of ABC transporters (30), we hypothesized that BioM or BioN protein may be involved in biotin transport. Tests using [¹⁴C]biotin showed that initial transport of biotin

FIG. 2. Physical organization of the two functional *S. meliloti bioB* and *bioF* genes. (A) Physical organization of *bioM* and *bioN* in *S. meliloti*. The *bioB* gene, which codes for the final step in biotin synthesis (Fig. 1), is cotranscribed with *bioM* and *bioN*, which affect retention of biotin in the cell. ORF numbers were assigned by the *S. meliloti* genome sequencing project. ORF Y00960 shows similarities to TldD proteins; ORF Y00961 is similar to the *E. coli* YcaQ protein; ORF Y00965 is similar to bacterial long-chain fatty acid ligases; and ORF Y00965 is similar to acetyl-CoA acetyl transferases. (B) Physical organization of *bioF* in *S. meliloti*. The *bioF* gene is involved in condensation of pimelyl-CoA (Fig. 1). The *S. meliloti bioF* is flanked by genes involved in DNA recombination (*recQ*), a threonine dehydrogenase (*tdh*), and a *sigA/rpoD* gene.

Transconjugants of Rm1021 containing extra copies of *bioB* showed better growth in the presence of desthiobiotin than wild-type Rm1021 in the same medium (data not shown). Thus, *bioB* gene transcription or copy number limits biotin production in Rm1021 cells supplied with desthiobiotin. Interestingly, while exogenous desthiobiotin promoted growth of the Rm1021 parent, this compound had no effect on growth of either Rm1021-B3 or Rm1021-B6. The same mutants, however, showed excellent growth in the presence of desthiobiotin when extra copies of *bioB* were present (data not shown). These results clearly suggest that *bioB* is not transcribed in these two mutants. Altogether, the data obtained from Blast searches, complementation tests, and precursor feeding studies suggested that the *bioB*, *bioH*, and *bioF* genes and their products are functional in *S. meliloti*, but the data also suggested that biotin synthesis is limited in *S. meliloti* because several other key genes (*bioA*, *bioC*, and *bioD*) are absent or nonfunctional.

Data presented here add new details to the long-standing debate over biotin auxotrophy in rhizobia. Wilson and Wilson (38) purified medium components to remove biotin and then demonstrated slow growth in the absence of added biotin directly by viable-cell counts through 16 transfers for *S. meliloti* and 40 transfers for *Rhizobium leguminosarum* biovar *trifolii*. Watson and coworkers (36) purified medium components to remove biotin and then demonstrated no significant increase in the optical density of 27 *S. meliloti* strains under biotin-limited conditions. Both studies contributed other information, but the dominant point of each report was that biotin stimulated growth. We concur in that conclusion and offer evidence here that the problem for *S. meliloti* 1021 lies in the absence of sufficient BioA, BioC, and BioD activity. This conclusion differs in detail, but not in overall effect, from the suggestion that *S. meliloti* lacks the entire known biotin biosynthetic pathway (36).

FIG. 3. Biotin uptake by *S. meliloti* parent Rm1021 and mutant Rm1021-B3. Cells grown to late log phase were starved for 2 h and then supplied with \[^{14}C\]biotin. Data represent mean values of at least three measurements, and data were highly reproducible.

phenotype was partially corrected when a complete *bio* operon was expressed in RM1021-B3 or -B6 (data not shown) (33).

The discovery here of *bioM* and *bioN* offers preliminary insight into the molecular mechanisms associated with biotin transport. The significant similarity between BioM and proteins that are commonly found in ABC transporters (30) documents a genetic basis that complements our direct functional evidence from uptake experiments. The observed \(K_m\) for biotin transport in both Rm1021 and mutant Rm1021-B3 was approximately 2.2 nM biotin, which indicates a markedly higher affinity than the *E. coli* \(K_m\) of 140 nM for biotin (26). Such a high-affinity uptake system for biotin may offset the lack of a fully functional biotin biosynthesis pathway and help this organism persist in soil as a biotin auxotroph. No other genetic locus has been assigned to microbial biotin transport in any prokaryotic microorganism. Therefore, defining how these genes function and the other genes that contribute to sensing and using external biotin in *S. meliloti* remains a worthwhile future objective.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie and by DFG grant STR415-2-3 to W.R. Streit.

W.R.S. thanks W. Liebl for helpful discussions. We are grateful to N. Shaw (Lonza AG) for providing the DAPA.

REFERENCES

1. Bower, S., J. B. Perkins, R. R. Yocum, C. L. Howitt, P. Rahaim, and J. Pero. 1996. Cloning, sequencing, and characterization of the *Bacillus subtilis* biotin biosynthetic operon. J. Bacteriol. 178:4122–4130.
2. Broughton, W. J., and X. Perret. 1999. Genealogy of legume-*Rhizobium* symbioses. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 2:305–311.
3. Cleary, P. P., and A. Campbell. 1972. Deletion and complementation analysis of biotin gene cluster of *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. 112:830–839.
4. Dunn, M. F. 1998. Tricarboxylic acid cycle and anaplerotic enzymes in rhizobia. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 22:105–123.
5. Dunn, M. F., G. Araiza, M. A. Cevallos, and J. Mora. 1997. Regulation of pyruvate carboxylase in *Rhizobium etli*. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 157:301–306.
6. Eisenberg, M. A. 1985. Regulation of the biotin operon in *E. coli*. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 447:335–349.
7. Eisenberg, M. A., and C. Star. 1968. Synthesis of 7-oxo-8-aminopelargonic acid, a biotin vitamer, in cell-free extracts of *Escherichia coli* biotin auxotrophs. J. Bacteriol. 96:1291–1297.
8. Encarnacion, S., M. Dunn, K. Willms, and J. Mora. 1995. Fermentative and aerobic metabolism in *Rhizobium etli*. J. Bacteriol. 177:3058–3066.
9. Entcheva, P., W. Liebl, A. Johann, T. Hartsch, and W. R. Streit. 2001. Direct cloning from enrichment cultures, a reliable strategy for isolation of complete operons and genes from microbial consortia. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67:89–99.
10. Galibert, F., T. M. Finan, S. R. Long, A. Puhler, P. Abola, F. Ampe, F.

Barloy-Hubler, M. J. Barnett, A. Becker, P. Boistard, G. Bothe, M. Boutry, L. Bowser, J. Buhrmester, E. Cadieu, D. Capela, P. Chain, A. Cowie, R. W. Davis, S. Dreano, N. A. Federspiel, R. F. Fisher, S. Gloux, T. Godrie, A. Goffeau, B. Golding, J. Gouzy, M. Gurjal, I. Hernandez-Lucas, A. Hong, L. Huizar, R. W. Hyman, T. Jones, D. Kahn, M. L. Kahn, S. Kalman, D. H. Keating, E. Kiss, C. Komp, V. Lelaure, D. Masuy, C. Palm, M. C. Peck, T. M. Pohl, D. Portetelle, B. Purnelle, U. Ramsperger, R. Surzycki, P. Thebault, M. Vandenbol, F. J. Vorholter, S. Weidner, D. H. Wells, K. Wong, K. C. Yeh, and J. Batut. 2001. The composite genome of the legume symbiont Sinorhizobium meliloti. Science 293:668–672.

11. Hashimoto-Gotoh, T., A. Kume, W. Masahashi, S. Takeshita, and A. Fukuda. 1986. Improved vector, pHSG664, for direct streptomycin-resistance selection: cDNA cloning with G:C-tailing procedure and subcloning of double-digest DNA fragments. Gene 41:125–128.

12. Hatfield, D., M. Hofnung, and M. Schwartz. 1969. Genetic analysis of the maltose A region in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol. 98:559–567.

13. Heinz, E. B., D. A. Phillips, and W. R. Streit. 1999. BioS, a biotin-induced, stationary-phase, and possible LysR-type regulator in Sinorhizobium meliloti. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 12:803–812.

14. Hofmann, K., E. B. Heinz, T. C. Charles, M. Hoppert, W. Liebl, and W. R. Streit. 2000. Sinorhizobium meliloti strain 1021 bioS and bdhA gene transcriptions are both affected by biotin available in defined medium. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 182:41–44.

15. Ifuku, O., S. Haze, J. Kishimoto, and M. Yanagi. 1992. Biotin production by using recombinant DNA technology. J. Nutr. Sci. Vitaminol. (Tokyo) Special issue, p. 263–266.

16. Ifuku, O., J. Kishimoto, S. Haze, M. Yanagi, and S. Fukushima. 1992. Conversion of dethiobiotin to biotin in cell-free extracts of Escherichia coli. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 56:1780–1785.

17. Kaminski, P. A., J. Batut, and P. Boistard. 1998. A survey of symbiotic nitrogen fixation by rhizobia, p. 431–460. In H. P. Spaink, A. Kondorosi, and P. J. J. Hooykaas (ed.), The Rhizobiaceae. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.

18. Kaneko, T., Y. Nakamura, S. Sato, E. Asamizu, T. Kato, S. Sasamoto, A. Watanabe, K. Idesawa, A. Ishikawa, K. Kawashima, T. Kimura, Y. Kishida, C. Kiyokawa, M. Kohara, M. Matsumoto, A. Matsuno, Y. Mochizuki, S. Nakayama, N. Nakazaki, S. Shimpo, M. Sugimoto, C. Takeuchi, M. Yamada, and S. Tabata. 2000. Complete genome structure of the nitrogen-fixing symbiotic bacterium Mesorhizobium loti. DNA Res. 7:331–338.

19. Kaneko, T., Y. Nakamura, S. Sato, E. Asamizu, T. Kato, S. Sasamoto, A. Watanabe, K. Idesawa, A. Ishikawa, K. Kawashima, T. Kimura, Y. Kishida, C. Kiyokawa, M. Kohara, M. Matsumoto, A. Matsuno, Y. Mochizuki, S. Nakayama, N. Nakazaki, S. Shimpo, M. Sugimoto, C. Takeuchi, M. Yamada, and S. Tabata. 2000. Complete genome structure of the nitrogen-fixing symbiotic bacterium Mesorhizobium loti (supplement). DNA Res. 7:381–406.

20. Kiss, G. B., E. Vincze, Z. Kalman, T. Forrai, and A. Kondorosi. 1979. Genetic and biochemical analysis of mutants affected in nitrate reduction in Rhizobium meliloti. J. Gen. Microbiol. 113:105–118.

21. Kiyasu, T., Y. Nagahashi, and T. Hoshino. 2001. Cloning and characterization of biotin biosynthetic genes of Kurthia sp. Gene 265:103–113.

22. Kovach, M. E., P. H. Elzer, D. S. Hill, G. T. Robertson, M. A. Farris, R. M. Roop II, and K. M. Peterson. 1995. Four new derivatives of the broad-host-range cloning vector pBBR1MCS, carrying different antibiotic-resistance cassettes. Gene 166:175–176.

23. Marquet, A., B. T. Bui, and D. Florentin. 2001. Biosynthesis of biotin and lipoic acid. Vitam. Horm. 61:51–101.

24. Meade, H. M., S. R. Long, G. B. Ruvkun, S. E. Brown, and F. M. Ausubel. 1982. Physical and genetic characterization of symbiotic and auxotrophic mutants of Rhizobium meliloti induced by transposon Tn5 mutagenesis. J. Bacteriol. 149:114–122.

25. Oke, V., and S. R. Long. 1999. Bacteroid formation in the Rhizobium-legume symbiosis. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2:641–646.

26. Prakash, O., and M. A. Eisenberg. 1978. In vitro synthesis and regulation of the biotin enzymes of Escherichia coli K-12. J. Bacteriol. 134:1002–1012.

27. Rovira, A. D., and J. R. Harris. 1961. Plant root excretions in relation to the rhizosphere effect. V. The exudation B-group vitamins. Plant Soil 14:199–214.

28. Sakurai, N., H. Akatsuka, E. Kawai, Y. Imai, and S. Komatsubara. 1996. Complete sequence and organization of the Serratia marcescens biotin operon. Microbiology 142:3295–3303.

29. Sambrook, J., E. F. Fritsch, and T. Maniatis. 1989. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

30. Schneider, E., and S. Hunke. 1998. ATP-binding-cassette (ABC) transport systems: functional and structural aspects of the ATP-hydrolyzing subunits/domains. FEMS Microbiol Rev 22:1–20.

31. Simon, R., U. Priefer, and A. Pühler. 1983. A broad host range mobilization system for in vivo genetic engineering: transposon mutagenesis in gram-negative bacteria. Bio/Technology 1:784–791.

32. Simon, R., J. Quandt, and W. Klipp. 1989. New derivatives of transposon Tn5 suitable for mobilization of replicons, generation of operon fusions and induction of genes in gram-negative bacteria. Gene 80:161–169.

33. Streit, W. R., C. M. Joseph, and D. A. Phillips. 1996. Biotin and other water-soluble vitamins are key growth factors for alfalfa root colonization by Rhizobium meliloti 1021. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 9:330–338.

34. Streit, W. R., and D. A. Phillips. 1997. A biotin-regulated locus, bioS, in a possible survival operon of Rhizobium meliloti. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 10:933–937.

35. Sullivan, J. T., S. D. Brown, R. R. Yocum, and C. W. Ronson. 2001. The bio operon on the acquired symbiosis island of Mesorhizobium sp. strain R7A includes a novel gene involved in pimelyl-CoA synthesis. Microbiology 147:1315–1322.

36. Watson, R. J., R. Heys, T. Martin, and M. Savard. 2001. Sinorhizobium meliloti cells require biotin and either cobalt or methionine for growth. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67:3767–3770.

37. West, P. M., and W. P. Wilson. 1939. Growth factor requirements of the root nodule bacteria. J. Bacteriol. 37:161–185.

38. Wilson, J. B., and W. P. Wilson. 1942. Biotin as a growth factor for rhizobia. J. Bacteriol. 43:329–341.
