
Annals of Biomedical Engineering, Vol. 30, pp. 356–370, 2002  
Printed in the USA. All rights reserved.

**Signaling in the Motility Responses of the Human Neutrophil**

DONCHO V. ZHELEV${}^{1}$ and ABDULLATIF ALTERAIFI${}^{2}$

${}^{1}$Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Duke University, Durham, NC and ${}^{2}$Department of Mechanical Engineering, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates

(Received 19 October 2000; accepted 14 March 2002)

Abstract—The neutrophil has developed into one of the most efficient vertebrate motile cells. It migrates through tissues, where it encounters multiple chemoattractant signals with complex spatial and temporal characteristics. The directional movement of the neutrophil is signaled by the binding of chemoattractants and chemokines to G-protein-coupled receptors expressed on the plasma membrane. The signals from the ligand-bound receptors are transmitted along signaling pathways and initiate various cell responses, such as motility, superoxide production, and secretion. The signaling of the motility responses finds its climax in the polymerization of F-actin, which results in lamella formation and overall rearrangement of the cellular cytoskeleton and cell crawling. Also, during motility, adhesion receptors attach to and detach from their ligands and provide the necessary traction for crawling. These events are highly synchronized and allow the cell to orient in shallow chemoattractant gradients even when more than one chemoattractants are present. Due to the complexity of the motility responses, the signaling of their regulation is still not well understood. Recent advances in the understanding of the mechanism of F-actin polymerization have shown that the small GTPases Cdc42, Rac2, and RhoA, play a critical role in motility. The bound integrin receptors may also contribute to the signaling of motility via tyrosine kinase phosphorylation of guanine nucleotide exchange factors and other regulatory proteins. In this review, we discuss the signaling of neutrophil motility in relation to the response of the cell to chemoattractant activation. © 2002 Biomedical Engineering Society. [DOI: 10.1114/1.1477446]

Keywords—Neutrophil, Motility, Signaling.

INTRODUCTION

Neutrophils protect our bodies from more than 90% of the pathogens that we encounter every day. This continuous quest of the neutrophil to inactivate pathogens has led to its denotation as a “professional” killing machine. The cell senses the presence of pathogens, moves toward the sites of acute inflammation in a process called chemotaxis, and destroys the pathogens by either phagocytosis or release of peroxide products and/or proteolytic enzymes. Not surprisingly, the neutrophil is one of the fastest crawling cells. Its rate of crawling is on the order of 10 μm/min, which is five to ten times faster than the rate of crawling of keratocytes and macrophages, and almost 50 times faster than the rate of crawling of fibroblasts. ${}^{183}$ The crawling of the neutrophil shows some fundamental similarities with the crawling of other vertebrate motile cells, such as fibroblasts and microphages. In all cases, the crawling cell protrudes surface filopodia and microspikes. The filopodia support thin veils of membrane protected cytoplasm, called lamellipodia. The lamellipodia are filled with actin filaments coupled with myosin II and numerous structural and regulatory proteins forming a meshwork. It is now widely accepted that the actin-myosin meshwork is the “engine” of neutrophil motility. ${}^{101}$ This locomotory “engine” works against the cell-to-substratum adhesion facilitated by adhesion receptors members of the integrin family. ${}^{66,93,137}$ The synchronization of lamellipodia extension with adhesion to substratum and cell body contraction results in cell movement or crawling. During crawling the cell encounters a complex chemical environment, where it is capable of detecting shallow gradients in chemoattractant concentration (in many cases less than 1% concentration difference across the cell length). ${}^{182}$ The ability of the neutrophil to detect small concentration gradients allows it to “navigate” through tissue and to the sites of inflammation. The “navigation” process is controlled by chemoattractant receptors, members of the G-protein-coupled receptor superfamily, ${}^{12,106,128}$ which bind to chemoattractants produced by the invading bacteria and/or chemokines produced by the cells from the injured tissue. The control of motility by the chemoattractant receptors is mediated by a variety of signaling processes that involve a variety of molecules grouped in signaling pathways. In addition to the signaling from the activated chemoattractant receptors, the motility of the neutrophil is affected by the signaling from the bound adhesion receptors. The precise mechanism of coupling of the signals from the different membrane receptors and the processes controlling the rearrangement of the cytoskeleton are not well understood. Recently, many of the components involved in the signaling of motility

Address correspondence to Doncho V. Zhelev, Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708-0300. Electronic mail: dvzh@duke.edu

Signaling in Motility Responses

FIGURE 1. Signaling of actin dynamics via PI3K activation starts with the binding of chemoattractant receptors to their ligands. The binding of the receptors triggers the release of the GβGγ subunit of the receptor associated G protein. The released GβGγ activates phospholipase C-β (PLC-β), phosphoinositide 3-kinase-γ (PI3Kγ) and adenylyl cyclase (AC). PLC-β and AC are not directly involved in the signaling of motility, however, they may modulate the motility responses through PKC and PKA activation. PI3Kγ is a major signaling molecule in motility. It produces PIP₃, which has multiple targets among the pleckstrin homology (PH) domains proteins, such as the WASp family proteins WASp and WAVE, and the guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), such as the Vav family of proteins. PH domain proteins also bind PIP₂, which modulates their activation by PIP₃. The activated GEFs activate the GTPases Cdc42 and Rac2. Cdc42 forms a complex with WASp, PIP₂, profilin, and Arp2/3 and initiates the nucleation of free barbed ends for actin polymerization. Similarly, Rac2 binds WAVE, profilin, and Arp2/3 and generates free barbed ends for polymerization. The polymerization of F-actin is coupled with actin disassembly, which is also controlled by Cdc42 and Rac2 via Pak 1 and downstream by LIM kinase and ADF/cofilin. The efficiency of cofilin to disassemble F-actin filaments is modulated by PIP₂ and profilin. Actin disassembly is signaled also by the GTPase RhoA, which in the human neutrophil modulates integrin detachment via ROCK. RhoA and Rac2 activate PI(4)P 5-kinase, which produces PIP₂. The activation of chemoattractant receptors also primes the adhesion receptors to bind to their ligands and provide traction for crawling. The distant signaling of integrin priming by the chemoattractant receptors may depend on PKC, however, this signaling is unclear. Priming of the integrins is directly dependent on the phosphorylation of L-plastin by PKA. The bound adhesion receptors may contribute to the overall neutrophil activation by inducing the phosphorylation of guanine nucleotide exchange factors such as Vav, by tyrosine kinase. There are still signaling relations that are unclear. These include the activation of Cdc42 by PI3Kγ and the signaling of ζ PKC activation.

responses, such as actin polymerization, adhesion receptors priming, and adhesion receptor detachment, have been identified. In this paper we discuss different aspects of the signaling of motility and the coupling between the different signaling pathways in an attempt to build a unified model of signaling of motility (Fig. 1).

## SENSING CHEMOATRACTANT STIMULI

The passive neutrophil is round and uniform. It behaves as a Newtonian liquid droplet when deformed into a pipet due to the contraction of the membrane bound F-actin cortex. Immediately after the exposure of the cell to a gradient of chemoattractant its shape changes in a process called polarization. The polarized cell has well-defined leading lamella, which extends toward the direction of increasing chemoattractant concentration, and a trailing “tail” called uropod, extending in the opposite direction. After polarization the neutrophil starts to crawl. The crawling cell continuously creates new extensions at the leading edge of the lamella region, while the main cell body remains adherent to the supporting substrate. The crawling of the cell is coupled with body contraction, which prevents the cell from being overextended along its crawling path. The maintenance of the spatial and functional asymmetry of the polarized cell is essential for motility. Interestingly, the polarity of the cell is maintained even when it changes direction, which is a common behavior when it follows moving bacteria. The persistence of polarity during motility has led to the conclusion that the cell senses the spatial distribution of chemoattractant in its surroundings.

Most importantly, it appears that the sensitivity of the leading lamella is enhanced compared to the rest of the cell body. This allows the cell to respond to extremely small (on the order of 1%) changes of chemoattractant concentration along its body. ${ }^{85}$ One possible mechanism of amplification of the stimulating signal is the change of receptor distribution after polarization and the recruitment of additional receptors to the leading lamella. Another possibility is the increase of the binding affinity/avidity of the receptors in the leading lamella relative to the rest of the cell. These possibilities have been tested for several chemoattractant receptors.

The early experiments of determining the distribution of chemoattractant receptors after neutrophil polarization use fluorescently labeled receptor ligands. Sullivan *et al.* observe that the concentration of N-formyl peptide receptors is the largest in the middle of the polarized cell. A smaller receptor density is found at the leading lamellae, and almost no receptors are found in the uropod region. ${ }^{144}$ Walter and Marasco ${ }^{162}$ identify two types of N-formyl peptide receptors, one with high affinity of binding to ligands and another with relatively low affinity of binding. The receptors with high affinity are found mostly close to the leading lamellae, while the low affinity receptors are found close to the uropod. ${ }^{162}$ Others report increased N-formyl peptide receptor density at the leading lamella of the polarized neutrophil. ${ }^{89,96,127}$ Overall, these data show that both the density and affinity of the N-formyl peptide receptor are increased in the lamella region relative to the rest of the cell. However, the same measurements for the other types of chemoattractant receptors, such as the receptors for C5a and IL-8, ${ }^{50}$ show that receptor distribution does not change after polarization. ${ }^{50}$ To add to the complexity of this phenomenon, different receptors show different local aggregation properties. For example, C5a and IL-8 appear in clusters both in activated and nonactivated cells, ${ }^{50}$ while the N-formyl receptors are commonly not clustered, and cluster only for some ligands when the temperature is equal to $14^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ or below. ${ }^{71}$ A recent study of the distribution of the C5a receptor using green fluorescent protein (GFP-C5a), confirms the earlier finding that the C5a receptors remain randomly distributed during polarization and crawling. ${ }^{131}$ Similarly, the receptors of other white blood cells such as the T lymphocyte, could be either redistributed after activation or remain randomly distributed during polarization and motility. ${ }^{107}$ Overall, these results show that the signal amplification in motility is unlikely to be based solely on receptor redistribution and/or aggregation. Therefore, the mechanism of amplification must occur downstream from the ligand-bound receptors. Two recent studies ${ }^{70,130}$ suggest that the amplification of chemoattractant activation may involve G-protein clustering ${ }^{70}$ or intracellular gradients of signaling molecules, such as Akt/PKB. ${ }^{130}$ However,

there is no conclusive evidence that this is the mechanism of signal amplification used by the motile cells.

Ultimately, the binding of chemoattractants to their receptors is the first event of neutrophil activation. The chemoattractant receptors are G-protein-coupled seven-transmembrane-domain receptors. ${ }^{34}$ They are divided into five groups, which correspond to the identified groups of chemoattractants stimulating neutrophil activation. These groups include: the N-formyl (fMLP) peptides derived from bacterial proteins, platelet-activating factor (PAF) produced by activated platelets, leukotriene B4 (LTB4) obtained from the metabolism of arachidonic acid by the myeloid cells, the complement factor C5a anaphylotoxin obtained after cleavage of the complement protein C5, and the chemokines, a family of proteins with conserved cysteines linked by disulfide bonds and produced by the cells of different tissues. The classical view of the activation mediated by these receptors requires a physical association of the receptor and a subunit of the G protein. Such physical association has been demonstrated for the IL-8 receptor. ${ }^{31}$

G proteins are trimeric molecules ($Ga\beta\gamma$), with three subunits—$\alpha$, $\beta$, and $\gamma$. The $\alpha$ subunit ($Ga_{i}$) is bound to GDP. Upon activation the $Ga_{i}$ subunit binds to the receptor by interacting with its intracellular loops ${ }^{8}$ and GDP is exchanged for GTP. This results in a release of the $G\beta\gamma$ subunit. The released $G\beta\gamma$ activates two major signaling molecules: phospholipase C (PLC) and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), which metabolize phosphatidylinositol 4,5-biphosphate (PIP $_{2}$). The human neutrophil contains PLC-$\beta 1-\beta 2$ and $\beta 3,{ }^{74,134}$ which upon activation hydrolyzes PIP $_{2}$ and generates inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP $_{3}$) and diacylglycerol (DAG). ${ }^{86,105}$ IP $_{3}$ mobilizes $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ from the intracellular stores, which is observed as calcium transients, while DAG activates different isoforms of protein kinase C (PKC) and other protein kinases, which catalyze protein phosphorylation and activate other not well-characterized signaling events. ${ }^{4,97,105}$ PI3K in the human neutrophil is represented by phosphoinositide 3-kinase-$\gamma$ (PI3K $\gamma$), which after activation uses PIP $_{2}$ to produce phosphatidylinositol triphosphate (PIP $_{3}$). ${ }^{65,86}$ This pathway does not trigger the release of intracellular $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$. ${ }^{86}$ Studies using PLC-$\beta 2$, -$\beta 3$, and PI3K $\gamma$ deficient mice, ${ }^{86}$ show that PI3K activation is responsible for $70 \%$ of the motility response of the neutrophil, while the motility of the neutrophil is independent of PLC-$\beta$. Finally, there is another pathway of activation, where the released $G\beta\gamma$ triggers the activation of adenyl cyclase (AC) and the production of cAMP. This pathway is receptor specific, which is demonstrated by the increase of the intracellular cAMP when the cell is activated by fMLP, C5a and IL-8, but not when the cell is activated by PAF. ${ }^{4}$ The released cAMP activates protein kinase A (PKA) and other cAMP-sensitive kinases. The overall result of these signaling events

is the activation of the neutrophil, which includes F-actin polymerization, adhesion receptor priming, cell crawling, and production of superoxide anions and release of proteolytic enzymes. Since the motility responses of the neutrophil are intimately related to actin dynamics, we will focus our discussion on the signaling of F-actin assembly and disassembly.

# ACTIN DYNAMICS

The actin dynamics involves the transformation of the soluble form of actin called G-actin into filamentous actin called F-actin and vice versa. Most of the actin in the passive neutrophil (about 70%) is G-actin, while the rest is F-actin. Upon activation, the total amount of polymerized F-actin almost doubles. The conversion of G-actin into F-actin is related to cell polarization and lamella formation. Evidence for this relationship is found in the dynamics of formation of F-actin structures. New actin filaments start to form a few seconds after the initial exposure of the cell to chemoattractant and 10–15 s later a lamella region filled with new F-actin filaments is formed. The F-actin filaments in the lamella region are shorter and depolymerize faster compared to the F-actin in the rest of the cell. Also, the F-actin of activated cells contains a large pool of F-actin soluble in strong surfactants, while this pool is small for the passive cell. These observations suggest that after neutrophil activation, new F-actin filaments are formed in the lamella region, which undergo fast actin turnover. The fast turnover of actin in the lamella region is essential for motility because it allows the cell to change shape and direction of crawling fast enough to follow the moving bacteria.

The turnover of actin between G-actin and F-actin is highly regulated by sequestering, capping, severing, and nucleating proteins. The actin in the G-actin is bound to either ATP or ADP. Since the amount of ATP in the cells is about ten times larger than that of ADP, most of the monomer actin is considered bound to ATP. The ATP-actin is sequestered by either profilin or thymosin-β4. This results in almost 100% sequestration of the G-actin in the passive neutrophil. The sequestration of actin allows the cell to contain more than two orders of magnitude higher concentrations of soluble actin than the critical concentration for spontaneous polymerization. The G-actin in the human neutrophil is almost exclusively sequestered by thymosin-β4, however, the smaller pool of G-actin sequestered by profilin is essential for the formation of new F-actin filaments. The F-actin filaments have two distinct sites, called barbed end and pointed end, where new actin monomers are added. The rate of polymerization at the barbed end is almost ten times faster than the same rate for the pointed end, which suggests that the addition

of actin monomers occurs preferentially at the filament's barbed end. The capping proteins, gelsolin, capping protein-beta2, cap Z, and fragmin, prevent the spontaneous addition of actin to the already formed F-actin filaments. Thus, the rate-limiting factor for F-actin polymerization is either the rate of uncapping of the existing barbed ends, or the formation of new barbed ends. New barbed ends are formed either after severing of existing filaments by coflin or gelsolin, or after the nucleation of new barbed ends. The comparison of the half time of dissociation of the capping proteins (on the order of 30 min), with the rate of cytoskeleton rearrangement after activation (on the order of seconds), shows that the spontaneous uncapping of the barbed ends is unlikely to be a factor in F-actin dynamics. The presence of a large number of new F-actin filaments in the lamella region immediately after activation, suggests that actin dynamics in the activated cell is highly regulated and involves formation of new barbed ends, uncapping of existing barbed ends, and severing of actin filaments.

## CONTROL OF ACTIN DYNAMICS BY GTPASES

The Rho GTPases: Cdc42, RhoA, and Rac are major regulators of actin dynamics (Fig. 1). In fibroblasts, the activation of Cdc42 stimulates the formation of actin-rich filopodia, the activation of RhoA induces the formation of stress fibers, and the activation of Rac stimulates the formation of lamellipodia and membrane ruffles. Similar F-actin structures are formed after injecting murine macrophages with constitutively active V12Cdc42, V12Rac1, and V14RhoA, which demonstrates the direct involvement of the GTPases in actin polymerization. The activation of the GTPases with GTPγS induces F-actin polymerization in cell-free systems via the formation of new barbed ends, which shows that the GTPases are intimately involved in F-actin nucleation.

The activation of Cdc42 affects critically monocyte chemotaxis. Similarly, the formation of new F-actin filaments in neutrophil extracts is critically dependent on Cdc42 activation with GTPγS. This suggests that Cdc42 activation is involved in the signaling of F-actin polymerization. However, the activation of Cdc42 alone is not enough for actin polymerization. This shows that there are downstream effectors of Cdc42, which are crucial for F-actin formation, but require also a secondary signal for activation by Cdc42. The motility of neutrophils and macrophages is significantly impaired in patients with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Thus, the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASp) is also involved in the signaling of actin polymerization. WASp is downstream of Cdc42 and is one of its major effectors, which is involved in the control of the nucleation of new barbed ends. In the resting cell WASp is in autoinhibited conformation and does not stimulate F-actin

360 D. V. ZHELEV and A. ALTERAIFI

polymerization. ${ }^{98,114,121}$ Upon activation it binds the protein complex Arp2/3 and forms branched F-actin filaments (dendrites). ${ }^{104}$ Arp2/3 is involved in both, the formation of new branches of F-actin filaments with free barbed ends and the protection of the newly formed barbed ends from the capping proteins. ${ }^{148}$ Apparently, WASp is activated by either Cdc42 or PIP $_{2}$, which together with Arp2/3 have distinct binding sites on the WASp molecule. ${ }^{117,121,152}$ The detailed characterization of the activation of WASp by Cdc42 and PIP $_{2}$ shows that WASp can be activated by PIP $_{2}$ alone, ${ }^{64,69}$ however, Cdc42 cannot activate WASp in the absence of PIP $_{2}$. ${ }^{64}$ When both PIP $_{2}$ and Cdc42 are present the activity of WASp is almost doubled. ${ }^{64,121}$ This shows that the phosphoinositide PIP $_{2}$ is the secondary signal for the activation of WASp by Cdc42. Similar synergy in the action of PIP $_{2}$ and Cdc42 in the signaling of actin polymerization is found in permeabilized neutrophils, ${ }^{47}$ where the increase of PIP $_{2}$ concentration stimulates F-actin polymerization but the presence of the dominant negative Cdc42 (N17-Cdc42) inhibits the effect of PIP $_{2}$. ${ }^{47}$ WASp has also a binding site for profilin, ${ }^{150}$ which suggests that profilin may be involved in the modulation of F-actin polymerization signaled by WASp. Profilin facilitates the exchange of ADP/ATP and increases the overall rate of F-actin formation facilitated by Cdc42 WASp, ${ }^{143}$ most probably by providing actin monomers for polymerization. There is an alternative pathway for the activation of the neural WASP (N-WASP) by WISH, which is independent of Cdc42. ${ }^{46}$ However, the existence of this pathway in the human neutrophil has not been confirmed. Interestingly, F-actin polymerization in permeabilized neutrophils is also stimulated by the addition of PIP $_{3}$. ${ }^{47}$ PIP $_{3}$ is produced by PI3K $\gamma$ from PIP $_{2}$ and does not bind to either WASp or Cdc42. ${ }^{100}$ This suggests that the effectors of PIP $_{3}$ are either upstream of Cdc42 and WASp or that there is an alternative pathway of F-actin polymerization. One such alternative pathway is the Rac2-dependent actin polymerization discussed below, which is PIP $_{3}$ dependent. The role of Cdc42 in the signaling of actin dynamics is dual. It is involved in both, the actin assembly discussed above, and in the modulation of F-actin disassembly. The role of Cdc42 in actin disassembly is mediated by Pak1, which activates LIM kinase. ${ }^{38}$ LIM kinase is involved in phosphorylation and inactivation of the actin depolymerizing factor cofillin (ADF/cofilin), which disassembles actin filaments. ${ }^{24,94,109,146}$

Rac2 is the other GTPase involved in the signaling of F-actin dynamics ${ }^{52}$ (Fig. 1). Its importance for the motility of the neutrophil is demonstrated by the finding that neutrophils from a patient having a rare Rac2 immunodeficiency show significantly impaired motility. ${ }^{7,171}$ Similarly, the motility response of neutrophils from patients receiving treatment for the Kostmann syndrome is decreased and this decrease is coupled with lower expression of Rac2. ${ }^{75}$ Studies using Rac2 deficient mice models confirm that Rac is a key molecule in motility. ${ }^{120}$ This is also confirmed on cultured cells, where the expression of constitutively active Rac induces F-actin polymerization. ${ }^{5,158}$ Overall, these results show that Rac provides alternative signaling pathway for F-actin polymerization to the pathway controlled by Cdc42. Rac activation is dependent on PI3K activation, ${ }^{11,91}$ which suggests that the Rac signaling of F-actin polymerization is most probably one of the major pathways of actin assembly utilized by chemoattractant receptors. The dependence of Rac activity on PI3K has been demonstrated in the cell-free system by using GTP $\gamma S$ loaded $G i \alpha_{2}$ and $G \beta_{1} \gamma_{2},{ }^{9}$ and in the human neutrophil, where the activation of Rac2 by fMLP and LTB $_{4}$ is PI3K dependent. ${ }^{1}$ The effector of Rac for F-actin polymerization is WAVE, which is from the WASp family proteins. ${ }^{99,150}$ Similar to WASp, WAVE binds Arp2/3 and profilin, and promotes the formation of free-barbed ends. ${ }^{142}$ The activity of the Rac–WAVE complex ${ }^{150}$ is dependent on the Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factors Vav and Sos1. ${ }^{32}$ Vav is activated by PIP $_{3},{ }^{53,100}$ which most probably provides the link between PI3K activation and Rac activation. Vav also binds PIP $_{2}$, which results in Vav inactivation. ${ }^{53}$ Rac promotes the formation of free barbed ends in two ways; by binding to WAVE and stimulating the formation of new barbed ends as described above and by inducing the dissociation of the capping protein gelsolin from the actin filaments. ${ }^{9}$ Similar to Cdc42, Rac activates Pak1, ${ }^{38}$ and via LIM kinase and cofilin regulates actin disassembly.

The role of the third GTPase involved in signaling of motility—RhoA, is to initiate stress fiber formation ${ }^{52}$ (Fig. 1). This function of RhoA is confirmed for fibroblast ${ }^{52}$ and murine macrophages, ${ }^{5}$ however, the human neutrophil does not form stress fibers. One of the major roles of RhoA in the motility of hematopoietic cells is the regulation of cell detachment. ${ }^{2,175}$ Blocking RhoA activity in the human neutrophil by the C3-exoenzyme results in failure of the cell to detach from the substrate and leads to the formation of undetached “tail.” ${ }^{2}$ Similar behavior is observed for T cells where the inhibition of either RhoA or the RhoA effector Rho kinase (ROCK) abolishes integrin detachment. ${ }^{175}$ The inhibition of either RhoA or ROCK also affects $\beta 2$ integrin distribution in the adhesion region. During the crawling of untreated cells the highest concentration of $\beta 2$ integrins is observed at the leading lamella, while the highest concentration of $\beta 2$ integrins for cells with inhibited RhoA or ROCK, is observed in the “tail” region. ${ }^{175}$ These data demonstrate that RhoA signals integrin detachment via ROCK. ${ }^{2,175}$ ROCK is also known to phosphorylate LIM kinase 1 and 2, ${ }^{112,145}$ which places RhoA together with Cdc42 and Rac as major regulator of

F-actin disassembly via LIM kinase activation and ADF/cofilin phosphorylation.

The activation of Cdc42, Rac, and RhoA after receptor ligation is not well understood. GTPases cycle between active GTP-bound and inactive GDP-bound states depending on their regulation by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), GTPase activating proteins (GAPs), and guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitors (GDIs).<sup>129</sup> The GEFs for Rac are Vav, Sos-1, and Tiam-1,<sup>129</sup> while the GEFs for Cdc42 and RhoA are unknown. From the Vav family, which includes Vav 1, 2, and 3, Vav 1 is the most studied GEF. It contains multiple protein domains that can bind to a variety of receptors or receptor-associated signaling molecules.<sup>15</sup> Commonly, it is activated by two signals present in motility: the activation of PI3K and the production of PIP₃, and the tyrosine kinase phosphorylation,<sup>15</sup> and most probably provides means for crossover of the two signaling pathways.

### ROLE OF ADF/COFIN LIN PROTEINS AND PROFILIN

As we mentioned already the sequestering, capping, severing, and nucleating proteins regulate cytoskeleton organization, however, some of these proteins, such as ADF/cofilin and profilin, are also involved in the signaling of actin dynamics. The dephosphorylated form of the proteins from the ADF/cofilin family intensively severs F-actin filaments.<sup>10,24</sup> In the resting neutrophil, cofilin is phosphorylated. About 1 min after activation with chemoattractants almost all cofilin in the cell becomes dephosphorylated and starts to disassemble the present F-actin filaments.<sup>113</sup> The ability of cofilin to enhance actin disassembly is increased by the presence of profilin.<sup>35</sup> Profilin also enhances actin polymerization in neutrophil extracts,<sup>177</sup> which seems to contradict its effect on cofilin-mediated actin disassembly. The mechanism by which cofilin and profilin are involved in F-actin polymerization is still unclear. Cofilin binds to the side of actin filaments with high affinity and increases the twist of the F-actin filament. This binding is coupled with both fast actin depolymerization from the pointed end<sup>19</sup> and severing of the filaments.<sup>92</sup> Cofilin binds with much higher affinity to ADP-actin than it does to ATP-actin,<sup>19</sup> which suggests that after the disassembly, cofilin remains attached to the dissociated ADP-actin. Profilin, a nucleotide exchange factor,<sup>173</sup> which recovers the cofilin-bound ADP-actin, converts it into profilin-bound ATP-actin.<sup>13</sup> During this process, cofilin is converted from an ADP-actin-bound state to a free state, when it can bind to and sever other F-actin filaments. The recovery of the ADP-actin by profilin apparently increases the “turnover” of cofilin, which results in an increase of the overall rate of actin disassembly. In addition to the increase of the cofilin-mediated F-actin disassembly, profilin binds to WASp and WAVE and increases the rate of recruitment of actin monomers for barbed-end nucleation.<sup>143,150</sup> This explains the role of profilin in enhancing Cdc42-mediated F-actin polymerization in neutrophil extracts.<sup>177</sup>

### ROLE OF PHOSPHOINOSITIDES

We mentioned in the previous discussion that PIP₂ and PIP₃ are involved in the modulation of GTPase activation.<sup>149</sup> The concentration of these lipids in the cell increases a few seconds after exposure to chemoattractants, which suggests that they are involved in the early stages of activation (Fig. 1). Most importantly, at least one of these phosphoinositides—PIP₃—has been implicated for its involvement in the signaling of cell polarization and chemotaxis (directional crawling). The role of PIP₃ in cell polarization is derived from the role of PI3K in this process. The role of PI3K in the signaling of chemotaxis has been controversial. The inhibition of PI3K with wortmannin in the human neutrophil abolishes almost completely chemotaxis, while it has no effect on chemokinesis.<sup>28,54</sup> This is in contradiction with the results from PI3Kγ-deficient mice,<sup>65,86,125</sup> where the loss of PI3Kγ activity does not abolish chemotaxis completely. It is possible that results obtained from mouse neutrophils are different from human neutrophils, because the two cell types may have different PI3 kinases. However, our experiments with the human neutrophil stimulated by chemoattractants (unpublished results) show that the rate of pseudopod extension is reduced by 80% in the presence of wortmannin, while it is inhibited completely if the basal calcium is also chelated. Our results are in agreement with the finding from the PI3K-deficient mice models, which show that there is PI3Kγ-dependent and PI3Kγ-independent signaling of chemotaxis. The crucial role of PIP₃ in the signaling of motility is demonstrated by the ability of this lipid to induce cell polarization and chemotaxis in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts<sup>33</sup> and human neutrophils<sup>108</sup> independent of wortmannin.<sup>33</sup> The rate of neutrophil crawling stimulated by the membrane-permeable PIP₃ analog PIP₃/AM (Ref. 108) is smaller but comparable to the same rate in the presence of the chemoattractant fNLPNTL, which demonstrates the physiological importance of the PIP₃ signaling for motility. These data show that PIP₃ is the sole mediator of PI3K signaling. Downstream of PIP₃, the signaling of motility is unclear and involves unknown calcium-independent PKC.<sup>33</sup> One of these PKCs is most probably the atypical ζ PKC, which is critically involved in the signaling of fMLP- and IL-8-stimulated chemotaxis.<sup>84</sup>

PIP₂ is the other major phosphoinositide involved in the signaling of motility.<sup>149</sup> It inhibits the activity of the Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor Vav 1, the actin

capping proteins Cap Z and gelsolin, the actin sequestering protein profilin, ${ }^{135,147}$ and the severing proteins from the ADF/cofilin family. ${ }^{82}$ The inhibiting effect of PIP $_{2}$ for the actin binding proteins is a result of its competitive binding with actin. ${ }^{135,147,155}$ PIP $_{2}$ activates the proteins from the WASp family, the proteins from the ezrin/ radixin/moesin family, which link the cytoskeleton with the plasma membrane, ${ }^{156}$ and the actin binding proteins vinculin ${ }^{67,138}$ and $\alpha$-actinin. ${ }^{45}$ PIP $_{2}$ is synthesized by PI(4)P 5-kinase and serves as a substrate for PLC-$\beta$ and PI3K$\gamma$. ${ }^{149}$ There is always a low basal level of PIP $_{2}$ in the passive cells. After activation PLC-$\beta$ and PI3K$\gamma$ use the basal PIP $_{2}$ to produce DAG and IP $_{3}$, and PIP $_{3}$, respectively. This results in cell activation and additional production of PIP $_{2}$ by the PI(4)P 5-kinase. The upstream signaling of PI(4)P 5-kinase activation is not well characterized. The ability of the C3 toxin to abolish the release of Ca $^{2+}$ after hormonal stimulation suggests that PI(4)P 5-kinase activity is RhoA dependent. ${ }^{26}$ PI(4)P 5-kinase activity is also dependent on Rac, which is seen from the ability of thrombin to activate the PI(4)P 5-kinase. ${ }^{23,60,153}$ The dependence of PI(4)P 5-kinase activity on Rac provides the link for the dependence of PI(4)P 5-kinase activation on PI3K. The activation of PI3K produces PIP $_{3}$ which activates Rac via Vav 1. The activated Rac activates PI(4)P 5-kinase, which produces PIP $_{2}$ and down modulates Vav 1 activation. Vav 1 inactivation by PIP $_{2}$ provides a feedback loop for the regulation of PI(4)P 5-kinase. In the crawling cell the reaction of producing PIP2 is most probably a steady-state reaction controlled by the opposite effects of PIP $_{3}$ and PIP $_{2}$ on Vav1 activation. The critical importance of PIP $_{2}$ for motility is demonstrated by the use of a synthetic peptide, which has its amino acid sequence derived from the PIP $_{2}$ binding site of gelsolin. ${ }^{30}$ The exposure of human neutrophils to this PIP $_{2}$-binding peptide abolishes almost completely their motility. ${ }^{30}$

The effectors of phosphoinositides are proteins containing pleckstrin homology (PH) domains and FIVE domains. The FIVE domains bind exclusively PIP $_{3}$, while the PH domains bind either PIP $_{2}$ or PIP $_{3}$, or both. ${ }^{159}$ The FIVE and PH domains are found in several classes of proteins, such as the serine/threonine-specific protein kinases, the Bruton’s tyrosine kinase, the adaptor proteins, GTPase-activating proteins, and the guanine-nucleotide-exchange factors. This shows that the effectors of PIP $_{2}$ and PIP $_{3}$ in the cell cytoplasm are multiple. Presently, there is an effort to identify the FIVE- and PH-domain-containing proteins in the human cells and to determine their affinity of binding to phosphoinositides. ${ }^{37}$ The completion of these studies will allow the identification of the effectors for PIP $_{2}$ and PIP $_{3}$. One group of unknown phosphoinositide effectors, which is of special interest for motility, is the group of GEFs for Cdc42 and RhoA. The proteins containing FIVE and PH domains

are recruited, at least in their activated state, to the plasma membrane because PIP $_{2}$ is a membrane lipid. This has been demonstrated for *Dictyostelium discoideum* amoebae, ${ }^{70}$ NIH 3T3 fibroblasts ${ }^{151}$ and neutrophils, ${ }^{130}$ where PH-domain-containing proteins are found to associate with the plasma membrane at the leading lamella of the crawling cell. The importance of the membrane association for the activity of the proteins involved in motility is also evident from the inability of the GTPases to stimulate F-actin polymerization in the absence of membrane structures. ${ }^{103}$ After activation, the membrane lipids are redistributed and form clusters called rafts. The rafts contain the lipids involved in the signaling of motility as well as the associated proteins. The raft composition in the lamella region is different from the raft composition in the uropod region, ${ }^{48}$ which suggests that raft formation plays a role in polarization. This hypothesis is confirmed by measuring the kinetics of raft formation, which is very similar to the kinetics of early activation. ${ }^{132}$ Interestingly, raft formation is dependent on Vav 1 activation, ${ }^{160}$ which based on the above discussion is critically involved in the signaling of motility. The formation of rafts in the membranes of activated cells explains the finding from the dynamic measurements of pseudopod extension, that the newly formed pseudopods have a cylindrical shape. ${ }^{179}$ This is most probably a result of raft formation in the front of the leading lamella.

## ROLE OF ADHESION RECEPTORS

The involvement of adhesion receptors in motility is dual; they provide the physical attachment of the cell to the substrate and are involved in the overall signaling of motility. There are many studies emphasizing the importance of adhesion receptors for cell attachment. ${ }^{17,25,29,49,58,68,169}$ Here we will focus our attention on the signaling of adhesion receptor priming and the possible involvement of the bound adhesion receptors in the signaling of motility.

The adhesion receptors involved in motility are from the integrin family. Integrins are heterodimers, made of two subunits called $\alpha$ and $\beta$ subunit. ${ }^{62,68}$ Human cells express eight different $\beta$ subunits and 16 $\alpha$ subunits, from which arise 20 heterodimers. ${ }^{172}$ The cytoplasmic domain of the $\beta$ subunit is linked to actin binding proteins such as $\alpha$-actinin, talin, filamin, and myosin. ${ }^{63,87,115,124}$ There are three $\beta$ integrin subunits that play a role in the attachment of the neutrophil; they are: $\beta_{1}$, $\beta_{2}$, and $\beta_{3}$ (also known as $\beta_{1}$, $\beta_{2}$, and $\beta_{3}$ integrins). $\beta_{2}$ integrin is the most abundant integrin in the human neutrophil. It mediates the adhesion of the cell to the vascular endothelium and has the ligands: fibrinogen, collagen, factor X of the coagulation cascade, complement factor C3bi, and the intercellular adhesion mol-

molecules ICAM 1, ICAM 2, and ICAM 3.²⁰ The $\beta_3$ subunit mediates the adhesion to vitronectin and fibronectin,¹²³ while the $\beta_1$ subunit binds to laminin, collagen, VCAM 1, and fibronectin and is involved in the *in vivo* adhesion to tissues.¹⁶⁹ In the passive cell integrins are in an inactive state and are unable to bind ligands. Upon activation, they are primed and their affinity/avidity of binding ligands increases dramatically. Integrin priming is very fast and allows stopping of a rolling cell 0.1 s (Ref. 49) to 90 s (Ref. 81) after its initial touching of the endothelial surface. The priming factors for integrins are: (1) many of the priming factors for the chemoattractant receptors and the ligands for the immune complexes receptors; (2) some of the adhesion receptors natural ligands; (3) some antibodies; and (4) all chemoattractants and chemokines. Examination of these groups of priming factors shows that integrin priming can occur either by factors outside the cell (“outside-in” activation), or by processes that involve intracellular signaling (“inside-out” activation). The existence of a variety of priming factors also suggests that the process of integrin priming is complex and may follow different signaling pathways.⁸⁸,¹⁶⁵ This complexity is increased by the difference of the response of the adhesion receptors to priming. For example, the treatment of T cells with phorbol esters and the increase of the intracellular Ca²⁺ concentration leads to an increase of $\alpha_L\beta_2$ (LFA-1) avidity, while the treatment of the cells with Mg²⁺ or EGTA increases the affinity of the same adhesion receptor.⁹⁰,⁹⁵ The priming of adhesion receptors after chemoattractant activation is evident from the increase of the avidity of $\alpha_M\beta_2$ after exposure to fMLP, IL-8 and C5a.⁷² However, this priming is independent of PI3K activation,⁷² which suggests that the signaling pathway of $\alpha_M\beta_2$ priming is distinct from the signaling pathway of F-actin polymerization. Interestingly, the priming of $\alpha_M\beta_2$ by the immune complexes for the Fc$\gamma$R receptor is PI3K$\gamma$ dependent.⁷² We mentioned earlier that blocking RhoA activity abolishes the detachment of $\beta_2$ integrins from their ligands.² The elevation of the intracellular cAMP, which activates RhoA, also reduces the overall binding of the cells to surfaces most probably by increasing the rate of integrin detachment.⁸³ While PI3K does not affect $\beta_2$ integrin priming, it is critical for the priming of $\beta_3$ integrin.¹⁴ $\beta_3$ integrin mediates the adhesion to vitronectin and fibronectin,¹²³ and is involved in the signaling of directional orientation in shear flow.¹¹⁸ The coupling between $\beta_3$ integrin priming and PI3K activity and the involvement of $\beta_3$ integrin in the signaling of directional orientation in shear flow suggests that $\beta_3$ integrin may be involved in the signaling of the PI3-K dependent motility.²⁸,⁵⁴

The immediate upstream regulation of integrin priming involves phosphorylation of the actin binding protein L-plastin by the cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA).¹²²,¹⁶³ The role of L-plastin in integrin priming is revealed by the ability of the synthetic membrane permeable peptides synthesized after the phosphorylated L-plastin, to prime the $\alpha_M\beta_2$ integrin.⁷³ The distant upstream regulation of integrin priming is not well understood. RhoA controls $\beta_2$ integrin detachment, however, there are no data suggesting that this GTPase is also involved in the signaling of priming. Integrin adhesion to fibrinogen is dependent on the activity of the atypical $\zeta$ PKC,⁸⁴ and PKC activity is PIP₃ dependent,³³ which suggests that integrin priming may be signaled by PI3K.

During motility only a small portion of adhesion receptors are bound to the substrate. This is seen from a simple experiment, where a single neutrophil is allowed to crawl along a pipet coated with plasma proteins and filled with chemoattractant solution.⁶ We estimated the number of bound receptors (unpublished results) by comparing the force necessary to detach a crawling cell from the pipet wall and slide it along the pipet, and the force for detachment of a single bound integrin receptor. We allowed a neutrophil to crawl along a 6-$\mu$m-diam pipet filled with $10^{-8}$ M fMLP at 23 °C. Then we applied a pressure until the cell started to slide. The applied pressure was increased fast (within 15 s), which allowed us to compare the measured force of cell detachment and sliding with the force of detachment of a single integrin receptor during its fast separation from a ligand.¹³³ The measured pressure for neutrophil sliding was from 80 to 100 Pa, which corresponded to a total force on the order of $3 \times 10^{-9}$ N. The force of fast integrin detachment is on the order of 40 pN,¹³³ which gives for the number of bound receptors a value of 75. This number of bound receptors is small compared to the total number of expressed adhesion receptors, which is usually from $10^4$ to $10^5$.⁹⁰,¹⁶⁷ The above estimate suggests that the role of adhesion receptors in the signaling of motility may be limited due to the small number of bound receptors. However, our experiments with phagocytosis after tether formation⁶ demonstrate that only a few bound integrin receptors are necessary for signaling cell spreading. Also, the critical role of the low-level expressed $\beta_3$ integrin in the signaling of the orientation in shear flow¹¹⁸ suggests that a small number of bound adhesion receptors may provide a sufficient signal for cytoskeleton rearrangement. The possibility for the involvement of the bound adhesion receptors in the signaling of motility is suggested by the synergy of the action of the chemoattractant and adhesion receptors. Such a synergy is observed in the secondary release of superoxide stimulated by the bound $\beta_2$ integrins.¹⁵⁷ Another example is the adhesion receptor stimulated tyrosine kinase phosphorylation,¹⁷⁴ which is significantly enhanced by chemoattractant activation.¹⁷⁰ Tyrosine kinase phosphorylation is required for neutrophil spreading on fibrinogen-coated surfaces⁴³ and for adapter molecule SPL-76-mediated F-actin poly-

merization in platelets.¹¹¹ The signaling of these events involves Vav phosphorylation.¹⁰² Vav phosphorylation is signaled by β₂ binding and is significantly increased after activation with TNF-α, fMLP, IL-8, or GM-CSF.¹⁷⁰ The phosphorylation of Vav is negligible after chemottractant activation if there are no bound integrin receptors.¹⁷⁰ These data suggest that the bound adhesion receptors may contribute to the overall signaling of motility, however, the elucidation of this contribution needs further studies.

# CRAWLING OF THE NEUTROPHIL AS A DECISION MAKING PROCESS

The motility of the neutrophil involves more than simple binding of ligands to chemoattractant receptors, priming of adhesion receptors, polymerization of F-actin, and cytoskeleton contraction. In its quest to defend our bodies the neutrophil encounters a complex chemical environment, where it has to recognize specific stimuli and “make decisions” in order to fulfill its function. The cell distinguishes between low and high concentrations of the same chemoattractant and either crawls or exhibits a cytotoxic response.¹³⁴ The response of the cell to changes of its surroundings is complicated additionally by its ability to modulate its response either positively or negatively, depending on its prior state.¹³⁴ The ability of the neutrophil to modulate its response negatively is called desensitization and the ability to modulate its response positively is called priming. Desensitization may involve consecutive exposure to the same stimulus (homologous desensitization),³,³⁴,¹²⁸,¹⁶⁸ or exposure to a different stimulus (heterologous desensitization).⁴,¹⁵⁴ Priming enhances the response of the neutrophil to chemoattractant activation relative to normal conditions. Some of the known priming agents include: TNF-α, granulocyte colony stimulating factor (GCSF), IL-4, IL-6, and IFN-γ.³,¹³⁴

During crawling, the neutrophil is exposed to chemoattractant for prolonged periods of time. Thus, the effect of priming is expected to be of importance only in the initial stages of activation. During prolonged crawling the desensitization of the cell may modulate its response to chemoattractant. Desensitization has been studied mostly in relation to the cytotoxic responses of the neutrophil. The homologous desensitization is linked to chemoattractant receptor phosphorylation by G-protein-coupled receptor kinases,⁵⁶ while the heterologous desensitization is derived from the receptor cross phosphorylation or from processes distant from the receptors.¹⁵⁴ Phosphorylated receptors during homologous desensitization bind to arrestin, which reduces their affinity for binding ligands.⁴² Arrestin bound receptors are internalized, which reduces the total number of receptors expressed on the plasma membrane. Receptor cross phosphorylation after heterologous desensitization is a result of the action of second messenger kinases such as protein kinase A and/or protein kinase C.⁵⁵ Both homologous and heterologous desensitization involve inhibition of GTPase activity, while the opposite is not always true.⁴ Since GTPase activity is crucial for F-actin polymerization and motility it is possible for desensitization to play a role in motility.

The desensitization of neutrophil motility is expected to affect the cell’s ability to “navigate” through tissue by increasing its apparent threshold of response to the chemoattractant. This effect is demonstrated by allowing a neutrophil to crawl in a chemoattractant gradient of one chemoattractant, while another chemoattractant is present in the experimental chamber. The exposure of the cells to fMLP and C5a desensitizes the response to LTB4 and IL-8, while the effect of LTB4 and IL-8 on fMLP and C5a stimulated crawling is marginal.¹⁶ Interestingly, a similar relation between the same chemoattractants is observed for the desensitization of the cytotoxic responses of the neutrophil.¹⁵⁴ This finding demonstrates that desensitization plays a role in motility. The studying of the release of intracellular Ca²⁺, which is intimately coupled with the secretion responses of the neutrophil,⁴ and the rate of pseudopod extension, shows that the release of intracellular calcium is desensitized, while the rate of pseudopod extension is not. This suggests that the signaling of motility and secretion follow different pathways of activation.⁶ The experiments with transfected RBL-2H3 cells, which express human neutrophil chemoattractant receptors, also show that the signaling of motility is distinct from the signaling of secretion.⁵⁷ These results are confirmed by the finding that receptor phosphorylation, which is one of the major events in the desensitization of secretion, does not affect crawling.⁷⁸

There are many motility responses that cannot be explained by the simple downstream chemoattractant signaling of activation considered here. For example, neutrophils change shape during activation, which is independent of chemoattractant gradient.³⁹ Similar cyclic behavior is measured for the other activation responses such as: respiratory burst,¹⁷⁶ change of crawling velocity,⁵⁹ and release of proteolytic enzymes and oxidants.⁸⁰ The signaling mechanism of these oscillations is unknown, however, their phase is similar to the phase of the cellular metabolic oscillations,⁷⁹ which suggests that the metabolic activity of the cell may also be involved in the signaling of motility.

## CONCLUSIONS

The signaling of motility responses of the human neutrophil starts with the activation of the trimeric G proteins by the ligand-bound chemoattractant receptors and continue downstream along diverse pathways that control

F-actin polymerization, adhesion receptor priming, cell body contraction, superoxide production, and proteolytic enzyme secretion. Our focus here has been on the signaling of the motility responses of the neutrophil. The complete set of molecules involved in this signaling is still unknown, and the exact relations between them are still unclear. However, in the past several years there have been significant advances in the understanding of this signaling. Many of the critical molecules involved in this signaling have been identified and their role in motility has been elucidated. Figure 1 shows the major known relations between the molecules involved in the signaling of F-actin dynamics after PI3K activation. The signaling of F-actin dynamics includes: (1) activation of PI3K and release of PIP₃; (2) activation of Rac via Vav and Cdc42 via unknown guanine nucleotide exchange factors; (3) binding of Rac and Cdc42 to WAVE and WASp, which then bind Arp2/3 and stimulate the formation of new barbed ends for F-actin polymerization; (4) F-actin disassembly by cofilin controlled by LIM kinase; and (5) modulating the F-actin dynamics by the activated tyrosine kinase after integrin receptor binding, and PI(4)P 5-kinase activation by Rac. There are also factors that are not directly involved in the signaling of actin dynamics, but affect critically the overall motility response of the neutrophils. These factors include RhoA, which controls integrin detachment, PKA, which controls integrin priming via L-plastin, and PKC, which controls integrin adhesion via PI3K-dependent activation. The results discussed here show also that the PI3K signaling of the F-actin assembly shown in Fig. 1 represent only 80% of the motility response of the neutrophil. The remaining 20% of the motility response is independent of PI3K activation and is signaled by factors that are still unknown.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by Grant No. HL57629 from the National Institutes of Health. The blood drawing was supported by Grant No. M01-RR-30 from the National Institutes of Health to the General Clinical Research Centers Program at Duke University.

### REFERENCES

1. Akasaki, T., H. Koga, and H. Sumimoto. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase-dependent and -independent activation of the small GTPase Rac2 in human neutrophils. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:18055–18059, 1999.
2. Alblas, J., L. Ulfman, P. Hordijk, and L. Koenderman. Activation of Rho and ROCK are essential for detachment of migrating leukocytes. *Mol. Biol. Cell.* 12:2137–2145, 2001.
3. Ali, H., B. Haribabu, R. M. Richardson, and R. Snyderman. Chemoattractant receptor cross desensitization. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:6027–6030, 1999.
4. Allen, W. E., G. E. Jones, J. W. Pollard, and A. J. Ridley. Rho, Rac, and Cdc42 regulate actin organization and cell adhesion in macrophages. *J. Cell. Sci.* 110:707–720, 1997.
5. Alteraifi, A. M., and D. V. Zhelev. Transient increase of free cytosolic calcium during neutrophil motility responses. *J. Cell. Sci.* 110:1967–1977, 1997.
6. Ambruso, D. R., C. Knall, A. N. Abell, J. Panepinto, A. Kurkchubasche, G. Thurman, C. Gonzalez-Aller, A. Hiester, M. deBoer, R. J. Harbeck, R. Oyer, G. L. Johnson, and D. Roos. Human neutrophil immunodeficiency syndrome is associated with an inhibitory Rac2 mutation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 97:4654–4659, 2000.
7. Arai, H., and I. F. Charo. Differential regulation of G-protein-mediated signaling by chemokine receptors. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271:21814–21819, 1996.
8. Arcaro, A. The small GTP-binding protein Rac promotes the dissociation of gelsolin from actin filaments in neutrophils. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:805–813, 1998.
9. Bamburg, J. R., A. McGoughb, and S. Onoc. Putting a new twist on actin: ADF/cofils modulate actin dynamics. *Trends Cell Biol.* 9:364–370, 1999.
10. Belisle, B., and A. Abo. N-formil peptide receptor ligation induces Rac-dependent actin reorganization through Gβγ subunits and class Ia phosphoinositide 3-kinases. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275:26225–26232, 2000.
11. Ben-Baruch, A., D. F. Michiel, and J. J. Oppenheim. Signals and receptors involved in recruitment of inflammatory cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270:11703–11706, 1995.
12. Blanchoin, L., and T. D. Pollard. Interaction of actin monomers with Acanthamoeba actophorin (ADF/cofilin) and profilin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:25106–25111, 1998.
13. Bruyninckx, W. J., K. M. Comerford, D. W. Lawrence, and S. P. Colgan. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase modulation of β₃-integrin represents an endogenous “braking” mechanism during neutrophil transmatrix migration. *Blood* 97:3251–3258, 2001.
14. Bustelo, X. R. Regulatory and signaling properties of the Vav family. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 20:1461–1477, 2000.
15. Campbell, J. J., E. F. Foxman, and E. C. Butcher. Chemoattractant receptor crosstalk as a regulatory mechanism in leukocyte adhesion and migration. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 27:2571–2578, 1997.
16. Campbell, J. J., J. Hedrick, A. Zlotnik, M. A. Siani, D. A. Thompson, and E. C. Butcher. Chemokines and the arrest of lymphocytes rolling under flow conditions. *Science* 279:381–384, 1998.
17. Carlier, M.-F., C. Jean, K. J. Rieger, M. Lenfant, and D. Pantaloni. Modulation of the interaction between G-actin and thymosin β₄ by the ATP/ADP ratio: Possible implication in the regulation of actin dynamics. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 90:5034–5038, 1993.
18. Carlier, M.-F., V. Laurent, J. Santolini, R. Melki, D. Didry, G.-X. Xia, Y. Hong, N.-H. Chua, and D. Pantaloni. Actin depolymerizing factor (ADF/Cofilin) enhances the rate of filament turnover: Implication in actin-based motility. *J. Cell Biol.* 136:1307–1322, 1997.
19. Carlos, T. M., and J. M. Harlan. Leukocyte-endothelial adhesion molecules. *Blood* 84:2068–2101, 1994.
20. Cassimeris, L., H. McNeill, and S. H. Zigmond. Chemoattractant-stimulated polymorphonuclear leukocytes

contain two populations of actin filaments that differ in their spatial distributions and relative stabilities. *J. Cell Biol.* 110:1067–1075, 1990.

22 Cassimeris, L., D. Safer, V. T. Nachmias, and S. H. Zigmond. Thymosin $\beta_{4}$ sequesters the majority of G-actin in resting human polymorphonuclear leukocytes. *J. Cell Biol.* 119:1261–1270, 1992.

23 Chatah, N.-E.-H., and C. S. Abrams. G-protein-coupled receptor activation induces the membrane translocation and activation of phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 5-kinase I$\alpha$ by a Rac- and Rho-dependent pathway. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:34059–34065, 2001.

24 Chen, H., B. W. Bernstein, and J. R. Bamburg. Regulating actin-filament dynamics *in vivo*. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 25:19–23, 2000.

25 Chen, S., and T. A. Springer. An automatic braking system that stabilizes leukocyte rolling by an increase in selectin bond number with shear. *J. Cell Biol.* 144:185–200, 1999.

26 Chong, L. D., A. Traynor-Kaplan, G. M. Bokoch, and M. A. Schwartz. The small GTP-binding protein Rho regulates a phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase in mammalian cells. *Cell* 79:507–513, 1994.

27 Coates, T. D., R. G. Watts, R. Hartman, and T. H. Howard. Relationship of F-actin distribution to development of polar shape in human polymorphonuclear neutrophils. *J. Cell Biol.* 117:765–774, 1992.

28 Coffer, P. J., N. Geijzen, L. M’Rabet, R. C. Schweizer, T. Maikoe, J. A. M. Raaijmekers, J.-W. J. Lammers, and L. Koenderman. Comparison of the roles of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase signal transduction in neutrophil effector function. *Biochem. J.* 329:121–130, 1998.

29 Cox, E. A., and A. Huttenlocher. Regulation of integrin-mediated adhesion during cell migration. *Microsc. Res. Tech.* 43:412–419, 1998.

30 Cunningham, C. C., R. Vegners, R. Bucki, M. Funaki, N. Korde, J. H. Hartwig, T. P. Stossel, and P. A. Janmey. Cell permeant polyphosphoinositide-binding peptides that block cell motility and actin assembly. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:43390–43399, 2001.

31 Damaj, B. B., S. R. McColl, K. Neote, N. Songquing, K. T. Ogborn, C. A. Herbert, and P. H. Naccache. Identification of G-protein binding sites of the human interleukin-8 receptors by functional mapping of the intracellular loops. *FASEB J.* 12:1426–1434, 1996.

32 Das, B., X. Shu, G.-J. Day, J. Han, U. M. Krishna, J. R. Falck, and D. Broek. Control of intramolecular interactions between the pleckstrin homology and Dbl homology domains of Vav and Sos1 regulates Rac binding. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275:15074–15081, 2000.

33 Derman, M. P., A. Toker, J. H. Hartwig, K. Spokes, J. R. Falck, C. S. Chen, L. C. Cantley, and L. G. Cantley. The lipid products of phosphoinositide 3-kinase increase cell mobility through protein kinase C. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272:6465–6470, 1997.

34 Devaraja, M. N., and A. Richmond. Multiple chemotactic factors: Fine control or redundancy? *Trends Pharmacol. Sci.* 20:151–156, 1999.

35 Didry, D., M.-F. Carlier, and D. Pantaloni. Synergy between actin depolymerizing factor/cofilin and profilin in increasing actin filament turnover. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:25602–25611, 1998.

36 DiNubile, M. J., L. Cassimeris, M. Joyce, and S. H. Zigmond. Actin filament barbed-end capping activity in neutro-

phil lysates: The role of capping protein-beta 2. *Mol. Biol. Cell.* 6:1659–1671, 1995.

37 Dowler, S., R. A. Currie, D. G. Campbell, M. Deak, G. Kular, C. P. Downes, and D. R. Alessi. Identification of pleckstrin-homology-domain-containing proteins with novel phosphoinositide-binding specificities. *Biochem. J.* 351:19–31, 2000.

38 Edwards, D. C., L. C. Sanders, G. M. Bokoch, and G. N. Gill. Activation of LIM-kinase by Pak1 couples Rac/Cdc42 GTPase signaling to actin cytoskeletal dynamics. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 1:253–259, 1999.

39 Ehrengruber, M. U., D. A. Deranleau, and T. D. Coates. Shape oscillations of human neutrophil leukocytes: Characterization and relationship to cell motility. *J. Exp. Biol.* 199:741–747, 1996.

40 Evans, E. A., and A. Yeung. Apparent viscosity and cortical tension of blood granulocytes determined by micropipet aspiration. *Biophys. J.* 56:151–160, 1989.

41 Fechheimer, M., and S. H. Zigmond. Focusing on unpolymerized actin. *J. Cell Biol.* 123:1–5, 1993.

42 Ferguson, S. S., L. S. Barak, J. Zhang, and M. G. Caron. G-protein-coupled receptor regulation: Role of G-protein-coupled receptor kinases and arrestins. *Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol.* 74:1095–1110, 1996.

43 Fernandez, R., and S. J. Suchard. Syk activation is required for spreading and H$_{2}$O$_{2}$ release in adherent human neutrophils. *J. Immunol.* 160:5154–5162, 1998.

44 Fernandez-Segura, E., J. M. Garcia, J. L. Santos, and A. Campos. Shape, F-actin, and surface morphology changes during chemotactic peptide-induced polarity in human neutrophils. *Anat. Rec.* 241:519–528, 1995.

45 Fukami, K., N. Sawada, T. Endo, and T. Takenawa. Identification of a phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate-binding site in chicken skeletal muscle alpha-actinin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271:2646–2650, 1996.

46 Fukuoka, M., S. Suetsugu, H. Miki, K. Fukami, T. Endo, and T. Takenawa. A novel neural Wiskott–Aldrich Syndrome Protein (N-WASP) binding protein, WISH, induces Arp2/3 complex activation independent of Cdc42. *J. Cell Biol.* 152:471–482, 2001.

47 Glogauer, M., J. Hartwig, and T. Stossel. Two pathways through Cdc42 couple the N-formyl receptor to actin nucleation in permeabilized human neutrophils. *J. Cell Biol.* 150:785–796, 2000.

48 Gómez-Moutón, C., J. L. Abad, E. Mira, R. A. Lacalle, E. Gallardo, S. Jiménez-Baranda, I. Illa, A. Bernad, S. Mañes, and C. Martínez-A. Segregation of leading-edge and uropod components into specific lipid rafts during T-cell polarization. *PNAS* 98:9642–9647, 2001.

49 Grabovsky, V., S. Feigelson, C. Chen, D. A. Bleijs, A. Peled, G. Cinamon, F. Baleux, F. Arenzana-Seisdedos, T. Lapidot, Y. v. Kooyk, R. R. Lobb, and R. Alon. Subsecond induction of $\alpha$4 integrin clustering by immobilized chemokines stimulates leukocyte tethering and rolling on endothelial vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 under flow conditions. *J. Exp. Med.* 192:495–506, 2000.

50 Gray, G. D., S. R. Hasslen, J. A. Ember, D. F. Carney, M. J. Herron, S. L. Erlandsen, and R. D. Nelson. Receptors for the chemoattractants C5a and IL-8 are clustered on the surface of human neutrophils. *J. Histochem. Cytochem.* 45:1461–1467, 1997.

51 Haddad, E., J. L. Zugaza, F. Louache, N. Debili, C. Crouin, K. Schwarz, A. Fischer, W. Vainchenker, and J. Bertoglio. The interaction between Cdc42 and WASP is required for

SDF-1-induced T-lymphocyte chemotaxis. *Blood* 97:33–38, 2001.

52 Hall, A. Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton. *Science* 279:509–514, 1998.

53 Han, J., K. Luby-Phelps, B. Das, X. Shu, Y. Xia, R. D. Mosteller, U. M. Krishna, J. R. Falck, M. A. White, and D. Broek. Role of substrates and products of PI 3-kinase in regulating activation of Rac-related guanosine triphosphatases by Vav. *Science* 279:558–560, 1998.

54 Harakawa, N., M. Sasada, A. Maeda, K. Asago, M. Nohgawa, K. Takano, Y. Matsuda, K. Yamamoto, and M. Okuma. Random migration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes induced by GM-CSF involving a signal transduction pathway different from that of fMLP. *J. Leukoc. Biol.* 61:500–506, 1997.

55 Haribabu, B., R. M. Richardson, M. W. Verghese, A. J. Barr, D. V. Zhelev, and R. Snyderman. Function and regulation of chemoattractant receptors. *Immunol. Res.* 3:271–279, 2000.

56 Haribabu, B., and R. Snyderman. Identification of additional members of human G-protein-coupled receptor kinase multigene family. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 90:9398–9402, 1993.

57 Haribabu, B., D. V. Zhelev, B. C. Pridgen, R. M. Richardson, H. Ali, and R. Snyderman. Chemoattractant receptors activate distinct pathways for chemotaxis and secretion. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:37087–37092, 1999.

58 Harris, E. S., T. M. McIntyre, S. M. Prescott, and G. A. Zimmerman. The leukocyte integrins. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275:23409–23412, 2000.

59 Hartman, R. S., K. Lau, W. Chou, and T. D. Coats. The fundamental motor of the human neutrophil is not random evidence for local non-Markov movement in neutrophils. *Biophys. J.* 67:2535–2545, 1994.

60 Hartwig, J. H., G. M. Bokoch, C. L. Carpenter, P. A. Janmey, L. A. Taylor, A. Toker, and T. P. Stossel. Thrombin receptor ligation and activated Rac uncap actin filament barbed ends through phosphoinositide synthesis in permeabilized human platelets. *Cell* 82:643–653, 1995.

61 Heidermann, S. R., and R. E. Buxbaum. Cell crawling: First the motor, now the transmission. *J. Cell Biol.* 141:1–4, 1998.

62 Hemler, M. E. Integrins. In: Guide Book to the Extracellular Matrix and Adhesion Proteins, edited by T. Kreis and R. Vale. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.

63 Hemmings, L., D. J. Rees, V. Ohanian, S. J. Bolton, A. P. Gilmore, B. Patel, H. Priddle, J. E. Trevithick, R. O. Hynes, and D. R. Critchley. Talin contains three actin-binding sites each of which is adjacent to a vinculin-binding site. *J. Cell. Sci.* 109:2715–2726, 1996.

64 Higgs, H. N., and T. D. Pollard. Activation by Cdc42 and PIP₂ of Wiscott/NAlrich syndrome protein (WASp) stimulates actin nucleation by Arp2/3 complex. *J. Cell Biol.* 150:1311–1320, 2000.

65 Hirsch, E., V. L. Katanaev, C. Garlanda, O. Azzolino, L. Pirola, L. Silengo, S. Sozzani, and A. Mantova. Central role for G-protein-coupled phosphoinositide 3-kinase γ in inflammation. *Science* 287:1049–1053, 2000.

66 Hughes, P. E., and M. Pfaff. Integrin affinity modulation. *Trends Cell Biol.* 8:359–364, 1998.

67 Huttelmaier, S., O. Mayboroda, B. Harbeck, T. Jarchau, B. M. Jockusch, and M. Rudiger. The interaction of the cell-contact proteins VASP and vinculin is regulated by phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate. *Curr. Biol.* 8:479–488, 1998.

68 Hynes, R. O. Integrins: Versatility, modulation, and signaling in cell adhesion. *Cell* 69:11–25, 1992.

69 Imai, K., S. Nonoyama, H. Miki, T. Morio, K. Fukami, Q. Zhu, A. Aruffo, H. D. Ochs, J. Yata, and T. Takenawa. The Pleckstrin homology domain of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein is involved in the organization of actin cytoskeleton. *Clin. Immunol.* 92:128–137, 1999.

70 Jin, T., N. Zhang, Y. Long, C. A. Parent, and P. N. Devreotes. Localization of the G protein βγ complex in living cells during chemotaxis. *Science* 287:1034–1036, 1999.

71 Johansson, B., M. P. Wymann, K. Holmgren-Peterson, and K. E. Magnusson. N-formyl peptide receptors in human neutrophils display distinct membrane distribution and lateral mobility when labeled with agonist and antagonist. *J. Cell Biol.* 121:1281–1289, 1993.

72 Jones, S. L., U. G. Knaus, G. M. Bokoch, and E. J. Brown. Two signaling mechanisms for activation of αMβ2 avidity in polymorphonuclear neutrophils. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:10556–10566, 1998.

73 Jones, S. L., J. Wang, C. W. Turck, and E. J. Brown. A role for the actin-bundling protein L-plastin in the regulation of leukocyte integrin function. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 95:9331–9336, 1998.

74 Juang, H., Y. Kuang, Y. Wu, A. Surcka, M. I. Simon, and D. Wu. Pertussis toxin-sensitive activation of phospholipase C by the C5a and fMet-Leu-Phe receptors. *J. Biol. Chem.* 27:13430–13434, 1996.

75 Kasper, B., N. Tidow, D. Grothues, and K. Welte. Differential expression and regulation of GTPases (RhoA and Rac2) and GDIs (LyGDI and RhoGDI) in neutrophils from patients with severe congenital neutropenia. *Blood* 95:2947–2953, 2000.

76 Katanaev, V. L. Signal transduction in neutrophil chemotaxis. *Biochemistry* 66:351–368, 2001.

77 Keller, H., and H. Cottier. Morphological and biochemical responses of leukocytes in chemokinesis and chemotaxis. *Path. Res. Pract.* 180:125–129, 1985.

78 Kim, J.-Y., R. D. M. Soedes, P. Schaap, R. Valkeman, J. A. Borleis, P. J. M. V. Haastert, P. N. Devreotes, and D. Hereld. Phosphorylation of chemoattractant receptors is not essential for chemotaxis or termination of G-protein-mediated responses. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272:27313–27318, 1997.

79 Kindzelskii, A. L., and H. R. Petty. Extremely low-frequency pulsed-dc electric fields promote neutrophil extension, metabolic resonance, and DNA damage when phase matched with metabolic oscillators. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1495:90–111, 2000.

80 Kindzelskii, A. L., M.-J. Zhou, R. P. Haugland, L. A. Boxer, and H. R. Petty. Oscillatory pericellular proteolysis and oxidant deposition during neutrophil locomotion. *Biophys. J.* 74:90–97, 1998.

81 Kunkel, E. J., J. L. Dunne, and K. Ley. Leukocyte arrest during cytokine-dependent inflammation *in vivo*. *J. Immunol.* 164:3301–3308, 2000.

82 Kusano, K., H. Abe, and T. Obinata. Detection of a sequence involved in actin and phosphoinositide binding in the N-terminal side of coflin. *Mol. Cell. Biochem.* 190:133–141, 1999.

83 Laudanna, C., J. J. Campbell, and E. C. Butcher. Elevation of intracellular cAMP inhibits RhoA activation and integrin-dependent leukocyte adhesion induced by chemoattractants. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272:24141–24144, 1997.

84 Laudanna, C., D. Mochly-Rosen, T. Liron, G. Constantin, and E. C. Butcher. Evidence of ζ protein kinase C involvement in polymorphonuclear neutrophil integrin-dependent

adhesion and chemotaxis. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:30306–30315, 1998.

85 Lauffenburger, D., B. Farrel, R. Tranquillo, A. Kistler, and S. Zigmond. Gradient perception by leucocytes. *J. Cell. Sci.* 88:415–416, 1987.

86 Li, Z., H. Jiang, W. Xie, Z. Zhang, A. V. Smrcka, and D. Wu. Roles of PLC-$\beta 2$ and -$\beta 3$ and PI3K$\gamma$ in chemoattractant-mediated signal transduction. *Science* 287:1046–1049, 2000.

87 Liu, S., D. A. Calderwood, and M. H. Ginsberg. Integrin cytoplasmic domain-binding proteins. *J. Cell. Sci.* 113:3563–3571, 2000.

88 Loike, J. D., L. Cao, S. Budhu, E. E. Marcantonio, J. E. Khoury, S. Hoffman, T. A. Yednock, and S. C. Silverstein. Differential regulation of $\beta 1$ integrins by chemoattractants regulates neutrophil migration through fibrin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 144:1047–1056, 1999.

89 Loitto, V.-M., B. Rasmusson, and K.-E. Magnusson. Assessment of neutrophil N-formyl peptide receptors by using antibodies and fluorescent peptides. *J. Leukocyte Biol.* 69:762–771, 2001.

90 Lollo, B. A., K. W. Chan, E. M. Hanson, V. T. Moy, and A. A. Brian. Direct evidence for two affinity states for lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 on activated T cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 268:21693–21700, 1993.

91 Ma, A. D., A. Metjian, A. Bagrodia, S. Taylor, and C. S. Abrams. Cytoskeletal reorganization by G-protein-coupled receptors is dependent on phosphoinositide 3-kinase $\gamma$, a Rac guanosine exchange factor, and Rac. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 18:4744–4751, 1998.

92 Maciver, S. K., B. J. Pope, S. Whytock, and A. G. Weeds. The effect of two actin depolymerizing factors (ADF/cofins) on actin filament turnover: pH sensitivity of F-actin binding by human ADF, but not of *Acanthamoeba* actophorin. *Eur. J. Biochem.* 256:388–397, 1998.

93 Mackay, C. R., and B. A. Imhof. Cell adhesion in the immune system. *Immunol. Today* 14:99–103, 1993.

94 Maekawa, M., T. Ishizaki, S. Boku, N. Watanabe, A. Fujita, A. Iwamatsu, T. Obinata, K. Ohashi, K. Mizuno, and S. Narumiya. Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein kinases ROCK and LIM kinase. *Science* 285:895–898, 1999.

95 McDowall, A., B. Leitinger, P. Stanley, P. A. Bates, A. M. Randi, and N. Hogg. The I domain of integrin leukocyte function-associated Antigen-1 is involved in a conformational change leading to high affinity binding to ligand intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1). *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:27396–27403, 1998.

96 McKay, D. A., J. R. Kusel, and P. C. Wilkinson. Studies of chemotactic factor-induced polarity in human neutrophils. *J. Cell. Sci.* 100:473–479, 1991.

97 Mellado, M., J. M. Rodríguez-Frade, S. Mañes, and C. Martínez-A. Chemokine signaling and functional responses: The role of receptor dimerization and TK pathway activation. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 19:397–421, 2001.

98 Miki, H., T. Sasaki, Y. Takai, and T. Takenawa. Induction of filopodium formation by WASP-related actin-polymerizing protein N-WASP. *Nature (London)* 391:93–96, 1998.

99 Miki, H., S. Suetsugu, and T. Takenawa. WAVE, a novel WASP-family protein involved in actin reorganization induced by Rac. *EMBO J.* 17:6932–6941, 1998.

100 Missy, K., V. v. Poucke, P. Raynal, C. Viala, G. Mauco, M. Plantavid, H. Charp, and B. Payrastre. Lipid products of phosphoinositide 3-kinase interact with Rac1 GTPase and stimulate GDP dissociation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:30279–30286, 1998.

101 Mitchison, T. J., and L. P. Cramer. Actin-based cell motility and cell locomotion. *Cell* 84:371–379, 1996.

102 Moores, S. L., L. M. Selfors, J. Fredericks, T. Breit, K. Fujikawa, F. W. Alt, J. S. Brugge, and W. Swat. Vav family proteins couple to diverse cell surface receptors. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 20:6364–6373, 2000.

103 Moreau, V., and M. Way. Cdc42 is required for membrane dependent actin polymerization *in vitro*. *FEBS Lett.* 427:353–356, 1998.

104 Mullins, R. D., J. A. Heuser, and T. D. Pollard. The interaction of Arp2/3 complex with actin: Nucleation, high affinity pointed end capping, and formation of branching networks of filaments. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 95:6181–6186, 1998.

105 Murdoch, C., and A. Finn. Chemokine receptors and their role in inflammation and infectious diseases. *Blood* 95:3032–3043, 2000.

106 Murphy, P. M. The molecular biology of leukocyte chemotactant receptors. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 12:593–633, 1994.

107 Nieto, M., J. M. R. Frade, D. Sancho, M. Mellado, C. Martinez-A, and F. Sanchez-Madrid. Polarization of chemokine receptors to the leading edge during lymphocyte chemotaxis. *J. Exp. Med.* 186:153–158, 1997.

108 Niggli, V. A membrane-permeant ester of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP$_3$) is an activator of human neutrophil migration. *FEBS Lett.* 473:217–221, 2000.

109 Nishita, M., H. Aizawa, and K. Mizuno. Stroma cell-derived factor 1$\alpha$ activates LIM kinase 1 and induces cofilin phosphorylation for T-cell chemotaxis. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 22:774–783, 2002.

110 Nobes, C. D., and A. Hall. Rho GTPases control polarity, protrusion, and adhesion during cell movement. *J. Cell Biol.* 144:1235–1244, 1999.

111 Obergfell, A., B. A. Judd, M. A. d. Pozo, M. A. Schwartz, G. A. Koretzky, and S. J. Shattil. The molecular adapter SPL-76 relays signals from platelet integrin $\alpha_{\text{IIb}}\beta_3$ to the actin cytoskeleton. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:5916–5923, 2001.

112 Ohashi, K., K. Nagata, M. Maekawa, T. Ishizaki, S. Narumiya, and K. Mizuno. Rho-associated kinase ROCK activates LIM-kinase 1 by phosphorylation at threonine 508 within the activation loop. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275:3577–3582, 2000.

113 Okada, K., H. Takano-Ohmuro, T. Obinata, and H. Abe. Dephosphorylation of cofilin in polymorphonuclear leukocytes derived from peripheral blood. *Exp. Cell Res.* 227:116–122, 1996.

114 Peterson, J. R., R. S. Lokey, T. J. Mitchison, and M. W. Kirschner. A chemical inhibitor of N-WASP reveals a new mechanism for targeting protein interactions. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 98:10624–10629, 2001.

115 Pfaff, M., S. Liu, D. J. Erle, and M. H. Ginsberg. Integrin beta cytoplasmic domains differentially bind to cytoskeletal proteins. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:6104–6109, 1998.

116 Pollard, T. D., L. Blanchoin, and R. D. Mullins. Molecular mechanisms controlling actin filament dynamics in non-muscle cells. *Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct.* 29:545–576, 2000.

117 Prehoda, K. E., J. A. Scott, R. D. Mullins, and W. A. Lim. Integration of multiple signals through cooperative regulation of the N-WASP–Arp2/3 complex. *Science* 290:801–806, 2000.

118 Rainger, G. E., C. D. Buckley, D. L. Simmons, and G. B. Nash. Neutrophils sense flow-generated stress and direct their migration through $\alpha_v\beta_3$ integrin. *Am. J. Physiol.* 276:H858–H864, 1999.

119 Redmont, T., and S. H. Zigmond. Distribution of F-actin elongation sites in lysed polymorphonuclear leukocytes parallels the distribution of endogenous F actin. *Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton* 26:7–18, 1993.

120 Roberts, A. W., C. Kim, L. Zhen, J. B. Lowe, R. Kapur, B. Petryniak, A. Spaetti, J. D. Pollock, J. B. Borneo, G. B. Bradford, S. J. Atkinson, M. C. Dinuer, and D. A. Williams. Deficiency of the hematopoietic cell-specific Rho family GTPase Rac2 is characterized by abnormalities in neutrophil function and host defense. *Immunity* 10:183–196, 1999.

121 Rohatgi, R., H. H. Ho, and M. W. Kirschner. Mechanism of N-WASP activation by CDC42 and phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate. *J. Cell Biol.* 150:1299–1310, 2000.

122 Rosales, C., S. L. Jones, D. McCourt, and E. J. Brown. Bromphenacyl bromide binding to the actin-bundling protein L-plastin inhibits inositol trisphosphate-independent increase in Ca²⁺ in human neutrophils. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 91:3534–3538, 1994.

123 Ruoslahti, E. Integrins. *J. Clin. Invest.* 87:1–5, 1991.

124 Sampath, R., P. J. Gallagner, and F. M. Pavalko. Cytoskeletal interactions with the leukocyte integrin β2 cytoplasmic tail. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273:33588–33594, 1998.

125 Sasaki, T., J. Irie-Sasaki, R. G. Jones, A. J. Oliveira-dos-Santos, W. L. Stanford, B. Bolon, A. Wakeham, A. Itie, D. Bouchard, I. Kozieradzki, N. Joza, T. W. Mak, P. S. Ohashi, A. Suzuki, and J. M. Penninger. Function of PI3K in thymocyte development, T-cell activation, and neutrophil migration. *Science* 287:1040–1046, 2000.

126 Schafer, D. A., P. B. Jennings, and J. A. Cooper. Dynamics of capping protein and actin assembly *in vitro*: Uncapping barbed ends by polyphosphoinositides. *J. Cell Biol.* 135:169–179, 1996.

127 Schmitt, M., and B. Bultmann. Fluorescent chemotactic peptide as tools to identify the f-Met-Leu-Phe receptor on human granulocytes. *Biochem. Soc. Trans.* 18:219–222, 1990.

128 Schroder, J.-M. Chemoattractants as mediators of neutrophilic tissue recruitment. *Clin. Dermatol.* 18:245–263, 2000.

129 Scita, G., P. Tenca, E. Frittoli, A. Tocchetti, M. Innocenti, G. Giardina, and P. P. d. Fiore. Signaling from Ras to Rac and beyond: Not just a matter of GEFs. *EMBO J.* 19:2393–2398, 2000.

130 Servant, G., O. D. Weiner, P. Herzmark, T. Balla, J. W. Sedat, and H. R. Bourne. Polarization of chemoattractant receptor signaling during neutrophil chemotaxis. *Science* 287:1037–1040, 2000.

131 Servant, G., O. D. Weiner, E. R. Neptune, J. W. Sedat, and H. R. Bourne. Dynamics of a chemoattractant receptor in living neutrophils during chemotaxis. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 10:1163–1178, 1999.

132 Seveau, S., R. J. Eddy, F. R. Maxfield, and L. M. Pierini. Cytoskeleton-dependent membrane domain segregation during neutrophil polarization. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 12:3550–3562, 2001.

133 Shao, J.-Y., and R. M. Hochmuth. Mechanical anchoring strength of L-selectin, β₂ integrins, and CD45 to neutrophil cytoskeleton and membrane. *Biophys. J.* 77:587–596, 1999.

134 Snyderman, R., and R. J. Uhing. Chemoattractant stimulus-response coupling. In: *Inflammation: Basic Principles and Clinical Correlates*, edited by J. I. Gallin, I. M. Goldstein, and R. Snyderman. New York: Raven, 1992, pp. 412–439.

135 Sohn, R. H., J. Chen, K. S. Koblan, P. F. Bray, and P. J. Goldschmidt-Clermont. Localization of a binding site for

136 Southwick, F., and C. Young. The actin released from profilin-actin complexes is insufficient to account for the increase in F-actin in chemoattractant-stimulated polymorphonuclear leukocytes. *J. Cell Biol.* 110:1965–1973, 1990.

137 Springer, T. A. Traffic signals on endothelium for lymphocyte recirculation and leukocyte emigration. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* 57:827–872, 1995.

138 Steimle, P. A., J. D. Hoffert, N. B. Adey, and S. W. Craig. Polyphosphoinositides inhibit the interaction of vinculin with actin filaments. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:18414–18420, 1999.

139 Stossel, T. P. The structure of cortical cytoplasm. *Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B* 299:275–289, 1982.

140 Stossel, T. P. The mechanical responses of white blood cells. In: *Inflammation: Basic Principles and Clinical Correlates*, edited by J. I. Gallin, I. M. Goldstein, and R. Snyderman. New York: Raven, 1992, pp. 459–475.

141 Stossel, T. P. On the crawling of animal cells. *Science* 260:1086–1094, 1993.

142 Suetsudu, S., H. Miki, H. Yamaguchi, T. Obinata, and T. Takenawa. Enhancement of branching efficiency by the actin filament-binding activity of N-WASP/WAVE2. *J. Cell. Sci.* 114:4533–4542, 2001.

143 Suetsugu, S., H. Miki, and T. Takenawa. The essential role of profilin in the assembly of actin for microspike formation. *EMBO J.* 17:6516–6526, 1998.

144 Sullivan, S. J., G. Dukas, and S. H. Zigmond. Asymmetric distribution of the chemotactic peptide receptor on polymorphonuclear leucocytes. *J. Cell Biol.* 99:1461–1467, 1984.

145 Sumi, T., K. Matsumoto, and T. Nakamura. Specific activation of LIM kinase 2 via phosphorylation of threonine 505 by ROCK, a Rho-dependent protein kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:670–676, 2001.

146 Sumi, T., K. Matsumoto, Y. Takai, and T. Nakamura. Cofilin phosphorylation and actin cytoskeleton dynamics regulated by Rho- and Cdc42-activated LIM-kinase 2. *J. Cell Biol.* 147:1519–1532, 1999.

147 Sun, H. Q., M. Yamamoto, M. Mejillano, and H. L. Yin. Gelsolin, a multifunctional actin regulatory protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274:33179–33182, 1999.

148 Svitkina, T. M., and G. G. Borisy. Arp2/3 complex and actin depolymerizing factor/cofilin in dendritic organization and treadmilling of actin filament array in lamellipodia. *J. Cell Biol.* 145:1009–1026, 1999.

149 Takenawa, T., and T. Itoh. Phosphoinositides, key molecules for regulation of actin cytoskeletal organization and membrane traffic from the plasma membrane. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 1533:190–206, 2001.

150 Takenawa, T., and H. Miki. WASP and WAVE family proteins: Key molecules for rapid rearrangement of cortical actin filaments and cell movement. *J. Cell. Sci.* 114:1801–1809, 2001.

151 Tall, E. G., I. Spector, S. N. Pentyal, I. Bitter, and M. J. Rebecchi. Dynamics of phosphoinositol 4,5-biphosphate in actin-rich structures. *Curr. Biol.* 10:743–746, 2000.

152 Thrasher, A. J., and S. Burns. Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: A disorder of haematopoietic cytoskeletal regulation. *Microsc. Res. Tech.* 47:107–113, 1999.

153 Tolias, K. F., J. H. Hartwig, H. Ishihara, Y. Shibasaki, L. C. Cantley, and C. L. Carpenter. Type Iα phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 5-kinase mediates Rac-dependent actin assembly. *Curr. Biol.* 10:153–156, 2000.

154 Tomhave, E. D., R. M. Richardson, J. R. Didsbury, L. Menard, R. Snyderman, and H. Ali. Cross desensitization of

receptors for peptide chemoattractants. J. Immunol. 153:3267–3275, 1994.

155 Troys, M. v., D. Dewitte, J. L. Verschelde, M. Goethals, J. Vandekerckhove, and C. Ampe. The competitive interaction of actin and PIP2 with actophorin is based on overlapping target sites: design of a gain-of-function mutant. Biochemistry 39:12181–12189, 2000.

156 Tsukita, S., and S. Yonemura. Cortical actin organization: Lessons from ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 274:34507–34510, 1999.

157 Tyagi, S. R., L. B. Klickstein, and A. Nicholson-Weller. C5a-stimulated human neutrophils use a subset of β2 integrins to support the adhesion-dependent phase of superoxide production. J. Leukocyte Biol. 68:679–686, 2000.

158 Ueda, H., R. Morishita, J. Yamauchi, H. Itoh, K. Kato, and T. Asano. Regulation of Rac and Cdc42 pathways by Gi during lysosphosphatic acid-induced cell spreading. J. Biol. Chem. 276:6846–6852, 2001.

159 Vanhaesebroeck, B., S. J. Leavers, K. Ahmadi, J. Timms, R. Kasto, P. C. Driscoll, R. Woscholski, P. J. Parker, and M. D. Waterfield. Synthesis and function of 3-phosphorylated inositol lipids. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 70:535–602, 2001.

160 Villalba, M., K. Bi, F. Rodriguez, Y. Tanaka, S. Schoenberger, and A. Altman. Vav 1/Rac-dependent actin cytoskeleton reorganization is required for lipid raft clustering in T cells. J. Cell Biol. 155:331–338, 2001.

161 Wagner, M., and A. Wegner. Similar affinities ADP and ATP for G actin at physiological salt concentrations. FEBS Lett. 162:112–116, 1983.

162 Walter, R. J., and W. A. Marasco. Direct visualization of formylpeptide receptor binding on rounded and polarized human neutrophils: Cellular and receptor heterogeneity. J. Leukocyte Biol. 41:377–391, 1987.

163 Wang, J., and E. J. Brown. Immune complex-induced integrin activation and L-plastin phosphorylation require protein kinase A. J. Biol. Chem. 274:24349–24356, 1999.

164 Watts, R. G., and T. H. Howard. Role of tropomyosin, alpha-actinin, and actin binding protein 280 in stabilizing Triton insoluble F-actin in basal and chemotactic factor activated neutrophils. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 28:155–164, 1994.

165 Weber, K. S. C., L. B. Klickstein, and C. Weber. Specific activation of leukocyte 2 integrins lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 and Mac-1 by chemokines mediated by distinct pathways via the subunit cytoplasmic domains. Mol. Biol. Cell. 10:861–873, 1999.

166 Weber, K. S. C., L. B. Klickstein, P. C. Weber, and C. Weber. Chemokine-induced monocyte transmigration requires cdc42-mediated cytoskeletal changes. Eur. J. Immunol. 28:2245–2251, 1998.

167 Weinand, R. G., A. J. Rosenspire, and H. R. Petty. Modeling the influence of ectodomain affinities on the spatial distribution of membrane receptors. J. Theor. Biol. 197:217–225, 1999.

168 Wells, T. N. C., A. E. I. Proudfoot, and C. A. Power. Chemokine receptors and their role in leukocyte activation. Immunol. Lett. 65:35–40, 1999.

169 Werr, J., X. Xie, P. Hedqvist, E. Ruoslahti, and L. Lindbom. β1 integrins are critically involved in neutrophil locomotion in extravascular tissue in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 187:2091–2096, 1998.

170 Willeke, T., S. Behrens, K. Scharffetter-Kochanek, P. Gaetgens, and B. Walzog. β2 integrin (CD11/CD18)-mediated

signaling involves tyrosine phosphorylation of c-Cbl in human neutrophils. J. Leukocyte Biol. 68:284–292, 2000.

171 Williams, D. A., W. Tao, F. Yang, C. Kim, Y. Gu, P. Mansfield, J. E. Levine, B. Petryniak, C. W. Derrow, C. Harris, B. Jia, Y. Zheng, D. R. Ambruso, J. B. Lowe, S. J. Atkinson, M. C. Dinuer, and L. Boxer. Dominant negative mutation of the hematopoietic-specific Rho GTPase, Rac2, is associated with a human phagocyte immunodeficiency. Blood 96:1646–1654, 2000.

172 Williams, M. A., and J. S. Solomkin. Integrin-mediated signaling in human neutrophil functioning. J. Leukocyte Biol. 65:725–736, 1999.

173 Wolven, A. K., L. D. Belmont, N. M. Mahoney, S. C. Almo, and D. G. Drubin. In vivo importance of actin nucleotide exchange catalyzed by profilin. J. Cell Biol. 150:895–903, 2000.

174 Woodside, D. G., A. Obergfell, L. Leng, J. L. Wilsbacher, C. K. Miranti, J. S. Brugge, S. J. Shattil, and M. H. Ginsberg. Activation of Syk protein tyrosine kinase through interaction with integrin β cytoplasmic domains. Curr. Biol. 11:1799–1804, 2001.

175 Worthylake, R. A., S. Lemoine, J. M. Watson, and K. Burridge. RhoA is required for monocyte tail retraction during transendothelial migration. J. Cell Biol. 154:147–160, 2001.

176 Wynmann, M. P., P. Kernen, D. A. Deranleau, and M. Baggiolini. Respiratory burst oscillations in human neutrophils and their correlation with fluctuations in apparent cell shape. J. Biol. Chem. 264:15829–15834, 1989.

177 Yang, C., M. Huang, J. DeBiasio, M. Pring, M. Joyce, H. Miki, T. Takenawa, and S. H. Zigmond. Profilin enhances Cdc42-induced nucleation of actin polymerization. J. Cell Biol. 150:1001–1012, 2000.

178 Yuli, I., and R. Snyderman. Rapid changes in light scattering from human polymorphonuclear leukocytes exposed to chemoattractants. Discrete responses correlated with chemotactic and secretory functions. J. Clin. Invest. 73:1408–1417, 1984.

179 Zhelev, D. V., A. M. Alteraifi, and R. M. Hochmuth. F-actin network formation in tethers and in pseudopods stimulated by chemoattractant. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 35:331–344, 1996.

180 Zhelev, D. V., D. Needham, and R. M. Hochmuth. Role of the membrane cortex in neutrophil deformation in small pipets. Biophys. J. 67:696–705, 1994.

181 Zicha, D., W. E. Allen, P. M. Brickell, C. Kinnon, G. A. Dunn, and G. E. Jones. Chemotaxis of macrophages is abolished in the Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome. Br. J. Haematol. 101:659–665, 1998.

182 Zigmond, S. H. Mechanism of sensing chemical gradients by polymorphonuclear leucocytes. Nature (London) 249:450–452, 1974.

183 Zigmond, S. H. Recent quantitative studies of actin filament turnover during cell locomotion. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 25:309–316, 1993.

184 Zigmond, S. H., M. Joyce, C. Yang, K. Brown, M. Huang, and M. Pring. Mechanism of Cdc42-induced actin polymerization in neutrophil extracts. J. Cell Biol. 142:1001–1012, 1998.

185 Zigmond, S. H., H. I. Levitsky, and B. J. Kreel. Cell polarity: an examination of its behavioral expression and its consequences for polymorphonuclear leucocyte chemotaxis. J. Cell Biol. 89:585–592, 1981.
