
Am J Physiol Regulatory Integrative Comp Physiol 283: R7–R28, 2002;  
10.1152/ajpregu.00738.2001.

**invited review**

# Chemokines and chemokine receptors in  
leukocyte trafficking

**TIMOTHY S. OLSON AND KLAUS LEY**  
Departments of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, Biomedical Engineering and  
Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908  

Olson, Timothy S., and Klaus Ley. Chemokines and chemokine  
receptors in leukocyte trafficking. *Am J Physiol Regulatory Integrative*  
*Comp Physiol* 283: R7–R28, 2002; 10.1152/ajpregu.00738.2001.—Chemokines regulate inflammation, leukocyte trafficking, and immune cell  
differentiation. The role of chemokines in homing of naive T lymphocytes  
to secondary lymphatic organs is probably the best understood of these  
processes, and information on chemokines in inflammation, asthma, and  
neurological diseases is rapidly increasing. Over the past 15 years,  
understanding of the size and functional complexity of the chemokine  
family of peptide chemoattractants has grown substantially. In this  
review, we first present information regarding the structure, expression,  
and signaling properties of chemokines and their receptors. The second  
part is a systems physiology-based overview of the roles that chemokines  
play in tissue-specific homing of lymphocyte subsets and in trafficking of  
inflammatory cells. This review draws on recent experimental findings  
as well as current models proposed by experts in the chemokine field.  
homing; chemoattractants; T cell; B cell; monocyte; neutrophil  

CHEMOKINES ARE SMALL CHEMOATTRACTANT peptides that  
are structurally very similar (189), as are their cognate  
receptors (130). Many of the proximal signal transduction  
pathways that are activated after receptor ligation  
are also very much alike (9, 12). However, the specific  
expression, regulation, and receptor binding patterns  
of each chemokine create a functional diversity that  
allows chemokines to play roles in such disparate processes  
as organogenesis (120), hematopoiesis (94), neuronal  
communication with microglia (76), and leukocyte trafficking (41).  
Chemokines may have originated from proteins with  
essential intracellular functions (186) through gene  
duplication and selected mutation at a relatively recent  
evolutionary stage (203). Some chemokines and  
their receptors may have evolved to fight specific infections (130). Conversely, some microorganisms such as  
the human immunodeficiency virus-1 (112) or herpesviruses (184) have evolved mechanisms to exploit the  
chemokine system to promote their survival in the  

host. Dysregulation of chemokines and chemokine receptors has also been implicated in various autoimmune conditions (7), further emphasizing the importance of understanding the physiological roles of this complex network of molecules.  
The chemoattractant property of chemokines was  
first demonstrated in a chemotaxis assay for neutrophils using interleukin-8 (IL-8) (200), and pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein-coupled receptor signaling  
was later shown to be required for this effect (129, 191). Soon after their discovery, some chemokines were found to be induced at sites of inflammation and required for proper recruitment of leukocytes to various tissues (10, 11). The goal of this review is to provide a current understanding regarding the roles of chemokines and their receptors in leukocyte recruitment to specific tissues under normal physiological conditions as well as in models of inflammation and disease.  

## STRUCTURE  

Chemokines (Table 1) are highly basic proteins of  
70–125 amino acids with molecular masses ranging  
from 6 to 14 kDa (94). Most are secreted, although  
some, such as fractalkine, are expressed on the cell  

Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: K. Ley,  
Health Science Center Box 800759, Charlottesville, VA 22908 (E-mail: klausley@virginia.edu).  

http://www.ajpregu.org 0363-6119/02 $5.00 Copyright © 2002 the American Physiological Society R7

Systematic Name* | Human Common Names | Mouse Common Names | Receptors Bound | Chemokine Type | Expression | Proposed Functional Expression Sites
--- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ---
CXCL1 | GROα, MGS A | MIP-2, KC | CXCR 2 | ELR+ | Inducible | Neutrophilic inflammatory sites; atherosclerotic lesions
CXCL2 | GROβ, MIP-2α | KC | CXCR 2 | ELR+ | Inducible |
CXCL3 | GROγ, MIP-2β | KC | CXCR 2 | ELR+ | Inducible |
CXCL4 | PF4 | PF4 |  | ELR− |  |
CXCL5 | ENA-78 | LIX | CXCR 2 | ELR+ | Inducible | Neutrophilic inflammatory sites
CXCL6 | GCP-2 | CKα-3 | CXCR 1, 2 | ELR+ | Inducible | Neutrophilic inflammatory sites
CXCL7 | NAP-2 |  | CXCR 2 | ELR+ | Inducible | Neutrophilic inflammatory sites
CXCL8 | IL-8 |  | CXCR 1, 2 | ELR+ | Inducible | Neutrophilic inflammation; liver, acute lung injury; atherosclerotic lesions
CXCL9 | Mig | Mig | CXCR 3 | ELR− | Inducible | Th1 inflammation; CNS,
CXCL10 | IP-10 | IP-10, CRG-2 | CXCR 3 | ELR− | Inducible | intestinal lesions
CXCL11 | I-TAC |  | CXCR 3 | ELR− | Inducible | Th1 inflammation
CXCL12 | SDF-1 | SDF-1 | CXCR 4 | ELR− | Constitutive | Bone marrow; thymus; lung; lymphoid organs
CXCL13 | BLC, BCA-1 | BLC, BCA-1 | CXCR 5 | ELR− | Constitutive | Lymphoid follicles
CXCL14 | BRAK, bolekine |  |  | ELR− |  |
CXCL15 | lungkine |  |  | ELR− |  |
CXCL16 | CXCL16 | CXCL16 | CXCR 6 | ELR−, TMD+ |  | Th1 inflammation
CCL1 | I-309 | TCA-3 | CCR 8 | 4 cysteines | Inducible | Th2 inflammation
CCL2 | MCP-1, MCAF | JE | CCR 2 | 4 cysteines | Inducible | Th1 inflammation; liver, CNS, allergic lung injury; atherosclerotic lesions
CCL3 | MIP-1α | MIP-1α | CCR 1, 5 | 4 cysteines | Inducible | Th1 inflammation; lung, CNS,
CCL4 | MIP-1β | MIP-1β | CCR 5, 8 | 4 cysteines | Inducible | atherosclerotic injury
CCL5 | RANTES | RANTES | CCR 1, 3, 5 | 4 cysteines | Inducible | Th1, Th2 inflammation; Lung, CNS, skin injury; atherosclerotic lesions
CCL6 | MRP-1 |  |  | 4 cysteines |  |
CCL7 | MCP-3 | MARC | CCR 1, 2, 3 | 6 cysteines | Inducible | Th1, Th2 inflammation; CNS,
CCL8 | MCP-2 | MCP-2 | CCR 3 | 4 cysteines | Inducible | lung injury
CCL9 | MRP-2, MIP-1γ |  |  | 6 cysteines |  |
CCL10 | CCF18 |  |  | 4 cysteines |  |
CCL11 | eotaxin | eotaxin | CCR 3 | 4 cysteines | Inducible | Th2 inflammation; allergic lung, skin disease
CCL12 | MCP-5 |  | CCR 2 | 4 cysteines | Inducible | Th1, Th2 inflammation; allergic lung disease
CCL13 | MCP-4 |  | CCR 2, 3 | 4 cysteines | Inducible |
CCL14 | HCC-1, CKβ1 |  | CCR 1 | 4 cysteines |  |
CCL15 | HCC-2, Lkn-1, MIP-5 |  | CCR 1, 3 | 6 cysteines |  |
CCL16 | HCC-4, LEC, Mtn-1 | LCC-1 | CCR 1 | 4 cysteines |  |
CCL17 | TARC | TARC | CCR 4 | 4 cysteines | Inducible | Th2 inflammation in skin
CCL18 | DC-CK1, PARC |  |  | 4 cysteines | Constitutive | Lymphoid T cell zones
CCL19 | MIP-3β, ELC, ckβ11 | MIP-3β, ELC | CCR 7 | 4 cysteines | Constitutive | Lymphoid T cell zones
CCL20 | MIP-3α, LARC | MIP-3α, LARC | CCR 6 | 4 cysteines | Constitutive | Intestinal villi; skin
CCL21 | 6Ckine, SLC, ckβ9 | SLC, TCA-4 | CCR 7 | 6 cysteines | Constitutive | Lymphoid organs, HEV
CCL22 | MDC, STCP1 | abcd-1 | CCR 4 | 4 cysteines | Both | Thymus; allergic lung disease; Th2 inflammation
CCL23 | MPIF-1, ckβ8-1 |  | CCR 1 | 6 cysteines |  |

Systematic Name* | Human Common Names | Mouse Common Names | Receptors Bound | Chemokine Type | Expression | Proposed Functional Expression Sites
--- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | ---
CCL 24 | MPIF-2, eotaxin-2 | CCR 3 | 4 cysteines | Inducible | Th 2 inflammation
CCL 25 | TECK, ckβ15 | TECK, ckβ15 | CCR 9 | 4 cysteines | Constitutive | Small intestine; thymus
CCL 26 | eotaxin-3, MIP-4α | CCR 3 | 4 cysteines | Inducible | Th 2 inflammation
CCL 27 | CTACK, ILC, E Skin | ALP, skinkine | CCR 10 | 4 cysteines | Constitutive | Skin
CX3CL1 | fractalkine | neurotactin | CX3CR1 | TMD+ | both | Ubiquitous
XCL1 | lymphotactin, ATAC | lymphotactin | XCR1 |

specific chemokines bind different types of glycosaminoglycans with divergent affinities (101). Glycosaminoglycan type can vary with cell type, location, and inflammatory status. Therefore, selective immobilization at a given site may be a regulatory step that determines chemokine function in certain tissues or inflammatory states. Furthermore, oligomerization of chemokine occurs on glycosaminoglycans and may provide a mechanism for gradient formation (81). Chemokines near their sites of production may form higher order oligomers on endothelial or extracellular matrix gly-

cosaminoglycans, thereby creating and preserving higher concentrations of chemokine near the initiating inflammatory or trafficking stimulus that cause the leukocyte to move up the chemokine gradient and toward the relevant site.

Other effects are more specific to certain chemokines and include cellular shape changes (Fig. 4), extension of lamellipodia through cytoskeletal restructuring, and release of oxygen radicals, histamine, and cytotoxic proteins from neutrophils, basophils, and eosinophils, respectively (9). Certain chemokines can trigger inte-

Fig. 1. Dendrogram showing the amount of protein sequence similarity among all known human chemokines. Protein sequences were obtained from the National Center for Biotechnology Information protein database. The phylogenetic tree was constructed using the Clustalw program provided by the European Bioinformatics Institute and analyzed using TreeView (139). The scale bar reflects the horizontal distance at which sequences diverge by 10% (90% identity). Amino acid identity between a pair of chemokines is given by \(1 - x\), where \(x\) is the sum of the 2 horizontal distances to the right of the pair's vertical branch point. For example, the horizontal distances before the vertical branch point of monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1 and MCP-3 are 13.6 and 12.4%, respectively. Therefore, the amino acid identity between these chemokines is \(100 - (13.6 + 12.4)\%\) or 74%. MDC, macrophage-derived chemokine; SDF, stromal cell derived factor; BCA, B cell-activating chemokine; IL, interleukin; NAP, neutrophil-activating protein; GRO, growth-related oncogene; ENA, Epithelial cell-derived neutrophil-activating factor; I-TAC, interferon-inducible T cell chemoattractant; Mig, monokine induced by \(\gamma\)-interferon; IP, inducible protein; CTACK, cutaneous T cell attracting chemokine; LARC, liver- and activation-induced chemokine; RANTES, regulated on activation normal T cell expressed and secreted; MIP, macrophage inflammatory protein; DC, dendritic cell; HCC, hemofiltrate cc chemokine; MPIF, myeloid progenitor inhibitory factor; TARC, thymus- and activation-related chemokine; TECK, thymus-expressed chemokine; ELC, Epstein-Barr virus-induced receptor ligand chemokine; SLC, secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine.

MDC  
SDF-1  
BCA-1  
IL-8  
NAP-2  
GRO\(_{\gamma}\)  
GRO\(_{\alpha}\)  
GRO\(_{\beta}\)  
ENA-78  
GCP-2  
BRAK  
I-TAC  
Mig  
IP-10  
CXCL16  
CTACK  
Fractalkine  
LARC  
Lymphotactin  
SCM-1\(\beta\)  
Eotaxin-2  
I-309  
MCP-4  
MCP-2  
Eotaxin  
MCP-1  
MCP-3  
Eotaxin-3  
RANTES  
MIP-1\(\beta\)  
MIP-1\(\alpha\)  
DC-CK1  
HCC-2  
MPIF-1  
HCC-1  
HCC-4  
TARC  
TECK  
ELC  
SLC

0.1

AJP-Regulatory Integrative Comp Physiol • VOL 283 • JULY 2002 • www.ajpregu.org

INVITED REVIEW

Fig. 2. Comparison of the 3-dimensional structures of human CXC homeostatic [stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1], CXC inflammatory (GROα), and CC inflammatory (RANTES) chemokines. Each chemokine is displayed with NH₂ terminus on the right and COOH-terminal α-helix to the left. The 2 disulfide bonds are also shown. Protein Data Bank files for SDF-1 (ID#1QG7), GROα (ID#1MGS), and RANTES (ID#1RTO) were obtained from the National Center for Biotechnology Information structure database. Files were analyzed using RasWin 2.6-ucb (Roger Sayle, Glaxo Wellcome, Hertfordshire, UK).

grin-dependent firm adhesion of rolling cells, an important step in the trafficking of leukocytes to sites of inflammation (107). IL-8 and monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1 can trigger β₂-integrin-mediated firm adhesion of monocytes (57) on intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1)-expressing cells in flow chambers. KC, a mouse chemokine related to IL-8, but not JE, mouse MCP-1, triggers arrest of monocytes via

Table 2. Characteristics of chemokine receptors

| Receptor | High Affinity Ligands | Functional Expression on Immune Cells | Roles in Leukocyte Trafficking |
|----------|------------------------|---------------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| CXCR1    | CXCL 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8 | PMN, mast cells, monocytes, macrophages | Recruitment of myeloid-lineage cells to inflammatory sites including liver, lung, atherosclerotic lesions |
| CXCR2    | CXCL 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8 | PMN, mast cells, monocytes, macrophages | Recruitment of myeloid-lineage cells to inflammatory sites including liver, lung, atherosclerotic lesions |
| CXCR3    | CXCL 9, 10, 11        | T cells (Th1 > Th2), B cells, NK       | Recruitment of lymphocytes to Th1-type inflammatory sites including CNS, intestine |
| CXCR4    | CXCL 12               | most progenitor cells, T cells, B cells, PMN, monocytes, macrophages, DC | Bone marrow and follicular B cell emigration; thymocyte homing; early recruitment of T cells to inflamed lung |
| CXCR5    | CXCL 13               | B cells, memory T cells              | Lymphocyte migration to B cell follicles |
| CXCR6    | CXCL 16               | memory T cells                       | Recruitment of Th1 cells to inflamed sites |
| CCR1     | CCL 3, 5, 7, 14, 15, 16, 23 | memory T cells                      | Recruitment to most types of inflammation including liver, lung, CNS, atherosclerosis |
| CCR2     | CCL 2, 7, 12, 13      | monocytes, DC, NK, basophils, PMN     | Recruitment to Th2-type inflammatory sites including lung and skin |
| CCR3     | CCL 5, 7, 8, 13, 15, 24, 26 | eosinophils, basophils, mast cells, T cells (Th2 > Th1) | Recruitment to Th2-type inflammatory sites including lung and skin |
| CCR4     | CCL 17, 22            | T cells (Th2 > Th1)                  | Lymphocyte recruitment to Th2-type inflammatory sites including lung and skin |
| CCR5     | CCL 3, 4, 5           | progenitors, Th1 cells, monocytes, macrophages, DC | Recruitment to Th1-type inflammatory sites including CNS, atherosclerotic lesions |
| CCR6     | CCL 20                | memory T cells, DC                   | Langerhans-type DC homing to skin |
| CCR7     | CCL 19, 21            | T cells, B-cells, DC                 | Homing to secondary lymphoid organs |
| CCR8     | CCL 1, 4              | Th2 Cells                            | T cell recruitment to Th2-type inflammatory sites |
| CCR9     | CCL 25                | α₄β₇+T cells, DC, macrophages, thymocytes | T cell homing to small intestine; thymocyte selection |
| CCR10    | CCL 27                | CLA+T cells                          | T cell homing to skin |
| CCR11    | CCL 2, 8, 13          | n.a.                                 | - |
| CX₃CR1   | CX₃CL1                | PMN, monocytes, NK, T cells          | Recruitment to inflammatory sites |
| XCR1     | XCL 1, XCL 2          | T cells                             | - |

NK, natural killer cell; DC, dendritic cell; PMN, polymorphonuclear granulocyte; CLA, cutaneous lymphocyte antigen.

AJP-Regulatory Integrative Comp Physiol • VOL 283 • JULY 2002 • www.ajpregu.org

R12

INVITED REVIEW

Fig. 3. Dendrogram showing the amount of protein sequence similarity among all known human chemokine receptors. Protein sequences were obtained from the National Center for Biotechnology Information protein database. The phylogenetic tree was constructed using the Clustalw program provided by the European Bioinformatics Institute and analyzed using TreeView (139). The scale bar reflects the horizontal distance at which sequences diverge by 10% (90% identity). Amino acid identity between a pair of chemokine receptors is given by \(1 - x\), where \(x\) is the sum of the 2 horizontal distances to the right of the pair's vertical branch point. For example, the horizontal distances before the vertical branch point of CXCR1 and CXCR2 are 12.9 and 11.8%, respectively. Therefore, the amino acid identity between these chemokine receptors is \(100 - (12.9 + 11.8)\)% or 75.3%.

α₄β₁-integrin in atherosclerotic arteries (84). Secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC), liver- and activation-induced chemokine (LARC), Epstein-Barr virus-induced receptor ligand chemokine (ELC), and stromal cell-derived factor (SDF)-1, but not IL-8, MCP-1, regulated on activation normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES), eotaxin, macrophage inflammatory protein-1α (MIP-1α), or thymus-and activation-related chemokine (TARC), also trigger firm adhesion of lymphocytes on ICAM-1 (31). SLC is the only known chemokine that can trigger α₄β₇-integrin-mediated firm adhesion of lymphocytes to mucosal addressin cellular adhesion molecule-1 (MAdCAM-1) (138). Mice lacking CXCR2 show elevated leukocyte rolling velocity (128), suggesting potential involvement of this receptor in slowing down rolling leukocytes via engagement of β₂-integrins before arrest (100).

Most work pertaining to signal transduction events (Fig. 5) downstream from chemokine receptor ligation thus far has focused on neutrophils and interactions between CXCR1, CXCR2, and their respective ligands (9, 12). Except for the receptor desensitization pathways discussed below, most signaling depends on coupling through Bordatella pertussis toxin-sensitive G proteins (20). CXCR1 and CXCR2 couple most commonly through Gα₁₂, but also through Gα₁₄, Gα₁₅, and Gα₁₆, but not Gαq or Gα₁₁ (191). Downstream of G proteins, receptor ligation leads to activation of many

AJP-Regulatory Integrative Comp Physiol • VOL 283 • JULY 2002 • www.ajpregu.org

intracellular pathways. One consequence of ligation shared by all chemokine receptors with the exception of low affinity receptors such as the Duffy antigen receptor complex (33) is activation of phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase C, which through inositol triphosphate and diacylglycerol leads to transient increases in cytosolic free Ca²⁺ through mobilization of intracellular stores of Ca²⁺ and activation of protein kinase C. In neutrophils, both of these steps are required for granule release and superoxide production but not for migration (11). Cytoskeletal restructuring leading to shape changes, firm adhesion, and chemotaxis results from the activation of small GTPases such as Rho (20, 104). CXCR1, but not CXCR2, activates phospholipase D, leading to superoxide formation by human neutrophils (91, 102). MAP kinases such as ERK2 (90), protein kinase B (179), and numerous transcription factors are also upregulated by receptor ligation. Phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinases (PI3K) are activated by Gβγ, small GTPases, SRC-related tyrosine kinase and phosphotyrosines binding the SH2 domain of PI3K (12) and may play key roles in chemokine signal transduction (178, 180), including chemotactic migration (11) and homologous and heterologous desensitization (Fig. 5).

Homologous receptor desensitization occurs when a receptor binds chemokine and is phosphorylated by a G protein receptor-coupled kinase (4, 150). The receptor is subsequently internalized. This mechanism plays a major role in determining the duration of leukocyte trafficking, migration, or sequestration in certain situations (146). Heterologous desensitization occurs without receptor ligation and results from serine phosphorylation of the receptor by a kinase activated by a different signaling cascade (105). One example is the desensitization of CXCR1, CXCR2, CXCR4, and CCR5 through activation of formyl peptide receptors by the tripeptide formylmethionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (fMLP) (4, 43). Only in some instances is this desensitization accompanied by internalization of the receptor. Unlike homologous desensitization, this pathway is completely inhibited by blocking protein kinase C. The importance of this phenomenon in inflammation and leukocyte trafficking is not completely clear (105), but the capacity for heterologous desensitization appears to be different among chemoattractant receptors, suggesting a hierarchy of chemoattractants (54).

### SPECIFICITY AND INTERSPECIES VARIATION

Chemokine and chemokine receptor pairs vary widely in terms of selectivity (Tables 1 and 2). Certain chemokines bind only one receptor and vice versa, such as the exclusive interactions of CXCR4 with SDF-1 (42), CXCR5 with B cell-activating chemokine-1 (BCA-1) (106), CCR6 with LARC (199), CCR9 with thymus-expressed chemokine (TECK) (99), CCR10 with cutaneous T cell attracting chemokine (CTACK) (79), and CXCR6 with CXCL16 (124). Another pattern of pairing involves chemokine receptors that exclusively bind two or three chemokines, as illustrated by CCR7 binding SLC and ELC (197, 198), CXCR3 binding γ-interferon-inducible protein (IP-10), monokine induced by γ-interferon (Mig), and interferon-inducible T cell chemoattractant I-TAC (35, 110), CCR4 binding TARC and macrophage-derived chemokine (MDC) (85), and CCR8 binding TARC and T cell-activation protein-3 (TCA-3) (202). Many other receptors and chemokines are far more promiscuous. CCR3 for instance has been shown to bind eotaxin, eotaxin-2, eotaxin-3, MCP-2, MCP-3, MCP-4, and RANTES (9). RANTES has been shown to bind at least CCR1, CCR3, and CCR5 with high affinity (130). There are also chemokines such as lungkine (152) and dendritic cell chemokine-1 (DC-CK1) (1) that exert their effects through as yet unidentified receptors. In general, chemokines and receptors that are involved in inflammatory trafficking

and activation of cells tend to participate in overlapping and redundant pairing, whereas those involved in homeostatic homing tend to show more exclusive interactions. Chemokines from the same gene cluster all tend to bind the same or similar receptors. The genes for many inducible inflammatory CC chemokines are on human chromosome 17, all of the ELR+ CXC chemokines are on chromosome 4, ELC and SLC are on chromosome 9, and MDC and TARC are on chromosome 16 (130).

The relatively late evolutionary appearance of chemokines resulted in a large amount of chemokine and receptor variation among species. Although CXCR1 is thought to play a pivotal role in neutrophil recruitment in humans (11), it does not appear to have a homolog in mice, and whereas a homologous protein is present in rats, it is expressed on macrophages and not neutrophils (130). Human chemokines for which a mouse homolog has not yet been discovered include IL-8, neutrophil-activating protein-2 (NAP-2), I-TAC, MCP-4, hemofiltrate CC chemokine-1 (HCC-1), myeloid progenitor inhibitory factor-1 (MIPF-1) and -2, and eotaxin-2 and -3, whereas mouse chemokines with no human counterpart include MIP-related protein-1 (MRP-1) and -2, lungkine, and MCP-5 (203). Findings in animal studies, though often very beneficial to understanding human chemokine and receptor actions, should therefore be interpreted cautiously.

## EXPRESSION PATTERNS

Chemokines are typically expressed in one of two characteristic patterns (Table 1). Chemokines involved in homeostatic trafficking such as SDF-1, BCA-1, SLC, ELC, CTACK, and TECK are expressed constitutively by many cell types in tissue-specific sites and contribute to homeostatic homing in these areas as discussed in detail below. The expression of inflammatory chemokines, in contrast, is induced only under specific conditions, typically by inflammatory cytokines. In general, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), IL-1β, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α induce broad expression of inflammatory chemokines by a variety of cell types,

Fig. 5. Overview of the major intracellular signaling events induced by a chemokine binding to its receptor and activating responses in a neutrophil (top). In response to strong or prolonged chemokine stimulus, the receptor undergoes homologous desensitization (middle), in which phosphorylation by a G protein-coupled receptor kinase leads to (thick arrow) uncoupling of G proteins, binding of arrestins, and subsequent internalization of the receptor. Heterologous desensitization (bottom) occurs through activation of protein kinase C and protein kinase A by another chemoattractant, leading to (thick arrow) phosphorylation of the receptor and phospholipase Cβ2, respectively, and the subsequent inactivation, but not internalization, of the receptor. αi2βγ, G-protein subunits; PLD, phospholipase D; PLCβ2, phospholipase C isoform β2; STK, soluble tyrosine kinase; PA, phosphatidic acid; DAG, diacylglycerol; PKC, protein kinase C; IP3, inositol triphosphate; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; Akt, protein kinase B; GPCRK, G-protein-coupled receptor kinase; fMLP, formylmethionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; MAP kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinase; Ras and Rho, small G proteins; P, phosphate.

whereas other inflammatory mediators induce more
specific responses (172). T-helper 1 (Th1)-like re-
sponses produce inflammatory reactions characterized
by interactions between macrophages, neutrophils,
and type-1 helper T cells that produce the cytokines
IFN-γ and IL-12. Th2 responses produce allergic reac-
tions involving eosinophils, mast cells, basophils, and
type-2 helper T cells that produce the cytokines IL-4
and IL-13 (184). IFN-γ induces expression of a number
of chemokines that act to recruit monocytes, neutro-
phils, and Th1 lymphocytes, while IL-4 and IL-13 in-
duce MCP-1, eotaxin, TCA-3, TARC, and MDC, which
lead to a Th2 pattern of cell recruitment. IL-4 and
IFN-γ can antagonize each other's chemokine induc-
tion (23). Only activated effector lymphocytes usually
respond to inflammatory chemokines, because naive
cells typically do not express receptors for these che-
mokines (172).

Chemokine receptors fall loosely into two categories
of expression, those expressed exclusively on a small
number of leukocyte types and those that are more
broadly expressed. CXCR4, present on T cells, B cells,
monocytes, neutrophils, blood-derived dendritic cells,
and others, is the most widely expressed chemokine
receptor. CXCR1 and CXCR2 are expressed on most
leukocytes but appear to be functionally significant
only for neutrophils, monocytes/macrophages, and
mast cells (130, 135). CXCR3, CXCR5, and CXCR6 are
expressed exclusively on cells of lymphoid lineage (51,
147, 182). CCR1, CCR2, and CCR4-CCR10 are ex-
pressed mainly on lymphocytes, monocytes, and mono-
cyte-derived dendritic cells (130). CCR3 has a unique
expression pattern, as it is found on eosinophils, mast
cells, basophils, Th2 lymphocytes, and certain den-
dritic cell populations (155, 161).

Chemokine receptor expression is also regulated by a
variety of inflammatory stimuli (172). T cell expression
of CCR1, CCR2, and CXCR3 is induced and main-
tained by IL-2, but inhibited by activation through the
CD3 complex (111, 113), whereas CCR3 expression
requires the synergistic effects of IL-2 and IL-4 (88).
CCR5 is upregulated by Th1 cytokines, but can be
suppressed by IL-10 (140), whereas CXCR4 can be
upregulated or downregulated by IL-4 or IFN-γ, re-
spectively (5). Transforming growth factor-β decreases
CCR1, CCR2, CCR3, and CCR5, whereas it upregu-
lates CCR7. Interferon-α, which induces expression of
CCR1 and decreases CCR4, can either increase or
decrease CCR3 and CXCR3 expression depending on T
cell polarization (160). Activation of cells can also
change chemokine expression. For T cells, activation
through T cell receptor stimulation triggers a decrease
in expression of CCR1, CCR2, CCR3, and CCR5; in-
creased expression of CCR7, CCR8, and CXCR5; and
experimental condition-specific changes in levels of
CXCR3, CCR4, and CXCR4 (119, 172). Activation leads
to decreased CXCR5 on B cells (51), whereas maturing
monocyte-derived dendritic cells switch off expression
of receptors for inflammatory chemokines and increase

INVITED REVIEW
R15
expression of lymph node-homing chemokines (162).
Thus expression of chemokine receptors is an axis of
regulation that can greatly influence leukocyte traf-
ficking patterns.

ROLE OF CHEMOKINES IN TISSUE-SPECIFIC
LEUKOCYTE TRAFFICKING

Secondary lymphoid organs. Secondary lymph or-
gans play critical roles in the initiation of immune
responses by serving as sites where naive T cells and B
cells become activated through interactions with circu-
lating memory cells and maturing dendritic cells arriv-
ing from sites of inflammation. These interactions
serve as the basis for the selection, proliferation, and
reprogramming of antigen-specific B cells and T cells,
which enables homing of the correct subtypes of these
cells to sites of inflammation where the initiating agent
can be contained and destroyed (41). Whether these
events occur in lymph nodes, Peyer's patches, the
spleen, or in tonsilar tissue depends on the site of
antigen encounter by dendritic cells and the presence
of region-specific cell surface chemokine receptors and
adhesion molecules on leukocytes (28). For instance,
expression of the intestine-tropic integrin α4β7 causes
naive cells to home selectively to Peyer's patches (74).
The chemokine-dependent events (Fig. 6) that mediate
cellular interactions may be similar in the various
secondary lymphoid organs (27), but there is also evi-
dence for organ specificity (99).

Human immature dendritic cells derived from mono-
cytes express the inflammatory chemokine receptors
CXCR1, CCR1, CCR2, and CCR5 (162, 171), which
allow these cells to follow chemotactic gradients to
inflammatory sites. Once there, dendritic cells process
antigen and become exposed to the maturation-stimu-
lating cytokines TNF-α and IFN-γ (158). Maturing
dendritic cells express large amounts of MIP-1α and
MIP-1β through 3 h postinduction along with IP-10,
MCP-2, and RANTES in a more sustained fashion
(162). One consequence of this increased chemokine
expression is the downregulation of inflammatory che-
mokine receptors on maturing dendritic cells, particu-
larly CCR1 and CCR5, by homologous receptor desen-
sitization. Although transcriptional regulation may
also be involved, posttranscriptional events appear to
dominate (163). The second consequence of this up-
regulation of chemokines is that it strengthens the
original chemotactic gradient, further boosting recruit-
ment of immature dendritic cells, monocytes, and T
cells and creating a continuous antigen-sampling loop
(157). In addition, maturing dendritic cells increase
CCR4, CXCR4, and CCR7 expression and ELC/SLC
responsiveness in a manner that is resistant to homo-
logous receptor desensitization (158). CCR7 induces
dendritic cell migration to secondary lymphatic organs
(53). ELC, TARC, MDC, and DC-CK1 are all upregu-
lated by maturing dendritic cells (162), leading to in-
creased interactions with and stimulation of T cells.

R16

INVITED REVIEW

Fig. 6. Chemokine involvement in dendritic cell and lymphocyte trafficking to and from secondary lymphoid organs. Dendritic cells undergoing maturation induced by interferon (IFN)-γ and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α lose expression of inflammatory chemokine receptors and increase expression of CCR7, leading to their trafficking to lymphoid organs through afferent lymphatics (*bottom left*). Naive T cells require secondary lymphoid tissue chemokine (SLC) to exit high endothelial venules (*top middle*) and follow SLC and Epstein-Barr virus-induced receptor ligand chemokine (ELC) gradients to T cell zones. At these sites, T cells differentiate into Th1, Th2, circulating memory, and follicular homing cells and the differential chemokine receptors expressed on these subsets produces trafficking to Th1-type inflammation (*bottom left*), Th2-type inflammation (*bottom right*), and B cell follicles, respectively. Naive B cells inside lymphoid organs traffic toward BLC expressed in follicles, whereas mature B cells leave the follicles by migrating toward SDF-1 expressed in the area surrounding the follicles.

Chemokines: IP-10 (pink diamond), SDF-1 (open circle), RANTES (blue circle), TARC (yellow triangle), IL-8 (black square), eotaxin (red trapezoid), MCP-1 (red square), MDC (green triangle), SLC (black star), ELC (black half-circle), BLC (red cross). PMN, neutrophil; Mφ, macrophage; DC, dendritic cell; T, naive T cell; Th1, Th1-type T cell; Th2, Th2-type T cell; T<sub>CM</sub>, circulating memory T cell; T<sub>FH</sub>, follicular homing T cell; EOS, eosinophil; BAS, basophil; MAST, mast cell; B, naive B cell; mB, mature B cell; HEV, high endothelial venule; MBP, major basic protein.

Entry of naive lymphocytes into lymph nodes occurs via transmigration across high endothelial venules beginning with a three-step sequential process involving L-selectin-mediated rolling, a chemokine-induced signaling event, and integrin-mediated firm adhesion to the endothelium (27, 184). In vitro experiments have shown that the signaling event required for firm adhesion is mediated by the chemokine SLC binding CCR7 on the surface of naive T lymphocytes (31). CCR7<sup>-/-</sup> mice show marked T cell and dendritic cell migration defects in lymph nodes and Peyer's patches (53). Similar defects are seen in *plt* mice that lack SLC

AJP-Regulatory Integrative Comp Physiol • VOL 283 • JULY 2002 • www.ajpregu.org

expression in lymphoid organs (70). Once inside lymphoid organs, T cells and dendritic cells migrate toward T cell zones in a process that requires CCR7, SLC, and ELC (41). SLC is produced by endothelial cells of lymphoid organs and stromal cells within T cell zones of spleen, lymph nodes, and Peyer's patches (72). ELC is expressed primarily in T cell areas by dendritic cells, macrophages, and other cells (41).

B cell trafficking to secondary lymphoid organs is much less altered by the absence of CCR7 or SLC (53, 70), suggesting other chemokines are involved in triggering firm adhesion of B cells on high endothelial venules. Naive B cells that recirculate to lymphoid organs express high levels of CXCR5 (51), which, through interactions with the chemokine BLC, leads to B cell migration into follicular areas and their subsequent maturation. BLC is produced specifically within B cell areas by stromal cells and follicular dendritic cells (71). CXCR5−/− and BLC−/− mice have disorganized lymph nodes and decreased antibody responses (6, 52). CXCR5 expression is decreased on activated B cells (51), which may allow their emigration from lymphoid organs. Interestingly, activation of germinal center B cells makes these cells temporarily unresponsive to SDF-1 despite maintaining CXCR4 expression (18). Once B cells are fully mature, responsiveness is regained to SDF-1 expressed in areas surrounding follicles, and thus this regulation may serve as a mechanism to block premature exit of maturing B cells from germinal centers (94).

Within T cell zones of lymph nodes and Peyer's patches, activation leads to the production of polarized sets of T cells. Th1 cells selectively express high levels of CCR5 and CXCR3, although functional CXCR3 is also expressed at low levels on Th2 cells (22, 114). These receptors, along with decreased levels of CCR7, are thought to allow migration of Th1 cells to inflammatory sites where IFN-γ has induced the production of IP-10, Mig, and MIP-1β (119). All Th2 lymphocytes express CCR4 and CCR8, and a subset in humans, but not mice (69), expresses CCR3 (5, 22). IL-4-induced MDC, TARC, TCA-3, and eotaxin can then recruit these cells to sites of allergic inflammation (22, 202). Activation of Th2 cells is also accompanied by markedly decreased CCR7 expression allowing for migration out of T cell zones and into B cell areas where these cells may participate in antibody production (121). Two nonpolarized subsets of T cells, tonsilar and blood follicular homing (Tfh) T cells, are also produced on T cell activation in T cell zones. These cells express high levels of CXCR5 while losing expression of CCR7 (26, 165). Tonsilar Tfh cells (CD4+, L-selectinlo, CD69hi) are localized within germinal centers of secondary lymphoid organs and may play a major role in antibody responses by expressing inducible costimulator (ICOS), a molecule that binds the signaling protein B7RP on B cells and induces antibody production (121). Blood Tfh (CD4+, CD69−, L-selectin+, ICOS−) regain expression of CCR7, do not possess immediate effector function,

and may be analogous to other types of circulating memory cells (159).

Memory T cells are generally grouped into central memory and effector memory T cell populations (158). Central memory cells express L-selectin, CCR1, CCR4, CCR6, and CCR7, while lacking CD69 and immediate effector function. CCR7 allows these cells to migrate through lymphoid organs to participate in activation of naive B and T cells. Effector memory cells are able to produce inflammatory cytokines or exhibit effector function. These cells express combinations of CCR1, CCR3, CCR4, CCR5, CCR6, and CXCR3. CD4+ memory cells can be of either central or effector type, whereas most CD8+ memory cells are of the effector type. Within 6 h of T cell receptor stimulation, effector memory cells lose this chemokine receptor expression and instead express CXCR5, CCR4, CCR7, and CCR8 (156). Naive cells stimulated in the presence or absence of IL-4 and IL-12 become effector memory or central memory cells, respectively (158). Recently, a new chemokine receptor, CXCR6, that is similar in humans and mice (182), has been shown to be induced on in vitro T cells primed in the presence of IL-12 but not IL-4 (95, 122). In blood, some CD4+ and CD8+ cells are CXCR6+. Very few CXCR6+ cells are found in lymph nodes, but large numbers are seen in sites of inflammation. This evidence suggests that CXCR6 may be a marker of effector Th1 and Tc1 cells. CXCR6 binds the chemokine CXCL16, a transmembrane or soluble protein produced by dendritic cells that attracts T cells and natural killer (NK) cells (124).

Lung inflammation. In asthma and animal models of allergic airway disease, many leukocytes, including mast cells, basophils, T cells, eosinophils, and alveolar macrophages, are recruited in tightly controlled spatial and temporal patterns associated with the pathophysiology of these diseases (73, 118). The adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) results from the accumulation of neutrophils within the pulmonary circulation and alveolar spaces via well-studied adhesion molecule-dependent and -independent pathways (44). Chemokines and chemokine receptors are thought to play critical roles in the recruitment, activation, and coordination of leukocytes in both disease processes.

Much information regarding the expression and function of chemokines in allergic airway disease (AAD) has been provided by the ovalbumin-sensitized/challenged AAD model, in which mice are given an intraperitoneal injection of ovalbumin, followed by intranasal challenge starting ~1 wk later (73). Production of chemokines has been measured in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) specimens and by immunostaining and in situ hybridization of the interstitium (87). These studies showed chemokine production by a variety of cell types, including alveolar epithelium, endothelium, smooth muscle, alveolar macrophages, and, at least for eotaxin, infiltrating T lymphocytes (73). In this study, Gutierrez-Ramos et al. (73) place chemokines into three groups on the basis of temporal expression. Eotaxin, MDC, and MCP-1 levels correlate with the

AJP-Regulatory Integrative Comp Physiol • VOL 283 • JULY 2002 • www.ajpregu.org

accumulation of eosinophils, T cells, and monocytes, respectively. RANTES, MCP-5, and MIP-1 levels increase nonspecifically over the course of inflammation. SDF-1 is expressed constitutively, and levels do not change over time. Interstitial eosinophilia and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) eosinophilia are blocked by antagonists to MCP-1, RANTES, and SDF-1 during both sensitization and challenge periods but not during challenge alone. These findings imply central roles for these chemokines in initial leukocyte subset recruitment. Eotaxin blockade decreases all eosinophilia regardless of time of administration. Blockade of MDC and MCP-5 has no effect on BAL eosinophilia but significantly blocks interstitial eosinophilia and consequent airway hyperreactivity and mucous secretion. These findings suggest that MDC and MCP-5 may be necessary to maintain sequestration of eosinophils within lung interstitial tissues (73).

The first cells to be recruited to the lungs during allergic inflammation are mast cells and basophils. MCP-1, MCP-2, MCP-3, RANTES, MIP-1α, and eotaxin, all expressed by various cells in the lung during early stages of inflammation, can recruit mast cells and basophils (118). Furthermore, both MCP-1 and RANTES can activate basophils to release histamine and produce other mediators (37). For example, intratracheal administration of MCP-1 has been shown to increase leukotriene C4 (LTC4) levels in BAL and leukotriene production in pulmonary mast cells (29). In the same study, mice deficient in CCR2 expression were shown to have decreased airway resistance and histamine release in a murine model of allergen airway inflammation induced by cockroach antigen. MCP-1 may be critical in the formation of allergic lung inflammation even in the absence of CCR2 (98). Furthermore, eotaxin can interact with MCP-1-activated basophils to increase their expression of IL-4, ensuring that a Th2-type environment is created and enabling subsequent migration of eosinophils and Th2 lymphocytes and the progression of the allergic response (118).

On the basis of studies using adoptive transfer of labeled cells along with neutralizing antibodies to various chemokines, Th2 lymphocyte homing to lungs during acute airway disease appears to sequentially rely on SDF-1, eotaxin, and MDC (73). SDF-1 is expressed constitutively in the lung, and accumulation of CXCR4+ cells always accompanies inflammatory changes within pulmonary tissue (64). Whether these cells represent critical precursors that recruit other leukocytes to produce inflammation or whether these cells home to the lung constitutively is unclear (73). The next phase of the response involves the upregulation of eotaxin by many cells including CXCR4+ Th2 cells and early expression of CCR3 by newly differentiated Th2 cells (108). The influx of more Th2 cells peaks around 4 days after the initial insult, CCR3 is subsequently downregulated, and CCR4 expression by Th2 lymphocytes and MDC expression throughout the lung are increased. CCR4 and MDC are required for maintenance of interstitial Th2 lymphocytes for the duration of the response (108).

Eosinophil accumulation and activation directly leads to allergic airway inflammation, as these cells release a variety of toxic granular proteins and lipid mediators that cause direct damage to alveolar cells and endothelium as well as indirect damage through influencing other physiological regulators (9). The end results of this damage include bronchial smooth muscle contraction, airway hyperreactivity, increased vascular permeability, and mucous hypersecretion. Initial recruitment of eosinophils is thought to be mediated primarily through CCR1/MIP-1α (153) and CCR3 and its many ligands expressed in the lung, including eotaxin, eotaxin-2, RANTES, MCP-3, and MCP-4 (118). Once fully activated and in tissues, however, eosinophils can migrate in response to MIP-1β via CCR5, TCA-3 via CCR8, and MDC in a process that does not involve CCR4 or CCR3 (19, 66).

CCR3 is involved in the initial lung-specific recruitment of mast cells, basophils, eosinophils, and Th2 cells, all four of the cell types that are critical in allergic lung inflammation. Mast cells, basophils, and eosinophils mediate the effector functions, whereas Th2 cells are required to make IgE antibody via IL-4 production and to prime and activate basophils and eosinophils via IL-5 (9). Blocking CCR3 using the decoy ligand Met-RANTES (189) can significantly block most aspects of allergic airway inflammation, including bronchial hyperactivity and CD4+ cell and eosinophil accumulation in the interstitium and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (65, 189). Blocking MIP-1α and RANTES using antibodies has also been shown to significantly reduce eosinophil accumulation (117). Alveolar macrophages have also been shown to play a role in chemokine-dependent leukocyte recruitment through low affinity IgE receptors (80). In response to large doses of antigen, IgE-dependent activation of these macrophages causes production of IL-8, MCP-1, and MIP-1α leading to the recruitment of neutrophils, eosinophils, and other leukocytes (67).

Although their role in allergic airway disease remains controversial (118), neutrophils are critical for producing the pathophysiology in sudden-onset atypical asthma (103) as well as in ARDS (45). Intratracheal instillation of IL-8 produces large influxes of neutrophils into the lungs in animal models (192). IL-8 is substantially elevated in BAL from patients with acute lung injury, and expression levels are positively correlated to neutrophil influx (103). Blocking IL-8 has been shown to ameliorate reperfusion-induced neutrophil influx within the lung (168). Epithelial cell-derived neutrophil-activating factor (ENA)-78 is stored in mast cells within the lung, and blockade with an antibody results in a large decrease in lung neutrophil accumulation (116). Surprisingly, eotaxin may negatively regulate neutrophil recruitment to the lung by blocking IL-8-mediated neutrophil chemotaxis (118). Eotaxin-deficient mice have increased neutrophil and decreased eosinophil numbers during acute allergic inflammation. The eosinophil deficit is compensated only much later in the response (154).

INVITED REVIEW

Leukocyte trafficking in the central nervous system. Leukocyte trafficking to the central nervous system (CNS) during homeostasis, antigen-specific inflammation, or trauma is complicated by the blood-brain barrier, which prevents most leukocytes from entering the CNS. Chemokines play key roles in overcoming this barrier (59). The CNS is unique in that chemokines are critical for the proper execution of many nonimmune functions. Knocking out the genes for SDF-1 or CXCR4 results in mice with an embryonic lethal phenotype, partly because of grossly abnormal organogenesis of the murine cerebellum (120). Fractalkine is expressed by neurons and is believed to bind CX3CR1 expressed by microglia, although the significance of this binding is unclear (76, 136, 167). Despite the blood-brain barrier, selective subsets of leukocytes can home to the CNS under baseline conditions. CXCR3+ T cells, representing 90% of all CD3+ cells in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), are seen in small numbers in the absence of inflammation (82), suggesting that this chemokine receptor may be required for T cell passage across the blood-brain barrier.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune condition in which antigen-specific Th1 cells cross the blood-brain barrier to mediate focal inflammation of the CNS, resulting in a variety of neurological symptoms and deficits (7). CSF levels of IP-10, Mig, and RANTES are increased in patients with MS undergoing active inflammatory demyelination compared with control subjects without disease (170). Consistent with Th1 lymphocytes being a key pathogenic cell type in this disease, CXCR3 is expressed on 99% of T cells that home to leukocyte-rich areas within MS lesions. These cells are attracted by IP-10, which is expressed at high levels in MS lesions (13, 147), perhaps by astrocytes that form the glial limitans (170). CD8+ T cells specific for myelin basic protein (MBP) are recruited by these Th1 cells and subsequently produce more IP-10, along with MIP-1α and MIP-1β, leading to a vicious cycle of T cell recruitment through CCR1, CCR5, and CXCR3 (17, 94). CCR5 is also expressed on many T cells, macrophages, monocytes, and microglia in CSF and active lesions of patients with MS (13, 170). The importance of CCR5 in recruitment of leukocytes during MS is emphasized by the better prognosis of patients with MS homozygous for the CCR5Δ32 mutation, a population including ~1% of all North American Caucasians (82).

Much has been learned regarding chemokine-dependent leukocyte homing to the CNS during inflammation through the experimental autoimmune encephalitis model (EAE), in which mice are given a subcutaneous injection of CNS myelin proteins in complete Freund's adjuvant followed by doses of pertussis toxin to manipulate disease severity and frequency (82). Symptoms, visible inflammation, and CNS-specific chemokine expression are always preceded by initial antigen-specific T cell infiltration into the CNS (61, 92). During initial inflammation, MCP-1, KC, RANTES, TCA3, and IP-10 are all expressed, possibly by astrocytes (149), 2 days before clinical symptoms (63), and these chemokines may play pivotal roles in leukocyte recruitment. In situ hybridization combined with immunocytochemistry for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), an indicator of the astrocyte reactive stress response known as astrogliosis, shows that IP-10 and MCP-1 colocalize with GFAP-producing astrocytes, implying that astrocytes may have to undergo astrogliosis to produce chemokines (175). As in MS, IP-10 and CXCR3 play critical roles in EAE. Antisense oligonucleotides for IP-10 (190) and anti-CXCR3 antibodies (7) can block mononuclear cell infiltration and disease development. In the relapsing phase of EAE, RANTES and MIP-1α are produced (60) in a temporal fashion that correlates with leukocyte infiltration and disease onset and resolution of the acute attack (175).

In animal models of cortex trauma (82), MCP-1 RNA is elevated 3 h after trauma, before initial infiltration of leukocytes (58). MCP-1/GFAP colocalization studies suggest that this MCP-1 is produced by astrocytes, and in neonatal models where astrogliosis does not occur, no increase in MCP-1 is seen (14). Spinal cord trauma models (82) have shown growth-related oncogene (GROα) to be key in producing neutrophil recruitment within 24 h (125). In the same study, MCP-1, MCP-5, MIP-3α, and IP-10, but not RANTES or MIP-1α, were elevated at later time points, implying that these chemokines may recruit cell types other than neutrophils to sites of spinal cord injury.

Lymphocyte trafficking and inflammation in the gastrointestinal system. The gastrointestinal system contains four spatially distinct populations of lymphocytes located within Peyer's patches, mesenteric lymph node, lamina propria, and epithelial tissue. Lymphocytes homing to any of these compartments express the α4β7-integrin, which binds to MAdCAM-1, an immunoglobulin-like molecule expressed exclusively by mucosal and high endothelial venules (16). Selective localization to one of the four gastrointestinal lymphatic compartments depends on expression of other surface markers. Most intraepithelial lymphocytes express the αEβ7-integrin, which can bind E-cadherin expressed on epithelial cells (3). The role of chemokines in regulating homeostatic homing and inflammatory trafficking of cells within this mucosal system is just beginning to be understood (119). SLC is the only chemokine that can trigger α4β7-mediated firm adhesion to MAD-CAM-1 in flow chambers in vitro (138), and thus by analogy to its role in peripheral lymph nodes, SLC may play a role in homing to Peyer's patches and mesenteric lymph node. The constitutive expression of a number of chemokines by intestinal epithelial cells has been noted (3), although the significance of most of these molecules is unclear. Positioning of chemokines at specific sites in the epithelium may be important. LARC is expressed by cells comprising the villous epithelium, but not by crypt cells, whereas TECK is expressed in the opposite pattern (99, 174). TECK, constitutively expressed selectively by the small intestine, has recently been postulated to play a critical role in homing

AJP-Regulatory Integrative Comp Physiol • VOL 283 • JULY 2002 • www.ajpregu.org

to the lamina propria and the epithelium of this organ. All small intestine-homing CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ T cells express CCR 9, the receptor that exclusively binds TECK (99).

Interestingly, there also appear to be inflammation-specific pathways of T cell trafficking to the gut (119). Under physiological conditions, virtually all lamina propria and intraepithelial lymphocytes express CXCR 3, and this expression can be significantly increased in vitro by IFN-γ (46, 169). In the same studies, CXCR 3 ligands, IP-10, and Mig were shown to be expressed on intestinal cells in vitro after IFN-γ treatment, and antibodies to these chemokines blocked intraepithelial lymphocyte chemotaxis in epithelial cell-conditioned medium. Thus Th1-type responses leading to the production of IFN-γ may cause intestine-specific homing through induction of chemokines and their respective receptors. This model may be applicable to ulcerative colitis, as IP-10 is expressed at high levels in focal lesions associated with this disease (181), although CCR3+Th2 cells are also present at these sites (56).

Skin-homing lymphocytes and cutaneous allergies. Skin-homing memory cells express the cutaneous lymphocyte antigen (CLA), which correlates with E-selectin binding of these cells (28). Specific responses to skin allergens are restricted to CLA+ cells (164). Two chemokines are also critical for skin-specific homing. CTACK, a recently discovered chemokine thought to be expressed exclusively in the skin by keratinocytes, selectively attracts CLA+ skin-homing T cells, which presumably express the CTACK receptor CCR10 (127). TARC is expressed in venules in chronically inflamed skin, and its receptor CCR4 is expressed on lymphocytes that infiltrate inflamed skin but not intestine (30). In the same study, TARC was shown to trigger integrin-dependent firm adhesion of CLA+ cells, but not α4β7+ cells, in flow chambers coated with ICAM-1 in vitro, further demonstrating the selective role TARC plays in recruitment of skin-homing cells. Through CCR6 binding, LARC is able to direct the constitutive homing of Langerhans-type dendritic cells to areas of the epidermis, providing resting antigen-presenting capability (32).

In inflamed skin lymphatics, the ability of glycosaminoglycans to bind RANTES, MCP-1, and MCP-3, but not MIP-1α or IL-8, is thought to play a role in determining which inflammatory cells are recruited (25, 83). RANTES and MCP-3 recruit CCR3+Th2 cells in patients with contact dermatitis (56), and these chemokines also activate eosinophils and basophils in vitro, causing their chemotaxis and the release of mediators such as histamine and leukotrienes (10). RANTES may also recruit and activate cutaneous mast cells, as a RANTES antagonist is effective in reducing eosinophilia and swelling by blocking mast cell degranulation (177, 189).

Chemokine-dependent leukocyte recruitment has been studied extensively in atopic dermatitis. The current model postulates that the initial phase of the disease is mediated by antigen-specific Th2 cells that produce local inflammation. These cells use chemokines to subsequently recruit eosinophils and macrophages, which then produce cytokines such as IL-12 that induce a switch to a Th1-type response (68). Eighty-five percent of T cells in skin inflammatory infiltrates are CLA+ (143). Eotaxin expression by resident mononuclear cells may be the key step in recruiting CCR3+Th2 cells and later eosinophils (80). T cell expression of eotaxin and CCR3 appears to be greatly elevated in patients with atopic dermatitis vs. normal controls, whereas there are no differences in MCP-3, MIP-1α, and IL-8 (195). RANTES is also increased in atopic lesions (166), although peak expression occurs at 24 h, much later than the peaks of chemokines that initially attract Th2 cells (196). Late expression of RANTES may help facilitate the switch from a Th2-to a Th1-type response, as RANTES can attract Th2 cells via CCR3 and Th1 cells via CCR5 (80).

Bone marrow. SDF-1 is expressed at high levels by stromal cells in bone marrow (176). Mice deficient in SDF-1 or its receptor CXCR4 do not survive past the first week in utero and have profound defects in hematopoiesis, particularly B cell lymphopoiesis and myelopoiesis (120, 131). Whereas in humans SDF-1 is thought to attract B cells in all stages of development, mouse SDF-1 only attracts pro- and pre-B cells (42). The current model is that SDF-1 may be important in directing B cells to proper sites of maturation within the bone marrow microenvironment, and the loss of SDF-1 responsiveness after maturation allows exit of mature B cells into the circulation (9). ELC and SLC have recently been shown to attract pre-B cells after CD34 expression is downregulated and before IgM is upregulated. CCR7 and its ligands may therefore also be important in allowing B cell emigration from bone marrow (96).

Thymus. In the thymus, dendritic cells involved in negative selection express MDC and TECK, and stromal cells have been shown to express TARC, SDF-1, LARC, SLC, and ELC (94). TECK attracts thymocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells in the thymus and may assist in negative selection by attracting macrophages to destroy double positive (CD4⁺, CD8⁺) thymocytes that are bound by dendritic cells with high avidity (183). SDF-1 may direct homing within the thymus of the more immature thymocyte populations, as it selectively attracts triple negative (CD3⁻, CD4⁻, CD8⁻), double negative (CD3⁺, CD4⁻, CD8⁻), and double positive thymocytes. In contrast, ELC selectively attracts the more mature single positive (CD4⁺ or CD8⁺) thymocyte population in the medulla and may aid in their migration into the circulation (97). MIP-1β, which binds CCR5 and CCR8, attracts double positive or single positive thymocytes and may be involved in differentiation of CD8⁺ or CD4⁺ subsets, as double positive and CD8⁺ thymocytes express the MIP-1β receptor CCR5, whereas CD4⁺ thymocytes are attracted to this chemokine via CCR8 (94). MDC, LARC, and SLC are expressed in thymus but do not attract immature thymocytes. These chemokines may be re-

responsible for negative feedback of T cell production
mediated by circulating mature cells. (94)
Liver. Specialized resident NK 1.1+ T cells and
Kupffer cells home to the liver constitutively by as yet
unknown mechanisms. In acetaminophen-induced
liver toxicity (APAP), MCP-1 is expressed at high levels, potentially by Kupffer cells (21). CCR2−/− mice
develop substantially more injury than do wild-type
mice, and this susceptibility can be ameliorated by
blocking TNF-α or IFN-γ (78), suggesting MCP-1 and
CCR2 may have protective functions during this type
of oxidative injury. Fractalkine is also expressed by
Kupffer cells in APAP, and fractalkine −/− mice show
decreased neutrophil infiltration, serum aspartate
aminotransferase (AST), and overall injury (21). ELR+
CXC chemokine administration usually leads to increased
infiltration of inflammatory cells but decreases
APAP injury due to direct proliferative effects on hepatocytes (77). These effects may also be required for
hepatic regrowth in partial resection models (36). Is-
chemia/reperfusion models, unlike APAP models, have
shown that MCP-1 is increased by reactive oxygen
species and may produce injury by increasing ICAM-1
expression on hepatic endothelium (194). Reducing
this chemokine decreases subsequent injury (193), suggesting that reperfusion-induced inflammation and
subsequent oxygen radical production may occur by a
mechanism distinct from that of APAP. In chronic
alcoholic liver disease and cirrhosis (21), MCP-1 is
required for infiltration of monocytes and subsequent
inflammation and fibrosis, and expression levels correlate
with AST levels and severity of injury (2, 50, 123).
IL-8, MCP-1, and MIP-2 are produced by ethanol-
challenged hepatocytes in rats and are linked to increased
ICAM-1 and vascular cellular adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) expression, both of which are
required for neutrophil infiltration (132, 142). T cell
migration during chronic hepatitis appears to be selectively
controlled by liver expression of IP-10 (173),
suggesting that the infiltrating cells may have a Th1
phenotype.
Atherosclerosis and vasculitis. Chemokines are also
involved in site-specific homing of leukocytes to athero-
sclerotic plaques. RANTES, released by thrombin-
stimulated platelets, is present on the luminal surface
of carotid arteries of apolipoprotein E-deficient mice
with early atherosclerotic lesions, and this chemokine
along with KC, but not MCP-1, can trigger monocyte
arrest on atherosclerotic endothelium in an ex vivo-
perfused carotid artery model (84, 185). The formation
of a plaque is believed to begin through accumulation
of minimally modified low-density lipoproteins (MM-
LDL), which become trapped in the extracellular matrix of subendothelial spaces and stimulate endothelial
cells and smooth muscle cells to produce MCP-1 and
IL-8 (40). KC, a murine chemokine related to human
IL-8 and GRO-α, triggers arrest of rolling monocytes in
atherosclerotic arteries (84). Subsequent transmigration
of large numbers of monocytes into the subendo-
thelial space can be blocked by high-density lipopro-
teins (HDL), antioxidants, or anti-MCP-1 antibodies
(133). Apolipoprotein E-deficient mice lacking CCR2
show smaller lesion sites than apolipoprotein E-deficient control mice (24). Once monocytes are present,
MM-LDL are oxidized and taken up by monocytes,
creating foam cells that produce MCP-1, IL-8, MIP-1α,
MIP-1β, and RANTES (187). These chemokines promote migration of CCR2+ and CCR5+ macrophages
and lymphocytes into the plaque. Many of these chemokines have other, pleiotropic effects within plaques
(187). MCP-1 induces proliferation of smooth muscle
cells (145), whereas IL-8 is mitogenic and chemotactic
for smooth muscle cells (201). IP-10, also expressed at
high levels in plaques, attracts lymphocytes via
CXCR3, but also attracts and leads to the proliferation
of smooth muscle cells (188). RANTES, thought to be
important in typical plaque formation by recruiting
lymphocytes, has been shown to be required in variants such as transplantation-associated accelerated
atherosclerosis (141).
Wegener’s granulomatosis is a disease characterized
by a systemic necrotizing vasculitis likely caused
by cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
(cANCA) that recognize a proteinase expressed on the
surface of TNF-α-primed neutrophils and monocytes
(15). IL-8 may play a key role in the pathogenesis of
this vasculitis, as cANCA has been shown to greatly
increase IL-8 expression by TNF-primed peripheral
blood monocytes (148). RANTES has been localized to
Wegener’s lesions and therefore may also play a role
(39). IL-8 expression is also significantly increased by
neutrophils and mononuclear cells isolated from patients with systemic vasculitis due to Kawasaki disease (8). Serum RANTES levels correlate closely with
disease activity in Takayasu arteritis (137). MCP-1 is
present in the vessel wall and plasma MCP-1 levels are
significantly elevated in patients with temporal arteritis and polymyalgia rheumatica (47). In a rat model of
chronic adjuvant-induced vasculitis, infusion of MCP-1
produces a large increase in neutrophil transendothelial migration (89), suggesting that MCP-1 may play a
critical role in the development of vascular lesions.
Other diseases. Chemokine-dependent inflammation
in other tissues is just beginning to be understood.
Fractalkine has been shown to induce glomerulonephritis (48), whereas MetRANTES and MIP-2 antibodies have been shown to be effective in treating this
disease (49, 109). Interestingly, RANTES expression in
the kidney is downregulated by activation of NO production pathways (94). MetRANTES can also block
inflammation in collagen-induced arthritis, a murine
model of rheumatoid arthritis (144). IP-10 levels are
high in rheumatic fluid, as are the levels of CXCR3+
and CCR5+ Th1 cells, but not CCR3+ Th2 cells (56).
Coxsackie virus-induced myocarditis appears to involve MIP-1α (38), implying that there are important
roles for chemokines in heart pathology as well. Chemokines are also thought to play critical roles in acute
allograft rejection (134). Expression of CXCR3, CXCR4,
and CCR5 was upregulated on circulating and graft-


This is the OCR output converted to Markdown format as requested.
infiltrating lymphocytes after liver transplantation (62). The presence of CXCR3 and IP-10 correlated strongly with acute rejection of human cardiac allografts (126). CXCR3 -/- and CCR5 -/- mice or mice treated with neutralizing antibodies to either of these receptors appear to be resistant to the development of cardiac allograft rejection (55, 75).

FUTURE DIRECTIONS

Because of the structural and functional differences of chemokines between humans and rodents (203), the development of animal models that are true representations of human conditions is challenging. Another challenge is the production of antibodies and small molecule inhibitors of chemokine receptors and chemokines (146). Data obtained with these reagents would complement data from knockout animals to help determine causal relationships between chemokines and certain homing patterns in homeostasis and inflammation. Much more work needs to be done to understand constitutive lymphocyte homing pathways, particularly for lung, liver, spleen, the gastrointestinal system, and the CNS. Due to the redundancy of the chemokine system, further understanding of general intracellular events produced by chemokine receptor ligation is necessary to understand how cell movement toward a chemotactic gradient is regulated and how chemokines interact with other classes of chemoattractants and their receptors. This knowledge would allow development of therapeutic interventions at the signaling level that may be broadly applicable to large sets of chemokines and their receptors, thereby producing better clinical outcomes in complex inflammatory diseases.

REFERENCES

1. Adema GJ, Hartgers F, Verstraten R, de Vries E, Marland G, Menon S, Foster J, Xu Y, Nooyen P, McClanahan T, Bacon KB, and Figdor CG. A dendritic-cell-derived C-C chemokine that preferentially attracts naive T cells. *Nature* 387: 713–717, 1997.
2. Afford SC, Fisher NC, Neil DA, Fear J, Brun P, Hubscher SG, and Adams DH. Distinct patterns of chemokine expression are associated with leukocyte recruitment in alcoholic hepatitis and alcoholic cirrhosis. *J Pathol* 186: 82–89, 1998.
3. Agace WW, Higgins JM, Sadasivan B, Brenner MB, and Parker CM. T-lymphocyte-epithelial-cell interactions: integrin alpha(E)(CD103)beta(7), LEEP-CAM and chemokines. *Curr Opin Cell Biol* 12: 563–568, 2000.
4. Ali H, Richardson RM, Haribabu B, and Snyderman R. Chemoattractant receptor cross-desensitization. *J Biol Chem* 274: 6027–6030, 1999.
5. Annunziato F, Cosmi L, Galli G, Beltrame C, Romagnani P, Manetti R, Romagnani S, and Maggi E. Assessment of chemokine receptor expression by human Th1 and Th2 cells in vitro and in vivo. *J Leukoc Biol* 65: 691–699, 1999.
6. Ansel KM, Ngo VN, Hyman PL, Luther SA, Forster R, Sedgwick JD, Browning JL, Lipp M, and Cyster JG. A chemokine-driven positive feedback loop organizes lymphoid follicles. *Nature* 406: 309–314, 2000.
7. Arimilli S, Ferlin W, Solvason N, Deshpande S, Howard M, and Mocci S. Chemokines in autoimmune diseases. *Immunol Rev* 177: 43–51, 2000.
8. Asano T and Ogawa S. Expression of IL-8 in Kawasaki disease. *Clin Exp Immunol* 122: 514–519, 2000.
9. Baggolini M. Chemokines and leukocyte traffic. *Nature* 392: 565–568, 1998.
10. Baggolini M and Dahinden CA. CC chemokines in allergic inflammation. *Immunol Today* 15: 127–133, 1994.
11. Baggolini M, Dewald B, and Moser B. Interleukin-8 and related chemotactic cytokines—CXC and CC chemokines. *Adv Immunol* 55: 97–179, 1994.
12. Baggolini M, Dewald B, and Moser B. Human chemokines: an update. *Annu Rev Immunol* 15: 675–705, 1997.
13. Balashov KE, Rottman JB, Weiner HL, and Hancock WW. CCR5(+) and CXCR3(+) T cells are increased in multiple sclerosis and their ligands MIP-1alpha and IP-10 are expressed in demyelinating brain lesions. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 96: 6873–6878, 1999.
14. Balasingam V, Tejada-Berges T, Wright E, Bouckova R, and Yong VW. Reactive astrogliosis in the neonatal mouse brain and its modulation by cytokines. *J Neurosci* 14: 846–856, 1994.
15. Balding CE, Howie AJ, Drake-Lee AB, and Savage CO. Th2 dominance in nasal mucosa in patients with Wegener's granulomatosis. *Clin Exp Immunol* 125: 332–339, 2001.
16. Berlin C, Berg EL, Briskin MJ, Andrew DP, Kilshaw PJ, Holzmann B, Weissman IL, Hamann A, and Butcher EC. Alpha 4 beta 7 integrin mediates lymphocyte binding to the mucosal vascular addressin MAdCAM-1. *Cell* 74: 185–195, 1993.
17. Biddison WE, Taub DD, Cruikshank WW, Center DM, Connor EW, and Honma K. Chemokine and matrix metalloproteinase secretion by myelin proteolipid protein-specific CD8+ T cells: potential roles in inflammation. *J Immunol* 158: 3046–3053, 1997.
18. Bleul CC, Schultze JL, and Springer TA. B lymphocyte chemotaxis regulated in association with microanatomic localization, differentiation state, and B cell receptor engagement. *J Exp Med* 187: 753–762, 1998.
19. Bochner BS, Bickel CA, Taylor ML, MacGlashan DWJ, Gray PW, Raport CJ, and Godiska R. Macrophage-derived chemokine induces human eosinophil chemotaxis in a CC chemokine receptor 3- and CC chemokine receptor 4-independent manner. *J Allergy Clin Immunol* 103: 527–532, 1999.
20. Bokoch GM. Chemoattractant signaling and leukocyte activation. *Blood* 86: 1649–1660, 1995.
21. Bone-Larson CL, Simpson KJ, Colletti LM, Lukacs NW, Chen SC, Lira S, Kunkel SL, and Hogaboam CM. The role of chemokines in the immunopathology of the liver. *Immunol Rev* 177: 8–20, 2000.
22. Bonecchi R, Bianchi G, Bordignon PP, D'Ambrosio D, Lang R, Borsatti A, Sozzani S, Allavena P, Gray PA, Mantovani A, and Sinigaglia F. Differential expression of chemokine receptors and chemotactic responsiveness of type 1 T helper cells (Th1s) and Th2s. *J Exp Med* 187: 129–134, 1998.
23. Bonecchi R, Sozzani S, Stine JT, Luini W, D'Amico G, Allavena P, Chantry D, and Mantovani A. Divergent effects of interleukin-4 and interferon-gamma on macrophage-derived chemokine production: an amplification circuit of polarized T helper 2 responses. *Blood* 92: 2668–2671, 1998.
24. Boring L, Gosling J, Cleary M, and Charo IF. Decreased lesion formation in CCR2 -/- mice reveals a role for chemokines in the initiation of atherosclerosis. *Nature* 394: 894–897, 1998.
25. Brandtzaeg P, Farstad IN, and Haraldsen G. Regional specialization in the mucosal immune system: primed cells do not always home along the same track. *Immunol Today* 20: 267–277, 1999.
26. Breitfeld D, Ohl L, Kremmer E, Ellwart J, Sallusto F, Lipp M, and Forster R. Follicular B helper T cells express CXC chemokine receptor 5, localize to B cell follicles, and support immunoglobulin production. *J Exp Med* 192: 1545–1552, 2000.
27. Butcher EC and Picker LJ. Lymphocyte homing and homeostasis. *Science* 272: 60–66, 1996.

INVITED REVIEW

28. Butcher EC, Williams M, Youngman K, Rott L, and Briskin M. Lymphocyte trafficking and regional immunity. *Adv Immunol* 72: 209–253, 1999.

29. Campbell EM, Charo IF, Kunkel SL, Strieter RM, Boring L, Gosling J, and Lukacs NW. Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 mediates cockroach allergen-induced bronchial hyperreactivity in normal but not CCR2−/− mice: the role of mast cells. *J Immunol* 163: 2160–2167, 1999.

30. Campbell JJ, Haraldsen G, Pan J, Rottman J, Qin S, Ponath P, Andrew DP, Warnke R, Ruffing N, Kassam N, Wu L, and Butcher EC. The chemokine receptor CCR4 in vascular recognition by cutaneous but not intestinal memory T cells. *Nature* 400: 776–780, 1999.

31. Campbell JJ, Hedrick J, Zlotnik A, Siani MA, Thompson DA, and Butcher EC. Chemokines and the arrest of lymphocytes rolling under flow conditions. *Science* 279: 381–384, 1998.

32. Charbonnier AS, Kohrgruber N, Kriehuber E, Stingl G, Rot A, and Maurer D. Macrophage inflammatory protein 3α is involved in the constitutive trafficking of epidermal langerhans cells. *J Exp Med* 190: 1755–1768, 1999.

33. Chaudhuri A, Zbrzezna V, Polyakova J, Pogo AO, Hesselgesser J, and Horuk R. Expression of the Duffy antigen in K562 cells. Evidence that it is the human erythrocyte chemokine receptor. *J Biol Chem* 269: 7835–7838, 1994.

34. Clark-Lewis I, Kim KS, Rajarathnam K, Gong JH, DeWald B, Moser B, Baggolini M, and Sykes BD. Structure-activity relationships of chemokines. *J Leukoc Biol* 57: 703–711, 1995.

35. Cole KE, Strick CA, Paradis TJ, Ogborne KT, Loetscher M, Gladue RP, Lin W, Boyd JG, Moser B, Wood DE, Sahagan BG, and Neote K. Interferon-inducible T cell alpha chemoattractant (I-TAC): a novel non-ELR CXC chemokine with potent activity on activated T cells through selective high affinity binding to CXCR3. *J Exp Med* 187: 2009–2021, 1998.

36. Colletti LM, Green M, Burdick MD, Kunkel SL, and Strieter RM. Proliferative effects of CXC chemokines in rat hepatocytes in vitro and in vivo. *Shock* 10: 248–257, 1998.

37. Conti P, Pang X, Boucher W, Letourneau R, Reale M, Barbacane RC, Thibault J, and Theoharides TC. Impact of Rantes and MCP-1 chemokines on in vivo basophilic cell recruitment in rat skin injection model and their role in modifying the protein and mRNA levels for histidine decarboxylase. *Blood* 89: 4120–4127, 1997.

38. Cook DN, Beck MA, Coffman TM, Kirby SL, Sheridan JF, Pragnell IB, and Smithies O. Requirement of MIP-1 alpha for an inflammatory response to viral infection. *Science* 269: 1583–1585, 1995.

39. Coulomb-L'Hermine A, Capron F, Zou W, Piard F, Galateau F, Laurent P, Crevon MC, Galanaud P, and Emilie D. Expression of the chemokine RANTES in pulmonary Wegener's granulomatosis. *Hum Pathol* 32: 320–326, 2001.

40. Cushing SD, Berliner JA, Valente AJ, Territo MC, Navab M, Parhami F, Gerrity R, Schwartz CJ, and Fogelman AM. Minimally modified low density lipoprotein induces monocyte chemotactic protein 1 in human endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 87: 5134–5138, 1990.

41. Cyster JG. Chemokines and cell migration in secondary lymphoid organs. *Science* 286: 2098–2102, 1999.

42. D'Apuzzo M, Rolink A, Loetscher M, Hoxie JA, Clark-Lewis I, Melchers F, Baggolini M, and Moser B. The chemokine SDF-1, stromal cell-derived factor 1, attracts early stage B cell precursors via the chemokine receptor CXCR4. *Eur J Immunol* 27: 1788–1793, 1997.

43. Deng X, Ueda H, Su SB, Gong W, Dunlop NM, Gao JL, Murphy PM, and Wang JM. A synthetic peptide derived from human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gp120 downregulates the expression and function of chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4 in monocytes by activating the 7-transmembrane G-protein-coupled receptor FPRL1/LXA4R. *Blood* 94: 1165–1173, 1999.

44. Doerschuk CM, Tasaka S, and Wang Q. CD11/CD18-dependent and -independent neutrophil emigration in the lungs. *Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol* 23: 133–136, 2000.

45. Downey GP, Dong Q, Kruger J, Dedhar S, and Chera-panov V. Regulation of neutrophil activation in acute lung injury. *Chest* 116: 46S–54S, 1999.

46. Dwinell MB, Lugering N, Eckmann L, and Kagnoff MF. Regulated production of interferon-inducible T-cell chemotactants by human intestinal epithelial cells. *Gastroenterology* 120: 49–59, 2001.

47. Ellingsen T, Elling P, Olson A, Elling H, Baandrup U, Matsushima K, Deleuran B, and Stengaard-Pedersen K. Monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (MCP-1) in temporal arteritis and polymyalgia rheumatica. *Ann Rheum Dis* 59: 775–780, 2000.

48. Feng L, Chen S, Garcia GE, Xia Y, Siani MA, Botti P, Wilson CB, Harrison JK, and Bacon KB. Prevention of crescentic glomerulonephritis by immunoneutralization of the fractalkine receptor CX3CR1 rapid communication. *Kidney Int* 56: 612–620, 1999.

49. Feng L, Xia Y, Yoshimura T, and Wilson CB. Modulation of neutrophil influx in glomerulonephritis in the rat with anti-macrophage inflammatory protein-2 (MIP-2) antibody. *J Clin Invest* 95: 1009–1017, 1995.

50. Fisher NC, Neil DA, Williams A, and Adams DH. Serum concentrations and peripheral secretion of the beta chemokines monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 and macrophage inflammatory protein 1α in alcoholic liver disease. *Gut* 45: 416–420, 1999.

51. Forster R, Emrich T, Kremmer E, and Lipp M. Expression of the G-protein-coupled receptor BLR1 defines mature, recirculating B cells and a subset of T-helper memory cells. *Blood* 84: 830–840, 1994.

52. Forster R, Mattis AE, Kremmer E, Wolf E, Brem G, and Lipp M. A putative chemokine receptor, BLR1, directs B cell migration to defined lymphoid organs and specific anatomic compartments of the spleen. *Cell* 87: 1037–1047, 1996.

53. Forster R, Schubel A, Breitfeld D, Kremmer E, Renner-Muller I, Wolf E, and Lipp M. CCR7 coordinates the primary immune response by establishing functional microenvironments in secondary lymphoid organs. *Cell* 99: 23–33, 1999.

54. Foxman EF, Kunkel EJ, and Butcher EC. Integrating conflicting chemotactic signals. The role of memory in leukocyte navigation. *J Cell Biol* 147: 577–588, 1999.

55. Gao W, Faia KL, Csizmadia V, Smiley ST, Soler D, King JA, Danoff TM, and Hancock WW. Beneficial effects of targeting CCR5 in allograft recipients. *Transplantation* 72: 1199–1205, 2001.

56. Gerber BO, Zanni MP, Uguccioni M, Loetscher M, Mackay CR, Pichler WJ, Yawalkar N, Baggolini M, and Moser B. Functional expression of the eotaxin receptor CCR3 in T lymphocytes co-localizing with eosinophils. *Curr Biol* 7: 836–843, 1997.

57. Gerszten RE, Garcia-Zepeda EA, Lim YC, Yoshida M, Ding HA, Gimbrone MAJ, Luster AD, Luscinskas FW, and Rosenzweig A. MCP-1 and IL-8 trigger firm adhesion of monocytes to vascular endothelium under flow conditions. *Nature* 398: 718–723, 1999.

58. Glabinski AR, Balasingam V, Tani M, Kunkel SL, Strieter RM, Yong VW, and Ransohoff RM. Chemokine monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 is expressed by astrocytes after mechanical injury to the brain. *J Immunol* 156: 4363–4368, 1996.

59. Glabinski AR and Ransohoff RM. Sentries at the gate: chemokines and the blood-brain barrier. *J Neurovirol* 5: 623–634, 1999.

60. Glabinski AR, Tani M, Strieter RM, Tuohy VK, and Ransohoff RM. Synchronous synthesis of alpha- and beta-chemokines by cells of diverse lineage in the central nervous system of mice with relapses of chronic experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. *Am J Pathol* 150: 617–630, 1997.

61. Glabinski AR, Tani M, Tuohy VK, Tuthill RJ, and Ransohoff RM. Central nervous system chemokine mRNA accumulation follows initial leukocyte entry at the onset of acute

AJP-Regulatory Integrative Comp Physiol • VOL 283 • JULY 2002 • www.ajpregu.org

R24 INVITED REVIEW

62. Goddard S, Williams A, Morland C, Qin S, Gladue R, Hubscher SG, and Adams DH. Differential expression of chemokines and chemokine receptors shapes the inflammatory response in rejecting human liver transplants. *Transplantation* 72:1957–1967, 2001.

63. Godiska R, Chantry D, Dietsch GN, and Gray PW. Chemokine expression in murine experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. *J Neuroimmunol* 58:167–176, 1995.

64. Gonzalo JA, Lloyd CM, Peled A, Delaney T, Coyle AJ, and Gutierrez-Ramos JC. Critical involvement of the chemotactic axis CXCR4/stromal cell-derived factor-1 alpha in the inflammatory component of allergic airway disease. *J Immunol* 165:499–508, 2000.

65. Gonzalo JA, Lloyd CM, Wen D, Albar JP, Wells TN, Proudfoot A, Martinez A, Dorf M, Bjerke T, Coyle AJ, and Gutierrez-Ramos JC. The coordinated action of CC chemokines in the lung orchestrates allergic inflammation and airway hyperresponsiveness. *J Exp Med* 188:157–167, 1998.

66. Gonzalo JA, Pan Y, Lloyd CM, Jia GQ, Yu G, Dussault B, Powers CA, Proudfoot AE, Coyle AJ, Gearing D, and Gutierrez-Ramos JC. Mouse monocyte-derived chemokine is involved in airway hyperreactivity and lung inflammation. *J Immunol* 163:403–411, 1999.

67. Gosset P, Tillie-Leblond I, Oudin S, Parmentier O, Walaert B, Joseph M, and Tonnelle AB. Production of chemokines and proinflammatory and antiinflammatory cytokines by human alveolar macrophages activated by IgE receptors. *J Allergy Clin Immunol* 103:289–297, 1999.

68. Grewe M, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CA, Schopf E, Thepen T, Langeveld-Wildschut AG, Ruzicka T, and Krutmann J. A role for Th1 and Th2 cells in the immunopathogenesis of atopic dermatitis. *Immunol Today* 19:359–361, 1998.

69. Grimaldi JC, Yu NX, Grunig G, Seymour BW, Cottrez F, Robinson DS, Hosken N, Ferlin WG, Wu X, Soto H, O'Garra A, Howard MC, and Coffman RL. Depletion of eosinophils in mice through the use of antibodies specific for C-C chemokine receptor 3 (CCR3). *J Leukoc Biol* 65:846–853, 1999.

70. Gunn MD, Kyuwa S, Tam C, Kakiuchi T, Matsuzawa A, Williams LT, and Nakano H. Mice lacking expression of secondary lymphoid organ chemokine have defects in lymphocyte homing and dendritic cell localization. *J Exp Med* 189:451–460, 1999.

71. Gunn MD, Ngo VN, Ansel KM, Ekland EH, Cyster JG, and Williams LT. A B-cell-homing chemokine made in lymphoid follicles activates Burkitt's lymphoma receptor-1. *Nature* 391:799–803, 1998.

72. Gunn MD, Tangemann K, Tam C, Cyster JG, Rosen SD, and Williams LT. A chemokine expressed in lymphoid high endothelial venules promotes the adhesion and chemotaxis of naive T lymphocytes. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 95:258–263, 1998.

73. Gutierrez-Ramos JC, Lloyd C, Kapsenberg ML, Gonzalo JA, and Coyle AJ. Non-redundant functional groups of chemokines operate in a coordinate manner during the inflammatory response in the lung. *Immunol Rev* 177:31–42, 2000.

74. Hamann A, Andrew DP, Jablonski-Westrich D, Holzmann B, and Butcher EC. Role of alpha 4-integrins in lymphocyte homing to mucosal tissues in vivo. *J Immunol* 152:3282–3293, 1994.

75. Hancock WW, Lu B, Gao W, Csizmadia V, Faia K, King JA, Smiley ST, Ling M, Gerard NP, and Gerard C. Requirement of the chemokine receptor CXCR3 for acute allograft rejection. *J Exp Med* 192:1515–1520, 2000.

76. Harrison JK, Jiang Y, Chen S, Xia Y, Maciejewski D, McNamara RK, Streit WJ, Salafranca MN, Adhikari S, Thompson DA, Botti P, Bacon KB, and Feng L. Role for neuronally derived fractalkine in mediating interactions between neurons and CX3CR1-expressing microglia. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 95:10896–10901, 1998.

77. Hogaboam CM, Bone-Larson CL, Steinhauser ML, Lukacs NW, Colletti LM, Simpson KJ, Strieter RM, and Kunkel SL. Novel CXCR2-dependent liver regenerative qualities of ELR-containing CXC chemokines. *FASEB J* 13:1565–1574, 1999.

78. Hogaboam CM, Bone-Larson CL, Steinhauser ML, Matsukawa A, Gosling J, Boring L, Charo IF, Simpson KJ, Lukacs NW, and Kunkel SL. Exaggerated hepatic injury due to acetaminophen challenge in mice lacking C-C chemokine receptor 2. *Am J Pathol* 156:1245–1252, 2000.

79. Homey B, Wang W, Soto H, Buchanan ME, Wiesenborn A, Catron D, Muller A, McClanahan TK, Dieu-Nosjean MC, Orozco R, Ruzicka T, Lehmann P, Oldham E, and Zlotnik A. Cutting edge: the orphan chemokine receptor G protein-coupled receptor-2 (GPR-2, CCR10) binds the skin-associated chemokine CCL27 (CTACK/ALP/ILC). *J Immunol* 164:3465–3470, 2000.

80. Homey B and Zlotnik A. Chemokines in allergy. *Curr Opin Immunol* 11:626–634, 1999.

81. Hoogewerf AJ, Kuschert GS, Proudfoot AE, Borlat F, Clark-Lewis I, Power CA, and Wells TN. Glycosaminoglycans mediate cell surface oligomerization of chemokines. *Biochemistry* 36:13570–13578, 1997.

82. Huang D, Han Y, Rani MR, Glabinski A, Trebst C, Soresen T, Tani M, Wang J, Chien P, O'Bryan S, Bielecki B, Zhou ZL, Majumder S, and Ransohoff RM. Chemokines and chemokine receptors in inflammation of the nervous system: manifold roles and exquisite regulation. *Immunol Rev* 177:52–67, 2000.

83. Hub E and Rot A. Binding of RANTES, MCP-1, MCP-3, and MIP-1alpha to cells in human skin. *Am J Pathol* 152:749–757, 1998.

84. Huo Y, Weber C, Forlow SB, Sperandio M, Thatte J, Mack M, Jung S, Littman DR, and Ley K. The chemokine KC, but not monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, triggers monocyte arrest on early atherosclerotic endothelium. *J Clin Invest* 108:1307–1314, 2001.

85. Imai T, Chantry D, Raport CJ, Wood CL, Nishimura M, Godiska R, Yoshie O, and Gray PW. Macrophage-derived chemokine is a functional ligand for the CC chemokine receptor 4. *J Biol Chem* 273:1764–1768, 1998.

86. Imai T, Hieshima K, Haskell C, Baba M, Nagira M, Nishimura M, Kakizaki M, Takagi S, Nomiyama H, Schall TJ, and Yoshie O. Identification and molecular characterization of fractalkine receptor CX3CR1, which mediates both leukocyte migration and adhesion. *Cell* 91:521–530, 1997.

87. Jia GQ, Gonzalo JA, Lloyd C, Kremer L, Lu L, Martinez A, Wershil BK, and Gutierrez-Ramos JC. Distinct expression and function of the novel mouse chemokine monocyte chemotactic protein-5 in lung allergic inflammation. *J Exp Med* 184:1939–1951, 1996.

88. Jinquan T, Quan S, Feili G, Larsen CG, and Thestrup-Pedersen K. Eotaxin activates T cells to chemotaxis and adhesion only if induced to express CCR3 by IL-2 together with IL-4. *J Immunol* 162:4285–4292, 1999.

89. Johnston B, Burns AR, Suematsu M, Issekutz TB, Woodman RC, and Kubes P. Chronic inflammation upregulates chemokine receptors and induces neutrophil migration to monocyte chemoattractant protein-1. *J Clin Invest* 103:1269–1276, 1999.

90. Jones SA, Moser B, and Thelen M. A comparison of post-receptor signal transduction events in Jurkat cells transfected with either IL-8R1 or IL-8R2. Chemokine mediated activation of p42/p44 MAP-kinase (ERK-2). *FEBS Lett* 364:211–214, 1995.

91. Jones SA, Wolf M, Qin S, Mackay CR, and Baggiolini M. Different functions for the interleukin 8 receptors (IL-8R) of human neutrophil leukocytes: NADPH oxidase and phospholipase D are activated through IL-8R1 but not IL-8R2. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 93:6682–6686, 1996.

92. Karpus WJ and Ransohoff RM. Chemokine regulation of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis: temporal and

AJP-Regulatory Integrative Comp Physiol • VOL 283 • JULY 2002 • www.ajpregu.org

INVITED REVIEW

spatial expression patterns govern disease pathogenesis. *J Immunol* 161: 2667–2671, 1998.

93. Kelner GS, Kennedy J, Bacon KB, Kleyensteuber S, Lagaspada DA, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Bazan JF, Moore KW, and Schall TJ. Lymphotactin: a cytokine that represents a new class of chemokine. *Science* 266: 1395–1399, 1994.

94. Kim CH and Broxmeyer HE. Chemokines: signal lamps for trafficking of T and B cells for development and effector function. *J Leukoc Biol* 65: 6–15, 1999.

95. Kim CH, Kunkel EJ, Boisvert J, Johnston B, Campbell JJ, Genovese MC, Greenberg HB, and Butcher EC. Bonzo/CXCR 6 expression defines type 1-polarized T-cell subsets with extralymphoid tissue homing potential. *J Clin Invest* 107: 595–601, 2001.

96. Kim CH, Pelus LM, Appelbaum E, Johanson K, Anzai N, and Broxmeyer HE. CCR7 ligands, SLC/6Ckine/Exodus 2/TCA 4 and CKbeta-11/MIP-3beta/ELC, are chemoattractants for CD56(+)CD16(−) NK cells and late stage lymphoid progenitors. *Cell Immunol* 193: 226–235, 1999.

97. Kim CH, Pelus LM, White JR, and Broxmeyer HE. Differential chemotactic behavior of developing T cells in response to thymic chemokines. *Blood* 91: 4434–4443, 1998.

98. Kim Y, Sung S, Kuziel WA, Feldman S, Fu SM, and Rose CEJ. Enhanced airway Th2 response after allergen challenge in mice deficient in CC chemokine receptor-2 (CCR2). *J Immunol* 166: 5183–5192, 2001.

99. Kunkel EJ, Campbell JJ, Haraldsen G, Pan J, Boisvert J, Roberts AI, Ebert EC, Vierra MA, Goodman SB, Genovese MC, Wardlaw AJ, Greenberg HB, Parker CM, Butcher EC, Andrew DP, and Agace WW. Lymphocyte CC chemokine receptor 9 and epithelial thymus-expressed chemokine (TECK) expression distinguish the small intestinal immune compartment: epithelial expression of tissue-specific chemokines as an organizing principle in regional immunity. *J Exp Med* 192: 761–768, 2000.

100. Kunkel EJ, Dunne JL, and Ley K. Leukocyte arrest during cytokine-dependent inflammation in vivo. *J Immunol* 164: 3301–3308, 2000.

101. Kuschert GS, Coulon F, Power CA, Proudfoot AE, Hubbard RE, Hoogewerf AJ, and Wells TN. Glycosaminoglycans interact selectively with chemokines and modulate receptor binding and cellular responses. *Biochemistry* 38: 12959–12968, 1999.

102. L'Heureux GP, Bourgoin S, Jean N, McColl SR, and Nacache PH. Diverging signal transduction pathways activated by interleukin-8 and related chemokines in human neutrophils: interleukin-8, but not NAP-2 or GRO alpha, stimulates phospholipase D activity. *Blood* 85: 522–531, 1995.

103. Lamblin C, Gosset P, Tillie-Leblond I, Saulnier F, Marquette CH, Wallaert B, and Tonnel AB. Bronchial neutrophilia in patients with noninfectious status asthmaticus. *Am J Respir Crit Care Med* 157: 394–402, 1998.

104. Laudanna C, Campbell JJ, and Butcher EC. Role of Rho in chemoattractant-activated leukocyte adhesion through integrins. *Science* 271: 981–983, 1996.

105. Le Y, Li B, Gong W, Shen W, Hu J, Dunlop NM, Oppenheim JJ, and Wang JM. Novel pathophysiological role of classical chemotactic peptide receptors and their communications with chemokine receptors. *Immunol Rev* 177: 185–194, 2000.

106. Legler DF, Loetscher M, Roos RS, Clark-Lewis I, Baggio-lini M, and Moser B. B cell-attracting chemokine 1, a human CXC chemokine expressed in lymphoid tissues, selectively attracts B lymphocytes via BLR1/CXCR5. *J Exp Med* 187: 655–660, 1998.

107. Ley K. Pathways and bottlenecks in the web of inflammatory adhesion molecules and chemoattractants. *Immunol Res* 24: 87–95, 2001.

108. Lloyd CM, Delaney T, Nguyen T, Tian J, Martinez A, Coyle AJ, and Gutierrez-Ramos JC. CC chemokine receptor (CCR) 3/eotaxin is followed by CCR4/monocyte-derived chemokine in mediating pulmonary T helper lymphocyte type 2 recruitment after serial antigen challenge in vivo. *J Exp Med* 191: 265–274, 2000.

109. Lloyd CM, Minto AW, Dorf ME, Proudfoot A, Wells TN, Salant DJ, and Gutierrez-Ramos JC. RANTES and monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) play an important role in the inflammatory phase of crescentic nephritis, but only MCP-1 is involved in crescent formation and interstitial fibrosis. *J Exp Med* 185: 1371–1380, 1997.

110. Loetscher M, Gerber B, Loetscher P, Jones SA, Piali L, Clark-Lewis I, Baggiolini M, and Moser B. Chemokine receptor specific for IP10 and mig: structure, function, and expression in activated T-lymphocytes. *J Exp Med* 184: 963–969, 1996.

111. Loetscher M, Loetscher P, Brass N, Meese E, and Moser B. Lymphocyte-specific chemokine receptor CXCR3: regulation, chemokine binding and gene localization. *Eur J Immunol* 28: 3696–3705, 1998.

112. Loetscher P, Moser B, and Baggiolini M. Chemokines and their receptors in lymphocyte traffic and HIV infection. *Adv Immunol* 74: 127–180, 2000.

113. Loetscher P, Seitz M, Baggiolini M, and Moser B. Interleukin-2 regulates CC chemokine receptor expression and chemotactic responsiveness in T lymphocytes. *J Exp Med* 184: 569–577, 1996.

114. Loetscher P, Uguccioni M, Bordoli L, Baggiolini M, Moser B, Chizzolini C, and Dayer JM. CCR5 is characteristic of Th1 lymphocytes. *Nature* 391: 344–345, 1998.

115. Lomize AL, Pogozheva ID, and Mosberg HI. Structural organization of G-protein-coupled receptors. *J Comput Aided Mol Des* 13: 325–353, 1999.

116. Lukacs NW, Hogaboam CM, Kunkel SL, Chensue SW, Burdick MD, Evanoff HL, and Strieter RM. Mast cells produce ENA-78, which can function as a potent neutrophil chemoattractant during allergic airway inflammation. *J Leukoc Biol* 63: 746–751, 1998.

117. Lukacs NW, Strieter RM, Warmington K, Lincoln P, Chensue SW, and Kunkel SL. Differential recruitment of leukocyte populations and alteration of airway hyperreactivity by C-C family chemokines in allergic airway inflammation. *J Immunol* 158: 4398–4404, 1997.

118. Lukacs NW and Tekkanat KK. Role of chemokines in asthmatic airway inflammation. *Immunol Rev* 177: 21–30, 2000.

119. Luster AD. Chemokines regulate lymphocyte homing to the intestinal mucosa. *Gastroenterology* 120: 291–294, 2001.

120. Ma Q, Jones D, Borghesani PR, Segal RA, Nagasawa T, Kishimoto T, Bronson RT, and Springer TA. Impaired B-lymphopoiesis, myelopoiesis, and derailed cerebellar neuron migration in CXCR4- and SDF-1-deficient mice. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 95: 9448–9453, 1998.

121. Mackay CR. Follicular homing T helper (Th) cells and the Th1/Th2 paradigm. *J Exp Med* 192: F31–F34, 2000.

122. Marquez G and Martinez A. Chemokines: the times they are a-changin'. *J Clin Invest* 107: 791–792, 2001.

123. Marra F, DeFranco R, Grappone C, Milani S, Pastacaldi S, Pinzani M, Romanelli RG, Laffi G, and Gentilini P. Increased expression of monocyte chemotactic protein-1 during active hepatic fibrogenesis: correlation with monocyte infiltration. *Am J Pathol* 152: 423–430, 1998.

124. Matloubian M, David A, Engel S, Ryan JE, and Cyster JG. A transmembrane CXC chemokine is a ligand for HIV-coreceptor Bonzo. *Nat Immun* 1: 298–304, 2000.

125. McTigue DM, Tani M, Krivacic K, Chernosky A, Kelner GS, Maciejewski D, Maki R, Ransohoff RM, and Stokes BT. Selective chemokine mRNA accumulation in the rat spinal cord after contusion injury. *J Neurosci Res* 53: 368–376, 1998.

126. Melter M, Exeni A, Reinders ME, Fang JC, McMahon G, Ganz P, Hancock WW, and Briscoe DM. Expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR3 and its ligand IP-10 during human cardiac allograft rejection. *Circulation* 104: 2558–2564, 2001.

127. Morales J, Homey B, Vicari AP, Hudak S, Oldham E, Hedrick J, Orozco R, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, McEvoy LM, and Zlotnik A. CTACK, a skin-associated chemokine that

AJP-Regulatory Integrative Comp Physiol • VOL 283 • JULY 2002 • www.ajpregu.org

preferentially attracts skin-homing memory T cells. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 96: 14470–14475, 1999.

128. Morgan SJ, Moore MW, Cacalano G, and Ley K. Reduced leukocyte adhesion response and absence of slow leukocyte rolling in interleukin-8 receptor-deficient mice. *Microvasc Res* 54: 188–191, 1997.

129. Murphy PM. Chemokine receptors: cloning strategies. *Methods* 10: 104–118, 1996.

130. Murphy PM, Baggolini M, Charo IF, Hebert CA, Horuk R, Matsushima K, Miller LH, Oppenheim JJ, and Power CA. International union of pharmacology. XXII. Nomenclature for chemokine receptors. *Pharmacol Rev* 52: 145–176, 2000.

131. Nagasawa T, Hirota S, Tachibana K, Takakura N, Nishikawa S, Kitamura Y, Yoshida N, Kikutani H, and Kishimoto T. Defects of B-cell lymphopoiesis and bone-marrow myelopoiesis in mice lacking the CXC chemokine PBSF/SDF-1. *Nature* 382: 635–638, 1996.

132. Nanji AA, Jokelainen K, Fotouhinia M, Rahemtulla A, Thomas P, Tipoe GL, Su GL, and Dannenberg AJ. Increased severity of alcoholic liver injury in female rats: role of oxidative stress, endotoxin, and chemokines. *Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol* 281: G1348–G1356, 2001.

133. Navab M, Imes SS, Hama SY, Hough GP, Ross LA, Bork RW, Valente AJ, Berliner JA, Drinkwater DC, and Laks H. Monocyte transmigration induced by modification of low density lipoprotein in cocultures of human aortic wall cells is due to induction of monocyte chemotactic protein 1 synthesis and is abolished by high density lipoprotein. *J Clin Invest* 88: 2039–2046, 1991.

134. Nelson PJ and Krensky AM. Chemokines and allograft rejection: narrowing the list of suspects. *Transplantation* 72: 1195–1197, 2001.

135. Nilsson G, Mikovits JA, Metcalfe DD, and Taub DD. Mast cell migratory response to interleukin-8 is mediated through interaction with chemokine receptor CXCR2/interleukin-8RB. *Blood* 93: 2791–2797, 1999.

136. Nishiyori A, Minami M, Ohtani Y, Takami S, Yamamoto J, Kawaguchi N, Kume T, Akaike A, and Satoh M. Localization of fractalkine and CX3CR1 mRNAs in rat brain: does fractalkine play a role in signaling from neuron to microglia? *FEBS Lett* 429: 167–172, 1998.

137. Noris M, Daina E, Gamba S, Bonazzola S, and Remuzzi G. Interleukin-6 and RANTES in Takayasu arteritis: a guide for therapeutic decisions? *Circulation* 100: 55–60, 1999.

138. Pachynski RK, Wu SW, Gunn MD, and Erle DJ. Secondary lymphoid-tissue chemokine (SLC) stimulates integrin alpha 4 beta 7-mediated adhesion of lymphocytes to mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1 (MAdCAM-1) under flow. *J Immunol* 161: 952–956, 1998.

139. Page RD. TreeView: an application to display phylogenetic trees on personal computers. *Comput Appl Biosci* 12: 357–358, 1996.

140. Patterson BK, Czerniewski M, Andersson J, Sullivan Y, Su F, Jiyamapa D, Burki Z, and Landay A. Regulation of CCR5 and CXCR4 expression by type 1 and type 2 cytokines: CCR5 expression is downregulated by IL-10 in CD4-positive lymphocytes. *Clin Immunol* 91: 254–262, 1999.

141. Pattison JM, Nelson PJ, Huie P, Sibley RK, and Krensky AM. RANTES chemokine expression in transplant-associated accelerated atherosclerosis. *J Heart Lung Transplant* 15: 1194–1199, 1996.

142. Pennington HL, Wilce PA, and Worrall S. Chemokine and cell adhesion molecule mRNA expression and neutrophil infiltration in lipopolysaccharide-induced hepatitis in ethanol-fed rats. *Alcohol Clin Exp Res* 22: 1713–1718, 1998.

143. Picker LJ, Michie SA, Rott LS, and Butcher EC. A unique phenotype of skin-associated lymphocytes in humans. Preferential expression of the HECA-452 epitope by benign and malignant T cells at cutaneous sites. *Am J Pathol* 136: 1053–1068, 1990.

144. Plater-Zyberk C, Hoogewerf AJ, Proudfoot AE, Power CA, and Wells TN. Effect of a CC chemokine receptor antag-

onist on collagen induced arthritis in DBA/1 mice. *Immunol Lett* 57: 117–120, 1997.

145. Porreca E, Di Febbo C, Reale M, Castellani ML, Baccante G, Barbacane R, Conti P, Cuccurullo F, and Poggi A. Monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1) is a mitogen for cultured rat vascular smooth muscle cells. *J Vasc Res* 34: 58–65, 1997.

146. Proudfoot AE, Power CA, and Wells TN. The strategy of blocking the chemokine system to combat disease. *Immunol Rev* 177: 246–256, 2000.

147. Qin S, Rottman JB, Myers P, Kassam N, Weinblatt M, Loetscher M, Koch AE, Moser B, and Mackay CR. The chemokine receptors CXCR3 and CCR5 mark subsets of T cells associated with certain inflammatory reactions. *J Clin Invest* 101: 746–754, 1998.

148. Ralston DR, Marsh CB, Lowe MP, and Wewers MD. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies induce monocyte IL-8 release. Role of surface proteinase-3, alphal-antitrypsin, and Fcgamma receptors. *J Clin Invest* 100: 1416–1424, 1997.

149. Ransohoff RM, Hamilton TA, Tani M, Stoler MH, Shick HE, Major JA, Estes ML, Thomas DM, and Tuohy VK. Astrocyte expression of mRNA encoding cytokines IP-10 and JE/MCP-1 in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. *FASEB J* 7: 592–600, 1993.

150. Richardson RM, DuBose RA, Ali H, Tomhave ED, Haribabu B, and Snyderman R. Regulation of human interleukin-8 receptor A: identification of a phosphorylation site involved in modulating receptor functions. *Biochemistry* 34: 14193–14201, 1995.

151. Rodriguez-Frade JM, Vila-Coro AJ, de Ana AM, Albar JP, Martinez A, and Mellado M. The chemokine monocyte chemotactic protein-1 induces functional responses through dimerization of its receptor CCR2. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 96: 3628–3633, 1999.

152. Rossi DL, Hurst SD, Xu Y, Wang W, Menon S, Coffman RL, and Zlotnik A. Lungkine, a novel CXC chemokine, specifically expressed by lung bronchoepithelial cells. *J Immunol* 162: 5490–5497, 1999.

153. Rot A, Krieger M, Brunner T, Bischoff SC, Schall TJ, and Dahinden CA. RANTES and macrophage inflammatory protein 1 alpha induce the migration and activation of normal human eosinophil granulocytes. *J Exp Med* 176: 1489–1495, 1992.

154. Rothenberg ME, MacLean JA, Pearlman E, Luster AD, and Leder P. Targeted disruption of the chemokine eotaxin partially reduces antigen-induced tissue eosinophilia. *J Exp Med* 185: 785–790, 1997.

155. Rubbert A, Combadiere C, Ostrowski M, Arthos J, Dybul M, Machado E, Cohn MA, Hoxie JA, Murphy PM, Fauci AS, and Weissman D. Dendritic cells express multiple chemokine receptors used as coreceptors for HIV entry. *J Immunol* 160: 3933–3941, 1998.

156. Sallusto F, Kremmer E, Palermo B, Hoy A, Ponath P, Qin S, Forster R, Lipp M, and Lanzavecchia A. Switch in chemokine receptor expression upon TCR stimulation reveals novel homing potential for recently activated T cells. *Eur J Immunol* 29: 2037–2045, 1999.

157. Sallusto F and Lanzavecchia A. Mobilizing dendritic cells for tolerance, priming, and chronic inflammation. *J Exp Med* 189: 611–614, 1999.

158. Sallusto F and Lanzavecchia A. Understanding dendritic cell and T-lymphocyte traffic through the analysis of chemokine receptor expression. *Immunol Rev* 177: 134–140, 2000.

159. Sallusto F, Lenig D, Forster R, Lipp M, and Lanzavecchia A. Two subsets of memory T lymphocytes with distinct homing potentials and effector functions. *Nature* 401: 708–712, 1999.

160. Sallusto F, Lenig D, Mackay CR, and Lanzavecchia A. Flexible programs of chemokine receptor expression on human polarized T helper 1 and 2 lymphocytes. *J Exp Med* 187: 875–883, 1998.

161. Sallusto F, Mackay CR, and Lanzavecchia A. Selective expression of the eotaxin receptor CCR3 by human T helper 2 cells. *Science* 277: 2005–2007, 1997.

162. Sallusto F, Palermo B, Lenig D, Miettinen M, Matikainen S, Julkunen I, Forster R, Burgstahler R, Lipp M, and Lanzavecchia A. Distinct patterns and kinetics of chemokine production regulate dendritic cell function. *Eur J Immunol* 29: 1617–1625, 1999.
163. Sallusto F, Schaerli P, Loetscher P, Schaniel C, Lenig D, Mackay CR, Qin S, and Lanzavecchia A. Rapid and coordinated switch in chemokine receptor expression during dendritic cell maturation. *Eur J Immunol* 28: 2760–2769, 1998.
164. Santamaria BL, Picker LJ, Perez SM, Drzimalla K, Flohr P, Blaser K, and Hauser C. Circulating allergen-reactive T cells from patients with atopic dermatitis and allergic contact dermatitis express the skin-selective homing receptor, the cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen. *J Exp Med* 181: 1935–1940, 1995.
165. Schaerli P, Willmann K, Lang AB, Lipp M, Loetscher P, and Moser B. CXC chemokine receptor 5 expression defines follicular homing T cells with B cell helper function. *J Exp Med* 192: 1553–1562, 2000.
166. Schroder JM, Nosso N, Sticherling M, and Christoffers E. Role of eosinophil-chemotactic C-C chemokines in cutaneous inflammation. *J Leukoc Biol* 59: 1–5, 1996.
167. Schwaeble WJ, Stover CM, Schall TJ, Dairaghi DJ, Trinder PK, Linington C, Iglesias A, Schubart A, Lynch NJ, Weihe E, and Schafer MK. Neuronal expression of fractalkine in the presence and absence of inflammation. *FEBS Lett* 439: 203–207, 1998.
168. Sekido N, Mukaida N, Harada A, Nakanishi I, Watanabe Y, and Matsushima K. Prevention of lung reperfusion injury in rabbits by a monoclonal antibody against interleukin-8. *Nature* 365: 654–657, 1993.
169. Shibahara T, Wilcox JN, Couse T, and Madara JL. Characterization of epithelial chemoattractants for human intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes. *Gastroenterology* 120: 60–70, 2001.
170. Sorensen TL, Tani M, Jensen J, Pierce V, Lucchinetti C, Folcik VA, Qin S, Rottman J, Sellebjerg F, Strieter RM, Frederiksen JL, and Ransohoff RM. Expression of specific chemokines and chemokine receptors in the central nervous system of multiple sclerosis patients. *J Clin Invest* 103: 807–815, 1999.
171. Sozzani S, Sallusto F, Luini W, Zhou D, Piemonti L, Allavena P, Van Damme J, Valitutti S, Lanzavecchia A, and Mantovani A. Migration of dendritic cells in response to formyl peptides, C5a, and a distinct set of chemokines. *J Immunol* 155: 3292–3295, 1995.
172. Syrbe U, Siveke J, and Hamann A. Th1/Th2 subsets: distinct differences in homing and chemokine receptor expression? *Springer Semin Immunopathol* 21: 263–285, 1999.
173. Tamaru M, Nishioji K, Kobayashi Y, Watanabe Y, Itoh Y, Okanoue T, Murai M, Matsushima K, and Narumi S. Liver-infiltrating T lymphocytes are attracted selectively by IFN-inducible protein-10. *Cytokine* 12: 299–308, 2000.
174. Tanaka Y, Imai T, Baba M, Ishikawa I, Uehira M, Nomiyama H, and Yoshie O. Selective expression of liver and activation-regulated chemokine (LARC) in intestinal epithelium in mice and humans. *Eur J Immunol* 29: 633–642, 1999.
175. Tani M, Glabinski AR, Tuohy VK, Stoler MH, Estes ML, and Ransohoff RM. In situ hybridization analysis of glial fibrillary acidic protein mRNA reveals evidence of biphasic astrocyte activation during acute experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. *Am J Pathol* 148: 889–896, 1996.
176. Tashiro K, Tada H, Heilker R, Shirozu M, Nakano T, and Honjo T. Signal sequence trap: a cloning strategy for secreted proteins and type I membrane proteins. *Science* 261: 600–603, 1993.
177. Teixeira MM, Wells TN, Lukacs NW, Proudfoot AE, Kunkel SL, Williams TJ, and Hellewell PG. Chemokine-induced eosinophil recruitment. Evidence of a role for endogenous eotaxin in an in vivo allergy model in mouse skin. *J Clin Invest* 100: 1657–1666, 1997.
178. Thelen M, Uguccioni M, and Bosiger J. PI 3-kinase-dependent and independent chemotaxis of human neutrophil leukocytes. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 217: 1255–1262, 1995.
179. Tilton B, Andjelkovic M, Didichenko SA, Hemmings BA, and Thelen M. G-protein-coupled receptors and Fcgamma-receptors mediate activation of Akt/protein kinase B in human phagocytes. *J Biol Chem* 272: 28096–28101, 1997.
180. Turner L, Ward SG, and Westwick J. RANTES-activated human T lymphocytes. A role for phosphoinositide 3-kinase. *J Immunol* 155: 2437–2444, 1995.
181. Uguccioni M, Gionchetti P, Robbiani DF, Rizzello F, Pruzzi S, Campieri M, and Baggolini M. Increased expression of IP-10, IL-8, MCP-1, and MCP-3 in ulcerative colitis. *Am J Pathol* 155: 331–336, 1999.
182. Unutmaz D, Xiang W, Sunshine MJ, Campbell J, Butcher E, and Littman DR. The primate lentiviral receptor Bonzo/STRL33 is coordinately regulated with CCR5 and its expression pattern is conserved between human and mouse. *J Immunol* 165: 3284–3292, 2000.
183. Vicari AP, Figueroa DJ, Hedrick JA, Foster JS, Singh KP, Menon S, Copeland NG, Gilbert DJ, Jenkins NA, Bacon KB, and Zlotnik A. TECK: a novel CC chemokine specifically expressed by thymic dendritic cells and potentially involved in T cell development. *Immunity* 7: 291–301, 1997.
184. Von Andrian UH and Mackay CR. T-cell function and migration. Two sides of the same coin. *N Engl J Med* 343: 1020–1034, 2000.
185. Von Hundelshausen P, Weber KS, Huo Y, Proudfoot AE, Nelson PJ, Ley K, and Weber C. RANTES deposition by platelets triggers monocyte arrest on inflamed and atherosclerotic endothelium. *Circulation* 103: 1772–1777, 2001.
186. Wakasugi K and Schimmel P. Two distinct cytokines released from a human aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase. *Science* 284: 147–151, 1999.
187. Wang JM, Su S, Gong W, and Oppenheim JJ. Chemokines, receptors, and their role in cardiovascular pathology. *Int J Clin Lab Res* 28: 83–90, 1998.
188. Wang X, Yue TL, Ohlstein EH, Sung CP, and Feuerstein GZ. Interferon-inducible protein-10 involves vascular smooth muscle cell migration, proliferation, and inflammatory response. *J Biol Chem* 271: 24286–24293, 1996.
189. Wells TN and Proudfoot AE. Chemokine receptors and their antagonists in allergic lung disease. *Inflamm Res* 48: 353–362, 1999.
190. Wojcik WJ, Swoveland P, Zhang X, and Vanguri P. Chronic intrathecal infusion of phosphorothioate or phosphodiester antisense oligonucleotides against cytokine responsive gene-2/IP-10 in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis of Lewis rat. *J Pharmacol Exp Ther* 278: 404–410, 1996.
191. Wu D, LaRosa GJ, and Simon MI. G protein-coupled signal transduction pathways for interleukin-8. *Science* 261: 101–103, 1993.
192. Xiu Q, Fujimura M, Nomura M, Saito M, Matsuda T, Akao N, Kondo K, and Matsushima K. Bronchial hyperresponsiveness and airway neutrophil accumulation induced by interleukin-8 and the effect of the thromboxane A2 antagonist S-1452 in guinea-pigs. *Clin Exp Allergy* 25: 51–59, 1995.
193. Yamaguchi Y, Matsumura F, Liang J, Okabe K, Ohshiro H, Ishihara K, Matsuda T, Mori K, and Ogawa M. Neutrophil elastase and oxygen radicals enhance monocyte chemotactant protein-expression after ischemia/reperfusion in rat liver. *Transplantation* 68: 1459–1468, 1999.
194. Yamaguchi Y, Matsumura F, Takeya M, Ichiguchi O, Kuratsu JI, Horiuchi T, Akizuki E, Matsuda T, Okabe K, Ohshiro H, Liang J, Mori K, Yamada S, Takahashi K, and Ogawa M. Monocyte chemottractant protein-1 enhances expression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 following ischemia-reperfusion of the liver in rats. *Hepatology* 27: 727–734, 1998.
195. Yawalkar N, Uguccioni M, Scharer J, Braunwalder J, Karlen S, Dewald B, Braathen LR, and Baggolini M. Enhanced expression of eotaxin and CCR3 in atopic dermatitis. *J Invest Dermatol* 113: 43–48, 1999.

R28

INVITED REVIEW

196. Ying S, Taborda-Barata L, Meng Q, Humbert M, and Kay AB. The kinetics of allergen-induced transcription of messenger RNA for monocyte chemotactic protein-3 and RANTES in the skin of human atopic subjects: relationship to eosinophil, T cell, and macrophage recruitment. *J Exp Med* 181: 2153–2159, 1995.

197. Yoshida R, Imai T, Hieshima K, Kusuda J, Baba M, Kitaura M, Nishimura M, Kakizaki M, Nomiyama H, and Yoshie O. Molecular cloning of a novel human CC chemokine EBI1-ligand chemokine that is a specific functional ligand for EBI1, CCR7. *J Biol Chem* 272: 13803–13809, 1997.

198. Yoshida R, Nagira M, Kitaura M, Imagawa N, Imai T, and Yoshie O. Secondary lymphoid-tissue chemokine is a functional ligand for the CC chemokine receptor CCR7. *J Biol Chem* 273: 7118–7122, 1998.

199. Yoshie O, Imai T, and Nomiyama H. Novel lymphocyte-specific CC chemokines and their receptors. *J Leukoc Biol* 62: 634–644, 1997.

200. Yoshimura T, Matsushima K, Tanaka S, Robinson EA, Appella E, Oppenheim JJ, and Leonard EJ. Purification of a human monocyte-derived neutrophil chemotactic factor that has peptide sequence similarity to other host defense cytokines. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 84: 9233–9237, 1987.

201. Yue TL, Wang X, Sung CP, Olson B, McKenna PJ, Gu JL, and Feuerstein GZ. Interleukin-8: a mitogen and chemottractant for vascular smooth muscle cells. *Circ Res* 75: 1–7, 1994.

202. Zingoni A, Soto H, Hedrick JA, Stoppacciaro A, Storlazzi CT, Sinigaglia F, D'Ambrosio D, O'Garra A, Robinson D, Rocchi M, Santoni A, Zlotnik A, and Napolitano M. The chemokine receptor CCR8 is preferentially expressed in Th2 but not Th1 cells. *J Immunol* 161: 547–551, 1998.

203. Zlotnik A and Yoshie O. Chemokines: a new classification system and their role in immunity. *Immunity* 12: 121–127, 2000.
