
DARPP-32 and regulation of the ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors in the nucleus accumbens

R. E. Maldve${}^{1,2}$, T. A. Zhang${}^{1,2}$, K. Ferrani-Kile${}^{2}$, S. S. Schreiber${}^{1,2}$, M. J. Lippmann${}^{1,2}$, G. L. Snyder${}^{3}$, A. A. Fienberg${}^{3}$, S. W. Leslie${}^{1,2}$, R. A. Gonzales${}^{1,2}$ and R. A. Morrisett${}^{1,2}$

1 The Waggoner Center for Alcohol and Addiction Research, 2500 Speedway, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712-1074, USA  
2 The College of Pharmacy, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712-1074, USA  
3 The Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021, USA  

Correspondence should be addressed to R.M. (ramorris@mail.utexas.edu)

Published online: 17 June 2002, doi:10.1038/nn877

The medium spiny neurons of the nucleus accumbens receive both an excitatory glutamatergic input from forebrain and a dopaminergic input from the ventral tegmental area. This integration point may constitute a locus whereby the *N*-methyl-*D*-aspartate (NMDA)-subtype of glutamate receptors promotes drug reinforcement. Here we investigate how dopaminergic inputs alter the ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors in rats and mice and report that previous dopamine receptor-1 (D1) activation, culminating in dopamine and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein-32 kD (DARPP-32) and NMDA receptor subunit-1 (NR1)-NMDA receptor phosphorylation, strongly decreases ethanol inhibition of NMDA responses. The regulation of ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors by D1 receptors was absent in DARPP-32 knockout mice. We propose that DARPP-32 mediated blunting of the response to ethanol subsequent to activation of ventral tegmental area dopaminergic neurons initiates molecular alterations that influence synaptic plasticity in this circuit, thereby promoting the development of ethanol reinforcement.

A major neural system in drug reinforcement involves mesocorticolimbic pathways, whereby dopaminergic ventral tegmental area (VTA) inputs regulate corticoaccumbens glutamatergic (Glu) systems${}^{1}$. The NMDA receptor, a subtype of glutamate receptor, has been implicated as a critical component of the neuroadaptive processes underlying addiction to abused drugs. Indeed, processes similar to NMDA receptor-dependent synaptic plasticity have been observed to be functionally linked with cocaine reinforcement. Trafficking of (*±*)-*α*-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid (AMPA) receptors to the postsynaptic density, a physiological process that underlies synaptic plasticity in hippocampal pyramidal neurons, occurs on VTA neurons following a single dose of cocaine${}^{2}$. Additionally, excitatory drive involving NMDA receptor activation from limbic structures that target the VTA reinitiates cocaine responding following extinction${}^{3}$. These findings suggest that NMDA receptor activation with concomitant glutamatergic synaptic potentiation may be necessary for induction of drug reinforcement${}^{4}$.

Accordingly, the NMDA receptor seems to be a mediator of many neuroadaptive processes underlying ethanol addiction, especially in relation to excessive ethanol intake or 'binge drinking'${}^{5}$. At concentrations corresponding to blood alcohol levels commonly associated with a significant level of intoxication in humans (20–50 mM or about 100–250 mg %, whereas legal intoxication in most states is 80 mg %), ethanol (EtOH) inhibits the activation of native NMDA receptors in many brain structures and neuronal preparations${}^{6,7}$. NMDA receptor currents and long-term potentiation (LTP) induction are both sensitive to ethanol concentrations achieved during binge drinking${}^{8}$. Long-term exposure to such concentrations of ethanol enhances NMDA receptor function and induces epileptiform activity and neurotoxicity following withdrawal from chronic exposure${}^{9,10}$. Drug discrimination studies indicate that strong NMDA receptor inhibition supplants for ethanol responding${}^{11}$. Thus, evidence indicates the NMDA receptor is a target of ethanol action, especially in relation to neuroadaptive responses seen in binge-level intake and underlies a variety of outcomes in chronic abusers including ethanol dependence, amnesia (blackouts), withdrawal seizures and neurotoxicity.

However, a paradox exists concerning the involvement of NMDA receptors in ethanol reinforcement. If these receptors promote reinforcement, as for other drugs of abuse, then ethanol inhibition of NMDA receptors should inhibit addiction to this drug. Instead, as described above, there is sufficient evidence to suggest that NMDA receptors mediate, at least in part, some components of ethanol reinforcement. Thus, we reasoned that some mechanism must exist that attenuates ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors in circuits involved in ethanol reinforcement. Coincidentally, the phosphoprotein DARPP-32 has been identified as an intracellular regulator of ethanol reinforcement${}^{12}$. DARPP-32 is a component of a postsynaptic signaling system in the medium spiny target neurons of the nucleus accumbens (NAcc) and communicates signals in response to dopamine D1 receptor activation${}^{13}$.

articles

Fig. 1. Patch clamp analysis reveals D1 receptor modulation of the EtOH sensitivity of accumbal-medium spiny NMDA synaptic currents. NMDA synaptic currents (average of 5 traces) elicited by local stimulation under control conditions (a) and 20 min following bath application of the dopamine D1 receptor agonist, SKF 38393 (25 μM, b). In each case, the current elicited in baseline condition and in the presence of ethanol (75 mM) are indicated. Stimulus artifacts are truncated for clarity. (c) The time course of the inhibition of the NMDA synaptic current by ethanol of the cells shown in (a) and (b), comparing ethanol inhibition in the absence and presence of the D1 agonist; washout of ethanol is also depicted in this time course plot. (d) The cumulative data of ethanol inhibition at 15–20 min after application in control cells versus those pretreated with SKF 38393 (25 μM) for all cells tested. The asterisk indicates that these groups differed significantly (*P* < 0.025, Student’s *t*-test comparison of 5 averaged responses in each condition from 4 cells in either group). (e) D1 receptor modulation of ethanol sensitivity of NMDA whole-cell currents, elicited by direct agonist application to cultured medium spiny neurons (3–7 days *in vitro*). The top pair of traces show NMDA-activated currents in the absence and presence of ethanol in a typical control cell, whereas typical ethanol inhibition in cells pretreated with the D1 agonist (SKF 38393, 25 μM) is shown in the bottom pair of traces. (f) The cumulative data of ethanol inhibition at 15–20 min post-application in control cells versus those pretreated with SKF 38393 (25 μM) for all cells tested. The asterisk indicates that these groups differed significantly (*P* < 0.015, Student’s *t*-test comparison of 5 averaged responses in each condition from 4 control and 5 SKF 38393-pretreated neurons).

and picrotoxin (25 μM). NMDA EPSCs were also slightly enhanced by reduction of extracellular Mg²⁺ to 0.5 mM⁸,¹⁰. NMDA EPSCs from control slices of NAcc, elicited by low amplitude stimulation of local afferents, were inhibited by bath application of ethanol (Fig. 1). The peak amplitude of the NMDA EPSCs was reduced by over 50% in 75 mM ethanol (Fig. 1a) and responses returned to baseline levels upon washout. However, medium spiny neurons in NAcc slices pretreated for 15 minutes with the D1 receptor agonist, SKF 38393 (25 μM), before an identical exposure to ethanol (75 mM), displayed a substantial reduction in the sensitivity to ethanol in comparison with that observed in control accumbal slices (Fig. 1b). The time course of the responses to ethanol in this pair of neurons depicted was identical (Fig. 1c) and returned to near-baseline NMDA EPSC levels after ethanol washout. Finally, the cumulative data from the population of neurons tested in this experiment indicate that under conditions of D1 receptor activation, the ethanol sensitivity of pharmacologically isolated NMDA EPSCs is reduced by about half that seen in native, untreated preparations (Fig. 1d).

To more definitively determine the synaptic site of D1 receptor modulation of the ethanol inhibition of the NMDA EPSC, we measured whole-cell currents elicited in medium spiny neurons after 3–7 days in culture in perforated patch mode to prevent intracellular perfusion from the recording electrode; whole-cell currents were elicited by direct NMDA application (*I*~NMDA~) via pressure ejection onto the soma of medium spiny neurons at a holding potential of −60 mV (Fig. 1e). Direct NMDA agonist application also revealed a suppression of ethanol sensitivity of NMDA responses in medium spiny neurons pretreated with SKF 38393 (25 μM for 15 min, Fig. 1e and f). These data were significant (*P* < 0.015), in agreement with observations with NMDA EPSCs and strongly suggest that postsynaptic D1 receptor-mediated processes regulate the ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors.

D1 receptors stimulate the phosphorylation of DARPP-32 on Thr-34 via adenylyl cyclase and protein kinase A, thereby converting DARPP-32 to an inhibitor of protein phosphatase-1 (PP-1). This decreases endogenous phosphatase activity and enhances phosphorylation of one of the major subunits of the NMDA receptor, NR1 (refs. 14 and 15). Mice lacking DARPP-32 display no dose-dependence for ethanol responding, as they do not increase their intake when ethanol concentrations are increased, especially at higher levels (> 10% v/v)¹². In contrast, wild-type mice increase their intake linearly as increasing concentrations are made available. These data suggest that the reinforcement process that occurs during long-term access to increasing concentrations of ethanol is regulated by the activity of DARPP-32.

Here we report that dopamine D1-receptor activation diminishes the ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors via the protein kinase A/DARPP-32 cascade in principal neurons of the NAcc, and we propose a molecular mechanism that contributes to ethanol reinforcement.

**RESULTS**

**SKF 38393 reduces EtOH inhibition of NMDA receptors**

We investigated regulation by the D1 receptor of the ethanol sensitivity (see Methods) of NMDA receptors in medium spiny neurons of the NAcc with whole-cell slice patch-clamp recordings. We pharmacologically isolated NMDA excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) by blocking non-NMDA and GABA receptors with 6,7-dinitroquinoxaline-2,3(1H,4H)-dione (DNQX; 10 μM)

Fig. 2. D1 receptors activate a protein kinase A–dependent process that regulates NMDA receptor sensitivity to ethanol in the nucleus accumbens. A field potential recording protocol using direct activation of postsynaptic NMDA receptors at 2-min intervals was used. (a) The amplitude of individual field potential responses to NMDA application (200 μM) from control slices (top) and following D1 receptor activation (bottom, 25 μM). (b) NMDA field potentials elicited as described in (a). Ethanol inhibition of NMDA responses was analyzed under control conditions (top), in the presence of the D1 agonist (middle, SKF 38393, 25 μM) and in the presence of the D1 agonist and the D1 antagonist (SCH 23390, bottom). (c) Cumulative data for all slices studied. Ethanol inhibition was tested at two concentrations (35 mM, raw traces not shown, and 75 mM) in the absence and presence of the D1 agonist, SKF 38393 (25 μM). The single asterisk indicates that ethanol inhibition in the SKF 38393 group is significantly different from the control group (35 mM, \(P < 0.005\), \(n = 4\) control slices, \(n = 7\) slices following SKF 38393 pre-treatment; 75 mM, \(P < 0.0001\), \(n = 8\) slices from different rats in each group). The double asterisk indicates that ethanol inhibition (75 mM) between the SKF 38393 and the SKF 38393/SCH 23390 groups was significantly different (\(P < 0.015\), \(n = 4\) for SCH/SKF group) and no difference between the control and SCH 23390 groups existed (\(P = 0.1\)). (d) The effect of the protein kinase A antagonist, H89, on the D1 receptor modulation of the ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors. Slices were tested under conditions of strong D1 receptor activation (SKF 38393, 100 μM, alone top traces) and following pretreatment with the protein kinase A antagonist, H89 (1 μM). (e) The cumulative ethanol inhibition data for all slices tested for experiments from (d). The single asterisk indicates that H89 was significantly different from the SKF alone group (\(P < 0.002\), \(n = 5\) control, SKF 38393 group, \(n = 4\) H89/SKF group). The double asterisk indicates the cumulative data from an experiment testing the ability forskolin (Fsk, raw traces not shown) to mimic the action of the D1 agonist on NMDA receptor ethanol sensitivity (\(P < 0.001\) versus ethanol with no addition, \(n = 4\) slices in forskolin group; \(P < 0.04\) versus SKF 38393 (100 μM)). A lower concentration of forskolin (10 μM) also elicited a significant reduction (\(P < 0.02\), \(n = 5\)) in ethanol sensitivity, which was not apparent when slices were exposed to an identical concentration of the inactive analogue, dideoxy-forskolin (dd-Fsk).

---

D1/protein kinase A mechanisms and ethanol sensitivity

To pharmacologically identify the receptor and biochemical pathways involved in the regulation of ethanol sensitivity in the nucleus accumbens, we used a field potential recording technique that directly activates postsynaptic NMDA receptors¹⁶. This technique allowed prolonged and stable recordings (>90 min) and avoided potential pitfalls that occur with prolonged whole-cell recording. As observed using patch clamp recordings of individual neurons (Fig. 1), previous activation of D1 dopamine receptors markedly decreased the ethanol sensitivity of field potential NMDA responses (Fig. 2a). After washout of ethanol, application of the selective NMDA receptor antagonist, D-CPPene (1 μM), resulted in virtually a complete block of the NMDA field potential (Fig. 2a). Thus, this technical approach is appropriate for investigation of the molecular mechanisms underlying D1 receptor suppression of NMDA receptor sensitivity to ethanol. These results also verify our previous findings using patch clamp recordings with both synaptic and direct NMDA receptor stimulation and indicate that D1 regulation of the ethanol sensitivity of NMDA responses can be detected at the population level.

We next addressed the pharmacological involvement of D1 receptors in SKF 38393 modulation of the ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors in NAcc (Fig. 2b). Ethanol (75 mM) inhibition of NMDA responses was elicited in slices treated under control conditions (top traces), with SKF 38393 alone (25 μM, middle traces) and with SKF 38393 pre-treated with the selective D1 receptor antagonist, SCH 23390 (15 μM, bottom traces). Ethanol inhibited the NMDA response by over 50% in the control condition and by about 15% in the presence of the D1 agonist. Previous treatment of the preparation with the D1 receptor antagonist prevented the reduction in ethanol sensitivity of NMDA responses by the receptor agonist (40% ethanol inhibition). Cumulative data for all slices tested under these conditions again indicate approximately a 50% reduction in ethanol sensitivity induced by D1 receptor activation at the agonist concentration tested (25 μM, Fig. 2c). When slices were pretreated with the D1 antagonist before the D1 agonist, the sensitivity of the neuronal population was restored to a level not significantly different from that observed under control conditions (Fig. 2c). We also tested inhibition at a lower concentration of ethanol (35 mM) and observed a similar, approximately 50% reduction in ethanol sensitivity in the presence of the D1 agonist (Fig. 2c).

A well-established pathway has been described in medium spiny neurons whereby D1 receptor activation initiates a protein kinase A–dependent phosphorylation cascade. Accordingly, we

articles

Fig. 3. Phosphorylation of DARPP-32 and NMDA receptors coincides with the time course of diminished ethanol sensitivity. (a, b) The time course of DARPP-32 and NR1 phosphorylation, respectively, measured using immunoblot techniques in nucleus accumbens slices treated as in electrophysiological recordings in Figs. 1 and 2. Lanes are indicated at the bottom of (b) and are identical for all treatment groups for both proteins and include basal, SKF 38393 alone (25 μM, 1–20 min, left blots) and 5 min following pretreatment with SCH 23390 (20 min, 15 μM, right blots). Treated versus untreated groups were significantly different across all times (*P* < 0.0015 for pNR1, *P* < 0.0005 for phospho-DARPP-32 groups, *n* = 4–5 separate experiments for either phosphoprotein by ANOVA). (c) Confocal microscopic-double labeling immunofluorescent detection in medium spiny neurons of the nucleus accumbens of the localization of NR1 (fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC), top) and DARPP-32 (rhodamine B isothiazole (RITC), middle) with superimposed images at the bottom.

determined whether inhibition of this enzyme could interrupt this pathway and thereby occlude D1 receptor-dependent regulation of ethanol sensitivity. We also sought to determine whether D1 receptor reduction of ethanol sensitivity could be enhanced under conditions of near-maximal D1 receptor activation alone (SKF 38393, 100 μM, Fig. 2d) as well as after pretreatment with H89 (1 μM), an antagonist selective for protein kinase A (Fig. 2d). Slices pretreated with SKF 38393 (100 μM) also had a markedly decreased sensitivity to ethanol that was greater than that observed at the lower concentration of the D1 agonist (Fig. 2e). However, when slices were pretreated with the protein kinase A antagonist, ethanol sensitivity of NMDA responses was restored to near control levels (Fig. 2e). These data indicate that protein kinase A must be critical in this cascade, which culminates in the regulation of ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors in nucleus accumbens.

To confirm further the involvement of the protein kinase A pathway in D1 receptor regulation of NMDA receptor sensitivity to ethanol, we also measured ethanol sensitivity in the presence of the adenyl cyclase activator, forskolin (50 μM, Fig. 2e, middle bar graphs). Direct activation of PKA with forskolin resulted in a decrement in ethanol inhibition (75 mM) of the NMDA response to a level of about 11%, significantly less than that observed under control conditions; this decrease in ethanol sensitivity induced by forskolin was also reversed by the protein kinase A antagonist,

H-89 (Fig. 2e, middle graphs). We also tested the effect of a lower concentration of forskolin (10 μM), which also induced a significant decrease in ethanol sensitivity relative to control inhibition (Fig. 2e, right bar graphs). In comparison, the ethanol sensitivity determined in the presence of the inactive analogue, dideoxy-forskolin, was significantly less than that observed in forskolin and not different from control values (Fig. 2e, right graphs).

DARPP-32 and NR1 phosphorylation in NAcc

The D1 receptor activated protein kinase A–DARPP-32 cascade has been suggested to induce the phosphorylation of numerous target proteins, including NMDA receptors, in medium spiny neurons. We hypothesized that this cascade may encompass a mechanism through which D1 receptor activation decreases the ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors. Therefore, we measured the time course of phosphorylation of DARPP-32, as well as NMDA-NR1 subunits, using immunoblot techniques in slices

Fig. 4. Ethanol directly increases DARPP-32 phosphorylation in nucleus accumbens. (a) The time course of DARPP-32 phosphorylation induced by ethanol (25 mM) in a typical experiment. (b) The cumulative data showing DARPP-32 phosphorylation following ethanol treatment (ANOVA for 1–20-min time points, *P* < 0.01, *n* = 5 experiments).

Fig. 5. Mice lacking DARPP-32 are insensitive to D1 receptor modulation of ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors. (a) Field potential recordings of NMDA responses in slices of nucleus accumbens from mice lacking (DARPP-32$^{-/-}$, left traces) and from mice containing DARPP-32 (DARPP-32$^{+/+}$, right traces). Traces are averaged responses from 5 responses elicited in the conditions indicated; SKF 38393 and ethanol applications were performed for 15–20 min in each condition; bottom traces are superimposed for comparison. Artifacts due to pressure ejection of NMDA are truncated for clarity. (b) The cumulative data from all slices tested from separate mice. The basal level of ethanol inhibition between DARPP-32$^{-/-}$ and DARPP-32$^{+/+}$ mice was not significantly different (raw traces not shown, $P = 0.61$, $n = 7$ DARPP-32$^{+/+}$ mice and $n = 8$ DARPP-32$^{-/-}$ mice). However, the ethanol sensitivity in slices from DARPP-32$^{-/-}$ mice was not altered 20 min after application of the D1 agonist while ethanol inhibition in the DARPP-32$^{+/+}$ slices was reduced substantially (student's t-test, $P < 0.001$, $n = 7–8$ mice).

treated as in the previous electrophysiological experiments. DARPP-32 phosphorylation was stimulated within 1 minute of agonist application and reached a maximum level after 10 minutes and remained stable over the ensuing 10 minutes (Fig. 3a). These data indicate that DARPP-32 was maximally phosphorylated under conditions in which the ethanol sensitivity was assessed electrophysiologically. DARPP-32 phosphorylation was not observed in slices pre-treated with the D1 antagonist SCH 23390 (15 μM) before or 5 minutes following subsequent addition of the D1 agonist (Fig. 3a). We analyzed the level of total DARPP-32 in all samples following subsequent stripping and re-probing with an antibody specific for total DARPP-32. No change in total DARPP-32 protein was observed following D1 receptor activation (Fig. 3a). The cumulative data from all slices tested in this manner for DARPP-32 phosphorylation normalized to total DARPP-32 in each sample indicates that the maximal increase in DARPP-32 phosphorylation was almost 300% over basal levels with a significant increase in DARPP-32 phosphorylation within 1 min of agonist application (Fig. 3a).

The phosphorylation of NR1 at Ser-897 via a protein kinase A/DARPP-32-dependent process has been suggested to result from D1 receptor activation. Therefore, if the regulation of ethanol sensitivity of these neurons is mediated via this pathway, this may be a critical step through which the ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors is modified. Therefore, we also assessed the state of phosphorylation of NR1 in the same samples generated for the measurements of DARPP-32 phosphorylation (Fig. 3b). We observed an increase in NR1 phosphorylation following D1 receptor activation of similar magnitude and time course to that of DARPP-32 phosphorylation. The stimulation of NR1 phosphorylation was completely abolished by previous treatment with the D1 antagonist, and these treatments did not modify the endogenous levels of NR1. The cumulative data for these samples indicate that the peak level of NR1 phosphorylation was over 300% greater than control levels, and the peak phospho-NR1 level was reached before that observed with phospho-DARPP-32, suggesting a high degree of regulation of NR1 phosphorylation in nucleus accumbens (see Discussion).

Our patch clamp and immunoblot studies are suggestive of colocalization of DARPP-32 and NMDA receptors within the principal neurons of the nucleus accumbens, the medium spiny neurons. However, there are no published reports that provide any direct immunocytochemical evidence for DARPP-32 and NMDA receptor colocalization in any type of neuron. To directly verify that these proteins are indeed colocalized in these cells,

we used double-labeling immunofluorescence techniques and confocal imaging of NAcc (Fig. 3c). Freshly frozen cryostat sections prepared from identically aged rats, as for the previous electrophysiological recordings, were used for these immunocytochemical studies, and samples were prepared under permeabilizing conditions to identify all cell-surface and internalized proteins. NR1 (Fig. 3c, top) was labeled with a secondary antibody derived from fluorescein; DARPP-32 was labeled with a rhodamine-derived secondary in the same samples (Fig. 3c, middle) and under these conditions, the colocalization of DARPP-32 and NR1 was readily apparent (Fig. 3c, bottom). Consistent with the density of these principal neurons of the accumbens (95% are medium spiny neurons), these proteins colocalized to some degree in virtually all the neurons we observed.

**Ethanol induction of DARPP-32 phosphorylation**

An additional question of interest concerns the direct effect of ethanol exposure on DARPP-32 phosphorylation. Slices were treated as in the previous experiments and exposed to ethanol at a moderate concentration (25 mM). Ethanol did induce a significant, albeit moderate, level of DARPP-32 phosphorylation (Fig. 4a). The cumulative data for the time course of ethanol effects on DARPP-32 phosphorylation indicate that ethanol induced a peak of about 39% over control phospho-DARPP-32 levels within 10 minutes that did not decline substantially within the next 10 minutes (Fig. 4b).

**Ethanol sensitivity in mice lacking DARPP-32**

The time course and pharmacological results of the immunoblot studies provide strong evidence indicative of the involvement of DARPP-32 in the phosphorylation of the NMDA-NR1 subunit; however, this evidence is indirect and circumstantial. To directly demonstrate the involvement of the DARPP-32 cascade, we assessed the ethanol sensitivity in DARPP-32$^{-/-}$ mice using the NMDA pressure ejection electrophysiological analysis described in Fig. 2 as used in rats. Such an expectation is indicated because D1 receptor-dependent phosphorylation of NR1 is absent in DARPP-32$^{-/-}$ mice${}^{15}$. Recordings from NAcc slices from DARPP-32$^{-/-}$ and DARPP-32$^{+/+}$ mice were pretreated with the D1 agonist for 15–20 minutes (SKF 38393, 25 μM) and subsequent bath application of ethanol (75 mM) resulted in inhibition of the NMDA response, which differed substantially between groups (Fig. 5). As previously observed in rats, DARPP-32$^{+/+}$ mice displayed a marked reduction in ethanol sensitivity when exposed in the presence of the D1 agonist. However, ethanol inhibition of NMDA responses

nature neuroscience • volume 5 no 7 • july 2002
in DARPP-32$^{-/-}$ mice displayed a much greater sensitivity to ethanol, independent of the presence of the D1 agonist. Cumulative data from all slices tested from individual mice indicate that active DARPP-32 is necessary for D1 receptor regulation of the ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors (Fig. 5b). There was a slight, albeit insignificant, trend that the DARPP-32$^{-/-}$ mice displayed a greater sensitivity to ethanol under basal conditions (without SKF 3893). This indicates that there is little if any basal tone of D1 receptor function influencing NMDA sensitivity to ethanol, and suggests that a wide range of regulatory control is available via this pathway. The previous immunoblot analysis (Fig. 3b) is supportive of this conclusion in that only under conditions of substantial D1 receptor activation did we observe a substantial level of NMDA-NR1 phosphorylation.

**DISCUSSION**

In animal models and in humans, ethanol consumption increases upon repeated exposure, a phenomenon that may be associated with use-dependent adaptation in reward circuits. However, mice lacking DARPP-32 do not display such an increase in ethanol intake even when the available ethanol concentration is increased to a relatively high range${}^{12}$. This result suggests a lack of neuroadaptive processes that might promote intake with repeated exposure to increasing concentrations. We propose a mechanism whereby the D1-receptor/DARPP-32 pathway modulates ethanol reinforcement. Whereas self-administration studies indicate that DARPP-32 is an important component of this neuroadaptive process, additional findings critical to this mechanism have been reported. First, mice lacking D1 receptors fail to exhibit increases in ethanol self-administration in tandem with the availability of increasing concentrations of ethanol in a pattern surprisingly similar to that seen in DARPP-32 knockout mice${}^{12,17}$. Second, enhancement of accumbal DA release, directly measured using *in vivo* microdialysis, occurs in temporal synchrony with operant ethanol self-administration${}^{18}$. Finally, ethanol directly increases VTA firing rates, possibly due to inhibition of a delayed rectifier potassium channel${}^{19}$. These findings support the contention that endogenous activation of D1 receptors and DARPP-32 phosphorylation may encompass steps that promote ethanol reinforcement.

Previous evidence suggests similarities between glutamatergic processes underlying synaptic potentiation and processes underlying drug reinforcement. NMDA receptor–dependent potentiation of excitatory synapses on VTA neurons occurs following a single dose of cocaine and glutamatergic excitation from limbic structures re-initiates cocaine responding${}^{2,3}$. Accordingly, we propose that alterations in glutamatergic transmission that are triggered by NMDA receptor activation are involved in the induction of ethanol reinforcement. Indeed, a direct involvement for NMDA receptors in ethanol reward has been reported, as NMDA antagonists can supplant for ethanol in conditioned place preference studies${}^{20}$.

We propose that if NMDA receptor activation is critical for establishing ethanol reinforcement, then some mechanism must exist that occludes inhibitory actions of ethanol on accumbal NMDA receptors. The present findings of D1/DARPP-32 regulation of ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors, combined with previous findings in the literature, suggest a mechanism that would contribute to a positive-feedback system promoting the recurrent intake of ethanol. Upon exposure to ethanol, depolarization of VTA neurons induces an increase in the release of DA in the NAcc, thereby activating D1 receptors and initiating the protein kinase A/DARPP-32 cascade. This cascade results in the phosphorylation of DARPP-32, thereby decreasing the activity of protein phosphatases and increasing the phosphorylation of

Ser-897 on the NR-1 subunit. Phosphorylation at this site results in a decreased sensitivity of the NMDA receptor to ethanol, which maintains a near normal level of NMDA receptor function and promotes long-term alterations in glutamatergic transmission. Subsequent activation of distal components of the medial forebrain bundle and the propagation of ethanol reinforcement signals to forebrain and limbic sites would be promoted by the increased tone of glutamatergic transmission in accumbens. D1 receptor–mediated modulation of the ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors is indeed demonstrable via both synaptic stimulation as well as direct agonist activation of postsynaptic NMDA receptors, indicating that the site of modulation of ethanol sensitivity is postsynaptic. A low level of DARPP-32 phosphorylation was induced by ethanol treatment, suggesting that this signaling pathway is activated during intoxication.

It is important to qualify this hypothesis with caveats. The outcome of conditioning stimulation of NMDA receptors in medium spiny neurons is complex and can result in either enhancement or depression of either NMDA or non-NMDA components of glutamatergic synaptic transmission${}^{21-23}$. Additionally, the output of the medium spiny neuron is GABAergic and inhibitory, and the nature of NMDA receptor–dependent synaptic plasticity underlying behavioral neuroadaptive responses in ethanol addiction remains to be addressed. In this regard, we have focused our efforts toward direct measures of ethanol effects on NMDA receptor activity and, accordingly, have sought to identify the intracellular processes regulating ethanol sensitivity.

Phosphorylation-dependent regulation of the ethanol sensitivity of NMDA receptors has previously been demonstrated for a tyrosine kinase, $fyn$, which seems to modulate ethanol tolerance, especially of NR2B receptors${}^{24}$. Concerning NR1, truncation of C0 elements has been associated with reduced ethanol sensitivity at a site associated with calcium-dependent desensitization of the receptor${}^{25}$. The present findings are the first to demonstrate dopamine-dependent regulation of NMDA receptor sensitivity to ethanol in a mesocorticolimbic structure. Our data suggest that phosphorylation of Ser-897 of the NMDA receptor decreases the ability of ethanol to inhibit NMDA receptors. Discriminating between direct steric hindrance mechanisms involving an ethanol binding pocket at or near this residue or more indirect and complex mechanisms will require further analysis. Ser-897 is critically involved in the expression of NMDA receptor effects on CREB phosphorylation, which are triggered by D1 receptor activation${}^{26}$. These findings implicate the PKA/DARPP-32 pathway in the mediation of NMDA receptor function and its regulation by D1 receptor activation.

The relative time courses of DARPP-32 and NR-1 phosphorylation in our samples seemed to be virtually synchronous; also, phospho-DARPP-32 generation did not reach levels seen with NR-1 phosphorylation. Complex regulation of the DARPP-32–dependent system that modulates ethanol sensitivity of these target neurons exists and may explain the differences in the time course for generation of phospho-DARPP-32 and phospho-NR1. For instance, a negative feedback regulation of DARPP-32 phosphorylation via NMDA receptor activation of calcineurin has been reported${}^{27}$. Indeed, such an inhibitory effect on phospho-DARPP-32 levels would be more likely at the low concentrations of the D1 agonist we used.

Inhibition of NMDA receptor–dependent function (for example, in working memory and spatial processing) by ethanol is well known${}^{28}$. Interestingly, cortical and hippocampal sites involved in such tasks have limited dopaminergic innervation when compared with other telencephalic structures that are implicated to have a much greater involvement in drug reinforcement mech-
anisms (for example, the NAcc). We propose that the DA innervation onto the NAcc appears to substantially reduce the ability of ethanol to inhibit the function of NMDA receptors, a major synaptic mediator of long-term neuroadaptive responses to cocaine. By this mechanism, dopamine release triggered by ethanol intake would maintain NMDA receptor function priming long-term synaptic alterations that promote use-dependent ethanol intake. Therefore, we suggest that this cascade, and DARPP-32 in particular, represent targets for modulation of the processes contributing to ethanol addiction.

**METHODS**

Materials. Forskolin and H89 were obtained from Calbiochem (San Diego, California). SKF 38393 and SCH 23390 were purchased from Research Biochemicals (Natick, Massachusetts). Pronase, protein phosphatase and protease inhibitors were from Sigma Chemical (St. Louis, Missouri). Anti-phospho-NR1 (Ser-897) was from Upstate Biotechnology (Waltham, Massachusetts). Cell culture media were from Gibco-Invitrogen (Carlsbad, California).

Preparation and incubation of coronal sections. Male Sprague-Dawley rat pups three to four weeks old, obtained from the Animal Resource Center at The University of Texas at Austin, were decapitated according to an IACUC-approved protocol. The brains were dissected in ice-cold, oxygenated artificial cerebrospinal buffer (ACSF; 120 mM NaCl, 25 mM NaHCO₃, 3.3 mM KCl, 1.23 mM Na₂HPO₄ and 10 mM dextrose, 95% O₂/5% CO₂). Coronal slices (500 μm) were prepared using a vibrating slicer (VibroSlice, Campden Instruments, Sileby, UK) and beginning from 2 mm anterior to bregma. The slices were then maintained at 32°C in ACSF buffer for 45–60 min before experimental analysis. In some cases, more than one slice was used per animal except for the knockout studies, where one slice per animal was used.

Culture techniques. The region surrounding the anterior commissure medial to the ventral striatum from rats three days old was dissected and then minced on ice and incubated with pronase, washed with DMEM, triturated through fire-polished glass pipets and cultured for 3–7 days in Neural basal media with B-27 supplement (Gibco). Previous immunocytochemical analysis of DARPP-32 in these cultures indicated that virtually all cells displaying a neural cytoarchitecture in these cultures contain DARPP-32 and NR1 (data not shown).

Slice electrophysiology and general patch clamp recording methods. Coronal hemisections containing NAcc were transferred to a recording chamber and continuously perfused with ACSF buffer at 32°C and a flow rate of 1.2 ml/min. The ACSF buffer was identical to that used for tissue preparation; however, the concentrations of CaCl₂ and MgSO₄ were adjusted to 2 mM and 1 mM, respectively, unless otherwise noted. All electrophysiological recordings were made between a 300–500 μm arc of tissue outside of the anterior commissure, encompassing the shell of the NAcc. Medium spiny neurons, which encompass more than 95% of the neurons in this brain region, were electrophysiologically identified by their resting membrane potentials greater than –70 mV. Recording electrodes were made from thin-walled borosilicate glass (TW150F-4, WPI, Sarasota, Florida, 1.2–2.2 MΩ) and filled with 135 mM KMeSO₃, 8 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EGTA, 10 mM HEPES, 2 mM MgCl₂, 2 mM Tris-ATP, 0.3 mM Tris-GTP, 260-270 mOsm, pH 7.2 with KOH. Access resistance was partially compensated and monitored throughout all experiments. Recordings where access resistance changed more than 10% during the course of the experiment were not included in data analyses and were made using an Axon Instruments Model 200B amplifier filtered at 1 kHz and digitized at 10–20 kHz with a Digidata interface (Axon Instruments, Foster City, California). Data acquisition and amplifier control were implemented using pClamp v7.0 or v8.0 software (Axon Instruments) All data presented are averaged from epochs of at least five individual trials recorded during the 15–20 min following ethanol exposure. Responses were continually monitored and recorded before and after that time for stability of ethanol onset and offset. In all recordings where recordings were maintained following ethanol application, reversal was at least partially observed.

NMDA EPSCs. NMDA-receptor mediated EPSCs elicited by electrical stimulation of local afferents were isolated pharmacologically using DNQX (10 μM) and picrotoxin (25 μM) and evoked by local stimulation via monopolar tungsten electrodes within 200 μm of the recording site (100 μs duration, 50–200 μA amplitude, evoked at 0.02 Hz).

NMDA whole-cell currents. Whole-cell currents were recorded using the identical patch electrode setup as for the synaptic recordings except they were done in the perforated patch mode with amphotericin B (60 mg/ml stock solutions in DMSO were periodically diluted (every 3 h) into fresh standard intracellular solution at a final concentration of 0.2–0.3% v/v). All recordings were made in the presence of tetrodotoxin (0.5 μM), MgCl₂ (0.5 mM) and CaCl₂ (2 mM). Access resistance was continually monitored during cell-attached mode to verify opening of the patch to whole-cell mode. This process normally required 15 min following sealing and recordings were initiated when the access resistance reached less than 50 MΩ. Currents were elicited via pressure ejection (10–20 p.s.i., 3–5 ms pulse at 1-min intervals, Picospritzer, General Valve, Fairfield, New Jersey) of a solution of NMDA and glycine (1 mM and 0.1 mM, respectively) from a patch pipet placed within 20–30 μM of the cell.

Extracellular NMDA field potentials. Field responses to local application of NMDA were recorded using a single micropipette (3–4 MΩ) for simultaneous pressure microejection of NMDA and potential recording¹⁶. Single pressure pulses of 10–30 ms duration and 10–30 p.s.i. were delivered at 2-min intervals in the shell region of the NAcc. Stability of all recordings was verified and recordings were terminated if responses varied by more than 20%. NMDA responses were measured at peak amplitude and a minimum of three responses was averaged for each condition, normally the last three of a drug administration epoch. All drugs, except for NMDA, were applied by bath perfusion. The NMDA stock solution (10 mM) was dissolved in ACSF buffer at a final concentration of 200 μM used for pressure ejection. The pressure ejection artifacts were omitted for clarity from the traces shown; however, the artifact was continually monitored for response stability and to detect pipet clogging. Ethanol inhibition was checked for reversal by washing back to normal recording solution.

Immunoblotting. Coronal sections were incubated for the times specified in each experiment. After exposure to the drugs, the NAcc was quickly dissected on ice, transferred to microfuge tubes containing 100 μl of 1% SDS, snap frozen in liquid N₂ and stored for analysis within 1–2 days. Samples were sonicated for 10 s and boiled for 10 min.

For analysis of phospho-DARPP-32 protein expression, 25 μg of protein and low-range molecular weight standards were electrophoresed on a 12% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and immunoblotted onto polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes (Immobilin-P; Millipore, Bedford, Massachusetts). The membranes were blocked for 1 h at room temperature (7.5% nonfat dry milk in 137 mM NaC, 25 mM Tris, 3 mM KCl, 25 mM Tris-HCl, 0.2% Tween 20 and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (1:100)) and immunoblotted overnight with phospho-DARPP-32 antibody (1:750)²⁹, a monoclonal antibody raised against the phospho-Thr-34 site phosphorylated or DARPP-32 antibody (1:10000)³⁰, a monoclonal antibody that was used to measure the total amount of DARPP-32 in the samples. Antibody binding was detected using a goat anti-mouse horseradish peroxidase-linked IgG (1:10000; Bio Rad, Hercules, California) and ECL immunoblotting detection system (Amersham Pharmacia, Piscataway, New Jersey). For phospho-NR1 (pNR1) analysis, 25 μg of protein and high-range molecular weight standards were electrophoresed on a 7.5% acrylamide SDS-PAGE gel and immunoblotted onto PVDF membranes. Detection of phospho-NR1 was determined using the anti-phospho-NR1 antibody (Upstate Biotechnology), specific for the phospho-NR1 subunit phosphorylated by PKA on serine residue 897. Antibody binding was detected using a goat anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase-linked IgG (1:10000) and ECL immunoblotting detection system. For western analysis, immunoblots were quantified by digital imaging with a high-resolution laser scanner and Scion Image1.62 densitometry software (NIH, Bethesda, Maryland).

Confocal fluorescence immunohistochemistry. Rats (20–30 days old) were transcardially perfused with 0.9% ice-cold saline followed by 4% paraformaldehyde under equithesin anesthesia. Frozen cryostat sections
(20 μm thick) were washed 3× with saponin (0.1%) and blocked with goat serum (10% in 0.1% saponin). Slides were then incubated overnight at 4°C with antibody (1°C) for a total NR1 as used for immunoblotting, then washed in saponin/serum and incubated with Alexa-Fluor-488 goat anti-rabbit 2° antibody (Molecular Probes, Eugene, Oregon) overnight at 4°C and again washed in saponin/serum. The process was then repeated with DARPP-32 antibody (1°C) and Alexa-Fluor-532 goat anti-mouse antibody (2°C). Slides were mounted with ProLong antifade (Molecular Probes) and imaged with an Olympus Fluoview FV-300 confocal microscope mounted on an Olympus IX-70 inverted microscope and using a 40× oil UPLANAPO obj. (Leeds Inst., Irving, Texas). Excitation was via the 488 (NR1) or 514 (DARPP-32) lines of a multi-line argon laser (Model 163/263, Spectra-Physics, Mountain View, California) using notch filters to eliminate the extra lines (Kaiser Optical, Ann Arbor, Michigan). Non-specific staining was verified by incubation of companion slides as above except that the 1°C antibody was omitted from the protocol. In all cases, such treatment completely eliminated all specific staining.

DARPP-32⁻/⁻ and DARPP-32⁺/⁺ mice. Homozygous C57Bl/6 congenic mice (back-crossed 10 times) lacking DARPP-32 (and their homozygous wild-type littermates) were obtained from The Rockefeller Institute.

Data analysis and statistics. Ethanol sensitivity was calculated as follows.

$$
1 - \left[ \frac{\text{peak amplitude of NMDA response in ethanol}}{\text{peak amplitude of control NMDA response}} \right]
$$

Simple comparisons were made using student's *t*-test and multiple comparisons used ANOVA comparing all time points to the baseline response.

### Acknowledgments

This work was supported primarily by NIH R01AA11845 (R.A.M.) and the Integrative Neuroscience Initiative on Alcoholism (INIA, NIH U01AA13CR (R.E.M.)), the Texas Commission on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse (TCADA) and the Waggoner Center on Alcoholism and Addiction Research (WCAAR) (R.A.M.). Additional support was from NIH R01AA11852 (R.A.G.) and R01AA11836 (S.W.L.) and T32AA07471 (K.F-K.). The authors thank R.A. Harris and A. Hendricson for suggestions and discussion, P. Greengard and P. Ingrasia for DARPP-32 antibodies and DARPP-32 modified mice, and A. Miao and M. Jia for technical support.

### Competing interests statement

The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.

RECEIVED 13 MAY; ACCEPTED 29 MAY 2002

1. Wise, R. A. Drug-activation of brain reward pathways. *Drug Alcohol Depend.* 51, 13–22 (1998).
2. Ungless, M. A., Whistler, J. L., Malenka, R. C. & Bonci, A. Single cocaine exposure *in vivo* induces long-term potentiation in dopamine neurons. *Nature* 411, 587–587 (2001).
3. Vorel, S. R., Liu, X., Hayes, R. J., Spector, J. A. & Gardner, E. L. Relapse to cocaine-seeking after hippocampal theta burst stimulation. *Science* 292, 1175–1178 (2001).
4. Nestler, E. J. Neurobiology. Total recall—the memory of addiction. *Science* 292, 2266–2267 (2001).
5. Woodward, J. J. Ethanol and NMDA receptor signalling. *Crit. Rev. Neurobiol.* 14, 68–89 (2000).
6. Lovinger, D. M., White, G. & Weight, F. F. Ethanol inhibits NMDA-activated ion currents in hippocampal neurons. *Science* 243, 1721–1724 (1989).
7. Hoffman, P. L., Rabe, C. S., Moses, F. & Tabakoff, B. N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors and ethanol: inhibition of calcium flux and cyclic GMP production. *J. Neurochem.* 52, 1937–1940 (1989).
8. Morrisett, R. A. & Swartzwelder, H. S. Attenuation of hippocampal long-term potentiation by ethanol: a patch clamp analysis of glutamatergic and GABAergic mechanisms. *J. Neurosci.* 13, 2264–2272 (1993).
9. Thomas, M. P., Monaghan, D. T. & Morrisett, R. A. Evidence for a causative role of NMDA receptors in an *in vitro* model of alcohol withdrawal hyperexcitability. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Therap.* 287, 87–97 (1998).
10. Thomas, M. P. & Morrisett, R. A. Dynamics of NMDAR-mediated neurotoxicity during chronic ethanol exposure and withdrawal. *Neuropharmacology* 39, 218–226 (2000).
11. Grant, K. A., Knisely, J. S., Tabakoff, B., Barrett, J. E. & Balster, R. L. Ethanol-like discriminative stimulus effects on non-competitive N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonists. *Behav. Pharmacol.* 2, 87–95 (1991).
12. Risiger, F. O., Freeman, P. A., Greengard, P. & Fienberg, A. A. Motivational effects of ethanol in DARPP-32 knock-out mice. *J. Neurosci.* 21, 340–348 (2001).
13. Fienberg, A. A. *et al.* DARPP-32: regulator of the efficacy of dopaminergic neurotransmission. *Science* 281, 838–842 (1998).
14. Hemmings, J. H. C., Greengard, P., Tung, H. Y. L. & Cohen, P. DARPP-32, a dopamine-regulated neuronal phosphoprotein, is a potent inhibitor of protein phosphatase-1. *Nature* 310, 503–505 (1984).
15. Snyder, G. L., Fienberg, A. A., Huganier, R. L. & Greengard, P. A dopamine/D1 receptor/protein kinase A/dopamine- and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein (Mr 32 kDa)/protein phosphatase-1 pathway regulated dephosphorylation of the NMDA receptor. *J. Neurosci.* 18, 10297–10303 (1998).
16. Fedorov, N. B. & Reymann, K. G. Simultaneous local pressure microinjection of excitatory amino acids and field potential recording with single micropipette in the hippocampal slice. *J. Neurosci. Meth.* 50, 83–90 (1993).
17. El-Ghundi, M. *et al.* Disruption of dopamine D1 receptor gene expression attenuates alcohol-seeking behavior. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* 353, 149–158 (1998).
18. Gonzales, R. A. & Weiss, F. Suppression of ethanol-reinforced behavior by naltrexone is associated with attenuation of the ethanol-induced increase in dialysate dopamine levels in the nucleus accumbens. *J. Neurosci.* 18, 10663–10671 (1998).
19. Brodie, M. S., Pesold, C. & Appel, S. B. Ethanol directly excites dopaminergic ventral tegmental reward neurons. *Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res.* 23, 1848–1852 (1999).
20. Biala, G. & Kotlinska, J. Blockade of the acquisition of ethanol-induced conditioned place preference by N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonists. *Alcohol Alcohol* 34, 175–182 (1999).
21. Pennartz, C., Aneerun, R., Groenewegen, H. & Lopes da Silva, F. Synaptic plasticity in an *in vitro* slice preparation of the rat nucleus accumbens. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* 5, 107–117 (1993).
22. Kombian, S. B. & Malenka, R. C. Simultaneous LTP of non-NMDA- and LTD of NMDA-receptor-mediated responses in the nucleus accumbens. *Nature* 368, 242–246 (1994).
23. Thomas, M. J., Malenka, R. C. & Bonci, A. Modulation of long-term depression by dopamine in the mesolimbic system. *J. Neurosci.* 20, 5581–5586 (2000).
24. Kalluri, H. & Ticku, M. Effect of ethanol on phosphorylation of the NMDAR2B subunit in mouse cortical neurons. *Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res.* 68, 159–168 (1999).
25. Anders, D., Blevins, T., Smothers, C. & Woodward, J. J. Reduced ethanol inhibition of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors by deletion of the NR1 CO domain or overexpression of α-actinin-2 proteins. *J Biol. Chem.* 275, 15019–15024 (2000).
26. Rajadhyalsha, A. *et al.* L-type Ca²⁺ channels are essential for glutamate-mediated CREB phosphorylation and c-fos gene expression in striatal neurons. *J. Neurosci.* 19, 6348–6359 (1999).
27. Halpain, S., Girault, J.-A. & Greengard, P. Activation of NMDA receptors induces dephosphorylation of DARPP-32 in rat striatal slices. *Nature* 343, 369–372 (1990).
28. Givens, B., Williams, J. & Gill, T. Septohippocampal pathway as a site for the memory-impairing effects of ethanol. *Hippocampus* 10, 111–121 (2000).
29. Snyder, G. L. *et al.* Phosphorylation of DARPP-32 and protein phosphatase inhibitor-1 in rat choroid plexus: regulation by factors other than dopamine. *J. Neurosci.* 12, 3071–3083 (1992).
30. Hemmings, J. H. C. & Greengard, P. DARPP-32, a dopamine-and adenosine 3′:5′-monophosphate-regulated phosphoprotein: regional, tissue, and phylogenetic distribution. *J. Neurosci.* 6, 1469–1481 (1986).