
surface of the brain underneath the stimulator, and consequent changes in brain activity (Fig. 1). This enables the investigator to intervene in the neural processes underlying cognitive function, because a stimulated brain area may increase or decrease in activity according to the stimulation parameters. Consequent behavioral changes can then be assessed. There are various means of generating neuronal change through TMS, including event-related, single-pulse or repetitive TMS. Knecht and colleagues³ used a different ‘blocked’ procedure, in which participants received a sustained block of TMS pulses for 600 seconds before doing language tasks. This procedure leads to more prolonged neuronal and behavioral changes, as measured in the subsequent task (here, matching the appropriate word to a picture). The pulses were applied in one of three sites: either over the approximate location of Wernicke’s area or its homologue in the right hemisphere, or over a midline region of occipital cortex (presumably without specialized language functions). Participants were separated according to whether they were left-hemisphere language dominant or right-hemisphere language dominant or had bilateral language representation, according to differences in brain activity

in a word generation task (measured through functional transcranial Doppler sonography).

Striking differences emerged between groups in the TMS effects. Stimulation of the left hemisphere above Wernicke’s area tended to slow picture-word matching by left-dominant participants, while, in contrast, speeding responses of right-dominant participants. Stimulation of the homologue area in the right hemisphere slowed matching by right-dominant patients while speeding responses by left-dominant participants. There were few effects from occipital stimulation. This study, then, provides evidence that altering activation in the right hemisphere (via TMS) affects a language-processing task in individuals with right-hemisphere lateralization—importantly, the lateralization was determined before testing. This clearly suggests that, for these individuals, the right hemisphere is necessary for language. For instance, it cannot be that right-hemisphere stimulation led to inhibition of left-hemisphere language, as exactly the opposite results occurred with individuals with left-dominant language functions.

Several questions remain, including which exact language functions were affected by TMS. Picture–word matching is relatively complex and may be accomplished using several possible representations (for example, the names of the objects or their semantics). Further studies, in which experimenters vary the relationships between the picture and the words, will be informative here. It is also unclear why responses were speeded by stimulation of the non-dominant hemisphere (for example, after TMS to the right hemisphere in left-dominant individuals). Knecht and colleagues³ argue that this effect was due to a narrowing of a lexical search when identifying the picture, but this needs to be verified by varying the size of the lexical search directly. Nevertheless, this important study provides perhaps the clearest evidence to date that language functions reside in the right hemisphere of some individuals.

1. Broca, P. *Bull. Soc. Anat.* 6, 330–350 (1861).
2. Wernicke, C. *Der Aphasische Symptomenkomplex* (Cohen & Weigert, Breslau, Poland, 1874).
3. Knecht, S. *et al.* *Nat. Neurosci.* 5, 695–699 (2002).
4. Code, C. *Language, Aphasia and the Right Hemisphere* (Wiley, London, 1987).
5. Weiller, C. *et al.* *Ann. Neurol.* 37, 723–732 (1995).
6. Warburton, E., Price, C. J., Swinburn, K. & Wise, R. J. S. *J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry* 66, 155–161 (1999).

---

**NMDA receptors lose their inhibitions**

David M. Lovinger

**A new study suggests that interactions between dopamine and glutamate neurotransmitter pathways are important in regulating the inhibitory effects of alcohol on brain function.**

The transition from controlled, ‘social’ drinking to uncontrolled alcohol abuse is a key step in the development of alcoholism. During this process, the brain develops changes in synaptic transmission that produce tolerance to the presence of alcohol and also promote a desire or craving for alcohol. The neural changes that promote alcohol abuse are thought to involve synaptic plasticity within the brain’s intrinsic reward circuitry, which includes the nucleus accumbens (NAc) and the ventral tegmental area (VTA). Two neurotransmitters within this reward system, dopamine and glutamate, are important in intoxication and alcohol addiction, but how interactions between these signals contribute to alcohol-related neural changes is unclear. One paradoxical finding is that alcohol inhibits the NMDA type of glutamate receptor, which contributes to intoxication¹. However, NMDA receptors also promote neural plasticity, such as lasting increases in synaptic communication in the NAc²,³. Inhibition of these receptors by alcohol therefore should prevent them from participating in the synaptic plasticity believed to be critical for the development of uncontrolled drinking.

In this issue, Maldve and coworkers provide a possible solution to this problem by demonstrating that activation of dopamine receptors relieves alcohol inhibition of NMDA receptors in the NAc⁴. This molecular ‘disinhibition’ could promote tolerance to alcohol, but more importantly in the context of alcohol abuse and alcoholism, would free NMDA receptors to participate in the generation of synaptic changes necessary for alcohol addiction. The new findings increase our understanding of key molecular events related to the development of alcoholism, and could lead to new pharmacotherapies for use in treatment of the disorder.

Maldve *et al.*⁴ found that ethanol inhibition of NMDA receptors was

The author is Chief of the Laboratory for Integrative Neuroscience at the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism,  
Rm. 158H Park 5 Bldg, 12420 Parklawn Drive,  
Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA  
e-mail: lovindav@mail.nih.gov

nature neuroscience • volume 5 no 7 • july 2002

Fig. 1. Intracellular molecular events linking dopamine receptor activation to increased NMDA receptor phosphorylation and decreased inhibition by alcohol. Without D1 receptor activation, alcohol inhibits NMDA receptor function. Activation of D1 receptors stimulates adenylate cyclase (AC), which catalyzes cAMP formation, increasing PKA activity, and subsequent phosphorylation of DARPP-32 and the NMDA receptor subunit NR1. Alcohol also stimulates DARPP-32 phosphorylation. Phosphorylated DARPP-32 inhibits protein phosphatase PP2A, and this reduces NMDA receptor dephosphorylation. The net increase in NMDA receptor phosphorylation relieves the inhibition of the receptor by alcohol.

greatly reduced following activation of D1 dopamine receptors in cultured neurons and brain slices. This dopamine-stimulated disinhibition depended on a series of intracellular signaling events involving activation of adenylate cyclase, subsequent activation of the cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), and phosphorylation of the protein phosphatase inhibitor DARPP-32 (Fig. 1). DARPP-32 seems to be a key molecular switch in this pathway, as this disinhibition was absent in mice lacking DARPP-32. Activation of D1 receptors also increased phosphorylation of the NR1 subunit of the NMDA receptor, presumably because phosphorylated DARPP-32 inhibits the protein phosphatase PP-1 that normally removes the phosphate group at serine 897 within the NR1 protein.

Several steps in this process remain to be explored in more detail. For example, the mechanism suggested in this paper likely works in conjunction with a D1 receptor-mediated activation of PKA that phosphorylates NR1 at residue 897 (ref. 5; Fig. 1). The relative importance of kinase activation and phosphatase inhibition in the D1 receptor stimulation of NR1 phosphorylation needs to be worked out in the context of alcohol's inhibition of the NMDA receptor. Furthermore, it is not yet clear if phosphorylation of the NMDA receptor directly produces decreased alcohol sensitivity or if there is another, as yet unidentified, phosphoprotein with a role in this scenario. If phosphorylation of NR1 is the key to decreased inhibition, then the intramolecular changes that render the NMDA receptor less sensitive to alcohol will require elucidation. These unanswered questions should provide fertile ground to extend the exciting findings presented in this paper, which may lead to development of pharmacological or genetic manipulations at several steps in the intracellular molecular cascade that could alter the pattern of alcohol effects. Interestingly, *in vivo* application of a D1 agonist also pro-

news and views

Dopamine  
↓  
D1-type receptor  
↓  
AC  
↓  
cAMP  
↓  
PKA  
↓  
DARPP-32  
← DARPP-32-PO₃⁻  
↑  
PP-1  
↓  
NR1-PO₃⁻  
← NR1  

Alcohol  
↓  
?  

Alcohol  

Ivelisse Robles  

receptors in dependence-related increases in alcohol drinking should help to evaluate this model.

The observations made by Maldve *et al.*⁴ also have the potential to explain some aspects of rapid tolerance to alcohol, in which individuals become less sensitive to alcohol's intoxicating effect even within a single drinking session. Alcohol was found to increase phosphorylation of DARPP-32 in the present report, although not to the extent seen following activation of D1 receptors. This increased phosphorylation, in conjunction with alcohol enhancement of NAc dopaminergic transmission, should decrease ethanol inhibition of NMDA receptors and remove impairment of neuronal activity even within a single intoxication experience. In support of this, another study implicated NMDA receptor phosphorylation in the development of acute alcohol tolerance¹².

The sensitivity of NMDA receptors to alcohol varies under different conditions, for example, as a function of development and brain region¹³,¹⁴. Protein phosphorylation likely provides one explanation for these differences in NMDA receptor alcohol sensitivity. The rich interactions between glutamate and other neurotransmitter systems and intracellular signaling pathways could

nature neuroscience • volume 5 no 7 • july 2002

tailor the cell’s response to continuing alcohol exposure, yielding different patterns of initial effect and tolerance depending on the brain region affected and the behavior studied. In the present case, the dopamine–glutamate interactions observed in the NAc are likely to be involved in the transition to excessive drinking, whereas differences in alcohol sensitivity among NMDA receptors due to fyn kinase activation in the hippocampus<sup>12</sup> might be involved in cognitive function. As the authors of the current study point out, the protein kinases and NMDA receptor subunit proteins implicated in tolerance differ across brain regions, and the dopamine-mediated disinhibition they have described is unlikely to occur in dopamine-poor brain regions that contain alcohol-sensitive NMDA receptors, such as the cerebellum.

Examination of the relationship between receptor subtypes and post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation with respect to alcohol sensitivity will no doubt provide important clues to alcohol effects on the NMDA receptor. It may be premature to extrapolate from studies of dissociated cells and brain slices to the behavior of animals, especially with respect to the multifaceted pharmacological effects of alcohol. However, the use of animal models such as genetically altered mice will help us to determine if altering presumed molecular targets of alcohol action in the brain alters alcohol-related behaviors. Viewed in this context, it is likely that a better understanding of the molecular effects of alcohol, in turn, should help us to explain several aspects of alcohol intoxication, tolerance and dependence. Ultimately, such studies could lead to better pharmacotherapies for alcohol abuse and alcoholism.

---

### Short circuiting the circadian clock

**Anthony N. van den Pol and Karl Obrietan**

**A recent report in *Cell* shows that the transcription and translation cycles that drive the molecular circadian clock may also be regulated by electrical activity.**

Circadian rhythms pervade all aspects of life. Although the cellular clocks that drive these near 24-hour cycles are entrained to environmental cues, they continue to keep time and to drive behavioral and physiological rhythms even in the absence of environmental signals. Now, a recent report in *Cell* adds a new dimension to our understanding of the mechanisms underlying time-keeping in these cellular clocks. Nitabach *et al.*<sup>1</sup> used a clever potassium channel gene-targeting approach to selectively silence the electrical activity of critical cells in the *Drosophila* central clock, the ventral subset of lateral pacemaker neurons (LNv). As might be expected, this electrical silencing blocked the ability of the pacemaker neurons to send the circadian signal to other brain regions, thereby stopping circadian rhythms of behavior. But more interestingly, silencing the electrical activity of these neurons also eliminated the cycles of the molecular clock. This is an unexpected finding, as current models of molecular clock function do not include ion channel feedback.

*Drosophila* have enjoyed great popularity among molecular chronobiologists since the identification of a single-gene mutation that is capable of eliminating circadian rhythms<sup>2</sup>. The molecular basis for circadian timing—postulated to arise from a limited number of gene products that interact to form a core clock feedback loop—has been worked out in great detail<sup>3–5</sup> (Fig. 1). In *Drosophila*, this loop involves the proteins Period, Timeless, Clock and Cycle. The pendulum of this clock swings into motion by the formation of a transcription factor, a dimer of Clock and Cycle. This basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor facilitates the expression of *period* and *timeless* genes. Period and Timeless dimerize in the cytoplasm, allowing them to move into the nucleus, and inhibit Clock/Cycle-dependent transcription. Degradation of the Period/Timeless complex relieves transcriptional inhibition, thus permitting a new round of *period* and *timeless* expression. Doubletime, a clock kinase, affects clock timing by reducing the stability of Period. The cycle of this complete loop takes about 24 hours, and is postulated to function as the timing mechanism of the circadian clock. The output of the molecular clock can be viewed as transcriptional modulation of other downstream genes by Clock and Cycle. Although a large number of genes, including some that code for ion channels, show circadian variations in expression<sup>5</sup>, which ones are directly modulated by core clock transcriptional regulators remains to be determined.

Despite our extensive knowledge about the molecular clock, little is known about how electrical activity interacts with the system. This is an important question, as the complex feedback loops among the core clock genes are fascinating, but relevant only

---

**Anthony N. van den Pol** is in the Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University Medical School, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA. **Karl Obrietan** is in the Department of Neuroscience, Ohio State University, 333 West 10th Avenue, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.  
e-mail: anthony.vandenpol@yale.edu

---

1. Diamond, I. & Gordon, A. S. *Physiol. Rev.* 77, 1–20 (1997).
2. Pennartz, C.M., Ameerun, R., Groenewegen,
3. H. & Lopes da Silva, F. H. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* 5, 107–117 (1993).
4. Kombian, S. B. & Malenka, R. C. *Nature* 368, 242–246 (1994).
5. Maldve, R. E. *et al.* *Nat. Neurosci.* 5, 641–648 (2002).
6. Snyder, G. L. *et al.* *J. Neurosci.* 18, 10297–10303 (1998).
7. Edwards, S. *et al.* *Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res.* 26, 173–180 (2002).
8. El-Ghundi, M. *et al.* *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* 353, 149–158 (1998).
9. Risinger, F. O. *et al.* *J. Neurosci.* 21, 340–348 (2001).
10. Brodie, M. S., Shefner, S. A. & Dunwiddie, T. V. *Brain Res.* 508, 65–69 (1990).
11. Gessa, G. L. *et al.* *Brain Res.* 348, 201–203 (1985).
12. Gonzales, R. A. & Weiss, F. *J. Neurosci.* 18, 10633–10671 (1998).
13. Miyakawa, T. *et al.* *Science* 278, 698–701 (1997).
14. Lovinger, D. M. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* 274, 164–172 (1995).
15. Yang, X. *et al.* *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* 278, 114–124 (1996).

nature neuroscience • volume 5 no 7 • july 2002
