
Brain Research Reviews 39 (2002) 74–83

Review

Dynamic regulation of GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors at synaptic sites

Matthias Kneussel*

Department of Neurochemistry, Max-Planck-Institute for Brain Research, Deutschordenstrasse 46, D-60528 Frankfurt/Main, Germany

Accepted 12 February 2002

Abstract

γ-Aminobutyric acid type A receptors (GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs) mediate fast synaptic inhibition in brain and spinal cord. They are ligand-gated ion channels composed of numerous distinct subunit combinations. For efficient synaptic transmission, GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs need to be localized to and anchored at postsynaptic sites in precise apposition to presynaptic nerve terminals that release the neurotransmitter GABA. Neurons therefore require distinct mechanisms to regulate intracellular vesicular protein traffic, plasma membrane insertion, synaptic clustering and turnover of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs. The GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor-associated protein GABARAP interacts with the γ2 subunit of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs and displays high homology to proteins involved in membrane fusion underlying Golgi transport and autophagic processes. The binding of GABARAP with NSF, microtubules and gephyrin together with its localization at intracellular membranes suggests a role in GABA<sub>A</sub>R targeting and/or degradation. Growth factor tyrosine kinase receptor activation is involved in the control of GABA<sub>A</sub>R levels at the plasma membrane. In particular insulin recruits GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs to the cell surface. Furthermore, the regulation of GABA<sub>A</sub>R surface half-life can also be the consequence of negative modulation at the proteasome level. Plic-1, a ubiquitin-like protein binds to both the proteasome and GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs and the Plic1-GABA<sub>A</sub>R interaction is important for the maintenance of GABA-activated current amplitudes. At synaptic sites, GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs are clustered via gephyrin-dependent and gephyrin-independent mechanisms and may subsequently become internalized via clathrin-mediated endocytosis underlying receptor recycling or degradation processes. This article discusses these recent data in the field of GABA<sub>A</sub>R dynamics. © 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor; GABARAP; Gephyrin; Receptor targeting; Receptor clustering; Synapse

Contents

1. GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors ..... 74
2. The GABA<sub>A</sub>R-associated protein GABARAP ..... 75
3. The GABARAP homologs Apg8/Aut7 and GATE-16 ..... 76
4. Regulation of surface membrane GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs ..... 77
5. Anchoring of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs at synaptic sites ..... 78
6. GABA<sub>A</sub>R internalization and recycling ..... 80
7. Summary ..... 80
Acknowledgements ..... 80
References ..... 80

1. GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors

GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors (GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs) are ligand-gated ion channels that mediate fast synaptic inhibition in brain and spinal cord. They are assembled in a heteropentameric arrangement of individual subunits from seven families

*Tel.: +49-69-96769-262; fax: +49-69-96769-441.
E-mail address: kneussel@mpih-frankfurt.mpg.de (M. Kneussel).

with multiple isoforms: α (six isoforms), β (three iso-
forms), γ (three isoforms), δ, ε, θ and π (one isoform each). Most native GABA<sub>A</sub>R subtypes are believed to consist of α, β and γ subunits. The expression pattern of individual subunits in a spatio-temporal dependent manner generates a high diversity of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs with different functional properties. Particularly the inclusion of a γ-
subunit into the pentamer is essential to produce receptors that are sensitive to benzodiazepine modulation [53,55].

© 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S0165-0173(02)00159-5
The GABA<sub>A</sub>R subunit diversity might further be important for mediating subcellular localization, as different isoforms containing the subunits α1, α2 and α3 aggregate at distinct postsynaptic sites on retinal, hippocampal and olfactory neurons [21,44,57]. While GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs containing the δ subunit are mainly found at extrasynaptic domains [26,59,69], γ2 subunit containing receptors display a tendency to localize at synaptic sites [8,17,39]. The mechanisms underlying such differential subcellular targeting of GABA<sub>A</sub>R isoforms to the neuronal plasma membrane are presently unknown.

Recently identified protein–protein interactions of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs with the GABA<sub>A</sub>R-associated protein GABARAP [81] and of the scaffolding protein gephyrin [72] with GABARAP [40] might provide new insights into GABA<sub>A</sub>R targeting mechanisms [36]. GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs expressed at the plasma membrane are, in analogy to the glycine receptor GlyR, thought to initially freely diffuse across the plane of the plasma membrane [54,66] and then, subsequently be concentrated by clustering proteins [32,33,48]. Such clustering of receptor proteins at sites of axo-dendritic contact, which release the neurotransmitter GABA, is a prerequisite to form functional synapses. As revealed by gene inactivation and transgenic studies in mice [4,17–19,39,42], as well as in cultured spinal neurons [16], the majority of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs essentially depend on gephyrin scaffolds at postsynaptic densities for such stabilization of receptors at synaptic sites. Moreover, synaptic GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs undergo constitutive dynamin-dependent, clathrin-mediated endocytosis [34,76], which could either lead to receptor recycling or receptor degradation [34,55]. The presently available data suggest a highly dynamic control of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs underlying inhibitory neurotransmission.

in the intermediate region of the polypeptide [81]. Furthermore, residues 37–117 were shown to bind the tubulin-binding protein gephyrin by applying biochemical GST-pulldown assays as well as yeast two-hybrid analysis [40]. Heterologous co-expression of GFP-GABARAP, together with different GABA<sub>A</sub>R subunits in the quail fibroblast cell line QT-6 leads to GABA<sub>A</sub>R aggregates that influence the function of surface GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs [11], a finding that suggests an involvement of GABARAP in the organization of GABAergic synapses. However, a quantitative light-microscopical study in the synaptic inner plexiform layer of mouse retina tissue sections revealed that GABARAP is not enriched at synaptic sites, as detected by a lack of colocalization with synaptic GABA<sub>A</sub>R clusters, synaptic gephyrin or the presynaptic marker protein bassoon [40]. In contrast, GABARAP is rather detectable in intracellular punctate structures of cultured cortical neurons [40]. Similar data were also obtained in cultured hippocampal neurons [35]. In contrast, an independent electron microscopical analysis conducted at the ultrastructural level, revealed that GABARAP immunoreactive sites are present at intracellular membranes including the Golgi-apparatus and postsynaptic cisternae [35] (Fig. 1). Accordingly, GABARAP immunoreactivity was either scattered in the dendritic cytoplasm or close to postsynaptic membranes, but consistently not found at postsynaptic gephyrin deposits. Therefore, GABARAP has been suggested to participate in membrane targeting and/or degradation processes of GABA<sub>A</sub>R-containing transport vesicles rather than to participate in receptor clustering mechanisms at the GABAergic postsynaptic density. This interpretation is further supported by the finding that GABARAP interacts and colocalizes with the ATPase N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF), a chaperone that activates SNARE proteins in membrane fusion events [83]. The structure of GABARAP was analyzed by different groups applying NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography [5,13,24,38]. Similar to the mammalian homolog GATE16 [62], GABARAP consists of a core structure with a conserved ubiquitin-fold and an N-terminal basic helical region implicated in tubulin binding [5,13,38]. Notably, one surface side of GABARAP shows almost no sequence conservation with GABARAP-like proteins, whereas the opposite face is highly conserved [5], suggesting for dual functions of family member proteins in common and specific protein–protein interactions. In addition to the monomeric state, Coyle et al. found that GABARAP can exist in a second, multimeric conformation when crystals are formed under high salt conditions [13]. Furthermore they provide evidence that GABARAP is likely to form filaments that assemble tubulin into cross-linked microtubules [13], a finding that would imply a direct link of vesicular GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs to microtubules via GABARAP.

The presently available data suggest GABARAP to participate in membrane fusion events underlying organizational processes at GABAergic synapses.

2. The GABA<sub>A</sub>R-associated protein GABARAP

De novo synthesized GABA<sub>A</sub>R subunits assemble into receptor complexes at the endoplasmic reticulum. While unassembled receptor subunits are degraded, assembled receptors are targeted to the plasma membrane via the Golgi apparatus where they might aggregate and anchor to subsynaptic elements to form synaptic clusters (for review, see Refs. [41,55]).

A recent candidate interaction to gain new insights into GABA<sub>A</sub>R plasma membrane targeting is the binding of the GABA<sub>A</sub>R γ2-subunit with the GABA<sub>A</sub>R-associated protein GABARAP [81]. GABARAP is composed of 117 amino acids and is expressed in all tissues including different subregions of the brain. The N-terminus of GABARAP (amino acids 1–36) is highly charged and features a tubulin binding motif that mediates interaction with both soluble tubulin and polymerized microtubules [82], whereas the GABA<sub>A</sub>R γ2-subunit interacts with residues 36–68
Fig. 1. Subcellular distribution of GABARAP and gephyrin in dendrites. Double detection of GABARAP-associated gold particles (arrows) and gephyrin-immunoperoxidase electron-dense deposits (double crossed arrow). Gold particles can be detected either in association with cisternae (arrowheads) or scattered in the cytoplasm. Presynaptic boutons (b) are filled with a pleiomorphic population of vesicles. Notably, GABARAP-associated gold particles localize close to postsynaptic differentiations, but are not colocalized with gephyrin immunoreactive sites. Scale bar: 0.5 μm. Modified from Ref. [35].

# 3. The GABARAP homologs Apg8/Aut7 and GATE-16

Different proteins with significant sequence homology to GABARAP have been described from various species, including light chain 3 (LC3) of microtubule-associated proteins 1A and 1B [22], Apg8/Aut7 [30,45], GATE-16 (initially introduced as p16) [46], gec1 [79] and GABARAPL 1–3 [86]. The yeast ortholog Apg8/Aut7 and the mammalian homolog GATE-16 share 54.7 and 57.3% amino acid sequence identity with GABARAP, respectively (Fig. 2). Both factors have also been shown to participate in membrane fusion events [47] and will therefore be discussed in the following.

Eukaryotic cells constitutively deliver parts of their intracellular contents to the vacuole (or lysosome) for degradation and recycling of macromolecules via autophagocytosis. This process is stimulated upon nutrient deprivation and is a non-specific process in terms of the selection of substrates [61]. Autophagocytosis requires the formation of autophagosomes, which are vesicles containing cytoplasm. These structures are typically surrounded by two membrane layers. In yeast and mammals, the outer layer of autophagosomes fuses with the vacuolar membrane, releasing autophagic vesicles into the vacuole, where they are lysed (for review, see Ref. [28]). This fusion process depends on NSF and SNARE molecules [3,15,70]. As shown in mammalian rat epithelial cells, microfilament depolymerization blocks the formation of the autophagosome, whereas microtubule depolymerization blocks fusion with the lysosome [2].

Apg8/Aut7, the yeast ortholog of the mammalian factors GABARAP and GATE-16 binds to microtubules [45] and is essential for the formation of autophagosomes [30]. Moreover, Apg8/Aut7 specifically binds to the v-SNARE

Bet1p, involved in endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi transport [47]. Prior to the autophagosome formation, Apg8/Aut7 is thought to transiently associate with respective membrane structures [25,29,61], a mechanism that includes the conjugation of Apg8/Aut7 to phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) in target membranes [25]. This so-called protein-lipidation process depends on a series of modifications to the protein itself and resembles the ubiquitination of lysine residues in target protein sequences (Fig. 3). First, the carboxy-terminal arginine residue of Apg8/Aut7 is cleaved by the cysteine protease Apg4, leading to the exposition of glycine residue 116 of the Apg8/Aut7 carboxy-terminus. Using ATP as the energy source [74], Apg8/Aut7 then interacts with Apg7, an E1 enzyme and, subsequently with Apg3, an E2 enzyme prior to its conjugation to membrane PE. Reversibly, the adduct Apg8/Aut7-G-PE is cleaved via Apg4 thereby releasing Apg8/Aut7 from membranous interactions [31] (Fig. 3b). Interestingly, the residue in position 116 is also a glycine in GABARAP and GATE-16 (Fig. 2) and both GABARAP and GATE-16 co-immunoprecipitate with the human ortholog of the E1 enzyme Apg7 [75]. Apg8/Aut7 can further substitute for the activity of its mammalian ortholog GATE-16 in intra-Golgi vesicle fusion in vitro [47]. These findings suggest similar functions for GATE-16 and Apg8/Aut7 at membranes. Consistent with this observation, GATE-16 has also been shown to bind NSF and a v-SNARE protein [67]. Structurally, GATE-16 was the first protein of the discussed homologs that had been characterized by X-ray crystallography. Based on this study, GATE-16 consists of a ubiquitin fold with two additional N-terminal helices [62], a structure that was later found to also be shared by GABARAP [5,13,38]. Furthermore, different conformations of the carboxy-terminal tail of GATE-16 were found in two independent

M. Kneussel / Brain Research Reviews 39 (2002) 74–83

| GABARAP/human, rat | MKFVYKEEHPFEKR |
| --- | --- |
| GATE-16/human | MKWMFKE DHSL EHR |
| Q09490/ Caenorh. | MKWAYKEENN FEKR |
| Apg8-Aut7/yeast | MKSTFKSEYPFEKR |
| AAD24645/Arabidop. | MAISSFKHEHPL EKR |
| Consensus | MK.FKEEHPEKRAEKIRAEKY PDRVP |

| GABARAP/human, rat | RS GEKIRK |
| --- | --- |
| GATE-16/human | CVESAKIRAKY PDRVP |
| Q09490/ Caenorh. | RAEGD KIRRKY PDRIP |
| Apg8-Aut7/yeast | AESE RIA DRFKNRIP |
| AAD24645/Arabidop. | AARIREKY PDRIP |
| Consensus | AE.KIRKY PDRIP |

| GABARAP/human, rat | VIVEKAPKARIGDKKKYLVPSDLTVGQFY |
| --- | --- |
| GATE-16/human | VIVEKVSGSQIVDI DKRYLVPSDLTVGQFM |
| Q09490/ Caenorh. | VIVEKAPKS KLHD LDKKKYLVPSDLTVGQFY |
| Apg8-Aut7/yeast | VICEEKAEKSIDIKRRKLVPADLTVGQFV |
| AAD24645/Arabidop. | VIVEKRAEKSDVPDI DRRKLVPADLTVGQFV |
| Consensus | VIVEKAKSI DI DKKKYLVPSDLTVGQFY |

| GABARAP/human, rat | FLIRKRILHRLAEDALFFFVN NVI PP T SATMG |
| --- | --- |
| GATE-16/human | WIIRKRIRQRLPSEKAIFLFVDKTVPQSSLTMG |
| Q09490/ Caenorh. | FLIRKRIRQRLRPEDALFFFVNNVIQTMTTMG |
| Apg8-Aut7/yeast | YVIRKRILMLPP EKAIFIFVNDTLPTAAALMS |
| AAD24645/Arabidop. | YVVRKRILKLLSPEKAIFFVKNI LPPTAAIMGS |
| Consensus | .IRKRIL.LPEKAIF.FVNN.PPTATMG |

| GABARAP/human, rat | QLYQEHHEDFFLYAYSDESVYG |
| --- | --- |
| GATE-16/human | QLYEKEKD EDGFLEYAYSGENTFG |
| Q09490/ Caenorh. | QLYQDHHEEDLFLEYAYSDESVYGGEEVEKKE |
| Apg8-Aut7/yeast | AIYQEHKDKDGFLEYVTYSGENTFG |
| AAD24645/Arabidop. | AIYEHKDEDGFLEYMSYSGENTFGIFF |
| Consensus | QLYQEHHKD EDGFLEY.AYSGENTFG |

Fig. 2. Sequence alignment of GABARAP, GATE-16, Apg8/Aut7, and their homologs from *Caenorhabditis elegans* and *Arabidopsis thaliana*. The mammalian homolog GATE-16 and the yeast ortholog Apg8/Aut7, both thought to be involved in membrane fusion events, share 54.7 and 57.3% amino acid sequence identity with GABARAP, respectively. Identities between GABARAP and its homologs from *Caenorhabditis elegans* and *Arabidopsis thaliana* are 78.9 and 54.2%, respectively. Modified from Ref. [40].

molecules in the crystals, suggesting the possibility of regulated conformational changes at this C-terminal tail [62].

Taken together, Apg8/Aut7 and GATE-16 share significant homology and certain characteristics with GABARAP. Complementary studies might therefore be of interest to understand the functional role of these proteins at intracellular membranes and their functional consequences for subcellular compartments such as autophagosomes or synapses.

## 4. Regulation of surface membrane GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs

Postsynaptic receptors are likely to be saturated by presynaptically released transmitter molecules. Therefore, increases in the number of active postsynaptic receptors might be an efficient way of strengthening synaptic efficacy. Processes that facilitate the insertion of newly synthesized or recycled receptors into neuronal membranes to maintain a stable cell surface receptor number, therefore seem to be a critical requirement for the regulation of synaptic strength. At GABAergic synapses, the presently known factors that participate in the recruitment of func-

tional GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs to postsynaptic domains and control GABA<sub>A</sub>R cell surface number are the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase [80] and the ubiquitin-like protein Plic-1 [6], respectively. Applying heterologous expression in human embryonic kidney cells, it has been shown that insulin causes GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs to rapidly translocate from the intracellular compartment to the plasma membrane [80]. This relocation is specifically dependent on the presence of a GABA<sub>A</sub>R β2-subunit in the receptor pentamer. Moreover, in neurons insulin increases the expression of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs on the dendritic and postsynaptic membrane as detected by an increased amplitude of GABA<sub>A</sub>R-mediated miniature inhibitory postsynaptic currents (mIPSCs) [80]. These data suggest a rapid recruitment of functional receptors, regulated via pathways that include the activation of growth factor receptors [41]. Other studies have also shown that changes in neuronal activity increase GABA<sub>A</sub>R density at synaptic sites [58, 60]. The control of GABA<sub>A</sub>R number at the plasma membrane also probably involve negative modulators of the protein degradation machinery at the proteasome. At this compartment, polyubiquitinated substrates are unfolded and degraded to small peptides, a process that underlies the control of intracellular protein levels [63]. The human proteins Plic-1 and

M. Kneussel / Brain Research Reviews 39 (2002) 74–83

A.

![Diagram A]

B.

![Diagram B]

Fig. 3. Comparison of the ubiquitin conjugation system and the Apg8/Aut7 conjugation system. (A) Ubiquitin is conjugated to lysine residues of target proteins mediated by the factors E1, E2 and E3 which might underlie subsequent protein degradation at the proteasome (for review, see Ref. [63]). (B) Apg8/Aut7 is first processed to a glycine-exposed form by the protease Apg4, activated by Apg7 (an E1 enzyme) and then transferred to Apg3 (an E2 enzyme). Finally, Apg8/Aut7 forms a conjugate with phosphatidylethanolamine (PE). Apg8/Aut7-PE is deconjugated by Apg4. Modified from Ref. [61].

Plic-2 [37] represent ubiquitin-like proteins that physically associate both with proteasomes and ubiquitin-ligases. The overexpression of hPlic proteins interferes with the in vivo degradation of ubiquitin-dependent proteasome substrates. Plic-1 further binds to both α and β subunits of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs and leads to an increased number of receptors available for insertion into the plasma membrane [6]. This finding has been confirmed by blocking the interaction of Plic-1 and GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs, which results in a time-dependent reduction in whole-cell GABA-activated current amplitudes. Consistently, Plic-1 does not colocalize with the gephyrin-positive postsynaptic density of GABAergic synapses but is found at intracellular sites [6]. These data suggest that Plic-1 is involved in the control of GABA<sub>A</sub>R subunit half-life. Other factors that negatively modulate GABA<sub>A</sub>R surface expression include the neurotrophic factor BDNF [9]. The treatment of cultured hippocampal neurons with BDNF led to a marked reduction of miniature inhibitory postsynaptic currents (mIPSCs), an effect that was reversible by a protein kinase inhibitor, which binds to trkB receptors [9]. These results therefore suggest that BDNF induces a rapid reduction in postsynaptic GABA<sub>A</sub>R number. Moreover, a recent study suggests that the downregulation of GABA<sub>A</sub>R surface levels also requires voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs) [51], as the drug Nifedipine, a VGCC-blocker, inhibits both GABA-induced increases in calcium concentrations and GABA<sub>A</sub>R down-regulation.

Together, the surface expression of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs is a highly regulated process that includes both positive and negative pathways of modulation. In this context, it will be important to distinguish pathways affecting gene expression from pathways that regulate intracellular trafficking and half-life of receptor proteins.

5. Anchoring of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs at synaptic sites

Based on studies on the inhibitory GlyR, receptor proteins which have been targeted to and inserted into the plasma membrane are thought to initially freely diffuse in the plane of the membrane [33,48,54] (Fig. 4). However, for efficient synaptic transmission, receptor proteins need to cluster in precise apposition to presynaptic terminals

M. Kneussel / Brain Research Reviews 39 (2002) 74–83

Fig. 4. Schematic representation of GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor (GABA<sub>A</sub>R) dynamics. GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs at the trans-Golgi network and/or secretory vesicles might be associated with GABARAP, NSF and SNARE proteins. In a manner similar to the closely related yeast ortholog Apg8/Aut7, GABARAP might associate with membrane lipids, thereby serving as a docking site for GABA<sub>A</sub>R-containing secretory vesicles prior to fusion with the plasma membrane. Surface receptors are, in analogy to the GlyR, thought to initially freely diffuse across the plane of the plasma membrane. Subsequent trapping and GABA<sub>A</sub>R clustering at sites of axo-dendritic contact, which release the neurotransmitter GABA, mainly depends on the subsynaptic scaffold protein gephyrin. Individual GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs, however, cluster via gephyrin-independent, yet unknown, mechanisms (question mark). In addition, synaptic GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs undergo constitutive dynamin-dependent, clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Internalized receptors enter the endosomal compartment by a membrane fusion process that could also include GABARAP. At this step receptors might then be either returned to the plasma membrane or become degraded.

releasing the appropriate neurotransmitter. Such trapping processes [54] are thought to be mediated by subsynaptic scaffolding proteins which anchor and immobilize receptors during the process of synaptic maturation [32,33] (Fig. 4). As GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs have been found in precise apposition with the postsynaptic scaffolding protein gephyrin in different neuronal tissues including spinal cord [7,10,77,78], retina [68], olfactory bulb [23] and cultured hippocampal and cortical neurons [14,17], gephyrin has been considered as the major candidate protein for synaptic GABA<sub>A</sub>R clustering. However, biochemical approaches failed to show a direct interaction of any GABA<sub>A</sub>R subunit with gephyrin [27], suggesting that additional proteins

mediate the receptor-scaffold interactions. Evidence for a role of gephyrin in GABA<sub>A</sub>R clustering comes from gene depletion experiments by either antisense oligonucleotides or gene knockout in mice [17,39], showing that the GABA<sub>A</sub>R subunits α2 and γ2 essentially depend on gephyrin for synaptic localization. Cultured hippocampal neurons and spinal cord sections derived from gephyrin knockout mice show a nearly complete loss of synaptic α2 and γ2 GABA<sub>A</sub>R clusters and display a significant increase in intracellular receptor immunoreactivity [39]. Vice-versa, GABA<sub>A</sub>R γ2-subunit knockout mice display a strong reduction in postsynaptic gephyrin and GABA<sub>A</sub>R clusters [17]. However, in spinal cord and retina, individual

GABA<sub>A</sub>R subunits were found to be either only partially dependent or totally independent of gephyrin for synaptic localization [19, 42]. In particular, GABA<sub>A</sub>R α3, as well as β2/3 subunit-containing clusters, were partially reduced in both tissues derived from gephyrin-deficient mice. In addition, the numbers of GABA<sub>A</sub>R α1 and α5 subunit clusters were shown to be totally unaltered upon the loss of gephyrin in spinal cord. Significantly, remaining receptor clusters were located at synaptic sites [42]. This finding suggests that more than a single subunit in the receptor pentamer anchors to clustering proteins. Therefore, pentameric receptors solely depending on the postsynaptic gephyrin scaffold would be lost from synaptic sites in a gephyrin-deficient background, whereas receptors anchoring to additional clustering proteins might remain at synapses. However, the majority of all natively expressed GABA<sub>A</sub>R subunits in the forebrain and other regions of the CNS are thought to depend on gephyrin for synaptic clustering. Therefore, despite the indication of additional clustering factors, gephyrin is thought to be the major GABA<sub>A</sub>R clustering protein. Other candidate proteins involved in GABA<sub>A</sub>R clustering include the actin-binding protein dystrophin, which colocalizes with GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs in different neuronal tissues [43]. Interestingly, dystrophin knockout mice display a reduction in GABA<sub>A</sub>R clusters immunoreactive for the α1 and α2 subunits [43], a finding which is not accompanied by a change in gephyrin staining. The precise mechanisms for the role of dystrophin and possibly utrophin, another member of the dystrophin-related family of proteins, at central synapses still remains to be elucidated.

This suggests that GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs constantly cycle between synaptic sites and endocytic structures, a process that is further dependent on dynamin for endocytic vesicle formation. Whether GABA<sub>A</sub>R-containing vesicles also interact with GABARAP prior to membrane fusion with the early/late endosome or lysosome and possibly with vesicles on their way back to the plasma membrane (Fig. 4), is presently speculative, however the GABARAP binding partner NSF is enriched on endosomal membranes, as it is involved in transport from early to late endosomes [65] and NSF is present at recycling endosomes [64].

## 7. Summary

The processes of GABA<sub>A</sub>R dynamics include receptor targeting, plasma membrane insertion, receptor clustering and the degradation/recycling of receptor proteins. As shown for other receptors including the excitatory AMPA receptor [20, 49, 84, 85] such steps in a receptor life-cycle are highly regulated underlying processes of synaptogenesis, the strengthening of individual synapses and synaptic plasticity. At GABAergic synapses we are just about to initially understand such different regulatory pathways. The presently available data suggest an involvement of tyrosine kinase receptors and intracellular membrane fusion events for the anterograde direction of GABA<sub>A</sub>R trafficking. Beside complex mechanisms to maintain a high concentration of receptors at sites of axo-dendritic contact, the retrograde direction of GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs include clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Moreover, GABA<sub>A</sub>R degradation processes might include the ubiquitination/proteasome pathway. Regarding the role of GABARAP in these processes, the next steps will have to clarify the functional significance of GABARAP’s multiple interaction partners. Furthermore, it will be necessary to know whether all the possible interactors can bind at the same time. However, our current knowledge about GABA<sub>A</sub>R dynamics has been mainly based on studies in heterologous expression systems and cultured neurons. It will therefore be important to apply functional experiments in complex organisms, such as transgenic and gene-targeted mice, to understand the role of GABA<sub>A</sub>R regulatory pathways in higher brain functions.

## Acknowledgements

I thank H. Betz for continuous support and J.C. Fuhrmann and S.M. O’Shea for critically reading the manuscript.

## References

[1] R.G. Anderson, E. Vasile, R.J. Mello, M.S. Brown, J.L. Goldstein, Immunocytochemical visualization of coated pits and vesicles in

human fibroblasts: relation to low density lipoprotein receptor distribution, Cell 15 (1978) 919–933.

[2] A. Aplin, T. Jasionowski, D.L. Tuttle, S.E. Lenk, W.A. Dunn Jr., Cytoskeletal elements are required for the formation and maturation of autophagic vacuoles, J. Cell Physiol. 152 (1992) 458–466.

[3] M. Baba, K. Takeshige, N. Baba, Y. Ohsumi, Ultrastructural analysis of the autophagic process in yeast: detection of autophagosomes and their characterization, J. Cell Biol. 124 (1994) 903–913.

[4] K. Baer, C. Essrich, J.A. Benson, D. Benke, H. Blüthmann, J.M. Fritschy, B. Lüscher, Postsynaptic clustering of γ-aminobutyric acid type A receptors by the γ3 subunit in vivo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96 (1999) 12860–12865.

[5] V.N. Bavro, M. Sola, A. Bracher, M. Kneussel, H. Betz, W. Weissenhorn, Crystal structure of the GABAA-receptor-associated protein, GABARAP, EMBO Reports 3 (2002) 10.1093/embo-reports/kvf026.

[6] F.K. Bedford, J.T. Kittler, E. Müller, P. Thomas, J.M. Uren, D. Merlo, W. Wisden, A. Triller, T.G. Smart, S.J. Moss, GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor cell surface number and subunit stability are regulated by the ubiquitin-like protein Plic-1, Nat. Neurosci. 4 (2001) 908–916.

[7] S. Bohlhalter, H. Möhler, J.M. Fritschy, Inhibitory neurotransmission in rat spinal cord: co-localization of glycine- and GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors at GABAergic synaptic contacts demonstrated by triple immunofluorescence staining, Brain Res. 642 (1994) 59–69.

[8] S.G. Brickley, S.G. Cull-Candy, M. Farrant, Single-channel properties of synaptic and extrasynaptic GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors suggest differential targeting of receptor subtypes, J. Neurosci. 19 (1999) 2960–2973.

[9] I. Brünig, S. Penschuck, B. Berninger, J. Benson, J.M. Fritschy, BDNF reduces miniature inhibitory postsynaptic currents by rapid downregulation of GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor surface expression, Eur. J. Neurosci. 13 (2001) 1320–1328.

[10] J.B. Cabot, A. Bushnell, V. Alessi, N.R. Mendell, Postsynaptic gephyrin immunoreactivity exhibits a nearly one-to-one correspondence with γ-aminobutyric acid-like immunogold-labeled synaptic inputs to sympathetic preganglionic neurons, J. Comp. Neurol. 356 (1995) 418–432.

[11] L. Chen, H. Wang, S. Vicini, R.W. Olsen, The γ-aminobutyric acid type A (GABA<sub>A</sub>) receptor-associated protein (GABARAP) promotes GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor clustering and modulates the channel kinetics, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97 (2000) 11557–11562.

[12] C.N. Connolly, J.T. Kittler, P. Thomas, J.M. Uren, N.J. Brandon, T.G. Smart, S.J. Moss, Cell surface stability of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors. Dependence on protein kinase C activity and subunit composition, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (1999) 36565–36572.

[13] J.E. Coyle, S. Qamar, K.R. Rajashankar, D.B. Nikolov, Structure of GABARAP in two conformations: implications for GABA(A) receptor localization and tubulin binding, Neuron 33 (2002) 63–74.

[14] A.M. Craig, G. Banker, W. Chang, M.E. McGrath, A.S. Serpinskaya, Clustering of gephyrin at GABAergic but not glutamatergic synapses in cultured rat hippocampal neurons, J. Neurosci. 16 (1996) 3166–3177.

[15] T. Darsow, S.E. Rieder, S.D. Emr, A multispecificity syntaxin homologue, Vam3p, essential for autophagic and biosynthetic protein transport to the vacuole, J. Cell Biol. 138 (1997) 517–529.

[16] A. Dumoulin, S. Levi, B. Riveau, B. Gasnier, A. Triller, Formation of mixed glycine and GABAergic synapses in cultured spinal cord neurons, Eur. J. Neurosci. 12 (2000) 3883–3892.

[17] C. Essrich, M. Lorez, J.A. Benson, J.M. Fritschy, B. Lüscher, Postsynaptic clustering of major GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor subtypes requires the γ2-subunit and gephyrin, Nat. Neurosci. 7 (1998) 563–571.

[18] G. Feng, H. Tintrup, J. Kirsch, M.C. Nichol, J. Kuhse, H. Betz, J.R. Sanes, Dual requirement for gephyrin in glycine receptor clustering and molybdoenzyme activity, Science 282 (1998) 1321–1324.

[19] F. Fischer, M. Kneussel, H. Tintrup, S. Haverkamp, T. Rauen, H. Betz, H. Wässle, Reduced synaptic clustering of GABA and glycine receptors in the retina of the gephyrin null mutant mouse, J. Comp. Neurol. 427 (2000) 643–648.

[20] H.V. Friedman, T. Bresler, C.C. Garner, N.E. Ziv, Assembly of new individual excitatory synapses: time course and temporal order of synaptic molecule recruitment, Neuron 27 (2000) 57–69.

[21] J.M. Fritschy, D.K. Johnson, H. Möhler, U. Rudolf, Independent assembly and subcellular targeting of GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor subtypes demonstrated in mouse hippocampal and olfactory neurons in vivo, Neurosci. Lett. 249 (1998) 99–102.

[22] C.C. Garner, A. Garner, G. Huber, C. Kozak, A. Matus, Molecular cloning of microtubule-associated protein 1 (MAP1A) and microtubule-associated protein 5 (MAP1B): identification of distinct genes and their differential expression in developing brain, J. Neurochem. 55 (1990) 146–154.

[23] M. Giustetto, J. Kirsch, J.M. Fritschy, D. Cantino, M. Sassoe-Pognetto, Localization of the clustering protein gephyrin at GABAergic synapses in the main olfactory bulb of the rat, J. Comp. Neurol. 395 (1998) 231–244.

[24] R. Harris, M.S. McAlister, A. Sankar, J.P. Phelan, S.J. Moss, N.H. Keep, P.C. Driscoll, Backbone 1H, 13C, and 15N resonance assignments for a 14 kD protein, GABA(A) receptor associated protein (GABARAP), J. Biomol. NMR 21 (2001) 185–186.

[25] Y. Ichimura, T. Kirisako, T. Takao, Y. Satomi, Y. Shimonishi, N. Ishihara, N. Mizushima, I. Tanida, E. Kominami, M. Ohsumi, T. Noda, Y. Ohsumi, A ubiquitin-like system mediates protein lipidation, Nature 408 (2000) 488–492.

[26] A. Jones, E.R. Korpi, R.M. McKernan, R. Pelz, Z. Nusser, R. Makela, J.R. Mellor, S. Pollard, S. Bahn, F.A. Stephenson, A.D. Randall, W. Sieghart, P. Somogy, A.J. Smith, W. Wisden, Ligand-gated ion channel subunit partnerships: GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor alpha6 subunit gene inactivation inhibits delta subunit expression, J. Neurosci. 17 (1997) 1350–1362.

[27] K. Kannenberg, R. Baur, E. Siegel, Proteins associated with alpha 1-subunit-containing GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors from bovine brain, J. Neurochem. 68 (1997) 1352–1360.

[28] J. Kim, D.J. Klionsky, Autophagy, cytoplasm-to-vacuole targeting pathway, and pexophagy in yeast and mammalian cells, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69 (2000) 303–342.

[29] J. Kim, H. Wei-Pang, D.J. Klionsky, Membrane recruitment of Aut7p in the autophagy and cytoplasm to vacuole targeting pathways requires Aut1p, Aut2p, and the autophagy conjugation complex, J. Cell Biol. 152 (2001) 51–64.

[30] T. Kirisako, M. Baba, N. Ishihara, K. Miyazawa, M. Ohsumi, T. Yoshimori, T. Noda, Y. Ohsumi, Formation process of autophagosome is traced with Apg8/Aut7p in yeast, J. Cell Biol. 147 (1999) 435–446.

[31] T. Kirisako, Y. Ichimura, H. Okada, Y. Kabeya, N. Mizushima, T. Yoshimori, M. Ohsumi, T. Takao, T. Noda, Y. Ohsumi, The reversible modification regulates the membrane binding state of Apg8/Aut7 essential for autophagy and the cytoplasm to vacuole targeting pathway, J. Cell Biol. 151 (2000) 263–276.

[32] J. Kirsch, I. Wolters, A. Triller, H. Betz, Gephyrin antisense oligonucleotides prevent glycine receptor clustering in spinal neurons, Nature 266 (1993) 745–748.

[33] J. Kirsch, H. Betz, Glycine receptor activation is required for receptor clustering in spinal neurons, Nature 392 (1998) 717–720.

[34] J.T. Kittler, P. Delmas, J.N. Jovanovic, D.A. Brown, T.G. Smart, S.J. Moss, Constitutive endocytosis of GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors by an association with the adaptin AP2 complex modulates inhibitory synaptic currents in hippocampal neurons, J. Neurosci. 20 (2000) 7972–7977.

[35] J.T. Kittler, P. Rostaing, G. Schiavo, J.M. Fritschy, R.W. Olsen, A. Triller, S.J. Moss, The subcellular distribution of GABARAP and its ability to interact with NSF suggest a role for this protein in the intracellular transport of GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors, Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 18 (2000) 13–25.

[36] J.T. Kittler, S.J. Moss, Neurotransmitter receptor trafficking and the regulation of synaptic strength, Traffic 2 (2001) 437–448.

[37] M.F. Kleijnen, A.H. Shih, P. Zhou, S. Kumar, R.E. Soccio, N.L. Kedersha, G. Gill, P.M. Howley, The hPlic proteins may provide a

link between the ubiquitination machinery and the proteasome, Mol. Cell 6 (2000) 409–419.

[38] D. Knight, R. Harris, M.S.B. McAlister, J.P. Phelan, S. Geddes, S.J. Moss, P.C. Driscoll, N.H. Keep, The X-ray crystal structure and putative ligand-derived peptide-binding properties of GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor associated protein (GABARAP), J. Biol. Chem. 277 (2002) 5556–5561.

[39] M. Kneussel, J.H. Brandstätter, B. Laube, S. Stahl, U. Müller, H. Betz, Loss of postsynaptic GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor clustering in gephyrin-deficient mice, J. Neurosci. 19 (1999) 9289–9297.

[40] M. Kneussel, S. Haverkamp, J.C. Fuhrmann, H. Wang, H. Wässle, R.W. Olsen, H. Betz, The γ-aminobutyric type A receptor (GABA<sub>A</sub>R)-associated protein GABARAP interacts with gephyrin but is not involved in receptor anchoring at the synapse, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97 (2000) 8594–8599.

[41] M. Kneussel, H. Betz, Clustering of inhibitory neurotransmitter receptors at developing postsynaptic sites: the membrane activation model, Trends Neurosci. 23 (2000) 429–435.

[42] M. Kneussel, J.H. Brandstätter, B. Gasnier, G. Feng, J.R. Sanes, H. Betz, Gephyrin-independent clustering of postsynaptic GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor subtypes, Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 17 (2001) 973–982.

[43] I. Knuesel, M. Mastrocola, R.A. Zuellig, B. Bornhauser, M.C. Schaub, J.M. Fritschy, Altered synaptic clustering of GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors in mice lacking dystrophin (mdx mice), Eur. J. Neurosci. 11 (1999) 4457–4462.

[44] P. Koulen, M. Sassoe-Pognetto, U. Grünert, H. Wässle, Selective clustering of GABA<sub>A</sub> and glycine receptors in the mammalian retina, J. Neurosci. 16 (1996) 2127–2140.

[45] T. Lang, E. Schaeffeler, D. Bernreuther, M. Bredschneider, D.H. Wolf, M. Thumm, Aut2p and Aut7p, two novel microtubule-associated proteins are essential for delivery of autophagic vesicles to the vacuole, EMBO J. 17 (1998) 3597–3607.

[46] A. Legesse-Miller, Y. Sagiv, A. Porat, Z. Elazar, Isolation and characterization of a novel low molecular weight protein involved in intra-Golgi traffic, J. Biol. Chem. 273 (1998) 3105–3109.

[47] A. Legesse-Miller, Y. Sagiv, R. Glozman, Z. Elazar, Aut7p, a soluble autophagic factor, participates in multiple membrane trafficking processes, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000) 32966–32973.

[48] S. Levi, C. Vannier, A. Triller, Strychnine-sensitive stabilization of postsynaptic glycine receptor clusters, J. Cell Sci. 111 (1998) 335–345.

[49] F. Liang, R.L. Huganir, Coupling of agonist-induced AMPA receptor internalization with receptor recycling, J. Neurochem. 77 (2001) 1626–1631.

[50] B. Lichte, R.W. Veh, H.E. Meyer, M.W. Kilimann, Amphiphysin, a novel protein associated with synaptic vesicles, EMBO J. 11 (1992) 2521–2530.

[51] H.R. Lyons, M.B. Land, T.T. Gibb, D.H. Farb, Distinct signal transduction pathways for GABA-induced GABA(A) receptor down-regulation and uncoupling in neuronal culture: a role for voltage-gated calcium channels, J. Neurochem. 78 (2001) 1114–1126.

[52] M. Marsh, H.T. McMahon, The structural era of endocytosis, Science 285 (1999) 215–220.

[53] R.M. McKernan, P.J. Whiting, Which GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor subtypes really occur in the brain?, Trends Neurosci. 19 (1996) 139–143.

[54] J. Meier, C. Vannier, A. Serge, A. Triller, D. Choquet, Fast and reversible trapping of surface glycine receptors by gephyrin, Nat. Neurosci. 4 (2001) 253–260.

[55] S.J. Moss, T.G. Smart, Constructing inhibitory synapses, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2 (2001) 240–250.

[56] J. Noel, G.S. Ralph, L. Pickard, J. Williams, E. Molnar, J.B. Uney, G.L. Collingridge, J.M. Henley, Surface expression of AMPA receptors in hippocampal neurons is regulated by an NSF-dependent mechanism, Neuron 23 (1999) 365–376.

[57] Z. Nusser, W. Sieghart, D. Benke, J.M. Fritschy, P. Somogyi, Differential synaptic localization of two major gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor alpha subunits on hippocampal pyramidal cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 (1996) 11939–11944.


[58] Z. Nusser, S. Cull-Candy, M. Farrant, Differences in synaptic GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor number underlie variation in GABA mini amplitude, Neuron 19 (1997) 697–709.

[59] Z. Nusser, W. Sieghart, P. Somogyi, Segregation of different GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors to synaptic and extrasynaptic membranes of cerebellar granule cells, J. Neurosci. 18 (1998) 1693–1703.

[60] Z. Nusser, N. Hajos, P. Somogyi, I. Mody, Increased number of synaptic GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors underlies potentiation at hippocampal inhibitory synapses, Nature 395 (1998) 172–177.

[61] Y. Ohsumi, Molecular dissection of autophagy: two ubiquitin-like systems, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2 (2001) 211–216.

[62] Y. Paz, Z. Elazar, D. Fass, Structure of GATE-16, membrane transport modulator and mammalian ortholog of autophagocytosis factor Aut7p, J. Biol. Chem. 275 (2000) 25455–25460.

[63] C.M. Pickart, Ubiquitin in chains, Trend Biochem. Sci. 11 (2000) 544–548.

[64] R. Prekeris, J. Klumperman, Y.A. Chen, R.H. Scheller, Syntaxin 13 mediates cycling of plasma membrane proteins via tubulovesicular recycling endosomes, J. Cell Biol. 143 (1998) 957–971.

[65] L.J. Robinson, F. Aniento, J. Gruenberg, NSF is required for transport from early to late endosomes, J. Cell Sci. 110 (1997) 2079–2087.

[66] M. Rosenberg, J. Meier, A. Triller, C. Vannier, Dynamics of glycine receptor insertion in the neuronal plasma membrane, J. Neurosci. 21 (2001) 5036–5044.

[67] Y. Sagiv, A. Legesse-Miller, A. Porat, Z. Elazar, GATE-16, a membrane transport modulator, interacts with NSF and the Golgi v-SNARE GOS-28, EMBO J. 19 (2000) 1494–1504.

[68] M. Sassoe-Pognetto, J. Kirsch, U. Grünert, U. Greferath, J.M. Fritschy, H. Möhler, H. Betz, H. Wässle, Colocalization of gephyrin and GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor subunits in the rat retina, J. Comp. Neurol. 357 (1995) 1–14.

[69] M. Sassoe-Pognetto, P. Panzanelli, W. Sieghart, J.M. Fritschy, Colocalization of multiple GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor subtypes with gephyrin at postsynaptic sites, J. Comp. Neurol. 420 (2000) 481–498.

[70] T.K. Sato, T. Darsow, S.D. Emr, Vam7p, a SNAP-25-like molecule, and Vam3p, a syntaxin homolog, function together in yeast vacuolar protein trafficking, Mol. Cell Biol. 18 (1998) 5308–5319.

[71] R.H. Scannevin, R.L. Huganir, Postsynaptic organization and regulation of excitatory synapses, Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 1 (2000) 133–141.

[72] B. Schmitt, P. Knaus, C.M. Becker, H. Betz, The Mr 93000 polypeptide of the postsynaptic glycine receptor complex is a peripheral membrane protein, Biochemistry 26 (1987) 805–811.

[73] H.S. Shpetner, R.B. Vallee, Identification of dynamin, a novel mechanochemical enzyme that mediates interactions between microtubules, Cell 59 (1989) 421–432.

[74] I. Tanida, N. Mizushima, M. Kiyooka, M. Ohsumi, T. Ueno, Y. Ohsumi, E. Kominami, Apg7p/Cvt2p: a novel protein-activating enzyme essential for autophagy, Mol. Biol. Cell 10 (1999) 1367–1379.

[75] I. Tanida, E. Tanida-Miyake, T. Ueno, E. Kominami, The human homolog of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Apg7p is a protein-activating enzyme for multiple substrates including human Apg12p, GATE-16, GABARAP, and MAP-LC3, J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 1701–1706.

[76] M.H. Tehrani, E.M. Barnes Jr., Identification of GABA<sub>A</sub>/benzodiazepine receptors on clathrin-coated vesicles from rat brain, J. Neurochem. 60 (1993) 1755–1761.

[77] A.J. Todd, C. Watt, R.C. Spike, W. Sieghart, Colocalization of GABA, glycine and their receptors at synapses in the rat spinal cord, J. Neurosci. 16 (1996) 974–982.

[78] A. Triller, F. Cluzeaud, H. Korn, Gamma-aminobutyric acid-containing terminals can be apposed to glycine receptors at central synapses, J. Cell Biol. 104 (1987) 947–956.

[79] S. Vernier-Magnin, S. Muller, M. Sallot, J. Radom, J.F. Musard, P. Adami, P. Dulieu, J.P. Remy-Martin, M. Jouvenout, A. Fraichard, A novel early estrogen-regulated gene gecl encodes a protein related

to GABARAP, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 284 (2001) 118–125.

[80] Q. Wan, Z.G. Xiong, H.Y. Man, C.A. Ackerley, J. Braunton, W.Y. Lu, L.E. Becker, J.F. MacDonald, Y.T. Wang, Recruitment of functional GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors to postsynaptic domains by insulin, Nature 388 (1997) 686–690.

[81] H. Wang, F.K. Bedford, N.J. Brandon, S.J. Moss, R.W. Olsen, GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor-associated protein links GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors and the cytoskeleton, Nature 397 (1998) 69–72.

[82] H. Wang, R.W. Olsen, Binding of the GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor-associated protein (GABARAP) to microtubules and microfilaments suggests involvement of the cytoskeleton in GABARAP-GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor interaction, J. Neurochem. 75 (2000) 644–655.

[83] S.W. Whiteheart, T. Schraw, E.A. Matveeva, *N*-Ethylmaleimide sensitive factor (NSF) structure and function, Int. Rev. Cytol. 207 (2001) 71–112.

[84] H. Xia, Z.D. Hornby, R.C. Malenka, An ER retention signal explains differences in surface expression of NMDA and AMPA receptor subunits, Neuropharmacology 41 (2001) 714–723.

[85] J. Xia, X. Zhang, J. Staudinger, R.L. Huganir, Clustering of AMPA receptors by the synaptic PDZ domain-containing protein PICK1, Neuron 22 (1999) 179–187.

[86] Y. Xin, L. Yu, Z. Chen, L. Zheng, Q. Fu, J. Jiang, P. Zhang, R. Gong, S. Zhao, Cloning, expression patterns, and chromosome localization of three human and two mouse homologues of GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor-associated protein, Genomics 74 (2001) 408–413.
