
34. Makishima, M. *et al.* Vitamin D receptor as a bile acid sensor that detoxifies the colon carcinogen lithocholic acid. *Science* **296**, 1313–1316 (2002).

35. Yanagisawa, J. *et al.* Convergence of transforming growth factor-β and vitamin D signaling pathways on SMAD transcriptional coactivators. *Science* **283**, 1317–1321 (1999).

36. Misteli, T. Protein dynamics: implications for nuclear architecture and gene expression. *Science* **291**, 843–847 (2001).

37. Reddy, B. S. *et al.* Chemoprevention of colon cancer by specific cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, celecoxib, administered during different stages of carcinogenesis. *Cancer Res.* **60**, 293–297 (2000).

38. Steinbach, G. *et al.* The effect of celecoxib, a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, in familial adenomatous polyposis. *N. Eng. J. Med.* **342**, 1946–1952 (2000).

39. Gupta, R. A. & DuBois, R. N. Colorectal cancer prevention and treatment by inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **1**, 11–21 (2001).

40. Bharti, A. C. & Aggarwal, B. B. Nuclear factor κB and cancer: its role in prevention and therapy. *Biochem. Pharmacol* (in the press).

41. Cameron, E. E., Bachman, K. E., Myohanen, S., Herman, J. G. & Baylin, S. B. Synergy of demethylation and histone deacetylase inhibition in the re-expression of genes silenced in cancer. *Nature Genet.* **21**, 103–107 (1999).

42. Lantry, L. E. *et al.* 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine is chemopreventive in a 4-(methyl-nitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butane-induced primary mouse lung tumor model. *Carcinogenesis* **20**, 343–346 (1999).

43. Ferrara, F. F. *et al.* Histone deacetylase-targeted treatment restores retinoic acid signaling and differentiation in acute myeloid leukemia. *Cancer Res.* **61**, 2–7 (2001).

44. Widschwendter, M. *et al.* Methylation and silencing of the retinoic acid receptor-β2 gene in breast cancer. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **92**, 826–832 (2000).

45. Tang, B. *et al.* Transforming growth factor-β1 is a new form of tumor suppressor with true haploid insufficiency. *Nature Med.* **4**, 802–807 (1998).

46. Massagué, J., Blain, S. W. & Lo, R. S. TGF-β signaling in growth control, cancer, and heritable disorders. *Cell* **103**, 295–309 (2000).

47. De Caestecker, M. P., Piek, E. & Roberts, A. B. Role of transforming growth factor-β signaling in cancer. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **92**, 1388–1402 (2000).

48. Derynck, R., Akhurst, R. J. & Balmain, A. TGF-β signaling in tumor suppression and cancer progression. *Nature Genet.* **29**, 117–129 (2001).

49. Kim, S. J., Im, Y. H., Markowitz, S. D. & Bang, Y. J. Molecular mechanisms of inactivation of TGF-β receptors during carcinogenesis. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.* **11**, 159–168 (2000).

50. Chen, T. *et al.* Transforming growth factor-β receptor type I gene is frequently mutated in ovarian carcinomas. *Cancer Res.* **61**, 4679–4682 (2001).

51. Fiocchi, C. TGF-β/Smad signaling defects in inflammatory bowel disease: mechanisms and possible novel therapies for chronic inflammation. *J. Clin. Invest.* **108**, 523–526 (2001).

52. Monteleone, G. *et al.* Blocking Smad7 restores TGF-β1 signaling in chronic inflammatory bowel disease. *J. Clin. Invest.* **108**, 601–609 (2001).

53. Danielsen, A. J. & Maihle, N. J. The EGF/ErbB receptor family and apoptosis. *Growth Factors* **20**, 1–15 (2002).

54. Raben, D., Helfrich, B. A., Chan, D., Johnson, G. & Bunn, P. A. Jr. ZD1839, a selective epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, alone and in combination with radiation and chemotherapy as a new therapeutic strategy in non-small cell lung cancer. *Semin. Oncol.* **29**, S37–S46 (2002).

55. Karin, M., Cao, Y., Greten, F. R. & Li, Z. W. NF-κB in cancer: from innocent bystander to major culprit. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **2**, 301–310 (2002).

56. Bromberg, J. & Darnell, J. E. The role of STATs in transcriptional control and their impact on cellular function. *Oncogene* **19**, 2468–2473 (2000).

57. Turkson, J. & Jove, R. STAT proteins: novel molecular targets for cancer drug discovery. *Oncogene* **19**, 6613–6626 (2000).

58. Malumbres, M. & Barbacid, M. To cycle or not to cycle: a critical decision in cancer. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **1**, 222–231 (2001).

59. Teicher, B. A. (ed.) *Tumor Models in Cancer Research*. 690 (Humana, Totowa, New Jersey, 2002).

60. Hong, W. K., Lippman, S. M., Hittleman, W. N. & Lotan, R. Retinoid chemoprevention of aerodigestive cancer: from basic research to the clinic. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **1**, 677–686 (1995).

61. Sporn, M. B. Hobson's choice and the need for combinations of new agents for the prevention and

treatment of breast cancer. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **94**, 242–243 (2002).

62. Song, C. Z., Tian, X. & Gelehrter, T. D. Glucocorticoid receptor inhibits transforming growth factor-β signaling by directly targeting the transcriptional activation function of Smad3. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.* **96**, 11776–11781 (1999).

63. Matsuda, T., Yamamoto, T., Muraguchi, A. & Saatcioglu, F. Cross-talk between transforming growth factor-β and estrogen receptor signaling through Smad3. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 42908–42914 (2001).

64. Chipuk, J. E. *et al.* The androgen receptor represses transforming growth factor-β signaling through interaction with Smad3. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 1240–1248 (2002).

65. Kang, H. Y. *et al.* From transforming growth factor-β signaling to androgen action: identification of Smad3 as an androgen receptor coregulator in prostate cancer cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.* **98**, 3018–3023 (2001).

66. Fu, M. *et al.* Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ inhibits transforming growth factor-β-induced connective tissue growth factor expression in human aortic smooth muscle cells by interfering with Smad3. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 45888–45894 (2001).

67. Ulloa, L., Doody, J. & Massague, J. Inhibition of transforming growth factor-beta/SMAD signalling by the interferon-γ/STAT pathway. *Nature* **397**, 710–713 (1999).

68. Bitzer, M. *et al.* A mechanism of suppression of TGF-β/SMAD signaling by NF-κB/RelA. *Genes Dev.* **14**, 187–197 (2000).

69. American Cancer Society. *Estimated Cancer Deaths and New Cases by Sex and Site: 1971 Cancer Facts and Figures* (American Cancer Society, New York, 1970).

70. Jemal, A., Thomas, A., Murray, T. & Thun, M. Cancer Statistics 2002. *CA Cancer J. Clin.* **52**, 23–47 (2002).

Acknowledgements  
We thank M. Padgett for expert assistance in the preparation of the manuscript. Our research is supported by grants from the National Cancer Institute, the Department of Defense, the National Foundation for Cancer Research, and the Oliver and Jennie Donaldson Trust. M. B. S is an Oscar M. Cohn Professor.

### Online links

#### DATABASES  
The following terms in this article are linked online to:  
Cancer.gov: http://www.cancer.gov/cancer_information/  
breast cancer | chronic myelogenous leukaemia | colon cancer | endometrial cancer | gastric cancer | head and neck cancer | Hodgkin’s disease | lung cancer | ovarian cancer | pancreatic cancer | prostate cancer | testicular cancer  

LocusLink: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/  
androgen receptor | BRCA1 | BRCA2 | COX1 | COX2 | EGF | ERBB2 | ERα | ERβ | IFN-γ | IL-1α | NF-κB | PPARγ | RARα | RARβ | RARγ | RXRα | RXRβ | RXRγ | SMAD2 | SMAD3 | SMAD4 | SMAD6 | SMAD7 | STAT1 | TGF-β | TNF-α | VDR  

Medscape DrugInfo:  
http://promini.medscape.com/drugdb/search.asp  
celecoxib | Gleevac | Herceptin | raloxifene | tamoxifen  

OMIM: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim/  
familial adenomatous polyposis | inflammatory bowel disease | osteoporosis  

---

### SCIENCE AND SOCIETY

#### Cancer after nuclear fallout: lessons from the Chernobyl accident

##### Dillwyn Williams

The Chernobyl accident exposed people located hundreds of kilometres away to fallout, but increases in cancer incidence as a result of the accident seem, at present, to be restricted to one tumour type. These thyroid tumours form the largest number of cancers of one type, caused by a single event on one date, ever recorded. Epidemiological, pathological and molecular studies have provided new insights into the carcinogenic process, as well as lessons for future nuclear accidents.

Four years after the Chernobyl accident, unusual numbers of **thyroid cancer** cases in children were noted in Belarus and Ukraine¹, and were reported to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). These reports were greeted sceptically in the West, partly because many felt that isotopes of iodine carried relatively little carcinogenic risk, and partly because it was considered that the latency period was far too short. Fifteen years on, what have we learned about the consequences of this, the largest ever peacetime nuclear accident?

The accident took place on 26 April 1986, when a misguided experiment went disastrously wrong. A steam explosion blew the lid off the reactor and a fire in the graphite core led to the release of over 10¹⁹ becquerels (Bqs) of radioisotopes, including nearly all of the volatile isotopes in the reactor, with high levels of fallout over Belarus, Northern Ukraine and part of the Russian Federation (FIG. 1). Some 10–20 million people were exposed to significant levels of fallout; several hundred workers at the plant received whole-body radiation, 134 developed acute radiation sickness and, of these, 28 died within four months². But what long-term effects did the accident have?

#### Thyroid cancer incidence  
The first official reports, in 1992, described 114 cases of thyroid cancer in children in Belarus during a 30-month period; the increase started in 1990, less than four years after the accident³,⁴. By comparison, there were only two cases in 1986, rising to six in 1989. The diagnoses were confirmed in 102 of 104 cases examined. These were not incidental microcarcinomas, but clinically significant

effectively that the thyroid dose from exposure to $^{131}$iodine is 1000–2000 times the average body dose$^9$, so it is not surprising that the dominant effect has been on the thyroid. The distribution of the cases corresponds to the fallout distribution, and the average excess absolute risk per unit thyroid dose for children has been estimated as 2.1 per 10$^4$ children/year/Gray (Gy)$^{10}$. What was difficult to explain at first, however, was that the pathological findings in the Chernobyl-related cases differed from those in unexposed areas.

**Pathology and molecular biology**

Three main types of differentiated cancers are found in the thyroid — papillary and follicular cancer, which are derived from the follicular cell (FIG. 2), and medullary cancer, which is derived from the embryologically distinct C cell. In England and Wales, a study spanning 30 years found that 67% of childhood thyroid cancers were papillary, 11% follicular and 17% medullary$^{11}$. Of the Chernobyl-related tumours, 98% were papillary and many showed an unusual solid morphology$^{12-14}$.

Two families of oncogenes have been particularly associated with differentiated thyroid tumours — the c-$RET$ family and the $RAS$ family (FIG. 2d). RET is a receptor tyrosine kinase that is activated by members of the glial-derived neurotrophic factor ($GDNF$) family, leading to dimerization (FIG. 3). In many papillary thyroid carcinomas, the tyrosine kinase part of the c-$RET$ gene is activated through rearrangement, with fusion to one of several unrelated genes either by inversion (as in the $RET-PTC1$ and $RET-PTC3$ oncogenes) or translocation (as in the $RET-PTC2$ oncogene) (FIG. 3c)$^{15-17}$. Other rare rearrangements can occur, but $RET-PTC1$ and $RET-PTC3$ are the most common types found, and are limited to papillary carcinomas$^{18}$. All of these rearrangements lead to replacement of the ligand-binding regions of the wild-type RET protein with a coiled-coil domain that can dimerize and activate the receptor in the absence of ligand$^{19}$. Surprisingly, the $RET$ gene is also involved in medullary carcinoma, but it is activated here by point mutation, either near the transmembrane region leading to dimerization or in the tyrosine kinase domain itself$^{20}$ (FIG. 3b). Rearrangement of another tyrosine kinase gene, $TRK$, also occurs in a small minority of papillary carcinomas. Activation of one of the three $RAS$ genes ($KRAS2$, $HRAS$ and $NRAS$) can also be found in thyroid tumours, initially reported in papillary and follicular tumours, but, using more specific techniques, it has been shown to be restricted almost entirely to follicular adenomas and carcinomas$^{21}$.

Figure 1 | Surface ground deposition of $^{137}$caesium released after the Chernobyl accident. Reproduced, with permission, from REF. 2 © (2000) United Nations.

cancers: 42% showed direct invasion of tissues adjacent to the thyroid, 6% had distant metastases and one patient had died. By mid-1998, the number of cases in Belarus had risen to 583, compared with eight cases in the ten years before Chernobyl$^5$. The incidence in Ukraine had also increased, with 324 cases in the 8 years between 1990 and 1998, compared with 23 in the three years between 1986 and 1988. The incidence was approximately tenfold higher in the exposed northern oblasts (regions), compared with the rest of Ukraine$^6$. In Belarus, almost exactly half the cases occurred in the oblast that is closest to Chernobyl (Gomel) (FIG. 1), which received the highest fallout. The world incidence of childhood thyroid cancer can be taken as approximately 1/million children/year, but in Belarus as a whole, by 1995, the incidence was almost 30-fold that figure, and in Gomel oblast it reached approximately 100/million children/year.

Can we be sure that these figures are accurate? Their reliability depends on the completeness of data collection, the accuracy of the pathological diagnosis and many other factors, including the influence of screening on the incidence level. In Belarus and the northern Ukraine, treatment is centralized (in Minsk and Kiev, respectively) (FIG. 1), and diagnostic accuracy has been verified. This is not the case in Russia, making it more difficult to confirm the reported incidence.

Overall, the size of the increase and the clinical features of the tumours are such that the contribution of screening was minor in the first few years$^7$. Screening for thyroid cancer is now widespread in all heavily exposed areas, and many agencies are involved. The size of the tumours at the time of surgery is less than it was$^8$, and it seems likely that diagnoses are being made at an earlier age; this is therapeutically beneficial, but it does inflate the current incidence rate to some extent. A two- to fourfold increase has been reported in adults in exposed areas$^5$, but it is not clear how much of this is due to radiation and how much to increased detection.

Why thyroid cancer?

The consequences of Chernobyl, which were due largely to exposure to fallout, could not have been predicted from the consequences of earlier large-scale radiation exposures, such as the atomic bombs in Japan, which increased the incidence of many different cancers. So far, there have been no reliable reports of increases in cancer types (other than thyroid) in those exposed to Chernobyl fallout. Why is this?

a Pathological classification and clinical features

| Follicular adenoma |
| --- |
| - Slow growing |
| - No invasion |
| - No metastasis |

| Follicular carcinoma |
| --- |
| - Slow growing |
| - Invades veins |
| - Metastasizes to lungs and bones |

| Undifferentiated carcinoma |
| --- |
| - Very rapidly growing |
| - Wide, direct local invasion |
| - Very wide metastases |

| Papillary carcinoma |
| --- |
| - Slow growing |
| - Invades lymphatics |
| - Metastasizes to lymph nodes and lungs |

b Macroscopic features

[Diagram of macroscopic features]

c Microscopic features

[Diagram of microscopic features]

d Molecular biological features

| Point mutation | RAS, etc. | PAX8-PPARγ, etc. | TP53 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Normal genome | Radiation |  | Point mutation |
| Rearrangement | RET, TRK, etc. |  | Point mutation |

Figure 2 | The features of papillary and follicular thyroid tumours. a | Pathological classification and clinical features. Follicular cells can give rise to two distinct types of neoplasia: follicular adenomas, which progress to follicular carcinomas, and papillary carcinomas. Medullary carcinomas are derived from a different cell type (the C-cell) and are not illustrated. b | Corresponding macroscopic features, illustrating a typical single encapsulated follicular adenoma progressing to a follicular carcinoma with capsular invasion, and the typically unencapsulated papillary carcinoma, showing intrathyroid spread. c | Corresponding microscopic features, showing the characteristic microscopic architecture that led to the names of the entities. Follicular tumours recapitulate the basic follicular architecture, and typical papillary carcinomas have a different pattern of epithelial growth, leading to convoluted papillary structures. d | Molecular biological features, which correlate with the two differing pathways of tumour development, shown by the pathological and clinical findings. RET rearrangements, common in papillary tumours are a consequence of double-strand breaks in DNA; the effectiveness of radiation in producing double-strand breaks might explain why radiation disproportionately leads to papillary tumours. PAX8, paired box gene 8; PPARγ, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ; TRK, tyrosine kinase.

PERSPECTIVES

Four large studies have found that 50–90% of Chernobyl-related childhood papillary cancers show a RET rearrangement, nearly all to RET-PTC1 or RET-PTC3 (REFS 22–25). By contrast, mutations in the three RAS genes and in genes that are involved in other types of thyroid tumours — such as TP53 (which encodes p53 in humans), the thyroid-stimulating hormone-receptor gene and the Gsα G-protein subunit gene — were absent²⁴,²⁶,²⁷. These studies have shown a significant correlation between the papillary cancers with a solid morphology and RET-PTC3, whereas those with a more typical pattern were associated with RET-PTC1 (REFS 22,23,25). Interestingly, a similar correlation is seen when thyroid tumours that arise in mice that are transgenic for Ret-Ptc1 are compared with those in mice that are transgenic for Ret-Ptc3; the latter show a solid phenotype and the former a more classical papillary pattern²⁸,²⁹.

The links between papillary carcinoma and rearrangement of RET, between follicular tumours and point mutation in RAS, and between medullary carcinomas and point mutation in RET, indicate that the specificity for papillary carcinoma in these radiation-induced thyroid tumours might be related to the high proportion of double-strand breaks that are present in radiation-induced mutations³⁰, which would preferentially increase the incidence of RET rearrangements compared with point mutations in other genes that are associated with thyroid tumours. This would also indicate that papillary carcinomas that lack rearrangements in RET or TRK might have rearrangements of other receptor tyrosine kinases, or defects in other genes in the RET signalling pathway.

At first sight, the finding that different rearrangements that involve the same tyrosine kinase correlate with different morphologies seems surprising, but it could be explained if the different rearrangements led to differing levels of activity of the RET tyrosine kinase. This could be dependent on different levels of promoter activity in the genes to which the RET tyrosine kinase is rearranged, or on their ability to mediate its oligomerization and activation. RET-PTC3 rearrangement involves fusion with the amino-terminal domain of the ELE1 gene, which encodes a transcriptional co-activator of the androgen receptor. The coiled-coil domain of ELE1 not only activates the RET tyrosine kinase, but also relocates it within the cell to areas where it might interact with a different range of substrates¹⁹. Greater activity of the RET tyrosine kinase could cause more rapid growth and a less differentiated (more solid) phenotype, together with a

PERSPECTIVES

a  Normal tissues  
c-RET N | TM | TK | C  

Ligand  
(GDNF family)  
↓  
RET receptor  
complex  
Activation in  
presence  
of ligand  
↓  
Tyrosine  
phosphorylation  
↓  
Regulated growth  
and survival signals  

b  Thyroid C-cell carcinogenesis  
× Germ-line mutation ● Mutation in TK  
near TM (e.g. 634) (e.g. 918): germ-line  
in MEN IIa mutation in MEN IIb,  
somatic in  
sporadic cancers  

Activation in  
absence of  
ligand  
↓  
Tyrosine  
phosphorylation  
↓  
Dysregulated growth and  
survival signals  
↓  
C-cell hyperplasia (germ-line mutation);  
medullary carcinoma of the thyroid  
(in both germ-line and somatic mutations)  

c  Thyroid follicular-cell carcinogenesis  
Inversion  
H4 | RET TK | RET-PTC1  
Translocation  
Rlα | RET-PTC2  
Inversion  
ELE1 | RET-PTC3  

Activation in  
absence of ligand  
↓  
Tyrosine phosphorylation  
↓  
Dysregulated growth and  
survival signals  
↓  
Papillary carcinoma  
of the thyroid  

Figure 3 | The role of RET in thyroid carcinogenesis. a | The receptor tyrosine kinase c-RET is normally expressed in the developing neural-crest-derived tissues, including thyroid C cells. It binds to members of the glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family of ligands, leading to dimerization of c-RET and activation of its tyrosine kinase activity. Downstream signalling events lead to growth and survival signals that are controlled by receptor occupancy, as well as crosstalk with other ligand-receptor interactions. b | Germ-line or somatic point mutations either close to the transmembrane (TM) or in the tyrosine kinase (TK) regions of c-RET contribute to thyroid C-cell carcinogenesis. These mutations cause c-RET to dimerize independently of ligand or have kinase activity that is independent of dimerization. Germ-line point mutations are a feature of multiple endocrine neoplasia type II syndrome (MEN II), which predisposes to phaeochromocytoma, in addition to thyroid carcinoma. The mutations are dominant; normal receptors are not shown. c | By contrast, somatic rearrangements of c-RET contribute to thyroid follicular-cell carcinogenesis: inversions or translocations fuse the part of c-RET that encodes the tyrosine kinase domain with one of several genes that encode coiled-coil-domain-containing proteins. Fusion to H4 (a gene of unknown function), Rlα (which encodes a regulatory subunit of protein kinase A) and ELE1 (a transcriptional co-activator of the androgen receptor) are the most commonly involved, giving rise to the RET-PTC1, RET-PTC2 and RET-PTC3 oncogenes, respectively. H4 and ELE1 are also involved in rare rearrangements with differing breakpoints. The resulting coiled-coil-domain-containing fusion protein dimerizes, leading to a constitutively active c-RET tyrosine kinase.

shorter latency period. In support of this suggestion is the high relative frequency of both RET-PTC3 and solid follicular variants of papillary carcinoma in cases that occurred soon after the Chernobyl accident¹²,²². A recent study has shown that RET-PTC3 has a more potent mitogenic action *in vitro* than RET-PTC1 (REF. 51). The correlation between tumour growth rate and latency period, together with the fact that radiation-induced mutations are not confined entirely to double-strand breaks, raises the possibility that an increase in follicular tumours and medullary carcinomas is yet to occur. Follicular adenomas increase in frequency after external radiation to children, but with latent periods that can be extremely long, and follicular cancers occur by progression from follicular adenomas³¹ (FIG. 2). Ultrasound studies indicate that follicular adenomas have increased in frequency in areas that are exposed to high levels of post-Chernobyl fallout³². Although there is no epidemiological evidence that links an

increase in medullary carcinomas to radiation exposure in man, the link has been shown in animals³³.

These observations indicate that there is not a specific 'radiation fingerprint' in these tumours. It seems more likely that exposure to a specific mutagen — in this case, β-radiation, largely from ¹³¹Iodine — leads to a spectrum of mutations that reflect the way in which the mutagen interacts with DNA, and that the biology of the cell determines which mutation within that spectrum leads to neoplasia. Various factors might influence the spectrum of rearrangements that follow double-strand breakage of DNA, including the spatial relationship of the genes that are involved. Interestingly, the breakpoints in chromosome 10 that are involved in RET-PTC1 lie close together during interphase³⁴.

Age-related susceptibility  
The early cases after the Chernobyl accident showed a particularly young peak age: 7–8 years of age in cases operated on in 1990–1992, rising to 9–10 years of age in cases operated on in 1994–1995. This implied that the youngest children at the time of exposure had increased sensitivity to radiation-induced thyroid carcinogenesis¹⁴. This has been confirmed by several other studies; in Belarus, up to mid-1998 there were 220 cases of thyroid cancer in children aged under 2 years at exposure, out of a total of 840 cases in all children aged under 15 years at exposure⁵. When the change in normal incidence with age is taken into account, it has been calculated that children in Belarus under the age of 1 year at exposure show a relative risk of 237, whereas those aged 10 years show a relative risk of 6 — a fortyfold difference in sensitivity³⁵. However, it must be remembered that new cases are still occurring, so this figure might change over time. Nevertheless, there can be no doubt that very young children are far more sensitive to the carcinogenic effect of radiation from fallout

546 | JULY 2002 | VOLUME 2  
© 2002 Nature Publishing Group  
www.nature.com/reviews/cancer

Table 1 | Health consequences of the Chernobyl accident in the first 15 years

| Cause | Condition | Morbidity | Mortality |
|-------|-----------|-----------|-----------|
| Whole-body irradiation | Acute radiation sickness | 134 | 28 |
| | Delayed consequences (for example, myelodysplasia) | ? | 3-11 |
| Fallout | Thyroid cancer | ~2000 in those exposed as children | 10-20 |
| | Other cancers | No evidence of significant increase; needs study | |
| Fear; social consequences of response to accident (for example, forced relocation, job loss) | Environmental stress disorder | Uncertain, but large | Contributory factor to an increased mortality (for example, through increased smoking and alcoholism) |

on the thyroid than older children, and that the age-related decrease in sensitivity continues into adult life.

There are two components to the explanation for this dramatic change in sensitivity with age. One is the thyroid dose: milk is the main route for ingestion of radioiodine from fallout, and children drink relatively more milk than adults and also have a higher thyroid uptake. The area around Chernobyl is also moderately iodine deficient, again increasing sensitivity. However, studies of thyroid carcinoma following external radiation also show an age-related effect, with those aged 0–4 years at exposure having a fivefold higher risk than those aged 10–14 years³⁶, so there is also a biological reason for this age-related sensitivity. It is likely that this is due to the growth pattern of the thyroid³⁷, which largely takes place in childhood, then reaches a plateau in adult life³⁸, with a limited reserve capacity³⁹. The detailed studies on thyroid kinetics have been carried out in animals, but the pattern of growth in humans is similar. The limited reserve capacity is shown by the limited regrowth of the gland that occurs after subtotal thyroidectomy for Graves’ disease. Transgenic studies in the mouse show that Ret rearrangement alone is not sufficient to lead to thyroid cancer; in this model, all thyroid cells possess the rearrangement but only a small minority of these cells give rise to tumours²⁸,²⁹. At least one more mutation is therefore needed to give rise to papillary carcinoma. Most mutations occur at cell division, and the number of cell divisions that can occur in the progeny of a thyroid follicular cell declines rapidly with age during childhood, as more and more thyroid cells approach replicative senescence. The chance of acquiring the further mutations that are needed to give a clinically detectable cancer will therefore also decline rapidly with increasing age at exposure³⁷.

Genetic susceptibility to radiation carcinogenesis might be important in Chernobyl-related tumours. A range of thyroid tumours can be genetically determined. Some show a specific morphology, including tumours that are associated with the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene⁴⁰, multiple oxyphil tumours that are linked with chromosome 19p13.2 (REFS 41,42) and tumours that are linked with an unknown gene on chromosome 14 (REF. 43). Papillary carcinomas with no specific morphological feature can also be familial. Thyroid follicular tumours occur in Cowden’s syndrome — a hereditary predisposition to tumours in which the PTEN tumour-suppressor gene is mutated⁴⁴ — and also in various conditions that have alterations in genes that affect thyroid-hormone synthesis. Ten families that have more than one child affected by thyroid papillary cancer have been reported from Chernobyl studies³⁵, and more work is needed to determine the role of specific genes in this susceptibility. An increased susceptibility in Jewish children to external thyroid radiation has been reported in studies from the United States, and the highest relative risk per Gy for thyroid carcinoma was in a study from Israel⁴⁵. It might therefore be relevant that the area around Chernobyl was part of the pale of Jewish settlement in Tsarist Russia.

Obviously, dose is the main risk factor, although at very high doses the risk of cancer declines, and that of hypothyroidism increases. Hypothyroidism was reported in horses that were grazing very close to the reactor¹, and biochemically defined features of hypothyroidism occurred more frequently in children from Gomel than in the other regions³². Many factors influenced individual dose in addition to the level of fallout in the region. These include sleeping outside (which provides a greater inhaled dose), and dietary differences such as drinking goats’ rather than cows’ milk, and the source of milk and vegetables. Iodide deficiency might well be relevant, but its effect is hard to quantify.

Other health implications

The 15 years since Chernobyl have seen an unprecedented increase in thyroid cancer in the exposed population, which can be linked to the amount of iodine radioisotopes in the fallout and the sensitivity of young children. However, the thyroid is not the only tissue to concentrate radioiodine: breast, salivary gland and stomach all have active transport mechanisms and would have received a higher-than-average tissue dose in those exposed to fallout — albeit much less than the thyroid. In addition, other isotopes were present in the fallout, and the population of parts of Ukraine and Belarus are still exposed to continuing low levels of radioactive caesium. We do not know what effect these exposures have had; for example, is there a raised incidence of breast cancer in women who were lactating or who were in puberty at the time of the accident? Although there are no reliable reports of significant increases in tumours of these or other organs, the absence of significant international studies of non-thyroid tumours allows extreme views to flourish: there are both exaggerated rumours of great increases in many tumour types, and unjustified reassurances of the lack of any increase in the absence of hard evidence. Large studies, which would cost a fraction of the money spent by the West on making the reactor safe and replacing generating capacity, are still needed. We should also recognize the continuing need for support for the exposed population: the psychological consequences of exposure to an unknown amount of radiation are considerable, and all of the consequences have taken place against a background of very difficult economic circumstances. The health consequences of the Chernobyl accident are summarized in TABLE 1.

Lessons learned from Chernobyl

Looking back at the response to the early reports of thyroid cancer, we can see that the initial reluctance to accept the early reports of an increase in thyroid cancer in exposed children four years after the accident was based on two misconceptions. It was well known that the use of ¹³¹Iodine to treat Graves’ disease in adults carries no detectable risk of thyroid cancer but does lead to hypothyroidism⁴⁶. However, it was wrong to assume from this that exposure of healthy young children to much lower doses would be equally free from risk of neoplasia. Studies of children exposed to external radiotherapy found no definite increase in

Table 2 | Health consequences of nuclear and conventional power generation

| Form of power generation | Risks of obtaining fuel | Risks of normal operation | Risks from major accidents | Long-term environmental consequences |
|--------------------------|------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|------------------------------------|
| Nuclear                 | Accidents in uranium mining, extraction or transport | Low | Accidents rare, but major risk to station staff and risk to public (see TABLE 1) | No contribution to global warming or acid rain; minor contribution to background radiation, providing that disposal is properly managed |
| Conventional            | Accidents in coal mining, gas or oil extraction or transport | Pollution can contribute to chronic lung disease or lung cancer over wide area | Accidents rare; risk to station staff, not to general public | Significant contribution to global warming and acid rain |

thyroid cancer within 10 years of exposure<sup>47</sup>, and 10 years has been assumed to be the latency period. It was wrong to assume that this should be regarded as a fixed limit. The biology of tumour development indicates that there is a stochastic element in both the acquisition of the additional mutations needed and the growth rate of the tumours that result. An excess of 1 cancer per 10,000 children in the first 10 years after exposure to external radiation or fallout would not be detected in studies of a few thousand children; the same incidence rate in the 4 million children that were exposed to fallout from Chernobyl would lead to 400 extra cancers.

There are also many lessons in the way the international community responded to the Chernobyl accident, and these underline the importance of involving independent experts in the study of such events<sup>48</sup>. Studying the consequences of Chernobyl remains of great importance, and an international tumour bank has now been set up to make nucleic acids from these tumours available<sup>49</sup>. Collaboration between local and international experts has confirmed the diagnoses of thyroid cancer, shown that they are virtually all papillary cancers, and linked this to the molecular biology and the effect of radiation on DNA. It has also shown the great importance of age at exposure and linked this to dose and the biology of thyroid growth. The age effect is relevant to the response to any future nuclear accident and also relevant to the consequences of exposure to fallout from nuclear testing. Three times as much <sup>131</sup>Iodine was released from the United States, above-ground nuclear-testing programme as was released from Chernobyl<sup>50</sup> (see also the **National Cancer Institute fallout report** in the online links box), although the release took place over 11 years in a country with a high dietary intake of iodine. Similar tests were also carried out in Russia, so the population of almost all of the northern hemisphere has received some level of exposure over the past 50 years. It remains possible that this has contributed to the incidence of papillary thyroid tumours generally. Studies of the consequences of the Chernobyl accident are also relevant to the debate about power generation. The nature of the risks that are associated with conventional and with nuclear power differ (TABLE 2). The risks to health from conventional power generation are more difficult to quantify; they include the consequences of continuous pollutant discharge and the indirect effects that arise from the contributions to global warming. The main problems from nuclear power are linked to accidents such as Chernobyl — hopefully rare events, but with obvious and quantifiable consequences. Renewable sources have fewer health effects than either, but at present seem unlikely to be able to obviate the need for the other sources.

The Chernobyl studies have confirmed that there has been a significant increase in the incidence of thyroid cancer in those exposed to fallout, but it must be remembered that only a small proportion of those exposed have developed thyroid cancer, and very few patients have died. Perhaps the biggest lesson is that if the population around Chernobyl had been advised not to drink local milk in the immediate aftermath of the accident, many of these thyroid cancers, which continue to be found, would not have occurred. The studies so far have shown a specificity in the morphology of the tumours, and have linked it to the molecular biological findings and to the action of radiation. They have also shown the great changes in sensitivity with age at exposure — very relevant to the actions that are needed in any future accidents — and linked the findings to the growth pattern of the gland. Continued study will allow correlation between these findings and the aggressiveness and latent period of the tumours: because exposure was synchronous, it will be possible to separate the molecular biology and pathology of the rapidly growing tumours that predominated in the early cases from those with successively slower growth rates and longer latency periods in a way that is not possible in ordinary practice. Continuing research into the biomedical aftermath of Chernobyl might reveal similar principles, as well as new insights into the radiobiology of cancer.

Dillwyn Williams is at the Thyroid Carcinogenesis Research Group, Strangeways Research Laboratory, Wort's Causeway, Cambridge, CB1 8RN, UK. e-mail: dillwyn@srl.cam.ac.uk doi:10.1038/nrc845

1. The International Chernobyl Project Technical Report (International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, 1991).
2. UNSCEAR 2000 Report Vol. 2, Annex J. (United Nations, New York and Geneva, 2000).
3. Kazakov, V. S., Demidchik, E. P. & Astakhova, L. N. Thyroid cancer after Chernobyl. *Nature* **359**, 21 (1992).
4. Baverstock, K., Egloff, B., Pinchera, A. & Williams, D. Thyroid cancer after Chernobyl. *Nature* **359**, 21–22 (1992).
5. Demidchik, E. *et al.* in *Radiation and Thyroid Cancer* (eds Thomas, G., Karaoglou, A. & Williams, E. D.) 51–54 (World Scientific, Singapore, 1999).
6. Tronko, M. *et al.* in *Radiation and Thyroid Cancer* (eds Thomas, G., Karaoglou, A. & Williams, E. D.) 61–70 (World Scientific, Singapore, 1999).
7. Astakhova, L. N. *et al.* Chernobyl-related thyroid cancer in children of Belarus: a case-control study. *Radiat. Res.* **150**, 349–356 (1998).
8. Farahati, J., Demidchik, E. P., Biko, J. & Reiners, C. Inverse association between age at the time of radiation exposure and extend of disease in cases of radiation-induced childhood thyroid carcinoma in Belarus. *Cancer* **88**, 1470–1475 (2000).
9. Braverman, L. E. & Utiger, R. D. (eds) *The Thyroid, a Fundamental and Clinical Text* 6th edn (J. D. Lippincott, Philadelphia, 1991).
10. Jacob, P. *et al.* Childhood exposure due to the Chernobyl accident and thyroid cancer risk in contaminated areas of Belarus and Russia. *Br. J. Cancer* **80**, 1461–1469 (1999).
11. Harach, H. R. & Williams, E. D. Childhood thyroid cancer in England and Wales. *Br. J. Cancer* **72**, 777–783 (1995).
12. Furmanchuk, A. W. *et al.* Pathomorphological findings in thyroid cancers of children from the Republic of Belarus. *Histopathology* **21**, 401–408 (1992).
13. Nikiforov, Y. & Gnepp, D. R. Pediatric thyroid cancer after the Chernobyl disaster. *Cancer* **74**, 748–766 (1994).
14. Williams, E. D. in *One Decade after Chernobyl* (International Atomic Energy Authority, Vienna, 1996).
15. Grieco, M. *et al.* PTC is a novel rearranged form of the RET proto-oncogene and is frequently detected *in vivo* in human thyroid papillary carcinomas. *Cell* **60**, 557–563 (1990).
16. Bongarzone, I. *et al.* Molecular characterisation of a thyroid tumour specific transforming sequence formed by the fusion of RET tyrosine kinase and the regulatory subunit RIA of cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **13**, 358–366 (1993).
17. Santoro, M. *et al.* Molecular characterisation of RET-PTC3, a novel rearranged version of the RET proto-oncogene in a human thyroid papillary carcinoma. *Oncogene* **9**, 509–516 (1994).
18. Santoro, M. *et al.* RET oncogene activation in human thyroid neoplasms is restricted to the papillary carcinoma subtype. *J. Clin. Invest.* **89**, 1517–1522 (1992).

19. Monaco, C. *et al.* The RFG oligomerization domain mediates kinase activation and relocation of the RET-PTC3 onco-protein to the plasma membrane. *Oncogene* **20**, 599–608 (2001).

20. Eng, C. *et al.* The relationship between specific RET proto-oncogene mutations and disease phenotype in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2. *JAMA* **276**, 1575–1579 (1996).

21. Manenti, G., Pilotti, S., Re, F. C., Della Porta, G. & Pierotti, M. A. Selective activation of RAS oncogenes in follicular and undifferentiated thyroid carcinomas. *Eur. J. Cancer* **7**, 787–893 (1994).

22. Nikiforov, Y. E., Rowland, J. M., Bore, K. E., Montfort-Mungo, H. & Fagin, J. A. Distinct pattern of RET oncogene rearrangements in morphological variants of radiation induced and sporadic thyroid papillary carcinomas in children. *Cancer Res.* **57**, 1690–1694 (1997).

23. Thomas, G. A. *et al.* High prevalence of RET-PTC rearrangements in Ukrainian and Belarusian post-Chernobyl thyroid papillary carcinomas: a strong correlation between RET-PTC3 and the solid follicular variant. *J. Clin. Endocr. Metab.* **84**, 4232–4238 (1999).

24. Santoro, M. *et al.* Gene rearrangement and Chernobyl related thyroid cancers. *Br. J. Cancer* **82**, 315–322 (2000).

25. Rabes, H. M. *et al.* Pattern of radiation induced RET and NTRK1 rearrangements in 191 post Chernobyl papillary carcinomas: biologic, phenotypic and clinical implications. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **6**, 1093–1103 (2000).

26. Suchy, B., Waldmann, V., Klugbauer, S. & Rabes, H. M. Absence of RAS and p53 mutations in thyroid carcinomas of children after Chernobyl in contrast to adult thyroid tumours. *Br. J. Cancer* **77**, 952–955 (1998).

27. Nikiforov, Y. E., Nikiforova, M. N., Gnepp, D. R. & Fagin, J. A. Prevalence of RAS and p53 mutations in benign and malignant thyroid tumours from children exposed to radiation after the Chernobyl nuclear accident. *Oncogene* **13**, 687–693 (1996).

28. Santoro, M. *et al.* Development of thyroid papillary carcinomas secondary to tissue specific expression of the RET-PTC1 oncogene in transgenic mice. *Oncogene* **12**, 1821–1826 (1996).

29. Powell, D. J. *et al.* The RET-PTC3 oncogene: metastatic solid type papillary carcinomas in murine thyroids. *Cancer Res.* **58**, 5523–5528 (1998).

30. Sankaranarayanan, K. Ionizing radiation and genetic risks. Nature of spontaneous and radiation induced mutations in mammalian *in vitro* systems and

mechanisms of induction of mutation by radiation. *Mutat. Res.* **258**, 75–97 (1991).

31. Shore, R. E., Hildreth, N., Dvoretsky, P., Pasternack, B. & Andressa, E. Benign thyroid adenomas among persons X irradiated in infancy for enlarged thymus glands. *Radiat. Res.* **134**, 217–223 (1993).

32. Yamashita, S. & Shibata, Y. (eds) *Findings of the Chemobyl Sasakawa Health and Medical Cooperation Project in Chemobyl, a Decade* (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1997).

33. Thurston, V. & Williams, E. D. The effect of radiation on thyroid C cells. *Acta Endocrinol.* **99**, 72–78 (1982).

34. Nikiforova, M. N. *et al.* Proximity of chromosomal loci that participate in radiation-induced rearrangements in human cells. *Science* **290**, 138–141 (2000).

35. Cardis, E. *et al.* in *Radiation and Thyroid Cancer* (eds Thomas, G., Karaoglou, A. & Williams, E. D.) (World Scientific, Singapore, 1999).

36. Ron, E. *et al.* Thyroid cancer after exposure to external radiation, a pooled analysis of 7 studies. *Radiat. Res.* **141**, 259–277 (1995).

37. Williams, E. D. in *Radiation and Thyroid Cancer* (eds Thomas, G., Karaoglou, A. & Williams, E. D.) (World Scientific, Singapore, 1999).

38. Wynford-Thomas, D., Stringer, B. M. J. & Williams, E. D. Dissociation of growth and function in the rat thyroid during prolonged goitrogen administration. *Acta Endocrinol.* **101**, 210–216 (1982).

39. Wynford-Thomas, D., Stringer, B. M. J. & Williams, E. D. Dissociation of growth and function in the rat thyroid during prolonged goitrogen administration, persistence of refractoriness following withdrawal of stimulus. *Acta Endocrinol.* **101**, 562–569 (1982).

40. Harach, H. R., Williams, G. T. & Williams, E. D. Familial adenomatous polyposis associated with thyroid carcinoma, a distinct type of follicular cell neoplasm. *Histopathology* **25**, 549–561 (1994).

41. Katoh, R., Harach, H. R. & Williams, E. D. Solitary, multiple and familial oxyphil tumours of the thyroid gland. *J. Pathol.* **186**, 292–299 (1998).

42. Canzian, F. *et al.* A gene predisposing to familial thyroid tumours with cell oxyphilia maps to chromosome 19p 13.2. *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* **63**, 1743–1748 (1998).

43. Bignell, C. R. *et al.* Familial nontoxic multinodular thyroid goitre locus maps to chromosome 14q, but does not account for familial non medullary thyroid cancer. *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* **61**, 1123–1130 (1997).

44. Liaw, D. *et al.* Germline mutations of the PTEN gene in Cowden's disease, an inherited breast and thyroid cancer syndrome. *Nature Genet.* **16**, 64–67 (1997).

45. Ron, E. & Modan, B. Benign and malignant thyroid neoplasms after childhood irradiation for tinea capitis. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **65**, 7–11 (1980).

46. Holm, L. E. *et al.* Cancer risk after iodine 131 therapy for hyperthyroidism. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **83**, 1072–1077 (1991).

47. Shore, R. E. Issues and epidemiologic evidence regarding radiation induced thyroid cancer. *Radiat. Res.* **131**, 98–111 (1992).

48. Williams, E. D. Lessons from Chernobyl. *BMJ* **323**, 643–644 (2001).

49. Thomas, G. A. & Williams, E. D. Thyroid tumour banks. *Science* **289**, 2283 (2000).

50. Estimated exposure, and thyroid doses received by the American people from iodine 131 in fallout following Nevada atmospheric nuclear bomb tests. A report from the National Cancer Institute. (US Department of Health and Human Services, Washington, 1997).

51. Basolo, F. *et al.* Potent mitogenicity of the RET-PTC3 oncogene correlates with its presence in tall-cell variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma. *Am. J. Pathol.* **160**, 247–254 (2002).

Acknowledgements

The invaluable work of the many doctors and scientists in the three affected countries who have contributed to so many of the studies is acknowledged, as are many discussions with G. A. Thomas, and the financial support from the European Community and the Leverhulme Trust.

Online links

DATABASES

The following terms in this article are linked online to:

Cancer.gov: http://www.cancer.gov/cancer_information/ breast cancer | thyroid cancer

LocusLink: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/

APC | ELE1 | GDNF | GsaG-protein subunit | HRAS2 | NRAS | PTEN | RAS | Ret | RET | thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor | TP53 | TRK

OMIM: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim/ Cowden's syndrome

FURTHER INFORMATION

National Cancer Institute fallout report: http://rex.nci.nih.gov/massmedia/Fallout/contents.html

Newly Independent States Chernobyl Tissue Bank: http://www.srl.cam.ac.uk/nisctb

United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR): http://www.unscear.org/

Access to this interactive links box is free online.
