
To make antibodies or not: signaling by the B-cell antigen receptor

Michael R. Gold

Antibodies produced by B cells play an essential role in protecting against disease-causing pathogens. B cells detect the presence of pathogens via B-cell antigen receptors (BCRs), which consist of a transmembrane form of an antibody that is associated with a signaling subunit. Signaling by BCRs not only initiates antibody production but also regulates B-cell development, B-cell survival and the elimination of B cells that recognize components of one's own body. Identifying the intracellular signals generated by BCRs and determining how these signals specify such diverse responses is the key to understanding how the immune system functions normally and how defects in BCR signaling can lead to either immunodeficiency diseases or autoimmune diseases.

The differentiation of B cells into antibody-producing cells requires the recognition of antigenic determinants by the B-cell antigen receptor (BCR). The BCR consists of an antigen-binding subunit and a signaling subunit (Fig. 1). The antigen-binding subunit is a transmembrane form of an antibody [membrane immunoglobulin (mIg)] in which the Ig heavy and light chains form the antigen-binding site. During B-cell development in the bone marrow, each B cell randomly rearranges Ig gene segments to form one complete heavy-chain gene and one complete light-chain gene. This ensures that all the BCRs on a single B cell have the same antigen-binding site whereas the population of B cells that is generated has millions of different antigen specificities. During an infection, only the B cells whose mIg binds to pathogen-associated antigens are activated. The BCR signaling subunit, which is composed of the invariant CD79a (Ig-α) and CD79b (Ig-β) polypeptides, translates antigen binding into intracellular signals that promote B-cell activation.

In addition to activating B cells that recognize pathogen-associated antigens, BCR signaling also regulates B-cell development, B-cell survival, and the elimination of B cells that recognize components of one’s own body (Box 1). B cells that recognize ‘self’ antigens must be eliminated because they can cause antibody-mediated autoimmune diseases.

The key question is how signaling by the same receptor can promote the survival, activation and death of B cells. As shown in Box 1, the outcome of BCR signaling depends on the maturation state of the B cell, the magnitude and duration of the BCR signal, and signals from other receptors. To understand how B cells decide whether to secrete antibodies, we must identify the intracellular signals that are generated by BCRs and determine how those signals are interpreted depending on the context in which they are received. Here, the key features of BCR signaling are described and recent insights into how BCR signals specify different outcomes are discussed.

Initiation of BCR signaling

The cytoplasmic domains of CD79a and CD79b contain immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) (Fig. 1). When phosphorylated on the tyrosine residues, these [D/E]xxYxx[L/I]xxxxxxYxx[L/I] motifs (where x is any amino acid) recruit and activate the Src family tyrosine kinases Fyn, Lyn and Blk as well as the Syk tyrosine kinase [1,2]. This is sufficient to initiate all BCR signaling reactions.

In unstimulated B cells, only a few BCRs are associated with Src kinases and few BCRs have phosphorylated ITAMs [2,3]. Although antigen binding increases the number of BCRs with phosphorylated ITAMs and associated tyrosine kinases (Fig. 2), how this occurs is not clear. The prevailing view is that BCRs exist as monomers on the surface of B cells and that multivalent antigens initiate signaling by causing BCRs to cluster [3] (Fig. 2a). This would allow BCR-associated Src kinases to phosphorylate tyrosine residues in the ITAMs of nearby BCRs and create binding sites for the SH2 domains of the Src kinases and Syk. The Src kinases and Syk that are recruited to BCRs in this manner are activated by conformational changes induced by occupancy of their SH2 domains, autophosphorylation and, in the case of Syk, phosphorylation by Src kinases [2,4]. Once activated, Fyn, Lyn, Blk and Syk phosphorylate proteins that control BCR signaling pathways. In this model, random antigen-independent collisions between BCRs generate the tonic low-level signaling required for B-cell survival (Box 1, Fig. Id) whereas antigen-induced clustering of BCRs allows many more BCRs to recruit tyrosine kinases and activate signaling pathways.

In contrast to this clustering model, recent studies show that many receptors exist as preformed multimeric complexes [5,6]. Binding of a ligand reorganizes the complex and allows the rapid initiation of signaling, perhaps by causing dissociation of a negative regulator. Work by Schamel et al. suggests that BCRs also exist as oligomeric complexes before antigen binding [7]. This leads to a new model for the initiation of BCR signaling [8] (Fig. 2b) in which BCR-associated Src kinases continually phosphorylate ITAMs on other

Michael R. Gold  
Dept of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,  
6174 University Blvd, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada V6T 1Z3.  
e-mail: mgold@interchange.ubc.ca

Review TRENDS in Pharmacological Sciences Vol.23 No.7 July 2002 317

BCRs within the same oligomer, allowing them to recruit and activate Syk as well as additional Src kinases. In unstimulated cells, this is opposed by SHP-1 (Src homology 2 domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 1), which associates with the BCR [9]. The net result is that recruitment and activation of tyrosine kinases occur at low frequency, just sufficient to generate survival signals. By contrast, the binding of a multivalent antigen to two or more BCRs in an oligomer reorganizes the oligomer such that SHP-1 is either released or neutralized. As a consequence, ITAM phosphorylation occurs efficiently, all of the BCRs in the oligomer recruit and activate tyrosine kinases, and BCR signaling is greatly amplified. This model awaits further support.

Another consequence of BCR clustering and/or reorganization is translocation of the BCR into lipid rafts [10]. These are membrane domains enriched in glycosphingolipids, cholesterol and acylated proteins [11]. Translocation of the BCR into lipid rafts colocalizes the BCR with the Lyn tyrosine kinase, which is constitutively localized in lipid rafts [10]. Initiating BCR signaling within lipid rafts might create a specialized signaling domain in which the BCR recruits and concentrates signaling enzymes such as phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and phospholipase C-γ2 (PLC-γ2) [12, 13]. However, the role of lipid rafts in BCR signaling remains

Fig. 1. Structures of the B-cell antigen receptor (BCR) and the pre-BCR. Both contain two identical immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chains (blue). The BCR has two identical Ig light chains (cyan) whereas the pre-BCR has two copies each of the surrogate light-chain components λ5 and Vpre-B (green). Disulfide bonds are represented by yellow circles. It is not known how the CD79a-CD79b signaling subunit of the BCR interacts with the Ig heavy chains. The regions of the CD79a and CD79b cytoplasmic domains that are indicated in orange represent the ITAMs (immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs) that mediate the recruitment and activation of tyrosine kinases.

Fig. 2. The initiation of B-cell antigen receptor (BCR) signaling. In unstimulated cells some BCRs bind Src kinases (e.g., Fyn) in a phosphotyrosine-independent manner. Antigen binding leads to increased tyrosine phosphorylation (red) of BCR immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) and the subsequent binding of tyrosine kinases via their SH2 domains (gray).

(a) In one model, antigen-induced clustering of BCRs brings BCRs that are not associated with tyrosine kinases close to those that are.

(b) In another model, antigen-induced reorganization or disorganization of pre-existing BCR oligomers causes the dissociation of SHP-1, a tyrosine phosphatase that opposes ITAM phosphorylation and tyrosine kinase activation.

Box 1. Signaling by the B-cell antigen receptor regulates B-cell development, survival and activation

Pre-B cells express a pre-B-cell receptor (pre-BCR) (Fig. 1 in main text) that lacks immunoglobulin (Ig) light chains but contains the surrogate light-chain components λ5 and V<sub>pre-B</sub>. Although it is controversial whether the pre-BCR has a ligand [a], pre-BCR expression and signaling are required for pre-B cells to survive, rearrange Ig light-chain genes, and differentiate into immature B cells [b] (Fig. Ia).

Fig. I.

Bone marrow

| Apoptosis | Apoptosis |
| --- | --- |
| (b') | (c) |
| Strong BCR signal | Strong BCR signal |
| (self-antigen array) | (self-antigen array) |
| Unsuccessful | Anergic |
| receptor editing | B cell |
| (still self-reactive) | (g) |
| Chronic moderate | |
| BCR signal | |
| (soluble self-antigen) | |
| (a) | (d) |
| Pre-BCR signal | Low tonic |
| (ligand?) | BCR signal |
| Survival | (survival) |
| differentiation | |
| Immature | Transitional | Mature |
| B cell | B cell | B cell |
| (b) | (e) | (f) |
| Strong BCR signal | • Moderate acute BCR signal | • Moderate acute BCR signal |
| (self-antigen array) | (soluble foreign antigen) | (soluble antigen) |
| Successful | and | and |
| receptor editing | CD40 co-stimulatory signal | NO co-stimulatory signal |
| (no longer | or | |
| self-reactive) | • Strong acute BCR signal | |
| | (multivalent microbial antigen) | |
| | ↓ | ↓ |
| | Proliferation; differentiation | Short life span; |
| | into antibody-producing cell | no proliferation |

controversial because some BCR signaling events can still occur when rafts are disrupted [14].

BCR signaling pathways

The BCR activates signaling pathways that are controlled by PI3K, PLC-γ2, and the Ras, Rac1 and Rap1 GTPases [15–18]. As described below, a key feature of signaling pathway activation by the BCR is the recruitment of cytosolic signaling proteins to the plasma membrane. BCR signaling induces the formation of membrane-associated ligands including phosphotyrosine, phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate [PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub>] and diacylglycerol (DAG) that bind interaction domains [SH2 domains, pleckstrin-homology (PH) domains and C1 domains, respectively] found in signaling enzymes as well as in docking proteins and adaptor proteins that regulate the localization of signaling enzymes. These interactions promote the assembly of complexes in which signaling enzymes are colocalized with their upstream activators and their downstream targets. The production of PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> by PI3K is a central element in BCR signaling because several important targets of BCR signaling contain PH domains that bind PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub>. Figure 3a depicts the BCR-mediated recruitment of PI3K to the plasma membrane, a process that allows PI3K to produce PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> by phosphorylating the membrane lipid phosphatidylinositol (4,5)-bisphosphate [PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub>]. BCR-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the transmembrane protein CD19 creates Y(P)xxM sequences that PI3K binds to via its SH2 domains. Following its recruitment to the plasma membrane by binding to CD19, PI3K produces PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub>. The Gab1 and Gab2 docking proteins are then recruited to the plasma membrane via the binding of their PH domains to PtdIns(3,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> [19,20]. Phosphorylation of YxxM sequences within Gab1 and Gab2 by BCR-associated tyrosine kinases [19,20] allows additional PI3K molecules to be recruited to the plasma membrane, thereby amplifying PI3K signaling. The BCR also uses the BCAP (B-cell adaptor for phosphoinositide 3-kinase) docking protein to recruit PI3K to the plasma membrane, in particular to lipid raft microdomains within the plasma membrane [12].

Review TRENDS in Pharmacological Sciences Vol.23 No.7 July 2002 319

Immature B cells that recognize self antigens that initiate a strong BCR signal undergo receptor editing or apoptosis [c,d] (Fig. Ib,b'). Strong BCR signaling induces new DNA rearrangements at the Ig light-chain locus. If this yields a new in-frame light-chain gene, newly synthesized BCRs will contain a different light chain and have different antigen specificity. If these BCRs are no longer self-reactive, the cell will mature and be exported from the bone marrow (Fig. Ib). If the BCRs remain self-reactive, the cell will undergo apoptosis (Fig. Ib'). Because the initiation of BCR signaling involves either clustering or reorganization of BCRs, self antigens that induce signals strong enough to cause receptor editing or apoptosis are usually antigens that form arrays on the surfaces of cells or tissues. This mechanism eliminates immature B cells that recognize self-antigen arrays in the bone marrow as well as circulating transitional B cells that recognize such antigens elsewhere in the body (Fig. Ic).

Transitional B cells differentiate into mature B cells that can survive for several weeks. Lam et al. [e] showed that the survival of mature B cells requires tonic, low-level BCR signaling (Fig. Id). Using conditional expression of an Ig heavy-chain gene in transgenic mice, Lam and colleagues showed that ablating BCR expression causes mature B cells to die.

Mature B cells circulate throughout the body, passing through lymphoid organs where foreign antigens are trapped. The outcome of an encounter between a mature B cell and its specific antigen depends on the strength and duration of BCR signaling and whether the cell receives a co-stimulatory signal [f] (Fig. Ie,f). For soluble antigens that engage a moderate number of BCRs and initiate a BCR signal of moderate strength, a co-stimulatory signal is required for the B cell to proliferate and differentiate into an antibody-producing cell (Fig. Ie). The co-stimulatory signal is provided by CD154, which is present on the surface of activated T cells and binds to CD40, a receptor on B cells. CD40 signals synergize with BCR-induced activation signals and antagonize BCR-induced death signals that prevail in the absence of the co-stimulatory signal (Fig. If).

By contrast, B cells that receive strong, acute BCR signals do not require T-cell-derived co-stimulatory signals to differentiate into antibody-producing cells (Fig. Ie). Antigens that induce strong BCR signals, such as bacterial cell walls and virus particles that have many copies of the same antigen, cause extensive clustering or reorganization of BCRs.

Whereas self-reactive B cells that recognize cell-surface antigens are eliminated at the immature and transitional B-cell stages, self-reactive B cells that recognize soluble antigens that cause only moderate

BCR signaling are silenced at the mature B-cell stage [g] (Fig. Ig). Chronic BCR signaling caused by continuous exposure to soluble self antigen disconnects the BCR from some of its signaling pathways, rendering these cells refractory to BCR-dependent activation, a condition called anergy. Anergic B cells have a shortened lifespan and cannot be induced to express proteins that prevent the induction of apoptosis via CD95 (also known as Fas), a caspase-activating death receptor on activated B cells [h]. Thus, chronically stimulated, self-reactive B cells are killed by activated T cells that produce the CD95 ligand (Fig. Ig). By contrast, B cells that receive an acute BCR signal from a foreign antigen synthesize FAIM (Fas apoptosis inhibitory molecule) and c-FLIP [cellular FLICE (FADD-like IL-1β-converting enzyme) inhibitory protein], proteins that confer resistance to CD95-induced apoptosis [h]. CD95-mediated B-cell death is an important mechanism for eliminating self-reactive B cells and mutation of either CD95 or its ligand causes autoimmune diseases.

References

a Bradl, H. and Jack, H-M. (2001) Surrogate light chain-mediated interaction of soluble pre-B cell receptor with adherent cell lines. J. Immunol. 167, 6403–6411

b Roth, P.E. and DeFranco, A.L. (1996) Receptor tails unlock developmental checkpoints for B lymphocytes. Science 272, 1752–1754

c Hertz, M. and Nemazee, D. (1998) Receptor editing and commitment in B lymphocytes. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 10, 208–213

d Sandel, P.C. and Monroe, J.G. (1999) Negative selection of immature B cells by receptor editing or deletion is determined by the site of antigen encounter. Immunity 10, 289–299

e Lam, K-P. et al. (1997) In vivo ablation of surface immunoglobulin on mature B cells by inducible gene targeting results in rapid cell death. Cell 90, 1073–1083

f Healy, J.I. and Goodnow, C.C. (1998) Positive versus negative signaling by lymphocyte antigen receptors. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 16, 645–670

g Cyster, J.G. and Goodnow, C.C. (1995) Antigen-induced exclusion from follicles and anergy are separate and complementary processes that influence peripheral B cell fate. Immunity 3, 691–701

h Rothstein, T.L. et al. (2000) Receptor-specific regulation of B-cell susceptibility to Fas-mediated apoptosis and a novel Fas apoptosis inhibitory molecule. Immunol. Rev. 176, 116–133

Although primarily cytosolic, some BCAP is associated with lipid rafts and, following BCR engagement, the raft-associated BCAP is phosphorylated on YxxM sequences and recruits PI3K to lipid rafts.

Interactions between PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ and PH domains are involved in BCR-induced activation of PLC-γ2, Rac1, phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1) and the Akt and Btk kinases. PDK1 and Akt both contain PH domains and, when they are recruited to the plasma membrane, PDK1 phosphorylates and activates Akt [21]. Akt mediates the pro-survival, anti-apoptotic effects of PI3K by promoting activation of nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) [22] and by phosphorylating BAD [23], a member of the BCL2 family. Phosphorylation of BAD prevents it from neutralizing the anti-apoptotic activity of BCL-xL. Akt activity promotes B-cell survival [24] and might be an important component of the tonic BCR-derived survival signal.

The BCR also recruits PLC-γ2 to the plasma membrane and activates it, resulting in the production of inositol (1,4,5)-trisphosphate

[Ins(1,4,5)P₃] and DAG (Fig. 3b). A key player in PLC γ2 activation is BLNK (B-cell linker protein), an SH2 domain-containing adaptor protein [16]. Following BCR engagement, BLNK binds, via its SH2 domain, to a phosphotyrosine-containing sequence on CD79a [25,26]. Syk then phosphorylates BLNK, creating a docking site for the SH2 domain of PLC-γ2. Once it has bound BLNK, PLC-γ2 is activated by phosphorylation by Syk and Btk. Btk is recruited to the plasma membrane via the binding of its PH domain to PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ and is directed to BLNK-PLC-γ2 complexes by the binding of its SH2 domain to tyrosine-phosphorylated BLNK. Ins(1,4,5)P₃ produced by PLC-γ2 releases Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores. This promotes the subsequent influx of extracellular Ca²⁺. A major target of Ca²⁺ signaling in B cells is the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NF-AT) transcription factor. DAG, the other PLC-γ2-derived second messenger, activates C1-domain-containing signaling enzymes including the Ras activator RasGRP (Ras guanyl nucleotide-releasing protein) [27] and multiple isoforms of protein kinase C (PKC). During BCR signaling, PKCs

http://tips.trends.com

The BCR activates the Rap1 GTPase via the production of DAG by PLC-γ2 [32] (Fig. 4b). Several Rap1 exchange factors contain DAG-binding domains [33]. Activated Rap1 promotes cell adhesion by increasing the ability of integrins to bind their ligands [34, 35]. Integrin-mediated adhesion is important for the development and activation of B cells.

The Rac1 GTPase links the BCR to kinase cascades that activate c-JUN N-terminal kinase (JNK) and the p38MAPK [36] (Fig. 4c). The BCR activates Rac1 via the Vav1 and Vav2 exchange factors, with Vav2 having the more important role [37]. After BCR engagement, binding of the SH2 domain of Vav to phosphotyrosine-containing sequences on CD19 or BLNK [15] recruits Vav to the plasma membrane where Rac1 is located. Subsequent phosphorylation of key tyrosine residues on Vav, as well as the binding of PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ to the PH domain of Vav, increases the ability of Vav to activate Rac1.

### Pathways to gene regulation

BCR signaling pathways regulate several pre-existing transcription factors. The BCR activates NF-κB in a PKC-dependent manner [28] that involves the BCL10 and MALT1 proteins [38]. The key step is activation of the IkB kinase (IKK) complex, which phosphorylates IkB and targets it for ubiquitin-mediated degradation. Because IkB restrains NF-κB in the cytosol, degradation of IkB allows NF-κB to translocate into the nucleus and initiate transcription. NF-κB regulates the expression of multiple survival factors and constitutive activation of this pathway causes B-cell malignancies. In particular, BCL10 and MALT1 are targets of chromosomal translocation in mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) B-cell lymphomas.

The BCR also regulates nuclear translocation of the NF-AT transcription factor [15]. Ca²⁺-induced activation of calcineurin (also known as phosphatase 2B) results in the dephosphorylation of NF-AT, which reveals a nuclear-localization signal within NF-AT. In addition, BCR signaling inhibits the activity of glycogen synthase kinase 3 [39], a kinase that phosphorylates NF-AT such that a nuclear export signal is generated. The net result is prolonged translocation of NF-AT into the nucleus where it can promote transcription.

The ERK, JNK, and p38MAPKs also link the BCR to transcription factors [36]. When activated, these kinases enter the nucleus and phosphorylate transcription factors including Elk-1, c-JUN, activating transcription factor 2 (ATF-2) and myocyte enhancer binding factor 2C (MEF2C). Similarly, MAPKAP kinase-2 (MAPK-activated protein kinase 2), a downstream target of p38MAPK, phosphorylates the CREB (cAMP response element-binding protein) transcription factor [40]. Phosphorylation of these DNA-binding proteins allows them to recruit RNA polymerase complexes and initiate transcription.

Review TRENDS in Pharmacological Sciences Vol.23 No.7 July 2002 321

(a)

BCR
BLNK
Syk
PLC-γ2
RasGRP
Ras-GTP
Raf-1
MEK
ERK
Gab1, Gab2
Shc, SHP-2
Grb2

- Phosphotyrosine
- SH2 domain
- PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃
- PH domain
- Diacylglycerol

(b)

BCR
BLNK
Syk
PLC-γ2
CalDAG-GEF
Rap1-GTP
Integrin activation and integrin-mediated adhesion

(c)

BLNK
BCR
CD19
Syk
Vav1, Vav2
Vav1, Vav2
Rac1-GTP
JNK, p38

TRENDS in Pharmacological Sciences

Fig. 4. The Ras, Rap1 and Rac1 GTPases link the B-cell antigen receptor (BCR) to multiple signaling pathways. (a) The BCR activates Ras via the RasGRP (Ras guanyl nucleotide-releasing protein) and mSOS exchange factors. Diacylglycerol (DAG) produced by phospholipase C-γ2 (PLC-γ2) recruits RasGRP to the plasma membrane where Ras is located. mSOS associates with the Grb2 adaptor protein and is recruited to the plasma membrane via the binding of the SH2 domain of Grb2 to tyrosine-phosphorylated Shc and SHP-2 (Src homology 2 domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 2). Shc and SHP-2 are recruited to the plasma membrane via the binding of their SH2 domains to Gab1, Gab2, and possibly other docking proteins. Ras controls the kinase cascade that activates the ERK (extracellular signal-regulated kinase) MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase). (b) The BCR activates Rap1 via PLC-γ2-dependent production of DAG. DAG presumably recruits and activates a Rap1 exchange factor that belongs to the CalDAG-GEF (guanine nucleotide exchange factor) family. Activated Rap1 promotes integrin-mediated adhesion. (c) The BCR activates Rac1 via the Vav1 and Vav2 exchange factors. The Vav proteins are recruited to the plasma membrane via the binding of their SH2 domains to tyrosine-phosphorylated BLNK (B-cell linker protein) and CD19. The ability of Vav to activate Rac1 is increased by tyrosine phosphorylation of Vav and the binding of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate [PTdIns(3,4,5)P₃] to the pleckstrin-homology domain of Vav. Rac1 controls the kinase cascades that activate JNK and p38 MAPKs.

Abbreviation: MEK, MAPK kinase.

Activation of these pre-existing transcription factors by the BCR leads to increased expression of other transcription factors (e.g. c-Myc, c-Fos, Egr-1 and Egr-2) that regulate genes that control cell proliferation and survival.

From gene expression to cellular responses How does the outcome of BCR signaling vary depending on the magnitude of the signal, the differentiation state of the B cell and whether the B cell receives costimulatory signals? Each of these factors influences which BCR signaling pathways are activated. Activating different combinations of signaling pathways results in the activation of different sets of transcription factors and therefore changes in the expression of different sets of genes. Thus, to elucidate the molecular basis of the different outcomes of BCR signaling, we need to determine which BCR signaling pathways are activated, which transcription factors are regulated and which genes are induced or repressed under different conditions.

Monroe's group has investigated why immature B cells undergo apoptosis after BCR engagement whereas mature B cells are activated. They found that BCR engagement fails to activate PKC in immature B cells [41]. Because the PKC-NF-κB-c-Myc pathway promotes B-cell survival, the failure to activate PKC might allow pro-apoptotic BCR signals to prevail.

Goodnow's group has used gene arrays to analyze how BCR signaling differs between naive B cells and anergic B cells that have been exposed continuously to self antigen (Box 1). They found that in anergic B cells the BCR does not activate NF-κB or JNK [42] and cannot regulate genes that promote survival, activation and proliferation [43, 44]. Gene-expression profiling showed that antigen stimulation of naive B cells upregulates the

http://tips.trends.com

(a)

C3d Antigen C3d

CD21 CD21
CD19 CD19

BCR BCR

Lyn Lyn

Syk

- Phosphotyrosine
- SH2 domain

(b)

Antigen Secreted
antibody

BCR CD32
(FcγRII-B1)

Lyn

Syk

Antigen Secreted
antibody

BCR CD32
(FcγRII-B1)

Lyn

Syk

Dephosphorylation of PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃

Decreased activation of
Btk, PLC-γ2, Akt

Fig. 5. Modulation of B-cell antigen receptor (BCR) signaling. (a) When antigens are coated with complement fragments such as C3d, co-clustering of the CD19-CD21 complex and the BCR enhances BCR signaling by facilitating the recruitment of tyrosine kinases to the BCR. (b) When antigen-antibody complexes bridge the BCR to CD32 (FcγRII-B1), CD32 downregulates BCR signaling by recruiting SHIP (Src homology 2-containing inositol 5'-phosphatase). Abbreviations: PLC-γ2, phospholipase C-γ2; PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃, phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate.

factor that regulates genes that promote cell survival and proliferation. Pim-1 is a kinase that cooperates with c-Myc in these roles. In the absence of co-stimulatory signals, sustained BCR signaling causes a significant decrease in the concentrations of c-Myc [46] and Pim-1 [47], which might specify a short lifespan for these cells. By contrast, CD40 signaling increases the concentrations of c-Myc and Pim-1 and opposes the BCR-induced downregulation of these proteins [46, 47]. The levels of c-Myc and Pim-1 might therefore be key determinants of B-cell survival.

Modulating BCR signaling: sensing danger, avoiding autoimmunity

With dangerous pathogens, small amounts of pathogen-associated antigens must trigger antibody production. The immune system tags such antigens with complement proteins, which greatly reduces the amount of antigen required for B-cell activation. Complement-coated antigens co-cluster the BCR with the CD19-CD21 complex (Fig. 5a) [48, 49]. CD21 is a receptor for complement components whereas the cytoplasmic domain of CD19 binds the Lyn tyrosine kinase. When CD19 is co-ligated with the BCR, Lyn efficiently phosphorylates ITAMs on BCRs, allowing tyrosine kinase recruitment and the initiation of BCR signaling. Co-ligation of the BCR with CD19 also

http://tips.trends.com

enhances translocation of the BCR into lipid rafts [50]. The ability of the CD19-CD21 complex to potentiate BCR signaling has therapeutic implications as coupling antigens to complement components has been shown to increase their potency as vaccines [51].

In contrast to the CD19-CD21 complex, CD22 and CD72 control feedback loops that limit BCR signaling [49, 52, 53]. After BCR engagement, Lyn phosphorylates the cytoplasmic domains of CD22 and CD72. This creates binding sites for the SH2 domains of SHP-1, a tyrosine phosphatase that downregulates BCR signaling by dephosphorylating BLNK [54], Syk [55] and the Src kinases [2]. Dephosphorylation of BLNK prevents the recruitment of PLC-γ2 and Vav, whereas dephosphorylation of Syk and the Src kinases decreases their activity and prevents the phosphorylation of additional BCR ITAMs. This negative feedback loop prevents excessive BCR signaling. Disrupting the genes that encode Lyn or SHP-1 causes autoimmune diseases in mice [52, 56]. Another negative regulatory mechanism turns off the immune response once the majority of antigen is coated with antibodies [57]. Antigen-antibody complexes cause the BCR to co-cluster with

Acknowledgements  
I thank Linda Matsuuchi and Tony DeFranco for their helpful comments.

References  
1 Gold, M.R. and Matsuuchi, L. (1995) Signal transduction by the antigen receptors of B and T lymphocytes. *Int. Rev. Cytol.* 157, 181–276  
2 Justement, L.B. (2000) Signal transduction via the B-cell antigen receptor: the role of protein tyrosine kinases and protein tyrosine phosphatases. *Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol.* 245, 1–51  
3 Reth, M. and Wienands, J. (1997) Initiation and processing of signals from the B cell antigen receptor. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 15, 453–479  
4 Kurosaki, T. (1999) Genetic analysis of B cell antigen receptor signaling. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 17, 555–592  
5 Livnah, O. *et al.* (1999) Crystallographic evidence for preformed dimers of erythropoietin receptor before ligand activation. *Science* 283, 987–990  
6 Chan, F.K.M. *et al.* (2000) A domain in TNF receptors that mediates ligand-independent receptor assembly and signaling. *Science* 288, 2351–2354  
7 Schamel, W.W.A. and Reth, M. (2000) Monomeric and oligomeric complexes of the B cell antigen receptor. *Immunity* 13, 5–14  
8 Reth, M. (2001) Oligomeric antigen receptors: a new view on signaling for the selection of lymphocytes. *Trends Immunol.* 22, 356–360  
9 Pani, G. *et al.* (1995) Identification of the tyrosine phosphatase PTP1C as a B cell antigen receptor-associated protein involved in the regulation of B cell signaling. *J. Exp. Med.* 181, 2077–2084  
10 Cheng, P.C. *et al.* (1999) A role for lipid rafts in B cell antigen receptor signaling and antigen targeting. *J. Exp. Med.* 190, 1549–1560  
11 Simons, K. and Toomre, D. (2000) Lipid rafts and signal transduction. *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* 1, 31–39  

12 Okada, T. *et al.* (2000) BCAP: the tyrosine kinase substrate that connects B cell receptor to phosphoinositide 3-kinase activation. *Immunity* 13, 817–827  
13 Guo, B. *et al.* (2000) Engagement of the human pre-B cell receptor generates a lipid raft-dependent calcium signaling complex. *Immunity* 13, 243–253  
14 Petrie, R.J. *et al.* (2000) Transient translocation of the B cell receptor and Src homology 2 domain-containing inositol phosphatase to lipid rafts: evidence towards a role in calcium regulation. *J. Immunol.* 165, 1220–1227  
15 Gold, M.R. (2000) Intermediary signaling effectors coupling the B-cell receptor to the nucleus. *Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol.* 245, 77–134  
16 Kurosaki, T. *et al.* (2000) Regulation of the phospholipase C-γ2 pathway in B cells. *Immunol. Rev.* 176, 19–29  
17 Marshall, A.J. *et al.* (2000) Regulation of B-cell activation and differentiation by the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and phospholipase Cγ pathways. *Immunol. Rev.* 176, 30–46  
18 Gold, M.R. *et al.* (2000) Targets of B cell antigen receptor signaling: The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt/GSK-3 signaling pathway and the Rap1 GTPase. *Immunol. Rev.* 176, 47–68  
19 Ingham, R.J. *et al.* (2001) The Gab1 docking protein links the B cell antigen receptor to the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway and to the SHP2 tyrosine phosphatase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 12257–12265  
20 Gu, H.H. *et al.* (1998) Cloning of p97/Gab2, the major SHP2-binding protein in hematopoietic cells, reveals a novel pathway for cytokine-induced gene expression. *Mol. Cell* 2, 729–740  
21 Kandel, E.S. and Hay, N. (1999) The regulation and activities of the multifunctional serine/threonine kinase Akt/PKB. *Exp. Cell Res.* 253, 210–229  

CD32 (FcγRII-B1), a receptor that binds IgG antibodies (Fig. 5b). This allows Lyn to phosphorylate the cytoplasmic domain of CD32. Phosphorylated CD32 can recruit SHIP (Src homology 2-containing inositol 5'-phosphatase), an enzyme that dephosphorylates PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ [31]. Loss of PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ impairs the ability of the BCR to induce Akt-dependent survival signals [58] and stimulate Btk-dependent activation of PLC-γ2 [31].

Concluding remarks  
Although the identification of BCR signaling pathways has revealed the molecular alphabet of BCR signaling, the next few years will bring increased understanding of how B cells use this alphabet to generate different sets of instructions. In particular, gene-expression profiling will help us understand how activating different combinations of BCR signaling pathways leads to apoptosis, anergy, survival, activation or proliferation. Understanding how BCR signaling specifies B-cell activation versus B-cell death has important implications for the development of vaccines and for the treatment of immunodeficiency and autoimmune diseases.

22 Kane, L.P. *et al.* (1999) Induction of NF-κB by the Akt/PKB kinase. *Curr. Biol.* 9, 601–604  
23 Datta, S.R. *et al.* (1997) Akt phosphorylation of BAD couples survival signals to the cell-intrinsic death machinery. *Cell* 91, 231–241  
24 Pogue, S.L. *et al.* (2000) B cell antigen receptor-induced activation of Akt promotes B cell survival and is dependent on Syk kinase. *J. Immunol.* 165, 1300–1306  
25 Engels, N. *et al.* (2001) Association of SLP-65/BLNK with the B cell antigen receptor through a non-ITAM tyrosine of Ig-α. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 31, 2126–2134  
26 Kabak, S. *et al.* (2002) The direct recruitment of BLNK to Igα couples the B cell antigen receptor to distal signaling pathway. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 22, 2524–2535  
27 Tognon, C.E. *et al.* (1998) Regulation of RasGRP via a phorbol ester-responsive C1 domain. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 18, 6995–7008  
28 Krappmann, D. *et al.* (2001) B-cell receptor and phorbol ester-induced NF-κB and 0c-Jun-N-terminal kinase activation in B cells requires novel protein kinase C's. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 21, 6640–6650  
29 Iritani, B.M. *et al.* (1997) Control of B cell development by Ras-mediated activation of Raf. *EMBO J.* 16, 7019–7031  
30 Richards, J.D. *et al.* (2001) Inhibition of the MEK/ERK signaling pathway blocks a subset of B cell responses to antigen. *J. Immunol.* 166, 3855–3864  
31 Brauweiler, A.M. *et al.* (2000) Bilevel control of B-cell activation by the inositol 5-phosphatase SHIP. *Immunol. Rev.* 176, 69–74  
32 McLeod, S.J. *et al.* (1998) Activation of the Rap1 GTPase by the B cell antigen receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273, 29218–29223  
33 McLeod, S.J. and Gold, M.R. (2001) Activation and function of the Rap1 GTPase in B lymphocytes. *Int. Rev. Immunol.* 20, 763–789

34 Katagiri, K. *et al.* (2000) Rap1 is a potent activation signal for leukocyte function-associated antigen 1 distinct from protein kinase C and phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 20, 1956–1969

35 Reedquist, K.A. *et al.* (2000) The small GTPase, Rap1, mediates CD31-induced integrin adhesion. *J. Cell Biol.* 148, 1151–1158

36 Hashimoto, A. *et al.* (1998) Involvement of guanosine triphosphatases and phospholipase C-γ2 in extracellular signal-regulated kinase, c-Jun NH₂-terminal kinase, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase activation by the B cell antigen receptor. *J. Exp. Med.* 188, 1287–1295

37 Doody, G.M. *et al.* (2000) Vav-2 controls NFAT-dependent transcription in B- but not T-lymphocytes. *EMBO J.* 19, 6173–6184

38 Lucas, P.C. *et al.* (2001) Bcl10 and MALT1, independent targets of chromosomal translocation in MALT lymphoma, cooperate in a novel NF-κB signaling pathway. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 19102–19019

39 Gold, M.R. *et al.* (1999) The B cell antigen receptor activates the Akt (protein kinase B)/glycogen synthase kinase-3 signaling pathway via phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. *J. Immunol.* 163, 1894–1905

40 Swart, J.M. *et al.* (2000) Identification of a membrane Ig-induced p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase module that regulates cAMP response element binding protein phosphorylation and transcriptional activation in CH31 B lymphomas. *J. Immunol.* 164, 2311–2319

41 King, L.B. and Monroe, J.G. (2000) Immunobiology of the immature B cell: plasticity in the B-cell receptor-induced response fine tunes negative selection. *Immunol. Rev.* 176, 86–104

42 Healy, J.I. *et al.* (1997) Different nuclear signals are activated by the B cell receptor during positive versus negative signaling. *Immunity* 6, 419–428

43 Glynne, R. *et al.* (2000) How self-tolerance and the immunosuppressive drug FK 506 prevent B-cell mitogenesis. *Nature* 403, 672–676

44 Glynne, R. *et al.* (2000) B-lymphocyte quiescence, tolerance, and activation as viewed by global gene expression profiling on microarrays. *Immunol. Rev.* 176, 216–246

45 Shaffer, A.L. *et al.* (2001) Signatures of the immune response. *Immunity* 15, 375–385

46 Sonenshein, G.E. (1997) Down-modulation of c-Myc expression induces apoptosis of B lymphocyte models of tolerance via clonal deletion. *J. Immunol.* 158, 1994–1997

47 Zhu, N. *et al.* (2002) CD40 signaling in B cells regulates the expression of the Pim-1 kinase via the NF-κB pathway. *J. Immunol.* 168, 744–754

48 Smith, K.G.C. and Fearon, D.T. (2000) Receptor modulators of B-cell receptor signaling—CD19/CD22. *Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol.* 245, 195–212

49 Tsubata, T. (1999) Co-receptors on B lymphocytes. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 11, 249–255

50 Cherukuri, A. *et al.* (2001) The CD19/CD21 complex functions to prolong B cell antigen

51 Carter, R.H. and Fearon, D.T. (1992) Lowering the threshold for antigen receptor stimulation of B lymphocytes. *Science* 256, 105–107

52 Cornell, R.J. *et al.* (1998) Polygenic autoimmune traits: Lyn, CD22, and SHP-1 are limiting elements of a biochemical pathway regulating BCR signaling and selection. *Immunity* 8, 497–508

53 Parnes, J.R. and Pan, C. (2000) CD72, a negative regulator of B-cell responsiveness. *Immunol. Rev.* 176, 76–85

54 Mizuno, K. *et al.* (2000) Src homology region 2 (SH2) domain-containing phosphatase-1 dephosphorylates B cell linker protein/SHP domain leukocyte protein of 65 kDa and selectively regulates c-Jun NH₂-terminal kinase activation in B cells. *J. Immunol.* 165, 1344–1351

55 Dustin, L.B. *et al.* (1999) Expression of dominant-negative Src-homology domain 2-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase-1 results in increased Syk tyrosine kinase activity and B cell activation. *J. Immunol.* 162, 2717–2724

56 Chan, V.W.F. *et al.* (1997) Characterization of the B lymphocyte populations in Lyn-deficient mice and the role of Lyn in signal initiation and down-regulation. *Immunity* 7, 69–81

57 Coggeshall, K.M. (2000) Positive and negative signaling in B lymphocytes. *Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol.* 245, 213–260

58 Jacob, A. *et al.* (1999) FcγRIIb modulation of surface immunoglobulin-induced Akt activation in murine B cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 13704–13710


---

# Novel therapeutic strategies provide the real test for the amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease

## Diana Ines Dominguez and Bart De Strooper

The amyloid and tangle cascade hypothesis is the dominant explanation for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). A complete knowledge of the metabolic pathways leading to β-amyloid (Aβ) production and clearance *in vivo* and of the pathological events that lead to fibril formation and deposition into plaques is crucial for the development of an ‘anti-amyloid’ therapeutic strategy. Important advances in this respect have been achieved recently, revealing new candidate drug targets. Among the most promising potential treatments are β- and γ-secretase inhibitors, Aβ vaccination, Cu-Zn chelators, cholesterol-lowering drugs and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Now, the major question is whether these drugs will work in the clinic.

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is characterized by two types of protein aggregates, neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques, distributed in regions of the CNS that are involved in learning and memory. The neurofibrillary tangles consist of twisted filaments containing hyperphosphorylated tau whereas the amyloid plaques contain mainly β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide fibrils. Incomplete knowledge of the molecular process that causes AD has hindered advances in drug development. The available cholinergic therapies target essentially late aspects of the disease, improving temporarily the performance of the undamaged neurones, but do not stop the progressive mental decline. In the past years, important progress has been made in the understanding of the pathogenic mechanism of AD, and new therapeutic targets have become available that should allow the underlying disease process to be tackled directly. In this respect, the ‘amyloid hypothesis’ has become the dominant theory in the field. It is believed that Aβ accumulation in plaques or as partial soluble filaments initiates a
