
Review TRENDS in Immunology Vol. 23 No. 8 August 2002 413

33 Boniface, J.J. *et al.* (1999) Thermodynamics of T cell receptor binding to peptide-MHC: evidence for a general mechanism of molecular scanning. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96, 11446–11451

34 Maenaka, K. *et al.* (1999) Killer cell immunoglobulin receptors and T cell receptors bind peptide-major histocompatibility complex class I with distinct thermodynamic and kinetic properties. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 28329–28334

35 Purbhoo, M.A. *et al.* (2001) The human CD8 coreceptor effects cytotoxic T cell activation and antigen sensitivity primarily by mediating complete phosphorylation of the T cell receptor ζ chain. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 32786–32792

36 Fung-Leung, W.P. *et al.* (1991) CD8 is needed for development of cytotoxic T cells but not helper T cells. Cell 65, 443–449

37 Rahemtulla, A. *et al.* (1991) Normal development and function of CD8+ cells but markedly decreased helper cell activity in mice lacking CD4. Nature 353, 180–184

38 Fung-Leung, W.P. *et al.* (1994) Reduced thymic maturation but normal effector function of CD8+ T cells in CD8β gene-targeted mice. J. Exp. Med. 180, 959–967

39 Krensky, A.M. *et al.* (1993) Peptides corresponding to the CD8 binding region of HLA class I block the differentiation of cytotoxic T lymphocyte precursors. Transplant. Proc. 25, 483–484

40 Clayberger, C. *et al.* (1994) Peptides corresponding to the CD8 and CD4 binding domains of HLA molecules block T lymphocyte immune responses in vitro. J. Immunol. 153, 946–951

41 Li, S. *et al.* (1997) A computer screening approach to immunoglobulin superfamily structures and interactions: discovery of small non-peptidic CD4 inhibitors as novel immunotherapeutics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94, 73–78

42 Choksi, S. *et al.* (1998) A structure-based approach to designing synthetic CD8α peptides that can inhibit cytotoxic T-lymphocyte responses. Nat. Med. 4, 309–314

43 Koch, U. *et al.* (1998) A synthetic CD4-CDR3 peptide analog enhances skin allograft survival across a MHC class II barrier. J. Immunol. 161, 421–429

44 Sewell, A.K. *et al.* (1999) Antagonism of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte activation by soluble CD8. Nat. Med. 5, 399–404

45 Edling, A.E. *et al.* (2001) Effect of a cyclic heptapeptide based on the human CD4 domain 1 CC′ loop region on murine experimental allergic encephalomyelitis: inhibition of both primary and secondary responses. J. Neuroimmunol. 112, 115–128

46 Edling, A.E. *et al.* (2002) An organic CD4 inhibitor reduces the clinical and pathological symptoms of acute experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. J. Autoimmun. 18, 169–179

47 Purbhoo, M.A. *et al.* (1998) Copresentation of natural HIV-1 agonist and antagonist ligands fails to induce the T cell receptor signaling cascade. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95, 4527–4532

48 Potter, T.A. *et al.* (2001) Formation of supramolecular activation clusters on fresh ex vivo CD8+ T cells after engagement of the T cell antigen receptor and CD8 by antigen-presenting cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 12624–12629

49 de la Calle-Martín, O. *et al.* (2001) Familial CD8 deficiency due to a mutation in the CD8α gene. J. Clin. Invest. 108, 117–123

50 Altman, J.D. *et al.* (1996) Phenotypic analysis of antigen-specific T lymphocytes. Science 274, 94–96

51 Bodinier, M. *et al.* (2000) Efficient detection and immunomagnetic sorting of specific T cells using

52 Xu, X.N. *et al.* (2001) A novel approach to antigen-specific deletion of CTL with minimal cellular activation using α3 domain mutants of MHC class I/peptide complex. Immunity 14, 591–602

53 Glick, M. *et al.* (2002) Novel CD8+ T cell antagonists based on β2-microglobulin. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 20840–20846

54 Sakihama, T. *et al.* (1995) Oligomerization of CD4 is required for stable binding to class II major histocompatibility complex proteins but not for interaction with human immunodeficiency virus gp120. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 92, 6444–6448

55 Xu, H. and Littman, D.R. (1993) A kinase-independent function of Lck in potentiating antigen-specific T cell activation. Cell 74, 633–643

56 Moody, A.M. *et al.* (2001) Developmentally regulated glycosylation of the CD8αβ coreceptor stalk modulates ligand binding. Cell 107, 501–512

57 Daniels, M.A. *et al.* (2001) CD8 binding to MHC class I molecules is influenced by T cell maturation and glycosylation. Immunity 15, 1051–1061

58 Leishman, A.J. *et al.* (2001) T cell responses modulated through interaction between CD8αα and the nonclassical MHC class I molecule, TL. Science 294, 1936–1939

59 Crise, B. and Rose, J.K. (1992) Identification of palmitoylation sites on CD4, the human immunodeficiency virus receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 267, 13593–13597

60 Arcaro, A. *et al.* (2000) Essential role of CD8 palmitoylation in CD8 coreceptor function. J. Immunol. 165, 2068–2076

---

**It's all Rel-ative: NF-κB and CD28 costimulation of T-cell activation**

Lawrence P. Kane, Joseph Lin and Arthur Weiss

Costimulatory signals complement or modify the signals provided to a lymphocyte through antigen receptors. For productive T-cell activation, the CD28 molecule is apparently the most important, although not the only, costimulatory receptor. CD28 can provide a signal that is at least partially distinct from that delivered by the T cell receptor (TCR)-CD3 complex. Several lines of evidence indicate that the nuclear factor (NF)-κB pathway is perhaps the most relevant biochemical or transcriptional target for the costimulatory activity of CD28. Although many questions remain, recent years have witnessed significant progress in understanding the signal transduction pathways leading from the TCR and CD28 to Rel/NF-κB-dependent transcription.

CD28, a 44-kDa member of the immunoglobulin superfamily, is constitutively expressed on the majority of CD4+ T cells as a disulfide-linked homodimer. The in vivo relevance of CD28 has been most convincingly established by the examination of CD28-deficient mice, which generate immune responses much less efficiently than their wild-type counterparts (reviewed in [1]). It should be noted, however, that these mice can still mount immune responses, which vary in magnitude and efficiency depending on the antigen or infectious agent. Likewise, interference with CD28-B7 interactions can significantly inhibit the development of disease in some murine autoimmune disease models [2,3], as well as inhibit other T-dependent responses, such as allograft rejection [2].

When discussing costimulation in helper T cells, it is important to define clearly which assays of T-cell activation are being examined. Various studies have shown positive effects of CD28 costimulation on proliferation, cytokine production and survival of T cells [4]. We favor the use of high levels of

http://immunology.trends.com 1471-4906/02/$ – see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. PII: S1471-4906(02)02264-0

Function
Prevents
IL-2 Proliferation anergy Survival NF-KB

Ig superfamily
Ligand

CD28
(Constitutive)
B7-1(CD80)
Yes Yes Yes Yes
B7-2(CD86)

ICOS
(Uregulated)
B7h
No Yes ? ? ?
(LICOS)

TNFR superfamily

4-1BB
(CD137)
4-1BBL
Yes Yes ? Yes Yes
(Uregulated)
(CD137L)

CD27
(Transiently
upregulated)
CD27L
No Yes ? No Yes
(CD70)

CD30
(Uregulated)
CD30L
Yes Yes ? ? Yes
(CD153)

OX40
(CD134)
OX40L
Yes Yes ? Yes Yes
(Uregulated)
(CD134L)

IL-1R family

CD121a

IL-1R
IL-1α
Yes Yes No ? Yes
(Constitutive)
IL-1β

IL-1RAcP

Integrin

LFA-1
(ICAM-1(CD 54)
Yes Yes No ? No
(Constitutive)
ICAM-2(CD 102)
ICAM-3(CD 50)

Disulfide linkage
○ Potential pTyr residue
IgC2 type
IgV type
TNFR cysteine-rich repeat

TRENDS in Immunology

reviews should be consulted for more detail [11, 12]. Figure 2 shows the major pathways of NF-κB regulation, as determined mainly from studies of the proinflammatory tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and IL-1 receptors. Nascent NF-κB/Rel transcription factors (present as dimers) are held in the cytoplasm by inhibitory proteins known as inhibitors of κB (IκB). For these NF-κB dimers to gain access to the nucleus and affect transcription, the associated IκB proteins must be degraded. This is accomplished by the proteasome, and is dependent on inducible ubiquitination of IκB. Ubiquitination is in turn dependent on phosphorylation of the IκB protein on two serine residues near its aminoterminal. This phosphorylation is performed by a multi-subunit complex known as the IκB kinase (IKK) complex, the core of which consists of three components: one adaptor protein (IKKγ or NEMO) and a dimer of catalytic subunits, IKKα (or IKK1) and IKKβ (or IKK2). Thus, this pathway leads to the liberation of NF-κB dimers, which contain newly exposed nuclear-localization sequences that allow them to translocate into the nucleus, bind DNA and participate in the transcriptional upregulation of various genes. There are multiple family members at several levels in this pathway, as shown in the boxes in Fig. 2, which provide for combinatorial diversity in the responses elicited by NF-κB induction downstream of various receptors and in different cell types.

In addition to the classical pathway of IκB degradation, there are at least two other ways in which NF-κB can be regulated by upstream signaling pathways: processing of the NF-κB2/p100 precursor and inducible phosphorylation of NF-κB proteins themselves [11, 12]. In their full-length forms, p100 and p105 possess IκB activity, but once processed yield p52 or p50 NF-κB molecules, respectively, which can enter the nucleus and bind DNA (Fig. 2). The processing of NF-κB2, at least, is proteasome- and phosphorylation-dependent [12]. Another level of NF-κB regulation is the inducible phosphorylation of p65/RelA. Two sites of serine phosphorylation have been described that are associated with increased transcriptional activation, independent of effects on IκB. Phosphorylation of one or more of these sites may regulate NF-κB association with transcriptional co-activators such as p300/CBP. This pathway appears to depend upon the IKK complex, providing yet another function for these kinases [11, 12].

NF-κB pathway and CD28 costimulation

The first two inducible T-cell genes shown to be regulated by NF-κB were the genes encoding IL-2 and the alpha chain of the high-affinity IL-2 receptor (CD25, or Tac in humans). This was shown by gel-shift analysis after lectin or phorbol ester stimulation or expression of the transforming Tax protein of HIV-1, which was known to activate NF-κB [13–15]. The connection between NF-κB induction

http://immunology.trends.com

and antigenic stimulation of T cells was subsequently
made by using antigen and antigen-presenting cells
(APCs) to stimulate T-cell clones [16, 17]. A potential
connection between CD28 and the NF-κB pathway
was suggested by the identification in the proximal
IL-2 promoter of an NF-κB-like sequence conferring
responsiveness to anti-CD28 antibodies, in
conjunction with anti-TCR/CD3 antibody or phorbol
ester and ionophore, which mimic the antigen
receptor signal [18–20]. Mutation or deletion of this
site, called the CD28-responsive element, or CD28RE,
largely abolished the increase in transcription
mediated by CD28 over and above other stimuli.
Another site in the promoter had previously been
identified as a classical NF-κB-binding site, and
CD28 had been shown to costimulate both NF-κB
binding to DNA and transcriptional reporter
activity [20]. The IL-2 promoter construct with a
mutated CD28RE but intact NF-κB site was still
partially responsive to CD28 costimulation,
suggesting that both sites are necessary for full
CD28 inducibility [21]. Unlike a classical NF-κB-
binding site, the CD28RE is insufficient to drive
transcription from a minimal promoter. Rather, the
adjacent non-consensus AP-1 site is required, because
these elements function as a composite
transcriptional element [22].
The binding of NF-κB-like factors to the CD28RE
was initially demonstrated with gel-shift assays and
competition with DNA oligonucleotides containing
classical NF-κB-binding sites [20]. Detailed studies
by several groups addressed which factors are
actually bound to the IL-2CD28RE, but
unfortunately such studies have not consistently
shown the same proteins binding to this site. There
does seem to be a consensus that c-Rel, RelA and p50
can all bind to the CD28RE after various stimulation
protocols that include anti-CD28 antibodies [22–27].
The relevance of c-Rel for IL-2 production is
reinforced by the observation that T cells from c-Rel
knockout mice are profoundly deficient in IL-2
secretion [28]. In addition, costimulation of IL-2
production, but not proliferation, correlates well with
c-Rel nuclear entry and DNA binding [29].
As mentioned above, the IL-2 receptor alpha chain
also appears to be regulated at the transcriptional
level by CD28 through NF-κB. However, this appears
to be different from the regulation of the IL-2 gene,
as transcription of IL-2α is mainly dependent
upon p65 and p50, and is expressed normally in
c-Rel knockout mice [28]. Thus, it is probably useful
to divide CD28-responsive, NF-κB-dependent,
genes into two categories—those that are c-Rel
dependent and those that are regulated chiefly by
classical NF-κB p50-p65 complexes [30]. The former
category would include IL-2 and granulocyte-
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF),
for example, whereas the latter would include the
IL-2 receptor alpha chain and the anti-apoptotic
molecule Bcl-xL [31–33].

It has also been suggested that the transcription
factor nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFATp) can
bind to the CD28RE and play a role in transcriptional
activation from this element [25]. Although NFAT
family transcription factors can participate in IL-2
transcription through this site, they are unlikely to
account for the CD28 specificity, as CD28 does not
costimulate transcription from a pure NFAT reporter
when TCR signals are not limiting [25, 34]. Recent data
suggest that the transcription factor high-mobility
group protein IY [HMGI(Y)] augments c-Rel binding
to the IL-2 promoter, but that in doing so it displaces
NFAT [35]. This model fits with the known kinetics of
c-Rel nuclear entry, which even in the presence of a
CD28 costimulatory signal takes on the order of hours,
because of a requirement for new protein synthesis
[36–40]. Pre-existing NFATp, by contrast, would be
rapidly translocated into the nucleus following TCR
stimulation, whereupon it could potentially bind to the
CD28RE in the absence of high c-Rel levels. This could
be relevant for transcriptional activation from the
CD28RE early in a response, but would not replace a
requirement for c-Rel, given the absence of IL-2
production by c-Rel-deficient T cells [28].
As stated above, access of NF-κB transcription
factors to the nucleus is controlled by inducible
degradation of the IkB proteins. Consistent with the
effects of CD28 on NF-κB-dependent transcription is
the contribution of CD28 to inducible IkB
degradation. Thus, CD28 costimulation provides a
potent stimulus for long-term downregulation of IkBa
[37, 41, 42]. Even more dramatic is the contribution of
CD28 to the degradation of IkBβ, which apparently
requires a stronger stimulus than does degradation of
IkBa [38, 41]. The other IkB proteins—gamma, epsilon
and the p100 and p105 proteins (Fig. 2) —have not
been thoroughly tested for their potential
involvement in CD28 costimulation. This is an
important issue, as there is evidence for differential
regulation of specific NF-κB proteins by each member
of the IkB family [38, 43]. This could have implications
for the range of genes induced by CD28 costimulatory
signals in different contexts or at different times
during development. The in vivo importance of IkB
degradation has been reinforced by the examination
of transgenic mice that overexpress various forms of
IkB in the T-cell lineage (reviewed in [44]). In general,
these mice display impaired thymic selection and
peripheral T-cell activation, as measured by
proliferation and cytokine production.
Activation of the IKK complex occurs upstream of
IkB degradation (Fig. 2). Several studies have now
demonstrated potent upregulation of IKK activity by
CD28 [33, 45, 46]. Tuosto et al. were also able to show
that IKK activation by superantigen and APCs could
be blocked by preventing CD28-B7 interactions [47].
Harhaj et al. have characterized a derivative of the
Jurkat T-cell line deficient in IKKy expression [48].
TCR or CD28-dependent NF-κB induction does not
occur in these cells unless IKKy expression is restored,

http://immunology.trends.com

recent evidence that a separate IKK complex can exist within cells, although its functional significance is still unclear [49, 50]. Called IKKe or IKKi (as the gene is inducible in some cell types), this kinase is related to IKK alpha and beta, and is highly expressed in thymus, spleen and peripheral blood lymphocytes [50]. It is not yet clear what contribution, if any, this complex makes to T-cell activation in vivo.

Linking the IKKs to the TCR and CD28

Recent studies have analyzed the roles of TCR-proximal signaling components in NF-κB induction (Fig. 3). These molecules are probably required for most, if not all, downstream effects of TCR ligation, and so in this regard they do not represent specific links to the NF-κB pathway [51, 52]. The ZAP-70 tyrosine kinase, which is recruited to the TCR-CD3 complex upon receptor crosslinking, is required for IkB degradation and NF-κB DNA-binding activity, as demonstrated in a ZAP-70-deficient Jurkat T-cell line [53]. This same study also found that the SLP-76 adaptor protein is required for TCR or CD28 induction of NF-κB-dependent transcription and DNA-binding activity, using an SLP-76-deficient Jurkat line. Others have implicated the Vav protein in NF-κB induction by TCR or CD28, as suggested in part by the observation that Vav tyrosine phosphorylation is cooperatively induced by TCR and CD28 signals [54]. There is evidence that Vav regulates PKCθ [55], which might supply at least in part the link between Vav and NF-κB. Another possible link between these pathways is the observation that under some circumstances Vav might lie upstream of PI-3 kinase and Akt [56].

There has been much interest recently in which molecules link membrane-proximal signaling components in various systems to the IKK complex. One class of proteins that has been implicated upstream of IKK activation is the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase (MAP3K or MAPKKK) family. Kinases of this family can activate not only downstream MAP kinases but also the NF-κB pathway, so it was not surprising to discover that in T cells various kinases of this family can also activate the IKKs, including MEKK1, MEKK2, MLK3 and Cot [47, 57–59]. It remains unresolved at this point which, if any, of these kinases are actually involved in IKK activation by the TCR and CD28. It is also unclear precisely how the MAP3Ks mediate IKK activation [11, 12]. Two issues that can arise from the analysis of knockout mice are those of specificity and redundancy, as this family of kinases is now relatively large, with multiple family members expressed in most cell types [60]. For instance, although Cot has been implicated in CD28 stimulation of IKK activation, preliminary analysis of Cot-deficient T cells revealed no major functional or NF-κB defect [61]. Additional knockouts that have been analyzed for proinflammatory cytokine, but not TCR or CD28, signaling are MEKK1- and MEKK3-deficient mice.


Fig. 3. Pathways upstream of inhibitor of κB kinase (IKK) activation in T cells. Components of T-cell receptor (TCR)-proximal signaling that participate in nuclear factor (NF)-κB induction are shown; see text and references [51, 52] for more detail. Also shown are recently described molecules that are thought to participate relatively specifically in the activation of the IKK complex downstream of the TCR and CD28. Question marks indicate areas in which direct connections have not been made.

although NFAT and activator protein 1 (AP-1) transcription factors are still regulated normally in the mutant cell line. Several groups have generated knockout mice that lack the alpha, beta or gamma components of the IKK complex (reviewed in [44]). However, none of these has been tested for the ability of the TCR and CD28 to induce NF-κB nuclear entry or DNA binding. This task is complicated by the fact that all of the knockouts die in utero or neonatally. It should be pointed out that there is heterogeneity of IKK complexes, including in T cells, in that they can include homo- or heterodimers of IKK alpha or beta, along with a gamma subunit [46]. Further adding to the potential complexity at the level of the IKKs is
Although TNF and IL-1-induced NF-κB induction are impaired in the MEKK3 knockout, these cytokines apparently signal normally in the MEKK1 knockout (reviewed in [12]).

An additional kinase that is similar to the MAP3Ks and has been linked to the IKKs is NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK). Two elegant studies have demonstrated that NIK acts through the IKKα subunit to catalyze the phosphorylation and processing specifically of NF-κB2/p100 (reviewed in [12]). It is also now apparent from analysis of both natural and engineered mutant mouse strains that NIK plays a role in IKK activation, by at least a subset of NF-κB-inducing pathways [11]. Although the NF-κB pathway itself has not been studied in detail in T cells from these mice, NIK-deficient T cells exhibit a significant impairment in IL-2 production, which correlates with lower levels of c-Rel protein, emphasizing the importance of this NF-κB family member for T-cell function [62].

Two other kinases that have been implicated in IKK activation in T cells are the Akt (or PKB) and PKCθ kinases. Intriguingly, Akt is unable to activate NF-κB-dependent transcription in T cells by itself, even when expressed as a constitutively active, myristylated form. It can, however, synergize with a low concentration of phorbol ester or a signal through the TCR to activate an NF-κB reporter, induce NF-κB DNA binding, activate the IKK complex or even induce CD28-dependent cytokine genes [63, 64]. Synergy with Akt could also be seen when an activated form of PKCθ was co-transfected [64]. These functional results are consistent with the finding that Akt and PKCθ can physically associate [65]. Other studies have found that this isoform of PKC is relatively unique in its ability to target NF-κB in T cells (versus other cell types and other PKC isoforms), suggesting cell-type specificity in the regulation of NF-κB [66, 67]. The observations that Akt can cooperate with TCR signals to induce NF-κB, and that it can reconstitute IL-2 production in CD28-deficient cells [64], strongly suggest that it is providing a unique CD28 signal at some level. Furthermore, these studies are consistent with a central role for NF-κB in CD28 costimulation, as Akt overexpression was found to have no effect on other inducible transcription factors, yet it could still substitute for CD28 costimulation of IL-2 production [63, 64]. It is not yet clear precisely how Akt targets IKK activation; one paradox is the observation that at least under some circumstances crosslinking either the TCR or CD28 can lead to increases in Akt catalytic activity. It is also intriguing that NF-κB induction by the MAP3K kinase Cot can be regulated by Akt-dependent phosphorylation of a serine near the carboxyl terminus of Cot, and that these kinases can physically associate [68]. The potential impact of this event on T-cell activation *in vivo* is not known.

Genetic evidence for the importance of PKCθ in T-cell activation and NF-κB induction has now been obtained [69]. Consistent with previous cell-line studies (reviewed in [70]), PKCθ is critical for initiation of T-cell activation through the TCR and CD28, as these stimuli cannot induce T-cell proliferation or IL-2 production in PKCθ-deficient animals. These cells are also refractory to stimulation with phorbol esters such as phorbol myristate acetate (PMA), consistent with the fact that these agents act mainly through the direct activation of certain isoforms of PKC. The functional defect in PKCθ-deficient cells appears to derive from an inability to induce both NF-κB and AP-1 family transcription factors, and is relatively specific, as TNF and IL-1 are still capable of inducing NF-κB DNA-binding activity in PKCθ-deficient T cells [69]. Intriguingly, the effect on NF-κB appears to be much less severe in immature CD4+CD8+ thymocytes, suggesting differential developmental control of NF-κB induction in the T-cell lineage. It should be noted that accounts of IKK activation in this knockout model have yet to appear, an issue of some interest, as previous studies provided evidence that PKCθ preferentially targets the IKKβ catalytic subunit of the IKK complex (reviewed in [70]).

Another genetic model that has a similar phenotype to that of the PKCθ knockout is the Bcl10 knockout. Rearrangement and mutation of Bcl10 (also known as CIPE/R, CARMEN, mE10, CLAP and c-E10) have been implicated in the development of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma [71]. Bcl10 and other caspase recruitment domain (CARD) proteins are thought to participate in apoptosis and NF-κB induction in various cell types. Surprisingly, murine T cells lacking Bcl10 show no defect in apoptosis induction, but are severely defective in T-cell proliferation and IL-2 production in response to TCR or CD28 stimulation [72]. As in the PKCθ knockout, the proliferation defect is not overcome by the addition of exogenous IL-2 or by the addition of phorbol ester. The latter observation suggests that Bcl10 lies downstream on the pathway from TCR or CD28 and PKCθ to the IKKs (Fig. 3). It appears that the product of another gene that is translocated in MALT lymphomas (MALT1) is also on this pathway and can cooperate with Bcl10 to induce NF-κB [73, 74]. The role of this protein in normal T-cell function remains to be determined. Finally, another CARD-containing protein, known as RIP2 (also CARDIAK or RICK), was recently implicated in T-cell activation and NF-κB induction [75]. Thus, T cells from RIP2 knockout mice respond relatively poorly to stimulation through the TCR and CD28, as measured by proliferation and IL-2 production. Curiously, functional responses to phorbol ester or the lectin ConA were intact, unlike those of Bcl10-deficient cells. IkB phosphorylation and degradation in response to anti-CD3 were deficient in these cells, although the NF-κB responses to phorbol ester or ConA were not examined. More work remains to be done to determine the precise role of this CARD

http://immunology.trends.com
protein in NF-κB induction, relative to Bcl 10 and the other proteins discussed below.

Recently there has been much interest in the ability of another class of proteins to couple the TCR and CD28 to the IKKs. These are proteins of the MAGUK family [76], which regulate the recruitment of signaling complexes to the cell surface, among other functions. One family member that might be linked to NF-κB in T cells is Bimp1 (also called CARMA3 or CARD10), which was found in a yeast-two-hybrid screen to associate with Bcl10 [73]. Similar proteins were discovered by two other groups using different approaches and called CARD11 (or CARMA1) and CARD14 (or CARMA2) [77, 78]. Intriguingly, the expression of CARD11 appears to be relatively restricted to lymphocytes [78]. Lin and colleagues recently isolated a mutant of the Jurkat T-cell line that lacks expression of this protein (X. Lin, pers. commun.). They find that there is a specific defect in NF-κB induction by TCR or CD28 or PMA, with the TNF pathway being unaffected, very much like the phenotypes of the PKCθ and Bcl10 knockout T cells discussed above. In other signaling pathways, MAGUK family proteins have been linked to plasma membrane recruitment of signaling complexes [76]. Furthermore, recent evidence suggests that recruitment of the IKK complex to the plasma membrane is important for NF-κB induction by the TNF receptor [12]. Thus, proteins such as CARD11 might be important in T cells for recruiting the IKK complex to the TCR and/or CD28. This remains to be proven, as do the precise roles, if any, of PKCθ, Akt and Bcl10 in this process. There is some evidence that PKCθ can associate (probably indirectly) with the IKK complex in T cells [79], which is consistent with the above model.

Acknowledgements  
We thank W. Greene, M. Tomlinson and V. Shapiro for their critical reading of the manuscript, and X. Lin for sharing unpublished data. LPK is the recipient of an Arthritis Foundation Investigator Award. This work was supported in part by the Rosalind Russell Medical Research Center for Arthritis.

References  
1 Sharpe, A.H. (1995) Analysis of lymphocyte costimulation in vivo using transgenic and 'knockout' mice. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 7, 389–395  
2 Salomon, B. and Bluestone, J.A. (2001) Complexities of CD28/B7: CTLA-4 costimulatory pathways in autoimmunity and transplantation. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 19, 225–252  
3 Daikh, D. *et al.* (1997) The CD28-B7 costimulatory pathway and its role in autoimmune disease. *J. Leukocyte Biol.* 62, 156–162  
4 Frauwrith, K.A. and Thompson, C.B. (2002) Activation and inhibition of lymphocytes by costimulation. *J. Clin. Invest.* 109, 295–299  
5 Boussiotis, V.A. *et al.* (1993) B7 but not intercellular adhesion molecule-1 costimulation prevents the induction of human alloantigen-specific tolerance. *J. Exp. Med.* 178, 1753–1763  
6 Bachmann, M.F. *et al.* (1997) Distinct roles for LFA-1 and CD28 during activation of naive T cells: adhesion versus costimulation. *Immunity* 7, 549–557  
7 Sharpe, A.H. and Freeman, G.J. (2002) The B7-CD28 superfamily. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* 2, 116–126  
8 Thompson, C.B. *et al.* (1989) CD28 activation pathway regulates the production of multiple T-cell-derived lymphokines/cytokines. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 86, 1333–1337  

Box 1. Important questions  
• How is c-Rel upregulated?  
• What exactly are the CD28-specific signals upstream of IKK?  
• Which MAP3Ks are downstream of TCR or CD28 and upstream of IKK?  
• Is there recruitment of the IKK complex to TCR or CD28?  
• If so, is there a role for a CARD11, Bcl10 and MALT complex?  
• What are the PKCθ and Akt substrates in the NF-κB pathway?

Concluding remarks  
CD28 costimulation is an immunological phenomenon that has attracted much attention from cell biologists and biochemists. Despite this, we still do not have a good understanding of how signals from CD28 contribute to helper T-cell function at either the cellular or biochemical level (Box 1). Based on existing data, it appears that a continuing focus on NF-κB induction should lead to more progress on this front. Indeed, there has been a great deal of progress recently in identifying pathway components that contribute to NF-κB induction in T cells. This work should be performed, however, with an understanding that the term 'NF-κB' encompasses a somewhat heterogeneous set of molecules with diverse effects. Finally, use of mouse genetic models has been hindered to some extent by the fact that NF-κB activity is important for T-cell survival and differentiation *in vivo*. Generation of more precisely timed and inducible knockouts may allow for a more thorough examination of the roles in T-cell activation of players in this pathway.

9 Weiss, A. *et al.* (1986) Synergy between the T3/antigen receptor complex and Tp44 in the activation of human T cells. *J. Immunol.* 137, 819–825  
10 Van Lier, R.A. *et al.* (1991) T cell receptor/CD3 and CD28 use distinct intracellular signaling pathways. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 21, 1775–1778  
11 Silverman, N. and Maniatis, T. (2001) NF-κB signaling pathways in mammalian and insect innate immunity. *Genes Dev.* 15, 2321–2342  
12 Ghosh, S. and Karin, M. (2002) Missing pieces in the NF-κB puzzle. *Cell* 109 (Suppl.), S81–S96  
13 Hoyos, B. *et al.* (1989) Kappa B-specific DNA binding proteins: role in the regulation of human interleukin-2 gene expression. *Science* 244, 457–460  
14 Ballard, D.W. *et al.* (1989) Activation of the interleukin-2 receptor alpha gene: regulatory role for DNA-protein interactions flanking the kappa B enhancer. *New Biol.* 1, 83–92  
15 Pomerantz, J.L. *et al.* (1989) A second sequence element located 3' to the NF-κB-binding site regulates IL-2 receptor-alpha gene induction. *J. Immunol.* 143, 4275–4281  
16 Jamieson, C. *et al.* (1991) Physiologic activation of T cells via the T cell receptor induces NF-κB. *J. Immunol.* 147, 416–420  
17 Kang, S.M. *et al.* (1992) NF-κB subunit regulation in nontransformed CD4+ T lymphocytes. *Science* 256, 1452–1456  

18 Fraser, J.D. *et al.* (1991) Regulation of interleukin-2 gene enhancer activity by the T cell accessory molecule CD28. *Science* 251, 313–316  
19 Fraser, J.D. and Weiss, A. (1992) Regulation of T-cell lymphokine gene transcription by the accessory molecule CD28. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 12, 4357–4363  
20 Verweij, C.L. *et al.* (1991) Activation of interleukin-2 gene transcription via the T-cell surface molecule CD28 is mediated through an NF-κB-like response element. *J. Biol. Chem.* 266, 14179–14182  
21 Fraser, J.D. *et al.* (1992) CD28 and T cell antigen receptor signal transduction coordinately regulate interleukin 2 gene expression in response to superantigen stimulation. *J. Exp. Med.* 175, 1131–1134  
22 Shapiro, V.S. *et al.* (1997) CD28 mediates transcriptional upregulation of the interleukin-2 (IL-2) promoter through a composite element containing the CD28RE and NF-IL-2BAP-1 sites. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 17, 4051–4058  
23 Lai, J.-H. *et al.* (1995) RelA is a potent transcriptional activator of the CD28 response element within the interleukin 2 promoter. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 15, 4260–4271  
24 Himes, S.R. *et al.* (1996) High mobility group protein I(Y) is required for function and for c-Rel binding to CD28 response elements within the GM-CSF and IL-2 promoters. *Immunity* 5, 479–489

http://immunology.trends.com

Review

TRENDS in Immunology Vol. 23 No. 8 August 2002

420

25 Maggirwar, S.B. *et al.* (1997) Regulation of the interleukin-2 CD28-responsive element by NF-ATp and various NF-κB/Rel transcription factors. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 17, 2605–2614

26 McGuire, K.L. and Iacobelli, M. (1997) Involvement of Rel, Fos, and Jun proteins in binding activity to the IL-2 promoter CD28 element/AP-1 sequence in human T cells. *J. Immunol.* 159, 1319–1327

27 Ghosh, P. *et al.* (1993) The interleukin 2 CD28-responsive complex contains at least three members of the NF-κB family: c-Rel, p50, and p65. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 90, 1696–1700

28 Kontgen, F. *et al.* (1995) Mice lacking the c-rel proto-oncogene exhibit defects in lymphocyte proliferation, humoral immunity, and interleukin-2 expression. *Genes Dev.* 9, 1965–1977

29 Zhou, X.Y. *et al.* (2002) Molecular mechanisms underlying differential contribution of CD28 versus non-CD28 costimulatory molecules to IL-2 promoter activation. *J. Immunol.* 168, 3847–3854

30 Civil, A. *et al.* (1999) Functional disparity of distinct CD28 response elements toward mitogenic responses. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 34369–34374

31 Boise, L.H. *et al.* (1995) CD28 costimulation can promote T cell survival by enhancing the expression of Bcl-xL. *Immunity* 3, 87–98

32 Chen, C. *et al.* (2000) The Rel/NF-κB family directly activates expression of the apoptosis inhibitor Bcl-x(L). *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 20, 2687–2695

33 Khoshnan, A. *et al.* (2000) The NF-κB cascade is important in Bcl-xL expression and for the anti-apoptotic effects of the CD28 receptor in primary human CD4+ lymphocytes. *J. Immunol.* 165, 1743–1754

34 Shapiro, V.S. *et al.* (1998) Nuclear factor of activated T cells and AP-1 are insufficient for IL-2 promoter activation: requirement for CD28 up-regulation of RE/AP. *J. Immunol.* 161, 6455–6458

35 Himes, S.R. *et al.* (2000) The role of high-mobility group I(Y) proteins in expression of IL-2 and T cell proliferation. *J. Immunol.* 164, 3157–3168

36 Molitor, J.A. *et al.* (1990) NF-κB: a family of inducible and differentially expressed enhancer-binding proteins in human T cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 87, 10028–10032

37 Bryan, R.G. *et al.* (1994) Effect of CD28 signal transduction on c-Rel in human peripheral blood T cells. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 14, 7933–7942

38 Kahn-Perles, B. *et al.* (1997) Temporal and subunit-specific modulations of the Rel/NF-κB transcription factors through CD28 costimulation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 21774–21783

39 Venkataraman, L. *et al.* (1996) Differential regulation of c-Rel translocation in activated B and T cells. *J. Immunol.* 157, 1149–1155

40 Wang, W. *et al.* (1997) c-Rel is a target of pentoxifylline-mediated inhibition of T lymphocyte activation. *Immunity* 6, 165–174

41 Harhaj, E.W. *et al.* (1996) CD28 mediates a potent costimulatory signal for rapid degradation of IkBβ which is associated with accelerated activation of various NF-κB/Rel heterodimers. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 16, 6736–6743

42 Lai, J-H. and Tan, T-H. (1994) CD28 signaling causes a sustained down-regulation of IkBa which can be prevented by the immunosuppressant rapamycin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 30077–30080

43 Whiteside, S.T. *et al.* (1997) I kappa B epsilon, a novel member of the IkB family, controls RelA

and cRel NF-κB activity. *EMBO J.* 16, 1413–1426

44 Gerondakis, S. *et al.* (1999) Genetic approaches in mice to understand Rel/NF-κB and IkB function: transgenics and knockouts. *Oncogene* 18, 6888–6895

45 Harhaj, E.W. and Sun, S-C. (1998) IkB kinases serve as a target of CD28 signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273, 25185–25190

46 Khoshnan, A. *et al.* (1999) Primary human CD4+ T cells contain heterogeneous IkB kinase complexes: role in activation of the IL-2 promoter. *J. Immunol.* 163, 5444–5452

47 Tuosto, L. *et al.* (2000) Mitogen-activated kinase kinase kinase 1 regulates T cell receptor-and CD28-mediated signaling events which lead to NF-κB activation. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 30, 2445–2454

48 Harhaj, E.W. *et al.* (2000) Somatic mutagenesis studies of NF-κB signaling in human T cells: evidence for an essential role of IKK γ in NF-κB activation by T-cell costimulatory signals and HTLV-I Tax protein. *Oncogene* 19, 1448–1456

49 Peters, R.T. and Maniatis, T. (2001) A new family of IKK-related kinases may function as IkB kinases. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 2, M57–62

50 Shimada, T. *et al.* (1999) IKK-i, a novel lipopolysaccharide-inducible kinase that is related to IkB kinases. *Int. Immunol.* 11, 1357–1362

51 Kane, L.P. *et al.* (2000) Signal transduction by the TCR for antigen. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 12, 242–249

52 Tomlinson, M.G. *et al.* (2000) Lymphocytes with a complex: adapter proteins in antigen receptor signaling. *Immunol. Today* 21, 584–591

53 Herndon, T.M. *et al.* (2001) ZAP-70 and SLP-76 regulate protein kinase C-? and NF-κB activation in response to engagement of CD3 and CD28. *J. Immunol.* 166, 5654–5664

54 Bustelo, X.R. (2001) Vav proteins, adaptors and cell signaling. *Oncogene* 20, 6372–6381

55 Villalba, M. *et al.* (2000) A novel functional interaction between Vav and PKC? is required for TCR-induced T cell activation. *Immunity* 12, 151–160

56 Reynolds, L.F. *et al.* (2002) Vav1 transduces T cell receptor signals to the activation of phospholipase Cγ1 via phosphoinositide 3-kinase-dependent and -independent pathways. *J. Exp. Med.* 195, 1103–1114

57 Hehner, S.P. *et al.* (2000) Mixed-lineage kinase 3 delivers CD3/CD28-derived signals into the IkB kinase complex. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 20, 2556–2568

58 Lin, X. *et al.* (1999) The proto-oncogene Cot kinase participates in CD3/CD28 induction of NF-κB acting through the NF-κB-inducing kinase and IkB kinases. *Immunity* 10, 271–280

59 Tsatsanis, C. *et al.* (1998) The Tpl-2 protooncoprotein activates the nuclear factor of activated T cells and induces interleukin 2 expression in T cell lines. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 95, 3827–3832

60 Schlesinger, T.K. *et al.* (1998) The tao of MEKK. *Front. Biosci.* 3, 1181–1186

61 Dumitru, C.D. *et al.* (2000) TNF-alpha induction by LPS is regulated posttranscriptionally via a Tpl2/ERK-dependent pathway. *Cell* 103, 1071–1083

62 Yamada, T. *et al.* (2000) Abnormal immune function of hemopoietic cells from alymphoplasia (aly) mice, a natural strain with mutant NF-κB-inducing kinase. *J. Immunol.* 165, 804–812

63 Kane, L.P. *et al.* (1999) Induction of NF-κB by the Akt/PKB kinase. *Curr. Biol.* 9, 601–604

64 Kane, L.P. *et al.* (2001) Akt provides the CD28 costimulatory signal for upregulation of IL-2 and IFN-γ but not Th2 cytokines. *Nat. Immun.* 2, 37–44

65 Bauer, B. *et al.* (2001) Complex formation and cooperation of protein kinase Cθ and Akt1/protein kinase Bα in the NF-κB transactivation cascade in Jurkat T cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 31627–31634

66 Coudronniere, N. *et al.* (2000) NF-κB activation induced by T cell receptor/CD28 costimulation is mediated by protein kinase C-?. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 97, 3394–3399

67 Lin, X. *et al.* (2000) Protein kinase C-θ participates in NF-κB activation induced by CD3-CD28 costimulation through selective activation of IkB kinase β. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 20, 2933–2940

68 Kane, L.P. *et al.* Akt-dependent phosphorylation specifically regulates Cot induction of NF-κB-dependent transcription. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* (in press)

69 Sun, Z. *et al.* (2000) PKC-θ is required for TCR-induced NF-κB activation in mature but not immature T lymphocytes. *Nature* 404, 402–407

70 Altman, A. *et al.* (2000) Protein kinase C?: a new essential superstar on the T-cell stage. *Immunol. Today* 21, 567–573

71 Thome, M. and Tschopp, J. (2002) Bcl10. *Curr. Biol.* 12, R45

72 Ruland, J. *et al.* (2001) Bcl10 is a positive regulator of antigen receptor-induced activation of NF-κB and neural tube closure. *Cell* 104, 33–42

73 McAllister-Lucas, L.M. *et al.* (2001) Bimp1, a MAGUK family member linking protein kinase C activation to Bcl10-mediated NF-κB induction. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 30589–30597

74 Lucas, P.C. *et al.* (2001) Bcl10 and MALT1, independent targets of chromosomal translocation in malt lymphoma, cooperate in a novel NF-κB signaling pathway. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 19012–19019

75 Kobayashi, K. *et al.* (2002) RICK/Rip2/CARDIAK mediates signalling for receptors of the innate and adaptive immune systems. *Nature* 416, 194–199

76 Dimitratos, S.D. *et al.* (1999) Signaling pathways are focused at specialized regions of the plasma membrane by scaffolding proteins of the MAGUK family. *BioEssays* 21, 912–921

77 Gaide, O. *et al.* (2001) Carma1, a CARD-containing binding partner of Bcl10, induces Bcl10 phosphorylation and NF-κB activation. *FEBS Lett.* 496, 121–127

78 Bertin, J. *et al.* (2001) CARD11 and CARD14 are novel caspase recruitment domain (CARD)/membrane-associated guanylate kinase (MAGUK) family members that interact with BCL10 and activate NF-κB. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 11877–11882

79 Khoshnan, A. *et al.* (2000) The physical association of protein kinase C ? with a lipid raft-associated inhibitor of κB factor kinase (IKK) complex plays a role in the activation of the NF-kappa B cascade by TCR and CD28.

80 Watts, T.H. and DeBenedette, M.A. (1999) T cell co-stimulatory molecules other than CD28. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 11, 286–293

81 Salazar-Fontana, L.I. and Bierer, B.E. (2001) T-lymphocyte coactivator molecules. *Curr. Opin. Hematol.* 8, 5–11
