
APPLIED AND ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY, Aug. 2002, p. 3780–3789
0099-2240/02/$04.00+0 DOI: 10.1128/AEM.68.8.3780–3789.2002
Copyright © 2002, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

# Identification, Characterization, and Regulation of a Cluster of Genes Involved in Carbapenem Biosynthesis in *Photorhabdus luminescens*

Sylviane Derzelle,$^{1*}$ Eric Duchaud,$^{2}$ Frank Kunst,$^{2}$ Antoine Danchin,$^{1,3}$ and Philippe Bertin$^{1†}$

**Unité de Génétique des Génomes Bactériens${}^{1}$ and Laboratoire de Génomique des Microorganismes Pathogènes${}^{2}$  
Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France, and HKU-Pasteur Research Centre, Pokfulam, Hong Kong${}^{3}$**

Received 25 January 2002/Accepted 29 May 2002

The luminescent entomopathogenic bacterium *Photorhabdus luminescens* produces several yet-uncharacterized broad-spectrum antibiotics. We report the identification and characterization of a cluster of eight genes (named *cpmA* to *cpmH*) responsible for the production of a carbapenem-like antibiotic in strain TT01 of *P.* luminescens. The *cpm* cluster differs in several crucial aspects from other *car* operons. The level of *cpm* mRNA peaks during exponential phase and is regulated by a Rap/Hor homolog identified in the *P.* luminescens genome. Marker-exchange mutagenesis of this gene in the entomopathogen decreased antibiotic production. The *luxS*-like signaling mechanism of quorum sensing also plays a role in the regulation of the *cpm* operon. Indeed, *luxS*, which is involved in the production of a newly identified autoinducer, is responsible for repression of *cpm* gene expression at the end of the exponential growth phase. The importance of this carbapenem production in the ecology of *P.* luminescens is discussed.

---

*Photorhabdus luminescens*, a gram-negative luminescent gamma-proteobacterium, forms an entomopathogenic symbiosis with a soil nematode of the genus *Heterorhabditis*. This bacterium undergoes a complex life cycle that involves a symbiotic stage, in which bacteria colonize the intestine of the nematodes, and a pathogenic stage, in which susceptible insects are killed by the combined action of the nematode and the bacteria. After entering the insect host, the nematodes expel their bacterial symbionts into the insect hemocoel. Once released, the bacteria proliferate, kill the insect within 24 h to 48 h, and enhance conditions for nematode reproduction by providing nutrients and other growth factors. Remarkably, the insect carcass does not putrefy over a period of several weeks, because *P.* luminescens produces several broad-spectrum antibiotics that prevent contamination of the insect cadaver by other microorganisms. These products are believed to be secreted into the insect hemolymph when the bacteria enter stationary-phase conditions. Two *P.* luminescens antibiotic molecules have now been identified. They consist of a red pigment with antimicrobial activity, identified as an anthraquinone derivative, and a hydroxystilbene derivative, 1,3-dihydroxy-4-isopropylstilbene, which showed strong fungicidal activity in previous studies (20, 30).

Carbapenems are a class of β-lactam antibiotics synthesized by a biochemical route distinct from that found in the biosynthetic pathways of the sulfur-ring β-lactams, namely, penicillins, cephamycins, and cephalosporins (5, 43). As naturally produced metabolites, they were originally isolated in the late 1970s from *Streptomyces* species. The first carbapenem antibiotic discovered was thienamycin, produced in small quantities by *Streptomyces cattleya* (J. S. Kahan, F. M. Kahan, R. Goegelman, S. A. Currie, M. Jackson, E. O. Stapley, T. W. Miller, A. K. Miller, D. Hendlin, S. Mochales, S. Hernandez, and H. B. Woodruff, Program Abstr. 16th Intersci. Conf. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother., abstr. 227, 1976). To date, over 40 naturally occurring carbapenems have been identified, the majority of which originate from streptomycetes. Carbapenems are broad-spectrum agents in their activity and relatively resistant to most of the clinically encountered bacterial β-lactamases (4, 18, 29).

The genes responsible for the synthesis of the model carbapenem molecule, 1-carbapen-2-em-3-carboxylic acid (SQ27860, Car), which contains only an unsubstituted bicyclic ring system (6, 26), have recently been identified in two gram-negative enteric bacteria, *Erwinia carotovora* and *Serratia* sp. strain ATCC 39006. These consist of a cluster of nine genes (designated *car*) that encode a positive regulator of carbapenem gene expression (*carR*), five enzymes required for the construction of the carbapenem molecule (*carABCDE*), two proteins responsible for a novel β-lactam resistance mechanism conferring carbapenem immunity in the producing host (*carFG*), and a protein of unknown function (*carH*). Genetic investigations have shown that the expression of *car* genes is regulated in both strains by quorum sensing. The first gene of the carbapenem cluster, *carR*, encodes a transcriptional activator that allows expression of the remaining downstream genes of the *car* cluster. In *E.* carotovora, CarR responds to a quorum-sensing, N-(3-oxohexanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (OHHL), signaling molecule synthesized by the product of the unlinked *carI* gene. This OHHL-dependent transcriptional activation allows cells to coordinate the expression of carbapenem with cell density (22). In *Serratia*, the autoinducer synthase *SmaI*, which directs the synthesis of N-butanoyl-L-homoserine lactones (BHLs) and N-hexanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (HHL), is essential for the full transcription of the carbapenem biosynthetic genes. A second regulatory gene affecting expression of

---

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Unité de Génétique des Génomes Bactériens, Institut Pasteur, 28 rue du Dr. Roux, 75724 Paris cedex 15, France. Phone: 33 (0) 1 45 68 84 43. Fax: 33 (0) 1 45 68 89 48. E-mail: derzelle@pasteur.fr.
* Present address: Laboratory of Microbiology, SCK/CEN, Boeretang 200, 2400 Mol, Belgium.

TABLE 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids

| Strain or plasmid                     | Relevant genotype                                                                                   | Reference or source |
|---------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|
| E. coli S17-1                         | $pro^{r} n^{+} Tp^{r} Sm^{r} RP4-2-Tc::Mu::Tn7recA thi$                                              | 35                  |
| E. coli TG1                           | $supE44 hsd\Delta 5 thi-1 \Delta (lac-proAB) F' [traD36 proAB^{+} lacI^{q} lacZ\Delta M15]$          | 33                  |
| P. luminescens TT01                   | Wild type                                                                                        | 12                  |
| P. luminescens PL2101                 | TT01$cpmA::Gm$                                                                                   | This work           |
| P. luminescens PL2102                 | TT01$luxS::Cm$                                                                                   | This work           |
| P. luminescens PL2103                 | TT01$slyA::Kan$                                                                                  | This work           |
| E. coli BCSE 8635$^a$                 | Resistant to $\beta$-lactam antibiotics                                                           |                      |
| Klebsiella pneumoniae 4321$^a$        | Penicillinase producer                                                                           |                      |
| Enterobacter cloacae T39180297$^a$    | Cephalosporinase producer                                                                        |                      |
| Enterobacter cloacae 39177636$^a$     | Cephalosporinase derepressed                                                                     |                      |
| Enterobacter cloacae C1$^a$           | Cephalosporinase producer                                                                        |                      |
| Enterobacter cloacae C1R$^a$          | Cephalosporinase derepressed                                                                     |                      |
| Xanthomonas maltophilia$^a$           | Imipenemase producer                                                                             |                      |
| Pseudomonas aeruginosa A81$^a$         | Resistant to imipenem                                                                            |                      |
| Pseudomonas aeruginosa 39170143$^a$   | Resistant to imipenem                                                                            |                      |
| V. harveyi BB152                      | $luxL::Tn5$                                                                                     | 2                   |
| V. harveyi BB170                      | $luxN::Tn5$                                                                                     | 2                   |
| pBluescript SK$^{+}$                  | Ap$^{r}$ cloning vehicle (ColE1 replicon)                                                        | Stratagene          |
| pJQ200KS                             | Gm$^{r}sacRBmoboriV$ (p15A replicon)                                                             | 27                  |
| pDIA600                              | 0.85-kb $XbaI-PstI$ fragment (contains an internal region of $cpmA$) inserted in pJQ200KS            | This work           |
| pDIA602                              | 2.73-kb $PstI-XbaI$ fragment (contains $luxS::Cm$) inserted in pJQ200KS                            | This work           |
| pDIA603                              | 2.61-kb $ApaI-SacI$ fragment (contains $slyA::Kan$) inserted in pJQ200KS                           | This work           |

$a$ Clinical isolate is from I. Podglajen and E. Collatz.

carbapenem in *Serratia* (the *rap* gene) and *E. carotovora* (its homolog *hor*) has also been identified elsewhere (39, 40).

In this report the characterization for *P. luminescens* of a cluster of genes (named $cpmA$ to $cpmH$) responsible for the biosynthesis of a carbapenem-like antibiotic is described. Although this cluster shows significant sequence similarities with the *car* operon, previously identified in *E. carotovora* and *Serratia* sp. strain ATCC 39006, it displays unique features and appears to be regulated differently than in the latter two species.

### MATERIALS AND METHODS

#### Bacterial strains and growth conditions
The bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table 1. *Escherichia coli* strains used were TG1 (33) for plasmid maintenance and S17-1 (35) for conjugation. The various $\beta$-lactam indicator strains used in this study were kindly provided by Isabelle Podglajen and Ekkehard Collatz (INSERM E0004—Laboratoire de Recherche Moléculaire sur les Antibiotiques, UFR Broussais-Hôtel Dieu and Pitié Salpêtrière, Université Paris VI, Paris, France). *Vibrio harveyi* strains are a generous gift from Bonnie Bassler (Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, N.J.). Strains were routinely grown in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium at $37^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$, except those of *P. luminescens* and *V. harveyi*, which were grown at $30^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ in Schneider medium (Bio-Whittaker) and autoinducer bioassay (AB) medium (16), respectively. The final concentrations (in milligrams per liter) of antibiotics used for selection for *E. coli* and *P. luminescens* were as follows: gentamicin, 30; kanamycin, 20; and chloramphenicol, 20. All experiments were performed in accordance with the European requirements concerning the contained use of genetically modified organisms of group I (agreement no. 2736CAII).

#### Carbapenem plate assay
LB plates were spot inoculated with 24-h broth cultures of each strain to be tested and incubated for 72 h. Ten milliliters of sterile soft agar was inoculated with 100 $\mu$L of the indicator strain and poured onto the test plates, which previously had been exposed to chloroform for 2 h to kill the test colonies. An inhibition zone around a spot indicated antibiotic production.

#### Assay for production of $luxS$-based signaling molecules
An AI-2 bioassay using *V. harveyi* BB170 was performed as described previously (36) with some modifications. Briefly, *V. harveyi* BB170 was grown overnight with aeration at $30^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ in AB medium and diluted 1:2,500 in fresh AB medium, and 27 mL of the diluted culture was added to 3 mL of cell-free *P. luminescens* supernatants in a 250-mL Erlenmeyer flask. Cultures were shaken at 200 rpm in a rotary shaker at $30^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$, and light emission by *V. harveyi* BB170 was measured every 30 min with a photomultiplier tube (PMT H5783 model; Hamamatsu) (41). Cell-free culture fluids were prepared from *P. luminescens* parental and $luxS$ mutant strains by centrifugation ($2 \mathrm{~min}$ at $4,500 \times g$) and filtration of supernatants through Millex-GP 0.22-$\mu$m-pore-size filters (Millipore). The supernatants were stored on ice before being assayed for $luxS$-based quorum-sensing activity. Three milliliters of Schneider sterile medium and *V. harveyi* BB152 cell-free culture fluid were used as negative and positive controls, respectively.

#### DNA manipulations and plasmid construction
Chromosomal DNA preparation, ligation, *E. coli* electroporation, and Southern blotting were carried out by standard procedures (33). Plasmid DNA was isolated with the GenElute Plasmid Miniprep kit (Sigma). Restriction enzymes were obtained from Roche, and enzymatic reaction mixtures were purified with the MinElute Reaction Cleanup kit (Qiagen). To construct the pDIA600 plasmid, a DNA fragment containing an internal region of $cpmA$ was generated by PCR with primers CpmA1 (5'-AAA CTGCAGCCTGCTCCATGAGTTGAAAA-3') and CpmA2 (5'-GATCTAGT GTGCTTAGTGATGTGGGA-3') and genomic DNA from *P. luminescens* TT01. The resulting 900-bp amplified fragment was purified with the QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen) and restricted by $XbaI$ (located inside the amplified sequence) and $PstI$ (present in primer CpmA2), before being cloned into the pJQ200KS vector (27) in an inverse orientation with respect to the $lacZ$ promoter. Plasmid pDIA602 was constructed via two steps of PCR amplification. Briefly, the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene of pACYC184 (Biolabs) was amplified by PCR with oligonucleotides Cat5 (5'-TTGATCGGCCACGTAAAG GGT-3') and Cat3 (5'-AATTCTGCCCATTCCGC-3'), resulting in an 850-bp DNA fragment. Two 950-bp DNA fragments containing either the 5' upstream region of $luxS$ or the end of the coding region of $luxS$ and the downstream region were also PCR generated with either oligonucleotides luxS1 (5'- AAACCTGCAGCTTTGGATGGGGTGATCCCCAT-3') and luxS2 (5'-ACCTCTT ACGTGCCGATCAAGGATCCTCATCGTATCCTCACGTTCC-3') or oligonucleotides luxS3 (5'-GCGGATGAATGGCAGAAAATGGGATCCGGCT

ATGGCTGATGTCTTGA-3') and luxS4 (5'-AGCTCTAGACGGCGACATTA TGGTTCCCC-3'). The 21st bases of primers luxS2 and luxS3 are complementary to primers Cat5 and Cat3, respectively. After purification and quantification, 100 ng of each of the three previously amplified fragments was mixed and used as a template to generate a new 2,730-bp DNA fragment by a second PCR amplification with oligonucleotides lux1 and lux4. The latter amplicon, which corresponds to a *luxS::Cm* fragment, was purified, *PstI* and *XbaI* restricted, and ligated to the pJQ200KS vector (27) to yield pDIA602. To construct plasmid pDIA603, a 1.35-kb DNA fragment containing *slyA* was generated by PCR with primers SlyA10 (5'-AAACTGCAGCGTGAAAGTATTGGCGACTGTGC-3') and SlyA8 (5'-CCAAAATGTTCAgggagctcttaacac-3') and genomic DNA from *P. luminescens* TT01. The amplified fragment was restricted by *NaeI* and *SacI* (both sites located inside the amplified sequence) and inserted at the *SmaI* and *SacI* sites of plasmid pBluescript SK+. A kanamycin resistance cassette obtained by *BamHI* restriction of pUC4K (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech) was then inserted into the latter vector at a *BglII* site located at the beginning of the *slyA* coding region. The *slyA::Kan* fragment was then cloned as an *ApaI-SacI* fragment at the same sites of the multiple cloning site of pJQ200KS to generate plasmid pDIA603.

Mutant construction. *P. luminescens* mutant PL2101 was obtained by using vector pDIA600 delivered into strain TT01 by conjugal transfer from *E. coli* strain S17-1. Gentamicin-resistant colonies containing an integrated copy of this vector inside the *cpmA* locus were selected. Disruption of *cpmA* was confirmed by Southern blot hybridization with a PCR-amplified digoxigenin-labeled *cpmA* gene probe performed with oligonucleotides CpmA1 and CpmA2 with the PCR digoxigenin probe synthesis kit (Roche) (data not shown). *P. luminescens luxS* and *slyA* mutants, PL2102 and PL2103, respectively, were created via allelic exchange with plasmids pDIA602 and pDIA603, respectively. Both plasmids were transformed into *E. coli* S17-1 and introduced into *P. luminescens* by mating. Cm<sup>r</sup> Gm<sup>s</sup> Sac<sup>r</sup> or Kan<sup>r</sup> Gm<sup>s</sup> Sac<sup>r</sup> exconjugants were selected on proteose peptone agar (1% proteose peptone, 0.5% NaCl, 0.5% yeast extract, 15% agar) containing 2% sucrose. Insertions were confirmed by Southern blot analysis (data not shown).

Handling of RNA. *E. coli* and *P. luminescens* total RNA was prepared from 10-ml cultures. Samples of bacterial cultures were collected by centrifugation for 2 min at 4°C at 6,000 × g and stored at −80°C to prevent RNA degradation. Bacterial pellets were resuspended in 500 μl of 25 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.6)-60 mM EDTA solution and transferred into tubes containing 500 μl of acid phenol (pH 4.5) and 0.4 g of 0.1-mm-diameter glass beads (Sigma). Cells were mechanically broken with a Fastprep apparatus (Bio 101) as homogenizer (two 30-s cycles of homogenization at maximum speed with 1-min intervals on ice). RNA was then extracted and purified with the TRIzol reagent kit (Gibco-BRL) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. After isopropanol precipitation, RNA was redissolved in 100 μl of TE (10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.6) and incubated with RNase-free DNase I (DNA-free kit; Ambion) according to the manufacturer's protocol. RNA samples were then quantified by measuring *A*<sub>260</sub> and *A*<sub>280</sub>. Both RNA purity and integrity were controlled by separating a sample on an agarose gel to ensure that mRNA, tRNA, and rRNA precursors could be seen.

Primer extension. Reactions were performed according to standard procedures (33) with some modifications. Ten picomoles of end-labeled oligonucleotide was precipitated with ammonium acetate and ethanol at −20°C, washed with 70% ethanol, dried, and resuspended in 40 μl of diethylpyrocarbonate-treated TE buffer (10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.6) to a concentration of 2.5 ng/ml. Ten nanograms of primer was annealed with 50 μg of total RNA in avian myeloblastosis virus reverse transcriptase reaction buffer (Roche) and 1 mM deoxynucleoside triphosphates at 65°C for 10 min. The reaction was kept going while the temperature slowly decreased to 42°C. RNasin (20 U; Promega) was added, and the reaction was performed with 40 U of avian myeloblastosis virus reverse transcriptase (Roche) at 42°C for 90 min. One microliter of 0.5 M EDTA (pH 8) and 1 μl of DNase-free pancreatic RNase (Roche) were added, and the reaction mixture was further incubated at 37°C for 30 min. The reaction mixture was precipitated with ammonium acetate and ethanol, washed with 70% ethanol, and resuspended in formamide loading buffer. As a reference, sequencing reactions were performed with the Thermosequenase radiolabeled terminator cycle sequencing kit (Amersham) with the same primer used in primer extension experiments. The oligonucleotide used to map the 5′ termini of *cpm* mRNA is CpmA7 (5′-CGGAAGAGTATGGTTCCAGTA-3′).

Oligonucleotide labeling. The oligonucleotides used in primer extension experiments were end labeled with phage T4 polynucleotide kinase (BioLabs) and [γ-<sup>32</sup>P]ATP (3,000 Ci/mmol) according to standard procedures (33).

Nucleotide sequence accession numbers. The 6,799- and 2,311-nucleotide sequences containing *cpm* clusters of *P. luminescens* have been assigned EMBL-EBI nucleotide sequence database (European entry point of the International

Nucleotide Sequence Database) accession no. AJ457087 (*cpmABCDEFGH*) and AJ457088 (*cpmIJK*). Nucleotide sequences of *P. luminescens luxS* and *slyA* genes have been assigned database accession no. AJ457090 and AJ457089, respectively.

---

### RESULTS

#### Identification of a carbapenem locus (*car* homologs) in *P. luminescens*. The genomic sequence of *P. luminescens* TT01 was recently completed at the Pasteur Institute (unpublished results). The availability of the sequence presented the opportunity to screen the genomic database for *P. luminescens* genes that exhibit some homology with known antibiotic genes. Using BLASTP as an analytical tool, we identified a cluster of eight coding sequences showing a high degree of similarity with proteins involved in carbapenem biosynthesis in *E. carotovora*. This similarity was especially obvious for three genes known to be essential for carbapenem biosynthesis, *carABC* (23). As shown in Fig. 1, the organization of the eight genes, here designated as *cpmA* to *cpmH*, is similar to the *car* loci found in *E. carotovora* and *Serratia marcescens* (24, 40). This specific nomenclature was used to avoid confusion with the universally known genes *carA* and *carB* encoding carbamoyl synthase subunits. The eight predicted proteins are similar in size and share significant amino acid identities with those described for *E. carotovora*. The organization of the *cpmA* to *cpmH* genes is strongly suggestive of an operon with several examples of likely translational coupling. A unique substantial gap (77 bp in *P. luminescens*, 55 bp in the other species) in the *cpmA* to *cpmH* region was observed between the third and fourth genes, *cpmC* and *cpmD*. Moreover, the last three genes, *cpmFGH*, have strong consensus signal sequences indicating a probable extracellular location. Finally, as in *Erwinia* and *Serratia* (24, 40), the translational initiation codon of the *cpmA* gene is not the more common ATG codon, but instead the TTG codon, suggesting that the synthesis of CpmA may be maintained at levels below those of the other Cpm proteins encoded by the same transcript.

Interestingly, the *P. luminescens cpm* cluster displays two major differences from those found in *Erwinia* and *Serratia* strains. First, the screening of the genomic database revealed that *P. luminescens* possesses a second copy of the last three genes, *cpmFGH*, at a distinct locus (named *cpmIJK*). Both copies exhibit more than 98% identity at the DNA level. Differences are mainly found at the beginning of the *cpmF* gene, as the *cpmI* copy is slightly shorter, starting at a TTG codon rather than at the more common ATG. It should also be noted that both *P. luminescens cpmH* and *cpmK* genes are located upstream from a small coding sequence which is significantly similar to a portion of a putative transposase B (data not shown). This suggests that these loci may have been part of a mobile genetic element. Secondly, *carR*, the gene located upstream of the *carA* to *carH* genes in *Erwinia* and *Serratia*, was not found in *P. luminescens*. *carR* codes for a transcriptional regulator of the LuxR family that activates transcription of the *car* cluster in these bacteria. In *E. carotovora*, CarR responds to an acyl-homoserine lactone (AHL) derivative, a cell-cell signaling molecule, synthesized by the product of the unlinked *carI* gene, a LuxI homolog involved in quorum sensing (22).

A. E. carotovora


carR → carA → carB → carC | carD → E → carF → carG → carH


Serratia sp.


carR → carA → carB → carC | carD → E → carF → carG → carH


P. luminescens


cpmA → cpmB → cpmC | cpmD → E → cpmF → cpmG → cpmH



cpmI → cpmJ → cpmK


B.

| AA identity (%) | CarR | CarA | CarB | CarC | CarD | CarE | CarF | CarG | CarH |
|------------------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|
| E. carotovora    | 100% | 100% | 100% | 100% | 100% | 100% | 100% | 100% | 100% |
| Serratia sp.     | 59.3 | 75.0 | 91.6 | 71.7 | 67.4 | 67.4 | 68.9 | 65.2 |      |
| P. luminescens   | –    | 50.9 | 60.0 | 80.6 | 41.6 | 52.2 | 46.2 | 32.4 | 33.0 |
|                  | –    | –    | –    | –    | –    | –    | 46.9 | 32.4 | 33.0 |

FIG. 1. Comparison of the putative *P. luminescens* *cpm* operon with the *car* operon of *E. carotovora* and *Serratia* sp. strain ATCC 39006. (A) Map of the genes involved in carbapenem biosynthesis. (B) Amino acid sequence identity between Car and Cpm proteins of *E. carotovora*, *Serratia* sp., and *P. luminescens*.

Functional role of *P. luminescens* *cpm* operon. On the basis of homology, we hypothesized that the *cpm* genes identified in *P. luminescens* might be involved in the biosynthesis of a carbapenem molecule as well as in carbapenem resistance. To obtain evidence about the presence of a carbapenem-like antimicrobial activity in *P. luminescens*, we tested diverse indicator strains for their sensitivity to *P. luminescens* (Table 1). These strains are clinical isolates that have developed resistance to β-lactam antibiotics, including penicillins, cephalosporins, and carbapenems. An overlay of each indicator strain was poured onto an LB plate containing spotted *P. luminescens* colonies previously killed by exposure to chloroform. As shown in Fig. 2A, inhibition halos caused by antibiotic-induced cell killing were reproducibly observed with strains of *E. coli*, *Klebsiella pneumoniae*, and *Enterobacter cloacae*. No antibiosis was observed with the various imipenem-resistant clinical isolates of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*, which have developed resistance to carbapenem by reducing the permeability of the outer membrane (32). Very small antibiosis zones were observed with a lawn of *Xanthomonas maltophilia*, a potent imipenemase strain. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that *P. luminescens* is a carbapenem producer and that *Enterobacter cloacae* is the species most sensitive to this β-lactam compound. Antibiosis assays performed with an isogenic set of *Enterobacter cloacae* strains producing low or high levels of cephalosporinase confirmed our observations (Fig. 2B). Indeed, the parental strain exhibited a growth inhibition in the presence of *P. luminescens* while no inhibition halo was observed with the cephalosporinase derepressed derivative. These latter strains were therefore chosen to test carbapenem-like activity in the rest of this work.

To ascertain that the carbapenem-like activity observed was related to *cpm* genes, a mutant of *P. luminescens* (PL2101) was constructed. A suicide vector in *P. luminescens* was designed to disrupt *cpmA* encoding the putative carbapenem synthetase and to simultaneously deprive the remaining part of the *cpm* cluster of a promoter (see details in Materials and Methods). This plasmid (pDIA600) was delivered to strain TT01 by conjugal transfer from *E. coli* strain S17-1. *P. luminescens* colonies that had integrated the vector inside the *cpmA* locus by a single step of homologous recombination were selected. Afterwards, the *cpm* mutant, designated PL2101, was compared to the wild-type strain for carbapenem production (Fig. 2). The zone of antibiosis caused by PL2101 was not as large as that caused by the wild-type strain of *P. luminescens* under similar conditions. This result further supports the involvement of the *cpm* cluster in carbapenem biosynthesis. The inhibition halos still observed were likely due to the production of other antibiotics by *P. luminescens*.

Characterization and expression of the *cpm* cluster from *P. luminescens*. Initial attempts to detect *cpm* mRNAs by reverse transcription-PCR suggested a very low level of *cpmA* expression (data not shown). Consequently, in order to map the transcription start point of the *cpmA*-to-*cpmH* putative operon, primer extension analysis was performed with a high quantity (50 μg) of RNA. *P. luminescens* total RNA was extracted during exponential growth phase and hybridized with primer CpmA7 specific for *cpmA*. The starting point is an adenosine residue located 69 bp upstream from the translation start codon of *cpmA* (Fig. 3B) and is preceded by -35 and -10 consensus sequences (TTGATA-16 bp-TACTAT). Interestingly, the upstream region (from +1 up to -100) and the 5' untranslated region were particularly AT rich, 88 and 85%, respectively (Fig. 3A).

A.
| Indicator strain | TT01 | PL2101 | Indicator strain | TT01 | PL2101 |
|------------------|------|--------|------------------|------|--------|
| Escherichia coli |      |        | Enterobacter     |      |        |
|                  |      |        | cloacae          |      |        |
|                  |      |        | T39180297        |      |        |
| Enterobacter     |      |        | Pseudomonas      |      |        |
| cloacae          |      |        | aeruginosa       |      |        |
| 39177636         |      |        |                  |      |        |
| Klebsiella       |      |        | Xanthomonas      |      |        |
| pneumoniae       |      |        | maltophilia      |      |        |

B.
| Indicator strain | TT01 | PL2101 | TT01 | PL2102 | TT01 | PL2103 |
|------------------|------|--------|------|--------|------|--------|
| Enterobacter     |      |        |      |        |      |        |
| cloacae C1       |      |        |      |        |      |        |
| Enterobacter     |      |        |      |        |      |        |
| cloacae C1R      |      |        |      |        |      |        |

FIG. 2. Carbapenem-like activity of *P. luminescens* visualized by antibiosis. Three-day LB plates spotted with 5 μl of both TT01 (wild type) and mutants were inoculated with 100 μl of various β-lactam indicator strain cultures (OD<sub>600</sub> = 0.2) mixed in soft agar. Growth inhibition around a spot indicates production of antibiotics to which the indicator strain is sensitive. All experiments were repeated at least three times. (A) Analysis of carbapenem production and the effect of a *cpmA* mutation (PL2101) by antibiosis of lawns of various β-lactam indicator strains. (B) Analysis of the effect of various mutations on the ability to produce carbapenem by antibiosis of lawns of *Enterobacter cloacae* strains C1 (cephalosporinase producer) and C1R (cephalosporinase derepressed). 1, *cpmA* mutation (PL2101); 2, *luxS* mutation (PL2102); 3, *slyA* mutation (PL2103).

Primer extension analyses were then performed to monitor *cpmA* mRNA abundance over a complete growth cycle at 30°C in *P. luminescens* (Fig. 4). This analysis revealed that early growing cells (optical density at 600 nm [OD<sub>600</sub>] = 0.3)

already contained substantial amounts of *cpmA* mRNA, which peaked at mid-exponential growth (OD<sub>600</sub> = 1.0). The abundance of transcripts subsequently dropped to become almost undetectable in stationary phase. Moreover, no *cpm*

A.

GTGATTGTCACTGGTACAATAATTTGCGAGTTCTAT
ATTAAAAAACAAATAGTTAATTAGATATATAAATAAT
-35
TTTAATTTTAATGATCAAATGCATTGATAAATTAATT
-10 +1
TAATATGFACTATTAAACACCAGATTAATTTTA
GAAJTATAACTTTAAAATCTTTTATAAAGTTATA
cpmA
AAAAGGAATTTAAAATTGAGCTCAGAGTTTTGCTTT
SD L S S E F C F

B.

C T A G
T A
T T
A A
A C
C C
A G
A T
T

FIG. 3. (A) Nucleotide sequence of the 5′ region of *cpmA* from *P. luminescens*. Promoter sequences (−35 and −10 boxes) are boxed. The Shine-Dalgarno sequence (SD) is underlined. Only the first codons of the coding sequence of *cpmA* are shown in boldface. (B) Primer extension analysis of *cpmA* transcripts in *P. luminescens*. Total RNA was extracted from an exponential culture of *P. luminescens* TT01 grown at 30°C in Schneider medium (OD<sub>600</sub> = 1.4). The arrow indicates the position of the extension product obtained.

FIG. 4. (A) Primer extension analysis of *cpm* mRNA at various times during *P. luminescens* growth at 30°C in Schneider medium. Lanes: 1, early log growth ($\mathrm{OD}_{600}=0.3$); 2, log growth ($\mathrm{OD}_{600}=1.0$); 3, early stationary phase ($\mathrm{OD}_{600}=4.0$). Equal amounts of each RNA sample (50 μg) were used. Experiments were done in triplicate. The relative *cpm* mRNA abundances at different times during *P. luminescens* growth, with the lowest mRNA level taken as 1, are represented graphically. (B) *P. luminescens* growth curve indicating the different times when mRNAs were extracted. 1, early log growth ($\mathrm{OD}_{600}=0.3$); 2, log growth ($\mathrm{OD}_{600}=1.0$); 3, early stationary phase ($\mathrm{OD}_{600}=4.0$). Since *P. luminescens* synthesizes a variety of secondary metabolites which interfere with OD measurement at late exponential phase, correlations between CFU and OD measurements were used to define the various growth stages.

mRNA was found in 15-, 24-, or 48-h-old cultures (data not shown).

A quorum sensing-dependent regulation? To extend our analysis of the *cpm* operon, the role of quorum sensing in the regulation of its expression was examined. In *Erwinia* and *Serratia* species, it is known that CarR, the product of the first gene of the cluster, activates transcription of the remaining genes in response to a specific AHL synthesized by unlinked genes encoding LuxI homologs (CarI and SmaI in *Erwinia* and *Serratia*, respectively) (22, 23, 40). Mutations in either gene lead to the abolition of carbapenem synthesis. In *P. luminescens*, no *carR* homolog was identified, either immediately upstream of *cpmA* to *cpmH* or elsewhere on the chromosome. In addition, the screening of our database revealed that the *P. luminescens* genome does not contain any protein showing homology with members of the LuxI or LuxM family of autoinducer synthases, whose function is to catalyze the formation of various AHLs involved in quorum sensing (11). These results suggest that *P. luminescens* does not synthesize any AHL derivative. Therefore, significant differences in the regulation of carbapenem production may exist between this bacterium and *Erwinia* and *Serratia* species.

FIG. 5. *P. luminescens* production of a *luxS*-dependent AI-2 activity. (A) AI-2 bioassay of *P. luminescens* culture supernatants with *V. harveyi* BB170 as reporter. Ten percent cell-free supernatants were mixed with the reporter strain and incubated at 30°C on a rotary shaker. Light production was determined 4 h 30 min after the BB170 cells were mixed with the various cell-free supernatants ($\mathrm{OD}_{600}=0.1$). Cell-free culture fluids were prepared from *P. luminescens* parental (TT01) and *luxS* mutant (PL2102) strains grown to an $\mathrm{OD}_{600}$ of 1.0. Schneider sterile medium and *V. harveyi* BB152 cell-free culture fluid were used as negative and positive controls, respectively. (B) Inhibition of growth by *P. luminescens* cell-free supernatants. Cell-free supernatants were prepared from a wild-type *P. luminescens* strain grown in Schneider medium for 5 h (exponential phase; $\mathrm{OD}_{600}=1.0$) (open circles), 10 h (early stationary phase; $\mathrm{OD}_{600}=4.0$) (open triangles), and 15 h (stationary phase) (open diamonds). Ten percent (vol/vol) cell-free supernatants (open symbols) or sterile Schneider medium (filled squares) was added to the *V. harveyi* BB170 reporter strain, and cultures were incubated at 30°C on a rotary shaker.

Although the AHL-based quorum sensing appears to be the predominant quorum signal used by host-associated gram-negative bacteria, another signaling pathway related to an alternate autoinducer (termed AI-2) has recently been discovered (34, 37). A gene involved in the new autoinducer synthesis, *luxS*, has been found in a large number of bacteria (19, 37). One homolog of *luxS* was identified in the *P. luminescens* genome, suggesting that *P. luminescens* directs the synthesis of this autoinducer. To examine whether *P. luminescens* produces such a molecule, we tested the ability of medium conditioned by *P. luminescens* cells to induce luminescence in the *V. harveyi* reporter strain BB170 (36). The results shown in Fig. 5A demonstrate that the addition of *P. luminescens* cell-free supernatant stimulates light emission in *V. harveyi* reporter strain BB170, while bioluminescence of BB170 was not increased by supernatant prepared from the *luxS* mutant PL2102 (see below). The level of luminescence induced by *P. luminescens*

supernatant was about 15-fold lower than that measured upon addition of a positive control, *V. harveyi* BB152 cell-free supernatant. It has to be mentioned that, in contrast to *V. harveyi* BB152, *P. luminescens* supernatant was prepared from cells grown to a low cell density to preclude the production of antibiotics. Indeed, media conditioned by *P. luminescens* grown to higher cell density strongly inhibit *V. harveyi* BB170 growth (Fig. 5B). These results indicate that *P. luminescens* produces the new autoinducer AI-2 during exponential growth phase and that *luxS* is involved in this production.

This prompted us to evaluate the influence of the new pheromone-mediated pathway on carbapenem synthesis. For this purpose, a chromosomal null *luxS* mutant (PL2102) was constructed via allelic exchange with pDIA602, a suicide plasmid that harbors a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase cassette flanked by the 5′ and 3′ regions of the *luxS* gene (see Materials and Methods). The *luxS* mutation did not affect *P. luminescens* growth rate in Schneider medium, although the mutant growth resumed with a short delay after inoculation into a fresh medium (Fig. 6A). The propensity of *P. luminescens* to produce pigments was also affected (data not shown). The mutant (PL2102) was compared to the wild-type strain for its carbapenem-like activity (Fig. 2B). Under similar conditions, the antibiosis zone produced by the *luxS* mutant was reproducibly larger than that of the wild-type strain, suggesting that PL2102 produces more antibiotic. Data from three independent primer extension analyses revealed that *luxS* exerts a repressor effect on carbapenem biosynthesis gene expression at the end of the exponential growth phase (Fig. 6B). In contrast to the wild-type strain, where the abundance of the *cpm* transcript rapidly declined (up to 40-fold) before entry into stationary phase (*OD*~600~ = 4), the *cpm* mRNA level in PL2102, although decreasing after mid-exponential growth (up to fivefold), remained higher for a quite longer period (Fig. 6B), being still faintly detectable after 20 h of growth (data not shown).

SlyA, a Rap/Hor homolog, also controls carbapenem production in *P. luminescens*. In *E. carotovora* and *S. marcescens*, carbapenem production is also regulated by another regulatory protein, designed Rap in *Serratia* spp. and Hor in *Erwinia* spp. (39). Mutations in the corresponding genes resulted in strains defective in carbapenem production. We identified such a regulator in *P. luminescens* and named it SlyA, according to its high amino acid identity with the *E. coli* and *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium Rap/Hor homolog, SlyA (for salmylosin) (21). To test its putative regulatory function on *cpmA* to *cpmH* expression, a *slyA::Kan* mutant (PL2103) was constructed by allelic exchange with pDIA603, a plasmid that harbors a copy of the *slyA* gene disrupted at the beginning of the coding region by a kanamycin cassette (see Materials and Methods). The mutant (PL2103), which showed a growth rate similar to that of the wild-type strain (Fig. 6A), was next compared to this strain for its carbapenem-like activity (Fig. 2B). The zone of antibiosis caused by the mutant on an *Enterobacter cloacae* lawn was not as large as that caused by the wild-type strain, suggesting that PL2103 produces less antibiotic than does the wild-type strain. To confirm this observation, primer extension analysis was performed on total RNA extracted from exponential-growth-phase culture of the wild-type and PL2103 strains (Fig. 6C). The amount of *cpm* mRNA measured in

FIG. 6. Analysis of the effect of *luxS* and *slyA* mutations on growth rate and *cpm* mRNA synthesis. (A) Growth curve comparison among TT01 (filled squares), PL2102 (*luxS* mutant) (open triangles), and PL2103 (*slyA* mutant) (open circles) strains of *P. luminescens*. (B) Primer extension analysis of the effect of *luxS* mutation on *cpm* mRNA synthesis. RNA samples were taken at different times from cultures of TT01 and PL2102. Lanes: 1, log growth (*OD*~600~ = 1.0); 2, early stationary phase (*OD*~600~ = 4.0). (C) Primer extension analysis of the effect of *slyA* mutation on *cpm* mRNA synthesis. RNA samples were taken from exponential-growth-phase cultures of TT01 and PL2103 (*OD*~600~ = 0.9). Three independent primer extension analyses were performed. Equal amounts of each RNA sample (50 μg) were used. The relative *cpm* mRNA abundances measured in TT01 and mutants, with the lowest mRNA level taken as 1, are represented graphically. Error bars represent standard errors of the mean. Statistical analysis was performed with a Student *t* test, resulting in a significant difference (*P* < 0.05).

PL2103 was less (about twice) than that in the untransformed strain. SlyA seems, therefore, to positively control the production of a carbapenem-like molecule in *P. luminescens*, like Hor and Rap in *E. carotovora* and *S. marcescens*, respectively.

DISCUSSION

The rapid emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections underscores a growing need for novel effective therapeutic agents. Although antibiotic production is known to be a very common characteristic of bacteria associated with insect-pathogenic nematodes such as *Photorhabdus* species, no systematic chemical study of these antibiotics has yet been undertaken, nor are the genes involved in antibiotic biosynthesis known in these species. We screened the recently completed *P. luminescens* genomic database to identify loci showing sequence homology to genes known to be involved in antibiotic biosynthesis. By using BLASTP comparison, eight genes (*cpmA* to *cpmH*) putatively responsible for carbapenem production were identified.

Antibiotic plate assays with various β-lactam-resistant indicator strains confirmed the production of a carbapenem-like molecule by *P. luminescens*. This compound was shown to be effective against *E. coli*, *K. pneumoniae*, and *Enterobacter cloacae*. It was ineffective against imipenem-resistant clinical isolates of *Pseudomonas* species and had little, if any, inhibitory effect on *X. maltophilia*. Our results also showed that carbapenem is clearly not the sole antibiotic produced by *P. luminescens*. Indeed, growth inhibition zones were still observed in the presence of a *cpm* mutation. Furthermore, the carbapenem-like molecule produced by *P. luminescens* is not effective against gram-positive bacteria, as no difference in growth inhibition halo size could be detected in antibiosis assays performed with bacteria of this class and either a wild-type or a *cpm* mutant strain of *P. luminescens*. The two strains similarly inhibit gram-positive bacterial growth (data not shown). The discovery of a new β-lactam antibiotic synthesized by the TT01 strain enlarges the spectrum of antibiotics known to be produced by *P. luminescens*. It is thought that the role of antibiotic production by *P. luminescens* is in keeping the insect carcass from putrefying after the bacterium-nematode infection, thereby maintaining a pure culture of *P. luminescens* inside the infected insect. This is a necessity for the successful completion of the nematode life cycle and for symbiont transmission to the nematode's progeny. Indeed, in the insect hemolymph, the infective nematode develops into hermaphrodites with eggs, but its offspring is unable to develop beyond the first juvenile stage (J1) without the presence of the symbiotic bacteria (17). When the symbiont dominates the microbial flora, nematodes subsequently develop into the nonfeeding infective juvenile stage (DJ), retain the symbiotic bacteria in the intestine, and emerge from the insect carcass in search of a new host (13).

Comparative sequence analysis of the *cpm* cluster of *P. luminescens* with those found in *E. carotovora* and *Serratia* spp. revealed unique features. The *P. luminescens* genome contains two copies of the last three genes, i.e., *cpmFGH* and *cpmIJK*, at distinct loci. The *cpmIJK* cluster is located near a gene homologous to penicillin binding protein B (38) and several genes showing homology to bacteriocin and immunity proteins (31). This location suggests that the yet-uncharacterized carbapenem self-resistance mechanism encoded by *cpmF* and *cpmG* may have a more general role. Although there is no evidence for the involvement of *cpmH* in either carbapenem biosynthesis or carbapenem resistance (23), its position immediately downstream of *cpmF* and *cpmG*, even at the second *cpm* un-

related locus, strongly suggests that it is involved in some aspect of carbapenem resistance.

Remarkably, *carR*, the gene located upstream of the *carA* to *carH* genes in *Erwinia* and *Serratia*, was not found in *P. luminescens*. The absence of this AHL-dependent activator suggests that the mechanism by which *P. luminescens* regulates the biosynthesis of its carbapenem-like compound is different from that described for *Erwinia* and *Serratia*. Carbapenem synthesis is not induced by AHL-based quorum sensing in *P. luminescens*. The finding that the *P. luminescens* genome does not contain any *luxI* homolog, the gene responsible for AHL synthesis, is surprising. Indeed, AHL appears to be the predominant quorum signal used by host-associated gram-negative bacteria (11), and it has been detected in *Xenorhabdus nematophilus* (10), another entomopathogenic bacterium symbiotically associated with nematodes (13). Moreover, as *P. luminescens* is a luminescent bacterium, it is expected that *lux* gene expression is controlled by the production of this autoinducer as in marine bacteria (9, 14). However, in accordance with the result of our BLAST comparisons, previous experiments looking for the accumulation of inducing activity have shown no indication of control of luminescence via autoinduction by AHLs in *P. luminescens* (14).

As with the *Erwinia* and *Serratia car* genes, the *cpmA* to *cpmH* expression in *P. luminescens* is positively regulated by a Rap/Hor homolog, SlyA (40). However, rather than a defective phenotype observed in those species, *slyA* disruption resulted only in a lower carbapenem production in *P. luminescens*. SlyA is a member of a growing family of transcriptional regulators which control diverse physiological processes in human, animal, and plant pathogens (28, 39). The mechanism by which they exert their influence is currently unknown (8, 42), as members of this family do not have any of the motifs common among other regulatory proteins such as helix-turn-helix motifs or zinc finger proteins (25). Further studies are therefore necessary to understand the nature of SlyA influence on carbapenem biosynthesis genes in *P. luminescens*.

Finally, the *luxS*-based quorum-sensing system, used by a variety of bacteria for communication (37), was shown to control the production of a carbapenem-like compound in *P. luminescens*. The *luxS*-mediated pathway negatively controls carbapenem biosynthesis gene expression. The *cpmA* mRNA amount detected in PL2102 was higher than that found in the wild type, especially during late-exponential growth phase. This quorum-sensing regulatory mechanism likely functions to limit carbapenem biosynthesis gene expression to the exponential growth phase. This timing must be important to ensure the monoxenic conditions for nematode reproduction at the moment of the insect death (about 24 to 48 h after infection). At this stage, *P. luminescens* bacteria have been growing rapidly and progressively enter into stationary phase (7). Carbapenem production before this period likely allows *P. luminescens* to inhibit most of the insect gut microflora and to avoid therefore their invasion of the insect body at the moment of insect death. Carbapenem secreted by *P. luminescens* is indeed active mainly against gram-negative bacteria and especially the family *Enterobacteriaceae*. It could also itself be used as some type of quorum sensing, when the bacterial concentration is still low. Furthermore, it may be important for bacteria not to be intoxicated by their own antibiotic production, since they are con-

fined to a close medium. Other antibiotics produced may help to control the microflora or, if they are produced later, may be important to prevent contamination of the cadaver by other soil or water microorganisms. In contrast with *P. luminescens*, where carbapenem production occurs in exponential growth phase, cell-density-dependent regulation in *Erwinia* and *Serratia* allows carbapenem to be maximally expressed only at relatively high cell concentrations (1, 40). In *Erwinia*, harnessing the regulation of virulence factors and carbapenem to population size ensures that plant defenses are quickly overwhelmed while minimizing bacterial competition for ensuing resources by antibiotic production. *P. luminescens*, unlike *Erwinia*, does not have to quickly overwhelm host defense, as it uses a protective vector, its nematode, to be inoculated directly into the insect open blood circulation system. Moreover, its vector, which is not recognized as nonself by the host immune system, possesses several weapons (i.e., helminthic toxins and an immune-depressive factor) against the insect defense system to protect its bacterial symbiont (3, 15).

The complete elucidation of the genome sequence of strain TT01 of *P. luminescens* would allow us to identify other loci involved in the biosynthesis of the *P. luminescens* antimicrobial agents active against gram-positive bacteria, yeasts, and some fungi, as well as genes encoding potential antivertebrate virulence factors or a specific mechanism for self-protection. This will undoubtedly contribute to a better understanding of the biology of this insect pathogen.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank I. Podglajen and E. Collatz for the various β-lactam indicator strains used in this study and B. Bassler for *V. harveyi* strains BB152 and BB170.

Financial support came from the Institut Pasteur, the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (URA 2171), and the French ASG program supported by Aventis CropScience, the Institut Pasteur, INRA, and the Ministry of Industry.

## REFERENCES

1. Bainton, N. J., P. Stead, S. R. Chhabra, B. W. Bycroft, G. P. Salmond, G. S. Stewart, and P. Williams. 1992. *N*-(3-Oxohexanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone regulates carbapenem antibiotic production in *Erwinia carotovora*. Biochem. J. 288:997–1004.
2. Bassler, B. L., M. Wright, and M. R. Silverman. 1993. Intercellular signalling in *Vibrio harveyi*: sequence and function of genes regulating expression of luminescence. Mol. Microbiol. 9:773–786.
3. Boemare, N., A. Givaudan, M. Brehelin, and C. Laumond. 1997. Symbiosis and pathogenicity of nematode-bacterium complexes. Symbiosis 22:21–45.
4. Bradley, J. S., J. Garau, H. Lode, K. V. Rolston, S. E. Wilson, and J. P. Quinn. 1999. Carbapenems in clinical practice: a guide to their use in serious infection. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 11:93–100.
5. Bycroft, B. W., C. Maslen, S. J. Box, A. Brown, and J. W. Tyler. 1988. The biosynthetic implications of acetate and glutamate incorporation into (3R,5R)-carbapenem-3-carboxylic acid and (5R)-carbapen-2-em-3-carboxylic acid by *Serratia* sp. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo) 41:1231–1242.
6. Bycroft, B. W., C. Maslen, S. J. Box, A. Brown, and J. W. Tyler. 1987. The isolation and characterisation of (3R,5R)- and (3S,5R)-carbapenem-3-carboxylic acid from *Serratia* and *Erwinia* species and their putative biosynthetic role. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun. 21:1623–1625.
7. Daborn, P. J., N. Waterfield, M. A. Blight, and R. H. Ffrench-Constant. 2001. Measuring virulence factor expression by the pathogenic bacterium *Photorhabdus luminescens* in culture and during insect infection. J. Bacteriol. 183: 5834–5839.
8. del Castillo, I., J. E. Gonzalez-Pastor, J. L. San Millan, and F. Moreno. 1991. Nucleotide sequence of the *Escherichia coli* regulatory gene *mprA* and construction and characterization of *mprA*-deficient mutants. J. Bacteriol. 173: 3924–3929.
9. Dunlap, P. V. 1999. Quorum regulation of luminescence in *Vibrio fischeri*. J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 1:5–12.
10. Dunphy, G., C. Miyamoto, and E. Meighen. 1997. A homoserine lactone autoinducer regulates virulence of an insect-pathogenic bacterium, *Xenorhabdus nematophilus* (*Enterobacteriaceae*). J. Bacteriol. 179:5288–5291.
11. Eberl, L. 1999. N-acyl homoserine lactone-mediated gene regulation in gram-negative bacteria. Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 22:493–506.
12. Fischer-Le Saux, M., V. Viallard, B. Brunel, P. Normand, and N. E. Boemare. 1999. Polyphasic classification of the genus *Photorhabdus* and proposal of new taxa: *P. luminescens* subsp. *luminescens* subsp. nov., *P. luminescens* subsp. *akhurstii* subsp. nov., *P. luminescens* subsp. *laumondii* subsp. nov., *P. temperata* sp. nov., *P. temperata* subsp. *temperata* subsp. nov. and *P. asymbotica* sp. nov. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 49:1645–1656.
13. Forst, S., B. Dowds, N. Boemare, and E. Stackebrandt. 1997. *Xenorhabdus* and *Photorhabdus* spp.: bugs that kill bugs. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 51:47–72.
14. Forst, S., and K. Nealson. 1996. Molecular biology of the symbiotic-pathogenic bacteria *Xenorhabdus* spp. and *Photorhabdus* spp. Microbiol. Rev. 60:21–43.
15. Götz, P., A. Boman, and H. Boman. 1981. Interactions between insect immunity and an insect pathogenic nematode with symbiotic bacteria. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B 212:333–350.
16. Greenberg, E. P., J. W. Hastings, and S. Ulitzur. 1979. Induction of luciferase synthesis in *Beneckea harveyi* by other marine bacteria. Arch. Microbiol. 120:87–91.
17. Han, R., and R.-U. Ehlers. 2000. Pathogenicity, development, and reproduction of *Heterorhabditis bacteriophora* and *Steinernema carpocapsae* under axenic in vivo conditions. J. Invertebr. Pathol. 75:55–58.
18. Hellinger, W. C., and N. S. Brewer. 1999. Carbapenems and monobactams: imipenem, meropenem, and aztreonam. Mayo Clin. Proc. 74:420–434.
19. Joyce, E. A., B. L. Bassler, and A. Wright. 2000. Evidence for a signaling system in *Helicobacter pylori*: detection of a *luxS*-encoded autoinducer. J. Bacteriol. 182:3638–3643.
20. Li, J., G. Chen, H. Wu, and J. M. Webster. 1995. Identification of two pigments and a hydroxystilbene antibiotic from *Photorhabdus luminescens*. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 61:4329–4333.
21. Ludwig, A., S. Bauer, R. Benz, B. Bergmann, and W. Goebel. 1999. Analysis of the SlyA-controlled expression, subcellular localization and pore-forming activity of a 34 kDa haemolysin (ClyA) from *Escherichia coli* K-12. Mol. Microbiol. 31:557–567.
22. McGowan, S., M. Sebaihia, S. Jones, B. Yu, N. Bainton, P. F. Chan, B. Bycroft, G. S. Stewart, P. Williams, and G. P. Salmond. 1995. Carbapenem antibiotic production in *Erwinia carotovora* is regulated by CarR, a homologue of the LuxR transcriptional activator. Microbiology 141:541–550.
23. McGowan, S. J., M. Sebaihia, S. O’Leary, K. R. Hardie, P. Williams, G. S. Stewart, B. W. Bycroft, and G. P. Salmond. 1997. Analysis of the carbapenem gene cluster of *Erwinia carotovora*: definition of the antibiotic biosynthetic genes and evidence for a novel beta-lactam resistance mechanism. Mol. Microbiol. 26:545–556.
24. McGowan, S. J., M. Sebaihia, L. E. Porter, K. R. Hardie, G. S. Stewart, P. Williams, B. W. Bycroft, and G. P. Salmond. 1996. Analysis of bacterial carbapenem antibiotic production genes reveals a novel beta-lactam biosynthesis pathway. Mol. Microbiol. 22:415–426.
25. Oscarsson, J., Y. Mizunoe, B. E. Uhlin, and D. J. Haydon. 1996. Induction of haemolytic activity in *Escherichia coli* by the *slyA* gene product. Mol. Microbiol. 20:191–199.
26. Parker, W. L., M. L. Rathnum, J. S. J. Wells, W. H. Trejo, P. A. Principe, and R. B. Sykes. 1982. SQ 27,860, a simple carbapenem produced by species of *Serratia* and *Erwinia*. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo) 35:653–660.
27. Quandt, J., and M. F. Hynes. 1993. Versatile suicide vectors which allow direct selection for gene replacement in gram-negative bacteria. Gene 127:15–21.
28. Revell, P. A., and V. L. Miller. 2000. A chromosomally encoded regulator is required for expression of the *Yersinia enterocolitica inv* gene and for virulence. Mol. Microbiol. 35:677–685.
29. Rice, L. B., and R. A. Bonomo. 2000. β-Lactamases: which ones are clinically important? Drug Resist. Updates 3:178–189.
30. Richardson, W., T. M. Schmidt, and K. H. Nealson. 1988. Identification of an anthraquinone pigment and a hydroxystilbene antibiotic from *Xenorhabdus luminescens*. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 54:1602–1605.
31. Riley, M. A. 1998. Molecular mechanisms of bacteriocin evolution. Annu. Rev. Genet. 32:255–278.
32. Sader, H. S., and A. C. Gales. 2001. Emerging strategies in infectious diseases: new carbapenem and trinem antibacterial agents. Drugs 61:553–564.
33. Sambrook, J., E. F. Fritsch, and T. Maniatis. 1989. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.
34. Schauder, S., K. Shokat, M. G. Surette, and B. L. Bassler. 2001. The LuxS family of bacterial autoinducers: biosynthesis of a novel quorum-sensing signal molecule. Mol. Microbiol. 41:463–476.
35. Simon, R. 1984. High frequency mobilization of gram-negative bacterial replicons by the *in vitro* constructed Tn5-Mob transposon. Mol. Gen. Genet. 196:413–420.
36. Surette, M. G., and B. L. Bassler. 1998. Quorum sensing in *Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella typhimurium*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95:7046–7050.
37. Surette, M. G., M. B. Miller, and B. L. Bassler. 1999. Quorum sensing in *Escherichia coli*, *Salmonella typhimurium*, and *Vibrio harveyi*: a new family of

genes responsible for autoinducer production. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96: 1639–1644.

38. Terrak, M., T. K. Ghosh, J. van Heijenoort, J. Van Beeumen, M. Lampilas, J. Aszodi, J. A. Ayala, J. M. Ghysen, and M. Nguyen-Disteche. 1999. The catalytic, glycosyl transferase and acyl transferase modules of the cell wall peptidoglycan-polymerizing penicillin-binding protein 1b of *Escherichia coli*. Mol. Microbiol. **34**:350–364.

39. Thomson, N. R., A. Cox, B. W. Bycroft, G. S. Stewart, P. Williams, and G. P. Salmond. 1997. The Rap and Hor proteins of *Erwinia, Serratia* and *Yersinia*: a novel subgroup in a growing superfamily of proteins regulating diverse physiological processes in bacterial pathogens. Mol. Microbiol. **26**:531–544.

CARBAPENEM BIOSYNTHESIS IN *P. LUMINESCENS* 3789

40. Thomson, N. R., M. A. Crow, S. J. McGowan, A. Cox, and G. P. Salmond. 2000. Biosynthesis of carbapenem antibiotic and prodigiosin pigment in *Serratia* is under quorum sensing control. Mol. Microbiol. **36**:539–556.

41. Trezzani, I. 2001. Thesis. Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

42. Westermark, M., J. Oscarsson, Y. Mizunoe, J. Urbonaviciene, and B. E. Uhlin. 2000. Silencing and activation of ClyA cytotoxin expression in *Escherichia coli*. J. Bacteriol. **182**:6347–6357.

43. Williamson, J. M., E. Inamine, K. E. Wilson, A. W. Douglas, J. M. Liesch, and G. Albers-Schonberg. 1985. Biosynthesis of the beta-lactam antibiotic, thienamycin, by *Streptomyces cattleya*. J. Biol. Chem. **260**:4637–4647.
