
PHYTOCHEMISTRY

PERGAMON Phytochemistry 60 (2002) 853–859 www.elsevier.com/locate/phytochem

The biosynthesis of β-carboline and quinolizidine alkaloids of *Alangium lamarckii*

Sudha Jain${}^{a,*}$, Archana Sinha${}^{a}$, Dewan S. Bhakuni${}^{b}$

${}^{a}$Department of Chemistry, Lucknow University, Lucknow, 226 007, India  
${}^{b}$Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, 226 001, India  

Received 24 July 2001; received in revised form 8 November 2001

---

### Abstract

The incorporation of tryptamine, dopamine, $N$-deacetylisoipecoside, $N$-deacetylisopecoside into alangimarcine, deoxytubuloline and ankorine and of strictosidine and vincoside into alangimarcine and deoxytubuloline in young *Alangium lamarckii* Thw. (*Alangiaceae*) has been studied and specific utilisation of $N$-deacetylisoipecoside demonstrated. Parallel experiments with nordeoxytubuloline and deoxytubuloline suggested that $O$-methylation precedes condensation of protoemetine with tryptamine and further the reduction of ethylene side chain takes place before condensation. Hydroxylation at C-8 in the trans-quinolizidine moiety is the terminal step in the biosynthesis of alangimarcine. © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: *Alangium lamarckii* Thw.; Alangiaceae; Antimicrobial; Biosynthesis; Alkaloids; Deoxytubuloline; Alangimarcine; Ankorine

---

### 1. Introduction

The β-carboline alkaloids, deoxytubuloline (17) (Battersby et al., 1965), tubuloline (19) (Pakrashi, 1964) and alangimarcine (20) (Battersby et al., 1966), the quinolizidine alkaloid ankorine (6) (Battersby et al., 1966; DasGupta, 1965) and various nitrogenous glucosides (Itoh et al., 1998) are produced by *Alangium lamarckii* Thw. a plant that has potent antimicrobial activity (Openshaw and Whittaker, 1969). Recently two new alkaloids namely 1′,2′-dehydrotubuloline and alangine have been isolated from *A. lamarckii* plant (Itoh et al., 1999, 2000). The alkaloidal extract of leaves has shown mild adrenolytic, antispasmodic, hypotensive and anticholinesterase activity (Sanyal et al., 1965, 1966). An amorphous yellow alkaloid (AL 60) has shown biphasic action on blood pressure of intact cats (Datta and Pakrashi, 1962a). The base also exerted spasmodic and spasmolytic effects in smooth muscles (Datta and Pakrashi, 1962b). A strong binding of deoxytubuloline with DNA has been shown by its absorption and emission spectra (Venkatachalam et al., 1994). The dihydrofolate reductase and cell growth activity inhibition was also reported by the base (Rao and Venkatachalam, 1999).

We report for the first time, the results of incorporation of labelled tryptamine, dopamine, $N$-deacetylisoipecoside and $N$-deacetylisopecoside into alangimarcine, deoxytubuloline and ankorine and of strictosidine (11) and vincoside (12) into alangimarcine and deoxytubuloline in young *A. lamarckii* Thw. (*Alangiaceae*).

---

### 2. Results and discussions

The biosynthesis of deoxytubuloline (17) and alangimarcine (20) is expected to be from deacetylisoipecoside (1). Enzymic hydrolysis of 1 and opening of ring C could furnish the dialdehyde (3) in which at least the stereochemistry at C-1 and C-4′ is retained. Condensation of the appropriate aldehyde function with the secondary amino function, followed by reduction of the corresponding iminium intermediate, could give rise to the protoemetine skeleton (4). Compound 4 would then react with tryptamine (15) (derived from tryptophan) to yield the key intermediate $O$-nordeoxytubuloline (16). Hydroxylation of 16 at C-8 could give a compound of the type 18 which by selective $O$-methylation of the ortho-phenolic hydroxyl group at C-9 and C-10, could

* Corresponding author. Fax: +91-522-287925.
E-mail address: jainsudha2@rediffmail.com (S. Jain).

0031-9422/02/$ - see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
PII: S0031-9422(02)00057-2

finally give alangimarckine (20). However, $O$-methylation of phenolic hydroxyl groups in 4 could give rise to protoemetine nucleus of the type 5 which undergoes condensation with 15 to give 17. Hydroxylation at C-8 in 17 could finally give 20. Alternately, $O$-methylation of the ortho-phenolic hydroxyl groups at C-9 and C-10 in the key intermediate $O$-nordeoxytubulosine (16) could give deoxytubulosine (17) which on selective hydroxylation at C-8 could finally yield alangimarckine (20). On the other hand 17 and 20 could also be formed from strictosidine (11), the universal precursor for terpenoid indole alkaloids (Battersby, 1967; Battersby et al., 1968a,b, 1969a; Mattes et al., 1975). Hydrolysis of 11 followed by opening of the pyran ring and decarboxylation could afford the dialdehyde (13). Condensation of compound 13 with dopamine (14) would generate the trans-quinolizidine moiety (16) which could give rise to 17 and 20 as described above. Reduction of ethylene side chain, however, can take place at any stage of the biosynthesis of deoxytubulosine.

Initial feeding of $(L)$-[U${}^{14}$-C]tyrosine (Table 1, experiment 1) to young $A$. lamarkii Thw. plants demonstrated that deoxytubulosine (17), alangimarckine (20) and ankorine (6) are being biosynthesized by the young plants at the time of feeding. Feeding of tryptamine (15) (experiment 2) and dopamine (14) (experiment 3) revealed that both the amines were being used by the young plants to form deoxytubulosine (17) and alangimarckine (20) whereas only 14 was used by the plants to form ankorine (6).

Feeding of a mixture of [3-${}^{14}$C]strictosidine (11) and [3-${}^{14}$C]vincoside (12) (experiment 4) demonstrated that neither 11 nor 12 was used by the young plants to form deoxytubulosine (17) and alangimarckine (20).

The epimeric monoterpenoid isoquinoline glucosides, $N$-deacetylisopecoside (1) and $N$-deacetylipecoside (2) have $\alpha$- and $\beta$-configuration at C-1 respectively. Deoxytubulosine (17), alangimarckine (20) and ankorine (6) have $\alpha$-configuration at C-11b corresponding to position C-1 of the epimeric monoterpenoid isoquinoline glucoside. $N$-Deacetylisopecoside (1) having $\alpha$-configuration at C-1 could be converted into 6, 17 and 20 without any change in configuration at the corresponding positions. On the other hand if young $A$. lamarkii Thw. chose $N$-deacetylipecoside (2) having $\beta$-configuration at C-1 to form 6, 17 and 20, an inversion of configuration at C-1 must occur during the biotransformation.

Parallel feeding of [3-${}^{14}$C]$N$-deacetylisopecoside (1) (experiment 5) and [3-${}^{14}$C]$N$-deacetylipecoside (2) (experiment 6) demonstrated that the stereo-specificity is maintained in the biosynthesis of 6, 17 and 20. The

The quinolizidine alkaloid, ankorine (6) could be formed from the key intermediate 4 by hydroxylation at C-5 followed by selective $O$-methylation of the phenolic hydroxyl groups at C-6 and C-7 positions and reduction of the aldehyde group into the corresponding secondary alcoholic function. Alternately, $O$-methylation of phenolic hydroxyl groups in 4 could follow hydroxylation of the $O$-methyl derivative (5).

Table 1  
Tracer experiments on *Alangium lamarckii* Thw.

| Expt. Precursor fed | Incorporation (%) into |
|---------------------|------------------------|
|                     | Deoxytubulosine (17)   | Alangimarckine (20) | Ankorine (6) |
| 1 (L)-[U-¹⁴C] Tyrosine | 0.20                  | 0.0142             | 0.012       |
| 2.[1-¹⁴C] Tryptamine (15) | 0.16                 | 0.175              | _a_         |
| 3.[1-¹⁴C] Dopamine (14) | 0.424                | 0.175              | 0.12        |
| 4 [3-¹⁴C] Strictosidine (11) and [3-¹⁴C] vincoside (12) | 0.002            | 0.0028       | _a_         |
| 5.[3-¹⁴C] N-Deacetylisopecoside (1) | 3.218             | 11.0             | 0.213       |
| 6.[3-¹⁴C] N-Deacetylipecoside (2) | 0.18              | 0.88              | 0.02        |
| 7.[Aryl-³H] Nordeoxytubulosine (16) | 0.003             | 0.063             | _a_         |
| 8.[Aryl-³H] Deoxytubulosine (17) | _a_               | 1.23              | _a_         |

_a_ Incorporation not detected.

3. Conclusion

The foregoing experiments support the following sequence for the biosynthesis of ipecac-β-carboline alkaloids deoxytubulosine (17), alangimarckine (20) and the quinolizidine alkaloid ankorine (6) in young *A. lamarckii* Thw. plants.

Tyrosine → dopamine (14) + secologanin → *N*-deacetylisopecoside (1) → deoxytubulosine (17) → alangimarckine (20). Tyrosine → dopamine (14) → *N*-deacetylisopecoside (1) → ankorine (6).

Further, poor incorporation of nordeoxytubulosine as compared to deoxytubulosine supported that the condensation of tryptamine takes place with methylated protoemetine.

4. Experimental

Melting points were taken in sulfuric acid bath and are uncorrected. The ${}^{1}$H NMR spectra were recorded on a Perkin Elmer P-30 (90 MHz) spectrometer. Mass spectra were recorded on a Jeol JMS D 300 spectrometer at an ionization energy of 70 eV. Infrared spectra were recorded on a Perkin Elmer Lambda spectro-photometer.

For general directions (counting method and labelling of precursors etc.) see earlier papers in the series (Bhakuni et al., 1977, 1979).

4.1. Synthesis and labelling of precursors

[1-${}^{14}$C]3,4-Dihydroxyphenethylamine (dopamine) (14) was prepared by a known procedure (Bhakuni and Jain, 1981).

4.2. [1-${}^{14}$C]Tryptamine (15)

Gramine was heated with MeI to give 3-dimethylaminomethylindole methiodide (Schramm, 1951) which on treatment with [${}^{14}$C]KCN furnished 3-[1-${}^{14}$C]acetonyl indole. [1-${}^{14}$C]Tryptamine (15) was obtained by catalytic reduction of 3-[1-${}^{14}$C]acetonyl indole (Terntiv et al., 1959).

4.3. [3-${}^{14}$C]Strictosidine (11) and (3-${}^{14}$C]vinicoside (12)

Secologanin was condensed with [1-${}^{14}$C]tryptamine (15) according to the standard procedure (Battersby et al., 1969b; Nagakura et al., 1978) to yield a mixture of [3-${}^{14}$C]strictosidine (11) and [3-${}^{14}$C]vinicoside (12) which was used as such for the feeding experiment.

4.4. [3-${}^{14}$C]*N*-Deacetylisopecoside (1) and [3-${}^{14}$C]*N*-deacetylipecoside (2)

Secologanin was condensed with [1-${}^{14}$C]dopamine (pH 5) and the mixture was purified and resolved according to the reported procedure (Battersby et al., 1969b; Nagakura et al., 1978) to furnish [3-${}^{14}$C]*N*-deacetylisopecoside (1) and [3-${}^{14}$C]*N*-deacetylipecoside (2).

4.5. [Ary-${}^{3}$H]nordeoxytubulosine (16) and [aryl-${}^{3}$H]deoxytubulosine (17)

Deoxytubulosine (17) was demethylated by HBr in AcOH to give nordeoxytubulosine (16). Acid-catalysed exchange reaction (Bhakuni et al., 1977, 1979) was employed to prepare [aryl-${}^{3}$H]nordeoxytubulosine (16) and [aryl-${}^{3}$H]deoxytubulosine (17).

4.6. Isolation of secologanin

Fresh leaves of *Lonicera japonica* (700 g) were percolated with EtOH (5 × 800 ml). The percolate was concentrated below 40 °C under reduced pressure to a thick syrup (40 g). The syrup was then diluted with H₂O (50 ml), defatted with benzene (6 × 50 ml) and extracted with *n*-BuOH (5 × 100 ml). The combined *n*-BuOH extract was washed with H₂O, dried (anhydrous Na₂SO₄) and concentrated in vacuo. The residue (20 g), so obtained, was chromatographed over silica gel (250 g) and eluted with CHCl₃ and CHCl₃:MeOH with increasing proportion of MeOH. Elution was monitored by TLC (plates: SiO₂GF₂₅₄; solvent: CHCl₃–MeOH; 8:2). Elution with CHCl₃–MeOH (9:1) gave secologanin (700 mg) as an amorphous powder [$\alpha$]$_{\text{D}}$ –95.6° (C, 1.12 in MeOH) (Budzikiewicz et al., 1964, [$\alpha$]$_{\text{D}}$ –96° MeOH).

4.7. Feeding experiment

For feeding purposes, dopamine, *N*-deacetylisopecoside, strictosidine and vinicoside were dissolved in H₂O (1 ml). Tryptamine, nordeoxytubulosine and deoxytubulosine were dissolved in H₂O (1 ml) containing DMSO (0.2 ml). Labelled precursors were fed to young *A. lamarckii* Thw. plant by a wick feeding technique and when uptake was complete, H₂O was added for washing the precursor. The plants were then kept alive for 7–8 days to metabolise the precursor and then worked up for the biosynthetic alkaloids ankorine (6), deoxytubulosine (17) and alangimarckine (20).

4.8. Isolation of biosynthetic ankorine (6), deoxytubulosine (17) and alangimarckine (20)

Precursor fed young plants of *A. lamarckii* Thw. (180 g wet wt) were macerated in EtOH (300 ml) with inactive deoxytubulosine (100 mg), alangimarckine (80 mg) and ankorine (80 mg) and left for 20 h. After decanting the ethanolic solution, the marc was percolated with EtOH (5 × 250 ml). The combined ethanol extract was concentrated in vacuo to afford a greenish viscous mass
which was then extracted with 10% AcOH (5×15 ml). The acidic extract was defatted with petroleum (4×20 ml), basified with Na₂CO₃ (pH 8–9) and the liberated bases were extracted with CHCl₃ (5×50 ml). The combined CHCl₃ extract was washed with H₂O, dried (anhydrous Na₂SO₄) and solvent removed under reduced pressure. The crude mixture so obtained was subjected to preparative TLC (plates: thickness 0.3 mm; SiO₂GF₂₅₄ solvent: CHCl₃–MeOH; 92:8; double run). The bands containing the desired alkaloids were cut-off and eluted with CHCl₃–MeOH (3:1), and the solvent removed in vacuo to give a series of residues. Pure biosynthetic deoxytubuloline (17) was crystallised from MeOH–Me₂CO, mp 230 °C (Battersby et al., 1965, 230–232 °C), alangimarine (20), mp 174–175 °C (MeOH–Me₂CO) (Battersby et al., 1966, 174–6 °C) and ankorine (6), mp 173 °C (MeOH–Me₂CO) (DasGupta, 1965, 174 °C).

H₂O (4.5 ml) added and then extracted with CHCl₃ (5×60 ml). The combined CHCl₃ extract was washed with H₂O, dried (anhydrous Na₂SO₄) and solvent removed under reduced pressure to furnish radioactive N-acetyldeoxytubuloline methylenine (27) (145.2 mg), crystallised from MeOH–C₆H₆, mp 173 °C (molar activity 8.30×10⁵ dpm/mmol); IR νmaxKBr: 3400 (NH indole), 2950, 1630 (NCOCH₃), 510 and 1450 cm⁻¹; ¹H NMR (CDCl₃): δ 0.85 (m, 3H, CH₂CH₃), 1.2 (m, 2H, CH₂CH₃), 1.95 (s, 3H, NCOCH₃), 2.16 (s, 3H, NCH₃), 3.76 and 3.84 (each s, 3H, each 2×OCH₃), 5.0–5.52 (m, 3H, CH=CH₂), 6.72–7.4 (m, 5H, ArH), m/z 515 (M⁺), 473 (M⁺-42), 302 (M⁺-213), 287 (M⁺-228), 272 (M⁺-243), 247 (M⁺-268), 245 (M⁺-270), 204 (M⁺-311), 185 (M⁺-330), 171 (base peak) (M⁺-344) and 169 (M⁺-346); (Found: C, 74.54; H, 7.99; N, 8.14. C₃₂H₄₁O₃N₃ requires C, 74.52; H, 8.01; N, 8.15%). Ozonised O₂ was passed through a solution of the radioactive 27 (132 mg) in EtOAc at –75 °C for 30 min, when the solvent from the resulting mixture was removed under reduced pressure. To the residue, H₂O (25 ml), Zn dust (250 mg) and AgNO₃ (20 mg) were added and refluxed for 20 min, then subjected to distillation. The distillate was collected in a solution of dimedone (300 mg) in aq. EtOH (3:1, 80 ml). The mixture was purified over silica gel column. Pure formaldehyde-dimethone (15 mg) was crystallised from MeOH–Et₂O, mp 188–189 °C (Battersby and Harper, 1962, 188 °C) (molar activity 8.20×10⁵ dpm/ mmol) (87% of original activity).

### 4.9. Degradation of the biosynthetic deoxytubuloline derived from [3-¹⁴C]N-deacetylisoipecoside

A mixture of radioactive deoxytubuloline (17) (300 mg) (molar activity 8.44×10⁵ dpm/mmol), pyridine (5 ml) and Ac₂O (5 ml) was heated on a water bath for 2 h, and then left at room temp. to furnish N-acetyldeoxytubuloline (21) (290 mg), mp 159–160 °C (MeOH–Et₂O) (Battersby et al., 1965, 158–160 °C) (molar activity 8.40×10⁵ dpm/mmol). A solution of the preceding N-acetyldeoxytubuloline (21) in MeOH (5 ml) was refluxed with MeI (4 ml) for 2 h on a water bath and then left at room temp. for 20 h. Solvent from the reaction mixture was removed under reduced pressure and residue crystallised from MeOH to afford pure N-acetyldeoxytubuloline methiodide (23) (250 mg), mp 273–276 °C (molar activity 8.38×10⁵ dpm/mmol); IR νmaxKBr: 3420 (NH indole), 1625 (NCOCH₃), 1520, 1230 (OMe) cm⁻¹; ¹H NMR (DMSO-d₆): δ 0.85 (m, 3H, CH₂CH₃), 1.2 (m, 2H, CH₂CH₃), 2.45 (s, 3H, NCOCH₃), 3.08 (s, 3H, N⁺CH₃), 3.71 and 3.72 (each s, 3H, each 2×OCH₃), 5.65 (m, 1H, H₁), 6.52 and 6.81 (each s, 1H each, H-8 and H-11) and 7.42–8.82 (m, 4H, ArH 5′, 6′, 7′ and 8′), m/z 516 (M⁺), 501 (M⁺-15), 459 (M⁺-57), 288 (M⁺-228), 272–275 (M⁺-244 to 241), 246 (M⁺-270), 244 (M⁺-272), 206 (M⁺-310), 205 (M⁺-311), 192 (M⁺-324), 191 (M⁺-325), 185 (M⁺-331), 171 (base peak) (M⁺-345) and 169 (M⁺-347); (Found: C, 74.51; H, 7.98; N, 8.14. C₃₂H₄₁O₃N₃ requires C, 74.53; H, 8.01; N, 8.15%). A solution of the foregoing radioactive 23 (220 mg) in MeOH (100 ml) was passed through a column of freshly generated amberlite IR-410 anion exchange resin (OH⁻ form) (5 g) and the eluate recycled five times. The resin was finally washed with MeOH (100 ml). Solvent from the combined eluate was removed in vacuo to afford radioactive methohydroxide (24). 24 In MeOH (10 ml) was refluxed with KOH (3.5 g) in H₂O (1 ml) for 5 h, solvent from the reaction mixture was removed,

### 4.10. Degradation of the biosynthetic alangimarine derived from [3-¹⁴C]N-deacetylisoipecoside

Labelled alangimarine (20) (62.8 mg) was diluted with inactive alangimarine (252 mg), crystallised (molar activity 3.2×10⁶ dpm/mmol) and treated with Ac₂O (5 ml) and pyridine (5 ml) to furnish N,O-diacytlalangimarine (22) (300 mg) mp 144–145 °C (Battersby et al., 1969a, 143–146 °C) (molar activity 3.0×10⁶ dpm/mmol). A solution of the radioactive 22 in MeOH (2 ml) was treated with MeONa (prepared from 50 mg Na in 1 ml MeOH) and MeI (5 ml). After 6 h, MeONa (1 ml) and MeI (2 ml) were added and after a total of 9 h solvent from the resulting mixture was removed under reduced pressure, then hot H₂O was added to the residue and filtered while hot. The filtrate was cooled and concentrated to give radioactive N-ace-tyl-O-methylalangimarine methiodide (25) (280 mg), mp 199–206 °C (MeOH–H₂O) (molar activity 2.9×10⁶ dpm/mmol); IR νmaxKBr: 3400 (indole NH), 1625 (NCOCH₃), 1430 and 1260 cm⁻¹; ¹H NMR (CDCl₃+ DMSO-d₆): δ 0.8 (m, 3H, CH₂CH₃), 1.0 (m, 2H, CH₂CH₃), 2.24 (s, 3H, NCOCH₃), 3.29 (s, 3H, N⁺ CH₃), 3.64, 3.76 and 3.85 (each s, 3H each, 3×OCH₃), 5.74 (m, 1H, H-1′), 6.45 (s, 1H, H-11) and 6.8–7.5 (m, 4H, ArH-5′,6′, 7′ and 8′), m/z 546 (M⁺), 531(M⁺-15),
489 (M⁺-57), 318 (M⁺-228), 302–305 (M⁺-244 to 241), 276 (M⁺-270), 274 (M⁺-272), 236 (M⁺-310), 235 (M⁺-311), 222 (M⁺-324), 221 (M⁺-325), 185 (M⁺-361), 171 (base peak) (M⁺-375) and 169 (M⁺-377); (Found: C, 72.61; H, 7.93; N, 7.71. C₃₃H₄₃O₄N₃ requires C, 72.62; H, 7.95; N, 7.70%). Methiodide 25 was converted into methohydroxide (26) as described earlier. Hofmann degradation of 26 as usual afforded *N*-acetyl-*O*-methylalangimarine methylmethine (28) (180 mg), mp 198 °C (MeOH-C₆H₆) (molar activity 2.85×10⁶ dpm/mmol); IR ν<sub>max</sub><sup>KBr</sup>: 3400 (NH), 1630 (NCOCH₃), 1510 and 1450 (OMe) cm⁻¹; <sup>1</sup>H NMR (CDCl₃) δ 0.82 (*m*, 3H, CH₂CH₃), 1.18 (*m*, 2H, CH₂CH₃), 2.11 (*s*, 3H, NCOCH₃), 2.18 (*s*, 3H, NCH₃), 3.73, 3.81 and 3.91 (each *s*, 3H, each 3×OCH₃), 5.2–5.78 (*m*, 3H, CH=CH₂) and 6.99–7.5 (*m*, 5H, ArH); *m*/*z* 545 (M⁺), 503 (M⁺-42), 332 (M⁺-213), 317 (M⁺-228), 302 (M⁺-243), 277 (M⁺-268), 275 (M⁺-270), 234 (M⁺-311), 222 (M⁺-323), 221 (M⁺-324), 185 (M⁺-360), 171 (base peak) (M⁺-374) and 169 (M⁺-376); (Found: C, 72.63; H, 7.94; N, 7.69. C₃₃H₄₃O₄N₃ requires C, 72.62; H, 7.95; N, 7.70%). Ozonolysis of the foregoing methine in the usual manner afforded formaldehyde-dimethone (molar activity 2.6×10⁶ dpm/mmol) (82% of original activity).

### 4.11. Degradation of the biosynthetic ankorine derived from [3-¹⁴C]*N*-deacetylisoipecoside

Radioactive ankorine (6) (48 mg) was diluted with inactive ankorine (250 mg), crystallised (molar activity 3.65×10⁴ dpm/mmol) and treated with an excess of ethereal CH₂N₂ to afford *O*-methylankorine (Bhakuni et al., 1979) (7) (280 mg) (molar activity 3.58×10⁴ dpm/ mmol). 7 In MeOH (5 ml) was refluxed with MeI (4 ml) for 4 h, and then left at room temp. to furnish *O*-methylankorine methiodide (8), mp 240 °C (dec.) (molar activity 3.50×10⁴ dpm/mmol); *m*/*z* 349 (M⁺-MeI), 348, 334, 318, 276, 235, 221, 220, 206, 164 and 163; (Found: C, 69.17; H, 9.43; N, 3.83. C₂₁H₃₄O₄N requires C, 69.16; H, 9.41; N, 3.84%). The preceding methiodide was converted into methohydroxide (9) as described earlier. Hofmann degradation of 9 in the usual way afforded *O*-methylankorine methylmethine (10) (140 mg), mp 120 °C (MeOH-C₆H₆) (molar activity 3.45×10⁴ dpm/mmol); IRν<sub>max</sub><sup>KBr</sup>: 3400, 2900, 1595 and 1450 cm⁻¹; <sup>1</sup>H NMR (CDCl₃): δ 0.8 (*m*, 3H, CH₂CH₃), 1.2 (*m*, 2H, CH₂CH₃), 1.92 (*s*, 3H, NCH₃), 3.72 (*s*, 3H, OCH₃), 3.78 (*s*, 6H, 2×OCH₃), 5.1–5.65 (*m*, 3H, CH=CH₂) and 6.82 (*s*, 1H, ArH); *m*/*z* 363 (M⁺), 362, 348, 333, 319, 318, 304, 290, 276, 236, 234, 220 and 205; (Found: C, 69.16; H, 9.40; N, 3.82. C₂₁H₃₄O₄N requires C, 69.18; H, 9.41; N, 3.84%). Ozonolysis of 10 in the usual way afforded formaldehyde-dimethone (molar activity 3.30×10⁴ dpm/mmol) (90% of original activity).

---

**References**

Battersby, A.R., 1967. Biosynthesis of the indole and colchicum alkaloids. Pure and Appl. Chem. 14, 117–136.

Battersby, A.R., Burnett, A.R., Parsons, P.G., 1968a. Preparation of secologanin: its conversion into ipecoside and its role in indole alkaloid biosynthesis. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun., 1280–1281.

Battersby, A.R., Burnett, A.R., Parsons, P.G., 1968b. Partial synthesis and isolation of vincoside and isovincoside: biosynthesis of the three major classes of indole alkaloids from the β-carboline system. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun., 1282–1284.

Battersby, A.R., Burnett, A.R., Parsons, P.G., 1969a. Alkaloid biosynthesis. Part XV. Partial synthesis and isolation of vincoside and isovincoside: biosynthesis of the three major classes of indole alkaloids from vincoside. J. Chem. Soc. (C), 1193–1200.

Battersby, A.R., Burnett, A.R., Parsons, P.G., 1969b. Alkaloid biosynthesis. Part XIV. Secologanin: its conversion into ipecoside and its role as biological precursor of the indole alkaloids. J. Chem. Soc. (C) 1187–1192.

Battersby, A.R., Harper, B.J.T., 1962. Alkaloid biosynthesis. Part I. The biosynthesis of papaverine. J. Chem. Soc., 3526–3533.

Battersby, A.R., Kapil, R.S., Bhakuni, D.S., Popli, S.P., Merchant, J.R., Salgar, S.S., 1966. New alkaloids from *Alangium lamarckii* Thw. Tetrahedron Lett., 4965–4971.

Battersby, A.R., Merchant, J.R., Ruveda, E.A., Salgar, S.S., 1965. Structure, synthesis and stereochemistry of deoxytubulosine. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Commun., 315–317.

Bhakuni, D.S., Jain, S., 1981. The biosynthesis of the alkaloids of *Croton sparsiflorus morong*. Tetrahedron 37, 3175–3181.

Bhakuni, D.S., Jain, S., Singh, A.N., 1979. Biosynthesis of cocsulinin. J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Transactions 1, 380–383.

Bhakuni, D.S., Tewari, S., Kapil, R.S., 1977. Biosynthesis of boldine (1,10-dimethoxy-6α-aporphine-2,9-diol). J. Chem. Soc. Perkin Transactions 1, 706–709.

Budzikiewicz, H., Pakrashi, S.C., Vorbruggen, H., 1964. Indian medicinal plants. VIII. Isolation of emetine, cephaeline and psychotrine from *Alangium lamarckii* and identification of almarckine with *N*-methylcephaeline. Discussion of the mass spectra of ipecacuanha alkaloids. Tetrahedron, 399–408.

DasGupta, B., 1965. Chemical investigations of *Alangium lamarckii*. I. Isolation of a new alkaloid, ankorine from the leaves. J. Pharm. Sci., 481–483.

Datta, A.K., Pakrashi, S.C., 1962a. Studies on cardiovascular drugs. III. Preliminary studies on the total alkaloids from the seeds of *Alangium lamarckii*. Ann. Biochem. Exp. Med. 22, 23–24.

Datta, A.K., Pakrashi, S.C., 1962b. Cardiovascular drugs. IV. Effect of a new alkaloid from the stem bark of *Alangium lamarckii* on the cardiovascular system and smooth muscles. Ann. Biochem. Exp. Med. 22, 129–146.

De-Eknamkul, W., Ounaroon, A., Tanahashi, T., Kutchan, T.M., Zenk, M.H., 1997. Enzymatic condensation of dopamine and secologanin by cell-free extracts of *Alangium lamarckii*. Phytochemistry 45 (3), 477–484.

Itoh, A., Ikuta, Y., Tanahashi, T., Nagakura, N., 1999. Structures of new alkaloids from *Cephaelis acuminata* and *Alangium lamarckii*. Tennen Yuki Kagobutsu Toronkai Koan Yoshishu 367–372. (Chem. Abstr. 2000, 132, 248531g).

Itoh, A., Ikuta, Y., Tanahashi, T., Nagakura, N., 2000. Two *Alangium* alkaloids from *Alangium lamarckii*. J. Nat. Prod., 723–725.

Itoh, A., Tanahashi, T., Nagakura, N., 1998. Isolation of two unusual tetrahydroisoquinoline-monoterpen glucosides from *Alangium lamarckii* as possible intermediates in the non-enzymic formation of alangimarine from alangiside. Heterocycles 48 (3), 499–505.

Itoh, A., Tanahashi, T., Nagakura, N., 1994. Three tetrahydroisoquinoline-monoterpen glucosides from *Alangium lamarckii*—the first occurrence of glucosides with the same absolute configurations as

deacetylipecoside, a key intermediate in the biosynthesis of ipecac alkaloids. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 42 (10), 2208–2210.

Itoh, A., Tanahashi, T., Nagakura, N., 1995. Five tetrahydroisoquinoline-monoterpeneglucosides and a tetrahydro-β-carboline-monoterpeneglucosides from *Alangium lamarckii*. J. Nat. Prod., 1228–1239.

Mattes, K.C., Hutchinson, C.R., Springer, J.P., Clardy, J., 1975. The absolute configuration of vincoside. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 6270–6271.

Nagakura, N., Hofle, G., Coggiola, D., Zenk, M.H., 1978. The biosynthesis of the ipecac alkaloids and of ipecoside and alangiside. Planta Medica, 381–389.

Openshaw, H.T., Whittaker, N., 1969. The synthesis of emetine and related compounds. Part VIII. The synthesis of tubulosine and isotubulosine. J. Chem. Soc. (C), 91–94.

Pakrashi, S.C., 1964. Studies on Indian medicinal plants: part XI. A new alkaloid from the root bark of *Alangium lamarckii* Thw. Indian J. Chem. 2, 468.

Rao, K.N., Venkatachalam, S.R., 1999. Dihydrofolate reductase and cell growth activity inhibition by the β-carboline-benzoquinolizidine plant alkaloid deoxytubulosine from *Alangium lamarckii*: its potential as an antimicrobial and anticancer agent. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 7, 1105–1110.

Sanyal, A.K., Dasgupta, B., Das, P.K., 1965. Studies on *Alangium lamarckii* Thw. Part I. Pharmacological studies of the total alkaloidal extract of the leaves. Indian J. Med. Res. 53, 1055–1061.

Sanyal, A.K., Dasgupta, B., Gambhir, S.S., Das, P.K., 1966. Studies on *Alangium lamarckii* Thw. Part II. Chemical and pharmacological studies with a quaternary base from the leaves. Indian J. Med. Res. 54, 1060–1063.

Schramm, G.H., 1951. Gramine methiodide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 73, 2961–2962.

Ternitv, A.P., Prebrzhenskaya, M.N., Lunge, B., 1959. Reduction of nitriles with hydrazine hydrate in the presence of raney-nickel. Khim. Nauka i. Prom. 4, 281–282. (Chem. Abstr. 1959, 53, 21879c).

Venkatachalam, S.R., Kunjappu, J.T., Nair, C.K., 1994. DNA binding studies on deoxytubulosine, an alkaloid from *Alangium lamarckii*. Indian J. Chem. 33B, 809–811.
