
1642

Brandi R. Baggett${}^{1}$  
John D. Cooper${}^{2}$  
Eric T. Hogan${}^{1}$  
Jason Carper${}^{1}$  
Nancy L. Paiva${}^{2}$  
Joel T. Smith${}^{1}$  

${}^{1}$Department of  
Physical Sciences,  
Southeastern Oklahoma  
State University,  
Durant, OK, USA  

${}^{2}$Division of Plant Biology,  
Samuel Roberts  
Noble Foundation,  
Ardmore, OK, USA  

---

**Profiling isoflavonoids found in legume root extracts using capillary electrophoresis**

Legumes such as alfalfa (*Medicago sativa* L.), barrel medic (*Medicago truncatula*), white sweet clover (*Melilotus alba*) and fenugreek (*Trigonella graecum*), normally accumulate (−)-medicarpin and its malonated glucose conjugate as natural inhibitors of fungal pathogens. These plants also accumulate the biosynthetic precursor formononetin as well as the malonated glycoside. We were interested in developing a robust high-throughput method to quantitate the levels of these two isoflavonoids, both free and conjugated, in legume root extracts, for use in screening for mutant plants accumulating altered levels of these compounds. Capillary electrophoresis was examined as an alternative to current high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) methods to generate isoflavonoid profiles. The developed assay used micellar electrokinetic capillary chromatography (MEKC) to provide the required selectivity in complex root extracts. The addition of 1,2-hexanediol to the sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) electrolyte provided improved resolution of adjacent isoflavonoids. We examined the role of several factors including sample preparation, buffer composition, buffer pH, and organic component in the injected sample. The use of capillaries with longer path lengths were also examined to increase sensitivity. A comparison of results obtained using MEKC and HPLC showed good correlation in the relative amounts of the isoflavonoids studied.

Keywords: Capillary electrophoresis / Flavonoid / Isoflavonoids / Legumes / Micellar electrokinetic chromatography

---

### 1 Introduction

The flavonoid family is one of the most abundant groups of natural products found in plants with over 4000 different compounds having been documented [1]. This family of compounds consists of several subclasses which include flavones, flavanones, isoflavones, aurones, anthocyanins, pterocarpanes, as well as others. Flavonoids possess many biological activities, and may prove to be effective drugs [2, 3] or important dietary components [4, 5]. The isoflavonoid medicarpin has been identified as a major phytoalexin produced in alfalfa (*Medicago sativa* L.), one of the world’s most important forage crops [6], as well as in other legumes such as sweet clover and fenugreek. In alfalfa, the biosynthetic pathway for medicarpin has been determined and is summarized in Fig. 1 [7]. This phytoalexin and its precursor formononetin are

---

Correspondence: Dr. Tim Smith, Southeastern Oklahoma State University, P.O. Box 4025 – Campus, Durant, OK 74701-0609, USA  
E-mail: tsmith@sosu.edu  
Fax: +580-745-7488  

Abbreviations: AA, Apollo alfalfa; CA, Cimarron alfalfa; F, formononetin; FG, formononetin-7-O-glucoside; FGM, formononetin-7-O-glucoside-6'-O-malonate; M, medicarpin; MG, medicarpin-7-O-malonate; MT, *Medicago truncatula*; PDA, photo-diode array; WSC, white sweet clover

---

Figure 1. Biosynthetic pathway for medicarpin in legumes.

© WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH, 69451 Weinheim, 2002

often stored in root cell vacuoles as the more soluble malonated glucosides. However, root extracts often contain a mixture of isoflavonoid glucosides and malonated glucosides, as well as a trace of free isoflavonoids, due to the action of plant esterases and β-glucosidases and nonenzymatic hydrolysis.

Improved genetics have led to the introduction of multiple disease resistance plants for major crop production in the United States. Plants deficient in medicarpin accumulation would be useful to evaluate the significance of medicarpin in the defense response of alfalfa to pathogens. One approach is to mutagenize a population of seeds, then screen by chemically assaying the total medicarpin and formononetin content of the progeny plants. HPLC has traditionally been used to profile the relative content of the various isoflavonoids found in tissue extracts [8, 9]. However, the fact that thousands of mutagenized seedlings may have to be profiled before one appropriate mutant is found, drives researchers to seek alternative methodology that would require less time and consume less solvent.

Capillary electrophoresis (CE) has found increasing applications to address numerous problems in many areas of science over the past 10 years [10–17]. CE offers shorter analysis times, higher efficiencies, and requires less sample than traditional HPLC. One reason that CE has been able to address such a variety of analytes is that the various modes of CE separate based on different mechanisms. Micellar electrokinetic chromatography (MEKC), first introduced by Terabe in 1984 [18], has proven especially useful in the separation of natural products [15]. This mode expands the scope of CE by allowing the separation of neutral molecules in a direct electrical field based on their extent of partitioning into a charged micellar phase. MEKC is not limited to only neutral molecules but has also proven very useful to alter the selectivity of charged solutes compared to what is observed in capillary zone electrophoresis. This has proven very useful when the sample matrix is as complex as a plant extract.

Many papers have advanced the fundamental understanding of CE by analyzing synthetic samples of flavonoids [19–22]. Several researchers have utilized CE to analyze for various metabolites found in plants including members of the flavonoid family [23]. Sources of the flavonoids include commonly used herbs [24–26], common foods [27–29], and fruits [30]. In this report, we describe the development of a MEKC-based assay used to profile isoflavonoids related to the biosynthetic pathway of medicarpin. In addition to root extracts from two commercial cultivars of alfalfa, namely Apollo (AA) and Cimarron (CA), we also examined root extracts from three other medicinal and forage crops, namely fenugreek, white

---

CE profiling of isoflavonoids 1643

sweet clover (WSC), and *Medicago truncatula* (MT). The last species is a diploid relative of alfalfa, well suited to mutagenesis studies and genetic analysis, and is a popular model legume species among plant scientists.

## 2 Materials and methods

### 2.1 Instrumentation and supplies

CE experiments were carried out using three different CE instruments. Optimization studies were performed using an in-house constructed modular CE instrument described previously [31]. Reproducibility studies and methods development were performed using a Beckman (Fullerton, CA, USA) P/ACE MDQ equipped with a filter wheel UV detector and controlled by P/ACE Station software. The CE analysis of root extracts was performed using a Hewlett Packard (Wilmington, DE, USA) 3-D CE instrument equipped with a photo-diode array (PDA) detector controlled by ChemStation software. Fused-silica capillary (50 and 75 μm ID) was purchased from Poly-micro Technologies (Phoenix, AZ, USA). Extended light path and high sensitivity cell capillaries were purchased from Hewlett Packard. HPLC experiments were performed using a Beckman 126 pump attached to a Beckman 168 diode-array detector controlled by 32 Karat software. Injections were made from a Gilson 231 XL autoinjector. The RP-HPLC column was a Bakerbond Octadecyl (C18, 4.6 × 250 mm, 5 μm spherical, 120 Å pore) purchased from J.T. Baker (Phillipsburg, NJ, USA). All components used in the preparation of the CE electrolytes were purchased from Aldrich Chemical (Milwaukee, WI, USA). Acetonitrile was Baker Analyzed grade from J.T. Baker.

### 2.2 Procedures

The legume species studied were alfalfa (*Medicago sativa* L.) cultivars Apollo (America’s Alfalfa, IL, USA) and Cimarron (Great Plains Research, Apex, NC, USA), barrel medic (*Medicago truncatula* cultivar Jemalong line A-17), white sweet clover (*Melilotus alba* cultivar Hubam) and fenugreek (*Trigonella graecum*; Peaceful Valley Farm Supply, Grass Valley, CA, USA). To prepare root extracts for comparative analysis, plants were grown in perlite, wetted with a low-nitrate hydroponics solution, and inoculated with a suspension of *Rhizobium meliloti* [32]. After 4 weeks, roots were extracted with 10 mL/g acetone. The acetone was removed from the samples using rotary evaporation. The remaining aqueous phase was extracted three times with equal volumes of ethyl acetate. The pooled ethyl acetate extract was dried and the residue dissolved in 1 mL methanol per 10 g of original tissue.

Prior to injection, the extracts were centrifuged to remove solids and were diluted 1:3 in methanol for HPLC and 1:2 in the running electrolyte for MEKC. For the studies comparing different sample amounts and sample treatments in MEKC, additional fenugreek seedlings were grown and extracted with acetone as described above, except vermiculite was substituted for perlite. Half of the acetone extract was concentrated and extracted with ethyl acetate as described above. The remaining half was concentrated by extended rotary evaporation, and the remaining water was removed by freeze-drying. The two samples were then dissolved in 1 mL of methanol per 20 g of initial tissue. Prior to injection, the extracts were first diluted to 20, 10, 5, and 2.5 g tissue per mL methanol, then diluted 1:2 in the running electrolyte for MEKC. Formononetin and formononetin glucoside (ononin) were purchased from Indofine (Somerville, NJ, USA). Small amounts of medicarpin glucoside, and malonated medicarpin glucoside, and malonated formononetin glucoside were purified from extracts of field-grown alfalfa roots and fenugreek using preparative HPLC [8]. Medicarpin, purified from copper-treated fenugreek seedlings, was available from previous studies.

The running electrolyte for MEKC was prepared by dissolving the required quantity of boric acid into approximately 95% of the desired volume and the pH was adjusted to the appropriate value using 1.0 M NaOH. The proper quantity of SDS and 1,2-hexanediol was then dissolved into the buffer and diluted into the correct total volume using a volumetric flask. The running electrolyte was filtered using a 0.45 μm syringe filter and degassed using an ultrasonic bath daily before use. Water used in the preparation of the running electrolyte was obtained from a Millipore (Bedford, MA, USA) Academic A-10 water polishing system. Prior to all CE injections, the capillary was rinsed 1.0 min with 0.1 M NaOH, 1.0 min with water, and 2.0 min with the running electrolyte. The HPLC solvents were a 1% v/v aqueous phosphoric acid and acetonitrile. Both solvents were filtered (0.2 μm nylon) and degassed before use. The flowrate was constant at 0.8 mL/min and a linear gradient of 20–60% acetonitrile in 45 min was used to profile the root extracts. The injection volume was constant at 20 μL for all HPLC analysis.

generated and the amount of charge an ionizable species possesses, both key factors in developing a MEKC separation. Since our method utilizes bare fused-silica capillary and the fact that anodic migration of the SDS micelle is strong, pH above 6.0 is required to obtain rapid analysis times. At pH below 6.0, the mobility of the micelle (~4 × 10⁻⁴ cm²/Vs) closely matches or exceeds the EOF which causes the elution time of the micelle to be greatly extended or even prevented. Our goal was to develop a rapid assay to profile the isoflavonoids of interest. Conditions that generate long analysis times were not considered. The ionization of the isoflavonoids should not be a factor in the pH range considered. The malonated isoflavonoids, FGM and MGM, will be deprotonated at any pH above 5. The glucosides, FG and MG, will not begin to deprotonate until pH approaches 12. These extreme pH conditions can not be used due to the presence of the ester bond found in the malonated isoflavonoids, which will undergo saponification at pH greater than 9. In the presence of SDS, the neutral glucoside isoflavonoids are migrating by a mobility induced by their partitioning in the charged SDS micelle. However, the charged malonates migrate based on their own electrophoretic mobility and that induced by the micelle. Figure 2 illustrates the electrophoretic mobility of the isoflavonoids as a function of pH in a 50 mM SDS electrolyte. The separation is almost completely unaffected by pH in the region examined. Other separation parameters must be further examined to improve resolution of the isoflavonoids.

---

**Figure 2. Variation of electrophoretic mobility with electrolyte pH for isoflavonoids. Conditions: running electrolyte, 50 mM SDS, 10 mM phosphate, at indicated pH; voltage, +15 kV; temperature, ambient; capillary, 50 μm ID, l = 50 cm, L = 60 cm; injection, 0.4 psi for 5 s; sample, 10 μL of methanolic isoflavonoid standards in 20 μL of running electrolyte.**

---

## 3 Results and discussion

### 3.1 CE methods development: dependence on pH

The first separation parameter was the pH of the running electrolyte. pH plays a dual role in MEKC since it influences the magnitude of the electroosmotic flow (EOF)

Electrophoresis 2002, 23, 1642–1651

### 3.2 Dependence on 1,2-hexanediol

We have introduced a series of alkyl polyalcohol modifiers that interact with the micelle to induce unique changes in selectivity as compared to the SDS micelle alone [33]. Of these modifiers, 1,2-hexanediol proved very useful to induce changes in selectivity between adjacent analytes that have slightly different hydrogen bonding characteristics [34]. Based on our previous successes with this modifier, we attempted to increase the resolution of the glucoside (formononetin-7-O-glucoside/medicarpin-7-O-glucoside; FG/MG) and malonated glucoside (formononetin-7-glucoside-O-6′-O-malonate/medicarpin-7-O-glucoside-6′-O-malonate; FGM/MGM) pairs. 1,2-Hexanediol is utilized at relatively low concentrations, usually less than 3% v/v, when compared to traditional organic modifiers that influence the bulk aqueous phase. Figure 3 illustrates the improvement in the selectivity as 1,2-hexanediol was added to the 50 mM SDS buffered at pH 8.5. The addition of the modifier clearly improves the selectivity between both adjacent pairs of peaks. Concentrations of 1,2-hexanediol greater than 2% v/v were not explored due to the fact that increased analysis times result with higher concentrations of 1,2-hexanediol due to a decrease in the EOF. We chose to use 2.0% v/v 1,2-hexanediol in the running electrolyte in order to maximize the selectivity between FGM/MGM and FG/MG.

---

### 3.3 Interference from plant matrix

Complex sample matrices often prove substantially more difficult to isolate the analyte peak(s) than compared to working with synthetic mixtures. Plant root extracts are no exception. Once the optimum pH and 1,2-hexanediol concentration were determined, root extracts from the legumes studied were obtained and analyzed. Figure 4A illustrates the separation of a root extract from WSC in 50 mM SDS electrolyte with 2% hexanediol at pH 9.0. The electropherogram shows the complexity of the sample matrix and there appears to be no major interferences when analyzing using the 287 nm signal. However, when the peak purity was examined by comparing UV spectra within each peak, it was determined that the MGM peak contained a major impurity. This interference co-eluting with MGM only appeared in WSC extracts. All other isoflavonoids appeared to be pure.

---

**Figure 3. Effect of 1,2-hexanediol on isoflavonoids. Conditions: running electrolyte, 50 mM SDS, 10 mM phosphate, pH 8.50, with indicated concentration of 1,2-hexanediol; other conditions as in Fig. 2. Sample, 10 μL of methanolic isoflavonoid standards in 20 μL of running electrolyte.**

---

**Figure 4. Effect of fine-tuning the running electrolyte composition with WSC root extract. Conditions: running electrolyte, (A) 50 mM SDS, 25 mM borate, 2% v/v 1,2-hexanediol, pH 9.0, (B) 60 mM SDS, 25 mM borate, 1.6% v/v 1,2-hexanediol, pH 9.0; voltage, +25 kV; temperature, 20°C; capillary, 75 μm ID, *l* = 56, *L* = 64.5 cm, extended path length; injection, 250 mbar·s. Sample, 10 μL of methanolic root extract in 20 μL of running electrolyte.**

In order to attempt to resolve the MGM peak in WSC from its interference, we varied several parameters including column temperature, concentration of SDS, and concentration of the 1,2-hexanediol. The temperature was varied from 20 to \(35^\circ \mathrm{C}\) in \(5^\circ \mathrm{C}\) increments. Only at \(35^\circ \mathrm{C}\) was partial resolution between MGM and the interfering peak obtained. However, the higher temperature significantly reduced the migration time window, due to the increased EOF, which lowered the resolution of all isoflavonoids of interest. The SDS concentration was varied from 30 to \(60 \mathrm{~mm}\) in \(10 \mathrm{~mm}\) increments at a fixed 1,2-hexanediol concentration of \(2 \%\) v/v. The lower concentrations of SDS produced a negative effect for all components. The best resolution between MGM and its interference occurred with \(60 \mathrm{~mm} \mathrm{SDS}\), where the MGM peak elutes first followed by the once co-eluting component. The resolution between the two peaks was greater than 2.5. Utilizing the \(60 \mathrm{~mm} \mathrm{SDS}\), the concentration of 1,2-hexanediol was varied. The use of \(3 \%\) v/v 1,2-hexanediol switched the elution order such that the interfering peak eluted before the MGM peak to the point that it began to co-elute with the FGM peak. This was obviously offsetting any improvement gained by increasing the SDS concentration to \(60 \mathrm{~mm}\). When concentrations lower than \(2 \%\) v/v 1,2-hexanediol were explored, \(1.6 \%\) v/v proved to be an optimum. Figure 4B illustrates an electropherogram of WSC under our optimized conditions. This buffer consisted of \(60 \mathrm{~mm} \mathrm{SDS}, 25 \mathrm{~mm}\) borate, pH 9.0, with \(1.6 \%\) v/v 1,2-hexanediol. Clearly, the interfering peak has been completely eliminated and good resolution between FGM and MGM still exist. This buffer system was utilized through the remainder of the study.

### 3.4 Comparison of cell windows

In order to increase detector sensitivity, different capillary cell configurations were compared. These include a straight \(75 \mu \mathrm{m}\) capillary, a \(75 \mu \mathrm{m}\) capillary with the extended light path cell (frequently referred to as a bubble cell), and a \(75 \mu \mathrm{m}\) capillary configured to the high sensitivity flow cell. The extended light and the high sensitivity cells are currently offered only for the Hewlett Packard (now Agilent) CE instrument. Figure 5 illustrates the results from a fenugreek root extract obtained using a standard capillary, the extended light path, and the high sensitivity flow cells. The length to the detector and the total length of the capillaries were the same for all three cell configurations (56/64.5 cm). The advantage of the longer path lengths is clearly illustrated in Figs. 5B and 5C and holds most true with the high sensitivity cell where more than a 10-fold gain in sensitivity is realized. The tradeoff for the gain in sensitivity is a loss in resolution for the longer path length. This becomes an issue in CE when the peaks are so narrow that two components may be

---

**Figure 5.** Comparison of flow cell windows with fenugreek root extract. Conditions: capillary, \(75 \mu \mathrm{m}\) ID, \(l=56\), \(L=64.5 \mathrm{~cm}\), (A) standard capillary, (B) extended path length, and (C) high-sensitivity flow cell. All other conditions as described in Fig. 4B.

separated but if they are both passing in the detection window at the same time they appear to co-elute. This effect can be seen in Fig. 5C as the resolution between some components decrease (see trace peaks between FGM and MGM). Because of the loss of resolution and the increase in complexity of installing the high sensitivity cell, we chose to use the extended light path capillaries for the generation of isoflavonoid profiles. In Fig. 5A, the peaks elute significantly faster than with the other flow cells. This can be attributed in part to the fact that this was a new capillary and the EOF generated was higher than with the other two configurations.

### 3.5 Variation of sample preparation

In the standard root extraction procedure, the plant roots are extracted with acetone followed by a second extraction step with three partitions against ethyl acetate.

Electrophoresis 2002, 23, 1642–1651

Figure 6. Comparison of acetone-ethyl acetate and acetone only extractions from fenugreek roots. Sample preparation: (A) acetone-ethyl acetate extraction (offset 10 mAU), (B) acetone only extraction. All other conditions as described in Fig. 4B.

ethyl acetate is evaporated and the extract is dissolved in methanol. While this procedure yields satisfactory results, it is very labor-intensive. In an attempt to simplify the sample preparation, extracts were prepared without the secondary extraction with ethyl acetate. In this variation, the acetone extract is evaporated to dryness and dissolved in the specified volume of methanol. A comparison of the different sample preparations for fenugreek grown in vermiculite is shown in Fig. 6. The advantage of the additional extraction of ethyl acetate is obvious. The sample extracted only with acetone has higher concentrations of contaminating compounds, especially in the region of the electropherogram between the peaks of FGM and MGM. However, the profiling of the isoflavonoids of interest can still be achieved and a significant reduction in the total sample preparation is gained. We noted a slight increase in migration times for all species with the acetone only extract. These shifts could be attributed to a small increase in the void time indicating a reduced EOF and as a result, the deviation was greatest at the micelle end of the electropherogram.

In a second variation of the sample preparation procedure, the final concentration of root extract in methanol was varied from 2.5 to 20 g/mL. This variation was performed using the traditional acetone-ethyl acetate procedure and the acetone only procedure. Using the acetone-ethyl acetate extraction procedure, a linear increase in isoflavonoid peak areas was observed. The MGM peak yielded peak areas of 84.11, 178.89, 358.92, and 769.71 for 2.5, 5, 10, and 20 g of initial tissue per mL of methanol, respectively. This indicates that lower concentrations of isoflavonoids could be profiled by using a more concentrated root extract if necessary. However, there was significant decrease in peak shape with peak symmetry decreasing from 1.454 with the 2.5 g/mL extract to 2.644 with the 20 g/mL for the MGM peak. This fronting peak can be attributed to sample overload. Also noted was an increase in migration time with the more concentrated extracts. This was most apparent for the more hydrophobic species with the migration times of 11.86, 12.10, 12.46, and 13.35 min for the 2.5, 5, 10, 20 g/mL, respectively, for MG. The acetone only extraction realized more significant problems. At only 5 g/mL, the MGM peak appears to split. An overall degradation in the separation was observed which was attributed to massive sample overload from the more complex acetone only extract.

### 3.6 Reproducibility

In order to be successful for a large-scale profiling study, the ability to reproducibly identify the isoflavonoids of interest is critical. One of the concerns we had was the composition of the injected sample. Samples were prepared by mixing 10 μL of the methanolic root extract with 20 μL of the running electrolyte. We were concerned that the large percentage of methanol in the injected sample may cause negative effects on the reproducibility and the separation. To study this effect, we prepared a sample by mixing the methanol extract with buffer and a second sample in which 10 μL of the methanolic root extract was placed in a centrifugal evaporator and the methanol was removed followed by redissolving the residue in 30 μL of the running electrolyte. In both samples the total volume is 30 μL and the concentrations of the isoflavonoids should be equal. Figure 7 shows the resulting electropherograms obtained with and without removing the methanol. The results are very similar, however, the presence of methanol in the sample does cause a slight decrease in retention, which is consistent with a decrease in partitioning until the analytes have migrated away from the methanol plug migrating with the void volume. An improvement in reproducibility was gained by evaporating the methanol. The standard deviation for seven repetitive injections of the fenugreek root extract without drying was 0.088 for FGM, 0.143 for MGM, 0.225 for FG, and 0.390 for MG. Upon evaporating the methanol from the sample, the standard deviation for seven replicate injections decreased to 0.069 for FGM, 0.082 for MGM, 0.157 for FG, and 0.193 for MG. A more detrimental effect is observed when comparing the separation efficiencies.

Electrophoresis 2002, 23, 1642–1651

Table 1. Migration time reproducibility for legume root extracts

| Average time (min) |
|--------------------|
| FGM                | MGM                | FG                 | MG                 |
| WSC                | Run-to-run<sup>a</sup> | 6.17 (0.05)        | 6.61 (0.06)        | 9.79 (0.13)       | N.D.<sup>c</sup> |
|                    | Buffer-to-         |                    |                    |                    |                   |
|                    | buffer<sup>b</sup>  | 6.18 (0.06)        | 6.64 (0.08)        | 9.81 (0.17)       | N.D.              |
| MT                 | Run-to-run         | 6.23 (0.06)        | 6.69 (0.08)        | 9.86 (0.17)       | N.D.              |
|                    | Buffer-to-         |                    |                    |                    |                   |
|                    | buffer             | 6.22 (0.06)        | 6.69 (0.08)        | 9.85 (0.17)       | N.D.              |
| Fenugreek          | Run-to-run         | 6.42 (0.04)        | 7.04 (0.06)        | 9.99 (0.11)       | 10.87 (0.13)      |
|                    | Buffer-to-         |                    |                    |                    |                   |
|                    | buffer             | 6.20 (0.07)        | 6.70 (0.09)        | 9.68 (0.19)       | 10.42 (0.21)      |
| AA                 | Run-to-run         | 6.10 (0.04)        | 6.54 (0.06)        | 9.60 (0.15)       | N.D.              |
|                    | Buffer-to-         |                    |                    |                    |                   |
|                    | buffer             | 6.16 (0.05)        | 6.64 (0.06)        | 9.77 (0.15)       | N.D.              |
| CA                 | Run-to-run         | 6.23 (0.04)        | 6.70 (0.05)        | 9.67 (0.13)       | N.D.              |
|                    | Buffer-to-         |                    |                    |                    |                   |
|                    | buffer             | 6.20 (0.06)        | 6.67 (0.07)        | 9.78 (0.15)       | N.D.              |

a) Run-to-run statistics are the average of 5 repetitive injections; the standard deviation for the resulting data set is shown in parenthesis.

b) Buffer-to-buffer statistics are the resulting averages of buffers prepared on 3 different days with 5 injections using each buffer. The pooled standard deviation is shown in parenthesis.

c) N.D., not determined.

Conditions: running electrolyte, 60 mm SDS, 25 mm borate, 1.6% v/v 1,2-hexanediol, pH 9.0; voltage, +25 kV; temperature, 20°C; capillary, 75 μm ID, l = 50, L = 60 cm, standard capillary; injection, 0.5 psi for 4 s; sample, 10 μL of methanolic root extract in 20 μL of running electrolyte.

### 3.7 UV spectra

PDA detection was proven to be a valuable tool in CE. The ability to rapidly acquire spectra to verify peak identity offset some problems in migration time reproducibility that haunt CE. The use of a PDA detector in complex sample matrices is also useful to determine if an analyte of interest is co-eluting with another species. Figure 8 shows the PDA spectra for the four isoflavonoids profiled in this study. The formononetin-related species have a UV maximum at 251 nm while the conjugates of medicarpin have a UV maximum at 285 nm in the running electrolyte. As expected the spectra between FG/FGM and MG/MGM are almost identical since the malonate group does not affect the chromophore responsible for UV absorbance.

Electrophoresis 2002, 23, 1642–1651

the analysis even with a 25 cm analytical column. The FG peak is only partially resolved. A major problem occurs when a sample contains large amounts of FGM and/or MG since the two species are only partially resolved. Even the MGM, although well resolved from the other iso- flavonoids of interest, is co-eluting with other species slightly in front and behind. These other peaks will become an issue when trace amounts of MGM are pre- sent or the concentration of the other peaks increase.

Figure 10 illustrates the electropherograms obtained from each of the root extracts with MEKC. As the electropher- ograms illustrate, the components of the root extracts vary significantly for the different legumes including the ratios of the isoflavonoids of interest. All of the extracts have measurable amounts of FGM, MGM, and FG. Fenugreek possesses a significantly higher concentration of MG and M than all of the other legumes while only CA and AA had detectable amounts of formononetin (F). When the peak purity of each component was examined using the PDA data, it was apparent that some of the iso- flavonoids contained co-eluting interferences. In CA inter- ference occurs with MGM and F. An interference is detected with FGM in fenugreek. These interferences

**Figure 8.** PDA spectra of the isoflavonoids studied obtained in the running electrolyte. All conditions as described in Fig. 4B.

### 3.8 Comparison of HPLC and CE results

The root extracts from each of the legumes were analyzed using RP-HPLC and MEKC. In the HPLC, the time between injections exceeds 1 h with the analytes of interest eluting within 35 min. A resulting chromatogram from WSC is shown in Fig. 9, which illustrates the difficulty of

**Figure 9.** RP-HPLC separation of WSC root extract.

**Figure 10.** Comparison of various legume root extracts using MEKC. All conditions as described in Fig. 4B. Sample: (A), WSC; (B) MT; (C) fenugreek; (D) AA; and (E) CA.

1650 B.R. Baggett et al.

Electrophoresis 2002, 23, 1642–1651

Table 2. Comparison of HPLC and CE results

| Peak area (287nm) normalized to FGM<sup>a</sup> | FGM | MGM | FG | MG |
|-----------------------------------------------|-----|-----|----|----|
| WSC                                           |     |     |    |    |
| CE                                            | 1.00| 0.345| 0.289| 0.086 |
| HPLC                                          | 1.00| 0.329| 0.084| 0.069 |
| MT                                            |     |     |    |    |
| CE                                            | 1.00| 0.305| N.D.| N.D. |
| HPLC                                          | 1.00| 0.370| N.D.| N.D. |
| Fenugreek                                     |     |     |    |    |
| CE                                            | 1.00| 8.848| 0.303| 0.149 |
| HPLC                                          | 1.00| 9.456| 0.228| 0.515 |
| AA                                            |     |     |    |    |
| CE                                            | 1.00| 0.218| 0.150| 0.013 |
| HPLC                                          | 1.00| 0.164| 0.042| 0.025 |
| CA                                            |     |     |    |    |
| CE                                            | 1.00| 0.151| 0.150| 0.093 |
| HPLC                                          | 1.00| 0.187| 0.078| 0.037 |

a) MEKC were mobility-corrected by dividing the integrated peak area by the migration time for each component. The resulting mobility-corrected peak area was used to calculate the normalized peak area ratio.

could possibly be resolved by further fine-tuning the running electrolyte, however, it is unlikely that one electrolyte could resolve all interferences for the various root extracts.

A comparison of the HPLC and MEKC results is given in Table 2. The results of the integration are expressed as the ratio of each peak area to the peak area of FGM. Peak areas for MEKC were mobility-corrected by dividing the integrated peak area by the migration time for each component. The resulting mobility-corrected peak area was used to calculate the normalized peak area ratio. This peak was chosen as the reference because it is fairly abundant in all root extracts and appears to be free of major interferences in both MEKC and HPLC separation. Correlation for WSC varies more than most of the other root extracts. The MEKC results show about 4 times more FG and 2 times as much MG than the HPLC results. The MG from the HPLC could possibly be due to poor integration of the overlapping FGM peak, see Fig. 9. Likewise, the FG peak in the HPLC is not fully resolved. The correlations from the MT match well. For fenugreek, the correlation for MGM/FGM is near identical but vary for both FG and MG. The lower ratio for FG in HPLC could be due to the interference as discussed with WSC, however, the difference in ratios for the MG peak is unclear. The correlation for AA and CA is good with a significant variation only for FG. While these results do not show perfect correlation, they do indicate general agreement for most of the isoflavonoids studied. The UV spectra from the MEKC data indicate that the peaks are free of interferences with few exceptions that have been previously discussed. The sample throughput is increased by more than 3-fold with the MEKC method and the volume of root extract required is reduced significantly as well.

### 4 Concluding remarks

We have devised a MEKC assay that provided the quantitative information needed for profiling key isoflavonoids in a large number of legume root extracts. Several parameters played a role in the separation. Most important were found to be running electrolyte composition and sample preparation. The use of extended path length capillaries produced adequate sensitivities to profile the isoflavonoids related to the biosynthetic pathway of medicarpin. The run-to-run and sample-to-sample reproducibility proved to be very good when simple capillary cleaning steps were taken between each injection. Some variations in migration time were observed between buffer-to-buffer. The results from the MEKC assay correlated well with those obtained from RP-HPLC. The developed assay has a sample throughput of less than 25 min and requires only 10 μL of the methanolic root extract.

The authors gratefully acknowledge the Samuel Roberts Noble Foundation for financial support. CE equipment used in this study was funded in part by NIH-NIGMS grant S06 GM08003-30.

Received November 21, 2001

### 5 References

[1] Wiltout, R.H., Hornung, R.L., *J. Natl. Cancer Inst.* 1988, 80, 220–228.

[2] Groweiss, A., Cardellina, J.H., Boyd, M.R., *J. Nat. Prod.* 2000, 63, 1537–1539.

[3] van Acker, F.A.A., Hageman, J.A., Haenen, G.R.M., van der Vijgh, W.J.F., Bast, A., Menge, M.P.B., *J. Med. Chem.* 2000, 43, 3752–3760.

[4] Messina, M.S., *Am. J. Clin. Nutrit.* 1999, 79, 574–575.

[5] Rice-Evans, C.A., Miller, N.J., *Biochem. Soc. Trans.* 1996, 24, 790–794.

[6] Baker, C.J., O’Neill, N.R., Bauchan, G.R., *Phytopathology* 1988, 78, 1590.

[7] Guo, L., Dixon, R.A., Paiva, N.L., *J. Biol. Chem.* 1994, 269, 22372–22378.

[8] Paiva, N.L., Edwards, R., Sun, Y., Hrazdina, G., Dixon, R.A., *Plant Mol. Biol.* 1991, 17, 653–667.

[9] Koster, J., Strack, D., Barz, W., *Planta Med.* 1983, 48, 131–135.

[10] Altria, K.D., Kelly, M.A., Clark, B.J., *TRAC* 1998, 17, 204–214.

Electrophoresis 2002, 23, 1642–1651

[11] Belen'kii, B. G., Belov, Y. V., Kasalainen, G. E., J. Anal. Chem. 1996, 51, 753–759.

[12] Blessum, C., Jeppsson, J. O., Aguzzi, F., Bernon, H., Bienvenu, J., Ann. Biol. Clin. 1999, 57, 643–657.

[13] Boone, C. M., Waterval, J. C. M., Lingemann, H., Ensing, K., Underberg, W. J. M., J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 1999, 20, 831–863.

[14] El Rassi, Z., Electrophoresis 1999, 20, 3134–3144.

[15] Issaq, H. J., Electrophoresis 1999, 20, 3190–3203.

[16] Lurie, I. S., Proc. SPIE-Int. Soc. Opt. Eng. 1999, 3576, 125–135.

[17] Smith, J. T., Electrophoresis 1999, 20, 3078–3083.

[18] Terabe, S., Otsuka, K., Ichikawa, K., Tsuchiya, A., Ando, T., Anal. Chem. 1984, 56, 111–113.

[19] Morin, P., Villard, F., Dreux, M., Andre, P., J. Chromatogr. 1993, 628, 161–169.

[20] Liang, H.-R., Vuorela, H., Vuorela, P., Hiltunen, R., Riekkola, M.-L., J. Liq. Chromatogr. Relat. Technol. 1998, 21, 625–643.

[21] McGhie, T. K., Markham, K. R., Phytochem. Anal. 1994, 5, 121–126.

[22] Morin, P., Villard, F., Dreux, M., J. Chromatogr. 1993, 628, 153–160.

CE profiling of isoflavonoids 1651

[23] Morin, P., Dreux, M., J. Liq. Chromatogr. 1993, 16, 3735–375.

[24] Liu, Y.-M., Sheu, S.-J., Anal. Chim. Acta 1994, 288, 221–226.

[25] Li, K.-L., Sheu, S. J., Anal. Chim. Acta 1995, 313, 113–120.

[26] Pietta, P. G., Mauri, P. L., Rava, A., Sabbatini, G., J. Chromatogr. 1991, 549, 367–373.

[27] Pietta, P. G., Mauri, P. L., Simonetti, P., Testolin, G., Fresenius’ J. Anal. Chem. 1995, 352, 788–792.

[28] Quaglia, M. G., Bossu, E., Donati, E., Mazzanti, G., Brandt, A., J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 1999, 19, 435–442.

[29] Bjergegaard, C., Michaelson, S., Mortensen, K., Sorensen, H., J. Chromatogr. 1993, 652, 477–485.

[30] Cancalon, P. F., J. AOAC Int. 1999, 82, 95–106.

[31] Allen, D. J., Gray, J. C., Paiva, N. L., Smith, J. T., Electrophoresis 2000, 21, 2051–2057.

[32] Hipskind, J. D., Paiva, N. L., Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 2000, 13, 551–562.

[33] Wall, W. E., Allen, D. J., Denson, K. D., Love, G. I., Smith, J. T., Electrophoresis 1999, 20, 2390–2399.

[34] Allen, D. J., Wall, W. E., Denson, K. D., Smith, J. T., Electrophoresis 1999, 20, 100–110.
