
Downloaded from http://gut.bmj.com/ on March 30, 2015 - Published by group.bmj.com

---

**LEADING ARTICLE**

**T-bet and mucosal Th1 responses in the gastrointestinal tract**

B Weigmann, M F Neurath

---

T cells play an essential role in regulating mucosal immune responses in the gastrointestinal tract. Recent observations on T helper cell differentiation and activation by regulatory transcription factors—especially T-bet—in chronic inflammatory diseases have provided new perspectives for understanding mucosal immunity. Here we summarise recent advances in the field of transcription factors and discuss the implications of these findings for future therapeutic approaches in inflammatory bowel diseases. In particular, we have focused on the role of T-bet in controlling mucosal Th1 responses in the gastrointestinal tract.

n antigen presentation, naïve T helper cells can differentiate into one of two T cell subsets that can be distinguished by their cytokine production and functions.¹² Whereas Th1 cells produce interferon γ (IFN-γ), and are important in macrophage activation as well as inflammatory and autoimmune reactions, Th2 cells produce cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-4, IL-5, IL-9, IL-10, and IL-13, and are mainly involved in controlling humoral and allergic immune responses.¹⁻⁷

T cells appear to play an important role in Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis, two major forms of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) in humans. Although the aetiology of these diseases is unknown, it has been suggested that activation of the mucosal immune system in response to bacterial antigens with consecutive pathological cytokine production plays a key pathogenic role.⁵⁶ In particular, cytokines produced by T lymphocytes appear to initiate and perpetuate chronic intestinal inflammation in IBD. Cytokine production by anti-CD2 plus anti-CD28 stimulated lamina propria CD4⁺ T lymphocytes differs between Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Whereas Crohn’s disease is associated with increased production of Th1-like cytokines such as IFN-γ and tumour necrosis factor (TNF), the cytokine profile in ulcerative colitis is characterised by increased production of the Th2 cytokine IL-5.⁸ Interestingly, both Th1 and Th2-type cytokines have been shown to play an important pathogenic role in various animal models of IBD suggesting that both Th1 and Th2 cells can induce chronic intestinal inflammation in vivo. The pathogenic function of Th1 and Th2 cells can be counteracted by immunosuppressive cytokines, such as IL-10 and transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), produced by regulatory T cells or Th3 cells.

---

**T-BET REGULATES THE DIFFERENTIATION AND FUNCTION OF LYMPHOCYTES**

Recent studies have focused on molecular mechanisms of Th1 and Th2 cell development. Transcription factors such as c-maf, STAT-6, GATA-3, JunB, and NFATc1 have been shown to induce or augment Th2 cytokine production. In contrast, transcription factors such as STAT-1, STAT-4, and the recently cloned T-bet protein are associated with IFN-γ and IL-12/IL-23 signalling, respectively, and play a key role in Th1 specific cytokine production.⁹⁻²⁴ T-bet, a novel member of the T-box family, was cloned by Szabo et al in 2000 and was found to be expressed by IFN-γ-producing Th1 but not Th2 cells.⁹ Mechanistic studies showed that overexpression of T-bet by retroviral gene transduction in primary T cell was sufficient to induce IFN-γ production by chromatin remodelling at the IFN-γ gene locus and direct transactivation of the IFN-γ gene promoter in an IL-12 independent fashion.⁹⁻¹¹ The homeoprotein Hlx has been recently identified as a target of T-bet and seems to contribute to the capacity of T-bet to induce IFN-γ production.²³ T-bet thus plays a key role in Th1 cell differentiation even before IL-12 dependent selection. In addition, T-bet was shown to upregulate IL-12 receptor β2 chain expression on T cells thereby making T cells more susceptible to the IL-12/STAT-4 signalling pathway that plays an important role in Th1 T cell differentiation (fig 1). Finally, in T lymphocytes T-bet was found to be activated by IFN-γ signalling via the transcription factor STAT-1 suggesting an autocrine pathway by which T-bet induced IFN-γ production causes T-bet activation.¹¹ ¹⁹ ²¹

"T-bet plays a key role in controlling Th cell differentiation and effector functions in vivo"

T-bet deficient mice showed normal lymphoid development but exhibited profound defects in mounting Th1 mediated immune responses in response to IL-12.¹² CD4⁺ T cells and natural killer T cells of T-bet deficient mice produced reduced amounts of IFN-γ whereas cytotoxic CD8⁺ T cells showed unaltered IFN-γ production indicating a key role for T-bet in controlling IFN-γ production by CD4⁺ but not CD8⁺ T cells. Furthermore, T-bet deficient Black6 mice failed to cure Leishmania major infections and their susceptibility to infection was similar to that of the

---

**Abbreviations:** IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IFN-γ, interferon γ; IL, interleukin; TNF, tumour necrosis factor; TGF-β, transforming growth factor β.

---

See end of article for authors' affiliations

Correspondence to:  
Dr M F Neurath,  
Laboratory of Immunology,  
I. Medical Clinic, University  
of Mainz, 55131 Mainz,  
Langenbeckstrasse 1,  
Germany; neurath@  
l-med.klinik.uni-mainz.de  

Accepted for publication  
24 June 2002

www.gutjnl.com

Downloaded from http://gut.bmj.com/ on March 30, 2015 - Published by group.bmj.com

Weigmann, Neurath

with Crohn’s disease.¹⁵ ¹⁶ These data suggested a potential regulatory role of T-bet in Th1 associated diseases of the gastrointestinal tract.

“Overexpression of T-bet is essential and sufficient to promote Th1 mediated colitis in vivo”

Recently, the function of T-bet in mucosal T cells in animal models of chronic intestinal inflammation was tested.¹⁶ Retroviral transduction of T-bet in CD62L⁺CD4⁺ T cells exacerbated colitis in reconstituted SCID mice compared with mice reconstituted with control transduced T cells. Conversely, T-bet deficient T cells failed to induce colitis in a Th1 mediated adoptive transfer model. This suggests that overexpression of T-bet is essential and sufficient to promote Th1 mediated colitis in vivo. T-bet deficient CD62L⁻CD4⁺ memory T cells showed enhanced protective functions in Th1 mediated colitis and exhibited increased Smad-3 signalling. A T-bet driven pathway of T cell activation therefore appears to control the intestinal cytokine balance. In addition, TGF-β was found to be a potent suppressor of T-bet expression in mucosal T cells suggesting that TGF-β mediated suppression of Th1 development may be due to TGF induced suppression of T-bet expression.¹⁶ ²⁴ Taken together, these data suggest an important regulatory function of T-bet in T cell mediated colitis in vivo.

### PERSPECTIVES

A wide range of drugs has been investigated in the clinical management of IBD, including biological agents, antibodies, recombinant cytokines, or low molecular weight inhibitors. Some strategies have attempted to block the interaction between antigen presenting cell and T cells whereas others have targeted cytokines, cytokine signalling, and adhesion molecules. For instance, neutralising antibodies to TNF have been widely used for the treatment of chronic active Crohn’s disease¹⁷ and further antibodies are currently being tested in clinical trials such as anti-CD40L, anti-IL6R, and anti-IL-12 antibodies.

“Targeted modulation of JAK/STAT and T-bet signalling in T cells might be helpful in interfering selectively with the clinical course of disease of IBD patients”

Recent data suggest however that targeted modulation of JAK/STAT and T-bet signalling in T cells might be helpful in interfering selectively with the clinical course of disease of IBD patients. At least in animal models, blockade of the IL-12/STAT-4 pathway in the CD45RBhi adoptive transfer model ameliorated experimental colitis and T-bet deficiency prevented Th1 mediated chronic intestinal inflammation.¹⁶ ¹⁸ The potential advantage of targeting cytokine signalling compared with cytokines is that the former approach may affect various proinflammatory cytokines at the same time rather than one single cytokine. Therefore, it will be interesting to develop specific inhibitors of cytokine signalling and to determine whether such inhibitors may be useful in future therapeutic approaches in patients with IBD.

Authors’ affiliations  
B Weigmann, M F Neurath, Laboratory of Immunology, I Medical Clinic, University of Mainz, Germany

### REFERENCES

1. Mosmann TR, Cherwinski H, Bond MW, et al. Two types of murine helper T cell clone. I. Definition according to profiles of lymphokine activities and secreted proteins. *J Immunol* 1986;7:2348–57.
2. Mosmann TR, Coffman RL. Th1 and Th2 cells: different patterns of lymphokine secretion lead to different functional properties. *Annu Rev Immunol* 1989;7:145–73.

www.gutjnl.com

T-bet and mucosal Th1 responses in the gastrointestinal tract

3 Mosmann TR, Sad S. The expanding universe of T cell subsets. Immunol Today 1996;17:138–46.

4 Paul WE, Seder RA. Lymphocyte responses and cytokines. Cell 1994;76:241–51.

5 Podolsky DK. Inflammatory bowel disease. N Engl J Med 1991;325:928–37.

6 Romagnani P, Annunziato F, Baccari MC, et al. T cells and cytokines in Crohn’s. Curr Opin Immunol 1997;9:793–9.

7 Romagnani S. Lymphokine production by human T cells in disease states. Ann Rev Immunol 1994;12:227–57.

8 Fuss I, Neurath MF, Boirivant M, et al. Disparate CD4+ lamina propria lymphocyte secretion profiles in inflammatory bowel. J Immunol 1996;157:1261–70.

9 Szabo SJ, Kim ST, Costa GL, et al. A novel transcription factor, T-bet, directs Th1 lineage commitment. Cell 2000;100:655–69.

10 Afkarian M, Sedy JR, Yang J, et al. T-bet is a STAT-1 induced regulator of IL-12R expression in naive CD4+ T cells. Nat Immunol 2002;3:549–57.

11 Mullen AC, High FA, Hutchins AS, et al. Role of T-bet in commitment of Th1 cells before IL-12-dependent selection. Science 2001;292:1907–10.

12 Szabo SJ, Sullivan BM, Stemann C, et al. Distinct effects of T-bet in Th1 lineage commitment and IFN-γ production in CD4 and CD8 T cells. Science 2002;295:338–42.

13 Finotto S, Sanctis GTD, Lehr HA, et al. Treatment of allergic airway inflammation and hyperresponsiveness by local antisense-induced blockade of GATA-3 expression. J Exp Med 2001;193:1247–60.

14 Peng SL, Szabo SJ, Glimcher LH. T-bet regulates IgG class switching and pathogenic autoantibody production. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002;99:5545–50.

15 Salvati VM, MacDonald TT, Bajaj-Elliott M, et al. Interleukin-18 and associated markers of T helper cell type 1 activity in celiac disease. Gut 2002;50:186–90.

16 Neurath MF, Weigmann B, Finotto S, et al. The transcription factor T-bet regulates mucosal T cell activation in experimental colitis and Crohn’s disease. J Exp Med 2002;195:1129–43.

17 Targan SR, Hanauer, SB, Deventer SJV, et al. A short-term study of chimeric monoclonal antibody cA2 to tumour necrosis factor alpha for Crohn’s disease. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1029–35.

18 Simpson SJ, Shah S, Comisky M, et al. T cell-mediated pathology in two models of experimental colitis depends predominantly on the interleukin-12/signal transducer and activator of transcription STAT-4 pathway, but is not conditional on interferon-γ expression by T cells. J Exp Med 1998;187:1225–34.

19 Afkarian M, Sedy JR, Yang J, et al. T-bet is a STAT1-induced regulator of IL-12R expression in naive CD4(+)T cells. Nat Immunol 2002;3:549–57.

20 Finotto S, Neurath MF, Glickman JN. et al. Development of spontaneous airway changes consistent with human asthma in mice lacking T-bet. Science 2002;295:336–8.

21 Lighvani AA, Frucht DM, Jankovic D, et al. T-bet is rapidly induced by interferon-gamma in lymphoid and myeloid cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:15137–42.

22 Avni O, Lee D, Macian F, et al. T(H) cell differentiation is accompanied by dynamic changes in histone acetylation of cytokine genes. Nat Immunol 2002;3:643–51.

23 Mullen AC,Hutchins AS, High FA, et al. Hlx is induced by and genetically interacts with T-bet to promote heritable T(H) 1 gene induction. Nat Immunol 2002;3:652–8.

24 Gorelik L, Constant S, Flavell RA. Mechanism of transforming growth factor beta-induced inhibition of T helper type 1 Differentiation. J Exp Med 2002;195:1499–505.

Downloaded from http://gut.bmj.com/ on March 30, 2015 - Published by group.bmj.com

**T-bet and mucosal Th1 responses in the gastrointestinal tract**

B Weigmann and M F Neurath

*Gut* 2002 51: 301-303  
doi: 10.1136/gut.51.3.301

---

Updated information and services can be found at:  
http://gut.bmj.com/content/51/3/301.1

These include:

- **References**: This article cites 23 articles, 11 of which you can access for free at:  
  http://gut.bmj.com/content/51/3/301.1#BIBL

- **Email alerting service**: Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article. Sign up in the box at the top right corner of the online article.

---

**Notes**

---

To request permissions go to:  
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions

To order reprints go to:  
http://journals.bmj.com/cgi/reprintform

To subscribe to BMJ go to:  
http://group.bmj.com/subscribe/
