
JACS
COMMUNICATIONS
Published on Web 08/16/2002

# Kanosamine Biosynthesis: A Likely Source of the Aminoshikimate Pathway's Nitrogen Atom

**Jiantao Guo and J. W. Frost**

*Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824*

Received April 22, 2002

Many biologically active natural products including rifamycin, mitomycin, and ansamitocin are derived from 3-amino-5-hydroxybenzoic acid (AHBA, Scheme 1) by way of the aminoshikimate pathway. Floss and co-workers have demonstrated the role of 4-amino-3,4-dideoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonic acid 7-phosphate (aminoDAHP, Scheme 1) in the aminoshikimate pathway and delineated the loci in the *rif* biosynthetic gene cluster required for biosynthesis of 3-amino-5-hydroxybenzoic acid. Recently, aminoDAHP was demonstrated to form in *Amycolatopsis mediterranei* cell-free lysate from 3-amino-3-deoxy-D-fructose 6-phosphate (aminoF6P, Scheme 1) via the inferred intermediacy of 1-deoxy-1-imino-D-erythrose 4-phosphate (iminoE4P, Scheme 1). Biosynthesis of 3-amino-3-deoxy-D-glucose (kanosamine, Scheme 1) is now examined as a possible source of the aminoshikimate pathway’s nitrogen atom.

With identification of 3-amino-3-deoxy-D-fructose 6-phosphate as a precursor to 3-amino-5-hydroxybenzoic acid, attention turned to delineation of the source of this alkaloid. One natural product that, by combination of an isomerization and phosphorylation, could be a precursor to 3-amino-3-deoxy-D-fructose 6-phosphate was kanosamine (Scheme 1). Various microbes generate kanosamine as a biosynthetic end-product. As exemplified by the biosynthesis of kanamycin, kanosamine is also an intermediate en route to other natural products. The possibility therefore needed to be explored that *A. mediterranei* might similarly utilize kanosamine as a biosynthetic intermediate as well as a vehicle for incorporation of the nitrogen atom into the aminoshikimate pathway. Working backward from the intermediacy of 3-amino-3-deoxy-D-fructose 6-phosphate, kanosamine 6-phosphate was first synthesized and tested as a precursor to aminoDAHP.

D-Glucose was selectively protected and the resulting C-3 hydroxyl group oxidized (Scheme 2). Subsequent diastereoselective reduction provided for an overall net inversion of configuration at C-3. Activation of the C-3 hydroxyl group as a triflate ester followed by nucleophilic displacement with NaN₃ introduced the requisite nitrogen atom at C-3. Reduction and subsequent deprotection gave kanosamine. Hexokinase-catalyzed phosphorylation of kanosamine employed citric acid as an activator and afforded kanosamine 6-phosphate in an overall yield of 43% from starting D-glucose.

Initial attempts at the in vitro bioconversion of kanosamine 6-phosphate into aminoDAHP focused on an assembled system. Kanosamine 6-phosphate, D-ribose 5-phosphate, and phosphoenolpyruvate were incubated with yeast phosphoglucose isomerase, *Escherichia coli tktA*-encoded transketolase, and *E. coli aroF*-encoded DAHP synthase. Although no aminoDAHP was detected (entry 1, Table 1), formation of 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonic acid 7-phosphate (DAHP) indicated that kanosamine 6-phosphate was a substrate for isomerase. The action of transketolase on

---

* Address correspondence to this author. E-mail: frostjw@cem.msu.edu.

Table 1. Biosynthesis of AminoDAHP from Kanosamine 6-Phosphate and Kanosamine from UDP-Glucose

| entry | reaction conditions                                                                                          | products$^{c}$ (yield,$^{d}$%) |
|-------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| 1     | kanosamine 6-phosphate, R5P, PEP; yeast phosphoglucose isomerase (60 units), $E$. coli TktA transketolase (9 units$^{a}$), $E$. coli AroF$^{FBR}$ DAHP synthase (660 units$^{b}$), pH 7.3 | DAHP (39)                     |
| 2     | kanosamine 6-phosphate, R5P, PEP; yeast phosphoglucose isomerase (60 units), $E$. coli TktA transketolase (9 units$^{a}$), $A$. mediterranei RifH aminoDAHP synthase (64 units$^{b}$), pH 7.3 | aminoDAHP (2); DAHP (30)       |
| 3     | kanosamine 6-phosphate, R5P, PEP; $A$. mediterranei cell-free extract (DAHP synthase activity of 0.2 unit$^{b}$), pH 7.3 | aminoDAHP (6); DAHP (20); AHBA (2); Tyr (3); Phe (2) |
| 4     | glucose 6-phosphate, R5P, PEP, glutamine, $(NH_{4})_{2}SO_{4}$; $A$. mediterranei cell-free extract (DAHP synthase activity of 0.2 unit$^{b}$), pH 7.3 | DAHP (21)                     |
| 5     | UDP-6,6-$[^{2}H_{2}]$-glucose, NAD, glutamine; $A$. mediterranei cell-free extract, pH 6.8 | 6,6-$[^{2}H_{2}]$-kanosamine (5) |

$a$ Transketolase was assayed according to ref 6a. $b$ AminoDAHP synthase was assayed as DAHP synthase activity according to ref 6a. $c$ See the legend to Scheme 1 for abbreviations. $d$ Yields are $^{1}$H NMR yields of aminoDAHP, DAHP, and AHBA purified to homogeneity and of L-tyrosine and L-phenylalanine purified to a binary mixture. Response factors and quantification of product concentrations were based on integration relative to 3-(trimethylsilyl)propionate-2,2,3,3-d$_{4}$.

Incubation of 3-amino-3-deoxy-D-fructose 6-phosphate with cell-free lysate of $A$. mediterranei (ATCC 21789) has previously been reported to give higher yields of aminoDAHP than incubations employing the assembled bioconversion system.$^{4}$ Accordingly, reaction of kanosamine 6-phosphate with D-ribose 5-phosphate and phosphoenolpyruvate in $A$. mediterranei cell-free lysate led to higher yields of aminoDAHP and formation of 3-amino-5-hydroxybenzoic acid (entry 3, Table 1). As a control experiment, D-glucose 6-phosphate, D-ribose 5-phosphate, and phosphoenolpyruvate were incubated in $A$. mediterranei cell-free lysate with glutamine and $(NH_{4})_{2}SO_{4}$ as possible sources of nitrogen (entry 4, Table 1). No aminoDAHP formation was observed.

Reaction of kanosamine with ATP, D-ribose 5-phosphate, and phosphoenolpyruvate in $A$. mediterranei cell-free lysate did not produce quantifiable levels of either aminoDAHP or DAHP. As a consequence, attention turned to biosynthesis of kanosamine in $A$. mediterranei. Kanosamine biosynthesis was first observed and studied in $Bacillus$ pumilus (formerly $Bacillus$ aminoglucosidicus) in the 1960s.$^{5a-c}$ Incubation of UDP-[U-$^{14}$C]-glucose in $B$. pumilus cell lysate with NAD and glutamine led to the formation of [U-$^{14}$C]-kanosamine.$^{5c}$ Likewise, incubation of UDP-6,6-$[^{2}H_{2}]$-glucose with NAD and glutamine in $A$. mediterranei cell-free lysate led to the formation of 6,6-$[^{2}H_{2}]$-kanosamine (entry 5, Table 1). Based on analysis by electrospray mass spectrometry, UDP-6,6-$[^{2}H_{2}]$-glucose having an M + 2 ion with relative intensity 98.08% yielded kanosamine having an M + 2 ion with 97.83% relative intensity. Incubation of UDP-glucose with NAD, glutamine, ATP, D-ribose 5-phosphate, and phosphoenolpyruvate in $A$. mediterranei cell-free lysate did not produce quantifiable concentrations of aminoDAHP. Low levels of aminoglucokinase (b, Scheme 1) in lysed $A$. mediterranei cells may explain the formation of kanosamine from UDP-glucose as well as the lack of quantifiable aminoDAHP formation from UDP-glucose and kanosamine.

Kanosamine biosynthesis has been directly implicated as the source of the aminoshikimate pathway's nitrogen atom. This follows from the observed bioconversions of kanosamine 6-phosphate into aminoDAHP and 3-amino-5-hydroxybenzoic acid (entries 2 and 3, Table 1), along with the observed bioconversion of UDP-glucose into kanosamine (entry 5, Table 1). As a consequence, elaboration of the source of the aminoshikimate pathway's nitrogen atom must now include elaboration of the biosynthesis of kanosamine. In turn, biosynthesis of kanosamine emerges as a pathway possibly shared by microbes (biosyntheses) as diverse as $Bacillus$ spp. (kanosamine),$^{5}$

Streptomyces kanamyceticus (kanamycin),$^{7}$ $A$. mediterranei (rifamycin),$^{8}$ Streptomyces lavendulae (mitomycin),$^{8}$ and Actinomyces pretiosum (ansamitocin).$^{9}$

Acknowledgment. Professor Heinz G. Floss provided $rifH$. Research was supported by a contract from F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. and a grant from the National Institutes of Health.

Supporting Information Available: Synthesis of kanosamine 6-phosphate and its conversion to aminoDAHP; synthesis of UDP-6,6-$[^{2}H_{2}]$-glucose and its conversion to 6,6-$[^{2}H_{2}]$-kanosamine (PDF). This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

References

(1) Floss, H. G. Nat. Prod. Rep. 1997, 14, 433.

(2) (a) Kim, C.-G.; Kirschning, A.; Bergon, P.; Ahn, Y.; Wang, J. J.; Shibuya, M.; Floss, H. G. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1992, 114, 4941. (b) Kirschning, A.; Bergon, P.; Wang, J.-J.; Breazeale, S.; Floss, H. G. Carbohydr. Res. 1994, 256, 245. (c) Kim, C.-G.; Kirschning, A.; Bergon, P.; Zhou, P.; Su, E.; Sauerbrei, B.; Ning, S.; Ahn, Y.; Breuer, M.; Leistner, E.; Floss, H. G. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1996, 118, 7486.

(3) (a) Kim, C.-G.; Yu, T.-W.; Fryhle, C. B.; Handa, S.; Floss, H. G. J. Biol. Chem. 1998, 273, 6030. (b) Eads, J. C.; Beeby, M.; Scapin, G.; Yu, T. W.; Floss, H. G. Biochemistry 1999, 38, 9840. (c) August, P. R.; Tang, L.; Yoon, Y. J.; Ning, S.; Müller, R.; Yu, T.-W.; Taylor, M.; Hoffmann, D.; Kim, C.-G.; Zhang, X.; Hutchinson, C. R.; Floss, H. G. Chem. Biol. 1998, 5, 69. (d) Yu, T.-W.; Müller, R.; Müller, M.; Zhang, X.; Draeger, G.; Kim, C.-G.; Leistner, E.; Floss, H. G. J. Biol. Chem. 2001, 276, 12546.

(4) Guo, J.; Frost, J. W. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2002, 124, 528.

(5) (a) Umezawa, S.; Umino, K.; Shibahara, S.; Hamada, M.; Omoto, S. J. Antibiot. 1967, 20, 355. (b) Umezawa, S.; Umino, K.; Shibahara, S.; Omoto, S. Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 1967, 40, 2419. (c) Umezawa, S.; Shibahara, S.; Omoto, S.; Takeuchi, T.; Umezawa, H. J. Antibiot. 1968, 21I, 485. (d) Dolak, L. A.; Castle, T. M.; Dietz, A.; Laborde, A. L. J. Antibiot. 1980, 33, 900. (e) Tsuno, T.; Ikeda, C.; Numata, K.; Tomita, K.; Konishi, M.; Kawaguchi, H. J. Antibiot. 1986, 39, 1001. (f) Fusetani, N.; Ejima, D.; Matsunaga, S.; Hashimoto, K.; Itagaki, K.; Akagi, Y.; Taga, N.; Suzuki, K. Experientia 1987, 43, 464. (g) Milner, J. L.; Silo-Suh, L.; Lee, J. C.; He, H.; Clardy, J.; Handelsman, J. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1996, 62, 3061.

(6) (a) Draths, K. M.; Pompliano, D. L.; Conley, D. L.; Frost, J. W.; Berry, A.; Disbrow, G. L.; Staversky, R. J.; Lievense, J. C. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1992, 114, 3956. (b) Li, K.; Mikola, M. R.; Draths, K. M.; Worden, R. M.; Frost, J. W. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 1999, 64, 61. (c) Weaver, L. M.; Herrmann, K. M. J. Bacteriol. 1990, 172, 6581.

(7) Umezawa, H.; Ueda, M.; Maeda, K.; Yagishita, K.; Kondo, S.; Okami, Y.; Utahara, R.; Osato, Y.; Nitta, K.; Takeuchi, T. J. Antibiot. 1957, 10, 181.

(8) Mao, Y.; Varoglu, M.; Sherman, D. H. J. Bacteriol. 1999, 181, 2199.

(9) (a) Higashide, E.; Asai, M.; Ootsu, K.; Tanida, S.; Kozai, Y.; Hasegawa, T.; Kishi, T.; Sugino, Y.; Yoneda, M. Nature 1977, 270, 721. (b) Carroll, B. J.; Moss, S. J.; Bai, L.; Kato, Y.; Toelzer, S.; Yu, T.-W.; Floss, H. G. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2002, 124, 4176. (c) Yu, T.-W.; Bai, L.; Clade, D.; Hoffmann, D.; Tolzer, S.; Trinh, K. Q.; Xu, J.; Moss, S. J.; Leistner, E.; Floss, H. G. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2002, 99, 7968.
