
PERGAMON

Molecular Immunology 38 (2001) 1181–1186

Review

Activation of small GTPases of the Ras and Rho family by growth factors active on mast cells

John W. Schrader*, Annette Schallhorn, Brock Grill, Xuecui Guo

The Biomedical Research Centre, 222
other effectors for which functions have yet to be established (e.g. Nore-1, AF6). In their GTP-bound state, GTPases also interact with negative regulators termed ‘GTPase activating proteins’ (GAPs) that greatly increase their low intrinsic GTPase activity. This results in the hydrolysis of bound GTP to GDP and they revert to their inactive, ‘off’
J.W. Schrader et al./Molecular Immunology 38 (2001) 1181–1186

6. Ras isoforms and their functional differences

The four ‘classical’ p21 Ras proteins and the ‘non-classical’ M-Ras, R-Ras, and Tc21/R-Ras2 share overlapping sets of exchange factors and
also preferentially activated the M-Ras and K-Ras4B proteins with their polybasic C-termini. Experiments with chimeric Ras proteins indicated that it was the polybasic carboxyterminus that determined preferential activation by growth factors (Table 1). However, surprisingly, the relative ability of different Ras proteins to be activated by ligation of immunoreceptors did not correlate simply with the nature
versions of Rac-1 and cdc42 blocked phagocytosis mediated by the Fc8RI in RBL-2H3 cells (Massol et al., 1998). Interpretation of results of the use of dominant-negative mutants of Rac and cdc42 is not straight-forward however, because dominant-negative mutants of Ras and Cdc42/Rac have the capacity to se
Kitamura, Y., Morii, E., et al., 2000. mi-transcription factor as a regulator of mast cell differentiation. Int. J. Hematol. 71 (3), 197–202.

Kjoller, L., Hall, A., 1999. Signaling to Rho GTPases. Exp. Cell Res. 