
Identification of a DNA Nonhomologous End-Joining Complex in Bacteria  
Geoffrey R. Weller et al.  
Science 297, 1686 (2002);  
DOI: 10.1126/science.1074584  

This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only.

If you wish to distribute this article to others, you can order high-quality copies for your colleagues, clients, or customers by [clicking here](https://www.sciencemag.org).

Permission to republish or repurpose articles or portions of articles can be obtained by following the guidelines [here](https://www.sciencemag.org).

The following resources related to this article are available online at www.sciencemag.org (this information is current as of June 11, 2014):

Updated information and services, including high-resolution figures, can be found in the online version of this article at:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/297/5587/1686.full.html](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/297/5587/1686.full.html)

Supporting Online Material can be found at:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2002/09/04/297.5587.1686.DC1.html](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2002/09/04/297.5587.1686.DC1.html)

This article cites 26 articles, 15 of which can be accessed free:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/297/5587/1686.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/297/5587/1686.full.html#ref-list-1)

This article has been cited by 116 article(s) on the ISI Web of Science

This article has been cited by 65 articles hosted by HighWire Press; see:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/297/5587/1686.full.html#related-urls](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/297/5587/1686.full.html#related-urls)

This article appears in the following subject collections:  
Molecular Biology  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/molec_biol](http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/molec_biol)

Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published weekly, except the last week in December, by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright 2002 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved. The title *Science* is a registered trademark of AAAS.

R E P O R T S

# Identification of a DNA Nonhomologous End-Joining Complex in Bacteria

Geoffrey R. Weller,$^{1*}$ Boris Kysela,$^{2*}$ Rajat Roy,$^{3*}$ Louise M. Tonkin,$^{1}$ Elizabeth Scanlan,$^{4}$ Marina Della,$^{1}$ Susanne Krogh Devine,$^{4}$ Jonathan P. Day,$^{5}$ Adam Wilkinson,$^{5}$ Fabrizio d'Adda di Fagagna,$^{3}$ Kevin M. Devine,$^{4}$ Richard P. Bowater,$^{5}$ Penny A. Jeggo,$^{2}$ Stephen P. Jackson,$^{3}$ Aidan J. Doherty$^{1†}$

In eukaryotic cells, double-strand breaks (DSBs) in DNA are generally repaired by the pathway of homologous recombination or by DNA nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ). Both pathways have been highly conserved throughout eukaryotic evolution, but no equivalent NHEJ system has been identified in prokaryotes. The NHEJ pathway requires a DNA end-binding component called Ku. We have identified bacterial Ku homologs and show that these proteins retain the biochemical characteristics of the eukaryotic Ku heterodimer. Furthermore, we show that bacterial Ku specifically recruits DNA ligase to DNA ends and stimulates DNA ligation. Loss of these proteins leads to hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation in *Bacillus subtilis*. These data provide evidence that many bacteria possess a DNA DSB repair apparatus that shares many features with the NHEJ system of eukarya and suggest that this DNA repair pathway arose before the prokaryotic and eukaryotic lineages diverged.

Double-strand breaks (DSBs) in DNA arise during exposure to ionizing radiation (IR) and as intermediates during site-specific rearrangement events such as mating-type switching in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* and V(D)J recombination in vertebrates (1, 2). In eukaryotic cells, the primary DNA end-binding component of NHEJ, Ku, is a heterodimer of two sequence-related subunits [Ku70 (69 kD) and Ku80 (83 kD)] (3–5) that forms an open ringlike structure through which a variety of DNA end structures can be threaded (6, 7). DNA-bound Ku helps to recruit the ligase IV/XRCC4 complex, thereby enhancing its ligation activity (8–10). In vertebrates, Ku also recruits the DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs), thereby activating its kinase activity, which is required for DSB rejoining (11–13). Mammalian cells deficient in these NHEJ proteins are defective in DSB rejoining and are hypersensitive to IR (1, 4, 13).

In contrast to the conservation between these components in higher and lower eukaryotes, NHEJ has not been reported in prokaryotes. However, genes with significant homology to Ku70 and Ku80 have been identified in some bacterial genomes (14, 15), which raises the possibility that prokaryotes might have a NHEJ apparatus that is fundamentally homologous to that of eukaryotic cells. Significantly, the Ku-like gene exists in some bacterial species in an operon that includes a gene predicted to encode an adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-dependent DNA ligase (14–16). Operons frequently co-regulate functionally interacting proteins (17); perhaps then, these putative ligases interact with the Ku-like proteins.

We exploited the genetically amenable bacterium *Bacillus subtilis* to generate strains bearing inactivating mutations in *YkoV* (Ku-like gene; *ykoV*) and *YkoU* (ligase-like gene; *ykoU*) and double mutants defective in *YkoU* and *YkoV* (*ykoU ykoV*) (18). None of the strains had any observable growth defect at temperatures ranging from 10°C to 37°C (19), which indicates that neither *YkoU* nor *YkoV* is essential. These findings are consistent with the notion that the *B. subtilis* nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD⁺)-dependent ligase *YerG* functions during DNA replication (20). To investigate the role of *YkoU* and *YkoV* in DNA repair, we examined the sensitivity of the mutant strains to DNA-damaging agents (18). No sensitivity to ultraviolet light or to methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) was observed, which suggests that nucleotide excision repair functions normally and alkylation damage induced by MMS is repaired efficiently (19). In contrast,

---

**Supporting Online Material**

www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/297/5586/1683/DC1  
Fig. S1  

---

**29 March 2002; accepted 29 July 2002**

---

**1Cambridge Institute for Medical Research & Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2XY, UK.**  
**2Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 9RQ, UK.**  
**3Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK, Institute of Cancer and Developmental Biology and Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2 1QR, UK.**  
**4Department of Genetics, Smurfit Institute, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Republic of Ireland.**  
**5School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich NR4 7TJ, UK.**

---

**\***These authors contributed equally to this work.  
**†**To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: AJD42@cam.ac.uk.

the mutant strains were sensitive to IR relative  
to a wild-type control (WT168) (Fig. 1A). The  
ykoU and ykoUV strains showed similar sensi-  
tivity to IR, more marked than that shown by  
the ykoV mutant strain (Fig. 1A), which indi-  
cates that ykoV and ykoU are epistatic but that  
defects in ykoU have the greatest impact. The  
major cytotoxic lesions induced by IR are DNA  
DSBs, which suggests a role for YkoV and  
YkoU in DSB repair.

In B. subtilis, RecA plays a crucial role in  
homologous recombination. Therefore, we  
generated YkoV and YkoU mutations (recA  
ykoU and recA ykoV) in a recA mutant back-  
ground and examined the response of the  
multiple mutant strains to IR. As expected, the  
recA mutant strain was very sensitive to IR, as  
were the recA ykoU and recA ykoV double-  
mutant strains (Fig. 1B). However, we noted  
that the triple-mutant strain (recA ykoU ykoV)  
was reproducibly slightly more resistant to  
lower doses of IR than the recA single mutant  
or the double-mutant strains. We interpret  
these survival experiments as indicating that  
there may be an alternative, inefficient DSB  
repair system that can operate in cells lacking  
RecA, YkoV, and YkoU. In recA mutant strains  
that still possess either YkoV or YkoU, how-  
ever, it may be that the remaining NHEJ  
factor interacts with IR-induced DNA damage  
in a nonproductive manner so that it not only  
precludes NHEJ but also interferes with the  
alternative DSB repair pathway.

The genes for YkoU and YkoV and their  
homologs were cloned from B. subtilis and  
additional bacteria, and the proteins were  
overexpressed in Escherichia coli (18). Many  
of the proteins, including B. subtilis YkoU  
and YkoV, expressed poorly or were insol-  
ble. By contrast, recombinant histidine-  
tagged versions of Mycobacterium tubercu-  
losis Ku-like protein [open reading frame  
(ORF) Rv0937c] and the genetically linked  
putative ATP-dependent ligase (ORF  
Rv0938) were readily overexpressed in solu-  
ble form. We analyzed these proteins, hence-  
forth called Mt-Ku and Mt-Lig, further after  
we purified them by nickel-agarose affinity  
chromatography (fig. S1).

Eukaryotic Ku70 and Ku80 form a stable  
heterodimeric complex, and this 1:1 stoichi-  
ometry is essential for interaction with DNA ends  
(6, 7). Analysis of recombinant Mt-Ku by gel-  
filtration chromatography indicated that Mt-Ku  
exists as a homodimer in solution (fig. S2). This  
species was very stable, even at high salt con-  
centrations, which suggests a strong ho-  
modimeric interaction (see supplemental text;  
fig. S3). Eukaryotic Ku binds to double-strand-  
ed (ds) DNA ends with high affinity (21). Elec-  
trophoretic mobility-shift assays (EMSAs),  
with a 33–base-pair (bp) dsDNA oligonucleo-  
tide with either 5′ or 3′ overhangs, demonstrat-  
ed that Mt-Ku, like eukaryotic Ku, forms a  
specific complex with either type of DNA end

(fig. S4). Excess nonlabeled linear dsDNA but  
not closed circular plasmid DNA or single-  
stranded DNA competed for binding (Fig. 2A),  
which demonstrates that Mt-Ku binds preferen-  
tially to dsDNA ends.

Multiple molecules of eukaryotic Ku can  
bind to the same DNA molecule to give multi-  
meric Ku-DNA complexes; because of this, the  
maximum number of Ku molecules that can  
bind to a DNA molecule is directly proportional  
to DNA length (21). Titration of Mt-Ku against  
a fixed concentration of labeled 33-nucleotide  
oligomer resulted in a single retarded band (Fig.  
2B), presumably representing a 1:1 Ku-DNA

Fig. 1. IR sensitivity of B. subtilis Ku (ykoV) and ligase (ykoU) knockout  
strains. B. subtilis wild type (WT168), ykoV, ykoU, or ykoV ykoU double-  
mutant and B. subtilis recA mutant cells were treated with x-rays. The  
percentage survival for each strain over the indicated range of doses was  
determined, and the mean from three independent experiments was plotted.  
Error bars denote standard deviation from the mean for each point. (A)  
Deletion of YkoV and YkoU genes (strains ykoU and ykoV) resulted in  
significant IR hypersensitivity of these strains compared with the wild type,  
and the ykoV ykoU double-knockout strain did not show any higher sensi-  
tivity than the ykoU single mutant, which suggests that these genes act in  
the same pathway. (B) B. subtilis recA mutant strains were extremely  
sensitive to irradiation. However, at lower IR dosage, deletion of ykoV and  
ykoU together (recA ykoU ykoV) could partially rescue the hypersensitivity  
of recA cells.

Fig. 2. DNA binding properties of Mt-Ku on dsDNA  
substrates. (A) Mt-Ku inter-  
acts specifically with  
dsDNA ends. Reaction  
mixtures contained 90  
fmol of labeled 33-mer  
dsDNA and 2.0 pmol of  
Mt-Ku, plus the following  
where indicated. Control,  
no competition, increasing  
unlabeled ds 33-mer (9,  
90, 180, 450, and 900  
fmol), closed-circular plas-  
mid (ccDNA; 9, 90, 180,  
450, and 900 fmol), and  
unlabeled single-stranded  
33-mer DNA (ssDNA; 9,  
90, 180, 450, and 900  
fmol). For each reaction  
Mt-Ku was added last. (B)  
Effect of DNA length on  
binding of Mt-Ku to  
dsDNA. Multiple Mt-Ku  
molecules load onto  
dsDNA in a length-depen-  
dent manner, about one  
Ku per 30 bp. Reaction  
mixtures contained 90  
fmol of labeled 33-mer or  
66-mer dsDNA and increasing concentrations of Mt-Ku (2.5, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, and 50 pmol).

Fig. 3. Mt-Lig is an ATP-dependent dsDNA ligase. (A) Mt-Lig forms a covalent adenylate adduct in the presence of ATP. One microgram of Mt-Lig or K481A mutant was incubated with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 10 mM MgCl₂, 5 mM dithiothreitol, [α-³²P]ATP for 1, 30, 60, and 120 min (lanes 1–4, respectively) at 25°C. K481A was incubated for 120 min. The reactions were stopped by boiling in SDS-PAGE loading buffer and analyzed by electrophoresis on a 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel. (B) Mt-Lig efficiently ligates DSBs in vitro. Equimolar concentrations of the DNA ends (70 fmol) were used in ligase reactions and the efficiency of ligation was compared with that mediated by T4 DNA ligase (330 ng). Labeled DNA fragments (53 bp to 2.6 kbp) were incubated with increasing amounts of Mt-Lig (0.5, 1.5, and 2.5 μg). Efficiency of ligation was monitored by converting the substrates into higher order concatamers.

Fig. 4. (A) Mt-Lig end-joining activity is greatly stimulated by the Mt-Ku complex. dsDNA fragments (70 fmol) (157 or 445 bp) were preincubated with increasing amounts of Mt-Ku (0, 20, 40 80, 200, 400, and 800 ng). The ligase reaction was started by addition of 1 μg of Mt-Lig. Optimum stimulation was achieved between 80 and 200 ng of Mt-Ku per reaction. (B) Stimulation of Mt-Lig end-joining activity is specific to the bacterial Ku complex. DNA fragments (445 bp) were preincubated with increasing amounts of Mt-Ku (20, 80, 200, and 400 ng) or human recombinant Ku70/80 complex (hKu; 20, 60, 120, 240, 500, and 1100 ng). Ligase reactions were started by adding 1 μg of Mt-Lig. No stimulation but significant inhibition has been observed in reaction mixtures preincubated with hKu. (C) Mt-Ku significantly inhibits end-joining ligation catalyzed by human recombinant LigaseIV/XRCC4 complex (LigIV/X4) or T4 DNA ligase. Ligase reaction mixtures were preincubated with Mt-Ku and ligation was started by adding 150 ng of LigIV/X4 complex or T4 Lig. In both cases, the presence of increasing amounts of Mt-Ku (200 and 400 ng, respectively) significantly inhibited end-joining reactions, which suggests that stimulation of ligation is critically dependent on interaction of the correct physiological partners, Mt-Ku and Mt-Lig. (D) Mt-Ku recruits Mt-Lig to DNA. Three distinct DNA-protein complexes formed by Mt-Ku (arrowhead 1), Mt-Lig (arrowhead 2), and Mt-Ku and Mt-Lig together (arrowhead 3) in EMSA. Reaction mixtures contained 90 fmol of 33-mer dsDNA and 2.5 pmol of Mt-Ku, where indicated (+). In reactions with ligase (left), DNA was incubated with increasing amounts of Mt-Lig (0, 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 pmol). For the supershift reactions (right), DNA was preincubated with Mt-Ku (2.5 pmol) followed by the addition of increasing amounts of Mt-Lig (0.5, 1, 2, 3, and 4 pmol).

and raises the possibility that these proteins might physically interact.

Eukaryotic Ku recruits DNA ligase IV/ XRCC4 to sites of DNA damage (8–10). Therefore, we looked for potential interactions between Mt-Ku and Mt-Lig by EMSAs with a radiolabeled dsDNA probe (33 bp). As shown in Fig. 4D, including Mt-Lig and Ku together led to the generation of a DNA-protein complex with a mobility distinct from that of the complexes formed by either protein alone. However, the addition of increasing amounts of Mt-Ku did not abolish the appearance of the novel DNA-protein complex, which strongly suggests that it does not inhibit the binding of Mt-Lig to DNA. Formation of the new complex did not occur if Mt-Lig had been heat denatured (19), which indicates that it reflects the binding of Mt-Lig and is not mediated by a buffer component (Fig. 4D). Biacore studies with a biotinylated dsDNA (33-mer) bound to a streptavidin-coated chip and isothermal titration calorimetry studies also confirmed that Mt-Ku specifically recruits Mt-Lig to DNA (19).

Despite the importance of XRCC4 in the eukaryotic NHEJ system, we have so far been unable to detect any XRCC4 homologs in bacteria (19). It has been reported that many of the Ku-associated DNA ligases possess additional domains with significant homology to eukaryotic DNA primases and nucleases (15, 16). Therefore, it is possible that these domains enhance ligase activity in the absence of XRCC4 and may also be directly involved in the DSB repair process (16). The similarity between the eukaryotic and bacterial Ku proteins suggests that they have evolved from a common ancestor and shows that NHEJ is a much more ancient process than was previously believed. The eukaryotic Ku proteins may have acquired additional domains—such as the VWA, SAP, and DNA-PKcs interaction domains—to enhance the repair activities of the complex and to provide additional functions, such as roles in telomere maintenance and V(D)J recombination. It is notable that only one characterized archaeal species, *Archaeoglobus fulgidus*, contains the Ku ligase system, which suggests that this was acquired by lateral transfer. The Mu phage protein, Gam, and related bacterial orthologs may also represent a distinct family of functional homologs of eukaryotic Ku (30). It is also interesting to note that many of the bacteria that contain the Ku ligase system are capable of sporulation (*B. subtilis*, *S. coelicolor*) and/or spend long periods of their life cycle in the stationary phase (*M. tuberculosis*, *Mesorhizobium loti*, *Sinorhizobium loti*). It is tempting to speculate that a Ku-based NHEJ system is particularly important for the repair of DSBs that arise during these states of relative inactivity, where the better characterized homologous recombination-based repair pathways may be less effective.

---

**References and Notes**

1. S. E. Critchlow, S. P. Jackson, Trends Biochem. Sci. **23**, 394 (1998).
2. A. Shinohara, T. Ogawa, Trends Biochem. Sci. **20**, 387 (1995).
3. W. S. Dynan, S. Yoo, Nucleic Acids Res. **26**, 1551 (1998).
4. C. Featherstone, S. P. Jackson, Mutat. Res. **434**, 3 (1999).
5. D. Gell, S. P. Jackson, Nucleic Acids Res. **17**, 3494 (1999).
6. J. R. Walker, R. A. Corpina, J. Goldberg, Nature **412**, 607 (2001).
7. A. J. Doherty, S. P. Jackson, Curr. Biol. **11**, R920 (2001).
8. S. A. Nick McElhinny, C. M. Snowden, J. McCarville, D. A. Ramsden, Mol. Cell. Biol. **20**, 2996 (2000).
9. L. Chen, K. Trujillo, P. Sung, A. E. Tomkinson, J. Biol. Chem. **275**, 26196 (2000).
10. S. H. Teo, S. P. Jackson, Curr. Biol. **10**, 165 (2000).
11. A. Dvir, S. R. Peterson, M. W. Knuth, H. Lu, W. S. Dynan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. **89**, 11920 (1992).
12. T. M. Gottlieb, S. P. Jackson, Cell **72**, 131 (1993).
13. G. C. Smith, S. P. Jackson, Genes Dev. **13**, 916 (1999).
14. A. J. Doherty, S. P. Jackson, G. R. Weller, FEBS Lett. **500**, 186 (2001).
15. L. Aravind, E. V. Koonin, Genome Res. **11**, 1365 (2001).
16. G. R. Weller, A. J. Doherty, FEBS Lett. **505**, 340 (2001).
17. T. Dandekar, B. Snel, M. Huynen, P. Bork, Trends Biochem. Sci. **23**, 324 (1998).
18. Materials and methods are available as supporting material on Science Online.
19. G. R. Weller et al., unpublished data.
20. M. A. Petit, S. D. Ehrlich, Nucleic Acids Res. **28**, 4642 (2000).
21. T. M. Bliss, D. P. Lane, J. Biol. Chem. **272**, 5765 (1997).
22. Single-letter abbreviations for the amino acid residues are as follows: A, Ala; C, Cys; D, Asp; E, Glu; F, Phe; G,
Gly; H, His; I, Ile; K, Lys; L, Leu; M, Met; N, Asn; P, Pro; Q, Gln; R, Arg; S, Ser; T, Thr; V, Val; W, Trp; and Y, Tyr.
23. A. J. Doherty, S. W. Suh, Nucleic Acids Res. **28**, 4051 (2000).
24. K. Kodama, D. E. Barnes, T. Lindahl, Nucleic Acids Res. **19**, 6093 (1991).
25. V. Sriskanda, S. Shuman, Nucleic Acids Res. **26**, 4618 (1998).
26. P. Pfeiffer, S. Thode, J. Hancke, W. Vielmetter, Mol. Cell. Biol. **14**, 888 (1994).
27. D. Pang, S. Yoo, W. S. Dynan, M. Jung, A. Dritschilo, Cancer Res. **57**, 1412 (1997).
28. R. B. Cary et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. **94**, 4267 (1997).
29. D. A. Ramsden, M. Gellert, EMBO J. **17**, 609 (1998).
30. F. d'Adda di Fagagna, G. R. Weller, A. J. Doherty, S. P. Jackson, unpublished data.
31. We thank J. Bradbury for comments on the manuscript, L. Serpell for assistance with figures, T. Kieser for providing *M. tuberculosis* DNA, and P. J. Piggot for supplying *B. subtilis* strains. G.R.W. was supported by a UK Medical Research Council (MRC) studentship. A.J.D. is a Royal Society University Research Fellow, and work in the A.J.D. laboratory is supported by grants from the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council, Cancer Research UK Leukaemia Research Fund, the Association for International Cancer Research, and the Royal Society. Research in the S.P.J. laboratory is supported by grants from Cancer Research UK. B.K. is funded by an MRC grant to P.A.J. R.R. is recipient of a Cambridge Commonwealth Trust Scholarship.

Supporting Online Material

www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/297/5587/1686/

DC1

Materials and Methods

SOM Text

Figs. S1 to S6

31 May 2002; accepted 19 July 2002

---

**Mast Cells: A Cellular Link Between Autoantibodies and Inflammatory Arthritis**

David M. Lee,$^{1,3}$ Daniel S. Friend,$^{2}$ Michael F. Gurish,$^{1,3}$ Christophe Benoist,$^{1,4}$ Diane Mathis,$^{1,4}$ Michael B. Brenner$^{1,3\ast}$

Previous studies have revealed that autoantibodies, complement components, and Fc receptors each participate in the pathogenesis of erosive arthritis in K/BxN mice. However, it is not known which cellular populations are responsive to these inflammatory signals. We find that two strains of mice deficient in mast cells, W/W$^v$ and Sl/Sl$^d$, were resistant to development of joint inflammation and that susceptibility was restored in the W/W$^v$ strain by mast cell engraftment. Thus, mast cells may function as a cellular link between autoantibodies, soluble mediators, and other effector populations in inflammatory arthritis.

The pathogenic mechanisms at play in inflammatory arthritis, such as rheumatoid arthritis, remain poorly understood both systematically and in the microenvironment of the diarthrodial joint. A large number of soluble inflammatory mediators and cellular effector populations have been implicated in arthritis; however, the early clinical events remain elusive. Recent studies using the serum of an engineered mouse model, K/BxN, have revealed that autoantibodies directed against a ubiquitously expressed antigen can selectively provoke inflammatory, hyperplastic, and erosive synovitis (1–3). It is known that members of the complement network (the alternative pathway and C5a), Fc receptors (FcγRIII), and cytokines [interleukin

$^1$Department of Medicine and $^2$Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. $^3$Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women’s Hospital; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. $^4$Section on Immunology and Immunogenetics, Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School, One Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: mbrenner@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 297 6 SEPTEMBER 2002 1689
