
REVIEW

Neuronal p38 MAPK signalling: an emerging regulator of cell fate and function in the nervous system

Kohsuke Takeda and Hidenori Ichijo*

Laboratory of Cell Signalling, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, and Laboratory
K Takeda & H Ichijo

Allen *et al.* 2000; Mudgett *et al.* 2000; Tamura *et al.* 2000). In this regard, analyses of knockout mice for other p38 isoforms and their compound mutant mice will be needed to research a precise conclusion concerning a pro-apoptotic role of p38 MAP
(Raingeaud *et al.* 1995), cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB) homologous protein (CHOP)/growth arrest and DNA damage 153 (GADD153) (Wang & Ron 1996), myocyte enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) (Han *et al.* 1997), Elk-
K Takeda & H Ichijo

Figure 1 Components of p38 MAPK-dependent differentiation and survival signalling in mammalian cell culture systems. In PC12 cells, NGF induces neuronal differentiation through not only the ERK but also the p38 MAPK pathways, although the mechanism of cross-talk between the two pathways remains to be elucidated. BMPs also induce the differentiation of PC12 cells
GTC_591.fm Page 1103 Thursday, October 10, 2002 5:26 PM

Neuronal p38 MAPK signalling

dorsal right  
left  

cilia dendrite axon  

ventral  

:green_circle::STR-2 (+) :grey_circle::STR-2 (-)

C. elegans AWC neurons mammalian
K Takeda & H Ichijo

# Activity-dependent survival

A precise control of neuronal activity is a prerequisite for the development of synaptic connections and the maintenance of the nervous system. Calcium signalling is an important mediator of neuronal survival during development. Although first characterized as a myogenic factor, MEF2 has been shown to be a calcium-regulated transcription factor and to act as a mediator of neuronal activity-dependent cell survival (
in the induction of metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR)-dependent long-term depression (LTD) at excitatory synapses between CA3 and CA1 pyramidal neurones in the mammalian hippocampus (Bolshakov *et al.* 2000). This observation suggests that the ERK and p38 pathways act in opposing fashions in regulating synaptic plasticity. Accordingly
K Takeda & H Ichijo

pathways, and are thought to be the physiological kinases for eIF-4E, a protein binding to capped mRNAs (Waskiewicz *et al.* 1997, 1999). In the *Aplysia* nervous system, it has recently been reported that the physiological phosphorylation of eIF-4E at
agonist of mGluR (R,S)-3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine (DHPG), stimulates internalization and thus induces loss of synaptic surface AMPARs (Snyder *et al.* 2001). Although no direct evidence for it has yet emerged, involvement of the p38 pathway in endocytic trafficking of glutamate receptors is an interesting hypothesis.


K Takeda & H Ichijo

English, J.M. & Cobb, M.H. (2002) Pharmacological inhibitors of MAPK pathways. *Trends Pharmacol. Sci.* 23, 40–45.

Ezoe, K., Lee, S.T., Strunk, K.M. & Spritz, R.A. (1994) PTK
Kanamoto, T., Mota, M., Takeda, K., *et al.* (2000) Role of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase in regulation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway and apoptosis in sympathetic neurons. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **20**, 196–204.

Kawasaki, H., Morooka, T., Shimoh
K Takeda & H Ichijo

Pierrat, B., Correia, J.S., Mary, J.L., Tomas-Zuber, M. & Lesslauer, W. (1998) RSK-B, a novel ribosomal S6 kinase family member, is a CREB kinase under dominant control of p38α mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38αMAPK
Wray, S., Key, S., Qualls, R. & Fueshko, S.M. (1994) A subset of peripherin positive olfactory axons delineates the luteinizing hormone releasing hormone neuronal migratory pathway in developing mouse. *Dev. Biol.* 166, 349–354.

Wu, S.K., Zeng