
Microbiology (2002), 148, 3639–3650

**Legionella pneumophila induces apoptosis via the mitochondrial death pathway**

Birgid Neumeister,$^{1}$ Marion Faigle,$^{1}$ Kirsten Lauber,$^{2}$ Hinnak Northoff$^{1}$ and Sebastian Wesselborg$^{2}$

Author for correspondence: Birgid Neumeister. Tel: +49 7071 298 1608. Fax: +49 7071 29 5240.  
e-mail: Birgid.Neumeister@med.uni-tuebingen.de

---

**1 Department of Transfusion Medicine, University Hospital of Tübingen, Otfried-Müller-Strasse 4/1, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany**

**2 Department of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital of Tübingen, Otfried-Müller-Strasse 10, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany**

*Legionella pneumophila* has been shown to induce apoptosis within macrophages, monocylic cell lines and alveolar epithelial cells. The mechanisms and significance of *L. pneumophila*-associated apoptosis are not well understood. It has been speculated that *L. pneumophila* may induce apoptosis through ligation of death receptors by bacterial surface components or by secreted bacterial factors. Translocation of apoptotic factor(s) through the Dot/Icm secretion machinery followed by direct activation of caspases within the cytosol is discussed as another possible mechanism of apoptosis induction by *L. pneumophila*. Here, it is shown that *L. pneumophila* induced the mitochondrial release of cytochrome c in CD95 (Fas/Apo-1)-negative monocytic Mono Mac 6 cells, indicating that *Legionella*-induced apoptosis is mediated via the mitochondrial signalling pathway. In addition, blocking of the death receptor pathway at distinct stages using CD95-, FADD- or caspase-8-deficient Jurkat cells did not affect induction of apoptosis by *L. pneumophila*. Conversely, inhibition of the mitochondrial death pathway by overexpression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 potently inhibited the processing of caspases and the induction of apoptosis. Therefore, these findings support a model in which the induction of apoptosis by *L. pneumophila* is mediated by activation of the intrinsic mitochondrial death pathway in the absence of external death receptor signalling.

---

Keywords: Legionnaires’ disease, macrophages, human monocytes

---

### INTRODUCTION

*Kwaik, 1999a)*. The mechanisms of *L. pneumophila*-associated apoptosis are not well understood. It has been demonstrated that induction of apoptosis is not growth-phase-regulated but dose-dependent; it also needs direct adherence of bacteria to host cells, but does not require intracellular bacterial replication or synthesis of new proteins (*Gao & Abu-Kwaik, 1999a*; *Walz et al.*, 2000). Neither heat-killed bacteria nor bacterial culture supernatants induce apoptosis (*Gao & Abu-Kwaik, 1999a*). Moreover, the extent of apoptosis induced by a given species belonging to the genus *Legionella* correlates with its human prevalence—species most frequently associated with cases of human legionellosis, such as *L. pneumophila* and *Legionella longbeachae*, are able to induce apoptosis, whereas species less frequently associated with this disease do not induce apoptosis of monocytes (*Walz et al.*, 2000). *Muller et al.* (1996) showed that neither the Mip protein, a major virulence factor of *L. pneumophila* which contributes to intracellular survival in eukaryotic cells

Abbreviations: Ac-DEVD-AMC, acetyl-Asp-Glu-Val-Asp-7-amido-4-methylcoumarin; FADD, Fas-associated death domain; MM6, Mono Mac 6; PARP, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell; sg., serogroup; Z-VAD-FMK, N-benzylloxycarbonyl-Val-Ala-Asp(O-Me) fluoromethyl ketone.
(Cianciotto *et al.*, 1990; Cianciotto & Fields, 1992), nor the major secretory protein Msp, which is reported to display cytotoxic and proteolytic activities (Quinn *et al.*, 1989), have any influence on monocyte apoptosis. Furthermore, it became evident that *Legionella*-induced apoptosis does not require the TNF-$\alpha$-mediated signal transduction pathway (Hagele *et al.*, 1998).

Gao & Abu-Kwaik (1999b) have demonstrated that activation of caspase-3, but not caspase-1, is essential for apoptosis induced upon infection with *L. pneumophila*. However, the molecular mechanism that activates the death proteases remained unknown. Generally, two principal signalling pathways are known that lead to the apoptotic demise of the cell: the extrinsic death receptor pathway and the intrinsic mitochondrial pathway. Ligation of death receptors (such as CD95/Fas/Apo-1 or CD120a/TNF receptor-1) with their respective ligand or agonistic antibodies recruits the adapter protein FADD to the active trimeric death receptor. FADD in turn recruits and activates the death protease caspase-8 (Schulze-Osthoff *et al.*, 1998). The mitochondrial death pathway is triggered by a number of apoptotic stimuli, such as anticancer drugs, staurosporine, cycloheximide, UV- and $\gamma$-irradiation (Ferrari *et al.*, 1998; Bantel *et al.*, 1999; Belka *et al.*, 2000; Wesselborg *et al.*, 1999). This pathway is initiated at the mitochondrion and is characterized by the mitochondrial release of cytochrome $c$. In the cytosol, cytochrome $c$ together with dATP binds to the adapter protein Apaf-1, which enables the subsequent binding and activation of caspase-9. The mitochondrial apoptosis pathway can be inhibited by anti-apoptotic members of the Bcl-2 family that block the release of cytochrome $c$ from the mitochondrion (Yang *et al.*, 1997). Activation of both pathways via initiator-caspase-8 or -9 triggers an amplifying cascade of executioner caspases (as caspase-3, -6 and -7) that, after cleavage of vital death substrates, leads to the final demise of the cell.

In the case of apoptosis induction by *L. pneumophila*, three possible mechanisms for activation of the caspase cascade have been proposed: (i) translocation of apoptotic factor(s) through the Dot/Icm secretion machinery followed by caspase activation within the cytosol; (ii) secretion of bacterial apoptotic factor(s) in close proximity of attachment, which bind to death receptors; or (iii) translocation of bacterial apoptotic factor(s) to the bacterial surface followed by binding to a death receptor (Gao & Abu-Kwaik, 1999b).

In the present study, we show that induction of apoptosis by *L. pneumophila* does not involve an interaction between the organism and death receptors at the host-cell surface but that it is mediated via the mitochondrial signalling pathway.

---

### METHODS

#### Bacteria.
*L. pneumophila* serogroup (sg.) 1 strain Pontiac was isolated from a patient with severe *Legionella* pneumonia and was passaged less than three times on BCYE-$\alpha$ agar. The strain was kindly provided by Professor Dr G. Ruckdeschel. *L. pneumophila* sg. 1 strain Philadelphia-1 ATCC 33152 was isolated from human lung and underwent multiple passages on BCYE-$\alpha$ agar; it was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA). *L. pneumophila* sg. 6 strain Heidelberg P10 was isolated from a patient with severe nosocomial *Legionella* pneumonia and was passaged less than three times on BCYE-$\alpha$ agar. The strain was kindly provided by Dr Christian Lueck (Kohler *et al.*, 1999). *Legionella micdadei* and *Legionella steigerwaltii* (a human and an environmental isolate, respectively, passaged less than three times each on BCYE-$\alpha$ agar) were kindly donated by Dr Barry Fields.

All strains were grown on BCYE-$\alpha$ agar (Oxoid) at $37^\circ$C in $5\% \mathrm{CO}_2$ for 5 days.

#### Cells

##### Mono Mac 6 (MM6) cells.
MM6 cells were kindly donated by Professor Dr H. W. L. Ziegler-Heitbrock. They were cultured as replicative non-adherent monocytes under lipopolysaccharide-free conditions in $75 \mathrm{~cm}^3$ vented culture flasks (Costar) in $25 \mathrm{ml}$ RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco) supplemented with $10 \%$ fetal calf serum (Myocline super plus; Gibco), $2 \mathrm{mM}$ L-glutamine (Gibco), $1 \%$ non-essential amino acids (Gibco) and OPI ($150 \mu \mathrm{g}$ oxaloacetate $\mathrm{ml}^{-1}, 50 \mu \mathrm{g}$ pyruvate $\mathrm{ml}^{-1}$ and $8.2 \mu \mathrm{g}$ bovine insulin $\mathrm{ml}^{-1}$; Sigma) (MM6 medium) at $37^\circ \mathrm{C}$ in $5 \% \mathrm{CO}_2$ as described by Ziegler-Heitbrock *et al.* (1988) and diluted $1: 3$ twice a week in fresh medium.

##### Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs).
PBMCs were prepared from buffy coats of citrate/phosphate/dextrose (CPD)-anticoagulated blood donations after informed consent of healthy blood donors and component production of plasma and red blood cell units (Baxter, Heidelberg, Germany) by using the Monocyte Isolation Kit (Miltenyi Biotec) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

##### Jurkat cells.
The CD95-negative Jurkat subline was generated by continuous culture of the parental cell line in the presence of an anti-CD95 mAb ($1 \mu \mathrm{g} \operatorname{IgG}_{3} \mathrm{ml}^{-1}$; BioCheck) for 6 months (kindly provided by Professor Schulze-Osthoff). The caspase-8-deficient and Fas-associated death domain (FADD) protein-negative Jurkat cells were derived from the parental Jurkat cell line by random mutagenesis as described previously and were kindly provided by J. Blenis (Juo *et al.*, 1998, 1999). Stable transfectants of Jurkat cells overexpressing Bcl-2 and their vector-transfected parental cell line were generated as described previously (Belka *et al.*, 2000). All Jurkat cell lines (human leukaemic T-cells) were maintained in RPMI 1640 supplemented with $10 \%$ fetal calf serum (FCS) and $10 \mathrm{mM}$ HEPES (all from Gibco). Cells were grown at $37^\circ \mathrm{C}$ in a $5 \% \mathrm{CO}_2$ atmosphere.

#### Reagents.
The broad-range caspase inhibitor N-benzoyl-carbonyl-Val-Ala-Asp(O-Me) fluoromethyl ketone (Z-VAD-FMK) was purchased from Bachem. The chemotherapeutic drugs etoposide and mitomycin C were obtained from the clinical pharmacy (Medical Clinics, Tübingen, Germany). Mitomycin C was dissolved in methanol and etoposide was dissolved in ethanol; they were both kept as stock solutions at $-70^\circ \mathrm{C}$. The agonistic anti-CD95 antibody (anti-CD95, IgG$_3$) was purchased from BioCheck.

#### Intracellular multiplication.
Intracellular multiplication within monocytes or Jurkat cells was determined as described for MM6 cells (Walz *et al.*, 2000). Briefly, $2 \times 10^7$ cells were
(a)
Apoptosis (enrichment factor)

(b)
Apoptosis (percentage of apoptotic nuclei)

(c)
DEVDase activity (mFU min⁻¹)

(d)
Stimulation time (h)
Cytochrome c

Time after infection (h)

Fig. 1. Apoptosis induction by members of the genus *Legionella* in human monocytic host cells. PBMCs or MM6 cells were left untreated (control) or were infected with different *Legionella* species. As a positive control for the activation of the mitochondrial pathway, the anticancer drugs etoposide (25 μg ml⁻¹) or mitomycin C (25 μg ml⁻¹) were used. For stimulation of CD95, agonistic anti-CD95 (1 μg ml⁻¹) was added. After 24 h, apoptosis-associated DNA fragmentation was assessed by (a) enrichment of cytoplasmic histone-associated DNA fragments over the control or by (b) propidium iodide staining of hypodiploid apoptotic nuclei and flow cytometry. Data are expressed as means ± SD of three independent experiments. In (a) and (b): light-grey bars, blood monocytes; dark-grey bars, MM6 cells; *L*. *pn*. sg. 1 Pontiac, *L*. *pneumophila* sg. 1 strain Pontiac; *L*. *pn*. sg. 1 ATCC, *L*. *pneumophila* sg. 1 strain Philadelphia-1 ATCC 33152; *L*. *pn*. sg. 6 P10, *L*. *pneumophila* sg. 6 strain Heidelberg P10. (c) Determination of caspase activity. MM6 cells were left untreated (control) or were infected with *L*. *pneumophila*. Additionally, cells were pre-treated with 100 μM Z-VAD-FMK prior to infection as indicated. As a positive control for the activation of the mitochondrial pathway, the anticancer drugs etoposide (25 μg ml⁻¹) or mitomycin C (25 μg ml⁻¹) were used. For stimulation of CD95, agonistic anti-CD95 (1 μg ml⁻¹) was added. After the indicated amount of time, cell lysates were prepared, incubated with the fluorogenic caspase substrate Ac-DEVD-AMC and caspase activity was measured in a spectrofluorometer. Caspase activity is given in arbitrary fluorescent units (FU) min⁻¹. Mean values of duplicate experiments are shown. DEVDase, Ac-DEVD-AMC hydrolase activity. (d) For analysis of cytochrome c release, 2 × 10⁷ MM6 cells were infected with *L*. *pneumophila*. Etoposide (25 μg ml⁻¹) or mitomycin C (25 μg ml⁻¹) were used as a positive control for the activation of the mitochondrial pathway; agonistic anti-CD95 (1 μg ml⁻¹) was added for stimulation of CD95. Cells were homogenized after the indicated amount of time and the cytosolic S10 fraction, depleted of mitochondria, was subjected to 15% SDS-PAGE. The release of cytochrome c into the cytosol was determined by immunoblotting and is indicated by the solid arrowhead. As a control for equal protein loading, a non-specific (n.s.) immunoreactive band is shown. A representative experiment is shown. L1P, *L*. *pneumophila* sg. 1 strain Pontiac.

infected with 2 × 10⁹ legionellae in 1·5 ml of culture medium without FCS in a well of a six-well tissue-culture plate (Nunc) to provide a bacterium-to-cell ratio of 100:1. After 2 h of co-
incubation, non-phagocytized bacteria were killed by the addition of 100 μg gentamicin ml⁻¹ for 1 h at 37 °C in 5% CO₂. After three washes, the cells were distributed in 1 ml

B. Neumeister and others

Fig. 2. For legend see facing page.
3642

aliquots into the wells of a 24-well tissue-culture plate (Costar), giving a concentration of \(2 \times 10^6\) infected cells per well. The cells were then incubated for 72 h at \(37^\circ \mathrm{C}\) in \(5 \% \mathrm{CO}_2\), and the number of viable legionellae after multiplication in monocytes or Jurkat cells was determined every 24 h by hypotonic disruption of the cells and culture of the resulting fluid on BCYE-α agar. All experiments were performed in triplicate.

**Induction of apoptosis.** Apoptosis was induced as previously described for MM6 cells (Walz *et al.*, 2000). Briefly, \(2 \times 10^6\) monocytes or Jurkat cells were co-incubated with \(2 \times 10^8\) legionellae in a well of a 24-well tissue-culture plate (Costar) to provide a bacterium-to-cell ratio of 100:1. Co-cultures were then incubated at \(37^\circ \mathrm{C}\) in \(5 \% \mathrm{CO}_2\) for the indicated amount of time. As positive controls for induction of apoptosis, cells were incubated for the indicated amount of time in medium containing \(25 \mu \mathrm{g}\) etoposide \(\mathrm{ml}^{-1}, 25 \mu \mathrm{g}\) mitomycin C \(\mathrm{ml}^{-1}\) or \(1 \mu \mathrm{g}\) anti-CD95 \(\mathrm{ml}^{-1}\). As negative controls, uninfected cells were incubated in medium and underwent the same treatment as the infected cells. All experiments were performed at least in triplicate.

**Measurement of apoptosis.** The leakage of fragmented DNA from apoptotic nuclei was measured by the method of Nicoletti *et al.* (1991). Briefly, apoptotic nuclei were prepared by lysing cells in a hypotonic lysis buffer (1% sodium citrate, \(0.1 \%\) Triton X-100, \(50 \mu \mathrm{g}\) propidium iodide \(\mathrm{ml}^{-1}\)) and subsequently analysed by flow cytometry. Nuclei to the left of the 2N peak containing hypodiploid DNA were considered as apoptotic. Flow cytometric analyses were performed on a FACScalibur apparatus (Becton Dickinson) using CELLQUEST analysis software.

Alternatively, the Cell Death Detection ELISA system (Roche Applied Science) was used for the quantitative *in vitro* determination of cytoplasmic histone-associated DNA fragments, as described in the manufacturer’s instructions. The specific enrichment of mono- and oligo-nucleosomes released into the cytoplasm of MM6 or Jurkat cells indicating apoptotic cell death was calculated using the following formula, where mU is the absorbance value at \(405 \mathrm{~nm}\).

\[
\frac{\text { mU of infected or ActD-treated cells }}{\text { mU of uninfected control cells }} = \text { enrichment factor (EF)}
\]

An EF above 1 was indicative of apoptosis.

**Fluorometric assay of caspase activity.** Cytosolic cell extracts of monocytes or Jurkat cells were prepared by lysing cells in a buffer containing \(0.5 \%\) Nonidet P-40 (NP-40), \(20 \mathrm{mM}\) HEPES (pH 7.4), \(84 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{KCl}, 10 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{MgCl}_2, 0.2 \mathrm{mM}\) EDTA, \(0.2 \mathrm{mM}\) ethylene glycol bis (2-aminoethyl)-tetraacetic acid (EGTA),

\(1 \mathrm{mM}\) DTT, \(5 \mu \mathrm{g}\) aprotinin \(\mathrm{ml}^{-1}, 1 \mu \mathrm{g}\) leupeptin \(\mathrm{ml}^{-1}, 1 \mu \mathrm{g}\) pepstatin \(\mathrm{ml}^{-1}\) and \(1 \mathrm{mM}\) PMSF. Caspase activities were determined by incubation of cell lysates with \(50 \mu \mathrm{M}\) of the fluorogenic substrate acetyl-Asp-Glu-Val-Asp-7-amido-4-methylcoumarin (Ac-DEVD-AMC; Bachem) in \(200 \mu \mathrm{l}\) buffer containing \(50 \mathrm{mM}\) HEPES (pH 7.3), \(100 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{NaCl}, 10 \%\) sucrose, \(0.1 \%\) CHAPS and \(10 \mathrm{mM}\) DTT. The release of aminomethylcoumarin was measured by fluorometry using an excitation wavelength of \(360 \mathrm{~nm}\) and an emission wavelength of \(475 \mathrm{~nm}\). Caspase activity was determined as the slope of the resulting linear regressions and expressed in arbitrary fluorescence units \(\mathrm{min}^{-1}\).

**Immunoblotting.** Cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) and caspases was detected by immunoblotting. Jurkat cells \((2 \times 10^6)\) were washed in cold PBS and lysed in \(1 \%\) Triton X-100, \(50 \mathrm{mM}\) Tris (pH 7.6) and \(150 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{NaCl}\) containing \(3 \mu \mathrm{g}\) aprotinin \(\mathrm{ml}^{-1}, 3 \mu \mathrm{g}\) leupeptin \(\mathrm{ml}^{-1}, 3 \mu \mathrm{g}\) pepstatin A \(\mathrm{ml}^{-1}\) and \(2 \mathrm{mM}\) PMSF. Subsequently, proteins were separated under reducing conditions by 8–15% gradient SDS-PAGE and electroblotted onto a PVDF membrane (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). The loading and transfer of equal amounts of protein were confirmed by staining the membrane with Ponceau S. Membranes were blocked for \(1 \mathrm{~h}\) with \(5 \%\) non-fat dry milk powder in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) and then immunoblotted for \(1 \mathrm{~h}\) with a rabbit anti-PARP polyclonal antibody (1:2000; Roche Applied Science) and caspase-9 (kindly provided by Y. A. Lazebnik) (Fearnhead *et al.* 1998), and mouse mAbs directed against caspase-8 (BioCheck) and caspase-3 (Transduction Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany). Membranes were washed four times with TBS/0.02% Triton X-100 and incubated with the respective peroxidase-conjugated affinity-purified secondary antibody for \(1 \mathrm{~h}\). Following extensive washing, the reaction was developed by enhanced chemiluminescent staining using ECL reagents (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech).

**Measurement of cytochrome c release.** For analysis of cytochrome c release, \(2 \times 10^7\) MM6 or Jurkat cells infected with *L. pneumophila* were collected by centrifugation, washed with ice-cold PBS and resuspended in 5 vols of buffer A containing \(250 \mathrm{mM}\) sucrose, \(20 \mathrm{mM}\) HEPES (pH 7.5), \(1.5 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{MgCl}_2, 10 \mathrm{mM} \mathrm{KCl}, 1 \mathrm{mM}\) EDTA, \(1 \mathrm{mM}\) EGTA, \(1 \mathrm{mM}\) DTT, \(0.1 \mathrm{mM}\) PMSF, \(10 \mu \mathrm{g}\) leupeptin \(\mathrm{ml}^{-1}\) and \(10 \mu \mathrm{g}\) aprotinin \(\mathrm{ml}^{-1}\). The cells were homogenized with 12 strokes in a douncer and the homogenates were centrifuged at \(1000 \mathrm{~g}\) for \(10 \mathrm{~min}\) at \(4^\circ \mathrm{C}\) to remove cell nuclei. The supernatants were transferred to a fresh tube and centrifuged at \(10000 \mathrm{~g}\) for \(10 \mathrm{~min}\) at \(4^\circ \mathrm{C}\) to deplete mitochondria. The resulting supernatants, designated as the cytosolic S10 fractions, from each sample were loaded onto a \(15 \%\) SDS-polyacrylamide gel. Cytochrome c release was analysed by immunoblotting with the mouse mAb 7H8.2C12 (PharMingen).

---

**Fig. 2.** Inhibition of CD95 signalling does not affect *Legionella*-induced apoptosis and caspase activation. (a, b) Induction of apoptosis by different *Legionella* species in Jurkat cells. Parental or CD95-negative Jurkat cells were stimulated with different *Legionella* species, mitomycin C, etoposide or anti-CD95 as described in Fig. 1(a, b). Data are expressed as means ± SD of three independent experiments. Light-grey bars, parental; dark-grey bars, CD95-negative. (c) Processing of caspase-3, caspase-8, caspase-9 and the caspase-specific substrate PARP in immunoblot analysis. Parental and CD95-negative Jurkat cells were infected with *L. pneumophila* or treated with etoposide \((25 \mu \mathrm{g} \mathrm{ml}^{-1})\), mitomycin C \((25 \mu \mathrm{g} \mathrm{ml}^{-1})\) or anti-CD95 \((1 \mu \mathrm{g} \mathrm{ml}^{-1})\) for the indicated amount of time. Where indicated, cells were pre-incubated with the broad-spectrum caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK (100 μM). Cellular proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and caspase activity was detected by cleavage of PARP, caspase-3, caspase-8 and caspase-9 using immunoblot analysis. Solid arrowheads indicate the uncleaved form and open arrowheads indicate the cleaved form of the respective protein. A representative of three independent experiments is shown. L1P, *L. pneumophila* sg. 1 strain Pontiac. (d) Caspase activity in parental (grey bars) and CD95-negative (solid bars) Jurkat cells was measured fluorometrically as described in Fig. 1(c). Mean values of duplicate experiments are shown. (e) The release of cytochrome c by parental Jurkat cells was determined as described in Fig. 1(d). A representative experiment is shown.

B. Neumeister and others

---

**RESULTS**

**Multiplication of *Legionella* species and induction of apoptosis in human monocytic cells**

Infection of MM6 cells and human PBMCs with different *Legionella* species resulted in varying degrees of apoptosis, as documented by DNA fragmentation. In general, the fresh clinical isolate *L. pneumophila* sg. 1 Pontiac, which was highly replicative (3–4 log within 72 h; data not shown), was most potent in inducing apoptosis (Fig. 1a, b). The two other strains of *L. pneumophila* tested as well as *L. micdadei* showed intracellular growth of about 1 log (data not shown) and were also able to induce programmed cell death, although to a lesser extent (Fig. 1a, b). *L. steigerwaltii* was not able to replicate within MM6 cells or PBMCs and did not cause apoptosis (Fig. 1a, b). In addition, *L. pneumophila* sg. 1 Pontiac was able to cleave the fluorogenic caspase substrate Ac-DEVD-AMC (Fig. 1c) and to induce the release of cytochrome c from MM6 cells (Fig. 1d). It should be noted that, in contrast to PBMCs, MM6 cells did not show apoptosis (Fig. 1a, b) or release of cytochrome c (Fig. 1d) after stimulation with anti-CD95, due to the lack of CD95 expression (B. Neumeister et al., unpublished observation), while the extent of apoptosis induced by bacteria and anticancer drugs did not differ between the PBMCs and the MM6 cells (Fig. 1a, b).

line as revealed by both enrichment of histone-associated DNA fragments (Fig. 2a) and assessment of hypodiploid apoptotic nuclei (Fig. 2b). Since *L. pneumophila* sg. 1 Pontiac was the most potent inducer of apoptosis in both cell lines, we used this strain to further investigate the involvement of caspases in *Legionella*-associated apoptosis by measuring the cleavage of known caspase substrates in immunoblot analysis. As shown in Fig. 2(c), the caspase-specific substrate PARP was cleaved into the characteristic 85 kDa fragments in both parental and CD95-negative Jurkat cells after infection with *L. pneumophila* within the same time range. In addition, the initiator caspases, caspase-8 and -9, as well as the executioner caspase-3 were all processed in parental and CD95-negative Jurkat cells after infection with *L. pneumophila* to the same extent (Fig. 2c). Since the analysis by Western blotting allowed us to examine the processing of caspases but did not indicate whether the cleavage products were enzymatically active, caspase activity was determined by cleavage of the fluorogenic substrate Ac-DEVD-AMC in a fluorometric assay. Again, no difference in caspase activity between parental and CD95-negative Jurkat cells could be detected (Fig. 2d). Since *L. pneumophila* induces similar amounts of apoptosis and caspase activation in CD95-resistant and CD95-sensitive host cells, ligation of CD95 seems not to be involved in the induction of programmed cell death by *Legionella* infection. This hypothesis is further supported by the fact that *L. pneumophila* was able to induce cytochrome c release in CD95-negative MM6 cells (Fig. 1d) as well as in Jurkat parental cells (Fig. 2e).

**Multiplication of *Legionella* species and induction of apoptosis in Jurkat T-cells**

In contrast to their strong multiplication within human monocytes, the three strains of *L. pneumophila* showed a weak intracellular growth of less than 1 log within all of the Jurkat cell lines tested (data not shown). The two non-*L. pneumophila* species tested (i.e. *L. micdadei* and *L. steigerwaltii*) did not possess intracellular replication (data not shown). Nevertheless, infection of the human leukaemic T-cell line Jurkat resulted in levels of apoptosis comparable to those of monocytic cells (Figs 2–4). This indicates that *Legionella*-induced apoptosis is not restricted to cells of monocytic origin but can also be triggered in human T lymphocytes independent of the extent of intracellular replication.

**Ligation of CD95 (Fas/Apo-1) is not necessary for apoptosis induced by *Legionella***

The induction of mitochondrial release of cytochrome c in CD95-negative MM6 cells by *L. pneumophila* (Fig. 1e) indicates that death receptor signalling might not be involved in *Legionella*-induced apoptosis. To further determine whether apoptosis induced by *L. pneumophila* involves ligation of CD95, we compared the levels of apoptosis induced by several strains and species of the genus *Legionella* in parental Jurkat cells with the levels of apoptosis induced in CD95-negative Jurkat cells. Infection of CD95-negative Jurkat cells resulted in levels of host-cell apoptosis similar to those of the parental cell

*L. pneumophila* does not induce apoptosis by stimulation of other death receptors*

The preceding experiments have shown that the ligation of CD95 is not a prerequisite for apoptosis induced by *L. pneumophila*. Consequently, we investigated the involvement of other death receptors in apoptosis. Since all known death receptors mediate apoptosis via the adapter protein FADD, we used a FADD-deficient Jurkat cell line to investigate whether death receptors other than CD95 are involved in *Legionella*-associated apoptosis. In addition, caspase-8-deficient Jurkat cells were used to investigate whether the initiator caspase of the death-receptor-dependent activation pathway is involved in *Legionella*-associated apoptosis. As previously shown, the absence of FADD and caspase-8 protected Jurkat cells from anti-CD95-induced apoptosis (Engels et al., 2000; Juo et al., 1998, 1999), whereas infection of host cells with different *Legionella* species induced comparable levels of apoptosis in parental and FADD-deficient host cells (Fig. 3a). Western-blot analysis revealed that processing of caspases after infection with *L. pneumophila* did not differ between parental and FADD-deficient cells (Fig. 3b). In addition, caspase-8 was processed in FADD-deficient cells after infection with *L. pneumophila*. As expected, caspase-8 was not processed in caspase-8-deficient cells due to the genetic deletion of this enzyme. Although caspase-8 was absent

from these cells, PARP and caspase-3 were processed, indicating an alternative pathway of apoptosis induction by *L. pneumophila*. Caspase activity, as determined by cleavage of Ac-DEVD-AMC, did not reveal differences between parental and FADD-deficient cells after infection with *L. pneumophila* (Fig. 3c). The reduced caspase activity in caspase-8-deficient Jurkat cells indicates that caspase-8 might contribute to *Legionella*-induced apoptosis in a death-receptor-independent way. In this context, we have previously demonstrated that in the mitochondrial death pathway, caspase-8 is cleaved downstream of caspase-9 and might serve as an amplification loop (Engels et al., 2000).

### Induction of apoptosis by *L. pneumophila* can be inhibited by the overexpression of Bcl-2 in Jurkat host cells

The preceding experiments have shown that apoptosis induced by *L. pneumophila* is independent of death receptor signalling. To address the question as to whether *L. pneumophila* induces apoptosis via the mitochondrial pathway, we infected Jurkat cells stably overexpressing Bcl-2 or the vector alone with several strains and species of the genus *Legionella*. In vector control cells, mainly *L. pneumophila* was able to induce apoptosis (Fig. 4a, b). The level of apoptosis was substantially reduced in Jurkat cells overexpressing Bcl-2 (Fig. 4a, b). Induction of apoptosis by *L. pneumophila* in the vector control cells was paralleled by activation of caspases, as demonstrated by proteolytic processing of caspase-3, caspase-8, caspase-9 and PARP (Fig. 4d) as well as fluorometric measurements of the cleavage of Ac-DEVD-AMC (Fig. 4e). Conversely, blocking of the mitochondrial pathway by Bcl-2 completely abrogated the activation of caspases, as demonstrated by immunoblot analysis and fluorometry (Fig. 4d, e). As a control, cells were stimulated via the death receptor pathway with anti-CD95 or via the mitochondrial pathway using etoposide and mitomycin C (Fig. 4c). As demonstrated previously, overexpression of Bcl-2 only affects activation of the mitochondrial cytochrome *c*/Apaf-1 pathway by anticancer drugs but has no or little effect on death receptor signalling (Engels et al., 2000). Accordingly, induction of apoptosis and activation of caspases by mitomycin C and etoposide was completely blocked by the overexpression of Bcl-2, whereas CD95 signalling was unaffected or only partially reduced by overexpression of Bcl-2 (Fig. 4a–c).

Taken together, the results from this study showed that despite differences in intracellular bacterial replication, the levels of apoptosis, the degrees of caspase activity and the degrees of cytochrome *c* release induced by legionellae were similar in monocytic and lymphocytic host cells. In addition, no differences could be observed between CD95-, FADD- and caspase-8-deficient cells when compared to their parental Jurkat cells. Conversely, overexpression of Bcl-2 inhibited the induction of apoptosis and processing of caspases. We therefore conclude that legionellae induce apoptosis via the

B. Neumeister and others

Fig. 4. For legend see facing page.

3646

mitochondrial death pathway rather than via ligation to
death receptors.

# DISCUSSION

Modulation of apoptosis is a widely used strategy
among extra- and intra-cellular bacteria but the exact
mechanisms by which bacteria are able to affect the
endogenous suicide programme still remain largely
unresolved. The pro-apoptotic arsenal of bacteria com-
prises direct activation of caspase-1 by bacterial toxins
such as IpaB of *Shigella flexneri* or SipB of *Salmonella*
enterica serovar Typhimurium (Hilbi et al., 1998; Hersh
et al., 1999), and the action of pore-forming factors such
as the α-toxin of *Staphylococcus aureus* (Jonas et al.,
1994), PorB of *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* (Muller et al.,
1999), the lipopeptide haemolysin of *Burkholderia*
cepacia (Hutchison et al., 1998) and the leukotoxin of
*Pasteurella haemolytica* (Stevens & Czuprynski, 1996),
which induce apoptosis by a still unknown mechanism.
Other known mechanisms involved in apoptosis in-
duction by bacteria are inhibition of the NF-κB-
mediated pathways by YopP/J of *Yersinia* spp. (Palmer
et al., 1998; Schemer et al., 1998), upregulation of CD95
at the surface of host cells by *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*
(Jendrossek et al., 2001) and *Helicobacter pylori* (Wang
et al., 2000), release of CD95L after phagocytosis of
*Staphylococcus aureus* (Baran et al., 2001) and down-
regulation of anti-apoptotic proteins, such as Bcl-2, by
mycobacteria (Klingler et al., 1997). However, some
bacterial pathogens, such as low numbers of *Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis* (Durrbaum-Landmann et al., 1996),
*Brucella suis* (Gross et al., 2000), the human granulocytic
ehrlichiosis agent (Yoshiie et al., 2000) and *Chlamydia*
pneumoniae (Rajalingam et al., 2001), are able to
prevent spontaneously occurring or induced apoptosis
of host cells.

We have previously described that members of the genus
*Legionella* induce apoptosis in the human monocytic
cell line MM6 (Walz et al., 2000). We observed that the
level of apoptosis was dose- and virulence-dependent
and that apoptosis was triggered by direct adherence of
bacteria to the host cell rather than by intracellular
multiplication. Gao & Abu-Kwaik (1999b) demon-
strated that activation of caspase-3, but not caspase-1, is
essential for apoptosis induced upon infection by *L.*
pneumophila, but the initial events of caspase induction
remained unclear. Here, we have shown that members
of the genus *Legionella* induce a comparable extent of
apoptosis in CD95-positive (PBMC) and CD95-negative
(MM6) human monocytic cells. The apoptotic death of
MM6 cells induced by *L. pneumophila* was accom-
panied by caspase activation and mitochondrial cyto-
chrome c release. This suggested that apoptosis of
human monocytic cells induced by legionellae is in-
dependent of the interaction between bacteria or bac-
terial products with the death receptor CD95.

Since appropriate monocytic cells are not available, we
used Jurkat cell lines deficient in the expression of
CD95, the adaptor molecule FADD or caspase-8 and
stable transfectants overexpressing the death antagonist
Bcl-2 to investigate whether *Legionella* induces apo-
tosis via the death-receptor-dependent pathway or the
mitochondrial apoptosis pathway. Although the *Legion-
ella* species under investigation have shown only modest
intracellular multiplication in Jurkat cells in comparison
to their behaviour in monocytes, they were able to
induce apoptosis within these T-cell lines. This again
supports the previous results that attachment rather
than intracellular replication within host cells is neces-
sary for apoptosis induction by *Legionella* (Walz et al.,
2000). As we have already demonstrated for monocytes
(Walz et al., 2000), a fresh isolate of *L. pneumophila* sg.
1 also induced the highest levels of apoptosis in Jurkat
cells. Since we could not observe differences in the level
of apoptosis and caspase activation between parental
cells and CD95-negative, FADD-deficient or caspase-8-
deficient Jurkat cells, ligation of death receptors by
bacterial apoptotic factor(s) can be excluded. Con-
versely, blocking of the mitochondrial death pathway by
overexpression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 ab-
rogated the activation of caspases and induction of
apoptosis by legionellae. Therefore, we conclude that
apoptosis induced by *Legionella* is mediated via the
intrinsic mitochondrial death pathway and does not rely
on external death receptor signalling. Although we
could not completely rule out that death receptors might
be involved in the induction of apoptosis, we could
demonstrate that death receptors are not a prerequisite
for *Legionella*-induced apoptosis. Interestingly, caspase-
8, the major initiator caspase of the death receptor
pathway, was also activated by legionellae in CD95- and
FADD-deficient Jurkat cells. In this context, we have
previously demonstrated that anticancer drugs induce
the processing of caspase-8 via the mitochondrial death
pathway in the absence of death receptor signalling
(Ferrari et al., 1998; Wesselborg et al., 1999). In addition,
we and others have shown that caspase-8 is not a
prerequisite for anticancer-drug-induced apoptosis and

---

**Fig. 4.** Inhibition of the mitochondrial signalling pathway blocks activation of caspases and induction of apoptosis by
legionellae. (a, b) Jurkat cells stably overexpressing the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 (dark-grey bars) or vector alone
(Vector; light-grey bars) were stimulated with different *Legionella* species, mitomycin C, etoposide or anti-CD95 as
described in Fig. 1(a, b). Subsequently, DNA fragmentation was assessed by (a) enrichment of cytoplasmic histone-
associated DNA fragments or by (b) propidium iodide staining of apoptotic nuclei as described in Fig. 1(a, b). Mean
values ± SD of triplicate cultures are given. (c–e) Effect of *L. pneumophila*, mitomycin C (Mito), etoposide (Etopo) and anti-
CD95 on the activation of caspases. Cells were pre-treated and stimulated as described in Fig. 2(c, d). Subsequently,
cleavage of PARP, caspase-3, caspase-8 and caspase-9 was assessed by immunoblot analysis (c, d). Solid arrowheads indicate
the uncleaved form and open arrowheads indicate the cleaved form of the respective protein. A representative of three
independent experiments is shown. (e) Alternatively, caspase activity was measured fluorometrically as described in
Fig. 1(c). Mean values of duplicate experiments are given.
that in the mitochondrial death pathway, caspase-8 is processed downstream of caspase-9 and caspase-3 (Chinnaiyan et al., 1997; Slee et al., 1999; Engels et al., 2000). However, activation of caspase-8 might constitute an amplification loop via the BID-mediated activation of the mitochondrial death pathway (Engels et al., 2000; Slee et al., 2000). Thus, the reduced caspase-3-like activity in caspase-8-deficient Jurkat cells (Fig. 3b, c) might be explained by the absence of this mitochondrial amplification loop. Since overexpression of Bcl-2 prevented the processing of caspase-8 (as well as that of caspase-3 and -9) (Fig. 4d), we presume that caspase-8 does not play an essential role in *Legionella*-induced apoptosis. However, since the *Legionella*-mediated caspase activity was decreased in caspase-8-deficient Jurkat cells in contrast to FADD-deficient or parental cells (Fig. 3c), mitochondrially processed caspase-8 might contribute to the extent of *Legionella*-induced apoptosis.

The bacterial factor(s) of *L. pneumophila* that are responsible for the activation of the mitochondrial pathway have yet to be determined. In contrast to the situation in *Chlamydia trachomatis* (Jendro et al., 2000), cell-free supernatant of macrophages or Jurkat cells infected with *L. pneumophila* sg. 1 Pontiac could not induce apoptosis in Jurkat cells (data not shown). This supports the hypothesis that contact-mediated export of a bacterial factor after attachment of bacteria to host cells may play a role in apoptosis induction (Gao & Abu-Kwaik, 1999a). It has been shown that expression and/or export of the apoptosis-inducing factor(s) of *L. pneumophila* is regulated by the *icm/dot* virulence system, since *icm/dot* mutants are defective in apoptosis induction (Gao & Abu-Kwaik, 1999a, b; Zink et al., 2002). Prospective studies have to clarify which of the gene products are associated with apoptosis induction. In *N. gonorrhoeae*, a porin (PorB) is transported to the mitochondria of infected cells and the subsequent apoptosis can be blocked by overexpression of Bcl-2 (Muller et al., 2000). Since *L. pneumophila* is able to insert pores of less than 3 nm in diameter into the plasma membrane of host cells using the *dot/icm* transport machinery, the *dot/icm* complex may not only play a role in altering endocytic trafficking events leading to the establishment of a replicative vacuole (Kirby et al., 1998) but may also be associated with *Legionella*-induced apoptosis. Whether induction of apoptosis is a prerequisite for the alteration of the specialized *Legionella* phagosome remains to be determined.

The biological plausibility of apoptosis of the host cells induced by legionellae is unclear. Modulation of apoptosis is often a prerequisite to the establishment of a host–pathogen relationship. Apoptotic bodies have been shown to have an immunosuppressive effect by enhancing the production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 and reducing the secretion of the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-$\alpha$, IL-1$\beta$ and IL-12 (Voll et al., 1997). Bacterial induction of apoptosis offers an advantage for attachment of enterohaemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* by augmenting outer leaflet levels of the phosphatidylethanolamine receptor (Barnett-Foster et

al., 2000). *In vivo*, apoptosis of macrophages induced by YopJ facilitates the establishment of a systemic infection in mice (Monack et al., 1998). However, apoptosis may also augment the antimicrobial immune response. Internalization of apoptotic macrophages infected with *Salmonella typhimurium* results in the presentation of bacterial antigenic epitopes after internalization by dendritic cells (Yrlid & Wick, 2000). Thus, further experiments are necessary to characterize the physiological function of apoptosis during *Legionella* infection.

# ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors wish to thank Dr G. Ruckdeschel (Institute for Medical Microbiology, University of Munich, Germany) for providing the Pontiac strain of *L. pneumophila* sg. 1, Dr Christian Lueck (German National *Legionella* Reference Laboratory, University of Dresden, Germany) for donating the *L. pneumophila* sg. 6 strain and Dr Barry Fields (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, USA) for providing the *L. micdadei* and *L. steigerwaltii* strains. In addition, we would like to thank Dr M. Los and Dr K. Schulze-Osthoff (University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany) for providing CD95-deficient Jurkat cells, Dr J. Blenis (Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA) for FADD- and caspase-8-deficient Jurkat cells, Dr Y. Lazebnik (Cold Spring Harbour, NY, USA) for the supply of anti-caspase-9 antibodies and Dr Ziegler-Heitbrock (University of Leicester, UK) for donation of MM6 cells. This work was supported in part by grants from the Federal Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Technology (no. 01KS9602) and the Interdisciplinary Center of the Clinical Research Center (IZKF) Tübingen.

# REFERENCES

Bantel, H., Engels, I. H., Voelter, W., Schulze-Osthoff, K. & Wesselborg, S. (1999). Mistletoe lectin activates caspase-8/FLICE independently of death receptor signaling and enhances anti-cancer drug-induced apoptosis. *Cancer Res* 59, 2083–2090.

Baran, J., Weglarczyk, K., Mysiak, M., Guzik, K., Ernst, M., Flad, H. D. & Pryjma, J. (2001). Fas (CD95)-Fas ligand interactions are responsible for monocyte apoptosis occurring as a result of phagocytosis and killing of *Staphylococcus aureus*. *Infect Immun* 69, 1287–1297.

Barnett-Foster, D., Abul-Milh, M., Huesca, M. & Lingwood, C. A. (2000). Enterohemorrhagic *Escherichia coli* induces apoptosis which augments bacterial binding and phosphatidylethanolamine exposure on the plasma membrane outer leaflet. *Infect Immun* 68, 3108–3115.

Belka, C., Rudner, J., Wesselborg, S. & 7 other authors (2000). Differential role of caspase-8 and BID activation during radiation- and CD95-induced apoptosis. *Oncogene* 19, 1181–1190.

Chinnaiyan, A. M., O’Rourke, K., Lane, B. R. & Dixit, V. M. (1997). Interaction of CED-4 with CED-3 and CED-9: a molecular framework for cell death. *Science* 275, 1122–1126.

Ciancotto, N. P. & Fields, B. S. (1992). *Legionella pneumophila mip* gene potentiates intracellular infection of protozoa and human macrophages. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 89, 5188–5191.

Ciancotto, N. P., Eisenstein, B. I., Mody, C. H. & Engleberg, N. C. (1990). A mutation in the *mip* gene results in an attenuation of *Legionella pneumophila* virulence. *J Infect Dis* 162, 121–126.

Durrbaum-Landmann, I., Gercken, J., Flad, H. D. & Ernst, M. (1996). Effect of *in vitro* infection of human monocytes with low
numbers of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* bacteria on monocyte apoptosis. *Infect Immun* 64, 5384–5389.

Engels, I. H., Stepczynska, A., Stroh, C. & 10 other authors (2000). Caspase-8/FLICE functions as an executioner caspase in anti-cancer drug-induced apoptosis. *Oncogene* 19, 4563–4573.

Fearnhead, H. O., Rodriguez, J., Govek, E. E., Guo, W., Kobayashi, R., Hannon, G. & Lazebnik, Y. A. (1998). Oncogene-dependent apoptosis is mediated by caspase-9. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 95, 13664–13669.

Ferrari, D., Stepczynska, A., Los, M., Wesselborg, S. & Schulze-Osthoff, K. (1998). Differential regulation and ATP requirement for caspase-8 and caspase-3 activation during CD95- and anti-cancer drug-induced apoptosis. *J Exp Med* 188, 979–984.

Gao, L. Y. & Abu-Kwaik, Y. (1999a). Apoptosis in macrophages and alveolar epithelial cells during early stages of infection by *Legionella pneumophila* and its role in cytopathogenicity. *Infect Immun* 67, 862–870.

Gao, L. Y. & Abu-Kwaik, Y. (1999b). Activation of caspase-3 during *Legionella pneumophila*-induced apoptosis. *Infect Immun* 67, 4886–4894.

Gross, A., Terraza, A., Ouahrani-Bettache, S., Liautard, J. P. & Dornand, J. (2000). *In vitro Brucella suis* infection prevents the programmed cell death of human monocytic cells. *Infect Immun* 68, 342–351.

Hagele, S., Hacker, J. & Brand, B. (1998). *Legionella pneumophila* kills human phagocytes but not protozoan host cells by inducing apoptotic cell death. *FEMS Microbiol Lett* 169, 51–58.

Hersh, D., Monack, D. M., Smith, M. R., Ghori, N., Falkow, S. & Zychlinsky, A. (1999). The *Salmonella* invasin SipB induces macrophage apoptosis by binding to caspase-1. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 96, 2396–2401.

Hilbi, H., Moss, J. E., Hersh, D. & 7 other authors (1998). *Shigella*-induced apoptosis is dependent on caspase-1 which binds to IpaB. *J Biol Chem* 273, 32895–32900.

Hutchison, M. L., Poxton, I. R. & Govan, J. R. (1998). *Burkholderia cepacia* produces a hemolysin that is capable of inducing apoptosis and degranulation of mammalian phagocytes. *Infect Immun* 66, 2033–2039.

Jendro, M. C., Deutsch, T., Korber, B., Kohler, L., Kuipers, J. G., Krausse-Opatz, B., Westermann, J., Raum, E. & Zeidler, H. (2000). Infection of human monocyte-derived macrophages with *Chlamydia trachomatis* induces apoptosis of T cells: a potential mechanism for persistent infection. *Infect Immun* 68, 6704–6711.

Jendrossek, V., Grassmé, H., Mueller, I., Lang, F. & Gulbins, E. (2001). *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*-induced apoptosis involves mitochondria and stress-activated protein kinases. *Infect Immun* 69, 2675–2683.

Jonas, D., Walev, I., Berger, T., Liebetrau, M., Palmer, M. & Bhakdi, S. (1994). Novel path to apoptosis: small transmembrane pores created by staphylococcal α-toxin in T lymphocytes evoke internucleosomal DNA degradation. *Infect Immun* 62, 1304–1312.

Juo, P., Kuo, C. J., Yuan, J. & Blenis, J. (1998). Essential requirement for caspase-8/FLICE in the initiation of the Fas-induced apoptotic cascade. *Curr Biol* 8, 1001–1008.

Juo, P., Woo, M. S., Kuo, C. J., Signorelli, P., Biemann, H. P., Hannun, Y. A. & Blenis, J. (1999). FADD is required for multiple signaling events downstream of the receptor Fas. *Cell Growth Differ* 10, 797–804.

Kirby, J. E., Vogel, J. P., Andrews, H. L. & Isberg, R. R. (1998). Evidence for pore-forming ability by *Legionella pneumophila*. *Mol Microbiol* 27, 323–336.

Klingler, K., Tchou-Wong, K. M., Brandli, O., Aston, C., Kim, R., Chi, C. & Rom, W. N. (1997). Effects of mycobacteria on regulation of apoptosis in mononuclear phagocytes. *Infect Immun* 65, 5272–5278.

Kohler, J. R., Maiwald, M., Lueck, P. C., Helbig, J. H., Hingst, V. & Sonntag, H. G. (1999). Detecting legionellosis by unselected culture of respiratory tract secretions and developing links to hospital water strains. *J Hosp Infect* 41, 301–311.

Monack, D. M., Mecsas, J., Bouley, D. & Falkow, S. (1998). *Yersinia*-induced apoptosis *in vivo* aids in the establishment of a systemic infection of mice. *J Exp Med* 188, 2127–2137.

Muller, A., Hacker, J. & Brand, B. C. (1996). Evidence for apoptosis of human macrophage-like HL-60 cells by *Legionella pneumophila* infection. *Infect Immun* 64, 4900–4906.

Muller, A., Gunther, D., Dux, F., Naumann, M., Meyer, T. F. & Rudel, T. (1999). Neisserial porin (PorB) causes rapid calcium influx in target cells and induces apoptosis by the activation of cysteine proteases. *EMBO J* 18, 339–352.

Muller, A., Gunther, D., Brinkmann, V., Hurwitz, R., Meyer, T. F. & Rudel, T. (2000). Targeting of the pro-apoptotic VDAC-like porin (PorB) of *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* to mitochondria of infected cells. *EMBO J* 19, 5332–5343.

Nicoletti, I., Migliorati, G., Pagliacci, M. C., Grignani, F. & Riccardi, C. (1991). A rapid and simple method for measuring thymocyte apoptosis by propidium iodide staining and flow cytometry. *J Immunol Methods* 139, 271–279.

Palmer, L. E., Hobbie, S., Galan, J. E. & Bliska, J. B. (1998). YopJ of *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* is required for the inhibition of macrophage TNF-α production and downregulation of the MAP kinases p38 and JNK. *Mol Microbiol* 27, 953–965.

Quinn, F. D., Keen, M. G. & Tompkins, L. S. (1989). Genetic, immunological, and cytotoxic comparisons of *Legionella* proteolytic activities. *Infect Immun* 57, 2719–2725.

Rajalingam, K., Al-Younes, H., Muller, A., Meyer, T. F., Szczepek, A. J. & Rudel, T. (2001). Epithelial cells infected with *Chlamydophila pneumoniae* (*Chlamydia pneumoniae*) are resistant to apoptosis. *Infect Immun* 69, 7880–7888.

Schemer, K., Spiik, A. K., Dukuzumuremyi, J. M., Neurath, M. F., Pettersson, S. & Wolf-Watz, H. (1998). The *yopJ* locus is required for *Yersinia*-mediated inhibition of NF-κB activation and cytokine expression: YopJ contains a eukaryotic SH2-like domain that is essential for its repressive activity. *Mol Microbiol* 28, 1067–1079.

Schulze-Osthoff, K., Ferrari, D., Los, M., Wesselborg, S. & Peter, M. E. (1998). Apoptosis signaling by death receptors. *Eur J Biochem* 254, 439–459.

Slee, E. A., Harte, M. T., Kluck, R. M. & 9 other authors (1999). Ordering the cytochrome c-initiated caspase cascade: hierarchical activation of caspases-2, -3, -6, -7, -8, and -10 in a caspase-9-dependent manner. *J Cell Biol* 144, 281–292.

Slee, E. A., Keogh, S. A. & Martin, S. J. (2000). Cleavage of BID during cytotoxic drug and UV radiation-induced apoptosis occurs downstream of the point of Bcl-2 action and is catalysed by caspase-3: a potential feedback loop for amplification of apoptosis-associated mitochondrial cytochrome c release. *Cell Death Differ* 7, 556–565.

Stevens, P. K. & Czuprynski, C. J. (1996). *Pasteurella haemolytica* leukotoxin induces bovine leukocytes to undergo morphologic changes consistent with apoptosis *in vitro*. *Infect Immun* 64, 2687–2694.

Voll, R. E., Herrmann, M., Roth, E. A., Stach, C., Kalden, J. R.

B. Neumeister and others

Girkontaitė, I. (1997). Immunosuppressive effects of apoptotic cells. *Nature* 390, 350–351.

Walz, J. M., Gerhardt, H., Faigle, M., Wolburg, H. & Neumeister, B. (2000). *Legionella* species of different human prevalence induce different rates of apoptosis in human monocytic cells. *APMIS* 108, 398–408.

Wang, J., Fan, X., Lindholm, C., Bennett, M., O’Connell, J., Shanahan, F., Brooks, E. G., Reyes, V. E. & Ernst, P. B. (2000). *Helicobacter pylori* modulates lymphoepithelial cell interactions leading to epithelial cell damage through Fas/Fas ligand interactions. *Infect Immun* 68, 4303–4311.

Wesselborg, S., Engels, I. H., Rossmann, E., Los, M. & Schulze-Osthoff, K. (1999). Anticancer drugs induce caspase-8/FLICE activation and apoptosis in the absence of CD95 receptor/ligand interaction. *Blood* 93, 3053–3063.

Yang, J., Liu, X., Bhalla, K., Kim, C. N., Ibrado, A. M., Cai, J., Peng, T. I., Jones, D. P. & Wang, X. (1997). Prevention of apoptosis by Bcl-2: release of cytochrome *c* from mitochondria blocked. *Science* 275, 1129–1132.

Yoshiie, K., Kim, H. Y., Mott, J. & Rikihisa, Y. (2000). Intracellular infection by the human granulocytic ehrlichiosis agent inhibits human neutrophil apoptosis. *Infect Immun* 68, 1125–1133.

Yrlid, U. & Wick, M. J. (2000). *Salmonella*-induced apoptosis of infected macrophages results in presentation of a bacteria-encoded antigen after uptake by bystander dendritic cells. *J Exp Med* 191, 613–624.

Ziegler-Heitbrock, H. W. L., Thiel, E., Futterer, A., Herzog, V., Wirtz, A. & Riethmüller, G. (1988). Establishment of a human cell line (Mono Mac 6) with characteristics of mature monocytes. *Int J Cancer* 41, 456–461.

Zink, S. D., Pedersen, L., Cianciotto, N. P. & Abu-Kwaik, Y. (2002). The Dot/Icm typeIV secretion system of *Legionella pneumophila* is essential for the induction of apoptosis in human macrophages. *Infect Immun* 70, 1657–1663.

Received 4 April 2002; revised 12 July 2002; accepted 19 August 2002.
