
Mol Genet Genomics (2002) 268: 387–396  
DOI 10.1007/s00438-002-0759-1  

**ORIGINAL PAPER**

H. Xu · Z.-X. Wang · J. Schmidt · L. Heide · S.-M. Li

# Genetic analysis of the biosynthesis of the pyrrole and carbamoyl moieties of coumermycin A₁ and novobiocin

Received: 28 August 2002 / Accepted: 13 September 2002 / Published online: 11 October 2002  
© Springer-Verlag 2002

---

### Abstract
The aminocoumarin antibiotic coumermycin A₁ contains a central and two terminal pyrrole moieties. The coumermycin gene cluster in *Streptomyces rishiriensis* contains three genes (*couN3*, *couN4* and *couN5*) that show sequence similarity to genes involved in the biosynthesis of the pyrrole moieties of pyoluteorin in *Pseudomonas fluorescens* and of undecylprodigine in *S. coelicolor*. The gene *couN3*, which codes for a putative L-prolyl-S-PCP dehydrogenase, and the gene *couN4*, which encodes a putative L-prolyl-AMP ligase, were disrupted using in-frame deletion and insertional inactivation, respectively. HPLC analysis of culture extracts showed that formation of the two terminal pyrrole moieties was abolished in the *couN3⁻* and *couN4⁻* mutants. The mutants accumulated coumermycin D, which contains only the central pyrrole moiety. This result not only confirmed the involvement of *couN3* and *couN4* in the biosynthesis of the terminal pyrrole-2-carboxylic acid moieties of coumermycin A₁, but also indicated, for the first time, that the central 3-methylpyrrole-2,4-dicarboxylic acid unit of the coumermycins is formed by a biosynthetic pathway that differs from that used to assemble the terminal pyrrole moieties. *novN*, a putative carbamoyl transferase gene from the gene cluster for novobiocin biosynthesis in *S. spheroides* was expressed in the *couN3⁻* mutant. This led to the formation of bis-carbamoylated coumermycin D, a novel compound of the coumermycin series.

### Keywords
*Streptomyces rishiriensis* · Coumermycins · Pyrrole biosynthesis · *couN3/N4* · *novN*

---

### Introduction
Coumarin antibiotics (Fig. 1) are potent inhibitors of gyrase (Maxwell 1999) and represent interesting starting compounds for the development of new antibacterial agents. X-ray crystallographic analysis has shown that the acyl moieties at the 3-hydroxy group of the deoxysugars of these antibiotics are particularly important for their binding to the biological target, i.e., the GyrB subunit of bacterial gyrase (Lewis et al. 1996; Tsai et al. 1997).

Novobiocin (Fig. 1A) is the only member of the coumarin antibiotics which is currently used clinically. Novobiocin carries a carbamoyl group at the 3-hydroxy group of the deoxysugar. In the interaction of gyrase with novobiocin, an aspartate residue forms a hydrogen bond directly with the carbamoyl moiety, and two further hydrogen bonds are formed via ordered water molecules. When clorobiocin (Fig. 1B) binds to gyrase, these two water molecules are displaced by the more voluminous pyrrole moieties present in this compound (Tsai et al. 1997), and the same is expected for the binding of coumermycin A₁ (Fig. 1C).

Pyrrole-2-carboxylic acid moieties are also found in the tripyrrole prodiginines and the chlorinated pyoluteorin (Fig. 2) as well as in other natural products. The gene clusters for biosynthesis of pyoluteorin (*plt* genes; Nowak-Thompson et al. 1999) and undecylprodigine (*red* genes; Malpartida et al. 1990; Cerdeno et al. 2001) have already been identified in *Pseudomonas fluorescens* and *Streptomyces coelicolor*, respectively. Recently, three key enzymes involved in the conversion of L-proline to pyrrole during the biosynthesis of these compounds have been expressed, purified and investigated biochemically (Thomas et al. 2002). PltF (or RedM) activates proline by forming a prolyl adenylate and transfers the prolyl moiety onto the 4-phosphopantethein cofactor of the

---

### Communicated by W. Goebel

H. Xu · Z.-X. Wang · L. Heide · S.-M. Li (✉)  
Pharmazeutische Biologie, Pharmazeutisches Institut,  
Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen,  
Auf der Morgenstelle 8, 72076 Tübingen, Germany  
E-mail: shuming.li@uni-tuebingen.de  
Tel.: +49-7071-2976995  
Fax: +49-7071-295250  

J. Schmidt  
Institut für Pflanzenbiochemie, Universität Halle,  
Weinberg 3, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany

Fig. 1 Structures of coumarin antibiotics

A) Novobiocin

B) Clorobiocin

C) Coumermycin A₁

D) Coumermycin D

E) Bis-carbamoylated coumermycin D

R = 

R = 

R = 

Fig. 2 Organization of the putative pyrrole biosynthesis genes in the coumermycin A₁ biosynthetic gene cluster (top) and proposed biosynthetic pathway for the pyrrole-2-carboxylic acid moieties of coumermycin A₁, pyoluteorin and undecylprodigine (bottom)

AF 235050

couN2 couN3 couN4 couN5 couN6

CouN4

CouN3

L-Proline

PCP

= CouN5

CouN6

Pyoluteorin

Undecylprodigine

small peptidyl carrier protein (PCP) PltL (or RedO) to form a thioester. The FAD-dependent dehydrogenase PltE (or RedW) oxidises this compound to Δ²-pyrrolyl-2-carboxyl-S-PCP, in a reaction that is similar to the acyl-CoA dehydrogenase reaction during the β-oxidation of fatty acids. The product appears to undergo spontaneous, non-enzymatic oxidation by air, yielding pyrrolyl-2-carboxyl-S-PCP (see Fig. 2).

A compound of special interest for pyrrole biosynthesis is coumermycin A₁ (Fig. 1C). It contains two terminal 5-methylpyrrole-2-carboxyl moieties and in addition a central 3-methylpyrrole-2,4-dicarboxyl moiety. The only experimental study so far published on the biosynthesis of the pyrrole moieties of coumermycin A₁ was carried out by Scannell and Kong (1969), who showed that radioactivity from [U-¹⁴C]L-proline and from [methyl-¹⁴C]L-methionine, but not from [4-¹⁴C]δ-aminolevulinic acid, was incorporated into the pyrroles. The authors concluded that “proline serves as a direct precursor of the pyrrole groups of coumermycin A₁”, and that S-adenosyl-methionine contributes the methyl groups attached to these moieties. No explanation was offered for the difference in structure between the central pyrrole moiety and the terminal pyrroles.

We have recently cloned and sequenced the gene cluster for biosynthesis of coumermycin A₁ and have established methods for homologous recombination experiments in the producer organism *S. rishiriensis* (Wang et al. 2000). This now makes it possible to study
the biosynthesis of the pyrrole moieties of coumermycin A₁ by gene inactivation, as reported in this study.

In order to provide a consistent nomenclature for corresponding genes within the biosynthetic gene clusters for novobiocin, coumermycin and clorobiocin (Pojer et al. 2002), we have recently revised the nomenclature of the coumermycin biosynthetic genes (see GenBank entry AF235050). The genes cumJ, proA, proB, proC and cumK (Wang et al. 2000) have been renamed couN2, couN3, couN4, couN5 and couN6, respectively.

### Materials and methods

#### Bacterial strains, plasmids and culture conditions

The bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table 1. For isolation of chromosomal DNA and preparation of protoplasts, S. rishiriensis was grown in liquid medium as described before (Wang et al. 2000). Regeneration of protoplasts was carried out on R2YE agar medium (Kieser et al. 2000). For the production of coumermycin A₁ and other secondary metabolites, wild-type and mutant strains of S. rishiriensis were cultured at 28°C and 180 rpm for 7–10 days in 500-ml baffled flasks containing 100 ml of production medium (Scannell and Kong 1969), consisting of 2% (w/v) cotton seed flour, 2% cornstarch, 2% lard oil, 0.4% yeast extract, 0.25% K₂HPO₄·3H₂O, 0.05% CaCl₂·2H₂O and 0.8 μM CoCl₂·6H₂O.

Escherichia coli XL1 Blue MRF⁻ (Stratagene, Heidelberg, Germany) was used for the preparation of recombinant plasmids.

For transformation of S. rishiriensis DSM 40489, plasmids were isolated after amplification in E. coli ET12567. Carbenicillin (50 µg/ml for E. coli), neomycin (10–20 µg/ml for S. rishiriensis) and apramycin (50 µg/ml for S. rishiriensis) were used for selection.

#### DNA isolation and manipulation

Standard methods for DNA isolation and manipulation were performed as described previously (Kieser et al. 2000; Sambrook and Russell 2001). DNA fragments were isolated from agarose gels using a QIAEX II gel extraction kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Isolation of plasmids was carried out on ion-exchange columns (Nucleobond AX, Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

#### Construction of vectors for gene inactivation

Plasmid pN3, used for couN3 inactivation, carried an in-frame deletion of 480 bp at the 3′ end of couN3. The 3′ region of the insert was obtained from the plasmid pZW11 (Table 1) as a PstI fragment of 1666 bp, including the 3′ region of couN3 and most of the couN4 gene. This fragment was ligated to a 4.7-kb fragment obtained by PstI digestion of the plasmid pZW33, containing the pBluescript SK(−) vector as well as a 1.8-kb fragment with the 5′ end of couN3 and the adjacent couN2 and couN1 genes. The resulting plasmid, pZW334, was digested with EcoRV and XbaI and religated into the same sites in pKC1132 (Bierman et al. 1992), a vector containing the apramycin resistance gene that cannot replicate in Streptomyces species, to give pN3.

### Table 1 Bacterial strains and plasmids used

| Strain/plasmid | Relevant characteristics                                                                 | Source/reference          |
|----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| **Strains**    |                                                                                         |                           |
| S. rishiriensis |                                                                                         |                           |
| DSM 40489      | Wild type, coumermycin A₁ producer                                                       | DSMZᵃ                     |
| XH12           | couN3⁻ mutant of S. rishiriensis DSM 40489                                               | This study                |
| XH13           | couN3⁻ mutant of S. rishiriensis DSM 40489                                               | This study                |
| XH14           | couN3⁻ mutant of S. rishiriensis DSM 40489                                               | This study                |
| ZW20           | couN4⁻ mutant of S. rishiriensis DSM 40489                                               | This study                |
| ZW21           | couN4⁻ mutant of S. rishiriensis DSM 40489                                               | This study                |
| E. coli        |                                                                                         |                           |
| XL1 Blue MRF⁻  |                                                                                         | Stratagene               |
| ET12567        | DNA methylase-negative strain                                                           | MacNeil et al. (1992)     |
| **Plasmids**   |                                                                                         |                           |
| pBluescript SK(−) | Cloning vector                                                                        | Stratagene               |
| pKC1132        | Vector containing an apramycin resistance gene (cannot replicate in Streptomyces)         | Bierman et al. (1992)     |
| pEM4           | Streptomyces expression vector, lacZα Ampʳ TsrᵉrmE* up promoter                          | Quiros et al. (1998)      |
| pNeo4          | aphII neomycin resistance gene                                                          | Wang et al. (2000)        |
| p9-6GE9        | 9.7-kb EcoRI fragment from cosmid 9-6G of the S. spheroides cosmid library                 | Steffensky et al. (2000)  |
|                | in pBluescript SK(−)                                                                    |                           |
| pZW11          | 14736-bp BglIII fragment (positions 1277 to 16013 in AF235050), cloned into the            | Wang et al. (2000)        |
|                | same site in pBluescript SK(−)                                                          |                           |
| pZW33          | 3103-bp EcoRI fragment (positions 9585 to 12688 in AF235050), cloned into the             | Wang et al. (2000)        |
|                | same site in pBluescript SK(−); the insert contains the complete sequence of couN3        |                           |
| pZW334         | 3419-bp EcoRI-PstI fragment (positions 9585 to 13484 in AF235050) lacking the             | This study                |
|                | 480-bp PstI fragment (positions 11338 to 11818) in the coding region of couN3,            |                           |
|                | cloned in pBluescript SK(−)                                                             |                           |
| pN3            | 3.4-kb EcoRV-XbaI fragment from pZW334, containing the defective couN3 gene,              | This study                |
|                | cloned into the same sites in pKC1132                                                   |                           |
| pN4            | 2.65-kb PstI-fragment containing the couN4 gene inactivated by the insertion               | Wang et al. (2000)        |
|                | of aphII into the EcoRI site, cloned in pBluescript SK(−)                                |                           |
| pXHN           | 2498-bp BclI-EcoRI fragment from plasmid p9-6GE9 (positions 15066 to 17564                  | This study                |
|                | in AF170880), containing the complete sequence of novN, cloned into the                  |                           |
|                | BamHI/EcoRI sites of pEM4                                                               |                           |

**DSMZ**, Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen, Braunschweig, GermanyThe vector pN4 for $couN4$ inactivation carried a neomycin resistance gene inserted in the sequence of $couN4$. It was constructed from pZW331 and pZW32 (Wang et al. 2000). pZW331, which contained the 5′ region of $couN4$, was restricted with EcoRI and HindIII and ligated to a 0.99-kb fragment (containing the $aphII$ gene), obtained by digestion of pNeo (Table 1) with the same enzymes. The resulting plasmid, pZW2, was restricted with HindIII and XhoI, and ligated to a 0.96-kb HindIII-XhoI fragment from pZW32 (containing the 3′ region of $couN3$) to give pZW3. pZW3 was restricted with PstI, and the resulting 2.65-kb fragment containing the disrupted $couN3$ gene was cloned into the $PstI$ site of pBluescript SK(−) to give the inactivation vector pN4. In pN4, the $aphII$ gene fragment is in the same orientation as the $couN4$ gene.

Construction of the $novN$ expression vector pXHN

A 2.5-kb $BclII-EcoRI$ fragment from plasmid p9-6GE9 (Table 1), comprising the complete $novN$ gene, was cloned into the $BamHI/EcoRI$ sites of the expression vector pEM4 (Quiros et al. 1998), resulting in plasmid pXHN.

Transformation of $S. rishiriensis$ DSM 40489

Preparation of protoplasts was carried out as described by Kieser et al (2000). Mycelia were grown for 40–48 h, harvested, and incubated with 2 mg of lysozyme in 7 ml of P buffer for 20–40 min at 30°C. For transformation, plasmid pN3 or pN4 was propagated in $E. coli$ ET12567 (MacNeil et al. 1992) and denatured by alkaline treatment prior to transformation (Oh and Chater 1997). The denatured DNA (10–50 μg) was mixed with 200 μl of P buffer, containing $10^8$ freshly prepared protoplasts of $S. rishiriensis$ DSM 40489, and 500 μl of T buffer containing 25% (w/v) polyethylene glycol 1000 (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany). The resulting suspension was plated on R2YE plates. After 16–20 h of incubation at 25°C, the plates were overlaid with 3 ml of soft nutrient agar (Kieser et al. 2000) containing apramycin (0.33 mg/ml) or neomycin (33 μg/ml) for selection of integration mutants.

Determination of the production of coumermycin A₁ and other secondary metabolites in $S. rishiriensis$ strains

Wild-type and mutant strains of $S. rishiriensis$ were cultured in production medium (see above) for 7–10 days at 28°C and 180 rpm. Aliquots (6 ml) of the whole culture were acidified with HCl to pH 6, washed twice with 6 ml of petroleum ether (40–60°C) and subsequently extracted twice with 6 ml of ethyl acetate. The solvent was removed and the residue was dissolved in 0.6 ml of ethanol. This solution was then used for HPLC and HPLC/MS analysis.

Fig. 3A–D Inactivation of $couN3$ and $couN4$ in $S. rishiriensis$ DSM 40489. A Schematic representation of the inactivation of the $couN3$ gene. B Southern analysis of strains obtained in the $couN3$ inactivation experiment. Genomic DNA was digested with $SphI$ and $ClaI$. Lane 1, wild-type; 2 and 3, single crossover mutants; 4, wild-type revertant; 5–7, $couN3^{-}$ mutants XH12, XH13 and XH14, respectively. C Schematic representation of the inactivation of $couN4$. D Southern analysis of strains obtained in the $couN4$ inactivation experiment. Genomic DNA was restricted with $PstI$. Lane 1, wild-type; lanes 2 and 3, $couN4^{-}$ mutants ZW20 and ZW21, respectively

Metabolites were analyzed by HPLC with a Nucleosil RP 120-5 column (5 μm, 250×2 mm, Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany) with a linear gradient from 30 to 100% acetonitrile in 0.1% aqueous phosphoric acid; eluted compounds were detected at 345 nm. Authentic coumermycin A₁ (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) was used as standard.

HPLC-MS and selected reaction monitoring

The positive and negative electrospray ionization (ESI) mass spectra were obtained using a Finnigan MAT TSQ 7000 instrument (electrospray voltage 4.5 kV; temperature of capillary 220°C; sheath and auxiliary gas: nitrogen) coupled to a Micro-Tech Ultra-Plus MicroLC system equipped with an RP18-column (5 μm, 1×100 mm; SepServ, Berlin). For all samples a mixture of $\mathrm{H}_2\mathrm{O}$ and $\mathrm{CH}_3\mathrm{CN}$ (each component contained 0.2% acetic acid) was used as the eluent in a gradient ranging from 80:20 to 10:90 over 15 min, followed by isocratic elution with a 10:90 mixture of the two solvents for 25 min at a flow rate of 70 μl/min. The collision-induced dissociation (CID) spectra of coumermycin A₁ and the selected reaction monitoring (SRM) during a HPLC run were recorded with a collision energy of −25 eV for positive ions and +40 eV for negative ions, respectively; the collision gas was argon and collision pressure was $1.8 \times 10^{-3}$ Torr.

The positive-ion ESI-CID mass spectrum of coumermycin A₁ comprises the following peaks ($m/z$, relative intensity): 1110 ([M+H]⁺, 3), 960 (8), 622 (10), 282 (100), 108 (9). The negative ion ESI-CID mass spectrum of coumermycin A₁ is characterized by signals at 1108 ([M-H]⁻, 22), 620 (24), 594 (36), 513 (42), 487 (100), and 206 (54).

Coumermycin A₁ gives the following positive-ion reactions: $m/z$ 1110 ([M+H]⁺) → $m/z$ 108, $m/z$ 1110 → $m/z$ 282 and $m/z$ 1110 → $m/z$ 622; and the negative-ion reactions: $m/z$ 1108 ([M-H]⁻) → $m/z$ 487 and $m/z$ 1108 → $m/z$ 206.

Coumermycin D yields the positive-ion reactions: $m/z$ 896 ([M+H]⁺) → $m/z$ 175 and $m/z$ 896 → $m/z$ 515; and the negative-ion reaction: $m/z$ 894 ([M-H]⁻) → $m/z$ 380.

Table 2 Homology of the gene products of $couN3$, $couN4$ and $couN5$ with products of the pyoluteorin and undecylprodigine gene clusters

| Coumermycin A₁ cluster (AF235050)ᵃ | Pyoluteorin cluster (AF081920) | Undecylprodigine cluster (AL021530, AL021409) | Proposed function |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Gene product, length | Degree of identity | Gene product, lengthᵇ | Degree of identity |  |
| CouN3 (=ProA), 373 residues | PltE, 380 residues | 47% | RedW (=ORF20), 391 residues | 43% | L-prolyl-S-PCP dehydrogenase |
| CouN4 (=ProB), 501 residues | PltF, 499 residues | 51% | RedM (=ORF11), 532 residues | 43% | L-prolyl-AMP-ligase |
| CouN5 (=ProC), 89 residues | PltL, 88 residues | 38% | RedO (=ORF9), 87 residues | 38% | Peptidyl carrier protein (PCP) |

ᵃThe GenBank Accession Nos. for each of the clusters are shown in parentheses. $proA$, $B$ and $C$ are previous synonyms for $couN3$, $couN4$ and $couN5$. In the paper by Thomas et al. (2002), the terms $proB$ and $proC$ have erroneously been interchanged

ᵇSC2E9.20 (=ORF20) is synonymous with $redW$, SC3F7.11 (=ORF11) with $redM$ and SC3F7.09 (=ORF9) with $redO$
wild-type

probe (870 bp)

BamHI

EcoRI PstI XbaI

couN5

couN4 (1506 bp)

PstI EcoRI PstI

couN3

X

EcoRI PstI

couN2

SphI PstI Clal

couN1

EcoRI

pN4

double crossover

integration mutant

BamHI

EcoRI PstI PstI

couN5

aphII (0.99 kb)

EcoRI EcoRI

PstI

PstI

PN4

BamHI

EcoRI PstI

couN3

XbaI

PstI

couN2

EcoRI SphI

couN1

---

wild-type

probe (826 bp)

EcoRI

couN1

SphI PstI Clal

couN2

couN3 (1126 bp)

PstI

X

EcoRI PstI

couN4

EcoRI SphI

couN1

pN3

double crossover

integration mutant

EcoRI SphI

couN1

PstI Clal

couN2

couN3* (646 bp)

PstI

couN4

couN3*

couN2

couN1

---

1 kb

A

C

D

1 2 3

B

1 2 3 4 5 6 7

4.8 kb

3.5 kb

2.7 kb

1.8 kb

2.04 kb

1.56 kb

2.65 kb

1.66 kb

Bis-carbamoylated coumermycin D is characterized by the positive-ion reactions: \( m/z \, 982 \, ([\mathrm{M}+\mathrm{H}]^{+}) \rightarrow m/z \, 218 \) and \( m/z \, 982 \rightarrow m/z \, 558 \); and the negative-ion reaction: \( m/z \, 980 \, ([\mathrm{M}-\mathrm{H}]^{-}) \rightarrow m/z \, 423 \).

the peak at 275 nm that is observed for coumermycin A₁ and all other coumermycins except coumermycin D.

The finding that the \( couN3^{-} \) mutant accumulated coumermycin D (Fig. 1D) instead of coumermycin A₁ (Fig. 1C) has two implications. First, it confirms experimentally that \( couN3 \) is indeed involved in the biosynthesis of the two terminal pyrrole moieties of coumermycin A₁, as had been speculated. Secondly, it proves that the central pyrrole moiety was still formed in the absence of an intact CouN3 protein, indicating that this moiety is synthesized by a different route.

### Results

#### Inactivation of \( couN3 \)

In the coumermycin A₁ gene cluster in *S. rishiriensis*, three genes (\( couN3 \), \( couN4 \), and \( couN5 \)) have been identified which show high sequence similarity to genes involved in pyrrole formation during pyoluteorin and undecylprodigine biosynthesis (Table 2). These genes are therefore likely to be involved in the formation of the pyrrole moieties of coumermycin A₁. In order to provide experimental proof for this hypothesis, the putative L-prolyl-S-PCP dehydrogenase gene \( couN3 \) was inactivated.

For this purpose, plasmid pN3 was constructed. The \( couN3 \) coding sequence in this plasmid contains a 480-bp in-frame deletion in the 3′ region of the gene, which reduces the length of the predicted gene product from 373 to 213 amino acids (Fig. 3A). The deletion site is flanked on either side by approximately 1.7 kb of the adjacent regions of the coumermycin A₁ cluster in order to allow homologous recombination, and this fragment was cloned into the vector pKC1132, which carries an apramycin resistance marker and cannot replicate autonomously in streptomycetes.

The construct was introduced into the coumermycin producer *S. rishiriensis* DSM 40489 by protoplast transformation. Mutants resulting from integration of the vector were selected with apramycin, sporulated and plated on agar medium with and without antibiotic. Four antibiotic-sensitive strains resulting from double cross-over events were obtained, and Southern analysis (Fig. 3B) revealed that three of them (strains XH12, XH13, and XH14) had the desired genotype, in which the \( couN3 \) gene was inactivated; in the fourth the \( couN3 \) gene had reverted to wild type.

#### Secondary metabolite production in the wild-type and \( couN3^{-} \) mutant

Culture extracts from the wild-type strain of *S. rishiriensis* and from the \( couN3^{-} \) mutants were analyzed by HPLC (Fig. 4B and C). The wild-type strain synthesized coumermycin A₁ as the dominant product. This compound was identified by HPLC by comparison with an authentic reference substance, as well as by LC-MS analysis which confirmed the expected molecular mass \([\mathrm{M}-\mathrm{H}]^{-}\)at \( m/z \, 1108 \).

In the \( couN3^{-} \) mutant, coumermycin A₁ production was completely abolished (Fig. 4C). Instead, this mutant accumulated another product, which was identified as coumermycin D (Fig. 1D) by LC-MS analysis \([\mathrm{M}-\mathrm{H}]^{-}\)at \( m/z \, 894 \). As described by Berger and Batcho (1978), the UV absorption spectrum of this compound did not show

#### Inactivation of \( couN4 \)

The hypothesis that the biosynthetic pathways for the central and the terminal pyrrole moieties of coumermycin A₁ are different was confirmed by a second gene inactivation experiment. \( couN4 \), which encodes a putative L-prolyl-AMP ligase, was targeted in this experiment, since its protein product catalyses the first reaction step in the biosynthesis of pyrroles from L-proline (Fig. 2).

The suicide vector pN4, was constructed for this purpose (Fig. 3C). In this vector, the \( couN4 \) ORF was disrupted by insertion of a neomycin resistance gene, i.e. \( aphII \). pN4 was introduced into protoplasts of *S. rishiriensis* (wild-type). Mutants resulting from integration of the construct were selected with neomycin and investigated further. Two mutants (strains ZW20 and ZW21) were obtained, which showed the desired genotype resulting from a double cross-over event, i.e. the replacement of the intact \( couN4 \) gene by the disrupted gene copy (Fig. 3D).

The absence of the intact \( couN4 \) gene and the presence of the disrupted gene were also confirmed by PCR, using two different pairs of primers (data not shown).

#### Secondary metabolite production in the \( couN4^{-} \) mutant

In HPLC analysis, culture extracts of the \( couN4^{-} \) mutants showed a complete loss of the ability to produce coumermycin A₁. Like the \( couN3^{-} \) mutants, \( couN4^{-} \) mutants accumulated coumermycin D as the dominant product, as revealed by HPLC (Fig. 4D) and UV spectroscopy. Therefore, \( couN4 \) is also involved in the formation of the two terminal pyrrole rings of coumermycin A₁, as suspected. Furthermore \( couN4 \) is not required for the biosynthesis of the central pyrrole moiety of coumermycin A₁ or coumermycin D (Fig. 1).

#### Expression of \( novN \) in the \( couN3^{-} \) mutant

Carbamoylation of the 3-hydroxy group of the deoxy-sugar is considered to be the last step in the biosynthesis of novobiocin (Fig. 1) (Queener et al. 1978). We have recently cloned and sequenced the novobiocin biosynthetic

Fig. 4A–D HPLC analysis of the secondary metabolites in wild-type and mutant S. rishiriensis strains

A
coumermycin A₁ standard

B
wild-type
coumermycin A₁ [M-H]⁻ = 1108

C
couN3 mutant (strain XH13)
coumermycin D [M-H]⁻ = 894

D
couN4 mutant (strain ZW20)
coumermycin D

gene cluster from *S. spheroides*, and identified a putative carbamoyl transferase gene, *novN* (Steffensky et al. 2000). Since the aminocoumarin and the deoxysugar moieties of coumermycin and novobiocin are identical, we decided to examine whether expression of *novN* in the *couN3⁻* (or *couN4⁻*) mutant would result in the formation of carbamoylated coumermycin D derivatives.

For this purpose, the *novN* gene was cloned into the expression vector pEM4, which contains a pIJ101 origin of replication, a thiostrepton resistance marker and an *ermE* promoter for foreign gene expression (Quiros et al. 1998). The resulting construct, pXHN, was introduced into the *couN3⁻* mutant of *S. rishiriensis* by protoplast transformation. Thiostrepton-resistant colonies were selected, and the presence of the intact plasmid was confirmed by isolation and restriction analysis (data not shown).

Secondary metabolite production in the *couN3⁻* mutant expressing *novN*

Culture extracts of the *couN3⁻* mutant with and without the *novN* expression vector pXHN were analysed by HPLC-MS, and compared with the wild-type product spectrum. This allowed selective detection of coumermycin A₁ (MW 1109), coumermycin D (MW 895) and bis-carbamoylated coumermycin D (MW 981). The collision-induced dissociation (CID) mass spectra and selected reaction monitoring (SRM) during a HPLC run were recorded both by positive and negative electrospray ionization (ESI) (see Materials and methods). As shown in Fig. 5, this analysis confirmed the identity of coumermycin A₁ and coumermycin D as the main products of the wild-type and the *couN3⁻* mutants, respectively. Bis-carbamoylated coumermycin D was detected in the *couN3⁻* mutant expressing *novN*, but not in the corresponding strain without *novN*, and not in the wild-type. The ESI-CID spectra of the \[M+H\]⁺ and \[M-H\]⁻ ions, respectively, of coumermycin A₁ display key fragments characterizing the several subunits (Fig. 5A). Thus, the complementary ions at *m/z* 487 (negative-ion ESI) and 622 (positive-ion ESI) are formed by scission of the amide bond. While the positive ion at *m/z* 108 represents the methylpyrrole moiety, the base peak ion at *m/z* 282 comprises the sugar unit with the attached methylpyrrole subunit. The negative ion at *m/z* 206 represents a key ion of the methylated aminocoumarin moiety. To detect coumermycin A₁ the fragment ions at *m/z* 282 and 622 were used for selected reaction monitoring (SRM) measurements in the positive-ion mode.

In coumermycin D (\[M+H\]⁺ at *m/z* 896) corresponding reactions from the \[M+H\]⁺ ion leading to ions at *m/z* 175 and 515 could be detected in the SRM mode (Fig. 5B). In addition, the transition from *m/z* 894 (\[M-H\]⁻) to *m/z* 380 was observed (negative ions).

The bis-carbamoylated coumermycin D (\[M+H\]⁺ at *m/z* 982) displays in the SRM mode the corresponding

---

Fig. 5A–C HPLC-MS and selected reaction monitoring analysis of the secondary metabolites in wild-type and mutant *S. rishiriensis* strains. A Extract from the wild type. B Extract from the *couN3⁻* mutant (strain XH13). C Extract from the *couN3⁻* mutant expressing *novN* (strain XHN6). The fragmentation spectra of the relevant coumermycins are depicted. See text for further details

mass shifts to *m/z* 218 and 558 (Fig. 5C), indicating the same fragmentation pattern as coumermycin A₁ and coumermycin D, respectively. The same is true for the reaction from *m/z* 980 (\[M-H\]⁻) to *m/z* 423 in the negative-ion mode.

The retention times of coumermycin D and bis-carbamoylated coumermycin D were very similar, so that a chromatographic separation could not be achieved. Coumermycin D was the dominant product in the *couN3⁻* mutant expressing *novN*, and the carbamoylated compound was present in smaller quantities. Addition of NH₄NO₃ (12 mM) or carbamoyl phosphate (4 mM) to the culture medium did not increase the proportion of carbamoylated coumermycin D.

---

### Discussion

The results of the present study indicate that the central 3-methylpyrrole-2,4-dicarboxylic acid moiety of coumermycin A₁ is formed by a different pathway from that responsible for synthesis of the two terminal 5-methylpyrrole-2-carboxylic acid moieties.

Based on the results of a previous feeding experiment with \[^{14}C\]L-proline, Scannell and Kong (1969) had assumed that all three pyrrole rings of coumermycin are formed from L-proline. A closer examination of their method, however, reveals that their chemical degradation procedure (pyrolysis and short-column gas chromatography) does not differentiate between the central and the two terminal pyrrole moieties. Therefore, the incorporation of L-proline reported in their study would also be consistent with biosynthesis of the terminal pyrroles from proline and of the central pyrrole from a different precursor.

In pyoluteorin and undecylprodigine biosynthesis, the three essential steps in the conversion of L-proline to pyrrole-2-carboxylic acid (Fig. 2) have been elucidated at the biochemical and genetic levels (Nowak-Thompson et al. 1999; Cerdeno et al. 2001; Thomas et al. 2002). As shown in Table 2, the genes *couN3*, *couN4* and *couN5* of the coumermycin cluster show sequence similarity with these established pyrrole biosynthesis genes and are likely to carry out the reaction steps depicted in Fig. 2. Experimental proof for their involvement in the formation of the terminal pyrrole moieties of coumermycin A₁ has now been provided by the demonstration that inactivation of *couN3* and *couN4* results in complete abrogation of coumermycin A₁ formation (Fig. 4).

The biosynthesis of the terminal pyrrole moieties of coumermycin A₁ requires two additional steps, i.e.

A

$\begin{aligned}
& \text { m/z 206 (ESI-) } \\
& \text { coumermycin A1 }
\end{aligned}$

B

$\begin{aligned}
& \text { coumermycin D }
\end{aligned}$

C

$\begin{aligned}
& \text { bis-carbamoylated coumermycin D }
\end{aligned}$

methylation at position 5 of the pyrrole ring, and transfer of the entire 5-methylpyrrole-2-carboxyl moiety onto the deoxysugar of coumermycin D (Fig. 2). It appears likely that the methylation step is catalyzed by the product of couN6, which lies immediately downstream of couN5 (Fig. 2) and shows sequence similarity to a new

class of radical SAM proteins identified recently (Sofia et al. 2001). The transfer of the activated pyrrole moieties to the deoxysugar may be catalyzed by the product of couN2 (Fig. 2), which shows sequence similarity to acyl transferases. No homologues to couN2 or couN6 are present in the biosynthetic gene cluster for novobiocin, which lacks the pyrrole group (Fig. 1).

As reported previously (Berger and Batcho 1978; Claridge et al. 1984), S. rishiriensis produces a multiplicity of related antibiotics, which differ by the substituents at the 3-hydroxy groups of the two deoxysugars. At either sugar moiety, a 5-methylpyrrole-2-carboxyl group, a non-methylated pyrrole-2-carboxyl group, or no substituent at all can be found, resulting in nine different possible coumermycins. In culture extracts of our wild-type strain (Fig. 4B), a variety of compounds could be detected by HPLC, with coumermycin A₁ being the dominant product. The presence of coumermycin D was confirmed by LC-MS analysis ([M-H]⁻ at m/z 894), but this compound was present in only minor quantities in the wild type. In contrast, coumermycin D was the dominant product in the couN3⁻ and couN4⁻ mutants, accompanied by relatively few other metabolites (Fig. 4C and D).

Carbamoylated derivatives of coumermycin D have never been identified before. Expression of the putative carbamoyltransferase gene novN from the novobiocin biosynthetic gene cluster in the couN3⁻ mutant, however, led to the formation of bis-carbamoylated coumermycin D (Fig. 1), which was identified by its molecular mass and fragmentation pattern in HPLC-MS analysis. This result provides experimental evidence for the presumed function of novN and also demonstrates that new amino coumarin antibiotics may be obtained by genetic modification of the producer strains.

The fact that neither the inactivation of the dehydrogenase gene couN3 nor the inactivation of the L-proline-AMP ligase gene couN4 prevented the biosynthesis of the central pyrrole moiety indicates that proline may not be a precursor of that moiety. The mechanism of biosynthesis of this moiety and the genes involved in this process are currently under investigation in our group.

Acknowledgements We thank Christine Kuhnt for excellent assistance in the LC-MS analysis. This work was supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft to L. H. and S.-M. L., and from the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie. H. Xu was recipient of a fellowship from the China Scholarship Council (CSC).

---

**References**

Berger J, Batcho AD (1978) Coumarin-glycoside antibiotics. J Chromatogr Libr 15:101–158

Bierman M, Logan R, O'Brien K, Seno ET, Rao RN, Schoner BE (1992) Plasmid cloning vectors for the conjugal transfer of DNA from Escherichia coli to Streptomyces spp. Gene 116:43–49

Cerdeno AM, Bibb MJ, Challis GL (2001) Analysis of the prodigine biosynthesis gene cluster of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2): new mechanisms for chain initiation and termination in modular multienzymes. Chem Biol 8:817–829

Claridge CA, Elander RP, Price KE (1984) The coumermycins: properties, biosynthesis, and fermentation. Drugs Pharmacol Sci 22:413–425

Kieser T, Bibb MJ, Buttner MJ, Chater KF, Hopwood DA (2000) Practical Streptomyces genetics. John Innes Foundation, Norwich, UK

Lewis RJ, Singh OM, Smith CV, Skarzynski T, Maxwell A, Wonacott AJ, Wigley DB (1996) The nature of inhibition of DNA gyrase by the coumarins and the cyclohalialidines revealed by X-ray crystallography. EMBO J 15:1412–1420

MacNeil DJ, Gewain KM, Ruby CL, Dezeny G, Gibbons PH, MacNeil T (1992) Analysis of Streptomyces avermitilis genes required for avermectin biosynthesis utilizing a novel integration vector. Gene 111:61–68

Malpartida F, Niemi J, Navarrete R, Hopwood DA (1990) Cloning and expression in a heterologous host of the complete set of genes for biosynthesis of the Streptomyces coelicolor antibiotic undecylprodigiosin. Gene 93:91–99

Maxwell A (1999) DNA gyrase as a drug target. Biochem Soc Trans 27:48–53

Nowak-Thompson B, Chaney N, Wing JS, Gould SJ, Loper JE (1999) Characterization of the pyoluteorin biosynthetic gene cluster of Pseudomonas fluorescens Pf-5. J Bacteriol 181:2166–2174

Oh SH, Chater KF (1997) Denaturation of circular or linear DNA facilitates targeted integrative transformation of Streptomyces coelicolor A3(2): possible relevance to other organisms. J Bacteriol 179:122–127

Pojer F, Li S-M, Heide L (2002) Molecular cloning and sequence analysis of the clorobiocin biosynthetic gene cluster: new insights into the biosynthesis of aminocoumarin antibiotics. Microbiology, in press

Queener SW, Sebek OK, Vezina C (1978) Mutants blocked in antibiotic synthesis. Annu Rev Microbiol 32:593–636

Quiros LM, Aguirrezabalaga I, Olano C, Mendez C, Salas JA (1998) Two glycosyltransferases and a glycosidase are involved in oleandomycin modification during its biosynthesis by Streptomyces antibioticus. Mol Microbiol 28:1177–1185

Sambrook J, Russell DW (2001) Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual (3rd edn). Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

Scannell J, Kong YL (1969) Biosynthesis of coumermycin A₁: incorporation of L-proline into the pyrrole groups. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 9:139–143

Sofia HJ, Chen G, Hetzler BG, Reyes-Spindola JF, Miller NE (2001) Radical SAM, a novel protein superfamily linking unresolved steps in familiar biosynthetic pathways with radical mechanisms: functional characterization using new analysis and information visualization methods. Nucleic Acids Res 29:1097–1106

Steffensky M, Mühlenweg A, Wang ZX, Li SM, Heide L (2000) Identification of the novobiocin biosynthetic gene cluster of Streptomyces spheroides NCIB 11891. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 44:1214–1222

Thomas MG, Burkart MD, Walsh CT (2002) Conversion of L-proline to pyrrolyl-2-carboxyl-S-PCP during undecylprodigiosin and pyoluteorin biosynthesis. Chem Biol 9:171–184

Tsai FT, Singh OM, Skarzynski T, Wonacott AJ, Weston S, Tucker A, Paupit RA, Breeze AL, Poyser JP, O'Brien R, Ladbury JE, Wigley DB (1997) The high-resolution crystal structure of a 24-kDa gyrase B fragment from E. coli complexed with one of the most potent coumarin inhibitors, clorobiocin. Proteins 28:41–52

Wang ZX, Li SM, Heide L (2000) Identification of the coumermycin A₁ biosynthetic gene cluster of Streptomyces rishiriensis DSM 40489. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 44:3040–3048
