
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek 81: 397–407, 2002.
© 2002 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.

# Quorum-sensing in Rhizobium

Florence Wisniewski-Dyé${}^{1,*}$ & J. Allan Downie${}^{2}$

${}^{1}$Laboratoire d'Écologie Microbienne, UMR-CNRS 5557, Université Lyon 1, 69622 Villeurbanne cedex, France; ${}^{2}$John Innes Centre, Colney, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK (*Author for correspondence; E-mail: wisniews@biomserv.univ-lyon1.fr)

Key words: autoinducer, bacteriocin, legumes, N-acyl-homoserine-lactone, nodulation, quorum-sensing, Rhizobium, symbiosis

## Abstract

Quorum-sensing signals are found in many species of legume-nodulating rhizobia. In a well-characterized strain of *R. leguminosarum* biovar *viciae*, a variety of autoinducers are synthesized, and all have been identified as N-acyl-homoserine lactones. One of these N-acyl-homoserine lactones, is N-(3-hydroxy-7-*cis*-tetradecenoyl)-L-homoserine lactone, previously known as small bacteriocin, which inhibits the growth of several *R. leguminosarum* strains. The *cinRI* locus is responsible for the production of small bacteriocin. CinR induces *cinI* in response to the AHL made by CinI, thus forming a positive autoregulatory induction loop. A complex cascade of quorum-sensing loops was characterized, in which the *cinIR* locus appears to be the master control for three other AHL-dependent quorum-sensing control systems. These systems include the *raiI/raiR*, *traI/triR* and *rhiI/rhiR*. Other rhizobial strains appear to share some of these quorum sensing loci, but not all loci are found in all strains. Small bacteriocin along with the other N-acyl-homoserine lactones produced by these three AHL-based control systems regulate (i) growth inhibition of sensitive strains, (ii) transfer of the symbiotic plasmid pRL1JI, and (iii) expression of the rhizosphere-expressed (*rhi*) genes that influence nodulation. Some of the genes regulated by these systems have been identified. While the functions of some, such as the *trb* operon regulated by *triR* are clear, several of the regulated genes have no homologues of known function. It is anticipated that several other genes regulated by these systems have yet to be identified. Therefore, despite the regulation of one of the most complex quorum-sensing cascade being understood, several of the functions regulated by the quorum-sensing genes remain to be elucidated.

## Abbreviations: AHL – acyl-homoserine lactone; HSL – homoserine lactone

## Introduction

For decades, bacteria were known to live in colonies but members of these colonies were thought to act as individuals with no apparent need to communicate between each other. Only a few species seemed to be able to perceive information from adjacent cells for specific purposes such as sporulation and fruiting body formation by *Myxococcus xanthus* (Gill & Cull 1986) and antibiotic production by *Streptomyces* species (Horinouchi & Beppu 1990).

Bioluminescence in the marine symbiotic bacterium (*Vibrio fischeri*) was shown to follow cell density-dependent expression (Nealson et al. 1970). This species produces and responds to N-acylated homoserine lactone signalling molecules that accumulate in the external environment and act as autoinducers as the cells grow (Eberhard et al. 1981). When a threshold level of autoinducer is reached, a cascade of events leads to bioluminescence production. Light production is controlled by two proteins: LuxI, responsible for the synthesis of the autoinducer and LuxR, a transcriptional activator, that, when bound to autoinducer promotes transcription of the luciferase operon (Engebrecht et al. 1983; Engebrecht & Silverman 1984). As the genetic basis of luminescence regulation was unravelled, several Gram negative species were shown to produce N-acylated homoserine lactones (AHLs) and this cell density-dependent signalling system was referred to as quorum-sensing
(Fuqua et al. 1994). A growing number of phylogenetically diverse Gram negative bacteria use $N$-acylated homoserine lactones to regulate various functions (for review Fuqua & Greenberg 1998; Eberl 1999). However, Gram negative bacteria can use other classes of signalling molecules. A second type of autoinducer molecule (AI-2) is made by *V. harveyi* (Bassler et al. 1994); this compound synthesised by LuxS appears to be a furanosyl borate diester (Chen et al. 2002) and was proposed to be a widespread signalling molecule that facilitates inter-species communication. However, LuxS was also shown to play a role in homocysteine biosynthesis in many bacteria and Winzer et al. (2002a, b) suggested that, in many species, AI-2 does not function as a signalling molecule, but is simply a metabolic by-product of homocysteine and methionine biosynthesis. *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* produces other types of signalling molecules such as quinolones (Pesci et al. 1999) and cyclic peptides (Holden et al. 1999). AHL molecules can be synthesized by other types of AHL synthases not belonging to the LuxI family. One class of such proteins include LuxM and AinS found respectively in *Vibrio harveyi* (Bassler et al. 1993) and *Vibrio fischeri* (Gilson et al. 1995). Another novel class is HtdS from *Pseudomonas fluorescens* (Laue et al. 2000).

The AHL based signalling mechanism is often involved in associations with higher organisms as illustrated with the human opportunistic pathogen *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* (Passador et al. 1993) and with many plant-associated bacteria such as the pathogens *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* (Zhang et al. 1993), *Erwinia carotovora* (Pirhonen et al. 1993), *Ralstonia solanacearum* (Flavier et al. 1997) and the legume-nodulating *Rhizobium*. In a survey of AHLs produced by diverse soil bacteria, it was noted that *Rhizobium* spp. produced the greatest diversity of quorum sensing signalling molecules (Cha et al. 1998).

The purpose of this review is to present the different stages of quorum sensing discovery in *Rhizobium*. We will discuss the complexity of this signalling system in a well-studied model *Rhizobium leguminosarum* biovar *viciae*.

are not self-propagating nor an antibiotic) characterized as small, medium or large on the basis of their assumed sizes and diffusion characteristics (Schwinghamer & Brockwell 1978; Hirsch 1979). Large bacteriocins were found to resemble defective bacteriophages (Schwinghamer & Brockwell 1978; Hirsch 1979; Lotz & Meyer 1982). A proteinaceous nature was suspected for medium bacteriocins (Rodelas et al. 1998) and recently a gene encoding a medium bacteriocin was isolated and the protein it encodes has predicted calcium-binding domains similar to those in RTX toxins such as hemolysin and leukotoxin (Oresnik et al. 1999).

Small bacteriocin was described as being able to diffuse through cellophane, being heat-labile, resistant to proteolytic enzymes and able to produce zones of growth inhibition when assayed using a sensitive strain as a lawn in an agar plate bioassay (Hirsch 1979). All isolates which produced *small* were not sensitive to it and inversely non-producers were sensitive to all producers (Hirsch 1979). The Sym-plasmid pRL1JI of *Rhizobium leguminosarum* strain 248 is a naturally occurring plasmid of about 220 kb (Hirsch et al. 1980), which carries genes for nodulation, plasmid transfer (Johnston et al. 1978), nitrogen fixation (Brewin et al. 1980). Two functions located close to the plasmid transfer genes on pRL1JI are responsible for the fact that this strain does not produce *small* and is sensitive to *small* bacteriocin (Brewin et al. 1980; Wijffelman et al. 1983). Introduction of the symbiotic plasmid pRL1JI into *small*-producing strains prevents the production or excretion of *small* and results in sensitivity to *small* (Wijffelman et al. 1983; Priem & Wijffelman 1984).

Partial purification of *small* following chloroform extraction demonstrated that its inhibitory effect on exponentially growing sensitive cells was not detected until 11 h after its addition and was preceded by an inhibition of cellular division (van Brussel et al. 1985).

Gray et al. (1996) isolated a *Rhizobium leguminosarum* autoinducer (RLAI) from supernatants of late-exponential phase culture of strain 8401 and showed that the compound was a $N$-acyl-homoserine lactone with a large, hydrophobic acyl side group. This RLAI could induce stationary phase on cells carrying the symbiotic plasmid pRL1JI, growth inhibition occurring approximately after two doublings. Interestingly, cultures of *Rhizobium leguminosarum* carrying the Sym plasmid pRL1JI did not produce detectable amounts of RLAI, whereas the same strain cured of the Sym plasmid did produce RLAI. These observations obviously

## Small bacteriocin: the first known autoinducer of Rhizobium

*Rhizobium leguminosarum* strains have been shown to produce bacteriocins (inhibitory agents which cause antagonism between closely related strains and whichled the authors to conclude that genes required for RLAI synthesis do not reside on the Sym plasmid and that RLAI had similar properties to small bacteriocin. Parallel work on the elucidation of small bacteriocin chemical structure led to the demonstration that small was *N*-(3-hydroxy-7-cis-tetradecenoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (Schripsema et al. 1996) referred to hereafter as 3OH,*C*~14:1~-HSL.

### The rhi region of *R. leguminosarum* bv. *viciae*

A characteristic found specifically in strains of *R. leguminosarum* bv. *viciae*, but not other rhizobial strains is the ability to make large amounts of a protein with an *M* of 24,000 (Dibb et al. 1984). This protein is expressed by bacteria in the rhizosphere around legume roots but not within legume nodules. The gene encoding this protein was called *rhiA* and was found to be located within a 10-kb region of DNA located between the *nod* (nodulation) genes and the *nifHDK* genes encoding the nitrogenase complex that reduces atmospheric nitrogen. Analysis of several strains of *R. leguminosarum* (biovars *viciae*, *trifolii* and *phaseoli*), *Rhizobium meliloti*, and *Rhizobium* sp. strain NGR234, using antibody to RhiA, showed that RhiA seems to be specific to *R. leguminosarum* bv *viciae*, indicating that it may play some host-specific role in the interaction between this biovar and its symbiotic partners (pea, vetch, lentil and *Lathyrus* spp.) (Dibb et al. 1984).

*rhiA* is in a three-gene operon (*rhiABC*); RhiA and RhiB appear to be cytoplasmic whereas RhiC is predicted to be a periplasmic protein, since it possesses a typical N-terminal transit sequence (Cubo et al. 1992). The biochemical role of the *rhiABC* genes has not been established, since there are currently no similar genes products of defined functions in the databases and mutations of these genes have no observed biochemical effects. The *rhiABC* operon is under the positive control of a fourth gene transcribed convergently toward the operon; this gene, named *rhiR* encodes a LuxR-type regulator and was one of the first *luxR*-like genes to be identified (Cubo et al. 1992). Using a plasmid carrying a *rhiA-lacZ* fusion, Gray and coworkers (1996) observed that an extract containing 3OH,*C*~14:1~-HSL could activate the *rhiA* promoter and inhibit the growth of cells containing pRL1JI.

The regulation of the *rhiABC* genes is also affected by genes other than *rhiR*. It was observed that flavonoid inducers of *nod* gene expression decreased

by about 50% the level of expression of the *rhiABC* operon and that this required the *nod* gene regulator NodD (Economou 1989; Cubo et al. 1992).

#### Rhizobium strains produce multiple *N*-AHLs

Very rapidly after the structural characterization of the first *N*-AHLs, biosensors to detect AHLs were designed. Plasmid reporter vectors, which respond to activation of LuxR and its *P. aeruginosa* homologues LasR and VmsR (Winson et al. 1998) as well as *gfp*-based vectors (Andersen et al. 2001), were constructed. *Chromobacterium violaceum* CVO26 is a mutant strain that no longer produces its cognate AHL (*C*~6~-HSL) due to inactivation of its *luxI*-like gene; thus it can be used as an indicator for exogenous AHLs as it produces the purple pigment violacein in response to added AHLs (McClean et al. 1997). Several strains of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* with an inactivated *traI* (the *luxI*-like gene) and harboring *lacZ* fused to a gene that is regulated by AHLs were also constructed (Shaw et al. 1997). These indicator strains can be used in plates assays with the strains to be tested or with organic extracts of supernatants from cultures of these strains. An important feature is that these various biosensors recognize only a range of AHLs, with *C. violaceum* CVO26 responding to AHLs with short acyl chains and *A. tumefaciens* responding to AHLs with acyl chain ranging from 6 to 14 carbons.

By coupling separation by thin layer chromatography and detection with the *A. tumefaciens* indicator, AHLs produced by plant-associated bacteria were investigated (Cha et al. 1998). Whereas most *A. tumefaciens* strains tested produced a single detectable component, multiple AHLs are apparently produced by several species of legume-nodulating bacteria, including species of the genera *Rhizobium* and *Sinorhizobium*. Using the same technique for *R. etli*, seven different autoinducers molecules appeared to be produced (Rosemeyer et al. 1998, Lithgow et al. 2000 and see below). Although no AHLs have been described in *Bradyrhizobium* spp., conditioned growth medium from *B. japonicum* was shown to induce the expression of the *nolA* gene, which causes repression of the nodulation genes in a cell density-dependent manner (Loh et al. 2001). The nature of the inducer of *nolA* has not yet been described.

Preliminary plate assays using *C. violaceum* with our model strain *Rhizobium leguminosarum* bv *viciae* 8401 indicated the production of short-acyl chains
terize the products made by RhiI among all the AHLs  
made by the *R. leguminosarum bv viciae* strain, a cos-  
mid carrying the *rhi* region was introduced into an  
*Agrobacterium tumefaciens* strain that makes no de-  
tectable AHLs, and the supernatant of this recombin-  
ant strain was extracted and subjected to HPLC-MS.  
This led to the characterisation of the products made  
by RhiI: C₆-HSL, and C₈-HSL (Rodelas et al. 1999). It  
is now evident that RhiR induces at least two operons,  
*rhiABC* and *rhiI* in response to the AHLs made by RhiI  
(Rodelas et al. 1999).

By screening Tn5-induced mutants of strain 8401  
unable to inhibit growth of a sensitive strain, the locus  
responsible for 3OH,C₁₄:₁-HSL has been character-  
ised (Lithgow et al. 2000). The *cinIR* locus is predicted  
to be on the chromosome, based on DNA hybridiz-  
ation. CinR regulates *cinI* to a very high level in a  
cell-density dependent manner and *cinI* expression is  
positively regulated by its cognate AHL, 3OH,C₁₄:₁-  
HSL. As expected, mutation of *cinI* or *cinR* abol-  
ishes the production of 3OH,C₁₄:₁-HSL; however such  
mutations also severely reduce the production of the  
other autoinducers (the short chain AHLs detected by  
the *C. violaceum* bioassay) both in strains carrying and  
deleted for the symbiotic plasmid pRL1JI (Lithgow et  
al. 2000). The other autoinducers are thought to result  
from the expression of three other AHL production  
loci; one of which is the previously characterised *rhiI*  
(Rodelas et al. 1999). Thus, mutation of *cinI* or *cinR*  
also strongly reduces the level of expression of the *rhiI*  
and *rhiA* genes. Apparently, this is an indirect effect,  
since RhiR does not induce *rhiI* or *rhiA* in response to  
3OH,C₁₄:₁-HSL but in response to short chain AHLs  
made by RhiI (Rodelas et al. 1999); furthermore the  
*cinR* gene product cannot directly regulate *rhiI* or *rhiA*  
gene expression in response to AHLs (Lithgow et al.  
2000).

Mutation of *cinI* or *cinR* significantly decreased the  
transfer frequency of the symbiotic plasmid pRL1JI,  
if the recipient strain in the mating was also defect-  
ive for 3OH,C₁₄:₁-HSL production. It was shown that  
3OH,C₁₄:₁-HSL produced by either the donor or re-  
cipient strain in matings can stimulate transfer of the  
plasmid pRL1JI (Lithgow et al. 2000). This was sug-  
gested to be an indirect effect, mediated via an AHL  
production system on pRL1JI. On this symbiotic plas-  
mid, there is a plasmid transfer gene region very  
similar to that found on the *Agrobacterium Ti* plasmid  
(Wilkinson et al. in press). In *Agrobacterium* the plas-  
mid transfer genes are under dual control by quorum-  
sensing via *traI/traR* and by nutritional factors, opines,

Figure 1. *Chromobacterium violaceum* assay with 8401 and  
8401pRL1JI. *R. leguminosarum* strains were inoculated on an over-  
lay of the indicator *C. violaceum* and the plate was incubated at 28  
°C for 24 h. The indicator strain is particularly sensitive to C₆-HSL  
and C₈-HSL, is relatively poor at detecting oxo and hydroxy AHLs  
and is insensitive to 3OH, C₁₄:₁-HSL. Production of short acyl chain  
AHLs is much greater in the presence of pRL1JI.

AHLs and that this production appeared much greater  
when pRL1JI was present in this strain (Figure 1).  
The first thin layer chromatographs overlaid with *C.*  
*violaceum* confirmed this observation and further stud-  
ies showed that, in addition to 3OH,C₁₄:₁-HSL not  
detected by this biosensor, the Sym⁻ strain could  
produce 3 or 4 short-acyl chain AHLs whereas the  
Sym⁺ strain could produce more than 6 (Lithgow et  
al. 2000). On this basis, it was predicted that several  
*luxI* homologues would exist in this strain.

### Unravelling the quorum-sensing cascade in *R.*  
#### *leguminosarum bv. viciae*

By further characterizing the *rhi* region of *Rhizobium*  
*leguminosarum bv viciae*, *rhiI* was found (Rodelas et  
al. 1999). RhiI shows clear similarities with the LuxI  
family of proteins, sharing similarity with LuxI (*Vibrio*  
*fischeri*), LasI (*Pseudomonas aeruginosa*) and RaiI  
(*R. etli*). As demonstrated using a *rhiI-lacZ* fusion,  
the *rhiI* gene is regulated by RhiR in a cell-density  
dependent manner, and is positively autoregulated.  
A *rhiI* mutant was still able to produce short-chain  
AHLs, suggesting the existence of at least another  
*luxI*-type locus in the studied strain. Thus, to charac-

Rhizosphere-expressed  
genes influencing nodulation  

- Transfer of symbiotic plasmid  
- Growth inhibition  

Plant factors  
Environmental factors  

Figure 2. Quorum-sensing cascade in *R. leguminosarum* bv. *viciae*. (1) CinR induces *cinI* expression allowing the production of 3OH, C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL, which together with CinR activates *cinI* to form a positive feedback loop. (2) 3OH, C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL influences the expression of *rhiI*, an AHL production gene located on pRL1JI. RhiR, with the AHLs made by RhiI, induces *rhiI* and *rhiABC*. (3) Another quorum-sensing loop located on pRL1JI is involved in plasmid transfer; expression of *traI*, also influenced by 3OH, C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL, leads to the production of several short chain AHLs which along with TraR allow the expression of the *trb* genes. (4) A fourth quorum-sensing loop, also influenced by the master loop *cinIR* is located outside pRL1JI. RaiI also produces several short acyl chain AHLs; the genes regulated by RaiR have not yet been identified. Functions located on pRL1JI are responsible for the repression of 3OH, C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL production. Indeed, growth inhibition mediated by 3OH, C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL is observed with strains carrying pRL1JI and hence is due to genes carried by this plasmid. B 3OH, C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL; ○○○ short acyl chain AHLs; → indicates a demonstrated regulation; . . . . . > indicates a putative regulation; <. . . . . > indicates possible cross-talk between the different loops.

One of the surprising observations made in this study was the identification of an AHL (C₇-HSL) with an odd number of carbons in the acyl chain (Lithgow et al. 2000). Such an AHL had not been described previously. The level of production of such AHLs appears to be somewhat dependent on the growth medium used (Lithgow et al. 2001). Lithgow et al. (2000) suggested that, if propionyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA, respectively, were the acyl chain starter and extender units, this could result in the formation of precursors for the acyl chain in which an odd number of carbon atoms are present. It would seem that at least two of the AHL synthetic loci in *R. leguminosarum* bv. *viciae* can produce C₇-HSL. One is the product of *raiI*, and C₇-HSL is co-regulated with the other AHLs made by this locus (Wisniewski-Dyé et al. 2002). The other locus likely to be involved in C₇-HSL synthesis is *rhiI*, which directs the synthesis of C₆-HSL, C₈-HSL and a third AHL that co-migrates with C₇-HSL (Rodelas et al. 1999 and unpublished data).

It is also noteworthy that among the short acyl chains AHLs made by the three loci of *R. leguminosarum* bv. *viciae*, some are redundant, i.e. a same molecule is made by more than one locus. For example C₆-HSL is made by RaiI and by RhiI and this could explain partly why when mutating *rhiI*, no effect was seen on the regulation of the *rhiABC* operon (Rodelas et al. 1999).

ily of AHL synthases and several genes showing some similarity to LuxR-type regulators. Two of these predicted regulatory genes (*visN* and *visR*) encode proteins which regulate genes involved in chemotaxis, flagellar assembly and motility (Sourjik et al. 2000). A search of the *Mesorhizobium loti* genome protein sequence database (http://www.kazusa.or.jp/rhizobase/index.html) revealed two genes encoding proteins with clear similarity to LuxI-like proteins and at least three LuxR-like proteins. The role of these genes has not been reported. The sequence of the *Sinorhizobium fredii* symbiotic plasmid pNGR234a revealed the presence of a *luxR*-like and a *luxI*-like gene (Freiberg et al. 1997). These genes encode proteins showing close similarity to TraI and TraR from *Agrobacterium* strains; this similarity together with their location (flanking a *trb* plasmid transfer operon) strongly imply a role in plasmid transfer analogous to that seen in *Agrobacterium* (Hwang et al. 1994).

### Autoinducers and nodulation

Although medium bacteriocin production confers a competitive advantage for nodule occupancy (Goel et al. 1999; Oresnik et al. 1999), the role of small bacteriocin and other *Rhizobium*-made AHLs on nitrogen fixation has yet to be fully defined. Initially, no effect on nodulation or symbiotic nitrogen fixation was observed with bacteria containing transposon insertions in *rhiA*, a quorum-sensing-regulated gene (Dibb et al. 1984). Subsequently, it was found that mutation of *rhiA* could affect nodulation in some mutant strains that were already impaired for nodulation due to deletion of some of the nodulation genes. In particular, in absence of the *nodFEL* genes, mutation of *rhiA* or *rhiR* could decrease the low level of nodulation even further (Cubo et al. 1992). The nodulation ability of a *rhiI* mutant is not impaired on peas, the final number of nodules formed being slightly but consistently higher than that of the control (Rodelas et al. 1999).

Interestingly, the *R. etli raiI* mutant when inoculated onto beans gave twice the number of nodules of the wild type; the appearance of nodules and nitrogen-fixing activity in terms of acetylene reduction per nodule were not affected. As for a *raiR* mutant, no difference was observed compared to the wild type. Thus, in *R. etli*, *raiI* (but not *raiR*) appears to be involved in the restriction of nodule number (Rosemeyer et al. 1998). However a *raiI* mutation in *R.

### Quorum sensing genes in other rhizobia

A genetic study on autoinducers produced by *R. etli* revealed that RaiI (a LuxI-type protein) was responsible for the synthesis of four AHLs in conjunction with the transcriptional regulator RaiR (a LuxR-type protein). However, in a *raiI* mutant some autoinducers are still produced suggesting the existence of at least a second *luxI*-like gene in *R. etli* (Rosemeyer et al. 1998). No data were presented to shed light on the location of the *raiIR* genes. The *cin* locus has recently been identified in the same *R. etli* strain and was shown to code for the production of a long saturated chain 3-hydroxy-AHL, a compound able to induce growth inhibition of a sensitive *R. leguminosarum* strain (Daniels et al. 2002).

Recently, the genomes of two rhizobial strains have been completely sequenced. A search of the *Sinorhizobium meliloti* protein sequence database (http://sequence.toulouse.inra.fr/meliloti.html) revealed one gene with clear similarity to the LuxI family.

leguminosarum bv. *viciae* did not induce increase in nodule number (Wisniewski-Dyé et al. 2002), but this could be attributed to the other loci compensating for AHL production.

Tn5-induced mutants lacking small bacteriocin production could induce formation of normal root acetylene-reducing nodules, showing that small production was not required for nodule formation (van Brussel et al. 1985). This observation was confirmed with a *cinI* mutant (mutant for which the 3OH,C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL synthetase was inactivated): it retains the ability to nodulate pea and vetch (Lithgow et al. 2000).

In *R. etli*, a clear impact of the *cin* system was observed on nitrogen fixation as inoculation of bean plants with the *cinI* mutant or the *cinR* mutant resulted in a lower acetylene reduction activity (30–40% of wild type) (Daniels et al. 2002). Symbiosomes carrying *cinI* mutant bacteroids did not fully differentiate compared with wild type symbiosomes (Daniels et al. 2002). Moreover, this study showed the expression of the *cin* genes under symbiotic conditions and demonstrated for the first time that autoinducers are produced within nodules.

### Autoinducers and survival

Rhizobium often has to survive long periods of starvation in the soil, when not in a symbiotic relationship with leguminous plants. Also, it is necessary for Rhizobium peat inoculants used by farmers to retain high numbers of viable cells. Recent work has indicated that *R. leguminosarum* adapts to stationary phase only at high cell density. This was measured by enhanced survival in the absence of nutrients or resistance to killing by high salt concentration (Thorne & Williams 1997). The addition of 3OH,C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL has been shown to promote starvation survival of *R. leguminosarum* cultures that enter stationary phase at low cell density (Thorne & Williams 1999). However, a mutant no longer able to synthesize 3OH,C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL showed no difference in long-term survival and in survival after exposure to sodium chloride (Lithgow et al. 2000).

*R. etli raiR* and *cinI* mutants and indeed the double *raiIcinI* mutant were shown to be altered in growth, the entry into exponential phase being delayed compared with the wild type strain. The observed difference in lag phases was pronounced when the culture was 1000-fold diluted and depends on the carbon source used (Daniels et al. 2002).

In a study of field populations of *R. leguminosarum*, it was observed that pRL1JI or closely related nodulation plasmids were the most prevalent in strains isolated from nodules, suggesting that there must be a natural selective pressure to maintain this type of plasmid (Young & Wexler 1988). The *cinI* locus affects plasmid transfer and 3OH,C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL from either the recipient or the donor strain can enhance plasmid transfer. However, as 3OH,C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL stimulates the formation of several different AHLs, 3OH,C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL may indirectly (i.e., via a different AHL) activate a regulatory gene product that induces plasmid transfer genes on pRL1JI (Lithgow et al. 2000).

#### What might interfere with Rhizobium cell-to-cell communication

Since there is remarkable similarity in the structure of AHLs produced by various bacteria, AHLs produced by one microorganism could, in theory, be used by another unrelated species. For example, C<sub>6</sub>-HSL produced by *R. leguminosarum* bv. *viciae* is also produced by a number of different bacteria including species of *Chromobacterium* (McClean et al. 1997), *Pseudomonas* (Winson et al. 1995), *Serratia* (Eberl et al. 1996). It was indeed shown that a *P. aeruginosa* supernatant could induce virulence factors production in *Burkholderia cepacia* (formerly *Pseudomonas cepacia*) (McKenney et al. 1995), suggesting that interspecies cross-talk might exist. Recently, a *P. fluorescens* strain was shown to produce 3OH,C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL, its synthesis being directed by a novel AHL synthase (HdtS), unrelated to the two known synthase families (Laue et al. 2000); whether *P. fluorescens* controls the growth of *Rhizobium* within the soil or the rhizosphere remains to be elucidated. *Rhodobacter sphaeroides* is another example of bacteria able to produce a closely 3OH,C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL related molecule: C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL (Puskas et al. 1997).

If some unrelated bacteria use the same ‘language’, some might be able to intercept the message; this was recently exemplified with a strain of *Bacillus* sp. whose gene *aiiA* is responsible for inactivation of quorum-sensing signal of *Erwinia carotovora* and hence attenuation of virulence (Dong et al. 2000). This gene encodes for an AHL lactonase that hydrolyses the ester bond of the homoserine lactone ring and was found in several *Bacillus* species (Dong et al. 2001, 2002); the role of AHL lactonase in these *Bacillus* species is unclear. Isolation of a *Variovorax paradoxus*

strain able to grow on AHL as the sole source of energy and nitrogen was also reported (Leadbetter & Greenberg 2000).

Moreover, higher organisms produce molecules capable of interfering with the quorum-sensing biosensors and inhibiting quorum-sensing regulated phenotypes, as was shown with some halogenated furanones from the marine alga *Delisea pulchra* (Manefield et al. 1999, 2001). Interestingly there is now clear evidence that pea roots exude components, which activate quorum-sensing reporter systems in different bacteria (Teplitski et al. 2000). The identity of the inducers is, as yet, not known, but it is evident that they are not AHLs. This work points to the possibility that plants may have utilised quorum-sensing regulatory systems to modulate bacterial gene expression in ways that enhance plant-microbe interactions.

A recent study showed that plants genetically modified to produce AHLs could compensate an AHL-deficient *Pseudomonas aureofaciens* strain and restore its AHL-regulated biocontrol activity (Fray et al. 1999). Thus plants producing AHLs might modify the behaviour of plant-associated bacteria and enhance the ability of nitrogen-fixing bacteria such as rhizobial species.

### Conclusion

Clearly, there is the potential for many different genes to be regulated via quorum-sensing in *Rhizobium* spp. It remains to be established what other genes (other than quorum-sensing genes) are regulated by the various quorum-sensing regulators. Of those regulated genes that have been described in the literature (Cubo et al. 1992; Rodelas et al. 1999; Lithgow et al. 2000) none has yet been ascribed a function. To identify putative target genes, a genetic method based on random mutagenesis of a quorum-sensing mutant with a promoterless reporter gene as used for *P. aeruginosa* could be used (Whiteley et al. 1999); alternatively a proteomic method comparing the protein profiles of a wild type and a quorum-sensing mutant as used for *V. fischeri* could reveal some related proteins (Callahan & Dunlap 2000). But an important and tricky step is the construction of a mutant entirely defective in the synthesis of *R. leguminosarum* autoinducers.

Putative target genes might encode functions necessary for free-living state and implicated in bacterial fitness and survival. Other candidates are functions involved in root colonization such as motility and adhesion via surface polysaccharides. Another conundrum is what causes the growth inhibition induced by 3OH,C<sub>14:1</sub>-HSL.

Furthermore, one cannot rule out the possibility of a higher level of regulation for the quorum-sensing cascade of *Rhizobium* but this, to our knowledge, has not been investigated yet. The *cinIR* locus could be regulated by environmental factors via a global regulator as was shown in *V. fischeri* with CRP (Shadel & Baldwin 1991), in *Erwinia chrysantemi* with CRP (Reverchon et al. 1998), in *P. aeruginosa* with RpoS (Whiteley et al. 2000) and in *V. harveyi* (Lilley & Bassler 2000). There is indeed some evidence to suggest that expression of *cinR* is affected by the growth phase and may be regulated by some other factor (Lithgow et al. 2000).

### References

Andersen JB, Heydorn A, Hentzer M, Eberl L, Geisenberger O, Christensen BB, Molin S & Givskov M (2001) *gfp*-based N-acyl-homoserine-lactone sensor systems for detection of bacterial communication. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67: 575–585.

Bassler BL, Wright M, Showalter RE & Silverman MR (1993) Intercellular signalling in *Vibrio harveyi*: sequence and function of genes regulating expression of luminescence. Mol. Microbiol. 9: 773–786.

Bassler BL, Wright M & Silverman MR (1994) Multiple signalling systems controlling expression of luminescence in *Vibrio harveyi*: sequence and function of genes encoding a second sensory pathway. Mol. Microbiol. 13: 273–286.

Beck von Bodman S, Hayman GT & Farrand SK (1992) Opine catabolism and conjugal transfer of the nopaline Ti plasmid pTiC58 are coordinately regulated by a single repressor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89: 643–647.

Brewin NJ, Beringer JE, Buchanan-Wollaston AV, Johnston AWB & Hirsch PR (1980) Transfer of symbiotic genes with bacteriocinogenic plasmids in *Rhizobium leguminosarum*. J. Gen. Microbiol. 116: 261–270.

Callahan SM & Dunlap PV (2000) LuxR- and acyl-homoserine-lactone-controlled non-*lux* genes define a quorum-sensing regulon in *Vibrio fischeri*. J. Bacteriol. 182: 2811–2822.

Cha C, Gao P, Chen Y-C, Shaw PD & Farrand SK (1998) Production of acyl-homoserine lactone quorum-sensing signals by Gram-negative plant-associated bacteria. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 11: 1119–1129.

Chen X, Schauder S, Potier N, Van Dorsselaer A, Pelczer I, Bassler BL & Hughson FM (2002) Structural identification of a bacterial quorum-sensing signal containing boron. Nature 415: 545–549.

Cubo MT, Economou A, Murphy G, Johnston AWB & Downie JA (1992) Molecular characterization and regulation of the rhizosphere-expressed genes *rhiABCR* that can influence nodulation by *Rhizobium leguminosarum* biovar *viciae*. J. Bacteriol. 174: 4026–4035.

Daniels R, De Vos DE, Desair J, Raedschelders G, Luyten E, Rosemeyer V, Verreth C, Schoeters E, Vanderleyden J & Michiels J (2002) The *cin* quorum sensing locus of *Rhizobium etli* CN-

PAF512 affects growth and symbiotic nitrogen fixation. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 462–468.

Dibb NJ, Downie JA & Brewin NJ (1984) Identification of a rhizosphere protein encoded by the symbiotic plasmid of *Rhizobium leguminosarum*. J. Bacteriol. 158: 621–627.

Dong YH, Xu JL, Li XZ & Zhang LH (2000) AiiA, an enzyme that inactivates the acylhomoserinelactone quorum-sensing signal and attenuates the virulence of *Erwinia carotovora*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 3526–3531.

Dong YH, Wang LH, Xu JL, Zhang HB, Zhang XF & Zhang LH (2001) Quenching quorum-sensing-dependent bacterial infection by an N-acyl homoserine lactonase. Nature 411: 813–817.

Dong YH, Gusti AR, Zhang Q, Xu JL & Zhang LH (2002) Identification of quorum-quenching N-acyl homoserine lactonases from *Bacillus* species. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68: 1754–1759.

Eberhard A, Burlingame AL, Eberhard C, Keenyon GL, Nealson KH & Oppenheimer NJ (1981) Structural identification of autoinducer of *Photobacterium fischeri* luciferase. Biochemistry 20: 2444–2449.

Eberl L, Winson MK, Sternberg C, Stewart GS, Christiansen G, Chhabra SR, Bycroft B, Williams P, Molin S & Givskov M (1996) Involvement of N-acyl-homoserine lactone autoinducers in controlling the multicellular behaviour of *Serratia liquefaciens*. Mol. Microbiol. 20: 127–136.

Eberl L (1999) N-acyl homoserine lactone-mediated gene regulation in gram-negative bacteria. Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 22: 493–506.

Economou A, Hawkins FKL, Downie JA & Johnston AWB (1989) Transcription of *rhiA*, a gene on a *Rhizobium leguminosarum* bv. *viciae* Sym plasmid, requires *rhiR* and is repressed by flavonoids that induce nod genes. Mol. Microbiol. 3: 87–93.

Engebrecht J, Nealson K & Silverman M (1983) Bacterial luminescence: isolation and genetic analysis of functions from *Vibrio fischeri*. Cell 32: 773–781.

Engebrecht J & Silverman M (1984) Identification of genes and gene products necessary for bacterial luminescence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 81: 4154–4158.

Flavier AB, Ganova-Raeva LM, Schell MA & Denny TP (1997) Hierarchical autoinduction in *Ralstonia solanacearum*: control of acyl-homoserine lactone production by a novel autoregulatory system responsive to 3-hydroxypalmitic acid methyl ester. J. Bacteriol. 179: 7089–7097.

Fray RG, Throup JP, Daykin M, Wallace A, Williams P, Stewart GSAB & Grieson D (1999) Plants genetically modified to produce N-acylhomoserine lactones communicate with bacteria. Nature Biotech. 17: 1017–1020.

Freiberg C, Fellay R, Bairoch A, Broughton WJ, Rosenthal A & Perret X (1997) Molecular basis of symbiosis between *Rhizobium* and legumes. Nature 387: 394–401.

Fuqua WC, Winans SC & Greenberg EP (1994) Quorum sensing in bacteria: the LuxR-LuxI family of cell density-responsive transcriptional regulators. J. Bacteriol. 176: 269–275.

Fuqua C & Greenberg EP (1998) Self perception in bacteria: quorum sensing with acylated homoserine lactones. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 1: 183–189.

Gill RE & Cull MG (1986) Control of developmental gene expression by cell-to-cell interactions in *Myxococcus xanthus*. J. Bacteriol. 168: 341–347.

Gilson L, Kuo A & Dunlap PV (1995) AinS and a new family of autoinducer synthesis proteins. J. Bacteriol. 177: 6946–6951.

Goel AK, Sindhu SS & Dadarwal KR (1999) Bacteriocin-producing native rhizobia of green gram (*Vigna radiata*) having competitive advantage in nodule occupancy. Microbiol. Res. 154: 43–48.

Gray KM, Pearson JP, Downie JA, Boboye BEA & Greenberg EP (1996) Cell-to-cell signaling in the symbiotic nitrogen-fixing

bacterium *Rhizobium leguminosarum*: autoinduction of a stationary phase and rhizosphere-expressed genes. J. Bacteriol. 178: 372–376.

Hirsch PR (1979) Plasmid-determined bacteriocin production by *Rhizobium leguminosarum*. J. Gen. Microbiol. 113: 219–228.

Hirsch PR, van Montagu M, Johnston AWB, Brewin NJ & Schell J (1980) Physical identification of bacteriocinogenic, nodulation plasmids in strains of *Rhizobium leguminosarum*. J. Gen. Microbiol. 120: 403–412.

Holden MTG, Chhabra SR, de Nys R, Stead P, Bainton NJ, Hill PJ, Manefield M, Kumar N, Labatte M, England D, Rice S, Givskov M, Salmond GPC, Stewart GSAB, Bycroft BW, Kjelleberg S & Williams P (1999) Quorum-sensing cross-talk: isolation and chemical characterization of cyclic dipeptides from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* and other Gram-negative bacteria. Mol. Microbiol. 33: 1254–1266.

Horinouchi S & Beppu T (1990) Autoregulatory factors of secondary metabolism and morphogenesis in actinomycetes. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 10: 191–204.

Johnston AWB, Beynon JL, Buchanan-Wollaston AV, Stretchell SM, Hirsch P & Beringer JE (1978) High frequency transfer of nodulating ability between strains and species of *Rhizobium*. Nature 276: 634–636.

Hwang I, Li P-L, Zhang L, Piper KR, Cook DM, Tate ME & Farrand SK (1994) TraI, a LuxI homologue, is responsible for production of conjugation factor, the Ti plasmid N-acylhomoserine lactone autoinducer. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91: 4639–4643.

Laue RE, Jiang Y, Chhabra SR, Jacob S, Stewart GSAB, Hardman A, Downie JA, O’Gara F & Williams P (2000) The biocontrol strain *Pseudomonas fluorescens* F113 produces the *Rhizobium* small bacteriocin, N-(3-hydroxy-7-cis-tetradecenoyl)homoserine lactone, via HdtS, a putative novel N-acylhomoserine lactone synthase. Microbiology 146: 2469–2480.

Leadbetter JR & Greenberg EP (2000) Metabolism of acylhomoserine lactone quorum-sensing signals by *Variovorax paradoxus*. J. Bacteriol. 182: 6921–6926.

Lilley BN & Bassler BL (2000) Regulation of quorum sensing in *Vibrio harveyi* by LuxO and Sigma-54. Mol. Microbiol. 36: 940–954.

Lithgow JK, Wilkinson A, Hardman A, Rodelas B, Wisniewski-Dyé F, Williams P & Downie JA (2000) The regulatory locus *cinRI* in *Rhizobium leguminosarum* controls a network of quorum-sensing loci. Mol. Microbiol. 37: 81–97.

Lithgow JK, Danino VE, Jones J & Downie JA (2001) Analysis of N-acyl homoserine-lactone quorum-sensing molecules made by different strains and biovars of *Rhizobium leguminosarum* containing different symbiotic plasmids. Plant and Soil 232: 3–12.

Loh JT, Yuen-Tsai JPY, Stacey MG, Lohar D, Welborn A & Stacey G (2001) Population density-dependent regulation of the *Bradyrhizobium japonicum* nodulation genes. Mol. Microbiol. 42: 37–46.

Lotz W & Mayer F (1982) Isolation and characterization of a bacteriophage tail-like bacteriocin from a strain of *Rhizobium*. J. Virol. 9: 160–173.

Manefield M, de Nys R, Kumar N, Read R, Givskov M, Steinberg P & Kjelleberg S (1999) Evidence that halogenated furanones from *Delisea pulchra* inhibit acylated homoserine lactone (AHL)-mediated gene expression by displacing the AHL signal from its receptor protein. Microbiology 145: 283–291.

Manefield M, Welch M, Givskov M, Salmond GPC & Kjelleberg S (2001) Halogenated furanones from the red alga, *Delisea pulchra*, inhibit carbapenem antibiotic synthesis and exoen-

zyme virulence factor production in the phytopathogen *Erwinia carotovora*. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 205: 131–138.

McClean KH, Winson MK, Fish L, Taylor A, Chhabra SR, Camara M, Daykin M, Swift S, Bycroft BW, Stewart GSAB & Williams P (1997) Quorum-sensing and *Chromobacterium violaceum*: exploitation of violacein production and inhibition for the detection of N-acylhomoserine lactones. Microbiology 143: 3703–3711.

McKenney D, Brown KE & Allison DG (1995) Influence of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* exoproducts on virulence factor production in *Burkholderia cepacia*: evidence of interspecies communication. J. Bacteriol. 177: 6989–6992.

Nealson KH, Platt T & Hastings JW (1970) Cellular control of the synthesis and activity of the bacterial luminescent system. J. Bacteriol. 104: 313–322.

Oresnik IJ, Twelker S & Hynes MF (1999) Cloning and characterization of a *Rhizobium leguminosarum* gene encoding a bacteriocin with similarities to RTX toxins. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65: 2833–2840.

Passador L, Cook JM, Gambello MJ, Rust L & Iglewski BH (1993) Expression of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* virulence genes requires cell-to-cell communication. Science 260: 1127–1130.

Pesci EC, Milbank JB, Pearson JP, McKnight S, Kende AS, Greenberg EP & Iglewski BH (1999) Quinolone signaling in the cell-to-cell communication system of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96: 11229–11234.

Pirhonen M, Flego D, Heikinheimo R & Palva ET (1993) A small diffusible molecule is responsible for the global control of virulence and exoenzyme production in the plant pathogen *Erwinia carotovora*. EMBO J. 12: 2467–2476.

Priem WJE & Wijffelman CA (1984) Selection of strains cured of the *Rhizobium leguminosarum* Sym-plasmid pRL1JI by using small bacteriocin. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 25: 247–251.

Puskas A, Greenberg EP, Kaplan S & Schaefer AL (1997) A quorum-sensing system in the free-living photosynthetic bacterium *Rhodobacter sphaeroides*. J. Bacteriol. 179: 7530–7537.

Reverchon S, Bouillant ML, Salmond G & Nasser W (1998) Integration of the quorum-sensing system in the regulatory networks controlling virulence factor synthesis in *Erwinia chrysanthemi*. Mol Microbiol. 29: 1407–1418.

Rodelas B, Gonzalez-Lopez J, Salmeron V, Martinez-Toledo MV & Pozo C (1998) Symbiotic effectiveness and bacteriocin production by *Rhizobium leguminosarum* bv. *viceae* isolated from agricultural soils in Spain. Appl. Soil Ecol. 8: 51–60.

Rodelas B, Lithgow JK, Wisniewski-Dyé F, Hardman A, Wilkinson A, Economou A, Williams P & Downie JA (1999) Analysis of quorum-sensing-dependent control of rhizosphere-expressed (*rhi*) genes in *Rhizobium leguminosarum* bv. *viciae*. J. Bacteriol. 181: 3816–3823.

Rosemeyer V, Michiels J, Verreth C & Vanderleyden J (1998) *luxI*- and *luxR*-homologous genes of *Rhizobium etli* CNPAF512 contribute to synthesis of autoinducer molecules and nodulation of *Phaseolus vulgaris*. J. Bacteriol. 180: 815–821.

Schripsema J, deRudder KEE, vanVliet TB, Lankhorst PP, deVroom E, Kijne JW & vanBrussel AAN (1996) Bacteriocin small of *Rhizobium leguminosarum* belongs to the class of N-acyl-homoserine lactone molecules, known as autoinducers and as quorum sensing co-transcription factors. J. Bacteriol. 178: 366–371.

Schwinghamer EA & Brockwell J (1978) Competitive advantage of bacteriocin and phage-producing strains of *Rhizobium trifolii* in mixed culture. Soil Biol. Biochem. 10: 383–387.

Shadel GS & Baldwin TO (1991) The *Vibrio fischeri LuxR* protein is capable of bidirectional stimulation of transcription and both

positive and negative regulation of the *luxR* gene. J. Bacteriol. 173: 568–574.

Shaw PD, Ping G, Daly SL, Cha C, Cronan JE, Rinehart KL & Farrand SK (1997) Detecting and characterizing N-acyl-homoserine lactone signal molecules by thin layer chromatography. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94: 6036–6041.

Sourjik V, Muschler P, Scharf B & Schmitt R (2000) VisN and VisR are global regulators of chemotaxis, flagellar, and motility genes in *Sinorhizobium (Rhizobium) meliloti*. J. Bacteriol. 182: 782–788.

Teplitski M, Robinson JB & Bauer WD (2000) Plants secrete substances that mimic bacterial N-acyl homoserine lactone signal activities and affect population density-dependent behaviors in associated bacteria. Mol. Plant Microbe Interact. 13: 637–648.

Thorne SH & Williams HD (1997) Adaptation to nutrient starvation in *Rhizobium leguminosarum* bv. *phaseoli*: analysis of survival, stress resistance, and changes in macromolecular synthesis during entry to and exit from stationary phase. J. Bacteriol. 179: 6894–6901.

Thorne SH & Williams HD (1999) Cell density-dependent starvation survival of *Rhizobium leguminosarum* bv. *phaseoli*: identification of the role of an N-acyl homoserine lactone in adaptation to stationary-phase survival. J. Bacteriol. 181: 981–990.

van Brussel AA, Zaat SA, Wijffelman CA, Pees E & Lugtenberg BJ (1985) Bacteriocin small of fast-growing rhizobia is chloroform soluble and is not required for effective nodulation. J. Bacteriol. 162: 1079–1082.

Whiteley M, Lee KM & Greenberg EP (1999) Identification of genes controlled by quorum sensing in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96: 13904–13909.

Whiteley M, Parsek MR & Greenberg (2000) Regulation of quorum sensing by RpoS in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Bacteriol. 182: 4356–4360.

Wijffelman CA, Pees E, van Brussel AAN & Hooykaas PJJ (1983) Repression of small bacteriocin excretion in *Rhizobium leguminosarum* and *Rhizobium trifolii* by transmissible plasmids. Mol. Gen. Genet. 192: 171–176.

Wilkinson A, Danino V, Wisniewski-Dyé F, Lithgow JK & Downie JA (2002) N-acyl-homoserine lactone inhibition of rhizobial growth is mediated by two quorum-sensing genes that regulate plasmid transfer. J. Bacteriol. in press.

Winson MK, Camara M, Latifi A, Foglino M, Chhabra SR, Daykin M, Bally M, Chapon V, Salmond GPC, Bycroft BW, Lazdunski A, Stewart GSAB & Williams P (1995) Multiple N-acyl-L-homoserine lactone signal molecules regulate production of virulence determinants and secondary metabolites in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92: 9427–9431.

Winson MK, Swift S, Fish L, Throup JP, Jørgensen F, Chhabra SR, Bycroft B, Williams P & Stewart GSAB (1998) Construction and analysis of *luxCDABE*-based plasmid sensors for investigating N-acyl homoserine lactone-mediated quorum-sensing. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 163: 185–192.

Winzer K, Hardie KR & Williams P (2002a) Bacterial cell-to-cell communication: sorry, can’t talk now – gone to lunch! Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 5: 216–222.

Winzer K, Hardie KR, Burgess N, Doherty N, Kirke D, Holden MTG, Linforth R, Cornell KA, Taylor AJ, Hill PJ & Williams P (2002b) LuxS: its role in central metabolism and the in vitro synthesis of 4-hydroxy-5-methyl-3(2H)-furanone. Microbiology 148: 909–922.

Wisniewski-Dyé F, Jones J, Chhabra SR & Downie JA (2002) *raiIR* genes are part of a quorum-sensing network controlled by *CinI* and *CinR* in *Rhizobium leguminosarum*. J. Bacteriol. 184: 1597–1606.

Young JPW & Wexler M (1988) Sym plasmid and chromosomal genotypes are correlated in field populations of *Rhizobium leguminosarum*. J. Gen. Microbiol. 134: 2371–2391.

Zhang L, Murphy PJ, Kerr A & Tate ME (1993) *Agrobacterium* conjugation and gene regulation by N-acyl-L-homoserine lactones. Nature 362: 446–448.
