
Free Radical Biology & Medicine, Vol. 33, No. 11, pp. 1552–1562, 2002  
Copyright © 2002 Elsevier Science Inc.  
Printed in the USA. All rights reserved  
0891-5849/02/$—see front matter  

PII S0891-5849(02)01089-4  

**Original Contribution**

**COMPLEMENTARY ANTIOXIDANT DEFENSE BY CYTOPLASMIC AND MITOCHONDRIAL PEROXIREDOXINS IN LEISHMANIA INFANTUM**

HELENA CASTRO,* CARLA SOUSA,* MARTA SANTOS,* ANABELA CORDEIRO-DA-SILVA,*† LEOPOLD FLOHÉ,‡ and ANA M. TOMÁS*§

*Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, Porto, Portugal; †Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal;  
‡Department of Biochemistry, Technical University of Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany; and §Abel Salazar Institute for Biomedical Research, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal  

(Received 10 April 2002; Revised 23 July 2002; Accepted 13 August 2002)

Abstract—In Kinetoplastida 2-Cys peroxiredoxins are the ultimate members of unique enzymatic cascades for detoxification of peroxides, which are dependent on trypanothione, a small thiol specific to these organisms. Here we report on two distinct *Leishmania infantum* peroxiredoxins, LicTXNPx and LimTXNPx, that may be involved in such a pathway. LicTXNPx, found in the cytoplasm, is a typical 2-Cys peroxiredoxin encoded by *LicTXNPx*, a member of a multicopy gene family. LimTXNPx, encoded by a single copy gene, *LimTXNPx*, is confined to the mitochondrion and is unusual in possessing an Ile-Pro-Cys motif in the distal redox center, replacing the common peroxiredoxin Val-Cys-Pro sequence, apart from an N-terminal mitochondrial leader sequence. Based on sequence and subcellular localization, the peroxiredoxins of Kinetoplastida can be separated in two distinct subfamilies. As an approach to investigate the function of both peroxiredoxins in the cell, *L. infantum* promastigotes overexpressing LicTXNPx and LimTXNPx were assayed for their resistance to H₂O₂ and tert-butyl hydroperoxide. The results show evidence that both enzymes are active as peroxidases in vivo and that they have complementary roles in parasite protection against oxidative stress. © 2002 Elsevier Science Inc.

Keywords—Peroxiredoxin, Tryparedoxin peroxidase, Antioxidant defense, Cytoplasm, Mitochondria, *Leishmania infantum*, Free radicals

---

**INTRODUCTION**

The peroxiredoxin (“peroxide-reducing”) family of proteins includes a large number of molecules found in different organisms and performing distinct functions, including general cell detoxification and specific signaling in proliferation or differentiation processes [1]. In parasites, the peroxiredoxins are also present [1] and, in many of these organisms, they may be crucial to defend against oxidative stress. Indeed, due to the frequent lack or low expression of other common and more efficient antioxidant enzymes (e.g., catalase or glutathione peroxidase), removal of peroxides in parasites has been suggested to depend on the presence of peroxiredoxins [2,3]. The possibility of achieving their inhibition, immunologically [3,4] or with drugs, was consequently proposed as a potential antiparasitic strategy, even though the structural similarity of these molecules may pose a problem for chemotherapy. This last approach holds more promise for the medically important Kinetoplastida, including the life-threatening pathogens *Trypanosoma brucei*, *T. cruzi*, and *Leishmania* sp., which affect millions of people and for which better chemotherapeutics are urgently needed. In fact, while in other eukaryotes, such as the mammalian hosts of these parasites, peroxiredoxins reduce peroxides using thioredoxin as the immediate electron donor, in Kinetoplastida the peroxiredoxins up to now characterized have been shown to interact, instead, with tryparedoxin (TXN), a thioredoxin remote homologue (Fig. 1) [2,5–7]. It is possible, therefore, that the specificity of Kinetoplastida peroxiredoxins for TXN may result from unique structural features, which allow their exploitation for drug design [8].

If peroxiredoxins are to be the key enzymes for peroxide elimination in Kinetoplastida they should be

Address correspondence to: Ana M. Tomás, Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, Rua do Campo Alegre 823, 4150-180 Porto, Portugal; Fax: +351-22-6098480; E-Mail: atomas@ibmc.up.pt.

TXNPx in Leishmania antioxidant defense 1553

A NADPH → TrxR<sub>red</sub> → Trx<sub>red</sub> → Pxn<sub>red</sub> → ROH + O₂  
NADP ← TrxR<sub>ox</sub> ← Trx<sub>ox</sub> ← Pxn<sub>ox</sub> ← ROOH  

B NADPH → TR<sub>red</sub> → T(SH)<sub>2</sub> → TXN<sub>red</sub> → Pxn<sub>red</sub> → ROH + O₂  
NADP ← TR<sub>ox</sub> ← TS<sub>2</sub> ← TXN<sub>ox</sub> ← Pxn<sub>ox</sub> ← ROOH  

Fig. 1. Pathway for peroxide detoxification by peroxiredoxin enzymes proposed to occur (A) in eukaryotes and (B) in the cytosol of *Crithidia fasciculata* and other Kinetoplastida [2]. TrxR = thioredoxin reductase; Trx = thioredoxin; Pxn = peroxiredoxin; TR = trypanothione reductase; T(SH)<sub>2</sub> = reduced trypanothione; TS<sub>2</sub> = oxidized trypanothione; TXN = tryparedoxin; ox = oxidized; red = reduced; ROOH = hydroperoxide; ROH = alcohol.

present in different compartments of the parasitic cell in order to protect these from hydrogen peroxide (H₂O₂) or other peroxides. Accordingly, peroxiredoxins with distinct subcellular localizations are present in both *T. cruzi* and *T. brucei* [7,9]. In *Leishmania* sp. more than one peroxiredoxin have been described. *L. donovani* and *L. major* contain at least one of these enzymes [4,5,10] and in *L. chagasi* different isogenes are responsible for the expression of three very similar peroxiredoxins [11]. However, none of the studies performed so far reported on the cell localization or on the functional role of these peroxiredoxins. Here we show that different compartmentalization of peroxiredoxins also occurs in *Leishmania*. We describe the isolation and characterization of two peroxiredoxin genes from *L. infantum*, the Old World counterpart of *L. chagasi* [12], and present evidence that the encoded enzymes, one mitochondrial and the other cytoplasmic, can cooperate to protect the cell from peroxide-induced damage derived from different sources.

MATERIAL AND METHODS

**Parasites**

Promastigotes of the *L. infantum* clone MHOM/MA67ITMAP263 freshly isolated from Balb/c mice spleens were grown at 25°C in RPMI medium (Gibco-BRL, Paisley, Scotland) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS), 2 mM L-glutamine, 50 mM Hepes sodium salt (pH 7.4), and 35 U/ml penicillin, 35 μg/ml streptomycin. To obtain exponentially and stationary phase promastigotes cells were seeded at 10⁶ ml⁻¹ and then harvested 1–3 and 6–8 d later, respectively [13].

**Reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) for amplification of peroxiredoxin sequences from L. infantum**

cDNA synthesis was achieved from 1 μg of total RNA extracted from promastigotes using Superscript II RT (GibcoBRL) with random hexamers as primers. PCR to amplify peroxiredoxin transcripts was performed from 1 μl of cDNA (1/20th of the total). The sense primer was an oligonucleotide corresponding to the sequence of the *L. donovani* spliced leader 5'-gggggatccTCAGTTTCTGTACTTTATTG<sub>OH</sub> (restriction site and clamp sequences in lower case). The antisense primer was a degenerated primer based on the amino acid sequence surrounding the active site of known peroxiredoxins, 5'-gggaatcGG(A/G)CAIAC(A/G)AAIGT(A/G)AA(A/G)TC<sub>OH</sub>, where I refers to inosine. Cycling conditions were an initial step at 94°C for 2 min and 30 cycles of 94°C for 45 s, 50°C for 60 s, 72°C for 60 s, and a final step of 10 min at 72°C.

**Construction and screening of a L. infantum cosmid library**

A genomic library was constructed in the pcosTL cosmid shuttle vector using *L. infantum* DNA partially digested with Sau3AI, according to previously described conditions [14]. Briefly, gel eluted Sau3AI DNA fragments of 30 to 50 kb were dephosphorylated with calf intestinal phosphatase and ligated to the cosmid vector previously double digested with SmaI, to separate the two cos sites, and with BamHI, an enzyme that generates overhanging ends compatible with those produced by Sau3AI. The ligation was then packaged into phage λ particles using an in vitro packaging extract (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA) and competent *E. coli* DH5α infected with different aliquots of the packaging reaction mix. Three thousand clones of the library were picked and stored as individual bacterial clones into 384 well plates at −70°C under ampicillin selection (50 μg/ml). To isolate clones containing the peroxiredoxin genes of interest, the library was screened with the radiolabeled peroxiredoxin probes previously isolated by RT-PCR using standard colony hybridization techniques.

DNA sequencing

DNA was cloned into different plasmid vectors and double-stranded sequenced using the facilities at Alta Bioscience (University of Birmingham, UK) and at MWG-BIOTECH AG (Ebersberg, Germany).

DNA and RNA analysis

Genomic DNA was isolated from exponentially growing promastigotes using the proteinase K/sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) method [15]. Total RNA was prepared using either the guanidinium thiocyanate lysis followed by purification on a CsCl gradient [15] or the AquaPure RNA Isolation kit (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Southern and northern blots were performed using standard protocols. Membrane development and analysis of the signals were achieved with a Typhoon 8600 (Molecular Dynamics, Buckinghamshire, UK). *L. infantum* α-tubulin was used to control for loading of samples in northern blots.

Western blotting

*L. infantum* protein extracts, obtained by parasite solubilization in 1% (v/v) Nonidet P-40 in 0.1 M sodium phosphate, 0.15 M sodium chloride pH 7.2 (PBS) at \(10^9\) cells ml\(^{-1}\) in the presence of a cocktail of proteinase inhibitors, were fractionated under reducing conditions by 12% SDS/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and electroblotted onto nitrocellulose. The membranes were probed with polyclonal antibodies against purified recombinant LimTXNPx (Castro et al. [15a]) raised in mice by three successive intraperitoneal injections of 25 μg of protein, purified recombinant *L. major* peroxiredoxin (thiol-specific antioxidant protein, TSA, [4]; kind gift from S. Reed) and recombinant LmS3arp [16] (kind gift of A. Ouaissi). Second antibodies were peroxidase-labeled anti-mouse serum (Transduction Laboratories, Lexington, UK) and anti-rabbit F(ab')₂ fragment (Molecular Probes, Leiden, The Netherlands). Membranes were developed using enhanced chemiluminescence (Amersham, Buckinghamshire, UK). Protein concentrations of the parasite extracts were determined with a bicinchoninic acid protein-assay system (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA).

Immunofluorescence assays

*L. infantum* promastigotes were stained with the mitochondrion-specific dye Mitotracker FM (Molecular Probes) as described previously [17], fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (w/v) in PBS and permeabilized with 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS. Parasites were then incubated with the anti-LimTXNPx and anti-TSA antibodies or control sera diluted in PBS, 1% (w/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA). Secondary antibodies were Alexa Fluor 568 goat anti-mouse IgG and Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rabbit IgG (Molecular Probes). Washed parasites were mounted in VectaShield (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) and examined with an Axioskop Zeiss microscope (Göttingen, Germany).

Construction of vectors for transfection of *L. infantum*

The LimTXNPx coding sequence was amplified with high fidelity PWO polymerase (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) using the oligonucleotides 5'-cgccggatccATGCTC-CGCCGTCTTCCCAOH and 5'-caccgctcgagTCACAT-GTTCTTCTCGAAAAACOH (restriction site and clamp sequences in lower case; start and stop codons underlined) as forward and reverse primers and the cycling conditions 94°C for 2 min, 53°C for 30 s, 72°C for 45 s, 30 cycles at 94°C for 30 s, 58°C for 30 s, 72°C for 45 s, and a final step of 10 min at 72°C. The product was cloned into pTEX [18] to obtain pTEX-LimTXNPx. The LicTXNPx gene was amplified with the forward primer 5'-cgccggatccATGTCCCTGCGGGTGACGCCOH and the reverse primer 5'-caccgctcgagTTACTGCTTTACTGAAG-TACC OH. Cycling conditions were one cycle at 94°C for 5 min, 44°C for 30 s, 72°C for 30 s, 30 cycles at 94°C for 30 s, 65°C for 30 s, 72°C for 30 s, and a final step of 10 min at 72°C. The PCR product was cloned into pTEX to obtain pTEX-LicTXNPx.

Transfection procedures

Transfections were done by electroporation as described [19] at 0.45 kV, 300–400 μF. Parasites were allowed to recover in culture medium for 48 h before being plated in agar selective plates containing 15 μg/ml G418 (Sigma, Steinheim, Germany). Isolated clones were grown in liquid medium under G418 selection (15–200 μg/ml G418).

Hydroperoxide sensitivity assays

To analyze the growth inhibitory effect of H₂O₂ (Sigma) and tert-butylhydroperoxide (*t*-bOOH) (Sigma), on wild-type and transformed parasites, cells from exponentially or, if required, stationary grown cultures were seeded at \(10^6\) ml\(^{-1}\) in 2 ml of growth medium in 24 well plates in the absence of G418 and allowed to recover for 24 h. Different concentrations of the hydroperoxides in parasite medium were then added to each well. Four to five days later parasite densities were determined with a hematocytometer and/or by absorbance reading at 600 nm. All promastigote lines were analyzed simultaneously and within the same number of days after parasite removal from mice spleens (a maximum of 21 d).

RESULTS

**Isolation of two peroxiredoxins genes from L. infantum**

The RT-PCR strategy to amplify peroxiredoxin gene fragments from *L. infantum* was based on primers designed according to conserved active site sequences of known peroxiredoxins and the spliced leader sequence of *L. donovani*. Thereby cDNA fragments of 320 and 410 bp were isolated and confirmed to belong to the peroxiredoxin family by sequencing. The complete coding sequences for the peroxiredoxin genes were obtained by screening a *L. infantum* cosmid library with the radiolabeled cDNA fragments.

The gene identified using the 320 bp cDNA fragment as a probe, *LicTXNPx* (Acc. Nr. AY058210), presents 600 nucleotides (nt) and is 99.5, 99.3, and 91.3% similar to peroxiredoxin genes recently reported by Barr and Gedamu [11] in *L. chagasi* (Acc. Nr. AF312397, AF312398, AF134161). *LicTXNPx* is also 99% and 94.7% similar to *L. donovani* and *L. major* genes previously characterized (Acc. Nr. AF225212, AF044679, and AF069386) and shown to encode proteins with trypanoredoxin peroxidase (TXNPx) activity in vitro [4,5,10]. Southern blot analysis of the isolated cosmid and of genomic DNA indicated that multiple copies of *LicTXNPx* are present in the same chromosome (not shown). As shown for *L. chagasi*, this multicopy organization suggests different isogenes [11]. No obvious organelle endorsement sequence was detected in *LicTXNPx*.

The coding sequence isolated with the 410 bp cDNA fragment has 681 nt and encodes a TXNPx with an N-terminal mitochondrial targeting peptide. This gene is 96.5% similar to a noncharacterized sequence from *L. major* (Acc. Nr. AL121851) and 66.8 and 65.5% similar to peroxiredoxin genes from *T. cruzi* (Acc. Nr. AJ006226) [9] and *T. brucei* (Acc. Nr. AF196570) [7], respectively, that were shown to locate to the mitochondrion. Therefore, *L. infantum* presents a putative mitochondrial peroxiredoxin gene (*LimTXNPx*, Acc. Nr. AY058209). Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA digested with different restriction enzymes indicates that this gene is single copy (not shown).

**Sequence characteristics of the predicted proteins**

*LicTXNPx* and *LimTXNPx* are predicted to encode mature proteins of 22.136 and 22.389 kDa, with pIs of 7.72 and 5.24, respectively. To outline their peculiarities the deduced amino acid sequences were aligned with previously established TXNPx (Fig. 2). Both *LicTXNPx* and *LimTXNPx* are 2-Cys peroxiredoxins that share the cysteine in the N-terminal domain with several trypanoredoxin peroxidases. This cysteine is embedded in a VCP motif as is typical for peroxiredoxins [1,20]. The cysteine in this position has been shown to be essential for activity in several peroxiredoxins (reviewed in [1]). It is assumed to be the residue that is oxidized by the peroxide substrate and for this purpose has to be activated by an arginine residue and a threonine [1]. As is highlighted in Fig. 2, these residues are also conserved in the sequences of *LicTXNPx* and *LimTXNPx*. The second VCP motif that is found in different TXNPx and thought to participate in catalysis [1] is also conserved in *LicTXNPx* but not in *LimTXNPx*. There is, however, a second cysteine retained near the C-terminus of *LimTXNPx*. Its sequence context (AIPCGWKPG) is very similar to that of the mTXNPx of *T. cruzi* (VIPCNWRPG) and *T. brucei* (VIPCNWKPG) and less similar to that found in the other TXNPx (GEVCPANWKK/PG). Another characteristic feature of *LimTXNPx* is the presence of an N-terminal extension similar in size and sequence to that of the *T. cruzi* and *T. brucei* mTXNPx. An overall comparison of the *LicTXNPx* sequence with the *LimTXNPx* sequence for the predicted mature protein yields an identity of 50.5%, while between *LicTXNPx* and the homologues of *T. cruzi* and *T. brucei*, both cytoplasmic, this is of 69.3 and 71.4%. On the other hand, the identity between *LimTXNPx* and the mTXNPx of *T. cruzi* and *T. brucei* is 71.7% and 71.2%, respectively. This reveals that *LicTXNPx* and *LimTXNPx* belong to two distinct peroxiredoxin subfamilies (Fig. 3) that split from each other prior to Kinetoplastida separation.

**Analysis of LicTXNPx and LimTXNPx expression in L. infantum promastigotes**

Expression of the *LicTXNPx* and *LimTXNPx* transcripts was analysed in exponentially and in stationary phase promastigotes, a stage that is enriched in metacyclic promastigotes, the form of the parasite that transmits the infection from the sandfly to vertebrates [22]. As shown in Fig. 4A, when the *LicTXNPx* probe was used to hybridise northern blots of these parasites, four different transcripts of 2.1, 1.7, 1.5, and 1.2 kb were evident. After correcting for loading with the α-tubulin signal the 1.5 kb mRNA was seen to be upregulated (1.5×) in stationary phase promastigotes. In contrast, the *LimTXNPx* gene is constitutively transcribed as a 1.4 kb single product irrespective of the age of the promastigote culture (Fig. 4A).

The expression of both peroxiredoxin genes was also investigated at the protein level. An antibody directed against the TSA protein of *L. major* [4], highly homologous to *LicTXNPx* (91% identity), was used to identify this protein in Western blots of *L. infantum* under reducing conditions. In spite of the presence of the four dif-

H. CASTRO et al.

|  | 1 | 10 | 20 | 30 | 40 | β1 | TT | TT | 50 | β2 | η1 | 60 | β3 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| LimTXNPx | MLRR | LPTSCFLKRSQFRGFAATSPLLNLDYQMYRT | ATVREAAPQFSGQAVV.NCAIKDINMNDYKGKYIV |
| TcmTXNPx | MFFRMAVTSLQKGLSRRAFCNTLRLLNLDYQAYKT | ATVREAAPEWAGKAVV.NGKIQDISLNDYKGKYVV |
| TbmTXNPx | MLRRFSMLPLSGGIARRSFFRTAPLFNLDYQAYRT | ATVREAAPFAGKAVV.DGKIKDISMNDYKGKYIV |
| LdTXNPx | MSCGN | AKINC | PAPFEEVALMPNGSFKKISLAAVKGKWVV |
| LiTXNPx | MSCGD | AKINC | PAPFEEVALMPNGSFKKISLAAVKGKWVV |
| LmTXNPx | MSCGN | AKINS | PAPSFEEVALLMPNGSFKKISLSSYKGKWV |
| CfTXNPx | MSCGA | KLNHP | APEFDDMALMPNGTFKKVSLSSYKGKYVV |
| TbTXNPx | MSCGD | AKLNHP | APHFNEVALMPNGTFKKVDLASYRGKWVV |
| TcTXNPx | MSCGD | AKLNHP | APDFNETALLMPNGTFKKVALTSYKGKWLV |

|  | 70 | α1 | 80 | 90 | 100 | β4 | 110 | α3 | 120 | η2 | 130 | β5 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| LimTXNPx | LFFYPMDFTFVCPTETIAFSDRHADFEKLNTQVVAVSCDSVYSHLAWVNTPRKKGGLGEMHIPVLADKSM |
| TcmTXNPx | LFFYPMDFTFVCPTETIAFSDAQAEFDKINTQVVAVSCDSQYSHLAWINTPRNKGGLEGEMSTPVLSDLTK |
| TbmTXNPx | LFFYPLDFTFVCPTETIVSFSDSHAEEFKLNTQVIAVSCDSHFSHLAWVETPRKKGGLEGEMKIPLLSDFTK |
| LdTXNPx | LFFYPLDFTFVCPTETIIAFSENVSREFNELNCEVLACSMDESYAHLQWTLQDRKKGGLEGAAMAIPMLADKTK |
| LiTXNPx | LFFYPLDFTFVCPTETIIAFSENVSREFNELNCEVLACSMDESYAHLQWTLQDRKKGGLEGAAMAIPMLADKTK |
| LmTXNPx | LFFYPLDFTFVCPTEVIAFSDSVSRFNELNCEVLACSIDSSEYAHLQWTLQDRKKGGLETMAMAIPMLADKTK |
| CfTXNPx | LFFYPMDFTFVCPTEIIOQSDDAKRFAEINTEVISCSCDSEYSHLQWTSVDRKKGGLEPMAIPMLADKTK |
| TbTXNPx | LFFYPLDFTFVCPTEICQFSDRVKEENDVDCEVIACSMDEFSHLAWTNVERKKGGLETMNIPILADKTK |
| TcTXNPx | LFFYPMDFTFVCPTEICQFSDRVKEESDIGCEVLACSMDSEYSHLAWTSIERKKGGLOGMNIPILADKTK |

|  | α4 | 140 | β6 | 150 | β7 | 160 | TT | β9 | 170 | TT | α5 | 180 | 190 | 200 | TT | TT |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| LimTXNPx | BTARDYGVLIEBSGIALRGLFITDKKGILRHSTINDLPVRNVDEALRVLBEAFQYADENGDAlPCGWKPg |
| TcmTXNPx | BtARDYGVLIEBQGISLRGLFITDDKGILRHTVNDLPVRNVBEVLRVVQAFQYVDKNGDVIPCNWRPG |
| TbmTXNPx | BTSRDYGVLVEBQGLSLRALFVIDDKGILRHVTINDLPVRNVDEVLRVVQAFQYADKTGDVIPCNWKPG |
| LdTXNPx | SIARA | YGVLBEKQGVAYRGLFITDPNGMVRIITVNDMPVRNVBEVLRLLLEAFQFVEKHGEVCPLANWKKG |
| LiTXNPx | SIARA | YGVLAEKQGVAYRGLFITDPNGMVRIITVNDMPVRNVBEVLRLLLEAFQFVEKHGEVCPLANWKKG |
| LmTXNPx | SHARS | YGVLBEBSRGVAYRGLFITDPHGMLRIITVNDMPVGRSVEEVLRLLEAFQFVEKHGEVCPLANWKKG |
| CfTXNPx | GHARA | YGVLDEDSGVAYRGVFIRDPNGKLRIIINDMPIGRNVEEVIIRLVEALQFVEEHGEVCPLANWKKG |
| TbTXNPx | SHMKA | YGVLKEEDGVAYRGLFIIDPQQNLRIITINDLPVRNVEDTLRLVKAFQFVEKHGEVCPLANWKPG |
| TcTXNPx | CHMKS | YGVLKEEDGVAYRGLFIIDPKQNLRRIITVNDLPVRNDVEALRLVKAFQFVEKHGEVCPLANWKPG |

|  | α6 | 210 | 220 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| LimTXNPx | QPTLDTTAKG...EFFEKN |
| TcmTXNPx | KP TMKTEKAN...EYFEKN |
| TbmTXNPx | KETMKVEAAK...EYFEKN |
| LdTXNPx | APTMKPEPKASLEGYFSKQ |
| LiTXNPx | APTMKPEPKASVEGYFSKQ |
| LmTXNPx | APTMKPEPKASVEGYFSKQ |
| CfTXNPx | .DAKKKEGH........... |
| TbTXNPx | SKTMKADPNGS.QDYFSSM |
| TcTXNPx | DKTMKPDPEKS.KEYFGAV |

Fig. 2. Alignment of LimTXNPx and LicTXNPx with known tryparedoxin peroxidases. Residues conserved in all types of TXNPx are shown in red boxes, those conserved in one subfamily only are typed in red. Secondary structural elements [(β₁₋₉) = beta strands; α₁₋₆ = α helices; η = 3–10 helices; TT = turns] are indicated above sequences. Red arrows mark redox-active cysteines, blue arrows mark residues implicated in the activation of C [10]; green dots highlight residues putatively interacting with TXN [10]; orange dots mark predicted cleavage sites for mitochondrial processing enzymes. LimTXNPx, *L. infantum* mitochondrial TXNPx (Acc. Nr. AY058209); TcmTXNPx, *T. cruzi* mitochondrial TXNPx (Acc. Nr. AJ006226); TbmTXNPx, *T. brucei* mitochondrial TXNPx (Acc. Nr. AF196570); LiTXNPx, *L. infantum* cytoplasmic TXNPx (Acc. Nr. AY058210); LdT XNPx, *L. donovani* TXNPx (Acc. Nr. AF225212); LmTXNPx, *L. major* TXNPx (Acc. Nr. AF044679); CfTXNPx, *C. fasciculata* TXNPx1 (Acc. Nr. AAC15095); TbTXNPx, *T. brucei* TXNPx (Acc. Nr. AAG45225); TcTXNPx, *T. cruzi* TXNPx (Acc. Nr. CAA09922). CfTXNPx, TbTXNPx and TcTXNPx were also shown to be cytoplasmic [7,9].

ferentially expressed transcripts referred to above, a single and equally intense polypeptide band of 20.1 kDa was detected in both exponentially and stationary forms, indicating that the total amount of peroxiredoxin detected with this antibody remains constant along promastigote development (Fig. 4B). Western blot analysis with an antibody against recombinant LimTXNPx (Castro et al., [15a]) shows that LimTXNPx is expressed as a single protein product of 21.4 kDa (Fig. 4B).

Subcellular localization of LicTXNPx and LimTXNPx

When the anti-TSA antibody [4] was used in the immunofluorescence assays, labeling was shown through the whole parasite body, indicating that LicTXNPx is cytoplasmic (Fig. 5E). No differences were observed between exponentially and stationary phase promastigotes (not shown). As suggested by the presence of a mitochondrial targeting sequence in LimTXNPx, immunofluorescence analysis corroborated that this protein

TXNPx in Leishmania antioxidant defense

Fig. 3. Neighbor-joining tree showing different TXNPx amino acid sequences of Kinetoplastida, using the Poisson correction. Sequence names are according Fig. 2. Percentage of bootstrap replicates (500 replications) supporting the branches are shown. Trees were generated using MEGA2 [21]. 2-Cys peroxiredoxin present in the Kinetoplastida order form two subfamilies, one mitochondrial, and the other cytoplasmic, which have diverged prior to Kinetoplastida separation. This origin suggests an initial common function for each subfamily that could have been maintained along evolution.

localizes to the single mitochondrion of the parasite, an elongated structure that includes the kinetoplast (Figs. 5A–C,F). Indeed, the anti-$LimTXNPx$ antibody staining perfectly colocalizes with the Mitofluor dye, a marker for mitochondria (Figs. 5A–C). No colocalization was observed when the parasites were labeled simultaneously with the anti-$LimTXNPx$ and the anti-TSA antibodies (Figs. 5E–G), further confirming the different compartmentalization of both peroxiredoxins analyzed.

**Production of parasites overexpressing $LicTXNPx$ and $LimTXNPx$**

Parasites overexpressing these proteins were produced and assayed for peroxide resistance in vivo. To this end, the expression plasmids pTEX-$LicTXNPx$ and pTEX-$LimTXNPx$, were introduced into *L. infantum* promastigotes. pTEX transfection was used as control. Plasmid integrity and copy number in transformed parasites was evaluated by Southern blot analysis of digested genomic DNA of wild-type and G418 resistant parasites, probed with $LicTXNPx$ and $LimTXNPx$ (Figs. 6A, B) and with the neo resistance gene (not shown). As can be observed in Fig. 6A, $LicTXNPx$ transformed parasites contained the plasmid replicating episomally at high copy number without evidence of rearrangements. This was accompanied by an increased expression of $LicTXNPx$ (Fig. 6C). Parasites transformed with construct pTEX-$LimTXNPx$ also showed a high increase in $LimTXNPx$ copy number and in the respective protein (Figs. 6B, D). Immunofluorescence analysis of transgenic parasites showed that, when overexpressed, the peroxiredoxins maintained their cytoplasmic and mitochondrial localization.

| kb | 1 | 2 | A | kDa | 1 | 2 | B |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 2.1 |  |  |  | 20.1 |  |  | $\alpha-LicTXNPx$ |
| 1.7 |  |  | $LicTXNPx$ | 33.8 |  |  | $\alpha-LmS3arp$ |
| 1.5 |  |  |  |  | 1 | 2 |  |
| 1.2 |  |  |  | 21.4 |  |  | $\alpha-LimTXNPx$ |
| 1.4 |  |  | $LimTXNPx$ |  |  |  |  |
| 2.1 |  |  | $\alpha$-tubulin | 33.8 |  |  | $\alpha-LmS3arp$ |

Fig. 4. Expression analysis of $LicTXNPx$ and $LimTXNPx$ in *L. infantum* promastigotes. (A) Northern blot analysis of 20 $\mu$g of total *L. infantum* RNA extracted from exponentially (lane 1) and stationary phase promastigotes (lane 2), hybridized with the $LicTXNPx$ and $LimTXNPx$ coding sequences and with a *L. infantum* $\alpha$-tubulin probe. (B) Western blot analysis of $LicTXNPx$ and $LimTXNPx$ under reducing conditions. Twenty micrograms of total protein extracts from exponentially (lane 1) and stationary phase (lane 2) promastigotes were fractionated in a 12% SDS/PAGE gel, transferred to nitrocellulose and incubated with the anti-TSA and the anti-$LimTXNPx$ antibodies and with anti-$LmS3arp$ as a control. Equal loading was also checked by amido black staining of an equivalent set of lanes (not shown).

Fig. 5. Subcellular localization of LicTXNPx and LimTXNPx in L. infantum promastigotes. L. infantum promastigote mitochondria were stained in vivo with the Mitotracker dye (A). After fixation and permeabilization, parasites were incubated with the anti-LimTXNPx (B,F) and the anti-TSA (E) antibodies, and with nonimmune serum from rabbit (I) and mice (K). Parasites were photographed at 1000× magnification. Contrast phase pictures of the preparations are also included (D,H,J,L). k = kinetoplast.

chondrial subcellular localization as no differences in the pattern of staining could be observed in relation to wild-type cells (not shown). Transgenic parasites showed no substantial alterations in their growth rate.

**Phenotypic analysis of parasites overexpressing LicTXNPx and LimTXNPx**

In vitro assays demonstrated that H₂O₂ and t-bOOH are substrates for recombinant LimTXNPx (Castro et al., [15a]). This specificity was also observed for the LicTX-

NPx homologue of L. donovani [10]. Therefore, we tested live promastigotes overexpressing LicTXNPx and LimTXNPx for their resistance against these peroxides when exogenously added, in comparison to wild-type and to parasites transformed with the empty expression plasmid. H₂O₂ resistance of Leishmania has been reported to be affected by the length of time the culture has been growing in vitro and by the stage of promastigote development [13,23]. Therefore, all parasite lines to be assayed were previously inoculated into mice for 5 d.

TXNPx in Leishmania antioxidant defense

Fig. 6. Overexpression of LicTXNPx and LimTXNPx in transformed parasites. Southern blot analysis of *L. infantum* promastigote SacI/KpnI digested genomic DNA (A) of wild-type (lane 1) and pTEX-LicTXNPx transformed parasites (lane 2), hybridized with the LicTXNPx coding sequence, and (B) of wild-type parasites (lane 1) and of cells transformed with pTEX (lane 2) and with pTEX-LimTXNPx (lane 3), hybridized with the LimTXNPx coding sequence. The 2.6 and 0.7 kb bands in A indicate plasmid derived LicTXNPx. In B the 2.5 kb band corresponds to endogenous LimTXNPx and the 3.4 kb band in lane 3 to vector derived LimTXNPx. Western blot analysis of total protein extract (20 μg) from (C) the same parasite lines as in (A), incubated with the anti-TSA and the anti-LmS3arp antibodies (to control for loading), and (D) from the same parasites as in (B), incubated with the anti-LimTXNPx and the anti-LmS3arp antibodies. No crossreacting between the anti-LimTXNPx and the anti-TSA antibodies was detected (not shown).

Amastigotes were then recovered, allowed to transform to promastigotes and analyzed for peroxide resistance within the same days after isolation from mice (a maximum of 21d). By doing this we observed that, although a small difference in the absolute levels of peroxide resistance could be observed between the experiments, the relative results between the lines were very reproducible. The slight difference observed between both control curves at the higher peroxide concentrations may be due to a small reduction in the rate of replication of plasmid-transformed parasites. As shown in Fig. 7 a different phenotype was found associated with overexpression of each peroxiredoxin studied. *L. infantum* promastigotes overexpressing LicTXNPx presented an increased resistance to H₂O₂ when compared with wild-type and pTEX transformed parasites. Those parasites were also more protected against the organic hydroperoxide t-BOOH but not to the same extent as to H₂O₂ (Fig. 7). In contrast, overexpression of LimTXNPx in promastigotes did not ensure any significant resistance to exogenously added H₂O₂, but sheltered parasites when exposed to t-BOOH.

DISCUSSION

To succeed as a parasite, *Leishmania* must evolve through a phlebotomine insect host as an extracellular flagellated promastigote and through a vertebrate host as a nonmotile intracellular amastigote found in macrophages. During this developmental cycle the parasite faces oxidants from external and internal sources. The oxidative burst that follows parasite internalization by macrophages [24] produces superoxide radical (·O₂⁻), H₂O₂, peroxynitrite and lipoxygenase products and such detrimental oxidants might also result from defensive processes taking place in the sandfly, as occurs with some insects [25–27]. H₂O₂ has been reported to be internally produced in Kinetoplastida as a consequence of the parasite's aerobic metabolism [28–30]. It can be formed in several reactions but the most important source is the mitochondrial electron chain. Therefore, *Leishmania* survival is likely to depend on strategically localized antioxidant enzymes able to quickly eliminate these oxidants in the cell compartments where they exert their action. Previous reports have identified two iron-containing superoxide dismutases able to dismutate ·O₂⁻ and protect the parasite from free radical damage [31]. In this report we addressed the question of peroxide reduction in *L. infantum* and demonstrate that two distinct peroxiredoxins, one localized in the cytoplasm the other in the mitochondrion, may cooperate to preserve the parasite from peroxide-induced damage.

interacts with the peroxides. Indeed, it could not be responsible for donor substrate specificity because it is conserved in many other peroxiredoxins that use reductants other than TXN. The second redox center in LimTXNPx is likely IPC and it is embedded in a sequence context distinct from cytoplasmic TXNPx molecules but is similar to that of mitochondrial peroxiredoxins of *T. brucei* and *T. cruzi* [7,9]. Emerging evidence suggests that this distal conserved cysteine represents the site of attack by specific reducing substrates in 2-Cys peroxiredoxins [10,33]. In recent models of TXNPx/TXN interactions a basic sequence stretch at positions 92–94 (RKR or more frequently RKK) and an acid residue (E) at position 171 in LicTXNPx and other TXNPx have been suggested to attract TXN electrostatically. In *T. cruzi* mTXNPx the corresponding basic center is weakened (RNK); it is however fully conserved in LimTXNPx and in the *T. brucei* mTXNPx. An acid residue (D) is present in the three mitochondrial TXNPx replacing E in cytoplasmic TXNPx. It is, however, shifted relative to the distal redox-active cysteine by two positions. These common denominators between the cytoplasmic and mitochondrial subfamilies may allow the mitochondrial types to function as specific trypanothione peroxidases ([7], Castro et al., [15a]). A specific feature of LimTXNPx shared with other mitochondrial TXNPx is the presence of an N-terminal mitochondrial import peptide of 26 amino acids typical of eukaryotic organisms. This complies with previous reports that mitochondrial protein import in Kinetoplastida does not fundamentally differ from that of more evolved eukaryotes [34]. This sequence is characterized by the presence of several hydrophobic and positively charged residues, implicated in the process of targeting and transport across mitochondrial membranes, and by lack of acidic residues [35]. The N-terminal sequence of LimTXNPx further suggests that processing of the mature protein requires the activity of two mitochondrial proteases [36,37]. A protein homologous to the mitochondrial processing protease, MPP, which requires an Arg residue in position -2 and in a distal position, would cleave first at position 18, leaving an octapeptide to be subsequently processed by a protein homologous to the mitochondrial intermediate peptidase (MIP). This two-step processing occurs in proteins intended to the mitochondrial matrix or to the inner membrane [35,38]. The predictions deduced from the sequence characteristics comply with the mitochondrial localization of LimTXNPx here demonstrated.

All peroxiredoxins analyzed to date have been shown to display peroxidase activity in vitro [39], however, that does not necessarily imply that in vivo such peroxiredoxins function in cell defense to oxidative stress [32].

Fig. 7. Effect of hydrogen peroxide ($\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}_{2}$) and tert-butyl hydroperoxide ($t$-bOOH) on replication of $L$. infantum promastigotes. Wild-type (▲), pTEX-LicTXNPx transformed (■), pTEX-LimTXNPx transformed (●) and pTEX transformed (◆) parasites were cultured for 5 d in medium containing $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}_{2}$ (A) and $t$-bOOH (B) at various concentrations. The number of promastigotes was then counted and the densities measured by spectrophotometry at 600 nm. The data are expressed as a percentage of promastigote replication in relation to control cultures without peroxide. Graphs show a representative experiment performed in triplicate. Standard deviations between the triplicates are indicated by bars.
Here we demonstrate that the novel peroxiredoxins of *L. infantum* can be active as peroxidases in vivo. Indeed, an increased resistance of parasites transformed with LicTXNPx and LimTXNPx to at least one of the hydroperoxides tested was observed. With LicTXNPx the interpretation of the results appears straightforward. Overexpression protects against H₂O₂ and t-bOOH added to the medium, an experimental approach meant to mimic the oxidative burst of phagocytes or analogous phenomena in the sandfly. In this respect the data mirrors the observations made with genetic disruption of trypanothione-mediated peroxide metabolism in *T. brucei*, an increased sensitivity to H₂O₂ and loss of virulence in an infection model [40]. The less pronounced protection against t-bOOH in comparison to H₂O₂ in LicTXNPx overexpressing parasites is not easily understood. It may be tentatively attributed to a higher specific activity of LicTXNPx toward H₂O₂ than toward t-bOOH, as shown to occur with homologous enzymes of *L. donovani* and *L. major* [5, 10], or to the tendency of peroxiredoxins to become inactivated by organic hydroperoxides ([10], Castro et al., [15a]). In view of the mitochondrial localization of LimTXNPx it is not surprising that overexpression of this enzyme does not induce resistance to exogenous H₂O₂ because this has little chance to reach the mitochondrion at concentrations that would not be readily detoxified by wild-type levels of LimTXNPx. Unfortunately, we are not aware of any experimental design to selectively increase the hydroperoxide tone in mitochondria of Kinetoplastida to unequivocally demonstrate the role of LimTXNPx. The relevance of this peroxiredoxin in mitochondrial hydroperoxide protection is, however, corroborated by the increased resistance against t-bOOH upon overexpression.

In conclusion, we have shown that *L. infantum* expresses at least two peroxiredoxins, a cytoplasmic, and a mitochondrial one. In their cellular context they are presumed to complement each other in protecting promastigotes against peroxide-mediated damage. Likely, therefore, these enzymes are key devices of the antioxidant armamentarium of these parasites. Preliminary results indicate that both peroxiredoxins are also expressed in amastigotes, the vertebrate stage of the parasite. If shown to be essential to amastigotes it will be important to explore unique structural features of these proteins in a chemotherapeutic perspective.

Acknowledgements — We thank S. Wilkinson and J. M. Kelly for the degenerated peroxiredoxin primer, and S. Reed and A. Ouaissi for the anti-TSA and anti-*LmS3arp* antibodies, respectively. We also acknowledge P. Coelho and P. Sampaio, for assistance with the fluorescence microscopy. This work was financed by a grant from Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (FCT) (Grant PRAXIS/P/SAU/10263/1998). H. Castro is recipient of a FCT doctoral fellowship (Grant SFRH/BD/1396/2000).

---

**REFERENCES**

[1] Hofmann, B.; Hecht, H. J.; Flohé, L. Peroxiredoxins. *Biol. Chem.* **383**:347–364; 2002.

[2] Nogoecke, E.; Gommel, D. U.; Kiess, M.; Kalisz, H. M.; Flohé, L. A unique cascade of oxidoreductases catalyses trypanothione-mediated peroxide metabolism in *Crithidia fasciculata*. *Biol. Chem.* **378**:827–836; 1997.

[3] McGonigle, S.; Dalton, J. P.; James, E. R. Peroxiredoxins: a new antioxidant family. *Parasitol. Today* **14**:139–145; 1998.

[4] Webb, J. R.; Campos-Neto, A.; Ovendale, P. J.; Martin, T. I.; Stromberg, E. J.; Badaro, R.; Reed, S. G. Human and murine immune responses to a novel *Leishmania major* recombinant protein encoded by members of a multicopy gene family. *Infect. Immun.* **66**:3279–3289; 1998.

[5] Levick, M. P.; Tetaud, E.; Fairlamb, A. H.; Blackwell, J. M. Identification and characterisation of a functional peroxiredoxin from *Leishmania major*. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* **96**:125–137; 1998.

[6] Guerrero, S. A.; Lopez, J. A.; Steinert, P.; Montemartini, M.; Kalisz, H. M.; Colli, W.; Singh, M.; Alves, M. J.; Flohé, L. His-tagged tryparedoxin peroxidase of *Trypanosoma cruzi* as a tool for drug screening. *Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.* **53**:410–414; 2000.

[7] Tetaud, E.; Giroud, C.; Prescott, A. R.; Parkin, D. W.; Baltz, D.; Biteau, N.; Baltz, T.; Fairlamb, A. H. Molecular characterisation of mitochondrial and cytosolic trypanothione-dependent tryparedoxin peroxidases in *Trypanosoma brucei*. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* **116**:171–183; 2001.

[8] Alpey, M. S.; Bond, C. S.; Tetaud, E.; Fairlamb, A. H.; Hunter, W. N. The structure of reduced tryparedoxin peroxidase reveals a decamer and insight into reactivity of 2Cys-peroxiredoxins. *J. Mol. Biol.* **300**:903–916; 2000.

[9] Wilkinson, S. R.; Temperton, N. J.; Mondragon, A.; Kelly, J. M. Distinct mitochondrial and cytosolic enzymes mediate trypanothione-dependent peroxide metabolism in *Trypanosoma cruzi*. *J. Biol. Chem.* **11**:8220–8225; 2000.

[10] Flohé, L.; Budde, H.; Bruns, K.; Castro, H.; Clos, J.; Hofmann, B.; Kansal-Kalavar, S.; Krumme, D.; Menge, U.; Plank-Schumacher, K.; Sztajer, H.; Wissing, J.; Wylegalla, C.; Hecht, H. J. Tryparedoxin peroxidase of *Leishmania donovani*, heterologous expression, specificity and catalytic mechanism. *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **397**:324–335; 2002.

[11] Barr, S. D.; Gedamu, L. Cloning and characterization of three differentially expressed peroxiredoxin genes from *Leishmania chagasi*: evidence for an enzymatic detoxification of hydroxyl radicals. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**:34279–34287; 2001.

[12] Maurício, I. L.; Stothard, J. R.; Miles, M. A. The strange case of *Leishmania chagasi*. *Parasitol. Today* **16**:188–189; 2000.

[13] Zarley, J. H.; Britigan, B. E.; Wilson, M. E. Hydrogen peroxide mediated toxicity for *Leishmania donovani chagasi* promastigotes: role of hydroxyl radical and protection by heat shock. *J. Clin. Invest.* **88**:1511–1521; 1991.

[14] Kelly, J. M.; Das, P.; Tomás, A. M. An approach to functional complementation by introduction of large DNA fragment into *Trypanosoma cruzi* and *Leishmania donovani* using a cosmid shuttle vector. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* **65**:51–62; 1994.

[15] Kelly, J. M. Isolation of DNA and RNA from *Leishmania*. *Methods Mol. Biol.* **21**:123–131; 1993.

[15a] Castro, H.; Budde, H.; Flohé, L.; Hofmann, B.; Lünsdorf, H.; Wissing, J.; Tomás, A. M. Specificity and kinetics of a mitochondrial peroxiredoxin of *Leishmania infantum*. *Free Radic. Biol. Med.* **33**:1563–1574; 2002.

[16] Zemzoumi, K.; Guilvard, E.; Sereno, D.; Preto, A.; Benlemlih, M.; Cordeiro Da Silva, A.; Lemesre, J.-L.; Ouaissi, A. Cloning of a *Leishmania major* gene encoding for an antigen with extensive homology to ribosomal protein S3a. *Gene* **240**:57–65; 1999.

[17] Vassella, E.; Straesser, K.; Boshart, M. A mitochondrion-specific dye for multicolour fluorescent imaging of *Trypanosoma brucei*. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* **90**:381–385; 1997.

[18] Kelly, J. M.; Ward, H. M.; Miles, M. A.; Kendall, G. A shuttle vector which facilitates the expression of transfected genes in
Trypanosoma cruzi and Leishmania. Nucleic Acids Res. 11:3963–3969; 1992.

[19] Beverley, S. M.; Clayton, C. E. Transfection of *Leishmania* and *Trypanosoma brucei* by electroporation. *Methods Mol. Biol.* 21: 333–348; 1993.

[20] Rhee, S. G.; Kang, S. W.; Netto, L. E.; Seo, M. S.; Stadtman, E. R. A family of novel peroxidases, peroxiredoxins. *Biofactors* 10:207–209; 1999.

[21] Kumar, S.; Tamura, K.; Jakobsen, I. B.; Nei, M. MEGA2: molecular evolutionary genetics analysis software. *Bioinformatics* 17:1244–1245; 2001.

[22] Sacks, D. L.; Perkins, P. V. Identification of an infective stage of *Leishmania* promastigotes. *Science* 223:1417–1419; 1984.

[23] Miller, M. A.; McGowan, S. E.; Gantt, K. R.; Champion, M.; Novick, S. L.; Andersen, K. A.; Bacchi, C. J.; Yarlett, N.; Britigan, B. E.; Wilson, M. E. Inducible Resistance to oxidant stress in the protozoan *Leishmania chagasi*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275:33883–33889; 2001.

[24] Murray, H. W. Susceptibility of *Leishmania* to oxygen intermediates and killing by normal macrophages. *J. Exp. Med.* 153: 1302–10315; 1981.

[25] Hoffmann, J. A. Innate immunity of insects. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 7:4–10; 1995.

[26] Nappi, A. J.; Vass, E. Hydrogen peroxide production in immune-reactive *Drosophila melanogaster*. *J. Parasitol.* 84:1150–1157; 1998.

[27] Whitten, M. M.; Mello, C. B.; Gomes, S. A.; Nigem, Y.; Azambuja, P.; Garcia, E. S.; Ratcliffe, N. A. Role of superoxide and reactive nitrogen intermediates in *Rhodnius prolixus (Reduviidae)*/ *Trypanosoma rangeli* interactions. *Exp. Parasitol.* 98:44–57; 2001.

[28] Boveris, A.; Stoppani, A. O. M. Hydrogen peroxide generation in *Trypanosoma cruzi*. *Experientia* 33:1306–1308; 1977.

[29] Turrens, J. F. Possible role of the NADH-fumarate reductase in superoxide anion and hydrogen peroxide production in *Trypanosoma brucei*. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 25:55–60; 1987.

[30] Denicola-Seoane, A.; Rubbo, H.; Prodanov, E.; Turrens, J. F. Succinate-dependent metabolism in *Trypanosoma cruzi* epimastigotes. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 54:43–50; 1992.

[31] Paramchuk, W. J.; Ismail, S. O.; Bhatia, A.; Gedamu, L. Cloning, characterization and overexpression of two iron superoxide dismutase cDNAs from *Leishmania chagasi*: role in pathogenesis. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 90:203–221; 1997.

[32] Flohé, L.; Hecht, H. J.; Steinert, P. Glutathione and trypanothione

in parasitic hydroperoxide metabolism. *Free Radic. Biol. Med.* 27:966–984; 1999.

[33] Chae, H. Z.; Chung, S. J.; Rhee, S. G. Thioredoxin-dependent peroxide reductase from yeast. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269:27670–27678; 1994.

[34] Hausler, T.; Stierhof, Y. D.; Blattner, J.; Clayton, C. Conservation of mitochondrial targeting sequence function in mitochondrial and hydrogenosomal proteins from the early-branching eukaryotes *Crithidia*, *Trypanosoma* and *Trichomonas*. *Eur. J. Cell Biol.* 73:240–251; 1997.

[35] Neupert, W. Protein import into mitochondria. *Ann. Rev. Biochem.* 66:863–917; 1997.

[36] Branda, S. S.; Isaya, G. Prediction and identification of new natural substrates of the yeast mitochondrial intermediate peptidase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270:27366–27373; 1995.

[37] Isaya, G.; Kalousek, F.; Fenton, W. A.; Rosenberg, L. E. Cleavage of precursors by the mitochondrial processing peptidase requires a compatible mature protein or an intermediate octapeptide. *J. Cell Biol.* 113:65–76; 1991.

[38] Priest, J. W.; Hajduk, S. L. In vitro import of the Rieske iron sulfur protein by trypanosome mitochondria. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271: 20060–20069; 1996.

[39] Lee, S. P.; Hwang, Y. S.; Kim, Y. J.; Kwon, K. S.; Kim, H. J.; Kim, K.; Chae, H. Z. Cyclophilin a binds to peroxiredoxins and activates its peroxidase activity. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276:29826–29832; 2001.

[40] Krieger, S.; Schwarz, W.; Ariyanayagam, M. R.; Fairlamb, A. H.; Krauth-Siegel, R. L.; Clayton, C. Trypanosomes lacking trypanothione reductase are avirulent and show increased sensitivity to oxidative stress. *Mol. Microbiol.* 35:542–552; 2000.

ABBREVIATIONS

mTXNPx—mitochondrial tryparedoxin peroxidase  
PCR—polymerase chain reaction  
RT-PCR—reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction  
t-bOOH—tert-butyl hydroperoxide  
TSA—thiol-specific antioxidant protein  
TXN—tryparedoxin  
TXNPx—tryparedoxin peroxidase
