
REGULATION OF B-CELL FATE BY  
ANTIGEN-RECEPTOR SIGNALS  

Hiroaki Niiro and Edward A. Clark  

Recent evidence indicates that B cells are instructed continuously by B-cell receptor (BCR) signals to make crucial cell-fate decisions at several checkpoints during their development. Targeted disruption of BCR signalling components leads to distinct blocks in B-cell maturation, which indicates that key kinases and adaptors fine-tune BCR signalling to direct appropriate cell fates. Recent progress in unravelling the molecular mechanisms of the BCR signalling pathways has helped to clarify how BCR signals regulate the proliferation, survival and apoptosis of developing B cells.

DECISION MAKING IN THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

For effective humoral immunity, mature B cells must respond to foreign antigens and generate antigen-specific effector cells. So, it is not surprising that the B-cell receptor (BCR) complex is required for the later stages of B-cell maturation. However, the BCR is required also during early B-cell ontogeny¹. Therefore, the classic distinction between antigen-independent and antigen-dependent stages of B-cell development is no longer so clear-cut. Targeted disruption of the BCR in mature B cells has shown that the BCR is required for the maintenance of B cells before they encounter foreign antigens². In addition, inducible deletion of immunoglobulin-associated protein-β (Igβ) in immature B cells leads to cell death, which indicates that BCR signals are required for cell survival at this stage³. Furthermore, disruption of genes encoding downstream components of the BCR signalling pathways leads to developmental arrest at several stages, implicating a role for BCR signals at key checkpoints during development. These checkpoints involve various processes, including negative selection (deletion), anergy, receptor editing and positive selection⁴. In this review, we first outline the molecular mechanisms of how BCR signalling leads to the death, survival and/or proliferation of B cells. Then, we discuss how BCR signals affect cell-fate decisions at the immature and mature B-cell stages.

The BCR signalling pathway

The BCR has two main roles. The first is to transmit signals that regulate B-cell fate decisions. The second is to mediate antigen processing, leading to the presentation of antigen to T cells, which allows full activation of B cells in the effector phase. Recent evidence indicates that these two roles are interrelated, but are under distinct genetic control (H.N. *et al.*, unpublished observations).

The BCR complex is made up of immunoglobulin heavy (IgH) and light (IgL) chains associated with two signalling components, Igα and Igβ (FIG.1). After BCR ligation by antigen, both the protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) SYK, and SRC-family PTKs such as LYN, are activated initially. Then, LYN phosphorylates immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) in the cytoplasmic tails of Igα and Igβ, which, in turn, recruit and facilitate the activation of SYK and the TEC-family PTK BTK⁵. Although B cells also express other SRC-family kinases, including FYN, BLK, FGR and HCK, mutations of FYN, BLK and FGR have little effect on B-cell function⁶⁷. This might be explained by redundancy of these kinases in BCR signalling, but further work is required to define the role of each kinase. SYK is a key B-cell signalling molecule, because disruption of SYK prevents most downstream BCR signalling⁸⁹ and leads to a marked block in B-cell development¹⁰.

The VAV family of RHO-family GTPases, which consists of at least three isoforms — VAV1, VAV2 and VAV3 (REF. 11) — also has a crucial role in BCR signalling. VAV proteins activate RAC1 and regulate cytoskeletal structures after activation¹¹¹², and BCR-induced proliferation is defective in VAV1-deficient B cells¹³¹⁴. In addition, recent studies of *Vav1⁻/⁻* and *Vav2⁻/⁻* mice showed clearly that VAV proteins have a crucial role in B-cell signalling,

including calcium mobilization ${ }^{15,16}$. Although VAV proteins have been proposed to function downstream of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) owing to their possession of a phospholipid-binding pleckstrin-homology (PH) domain, a recent study using VAV3-deficient cells has challenged this idea. Indeed, SYK phosphorylates VAV3 and this, in turn, might regulate the activation of PI3K in B cells ${ }^{17}$. However, it remains to be determined whether the same is true for VAV1 or VAV2. The VAV family might function both upstream and downstream of PI3K in B cells. BTK, together with SYK, phosphorylates and activates phospholipase Cγ2 (PLCγ2) after stimulation.

PI3K and PLCγ2 are both crucial effector enzymes that generate key second messengers in BCR signalling ${ }^{18}$. PI3K phosphorylates phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PtdInsP $_{2}$ ) to produce phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdInsP $_{3}$ ), which, in turn, recruits some BCR signalling molecules to the membrane through PH domains. PLCγ2 uses PtdInsP $_{2}$ — the same substrate as PI3K — but generates inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP $_{3}$ ) and diacylglycerol (DAG), which are required for the release of intracellular calcium (Ca $^{2+}$ ) and activation of protein kinase C (PKC), respectively ${ }^{18}$. Subsequently, Ca $^{2+}$ flux and PKC activation induce the activation of mitogen-activated protein

Figure 1 | **BCR-induced signal-transduction pathways.** After antigen ligation, three main protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) — the SRC-family kinase LYN, SYK and the TEC-family kinase BTK — are activated. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and phospholipase Cγ2 (PLCγ2) are important downstream effectors of B-cell receptor (BCR) signalling. B-cell adaptors, such as B-cell linker (BLNK) and BAM32 (B-lymphocyte adaptor molecule of 32 kDa), fine-tune BCR signals by efficiently connecting the kinases with the effectors. A PI3K product, phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdInsP $_{3}$ ), recruits some BCR signalling components through their pleckstrin-homology domains, and also activates downstream kinases such as AKT. Activation of PLCγ2 leads to the release of intracellular Ca $^{2+}$ and activation of protein kinase C (PKC) — both of which are crucial for the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), such as extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), c-JUN NH $_{2}$ -terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 MAPK, and transcription factors, including nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT). The profiles of these outputs determine B-cell fate. DAG, diacylglycerol; FcγRIIB, low-affinity Fc receptor for IgG; GSK3, glycogen synthase kinase 3; IKK, inhibitor of NF-κB (IκB) kinase; PIRB, paired immunoglobulin-like receptor B; SHIP, SH2-domain-containing inositol polyphosphate 5′ phosphatase; SHP1, SH2-domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 1.

kinase (MAPK)-family kinases — extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), c-JUN NH₂-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 MAPK — and transcription factors, including nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) and nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT). It is probable that the profile of these activated transcription factors then determines B-cell fate.

Non-enzymatic adaptor proteins are important also for regulating BCR signalling. Among them, the B-cell linker (BLNK) efficiently connects SYK and BTK with PLCγ2 (REFS 19,20) (FIG. 1). Disruption of the BLNK gene leads to impaired activation of PLCγ2 in B cells²¹. However, BLNK also associates with VAV and NCK¹⁹, both of which regulate cytoskeletal organization in B cells. So, the defect in B-cell development is more severe in BLNK-deficient mice than in PLCγ2-deficient mice²²⁻²⁶. B-cell adaptor for PI3K (BCAP) was isolated originally as a new molecule that associates with the SRC-homology 2 (SH2) domain of PI3K p85 subunits, and disruption of BCAP in DT40 CELLS leads to impaired BCR-induced activation of PI3K and the protein serine/threonine kinase AKT (also known as PKB)²⁷. Another B-cell adaptor, B-lymphocyte adaptor molecule of 32 kDa (BAM32), also binds PLCγ2 and regulates its activation²⁸,²⁹. As it is recruited to the membrane in a PI3K-dependent manner²⁸, BAM32 integrates the PI3K and PLCγ2 pathways. Intriguingly, BAM32 is expressed at a high level in GERMINAL-CENTRE (GC) B cells, whereas other adaptors, such as GRB2-related protein of the lymphoid system (GRPL; also known as GRB2-related adaptor downstream of SHC, GADS) and SH2-domain protein 1A (SH2D1A), are not expressed in GC and memory B cells, respectively²⁸,³⁰,³¹. This indicates that the selective or relative expression of key adaptors during B-cell development might influence BCR-induced signalling pathways and cell fate. The B-cell-specific co-receptor CD19 can function as an adaptor for PI3K in B cells also³².

Negative regulators of BCR signalling include B-cell co-receptors, such as paired immunoglobulin-like receptor B (PIRB) and FcγRIIB, which have immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs (ITIMs) in their cytoplasmic tails that recruit the phosphatases SH2-domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase 1 (SHP1) and SH2-domain-containing inositol polyphosphate 5′ phosphatase (SHIP), thereby inhibiting BCR signalling³³,³⁴. The CD22 co-receptor might regulate BCR signalling both positively and negatively; recruitment of the adaptor protein GRB2 to the CD22 cytoplasmic tail might lead to MAPK activation, whereas recruitment of SHP1 to cytoplasmic ITIMs of CD22 blocks BCR signalling³⁵,³⁶. Together, the adaptors and co-receptors that are discussed finely modulate the quality and quantity of BCR signalling (FIG. 1).

DT40 CELLS  
A chicken B-cell line that undergoes homologous recombination at a high frequency, and so is a system to generate knockout mutants in vitro to study B-cell biology.

GERMINAL CENTRES  
Located in peripheral lymphoid tissues (for example, the spleen), these structures are sites of B-cell proliferation and selection for clones that produce antigen-specific antibodies of higher affinity.

LIPID RAFTS  
Cholesterol-rich regions that provide an ordered structure to the lipid bilayer and can include or exclude specific signalling molecules and complexes.

which generate a basal level of signalling that is essential for B-cell maintenance. After antigen binding, BCR arrays are formed and recruited to membrane compartments known as LIPID RAFTS. In B cells, SRC-family kinases, such as LYN, are selectively enriched in these rafts³⁸. It has been proposed that these rafts are a crucial compartment for the propagation of BCR signalling, because many BCR signalling components, including PI3K and PLCγ2, are recruited to the rafts after BCR cross-linking³⁸. In pre-B cells, these signalling molecules reside in rafts constitutively³⁹. This might lead to basal, ligand-independent pre-BCR signalling that is sufficient for pre-B cells to differentiate to immature B cells⁴⁰. Notably, PtdInsP₂, a substrate for PI3K and PLCγ2, is enriched in rafts also⁴¹. So, BCR signalling components, such as BTK, BLNK, VAV, PI3K and PLCγ2, might form complexes in lipid rafts, which have been referred to as ‘signalosomes’⁴².

An intriguing question that remains to be clarified is how oligomeric BCRs transduce their signals. In the absence of antigen binding, it is clear that the BCR resides in a non-raft compartment. So, the signals emanating from the non-raft compartment, which include transduction through SYK and SHP1, might be crucial for basal BCR signalling⁴³. It is important also to determine how the entry and release of BCR signalling components to and from rafts is regulated. Although the lipid-raft model might explain how the duration of BCR signalling is regulated, there are contradictory results regarding the role of lipid rafts in BCR-induced Ca²⁺ flux⁴⁴,⁴⁵. In addition, blocking the formation of rafts has no effect on BCR-induced activation of ERK in a human B-cell line⁴⁵. This indicates that some pathways of BCR signalling can occur independently of lipid rafts.

Another important unanswered question is how BCR signals in lipid rafts regulate BCR capping and internalization, which are required for antigen processing by B cells and which might affect B-cell fate. For example, BCR-induced activation of JNK, but not AKT, requires BCR internalization (H.N. *et al.*, unpublished observations). The phenomenon of BCR internalization has long been recognized and it is clear that PTKs are involved⁴⁶,⁴⁷; however, this process is still not understood well. BCR internalization is impaired markedly in LYN- and SYK-deficient DT40 B cells⁴⁸ (H.N. *et al.*, unpublished observations). Although BCR-induced cell death requires PLCγ2 and Ca²⁺, and BCR-induced cell survival requires PI3K (as described below), BCR internalization does not require PLCγ2 or PI3K. These findings indicate that BCR internalization involves a signalling pathway that is distinct from those pathways mediating BCR-induced proliferation and cell death (H.N. *et al.*, unpublished observations).

**Lipid rafts and B-cell signalling**

Recent evidence indicates that BCR signalling can be regulated also by the membrane organization of signalling components. Reth’s group³⁷ proposed recently that in the absence of antigen binding, the BCR is already pre-assembled into oligomeric receptor complexes,

**BCR-induced survival and proliferation**

The BCR can induce signalling pathways that are crucial for the survival and proliferation of B cells. These include the PI3K, RAS–RAF–ERK and NF-κB pathways.

PI3K pathway. PI3K is a primary candidate for mediating B-cell survival. Treatment of B cells with inhibitors of PI3K leads to an increase in BCR-induced cell death⁴⁹,⁵⁰. Of the downstream molecules that are activated after PI3K activation, AKT is of particular interest. In mice that are deficient for the p110δ subunit of PI3K, the activation of AKT in B cells is impaired significantly⁵¹,⁵². Generally, AKT phosphorylates cellular targets that are involved in cell survival, including factors that regulate apoptosis⁵³ and glycogen metabolism⁵⁴. BCR signalling activates AKT even in PLCγ2-deficient B cells, whereas inhibitors of PI3K block this activation completely⁵⁰,⁵⁵, which indicates that AKT is downstream of PI3K, but not PLCγ2. The finding that disruption of AKT leads to the death of DT40 cells underscores a role for AKT in B-cell survival⁵⁰. So, AKT functions not only to protect against BCR-induced cell death, but also to promote B-cell survival in the resting state. One function of AKT is to inhibit activation of the pro-apoptotic BCL-2-family member BAD (BCL-2 antagonist of cell death)⁵³. AKT phosphorylates and inhibits glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) kinase in B cells⁵⁶. In unstimulated cells, GSK3 is active constitutively, and it phosphorylates and destabilizes MYC and cyclin D, both of which are required for cell-cycle progression⁵⁷. So, it seems that AKT functions to promote BCR-induced cell proliferation, as well as survival.

RAS–RAF–ERK pathway. The upstream signals that are required for the activation of ERK in B cells are distinct from those that are required for the activation of other MAPKs, such as JNK and p38 MAPK. For example, in PLCγ2-deficient B cells, BCR-mediated JNK and p38 MAPK activity are not detectable, whereas ERK activation is significantly impaired, but still induced. This indicates that ERK is also regulated in a PLCγ2-independent manner, most probably through the RAS–RAF pathway⁵⁸. Although it is clear that ERK is involved in the survival of other cell types⁵⁹, its role in immature B cells is unclear. An inhibitor of ERK activation does not affect BCR-induced cell death in immature B-cell lines⁶⁰. However, this inhibitor does block BCR-induced proliferation of mature B cells⁶⁰. The RAF1–ERK pathway is involved also in BCR-induced expression of cyclin D2 in B cells⁶¹.

Disruption of the Raf1 gene in mice has shown a unique ERK-independent function for Raf1 in cell survival; in these mice, the activation of ERK is as normal, but cell death is enhanced⁶²,⁶³. Raf1 can translocate to mitochondria and regulate mitochondrial function directly⁶⁴, and so it is likely to be a pro-survival molecule in B cells.

NF-κB pathway. NF-κB, a family of dimeric transcription factors, has been shown to protect many cells from pro-apoptotic signals⁶⁵. In mice that are deficient for inhibitor of NF-κB (IκB) kinase-α (IKKα), IKKβ and the regulatory subunit NF-κB essential modulator (NEMO) — which are upstream molecules of NF-κB activation — B-cell apoptosis is increased markedly⁶⁶–⁶⁸. Activation of PLCγ2 is absolutely required for BCR-induced NF-κB activation in B cells⁶⁹ (FIG. 2). So, any disruption of molecules that regulate the activation of PLCγ2 is likely to affect BCR-induced NF-κB activation. Indeed, BCR-induced NF-κB activation is blocked in BTK-, BLNK- and BAM32-deficient B cells, which have defects in the PLCγ2 pathway²⁹,⁷⁰,⁷¹. PLCγ2-induced Ca²⁺ flux and PKC activation are both required for NF-κB activation⁶⁹, which indicates that the activation of Ca²⁺-dependent PKC isoforms might regulate the activation of NF-κB. The PKC family is divided into four subgroups: conventional PKCs (α, βI/II and γ), which require both Ca²⁺ and DAG; novel PKCs (δ, ε, η and θ), which require only DAG; atypical PKCs (ζ and λ), which require neither Ca²⁺ nor DAG; and PKCμ (PKD in the mouse), which behaves differently from other PKCs with respect to its catalytic activity⁷². In T cells, PKCθ is important for NF-κB activation⁷³, but PKCθ is not found in most B cells. In PKCδ-deficient mice, NF-κB activation is normal in B cells⁷⁴,⁷⁵. Indirect evidence indicates that a conventional PKC might be required for BCR-induced activation of NF-κB; for example, recent studies found that PKCβ is required to activate IKKα/β, an upstream kinase of NF-κB activation⁷⁶,⁷⁷.

The NF-κB transcription-factor family consists of heterodimers or homodimers of the subunits NF-κB1 (p50), NF-κB2 (p52), c-REL, RELA (p65) and RELB⁷⁸. Different pairs of these subunits function at different stages of B-cell development⁷⁹. NF-κB induces the expression of anti-apoptotic BCL-2-family members, such as BCL-2, BCL-X<sub>L</sub> and A1 (REFS 80–82). These molecules counteract the effects of pro-apoptotic BCL-2-family molecules, thereby protecting cells from BCR-induced death. Recently, BCL-X<sub>L</sub> was reported to block expression of the InsP₃ receptor (InsP₃R) in a B-cell line⁸³, which indicates that BCL-X<sub>L</sub> might also regulate BCR-induced cell death by inhibiting the release of Ca²⁺ through the InsP₃R.

Another NF-κB-regulated gene product is cyclin D2 (REF. 84). As mentioned earlier, Ca²⁺-dependent PKCβ is required for BCR-induced activation of NF-κB in B cells. Blockade of Ca²⁺ entry completely blocks BCR-induced induction of expression of cyclin D2 (REF. 85). These results indicate that a Ca²⁺-dependent PKC regulates the expression of cyclin D2 through activation of NF-κB. However, BCR-induced induction of cyclin D2 is intact in PKCβ-deficient B cells, in which IKKα/β is not activated⁷⁷. So, an NF-κB-independent pathway (for example, activation of ERK) induced by other PKCs or RAS–RAF1-induced ERK activation might regulate the expression of cyclin D2 by B cells.

### Immature B-cell fate

Productive variable-region and joining-region rearrangements of the immunoglobulin light chain (V<sub>L</sub>J<sub>L</sub> rearrangements) are completed in pre-B cells, and expression of the BCR drives pre-B cells to the immature B-cell stage. However, the process of generating B-cell diversity can generate potentially harmful, self-reactive B cells. So, an important role of the BCR at the immature B-cell stage is to induce efficient elimination of these potentially harmful cells. This can be achieved in three ways:

blocking Ca²⁺ release prevents BCR-induced cell death⁸⁷. However, Ca²⁺ is not simply a pro-apoptotic molecule. Ca²⁺ is required also for activation of the pro-survival NF-κB pathway in B cells (FIG. 2). JNK is required to induce cell death in thymocytes⁸⁸, but its role in B cells remains unclear. Although the upstream events remain ambiguous, it is clear that mitochondrial dysfunction is involved in BCR-induced cell death⁸⁹–⁹¹. This, in turn, facilitates the release of cytochrome c, thereby triggering the activation of caspase-9, followed by activation of the effector caspases caspase-7 and caspase-3, and cell death⁸⁹–⁹¹. Enzymatically inactive pro-caspase-9 blocks the activation of caspase-7 and -3 and also inhibits DNA fragmentation after BCR crosslinking⁹¹. In addition, a broad-specificity caspase inhibitor blocks cell death efficiently in primary immature B cells⁹².

## Transitional B-cell and mature B-cell fates

Immature B cells that have passed successfully through developmental checkpoints in the bone marrow emigrate subsequently to the spleen as transitional B cells, which then become mature B cells (FIG. 3). Transitional B cells can be divided further into two subsets⁹³—transitional type 1 (T1) and T2.

### T1–T2 transition

As T1 cells are recent emigrants from the bone marrow, their phenotype is related closely to that of immature B cells in the bone marrow; T1 cells express no or low levels of immunoglobulin D (IgD), CD21 and CD23, but high levels of surface immunoglobulin M (sIgM)⁹³. Only a small percentage of T1 cells proceed to the T2 stage, which indicates that most T1 cells undergo clonal deletion or anergy. This makes sense, because some of the B cells that are generated in the BM might cross-react with self-antigens that are expressed only in peripheral tissues and so need to be deleted. In addition, the fact that T1 cells express the pro-apoptotic molecule FAS (CD95), and not the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-2, is consistent with them being highly sensitive to negative selection⁹⁴.

T1 cells that successfully enter splenic B-cell follicles become T2 cells. T2 cells have a mixed phenotype between that of T1 B cells and mature FOLLICULAR B CELLS; they still express high levels of sIgM, but also express high levels of sIgD, CD21 and CD23 (REF. 93). BCR signalling pathways are different in T1 and T2 cells; after BCR crosslinking, T1 cells express little cyclin D2 or A1, and a reduced amount of active AKT, whereas T2 cells, similar to mature follicular B cells, express high levels of cyclin D2, A1 and active AKT⁹⁵. However, there are conflicting findings regarding the apoptotic and proliferative responses of these two subsets. Some studies have shown that after BCR ligation, T1 cells undergo apoptosis, whereas T2 cells proliferate strongly⁹³,⁹⁵. By contrast, others have found that both T1 and T2 subsets are more susceptible to BCR-induced death than are follicular B cells⁹⁶,⁹⁷. However, T-cell help signals, such as CD40–CD40L interactions and interleukin-4 (IL-4), rescue T2 cells from BCR-induced apoptosis and promote vigorous proliferation⁹⁷. This is consistent with the

Figure 2 | BCR-induced cell death, survival and proliferation. Two effectors, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and phospholipase Cγ2 (PLCγ2), have crucial roles in B-cell receptor (BCR)-induced cell death, survival and growth. Upstream signals that depend on Ca²⁺ lead to mitochondrial dysfunction. This, in turn, facilitates the release of cytochrome c, followed by caspase activation and cell death. Three main pathways (AKT, RAF1–ERK and NF-κB) are involved in BCR-induced survival and proliferation. AKT directly inhibits the function of pro-apoptotic molecules such as BAD (BCL-2 antagonist of cell death) and also induces the expression of pro-survival molecules (such as BCL-Xₗ, BCL-2 and A1) through activation of NF-κB. In addition, AKT blocks the function of glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) and stabilizes MYC and cyclin D, thereby promoting cell growth. BAK, BCL-2 antagonist/killer; BAX, BCL-2-associated X protein; BIK, BCL-2-interacting killer; BIM, BCL-2-interacting mediator of cell death; ERK, extracellular signal-regulated kinase; JNK, c-JUN NH₂-terminal kinase; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; PKC, protein kinase C.

immature B cells are eliminated through negative selection (BCR-induced cell death), they are inactivated (anergy), or they revise the specificity of their BCRs (receptor editing). Here, we focus on the molecular mechanisms of BCR-induced cell death.

So far, this has been studied extensively using various immature B-cell lines. What signals are required for BCR-induced cell death? Treatment of B cells with a Ca²⁺ ionophore induces cell death, indicating a role for Ca²⁺ in B-cell apoptosis⁸⁶. In support of this, disruption of all three genes encoding InsP₃Rs in DT40 B cells or

FOLLICULAR B CELL  
A recirculating mature B-cell subset that populates the follicles of the spleen and lymph nodes.

Bone marrow

Spleen

$\begin{aligned}
& \text { NF-κB1 }^{-/-} \text {NF-κB2 }^{-/-} \\
& \text { Syk }^{-/-} \\
& \text { Igβ }^{\Delta c / \Delta c} \\
& \text { Igα }^{\Delta c / \Delta c}
\end{aligned}$

$\begin{aligned}
& \text { IKKα }^{-/-} \\
& \text { Bcap }^{-/-} \\
& \text { Vav1 }^{-/-} \text {Vav2 }^{-/-} \\
& \text { PLCγ2 }^{-/-} \\
& \text { Btk }^{-/-} \\
& \text { Tec }^{-/-} \text {Btk }^{-/-} \\
& \text { PI3K p85 }^{-/-} \\
& \text { Blnk }^{-/-} \\
& \text { Lyn }^{-/-}
\end{aligned}$

Immature

T1

BCR weak

BAFF

T2

BCR intermediate

BAFF or ?

FO

BCR strong

TLR?

BCR weak

BAFF TLR?

PB

MZ

Fetal liver

Peritoneum

Figure 3 | Development of transitional and mature B cells. Basal (weak) B-cell receptor (BCR) signals are required for the transition from transitional type 1 (T1) to T2 B-cell stages. Disruption of proximal BCR signalling components — the cytoplasmic tails of immunoglobulin-associated protein-α (Igα) or Igβ, and SYK — blocks this transition. BAFF (B-cell-activating factor of the tumour-necrosis-factor family) is also required for the maintenance of T2 cells. For the transition from T2 to follicular (FO) B-cell stages, intermediate levels of BCR signals are required. Disruption of some BCR signalling components leads to a block at this stage. Again, BAFF might be required for the maintenance of follicular B cells. A weak BCR signal and a stronger BCR signal are required for the generation of marginal-zone (MZ) B cells and peritoneal B cells, respectively (see also TABLE 1). BAFF might be required for the maintenance of MZ B cells, but not peritoneal B cells. The Toll-like receptor (TLR) signals that are provided by blood-borne and commensal pathogens might regulate the survival of MZ B cells also. BAFFR; BAFF receptor; BCAP, B-cell adaptor for PI3K; BLNK, B-cell linker; IKK, inhibitor of NF-κB (IkB) kinase; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; PB cell, peritoneal B cell; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PLC, phospholipase C.

idea that T2 cells are located in the splenic follicles, where they can receive T-cell signals. A recent study indicates that cognate T-cell–B cell interactions take place at the follicular border$^{98}$.

What signals are required for the T1 to T2 transition? Data obtained from mice with a truncated cytoplasmic tail of either Igα or Igβ, and from Syk-deficient mice, indicate that BCR signalling is required for this step$^{99-102}$ (FIG. 3). Recent findings, however, show that B-cell activating factor of the tumour-necrosis-factor family (BAFF)$^{103}$ is also crucial for this transition$^{103}$. Baff-deficient mice have a marked developmental arrest at the T1 stage$^{104}$. However, it seems probable that BAFF affects the T1 to T2 transition at the level of survival, rather than differentiation. BAFF alone enhances the survival of T2 cells, whereas T2 cells need signals through the BCR and BAFF to proliferate and differentiate$^{105,106}$. This is consistent with the finding that BAFF alone cannot activate B cells to enter the cell cycle$^{107,108}$. Although it is still unclear which receptors — TACI (transmembrane activator and CAML interactor), and/or BCMA (B-cell maturation antigen) and/or BAFFR (BAFF receptor) — are responsible for the effect of BAFF on B-cell survival, at present, BAFFR is the best candidate, because A/WySnJ mice, which have a mutation in BaffR, have a defect in

T2-cell generation similar to that seen in Baff-deficient mice$^{104}$. In addition, the level of expression of BAFFR is higher in T2 cells than in T1 cells or mature B cells$^{107}$, which is consistent with the finding that BAFF enhances B-cell survival to a greater extent at the T2 stage than at the T1 or mature B-cell stages$^{103}$.

What signals downstream of BAFF and the BCR are required for the generation and maintenance of T2 cells? At present, this is not entirely clear, but we speculate that BCR signals facilitate T2-cell generation, and that BCR and BAFF signals maintain T2-cell survival, perhaps by enhancing the activation of NF-κB. Interestingly, overexpression of the pro-survival molecule Bcl-2 in Syk-deficient mice fails to rescue the generation of mature B cells$^{101}$, which indicates that the survival and differentiation signals that are generated by the BCR can be dissociated.

BAFF induces activation of NF-κB through a non-classical pathway; BAFF activates NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK) and this, in turn, induces the activation of IKKα, leading to the phosphorylation and processing of the NF-κB precursor p100 to produce NF-κB2. This subunit forms heterodimers preferentially with RELB to activate transcription$^{109,110}$, which results in the expression of anti-apoptotic BCL-2-family proteins such as

BCL-2, BCL-X<sub>L</sub> and A1 (REFS 107,108,111). The importance of NF-κB activation at this stage is supported by the finding that double-knockout mice of NF-κB subunits (NF-κB1 and NF-κB2 knockouts) have a developmental arrest at the T1 stage<sup>112</sup>.

**Generation of mature B-cell subsets.** Mature B cells are classified into at least three subsets — follicular B cells, MARGINAL-ZONE B CELLS and PERITONEAL B CELLS<sup>113,114</sup>. How do BCR signals regulate the generation and maintenance of these three subsets? Disruption of some BCR signalling components blocks transition from the T2 to follicular B-cell stage<sup>15,16,22–26,49,93,115–121</sup> (FIG. 3). For example, most of the splenic B cells of Btk-deficient mice are phenotypically identical to the T2 cells of normal mice. As disruption of BCR signalling components further downstream of Igα/Igβ or SYK seems to affect the transition from T2 to follicular B cells, a higher level of BCR signal might be required for this transition compared with the T1–T2 transition (FIG. 3). Interestingly, *in vitro* BCR crosslinking of T2 cells induces their differentiation to follicular B cells<sup>77,95</sup>. So, basal BCR signalling might not be sufficient for this process, and interaction of the BCR with unknown ligands, possibly self-antigens, might be required. Recently, BTK and PKCβ were reported to have distinct roles in the generation and maintenance of follicular B cells<sup>77</sup>. In both Btk- and PKCβ-deficient mice, T2 and follicular B cells are susceptible to BCR-induced death owing to impaired activation of NF-κB and induction of expression of Bcl-X<sub>L</sub>. By contrast, PKCβ-deficient, but not Btk-deficient, mice have normal differentiation of T2 cells to follicular B cells. These results indicate that the BCR can trigger the T2 to follicular B-cell transition (differentiation) independent of PKCβ and NF-κB activation. Consistent with this idea, a transient but strong activation of ERK is required to drive the differentiation of T2 cells to follicular B cells<sup>93</sup>.

BAFF might be required also for this transition; in Baff-deficient mice, follicular B cells are absent<sup>104</sup>. Conversely, overexpression of Baff in transgenic mice induces the production of a greater number of follicular B cells<sup>103</sup>. Although these findings might be explained simply by BAFF-induced regulation of T2 cells, BAFF acts directly on follicular B cells to increase their survival *in vitro*<sup>122</sup>. In addition, this is associated with an increase in the level of anti-apoptotic BCL-2-family proteins<sup>107</sup>. So, it is probable that BAFF is essential for the maintenance (survival) of follicular B cells (FIG. 3). Consistent with this idea, B cells fail to enter the cell cycle in response to stimulation with BAFF alone<sup>107,108</sup>. Disruption of IKKα, an upstream kinase for NF-κB activation, blocks the maturation of follicular B cells<sup>66,67</sup>, which indicates that activation of NF-κB is crucial for the maintenance of follicular B cells.

In contrast to follicular B cells, it is clear that the generation of marginal-zone (MZ) and peritoneal B cells requires ligand-induced positive selection through the BCR<sup>113,114,123</sup>. First, a restricted BCR repertoire that is weakly self-reactive is selected preferentially in these populations, which indicates that BCR signalling induced by self-ligands is required for the generation

and maintenance of MZ and peritoneal B cells. Second, inducible disruption of the BCR in mature B cells leads to the absence of all three mature subsets<sup>2</sup>. In other words, some ongoing BCR signal is required for B cells to survive. However, these subsets have marked differences in their homeostasis; in mice in which the recruitment of immature B cells from the bone marrow to the periphery is prevented by conditional deletion of **Rag2** in B cells, the number of follicular B cells declines gradually, whereas the levels of MZ and peritoneal B cells are relatively stable<sup>124</sup>. In this regard, the self-renewing capacity of MZ and peritoneal B cells is indicated by the analysis of mice in which Rag2 is deleted at birth<sup>124</sup>. In Baff-deficient mice, MZ B cells are missing<sup>104</sup>, and Baff-transgenic mice have a greatly increased number of MZ B cells<sup>103</sup>. This might be due to the secondary phenomenon of Baff-induced clonal expansion of T2 cells (FIG. 3). However, given that the splenic MZ contains both dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages that express high levels of BAFF and, to a lesser extent, the BAFF homologue APRIL (a proliferation-inducing ligand)<sup>114</sup>, BAFF might provide a maintenance signal for MZ B cells<sup>125</sup>. Our data and the results of others indicate that BAFF has little effect on the proliferation of B cells unless the BCR is triggered first<sup>106</sup> (A. Craxton and E.A.C., unpublished observations).

Two main hypotheses (lineage versus differentiation) have been proposed for the generation of peritoneal B (mainly B1) cells<sup>126</sup>. The former proposes that certain B-cell precursors are destined to become gut-associated or peritoneal B cells, whereas the latter proposes that every B cell has the same potential to become a peritoneal B cell. However, peritoneal B cells have a distinct phenotype after BCR-induced signalling, which is similar to the phenotype of anergic B cells — that is, constitutive activation of ERK and NFAT, but not NF-κB<sup>127</sup>. These data indicate that peritoneal B cells have been exposed to antigenic stimulation (weakly self-reactive antigens or commensal pathogens). In Baff-deficient mice, peritoneal B cells are present at normal levels<sup>104</sup>, which indicates that the generation and maintenance of peritoneal B cells is regulated differently from that of other mature B-cell subsets. Alternatively, peritoneal B cells might differentiate from a different subset of immature B cells (FIG. 3).

Given the different anatomical locations of MZ and peritoneal B cells compared with follicular B cells, unique signals might affect the development of these B-cell subsets. Intriguingly, microbial products, recognized specifically through Toll-like receptors (TLRs), are sufficient to drive the differentiation of T2 cells to MZ B cells *in vitro*. In addition, in mice that lack the normal commensal intestinal microflora, the generation of MZ and peritoneal B cells is impaired (D.J. Rawlings and J. Braun, personal communication). These findings indicate that signals through TLRs might have a role in the development of MZ and peritoneal B cells (FIG. 3).

The role of BCR signalling components in the development of mature B-cell subsets is summarized in TABLE 1. Overall, the data indicate that a different strength and context of BCR signalling are required for

MARGINAL-ZONE B CELL  
A static, mature B-cell subset that is enriched primarily in the marginal zone of the spleen.

PERITONEAL B CELL  
A mature B-cell subset in the peritoneal cavity that is enriched with a unique population of B cells known as B1 cells that recirculate between the blood and body cavities.

Table 1 | BCR signals regulate the generation of mature B-cell subsets

| Disrupted component | Role in B-cell generation | References |
|---------------------|---------------------------|------------|
|                     | MZ B cells | FO B cells | PB cells   |
| BCR complex         | – | – | – | 2          |
| SYK                 | – | – | – | 101, 102   |
| BTK                 | + | – | – | 93, 118, 119 |
| BLNK                | ND | – | – | 22–24      |
| PLCγ2               | ND | – | – | 25, 26     |
| PKCβ                | ND | + | – | 77, 128    |
| VAV1/VAV2           | ND | – | – | 15, 16     |
| RAC2                | – | ± | – | 129         |
| p85PI3K             | ND | – | – | 49, 120    |
| p110δPI3K           | – | + | – | 51, 52      |
| BCAP                | + | – | – | 121         |
| LYN                 | – | – | ++ | 115, 116   |
| CD19                | – | + | – | 118, 130, 131 |
| CD22                | – | + | ++ | 132, 136   |
| PIRB                | + | + | ++ | 133         |
| PYK2                | – | + | + | 137         |
| IKKa                | ND | – | ND | 66, 67     |
| IKKB                | – | – | – | 68          |
| NEMO                | – | – | – | 68          |
| NF-κB1/RELA         | – | ± | ND | 139         |
| NF-κB1              | ± | + | ND | 139         |
| c-REL               | ± | + | ND | 139         |
| RELA                | ± | + | ND | 139         |

The strength of B-cell receptor (BCR) signalling regulates which mature B-cell subsets can develop. This idea is consistent with studies of BCR-, Syk-, Btk-, BLNK-, PLCγ2- and PKCβ-deficient mice; peritoneal B (PB) cells require a strong BCR signal, follicular (FO) B cells require an intermediate BCR signal, and marginal-zone (MZ) B cells require a weak BCR signal for development. In addition, disruption of some negative co-receptors (CD22 and PIRB) for BCR signalling enhances PB-cell generation. However, it is important to remember that some BCR signalling components are used also by other receptor signalling pathways (for example, chemokines). BCAP, B-cell adaptor for PI3K; BLNK, B-cell linker; IKK, IkB kinase; ND, not determined; NEMO, NF-κB essential modulator; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PIRB, paired immunoglobulin-like receptor B; PKC, protein kinase C; PLC, phospholipase C; PYK2, protein tyrosine kinase 2.

BCR signalling, leads to a greater number of peritoneal B cells only<sup>132,133</sup>. Similarly, enhanced peritoneal B-cell generation in Lyn-deficient mice might be explained by the finding that Lyn is required for the recruitment of SHP1 to the ITIMs of B-cell co-receptors<sup>115</sup>. Together, these findings indicate that the development of peritoneal B cells is fine-tuned by the strength of BCR signalling. Development of peritoneal B cells depends on a ligand-driven process<sup>123</sup>. If ligand-induced signalling exceeds a certain threshold, cells might be positively selected to the peritoneal B-cell population.

Also, there is evidence that enhanced BCR signals induce the development of more follicular B cells than MZ B cells, whereas weak BCR signals induce the development of more MZ B cells than follicular B cells. Aiolos is a zinc-finger transcription factor of the Ikaros family that is expressed in the B-cell lineage<sup>134</sup>. Disruption of Aiolos seems to lower the threshold of signalling for BCR-induced activation, although the precise mechanism remains unclear<sup>135</sup>. Aiolos-deficient mice produce more follicular B cells than wild-type mice, whereas Btk-deficient mice produce more MZ B cells<sup>119</sup>. These findings support the idea that follicular B cells require a stronger BCR signal than do MZ B cells for their generation. However, distinguishing the signalling requirements for the generation of MZ B cells and follicular B cells is not so simple. For example, in CD22-deficient mice, the number of peritoneal B cells is increased, but the number of MZ B cells is decreased<sup>132,136</sup>. One possible explanation for this finding might be the dual signalling functions of CD22. In addition to its negative regulation of BCR signalling, CD22 recruits the adaptor protein GRB2 to its cytoplasmic tail, which might lead to MAPK activation<sup>35,36</sup>. Alternatively, this might be due to a requirement for chemokine signalling for the development of MZ B cells, as chemokine-induced migration of MZ B cells is altered in CD22-deficient mice<sup>136</sup>. As MZ B cells are highly motile<sup>137</sup>, CD22 deficiency might affect the retention of MZ B cells in the marginal zone. Of note, some BCR signalling components, such as NF-κB, are also used in chemokine signalling<sup>138</sup>. So, caution is required when interpreting data from knockout mice that are deficient in signalling through NF-κB pathways. In mice that are deficient for specific NF-κB subunits, for IKKβ or for NEMO, the development of MZ B cells is affected to a greater extent than the development of follicular B cells<sup>68,139</sup> (TABLE 1). So, in addition to signals through the BCR and BAFF, chemokines might be crucial also for the development of MZ B cells. Consistent with this idea, disruption of either Rac or Pyk2, which are known to be involved in chemokine signalling, in mice leads to the absence of MZ B cells<sup>129,137</sup>. Chemokines are potent activators of integrins<sup>140</sup>. Furthermore, MZ B cells express elevated levels of integrins, such as leukocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA1) and α<sub>4</sub>β<sub>1</sub>. In addition, inhibition of these integrins leads to the release of B cells from the MZ<sup>141</sup>. Taking these data together, the requirement for BCR signals for the development of mature B-cell subsets is clear; however, the role of other signalling events, such as chemokines or co-receptors, needs to be investigated further.

BCR signalling directs different B-cell fates

In view of the findings that are discussed in this review, we wish to propose a model in which the BCR mediates distinct cell-fate decisions at the immature and mature stages of B-cell development. The main idea of this model is that B-cell fate is determined by the balance between survival and death signals initiated through the BCR (FIG. 4), although other co-stimulatory signals might be involved subsequently. As the threshold for triggering the survival pathway is lower than that for triggering the death pathway, a weak signal favours B-cell survival. In particular, activation of NF-κB might be crucial for survival. Low levels of NF-κB1 and c-REL are present in the nuclei of resting mature B cells$^{81}$, and pharmacological inhibition of basal NF-κB activity in quiescent B cells causes spontaneous apoptosis$^{142}$. Therefore, BCR expression at the cell surface might generate a basal ‘tonic’ signal, which includes the activation of NF-κB, that is sufficient for cell survival (FIG. 4). This also seems to be the case for immature B cells. A recent study showed that inducible deletion of Igβ in immature B cells leads to cell death$^{3}$. The same is true for immature B cells lacking BLNK$^{143}$. In the absence of BLNK, the production of κ-light chain is decreased and the cellular maturation of immature B cells is delayed.

At the immature B-cell stage, some B cells have high-avidity BCRs for self-antigen, and so a strong BCR signal is induced. Although survival signals such as AKT, RAF–ERK and NF-κB activation are induced also, death signals induced by Ca$^{2+}$ flux are dominant in this setting. In mature B cells, basal BCR signalling acts as a maintenance signal for cell survival$^{2}$. Again, basal NF-κB activation might be crucial in this respect. Consistent with this, disruption of $IKK\beta$ or NEMO leads to the disappearance of all mature B-cell subsets$^{68}$. However, as discussed earlier, NF-κB activation induced by non-BCR signals might be crucial for this process. BCR ligation in mature B cells probably induces additional survival signals (AKT, ERK and NF-κB) that override death signals.

What then leads to such qualitative differences in BCR signalling between immature and mature B cells? This cannot be explained simply by quantitative differences in BCR signalling. Several possibilities can be envisaged (FIG. 4). First, the partitioning of BCR signalling components might not be optimal for the activation of immature B cells. BCR translocation to lipid rafts is defective in immature primary B cells and B-cell lines compared with mature B cells$^{144,145}$. Differential recruitment to rafts might result in qualitative differences in downstream signalling profiles. For example, IKK, an upstream kinase of the NF-κB pathway, is only phosphorylated in B cells if it is recruited to rafts$^{77}$.

Second, basal levels of anti-apoptotic BCL-2-family proteins, such as BCL-2 and A1, are higher in mature B cells than immature B cells$^{146,147}$. Disruption of $BCL-2$ leads to the loss of mature B cells$^{148}$.

Third, the expression of B-cell-specific co-receptors, such as CD19 and CD22, is increased after B-cell maturation. CD19 might enhance BCR-induced activation of PI3K and AKT$^{149}$. CD22 recruits SHP1 to its cytoplasmic domain and attenuates BCR signalling and cell death$^{150}$.

Fourth, immature and mature B-cell subsets differ in the level of expression or activation of specific kinases and phosphatases, which, in turn, affect the quality of BCR signalling. Activation of PKCs, which prevents BCR-induced apoptosis of mature B cells<sup>151</sup>, is impaired selectively in BCR-activated primary immature B cells<sup>152</sup>. As PKCβ is crucial for BCR-induced activation of NF-κB, as mentioned earlier, the difference in the level of NF-κB activation between immature and mature B cells might be explained by this profile of PKC activation. Indeed, the levels of expression of NF-κB-regulated pro-survival molecules differ between immature and mature B cells; after BCR ligation, the expression of BCL-X<sub>L</sub> and A1 survival factors is induced to a greater extent in mature B cells than in immature B cells<sup>77,95</sup>. In addition to differences in the activation of PKC, SHIP, which hydrolyses the 5′ phosphate from PtdInsP<sub>3</sub> to produce PtdInsP<sub>2</sub>, is expressed at a much lower level in mature B cells than in immature B cells<sup>153</sup>. So, in mature B cells, higher levels of PtdInsP<sub>3</sub> might lead to the sustained activation of PI3K-regulated molecules, including AKT.

Fifth, the expression and activation of crucial adaptor molecules might vary depending on the B-cell stage. GRB2-associated binder protein (GAB), an adaptor for PI3K and ERK, is tyrosine phosphorylated in mature, but not immature, B cells after BCR ligation<sup>154</sup>. BAM32, which seems to protect B cells from BCR-induced cell death, is expressed at a high level in GC B cells, which indicates that it has a selective role in GC B-cell survival, whereas other adaptors, such as GRPL/GADS and SH2D1A, are not expressed in GC and memory B cells, respectively<sup>28,30,31</sup>.

Finally, mature B cells might be provided with distinct secondary signals (such as through BAFF, CD40, TLRs or IL-4) from non-B cells, depending on the microenvironment to which they have migrated.

### Conclusions and future perspectives

Knockout studies of BCR signalling components strongly support the idea that BCR signals are crucial for B-cell development. However, the downstream BCR signals that are crucial for differentiation versus the maintenance of B cells during development remain ambiguous. Further studies are required to dissect these signals and identify the genes that are associated with these cell-fate decisions.

Although studies using gene-targeted mice have advanced our understanding of how BCR signals regulate B-cell fate, it is not always clear whether the phenotype that is obtained is B-cell autonomous, because changes to non-B cells in knockout mice might affect B-cell fate. In addition, once B-cell development has been blocked at a particular stage, it is hard to assess any role for a disrupted molecule in cell fate at a later stage. Further studies using mice with B-cell-specific inducible disruptions at particular B-cell stages are in progress and should provide useful information.

In addition, more sensitive methods to evaluate BCR signalling genetically and biochemically are required. In this respect, recent DNA- and protein-array approaches have identified many genes and proteins that are related to B-cell fate decisions. Also, new cell-biology approaches will help to assess the signals in a more physiological manner. It might be useful to simply follow the movement of BCRs in B cells that are deficient for specific signalling components at different stages of development. Naturally, similar approaches should be aimed also at B cells in pathological conditions, such as immunodeficiency, autoimmunity or cancer, which might be caused by dysregulated BCR signalling and cell-fate decisions. This will provide us with a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of such diseases and help in the design of better therapies for them.

---

1. Kitamura, D., Roes, J., Kuhn, R. & Rajewsky, K. A B-cell-deficient mouse by targeted disruption of the membrane exon of the immunoglobulin μ-chain gene. *Nature* **350**, 423–426 (1991).
2. Lam, K. P., Kuhn, R. & Rajewsky, K. *In vivo* ablation of surface immunoglobulin on mature B cells by inducible gene targeting results in rapid cell death. *Cell* **90**, 1073–1083 (1997). This paper shows the requirement for surface B-cell receptor (BCR) for the maintenance of mature B-cell subsets.
3. Meffre, E. & Nussenzweig, M. C. Deletion of immunoglobulin-β in developing B cells leads to cell death. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **99**, 11334–11339 (2002). This paper proposes a requirement for surface BCR and signalling for immature B-cell survival.
4. Hardy, R. R. & Hayakawa, K. B-cell development pathways. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **19**, 595–621 (2001).
5. Kurosaki, T. Genetic analysis of B-cell antigen receptor signaling. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **17**, 555–592 (1999).
6. Lowell, C. A. & Soriano, P. Knockouts of Src-family kinases: stiff bones, wimpy T cells and bad memories. *Genes Dev.* **10**, 1845–1857 (1996).
7. Texido, G. *et al*. The B-cell-specific Src-family kinase Blk is dispensable for B-cell development and activation. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **20**, 1227–1233 (2000).
8. Jiang, A., Craxton, A., Kurosaki, T. & Clark, E. A. Different protein tyrosine kinases are required for B-cell antigen-receptor-mediated activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase, c-Jun NH<sub>2</sub>-terminal kinase 1, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase. *J. Exp. Med.* **188**, 1297–1306 (1998).
9. Takata, M. *et al*. Tyrosine kinases Lyn and Syk regulate B-cell receptor-coupled Ca<sup>2+</sup> mobilization through distinct pathways. *EMBO J.* **13**, 1341–1349 (1994).
10. Turner, M. *et al*. Perinatal lethality and blocked B-cell development in mice lacking the tyrosine kinase Syk. *Nature* **378**, 298–302 (1995).
11. Turner, M. & Billadeau, D. D. VAV proteins as signal integrators for multi-subunit immune-recognition receptors. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **2**, 476–486 (2002).
12. Holsinger, L. J. *et al*. Defects in actin-cap formation in Vav-deficient mice implicate an actin requirement for lymphocyte signal transduction. *Curr. Biol.* **8**, 563–572 (1998).
13. Tarakhovsky, A. *et al*. Defective antigen-receptor-mediated proliferation of B and T cells in the absence of Vav. *Nature* **374**, 467–470 (1995).
14. Zhang, R., Alt, F. W., Davidson, L., Orkin, S. H. & Swat, W. Defective signalling through the T- and B-cell antigen receptors in lymphoid cells lacking the Vav proto-oncogene. *Nature* **374**, 470–473 (1995).
15. Doody, G. M. *et al*. Signal transduction through Vav-2 participates in humoral immune responses and B-cell maturation. *Nature Immunol.* **2**, 542–547 (2001).
16. Tedford, K. *et al*. Compensation between Vav-1 and Vav-2 in B-cell development and antigen-receptor signaling. *Nature Immunol.* **2**, 548–555 (2001).
17. Inabe, K. *et al*. Vav3 modulates B-cell receptor responses by regulating phosphoinositide 3-kinase activation. *J. Exp. Med.* **195**, 189–200 (2002).
18. Marshall, A. J., Niiro, H., Yun, T. J. & Clark, E. A. Regulation of B-cell activation and differentiation by the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and phospholipase Cγ pathway. *Immunol. Rev.* **176**, 30–46 (2000).
19. Fu, C., Turok, C. W., Kurosaki, T. & Chan, A. C. BLNK: a central linker protein in B-cell activation. *Immunity* **9**, 93–103 (1998).
20. Hashimoto, S. *et al*. Identification of the SH2 domain binding protein of Bruton’s tyrosine kinase as BLNK — functional significance of Btk-SH2 domain in B-cell antigen receptor-coupled calcium signaling. *Blood* **94**, 2357–2364 (1999).
21. Ishiai, M. *et al*. BLNK required for coupling Syk to PLCγ2 and Rac1-JNK in B cells. *Immunity* **10**, 117–125 (1999).
22. Pappu, R. *et al*. Requirement for B-cell linker protein (BLNK) in B-cell development. *Science* **286**, 1949–1954 (1999).
23. Xu, S. *et al*. B-cell development and activation defects resulting in Xid-like immunodeficiency in BLNK/SLP-65-deficient mice. *Int. Immunol.* **12**, 397–404 (2000).
24. Hayashi, K. *et al*. The B-cell-restricted adaptor BASH is required for normal development and antigen-receptor-mediated activation of B cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **97**, 2755–2760 (2000).
25. Hashimoto, A. *et al*. Cutting edge: essential role of phospholipase Cγ2 in B-cell development and function. *J. Immunol.* **165**, 1738–1742 (2000).
26. Wang, D. *et al*. Phospholipase Cγ2 is essential in the functions of B-cell and several Fc receptors. *Immunity* **13**, 25–35 (2000).
27. Okada, T., Maeda, A., Iwamatsu, A., Gotoh, K. & Kurosaki, T. BCAP: the tyrosine kinase substrate that connects B-cell receptor to phosphoinositide 3-kinase activation. *Immunity* **13**, 817–827 (2000).
28. Marshall, A. J. *et al*. A novel B-lymphocyte-associated adaptor protein, Bam32, regulates antigen-receptor signaling downstream of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. *J. Exp. Med.* **191**, 1319–1332 (2000).
29. Niiro, H., Maeda, A., Kurosaki, T. & Clark, E. A. The B-lymphocyte adaptor molecule of 32 kD (Bam32) regulates B-cell antigen receptor signaling and cell survival. *J. Exp. Med.* **195**, 143–149 (2002).

References 28 and 29 show that after BCR ligation, BAM32 is recruited to the plasma membrane through its pleckstrin-homology domain, and that it binds and regulates the activation of PLCγ2.

30. Shlapatska, L. M. *et al.* CD150 association with either the SH2-containing inositol phosphatase or the SH2-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase is regulated by the adaptor protein SH2D1A. *J. Immunol.* **166**, 5480–5487 (2001).

31. Yankee, T. M., Solow, S. A., Draves, K. E. & Clark, E. A. Expression of the GrpL/Gads adaptor protein in B-cell subsets enhances BCR signaling through MAPK pathways. *J. Immunol.* (in the press).

32. Tuveson, D. A., Carter, R. H., Soltoff, S. P. & Fearon, D. T. CD19 of B cells as a surrogate kinase insert region to bind phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. *Science* **260**, 986–989 (1993).

33. Chacko, G. W. *et al.* Negative signaling in B lymphocytes induces tyrosine phosphorylation of the 145-kDa inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase, SHIP. *J. Immunol.* **157**, 2234–2238 (1996).

34. Cyster, J. G. & Goodnow, C. C. Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1C negatively regulates antigen-receptor signaling in B lymphocytes and determines thresholds for negative selection. *Immunity* **2**, 13–24 (1995).

35. Poe, J. C., Fujimoto, M., Jansen, P. J., Miller, A. S. & Tedder, T. F. CD22 forms a quaternary complex with SHIP, Grb2 and Shc. A pathway for regulation of B-lymphocyte antigen receptor-induced calcium flux. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 17420–17427 (2000).

36. Otipoby, K. L., Draves, K. E. & Clark, E. A. CD22 regulates B-cell receptor-mediated signals via two domains that independently recruit Grb2 and SHP-1. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 44315–44322 (2001).

37. Schamel, W. W. & Reth, M. Monomeric and oligomeric complexes of the B-cell antigen receptor. *Immunity* **13**, 5–14 (2000).

38. Pierce, S. K. Lipid rafts and B-cell activation. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **2**, 96–105 (2002).

39. Guo, B., Kato, R. M., Garcia-Lloret, M., Wahl, M. I. & Rawlings, D. J. Engagement of the human pre-B-cell receptor generates a lipid raft-dependent calcium signaling complex. *Immunity* **13**, 243–253 (2000).

40. Bannish, G., Fuentes-Panana, E. M., Cambier, J. C., Pear, W. S. & Monroe, J. G. Ligand-independent signaling functions for the B-lymphocyte antigen receptor and their role in positive selection during B lymphopoiesis. *J. Exp. Med.* **194**, 1583–1596 (2001). This paper shows that the plasma-membrane localization of immunoglobulin-associated protein-α (Igα) and Igβ cytoplasmic domains provides basal signalling that is sufficient for transition from the pro-B-cell to pre-B-cell stage, which indicates a role for antigen-independent BCR signals in B-cell development.

41. Xavier, R., Brennan, T., Li, Q., McCormack, C. & Seed, B. Membrane compartmentation is required for efficient T-cell activation. *Immunity* **8**, 723–732 (1998).

42. Fruman, D. A., Satterthwaite, A. B. & Witte, O. N. Xid-like phenotypes: a B-cell signalosome takes shape. *Immunity* **13**, 1–3 (2000).

43. Reth, M. Oligomeric antigen receptors: a new view on signaling for the selection of lymphocytes. *Trends Immunol.* **22**, 356–360 (2001). Together with reference 37, this paper proposes an intriguing model in which in the absence of antigen ligation, oligomeric BCR complexes are formed and transduce basal BCR signalling.

44. Aman, M. J. & Ravichandran, K. S. A requirement for lipid rafts in B-cell receptor induced Ca²⁺ flux. *Curr. Biol.* **10**, 393–396 (2000).

45. Petrie, R. J., Schnetkamp, P. P., Patel, K. D., Awasthi-Kalia, M. & Deans, J. P. Transient translocation of the B-cell receptor and Src homology 2 domain-containing inositol phosphatase to lipid rafts: evidence toward a role in calcium regulation. *J. Immunol.* **165**, 1220–1227 (2000).

46. Braun, J., Hochman, P. S. & Unanue, E. R. Ligand-induced association of surface immunoglobulin with the detergent-insoluble cytoskeletal matrix of the B lymphocyte. *J. Immunol.* **128**, 1198–1204 (1982).

47. Pure, E. & Tardelli, L. Tyrosine phosphorylation is required for ligand-induced internalization of the antigen receptor on B lymphocytes. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **89**, 114–117 (1992).

48. Ma, H. *et al.* Visualization of Syk–antigen-receptor interactions using green fluorescent protein: differential roles for Syk and Lyn in the regulation of receptor capping and internalization. *J. Immunol.* **166**, 1507–1516 (2001).

49. Fruman, D. A. *et al.* Impaired B-cell development and proliferation in absence of phosphoinositide 3-kinase p85α. *Science* **283**, 393–397 (1999).

50. Pogue, S. L., Kurosaki, T., Bolen, J. & Herbst, R. B-cell antigen receptor-induced activation of Akt promotes B-cell survival and is dependent on Syk kinase. *J. Immunol.* **165**, 1300–1306 (2000).

51. Okkenhaug, K. *et al.* Impaired B- and T-cell antigen receptor signaling in p110δ PI 3-kinase mutant mice. *Science* **297**, 1031–1034 (2002).

52. Clayton, E. *et al.* A crucial role for the p110δ subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in B-cell development and activation. *J. Exp. Med.* **196**, 753–763 (2002).

53. Datta, S. R. *et al.* Akt phosphorylation of BAD couples survival signals to the cell-intrinsic death machinery. *Cell* **91**, 231–241 (1997).

54. Cross, D. A., Alessi, D. R., Cohen, P., Andjelkovich, M. & Hemmings, B. A. Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 by insulin mediated by protein kinase B. *Nature* **378**, 785–789 (1995).

55. Craxton, A., Jiang, A., Kurosaki, T. & Clark, E. A. Syk and Bruton’s tyrosine kinase are required for B-cell antigen receptor-mediated activation of the kinase Akt. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 30644–30650 (1999).

56. Gold, M. R. *et al.* The B-cell antigen receptor activates the Akt (protein kinase B)/glycogen synthase kinase-3 signaling pathway via phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. *J. Immunol.* **163**, 1894–1905 (1999).

57. Sears, R. C. & Nevins, J. R. Signaling networks that link cell proliferation and cell fate. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 11617–11620 (2002).

58. Hashimoto, A. *et al.* Involvement of guanosine triphosphatases and phospholipase C-γ2 in extracellular signal-regulated kinase, c-Jun NH₂-terminal kinase, and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase activation by the B-cell antigen receptor. *J. Exp. Med.* **188**, 1287–1295 (1998).

59. Ballif, B. A. & Blenis, J. Molecular mechanisms mediating mammalian mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase (MEK)-MAPK cell-survival signals. *Cell. Growth Differ.* **12**, 397–408 (2001).

60. Richards, J. D., Dave, S. H., Chou, C. H., Mamchak, A. A. & DeFranco, A. L. Inhibition of the MEK/ERK signaling pathway blocks a subset of B-cell responses to antigen. *J. Immunol.* **166**, 3855–3864 (2001).

61. Piatelli, M. J., Doughty, C. & Chiles, T. C. Requirement for a HSP90 chaperone-dependent MEK1/2-ERK pathway for B-cell antigen receptor-induced cyclin D2 expression in mature B lymphocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 12144–12150 (2002). References 60 and 61 show that the RAF-MEK-ERK pathway has a crucial role in BCR-induced proliferation of mature B cells.

62. Huser, M. *et al.* MEK kinase activity is not necessary for Raf-1 function. *EMBO J.* **20**, 1940–1951 (2001).

63. Mikula, M. *et al.* Embryonic lethality and fetal-liver apoptosis in mice lacking the c-raf-1 gene. *EMBO J.* **20**, 1952–1962 (2001).

64. Wang, H. G., Rapp, U. R. & Reed, J. C. Bcl-2 targets the protein kinase Raf-1 to mitochondria. *Cell* **87**, 629–638 (1996).

65. Barrett, M. & Gilmore, T. D. Control of apoptosis by Rel/NF-κB transcription factors. *Oncogene* **18**, 6910–6924 (1999).

66. Kaisho, T. *et al.* IkB kinase-α is essential for mature B-cell development and function. *J. Exp. Med.* **193**, 417–426 (2001).

67. Sentfleben, U. *et al.* Activation by IKKα of a second, evolutionary conserved, NF-κB signaling pathway. *Science* **293**, 1495–1499 (2001).

68. Pasparakis, M., Schmidt-Supprian, M. & Rajewsky, K. IkB kinase signaling is essential for maintenance of mature B cells. *J. Exp. Med.* **196**, 743–752 (2002). This paper shows that IKK-mediated NF-κB activation is crucial for the maintenance of mature B-cell subsets.

69. Petro, J. B. & Khan, W. N. Phospholipase C-γ2 couples Bruton’s tyrosine kinase to the NF-κB signaling pathway in B lymphocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 1715–1719 (2001).

70. Petro, J. B., Rahman, S. M., Ballard, D. W. & Khan, W. N. Bruton’s tyrosine kinase is required for activation of IkB kinase and nuclear factor-κB in response to B-cell receptor engagement. *J. Exp. Med.* **191**, 1745–1754 (2000).

71. Tan, J. E., Wong, S. C., Gan, S. K., Xu, S. & Lam, K. P. The adaptor protein BLNK is required for B-cell antigen receptor-induced activation of nuclear factor-κB and cell-cycle entry and survival of B lymphocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 20055–20063 (2001).

72. Parekh, D. B., Ziegler, W. & Parker, P. J. Multiple pathways control protein kinase C phosphorylation. *EMBO J.* **19**, 496–503 (2000).

73. Lin, X., O’Mahony, A., Mu, Y., Geleziunas, R. & Greene, W. C. Protein kinase Cθ participates in NF-κB activation induced by CD3-CD28 costimulation through selective activation of IkB kinase-β. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **20**, 2933–2940 (2000).

74. Mecklenbrauker, I., Saito, K., Zheng, N. Y., Leitges, M. & Tarakhovsky, A. Protein kinase Cδ controls self-antigen-induced B-cell tolerance. *Nature* **416**, 860–865 (2002).

75. Miyamoto, A. *et al.* Increased proliferation of B cells and auto-immunity in mice lacking protein kinase Cδ. *Nature* **416**, 865–869 (2002).

76. Saito, K. *et al.* Protein kinase Cβ controls nuclear factor-κB activation in B cells through selective regulation of the IkB kinase-α. *J. Exp. Med.* **195**, 1647–1652 (2002).

77. Su, T. T. *et al.* PKC-β controls IkB kinase lipid-raft recruitment and activation in response to BCR signaling. *Nature Immunol.* **3**, 780–786 (2002). References 76 and 77 show the importance of PKCβ for BCR-induced NF-κB activation, and reference 77 also shows that BTK and PKCβ have distinct roles in the maturation of follicular B cells.

78. Baldwin, A. S. Jr. The NF-κB and IkB proteins: new discoveries and insights. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **14**, 649–683 (1996).

79. Grumont, R. J. & Gerondakis, S. The subunit composition of NF-κB complexes changes during B-cell development. *Cell. Growth Differ.* **5**, 1321–1331 (1994).

80. Anderson, J. S., Teutsch, M., Dong, Z. & Wortis, H. H. An essential role for Bruton’s tyrosine kinase in the regulation of B-cell apoptosis. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **93**, 
99. Torres, R. M., Flaswinkel, H., Reth, M. & Rajewsky, K. Aberrant B-cell development and immune response in mice with a compromised BCR complex. *Science* **272**, 1802–1804 (1996).

100. Reichlin, A. *et al.* B-cell development is arrested at the immature B-cell stage in mice carrying a mutation in the cytoplasmic domain of immunoglobulin-β. *J. Exp. Med.* **193**, 13–23 (2001).

101. Turner, M. *et al.* Syk tyrosine kinase is required for the positive selection of immature B cells into the recirculating B-cell pool. *J. Exp. Med.* **186**, 2013–2021 (1997).

102. Cornell, R. J., Cheng, A. M., Pawson, T. & Goodnow, C. C. Role of Syk in B-cell development and antigen-receptor signaling. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **97**, 1713–1718 (2000).

103. Batten, M. *et al.* BAFF mediates survival of peripheral immature B lymphocytes. *J. Exp. Med.* **192**, 1453–1466 (2000).

104. Schiemann, B. *et al.* An essential role for BAFF in the normal development of B cells through a BCMA-independent pathway. *Science* **293**, 2111–2114 (2001). This paper shows a crucial role for BAFF in transition from the T1 to T2 stage, and also shows that Baff-deficient mice have a similar phenotype to A/WySnJ mice, which have a mutation of the Baff receptor.

105. Moore, P. A. *et al.* BLyS: member of the tumor-necrosis factor family and B-lymphocyte stimulator. *Science* **285**, 260–263 (1999).

106. Schneider, P. *et al.* BAFF, a novel ligand of the tumor-necrosis factor family, stimulates B-cell growth. *J. Exp. Med.* **189**, 1747–1756 (1999).

107. Hsu, B. L., Harless, S. M., Lindsey, R. C., Hilbert, D. M. & Cancro, M. P. Cutting edge: BLyS enables survival of transitional and mature B cells through distinct mediators. *J. Immunol.* **168**, 5993–5996 (2002).

108. Do, R. K. *et al.* Attenuation of apoptosis underlies B-lymphocyte stimulator enhancement of humoral immune response. *J. Exp. Med.* **192**, 953–964 (2000).

109. Claudio, E., Brown, K., Park, S., Wang, H. & Siebenlist, U. BAFF-induced NEMO-independent processing of NF-κB2 in maturing B cells. *Nature Immunol.* **3**, 958–965 (2002).

110. Kayagaki, N. *et al.* BAFF/BLyS receptor 3 binds the B-cell survival factor BAFF ligand through a discrete surface loop and promotes processing of NF-κB2. *Immunity* **17**, 515–524 (2002).

References 109 and 110 show that BAFF signalling involves a non-classical NF-κB pathway (NEMO-independent processing of NF-κB2) and that this requires the BAFF receptor.

111. Marsters, S. A. *et al.* Interaction of the TNF homologues BLyS and APRIL with the TNF receptor homologues BCMA and TACI. *Curr. Biol.* **10**, 785–788 (2000).

112. Franzoso, G. *et al.* Requirement for NF-κB in osteoclast and B-cell development. *Genes Dev.* **11**, 3482–3496 (1997).

113. Berland, R. & Wortis, H. H. Origins and functions of B-1 cells with notes on the role of CD5. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **20**, 253–300 (2002).

114. Martin, F. & Kearney, J. F. Marginal-zone B cells. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **2**, 323–335 (2002).

115. Chan, V. W., Meng, F., Soriano, P., DeFranco, A. L. & Lowell, C. A. Characterization of the B-lymphocyte populations in Lyn-deficient mice and the role of Lyn in signal initiation and down-regulation. *Immunity* **7**, 69–81 (1997).

116. Meade, J., Fernandez, C. & Turner, M. The tyrosine kinase Lyn is required for B-cell development beyond the T1 stage in the spleen: rescue by over-expression of Bcl-2. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **32**, 1029–1034 (2002).

117. Ellmeier, W. *et al.* Severe B-cell deficiency in mice lacking the Tec-kinase family members Tec and Btk. *J. Exp. Med.* **192**, 1611–1624 (2000).

118. Martin, F. & Kearney, J. F. Positive selection from newly formed to marginal-zone B cells depends on the rate of clonal production, CD19 and Btk. *Immunity* **12**, 39–49 (2000). This paper shows that CD19 and BTK have distinct roles in the development of marginal-zone (MZ) and follicular B cells.

119. Cariappa, A. *et al.* The follicular versus marginal-zone B-lymphocyte cell-fate decision is regulated by Aiolos, Btk and CD21. *Immunity* **14**, 603–615 (2001).

This paper indicates that a strong BCR signal might favour the generation of follicular B cells, whereas a weak BCR signal favours the generation of MZ B cells.

120. Suzuki, H. *et al.* Xid-like immunodeficiency in mice with disruption of the p85α subunit of phosphoinositide 3-kinase. *Science* **283**, 390–392 (1999).

121. Yamazaki, T. *et al.* Essential immunoregulatory role for BCAP in B-cell development and function. *J. Exp. Med.* **195**, 535–545 (2002).

122. Rolink, A. G., Tschopp, J., Schneider, P. & Melchers, F. BAFF is a survival and maturation factor for mouse B cells. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **32**, 2004–2010 (2002).

123. Hayakawa, K. *et al.* Positive selection of natural autoreactive B cells. *Science* **285**, 113–116 (1999).

124. Hao, Z. & Rajewsky, K. Homeostasis of peripheral B cells in the absence of B-cell influx from the bone marrow. *J. Exp. Med.* **194**, 1151–1164 (2001). This paper shows that blockade of the entry of immature B cells from the bone marrow leads to a gradual decrease in the number of follicular B cells, whereas the levels of MZ and peritoneal B cells remain unchanged in this setting.

125. Balazs, M., Martin, F., Zhou, T. & Kearney, J. Blood dendritic cells interact with splenic marginal-zone B cells to initiate T-independent immune responses. *Immunity* **17**, 341 (2002).

126. Rothstein, T. L. Cutting edge commentary: two B-1 or not to be one. *J. Immunol.* **168**, 4257–4261 (2002).

127. Wong, S. C. *et al.* Peritoneal CD5+ B-1 cells have signaling properties similar to tolerant B cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 30707–30715 (2002). The authors characterize the BCR signalling profile of CD5+ peritoneal B cells, and show that it is similar to that of anergic B cells.

128. Leitges, M. *et al.* Immunodeficiency in protein kinase Cβ-deficient mice. *Science* **273**, 788–791 (1996).

129. Croker, B. A. *et al.* The Rac2 guanosine triphosphatase regulates B-lymphocyte antigen-receptor responses and chemotaxis and is required for establishment of B-1a and marginal-zone B lymphocytes. *J. Immunol.* **168**, 3376–3386 (2002).

130. Engel, P. *et al.* Abnormal B-lymphocyte development, activation and differentiation in mice that lack or overexpress the CD19 signal-transduction molecule. *Immunity* **3**, 39–50 (1995).

131. Rickert, R. C., Rajewsky, K. & Roes, J. Impairment of T-cell-dependent B-cell responses and B-1-cell development in CD19-deficient mice. *Nature* **376**, 352–355 (1995).

132. Sato, S. *et al.* CD22 is both a positive and negative regulator of B-lymphocyte antigen-receptor signal transduction: altered signaling in CD22-deficient mice. *Immunity* **5**, 551–562 (1996).

133. Ujike, A. *et al.* Impaired dendritic-cell maturation and increased T~H~2 responses in PIR-B−/− mice. *Nature Immunol.* **3**, 542–548 (2002).

134. Morgan, B. *et al.* Aiolos, a lymphoid-restricted transcription factor that interacts with Ikaros to regulate lymphocyte differentiation. *EMBO J.* **16**, 2004–2013 (1997).

135. Wang, J. H. *et al.* Aiolos regulates B-cell activation and maturation to effector state. *Immunity* **9**, 543–553 (1998).

136. Samardzic, T. *et al.* Reduction of marginal-zone B cells in CD22-deficient mice. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **32**, 561–567 (2002).

137. Guinamard, R., Okigaki, M., Schlessinger, J. & Ravetch, J. V. Absence of marginal-zone B cells in Pyk-2-deficient mice defines their role in the humoral response. *Nature Immunol.* **1**, 31–36 (2000).

138. Ganju, R. K. *et al.* The α-chemokine, stromal-cell-derived factor-1α, binds to the transmembrane G-protein-coupled CXCR-4 receptor and activates multiple signal-transduction pathways. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 23169–23175 (1998).

139. Cariappa, A., Liou, H. C., Horwitz, B. H. & Pillai, S. Nuclear factor-κB is required for the development of marginal-zone B lymphocytes. *J. Exp. Med.* **192**, 1175–1182 (2000). This paper shows that NF-κB is more crucial for the development of MZ B cells than of follicular B cells.

140. Laudanna, C., Kim, J. Y., Constantin, G. & Butcher, E. C. Rapid leukocyte integrin activation by chemokines. *Immunol. Rev.* **186**, 37–46 (2002).

141. Lu, T. T. & Cyster, J. G. Integrin-mediated long-term B-cell retention in the splenic marginal zone. *Science* **297**, 409–412 (2002). This paper shows that MZ B cells express elevated levels of LFA1 and α₄β₁ integrin, which are required for MZ B-cell localization.

142. Bureau, F. *et al.* Constitutive nuclear factor-κB activity preserves homeostasis of quiescent mature lymphocytes and granulocytes by controlling the expression of distinct Bcl-2-family proteins. *Blood* **99**, 3683–3691 (2002).

143. Xu, S. & Lam, K. P. Delayed cellular maturation and decreased immunoglobulin-κ light chain production in immature B lymphocytes lacking B-cell linker protein. *J. Exp. Med.* **196**, 197–206 (2002).

144. Chung, J. B., Baumeister, M. A. & Monroe, J. G. Cutting edge: differential sequestration of plasma-membrane-associated B-cell antigen receptor in mature and immature B cells into glycosphingolipid-enriched domains. *J. Immunol.* **166**, 736–740 (2001).

145. Sproul, T. W., Malapati, S., Kim, J. & Pierce, S. K. Cutting edge: B-cell antigen receptor signaling occurs outside lipid rafts in immature B cells. *J. Immunol.* **165**, 6020–6023 (2000).

146. Merino, R., Ding, L., Veis, D. J., Korsmeyer, S. J. & Nunez, G. Developmental regulation of the Bcl-2 protein and susceptibility to cell death in B lymphocytes. *EMBO J.* **13**, 683–691 (1994).

147. Tomayko, M. M. & Cancro, M. P. Long-lived B cells are distinguished by elevated expression of A1. *J. Immunol.* **160**, 107–111 (1998).

148. Nakayama, K. *et al.* Disappearance of the lymphoid system in Bcl-2 homozygous mutant chimeric mice. *Science* **261**, 1584–1588 (1993).

149. Otero, D. C., Omori, S. A. & Rickert, R. C. CD19-dependent activation of Akt kinase in B lymphocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 1474–1478 (2001).

150. Otipoby, K. L. *et al.* CD22 regulates thymus-independent responses and the lifespan of B cells. *Nature* **384**, 634–637 (1996).

151. King, L. B., Norvell, A. & Monroe, J. G. Antigen-receptor-induced signal-transduction imbalances associated with the negative selection of immature B cells. *J. Immunol.* **162**, 2655–2662 (1999).

152. Yellen, A. J., Glenn, W., Sukhatme, V. P., Cao, X. M. & Monroe, J. G. Signaling through surface