
seminars in
IMMUNOLOGY

www.elsevier.com/locate/ysmim

Chemokines: attractive mediators of the immune response

Mark M. Wong, Eleanor N. Fish*

Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ont., Canada M5S 1A8

---

### Abstract

An effective inflammatory immune response first requires the recruitment of cells to the site
M.M. Wong, E.N. Fish / Seminars in Immunology 15 (2003) 5–14

Fig. 1. Chemokine function in an immune response. (1) Migration of recently activated Th1 T cells or memory T cells. (2) Rolling of T cells along the endothelial cells mediated by selectins. (3) Firm adhesion of T
expression [12]. CXCL12 (SDF-1α) will also costimulate human CD4 positive T cells, implying that T cell stimulatory activity is exhibited by different chemokines [13]. As for CCR5, membrane-associated lipid rafts are important for CXCL12–CXCR4 binding and signaling [14]. Of note, CC chemokine costimulatory
regulatory events that follow activation of cognate receptors is important. As seven transmembrane G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR)s, chemokine receptor activation results in the exchange of GTP for GDP by the Go subunit and the dissociation of the heterotrimeric G-proteins into Go and Gβγ subunits [34]. It is now clear that signaling through GPCRs is more
similar to cytokine receptors, GPCRs can form dimers and oligomers [35], implying that GPCR dimerization/oligomerization may be an important prerequisite for signaling. Coimmunoprecipitation studies confirmed GPCR homodimerization for the β2 adrenergic [36], δ-opioid [37], dopamine and serotonin [38], angiotens
responses are defective, due to the absence of IL-4 inducible Stat6 activation [60,61]. In the absence of supportive data, it is intriguing to speculate that chemokine-mediated, IL-12 independent, induction of Th1 differentiation may be attributable to chemokine activation of Stat4 [29]. Alternatively, other chemokine-activated Stats may be involved in determining T helper
determining both the cytokine profile and growth characteristics of T cells.

10. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and other signaling events

PI3Ks are a family of kinases that phosphorylate the 3′-OH position of the inositol ring of phosphoinositides [93]. There are three classes of PI3Ks: class I
role in immunosurveillance. The outstanding challenge is
to characterize the sequence of events that are precipitated
following chemokine receptor activation in this context of
immune regulation.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by a grant from the Arthritis
Society of Canada (96/0002). Mark M. Wong is a recipient
of a CIHR studentship.

References

[1]
transmembrane domain inhibits both receptor dimerization and activation. J Biol Chem 1996;271:16384–92.

[37] Cvejic S, Devi LA. Dimerization of the delta opioid receptor: implication for a role in receptor internalization. J Biol Chem 1997;272:2695
[75] Renshaw MW, Price LS, Schwartz MA. Focal adhesion kinase mediates the integrin signaling requirement for growth factor activation of MAP kinase. J Cell Biol 1999; 147:611–8.

[76] Abdel-Ghany M, Cheng HC, Elble RC, Pauli BU. Focal adhesion kinase activated by beta