
J Mol Cell Cardiol 34, 1569–1576 (2002)  
doi:10.1006/jmcc.2002.2080, available online at http://www.idealibrary.com on IDEAL®

# Cardiac Renin–Angiotensin Aldosterone System

## Products of Angiotensin I Hydrolysis by Human Cardiac Enzymes Potentiate Bradykinin

Ervin G. Erdős${}^{1,2}$, Herbert L. Jackman${}^{1}$, Viktor Brovkovych${}^{1}$, Fulong Tan${}^{1,2}$ and Peter A. Deddish${}^{1,3}$

Departments of ${}^{1}$Pharmacology, ${}^{2}$Anesthesiology and ${}^{3}$Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois College of Medicine at Chicago

(Received 30 May 2002, accepted for publication 3 June 2002)

E. G. ERDŐS, H. L. JACKMAN, V. BROVKOVYCH, F. TAN AND P. A. DEDDISH. Products of Angiotensin I Hydrolysis by Human Cardiac Enzymes Potentiate Bradykinin. *Journal of Molecular and Cellular Cardiology* (2002) 34, 1569–1576. Some beneficial effects of ACE inhibitors are attributed to potentiation of bradykinin’s actions exerted through its B₂ receptor. We investigated them on cultured cells transfected or constitutively expressing both ACE and B₂ receptor. The potentiation of bradykinin was indirect and attributed to a crosstalk induced between enzyme and receptor via ACE, a heterodimer formation. While looking for endogenous activators, we investigated the split products of angiotensin I (Ang) Ang 1–9 and 1–7, peptides released by enzymes of human atria and ventricle. Ang 1–9 was liberated by a cathepsin A-type enzyme, Ang 1–7 by a different metallopeptidase-protease. Cathepsin A’s presence in heart tissue was shown by deamidating enkephalinamide substrate, by immunoprecipitation and by immunohistochemistry. In immunohistochemistry, cathepsin A was detected in myocytes of atrial tissue. Ang 1–9 and Ang 1–7 potentiated the effect of an ACE-resistant bradykinin analogue on the B₂ receptor in transfected cells expressing human ACE and B₂, and in human endothelial cells. Ang 1–9 and 1–7 augmented arachidonic acid and NO release by bradykinin. NO liberation by bradykinin from endothelial cells was potentiated at 10 nmol/L concentration by Ang 1–9 and Ang 1–7; at higher concentrations, Ang 1–9 was significantly more active. Both peptides had little activity in absence of bradykinin or ACE. Ang 1–9 and 1–7 potentiated bradykinin action on its B₂ receptor at much lower concentrations than their IC₅₀ values with ACE. They probably induce conformational changes in the ACE/B₂ receptor complex via interaction with ACE.

© 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

KEY WORDS: Angiotensin 1–7; Angiotensin 1–9; B₂ receptor; ACE.

---

### Introduction

The development of angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors has been described in many review articles and how their applications were extended from treatment of hypertension to other clinical conditions. ${}^{1,2}$ Laboratory and clinical studies frequently attribute at least some of the beneficial effects of the administration of ACE inhibitors to the potentiation of bradykinin (BK) in organs such as the heart or kidney. ${}^{3}$ Nevertheless,

the enhancement of the effects of BK by ACE inhibitors cannot entirely be due to blocking its enzymatic inactivation. This was observed first by using isolated tissues surviving in a tissue bath. Already in 1970, a review article surveyed a variety of materials which enhanced BK effects in bioassays. ${}^{4}$ Of the many compounds, tissue extracts, and blood components that have been tested before and after that date, some did inhibit a kininase, but some others did not. ${}^{5}$

---

Please address all correspondence to: Ervin G. Erdős, MD, University of Illinois, College of Medicine at Chicago, Department of Pharmacology MC 868, 835 S. Wolcott Ave., Chicago, IL 60612-7344, USA. Tel: (312) 996-9146; Fax: (312) 996-1648; E-mail: egerdos@uic.edu

0022–2828/02/121569+08 $35.00/0

© 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

[Hyp³-Tyr(Me)⁸]-BK (1 μM)

EPT (1 μM)

CONTRACTILE FORCE

(mg)

1200

1100

1000

900

800

TIME (min)
0    4    8    12   16   20

Figure 1 Reactivation of desensitized B₂ receptors by enalaprilat (EPT). EPT (1 μmol/L) was added to isolated guinea pig atria, 15 min after adding 1 μmol/L [Hyp³-Tyr(Me)⁸]-BK (HT-BK). The positive inotropic effect of HT-BK declined to near baseline in the presence of the agonist. In the experiment (representative of six experiments), EPT given 16 min after the initial application of HT-BK, completely restored the inotropic response to HT-BK. This effect of EPT was blocked by HOE 140 (0.75 μmol/L; not shown). (From ref. 13 with permission).

Other investigators using blood vessel preparations or isolated perfused heart also concluded that ACE inhibitors augmented the responses to BK via the B₂ receptor independent of blocking its enzymatic degradation and suggested a variety of possible mechanisms.⁶⁻⁹

We have found that ACE inhibitors indeed potentiate BK not by inhibiting its enzymatic inactivation by the isolated organs, for example, in the guinea pig ileum.¹⁰

We also studied the effects of BK and analogues on the isolated left atrial preparation of the guinea pig heart. BK had a positive inotropic effect, which disappeared in 20 min in the presence of an agonist and in the absence of an ACE inhibitor.¹¹ Enalaprilat augmented this activity 2.8-fold and also prevented the decline in inotropy (Fig. 1). Even when enalaprilat was added after desensitization to the agonist tachyphylaxis occurred, the ACE inhibitor reversed the decrease in activity. The actions of BK in the presence or absence of ACE inhibitor were abolished by BK B₂ receptor blocker. The experiments on isolated tissues indicated that ACE inhibitors indeed augment the effects of BK, and that these can be related to local actions.

ACE

Because these actions of the inhibitors are exerted through their primary target ACE, we expressed

A

[Ca²⁺]i, nM

433

325

217

108

0

Time, s
182    363    544    725

B

[Ca²⁺]i, nM

433

325

217

108

0

Time, s
182    363    544    725

Figure 2 Bradykinin (BK) desensitizes the B₂ receptor; ACE inhibitor resensitizes it. Bradykinin (BK; 100 nmol/L) raises [Ca²⁺]i level and desensitizes human B₂ receptor to second dose of BK in CHO cells expressing B₂ receptor and wild-type (WT)-ACE. Ramiprilat (RAM, 1 μmol/L) resensitizes the receptor to BK present in the medium. (A) Simultaneous measurements in one hundred CHO/AB cells. (B) Tracing showing calculated mean value from(A). (From ref. 14 with permission).

chimeric and mutated ACE, the human wild type (WT) enzyme and B₂ BK receptor in cultured cells to study the activation of the receptor by BK at different expression levels. The results were taken in support of the notion that ACE inhibitors do not act directly on B₂ receptor but induce a crosstalk between ACE and the B₂ receptor. The resulting allosteric modification of the receptor conformation enhances the activity of the peptide ligands and also resensitizes the receptor¹²⁻¹⁴ after it was desensitized by the agonist¹⁵ (Fig. 2). In all of these experiments, both BK and its partially or fully ACE resistant peptide analogues were used with the same results.¹²,¹⁴,¹⁶

B₂ receptor coupled to pertussis-sensitive Gαi protein, after being activated by BK and consequently desensitized, was resensitized at a lower concentration of ACE inhibitors, shown by arachidonic acid release, than the Gαq coupled

B₂ receptor.¹⁶ The activation of the latter form of the BK receptor leads to elevated \[Ca²⁺]i level and NO synthesis.

For the ACE inhibitors to potentiate BK, both ACE and B₂ have to be present on the cell membrane, as the inhibitors do not directly activate the B₂ receptor¹²,¹⁴,¹⁶ and are inactive in the absence of ACE. ACE, a type I enzyme, has two active N- and C-domains and it is bound to plasma membrane by an anchor peptide ending in a cytosolic C-terminus.¹⁷,¹⁸ We wanted to determine whether or not both domains of ACE are necessary for a crosstalk with the receptor, and found that a single active center is sufficient.¹⁶ Deleting most of the cytosolic portion of ACE, including three out of the potential five sites of phosphorylation, had no influence on the activation of the BK B₂ receptor by ACE inhibitors.¹⁴ Then a chimeric ACE was constructed where the transmembrane anchor peptide together with the cytosolic C-terminal end was replaced with a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor (GPI-ACE). In GPI-ACE expressing cells, the B₂ receptor was still activated by BK, but ACE inhibitors did not resensitize the receptor. Using filipin to deplete cholesterol in the cell membrane returned the sensitivity to ACE inhibitors; they augmented \[Ca²⁺]i elevation by BK. In immunocytochemistry, GPI-ACE had patchy, uneven dispersal on the plasma membrane that was restored to normal distribution on the cell membrane by filipin. ACE inhibitors did not induce a crosstalk with BK B₂ receptors when GPI-ACE was sequestered in cholesterol-rich membrane domain¹⁴ but they did after it was redistributed. Apparently, enzyme has to be in the immediate vicinity of the receptor to form a heterodimer.

ACE inhibitors act entirely differently on the other human BK receptors, the B₁. Their ligands are des-Arg kinins. ACE inhibitors bind at a specific site in an extracellular loop of the receptor and directly stimulate the release of NO. This is done in the absence of peptide ligands¹⁹ and ACE expression in the cells.

effects of Ang II. Ang 1–7, released from Ang I by neprilysin (neutral endopeptidase 24.11; NEP), by prolyl oligopeptidase or metalloendopeptidase 24.15, is the most investigated Ang I derivative.²¹⁻²³ This peptide is a substrate of the N-domain active center of ACE²⁰ while it mainly inhibits the ACE C-domain active center.

The vasodilator effect of Ang 1–7 on porcine, canine, or human arterial strips was attributed to NO release, very likely mediated by BK because it was also abolished by the BK B₂ receptor antagonist HOE 140. Another derivative of Ang I, Ang 1–9, is released from the decapeptide by enzymes that cleave off the C-terminal Leu-OH¹⁰ of the peptide.²⁴ A mast cell carboxypeptidase,²⁵ the so-called ACE II,²⁶,²⁷ which is a carboxypeptidase, and carboxypeptidase A also belong here (Fig. 3).

We have been especially interested in a human enzyme that is released from platelets by epinephrine and thrombin. We purified, cloned and expressed it as recombinant protein and called it deamidase.²⁴ The enzyme is probably identical with cathepsin A. It was recently named lysosomal carboxypeptidase A,²⁸ although it has both A- and B-type carboxypeptidase activities because it also cleaves C-terminal basic amino acids,²⁴ just as carboxypeptidase B does.

This enzyme to which we refer with the acronym CATA, is a serine peptidase with two different pH optima because it cleaves peptide bonds best at an acid pH while the esterase and deamidase activities are optimal at neutrality.²⁴ The enzyme is present in high concentrations, for example, in kidney, urine, placenta, brain, fibroblasts, macrophages, platelets, and endothelial cells,²⁰,²⁹⁻³³ but it is generally unstable in solution above neutrality. In its role as the lysosomal protective protein,³⁴ it became of special interest because it complexes with neuraminidase and β-galactosidase intracellularly²⁸,²⁹,³⁵,³⁶ and protects them against breakdown. A lack of

Endogenous activation

It also became obvious that besides the clinically employed ACE inhibitors, one should look for endogenous inhibitors, for slowly hydrolyzed substrates to inhibit ACE and potentiate BK on the B₂ receptor by promoting crosstalk between the receptor and the enzyme.²⁰ When angiotensin (Ang) I conversion to Ang II is blocked, that can enhance liberation of other Ang I derivatives to oppose the

Angiotensin I

Asp¹-Arg²-Val³-Tyr⁴-Ile⁵-His⁶-Pro⁷-Phe⁸-His⁹-Leu¹⁰

Ang 1-7
Ang 1-9

Nephrilysin (NEP 24.11)
NEP 24.15
Prolylcarboxypeptidase
Prolyl oligopeptidase

Cathepsin A (Deamidase)
ACE II
Carboxypeptidase A
Mast cell carboxypeptidase A

Figure 3 Enzymes that release active products from Ang I.

this function causes the genetically determined disease galactosialidosis.²⁹

Besides hydrolyzing the C-terminal amino acid of Ang I (Fig. 4) and BK, CATA also cleaves endothelin and the chemotactic peptide f-Met-Leu-Phe at a very high rate. At neutral pH, it breaks a C-terminal amide bond.; among the important substrates of the CATA-deamidase (-CONH2) are oxytocin, substance P,²⁴ enkephalinamide, peptides administered against malignant tumors³⁷ and others.³⁸

Owing to the probable importance of endogenous peptides that may counteract the action of Ang II by activating the B₂ receptor to BK we investigated the breakdown products of Ang I by heart tissue enzymes, especially by CATA.

Deamidation

First we wished to show the presence of CATA in atrial and ventricular tissue extracts from human heart.³⁹ We used a tissue preparation called Prep 1 with D-Ala²-Leu⁵-enkephalinamide substrate in high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).²⁴ CATA converts enkephalinamide to enkephalin by cleaving the CONH₂ bond of Leu⁵ and the D-Ala² residue protects it against amino-peptidases. Prep 1 was the supernatant of homogenized heart tissue after centrifugation at 16000 × g for 10 min. The pellet after sonication was solubilized with 1% Chaps detergent and the preparation obtained after removal of a low speed sediment at 1000 × g of atrial or ventricular homogenates was called Prep 2.³⁹

The atrial extract converted the peptide to enkephalin at a rate of 19.7 ± 4 nmol per h/mg protein at neutral pH. The activity was inhibited by serine peptidase inhibitors, DFP 63% and ebelactone B 54%.⁴⁰⁻⁴² The metallopeptidase inhibitor, 1,10-phenanthroline, instead of inhibiting, enhanced the reaction by 13% and even more at pH 5.5 (45%). At that pH, the rate of conversion of enkephalinamide increased to 29.3, but inhibitors of CATA inhibited much less (Table 1).

These experiments indicated that some additional enzymes are present in heart tissue, which deamidate enkephalinamide at an acid pH. Phenanthroline by binding a metal cofactor may protect substrates against metallopeptidase and thereby enhance the reaction.

Human rCATA after releasing Ang 1–9 from Ang I, converted it to Ang II as detected by HPLC³⁹ (Fig. 4).

Peptidase activity

The Prepl extracts of the right atrium and left ventricle at pH 5.5 released little Ang II from Ang I, however, it converted statistically significantly more Ang I to Ang 1–9 and Ang 1–7 (77 vs 45 nmol/h/mg) than the ventricular extracts (20

Figure 4 Metabolism of angiotensin I (Ang I) by recombinant human cathepsin A (rCATA). Assay mixture contained 100 μmol/L Ang I and 37 ng rCATA in sodium phosphate buffer at pH 7.0 and 37°C in a volume of 100 μL. Fifty μL of reaction mixture was analyzed for Ang I, Ang 1–9 and Ang II; no other products were found in HPLC. The panels show the stepwise conversion of Ang I to Ang 1–9 and subsequently to Ang II with time. Abscissa: retention time of peaks in min. Ordinate: absorption units at 214 nm. Abscissa: 5 min markings (From ref. 39 with permission).

Table 1 Conversion of D-Ala²-Leu⁵-enkephalinamide to enkephalin by human right atrial Prepl

| Activity | Inhibitors |
|----------|------------|
| pH       | nmol/h/mg  | DFP (1 mmol/L) | Ebelactone B (10 μmol/L) | 1,10-Phenanthroline (1 mmol/L) |
| 7.0      | 19.7       | -63            | -54                       | +13                          |
| 5.5      | 29.3       | -12            | -21                       | +45                          |

(Modified from ref. 39 with permission.)

Bradykinin Potentiation by Ang 1–7 and 1–9

Table 2 Percent inhibition of Ang I conversion by human atrial preparations at pH 7

|           | Ang II       | Ang 1–9      | Ang 1–7      |
|-----------|--------------|--------------|--------------|
|           | I     | II    | I     | II    | I     | II    |
| None      | 2.7   | 41.1  | 19.4  | 11.3  | 49.8  | 12.2  |
| Ebelactone B | 13    | 0     | 65    | 32    | 8     | 11    |
| 1,10 Phenanthroline | 35    | 16    | 22    | 69    | 88    | 100   |
| Soybean trypsin inhibitor | 57    | 49    | 0     | 9     | 0     | 0     |
| Enalaprilat | 71    | 44    | 0     | 0     | 0     | 0     |

(Modified from ref. 39 with permission.)

I. $16000 \times g$ supernatant without Chaps, Prep 1; II. $1000 \times g$ supernatant with 1% Chaps, Prep 2.

vs 9). Because the peptidase activity of CATA has an acidic pH optimum, ${ }^{35,40}$ the atrial preparation released more Ang 1–9 at pH 5.5 than at pH 7, while the amount of Ang 1–7 liberated was about the same.

The breakdown products of Ang I hydrolysis by human atrial tissues at neutral pH are shown in Table 2. Adding detergent (Prep 2) enhanced the release of Ang II (41 nmol/h/mg protein) from Ang I in Prep 2, compared to Prep 1 (2.7). Obviously the detergent helped to solubilize a membrane-bound enzyme(s), e.g., ACE, ${ }^{43,44}$ and liberate others (e.g., chymase) from vesicles. ${ }^{45}$ Ang I conversion to Ang II was inhibited by the ACE and chymase inhibitors, ${ }^{45}$ enalaprilat and soybean trypsin inhibitor (SBTI).

Most Ang 1–9 was released in Prep 1 by CATA as shown by high ebelactone B inhibition (65%), ${ }^{41,42}$ while phenanthroline inhibited much less (22%). In Prep 2, this ratio of inhibition was reversed. Ang 1–9 release by a carboxypeptidase-type enzyme was inhibited by phenanthroline (69%) by binding a metal cofactor of this enzyme. Ang 1–7 was also liberated by a metallopeptidase that was significantly inhibited by phenanthroline. Enalaprilat did not inhibit either Ang 1–9 or Ang 1–7 release.

Potentiation of bradykinin

In pilot experiments, Ang 1–9 and 1–7 enhanced the activation of the B₂ receptor by BK or its analogues in cells expressing ACE and B₂ receptor. This was tested first in relatively high, micromolar concentrations. ${ }^{16,20}$ The analogue used was BKan, a peptide agonist of the B₂ receptor resistant to enzymatic hydrolysis at the C-terminal end. ${ }^{46}$ Ang 1–9 and 1–7 enhanced the [³H]-arachidonic acid (AA) release stimulated by BKan. ${ }^{20}$ Later we found out that these peptides were much more potent than first thought. In human pulmonary arterial endothelial (HPAE) cells, in the 4th through 7th passages, Ang 1–9 (30 and 100 nM) enhanced the activity of 100 nM BKan 2.6-fold and 3.3-fold ($n=4$), while adding 100 nM Ang 1–7 doubled the effect of BKan. ${ }^{39}$ These concentrations are more than an order of magnitude below the IC₅₀ values of these two peptides for ACE. ${ }^{20,47,48}$ Consequently, both Ang 1–9 and Ang 1–7 increased the activity of the ligand of the B₂ BK receptors in concentrations much lower than needed to inhibit ACE significantly. Furthermore, using various inhibitors with tissue homogenates proved that Ang 1–9 is active *per se* without being converted to Ang 1–7. Ang II, once released, has no affinity to ACE.

NO release

Because besides releasing AA, Ang 1–7 and Ang 1–9 also potentiated [Ca²⁺]i elevation by BK we investigated their effects on NO synthesis in HPAE cells using BKan (10 nmol/L) as ligand (Fig. 5). Both Ang 1–7 and Ang 1–9 significantly enhanced, stepwise from 10, 100 to 1000 nmol/L concentration, the BK effect on NO synthesis (Fig. 5). The corresponding numbers for Ang 1–7 are: a 2-followed by a 2.6- and finally a 4-fold increase in the effect of BKan over that of the peptide added to HPAE cells only with medium. ${ }^{39}$ Ang 1–9 augmented the B₂ receptor activation by BKan in 10, 100 and

Immunoprecipitation

CATA activity was precipitated by antibody to the human recombinant truncated enzyme ${ }^{39}$ in Prep 1 of human atrial and ventricular tissues. The release of Leu ${ }^{10}$ of Ang I, and a subsequent liberation of Ang II, assayed at pH 5.5, was decreased 53–67% by immunoprecipitation with antiserum, elicited to the truncated human rCATA. As expected, the release of Ang 1–7 was not reduced; CATA of left ventricle or right atrium reacted about equally to the antiserum to rCATA; it was mainly responsible for Ang 1–9 but not for Ang 1–7 release.

and the BK receptor blocker HOE 140 abolished 80–90% of the activity.³⁹

Besides conversion of Ang I to Ang II by ACE⁴⁹,⁵⁰ and chymase⁴⁵ and the release of Ang 1–9,²⁴,³¹,⁴⁷,⁴⁸ the cleavage of BK by enzymes from human heart tissue⁵⁰ has also been investigated. In atrial tissues of patients with atrial fibrillation, the expression of carboxypeptidase M, the enzyme that converts kinins to desArg-derivatives⁴³ and shifts their receptor affinity from the B₂ BK receptor to B₁, decreased very much.⁵¹ This can be taken as an indication that the release of NO which can follow B₁ activation¹⁹ is also diminished in the affected heart.

Lysosomal and cytosolic enzymes can hydrolyze peptides outside the cells either after their release or by being present and active on cell membranes, for example, cathepsin G.⁵² CATA is also a lysosomal enzyme. It was released by epinephrine and thrombin from platelet granules.²⁴ Its peptidase activity has an acid pH optimum,²⁴ but it can be extended and stabilized at neutrality by KCl and sucrose.⁵³ CATA as the lysosomal protective protein complexes other proteins, β-galactosidase and neuraminidase.²⁸,²⁹,³³ CATA also appears on the surface of various cells as part of the laminin/elastin receptor.⁵⁴

Ang 1–9 is active *per se* without being converted to Ang 1–7 because different enzymes are involved in their liberation from Ang I. Actually, Ang 1–9 amplified NO release by BK more than Ang 1–7 from cultured cells.³⁹ Both derivatives of Ang I augment BK activity on its B₂ receptor, probably by combining with an active site of ACE, below the concentrations they inhibit at and induce a conformational change, a heterodimer complex formation between ACE and B₂.¹⁴ Because they elevate the release of AA and NO by BK, both Gαᵢ and Gαₕ proteins are involved when the B₂ receptor is activated.¹⁴,⁵⁵

Neither ACE inhibitors nor the two derivatives of Ang I, Ang 1–9 and Ang 1–7 directly activate the BKB₂ receptor, but they do amplify the effects of BK and its ACE-resistant analogues via ACE.¹⁴ These effects cannot be attributed alone to blocking peptide cleavage by ACE. The experiments³⁹ summarized above indicate that the two Ang I split products may enhance the local vasodilation caused by BK through the liberation of prostaglandins and NO.


## Discussion

Enzymes of the human heart, when cleaving Ang I, release products that can counteract the actions of Ang II. It has been reported that Ang 1–7 opposes Ang II and enhances the effect of BK in animal experiments, tissues²¹⁻²³ and cultured cells. Ang 1–7 is cleaved by the N-domain of ACE, but it inhibits only the C-domain,²⁰ while Ang 1–9 inhibits both domains in μmolar concentration. The two peptides raised the release of arachidonic acid, the precursors of prostaglandins and the [Ca²⁺]i level and NO synthesis by BK.²⁰,³⁹ These peptides potentiated BK effects in much lower concentrations than needed to inhibit ACE, provided both ACE and the B₂ receptor were expressed by the cells.³⁹ The calculated EC₅₀'s were about two orders of magnitude lower than the reported IC₅₀'s. The products of Ang I hydrolysis did not act directly on the B₂ receptor,

## Acknowledgements

These studies were supported in part by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute

(grants #HL68580 and #HL36473). The authors are grateful for Ms Sara Bahnmaier's editorial assistance.

### References

1. GAVRAS HP, FAXON DP, BERKOBEN J, BRUNNER HR, RYAN TJ. Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibition in patients with congestive heart failure. *Circulation* 1978; 58: 770–776.
2. PFEFFER JM, FISCHER TA, PFEFFER MA. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition and ventricular remodeling after myocardial infarction. *Annu Rev Physiol* 1995; 57: 805–826.
3. LINZ W, WIEMER G, GOHLKE P, UNGER T, SCHÖLKENS BA. Contribution of kinins to the cardiovascular actions of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors. *Pharmacol Rev* 1995; 47: 25–49.
4. VOGEL R, WERLE E, ZICKGRAF-RÜDEL G. Neure Aspekte der Kininforschung. I. Potenzierung und Blockierung der biologischen Kininwirkung. *Z klin Chem u klin Biochem* 1970; 8: 177–185.
5. ERDÖS EG, MARCIC BM. Kinins, receptors, kinases and inhibitors—where did they lead us? *Biol Chem* 2001; 382: 43–47.
6. AUCH-SCHWELK W, BOSSALLER C, CLAUS M, GRAF K, GRÄFE M, FLECK E. ACE inhibitors are endothelium dependent vasodilators of coronary arteries during submaximal stimulation with bradykinin. *Cardiovasc Res* 1993; 27: 312–317.
7. AUCH-SCHWELK W, KUCHENBUCH C, CLAUS M, WALTHER B, BOSSALLER C, FRIEDEL N, GRAF K, GRÄFE M, FLECK E. Local regulation of vascular tone by bradykinin and angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors. *Eur Heart J* 1993; 14: 154–160.
8. HECKER M, PÖRSTI K, BARA AT, BUSSE R. Potentiation by ACE inhibitors of the dilator response to bradykinin in the coronary microcirculation: interaction at the receptor level. *Br J Pharmacol* 1994; 111: 238–244.
9. HECKER M, BLAUKAT A, BARA AT, MÜLLER-ESTERL W, BUSSE R. ACE inhibitor potentiation of bradykinin-induced venoconstriction. *Brit J Pharmacol* 1997; 121: 1475–1481.
10. MINSHALL RD, NEDUMGOTTIL SJ, IGIC R, ERDÖS EG, RABITO SF. Potentiation of the effects of bradykinin on its receptor in the isolated guinea pig ileum. *Peptides* 2000 24: 1257–1264.
11. MINSHALL RD, ERDÖS EG, VOGEL SM. Angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitors potentiate bradykinin's inotropic effects independent of blocking its inactivation. *Am J Cardiol* 1997; 80: 132A–136A.
12. MINSHALL RD, TAN F, NAKAMURA F, RABITO SF, BECKER RP, MARCIC B, ERDÖS EG. Potentiation of the actions of bradykinin by angiotensin I converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. The role of expressed human bradykinin B2 receptors and ACE in CHO cells. *Circul Res* 1997; 81: 848–856.
13. ERDÖS EG, DEDDISH PA, MARCIC BM. Potentiation of bradykinin actions by ACE inhibitors. *Trends Endocrinol Metab* 1999; 10: 223–229.
14. MARCIC B, DEDDISH PA, SKIDGEL RA, ERDÖS EG, MINSHALL RD, TAN F. Replacement of the transmembrane anchor in angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE) with a glycosylphosphatidylinositol tail affects activation of the B2 bradykinin receptor by ACE inhibitors. *J Biol Chem* 2000; 275: 16110–16118.
15. ROBERTS RA, GULLICK WJ. Bradykinin receptors undergo ligand-induced desensitization. *Biochemistry* 1990; 29: 1975–1979.
16. MARCIC B, DEDDISH PA, JACKMAN HL, ERDÖS EG. Enhancement of bradykinin and resensitization of its B₂ receptor. *Hypertension* 1999; 33: 835–843.
17. SOUBRIER F, HUBERT C, TESTUS P, NADAUD S, ALHENCGELAS F, CORVOL P. Molecular biology of the angiotensin I converting enzyme: I. Biochemistry and structure of the gene. *J Hypertension* 1993; 11: 471–476.
18. SOUBRIER F, WEI L, HUBERT C, CLAUSER E, ALHENCGELAS F, CORVOL P. Molecular biology of the angiotensin I converting enzyme: II. Structure-function. Gene polymorphism and clinical implications. *J Hypertension* 1993; 11: 599–604.
19. IGNJATOVIC T, TAN F, BROVKOVYCH V, SKIDGEL RA, ERDÖS EG. Novel mode of action of angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitors: Direct activation of bradykinin B₁ receptor. *J Biol Chem* 2002; 277: 16847–16852.
20. DEDDISH PA, MARCIC B, JACKMAN HL, WANG H-Z, SKIDGEL RA, ERDÖS EG. N-domain specific substrates and C-domain inhibitors of angiotensin converting enzyme: Angiotensin-(1–7) and keto-ACE. *Hypertension* 1998; 31: 912–917.
21. WELCHES WR, BROSNIHAN KB, FERRARIO CM. A comparison of the properties and enzymatic activities of three angiotensin processing enzymes: angiotensin converting enzyme, prolyl endopeptidase and neutral endopeptidase 24.11. *Life Sci* 1993; 52: 1461–1480.
22. FERRARIO CM, IYER SN. Angiotensin-(1–7): a bioactive fragment of the renin-angiotensin system. *Reg Peptides* 1998; 78: 13–18.
23. SANTOS RA, CAMPAGNOLE-SANTOS MJ, ANDRADE SP. Angiotensin-(1–7): an update. *Regul Pept* 2000; 91: 45–62.
24. JACKMAN HL, TAN F, TAMEI H, BEURLING-HARBURY C, LI X-Y, SKIDGEL RA, ERDÖS EG. A peptidase in human platelets that deamidates tachykinins: Probable identity with the lysosomal “protective protein.” *J Biol Chem* 1990; 265: 11265–11272.
25. GOLDSTEIN SM, KAEMPFER CE, KEALEY JT, WINTRROUB BU. Human mast cell carboxypeptidase. Purification and characterization. *J Clin Invest* 1989; 83: 1630–1636.
26. DONOGHUE M, HSIEH F, BARONAS E, GODBOUT K, GOSSELIN M, STAGLIANO N, DONOVAN M, WOOLF B, ROBISON K, JEYASEELAN R, BREITBART RE, ACTON S. A novel angiotensin-converting enzyme-related carboxypeptidase (ACE2) converts angiotensin I to angiotensin 1–9. *Circ Res* 2000; 87: E1–E9.
27. TIPNIS SR, HOOPER NM, HYDE R, KARRAN E, CHRISTIE G, TURNER AJ. A human homolog of angiotensin converting enzyme. Cloning and functional expression as a captopril-insensitive carboxypeptidase. *J Biol Chem* 2000; 275: 33238–33243.
28. PSHEZHETSKY AV. Lysosomal carboxypeptidase A. In: Barrett AJ, Rawlings ND, Woessner JF (eds.) *Handbook of Proteolytic Enzymes* 1998. London: Academic Press.

29. D'Azzo A, HOOGVEEEN A, REUSER AJ, ROBINSON D, GALJAARD H. Molecular defect in combined beta-galactosidase and neuraminidase deficiency in man. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1982; 79: 4535–4539.
30. MILLER JJ, CHANGARIS DG, LEVY RS. Conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II by cathepsin A isoenzymes of porcine kidney. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1988; 154: 1122–1129.
31. CHANGARIS DG, LESOUSKY NW, MILLER JJ, LEVY RS. Subcellular localization in rat brain of angiotensin-related carboxypeptidase activity distinct from converting enzyme. Pathol Immunopathol Res 1988; 7: 200–207.
32. JACKMAN HL, MORRIS PW, RABITO SF, JOHANSSON GB, SKIDGEL RA, ERDÖS EG. Inactivation of endothelin-1 by an enzyme of the vascular endothelial cells. Hypertension 1993; 21: 925–928.
33. HIRAIWA M. Cathepsin A/protective protein: an unusual lysosomal multifunctional protein. Cell Mol Life Sci 1999; 56: 894–907.
34. TAN F, JACKMAN HL, HARBURY P, DEDDISH PA, BECKER RP, ABE M, SKIDGEL RA, ERDÖS EG. Identity of human platelet deamidase with lysosomal protective protein (LPP). FASEB J 1994; 8: A1372 (Abstract).
35. PSHEZHETSKY AV, ELSLIGER MA, VINOGRADOVA MV, POTIER M. Human lysosomal beta-galactosidase-cathepsin A complex: definition of the beta-galactosidase-binding interface on cathepsin A. Biochemistry 1995; 34: 2431–2440.
36. D'Azzo A, ANDRIA G, STRISCIUGLIO P, GALJAARD H. Galactosialidosis. In: Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly WS, Valle D (eds.) The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease 7th ed. 1995. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.; 2825–2837.
37. JONES DA, CUMMINGS J, LANGDON SP, MACLELLAN A, SMYTH JF. Characterization of the deamidase enzyme responsible for the metabolism of the anticancer peptide: H-Arg-D-Trp-NmePhe-D-Trp-Leu-Met-NH2. Biochem Pharmacol 1995; 50: 585–590.
38. CUMMINGS J, MACLELLAN AJ, LANGDON SP, JONES DA, ROZENGURT E, SMYTH JF. Processing of the neuropeptide growth factor antagonist [Arg6, D-Trp7.9, NmePhe8]-substance P (6–11) by a small cell lung cancer cell line (H69). Biochem Pharmacol 1995; 49: 1709–1712.
39. JACKMAN HL, MASSAD MG, SEKOSAN M, TAN F, MARCIC BM, BROVKOVYCH V, ERDÖS EG. Angiotensin 1–9 and 1–7 release in human heart: Role of cath-epsin A. Hypertension 2002; 39: 976–981.
40. JACKMAN HL, MORRIS PW, DEDDISH PA, SKIDGEL RA, ERDÖS EG. Inactivation of endothelin I by deamidase (lysosomal protective protein). J Biol Chem 1992; 267: 2872–2875.
41. JACKMAN HL, TAN F, SCHRAUFNAGEL D, DRAGOVIC T, DEZSŐ B, BECKER RP, ERDÖS EG. Plasma membrane-bound and lysosomal peptidases in human alveolar macrophages. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 1995; 13: 196–204.
42. AOYAGI T. Small molecular protease inhibitors and their biological effects. In: Kleinkauf H, von Döhren H (eds.) Biochemistry of Peptide Antibiotics. Recent

Advances in the Biotechnology of B-Lactams and Microbial Bioactive Peptides. Berlin: W. de Gruyter; 1990: 311–363.
43. ERDÖS EG, SKIDGEL RA. Metabolism of bradykinin by peptidases in health and disease. In: Farmer SG (ed.) The Kinin System 1997. London: Academic Press; 111–141.
44. ERDÖS EG, YANG HYT. An enzyme in microsomal fraction of kidney that inactivates bradykinin. Life Sci 1967; 6: 569–574.
45. CAUGHEY GH. Chymase. In: Barrett AJ, Rawlings ND, Woessner JF (eds.) Handbook of Proteolytic Enzymes 1998. London: Academic Press; 66–70.
46. DRAPEAU G, RHALEB N-E, DION S, JUKIC D, REGOLI D. [Phe⁸ ω(CH₂-NH)Arg⁹]bradykinin, a B₂ receptor selective agonist which is not broken down by either kininase I or kininase II. Eur J Pharmacol 1988; 155: 193–195.
47. SNYDER RA, WATT KWK, WINTRROUB BU. A human platelet angiotensin I-processing system. Identification of components and inhibition of angiotensin-converting enzyme byproduct. J Biol Chem 1985; 260: 7857–7860.
48. SNYDER RA, WINTRROUB BU. Inhibition of angiotensin-converting enzyme by des-Leu¹⁰-angiotensin I: a potential mechanism of endogenous angiotensin-converting enzyme regulation. Biochim Biophys Acta 1986; 871: 1–5.
49. WOLNY A, CLOZEL JP, REIN J, MORY P, VOGT P, TURINO M, KIOWSKI W, FISCHLI W. Functional and biochemical analysis of angiotensin II-forming pathways in the human heart. Circ Res 1997; 80: 219–227.
50. KOKKONEN JO, SAARINEN J, KOVANEN PT. Regulation of local angiotensin II formation in the human heart in the presence of interstitial fluid. Inhibition of chymase by protease inhibitors of interstitial fluid and of angiotensin-converting enzyme by Ang-(1–9) formed by heart carboxypeptidase A-like activity. Circulation 1997; 95: 1455–1463.
51. LENDECKEL U, ARNDT M, WRENGER S, NEPPLE K, HUTH C, ANSORGE S, KLEIN HU, GOETTE A. Expression and activity of ectopeptidases in fibrillating human atria. J Mol Cell Cardiol 2001; 33: 1273–1281.
52. SKIDGEL RA, JACKMAN HL, ERDÖS EG. Metabolism of substance P and bradykinin by human neutrophils. Biochem Pharmacol 1991; 41: 1335–1344.
53. Doi E. Stabilization of pig kidney cathepsin A by sucrose and chloride ion, and inhibition of the enzyme activity by diisopropyl fluorophosphate and sulfhydryl reagents. J Biochem (Tokyo) 1974; 75: 881–887.
54. HINEK A. Biological roles of the non-integrin elastin/laminin receptor. Biol Chem 1996; 377: 471–480.
55. MARCIC BM, ERDÖS EG. Protein kinase C and phosphatase inhibitors block the ability of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors to resensitize the receptor to bradykinin without altering the primary effects of bradykinin. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 2000; 294: 605–612.
