
Toxicology 181–182 (2002) 475–481

**Cell cycle checkpoint signaling:**
**Cell cycle arrest versus apoptosis**

J.A. Pietenpol*, Z.A. Stewart

Department of Biochemistry, Center in Molecular Toxicology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 2220 Pierce Avenue, Nashville, TN 37232, USA

---

### Abstract

Although toxicants may initiate cell damage or stress, the cellular proteins that are involved in control of cell cycle and apoptosis are the final arbiters of cell fate. The biochemical pathways that restrain cell cycle transition and/or induce cell death after stress are known as cell cycle checkpoints. These checkpoints maintain the fidelity of DNA replication, repair, and division. Herein, select cell cycle checkpoint signaling pathways will be discussed and how different components of these pathways are regulated by exogenous and endogenous agents, with focus on the p53 tumor suppressor signaling. The p53 protein is known to play a key role in growth arrest and apoptosis after cell stress, primarily through its ability to regulate the transcription of select downstream target genes in the cell. Further elucidation of the signaling pathways that control growth arrest and apoptosis will continue to provide insights to the complex cellular responses to environmental toxicants.

© 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

**Keywords:** p53; G1 checkpoint; G2 checkpoint; G2 override; Cancer; Anticancer therapeutics

---

### 1. Cell cycle checkpoints

At key transitions during eukaryotic cell cycle progression, signaling pathways monitor the successful completion of upstream events prior to proceeding to the next phase. These regulatory pathways are commonly referred to as cell cycle checkpoints (Hartwell and Weinert, 1989). Cells can arrest at cell cycle checkpoints temporarily to allow for: (i) cellular damage to be repaired; (ii) the dissipation of an exogenous cellular stress signal; or (iii) availability of essential growth factors, hormones, or nutrients. Checkpoint signaling may also result in activation of pathways leading to programmed cell death if cellular damage cannot be properly repaired. Defects in cell cycle checkpoints can result in gene mutations, chromosome damage, and aneuploidy, all of which can contribute to tumorigenesis.

---

### 2. G1/S checkpoint

Negative regulation of G1 phase cyclin/Cdk complexes plays a key role in the G1/S checkpoint

*Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-615-936-1512; fax: +1-615-936-2294  
E-mail address: pietenpol@toxicology.mc.vanderbilt.edu (J.A. Pietenpol).*

0300-483X/02/$ - see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.  
PII: S0300-483X(02)00460-2

function. Cdk4 and Cdk6 activity during the G1 phase of the cell cycle, while the Cip/Kip family can inhibit Cdk activity during all phases of the cell cycle. Both families of Cdk inhibitors play regulatory roles during the G1/S cell cycle checkpoint (Sherr and Roberts, 1995). For example, after exposure of normal cells to genotoxic agents, p21<sup>Waf1/Cip1</sup> (p21) is induced by p53-dependent transactivation. The elevated p21 binds and inactivates cyclin D/Cdk4, 6 and cyclin E/Cdk2 complexes resulting in pRB hypophosphorylation and cell cycle arrest (Fig. 1) (reviewed in Stewart and Pietenpol, 2001).

### 3. G2 checkpoint

The biochemical pathways involved in the DNA damage-induced G2 arrest are thought to involve signaling cascades that converge to inhibit the activation of Cdc2 (Hwang and Muschell, 1998). After DNA damage, members of the PI-3K family become activated and initiate signal transduction pathways that regulate DNA repair and cell cycle progression (Fig. 2a). Several members of the PI-3K family can directly phosphorylate p53, including DNA-PK, ATM, and ATR (reviewed in Canman and Lim, 1998). ATM-dependent signaling induced by DNA damage also results in activation of the Chk1 and Chk2 kinases (Matsuoka et al., 1998; Sanchez et al., 1997; Furnari et al., 1997). Several studies suggest that Chk1-and Chk2-mediated phosphorylation of p53 may be important for stabilization of the protein after DNA damage (Hirao et al., 2000; Shieh et al., 2000; Chehab et al., 2000). After ATM-dependent activation, Chk1 and Chk2 also phosphorylate Cdc25C on Ser-216 (Matsuoka et al., 1998; Sanchez et al., 1997; Furnari et al., 1997). Phosphorylation of Ser-216 on Cdc25C generates a consensus binding site for 14-3-3 proteins (Peng et al., 1997). Binding of 14-3-3 proteins to Cdc25C results in the nuclear export of Cdc25C, sequestration of the phosphatase in the cytoplasm, and thus inhibition of Cdc2 activity (Lopez-Girona et al., 1999).

Recent studies show that p53 and p21 are necessary to maintain a G2 arrest following DNA damage, since tumor cells lacking these proteins enter into mitosis with accelerated kinetics (Bunz et al., 1998; Flatt et al., 2000b). The mechanism of p53-dependent G2 arrest involves an initial inhibition of cyclin B1/Cdc2 activity by p21 and a subsequent reduction of cyclin B1 and Cdc2 protein levels (2b) (Innocente et al., 1999; Flatt et al., 2000b). The reduced expression of cyclin B1/Cdc2 is mediated in part by p53-dependent repression of the cyclin B1 and Cdc2 promoters (Taylor et al., 1999; Flatt et al., 2000b). In addition to modulation of cyclin B1/Cdc2 levels and activity by transactivation of p21, p53 also exerts G2 checkpoint responses through transcriptional upregulation of additional downstream target genes, namely 14-3-3σ, and GADD45. 14-3σ can modulate the subcellular localization of the cyclin B1/Cdc2 complex, as the binding of 14-3σ to Cdc2 results in retention of the kinase in the cytoplasm (Chan et al., 1999). Loss of 14-3-3σ also results in abrogation of the DNA damage G2 checkpoint and premature mitotic entry (Chan et al., 1999). GADD45 expression in normal fibroblasts induces a G2 arrest that is abrogated by the overexpression of cyclin B1 or Cdc25C (Wang et al., 1999).

### 4. Role of p53 in apoptotic signaling

Several p53 downstream target gene products can promote apoptosis; however, significant cell death is only observed when several of these genes are expressed in concert, suggesting that p53 apoptotic target genes may need to activate parallel apoptotic pathways to induce programmed cell death (Burns and El-Deiry, 1999). The p53 apoptotic target genes can be divided into two groups, the first group encodes proteins that act through receptor-mediated signaling and the

J.A. Pietenpol, Z.A. Stewart / Toxicology 181–182 (2002) 475–481

Fig. 3

Fig. 1

A

B

Fig. 2

second group encodes proteins that regulate apoptotic effector proteins. p53-dependent transactivation of IGF-BP3 induces apoptosis by blocking IGF-1 survival signaling to the IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R). When combined with p53-dependent repression of the IGF-1R, p53 signaling results in a highly efficient block of this survival pathway (Sionov and Haupt, 1999). p53 also mediates apoptosis through activation of the Fas/APO1/CD95 (Fas) and KILLER/DR5 death receptors. Fas is induced by p53 in response to genotoxic stress and is necessary for T-cell mediated apoptosis in response to anticancer drugs (Sionov and Haupt, 1999; Friesen et al., 1996) and p53-mediated apoptosis is impaired in MEFs derived from Fas-deficient mice and Fas ligand-deficient mice (Bennett et al., 1998).

Early cell changes that occur during apoptosis are associated with mitochondrial changes mediated by members of the Bcl-2 family of proteins, including anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 and pro-apoptotic BAX proteins. In addition to the previously described p53 transrepression of Bcl-2 (Miyashita et al., 1994), p53 may also inhibit

Bcl-2 function through transactivation of Cdc42 (Thomas et al., 2000). Cdc42 initiates a signaling pathway resulting in Bcl-2 phosphorylation and inactivation, and the expression of a Bcl-2 phosphorylation resistant mutant inhibits both Cdc42-and p53-mediated apoptosis (Thomas et al., 2000). In contrast to Bcl-2, BAX expression is upregulated during p53-dependent apoptosis (Miyashita and Reed, 1995). BAX facilitates the release of apoptosis-inducing factor and cytochrome c from the mitochondria, thus activating the caspase cascade (Sionov and Haupt, 1999). Other apoptotic targets of p53 that are likely to contribute to the release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria include p53AIP1 (Oda et al., 2000a), Noxa (Oda et al., 2000b) and PUMA (Nakano and Vousden, 2001; Yu et al., 2001).

p53 may also mediate mitochondrial apoptotic signaling through the elevation of reactive oxygen species. A recent study identified a panel of 14 p53-induced genes that are activated after oxidative stress (Polyak et al., 1997). One of these genes, PIG3, encodes a protein that shares homology with NADPH-quinone oxidoreductase, an enzyme

Fig. 1. The G1/S checkpoint. During G1 progression, there is sequential activation of cyclin D1 and cyclin E complexes. Cyclin D1 binds to Cdk4,6 and cyclin E binds to Cdk2. These complexes undergo activating phosphorylation and once active, phosphorylate pRB. In its hypo phosphorylated state, pRB binds to E2F to inhibit S phase entry; however, once hyper-phosphorylated, pRB releases E2F. The release of E2F results in activation of genes required for S phase entry. Cdk inhibitors, including p21 (a p53 downstream target), p27, and p16 can bind and inhibit the indicated Cdk or cyclin/Cdk complexes and effectively block the progression of cells from G1 into S-phase. DHFR, dihydrofolate reductase; TK, thymidine kinase.

Fig. 2. G2 checkpoint response after genotoxic stress. (A) During the G2/M transition, the activity of Cdc2 is tightly regulated by phosphorylation and protein interactions, Cdc2 activation requires association with cyclin partners and phosphorylation by CAK. During S and G2 phases, cells accumulate cyclin B1/Cdc2 in an inactive form due to inhibitory phosphorylations by Weel and Mytl kinases. The conversion of Cdc2 from an inactive to active form is mediated by the Cdc25C phosphatase. Mitotic events are stimulated by active cyclin B/Cdc2 complexes. (B) In response to genotoxic stress, the Chk1 and Chk2 kinases are activated and phosphorylate Cdc25C. This phosphorylation promotes the interaction of Cdc25C with 14-3-3 adaptor proteins and inhibits the ability of Cdc25C to activate cyclin B1/Cdc2, resulting in cell cycle arrest at the G2/M transition. After DNA damage, activated Chk1 and Chk2 also phosphorylate p53, resulting in stabilization and activation of the protein. p53-dependent signaling contributes to maintenance of the G2 cell cycle arrest by upregulating the 14-3-3σ protein that binds to Cdc2 and sequesters the kinase in the cytoplasm. p53-dependent transcription also elevates the Cdk inhibitor p21, which binds to cyclin/Cdk complexes to reduce phosphorylation of pRB. Hypo-phosphorylated pRB remains bound to E2F, preventing E2F from mediating the biosynthesis of cyclin B1 and Cdc2.

Fig. 3. p53-mediated apoptotic signaling. p53-mediated apoptosis can be mediated by both transactivation-dependent (dashed lines) and -independent (dotted lines) pathways. Several p53 target genes can promote apoptosis, including the pro-apoptotic BAX protein, the Fas death receptor, and BH3 domain-containing proteins such as p53AIP-1 and PUMA. BAX facilitates the release of AIF and cytochrome c from the mitochondria, thus activating the caspase cascade. p53 inhibits expression of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein, which normally blocks apoptosis by preventing the release of AIF and cytochrome c from the mitochondria. In addition, p53-dependent induction of IGF-BP3 induces apoptosis by blocking IGF-IR survival signaling. p53 may mediate mitochondrial signaling by elevation of reactive oxygen species through PIG3 and PIG8 induction.
that generates reactive oxygen species (Polyak et al., 1997). However, overexpression of PIG3 in human tumor cells fails to initiate apoptosis, suggesting that other signaling pathways must be activated for programmed cell death (Flatt et al., 2000a). The precise biological functions of the p53-inducible gene products and the roles they play in apoptotic signaling after oxidative stress await further characterization.

Although transactivation-independent models of p53-mediated apoptosis are provocative, they have only been made in cell culture-based in vitro systems (Caelles et al., 1994; Dyson, 1998). Further, two recently developed transactivation-deficient p53 mouse model systems clearly show that p53 transcriptional activation is required for p53-mediated apoptosis (Jimenez et al., 2000; Chao et al., 2000).

### 5. Looking towards the future

Several recent studies show that tumor cells with defective checkpoint function are more vulnerable to anticancer agents. In fact, if one considers the frequency of alterations in p53 and pRb, as well as their upstream and downstream regulatory pathways in tumor cells, the majority of human carcinomas have defective checkpoint function. Indeed, many laboratories are now searching for compounds that interfere with cell cycle checkpoints, in the hope that such agents will be more effective in anticancer therapy.

There is growing evidence that ablation of G2 checkpoint function in human tumor cell lines increases sensitivity to several anticancer agents. Treatment of cells with radiation in combination with caffeine or pentoxifylline, compounds which activate cdc2 by activation of Cdc25C phosphatase, results in G2 checkpoint override and increased rates of apoptosis (Yao et al., 1996; Russell et al., 1995). Further, studies with xenograft tumors in mice show that loss of p53 or p21 sensitizes tumor cells in vivo to chemotherapeutics (Bunz et al., 1999; Stewart et al., 1999). UCN-01, a protein kinase inhibitor related to staurosporine, is a potent abrogator of the G2 cell cycle checkpoint and increases the cytotoxic effect of DNA-dama-

ging agents in cancer cells (Wang et al., 1996). Studies suggest that UCN-01 preferentially ablates the G2 checkpoint in cancer cells with defective p53 function (Wang et al., 1996).

Since p53 is mutated, or disrupted, in the majority of human cancers, any drug that preferentially acts on cells lacking normal p53 is of great interest since it may have more tumor cell specificity. Along these same lines, other investigators are implementing high-throughput screens to identify G2 checkpoint inhibitors. In one such screen, isogranulatimide was identified. This is a structurally novel compound that, when used in combination with radiation, resulted in synergistic cell-killing activity (Roberge et al., 1998).

The drug discovery process has been transformed by the human genome project and the wealth of information generated from many scientific disciplines that has led to our current knowledge of the cell cycle across numerous organisms. As our understanding of cell cycle regulation and checkpoints increases so will the number of signaling molecules and pathways that are altered by xenobiotics and that can be used as targets for rational drug design.

## References

Bennett, M., Macdonald, K., Chan, S.W., Luzio, J.P., Simari, R., Weissberg, P., 1998. Cell surface trafficking of Fas: a rapid mechanism of p53-mediated apoptosis. Science 282, 290–293.

Bunz, F., Dutriaux, A., Lengauer, C., Waldman, T., Zhou, S., Brown, J.P., Sedivy, J.M., Kinzler, K.W., Vogelstein, B., 1998. Requirement for p53 and p21 to sustain G₂ arrest after DNA damage. Science 282, 1497–1501.

Bunz, F., Hwang, P.M., Torrance, C., Waldman, T., Zhang, Y., Dillehay, L., Williams, J., Lengauer, C., Kinzler, K.W., Vogelstein, B., 1999. Disruption of p53 in human cancer cells alters the responses to therapeutic agents. J. Clin. Invest. 104, 263–269.

Burns, T.F., El-Deiry, W.S., 1999. The p53 pathway and apoptosis. J. Cell Physiol. 181, 231–239.

Caelles, C., Helmberg, A., Karin, M., 1994. p53-dependent apoptosis in the absence of transcriptional activation of p53-target genes. Nature 370, 220–223.

Camman, C.E., Lim, D.S., 1998. The role of ATM in DNA damage responses and cancer. Oncogene 17, 3301–3308.

Chan, T.A., Hermeking, H., Lengauer, C., Kinzler, K.W., Vogelstein, B., 1999. 14-3-3Sigma is required to prevent
mitotic catastrophe after DNA damage. Nature 401, 616–620.

Chao, C., Saito, S., Kang, J., Anderson, C.W., Appella, E., Xu, Y., 2000. p53 transcriptional activity is essential for p53-dependent apoptosis following DNA damage. EMBO J. 19, 4967–4975.

Chehab, N.H., Malikzay, A., Appel, M., Halazonetis, T.D., 2000. Chk2/hCds1 functions as a DNA damage checkpoint in G1 by stabilizing p53. Genes Dev. 14, 278–288.

Dyson, N., 1998. The regulation of E2F by pRB-family proteins. Genes Dev. 12, 2245–2262.

Flatt, P.M., Polak, K., Tang, L.J., Scatena, C.D., Westfall, M.D., Rubinstein, L.A., Vogelstein, B., Hill, D.E., Pietenpol, J.A., 2000. p53-dependent induction of PIG3 during proliferation, genotoxic stress, and reversible growth arrest. Cancer Lett. 156, 63–72.

Flatt, P.M., Tang, L.J., Scatena, C.D., Szak, S.T., Pietenpol, J.A., 2000. p53 Regulation of G2 checkpoint is retinoblastoma protein dependent. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20, 4210–4223.

Friesen, C., Herr, I., Krammer, P.H., Debatin, K.M., 1996. Involvement of the CD95 (APO 1/Fas) receptor/ligand system in drug-induced apoptosis in leukemia cells. Nat. Med. 2, 574–577.

Furnari, B., Rhind, N., Russell, P., 1997. Cdc25C mitotic inducer targeted by Chkl DNA damage checkpoint kinase. Science 277, 1495–1497.

Hartwell, L.H., Weinert, T.A., 1989. Checkpoints: controls that ensure the order of cell cycle events. Science 246, 629–634.

Hirao, A., Kong, Y.Y., Matsuoka, S., Wakeham, A., Ruland, J., Yoshida, H., Liu, D., Elledge, S.J., Mak, T.W., 2000. DNA damage-induced activation of p53 by the checkpoint kinase Chk2. Science 287, 1824–1827.

Hwang, A., Muschell, R.J., 1998. Radiation and the G2 phase of the cell cycle. Radiat. Res. 150, S52–S59.

Innocente, S.A., Abrahamson, J.L.A., Cogswell, J.P., Lee, J.M., 1999. p53 regulates a G2 checkpoint through cyclin Bl. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 2147–2152.

Jimenez, G.S., Nister, M., Stommel, J.M., Beeche, M., Barcarce, E.A., Zhang, X.Q., O’Gorman, S., Wahl, G.M., 2000. A transactivation-deficient mouse model provides insight into Trp53 regulation and function. Nat. Genet. 26, 37–43.

Lopez-Girona, A., Furnari, B., Mondesert, O., Russell, P., 1999. Nuclear localization of Cdc25C is regulated by DNA damage and a 14-3-3 protein. Nature 397, 172–175.

Matsuoka, S., Huang, M., Elledge, S.J., 1998. Linkage of ATM to cell cycle regulation by the Chk2 protein kinase. Science 282, 1893–1897.

Miyashita, T., Harigai, M., Hanada, M., Reed, J.C., 1994. Identification of a p53-dependent negative response element in the bcl-2 gene. Cancer Res. 54, 3131–3135.

Miyashita, T., Reed, J.C., 1995. Tumor suppressor p53 is a direct transcriptional activator of the human bax gene. Cell 80, 293–299.

Nakano, K., Vousden, K.H., 2001. PUMA, a novel proapoptotic gene, is induced by p53. Mol. Cell 7, 693–694.

Oda, E., Ohki, R., Murasawa, H., Nemoto, J., Shibue, T., Yamashita, T., Tokino, T., Taniguchi, T., Tanaka, N., 2000.

Noxa, a BH3-only member of the Bcl-2 family and candidate mediator of p53-induced apoptosis. Science 288, 1053–1058.

Oda, K., Arakawa, H., Tanaka, T., Matsuda, K., Tanikawa, C., Mori, T., Nishimori, H., Tamai, K., Tokino, T., Nakamura, Y., Taya, Y., 2000. p53AIP1, a potential mediator of p53-dependent apoptosis, and its regulation of Ser-46-phosphorylated p53. Cell 102, 849–862.

Peng, C.Y., Graves, P.R., Thoma, R.S., Wu, Z.Q., Shaw, A.S., Piwnica-Worms, H., 1997. Mitotic and G2 checkpoint control: regulation of 14-3-3 protein binding by phosphorylation of Cdc25C on serine-216. Science 277, 1501–1505.

Polyak, K., Xia, Y., Zweier, J.L., Kinzler, K.W., Vogelstein, B., 1997. A model for p53-induced apoptosis. Nature 389, 300–305.

Roberge, M., Berlinck, R.G.S., Xu, L., Anderson, H.J., Lim, L.Y., Curman, D., Stringer, C.M., Friend, S.H., Davies, P., Vincent, I., Haggarty, S.J., Kelly, M.T., Britton, R., Piers, E., Andersen, R.J., 1998. High-throughput assay for G2 checkpoint inhibitors and identification of the structurally novel compound isogranulatamide. Cancer Res. 58, 5701–5706.

Russell, K.J., Wiens, L.W., Demers, W., Galloway, D.A., Plon, S.E., Groudine, M., 1995. Abrogation of the G2 checkpoint results in differential radiosensitization of G1 checkpoint-deficient and G1-checkpoint competent cells. Cancer Res. 55, 1639–1642.

Sanchez, Y., Wong, S., Thoma, R.S., Richman, R., Wu, Z., Piwnica-Worms, H., Elledge, S.J., 1997. Conservation of the Chk1 checkpoint pathway in mammals: linkage of DNA damage to Cdk regulation through Cdc25C. Science 277, 1497–1501.

Sherr, C.J., Roberts, J.M., 1995. Inhibitors of mammalian G1 cyclin-dependent kinases. Genes Dev. 9, 1149–1163.

Shieh, S.Y., Ahn, J., Tamai, K., Taya, Y., Prives, C., 2000. The human homologs of checkpoint kinases Chk1 and Cds1 (Chk2) phosphorylate p53 at multiple DNA damage-inducible sites. Genes Dev. 14, 289–300.

Sionov, R.V., Haupt, Y., 1999. The cellular response to p53: the decision between life and death. Oncogene 18, 6145–6157.

Stewart, Z.A., Mays, D., Pietenpol, J.A., 1999. Defective G1-S cell cycle checkpoint function sensitizes cells to microtubule inhibitor-induced apoptosis. Cancer Res. 59, 3831–3837.

Stewart, Z.A., Pietenpol, J.A., 2001. p53 signaling and cell cycle checkpoints. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 14, 243–263.

Taylor, W.R., DePrimo, S.E., Agarwal, A., Agarwal, M.L., Schönthal, A.H., Katula, K.S., Stark, G.R., 1999. Mechanisms of G2 arrest in response to overexpression of p53. Mol. Biol. Cell 10, 3607–3622.

Thomas, A., Giesler, T., White, E., 2000. p53 mediates Bcl-2 phosphorylation and apoptosis via activation of the Cdc42/JNK1 pathway. Oncogene 19, 5259–5269.

Wang, Q., Fan, S., Eastman, A., Worland, P.J., Sausville, E.A., O’Connor, P.M., 1996. UCN-01: a potent abrogator of G2 checkpoint function in cancer cells with disrupted p53. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 88, 956–965.

J.A. Pietenpol, Z.A. Stewart / Toxicology 181–182 (2002) 475–481

Wang, X.W., Zhan, Q.M., Coursen, J.D., Khan, M.A., Kontny, H.U., Yu, L.J., Hollander, M.C., O'Connor, P.M., Fornace, A.J., Jr., Harris, C.C., 1999. GADD45 induction of a G₂/M cell cycle checkpoint. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 3706–3711.

Xiong, Y., 1996. Why are there so many CDK inhibitors? Biochim. Biophys. Acta Rev. Cancer 1288, 1–5.

Yao, S.L., Akhtar, A.J., McKenna, K.A., Bedi, G.C., Sidransky, D., Mabry, M., Ravi, R., Collector, M.I., Jones, R.J., Sharkis, S.J., Fuchs, E.J., Bedi, A., 1996. Selective radiosensitization of p53 deficient cells by caffeine-mediated activation of p34cdc2 kinase. Nat. Med. 2, 1140–1143.

Yu, J., Zhang, L., Hwang, P.M., Kinzler, K.W., Vogelstein, B., 2001. PUMA induces rapid apoptosis of colorectal cancer cells. Mol. Cell 7, 673–682.
