
Cloning and nucleotide sequence of carbazole catabolic genes from *Pseudomonas stutzeri* strain OM1, isolated from activated sludge

Naoki Ouchiyama,* Shigeki Miyachi, and Toshio Omori¹

Kurume Research Laboratories, Chemicals Inspection and Testing Institute, Kurume 830–0023, Japan  
¹Biotechnology Research Center, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan  

(Received September 1, 1997; Accepted February 23, 1998)

A new carbazole (CAR)-degrading bacterium, called strain OM1, was isolated from activated sludge obtained from sewage disposal plants in Fukuoka Prefecture, and it was identified as *Pseudomonas stutzeri*. Anthranilic acid (AN), 2′-aminobiphenyl-2,3-diol and its meta-cleavage product, 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-6-(2′-aminophenyl)-hexa-2,4-dienoic acid, were identified as metabolic intermediates of CAR in the ethyl acetate extract of the culture broth. Therefore, the CAR catabolic pathway to AN in strain OM1 was indicated to be identical to those found in the *Pseudomonas sp.* strains CA06 and CA10. The strain OM1 degraded catechol (CAT) via a meta-cleavage pathway in contrast to strains CA06 and CA10, which transform catechol into *cis*, *cis*-muconic acid. Clones containing a 6.9-kb EcoRI fragment and a 3-kb PstI-SphI fragment were isolated from colonies, forming a clear zone of CAR and a yellow ring-cleavage product from CAT, respectively. Recombinant *E. coli* carrying the 6.9-kb fragment degraded CAR in the L-broth and produced AN. Cell-free extract from the clone carrying a 3-kb PstI-SphI fragment had high meta-ring-cleavage dioxygenase activity for CAT. The nucleotide sequences of these fragments were determined. The 6.9-kb fragment showed a very high degree of homology with the CAR catabolic genes of strain CA10. The amino acid and nucleotide sequences of the 3-kb fragment were found to exhibit significant homology with the genes for the CAT-catabolic enzymes of TOL plasmid pWW0, plasmid NAH7, and plasmid pVI150.

Key Words—carbazole catabolic genes; catechol 2,3-dioxygenase; microbial degradation; *Pseudomonas stutzeri*

Recently, the global pollution of soil, rivers, lakes, marshes and the ocean by various chemical substances has been spreading. Hard degradable polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons are increasingly polluting the soil, particularly in this century, and attention is being paid to bioremediation technology using microorganisms to clean up the widely polluted environment (Jones et al., 1989; Pritchard and Costa, 1991). This technology makes the environment suitable for the proliferation of pollutant-degrading bacteria. Since the production of toxic intermediates is a major concern of this technology, it is imperative to obtain knowledge concerning the pollutant-degrading bacteria and their degradation pathways.

The microbiological degradation of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons including PCBs, naphthalene and nitrogen-containing polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons has been studied (Kimura and Omori, 1995; Silver et al., 1990). The biodegradation of water-insoluble carbazole (CAR) has been investigated by several research groups including ours (Grosser et al., 1991; Hisatsuka and Sato, 1994; Kobayashi et al., 1995; Ouchiyama et al., 1993). The partial degradation of CAR by naphthalene-1,2-dioxygenase and biphenyl-2,3-dioxygenase has also been reported (Resnick et al., 1993).

So far, two CAR-degrading strains, *Pseudomonas sp.* CA06 and *Pseudomonas sp.* CA10, have been isolated by us from farm soil in Chiba Prefecture and from activated sludge at a sewage disposal plant in metropolitan Tokyo, respectively. The degradation pathways of CAR in these two strains have been characterized (Fig. 1, Ouchiyama et al., 1993). This paper presents the isolation of a new CAR-degrading bacterium from the activated sludge at a sewage disposal plant in Fukuoka Prefecture, far from the above-men-

* Address reprint requests to: Dr. Naoki Ouchiyama, Kurume Research Laboratories, Chemicals Inspection and Testing Institute, 19–14 Chuo-machi, Kurume 830–0023, Japan.

Carbazole

TCC

Fig. 1. Proposed degradation pathway for the utilization of carbazole by *P. stutzeri* strain OM1 and *Pseudomonas* sp. strain CA06 and strain CA10.

The three strains had the same upper metabolic pathway, CAR to AN. In AN degradation, strain OM1 had *meta*-ring-cleavage of CAT, while strains CA06 and CA10 had *ortho*-ring-cleavage of CAT.

tioned sewage disposal plant. The degradation pathway and degradation enzyme genes of CAR in this strain were investigated.

**Materials and Methods**

**Growth conditions.** *Pseudomonas stutzeri* strain OM1 was grown in a minimal medium (MM) at 25°C with CAR as the carbon and nitrogen source, as described previously (Ouchiyama et al., 1993). *E. coli* JM109 was used as the recipient strain in transformation experiments. The cells were grown at 37°C overnight in L-broth (1% Bacto-tryptone, 0.5% yeast extract, 0.5% NaCl) containing ampicillin (75 μg/ml) and/or isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG, 1 mM) when necessary. Solid medium was prepared by the addition of 1.5% Bacto Agar (Difco Laboratories, MI, USA).

**Cloning of genes involved in the CAR catabolism.** The total genomic DNA of *P. stutzeri* OM1 was isolated by the method of Misawa (Misawa et al., 1990). The total genomic DNA of OM1 was partially digested with Sau3AI. Fragments were ligated to the BamHI site of the SuperCos1 cosmid vector according to the recommendations of the manufacturer (Stratagene, CA, USA). In vitro packaging was performed using Gigapack Gold (Stratagene). Packaged cosmids were transfected to *E. coli* XL1-Blue MR and spread on L-agar plates containing ampicillin (75 μg/ml). The plates were incubated overnight at 37°C, and then the ethereal solution containing a saturated concentration of CAR was sprayed on the surface of the L-agar plates. The CAR degradation activity was assayed by the formation of clear zones of CAR surrounding colonies after 3 to 5 days of incubation. The genes encoding the CAR-degrading enzyme were subcloned into the EcoRI site of the pUC18 vector (Takara, Tokyo, Japan) from the recombinant cosmid. In order to examine the expression of genes encoding the upper metabolic pathway enzymes of CAR degradation, the recombinant *E. coli* catabolizing the conversion of CAR into anthranilic acid (AN) was cultured overnight, and added to 2 ml of fresh L-broth containing ampicillin. This was followed by incubation for 3 h, and then 10 μl of CAR ethanol solution (20 mM) was added. After incubation overnight, the culture was mixed with 2 ml of acetonitrile and vortexed for 5 s. It was clarified by centrifugation (2 min at 12,000 × g) in an Eppendorf microfuge tube and analyzed by HPLC to determine the concentration of CAR.

In order to clone the DNA fragments encoding catechol 2,3-dioxygenase (C23O, *meta*-cleavage enzyme of catechol (CAT)) activity, the following experiment was performed. Total genomic DNA was digested with the appropriate restriction enzymes, and DNA fragments were fractionated by agarose gel electrophoresis into 3 to 8 kb. The size-fractionated fragments were ligated to pUC19 vector (Takara), which was digested with the appropriate restriction enzymes and treated with alkaline phosphatase to prevent religation of the vector. The ligation mixture was used to transform cells of *E. coli* JM109. The cells were plated on L-agar containing ampicillin and IPTG. The presence of fragments encoding C23O activity was assayed by spraying the colonies with a solution containing 50 mM CAT in acetone. Positive clones turned yellow in a few

minutes because of the formation of 2-hydroxymu-
conic semialdehyde from CAT. The isolation of plas-
mid DNA, restriction enzyme digestion, molecular
cloning, and transformation were done according to
standard methods or those recommended by the
manufacturer (Sambrook et al., 1989).

DNA sequencing. Nucleotide sequencing was
performed on both DNA strands using the dideoxy
chain termination method (Sanger et al., 1977). Standard
protocols of the manufacturer for Taq DNA poly-
merase-initiated cycle sequencing reactions with fluo-
rescence-labeled dideoxynucleotide terminators (Perkin-
Elmer Japan, Chiba, Japan) were used. The labeled
DNA samples were subjected to an ABI 373A auto-
mated sequencer. All computer sequence analyses
were performed using a DNASIS-Mac (Hitachi Soft-
ware Engineering, Yokohama, Japan). The nucleotide
sequences that we determined have been deposited
in the DDBJ nucleotide databases under accession
numbers AB001722 and AB001723.

Analytical methods. Reversed-phase HPLC, GC-
MS and high-performance liquid chromatograph-mass
spectrometry (HPLC-MS) were performed as de-
scribed previously (Ouchiyama et al., 1993). In the
HPLC analysis of CAR, acetonitrile-water-phosphoric
acid (30/70/0.05, v/v/v) was used isocratically as the
mobile phase at a flow rate of 1.0 ml/min. The
amounts of target analyses present were calculated
for at least duplicate samples from the peak areas
using standard calibration curves for each chemical.
For the identification of metabolites, a medium cul-
tured at a MM with CAR was extracted with ethyl ac-
etate under the acidic condition of hydrochloric acid
(pH 3), and methyl-esterified with diazomethane, to
submit to GC-MS analysis as described previously
(Ouchiyama et al., 1993).

Assay of aromatic ring-cleavage dioxygenase activ-
ity. Cells used for enzyme assays were grown in L-
broth containing ampicillin (75 μg/ml) and IPTG (1 mM)
at 37°C to the late exponential growth phase. The
cells were harvested and washed with 50 mM phos-
phate buffer (pH 7.5). The washed cells were dis-
rupted by sonication for 20 s in an ice-water bath.
Centrifugation of the disrupted cells at 48,000×g and
4°C for 30 min yielded a supernatant, which was used
as the cell extract. Ring-cleavage dioxygenase activity
was assayed at 25°C by the method of Hirose et al.
(1994) following the absorbance changes at 375, 388,
379, and 434 nm to determine the formation of the
ring-cleavage products of CAT, 3-methylcatechol (3-
MCAT), 4-methylcatechol (4-MCAT), and biphenyl-2,3-
diol, respectively. The molar absorption coefficients of
the ring-cleavage products of CAT, 3-MCAT, 4-MCAT,
and biphenyl-2,3-diol at pH 7.5 were 33,000, 13,400,
28,100, and 13,200, respectively. One unit of enzyme

is defined as the amount which catalyzes 1 μmol of
the product per minute. The enzyme activity of 2-hy-
droxymuconic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (HMSD)
was assayed by determining the rate of decrease in
absorbance at 375 nm as caused by the disappear-
ance of 2-hydroxymuconic semialdehyde. The sub-
strate for HMSD assay, 2-hydroxymuconic semialde-
hyde, was prepared enzymatically from CAT. The pro-
tein concentration was determined with a protein
assay kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Richmond, CA, USA)
using the Bradford method (Bradford, 1976).
Chemicals. CAR, AN, and CAT were purchased
from Kanto Chemicals Co., Inc., Tokyo, Japan. Al-
though CAR was of the highest purity commercially
available, four recrystallizations in toluene were per-
formed for further purification. All other chemicals
were obtained from Wako Pure Chemical Industries,
Ltd., Osaka, Japan.

Results

Isolation and taxonomic characterization of strain
OM1

We have screened four activated sludges obtained
from four sewage disposal plants in Fukuoka and
Saga Prefectures for the isolation of CAR-degrading
bacteria. Two of these activated sludges degraded
CAR. A CAR-degrading bacterium, strain OM1, was
isolated from the activated sludge of a sewage dis-
posal plant in Fukuoka Prefecture. Strain OM1 was
able to grow on CAR, as the carbon and nitrogen
sources under aerobic conditions. The isolate was a
rod-shaped Gram-negative bacterium. It was non-
spore-forming, motile, catalase-positive, and oxidase-
positive; however, the activities of arginine dihydro-
lase, urease, gelatinase, and β-galactosidase were
negative. The strain was oxidative in the OF-test, and
had activity on denitrification, starch hydrolysis and
degradation of Tween 80. The Q-9 type ubiquinone
was a major quinone in this strain. The guanine-plus-
cytosine content of the DNA was estimated to be
64 mol%. The isolate was subjected to taxonomic
analyses by NCIMB (Scotland, UK) and was identified
as *Pseudomonas stutzeri*. The denitrification capabil-
ity and maltose utilization observed on strain OM1
were not detected on the previously reported strains,
CA06 and CA10. Considering the taxonomic proper-
ties of strains OM1, CA06, and CA10, they were clas-
sified into different species.

Identification of CAR catabolic products

The analytical result of GC-MS indicated that the
metabolites of CAR included AN (methylated M, *m/z*=
151), 2′-aminobiphenyl-2,3-diol (methylated M, *m/z*=
229) and its ring-cleavage compound, 2-hydroxy-6-

E     Sm    Sm    P     B     Sp    Sp    EP

|       | carAa | carAa | carBa | carBb | carC  | carAc | ORF7 | carAd |       |
|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|------|-------|-------|

pSB185  
Plac  

pSB186  
Plac  

pSB190  
Plac  

pSB191  
Plac  

pSB192  
Plac  

pSB200  
1kb  
Plac  

Activity  

Fig. 2. Upper metabolic pathway genes of CAR degradation.  
The pSB186 plasmid was produced by inversely ligating the *PstI* fragment from pSB185. Restriction endonucleases are *BglII* (B), *EcoRI* (E), *PstI* (P), *SmaI* (Sm), *SphI* (Sp).

oxo-6-(2′-aminophenyl)-hexa-2,4-dienoic acid (methylated M, *m/z* = 261), which were also indicated in strains CA06 and CA10 (Ouchiyama et al., 1993). The medium turned yellow when strain OM1 was cultured on AN as the substrate. The absorption spectral analysis of the cultured medium of strain OM1 grown on AN indicated that a meta-ring-cleavage compound of CAT with absorbance at 375 nm was produced.

**Cloning and sequencing of genes encoding CAR catabolic enzymes**

A gene library was constructed using a cosmid vector for obtaining catabolic enzyme genes in the upper metabolic pathway, CAR to AN, of CAR. A CAR-saturated ether solution was sprayed upon approximately 20,000 colonies grown on L-agar containing ampicillin (75 μg/ml). After culturing for 3 to 5 days, 15 clones producing clear zones of CAR were isolated. Plasmid DNAs were extracted from the positive clones, and the *EcoRI* fragments of their inserts were subcloned into a pUC18 vector. As a result, a 6.9-kb *EcoRI* fragment common to all clones was observed. Recombinant *E. coli* carrying the 6.9-kb *EcoRI* fragment converted CAR to AN in the L-broth without adding IPTG. It was found by subcloning that a gene encoding the ring-cleavage enzyme was located at the 2-kb fragment of *SmaI-BglII* (Fig. 2). The washed cells of the recombinant were incubated with CAR, and the degradation products of CAR were examined periodically by HPLC and HPLC-MS. The analytical result indicated that 2′-aminobiphenyl-2,3-diol (*m/z* = 202: M+H) was produced in a few hours. It was inferred from these experimental results that ring-cleavage enzyme genes were distributed around the *PstI* site located at the center of plasmid pSB185. The plasmid pSB186, with the reversed *PstI* fragment of pSB185, lacked only the ring-cleavage enzyme activity, possibly supporting this conclusion. It was also found that the restriction enzyme map was similar to that of strain CA10 (Sato et al., 1997a, b). The DNA sequence of the *EcoRI* fragment of pSB185 was determined. There were eight open reading frames in the 6.9-kb fragment. The DNA sequence of pSB185 encoding the catabolic enzymes which convert CAR to AN was highly homologous with that of strain CA10. The first and second open reading frames had the same sequences and were located in tandem. The differences between the sequences of strain OM1 and strain CA10 were investigated. One nucleotide difference was found in the each of first (1478: G-C), second (2744: G-C), fifth (4643: A-T), sixth (5323: T-G), and eighth (6513: T-C) open reading frames, and two nucleotide differences were found in the fourth (3934: C-T, 3951: G-A) open reading frame. The third (carBb) and seventh open reading frames (ORF7) had the same sequences (Fig. 2). The nucleotide sequence of the 6.9-kb *EcoRI* fragment was highly homologous with that of strain CA10. Consequently, a very high homology was seen in the deduced amino acid sequences (Table 1).

The ring-cleavage enzyme gene of CAT was cloned by the detection of the yellow compound formed from CAT by meta-ring-cleavage. More than fifty yellowed colonies in total were obtained from the OM1 genomic library constructed using *PstI* and *SphI*. All positive clones were isolated and purified, and confirmed the ring-cleavage enzyme activity of CAT; and finally, pSP101 plasmid was obtained as illustrated in Fig. 3.

1998 Catabolic genes of carbazole degradation 61

Table 1. Comparison of carbazole catabolic enzymes and gene components of Pseudomonas stutzeri OM1 and Pseudomonas sp. CA10.

| Enzymes | Genes | Amino acid residues | Difference of amino acids | Similarity (%) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  | Position | Strain OM1 | Strain CA10 |
| Carbazole dioxygenase | carAa | 384 | 303 | Arg | Pro | 99.7 |
| 2'-aminobiphenyl-2, 3-diol 1, 2-dioxygenase | carBa | 90 | — | — | — | 100 |
| 2'-aminobiphenyl-2, 3-diol 1, 2-dioxygenase | carBb | 269 | 205 | Ala | Val | 99.3 |
|  |  |  | 211 | Glu | Lys |  |
| 2-hydroxy-6-oxo-6-(2'-aminophenyl)-hexa-2, 4-dienoic acid hydrolase | carC | 290 | 175 | Tyr | Phe | 99.7 |
| Ferredoxin | carAc | 107 | 104 | Val | Gly | 99.1 |
| Unknown | ORF7 | 105 | — | — | — | 100 |
| Ferredoxin reductase | carAd | 329 | 266 | Met | Thr | 99.7 |

P X Sp  
ORF1 ORF2 ORF3 ORF4 C23O HMSD  
pSP101 Plac + +  
pSP101R Plac - -  
pSP115 Plac + -  

Fig. 3. CAT ring-cleavage genes of lower pathway. The ORF4 illustrated the former part of the whole. PstI (P), SphI (Sp), XhoI (X).

Table 2. Comparison of DNA and amino acids between the CAT catabolism of Pseudomonas stutzeri strain OM1 and various isofunctional genes.

| Bacterial strains (plasmid) | Sequence homology (%) |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | ORF1 | ORF2 | ORF3 |  |
|  | DNA | Protein | DNA | Protein | DNA | Protein |
| P.putida (TOLpWW0) | xylT | 62 | 52 | xylE | 92 | 94 | xylG | 95 | 91 |
| Pseudomonas sp. (pVI150) | dmpQ | 65 | 63 | dmpB | 84 | 87 | dmpC | 86 | 90 |
| P.putida (NAH7) | nahT | 84 | 84 | nahH | 83 | 88 | — | — | — |
| P.putida (TOLpDK1) | — | — | xylE | 79 | 83 | — | — | — |

A restriction enzyme map revealed that ring-cleavage enzyme genes existed in the 1.6-kb fragment of PstI-XhoI in pSP115. Then, the nucleotide sequence of pSP101 plasmid containing the PstI-SphI 3-kb fragment was determined. It was suggested that three ORFs and the upper end of the fourth ORF existed in pSP101 plasmid containing the ring-cleavage enzyme genes of CAT. Nucleotide sequence homology suggested that ORF1, ORF2, ORF3, and ORF4 were the genes encoding ferredoxin, C23O, HMSD, and HMSH, respectively, as shown in Table 2.

Substrate specificities of the ring-cleavage enzymes E.coli cells transformed with the recombinant plasmids, pSB200, and pSP115 were cultured in L-broth containing ampicillin and IPTG. The ring-cleavage enzyme activity was determined using cell extract prepared from the clone. The relative specific activities of the ring-cleavage enzyme expressed by pSB200 were 100 for biphenyl-2, 3-diol, 4.0 for 3-MCAT, 2.2 for CAT, and 1.4 for 4-MCAT. On the other hand, those by pSP115 for CAT, biphenyl-2, 3-diol, 3-MCAT, and 4-MCAT were 100, 22, 3.8, and 1.3, respectively. Although the ring-cleavage enzyme of pSB200 plasmid

had high activity on biphenyl-2,3-diol, the activity on CAT, 3-MCAT, and 4-MCAT was low. Meanwhile, the ring-cleavage enzyme of pSP115 had as high as 22% activity on biphenyl-2,3-diol as compared to that on CAT. It was inferred that the ring-cleavage enzyme of pSP115 was potentially participating in the catabolism of not only the lower pathway, but also the upper metabolic pathway of CAR. Then, a pTV101 plasmid with ring-cleavage enzyme activity and ring-cleavage compound hydrolase activity of CAT was produced by inserting the PstI-SphI fragment of pSP101 into a pSTV29 vector (Takara). The recombinant E. coli carrying pSTV101 and pSB186 plasmids, conferring the transformation activity of CAR to 2'-aminobiphenyl-2,3-diol, produced neither AN nor a ring-cleavage compound from CAR, showing that the ring-cleavage enzyme encoded on pSP101 did not participate in the ring-cleavage in the upper metabolic pathway of the catabolism of CAR.

Discussion

The catabolic pathway of the CAR of strain OM1 was demonstrated by analyzing the degradation metabolites from the ethyl acetate extracts of the culture broth of CAR. The catabolic pathway converting CAR to AN in the upper metabolic pathway was suggested to be the same as those employed by strains CA06 and CA10, described in a previous paper (Ouchiyama et al., 1993). However, strain OM1 catabolized CAT via a meta-cleavage pathway, unlike that of strains CA06 and CA10 (Fig. 1).

A recombinant E. coli carrying the pSB185 plasmid could convert CAR to AN. Therefore, this result showed that the pSB185 plasmid had the gene encoding the catabolic enzymes of the upper degradation pathway of CAR. The nucleotide sequence of pSB185 was determined, and the deduced amino acid sequence of it was compared with that of strain CA10. The results indicated that the homology of both strains was more than 99%. It is obvious that both strains OM1 and CA10 have almost the same catabolic enzymes participating in the degradation of CAR to AN. PCB-degrading bacteria *P*. pseudoalcaligenes KF707 and *Pseudomonas* sp. LB400 also had similar high biphenyl dioxygenase components (Furukawa, 1994). The mol% G+C content in the insert of pSB185 plasmid was 51%, while those of the strain OM1 chromosome and the insert of pSP101 plasmid were 64 and 63%, respectively. The difference between them is large enough to speculate that the catabolic enzyme genes in the upper metabolic pathway of CAR may be extraneous genes for strain OM1. Both strains have common catabolic enzyme genes of CAR, though these strains have been separately isolated from different sewage disposal plants 1,000 km or more apart. These are interesting results for further investigation of the horizontal propagation of catabolic enzyme genes.

The cloned ring-cleavage enzyme genes of CAT were highly homologous to the xyl genes of TOL plasmid pWW0, and both of them form the same cluster (Harayama and Rekik, 1990). Harayama and Kok argued that most of the C23Os promoting the meta-ring-cleavage of CAT had significantly homologous amino acid sequences, and accordingly, they were in a family having a common ancestral gene (Harayama and Kok, 1992). It was considered that the ring-cleavage enzyme of CAT, encoded by ORF2, also belongs to the C23O family. Further, ORF1, ORF3, and ORF4, located before and after ORF2 (ring-cleavage enzyme gene), were highly homologous to xyl genes of the TOL plasmid, nah genes of NAH7 plasmid, and dmp genes of plasmid pVI150 for phenol degradation. These data suggest that the CAT-catabolic enzyme genes of strain OM1 also have evolved in a similar way as the degradative plasmids, TOL, NAH7, and pVI150 (Harayama and Rekik, 1993; Williams and Sayers, 1994).

We thank Miss E. Kikushima, Miss N. Fujii, Miss T. Fukuda, and Mr. S. Kudo, Kurume Research Laboratories, CITI, for technical assistance, and Mr. S. Sato and Dr. K. Kasuga, Biotechnology Research Center, The University of Tokyo, for many helpful discussions.

References

Bradford, M. M. (1976) A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding. *Anal. Biochem.*, **72**, 248–254.

Furukawa, K. (1994) Molecular genetics and evolutionary relationship of PCB-degrading bacteria. *Biodegradation*, **5**, 289–300.

Grosser, R. J., Warshawsky, D., and Vestal, J. R. (1991) Indigenous and enhanced mineralization of pyrene, benzo[a]pyrene, and carbazole in soils. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.*, **57**, 3462–3469.

Harayama, S. and Kok, M. (1992) Functional and evolutionary relationships among diverse oxygenases. *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.*, **46**, 565–601.

Harayama, S. and Rekik, M. (1990) The meta cleavage operon of TOL degradative plasmid pWW0 comprises 13 genes. *Mol. Gen. Genet.*, **221**, 113–120.

Harayama, S. and Rekik, M. (1993) Comparison of the nucleotide sequences of the meta-cleavage pathway genes of TOL plasmid pWW0 from *Pseudomonas putida* with other meta-cleavage genes suggests that both single and multiple nucleotide substitutions contribute to enzyme evolution. *Mol. Gen. Genet.*, **239**, 81–89.

Hirose, J., Kimura, N., Suyama, A., Kobayashi, A., Hayashida, S., and Furukawa, K. (1994) Functional and structural relationship of various extradiol aromatic ring-cleavage dioxygenases of *Pseudomonas* origin. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.*, **118**, 273–278.

Hisatsuka, K. and Sato, M. (1994) Microbial transformation of carbazole to anthranilic acid by *Pseudomonas stutzeri*. *Biosci. Biotech. Biochem.*, **58**, 213–214.

Jones, K. C., Stratford, J. A., Waterhouse, K. S., Furlong, E. T.,

Giger, W., Hites, R. A., Schaffner, C., and Johnston, A. E. (1989) Increases in the polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbon content of an agricultural soil over the last century. *Environ. Sci. Technol.*, **23**, 95–101.

Kimura, T. and Omori, T. (1995) Microbial degradation of azaarene related compounds. *Life Chem. Rep.*, **12**, 207–225.

Kobayashi, T., Kurane, R., Nakajima, K., Nakamura, Y., Kirimura, K., and Usami, S. (1995) Isolation of bacteria degrading carbazole under microaerobic conditions, i.e. nitrogen gas substituted conditions. *Biosci. Biotech. Biochem.*, **59**, 932–933.

Misawa, N., Nakagawa, M., Kobayashi, K., Yamano, S., Izawa, Y., Nakamura, K., and Harashima, K. (1990) Elucidation of the *Erwinia uredovora* carotenoid biosynthetic pathway by functional analysis of gene products expressed in *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.*, **172**, 6704–6712.

Ouchiyama, N., Zhang, Y., Omori, T., and Kodama, T. (1993) Biodegradation of carbazole by *Pseudomonas* spp. CA06 and CA10. *Biosci. Biotech. Biochem.*, **57**, 455–460.

Pritchard, P. H. and Costa, C. F. (1991) EPA’s Alaska oil spill bioremediation project. *Environ. Sci. Technol.*, **25**, 372–379.

Resnick, S. M., Torok, D. S., and Gibson, D. T. (1993) Oxidation of carbazole to 3-hydroxycarbazole by naphthalene 1,2-dioxygenase and biphenyl 2,3-dioxygenase. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.*, **113**,

Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T. (1989) Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual, 2nd ed., Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.

Sanger, F., Nicklen, S., and Coulson, A. R. (1977) DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.*, **74**, 5463–5467.

Sato, S., Nam, J.-W., Kasuga, K., Nojiri, H., Yamane, H., and Omori, T. (1997a) Identification and characterization of genes encoding carbazole 1,9a-dioxygenase in *Pseudomonas* sp. strain CA10. *J. Bacteriol.*, **179**, 4850–4858.

Sato, S., Ouchiyama, N., Kimura, T., Nojiri, H., Yamane, H., and Omori, T. (1997b) Cloning of genes involved in carbazole degradation of *Pseudomonas* sp. strain CA10: Nucleotide sequences of genes and characterization of meta-cleavage enzymes and hydrolase. *J. Bacteriol.*, **179**, 4841–4849.

Silver, S., Chakrabarty, A. M., Iglewski, B., and Kaplan, S. (1990) *Pseudomonas*, American Society for Microbiology, Washington, D. C.

Williams, P. A. and Sayers, J. R. (1994) The evolution of pathways for aromatic hydrocarbon oxidation in *Pseudomonas*. *Biodegradation*, **5**, 195–217.
