
Biology of the Cell  
www.elsevier.com/locate/bicell  

**Review**  

**Cadherin-based cell adhesion in neuromuscular development**  

Véronique Marthiens, Julie Gavard, Mireille Lambert, René Marc Mège *  

*Signalisation et différenciation cellulaires dans les systèmes nerveux et musculaire, Inserm U440-Université Paris 6,*  
*Institut du Fer-à-Moulin, 17, rue du Fer-à-Moulin, 75005 Paris, France*  

Received 8 September 2002; accepted 11 September 2002  

---

### Abstract

The organisation and differentiation of striated skeletal muscles and their innervation is a particularly complex process implicating cells of mesodermic (myoblasts and fibroblasts) and neuroectodermic origin (neurons and glial cells). Myogenic and motor neuron precursors, the two major cell types participating in the formation of the neuromuscular axis, migrate, segregate, reassociate and differentiate in a coordinated fashion. The subsequent organisation of muscle cells and the establishment of muscle innervation rely on a complex tissular and cellular architectural organisation, which cannot be understood without taking into account juxtacrine cell interactions, and especially cell adhesion. Cell adhesion receptors of the cadherin family are widely expressed and dynamically regulated in space and time throughout neuromuscular development. A single cell expresses in general more than one cadherin at its surface and it is the combination of these molecules and their level of expression that determine their action within a given cell population. We focused in this review on the expression and roles of classical cadherins in relation to muscle cell and motoneuron differentiation. We also review the latest results on the mode of action of cadherins allowing to propose cellular and molecular cues on the mechanisms by which these cell adhesion receptors control muscle and neuronal cell shape, migration and differentiation. © 2002 Éditions scientifiques et médicales Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

---

### Keywords: Myogenesis; Motor neurons; Axon elongation and pathfinding; Cell signalling; Mechanotransduction

---

### 1. Introduction

Cell–cell recognition and cell migration are crucial for embryogenesis and histogenesis. Embryonic cell movements and modifications in cell shape directly rely on cell adhesion and require at the same time dynamic changes in adhesive cell–cell interactions. These adhesion-related morphogenetic processes are intimately associated with cell proliferation, death and differentiation. During neuromuscular development, the specification and determination of mesodermal cells in the myoblast lineage are immediately followed by their migration towards their final differentiation position. The withdrawal of myoblasts from the cell cycle is then followed by their alignment and fusion into differentiated myotubes. The differentiation of neuroepithelial cells into motoneurons implies both the migration of post-mitotic neu-

---

*Corresponding author. Tel.: +33-1-45-87-61-36; fax: +33-1-45-87-61-32.*  
*E-mail address: mege@ifm.inserm.fr (R.M. Mège)*  

© 2002 Éditions scientifiques et médicales Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.  
PII: S0248-4900(02)00005-9

et al., 1997). Cadherins contribute to embryonic cell aggregation, segregation and migration through dynamic cell–cell contact remodeling (Nose et al., 1988; Friedlander et al., 1989; Tepass et al., 2000). They further specify differentiated cell–cell contacts by inducing the recruitment of junctional complexes during mesenchymal–epithelial transition (Mège et al., 1988; Gumbiner, 1996), cardiomyocyte assembly (Radice et al., 1997) and synaptogenesis (Uchida et al., 1996). In the nervous system, the diversity and dynamics of cadherin expression make them candidates for molecules involved in patterning the nervous system and specifying synapse formation (Redies, 1995; Shapiro and Colman, 1999; Benson et al., 2001). Indeed, they have been associated with formation and maintenance of early neuronal subdivisions, as well as with formation of neuronal networks (Redies and Takeichi, 1996). While cadherins have been earlier identified as molecules accumulated at the neuromuscular junction and modulated by electric activity (Cifuentes-Diaz et al., 1994b; Cifuentes-Diaz et al., 1995), they have been only more recently identified as essential constituents of central neuro-neuronal synapses (Uchida et al., 1996; Fannon and Colman, 1996). Growing evidence provided by an increasing number of milestone studies indicates that cadherins not only play important roles in building and maintaining synaptic structures, but also in regulating synaptic plasticity, learning and memory (reviewed in: Benson et al., 2000; Benson et al., 2001). Cadherins are thought to contribute to the active recruitment and clustering of neuromediator receptors in subdomains of the post-synaptic membrane (Coussen et al., 2002) and to modulate, on an activity-dependent basis, morphological changes in both pre- and post-synaptic structures (Murase et al., 2002; Togashi et al., 2002).

During neuromuscular development, cadherins are expressed in a combinatorial fashion in skeletal muscle territories, spinal cord, spinal ganglia and peripheral nerve tracts. We compiled in this review the data obtained so far on the expression and roles of classical cadherins during early neuromuscular development. The expression and role of cadherins during late neuromuscular organisation have been reviewed elsewhere (Cifuentes-Diaz et al., 1994a) and thus will not be developed here. Immunolocalisation studies in the embryo, together with in vivo and in vitro perturbations of cadherin function point towards a major role of cadherins in the migration, organisation and differentiation of muscle cell precursors. Recent advances concerning the functional significance of this developmentally regulated combinatorial expression suggest that cadherin function is crucial for the organisation of motor and sensory neurons into discrete nuclei, for the specification of sensory–motor networks, as well as for elongation and pathfinding of peripheral nerve tracts towards their muscle targets. Moreover, very recent advances in cell biology on the mode of action of cadherins allow us to propose now new hypothesis on the molecular mechanisms by which these adhesion receptors sustain their physiological roles during neuromuscular development.

---

### 2. Skeletal muscle formation

The differentiation of striated skeletal muscles has been an active and productive area of research for the ones interested in cell determination and differentiation. These studies have contributed to important findings of very general interest for the understanding of the mechanisms by which embryonic cells adopt a specific fate and differentiate. However, the morphogenesis of skeletal muscle is also an attractive paradigm for the ones interested in cell adhesion and juxtacrine cell interactions. Indeed, there is no doubt that interactions of muscle cell precursors with their neighbors or with the extracellular matrix (ECM) are essential for myogenesis and muscle homeostasis.

#### 2.1. Differentiation of the myogenic lineage in vertebrates

In vertebrates, all the body skeletal muscles, except the cranio-facial ones arise from somites. Somites are epithelial structures, formed in paraxial mesoderm during embryogenesis and further differentiating ventrally in sclerotome and dorsally in dermomyotome (Christ and Ordahl, 1995). While cells issued from the sclerotome will contribute to the cartilage and bone territories, myogenic progenitor cells are specified from multipotent mesodermal cells within the dermomyotome (Fig. 1A). The establishment of myogenic identity, named specification, is not irreversibly fixed at the beginning of somitogenesis, because the rotation of the somitic epithelium in the dorso-ventral or medio-lateral axis does not alter the differentiation of somite territories (Tajbakhsh and Cossu, 1997). This strongly suggests that environmental signals provided by surrounding tissues participate in the specification of multipotent mesodermal precursors. In the past decade, many signalling molecules implicated in myogenic cell specification have been identified (Buckingham, 2001), in particular Wnts and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) produced by the dorsal ectoderm and neural tube and Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) produced by the notochord and floor plate. Specialised muscle progenitor cells (or myoblasts) acquire the expression of the myogenic determination genes Myf5 and MyoD. After this determination step, myoblasts undergo an epithelial–mesenchymal transition, leave the myotome and migrate to presumptive muscle territories. Myoblasts then differentiate and fuse together to form multinucleated myotubes. During this process, the expression of other bHLH proteins of the MyoD family, the muscle regulatory factors (MRFs) myogenin, MRF4 and MEF2, is acquired. Myoblasts exit from the cell cycle into a specialised and permanent G0/G1 arrest. The expression of the MRFs enhances the expression of differentiation genes as T-troponin, muscle creatine kinase (MCK) or acetylcholine receptor subunits. The terminal differentiation is marked by the up-regulation of differentiation—

V. Marthiens et al. / Biology of the Cell 94 (2002) 317

A

- multipotent
- cells

ec
somite
lm
nt
nc
sc
dm

myoblasts

migration

myotubes

muscle fibres

satellite cells

B

Specification
Determination
Differentiation
G0/G1 arrest
Terminal
differentiation
Innervation

N-cadherin
R-cadherin
M-cadherin
cadherin-11

Fig. 1. Schematic view of the myogenic cell differentiation and the associated regulation of cadherin expression in the mouse. (A) Major steps of the differentiation of skeletal muscle cell lineage in vertebrates. ec, ectoderm; nt, neural tube; nc, notochord; lm, lateral mesoderm; dm, dermomyotome; sc, sclerotome. (B) Expression of classical cadherins in the muscle lineage during mouse embryo development.

specific genes and the down-regulation of negative regulators (Yun and Wold, 1996). While differentiating, myoblasts adhere with each other, align and fuse to form multinucleated myotubes in two successive waves called primary and secondary myogenesis. Primary myogenesis correlates with the onset of innervation by motoneurons, leading subsequently to the acquisition of mature fibre type identity (Hughes and Salinas, 1999). Satellite cells, which lie between the basal lamina and the muscle fibre, constitute a reservoir of undifferentiated myoblasts that are activated in response to muscle damage, leading to regeneration of adult skeletal muscle.

### 2.2. The regulation of cadherin expression during muscle morphogenesis

Growing evidence has accumulated along the past decade indicating that cell adhesion is directly involved in myogenesis. The adhesive properties of muscle precursors are modulated in large part by the orchestrated expression of a combination of cadherins. At least four classical-type cadherins: three type I (R-, N-, and M-cadherin) and one type II (cadherin-11) have been identified in embryonic muscle territories during mouse development (Fig. 1). N-cadherin, the so-called neural cadherin is expressed from the commitment of myogenic precursors in somites and in muscle territories throughout myogenesis. N-cadherin is present in the zone of myogenic precursor migration, expressed by myoblasts themselves, but also by the surrounding mesenchymal cells (Brand-Saberi et al., 1996). Later, the molecule is highly expressed by fusing myoblasts and young myotubes with a peak of expression during primary myogenesis, suggesting a regulatory role of N-cadherin at different steps of myogenesis including myoblast fusion and myotube innervation (Cifuentes-Diaz et al., 1994b). R-cadherin (R- for retinal) is expressed in the myotome slightly after the onset of N-cadherin expression and disappears in multinucleated cells shortly after fusion (Rosenberg et al., 1997). M-cadherin (M- for muscle) has been initially identified in differentiated C2 muscle cells in culture (Donalies et al., 1991). In vivo, M-cadherin is expressed in embryonic skeletal muscles with a delay compared to the expression of N- and R-cadherin (Moore and Walsh, 1993). It is specifically accumulated during secondary myogenesis at the characteristic sites of insertion of secondary myotubes on primary myotubes (Cifuentes-Diaz et al., 1995). Finally, cadherin-11 is expressed at low levels by fibroblastic and myogenic cells during muscle development and regeneration, probably contributing to the muscle–motoneurons interactions (Padilla et al., 1998; Padilla et al., 1999). This regulated expression and subcellular localisation of cadherins during skeletal muscle formation suggests that, in addition to soluble signals from the surrounding tissue, cadherins are part of the myogenic program providing instructive cues for muscle cell differentiation.

### 2.3. The regulation of myogenesis by cadherins

The early expression of N-cadherin suggests an implication of this cadherin in myogenesis, notably through a community effect (Holt et al., 1994). Mice lacking N-cadherin exhibit severe defects in neurulation, somitogenesis and development of myocardium, dying at E9, before muscle formation (Radice et al., 1997). However, myoblasts rendered genetically null for N-cadherin are competent to differentiate and fuse in vitro, suggesting that N-cadherin is not absolutely required for myogenesis (Charlton et al., 1997). In contrast, several other studies have shown a direct implication of N-cadherin at specific steps of the myogenic process. Perturbation of N-cadherin function in the chick embryo leads to an alteration of myoblast migration, while its activation allows early muscle differentiation in immobilised cell aggregates (Brand-Saberi et al., 1996). Forced expression of N-cadherin in fibroblasts promotes the myogenic differentiation in 3-D culture (Redfield et al., 1997). Moreover, in vitro studies indicate that myoblast fusion is dependent on N-cadherin-mediated adhesion (Mège et al., 1992; George-Weinstein et al., 1997; Knudsen et al., 1990). Similarly, R-cadherin expression in E-cadherin--/ES cells rescued the formation of striated muscles (Rosenberg et al., 1997), and perturbations of M-cadherin-mediated adhesion was found to interfere with the fusion process (Zeschnigk et al., 1995). Recent observations indicate that direct N-cadherin activation, independently of integrin contribution, could signal differentiation in myogenic cell lines and induce growth arrest (Goichberg and Geiger, 1998; Levenberg et al., 1999; Goichberg et al., 2001; Gavard et al. in preparation).

In conclusion, these data support a direct implication of cadherin-based cell adhesion in myogenesis. Clearly this role cannot be attributed to a single cadherin because neither the inactivation of the genes coding for N-cadherin, M-cadherin (Hollnagel et al., 2002), R-cadherin (Dahl et al., 2002) or cadherin-11 (Manabe et al., 2000) led to obvious myogenesis defects in mice. There is no doubt, however, that the production of double or triple mutant mice in the future may provide direct evidence for a role of these combinatorially expressed molecules in skeletal muscle formation. Indeed, other available data indicate that cadherin-mediated adhesion participates in the control of myogenesis at least at three crucial steps: (1) myogenic cell precursor migration; (2) myoblast differentiation; and (3) myoblast fusion. The molecular mechanisms, in particular signalling pathways, by which cadherins control myoblast differentiation, are not yet elucidated. Cadherin-triggered adhesion may directly modulate the activity of the small G proteins of the Rho, Rac, cdc42 subfamily (Noren et al., 2001; Meriane et al., 2000; Lambert et al., 2002). These proteins are known to signal themselves both toward the nucleus and toward the cytoplasm by controlling cytoskeleton dynamics (Hall, 1998). Interestingly, the same GTPases are also involved in signalling cascades downstream of growth factor receptors

and ECM receptors (integrins). Cadherin-based adhesion may modulate myogenesis by a crosstalk with these well established signalling pathways, ensuring that only cells located at the right place at the right time may continue in the differentiation process.

3. Motor innervation

Concomitantly to myogenic differentiation, some neuroepithelial cells in the basal plate of the neural tube exit the cell cycle and differentiate under the control of Shh, a ventralising diffusible factor secreted by the notochord and the floor plate (Fig. 2A). At first, Shh is secreted at low

A
E9.5
E11.5
E12.5
nt
nc
motoneuron
birth
drg
vh
vr
fp
motoneuron
migration
dr
pn
axonal outgrowth
and pathfinding

B

N-cadherin
E-cadherin
cadherin-6
cadherin-11

Fig. 2. Major steps of motoneuron differentiation and domains of cadherin expression in developing spinal cord in the mouse. (A) Major steps of motoneuron differentiation in the mouse. nt, neural tube; nc, notochord; fp, floor plate; vh, ventral horns; drg, dorsal root ganglia; vr, ventral roots; dr, dorsal roots; pn, peripheral sensory–motor nerves. (B) Domains of expression of classical cadherins in the developing spinal cord and peripheral sensory–motor nerves.

levels by the notochord and converts neuroepithelial cells into ventralised progenitors. Then, Shh secreted at high concentrations by the floor plate converts these progenitors in post-mitotic motoneurons (Ericson et al., 1996) that begin to express Islet-1, a transcription factor of the LIM homeodomain class, essential for their induction and early survival (Pfaff et al., 1996). These post-mitotic motoneurons migrate and segregate to organise into motor columns within the forming ventral horns. At this time, they no longer express Islet-1, but rather a combination of members of the LIM homeodomain class, allowing motor column identification (Lumsden, 1995). Short after the last mitosis, motoneurons send out an axon that will grow towards the periphery through the ventral root of the spinal cord. While motoneurons establish neuro-neuronal contacts with more dorsally located neurons, their single axon elongates finding its way all across the embryo towards its muscle target. During this pathfinding process, motor fibers associate with sensory fibers of the dorsal root ganglia, and precursors of peripheral glial cells, i.e. Schwann cells, to form peripheral nerves.

### 3.1. A role for cadherins in the organisation of motor neurons into nuclei and in the specification of sensory–motor networks

According to their spatio-temporal expression profiles, cadherins have been associated to different steps of the development of the nervous system, including cell migration, segregation and differentiation, as well as neurite outgrowth and pathfinding. The same might be true during the formation of the sensory–motor networks which innervate and control the activity of striated skeletal muscle fibers. Indeed, cadherins are expressed in a combinatorial fashion in the spinal cord throughout development (Fig. 2). N-cadherin is expressed in the neural tube as soon as it folds and segregates out from the ectoderm. Later, its expression becomes prominent in the dorsal spinal cord and in the floor plate, as well as in dorsal root ganglia (Packer et al., 1997). Thus, N-cadherin expression is confined to the sensory compartment of sensory–motor networks. E-cadherin, another type I cadherin, has been shown to be expressed by a particular subset of sensory neurons of dorsal root ganglia in the mouse, suggesting that it might play a role in the selective recognition of sensory neuron targets (Shimamura et al., 1992). However, until recently, no cadherin expression has been described in the ventral spinal cord where the motor neurons are located.

A systematic search for cadherins expressed in the developing mouse neuromuscular system identified cadherins 6 and 11. Their spatio-temporal mRNA expression patterns suggested a role for these type II cadherins in the differentiation of spinal motoneurons (Padilla et al., 1998). Protein localisation further demonstrated that cadherin-6 and 11 expression takes place early in post-mitotic spinal neurons. These two cadherins are differentially regulated in space and time in relation to neuronal differentiation (Marthiens et al., 2002). Indeed, while cadherin-11 is expressed by all spinal neurons soon after their birth, cadherin-6 expression is restricted to subpopulations of differentiating motoneurons. According to their homophilic adhesive properties, cadherins 6 and 11 were proposed to be involved in the segregation of motoneuron cell bodies leading to their organisation into specific motor columns. At the same time, Price et al. (2002) also observed that the combinatorial expression of type II cadherins defines specific motor pools in the developing chick spinal cord. These authors showed that the ectopic expression or misexpression of MN-cadherin, a new identified member of the cadherin family specifically expressed in certain motor pools, led to an abnormal mixing of motoneuron populations that are normally distinguished by the expression of this cadherin. These data provided direct evidence for a role of cadherins in motor pool segregation. Motor pools were also identified by the combinatorial expression of members of the LIM homeodomain class (Lumsden, 1995). This raises the possibility that cadherin expression in specific motor pools is under the control of LIM transcription factors. In addition, type II cadherins are also expressed by subsets of proprioceptive neurons, raising the possibility that these proteins have additional roles in the formation of sensory–motor connections (Price et al., 2002). Interestingly, protocadherins of the cadherin-related neuronal receptor (CNR) family are also expressed in embryonic spinal motoneurons, as well as in dorsal root ganglia (Carroll et al., 2001). Altogether, these results strongly support the notion that the expression and prevalence of cadherin receptors, under the control of specific transcription factors, directly control the formation of discrete motor and sensory nuclei in the spinal cord.

### 3.2. Motor axon elongation and pathfinding

In periphery, cadherins are also expressed in a combinatorial fashion by motor and sensory axons and by Schwann cell precursors, suggesting that they are also involved in peripheral nerve outgrowth. In the chick embryo, T-cadherin, a GPI anchored protein lacking the conserved cytoplasmic domain of cadherins (Ranscht and Dours-Zimmermann, 1991) is present at the surface of outgrowing motor axons, as well as in regions avoided by growing axons, like caudal sclerotome and extrasynaptic muscle surfaces (Fredette and Ranscht, 1994). In vitro studies revealed that T-cadherin used as a substrate inhibits neurite extension, suggesting it may act as a negative guidance cue for motor axon projections (Fredette et al., 1996). In the mouse embryo, N-cadherin is abundantly expressed in sensory axons emerging from dorsal root ganglia (Packer et al., 1997) and accumulated at axo-axonal and axo-glial contacts of unmyelinated fibers (Shibuya et al., 1995). In vitro, this molecule has been involved in sensory growth cone migration onto Schwann cells (Bixby et al., 1988; Letourneau et al., 1990), in Schwann cell–Schwann cell interactions (Letourneau et al., 1991) and in Schwann cell process growth and alignment on axons (Wanner
and Wood, 2002). Furthermore, N-cadherin promotes neurite outgrowth of chick ciliary ganglia neurons (Bixby et al., 1988; Bixby and Zhang, 1990). Cadherins 6 and 11 are also good candidates for contributing to the formation of peripheral nerve tracts and to the regulation of axon growth in vivo (Marthiens et al., 2002). Indeed, cadherin-11 is expressed at the surface of both sensory and motor axons (Fig. 2B), suggesting a role in axon fasciculation, elongation and/or pathfinding. In contrast, cadherin-6, which is distributed at the surface of both motor axons and Schwann cell precursors could be specifically involved in motor growth cone–Schwann cell interactions. While cadherins seem to be involved in peripheral axon elongation and pathfinding, their potential involvement in the specification of sensory–motor networks leading to a selective targeting of muscle fibers remains a field of investigation.

### 3.3. N-cadherin and neurite outgrowth

In the recent past years, in vitro studies have provided evidence that cadherin-based homophilic adhesion initiates intracellular signals leading to neurite induction and elongation. Doherty and collaborators have shown that N-cadherin, used as a culture substrate, potentiates neurite extension in PC12 cells and that this promoting activity is inhibited by antagonists of Ca²⁺ channels (Doherty et al., 1991). In addition, soluble N-cadherin induces an increase of intracellular Ca²⁺ concentrations in the growth cone of chick dorsal root ganglia cells (Bixby et al., 1994). N-cadherin could promote neurite growth by stimulating Ca²⁺ influx into neurons, which is known to modulate growth cone motility. Other studies suggest that N-cadherin dependent promoting activity could involve the tyrosine kinase and phosphatase receptors. The induction of neurite outgrowth by N-cadherin is inhibited by the expression of a dominant negative form of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR), lacking the tyrosine kinase activity (Saffell et al., 1997). N-cadherin and FGFR can directly associate within the same complex because antibody-mediated clustering of N-cadherin results in a co-clustering of the FGFR (Utton et al., 2001) and N-cadherin and FGFR are able to coimmunoprecipitate (Peluso, 2000). This interaction seems to be mediated by a specific motif in the fourth extracellular domain of N-cadherin. Antibodies directed against this motif inhibit N-cadherin function in neurons, providing evidence that a direct interaction of N-cadherin and the FGFR is essential for the neurite outgrowth promoting activity of N-cadherin (Williams et al., 2001). In addition, the receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase μ (RPTPμ), which has been shown to directly interact with the cytoplasmic domain of cadherins in vivo (Brady-Kalnay et al., 1998), seems to be involved in N-cadherin-induced neurite outgrowth of retinal explant cultures. Downregulation of RPTPμ expression and overexpression of a catalytically inactive form of this protein result in decreased neurite extension on a N-cadherin substrate (Burden-Gulley and Brady-Kalnay, 1999). Altogether, these results raise

the possibility that tyrosine kinase and phosphatase receptors can relay or modulate the function of cadherins in axonal elongation.

In conclusion, cadherins are likely to represent one of the major classes of adhesion receptors involved in nuclei formation and axon outgrowth and pathfinding in the nervous system. Clearly, these receptors have two complementary actions that may contribute cooperatively to control neuronal cell fate, shape and migration. First, cadherins transduce instructive signals inside the cells in response to cell adhesion by activating specific signalling pathways. Second, as importantly, they are primary constituents of a mechanotransduction apparatus linking the cell membrane to the cytoskeleton at sites of contact with adjacent cells.

## 4. Possible modes of action of cadherins

A growing number of cell biology studies suggest that cadherins could be true cell surface receptors, relaying informations related to the juxtacrine cell environment and its modifications. For this purpose, it appears evident that these receptors are associated to mechanisms able to transduce those signals inside the cell, allowing adapted cell responses in terms of cell growth, motility and differentiation. Information relayed by cadherins may be either chemical or mechanical in nature, leading to the activation of two types of interrelated signalling pathways. In this last paragraph we will try to give an overview of the data supporting these two notions (i.e. activation of signalling cascade and mechanotransduction), independently of the cellular system in which they have been described.

### 4.1. Cadherins as adhesion receptors

One of the first evidence for signalling at cell–cell contacts is the recruitment of proteins phosphorylated on tyrosine and protein tyrosine kinases themselves at adherens junctions and cadherin-mediated cell–cell contacts (Kinch et al., 1997; Lambert et al., 2000; Pece and Gutkind, 2000). It became apparent from further studies that cadherin-mediated adhesion can trigger intracellular signalling events via the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), including activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase) and of the extracellular-signal regulated kinase/mitogen activated kinase (ERK/MAPK) pathway (Pece et al., 1999). In addition, EGFR coimmunoprecipitates with the cadherin complex from epithelial cells and is activated upon cell–cell contact formation in the absence of EGF (Pece and Gutkind, 2000).

Another well documented signalling pathway activated in response to cadherin-mediated cell contact converges on the small GTPases of the Rho, Rac, cdc42 family. Rac is recruited upon induction of intercellular adhesion in epithelial, endothelial or muscle cells (Noren et al., 2001; Nakagawa et al., 2001; Lampugnani et al., 1997; Lambert et al.,
2002). Furthermore, direct engagement of cadherins has been shown to increase the level of either Rac-GTP or cdc42-GTP in various cellular backgrounds (Noren et al., 2001; Kovacs et al., 2002a; Kim et al., 2000). Both antibody-mediated clustering and homophilic ectodomain liganding of cadherins have been shown to activate Rac. The activation of PI3-kinase which may be part of the cadherin complex, appears either necessary or dispensable for Rac activation, depending on the studies (Kovacs et al., 2002a; Nakagawa et al., 2001; Betson et al., 2002; Gavard et al., unpublished data). These data suggest that the modulation of GTPases activity by cadherins results from a complex signalling pathway initiated by either cadherin activation, clustering or both (Lambert et al., 2002). Recently, it has been shown that cadherin-mediated activation of Rac in keratinocytes is also mediated by EGFR (Betson et al., 2002). The oligomerisation of cadherins is required for the activation of both MAPK and Rac pathways, suggesting that cadherins are able to transactivate EGFR, likely as a result of their co-clustering. This mechanism is similar to the one proposed for the N-cadherin-dependent activation of the FGFR during neurite outgrowth (Utton et al., 2001). A functional interaction and crosstalk between VE-cadherin and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR) has been also described in endothelial cells (Carmeliet et al., 1999).

The catenin p120 was initially described as a src-substrate bound to the juxta membrane region of the intracellular domain of cadherins (Reynolds et al., 1992). p120, which is recruited at cell-cell contacts, appears as another major player in the signalling cascade initiated in response to cadherin-mediated cell adhesion. It is thought to influence cadherin dimerisation and/or clustering (Yap et al., 1998; Thoreson et al., 2000), although its positive or inhibitory role

is a matter of discussion (Aono et al., 1999; Ohkubo and Ozawa, 1999). p120 has been proposed to act as a switch both in the regulation of small GTPases by cadherin-mediated contacts (Anastasiadis and Reynolds, 2001) but also in the regulation of cadherin function by small GTPases (Fukata and Kaibuchi, 2001). Alternatively, p120 may directly signal to the nucleus via its interaction with Kaiso (Daniel and Reynolds, 1999), a transcription factor of the zinc finger super-family that has been recently described as a methylation-dependent gene repressor (Prokhortchouk et al., 2001). p120 recruitment may constitute one of the first steps of a signalling cascade initiated in response to cell adhesion.

Altogether, these studies suggest that cadherin receptors act as adhesion triggered nucleation centres for various scaffolding and signalling complexes (Fig. 3). Small GTPases of the Rho, Rac, cdc42 subfamily appear as central targets of cadherin-induced cell signalling. Interestingly, these signalling proteins are ubiquitously expressed in embryonic and adult tissues. They are well known to integrate signals initiated at the cell membrane by growth factor binding and cell–ECM contacts. Moreover, Rho GTPases relay these signals both towards the nucleus by activating p38-JNK pathways and towards the cytoskeleton (Van Aeslt and D’Souza-Schorey, 1997). Indeed, Rho GTPases strongly modulate actin cytoskeleton shape and dynamics (Hall, 1998). Thus, beside the direct association of cadherin cytoplasmic tail to the actin cytoskeleton, Rho GTPases are directly involved in the bidirectional mechanochemical signalling between cadherins and the actin cytoskeleton, which is an essential aspect of the mode of action of cadherins in the control of cell shape, cell aggregation and migration.


Cell-cell adhesion

cadherins

β-catenin  
p120  
α-catenin  

actin cytoskeleton

nucleus

GFR

PI3-K

cdc 42  
Rac

Cell responses

shape, migration, differentiation


Fig. 3. Signal transduction and signalling pathways triggered by cadherin receptors. Schematic representation of the signal transduction pathway mediated by cadherins in response to cell–cell contact formation. Only the more commonly described signalling partners are represented. GFR, growth factor receptors.

4.2. Cadherins as mechanotransducers

During the processes of cell rearrangement, cell migration and growth cone progression, the cytoskeleton dynamics plays a major role assuming the retrograde movement of actin filaments generating the driving force to pull the lamellipodia leading edge or the growth cone forward (Lin and Forscher, 1995; Lauffenburger and Horwitz, 1996). For cell rearrangements to occur, forces are translocated between cell and substratum or neighboring cells through binding of adhesion molecule ectodomain and anchoring of their cytoplasmic tail to the cytoskeleton.

Cadherins may control cell movement during morphogenetic processes by anchoring and signalling to the actin cytoskeleton (Tepass et al., 2000; Lambert et al., 2002), as shown earlier for integrins (Lauffenburger and Horwitz, 1996). Indeed, cadherin molecules are recruited at newly formed sites of cell–cell contact together with catenins, inducing the local anchoring of actin cytoskeleton to the membrane (Adams and Nelson, 1998; Lambert et al., 2000). It has been shown recently that, as a consequence of cadherin homophilic liganding, cadherin cytoplasmic tail associates with the Arp2/3 complex to direct actin assembly at nascent adhesive contacts (Kovacs et al., 2002b; Lambert et al., 2002; Gavard et al., unpublished observations). As a result, the global cell cytoskeleton is remodeled with actin filaments ending at sites of cadherin-mediated cell contact (Gavard et al., unpublished observations). Very recent findings, obtained by the analysis of single cadherin molecules displacement in the plane of the membrane (Lambert et al., 2002; Iino et al., 2001) led us to propose a multi-step model for the adhesion-triggered anchoring of cadherins to the cytoskeleton allowing the generation of traction forces against neighboring cells (Fig. 4). Indeed, cadherin molecules are initially free to diffuse in the plasma membrane. Their homophilic binding to cadherin presented at the surface of adjacent cell may induce their clustering. This clustering resulting from the recruitment by passive diffusion of cadherin–catenin complexes present at the cell surface may then trigger the strong anchoring of the complexes to the actin cytoskeleton. This adhesion-triggered anchoring of adhesion complexes to the cytoskeleton allows the generation of traction forces against neighboring cells.

Interestingly, this anchoring is an inducible process depending on the density of homophilic ligand presented by the adjacent cell (Lambert et al., 2002). This mechanism will preferentially render contacts between higher cadherin expresser cells efficient to transduce mechanical forces generated by the cell’s motility system, via a faster anchoring of cadherins to the actin cytoskeleton. Furthermore, the activity of Rac1 is required for cadherin anchoring by acting on either actin polymerisation and/or actin crosslinking (Lambert et al., 2002). This double dependence of cadherin anchoring upon cadherin density and Rac1 activity may have strong physiological relevance for the control of cell sorting, cell migration and neurite outgrowth, providing the molecular bases for the selective choice of lamellipodia or growth cone directed progression in function of the local extracellular and intracellular environments, respectively. In addition, the initial homophilic binding might also be regulated differently.

**Fig. 4. Model for the ligand-dependent, Rac1-dependent anchoring of cadherin to the cytoskeleton and subsequent lamellipodia progression.**

(A) Cell–cell interaction is initiated by the homophilic interaction of N-cadherin molecules with similar cadherin molecules free to diffuse in the plasma membrane of an adjacent cell.

(B) This initial binding triggers the clustering of neighboring cadherin complexes recruited by passive diffusion. This step would be dependent upon the prevalence of cadherin molecules at the cell surface.

(C) Cadherin clustering induces their strong anchoring to the actin cytoskeleton in a Rac1-dependent manner.

(D) This cytoskeleton anchoring then allows the transduction of forces across the cell membrane, establishing tension on this focal point, which is needed for lamellipodia progression and establishment of further adhesive interactions at the leading edge.

essentially in the various compartments of the cell by factors such as cell contractility, actin dynamics or cellular level of tyrosine phosphorylation regulating cellular cadherin presentation or activity, contributing to the physiological regulation of cell motility.

In conclusion, these results show that cadherins are essential for the transduction of forces generated by the cell motility system across the cell membrane enlightening an essential aspect of the mode of action of cadherins in muscle/neural cell migration and growth cone navigation. Some of the major partners of cadherins in this process have been identified such as p120, Arp2/3 and Rac1. However, large gaps remain in this mechanochemical signal transduction pathway triggered by cadherin homophilic liganding, and more studies at the molecular and cellular levels are needed. Among the more important questions to be answered in the near future are the molecular definition of the cadherin activation process and the identification of the molecular link between this activation and the regulation of Rho GTPases at the cell membrane. It is also very important to get information on the dynamics and mechanisms of cadherin-mediated cell adhesion and associated transduction of bidirectionally mechanochemical signals directly in the growth cone of living neurons.

**Acknowledgements**

Laboratory work was supported by institutional funding from INSERM, as well as by grants from AFM (Association Française contre les Myopathies) and ARC (Association Française de Recherche contre le Cancer).

**References**

Adams, C.L., Nelson, W.J., 1998. Cytomechanics of cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 10, 527–577.

Anastasiadis, P.Z., Reynolds, A.B., 2001. Regulation of Rho GTPases by p120-catenin. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13, 604–610.

Aono, S., Nakagawa, S., Reynolds, A.B., Takeichi, M., 1999. p120<sup>ctn</sup> acts as an inhibitory regulator of cadherin function in colon carcinoma cells. J. Cell Biol. 145, 551–562.

Benson, D.L., Colman, D.R., Huntley, G.W., 2001. Molecules, maps and synapse specificity. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 899–909.

Benson, D.L., Schnapp, L.M., Shapiro, L., Huntley, G.W., 2000. Making memories stick: cell-adhesion molecules in synaptic plasticity. Trends Cell Biol. 10, 473–482.

Betson, M., Lozano, E., Zhang, J., Braga, V.M.M., 2002. Rac activation upon cell-cell contact formation is dependent on signaling from the epidermal growth factor receptor. J. Biol. Chem., 36962–36969.

Bixby, J.L., Grünwald, G.B., Bookman, R.J., 1994. Ca<sup>2+</sup> influx and neurite growth in response to purified N-cadherin and laminin. J. Cell Biol. 127, 1461–1475.

Bixby, J.L., Lilien, J., Reichardt, L.F., 1988. Identification of the major proteins that promote neuronal process outgrowth on Schwann cells *in vitro*. J. Cell Biol. 107, 353–362.

Bixby, J.L., Zhang, R., 1990. Purified N-cadherin is a potent substrate for the rapid induction of neurite outgrowth. J. Cell Biol. 110, 1253–1260.

Brady-Kalnay, S.M., Mourton, T., Nixon, J.P., Pietz, G.E., Kinch, M., Chen, H., Brackenbury, R., Rimm, D.L., Del Vecchio, R.L., Tonks, N.K., 1998. Dynamic Interaction of PTP with multiple cadherins in vivo. J. Cell Biol. 141, 287–296.

Brand-Saberi, B., Gamel, A.J., Krenn, V., Müller, T.S., Wilting, J., Christ, B., 1996. N-cadherin is involved in myoblast migration and muscle differentiation in the avian limb bud. Dev. Biol. 178, 160–173.

Buckingham, M., 2001. Skeletal muscle formation in vertebrates. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 11, 440–448.

Burden-Gulley, S.M., Brady-Kalnay, S.M., 1999. PTP regulates N-cadherin-dependent neurite outgrowth. J. Cell Biol. 144, 1323–1336.

Carmeliet, P., Lampugnani, M.G., Moons, L., Breviario, F., Compernolle, V., Bono, F., Balconi, G., Spagnuolo, R., Oosthuyse, B., Dewerchin, M., Zanetti, A., Angellilo, A., Mattot, V., Nuyens, D., Lutgens, E., Clotman, F., DeRuiter, M.C., Gittenberger-de Groot, A., Poelmann, R., Lupu, F., Herbert, J.M., Collen, D., Dejana, E., 1999. Targeted deficiency or cytosolic truncation of the VE-cadherin gene in mice impairs VEGF-mediated endothelial survival and angiogenesis. Cell 98, 147–157.

Carroll, P., Gayet, O., Feuillet, C., Kallenbach, S., De Bovis, B., Dudley, K., Alonso, S., 2001. Juxtaposition of CNR protocadherins and reelin expression in the developing spinal cord. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 17, 611–623.

Charlton, C.A., Mohler, W.A., Radice, G.L., Hynes, R.O., Blau, H.M., 1997. Fusion competence of myoblasts rendered genetically null for N-cadherin in culture. J. Cell Biol. 138, 331–336.

Christ, B., Ordahl, C.P., 1995. Early states of Chick somite development. Anal. Embryol. 191, 381–396.

Cifuentes-Diaz, C., Mège, R.M., Nicolet, M., Rieger, F., 1994a. Presence and role of cell adhesion molecules during morphogenesis and regeneration in the neuromuscular system. Basic Appl. Myol. 4, 257–280.

Cifuentes-Diaz, C., Nicolet, M., Alameddine, H., Goudou, D., Dehau-pas, M., Rieger, F., Mège, R.M., 1995. M-cadherin expression in developing, adult and regenerating mouse skeletal muscle: possible involvement in secondary myogenesis. Mech. Dev. 50, 85–97.

Cifuentes-Diaz, C., Nicolet, M., Goudou, D., Rieger, F., Mege, R.M., 1994b. N-cadherin expression in developing, adult and denervated chicken neuromuscular system. Accumulations at both the neuromuscular junction and the node of Ranvier. Development 120, 1–11.

Coussen, F., Normand, E., Marchal, C., Costet, P., Choquet, D., Lambert, M., Mège, R.M., Mulle, C., 2002. Recruitment of the kainate receptor subunit glutamate receptor 6 by cadherin/catenin complexes. J. Neurosci. 22, 6426–6436.

Dahl, U., Sjodin, A., Larue, L., Radice, G.L., Cajander, S., Takeichi, M., Kemler, R., Semb, H., 2002. Genetic dissection of cadherin function during nephrogenesis. Mol. Cell Biol. 22, 1474–1487.

Daniel, J.M., Reynolds, A.B., 1999. The catenin p120<sup>ctn</sup> interacts with Kaiso, a novel BTB/POZ domain zinc finger transcription factor. Mol. Cell. Biol. 19, 3614–3623.

Doherty, P., Ashton, S.V., Moore, S.E., Walsh, F.S., 1991. Morphoregulatory activities of NCAM and N-cadherin can be accounted for by G protein-dependent activation of L- and N-type neuronal Ca<sup>2+</sup> channels. Cell 67, 21–33.

Donalies, M., Cramer, M., Ringwald, M., Starzinski-Powitz, A., 1991. Expression of M-cadherin, a member of the cadherin multigene family, correlates with differentiation of skeletal muscle cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 88, 8024–8028.

Edelman, G.M., 1988. Morphoregulatory molecules. Biochem. 27, 3533–3543.

Ericson, J., Morton, S., Kawakami, A., Roelink, H., Jessell, T.M., 1996. Two critical periods of Sonic Hedgehog signaling required for the specification of motor neuron identity. Cell 87, 661–673.

Fannon, A.M., Colman, D.R., 1996. A model for central synaptic junctional complex formation based on the differential adhesive specificities of the cadherins. Neuron 17, 423–434.

Fredette, B.J., Miller, J., Ranscht, B., 1996. Inhibition of motor axon growth by T-cadherin substrata. Development 122, 3163–3171.

Fredette, B.J., Ranscht, B., 1994. T-cadherin expression delineates specific regions of the developing motor axon-hindlimb projection pathway. J. Neurosci. 14, 7331–7346.

Friedlander, D.R., Mège, R.M., Cunningham, B.A., Edelman, G.M., 1989. Cell sorting-out is modulated by both the specificity and amount of different cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) expressed on cell surfaces. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86, 7043–7047.

Fukata, M., Kaibuchi, K., 2001. Rho-family GTPases in cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2, 887–897.

George-Weinstein, M., Gerhart, J., Blitz, J., Simak, E., Knudsen, K.A., 1997. N-cadherin promotes the commitment and differentiation of skeletal muscle precursor cells. Dev. Biol. 185, 14–24.

Goichberg, P., Geiger, B., 1998. Direct involvement of N-cadherin-mediated signaling in muscle differentiation. Mol. Biol. Cell 9, 3119–3131.

Goichberg, P., Shtutman, M., Ben-Ze’ev, A., Geiger, B., 2001. Recruitment of β-catenin to cadherin-mediated intercellular adhesions is involved in myogenic induction. J. Cell Sci. 114, 1309–1319.

Gumbiner, B.M., 1996. Cell adhesion: the molecular basis of tissue architecture and morphogenesis. Cell 84, 345–357.

Hall, A., 1998. Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton. Science 279, 509–514.

Hollnagel, A., Grund, C., Franke, W.W., Arnold, H.H., 2002. The cell adhesion molecule M-cadherin is not essential for muscle development and regeneration. Mol. Cell Biol. 22, 4760–4770.

Holt, C.E., Lemaire, P., Gurdon, J.B., 1994. Cadherin-mediated cell interactions are necessary for the activation of MyoD in Xenopus mesoderm. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 10844–11048.

Hughes, S.M., Salinas, P.C., 1999. Control of muscle fibre and motoneuron diversification. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 9, 54–64.

Iino, R., Koyama, I., Kusumi, A., 2001. Single molecule imaging of green fluorescent proteins in living cells: E-cadherin forms oligomers on the free cell surface. Biophys. J. 80, 2667–2677.

Kim, S.H., Li, Z., Sacks, D.B., 2000. E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell attachment activates cdc42. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 36999–37005.

Kinch, M.S., Petch, L., Zhong, C., Burridge, K., 1997. E-cadherin engagement stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation. Cell Adhes. Commun. 4, 425–437.

Knudsen, K.A., Myers, L., Mc Elwee, S.A., 1990. A role for the Ca²⁺ dependent adhesion molecule, N-cadherin, in myoblast interaction during myogenesis. Exp. Cell Res. 188, 175–184.

Kovacs, E.M., Ali, R.G., McCormack, A.J., Yap, A.S., 2002a. E-cadherin homophilic ligation directly signals through Rac and Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase to regulate adhesive contacts. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 6708–6718.

Kovacs, E.M., Goodwin, M., Ali, R.G., Paterson, A.D., Yap, A.S., 2002b. Cadherin-directed actin assembly: E-cadherin physically associates with the Arp2/3 complex to direct assembly in nascent adhesive contacts. Curr. Biol. 12, 379–382.

Lambert, M., Choquet, D., Mège, R.M., 2002. Dynamics of ligand induced, Rac1-dependent anchoring of cadherins to the actin cytoskeleton. J. Cell Biol. 157, 469–479.

Lambert, M., Padilla, F., Mège, R.M., 2000. Immobilized dimers of N-cadherin-Fc chimera mimic cadherin-mediated cell contact formation: Contribution of both inside-out and outside-in signals. J. Cell Sci. 113, 2207–2219.

Lampugnani, M.G., Corada, M., Anriopoulou, P., Esser, S., Risau, W., Dejana, E., 1997. Cell confluence regulates tyrosine phosphorylation of adherens junction components in endothelial cells. J. Cell Sci. 110, 2065–2077.

Lauffenburger, D.A., Horwitz, A.F., 1996. Cell migration: a physically integrated molecular process. Cell 84, 359–369.

Letourneau, P.C., Roche, F.K., Shattuck, T.A., Lemmon, V., Takeichi, M., 1991. Interactions of Schwann cells with neurites and with other Schwann cells involve the calcium-dependent adhesion molecule, N-cadherin. J. Neurobiol. 22, 707–720.

Letourneau, P.C., Shattuck, T.A., Roche, F.K., Takeichi, M., Lemmon, V., 1990. Nerve growth cone migration onto schwann cells involves the calcium dependent adhesion molecule, N-cadherin. Dev. Biol. 138, 430–442.

Levenberg, S., Yarden, A., Kam, Z., Geiger, B., 1999. p27 is involved in N-cadherin-mediated contact inhibition of cell growth and S-phase entry. Oncogene 18, 869–876.

Lin, C.H., Forscher, P., 1995. Growth cone advance is inversely proportional to retrograde F-actin flow. Neuron 14, 763–771.

Lumsden, A., 1995. A “LIM code” for motor neurons?. Curr. Biol. 5, 491–495.

Manabe, T., Togashi, H., Uchida, N., Suzuki, S.C., Hayakawa, Y., Yamamoto, M., Yoda, H., Miyakawa, T., Takeichi, M., Chisaka, O., 2000. Loss of cadherin-11 adhesion receptor enhances plastic changes in hippocampal synapses and modifies behavioral responses. Mol. Cell Neurosci. 15, 534–546.

Marthiens, V., Padilla, F., Lambert, M., Mège, R.M., 2002. Complementary Expression and Regulation of Cadherins 6 and 11 during Specific Steps of Motoneuron Differentiation. Mol. Cell Neurosci. 20, 458–475.

Mège, R.M., Goudou, D., Diaz, C., Nicolet, M., Garcia, L., Géraud, G., Rieger, F., 1992. N-cadherin and N-CAM in myoblast fusion: compared localisation and effect of blockade by peptides and antibodies. J. Cell Sci. 103, 897–906.

Mège, R.M., Matsuzaki, F., Gallin, W.J., Goldberg, J.I., Cunningham, B.A., Edelman, G.M., 1988. Construction of epithelioid sheets by transfection of mouse sarcoma cells with cDNAs for chicken cell adhesion molecules. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 85, 7274–7278.

Meriane, M., Roux, P., Primig, M., Fort, P., Gauthier-Rouvière, C., 2000. Critical activities of Rac1 and cdc42Hs in skeletal myogenesis: antagonistic effects of JNK and p38 pathways. Mol. Biol. Cell 11, 2513–2528.

Moore, R., Walsh, F.S., 1993. The cell adhesion molecule M-cadherin is specifically expressed in developing and regenerating, but not denervated skeletal muscle. Development 117, 1409–1420.

Murase, S., Mosser, E., Schuman, E.M., 2002. Depolarization drives beta-Catenin into neuronal spines promoting changes in synaptic structure and function. Neuron 35, 91–105.

Nakagawa, M., Fukata, M., Yamaga, M., Itoh, N., Kaibuchi, K., 2001. Recruitment and activation of Rac 1 by the formation of E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion sites. J. Cell Sci. 114, 1829–1838.

Noren, N.K., Niessen, C.M., Gumbiner, B.M., Burridge, K., 2001. Cadherin engagement regulates Rho family GTPases. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 33305–33308.

Nose, A., Nagafuchi, A., Takeichi, M., 1988. Expressed recombinant cadherins mediate cell sorting in model system. Cell 54, 993–1001.

Ohkubo, T., Ozawa, M., 1999. P120ctn binds to the membrane-proximal region of the E-cadherin cytoplasmic domain and is involved in modulation of adhesion activity. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 21409–21415.

Packer, A.I., Elwell, V.A., Parnass, J.D., Knudsen, K.A., Wolgemuth, D.J., 1997. N-cadherin protein distribution in normal embryos and in embryos carrying mutations in the homeobox gene *Hoxa-4*. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 41, 459–468.

Padilla, F., Broders, F., Nicolet, M., Mège, R.M., 1998. Cadherin M, 6 and 11 expression patterns suggest complementary roles in mouse neuromuscular axis development. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 11, 217–233.

Padilla, F., Mège, R.M., Sobel, A., Nicolet, M., 1999. Upregulation and redistribution of cadherins reveal specific glial and muscle cell phenotypes during Wallerian degeneration and muscle denervation in the mouse. J. Neurosci. Res. 58, 270–283.

Pecè, S., Chiariello, M., Murga, C., Gutkind, J.S., 1999. Activation of the protein kinase Akt/PKB by the formation of E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell junctions. Evidence for the association of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase with the E-cadherin adhesion complex. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 19347–19351.

Pecè, S., Gutkind, J.S., 2000. Signaling from E-cadherins to the MAPK pathway by the recruitment and activation of EGF receptors upon cell-cell contact formation. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 41227–41233.

Peluso, J.J., 2000. N-cadherin-mediated cell contact regulates ovarian surface epithelial cell survival. Biol Signals Recept. 9, 115–121.

Pfaff, S., Mendelsohn, M., Stewart, C., Edlund, T., Jessell, T.M., 1996. Requirement for LIM homeobox gene Isl1 in motor neuron generation reveals a motor neuron-dependent step in interneuron differentiation. Cell 84, 309–320.

Price, S.R., De Marco Garcia, N.V., Ranscht, B., Jessell, T.M., 2002. Regulation of motor neuron pool sorting by differential expression of type II cadherins. Cell 109, 205–216.

Prokhortchouk, A., Hendrich, B., Jorgensen, H., Ruzov, A., Wilm, M., Georgiev, G., Bird, A., Prokhortchouk, E., 2001. The p120 catenin partner Kaiso is a DNA methylation-dependent transcriptional repressor. Genes Dev. 15, 1613–1618.

Radice, G.L., Rayburn, H., Matsunami, H., Knudsen, K.A., Takeichi, M., Hynes, R.O., 1997. Developmental defects in mouse embryos lacking N-cadherin. Dev. Biol. 181, 64–78.

Ranscht, B., Dours-Zimmermann, M.T., 1991. T-cadherin, a novel cadherin cell adhesion molecule in the nervous system lacks the conserved cytoplasmic region. Neuron 7, 391–402.

Redfield, A.R., Nieman, M.T., Knudsen, K.A., 1997. Cadherins promote skeletal muscle differentiation in three-dimensional cultures. J. Cell Biol. 138, 1323–1331.

Redies, C., 1995. Cadherin expression in the developing vertebrate CNS: from neuromeres to brain nuclei and neural circuits. Exp. Cell Res. 220, 243–256.

Redies, C., Takeichi, M., 1996. Cadherins in the developing central nervous system: an adhesive code for segmental and functional subdivisions. Dev. Biol. 180, 413–423.

Reynolds, A.B., Herbert, L., Cleveland, J.L., Berg, S.T., Gaut, J.R., 1992. p120, a novel substrate of protein tyrosine kinase receptors and of p60src, is related to cadherin-binding factors β-catenin, plakoglobin and armadillo. Oncogene 7, 2439–2445.

Rosenberg, P., Esni, F., Sjödin, A., Larue, L., Carlsson, L., Gullberg, D., Takeichi, M., Kemler, R., Semb, H., 1997. A potential role of R-cadherin in striated muscle formation. Dev. Biol. 187, 55–70.

Saffell, J.L., Williams, E.J., Mason, I.J., Walsh, F.S., Doherty, P., 1997. Expression of a dominant negative FGF receptor inhibits axonal growth and FGF receptor phosphorylation stimulated by CAMs. Neuron 18, 231–242.

Shapiro, L., Colman, D.R., 1999. The diversity of cadherins and implications for a synaptic adhesive code in the CNS. Neuron 23, 427–430.

Shibuya, Y., Mizoguchi, A., Takeichi, M., Shimada, K., Ide, C., 1995. Localization of N-cadherin in the normal and regenerating nerve fibers of the chicken peripheral nervous system. Neuroscience 67, 253–261.

Shimamura, K., Takahashi, T., Takeichi, M., 1992. E-cadherin expression in a particular subset of sensory neurons. Dev. Biol. 152, 242–254.

Tajbakhsh, S., Cossu, G., 1997. Establishing myogenic identity during somitogenesis. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 7, 634–641.

Takeichi, M., 1995. Morphogenic roles of classic cadherins. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 7, 619–627.

Tepass, U., Truong, K., Godt, D., Ikura, M., Peifer, M., 2000. Cadherins in embryonic and neural morphogenesis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 1, 91–100.

Thoreson, M.A., Anastasiadis, P.Z., Daniel, J.M., Ireton, R.C., Wheelock, M.J., Johnson, K.R., Hummingbird, D.H., Reynolds, A.B., 2000. Selective uncoupling of p120ctn from E-cadherin disrupts strong adhesion. J. Cell Biol. 148, 189–201.

Togashi, H., Abe, K., Mizoguchi, A., Takaoka, K., Chisaka, O., Takeichi, M., 2002. Cadherin regulates dendritic spine morphogenesis. Neuron 35, 77–89.

Uchida, N., Honjo, Y., Johnson, K.R., Wheelock, M.J., Takeichi, M., 1996. The catenin/cadherin adhesion system is localized in synaptic junctions bordering transmitter release zones. J. Cell Biol. 135, 767–779.

Utton, M.A., Eickholt, B.J., Howell, F.V., Wallis, J., Doherty, P., 2001. Soluble N-cadherin stimulates fibroblast growth factor receptor dependent neurite outgrowth and N-cadherin and fibroblast growth factor receptor co-cluster in cells. J. Neurochem. 76, 1421–1430.

Van Aeslt, L., D’Souza-Schorey, C., 1997. Rho GTPases and signaling networks. Genes Dev. 11, 2295–2322.

Wanner, I.B., Wood, P.M., 2002. N-cadherin mediates axon-aligned process growth and cell-cell interaction in rat Schwann cells. J. Neurosci. 22, 4066–4079.

Williams, E.J., Williams, G., Howell, F.V., Skaper, S.D., Walsh, F.S., Doherty, P., 2001. Identification of an N-cadherin motif that can interact with the fibroblast growth factor receptor and is required for axonal growth. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 43879–43886.

Yap, A.S., Briehl, W.M., Gumbiner, B.M., 1997. Molecular and functional analysis of cadherin-based adherens junctions. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 13, 119–146.

Yap, A.S., Niessen, C.M., Gumbiner, B.M., 1998. The juxtamembrane region of the cadherin cytoplasmic tail supports lateral clustering, adhesive strengthening, and interaction with p120ctn. J. Cell Biol. 141, 779–789.

Yun, K., Wold, B., 1996. Skeletal muscle determination and differentiation: story of a core regulatory network and its context. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 8, 877–889.

Zeschnigk, M., Kozian, D., Kuch, C., Schmoll, M., Starzinski-Powitz, A., 1995. Involvement of M-cadherin in terminal differentiation of skeletal muscle cells. J. Cell Sci. 108, 2973–2981.
