
IUBMB Life, 54: 177–186, 2002  
1521-6543/02$12.00+.00  
DOI: 10.1080/15216540290114450  

**Review Article**

**Biosynthesis of Chondroitin/Dermatan Sulfate**

Jeremiah E. Silbert${}^{1,2}$ and Geetha Sugumaran${}^{1,2,3}$

${}^{1}$Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Bedford, Massachusetts 01730, USA  
${}^{2}$Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA  
${}^{3}$Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA  

---

**Summary**

Chondroitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate are synthesized as galactosaminoglycan polymers containing N-acetylgalactosamine alternating with glucuronic acid. The sugar residues are sulfated to varying degrees and positions depending upon the tissue sources and varying conditions of formation. Epimerization of any of the glucuronic acid residues to iduronic acid at the polymer level constitutes the formation of dermatan sulfate. Chondroitin/dermatan glycosaminoglycans are covalently attached by a common tetrasaccharide sequence to the serine residues of core proteins while they are adherent to the inner surface of endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi vesicles. Addition of the first sugar residue, xylose, to core proteins begins in the endoplasmic reticulum, followed by the addition of two galactose residues by two distinct glycosyl transferases in the early cis/medial regions of the Golgi. The linkage tetrasaccharide is completed in the medial/trans Golgi by the addition of the first glucuronic acid residue, followed by transfer of N-acetylgalactosamine to initiate the formation of a galactosaminoglycan rather than a glucosaminoglycan. This specific N-acetylgalactosaminyl transferase is different from the chondroitin synthase involved in generation of the repeating disaccharide units to form the chondroitin polymer. Sulfation of the chondroitin polymer by specific sulfotransferases occurs as the polymer is being formed. All the enzymes in the pathway for synthesis have been cloned, with the exception of the glucuronoyl to iduronyl epimerase involved in the formation of dermatan residues.

---

**Keywords** Biosynthesis; chondroitin sulfate; dermatan sulfate.

Received 14 February 2002; accepted 30 June 2002.  
This article is not subject to U.S. copyright laws.  
Address correspondence to Jeremiah E. Silbert, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Bedford, 200 Springs Road, Bedford, MA 01730, U.S.A. E-mail: jesilbert@aol.com  
Abbreviations: ER, endoplasmic reticulum; Gal, D-galactose; GalNAc, N-acetyl-D-galactosamine; GlcA, D-glucuronic acid; GlcNAc, N-acetyl-D-glucosamine; IdoA, L-iduronic acid; PAPS, adenosine 3′-phosphate 5′-phosphosulfate; UDP, uridine 5′-phosphate; Xyl, D-xylose.

---

**INTRODUCTION**

Chondroitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate constitute the polysaccharide (glycosaminoglycan) portions of several families of proteoglycans. The chondroitin/dermatan glycosaminoglycan consists of N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) residues alternating in glycosidic linkages with glucuronic acid (GlcA) or iduronic acid (IdoA) residues (1–3). The GalNAc residues are substituted to varying degrees with sulfate linked to 4- and/or 6-hydroxyl positions, and to a lesser extent the uronic acid residues may be substituted with sulfate at the 2- and rarely 3-hydroxyl positions, making these compounds highly anionic. Chondroitin/dermatan chains vary in size up to a hundred or more disaccharide repeating units. There also may be glycoprotein-like oligosaccharide substituents on the core proteins. The chondroitin/dermatan chains are attached glycosidically to serine in core proteins through the same glucuronic acid-galactose-galactose-xylose (GlcA-Gal-Gal-Xyl) tetrasaccharide as heparin/heparan sulfate. Major strides in defining the structures of the core protein portions have been accomplished by use of molecular biological techniques, which have permitted the classification of families of proteochondroitin/dermatan sulfate by similarities in size, amino acid sequences, and number and location of their glycosaminoglycan and glycoprotein-like oligosaccharide substituents. Sizes of the core proteins range from as small as 10 kDa to as large as 500 kDa and overall sizes of the entire proteoglycans from as small as 80 kDa to as large as 3,500 kDa.

Proteochondroitin/dermatan sulfate proteoglycans are produced to a variable extent by most, if not all, vertebrate cells as major components of connective tissue matrix (2–6), but are also found on cell surface and basement membranes (2–4, 6, 7), and in intracellular granules of certain cells (8). Each of these locations has one or more specific families of proteoglycan structures not found in the other locations. Functions in matrix locations such as skin and cartilage are mainly structural, whereas on membranes they appear to function mainly as receptors. These functions have not been demonstrated to the
degree shown for the multiple specific interactions of heparan sulfate (2).

# Biosynthesis of Core Protein

As is the case for most membrane and secreted glycoproteins, nascent core protein biosynthesis (3) is initiated by translation in the cytosol and translocation of the nascent polypeptide into the lumen of the ER through the translocon, via a signal sequence-mediated process. After the nascent core protein is translocated to the ER lumen, $N$-linked oligosaccharides are added cotranslationally to Asn residues from dolichol phosphate intermediates. Chaperone-mediated folding, formation of disulfide bonds, and the initial trimming of the $N$-linked oligosaccharides presumably occur before the modified core protein exits the ER. Some of these events have been described specifically for the core proteins of aggrecan and decorin, and are probably operative for other core proteins as well. Aberrant proteins that are not properly folded are degraded and never exit the ER, but it is not as yet clear what minimal folding or conformational requirements are necessary to enable movement to Golgi from ER for glycosaminoglycan synthesis.

At present it is not clear what commits a protein to become a proteoglycan. Studies with synthetic peptides have not defined a single consensus sequence for chain initiation, but generally Gly follows a substituted Ser, and the Ser-Gly pair is preceded by acidic amino acids (4). Recently, the alignment of amino acid sequences of over 50 chondroitin sulfate attachment sites from 19 different core proteins generated the consensus sequence a-a-a-a-Gly-Ser-Gly-a-b-a (with a = Glu or Asp and b = Gly, Glu, or Asp), which was further tested by in vitro xylosylation reactions. Despite these correlations, potential Ser-Gly sites for xylose addition commonly escape substitution. As a further complication, results from site-directed mutagenesis studies indicate that Ala residues could replace either of the two Gly residues in the Ser-Gly-Ile-Gly sequence of the decorin core protein, without any appreciable decrease in glycosaminoglycan substitution. Properties such as proximity to other substituted sites, downstream sequence, or secondary structure may also be important for xylose addition to singly and multiply substituted core proteins, while other sequence and structural features of the linkage oligosaccharide might contribute to the specification of chondroitin/dermatan or heparin/heparan chains on the common linkage region (see Sugahara and Kitagawa (9), accompanying review of heparin/heparan sulfate).

## Precursor Formation

Steps in formation of the sugar nucleotide precursors, UDP-Xyl, UDP-Gal, UDP-GlcA, and UDP-GalNAc for sugar incorporations are shown in Fig. 1. Glucose is the main precursor for all the sugars of chondroitin/dermatan as shown, although galactose, mainly derived from lactose, can be a precursor for the galactose, glucuronic acid, and xylose residues through formation of UDP-Gal, UDP-GlcA, and UDP-Xyl. Glucosamine can serve as a substrate for the $N$-acetylgalactosamine residues through formation of UDP-GalNAc if the glucosamine is provided as the monosaccharide to cultured cells or to an intact animal. Recently there have been many claims, mainly in advertisements and the lay press, for use of oral glucosamine in treatment of degenerative joint disease (osteoarthritis), purportedly by affecting production of chondroitin sulfate. However, glucosamine is ordinarily present in human diet only as part of oligosaccharides or polysaccharides and these do not provide the monosaccharide in any significant amount. Furthermore it has been shown that cultured cells from numerous sources, including chondrocytes, are capable of producing ample amounts of glucosamine from glucose, and there is no good evidence that additional exogenous glucosamine has any effect on synthesis of chondroitin sulfate by cartilage or any other tissue.

Sulfation is provided from 3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS) as shown in Fig. 1. Its formation is catalyzed by ATP sulfurylase and APS kinase, activities that reside on a single bifunctional protein in mammals (10). In general, sulfate is obtained mainly by direct ingestion of free sulfate or by metabolism of sulfated compounds, but some may be provided by oxidation of cysteine or methionine sulfhydryl groups, primarily in the liver. Enzymes that perform this oxidation also appear to be available in some chondroitin-forming tissues or cells (11, 12), including some skin fibroblasts (13), but not in chondrocytes (14).

Cells capable of synthesizing glycosaminoglycans contain all the enzymes necessary for formation of the precursors, because the sugar nucleotides and PAPS normally do not enter cells. The reactions for activation of sugars and sulfate are catalyzed by soluble enzymes in the cytosol, with the exception of the formation of UDP-Xyl from UDP-GlcA, which occurs within the lumen of the ER or Golgi (15, 16). Subsequently, the sugar nucleotides and PAPS are transported from the cytosol across the membrane into the lumen of the ER or Golgi by means of an antiport mechanism (17). Since an adequate supply of the nucleotide sugars and PAPS within the ER and Golgi is critical for the biosynthesis of proteoglycans, any lack of sufficient amounts of these molecules would affect the regulation of glycosaminoglycan chain initiation, final chain length, and the type and extent of sulfation. Although such deficiency has been described under abnormal conditions (18), culturing cells with $\beta$-xylosides (see Synthesis of the Linkage Region for details) has been shown to result in immediate multifold increases in chondroitin formation, demonstrating that there is a large excess capacity for providing the sugar nucleotides, PAPS, and an excess capacity of the enzymes present at the membranous sites of synthesis. Thus it is questionable that transport of sugar nucleotides or PAPS is a major control factor in regulation of chondroitin/dermatan sulfate biosynthesis under normal conditions. However $\beta$-xylosides do not appear to promote heparin/heparan sulfate synthesis to the same degree, so it is possible although unlikely that transport of the precursors to heparin/heparan sulfate sites of synthesis could be a regulatory factor.
BIOSYNTHESIS OF CHONDROITIN/DERMATAN SULFATE

GLUCOSAMINE

Acetyl CoA

↓ ATP
GlcN-6-P ← Glutamine
↓ Acetyl CoA
GlcNAc-6-P
↓ ATP
GlcNAc
↓ UTP
GlcNAc-1-P
↓
UDP-GlcNAc ↔ UDP-GalNAc

SO₄²⁻ + ATP → APS + PP
↓ ATP
PAPS

GLUCOSE

ATP

↓
Glc-6-P ↔ Fru-6-P
↑
Glc-1-P
↓ UTP
UDP-Glc
↑ NAD
UDP-GalA → UDP-Xyl UDP-Gal

GALACTOSE

ATP

↓
Gal-1-P
↑ UDP-Glc
Glc-1-P

PROTEIN

GlcA — GalNAc
↓ ↓
IdoA S
↓
S

n

GlcA — Gal — Xyl — SERINE
↓ ↓ ↓ ↓
S S P
↓
PAPS ↑
ATP

Figure 1. Formation of precursors.

---

### Polysaccharide Formation

Formation of the oligosaccharide linkage region and the chondroitin polymer attached to core proteins proceeds from sugar nucleotides by direct addition of single sugars onto the appropriate receptors without any intermediates such as the dolichol pyrophosphate oligosaccharides involved in glycoprotein formation. All synthesis is segregated within the intracellular membrane system composed of the ER, transfer vesicles, and Golgi apparatus. As described in this review, there is considerable evidence that during the course of active biosynthesis, the core proteins are continuously adherent or attached to the inner membrane surfaces of these structures. However, in contrast to the cell surface where proteoglycans may become integral parts of the membrane, proteoglycans do not appear at any time to become integral structural components of the membranes at the site of biosynthesis.

Table 1 lists the enzymes for chondroitin/dermatan sulfate synthesis that have been cloned to date. ER and Golgi locations of polysaccharide synthesis are shown in Fig. 2.

#### Synthesis of the Linkage Region.
Chondroitin/dermatan and heparin/heparan chains are linked to serine residues in core proteins by the same tetrasaccharide sequence of GlcA-Gal-Gal-Xyl (see accompanying review of heparin/heparan sulfate (9)). Because mutant CHO cells lacking Xyl transferase or Gal I transferase fail to synthesize both types of glycosaminoglycan chains (19), it has been concluded that the same enzymes catalyze the addition of the linkage sugars that initiate the formation of both types of glycosaminoglycans. Thus, it can be assumed that the ER and Golgi location of linkage region formation for chondroitin also applies to heparin/heparan sulfate. The accompanying review of heparin/heparan sulfate biosynthesis (9) provides details on the enzymes of linkage synthesis.

Xyl transferase reactions have been investigated using microsomal preparations from several tissues, with cartilage serving as a prototype. However, xylosyl transferase is easily solubilized so that reactions with suitable protein acceptors can be shown readily in soluble systems. Various β-D-xylosides substitute for xylosylated core protein in priming chondroitin synthesis in cultured cells (20), and microsomal systems derived from cartilage as well as other tissues have been used to demonstrate the transfer of Gal to free Xyl and β-D-xylosides (21). Immunocytochemistry, subcellular fractionation, and electron microscopy with permeabilized chondrocytes have demonstrated that xylosylation begins in the ER and continues in the early Golgi (16). It was suggested that interaction of Xyl transferase with core protein and subsequent interaction of Xyl transferase with Gal I transferase could serve as a docking mechanism to deliver the

Table 1  
Cloned enzymes of chondroitin/dermatan sulfate formation  

| Name                                      | Source   | Amino acids | Chromosome location | Accession number |
|-------------------------------------------|----------|-------------|--------------------|------------------|
| Xyl transferase                           | Human    | 827         | 16p13.1            | AJ295748          |
| Gal I transferase                         | Human    | 327         | 5q35.1-q35.3       | AB028600          |
| Gal II transferase                        | Human    | 329         | 1p36.3             | AF092050          |
| GlcA I transferase                        | Human    | 335         | 11q12q13           | AB009598          |
| GalNAc I transferase                      | Human    | 532         | 8                  | AB071403          |
| Chondroitin synthase                      | Human    | 802         | 15                 | AB023207          |
| Chondroitin 6-O-sulfotransferase           | Chick    | 458         | N.D.               | D49915            |
|                                         | Mouse    | 472         | 9                  | AB008937          |
|                                         | Human    | 479         | N.D.               | AB012192          |
|                                         | Human    | 486         | Xp11               | AB037187          |
|                                         | Human    | 530         | 3q24-3q25          | AF083066          |
|                                         | Human    | 411         | 11                 | U65637            |
| Chondroitin 4-O-sulfotransferase           | Mouse    | 352         | N.D.               | AB030378          |
|                                         | Human    | 352         | 12q23.2-q23.3      |                   |
| Chondroitin 4-sulfate-6-O-sulfotransferase | Squid    | 561         | N.D.               | AB062424          |
|                                         | Human    | 561         | 10q26              | AB062423          |
| Dermatan 4-O-sulfotransferase             | Human    | 376         | N.D.               | AF401222          |
| Chondroitin/dermatan 2-O-sulfotransferase  | Human    | 406         | N.D.               | AB020316          |
| Epimerase                                 | None cloned |             |                    |                   |

BIOSYNTHESIS OF CHONDROITIN/DERMATAN SULFATE

ER
Golgi
Extracellular
cis
medial
trans
network

Xyl → Gal I → Gal II → GlcA I → GlcA
GalNAc
Polymerase
SO₃H
Sulfotransferase

Figure 2. Subcellular localization of proteochondroitin/dermatan sulfate formation.

by incubation of radiolabeled UDP-GalNAc, UDP-GlcA, and PAPS together with microsomal fractions from chick embryo cartilage (30) and mouse mast cell tumors (31), forming chondroitin 6-sulfate and chondroitin 4-sulfate, respectively. Subsequently this was shown to take place in the Golgi (32). Microsomal fractions from other sources such as skin fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and chondrosarcoma have also been utilized. Polymerization takes place in a highly organized fashion, with both GalNAc transferase and GlcA transferase acting in concert to add individual sugars to the nonreducing end of a growing nascent endogenous proteoglycan acceptor, resulting in formation of chondroitin chains as large as 70 kDa. However, oligosaccharides (33), β-xylosides (21), and chondroitin added to microsomal preparations served only as acceptors for one or a few sugars (with the exception of some large size polymer production (32) by mast cell microsomal preparations). This suggests that it is essential for the nascent membrane-bound proteoglycan to be positioned in juxtaposition to the enzymes in order to obtain extensive polymerization.

Density gradient subfractionation (34), as well as immunocytochemical/cytochemical (35) studies, have indicated that the polymer-forming glycosyl transferases (polymerases) in chondrocytes are situated in medial/trans Golgi. Addition of brefeldin A to various cell cultures resulted in variable effects including shorter and undersulfated chondroitin/dermatan (36, 37) and considerable loss of chondroitin sulfate-synthesizing activity (22), suggesting considerable differences in specific Golgi subcompartments and between various specialized cells.

Incubation of microsomal preparations with oligosaccharide acceptors demonstrated that each sugar in the polymer is added independently, so that addition of the second sugar is delayed until the concentration of the oligosaccharide with the first added sugar increased considerably (33). Because there was no paired addition, it appears that the GlcA transferase and GalNAc transferase are on separate proteins. Moreover, a photoaffinity labeling technique was used to obtain and then purify and characterize an 80-kDa GlcA transferase protein (38), which did not appear to have GalNAc transferase activity.

Nevertheless, a protein of 802 amino acids, found by screening a human protein database, had both GlcA transferase and GalNAc transferase activities (39), and has been referred to as chondroitin synthase. It is of note that this enzyme was incapable of adding GalNAc to the linkage region GlcA, and therefore is different from the previously described cloned

GalNAc I transferase, which also has chondroitin synthesizing activity (29).

As with the microsomal incubations, the expressed and purified human chondroitin synthase was capable of adding only a single GlcA or GalNAc to appropriate oligosaccharide or chondroitin acceptors, with no polymerization occurring when both UDP-GlcA and UDP-GalNAc were present. Thus even when both enzyme activities are present on the same protein, polymerization appears to require an acceptor attached to the same membrane site as the enzymes.

In addition, two bacterial chondroitin synthases with no sequence homology to the human chondroitin synthase have been cloned (40, 41).

**Polymer Modification**

* **Phosphorylation.** The phosphorylation of Xyl has been reported for both aggrecan (42, 43) and decorin (44) as well as for heparan sulfate as an early posttranslational event (43). In cartilage extracellular matrix, the modification on aggrecan appears to be stable (42), but in contrast, the phosphorylation of xylose in the linkage region of decorin is transient, with removal of the phosphate group upon addition of the first GlcA residue (44). However, treatment with brefeldin A and competition experiments using β-D-xylosides to prime galactosaminoglycans demonstrated that dephosphorylation could be blocked. It has been suggested that phosphorylated Xyl may serve as a signal during intracellular trafficking or in regulating subsequent glycosaminoglycan modification.

* **Sulfation—Linkage Region.** Some sulfation of one or both Gal residues in chondroitin/dermatan sulfate has been found in various tissues but none in heparin/heparan sulfate (45) even when chondroitin and heparan are on the same syndecan-1 core protein (46). Furthermore, upon reviewing multiple reports concerning sulfation of the linkage region, it appears that Gal 4-sulfate is found only with chondroitin 4-sulfate, and Gal 6-sulfate is found only with chondroitin 6-sulfate. As yet, no specific Gal sulfotransferases have been found for the linkage region, suggesting that the sulfation of both Gal residues are catalyzed by the same sulfotransferases that add sulfate to the GalNAc of chondroitin. If this were to be the case, the Gal sulfation would be occurring relatively late in the biosynthetic process, and therefore could not be involved in targeting of the nascent proteoglycan to sites in the medial/trans Golgi. Such lack of specificity for sulfation of Gal has been found with a purified chondroitin GalNAc 6-sulfotransferase that also catalyzes the 6-sulfation of Gal in keratan sulfate as described next. [See also accompanying minireview by Funderburgh (47).]

* **Sulfation—Chondroitin.** Sulfation of chondroitin/dermatan is highly variable. It includes chondroitin sulfated only as GalNAc 4-sulfate, only as GalNAc 6-sulfate, with both GalNAc 4-sulfate and GalNAc 6-sulfate in the same glycosaminoglycan chains, with occasional GalNAc 4,6-disulfate, and with some GlcA 2-sulfate or 3-sulfate as well as GalNAc 4-sulfate or GalNAc 6-sulfate. There are also variable amounts of GalNAc

residues that are unsulfated in all proteochondroitin sulfates. Proteodermatan sulfate usually contains GalNAc 4-sulfate and IdoA 2-sulfate with some nonsulfated GalNAc and nonsulfated IdoA but has also been found with some GalNAc 6-sulfate. The identification of these various sulfated residues in a chondroitin/dermatan chain has depended upon the characterization of a series of chondroitin sulfate-degrading bacterial lyases (48), and this subject has been reviewed in detail (49). Information concerning which GalNAc residues in the chain containing the various sulfations has been limited because of a lack of ability to sequence the chondroitin sulfate. However, some data have been obtained regarding variable sulfation patterns near the oligosaccharide linkage region (50, 51) and there has been considerable detailed analysis of sulfation at the terminal nonreducing end (see Chain Termination for details).

Diminished sulfation of chondroitin was found when cell cultures were incubated in media with concentrations of sulfate below 0.2 mM (52). Undersulfation of heparan does not occur until concentrations are considerably lower, suggesting that lower concentrations of plasma sulfate in intact organisms would affect sulfation of chondroitin before influencing sulfation of heparan. Decreased sulfation of chondroitin occurs when chlorate is added to cell cultures, with complete loss of sulfation at higher chlorate concentrations (53). Techniques using chlorate or low sulfate concentrations in tissue culture are now used widely to examine effects of undersulfation on proteoglycan interactions and functions.

Sulfation appears to occur as the nascent glycosaminoglycan chains are growing actively rather than after the chains are completed (54). When PAPS is added to microsomal preparations during or subsequent to the biosynthesis of chondroitin from UDP-GlcA and UDP-GalNAc precursors, sulfation takes place on the nascent acceptors in an essentially all-or-nothing pattern resulting in some chondroitin that is as much as 95% sulfated (almost a 1:1 ratio of sulfate to GalNAc), and lesser amounts of chondroitin that remains nonsulfated (55). Little or no partly sulfated chondroitin is seen. When exogenous chondroitin oligosaccharides, chondroitin, or proteochondroitin are used as acceptors in a microsomal preparation, total sulfation is much less efficient than with the membrane-bound nascent proteochondroitin/dermatan, and results in a mixture containing a predominance of nonsulfated products with small amounts of acceptors sulfated approximately 30–50% (56). The presence of detergent in the incubations with microsomal preparations results in considerable increase in sulfation of oligosaccharides and chondroitin, and is essential for any incorporation into exogenous proteochondroitin (56, 57). Thus exogenous acceptors do not reach the microsomal sites of the sulfotransferase easily; those that do so will be highly sulfated, but not as completely as the endogenous, membrane-bound, nascent proteochondroitin acceptors.

When a β-xyloside is added to cultures of cells grown with either high or low sulfate concentrations, the sulfation of the resulting chondroitin-xyloside is less than the concurrent degree of sulfation of the nascent, membrane-bound proteochondroitin

(58). Thus efficiency of sulfation appears to depend upon a degree of membrane adherence of acceptor at the site of membrane-bound enzyme.

Proteochondroitin formed by microsomal preparations that contain only the 4-sulfotransferase can be 6-sulfated when added to microsomal preparations that contain only the 6-sulfotransferase and vice versa, demonstrating that the core protein does not define specificity of sulfation (56). Like polymerization, 6-sulfation of chondroitin/dermatan takes place in the medial/trans Golgi regions (34), whereas 4-sulfation appears to occur in a later trans Golgi region (J. E. Silbert and G. Sugumaran, unpublished observation).

The first chondroitin sulfotransferase to be purified, cloned, and expressed was a chicken 6-sulfotransferase (59) that catalyzes the sulfation of the Gal residues of keratan in addition to the GalNAc residues of chondroitin (60, 61). Subsequently several chondroitin 6-sulfotransferases with varying degrees of homology to the avian chondroitin 6-sulfotransferase have also been cloned and expressed (62), but it remains to be established if these individual isoforms have different substrate specificities. Recently, another GalNAc 6-sulfotransferase that sulfates the nonreducing terminal GalNAc 4-sulfate residues of chondroitin sulfate has been purified and cloned from squid cartilage and shown to be related to the human B cell RAG-associated gene (63). A GalNAc 6-sulfotransferase from fetal bovine serum has been found to transfer sulfate to GalNAc residues that are adjacent to IdoA residues of dermatan (64) but has no 6-sulfotransferase activity on chondroitin.

Disruption of a chondroitin 6-sulfotransferase gene has been achieved in mice and shown to result in a decrease in 6-sulfation adjacent to 2-sulfated GlcA in the tiny amount of GalNAc-6-S–GlcA-2-S (chondroitin sulfate D) found in brain (65). Although there was no obvious pathological phenotype, there was a significant reduction in the number of naive splenic T-lymphocytes.

A GalNAc 4-sulfotransferase, purified to homogeneity and cloned from rat chondrosarcoma (66) was found to be capable of sulfating chondroitin, but had no capability for sulfating GalNAc adjacent to IdoA residues of dermatan. Furthermore, a 4-sulfotransferase that specifically sulfates GalNAc residues that are adjacent to IdoA but not adjacent to GlcA has been cloned (67). These results indicate that there are different enzymes for 4-sulfation of chondroitin residues and 4-sulfation of dermatan residues. This is consistent with results demonstrating that dermatan sulfation is not affected by low sulfate as much as chondroitin sulfation is affected (68). It is also consistent with results using microsomal preparations, which demonstrated dermatan sulfation at lower PAPS concentrations than needed for sulfation of chondroitin (69).

Usually, many of the IdoA residues in dermatan sulfate are 2-sulfated, while 2-sulfation of GlcA in chondroitin is relatively rare. A 2-sulfotransferase with considerable homology to the heparin/heparan sulfate epimerase has been cloned, expressed, and shown to add 2-sulfate to IdoA residues adjacent to GalNAc

4-sulfate (70). It has less activity for adding 2-sulfate to IdoA residues next to nonsulfated GalNAc and has only slight activity in adding 2-sulfate to GlcA residues adjacent to GalNAc 6-sulfated residues of chondroitin sulfate. Neither chondroitin nor chondroitin 4-sulfate functioned as substrates for 2-sulfation. Because the reaction preferentially appears to take place following sulfation of GalNAc, it would be the last step in the biosynthesis of dermatan sulfate or chondroitin sulfate. Thus, it presumably occurs in a relatively late Golgi compartment.

Although 3-sulfation has not been demonstrated in mammalian chondroitin or dermatan, 3-O-sulfated GlcA chondroitin oligosaccharides that are recognized by the HNK-1 monoclonal antibody have been isolated from king crab cartilage (71).

**Epimerization.** Dermatan is derived from chondroitin by epimerization of varying amounts of GlcA residues to IdoA residues during or subsequent to the formation of chondroitin and concomitant with its 4-sulfation. Experiments with microsomal systems indicated that small amounts of epimerization occurred when non-sulfated glycosaminoglycan was formed, but that the presence of PAPS to provide 4-sulfation increased the epimerization markedly (72). These results were confirmed and extended using cultured human skin fibroblasts grown under conditions of sulfate deprivation, which produced chondroitin/dermatan sulfate with all the IdoA adjacent to GalNAc 4-S and all the GlcA adjacent to nonsulfated GalNAc (13, 68). The sequence of these reactions has not been established definitively, but it is probable that epimerization to form the dermatan portions of the glycosaminoglycan occurs first accompanied by sulfation of the epimerized disaccharides that may act to facilitate further epimerization. This is consistent with specific different enzymes for 4-sulfation of GalNAc residues adjacent to GlcA and 4-sulfation adjacent to IdoA, which preferentially occurs at lower PAPS concentrations.

The precise subcellular location for epimerization is not known, but studies with monensin, which blocks the secretory pathway in the medial Golgi region, have indicated that 6-sulfation of decorin proteochondroitin/dermatan is less affected than the degree of epimerization and 4-sulfation (73). This confirms that the 4-sulfotransferase and epimerase are in close proximity to each other and suggests that the 6-sulfation of decorin occurs in an earlier Golgi compartment.

**Chain Termination**

The size of chondroitin sulfate does not appear to be affected by the degree of sulfation, because sulfated and nonsulfated chondroitin produced before and after chlorate was added to cell cultures were the same size (53).

Naturally occurring chondroitin sulfate chains as well as chondroitin sulfate synthesized on endogenous microsomal acceptors terminate variably in nonsulfated GlcA, GalNAc, GalNAc 4-sulfate, 6-sulfate, or 4,6-disulfate (74, 75). Nevertheless, a degree of specificity has been indicated by cell-free studies showing that GalNAc 4-sulfate at the nonreducing end (32) or preterminal to GlcA at the nonreducing end (76) of a
chondroitin sulfate chain blocks the further addition of GlcA or GalNAc respectively. In contrast, GlcA adds readily to a terminal GalNAc 6-sulfate. However, incubations of oligosaccharides and PAPS with cartilage microsomal preparations demonstrated poor 4-sulfation and no 6-sulfation of terminal GalNAc (77). It is likely that terminal GalNAc 6-sulfate that is found in vivo arises through a 6-sulfotransferase specific for terminal GalNAc 4-sulfate (78), followed by 4-desulfation (79) to provide terminal GalNAc 6-sulfate, which will then allow further polymerization to proceed. Accordingly, aggrecan from chicken cartilage and rat chondrosarcoma has been shown to contain chondroitin sulfate with significant proportions of terminal GalNAc 4-sulfate and GalNAc 4,6-disulfate (75, 80).

### CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

Fine structure such as degree and location of sulfation and epimerization are known to be prime factors in the specificity of functions and interactions of chondroitin/dermatan sulfate, but the manner in which the fine structure is achieved is not well understood. The linkage region for chondroitin/dermatan sulfate is produced sequentially on membrane-adherent core protein by enzymes located separately in the ER and Golgi. Polymerization, sulfation, and epimerization on nascent membrane-bound proteochondroitin then occurs together in the trans Golgi in the presence of membrane-bound polymerase, sulfotransferase, and epimerase acting in concert on the growing polysaccharide.

Three different proteochondroitin/dermatan sulfates with distinctive sizes, 4- or 6-sulfation, with and without epimerization were produced by immortalized cultured chondrocytes (81). Thus, targeting of different core proteins to separate Golgi locations in a single cell takes place in order to obtain the specific chondroitin/dermatan sulfate structures. It would seem likely that varying fine details of the membrane vesicle architecture in each of these specific locations together with specific arrangement of the appropriate membrane-bound enzymes and nascent proteochondroitin determines the structure by providing a “membrane template” for specific patterns of epimerization and/or sulfation. Chain length could be controlled by availability of space in a membrane vesicle carrying the nascent growing proteoglycans.

The recent cloning, expression, and characterization of many of the biosynthetic enzymes and individual core proteins have provided great progress in understanding proteochondroitin/dermatan biosynthesis. However, the expressed and isolated enzymes have not been capable of providing formation or sulfation of an entire glycosaminoglycan chain. Cell-free polymerization and sulfation to form entire chondroitin/dermatan polymers has been achieved only with microsomal systems on membrane-bound acceptors. It is apparent from this that the interactions of membrane-bound enzymes with each other together with appropriate substrates and membrane-bound nascent proteoglycans are fundamental for determining the specificities of structure and efficiency in formation of chondroitin/dermatan sulfate. In all likelihood this applies to heparin/heparan sulfate

synthesis as well. Thus epimerization is associated in an undetermined way with 4-sulfation in dermatan formation, so that extensive epimerization is promoted by provision of PAPS for sulfation. Similarly, deacetylation in the biosynthesis of heparin with microsomal preparations was shown many years ago to be limited until PAPS was added to incubations, thereupon allowing extensive deacetylation together with N-sulfation (82). Even though both N-deacetylase and N-sulfotransferase activities have been shown to reside on a single protein [see Suguhara and Kitagawa (9) accompanying review of heparin/heparan sulfate], and this may account for the observation that the presence of PAPS affects the capacity of the enzyme to promote deacetylation.

The interactions of the purified enzymes with each other need to be explored, and methods for combining them in synthetic membrane vesicles together with appropriate acceptors and substrates need to be developed. Cells from different tissues and species should be used to reveal similarities and differences in the organization and activities of the enzymes in the ER and Golgi subcompartments and to explore the trafficking of the different proteoglycans.

### ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Supported by the Department of Veterans Affairs, Medical Research Service and by Research Grant AR-41649, NIAMS (GS).

### REFERENCES

1. Roden, L. (1980) Structure and metabolism of connective tissue proteoglycans. In *The Biochemistry of Glycoproteins and Proteoglycans* (Lennarz, W. J., ed.). pp. 267–371, Plenum Press, New York.
2. Silbert, J. E., Bernfield, M., and Kokenyesi, R. (1997) Proteoglycans: a special class of glycoproteins. In *Glycoproteins II* (Montreuil, J., Vliegenthart, J. F. G., and Schachter, H., eds.). pp. 1–31, Elsevier, New York.
3. Sugumaran, G., and Vertel, B. M. (2000) Biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate proteoglycans. In *Oligosaccharides in Chemistry and Biology: A Comprehensive Handbook* (Ernst, B., Hart, G., and Sinay, P., eds.). pp. 375–394, Wiley VCH.
4. Kjellen, L., and Lindahl, U. (1991) Proteoglycans: structures and interactions. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* **60**, 443–475.
5. Wight, T. N., Heinegard, D. K., and Hascall, V. C. (1991) Proteoglycans: structure and function. In *Cell Biology of the Extracellular Matrix*, 2nd ed. (Hay, E. D., ed.). pp. 45–78, Plenum Press, New York.
6. Iozzo, R. V. (1998) Matrix proteoglycans: from molecular design to cellular function. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* **67**, 609–652.
7. Bernfield, M., Kokenyesi, R., Kato, M., Hinkes, M. T., Spring, J., Gallo, R. L., and Lose, E. J. (1992) Biology of the syndecans: a family of transmembrane heparan sulfate proteoglycans. *Ann. Rev. Cell Biol.* **8**, 365–393.
8. Stevens, R. L. (1987) Intracellular proteoglycans in cells of the immune system. In *Biology of Proteoglycans* (Wight T. N., and Mecham, R. P., eds.). pp. 367–387, Academic Press, Orlando.
9. Sugahara, K., and Kitagawa, H. (2002) Heparin and heparan sulfate biosynthesis. *IUBMB Life* **54**, 163–175.
10. Lyle, S., Stanczak, J., Ng, K., and Schwartz, N. B. (1994) Rat chondrosarcoma ATP sulfurylase and adenosine 5′-phosphosulfate kinase reside on a single bifunctional protein. *Biochemistry* **33**, 5920–5925.
11. Esko, J. D., Elgavish, A., Prasthofer, T., Taylor, W. H., and Weinke, J. L. (1986) Sulfate transport-deficient mutants of Chinese hamster ovary cells:
sulfation of glycosaminoglycans dependent on cysteine. *J. Biol. Chem.* 261, 15725–15733.

12. Humphries, D. E., Silbert, C. K., and Silbert, J. E. (1988) Sulphation by cultured cells: cysteine, cysteinesulphinic acid, and sulphite as sources for proteoglycan sulphate. *Biochem. J.* 252, 305–308.

13. Silbert, C. K., Humphries, D. E., Palmer, M. E., and Silbert, J. E. (1991) Effects of sulfate deprivation on the production of chondroitin/dermatan sulfate by cultures of skin fibroblasts from normal and diabetic individuals. *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* 285, 137–141.

14. Ito, K., Kimata, K., Sobue, M., and Suzuki, S. (1982) Altered proteoglycan synthesis by epiphyseal cartilages in culture at low SO₄²⁻ concentration. *J. Biol. Chem.* 257, 917–923.

15. Silbert, J. E., and DeLuca, S. (1967) The synthesis of uridine diphosphate xylose by cell-free preparations from mouse mast cell tumors. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 141, 193–196.

16. Kearns, A. E., Vertel, B. M., and Schwartz, N. B. (1993) Topography of glycosylation and UDP-xylose production. *J. Biol. Chem.* 268, 11097–11104.

17. Abeijon, C., Mandon, E. C., and Hirschberg, C. B. (1997) Transporters of nucleotide sugars, nucleotide sulfate and ATP in the Golgi apparatus. *Trends Biochem. Sci.* 22, 203–207.

18. Toma, L., Pinhal, M. M., Dietrich C. P., Nader, H. B., and Hirschberg, C. B. (1996) Transport of UDP-galactose into the Golgi lumen regulates the biosynthesis of proteoglycans. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271, 3897–3906.

19. Esko, J. D., and Zhang, L. (1996) Influence of core protein sequence on glycosaminoglycan assembly. *Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.* 6, 663–670.

20. Sobue, M., Habuchi, H., Ito, K., Yonekura, H., Oguri, K., Sakurai, K., Kamohara, S., Ueno, Y., Noyori, R., and Suzuki, S. (1987) β-D-Xylosides and their analogues as artificial initiators of glycosaminoglycan chain synthesis. A glycone-related variation in their effectiveness in vitro and in ovo. *Biochem. J.* 241, 591–601.

21. Robinson, J. A., and Robinson, H. C. (1981) Control of chondroitin sulfate biosynthesis. β-D-Xylopyranosides as substrates for UDP-galactose: D-xylose transferase from embryonic chicken cartilage. *Biochem. J.* 194, 839–846.

22. Sugumaran, G., Katsman, M., and Silbert, J. E. (1992) Effects of brefeldin A on the localization of chondroitin sulfate-synthesizing enzymes: activities in subfractions of the Golgi from chick embryo epiphyseal cartilage. *J. Biol. Chem.* 267, 8802–8806.

23. Etchison, J. R., Srikrishna, G., and Freeze, H. H. (1995) A novel method to co-localize glycosaminoglycan-core oligosaccharide glycosyltransferases in rat liver Golgi. Co-localization of galactosyltransferase I with a sialyltransferase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 756–764.

24. Wei, G., Bai, X., Sarkar, A., and Esko, J. D. (1999) Formation of HNK-1 determinants and the glycosaminoglycan tetrasaccharide linkage region by UDP-GlcUA: galactose β1,3-glucuronosyltransferases. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 7857–7864.

25. Sugumaran, G., Katsman, M., and Silbert, J. E. (1998) Subcellular co-localization and potential interaction of glucuronosyl transferases with nascent proteochondroitin sulphate at Golgi sites of chondroitin synthesis. *Biochem. J.* 329, 203–208.

26. Pinhal, M. A., Smith, B., Olson, S., Aikawa, J., Kimata, K., and Esko, J. D. (2001) Enzyme interactions in heparan sulfate biosynthesis: uronosyl 5-epimerase and 2-O-sulfotransferase interact in vivo. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 98, 12984–12989.

27. Rohrmann, K., Niemann, R., and Buddecke, E. (1985) Two N-acetylgalactosaminyl-transferases are involved in the biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate. *Eur. J. Biochem.* 148, 463–469.

28. Nadanaka, S., Kitagawa, H., Goto, F., Tamura, J., Neumann, K. W., Ogawa, T., and Sugahara, K. (1999) Involvement of the core protein in the first β-N-acetylgalactosamine transfer to the glycosaminoglycan protein linkage-region tetrasaccharide and in the subsequent polymerization: the critical determining step for chondroitin sulphate biosynthesis. *Biochem. J.* 340, 353–357.

29. Uyama, T., Kitagawa, H., Tamura, J.-I., and Sugahara, K. (2002) Molecular cloning and expression of human chondroitin

N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase: the key enzyme for chain initiation and elongation of chondroitin/dermatan sulfate on the protein linkage region tetrasaccharide shared by heparin/heparan sulfate. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 8841–8846.

30. Silbert, J. E., and DeLuca, S. (1969) Biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate: III. Formation of sulfated glycosaminoglycan with a microsomal preparation from chick cartilage. *J. Biol. Chem.* 244, 876–881.

31. Lewis, R. G., Spencer, A. F., and Silbert, J. E. (1973) Biosynthesis of glycosaminoglycans by microsomal preparations from cultured mastocytoma cells. *Biochem. J.* 134, 465–471.

32. Silbert, J. E., and Freilich, L. S. (1980) Biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate by a Golgi-apparatus-enriched preparation from cultures of mouse mastocytoma cells. *Biochem. J.* 190, 307–313.

33. Silbert, J. E., and Reppucci, A. C., Jr. (1976) Biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate: independent addition of glucuronic acid and N-acetylgalactosamine to oligosaccharides. *J. Biol. Chem.* 251, 3942–3947.

34. Sugumaran, G., and Silbert, J. E. (1991) Subfractionation of chick embryo epiphyseal cartilage Golgi: localization of enzymes involved in the synthesis of the polysaccharide portion of proteochondroitin sulfate. *J. Biol. Chem.* 266, 9565–9569.

35. Velasco, A., Hidalgo, J., Perez-Vilar, J., Garcia-Herdrigo, G., and Navas, P. (1988) Detection of glycosaminoglycans in the Golgi complex of chondrocytes. *Eur. J. Cell Biol.* 47, 241–250.

36. Sugumaran, G., Katsman, M., and Silbert, J. E. (1992) Effects of brefeldin A on the synthesis of chondroitin 4-sulfate by cultures of mouse mastocytoma cells. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 183, 357–361.

37. Uhlin-Hansen, L., Kusche-Gullberg, M., Berg, E., Eriksson, I., and Kjellen, L. (1997) Mouse mastocytoma cells synthesize undersulfated heparin and chondroitin sulfate in the presence of brefeldin A. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 3200–3206.

38. Sugumaran, G., Katsman, M., Sunthankar, P., and Drake, R. R. (1997) Purification of glucuronosyl transferase II and use of photoaffinity labeling for characterization of the enzyme as an 80-kDa protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 14399–14403.

39. Kitagawa, H., Uyama, T., and Sugahara, K. (2001) Molecular cloning and expression of a human chondroitin synthase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 38721–38726.

40. DeAngelis, P. L., and Padgett-McCue, A. J. (2000) Identification and molecular cloning of a chondroitin synthase from Pasteurella multocida type F. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 24124–24129.

41. Ninomiya, T., Sugiura, N., Tawada, A., Sugimoto, K., Watanabe, H., and Kimata, K. (2002) Molecular cloning and characterization of chondroitin polymerase from *Escherichia coli* strain K4. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 21567–21575.

42. Oegema, T. R. J., Kraft, E. L., Jourdan, G. W., and VanValen, T. R. (1984) Phosphorylation of chondroitin sulfate in proteoglycans from the Swarm rat chondrosarcoma. *J. Biol. Chem.* 259, 1720–1726.

43. Lohmander, L. S., Hascall, V. C., Yanagishita, M., Kuettner, K. E., and Kimura, J. H. (1986) Post-translational events in proteoglycan synthesis: kinetics of synthesis of chondroitin sulfate and oligosaccharides on the core protein. *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* 250, 211–227.

44. Moses, J., Oldberg, A., Cheng, F., and Fransson, L.-A. (1997) Biosynthesis of the proteoglycan decorin—transient 2-phosphorylation of xylose during formation of the trisaccharide linkage region. *Eur. J. Biochem.* 248, 521–526.

45. Sugahara, K., and Kitagawa, H. (2000) Recent advances in the study of the biosynthesis and functions of sulfated glycosaminoglycans. *Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.* 10, 518–527.

46. Ueno, M., Yamada, S., Zako, M., Bernfield, M., and Sugahara, K. (2001) Structural characterization of heparan sulfate and chondroitin sulfate of syndecan-1 purified from normal murine mammary gland epithelial cells. Common phosphorylation of xylose and differential sulfation of galactose in the protein linkage region tetrasaccharide sequence. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 29134–29140.

47. Funderburgh, J. L. (2002) Keratan sulfate biosynthesis. *IUBMB Life* 54, 187–194.

48. Saito, H., Yamagata, T., and Suzuki, S. (1968) Enzymatic methods for the determination of small quantities of isomeric chondroitin sulfates. *J. Biol. Chem.* 243, 1530–1542.

49. Ernst, S., Langer, R., Cooney, S. L., and Sasisekharan, R. (1995) Enzymatic degradation of glycosaminoglycans. *Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol.* 30, 387–444.

50. Cheng, F., Yoshida, K., Heinegard, D., and Fransson, L.-A. (1992) A new method for sequence analysis of glycosaminoglycans from heavily substituted proteoglycans reveals non-random positioning of 4- and 6-O-sulphated N-acetylgalactosamine in aggrecan-derived chondroitin sulphate. *Glycobiology* 2, 553–561.

51. Shibata, S., Midura, R. J., and Hascall, V. C. (1992) Structural analysis of the linkage region oligosaccharides and unsaturated disaccharides from chondroitin sulfate using CarboPac PAC1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 267, 6548–6455.

52. Humphries, D. E., Silbert, C. K., and Silbert, J. E. (1986) Glycosaminoglycan production by bovine aortic endothelial cells cultured in sulfate-depleted medium. *J. Biol. Chem.* 261, 9122–9127.

53. Humphries, D. E., Sugumaran, G., and Silbert, J. E. (1989) Techniques for decreasing the sulfation of proteoglycans produced by cultured cells. *Methods Enzymol.* 179, 428–434.

54. Sugumaran, G., and Silbert, J. E. (1990) Relationship of sulfation to ongoing chondroitin polymerization during biosynthesis of chondroitin 4-sulfate by microsomal preparations from cultured mouse mastocytoma cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 265, 18284–18288.

55. DeLuca, S., Richmond, M. E., and Silbert, J. E. (1973) Biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate: sulfation of the polysaccharide chain. *Biochemistry* 12, 3911–3915.

56. Sugumaran, G., and Silbert, J. E. (1988) Sulfation of chondroitin: specificity, degree of sulfation, and detergent effects with 4-sulfating and 6-sulfating microsomal systems. *J. Biol. Chem.* 263, 4673–4678.

57. Sugumaran, G., and Silbert, J. E. (1992) Effects of detergent on the sulfation of chondroitin by cell-free preparations from chick embryo epiphyseal cartilage. *Biochem. J.* 285, 577–583.

58. Silbert, J. E., Sugumaran, G., and Cogburn, J. N. (1993) Sulfation of proteochondroitin and 4-methylumbelliferyl β-D-xyloside-chondroitin formed by mouse mastocytoma cells cultured in sulfate-deficient medium. *Biochem. J.* 296, 119–126.

59. Habuchi, O., Matsui, Y., Kotoya, Y., Aoyama, Y., Yasuda, Y., and Noda, M. (1993) Purification of chondroitin 6-sulfotransferase secreted from cultured chick embryo chondrocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.* 268, 21968–21974.

60. Fukuta, M., Uchimura, K., Nakashima, K., Kato, M., Kimata, K., Shinomura, T., and Habuchi, O. (1995) Molecular cloning and expression of chick chondrocyte chondroitin 6-sulfotransferase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 18575–18580.

61. Sugumaran, G., Katsman, M., and Drake, R. R. (1995) Purification, photoaffinity labeling, and characterization of a single enzyme for 6-sulfation of both chondroitin sulfate and keratan sulfate. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 22483–22487.

62. Habuchi, O. (1998) Diversity and functions of glycosaminoglycan sulfotransferases. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1474, 115–127.

63. Ohtake, S., Ito, Y., Fukuta, M., and Habuchi, O. (2001) Human N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulfate 6-O-sulfotransferase cDNA is related to human B cell RAG-associated gene. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 43894–43900.

64. Nadanaka, S., Fujita, M., and Sugahara, K. (1999) Demonstration of a novel sulfotransferase in fetal bovine serum, which transfers sulfate to the C6 position of the GalNAc residue in the sequence iduronic acid α1-3GalNAc β1-4iduronic acid in dermatan sulfate. *FEBS Lett.* 452, 185–189.

65. Uchimura, K., Kadomatsu, K., Nishimura, H., Muramatsu, H., Nakamura, E., Kurosawa, N., Habuchi, O., El-Fasakhany, F. M., Yoshikai, Y., and Muramatsu, T. (2002) Functional analysis of the chondroitin 6-sulfo-

transferase gene in relation to lymphocyte subpopulations, brain development and oversulfated chondroitin sulfate. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 1443–1450.

66. Yamauchi, S., Mita, S., Matsubara, T., Fukuta, M., Habuchi, H., Kimata, K., and Habuchi, O. (2000) Molecular cloning and expression of chondroitin 4-sulfotransferase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 8975–8978.

67. Evers, M. R., Xia, G., Kang, H. G., Schachner, M., and Baenziger, J. U. (2001) Molecular cloning and characterization of a dermatan-specific N-acetylgalactosamine 4-O-sulfotransferase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 36344–36353.

68. Silbert, J. E., Palmer, M. E., Humphries, D. E., and Silbert, C. K. (1986) Formation of dermatan sulfate by cultured human skin fibroblasts: effects of sulfate concentration on proportions of dermatan/chondroitin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 261, 13397–13400.

69. Silbert, J. E., Silbert, C. K., Humphries, D. E., and Sugumaran, G. (1993) Role of sulphation in dermatan formation. In *Dermatan Sulphate Proteoglycans: Chemistry, Biology, and Chemical Pathology* (Scott J. E., ed.). pp. 147–158, Portland Press, London.

70. Kobayashi, M., Sugumaran, G., Liu, J., Shworak, N. W., Silbert, J. E., and Rosenberg, R. D. (1999) Molecular cloning and characterization of a human uronyl 2-sulfotransferase that sulfates iduronyl and glucuronyl residues in dermatan/chondroitin sulfate. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 10474–10480.

71. Kitagawa, H., Tanaka, Y., Yamada, S., Seno, N., Haslam, S. M., Morris, H. R., Dell, A., and Sugahara, K. (1997) A novel pentasaccharide sequence GlcA(3-sulfate)(β1-3)GalNAc(4-sulfate)(β1-4)(Fucα1-3)GlcA(1-3)GalNAc(4-sulfate) in the oligosaccharides isolated from king crab cartilage chondroitin sulfate K and its differential susceptibility to chondroitinases and hyaluronidase. *Biochemistry* 36, 3998–4008.

72. Malmstrom, A., Fransson, L.-A., Hook, M., and Lindahl, U. (1975) Biosynthesis of dermatan sulfate. 1. Formation of L-iduronic acid residues. *J. Biol. Chem.* 250, 3419–3425.

73. Hoppe, U., Glossl, J., and Kresse, H. (1985) Influence of monensin on biosynthesis, processing and secretion of proteodermatan sulfate by skin fibroblasts. *Eur. J. Biochem.* 152, 91–97.

74. Silbert, J. E. (1978) Biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate: chain termination. *J. Biol. Chem.* 253, 6888–6892.

75. Otsu, K., Inoue, H., Tsuzuki, Y., Yonekura, H., Nakanishi, Y., and Suzuki, S. (1985) A distinct terminal structure in newly synthesized chondroitin sulfate chains. *Biochem. J.* 227, 37–48.

76. Cogburn, J. N., and Silbert, J. E. (1986) The effect of penultimate N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulfate on chondroitin chain elongation. *Carbohydr. Res.* 151, 207–212.

77. Sugumaran, G., Cogburn, J. N., and Silbert, J. E. (1986) Simultaneous sulfation of endogenous chondroitin sulfate and chondroitin-derived oligosaccharides: studies with separate 4-sulfating and 6-sulfating microsomal systems. *J. Biol. Chem.* 261, 12659–12664.

78. Nakanishi, Y., Shimizu, M., Otsu, S., Tsuji, M., and Suzuki, S. (1981) A terminal 6-sulfotransferase catalyzing a synthesis of N-acetylgalactosamine 4,6-bisulfate residue at the nonreducing terminal position of chondroitin sulfate. *J. Biol. Chem.* 256, 5443–5449.

79. Otsu, K., Inoue, H., Nakanishi, Y., Kato, S., Tsuji, M., and Suzuki, S. (1984) A sulfotransferase-sulfatase system in avian oviduct which catalyzes a conversion of UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulfate to the 6-sulfate isomer. *J. Biol. Chem.* 259, 6403–6410.

80. Midura, R. J., Calabro, A., Yanagishita, M., and Hascall, V.C. (1995) Nonreducing end structures of chondroitin sulfate chains on aggrecan isolated from Swarm rat chondrosarcoma cultures. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 8009–8015.

81. Kokenyesi, R., and Silbert, J. E. (1997) Immortalized cloned mouse chondrocytes (MC 615) produce three different matrix proteoglycans with core protein-specific chondroitin/dermatan sulfate structures. *Biochem. J.* 327, 831–839.

82. Silbert, J. E. (1967) Biosynthesis of heparin: IV. N-Decetylation of a precursor glycosaminoglycan. *J. Biol. Chem.* 242, 5146–5152.
