
Plant Molecular Biology 50: 925–947, 2002.
© 2002 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.

# Multi-protein complexes in eukaryotic gene transcription

## Ernest Martinez
Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, U.S.A. (*author for correspondence; e-mail: ernest.martinez@ucr.edu)

Received 7 September 2001; accepted in revised form 19 December 2001

## Abstract

Specific transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II at eukaryotic protein-coding genes involves the cooperative assembly at the core promoter of more than 40 distinct proteins – with a total mass of over 2 MDa – including RNA polymerase II itself and general/basal transcription initiation factors, to form a stable pre-initiation complex (PIC). In vivo, PIC assembly is a major point of regulation by sequence-specific transcription regulators (activators and repressors) and is hindered by the packaging of promoter DNA into nucleosomes and higher order chromatin structures. Genetic and biochemical studies have recently identified a variety of transcription cofactors/co-regulators (coactivators and corepressors) that interact with sequence-specific regulators and/or various components of the general/basal transcription machinery and are essential for regulated transcription. An emerging view from these studies is that regulators must target two types of transcription cofactors: chromatin-modifying/remodeling cofactors and general cofactors that associate with and/or influence the activities of components of the general/basal transcription machinery. The recent biochemical identification and characterization of many different chromatin-modifying and general transcription cofactors has revealed their often complex multi-subunit nature and a previously unsuspected level of structural and functional redundancy. Another emerging theme is the multifunctional nature of chromatin-modifying cofactor complexes that appear to couple gene-specific transcription to other cellular processes.

## Introduction

Transcription regulation of eukaryotic protein-coding (class II) genes is an orchestrated process that requires the concerted functions of multiple proteins or transcription factors. These factors can be classified into three groups:

1. Sequence-specific DNA-binding transcription regulators (i.e., activators and repressors) which bind to proximal promoter elements and/or more distal regulatory sequences (i.e., enhancers and silencers) and modulate the rate of transcription of specific target genes in a tissue- and developmental stage-specific manner or in response to physiological or environmental stimuli;
2. General/basal transcription factors which are ubiquitous and include RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and a set of accessory general transcription initiation factors (GTFs) that bind to core promoter DNA elements (e.g., TATA box, initiator) and allow the specific recruitment of Pol II to the core promoter of all class II genes;
3. Transcription cofactors/co-regulators (coactivators and corepressors), which interact with regulators and play essential roles in mediating or facilitating the effects of regulators on the general/basal transcription machinery either via direct physical interactions with GTFs and/or Pol II or indirectly through modification of chromatin structure (Figure 1).

Cooperative protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions play critical roles in the specific binding of activators to enhancers – resulting in the formation of specific nucleoprotein complexes called enhosomes (Carey, 1998; Merika and Thanos, 2001) – and in the precise assembly of GTFs and Pol II into a stable pre-initiation complex at the core promoter (Orphanides et al., 1996; Roeder, 1996). In contrast to sequence-specific regulators that generally bind to DNA as single proteins or dimeric complexes (reviewed in Patikoglou and Burley, 1997), several components of the general/basal transcription machinery exist as stable multi-protein complexes in solution and

Figure 1. Optimal induction of gene transcription by activators involves various coactivators and protein-protein interactions. Coactivators (dark blue) are recruited by promoter-bound activators (pink, polygons) to remodel chromatin structure (nucleosome; green) and/or to stimulate the recruitment or activity of the general transcription machinery (yellow; general/basal factors) during initiation of transcription by RNA polymerase II (pol II) at the core promoter or during transcription elongation. Coactivators include (1) proteins and complexes that can intimately associate with (or be part of) the general transcription machinery, e.g., TBP-associated factors (TAFIIs) of the TFIID complex, TFIIA (IIA), and the Pol II-associated SRB/Mediator Complex (Mediator) and (2) chromatin-modifying/remodeling factors and complexes that modulate the generally repressive influence of chromatin on protein-DNA interactions (e.g., SAGA histone acetylase and SWI/SNF ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling complexes). Note that multiprotein cofactor complexes (e.g., the TAFII-containing complexes TFIID and SAGA) might be involved both in chromatin modification (histone acetylation) and in interactions with activators and the general transcription machinery (see text for details).

can further pre-assemble off-DNA into larger multi-subunit holoenzymes. The pre-assembly off-DNA of multiple proteins into stable complexes is even more striking for the more recently characterized group of transcription cofactors/co-regulators.

The scope of this review is to provide an overview of the structural and functional characteristics of the different multi-protein GTF and cofactor complexes that control eukaryotic class II gene transcription with more emphasis on the two distinct but structurally related complexes, TFIID and SAGA. Because of the sheer number of cofactors that have been identified in different organisms, references to most recent research papers and reviews are provided for more in-depth information on particular factors and complexes. Most of the factors and emerging themes presented here derive from studies performed in yeast, *Drosophila* and human cells. The striking similarities in the structure and function of components of both the general transcription machinery and the cofactor/co-regulator complexes revealed by these studies suggest

that many of the concepts will be applicable to most eukaryotes including plants. Indeed, several previously described components of the class II basal transcription machinery in *Arabidopsis*, including Pol II subunits (Larkin et al., 1999; and references therein) and several GTFs (Gasch et al., 1990; Baldwin and Gurley, 1996; Li et al., 1999), are highly conserved with their other eukaryotic counterparts. Based on their sequence similarity with known basal factors, candidates for the remaining GTFs in *Arabidopsis* can be found in the NCBI GenBank sequence database (E. Martinez, unpublished observations). Furthermore, several *Arabidopsis* homologues of subunits present in other eukaryotic chromatin-modifying cofactor complexes have also been described more recently. These include subunits of histone acetylase and deacetylase complexes (Finnegan, 2001; Murfett et al., 2001; Stockinger et al., 2001) and components of ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling complexes (Brzeski et al., 1999; Ogas et al., 1999; Eshed et al., 1999), which is consistent with an important role of

chromatin remodeling in plants (reviewed in Finnegan, 2001; Verbsky and Richards, 2001). With the recent completion of the Arabidopsis genome sequence a more comprehensive evaluation of the number and function of Arabidopsis genes encoding proteins similar to known cofactors/co-regulators in yeast and animals is now possible.

The transcription initiation machinery: complexity at the core

The general (or basal) class II transcription machinery is composed of Pol II and six GTFs, which include TFIIA (Transcription Factor IIA), TFIIB, TFIID, TFIIE, TFIIF, and TFIIH. The subunit composition and functions of human GTFs is summarized in Table 1. With the exception of TFIIB, which is a single polypeptide of 35 kDa, all the other human GTFs and Pol II are complexes formed by the stable association of 2 to 14 different proteins. Pol II, itself, is a large multisubunit enzyme (with a mass of about 0.5 MDa) that has been best characterized in yeast and is composed of 12 different proteins of which 5 (i.e., RPB5, RPB6, RPB8, RPB10, and RPB12) are shared with the other two eukaryotic RNA polymerases, Pol I and Pol III, that transcribe, respectively, class I (rRNA) genes and class III (tRNA, 5S rRNA and U6 snRNA) genes. High resolution crystal structures of a free and transcribing 10-subunit yeast Pol II have been described recently (Cramer et al., 2001; Gnatt et al., 2001). Despite its complexity, Pol II is unable, on its own, to recognize promoters and accurately initiate transcription. Specific transcription initiation by Pol II requires the recognition by GTFs of various core promoter DNA elements – which include the TATA, initiator (INR), TFIIB-response element (BRE) and DPE elements that are found in various combinations in different genes (reviewed in Lagrange et al. 1998) – and the cooperative assembly of GTFs and Pol II into a pre-initiation complex (PIC) at the core promoter (Orphanides et al., 1996; Hampsey, 1998). The core promoter is thus the minimal promoter DNA sequence that is necessary and sufficient to direct specific transcription initiation by Pol II and GTFs in vitro. Core promoter-directed transcription in vitro is referred to as basal transcription. Core promoters have been best characterized for Drosophila and mammalian genes.

Figure 2 summarizes the different steps involved in PIC formation and transcription initiation at a TATA- and initiator (INR)-containing core promoter. The first

Figure 2. Model for a stepwise assembly and function of a pre-initiation complex (PIC). PIC assembly at a TATA-containing class II promoter is initiated by the binding of TFIID to the core promoter through both TBP interactions with the TATA box and TAF interactions with initiator (INR) or other downstream promoter elements. These interactions are stabilized by TFIIA. TFIIB further stabilizes the TBP-TATA complex and allows the recruitment of TFIIF, Pol II, TFIIE, and TFIIH in either a sequential manner (as shown) or as a preformed holoenzyme in which Pol II is in addition associated with the Mediator coactivator components (not shown in this figure). ATP-dependent promoter melting involves ATPase activities in TFIIH and is stimulated by TFIIE to form the open complex that is competent to initiate transcription upon addition of ribonucleoside-triphosphate (NTPs). During initiation or early elongation the CTD domain of Pol II becomes phosphorylated by the CDK7 kinase activity of TFIIH allowing promoter escape/clearance and transcription elongation by hyperphosphorylated Pol II in association with TFIIF, while TFIIB, IIE and IIH dissociate from the core promoter. After termination reinitiation might require de-phosphorylation of Pol II by a CTD-phosphatase (see text for further details).

Table 1. Human class II general transcription initiation factors.

| Factor | Number of subunits | Mass in kDa (subunit) | Function |
|--------|-------------------|----------------------|----------|
| TBP    | 1                 | 38                   | Core promoter recognition (TATA box); TFIIB recruitment |
| TFIID  |                   |                      |          |
|        | TAF<sub>II</sub>S | 14                   | 250, 150, 140, 135, 100, 80, 55<br>43, 31, 30, 28, 20, 18, 15 | Core promoter recognition/selectivity (non-TATA elements); regulate TBP functions; coactivators;<br>protein kinase, histone acetyltransferase, and H1 ubiquitylase activities (TAF 250). |
| TFIIA  | 3                 | 34(α), 19(β), 12(γ)   | Stabilization of TBP-DNA and TAF-DNA interactions; anti-repression and coactivator functions. |
| TFIIB  | 1                 | 35                   | Stabilization of TBP-DNA interactions; recruitment of Pol II-TFIIF; start site selection by Pol II. |
| TFIIF  | 2                 | 74(RAP 74), 30(RAP 30) | Recruitment of Pol II to promoter DNA-TBP-IIB complex; destabilization of non-specific Pol II-DNA interactions; facilitates Pol II elongation. |
| Pol II | 12                | 220-10(RPB1-12)      | RNA polymerase (pre-mRNA synthesis); recruitment of TFIIIE; role of its CTD domain in interactions with Mediator complex, Elongator complex and pre-mRNA processing factors. |
| TFIIIE | 2                 | 57(α), 34(β)         | TFIIH recruitment, modulation of TFIIH helicase ATPase and kinase activities; facilitates promoter melting. |
| TFIIH  | 9                 | 89(ERCC3/XPB), 80(ERCC2/XPD),<br>62, 50, 44(hSSL1), 41(CDK7),<br>38(cyclin H), 34, 32(MAT1) | Promoter melting (open complex); helicase (XPB and XPD); CTD kinase (CDK7); role in nucleotide excision repair. |

Table 2. Human TFIID complex: subunit composition and functions.

| TAFII250 | Histone acetyltransferase (H3>H4>H2A, TFIIIE); ubiquitin-activating/conjugating activity (H1); kinase (TFIIF>TFIIE=TFIIA); two bromodomains bind di-acetylated N-terminal histone H4 tail; contacts TBP and several TAFs; inhibits TBP-TATA interaction; HMG box; core promoter selectivity; cell cycle progression (G1/S). |
| TAFII140 | Histone fold interacts with that of TAF30; contains PHD finger |
| TAFII150 | INR and downstream promoter DNA binding together with TAF250 (core promoter selectivity); cell cycle progression (G2/M) |
| TAFII135 | Histone H2A-like fold mediates association with H2B fold of TAF20/15; Sp1-like Q-rich regions; contacts TFIIA and activators (Sp1, NFATp). |
| TAFII100 | WD40 repeats; contacts TAF80, TAF31, TBP and TFIIF (RAP30); cell cycle progression (G2/M). |
| TAFII80 | Histone 4H-like fold associates with H3 fold of TAF31; Drosophila homolog (dTAFII60) binds to downstream promoter elements (DPE); contacts TFIIEd, TFIIF(RAP74) and TBP; contacts activators (p53, NFkB/p65 and NTF-1). |
| TAFII55 | Interacts with multiple activators (Sp1, USF, CTF, HIV-Tat, E1A, and YY1). |
| TAFII43 | Interacts with TAF150. |
| TBP | TATA Box-binding; contacts TFIIA, TFIIIB, several TAFs, activators and negative cofactors (NC2/Dr1-DRAP1). |
| TAFII31 | Histone H3-like fold associates with H4 fold of TAF80; binds DPE; contacts acidic activators (VP16, p53), N-CoR, and TFIIIB. |
| TAFII30 | Histone fold associates with that of TAF140; contacts TBP and the estrogen receptor. |
| TAFII28 | Histone fold similar to SPT3 C-terminus associates with histone fold of TAF18. |
| TAFII20 | Histone H2B-like fold associates with H2A fold of TAF135; contacts TBP. |
| TAFII18 | Histone-like fold similar to SPT3 N-terminus associates with histone fold of TAF28. |
| TAFII15 | Histone H2B-like fold; alternative translation initiation product of TAF20. |

an anti-repression function by competing with TBP-interacting negative cofactors (NCs), like NC2/Dr1-DRAP1, that prevent the association of TFIIIB with the TBP-TATA complex (reviewed in Roeder 1998; Kamada et al., 2001). Thus, the requirement of TFIIA in basal transcription is core promoter-specific and appears linked to the association of TAFIIs (or NCs) with TBP and the core promoter-selective functions of the TFIID complex. Consistent with this, TFIIA has been shown to relieve the inhibitory effect on the N-terminus of TAFII250 on TBP-TATA interactions, and to induce/reorganize or stabilize interactions of TAFIIs with the INR and downstream sequences (reviewed in Burley and Roeder, 1996; Oelgeschläger et al., 1996; Emami and Smale, 1997; Ozer et al., 1998a). As discussed further below, besides their core promoter-selective basal activities, TFIIA and TAFIIs also function as coactivators.

The formation of a TFIID-IIA-IIB-DNA complex (or minimally a TBP-IIB-DNA), allows the subsequent recruitment of TFIIF in association with Pol II. The minimal TBP-IIB-IIF-Pol II complex is able to initiate transcription from supercoiled DNA plasmids and pre-melted promoter templates *in vitro*. However, the additional incorporation of TFIIIE and TFIIH is required for promoter melting (open complex formation) and efficient transcription initiation on linear DNAs *in vitro*. TFIIIE has a role in recruiting TFIIH and in stimulating TFIIH activities. TFIIH is a nine-subunit complex with a ring-like architecture (Chang and Kornberg, 2000; Schultz et al., 2000) that contains two DNA helicases (XPB and XPD) involved in ATP-dependent promoter melting at the transcription start site (i.e., formation of the open PIC) and in Pol II escape/clearance from the promoter (i.e., the transition from initiation to elongation) (reviewed in Dvir et al., 2001). TFIIH also contains a cyclin H/CDK7 kinase pair that phosphorylates the CTD (carboxy-terminal domain) of the largest subunit of Pol II, a step that is thought to also facilitate promoter clearance by disrupting interactions of the CTD with components of the PIC. Interestingly, besides its role in transcription, TFIIH has also a role in DNA damage repair through the nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway.

way and genes encoding TFIIH subunits (XPB and XPD) are mutated in three human genetic disorders: xeroderma pigmentosum, Cockayne's syndrome, and trichothiodystrophy (Hoeijmakers *et al.*, 1996; de Laat *et al.*, 1999).

The ordered recruitment of TFIIF, Pol II, TFIIE and TFIIH described above derives from *in vitro* experiments with purified factors and has been challenged by the more recent discovery that the hypophosphorylated form of Pol II (i.e., Pol IIA), in yeast and mammalian cells, can be found associated (off-DNA) with a variety of factors in large holoenzyme complexes that vary in composition but generally include TFIIF, TFIIE, TFIIH, and components (e.g., SRBs and Med proteins) of the multi-subunit cofactor complex called ‘Mediator’ (reviewed in Orphanides *et al.*, 1996; Malik and Roeder, 2000). This raises the possibility that the TFIID/TBP-IIA-IIB-DNA complex is recognized in a single step by a pre-assembled Pol II holoenzyme and that components of the Mediator complex – which is required for regulated transcription (see below) – may also play essential functions in basal transcription. Consistent with this, purified yeast Mediator stimulates the TFIIH kinase activity and basal transcription *in vitro* (Kim *et al.*, 1994) and the yeast Mediator subunit SRB4 is required both for global Pol II transcription *in vivo* (Holstege *et al.*, 1998) and for TBP recruitment *in vivo* to certain yeast promoters that appear less dependent on TAF<sub>II</sub>s (Li *et al.*, 2000).

The final/complete PIC is thus a large nucleoprotein complex composed of 43 distinct proteins with a total mass of over 2.2 MDa (not including the about 24 subunits of the mediator complex). After open complex formation, transcription initiation and promoter clearance, the CTD-phosphorylated Pol II (Pol II0) in association with TFIIF elongates downstream of the gene, while TFIIA and TFIID remain bound to the core promoter and TFIIB, TFIIE and TFIIH are released (Zawel *et al.*, 1995). Interestingly, a recent study (with yeast nuclear extracts as source of transcription factors) has shown that, after transcription initiation and Pol II escape, Mediator components can remain associated with the core promoter together with TFIIA, TFIID, TFIIE and TFIIH forming a scaffold that is stabilized by activators. This suggests that the second and subsequent rounds of transcription initiation (i.e., re-initiation) may not require *de novo* recruitment of TFIIE, TFIIH or the Pol II-Mediator holoenzyme, but may just need re-incorporation of TFIIB, TFIIF and Pol II (Yudkovsky *et al.*, 2000).

The re-initiating Pol II could be a de-phosphorylated Pol IIA form that is generated during or after transcription termination by a CTD-specific phosphatase (i.e., the generally accepted model, Figure 2) or, alternatively, a Pol II0 form might be able to re-initiate transcription at the core promoter in the presence of upstream promoter-bound activators (Castaño *et al.*, 2000).

The pathway for PIC formation described above (Figure 2) is governed by the initial binding of TBP/TFIID to the TATA box. However, many genes do not have a TATA element and TATA-less INR-containing core promoters can still direct accurate transcription initiation by Pol II *in vivo* and in cell-free systems from a single start site within the INR element (reviewed in Smale, 1997). The factors and mechanism involved in PIC formation and transcription initiation at TATA-less promoters are still poorly characterized. TATA-less promoters also require TFIID (Pugh and Tjian, 1991; Zhou *et al.*, 1992). However, in contrast to TATA-containing promoters that can direct activator-independent (basal) transcription in the presence of TBP, mammalian TATA-less promoters require TAF<sub>II</sub>s within the TFIID complex (Table 2) and TFIIA for basal transcription (Martinez *et al.*, 1994, 1998a; reviewed in Smale, 1997; Roeder, 1998). Moreover, a mutation in the DNA-binding surface of TBP that inhibits transcription from mammalian TATA-containing promoters *in vivo* and *in vitro* does not affect basal (or activated) transcription from TATA-less INR-containing core promoters (Martinez *et al.*, 1995). These and other experiments described below demonstrate the existence of alternative pathways for functional TFIID recruitment that are core promoter selective (reviewed in Roeder, 1996, 1998; Verrijzer and Tjian, 1996). Significantly, in accord with the *in vitro* studies with *Drosophila* and mammalian TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>s, core promoter-selective functions of yeast TAF<sub>II</sub>s have also been observed *in vivo* (Shen and Green, 1997). Interestingly, human TAF<sub>II</sub>250 and TAF<sub>II</sub>150, in association, have been shown to bind weakly but directly to the INR in a sequence-specific manner (Chalkley and Verrijzer, 1999) and *Drosophila* TAF<sub>II</sub>s with histone H3/H4-like structures have been crosslinked to a DPE (downstream promoter element) sequence that is present downstream of the INR (+30) in certain TATA-containing and TATA-less genes (Burke and Kadonaga, 1997). Thus, TAF<sub>II</sub>-DNA contacts may constitute an alternative to the TBP-TATA interactions and are sufficient for TFIID recruitment to certain TATA-less INR-containing genes that con-
tain a DPE (Burke and Kadonaga, 1996; 1997) but are not sufficient for efficient TFIID binding to DPE-deficient TATA-less promoters (Martinez *et al.*, 1995; Burke and Kadonaga, 1996). Moreover, both DPE-containing and DPE-deficient TATA-less promoters need additional cofactors besides TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>s, the other GTFs and Pol II, for productive PIC formation and transcription *in vitro*. Indeed, NC2 – a negative cofactor that inhibits TATA-dependent promoters – has been shown recently to stimulate transcription of DPE-dependent TATA-less promoters (Willy *et al.*, 2000). In addition, several human TAF<sub>II</sub>- and INR-dependent Cofactors (TICs) have been partially purified and are selectively required for INR-dependent basal and activated transcription from DPE-deficient TATA-less promoters and for the TAF<sub>II</sub>-dependent synergy between TATA and INR elements in systems reconstituted with highly purified GTFs (including TFIID and TFIIA) and Pol II (Martinez *et al.*, 1998a; reviewed in Roeder, 1998). The identity of TICs and possible relationship to general factors or cofactors (including NC2) remains to be elucidated.

It is now clear that different rate-limiting steps exist in PIC assembly and transcription initiation at different core promoters and that although GTFs are ubiquitous and generally required for transcription of most class II genes they also have core promoter-selective functions or interact with cofactors (e.g., NCs, TAF<sub>II</sub>s, TICs) that can modulate their activity in a core promoter-selective manner. Moreover, tissue-specific TAF<sub>II</sub>s (reviewed in Green 2000) and homologues of TBP (i.e., TRF1 and TRF2; reviewed in Berk, 2000) and TFIIA (ALF/TFIIAtau; Upadhyaya *et al.*, 1999; Ozer *et al.*, 2000) have also been described recently. This emphasizes the gene-selective properties and tissue-specific variations of the class II basal transcription machinery and further adds to its complexity.

### Regulated transcription: diversity, redundancy, and synergy of cofactors

Despite the complexity of the general transcription machinery described above-sequence-specific DNA-binding regulators (activators and repressors) are generally unable to significantly modulate the rate of transcription from their target promoters in systems reconstituted with highly purified GTFs and Pol II, but require the functions of a variety of so-called cofactors (i.e., coactivators and corepressors) which

have been identified through both genetic and biochemical experiments in many laboratories over the past ten years (reviewed in Roeder, 1998; Björklund *et al.*, 1999; Burke and Baniahmad, 2000; Näär *et al.*, 2001). Cofactors do not bind to DNA in a sequence-specific manner but are generally recruited to specific promoters via interactions with either regulators and/or components of the basal transcription machinery (see Figure 1). Thus, transcription cofactors can be classified into two broad groups: (I) ‘general cofactors’ which have global functions in conjunction with many different regulators and/or associate with (or are part of) the general/basal transcription machinery and thus often have basal functions and are likely to be recruited to most genes; and (II) ‘regulator-associated cofactors’ which are primarily recruited to promoters by gene-specific regulators and often have enzymatic activities that modify chromatin structure. Note that certain general cofactors (group I) have also been shown both to interact directly with regulators (e.g., PC4, TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>s, and Mediator) and to modify nucleosomes (e.g., TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>s, yeast Mediator). On the other hand, regulator-associated cofactors (group II) have also been shown to interact with components of the general/basal machinery (e.g., SAGA and SWI/SNF; see below). Therefore the terms ‘general cofactors’ and ‘regulator-associated cofactors’, while not completely satisfactory, are used here for simplicity. Moreover, cofactors from both groups include large multi-subunit complexes with catalytic activities involved in the modification of chromatin structure (Table 3) and can be structurally related and/or functionally redundant (see below).

#### General cofactors

General cofactors can be divided into two sub-groups (Roeder, 1998) that function in concert to achieve optimal transcription induction of many genes and in response to a wide variety of regulators: (1) general positive and negative cofactors that include the positive cofactors PC1, PC2, PC3, PC4, p52, p75 and the less well characterized PC5 and PC6, the negative cofactors NC1 and NC2, and the architectural proteins HMG1 and HMG2, which – with the exception of PC2 (see below) – are single polypeptides (e.g., PCI/PARP, PC3/Dr2/Topol, PC4, HMG1, and HMG2) or small dimeric complexes (e.g., NC2), and (2) basal factor-associated cofactors which are larger complexes of 3 to about 24 different proteins, and include TFIIA, TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>s, Mediator and Elongator
| Type | Number of subunits | Catalytic activities (subunits) | Functions |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| I. General cofactors |  |  |  |
| General/basal factor-associated |  |  |  |
| TFIID/TAF<sub>Is</sub> | 15 (h) | HAT, Ubac, kinase (hTAFII250) | Basal & activator-dependent transcription; TAF<sub>Is</sub> modulate promoter-selective PIC assembly and interact with many activators (coactivator function); enzymatically modifies chromatin and GTFs. |
| TFIIA | 2(y), 3(h) | – | Basal & activator-dependent transcription; interacts with and regulates TBP-TAF functions; anti-repression; interacts with activators and PC4. |
| Mediator (hTRAP/SMCC, DRIP, ARC, NAT) | 24(y,h) | kinase (SRB10/CDK8); HAT (yNut1) | Basal & transcription activation and repression; associates with and phosphorylates Pol II and activators; acetylates chromatin (H3>H4). |
| Elongator | 6(y) | HAT (yElp3) | Associates with elongating Pol II form; acetylates chromatin (H2A, H2B, H3, H4); may facilitate transcription elongation through nucleosomes. |
| II. Regulator-associated cofactors |  |  |  |
| Multifunctional chromatin modifiers |  |  |  |
| ADA* | ≥4(y) | HAT (yGCN5) | Facilitates transcription on chromatin templates in vitro but is not recruited by acidic activators; acetylates chromatin (H3>H2B). |
| SAGA (hSTAGA, PCAF, TFTC) | 14(y), 17(h) | HAT (yGCN5, hGCN5 & PCAF) | Coactivator, recruited to promoters by acidic activators; ySAGA interacts with TBP, hSTAGA/ITFC associate with splicing and DNA damage-binding proteins; all acetylate chromatin (H3). |
| NuA3* | 2–5(y) | HAT (ySas3) | Gene silencing in vivo; facilitates transcription in vitro on chromatin but is not recruited by acidic activators; acetylates chromatin (H3). |
| NuA4 (hTIP60) | 11(y), ≥13(h) | HAT (yEsa1, hTip60); ATPase-DNA helicase (hTAP54α, β/hTIP49, 48 /RUVEL1, 2) | Coactivator; recruited to promoters by acidic activators; hTIP60 is involved in DNA double-strand-break repair and apoptosis; acetylates chromatin (H4). |
| Sin3-HDAC | ≥6(y,h) | HDAC (HDAC1, 2); ATPase (Mi-2α, β/CHD3, 4) | Corepressor; recruited by DNA-bound regulators directly or via specific corepressors/adapters (e.g., N-CoR/SMRT); deacetylates chromatin. |
| NURD | ≥6(X,h) | ATPase(yRpd3, hHDAC1, 2) | Gene silencing; ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling and deacetylation; recruited to methylated DNA and by promoter-bound repressors. |
| SWI/SNF-y,d,h,SWI/SNF -yRSC | 11(y), 8(d), ≥10(h) | ATPase(ySWI2/SNF2, dBRM, hBRM, hBRG1) | ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling (nucleosome sliding, restructuring, and trans-displacement); transcription activation (coactivator) and repression; recruited to promoters by activators; cell cycle regulation. |
| ISWI | 11(y) | ATPase (ySTH1) | ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling (nucleosome sliding); chromatin assembly (ACF); chromatin-dependent transcription activation (NURF, RSF) and repression (ISW2); possible roles in DNA replication, recombination and/or repair within chromatin (INO80). |
| -d,h ACF/CHRAC | 2/4(d,h) | ATPase (dISWI, hSNF2H) |  |
| -d NURF | 4(d) | ATPase (dISWI), IPPase (dNurf38) |  |
| -h RSF | 2(h) | ATPase (hSNF2H) |  |
| -y ISWI1 & 2 | 4&2(y) | ATPase (yISWI1 or yISWI2) |  |
| -y INO80 | 12(y) | ATPase (yIno80); DNA helicase (yRvb1&2) |  |

*Complexes not shown yet to directly interact with regulators.

complexes (Table 3). Most, if not all, general cofactors have in common the ability to affect both basal and activated transcription. Moreover, the 500 kDa general positive cofactor, PC2, links both sub-groups as it has been shown recently to be the core of the multi-protein human Mediator/SMCC complex (Malik et al., 2000; and references therein, see below).

**General positive and negative cofactors**

The small general positive cofactors have non-specific DNA-binding activities that may contribute to their coactivator function perhaps by facilitating the assembly/stability of the PIC and/or by favoring a specific nucleoprotein architecture at the promoter (reviewed in Roeder, 1998). Indeed, the best characterized general positive cofactor, PC4, functions as a coactivator for a variety of activation domains with which it interacts directly. PC4 has been proposed to facilitate functional PIC formation via its multiple contacts with activators, TFIIA, Pol II, and DNA (Malik et al., 1998; and references therein).

The best characterized general negative cofactor, NC2/Dr1-Drap1, is a heterodimer of two histone fold-containing proteins, NC2 α and β, that resemble histone H2A and H2B, respectively. NC2 appears to have both corepressor and coactivator functions in addition to its core promoter-selective activity. NC2 stimulates basal transcription through the DPE element of certain TATA-less core promoters and represses basal transcription from TATA-containing core promoters (see above and Kamada et al., 2001). NC2 repressive function can be stimulated by contacts with a DNA-bound repressor, indicating a *bona fide* corepressor/adapter activity (Ikeda et al., 1998). A coactivator activity of NC2 is also suggested by the recent observation that NC2 assembles with PICs at yeast promoters *in vivo* in response to transcriptional activation (Geisberg et al., 2001) and is found associated in nuclear extracts with a transcriptionally active Pol II that is hyperphosphorylated (II0 form) (Castaño et al., 2000).

**Basal factor-associated cofactors**

Well-characterized members of this second sub-group of general cofactors include the multi-subunit TFIIA, TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>s, and Mediator complexes (Table 3).

**TFIIA**

TFIIA has a more general function as a coactivator than as a basal factor (see above). Indeed, TFIIA is generally required for optimal activator-induced transcription in TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>-dependent *in vitro* systems

and *in vivo* (Sun et al., 1994; Kang et al., 1995; Ozer et al., 1998b; reviewed in Roeder 1998). Moreover, TFIIA not only interacts with TBP, but also with specific activators (Ozer et al., 1994; Kobayashi et al., 1995), TAF<sub>II</sub>s (Burley and Roeder, 1996; Kraemer et al., 2001), and the general coactivator PC4 (Ge and Roeder, 1994; Kretzschmar et al., 1994; Kaiser et al., 1995). This network of interactions (including additional activator-TAF<sub>II</sub>s interactions, see below) might thus contribute to the observed increased assembly and/or isomerization of the TFIIA-TFIID-DNA complex by activators (Wang et al., 1992; Liebermann and Berk, 1994; Chi et al., 1995; Kobayashi et al., 1995; Shykind et al., 1995, 1997; Chi and Carey, 1996; Oelgeschläger et al., 1996), either directly via an increase in the rate of both assembly (cooperative binding) and isomerization or indirectly through modulation of the intrinsic ability of TFIIA to counteract the effect of negative cofactors (e.g., NC2 and/or TAF<sub>II</sub>250) on TBP-TATA interactions.

**TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>s**

Early transcription studies recognized TFIID as a target of sequence-specific transcription activators. These pioneering *in vitro* analyses with a native human TFIID fraction indicated both quantitative (stabilizing) effects of activators on TFIID binding to core promoters (Sawadogo and Roeder, 1985; Abmayr et al., 1988; Workman et al., 1988) and qualitative effects (i.e., activator-induced isomerization of TFIID) resulting in extended TFIID-core promoter interactions (Horikoshi et al., 1988a, b). These results were further confirmed in later studies with highly purified TFIID and further indicated a role of TFIIA in the process of activation (Lieberman and Berk, 1994; Chi and Carey, 1996; see also below).

The observations that native TFIID but not recombinant TBP could support activator-stimulated transcription in purified systems led to the original proposals and subsequent demonstrations that cofactors/coactivators associate with TBP in native TFIID and are essential for activator-mediated transcription in purified systems *in vitro* (Hoey et al., 1990; Hoffman et al., 1990; Pugh and Tjian, 1990; reviewed in Roeder, 1996, and Verrijzer and Tjian, 1996). These cofactors/coactivators are the now well-known TAF<sub>II</sub>s (Table 2) that are tightly associated with the core domain of TBP in *Drosophila* and mammalian TFIID but appear less stably associated with TBP in yeast (for review see Burley and Roeder, 1996; Green, 2000; Gangloff et al., 2001). TFIID-associated

TAF<sub>II</sub>s are essential for activation in purified systems *in vitro* by many different sequence-specific activators with which they interact directly. Moreover, distinct classes of activators have been shown to target different TAF<sub>II</sub>s within the TFIID complex (Chen *et al.*, 1994). However, certain TAF<sub>II</sub>s (e.g., TAF<sub>II</sub>55) can interact with several different activators (Chiang and Roeder, 1995; see Table 2). Thus, direct activator-TAF<sub>II</sub>s interactions are likely to contribute to the increased recruitment/stabilization and/or isomerization of TFIID on core promoters (see above). Consistent with this, the interaction of two distinct activators (or activation domains) with different TAF<sub>II</sub>s within TFIID results in the cooperative recruitment (or stabilization) of TFIID to TATA-containing core promoters and synergistic transcription activation *in vitro* (Sauer *et al.*, 1995a, b).

In contrast to the general requirement of TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>s for high levels of activated transcription in systems reconstituted with purified GTFs and Pol II, more recent studies on the role of TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>s for activated transcription *in vivo* have shown that inactivation or depletion of individual TAF<sub>II</sub>s in yeast cells – which destabilizes the TFIID complex – does not have a global effect on transcription activation of many yeast genes (Apone *et al.*, 1996; Moqtaderi *et al.*, 1996; Walker *et al.*, 1996; Shen and Green, 1997). Genome-wide analyses have further shown that inactivation of different TAF<sub>II</sub>s affects the transcription of distinct and overlapping sets of genes ranging from 3% to 67% of the genome and that several TFIID-specific TAF<sub>II</sub>s are important for transcription of specific genes involved in cell growth and cell cycle control. (Holstege *et al.*, 1998; reviewed in Green, 2000; see also Table 2). Similar observations have also been made in higher eukaryotic cells (Metzger *et al.*, 1999; Chen and Manley, 2000; reviewed in Green, 2000). In addition, high levels of transcription activation have been observed *in vitro* in a crude human HeLa cell nuclear extract depleted of TAF<sub>II</sub>s (Oelgeschläger *et al.*, 1998) and lower but significant activation has also been seen with TBP in more purified human systems containing the general cofactors PC4, PC2 and/or the PC2-containing TRAP/SMCC/Mediator complex (Wu *et al.*, 1998; Fondell *et al.*, 1999). These results are also consistent with earlier findings that showed that the yeast Mediator-Pol II holoenzyme can support activated transcription in purified systems *in vitro* in the absence of TAF<sub>II</sub>s (Kim *et al.*, 1994; Koleske and Young, 1994). These results suggest that the Mediator complex and/or additional coactivators can compensate for the absence of TAF<sub>II</sub>s for transcription activation *in vivo* and *in vitro* and indicate a certain level of redundancy in coactivator function (see below). Thus, TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>s are not obligatory coactivators and are not globally required for transcription activation *in vivo* but may play more gene-selective roles, consistent with their core promoter-selective functions (see above). Note, however, that these results do not exclude the possibility that TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>s might play a more global role as ‘conditional’ or ‘transient’ coactivators for most (if not all) genes depending on specific physiological or environmental stimuli and/or at different times during cell growth, development or during the life span of an organism. Indeed, metazoan TAF<sub>II</sub>s are most likely recruited to most genes via their very stable association with TBP as part of the TFIID complex. Consistent with this, recent chromatin crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments have demonstrated that although TAF<sub>II</sub>s are differentially recruited to different yeast promoters, most (if not all) yeast promoters tested nevertheless appear to recruit TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>s (Kuras *et al.*, 2000; Li *et al.*, 2000). Furthermore, TAF<sub>II</sub>s are recruited to the yeast RPS5 promoter *in vivo* in a manner that depends on upstream activating sequences (Li *et al.*, 2000); this suggests that activators might be required for TAF<sub>II</sub> recruitment *in vivo* either through direct physical interactions with TAF<sub>II</sub>s, as originally proposed from the earlier *in vitro* studies described above, and/or indirectly via modification of chromatin structure.

Interestingly, several TAF<sub>II</sub>s are structurally related to core histones (i.e., H2A, H2B, H3 and H4) and have so-called histone fold domains (Table 2) that mediate their specific heterodimerization with other histone-like TAF<sub>II</sub>s (see also brackets in Table 4) and with core histones themselves (Hoffmann *et al.*, 1996; Xie, *et al.*, 1996). Some of these histone-like TAF<sub>II</sub>s have also been found in other complexes distinct from TFIID, including the yeast SAGA and several mammalian SAGA-like co-regulator complexes that modify chromatin (see below and Table 4). Based on these observations and the recent demonstration that two copies of each H2A-, H2B-, H3- and H4-like TAF<sub>II</sub>s can assemble into an octameric complex (Selleck *et al.*, 2001), a histone octamer-like sub-structure has been proposed to reside within both the TFIID and SAGA complexes (reviewed in Burley and Roeder, 1996; Selleck *et al.* 2001). The role of this octameric structure is unknown, but it could facilitate the binding of TFIID to core promoters within chromatin and/or could be involved in the formation of a nucleosomal-

like TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>-DNA complex at the core promoter (Hoffmann *et al.*, 1997). This would be consistent with the proposed wrapping of core promoter DNA around the TFIIID complex (Oelgeschläger *et al.*, 1996) and with the role of TAF<sub>II</sub>s with histone H3 and H4 similarities in recognition of the DPE core promoter element (see above).

The TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>-chromatin connection is further underscored by the fact that the largest subunit of TFIID, TAF<sub>II</sub>250, is a histone acetyltransferase (HAT) that acetylates core histones H2A, H3 and H4 (Mizzen *et al.*, 1996) and has ubiquitin-activating/conjugating (Ubac) activity that monoubiquitates linker histone H1 (Pham and Sauer, 2000). Significantly, mutations that affect the HAT and Ubac activities of TAF<sub>II</sub>250 correlate with the decreased expression of specific mammalian and *Drosophila* genes *in vivo* (O’Brien and Tjian, 2000; Pham and Sauer, 2000). Moreover, human TAF<sub>II</sub>250 has two bromodomains that can interact with the multiple-acetylated N-terminal rail of histone H4, suggesting that TAF<sub>II</sub>250 could target TFIID to acetylated nucleosomes (Jacobson *et al.*, 2000). Interestingly, yeast TAF<sub>II</sub>130(145) — the homologue of human TAF<sub>II</sub>250 — lacks the C-terminal bromodomains, which are present in Bdf1, separate yeast protein/TAF<sub>II</sub> that associates with yeast TFIID (Matangkasombut *et al.*, 2000). However, the exact role(s) of the TAF<sub>II</sub>250 bromodomains and of its HAT and Ubac activities remain to be determined *in vivo* and at the molecular level *in vitro*. Indeed, besides a chromatin function, the TAF<sub>II</sub>250 bromodomains and catalytic HAT and Ubac activities might also target other non-histone proteins. For instance, TAF<sub>II</sub>250 can also acetylate the general/basal transcription initiation factor TFIIE, although the functional relevance of this modification remains to be established (Imhof *et al.*, 1997). Interestingly, TAF<sub>II</sub>250 has also a protein kinase activity that targets TFIIF, TFIIE and TFIIA (Dickstein *et al.*, 1996; Solowet *al.*, 2001) and that appears required *in vivo* for the expression of a small number of mammalian genes (O’Brien and Tjian, 2000). Thus, covalent modifications of histones and/or GTFs might also contribute to TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>250-dependent regulation of transcription *in vivo*.

**Mediator**

The Mediator complex was originally characterized in yeast through genetic and biochemical analyses. Yeast Mediator is a stable multi-subunit complex of more than 20 proteins that include various SRB and MED proteins which reversibly associate with the unphosphorylated CTD of the largest subunit of Pol II to form a holoenzyme that can support activator-dependent transcription *in vitro* in the absence of TAF<sub>II</sub>s (Flanagan *et al.*, 1991; Thompson *et al.*, 1993; Kim *et al.*, 1994; Koleske and Young, 1994; and references therein). More recently, various metazoan Mediator-like complexes have been purified by affinity methods and have been shown to contain more than 20 distinct proteins, which include homologues of yeast SRB and MED proteins. The human Mediator complexes purified by different laboratories include the SMCC/TRAP, DRIP, ARC, and NAT complexes (Table 3), which have very similar subunit compositions and thus, are likely to represent the same complex. Details about the subunit composition and structure of the yeast, *Drosophila* and mammalian Mediator complexes can be found in recent research publications (Park *et al.*, 2001; Wang *et al.*, 2001a) and reviews (Malik and Roeder, 2000; Myers and Kornberg, 2000).

A low-resolution structural analysis (by electron microscopy of single particles) has revealed a significant similarity in 3D structure between purified yeast Mediator and mammalian Mediator/TRAP/SMCC complexes, although morphological differences — possibly related to variations in subunit composition — were also detected (Dotson *et al.*, 2000). Yeast and metazoan Mediator complexes appear composed of different modules (or sets of stably associated proteins) that can dissociate from core components during extensive biochemical purification. Indeed, the general positive cofactor activity PC2 was originally extensively purified by conventional ion exchange chromatography and was later shown to correspond to a stripped core of the human Mediator/TRAP/SMCC complex (Malik *et al.*, 2000). However, it is also possible that different forms of Mediator exist in the cell and that Mediator is in dynamic interaction with different modules *in vivo*, a process that could potentially be controlled by specific physiological or environmental stimuli (Malik and Roeder, 2000). Indeed, mild purification (i.e., avoiding high-salt conditions) of yeast mediator complexes by affinity and gel filtration chromatography have identified two major forms of Mediator in yeast: a small core mediator (Medc) complex — which has several subunits conserved in PC2 — and a ‘complete’ Mediator in association with Pol II in a holoenzyme (Liu *et al.*, 2001). However, a similar approach has failed to identify any equivalent small core mediator complex — including the 500–700 kDa PC2 complex — in human HeLa cell nuclear extracts but predominantly found larger (2 MDa)

Table 4. Subunits of TAF-HAT complexes with conserved structures and/or functions are aligned. ? indicates that the presence of a corresponding subunit is unknown. – indicates the absence of the corresponding subunit. The structurally related SAP130 and CPSF160 appear loosely associated components of their respective complexes. Colors and brackets indicate complementary histone-like pairwise interactions.

| Conserved features               | Yeast       | Human        |
|----------------------------------|-------------|--------------|
|                                  | SAGA        | TFIID        | STAGA       | PCAF        | TFTC        | TFIID        |
| HAT & Bromodomain                | GCN5        | TAF130(145)  | GCN5L       | PCAF        | GCN5L       | TAF250       |
|                                  |             | & Bdf1       |             |             |             |              |
| 2 Histone folds, TBP interaction | SPT3        | TAF40 &      | hSPT3       | hSPT3       | hSPT3       | TAF28 &      |
|                                  |             | TAF19        |             |             |             | TAF18        |
| Histone fold                     | SPT7        | TAF47        | SPT7L(STAF65γ) | ?          | TAF140      | TAF140       |
| TBP interaction                  | SPT8        | –            | ?           | ?           | ?           | –            |
| Complex integrity                | SPT20(ADA5)  | –            | ?           | ?           | ?           | –            |
| Activator interaction            | ADA3        | –            | hADA3       | hADA3       | hADA3       | –            |
| Activator interaction            | ADA2        | –            | hADA2       | hADA2       | –           | –            |
| H2A-like Histone fold            | ADA1        | TAF48        | hADA1(STAF42) | ?          | TAF135      | TAF135       |
| WD40 repeats                    | TAF90       | TAF90        | PAF65β      | PAF65β      | PAF65β &    | TAF100       |
|                                  |             |              |             |             | TAF100      |              |
| H2B-like Histone fold            | TAF61(68)   | TAF61(68)    | TAF20/15    | TAF20/15    | TAF20/15    | TAF20/15     |
| H4-like Histone fold             | TAF60       | TAF60        | PAF65α      | PAF65α      | TAF80       | TAF80        |
| H3-like Histone fold             | TAF17(20)   | TAF17(20)    | TAF31       | TAF31       | TAF31       | TAF31        |
| Histone fold                     | TAF25       | TAF25        | TAF30       | TAF30       | TAF30       | TAF30        |
| Activator interaction            | –           | TAF67        | –           | ?           | TAF55       | TAF55        |
| Histone fold                     | –           | TAF65        | ?           | ?           | ?           | ?            |
| TAF150 interaction               | ?           | ?            | ?           | ?           | ?           | TAF43        |
| INR interaction                  | –           | TSM1/TAF150  | –           | –           | TAF150      | TAF150       |
| ATM-like; activator interaction  | Tra-1       | –            | TRRAP       | TRRAP       | TRRAP       | –            |
| pre-mRNA processing              | ?           | ?            | (SAP130)    | ?           | (SAP130)    | (CPSF160)    |
| TATA box-binding                 | –           | TBP          | –           | –           | –           | TBP          |

Mediator/SMCC/TRAP complexes that, in contrast to yeast Mediator, were not associated with Pol II. This suggests that if PC2 exists as a stable functional entity in human HeLa cells, it must be present in very low amounts (Wang *et al.*, 2001a).

The SRB4 and SRB6 proteins are core components of yeast Mediator and their inactivation has been shown to decrease transcription of most genes *in vivo*, suggesting that the Mediator complex is recruited together with Pol II to most genes in yeast (Thompson and Young, 1995; Holstege *et al.*, 1998). However, inactivation of two other core components, SRB5 and MED6, does not have similar global effects and only affects transcription of, respectively, 16% and 10% of the yeast genes (Holstege *et al.*, 1998). Moreover, inactivating mutations of the yeast cyclin-dependent kinase SRB 10/CDK8 — a component of the negative regulatory SRB8-11 sub-complex that is variably associated with Mediator and phosphorylates the CTD of Pol II — revealed that SRB10 is mostly involved in gene repression *in vivo* and that it affects only 3% of the yeast genome (Holstege *et al.*, 1998). Therefore, in a manner similar to TFIID, Mediator may be recruited to most genes through its interaction with components of the basal machinery (e.g., Pol II), perhaps involving the functions of the core components SRB4 and SRB6, and other subunits may have regulator- and/or gene-selective functions. Consistent with this, different Mediator subunits are required for the function of distinct activators with which they interact directly (reviewed in Malik and Roeder, 2000; Myers and Kornberg, 2000). Thus, an increased recruitment of the Mediator-Pol II holoenzyme by activators could facilitate PIC assembly, alternatively activators may stabilize Mediator-GTFs interactions to facilitate reinitiation by Pol II (Yudkovsky *et al.*, 2000). Interestingly, although TFIID/TAF<sub>II</sub>s and Mediator/SMCC/TRAP appear redundant in certain *in vitro* assays (Fondell *et al.*, 1999; Oelgeschläger *et al.*, 1998; see above), PC2, which lacks specific mediator components, requires TAF<sub>II</sub>s for function (Malik *et al.*, 2000). This synergy of TAF<sub>II</sub>s and PC2 suggests distinct roles for TAF<sub>II</sub>s and for PC2-specific Mediator/SMCC components, and also points to common functions shared by TAF<sub>II</sub>s and the Mediator/SMCC subunits that are missing in the PC2 core complex.

Moreover, an additional level of coactivator synergy is reflected in the fact that both TAF<sub>II</sub>S and Mediator/SMCC synergize with (or require) general positive cofactors (e.g., PC4) to achieve optimal transcription activation (see above; Malik *et al.*, 2000).

A recent study has shown that the yeast Mediator complex can bind to nucleosomes and acetylates core histone H3 (and, less efficiently, histone H4, histone H1, HMG14 and HMG17) both in free form and within nucleosomes. The Mediator-associated HAT activity was shown to reside in the yeast Nut1 subunit. Nut1 has been involved in the repressive function of the URS2 region of the yeast HO promoter in conjunction with other Mediator subunits that include Nut2 (Lorch *et al.*, 2000, and references therein). Although a homologue of yeast, Nut2 is present in human Mediator complexes (i.e., TRAP/SMCC, PC2, and NAT) no homologue for Nut1 has yet been identified within highly purified human Mediator complexes, which also do not appear to have a stably associated HAT activity (for review see Lorch *et al.*, 2000; Malik and Roeder, 2000). However, a connection between human Mediator and chromatin may exist since synergy between two activators in a reconstituted human transcription system required human Mediator (the ARC complex) and the use of a chromatin rather than a naked DNA template (Näär *et al.*, 1998).

Another recent study has shown that yeast SRB10 phosphorylates the transcription regulator GCN4, which signals the destruction of GCN4 by ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis (Chi *et al.*, 2001). This suggests that the Mediator complex (and perhaps other coactivator complexes with catalytic activities) may also negatively regulate (or terminate) transcription by marking activators for destruction (reviewed in Tansey, 2001).

### Regulator-associated cofactors (co-regulators)

Regulator-associated cofactors (hereafter referred to as co-regulators) have been identified genetically and/or biochemically through their functional and/or physical interactions with sequence-specific transcription regulators. These co-regulators are recruited to specific promoters mainly through their specific interactions with the transcription activation or repression domains of regulators. Moreover, immunoprecipitation experiments have indicated that regulators often pre-assemble (off-DNA) with their cognate co-regulators in the cell. Note that, as mentioned above, several general cofactors should also be considered as co-regulators since they can interact directly with sequence-specific activators and repressors (see above and Table 3). However, in contrast to the rather 'global' role of general cofactors, the co-regulators considered here are generally not found stably associated with components of the general/basal transcription machinery and are most often required for regulation of a more limited number of genes and by selected sequence-specific regulators. The wide variety of regulator-associated cofactors identified can be divided into (1) adapters which are often single proteins that either tether other co-regulators to the regulatory domains of DNA-binding activators and repressors or bridge regulatory domains to general cofactors or the basal transcription machinery, and (2) chromatin modifiers which are single proteins or stable multi-subunit complexes with catalytic activities that alter chromatin structure and that are recruited to promoters through either direct physical interactions with regulators and/or via the adapters mentioned above. Note that multi-protein chromatin modifiers (Table 3) often carry subunits with adapter functions.

#### Adapters

Adapters include proteins that function either as coactivators or corepressors. Examples of adapter-coactivators are the B cell-specific coactivator OCA-B/OBF-1, the herpes simplex virus VP16, human HCF, and *Drosophila* Notch (reviewed in Roeder, 1998; Lemon and Tjian, 2000). OCA-B is recruited by DNA-bound Oct-1 to immunoglobulin promoters and the complex further requires the function of general cofactors PC4 and PC2/Mediator, demonstrating a synergy between an adapter and general cofactors (reviewed in Roeder, 1998). Examples of adapter-corepressors include the yeast Ssn6-Tup1 complex, the nuclear receptor corepressors N-CoR/SMRT, *Drosophila* Groucho, the tumor suppressor protein Rb, and the Smad corepressors Ski and TGIF, to cite a few (reviewed in Knoepfler and Eisenman, 1999; Lemon and Tjian, 2000; Ng and Bird, 2000; Smith and Johnson, 2000). The repressive function of adapter-corepressors is achieved either by blocking/masking the activation domain of regulators (e.g., Rb inhibition of E2F), by recruiting histone deacetylase (HDAC)-containing complexes (e.g., recruitment of Sin3-HDAC complex by N-Cor/SMRT and Rb), and through interactions with nucleosomal histones and components of the basal machinery (e.g., Ssn6-Tup1) (reviewed in Burke and Baniahamid, 2000; Ng and Bird, 2000; Smith and Johnson, 2000).

Chromatin modifiers

Chromatin-modifying co-regulators belong to a rapidly expanding class of regulator-associated proteins and protein complexes with catalytic activities that modify chromatin structure and either antagonize (coactivators) or potentiate (corepressors) the repressive nature of chromatin. The compaction of eukaryotic DNA by histones into nucleosomes and higher order chromatin structures has long been known to affect (generally negatively) protein-DNA interactions and thus is an obstacle to most DNA transactions including transcription. Indeed, the earliest mechanistic studies on transcription activation implicated the mutually exclusive association of TFIID and nucleosomes with the promoter as a point of regulation of PIC assembly (Workman and Roeder, 1987; Workman *et al.*, 1988). It is now well established that sequence-specific regulators control transcription initiation at specific genes in part through the recruitment to promoter regions (i.e., targeting) of at least two different types of chromatin-modifying co-regulators: (1) ATP-dependent nucleosome-remodeling complexes, which alter the association of nucleosomal histones with DNA and facilitate nucleosome/octamer sliding and/or displacement, and (2) histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and deacetylases (HDACs) which control the level of acetylation of specific lysine residues within the core histone tails and thereby influence core histone interactions with either DNA, adjacent nucleosomes, and/or other regulatory proteins (Workman and Kingston, 1998; Strahl and Allis, 2000; Fry and Peterson, 2001). Histone acetylation generally correlates with gene activation and many HATs have coactivator functions, while gene silencing is often associated with histone deacetylation and HDACs are generally part of corepressor complexes. Importantly, different HATs have distinct substrate specificity and HATs also modify other non-histone proteins including sequence-specific transcription regulators, which affects their DNA-binding, protein-association, stability, and sub-cellular localizations properties (Kouzarides, 2000; Sterner and Berger, 2000). Furthermore, histones are also modified by phosphorylation, methylation, ubiquitylation and poly-ADP ribosylation (Strahl and Allis, 2000; Grant, 2001). It is likely that most (if not all) of these modifications will be targeted by regulators to specific promoters. Consistent with this, TAFII250 mono-ubiquitylates histone H1 (Pham and Sauer, 2001; see above), the histone H3-and H4-specific arginine-methyltransferases CARM1 and PRMT1 facilitate activation by nuclear receptors (Chen *et al.*, 1999; Wang *et al.*, 2001b), and a histone H3-specific lysine-methyltransferase complex (Suv39H1-HP1) involved in heterochromatin silencing has also been shown recently to function as a corepressor that is targeted to E2F-regulated promoters by the adapter functions of Rb (Nielsen *et al.*, 2001). Moreover, an emerging theme is that one type of histone modification influences others and that the resulting pattern of histone modification forms a code that is read/recognized by specific protein domains (e.g., bromodomains and chromodomains) present in certain regulatory cofactors (reviewed in Strahl and Allis, 2000; Berger, 2001).

Strikingly, like nucleosome remodeling complexes most HATs and HDACs co-regulators are stable multi-subunit complexes (Table 3) and recent data indicate that they may also be involved in the remodeling of chromatin during processes other than transcription (Table 3, and see below). Excellent recent reviews describe in detail the composition and functional properties of ATP-dependent nucleosome-remodeling complexes which can function as both coactivators and corepressor complexes (Vignali *et al.*, 2000), HDAC corepressor complexes (Knoepfler and Eisenman, 1999; Burke and Baniahmad, 2000; Ng and Bird, 2000), coactivator HATs (e.g., p300/CBP, p160/SRC families) and HAT-containing complexes (Brown *et al.*, 2000; Roth *et al.*, 2001), which have been characterized to various extents (see Table 3). Thus, the following sections concentrate on the description of the structural and functional characteristics of the SAGA group of coactivator-HAT complexes, which have been well characterized in yeast and mammalian cells and are highly related in structure and function (including shared subunits) with several other multi-protein cofactor-HAT complexes including TFIID, ADA and NuA4/TIP60 complexes (Table 3, and see below).

The yeast SAGA complex

Yeast SAGA (Spt-Ada-Gcn5-Acetyltransferase) is a 1.8 MDa multi-subunit co-regulator complex (Figure 3) that is composed of (1) ADA proteins: ADA1, ADA2, ADA3, and the prototypical HAT-coactivator GCN5 (ADA4), (2) a subset of SPT proteins: SPT3, SPT7, SPT8, and SPT20 (ADA5), (3) a subset of yeast TAFIIs: yTAFII17/20, yTAFII25, yTAFII60, yTAFII61/68, and yTAFII90, and (4) a protein, Tra1 that is structurally related to members of the ATM/DNA-PK/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase family (Grant *et al.*, 1997, 1998a, b).

Figure 3. Model for the modular structure of the yeast SAGA complex. Module 1 includes proteins known to interact genetically and/or physically with activators and nucleosomes (identified by italics and a blue color) and include the histone acetyltransferase GCN5, ADA2, ADA3 and perhaps the C-terminal domain of Tra1 which has been shown recently to mediate the interaction of SAGA with specific activators. Module 2 components (*, red) and the yTAF_{II}s of module 4 (yTAF, green) have structural functions perhaps by forming a core histone-like octameric scaffold composed of two copies of each H2A-, H2B-, H3- and H4-like proteins. In addition, the histone fold domain (HFD) of SPT7 has been shown to specifically interact with the HFD of yTAF25. It is likely also that yTAFIIs participate in interactions with activators, nucleosomes, and core promoter elements. Module 3 (yellow) includes SPT3 and SPT8, which have been shown to interact genetically and biochemically with TBP. SPT3 has two complementary histone fold domains (2×HFD) (see text for details).

Thus, SAGA incorporates multiple activities, including SAGA-specific subunits (i.e., ADA1, SPT20, SPT8, SPT7, and SPT3) and sets of proteins that constitute structural and/or functional modules in other multi-protein transcription cofactor-HAT complexes (see below). Biochemical and genetic analyses have pointed to at least 3 distinct functional modules in yeast SAGA (Sterner et al., 1999). Module 1 contains GCN5, ADA2, and ADA3 which link SAGA physically and functionally to activators (as adapters) and nucleosomal histones (Figure 3). This module is also part of the smaller ADA complex. Like SAGA, the ADA complex acetylates histones H3 and H2B within nucleosomes (Grant et al., 1997). However, the ADA complex lacks the other SAGA subunits and, in contrast to the SAGA complex (and to individual ADA proteins), has not yet been shown to interact with activators. Note that ADA is not merely a sub-complex of SAGA but is a distinct complex with additional ADA-specific components (Eberharter et al., 1999). Module 2 is composed of proteins that are essential for the structural integrity of the SAGA complex and include ADA1, SPT7, and SPT20/ADA5, which have so far not been found in other complexes. Module 3 contains the SAGA-specific components SPT3 and SPT8, which have been shown both genetically and biochemically to be required for SAGA interaction with TBP and are involved in core promoter (TATA) selectivity *in vivo* (Eisenman et al., 1992; Sterner et al., 1999; Larschan and Winston, 2001); note however that TBP is not found stably associated with the SAGA complex (Figure 3).

Mutations in the genes encoding components of either module 1 or 3 have very mild phenotypes, whereas inactivation of components of module 2 causes the broadest and most severe set of phenotypes (Horiuchi et al., 1997; Sterner et al. 1999). Consistent with this, genome-wide expression analyses of *gcn5Δ* (module 1) and *spt3Δ* (module 3) null mutants indicate that GCN5 and SPT3 are required, respectively, for the expression of only 4% and 3% of yeast genes, whereas a *spt20Δ* (module 2) mutation affects 10% of the genome (Lee et al., 2000).

The discovery that yTAF_{II}s with histone-like folds are also integral components of the SAGA complex (Grant et al., 1998a) and the demonstration of pairwise interactions between the histone fold domains of yTAF_{II}61 (H2B-like) and yTAF_{II}25 with, respectively, those of ADA1 (H2A-like) and SPT7 (Gangloff et al., 2000, 2001), suggest an additional TAF module (module 4) that associates with module 2 and perhaps with module 3 as well (see Figure 3 and Table 4 for histone-

like interactions within SAGA and TFIID). Indeed, inactivation of yTAFII61 results in the selective loss of SPT3 from an otherwise apparently complete SAGA complex (Grant *et al.*, 1998a). Module 4 might thus form a histone octamer-like structure together with ADA1 (Figure 3) similar to the one postulated in the TFIID complex (see above) which might perhaps be involved in the interaction of SAGA with nucleosomes (Figure 3). Consistent with this possibility, inactivation of TAFII61 results in a SAGA complex that can acetylate free histones but is defective in acetylation of nucleosomes (Grant *et al.*, 1998a).

Tral1 is a large (434 kDa) protein that is also a subunit of the H4-specific HAT complex NuA4 (Grant *et al.*, 1998b; Allard *et al.*, 1999). Due to its size Tral1 is likely to have several functions, including a possible architectural role within the SAGA complex. Very recently, Tral1 was shown to contact directly acidic activators as part of the SAGA and NuA4 complexes and thus at least one of its functions is to serve as an adapter within these two co-regulator complexes (Brown *et al.*, 2001).

SAGA is involved in both transcription activation and repression *in vivo* (Holstege *et al.*, 1998; reviewed in Roth *et al.*, 2001). How does SAGA function to regulate transcription? In a current model SAGA is recruited to promoters by DNA-bound activators through interactions of activation domains with either Tral1, the ADA/GCN5 module and/or TAFIIs (see above). After its recruitment to the promoter, SAGA acetylates nearby nucleosomes (and perhaps other non-histone factors) via its GCN5 HAT subunit to help remodel chromatin, which ultimately facilitates PIC assembly at the core promoter through as yet unknown mechanisms. Consistent with this model, SAGA is recruited to promoters by acidic activators *in vitro* and *in vivo* (Utley *et al.*, 1998; Bhaumik and Green, 2001; Larschan and Winston, 2001). Moreover, SAGA stimulates activator-dependent transcription *in vitro* on chromatin templates in an acetyl-CoA-dependent manner (Utley *et al.*, 1998; Ikeda, 1999) and the GCN5 HAT activity is required for activation of specific genes *in vivo* (Kuo *et al.*, 1998; Wang *et al.*, 1998). Furthermore, SAGA functions in concert with the ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling complex SWI/SNF both to remodel chromatin and to activate gene transcription at particular promoters *in vivo* and *in vitro* in part by stabilizing SWI/SNF binding to acetylated nucleosomes (Cosma *et al.*, 1999; Krebs *et al.*, 1999; Hassan *et al.*, 2001). However, besides a targeted chromatin-remodeling role, there

is now substantial evidence indicating that SAGA also functions at certain promoters in a GCN5/HAT-independent manner to facilitate the recruitment of TBP to the core promoter, presumably through direct physical interactions of SPT3 with TBP (Dudley *et al.*, 1999; Bhaumik and Green, 2001; Larschan and Winston, 2001). Moreover, SAGA has also been shown to prevent TBP-TATA interactions *in vitro* and to repress specific TATA elements *in vivo* in a manner that depends on the presence of SPT3 and SPT8 (Belotserkovskaya *et al.*, 2000). Interestingly, SPT8 is found associated with SAGA in a conditional and dynamic manner that depends on cell growth conditions suggesting that the functions of SAGA might be regulated by specific growth stimuli (Belotserkovskaya *et al.*, 2000).

The striking structural and functional conservation in several subunits of both SAGA and TFIID (Table 4) suggest that these two complexes might perform similar functions *in vivo*. Consistent with this, genome-wide expression analyses have indicated redundant roles for the HAT subunits of SAGA and TFIID (i.e., GCN5 and yTAFII145/130). Moreover, although only about 12% of yeast genes are affected by inactivation of SAGA (i.e., the sum of effects of inactivating SPT3, SPT20, and GCN5) and about 30% of genes are dependent on TFIID-specific TAFIIs (yTAFII130/145 and yTAFII150), a minimum of 70% of yeast genes are affected by inactivation of the yTAFIIs shared by TFIID and SAGA. Thus, some combination of TFIID and SAGA is required for transcription of most genes in yeast (Lee *et al.*, 2000).

### Mammalian SAGA-like complexes

Mammalian homologues of yeast GCN5 include GCN5L and PCAF (p300/CBP-associated factor). GCN5L and PCAF are the products of distinct genes whose expression is differential and complementary in various tissues (Yang *et al.*, 1996; Xu *et al.*, 1998). GCN5L and PCAF have distinct but overlapping roles during mouse embryogenesis; indeed, GCN5L is essential while PCAF is dispensable for mouse development (Xu *et al.*, 2000; Yamauchi *et al.*, 2000). Three distinct human multiprotein HAT complexes have been shown to contain either GCN5L or PCAF and include: (1) the PCAF complex (Ogryzko *et al.*, 1998), (2) the TBP-free TAFII-containing complex (TFTC) (Brand *et al.*, 1999), and (3) the STAGA (SPT3-TAFII31-GCN5L-acetylase) complex (Martinez *et al.*, 1998b, 2001). While characterized to various extents, these human HAT complexes preferentially acetylate

histone H3 within nucleosomes and have related but not identical subunit compositions (Table 4). All lack TBP and contain human homologues of yeast SAGA-specific subunits (GCN5L/PCAF, hSPT3, hADA3, and TRRAP) and the histone-like TAFIIIs that are shared with human TFIID. STAGA and PCAF complexes appear very similar and may differ only by the identity of their HAT subunit (GCN5L or PCAF), while the TFTC complex seems quite distinct since it has the additional TFIID-specific TAFIIs: TAFII150, TAFII140, TAFII135, TAFII100, and TAFII55 that are mostly absent in STAGA and PCAF complexes (Brand *et al.*, 1999; Gangloff *et al.*, 2001; Martinez *et al.*, 2001). Moreover, the histone fold-containing TAFII140 and TAFII135 that are present in human TFTC (and TFIID) are replaced in yeast SAGA and human STAGA complexes by the structurally related subunits SPT7 and ADA1, respectively (see Table 4). Note that the potential additional presence of TAFII140 in STAGA and PCAF complexes has not yet been tested. Thus, STAGA (and perhaps the PCAF complex) might be the *bona fide* human homologue of the yeast SAGA complex, whereas the TFTC complex might fulfil functions more similar or redundant with TFIID. Consistent with this, low-resolution structural analyses by electron microscopy of single TFTC and TFIID particles have revealed strikingly similar architectures (reviewed in Nogales, 2000). Furthermore, TFTC has been shown to substitute for TFIID in basal and activated transcription from both TATA-dependent and TATA-less promoters, a function that has so far not been observed with purified STAGA or SAGA complexes (Wieczorek *et al.*, 1998). However, in a manner similar to the function of the yeast SAGA complex, the human STAGA and PCAF complexes have been shown recently to facilitate activator-dependent transcription on chromatin templates *in vitro* in an acetyl-CoA-dependent manner and in synergy with ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling activities; in addition, STAGA was shown to interact directly with the activation domain of the viral VP16 activator/adapter (Martinez *et al.*, 2001; Mizuguchi *et al.*, 2001).

Very recently, both the human TFTC and STAGA complexes have been shown to contain the spliceosome-associated protein 130 (SAP130), a component of the splicing factor SF3b that participates within the U2snRNP particle in spliceosome assembly (Brand *et al.*, 2001; Martinez *et al.*, 2001). Although the yeast homologue (Rsel1p) has so far not been found associated with SAGA and the function

of SAP130 within these human complexes is still unclear, it is interesting to note the previously described parallel association of TFIID with CPSF160 (cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor 160), a protein that is involved in pre-mRNA 3′-end processing and is structurally related to SAP130 (Dantonel *et al.*, 1997). This might suggest that TFIID, TFTC, and STAGA might play additional roles perhaps including a function in the coupling of transcription regulation to pre-mRNA processing events. Alternatively, since SAP130 belongs to the structurally-related family of proteins that include CPSF160 and the UV-damaged DNA binding protein (UV-DDB1), SAP130 might play a role in UV-damaged DNA recognition by the TFTC complex (Brand *et al.*, 2001). Interestingly, the STAGA complex can also associate with UV-DDB1 (Martinez *et al.*, 2001).

### Concluding remarks

Eukaryotes have evolved a variety of transcription factors and cofactors by mixing and matching protein domains to create proteins with diverse functions and by the combinatorial association of proteins and protein modules into large multi-subunit complexes. This results in both an increase in diversity of cofactors but also through the sharing of protein domains and/or proteins or protein modules to some level of apparent functional redundancy. Why would eukaryotic cells build up such large multi-protein complexes of promoter DNA to regulate gene transcription? Indeed, similar to the combinatorial association of independent activators into specific enhanceosomes one could imagine that diversity and selectivity of co-regulator function could also be achieved by the sequential recruitment to promoters of specific combinations of single-protein cofactors. One answer to this question is being revealed by the identification and functional characterization of the different components of various multi-subunit cofactor complexes. Indeed, it appears that transcription cofactors—such as HAT complexes—have different targets and are not solely devoted to transcription but are also likely to play important roles in the regulation of other DNA transactions within chromatin, including DNA replication, recombination and repair (Ikura *et al.*, 2000; Shen *et al.*, 2000; Brand *et al.*, 2001; Martinez *et al.*, 2001). Thus, the pre-assembly of proteins with different functions might help in the coordination of transcription regulation of groups of genes and in the coupling of gene-specific

transcription to other cellular processes. In this respect, it will be important to address whether and how co-regulator complexes are themselves regulated. Additional challenges will be to identify the physiological targets of specific cofactors within the cell and to reconstitute the corresponding physiological functions of multi-protein cofactor complexes *in vitro* in order to dissect the molecular mechanisms involved.

**Acknowledgements**

I wish to thank Robert G. Roeder for valuable discussions and all the members of the Biochemistry department at UCR, and especially Daniel R. Gallie and Xuan Liu, for their support.

**References**

Abmayr, S.M., Workman, J.L. and Roeder, R.G. 1988. The pseudorabies immediate early [protein stimulates *in vitro* transcription by facilitating TFIID: promoter interactions. Genes Dev. 2: 542–553.

Allard, S., Utley, R.T., Savard, J., Clarke, A., Grant, P., Brandl, C.J., Pillus, L., Workman, J.L. and Cote, J. 1999. EMBO J. 18: 5108–5119.

Apone, L.M., Virbasius, C.M., Reese, J.C. and Green, M.R. 1996. Yeast TAF(II)90 is required for cell-cycle progression through G2/M but not for general transcription activation. Genes Dev. 10: 2368–2380.

Baldwin, D.A. and Gurley, W.B. 1996. Isolation and characterization of cDNAs encoding transcription factor IIB from *Arabidopsis* and soybean. Plant J. 10: 561–568.

Belotserkovskaya, R., Sterner, D.E., Deng, M., Sayre, M.H., Lieberman, P.M. and Berger, S.L. 2000. Inhibition of TATA-binding protein function by SAGA subunits Spt3 and Spt8 at Gcn4-activated promoters. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20: 634–647.

Berger, S.L. 2001. The histone modification circus. Science 292: 64–65.

Berk, A.J. 2000. TBP-like factors come into focus. Cell 103: 5–8.

Bhaumik, S.R. and Green, M.R. 2001. SAGA is an essential *in vivo* target of the yeast acidic activator Gal4p. Genes Dev. 15: 1935–1945.

Björklund, S., Almouzni, G., Davidson, I., Nightingale, K.P. and Weiss, K. 1999. Global transcription regulators of eukaryotes. Cell 96: 759–767.

Brand, M., Yamamoto, K., Staub, A. and Tora, L. 1999. Identification of TATA-binding protein-free TAFII-containing complex subunits suggests a role in nucleosome acetylation and signal transduction. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 18285–18289.

Brand, M., Moggs, J.G., Oulad-Abdelghani, M., Lejeune, F., Dilworth, F.J., Stevenin, J., Almouzni, G. and Tora, L. 2001. UV-damaged DNA-binding protein in the TFTC complex links DNA damage recognition to nucleosome acetylation. EMBO J. 20: 3187–3196.

Brown, C.E., Lechner, T., Howe, L. and Workman, J.L. 2000. The many HATs of transcription coactivators. Trends Biochem. Sci. 25: 15–19.

Brzeski, J., Podstolski, W., Olczak, K. and Jerzmanowski, A. 1999. Identification and analysis of the *Arabidopsis thaliana* BSH gene, a member of the SNF5 gene family. Nucl. Acids Res. 27: 2393–2399.

Burke, L.J. and Baniahmad, A. 2000. Co-repressors 2000. FASEB J. 14: 1876–1888.

Burke, T.W. and Kadonaga, J.T. 1996. *Drosophila* TFIID binds to a conserved downstream basal promoter element that is present in many TATA-box-deficient promoters. Genes Dev. 10: 711–724.

Burke, T.W. and Kadonaga, J.T. 1997. The downstream core promoter element, DPE, is conserved from *Drosophila* to humans and is recognized by TAFII60 of *Drosophila*. Genes Dev. 11: 3020–3031.

Burley, S.K. and Roeder, R.G. 1996. Biochemistry and structural biology of transcription (factor IID (TFIID)). Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65: 769–799.

Carey, M. 1998. The enhanceosome and transcriptional synergy. Cell 92: 5–8.

Castañó, E., Gross, P., Wang, Z., Roeder, R.G. and Oelgeschläger, T. 2000. The C-terminal domain-phosphorylated IIo form of RNA polymerase II is associated with the transcription repressor NC2 (Dr1/DRAP1) and is required for transcription activation in human nuclear extracts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 7184–7189.

Chalkley, G.E. and Verrijzer, C.P. 1999. DNA binding site selection by RNA polymerase II TAFs: a TAF(II)250-TAF(II) 150 complex recognizes the initiator. EMBO J. 18: 4835–4845.

Chang, W.H. and Kornberg, R.D. 2000. Electron crystal structure of the transcription factor and DNA repair complex, core TFIIH. Cell 102: 609–613.

Chen, Z. and Manley, J.L. 2000. Robust mRNA transcription in chicken DT40 cells depleted of TAF(II)31 suggests both functional degeneracy and evolutionary divergence. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20: 5064–5076.

Chen, J.L., Attardi, L.D., Verrijzer, C.P., Yokomori, K. and Tjian, R. 1994. Assembly of recombinant TFIID reveals differential coactivator requirements for distinct transcriptional activators. Cell 79: 93–105.

Chen, D., Ma, H., Hong, H., Koh, S.S., Huang, S.M., Schurter, B.T., Aswad, D.W. and Stallcup, M.R. 1999. Regulation of transcription by a protein methyltransferase. Science 284: 2174–2177.

Chi, T. and Carey, M. 1996. Assembly of the isomerized TFIIA–TFIID–TATA ternary complex is necessary and sufficient for gene activation. Genes Dev. 10: 2540–2550.

Chi, T., Lieberman, P., Ellwood, K. and Carey, M. 1995. A general mechanism for transcriptional synergy by eukaryotic activators. Nature 377: 254–257.

Chi, Y., Huddleston, M.J., Zhang, X., Young, R.A., Annan, R.S., Carr, S.A., Deshaies, R.J. 2001. Negative regulation of Gcn4 and Msn2 transcription factors by Srb10 cyclin-dependent kinase. Genes Dev. 15: 1078–1092.

Chiang, C.M. and Roeder, R.G. 1995. Cloning of an intrinsic human TFIID subunit that interacts with multiple transcriptional activators. Science 267: 531–536.

Cosma, M.P., Tanaka, T. and Nasmyth, K. 1999. Ordered recruitment of transcription and chromatin remodeling factors to a cell cycle- and developmentally regulated promoter. Cell 97: 299–311.

Cramer, P., Bushnell, D.A. and Kornberg, R.D. 2001. Structural basis of transcription: RNA polymerase II at 2.8 Å resolution. Science 292: 1863–1876.

Dantonel, J.C., Murthy, K.G., Manley, J.L. and Tora, L. 1997. Transcription factor TFIID recruits factor CPSF for formation of 3′ end of mRNA. Nature 389: 399–402.

de Laat, W.L., Jaspers, N.G. and Hoeijmakers, J.H. 1999. Molecular mechanism of nucleotide excision repair. Genes Dev. 13: 768–785.

Dikstein, R., Ruppert, S. and Tjian, R. 1996. TAFII250 is a bipartite protein kinase that phosphorylates the base transcription factor RAP74. Cell 84: 781–790.

Dotson, M.R., Yuan, C.X., Roeder, R.G., Myers, L.C., Gustafsson, C.M., Jiang, Y.W., Li, Y., Kornberg, R.D. and Asturias, F.J. 2001. Structural organization of yeast and mammalian mediator complexes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 14307–14310.

Dudley, A.M., Rougeulle, C. and Winston, F. 1999. The Spt components of SAGA facilitate TBP binding to a promoter at a post-activator-binding step in vivo. Genes Dev. 13: 2940–2945.

Dvir, A., Conaway, J.W. and Conaway, R.C. 2001. Mechanism of transcription initiation and promoter escape by RNA polymerase II. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 11: 209–214.

Eberharter, A., Sterner, D.E., Schieltz, D., Hassan, A., Yates, J.R. 3rd, Berger, S.L., Workman, J.L. 1999. The ADA complex is a distinct histone acetyltransferase complex in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol. Cell. Biol. 19: 6621–6631.

Eisenmann, D.M., Arndt, K.M., Ricupero, S.L., Rooney, J.W. and Winston, F. 1992. SPT3 interacts with TFIID to allow normal transcription in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genes Dev. 6: 1319–1331.

Emami, K.H., Jain, A. and Smale, S.T. 1997. Mechanism of synergy between TATA and initiator: synergistic binding of TFIID following a putative TFIIA-induced isomerization. Genes Dev. 11: 3007–3019.

Eshed, Y., Baum, S.F. and Bowman J.L. 1999. Distinct mechanisms promote polarity establishment in carpels of Arabidopsis. Cell 99: 199–209.

Flanagan, P.M., Kelleher, R.J. 3rd, Sayre, M.H., Tschochner, H. and Kornberg, R.D. 1991. A mediator required for activation of RNA polymerase II transcription in vitro. Nature 350: 436–438.

Finnegan, E.J. 2001. Is plant gene expression regulated globally? Trends Genet. 17: 361–365.

Fondell, J.D., Guermah, M., Malik, S. and Roeder, R.G. 1999. Thyroid hormone receptor-associated proteins and general positive cofactors mediate thyroid hormone receptor function in the absence of the TATA box-binding protein-associated factors of TFIID. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96: 1959–1964.

Fry, C.J. and Peterson, C.L. 2001. Chromatin remodeling enzymes: who’s on first? Curr. Biol. 11: R185–R197.

Gangloff, Y.G., Werten, S., Romier, C., Carre, L., Poch, O., Moras, D. and Davidson, I. 2000. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20: 340–351.

Gangloff, Y.G., Pointud, J.C., Thuault, S., Carre, L., Romier, C., Muratoglu, S., Brand, M., Tora, L., Couderc, J.L. and Davidson, I. 2001. The TFIID components human TAFII140 and Drosophila BIP2 (TAFII155) are novel metazoan homologues of yeast TAFII47 containing a histone fold and a PHD finger. Mol. Cell. Biol. 21: 5109–5121.

Gasch, A., Hoffmann, A., Horikoshi, M., Roeder, R.G. and Chua, N.H. 1990. N.G. 1990. Arabidopsis thaliana contains two genes for TFIID. Nature 346: 390–394.

Ge, H. and Roeder, R.G. 1994. Purification, cloning, and characterization of a human coactivator, PC4, that mediates transcriptional activation of class II genes. Cell 78: 513–523.

Geiger, J.H., Hahn, S., Lee, S. and Sigler, P.B. 1996. Crystal structure of the yeast TFIIA/TBP/DNA complex. Science 272: 830–836.

Geisberg, J.V., Holstege, F.C., Young, R.A. and Struhl, K. 2001. Yeast NC2 associates with the RNA polymerase II preinitiation complex and selectively affects transcription in vivo. Mol. Cell. Biol. 21: 2736–2742.

Gnatt, A.L., Cramer, P., Fu, J., Bushnell, D.A. and Kornberg, R.D. 2001. Structural basis of transcription: an RNA polymerase II elongation complex at 3.3 Å resolution. Science 292: 1876–1882.

Grant, P.A. 2001. A tale of histone modifications. Genome Biol. 2: reviews0003.1–0003.6

Grant, P.A., Duggan, L., Cote, J., Roberts, S.M., Brownell, J.E., Candau, R., Ohba, R., Owen-Hughes, T., Allis, C.D., Winston, F., Berger, S.L. and Workman, J.L. 1997. Yeast Gcn5 functions in two multisubunit complexes to acetylate nucleosomal histones: characterization of an Ada complex and the SAGA (Spt/Ada) complex. Genes Dev. 11: 1640–1650.

Grant, P.A., Schieltz, D., Pray-Grant, M.G., Steger, D.J., Reese, J.C., Yates, J.R. III and Workman, J.L. 1998a. A subset of TAF(II)s are integral components of the SAGA complex required for nucleosome acetylation and transcriptional stimulation. Cell 94: 45–53.

Grant, P.A., Schieltz, D., Pray-Grant, M.G., Yates, J.R. III and Workman, J.L. 1998b. The ATM-related cofactor Tral is a component of the purified SAGA complex. Mol. Cell 2: 863–867.

Green, M.R. 2000. TBP-associated factors (TAF_II_S): multiple, selective transcriptional mediators in common complexes. Trends Biochem. Sci. 25: 59–63.

Hampsey, M. 1998. Molecular genetics of the RNA polymerase II general transcription machinery. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 62: 465–503.

Hansen, S.K. and Tjian, R. 1995. TAFs and TFIIA mediate differential utilization of the tandem Adh promoters. Cell 82: 565–575.

Hassan, A.H., Neely, K.E. and Workman, J.L. 2001. Histone acetyltransferase complexes stabilize swi/snf binding to promoter nucleosomes. Cell 104: 817–827.

Hoeijmakers, J.H., Egly,, J.M. and Vermeulen, W. 1996. TFIIH: a key component in multiple DNA transactions. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 6: 26–33.

Hoey, T., Dynlacht, B.D., Peterson, M.G., Pugh, B.F. and Tjian, R. 1990. Isolation and characterization of the Drosophila gene encoding the TATA box binding protein, TFIID. Cell 61: 1179–1186.

Hoffmann, A., Sinn, E., Yamamoto, T., Wang, J., Roy, A., Horikoshi, M. and Roeder, R.G. 1990. Highly conserved core domain and unique N terminus with presumptive regulatory motifs in a human TATA factor (TFIID). Nature 346: 387–390.

Hoffmann, A., Chiang, C.M., Oelgeschläger, T., Xie, X., Burley, S.K., Nakatani, Y. and Roeder, R.G. 1996. A histone octamer-like structure within TFIID. Nature 380: 356–359.

Hoffmann, A., Oelgeschläger, T. and Roeder, R.G. 1997. Considerations of Transcriptional control mechanisms: do TFIID-core promoter complexes recapitulate nucleosome-like functions? Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94: 8928–8935.

Holmes, M.C. and Tjian, R. 2000. Promoter-selective properties of the TBP-related factor TRF1. Science 288: 867–870.

Holstege, F.C., Jennings, E.G., Wyrick, J.J., Lee, T.I., Hengartner, C.J., Green, M.R., Golub, T.R., Lander, E.S. and Young, R.A. 1998. Dissecting the regulatory circuitry of a eukaryotic genome. Cell 95: 717–728.

Horikoshi, M., Carey, M.F., Kakidani, H. and Roeder, RG. 1988a. Mechanism of action of a yeast activator: direct effect of GAL4 derivatives on mammalian TFIID-promoter interactions. Cell 54: 665–669.

Horikoshi, M., Hai, T., Lin, Y.S., Green, M.R. and Roeder, R.G. 1988b. Transcription factor ATF interacts with the TATA factor to facilitate establishment of a preinitiation complex. Cell 54: 1033–1042.

Horiuchi, J., Silverman, N., Pina, B., Marcus, G.A. and Guarente, L. 1997. ADA1, a novel component of the ADA/GCN5 complex, has broader effects than GCN5, ADA2, or ADA3. Mol. Cell. Biol. 17: 3220–3228.

Ikeda, K., Halle, J.P., Stelzer, G., Meisterernst, M. and Kawakami, K. 1998. Involvement of negative cofactor NC2 in active repression by zinc finger-homeodomain transcription factor AREB6. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18: 10–18.

Ikeda, K., Steger, D.J., Eberharter, A. and Workman, J.L. 1999. Activation domain-specific and general transcription stimulation by native histone acetyltransferase complexes. Mol. Cell. Biol. 19: 855–863.

Ikura, T., Ogryzko, V.V., Grigoriev, M., Groisman, R., Wang, J., Horikoshi, M., Scully, R., Qin, J. and Nakatani, Y. 2000. Involvement of the TIP60 histone acetylase complex in DNA repair and apoptosis. Cell 102: 463–473.

Imhof, A., Yang, X.J., Ogryzko, V.V., Nakatani, Y., Wolff, A.P. and Ge, H. 1997. Acetylation of general transcription factors by histone acetyltransferases. Curr. Biol. 7: 689–692.

Jacobson, R.H., Ladurner, A.G., King, D.S., Tjian, R. 2000. Structure and function of a human TAFII250 double bromodomain module. Science 288: 1422–1425.

Kaiser, K., Stelzer, G. and Meisterernst, M. 1995. The coactivator p15 (PC4) initiates transcriptional activation during TFIIA-TFIID-promoter complex formation. EMBO J. 14: 3520–3527.

Kamada, K., Shu, F., Chen, H., Malik, S., Stelzer, G., Roeder, R.G., Meisterernst, M., Burley, S.K. 2001. Crystal structure of negative cofactor 2 recognizing the TBP-DNA transcription complex. Cell 106: 71–81.

Kang, J.J., Auble, D.T., Ranish, J.A., Hahn, S. 1995. Analysis of the yeast transcription factor TFIIA: distinct functional regions and a polymerase II-specific role in basal and activated transcription. Mol. Cell. Biol. 15: 1234–1243.

Kim, Y.J., Bjorklund, S., Li, Y., Sayre, M.H. and Kornberg, R.D. 1994. A multiprotein mediator of transcriptional activation and its interaction with the C-terminal repeat domain of RNA polymerase II. Cell 77: 599–608.

Knoepfler, P.S. and Eisenman, R.N. 1999. Sin meets NuRD and other tails of repression. Cell 99: 447–450.

Kobayashi, N., Boyer, T.G. and Berk, A.J. 1995. A class of activation domains interacts directly with TFIIA and stimulates TFIIA-TFIID-promoter complex assembly. Mol. Cell. Biol. 15: 6465–6473.

Koleske, A.J. and Young, R.A. 1994. An RNA polymerase II holoenzyme responsive to activators. Nature 368: 466–469.

Kouzarides, T. 2000. Acetylation: a regulatory modification to riyal phosphorylation? EMBO J. 19: 1176–1179.

Kraemer, S.M., Ranallo, R.T., Ogg, R.C. and Stargell, L.A. 2001. TFIIA interacts with TFIID via association with TATA-binding protein and TAF40. Mol. Cell. Biol. 21: 1737–1746.

Krebs, J.E., Kuo, M.H., Allis, C.D., Peterson, C.L. 1999. Cell cycle-regulated histone acetylation required for expression of the yeast HO gene. Genes Dev. 13: 1412–1421.

Kretzschmar, M., Kaiser, K., Lottspeich, F. and Meisterernst, M. 1994. A novel mediator of class II gene transcription with homology to viral immediate-early transcriptional regulators. Cell 78: 525–534.

Kuo, M.H., Zhou, J., Jambeck, P., Churchill, M.E. and Allis, C.D. 1998. Histone acetyltransferase activity of yeast Gcn5p is re- quired for the activation of target genes *in vivo*. Genes Dev. 12: 627–639.

Kuras, L., Kosa, P., Mencia, M. and Struhl, K. 2000. TAF-Containing and TAF-independent forms of transcriptionally active TBP *in vivo*. Science 288: 1244–1248.

Lagrange, T., Kapanidis, A.N., Tang, H., Reinberg D. and Ebright, R.H. 1998. New core promoter element in RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription: sequence-specific DNA binding by transcription factor IIB. Genes Dev. 12: 34–44.

Larkin, R.M., Hagen, G. and Guilfoyle T.J. 1999. *Arabidopsis thaliana* RNA polymerase II subunits related to yeast and human RPB5. Gene 231: 41–47.

Larschan, E. and Winston, F. 2001. The S. cerevisiae SAGA complex functions *in vivo* as a coactivator for transcriptional activation by Gal4. Genes Dev. 15: 1946–1956.

Lee, T.I., Causton, H.C., Holstege, FC., Shen, W.C., Hannett, N., Jennings, E.G., Winston, F., Green, M.R. and Young, R.A. 2000. Redundant roles for the TFIID and SAGA complexes in global transcription. Nature 405: 701–704.

Lemon, B. and Tjian, R. 2000. Orchestrated response: a symphony of transcription factors for gene control. Genes Dev. 14: 2551–2569.

Li, Y.F., Le Gourrierec, J., Torki, M., Kim, Y.J., Guerineau, F. and Zhou, D.X. 1999. Characterization and functional analysis of *Arabidopsis* TFIIA reveal that the evolutionarily unconerved region of the large subunit has a transcription activation domain. Plant Mol. Biol. 39: 515–525.

Li, X.Y., Bhaumik, S.R. and Green, M.R. 2000. Distinct classes of yeast promoters revealed by differential TAF recruitment. Science 288: 1242–1244.

Lieberman, P.M. and Berk, A.J. 1994. A mechanism for TAFs in transcriptional activation: activation domain enhancement of TFIID-TFIIA-promoter DNA complex formation. Genes Dev. 8: 995–1006.

Liu, Y., Ranish, J.A., Aebersold, R. and Hahn, S. 2001. Yeast nuclear extract contains two major forms of RNA polymerase II mediator complexes. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 7169–7175.

Lorch, Y., Beve, J., Gustafsson, C.M., Myers, L.C. and Kornberg, R.D. 2000. Mediator-nucleosome interaction. Mol. Cell 6: 197–201.

Malik, S. and Roeder, R.G. 2000. Transcriptional regulation through Mediator-like coactivators in yeast and metazoan cells. Trends Biochem. Sci. 25: 277–283.

Malik, S., Guermah, M. and Roeder, R.G. 1998. A dynamic model for PC4 coactivator function in RNA polymerase II transcription. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95: 2192–2197.

Malik, S., Gu, W., Wu, W., Qin, J. and Roeder, R.G. 2000. The USA-derived transcriptional coactivator PC2 is a submodule of TRAP/SMCC and acts synergistically with other PCs. Mol. Cell 5: 753–760.

Martinez, E., Chiang, C.M., Ge, H. and Roeder, R.G. 1994. TATA-binding protein-associated factor(s) in TFIID function through the initiator to direct basal transcription from a TATA-less class II promoter. EMBO J. 13: 3115–3126.

Martinez, E., Zhou, Q., L’Etoile, N.D., Oelgeschläger, T., Berk, A.J. and Roeder, R.G. 1995. Core promoter-specific function of a mutant transcription factor TFIID defective in TATA-box binding. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92: 11864–11868.

Martinez, E., Ge, H., Tao, Y., Yuan, C.X., Palhan, V. and Roeder, R.G. 1998a. Novel cofactors and TFIIA mediate functional core promoter selectivity by the human TAFII150-containing TFIID complex. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18: 6571–6583.

Martinez, E., Kundu, T.K., Fu, J. and Roeder, R.G. 1998b. A human SPT3-TAFII31-GCN5-L acetylase complex distinct from transcription factor IID. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 23781–23785.

Martinez, E., Palhan, V.B., Tjernberg, A., Lymar, E.S., Gampfer, A.M., Kundu, T.K., Chait, B.T. and Roeder, R.G. 2001. Human STAGA complex is a chromatin-acetylating transcription coactivator that interacts with pre-mRNA splicing and DNA damage-binding factors *in vivo*. Mol. Cell. Biol. 21: 6782–6795.

Matangkasombut, O., Buratowski, R.M., Swilling, N.W. and Buratowski, S. 2000. Bromodomain factor 1 corresponds to a missing piece of yeast TFIID. Genes Dev. 14: 951–962.

Merika, M. and Thanos, D. 2001. Enhanceosomes. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 11: 205–208.

Metzger, D., Scheer, E., Soldatov, A. and Tora, L. 1999. Mammalian TAF(II)30 is required for cell cycle progression and specific cellular differentiation programmes. L EMBO J. 18: 4823–4834.

Mizuguchi, G., Vassilev, A., Tsukiyama, T., Nakatani, Y. and Wu, C. 2001. ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling and histone hyperacetylation synergistically facilitate transcription of chromatin. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 14773–14783

Mizzen, C.A., Yang, X.J., Kokubo, T., Brownell, J.E., Bannister, A.J., Owen-Hughes, T., Workman, J., Wang, L., Berger, S.L., Kouzarides, T., Nakatani, Y. and Allis, C.D. 1996. The TAF(II)250 subunit of TFIID has histone acetyltransferase activity. Cell 87: 1261–1270.

Moqtaderi, Z., Bai, Y., Poon, D., Weil, P.A. and Struhl, K. 1996. TBP-associated factors are not generally required for transcriptional activation in yeast. Nature 383: 188–191.

Murfett, J., Wang, X.J., Hagen, G. and Guilfoyle, T.J. 2001. Identification of arabidopsis histone deacetylase *hda6* mutants that affect transgene expression. Plant Cell 13: 1047–1061.

Myers, L.C. and Kornberg, R.D. 2000. Mediator of transcriptional regulation. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69: 729–749.

Näär, A.M., Beaurang, P.A., Robinson, K.M., Oliner, J.D., Avizonis, D., Scheek, S., Zwicker, J., Kadonaga, J.T. and Tjian, R. 1998. Chromatin, TAFs, and a novel multiprotein coactivator are required for synergistic activation by Sp1 and SREBP-1a *in vitro*. Genes Dev. 12: 3020–3031.

Näär, A.M., Lemon, B.D., Tjian, R. 2001. Transcriptional coactivator complexes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 70: 475–501.

Ng, H.H. and Bird, A. 2000. Histone deacetylases: silencers for hire. Trends Biochem. Sci. 25: 121–126.

Nielsen, S.J., Schneider, R., Bauer, V.M., Bannister, A.J., Morrison, A., O’Carroll, D., Firestein, R., Cleary, M., Jenuwein, T., Herrera, R.E. and Kouzarides, T. 2001. Rb targets histone H3 methylation and HP1 to promoters. Nature 412: 561–565.

Nikolov, D.B., Chen, H., Halay, E.D., Usheva, A.A., Hisatake, K., Lee, D.K., Roeder, R.G., Burley, S.K. 1995. Crystal structure of a TFIIIB-TBP-TATA-element ternary complex. Nature 377: 119–128.

Nogales, E. 2000. Recent structural insights into transcription preinitiation complexes. J. Cell. Sci. 113: 4391–4397.

O’Brien, T. and Tjian, R. 2000. Different functional domains of TAFII250 modulate expression of distinct subsets of mammalian genes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 2456–2461.

Oelgeschläger, T., Chiang, C.M. and Roeder, R.G. 1996. Topology and reorganization of human TFIID-promoter complex. Nature 382: 735–738.

Oelgeschläger T., Tao, Y., Kang, Y.K. and Roeder, R.G. 1998. Transcription activation via enhanced preinitiation complex assembly in a human cell-free system lacking TAF<sub>IS</sub>. Mol. Cell. 1: 925–931.

Ogas, J., Kaufmann, S., Henderson, J. and Somerville, C. 1999. PICKLE is a CHD3 chromatin-remodeling factor that regulates the transition from embryonic to vegetative development in *Arabidopsis*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96: 13839–13844.

Ogryzko, V.V., Kotani, T., Zhang, X., Schiltz, R.L., Howard, T., Yang, X.J., Howard, B.H., Qin, J. and Nakatani, Y. 1998. Histone-like TAFs within the PCAF histone acetylase complex. Cell 94: 35–44.

Orphanides, G., Lagrange T. and Reinberg, D. 1996. The general transcription factors of RNA polymerase II. Genes Dev. 10: 2657–2683.

Ozer, J., Moore, P.A., Bolden, A.H., Lee, A., Rosen, C.A. and Lieberman, P.M. 1994. Molecular cloning of the small (gamma) subunit of human TFIIA reveals functions critical for activated transcription. Genes Dev. 8: 2324–2335.

Ozer, J., Mitsouras, K., Zerby, D., Carey, M. and Lieberman, P.M. 1998a. Transcription factor IIA derepresses TATA-binding protein (TBP)-associated factor inhibition of TBP-DNA binding. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 14293-14300.

Ozer, J., Lezina, L.E., Ewing, J., Audi S. and Lieberman, P.M. 1998b. Association of transcription factor IIA with TATA binding protein is required for transcriptional activation of a subset of promoters and cell cycle progression in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18: 2559–2570.

Ozer, J., Moore, P.A. and Lieberman, P.M. 2000. A testis-specific transcription factor IIA (TFIIAtau) stimulates TATA-binding protein-DNA binding and transcription activation. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 122–128.

Park, J.M., Gim, B.S., Kim, J.M., Yoon, J.H., Kim, H.S., Kang, J.G. and Kim, Y.J. 2001. *Drosophila* Mediator complex is broadly utilized by diverse gene-specific transcription factors at different types of core promoters. Mol. Cell. Biol. 21: 2312–2323.

Patikoglou, G. and Burley, S.K. 1997. Eukaryotic transcription factor-DNA complexes. Annu. Rev. Biomol. Struct. 26: 289–325.

Pham, A.D. and Sauer, F. 2000. Ubiquitin-activating/conjugating activity of TAFII250, a mediator of activation of gene expression in *Drosophila*. Science 289: 2357–2360.

Pugh, B.F. and Tjian, R. 1990. Mechanism of transcriptional activation by Sp1: evidence for coactivators. Cell 61: 1187–1197.

Pugh, B.F. and Tjian, R. 1991. Transcription from a TATA-less promoter requires a multisubunit TFIID complex. Genes Dev. 5: 1935–1945.

Roeder, R.G. 1996. The role of general initiation factors in transcription by RNA polymerase II. Trends Biochem. Sci. 21: 327–335.

Roeder, R.G. 1998. Role of general and gene-specific cofactors in the regulation of eukaryotic transcription. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 63: 201–218.

Roth, S.Y., Denu, J.M. and Allis, C.D. 2001. Histone acetyltransferases. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 70: 81–120.

Sawadogo, M. and Roeder, R.G. 1985. Interaction of a gene-specific transcription factor with the adenovirus major late promoter upstream of the TATA box region. Cell 43: 165–175.

Sauer, F., Hansen, S.K. and Tjian, R. 1995a. Multiple TAFIIs directing synergistic activation of transcription. Science 270: 1783–1788.

Sauer, F., Hansen, S.K. and Tjian, R. 1995b. DNA template and activator-coactivator requirements for transcriptional synergy by *Drosophila* bicoid. Science 270: 1825–1828.

Schultz, P., Fribourg, S., Poterszman, A., Mallouh, V., Moras, D. and Egly, J.M. 2000. Molecular structure of human TFIIH. Cell 102: 599–607.

Selleck, W., Howley, R., Fang, Q., Podolny, V., Fried, M.G., Buratowski, S. and Tan, S. 2001. A histone fold TAF octamer within

the yeast TFIID transcriptional coactivator. Nat. Struct. Biol. 8: 695–700.

Shen, W.C. and Green, M.R. 1997. Yeast TAF(II)145 functions as a core promoter selectivity factor, not a general coactivator. Cell 90: 615–624.

Shen, X., Mizuguchi, G., Hamiche, A. and Wu, C. 2000. A chromatin remodeling complex involved in transcription and DNA processing. Nature 406: 541–544.

Shykind, B.M., Kim, J. and Sharp, P.A. 1995. Activation of the TFIID-TFIIA complex with HMG-2. Genes Dev. 9: 1354–1365.

Shykind, B.M., Kim, J., Stewart, L., Champoux, J.J. and Sharp, P.A. 1997. Topoisomerase I enhances TFIID-TFIIA complex assembly during activation of transcription. Genes Dev. 11: 397–407.

Smale, S.T. 1997. Transcription initiation from TATA-less promoters within eukaryotic protein-coding genes. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1351: 73–88.

Smith, R.L. and Johnson, A.D. 2000. Turning genes off by Ssn6-Tup1: a conserved system of transcriptional repression in eukaryotes. Trends Biochem. Sci. 25: 325–330.

Solow, S., Salunek, M., Ryan, R. and Lieberman, P.M. 2001. TAF(II) 250 phosphorylates human transcription factor IIA on serine residues important for TBP binding and transcription activity. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 15886–15892.

Sterner, D.E. and Berger, S.L. 2000. Acetylation of histones and transcription-related factors. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 64: 435–459.

Sterner, D.E., Grant, P.A., Roberts, S.M., Duggan, L.J., Belotserkovskaya, R., Pacella, L.A., Winston, F., Workman, J.L. and Berger, S.L. 1999. Functional organization of the yeast SAGA complex: distinct components involved in structural integrity, nucleosome acetylation, and TATA-binding protein interaction. Mol. Cell. Biol. 19: 86–98.

Stockinger, E.J., Mao, Y., Regier, M.K., Triezenberg, S.J. and Thomashow, M.F. 2001. Transcriptional adaptor and histone acetyltransferase proteins in *Arabidopsis* and their interactions with CBF1, a transcriptional activator involved in cold-regulated gene expression. Nucl. Acids Res. 29: 1524–1533.

Strahl, B.D. and Allis, C.D. 2000. The language of covalent histone modifications. Nature 403: 41–45.

Sun, X., Ma, D., Sheldon, M., Yeung, K. and Reinberg, D. 1994. Reconstitution of human TFIIA activity from recombinant polypeptides: a role in TFIID-mediated transcription. Genes Dev. 8: 2336–2348.

Tan, S., Hunziker, Y., Sargent, D.F. and Richmond, T.J. 1996. Crystal structure of a yeast TFIIA/TBP/DNA complex. Nature 381: 127–1251.

Tansey, W.P. 2001. Transcriptional activation: risky business. Genes Dev. 15: 1045–1050.

Thompson, C.M. and Young, R.A. 1995. General requirement for RNA polymerase II holoenzymes *in vivo*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92: 4587–4590.

Thompson, C.M., Koleske, A.J., Chao, D.M. and Young, R.A. 1993. A multisubunit complex associated with the RNA polymerase II CTD and TATA-binding protein in yeast. Cell 73: 1361–1375.

Tsai, F.T. and Sigler, P.B. 2000. Structural basis of preinitiation complex assembly on human pol II promoters. EMBO J. 19: 25–36.

Upadhyaya, A.B., Lee, S.H. and DeJong, J. 1999. Identification of a general transcription factor TFIIAα/β homolog selectively expressed in testis. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 18040–18048.

Utley, R.T., Ikeda, K., Grant, P.A., Cote, J., Steger, D.J., Eberharter, A., John, S. and Workman, J.L. 1998. Transcriptional activators direct histone acetyltransferase complexes to nucleosomes. Nature 394: 498–502.

Verbsky, M.L. and Richards, E.J. 2001. Chromatin remodeling in plants. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 4: 494–500.

Verrijzer, C.P. and Tjian, R. 1996. TAFs mediate transcriptional activation and promoter selectivity. Trends Biochem. Sci. 21: 338–339.

Vignali, M., Hassan, A.H., Neely, K.E. and Workman, J.L. 2000. ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling complexes. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20: 1899–1910.

Walker, S.S., Reese, J.C., Apone, L.M. and Green, M.R. 1996. Transcription activation in cells lacking TAFIIs. Nature 383: 185–188.

Wang, G., Cantin, G.T., Stevens, J.L. and Berk, A.J. 2001a. Characterization of mediator complexes from HeLa cell nuclear extract. Mol. Cell Biol. 21: 4604–4613.

Wang, H., Huang, Z.Q., Xia, L., Feng, Q., Erdjument-Bromage, H., Strahl, B.D., Briggs, S.D., Allis, C.D., Wang, J., Tempst, P. and Zhang, Y. 2001b. Methylation of histone H4 at arginine 3 facilitating transcriptional activation by nuclear hormone receptor. Science 293: 853–857.

Wang, L., Liu, L. and Berger, S.L. 1998. Critical residues for histone acetylation by rGcn5, functioning in Ada and SAGA complexes, are also required for transcriptional function *in vivo*. Genes Dev. 12: 640–653

Wang, W., Gralla, J.D. and Carey, M. 1992. The acidic activator GAL4-AH can stimulate polymerase II transcription by promoting assembly of a closed complex requiring TFIID Land TFIIA. Genes Dev. 6: 1716–1727.

Wieczorek, E., Brand, M., Jacq, X., Tora, L. 1998. Function of TAF(II)-containing complex without TBP in transcription by RNA polymerase II. Nature 393: 187–191.

Willy, P.J., Kobayashi, R. and Kadonaga, J.T. 2000. A basal transcription factor that activates or represses transcription. Science 290: 982–985.

Workman, J.L. and Kingston R.E. 1998. Alteration of nucleosome structure as a mechanism of transcriptional regulation. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67: 545–579.

Workman, J.L. and Roeder, R.G. 1987. Binding of transcription factor TFIID to the major late promoter during *in vitro* nucleosome assembly potentiates subsequent initiation by RNA polymerase II. Cell 51: 613–622.

Workman, J.L., Abmayr, S.M., Cromlish, W.A. and Roeder, R.G. 1988. Transcriptional regulation by the immediate early protein of pseudorabies virus during *in vitro* nucleosome assembly. Cell 55: 211–219.

Wu, S.Y., Kershnar, E. and Chiang, C.M. 1998. TAFII-independent activation mediated by human TBP in the presence of the positive cofactor PC4. EMBO J. 17: 4478–4490.

Wu, C.H., Madabusi, L., Nishioka, H., Emanuel, P., Sypes, M., Arkhipova, I. and Gilmour, D.S. 2001. Analysis of core promoter sequences located downstream from the TATA element in the hsp70 promoter from *Drosophila melanogaster*. Mol. Cell. Biol. 21: 1593–1602.

Xie, X., Kokubo, T., Cohen, S.L., Mirza, U.A., Hoffmann, A., Chait, B..T., Roeder, R.G., Nakatani, Y. and Burley, S.K. 1996. Structural similarity between TAFs and the heterotetrameric core of the histone octamer. Nature 380: 316–322.

Xu, W., Edmondson, D.G. and Roth, S.Y. 1998. Mammalian GCN5 and P/CAF acetyltransferases have homologous amino-terminal domains important for recognition of nucleosomal substrates. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18: 5659–5669.

Xu, W., Edmondson, D.G., Evrard, Y.A., Wakamiya, M., Behringer, R.R. and Roth, S.Y. 2000. Loss of Gcn512 leads to increased

apoptosis and mesodermal defects during mouse development. Nat. Genet. 26: 229–232.

Yamauchi, T., Yamauchi, J., Kuwata, T., Tamura, T., Yamashita, T., Bae, N., Westphal, H., Ozato, K. and Nakatani, Y. 2000. Distinct but overlapping roles of histone acetylase PCAF and of the closely related PCAF-B/GCN5 in mouse embryogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 11303–11306.

Yang, X.J., Ogryzko, V.V., Nishikawa, J., Howard, B.H. and Nakatani, Y. 1996. A p300/CBP-associated factor that competes with the adenoviral oncoprotein E1A. Nature 382: 319–324.

Yudkovsky, N., Ranish, J.A. and Hahn, S. 2000. A transcription reinitiation intermediate that is stabilized by activator. Nature 408: 225–229.

Zawel, L., Kumar, K.P. and Reinberg, D. 1995. Recycling of the general transcription factors during RNA polymerase II transcription. Genes Dev. 9: 1479–1490.

Zhou, Q., Lieberman, P.M., Boyer, T.G. and Berk, A.J. 1992. HoloTFIID supports transcriptional stimulation by diverse activators and from a TATA-less promoter. Genes Dev. 6: 1964–1974.
