
Intestinal Glucose Transport: Evidence for a Membrane Traffic-Based Pathway in Humans

RENE SANTER,* GEORG HILLEBRAND,* BEAT STEINMANN,† and JURGEN SCHAUB*
University Children’s Hospital, *Kiel, Germany, and †Zurich, Switzerland

**Background & Aims:** The presence of glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2) molecules in the basolateral membrane of enterocytes has long been considered to be of major importance for intestinal glucose absorption. The aim of this study was to reevaluate the role of GLUT2 in a patient with congenital GLUT2 deficiency (Fanconi-Bickel syndrome, FBS). **Methods:** Oral mono- and disaccharide tolerance tests including gas chromatographic determination of breath hydrogen concentrations were performed in an FBS patient. For comparison, a patient with a microsomal carbohydrate transport defect, glucose-6-phosphate translocase 1 (G6PT1) deficiency, and a control individual were investigated. **Results:** No increase in breath hydrogen concentration was found in the GLUT2-deficient patient after a glucose load. In G6PT1 deficiency, basal hydrogen concentrations were repeatedly found to be elevated. **Conclusions:** From the fact that a GLUT2-deficient patient does not show any impairment of intestinal monosaccharide transport measurable by the hydrogen breath test, we conclude that mechanisms other than facilitative glucose transport by GLUT2 must be involved in the transport of monosaccharides at the basolateral membrane of enterocytes. When relating this observation to the high intestinal expression of human hexokinase, G6PT1, and glucose-6-phosphatase and to our results of oral carbohydrate tolerance tests in a G6PT1-deficient patient, there is evidence that a microsomal membrane traffic-based transport pathway, as recently suggested for GLUT2-deficient animals, also plays a major role in transcellular monosaccharide transport of the human intestine.

After oral ingestion, carbohydrates are degraded to monosaccharides by luminal and mucosal enzymes. The transepithelial transport of these sugars is generally believed to occur in 2 steps. Glucose and galactose are first transported across the apical membrane of enterocytes by sodium-dependent glucose transporter 1, a membrane protein of the sodium-dependent glucose transporter family. Evidence for the important role of this transporter comes from the observation that patients with a congenital defect of sodium-dependent glucose transporter 1 suffer from glucose-galactose malabsorption, a potentially life-threatening disease characterized by severe osmotic diarrhea and dehydration.¹

The second step by which monosaccharides are released from enterocytes into the interstitial space before they reach the blood circulation is more obscure. It has long been believed that transport at the basolateral membrane is solely mediated by glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2),² a member of the facilitative glucose transporter family (Figure 1A). However, evidence for a role of GLUT2 comes mainly from immunohistochemical studies localizing GLUT2 to the basolateral membrane of enterocytes³ and from glucose transport studies in which GLUT2 was artificially expressed.⁴ Thus, the existence of other mechanisms cannot be excluded, and recently the essential role of GLUT2 in intestinal monosaccharide absorption has been questioned when investigating GLUT2-deficient knockout animals. From these studies, not GLUT2-mediated transport but a microsomal membrane traffic-based mechanism has been suggested to be the most important glucose release pathway in enterocytes in mice.⁵ We therefore were interested whether patients with Fanconi-Bickel syndrome (FBS), a rare inborn error of metabolism recently shown to be caused by a congenital defect within the GLUT2 gene,⁶ show signs of intestinal monosaccharide malabsorption. For comparison, absorption studies were performed in glycogen storage disease (GSD) type 1, non-A caused by a defect of the microsomal glucose-6-phosphate transporter G6PT1.

---

Abbreviations used in this paper: FBS, Fanconi-Bickel syndrome; GSD, glycogen storage disease; G6PC, glucose-6-phosphatase; G6PT1, glucose-6-phosphate translocase 1; GLUT2, glucose transporter 2; SGLT1, sodium-dependent glucose transporter 1.

© 2003 by the American Gastroenterological Association  
0016-5085/03/\$35.00  
doi:10.1053/gast.2003.50009

January 2003

Figure 1. (A) Classical model of intestinal glucose absorption: glucose is transported at the apical membrane of enterocytes against its gradient by coupling of its transport to the transport of sodium. Sodium follows its electrochemical gradient, which is maintained by the action of the sodium-potassium-ATPase at the basolateral membrane. Glucose exits the enterocyte at the basolateral side along its gradient by facilitated diffusion mediated by the transporter protein GLUT2.

(B) Proposed mechanism of intestinal glucose transport including the suggested membrane traffic-based pathway. This pathway seems to be a major route for glucose transport because congenital GLUT2 deficiency was not found to be associated with any impairment of glucose absorption. Conversely, congenital G6PT1 deficiency only results in slightly impaired glucose transport; presumably because of the fact that facilitated diffusion mediated by GLUT2 can serve as a salvage pathway.

Materials and Methods

Patient 1

Clinical and molecular genetic findings in S.C., a 10-year-old Turkish patient with FBS, have been previously published. In summary, this child presented during the first year of life with hepatomegaly because of glycogen accumulation in the absence of an enzymatic defect known to cause one of the different types of GSD. Furthermore, he showed diminished postprandial glucose and galactose clearance from plasma, a propensity to fasting hypoglycemia, and a characteristic tubular nephropathy with disproportionately severe glucosuria. During the first 2 years of life, he and his younger sister who also has the FBS showed clinical signs of intestinal malabsorption with up to 8 bowel movements per day. In both children, height for age and weight for height were significantly decreased. Beyond the second birthday, short stature persisted; weight gain and diarrhea, however, improved. Around that time, the parents realized that the boy rejected milk products, and milk ingestion was therefore restricted. Other dietary measures such as the application of cornstarch at night were not accepted by this boy. At age 9 years, he was tested for a GLUT2 mutation and homozygosity for a 1 base pair deletion (c.449 del T [V 45 fs...X]) was detected, which predicts a nonfunctioning glucose transporter protein.

Patient 2

Patient I.V. is a 27-year-old German woman with GSD 1 non-A. She was diagnosed in early infancy when she presented with hypoglycemic seizures, granulocytopenia, and hepato- and nephromegaly because of glycogen storage. Glucose-6-phosphatase activity was markedly reduced in fresh liver, whereas it was found to be normal in frozen tissue. Again, detailed clinical data, particularly the results of leukocyte function tests, have been previously reported and also the results of mutation analysis (G6PT1 c.1211-2 del CT [A 347 fs...400X]/c.1184 G>T [G 339 C]) have been published earlier. Gastrointestinal symptoms have never been a major problem. The patient follows a diet composed of small but frequent feeds with a late night meal before bedtime. Slow release carbohydrates are generally preferred; small amounts of milk products, however, are occasionally ingested without subjective problems. Although neutropenia has consistently been detectable, severe infections or any signs of an inflammatory bowel disease have never been observed. No antibiotics were taken at the time of this investigation, nor has a prophylactic treatment been necessary.
lactic antibiotic treatment ever been performed in the years before.

# Methods

Oral carbohydrate tolerance tests were performed in both patients and, concomitantly, in a 28-year-old healthy woman. For that purpose, lactose (2 g/kg as 10% solution in water) or a mixture of glucose and galactose (1 g/kg each) were administered with an interval of at least 1 week. Venous blood samples were drawn at 20-minute intervals for 3 hours. For plasma glucose determination, the hexokinase method was used (Gluco-quant; Roche/Hitachi, Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany); plasma galactose concentration was determined by the galactose dehydrogenase reaction (Galac; Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) after immediate deproteinization of the blood sample. Breath samples were also collected every 20 minutes, and hydrogen concentration was determined by gas chromatography using a Stimotron gas chromatograph (Stimotron, Wendelstein, Germany).

# Results

A detailed description of the results of the oral monosaccharide tests and the lactose tests is given in Figure 2A–C. In summary, no impairment of glucose and galactose absorption from the intestine was detected by the hydrogen breath test in congenital GLUT2 deficiency. The results of the breath test obtained in congenital G6PT1 deficiency must be interpreted as a consequence of bacterial overgrowth of the small intestine compatible with altered carbohydrate absorption. This presumed impairment of intestinal glucose transport can only be mild because the administration of glucose was found to result in an immediate and appropriate increase of the plasma glucose concentration.

# Discussion

Glucose absorption from the intestine is believed to occur by sodium-dependent transport at the apical membrane and by facilitative diffusion at the basolateral membrane of enterocytes.² Our finding of a normal hydrogen breath test after oral administration of glucose and galactose in a patient with congenital GLUT2 deficiency stands in contradiction to this generally accepted model.

This was a surprising finding for us because we had originally suggested that this model provides a good explanation for the intestinal symptoms observed in some patients with FBS during their first years of life.⁸ Already before the detection of the basic defect in FBS, single patients were reported in the literature in whom malabsorption was one of the leading symptoms¹² and who were indeed shown later on to be GLUT2 deficient.⁹

We have therefore revisited clinical data of published FBS cases,⁸ and we found that 16% have been reported to have intestinal symptoms like chronic diarrhea or inappropriate weight gain in infancy (detailed data not shown). However, despite the putative role of GLUT2 in intestinal glucose release, for the great majority of FBS patients, clinical signs of impaired monosaccharide malabsorption have not been mentioned, and in the ones who have symptoms, they may be well explained by other mechanisms. For example, hepatomegaly could lead to secondary problems, and most FBS patients ingest very high fluid volumes orally to compensate for the renal losses that could explain diarrhea and vomiting. The FBS patient reported in this article had chronic diarrhea and failure to thrive during infancy, and we cannot ultimately exclude that an impairment of monosaccharide transport contributed to these symptoms at that time. However, as shown by the hydrogen breath test, intestinal monosaccharide transport was not significantly impaired at the time of this investigation when the patient was 10 years old (Figure 2B).

The most likely explanation for this observation is that transport mechanisms not mediated by GLUT2 exist by which glucose can be released from human enterocytes. One possibility is that other members of the facilitative glucose transporter family are up-regulated and compensate for the impaired GLUT2 function in FBS. Among these transporters, GLUT1, GLUT5, and some of the novel members of this family have been reported to be expressed to some degree in normal intestine.¹³ A more attractive model has recently been reported from observations in transgenic animals deficient in GLUT2. Like FBS patients, these animals show no impairment of intestinal glucose transport.⁵ Inspired by previous investigations on glucose release from hepatocytes,¹⁴⁻¹⁶ the authors of these publications showed by various inhibition studies that not facilitative diffusion by a transporter other than GLUT2 but a membrane traffic-based mechanism provides an alternative route for glucose transport. This pathway requires a glucose-phosphorylating enzyme, the glucose-6-phosphate transporter G6PT1 necessary to transport phosphorylated glucose across the microsomal membrane, and glucose-6-phosphatase, the microsomal enzyme that produces free glucose within this cell compartment (Figure 1B).

Glucose-6-phosphate is an intermediate of glycogen breakdown, and this metabolic pathway has been well studied in glycogen metabolism of the liver. Although only minimal amounts of glycogen can be shown histochemically in normal jejunal biopsies,¹⁷ studies have shown that the genes for glucose-6-phosphate translocase
January 2003                                                                 INTESTINAL GLUCOSE TRANSPORT   37

A control                                                                 B GLUT2 deficiency                                          C G6PT1 deficiency

![Graphs]

Figure 2. Results of oral monosaccharide and lactose tolerance tests. (A) In a normal individual, both the ingestion of monosaccharides (Glc + Gal) and lactose (Lac) resulted in a marked increase of plasma glucose (>1.4 mmol/L) within a few minutes (upper panel). Plasma galactose concentration remained within normal limits (<0.8 mmol/L) (middle panel). In the breath samples, a normal basal H₂ concentration (<16 ppm)²⁵ and no increase of H₂ after carbohydrate ingestion was found both in the Glc + Gal test and in the Lac test. (B) In congenital GLUT2 deficiency (FBS), the oral administration of monosaccharides resulted in an exaggerated plasma glucose increase, a known phenomenon in patients with this condition.⁷ It can be explained by diminished hepatic uptake; furthermore, an inappropriately low insulin secretion because of an impairment of the glucose sensing mechanism of beta cells has been suggested to contribute to this phenomenon (upper panel). Likewise, galactose ingestion resulted in an elevated plasma galactose concentration, which is explained by the fact that GLUT2 is both a glucose and a galactose carrier (middle panel; note the logarithmic scale). The main finding is that no impairment of the intestinal transport of monosaccharides was detected by the H₂ breath test in congenital GLUT2 deficiency (lower panel). The fact that Lac resulted in a marked H₂ increase shows that the patient investigated was indeed able to produce H₂, which means that the bacterial flora of his large intestine was able to convert undigested carbohydrates to H₂. This finding has to be interpreted in the sense that this patient is also lactase deficient. This had already been known from his medical history, and it well explains the different results obtained for plasma glucose and galactose concentrations after the ingestion of the different carbohydrate solutions (upper and middle panel). (C) In congenital G6PT1 deficiency (GSD 1 non-A), the fasting period of 8 hours before the tests resulted in a marked decrease of plasma glucose concentration (upper panel), which is explained by an impairment of hepatic glycogen breakdown and gluconeogenesis because of the defect of the glucose-6-phosphatase system in these patients. This decrease was more pronounced than in GLUT2 deficiency, and it was accompanied by compensated metabolic acidosis (pH_min 7.4, BE_max -13.4). The main finding in G6PT1 deficiency is the elevation of basal H₂ concentrations, which were reproducible in both breath tests (lower panel). This observation is generally interpreted as the result of bacterial overgrowth of the small intestine, which in the absence of other known causes is suggestive for chronic malabsorption of carbohydrates.²⁵ Certainly, absorption of monosaccharides cannot be severely impaired because plasma glucose concentration markedly increased on Glc + Gal. This patient, like the FBS patient in Figure 2B, has additional signs of mild lactase deficiency such as the diminished increase of plasma glucose after Lac, and the increase of H₂ at the expected time interval when unabsorbed lactose enters the colon, which is colonized by H₂-producing bacteria.

1, (G6PT1),¹⁸ and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6PC)¹⁹ are expressed in human intestinal cells. Furthermore, it has been shown that hexokinase activity in intestinal cells is more than 10-fold greater than the reported maximal flux of glucose through glycolysis,²⁰ and it is sufficient to use all the glucose consumed in a normal diet. Interestingly, a glucose/glucose-6-phosphate cycle using both hexokinase and glucose-6-phosphatase has been suggested to explain the repeatedly observed low rate of glucose utilization despite the very high hexokinase activity of these cells.²⁰,²¹ In retrospect, these observations support the hypothesis that these enzymes and transport-

ers of human enterocytes rather play a role in transcellular glucose transport than in glycogen degradation within the small intestine (Figure 1B).

Furthermore, it has long been known that patients with G6PC or G6PT1 deficiency (i.e., GSD 1A and 1 non-A, respectively) suffer from mild intermittent diarrhea. Studies have suggested that intestinal symptoms are more common in types 1A and 1 non-A when compared with other types of GSD, from which one may conclude that this is rather the effect of a primary disturbance of intestinal absorptive functions than the consequence of the diet used in GSDs. Finally, a small study using in vitro and in vivo techniques in 3 GSD 1 patients has indeed reported a diminished intestinal glucose absorption.

To test the role of a potential microsomal membrane traffic-based pathway in man, oral monosaccharide and lactose absorption tests were therefore not only performed in GLUT2 deficiency but also in a patient with GSD 1 non-A. The results of these monosaccharide tolerance tests did not show a severe impairment of intestinal glucose absorption in G6PT1 deficiency. This was concluded from the marked rise of plasma glucose concentration after monosaccharide ingestion. However, the result of the hydrogen breath test was not normal, and it must be interpreted as the effect of bacterial overgrowth of the small intestine, which in the absence of other known causes (short bowel syndrome, resection of the ileal valve, stasis due to inflammatory bowel disease, folic acid deficiency) is highly suggestive of carbohydrate malabsorption.

This prompted us to formulate the following model: a membrane traffic-based glucose pathway and facilitative diffusion at the basolateral membrane can mutually compensate for an impaired function. Therefore, GLUT2 deficiency will not result in altered glucose transport as measurable by the hydrogen breath test. Because of the kinetic properties of GLUT2 with its relatively high \( K_m \) of 42 mmol/L, the proportion contributed by each of the pathways to glucose transport under normal conditions may be concentration dependent, and in case of G6PT1 deficiency, intracellular glucose concentration will probably have to increase before a significant amount of glucose will be transported out of the cell by GLUT2. As a consequence of this increase of intracellular glucose concentration, glucose transport at the apical membrane might be altered, and other functions of enterocytes might be affected.

Although the interpretation of the results in G6PT1 deficiency in part still is speculative, we conclude from our observations that the findings in the GLUT2-deficient patient are not compatible with the classic model of intestinal glucose absorption. Together with the knowledge on expression of hexokinase, G6PT1, and G6PC in the human intestine, with the results that we and others have obtained in GSD 1 patients, and the fact that a membrane traffic-based pathway has already been shown to exist in mice, our findings in an FBS patient provide evidence that such an alternative pathway also plays an important role in transmembranous glucose transport of the human gut.

### References

1. Martin MG, Turk E, Lostao MP, Kerner C, Wright EM. Defects in Na+/glucose cotransporter (SGLT1) trafficking and function cause glucose-galactose malabsorption. Nat Genet 1996;12:216–220.
2. Ferraris RP, Diamond J. Regulation of intestinal sugar transport. Physiol Rev 1997;77:257–302.
3. Davidson NO, Hausman AM, Ifkovits CA, Buse JB, Gould GW, Burant CF, Bell GI. Human intestinal glucose transporter expression and localization of GLUT5. Am J Physiol 1992;262:C795–800.
4. Gould GW, Thomas HM, Jess TJ, Bell GI. Expression of human glucose transporters in Xenopus oocytes: kinetic characterization and substrate specificities of the erythrocyte, liver, brain isoforms. Biochemistry 1991;30:5139–5145.
5. Stümpel F, Burcelin R, Jungermann K, Thorens B. Normal kinetics of intestinal glucose absorption in the absence of GLUT2: evidence for a transport pathway requiring glucose phosphorylation and transfer into the endoplasmic reticulum. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:11330–11335.
6. Santer R, Schneppenheim R, Dombrowski A, Götz H, Steinmann B, Schaub J. Mutations in GLUT2, the gene for the liver-type glucose transporter, in patients with Fanconi-Bickel syndrome. Nat Genet 1997;17:324–326.
7. Müller D, Santer R, Krawinkel M, Christiansen B, Schaub J. Fanconi-Bickel syndrome presenting in neonatal screening for galactosaemia. J Inherit Metab Dis 1997;20:607–608.
8. Santer R, Schneppenheim R, Suter D, Schaub J, Steinmann B. Fanconi-Bickel syndrome—the original patient and his natural history, historical steps leading to the primary defect, and a review of the literature. Eur J Pediatr 1998;157:783–797.
9. Santer R, Groth S, Kinner M, Dombrowski A, Berry GT, Brodehl J, Leonard JV, Moses S, Norgren S, Skovby F, Schneppenheim R, Steinmann B, Schaub J. The mutation spectrum of the facilitative glucose transporter gene SLC2A2 (GLUT2) in patients with Fanconi-Bickel syndrome. Hum Genet 2002;110:21–29.
10. Gahr M, Heyne K. Impaired metabolic function of polymorphonuclear leukocytes in glycogen storage disease Ib. Eur J Pediatr 1983;140:329–330.
11. Santer R, Rischewski J, Block G, Kinner M, Wendel U, Schaub J, Schneppenheim R. Molecular analysis in glycogen storage disease 1 non-A: DHPLC detection of the highly prevalent exon 8 mutations of the G6PT1 gene in German patients. Hum Mutat 2000;16:177.
12. Aperia A, Bergqvist G, Linne T, Zetterstrom R. Familial Fanconi syndrome with malabsorption and galactose intolerance, normal kinase and transferase activity. A report on two siblings. Acta Paediatr Scand 1981;70:527–533.
13. Joost HG, Thorens B. The extended GLUT-family of sugar/polyol transport facilitators: nomenclature, sequence characteristics, and potential function of its novel members. Mol Membr Biol 2001;18:247–256.
14. Guillam MT, Burcelin R, Thorens B. Normal hepatic glucose pro-
duction in the absence of GLUT2 reveals an alternative pathway for glucose release from hepatocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998;95:12317–12321.

15. Burcelin R, del Carmen Munoz M, Guillam MT, Thorens B. Liver hyperplasia and paradoxical regulation of glycogen metabolism and glucose-sensitive gene expression in GLUT2-null hepatocytes. Further evidence for the existence of a membrane-based glucose release pathway. J Biol Chem 2000;275:10930–10936.

16. Hosokawa M, Thorens B. Glucose release from GLUT2-null hepatocytes: characterization of a major and a minor pathway. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2002;282:E794–801.

17. Milla PJ, Atherton DA, Leonard JV, Wolff OH, Lake BD. Disordered intestinal function in glycogen storage disease. J Inherit Metab Dis 1978;1:155–157.

18. Ihara K, Nomura A, Hikino S, Takada H, Hara T. Quantitative analysis of glucose-6-phosphate translocase gene expression in various human tissues and haematopoietic progenitor cells. J Inherit Metab Dis 2000;23:583–592.

19. Rajas F, Bruni N, Montano S, Zitoun C, Mithieux G. The glucose-6 phosphatase gene is expressed in human and rat small intestine: regulation of expression in fasted and diabetic rats. Gastroenterology 1999;117:132–139.

20. Newsholme EA, Carrie AL. Quantitative aspects of glucose and glutamine metabolism by intestinal cells. Gut 1994;35(1 Suppl):S13–17.

21. Bjorkman O, Eriksson LS, Nyberg B, Wahren J. Gut exchange of glucose and lactate in basal state and after oral glucose ingestion in postoperative patients. Diabetes 1990;39:747–751.

22. Howell RR, Ashton DM, Wyngaarden JB. Glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency glycogen storage disease. Studies on the interrelationships of carbohydrate, lipid and purine abnormalities. Pediatrics 1962;29:553–565.

23. Fine RN, Kogut MD, Donnell GN. Intestinal absorption in type I glycogen storage disease. J Pediatr 1969;75:632–635.

24. Visser G, Rake JP, Kokke FTM, Nikkels PGJ, Sauer PJJ, Smit GPA. Intestinal function in glycogen storage disease type I. J Inherit Metab Dis 2002;25:261–267.

25. Perman JA, Modler S, Barr RG, Rosenthal P. Fasting breath hydrogen concentration: normal values and clinical application. Gastroenterology 1984;87:1358–1363.

Received June 13, 2002. Accepted September 19, 2002.

Address requests for reprints to: René Santer, M.D., University Children’s Hospital, Schwanenweg 20, D-24105 Kiel, Germany. e-mail: santer@pediatrics.uni-kiel.de; fax: (49) 431-597-1831.

The authors thank Edward Woda, 1st Department of Internal Medicine, University of Kiel, for technical assistance in the hydrogen breath tests, and Kristin Bachmann for participation in this study.