
# Organ-Specific Expression of Brassinosteroid-Biosynthetic Genes and Distribution of Endogenous Brassinosteroids in Arabidopsis

Yukihiro Shimada*, Hideki Goda, Ayako Nakamura, Suguru Takatsuto, Shozo Fujioka, and Shigeo Yoshida

RIKEN, Wako-shi, Saitama 351–0198, Japan (Y.S., H.G., A.N., S.F., S.Y.); Department of Chemistry, Joetsu University of Education, Joetsu-shi, Niigata 943–8512, Japan (S.T.); and Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama University, Saitama 338–8570, Japan (A.N.)

Brassinosteroids (BRs) are steroidal plant hormones that are essential for growth and development. There is only limited information on where BRs are synthesized and used. We studied the organ specificity of BR biosynthesis in Arabidopsis, using two different approaches: We analyzed the expression of BR-related genes using real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, and analyzed endogenous BRs using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Before starting this study, we cloned the second BR-6-oxidase (*BR6ox2*) gene from Arabidopsis and found that the encoded enzyme has the same substrate specificity as the enzyme encoded by the previously isolated 6-oxidase gene (*BR6ox1*) of Arabidopsis. Endogenous BRs and the expression of BR-related genes were detected in all organs tested. The highest level of endogenous BRs and the highest expression of the *BR6ox1*, *BR6ox2*, and *DWF4* genes were observed in apical shoots, which contain actively developing tissues. These genes are important in BR biosynthesis because they encode the rate-limiting or farthest downstream enzyme in the BR biosynthesis pathway. The second highest level of endogenous BRs and expression of *BR6ox1* and *DWF4* were observed in siliques, which contains actively developing embryos and seeds. These findings indicate that BRs are synthesized in all organs tested, but are most actively synthesized in young, actively developing organs. In contrast, synthesis was limited in mature organs. Our observations are consistent with the idea that BRs function as the growth-promoting hormone in plants.

Since the discovery of brassinolide (BL; Grove et al., 1979), more than 40 natural analogs, collectively called brassinosteroids (BRs), have been isolated and characterized (Fujioka and Sakurai, 1997a, 1997b; Yokota, 1997; Fujioka, 1999). Exogenous application of BRs to plants at nanomolar to micromolar concentrations has a wide spectrum of physiological effects, including promotion of cell elongation and division, enhancement of tracheary element differentiation, retardation of abscission, enhancement of gravitropic-induced bending, promotion of ethylene biosynthesis, and enhancement of stress resistance, as reviewed by Clouse and Sasse (1998) and Sasse (1999). A number of BR-deficient mutants have been discovered in Arabidopsis, pea (*Pisum sativum*), and tomato (*Lycopersicon esculentum*; for review, see Clouse and Feldmann, 1999; Schumacher and Chory, 2000; Bishop and Koncz, 2002). These mutants exhibit dwarfism when grown in either light or dark conditions. Many of these mutants also have dark-green leaves, reduced fertility, a prolonged lifespan, and abnormal skotomorphogenesis. BR-insensitive mutants have been identified in Arabidopsis, pea, tomato, and rice (*Oryza sativa*; for review, see Müssig and Altmann, 2001; Bishop and Koncz, 2002).

In Arabidopsis, studies have reported BR biosynthesis and signal transduction mutants, including *det2* (Li et al., 1996; Noguchi et al., 1999a), *cpd* (Szekeres et al., 1996), *dwf4* (Choe et al., 1998), *dwf1/dim* (Klahre et al., 1998; Choe et al., 1999a), *ste1/dwf7* (Choe et al., 1999b), *sax1* (Ephritikhine et al., 1999), *dwf5* (Choe et al., 2000), *fackel* (Jang et al., 2000; Schrick et al., 2000), *brl1* (Clouse et al., 1996; Li and Chory, 1997), *brs1* (Li et al., 2001), *bin2/ucu1/dwf12* (Choe et al., 2002; Li and Nam, 2002; Perez-Perez et al., 2002), *bzr1* (Wang et al., 2002), and *bes1* (Yin et al., 2002). *BAS1/CYP72B1*, which encodes a repressor of a *phyB* mutant, catalyzes C-26 hydroxylation of BL (Neff et al., 1999). We recently showed that the *BAS1* gene is induced by exogenous BRs (Goda et al., 2002). These observations strongly suggest that the *BAS1* gene functions to maintain steady-state levels of endogenous BRs by inactivating active BRs. The *ROT3/CYP90C* gene was reported to be involved in polar cell elongation of leaf cells (Kim et al., 1998). We also demonstrated that the *ROT3* gene and its homolog, *CYP90D*, are both repressed by exogenous BRs (Goda et al., 2002). These observations, together with the fact that the *ROT3* and *CYP90D* genes are highly homologous to known BR-biosynthetic genes (*CYP85As*, *CYP90A1*, and *CYP90B1*), suggest that

* Corresponding author; e-mail shimada@postman.riken.go.jp; fax 81–48–462–4674.
Article, publication date, and citation information can be found at www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/doi/10.1104/pp.013029.

Shimada et al.

both *ROT3* and *CYP90D* genes encode putative BR-biosynthetic P450 enzymes (Goda et al., 2002).

From the analysis of mutants and wild-type plants, we identified BL, castasterone (CS), typhasterol (TY), teasterone (TE), 6-oxocampestanol (6-OxoCN), 6-deoxocastasterone (6-DeoxoCS), 6-deoxotyphasterol (6-DeoxoTY), 3-dehydro-6-deoxoteasterone (6-Deoxo3DT), 6-deoxoteasterone (6-DeoxoTE), and 6-deoxocathasterone (6-DeoxoCT) as endogenous BRs in various Arabidopsis tissues, including shoots, siliques, and seeds (Fujioka et al., 1996, 1998, 2002; Noguchi et al., 1999b, 2000; S. Fujioka, unpublished data; Fig. 1). On the other hand, we studied the metabolism of deuterium-labeled BR intermediates in Arabidopsis and demonstrated the operation of the biosynthetic sequence: campestanol (CN) → 6-DeoxoCT → 6-DeoxoTE → 6-Deoxo3DT → 6-DeoxoTY → 6-DeoxoCS → 6α-hydroxyCS (6-OHCS) → CS → BL (Noguchi et al., 2000). We also showed the operation of the biosynthetic sequence: TE → 3-dehydroteasterone (3DT) → TY → CS → BL. We have also characterized the Arabidopsis *BR6ox* and tomato *Dwarf* gene, which were expressed in yeast (*Saccharomyces cerevisiae*), and the ability of the transformed yeast cells to metabolize 6-deoxo-BRs was tested. Both enzymes catalyze multiple steps in BR biosynthesis, 6-DeoxoTE to TE, 6-Deoxo3DT to 3-DT, 6-DeoxoTY to TY, and 6-DeoxoCS to CS (Shi-

mada et al., 2001). These studies established the BR-biosynthetic pathway in Arabidopsis (Fig. 1).

In contrast to the intensive studies on the BR-metabolic pathway and BR-related genes, there is only limited information on where BRs are synthesized and function. BRs occur at very low concentrations in plants, and pollen and immature seeds are known to be the richest sources (Fujioka, 1999). The transcript abundance of downstream BR-metabolic genes, *DWF4* (Noguchi et al., 1999a; Choe et al., 2001), *ROT3* (Kim et al., 1998), *BAS1* (Neff et al., 1999), and *BR6ox* (Shimada et al., 2001) are reported at extremely low levels. The signals are too weak to be detected on RNA gel blots, except for the *CPD* gene (Szekeres et al., 1996; Mathur et al., 1998). Therefore, studies have mainly used semiquantitative reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR. There have been histochemical studies of the *CPD* (Mathur et al., 1998), *ROT3* (Kim et al., 1999), *BRI1* (Friedrichsen et al., 2000), and tomato *dwarf/CYP85* (Pien et al., 2001) genes, but it is still unclear if the histochemical pattern of the reporter or in situ hybridization signal corresponds to the native gene expression, enzyme existence/activity, or endogenous BR accumulation.

Before starting to study organ-specific BR biosynthesis, we isolated and characterized the second *CYP85A* gene from Arabidopsis, which is homologous to the previously isolated *BR6ox/CYP85A1* gene and the tomato *Dwarf* gene (Fig. 2). The *BR6ox/Dwarf* enzyme catalyzes an important biosynthetic step of BRs, 6-DeoxoCS to CS via 6-OHCS. This step is the farthest downstream step in BL biosynthesis for known mutations and enzymes. A defect in the *Dwarf* gene results in CS deficiency and causes dwarfism by suppressing stem elongation and leaf expansion (Bishop et al., 1996, 1999). These studies indicate that 6-deoxo BRs have very weak biological activity. It remains to be determined whether any or all of the 6-oxo BRs, e.g. TE, 3DT, TY, or CS, are active per se, or become active after being converted to BL. Intermediates of the late C-6 oxidation pathway are predominant over those of the early C-6 oxidation pathway in many species, including Arabidopsis, tomato, and pea (Choi et al., 1997; Yokota et al., 1997; Bishop et al., 1999; Noguchi et al., 1999b; Koka et al., 2000; Nomura et al., 2001). Especially high accumulation of 6-DeoxoCS has been recorded in many plants, suggesting that C-6 oxidation is a rate-limiting step. Such regulation seems to be canceled in BR-insensitive mutants. CS accumulates at aberrant levels in pea *lka* (Nomura et al., 1997, 1999) and tomato *curl-3* (T. Nomura, T. Yokota, and G.J. Bishop, personal communication). Both CS and BL accumulate in the Arabidopsis *bril* mutant (Noguchi et al., 1999b). These observations indicate that C-6 oxidation is controlled by a feedback mechanism in steady-state conditions in wild-type plants. Interestingly, the presence of BL has not been demonstrated in tomato, indicating that CS may be a biologically active BR. The Dwarf en-

Organ-Specific Brassinosteroid Biosynthesis

Figure 2. Sequence comparison of BR6ox2 and related genes. A, Sequence alignment of the BR6ox2, BR6ox1, and tomato Dwarf genes. Reverse contrast characters highlight identical amino acid residues and hatched characters indicate conserved residues. The GenBank/EMBL/DDBJ accession numbers of the BR6ox1 (CYP85A1) and the tomato Dwarf gene (CYP85A1) are AB035868 and U54770, respectively. The heme-binding signature sequence is underlined. B, Phylogenetic relationship between BR6ox2 and selected P450 genes. BR6ox2 belongs to a group consisting of Dwarf (tomato, CYP85A1), BR6ox1 (Arabidopsis, CYP85A1), CPD (Arabidopsis, CYP90A1 and X87367), ROT3 (Arabidopsis, CYP90C1 and AB008097), DWF4 (Arabidopsis, CYP90B1 and AF044216), and CYP90D (Arabidopsis, AB066286). BAS1/CYP72B1 (Arabidopsis, BAS1 and AC003105) is reported to be involved in BR inactivation. Dwarf3 (maize [Zea mays], CYP88A and U32579) and GA3 (Arabidopsis, CYP701A and AF047720) are reported to be involved in GA biosynthesis. The first P450 genes functionally identified from higher plants are CYP73A (Helianthus annuus cinnamate 4-hydroxylase, Z17369) and CYP75A (Petunia hybrida flavonoid-3', 5'-hydroxylase, D14588); both belong to the higher plant-specific group A of P450 genes. The accession numbers of the other members are D30718 (CYP8), M93133 (CYP7A), and X90458 (CYP86A).

zyme may be a key enzyme governing the physiological role of BRs in tomato. Based on these observations, it is physiologically important to study how BR-6-oxidases regulate the biosynthesis of 6-oxoBRs, including BL.

In this study, we isolated and characterized the second BR-6-oxidase gene from Arabidopsis. Then, we studied organ-specific BR biosynthesis using two different approaches. First, we studied gene expression of BR-related genes, including genes encoding the downstream BR-biosynthetic enzymes (BR6ox1, BR6ox2, CPD [23-hydroxylase], and DWF4 [22-hydroxylase]), genes encoding the putative BR-biosynthetic enzymes (ROT3 and CYP90D), a gene encoding a degradation enzyme (BAS1 [26-hydroxylase]), and a gene encoding a critical component of the BR receptor (BRI1). We used a real-time quantitative (RTQ) RT-PCR to analyze

Plant Physiol. Vol. 131, Downloaded from www.plantphysiol.org on November 3, 2014 - Published by www.plant.org
Copyright © 2003 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
Shimada et al.

tomato *Dwarf* gene. We previously cloned one of them, CYP85A1/At5g38970, and named it BR-6-oxidase (*BR6ox*; Shimada et al., 2001). Here, we isolate the second homolog, CYP85A2/At3g30180 from Arabidopsis, and examine functional overlap and differences between the two genes. An Arabidopsis cDNA library was screened using a PCR-based strategy and two cDNA clones were isolated. The entire nucleotide sequence of the two cDNAs revealed that they contained an identical open reading frame. Because one of these inserts had an in-frame stop codon in the 5′-upstream region of the open reading frame, we concluded that these cDNAs are the full length. The entire sequence of one of these cDNA clones, pGWB28, has been deposited to the GenBank/EMBL/DNA Data Bank of Japan (DDBJ) databases (accession no. AB087801; nucleotide sequence data not shown). We designated this gene *BR6ox2* and renamed the previously reported *BR6ox*/CYP85A1 gene as *BR6ox1*. The deduced amino acid sequence of *BR6ox2* has 82% identity with *BR6ox1* and 68% identity with the tomato *Dwarf* gene (Fig. 1A). It was apparent that *BR6ox2* belongs to the P450 gene superfamily because its amino acid sequence has characteristics of P450 genes, such as the heme-binding consensus sequence FxxGxxxCxG (lowercase x indicates variable amino acid residue; Nelson et al., 1996). A phylogenetic relationship of P450 genes (Fig. 1B) indicates that *BR6ox2* is nearer to the *BR6ox1* than to the tomato *Dwarf* genes or any other Arabidopsis P450 genes. Comparison of the cDNA and genomic sequences revealed that the *BR6ox2* gene consists of nine exons. The exon-intron structures are completely conserved in *BR6ox1* and *BR6ox2*. These observations suggest that the *BR6ox* genes arose by recent gene duplication in this species.

### Functional Analysis of BR6ox2

The sequence similarity between *BR6ox1* and *BR6ox2* does not necessarily indicate that the BR6ox enzymes catalyze the conversion of the same substrates in the BR-biosynthetic pathway. To establish the biochemical function of the *BR6ox2* product, the gene was functionally expressed in yeast. The protein-coding region of the *BR6ox2* gene was subcloned into a yeast expression vector, pYeDP60, and expressed in the yeast strain, WAT11, which carries Arabidopsis NADPH-P450-reductase (Urban et al., 1997). In this strain, both *BR6ox2* and the P450 reductase gene were overexpressed in the presence of Gal (Pompon et al., 1996). An induced culture of the yeast transformant was incubated with 5 μg of deuterated [²H₆]BRs. Products from the incubation were analyzed by GC-MS. The identity of the products was confirmed by a direct comparison of the relative abundance of characteristic ions of the metabolites and standard compounds (data not shown). When the yeast strain expressing *BR6ox2* was incubated

with [²H₆]6-DeoxoCS, both [²H₆]CS and [²H₆]6-OHCS were identified as metabolites. Other 6-deoxo compounds were also fed to the yeast to determine whether they can also act as substrates for the BR6ox2 enzyme. It was found that [²H₆]6-DeoxoTY, [²H₆]6-Deoxo3DT, and [²H₆]6-DeoxoTE were converted to [²H₆]TY, [²H₆]3DT, and [²H₆]TE, respectively. However, [²H₆]6-DeoxoCT and [²H₆]CN were not converted to [²H₆]cathasterone (CT) and [²H₆]6-OxoCN, respectively. No conversion was detected in a yeast strain that was transformed only with the vector pYeDP60. From these results, we concluded that the BR6ox2 enzyme has the same substrate specificity as the BR6ox1 and tomato Dwarf enzymes, at least in our yeast expression system (summarized in Fig. 1).

#### Specificity of RTQ RT-PCR to Analyze BR-Related P450 Genes

To understand the organ specificity of BR biosynthesis, we analyzed downstream BR-biosynthetic genes, putative BR-biosynthetic genes, the *BRI1*, and the *BAS1* genes. It has been technically difficult to quantify transcript abundance of BR-related genes because their transcript levels are extremely low. This study used the RTQ-RT-PCR to analyze transcript abundance. We tested the risk of cross amplification/detection before analyzing BR-related P450 genes, two CYP85 genes, four CYP90 genes, and one CYP72B1 gene, which share significant sequence similarity. We compared the SYBR Green and the TaqMan methods. DNA solutions (10¹ ~ 10⁷ copies μL⁻¹) of cDNA clones for BR-metabolic P450 genes were used as templates to draw standard curves. DNA solutions in this range of concentration were used as templates to estimate the rate of cross detection in each method. When the SYBR Green method was used, the *CPD* gene primers cross amplified *ROT3* DNA (the efficiency of the amplification was less than 10⁻² when compared with the amplification of the *CPD* DNA). This implies that if there are 100 times as many *ROT3* transcripts as *CPD* transcripts, the abundance of *CPD* transcripts will be overestimated by a factor of two. Other primers generally cross detected nonspecific templates at low rate (<10⁻³) in SYBR Green method (data not shown). On the other hand, when the Taq-Man method was used for the analysis, Taq-Man probes cross detected nonspecific templates at lower rates (<10⁻⁴) compared with the SYBR Green method (Table I). We concluded that the rate of cross detection in the Taq-Man method does not affect the analysis of BR-related transcripts. The subsequent analyses were performed with the Taq-Man method.

#### Feedback Regulation at the Transcript Level

It has been reported that the *CPD* (Mathur et al., 1998; Asami et al., 2001) and *DWF4* (Noguchi et al., 
Table I. Cross detection of BR-related P450 gene expression using the TaqMan method

| Template | BR6ox1 | BR6ox2 | CPD | DWF4 | ROT3 | CYP90D | BAS1 |
|----------|--------|--------|-----|------|------|-------|------|
| BR6ox1   | –      | <10⁻⁴  | ND  | ND   | <10⁻⁵| ND    | ND   |
| BR6ox2   | ND     | –      | ND  | ND   | ND   | ND    | ND   |
| CPD      | <10⁻⁵  | <10⁻⁵  | –   | ND   | ND   | ND    | ND   |
| DWF4     | <10⁻⁴  | <10⁻⁴  | ND  | –    | ND   | –     | ND   |
| ROT3     | ND     | <10⁻⁴  | ND  | <10⁻⁴| –    | <10⁻⁴ | ND   |
| CYP90D   | ND     | ND     | ND  | ND   | <10⁻⁴| –     | ND   |
| BAS1     | ND     | <10⁻⁴  | ND  | ND   | ND   | <10⁻⁴ | –    |

ND, Not detected.

Shimada et al.

Figure 4. The expression of BR-related genes in various organs. Arabidopsis seedlings were grown in soil for 4 to 12 weeks. The aerial parts of the plants were divided into apical shoots (As), inflorescence stems (St), rosette leaves (rL), cauline leaves (cL), and siliques (Si). Alternatively, plants were germinated on agar medium for 7 d, then cultured in liquid medium for 7 to 30 d, and then divided into shoots (Sh) and roots (Ro). Transcript levels were analyzed by the Taq-Man RTQ RT-PCR. Transcript levels are given as relative values to As (the value of 1), after being normalized to the 18S ribosomal RNA levels. Data are shown as the means with variation bars (SD) from three different plant samples for As, St, rL, Si, Sh, and Ro, or from two different plant samples for cL.

pression of CPD was exceptional; the expression in roots was lower than that in shoots.

### Organ-Specific Distribution of Endogenous BRs

Arabidopsis seedlings were grown in soil for 6 weeks to compare aerial organs. Alternatively, plants were germinated on agar medium for 7d, and then cultured in liquid medium for 13d to compare roots and shoots. They were then divided into organs as described for the gene expression analysis. The endogenous BRs were then extracted and analyzed by GC-MS (Table II). In soil-grown plants, apical shoots contained much higher levels of BRs than other organs, especially 24-methylenecholesterol, 6-DeoxoCT, 6-DeoxoCS, and CS. Siliques also contained more endogenous BRs, especially CN, 6-DeoxoCT, 6-DeoxoCS, and CS. Inflorescent stems, rosette leaves, and cauline leaves contained relatively less BRs. When roots are compared with shoots in liquid-cultured seedlings, roots contained more BRs, especially 6-DeoxoCT, 6-DeoxoTE, and 6-DeoxoTY. In contrast, shoots contained higher lev-

### DISCUSSION

In a previous report, we demonstrated that the BR6ox1 enzyme, expressed in yeast, catalyzed C-6 oxidation of 6-DeoxoCS, 6-DeoxoTY, 6-Deoxo3DT, and 6-DeoxoTE, whereas the enzyme did not catalyze C-6 oxidation of 6-DeoxoCT or CN (Shimada et al., 2001). We found naturally occurring 6-OxoCN in Arabidopsis (Choe et al., 2001). These two findings suggest that an unknown BR-6-oxidase catalyzing CN to 6-OxoCN (or 6-DeoxoCT to CT) exists in Arabidopsis (Shimada et al., 2001). In this manuscript, we isolated the second BR6ox gene, BR6ox2, from Arabidopsis and characterized the encoded enzyme in transgenic yeast, to test whether the isolated enzyme has the same or different substrate specificity as the BR6ox1 enzyme. The BR6ox2 enzyme catalyzed the same C-6 oxidation steps, 6-DeoxoCS to CS,

Table II. Endogenous BRs in different organs

| Sterol ($\mu$g g fresh wt$^{-1}$) | Apical shoot (3.62 g) | Stem (44.7 g) | Cauline (56.0 g) | Rosette (11.0 g) | Silique (3.89 g) | Shoot (41.5 g) | Root (11.0 g) |
|----------------------------------|----------------------|--------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|----------------|---------------|
| 24-MC$^a$                        | 38.7                 | 2.11         | 3.27            | 2.91            | 7.77            | 0.64           | 0.85          |
| CR$^b$                           | 72.7                 | 27.1         | 28.9            | 18.8            | 47.9            | 14.6           | 40.4          |
| CN                               | 1.52                 | 0.90         | 0.57            | 0.50            | 5.27            | 0.28           | 0.72          |
| 6-OxoCN                          | 0.030                | 0.018        | 0.013           | 0.018           | 0.036           | 0.012          | 0.035         |

| 6-DeoxoBRs (ng g fresh wt$^{-1}$) | Apical shoot (3.62 g) | Stem (44.7 g) | Cauline (56.0 g) | Rosette (11.0 g) | Silique (3.89 g) | Shoot (41.5 g) | Root (11.0 g) |
|----------------------------------|----------------------|--------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|----------------|---------------|
| 6-DeoxoCT                         | 7.93                 | 0.65         | 0.63            | 0.97            | 8.89            | 0.29           | 1.71          |
| 6-DeoxoTE                         | 0.72                 | 0.14         | 0.20            | 0.19            | 0.36            | 0.08           | 0.22          |
| 6-DeoxoTY                         | 1.18                 | 2.24         | 2.01            | 1.08            | 2.86            | 0.69           | 1.37          |
| 6-DeoxoCS                         | 6.01                 | 2.64         | 4.33            | 2.85            | 5.64            | 0.73           | 0.23          |

| 6-OxoBRs (ng g fresh wt$^{-1}$)   | Apical shoot (3.62 g) | Stem (44.7 g) | Cauline (56.0 g) | Rosette (11.0 g) | Silique (3.89 g) | Shoot (41.5 g) | Root (11.0 g) |
|----------------------------------|----------------------|--------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|----------------|---------------|
| CT                               | ND$^c$               | ND           | ND              | ND              | ND              | ND             | ND            |
| TE                               | 0.03                 | ND           | ND              | ND              | ND              | ND             | ND            |
| TY                               | 0.30                 | 0.22         | 0.11            | 0.06            | 0.38            | 0.01           | 0.01          |
| CS                               | 2.02                 | 0.40         | 0.31            | 0.13            | 0.94            | 0.12           | 0.05          |
| BL                               | ND                   | ND           | ND              | ND              | ND              | ND             | ND            |

$a$ 24-MC, 24-Methylenecholesterol.  
$b$ CR, Campesterol.  
$c$ ND, Not detected.

Table III. Primers and TaqMan probes used for RT-PCR

| Gene Name       | Forward Primer Sequence          | Reverse Primer Sequence         | TaqMan Probe Sequence           |
|-----------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| BR6ox1          | TGGCCAATCTTTGGCGAA              | TCCCGTATCGGAGTCTTTGGT           | ACCGAGTTTCTCAAACAAGGCCCAAC     |
| BR6ox2          | CAATAGTCTCAATGGACGCAGAGT        | AACCGCAGCTATGTTGCGATG           | ACTTGTTGCCGGTTACCCGCAATCTATG   |
| CPD             | CCCAAACCACCTCAAAGATGCT          | GGGCCTGTCTGTTACCGAGTT           | TCTGCCATCTCCAAGGGTTGAAAGTGC    |
| DWF4            | GTGATCTCAGCCGTACATTGGA          | CACGTCAAAAAACTACCACTTCCT        | CAGCAAAACAACGGAGCGTCATCG       |
| ROT3            | ATTGGCGCGTTCTCAGAT              | CAAGACGCCAAAGTGAGAACAA          | CTCACTCAAAAGACCGGATCACTCGAGA   |
| CYP90D          | CTCATTACCCCTTGGCGTCAA           | CAGCTCATGTTTCTTCCGTTAG          | CCTCTCTGATTCTCCTGCTGCCCTCAAT  |
| BAS1            | TTGGCTTCATACCGTTTGGC            | TTACAGCGAGTGTCAATTGGC           | CGGAGTTCGTACATGGCATTGGTCAGAATC |
| BRI1            | GGTGAAACAGCACGCAAAACT           | CACGCAACCGCAACTTTAA              | ACCCCGAGTTATGAAGGAAGATCCAGC    |
| 18S ribosomal RNA | CGGCTACCACATCCAAGGA            | GCTGGAATTACCGCGGCT               | TGCTGGCACCAGACTTGGCCCCTC       |

biosynthetic genes was higher, suggesting that BR catabolism is active in organs where BR biosynthesis is active. $B R I 1$ was expressed more ubiquitously than the BR-biosynthetic genes. This concurs with a previous GFP reporter study (Friedrichsen et al., 2000), and suggests that BR action in Arabidopsis is regulated at the level of biosynthesis rather than by the number of receptors. In contrast, the OsBRI1 gene expression predominates in shoot apex in rice (Yamamuro et al., 2000).

Only limited information is available on the sites of biosynthesis or action of BRs at the organ, tissue, and cell levels. Exogenously applied BRs are absorbed by plants, move acropetally, and promote cell elongation (Sasse, 1999), but long-distance transport of endogenous BRs is controversial. The variegated revertant phenotype of transposon-mutagenized tomato dwarf mutants (Bishop et al., 1996) suggests that BRs are synthesized in tissues adjacent to where they function. Therefore, it is very important to determine where BRs are synthesized to understand their sites of action. This study analyzed organ specificity in the BR biosynthesis, for the first time to our knowledge, using two different approaches. BR-biosynthetic gene expression was detected in all organs tested, as was the occurrences of endogenous BRs. Our findings indicate that BRs are synthesized in all organs. When aerial tissues of soil-grown plants were compared, apical shoots contained the highest levels of endogenous BRs and the greatest expression of $B R 6 o x 1$, $B R 6 o x 2$, and DWF4, which are important genes encoding the rate-limiting or farthest downstream enzyme in the BR-biosynthetic pathway. These observations strongly suggest that BRs are most actively synthesized, and, therefore, used in apical shoots, which contain actively developing tissues. Siliques contained the second highest levels of endogenous BRs and expression of $B R 6 o x 1$ and DWF4. Siliques also contain developing embryos and seeds. Based on these observations, we propose that BRs are synthesized most actively in young developing organs in aerial tissues.

When roots were compared with shoots in liquid-cultured seedlings, the expression of $B R 6 o x 1$, ROT3, CYP90D, and BAS1 was higher in roots than in shoots. The levels of midstream BR intermediates, 6-DeoxoCT, 6-DeoxoTE, and 6-DeoxoTY, were higher in roots than in shoots, whereas the levels of the downstream intermediates, 6-DeoxoCS and CS, were higher in shoots than in roots. Yokota et al. (2001) reported a very similar accumulation pattern for $C_{27}$ BRs in shoots and roots of tomato; 6-deoxo-28-norcathasterone and 6-deoxo-28-nortyphasterol levels were higher in roots than in shoots, whereas 6-deoxo-28-norcasterone and 28-norcasterone levels were higher in shoots than in roots. Therefore, Arabidopsis and tomato seems to share a common mechanism to maintain opposing levels of midstream and downstream BR intermediates, although the physiological or biochemical significance of this mechanism is not clear. One of our hypotheses is as follows. BR biosynthesis may be more active in roots than in shoots, as assumed from the biosynthesis gene expression pattern. On the other hand, from the BAS1 expression pattern, BR catabolism may also be more active in roots than in shoots. If the BAS1 enzyme acts more efficiently on downstream BRs (6-DeoxoCS and CS) as hypothesized in a previous report (Neff et al., 1999), the balance of biosynthetic enzymes and degradation enzymes could explain why more midstream intermediates accumulate in roots. The greater BAS1 enzyme activity in roots would maintain the lower levels of the furthest downstream, active BRs in roots because roots are more sensitive to active BRs than shoots.

Very recently, Bancos et al. (2002) reported endogenous BR levels in shoots and roots of Arabidopsis, pea, and tomato. In these plants, the levels of midstream BR intermediates were higher in roots than in shoots and the levels of downstream intermediates were higher in shoots than in roots. Their results, therefore, coincide well with our results. They also reported differential accumulation of Arabidopsis CYP85 and CYP90 genes in shoots and roots. Their results generally coincide with our results except for the $B R 6 o x 2 / C Y P 8 5 A 2$ gene, which was reported to be expressed preferentially in shoots. On the other hand, in our growth condition, the expression of $B R 6 o x 2$ gene was not always higher in shoots than in roots (Fig. 4).

CONCLUSIONS

We isolated and characterized the second $BR6ox$ gene from Arabidopsis. We then analyzed the organ specificity of BR biosynthesis using two different approaches: analyses of gene expression and analyses of endogenous BRs. BRs were synthesized in all organs tested, but were most actively synthesized in young actively developing organs. In contrast, synthesis was limited in mature organs. Our observation is consistent with the idea that BRs function as growth-promoting hormone in plants.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Plant Materials

Arabidopsis ecotype Columbia was used as the wild type in this study. Wild-type seedlings were grown for 4 to 12 weeks to compare aerial organs. Alternatively, they were grown aseptically on one-half-strength Murashige and Skoog medium (Murashige and Skoog, 1962) supplemented with 1% (w/v) Suc with or without 0.8% (w/v) agar in a growth cabinet (at 22°C, continuous illumination of 100 $\mu$Em${}^{-2}$ s${}^{-1}$). Plants were grown under similar conditions and harvested at different times for gene expression analyses and BR quantification analyses. The growth conditions and BL treatment of $det2-1$ mutants were described previously (Goda et al., 2002).

GC-MS Analysis

GC-MS analysis was carried out on a mass spectrometer (JMS-AM SUN200, JEOL, Tokyo) connected to a gas chromatograph (6890A, Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE) with a capillary column DB-5 (0.25 mm × 15 m, 0.25-$\mu$m film thickness, J&W Scientific, Folsom, CA).

Isolation of cDNA Clones

An Arabidopsis cDNA library (SUPERSCRIPT Arabidopsis cDNA Library, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) was screened using a PCR-based strategy with gene-specific primers, $BR6ox2$–101F (5′ GGG GGA TCC ATG GGC ATA ATG ATG ATT TTG3′) and $BR6ox2$–1509R (5′ GGG GGT ACC GAC AAA ACT AGT CAG TAA GGT GAA CAC TT3′). The isolated cDNA clone is a derivative of the pSPORT-P vector (Invitrogen).

DNA Sequence Analyses

DNA sequences were determined using an automated DNA sequencer (model 373A DNA Sequencing System, PE-Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The nucleotide sequence was compiled and analyzed using GENETYX-Mac (Software Development Co., Ltd., Tokyo). The BLAST (Altschul et al., 1990) program was used to search for entries of homologous sequences in the DDBJ. The ClustalW program on the server at DDBJ was used to align the amino acid sequences and to draw phylogenetic relationships using the neighbor-joining method (Saitou and Nei, 1987). The aligned sequences were shaded using the program Boxshade, available on the server at the European Molecular Biology Network.

Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) Expression Vector

The full-length cDNA of the $BR6ox2$ gene was subcloned from a cDNA clone pGWB28 to a vector, pDONR207, yielding pDONRB28 using the BP Clonase reaction of the Gateway system (Invitrogen). The cDNA was then subcloned into a yeast expression vector pYESDEST52 (Invitrogen) using the LR Clonase reaction (Invitrogen). The resulting plasmid was designated pYESB284. In this construct, the $BR6ox2$ gene is controlled under the yeast GAL1 promoter.

Organ-Specific Brassinosteroid Biosynthesis

Yeast Functional Assay

pYESB284 vector was transformed to yeast strain WAT11 (Pompon et al., 1996) under selection using the $URA3$ gene. Yeast expression and functional assay of the $BR6ox2$ gene were performed as described previously (Bishop et al., 1999; Noguchi et al., 1999b; Shimada et al., 2001). Products from the incubations were analyzed by GC-MS. The identity of the products was confirmed using their full-scan mass spectra.

RT-PCR Analysis

Total RNAs were extracted from Arabidopsis seedlings using the guanidine-hydrochloride method (Kawakami and Watanabe, 1988). The RNAs were then treated with DNase I. They were then converted to cDNAs with random primers using the Super Script First-Strand Synthesis System (Life Technologies/Gibco-BRL, Cleveland). Unless otherwise noted, quantitative RT-PCR was performed with the use of real-time-monitoring TaqMan technology (Holland et al., 1991) with a model 7700 sequence detector and a Taq-Man Universal PCR Master Mix (PE-Applied Biosystems). 6-Carboxyfluorescein and 6-carboxytetramethylrhodamine were used for “Reporter” and “Quencher” to label Taq-Man primers, respectively. 6-Carboxy-X-rhodamine was used for “Passive Reference” as an internal standard to normalize the “Reporter” signal. Normalization is necessary to correct for well-to-well fluorescent fluctuations of “Reporter” because of changes in concentration or volume. The gene-specific primers were designed with care (e.g. not to be homologous to other Arabidopsis genes) using the Primer Express program (PE-Applied Biosystems) and the BLAST program. The primers and Taq-Man probes are listed in Table III. The 18S ribosomal RNA was analyzed as an internal control to monitor the efficiency of the RT reaction, and was used to normalize the transcript abundance in each sample. The 18S ribosomal RNA was chosen because it is the most abundant transcript in vivo. If the efficiency of the RT reaction of a sample was significantly lower than the efficiency of other samples, these samples were not used for further analysis. The same cDNA substrate was used for the quantifications of all genes, including the 18S ribosomal RNA. Because the RTQ-RT-PCR system is so sensitive that it can detect degradation of DNA solutions caused by freezing and thawing or absorption to tubes, the raw data of transcript abundance varies in each measurement. Therefore, we presented relative transcript abundance in results because relative values are reproducible regardless of measurements.

Quantification of BRs in Arabidopsis Seedlings

BR purification and quantification were carried out according to the method described by Noguchi et al. (1999a).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Drs. Philippe Urban and Denis Pompon for providing pYeDP60 and yeast strain WAT11. We thank Mr. Narumasa Miyauichi for technical assistance with the quantitative PCR and cDNA cloning. We also thank Ms. Masayo Sekimoto and Mr. Makoto Kobayashi for technical assistance with the endogenous BR analysis.

Received August 14, 2002; returned for revision September 6, 2002; accepted October 15, 2002.

LITERATURE CITED

Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ (1990) Basic local alignment search tool. J Mol Biol 215: 403–410

Arabidopsis Genome Initiative (2000) Analysis of the genome sequence of the flowering plant *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Nature 408: 796–815

Asami T, Mizutani M, Fujioka S, Goda H, Min YK, Shimada Y, Nakano T, Takatsuto S, Matsuyama T, Nagata N et al. (2001) Selective interaction of triazole derivatives with $DWF4$, a cytochrome P450 monooxygenase of the brassinosteroid biosynthetic pathway, correlates with brassinosteroid deficiency in planta. J Biol Chem 276: 25687–25691

Bancos S, Nomura T, Sato T, Molnar G, Bishop GJ, Koncz C, Yokota T, Nagy F, Szekeres M (2002) Regulation of transcript levels of the Arabi-

Shimada et al.

dopsis cytochrome P450 genes involved in brassinosteroid biosynthesis. Plant Physiol 130: 504–513

Bishop GJ, Harrison K, Jones J (1996) The tomato *Dwarf* gene isolated by heterologous transposon tagging encodes the first member of a new cytochrome P450 family. Plant Cell 8: 959–969

Bishop GJ, Koncz C (2002) Brassinosteroids and plant steroid hormone signaling. Plant Cell 14: S97–S110

Bishop GJ, Nomura T, Yokota T, Harrison K, Noguchi T, Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Jones JD, Kamiya Y (1999) The tomato DWARF enzyme catalyses C-6 oxidation in brassinosteroid biosynthesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96: 1761–1766

Choe S, Dilkes BP, Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Sakurai A, Feldmann KA (1998) The *DWF4* gene of Arabidopsis encodes a cytochrome P450 that mediates multiple 22α-hydroxylation steps in brassinosteroid biosynthesis. Plant Cell 10: 231–243

Choe S, Dilkes BP, Gregory BD, Ross AS, Yuan H, Noguchi T, Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Tanaka A, Yoshida S et al. (1999a) The Arabidopsis *dwarf1* mutant is defective in the conversion of 24-methylenecholesterol to campesterol in brassinosteroid biosynthesis. Plant Physiol 119: 897–907

Choe S, Fujioka S, Noguchi T, Takatsuto S, Yoshida S, Feldmann KA (2001) Overexpression of *DWARF4* in the brassinosteroid biosynthetic pathway results in increased vegetative growth and seed yield in Arabidopsis. Plant J 26: 573–582

Choe S, Noguchi T, Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Tissier CP, Gregory BD, Ross AS, Tanaka A, Yoshida S, Tax FE et al. (1999b) The Arabidopsis *dwf7/stel1* mutant is defective in the Δ7 sterol C-5 desaturation step leading to brassinosteroid biosynthesis. Plant Cell 11: 207–221

Choe S, Schmitz RJ, Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Lee M-O, Yoshida S, Feldmann KA, Tax FE (2002) Arabidopsis brassinosteroid-insensitive *dwarf12* mutants are semi-dominant and defective in a glycogen synthase kinase3 β-like kinase. Plant Physiol 130: 1506–1515

Choe S, Tanaka A, Noguchi T, Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Ross AS, Tax FE, Yoshida S, Feldmann KA (2000) Lesions in the sterol Δ7 reductase gene of Arabidopsis cause dwarfism due to a block in brassinosteroid biosynthesis. Plant J 21: 431–443

Choi Y, Fujioka S, Nomura T, Harada A, Yokota T, Takatsuto S, Sakurai A (1997) An alternative brassinolide biosynthetic pathway via late C-6 oxidation. Phytochemistry 44: 609–613

Clouse SD, Feldmann KA (1999) Molecular genetics of brassinosteroid action. In A Sakurai, T Yokota, S Clouse, eds, Brassinosteroids: Steroidal Plant Hormones. Springer-Verlag, Tokyo, pp 163–190

Clouse SD, Langford M, McM Morris TC (1996) A brassinosteroid-insensitive mutant in *Arabidopsis thaliana* exhibits multiple defects in growth and development. Plant Physiol 111: 671–678

Clouse SD, Sasse JM (1998) Brassinosteroids: essential regulators of plant growth and development. Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 49: 427–451

Ephritikhine G, Pagant S, Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Lapous D, Caboche M, Kendrick RE, Barbier-Brygoo H (1999) The *sax1* mutation defines a new locus involved in the brassinosteroid biosynthesis pathway in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Plant J 18: 315–320

Friedrichsen DM, Joazeiro CAP, Li JM, Hunter T, Chory J (2000) Brassinosteroid-insensitive-1 is a ubiquitously expressed leucine-rich repeat receptor serine/threonine kinase. Plant Physiol 123: 1247–1255

Fujioka S (1999) Natural occurrence of brassinosteroids in the plant kingdom. In A Sakurai, T Yokota, SD Clouse, eds, Brassinosteroids: Steroidal Plant Hormones. Springer-Verlag, Tokyo, pp 21–45

Fujioka S, Choi YH, Takatsuto S, Yokota T, Li J, Chory J, Sakurai A (1996) Identification of castasterone, 6-deoxocastasterone, typhasterol and 6-deoxotyphasterol from the shoots of *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Plant Cell Physiol 37: 1201–1203

Fujioka S, Noguchi T, Yokota T, Takatsuto S, Yoshida S (1998) Brassinosteroids in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Phytochemistry 48: 595–599

Fujioka S, Sakurai A (1997a) Biosynthesis and metabolism of brassinosteroids. Physiol Plant 100: 710–715

Fujioka S, Sakurai A (1997b) Brassinosteroids. Nat Prod Rep 14: 1–10

Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Yoshida S (2002) An early C-22 oxidation branch in the brassinosteroid biosynthetic pathway. Plant Physiol 130: 930–939

Goda H, Shimada Y, Asami T, Fujioka S, Yoshida S (2002) Microarray analysis of brassinosteroid-regulated genes in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 130: 1319–1334

Grove MD, Spencer GF, Rohwedder WK, Mandava N, Worley JF, Warthen JD, Steffen GL, Flippen-Anderson JL, Cook JC (1979) Brassinolide, a plant growth-promoting steroid isolated from *Brassica napus* pollen. Nature 281: 216–217

Holland PM, Abramson RD, Watson R, Gelfand DH (1991) Detection of specific polymerase chain-reaction product by utilizing the 5′ → 3′ exonuclease activity of *Thermus aquaticus* DNA polymerase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88: 7276–7280

Jang JC, Fujioka S, Tasaka M, Seto H, Takatsuto S, Ishii A, Aida M, Yoshida S, Sheen J (2000) A critical role of sterols in embryonic patterning and meristem programming revealed by the *fackel* mutants of *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Genes Dev 14: 1485–1497

Kawakami N, Watanabe A (1988) Change in gene expression in radish cotyledons during dark-induced senescence. Plant Cell Physiol 29: 33–42

Kim GT, Tsukaya H, Uchimiya H (1998) The *ROTUNDIFOLIA3* gene of *Arabidopsis thaliana* encodes a new member of the cytochrome P-450 family that is required for the regulated polar elongation of leaf cells. Genes Dev 12: 2381–2391

Kim GT, Tsukaya H, Saito Y, Uchimiya H (1999) Changes in the shapes of leaves and flowers upon overexpression of cytochrome P450 in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96: 9433–9437

Klahre U, Noguchi T, Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Yokota T, Nomura T, Yoshida S, Chua NH (1998) The Arabidopsis *DIMINUTO/DWARF1* gene encodes a protein involved in steroid synthesis. Plant Cell 10: 1677–1690

Koka CV, Cerny RE, Gardner RG, Noguchi T, Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Yoshida S, Clouse SD (2000) A putative role for the tomato genes *DUMPY* and *CURL-3* in brassinosteroid biosynthesis and response. Plant Physiol 122: 85–98

Li J, Chory J (1997) A putative leucine-rich repeat receptor kinase involved in brassinosteroid signal transduction. Cell 90: 929–938

Li J, Lease KA, Tax FE, Walker JC (2001) *BRS1*, a serine carboxypeptidase, regulates *BRI1* signaling in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98: 5916–5921

Li J, Nagpal P, Vitart V, McM Morris TC, Chory J (1996) A role for brassinosteroids in light-dependent development of Arabidopsis. Science 272: 398–401

Li JM, Nam KH (2002) Regulation of brassinosteroid signaling by a GSK3/SHAGGY-like kinase. Science 295: 1299–1301

Mathur J, Molnar G, Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Sakurai A, Yokota T, Adam G, Voigt B, Nagy F, Maas C et al. (1998) Transcription of the Arabidopsis *CPD* gene, encoding a steroidogenic cytochrome P450, is negatively controlled by brassinosteroids. Plant J 14: 593–602

Murashige T, Skoog F (1962) A revised medium for rapid growth and bioassay with tobacco tissue cultures. Physiol Plant 15: 473–498

Müssig C, Altmann T (2001) Brassinosteroid signaling in plants. Trends Endocrinol Metab 12: 398–402

Neff MM, Nguyen SM, Malanchauvil EJ, Fujioka S, Noguchi T, Seto H, Tsubuki M, Honda T, Takatsuto S, Yoshida S et al. (1999) *BAS1*: a gene regulating brassinosteroid levels and light responsiveness in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96: 15316–15323

Nelson DR, Koymans L, Kamataki T, Stegeman JJ, Feyereisen R, Waxman DJ, Waterman MR, Gotoh O, Coon MJ, Estabrook RW et al. (1996) P450 superfamily: update on new sequences, gene mapping, accession numbers and nomenclature. Pharmacogenetics 6: 1–42

Noguchi T, Fujioka S, Choe S, Takatsuto S, Tax FE, Feldmann KA (2000) Biosynthetic pathways of brassinolide in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 124: 201–209

Noguchi T, Fujioka S, Choe S, Takatsuto S, Yoshida S, Yuan H, Feldmann KA, Tax FE (1999a) Brassinosteroid-insensitive dwarf mutants of Arabidopsis accumulate brassinosteroids. Plant Physiol 121: 743–752

Noguchi T, Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Sakurai A, Yoshida S, Li J, Chory J (1999b) Arabidopsis *det2* is defective in the conversion of (24R)-24-methylcholest-4-en-3-one to (24R)-24-methyl-5α-cholestan-3-one in brassinosteroid biosynthesis. Plant Physiol 120: 833–839

Nomura T, Kitasaka Y, Takatsuto S, Reid JB, Fukami M, Yokota T (1999) Brassinosteroid/sterol synthesis and plant growth as affected by *lka* and *lkb* mutations of pea. Plant Physiol 119: 1517–1526

Nomura T, Nakayama M, Reid JB, Takeuchi Y, Yokota T (1997) Blockage of brassinosteroid biosynthesis and sensitivity causes dwarfism in garden pea. Plant Physiol 113: 31–37

Nomura T, Sato T, Bishop GJ, Kamiya Y, Takatsuto S, Yokota T (2001) Accumulation of 6-deoxocathasterone and 6-deoxocastasterone in Arabidopsis, pea and tomato is suggestive of common rate-limiting steps in brassinosteroid biosynthesis. Phytochemistry 57: 171–178

Perez-Perez JM, Ponce MR, Micol JL (2002) The UCU1 Arabidopsis gene encodes a SHAGGY/GSK3-like kinase required for cell expansion along the proximodistal axis. Dev Biol 242: 161–173

Pien S, Wyrzykowska J, Fleming AJ (2001) Novel marker genes for early leaf development indicate spatial regulation of carbohydrate metabolism within the epical meristem. Plant J 25: 663–674

Pompon D, Louerat B, Bronine A, Urban P (1996) Yeast expression of animal and plant P450s in optimized redox environments. Methods Enzymol 272: 51–64

Saitou N, Nei M (1987) The neighbor-joining method: a new method for reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 4: 406–425

Sasse J (1999) Physiological actions of brassinosteroids. *In* A Sakurai, T Yokota, SD Clouse, eds, Brassinosteroids: Steroidal Plant Hormones. Springer-Verlag, Tokyo, pp 137–161

Schrick K, Mayer U, Horrichs A, Kuhnt C, Bellini C, Dangl J, Schmidt J, Jurgens G (2000) FACKEL is a sterol C-14 reductase required for organized cell division and expansion in Arabidopsis embryogenesis. Genes Dev 14: 1471–1484

Schumacher K, Chory J (2000) Brassinosteroid signal transduction: still casting the actors. Curr Opin Plant Biol 3: 79–84

Shimada Y, Fujioka S, Miyauchi N, Kushiro M, Takatsuto S, Nomura T, Yokota T, Kamiya Y, Bishop GJ, Yoshida S (2001) Brassinosteroid-6 oxidases from Arabidopsis and tomato catalyze multiple C-6 oxidations in brassinosteroid biosynthesis. Plant Physiol 126: 770–779

Szekeres M, Nemeth K, Koncz Kalman Z, Mathur J, Kauschmann A, Altmann T, Redei GP, Nagy F, Schell J, Koncz C (1996) Brassinosteroids

Organ-Specific Brassinosteroid Biosynthesis

rescue the deficiency of CYP90, a cytochrome P450, controlling cell elongation and de-etiolation in Arabidopsis. Cell 85: 171–182

Urban P, Mignotte C, Kazmaier M, Delorme F, Pompon D (1997) Cloning, yeast expression, and characterization of the coupling of two distantly related *Arabidopsis thaliana* NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductases with P450 CYP73A5. J Biol Chem 272: 19176–19186

Wang ZY, Nakano T, Gendron J, He JX, Chen M, Vafeados D, Yang YL, Fujioka S, Yoshida S, Asami T et al. (2002) Nuclear-localized BZR1 mediates brassinosteroid-induced growth and feedback suppression of brassinosteroid biosynthesis. Dev Cell 2: 505–513

Yamamuro C, Ihara Y, Wu X, Noguchi T, Fujioka S, Takatsuto S, Ashikari M, Kitano H, Matsuoka M (2000) Loss of function of a rice brassinosteroid insensitive1 homolog prevents internode elongation and bending of the lamina joint. Plant Cell 12: 1591–1605

Yin YH, Wang ZY, Mora-Garcia S, Li JM, Yoshida S, Asami T, Chory J (2002) BES1 accumulates in the nucleus in response to brassinosteroids to regulate gene expression and promote stem elongation. Cell 109: 181–191

Yokota T (1997) The structure, biosynthesis and function of brassinosteroids. Trends Plant Sci 2: 137–143

Yokota T, Nomura T, Nakayama M (1997) Identification of brassinosteroids that appear to be derived from campesterol and cholesterol in tomato shoots. Plant Cell Physiol 38: 1291–1294

Yokota T, Sato T, Takeuchi Y, Nomura T, Uno K, Watanabe T, Takatsuto S (2001) Roots and shoots of tomato produce 6-deoxo-28-norcathasterone, 6-deoxo-28-nortysterol and 6-deoxo-28-norcastasterone, possible precursors of 28-norcastasterone. Phytochemistry 58: 233–238
