
technology for rapid, in vivo, non-destructive visualisation of plants
and plant cells. Plant Physiol. 123, 3–15
21 (1992) In Electron Tomography: Three-dimensional imaging with the
TEM (Frank, J., ed.), Plenum Press
22 Zimmermann, M.H. and Tomlinson, P.B. (1967) Anatomy of the palm
Raphis excelsa. 4. Vascular development in apex of vegetative aerial
axis and rhizome. J. Arnold Arbor. Harvard Univ. 48, 122–142
23 Zimmermann, M.H. and Tomlinson, P.B. (1974) Vascular patterns in

palm stems—variations of Raphis principle. J. Arnold Arbor. Harvard
Univ. 55, 402–424
24 Tomlinson, P.B. et al. (2001) Stem-vascular architecture in the rattan palm
Calamus (Arecaceae-Calamoideae-Galaminae). Am. J. Bot. 88, 797–809
1360-1385/02/$ - see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
PII: S1360-1385(02)00004-3


# Vitamin E biosynthesis: biochemistry meets cell biology

## Daniel Hofius and Uwe Sonnewald

Institut für Pflanzengenetik und Kulturpflanzenforschung (IPK), Corrensstrasse 3, D-06466 Gatersleben, Germany

Vitamin E is thought to be involved in many essential
processes in plants, but no functional proof has been
reported. To study vitamin E deficiency in plants, a
high-throughput biochemical screen for vitamin E
quantification in Arabidopsis mutants has been devel-
oped, which has led to the identification of VTE1-encod-
ing tocopherol cyclase. Interestingly, the corresponding
maize mutation, sxd1, causes plasmodesmata malfunc-
tion, suggesting a link between tocopherol cyclase and
plasmodesmata function.

Tocopherols are an important class of lipid-soluble
compounds with antioxidant activities that are syn-
thesized only by plants and other photosynthetic microor-
ganisms. All tocopherols are amphipathic molecules: the
hydrophobic prenyl tail associates with membrane lipids
and the polar chromanol head groups are exposed to the
membrane surface. Four naturally occurring derivatives
of tocopherols (α-, β-, γ- and δ-tocopherol) have been
described that differ only in number and position of methyl
substituents on the aromatic ring (Fig. 1). The composition
and the content of the different tocopherol components in
plant tissues varies considerably, ranging from the
extremely low levels found in potato tubers to the high
levels found in oil seeds. In addition, plant tissues might
contain tocotrienol derivatives that differ from tocopherols
only in the degree of saturation of their hydrophobic tails
[1,2]. Among the tocopherols, α-tocopherol is the predo-
minant form in photosynthetic tissues, and is mainly
localized in plastids. The particular enrichment in
chloroplast membranes is probably related to the ability
of tocopherols to quench or to scavenge reactive oxygen
species and lipid peroxyl radicals by physical or chemical
means. In this way, the photosynthetic apparatus can be
protected from oxygen toxicity and lipid peroxidation. In
non-photosynthetic tissues, γ-tocopherol frequently pre-
dominates and can be involved in the prevention of auto-
oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids [2].
The various tocopherol and tocotrienol derivatives –
commonly referred to as vitamin E – represent essential

micronutrients for humans. α-Tocopherol in particular,
has been reported to have beneficial effects on human
health. A decreased risk of cardiovascular disease and
certain cancers and retardation of several degenerative
disease processes have been achieved when vitamin E
supplements have been taken at therapeutic doses (100 to
1000 International Units, I.U.) [1,3]. However, these
vitamin E levels are greatly in excess of the recommended
daily allowance (~40 I.U.) and cannot be obtained from
the average plant-derived diet. Therefore, much effort is
currently aimed at identifying the genes involved in
tocopherol biosynthesis to improve vitamin E levels in
crop plants by metabolic engineering [4,5].

### Tocopherol biosynthetic pathway

Tocopherol biosynthesis proceeds via the condensation of
homogentisate, derived from the shikimate pathway,
and phytyl pyrophosphate (phytyl-PP), derived from
the non-mevalonate pathway, through the action of
the homogentisate prenyltransferase (HPT). This yields
2-methyl-6-phytylplastoquinone, the first true tocopherol
intermediate and common precursor of all tocopherols
(Fig. 1). Subsequent ring cyclization and methylation
reactions result in the formation of the four major
tocopherol derivatives. It is probable that the formation
of γ- and δ-tocopherol proceeds via a common cyclase.
Similarly, the final methylation reaction resulting in
α- and β-tocopherol, respectively, is expected to be
catalysed by the same methyltransferase (γ-TMT).
The enzymatic steps of tocopherol biosynthesis were
elucidated by biochemical means nearly 20 years ago, but
the membrane association of the enzymes in the inner
chloroplast envelope [6] has made purification and subse-
quent gene identification difficult. In recent years, genomics-
based approaches have been applied for Arabidopsis
thaliana and the cyanobacterium Synechocystis to identify
genes of the tocopherol pathway. For instance, the γ-TMT
gene was isolated from the putative 10-gene tocopherol
biosynthetic operon in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, using
bioinformatics and gene disruption experiments [7].
Overexpression of an Arabidopsis orthologue greatly

Corresponding author: Uwe Sonnewald (sonnewald@ipk-gatersleben.de).

http://plants.trends.com

Shikimate
pathway

Non-mevalonate
pathway

$\downarrow$

HO  
CH₂  
NH₂  
COOH  

Tyrosine

$\downarrow$

Hydroxyphenylpyruvate

$\downarrow$

HO  
HOOC  

Homogentisic acid

$\downarrow$

HPT

HO  
CH₃  
OH  

2-Methyl-6-phytylhydroquinone

$\downarrow$

MT

HO  
CH₃  
CH₃  
OH  

2,3-Dimethyl-5-phytylhydroquinone

$\downarrow$

Cyclase

HO  
CH₃  
CH₃  
O  

γ-Tocopherol

$\downarrow$  
γ-TMT

HO  
CH₃  
CH₃  
O  

α-Tocopherol

$\downarrow$

DMPP  
IPP  

GGPP  

PPO  
Phytol-PP  

Cyclase

HO  
CH₃  
CH₃  
O  

δ-Tocopherol

$\downarrow$  
γ-TMT

HO  
CH₃  
CH₃  
O  

β-Tocopherol

TRENDS in Plant Science

Fig. 1. Vitamin E biosynthetic pathway. The blue box highlights the four naturally occurring tocopherol derivatives in plants. Abbreviations: DMPP, dimethylallyl pyrophosphate; GGPP, geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate; phytol-PP, phytol pyrophosphate; HPT, homogentisate phytoltransferase; IPP, isopentenyl pyrophosphate; MT, 2-methyl-6-phytylhydroquinone methyltransferase; γ-TMT, γ-tocopherol methyltransferase.

increased the α-to γ-tocopherol ratio in seeds of transgenic Arabidopsis plants, increasing vitamin E activity by nearly ninefold compared with wild-type controls [7]. Using similar bioinformatics techniques, the gene encoding homogentisate prenyltransferase (HPT) was identified from Synechocystis and Arabidopsis. Seed-specific expression of the Arabidopsis gene resulted in a twofold increase of overall tocopherol levels in seeds of transgenic Arabidopsis plants [8].

http://plants.trends.com

Isolation of a vitamin E-deficient *Arabidopsis* mutant defective in the tocopherol cyclase

As an alternative strategy to identify genes of the tocopherol biosynthetic pathway, a high-throughput biochemical screening approach has recently been applied by Svetlana Porfirova *et al.* to identify EMS *Arabidopsis* mutants deficient in tocopherol synthesis [9]. This approach resulted in the isolation of the *vte1* (vitamin E-deficient) mutant, which lacks all four tocopherols and tocopherol cyclase activity. Combining genetic mapping with a genomics-based approach, the authors were able to isolate a gene encoding the tocopherol cyclase that contained a splicing site mutation, resulting in reduced mRNA levels in the mutant. Heterologous expression in *E. coli* provided conclusive evidence that the *Arabidopsis VTE1* codes for a functional tocopherol cyclase protein that is essential for the synthesis of both tocopherols and tocotrienols. With respect to the possible function of tocopherols in plants, the absence of tocopherol did not have a large impact on the photosynthesis, growth and development of the mutant plants under optimal growth conditions. Exposure to different stress conditions (e.g. heat, cold, paraquat and high-light treatments) resulted only in a minor decrease in chlorophyll content and quantum yield under photo-oxidative stress compared with wild-type plants, supporting the view that tocopherol has a role in protecting the photosynthetic apparatus from photo-oxidative damage.

and *SXD1* represent single-copy orthologues, both encoding an enzyme with tocopherol cyclase activity [9]. This finding raises the question of how an enzymatic defect in tocopherol synthesis might exert a cell-specific influence on plasmodesmata structure causing major metabolic changes in the maize *sxd1* mutant. Because the *Arabidopsis vte1* mutant did not show any visible phenotypic alterations under optimal growth conditions, comparative experiments on both mutants are required.

### Conclusions

Both *VTE1* and *SXD1* encode tocopherol cyclase, an essential enzyme of the tocopherol biosynthetic pathway. This reveals an unexplained link between tocopherol synthesis and/or accumulation and the development of functional plasmodesmata. However, the mode of vitamin E action on plasmodesmata function is completely unknown. This observation provides direct evidence that the interpretation of knock-out mutants might be difficult in some cases because an adaptation to a life-long deficiency rather than a direct response is studied.

Therefore, some of the cross-talk phenomena, often discussed in the literature, might be because of adaptive responses and might not be linked directly to the gene under study. This disadvantage can be overcome by the use of conditional mutants (i.e. inducible RNAi strategies).

### References

1. Grusak, M.A. and DellaPenna, D. (1999) Improving the nutrient composition of plants to enhance human nutrition and health. *Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol.* 50, 133–161
2. Munné-Bosch, S. and Alegre, L. (2002) The function of tocopherols and tocotrienols in plants. *Crit. Rev. Plant Sci.* 21, 31–57
3. Bramley, P. (2000) Review vitamin E. *J. Sci. Food Agric.* 80, 913–938
4. DellaPenna, D. (1999) Nutritional genomics: manipulating plant micronutrients to improve human health. *Science* 285, 375–379
5. Rochford, T.R. *et al.* (2002) Enhancement of vitamin E levels in corn. *J. Am. Coll. Nutr.* 21, 191S–198S
6. Soll, J. *et al.* (1985) Localization and synthesis of prenylquinones in isolated outer and inner envelope membranes from spinach chloroplasts. *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* 238, 290–299
7. Shinatani, D. and DellaPenna, D. (1998) Elevating the vitamin E content of plants through metabolic engineering. *Science* 282, 2098–2100
8. Savidge, B. *et al.* (2002) Isolation and characterization of homogentisate phytyltransferase genes from *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803 and *Arabidopsis*. *Plant Physiol.* 129, 321–332
9. Porfirova, S. *et al.* (2002) Isolation of an *Arabidopsis* mutant lacking vitamin E and identification of a cyclase essential for all tocopherol biosynthesis. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 99, 1245–1250
10. Provencher, L.M. *et al.* (2001) *Sucrose export defective1* encodes a novel protein implicated in chloroplast-to-nucleus signaling. *Plant Cell* 13, 1127–1141
11. Russin, W.A. *et al.* (1996) Modification of a specific class of plasmodesmata and loss of sucrose export ability in a *sucrose export defective1* maize mutant. *Plant Cell* 8, 645–658
12. Botha, C.E.J. *et al.* (2000) Phloem loading in the sucrose-export-defective (*SXD-1*) mutant maize is limited by callose deposition at plasmodesmata in bundle sheath-vascular parenchyma interface. *Protoplasma* 214, 65–72
13. Haywood, V. *et al.* (2002) Plasmodesmata: pathways for protein and ribonucleoprotein signaling. *Plant Cell* 14, S303–S325

1360-1385/02/$ - see front matter © 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
PII: S1360-1385(02)00002-X

---

**http://plants.trends.com**
