
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ELSEVIER

Biology of the Cell 94 (2002) 433–443

Review

Connexins, gap junctional intercellular communication and kinases

Véronique Cruciani, Svein-Ole Mikalsen*

Department of Environmental and Occupational Cancer, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, N-0310 Oslo, Norway

Received 7 March 2002; accepted 13 September 2002

---

### Abstract

A number of kinases and signal transduction pathways are known to affect gap junctional intercellular communication and/or phosphorylation of connexins. Most of the information is available for protein kinase A, protein kinase C, mitogen-activated protein kinase, and the tyrosine kinase Src. Much less is known for protein kinase G, Ca²⁺-calmodulin dependent protein kinase, and casein kinase. However, the present lack of knowledge is not necessarily synonymous with lack of importance in the regulation of intercellular communication and phosphorylation of connexins. Kinases and the phosphorylation of connexins may be involved in the regulation of gap junctional intercellular communication at all levels ranging from the expression of connexin genes to the degradation of the gap junction channels. The exact role of the phosphorylation depends both on the kinase and the connexin involved, as well as the cellular context.

© 2002 Éditions scientifiques et médicales Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Connexins; Gap junctions; Intercellular communication; Kinases; Phosphorylation

---

### 1. Introduction

The gap junction structure was first observed by electron microscopy studies around 45 years ago (Robertson, 1957; Karrer, 1960). In the same period, electrical conductance between adjacent cells was observed (Furshpan and Potter, 1959; Dewey and Barr, 1962). Some years later, it became clear that not only small ions, but also molecules of a considerable size could diffuse between neighboring cells (Kanno and Loewenstein, 1964; Stoker, 1967; Simpson et al., 1977). Several hormones and second messengers were shown to affect the size of gap junction plaques or to modulate the permeability between cells (Hax et al., 1974; Amsterdam et al., 1981; Flagg-Newton et al., 1981; Maldonado et al., 1988). It was also shown that pharmacological agents, especially the protein kinase C (PKC) activator 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), could modulate the intercellular communication (Murray and Fitzgerald, 1979; Yotti et al., 1979). The potential of kinases to modulate gap junctional intercellular communication (GJIC) was further underlined by the finding that introduction of the catalytic subunit of protein kinase A (PKA) into communication-deficient cells corrected the defect (Wiener and Loewenstein, 1983). Furthermore, the gap junction proteins could be direct targets of kinases as shown by the cAMP-induced stimulation of phosphorylation of the main 27 kDa gap junction protein (today known as Cx32) from rat hepatocytes (Sáez et al., 1986). Also a temperature-sensitive and oncogenic tyrosine kinase, v-Src, was shown to strongly influence GJIC (Atkinson et al., 1981).

The first connexin to be cloned was Cx32 (Kumar and Gilula, 1986), soon followed by Cx43 (Beyer et al., 1987). As of today, around 20 connexins have been cloned from humans and rodents. Most of them contain potential phosphorylation sites, usually in their cytoplasmic C-terminal tail. Many connexins have a basal level of phosphorylation, but their phosphorylation can also be induced or changed by the activation of the proper signal transduction pathways. Such activation is often accompanied by changes in the level of GJIC. Thus, kinases are directly (by phosphorylation of connexins) or indirectly involved in the regulation of GJIC. The action of kinases is usually balanced by protein phosphatases (see review by Hervé and Sarrouilhe).

The permeability and electrical conductance between cells are determined by the pore size of the channels, their open-state probability, and the number of channels. The channels flicker between closed and open states, and even between two or more levels of pore size. The number of channels may be affected by synthesis or degradation of

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: s.o.mikalsen@labmed.uio.no (S.O. Mikalsen)

© 2002 Éditions scientifiques et médicales Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.
PII: S0248-4900(02)00014-X

connexins, by the kinetics of assembly into connexons, the transport of connexons to the cell membrane, and the subsequent assembly of connexons into gap junction plaques. The pore size may increase or decrease by changing the conformation of the protein in a phosphorylation-dependent manner (Takens-Kwak and Jongsma, 1992; Moreno et al., 1994). The conformation may also change the kinetics of opening and closing cycles, and thereby affect the open-state probability. In this review, we will mention examples that support the involvement of kinases and connexin phosphorylation in many of these processes.

Recommended early reviews in the field are from Stagg and Fletcher (1990) and Sáez et al. (1993a). In the present review, “in vivo” will refer to tissues or intact cells, including cell cultures, while “in vitro” will refer to enzymatic assays, reconstituted pathways, etc.

## 2. The kinases and signal transduction pathways

### 2.1. Protein kinase A and cyclic AMP

The cAMP/PKA system was early known to affect GJIC (Stagg and Fletcher, 1990; Sáez et al., 1993a). Three types of responses are found, depending on the system studied: (i) a slow increase in GJIC; (ii) a rapid decrease in GJIC; or (iii) a rapid increase in GJIC. The first of these responses is mainly dependent on increased gene expression and/or protein synthesis. Little is known about the second type of response, but it will be discussed at the end of this section. We will first focus on the third type of response.

A very interesting early work used CHO cells lacking either PKAI or PKAII (Wiener and Loewenstein, 1983). The categorization of PKA into isoforms I and II is based on two main types of regulatory subunits, and the catalytic subunits can freely exchange between them. The PKAI-lacking cells showed low GJIC, while the PKAII-lacking cells had a behavior more similar to wild-type cells. When the catalytic subunit of PKA was introduced into PKAI-lacking cells, GJIC was normalized. This not only clearly suggests the importance of the catalytic subunit, but may also suggest differences in the functions of the regulatory subunits of PKA. However, regulatory subunits of type II injected into well-coupled pig granulosa cells had no effect on GJIC, in contrast to a PKA inhibitory peptide (Godwin et al., 1993).

One possible explanation of the rapid responses to cAMP is PKA-mediated phosphorylation of connexins. Rat hepatocytes increased their conductance within minutes in response to cAMP analogs (Sáez et al., 1986). PKA phosphorylated Cx32 (Sáez et al., 1986), but to a considerably lower extent than PKC (see Section 2.4). The major phosphorylation occurred at S233 in an in vitro system (Sáez et al., 1990). The same residue is phosphorylated by PKC. Also Cx40 became phosphorylated in response to cAMP (Traub et al., 1994; van Rijen et al., 2000), and the conductance and dye transfer between Cx40-transfected SKHep1 cells increased (van Rijen et al., 2000).

There is some controversy on whether PKA phosphorylates Cx43 in vitro (Dasgupta et al., 2001) or not (Sáez et al., 1993b; TenBroek et al., 2001). Some cell types do not change the phosphorylation status of Cx43 in response to cAMP elevating agents (Berthoud et al., 1992; Bårud et al., 1994; Paulson et al., 2000; TenBroek et al., 2001), while others do (Granot and Dekel, 1994; Atkinson et al., 1995). In a recent paper, it was concluded that PKA did not phosphorylate Cx43 directly, but the enhanced assembly of Cx43-containing gap junctions was dependent on the basal phosphorylation of S364 by an unknown kinase (TenBroek et al., 2001; see also Section 2.9).

cAMP/PKA may affect GJIC by changing the transport kinetics through the Golgi system. It was observed that a 24-h exposure to 8-Br-cAMP decreased the amount of intracellular Cx43 (Atkinson et al., 1995), probably located in the Golgi, suggesting a recruitment of Cx43 from the Golgi to the cell membrane. Also considerably shorter exposures may recruit Cx43 from the Golgi, as pre-treatment with monensin (which blocks protein transport at the level of the transGolgi network) or brefeldin A (which blocks protein transport by collapsing the Golgi into the endoplasmic reticulum) inhibited the rapid increase in GJIC by 8-Br-cAMP (Burghardt et al., 1995; Paulson et al., 2000). Thus, cAMP-induced increase in GJIC in Cx43-containing cells may occur by cell-specific mechanisms with increased open-state probability, increased single channel conductance, enhanced assembly of Cx43 connexons into functional channels, or recruitment of Cx43 from the Golgi-located subpopulation as the major alternatives. We also note that other agents may affect GJIC by the latter mechanism as a high concentration of WY-14,643, a peroxisome proliferator, induced a rapid increase of GJIC in V79 hamster fibroblasts, which was fully counteracted by brefeldin A (Cruciani and Mikalsen, 2002).

PKA appeared to phosphorylate chick Cx56 in vitro at some of the same sites as PKC, but 8-Br-cAMP-stimulated lens cells did not show any changes in phosphopeptide pattern compared with controls (Berthoud et al., 1997). Functional consequences are therefore uncertain.

As mentioned in the beginning of this section, cAMP/PKA also causes a decrease of GJIC in some systems. Sometimes, this can be attributed to the connexin expressed. Cx45 forms gap junction channels with low conductance, which are poorly permeable to the commonly used fluorescent dyes like Lucifer Yellow (Steinberg et al., 1994). cAMP decreased the electrical coupling between Cx45-transfected HeLa cells, most likely due to decreased open-state probability, and increased the phosphorylation of the protein (van Veen et al., 2000). Dopamine and cAMP blocked dye transfer between horizontal cells in fish retina (Teranishi et al., 1983). Fish retina expresses a number of connexins (Cx27.5, 34.7, 35, 43, 44.1, 55.5) (O’Brien et al., 1998; Wagner et al., 1998; Dermietzel et al., 2000), but it is uncertain whether they are regulated in the same manner as their
mammalian counterparts. In some cases, connexins involved in cAMP-induced upregulation of GJIC (see above) may also be inhibited by cAMP. For example, cAMP (and cGMP) bound directly to Cx26 and Cx32 before the incorporation into liposomes, and this completely inhibited the opening of the half channels (Bevans and Harris, 1999). Although this is a highly interesting observation, the physiological relevance is not clear. However, in intact cells also, the dichotomy of response can be found. Increased cAMP levels decreased gap junctional permeability, although only to a limited extent, in uterine (Cole and Garfield, 1986), vascular (Moore et al., 1991) and corpus cavernosum (Moreno et al., 1993) smooth muscle cells expressing Cx43. It is not known as to why different cell systems expressing the same connexin respond differently to cAMP. The most trivial possibility is that this rapid, but small, response (Moore et al., 1991; Moreno et al., 1993) has been overlooked in studies where long-term effects of cAMP were investigated. In support of this possibility, the short-term decrease in GJIC was followed by a long-term increased synthesis of Cx43 in corpus cavernosum smooth muscle cells (Moreno et al., 1993). Among the more appealing explanations are the involvement of different subtypes of PKA, especially of the catalytic subunit (and thereby different substrate specificities), and different anchoring proteins (causing different localizations of the enzyme). As will be made clear throughout the present review, the puzzle of “opposite responses” is a recurrent phenomenon in the field of GJIC.

### 2.2. Protein kinase G and cyclic GMP

cGMP decreased conductance between rat cardiomyocytes, probably due to the lowering of single channel conductance (Burt and Spray, 1988; Takens-Kwak and Jongsma, 1992), but there was no effect in Cx43-expressing rat A7r5 cells (Moore et al., 1991). When non-communicating SKHep1 cells were transfected with rat or human Cx43, only the rat Cx43-transfected cells responded to 8-Br-cGMP (Kwak et al., 1995b). 8-Br-cGMP increased the incorporation of phosphate into rat Cx43, but not human Cx43. This could be due to the presence of Ser at position 257 in rat Cx43, while in human Cx43, there is Ala at the corresponding position (Kwak et al., 1995b). cGMP did not affect the conductance between Cx45-transfected HeLa cells (van Veen et al., 2000).

Nitric oxide (NO) is an important signal molecule, whose synthesis is induced by many cytokines and by endotoxins, like bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS). NO activates guanylate cyclase, thereby increasing the cGMP level. LPS inhibited GJIC in rat astrocytes, and GJIC remained low after the removal of LPS (Bolaños and Medina, 1996). NO may be involved in the suppression of Cx43 expression in rat uterus, balancing the stretch-induced expression of Cx43 in the pregnant uterus (Sladek et al., 1999).

---

### 2.3. Mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases and growth factors

Growth factors like EGF, PDGF, FGF-2 (previously called bFGF), and others, have for some time been known to affect GJIC in a number of cell types (Maldonado et al., 1988; Pepper and Meda, 1992). The mentioned growth factors activate the ERK pathway (one of several MAP kinase pathways; two other well-characterized MAP kinase pathways are the p38 and the JNK pathways, and there are at least two MAP kinases in each of the pathways). In rat liver epithelial cells, EGF caused a transient, but strong, decrease in GJIC that was independent of PKC (Kanemitsu and Lau, 1993; Rivedal and Opsahl, 2001). EGF profoundly affected the phosphorylation status of Cx43 in these cell systems. MAP kinase (this term is used when the exact identity is not given in the paper) was found to phosphorylate purified Cx43, and phosphopeptide mapping showed coincidence with a subset of phosphopeptides from Cx43 phosphorylated in vivo (Kanemitsu and Lau, 1993). By a combination of site-directed mutagenesis, peptide-based kinase assays, tryptic phosphopeptide mapping, and peptide sequencing, the major MAP kinase phosphorylation sites were determined as S255, S279 and S282 (Warn-Cramer et al., 1996). Phosphorylation of these sites was not necessary for the assembly of Cx43 into gap junction channels or the establishment of GJIC itself (Warn-Cramer et al., 1998). In contrast to the response to EGF described above, a human kidney cell line increased GJIC after exposure to EGF (Rivedal et al., 1996). This also appeared dependent on the ERK pathway, but protein synthesis was needed (Rivedal et al., 1996; Vikhamar et al., 1998). The kinetics of Cx43 phosphorylation were considerably more rapid than the changes in GJIC (Vikhamar et al., 1998). It is presently unknown as to why two cell types stimulated with the same growth factor, utilizing the same signal transduction pathway, and having the same connexin protein, have opposite responses with regard to GJIC. However, we note that the stimulation of ERK in some cases causes an import of ERK into the nucleus, where it presumably affects transcription factors, while in other cases, it remains in the cytoplasm (reviewed in Volmat and Pouysségur, 2001). The localization of the MAP kinases has not been studied in any of these papers.

PDGF induced a strong, but transient, decrease of GJIC in fibroblasts (Maldonado et al., 1988; Pelletier and Boynton, 1994) and in T51B rat liver epithelial cells transfected with a PDGF receptor (Hossain et al., 1998), but there are different conclusions on the necessity of PDGF receptor tyrosine kinase activity for the response (Pelletier and Boynton, 1994; Hossain et al., 1998). This could suggest that at least two PDGF modulated pathways might affect GJIC. In T51B cells, PDGF-induced phosphorylation of Cx43 appeared to give a signal for degradation, followed by resynthesis (Hossain et al., 1998). Both ERK1/2 and PKC were necessary, but not sufficient, to obtain a response in T51B cells, and using PDGF receptor mutants, it was concluded that several PDGFreceptor-initiated pathways were involved (Hossain et al., 1999).

FGF-2 increased GJIC in a number of cell systems like microvascular endothelial cells (Pepper and Meda, 1992), cardiac fibroblasts (Doble and Kardami, 1995), and chick lens cells (Le and Musil, 2001). In cultured glia cells, both increases (Nadarajah et al., 1998) and decreases (Reuss et al., 1998) in GJIC have been found. The increase was generally relatively slow (several hours), and could be due to increased expression of Cx43, without any considerable change in phosphorylation status. In striking contrast to cardiac fibroblasts, cardiomyocytes had a rapid decrease in GJIC and an increase in Cx43 phosphorylation after exposure to FGF-2 (Doble et al., 1996). In spite of the activation of the ERK1/2 pathway by FGF-2 in cardiomyocytes, the response in GJIC was in this case mediated through PKC (Doble et al., 2000; see Section 2.4). In chick lens cells, ERK mediated the increase in GJIC (Le and Musil, 2001). Again, the differences between systems are puzzling. It should also be mentioned that FGF-2 was colocalized with Cx43-containing gap junctions in the brain (Yamamoto et al., 1991) and the heart (Kardami et al., 1991). The functional importance of this colocalization is unclear, especially since the signaling is believed to be initiated from the extracellular side of the membrane.

MAP kinases may become activated by agents employing receptors outside the growth factor systems. TPA activates MAP kinases (see Section 2.4). Also several ligands using G-protein coupled receptors activate MAP kinases (Belcheva and Coscia, 2002). While Postma et al. (1998) concluded that channel closure by G-protein coupled receptor ligands was independent of MAP kinase, ERK1/2 mediated the inhibition of GJIC in endothelial cells by cannabinoids (Brandes et al., 2002).

### 2.4. Protein kinase C

Many PKC-mediated effects on GJIC and connexin phosphorylation have been elucidated by the use of TPA. In many, but not all systems, TPA causes a strong, but transient, decrease in GJIC, usually measured by dye transfer. However, dye permeability and conductance are differentially affected by TPA in rat cardiomyocytes (Kwak et al., 1995c). This can be explained by a smaller pore size restricting dye transfer, while the open-state probability and/or number of channels are increased. The complexity and differences in responses to TPA is further shown by the fact that TPA enhanced the degradation of Cx43 in some cell systems (Oh et al., 1991; Matesic et al., 1994), but not in others (Yamasaki et al., 1983; Cruciani et al., 1999). The endogenous PKC activator, diacylglycerol, usually gives the same responses as TPA (Enomoto and Yamasaki, 1985; Yada et al., 1985), although some controversy exists on this point (Bastide et al., 1994).

Cx32 was the first connexin found as a PKC substrate in vitro (Takeda et al., 1987) and in hepatocyte cultures (Takeda et al., 1989). The PKA and PKC phosphorylation sites are partially different (Takeda et al., 1989), but the major phosphorylation site in both cases seems to be S233 (Sáez et al., 1990). TPA does not decrease GJIC in rat hepatocytes (Sáez et al., 1990). The PKC-mediated phosphorylation of Cx32 may protect against the degradation of the protein (Elvira et al., 1993). Interestingly, both Cx26-, 32-, 40-, and 43-transfected HeLa cells decreased their GJIC in response to TPA (Mazzoleni et al., 1996). TPA also strongly decreased GJIC in Cx26-transfected human hepatoma SKHep1 cells (Kwak et al., 1995a). These results are intriguing for two reasons. First, they show that connexins can deviate in response depending on their cellular environment. Second, TPA is able to suppress GJIC in cell systems containing Cx26, a connexin that presumably is devoid of phosphorylation sites. Thus, TPA may suppress GJIC by mechanisms not dependent on a direct phosphorylation of connexins. One explanation could be that PKC phosphorylates an accessory protein that subsequently can bind to Cx26. The concept of accessory proteins may also extend to other connexins, including Cx43 (see review by Thomas et al.).

By far, Cx43 is the most studied connexin in relation to TPA and PKC. Still we do not know why the phosphorylation changes of Cx43 vary so much between systems, in spite of a similar response with regard to GJIC (see e.g. Cruciani et al., 1997, 1999). In addition to the cell membrane, there is often a considerable subpopulation of Cx43 in the Golgi area (Cruciani and Mikalsen, 1999). This subpopulation mainly consists of the NP form of Cx43. In cell types where TPA caused profound changes in phosphorylation status of Cx43, the NP form became phosphorylated, but was still present in the Golgi (Cruciani and Mikalsen, 1999). However, the phosphorylation caused a slower migration during electrophoresis, thus obscuring the (potential) phosphorylation changes occurring in the plasma membrane-located P1 and P2 forms (Cruciani and Mikalsen, 1999). Ideally, the differently located subpopulations of Cx43 (and any other connexin) should be separated before analyzing the posttranslational modifications.

Where in Cx43 are the sites phosphorylated by PKC? In a peptide-based PKC assay (isoform not given, but may consist of α, β, and γ), only the peptide 360–375 became phosphorylated at the positions corresponding to S368 and S372 (Sáez et al., 1993b). The PKC-mediated phosphorylation of S368 was recently supported by observations in another system (Lampe et al., 2000). This included the transfection of Cx43 knockout cells with mutated (S368A) Cx43. However, phosphopeptide analyses showed that several other PKC-mediated phosphorylation sites exist in vivo (Sáez et al., 1997; Lampe et al., 2000). Some of these phosphorylations may be due to an activation of the MAP kinase/ERK pathway or cdc2 kinase. It was recently shown that ERK1/2 mediated a part of the response to TPA both with regard to Cx43 phosphorylation and GJIC in rat liver epithelial cells (Rivedal and Opsahl, 2001; Ruch et al., 2001). Also in V79 hamster fibroblasts, a part of the TPA effect on Cx43 phosphorylation appeared mediated through ERK1/2 (V. Cru-
ciani, S.-O. Mikalsen, unpublished). However, Cx43 phosphopeptides obtained from neonatal cardiomyocytes under basal growth conditions did not coincide well with phosphopeptides from MAP kinase or cdc2 kinase in vitro phosphorylations of the Cx43 cytoplasmic C-terminal tail (Sáez et al., 1997).

PKC is activated by a number of physiological and pathological conditions. For example, a short heart ischemia may activate PKC (Ytrehus et al., 1994). Gap junctions become disordered in the failing heart (reviewed in Severs et al., 2001), uncoupling occurs, and Cx43 changes its phosphorylation status (Beardslee et al., 2000). PKCe appears as the major Cx43-interacting isoenzyme in the failing heart, and it may directly phosphorylate Cx43. On the other hand, PKCa may activate another kinase that phosphorylates Cx43 (Bowling et al., 2001). PKCe also appears as the major isoform involved in FGF-2 induced decrease of GJIC in cardiomyocytes (Doble et al., 2000). Curiously, PKCe was found involved in TPA-induced decrease of GJIC in early passage hamster fibroblasts and in R6 rat fibroblasts, but it had no visible effect on the phosphorylation status of Cx43 in these cells (Cruciani et al., 2001, Husøy et al., 2001). PKCe was not involved in responses to TPA in V79 fibroblasts. In the latter cells, PKCδ appeared as the major mediator of suppressed GJIC by TPA, but it had minimal effects on the phosphorylation of Cx43 (Cruciani et al., 2001). Thus, different PKC isoenzymes may be of different importance in different systems. Interestingly, differences in the total PKC enzyme activity did not determine the sensitivity of fibroblasts to TPA (Cruciani et al., 2001; Husøy et al., 2001).

PKC (a mixture of α, β, and γ isoforms) is able to phosphorylate chick lens Cx45.6 and Cx56 in vitro (Jiang and Goodenough, 1998). TPA stimulates the phosphorylation of Cx56 in both the intracellular loop (S118) and in the C-terminal tail (S493) (Berthoud et al., 1997). There are also probably other, presently unidentified, phosphorylation sites in Cx56. The phosphorylation of S118 may act as a signal for increased degradation of the protein (Berthoud et al., 1997). Cx56 is presently the only connexin where there is good evidence for phosphorylation of the intracellular loop. PKCγ is a candidate for mediating these effects (Berthoud et al., 2000). Additionally, overexpressed PKCγ inhibited GJIC in rat lens epithelial cells (Saleh and Takemoto, 2000), and it phosphorylated rat lens Cx46 (Saleh et al., 2001). Thus, PKCγ appears to be involved in the regulation of GJIC and connexin phosphorylation in the lens. PKCγ is a neurospecific isoform of PKC, and these results should therefore not be directly extended to other tissues.

TPA/PKC and cAMP/PKA often influence GJIC in opposite directions. It is therefore not surprising that TPA/PKC causes increased GJIC in some systems. In Cx45-transfected HeLa cells, TPA increased electrical conductance by changing the open-state probability, but did not change the phosphorylation status as judged by western blotting (van Veen et al., 2000). In Cx43-expressing corpus cavernosum smooth muscle cells, TPA induced an increase in conductance within

15 min, concurrent with a shift to lower single channel unitary conductances (Moreno et al., 1993). Thus, this observation is in line with the results of Kwak et al. (1995c) described above. There are relatively few papers that have compared dye transfer and electrical conductance, or analyzed the parameters determining GJIC or macroscopic conductance (open-state probability, number of channels, single channel conductance). Thus, we do not know whether the paradoxical situation with increased conductance concurrent with decreased pore size or decreased dye transfer is restricted to a few cell types and one kinase-activating agent. For retinoic acid, there was a correlation between decreased dye transfer and decreased conductance in primary human keratinocytes (Salomon et al., 1992).

### 2.5. Ca²⁺-calmodulin dependent protein kinase

There is much literature on Ca²⁺ and GJIC (which will not be touched upon here), but Ca²⁺-calmodulin dependent protein kinase (Ca²⁺-CDPK) has been little studied. Calmodulin itself can bind to Cx32 at two sites, one in the N-terminal tail and one close to the C-terminal tail (Török et al., 1997). The N-terminal sequences of the connexins are much conserved, but it is not known whether calmodulin directly interacts with other connexins. It was suggested that calmodulin may act as an integral regulatory subunit of Cx32 connexons (Peracchia et al., 2000). Calmodulin may enhance the decrease in conductance by an increased intracellular Ca²⁺ level in cardiomyocytes (Toyama et al., 1994), but it is not known whether any kinase is involved in the enhancement.

Ca²⁺-CDPK phosphorylates Cx32, but not at the same site as PKC or PKA (Sáez et al., 1990). It is uncertain whether this phosphorylation has any functional consequences for Cx32. In contrast, Ca²⁺-CDPK may be involved in K⁺-induced increase of GJIC in astrocytes (De Pina-Benabou et al., 2001), but without any visible change in phosphorylation status of Cx43. The increase is probably secondary to the influx of Ca²⁺. In the Mauthner neurons of goldfish, Ca²⁺ may stimulate a Ca²⁺-CDPK-dependent increase in GJIC (Pereda et al., 1998). Traditionally, Ca²⁺ is said to decrease GJIC, but obviously the consequences may depend on the cellular context.

### 2.6. Casein kinase

Chick lens Cx45.6 was found to be phosphorylated on S363 in vivo (Yin et al., 2000). This site was phosphorylated by casein kinase II in a peptide-based kinase assay, and phosphopeptide mapping suggested that this is one of several phosphorylations occurring in vivo (Yin et al., 2000). The Cx45.6 mutant S263A was partly protected against degradation by a caspase-3-like protease (Yin et al., 2000, 2001). Interestingly, human Cx50 (the ortholog of chick Cx45.6) has Ser at the corresponding position, while mouse Cx50 has

Ala. Thus, it is unclear whether the human and mouse Cx50 are regulated in the same manner. This is further underlined by sheep Cx49, which contains Pro at this position. Moreover, casein kinase I, but not casein kinase II, phosphorylated sheep Cx49 (Cheng and Louis, 1999), and it appeared that this phosphorylation contributed to lowering of GJIC in the lens cells (Cheng and Louis, 2001). At first sight, this may look self-contradictory, as Cx50 knockout mice develop cataract (White et al., 1998). However, it may be that a certain level of GJIC, not too high, not too low, is needed for differentiation and proper homeostasis both in the lens and in other tissues.

There is no clear picture of the cellular functions of casein kinase I (which is a family of isoforms) and II (reviewed in Gross and Anderson, 1998; Faust and Montenarh, 2000). Both are present in most tissues, in many cellular compartments, are constitutively active, and have a number of substrates. Both kinases normally prefer substrates with numerous negative charges N-terminal to the target site. Casein kinase I may in certain contexts be a phosphate-directed kinase (Gross and Anderson, 1998), and it is involved in Wnt signaling in Xenopus embryos (Peters et al., 1999). How or whether this relates to the potential role of Wnt in the regulation of GJIC and Cx43 expression (Olson et al., 1991; Van der Heyden et al., 1998; Ai et al., 2000), is not known.

### 2.7. Cdc-2 kinase and cell cycle

We will here concentrate on the phosphorylation changes occurring in Cx43 during the cell cycle. Whether such changes occur in other connexins is presently unknown. The large field of connexin-mediated growth regulation is considered to be outside the scope of the present paper (see review by Mesnil).

GJIC is usually strongly decreased during mitosis (Goodall and Maro, 1986; Stein et al., 1992; Xie et al., 1997; Wilson et al., 2000; but see also O’Lague et al., 1970), although there is not always a correlation between dye transfer and electrical conductance (Goodall and Maro, 1986; Kwak et al., 1995c). Regardless of whether the cells have been collected by mitotic shake-off or by chemically induced accumulation of mitotic cells, the phosphorylation status of Cx43 is much changed during mitosis, and the major part of the Cx43 population is in a slow migrating form found slightly above the P2 position (Xie et al., 1997; Kanemitsu et al., 1998; Lampe et al., 1998). Additionally, Cx43 seems redistributed to an intracellular location (Xie et al., 1997; Lampe et al., 1998), which may explain the decrease in GJIC. It is not known whether the mitotic version of Cx43 is formed at the level of the cell membrane with subsequent internalization, or the protein is internalized before the phosphorylations occur. However, the continued presence of an antigenically masked form of Cx43 in the cell membrane should not be excluded. The formation of the mitosis-specific form of Cx43 is dependent on cdc2 kinase activity (Kanemitsu et al., 1998; Lampe et al., 1998). While one group found similar Cx43

phosphotryptic peptides from in vitro assays with cdc2 and MAP kinase (Sáez et al., 1997), others identified the major candidate phosphorylation site for cdc2 kinase as S255 (Kanemitsu et al., 1998; Lampe et al., 1998), potentially with S262 as a minor target (Kanemitsu et al., 1998). There are also other phosphorylations present in the mitotic form of Cx43 (Kanemitsu et al., 1998; Lampe et al., 1998), which were suggested to be caused by unidentified cdc2-activated mitotic kinases (Lampe et al., 1998). However, as the mitotic form probably is created from NP, P1 and P2 forms present in interphase cells, it is likely that some of the phosphorylation sites in the mitotic form will correspond to the phosphorylation sites in P1 and P2 forms.

Little work has been done on other parts of the cell cycle. It was reported that quiescent (G₀) cells stimulated by serum to enter the cell cycle changed Cx43 phosphorylation status and lowered GJIC in a reversible and PKC-dependent manner (Koo et al., 1997). However, it is not clear whether these changes are directly associated with the entry into the cell cycle.

#### 2.8. Src and other tyrosine kinases

Three tyrosine kinases have been found to induce tyrosine phosphorylation of connexins. Little information is available for v-Fps, but it seems to affect GJIC and Cx43 in a manner similar to v-Src (Kurata and Lau, 1994). The third tyrosine kinase is the EGF receptor, which phosphorylated Cx32 in vitro, but only at a low stoichiometry (Diez et al., 1998). Whether this can be extended to the in vivo situation is presently unclear. In the remaining part, we will concentrate on Src.

A temperature-sensitive variant of the viral and oncogenic version of the cellular proto-oncogene, Src, was earlier shown to have a rapid and strong effect on GJIC (Atkinson et al., 1981). Also overexpressed c-Src can affect GJIC (Azarnia et al., 1988). Several groups showed that activated versions of Src caused tyrosine phosphorylation of Cx43 (Crow et al., 1990; Filson et al., 1990; Swenson et al., 1990). There is some conflict regarding the importance of the tyrosine phosphorylation of Cx43, and the site phosphorylated. One group found the mutation Y265F to abolish v-Src-induced decrease in GJIC in a Xenopus oocyte system (Swenson et al., 1990), while another group found minimal effects both for Y265F and Y247F (Zhou et al., 1999; see also below). In contrast, site-directed mutation analysis of Cx43 in mammalian cell systems suggested that Y265 is a major Src phosphorylation target, and that this residue is involved in the Src-mediated closure of Cx43 gap junction channels (Giepmans et al., 2001; Lin et al., 2001). The results from Lin et al. (2001) suggested that Y247 is also phosphorylated by v-Src, this phosphorylation being as important as Y265 phosphorylation. In contrast to these controversies, there is general agreement that Src interacts with Cx43 through its SH3 domain, probably using the second polyproline area (residues 274–284) as target sequence (Kanemitsu et al., 1997;

Zhou et al., 1999; Giepmans et al., 2001). The Cx43–Src association may be further stabilized by the Src SH2 domain binding to the phosphorylated Y265 (Kanemitsu et al., 1997).

Investigations in *Xenopus* oocytes suggested that some of the effects of v-Src-induced decrease in conductance could be mediated through MAP kinases (Zhou et al., 1999), as the mutations of Sers or Pros in the area 253–282 counteracted the effects of v-Src. It should be noted that some of the mutations caused decreased binding of v-Src to Cx43, although mutations of Y247 and Y265 were more efficient in decreasing the interaction (Zhou et al., 1999). The use of the MEK1 inhibitor PD98059 also counteracted v-Src in *Xenopus* oocytes (Zhou et al., 1999), but not in mammalian cells (Lin et al., 2001).

Constitutively, active versions of Src are well known to be oncogenic in experimental systems, and a part of the oncogenic effect may be mediated through its effect on Cx43 gap junction channels. Wild-type c-Src is activated by several physiological and pathological conditions. Agonists of a number of G-protein coupled receptors activated c-Src and caused a decrease in cell–cell coupling, but did not cause tyrosine phosphorylation of Cx43 (Postma et al., 1998). In contrast, c-Src may directly be involved in the reduced electrical coupling between myocytes in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. In the late stages of cardiomyopathy, Cx43 was found to be tyrosine phosphorylated concurrent with an increased c-Src activity (Toyofuku et al., 1999).

The protein tyrosine-phosphatase inhibitors pervanadate and permolybdate had profound effects on both Cx43 phosphorylation and GJIC in fibroblasts (Husøy et al., 1993; Mikalsen and Kaalhus, 1996, 1997). They induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Cx43 (Mikalsen et al., 1997), but the phosphorylation sites are not known. It is possible that these compounds reveal a rapid cycle of tyrosine phosphorylation–dephosphorylation of Cx43, but it is more likely that they induce an indirect activation of tyrosine kinases, which then phosphorylate Cx43 (Mikalsen and Kaalhus, 1998). This implies that under normal conditions, there is no cycle of tyrosine phosphorylation–dephosphorylation of Cx43. Phosphotyrosine in Cx43 is usually not found in control cells (e.g., Crow et al., 1990; Filson et al., 1990; Kurata and Lau, 1994; Kanemitsu et al., 1997; Mikalsen et al., 1997), although there have been a few such claims (Zhang et al., 1999; Yao et al., 2000). High level of oxidative stress, e.g., experimentally induced by H₂O₂, may also cause tyrosine phosphorylation of Cx43 (Mikalsen et al., 1997). Ischemia and reoxygenation processes occurring under pathological conditions (heart attack, brain stroke) cause oxidative stress. This may explain the induction of phosphotyrosine in Cx43 found in human umbilical vein endothelial cells after a procedure of hypoxia and reoxygenation (Zhang et al., 1999).

Pervanadate significantly decreased electrical conductance between Cx45-transfected HeLa cells, and it increased the amount of phosphorylated Cx45 (van Veen et al., 2000). It was not studied if this was due to tyrosine phosphorylation.

trace of phosphotyrosine in Cx45 was previously found in transfected HeLa cells (Hertlein et al., 1998).

### 2.9. Unidentified kinases

In spite of the efforts taken to identify kinases involved in phosphorylation of connexins, especially Cx43, some of them remain elusive. The kinase(s) involved in the generation of the phospho-connexins under basal cell culture conditions or under physiological conditions in the tissues are in general unknown; so are the phosphorylation sites under these conditions, even for Cx43. It has been suggested that there is a hierarchical phosphorylation sequence of Cx43, with the first phosphorylation occurring in the epitope of the monoclonal antibody, 13–8300, as this antibody recognizes only NP form of Cx43 in rat heart cells and canine smooth muscle cells (Nagy et al., 1997), but also the minor phosphorylation form called P' is recognized in non-stimulated V79 cells (Cruciani and Mikalsen, 1999). The 13–8300 epitope encompasses 360–376, and thus includes some potential PKC phosphorylation sites (see above). However, TPA did not cause a further diminished recognition of Cx43 in western blots probed by 13–8300 even under conditions where Cx43 clearly gets phosphorylated in response to TPA (Cruciani and Mikalsen, 1999). Peptide competition experiments suggested that the epitope is rather N-terminal in this sequence, and includes S364 and/or S365 (Cruciani and Mikalsen, 1999). The phosphorylation of S364 was recently confirmed by another group (TenBroek et al., 2001). Interestingly, several mutations of which S364P and R(362,376)Q were the most frequent, were detected in Cx43 from patients with heart heterotaxia and from the hypoplastic heart, respectively (Britz-Cunningham et al., 1995; Dasgupta et al., 2001). When the S364P mutant of Cx43 was transfected into non-communicating L929 cells, a low level of GJIC was achieved, and it was unaffected by PKA in contrast to the increase in cells transfected with wild-type Cx43 (Britz-Cunningham et al., 1995). Furthermore, PKC caused an increase in GJIC in mutant cells, but not in cells transfected with wild-type Cx43 (Britz-Cunningham et al., 1995). Thus, this area of Cx43 seems involved in the regulation of GJIC. It is therefore intriguing that Cx43 in chick has Pro, fish has Cys, and *Xenopus* has Ser (similar to mammals) at position 364. The S364P mutant caused a significant fraction of *Xenopus* embryos to develop a symptom similar to the human heterotaxia (Levin and Mercola, 1998). This could suggest a different regulation of Cx43 channels depending on the species.

Mice Cx45 with site-directed mutations of Sers in the sequence 374-394 were transfected into HeLa cells. The results suggested that S374/376/378/381/382 are the major, but not exclusive, phosphorylation sites, and that the phosphorylations may show cooperativity. The double mutants S381G/S382A or S384G/S385L showed considerably increased degradation rates, suggesting that phospho-Cx45 is more stable (Hertlein et al., 1998).

3. Concluding remarks

Future aims are to understand the regulation of GJIC, the importance of connexin phosphorylation, and potential non-GJIC roles of connexins. The bewildering array of connexins, of which several are often coexpressed in a cell, their numerous phosphorylation sites, their interactions with accessory proteins, and their confusingly different regulations in different cell types make it difficult to obtain a unified picture of the field. This is underlined by the increasing number of diverse pathological conditions where mutations in connexin genes are found.

## References

Ai, Z.W., Fischer, A., Spray, D.C., Brown, A.M.C., Fishman, G.I., 2000. Wnt-1 regulation of connexin 43 in cardiac myocytes. J. Clin. Invest. 105, 161–171.

Amsterdam, A., Knecht, M., Catt, K.J., 1981. Hormonal regulation of cytodifferentiation and intercellular communication in cultured granulosa cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78, 3000–3004.

Atkinson, M.M., Lampe, P.D., Lin, H.H., Kollander, R., Li, X.R., Kiang, D.T., 1995. Cyclic AMP modifies the cellular distribution of connexin 43 and induces a persistent increase in the junctional permeability of mouse mammary tumor cells. J. Cell Sci. 108, 3079–3090.

Atkinson, M.M., Menko, A.S., Johnson, R.G., Sheppard, J.R., Sheridan, J.D., 1981. Rapid and reversible reduction of junctional permeability in cells infected with a temperature-sensitive mutant of avian sarcoma virus. J. Cell Biol. 91, 573–578.

Azarnia, R., Reddy, S., Kmiecik, T.E., Shalloway, D., Loewenstein, W.R., 1988. The cellular src gene product regulates junctional cell-to-cell communication. Science 239, 398–401.

Bastide, B., Hervé, J.C., Délèze, J., 1994. The uncoupling effect of diacylglycerol on gap junctional communication of mammalian heart cells is independent of protein kinase C. Exp. Cell Res. 214, 519–527.

Beardslee, M.A., Lerner, D.L., Tadros, P.N., Laing, J.G., Beyer, E.C., Yamada, K.A., Kléber, A.G., Schuessler, R.B., Saffitz, J.E., 2000. Dephosphorylation and intracellular redistribution of ventricular connexin 43 during electrical uncoupling induced by ischemia. Circ. Res. 87, 656–662.

Belcheva, M.M., Coscia, C.J., 2002. Diversity of G protein-coupled receptor signaling pathways to ERK/MAP kinase. Neurosignals 11, 34–44.

Berthoud, V.M., Beyer, E.C., Kurata, W.E., Lau, A.F., Lampe, P.D., 1997. The gap-junction protein connexin 56 is phosphorylated in the intracellular loop and the carboxy-terminal region. Eur. J. Biochem. 244, 89–97.

Berthoud, V.M., Ledbetter, M.L.S., Hertzberg, E.L., Sáez, J.C., 1992. Connexin 43 in MDCK cells: regulation by a tumor-promoting phorbol ester and Ca²⁺. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 57, 40–50.

Berthoud, V.M., Westphale, E.M., Grigoryeva, A., Beyer, E.C., 2000. PKC isoenzymes in the chicken lens and TPA-induced effects on intercellular communication. Invest. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 41, 850–858.

Bevans, C.G., Harris, A.L., 1999. Direct high affinity modulation of connexin channel activity by cyclic nucleotides. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 3720–3725.

Beyer, E.C., Paul, D.L., Goodenough, D.A., 1987. Connexin 43: a protein from rat heart homologous to a gap junction protein from liver. J. Cell Biol. 105, 2621–2629.

Bolaños, J.P., Medina, J.M., 1996. Induction of nitric oxide synthase inhibits gap junction permeability in cultured rat astrocytes. J. Neurochem. 66, 2091–2099.

Bowling, N., Huang, X., Sandusky, G.E., Fouts, R.L., Mintze, K., Esterman, M., Allen, P.D., Maddi, R., McCall, E., Vlahos, C.J., 2001. Protein kinase C-α and -ε modulate connexin 43 phosphorylation in human heart. J. Mol. Cell Cardiol. 33, 789–798.

Brandes, R.P., Popp, R., Ott, G., Bredenkötter, D., Wallner, C., Busse, R., Fleming, I., 2002. The extracellular regulated kinases (ERK) 1/2 mediate cannabinoid-induced inhibition of gap junctional communication in endothelial cells. Br. J. Pharmacol. 136, 709–716.

Britz-Cunningham, S.H., Shah, M.M., Zuppan, C.W., Fletcher, W.H., 1995. Mutations of the connexin 43 gap-junction gene in patients with heart malformations and defects of laterality. N. Engl. J. Med. 332, 1323–1329.

Burghardt, R.C., Barhoumi, R., Sewall, T.C., Bowen, J.A., 1995. Cyclic AMP induces rapid increases in gap junction permeability and changes in the cellular distribution of connexin 43. J. Membr. Biol. 148, 243–253.

Burt, J.M., Spray, D.C., 1988. Inotropic agents modulate gap junctional conductance between cardiac myocytes. Am. J. Physiol. 254, H1206–H1210.

Bårnud, H., Mikalsen, S.O., Berg, K., Moan, J., 1994. Effects of ultraviolet radiation on intercellular communication in V79 Chinese hamster fibroblasts. Carcinogenesis 15, 233–239.

Cheng, H.L., Louis, C.F., 1999. Endogenous casein kinase I catalyzes the phosphorylation of the lens fiber cell connexin 49. Eur. J. Biochem. 263, 276–286.

Cheng, H.L., Louis, C.F., 2001. Functional effects of casein kinase I-catalyzed phosphorylation on lens cell-to-cell coupling. J. Membr. Biol. 181, 21–30.

Cole, W.C., Garfield, R.E., 1986. Evidence for physiological regulation of myometrial gap junction permeability. Am. J. Physiol. 251, C411–C420.

Crow, D.S., Beyer, E.C., Paul, D.L., Kobe, S.S., Lau, A.F., 1990. Phosphorylation of connexin 43 gap junction protein in uninfected and Rous sarcoma virus-transformed mammalian fibroblasts. Mol. Cell. Biol. 10, 1754–1763.

Cruciani, V., Husøy, T., Mikalsen, S.O., 2001. Pharmacological evidence for system-dependent involvement of protein kinase C isoenzymes in phorbol ester-suppressed gap junctional communication. Exp. Cell Res. 268, 150–161.

Cruciani, V., Kaalhus, O., Mikalsen, S.O., 1999. Phosphatases involved in modulation of gap junctional intercellular communication and dephosphorylation of connexin 43 in hamster fibroblasts: 2B or not 2B?. Exp. Cell Res. 252, 449–463.

Cruciani, V., Mikalsen, S.O., 1999. Stimulated phosphorylation of intracellular connexin 43. Exp. Cell Res. 251, 285–298.

Cruciani, V., Mikalsen, S.O., 2002. Mechanisms involved in responses to the peroxisome proliferator WY-14,643 on gap junctional intercellular communication in V79 hamster fibroblasts. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 181, 66–75.

Cruciani, V., Mikalsen, S.O., Vasseur, P., Sanner, T., 1997. Effects of peroxisome proliferators and 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate on intercellular communication and connexin 43 in two hamster fibroblast systems. Int. J. Cancer 73, 240–248.

Dasgupta, C., Martinez, A.M., Zuppan, C.W., Shah, M.M., Bailey, L.L., Fletcher, W.H., 2001. Identification of connexin 43 (α1) gap junction gene mutations in patients with hypoplastic left heart syndrome by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). Mutat. Res. 479, 173–186.

De Pina-Benabou, M.H., Srinivas, M., Spray, D.C., Schemes, E., 2001. Calmodulin kinase pathway mediates the K⁺-induced increase in gap junctional communication between mouse spinal cord astrocytes. J. Neurosci. 21, 6635–6643.

Dermietzel, R., Kremer, M., Paputsoglu, G., Stang, A., Skerrett, I.M., Gomes, D., Srinivas, M., Janssen-Bienhold, U., Weiler, R., Nicholson, B.J., Bruzzone, R., Spray, D.C., 2000. Molecular and functional diversity of neural connexins in the retina. J. Neurosci. 20, 8331–8343.

Dewey, M.M., Barr, L., 1962. Intercellular connections between smooth muscle cells: the nexus. Science 137, 670–672.

Diez, J.A., Elvira, M., Villalobo, A., 1998. The epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase phoshorylates connexin 32. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 187, 201–210.

Doble, B.W., Chen, Y.J., Bose, D.G., Litchfield, D.W., Kardami, E., 1996. Fibroblast growth factor-2 decreases metabolic coupling and stimulates phosphorylation as well as masking of connexin 43 epitopes in cardiac myocytes. Circ. Res. 79, 647–658.

Doble, B.W., Kardami, E., 1995. Basic fibroblast growth factor stimulates connexin 43 expression and intercellular communication of cardiac fibroblasts. Mol. Cell Biochem. 143, 81–87.

Doble, B.W., Ping, P., Kardami, E., 2000. The ε subtype of protein kinase C is required for cardiomyocyte connexin 43 phosphorylation. Circ. Res. 86, 293–301.

Elvira, M., Diez, J.A., Wang, K.K., Villalobo, A., 1993. Phosphorylation of connexin 32 by protein kinase C prevents its proteolysis by μ-calpain and m-calpain. J. Biol. Chem. 268, 14294–14300.

Enomoto, T., Yamasaki, H., 1985. Rapid inhibition of intercellular communication between BALB/c 3T3 cells by diacylglycerol, a possible endogenous functional analogue of phorbol esters. Cancer Res. 45, 3706–3710.

Faust, M., Montenarh, M., 2000. Subcellular localization of protein kinase CK2: A key to its function?. Cell Tissue Res. 301, 329–340.

Filson, A.J., Azarnia, R., Beyer, E.C., Loewenstein, W.R., Brugge, J.S., 1990. Tyrosine phosphorylation of a gap junction protein correlates with inhibition of cell-to-cell communication. Cell Growth Differ. 1, 661–668.

Flagg-Newton, J.L., Dahl, G., Loewenstein, W.R., 1981. Cell junction and cyclic AMP: 1. Upregulation of junctional membrane permeability and junctional membrane particles by administration of cyclic nucleotide or phosphodiesterase inhibitor. J. Membr. Biol. 63, 105–121.

Furshpan, E.J., Potter, D.D., 1959. Transmission at the giant motor synapses of the crayfish. J. Physiol. 145, 289–325.

Giepmans, B.N., Hengeveld, T., Postma, F.R., Moolenaar, W.H., 2001. Interaction of c-Src with gap junction protein connexin 43: role in the regulation of cell–cell communication. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 8544–8549.

Godwin, A.J., Green, L.M., Walsh, M.P., McDonald, J.R., Walsh, D.A., Fletcher, W.H., 1993. In situ regulation of cell-cell communication by the cAMP-dependent protein kinase and protein kinase C. Mol. Cell Biochem. 127-128, 293–307.

Goodall, H., Maro, B., 1986. Major loss of junctional coupling during mitosis in early mouse embryos. J. Cell Biol. 102, 568–575.

Granot, I., Dekel, N., 1994. Phosphorylation and expression of connexin 43 ovarian gap junction protein are regulated by luteinizing hormone. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 30502–30509.

Gross, S.D., Anderson, R.A., 1998. Casein kinase I: spatial organization and positioning of a multifunctional protein kinase family. Cell. Signal. 10, 699–711.

Hax, W.M.A., van Venrooij, G.E.P.M., Vossenberg, J.B.J., 1974. Cell communication: a cyclic AMP mediated phenomenon. J. Membr. Biol. 19, 253–266.

Hertlein, B., Butterweck, A., Haubrich, S., Willecke, K., Traub, O., 1998. Phosphorylated carboxy terminal serine residues stabilize the mouse gap junction protein connexin 45 against degradation. J. Membr. Biol. 162, 247–257.

Hossain, M.Z., Ao, P., Boynton, A.L., 1998. Rapid disruption of gap junctional communication and phosphorylation of connexin 43 by platelet-derived growth factor in T51B rat liver epithelial cells expressing platelet-derived growth factor receptor. J. Cell. Physiol. 174, 66–77.

Hossain, M.Z., Jagdale, A.B., Ao, P., Kazlauskas, A., Boynton, A.L., 1999. Disruption of gap junctional communication by the platelet-derived growth factor is mediated via multiple signaling pathways. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 10489–10496.

Husøy, T., Cruciani, V., Sanner, T., Mikalsen, S.O., 2001. Phosphorylation of connexin 43 and inhibition of gap junctional communication in 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-exposed R6 fibroblasts: minor role of protein kinase CβI and μ. Carcinogenesis 22, 221–231.

Husøy, T., Mikalsen, S.O., Sanner, T., 1993. Phosphatase inhibitors, gap junctional intercellular communication and [125I]-EGF binding in hamster fibroblasts. Carcinogenesis 14, 2257–2265.

Jiang, J.X., Goodenough, D.A., 1998. Phosphorylation of lens-fiber connexins in lens organ cultures. Eur. J. Biochem. 255, 37–44.

Kanemitsu, M.Y., Jiang, W., Eckhart, W., 1998. Cdc2-mediated phosphorylation of the gap junction protein, connexin 43, during mitosis. Cell Growth Differ. 9, 13–21.

Kanemitsu, M.Y., Lau, A.F., 1993. Epidermal growth factor stimulates the disruption of gap junctional communication and connexin 43 phosphorylation independent of 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate-sensitive protein kinase C: the possible involvement of mitogen-activated protein kinase. Mol. Biol. Cell 4, 837–848.

Kanemitsu, M.Y., Loo, L.W.M., Simon, S., Lau, A.F., Eckhart, W., 1997. Tyrosine phosphorylation of connexin 43 by v-Src is mediated by SH2 and SH3 domain interactions. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 22824–22831.

Kanno, L., Loewenstein, W.R., 1964. Intercellular diffusion. Science 143, 959–960.

Kardami, E., Stoski, R.M., Doble, B.W., Yamamoto, T., Hertzberg, E.L., Nagy, J.I., 1991. Biochemical and ultrastructural evidence for the association of basic fibroblast growth factor with cardiac gap junctions. J. Biol. Chem. 266, 19551–19557.

Karrer, H.E., 1960. Cell interconnections in normal human cervical epithelium. J. Biophys. Biochem. Cytol. 7, 181–185.

Koo, S.K., Kim, D.Y., Park, S.D., Kang, K.W., Joe, C.O., 1997. PKC phosphorylation disrupts gap junctional communication at G₀/S phase in clone 9 cells. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 167, 41–49.

Kumar, N.M., Gilula, N.B., 1986. Cloning and characterization of human and rat liver cDNAs coding for a gap junction protein. J. Cell Biol. 103, 767–776.

Kurata, W.E., Lau, A.F., 1994. p130<sup>gag-fps</sup> disrupts gap junctional communication and induces phosphorylation of connexin 43 in a manner similar to that of pp60<sup>v-src</sup>. Oncogene 9, 329–335.

Kwak, B.R., Hermans, M.M.P., De Jonge, H.R., Lohmann, S.M., Jongsma, H.J., Chanson, M., 1995a. Differential regulation of distinct types of gap junction channels by similar phosphorylating conditions. Mol. Biol. Cell 6, 1707–1719.

Kwak, B.R., Sáez, J.C., Wilders, R., Chanson, M., Fishman, G.I., Hertzberg, E.L., Spray, D.C., Jongsma, H.J., 1995b. Effects of cGMP-dependent phosphorylation on rat and human connexin 43 gap junction channels. Pflügers Arch. 430, 770–778.

Kwak, B.R., van Veen, T.A.B., Analbers, L.J.S., Jongsma, H.J., 1995c. TPA increases conductance but decreases permeability in neonatal rat cardiomyocyte gap junction channels. Exp. Cell Res 220, 456–463.

Lampe, P.D., Kurata, W.E., Warn-Cramer, B.J., Lau, A.F., 1998. Formation of a distinct connexin 43 phosphoisoform in mitotic cells is dependent upon p34<sup>cdc2</sup>kinase. J. Cell Sci. 111, 833–841.

Lampe, P.D., TenBroek, E.M., Burt, J.M., Kurata, W.E., Johnson, R.G., Lau, A.F., 2000. Phosphorylation of connexin 43 on serine368 by protein kinase C regulates gap junctional communication. J. Cell Biol. 149, 1503–1512.

Le, A.C.N., Musil, L.S., 2001. A novel role for FGF and extracellular signal-regulated kinase in gap junction-mediated intercellular communication in the lens. J. Cell Biol. 154, 197–216.

Levin, M., Mercola, M., 1998. Gap junctions are involved in the early generation of left-right asymmetry. Dev. Biol. 203, 90–105.

Lin, R., Warn-Cramer, B.J., Kurata, W.E., Lau, A.F., 2001. v-Src phosphorylation of connexin 43 on Tyr247 and Tyr265 disrupts gap junctional communication. J. Cell Biol. 154, 815–828.

Maldonado, P.E., Rose, B., Loewenstein, W.R., 1988. Growth factors modulate junctional cell-to-cell communication. J. Membr. Biol. 106, 203–210.

Matesic, D.F., Rupp, H.L., Bonney, W.J., Ruch, R.J., Trosko, J.E., 1994. Changes in gap-junction permeability, phosphorylation, and number mediated by phorbol ester and non-phorbol-ester tumor promoters in rat liver epithelial cells. Mol. Carcinogen. 10, 226–236.

Mazzoleni, G., Camplani, A., Telo, P., Pozzi, A., Tanganelli, S., Elfgang, C., Willecke, K., Ragnotti, G., 1996. Effect of tumor-promoting and anti- promoting chemicals on the viability and junctional coupling of human HeLa cells transfected with DNAs coding for various murine connexin proteins. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 113C, 247–256.

Mikalsen, S.O., Husøy, T., Vikhamar, G., Sanner, T., 1997. Induction of phosphotyrosine in the gap junction protein, connexin 43. FEBS Lett. 401, 271–275.

Mikalsen, S.O., Kaalhus, O., 1996. A characterization of pervanadate, an inducer of cellular tyrosine phosphorylation and inhibitor of gap junctional intercellular communication. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1290, 308–318.

Mikalsen, S.O., Kaalhus, O., 1997. A characterization of permolybdate and its effect on cellular tyrosine phosphorylation, gap junctional intercellular communication and phosphorylation status of the gap junction protein, connexin 43. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1356, 207–220.

Mikalsen, S.O., Kaalhus, O., 1998. Properties of pervanadate and permolybdate. Connexin 43, phosphatase inhibition, and thiol reactivity as model systems. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 10036–10045.

Moore, L.K., Beyer, E.C., Burt, J.M., 1991. Characterization of gap junction channels in A7r5 vascular smooth muscle cells. Am. J. Physiol. 260, C975–C981.

Moreno, A.P., Campos de Carvalho, A.C., Christ, G., Melman, A., Spray, D.C., 1993. Gap junctions between human corpus cavernosum smooth muscle cells: gating properties and unitary conductance. Am. J. Physiol. 264, C80–C92.

Moreno, A.P., Sáez, J.C., Fishman, G.I., Spray, D.C., 1994. Human connexin 43 gap junction channels. Regulation of unitary conductances by phosphorylation. Circ. Res. 74, 1050–1057.

Murray, A.W., Fitzgerald, D.J., 1979. Tumour promoters inhibit metabolic cooperation in cocultures of epidermal and 3T3 cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 91, 395–401.

Nadarajah, B., Makarenkova, H., Becker, D.L., Evans, W.H., Parnavelas, J.G., 1998. Basic FGF increases communication between cells of the developing neocortex. J. Neurosci. 18, 7881–7890.

Nagy, J.I., Li, W.E.I., Roy, C., Doble, B.W., Gilchrist, J.S., Kardami, E., Hertzberg, E.L., 1997. Selective monoclonal antibody recognition and cellular localization of an unphosphorylated form of connexin 43. Exp. Cell Res. 236, 127–136.

O'Brien, J., Bruzzone, R., White, T.W., Al-Ubaidi, M.R., Ripps, H., 1998. Cloning and expression of two related connexins from the perch retina define a distinct subgroup of the connexin family. J. Neurosci. 18, 7625–7637.

O'Lague, P., Dalen, H., Rubin, H., Tobias, C., 1970. Electrical coupling: low resistance junctions between mitotic and interphase fibroblasts in tissue culture. Science 170, 464–466.

Oh, S.Y., Grupen, C.G., Murray, A.W., 1991. Phorbol ester induces phosphorylation and down-regulation of connexin 43 in WB cells. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1094, 243–245.

Olson, D.J., Christian, J.L., Moon, R.T., 1991. Effect of Wnt-1 and related proteins on gap junctional communication in Xenopus embryos. Science 252, 1173–1176.

Paulson, A.F., Lampe, P.D., Meyer, R.A., TenBroek, E., Atkinson, M.M., Walseth, T.F., Johnson, R.G., 2000. Cyclic AMP and LDL trigger a rapid enhancement in gap junction assembly through a stimulation of connexin trafficking. J. Cell Sci. 113, 3037–3049.

Pelletier, D.B., Boynton, A.L., 1994. Dissociation of PDGF receptor tyrosine kinase activity from PDGF-mediated inhibition of gap junctional communication. J. Cell. Physiol. 158, 427–434.

Pepper, M.S., Meda, P., 1992. Basic fibroblast growth factor increases junctional communication and connexin 43 expression in microvascular endothelial cells. J. Cell. Physiol. 153, 196–205.

Peracchia, C., Sotkis, A., Wang, X.G., Peracchia, L.L., Persechini, A., 2000. Calmodulin directly gates gap junction channels. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 26220–26224.

Pereda, A.E., Bell, T.D., Chang, B.H., Czernik, A.J., Nairn, A.C., Soderling, T.R., Faber, D.S., 1998. Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent kinase II mediates simultaneous enhancement of gap-junctional conductance and glutamatergic transmission. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 13272–13277.

Peters, J.M., McKay, R.M., McKay, J.P., Graff, J.M., 1999. Casein kinase I transduces Wnt signals. Nature 401, 345–350.

Postma, F.R., Hengeveld, T., Alblas, J., Giepmans, B.N.G., Zondag, G.C.M., Jalink, K., Moolenaar, W.H., 1998. Acute loss of cell-cell communication caused by G protein-coupled receptors: A critical role for c-Src. J. Cell Biol. 140, 1199–1209.

Reuss, B., Dermietzel, R., Unsicker, K., 1998. Fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2) differentially regulates connexin (cx) 43 expression and function in astroglial cells from distinct brain regions. Glia 22, 19–30.

Rivedal, E., Møllerup, S., Haugen, A., Vikhamar, G., 1996. Modulation of gap junctional intercellular communication by EGF in human kidney epithelial cells. Carcinogenesis 17, 2321–2328.

Rivedal, E., Opsahl, H., 2001. Role of PKC and MAP kinase in EGF- and TPA-induced connexin 43 phosphorylation and inhibition of gap junction intercellular communication in rat liver epithelial cells. Carcinogenesis 22, 1543–1550.

Robertson, J.D., 1957. New observations on the ultrastructure of the membranes of frog peripheral nerves fibers. J. Biophys. Biochem. Cytol. 3, 1043–1051.

Ruch, R.J., Trosko, J.E., Madhukar, B.V., 2001. Inhibition of connexin 43 gap junctional intercellular communication by TPA requires ERK activation. J. Cell. Biochem. 83, 163–169.

Saleh, S.M., Takemoto, D.J., 2000. Overexpression of protein kinase Cγ inhibits gap junctional intercellular communication in the lens epithelial cells. Exp. Eye Res. 71, 99–102.

Saleh, S.M., Takemoto, L.J., Zoukhri, D., Takemoto, D.J., 2001. PKC-γ phosphorylation of connexin 46 in the lens cortex. Mol. Vis. 7, 240–246.

Salomon, D., Chanson, M., Vischer, S., Masgrau, E., Vozzi, C., Saurat, J.H., Spray, D.C., Meda, P., 1992. Gap junctional communication of primary human keratinocytes: characterization by dual voltage clamp and dye transfer. Exp. Cell Res. 201, 452–461.

Sáez, J.C., Berthoud, V.M., Moreno, A.P., Spray, D.C., 1993a. Gap junctions: multiplicity of controls in differentiated and undifferentiated cells and possible functional implications. Adv. Second Messenger Phosphoprotein Res. 27, 163–198.

Sáez, J.C., Nairn, A.C., Czernik, A.J., Fishman, G.I., Spray, D.C., Hertzberg, E.L., 1997. Phosphorylation of connexin 43 and the regulation of neonatal rat cardiac myocyte gap junctions. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 29, 2131–2145.

Sáez, J.C., Nairn, A.C., Czernik, A.J., Spray, D.C., Hertzberg, E.L., 1993b. Rat connexin 43: regulation by phosphorylation in heart. Prog. Cell Res. 3, 275–281.

Sáez, J.C., Nairn, A.C., Czernik, A.J., Spray, D.C., Hertzberg, E.L., Greengard, P., Bennett, M.V.L., 1990. Phosphorylation of connexin 32, a hepatocyte gap-junction protein, by cAMP-dependent protein kinase, protein kinase C and Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. Eur. J. Biochem. 192, 263–273.

Sáez, J.C., Spray, D.C., Nairn, A.C., Hertzberg, E., Greengard, P., Bennett, M.V., 1986. cAMP increases junctional conductance and stimulates phosphorylation of the 27-kDa principal gap junction polypeptide. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 83, 2473–2477.

Severs, N.J., Rothery, S., Dupont, E., Coppen, S.R., Yeh, H.I., Ko, Y.S., Matsushita, T., Kaba, R., Halliday, D., 2001. Immunocytochemical analysis of connexin expression in the healthy and diseased cardiovascular system. Microsc. Res. Tech. 52, 301–322.

Simpson, I., Rose, B., Loewenstein, W.R., 1977. Size limit of molecules permeating the junctional membrane channels. Science 195, 294–296.

Sladek, S.M., Westerhausen-Larson, A., Roberts, J.M., 1999. Endogenous nitric oxide suppresses rat myometrial connexin 43 gap junction protein expression during pregnancy. Biol. Reprod. 61, 8–13.

Stagg, R.B., Fletcher, W.H., 1990. The hormone-induced regulation of contact-dependent cell–cell communication by phosphorylation. Endocr. Rev. 11, 302–325.

Stein, L.S., Boonstra, J., Burghardt, R.C., 1992. Reduced cell–cell communication between mitotic and nonmitotic coupled cells. Exp. Cell Res. 198, 1–7.

Steinberg, T.H., Civitelli, R., Geist, S.T., Robertson, A.J., Hick, E., Veenstra, R.D., Wang, H.Z., Warlow, P.M., Westphale, E.M., Laing, J.G., Beyer, E.C., 1994. Connexin 43 and connexin 45 form gap junctions with different molecular permeabilities in osteoblastic cells. EMBO J. 13, 744–750.

Stoker, M.G.P., 1967. Transfer of growth inhibition between normal and virus-transformed cells: autoradiographic studies using marked cells. J. Cell Sci. 2, 293–304.

Swenson, K.I., Piwnica-Worms, H., McNamee, H., Paul, D.L., 1990. Tyrosine phosphorylation of the gap junction protein connexin 43 is required for the pp60<sup>Y-SRC</sup>-induced inhibition of communication. Cell Regul. 1, 989–1002.

Takeda, A., Hashimoto, E., Yamamura, H., Shimazu, T., 1987. Phosphorylation of liver gap junction protein by protein kinase C. FEBS Lett. 210, 169–172.

Takeda, A., Saheki, S., Shimazu, T., Takeuchi, N., 1989. Phosphorylation of the 27-kDa gap junction protein by protein kinase C in vitro and in rat hepatocytes. J. Biochem. 106, 723–727.

Takens-Kwak, B.R., Jongsma, H.J., 1992. Cardiac gap junctions: three distinct single channel conductances and their modulation by phosphorylating treatments. Pflügers Arch. 422, 198–200.

TenBroek, E.M., Lampe, P.D., Solan, J.L., Reynhout, J.K., Johnson, R.G., 2001. Ser364 of connexin 43 and the upregulation of gap junction assembly by cAMP. J. Cell Biol. 155, 1307–1318.

Teranishi, T., Negishi, K., Kato, S., 1983. Dopamine modulates S-potential amplitude and dye-coupling between external horizontal cells in carp retina. Nature 301, 243–246.

Toyama, J., Sugiura, H., Kamiya, K., Kodama, I., Terasawa, M., Hidaka, H., 1994. Ca<sup>2+</sup>-calmodulin mediated modulation of the electrical coupling of ventricular myocytes isolated from guinea pig heart. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 26, 1007–1015.

Toyofuku, T., Yabuki, M., Otsu, K., Kuzuya, T., Tada, M., Hori, M., 1999. Functional role of c-Src in gap junctions of the cardiomyopathic heart. Circ. Res. 85, 672–681.

Traub, O., Eckert, R., Lichtenberg-Fraté, H., Elfgang, C., Bastide, B., Scheidtmann, K.H., Hülser, D.F., Willecke, K., 1994. Immunochemical and electrophysiological characterization of murine connexin 40 and 43 in mouse tissues and transfected human cells. Eur. J. Cell Biol. 64, 101–112.

Török, K., Stauffer, K., Evans, W.H., 1997. Connexin 32 of gap junctions contains two cytoplasmic calmodulin-binding domains. Biochem. J. 326, 479–483.

Van der Heyden, M.A.G., Rook, M.B., Hermans, M.M.P., Rijksen, G., Boonstra, J., Defize, L.H.K., Destrée, O.H.J., 1998. Identification of connexin 43 as a functional target for Wnt signalling. J. Cell Sci. 111, 1741–1749.

van Rijen, H.V.M., van Veen, T.A.B., Hermans, M.M.P., Jongsma, H.J., 2000. Human connexin 40 gap junction channels are modulated by cAMP. Cardiovasc. Res. 45, 941–951.

van Veen, T.A., van Rijen, H.V., Jongsma, H.J., 2000. Electrical conductance of mouse connexin 45 gap junction channels is modulated by phosphorylation. Cardiovasc. Res. 46, 496–510.

Vikhamar, G., Rivedal, E., Mollerup, S., Sanner, T., 1998. Role of Cx43 phosphorylation and MAP kinase activation in EGF induced enhancement of cell communication in human kidney epithelial cells. Cell Adhes. Commun. 5, 451–460.

Volmat, V., Pouysségur, J., 2001. Spatiotemporal regulation of the p42/p44 MAPK pathway. Biol. Cell 93, 71–79.

Wagner, T.L.E., Beyer, E.C., McMahon, D.G., 1998. Cloning and functional expression of a novel gap junction channel from the retina of *Danio aquipinnatus*. Visual Neurosci. 15, 1137–1144.

Warn-Cramer, B.J., Cottrell, G.T., Burt, J.M., Lau, A.F., 1998. Regulation of connexin 43 gap junctional intercellular communication by mitogen-activated protein kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 9188–9196.

Warn-Cramer, B.J., Lampe, P.D., Kurata, W.E., Kanemitsu, M.Y., Loo, L.W.M., Eckhart, W., Lau, A.F., 1996. Characterization of the mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylation sites on the connexin 43 gap junction protein. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 3779–3786.

White, T.W., Goodenough, D.A., Paul, D.L., 1998. Targeted ablation of connexin 50 in mice results in microphthalmia and zonular pulverulent cataracts. J. Cell Biol. 143, 815–825.

Wiener, E.C., Loewenstein, W.R., 1983. Correction of cell–cell communication defect by introduction of a protein kinase into mutant cells. Nature 305, 433–435.

Wilson, M.R., Close, T.W., Trosko, J.E., 2000. Cell population dynamics (apoptosis, mitosis, and cell–cell communication) during disruption of homeostasis. Exp. Cell Res. 254, 257–268.

Xie, H.Q., Laird, D.W., Chang, T.H., Hu, V.W., 1997. A mitosis-specific phosphorylation of the gap junction protein connexin 43 in human vascular cells: biochemical characterization and localization. J. Cell Biol. 137, 203–210.

Yada, T., Rose, B., Loewenstein, W.R., 1985. Diacylglycerol downregulates junctional membrane permeability. TMB-8 blocks this effect. J. Membr. Biol. 88, 217–232.

Yamamoto, T., Kardami, E., Nagy, J.I., 1991. Basic fibroblast growth factor in rat brain: localization to glial gap junctions correlates with connexin 43 distribution. Brain Res. 554, 336–343.

Yamasaki, H., Enomoto, T., Martel, N., Shiba, Y., Kanno, Y., 1983. Tumour promoter-mediated reversible inhibition of cell–cell communication (electrical coupling). Relationship with phorbol ester binding and de novo macromolecule synthesis. Exp. Cell Res. 146, 297–308.

Yao, J., Morioka, T., Oite, T., 2000. PDGF regulates gap junction communication and connexin 43 phosphorylation by PI 3-kinase in mesangial cells. Kidney Int. 57, 1915–1926.

Yin, X., Gu, S., Jiang, J.X., 2001. The development-associated cleavage of lens connexin 45.6 by caspase-3-like protease is regulated by casein kinase II-mediated phosphorylation. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 34567–34572.

Yin, X.Y., Jedrzejewski, P.T., Jiang, J.X., 2000. Casein kinase II phosphorylates lens connexin 45.6 and is involved in its degradation. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 6850–6856.

Yotti, L.P., Chang, C., Trosko, J.E., 1979. Elimination of metabolic cooperation in Chinese hamster cells by a tumor promoter. Science 206, 1089–1091.

Ytrehus, K., Liu, Y., Downey, J.M., 1994. Preconditioning protects ischemic rabbit heart by protein kinase C activation. Am. J. Physiol. 266, H1145–H1152.

Zhang, Y.W., Morita, I., Nishida, M., Murota, S.I., 1999. Involvement of tyrosine kinase in the hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced gap junctional intercellular communication abnormality in cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells. J. Cell. Physiol. 180, 305–313.

Zhou, L., Kasperek, E.M., Nicholson, B.J., 1999. Dissection of the molecular basis of pp60<sup>Y-SRC</sup> induced gating of connexin 43 gap junction channels. J. Cell Biol. 144, 1033–1045.
