
Molecular Brain Research 110 (2003) 1–6

**Research report**

**Mouse dexamethasone-induced RAS protein 1 gene is expressed in a circadian rhythmic manner in the suprachiasmatic nucleus**

Hirokazu Takahashi${}^{a,1}$, Nanae Umeda${}^{b,1}$, Yoko Tsutsumi${}^{a}$, Ryutaro Fukumura${}^{a,c}$,  
Hajime Ohkaze${}^{a}$, Mitsugu Sujino${}^{b}$, Gijsbertus van der Horst${}^{d}$, Akira Yasui${}^{e}$,  
Shin-Ichi T. Inouye${}^{b}$, Akira Fujimori${}^{a}$, Tatsuya Ohhata${}^{a,f}$, Ryoko Araki${}^{a}$, Masumi Abe${}^{a,*}$

${}^{a}$Transcriptome Profiling Group, National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Anagawa 4-9-1, Inage-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba 263-8555, Japan  
${}^{b}$Department of Physics, Informatics and Biology, Yamaguchi University, Yoshida 1677-1, Yamaguchi-shi, Yamaguchi 753-8512, Japan  
${}^{c}$Japan Science for the Promotion of Science, Domestic Research Fellowship, Kawaguchi Center Building, Honcho 4-1-8, Kawaguchi,  
Saitama 332-0012, Japan  
${}^{d}$Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus University, PO Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands  
${}^{e}$Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8575, Japan  
${}^{f}$Graduate School of Science and Technology, Chiba University, Yayoi-cho 1-33, Inage-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba 263-8522, Japan  

Accepted 8 October 2002

---

### Abstract

We identified the *Dexamethasone-induced RAS protein 1* (*Dexras1*) gene as a cycling gene in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN). Investigation of the whole brain using in situ hybridization demonstrated the localization of the expression of the gene in the SCN, thalamus, piriform cortex and hippocampus. However, rhythmic expression of the gene was observed only in the SCN. The rhythmic change in gene expression during 1 day was approximately five-fold, and the maximum expression was observed during subjective night. Real-time PCR using the SCN, paraventricular nucleus and cortex confirmed these results. Next, we analyzed the expression of the *Dexras1* gene in the SCN of cryptochrome (Cry) 1 and 2 double knockout mice. We found that the rhythmic expression disappeared. The results indicate that *Dexras1* rhythmicity and levels are dependent upon CRYs. This is the first time that the G protein, which may be involved in the input pathway, has been isolated as a cycling gene in the SCN.

© 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

#### Theme: Neural basis of behaviour

#### Topic: Biological rhythms and sleep

#### Keywords: Circadian rhythm; Suprachiasmatic nucleus; *Dexras1*; G protein; Real-time PCR; In situ hybridization

---

### 1. Introduction

The endogenous circadian clock governs most behaviors and metabolic reactions in organisms and enables them to adapt to environmental circumstances. The central circadian clock localizes in specific tissues. The site of the pacemaker in cockroaches is the optic lobes and the central pacemaker in *Drosophila* and lepidopteran species resides in the central brain. While clocks reside in the pineal and retina of both frogs and birds, the contribution of a hypothalamic pacemaker cannot be excluded. In rodents, it localizes in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the anterior hypothalamus [5,14,17,23,27]. The endogenous clock mechanism conceptually consists of three signal pathways: the input pathway, oscillator and the output pathway. The input pathway conveys light signals from the eyes to the oscillator through the retino-hypothalamic tract. The oscillator is the endogenous clock mechanism itself. The output signal pathway conveys the rhythmic signals to peripheral tissues.

Most previous studies carried out to identify circadian rhythm genes have used fruit flies, and rhythm genes in rodents (except for the Clock and casein kinase I epsilon

*Corresponding author. Tel.: +81-43-206-3219; fax: +81-43-251-4593.  
E-mail address: abemasum@nirs.go.jp (M. Abe).

${}^{1}$These authors contributed equally to this work.
genes) have been isolated as homologues of the fruit fly genes. Subsequent histochemical studies using the genes $m P e r 1$ [26, 28], $m P e r 2$ [1, 25], $m B m a l 1$ [2], $m C r y 1$ [19, 21] and $m C r y 2$ [21] have disclosed their expression. In some cases, rhythmic expression was found in the SCN. These findings show that the isolation of cycling genes in the SCN would greatly contribute to our understanding of the circadian rhythm mechanism.

Although great efforts have been made towards isolating SCN-specific genes, little information has been obtained. One reason for this is that the number of neuronal cells in the SCN is very small, approximately $10^{4}$ [33], from which only about 50 ng of total RNA can be purified. This is insufficient for preparing a cDNA library, for which 1–2 $\mu \mathrm{g}$ of mRNA is usually used. Another reason is the small variation in gene expression depending on circadian rhythm, about two- to three-fold [21, 25, 28].

We attempted to identify genes expressed in a circadian rhythmic manner in the SCN. Although in the present study we focused on genes exhibiting rhythmic expression in the SCN but not in other tissues to remove any genes that are also involved in the output pathway, we should note that some circadian genes express rhythmically not only in the SCN but also in other tissues, and some circadian genes are not rhythmic.

### 2. Materials and methods

#### 2.1. Animals

Male mice of the C57BL/6 strain (SLC, Japan) were kept under a light/dark (LD) cycle (12L:12D) for at least 10 days and then transferred to constant darkness (DD). On day 4 of DD, sample tissues were obtained by micropunch. Animals were sacrificed at circadian times (CTs) 2, 6, 10, 14, 18, and 22, and their brains were immediately removed and rinsed in PBS. Two frontal sections of 1 mm thickness were made at the level of the optic chiasm with the help of a brain matrix (ASI Instruments, USA). The SCN, paraventricular nucleus (PVN) and cortex tissues were punched out using a puncher with an inner diameter of 400 $\mu \mathrm{m}$. SCN and PVN tissues were obtained from the anterior section, and cortical tissues were obtained from around the most dorsal area from the next caudal section. Tissues from 10 (for the modified AFLP procedure) or five (for real-time PCR) animals were used. Cry1 and Cry2 double knockout mice [31] were also prepared using the same procedure as for the wild-type mice and used for real-time PCR.

#### 2.2. Isolation of a cycling gene

Total RNA was prepared from each tissue (CT 2, 6, 10,

14, 18 and 22). AFLP-based fingerprinting was performed as described previously [13, 18] except that fluorescent-labeled primers were used instead of radio-labeled primers and the PCR products were analyzed using PRISM 3100 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The cloning procedure was also performed as described previously [13, 18].

Briefly, we synthesized the first strand cDNA with total RNA prepared from the cortex and the SCN. The cDNA was digested with appropriate restriction enzymes for fingerprinting, and adapters were ligated. Next, the adapter-ligated cDNA fragments amplified with PCR were analyzed using capillary electrophoresis and the peaks of interest were fractionated by slab gel electrophoresis followed by TA cloning and DNA sequencing.

#### 2.3. Real-time PCR

Real-time PCR was performed as described previously [15]. Briefly, total RNA prepared from the SCN, PVN and cerebral cortex was treated with DNase I (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and used for the first strand cDNA synthesis (SuperScript™ First-Strand Synthesis System for RT-PCR; Invitrogen). The reaction was performed using oligo d(T) 18 primer. The real-time PCR (FG, Syber Green PCR Master Mix, Applied Biosystems) was performed and analyzed by ABI PRISM 7700 (Applied Biosystems). The results for each sample were obtained by normalizing in relation to the expression level of the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Gapdh) gene. The PCR conditions were $95.0^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ for $10 \mathrm{~min}$ and 50 cycles of $95.0^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ for $15 \mathrm{~s}, 60.0^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ for $30 \mathrm{~s}$ and $78.0^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ for $40 \mathrm{~s}$. The primers for each gene were as follows:

- $D e x r a s 1$ forward $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{CCACACAACCTGAGGACCTT}-3^{\prime}$,
- reverse $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{TTCACAGCAGGTGACTGTCC}-3^{\prime}$;
- $G a p d h$ forward $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{GAGGCCGGTGCTGAGTATGTCGT}-3^{\prime}$,
- reverse $5^{\prime}-\mathrm{GGTGGTGCAGGATGCATTGCTG}-3^{\prime}$.

#### 2.4. In situ hybridization

Brains were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde-PBS solution for $24 \mathrm{~h}$, followed by immersion in 20% sucrose-PBS solution for another $24 \mathrm{~h}$. Then, the brains were sliced into 30-$\mu \mathrm{m}$ sections with a Cryostat (Leitz CM-1510, Germany). cDNA fragments were cloned into the plasmid vectors, pGEM-T Easy (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), which were linearized and used as template for cRNA probes. Radio-labeled probes were made using [$\alpha$-$^{33} \mathrm{P}] \mathrm{UTP}$ (New England Nuclear, Boston, MA, USA) with the standard protocols for cRNA synthesis. Hybridization was performed as described previously [28]. Regions 408–1153 and 1001–1408 of Acc. No. NM_009026 were used for the probe of the $D e x r a s 1$ gene.
3. Results

3.1. Identification of a gene expressed rhythmically in mouse SCN

To identify rhythmic genes in the SCN, we modified a mRNA fingerprinting method based on AFLP and used total RNA prepared from the SCN and cortex as templates. We prepared the SCN and cortex tissues from mice which were kept under DD conditions at CTs 2, 6, 10, 14, 18 and 22. We successfully identified a gene fragment from the SCN which expresses in a circadian rhythmic manner, as shown in Fig. 1. During the day, maximum and minimum expression of the gene were observed at CT14 and CT2, respectively, an approximate five-fold difference. By contrast, little or no expression was observed in the cortex. We performed analyses twice and obtained similar results. Next, we cloned the fragment and determined its DNA sequence. A subsequent homology search revealed that the fragment was transcribed from the Dexamethasone-induced RAS protein 1 (Dexras1) gene, which was initially isolated as a dexamethasone-induced gene [16] and belongs to the Ras superfamily of small GTPases. The transcript codes a 280 a.a. open reading frame (ORF).

3.2. Rhythmic expression in mouse SCN

Using real-time PCR we examined whether the Dexras1 gene expresses rhythmically or not, and detected rhythmic expression of the Dexras1 gene in the SCN over the course of 1 day (Fig. 2A), supporting the result obtained by the modified AFLP procedure. No rhythmic expression was detected in either the cortex or the PVN (Fig. 2A), as expected. We performed in situ hybridization to learn more about gene expression within the whole brain, and obtained similar results. Although expression of the Dexras1 gene was observed in the thalamus, piriform cortex and hippocampus in addition to the SCN (data not shown), circadian rhythmic expression was observed only in the SCN (Fig. 2B). Two different probes showed similar results; the result of one probe is shown (Fig. 2B and C). The change in the degree of expression of the Dexras1 gene in the SCN in 1 day is approximately five-fold, and the maximum expression of the gene was observed at CT14, which is in subjective night (Fig. 2A). Note that the tissue samples used for each experiment (modified AFLP, real-time PCR and in situ hybridization) were prepared independently, and the results for the three methods were quite similar.

3.3. No rhythmic expression in the SCN of Cry1 and Cry2 double knockout mice

Cry1 and Cry2 genes are known to play a critical role in the oscillator mechanism in rodents, and Cry1 and Cry2 targeted knockout mice exhibit an arrhythmic phenotype [21,24,31,32]. We examined the expression of the Dexras1 gene in the SCN of double knockout mice to assess the relationship between gene expression and CRY function. We prepared the SCN, cortex and PVN at CT6 and CT14 from wild-type and double knockout mice and performed real-time PCR (Fig. 2D). More accurately, we prepared tissues at CT6 and 14 from wild-type mice and at times corresponding to CT6 and 14 from the double knockout mice, because we could not define the CT in the arrhythmic mice. Although a more than three-fold difference in gene expression was found between the samples at CT6 and 14 in the SCN of wild-type mice, no difference was observed in the SCN of the Cry1 and Cry2 double knockout mice. Expression at CT14 decreased to that observed at CT6. As expected, in both the cortex and PVN, no difference in gene expression between CT6 and 14 was detected and no effect of the Cry mutation was observed.

4. Discussion

After several years during which many clock genes have been identified through mutant studies, the circadian-clock field has entered an exciting phase and it is now clear that new pieces will have to be identified through genetic screens and other molecular approaches [3].

In this study, we attempted to identify genes which express in a circadian rhythmic manner specifically in the SCN using an expression profiling procedure. As a result, we identified the Dexras1 gene as an SCN-specific rhythmic gene. Measuring its expression in the SCN over the course of a day using three different methods (modified AFLP, real-time PCR and in situ hybridization) yields clear evidence of a circadian rhythm in gene expression. Expression of the gene has a maximum peak at subjective night around CT14. To confirm that its rhythmic expression is

H. Takahashi et al. / Molecular Brain Research 110 (2003) 1–6

**Fig. 2.** (A) The rhythmic expression of the *Dexras1* gene in SCN observed by real-time PCR. The mean ± S.E. (*n* = 2) is indicated. The Y-axis indicates the relative amount of mRNA when the intensity of the fluorescence at CT2 in the SCN is defined as 100. The expression of the *Dexras1* gene in the SCN, cortex and PVN is shown. (B) SCN-specific rhythmic expression of the *Dexras1* gene observed by in situ hybridization within the whole brain. The result of the in situ hybridization with the *Dexras1* gene fragment as a probe (408–1153) using the whole brain containing the SCN is shown. (C) Probe for in situ hybridization and primers for real-time PCR. (D) Expression of the *Dexras1* gene in *Cry1* and *Cry2* double knockout mice. The results of real-time PCR using the SCN, cortex and PVN prepared from the double knockout mice and wild-type mice at CT6 and 14 are shown. The Y-axis indicates the relative amount of each mRNA when the intensity of the fluorescence at CT14 of the SCN is defined as 100.

confined to the SCN, we measured its expression in the cortex and PVN using real-time PCR, and also performed in situ hybridization using whole brain sections. All analyses showed SCN-specific rhythmic expression of *Dexras1* (Figs. 1 and 2). In addition, note that expression reaches a maximum at CT14, which is during subjective night. Most circadian genes (*Per1*, *Per2*, *Per3*, *Cry1*, *Cry2* and *Dbp*) reach maximum expression during subjective day, while *Bmal1* and *Nfil3/e4bp4* reach maximum expression during subjective night. In other words, *Bmal1*, *Nfil3/e4bp4* and *Dexras1* oscillate in antiphase with the other circadian genes. We did not find the typical E-box sequence (CACGTG), which is a cis-element controlling circadian expression in a diurnal rhythm found upstream of the ORF of *Per1* and *Dbp*, within 10 kbp upstream of *Dexras1*. The E-box sequence is also missing upstream of *Bmal1* [34]. This suggests that the *Dexras1* and *Bmal1* genes may be controlled by a similar mechanism in gene expression in the SCN.

*Dexras1* belongs to the Ras superfamily of small GTPases and was initially identified as a dexamethasone-induced gene [16]. It has the prenyl group binding site (CAAX box), ATP/GTP binding site motif A (P-loop), guanine base binding loops (NKXD) and EXSAK motif [16]. We did not find the dimerization PAS domain, which exist in PER, ARNT and SIM, in *Dexras1* [6]. It is expressed in several tissues in addition to the brain [9,29].

The mechanisms governing the phase-restricted effects of light on SCN clock are not understood. Fang et al. [9] found recently that *Dexras1* is involved in nitric oxide (NO) signaling through binding with the neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) adopter protein CAPON in the brain. Furthermore, it was shown that the NO signals through the NMDA receptor activate the phosphorylation of cyclic AMP responsible element binding protein (CREB) molecules during the night but do not activate during the day [4,7,8,10]. A gate molecule ‘X’ exists between NOS and CREB, by which the phosphorylation of CREB is restricted to the night [11,12]. In addition, Obrietan et al. [20] found the night-specific activation of mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) which phosphorylates CREB molecules on light exposure. They also suggested the presence of unknown molecules, by which the activity of MAPK is restricted during the night.

H. Takahashi et al. / Molecular Brain Research 110 (2003) 1–6

AGGTCA at 1.1 kbp upstream of the mouse Dexras1 gene and also found the sequence GGGTCA in the corresponding region of the human Dexras1 gene. This suggests that the Dexras1 gene is also regulated by Rev-ErbA/ROR.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank K. Yokoro for encouragement, and J.J. Rodrigue for editing the manuscript. We would also like to thank Y. Miyamoto, K. Shingu, M. Nakamura, H. Muto, K. Nishikawa and Y. Hoki-Fujimori for technical assistance.

References

[1] U. Albrecht, Z.S. Sun, G. Eichele, C.C. Lee, A differential response of two putative mammalian circadian regulators, mper1 and mper2, to light, Cell 91 (1997) 1055–1064.

[2] M.K. Bunger, L.D. Wilsbacher, S.M. Moran, C. Clendenin, L.A. Radcliffe, J.B. Hogenesch, M.C. Simon, J.S. Takahashi, C.A. Bradfield, Mop3 is an essential component of the master circadian pacemaker in mammals, Cell 103 (2000) 1009–1017.

[3] N. Cermakian, P. Sassone-Corsi, Multilevel regulation of the circadian clock, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 1 (2000) 59–67.

[4] D. Chen, W.J. Hurst, J.M. Ding, L.E. Faiman, B. Mayer, M.U. Gillette, Localization and characterization of nitric oxide synthase in the rat suprachiasmatic nucleus: evidence for a nitrergic plexus in the biological clock, J. Neurochem. 68 (1997) 855–861.

[5] C.S. Colwell, T.L. Page, A circadian rhythm in neural activity can be recorded from the central nervous system of the cockroach, J. Comp. Physiol. A 166 (1990) 643–649.

[6] S.T. Crews, J.B. Thomas, C.S. Goodman, The Drosophila single-minded gene encodes a nuclear protein with sequence similarity to the per gene product, Cell 52 (1988) 143–151.

[7] J.M. Ding, D. Chen, E.T. Weber, L.E. Faiman, M.A. Rea, M.U. Gillette, Resetting the biological clock: mediation of nocturnal circadian shifts by glutamate and NO, Science 266 (1994) 1713–1717.

[8] J.M. Ding, L.E. Faiman, W.J. Hurst, L.R. Kuriashkina, M.U. Gillette, Resetting the biological clock: mediation of nocturnal CREB phosphorylation via light, glutamate, and nitric oxide, J. Neurosci. 17 (1997) 667–675.

[9] M. Fang, S.R. Jaffrey, A. Sawa, K. Ye, X. Luo, S.H. Snyder, Dexras1: a G protein specifically coupled to neuronal nitric oxide synthase via CAPON, Neuron 28 (2000) 183–193.

[10] D. Gau, T. Lemberger, C. von Gall, O. Kretz, N. Le Minh, P. Gass, W. Schmid, U. Schibler, H.W. Korf, G. Schutz, Phosphorylation of CREB Ser142 regulates light-induced phase shifts of the circadian clock, Neuron 34 (2002) 245–253.

[11] M.U. Gillette, Regulation of entrainment pathways by the suprachiasmatic circadian clock: sensitivities to second messengers, Prog. Brain Res. 111 (1996) 121–132.

[12] M.U. Gillette, Cellular and biochemical mechanisms underlying circadian rhythms in vertebrates, Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 7 (1997) 797–804.

[13] Y. Habu, S. Fukada-Tanaka, Y. Hisatomi, S. Iida, Amplified restriction fragment length polymorphism-based mRNA fingerprinting using a single restriction enzyme that recognizes a 4-bp sequence, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 234 (1997) 516–521.

[14] S.T. Inouye, H. Kawamura, Persistence of circadian rhythmicity in a

Fig. 3. Model of the Dexras1 function in circadian rhythm in the SCN. The solid lines show the signal pathways observed in the SCN, and the broken lines indicate hypothetical pathways. Glu, glutamine; CaMK, calmodulin dependent protein kinase; MAPK, mitogen activated protein kinase; CRE, cyclic AMP responsible element; CREB, CRE binding protein.

RAS family molecules phosphorylate and activate MAPK. Therefore, the fact that *Dexras1* expresses rhythmically in a circadian manner with high expression during the night strongly suggests that Dexras1 is the gate molecule ‘X’ (Fig. 3). This is the first cycling gene specific to the SCN which is suggested to be a product involved in the entrainment mechanism.

Quite recently, in the course of our study, Panda et al. [22] suggested a number of genes expressed rhythmically in mouse SCN using a DNA chip with 10,000 genes. They found a total of 664 candidates for the rhythmic expressing genes, 337 of which were observed in the SCN. The *Dexras1* gene was among the candidates described in the supplemental data. This is great information for the field of the circadian rhythm and a starting point for further studies.

This study is the first time that the G-protein encoding gene, which plays a role in signal transduction, has been isolated as a cycling gene specific to the SCN.

## 5. Note added in proof

Ueda et al. [30] reported that a putative Rev-ErbA/ROR response element (RGGTCA) was found in 10 of 32 genes generating circadian expression antiphase to *Per* gene expression, including the Bmal1 gene. While they did not categorize the Dexras1 gene as the gene possessing the Rev-ErbA/ROR response element, we found the sequence

mammalian hypothalamic ‘island’ containing the suprachiasmatic nucleus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76 (1979) 5962–5966.

[15] A. Karsai, S. Muller, S. Platz, M.T. Hauser, Evaluation of a homemade SYBR green I reaction mixture for real-time PCR quantification of gene expression, Biotechniques 32 (2002) 790–792, 794–796.

[16] R.J. Kemppainen, E.N. Behrend, Dexamethasone rapidly induces a novel ras superfamily member-related gene in AtT-20 cells, J. Biol. Chem. 273 (1998) 3129–3131.

[17] D.C. Klein, R.Y. Moore, S.M. Reppert, Suprachiasmatic Nucleus: The Mind’s Clock, Oxford University Press, New York, 1991, pp. 467.

[18] T. Kojima, Y. Habu, S. Iida, Y. Ogihara, Direct isolation of differentially expressed genes from a specific chromosome region of common wheat: application of the amplified fragment length polymorphism-based mRNA fingerprinting (AMF) method in combination with a deletion line of wheat, Mol. Gen. Genet. 263 (2000) 635–641.

[19] Y. Miyamoto, A. Sancar, Vitamin B2-based blue-light photoreceptors in the retinohypothalamic tract as the photoactive pigments for setting the circadian clock in mammals, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 (1998) 6097–6102.

[20] K. Obrietan, S. Impey, D.R. Storm, Light and circadian rhythmicity regulate MAP kinase activation in the suprachiasmatic nuclei, Nat. Neurosci. 1 (1998) 693–700.

[21] H. Okamura, S. Miyake, Y. Sumi, S. Yamaguchi, A. Yasui, M. Muijtjens, J.H. Hoeijmakers, G.T. van der Horst, Photic induction of mPer1 and mPer2 in cry-deficient mice lacking a biological clock, Science 286 (1999) 2531–2534.

[22] S. Panda, M.P. Antoch, B.H. Miller, A.I. Su, A.B. Schook, M. Straume, P.G. Schultz, S.A. Kay, J.S. Takahashi, J.B. Hogenesch, Coordinated transcription of key pathways in the mouse by the circadian clock, Cell, online 2 April 2002.

[23] I. Sauman, S.M. Reppert, Circadian clock neurons in the silkworm Antheraea pernyi: novel mechanisms of Period protein regulation, Neuron 17 (1996) 889–900.

[24] L.P. Shearman, S. Sriram, D.R. Weaver, E.S. Maywood, I. Chaves, B. Zheng, K. Kume, C.C. Lee, G.T. van der Horst, M.H. Hastings, S.M. Reppert, Interacting molecular loops in the mammalian circadian clock, Science 288 (2000) 1013–1019.

[25] L.P. Shearman, M.J. Zylka, D.R. Weaver, L.F. Kolakowski Jr., S.M.

Reppert, Two period homologs: circadian expression and photic regulation in the suprachiasmatic nuclei, Neuron 19 (1997) 1261–1269.

[26] Z.S. Sun, U. Albrecht, O. Zhuchenko, J. Bailey, G. Eichele, C.C. Lee, RIGUI, a putative mammalian ortholog of the Drosophila period gene, Cell 90 (1997) 1003–1011.

[27] J.S. Takahashi, N. Murakami, S.S. Nikaido, B.L. Pratt, L.M. Robertson, The avian pineal, a vertebrate model system of the circadian oscillator: cellular regulation of circadian rhythms by light, second messengers, and macromolecular synthesis, Recent Prog. Horm. Res. 45 (1989) 279–348, discussion 348–252.

[28] H. Tei, H. Okamura, Y. Shigeyoshi, C. Fukuhara, R. Ozawa, M. Hirose, Y. Sakaki, Circadian oscillation of a mammalian homologue of the Drosophila period gene, Nature 389 (1997) 512–516.

[29] Y. Tu, C. Wu, Cloning, expression and characterization of a novel human Ras-related protein that is regulated by glucocorticoid hormone, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1489 (1999) 452–456.

[30] H.R. Ueda, W. Chen, A. Adachi, H. Wakamatsu, S. Hayashi, T. Takasugi, M. Nagano, K. Nakahama, Y. Suzuki, S. Sugano, M. Iino, Y. Shigeyoshi, S. Hashimoto, A transcription factor response element for gene expression during circadian night, Nature 418 (2002) 534–539.

[31] G.T. van der Horst, M. Muijtjens, K. Kobayashi, R. Takano, S. Kanno, M. Takao, J. de Wit, A. Verkerk, A.P. Eker, D. van Leenen, R. Buijs, D. Bootsma, J.H. Hoeijmakers, A. Yasui, Mammalian Cry1 and Cry2 are essential for maintenance of circadian rhythms, Nature 398 (1999) 627–630.

[32] M.H. Vitaterna, C.P. Selby, T. Todo, H. Niwa, C. Thompson, E.M. Fruechte, K. Hitomi, R.J. Thresher, T. Ishikawa, J. Miyazaki, J.S. Takahashi, A. Sancar, Differential regulation of mammalian period genes and circadian rhythmicity by cryptochromes 1 and 2, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96 (1999) 12114–12119.

[33] D.K. Welsh, D.E. Logothetis, M. Meister, S.M. Reppert, Individual neurons dissociated from rat suprachiasmatic nucleus express independently phased circadian firing rhythms, Neuron 14 (1995) 697–706.

[34] W. Yu, M. Nomura, M. Ikeda, Interacting feedback loops within the mammalian clock: BMAL1 is negatively autoregulated and upregulated by CRY1, CRY2, and PER2, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 290 (2002) 933–941.
