
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 2003 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**Biochemical Properties of CikA, an Unusual Phytochrome-like Histidine Protein Kinase That Resets the Circadian Clock in Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942**

Received for publication, December 30, 2002, and in revised form, March 7, 2003  
Published, JBC Papers in Press, March 7, 2003, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M213255200

Michinori Mutsuda‡§, Klaus-Peter Michel‡§∥, Xiaofan Zhang‡, Beronda L. Montgomery**, and Susan S. Golden‡‡

From the ‡Department of Biology, Texas A & M University, College Station, Texas 77843-3258 and the ||Section of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California, Davis, California 95616

We recently described the *cikA* (circadian kinase A) gene, whose product supplies environmental information to the circadian oscillator in the cyanobacterium *Synechococcus elongatus* PCC 7942. CikA possesses three distinct domains: a GAF, a histidine protein kinase (HPK), and a receiver domain similar to those of the response regulator family. To determine how CikA functions in providing circadian input, we constructed modified alleles to tag and truncate the protein, allowing analysis of each domain individually. CikA covalently bound bilin chromophores *in vitro*, even though it lacks the expected ligand residues, and the GAF domain influenced but did not entirely account for this function. Full-length CikA and truncated variants that carry the HPK domain showed autophosphorylation activity. Deletion of the GAF domain or the N-terminal region adjacent to GAF dramatically reduced autophosphorylation, whereas elimination of the receiver domain increased activity 10-fold. Assays to test phosphorelay from the HPK to the cryptic receiver domain, which lacks the conserved aspartyl residue that serves as a phosphoryl acceptor in response regulators, were negative. We propose that the cryptic receiver is a regulatory domain that interacts with an unknown protein partner to modulate the autokinase activity of CikA but does not work as *bona fide* receiver domain in a phosphorelay.

work synergistically (8). Cryptochromes are blue light photoreceptors that most likely evolved from DNA photolyases. They bind two chromophores, flavin-adenine dinucleotide, and a pterin (methenyltetrahydrofolate) or a deazaflavin (7,8-dimethyl-8-hydroxy-5-deazariboflavine). The latter functions in light perception by transducing excitation energy to flavin-adenine dinucleotide, which then catalyzes an electron transfer reaction in the DNA photolyase (5, 9, 10). Plant phytochromes are red/far-red photoreceptors that bear linear tetrapyrrole (bilin) chromophores (11, 12) attached to an N-terminal sensory module known as a GAF domain (13, 14). Plant phytochromes also have sequence similarity to histidine-protein kinases (HPK)¹ but instead possess serine/threonine (S/T) kinase activity (15, 16). Members of the phytochrome family have also been identified in prokaryotes, including cyanobacteria (17–19), purple photosynthetic bacteria (20, 21), and nonphotosynthetic eubacteria (22). Many of these proteins exhibit a similar domain structure to plant phytochromes with an N-terminal bilin-binding domain that is associated with an HPK module (23). The HPK domain of cyanobacterial Cph1 has been shown to have authentic HPK activity (19).

We recently described the *cikA* gene of the cyanobacterium *Synechococcus elongatus* PCC 7942, which encodes a phytochrome-related protein with similarity to HPKs of bacterial two component signal transduction systems (24–26) and is involved in signal perception for resetting the circadian clock in response to environmental cues (27). CikA was first identified from a Tn5 mutant that has subtle alterations in light-responsive regulation of the photosystem II gene *psbAII* (28). The mutant has an expression level of a *psbAII::luxAB* reporter fusion strain that is 50–80% of that in wild type (WT) under low light conditions and exhibits an exaggerated increase in expression upon exposure to higher light intensities. However, a more striking circadian phenotype was observed, because both the period length and amplitude of circadian rhythms of different *luxAB* reporter strains (*kaiB::luxAB*, *purF::luxAB*, and *kaiA::luxAB*) were reduced (27, 29, 30). In addition, the relative phasing of expression (timing of circadian peaks) was altered for some genes. The additive effect on period length reduction of *cikA* inactivation in both short and long period *kai* mutants of *S. elongatus* suggested that CikA and the Kai proteins have independent, nonoverlapping functions. A lack of phase resetting in the CikA-free mutant in response to a 5-h

* This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant GM62419-02 (to S. S. G.). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* § These authors contributed equally to this work.
* ∥ Present address: Fakultaet Fuer Biologie, Universitaet Bielefeld, D-33615 Bielefeld, Germany.
* ** Supported by National Science Foundation Grant MCB 96-04511 and United States Department of Agriculture Grant AMD-9801768 to J. Clark Lagarias (University of California, Davis). Present address: Dept. of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47405.
* ‡‡ To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dept. of Biology, 3258 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843-3258. Tel.: 979-845-9824; Fax: 979-862-7659; E-mail: sgolden@tamu.edu.

¹ The abbreviations used are: HPK, histidine-protein kinase(s); WT, wild type; RR, response regulator(s); APRR, *Arabidopsis pseudo-response regulator(s)*; Ap, ampicillin; Cm, chloramphenicol; Gm, gentamycin; Km, kanamycin; Sp, spectinomycin; IPTG, isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside; Ni-NTA, nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid; PVDF, polyvinylidene difluoride; PCB, phycocyanobilin; BSA, bovine serum albumin.

dark pulse that resets WT revealed that CikA functions as a sensor component on the input pathway of the circadian clock.

The deduced amino acid sequence of *cikA* reveals it to be a member of the extended phytochrome family (27). CikA exhibits a typical bacteriophytochrome domain structure with an N-terminal GAF domain (13) and a C-terminal histidine kinase motif possessing H-, N-, D/F-, and G-boxes, as defined previously by Stock *et al.* (31). By contrast, CikA lacks the PAS domains present in plant phytochromes (27, 32). Relative to the plant phytochromes PhyA–E and the cyanobacterial bacteriophytochromes Cph1 of *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803 (18, 33) and RcaE of *Fremyella diplosiphon* (17), the GAF domain of CikA has a deletion near the usually conserved cysteine ligand for bilin binding; this makes it difficult to evaluate which residues, if any, play a role in bilin association with the CikA apoprotein. Indeed, CikA appears to lack both the conserved Cys residue that serves as the site for bilin attachment in plant phytochrome photoreceptors and the adjacent His residue to which phycocyanobilin (PCB) or biliverdin (BV) binds for some BphPs from nonphotosynthetic bacteria (22, 34).

The C-terminal region of CikA has similarities to receiver domains of two-component response regulators (RR) such as PhoB. However, the mode of action of this RR domain may be different, because the conserved Asp residue necessary for phosphoryl transfer is missing (24–27). In this regard, the CikA structure is similar to the family of so-called pseudo-response regulators (APRR) that has been identified in *A. thaliana* (35–38). APRRs also possess N-terminal CONSTANS “Myb-related” motifs, which regulate transcriptional activity in eukaryotes, in addition to their pseudo-receiver domains. In contrast to the authentic response regulator proteins of *A. thaliana*, APRRs lack two of three invariant residues of receiver domains, which apparently prevents them from accepting phosphoryl groups from *A. thaliana* histidine kinases *in vitro* (35). APRR mutants also exhibit significant circadian phenotypes, such as delayed flowering and shortened periods of several rhythmic markers, including expression of the *CAB* (chlorophyll a/b-binding protein) gene (37, 38).

To determine whether CikA is an input photoreceptor to the cyanobacterial circadian clock and to clarify its mode of action, we made a variety of plasmid constructs for expression of tagged full-length and truncated CikA variants in *Escherichia coli* and in *S. elongatus*. After showing functionality of the His-tagged CikA variant in complementation experiments, we investigated the ability of affinity-purified CikA to covalently attach a bilin chromophore *in vitro*. We also tested the influence of other predicted domains on the autophosphorylation activity of the HPK. The results suggest regulatory roles for the N-terminal, GAF, and pseudo-receiver domains.

---

**EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES**

**Culture Conditions—** The mesophilic cyanobacterium *S. elongatus* PCC 7942 WT (39) and mutant strains were grown in BG-11M medium (40) as 100-ml cultures in CO₂-enriched air (1%) at a light intensity (photosynthetic photon flux density) of 150 microeinsteins m⁻² s⁻¹ (standard fluorescent light bulbs). All of the cyanobacterial strains were grown on BG-11M agar plates containing 1.5% agar (Difco Bacto Agar). Where indicated, antibiotics were added at the following concentrations: ampicillin (Ap), 10 mg liter⁻¹; chloramphenicol (Cm), 10 mg liter⁻¹; gentamycin (Gm), 2 mg liter⁻¹; kanamycin (Km), 25 mg liter⁻¹; and spectinomycin (Sp), 20 mg liter⁻¹.

**E. coli—** *E. coli* strains DH10B, SG13009 (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and BL21DE3 (Novagen, Madison, WI) were hosts for plasmids. The cells were cultivated in liquid or on 1.5% agar in LB medium. Where indicated, the antibiotics were added to the following concentrations: Ap, 150 mg liter⁻¹; Cm, 50 mg liter⁻¹; Gm, 10 mg liter⁻¹; Km, 50 mg liter⁻¹; and Sp, 50 mg liter⁻¹.

**Construction of Mutant Strains and DNA Manipulations—** Plasmid clone analysis, cleavage with restriction endonucleases, agarose gel electrophoresis, ligation, and transformation of *E. coli* strains were performed according to standard procedures (41). Plasmids, strains, and oligonucleotide primers for PCR amplification with Pwo polymerase (Roche Applied Science) are listed in Table I.

**Expression and Purification of His₆- and Trx-tagged CikA and Truncated Versions of CikA in E. coli—** Expression of recombinant CikA₆HIS was achieved using the Qiaexpress overexpression system (Qiagen) for synthesis of N-terminal His₆-tagged proteins. A PCR-derived fragment using primers AMO558 and F0748, encoding the entire *cikA* gene except the first methionine, was cloned into *SacI/SalI*-digested pQE30/80L expression vector and used to transform *E. coli* SG13009. The cells were grown to OD₆₀₀ₙₘ = 0.5, induced with 0.9 mM IPTG, and grown for an additional 3–5 h at 25 °C to minimize the formation of insoluble protein. The cells were harvested and passed twice through a prechilled French press at 137.9 MPa. This extract was clarified by centrifugation for 30 min at 12,000 × g to prepare a lysate for affinity purification on nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid (Ni-NTA) matrix (Qiagen). For expression of truncated versions of CikA, we used the pET overexpression system (Novagen), generating fusion proteins that carry an N-terminal thioredoxin domain (Trx) for enhanced solubility as well as N- and/or C-terminal His₆ tags for purification by a Ni-NTA matrix (Table II).

**Expression and Purification of Cik₆HIS in S. elongatus—** 5 ml of stationary phase AMC1006 was added to 500 ml of fresh BG-11M medium, incubated in an aquarium at 30 °C and a light intensity of ~200 microeinsteins m⁻² s⁻¹, and bubbled with 1% CO₂ in air. When the cells were grown to an OD₇₅₀ₙₘ of 1.5, production of CikA₆HIS was induced with 2 mM IPTG. After 48 h, the cells were harvested, washed, and resuspended in 20 ml of Buffer 1 (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl). After passage through a prechilled French press at 137.9 MPa, a cleared lysate was prepared by centrifugation at 100,000 × g for 60 min. CikA₆HIS in the soluble protein fraction was diluted to 200 ml in Buffer 1. Protein was bound to Ni-NTA-agarose (Qiagen), washed, and eluted with Buffer 1 that contained 50 and 250 mM imidazole, respectively.

**Assay of Bioluminescence in 96-well Microtiter Plates—** Inocula of AMC913, AMC914, AMC1006, and the corresponding control strains were streaked from solid medium onto 300-μl BG-11 M agar pads in 96-well plates. After applying a 12-h dark pulse to the cultures to synchronize the circadian clock, the *psbAI::luxAB* and *kaiB::luxAB* reporter strains were incubated in continuous light, and bioluminescence was measured using a Packard TopCount luminometer (Packard Instrument Company, Meriden, CT) (29). Period length and amplitude were calculated using I&A and FFT-NLLS software (www.scripps.edu/cb/kay/shareware/) (30).

**[γ⁻³²P]ATP Autophosphorylation Assays—** CikA autophosphorylation assays were done as previously described (42, 43), except that gels were dried for exposure to phosphorimaging plates in most cases. Briefly, the standard phosphorylation buffer stock to which purified protein was added was 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM dithiothreitol, 0.1 mM ATP (unlabeled), and 0.15 μM [γ⁻³²P]ATP. Chemical stability measurements were performed as described by McCleary and Zusman (42) with minor modifications. The assays to test for transphosphorylation from ³²P-labeled CikA₆HIS or Trx-ΔRR (Table II) to the receiver domain of CikA were done according to previously published protocols (44). The activities were quantitated using a Fujix BAS 2000 phosphorimaging system.

**In Vitro Bilin Lyase Assays with Purified CikA—** The assays were performed according to a previously published protocol with purified phycocyanobilin, phytochromobilin, and phycoerythrobilin (12). Biliverdin was obtained as described previously (45). After the reaction, the mixtures were concentrated by acetone precipitation and applied to 0.1% SDS-8% PAGE. The proteins were electrophoretically transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes (Immun-Blot™; Bio-Rad) for 3 h at 45 V. After incubation of the PVDF membranes with 1.3 M zinc acetate, the bilin adducts were visualized by fluorescence with a Molecular Dynamics Storm 860 instrument with a setting of red fluorescence and Photomultiplier tube voltage = 1000.

---

**RESULTS**

**Complementation of a cikA Mutant with an Affinity Tagged Allele—** We constructed a 6-histidine tag-encoding full-length allele of *cikA* (*cikA₆HIS*) in the IPTG-inducible expression vector pQE30/80 to express, purify, and characterize recombinant CikA in both *E. coli* and *S. elongatus* (Table II). To verify that the tagged allele has equivalent functions to WT *cikA*, the *cikA₆HIS* gene was introduced into the *S. elongatus* CikA-free

Strains                      Plasmids for transformations                              Marker                     Characteristics of plasmids and strains                                                                                       Source
S. elongatus                 PCC 7942                                                 basic wild type strain                                                               Lab collection
AMC 543                      pAM 1583, pAM 1850                                       Km, Cm                     psbAI::luxAB NS 2.2<sup>a</sup>, psbA::luxCDE NS 2.1<sup>a</sup>                                                       Lab collection
AMC 568                      pAM 1583, pAM 1850, pAM 2152                             Km, Cm, Gm                 cikA, psbAI::luxAB NS 2.2, psbA::luxCDE NS 2.1                                                                           Lab collection
AMC 669                      pAM 2195                                                 Cm                         psbAI::luxABCDE, NS 2.2                                                                                                   Lab collection
AMC 913                      pAM 1583, pAM 1850,                                      Cm, Km, Gm, Sp             cikA, psbAI::luxAB NS 2.2, psbA::luxCDE NS 2.1, cikA<sub>6His</sub>                                                   This study
                              pAM 2152, pAM 2447                                                                                                                                                                                                  
AMC 914                      pAM 1583, pAM 1850,                                      Cm, Km, Gm, Sp             cikA, psbAI::luxAB, psbA::luxCDE, cikA<sub>6His</sub>NS 1;                                                          This study
                              pAM 2152, pAM 2448                                                                                                                                                                                                  
AMC 1003                     pAM 1850                                                 Cm                         psbAI::luxCDE, NS 2.1                                                                                                    This study
AMC 1004                     pAM 1850, pAM 2857                                       Cm, Km                     psbAI::luxCDE NS 2.1, kaiB::luxAB NS 2.2                                                                               This study
AMC 1005                     pAM 1850, pAM 2857, pAM 2152                             Cm, Km, Gm                 cikA, kaiB::luxAB NS 2.2, psbAI::luxCDE NS 2.1                                                                        This study
AMC 1006                     pAM 1850, pAM 2857,                                      Cm, Km, Gm, Sp             cikA, kaiB::luxAB NS 2.2, psbAI::luxCDE NS 2.1, cikA<sub>6His</sub>;                                                This study
                              pAM 2152, pAM 2477                                                                                                                                                                                                  
E. coli                      AM1843                    pREP 4                        Km                         Qiagen E. coli overexpression strain SG 13009; contains                                                              Qiagen<sup>c</sup>
                                                                                                               pREP 4 plasmid                                                                                                           
AM2255                       p322-Ptrc                                              Ap                         Plasmid used to overexpress genes from P<sub>trc</sub>; includes                                                    H. Iwasaki
                                                                                                               laqI                                                                                                                     (Nagoya
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           University)
AM2314                       pAM 2314                                                Sp                         basic NS 1 cloning vector                                                                                               Lab collection
AM2420                       pAM 2420                                                Ap, Km                     PCR amplified cikA fragment (AM 0558 and F 0748),                                                                  This study
                                                                                                               encoding full-length CikA<sub>HIS6</sub> cloned into SacI-SalI-                                                       
                                                                                                               digested pQE30<sup>c</sup>; also carries pREP 4                                                                         
AM2428                       pAM 2428                                                Sp                         NS 2 overexpression cloning vector; blunted BglII                                                                   This study
                                                                                                               fragment from pAM 2255 cloned into SmaI-cut                                                                           
                                                                                                               pAM 2314; unique SmaI site downstream of P<sub>trc</sub>                                                               
                                                                                                               promoter                                                                                                                
AM2448                       pAM 2448                                                Sp                         XhoI-HindIII fragment from pAM 2420, encoding                                                                         This study
                                                                                                               CikA<sub>6HIS</sub> plus T 5 promoter and lacI operator cloned                                                       
                                                                                                               into SmaI site of pAM 2428; used for complementation                                                                   
                                                                                                               of cikA in psbAI::luxABpsbAI::luxCDE reporter                                                                           
                                                                                                               background (AMC 568)                                                                                                      
AM2477                       pAM 2477                                                Sp                         Blunted MfeI-HindIII fragment from pAM 2420 cloned                                                                    This study
                                                                                                               into SmaI-digested pAM 2428 (NS 1) for                                                                                 
                                                                                                               complementation of cikA mutation in a psbAI::luxAB                                                                     

                                                                                                               psbAI::luxCDE reporter background                                                                                      
AM2478                       pAM 2478                                                Ap, Km                     cikASacI-SalI fragment from pAM 2420, encoding full-                                                                  This study
                                                                                                               length CikA<sub>HIS6</sub> was cloned into SacI-SalI cut                                                                 
                                                                                                               pQE80L<sup>c</sup>, pREP 4(laqI)                                                                                       
AM2760                       pAM 2760                                                Ap                         PCR-amplified 1.8-kb cikA fragment (AMO 558-AMO 543)                                                                  This study
                                                                                                               cloned into SacI-XhoI cut pET32a(+)<sup>d</sup>, encoding ΔRR                                                          
AM2761                       pAM 2761                                                Ap                         PCR-amplified 0.5-kb cikA fragment (AMO 542-F 0748)                                                                   This study
                                                                                                               cloned into BamHI-SalI-cut pET32c(+)<sup>d</sup>, encoding                                                             
                                                                                                               Trx-RR                                                                                                                  
AM2763                                                                                                          Novagen<sup>d</sup> strain for protein overexpression; contains                                                         Novagen<sup>d</sup>
                                                                                                               chromosomal copy of T 7 polymerase gene under control                                                                 
                                                                                                               of IPTG inducible promoter; suitable as host for vectors                                                              
                                                                                                               like pET32a-c(+) with T7lac promoter                                                                                  
AM2803                       pAM 2803                                                Ap                         PCR-amplified cikA fragment (AMO 558-AMO 559) cut                                                                     This study
                                                                                                               with SacI-XhoI and cloned into pET32a(+)<sup>d</sup>, encoding                                                         
                                                                                                               ΔHPK                                                                                                                   
AM2804                       pAM 2804                                                Ap                         PCR-amplified cikA fragment (AMO 558-AMO 560) cut                                                                     This study
                                                                                                               with SacI-XhoI and cloned into pET32a(+)<sup>d</sup>, encoding                                                         
                                                                                                               N+GAF                                                                                                                   
AM2932                       pAM 2932                                                Ap                         2.2-kb NruI-HindIII fragment of pAM 2478 cloned into                                                                 This study
                                                                                                               pAM 2798atNruI-HindIII sites, encoding Trx-CikA                                                                        
AM2933                       pAM 2933                                                Ap                         1.3-kb BglII-BamHI fragment of pAM 2478 cloned into                                                                  This study
                                                                                                               pAM 2761atBglII-BamHI sites, encoding ΔN                                                                              
AM2934                       pAM 2934                                                Ap                         pAM 2932 derivative from which GAF domain has been                                                                    This study
                                                                                                               removed at positions 1051-1515 of pAM 2932 by the                                                                      
                                                                                                               method of Taylor and Eckstein (see “Experimental Procedures”) with AMO 693 and AMO 694, encoding                          
                                                                                                               ΔGAF                                                                                                                   
AM2935                       pAM 2935                                                Ap                         pAM 2804 derivative from which a 0.6-kb BglII fragment                                                                This study
                                                                                                               was removed and the remaining plasmid self-ligated,                                                                   
                                                                                                               encoding Trx-GAF                                                                                                        
AM2936                       pAM 2936                                                Ap                         pAM 2478 derivative produced by the method of Taylor                                                                  This study
                                                                                                               and Eckstein (see “Experimental Procedures”) with                                                                     
                                                                                                               AMO 697 and AMO 698, containing a point mutation                                                                       
                                                                                                               (Ala to His) at amino acid number 407inCikA<sub>6HIS</sub>                                                              
                                                                                                               (corresponds to WT His<sup>393</sup>)                                                                                   
AM2937                       pAM 2937                                                Ap                         2.2-kb NruI-HindIII fragment from pAM 2936 cloned into                                                                This study
                                                                                                               pAM 2798atNruI-HindIII sites, encoding Trx-H393A                                                                        


CikA Activities

TABLE I—continued

| Oligo- | Sequence 5' to 3' | Characteristics | Source |
|--------|-------------------|-----------------|--------|
| nucleotides | | | |
| AMO 558 | GTTTTGCCTGAGCTCGCACCATC | upstream cikA primer with SacI site, replaces cikA ATG start codon in all overexpression constructs | This study |
| F0748 | GCATTGGTCGACTCGCAG | downstream cikA primer with SalI site, includes native stop codon | This study |
| AMO 542 | CAGTCTGGATCCCCGAACAA | with F0748 amplifies 500-bp fragment, which encodes N-terminally truncated version of CikA (CikA-RR) in AM2761; contains mutated BamHI site for cloning into pET32c(+) | This study |
| AMO 543/548 | TTCTCGAGGGACGGTCTAGG | with AMO 558 amplifies 1870-bp fragment, which encodes C-terminally truncated version of CikA in AM2760 (CikA-CBD-HKD); contains mutated XhoI site for cloning into pET32a(+) | This study |
| AMO 556 | CAGGCGGTTCTGGTATGA | pET32a/c(+) sequencing primer | This study |
| AMO 559 | GTTCATGACTCGAGGTGGCCAA | with AMO 558 amplifies 1184-bp fragment, which encodes C-terminally truncated version of CikA in AM2803; contains mutagenized XhoI site for cloning into pQE80 or pET32a(+) | This study |
| AMO 560 | CTGATCTTGAAGCCTTACCCTAGAG | with AMO 558 amplifies 1066-bp fragment, which encodes C-terminally truncated version of CikA in AM2804; contains mutagenized HindIII site for cloning into pET32a(+) | This study |
| AMO 693 | CAAATTCGTCTCAGTTTACTCTC GATCGCCATTTAC | forward primer of fusion sequence from positions 1033–1050 and positions 1516–1533 of Trx-CikA open reading frame in pAM2932, used for a deletion of GAF domain | This study |
| AMO 694 | GTAAATGGCGATCGAGAGTAAAC TGAGACGAATTTG | reverse primer of fusion sequence from positions 1033–1050 and positions 1516–1533inTrx-CikA open reading frame in pAM2932, used for a deletion of GAF domain | This study |
| AMO 698 | GGCCACCATGTCGGCCGAACTCAGACG | forward primer to introduce a point mutation of His to Ala at amino acid number 407 in CikA<sub>HIS</sub> | This study |
| AMO 697 | CGTCCTGAGTTCGGCCGACATGGTGGCC | reverse primer to introduce a point mutation of His to Ala at amino acid number 407 in CikA<sub>HIS</sub> | This study |

* Neutral site II (GenBank™ accession U44761) cloning sites NS2.1 (BstEII) and 2.2 (BglII).
* Neutral site I (GenBank™ accession U30252).
* Qiagen, Valencia, CA.
* Novagen, Madison, WI.

---

TABLE II

Characteristics of variant CikA proteins

Domains in native CikA were defined as follows: (i) GAF domain: aa 184–338; (ii) HPK domain; H-box aa 393, N-box aa 498–518, D/F-box aa 536–562; and (iii) RR domain: aa 630–689.

| Name | Strain | Encoded amino acids of native CikA | Location of His tag |
|------|--------|------------------------------------|---------------------|
| CikA<sub>HIS</sub> | AM2478 | 2–754 | N terminus |
| Trx-CikA | AM2932 | 2–754 | N terminus |
| ΔRR | AM2760 | 2–621 | Twin tag |
| ΔATP | AM2798 | 2–419 | N terminus |
| ΔHPK | AM2803 | 2–390 | N terminus |
| N+GAF | AM2804 | 2–350 | Twin tag |
| ΔN | AM2933 | 184–754 | N terminus |
| ΔGAF | AM2934 | 2–183,399–754 | N terminus |
| Trx-RR | AM2761 | 606–754 | N terminus |
| Trx-GAF | AM2935 | 184–350 | Twin tag |
| Trx-H393A | AM2937 | 2–754 | N terminus |

---

mutant strain AMC568, which carries a psbAI::luxAB reporter gene. Previous work had shown that the insertional inactivation of cikA in strain AMC568 leads to clear circadian phenotypes (27). These include alteration of period length (shortened by about 2 h) and reduction in amplitude of the oscillation of expression from reporter genes, e.g. kaiB::luxAB, purF::luxAB, psbAII::luxAB, and psbAI::luxAB, as well as a change in the relative phasing of circadian peaks for some genes, such as the light-regulated psbA family. A construct that bears the cikA<sub>6HIS</sub> allele (pAM2477: P<sub>TRC</sub>-OP-OP-cikA<sub>6HIS</sub>) was introduced into strain AMC568 via a neutral site I-targeting over-expression vector pAM2428 (P<sub>trc</sub> and laqI regulation system) (Table I). We monitored bioluminescence from the complemented strain, AMC913 (pAM2477), along with the parent strain AMC568 and the WT psbAI::luxAB reporter strain AMC669, to assess the circadian phenotypes. The cikA<sub>6HIS</sub> allele complemented the cikA phenotype with respect to period length and amplitude (compare traces from of AMC568 and AMC913 without IPTG; Fig. 1.). Based on these experiments, the following period lengths were calculated: (i) AMC568: 23.85 ± 0.34 h, n = 8; (ii) AMC669: 25.24 ± 0.23 h, n = 8; and (iii) AMC913 without IPTG: 24.99 ± 0.35 h, n = 8. Because period length was altered in AMC913 in the absence of inducer, transcriptional repression of cikA<sub>6HIS</sub> appears to be leaky despite the presence of twin LaqI operator sequences; the leaky expression was sufficient to complement the cikA phenotype. Induction of CikA<sub>6HIS</sub> expression in AMC913 by adding 2 mM IPTG led to an arrhythmic phenotype of psbAI::luxAB reporter activity (Fig. 1). The effect of CikA<sub>6HIS</sub> overexpression on the more robust, high amplitude rhythm of kaiB::luxAB in a CikA-free mutant background (AMC1006) also led to arrhythmic bioluminescence (data not shown).

CikA Activities

FIG. 1. Circadian phenotypes of *psbAI::luxAB* reporter strains carrying WT, null, or His<sub>6</sub>-tag-encoding alleles of *cikA*. The samples were entrained and bioluminescence was monitored as described under “Experimental Procedures.” Triangles, AMC 669 (WT *cikA* background); diamonds, AMC 568 (*cikA* null); squares, AMC 913 (ectopic *cikA*<sub>HIS</sub> in *cikA* background); circles, AMC 913 (in the presence of 2 mM IPTG).

Chromophore Ligation Assays with Various Substrates—We assayed in vitro ligation of bilin chromophores to full-length CikA<sub>HIS</sub> and a number of variants to determine whether the GAF-like domain of CikA can autocatalytically attach a bilin chromophore, indicating lyase activity. Table II and Fig. 2 describe the proteins used in this study. The proteins were overexpressed in *E. coli* and affinity-purified by His<sub>6</sub> tags. Truncated versions of CikA required, additionally, a Trx tag at the N terminus to improve solubility, even though the full-length protein is soluble when expressed with only a His<sub>6</sub> tag. Zinc blot analysis, which detects tetrapyrroles, gave clear fluorescent signals for CikA<sub>HIS</sub> with phytochromobilin (PΦB) and PCB chromophores (Fig. 3). The fluorescence with these substrates was well above the background obtained when the protein was incubated with Me<sub>2</sub>SO alone as a control, as well as above that detected with either BV or phycoerythrobilin, to which CikA<sub>HIS</sub> does not appear to attach covalently (Fig. 3).

Assaying GAF as a Chromophore Attachment Domain—CikA<sub>HIS</sub>, Thioredoxin-tagged CikA (Trx-CikA) and its variants were assayed for chromophore ligation with purified PCB in vitro. In this experiment, we decreased the PCB concentration to 2.0 μM to reduce nonspecific binding. As shown in Fig. 4 (A and B), recombinant proteins that included the GAF domain (CikA<sub>HIS</sub>, Trx-CikA, ΔRR, ΔATP, ΔHPK, N+GAF, and ΔN) emitted obvious zinc-induced fluorescence, indicating the presence of protein-chromophore interaction. However, the ΔGAF variant had a reduced signal, only slightly higher than background negative controls (Fig. 4B). We concluded that GAF, but no other single motif, is important for bilin attachment. However, a Trx-GAF variant, composed of only GAF and the Trx tag, produced no signal above that obtained with a Trx-RR, in which the only the receiver-like domain of CikA is fused to Trx (Fig. 4C). These results suggest that the GAF domain we defined is not sufficient for bilin lyase activity or that the domain does not fold stably when removed from its natural protein context.

Although lyase assays showed that CikA can bind a bilin in vitro, CikA<sub>HIS</sub> isolated from *S. elongatus* gave no fluorescent signal on a zinc blot (Fig. 4D) and showed no spectral evidence of a chromophore (data not shown). This negative result was obtained whether the protein was isolated from cells under normal illumination or in darkness. We reasoned that CikA might associate noncovalently with a bilin in vivo and that the co-factor might be lost during purification. However, co-expression of the protein with either PCB or BV in *E. coli*, under conditions in which other bacteriophytochromes form photoactive adducts (46, 47), showed no evidence of association between CikA and the chromophores (Fig. 5). We concluded from these various lines of data that CikA is unlikely to form a biliprotein complex naturally in *S. elongatus*.

Autophosphorylation Assays with Overexpressed and Partially Purified CikA<sub>HIS</sub>—We performed in vitro autophosphorylation assays with affinity-purified CikA<sub>HIS</sub> apoprotein under various conditions to test whether the protein has authentic HPK activity as predicted from its sequence. CikA<sub>HIS</sub> showed strong autophosphorylation, with a temperature optimum around 25°C and detectable activity at 0°C (Fig. 6A). Maximum phosphorylation was detected after 10 min of incubation at 25°C under these conditions (Fig. 6B). Autophosphorylation activity showed a strong dependence on substrate concentration (Fig. 6C), and cold ATP competed with [γ-<sup>32</sup>P]ATP as expected for an enzymatic activity (Fig. 6D). The phosphoryl linkage remained stable under basic conditions (100% signal remaining; Fig. 6E, lane 1) and decreased after treatment with hydroxylamine (14% signal remaining; Fig. 6E, lane 2) and under acidic conditions (11% signal remaining; Fig. 6E, lane 3). This result is consistent with a phosphoryl linkage to the His<sup>393</sup> determined as an H-box by sequence alignment (27). The holoprotein generated in vitro by addition of 2 or 4 μM PCB showed the same autophosphorylation activity as the apoprotein purified from *E. coli*, and CikA<sub>HIS</sub> purified directly from the cyanobacterium showed autokinase activity comparable with that observed for *E. coli*-derived protein (data not shown).

Influence of other CikA domains on HPK Activity—The assay conditions described for partially purified CikA did not produce robust activity when the protein was more highly purified, either as a His<sub>6</sub> or Trx fusion. The addition of 2 μg/μl (w/v) BSA to the reaction mixture allowed a linear increase of autophosphorylation of CikA variants up to 120 min at 30°C, whereas the mixture without BSA reached a plateau at 15 min (data not shown). Therefore, the following reactions were carried out in the presence of 2 μg/μl BSA at 30°C for 1 h.

To identify which regions of the protein influence autophosphorylation activity, we produced variants that are missing specific residues or motifs and performed in vitro autophosphorylation assays. Because truncated CikA variants were soluble only if fused to Trx, we first compared autophosphorylation of full-length CikA<sub>HIS</sub> and Trx-CikA (Fig. 7). The addition of the Trx tag dropped autophosphorylation to 20–25%; this variant served as the control for the following mutant derivatives.

All of the recombinant proteins that have a critical deficiency

CikA Activities

FIG. 2. CikA recombinant proteins expressed in and purified from *E. coli* N-terminal His₆ tags (gray bars) or thioredoxin with an internal six histidine residues (*Trx*, hatched bars) are indicated for CikA variants. Details of plasmid constructions are in Table I. Open boxes, identifiable motifs of the CikA protein; black bars, protein coding regions for each recombinant protein variant; star, mutagenized histidyl to alanyl substitution. ΔRR, N+GAF, and Trx-GAF variants have a second His₆ tag at the C terminus (Table II).

| Kinase domain |
| --- |
| GAF domain | Phosphoacceptor domain | ATPase domain | Receiver domain |
| 6HIS |  |  |  |
| Thioredoxin |  |  |  |
|  |  |  | CikA<sub>6HIS</sub> |
|  |  |  | Trx-CikA |
|  |  |  | ΔRR |
|  |  |  | ΔATP |
|  |  |  | ΔHPK |
|  |  |  | N+GAF |
|  |  |  | ΔN |
|  |  |  | ΔGAF |
|  |  |  | Trx-RR |
|  |  |  | Trx-GAF |
|  |  |  | Trx-H393A |

an intact HPK domain (Fig. 2), also had no autophosphorylation signal (Fig. 7, *B* and *C*). Additionally, only an extremely weak signal was detected after 60 min from ΔN (Fig. 7, *B* and *C*), which retains all recognizable motifs of the protein (Fig. 2), and was lower than the detectable sensitivity at 30 min (data not shown). In sharp contrast, removal of the receiver domain enhanced autophosphorylation activity by about 2-fold over CikA<sub>6HIS</sub>, and more than 10-fold over the more comparable Trx-CikA full-length control. We confirmed the linearity of these single time point experiments by performing time courses for the active CikA variants (CikA<sub>6HIS</sub>, Trx-CikA, and ΔRR; Fig. 8A), except for ΔN, which needs longer than 60 min to visualize activity. The assays showed a linear increase of autophosphorylation as expected for kinase activity dependent on the HPK domain, as depicted for CikA<sub>6HIS</sub> in Fig. 8B.

Absence of Internal Phosphoryl Transfer in CikA—We tested whether CikA transfers a phosphoryl group from the HPK domain to the atypical receiver domain in transphosphorylation assays. In the first strategy, we used autophosphorylated full-length CikA<sub>6HIS</sub> or ΔRR as a phosphodonor and Trx-RR as a potential acceptor. No phosphorylation of Trx-RR was observed (data not shown). Because HPKs tend to dimerize, we reasoned that if phosphoryl transfer occurs in CikA, it might involve the H-box of one monomer and the receiver domain of the other. To test this possibility, we used ΔRR as a donor that is lacking its own receiver and Trx-H393A as a potential receiver that is incapable of autophosphorylation (Fig. 9A). No phosphorylation of Trx-H393A was observed (Fig. 9B). The same negative result was obtained when the Trx-H393A sequence was modified to substitute Asp for Ala at the site that most closely aligns with Asp of *bona fide* receivers of two-component phosphorelay systems (data not shown).

DISCUSSION

The identification of *cikA* as a locus that affects circadian phasing and induction of light-regulated genes and resetting of circadian rhythms in response to a dark pulse implicates the CikA protein as important for transducing light signals from the environment, especially as an entry point to the circadian clock (27). Its structure is similar to bacteriophytochromes, suggesting a direct role as a photoreceptor. However, if CikA is a phytochrome-like photoreceptor, its properties are very different from previously reported bacteriophytochromes. CikA can form adducts with bilins *in vitro* that survive conditions used for SDS-PAGE, despite the absence of residues expected to be necessary for covalent linkage of a bilin (Fig. 3) (27). Mutation of the GAF domain at residues highly conserved among bacteriophytochromes (E236A, E285A, or C299A) did not abolish *in vitro* bilin binding (data not shown). Although the GAF domain was important for bilin lyase activity, it was not sufficient (Fig. 4C), and its absence did not completely abolish binding (Fig. 4B). This suggests either that the covalent

FIG. 3. Chromophore ligation assays with partially purified CikA<sub>6HIS</sub> and various chromophores. Zinc-dependent fluorescence of CikA<sub>6HIS</sub> chromophore holoproteins (10 μg) was detected using the STORM with red laser setting and is shown as an inverted image. DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide as a negative control; BV, 4 μM biliverdin; PΦB, 4 μM phytochromobilin; PCB, 4 μM phycocyanobilin; PEB, 4 μM phycoerythrobilin.

FIG. 4. Chromophore ligation assays with PCB and purified CikA variants. Zinc-dependent fluorescence of purified CikA variant holoproteins with PCB is shown as an inverted image. A, control experiment using purified CikA<sub>6HIS</sub> without or with PCB for chromophore ligation assays. B and C, upper panels, each recombinant protein (2 μg) loaded on 8% SDS-PAGE was visualized by Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB Stain) to check protein concentrations and mobilities. Lower panels, zinc-induced fluorescence from CikA variants (6 μg each) with 2 μM PCB was visualized on PVDF membranes (Zn Stain). D, zinc-induced fluorescence assay from recombinant CikA<sub>6HIS</sub> produced in *E. coli* (rCikA) with added PCB and CikA<sub>6HIS</sub> purified from *S. elongatus* (sCikA) with no added PCB.

of the HPK domain (ΔHPK and Trx-RR) or a point mutation at the expected phosphoryl acceptor His residue in the kinase domain (Trx-H393A) were completely defective in autophosphorylation activity (Fig. 7, *B* and *C*). ΔGAF, which conserves

19108

CikA Activities

FIG. 5. Co-expression of CikA and bilins in *E. coli*. Strains of *E. coli* engineered to produce PCB or BV were transformed with a plasmid that encodes CikA. As standards for holoprotein formation, the PCB-producing cells were transformed with the gene for Cph1 of Synechocystis sp. Strain PCC 6803 (46) and the BV cells with the gene for BphP1 of Agrobacterium tumefaciens (47).

PCB
BV
--- --- --- --- ---
Cph1 CikA - BphP CikA

factor. One of the potential CikA partners identified in a yeast two-hybrid screen is a protein that carries a canonical GAF.² Whether or not CikA naturally binds a co-factor that would serve as a chromophore, the GAF domain likely serves a regulatory role, as evidenced by the negative effect of GAF removal on HPK activity. We favor interaction with a partner as the regulatory role of the CikA GAF domain.

As is implicit in the name of the gene *cikA* (circadian input kinase A), the deduced amino acid sequence predicts a well conserved transmitter module typical of the sensor kinases of bacterial two-component signal transduction systems and is expected to supply a phosphoryl group to a specific, yet unidentified, response regulator(s) (27, 31). A histidyl residue in the region designated as the H-box is the site of autophosphorylation in HPKs. In CikA, this residue is His³⁹³, and a single point mutation at that site completely abolished the autophosphorylation with [γ⁻³²P]ATP (H393A in Fig. 7). Additionally, the ³²P-labeled protein obtained by in vitro autophosphorylation was alkali-tolerant in 3 M NaOH on PVDF membrane but was not stable to hydroxylamine or acidic conditions. These results also support the expectation that the histidyl residue in the H-box works as a typical phosphoacceptor residue (42).

In vitro autophosphorylation assays with a series of truncated CikA variants identified regions that affect autokinase activity. Purified full-length CikA tagged by His₆ or Trx and some of the Trx-tagged truncated variants that carry the HPK domain showed clear autophosphorylation activity. However, deletion of the GAF domain or the N-terminal region adjacent to the GAF domain dramatically reduced the autophosphorylation despite the existence of an intact HPK domain (ΔN and ΔGAF; Fig. 7, B and C). These variants were soluble and expected to be folded correctly. From this, we conclude that both the GAF domain and the undefined N-terminal region are important for activating the kinase (Fig. 7D). Interaction of each domain with a protein partner or small organic molecule (bilin or other) could provide a mechanism to modulate the activating functions. Fusion of Trx to the CikA N terminus, which was used to achieve soluble protein expressed in *E. coli*, reduced the activity as compared with CikA₆HIS. Because Trx is a larger tag than His₆, the physical structure of the N-terminal region of CikA may have been modified. This is consistent with the finding that a functional domain that influences kinase activity resides in this portion of the protein.

The C terminus of CikA contains a similar sequence to the receiver domains of response regulators involved in two-component signal transduction systems. Although this cryptic receiver domain conserves other key residues of the motif, the invariant aspartyl residue that is phosphorylated by a cognate HPK in bona fide receivers is absent from the sequence (27). From the negative results of various in vitro trans-phosphorylation experiments using the HPK domain and the C-terminal domain of CikA (such as in Fig. 9), we conclude that the latter is a pseudo-receiver and does not accept a phosphoryl group.

FIG. 6. Autophosphorylation activity of partially purified CikA₆HIS apoprotein. A, temperature dependence of autophosphorylation activity of 1 μg of purified protein in the presence of [γ⁻³²P]ATP at 0, 4, 15, 25, 37, and 42 °C. Incubation in standard reaction buffer was for 15 min. B, time course of autophosphorylation activity of 1 μg of purified protein in the presence of [γ⁻³²P]ATP after 1, 5, 10, 15, 30, 45, and 60 min at 25 °C. C, concentration dependence of autophosphorylation activity with 1 μg of affinity-purified Cik₆HIS and 10 min of incubation at 25 °C with 0, 1, 10, 50, 100, 250, and 500 nM [γ⁻³²P]ATP. D, competition experiment with [γ⁻³²P]ATP and 1, 10, 50, 100, 500, or 1000 nM unlabeled ATP. Other components of the reaction mixture were standard, and the incubation was carried out for 10 min at 25 °C. E, chemical stability of phosphoryl linkage after 1 h of treatment at 37 °C with 2 M NaOH, 0.8 M NH₂OH pH 6.8, 1 M HCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, and no treatment (lanes 1–5, respectively). Incubation was in standard stock buffer with 1 μg of purified protein for 15 min at 25 °C. The gel was electroblotted onto PVDF membranes and exposed to a phosphorimaging plate for 15 min prior to chemical treatment and re-exposed for 15 min after treatment.

attachment site(s) lies outside of the GAF proper or that GAF alone does not assume the tertiary structure needed to support the physical structure of the bilin-binding pocket. Because we observed clear covalent binding with PCB from both ΔN and N+GAF (Fig. 4B), which lack either the N- or C-terminal region neighboring the GAF domain, respectively, neither of those regions is specifically critical for the autocatalytic attachment reaction of linear tetrapyrrole chromophores.

No spectral activity was detected from CikA in the presence of PCB or PΦB, and recombinant CikA isolated from S. elongatus did not co-purify with a bound bilin. Recent studies with phytochromes and bacteriophytochromes that lack the conserved cysteine site of attachment have established that non-covalent adducts are photochromic and could serve as photoreceptors (48–50). However, co-expression of CikA with BV or PCB in *E. coli* did not produce a pigmented holoprotein (Fig. 5). It is possible that CikA does not serve as a photoreceptor itself but oligomerizes with a partner that binds a photoactive co-

² J.-S. Choi, S. Canales, and S. S. Golden, unpublished data.

CikA Activities

FIG. 7. Autophosphorylation by purified CikA variants. A, each recombinant protein (2 μg) loaded on SDS-PAGE was visualized by Coomassie Brilliant Blue to check the mobility, purity, and protein concentration. B, phosphorimaging visualization of autophosphorylation of each CikA by [γ-³²P]ATP. The proteins (200 ng) were used for each standard reaction and applied to 8% SDS-PAGE. C, graphical representation of relative autophosphorylation activity. 100% is the average of the highest activity (n = 4, ΔRR), n.d., not detectable. D, summary figure of interactions among proposed functional domains. Phosphorylation at the H-box of the kinase domain is regulated positively by GAF and the N-terminal region and negatively by the pseudo-receiver.

FIG. 8. Time course of autophosphorylation activity of purified CikA variants. A, phosphorimage of autophosphorylation time courses from CikA variants. The protein concentration was adjusted to achieve comparable signal intensity among variants (400 ng of TrxCikA, 100 ng of CikA₆HIS, and 40 ng of ΔRR). B, graphic representation of the time course from CikA₆HIS. Autophosphorylation was quantified, and the average of the maximum activity from four separate assays was set as 100% (n = 4).

FIG. 9. In vitro assay to detect potential trans-phosphorylation of the receiver-like domain by the CikA HPK. A, scheme for experimental design. A donor CikA variant having kinase activity but lacking the receiver-like domain (ΔRR) was allowed to autophosphorylate and then mixed with a recipient that is full-length but defective for kinase activity (Trx-H393A). B, results of test for trans-phosphorylation between dissimilar CikA variants. The ΔRR phosphodonor and Trx-H393A potential recipient (0.5 μg each) were incubated in solution containing 25 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl₂, 3000 Ci/mmol [γ-³²P]ATP, 0.01 mM unlabeled ATP, 1 μg/μl BSA, and 2 mM dithiothreitol at 30 °C. The proteins were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE, dried to filter paper, and exposed to a phosphorimaging plate. The migration positions of the two variants are indicated.

from the kinase domain of CikA. The N-terminal domain of the circadian clock protein KaiA has been identified structurally as a pseudo-receiver that is unlikely to be involved in phosphoryl transfer, in the A. thaliana putative clock component TOC1 and its APRR family members (35–38). We predict that each of these acts as a protein-protein interaction domain that induces conformational changes in another domain to modulate its activity. Unlike the N-terminal region and GAF domain, elimination of the pseudo-receiver domain increased autokinase activity 10-fold over full-length Trx-CikA. These results suggest that the receiver domain functions as an autophosphorylation suppressor of the CikA HPK transmitter but not as a phosphoryl receiver. This is consistent with a role for the pseudo-receiver similar to that in AmiR, an antiterminator whose RNA-binding domain is regulated by interaction of

the pseudo-receiver with its ligand-binding partner AmiC (52).

Bacteriophytochrome two-component systems are present in other cyanobacterial species and have been characterized best from *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803. Cph1 carries a typical GAF domain that includes the critical cysteine residue for bilin attachment and has an HPK domain; Rcp1 is its response regulator (19). Like plant phytochromes, Cph1 exists in photoconvertible Pr and Pfr forms that are generated by absorption of red or far-red light, respectively. Cph1 autophosphorylation is attenuated by red light and increased by far-red light; the phosphorylated Pr form transfers a phosphoryl group to Rcp1 (19). In the case of plant phytochromes, light affects a Ser/Thr protein kinase activity (15, 16). CikA reconstituted *in vitro* with purified PCB had the same level of autophosphorylation activity as CikA apoprotein (data not shown) and showed no spectral activity. These differences between CikA and phytochromes/bacteriophytochromes suggest a very distinct mechanism for modulating signal transduction, despite an expected shared reliance on phosphoryl transfer to a partner response regulator protein.

CikA plays a central role in transducing environmental information to the cyanobacterial circadian clock. In addition to acting as a mediator for light/dark signals (27), it is required for response to temperature and clock-generated signals as well.³ Whether multiple signals converge on CikA as an integrator before transduction to the clock or CikA is part of a complex that can sense various inputs directly remains to be determined. The basic function of the protein as a kinase has been established; further understanding its role depends on discovering the other molecules with which it directly interacts.

Acknowledgments—We are grateful to J. Clark Lagarias for support and for materials, advice, and insightful comments regarding the manuscript. Specifically, we thank him for providing *E. coli* cells that produce PΦB and PCB and for the *cph1* control plasmid. We also thank B. Karniol and R. Vierstra, who generously provided plasmids used for co-expression of BV and AtBphP1 in *E. coli*.

---

**REFERENCES**

1. Dunlap, J. C. (1999) *Cell* **96**, 271–290
2. Dunlap, J. C., Loros, J. J., Liu, Y., and Crosthwaite, S. K. (1999) *Genes Cells* **4**, 1–10
3. Liu, Y., Heintzen, C., Loros, J., and Dunlap, J. C. (1999) *Cell Mol. Life Sci.* **55**, 1195–1205
4. McWatters, H., Dunlap, J. C., and Millar, A. J. (1999) *Curr. Biol.* **9**, R633–R635
5. Cashmore, A. R., Jarillo, J. A., Wu, Y. J., and Liu, D. (1999) *Science* **284**, 760–765
6. Ceriani, M. F., Darlington, T. K., Staknis, D., Mas, P., Petti, A. A., Weitz, C. J., and Kay, S. A. (1999) *Science* **285**, 553–556
7. Emery, P., So, W. V., Kaneko, M., Hall, J. C., and Rosbash, M. (1998) *Cell* **95**, 669–679
8. Somers, D. E., Devlin, P. F., and Kay, S. A. (1998) *Science* **282**, 1488–1490
9. Ahmad, M. (1999) *Curr. Opin. Plant Biol.* **2**, 230–235
10. Ahmad, M., Jarillo, J. A., Smirnova, O., and Cashmore, A. R. (1998) *Nature* **392**, 720–723
11. Li, L., and Lagarias, J. C. (1992) *J. Biol. Chem.* **267**, 19204–19210
12. Wu, S. H., and Lagarias, J. C. (2000) *Biochemistry* **39**, 13487–13495

---

³ M. Katayama, S. S. Golden, H. Iwasaki, and T. Kondo, unpublished data.

13. Aravind, L., and Ponting, C. P. (1997) *Trends Biochem. Sci.* **22**, 458–459
14. Ho, Y. S., Burden, L. M., and Hurley, J. H. (2000) *EMBO J.* **19**, 5288–5299
15. Yeh, K. C., and Lagarias, J. C. (1998) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **95**, 13976–13981
16. Fankhauser, C. (2001) *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 11453–11456
17. Kehoe, D. M., and Grossman, A. R. (1996) *Science* **273**, 1409–1412
18. Hughes, J., Lampter, T., Mittmann, F., Hartmann, E., Gartner, W., Wilde, A., and Borner, T. (1997) *Nature* **386**, 663
19. Yeh, K. C., Wu, S. H., Murphy, J. T., and Lagarias, J. C. (1997) *Science* **277**, 1505–1508
20. Jiang, Z., Swem, L. R., Rushing, B. G., Devanathan, S., Tollin, G., and Bauer, C. E. (1999) *Science* **285**, 406–409
21. Giraud, E., Fardoux, J., Fourrier, N., Hannibal, L., Genty, B., Bouyer, P., Dreyfus, B., and Vermeglio, A. (2002) *Nature* **417**, 202–205
22. Davis, S. J., Vener, A. V., and Vierstra, R. D. (1999) *Science* **286**, 2517–2520
23. Montgomery, B. L., and Lagarias, J. C. (2002) *Trends Plant Sci.* **7**, 357–366
24. Chang, C., and Stewart, R. C. (1998) *Plant Physiol.* **117**, 723–731
25. Stock, A. M., Robinson, V. L., and Goudreau, P. N. (2000) *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* **69**, 183–215
26. West, A. H., and Stock, A. M. (2001) *Trends Biochem. Sci.* **26**, 369–376
27. Schmitz, O., Katayama, M., Williams, S. B., Kondo, T., and Golden, S. S. (2000) *Science* **289**, 765–768
28. Golden, S. S. (1994) in *The Molecular Biology of Cyanobacteria* (Bryant, D. A., ed) pp. 693–714, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands
29. Andersson, C. R., Tsinoremas, N. F., Shelton, J., Lebedeva, N. V., Yarrow, J., Min, H., Golden, S. S., Iwasaki, H., Tanabe, A., Johnson, C. H., and Kondo, T. (2000) *Methods Enzymol.* **305**, 527–542
30. Plautz, J. D., Straume, M., Stanewsky, R., Jamison, C. F., Brandes, C., Dowse, H. B., Hall, J. C., and Kay, S. A. (1997) *J. Biol. Rhythms* **12**, 204–217
31. Stock, J. B., Surette, M. G., Levit, M., and Park, P. (1995) in *Two-Component Signal Transduction* (Hoch, J. A., and Silhavy, T. J., eds) pp. 25–51, ASM Press, Washington D.C.
32. Taylor, B. L., and Zhulin, I. B. (1999) *Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.* **63**, 479–506
33. Zhulin, I. B., Taylor, B. L., and Dixon, R. (1997) *Trends Biochem. Sci.* **22**, 331–333
34. Bhoo, S. H., Davis, S. J., Walker, J., Karniol, B., and Vierstra, R. D. (2001) *Nature* **414**, 776–779
35. Makino, S., Kiba, T., Imamura, A., Hanaki, N., Nakamura, A., Suzuki, T., Taniguchi, M., Ueguchi, C., Sugiyama, T., and Mizuno, T. (2000) *Plant Cell Physiol.* **41**, 791–803
36. Makino, S., Matsushika, A., Kojima, M., Oda, Y., and Mizuno, T. (2001) *Plant Cell Physiol.* **42**, 334–339
37. Matsushika, A., Makino, S., Kojima, M., and Mizuno, T. (2000) *Plant Cell Physiol.* **41**, 1002–1012
38. Strayer, C., Oyama, T., Schultz, T. F., Raman, R., Somers, D. E., Mas, P., Panda, S., Kreps, J. A., and Kay, S. A. (2000) *Science* **289**, 768–771
39. Herdman, M., Castenholz, R. W., Iteman, I., Waterbury, J. B., and Rippka, R. (2001) in *Bergey’s Manual of Systematic Bacteriology* (Boone, D. R., Castenholz, R. W., and Garrity, G. M., eds) 2nd Ed., Vol. 1, p. 776, Springer-Verlag, New York
40. Bustos, S. A., and Golden, S. S. (1991) *J. Bacteriol.* **173**, 7525–7533
41. Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T. (1989) *Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual*, 2nd Ed., Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York
42. McCleary, W. R., and Zusman, D. R. (1990) *J. Bacteriol.* **172**, 6661–6668
43. Nishiwaki, T., Iwasaki, H., Ishiura, M., and Kondo, T. (2000) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **97**, 495–499
44. Kamei, A., Yuasa, T., Orikawa, K., Geng, X. X., and Ikeuchi, M. (2001) *J. Bacteriol.* **183**, 1505–1510
45. McDowell, M. T., and Lagarias, J. C. (2001) *Plant Physiol.* **126**, 1546–1554
46. Gambetta, G. A., and Lagarias, J. C. (2001) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **98**, 10566–10571
47. Karniol, B., and Vierstra, R. D. (2003) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.*
48. Jorissen, H. J., Quest, B., Remberg, A., Coursin, T., Braslavsky, S. E., Schaffner, K., de Marsac, N. T., and Gartner, W. (2002) *Eur. J. Biochem.* **269**, 2662–2671
49. Jorissen, H. J., Quest, B., Lindner, I., Tandeau de Marsac, N., and Gartner, W. (2002) *Photochem. Photobiol.* **75**, 554–559
50. Lindner, I. I., Braslavsky, S. E., Schaffner, K., and Gartner, W. (2000) *Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.* **39**, 3269–3271
51. Williams, S. B., Vakonakis, I., Golden, S. S., and LiWang, A. C. (2002) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **99**, 15357–15362
52. O’Hara, B. P., Norman, R. A., Wan, P. T., Roe, S. M., Barrett, T. E., Drew, R. E., and Pearl, L. H. (1999) *EMBO J.* **18**, 5175–5186

Mechanisms of Signal Transduction:  
Biochemical Properties of CikA, an  
Unusual Phytochrome-like Histidine  
Protein Kinase That Resets the Circadian  
Clock in *Synechococcus elongatus* PCC  
7942  

Michinori Mutsuda, Klaus-Peter Michel,  
Xiaofan Zhang, Beronda L. Montgomery and  
Susan S. Golden  
J. Biol. Chem. 2003, 278:19102-19110.  
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M213255200 originally published online March 7, 2003  

Access the most updated version of this article at doi: [10.1074/jbc.M213255200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M213255200)  

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the [JBC Affinity Sites](https://www.jbc.org/site/JBCAffinitySites).  

Alerts:  
- When this article is cited  
- When a correction for this article is posted  

[Click here](https://www.jbc.org/site/JBCAlerts) to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts  

This article cites 48 references, 27 of which can be accessed free at  
[http://www.jbc.org/content/278/21/19102.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/278/21/19102.full.html#ref-list-1)
