
The NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL of MEDICINE

REVIEW ARTICLE

GENOMIC MEDICINE

Alan E. Guttmacher, M.D., and Francis S. Collins, M.D., Ph.D., Editors

Hereditary Colorectal Cancer

Henry T. Lynch, M.D., and Albert de la Chapelle, M.D., Ph.D.

THE ANNUAL INCIDENCE OF COLORECTAL CANCER IN THE UNITED States is approximately 148,300 (affecting 72,600 males and 75,700 females), with 56,600 deaths (in 27,800 males and 28,800 females).¹ The lifetime risk of colorectal cancer in the general population is about 5 to 6 percent.¹ Patients with a familial risk — those who have two or more first- or second-degree relatives (or both) with colorectal cancer — make up approximately 20 percent of all patients with colorectal cancer, whereas approximately 5 to 10 percent of the total annual burden of colorectal cancer is mendelian in nature — that is, it is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. In this review we will focus on the two major forms of hereditary colorectal cancer, familial adenomatous polyposis and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer.

From the Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, Nebr. (H.T.L.); and the Human Cancer Genetics Program, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State University, Columbus (A.C.). Address reprint requests to Dr. Lynch at the Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, Creighton University School of Medicine, 2500 California Plaza, Omaha, NE 68178, or at htlynch@creighton.edu.

N Engl J Med 2003;348:919-32. Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society.

OVERALL CLINICAL APPROACH

The most important step leading to the diagnosis of a hereditary cancer syndrome is the compilation of a thorough family history of cancer.²⁻⁴ A patient and his or her key relatives, working either alone or with a trained nurse or genetic counselor, can compile such a detailed family history. The focus should be on identifying cancer of all types and sites; the family member’s age at the onset of cancer; any pattern of multiple primary cancers; any association with phenotypic features that may be related to cancer, such as colonic adenomas; and documentation of pathological findings whenever possible. This information will frequently identify a hereditary colorectal cancer syndrome in the family, should it exist. Molecular genetic testing may then provide verification of the diagnosis, when a germ-line mutation is present in the family.⁵⁻⁶ The primary care physician may wish to refer the patient to a hereditary-cancer specialist and genetic counselor for further evaluation should there be any remaining question about the disorder’s clinical or molecular genetic diagnosis and the need for targeted surveillance and management.

Once a diagnosis of a hereditary colorectal cancer syndrome is established, the proband’s high-risk relatives should be notified, and genetic counseling and DNA testing should be performed in consenting relatives, when such testing is appropriate. In an attempt to reduce morbidity and mortality, surveillance measures may then be instituted that reflect the natural history of the disorder.⁷

Once it is clear that a patient has a familial form of colorectal cancer, genetic counseling is mandatory and must provide the patient and his or her extended family with important details about their genetic risk of cancer at specific sites, on the basis of the natural history of the hereditary cancer syndrome; the options for surveillance and management; and the availability of genetic testing.⁸⁻⁹ Counseling should be face to face, but a session may include multiple family members.⁸ The concept of informed consent implies that a patient has received counseling, information, and putative test results and

N ENGL J MED 348;10 WWW.NEJM.ORG MARCH 6, 2003 919

The New England Journal of Medicine

Downloaded from nejm.org on July 10, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission. Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

has signed a document to that effect. The results of tests for mutations should be revealed to the patient on a one-to-one basis.⁷

---

### DIAGNOSTIC CLUES

Syndromes with distinguishing phenotypes, such as florid colonic adenomas in familial adenomatous polyposis, are easier to diagnose than hereditary disorders that lack clear phenotypic characteristics. For instance, the attenuated polyposis phenotype of familial adenomatous polyposis is characterized by a paucity of colonic adenomas, and the ones that do occur are primarily in the proximal colon. The onset of colorectal cancer is at a later average age (approximately 55 years) than that of classic familial adenomatous polyposis (approximately 39 years). These differences make it more difficult for clinicians to diagnose than its classic counterpart, despite their having a high index of suspicion for a familial colorectal cancer syndrome.¹⁰,¹¹

In the case of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, five cardinal features will help to identify affected families. The first is an earlier average age at the onset of cancer than in the general population; for example, the average age at the onset of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer is approximately 45 years,⁷ whereas the average age at the onset of sporadic cases is approximately 63 years. The second feature is a particular pattern of primary cancers segregating within the pedigree, such as colonic and endometrial cancer.⁷,¹² The third is survival that differs from the norm for the specific cancer.¹³⁻¹⁶ The fourth is distinguishing pathological features,¹⁷,¹⁸ and the fifth and sine qua non is the identification of a germ-line mutation in affected members of the family.⁵

There are two broad classes of hereditary colorectal cancer, based on the predominant location of the cancer: distal and proximal. Colorectal cancers involving the distal colon are more likely to have aneuploid DNA, harbor mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), p53, and K-ras genes, and behave more aggressively;⁷ proximal colorectal cancers are more likely to have diploid DNA, possess microsatellite instability, harbor mutations in the mismatch-repair genes, and behave less aggressively, as in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer.⁷ Familial adenomatous polyposis and most sporadic cases may be considered a paradigm for the first, or distal, class of colorectal cancers, whereas hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer more clearly represents the second, or proximal, class.⁷

---

A hallmark of tumors in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer is microsatellite instability.¹⁹⁻²¹ Microsatellites are genomic regions in which short DNA sequences or a single nucleotide is repeated. There are hundreds of thousands of microsatellites in the human genome. During DNA replication, mutations occur in some microsatellites owing to the misalignment of their repetitive subunits and result in contraction or elongation (“instability”). These abnormalities are usually repaired by the mismatch-repair proteins. However, repair is inefficient in tumors with a deficiency of these proteins. Typically, in such tumor cells, half or more of all microsatellites have mutations (contraction or elongation), so microsatellite instability serves as an excellent, easy-to-evaluate marker of mismatch-repair deficiency (Fig. 1). Since microsatellite instability is found in virtually all hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancers,²⁹ we consider it unnecessary to search for germ-line mutations in mismatch-repair genes (e.g., MSH2 and MLH1) in patients whose tumors do not have microsatellite instability. An exception is found in families with the MSH6 mutation, in which microsatellite instability may or may not be present.³⁰,³¹ Most microsatellites occur in noncoding DNA; therefore, contractions or elongations are believed to have little or no effect on protein function. However, there are genes that have microsatellites in their coding regions (Fig. 2), and microsatellite instability will thus lead to altered proteins.

---

### FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS

#### CLINICAL AND MOLECULAR FEATURES

Multiple colonic adenomas occur at an early age in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis, occasionally during the preteen years, and proliferate throughout the colon, with malignant degeneration in most patients by the age of 40 to 50 years. Patients who have an APC mutation or who have one or more first-degree relatives with familial adenomatous polyposis or an identified APC mutation (or both) are at high risk and should be screened with flexible sigmoidoscopy by the age of 10 to 12 years. Patients with colonic polyps, a verified APC germ-line mutation, or both will require annual endoscopic examination. However, as the disease advances, as is often the case in the late teens and early 20s, too many colonic polyps may be present for adequate and safe colonoscopic polypectomy; when this occurs, prophylactic subtotal colectomy followed by annual endoscopy of the remaining rectum is recommended.

GENOMIC MEDICINE

1044 Unselected consecutive patients with colorectal cancer

Microdissection of tumor to obtain cancer-cell DNA; germ-line DNA obtained from blood or normal colonic mucosa; use of polymorphic markers to test for microsatellite instability in tumor

| 129 Tumors positive for microsatellite instability (12%) |  |
| --- | --- |
| Germ-line DNA examined for mutations in MLH1 and MSH2 |  |
| 19 Patients found to be positive for 1 of 2 founder mutations | 9 Patients found to be positive for other mutations on genomic exon-by-exon sequencing |
| 28 Patients found to be mutation-positive, for a frequency of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer of 2.7% |  |

| 915 Tumors negative for microsatellite instability (88%) |  |
| --- | --- |
| Germ-line DNA examined for 2 founder mutations |  |
| None found |  |
| Result serves as a control, suggesting that the sensitivity of microsatellite instability as a marker for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer is high |  |

Figure 1. Approach to Molecular Screening for Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer in an Unselected Cohort of Consecutive Patients with Newly Diagnosed Colorectal Cancer.

Data are from Aaltonen et al.²² and Salovaara et al.²³ This screening strategy relies on microsatellite instability as a primary marker for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer.¹⁹,²⁴ In most studies of unselected patients with colorectal cancers, the proportion who are positive for microsatellite instability ranges from 12 to 16 percent.²⁵ For this purpose, microsatellite instability can be determined with the use of just one or two markers and, in many cases, without the need for matching normal DNA.²⁶,²⁷ Fixed, paraffin-embedded tumor specimens are a readily available source of DNA for this test, but the specimen must be determined histologically to contain at least 30 to 50 percent tumor cells. As a source of germ-line DNA for the detection of mutations, a blood sample is most suitable. The proportion of all patients with colorectal cancer who have hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer may vary among populations. The proportion found in these studies (2.7 percent) is an underestimate, because neither microsatellite-instability testing nor mutation detection is error-free, and mutations were sought only in the MLH1 and MSH2 genes. Two founder mutations account for over half of all hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer mutations in this population.²⁸ These mutations can be easily screened for in large numbers of samples.

Upper endoscopy is also necessary because of the potential for adenomas, which increase the risk of cancer of the stomach. Although cancers of the stomach are uncommon in whites, they are of particular concern to families with familial adenomatous polyposis in Korea and Japan.³² Adenomas in the duodenum, which carry a risk of a periampullary carcinoma, and in the remainder of the small intestine are more common.³³ There is limited knowledge about the causation, prevention, and management of duodenal polyposis in familial adenomatous polyposis. However, there is a strong association with stage IV periampullary adenomas, which pose a high lifetime risk of periampullary carcinoma in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis.³⁴ Even though the efficacy of screening is yet to be fully demonstrated, Burke³³ recommends upper endoscopic screening with forward-and side-viewing endoscopes for all those with a family history of familial adenomatous polyposis.

N ENGL J MED 348; 10 WWW.NEJM.ORG MARCH 6, 2003 921

The New England Journal of Medicine

Downloaded from nejm.org on July 10, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.

Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

The NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL of MEDICINE

Germ-Line DNA from Blood

Homozygous for  
1 allele (120 bp)

Homozygous for  
1 allele (170 bp)

BAT26 marker

D2S123 marker

DNA from Tumor Containing >50% Tumor Cells

Size of PCR Product (bp)
90    100   110   120   130   140   150   160   170   180   190

Figure 2. Detection of Microsatellite Instability with the Use of Fluorescent Labeling of Polymerase-Chain-Reaction (PCR) Products Analyzed in an Automatic Sequencer.

Two markers are analyzed in the same track: the mononucleotide repeat marker BAT26 is shown on the left, and the dinucleotide marker D2S123 is shown on the right. The upper tracing is from germ-line DNA from blood. The lower tracing is from DNA extracted from a histologic section of a tumor containing more than 50 percent tumor cells. For marker BAT26, germ-line DNA shows a single peak, indicating that the patient is homozygous for this marker (arrow). Tumor DNA shows, in addition to the normal allele (single arrow), a new allele (double arrows) that has lost approximately five nucleotides. This constitutes microsatellite instability. For marker D2S123, germ-line DNA is homozygous, whereas tumor DNA shows two new alleles (triple arrows), one with a loss of approximately 10 nucleotides (left) and one with a gain of 2 nucleotides (right). Thus, the tumor shows microsatellite instability with both markers. All peaks display “stutter” — that is, small amounts of material with a gain or a loss of one or a few nucleotides. This is a normal phenomenon.

Desmoids also appear frequently in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis and are often induced by surgery.³⁵,³⁶ Ideally, prophylactic colectomy should be delayed unless there are too many colonic adenomas to manage safely. Elective surgical procedures should be avoided whenever this is possible. Other, less common tumors that may occur in families with familial adenomatous polyposis include papillary thyroid carcinoma, sarcomas, hepatoblastomas, pancreatic carcinomas, and medulloblastomas of the cerebellar-pontine angle of the brain.³⁶⁻⁴¹ With the exception of papillary thyroid carcinoma, screening for these tumors is difficult and therefore not generally performed.

The penetrance of germ-line mutations that increase the risk of colorectal cancer varies.³⁸,⁴⁰,⁴² It is 10 to 20 percent for the I1307K APC polymorphism, which occurs predominantly in Ashkenazi Jews (Fig. 3). In contrast, penetrance approaches 100 percent in classic familial adenomatous polyposis,⁴⁷ caused by truncating germ-line mutations of the APC gene.

GENETIC TESTING

Genetic counseling should be performed by a genetic counselor or medical geneticist before DNA is collected and at the time of the disclosure of test results. We recommend discussing the matter in depth with the parents of patients who are younger than 18 years, as well as with the patients themselves, since polyps may occur in the preteen and teen years, and cancer may occur relatively early in some of these patients. It is important for the counselor to know whether the APC mutation is present, and if so, its probable penetrance, particularly in patients with attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis.¹⁰,³⁷

CHEMOPREVENTION

Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis who were treated with 400 mg of celecoxib, a selective inhibitor of cyclooxygenase-2, twice a day for six months had a 28.0 percent reduction in the mean number of colorectal polyps (P=0.003), as compared with patients in the placebo group.⁴⁸ How-

GENOMIC MEDICINE

| Somatic mutations in carriers of I1307K | Lys |
| --- | --- |
| +A | A |
| DNA sequence GCA GAA | ATA |
|  |  |
| Amino acid Ala Glu | Ile |
| Codon no. 1305 1306 | 1307 |

+G G to T -G

AAA GAA AAG ATT GGA ACT AGG TCA

Lys Glu Lys Ile Gly Thr Arg Ser

1308 1309 1310 1311 1312 1313 1314 1315

Figure 3. The I1307K Germ-Line Mutation (Polymorphism) of the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) Gene.

Shown here is the DNA sequence of codons 1305 through 1315 of the APC gene. Below each codon is the encoded amino acid and the number of the codon. The germ-line mutation of codon 1307 shown in the blue box is a change from T to A that changes an ATA encoding isoleucine (abbreviated I in the one-letter system) to an AAA encoding lysine (abbreviated K). Thus, the designation for the mutation is I1307K. This change is believed to be a neutral variant—that is, it does not alter the function of the APC protein; hence, it may be called both a mutation and a polymorphism. Approximately 6 percent of Ashkenazi Jews and a smaller proportion of other Jews are carriers of the I1307K mutation or polymorphism; it has not been seen in non-Jews. As compared with noncarriers, carriers have approximately twice the risk of colorectal cancer. The T-to-A change results in a stretch of eight adenines (AAAAAAAA) that is believed to increase the risk of somatic mutations as a result of slippage during replication. Examples of these somatic changes in colonic tumors are shown in red above the sequence. For instance, an addition of one A (+A) has been seen in the affected allele of many carriers. The addition or loss of a nucleotide causes a frameshift and loss of function of APC, constituting an important somatic event in tumor initiation.

ever, polyps may return while the patient is taking nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. In one study, regression of colonic adenomas occurred in all patients after six months of sulindac (200 mg per day) (P<0.02). However, after a mean of 48.6 months, the number and size of the polyps increased. At a dose of 200 mg, sulindac did not influence the progression of polyps toward a malignant pattern. There is hope that large, ongoing chemoprevention trials will provide concrete clues as to the future of antiinflammatory agents in the prevention of polyps and cancer. Currently, none of these chemoprevention strategies should replace screening, although they may delay prophylactic colectomy.

There is an excess of synchronous colorectal cancer (multiple colorectal cancers at or within six months after surgical resection for colorectal cancer) and metachronous colorectal cancer (colorectal cancer occurring more than six months after surgery). In addition, there is an excess of extracolonic cancers—namely, carcinoma of the endometrium (second only to colorectal cancer in frequency), ovary, stomach (particularly in Asian countries such as Japan and Korea), small bowel, pancreas, hepatobiliary tract, brain, and upper uroepithelial tract. There is also an apparent statistically significant decrease in the risk of lung cancer, which, while not proved, merits further research. Patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer may also have sebaceous adenomas, sebaceous carcinomas, and multiple keratoacanthomas, findings consonant with Torre's syndrome variant.

HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS COLORECTAL CANCER

CLINICAL FEATURES

Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, also referred to as the Lynch syndrome, is the most common form of hereditary colorectal cancer. Multiple generations are affected with colorectal cancer at an early age (mean, approximately 45 years) with a predominance of right-sided colorectal cancer (approximately 70 percent proximal to the splenic flexure).

Figure 4 depicts the evaluation of a family with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer from initial ascertainment to completion. The figure illustrates the advantage of seeking a more extensive family history when initial information is limited but includes clinical findings suggestive of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. For example, two siblings may have colorectal cancer of the prox-

The NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL of MEDICINE

| Cancer Sites |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Colon or rectum | A | B | C |
| Bile duct | III | III | Ut43 |
| Endometrium or uterus | 1 | 1 | d.44 |
| Pancreas |  | 2 | 3 |
| Ureter |  | 3 |  |
| Ovary | Cx37 | En57 | En61 |
| Brain tumor | Co55 | d. | 72 |
| Non-HNPCC cancer | 71 |  |  |
| Cancer site undetermined | IV | 1 | 2 |
| Cervix |  | Co40 | 47 |
| Esophagus | Ur44 |  |  |
| Malignant melanoma | 44 |  |  |
| Prostate |  |  |  |
| Testicle |  |  |  |

D

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 
imal colon before the age of 30 years in the absence
of multiple colonic adenomas. However, their par-
ents may have died at an early age of causes other
than cancer and other relatives with potentially valu-
able genetic information may simply not be avail-
able for testing. Although neither of these clinical
scenarios fulfills the Amsterdam I or II criteria for
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (Table 1),
the clinician may prudently wish to err on the side
of caution. Additional study of the tumor should
include microsatellite-instability testing in at least
one of the colorectal cancers or a search for a muta-
tion in a mismatch-repair gene, such as MSH2 or
MLH1, in the resected tumor.

**PATHOLOGICAL FEATURES**
As compared with sporadic colorectal cancer, tu-
mors in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer
are more often poorly differentiated, with an excess
of mucoid and signet-cell features, a Crohn's-like
reaction (lymphoid nodules, including germinal
centers, located at the periphery of infiltrating colo-
rectal carcinomas), and the presence of infiltrating
lymphocytes within the tumor.58-61

**ACCELERATED CARCINOGENESIS**
Accelerated carcinogenesis occurs in hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. In this setting, a
tiny colonic adenoma may emerge as a carcinoma
within 2 to 3 years, as opposed to the 8 to 10 years
this process may take in the general population.7,61
This rapid growth leads us to recommend annual
colonoscopy, as discussed below.

**FEATURES OF PEDIGREES**
The original definitions based on clinical and ped-
igree criteria such as the more stringent Amster-
dam I criteria56 or the less stringent Amsterdam II
criteria57 remain valid (Table 1). However, in many
situations, even if the criteria are not met, the occur-
rence of cancers associated with hereditary nonpoly-
posis colorectal cancer, especially in small families,
should alert the clinician to the possibility of heredi-
tary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, as should can-
cer at a very early age or multiple cancers in one
person (Fig. 5).

**INCIDENCE AND MOLECULAR SCREENING**
When the Amsterdam criteria (Table 1) are used to
determine what proportion of all colorectal cancers
are due to hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal can-
cer, estimates range from 1 to 6 percent.7,22,23,62

---

**Table 1. Amsterdam I and Amsterdam II Criteria.***

**Amsterdam I criteria**
At least three relatives must have histologically verified colorectal cancer:
One must be a first-degree relative of the other two.
At least two successive generations must be affected.
At least one of the relatives with colorectal cancer must have received the
diagnosis before the age of 50 years.
Familial adenomatous polyposis must have been excluded.

**Amsterdam II criteria**
At least three relatives must have a cancer associated with hereditary non-
polyposis colorectal cancer (colorectal, endometrial, stomach, ovary,
ureter or renal-pelvis, brain, small-bowel, hepatobiliary tract, or skin
[sebaceous tumors]):
One must be a first-degree relative of the other two.
At least two successive generations must be affected.
At least one of the relatives with cancer associated with hereditary non-
polyposis colorectal cancer should have received the diagnosis before
the age of 50 years.
Familial adenomatous polyposis should have been excluded in any rela-
tive with colorectal cancer.
Tumors should be verified whenever possible.

* The Amsterdam I and II criteria are from Vasen et al.56,57

Molecular screening of all patients with colorectal
cancer for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal can-
cer is now both feasible and desirable. Such screen-
ing has suggested that upward of 3 percent of all
such patients have hereditary nonpolyposis colorec-
tal cancer (Fig. 1). In one study, the mean age at
presentation with hereditary nonpolyposis colorec-
tal cancer diagnosed by molecular screening was
54 years old; the study included several patients over
60 years of age, and some had a minimal family his-
tory of cancer.22,23 If further studies confirm these
findings, the age at onset may prove older than the
mean of 45 years in cases ascertained on the basis
of family-history criteria. For this reason, we rec-
ommend that whenever population-based screen-
ing is performed, it include all patients with colorec-
tal cancer irrespective of age and family history.
Analysis of mutations in mismatch-repair genes
has provided estimates of the proportion of such
mutations in families with a history consonant with
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. These
estimates range from 40 to 80 percent for families
meeting the Amsterdam I criteria and from 5 to 50
percent for families meeting the Amsterdam II cri-
teria.62,63 Among such families, as well as in other
families whose history is consistent with the pres-
ence of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer
but who do not meet these formal criteria, some

families will not harbor a known mismatch-repair mutation. This is consistent with the notions that in such families other, as yet undiscovered genes may be responsible for the syndrome and that the aggregation of cancers may be caused by environmental factors or be due to chance.⁵

GENES AND GERM-LINE MUTATIONS
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer is caused by a germ-line mutation in any of the mismatch-repair genes listed in Table 2. As of this writing, two genes, MLH1 and MSH2, account for almost 90 percent of all identified mutations. MSH6 accounts for almost 10 percent, but its share of typical as opposed to less typical hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer remains to be determined.³⁰,³¹ It is usually sufficient first to screen patients for MLH1 and MSH2 and then to test other genes only if mutations are not found in these two.

ASSESSING THE PATHOGENICITY OF MUTATIONS
All genomic coding changes are potentially deleterious. However, as opposed to nonsense mutations (which create a stop codon or lead to a frame shift) or those that cause abnormal splicing, missense mutations (which lead to the substitution of an amino acid) are usually not considered a priori pathogenic. Of all mutations identified in MLH1 and MSH2, 29 percent and 16 percent, respectively, are missense mutations. Missense mutations make the interpretation of genotypic data difficult. The mutation data base maintained by the International Collaborative Group on Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer is an important primary reference (http://www.nfdht.nl). Immunohistochemical analysis of mismatch-repair proteins in the tumor can provide clues as to which mismatch-repair gene is involved in tumor pathogenesis if staining for one of the proteins is weak or absent.²⁵,⁶⁵

SOURCES OF UNDERDIAGNOSIS
Previous estimates of the frequency of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer were most likely low. Most analyses of mutations to date have not included analysis of MSH6, which undoubtedly causes hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer or a predisposition to an atypical and more benign form of this syndrome.³⁰ Moreover, conventional mutation analysis overlooks some mutations that can be detected only when the two alleles are studied separately, with the use of more sophisticated techniques.⁶⁶ Such techniques permit the detection

of several types of mutation that elude conventional
mutation analysis, mainly mutations in control re-
gions or introns that affect transcription or splic-
ing. 67 Finally, large deletions in the MSH2 gene are
more common than previously thought and can be
detected by Southern hybridization. 68

SURVEILLANCE FOR CANCER
In patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
cancer, annual full colonoscopy, initiated between
the ages of 20 and 25 years, is recommended for
those with strong clinical evidence or documented
germ-line mutations in MLH1, MSH2, or MSH6 (or a
combination). Although less frequent colonoscopy
(every three years) has been suggested in a con-
sensus statement, 69 we believe this would lead to
missed colorectal cancers, given the phenomenon
of accelerated carcinogenesis in such cancers. 7, 60, 61
Extracolonic screening, particularly of the endo-
metrium and ovary, the sites of the second and third
most common cancers in this disorder, is indicated
in patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
cancer. With respect to the endometrium, annual
transvaginal ultrasonography and endometrial as-
piration for pathological assessment should be be-
gun at the age of 30 years and repeated annually. In
the case of the ovary, this evaluation should include
transvaginal ovarian ultrasonography and CA-125
screening, also beginning at the age of 30 years. Pa-
tients should be aware of the low sensitivity and
specificity of surveillance methods for ovarian can-
cer. Screening at other sites, such as the upper uro-
epithelial tract and stomach (particularly in natives
of Korea 32 or Japan or in a family with an excess
number of cancers at these extracolonic sites) must
be considered, but it is difficult.

EFFICACY OF SURVEILLANCE
The efficacy of surveillance for colorectal cancer in
families with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
cancer was evaluated in a controlled clinical trial
extending over a 15-year period. 70 The study con-
cluded that screening for colorectal cancer at three-
year intervals more than halves the risk of colorectal
cancer, prevents deaths from colorectal cancer, and
decreases the overall mortality rate by about 65 per-
cent in such families. The relatively high incidence
of colorectal cancer (albeit nonfatal cases) even
among these frequently screened subjects is an ar-
gument for shorter screening intervals, such as one
year. Prophylactic subtotal colectomy, prophylactic
total abdominal hysterectomy, and bilateral sal-

GENOMIC MEDICINE

Table 2. Number of Different Germ-Line Mutations and Polymorphisms
Identified in Patients with Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer.*

| Gene   | Total No. of Mutations† | No. of Missense Mutations (% of total) | No. of Polymorphisms‡ |
|--------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------------|------------------------|
| MLH1   | 164                      | 47 (29)                                | 20                     |
| MSH2   | 121                      | 19 (16)                                | 24                     |
| MSH6   | 31                       | 12 (39)                                | 43                     |
| PMS1   | 1                        | 0                                      | 0                      |
| PMS2   | 5                        | 1 (20)                                 | 5                      |
| Total  | 322                      | 79 (25)                                | 92                     |

* The mutations are from the data maintained by the International Collaborative Group on Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer (http://www.nfdht.nl). The database also lists 10 mutations in the MLH3 gene; all but 1 are missense mutations and have so far been reported by a single laboratory. 64 Their puta-
tive pathogenic role remains to be determined.
† The mutations listed are considered disease-causing.
‡ The polymorphisms listed are not considered disease-causing.

pingo-oophorectomy are presented as options to
selected patients. 7, 71

The identification of hereditary nonpolyposis co-
lorectal cancer can be lifesaving, since it can lead
to the early detection of cancer. 70, 72 This effect was
quantified in a study by Ramsey et al., 73 a cost-effec-
tiveness analysis comparing standard care with a
process that included the application of the Bethes-
da guidelines (which identify the colorectal tumors
to test for microsatellite instability), 74 followed by
testing of the tumor for microsatellite instability,
germ-line testing, and lifelong screening for colo-
rectal cancer among carriers of mutations. The cost
of screening was $7,556 per year of life gained when
patients with cancer and their siblings and children
were considered together. 73

SOMATIC MUTATIONS AND THE PROGRESSION
TO CANCER
The multigene, clonal evolution, and selection mod-
el of the initiation and progression of cancer pro-
posed by Fearon and Vogelstein originally identified
APC, genes on 18q, Ras, and p53 (TP53) as the genes
in which mutations or epigenetic dysregulation con-
tributes to the evolution of colon cancer. 75 Although
later studies have confirmed this model, many ad-
ditional genes are also involved. 46, 76 What is the role
of a mismatch-repair deficiency in this model? In
colorectal tumors with a deficiency of mismatch-
repair protein, all the named components are in-
volved, 19 but probably to different degrees. 77 It ap-

The NEW ENGLAND JOURNAL of MEDICINE

HAMARTOMATOUS POLYPOSIS SYNDROMES

The differential diagnosis of juvenile polyposis syndrome includes Cowden's disease, the Bannayan-Ruvalcaba–Riley syndrome, and the Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, and there are often only very subtle clinical distinctions among them. Hence, the emerging evidence of their molecular bases may allow more precise distinctions to be made among these syndromes (Table 3). For example, germ-line mutations in PTEN, a protein tyrosine phosphatase gene, have been identified in Cowden's disease and Bannayan-Ruvalcaba–Riley syndrome that show that the two syndromes may be allelic and “might even be one and the same syndrome along a broad spectrum.” Eng and Ji discuss the problem of phenotypic overlap.

---

Examples of Genes with Coding Microsatellites

| TGFβ1RII | 90% |
| RIZ      | 37% |
| TCF4     | 35% |
| BAX      | 33% |
| IGFIIIR  | 27% |

Mismatch-Repair Genes

| MLH1 |
| MSH2 |
| MSH6 |

Normal epithelium  
Early adenoma  
Intermediate adenoma  
Late adenoma  
Carcinoma  
Metastasis  

APC  
K-ras  
DCC Smad4  
p53  
Other  

Mismatch-Repair Genes with Coding Microsatellites

---

Figure 6. Putative Role of Mutations in Mismatch-Repair Genes.

A mutation in one of the three main mismatch-repair genes leads to a deficiency of mismatch-repair proteins, which promotes mutations in some of the traditional genes, such as the adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC) and K-ras. Genes with coding microsatellites accumulate frame-shift mutations and lose function, further affecting, and perhaps speeding up, the evolution of cancer. They may also affect the organ specificity of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancers. The approximate percentages of all colorectal-cancer tumors with mismatch-repair deficiency that harbor these frame-shift mutations are shown in the box at the top. 56, 76, 79, 80 Three mismatch-repair genes that have coding microsatellites are shown at the bottom. 81, 82 Somatic frame-shift mutations occur in these genes, but their role remains unclear. TGFβ1RII denotes transforming growth factor β1 receptor II, RIZ retinoblastoma-protein–interacting zinc finger, TCF4 transcription factor 4, BAX BCL-2-associated X, IGFIIIR insulin-like growth factor II receptor, and DCC deleted in colorectal cancer.

ic features that may be shared by the various ham-
artomatous syndromes, thereby contributing to the
complexity of clinical diagnosis.94 They suggest re-
ferring such patients to physicians with extensive
experience with these disorders.

---

### PROSPECTS FOR PREVENTION
AND TREATMENT

Morbidity and mortality from hereditary forms of
colorectal cancer should be reduced once a patient's
familial or hereditary risk is established and a high-
ly targeted program of cancer surveillance and man-
agement is undertaken.69, 70, 73 Prevention will be
aided by the identification of the causative germ-line
mutation in a patient's family, thus confirming the
risk. Cancer prevention, particularly among patients
with familial adenomatous polyposis and hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, will be most effec-
tive when physicians understand the natural histo-
ry and the molecular bases of these disorders. They
must recognize the need for genetic counseling be-
fore DNA testing is performed and at the time the
test results are disclosed. A vexing problem is the
perception of many high-risk patients that partici-
pating in genetic-testing, clinical, and research pro-
grams, which can contribute to the identification
and ultimate prevention and reduction in morbid-
ity and mortality from hereditary cancer syndromes,
will result in discrimination by insurance compa-
nies or employers.9, 95-97 Legislative bodies need to
enact laws that will protect such patients from po-
tential discrimination.95-98

In addition to diagnostic methods, physicians
must also be familiar with the available screening
methods and with the options for surgical prophyl-
axis, particularly prophylactic colectomy in patients
with familial adenomatous polyposis and prophyl-
actic colectomy and prophylactic bilateral salpingo-
oophorectomy (the latter when childbearing is com-
plete) in patients with hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer. Technologic advances in both
cancer screening and the identification of biologic
markers of cancer susceptibility, such as microsat-
ellite instability, and ultimately specific germ-line
testing, will expedite attempts to achieve these can-

---

**Table 3. Hamartomatous Polyposis Syndromes.**

| Syndrome                | Phenotype                                                                                   | Mutant Gene* |
|-------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|
| Peutz-Jeghers syndrome  | Perioral pigmentation, pigmentation of fingers, upper and lower gastrointestinal hamartomatous lesions, small-bowel and pancreatic cancer, colorectal cancer and sex-cord tumors with annular tubules of the ovary | LKB1 (STK11) 88 |
| Familial juvenile polyposis | Gastrointestinal hamartomatous polyps, increased risk of gastrointestinal cancer (stomach, colon, rectum)† | Smad4 (DPC4) 89 BMPRIA 90 PTEN 91 |
| Cowden's disease‡       | Colonic hamartomatous polyps, benign and malignant neoplasms of the thyroid, breast, uterus, and skin (multiple trichilemmomas)§ | PTEN (MMAC1, DEP1) 92, 93 |
| Bannayan-Ruvalcaba-Riley syndrome | Microcephaly, fibromatosis, hamartomatous polyposis, hemangiomas, speckled penis§ | PTEN |

* Alternative names are given in parentheses.
† The diagnosis is made only when features pathognomonic of the other syndromes are not present.
‡ Finding a germ-line mutation in PTEN provides molecular evidence of Cowden's disease, but the absence of an identifiable PTEN mutation is nondiagnostic.
§ A firm association with colorectal cancer has yet to be identified.

cer-prevention goals. Pharmacologic treatment that
is based on molecular-targeting strategies holds
great promise.99, 100

Finally, molecular genetic research on hereditary
forms of colorectal cancer must continue to
search for new mutations in these heterogeneous
disorders. For example, researchers have described
germ-line mutations in MYH in classic familial adenomatous polyposis coli showing apparent autosomal recessive inheritance.101, 102

Supported by revenue from Nebraska cigarette taxes awarded to Creighton University by the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services and by grants (1U01 CA86389-01, P30 CA16058, and R01 CA67941) from the National Institutes of Health and by Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland.

The contents of this article are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the State of Nebraska or the Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services.

We are indebted to Trudy Shaw, M.A., for her faithful and diligent technical assistance throughout the development of this manuscript, and to Jane Lynch, B.S.N., who was a constant source of help in our family studies and in portions of the writing of this article.

---

### REFERENCES

1. Jemal A, Thomas A, Murray T, Thun M. Cancer statistics, 2002. CA Cancer J Clin 2002;52:23-47. [Errata, CA Cancer J Clin 2002;52:119, 181-2.]
2. Polednak AP. Do physicians discuss genetic testing with family-history-positive breast cancer patients? Conn Med 1998;62:3-7.
3. Cho MK, Sankar P, Wolpe PR, Godmilow L. Commercialization of BRCA1/2 testing:
4. Giardiello FM, Brensinger JD, Petersen GM, et al. The use and interpretation of commercial genetic test. Am J Med Genet 1999;83:157-63.

---

N ENGL J MED 348;10 WWW.NEJM.ORG MARCH 6, 2003 929

The New England Journal of Medicine

Downloaded from nejm.org on July 10, 2018. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.

Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.

mercial APC gene testing for familial adenomatous polyposis. N Engl J Med 1997; 336:823-7.

5. Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW, eds. The genetic basis of human cancer. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998.

6. Eng C, Hampel H, de la Chapelle A. Genetic testing for cancer predisposition. Annu Rev Med 2001;52:371-400. [Erratum, Annu Rev Med 2002;53:xi.]

7. Lynch HT, de la Chapelle A. Genetic susceptibility to non-polyposis colorectal cancer. J Med Genet 1999;36:801-18.

8. Lynch HT. Family information service and hereditary cancer. Cancer 2001;91:625-8.

9. Aktan-Collan K, Mecklin JP, Jarvinen HJ, et al. Predictive genetic testing for hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer: uptake and long-term satisfaction. Int J Cancer 2000; 89:44-50.

10. Lynch HT, Smyrk T, McGinn T, et al. Attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP): a phenotypically and genotypically distinctive variant of FAP. Cancer 1995;76: 2427-33.

11. Lynch HT, Lynch JF, Casey MJ, Bewtra C, Narod SA. Genetics of gynecological cancer. In: Hoskins WJ, Perez CA, Young RC, eds. Principles and practice of gynecologic oncology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000:29-53.

12. Watson P, Lynch HT. The tumor spectrum in HNPCC. Anticancer Res 1994;14: 1635-9.

13. Watson P, Lin KM, Rodriguez-Bigas MA, et al. Colorectal carcinoma survival among hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma family members. Cancer 1998;83:259- 66.

14. Sankila R, Altonen LA, Jarvinen HJ, Mecklin J-P. Better survival rates in patients with MLH1-associated hereditary colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 1996;110:682-7.

15. Gryfe R, Kim H, Hsieh ETK, et al. Tumor microsatellite instability and clinical outcome in young patients with colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med 2000;342:69-77.

16. Branch P, Bicknell DC, Rowan A, Bodmer WF, Karlan P. Immune surveillance in colorectal carcinoma. Nat Genet 1995;9: 231-2.

17. Shashidharan M, Smyrk T, Lin KM, et al. Histologic comparison of hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer associated with MSH2 and MLH1 and colorectal cancer from the general population. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:722-6.

18. Boman BM, Fry RD, Curran W, et al. Unique immunohistochemical features of MSI-classified tumors from HNPCC patients. Prog Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 1999;18:236a. abstract.

19. Altonen LA, Peltomaki P, Leach FS, et al. Clues to the pathogenesis of familial colorectal cancer. Science 1993;260:812-6.

20. Peltomaki P, Lothe RA, Altonen LA, et al. Microsatellite instability is associated with tumors that characterize the hereditary non-

polyposis colorectal carcinoma syndrome. Cancer Res 1993;53:5853-5.

21. Boland CR, Thibodeau SN, Hamilton SR, et al. A National Cancer Institute workshop on microsatellite instability for cancer detection and familial predisposition: development of international criteria for the determination of microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer. Cancer Res 1998;58:5248-57.

22. Altonen LA, Salovaara R, Kristo P, et al. Incidence of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer and the feasibility of molecular screening for the disease. N Engl J Med 1998;338:1481-7.

23. Salovaara R, Loukola A, Kristo P, et al. Population-based molecular detection of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:2193-200. [Erratum, J Clin Oncol 2000;18:3456.]

24. Lothe RA, Peltomaki P, Meling GI, et al. Genomic instability in colorectal cancer: relationship to clinicopathological variables and family history. Cancer Res 1993;53: 5849-52.

25. Thibodeau SN, French AJ, Cunningham JM, et al. Microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer: different mutator phenotypes and the principal involvement of hMLH1. Cancer Res 1998;58:1713-8.

26. Zhou X-P, Hoang J-M, Li Y-J, et al. Determination of the replication error phenotype in human tumors without the requirement for matching normal DNA by analysis of mononucleotide repeat microsatellites. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 1998;21:101-7.

27. de la Chapelle A. Testing tumors for microsatellite instability. Eur J Hum Genet 1999;7:407-8.

28. Nyström-Lahti M, Kristo P, Nicolaides NC, et al. Founding mutations and Alu-mediated recombination in hereditary colon cancer. Nat Med 1995;1:1203-6.

29. Altonen LA, Peltomaki P, Mecklin JP, et al. Replication errors in benign and malignant tumors from hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer patients. Cancer Res 1994; 54:1645-8.

30. Miyaki M, Konishi M, Tanaka K, et al. Germline mutation of MSH6 as the cause of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Nat Genet 1997;17:271-2.

31. Wijnen J, de Leeuw W, Vasen H, et al. Familial endometrial cancer in female carriers of MSH6 germline mutations. Nat Genet 1999;23:142-4.

32. Park YJ, Shin K-H, Park J-G. Risk of gastric cancer in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer in Korea. Clin Cancer Res 2000;6:2994-8.

33. Burke C. Risk stratification for periampullary carcinoma in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis: does Theodore know what to do now? Gastroenterology 2001;121:1246-8.

34. Björk J, Akerbrant H, Iselius L, et al. Periampullary adenomas and adenocarcinomas in familial adenomatous polyposis: cumulative risks and APC gene mutations. Gastroenterology 2001;121:1127-35.

35. Lynch HT, Fitzgibbons RJr, Chong S, et al. Use of doxorubicin and dacarbazine for the management of unresectable intra-abdominal desmoid tumors in Gardner's syndrome. Dis Colon Rectum 1994;37:260-7.

36. Lynch HT, Fitzgibbons RJr. Surgery, desmoid tumors, and familial adenomatous polyposis: case report and literature review. Am J Gastroenterol 1996;91:2598-601.

37. Lynch HT, Lynch PM. Negative genetic test result in familial adenomatous polyposis. Dis Colon Rectum 1999;42:310-2.

38. Lynch HT, Smyrk TC. Classification of familial adenomatous polyposis: a diagnostic nightmare. Am J Hum Genet 1998;62: 1288-9.

39. Lynch HT, Tinley ST, Lynch J, Vanderhoof J, Lemon SJ. Familial adenomatous polyposis: discovery of a family and its management in a cancer genetics clinic. Cancer 1997;80:Suppl:614-20.

40. Lynch HT, Smyrk T, Lynch J, Lanspa S, McGinn T, Cavalieri RJ. Genetic counseling in an extended attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis kindred. Am J Gastroenterol 1996;91:455-9.

41. Lynch HT. Desmoid tumors: genotype-phenotype differences in familial adenomatous polyposis — a nosological dilemma. Am J Hum Genet 1996;59:1184-5.

42. Brensinger JD, Laken SJ, Luce MC, et al. Variable phenotype of familial adenomatous polyposis in pedigrees with 3' mutation in the APC gene. Gut 1998;43:548-52.

43. Laken SJ, Petersen GM, Gruber SB, et al. Familial colorectal cancer in Ashkenazim due to a hypermutable tract in APC. Nat Genet 1997;17:79-83.

44. Prior TW, Chadwick RB, Papp AC, et al. The I1307K polymorphism of the APC gene in colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 1999; 116:58-63.

45. Rozen P, Shomrat R, Strul H, et al. Prevalence of the I1307K APC gene variant in Israeli Jews of differing ethnic origin and risk for colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 1999; 116:54-7.

46. Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B. Lessons from hereditary colon cancer. Cell 1996;87:159-70.

47. Herrera L, ed. Familial adenomatous polyposis. New York: Alan R. Liss, 1990.

48. Steinbach G, Lynch PM, Phillips RKS, et al. The effect of celecoxib, a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, in familial adenomatous polyposis. N Engl J Med 2000;342:1946-52.

49. Tonelli F, Valanzano R, Messerini L, Ficari F. Long-term treatment with sulindac in familial adenomatous polyposis: is there an actual efficacy in prevention of rectal cancer? J Surg Oncol 2000;74:15-20.

50. Burn J, Chapman PD, Mathers J, et al. The protocol for a European double-blind trial of aspirin and resistant starch in familial adenomatous polyposis: the CAPP study. Eur J Cancer 1995;31A:1385-6.

51. Williamson SLH, Kartheuser A, Coaker J, et al. Intestinal tumorigenesis in the Apc1638N mouse treated with aspirin and

resistant starch for up to 5 months. Carcinogenesis 1999;20:805-10.

52. Lynch HT, Thorson AG, Smyrk T. Rectal cancer after prolonged sulindac chemoprevention: a case report. Cancer 1995;75:936-8.

53. Aarnio M, Sankila R, Pukkala E, et al. Cancer risk in mutation carriers of DNA-mismatch-repair genes. Int J Cancer 1999; 81:214-8.

54. Fusaro RM, Lemon SJ, Lynch HT. The Muir-Torre syndrome: a variant of the hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer syndrome. J Tumor Marker Oncol 1996;11:19-31.

55. Lynch HT, Richardson JD, Amin M, et al. Variable gastrointestinal and urologic cancers in a Lynch syndrome II kindred. Dis Colon Rectum 1991;34:891-5.

56. Vasen HFA, Mecklin J-P, Khan PM, Lynch HT. The International Collaborative Group on Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer (ICG-HNPCC). Dis Colon Rectum 1991;34:424-5.

57. Vasen HFA, Watson P, Mecklin J-P, Lynch HT. New clinical criteria for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC, Lynch syndrome) proposed by the International Collaborative Group on HNPCC. Gastroenterology 1999;116:1453-6.

58. Smyrk TC, Watson P, Kaul K, Lynch HT. Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes are a marker for microsatellite instability in colorectal carcinoma. Cancer 2001;91:2417-22.

59. Alexander J, Watanabe T, Wu T-T, Rashid A, Li S, Hamilton SR. Histopathological identification of colon cancer with microsatellite instability. Am J Pathol 2001;158:527-35.

60. Jass JR, Do K-A, Simms LA, et al. Morphology of sporadic colorectal cancer with DNA replication errors. Gut 1998;42:673-9.

61. Jass JR, Stewart SM. Evolution of hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. Gut 1992;33:783-6.

62. Lynch J. The genetics and natural history of hereditary colon cancer. Semin Oncol Nurs 1997;13:91-8.

63. Nyström-Lahti M, Wu Y, Moisio A-L, et al. DNA mismatch repair gene mutations in 55 kindreds with verified or putative hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. Hum Mol Genet 1996;5:763-9.

64. Wu Y, Berends MJW, Sijmons RH, et al. A role for MLH3 in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Nat Genet 2001;29:137-8.

65. Lindor NM, Burgart LJ, Leontovich O, et al. Immunohistochemistry versus microsatellite instability testing in phenotyping colorectal tumors. J Clin Oncol 2002;20:1043-8.

66. Yan H, Papadopoulos N, Marra G, et al. Conversion of diploidy to haploidy. Nature 2000;403:723-4.

67. Nakagawa H, Yan H, Lockman J, et al. Allele separation facilitates interpretation of potential splicing alterations and genomic rearrangements. Cancer Res 2002;62:4579-82.

68. Wijnen J, van der Klift H, Vasen H, et al. MSH2 genomic deletions are a frequent cause of HNPCC. Nat Genet 1998;20:326-8.

69. Burke W, Petersen G, Lynch P, et al. Recommendations for follow-up care of individuals with an inherited predisposition to cancer. I. Hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer. JAMA 1997;277:915-9.

70. Järvinen HJ, Aarnio M, Mustonen H, et al. Controlled 15-year trial on screening for colorectal cancer in families with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 2000;118:829-34.

71. Lynch HT. Is there a role for prophylactic subtotal colectomy among hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer germline mutation carriers? Dis Colon Rectum 1996; 39:109-10.

72. Houlston RS, Collins A, Slack J, Morton NE. Dominant genes for colorectal cancer are not rare. Ann Hum Genet 1992;56:99-103.

73. Ramsey SD, Clarke L, Etzioni R, Higashi M, Berry K, Urban N. Cost-effectiveness of microsatellite instability screening as a method for detecting hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Ann Intern Med 2001; 135:577-88.

74. Rodriguez-Bigas MA, Boland CR, Hamilton SR, et al. A National Cancer Institute workshop on hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer syndrome: meeting highlights and Bethesda guidelines. J Natl Cancer Inst 1997;89:1758-62.

75. Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. Cell 1990;61:759-67.

76. Ilyas M, Straub J, Tomlinson IPM, Bodmer WF. Genetic pathways in colorectal and other cancers. Eur J Cancer 1999;35:335-51.

77. Konishi M, Kikuchi-Yanoshita R, Tanaka K, et al. Molecular nature of colon tumors in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, familial polyposis, and sporadic colon cancer. Gastroenterology 1996;111:307-17.

78. Huang J, Papadopoulos N, McKinley AJ, et al. APC mutations in colorectal tumors with mismatch repair deficiency. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;93:9049-54.

79. Duval A, Rolland S, Compoint A, et al. Evolution of instability at coding and noncoding repeat sequences in human MSI-H colorectal cancers. Hum Mol Genet 2001; 10:513-8.

80. Chadwick RB, Jiang G-L, Bennington GA, et al. Candidate tumor suppressor RIZ is frequently involved in colorectal carcinogenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97: 2662-7.

81. Chadwick RB, Pyatt RE, Niemann TH, et al. Hereditary and somatic DNA mismatch repair gene mutations in sporadic endometrial carcinoma. J Med Genet 2001;38:461-6.

82. Malkhosyan S, Rampino N, Yamamoto H, Perucho M. Frameshift mutator mutations. Nature 1996;382:499-500.

83. Kane MF, Loda M, Gaida GM, et al. Methylation of the hMLH1 promoter correlates with lack of expression of hMLH1 in sporadic colon tumors and mismatch repair-defective human tumor cell lines. Cancer Res 1997;57:808-11.

84. Herman JG, Umar A, Polyak K, et al. Incidence and functional consequences of hMLH1 promoter hypermethylation in colorectal carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998;95:6870-5.

85. Cunningham JM, Christensen ER, Tester DJ, et al. Hypermethylation of the hMLH1 promoter in colon cancer with microsatellite instability. Cancer Res 1998;58:3455-60.

86. Veigl ML, Kasturi L, Olechnowicz J, et al. Biallelic inactivation of hMLH1 by epigenetic gene silencing, a novel mechanism causing human MSI cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998;95:8698-702.

87. Nakagawa H, Chadwick RB, Peltomäki P, Plass C, Nakamura Y, de la Chapelle A. Loss of imprinting of the insulin-like growth factor II gene occurs by biallelic methylation in a core region of H19-associated CTCF-binding sites in colorectal cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:591-6.

88. Hemminki A, Markie D, Tomlinson I, et al. A serine/threonine kinase gene defective in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Nature 1998; 391:184-7.

89. Howe JR, Roth S, Ringold JC, et al. Mutations in the SMAD4/DPC4 gene in juvenile polyposis. Science 1998;280:1086-8.

90. Howe JR, Bair JL, Sayed MG, et al. Germline mutations of the gene encoding bone morphogenetic protein receptor 1A in juvenile polyposis. Nat Genet 2001;28:184-7.

91. Lynch ED, Ostermeyer EA, Lee MK, et al. Inherited mutations in PTEN that are associated with breast cancer, Cowden disease, and juvenile polyposis. Am J Hum Genet 1997; 61:1254-60.

92. Liaw D, Marsh DJ, Li J, et al. Germline mutations of the PTEN gene in Cowden disease, an inherited breast and thyroid cancer syndrome. Nat Genet 1997;16:64-7.

93. Marsh DJ, Coulon V, Lunetta KL, et al. Mutation spectrum and genotype-phenotype analyses in Cowden disease and Bannayan-Zonana syndrome, two hamartoma syndromes with germline PTEN mutation. Hum Mol Genet 1998;7:507-15.

94. Eng C, Ji H. Molecular classification of the inherited hamartoma polyposis syndromes: clearing the muddied waters. Am J Hum Genet 1998;62:1020-2.

95. Matloff ET, Shappell H, Brierley K, Bernhardt BA, McKinnon W, Peshkin BN. What would you do? Specialists’ perspectives on cancer genetic testing, prophylactic surgery, and insurance discrimination. J Clin Oncol 2000;18:2484-92.

96. Pokorski RJ, Sanderson P, Bennett N, et al. Insurance issues and genetic testing: challenges and recommendations: workshop no. 1. Cancer 1997;80:Suppl:627.

97. The Ad Hoc Committee on Genetic Testing/Insurance Issues. Genetic testing and insurance. Am J Hum Genet 1995;56:327-31.

98. Balanced Budget Act of 1997, Pub. L. No. 105-33, 105th Cong. 1st Sess.

99. Druker BJ, Talpaz M, Resta DJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of a specific inhibitor of

the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1031-7.

100. Druker BJ, Sawyers CL, Kantarjian H, et al. Activity of a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in the blast crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia with the Philadelphia chromosome. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1038-42. [Erratum, N Engl J Med 2001;345:232.]

101. Al-Tassan N, Chmiel NH, Maynard J, et al. Inherited variants of MYH associated with somatic G:C→T:A mutations in colorectal tumors. Nat Genet 2002;30:227-32.

102. Sieber OM, Lipton L, Crabtree M, et al. Multiple colorectal adenomas, classic adenomatous polyposis, and germ-line mutations in MYH. N Engl J Med 2003;348:791-9. Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society.


---

**APPLY FOR JOBS ELECTRONICALLY AT THE NEW NEJM CAREER CENTER**

Physicians registered at the new NEJM Career Center can now apply for jobs electronically using their own cover letters and CVs. You can now keep track of your job-application history with a personal account that is created when you register with the Career Center and apply for jobs seen online at our Web site. Visit www.nejmjobs.org for more information.
