
# O-Glucosylation of cis-Zeatin in Maize. Characterization of Genes, Enzymes, and Endogenous Cytokinins¹

Yeonjin K. Veach, Ruth C. Martin, David W.S. Mok, Jiri Malbeck, Radomira Vankova, and Machteld C. Mok*

Department of Horticulture and Center for Gene Research and Biotechnology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331–7304 (Y.K.V., R.C.M., D.W.S.M., M.C.M.); and Institute of Experimental Botany, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Rozvojová 135, 165 02 Prague 6, Czech Republic (J.M., R.V.)

trans-Zeatin is a major and ubiquitous cytokinin in higher plants. cis-Zeatin has traditionally been viewed as an adjunct with low activity and rare occurrence. Recent reports of cis-zeatin and its derivatives as the predominant cytokinin components in some plant tissues may call for a different perspective on cis-isomers. The existence of a maize (*Zea mays*) gene (*cisZOG1*) encoding an O-glucosyltransferase specific to cis-zeatin (R.C. Martin, M.C. Mok, J.E. Habben, D.W.S. Mok [2001] Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98: 5922–5926) lends further support to this view. Results described here include the isolation of a second maize *cisZOG* gene, differential expression of *cisZOG1* and *cisZOG2*, and identification of substantial amounts of cis-isomers in maize tissues. The open reading frame of *cisZOG2* has 98.3% identity to *cisZOG1* at the nucleotide level and 97.8% at the amino acid level. The upstream regions contain common and unique segments. The recombinant enzymes have similar properties, *K*ₘ values of 46 and 96 μM, respectively, for cis-zeatin and a pH optimum of 7.5. Other cytokinins, including N⁶-(Δ²-isopentenyl)adenine, trans-zeatin, benzyladenine, kinetin, and thidiazuron inhibited the reaction. Expression of *cisZOG1* was high in maize roots and kernels, whereas *cisZOG2* expression was high in roots but low in kernels. cis-Zeatin, cis-zeatin riboside, and their O-glucosides were detected in all maize tissues, with immature kernels containing very high levels of the O-glucoside of cis-zeatin riboside. The results are a clear indication that O-glucosylation of cis-zeatin is a natural metabolic process in maize. Whether cis-zeatin serves as a precursor to the active trans-isomer or has any other unique function remains to be demonstrated.

Cytokinins are plant hormones regulating cell division and a range of developmental events such as bud formation, leaf expansion, senescence, seed germination, and chloroplast formation (Mok, 1994). trans-Zeatin is a major and ubiquitous cytokinin in higher plants. Earlier cytokinin analyses detected cis-zeatin and its derivatives in trace amounts in some plants, but due to their low activity (Schmitz et al., 1972), cis-isomers were viewed as adjunct to trans-isomers. Recent analyses, however, showed that the cis-isomers can be the dominant cytokinins at particular stages of development in plants such as chickpea (*Cicer arietinum*) and lupine (*Lupinus albus*; Emery et al., 1998, 2000). Moreover, the presence of cis-isomers was associated with male sterility in *Mercurialis* spp. flowers (Louis et al., 1990; Durand and Durand, 1994). These are indications that cis-isomers may have unique physiological functions. The ability to regulate the levels of cis-zeatin is evidenced by the maize (*Zea mays*) *cisZOG1* gene, encoding an O-glucosyltransferase with specificity to cis-zeatin (Martin et al., 2001).

O-Glucosylation is a major step in the metabolism of trans-zeatin (Mok and Mok, 2001). The resulting O-glucosides seem to serve as storage compounds and are resistant to degradation by cytokinin oxidases (Armstrong, 1994). O-Glucosides are found in xylem sap and are likely also transport forms of zeatin (Letham, 1994). *Phaseolus* spp. enzymes and genes involved in conversion of trans-zeatin to its O-glucoside and O-xyloside have been characterized in our laboratories (Turner et al., 1987; Dixon et al., 1989; Martin et al., 1999a, 1999b). These bean enzymes have either no or very low affinity to cis-zeatin. The discovery of the maize *cisZOG1* gene is indicative of the existence of similar conversions for trans- and cis-zeatin, but mediated by isomer-specific enzymes. This idea is compatible with findings reported here, the isolation of a second *cisZOG* gene, the preference of both enzymes for cis-zeatin, and substantial levels of cis-zeatin and its O-glucoside in maize tissues.

---

¹ This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (grant nos. IBN–9981974 and IBN–0086731), by the U.S. Department of Agriculture National Research Initiative Competitive Grants Program (grant no. 01–02015), by the Nucleic Acids and Proteins Core Facility of the Oregon State Environmental Health Sciences Center (grant no. 01–02015), by Pioneer Hi-Bred International, and by the Czech Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports (grant no. Kontakt ME 406). This is paper no. 11,892 of the Oregon Agricultural Experiment Station.

* Corresponding author; e-mail mokm@science.oregonstate.edu; fax 541–737–3479.

Article, publication date, and citation information can be found at www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/doi/10.1104/pp.017210.

RESULTS

Isolation of cisZOG2

Screening of a genomic library of the maize inbred B73 with cisZOG1 led to identification of two different clones. One clone contained a partial sequence of the open reading frame (ORF) of cisZOG1 and an upstream region of 3.5 kb. The other genomic fragment contained a gene designated as cisZOG2 plus a 2.5-kb upstream fragment. The sequences have been deposited in the GenBank database (AF318075 for cisZOG1 and AY082660 for cisZOG2). The upstream sequence of cisZOG1 can be found under AF466203. Neither cisZOG1 nor cisZOG2 have any introns (see GenBank sequences). The amino acid sequence of cisZOG2 is 98% identical to that of cisZOG1, but the protein is shorter by four amino acids (Fig. 1A). However, the upstream regions of the two genes are different, with large gaps in cisZOG2, although there are also highly similar regions (Fig. 1B).

Biochemical Characterization of cisZOG1 and cisZOG2

The ORFs of both genes were cloned into the modified expression vector Ptrc99A producing recombinant proteins with a His tag at the N terminus. Enzymes were purified based on their poly-his tag on a Ni affinity column and used to study the biochemical properties. The enzymes have a theoretical pI of 5.4 and mass of 52 kD. The recombinant proteins catalyze the formation of cis-zeatin-O-glucoside with a pH optimum of 7.5. The \(K_m\) for cis-zeatin is about 46 \(\mu\)M for cisZOG1 and 96 \(\mu\)M for cisZOG2. UDP-Glc is the sugar donor with \(K_m\) values of 0.11 and 0.59 mM for cisZOG1 and cisZOG2, respectively. When UDP-Xyl was used in place of UDP-Glc, no product was formed. This is another property distinguishing these enzymes from the trans-zeatin O-glucosyltransferases of beans, which can transfer the Xyl from UDP-Xyl albeit at a lower affinity than UDP-Glc (Dixon et al., 1989; Martin et al., 1999a, 1999b). Using a larger quantity of purified enzyme, formation of trans-[³H]zeatin-O-glucoside was mediated by both maize enzymes under standard reaction conditions. However, conversion of cis-zeatin was much higher than that of trans-zeatin under the same conditions. For instance, under assay conditions that resulted in 44% conversion of cis-zeatin to its glucoside, only 4% of trans-zeatin was glucosylated.

To examine possible affinity to or interference by other cytokinins, competition experiments were conducted. Conversion of cis-zeatin to its glucoside was lowered by all adenine-type cytokinins tested (Fig. 2). Although the inhibition seemed to be very moderate for the large excess of unlabeled cis-zeatin, this would be expected for an enzyme with \(K_m\) for cis-zeatin of 46 \(\mu\)M. Interestingly, thidiazuron, a very active phenylurea-type cytokinin (Mok et al., 1982), also decreased conversion of cis-[³H]zeatin. Thidiazuron also inhibits cytokinin oxidase activity (Armstrong, 1994) and was shown to be a competitive inhibitor of the maize oxidase (Bilyeu et al., 2000). Whether the inhibition of glucosyltransferase activity observed here is competitive or noncompetitive remains to be determined, but it appears that thidiazuron interferes with several cytokinin-specific but distinct enzymatic reactions.

Expression of cisZOG1 and cisZOG2 in Maize Tissues

To examine whether there is differential expression of the two genes in maize tissues, mRNA levels of cisZOG1 and cisZOG2 were compared by reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR (Fig. 3). Gene-specific primers were used, as shown by the differential amplification of the cisZOG1 and cisZOG2 plasmid controls (Fig. 3, lanes 8 and 9), and amounts were adjusted

Figure 1. Comparison of the cisZOG1 and cisZOG2 genes. A, Alignment of the deduced amino acid sequences. B, Diagrammatic presentation of the upstream sequences. Alignment was performed with gcg software (Genetics Computer Group, Madison, WI).

Veach et al.

O-glucosides of cis-isomers were found in roots, young cobs, and kernels, which is compatible with the expression of *cisZOG1* and *cisZOG2* in maize tissues (Fig. 3). Comparing the two groups of cytokinins, cis-isomers were more prevalent in roots, stems, and leaves, whereas trans-isomers were more abundant in the kernels. The levels of other types of cytokinins, dihydrozeatin and isopentenyladenine derivatives, were relatively low.

## DISCUSSION

The clear preference of the two glucosyltransferases for cis-zeatin and the presence of O-glucosides of cis-zeatin and its riboside in maize lead to the obvious conclusion that cis-zeatin O-glucosylation is a natural metabolic process in maize. The \(K_{\mathrm{m}}\) values for cis-zeatin and UDP-Glc are well within the range expected of cytokinin metabolic enzymes. For example, the recombinant cytokinin oxidase of maize has \(K_{\mathrm{m}}\) values of 46 \(\mu \mathrm{M}\) for cis-zeatin and 14 \(\mu \mathrm{M}\) for trans-zeatin (Bilyeu et al., 2000), whereas other native cytokinin oxidases have reported \(K_{\mathrm{m}}\) values for trans-zeatin ranging from 25 to 33 \(\mu \mathrm{M}\) (Armstrong, 1994). The \(K_{\mathrm{m}}\) of the native zeatin O-glucosyltransferase of *P. lunatus* is 28 \(\mu \mathrm{M}\) for trans-zeatin and 0.2 \(\mathrm{mM}\) for UDP-Glc (Dixon et al., 1989). The difference in \(K_{\mathrm{m}}\) between *cisZOG1* and *cisZOG2* may be related to the gap of four amino acids in *cisZOG2* or in the additional amino acid differences between the two enzymes, resulting in slight differences in folding. With larger amounts of recombinant enzyme available, trans-zeatin was also found to be a substrate, even though in previous tests with less pure enzyme conversion was found to be negligible (Martin et al., 2001).

The O-glucosyltransferases we have identified thus far have high substrate specificity, differentiating between trans- and cis-zeatin and between sugar donors UDP-Glc and UDP-Xyl (Dixon et al., 1989; Martin et al., 1999a, 1999b). The genes encoding these enzymes have higher homology to each other than to any other sequences in the GenBank. Among glycosyltransferase

### Identification of Cytokinins in Maize Tissues

Cytokinins were purified from maize tissues and quantified by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) with equal attention to trans- and cis-zeatin and their derivatives. Cytokinins with cis-hydroxylated side chains have not been reported previously for maize and are usually not part of the repertoire of traditional analyses. The methodologies can clearly discriminate between the two isomers, as shown in Figure 4. The LC method causes clean separation of the two compounds (standards as well as samples), and their mass spectra show significant differences in the relative intensities of fragments. The analyses revealed that cis-zeatin was present in roots, stems, leaves, unfertilized cobs, and kernels (Table I) along with its riboside and nucleotide. The

Figure 2. Effects of various cytokinins on conversion of cis-[³H]zeatin to its glucoside by *cisZOG1*. Enzyme activity was assayed by incubating 0.75 \(\mu \mathrm{M}\) cis-[³H]zeatin (specific activity 3.1 Ci mmol⁻¹), 200 \(\mu \mathrm{M}\) (A) or 400 \(\mu \mathrm{M}\) (B) cytokinin, 4 mM UDP-Glc, 10 \(\mu \mathrm{L}\) of recombinant protein, and 0.17 M MgCl₂ in 150 \(\mu \mathrm{L} 0.17 \mathrm{M}\) Tris, pH 7.5, for 30 min at 27°C. C, Control (no cytokinin added); cZ, cis-zeatin; tZ, trans-zeatin; iP, N⁶-(Δ²-isopentenyl) adenine; BAP, N⁶-benzyladenine; K, kinetin; Ade, adenine; and TDZ, thidiazuron.

using the actin gene message as control. Both *cisZOG* genes were highly expressed in roots (Fig. 3, lane 2) and very weakly expressed in stems and leaves (Fig. 3, lanes 3 and 4). Differential expression was observed in developing kernels, with high expression of *cisZOG1*, particularly in large seeds, and low expression of *cisZOG2* in all kernel sizes sampled (Fig. 3, lanes 5 through 7). These results indicate a divergence in gene expression, which may be reflected in the differences in the upstream sequences (Fig. 1) harboring the promoter.

Figure 3. Gene expression analysis of *cisZOG1*, *cisZOG2*, and actin (control) in maize tissues as determined by RT-PCR with gene-specific primers. Lane 1, Water control; lane 2, roots of 2-week-old seedlings; lanes 3 and 4, stems and leaves of 2-week-old plants; lanes 5 through 7, kernels 1, 2, and 3 weeks after pollination; lane 8, *cisZOG1* plasmid; and lane 9, *cisZOG2* plasmid.

STANDARDS

SAMPLE

A

B

Internal standard  
deuterated trans-zeatin  

C

D

MS/MS SPECTRUM OF  
PEAK 1  

MS/MS SPECTRUM OF  
PEAK 2  

MS/MS SPECTRUM OF  
PEAK 3  

Figure 4. Chromatographical profiles and mass spectra of standards (A and C) and a representative biological sample obtained from LC-MS/MS (B and D). The mass spectra of peaks 1, 2, and 3 correspond to those of standards of trans-zeatin, cis-zeatin, and dihydrozeatin, respectively.

genes, the cytokinin O-glycosyltransferases constitute a distinct branch in the evolutionary tree (Li et al., 2001). The upstream regions of the *cisZOG1* and *cisZOG2* ORFs have stretches with high identity but also unique segments. These unique sequences may have contributed to the differences in gene expression in maize kernels (Fig. 3).

It was somewhat surprising to find high levels of cis-zeatin derivatives in maize tissues because maize has been the subject of numerous cytokinin analyses in the past and the occurrence of cis-zeatin has, to our knowledge, never been reported. However, in rice (*Oryza sativa*), another monocot, O-glucosyl-cis-zeatin and its riboside were found (Takagi et al., 1989). In fact, the number of species in which cis-zeatin was detected has increased steadily over the years and now includes potato (*Solanum tuberosum*; Mauk and Langille, 1978; Suttle and Banowetz, 2000), hops (Watanabe et al., 1981), sweet potato (*Ipomoea batatas*; Hashizumi et al., 1982), rice (Takagi et al., 1985), wheat (*Triticum aestivum*; Parker et al., 1989),

Plant Physiol. Vol. 131, 2008 Downloaded from www.plantphysiol.org on March 19, 2015 - Published by www.plant.org Copyright © 2003 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.

Veach et al.

Table I. Cytokinin concentrations$^a$ in roots, stems, leaves, unfertilized cobs, and kernels of maize

| Cytokinin | Roots | Stems | Leaves | Cobs | Kernels |
|-----------|-------|-------|--------|------|---------|
| $Z^b$     | <DL$^c$ | <DL   | 4.5    | 5.5  | 25.3    |
| ZR        | <DL   | 1.1   | 1.9    | 13.4 | 180.0   |
| ZRP       | 2.6   | <DL   | 1.0    | 13.9 | 589.0   |
| Z-9G      | 4.6   | <DL   | <DL    | 23.5 | 31.9    |
| Z-OG      | <DL   | <DL   | <DL    | 2.7  | 10.5    |
| ZR-OG     | <DL   | <DL   | <DL    | <DL  | 16.0    |
| cZ        | 2.5   | 28.1  | 26.6   | 9.7  | 5.3     |
| cZR       | 6.5   | 39.5  | 26.5   | 21.4 | 25.3    |
| cZRP      | 1.2   | 7.0   | 6.1    | 7.1  | 25.8    |
| cZ-OG     | 55.2  | 7.6   | 8.2    | 10.0 | 23.5    |
| cZR-OG    | 18.8  | <DL   | <DL    | 12.2 | 226.9   |
| DZ        | <DL   | <DL   | <DL    | <DL  | <DL     |
| DZR       | <DL   | <DL   | 1.9    | 0.8  | 8.9     |
| DZRP      | <DL   | <DL   | <DL    | <DL  | 6.3     |
| DZ-9G     | <DL   | <DL   | <DL    | <DL  | <DL     |
| DZ-OG     | <DL   | <DL   | <DL    | <DL  | <DL     |
| DZR-OG    | 1.0   | <DL   | 2.1    | 0.4  | 34.2    |
| iP        | 0.9   | <DL   | 0.8    | 2.1  | 6.9     |
| iPR       | 1.2   | 3.4   | 2.2    | 2.9  | 34.4    |
| iPRP      | <DL   | <DL   | 4.2    | <DL  | 34.3    |
| iP-9G     | 10.4  | <DL   | <DL    | <DL  | <DL     |

$^a$ Averages of two replicate samples except for cobs (one sample).  
$^b$ Z, (trans-)zeatin; ZR, zeatin riboside; ZRP, zeatin riboside phosphate; Z-9G, zeatin-9-glucoside; Z-OG, zeatin-O-glucoside; ZR-OG, ribosylzeatin-O-glucoside; cZ, cis-zeatin; cZR, cis-zeatin riboside; cZRP, cis-zeatin riboside phosphate; cZ-OG, cis-zeatin-O-glucoside; cZR-OG, cis-ribosylzeatin-O-glucoside; DZ, dihydrozeatin; DZR, dihydrozeatin riboside; DZRP, dihydrozeatin riboside phosphate; DZ-9G, dihydrozeatin-9-glucoside; DZ-OG, dihydrozeatin-O-glucoside; DZR-OG, dihy-droribosylzeatin-O-glucoside; iP, N$^6$-(Δ$^2$-isopentenyl)adenine; iPR, N$^6$-(Δ$^2$-isopentenyl)adenosine; iPRP, N$^6$-(Δ$^2$-isopentenyl)adenosine phos-phate; iP-9G, N$^6$-(Δ$^2$-isopentenyl)adenine-9-glucoside.  
$^c$ <DL, Concentration is smaller than the detection limit.
with ${}^{32}$P according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Positive clones were plaque purified, and $\lambda$ DNA was digested with various restriction enzymes (KpnI, XbaI, EcoRI, HindIII, and XmnI). Digestion products were separated by electrophoresis on a 1.1% (w/v) agarose gel, blotted to a Zeta-Probe GT membrane (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) following the manufacturer’s protocol, and probed with ${}^{32}$P-labeled $cisZOG1$. Positive fragments of approximately 3.5 kb were identified from the EcoRI- and XbaI-digested DNA. These fragments were subcloned into pUC18 digested with either EcoRI or XbaI and then sequenced by the Central Services Laboratory (Center for Gene Research and Biotechnology, Oregon State University, Corvallis) with sequence analyzers (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). On the basis of the sequence comparison to $cisZOG1$, a variant of this gene, $cisZOG2$, was identified.

# Generation of Recombinant Protein

The ORF of $cisZOG2$ was amplified by PCR with a forward primer specific to this gene containing an NcoI site (GAG CTC CAT GGC GGT TGA CAC GAT GGA) and a backward primer containing an XbaI site (GAA TTC ACT CTA GAT TAC CTT GTG ATG TAG CCA ATG). The PCR product was digested with NcoI and XbaI and ligated into the Ptrc99A vector (Amersham Biosciences), which was modified to contain a translational fusion with seven His residues at the N terminus of the protein. This vector was transformed into the XL1 Blue cell line. The same procedures as used for generating crude $cisZOG1$ enzyme (Martin et al., 2001) were used to obtain $cisZOG2$ protein. Both $cisZOG1$ and $cisZOG2$ enzymes were purified by incubation with Ni column material (Novagen, Madison, WI) for 2 h at 4°C, followed by sequential elution with 100 mM and 500 mM imidazole. The 500 mM imidazole fraction contained the purified enzyme, which was concentrated by ultrafiltration in Centriprep 10 (Millipore, Bedford, MA) and desalted on an Econo-Pac10 DG column (Bio-Rad).

# Biochemical Characterization of Recombinant Enzymes

Enzyme activity was assayed by incubating 0.75 $\mu$M cis-[${}^8$-${}^3$H]zeatin (specific activity 3.1 Ci mmol${}^{-1}$; OlChemIm, Brno, Czech Republic), 4 mM UDP-Glc, 10 $\mu$L of recombinant protein, and 0.17 M MgCl${}_2$ in 150 $\mu$L of 0.17 M Tris, pH 7.5, for 30 min or 1 h at 27°C. The reaction was terminated by addition of 800 $\mu$L of cold 95% (v/v) ethanol, after which the mixture was centrifuged, and the supernatant was collected. Substrate and product were separated by HPLC (Dixon et al., 1989). For determination of the optimum pH for the reaction, the pH range of 6 to 8 was used. For $K_m$ determinations of cis-zeatin, various amounts of non-radiolabeled cis-zeatin were added and for $K_m$ of UDP-Glc, the cis-zeatin concentration was 100 $\mu$M. The reaction was linear over time (30 min) at the concentrations tested (data not shown). $K_m$ values were determined with Scientist Micromath version 2.0 from Micromath Inc. To determine possible inhibition by other cytokinins, 200 or 400 $\mu$M of the compound was added to the reaction mixture containing 10 $\mu$M cis-[${}^3$H]zeatin.

# RT-PCR

Total RNA was isolated from roots, stems, leaves, and kernels of B73 using a modified cetyl-trimethyl-ammonium bromide procedure (Chang et al., 1993). The roots, stems, and leaves were taken from 2-week-old seedlings in the greenhouse. Kernels were from field-grown maize, taken 1, 2, and 3 weeks post-fertilization. The RNA was treated with RNase-free DNase (Qiagen USA, Valencia, CA) and further purified using an RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen USA). SuperScript II RNase H${}^-$ reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) was used to synthesize first strand cDNA using oligo(dT)${}_{15}$ as a primer following the manufacturer’s instructions. Escherichia coli RNase H (Invitrogen) was used to remove RNA complementary to cDNA before PCR. Primers were designed to amplify $cisZOG1$ (but not $cisZOG2$) and $cisZOG2$ (but not $cisZOG1$). The maize actin gene was used as an internal standard. Primer sequences were as follows: actin sense, GTGACAATGGCACTGGGAATG; actin antisense, GACCTGACCATCAGGCATCT; $cisZOG1$ sense, CAGGGAGTTCGTGGACCTC, $cisZOG1$ antisense, GAGCCCTGGAAAGTAC; $cisZOG2$ sense, CAGGGAGTTCGTGACCTG, and $cisZOG2$ antisense, GAGCCCTGCCTTGAAGTAG. PCR conditions used to compare the $cisZOG1$ and $cisZOG2$ transcripts were as follows: 95°C for 5 min followed by 30 cycles of: 94°C for 1 min, 57°C for 45 s, 72°C for 1 min.

This was followed by a 10-min extension at 72°C, after which samples were held at 4°C until they were analyzed. PCR products were separated by electrophoresis in a 1.2% (w/v) Tris-acetate-EDTA agarose gel. Products were stained with ethidium bromide and visualized with a gel documentation system (UVP, Upland, CA).

## Identification of Cytokinins in Maize Tissues

Roots were obtained from 2-week-old B73 seedlings grown under aseptic conditions on filter paper in Magenta boxes in the dark at 27°C. Leaves and stems were obtained from 5-week-old seedlings grown in the greenhouse at 75°C/65°C (day/night). Immature cobs (unfertilized) and young fertilized cobs (10 and 16 d after anthesis) were taken from the field. All tissues were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at $-80^\circ$C. Tissues (roots, stems, leaves, unfertilized cobs, and kernels from the fertilized cobs) were lyophilized for 72 h before cytokinin analyses.

For MS quantification, nine deuterium-labeled cytokinins ([${}^2$H${}_5$]Z, [${}^2$H${}_5$]ZR, [${}^2$H${}_5$]Z-7G, [${}^2$H${}_5$]Z-9G, [${}^2$H${}_5$]Z-OG, [${}^2$H${}_5$]ZR-OG, [${}^2$H${}_6$]iP, [${}^2$H${}_6$]iPR, [${}^2$H${}_6$]iP-9G; Apex Organics, Honiton, UK), each at 100 pmol per sample, were used as internal standards. Cytokinins were extracted from 1 g of tissue with a mixture of MeOH:water:formic acid (15:4:1, v/v) at $-20^\circ$C overnight. After passing the sample through a Si-C${}_{18}$ cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA), cytokinins were trapped on an Oasis MCX mixed mode, cation-exchange, reverse-phase column (150 mg, Waters). Cytokinin nucleotides were eluted with 0.17 M NH${}_4$OH in water, and after dephosphorylation (with 1 mg of phosphatase per 1 g tissue fresh weight for 1 h at $37^\circ$C), they were analyzed as the corresponding ribosides. Cytokinin bases, ribosides, and glucosides were eluted from MCX with 0.17 M NH${}_4$OH in 60% (v/v) MeOH and concentrated using Si-C${}_{18}$ cartridges.

Cytokinins were quantified by HPLC linked to an Ion Trap mass spectrometer Finnigan MAT LCQ-MS${}^n$ equipped with an electrospray interface using an RP-C${}_8$ column (Supersphere RP Select B, $2 \times 250$ mm, 4 $\mu$m; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). Linear gradients of acetonitrile (B) in 0.001% (v/v) acetic acid in water (A), 14% B to 20% B in 14 min, to 80% B in 6 min, and to 100% B in 6 min, were used at a flow rate 0.2 mL min${}^{-1}$. Detection and quantification were carried out with a Finnigan LCQ operated in the positive ion, full-scan MS/MS mode, using a multilevel calibration graph with deuterated cytokinins as internal standards. Because deuterated standards of cis-zeatin and derivatives are not available, the levels of these compounds were calculated based on the recovery of deuterated standards of the corresponding trans compounds. The electrospray ionization probe was installed with a sheath and auxiliary gasses at 96 and 6 units, respectively. The heated metal capillary temperature was maintained at $250^\circ$C and capillary voltage at 2.5 V. Data were obtained from two samples, except for unfertilized cobs (one sample). The detection limit was calculated for each compound as $3.3\sigma/S$, where $\sigma$ is the SD of the response and $S$ is the slope of the calibration curve.

Received November 6, 2002; returned for revision November 22, 2002; accepted December 6, 2002.

## LITERATURE CITED

Armstrong DJ (1994) Cytokinin oxidase and the regulation of cytokinin degradation. *In* DWS Mok, MC Mok, eds, Cytokinins: Chemistry, Activity, and Function. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp 139–154

Basil NV, Mok DWS, Mok MC (1993) Partial purification of a cis-trans-isomerase of zeatin from immature seed of *Phaseolus vulgaris* L. Plant Physiol 102: 867–872

Bilyeu KD, Cole JL, Laskey JG, Riekhof WR, Esparza TJ, Kramer MD, Morris RO (2000) Molecular and biochemical characterization of a cytokinin oxidase from *Zea mays*. Plant Physiol 125: 378–386

Chang S, Puryear J, Cairney J (1993) A simple and efficient method for isolating RNA from pine trees. Plant Mol Biol Rep 11: 113–116

Chen C-M, Leisner SM (1984) Modification of cytokinins by cauliflower microsomal enzymes. Plant Physiol 75: 442–446

Dixon SC, Martin RC, Mok MC, Shaw G, Mok DWS (1989) Zeatin glycosylation enzymes in *Phaseolus*: isolation of O-glucosyltransferase from *P. lunatus* and comparison to O-xylosyltransferase from *P. vulgaris*. Plant Physiol 90: 1316–1321

Dobrev P, Motyka V, Gaudinová A, Malbeck J, Trávnícková A, Kamínek M, Vanková R (2002) Transient accumulation of cis- and trans-zeatin type

Plant Physiol. Vol. 131, Downloaded from www.plantphysiol.org on March 19, 2015 - Published by www.plant.org Copyright © 2003 American Society of Plant Biologists. All rights reserved.
cytokinins and its relations to cytokinin oxidase activity during cell cycle
of synchronized tobacco cells. Plant Physiol Biochem 40: 333–337
Durand R, Durand B (1994) Cytokinins and reproductive organogenesis in
Mercurialis. In DWS Mok, MC Mok, eds, Cytokinins: Chemistry, Activity,
and Function. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp 295–304
Emery RJN, Leport L, Barton JE, Turner NC, Atkins CA (1998) cis-Isomers
of cytokinins predominate in chickpea seeds throughout their develop-
ment. Plant Physiol 117: 1515–1523
Emery RJN, Ma Q, Atkins CA (2000) The forms and sources of cytokinins
in developing white lupine seeds and fruits. Plant Physiol 123: 1593–1604
Hashizumi T, Suye S, Sugiyama T (1982) Isolation and identification of
cis-zeatin riboside from tubers of sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas L.) Agric
Biol Chem 46: 663–665
Kakimoto T (2001) Identification of plant cytokinin biosynthetic enzymes as
dimethylallyl diphosphate:ATP/ADP isopentenyltransferases. Plant Cell
Physiol 42: 677–685
Krall L, Raschke M, Zenk MH, Baron C (2002) The Tzs protein from
Agrobacterium tumefaciens C58 produces zeatin riboside 5′-phosphate
from 4-hydroxy-3-methyl-2-(E) butenyl riboside 5′phosphate and AMP.
FEBS Lett 527: 315–318
Letham DS (1994) Cytokinins as phytohormones: sites of biosynthesis,
translocation, and function of translocated cytokinin. In DWS Mok, MC
Mok, eds, Cytokinins: Chemistry, Activity, and Function. CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL, pp 57–80
Li Y, Baldauf S, Lim E-K, Bowles DJ (2001) Phylogenetic analysis of the
UDP-glycosyltransferase multigene family of Arabidopsis thaliana. J Biol
Chem 276: 4338–4343
Lichtenthaler HK (1999) The 1-deoxy-d-xylulose-5-phosphate pathway of
isoprenoid biosynthesis in plants. Annu Rev Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol
50: 47–65
Louis J-P, Augur C, Teller G (1990) Cytokinins and differentiation pro-
cesses in Mercurialis annua. Plant Physiol 84: 1535–1541
Martin RC, Mok MC, Habben JE, Mok DWS (2001) A cytokinin gene from
maize encoding an O-glucosyltransferase specific to cis-zeatin. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 98: 5922–5926
Martin RC, Mok MC, Mok DWS (1999a) Isolation of a cytokinin gene,
ZOG1, encoding zeatin O-glucosyltransferase of Phaseolus lunatus. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 96: 284–289
Martin RC, Mok MC, Mok DWS (1999b) A gene encoding the cytokinin
enzyme zeatin O-xylosyltransferase of Phaseolus vulgaris. Plant Physiol
120: 553–557
Martin RC, Mok MC, Shaw G, Mok DWS (1989). An enzyme mediating the
conversion of zeatin to dihydrozeatin in Phaseolus embryos. Plant Physiol
90: 1630–1635

Mauk CS, Langille AR (1978) Physiology of tuberization in Solanum tubero-
sum L. Plant Physiol 62: 438–442
Mok DWS, Mok MC (2001) Cytokinin metabolism and action. Annu Rev
Plant Physiol Plant Mol Biol 52: 89–118
Mok MC (1994) Cytokinins and plant development: an overview. In DWS
Mok, MC Mok, eds, Cytokinins: Chemistry, Activity, and Function. CRC
Press, Boca Raton, FL, pp 155–166
Mok MC, Mok DWS, Armstrong DJ, Shudo K, Isogai Y, Okamoto T (1982)
Cytokinin activity of N-phenyl-N′-1,2,3-thiadiazol-5-yurea (thidia-
zuron). Phytochemistry 21: 1509–1511
Parker CW, Badenoch-Jones J, Letham DS (1989) Radioimmunoassay for
quantifying the cytokinins cis-zeatin and cis-zeatin riboside and its ap-
plication to xylem sap samples. J Plant Growth Regul 8: 93–105
Schmitz RY, Skoog F, Playtis AJ, Leonard NJ (1972) Cytokinins: synthesis
and biological activity of geometric and position isomers of zeatin. Plant
Physiol 50: 702–705
Skoog F, Armstrong DJ (1970) Cytokinins. Annu Rev Plant Physiol 21:
359–384
Suttle JC, Banowetz GM (2000) Changes in cis-zeatin and cis-zeatin riboside
levels and biological activity during tuber dormancy. Physiol Plant 109:
68–74
Takagi M, Yokota T, Murofushi N, Ota Y, Takahashi N (1985) Fluctuation
of endogenous cytokinin contents in rice during its life cycle: quantifica-
tion of cytokinins by selected ion monitoring using deuterium-labelled
internal standards. Agric Biol Chem 49: 3271–3277
Takagi M, Yokota T, Murofushi N, Saka H, Takahashi N (1989) Quanti-
tative changes of free-base, riboside, ribotide and glucoside cytokinins in
developing rice grains. Plant Growth Regul 8: 349–364
Takei K, Sakakibara H, Sugiyama T (2001) Identification of genes encoding
adenylate isopentenyltransferase, a cytokinin biosynthesis enzyme, in
Arabidopsis thaliana. J Biol Chem 276: 26405–26410
Turner JE, Mok DWS, Mok MC, Shaw G (1987) Isolation and partial
purification of an enzyme catalyzing the formation of O-xylosylzeatin in
Phaseolus vulgaris embryos. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 84: 3714–3717
Watanabe N, Yokota T, Takahashi N (1981) Variations in the levels of cis-
and trans-ribosylzeatins and other minor cytokinins during development
and growth of cones of the hop plant. Plant Cell Physiol 22: 489–500
Wolff M, Seemann M, Grosdemange-Billiard C, Tritsch D, Campos N,
Rodríguez-Concepción M, Boronal A, Rohmer M (2002) Isoprenoid
biosynthesis via the methylerythritol phosphate pathway: (E)-4-hydroxy-
3-methylbut-2-enyl diphosphate: chemical synthesis and formation from
methylerythritol cyclodiphosphate by a cell-free system from Escherichia
coli. Tetrahedron Lett 43: 2555–2559
