
Seminar

Amoebiasis

Samuel L Stanley Jr

---

Amoebiasis is the second leading cause of death from parasitic disease worldwide. The causative protozoan parasite, *Entamoeba histolytica*, is a potent pathogen. Secreting proteinases that dissolve host tissues, killing host cells on contact, and engulfing red blood cells, *E. histolytica* trophozoites invade the intestinal mucosa, causing amoebic colitis. In some cases, amoebas breach the mucosal barrier and travel through the portal circulation to the liver, where they cause abscesses consisting of a few *E. histolytica* trophozoites surrounding dead and dying hepatocytes and liquefied cellular debris. Amoebic liver abscesses grow inexorably and, at one time, were almost always fatal, but now even large abscesses can be cured by one dose of antibiotic. Evidence that what we thought was a single species based on morphology is, in fact, two genetically distinct species—now termed *Entamoeba histolytica* (the pathogen) and *Entamoeba dispar* (a commensal)—has turned conventional wisdom about the epidemiology and diagnosis of amoebiasis upside down. New models of disease have linked *E. histolytica* induction of intestinal inflammation and hepatocyte programmed cell death to the pathogenesis of amoebic colitis and amoebic liver abscess.

---

Few pathogens are more aptly named than *Entamoeba histolytica*, the tissue-lysing amoeba that causes amoebic colitis and amoebic liver abscess. Think of this protozoan parasite as a macrophage on steroids with pumped-up phagocytic, proteolytic, and cytolytic capabilities, invading human colonic mucosa, and occasionally penetrating through to the portal circulation, reaching the liver, and causing fatal abscesses. Amoebic colitis and amoebic liver abscess were known to the ancients; Hippocrates recognised that “Dysenteries, when they set in with fever, alvine [intestinal] discharges of a mixed character, or with inflammation of the liver . . . are bad.” However, more than 2000 years would elapse before amoebas were identified as a cause of dysentery when, in 1875, the St Petersburg physician Fedor Aleksandrovich Lösch described amoebic trophozoites in the stool and colonic ulcerations of a farmer with a fatal case of dysentery. In the ensuing years, we have learned much about the clinical manifestations of *E. histolytica* infection, and have developed effective treatments for this deadly disease. Despite this progress, the parasite remains a major threat to public health in most of the world, and has re-emerged in some previously quiescent areas. In this seminar, I will focus on the organism *E. histolytica*, amoebiasis the disease, and discoveries that have changed our thinking about the epidemiology of infection, the optimum diagnostic techniques, and the nature of interactions between *E. histolytica* and its human host.

The organism

Unlike many protozoan parasites, *E. histolytica* has a simple lifecycle, existing as either the infectious cyst form or the amoeboid trophozoite stage. Human beings, and perhaps some non-human primates, are the only natural hosts. Infection usually begins with the ingestion of the cysts in food or water that has been contaminated by human faeces. *E. histolytica* cysts are round, usually 10–15 μm in diameter, and are surrounded by a refractile wall that may include chitin. They contain four nuclei, glycogen, and ribosomal assemblies called chromatoid bodies (figure 1). They survive the acid of the stomach, travel through the small intestine, and, within the terminal ileum or colon, excyst to form the trophozoite stage.

Unlike the inert cysts, *E. histolytica* trophozoites are highly motile, with a pleomorphic shape (diameter varying from 10 to 50 μm; figure 1). The fuel for this constant motion comes from the anaerobic conversion of glucose and pyruvate to ethanol. *E. histolytica* has no mitochondria (probably through secondary loss), but many of its metabolic enzymes seem to be of prokaryotic origin, possibly acquired from the lateral transfer of genes from bacteria. Trophozoites ingest bacteria and food particles, reproduce by binary fission, and encyst within the colon, completing the lifecycle when infectious cysts are excreted into the environment in stool. Trophozoites may exit in the stool as well, but they cannot survive outside the human host. The signals leading to encystation or excystation are poorly understood, but findings in the related reptilian parasite *Entamoeba invadens* suggest that ligation of a surface galactose-binding lectin on the surface of the parasite might be one trigger for encystation.

**Epidemiology—*E. histolytica*, the doppelganger**

*E. histolytica* is distributed throughout the world, and is a substantial health risk in almost all countries where the barriers between human faeces and food and water are inadequate. Remarkably, our understanding of the worldwide and regional prevalence of *E. histolytica* infection is now changing, thanks to the discovery that the organism called *E. histolytica* on the basis of its morphology is, in fact, two genetically distinct species. Brumpt suggested in 1925 that the genus *Entamoeba* included a commensal, *Entamoeba dispar*, and a pathogen, *Entamoeba*

---

**Search strategy**

I obtained sources for this review by searching PubMed until Aug 31, 2002, with the keywords: *Entamoeba histolytica*, amebiasis, amoebiasis, amoebic liver abscess, amoebic liver abscess, amoebic colitis, amoebic colitis, amoebic dysentery, and amoebic dysentery. The search was restricted to papers in the English language.

---

Lancet 2003; 361: 1025–34

Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St Louis, MO 63110, USA  
(Prof S L Stanley Jr MD)

Correspondence to: Dr Samuel L Stanley Jr  
(e-mail: sstanley@im.wustl.edu)

THE LANCET • Vol 361 • March 22, 2003 • www.thelancet.com 1025

For personal use. Only reproduce with permission from The Lancet Publishing Group.

SEMINAR

| Population | Number screened | Technique | $E$ histolytica | $E$ dispar |
|------------|-----------------|-----------|----------------|------------|
| Asymptomatic individuals in South Africa<sup>18</sup> | 1381 | Culture/ isoenzyme analysis | 1% | 9% |
| Asymptomatic children in Bangladesh<sup>14</sup> | 680 | ELISA | 5% | 12% |
| Asymptomatic individuals in 14 Philippine communities<sup>17</sup> | 1872 | PCR | 1% | 7% |
| Asymptomatic individuals in Brazilian slum<sup>16</sup> | 564 | ELISA | 11% | 9% |
| Asymptomatic individuals in Egypt<sup>19</sup> | 182 | ELISA | 21 | 24% |
| Asymptomatic individuals in Greece<sup>21</sup> | 322 | PCR and ELISA | <1% | 8% |

Table 1. Prevalence of $E$ histolytica and $E$ dispar in asymptomatic individuals.

Focusing on disease rather than rates of infection gives a clearer picture of the effect of amoebiasis on public health. An estimated 40 000–100 000 people die yearly from amoebiasis, making this disease the second leading cause of death from parasitic diseases.<sup>23</sup> In 1996, 1·3 million cases of intestinal amoebiasis were reported in Mexico, and although this value might include infections with $E$ dispar, it is consistent with findings of serological studies indicating that more than 8% of the population have had amoebiasis.<sup>24,25</sup> In Hue, Vietnam, a city with a population of about 1 million, one hospital reported 1500 cases of amoebic liver abscess over 5 years.<sup>26</sup> In Egypt, results of a survey indicated that 38% of individuals presenting with acute diarrhoea to an outpatient clinic had amoebic colitis.<sup>21</sup> In the USA, most cases arise in immigrants from endemic areas, and people living in states that border Mexico have the most disease. In 1993, 2970 cases of amoebiasis were recorded in the USA, 33% of which were in immigrants from Mexico and central and South America, and 17% were from Asia or the Pacific Islands.<sup>27</sup> Travellers to endemic areas are also at risk; 10% of 469 individuals with diarrhoea after travelling to a developing country were diagnosed with amoebiasis in one study, and 0·3% of 2700 German travellers returning from the tropics were infected with $E$ histolytica.<sup>28,29</sup>

Amoebic colitis has generally been regarded as an equal-opportunity disease affecting children and adults of both sexes (although this notion has been challenged by data indicating a significant male predominance<sup>30</sup>). However, amoebic liver-abscess mainly affects men between the ages of 18 and 50, in whom rates are 3–20 times higher than other populations.<sup>30-36</sup> In fact, the Zulu word for this illness is *isigwebedhla*, which means disease of the strong young men.<sup>33,37</sup> The reason for the profound difference in rates of amoebic liver-abscess between populations is unknown; hormonal effects (postmenopausal women also have increased rates) and alcohol are possible factors.<sup>33,36,37</sup> Susceptibility to amoebic liver-abscess is associated with HLA-DR3 and complotype SC01 in some Mexican populations; this association is not seen for amoebic colitis or asymptomatic colonisation with $E$ histolytica.<sup>38-40</sup>

Most individuals with amoebiasis are infected by ingestion of food or water contaminated with faeces containing $E$ histolytica cysts, but more unusual modes of transmission, including oral and anal sex, and contaminated enema apparatus, are possible.<sup>41</sup> A high rate of $E$ histolytica infection among men who had had sex with men was

Figure 1: $E$ histolytica in stool  
Above: $E$ histolytica cyst in stool (about ×1600). Chlorazol black stain. Two of the four nuclei, each with the characteristic central karyosome, are clearly visible. Courtesy of George Healy, US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Below: $E$ histolytica trophozoite in stool (about ×800). Wheatley's trichrome stain. Note the round nucleus and central karyosome. Courtesy of US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

dysenteriae; subsequently, Sargeaunt and colleagues<sup>9</sup> used isoenzyme analyses to identify differences between isolates from asymptomatic individuals and from those with disease. But DNA evidence (sequencing of ribosomal and other highly conserved genes) was needed to clearly differentiate the two species, which are now designated Entamoeba dispar (the commensal), and Entamoeba histolytica (the pathogen).<sup>10-12</sup>

We now know that many of the estimated 500 million individuals infected with Entamoeba are colonised by $E$ dispar; this organism is not a pathogen, and causes no signs of disease or mucosal invasion even in patients with AIDS.<sup>13,14</sup> $E$ histolytica is the causative agent of amoebic colitis and all forms of extraintestinal amoebiasis, but is also noted in many asymptomatic individuals. Data from epidemiological surveys with techniques that can differentiate between $E$ dispar and $E$ histolytica in stool samples suggest that most asymptomatic individuals infected with Entamoeba are colonised with $E$ dispar; however, in some regions, the prevalence of $E$ histolytica both in asymptomatic individuals and in patients with diarrhoea is very high (table 1).<sup>15-22</sup>

reported in urban areas in the USA in the 1970s and 1980s, but almost all of these individuals were probably infected with *E. dispar*. The most notorious point-source outbreak of *E. histolytica* infection arose in Chicago in 1933, when an unfortunate union between sewage and tap-water pipes at a hotel led to at least 800 cases of amoebiasis. Amoebiasis can spread within families, and household contacts of patients with the disease should be screened for *E. histolytica* colonisation.

### Pathophysiology

The pathological range of amoebic colitis encompasses mucosal thickening, multiple discrete ulcers separated by regions of colonic mucosa of normal appearance, diffusely inflamed and oedematous mucosa, and necrosis and perforation of the intestinal wall (figure 2). The gross findings can strongly resemble those seen in inflammatory bowel disease. Disease begins when *E. histolytica* trophozoites adhere to colonic epithelial cells, probably through the galactose/N-acetylgalactosamine specific lectin, a complex of a disulphide-linked 170 kDa and 35/31 kDa subunits, and an associated 150 kDa protein. Mammalian cells without N-terminal galactose or N-acetylgalactosamine residues are resistant to adherence by amoebic trophozoites and to killing by *E. histolytica*, consistent with a physiological role for the lectin in adhesion, and the known requirement for cell-cell contact in the killing process.

The cytolytic capabilities of *E. histolytica* were documented decades ago, but we are only now beginning to understand the molecular events. Human cells touched by amoebic trophozoites become immobile within minutes, and lose their cytoplasmic granules and structures, and eventually their nucleus. Cytolysis is undertaken by the amoebapores, a family of at least three small peptides capable of forming pores in lipid bilayers. These molecules are structurally related to granulysins and NK-lysins produced by mammalian T cells.

*E. histolytica* trophozoites can also kill mammalian cells by induction of programmed cell death (apoptosis). Host-cell apoptosis is detected in amoebic liver-abscess and intestinal disease in mice, suggesting that human intestinal epithelial or liver cells might undergo the same fate. The mechanisms by which amoebic trophozoites induce apoptosis in mammalian cells are being investigated; in the murine model of amoebic liver abscess, hepatocyte apoptosis requires activation by caspase, but is independent of Fas and tumour necrosis factor (TNF) α receptor 1. Amoebapores could be necessary both for the lytic and for the apoptotic pathways, since sublytic concentrations of pore-forming proteins can induce apoptosis in target cells. Amoebic trophozoites cause alterations in intestinal permeability that are independent of their cytolytic activity; trophozoites added to the apical surface of polarised Caco-2 cell line cause a rapid decrease in transepithelial resistance that precedes any morphological disruption of monolayer integrity, and might be associated with disruption of tight-junction proteins.

Amoebic invasion through the mucosa and into the submucosal tissues is the hallmark of amoebic colitis. Lateral extension through submucosal tissues gives rise to the classic flask-shaped ulcer of amoebiasis (figure 2). A trigger for invasion might be contact between amoebic trophozoites and the extracellular matrix protein fibronectin, which triggers signalling cascades within the parasite, and causes actin rearrangements that alter adherence and motility. The *E. histolytica* cysteine proteinases are directly implicated in invasion and inflammation of the gut. So far, seven distinct genes encoding pre-pro forms of papain-family proteinases have

---

**Figure 2: Ulceration in amoebic colitis**

Above: Gross pathology of amoebic colitis showing multiple ulcer formation.  
Below: Classic flask-shaped ulcer of amoebiasis. Mucosal ulceration with widespread submucosal invasion shown. Courtesy of US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

been identified in this species. Proteinases are secreted by *E. histolytica* trophozoites, and large quantities of cysteine proteinases are seen extracellularly in amoebic liver abscesses in animals. *E. histolytica* trophozoites can secrete 10–1000 times more cysteine proteinase than *E. dispar*, but genetically engineered overexpression of cysteine proteinases in *E. dispar* does not confer virulence. *E. histolytica* cysteine proteinases digest extracellular matrix proteins, which might facilitate trophozoite invasion into and within the submucosal tissues. Genetically engineered, proteinase-deficient *E. histolytica* trophozoites have reduced virulence in a model of amoebic liver-abscess in rodents, are less invasive, and cause significantly less inflammation and tissue damage to human intestinal xenografts in the severe combined immunodeficient mouse/human intestinal xenograft (SCID-HU-INT) model of amoebic colitis. A direct link between *E. histolytica* cysteine proteinases and the host inflammatory response to amoeba was made with the discovery that *E. histolytica* cysteine proteinases might amplify interleukin-1 mediated inflammation by mimicking the action of human interleukin-1 converting enzyme, and cleaving precursor interleukin-1 into its active mature form.

The next stage might depend on the host response to *E. histolytica* infection. Results of studies in human colonic xenografts show that intestinal epithelial cells are not passive victims, but that they sense *E. histolytica* infection and produce interleukin-1B, interleukin-8, and cyclo-oxygenase (COX)-2 in response; these mediators have several effects including attraction of neutrophils and macrophages to the site of amoebic invasion.

SEMINAR

1 Amoebic adherence to  
intestinal epithelial cell  

Gal/GalNAc lectin  
Intestinal epithelial cells  

2 Activation of amoebic  
virulence programme  

Amoebic  
cysteine  
proteinase  
Amoebapore  

3 Cell damage with  
release of pIL-1β  

pIL-1β pIL-1β  
IL-1β  
Extracellular amoebic cysteine  
proteinase cleaving pIL-1β  

4 IL-1β activates NF-κB in distal  
cells—cytokines and  
inflammatory mediators  
produced  

IL-1β  
NF-κB  
NF-κB  
IL-8  
COX-2  
IL-8  

5 Neutrophils influx in  
response to IL-8 and  
other chemoattractants  

Neutrophil migration  
damages epithelial  
TNF α  
Macrophages arrive in  
response to chemokines;  
release TNF α  

6 Mediators released by  
neutrophils damage  
epithelial cells  

Amoeba uses cysteine  
proteinase to cleave extracellular  
matrix proteins and invade  

Figure 3: Model for E histolytica induction of inflammation and  
tissue damage in amoebic colitis  

IL=interleukin. pIL-1β=precursor interleukin-1β. E histolytica trophozoites  
adhere to intestinal epithelial cells and can kill them by contact mediated  
cytolysis, resulting in cell necrosis. Cells dying by lytic necrosis can  
release interleukin-1α and precursor interleukin-1β. Intestinal epithelial  
cells in contact with E histolytica trophozoites might also die by apoptosis,  
with release of mature interleukin-1β. Interleukin-1 can activate cells  
distal to the site of infection through activation of the transcription factor  
NF-κB to produce more interleukin-1, as well as other mediators (COX-2,  
interleukin-8). This process might be facilitated by amoebic cysteine  
proteinases, which can convert precursor interleukin-1β to the active  
interleukin-1β. The cytokines and chemokines released from epithelial  
cells attract neutrophils and macrophages to the site of infection.  
Neutrophils transmigrating to the luminal surface might create channels  
that facilitate E histolytica invasion. Cysteine proteinases might also aid  
the parasite’s direct invasion by digestion of extracellular matrix proteins,  
causing epithelial cells to break from the villi, and allowing further  
invasion into submucosal tissues. Many neutrophils might be killed by  
contact with E histolytica trophozoites and release mediators that cause  
more damage to adjacent intestinal epithelial cells. Macrophages may  
release other mediators, including TNF α, contributing to further  
inflammation.  

of intestinal epithelial cells takes place via the transcription  
factor nuclear factor (NF)-κB, and specific inhibition of  
human NF-κB blocks the inflammatory response to amoeba  
in human intestinal xenografts.73 Neutrophils are a key  
effector cell in the inflammatory process, and when they are  
depleted from SCID-HU-INT mice, reduced intestinal  
tissue damage is seen in the early phase of infection.73  
E histolytica can lyse neutrophils, and this property could  
contribute to release of mediators (causing diarrhoea and  
tissue damage) and explain why so few neutrophils are seen  
in direct contact with amoebic trophozoites in human  
biopsy samples.53,73,74  

Although inflammation clearly contributes to tissue  
damage early in disease in this model, innate immunity  
might ultimately be key in containment and resolution of  
amoebic colitis (figure 3). This idea is consistent with the  
clinical evidence that individuals with amoebic colitis who  
mistakenly receive corticosteroids (which are potent  
inhibitors of NF-κB) have increased severity of disease, with  
a raised incidence of perforation and amoebic liver abscess.75  

As E histolytica trophozoites penetrate through the  
mucosa and submucosal tissues, and even into the  
portal circulation, they encounter additional host  
defences, including the complement system. E histolytica  
trophozoites are covered by highly glycosylated and  
phosphorylated lipophosphoglycan/proteophosphoglycan  
glycosyl phosphatidylinositol-anchored molecules.76–79 These  
molecules may serve as a physical barrier to complement  
components. Within the 170 kDa heavy chain of the  
amoebic Gal/GalNAc lectin is a region with antigenic  
crossreactivity with CD59, a membrane inhibitor of the  
C5b-9 attack complex in human red blood cells; this  
structure might protect E histolytica trophozoites against  
lysis.80 E histolytica cysteine proteinases cleave and inactivate  
the anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a, as well as human IgA and  
IgG, to provide further defence against host immune  
responses,81,82 although neutrophils and macrophages  
activated by interferon gamma can kill E histolytica  
trophozoites in vitro.83 All these factors could contribute to  
the ability of E histolytica trophozoites to survive within its  
human host.  

E histolytica trophozoites reaching the liver create their  
unique abscesses, which are well circumscribed regions of  
dead hepatocytes, liquefied cells, and cellular debris  
(figure 4). A rim of connective tissue, with few inflammatory  
cells and amoebic trophozoites, surrounds the lesion.84 The  
adjacent liver parenchyma is often completely unaffected. In  
animals, neutrophils are important both in the pathogenesis  
of amoebic liver-abscess and in the host’s ability to control  
infection. Lysis of neutrophils by E histolytica trophozoites  
might release mediators that lead to hepatocyte death, and  
extend damage to hepatocytes not in direct contact with  
E histolytica trophozoites.85,86 However, neutrophils are also  
part of host defence against liver abscess in the mouse;87,88  
findings in knockout mice suggest roles for interferon-  
gamma and inducible nitric-oxide synthase (iNOS) in  
control of amoebic infection and size of liver abscess.89 In  
amoebic liver-abscesses in mice, most hepatocytes die from  
apoptosis, but necrosis is also present.60 In amoebic liver-  
abscesses from people, the small numbers of amoebas  
relative to the size of the abscess suggests that E histolytica  
can kill hepatocytes without direct contact.  

Clinical symptoms and signs  

Gastrointestinal  

Many individuals with E histolytica infection have no  
symptoms, and can clear their infection without any signs of  
disease. However, 4–10% of asymptomatic individuals  
infected with E histolytica develop disease over a year.19,90  

1028  

THE LANCET • Vol 361 • March 22, 2003 • www.thelancet.com  

For personal use. Only reproduce with permission from The Lancet Publishing Group.

Patients with amoebic colitis present with bloody diarrhoea and abdominal pain and tenderness.⁹¹,⁹² The onset is often gradual, with patients reporting several weeks of symptoms. Multiple small volume mucoid stools are common, but profuse, watery diarrhoea might be noted. Because *E histolytica* invades the colonic mucosa, even if no blood is seen, stools are almost invariably haem-positive.⁹¹ Rectal bleeding without diarrhoea may be seen, especially in children.⁹³,⁹⁴ White blood cells can be present in the stool, and in severe cases pus can be visible, but faecal leucocyte numbers are generally not as high as in shigellosis.⁹⁵,⁹⁶ Fever is unusual (<40% of patients); weight loss and anorexia can be present.⁹¹,⁹² Occasionally, individuals develop fulminant amoebic colitis, with profuse bloody diarrhoea, fever, pronounced leucocytosis, widespread abdominal pain often with peritoneal signs, and extensive implication of the colon.⁹²,⁹⁷–¹⁰⁰ Concurrent amoebic liver-abscess is not unusual. Paralytic ileus and colonic mucosal sloughing may be seen, but intestinal perforation (in >75% of individuals with fulminant amoebic colitis) often dominates the clinical picture.¹⁰¹ Mortality with fulminant amoebic colitis is higher than 40% in most series.⁹⁷,⁹⁸,¹⁰⁰ Pregnant women, immunocompromised individuals, and patients receiving corticosteroids are especially at risk of fulminant disease, and associations with diabetes and alcohol use have also been reported.¹⁰⁰,¹⁰² Toxic megacolon complicates amoebic colitis in about 0·5% of patients, and is a recognised consequence of inappropriate corticosteroid treatment.¹⁰¹,¹⁰³,¹⁰⁴ Amoebomas—localised inflammatory annular masses that develop in the caecum or ascending colon—can cause obstructive symptoms and can be confused with carcinomas.¹⁰¹

Liver

The most common extraintestinal manifestation of disease is amoebic liver-abscess. This was a relentlessly progressive and almost invariably fatal disease little more than a century ago, but since the introduction of effective medical treatment and rapid diagnosis, mortality rates have fallen to 1–3%.³¹–³⁴,³⁶,¹⁰⁵,¹⁰⁶ Amoebic liver-abscesses arise from haematogenous spread (probably via the portal circulation) of amoebic trophozoites that have breached the colonic mucosa. Some individuals presenting with amoebic liver abscess have concurrent amoebic colitis, but more often they have no bowel symptoms, and stool microscopy is usually negative for *E histolytica* trophozoites and cysts (table 2).³¹–³⁶,¹⁰⁵

Individuals can present with amoebic liver-abscess months to years after travel or residency in an endemic area, so a careful travel history is mandatory.³³,³⁴,¹⁰⁷ The disease should be suspected in anyone with an appropriate exposure history (residency or travel in an endemic area) and fever, right upper quadrant pain, and substantial hepatic tenderness. Cough may be present, and dullness and rales in the right lung base are not infrequent.³¹–³⁴,¹⁰⁵ Jaundice is unusual. Symptoms are usually acute (<10 days in duration) but can be chronic, with anorexia and weight loss as prominent features. Leucocytosis without eosinophilia, mild anaemia, raised concentrations of alkaline phosphatase, and a high rate of erythrocyte sedimentation are the most common laboratory findings.³¹–³⁴,¹⁰⁵

Respiratory tract

Atelectasis and transudative pleural effusions are common, especially on the right side, and do not require specific treatment. However, patients developing cough, pleuritic chest pain, and respiratory distress could have pleuropulmonary amoebiasis secondary to amoebic liver-abscess rupture through the diaphragm. This

Figure 4: Amoebic liver abscess

Above: Gross pathology of amoebic liver abscess. Section showing necrotic material within the abscess, and the surrounding fibrinous border. The adjacent liver parenchyma is usually normal. Courtesy of Mae Melvin, US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and E West. Below: Chest radiograph from patient with amoebic liver abscess. Rupture of the abscess into the right pleural space and formation of a hepatobronchial fistula. Elevation of the right hemidiaphragm and a right pleural effusion are present.

complication occurs in 7–20% of patients with amoebic liver-abscess, and with resultant empyema and effects on the lung parenchyma occasionally leads to an erroneous diagnosis of bacterial pneumonia (figure 4).¹⁰⁵,¹⁰⁸–¹¹² If a hepatobronchial fistula develops, patients can produce copious amounts of brown sputum containing necrotic material, and occasionally amoebic trophozoites, as they literally cough up the abscess.¹⁰⁹–¹¹¹ In 2–7% of individuals with amoebic liver-abscess, rupture into the peritoneum happens, usually signalled by sudden onset of peritonitis and shock.¹⁰⁵,¹⁰⁶,¹¹³ More dangerous, but fortunately even less common than this complication, is abscess rupture into the pericardium, which can present with signs and symptoms of pericarditis (chest pain, pericardial rub, dyspnoea, tachycardia) or cardiac tamponade.¹⁰⁵,¹⁰⁶ Mortality is very high (30%) in this situation, even when the treating physician has experience of such problems.

Brain

Amoebic brain abscesses are very rare, and arise almost exclusively alongside amoebic liver-abscess (<0·1% of liver abscess cases). Sudden onset of symptoms

THE LANCET • Vol 361 • March 22, 2003 • www.thelancet.com

SEMINAR

| Study (reference number) | 31          | 104         | 31          | 35           | 33            | 32             |
|--------------------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|--------------|---------------|----------------|
| Number of patients (M/F) | 263 (221/42)| 2074        | 35 (32/3)   | 67 (57/10)   | 96 (91/5)     | 49 (43/6)      |
| Mean or median age (years) |             |             |             |              |               |                |
| Duration of symptoms      |             |             | Mean 9 days |              | Median 10 days|                |
| <2 weeks                 | 59%         |             | 66%         | 86%          |               |                |
| >2 weeks                 | 41%         |             | 33%         | 14%          |               |                |
| Fever                    | 87%         | 75%         | 77%         | 67%          | 87%           | 85%            |
| Abdominal pain            | 88%         | 62%         | 94%         | 68%          | 90%           | 92%            |
| RUQ tenderness            |             |             | 84%*        | 86%          | 67%           | 74%            |
| Diarrhoea                | 27%         | 14%         |             | 30%          | 35%           | 17%            |
| Cough                    |             | 11%         |             | 14%          | 10%           | 8%             |
| Weight loss              | 53%         |             | 37%         | 33%          | 45%           | 29%            |
| Leucocytosis             |             | 77%         | 66%         | 94%          | 92%           | 78%            |
| Increased alkaline       |             |             | 85%         | 84%          | 81%           | 78%            |
| phosphatase              |             |             |             |              |               |                |
| Mortality                | 15%         | 2%          | 6%          | 4%           | 0%            | 2%             |

RUQ=right upper quadrant. M=male. F=female. *Abdominal tenderness. †Chest pain/cough.

Table 2: Clinical features of amoebic liver abscess.

(headache, vomiting, seizures, and mental status changes)  
and rapid progression to death has been reported in  
almost half the patients with cerebral abscesses.¹¹⁴  
Outcomes have improved with metronidazole therapy.¹¹⁵  

Other  
Urinary tract problems, genital disease (including  
rectovaginal fistulae), perianal disease, and cutaneous  
lesions have been described as case reports.¹¹⁶–¹¹⁸  

Diagnosis  
The diagnosis of amoebic colitis rests on the demonstration  
of *E. histolytica* in the stool or colonic mucosa of patients  
with diarrhoea. For years this diagnosis was done by  
microscopic examination of stool, a technique that probably  
identified most cases of amoebic colitis when used by skilled  
individuals (differentiation of *E. histolytica* trophozoites from  
leucocytes and other intestinal protozoa can be difficult),  
and with the examination of at least three properly prepared  
stool samples.¹¹⁹,¹²⁰ However, since this method cannot  
distinguish between *E. histolytica* and *E. dispar* it is unsuitable  
as a screening technique for epidemiological studies, and  
probably for patient care. Some investigators have  
persuasively argued that in the appropriate clinical situation  
(an individual with bloody diarrhoea), and when  
characteristic microscopic findings for *E. histolytica* are  
present (erythrophagocytosis by trophozoites), stool  
microscopy is diagnostic.¹²¹ However, in view of the high  
frequency of *E. dispar* in many areas, dysentery due to  
entities such as shigellosis or campylobacter will probably be  
misdiagnosed as amoebic colitis if microscopy is the sole  
diagnostic criterion.  

Alternatives to this technique are commercially available  
ELISA assays that identify *E. histolytica* antigens in stool,  
and, importantly, distinguish *E. histolytica* from  
*E. dispar*.¹²²,¹²³ These new assays are much less user  
dependent and much more sensitive than microscopy, and  
could become the preferred tests for diagnosis. However,  
they are not generally used in endemic areas, and their  
reported sensitivity and specificity still need to be confirmed  
with independent studies (eg, with alternative methods such  
as PCR).¹²³,¹²⁴  

Other techniques (stool culture and stool PCR) are used  
in research, but advances in stool PCR techniques could  
make this another possible diagnostic method, especially if  
strains could be genotyped.¹²⁵,¹²⁶ Some patients with acute  
colitis, especially where amoebiasis is suspected on clinical  
grounds but *E. histolytica* is not initially detected in stools,  
will benefit from colonoscopy or flexible sigmoidoscopy  
with examination of scrapings and biopsy samples for  
amoebic trophozoites (figure 5).¹²⁷ These methods could  

also be useful in diagnosis of other, unsuspected, problems  
such as inflammatory bowel disease or pseudomembranous  
colitis.  

The diagnosis of amoebic liver-abscess relies on  
identification of space-occupying lesion of the liver and  
positive amoebic serology (figure 5). Ultrasound or CT scan  
is the test of choice; both methods are very sensitive, but  
neither provides absolute specificity for amoebic liver-  
abscesses.¹²⁸–¹³⁰ Formerly, such abscesses were usually  
described as solitary lesions in the right lobe of the liver, but  
modern imaging techniques show a high frequency of  
multiple abscesses. Amoebic serology is highly sensitive  
(>94%) and highly specific (>95%) for the diagnosis of  

Figure 5: Diagnosis of amoebic colitis and liver abscess  
Above: Section from intestine showing amoebic trophozoites (about  
×105). Many trophozoites have ingested red blood cells  
(erythrophagocytosis). Courtesy of US Centers for Disease Control and  
Prevention. Below: CT scan from a patient with amoebic liver-abscess.  
A large solitary lesion is present in the right lobe of the liver.

| Mechanism                                                                 | Adult dosage                                                                 | Clinical efficacy                          | Adverse effects                                                                                     | Comments                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Metronidazole or tinidazole                                               | Activated in anaerobic organisms by reduction of the 5-nitro group. Activated compound damages DNA                                      | 750 mg tid po or iv × 5 to 10 days. For uncomplicated effective liver abscess (limited experience) 2·4 g qD po 2 days Or (tinidazole): 2 g qD po × 3 days | Highly                                                                                                                             | Metallic aftertaste, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea. Rarely —sensory neuropathies, central nervous system toxicity with ataxia, vertigo, seizures and encephalopathy. USA | Drugs of choice for amoebic colitis and amoebic liver-abscess.                                                                                                                                         |
| Dehydroemetine                                                           | Inhibits protein synthesis                                                   | 1-1.5 mg/kg/day IM for up to 5 days       | Rapid amoebicidal activity                                                                        | Cardiotoxicity, diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, muscle weakness                                                                                   | No indication for use in standard therapy. May offer some benefit in fulminant colitis or patients with ruptured amoebic liver-abscess when administered in combination with metronidazole, but controlled trials lacking |                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Luminal agents                                                           |                                                                              |                                          |                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Paromomycin                                                              | Aminoglycoside— inhibit protein synthesis.                                  | 30 mg/kg/day po in three divided doses for 5 to 10 days                                         | Poorly absorbed aminoglycoside with excellent safety profile                                                                                   | Nausea, vomiting, cramps, diarrhoea                                                                                                     | Drug of choice for treatment of luminal E histolytica infection. Should be administered to all individuals following completion of metronidazole therapy. Is not as effective against amoebic colitis and should not be used as a first line drug |                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Diloxanide furoate                                                       | Unknown                                                                     | 500 mg po tid × 10 days                  | Poorly absorbed antibiotic with excellent safety profile                                           | Flatulence                                                                                                                            | Excellent alternative to paromomycin for treatment of luminal E histolytica infection. Should be administered to all individuals following completion of metronidazole therapy. Not readily available in US |                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Iodoquinol                                                               | Unknown                                                                     | 650 mg po tid × 20 days.                 | Poorly absorbed agent                                                                             | Headache, nausea, vomiting. Optic nerve damage and peripheral neuropathy reported in individuals exceeding recommended dosage                              | Alternative to paromomycin or diloxanide furoate for treatment of luminal E histolytica infection. Should be administered to all individuals following completion of metronidazole therapy |                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

tid=thrice daily. po=by mouth. iv=intravenous. IM=intramuscular. qD=once daily.

Table 3: Drugs of choice for the treatment of amoebic colitis and amoebic liver-abscess.

amoebic liver-abscess. False-negative serological test results can be obtained early in infection (within the first 7–10 days), but repeat tests will usually be positive. The successful use of an antigen detection ELISA in patients with amoebic liver-abscess has suggested that these tests could soon play an important part in the diagnosis of extraintestinal disease.

Treatment

Amoebiasis

In an age where drug resistance has become the rule, rather than the exception, for many microbial pathogens, I find it refreshing to report that the cornerstone of treatment for amoebiasis remains the nitroimidazole derivatives (metronidazole, tinidazole, ornidazole). Because metronidazole is the only nitroimidazole available in the USA, my recommendations (table 3) focus on this agent, but the other tinidazole agents are equally or slightly more effective. Amoebic colitis is treated by metronidazole, followed by a luminal agent (paromomycin, iodoquinol, or diloxanide furoate) to eradicate colonisation. When possible, fulminant amoebic colitis, even with perforation, is managed conservatively, with the addition of antibiotics to deal with bowel flora. Radiographic monitoring of the abdomen by CT scan, coupled with the judicious use of percutaneous catheter drainage to obtain suspect fluid, might aid in management. Asymptomatic individuals with documented E histolytica infection should be treated with a luminal agent to eradicate infection; this recommendation is based both on the known risk for the development of invasive disease in such patients, and the fact that individuals shedding E histolytica cysts are a risk to public health. E dispar infection does not require treatment, but should alert the physician that the infected person has been exposed to faecally contaminated food or water.

Amoebic liver-abscess

The management of amoebic liver-abscess is unique. Abscesses occupying large areas of the liver can be cured without drainage, and even by one dose of metronidazole. Most patients show a response to treatment (reduced fever and abdominal pain) within 72–96 h. Individuals with amoebic liver abscess should also be treated with a luminal agent to eliminate intestinal colonisation. Surgical drainage of uncomplicated amoebic liver-abscesses is generally unnecessary and should be avoided. The role of ultrasound or percutaneous therapeutic aspiration guided by CT in the treatment of uncomplicated amoebic liver-abscess is controversial. Clearly, most such abscesses can be cured by

THE LANCET • Vol 361 • March 22, 2003 • www.thelancet.com
For personal use. Only reproduce with permission from The Lancet Publishing Group.

metronidazole treatment alone, and in a randomised controlled study no significant difference in either length of hospitalisation or duration of time to becoming afebrile was seen between 21 individuals treated medically, and 20 treated medically with percutaneous therapeutic aspiration. However, a prospective study in which large amoebic liver-abscesses (those greater than 300 cm³) underwent aspiration, whereas small abscesses (<300 cm³) were treated with drugs alone, showed benefits in mean hospital stay and the speed of clinical improvement in the aspiration group.

A reasonable policy might be to reserve aspiration for individuals in whom diagnosis is uncertain (where pyogenic abscess or bacterial superinfection of the amoebic liver-abscess is a concern), those who have not responded to metronidazole therapy (persistent fever or abdominal pain after 4 days of treatment), individuals with large left-lobe abscesses (because of the risk of rupture into the pericardium), and severely ill patients in whom an accelerated clinical course and large abscesses make rupture seem imminent. Aspiration, percutaneous catheter drainage, or both, improve outcomes in the treatment of amoebic empyema after liver-abscess rupture, and percutaneous catheter (or, if necessary, surgical) drainage could be lifesaving in the treatment of amoebic pericarditis. Amoebic liver abscess rupture into the peritoneum might also respond best to conservative treatment, with medical management, and use of percutaneous catheter drainage if localised collections of fluid are noted.

### The future

Walker and Sellards discovered that two different individuals infected with the same stool sample from a patient with amoebic dysentery could show completely different clinical manifestations (asymptomatic cyst passer or amoebic colitis). Since then, investigators have questioned why some hosts seem to be more susceptible to disease, and whether *E. histolytica* isolates might differ in their virulence. We now have the techniques to try and answer both of those queries. Studies in the mouse model of amoebic liver abscess and the SCID-HU-INT model of amoebic colitis have identified candidate genes (for interleukin-1, iNOS, COX-2, TNF α, and interferon gamma) that could affect susceptibility to disease, and may merit study for polymorphisms in appropriate human populations. Genotyping of isolates from individuals with various clinical manifestations in different regions of the world should help to establish whether particular strains are associated with colitis, liver abscess, or colonisation. The nearly completed *E. histolytica* genome project will complement these efforts by identification of other genes that encode key virulence factors.

Amoebiasis could be eradicated by the provision of adequate sanitation worldwide, but this situation is unlikely to happen in the foreseeable future. New diagnostic tests are showing a remarkably high prevalence of *E. histolytica* in some populations. If these infections lead to disease in even a few individuals, the role of amoebiasis in diarrhoeal illnesses in children and adults in these regions could be far greater than we previously suspected. Confirmation of these findings worldwide might help to further spur the drive for a vaccine to prevent amoebiasis. Effective recombinant antigen-based vaccines have been developed that prevent amoebic liver-abscess, and generate mucosal antiamoebic antibody immune responses in animals, but no product has yet been tested in man.

Expectations for a vaccine must be tempered by the recognition that natural infections with *E. histolytica* do not seem to result in long term immunity to reinfection in most individuals; a recent large study in a Vietnamese population showed that individuals with a previous amoebic liver-abscess were as susceptible to a new episode of amoebic liver-abscess as the *E. histolytica*-naive population. This fact, along with experience in vaccines development for other parasitic diseases, suggests that development of a vaccine that prevents amoebiasis will be a daunting task, but the need may be greater than we imagined.

**Conflict of interest statement**

None declared.

**Acknowledgments**

Work from the Stanley Laboratory cited in this review has been supported by NIAID grants AI30084 and AI51591, and NIDDK grant DK52574 to the Washington University Digestive Diseases Research Core Center. S Stanley is a Burroughs Wellcome Scholar in molecular parasitology.

**References**

1. Coar T. The aphorisms of Hippocrates. New York: Classics of Medicine Library 1982.
2. Lösch F. Massenhafte Entwickelung von Amöben im Dickdarm. Arch F Path Anat 1875; 65: 196–211.
3. Reeves RE. Metabolism of *Entamoeba histolytica* Schaudinn, 1903. Adv Parasitol 1984; 23: 105–42.
4. Clark CG, Roger AJ. Direct evidence for secondary loss of mitochondria in *Entamoeba histolytica*. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995; 92: 6518–21.
5. Rosenthal B, Mai ZM, Caplivski D, et al. Evidence for the bacterial origin of genes encoding fermentation enzymes of the amitochondriate protozoan parasite *Entamoeba histolytica*. J Bacteriol 1997; 179: 3736–45.
6. Yang W, Li E, Kairong T, Stanley SL Jr. *Entamoeba histolytica* has an alcohol dehydrogenase homologous to the multifunctional adhE gene product of *Escherichia coli*. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1994; 64: 253–60.
7. Eichinger D. A role for a galactose lectin and its ligands during encystment of Entamoeba. J Eukaryot Microbiol 2001; 48: 17–21.
8. Brumpt ME. Étude sommaire de l’<<Entamoeba dispar>> n sp Amibe a kystes quadrinucléés, parasite de l’homme. Bull Acad Méd (Paris) 1925; 94: 943–52.
9. Sargeaunt PG, Williams JE. The differentiation of invasive and non-invasive *Entamoeba histolytica* by isoenzyme electrophoresis. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 1978; 72: 519–21.
10. Clark CG, Diamond LS. Ribosomal RNA genes of ‘pathogenic’ and ‘nonpathogenic’ *Entamoeba histolytica* are distinct. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1991; 49: 297–302.
11. Tannich E, Horstmann RD, Knobloch J, Arnold HH. Genomic differences between pathogenic and nonpathogenic *Entamoeba histolytica*. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989; 86: 5118–22.
12. Burch DJ, Li E, Reed S, Jackson TFHG, Stanley SL Jr. Isolation of a strain-specific *Entamoeba histolytica* cDNA clone. J Clin Microbiol 1991; 29: 696–701.
13. Allason-Jones E, Mindel A, Sargeaunt P, Williams P. *Entamoeba histolytica* as a commensal intestinal parasite in homosexual men. N Engl J Med 1986; 315: 353–56.
14. Reed SL, Wessel DW, Davis CE. *Entamoeba histolytica* infection and AIDS. Am J Med 1991; 90: 269–71.
15. Haque R, Ali IM, Petri WA Jr. Prevalence and immune response to *Entamoeba histolytica* infection in preschool children in Bangladesh. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1999; 60: 1031–34.
16. Haque R, Faruque ASG, Hahn P, Lyerly DM, Petri WA Jr. *Entamoeba histolytica* and *Entamoeba dispar* infection in children in Bangladesh. J Infect Dis 1997; 175: 734–36.
17. Braga LL, Mendonca Y, Paiva CA, et al. Seropositivity for and intestinal colonization with *Entamoeba histolytica* and *Entamoeba dispar* in individuals in northeastern Brazil. J Clin Microbiol 1998; 36: 3044–45.
18. Rivera WL, Tachibana H, Kanbara H. Field study on the distribution of *Entamoeba histolytica* and *Entamoeba dispar* in the northern Philippines as detected by the polymerase chain reaction. Am J Trop Med Hyg 1998; 59: 916–21.
19. Gathiram V, Jackson TFHG. A longitudinal study of asymptomatic carriers of pathogenic zymodemes of *Entamoeba histolytica*. S Afr Med J 1987; 72: 669–72.
20. Abd-Alla MD, Wahib AA, Ravdin JI. Comparison of antigen-capture ELISA to stool-culture methods for the detection of asymptomatic *Entamoeba* species infection in Kafer Daoud, Egypt. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2000; 62: 579–82.
21. Abd-Alla MD, Ravdin JI. Diagnosis of amoebic colitis by antigen capture ELISA in patients presenting with acute diarrhoea in Cairo, Egypt. Trop Med Int Health 2002; 7: 365–70.

22 Evangelopoulos A, Legakis N, Vakalis N. Microscopy, PCR and ELISA applied to the epidemiology of amoebiasis in Greece. *Parasitol Int* 2001; 50: 185–89.

23 Walsh J. Prevalence of *Entamoeba histolytica* infection. In: Ravdin JJ, ed. Amebiasis: human infection by *Entamoeba histolytica*. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1988: 93–105.

24 Pan American Health Organization. Mexico. In: Health in the Americas. Washington DC: Pan American Health Organization, 1998: 357–78.

25 Caballero-Salcedo A, Viveros-Rogel M, Salvatierra B, et al. Seroepidemiology of amoebiasis in Mexico. *Am J Trop Med Hyg* 1994; 4: 412–19.

26 Pham VL, Duong MH, Pham NH. Amebic abscess of the liver: ultrasound guided puncture. *Ann Chir* 1996; 50: 340–43.

27 Summary of notifiable diseases, United States. *MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep* 1994; 42: 1–73.

28 Jelinek T, Peyerl G, Löscher T, Nothdurft HD. Evaluation of an antigen-capture enzyme immunoassay for detection of *Entamoeba histolytica* in stool samples. *Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis* 1996; 15: 752–55.

29 Weinke T, Friedrich-Jaenicke B, Hopp P, Janitschke K. Prevalence and clinical importance of *Entamoeba histolytica* in two high-risk groups: travelers returning from the tropics and male homosexuals. *J Infect Dis* 1990; 161: 1029–31.

30 Acuna-Soto R, Maguire JH, Wirth DF. Gender distribution in asymptomatic and invasive amebiasis. *Am J Gastroenterol* 2000; 95: 1277–83.

31 Thompson JE Jr, Forlenza S, Verma R. Amebic liver abscess: a therapeutic approach. *Rev Infect Dis* 1985; 7: 171–79.

32 Abuabara SF, Barrett JA, Hau T, Jonasson O. Amebic liver abscess. *Arch Surg* 1982; 117: 239–44.

33 Shandera WX, Bollam P, Hashmey RH Jr, et al. Hepatic amebiasis among patients in a public teaching hospital. *South Med J* 1998; 91: 829–37.

34 Barnes PF, DeCock KM, Reynolds TN, Ralls PW. A comparison of amebic and pyogenic abscess of the liver. *Medicine (Baltimore)* 1987; 66: 472–83.

35 DeBakey ME, Ochsner A. Hepatic amebiasis: A twenty year experience and analysis of 263 cases. *Surg Gynec Obstet (Int Abstr Surg)* 1951; 92: 209.

36 Katzenstein D, Rickerson V, Braude A. New concepts of amebic liver abscess derived from hepatic imaging, serodiagnosis, and hepatic enzymes in 67 consecutive cases in San Diego. *Medicine (Baltimore)* 1982; 61: 237–46.

37 Elsdon-Dew R. The epidemiology of amoebiasis. *Adv Parasitol* 1968; 6: 1–62.

38 Arellano J, Perez-Rodriguez M, Lopez-Osuna M, et al. Increased frequency of HLA-DR3 and complotype SCO1 in Mexican mestizo children with amoebic abscess of the liver. *Parasite Immunol* 1996; 18: 491–98.

39 Valdez E, del Carmen MM, Gomez A, et al. HLA characterization in adult asymptomatic cyst passers of *Entamoeba histolytica/E dispar*. *Parasitol Res* 1999; 85: 833–36.

40 Arellano J, Granados J, Frenk P, et al. Increased frequency of HLA-DR3 in Mexican mestizo pediatric patients with amebic liver abscess (ALA). *Arch Med Res* 1992; 23: 269–70.

41 Istre GR, Kreiss K, Hopkins RS, et al. An outbreak of amebiasis spread by colonic irrigation at a chiropractic clinic. *N Engl J Med* 1982; 307: 339–42.

42 Schmerin MJ, Gelston A, Jones TC. Amebiasis. An increasing problem among homosexuals in New York City. *JAMA* 1977; 238: 1386–87.

43 Markell EK, Havens RF, Kuritsubo RA, Wingerd J. Intestinal protozoa in homosexual men of the San Francisco Bay area: prevalence and correlates of infection. *Am J Trop Med Hygiene* 1984; 33: 239–45.

44 Lowther SA, Dworkin MS, Hanson DL. *Entamoeba histolytica/Entamoeba dispar* infections in human immunodeficiency virus-infected patients in the United States. *Clin Infect Dis* 2000; 30: 955–59.

45 Bundesen HN, Tonney FO, Rawlings ID. The outbreak of amebiasis in Chicago during 1933. Sequence of events. *JAMA* 1934; 102: 367–72.

46 Gatti S, Cevini C, Bruno A, Novati S, Scaglia M. Transmission of *Entamoeba histolytica* within a family complex. *Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg* 1995; 89: 403–05.

47 Vreden SG, Visser LG, Verweij JJ, et al. Outbreak of amebiasis in a family in The Netherlands. *Clin Infect Dis* 2000; 31: 1101–04.

48 Tucker PC, Webster PD, Kilpatrick ZM. Amebic colitis mistaken for inflammatory bowel disease. *Arch Intern Med* 1975; 135: 681–85.

49 Mann BJ. Structure and function of the *Entamoeba histolytica* Gal/GalNAc lectin. *Int Rev Cytol* 2002; 216: 59–80.

50 Li E, Becker A, Stanley SL Jr. Use of Chinese hamster ovary cells with altered glycosylation patterns to define the carbohydrate specificity of *Entamoeba histolytica* adhesion. *J Exp Med* 1988; 167: 1725–30.

51 Li E, Becker A, Stanley SL Jr. Chinese hamster ovary cells deficient in N-acetylglycosaminyltransferase I activity are resistant to *Entamoeba histolytica*-mediated cytotoxicity. *Infect Immun* 1989; 57: 8–12.

52 Ravdin JJ, Stanley P, Murphy CF, Petri WA Jr. Characterization of cell surface carbohydrate receptors for *Entamoeba histolytica* adherence lectin. *Infect Immun* 1989; 57: 2179–86.

53 Jarumilinta R, Kradolfer F. The toxic effect of *Entamoeba histolytica* on leucocytes. *Ann Trop Med Parasitol* 1964; 58: 375–81.

54 Ravdin JJ, Croft BY, Guerrant RL. Cytopathogenic mechanisms of *Entamoeba histolytica*. *J Exp Med* 1980; 152: 377–90.

55 Berninghausen O, Leippe M. Necrosis versus apoptosis as the mechanism of target cell death induced by *Entamoeba histolytica*. *Infect Immun* 1997; 65: 3615–21.

56 Leippe M. Amoebapores. *Parasitol Today* 1997; 13: 178–83.

57 Ragland BD, Ashley LS, Vaux DL, Petri WA Jr. *Entamoeba histolytica*: target cells killed by trophozoites undergo DNA fragmentation which is not blocked by Bcl-2. *Exp Parasitol* 1994; 79: 460–67.

58 Seydel KB, Stanley SL Jr. *Entamoeba histolytica* induces host cell death in amebic liver abscess by a non-Fas-dependent, non-tumor necrosis factor alpha-dependent pathway of apoptosis. *Infect Immun* 1998; 66: 2980–83.

59 Huston CD, Houp ER, Mann BJ, Hahn CS, Petri WA Jr. Caspase 3-dependent killing of host cells by the parasite *Entamoeba histolytica*. *Cell Microbiol* 2000; 2: 617–25.

60 Yan L, Stanley SL Jr. Blockade of caspases inhibits amebic liver abscess formation in a mouse model of disease. *Infect Immun* 2001; 69: 7911–14.

61 Li E, Stenson WF, Kunz-Jenkins CJr, et al. *Entamoeba histolytica* interactions with polarized human intestinal Caco-2 epithelial cells. *Infect Immun* 1994; 62: 5112–19.

62 Leroy A, Lauwaet T, De Bruyne G, Cornelissen M, Mareel M. *Entamoeba histolytica* disturbs the tight junction complex in human enteric T84 cell layers. *FASEB J* 2000; 14: 1139–46.

63 Meza I. Extracellular matrix-induced signaling in *Entamoeba histolytica*: its role in invasiveness. *Parasitol Today* 2000; 16: 23–28.

64 Que X, Reed SL. Cysteine proteinases and the pathogenesis of amebiasis. *Clin Microbiol Rev* 2000; 13: 196–206.

65 Bruchhaus I, Jacobs T, Leippe M, Tannich E. *Entamoeba histolytica* and *Entamoeba dispar*: differences in numbers and expression of cysteine proteinase genes. *Mol Microbiol* 1996; 22: 255–63.

66 Leippe M, Sievertsensen HJ, Tannich E, Horstmann RD. Spontaneous release of cysteine proteinases but not of pore-forming peptides by viable *Entamoeba histolytica*. *Parasitology* 1995; 111: 569–74.

67 Stanley SL Jr, Zhang T, Rubin D, Li E. Role of the *Entamoeba histolytica* cysteine proteinase in amebic liver abscess formation in severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice. *Infect Immun* 1995; 63: 1587–90.

68 Hellberg A, Nickel R, Lotter H, Tannich E, Bruchhaus I. Overexpression of cysteine proteinase 2 in *Entamoeba histolytica* or *Entamoeba dispar* increases amoeba-induced monolayer destruction in vitro but does not augment amebic liver abscess formation in gerbils. *Cell Microbiol* 2001; 3: 13–20.

69 Ankri S, Stolarsky T, Bracha R, Padilla-Vaca F, Mirelman D. Antisense inhibition of expression of cysteine proteinases affects *Entamoeba histolytica*-induced formation of liver abscess in hamsters. *Infect Immun* 1999; 67: 421–22.

70 Zhang Z, Wang L, Seydel KB, et al. *Entamoeba histolytica* cysteine proteinases with interleukin-1 beta converting enzyme (ICE) activity cause intestinal inflammation and tissue damage in amebiasis. *Mol Microbiol* 2000; 37: 542–48.

71 Seydel KB, Li E, Swanson PE, Stanley SL Jr. Human intestinal epithelial cells produce pro-inflammatory cytokines in response to infection in a SCID mouse-human intestinal xenograft model of amebiasis. *Infect Immun* 1997; 65: 1631–39.

72 Stenson WF, Zhang Z, Riehl T, Stanley SL Jr. Amebic infection in the human colon induces cyclooxygenase-2. *Infect Immun* 2001; 69: 3382–88.

73 Seydel KB, Li E, Zhang Z, Stanley SL Jr. Epithelial cell-initiated inflammation plays a crucial role in early tissue damage in amebic infection of human intestine. *Gastroenterology* 1998; 115: 1446–53.

74 Prathap K, Gilman R. The histopathology of acute intestinal amebiasis: a rectal biopsy study. *Am J Pathol* 1970; 60: 229–45.

75 Kanani SR, Knight R. Relapsing amoebic colitis of 12 years’ standing exacerbated by corticosteroids. *BMJ* 1969; 2: 613–14.

76 Stanley SL Jr, Huizenga H, Li E. Isolation and partial characterization of a surface glycoconjugate of *Entamoeba histolytica*. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* 1992; 50: 127–38.

77 Bhattacharya A, Prasad R, Sacks DL. Identification and partial characterization of a lipophosphoglycan from a pathogenic strain of *Entamoeba histolytica*. *Mol Biochem Parasitol* 1992; 56: 161–68.

78 Marinets A, Zhang T, Guillen N, et al. Protection against invasive amebiasis by a single monoclonal antibody directed against a lipophosphoglycan antigen localized on the surface of *Entamoeba histolytica*. *J Exp Med* 1997; 186: 1557–65.

SEMINAR

79 Moody-Haupt S, Patterson JH, Mirelman D, McConville MJ. The major surface antigens of *Entamoeba histolytica* trophozoites are GPI-anchored proteophosphoglycans. *J Mol Biol* 2000; **297**: 409–20.

80 Braga LL, Ninomiya H, McCoy JJ, et al. Inhibition of the complement membrane attack complex by the galactose-specific adhesin of *Entamoeba histolytica*. *J Clin Invest* 1992; **90**: 1131–37.

81 Kelsall BL, Ravdin JI. Degradation of human IgA by *Entamoeba histolytica*. *J Infect Dis* 1993; **168**: 1319–22.

82 Reed SL, Keene WE, McKerrow JH, Gigli I. Cleavage of C3 by a neutral cysteine proteinase of *Entamoeba histolytica*. *J Immunol* 1989; **143**: 189–95.

83 Denis M, Chadee K. Cytokine activation of murine macrophages for in vitro killing of *Entamoeba histolytica* trophozoites. *Infect Immun* 1989; **57**: 1750–6.

84 Reed SL, Braude AI. Extraintestinal disease: clinical syndromes, diagnostic profile, and therapy. In: Ravdin JI, ed. Amebiasis: human infection by *Entamoeba histolytica*. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1988: 511–32.

85 Burchard GD, Prange G, Mirelman D. Interaction between trophozoites of *Entamoeba histolytica* and the human intestinal cell line HT-29 in the presence and absence of leukocytes. *Parasitol Res* 1993; **79**: 140–45.

86 Tsutsumi V. Pathology of experimental amebiasis. In: Ravdin JI, ed. Amebiasis: human infection by *Entamoeba histolytica*. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1988: 147–65.

87 Seydel KB, Zhang T, Stanley SL Jr. Neutrophils play a critical role in early resistance to amebic liver abscesses in SCID mice. *Infect Immun* 1997; **65**: 3951–53.

88 Velazquez C, Shibayama-Salas M, Aguirre-Garcia J, Tsutsumi V, Calderon J. Role of neutrophils in innate resistance to *Entamoeba histolytica* liver infection in mice. *Parasite Immunol* 1998; **20**: 255–62.

89 Seydel KB, Smith SJ, Stanley SL Jr. Innate immunity to amebic liver abscess is dependent on gamma interferon and nitric oxide in a murine model of disease. *Infect Immun* 2000; **68**: 400–02.

90 Haque R, Ali IM, Sack RB Jr, et al. Amebiasis and mucosal IgA antibody against the *Entamoeba histolytica* adherence lectin in Bangladeshi children. *J Infect Dis* 2001; **183**: 1787–93.

91 Adams EB, MacLeod IN. Invasive amebiasis: amebic dysentery and its complications. *Medicine (Baltimore)* 1977; **56**: 315–24.

92 Lewis EA, Antia AU. Amoebic colitis: review of 295 cases. *Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg* 1969; **63**: 633–8.

93 Jammal MA, Cox K, Ruebner B. Amebiasis presenting as rectal bleeding without diarrhea in childhood. *J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr* 1985; **4**: 294–96.

94 Merritt RJ, Coughlin E, Thomas DW, et al. Spectrum of amebiasis in children. *Am J Dis Child* 1982; **136**: 785–89.

95 Harris HF. Amoebic dysentery. *Am J Med Sci* 1898; **115**: 384–413.

96 Speelman P, Kabir I, Islam M. Distribution and spread of colonic lesion in Shigellosis: a colonoscopic study. *J Infect Dis* 1984; **50**: 899–903.

97 Aristizabal H, Acevedo J, Botero M. Fulminant amoebic colitis. *World J Surg* 1991; **15**: 216–21.

98 Elyson JH, Bezmalinovic Z, Parks SN, Lewis FR Jr. Necrotizing amoebic colitis: a frequently fatal complication. *Am J Surg* 1986; **152** (1): 21–26.

99 Bank S, Burns DG, Marks IN, Stein D. The clinical spectrum of amoebic colitis. *S Afr Med J* 1971; **45** (9): 219–25.

100 Takahashi T, Gamboa-Dominguez A, Gomez-Mendez TJ, et al. Fulminant amoebic colitis: analysis of 55 cases. *Dis Colon Rectum* 1997; **40** (11): 1362–67.

101 Cardoso JM, Kimura K, Stoopen M, et al. Radiology of invasive amebiasis of the colon. *Am J Roentgenol* 1977; **128** (6): 935–41.

102 Abioye AA. Fatal amoebic colitis in pregnancy and puerperium: a new clinico-pathological entity. *J Trop Med Hyg* 1973; **76**: 97–100.

103 Wruble LD, Duckworth JK, Duke DD, Rothschild JA. Toxic dilatation of the colon in a case of amebiasis. *N Engl J Med* 1966; **275**: 926–28.

104 el Henawy M, Abd-Rabbo H. Hazards of cortisone therapy in hepatic amoebiasis. *J Trop Med Hyg* 1978; **81**: 71–73.

105 Adams EB, MacLeod IN. Invasive amebiasis: amebic liver abscess and its complications. *Medicine (Baltimore)* 1977; **56**: 325–34.

106 Boonyapisit S, Chinapak O, Plengvanit U. Amoebic liver abscess in Thailand, clinical analysis of 418 cases. *J Med Assoc Thai* 1993; **76**: 243–46.

107 Knobloch J, Mannweiler E. Development and persistence of antibodies to *Entamoeba histolytica* in patients with amoebic liver abscess: analysis of 216 cases. *Am J Trop Med Hyg* 1983; **32**: 727–32.

108 Hoffner RJ, Kilaghbian T, Esekogwu VI, Henderson SO. Common presentations of amoebic liver abscess. *Ann Emerg Med* 1999; **34**: 351–55.

109 Adeyemo AO, Aderounmu A. Intrathoracic complications of amoebic liver abscess. *J R Soc Med* 1984; **77**: 17–21.

110 Nwafo DC, Egbue MO. Intrathoracic manifestations of amoebiasis. *Ann R Coll Surg Engl* 1981; **63**: 126–28.

111 Kubitschek KR, Peters J, Nickeson D, Musher DM. Amebiasis presenting as pleuropulmonary disease. *West J Med* 1985; **142**: 203–07.

112 Ibarra-Perez C. Thoracic complications of amebic abscess of the liver: report of 501 cases. *Chest* 1981; **79**: 672–77.

113 Eggleston FC, Handa AK, Verghese M. Amebic peritonitis secondary to amebic liver abscess. *Surgery* 1982; **91**: 46–48.

114 Orbison JA, Reeves N, Leedham CL, Blumberg JM. Amoebic brain abscess: review of the literature and report of five additional cases. *Medicine* 1951; **30**: 247–82.

115 Campbell S. Amoebic brain abscess and meningoencephalitis. *Semin Neurol* 1993; **13**: 153–60.

116 Kirsch D, Diaz-Rivera RS. Perinephric abscess: a previously unrecognized complication of amebiasis. *Am J Med Sci* 1943; **206**: 373–79.

117 Heinz KP. Amoebic infection of the female genital tract: a report of three cases. *S Afr Med J* 1973; **47**: 1795–98.

118 O’Leary RK, Posen J. Amoebiasis of the penis. *S Afr Med J* 1984; **65**: 113.

119 Healy GR. Laboratory diagnosis of amebiasis. *Bull NY Acad Med* 1971; **47**: 478–93.

120 Krogstad DJ, Spencer HC Jr, Healy GR. Current concepts in parasitology: amebiasis. *N Engl J Med* 1978; **298**: 262–65.

121 González-Ruiz A, Haque R, Aguirre A, et al. Value of microscopy in the diagnosis of dysentery associated with invasive *Entamoeba histolytica*. *J Clin Pathol* 1994; **47**: 236–39.

122 Haque R, Mollah NU, Ali IK, et al. Diagnosis of amebic liver abscess and intestinal infection with the TechLab *Entamoeba histolytica* II antigen detection and antibody tests. *J Clin Microbiol* 2000; **38**: 3235–39.

123 Pillai DR, Keystone JS, Sheppard DC, et al. *Entamoeba histolytica* and *Entamoeba dispar*: epidemiology and comparison of diagnostic methods in a setting of nonendemicity. *Clin Infect Dis* 1999; **29**: 1315–18.

124 Mirelman D, Nuchoamowitz Y, Stolarsky T. Comparison of use of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay-based kits and PCR amplification of rRNA genes for simultaneous detection of *Entamoeba histolytica* and *E dispar*. *J Clin Microbiol* 1997; **35**: 2405–07.

125 Ayeh-Kumi PF, Ali IM, Lockhart LA, Gilchrist CA, Petri WA Jr, Haque R. *Entamoeba histolytica*: genetic diversity of clinical isolates from Bangladesh as demonstrated by polymorphisms in the serine-rich gene. *Exp Parasitol* 2001; **99**: 80–88.

126 Clark CG, Diamond LS. *Entamoeba histolytica*: a method for isolate identification. *Exp Parasitol* 1993; **77**: 450–55.

127 Blumencranz H, Kasen L, Romeu J, Waye JD, LeLeiko NS. The role of endoscopy in suspected amebiasis. *J Gastroenterol* 1983; **78**: 15–18.

128 Ralls PW, Colletti PM, Quinn MF, Halls J. Sonographic findings in hepatic amebic abscess. *Radiology* 1982; **145**: 123–26.

129 Radin DR, Ralls PW, Colletti PM, Halls JM. CT of amebic liver abscess. *Am J Roentgenol* 1988; **150**: 1297–301.

130 Kimura K, Stoopen M, Reeder MM. Amebiasis: modern diagnostic imaging with pathological and clinical correlation. *Semin Roentgenol* 1997; **32**: 250–75.

131 Krupp IM. Antibody response in intestinal and extraintestinal amebiasis. *Am J Trop Med Hyg* 1970; **19**: 57–62.

132 Powell SJ, Wilmot AJ, Elsdon-Dew R. Single and low dosage regimens of metronidazole in amoebic dysentery and amoebic liver abscess. *Ann Trop Med Parasitol* 1969; **63**: 139–42.

133 Pehrson PO, Bengtsson E. A long-term follow up study of amoebiasis treated with metronidazole. *Scan J Infect Dis* 1984; **16**: 195–98.

134 Monga NK, Sood S, Kaushik SP, et al. Amoebic peritonitis. *Am J Gastroenterol* 1976; **66**: 366–73.

135 Lasserre R, Jaroonvesama N, Kurathong S, Soh C-T. Single-day drug treatment of amebic liver abscess. *Am J Trop Med Hyg* 1983; **32**: 723–26.

136 Akgun Y, Tayciildiz IH, Celik Y. Amoebic liver abscess: changing trends over 20 years. *World J Surg* 1999; **23**: 102–06.

137 Allan RJ Van, Katz MD, Johnson MB, et al. Uncomplicated amebic liver abscess: prospective evaluation of percutaneous therapeutic aspiration. *Radiology* 1992; **183**: 827–30.

138 Weinke T, Grobusch MP, Guthoff W. Amoebic liver abscess—rare need for percutaneous treatment modalities. *Eur J Med Res* 2002; **7**: 25–29.

139 Zafar A, Ahmed S. Amoebic liver abscess: a comparative study of needle aspiration versus conservative treatment. *J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad* 2002; **14**: 10–12.

140 Meng XY, Wu JX. Perforated amebic liver abscess: clinical analysis of 110 cases. *South Med J* 1994; **87**: 985–90.

141 Walker EL, Sellards AW. Experimental entamoebic dysentery. *Philippine J Sci B Trop Med* 1913; **8**: 253–30.

142 Haghighi A, Kobayashi S, Takeuchi T, Masuda G, Nozaki T. Remarkable genetic polymorphism among *Entamoeba histolytica* isolates from a limited geographic area. *J Clin Microbiol* 2002; **40**: 4081–90.

143 Stanley SL Jr. Prevention and potential of new interventions. In: Ravdin JI, ed. Amebiasis. London: Imperial College Press, 2000: 137–62.

144 Blessman J, Pham L Van, Nu PAT, et al. Epidemiology of amebiasis in a region of high incidence of amebic liver abscess in central Vietnam. *Am J Trop Med Hyg* 2002; **66**: 578–83.
