
Biol. Chem., Vol. 384, pp. 213–218, February 2003 · Copyright © by Walter de Gruyter · Berlin · New York

# Identification of Cytosolic Leucyl Aminopeptidase (EC 3.4.11.1) as the Major Cysteinyglycine-Hydrolysing Activity in Rat Liver

Claudio Jösch, Lars-Oliver Klotz and Helmut Sies*

Institut für Physiologische Chemie I, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, D-40001 Düsseldorf, Germany

*Corresponding author  
e-mail: sies@uni-duesseldorf.de

Cysteinyglycine hydrolysis is a step in the metabolism of glutathione and glutathione S-conjugates. We had previously observed that in rat liver the enzymatic activity is predominantly located in the cytosol. Here we demonstrate that cytosolic leucyl aminopeptidase (EC 3.4.11.1) is the major cysteinyglycine hydrolysing activity in rat liver.

Evidence was obtained from the use of peptidase inhibitors and from immunoprecipitation studies using Pansorbin-coupled antibodies raised against hog kidney cytosolic leucyl aminopeptidase. Both isolated cytosolic leucyl aminopeptidase and the cysteinyglycine-hydrolysing activity in rat liver cytosol are bound with equal efficiency to the affinity matrix. We demonstrate that cytosolic leucyl aminopeptidase exhibits leucinamidase and cysteinyglycinase activity. Cysteinyglycine, cystinyl-bis-glycine, S-nitrosocysteinylglycine, and bimane-S-cysteinyglycine are hydrolysed at high rates; low activity is seen with leukotriene D₄.

Our findings establish a previously unrecognised physiological function of cytosolic leucyl aminopeptidase, participating in glutathione metabolism and in the degradation of glutathione S-conjugates via the mercapturic acid pathway.

Key words: Cysteinyglycine / Dipeptidase / Glutathione metabolism / Immunoprecipitation / Leucyl aminopeptidase / Rat liver cytosol.

## Introduction

Hydrolysis of cysteinyglycine (CysGly) and its S-conjugates represents the second step in the degradation of glutathione (GSH) and glutathione S-conjugates. A cysteinyglycine dipeptidase activity was found to be responsible for the hydrolysis of cysteinyglycine in hog kidney (Semenza, 1957). This dipeptidase was enriched from membrane fractions of the kidney. It was not investigated whether this enzyme also hydrolyses cysteinyglycine S-conjugates. Additionally, two other peptidases have been described to catalyse the hydrolysis of cysteinyglycine S-conjugates, membrane alanyl aminopeptidase (APM; EC 3.4.11.2) (Rankin et al., 1980) and membrane dipeptidase (EC 3.4.13.19) (Hirota et al., 1985). Highest activities of these membrane-bound peptidases are found in kidney, intestine, and lung.

We have shown that in rat and guinea pig livers more than 90% of bimane-S-cysteinyglycine (mBCG) hydrolysing activity is located in the cytosolic fraction. Only low activities were found to be membrane-bound (Jösch et al., 1998). The aim of the present study was to identify the cytosolic cysteinyglycine hydrolysing activity of rat liver. We show that this cytosolic cysteinyglycine hydrolysing activity of rat liver is immunologically indistinguishable from cytosolic leucyl aminopeptidase (LAPc; EC 3.4.11.1). Furthermore, the substrate specificity of LAPc from hog kidney and of cysteinyglycine-hydrolysing activity from rat liver was examined.

## Results

### Subcellular Distribution of Cysteinyglycine-Hydrolysing Activity in Rat Liver

More than 90% of cysteinyglycine-hydrolysing activity is located in the cytosolic fraction of rat and guinea pig livers, as determined using mBCG as substrate (Jösch et al., 1998). Here we investigated the subcellular distribution in rat liver with CysGly as substrate (Table 1). As with mBCG, highest cysteinyglycine-hydrolysing activity was found to be located in the cytosolic fraction of rat liver. Moreover, the specific activity in the cytosol was found to be 8-fold higher than with mBCG. In comparison, APM activity was highest in canalicular plasma membranes.

### Effect of Inhibitors on Cysteinyglycine-Hydrolysing Activity in Rat Liver Cytosol

To investigate the possibility that in rat liver aminopeptidases may be responsible for cytosolic cysteinyglycine-hydrolysing activity, the cytosolic fraction was tested for mBCG-hydrolysing activity in the presence of o-phenanthroline (an inhibitor of metallopeptidases), bestatin (an inhibitor of aminopeptidases), or of zinc chloride (Table 2). The mBCG-hydrolysing activity was strongly inhibited by o-phenanthroline and bestatin, with 50% and 90% inhibition, respectively. The addition of zinc chloride led to an almost 3-fold increase of mBCG-hydrolysing activity.

Table 1 Subcellular Distribution of Hydrolysing Activities for mBCG and Cysteinyglycine, as well as of Membrane Alanyl Aminopeptidase (APM) in Rat Hepatocytes.

| Hydrolysing activity | Homogenate | Cytosol | Microsomes | Plasma membranes |
|----------------------|------------|---------|------------|------------------|
|                      |            |         |            | SMV              |
|                      |            |         |            | CMV              |
| mBCG                 | 6.1±0.9    | 21.0±3.7| 5.3±1.0    | 0.7±0.1          | 11.0±1.7        |
|                      |            | (3.5)   | (0.9)      | (0.1)            | (1.9)           |
| CysGly               | 58.8±8.9   | 183.6±10.9 | 5.7±0.5    | 5.7±0.7          | 49.8±2.8        |
|                      |            | (3.1)   | (0.1)      | (0.1)            | (0.6)           |
| APM                  | 14.0±1.5   | 6.0±0.8 | 23.0±2.1   | 18.0±2.2         | 252±32          |
|                      |            | (0.4)   | (1.7)      | (1.3)            | (18)            |

Values are mean ± SEM (n = 4–8) and expressed in nmol × min⁻¹ × mg protein⁻¹. SMV, sinusoidal membrane vesicles; CMV, canalicular membrane vesicles (see Jösch et al., 1998). Enrichment factors are given in parentheses.

---

Table 2 Effect of Bestatin, o-Phenanthroline and Zinc Chloride on Cytosolic Cysteinyglycine-Hydrolysing Activity.

| Cytosol | +Bestatin     | +o-Phenanthroline | +Zinc chloride |
|---------|---------------|-------------------|----------------|
| 21.3±5.3| 2.23±0.2      | 10.4±0.7          | 59.7±1.7       |
| (100)   | (10.5)        | (49)              | (280)          |

The cytosolic fraction from rat liver was preincubated with the reagents (0.1 mM) at 37°C for 5 min. Dipeptidase activity was measured with mBCG as substrate. Values are mean ± SEM (n=4–5) and expressed in nmol×min⁻¹×mg protein⁻¹. Percentage of control in parentheses.

---

Chromatography of Cytosolic Cysteinyglycine-Hydrolysing Activity and of Leucyl Aminopeptidase

Anion exchange chromatography of the cytosolic fraction of rat liver was performed on a DEAE-Sepharose column (Figure 1). Peptidase activities were determined in each fraction using leucinamide and mBCG as well as CysGly as substrates. Leucinamide is the most commonly used artificial substrate to measure LAPc (EC 3.4.11.1) activity. At least three different peptidases are located in rat liver cytosol to hydrolyse leucinamide, whereas cysteinyglycine-hydrolysing activity eluted in only one single

---

**Figure 1 Ion-Exchange Chromatography of the Cytosolic Fraction from Rat Liver.**

Peptidase activity was measured in each fraction with leucinamide (triangles, dashed line), cysteinyglycine (solid line), and mBCG (circles, shaded area) as substrates. Representative result of three independent preparations.

peak. Major leucinamide- and cysteinyglycine-hydrolysing activity coeluted on the anion-exchange column.

### Immunoprecipitation of Cysteinyglycine-Hydrolysing Activity from Rat Liver Cytosol

Antibodies raised against LAPc from hog kidney were employed to immunoprecipitate cytosolic cysteinyglycine hydrolysing activity from rat liver cytosol (Table 3). More than 80% of this activity was precipitated from rat liver cytosol with the Pansorbin®/antibody-complex. The same precipitation efficiency was observed with isolated LAPc in control experiments. Only 14 to 25% of total cytosolic cysteinyglycine-hydrolysing and LAPc activities were precipitated with control Pansorbin®/IgG-complexes.

### Substrate Specificity of Cytosolic Leucyl Aminopeptidase (EC 3.4.11.1) from Hog Kidney and of Cysteinyglycine-Hydrolysing Activity from Rat Liver

The substrate specificity of LAPc from hog kidney and of cysteinyglycine-hydrolysing activity from rat liver was investigated with different substrates of physiological interest: CysGly, cystinyl-bis-glycine [(CysGly)₂], S-nitroso-cysteinyglycine (CGS-NO), and leukotriene D₄ (LTD₄). Table 4 lists specific activities found with these substrates as well as with mBCG which served as model substrate for cysteinyglycine-S-conjugates participating in the mercapturic acid pathway.

Highest specific activity of LAPc was seen with CGS-NO as substrate (Table 4). This activity was found to be almost 50-fold higher than with mBCG as substrate. With CysGly and (CysGly)₂ about 10-fold higher activities were measured than with mBCG. In contrast, specific activity with LTD₄ was more than 1000-fold lower (Table 4). Cytosolic CysGly-hydrolysing activity was about 40-fold higher with (CysGly)₂ as substrate than with CysGly, thus exhibiting a preference that is not seen with LAPc. Again, mBCG is a comparatively poor substrate (Table 4).

#### Discussion

Cysteinyglycine-hydrolysing activity with mBCG and CysGly as substrates was found to be predominantly (>90% of total activity) located in the cytosolic fraction of rat liver (Table 1 and Jösch et al., 1998). This activity may be of major importance for intrahepatic glutathione S-conjugate metabolism (Jösch et al., 1998), especially for species like guinea pig and humans, with high γ-glutamyltransferase (γ-GT) activity on the sinusoidal side of hepatocytes (Purucker and Wernze, 1990; Lança and Israel, 1991).

#### Characteristics of Cytosolic Cysteinyglycine-Hydrolysing Activity from Rat Liver

Inhibition of cytosolic cysteinyglycine-hydrolysing activity by o-phenanthroline indicates that this activity may be due to (a) metallopeptidase(s). This suggestion is supported by the drastic enhancement of this activity in the presence of zinc ions, which implies the presence of extra amounts of apoprotein in the lysate. Cysteinyglycine-hydrolysing activity was inhibited by 90% by the addition of bestatin, a specific competitive inhibitor for aminopeptidases, indicating that aminopeptidases are responsible for cytosolic mBCG hydrolysis in rat liver (Table 2).

Cytosolic aminopeptidases are found in several mammalian tissues. Aminopeptidase P (EC 3.4.11.9) was described to be located in rat brain. Preferential substrates for this manganese-dependent aminopeptidase are peptides with proline at the second amino-terminal position (Harbeck and Mentlein, 1991). Another aminopeptidase, aspartyl aminopeptidase (EC 3.4.11.21), is present in rabbit brain (Wilk et al., 1998). From rat liver cytosol a cobalt-activated 95 kDa aminopeptidase was isolated, which shows high activities with leucine-β-naphthylamide and leucyl amino acids (Hiroi et al., 1992). LAPc (EC 3.4.11.1) was found in bovine and hog lens and kidneys (for review see Taylor, 1993a,b), in human liver

---

**Table 3** Immunoprecipitation of Cysteinyglycine-Hydrolysing Activity from Rat Liver Cytosol.

|          | Cytosol       | LAPc         |
|----------|---------------|--------------|
|          | PS            | AS           | PS            | AS           |
| mBCG     | 20 ± 1        | 83 ± 8       | 14 ± 3        | 80 ± 2       |
| CysGly   | 25 ± 2        | 82 ± 3       | 22 ± 1        | 88 ± 2       |

Values are percentage of total dipeptidase activity precipitated by Pansorbin/IgG and are given as mean ± SEM (n=3). Pansorbin was coupled with IgGs purified from preimmune serum (PS) and antiserum (AS) raised against hog kidney LAPc and incubated with 25 μg of cytosolic protein. In the control experiments Pansorbin/IgG-complexes were incubated with cytosolic leucine aminopeptidase (LAPc, 100 ng) from hog kidney. Enzyme activities were determined with bimane-S-cysteinyglycine (mBCG) and cysteinyglycine (CysGly).

---

**Table 4** Specific Activities of Cytosolic Leucine Aminopeptidase (LAPc) from Hog Kidney and of Cytosolic Cysteinyglycine (CysGly)-Hydrolysing Activity from Rat Liver with Various Substrates.

| Substrate      | Specific activity [μmol·min⁻¹·mg protein⁻¹] |
|----------------|---------------------------------------------|
|                | LAPc                                      | CysGly hydrolysing activityᵃ                          |
| CysGly         | 9.5 ± 1.30                                 | 1.60 ± 0.03                                         |
| (CysGly)₂      | 14.0 ± 0.50                                | 63.60 ± 5.50                                        |
| mBCG           | 1.1 ± 0.05                                 | 0.54 ± 0.03                                         |
| CGS-NO         | 52.0 ± 6.60                                |                                                     |
| LTD₄           | (0.7 ± 0.04) × 10⁻³                         |                                                     |

Values are mean ± SEM (n=4–5). Substrate concentrations were 1 mM, except for LTD₄ (25 μM).

ᵃ Isolated as described in Materials and Methods.
(Kohno *et al.*, 1986), and in rat brain (Turzinsky and Mentlein, 1990). LAPc from different organs of one species are immunologically indistinguishable (Oettgen and Taylor, 1985). LAPc is a homohexamer with two zinc cations per subunit, which are involved in the catalytic cleavage of peptide bonds. Like most of the other aminopeptidases, LAPc has a broad substrate specificity, including di- and tripeptides, glucagon (Appel, 1974; Turzinsky and Mentlein, 1990; Taylor, 1993a,b), and leucinamide, which is used as a substrate for LAPc.

Analysis of the cytosolic fraction of rat liver by ion exchange chromatography revealed at least three different peptidases that use leucinamide as a substrate. However, the main leucinamidase and mBCG-hydrolysing as well as CysGly-hydrolysing activities coelute on DEAE-Sepharose (Figure 1). This observation suggests that LAPc may be responsible for cytosolic cysteinylglycine-hydrolysing activity in rat liver.

### Immunoprecipitation Studies

Immunoprecipitation studies employing antibodies against LAPc from hog kidney show that cytosolic cysteinylglycine-hydrolysing activity is immunologically indistinguishable from LAPc (Table 3). From this we conclude that LAPc is completely responsible for cytosolic cysteinylglycine hydrolysing activity in rat liver. Hanson *et al.* (1967) showed that LAPc activity in hog kidney, bovine liver and kidney were precipitated to 80–100% when immunoprecipitation studies were performed with antibodies against LAPc from bovine lens. Interestingly, only 30–50% of LAPc activity were precipitated in rat liver cytosol. It was discussed that this may be either due to a lesser phylogenetic relation or to the presence of other leucinamide-hydrolysing peptidases. Here we demonstrated that in addition to LAPc at least two more peptidases with leucinamidase activity are present in the cytosolic fraction of rat liver (Figure 1).

### Substrate Specificity of Cytosolic Leucyl Aminopeptidase from Hog Kidney

LAPc exhibited only very low specific activity with LTD₄ as substrate, suggesting that the enzyme plays only a minor role in leukotriene metabolism. On the contrary, higher specific activities were determined with CysGly and (CysGly)₂ (Table 4), which indicates a role in hepatic glutathione metabolism. The fact that specific activities with CysGly vs. (CysGly)₂ are different for LAPc and CysGly-hydrolysing activity from rat liver cytosol, the latter exhibiting a preference for (CysGly)₂ that is not seen with LAPc, is possibly due to species differences (hog vs. rat). While changing substrate preferences, these differences do not appear to influence immunological recognition by anti-hog kidney LAPc antibodies, as demonstrated in Table 3.

Highest specific activity of LAPc was observed with CGS-NO as substrate (Table 4). S-Nitrosoglutatione (GSNO) is discussed as a stable pool of NO in cells (Gi-

rard and Potier, 1993) and is held responsible for many physiological effects, such as vasodilation and inhibition of platelet aggregation. These effects are believed to occur via liberation of NO and related species from GSNO. Furthermore, S-nitrosothiols are involved in the physiological response to hypoxia (Lipton *et al.*, 2001). Hogg *et al.* (1997) demonstrated that GSNO is degraded to CGS-NO via γ-glutamyltransferase and postulated that extracellular degradation of GSNO and uptake of CGS-NO may be of major importance for NO metabolism in organs with high γ-glutamyltransferase levels. The data reported here suggest that CGS-NO is intracellularly hydrolysed to S-nitrosocysteine (CysS-NO) via LAPc.

In line with this, the direct injection of L-CysS-NO into the ventricles of rat brain led to a decrease of arterial blood pressure and to an increase of heart frequency. Those effects were much lower with D-CysS-NO (Davisson *et al.*, 1997). This may be due to the presence of a stereoselective receptor or transport system localised in neurons. Dringen *et al.* (1997, 1998, 1999) observed that GSH is degraded to CysGly via γ-glutamyltransferase located on the surface of astrocytes. Uptake of CysGly occurs via the PepT2 transporter and intracellular hydrolysis leads to the formation of cysteine and glycine. However, it is not known in which intracellular compartment hydrolysis occurs. The formation of CysGly in astrocytes is important for neurons, which use the dipeptide for GSH synthesis (Dringen *et al.*, 1999). LAPc was found to be located in rat brain (Turzinsky and Mentlein, 1990). Therefore, LAPc may also be responsible for the intracellular hydrolysis of CysGly in astrocytes and possibly in neurons. In summary, LAPc may also play an important physiological role in the mercapturic acid pathway and in the degradation of GSNO to CysS-NO in brain.

In general, CysGly as well as its derivatives are generated extracellularly from GSH or glutathione S-conjugates by the action of γ-glutamyltransferase. Thus, for a cytosolic cysteinylglycine-hydrolysing activity in rat liver to be of physiological significance, a transporter is required for the import of these dipeptides into hepatocytes. As mentioned above, PepT2 was described to exert this function in brain. In rat, PepT2 is mainly expressed in kidney and is present at low levels in brain, lung and spleen (Saito *et al.*, 1996); an analogous transporter for liver remains to be identified.

## Materials and Methods

### Proteins and Reagents

Monobromobimane (mBBr) was purchased from Molecular Probes Europe BV (Leiden, Netherlands). PIC A-reagent was obtained from Waters Corporation (Milford, USA), leucinamide was from Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland), glutamate dehydrogenase and 2-oxoglutarate from Boehringer (Mannheim, Germany), Sep-Pak C₁₈-cartridge from Millipore Corp. (Milford, USA), Pansorbin® from Calbiochem (La Jolla, USA), and other chemicals and biochemicals from Sigma-Aldrich or Merck. Antiserum against

Brought to you by | Georgetown University  
Authenticated  
Download Date | 10/3/14 12:06 PM
LAPc from hog kidney was obtained from BioScience (Göttingen, Germany).

### Rat Liver Fractionation

Homogenate, cytosolic, and microsomal fractions as well as enriched basolateral and canalicular plasma membranes from rat liver were isolated according to Jösch et al. (1998).

### Analysis of Rat Liver Cytosol by Ion Exchange Chromatography and Isolation of Cytosolic CysGly-Hydrolysing Activity

The cytosolic fraction (60 ml) isolated from rat liver was applied to a DEAE-Sepharose column (2.6 cm × 40 cm) equilibrated with 20 mM triethanolamine, pH 7.5, containing 0.1% sodium azide. Elution was performed using a NaCl gradient (0–300 mM) in the equilibration buffer. Flow rate was 2 ml/min and fractions of 10 ml were collected. The fractions with CysGly-hydrolysing activity were collected, concentrated by ultrafiltration and further purified by gel filtration on a Sephadex G-200 column. Fractions with CysGly-hydrolysing activity were combined.

### Immunoprecipitation Studies

Immunoglobulins from rabbit serum were isolated as described by Livingston (1974) and coupled to Pansorbin® according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Calbiochem-Novabiochem, La Jolla, USA). Coupling buffer was 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4. For immunoprecipitation studies, 90 μl of Pansorbin® coupled with immunoglobulins purified from preimmune- and antiserum were incubated for 2 h at 4°C with 10 μl of LAPc (100 ng; Sigma-Aldrich, Deisenhofen, Germany) and 30 μl of rat liver cytosol (25 μg). Control experiments were performed by incubating LAPc and rat liver cytosol under the same conditions. After incubation samples were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 5 min. Peptidase activities were determined in the resulting supernatant with mBCG and CysGly as substrates.

### Synthesis of Cysteinylglycine S-Conjugates

The bimane S-conjugates of CysGly and cysteine were synthesised as described by Jösch et al. (1998). CGS-NO and CysS-NO were synthesised as described by Mathews and Kerr (1993).

### Enzyme Assays

Enzyme activities were measured at 37°C. Substrate concentrations in the incubation mixtures were 1 mM, except for LTD₄ (25 μM). Incubations were stopped at different times within 10 min, for LTD₄ within 60 min.

- MBCG-hydrolysing activity and APM were assayed as described by Jösch et al. (1998) and Rankin et al. (1980), respectively. For determination of dipeptidase activities with all other substrates, this procedure was slightly modified as follows. CysGly was dissolved in incubation buffer. The reaction was stopped by adding 300 μl of incubation mixture to 200 μl of TCA (5%). The protein was removed by centrifugation. 300 μl of the supernatant were added to 20 μl of mBBR (30 mM), followed by addition of 100 μl Tris (1 M) to start the conjugation reaction. After 1.5 h the residual mBBR was removed by extraction with 500 μl dichloromethane. Finally, the samples were diluted for HPLC analysis. (CysGly)₂ incubation was stopped by dilution in ethanol (1:4, v/v). After centrifugation the supernatant was diluted in HPLC buffer (1:10, v/v). The CGS-NO incubation was stopped by dilution in HPLC buffer (1:10, v/v). Incubation with LTD₄ was stopped by dilution in ethanol (1:4, v/v).
- Peptidase activity with leucinamide as substrate was measured as described by Kohno and Kanno (1985). Protein was assayed according to Bradford (1976).

HPLC analysis was performed as described by Jösch et al. (1998) for bimane S-conjugates. (CysGly)₂ was detected as described by Hirota et al. (1987), CGS-NO and CysS-NO as by Hogg et al. (1997), and LTD₄ and LTE₄ as by Campbell et al. (1990).

## Acknowledgement

This work is part of the Ph.D. thesis of C.J. We gratefully acknowledge helpful discussions with Dr. T. Akerboom, particularly his support in early stages of this project. Financial support came from the National Foundation for Cancer Research (NFCR), Bethesda, MD, USA, and from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Bonn, Germany (Ak8/2-1).

## References

Appel, W. (1974). Di- und Polypeptidasen. In: Methoden der Enzymatischen Analyse, Vol. I, H.U. Bergmeyer, ed. (Weinheim, Germany: Verlag Chemie), pp. 1015–1023.

Bradford, M.M. (1976). A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding. Anal. Biochem. 72, 248–254.

Campbell, B.J., Baker, S.F., Shukla, S.D., Forrester, L.J., and Zahler, W.L. (1990). Bioconversion of leukotriene D₄ by lung dipeptidase. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1042, 107–112.

Davisson, R.L., Travis, M.D., Bates, J.N., Johnson A.K., and Lewis, S.J. (1997). Stereoselective actions of S-nitrosocysteine in central nervous system of conscious rat. Am. J. Physiol. 272, H2361–H2368.

Dringen, R., Kranich, O., Löschmann, P.-A., and Hamprecht, B. (1997). Use of dipeptides for the synthesis of glutathione by astroglia-rich primary cultures. J. Neurochem. 69, 868–874.

Dringen, R., Hamprecht, B., and Bröer, S. (1998). The peptide transporter PepT2 mediates the uptake of the glutathione precursor CysGly in astroglia-rich primary cultures. J. Neurochem. 71, 388–393.

Dringen, R., Pfeiffer, B., and Hamprecht, B. (1999). Synthesis of the antioxidant glutathione in neurons: supply by astrocytes of CysGly as precursor for neuronal glutathione. J. Neurosci. 19, 562–569.

Girard, P., and Potier, P. (1993). NO, thiols and disulfides. FEBS Lett. 320, 7–8.

Hanson, H., Glässer, D., Ludewig, M., Mannsfeldt, H.-G., and John, M. (1967). Struktur- und Wirkungsidentität der Leucinaminopeptidase aus Schweinenieren und Rinderaugenlinsen und Vergleich mit der Partikelaminopeptidase aus Schweinenieren. Hoppe-Seyler’s Z. Physiol. Chem. 348, 689–704.

Harbeck, H.-T., and Mentlein, R. (1991). Aminopeptidase P from rat brain. Purification and action on bioactive peptides. Eur. J. Biochem. 198, 451–458.

Hiroi, Y., Endo, Y., and Natori, Y. (1992). Purification and properties of an aminopeptidase from rat-liver cytosol. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 294, 440–445.

Hirota, T., Nishikawa, Y., Takahagi, H., Igarashi, T., and Kitagawa, H. (1985). Simultaneous purification and properties of dehydropeptidase-I and aminopeptidase M from rat kidney. Res. Commun. Chem. Pathol. Pharmacol. 49, 435–445.

Hirota, T., Nishikawa, Y., Komai, T., Igarashi, T., and Kitagawa, H. (1987). Role of dehydropeptidase-I in the metabolism of glutathione and its conjugates in the rat kidney. Res. Commun. Pathol. Pharmacol. 56, 235–242.

Hogg, N., Jit Singh, R., Konorev, E., Joseph, J., and Kalyanaraman, B. (1997). S-Nitrosoglutathione as a substrate for γ-glutamyl transpeptidase. Biochem. J. 323, 477–481.

Jösch, C., Sies, H., and Akerboom, T.P.M. (1998). Hepatic mercapturic acid formation: involvement of cytosolic cysteinylglycine S-conjugate dipeptidase activity. Biochem. Pharmacol. 56, 763–771.

Kohno, H., and Kanno, T. (1985). Properties and activities of amino peptidases in normal and mitogen-stimulated human lymphocytes. Biochem. J. 226, 59–65.

Kohno, H., Kanda, S., and Kanno, T. (1986). Immunoaffinity purification and characterization of leucine aminopeptidase from human liver. J. Biol. Chem. 261, 10744–10748.

Lança, A.J., and Israel, Y. (1991). Histochemical demonstration of sinusoidal gamma-glutamyltransferase activity by substrate protection fixation: comparative studies in rat and guinea pig liver. Hepatology 14, 857–863.

Lipton, A.J., Johnson, M.A., Macdonald, T., Lieberman, M.W., Gozal, D., Gaston, B. (2001). S-Nitrosothiols signal the ventilatory response to hypoxia. Nature 413, 171–174.

Livingston, D.M. (1974). Immunoaffinity chromatography of proteins. Methods Enzymol. 34, 723–731.

Mathews, W.R., and Kerr, S.W. (1993). Biological activity of S-nitrosothiols: the role of nitric oxide. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 267, 1529–1537.

Oettgen, H.C., and Taylor, A. (1985). Purification, preliminary characterization, and immunological comparison of hog lens

leucine aminopeptidase (EC 3.4.11.1) with hog kidney and beef lens aminopeptidase. Anal. Biochem. 146, 238–245.

Purucker, E., and Wernze, H. (1990). Hepatic efflux and renal extraction of plasma glutathione: marked differences between healthy subjects and the rat. Klin. Wochenschr. 68, 1008–1012.

Rankin, B.B., McIntyre, T.M., and Curthoys, N.P. (1980). Brush border membrane hydrolysis of S-benzyl-cysteine-p-nitroanilide, an activity of aminopeptidase M. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 96, 991–996.

Saito, H., Terada, T., Okuda, M., Sasaki, S., and Inui, K. (1996). Molecular cloning and tissue distribution of rat peptide transporter PEPT2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1280, 173–177.

Semenza, G. (1957). Chromatographic purification of cysteinylglycinase. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 24, 401–413.

Taylor, A. (1993a). Aminopeptidases: towards a mechanism of action. Trends Biochem. Sci. 18, 167–172.

Taylor, A. (1993b). Aminopeptidases: structure and function. FASEB J. 7, 290–298.

Turzynski, A., and Mentlein, R. (1990). Prolyl aminopeptidase from rat brain and kidney. Action on peptides and identification as leucyl aminopeptidase. Eur. J. Biochem. 190, 509–515.

Wilk, S., Wilk, E., and Magnusson, R.P. (1998). Purification, characterization, and cloning of a cytosolic aspartyl aminopeptidase. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 15961–15970.

Received May 14, 2002; accepted September 24, 2002
