
APPLIED AND ENVIRONMENTAL MICROBIOLOGY, Apr. 2003, p. 2349–2355  
0099-2240/03/$08.00+0 DOI: 10.1128/AEM.69.4.2349–2355.2003  
Copyright © 2003, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

**Reconstruction of Mycobacterial Dehalogenase Rv2579 by Cumulative Mutagenesis of Haloalkane Dehalogenase LinB**

Yuji Nagata,$^{1*}$ Zbyněk Prokop,$^{2}$ Soňa Marvanová,$^{2}$ Jana Sýkorová,$^{2}$ Marta Monincová,$^{2}$ Masataka Tsuda,$^{1}$ and Jiří Damborský$^{2}$

*Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8577, Japan,*$^{1}$ *and National Centre for Biomolecular Research, Masaryk University, 611 37 Brno, Czech Republic*$^{2}$

Received 3 September 2002/Accepted 13 January 2003

The homology model of protein Rv2579 from *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* H37Rv was compared with the crystal structure of haloalkane dehalogenase LinB from *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26, and this analysis revealed that 6 of 19 amino acid residues which form an active site and entrance tunnel are different in LinB and Rv2579. To characterize the effect of replacement of these six amino acid residues, mutations were introduced cumulatively into the six amino acid residues of LinB. The sixfold mutant, which was supposed to have the active site of Rv2579, exhibited haloalkane dehalogenase activity with the haloalkanes tested, confirming that Rv2579 is a member of the haloalkane dehalogenase protein family.

Haloalkane dehalogenase is a key enzyme for degradation of synthetic haloalkanes that occur as soil pollutants (11). Haloalkane dehalogenase catalyzes dehalogenation by a hydrolytic mechanism and belongs to the α/β-hydrolase family. The reaction mechanism of haloalkane dehalogenase (DhlA) from *Xanthobacter autotrophicus* GJ10 was studied in detail by crystallographic and site-directed mutagenesis analyses (27, 30). The 1,3,4,6-tetrachloro-1,4-cyclohexadiene (1,4-TCDN) halidohydrolase (LinB), which is involved in the biochemical pathway responsible for utilization of the halogenated organic insecticide γ-hexachlorocyclohexane (also called γ-benzenehexachloride or lindane) in *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26, also belongs to the family of haloalkane dehalogenases (19, 22). LinB not only converts 1,4-TCDN to 2,5-dichloro-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1-ol but also converts various kinds of haloalkanes to their corresponding alcohols (20). A catalytic triad (i.e., nucleophile-histidine-acid) is essential for the reactions catalyzed by members of the α/β-hydrolase family. Amino acid residues for the catalytic triad of LinB were proposed to be D108, H272, and E132 based on a site-directed mutagenesis analysis (10).

Haloalkane dehalogenase is also fascinating as a material for studying structure-function relationships of enzymes. To date, three-dimensional structures of the DhlA (30), DhaA (23), and LinB (17) proteins have been determined, and they have been used to study differences in substrate specificity (4). Furthermore, a theoretical analysis of the substrate specificities of these three enzymes was performed by using the multiple computer-automated structure evaluation method (5). Recently, the substrate ranges of haloalkane dehalogenases were altered by both rational site-directed mutagenesis (9) and directed evolution (2).

For a long time it was believed that haloalkane dehalogenases are present only in soil bacteria colonizing contaminated environments (7). Recently, it was found that *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* H37Rv, whose complete genome has been sequenced (3), possesses genes encoding putative haloalkane dehalogenases on its chromosome (4). Furthermore, hydrolytic dehalogenation was shown to occur in a number of different mycobacteria (12). However, the function and features of the enzymes are still under investigation (13). Rv2579, one such putative dehalogenases from H37Rv, is highly homologous to haloalkane dehalogenase LinB (68% sequence identity). Sequence analysis revealed that Rv2579 has the conserved catalytic triad Asp-His-Glu (4), suggesting that this protein potentially can catalyze dehalogenation by a hydrolytic mechanism. However, it is not obvious that halogenated substrates can bind to its active site. One of purposes of this study was to confirm that Rv2579 is a haloalkane dehalogenase. Another aspect of this study involved experimental evolution of LinB. Since we changed an active site and an entrance tunnel of LinB into those of Rv2579 using cumulative mutagenesis, we could also characterize enzymes that are intermediate between LinB and Rv2579.

Design of mutations. The amino acid sequence of Rv2579 was aligned with that of LinB (Fig. 1). The sequences were obtained from genetic databases by using the following GenBank/EMBL/DDBJ accession numbers: D14594 for the haloalkane dehalogenase from *S.* *paucimobilis* UT26 (LinB) (19) and Z77724 for the putative haloalkane dehalogenase from *M.* *tuberculosis* H37Rv (Rv2579) (25). A pairwise alignment of the protein sequences was performed manually by using Cameleon 3.14a (Oxford Molecular, Oxford, United Kingdom). The amino acid residues of an active site and entrance tunnel of LinB were deduced from the X-ray structure. In the alignment, six substitutions between LinB and Rv2579 were identified in 19 amino acid residues which form the active site and the entrance tunnel of LinB (Fig. 1). The model of Rv2579 was constructed (data not shown) by using the method of satisfaction of spatial restraints as implemented in the software Modeller 6.0a (26). The crystal structure of the haloalkane dehalogenase LinB (17) served as the template structure (PDB accession code 1cv2). The correctness of the model was tested

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Sendai 980-8577, Japan. Phone: 81-22-217-5682. Fax: 81-22-217-5704. E-mail: aynaga@ige.tohoku.ac.jp.

2350 NAGATA ET AL. APPL. ENVIRON. MICROBIOL.

LinB Rv2579

| β1 | β2 | β3 | α1 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| - M S L G A K P F G E K K F I E I K G R R M A Y I D E G T G D P I L F Q H G [N] | P T S S Y L W R N I M P H C A G L G R L I | 59 |
| M T A F G V E P Y G Q P K Y L E I A G K R M A Y I D E G K G D A I V F Q H G N P T S S Y L W R N I M P H L E G L G R L V | 60 |

| β4 | α2 | β5 | α3 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| A C D L I G M G D S D K L D P S G P E R Y A Y A E H R D Y L D A L W E A L | D L G D R V V L V V H [D][W] G S A L G F D W A R | 119 |
| A C D L I G M G A S D K L S P S G P D R Y S Y G E Q R D F L F A L W D A L | D L G D H V V L V L H D W G S A L G F D W A N | 120 |

| β6 | Δ | α4 | β5 | α6 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| R H R E R V Q G I A Y M E A [I] A M P I E W A D [F] P E [Q][O] R D L [F] Q A F R | S Q A G E E L V L Q D N [V][F] V E Q [V] L P G | 179 |
| Q H R D R V Q G I A F M E A I V T P M T W A D [W] P P [A][V] R G V F Q G F R | S P Q G E P M A L E H N I F V E R V L P G | 180 |

| α7 | α8 | α9 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| R P L S E A E M A A Y R E P F L A A G E A R R P T L S [W]P R Q | P I A G T P A D V V A I A R D Y A G W L S E S P I P K L | 239 |
| R Q L S D E E M N H Y R R P F V N G G E D R R P T L S W P R N | P I D G E P A E V V A L V N E Y R S W L E E T D M P K L | 240 |

| β7 | α10 | β8 | Δ | α11 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| F I N A E P G [A][L] | T T G R M R D F C R T W P N Q T E I T V A G A | [H][F] I Q E D S P D E I G A A I A A F V R R L R P A | 296 |
| F I N A E P G A [I] | I T G R I R D Y V R S W P N Q T E I T V P G V H F V Q E D S P E E I G A A I A Q F V R R L R S A A G V | 300 |

FIG. 1. Alignment of amino acid sequences of LinB and Rv2579. The secondary structure elements (indicated by lines under the sequence), the catalytic triad (indicated by triangles above the sequence), and the active site and tunnel residues (indicated by boxes) of LinB were deduced from the crystal structure (17). The active site residues that are different in LinB and Rv2579 are shaded.

by analyzing the stereochemical quality by using PROCHECK 3.0 (15), the packing quality was tested by using bump checks, and the folding reliability was analyzed by using 3D-1D (16) and PROSAII 3.0 (28). Using the model, we confirmed that (i) the position of the catalytic triad in the protein structure is the same in LinB and Rv2579, (ii) no additional amino acid residues form the active site of Rv2579, and (iii) the tunnel leading to the active site of Rv2579 contains residues analogous to those in LinB. In other words, we confirmed that the six amino acid residues indicated in Fig. 2 account for most of the differences between the active sites of LinB and Rv2579.

Construction of mutants by cumulative mutagenesis. Because His-tagged LinB was used as a template, all the mutant proteins were His tagged. Although His-tagged LinB showed an average of 80% of the activity of the wild-type LinB for 10 different substrates (21), the decreases were very similar for different substrates, and the standard deviation was 5.5%. The small reduction in activity was independent of the substrate shape, size, or number of substituents. The order of mutations was selected to avoid inactivation of the enzyme at an early stage of cumulative mutagenesis. In brief, the mutations were introduced from outside to inside. First, relatively less important surface residues (Q146 and D147) were mutated. A double mutant (Q146A+D147V) was constructed, because it was practical from an experimental point of view. Then a more important surface residue (L177) was mutated. Second, the

FIG. 2. Stereo picture of the three-dimensional structure of haloalkane dehalogenase LinB, with the mutated residues indicated. The protein structure is represented by the alpha trace; the substrate molecule 1-chlorobutane (colored by atom type) docked to the active site and mutated amino acid residues (in red) are represented by sticks.

TABLE 1. Steady-state kinetic constants for LinB and its mutants

| Substrate          | Enzyme      | $S p \text{ act }(\mu \text{ mol } \cdot s^{-1} \cdot$ mg of protein${}^{-1}$) | $k_{\text{cat}}(s^{-1})$ | $K_{m}(\text{mM})$ | $\frac{k_{\text{cat}}}{K_{m}}(\text{mM}^{-1} \cdot s^{-1})$ | $K_{si}(\text{mM})$ |
|--------------------|-------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|---------------------|------------------------------------------------------|---------------------|
| 1-Chlorobutane     | Wild type   | $0.034 \pm 0.002^{a}$                                          | $1.11 \pm 0.03$         | $0.23 \pm 0.02$     | $4.83$                                           | NA${}^{b}$          |
|                    | Q146A+D147V | $0.016 \pm 0.001$                                              | $0.65 \pm 0.02$         | $0.06 \pm 0.01$     | $10.10$                                          | NA                  |
|                    | L177A       | $0.015 \pm 0.003$                                              | $0.41 \pm 0.03$         | $0.08 \pm 0.02$     | $4.99$                                           | NA                  |
|                    | I211L       | $0.008 \pm 0.001$                                              | $0.27 \pm 0.01$         | $0.05 \pm 0.01$     | $5.26$                                           | NA                  |
|                    | L248I       | $0.021 \pm 0.002$                                              | $0.76 \pm 0.03$         | $0.21 \pm 0.02$     | $3.58$                                           | NA                  |
|                    | F143W       | $0.018 \pm 0.002$                                              | $0.58 \pm 0.03$         | $0.14 \pm 0.02$     | $4.05$                                           | NA                  |
| 1,3-Dibromopropane | Wild type   | $0.094 \pm 0.013$                                              | $40.9 \pm 5.2$          | $24.10 \pm 3.23$    | $1.70$                                           | $0.49 \pm 0.06$     |
|                    | Q146A+D147V | $0.034 \pm 0.001$                                              | $25.8 \pm 2.6$          | $5.90 \pm 1.22$     | $4.37$                                           | $0.21 \pm 0.04$     |
|                    | L177A       | $0.033 \pm 0.005$                                              | $1.9 \pm 0.2$           | $0.06 \pm 0.02$     | $30.86$                                          | $27.20 \pm 11.29$   |
|                    | I211L       | $0.072 \pm 0.008$                                              | $3.4 \pm 0.7$           | $0.19 \pm 0.11$     | $17.68$                                          | $6.82 \pm 2.31$     |
|                    | L248I       | $0.095 \pm 0.006$                                              | $20.3 \pm 4.3$          | $5.11 \pm 2.18$     | $3.96$                                           | $1.50 \pm 0.52$     |
|                    | F143W       | $0.107 \pm 0.003$                                              | $21.5 \pm 2.8$          | $10.07 \pm 2.44$    | $2.13$                                           | $1.63 \pm 0.34$     |

$a$ Mean ± standard error.

$b$ NA, not applicable.

1-chlorobutane and 1,3-dibromopropane was only 0.43, while the correlation coefficient calculated with catalytic constants was 0.93, supporting the use of the substrate inhibition model for 1,3-dibromopropane.

The final sixfold mutant (+F143W), which was supposed to have an active site and entrance tunnel of Rv2579, showed significant haloalkane dehalogenase activity with two halogenated compounds (Table 1), confirming that the Rv2579 protein can bind haloalkanes and can convert them to products by a hydrolytic mechanism. Not only the sixfold mutant but also intermediate mutants showed haloalkane dehalogenase activity. During the cumulative mutagenesis analysis, significant changes in both the \( K_m \) and \( k_{cat} \) of evolved proteins were observed. These changes were correlated; i.e., mutants with lower activity showed improved binding and vice versa. The first double mutation, Q146A+D147V, had a positive effect on \( K_m \). The Q146A+D147V mutant exhibited lower Michaelis constants for both 1-chlorobutane and 1,3-dibromopropane than the wild-type enzyme. The \( K_m \) for 1,3-dibromopropane was further improved by monitoring mutation L177A. These findings suggest that the first three mutations had positive effects on binding affinity. Furthermore, the +L177A mutant had a significantly higher substrate inhibition constant (\( K_{si} \)), suggesting that the substrate inhibition effect of 1,3-dibromopropane was weaker. When the results were considered together, the most significant enhancement of the catalytic efficiency of LinB with the substrate 1,3-dibromopropane (as quantified by \( k_{cat}/K_m \)) was due to the L177A mutation.

Biochemical characterization of substrate specificity. To characterize the substrate specificity of every mutant, the semi-quantitative spectrophotometric method of Holloway et al. (9) as optimized for characterization of LinB mutants by Marvanova et al. (18) was used. The principle of this method is based on estimating the acidification associated with dehalogenation of the substrates. The reaction was performed in 5-ml vials closed with headspace caps. The reaction buffer consisted of 1 mM HEPES (pH 8.2), 20 mM sodium sulfate, and 1 mM EDTA. Phenol red was added to a final concentration of 25 mg/ml, and a halogenated compound was added to an apparent concentration of 10 mM. The substrate-buffer solution was mixed vigorously for 15 s with a vortex mixer and equilibrated for 30 min at room temperature in an orbital shaker to dissolve the substrate. Each microplate well received 170 μl of the reaction mixture and 40 μl of the enzyme solution (protein concentration, 5 mg/ml; pH 7.8 ± 0.03). The absorbance at 550 nm was measured for eight replicates at 25°C for 3 min at intervals of 30 s by using a SUNRISE microplate reader (TECAN, Durham, N.C.). The slope of the plot of absorbance versus time was used to quantify the rate of dehalogenation. Every mutant was tested with 34 different halogenated substrates selected by multivariate experimental design (18). The natural substrate of LinB, 1,4-TCDN, was not included in the set of substrates due to its low stability. The relative dehalo-

genation activities (centered and scaled to unit variance) were analyzed by principal component analysis (31) using the statistical package SIMCA P v9.0 (Umetrics AB, Umea, Sweden). Principal component analysis is an analytical method intended to extract and visualize systematic patterns or trends in large data matrices. This analysis enabled objective comparisons of the protein mutants based on their substrate specificities (i.e., classification based on simultaneous consideration of activity data measured for a large number of different substrates). Here, a large matrix of \( 6 \times 34 \) data points (mutants × substrates) was summarized by just three plots. The score plot (Fig. 3A) should be examined along with loading plots (Fig. 3B and C) in order to see which substrates were responsible for separation of mutants in the horizontal and vertical directions. The separation of the mutants in the horizontal direction was based on the overall catalytic activities with many different substrates, as follows: wild type > +L248I ≫ +F143W > +L177A > Q146A+D147A > +I211L (Fig. 3A). All but non-active substrates (Fig. 3B) contributed to this separation, which corresponded well to the large data variance (70%) in this direction. The separation of the two most active proteins, the wild type and +L248I, in the horizontal direction (Fig. 3A) accounted for 12% of the data variance (Fig. 3C). As far as substrate specificities are concerned, the wild type and the +L248I variant represent different subclasses than the rather homogeneous group of other protein mutants. Several substrates (i.e., substrates with high positive loading values in Fig. 3C) showed higher activities with +L248I than with the wild-type enzyme in the semiquantitative screening analysis. A quantitative and more sensitive gas chromatographic analysis was subsequently performed for some of these compounds (Table 2). Improved activities (about threefold improved) of +L248I with the haloalkenes 2,3-dichloropropene and 3-chloro-2-methylpropene were observed (Table 2). This important change in substrate specificity would have been missed if only steady-state kinetic experiments with two substrates had been used for characterization of the mutants.

Structural interpretation of experimentally evolved mutants. It is possible to interpret observed changes in activity and specificity in terms of structural changes introduced into LinB by each of the mutations. The Q146A mutation resulted in modification of the nose of the tunnel; however, this was not very significant. Mostly the hydrophobicity of the tunnel was changed by this mutation. More significant was the D147V substitution, which resulted in a change in the electrostatic properties of the tunnel. Lower stabilization of the substrate dipole moment and thus lower activity were expected for this mutant. The L177A mutation resulted in the most dramatic change in the catalytic efficiency of the LinB protein. This is not surprising considering the position of this residue in the wall of the tunnel leading to the enzyme active site. The side chain of residue 177 points towards the tunnel, and replacement of this residue results in a significant change in the ap-

FIG. 3. (A) Scatter plot of the first score (t1) plotted against the second score (t2). (B and C) Column plots of the first loading p1 (B) and the second loading p2 (C). The scores and loadings were obtained from the principal component analysis applied to the \( 6 \times 34 \) (mutants × substrates) data matrix. The first principal component explained 70% of the data variance, and the second principal component explained 12% of the data variance.

A

| t2 |
| --- |
| 6 |
| 4 |
| 2 |
| 0 |
| -2 |
| -4 |
| -6 |

- ▲ +L211L
- ▲ +L177A
- ▲ Q146A+D147V
- ▲ +F143W
- ▲ +L248I
- ▲ wt

t1

B

| p1 | Substrates |
| --- | ---------- |
| 0.220 | 1-chlorobutane |
| 0.200 | 1-bromoethane |
| 0.180 | 1-bromobutane |
| 0.160 | 1-iodopropane |
| 0.140 | 1,2-dichloroethane |
| 0.120 | 1,3-dichloropropene |
| 0.100 | 1,2-dibromoethane |
| 0.080 | 1,3-dibromopropane |
| 0.060 | 2-chloropropane |
| 0.040 | 2-iodobutane |
| 0.020 | 1,2-dichloropropane |
| 0.000 | 1,2-dibromopropane |
|  | 1,2,3-trichloropropane |
|  | 1-chloro-2-methylpropane |
|  | 1-bromo-2-methylpropane |
|  | bis(2-chloroethyl)ether |
|  | chlorocyclohexane |
|  | bromocyclohexane |
|  | (1-bromomethyl)cyclohexane |
|  | chloroacetoniitrile |
|  | chlorocyclopentane |
|  | 4-chlorobutyronitrile |
|  | 4-bromobutyronitrile |
|  | 2-chloroethylmethyl ether |
|  | 1,2,3-tribromopropane |
|  | 1,2-dibromo-3-chloropropene |
|  | 3-chloro-2-methylpropene |
|  | 2,3-dichloropropene |

C

| p2 | Substrates |
| --- | ---------- |
| 0.20 | 1-chlorobutane |
| 0.10 | 1-bromoethane |
| 0.00 | 1-bromobutane |
| -0.10 | 1-iodopropane |
| -0.20 | 1,2-dichloroethane |
| -0.30 | 1,3-dichloropropene |
| -0.40 | 1,2-dibromoethane |
|  | 1,3-dibromopropane |
|  | 2-chloropropane |
|  | 2-iodobutane |
|  | 1,2-dichloropropane |
|  | 1,2-dibromopropane |
|  | 1,2,3-trichloropropane |
|  | 1-chloro-2-methylpropane |
|  | 1-bromo-2-methylpropane |
|  | bis(2-chloroethyl)ether |
|  | chlorocyclohexane |
|  | bromocyclohexane |
|  | (1-bromomethyl)cyclohexane |
|  | chloroacetoniitrile |
|  | chlorocyclopentane |
|  | 4-chlorobutyronitrile |
|  | 4-bromobutyronitrile |
|  | 2-chloroethylmethyl ether |
|  | 1,2,3-tribromopropane |
|  | 1,2-dibromo-3-chloropropene |
|  | 3-chloro-2-methylpropene |
|  | 2,3-dichloropropene |

TABLE 2. Specific activities of wild-type LinB and mutant +L248I

| Substrate                | Sp act (μmol·s⁻¹·mg of protein⁻¹) |
|--------------------------|------------------------------------|
| Wild type                | Mutant +L248I                     |
| 1-Bromoethane            | 0.112 ± 0.009<sup>a</sup>          | 0.119 ± 0.014 |
| 1-Chlorobutane           | 0.034 ± 0.002                     | 0.021 ± 0.002 |
| 1-Bromobutane            | 0.051 ± 0.011                     | 0.040 ± 0.011 |
| 1,3-Dichloropropane      | 0.014 ± 0.001                     | 0.015 ± 0.002 |
| 1,3-Dibromopropane       | 0.102 ± 0.016                     | 0.040 ± 0.013 |
| 3-Chloro-2-methylpropene | 0.121 ± 0.032                     | 0.396 ± 0.039 |
| 2,3-Dichloropropene      | 0.023 ± 0.003                     | 0.063 ± 0.006 |

<sup>a</sup> Mean ± standard error.

substrate range of haloalkane dehalogenase by site-directed mutagenesis. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 59:520–523.

10. Hynkova, K., Y. Nagata, M. Takagi, and J. Damborsky. 1999. Identification of the catalytic triad in the haloalkane dehalogenase from *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26. FEBS Lett. 446:177–181.

11. Janssen, D. B., F. Pries, and J. R. Van der Ploeg. 1994. Genetics and biochemistry of dehalogenating enzymes. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 48:163–191.

12. Jesenska, A., I. Sedlacek, and J. Damborsky. 2000. Dehalogenation of haloalkanes by *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* H37Rv and other mycobacteria. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66:219–222.

13. Jesenska, A., M. Bartos, V. Czernekova, I. Rychlik, I. Pavlik, and J. Damborsky. 2002. Cloning and expression of the haloalkane dehalogenase gene *dhmA* from *Mycobacterium avium* N85 and preliminary characterization of DhmA. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68:3724–3730.

14. Kmunicek, J., S. Luengo, F. Gago, A. R. Ortiz, R. C. Wade, and J. Damborsky. 2001. Comparative binding energy analysis of the substrate specificity of haloalkane dehalogenase from *Xanthobacter autotrophicus* GJ10. Biochemistry 40:8905–8917.

15. Laskowski, R. A., M. W. McArthur, D. S. Moss, and J. M. Thornton. 1993. PROCHECK: a program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 26:283–291.

16. Luthy, R., J. U. Bowie, and D. Eisenberg. 1992. Assessment of protein models with three-dimensional profiles. Nature 356:83–85.

17. Marek, J., J. Vevodova, I. Kuta-Smatanova, Y. Nagata, L. A. Svensson, J. Newman, M. Takagi, and J. Damborsky. 2000. Crystal structure of the haloalkane dehalogenase from *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26. Biochemistry 39:14082–14086.

18. Marvanova, S., Y. Nagata, M. Wimmerova, J. Sykorova, K. Hynkova, and J. Damborsky. 2001. Biochemical characterization of broad-specificity enzymes using multivariate experimental design and a colorimetric microplate assay: characterization of the haloalkane dehalogenase mutants. J. Microbiol. Methods 44:149–157.

19. Nagata, Y., T. Nariya, R. Ohtomo, M. Fukuda, K. Yano, and M. Takagi. 1993. Cloning and sequencing of a dehalogenase gene encoding an enzyme with hydrolase activity involved in the degradation of γ-hexachlorocyclohexane in *Pseudomonas paucimobilis*. J. Bacteriol. 175:6403–6410.

20. Nagata, Y., K. Miyauchi, J. Damborsky, K. Manova, A. Ansorgova, and M. Takagi. 1997. Purification and characterization of haloalkane dehalogenase

of a new substrate class from a γ-hexachlorocyclohexane-degrading bacterium, *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 63:3707–3710.

21. Nagata, Y., K. Hynkova, J. Damborsky, and M. Takagi. 1999. Construction and characterization of histidine-tagged haloalkane dehalogenase (LinB) of a new substrate class from a γ-hexachlorocyclohexane-degrading bacterium, *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26. Protein Express. Purif. 17:299–304.

22. Nagata, Y., K. Miyauchi, and M. Takagi. 1999. Complete analysis of genes and enzymes for γ-hexachlorocyclohexane degradation in *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* UT26. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 23:380–390.

23. Newman, J., T. S. Peat, R. Richard, L. Kan, P. E. Swanson, J. A. Affholter, I. H. Holmes, J. F. Schindler, C. J. Unkefer, and T. C. Terwilliger. 1999. Haloalkane dehalogenase: structure of a *Rhodococcus* enzyme. Biochemistry 38:16105–16114.

24. Oue, S., A. Okamoto, T. Yano, and H. Kagamiyama. 1999. Redesigning the substrate specificity of an enzyme by cumulative effects of the mutations of non-active site residues. J. Biol. Chem. 274:2344–2349.

25. Philipp, W. J., S. Poulet, K. Eiglmeier, L. Pascopella, V. Balasubramanian, B. Heym, S. Bergh, B. R. Bloom, W. R. Jacobs, and S. T. Cole. 1996. An integrated map of the genome of the tubercle bacillus, *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* H37Rv, and comparison with *Mycobacterium leprae*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93:3132–3137.

26. Sali, A., and T. L. Blundell. 1993. Comparative protein modelling by satisfaction of spatial restraints. J. Mol. Biol. 234:779–815.

27. Schanstra, J. P., J. Kingma, and D. B. Janssen. 1996. Specificity and kinetics of haloalkane dehalogenase. J. Biol. Chem. 271:14747–14753.

28. Sippl, M. J. 1993. Recognition of errors in three-dimensional structures of proteins. Proteins Struct. Funct. Genet. 17:355–362.

29. Terada, I., S.-T. Kwon, Y. Miyata, H. Matsuzawa, and T. Ohta. 1993. Unique precursor structure of an extracellular protease, aqualysin I, with NH₂-and COOH-terminal pro sequences and processing in *E. coli*. J. Biol. Chem. 265:6576–6581.

30. Verschueren, K. H. G., F. Seljee, H. J. Rozeboom, K. H. Kalk, and B. W. Dijkstra. 1993. Crystallographic analysis of the catalytic mechanism of haloalkane dehalogenase. Nature 363:693–698.

31. Wold, S., K. Esbensen, and P. Geladi. 1987. Principal component analysis. Chemometr. Intel. Lab. Systems 2:37–52.
