
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Apr. 2003, p. 2418–2431
0021-9193/03/$08.00+0 DOI: 10.1128/JB.185.8.2418–2431.2003
Copyright © 2003, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

# Methionine Regeneration and Aminotransferases in *Bacillus subtilis*, *Bacillus cereus*, and *Bacillus anthracis*

**Bradley J. Berger**,${}^{1*}$ **Shane English**,${}^{1}$ **Gene Chan**,${}^{2}$ and **Marvin H. Knodel**${}^{1}$

**Defence R&D Canada-Suffield, Medicine Hat,**${}^{1}$ **and Canada West Biosciences, Calgary,**${}^{2}$ **Alberta, Canada**

Received 8 November 2002/Accepted 27 January 2003

The conversion of ketomethiobutyrate to methionine has been previously examined in a number of organisms, wherein the aminotransferases responsible for the reaction have been found to be members of the Ia subfamily (L. C. Berger, J. Wilson, P. Wood, and B. J. Berger, J. Bacteriol. 183:4421-4434, 2001). The genome of *Bacillus subtilis* has been found to contain no subfamily Ia aminotransferase sequences. Instead, the analogous enzymes in *B. subtilis* were found to be members of the If subfamily. These putative aspartate aminotransferases, the *yugH, ywfG, ykrV, aspB,* and *patA* gene products, have been cloned, expressed, and characterized for methionine regeneration activity. Only YkrV was able to convert ketomethiobutyrate to methionine, and it catalyzed the reaction only when glutamine was used as amino donor. In contrast, subcellular homogenates of *B. subtilis* and *Bacillus cereus* utilized leucine, isoleucine, valine, alanine, phenylalanine, and tyrosine as effective amino donors. The two putative branched-chain aminotransferase genes in *B. subtilis*, *ybgE* and *ywaA*, were also cloned, expressed, and characterized. Both gene products effectively transaminated branched-chain amino acids and ketoglutarate, but only YbgE converted ketomethiobutyrate to methionine. The amino donor preference for methionine regeneration by YbgE was found to be leucine, isoleucine, valine, phenylalanine, and tyrosine. The *B. subtilis ybgE* gene is a member of the family III of aminotransferases and falls in a subfamily designated here IIIa. Examination of *B. cereus* and *Bacillus anthracis* genome data found that there were no subfamily IIIa homologues in these organisms. In both *B. cereus* and *B. anthracis*, two putative branched-chain aminotransferases and two putative D-amino acid aminotransferases were discovered as members of subfamily IIIb. These four sequences were cloned from *B. cereus*, expressed, and characterized. Only the gene product from the sequence designated Bc-BCAT2 was found to convert ketomethiobutyrate to methionine, with an amino donor preference of leucine, isoleucine, valine, phenylalanine, and tyrosine. The *B. anthracis* homologue of Bc-BCAT2 was also cloned, expressed, and characterized and was found to be identical in activity. The aminoxy compound canaline was found to be an uncompetitive inhibitor of *B. subtilis* YbgE and also inhibited growth of *B. subtilis* and *B. cereus* in culture.

---

Methionine (Met) is a key amino acid required for protein synthesis, biological methylation, and polyamine biosynthesis. This latter function is particularly important in rapidly growing cells, such as cancer cells and most bacteria and parasites, which must continually synthesize polyamines in order to replicate their DNA (31). The de novo production of Met is energetically expensive and requires aspartate, ATP, NADPH, succinyl-coenzyme A or acetyl-coenzyme A, cysteine or H₂S, and 5-methyltetrahydrofolate. In addition, many organisms lack the ability to make Met and rely on exogenous sources. For these reasons, Met bioavailability is limiting and tightly controlled. Almost all organisms examined to date, including those that can synthesize Met, have recycling pathways that can regenerate the amino acid from metabolic by-products.

In the production of spermidine from putrescine or spermine from spermidine, Met is consumed (in the form of decarboxylated S-adenosylmethionine) in a one-to-one stoichiometry (Fig. 1). The end product of this reaction is methylthioadenosine, which can be recycled to adenine and Met via a unique pathway, which has been found in organisms ranging from bacteria to mammals (Fig. 1) (5, 17, 30, 48, 51). Studies

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Defence R&D Canada-Suffield, P.O. Box 4000, Medicine Hat, Alberta, Canada, T1A 8K6. Phone: (403) 544-4621. Fax: (403) 544-3388. E-mail: Brad.Berger@drdc-rddc.gc.ca.

Ketomethiobutyrate
Methylthiopropionate
CO
HCO₃
O₂
8a
1,2-Dihydroxy-3-ketomethiopentene
HCO₃
O₂
8
Amino Acid
Keto Acid
AspAT [Ia] (Cf Tbb Pf Gi)
TyrAT [Ia] (Kp)
BCAT [IIIa] (Bs)
BCAT [IIIb] (Bc Ba)
Methionine
Pi
7b
2-Hydroxy-3-ketomethiopentene-1-PO₄
7a
2,3-Diketomethiopentane-1-PO₄
H₂O
6
Methylthioribulose-1-PO₄
5
Methylthioribose-1-PO₄
Adenine
PO₄
4
4a
H₂O
Adenine
4b
ATP
ADP
Methylthioribose
S-Adenosylmethionine
1
ATP
Decarboxylated
S-Adenosylmethionine
2
CO₂
Putrescine
Spermidine
3
Methylthioadenosine

FIG. 1. The Met regeneration pathway. The labeled enzymes are as follows: 1, S-adenosylmethionine synthetase; 2, S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase; 3, spermidine/spermine synthetase; 4, methylthioadenosine phosphorylase; 4a, methylthioadenosine nucleosidase; 4b, methylthioribose kinase; 5, unidentified isomerase; 6, unidentified dehydratase; 7, enolase-phosphatase; 8, nonenzymatic or dioxygenase; 8a, dioxygenase. The specific aminotransferases that catalyze the final step are shown, with the subfamily membership in square brackets. The organism abbreviations are as follows: Cf, *Crithidia fasciculata*; Tbb, *Trypanosoma brucei brucei*; Pf, *Plasmodium falciparum*; Gi, *Giardia intestinalis*; Kp, *Klebsiella pneumoniae*; Bs, *Bacillus subtilis*; Bc, *Bacillus cereus*; Ba, *Bacillus anthracis*.

During these previous studies it became apparent, by using aminotransferase sequences available from completed genome projects, that gram-positive bacteria and archaeabacteria have no members of the aminotransferase Ia subfamily (see below). The few AspATs that have been characterized for these organisms, such as one from *Bacillus subtilis* (32) and one from *Sulfolobus solfataricus* (13), are members of the If subfamily (Fig. 2). To date, members of this subfamily have not been examined for their capacity to transaminate KMTB.

In this study, we have determined the phylogenetic relationship of the AspATs from *B. subtilis* and have cloned, functionally expressed, and characterized these enzymes in regard to Met regeneration. In addition, based on the amino acid preference shown by bacterial homogenates in catalyzing the conversion of KMTB to Met, we have also cloned, expressed, and characterized selected members of the family III of aminotransferases from *B. subtilis*, *B. cereus*, and *B. anthracis*. It was discovered that the final step of Met recycling in these organisms was catalyzed by a single branched-chain amino acid aminotransferase (BCAT).

**MATERIALS AND METHODS**

Cells and homogenates. *Bacillus subtilis* 168 (ATCC 23857) and *Bacillus cereus* 14579 were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, Va.) and were routinely cultured in nutrient broth at 30°C with agitation at 250 rpm. For selected experiments, *B. subtilis* was grown in a liquid minimal methionine-free medium as described by Anagnostopoulos and Spizizen (2). For similar experiments, *B. cereus* was grown in a minimal methionine-free medium as described by Milner et al. (34). *Bacillus anthracis* Ames was obtained from Defence R&D Canada-Suffield reference stocks and was originally acquired from the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute for Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID) (Frederick, Md.). Growth of *B. anthracis* was under the same conditions as for *B. cereus*, except that growth temperature was 37°C.

Cells in late log or stationary phase were harvested by centrifugation at 3,500 × g for 20 min and 4°C. The cell pellets were resuspended in a minimal volume of 25 mM PO₄ (pH 7.8)–120 mM KCl–2.5 mM α-ketoglutarate (KG)–1.0 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)–0.2 mM pyridoxal phosphate–protease inhibitors (Complete Tablets; Roche Biomedical, Laval, Quebec, Canada), lysozyme was added to a 0.3% final concentration (wt/vol), and then the mixtures were incubated on ice for 60 min. The samples were then sonicated on ice and dialyzed against 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.4)–1.0 mM EDTA–1.0 mM DTT at 4°C. After dialysis, the samples were briefly resonicated on ice and stored at 4°C for enzyme assays. For long-term storage, glycerol was added to a final concentration of 20% (vol/vol) and the samples were kept at –20°C.

FIG. 2. The amino donor range for Met regeneration in *Bacillus* spp. An enzyme source was mixed with 1.0 mM KMTB, a 2.0 mM concentration of a single amino acid, and pyridoxal phosphate for 30 min at 37°C before analysis of Met production by HPLC. The enzyme sources are as follows: *B. subtilis* homogenate from cells grown in nutrient broth (A), *B. cereus* homogenates from cells grown in nutrient broth (open bars) or minimal medium (hatched bars) (B), recombinant *B. subtilis* YkrV (C), recombinant *B. subtilis* YbgE (D), or recombinant *B. cereus* BCAT2 (open bars) or recombinant *B. anthracis* BCAT2 (hatched bars) (E).

Cloning of aminotransferases. Genomic DNA was isolated from *B. subtilis* 168, *B. cereus* 14579, or *B. anthracis* Ames by digestion with 0.3% (wt/vol) lysozyme for 1 h on ice, followed by incubation with an equal volume of 100 mM NaCl–10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0)–25 mM EDTA–0.5% (wt/vol) sodium dodecyl sulfate–0.1 mg of proteinase K/ml at 37°C for 1 h with occasional mixing. The mixture was then subjected to extraction with phenol-chloroform–isoamyl alcohol (24:1), and the DNA was ethanol precipitated.

The nucleotide sequences of the *B. subtilis* aminotransferases were obtained from the SubtiList website (http://www.genolist.pasteur.fr/SubtiList/) (36) and used to design oligonucleotide primers for each enzyme. A gapped genome of *B. cereus* 14579 was obtained from Integrated Genomics (www.integratedgenomics.com/Public/IG_Release.html), and data from the completed genome project for *B. anthracis* Ames were obtained from The Institute for Genomic Research (Rockville, Md.) and USAMRIID (40). The nucleotide sequences of the *B.

cereus and *B. anthracis* aminotransferases were obtained by examination of the appropriate genome data by using the BLAST program (1) running within BioEdit (20) and used to design oligonucleotide primers for each enzyme. The 5′ primers contained a 12-nucleotide ligation-independent cloning (LIC) (3) sequence and an in-frame start codon, while the 3′ primers contained a 13-nucleotide LIC sequence and an in-frame stop codon. Primer sequences are available from the authors. The target sequences were amplified from the genomic DNA and cloned into pCALnFLAG by using the LIC procedure outlined by Stratagene (La Jolla, Calif.) before transformation into *Escherichia coli* XL10 competent cells (Stratagene). The recombinant plasmid was purified from these cells by using the QiaSpin miniprep kit (Qiagen), and the presence of the insert was confirmed by digestion with *NdeI* and *SacI*. The insert was sequenced by using the Big-Dye cycle sequencing kit (ABI, Foster City, Calif.) and an ABI Prism 310 genetic analyzer.

**Phylogenetic analysis.** Additional aminotransferase sequences were obtained from GenBank and were aligned by using the Clustal algorithm and the BLOSUM sequence substitution table in the ClustalX program (50). Aligned sequences were visualized with the Bioedit program (20). The aligned sequences were then used with the ProtDist component of PHYLIP (16) to construct a distance matrix which was the basis for tree construction using neighbor joining (42). All trees were visualized by using Treeview (39).

**Expression of recombinant enzymes.** The plasmids from positive clones were transformed into *E. coli* BL21 DE3 CodonPlus RIL cells (Stratagene) for functional expression. The BL21 cells containing the recombinant plasmid were grown in Luria-Bertani liquid medium containing 50 μg of ampicillin/ml and 50 μg of chloramphenicol/ml at 37°C and 250 rpm until the cell density reached an *A*<sub>600</sub> of 0.6 to 0.8. The culture was then cooled to 28°C, and IPTG (isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactopyranoside) was added to 1.0 mM before 2 to 5 h of continued culture at 28°C and 250 rpm. The cells were then pelleted by centrifugation at 3,500 × *g* for 20 min at 4°C and resuspended in a minimal volume of 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.8)–150 mM NaCl–1.0 mM DTT–1.0 mM imidazole–2.0 mM CaCl<sub>2</sub> before storage at –20°C. The sample was thawed, sonicated on ice, and centrifuged at 3,500 × *g* for 20 min at 4°C. The resulting supernatant was loaded onto a 1.6- by 8.0-cm calmodulin-agarose column (Stratagene) equilibrated with the resuspension buffer. The column was eluted with 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.8)–1.2 M NaCl–1.0 mM DTT–3.0 mM EGTA. The eluted enzyme was concentrated to less than 5.0 ml by using a 10-kDa molecular mass cutoff centrifugal filter (Pall Filtron; Mississauga, Ontario, Canada). The concentrated enzyme was kept at 4°C for short-term storage and at –20°C with 20% (vol/vol) glycerol for long-term storage.

**Enzyme assays.** Aminotransferase activities were assayed by a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method (9). Ten microliters of subcellular homogenate or a variable volume of recombinant enzyme was added to 100 μl of substrate mix (100 mM PO<sub>4</sub>, 50 μM pyridoxal-5-phosphate, and various concentrations of amino acid and keto acid) and incubated for 30 min at 37°C. The samples were then stored at –20°C until analysis by HPLC. BCAT activity was assayed by using 2.0 mM valine, isoleucine, or leucine and 1.0 mM KG mixtures, while D-alanine aminotransferase (DAAT) activity was measured by using 2.0 mM D-alanine–1.0 mM KG. AspAT activity was measured by using 2.0 mM aspartate–1.0 mM KG in the substrate mix. Met regeneration was screened by using 2.0 mM concentrations of each of the amino acids A, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L, N, Q, R, S, T, W, Y and 1.0 mM KMTB in the substrate mix. The range of effective amino donors for Met formation was determined by using 2.0 mM individual amino acid and 1.0 mM KMTB in the substrate mix. For the determination of Michaelis-Menten constants, the substrate mixes contained 0.1 to 10 mM concentrations of substrate and 5 or 10 mM concentrations of the cosubstrate. Similar kinetic constants were determined by using valine, isoleucine, or leucine and KG mixtures at the same concentrations as for Met formation from KMTB. The apparent *K*<sub>m</sub> and *V*<sub>max</sub> for each substrate pairing was determined by nonlinear curve fitting by using the Scientist software program (Micromax, Salt Lake City, Utah). All samples were analyzed by pre-column derivatization and reverse-phase HPLC by using an Agilent 1100 HPLC equipped with an autosampler, variable wavelength UV and visible spectrophotometric detector, Chemstation operating system, and a 2.1- by 200-mm ODS-AA column (Agilent; Mississauga, Ontario, Canada).

Protein concentration was determined by using the Bio-Rad dye (Bio-Rad; Mississauga, Ontario, Canada). Recombinant protein samples were examined by electrophoresis on 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels followed by Coomassie brilliant blue R250 staining.

**Inhibition studies.** The inhibition constant for canaline against recombinant *B. subtilis* YbgE was determined by adding 0, 1.0, 5.0, 10, 50, or 100 μM canaline to enzyme incubation mixtures containing 10 mM KMTB and 1.0, 2.5, 5.0, or 10.0 mM leucine. The resulting data were analyzed as Cornish-Bowden plots (12). For measurement of in vitro growth inhibition, 100 μl of nutrient broth or appropriate minimal medium containing 2 × 10<sup>4</sup> CFU of *B. subtilis* or *B. cereus* was added to an equal volume of medium containing 0 to 10 mM canaline. The cultures were then incubated for 16 h, and the turbidity of the samples was measured at 650 nm by using a ThermoMax microtiter plate spectrophotometer (Molecular Devices; Sunnyvale, Calif.). The IC<sub>50</sub> was calculated by nonlinear curve fitting of the data to the Chou equation (11), and the MIC was determined by inspection of the wells for the lowest drug concentration permitting no cell growth.

**Nucleotide sequence accession numbers.** The sequences reported in this paper have been submitted to GenBank under accession numbers AF527041, AF527042, AF527043, AF527044, and AF527045.

---

**RESULTS**

**Methionine regeneration in *B. subtilis* and *B. cereus.** Subcellular homogenates of *B. subtilis* grown in nutrient broth were examined for the range of effective amino donors for the transamination of KMTB (Fig. 2A). Alanine, isoleucine, leucine, and valine were clearly the most effective amino donors, with phenylalanine and tyrosine also able to act as donors. The maximal rate of activity ranged from 1.20 to 1.48 nmol/min/mg of protein (for Ile:KMTB) which was equivalent to that seen in *K. pneumoniae* homogenates (1.92 nmol/min/mg of protein for Glu:KMTB [22]).

Subcellular homogenates of *B. cereus* prepared from cells grown in nutrient broth were found to utilize leucine, isoleucine, valine, tyrosine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, and histidine as preferred amino donors for the reaction (Fig. 2B). Alanine, glutamate and glutamine could also act as amino donors to a lesser degree. Cells grown in a minimal medium with sulfate as the only exogenous sulfur source presented a nearly identical amino donor spectrum, with the exception of a greater utilization of alanine and glutamate and a lower use of tyrosine.

**Relationships of *B. subtilis* family I aminotransferases.** Previous research into the final step of Met recycling in the lower eukaryotes *C. fasciculata*, *T. brucei brucei*, *G. intestinalis*, and *P. falciparum* and in the gram-negative bacterium *K. pneumoniae* has demonstrated that the reaction in these organisms is catalyzed by AspATs and TyrAT that belong to the Ia subfamily of the enzymes (9, 22). However, tree construction of the complete aminotransferase I family clearly showed that gram-positive bacteria and archaeabacteria had no enzymes in the Ia subfamily (22). The previously assembled phylogenies have suggested that gram-positive bacterial AspATs are members of the aminotransferase If subfamily. The *B. subtilis* genome has six open reading frames (*aspB*, *patA*, *ykrV*, *yugH*, *ywfG*, and *yhdR*) with significant homology to AspATs from diverse organisms (28). One of these putative AspATs, the *aspB* gene product, corresponds to an AspAT which had been previously purified and characterized from cell homogenates (32). Alignment of the six *B. subtilis* sequences with selected members of the aminotransferase I family and construction of a phylogeny via neighbor joining clearly showed that the *B. subtilis* sequences clustered with other enzymes of the If subfamily (Fig. 3). Therefore, the putative AspATs in *B. subtilis* are all members of the If subfamily.

Sequence alignment and tree construction of all the existing members of the If subfamily available in public databases showed that the *B. subtilis* sequences are broadly dispersed among several divisions of the subfamily (Fig. 4). The YhdR sequence was 50% identical to that of the *Bacillus halodurans*

Saccharomyces cerevisiae TyrAT  
Schizosaccharomyces pombe TyrAT  

Escherichia coli AVTA  
Escherichia coli HisPAT  
Schizosaccharomyces pombe HisPAT  
Halobacterium sp. HisPAT  
Saccharomyces cerevisiae AlaAT  
Homo sapiens AlaAT  
Trypanosoma cruzi TyrAT  
Homo sapiens TyrAT  
Mus musculus KynAT  
Homo sapiens KynAT  

Plasmodium falciparum AspAT  
Trypanosoma brucei mAspAT  
Giardia intestinalis cAspAT  
Saccharomyces cerevisiae cAspAT  
Gallus gallus cAspAT  
Mus musculus cAspAT  
Homo sapiens cAspAT  
Arabidopsis thaliana mAspAT  
Arabidopsis thaliana AspAT1  
Gallus gallus mAspAT  
Mus musculus mAspAT  
Homo sapiens mAspAT  
Trypanosoma brucei cAspAT  
Crithidia fasciculata cAspAT  
Escherichia coli AspAT  
Escherichia coli TyrAT  

Klebsiella pneumoniae TyrAT  

Bacillus subtilis yhdR  
Mycobacterium tuberculosis AspAT  
Synechocystis sp. AspAT  
Bacillus subtilis ywfG  
Bacillus subtilis ykrV  
Bacillus subtilis patA  
Bacillus subtilis yugH  
Streptomyces griseus AspAT  
Bacillus subtilis aspB  
Rhizobium meliloti AspAT-A  

FIG. 3. Family I aminotransferases. Selected sequences were aligned via the clustal algorithm and utilized for tree construction with the neighbor-joining method. The putative *B. subtilis* AspAT sequences are underlined, and the subfamily designations (as defined by Iraqui et al. [25a]) are shown on the base of the appropriate branches. The enzymes are abbreviated as follows: AspAT, aspartate aminotransferase; TyrAT, tyrosine aminotransferase; AVTA, alanine:valine aminotransferase; HisPAT, histidinol-phosphate aminotransferase; AlaAT, alanine aminotransferase; KynAT, kynurenine aminotransferase.

BH2195 gene product and had a low identity to the other subfamily If enzymes. The YkrV and YwfG sequences were 49% identical to each other and had 60 and 48% identity, respectively, to the sequence of the *B. halodurans* BH1060 gene product. The YugH sequence was 53% identical to that of the *B. halodurans* BH3350 gene product, and the PatA sequence was 45% identical to the *Streptococcus pneumoniae* *aspC* gene product. Finally, the *B. subtilis* AspB sequence was 73% identical to the *B. halodurans* *aspC* gene product. It is interesting that, aside from the YkrV and YwfG sequences, the putative *B. subtilis* AspATs bear little resemblance to each other and are highly divergent within subfamily If.

Characterization of the *B. subtilis* subfamily If aminotransferases. The alignment of the six *B. subtilis* sequences with selected subfamily If enzymes that have been fully characterized in the literature highlighted the lack of sequence conservation within subfamily If (Fig. 5). In the alignment, only Y115, G120, Y181, P238, N240, P241, G243, D274, Y277, K311, G317, R401, and R463 are conserved across the 12 enzymes. Of these residues, G243(G197), D274(D222), K311(K258), and R463(R386) are reported by Mehta et al. to be conserved across all four aminotransferase families (33). By the convention of Mehta et al. (33), conserved residues are labeled in parentheses with the corresponding residue number from pig cytosolic AspAT. Residues Y115(Y70), G120(G110), N240 (N194), P241(P195), Y277(Y225), and G317(G268) are reported by Jensen and Gu to be conserved across all family I aminotransferases (27). Therefore, unlike subfamily Ia aminotransferases, the subfamily If enzymes do not present a recognizable unique sequence motif.

The *aspB*, *patA*, *yugH*, *ykrV*, and *ywfG* genes were cloned and functionally expressed as calmodulin-binding peptide fusion proteins. Each of the putative enzymes was screened for Met regeneration activity by using a mixture containing KMTB as the amino acceptor and an amino acid mixture as potential amino donors. YugH, YwfG, PatA, and AspB catalyzed little detectable Met regeneration under these conditions. Only YkrV was able to produce a moderate amount of Met (approximately 40 nmol/min/mg of protein) by using the mixture of amino donors. The enzyme was rescreened by using KMTB and individual amino acids as amino donors (Fig. 2C). The enzyme was found to have an almost exclusive preference for Gln as an amino donor for the transamination of KMTB. The enzyme was also found to be similarly active in catalyzing

Rattus norvegicus KynAT II  
Mus musculus KynAT II  
Homo sapiens KynAT  
Streptomyces coelicolor SCE68.04c (AspAT)  
Sulfolobus solfataricus aspB-1 (AspAT)  
Thermoplasma acidophilum Ta1193 (AspAT)  
Sulfolobus solfataricus AspB-4 (AspAT)  
Bacillus circulans AspAT  
Thermoplasma acidophilum Ta1078 (AspAT)  
Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum MTH1694 (AspAT)  
Yersinia pestis YP00623 (AspAT)  
Synechocystis sp. aspC  
Caenorhabditis elegans mKynAT  
Caenorhabditis elegans cKynAT  
Aedes aegypti KynAT  
Rattus norvegicus KynAT I  
Schizosaccharomyces pombe KynAT  
Saccharomyces cerevisiae KynAT  
Streptomyces coelicolor (AspAT)  
Listeria monocytogenes (AspAT)  
Bacillus subtilis yhdR (AspAT)  
Bacillus halodurans BH2195 (AspAT)  
Aeropyrum pernix APE0674 (AspAT)  
Rattus norvegicus TyrAT  
Homo sapiens TyrAT  
Mustela vison TyrAT  
Trypanosoma cruzi TyrAT  
Trypanosoma rangeli TyrAT  
Arabidopsis thaliana At2g20610 (TyrAT)  
Arabidopsis thaliana At2g24850 (TyrAT)  
Arabidopsis thaliana At5g53970 (TyrAT)  
Mycobacterium tuberculosis aspC (AspAT)  
Mycobacterium leprae aspC (AspAT)  
Streptomyces coelicolor SC2H4.04c (AspAT)  
Streptococcus pyogenes SPy1779 (AspAT)  
Lactococcus lactis aspC (AspAT)  
Pyrococcus horikoshii PH1322 (AspAT)  
Pyrococcus abyssi aspB (AspAT)  
Thermotoga maritima TM1698 (AspAT)  
Clostridium acetobutylicum CAC1001 (AspAT)  
Bacillus subtilis ykrV (AspAT)  
Bacillus halodurans BH1060 (AspAT)  
Bacillus subtilis ywfG (AspAT)  
Staphylococcus aureus SAV2560 (AspAT)  
M. thermoautotrophicum (AspAT)  
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Rv1178 (AspAT)  
Mycobacterium tuberculosis aspB (AspAT)  
Halobacterium sp. aspC2 (AspAT)  
Streptomyces coelicolor SC7H1.11 (AspAT)  
Thermoplasma volcanium TVN0848 (AspAT)  
Bacillus subtilis yugH (AspAT)  
Bacillus halodurans BH3350 (AspAT)  
Archaeoglobus fulgidis AF1623 (AspAT)  
Streptococcus pneumoniae aspC (AspAT)  
Bacillus subtilis patA (AspAT)  
Pyrococcus horikoshii PH1371 (AspAT)  
Pyrococcus abyssi aspC (AspAT)  
Pyrococcus horikoshii (AspAT)  
Pyrococcus abyssi (AspAT)  
Halobacterium sp. (AspAT)  
Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum (AspAT)  
Bacillus stearothermophilus AspAT  
Bacillus subtilis aspC AspAT  
Bacillus halodurans aspC (AspAT)  
Streptococcus pneumoniae SP1544 (AspAT)  
Streptococcus pyogenes aspC (AspAT)  
Streptomyces virginiae AspAT  
Streptomyces coelicolor aspC (AspAT)  
Sinorhizobium meliloti aatB (AspAT)  
Sinorhizobium meliloti aatA (AspAT)  
Synechocystis sp. aspC (AspAT)  
Clostridium acetobutylicum (AspAT)  
Halobacterium sp. aspB2 (AspAT)  
Archaeoglobus fulgidis aspB2 (AspAT)  
Thermotoga maritima (AspAT)  
Aeropyrum pernix (AspAT)  
Sulfolobus solfataricus aspB2 (AspAT)  
Thermococcus kodakarensis AspAT  
Archaeoglobus fulgidis aspB1 (AspAT)  
Thermoplasma volcanium (AspAT)  
Thermoplasma acidophilum (AspAT)  
Methanococcus jannaschii aspB2 (AspAT)

FIG. 4. The If subfamily of aminotransferases. The sequences were aligned with the clustal algorithm and used for tree construction with the neighbor-joining method. The putative B. subtilis AspATs are underlined.

Gln:KG aminotransfer (data not shown). In this regard, YkrV has the characteristics of a glutamine aminotransferase (KynAT). Of the putative B. subtilis AspATs, only YkrV was effective at transaminating KMTB. However, the amino donor specificity for recombinant YkrV did not match the major activity seen above in B. subtilis cell homogenates grown in nutrient broth or minimal medium. Another aminotransferase(s) is clearly responsible for the cellular activity seen by using branched-chain and aromatic amino acids as amino donors.

2424 BERGER ET AL.

| 10 | 20 | 30 | 40 | 50 | 60 | 70 | 80 | 90 | 100 | 110 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ykrV | MKFEQSHVLKELPKQ | FFASLVQKNRKLAEGHDVIN | QPTEHIVEEMKRAVADPE | 62 |
| yhdR | MKLAGLSREVEENLNKGSW | IRKLFDEGARLKKEFGEDQVFDFSLGNP | IVEPPEAFKRALIEEAEG | 66 |
| ywfG | MEITPSDVIKTLPQ | EFSLVFQKVKEMEK-TGAHIIN | DLPTBPHIVEALRESLNPS | 62 |
| yugH | MTSYLSDYVQQ | IKPSGIRKFFDLAA-TMEGVIS | DFVIAWNVREASILSLEQG | 57 |
| patA | MEHLLNPKARE | IEISGIRKFSNLVA-QHEDVIS | DFFTAPHHVKAIAKKALDEN | 57 |
| aspB | MK-LAKRVSALTPS | TTLAITAKAKELKA-AGHDVIG | DFNTIPQHIIDAAVRSMNEG | 59 |
| Bci | MNPLAGQLNEKLQAGNPHVFDMLSTLGKELYFPKEGILSQSAEAAAHAKKYNATIGIATEG | GIPMHHLGVIQEKLSAFAPKD | 81 |
| Bst | MK-LAKRVASLTPS | ATLAITEKAKELKA-AGHDVIG | DFNTIPQHILDAAAIKAMNEG | 59 |
| Taq | MRGLSQRVKSMKPS | ATVAVNARALELRR-KGVDLVALTAGEP | DFDTPPEHVKEAGRRAALAQG | 60 |
| Ssu | MVSLDDFNGNMSQVTGE | TTLLYKEIARNVEKTKIKIIDFGIQP | DLPTFKRIRDAAKEALDQG | 64 |
| Hs-K | MAKQLQARRLDG | IDYNPWWEFVKLASEHDVVN | DFPPPDFAVEAFQHAVSGDF | 58 |
| Hs-T | MDPYMIQMSSKGNLPSILDVHVNVGGRSSVPGKMKGKRARWSVRPSDMAKKT | FNPIRAIVDNMKVKPNPNKTMIS | TVFGNLPTDPEVTOAMKDALDSGK | 105 |

| 120 | 130 | 140 | 150 | 160 | 170 | 180 | 190 | 200 | 210 | 220 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ykrV | NHKYSSEFRGSYRLK-SAAAAFYKREYGIDLDPETEVAVLF | GKAGLVELPQCLLNP | TILVPDPYGYPD | WSGVTLAKAKMEMM | PLVKDRAFLPD--YS | 158 |
| yhdR | SHGYIQNGLLAAR-EKVAQFLGSRFEADFSAE-RIVMTV | GAGGALNVALKSIVNPGE | EVIIILAPYFAEY | KLYIENYGKAVSCP | LTSSBEID--IE | 159 |
| ywfG | FHGYGPFRGYPELK-EAIAAFYKREYGVTINPETEVALFG | GGKAGLYVLTQCLLNPGD | IALVPNYPEY | YLSGITMARAELEYEM | PLYEENGYLPD--FE | 158 |
| yugH | YTSTANAGLYSLR-EEISRYLSNRFDLSYPDNELIVTV | GASQALDIAIRAIVNPGE | EVTIPEPCFVA | YDALVSLAGGIPVHV | HTTADKGFKAT--AA | 153 |
| patA | VTSTPNAIGYLELR-QAVQLYMKKKADFNYDAESETIITTGA-OATDAAFRTILSPGD | EVMIPGPPIYPG | YEPIINLCGAKPVIV | DTTS-HGF | KLT--AR | 151 |
| aspB | HTKYTPSGGLAELK-NSIAEKFKRDQNIEYKPS-QIIVCTGAKHALYTLFQVILDEED | EVIIPTPYWVS | YPEQVKLAGGKPVYV | EGLEENHKIS--PE | 154 |
| Bci | LYPYAPPAGKPELRSLWRDKMLEENPSLQGKSFGNPIATNALTHGLSIVADLFVDEGD | AVIYPDKNWEN | YDLTFGVRRHGVNVNFP | LFTSEMTNAAGLRD | 182 |
| Bst | HTKYTPSGGLPALK-EEIILKKFARDQGLDYEPA-EIVICVGAKHALYTLFQVLLDEG | DEVIIPTPYWVS | YPEQVKLAGGVPVYV | EGLEQNHFKIT--PE | 154 |
| Taq | KTKYAPPAGIPELR-EAVAEEKFRRENGLEVTPE-ETIVTVGSKOALFNLFQAILDPG | DEIVILAPYWVS | YPEMVRFAGGVPVEV | PTLP EEGFVPD--PE | 155 |
| Ssu | FTFYTSAFGIDELR-EKIAQYLNTRYGTDVKKE-EIVTPGAKPALFLVFILYINPS | DEVILBDPSFYS | YAEVKLLGGKPIYANL | KWSREEGFSID--VD | 161 |
| Hs-K | MLNQYTKTFGYPLT-KILASFFGELLGQEIDPLRNVLVTVGGYGALFTAFQALVDEG | DEVIIEPFFDCY | EPMTMMAGGRPVFVSLKPGPIQNGELGSSSNWQLD--PM | 165 |
| Hs-T | YNGYAPSIGFLSSR-EEIASYYHCP-EAPLEAK-DVILTSGCSEQIDLCLAVLANP | GQNILVRPRPGSLYKTLAESMG | IEVKLYN | LLPEKSWEID--LK | 199 |

| 230 | 240 | 250 | 260 | 270 | 280 | 290 | 300 | 310 | 320 | 330 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ykrV | SITAEIREQAELMYLNPNPTGAVATSEFFEDTVRFAAENG | ICVHDFAYGAVGFDGCKPLS | FLQTEG--AKDIGIEIYTLS | TYNMA | GWRVGFAVGNASVI | 259 |
| yhdR | AVRQSITPOGTKGLILNTPHNPTGTVLSQKNIDDLGALLKEIEEKSQTIYVLFDEP | YSQLIYDEELANPFQSYYHR | VILASSFSKDLGIAGERLGYIGLDSRMP | 262 |
| ywfG | KIDPAVLEKAKLMFLYNPNPTGAVADAAFYAKAAFAKEHN | IHLIHDFAYGAFEFD-QKPAS | FLEABD--AKTVGAELYSFSKTFNMAGWRMAFAVGNEKII | 258 |
| yugH | DFEAAVTEKTKAILICSPSNPTGSVYSKEELNEIAEFACKHD | VIVLADEIYAELTYDE-EFTS | IAALPG--MKERTVVISGFSKAFAMTGWRILGFAAAPSLR | 253 |
| patA | LIEDALTPNTKCVVLPYPSNPTGVTLSEEEELKSIAALLKGN | VFVLSD | YSELTYDR-PHYSIATY--LRDQTIVINGLSKSHSMTGWRIGFLFAPKDI | A | 249 |
| aspB | QLKNAITEKTKAIVINSPTGVMYTEEELSALGEVCLEHD | ILIVSDEIYEKLTYGGKKHV | SIAQLSDR--LKEQTVIINGVSKSHSMTGWRIGYAAGSEDI | II | 256 |
| Bci | ALLAQDKDGKAVVILNPPTGYTPGAAEGDAIVAAIKDAAEAG-INVVVTD | DAYFGLFFEDSLKES | LFGRALDLHPRVLAVKVDGATKEEFWGFRVGFITYASENK | 291 |
| Bst | QLKQAITPRTKAVIINSPTGMIYTAEEKLALGEVCLAHG | VLIVSDEIYEKLTYGGAKHVS | IAELSPE--LKAQTVIINGVSKSHSMTGWRIGYAAGPKDI | II | 256 |
| Taq | RVRAITPRTKALVNSPNPTGVVYPEEVLRALAEMALQHD | FYLVSDEIYEHLIYEG-AHFS | PGTLAP---EHTITVNGAAKAFAMTGWRIGYACGPKAVI | 253 |
| Ssu | DLQSKISKRTKMIVENDPHNPTGTLFSPNDVKKIVDISRDNK | IILLSDEIYDNFVYEKGMRSTLEDSD | WRDFLIYVNGFSKTFSMTGWRILGYIVAKRETI | 261 |
| Hs-K | ELAGKFTSRTKALVINPNPLGKVFSREELELVASLCQQHD | VVCITDEVYQWMVYDGHQHIS | IASLPG--MWERTLTTIGSAGKTFSATGWVLGPDHIM | 266 |
| Hs-T | QLEYLIDEKTACLIVNPSNPCGSVFSKRHLQKILAVAARQC | VPILADEVYGDMVFSDCKEYPLATLST | DVPILSCGGLAKRWLVPGWRILGWILIHDRD | 299 |

| 340 | 350 | 360 | 370 | 380 | 390 | 400 | 410 | 420 | 430 | 440 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ykrV | EAINLYQDHMFVSLFRATQEA AEALL | ADQTCVAEQNARYESRNAWITACR-EI | GWDVTAIPAGS | EFAWLVPPEGY | TSEQFSDLILEKAN | 348 |
| yhdR | DADLLINAFVYCNRTLGFVNA PVMQR | AVARMDDLVRDASAYKERRDLMVDI | KEA-GFEFEMPKGGSFFVPKSPIED | EVAFCVHAAQKYK | 352 |
| ywfG | QAVNEFQDHVFVGMFGGLQAA SAALS | GDPEHTESLKRIYKERIDFTALCEKEL | WKMEKPKGT | FYWAEIPNTFE | TSHQFSDYLEHAH | 349 |
| yugH | DAMLKIHQYAMMCAPAMAQFA ALEGLK | NGMEDVEKMKKSYRRRNLNFES | NEI-GLSCHHPGGRFLCFSIYQKHGN | EFKNSLPEELLTQEK | 344 |
| patA | KHILKVHQYNVSCASSISQKA LEAVT | NGFDDALIMREQYKKRLDYVYDR | LSM-GLDVVKPSGAFYIFPSIKSFG | MTSFDFSMAILLE DAG | 339 |
| aspB | KAMTNLAHSHTSNPTSIAQYG AIAAYN | GPSEPLEEMREAFEHR | LNTIYAKLIEIPGFSCVKPEGA | FYLFPNAAEAQSC | GFKDVDEFVKALLEEEK | 352 |
| Bci | DVLDALEQKTLGIIRATISSG PHPSQ | FVLDAKAPGFKEQKEEKLQIMKGRANKVKDILDS | KYSEAWDYYPFNSG | YFMCLKLKTVQAEALR | 384 |
| Bst | KAMTDLAHSHTSNPTSIAQY AIAAYS | GPQEPVEQMRQAFEQLNIYDK | LVQIPGFTCVKPQGA | FYLFPNAREAAAMA | GCRTVDEFVAALLEAK | 352 |
| Taq | KAMADVSSQSTTSPDTIAQWA TLEALTN | REASMAFIAMAREAYKRDRDLLLEG | LSRI-GLLEAVRPSGA | FYVLMDTSPFAP | NEVEAAERLIMAG-- | 345 |
| Ssu | QKMGLAANVYTAPTSFVQKAA VKAFD | TFDEVNQMVSLFKKR | RDVMYDELTKVKGEVESKPNGA | FYMFPNVSILKTS | G-FDVKSLAIKLIEEKG | 355 |
| Hs-K | KHLRTVHQNSVFHCPTQSQAA VAESFEREQLLFRQPSSYFVQFQAMQRCRDHMIRS | QS-VGLKPIIPQGSYFLITDISDFKRKMPDLPGA | VDEPYDRRFVKWMIKNG | 375 |
| Hs-T | IFGNEIRDGLVKLSQRILGP CTIVQGALKSILCRTPGEFYHNTLSFLKSNADLCYGA | AAIPGLRPVRBSGAMYLMVGIEMEHFP | EFENDVEFTERLVAEQS | 401 |

| 450 | 460 | 470 | 480 | 490 | 500 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| ykrV | JVAAGNGF | GEYGEGYVRVGLLTSEERLKEAAYRIGKLNFLTQKSIDKT | 398 |
| yhdR | LLIVPSSGEF | GMMSGH--FR | LSFSVPIEQIKNSRDIFFISLYKDF | 393 |
| ywfG | JVVTPEGEIF | GSNGKHRVRI | SMVSKQEDLREFTRIQKLNLPFGSLQETSRS | G | 401 |
| yugH | JAVVSWK | CVWSE--RS | GFGSPENVRLSYA | 371 |
| patA | JALVPGSSF | STYGEGYVR | LSFACSMDTLREGDLRLEFLVKKREAMQTINNGV | -- | 392 |
| aspB | JAIVPGSGEF | GSPEN--VR | LSYATSLDLEEAIERIKRFVEKHS | 393 |
| Bci | SHLIHEYGIG | TIALGEHDL | RIAFSCIEEPYLEDLDLIHQGVQDLQQA | 432 |
| Bst | JALVPGSGEF | GAPDN--VR | LSYATSLDALETAVERIHRFMEARA | 393 |
| Taq | JAVVPGTEEF | AAFGH--VR | LSYATGEENLKKAERFAQALQ | 383 |
| Ssu | JVTIPGEVFP | LNIGKEFL | RSFAVNEEVIKEGIQKIREFAEQMMNSR | 402 |
| Hs-K | LVAIPVSI | FYSVPHQKHFDHYIRFCFVKDEATLQAMDEKLRKWVEL | 422 |
| Hs-T | JHCLPATCEF | EYPN-FIRVVITVPEVMMLEACSRIQEFCEQHYHCAEGSQEECDK | 454 |

FIG. 5. Alignment of the putative *B. subtilis* AspATs. The following sequences were aligned by using the clustal algorithm: *B. subtilis* YkrV, YhdR, YwfG, YugH, PatA, and AspB, *B. circulans* (Bci) AspAT (6), *Bacillus* sp. (Bst) AspAT (49), *Thermus aquaticus* AspAT (Taq) (38), *Sulfolobus solfataricus* (Ssu) AspAT (13), human KynAT (Hs-K) (35), and human TyrAT (Hs-T) (47). Residues conserved by 75% of the sequences are boxed.

Characterization of *B. subtilis* family III aminotransferases. The strong preference for branched-chain amino acids as amino donors suggested the possibility that a BCAT was responsible for this Met regeneration activity in *B. subtilis*. In a previous publication, Hall et al. (21) reported that rat brain BCAT could catalyze Met:KG aminotransfer at a rate approximately 10% that of Leu:KG, but this reaction has not been further examined, particularly in the reverse reaction.

larly, bacterial BCATs are known to play a role in the conversion of Met to odor compounds in cheese bacteria (10, 10, 54), but the use of KMTB in the reverse reaction has not been studied.

BCATs are members of family III of the aminotransferase superfamily, which appears to be evolutionarily unrelated to the family I and II aminotransferases (26). Members of family III have not been subjected to the same level of phylogenetic analysis as family I, and there is no information available on potential subfamilies within family III. Clustal alignment of all the available family III aminotransferase sequences followed by tree construction using a variety of algorithms demonstrated a clear division into two subfamilies (Fig. 6). The first, designated subfamily IIIa, contained BCATs from eukaryotic and bacterial sources. The second, designated subfamily IIIb, contained BCATs from archaeal and bacterial sources, as well as DAATs. Analysis of the *B. subtilis* genome data (28) has uncovered three sequences with homology to existing members of family III: *ywaA*, *ybgE*, and *yheM* (Fig. 7). The YheM sequence clearly localized among the DAAT sequences in subfamily IIIb and was 62% identical to the *Bacillus licheniformis* DAAT. The YbgE and YwaA sequences were found in the IIIa subfamily and were 59% identical to each other and 60 and 62% identical, respectively, to the sequence of the *B. halodurans* BAB05575 gene product.

Alignment of YheM, YbgE, and YwaA sequences with six other family III sequences that have been fully characterized in the literature and with the *B. cereus* and *B. anthracis* family III sequences (see below) demonstrated a low number of conserved residues across the family (Fig. 7). As the family III aminotransferases are now thought of as unrelated to the family I and II enzymes (26), it would be inappropriate to continue using pig cytosolic AspAT as the reference sequence for family III enzymes. The residues in parentheses reflect the corresponding residue in the *E. coli ilvE* gene product, which has been well studied (29). Residues E106(E37), R129(R59), K233(K159), N237(N163), G252(G178), E269(E193), N274(N198), T290(T209), L298(L217), E342(E251), and G376(G278) are conserved across the sequences shown in Fig. 7, with K233(K159) as the pyridoxal-phosphate binding site. Even among this small selection of family III enzymes, it is clear that there is no retention of D/E222 (in pig cytosolic AspAT), which was postulated by Mehta et al. (33) as an invariant residue across all aminotransferases. While completely conserved across family I and II enzymes, this residue appears to be unnecessary for activity in family III enzymes.

The two putative BCATs were cloned and functionally expressed as calmodulin-binding peptide fusion proteins. Both recombinant enzymes were screened by using KMTB and single amino acids as amino sources. YwaA catalyzed little Met production, whereas YbgE readily formed Met using leucine, isoleucine, valine, phenylalanine, and tyrosine as amino donors (Fig. 2D). Both enzymes were active in leucine:KG amino-transfer (data not shown). As the amino donor preference for Met regeneration with the recombinant YbgE closely mirrored that seen in *B. subtilis* homogenates and in the semipurified fraction, more-detailed kinetic studies were performed with the BCATs (Table 1). The \(K_m\) values for Leu, Val, and Ile in the presence of KMTB or KG were very similar for both YbgE and YwaA and ranged from 2.11 to 5.68 mM. Both YbgE and

YwaA catalyzed KMTB transamination at a rate approximately 10-fold lower than that of the corresponding reaction with KG. In addition, YwaA was 100-fold less active than YbgE for all of the reactions examined. Therefore, it would appear that YbgE is responsible for the majority of the Met regeneration seen in the *B. subtilis* homogenates.

Characterization of the *B. cereus* family III aminotransferases. As the primary catalyst of KMTB transamination in *B. subtilis* proved to be the *ybgE* gene product and was a member of the family III of aminotransferases, *B. cereus* and *B. anthracis* genome data were examined for potential homologues. Both *B. cereus* and *B. anthracis* were found to contain four sequences with high identity to known members of family III aminotransferases. Two of these sequences were similar to those of BCATs, and two were similar to those of DAATs, and these were given the names Bc-BCAT1 (GenBank AF527041), Bc-BCAT2 (GenBank AF527043), Bc-DAAT1 (GenBank AF527045), Bc-DAAT2 (GenBank AF527042), Ba-BCAT1, Ba-BCAT2 (GenBank AF527044), Ba-DAAT1, and Ba-DAAT2.

Despite their relatively close relationship to *B. subtilis*, neither *B. cereus* nor *B. anthracis* had any aminotransferases with homology to subfamily IIIa. All four *B. cereus* and *B. anthracis* family III aminotransferases are members of subfamily IIIb and are not closely related to the *B. subtilis ybgE* gene product (Fig. 6). Given the extreme similarity of the *B. cereus* and *B. anthracis* genomes, it is not surprising that each of the family III enzymes from *B. cereus* is most identical to its *B. anthracis* counterpart, with identities in excess of 96%. The BCAT1s were also found to be 61% identical to the BCAT2s, and all four BCATs were 56% identical to the *Archaeoglobus fulgidus* AF0933 gene. The *B. subtilis ybgE* gene product, which is responsible for Met regeneration in that organism and is a member of subfamily IIIa, was only 17% identical to the *B. cereus* and *B. anthracis* BCATs.

As with the BCATs, the putative DAAT sequences from *B. cereus* were most identical to their *B. anthracis* counterparts, with an identity in excess of 86%. The two DAAT1 sequences were found to be 47% identical to the DAAT2 sequences, and all four DAAT sequences were 42% identical to the *B. subtilis yheM* gene product sequence.

The four putative family III aminotransferase sequences in *B. cereus* were cloned and functionally expressed as calmodulin-binding peptide fusion proteins in *E. coli*. Bc-DAAT2 was expressed completely as insoluble, inactive inclusion bodies. Bc-BCAT1, Bc-BCAT2, and Bc-DAAT1 were screened with branched-chain amino acids and KG or KMTB, as well as D-alanine and KG, in order to determine their capacity for transamination of these substrates (Fig. 8). As would be expected, only Bc-DAAT1 catalyzed the D-alanine:KG amino-transfer, confirming its identity as a DAAT. Both Bc-BCAT1 and Bc-BCAT2 were active with branched-chain amino acids when KG was used as an amino acceptor, confirming their identities as BCATs. However, Bc-BCAT2 catalyzed these reactions three- to fourfold better than Bc-BCAT1. Only Bc-BCAT2 had any appreciable activity with branched-chain amino acids and KMTB as an amino donor. Therefore, while both BCATs were capable of transaminating KG and branched-chain amino acids, only Bc-BCAT2 had the ability to produce Met from KMTB. Therefore, Bc-BCAT2 is likely the analogue of YbgE in *B. subtilis* and acts as the primary catalyst

Homo sapiens NM005504 cBCAT  
Ovis aries AF184916 cBCAT  
Mus musculus X17502 cBCAT  
Rattus norvegicus NM017253 cBCAT  
Homo sapiens NM001190 mBCAT  
Ovis aries AAD02563 (mBCAT)  
Rattus norvegicus NM022400 mBCAT  
Caenorhabditis elegans CE03457 (BCAT)  
Saccharomyces cerevisiae YJR148w (BCAT)  
Saccharomyces cerevisiae YHR208w (BCAT)  
Schizosaccharomyces pombe SPBC428.02C (BCAT)  
Streptomyces coelicolor AL031124 (BCAT)  
Mycobacterium tuberculosis MT2266 (BCAT)  
Xyella fastidiosa XF1999 (BCAT)  
Ralstonia solanacearum RS05654 (BCAT)  
Sinorhizobium meliloti Smc02896 (BCAT)  
Bacillus halodurans BAB05875 (BCAT)  
Bacillus subtilis ywaA BCAT  
Bacillus subtilis ybgE BCAT  
Neisseria meningitidis NM0337 (BCAT)  
Streptococcus pneumoniae SP0856 (BCAT)  
Streptococcus pyogenes Spy0910 (BCAT)  
Lactococcus lactis 1320 (BCAT)  
Haemophilus influenzae HII193 (BCAT)  
Deinococcus radiodurans DR1626 (BCAT)  
Helicobacter pylori JHP1361 (BCAT)  
Cochliobolus carbonum AF157629 BCAT  
Arabidopsis thaliana At1g10060 (BCAT)  
Capsicum annuum AAK57535 (BCAT)  
Arabidopsis thaliana At1g50090 (BCAT)  
Solanum tuberosum AF193845 BCAT  
Solanum tuberosum AF193846 BCAT  
Synechocystis sp. SLR0032 (BCAT)  
Aquifex aeolicus aq1893 (BCAT)  
Escherichia coli ilvE BCAT  
Salmonella typhimurium PSLT3903 (BCAT)  
Yersinia pestis YP03899 (BCAT)  
Methanobacterium thermotrophicum MTH1430 (BCAT)  
Halobacterium sp. ilve2 (BCAT)  
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA05014 (BCAT)  
Ralstonia solanacearum RS04898 (BCAT)  
Campylobacter jejuni Cj0269c (BCAT)  
Rickettsia conorii ilve (BCAT)  
Rickettsia typhi ilve (BCAT)  
Rickettsia rickettsia ilve (BCAT)  
Rickettsia montanensis ilve (BCAT)  
Caulobacter crescentus CC2930 (BCAT)  
Agrobacterium tumefaciens C_1592 (BCAT)  
Mesorhizobium loti mlr9205 (BCAT)  
Streptomyces coelicolor AL157953 (BCAT)  
Bacillus anthracis BCAT1  
Bacillus cereus BCAT1  
Bacillus anthracis BCAT2  
Bacillus cereus BCAT2  
Archaeoglobus fulgidus AF0933 (BCAT)  
Methanococcus jannaschii MJ1008 (BCAT)  
Clostridium acetobutylicum CAC2226 (BCAT)  
Mesorhizobium loti mlr7635 (BCAT)  
Agrobacterium tumefaciens pAT_698 (DAAT)  
Sinorhizobium meliloti Sma0093 (DAAT)  
Ralstonia solanacearum RS01735 (DAAT)  
Agrobacterium tumefaciens C_4563 (DAAT)  
Caulobacter crescentus CC1744 (DAAT)  
Mesorhizobium loti mlr0401 (DAAT)  
Bacillus licheniformis U26947 (DAAT)  
Bacillus subtilis yheM (DAAT)  
Staphylococcus haemolyticus U12238 (DAAT)  
Bacillus anthracis DAAT2  
Bacillus cereus DAAT2  
Bacillus anthracis DAAT1  
Bacillus cereus DAAT1  
Listeria monocytogenes AF038439 (DAAT)  
Bacillus sp. J04460 (DAAT)  
Bacillus sphaericus U26732 (DAAT)  
Bacillus halodurans NT01BH3 (DAAT)  
Clostridium acetobutylicum CAC0792 (DAAT)

FIG. 6. Family III aminotransferases. The sequences were aligned with the Clustal algorithm and used for tree construction with the neighbor-joining method. The division between subfamilies IIIa and IIIb is shown by arrows. The *B. subtilis*, *B. cereus*, and *B. anthracis* sequences are underlined.

of Met regeneration in *B. cereus*. The recombinant Bc-BCAT2 was screened with single amino acids and KMTB in order to define the amino donor preference of the enzyme (Fig. 2E). The enzyme used isoleucine, leucine, valine, tyrosine, phenylalanine, and, to a lesser degree, histidine and arginine. Therefore, with the exception of alanine and glutamine as amino donors, Bc-BCAT2 would appear to be responsible for almost all the Met regeneration activity seen in the *B. cereus* homologs (Fig. 2B).

Selected substrate pairings were examined in more detail in order to determine the kinetic parameters of the enzyme (Table 1). The *K*<sub>m</sub> and *V*<sub>max</sub> values were found to be similar

Ba-BCAT1  MGNQYIYMNGEFVE--KEKAVSVYDHGFLYGDGVEEGIRS 39
Bc-BCAT1  MGNQYIYMNGEFVE--KEKAVSVYDHGFLYGDGVEEGIRS 39
Ba-BCAT2  VNEQWIFLNGEFVP--KDEAKVSVYDHGYLGDGVEEGIRV 39
Bc-BCAT2  MNEQWIFLNGEFVP--KDEAKVSVYDHGYLGDGVEEGIRV 39
Bs-ybgE  MNKLIEREKTVYYKEKPDPSS-LGFGQYFTDYMFDYEEGIGWHHPRIAP--YAPLTLDPSSSVFYGQAVEEGLKA 75
Bs-ywaA  MTKQTIRVELTSTKKPKPDPNQ-LSFGRVFTHMFVMDYAADKGWDPRIIP--YQPLSMDPTAMVYHYGQTVFEGLKA 76
Ll-BCAT  MAINLDWEN-LGFSYRNLPFRYIARFK-DGWKSAGELTG--DNQLHISESSPALHYGQQGHEGLKA 62
Ec-ilvE  TTKKADYIWNGEMVR--WEDAKVHMSHALHYGTSVEEGIRC 41
Sp-BCAT  MVQTAALHGKPMDSSHIKVTNVKELKPLPEWKS-LKFGENFTDHMLIMKNREKGWSTPEIVP--FGKLCFHPASSVFHYGFECHEGMKA 88
Hs-BCAT1 -MDCSNG-------SAECTGEGGSKEVVGTKAKDLIVTPATILKEKPDNN-LVFGTVFTDHMLTVESSEFGWEKPHIKP--LQNLSLHPGSSALHYAVELEEGGLKA 98
Hs-BCAT2 MAAAALGQIWARKLLSVPWLLCGPRRYASSSFKAADLQLEMTQKPHKKPGPEPLVEGKTFTDHMIMVEWN-DKGWGQPRIQP--FQNLTLHPASSSLHSYLQLPEGGMKA 107
Ba-DAAT1 ----------------ERFVLWNDAIIDTTKQKTYIELEERGLQFGDGVEEVIRL 39
Bc-DAAT1 ----------------MKVSHYLRTYERMGRKLAYEKFLWNDEVIDTTKQQTYYIELEERGSQFGDGVEEVIRL 58
Ba-DAAT2 ----------------MEATHKDWILFNGRIVNTKKEEQPMIPLEERGFOFGDGIVEVIRL 44
Bc-DAAT2 ----------------MKATHKDWILFNGRMINTKKEQPMVALEERGFOFGDGIVEVIRL 44
Bs-yheM ----------------MKVLVNGRLIGRSEAS--IDLEDRGYQFGDGIVEVIRV 36
Bsp-DAAT ----------------MAYSLWNDQIVE--EGSITISPEDRGYQFGDGIVEVIKV 37

Ba-BCAT1 YGGNV------FCLKEHVRLYESAKSILLTIPLTVDEEMEEAVLQTLOKNEYA-----DAYIRLIVSRGKGDGLGLDPRSCVKPSVIIAEQLKLFPQEFYDNGLSVVSVAS 139
Bc-BCAT1 YGGNV------FCLKEHVRLYESAKSILLTIPMTVEEMEEAVLHTLOKNEYT-----DAYIRLIVSRGKGDGLGLDPRSCVKPSVIIAEQLKLFPQEFYDNGLSVVSVAS 139
Ba-BCAT2 YSGNV------FRLREHLVRLYESAKSIMLEIPYSLDEITNIVVETIRQNKLS----NGYIRLVVSRGAGNLGLDPDSCTKPNVVVIAEQLSLFPQEYYEKGPVVTAT 139
Bc-BCAT2 YSGNV------FRLREHLVRLYESAKSILLEIPYSLDEVTNIVVETIRHNKLS----NGYIRLVVSRGAGNLGLDPDSCRKPNVVVIAVPISLFPOEYYEIDIPVVTAT 139
Bs-ybgE YRTDDGRVLLFRPDQNIKRINRSCERMSMPPLDEELVLEALTQLVELEKDWP--KEKGISLYIRPFIATEPSLGVKASRSYTFMIVLSPGSSYYGDDQLKPVRIVYEDE 184
Bs-ywaA YVSEDDHVLLFRPEKNMERLNCSDNRLCIPQIDEEQVLEGKLQLVAIDKDWIP-NAEGTSLYIRPFIATEPFLGVAASHTYKLLIILSPVGSSYKEG-IKPVKIAVESE 184
Ll-BCAT YRTKDGSIQLERPDQNAARLQNTARRLCMAEVPTEMFDAVKQVVKANEDFVPPYGTTGLTYLRPLLIGVDVIGVKPADEYIFTVFAMPVGSYFKGG-LAPSKFVISRD 171
Ec-ilvE YDSHKG-PVVRHREHMQRHDAKIYRFVSQSIDELMEACRDVIRKNNLTS----AYIRPLIFVGDVGMGVNPAGYSTDVIIAAFPGAYLGAEALEQGIDAMVSSW 146
Sp-BCAT FRDEKGVPRLFRPIKNAERMILSTGTRISLPSFDPAEIAEIIRKFVAHENRWVP-DQRGYSLYIRPTFIGTDEALGVHHCDNAMLYVIASPVGYYSSG-FKALSFVAPKK 196
Hs-BCAT1 FRGVDNKIRIFRQPNLMDEMYRSAVRAITLPVFDKEELLECIOQLVKLDQEWVP-YSTSASLYIRPAFIGTEPSLGVKKPTKALLFVLLSPVGPFESSGTFNPVSLWANPK 207
Hs-BCAT2 FKGKDQQVRLFRPWLNMDRMRLSAMRLCLPSFDKELLECIRRLEIVDKDWVP-DAAGTSLYVRPVLINEPSLGVSQPRRALLFVILCPVGAFPGGSVTPVSLADPA 216
Ba-DAAT1 MKGNF------HLLDPHITRLYRFMEEIELTLPFSKAEILTLLYKLIENNFHE----DGTIYLQVSRGVQARTHTF-SYDVPTTIYAIITKKERPALWIEYGVAISEPD 139
Bc-DAAT1 MKGNF------HLLDPHITRLYRSMEEVESLPSFKAEILTLLYKLIERNHFHE----DGTIYLQVSRGVQARTHVF-SYDTPTTIYAIITKKERPALWIEYGIRAISEPD 158
Ba-DAAT2 YDGKP------HLLDLHLERFFHSMEEIKLIPFTKEELAEELHQMIENKQFQE----DGNVYLQISRGAQARNHVV-ESNMQPTYFANIVSFPRPIATMEQGIKVTEED 144
Bc-DAAT2 YDGKP------HLLDLHLERFFNSMAEIKLIPFTKEELVEELYQMIENKQFQE----DGNVYLQISRGAQQRNHVV-ESDLQPTYFANLVSFPRPVASMEAGIKVTEED 144
Bs-yheM YKGVL------FGLREHAEFFRSAAEIGISLPSIEDLEWLQKLVQENAVS-----EGAVYIQTTRGVAPRKHQY-EAGLEPQTAYTFTVKKEPEQEQAYGVAAITDED 135
Bsp-DAAT YNGHM------FTAQEHTIRFYASAEEKIRLVIPTYKDVLLHKLLHDLJEKNLN----TGHVYFQITRGTTSRNHIFPDASVPAVLTGNVKTGERSIENFEKGVKATLVED 137

Ba-BCAT1 RRNTPDALDPRIKSMNYLNNVLVKIEAAQAGVLEALMLN--QQGYVCEGSGDNVEVVKDG-----KVLEBSYLGAIEGITNSVIELCERLS---------IPCEER 231
Bc-BCAT1 RRNTPDALDPRIKSMNYLNNVLVKIEAAQAGVLEALMLN--QQGYVCEGSGDNVEVVKDG-----KVLEBSYLGAIEGITNSVIELCERLS---------IPCEER 231
Ba-BCAT2 RRNRPDVLSPQVKSM-INYLNNILVRIBAKLAGVQEALMLN--DQGYVAEGSGDNVEIVKGN-----KLITBSSAGAIEGITRNAILEIGEKLG--------YDREE 231
Bc-BCAT2 RRNRPDVLSPQVKSM-INYLNNILVRIBAKLAGVQEALMLN--DQGYVAEGSGDNVEIVKGN-----KLITBSSAGAIEGITRNAILEIGEKLG--------YDREE 231
Bs-ybgE YVRAVNGGVGFAKTAGNYAASLQAQRKANELGQDQLWLDAIEKKYVEEVGSMNIEFVING------EAVTPALSGLSILSGVMTRASAIELIRSWG------IPVERERISIDE 285
Bs-ywaA FVRAVKGGTGNAKTAGNYASSLKAQQVEEEKGFSQVILWDGIEKKYIEEVGSMNIEFKING------EIVTPMLNGSILEGITNSVIALLKHWG------LQVSERKIAIDE 285
Ll-BCAT YDRAAPLGTGGAIVGCNYAASLQAEVGAKASGYADAIYLDPSTHTKIEEVGAANPEGITADN------EFIIP-LSPSILPSITKYSLLYLAEHRLG--------LKAIEG 267
Ec-ilvE NRAAPNTIPTAAKAGNYLSSLVVGSEARRHGQOEGIALD---VNGYISEGAGENJBEVKDG------VLFTEFFTSSALEGITRNAIJKLAKELG--------IEVREQ 239
Sp-BCAT SVRAWPGGTGHYLGCNYAPSVPQKEAAKKGYAQILWLYGDED-YITEVGMTNCFVWINKNGEKEIITABLDGMIIEGVMTRDSILEICRERLAPKGWKITEGKYSMKE 305
Hs-BCAT1 YVARWKGTTGDOCMGCNYGSSLFAQCEDVDNGCQQLVLWLYGRDH-QITEVGMTNLELYWINEDGEEELATBBLDIGIILEGVTTRRCILDLAHQWG---EFKVSEYRLTMDD 313
Hs-BCAT2 FIRAWVGGVGNULGNYGPTVLVQQBALKRQCCEQLVLWLYGPDH-QLTEVGMTNIEVYWTHEADGVLELVTEELNGVILIEGVVRQSLLDMAQTWG---EFRVERTITMKQ 322
Ba-DAAT1 TR------WLRCDIKSM-INLLPNILAATKERKGCKEALFVR--N-GTVEEGHSNIEELIKNG-----TLYTHEANHLIILNGTIRQYVLSIAKTLR--------IPVQEE 226
Bc-DAAT1 TR------WLRCDIKSM-INLLPNVLAATKERKGCKEALLVR--N-GIVTEEGHSNIEELIKNG-----TLYTHEANHLIILNGIIRQYVLSLANTLH--------IPVQEE 245
Ba-DAAT2 IR------WKFCHIKSM-INLLPNIMIKNINEQGQYEAILVR--D-GIVTEEGCHSNIEIVKNN-----KLITBADNFTIHGITRHYVITLAKE LH--------IEVEER 231
Bc-DAAT2 IR------WKFCHIKSM-INLLPNIMIKNINEQGQYEAILVR--D-GIVTEEGCHSNIEIVKNN-----KLITBADHFIUHGITRHYVITLAKE LH--------IDVEER 231
Bs-yheM LR------WLRCDIKSM-INLLYNVMTKQREYAQAFEAILLR--D-GVVTETGTSNVYAVING-----TVRTHFANRLIINGITRMNILGLIEKNG--------IKLDDET 222
Bsp-DAAT VR------WLRCDIKSM-INLLIGAVLAKQASEKCYEAILHR--G-DIITGCCSAWVYGIKDG-----KLYTHEANNYILNGITRQVILKCAAEIN--------LPVIEE 224

Ba-BCAT1 PFTRHDVYVADEMLIGTAAELIPWKVDSRE----IGD---GKEGS-VTKQITEEFKKLTRERGVRPGLAESLL-------- 299
Bc-BCAT1 PFTRHDVYVADEMLIGTAAELIPWKVDSRE----IGD---GKEGS-VTKQITEEFKKLTRERGVRPRLTESLA-------- 299
Ba-BCAT2 LFTRHDVYVADEMLIGTAAEVIAMTTVDGRT---IGL---GQTCP-HTNRILLEFRKLVIDEGEKIYEENKVG-------- 298
Bc-BCAT2 LFTRHDVYVADEMLIGTAAEVIAMTTVDGRT---IGL---GQTCP-HTNRILLEFRKLIVEDGEKIYEENKVG-------- 298
Bs-ybgE VYAAASARGLEVEGITAAWVTPVGELNIHGKTVIGVD---GOICD-LSKKIYETITDIQLGKVKGPFNWTEV--------- 356
Bs-ywaA VIQAHKDGILEEAGIGIAAVISPVGELIWQDETLSINN---GETGE-IAKKIYDTITGIQKGAVADEFGWTEVAALTESK 363
Ll-BCAT EVYAKDLGKFVEAGAGTAAIISPIGRIDDGEDSYIFHS---ETEVGP-TVKRILYDELVGIQFGDVEAPEGWIVKVD------ 340
Ec-ilvE VLSRESLYLADEEMSGLAAEITPVRSDGIQ----VGE---BRCCP-VTKRIQQAFFGLFTGETEDKWGLDQVNQ-------- 308
Sp-BCAT VAQASKEGRLLEVGAGTAAALSPVKAINYKGTEYIIPMEGQEAEGP-ITSEISKWILDIQYGKEPNNP-WSVPALP------- 380
Hs-BCAT1 LTTALEGNVRVEESSGTACVVCVPVSDILYKGETIHIPT---MENGPKLASRILSKLTDIQYGREESD---WTIVLS------ 384
Hs-BCAT2 LLRALEEGRVREMGSGTACQVOPVHRILYKDRNLHIPTE---MENGPPELILRFQKELKEIQYGIRAHE---WMFPV------ 392
Ba-DAAT1 LFSIRDVYQADEFITGTTIEIILMTHLDGTA----IQD---GQVGP-ITKMQRSFSQSSLQSNMSSS-------- 287
Bc-DAAT1 LFSVRDVYQADEFITGTTIEIILMTHLDGTA----IQD---GQVGA-ITKKIQKSFNKILLQSNMSSS-------- 306
Ba-DAAT2 EFSLQVEYVEDECFTRPLEIFPVQIGDEQ----FGN---GERGP-ITKRIQAYEESIRLFKVTN-------- 291
Bc-DAAT2 EFSLQVEYDAEECFTRAIPLEIFPVQIGDEQ----FGA---GERGP-ITKKIQAAYEESIRLFKVTN-------- 291
Bs-yheM PVSEEELKQAEFEISSATAEIIIPVVTLDGQS----IGS---GKEGP-VTKLQAAFQESIQQAAASIS-------- 282
Bsp-DAAT PMTKGDLLIMDEIVSSVSSEVIPVIDVGQQ----IGA---GVPE-WTRKIQKAFEAKLPISINA-------- 283

TABLE 1. Kinetic characterization of the Bacillus BCATs$^a$

| Gene product          | Substrate | Cosubstrate | Apparent $K_m$ (mM) | Apparent $V_{\text{max}}$ ($\mu$mol/min/mg of protein) |
|----------------------|-----------|-------------|---------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| $B. subtilis$ YbgE   | Leu       | KG          | $3.99 \pm 0.75$     | $14.58 \pm 0.12$                                   |
|                      | Val       | KG          | $2.82 \pm 1.55$     | $13.93 \pm 0.29$                                   |
|                      | Ile       | KG          | $3.15 \pm 0.93$     | $16.61 \pm 0.20$                                   |
|                      | Leu       | KMTB        | $2.78 \pm 0.76$     | $1.87 \pm 0.14$                                    |
|                      | Val       | KMTB        | $3.20 \pm 0.58$     | $2.03 \pm 0.09$                                    |
|                      | Ile       | KMTB        | $2.36 \pm 0.59$     | $1.84 \pm 0.12$                                    |
| $B. subtilis$ YwaA   | Leu       | KG          | $3.04 \pm 0.33$     | $0.10 \pm 0.02$                                    |
|                      | Val       | KG          | $3.34 \pm 1.22$     | $0.05 \pm 0.01$                                    |
|                      | Ile       | KG          | $4.83 \pm 1.33$     | $0.23 \pm 0.03$                                    |
|                      | Leu       | KMTB        | $5.68 \pm 0.39$     | $0.02 \pm 0.00$                                    |
|                      | Val       | KMTB        | ND$^b$              | ND                                                 |
|                      | Ile       | KMTB        | $2.11 \pm 0.94$     | $0.02 \pm 0.00$                                    |
| $B. cereus$ BCAT2    | Leu       | KG          | $0.48 \pm 0.29$     | $0.54 \pm 0.07$                                    |
|                      | Val       | KG          | $0.91 \pm 0.45$     | $0.74 \pm 0.10$                                    |
|                      | Ile       | KG          | $0.59 \pm 0.25$     | $0.63 \pm 0.06$                                    |
|                      | KG        | Leu         | $4.34 \pm 1.21$     | $0.80 \pm 0.10$                                    |
|                      | Leu       | KMTB        | $2.09 \pm 0.72$     | $0.52 \pm 0.06$                                    |
|                      | Val       | KMTB        | $3.09 \pm 1.26$     | $0.90 \pm 0.13$                                    |
|                      | Ile       | KMTB        | $1.37 \pm 0.57$     | $1.16 \pm 0.15$                                    |
|                      | KMTB      | Leu         | $2.84 \pm 1.01$     | $1.44 \pm 0.20$                                    |
| $B. anthracis$       | Leu       | KG          | $0.41 \pm 0.06$     | $0.25 \pm 0.01$                                    |
| BCAT2                | Val       | KG          | $0.71 \pm 0.33$     | $0.34 \pm 0.04$                                    |
|                      | Ile       | KG          | $0.67 \pm 0.28$     | $0.33 \pm 0.04$                                    |
|                      | KG        | Leu         | $0.83 \pm 0.22$     | $0.13 \pm 0.01$                                    |
|                      | Leu       | KMTB        | $1.75 \pm 0.58$     | $0.44 \pm 0.06$                                    |
|                      | Val       | KMTB        | $3.23 \pm 1.18$     | $0.43 \pm 0.06$                                    |
|                      | Ile       | KMTB        | $1.66 \pm 0.52$     | $0.45 \pm 0.05$                                    |
|                      | KMTB      | Leu         | $0.95 \pm 0.20$     | $0.42 \pm 0.02$                                    |

$a$ The enzymes were incubated with various amounts of substrate and 10 mM cosubstrate before analysis by HPLC as described in Materials and Methods.

$b$ ND, no detectable Met produced.

FIG. 9. In vitro inhibition of *Bacillus* sp. growth by canaline. (A) *B. subtilis* early log cells were inoculated into nutrient broth (triangles) or minimal medium (circles) in the presence of various concentrations of canaline. Growth after incubation overnight at 30°C was measured by turbidity at 650 nm. (B) *B. cereus* early-log-phase cells were inoculated into nutrient broth (triangles) or minimal medium (circles) in the presence of various amounts of canaline. Growth after incubation overnight at 30°C was measured by turbidity at 650 nm. The squares and diamonds represent minimal medium supplemented with 10 mM Met and 30 mg of BSA/ml, respectively. The dark symbols are the appropriate values for growth with no inhibitor and for medium without cells.

the inoculum in a final volume of 200 μl of nutrient broth, up to 5.0 mM canaline was found to have little effect on cell growth over 16 h (Fig. 9A). When the experiment was repeated with a minimal medium, canaline was found to be an effective growth inhibitor, with an IC₅₀ of 36.69 ± 9.62 μM and an MIC of 500 μM. These experiments were repeated with *B. cereus* in nutrient broth and in a defined minimal medium (Fig. 9B). Since *B. cereus* and *B. anthracis* are the same species, differing only in plasmid content (23), the former organism makes a convenient, lower pathogenicity model for the latter. As was seen with *B. subtilis*, canaline is much more effective as an antibacterial when utilized in minimal medium. However, the degree of difference between these two media was not as marked as with *B. subtilis*. Canaline killed *B. cereus* with an IC₅₀ of 38 μM in minimal medium and 759 μM in nutrient broth and MICs of 100 and 5,000 μM, respectively. Total *B. cereus* growth in minimal medium (which has no exogenous protein and uses sulfate as a sulfur source) was approximately half of that seen in nutrient broth (which contains 30 mg/ml of protein and uses methionine and cysteine as sulfur sources). Addition of 1 or 10 mM methionine to the minimal medium reversed most of this inherent growth inhibition but had little effect on the IC₅₀ of canaline. Supplementation of minimal medium with 30 mg of bovine serum albumin (BSA)/ml had no effect on inherent growth rate and also had little effect on the IC₅₀ of canaline.

DISCUSSION

Polyamine biosynthesis and its associated Met regeneration pathway have been the subject of a number of studies on experimental chemotherapeutics with bacteria, protozoa, and cancer cells (31). To date, none of the previous reports have examined this chemotherapeutic potential in gram-positive bacteria. Many of the enzymes shown in Fig. 1 have been characterized for *B. subtilis*, including S-adenosylmethionine synthase (52), S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase (43), methylthioadenosine nucleosidase (44), and methylthioribose kinase (46), but have not been considered as drug targets. Previous work with parasitic protozoa and *K. pneumoniae* had identified the regeneration of Met from KMTB by aspartate or tyrosine aminotransferase as a potential target for therapeutic development (7–9, 22). In this study, we have identified branched-chain amino acid aminotransferase as the primary source of Met recycling in *B. subtilis*, *B. cereus*, and *B. anthracis*.

Unlike the situation seen with the TyrAT in *K. pneumoniae*, where tyrosine:KMTB and tyrosine:KG aminotransfer occurred at equal rates (22), the *B. subtilis* YbgE catalyzed leucine:KG aminotransfer approximately 10-fold better than leucine:KMTB aminotransfer. When growing in nutrient broth, *B. subtilis* has access to large amounts of exogenous Met and might repress the expression of an aminotransferase required for Met regeneration. However, we have examined subcellular homogenates made from *B. subtilis* grown in minimal medium with no exogenous Met and sulfate as the sulfur source and have found no substantial increase in the formation of Met from KMTB (data not shown).

As was the case with *B. subtilis*, *B. cereus* homogenates preferentially catalyzed KMTB transamination by using branched-chain amino acids. However, while this activity is catalyzed by YbgE in *B. subtilis*, neither *B. cereus* nor *B. anthracis* was found to contain any aminotransferase with a high identity to YbgE. The sequence identity between YbgE and the *B. cereus* and *B.

anthracis aminotransferases is very low (approximately 17%). Given that the *B. cereus* complex and *B. subtilis* are fairly closely related as judged by 16S ribosomal DNA sequences (data not shown), this lack of homology between BCAT sequences is quite striking. It seems likely that acquisition or loss of BCATs occurred after the split from a *Bacillus* progenitor to pre-*subtilis* and pre-*cereus* complexes. As *B. halodurans* also contains a BCAT within subfamily IIIa and is much more distantly related to *B. subtilis* and *B. cereus*, the most likely explanation is that the *B. cereus* complex lost any subfamily IIIa sequence(s) and evolved BCAT functionality from DAAT members of subfamily IIIb. These results highlight the perils of extrapolating biochemical findings from one bacterial species to another regardless of the appearance of a close evolutionary relationship.

That family III aminotransferases might catalyze Met regeneration in the place of subfamily Ia aminotransferases is interesting. Family I and family III enzymes appear to be unrelated and the result of convergent, rather than divergent, evolution. Structural studies have shown that family I and family III aminotransferases consist of different folds and do not have a spatial resemblance (26). In addition, family III enzymes are substantially smaller than family I aminotransferases and lack one of the four universally conserved residues found in the other aminotransferase families (33). The evolution of this functionality in family III aminotransferases in *Bacillus* spp. suggests that this family of enzymes should be examined in other gram-positive bacteria and archaea, which lack subfamily Ia enzymes, and in mammals, where the subfamily Ia enzymes have been found not to catalyze Met regeneration (8). The work of Hutson (24) has shown that rat and human BCAT can catalyze Met:KG aminotransfer, but this finding has not been further developed.

Among the subfamily If enzymes examined in this study, only one, YkrV, was found to have any appreciable Met regeneration activity. However, this enzyme only produced Met from KMTB using glutamine as an amino donor, did not have any aspartate:KG activity, and had substantial glutamine:KG activity. This profile did not match with that seen in subcellular homogenates. Recently, Sekowska and Danchin (45) and Murphy et al. (37) identified members of the *ykrTS* and *ykrWXYZ* operons as enzymes involved in Met regeneration. These operons were found to be members of the S-box regulon (19), which is up-regulated during sulfur limitation. In particular, the authors have unequivocally identified the *ykrT* gene product as the *B. subtilis* methylthioribose kinase (see Fig. 1). By gene deletion the *ykrS*, *ykrY*, *ykrZ*, *ykrU*, and *ykrW* genes have been shown to be involved in the methionine regeneration pathway, but their enzymatic activity has not yet been demonstrated (45). The *ykrV* gene lies immediately between the *ykrTS* and *ykrWXYZ* operons and was hypothesized to act as the catalyst for the last step in the cycle. However, *ykrV* itself is not S-box regulated, the gene product has not been previously examined for its enzymatic properties, and Sekowska and Danchin have found that deletion of the gene has no effect on methionine regeneration in *B. subtilis* (45). While we have shown that YkrV will convert KMTB to Met by using glutamine as an amino donor, it does not act in this capacity under the conditions we have examined. Perhaps YkrV plays a role in Met recycling under specific growth conditions not replicated

by planktonic growth in nutrient broth or minimal medium. This aspect of YkrV function deserves further attention.

As seen with the other enzymes previously investigated (7–9, 22), canaline acts as an efficient inhibitor of Met regeneration by YbgE with a \(K_i\) of 48 μM. However, in nutrient broth, *B. subtilis* growth in the presence of 5.0 mM canaline showed little inhibition. In a minimal medium containing no exogenous Met, cysteine, or protein, canaline was an effective inhibitor of *B. subtilis* growth with an IC₅₀ of 37 μM and an MIC of 500 μM. It is interesting that the IC₅₀ for canaline in this minimal medium is very similar to the \(K_i\) for canaline against YbgE, suggesting that inhibition of this enzyme plays a role in the toxic effect of the drug. Unlike *B. subtilis*, where canaline had no effect on cell growth in nutrient broth, *B. cereus* in nutrient broth was inhibited by canaline with an IC₅₀ of 760 μM and an MIC of 5.0 mM. The basis for the differential sensitivity to canaline between rich and minimal media was examined from two potential mechanisms: exogenous methionine as an antagonist and drug binding to exogenous protein. Addition of methionine to minimal medium had little effect on the IC₅₀ of canaline, which suggested that methionine neither interfered with canaline transport nor rescued metabolically starved cells. The addition of 30 mg of BSA/ml to the minimal medium also had little effect on the IC₅₀ of canaline. Therefore, the compound does not bind well to BSA. As canaline is known to bind to pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzymes and pyridoxal phosphate itself, a logical step for the future would be the examination of nutrient broth for the levels of pyridoxine, pyridoxal, and pyridoxal phosphate. Addition of a similar amount of cofactor to the minimal medium would then test for loss of canaline activity.

The effectiveness of canaline against *B. cereus* in in vitro growth inhibition tests suggests that the compound should be examined against *B. anthracis* in vitro and against *B. cereus* and *B. anthracis* in vivo. These experiments and the screening of further aminoxy analogues against the bacilli are planned for the immediate future. In addition, potential synergy with other inhibitors of enzymes involved in polyamine biosynthesis and Met regeneration is to be examined.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was funded in part by a Defence R&D Canada Technology Investment Fund award. Shane English was supported by the Defence R&D Canada Summer Research Associate program.

We gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Mark Dertzbaugh, USAMRIID, in obtaining prepublication access to the *Bacillus anthracis* genome data.

Genomic data for *Bacillus cereus* 14579 were made available by Integrated Genomics (Chicago, Ill.) and were funded by DARPA. Genomic data for *Bacillus anthracis* Ames were made available by USAMRIID (Frederick, Md.) and The Institute for Genomic Research (Rockville, Md.) and were funded by DARPA.

### REFERENCES

1. Altschul, S. F., T. L. Madden, A. A. Schaffer, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, W. Miller, and D. J. Lipman. 1997. Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res. **25**:3389–3402.
2. Anagnostopoulos, C., and J. Spizizen. 1961. Requirements for transformation in *Bacillus subtilis*. J. Bacteriol. **81**:741–746.
3. Aslanidis, C., and P. J. de Jong. 1990. Ligation-independent cloning of PCR products (LIC-PCR). Nucleic Acids Res. **18**:6069–6074.
4. Bacchi, C. J., J. R. Sufrin, H. C. Nathan, A. J. Spiess, T. Hannan, J. Garofalo, K. Alecia, L. Katz, and N. Yarlett. 1991. 5′-Alkyl-substituted analogs of 5′-methylthioadenosine as trypanocides. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **35**:1315–1320.

5. Backlund, P. S., Jr., and R. A. Smith. 1981. Methionine synthesis from 5′-methylthioadenosine in rat liver. J. Biol. Chem. 256:1533–1535.

6. Batchkikova, N., M. Koivulehto, A. Denesyuk, L. Ptitsyn, Y. Boretsky, J. Hellman, and T. Korpela. 1996. Aspartate aminotransferase from an alkalophilic Bacillus contains an additional 20-amino acid extension at its functionally important N-terminus. J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 120:425–432.

7. Berger, B. J. 2000. Antimalarial activities of aminoxy compounds. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 44:2540–2542.

8. Berger, B. J., W. W. Dai, and J. Wilson. 1998. Methionine formation from alpha-ketomethiobutyrate in the trypanosomatid Crithidia fasciculata. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 165:305–312.

9. Berger, L. C., J. Wilson, P. Wood, and B. J. Berger. 2001. Methionine regeneration and aspartate aminotransferase in parasitic protozoa. J. Bacteriol. 183:4421–4434.

10. Bonnarme, P., L. Psoni, and H. E. Spinnler. 2000. Diversity of L-methionine catabolism pathways in cheese-ripening bacteria. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66:5514–5517.

11. Chou, T. C. 1976. Derivation and properties of Michaelis-Menten type and Hill type equations for reference ligands. J. Theor. Biol. 59:253–276.

12. Cornish-Bowden, A. 1974. A simple graphical method for determining the inhibition constants of mixed, uncompetitive and non-competitive inhibitors. Biochem. J. 137:143–144.

13. Cubellis, M. V., C. Rozzo, G. Nitti, M. I. Arnone, G. Marino, and G. Sannia. 1989. Cloning and sequencing of the gene coding for aspartate aminotransferase from the thermoacidophilic archaebacterium Sulfolobus solfataricus. Eur. J. Biochem. 186:375–381.

14. Eden, A., and N. Benvenisty. 1998. Characterization of a branched-chain amino-acid aminotransferase from Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Yeast 14: 189–194.

15. Faure, M., F. Glomot, R. Bledsoe, S. Hutson, and I. Papet. 1999. Purification and cloning of the mitochondrial branched-chain amino acid aminotransferase from sheep placenta. Eur. J. Biochem. 259:104–111.

16. Felsenstein, J. 1989. PHYLIP—phylogeny inference package (version 3.2). Cladistics 5:164–166.

17. Ghoda, L. Y., T. M. Savarese, D. L. Dexter, R. E. Parks, Jr., P. C. Trackman, and R. H. Abeles. 1984. Characterization of a defect in the pathway for converting 5′-deoxy-5′-methylthioadenosine to methionine in a subline of a cultured heterogeneous human colon carcinoma. J. Biol. Chem. 259:6715–6719.

18. Gianotti, A. J., P. A. Tower, J. H. Sheley, P. A. Conte, C. Spiro, A. J. Ferro, J. H. Fitchen, and M. K. Riscoe. 1990. Selective killing of Klebsiella pneumoniae by 5-trifluoromethylthioribose. Chemotherapeutic exploitation of the enzyme 5-methylthioribose kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 265:831–837.

19. Grundy, F. J., and T. M. Henkin. 1998. The S box regulon: a new global transcription termination control system for methionine and cysteine biosynthesis genes in gram-positive bacteria. Mol. Microbiol. 30:737–749.

20. Hall, T. A. 1999. Bioedit: a user-friendly biological sequence alignment editor and analysis program for Windows 95/98/NT. Nucleic Acids Symp. Ser. 41:95–98.

21. Hall, T. R., R. Wallin, G. D. Reinhart, and S. M. Hutson. 1993. Branched chain aminotransferase isoenzymes. Purification and characterization of the rat brain isoenzyme. J. Biol. Chem. 268:3092–3098.

22. Heilbronn, J., J. Wilson, and B. J. Berger. 1999. Tyrosine aminotransferase catalyzes the final step of methionine recycling in Klebsiella pneumoniae. J. Bacteriol. 181:1739–1747.

23. Helgason, E., O. A. Okstad, D. A. Caugant, H. A. Johansen, A. Fouet, M. Mock, I. Hegna, and A.-B. Kolstø. 2000. Bacillus anthracis, Bacillus cereus, and Bacillus thuringiensis—one species on the basis of genetic evidence. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66:2627–2630.

24. Hutson, S. 2001. Structure and function of branched chain aminotransferases. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 70:175–206.

25. Hutson, S. M., R. K. Bledsoe, T. R. Hall, and P. A. Dawson. 1995. Cloning and expression of the mammalian cytosolic branched chain aminotransferase isoenzyme. J. Biol. Chem. 270:30344–30352.

25a. Iraqui, I., S. Vissers, M. Cartiaux, and A. Urrestarazu. 1998. Characterisation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae AR08 and AR09 genes encoding aromatic aminotransferases I and II reveals a new aminotransferase subfamily. Mol. Gen. Genet. 257:238–248.

26. Jansonius, J. N. 1998. Structure, evolution and action of vitamin B6-dependent enzymes. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 8:759–769.

27. Jensen, R. A., and W. Gu. 1996. Evolutionary recruitment of biochemically specialized subdivisions of family I within the protein superfamily of aminotransferases. J. Bacteriol. 178:2161–2171.

28. Kunst, F., N. Ogasawara, I. Moszer, A. M. Albertini, G. Alloni, V. Azevedo, M. G. Bertero, P. Bessieres, A. Bolotin, S. Borchert, R. Boriss, L. Boursier, A. Brans, M. Braun, S. C. Brignell, S. Bron, S. Brouillet, C. V. Bruschi, B. Caldwell, V. Capuano, N. M. Carter, S. K. Choi, J. J. Codani, I. F. Conerton, A. Danchin, et al. 1997. The complete genome sequence of the gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis. Nature 390:249–256.

29. Kuramitsu, S., T. Ogawa, H. Ogawa, and H. Kagamiyama. 1985. Branched-chain amino acid aminotransferase of Escherichia coli: nucleotide sequence of the ilvE gene and the deduced amino acid sequence. J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 97:993–999.

30. Marchitto, K. S., and A. J. Ferro. 1985. The metabolism of 5′-methylthioadenosine and 5-methylthioribose 1-phosphate in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Gen. Microbiol. 131:2153–2164.

31. Marton, L. J., and A. E. Pegg. 1995. Polyamines as targets for therapeutic intervention. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 35:55–91.

32. Mavrides, C., and M. Comerton. 1978. Aminotransferases for aromatic amino acids and aspartate in Bacillus subtilis. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 524: 60–67.

33. Mehta, P. K., T. I. Hale, and P. Christen. 1993. Aminotransferases: demonstration of homology and division into evolutionary subgroups. Eur. J. Biochem. 214:549–561.

34. Milner, J. L., S. J. Raffel, B. J. Lethbridge, and J. Handelsman. 1995. Culture conditions that influence accumulation of zwittermicin A by Bacillus cereus UW85. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 43:685–691.

35. Mosca, M., L. Cozzi, J. Breton, N. Avanzi, S. Toma, E. Okuno, R. Schwarcz, C. Speciale, S. Magagnin, M. Mostardini, and L. Benatti. 1996. Cloning of rat and human kynurenine aminotransferase. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 398:449–454.

36. Moszer, I., L. M. Jones, S. Moreira, C. Fabry, and A. Danchin. 2002. SubtiList: the reference database for the Bacillus subtilis genome. Nucleic Acids Res. 30:62–65.

37. Murphy, B. A., F. J. Grundy, and T. M. Henkin. 2002. Prediction of gene function in methylthioadenosine recycling from regulatory signals. J. Bacteriol. 184:2314–2318.

38. O’Farrell, P. A., G. Sannia, J. M. Walker, and S. Doonan. 1997. Cloning and sequencing of aspartate aminotransferase from Thermus aquaticus YT1. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 239:810–815.

39. Page, R. D. 1996. TreeView: an application to display phylogenetic trees on personal computers. Comput. Appl. Biosci. 12:357–358.

40. Read, T. D., S. L. Salzberg, M. Pop, M. Shumway, L. Umayam, L. Jiang, E. Holtzapple, J. D. Busch, K. L. Smith, J. M. Schupp, D. Solomon, P. Keim, and C. M. Fraser. 2002. Comparative genome sequencing for discovery of novel polymorphisms in Bacillus anthracis. Science 296:2028–2033.

41. Riscoe, M. K., A. J. Ferro, and J. H. Fitchen. 1988. Analogs of 5-methylthioribose, a novel class of antiprotozoal agents. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 32:1904–1906.

42. Saitou, N., and M. Nei. 1987. The neighbor-joining method: a new method for reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol. Biol. Evol. 4:406–425.

43. Sekowska, A., J. Y. Copée, J. P. Le Caer, I. Martin-Verstraete, and A. Danchin. 2000. S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase of Bacillus subtilis is closely related to archaeal counterparts. Mol. Microbiol. 36:1135–1147.

44. Sekowska, A., and A. Danchin. 1999. Identification of yrrU as the methylthioadenosine nucleosidase gene in Bacillus subtilis. DNA Res. 6:255–264.

45. Sekowska, A., and A. Danchin. 2002. The methionine salvage pathway in Bacillus subtilis. BMC Microbiol. 2:8.

46. Sekowska, A., L. Mulard, S. Krogh, J. K. Tse, and A. Danchin. 2001. MtnK, methylthioribose kinase, is a starvation-induced protein in Bacillus subtilis. BMC Microbiol. 1:15.

47. Seralini, G. E., V. Luu-The, and F. Labrie. 1995. Cloning and expression of human tyrosine aminotransferase cDNA. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1260:97–101.

48. Sufrin, J. R., S. R. Meshnick, A. J. Spiess, J. Garofalo-Hannan, X. Q. Pan, and C. J. Bacchi. 1995. Methionine recycling pathways and antimalarial drug design. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 39:2511–2515.

49. Sung, M. H., K. Tanizawa, H. Tanaka, S. Kuramitsu, H. Kagamiyama, and K. Soda. 1990. Purification and characterization of thermostable aspartate aminotransferase from a thermophilic Bacillus species. J. Bacteriol. 172: 1345–1351.

50. Thompson, J. D., D. G. Higgins, and T. J. Gibson. 1994. CLUSTAL W: improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice. Nucleic Acids Res. 22:4673–4680.

51. Wang, S. Y., D. O. Adams, and M. Lieberman. 1982. Recycling of 5′-methylthioadenosine-ribose carbon atoms into methionine in tomato tissue in relation to ethylene production. Plant Physiol. 70:117–121.

52. Yocum, R. R., J. B. Perkins, C. L. Howitt, and J. Pero. 1996. Cloning and characterization of the metE gene encoding S-adenosylmethionine synthetase from Bacillus subtilis. J. Bacteriol. 178:4604–4610.

53. Yonaha, K., H. Misono, T. Yamamoto, and K. Soda. 1975. D-amino acid aminotransferase of Bacillus sphaericus. Enzymologic and spectrometric properties. J. Biol. Chem. 250:6983–6989.

54. Yvon, M., E. Chambellon, A. Bolotin, and F. Roudot-Algaron. 2000. Characterization and role of the branched-chain aminotransferase (BcaT) isolated from Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris NCDO 763. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66:571–577.
