
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Journal of Molecular and Cellular Cardiology 35 (2003) 347–355

Review Article

Regulation of force in vascular smooth muscle

Ozgur Ogut${}^{a}$, Frank V. Brozovich${}^{a,b,*}$

${}^{a}$ Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4970, USA  
${}^{b}$ Department of Medicine (Cardiology), Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106-4970, USA  

Received 2 December 2002; received in revised form 21 January 2003; accepted 22 January 2003

Abstract

Vascular smooth muscle contraction plays a defining role in the regulation and maintenance of blood pressure, and its deregulation is associated with many clinical syndromes including hypertension, coronary vasospasm and congestive heart failure. Over the past 20 years, there has been a growing understanding of the regulation of 20 kDa myosin light chain phosphorylation by myosin light chain kinase and myosin light chain phosphatase, the role of splice-variant isoforms of both the myosin heavy chain and the essential myosin light chain, as well as the signaling pathways involved in smooth muscle contraction under normal and pathophysiological conditions. This review will attempt to recapitulate the data in the field, primarily focusing on the contractile response of smooth muscle, and the molecular determinants responsible for the regulation of vascular tone.

© 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Two general forms of excitation initiate contraction of smooth muscles. The initiation of contraction may occur due to innervation and consequent depolarization of the membrane's resting potential, termed electromechanical coupling, whereas activation by ligands of cell surface receptors has been termed pharmacomechanical coupling [1]. The electrical component of smooth muscle cell excitation is accounted for by action potentials, triggering the influx of Ca²⁺ through voltage-dependent Ca²⁺ channels. This rise in intracellular Ca²⁺ may be augmented by Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release from intracellular stores (for a comprehensive review, see Bolton and coworkers [2]). On the other hand, pharmacomechanical coupling involves activation of cell surface receptors to augment the increase in Ca²⁺, either by the release of Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores or through cell

signaling-mediated mechanisms that increase the Ca²⁺ sensitivity of the contractile apparatus. For example, the Ca²⁺ response in smooth muscle cells may be modulated by α-adrenergic stimulation. Such excitation of α-adrenergic membrane receptors coupled to heterotrimeric G-proteins may activate phospholipase C (PLC) to promote hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate to diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol trisphosphate, the latter of which can serve as an agonist for inositol trisphosphate-dependent Ca²⁺ release from intracellular stores to augment intracellular Ca²⁺ concentration.

2. Myosin light chain kinase

The primary target of a rise in intracellular Ca²⁺ is believed to be calmodulin, a member of the family of EF hand Ca²⁺-binding proteins [3]. The binding of Ca²⁺ to the four EF hands of calmodulin allows for a conformational change in Ca²⁺-calmodulin [4,5] and its subsequent interaction with myosin light chain kinase (MLCK). The COOH-terminal domain of the Ca²⁺-calmodulin complex binds to the calmodulin-binding domain at the NH₂-terminus of MLCK, followed by the association of the NH₂-terminal domain of calmodulin with the COOH-terminus of the calmodulin-binding sequence of MLCK. The association results in a conformational change of the calmodulin-MLCK complex,

Abbreviations: cGKI, cGMP-dependent protein kinase; HSP27, Heat shock protein 27; MLC17, Acidic (MLC17b) or basic (MLC17a) 17 kDa essential myosin light chain; MLC20, Regulatory 20 kDa myosin light chain; MLCK, Myosin light chain kinase; MLCP, Myosin light chain phosphatase; MYPT1, Myosin-binding/phosphatase-targeting subunit; $V_{\text{max}}$, Maximum velocity of muscle shortening.

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-216-844-8955; fax: +1-216-368-5586.  
E-mail address: fxb9@po.cwru.edu (F.V. Brozovich).

© 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.  
DOI: 10.1016/S0022-2828(03)00045-2

displacing the autoinhibitory sequence of MLCK to expose
the enzyme's catalytic site. This series of events leads to the
activation of MLCK and a subsequent phosphorylation of
Ser 19 of the 20 kDa regulatory light chain of myosin
(MLC20). MLCKs only documented physiological substrate
to date [6,7]. The phosphorylation of MLC20 is the primary
regulatory event for the initiation of force production in
smooth muscles. In vitro, myosin’s sedimentation properties
have been shown to change from a 10S conformation in its
inactive form to a 6S conformation following phosphoryla-
tion [8]. The filamentous arrangement of myosin in the
smooth muscle cell suggests that in vivo, global changes of
myosin’s conformation following MLC20 phosphorylation
are unlikely to be as dramatic due to the steric constraints
placed particularly on the myosin tail. However, with the tail
domain of myosin immobilized in the thick filaments, the
energy associated with the change in conformation observed
in vitro might still manifest itself in vivo as a pivot along the
neck region of myosin, while the tail serves as a fixed,
stationary point. Additional studies have also demonstrated
changes in the orientation of MLC20 as a result of phospho-
rylation [9], suggesting that conformational changes in myo-
sin during smooth muscle activation merit further investiga-
tion.

3. Myosin light chain phosphatase

As a means to balance MLCK activity, smooth muscle
myosin’s actin-activated Mg²⁺-ATPase is attenuated by de-
phosphorylation of MLC20 by myosin light chain phos-
phatase (MLCP), a type 1 protein phosphatase [10–12]. The
regulation of smooth muscle myosin activity through bal-
anced MLC20 phosphorylation and dephosphorylation dis-
tinguishes this class of myosin II from striated muscle myo-
sin II isoforms, which are not dependent on MLC20
phosphorylation for activation. In fact, since actomyosin
activation in smooth muscles is dependent on downstream
phosphorylation events pursuant to the intracellular influx of
Ca²⁺ or agonist stimulation, its slower kinetics of contraction
are easily understood in contrast to striated muscles, wherein
Ca²⁺ acts directly at the level of the actomyosin crossbridges.
Protein purification and cDNA cloning techniques dem-
onstrated the MLCP holoenzyme to be a heterotrimer, con-
sisting of a ~110 kDa myosin-binding subunit (MYPT1), a
37-kDa catalytic subunit as well as a 20-kDa subunit of
unknown function to date [10–12]. The selectivity of the
phosphatase for phosphorylated myosin is conferred by the
myosin-binding subunit, likely potentiating the dephospho-
rylation of myosin by the catalytic subunit as determined by
competition assays [12]. Interestingly, the myosin-binding
subunit shows isoform diversity, with two alternatively
spliced exons—one central and another near the 3′end of the
transcript, responsible for the expression of up to four unique
isoforms. With characterization of the heterotrimeric en-
zyme, the smooth muscle myosin phosphatase was subse-
quently recognized to be a G-protein-regulated enzyme, con-

firming earlier expectations [13,14]. As it stands, the
contribution of the myosin-binding subunit isoforms to
MLCP activity and smooth muscle contractility is newly
emerging.

3.1. Ca²⁺ sensitization

One of the driving observations in characterizing MLCP
activity was the demonstration that for a given intracellular
Ca²⁺ concentration, the force generated was variable depend-
ing on the method of muscle activation. In fact, it was ob-
served that agonist stimulation yielded higher force for a
given Ca²⁺ concentration, when compared to depolarization
[15–17], and the increased interest in MLCP regulation has
stemmed from its role in this observed Ca²⁺ sensitization.
Experiments have demonstrated that activated G-proteins are
involved in the signaling pathway for Ca²⁺ sensitization,
since GTPγS, a non-hydrolyzable GTP analog, increases
MLC20 phosphorylation and potentiates force. GTPγS was
also shown to decrease the rate of MLC20 dephosphoryla-
tion, consistent with increased muscle tone and predictive of
an overall decrease in MLCP activity [14] Independent ob-
servations demonstrated that incubation of rabbit portal vein
with ATPγS in a low Ca²⁺ buffer resulted in an increase of
Ca²⁺ sensitivity. In the same study, ATPγS was demonstrated
to lead to thiophosphorylation of the myosin-binding subunit
of MLCP [18]. This presumably decreased the holoenzyme’s
activity, resulting in greater MLC20 phosphorylation for a
given Ca²⁺ concentration, rationalizing the ensuing Ca²⁺
sensitization. This further suggested that phosphorylation is
the driving reversible event for MLCP’s regulation. Subse-
quent experiments suggested that G-protein-mediated Ca²⁺
sensitization, and the consequent decrease of MLCP activity
were a result of the RhoA-GTP-activated Rho-kinase path-
way leading to the phosphorylation of the myosin-binding
subunit of MLCP (Fig. 1). RhoA is a monomeric G-protein
that is active in its GTP-bound form, a transition that is
facilitated by Rho-guanine nucleotide exchange factors that
support the exchange of nucleotide to activate RhoA-GDP to
RhoA-GTP [19]. RhoA’s candidacy as a primary regulator
involved in Ca²⁺ sensitization was in agreement with the
ability of GTPγS to Ca²⁺ sensitize smooth muscle prepara-
tions. Experiments delineating the pathway involved demon-
strated that activated RhoA-GTP might, in turn, bind to and
activate Rho-kinase, a serine/threonine kinase [20]. Phos-
phorylation of the myosin-binding subunit of MLCP by Rho-
kinase has been shown to inhibit MLCP activity [21]. This
results in a decrease in overall phosphatase activity, allowing
the MLCK:MLCP balance to favor increased MLC20 phos-
phorylation, the net result being an increase in force for a
given submaximal intracellular Ca²⁺ concentration. To date,
this remains the best-characterized pathway for agonist-
induced Ca²⁺ sensitization. The decrease in MLCP activity
due to Rho-kinase activation has been attributed to phospho-
rylation of two residues on the COOH-terminal half of the
myosin-binding subunit, Thr 695 and 850 [22]. However,
recent experiments have suggested that phosphorylation of

O. Ogut, F.V. Brozovich / Journal of Molecular and Cellular Cardiology 35 (2003) 347–355

Others have demonstrated the presence of a unique kinase, termed Zip-like kinase (also referred to as MYPT1 kinase), which co-localizes with MLCP and may, therefore, participate in Ca²⁺ sensitization. Zip-like kinase is phosphorylated following activation of a Rho-kinase-dependent pathway during carbachol stimulation of rabbit bladder, and the phosphorylated Zip-like kinase can, in turn, phosphorylate the myosin-binding subunit at Thr-695, considerably faster than Rho-kinase [26]. The addition of activated MYPT1 kinase to β-escin skinned smooth muscle results in a Ca²⁺-independent contraction [27]. This direct effect of activated Zip-like kinase in the absence of RhoA stimulation suggests that it is indeed downstream of Rho-kinase in the pathway for Ca²⁺ sensitization. However, Niiro and Ikebe [28] have demonstrated that MYPT1 is a poor substrate for Zip-like kinase, and that Zip-like kinase directly phosphorylates MLC20. A similar mechanism leading to direct MLC20 phosphorylation for Ca²⁺-independent contractions has independently been suggested for integrin-linked kinase (ILK) [29]. Further experiments are clearly required to consolidate the roles of the newly identified kinases within the signaling pathways controlling MLC20 phosphorylation (see Fig. 1). Other potential mechanisms have also been proposed for Ca²⁺ sensitization. CPI-17 is a small protein that serves as a substrate for both Rho-kinase and protein kinase C (PKC) [30]. Phosphorylated CPI-17 binds to the catalytic subunit of MLCP to inhibit the enzyme’s activity [31]. In addition, the magnitude of Ca²⁺ sensitization has been correlated with CPI-17 expression [32]. Thus, Ca²⁺ sensitization may involve Rho-kinase- or PKC-mediated phosphorylation of CPI-17 to increase MLC20 phosphorylation and force. Although CPI-17 is abundantly expressed in mammalian smooth muscle, the protein has not been found to be expressed in avian smooth muscle (unpublished observations), suggesting that CPI-17 may participate in a unique aspect of the mechanism for force maintenance only in mammalian smooth muscle.

Another potential pathway for Ca²⁺ sensitization involves arachidonic acid. Activation of heterotrimeric G-proteins have been shown to lead to the production of arachidonic acid [33], which interacts with MYPT1 to dissociate the MLCP holoenzyme, and consequently, inhibit phosphatase activity. Alternatively, arachidonic acid has been proposed to activate a kinase that may phosphorylate MYPT1 to inhibit phosphatase activity [34]. Thus, agonist stimulation via the production of arachidonic acid could lead to an inhibition of MLC phosphatase activity and consequent Ca²⁺ sensitization.

### 3.2. Ca²⁺ desensitization

In addition to its role in Ca²⁺ sensitization, MLCP has also been demonstrated to be a target for nitric oxide (NO)-mediated relaxation of vascular smooth muscle. NO acts on the intracellular, soluble guanylate cyclase to increase the protein’s activity and raise intracellular cyclic GMP concentration [35]. Cyclic GMP has a well-characterized intracellular target in cGMP-dependent protein kinase (cGKI), and has
been shown to interact with the COOH-terminal region of MYPT1 through its NH₂-terminal domain that contains a leucine zipper [36] Interestingly, MYPT1 has also been shown to express isoforms containing a leucine zipper at the COOH-terminus of the protein, a consequence of exclusion of a 31 nucleotide exon in the transcript of MYPT1 [34,37] This leucine zipper motif has been shown to allow specific interaction with the amino-terminus leucine zipper of cGMP-dependent protein kinase Iα (cGKIα). The association was found to lead to an activation of MLC phosphatase activity by cGKIα, and potentiated MLCP's ability to dephosphorylate MLC20 [36] This pathway was validated further by in vivo experiments demonstrating that only smooth muscles expressing myosin-binding subunit isoforms containing the leucine zipper motif were sensitive to relaxation by 8-bromo-cGMP, a membrane permeable cGMP analog [37] The expression of leucine zipper positive isoforms of MYPT1 has been demonstrated to be tissue specific and developmentally regulated [37], which could suggest that the diversity in the sensitivity to NO-mediated vasodilation is determined in part by the relative expression of the leucine zipper-positive isoforms of MYPT1.

### 4. Fast and slow contractile properties

The contractile properties of smooth muscle can be broadly classified as phasic (or fast) and tonic (or slow) [1] For phasic smooth muscle, it has been well documented that the rates of force activation and relaxation are relatively rapid and the maximum velocity of muscle shortening (V_max) is relatively fast. Tonic smooth muscle maintains a resting tone or force has slower rates of force activation and relaxation, as well as a slower V_max. Although the focus of intense research, the molecular mechanism(s) responsible for the diverse contractile characteristics in smooth muscles are just slowly being elucidated. It is very likely that the contractile properties observed are due to differences in both messenger signaling and actomyosin crossbridge kinetics. However, the fast and slow contractile properties of smooth muscles remain after activation of skinned, thiophosphorylated smooth muscle tissue strips with photolytic release of caged MgATP [38] Such an observation suggests that the differences in the contractile properties are predominantly due to the kinetics of the actomyosin crossbridge cycle.

#### 4.1. Myosin heavy chain

Smooth muscle myosin is a type II myosin, a hexamer composed of two intertwined heavy chains, two 20 kDa regulatory light chains and two essential 17 kDa light chains (MLC17). High-resolution structure determination has shown that the structure of myosin II isoforms from smooth and striated muscles are very similar [39,40] in agreement with the general similarity in their heavy chain and light chain compositions. The smooth muscle myosin heavy chain gene encodes a protein with an elongated, coiled-coil rod at

the COOH-terminus that extends into a neck region connecting the myosin tail to the NH₂-terminal globular motor domain that houses the actin binding and catalytic sites of the enzyme. The two sets of light chains associate noncovalently with the neck region of the heavy chains, with the essential light chains being more proximal to the globular motor domain. A single gene encodes the smooth muscle myosin heavy chain with two pairs of alternatively spliced exons near the 5′ and 3′ ends of the gene. Two isoforms, named SM-1 and SM-2, differ by expression of two unique alternatively spliced exons encoding either a 43 (SM-1) or 9 (SM-2) amino acids sequence at the COOH-terminal tail [41,42]. Their contribution to contractility remains under investigation using both in vitro and cellular systems [43,44]. In the motility assay, SM-1 and SM-2 myosins do not demonstrate significant differences in the speed with which they propel actin filaments. Recent evidence suggests that the two isoforms may have unique contributions to thick filament assembly by favoring homodimer vs. heterodimer formation [45] Therefore, the SM-1 and SM-2 isoforms of the myosin heavy chain may have more pertinent contributions to the organization of thick filaments in the cell, rather than the kinetics of smooth muscle contractility. This finding may be an initial clue to interpreting the correlation between SM-1/SM-2 expression level and final cell length following contraction of single smooth muscle cells [44]

Additional myosin heavy chain isoform diversity is generated by alternative splicing of a 21 nucleotide exon nearer to the 5′ end of the transcript. The unique seven amino acids encoded by this exon lie within the surface loop spanning the ATP-binding pocket of the myosin head [42,46] Myosin heavy chain isoforms with inclusion of this seven amino-acid stretch are termed SM-B isoforms and are predominantly expressed in visceral smooth muscles in contrast to their relatively low levels in vascular smooth muscles. In keeping with this observation, myosin heavy chain isoform diversity at the NH₂-terminus has been hypothesized as a determinant of the tonic and phasic contractile properties of smooth muscle [46–48] Studies using the laser trap to characterize the SM-A and SM-B isoforms have shown the SM-A isoforms to demonstrate a longer duty cycle, a reflection of the time myosin remains attached to actin during the power-stroke [47] This would reasonably imply an increase in shortening speed for smooth muscles primarily expressing SM-B isoforms of the smooth muscle myosin heavy chain due to their reduced time spent attached to actin during the actomyosin crossbridge cycle. In fact, this hypothesis has been strengthened by comparisons of shortening velocities from phasic and tonic smooth muscles [49], from isolated single smooth muscle cells with differing SM-A/SM-B expression levels [50] and an SM-B knockout mouse model [51]

It is certainly of interest to characterize the catalytic activity of the various myosin isoforms, and more importantly, their contribution to the contractility of intact smooth muscle tissues. However, the isoform heterogeneity observed in
smooth muscles [48] complicates comparisons of contractility between muscles expressing different myosin isoforms. Quite often, such heterogeneity excludes unequivocal assessment of the contribution of specific myosin isoforms to contractility. This limitation has been circumvented by the use of transgenic mouse lines, notably knockout mice deficient in smooth muscle myosin heavy chain expression [52] or specific targeting of exons to knockout SM-B myosin heavy chain isoform expression in favor of SM-A [51]. Surprisingly, muscle strips from embryos of smooth muscle myosin heavy chain knockout mice demonstrated the ability to contract in response to depolarization. However, the initial, transient phasic component of force generation during contraction was lost, in favor of slower, but sustained force activation. The researchers suggested that although smooth muscle myosin isoforms are required to initiate the rapid force development at activation, non-muscle myosin was sufficient to sustain smooth muscle contractions. However, the knockout offspring died soon after birth, demonstrating that smooth muscle myosin heavy chain function and expression is developmentally regulated and become dominant after birth. Deletion of the exon encoding the seven amino-acid insert near the ATP-binding pocket of the myosin head resulted in smooth muscles impaired in force production and rate of tension regeneration, suggesting that the SM-B isoforms of the smooth muscle myosin heavy chain are important in determining faster kinetics of force production.

### 4.2. The essential myosin light chain

Additionally, isoform diversity of MLC17 associated with the neck region of the myosin heavy chain increases the heterogeneity of myosin isoforms. Two splice variants of MLC17 have been found to be associated with smooth muscle myosin, and they differ by inclusion (acidic isoform or MLC17b) or exclusion (basic isoform or MLC17a) of a 39 bp exon [53]. In general, vascular smooth muscles with tonic contractile properties display a higher percentage of acidic MLC17b expression vs. basic MLC17a [54, 55]. Studies have shown a correlation between increased acidic MLC17b expression and reduced actin-activated Mg²⁺-ATPase activity of myosin [56] as well as decreased \( V_{\text{max}} \) in tissue strips [54]. This has been independently demonstrated following chemical exchange of MLC17 isoforms in permeabilized smooth muscles, wherein reconstitution with basic MLC17a increased both the velocity of shortening and the rate of force activation [57]. At the level of the single smooth muscle cell, recent data have shown both agreement and disagreement with results obtained from smooth muscle tissue strips. Edinger and coworkers [58] found no relationship between MLC17 isoform expression levels and the velocity of shortening. On the other hand, the influence of MLC17a and MLC17b in modulating the rate of force development was confirmed at the level of intact single smooth muscle cells through overexpression of the endogenous or exogenous MLC17 isoform in cultured aorta or gizzard smooth muscle cells [59]. It was shown therein and elsewhere [60] that

phasic and tonic force activation profiles of smooth muscle cells rely heavily on the expression level of MLC17a (phasic) or MLC17b (tonic). This finding is supported by experiments demonstrating a change from fast to slow force activation kinetics for cultured gizzard smooth muscle cells following an endothelin-1-induced increase in acidic MLC17b isoform expression [55]. Proposals in explaining the function of MLC17a in modulating the rate of force development have hypothesized that MLC17 isoforms may differentially affect the stiffness of the myosin lever arm, accounting for the changes in force development kinetics. Additional experiments will be required to expound on this hypothesis.

#### 5. Force maintenance

It has been documented that vascular smooth muscles have the ability to maintain force for extended periods of time with a low rate of energy utilization. The initial observations correlating force production with MLC20 phosphorylation were confounded by experiments demonstrating a maintenance of tone in the face of falling or low MLC20 phosphorylation levels and decreasing actin-activated myosin Mg²⁺-ATPase activity [17, 61–63]. One early hypothesis suggested that force was maintained through dephosphorylated myosins attached to actin in a force-generating state [64]. Such an observation rationally suggests that cross-bridges in vascular smooth muscle may segregate into two large populations—one population of rapidly cycling cross-bridges responsible for the initial force activation and the other set of slowly cycling crossbridges playing a predominant role in force maintenance. Interestingly, the sustained phase of smooth muscle contraction can be inhibited with Y-27632, the Rho-kinase inhibitor [65]. It opens the possibility that the slowly cycling crossbridges working during agonist-induced force maintenance may be additionally regulated by Rho-kinase. Experiments with the smooth muscle myosin heavy chain knockout mice have led credence to the idea that during force maintenance, there are two crossbridge populations—one rapidly cycling and the other cycling slowly. Bladder tissue from the knockout animal lacks the rapid, phasic phase of force development, but contracts slowly to a steady-state level with force maintenance [52]. Since the force maintenance phase of smooth muscle contraction is conserved in the knockout mice, this suggests that non-muscle myosin, possibly regulated by the Rho-kinase pathway, is a major factor in the mechanism for force maintenance and may represent the slowly cycling cross-bridge population. Nonetheless, these findings were in embryonic bladder tissue, as the homozygous offspring of these mice died shortly after birth. This not only cements smooth muscle myosin II's importance in muscle contraction during early development and adulthood, but also raises the possibility that this model may not be entirely reflective of force maintenance in the adult.

Another mechanism of force maintenance has been suggested from comparisons of the contractile properties of

tonic and phasic smooth muscles. The rate of ADP release from smooth muscle myosin is dependent on MLC20 phosphorylation [66] and phosphorylated crossbridges in tonic smooth muscles may exhibit stronger ADP binding compared to phasic smooth muscles, rationalizing a longer duty cycle and facilitating force maintenance [49]. This would be in agreement with independent research suggesting that dephosphorylated but ADP-bound crossbridges play a large role in force maintenance during low MLC20 phosphorylation levels [67]. Thus, force maintenance may also be facilitated by a slowing in the rate of ADP dissociation from smooth muscle myosin, and a resulting increase in the number of crossbridges populating the strong binding, force producing, ADP-bound state of actomyosin.

### 6. The thin filament and the cytoskeleton

The roles of the thin filament [68] and the cytoskeleton [69] in smooth muscle contraction have been recently reviewed; therefore, we will only present a brief overview in this section. Despite numerous studies, the role of the thin filament for force regulation in smooth muscle remains controversial [70–72]. Both caldesmon [73,74] and calponin [75,76] have been suggested to modulate smooth muscle activation. Caldesmon is able to bind actin and inhibit actomyosin ATPase activity [77,78]. These observations have been extended to show that caldesmon is capable of regulating force in smooth muscle [73,79]. Caldesmon's inhibitory effect on the actomyosin ATPase activity can be reversed by phosphorylation [80,81], providing an important means for regulation of its inhibitory activity. Also relevant to its regulation, caldesmon has been shown to be phosphorylated by both PKC [82] and MAP kinase [83,84], although differences in the magnitude of caldesmon phosphorylation have been reported. Adam et al. [85] were only able to demonstrate a modest increase in caldesmon phosphorylation, whereas Morgan’s group [86] has demonstrated a time-dependent, 3-5-fold increase in caldesmon phosphorylation following α-agonist activation of ferret aorta. Although independent studies have confirmed the phosphorylation of caldesmon during agonist stimulation of both tracheal [87] and pulmonary arterial smooth muscle [88], the event was unrelated to force production [88]. Additional experiments have demonstrated that differences in caldesmon content among tissues affect force at submaximal levels of Ca²⁺ activation [74]. Thus, further experiments are required to define the role of caldesmon in smooth muscle force regulation.

Calponin is also a thin filament-associated protein that may influence smooth muscle contraction. Two isoforms, h1-calponin and h2-calponin, have been found to be expressed in smooth muscles. H1-calponin has been suggested to influence smooth muscle $V_{\text{max}}$ [72,89], but others have not found a correlation of $V_{\text{max}}$ and h1-calponin expression [90]. Similarly, h1-calponin has been reported to both decrease [91] or not affect maximal force [72,89]. These conclusions are additionally confounded by the changes in thin filament protein content observed in the h1-calponin knockout mice [72], leaving discrepancies in the observed function of h1-calponin that still require reconciliation. Recent experiments have suggested that h2-calponin may play a more prominent role in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton [92,93], suggesting that it does not have a direct contribution to the actomyosin crossbridge cycle during cell motility.

#### 6.1. Cytoskeleton

There is also evidence that a secondary system outside of the thin and thick filament domains may play a role in force maintenance. Agonist-induced phosphorylation of the membrane-associated dense plaque proteins, paxillin and talin, have been shown to correlate with force production [94]. Further, paxillin antisense has been demonstrated to neither affect the expression of other cytoskeletal proteins nor MLC20 phosphorylation, but result in a reversible decrease in both paxillin expression and force in response to both KCl and acetylcholine stimulation [95]. These authors suggest that attachment of actin filaments to membrane-associated dense plaques is regulated during smooth muscle contraction by the PKC-mediated phosphorylation of membrane-associated dense plaque proteins. Therefore, force maintenance would have a large component that would require reorganization of actin filaments to support load.

Others have demonstrated that both extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) MAP kinase and p38 MAP kinase are activated during agonist stimulation of smooth muscle [87]. The activation of ERK MAP kinase leads to downstream phosphorylation of caldesmon, while p38 MAP kinase does not phosphorylate caldesmon, but rather increases phosphorylation and activation of heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) via a MAPKAP kinase 2 pathway [88]. In agreement with these findings, inhibition of p38 MAP kinase resulted in a reduction in HSP27 phosphorylation and consequent decreases in both the rate of increase and maximal force. Interestingly, HSP27 is known to regulate actin polymerization (for review, see [69]), once again suggesting that remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton may participate in the mechanism for force maintenance during smooth muscle contraction.

Therefore, the contribution of thin filament-associated proteins and the cytoskeleton in the regulation and maintenance smooth muscle contraction will require further clarification. However, with emerging biophysical, molecular and protein chemistry techniques, the progress in elucidating the mechanisms responsible for smooth muscle contraction will inevitably be swift.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grants from the American Heart Association (0120359B to O.O.) and National Institutes of Health (HL44181, HL64137 to F.V.B.).

References

[1] Somlyo AV, Somlyo AP. Electromechanical and pharmacomechanical coupling in vascular smooth muscle. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1968; 159: 129–45.

[2] Bolton TB, Prestwich SA, Zholos AV, Gordienko DV. Excitation-contraction coupling in gastrointestinal and other smooth muscles. Annu Rev Physiol 1999; 61: 85–115.

[3] Kretsinger RH, Nockolds CE. Carp muscle calcium binding protein. J Biol Chem 1973; 248: 3313–26.

[4] Seamon KB. Calcium- and magnesium-dependent conformational states of calmodulin as determined by nuclear magnetic resonance. Biochemistry 1980; 19: 207–15.

[5] Ikura M, Hiraoki T, Hikichi K, Minowa O, Yamaguchi H, Yazawa M, et al. Nuclear magnetic resonance studies on calmodulin: Ca²⁺ dependent spectral change of proteolytic fragments. Biochemistry 1984; 23: 3124–8.

[6] Adelstein RS, Conti MA. Phosphorylation of platelet myosin increases actin-activated myosin ATPase activity. Nature 1975; 256: 597–8.

[7] Gallagher PJ, Herring BP, Stull JT. Myosin light chain kinases. J Muscle Res Cell Motil 1997; 18: 1–16.

[8] Ikebe M, Hinkins S, Hartshorne DJ. Correlation of enzymatic properties and conformation of smooth muscle myosin. Biochemistry 1983; 22: 4580–7.

[9] Gollub J, Cremon CR, Cooke R. Phosphorylation regulates the ADP-induced rotation of the light chain domain of smooth muscle myosin. Biochemistry 1999; 38: 10107–18.

[10] Alessi D, MacDougall LK, Sola M, Ikebe M, Cohen P. The control of protein phosphatase-1 by targeting subunits: the major myosin phosphatase in avian smooth muscle is a novel form of protein phosphatase-1. Eur J Biochem 1992; 210: 1023–35.

[11] Shimizu H, Ito M, Miyahara M, Ichikawa K, Okubo S, Konishi T, et al. Characterization of the myosin-binding subunit of smooth muscle myosin phosphatase. J Biol Chem 1994; 269: 30407–11.

[12] Shirazi A, Izuka K, Fadden P, Mosse C, Somlyo AP, Somlyo AV, et al. Purification and characterization of the mammalian light chain phosphatase holoenzyme: the differential effects of the holoenzyme and its subunits on smooth muscle. J Biol Chem 1994; 269: 31598–606.

[13] Kitazawa T, Kobayashi S, Horiuti K, Somlyo AV, Somlyo AP. Receptor-coupled, permeabilized smooth muscle. Role of the phosphatidylinositol cascade, G-proteins, and modulation of the contractile response to Ca²⁺. J Biol Chem 1989; 264: 5339–42.

[14] Kitazawa T, Masuo M, Somlyo AP. G protein-mediated inhibition of myosin light-chain phosphatase in vascular smooth muscle. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991; 88: 9307–10.

[15] DeFeo TT, Morgan KG. Calcium-force relationships as detected with aequorin in two different vascular smooth muscles of the ferret. J Physiol 1985; 369: 269–82.

[16] Bradley AB, Morgan KG. Alteration in cytoplasmic calcium sensitivity during porcine coronary artery contractions as detected by aequorin. J Physiol 1987; 385: 437–48.

[17] Rembold CM, Murphy RA. Myoplasmic [Ca²⁺] determines myosin phosphorylation in agonist-stimulated swine arterial smooth muscle. Circ Res 1988; 63: 593–603.

[18] Trinkle-Mulcahy L, Ichikawaa K, Hartshorne DJ, Siegman MJ, Butler TM. Thiophosphorylation of the 130-kDa subunit is associated with a decreased activity of myosin light chain phosphatase in α-toxin permeabilized smooth muscle. J Biol Chem 1995; 270: 18191–4.

[19] Schmidt A, Hall A. Guanine nucleotide exchange factors for Rho GTPases: turning on the switch. Genes Dev 2002; 16: 1587–609.

[20] Leung T, Manser E, Tan L, Lim L. A novel serine/threonine kinase binding the Ras-related RhoA GTPase which translocates the kinase to peripheral membranes. J Biol Chem 1995; 270: 29051–4.

[21] Kimura K, Ito M, Amano M, Chihara K, Fukata Y, Nakafuku M, et al. Regulation of myosin phosphatase by Rho and Rho-associated kinase (Rho-kinase). Science 1996; 273: 245–8.

[22] Feng J, Ito M, Ichikawa K, Isaka N, Nishikawa M, Hartshorne DJ, et al. Inhibitory phosphorylation site for Rho-associated kinase on the smooth muscle myosin phosphatase. J Biol Chem 1999; 274: 37385–90.

[23] Richards CT, Ogut O, Brozovich FV. Agonist-induced force enhancement: the role of isoforms and phosphorylation of the myosin-targeting subunit of myosin light chain phosphatase. J Biol Chem 2002; 277: 4422–7.

[24] Shin HM, Je HD, Gallant C, Tao TC, Hartshorne DJ, Ito M, et al. Differential association and localization of myosin phosphatase sub-units during agonist-induced signal transduction in smooth muscle. Circ Res 2002; 90: 546–53.

[25] Miyazaki K, Yano T, Schmidt DJ, Tokiu T, Shibata M, Lifshitz LM, et al. Rho-dependent agonist-induced spatio-temporal change in myosin phosphorylation in smooth muscle cells. J Biol Chem 2002; 277: 725–34.

[26] MacDonald JA, Borman MA, Muranyi A, Somlyo AV, Hartshorne DJ, Haystead TA. Identification of the endogenous smooth muscle myosin phosphatase-associated kinase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001; 98: 2419–24.

[27] Borman MA, MacDonald JA, Muranyi A, Hartshorne DJ. Smooth muscle myosin phosphatase-associated kinase induces Ca²⁺ sensitization via myosin phosphatase inhibition. J Biol Chem 2002; 277: 23441–6.

[28] Niiro N, Ikebe M. Zipper-interacting protein kinase induces Ca²⁺-free smooth muscle contraction via myosin light chain phosphorylation. J Biol Chem 2001; 276: 29567–74.

[29] Deng JT, Van Lierop JE, Sutherland C, Walsh MP. Ca²⁺-independent smooth muscle contraction. A novel function for integrin-linked kinase. J Biol Chem 2001; 276: 16365–73.

[30] Kitazawa T, Eto M, Woodsome TP, Brautigan DL. Agonists trigger G protein-mediated activation of the CPI-17 inhibitor phosphoprotein of myosin light chain phosphatase to enhance vascular smooth muscle contractility. J Biol Chem 2000; 275: 9897–900.

[31] Eto M, Ohmori T, Suzuki M, Furuya K, Morita F. A novel protein phosphatase-1 inhibitory protein potentiated by protein kinase C. Isolation from porcine aorta media and characterization. J Biochem (Tokyo) 1995; 118: 1104–7.

[32] Woodsome TP, Eto M, Everett A, Brautigan DL, Kitazawa T. Expression of CPI-17 and myosin phosphatase correlates with Ca²⁺ sensitivity of protein kinase C-induced contraction in rabbit smooth muscle. J Physiol 2001; 535: 553–64.

[33] Gong MC, Fuglsang A, Alessi D, Kobayashi S, Cohen P, Somlyo AV, et al. Arachidonic acid inhibits myosin light chain phosphatase and sensitizes smooth muscle to calcium. J Biol Chem 1992; 267: 14662–8.

[34] Hartshorne DJ, Ito M, Erdodi F. Myosin light chain phosphatase: subunit composition, interactions and regulation. J Muscle Res Cell 1998; 19: 325–41.

[35] Hamad AM, Range S, Holland E, Knox AJ. Regulation of cGMP by soluble and particulate guanylyl cyclases in cultured human airway smooth muscle. Am J Physiol 1997; 273: L807–813.

[36] Surks HK, Mochizuki N, Kasai Y, Georgescu SP, Tang KM, Ito M, et al. Regulation of myosin phosphatase by a specific interaction with cGMP-dependent protein kinase Ia. Science 1999; 286: 1583–7.

[37] Khatri JJ, Joyce KM, Brozovich FV, Fisher SA. Role of myosin phosphatase isoforms in cGMP-mediated smooth muscle relaxation. J Biol Chem 2001; 276: 37250–7.

[38] Horiuti K, Somlyo AV, Goldman YE, Somlyo AP. Kinetics of contraction initiated by flash photolysis of caged adenosine triphosphate in tonic and phasic smooth muscles. J Gen Physiol 1989;94:769–81.

[39] Rayment I, Holden HM, Whittaker M, Yohn CB, Lorenz M, Holmes KC, et al. Structure of the actin-myosin complex and its implications for muscle contraction. Science 1993;261:58–65.

[40] Dominguez R, Freyzon Y, Trybus KM, Cohen C. Crystal structure of a vertebrate smooth muscle myosin motor domain and its complex with the essential light chain: visualization of the pre-power stroke state. Cell 1998;94:559–71.

[41] Eddinger TJ, Murphy RA. Two smooth muscle myosin heavy chains in cultured aorta smooth muscle cells. A comparative study. J Biol Chem 1987;2262:7282–8.

[42] Babij P, Kelly C, Periasamy M. Characterization of a mammalian smooth muscle myosin heavy-chain gene: complete nucleotide and protein coding sequence and analysis of the 5′ end of the gene. Proc Natl Acad USA 1991;88:10676–80.

[43] Kelley CA, Sellers JR, Goldsmith PK, Adelstein RS. Smooth muscle myosin is composed of homodimeric heavy chains. J Biol Chem 1992;267:2127–30.

[44] Meer DP, Eddinger TJ. Expression of smooth muscle myosin heavy chains and unloaded shortening in single smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1997;273:C1259–1266.

[45] Rovner AS, Fagnant PM, Lowey S, Trybus KM. The carboxyl-terminal isoforms of smooth muscle myosin heavy chain determine thick filament assembly properties. J Cell Biol 2002;156:113–23.

[46] Kelley CA, Takahashi M, Yu JH, Adelstein RS. An insert of seven amino acids confers functional differences between smooth muscle myosins from the intestines and vasculature. J Biol Chem 1993;268:12848–54.

[47] Lauzon A-M, Tyska MJ, Rovner AS, Freyzon Y, Warshaw DM, Trybus KM. A 7-amino-acid insert in the heavy chain nucleotide binding loop alters the kinetics of smooth muscle myosin in the laser trap. J Muscle Res Cell Motil 1998;19:825–37.

[48] Szymanski PT, Chacko TK, Rovner AS, Goyal RJ. Differences in contractile protein content and isoforms in phasic and tonic smooth muscles. Am J Physiol 1998;275:C684–692.

[49] Lofgren M, Malmqvist U, Arner A. Substrate and product dependence of force and shortening in fast and slow smooth muscle. J Gen Physiol 2001;117:407–18.

[50] Meer DP, Eddinger TJ. Single rabbit stomach smooth muscle cell heavy chain SMB expression and shortening velocity. Am J Physiol 2001;280:C309–316.

[51] Babu GJ, Loukianov E, Loukianova T, Pyne GJ, Huke S, Osol G, et al. Loss of SM-B myosin affects muscle shortening velocity and maximal force development. Nature Cell Biol 2001;3:1025–9.

[52] Morano I, Chai G- X, Baltas LG, Lamounier-Zepter V, Lutsch G, Kott M, et al. Smooth-muscle contraction without smooth-muscle myosin. Nature Cell Biol 2000;2:371–5.

[53] Nabeshima Y, Nonomura Y, Fujii-Kuriyama Y. Nonmuscle and smooth muscle myosin light chain mRNAs are generated from a single gene by the tissue-specific alternative RNA splicing. J Biol Chem 1987;262:10608–12.

[54] Malmqvist U, Arner A. Correlation between isoform composition of the 17 kDa myosin light chain and maximal shortening in smooth muscle. Pflugers Arch 1991;418:523–30.

[55] Fisher SA, Ikebe M, Brozovich FV. Endothelin-1 alters the contractile phenotype of cultured embryonic smooth muscle cells. Circ Res 1997;80:885–93.

[56] Helper DJ, Lash JA, Hathaway DR. Distribution of isoelectric variants of the 17,000-dalton myosin light chain in mammalian smooth muscle. J Biol Chem 1988;263:15748–53.

[57] Matthew JD, Khromov AS, Trybus KM, Somlyo AP, Somlyo AV. Myosin essential light chain isoforms modulate the velocity of shortening propelled by nonphosphorylated cross-bridges. J Biol Chem 1998;273:31289–96.

[58] Eddinger TJ, Korwek AA, Meer DP, Sherwood JJ. Expression of smooth muscle myosin light chain 17 and unloaded shortening in single smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol 2000;278:C1133–1142.

[59] Huang QQ, Fisher SA, Brozovich FV. Forced expression of essential myosin light chain isoforms demonstrates their role in smooth muscle force production. J Biol Chem 1999;274:35095–8.

[60] Ogut O, Brozovich FV. Determinants of the contractile properties in the embryonic chicken gizzard and aorta. Am J Physiol 2000;279:C1722–1732.

[61] Dillon PF, Murphy RA. Tonic force maintenance with reduced shortening velocity in arterial smooth muscle. Am J Physiol 1982;242:C102–108.

[62] Moreland S, Moreland RS. Effects of dihydropyridines on stress, myosin phosphorylation, and Vo in smooth muscle. Am J Physiol 1987;252:H1049–1058.

[63] Jiang MJ, Morgan KG. Agonist-specific myosin phosphorylation and intracellular calcium during isometric contractions of arterial smooth muscle. Pflugers Arch 1989;413:637–43.

[64] Hai CM, Murphy RA. Cross-bridge phosphorylation and regulation of latch state in smooth muscle. Am J Physiol 1988;254:C99–106.

[65] Sward K, Dreja K, Susnjar M, Hellstrand P, Hartshorne DJ, Walsh MP. Inhibition of Rho-associated kinase blocks agonist-induced Ca²⁺ sensitization of myosin phosphorylation and force in guinea-pig ileum. J Physiol 2000;522:33–49.

[66] Vyas TB, Mooers SU, Narayan SR, Siegman MJ, Butler TM. Cross-bridge cycling at rest and during activation. Turnover of myosin-bound ADP in permeabilized smooth muscle. J Biol Chem 1994;269:7316–22.

[67] Khromov A, Somlyo AV, Somlyo AP. MgADP promotes a catch-like state developed through force-calcium hysteresis in tonic smooth muscle. Biophys J 1998;75:1926–34.

[68] Morgan KG, Gangopadhyay SS. Invited review: cross-bridge regulation by thin filament-associated proteins. J Appl Physiol 2001;91:953–62.

[69] Gerthoffer WT, Funst SJ. Invited review: focal adhesion and small heat shock proteins in the regulation of actin remodeling and contractility in smooth muscle. J Appl Physiol 2001;91:963–72.

[70] Adam LP, Franklin MT, Raff GJ, Hathaway DR. Activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase in porcine carotid arteries. Circ Res 1995;76:183–90.

[71] Brozovich FV, Yamakawa M. Thin filament regulation of force activation is not essential in single vascular smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1995;268:C237–242.

[72] Matthew JD, Khromov AS, McDuffie MJ, Somlyo AV, Somlyo AP, Taniguchi S, et al. Contractile properties and proteins of smooth muscles of a calponin knockout mouse. J Physiol 2000;529:811–24.

[73] Katsuyama H, Wang CL, Morgan KG. Regulation of vascular smooth muscle tone by caldesmon. J Biol Chem 1992;267:14555–8.

[74] Malmqvist U, Arner A, Makuch R, Dabrowska R. The effects of caldesmon extraction on mechanical properties of skinned smooth muscle fibre preparations. Pflugers Arch 1996;432:241–7.

[75] Winder SJ, Walsh MP. Calponin: thin filament-linked regulation of smooth muscle contraction. Cell Signal 1993;5:677–86.

[76] Horowitz A, Clement-Chomienne O, Walsh MP, Tao T, Katsuyama H, Morgan KG. Effects of calponin on force generation by single smooth muscle cells. Am J Physiol 1996;270:H1858–1863.

[77] Marston S, Pinter K, Bennett P. Caldesmon binds to smooth muscle myosin and myosin rod and crosslinks thick filaments to actin filaments. J Muscle Res Cell Motil 1992;13:206–18.

[78] Pritchard K, Marston SB. Ca²⁺-calmodulin binding to caldesmon and the caldesmon-actin-tropomyosin complex. Ca²⁺ regulation of the activity of synthetic smooth-muscle thin filaments. Biochem J 1989;257:839–43.

[79] Szpacenko A, Wagner J, Dabrowska R, Ruegg JC. Caldesmon-induced inhibition of ATPase activity of actomyosin and contraction of skinned chicken gizzard smooth muscle. FEBS Lett 1985;192:9–12.

[80] Marston SB, Redwood CS. The molecular anatomy of caldesmon. Biochem J 1991;279:1–16.

[81] Sutherland C, Walsh MP. Phosphorylation of caldesmon prevents its interaction with smooth muscle myosin. J Biol Chem 1989;264: 578–83.

[82] Vorotnikov AV, Gusev NB, Hua S, Collins JH, Redwood CS, Mar- ston SB. Phosphorylation of aorta caldesmon by endogenous pro- teolytic fragments of protein kinaes C. J Muscle Res Cell Motil 1994;15:37–48.

[83] Gerthoffer WT, Yamboliev IA, Shearer M, Pohl J, Haynes R, Dang S, et al. Activation of MAP kinases and phosphorylation of caldesmon in canine colonic smooth muscle. J Physiol 1996;495: 597–609.

[84] Gerthoffer WT, Yamboliev IA, Pohl J, Haynes R, Dang S, McHugh J. Activation of MAP kinases in airway smooth muscle. Am J Physiol 1997;272:L244–252.

[85] Adam LP, Haeberle JR, Hathaway DR. Phosphorylation of caldesmon in arterial smooth muscle. J Biol Chem 1989;264:7698–703.

[86] Dessy C, Kim I, Sougnez CL, Laporte R, Morgan KG. A role for MAP kinase in differentiated smooth muscle contraction evoked by alpha- adrenoceptor stimulation. Am J Physiol 1998;275:C1081–1086.

[87] Hedges JC, Oxhorn BC, Carty M, Adam LP, Yamboliev IA, Gerthof- fer WT. Phosphorylation of caldesmon by ERK MAP kinases in smooth muscle. Am J Physiol 2000;278:C718–726.

[88] Yamboliev IA, Wiesmann KM, Singer CA, Hedges JC, Gerthof- fer WT. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases regulate ERK and p38 MAP kinases in canine colonic smooth muscle. Am J Physiol 2000;279: C352–60.

[89] Jaworowski A, Anderson KI, Arner A, Engstrom M, Gimona M, Strasser P, et al. Calponin reduces shortening velocity in skinned Taenia coli smooth muscle fibres. FEBS Lett 1995;265:167–71.

[90] Facemire C, Brozovich FV, Jin JP. The maximal velocity of vascular smooth muscle shortening is independent of the expression of calpo- nin. J Muscle Res Cell Motil 2000;21:367–73.

[91] Uyama Y, Imaizumi Y, Watanabe M, Walsh MP. Inhibition by calponin of isometric force in demembranated vascular smooth muscle strips: the critical role of serine-175. Biochem J 1996;319:551–8.

[92] Danninge C, Gimona M. Live dynamics of GFP-calponin: isoform- specific modulation of the actin cytoskeleton and autoregulation by C-terminal sequences. J Cell Sci 2000;21:3725–36.

[93] Hossain M, Hwang DY, Huang QQ, Sasaki Y, Jin JP. Developmentally regulated expression of calponin isoforms and the effect of h2-calponin on cell proliferation. Am J Physiol 2003;248:C156–67.

[94] Mehta D, Wang Z, Wu MF, Gunst SJ. Relationship between paxillin and myosin phosphorylation during muscarinic stimulation of smooth muscle. Am J Physiol 1998;274:C741–7.

[95] Tang DD, Wu MF, Opazo Saez AM, Gunst SJ. The focal adhesion protein paxillin regulates contraction in canine tracheal smooth muscle. J Physiol 2002;545:501–13.
