
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ELSEVIER

SCIENCEDIRECT®

Virus Research 92 (2003) 131–140

www.elsevier.com/locate/virusres

Review

Hepatitis viruses and the MAPK pathway: is this a survival strategy?

Milena Panteva, Hasan Korkaya, Shahid Jameel*

Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi 110067, India

Received 21 August 2002; received in revised form 9 December 2002; accepted 9 December 2002

---

### Abstract

The viruses that cause hepatitis comprise of at least five different agents, which share the ability to cause inflammation and necrosis of the liver. The disease spectrum is quite diverse and the outcome of infection by the different hepatitis viruses can be rationalized based on virus-host cell interactions. New insights into the molecular basis of viral hepatitis reveal that three of these agents—the hepatitis B, C and E viruses (HBV, HCV and HEV) modulate the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway. In this review we briefly describe the structural organization of the MAPK cascade and emphasize its importance as a central pathway in the signaling network. Selected mechanisms through which HBV, HCV and HEV proteins target various steps in the MAPK pathway are discussed and used to propose a pro-survival outcome for the host cell. In addition, we offer an insight into how the common theme of MAPK activation and its downstream effects may be used to rationalize the different outcomes of hepatitis B, C and E.

© 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Hepatitis virus; Viral hepatitis; Hepatocellular carcinoma

---

### 1. Introduction

The viruses that cause hepatitis comprise of five agents—hepatitis A, B, C, D and E viruses (HAV, HBV, HCV, HDV and HEV). A growing number of papers in the last few years and newly published results reveal various accessory functions of HBV, HCV and HEV proteins. These viral proteins target host proteins, involved in a wide range of functions, thus regulating transcription, growth, apoptosis and cellular signaling cascades.

One pathway that is affected by all three of these viruses is the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway. In this review, we will attempt to briefly describe the components and the function of the MAPK cascade, emphasize its importance as a central pathway in the cellular signaling network and point out steps that are targeted by HBV, HCV and HEV proteins. Do different outcomes of hepatitis B, C and E depend upon such virus-host interactions? Acute HBV and HCV infections frequently progress to chronic hepatitis and hepatocyte transformation while acute HEV infection is generally self-limiting. Can this be rationalized by understanding interactions between viral and cellular proteins?

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +91-11-6176680; fax: +91-11-6162316.
E-mail address: shahid@icgeb.res.in (S. Jameel).

0168-1702/03/$ - see front matter © 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0168-1702(02)00356-8

2. MAPK signaling pathways

The cells that make up a multicellular organism depend upon complex molecular circuits designed to receive, interpret and respond to various signals from their environment. Such signals can instruct a cell to proliferate, differentiate into another cell type, or commit suicide by programmed cell death (Pomerantz and Baltimore, 2000). Thus, cellular homeostasis is maintained through a balance between cell proliferation and cell death, processes that depend upon accurate intracellular signaling.

The MAP kinases are a group of protein kinases that mediate the nuclear response of cells to changes in their environment (Davis, 2000). The MAPK signaling pathways are initiated at the cell surface, with the binding of specific ligands to various receptors. However, since the targets of MAPK signaling include transcription factors located in the nucleus, this involves the transmission of signals through the cytoplasm to the nucleus. Many proteins involved in signal transduction are modular, and some of these domains serve to mediate protein–protein interactions (Cohen et al., 1995). Src homology 2 and 3 (SH2/SH3) domains are examples of such modules. First discovered in the Src kinase and subsequently found in many other proteins, the SH2 and SH3 domains are independently folded polypeptide modules that bind proteins containing phosphotyrosine residues and proline-rich domains, respectively (Koch et al., 1991). These modules are found in a wide variety of protein contexts: in association with catalytic domains, within structural proteins and in a group of small ‘adaptor’ molecules, that consist almost entirely of SH2 and SH3 domains. These adaptor proteins are important for transducing signals from activated receptor tyrosine kinases to downstream signaling pathways.

In vertebrates, three MAPK pathways have been characterized (Davis, 2000) (Fig. 1). These are the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (MAPK/ERK), the p38 MAPK and the stress-activated protein kinase/c-Jun N-terminal kinase (SAPK/JNK) pathways. All of these are based on a central three-kinase signaling module consisting of a MAPK that is activated by an upstream MAPK kinase (MAPKK), which is itself activated by a MAPK kinase kinase (MAPKKK). Signals are transmitted through the module by sequential phosphorylation and activation of these components, and cross talk between the pathways ensures fine control of the system (Garrington and Johnson, 1999). The prototype of the MAPK signaling pathways is the Raf/MEK/ERK cascade, a major pathway for cell growth and differentiation (Figs. 1 and 2). Growth factor-induced signals are transmitted to Ras by the plasma membrane adaptor proteins such as SH2-containing collagen-related proteins (Shc), growth factor receptor-bound protein-2 (Grb2) and protein, known as

Son of sevenless (Sos) (Robinson and Cobb, 1997). Ras proteins bind guanine nucleotides with high affinity, possess an intrinsic guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) activity that cycles between an active GTP-bound state and an inactive GDP-bound state, and link receptor and non-receptor signaling pathways by activating the Raf serine/threonine kinase. Raf transduces the signal to the ERK by first phosphorylating and activating the MAPKK, MEK1/2 (Robinson and Cobb, 1997). Activated ERK1/2 in turn translocates to the nucleus to activate a variety of transcription factors such as ELK-1, c-Fos, c-Jun, c-Myc, STAT-3 etc., involved in regulating cell proliferation and differentiation (Garrington and Johnson, 1999). The MAPK pathways are composed of multiple components and signals could be transmitted to the nucleus by any one of these components and in many different ways. This complexity is crucial for the co-ordination of multiple responses depending upon the type of extracellular stimulus.

3. The strategies of hepatitis viruses

Viruses encode proteins that target various intracellular signaling pathways, causing their constitutive or prolonged activation, resulting in increased cell proliferation and survival (Teodoro and Branton, 1997). Some examples of these targets are the receptor and non-receptor tyrosine kinases, MAPKs, protein kinase C (PKC), the 14-3-3 class of proteins and transcription factors such as nuclear factor κB (NF-κB). Hepatitis viruses are no exception. At least three of these viruses activate the MAPK pathway. The mechanisms are outlined below and schematically summarized in Figs. 2 and 3.

4. Hepatitis B virus

The HBV causes acute and chronic hepatitis (Hollinger and Liang, 2001), is strongly associated with development of HCC and variable amounts of the viral genome have been detected in the chromosomal DNA from patients with HBV-related HCC (Bergsland, 2001). The 3.2 kb DNA genome of HBV contains four overlapping open reading frames (ORFs) encoding the surface antigens (HBsAg), the core and ‘e’ antigens (HBcAg, HBeAg), a polymerase (Pol) and a transactivator (HBV X). The HBV X is a small protein of about 17 kDa, found only in mammalian hepadnaviruses, and is indispensable for viral replication (Zoulim et al., 1994). The localization of HBV X is predominantly cytoplasmic and very little, if any, can be demonstrated in the nucleus of transfected cells (Siddiqui et al., 1987). HBV X does not bind directly to DNA nor does it contain any structural motifs that convincingly suggest a

Stimulus
Growth Factors
Inflammatory Cytokines
Mitogens

Cell surface

MAPKKK
Raf
MAPKK
MEK
MAPK
HEV ORF3
HBV X
MHBs(t)
MAPK/ERK
SAPK/JNK
p38 MAPK
HCV core
HCV NS5A

Three-
kinase
module

Nucleus

Biological
Response
Growth
Differentiation
Development
Inflammation
Apoptosis
Growth
Differentiation

Fig. 1. The MAPK pathways in vertebrates follow a ‘three-kinase module’ model for transmitting signals from the cell surface to the nucleus to execute an appropriate biological response. Three parallel pathways have been described—MAPK/ERK, p38 MAPK and SAPK/JNK. The MAPK/
ERK pathway is presented with its key components and the hepatitis virus proteins known to target the pathways are indicated. The upstream kinases of the p38 MAPK and SAPK/JNK pathways have also been characterized, but are not presented to maintain simplicity of the scheme.

function (Yen, 1996). Cumulative data suggests that HBV X is a multifunctional regulatory protein, which communicates directly or indirectly with a variety of host targets and mediates many opposing cellular functions, including cell cycle progression and G1/S phase arrest (Benn and Schneider, 1995), transformation (Feitelson and Duan, 1997), and apoptosis (Kim et al., 1998). HBV X targets the NF-κB/IκB complex, causes phosphorylation and subsequent degradation of inhibitor of κB factors (IκB), thus causing activation of NF-κB (Su and Schneider, 1996). Since it regulates a large number of genes involved in cell activation and growth control, the NF-κB-associated signal is recognized as a ‘survival’ signal (Karin, 1998). Because of its association with mitochondria and through oxidative stress, HBV X constitutively induces the transcription factors STAT-3 and NF-κB (Waris et al., 2001) (Fig. 3).

HBV X affects cell viability in a dose-dependent manner. Low levels of HBV X trigger NF-κB, but do not fully suppress IκB; consequently, infected cells may have limited resistance to apoptosis. High levels of HBV X lead to complete inactivation of IκB and thus increased resistance to Fas-mediated apoptosis (Pan et al., 2001). Further, HBV X stimulates the expression of Fas ligand (Shin et al., 1999), promotes the lysis of Fas expressing HBV-specific effector T-cells and contributes to viral persistence. Early chronic HBV infection is characterized by low levels of HBV X; later during regeneration, HBV DNA integrates into the host chromosomal DNA, resulting in higher intracellular HBV X levels (Pan et al., 2001). The promotion of HCC by HBV probably involves a combination of direct and indirect mechanisms. Chronic liver injury leads to necrosis, inflammation, and liver regeneration, which

M. Panteva et al. / Virus Research 92 (2003) 131–140

Ion Channels
[Ca++]
RTKs
PLCγ
She
Grb2
SOS
Ras
HBV X
HCV NS5A
Src
Raf
14-3-3
HCV core
PD98059
U0126
MEK1/2
HCV core
PKC
[Ca++]
ER
p90RSK
ERK1/2
HEV ORF3
HCV core
ERK1/2
cytoplasm
nucleus
EGF-R
(RTK)
p90RSK
c-Fos
SRF
CREB
c-Jun
c-Myc
ELK-1
STAT-3

Transcription

Fig. 2. The ERK signaling pathway, activated by ligation of a variety of cell surface receptors, is responsible for regulating the expression of many downstream genes. Proteins encoded by hepatitis viruses can either activate (→) or block (−) various steps in this signaling pathway, as described in the text. The viral proteins are color-coded: HBV, red; HCV, blue; HEV, purple.

over a period of time can contribute to cirrhosis, thus paving a way for events preceding the development of HCC.
HBV X prevents the turnover of Ras-GTP resulting in activation of Ras and the downstream MAPK pathway (Benn and Schneider, 1994) (Fig. 2). This Ras-dependent stimulation of the MEK/ERK pathway occurs only

in quiescent cells forcing them to enter S phase (Benn and Schneider, 1995). HBV X fails to phosphorylate ERK2 in mitotically active cells, but induces Ser63 phosphorylation of c-Jun and ERK-independent activation of c-Jun/c-Fos (Henkler et al., 1998). Another interesting observation is that HBV X increases the levels of epidermal growth-factor receptor (EGFR) by

Fig. 3. Survival or apoptosis of cells depends upon the balance of various extracellular and/or intracellular stimuli. Two major cell survival pathways function through activation of the MAPK/ERK and PI3K/Akt cascades, leading to activation of caspases, the central executioners in apoptosis. Hepatitis viruses modulate other anti-apoptotic signals such as STAT-3 and NFκB through ER stress and the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The viral proteins are boxed and color-coded: HBV, red; HCV, blue.

Fig. 4. ERK is activated by dual phosphorylation within its TEY motif by the MAPK kinase (MEK) and is inactivated on dephosphorylation by a dual specificity MAPK phosphatase (MKP). The ORF3 protein is proposed to be expressed during the early phase of HEV infection and activates ERK through an undetermined mechanism. Activated ERK signals increased cell survival and can directly phosphorylate the ORF3 protein on Serine-80. During the late phase of HEV infection, the viral ORF2 capsid protein is expressed and can bind the S80-phosphorylated ORF3 protein. This sequestration of the ORF3 protein blocks its ERK-mediated cell survival function.

M. Panteva et al. / Virus Research 92 (2003) 131–140

TNF/Fas L

Survival factors: growth  
factors, Cytokines etc.

ER stress

[Ca++]  

HCV  
NS5A  

HCV core  

IKK  

IκB  

NFκB  

ROS  

IκB  

NFκB  

Caspases  

APOPTOSIS  

HBV X  

Ras  

Raf  

MEK  

Jaks  

PKC  

ERK1/2  

p90RSK  

Bad  

CREB  

STAT-1  

STAT-3  

Bcl-XL  

Bcl-2  

cyto C  

ER stress  

[Ca++]  

HCV  
NS5A  

ROS  

HBV X  

Fig. 3  

Early phase  

Late phase  

ORF3  

ERK  
SAPK/JNK  

?  

ERK  

MEK  

MKP  

ORF3  

S80  

TEY  

pERK  

ORF2  

ORF2  

Cell Survival  

Fig. 4

transactivating the EGFR promoter (Menzo et al., 1993) (Fig. 2). The EGFR is a membrane-bound glycoprotein, the cytoplasmic domain of which undergoes autophosphorylation following ligand binding. This in turn mediates its interaction with Shc and Grb2 and leads to activation of the Raf/MEK/ERK cascade (Hackel et al., 1999). Increased receptor density on HBV-infected cells would lead to activation of cellular growth through increased EGFR signaling. Direct evidence that HBV X promotes cell survival has been obtained in the context of its activation of the PI3K pathway (Fig. 3), resulting in rescue from apoptosis induced by serum deprivation and pro-apoptotic stimuli (Lee et al., 2001). Another HBV protein, a truncated form of the middle surface antigen, MHBs(t) has also been shown to trigger a PKC-dependent activation of the Ras/MEK/ERK pathway (Hildt et al., 2002) (Fig. 2).

Thus, HBV utilizes multiple strategies and cellular targets to promote cell survival and to deregulate the cell cycle. Being a small DNA virus with a limited coding capacity, it achieves this through HBV X, one versatile protein with multiple activities.

## 5. Hepatitis C virus

The HCV causes persistent infection, an asymptomatic disease with intermittent flare-ups, and may lead to the development of HCC (Major et al., 2001). The HCV positive-sense RNA genome of ~9.6 kb has 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions and encodes a polyprotein precursor. This polyprotein is processed into at least 10 proteins, 4 of which are structural proteins (core, E1, E2 and p7) and 6 nonstructural (NS) proteins (NS2, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A, and NS5B) (Grakoui et al., 1993). The effects of HCV proteins on the mitogenic signaling pathways have been characterized to some degree of sophistication. It is interesting to note that different HCV proteins (core and NS5A) or sometimes even the same protein (core) exert seemingly contradictory effects on cell death, regeneration and mitotic activity.

The HCV core protein forms oligomers (Matsumoto et al., 1996), binds viral RNA (Hwang et al., 1995), and is present on the cytoplasmic side of the endoplasmic reticulum and in the nucleus (Lo et al., 1995). Besides a structural function, it has been shown to activate the Raf/MEK/ERK cascade (Giambartolomei et al., 2001; Hayashi et al., 2000; Fukuda et al., 2001) (Fig. 2). Constitutive expression of the core protein in cell lines resulted in high basal activity of Raf and MEK, as well as hyperphosphorylation and activation of ERK (Giambartolomei et al., 2001). This can be partly explained by binding of the core protein to 14-3-3 (Fig. 2), a class of Raf-inhibitory proteins with affinity for phosphoserine residues (Aoki et al., 2000). ERK is activated by core,

independently of hepatocyte mitogen (EGF; transforming growth factor α, TGF-α) mediated signaling; this activation is blocked by PD98059, an inhibitor of MEK (Hayashi et al., 2000). The HCV core protein thus appears to function either at or upstream of MEK (Fig. 2). It also enhances ELK-1 activation in cell lines, without affecting ERK activity or ELK-1 phosphorylation, placing the effect downstream of MEK (Fukuda et al., 2001) (Fig. 2). Additional proof for the downstream action of HCV core comes from the observation that it can directly interact with and activate STAT-3 in NIH 3T3 cells (Yoshida et al., 2002) (Figs. 2 and 3). The activation of STAT-3 results in rapid proliferation and up-regulation of Bcl-XL and cyclin D1. Moreover, additional expression of STAT-3 in HCV core-expressing cells results in anchorage-independent growth and tumorigenesis. Thus, the ability to directly activate the MAPK cascade and to prolong its activity in response to mitogenic stimuli may contribute to neoplastic transformation of HCV-infected hepatocytes. Indeed, HCV core can transform cells in cooperation with c-Ras (Ray et al., 1996) and its constitutive expression in transgenic mice causes steatosis and HCC, analogous to the situation in patients with chronic hepatitis C (Moriya et al., 1998). Another function of HCV core might be related to inhibiting or promoting TNF receptor-mediated apoptosis (Fig. 3). Based on the fact that HCV core binds to the cytoplasmic domain of tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) family (Zhu et al., 1998), this protein can promote cell death during HCV infection via TNF signaling pathways. In a different study, the HCV core was shown to protect cells from apoptotic cell death through activation of the NFκB pathway (Marusawa et al., 1999). Thus, the role of HCV core in the TNFR-mediated apoptosis is controversial and may vary with the cellular context.

Another interesting HCV protein is NS5A. It is phosphorylated on multiple serine residues and exists in two forms: a basal phosphorylated form of 56 kDa and a hyperphosphorylated form of 58 kDa (Kaneko et al., 1994). This protein is believed to be part of the viral replicase complex and associates with membranes. The NS5A protein has multiple proline-rich (PXXP) motifs, two of which are highly conserved among all HCV genotypes. Such PXXP motifs are part of polyproline helices found in a number of viral and cellular proteins involved in signal transduction, and bind the SH3 domains found in a diverse group of signal-transducing molecules (Koch et al., 1991). The NS5A protein binds Grb2 (Fig. 2) causing decreased phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and has been suggested to perturb signaling through this adaptor protein (Tan et al., 1999). In addition, NS5A can bind to the p85 subunit of PI3K (He et al., 2002) (Fig. 3). This would lead to subversion of the cell signaling through the Raf/MEK/ERK and PI3K/Akt pathways. Interestingly, the association with

Grb2, which interferes with ERK activation, may also result in downregulation of interferon (IFN) gene expression (Francois et al., 2000). NS5A can also bind and inhibit protein kinase R (PKR) (Gale et al., 1998), an effector of IFN action, a signal integrator in translational and transcriptional control pathways (Williams, 2001), and an effector molecule capable of inducing apoptosis in response to stress signals (Tan and Katze, 1999). The NS5A protein appears to promote cell survival in the face of a host IFN response. Constitutive expression of NS5A induces a transformed phenotype in murine NIH3T3 fibroblasts and tumors in nude mice (Gale et al., 1999). It contains a potential transcriptional transactivator domain near its C-terminus, suggesting that the NS5A protein might function as a viral transactivator (Kato et al., 1997). It can activate transcription factors NF-κB and STAT-3 by altering calcium homeostasis and inducing oxidative stress in cells (Gong et al., 2001) (Fig. 3). The constitutive activation of STAT-3, besides stimulating growth, is also the major inducer of the acute phase of liver disease, which may be relevant to HCV-associated acute hepatitis.

Two other HCV proteins contribute to increased survival of infected cells. The E2 surface glycoprotein has sequences homologous to the PKR and eIF2α phosphorylation sites. It can inhibit the activation and effector functions of PKR (Taylor et al., 1999), and through it the host IFN response. The NS3 protein is a serine protease with NTPase and helicase activities, binds the protein kinase A (PKA) and PKC enzymes involved in diverse signaling pathways (Borowski et al., 1999), and can transform NIH3T3 cells in vitro (Sakamuro et al., 1995).

Thus, HCV appears to have evolved a dual strategy to sustain the survival and growth of infected cells. This involves MAPK activation and interference with the host IFN response.

cellular proteins such as Src, Grb2, Hck, Fyn, PLCγ and the p85α subunit of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) (Korkaya et al., 2001). These proteins are upstream modulators of the Raf/MEK/ERK, PI3K/Akt and PLCγ/PKC pathways, and are critical for mitogenic and cell survival signaling (Shimamura et al., 2000). Compared to control cells, those expressing pORF3 contain higher ERK activity (Korkaya et al., 2001) (Fig. 2) and can better survive serum starvation or apoptotic stimuli (Jameel et al., unpublished). Though the mechanism for pORF3-mediated ERK activation is not established, it appears to be independent of pORF3 phosphorylation or its ability to interact with cellular proteins containing SH3 domains (Jameel et al., unpublished).

The ORF3 protein has been shown to homodimerize (Tyagi et al., 2001) and this raises interesting possibilities for the formation of protein–protein complexes. Recently pORF3 has also been shown to bind the ORF2 capsid protein of HEV (Tyagi et al., 2002). This interaction requires pORF3 to be phosphorylated at Ser80.

Phosphorylation of pORF3 by MAPKs and its ability to activate ERK serves as an interesting model of viral regulation. Though the temporal expression of HEV proteins during an acute infection of hepatocytes has not been worked out, we propose that pORF3 is expressed early during infection and signals cell survival through the activation of ERK. This would also lead to increased phosphorylation of pORF3. At later times in the viral infection cycle, the ORF2 capsid protein is expressed. While most of this protein is used to build new virions, some ORF2 protein binds phosphorylated pORF3 and blocks pro-survival function of the latter. This would enhance cell death and aid in dissemination of progeny virions. This model is presented in Fig. 4.

## 7. What does it all mean?

Hepatitis viruses are generally not cytolytic; cell death is primarily due to antiviral host defense mechanisms (Chisari, 1997). The liver plays a pivotal role in maintaining adequate levels of metabolites and in detoxifying potentially toxic chemicals in the bloodstream. In adults, hepatocytes have a long lifespan and rarely divide under normal conditions. However, under pathophysiological stress such as partial hepatectomy, toxic injury or viral infection, these cells divide in response to growth factors (Masuhara et al., 1996). The cell cycle is characterized by a quick G0/G1 transition after liver injury, followed by a long G1 phase (Talarmin et al., 1999). Hepatocellular swelling is commonly observed following regenerative stimuli. A causal relationship has now been established between increase in cell volume and activation of cytoplasmic

## 6. Hepatitis E virus

HEV is an acutely infecting virus and, in contrast to HBV and HCV, has no reported ability to cause chronic infection or cellular transformation. The HEV genome is a polyadenylated, positive-sense RNA of ~7.2 kb with short 5′ and 3′ non-coding regions spanning a coding region that includes three ORFs: ORF1 encoding a NS polyprotein, ORF2 encoding the major capsid protein, and ORF3 encoding a small protein of undefined function (Tam et al., 1991).

The ORF3 protein (pORF3) is phosphorylated at a single serine residue (Ser80) by cellular MAPKs and is associated with cytoskeletal and membrane fractions of the cell (Zafarullah et al., 1997). In addition, it contains PXXP sequences, which interact with SH3 domains of

signaling cascades such as MAPKs, PI3K and PKC, as well as proliferative transcription factors such as NF-κB, STAT-3 and c-Fos/c-Jun (Kim et al., 2001).

Different growth factors regulate this process by providing both stimulatory and inhibitory signals for cell growth. The MEK/ERK activation, observed only in regenerating hepatocytes, represents an early marker of regeneration, causes hepatocyte spreading in early G1 and makes cells permissive to DNA replication (Rescan et al., 2001). Activation of the MEK/ERK cascade in regenerating liver is biphasic and appears to control two main points of G1 progression. The first, occurring very early in G1, could be associated with the pre-replicative competence of the hepatocytes before they can fully respond to growth factors. This priming step is an initiating event that involves increased DNA binding activity of NF-κB and activation of other transcription factors such as STAT-3, C/EBPβ, and AP1, presumably through TNFα and interleukin-6 (IL-6) (Taub, 1996). The second activation is at the G1/S boundary, is growth factor-dependent and is linked to cyclin D1 induction (Albrecht et al., 1995). Further, MAPK causes telomerase activation before hepatocytes enter the S phase (Inui et al., 2001). The growth factors that contribute to this process are EGF, TGFα, and the hepatocyte growth factor (Hackel et al., 1999; Block et al., 1996). Reports indicate that EGF may stimulate hepatocyte growth through two distinct pathways that activate MAPKs, either through Raf or independent of it (Cowley et al., 1994).

The hepatic stellate cells (HSC) are tissue-specific pericytes involved in tissue repair. Ligation of the chemokine receptor CXCR3 results in increased chemotaxis and activation of the Raf/MAPK/ERK cascade. In HSC, following CXCR3 activation, increased Src phosphorylation and kinase activity is associated with activation of two critical survival pathways—the PI3K/Akt and MAPK cascades (Bonacchi et al., 2001). These observations have helped determine a growth-factor dependency in mid-to-late G1 and to define a crucial role of the MAPK signaling pathway in the process of liver regeneration, as also during hepatocyte transformation (Taub, 1996; Inui et al., 2001). It is therefore not surprising that all hepatitis viruses examined so far encode one or more proteins to regulate this signaling pathway.

The hepatitis viruses examined here show a wide disease spectrum. Among these viruses, HCV appears to be the most competent at evading host responses. It encodes multiple proteins to target not just the MAPK-mediated survival pathway, but also the cell cycle and the host IFN response. Together with high rates of mutation and viral quasispecies, this translates into high levels of chronicity, reaching up to 80% following an acute infection (Major et al., 2001). Infection with HBV also results in chronicity, but in about 20% of cases

(Hollinger and Liang, 2001). Being a small DNA virus, a limited genome necessitates conservation of sequence space. The HBV X regulatory protein contains multiple activities that range from MAPK activation to cell cycle deregulation. Though this is an efficient strategy considering the constraints on genome size, HBV is unable to evade host responses as efficiently as HCV. Nevertheless, by integrating its genetic material into the host genome, HBV is able to deregulate the cell cycle over a longer period. Finally, HEV predominantly causes an acute, self-limiting infection. Activation of the MAPK pathway by pORF3 appears to promote cell survival, perhaps only during the early phase of viral replication. However, in the absence of other evasion strategies, HEV is eventually cleared by the host.

The interplay between multiple signals would influence cell survival or death; many viral proteins act within this context (Thomson, 2001; Goodbourn et al., 2000; Murphy, 2001). We have focused here on the common theme of MAPK activation by hepatitis viruses. While we propose a pro-survival outcome, the downstream effects of MAPK activation by hepatitis viruses may vary considerably, depending upon the state of the cell. Complex signaling networks show a high degree of cross talk, the quantitative nature of which is just beginning to be appreciated. Most of the work described in this review has been performed in cell lines and results with infectious virus are lacking due to non-availability of small animal models of infection. Though the in vitro results must be interpreted with caution, they have provided unifying concepts and significant insights into the molecular basis of viral hepatitis.


## Acknowledgements

Work in the authors’ laboratory is supported by internal funds from the ICGEB and through an International Senior Research Fellowship in Biomedical Sciences of the Wellcome Trust. M.P. extends sincere gratitude to Assoc. Prof. T. Varadinova for the encouragement and support during the early stages of her career.


## References

Albrecht, J.H., Hu, M.Y., Cerra, F.B., 1995. Distinct patterns of cyclin D1 regulation in models of liver regeneration and human liver. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 209, 648–655.

Aoki, H., Hayashi, J., Moriyama, M., Arakawa, Y., Hino, O., 2000. Hepatitis C virus core protein interacts with 14-3-3 protein and activates the kinase Raf-1. J. Virol. 74, 1736–1741.

Benn, J., Schneider, R.J., 1994. Hepatitis B virus HBx protein activates Ras-GTP complex formation and establishes a Ras, Raf, MAP kinase signaling cascade. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 10350–10354.

Benn, J., Schneider, R.J., 1995. Hepatitis B virus HBx protein deregulates cell cycle check point control. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 11215–11219.

Bergsland, E.K., 2001. Molecular mechanisms underlying the development of hepatocellular carcinoma. Semin. Oncol. 28, 521–531.

Block, G.D., Locker, J., Bowen, W.C., Petersen, B.E., Katyal, S., Storm, S.C., Riley, T., Howard, T.A., Michalopoulos, G.K., 1996. Population expansion, clonal growth and specific differentiation patterns in primary cultures of hepatocytes induced by HGF/SF, EGF and TGFα in a chemically defined (HGM) medium. J. Cell Biol. 132, 1133–1149.

Bonacchi, A., Romagnani, P., Romanelli, R.G., Efsen, E., Annunziato, F., Lasagni, L., Francalanci, M., Serio, M., Laffi, G., Pinzani, M., Gentilini, P., Marra, F., 2001. Signal transduction by the chemokine receptor CXCR3: activation of Ras/ERK, Src, and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt controls cell migration and proliferation in human vascular pericytes. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 9945–9954.

Borowski, P., zur Wiesch, J.S., Resch, K., Feucht, H., Laufs, R., Schmitz, H., 1999. Protein kinase C recognizes the protein kinase A-binding motif on nonstructural protein 3 of hepatitis C virus. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 30722–30728.

Chisari, F.V., 1997. Cytotoxic T cells and viral hepatitis. J. Clin. Invest. 99, 1472–1477.

Cohen, G.B., Ren, R., Baltimore, D., 1995. Modular binding domains in signal transduction pathways. Cell 80, 237–248.

Cowley, S., Paterson, H., Kemp, P., Marshall, C.J., 1994. Activation of MAP kinase kinase is necessary and sufficient for PC12 differentiation and for transformation of NIH 3T3 cells. Cell 77, 841–852.

Davis, R.J., 2000. Signal transduction to the nucleus by MAP kinase. In: Gutkind, J.S. (Ed.), Signalling Networks and Cell Cycle Control: The Molecular Basis of Cancer and other Diseases. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, pp. 153–164.

Feitelson, M.A., Duan, L.X., 1997. Hepatitis B virus X antigen in the pathogenesis of chronic infections and development of hepatocellular carcinoma. Am. J. Pathol. 150, 1141–1157.

Francois, C., Duverlie, G., Rebouillat, D., Khorsi, H., Castelain, S., Blum, H.E., Gatignol, A., Wychowski, C., Moradpour, D., Meurs, E.F., 2000. Expression of hepatitis C virus proteins interferes with the antiviral action of interferon independently of PKR-mediated control of protein synthesis. J. Virol. 74, 5587–5596.

Fukuda, K., Tsuchihara, K., Hijakata, M., Nishiguchi, S., Kuroki, T., Shimotohno, K., 2001. Hepatitis C virus core protein enhances the activation of the transcription factor, Elk1, in response to mitogenic stimuli. Hepatology 33, 159–165.

Gale, M.J., Jr., Blakely, C.M., Kwieciszewski, B., Tan, S.-L., Dosset, M., Korth, M.J., Polyak, S.J., Gretch, D.R., Katze, M.G., 1998. Control of PKR protein kinase by hepatitis C virus non structural 5A protein: molecular mechanisms of kinase regulation. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 5208–5218.

Gale, M.J., Jr., Kwieciszewski, B., Dossett, M., Nakao, H., Katze, M.G., 1999. Antiapoptotic and oncogenic potentials of hepatitis C virus are linked to interferon resistance by viral repression of the PKR protein kinase. J. Virol. 73, 6506–6516.

Garrington, T.P., Johnson, G.L., 1999. Organization and regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 11, 211–218.

Giambartolomei, S., Covone, F., Levero, M., Balsano, C., 2001. Sustained activation of the Raf/MEK/Erk pathway in response to EGF in stable cell lines expressing the hepatitis C virus (HCV) core protein. Oncogene 20, 2606–2610.

Gong, G., Waris, G., Tanveer, R., Siddiqui, A., 2001. Human hepatitis C virus NS5A protein alters intracellular calcium levels, induces oxidative stress, and activates STAT-3 and NF-κB. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 9599–9604.

Goodbourn, S., Didcock, L., Randall, R.E., 2000. Interferons: cell signalling, immune modulation, antiviral responses and virus countermeasures. J. Gen. Virol. 10, 2341–2364.

Grakoui, A., Wychowski, C., Lin, C., Feinstone, S.M., Rice, C.M., 1993. Expression and identification of hepatitis C virus polyprotein cleavage products. J. Virol. 67, 1385–1395.

Hackel, P.O., Zwick, E., Prenzel, N., Ullrich, A., 1999. Epidermal growth factor receptors: critical mediators of multiple receptor pathways. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 11, 184–189.

Hayashi, J., Aoki, H., Kajino, K., Moriyama, M., Arakawa, Y., Hino, O., 2000. Hepatitis C virus core protein activates the MAPK/ERK cascade synergistically with tumor promoter TPA, but not with epidermal growth factor β. Hepatology 32, 958–961.

He, Y., Nakao, S.L., Polyak, S.J., Neddermann, P., Vijaysri, S., Jacobs, B.L., Katze, M.G., 2002. Subversion of cell signaling pathways by hepatitis C virus nonstructural 5A protein via interaction with Grb2 and p85 phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. J. Virol. 76, 9207–9217.

Henkler, F., Lopes, A.R., Jones, M., Koshy, R., 1998. Erk-independent partial activation of AP-1 sites by the hepatitis B virus HBx protein. J. Gen. Virol. 79, 2737–2742.

Hildt, E., Munz, B., Saher, G., Reifenberg, K., Hofscheider, P.H., 2002. The preS2 activator MHBs(t) of hepatitis B virus activates c-raf-1/Erk2 signaling in transgenic mice. EMBO J. 21, 525–535.

Hollinger, F.B., Liang, T.J., 2001. Hepatitis B virus. In: Knipe, D.M., Howley, P.M. (Eds.), Field’s Virology, fourth ed.. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, PA, pp. 2971–3036.

Hwang, S.B., Lo, S.-Y., Ou, J.-H., Lai, M.M.C., 1995. Detection of cellular proteins and viral core protein interacting with the 5′-untranslated region of hepatitis C virus RNA. J. Biomed. Sci. 2, 227–236.

Inui, T., Shinomiya, N., Fukusawa, M., Kuranaga, N., Ohkura, S., Seki, S., 2001. Telomerase activation and MAPK pathways in regenerating hepatocytes. Hum. Cell 14, 275–282.

Jameel, S., Siddiqui, A., Hu, K.-Q., 1994. Molecular biology of hepatitis viruses. In: Gitnick, G. (Ed.), Principles and Practice of Gastroenterology and Hepatology. Appleton and Lange, Norwalk, CT, pp. 743–757.

Kaneko, T., Tanji, Y., Satoh, S., Hijikata, M., Asabe, S., Kimura, K., Shimotohno, K., 1994. Production of two phosphoproteins from the NS5A region of the hepatitis C viral genome. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 205, 320–326.

Karin, M., 1998. The NF-κB activation pathway: its regulation and role in inflammation and cell survival. Cancer J. Sci. Am. 4 (Suppl. 1), S92–S99.

Kato, N., Lan, K.H., Ono-Nita, S.K., Shiratori, Y., Omata, M., 1997. Hepatitis C virus nonstructural region 5A protein is a potent transcriptional activator. J. Virol. 71, 8856–8859.

Kim, H., Lee, H., Yun, Y., 1998. X-gene product of hepatitis B virus induces apoptosis in liver cells. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 381–385.

Kim, R.D., Stein, G.S., Chari, R.S., 2001. Impact of cell swelling on proliferative signal transduction in the liver. J. Cell Biochem. 83, 56–69.

Koch, C.A., Anderson, D., Moran, M.F., Ellis, C., Pawson, T., 1991. SH2 and SH3 domains: elements that control interactions of cytoplasmic signaling proteins. Science 252, 668–674.

Korkaya, H., Jameel, S., Gupta, D., Tyagi, S., Kumar, R., Zafrullah, M., Mazumdar, M., Lal, S.K., Xiaofang, L., Sehgal, D., Das, S.R., Sahal, D., 2001. The ORF3 protein of hepatitis E virus binds to Src homology 3 domains and activates MAPK. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 42389–42400.

Lee, Y.I., Kang-Park, S., Do, S.-I., 2001. The hepatitis B virus X protein activates a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-dependent survival signaling cascade. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 16969–16977.

Lo, S.-Y., Masiarz, F., Hwang, S.B., Lai, M.M.C., Ou, J.-H., 1995. Differential subcellular localization of hepatitis C virus core gene products. Virology 213, 455–461.

Major, M.E., Rehermann, B., Feinstone, M., 2001. Hepatitis C viruses. In: Knipe, D.M., Howley, P.M. (Eds.), Field's Virology, fourth ed.. Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, PA, pp. 1127–1161.

Marusawa, H., Hijikata, M., Chiba, T., Shimotohno, K., 1999. Hepatitis C virus core protein inhibits Fas- and tumor necrosis factor alpha-mediated apoptosis via NFκB activation. J. Virol. 73, 4713–4720.

Masuhara, M., Yasunaga, M., Tanigawa, K., Tamura, F., Yamashita, S., Sakaida, I., Okita, K., 1996. Expression of hepatocyte growth factor, transforming factor alpha and transforming growth factor beta 1 messenger RNA in various human liver diseases and correlation with hepatocyte proliferation. Hepatology 24, 323–329.

Matsumoto, M., Hwang, S.B., Jeng, K.-S., Zhu, N., Lai, M.M.C., 1996. Homotypic interactions and multimerization of hepatitis C virus core protein. Virology 218, 43–51.

Menzo, S., Clementi, M., Alfani, E., Bagnarelli, P., Iacovacci, S., Manzin, A., Dandri, M., Natoli, G., Levrero, M., Carloni, G., 1993. Trans-activation of epidermal growth factor receptor gene by the hepatitis B virus X-gene product. Virology 196, 878–882.

Moriya, K., Fujie, H., Shintani, Y., Yotsuyanagi, H., Tsutsumi, T., Ishibashi, K., Matsuura, Y., Kimura, S., Miyamura, T., Koike, K., 1998. The core protein of hepatitis C virus induces hepatocellular carcinoma in transgenic mice. Nat. Med. 4, 1065–1067.

Murphy, P.M., 2001. Viral exploitation and subversion of the immune system through chemokine mimicry. Nat. Immunol. 2, 116–122.

Pan, J., Duan, L.-X., Sun, B.S., Feitelson, M.A., 2001. Hepatitis B virus X protein protects against anti-Fas-mediated apoptosis in human liver cells by inducing NF-κB. J. Gen. Virol. 82, 171–182.

Pomerantz, J.L., Baltimore, D., 2000. A cellular rescue team. Nature 406, 26–29.

Ray, R.B., Lagging, L.M., Meyer, K., Ray, R., 1996. Hepatitis C virus core protein cooperates with ras and transforms primary rat embryo fibroblasts to tumorigenic phenotype. J. Virol. 70, 4438–4443.

Rescan, C., Coutant, A., Talarmin, H., Theret, N., Glaise, D., Guguen-Guillouzo, C., Baffet, G., 2001. Mechanism in the sequential control of cell morphology and S phase entry by epidermal growth factor involves distinct MEK/ERK activations. Mol. Cell Biol. 12, 725–738.

Robinson, M.J., Cobb, M.H., 1997. Mitogen activated protein kinase pathways. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 9, 180–186.

Sakamuro, D., Furukawa, T., Takegami, T., 1995. Hepatitis C virus nonstructural protein NS3 transforms NIH 3T3 cells. J. Virol. 69, 3893–3896.

Shimamura, A., Ballif, B.A., Richards, S.A., Blenis, J., 2000. Rsk1 mediates a MEK-MAP kinase cell survival signal. Curr. Biol. 10, 127–135.

Shin, E.C., Shin, J.S., Park, J.H., Kim, H., Kim, S.J., 1999. Expression of Fas ligand in human hepatoma cell lines: role of hepatitis-B virus X (HBx) in induction of Fas ligand. Int. J. Cancer 4, 587–591.

Siddiqui, A., Jameel, S., Mapoles, J.E., 1987. Expression of the hepatitis B viral X gene. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 84, 2513–2517.

Su, F., Schneider, R.J., 1996. Hepatitis B virus HBx protein activates transcription factor NF-κB by acting on multiple cytoplasmic inhibitors of rel-related proteins. J. Virol. 70, 4558–4566.

Talarmin, H., Rescan, C., Cariou, S., Glaise, D., Zanninelli, G., Bilodeau, M., Loyer, P., Guguen-Guillouzo, C., Baffet, G., 1999.


The mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal regulated kinase cascade activation is a key signaling pathway involved in the regulation of G1 phase progression in proliferating hepatocytes. Mol. Cell Biol. 19, 6003–6011.

Tam, A.W., Smith, M.M., Guerra, M.E., Huang, C.C., Bradley, G.R., 1991. Hepatitis E virus (HEV): molecular cloning and sequencing of the full-length viral genome. Virology 185, 120–131.

Tan, S.-L., Katze, M.G., 1999. The emerging role of interferon-induced PKR protein kinase as an apoptotic effector: a new face of death? J. Interf. Cytok. Res. 19, 545–556.

Tan, S.-L., Nakao, H., He, Y., Vijaysri, S., Neddermann, P., Jacobs, B.L., Mayer, B.J., Katze, M.G., 1999. NS5A, a nonstructural protein of hepatitis C virus, binds growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 adaptor protein in a Src homology 3 domain/ligand-dependent manner and perturbs mitogenic signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 5533–5538.

Taub, R., 1996. Transcriptional control of liver regeneration. FASEB J. 10, 413–427.

Taylor, D.R., Shi, S.T., Romano, P.R., Barber, G.N., Lai, M.M.C., 1999. Inhibition of the interferon-inducible protein kinase PRK by HCV E2 protein. Science 285, 107–110.

Teodoro, J.G., Branton, P.E., 1997. Regulation of apoptosis by viral gene products. J. Virol. 71, 1739–1746.

Thomson, B.J., 2001. Viruses and apoptosis. Int. J. Exp. Pathol. 82, 65–76.

Tyagi, S., Jameel, S., Lal, S.K., 2001. Self-association and mapping of the interaction domain of hepatitis E virus ORF3 protein. J. Virol. 75, 2493–2498.

Tyagi, S., Korkaya, H., Zafrullah, M., Jameel, S., Lal, S.K., 2002. The phosphorylated form of ORF3 protein of hepatitis E virus interacts with its non-glycosylated form of the capsid protein, ORF2. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 22759–22767.

Waris, G., Huh, K.-W., Siddiqui, A., 2001. Mitochondrially associated hepatitis B virus X protein constitutively activates transcription factors STAT-3 and NF-κB via oxidative stress. Mol. Cell Biol. 21, 7721–7730.

Williams, B.R.G., 2001. Signal integration via PKR. Science’s STKE. Available from http://www.stke.org/cgi/content/full/oc-sig;trans;2001/89/re2.

Yen, T.S.B., 1996. Hepadnaviral X protein: review of recent progress. J. Biomed. Sci. 3, 20–30.

Yoshida, T., Hanada, T., Tokuhisa, T., Kosai, K., Sata, M., Kohara, M., Yoshimura, A., 2002. Activation of STAT3 by the hepatitis C virus core protein leads to cellular transformation. J. Exp. Med. 196, 641–653.

Zafrullah, M., Ozdener, M.H., Panda, S.K., Jameel, S., 1997. The ORF3 protein of hepatitis E virus is a phosphoprotein that associates with the cytoskeleton. J. Virol. 71, 9045–9053.

Zhu, N., Khoshnan, A., Schneider, R., Matsumoto, M., Dennert, G., Ware, C., Lai, M.M.C., 1998. Hepatitis C virus core protein binds to the cytoplasmic domain of tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor 1 and enhances TNF-induced apoptosis. J. Virol. 72, 3691–3697.

Zoulim, F., Saputelli, J., Seeger, C., 1994. Woodchuck hepatitis B virus X gene is important for viral infection in vivo. J. Virol. 68, 2026–2030.

Zuckerman, A.J., 1983. The history of viral hepatitis from antiquity to the present. In: Deinhardt, F., Deinhardt, J. (Eds.), Viral Hepatitis: Laboratory and Clinical Science. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp. 3–32.
