
Pflügers Arch - Eur J Physiol (2003) 446:304–308  
DOI 10.1007/s00424-003-1045-8  

**EJP (PFLÜGERS ARCHIV)—SYMPOSIUM**

Joost G. J. Hoenderop · Bernd Nilius · René J. M. Bindels

# Epithelial calcium channels: from identification to function and regulation

Published online: 27 March 2003  
© Springer-Verlag 2003

Abstract The epithelial calcium channels TRPV5 and TRPV6 have been studied extensively in the epithelial tissues controlling Ca²⁺ homeostasis and exhibit a range of distinctive properties that distinguish them from other transient receptor potential (TRP) channels. These two novel members of the superfamily of TRP channels were cloned from vitamin D-responsive epithelia: kidney, small intestine and placenta, and identified subsequently in tissues like pancreas, bone and prostate. This review addresses the unique properties of these highly Ca²⁺-selective channels and highlights their implications for the process of transepithelial Ca²⁺ transport.

Keywords Vitamin D · Hypercalciuria · Oestrogen · ECaC1 · ECaC2 · Calcium transport

## Identification of two unique transient receptor potential (TRP) channel family members, TRPV5 and TRPV6

The maintenance of the body’s Ca²⁺ balance is of crucial importance for many vital physiological functions including neuronal excitability, muscle contraction and bone formation, and is tightly controlled by the concerted action of kidney, intestine and bone. Ca²⁺ transport occurring in these Ca²⁺ absorbing tissues is realized by Ca²⁺ entry across the apical plasma membrane; cytosolic diffusion of Ca²⁺ bound to calbindin-D and extrusion across the basolateral membrane (Fig. 1) [6, 9, 11]. In the last decade a number of Ca²⁺-permeable cation channels have been identified as relevant Ca²⁺ influx pathways, most of which belong to the superfamily of TRP channels [15]. The molecular nature of the luminal Ca²⁺ influx pathway has been identified by our group and termed the epithelial Ca²⁺ channel 1 (ECaC1, recently renamed TRPV5) [3]. Subsequently, a homologous isoform was identified from rat intestine and named calcium transporter 1 (CaT1, synonymous with ECaC2 and recently renamed TRPV6) [22]. TRPV5 and TRPV6 represent two novel highly homologous members within the TRP superfamily [9]. These channels consist of six transmembrane domains including a putative pore-forming region between transmembrane segments 5 and 6 and include large intracellular amino and carboxyl tails. They belong to the TRPV (vanilloid) subfamily, which is one of the three subfamilies—TRPC (canonical), TRPV (vanilloid) and TRPM (melastatin)—comprising this superfamily [15]. The genes encoding TRPV5 and TRPV6 are juxtaposed on human chromosome 7q35 and on mouse chromosome 6. The distinct genes comprise 15 exons and encode proteins of about 730 amino acids [17, 18, 23, 29].

### Tissue distribution of TRPV5 and TRPV6

The tissue distribution of TRPV5 and TRPV6 has been studied extensively by Northern blot, RT-PCR analysis and immunohistochemistry [7, 13, 14, 16, 22, 23, 29, 30]. In humans, both channels are co-expressed in the organs that mediate transcellular Ca²⁺ transport, such as duodenum, jejunum, colon and kidney, but also in exocrine tissues such as pancreas, prostate, mammary gland, sweat gland and salivary gland. Epithelial calcium channels present in the placenta might be involved in placental transfer of maternal Ca²⁺. This crucial process in fetal development is carried out by the placental syncytiotrophoblast layer. The finding that mRNA of TRPV5 and TRPV6 is expressed in this layer might indicate that these Ca²⁺ channels account for the basal Ca²⁺ uptake by these cells. The expression of TRPV6 in prostate is increased in

J. G. J. Hoenderop · R. J. M. Bindels (✉)  
Department of Cell Physiology,  
Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences,  
University Medical Centre Nijmegen,  
P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands  
e-mail: r.bindels@ncmls.kun.nl  
Tel.: +31-24-3614211  
Fax: +31-24-3616413  

B. Nilius  
Department of Physiology, Campus Gasthuisberg,  
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

Fig. 1 Transcellular Ca²⁺ transport takes place in the kidney and intestine and is a three-step-process. Following entry of Ca²⁺ through the (hetero)tetrameric epithelial Ca²⁺ channels, TRPV5 (red) and TRPV6 (blue), cytosolic Ca²⁺ is buffered by the calbindins. At the basolateral membrane, Ca²⁺ is extruded via a plasma membrane Ca²⁺-ATPase (PMCA1b) and a sodium-calcium-exchanger (NCX1)

duodenum

kidney

luminal

basolateral

1,25(OH)₂D₃  
estrogen  
diet Ca²⁺  

NCX1  

TRPV6  

calbindin-D  

TRPV5  

PMCA1b  

3Na⁺  

Ca²⁺  

ATP  

ADP  

Ca²⁺  

prostate cancer and correlates with the tumour grade [24]. Since TRPV6 expression is also increased in carcinomas of other tissues, such as breast, thyroid, colon and ovary, it might be a marker for tumour progression. In mice, TRPV6 is expressed more ubiquitously than in humans, whereas TRPV5 expression is mainly restricted to the kidney. The relative mRNA levels of TRPV5 and TRPV6 in tissues co-expressing these channels are different. In duodenum, the TRPV5 mRNA level is much lower than that of TRPV6 mRNA [27]. The variation in TRPV5 and TRPV6 expression patterns found in different studies in intestine, kidney, testis, oesophagus, ileum and colon could result from differences between species, or expression of TRPV5 or TRPV6 in these tissues below detection levels. In general, TRPV5 seems to be the major isoform in kidney, whereas TRPV6 is highly expressed in small intestine, although both isoforms are co-expressed in these tissues. Detailed investigations of protein levels and activity measurements will provide more clarity on this subject.

In the kidney, TRPV5 is localized in the apical domain of the epithelial cells lining the late part of the distal convoluted tubule (DCT2) and the connecting tubule (CNT) (Fig. 2) [5, 14]. In these nephron segments TRPV5 co-localizes with other proteins involved in Ca²⁺ transport, such as calbindin-D₂₈K, Na⁺-Ca²⁺ exchanger type 1 and plasma membrane Ca²⁺-ATPase 1b [5]. In the pancreas, TRPV5 is present in the secretory granules of the β-cells where it co-localizes with calbindin-D₂₈K and insulin [13]. Although this suggests a role for TRPV5 in insulin secretion, such a function could not be confirmed in Zucker diabetic fatty (ZDF) rats, an animal model for type-2 diabetes mellitus. In contrast to TRPV5, TRPV6 mRNA is found in the exocrine acinar cell of the pancreas, but not in pancreatic duct cells and β-cells.

Fig. 2 Immunopositive fluorescence staining of epithelial Ca²⁺ channel-1 (TRPV5, green) in kidney, predominantly along the apical membrane of the distal convoluted and connecting tubules (*) (PT proximal tubule, G glomerulus)

TRPV6 protein expression, in the mouse and human gastrointestinal tract, is restricted essentially to the epithelial cells, and is confined largely to the apical cell surface [30]. mRNA expression of TRPV5 decreases along the intestinal tract, and is absent in the ileum [16, 30]. In the duodenum, TRPV5 and TRPV6 proteins are present in a thin layer along the apical membrane of the villus tips [5, 30]. As this is the major site for Ca²⁺ absorption, TRPV5/6 expression patterns are in line with the role of these proteins in dietary Ca²⁺ uptake.

Functional properties of TRPV5 and TRPV6

When expressed in *Xenopus laevis* oocytes or human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells, TRPV5 and TRPV6 mediate a saturable Ca²⁺ uptake and manifest distinct electrophysiological features, including hyperpolarization-dependent Ca²⁺ entry and Ca²⁺-dependent inactivation [3, 4, 19, 20, 21, 28]. TRPV5- or TRPV6-expressing HEK 293 cells display large inward currents that are strongly dependent on extracellular Ca²⁺ and reverse at high positive membrane potentials [28]. The current/voltage relationship shows prominent inward rectification. Thus, under unstimulated physiological conditions, when the membrane potential is typically around -70 mV in the distal part of the nephron, TRPV5 constitutes a substantial Ca²⁺ conductance permitting basal Ca²⁺ influx. Studies in HEK293 cells expressing TRPV5 or TRPV6 heterologously have shown that these channels exhibit a similar ion permeation sequence for divalent cations (Ca²⁺ > Sr²⁺ ≈ Ba²⁺ > Mn²⁺) [28]. The characteristic pore region of TRPV5 and TRPV6 is unique for its high Ca²⁺ selectivity. A single aspartic residue in the pore region at position 542 (D542) is crucial for Ca²⁺ permeation. This amino acid is completely conserved in TRPV6. Mutation of D542 to alanine abolishes Ca²⁺ permeation, but does not affect the permeation of monovalent cations [19]. Like voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channels, these epithelial calcium channels are both permeable for monovalent cations in the absence of divalent cations with the permeation sequence Na⁺ > Li⁺ > K⁺ > Cs⁺. From an electrophysiological point of view TRPV5 and TRPV6 are highly similar, in line with the 75% homology at the amino acid level between these channels [8]. The main sequence differences are located in the N- and C-terminal tails. Detailed analysis has demonstrated three distinctive differences that include kinetics of Ca²⁺-dependent inactivation and recovery from inactivation, Ba²⁺ conductance and pharmacological block by the potent channel inhibitor ruthenium red. Differences were found in the Ca²⁺-dependent inactivation mechanism, which may reflect mainly the Ca²⁺-dependent inactivation of currents in response to a hyperpolarizing voltage step. TRPV6 inactivation consists of a fast initial phase followed by a slower phase of inactivation, whereas TRPV5 displays only this slow inactivation behaviour [8]. An intriguing difference is the Ba²⁺ selectivity that results in a significantly higher Ba²⁺/Ca²⁺ current ratio for TRPV5 than for TRPV6. Importantly, a pharmacological distinction can be made between TRPV5 and TRPV6 with ruthenium red, for which TRPV6 has a 100-fold lower affinity than TRPV5.

Regulation of TRPV5 and TRPV6

Ca²⁺ (re)absorption is regulated primarily by vitamin D₃ metabolites. Alterations in these regulatory processes are present in many (patho)physiological states including idiopathic hypercalciuric syndromes, chronic renal failure, aging-related Ca²⁺ malabsorption and vitamin D intoxication.

Regulation by vitamin D₃

The active hormonal form of vitamin D, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃ [1,25(OH)₂D₃], is well established in humans and animal models as having a significant role in the regulation of Ca²⁺ (re)absorption in Ca²⁺ transporting epithelia. Recent studies have indicated that TRPV5 and TRPV6 are tightly controlled by 1,25(OH)₂D₃ [1, 2, 7, 10, 25, 27] The first evidence for this vitamin D sensitivity was obtained in vivo studies in which rats were depleted of vitamin D₃ and subsequently repleted [7]. This was accompanied by normalization of the plasma [Ca²⁺] and an increase in the amount of TRPV5 mRNA and protein expression. This observed vitamin D-dependent regulation of TRPV5 and TRPV6 has been confirmed using different animal models and cell lines including in vitamin D receptor (VDR) and in 25-hydroxyvitamin D₃-1α-hydroxylase (1α-OHase) knockout mice [1, 10, 27]. Analysis of putative promoter regions of human and murine TRPV5/6 genes has revealed potential vitamin D response elements, in line with the previously observed functional data.

Regulation by Ca²⁺

Several of the studies cited above have provided evidence that TRPV5 channels are regulated by 1,25(OH)₂D₃. It is, however, difficult to distinguish the effects of hypocalcaemia from those of vitamin D deficiency. Studies were therefore performed in VDR and 1α-OHase knockout mice fed a normal or a high rescue Ca²⁺ diet [10, 27]. Intriguingly, the reduced expression level of renal TRPV5 in the 1α-OHase⁻/- mice is restored by a high dietary Ca²⁺ intake and accompanied by normalization of the plasma [Ca²⁺]. Importantly, this effect is observed in the absence of 1α-OHase activity. In line with the 1,25(OH)₂D₃-dependent regulation, dietary Ca²⁺ also controls the other Ca²⁺ transport proteins. In contrast, the Ca²⁺-enriched rescue diet reduces the expression of renal TRPV5 in 1α-OHase⁺/- mice that exhibit normal serum vitamin D and Ca²⁺ levels. Under physiological conditions, plasma Ca²⁺ acts via a negative feedback mechanism that eventually leads to suppression of the 1α-OHase-activity that in turn decreases Ca²⁺ reabsorption and expression of Ca²⁺ transport proteins. Identical observations have been made in VDR knockout mice, in which TRPV5 and TRPV6 mRNA levels are up-regulated by dietary Ca²⁺ [27]. Studies with VDR⁻/- and 1α-OHase⁻/- mice have revealed that Ca²⁺ supplementation can up-regulate gene transcription encoding Ca²⁺ transporters in the absence of circulating 1,25(OH)₂D₃, but the molecular mechanism of this vitamin D-independent, Ca²⁺-sensitive pathway remains elusive. It is, however, likely that, in addition to the identified vitamin D response elements in the promoter
regions of TRPV5 and calbindin-D genes, Ca²⁺-responsive elements are also present. Several elements have been proposed to function as Ca²⁺-sensitive transcriptional regulators, including the serum-responsive element and the cAMP/Ca²⁺-responsive element. Of interest is the identification of a Purkinje cell expression-specific element in the calbindin-D₂₈K gene that functions as a Ca²⁺-sensitive transcriptional regulatory mechanism. This mechanism may play a role in fine-tuning the Ca²⁺ buffer capacity of Purkinje cells. Detailed promoter analysis is needed to establish whether these domains are also present in the promoter of TRPV5

### Regulation by oestrogens

Oestrogen is involved in bone mineralization and its deficiency in postmenopausal women results in bone loss because of a negative Ca²⁺ balance. In ovariectomized 1α-OHase knockout mice 17β-oestradiol replacement therapy up-regulates renal TRPV5 mRNA and protein levels, leading to normalization of plasma Ca²⁺ levels [26]. Thus, TRPV5 expression is, independent of vitamin D, controlled transcriptionally by oestrogen. Recent findings indicate that TRPV6 expression is also regulated by oestrogen, as duodenal expression of TRPV6 mRNA in male 1α-OHase knockout mice and ovariectomized rats is up-regulated after 17β-oestradiol administration. Together, these data indicate that the function of oestrogen in maintenance of Ca²⁺ balance might be at least in part fulfilled by regulation of TRPV5 and TRPV6 levels, thereby controlling (re)absorption of the amount of Ca²⁺ that is needed for bone calcification. The mechanism of oestrogen-controlled up-regulation of TRPV5/6 mRNA remains to be elucidated, since oestrogen-responsive elements are not consequently present in the putative TRPV5/6 promoter region.

---

of the heterotetramer composition on channel properties has been investigated. Concatemers were constructed consisting of four TRPV5 and TRPV6 subunits configured in a head-to-tail fashion. A different number of TRPV5 and TRPV6 subunits in these concatemers showed that the phenotype resembled the mixed properties of TRPV5 and TRPV6. An increased number of TRPV5 subunits in such a concatemer displayed more TRPV5-like properties, indicating that the stoichiometry of TRPV5/6 heterotetramers influences the channel properties [12]. Consequently, regulation of the relative expression levels of TRPV5 and TRPV6 may be a mechanism for fine-tuning Ca²⁺ transport kinetics in TRPV5/6-expressing tissues.

The tetrameric organization of TRPV5/6 resembles that of the Shaker K⁺ channel, which is composed of four tandemly associated homologous domains. The clustering of four subunits is assumed to create an aqueous pore centred at the four-fold symmetry axis. This tetrameric architecture of TRPV5/6 implies that four of the aspartic residues (D542) form a negatively charged ring that functions as a selectivity filter for Ca²⁺ in analogy with voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channels [9]. The specificity for tetramer formation of the Shaker K⁺ channel is conferred by the T1 domain that consists of two short α-helices in between two pairs of anti-parallel β-strands. It would be interesting to determine whether similar structures in TRPV5/6 are involved in tetramerization. Alternatively, assembly of TRPV5/6 channels into heterotetramers might involve the N-linked glycosylation site in the first extracellular loop, as has been shown for the purinergic P2X₁ receptor trimerization, or the PDZ motif in the N-and C-terminal tail.

---

### Conclusion

The new epithelial Ca²⁺ channels TRPV5 and TRPV6 comprise a unique couple of highly Ca²⁺ selective channels mainly expressed in epithelial tissues. The molecular properties of these channels have been studied extensively and include a high selectivity for Ca²⁺, regulation by calciotropic hormones and Ca²⁺ and operation as homo- and heterotetrameric channel complex. Distinctive physiological functions important for body Ca²⁺ homeostasis have now been established for these channels, but many areas remain open for further investigation. For instance, the physiological function of TRPV5/6 in tissues as pancreas, stomach and prostate remain to be established. Research on the molecular mechanisms regulating TRPV5/6 activity is still in its infancy. In this respect it will be interesting to identify the regulatory domains in these channels, the binding partners of TRPV5/6 that participate in the channel complex and the signalling pathways controlling channel activity. Finally, characterization of TRPV5 and TRPV6 knockout mice should reveal the diseases that are associated with channel dysfunction.

---

### Molecular architecture of the TRPV5/6 channel

The oligomerization of TRPV5 and TRPV6 channels has recently been unravelled [12]. Cross-linking studies, co-immunoprecipitation and molecular mass determination of TRPV5/6 complexes using sucrose gradient sedimentation have shown that TRPV5 and TRPV6 form homo- and heterotetrameric channel complexes. As described above TRPV5 and TRPV6 are co-expressed in several tissues, which allows oligomerization of these channels in vivo. Heteromeric complex formation has been shown to modify the activity of members of the TRPC family. For TRPC1 and TRPC3 it has been shown that hetero-oligomers of these channels possess properties distinct from those of either channel alone. Likewise, oligomerization of TRPV5 and TRPV6 might influence the functional properties of the Ca²⁺ channel. As TRPV5 and TRPV6 exhibit different channel kinetics with respect to Ca²⁺-dependent inactivation, Ba²⁺ selectivity and sensitivity for inhibition by ruthenium red, the influence
Acknowledgements This work was supported in part by grants from the Dutch Kidney Foundation (C10.1881) and the Dutch Organization of Scientific research (Zon-Mw 016.006.001, Zon-Mw 902.18.298, NWO-ALW 805.09.042 and NWO-ALW 810.38.004).

**References**

1. Dardenne O, Prud'homme J, Arabian A, Glorieux FH, St-Arnaud R (2001) Targeted inactivation of the 25-hydroxyvitamin D₃-1α-hydroxylase gene (CYP27B1) creates an animal model of pseudovitamin D-deficiency rickets. Endocrinology 142:3135–3141
2. Fleet JC, Eksir F, Hance KW, Wood RJ (2002) Vitamin D-inducible calcium transport and gene expression in three Caco-2 cell lines. Am J Physiol 283:G618–G625
3. Hoenderop JG, Kemp AW van der, Hartog A, Graaf SF van de, Os CH van, Willems PH, Bindels RJ (1999) Molecular identification of the apical Ca²⁺ channel in 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D₃-responsive epithelia. J Biol Chem 274:8375–8378
4. Hoenderop JG, Kemp AW van der, Hartog A, Os CH van, Willems PH, Bindels RJ (1999) The epithelial calcium channel, ECaC, is activated by hyperpolarization and regulated by cytosolic calcium. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 261:488–492
5. Hoenderop JG, Hartog A, Stuiver M, Doucet A, Willems PH, Bindels RJ (2000) Localization of the epithelial Ca²⁺ channel in rabbit kidney and intestine. J Am Soc Nephrol 11:1171–1178
6. Hoenderop JG, Muller D, Suzuki M, Os CH van, Bindels RJ (2000) Epithelial calcium channel: gate-keeper of active calcium reabsorption. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 9:335–340
7. Hoenderop JG, Muller D, Kemp AW van der, Hartog A, Suzuki M, Ishibashi K, Imai M, Sweep F, Willems PH, Os CH van, Bindels RJ (2001) Calcitriol controls the epithelial calcium channel in kidney. J Am Soc Nephrol 12:1342–1349
8. Hoenderop JG, Vennekens R, Muller D, Prenen J, Droogmans G, Bindels RJ, Nilius B (2001) Function and expression of the epithelial Ca²⁺ channel family: comparison of the mammalian epithelial Ca²⁺ channel 1 and 2. J Physiol (Lond) 537:747–761
9. Hoenderop JG, Nilius B, Bindels RJ (2002) Molecular mechanisms of active Ca²⁺ reabsorption in the distal nephron. Annu Rev Physiol 64:529–549
10. Hoenderop JG, Dardenne O, Abel M van, Kemp AW van der, Os CH van, St-Arnaud R, Bindels RJ (2002) Modulation of renal Ca²⁺ transport protein genes by dietary Ca²⁺ and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D₃ in 25-hydroxyvitamin D₃-1α-hydroxylase knockout mice. FASEB J 16:1398–1406
11. Hoenderop JG, Willems PH, Bindels RJ (2000) Toward a comprehensive molecular model of active calcium reabsorption. Am J Physiol 278:F352–F360
12. Hoenderop JG, Voets T, Hoefs S, Weidema AF, Prenen J, Nilius B, Bindels RJ (2003) Homo- and heterotetrameric architecture of the epithelial Ca²⁺ channels, TRPV5 and TRPV6. EMBO J 22:776–785
13. Janssen SW, Hoenderop JG, Hermus AR, Sweep CG, Martens GJ, Bindels RJ (2002) Expression of the novel epithelial Ca²⁺ channel ECaC in rat pancreatic islets. J Histochem Cytochem 50:789–798
14. Loffing J, Loffing-Cueni D, Valderrabano V, Klausli L, Hebert SC, Rossier BC, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ, Kaisling B (2001) Organization of the mouse distal nephron: distributions of transcellular calcium and sodium transport pathways. Am J Physiol 281:F1021–F1027
15. Montell C, Birnbaumer L, Flockerzi V (2002) The TRP channels, a remarkably functional family. Cell 108:595–598
16. Muller D, Hoenderop JG, Meij IC, Heuvel LP van den, Knoers NV, Hollander AI den, Eggert P, Garcia-Nieto V, Claverie-
Martin F, Bindels RJ (2000) Molecular cloning, tissue distribution, and chromosomal mapping of the human epithelial Ca²⁺ channel (ECAC1). Genomics 67:48–53
17. Muller D, Hoenderop JG, Merkx GF, Os CH van, Bindels RJ (2000) Gene structure and chromosomal mapping of human epithelial calcium channel. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 275:47–52
18. Muller D, Hoenderop JG, Vennekens R, Eggert P, Harangi F, Mehes K, Garcia-Nieto V, Claverie-Martin F, Os C van, Nilius B, Bindels RJ (2002) Epithelial Ca²⁺ channel (ECaC) in autosomal dominant idiopathic hypercalciuria. Nephrol Dial Transplant 17:1614–1620
19. Nilius B, Vennekens R, Prenen J, Hoenderop JG, Droogmans G, Bindels RJ (2001) The single pore residue Asp542 determines Ca²⁺ permeation and Mg²⁺ block of the epithelial Ca²⁺ channel. J Biol Chem 276:1020–1025
20. Nilius B, Prenen J, Hoenderop JG, Vennekens R, Hoefs S, Weidema AF, Droogmans G, Bindels RJ (2002) Fast and slow inactivation kinetics of the Ca²⁺ channels ECaC1 and ECaC2 (TRPV5 and 6): role of the intracellular loop located between transmembrane segment 2 and 3. J Biol Chem 277:30852–30858
21. Nilius B, Weidema F, Prenen J, Hoenderop JGJ, Vennekens R, Hoefs S, Droogmans G, Bindels RJM (2003) The carboxyl-terminus of the epithelial Ca²⁺ channel ECaC1 is involved in Ca²⁺-dependent inactivation. Pflugers Arch 445:584–588
22. Peng JB, Chen XZ, Berger UV, Vassilev PM, Tsukaguchi H, Brown EM, Hediger MA (1999) Molecular cloning and characterization of a channel-like transporter mediating intestinal calcium absorption. J Biol Chem 274:22739–22746
23. Peng JB, Chen XZ, Berger UV, Weremowicz S, Morton CC, Vassilev PM, Brown EM, Hediger MA (2000) Human calcium transport protein CaT1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 278:326–332
24. Peng JB, Zhuang L, Berger UV, Adam RM, Williams BJ, Brown EM, Hediger MA, Freeman MR (2001) CaT1 expression correlates with tumor grade in prostate cancer. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 282:729–734
25. Tenenhouse HS, Gauthier C, Martel J, Hoenderop JG, Hartog A, Meyer MH, Meyer Jr RH, Bindels RJ (2002) Na/Pi cotransporter (Npt2) gene disruption increases duodenal calcium absorption and expression of epithelial calcium channel 1 and 2. Pflugers Arch 444:670–676
26. Van Abel M, Hoenderop JG, Dardenne O, St-Arnaud R, Os C van, Leeuwen JP van, Bindels RJ (2002) 1,25(OH)₂D₃-independent stimulatory effect of estrogen on the expression of ECaC1 in kidney. J Am Soc Nephrol 13:2102–2109
27. Van Cromphaut S, Dewerchin M, Hoenderop JG, Stockmans I, Herck E van, Kato S, Bindels RJ, Collen D, Carmeliet P, Bouillon R, Carmeliet G (2001) Active duodenal calcium absorption in vitamin D receptor-knock out mice: functional and molecular aspects. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:13324–13329
28. Vennekens R, Hoenderop JG, Prenen J, Stuiver M, Willems PH, Droogmans G, Nilius B, Bindels RJ (2000) Permeation and gating properties of the novel epithelial Ca²⁺ channel. J Biol Chem 275:3963–3969
29. Weber K, Erben RG, Rump A, Adamski J (2001) Gene structure and regulation of the murine epithelial calcium channels ECaC1 and 2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 289:1287–1294
30. Zhuang L, Peng JB, Tou L, Takanaga H, Adam RM, Hediger MA, Freeman MR (2002) Calcium-selective ion channel, CaT1, is apically localized in gastrointestinal tract epithelia and is aberrantly expressed in human malignancies. Lab Invest 82:1755–1764
