
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 2003 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**Molecular Cloning of a Chondroitin Polymerizing Factor That Cooperates with Chondroitin Synthase for Chondroitin Polymerization**

Received for publication, March 11, 2003, and in revised form, April 21, 2003  
Published, JBC Papers in Press, April 25, 2003, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M302493200

Hiroshi Kitagawa, Tomomi Izumikawa, Toru Uyama, and Kazuyuki Sugahara†

*From the Department of Biochemistry, Kobe Pharmaceutical University, Higashinada-ku, Kobe 658-8558, Japan*

We recently cloned human chondroitin synthase (ChSy) exhibiting the glucuronyltransferase-II (GlcAT-II) and N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase-II (GalNAcT-II) activities responsible for the biosynthesis of repeating disaccharide units of chondroitin sulfate, but chondroitin polymerization was not demonstrated *in vitro* using the recombinant ChSy. We report here that the chondroitin polymerizing activity requires concomitant expression of a novel protein designated chondroitin polymerizing factor (ChPF) with ChSy. The human ChPF consists of 775 amino acids with a type II transmembrane protein topology. The amino acid sequence displayed 23% identity to that of human ChSy. The expression of a soluble recombinant form of the protein in COS-1 cells produced a protein with little GlcAT-II or GalNAcT-II activity. In contrast, coexpression of the ChPF and ChSy yielded markedly augmented glycosyltransferase activities, whereas simple mixing of the two separately expressed proteins did not. Moreover, using both UDP-glucuronic acid (GlcUA) and UDP-N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) as sugar donors, chondroitin polymerization was demonstrated on the so-called glycosaminoglycan-protein linkage region tetrasaccharide sequence of α-thrombomodulin. These results suggested that the ChPF acts as a specific activating factor for ChSy in chondroitin polymerization. The coding region of the ChPF was divided into four discrete exons and localized to chromosome 2q35-q36. Northern blot analysis revealed that the ChPF gene exhibited a markedly different expression pattern among various human tissues, which was similar to that of ChSy. Thus, the ChPF is required for chondroitin polymerizing activity of mammalian ChSy.

---

Chondroitin sulfate (CS)¹ proteoglycans, at cell surfaces and in the extracellular matrix of most tissues, consist of CS chains substituted on core proteins. Recent studies of CS chains have shown that they play important roles in neural network formation in the developing mammalian brain (for reviews see Refs. 1 and 2) and are major inhibitory molecules affecting axon growth after spinal cord injury in the central nervous system of adult mammals (3).

CS biosynthesis is initiated by the addition of xylose to serine residues in the core protein, followed by the sequential addition of two Gal residues and a GlcUA residue to form the tetrasaccharide linkage structure GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xylβ1-O-Ser. Chondroitin polymerization with alternating GalNAc and GlcUA then takes place, forming the repeating disaccharide region. In a previous study, *in vitro* chondroitin polymerization was demonstrated when α-thrombomodulin (α-TM) with a truncated glycosaminoglycan-protein linkage region tetrasaccharide sequence (4), GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xyl, was tested as an acceptor together with both UDP-GlcUA and UDP-GalNAc as sugar donors using a cell-free enzyme system, which was prepared from the serum-free culture medium of a human melanoma cell line (5). We recently cloned chondroitin synthase (ChSy) consisting of a single large polypeptide with dual glycosyltransferase activities of GlcUA transferase II (GlcAT-II) and GalNAc transferase II (GalNAcT-II), which are responsible for synthesizing the repeating disaccharide units of CS (6). However, despite the individual transferase activities observed for ChSy, chondroitin polymerization was not demonstrated using the recombinant ChSy *in vitro*. We hypothesized, therefore, that an unidentified regulatory protein might be required for the full polymerization activity of ChSy and might be homologous to ChSy.

To date, four homologous glycosyltransferases including ChSy, all of which are responsible for CS biosynthesis, have been cloned (6–10). To search for such a regulatory protein involved in chondroitin polymerization, the ChSy sequence was used to screen a data base. Here, we describe the cloning of a human cDNA encoding a novel protein required for chondroitin polymerization, designated chondroitin polymerizing factor (ChPF).

---

* This work was supported in part by the Science Research Promotion Fund of the Japan Private School Promotion Foundation and Grants-in-aid for Scientific Research C-14572086 (to H. K.), B-13470493 (to K. S.) and Scientific Research on Priority Areas 14082207 (to K. S.) from the Ministry of Education, Science, Culture, and Sports of Japan. The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* The nucleotide sequence(s) reported in this paper has been submitted to the GenBank™/EBI Data Bank with accession number(s) AB095813.
* To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dept. of Biochemistry, Kobe Pharmaceutical University, 4-19-1 Motoyamakita-machi, Higashinada-ku, Kobe 658-8558, Japan. Tel.: 81-78-441-7570; Fax: 81-78-441-7571; E-mail: k-sugar@kobepharma-u.ac.jp.
* The abbreviations used are: CS, chondroitin sulfate; GalNAc, N-acetyl-D-galactosamine; GalNAcT, N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase;

---

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Materials—UDP-[U-¹⁴C]GlcUA (285.2 mCi/mmol) and UDP-[³H]GalNAc (10 Ci/mmol) were purchased from PerkinElmer Life Sciences. Unlabeled UDP-GlcUA and UDP-GalNAc were obtained from Sigma. Chondroitin (a chemically desulfated derivative of whale cartilage CS-A) and *Arthrobacter aureus* chondroitinase ABC (EC 4.2.2.4) were purchased from Seikagaku Corp. (Tokyo, Japan). Purified α-TM (11) was provided by the research institute of Dai-ichi Pharmaceutical GlcAT, glucuronyltransferase; GlcUA, d-glucuronic acid; ChSy, chondroitin synthase; ChPF, chondroitin polymerizing factor; HPLC, high-performance liquid chromatography; MES, 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid; TM, thrombomodulin; ΔHexUA, 4-deoxy-α-threo-hex-4-enepyranosyluronic acid.

Co. (Tokyo, Japan) and contained the linkage tetrasaccharide GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xyl (4). Chondro-glycuronidase from *Flavobacterium heparinum* (12) was from Dr. K. Yoshida (Seikagaku Corp., Tokyo). The chemically synthesized linkage tetrasaccharide serines GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xylβ1-O-Ser and GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xylβ1-O-(Gly)Ser-(Gly-Glu) (13) were from Dr. T. Ogawa (RIKEN, Saitama, Japan). ΔHexUAα1-3GalNAcβ1-4GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xyl was isolated by HPLC after the chondroitinase ABC digestion of whale cartilage CS-A followed by mild alkaline treatment using 0.5 M LiOH, and was structurally identified by 500-MHz ¹H NMR spectroscopy. It was then derivatized with a fluorophore, 2-aminobenzamide, and purified by HPLC as described previously (4, 14). GalNAcβ1-4Glc-UAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xyl-2-aminobenzamide was prepared by the chondro-glycuronidase digestion of ΔHexUAα1-3GalNAcβ1-4GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xyl-2-aminobenzamide. The Superdex™ peptide HR10/30 column was obtained from Amersham Biosciences.

Northern Blot Analysis—A commercial human 12-lane multiple tissue Northern blot (Clontech) membrane was used for the analysis. The membrane was probed with a gel-purified, radiolabeled (>1 × 10⁹ cpm/µg), 0.84-kb ChPF-specific fragment corresponding to nucleotides 1720–2558 of the ChPF cDNA (GenBank™ accession number AB095813).

**RESULTS**

In Silico Cloning of a ChPF cDNA—We recently identified and characterized human ChSy (6). Screening of the nonredundant data base at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD), using the deduced amino acid sequence of human ChSy, identified a few clones. One of them, designated ChPF here (GenBank™ accession number BC021223), contained a 5′-untranslated region of 236 bp, a single open reading frame of 2325 bp coding for a protein of 775 amino acids with three potential N-glycosylation sites (Fig. 1), and a 3′-untranslated region of about 0.5 kb with a presumptive polyadenylation signal. Northern blot analysis showed that the mRNA was about 3.4 kb in length in various human tissues (see below), suggesting that the cDNA was approximately full-length. The deduced amino acid sequence corresponded to a 85,494-Da polypeptide. The predicted translation initiation site conformed to the Kozak consensus sequence for initiation (21). A Kyte-Doolittle hydropathy analysis (22) revealed one prominent hydrophobic segment of 23 amino acid residues in the NH₂-terminal region, predicting that the protein has a type II transmembrane topology (Fig. 1). Database searches suggested that the amino acid sequence displayed 57 and 23% identity to human chondroitin GlcAT (9) and ChSy (6), respectively (Fig. 1). Notably, however, the identified protein did not have the conserved DXD motif found in most glycosyltransferases (23). Thus, the features of the identified protein sequence suggest that the identified gene product might be involved in CS biosynthesis but would not possess a glycosyltransferase activity. Intriguingly, a homologue of the identified human gene was found in the *Caenorhabditis elegans* and *Drosophila* genome, sharing 27 and 25% identity with that of *C. elegans* and *Drosophila*, respectively (data not shown).

Construction of a Soluble Form of the ChPF—A cDNA fragment of a truncated form of the ChPF, lacking the first 62 amino-terminal amino acid sequence containing the putative cytoplasmic and transmembrane domains, was amplified by reverse transcription-PCR with total RNA derived from G361 human melanoma cells (ATCC number CRL-1424) as a template using a 5′-primer (5′-CGGGATCCAACCTCGGTGCAGC-CCGGAGC-3′) containing an in-frame *Bam*HI site and a 3′-primer (5′-CGGGATCCCGCTCTGGTTTGGGGGAAG-3′) containing a *Bam*HI site located 46 bp downstream from the stop codon. PCR was carried out with KOD polymerase (TOYOBO, Osaka, Japan) for 32 cycles of 94 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 30 s, and 68 °C for 180 s in 5% (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide. The PCR fragments were subcloned into the *Bam*HI site of pGIR201protA (15), resulting in the fusion of the ChPF with the insulin signal sequence and the protein A sequence present in the vector. An *Nhe*I fragment containing this fusion protein sequence was inserted into the *Xba*I site of the expression vector pEF-BOS (16). The nucleotide sequence of the amplified cDNA was determined in an ABI PRISM 377 DNA sequencer (Applied Biosystems).

Expression of a Soluble Form of the ChPF and Enzyme Assays—The expression plasmid (6.0 µg) was transfected into COS-1 cells on 100-mm plates using FuGENE 6 (Roche Applied Science) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For cotransfection experiments, the ChPF and ChSy expression plasmids (3.0 µg each) (6) were cotransfected into COS-1 cells on 100-mm plates using FuGENE 6 as above. Two days after transfection, 1 ml of the culture medium was collected and incubated with 10 µl of IgG-Sepharose (Amersham Biosciences) for 1 h at 4 °C. The beads recovered by centrifugation were washed with and then resuspended in the assay buffer and tested for glycosyltransferase activities as described below. Assays for GalNAcT-II and GlcAT-II were carried out using chondroitin as an acceptor and UDP-GalNAc or UDP-GlcUA as a sugar donor, respectively, as described previously (17, 18). Polymerization reactions using linkage tetrasaccharide-serine or -peptide and α-TM as acceptors were conducted in incubation mixtures containing the following constituents in a total volume of 20 µl, i.e. 1 nmol of a linkage tetrasaccharide-serine or α-TM, 0.25 mM UDP-[³H]GalNAc (5.28 × 10⁵ dpm), 0.25 mM UDP-GlcUA, 100 mM MES buffer, pH 6.5, 10 mM MnCl₂, and 10 µl of the resuspended beads. The mixtures were incubated at 37 °C overnight, and the ³H-labeled products were then separated by gel filtration chromatography on a Superdex peptide column equilibrated and eluted with 0.2 M NH₄HCO₃. Fractions (0.4 ml each) were collected at a rate of 0.4 ml/min, and the measurement of radioactivity was carried out by liquid scintillation counting.

Characterization of the Reaction Products—Products of the polymerization reactions on α-TM were isolated by gel filtration on a Superdex peptide column with 0.2 M NH₄HCO₃ as the eluent. The [³H]GalNAc-labeled oligosaccharide chains released from α-TM by mild alkaline treatment using 0.5 M LiOH were derivatized with 2-aminobenzamide (4, 14) and then exhaustively digested with chondroitinase ABC using 50 mIU of the enzyme for 1 h as described previously (19). The enzyme digest was subjected to gel filtration on Superdex peptide as described above. The radioactive peak of the 2-aminobenzamide-derivatized putative linkage hexasaccharide and its digest with chondro-glycuroni-

23668

**Identification of a Chondroitin Polymerizing Factor**

ChPF | 1 MRASLLLSVLRPAGPAVAVGISLGFTEILLSVTWVEEPCGPGPPQPGDSELPPRGNTNAARRPNSVQPGAEREKPGAGEGAGE--NWEPRV | 88
--- | --- | ---
Chondroitin GlcAT | 1 MRLSSLALLRFPALPLILGLSLGCSSLLLRVSWIDGEGE-DPCVEAVGE---RGGPONPDSARLDQSDEDFK---------PRI | 72
ChSy | 1 -----------------MAARGRAWLSVLTGL-VLGFLASRLVLPRASELKRAAGPRRRASPEGCRSGQA | 53

ChPF | 89 LPYHPAQPQGQAAKKAV-RTRYISTELGIRQRLL--VAVLTSQTTLPTLGVAVNRTLGHRLERVVFLTGARGRRAPPGMAVVTLG-EERPI | 174
--- | --- | ---
Chondroitin GlcAT | 73 VPYYRDP-NKPYKKVL-RTRYIQTELGSREELL--VAVLTSRAITSLTAVAVRTVAHHFPRLLYFTGQRGARAPAGMQVVSHG-DERPA | 157
ChSy | 54 AASQAGGARGDARGAQLWPPGSDPDGGPRDRNFLVGVMTAOKYLQTRAVAAYRTWSKTIPGKVQFFSSEGSDTSVPIPVPPLRGVDDSY | 143

ChPF | 175 GHLHLA---LRHLELEQHGDDFDWWFLVPDTTYTEAHGLARLTGHLSLASAAHLYL------GRPQDFIGGE-PTPGR-YCHGGFGVLLSRM | 254
--- | --- | ---
Chondroitin GlcAT | 158 WLMSET---LRHLHTHFADYDWFIIMQQDTYVQAPRLAAAGHLSINQD--LYL------GRAEEFIGAGEQ-A-R-YCHGGFGYLLSRS | 234
ChSy | 144 PPQKKSFMMKYMHHDHYLDKYEFMRADDDVYIKGDRLENFLRSLNSSEP--LFQGTGLGTTTEEM-GKLALEPGENFCMGGPGVIMSRE | 230

ChPF | 255 LLQQLRPHLEGCRNDIVSARPDEWLGRCLILDATGVGCTGDHEGVH-YSH-LELSPGEPVQ-EGDPHFRSALTAHPVRDPVHMYQLHKAF | 341
--- | --- | ---
Chondroitin GlcAT | 235 LLRLRPHLDGCRGDILSARPDEWLGRCLIDSLGVGCVSQHQGQQ-YRS-FELAKNRDPEKEGSSAFLSAFAVHPVSEGTLMYRLHKRF | 322
ChSy | 231 VLRRMVPHIGKCLREMYTHEDVEVGRCVRRFAGVQCWNSYEMQQLFYENEQNKKGYIRDLHNSKIHOAITLHPNKNPPYQYRLHSYM | 320

ChPF | 342 RAELERTYQE-IQELQWEIQNTSHLAVDGDRAAAWPVGTPAPSR---PASRFEVLRNDYFTEOHAHFSCADGSPRCPLRGAD-RADVADVL | 426
--- | --- | ---
Chondroitin GlcAT | 323 ALELERAYSE-IEQLQAOIRNLTVLTEGEAGLSWPVGLPAPFT---PHSRFEVLLGWDYFTEOHTFSCADGAPKCPLOQAS-RADVGDAL | 407
ChSy | 321 SRKISELRHRTIQ-LHREIVLMSKYSNTEIHKEDLQLGIPPSFMRFQPRQREEILENEFLTGKYLYSAVDGQPPRRGMDSAQREALDDIV | 409

ChPF | 427 GTALEEELNRRYHPALRLQ--KQQIVNGYRRFDPARGMEYTLDDLQLEALTTPQGGRRLPTRRV-QLLRP-LSRVEILPVPYVTEASRLTVLL | 512
--- | --- | ---
Chondroitin GlcAT | 408 ETALEEQLNRRYQPRLLRFQ--KORLLNGYRRFDPARGMEYTLDLLLECVTQRGHRRALARRV-SLLRP-LSRVEILPMPYVTEATRVQLVL | 493
ChSy | 410 MQVMEMINANAKTRGRIIDFK-E-IQYGYRRVPNMYGAEYILDLLLLYKKHKKGKMTVPVRRHAYLQQTFSKIQ-----FVEHEELDAQEL | 493

ChPF | 513 PLAAAEERDLAPGLEAFATAALEPGDAAAALTLLLLYEPRAQQRVAHADV-FAPVKAHVAELERRF---PGARVPW---L-SVQTAAPSPL | 595
--- | --- | ---
Chondroitin GlcAT | 494 PLLVAAAAAAPALEAFAANVEPREHAL-LTLLLVYGPREGGRGAPDP--FLGVKAAAALERRY--PGTRLAW---L-AVRAEAPSQV | 574
ChSy | 494 AKRINQESGSLSFISNSLKKLV-PFQLPGSKSEHKEPDKKINILILPLSGRFDMFVRFMGNFEKTCLIPNQNVKLVVLLFNSDSN-PDKA | 581

ChPF | 596 R---LMDLLSKKHPLDTLFLLAGPDTVLTPDFLNRCRMHAISGWQAFFPM-H---FOA-FH---PAVAPPQGPGP-PELGRDT-------- | 666
--- | --- | ---
Chondroitin GlcAT | 575 R---LMDVVSKKHVPDTLLFLTTVWTRPGPEVLNRCRNAISGWQAFFPV-H---FOE-FN---PALSQRSPPGPPGAGPDPSPSPG-AD | 653
ChSy | 582 KQVELMTDYRIKYPKADMQILPVSGEFSRALALEVGSSQFNNESLLFFCDVDLVFTTEFLQRCRANTVLGQQIYFPIIFSQYD--PKIVY | 669

ChPF | 667 --------G-RFDRQAA---SEACFYNSD--YVAARGRLAAASEQEE--ELLESLDVYELFLHFSLLHVLRAVEPALLORYRAQTCSARLS | 741
--- | --- | ---
Chondroitin GlcAT | 654 PSRGAPIGGRFDRQAS---AEGCFYNAD--YLAARARLAGELAGQEEEEALEGLEVMDVFLRESGLHLFRAVEPGLVQKFSLRDCSPRLS | 738
ChSy | 670 SGKVPSDN-HFAFTQKTGFWRNYGFGITCIYKGDLVRVGGFDVSIQGWGL-EDVDLFNKVVQAG-LKTFRSQEVGVVHVHHPVFCDBNLD | 756

ChPF | 742 EDLYHRCLQ-SVLEGLGSRTQLAM-LLFEQEQQ-----------------NST | 775
--- | --- | ---
Chondroitin GlcAT | 739 ELYHRCLRSN-LEGLGGRALAM-ALFEQEQA-----------------NST | 772
ChSy | 757 PKQYKMCLGSKAST-YGSTQQLAEMW-LEKNDPSYSKSSNNNGSVRTA- | 802

**FIG. 1. Comparison of the predicted amino acid sequence of the human ChPF, the human chondroitin GlcAT, and the human ChSy. The predicted amino acid sequences were aligned using the program GENETYX-MAC (version 10). Closed and shaded boxes indicate that the predicted amino acid in the alignment is identical in all three or any two sequences, respectively. Gaps introduced for maximal alignment are indicated by dashes. The putative membrane spanning domains are boxed. Three potential N-glycosylation sites for the human ChPF are marked with asterisks.**

---

**ChPF**

ATG
↓
TGA
↓
1 kb


**Chondroitin GlcAT**

ATG
↓
TAG


---

**TABLE I**
**GalNAcT-II and GlcAT-II activities of the fusion proteins secreted into the culture medium by transfected COS-1 cells**

| Protein      | GalNAcT-II activity<sup>a</sup> | GlcAT-II activity<sup>a</sup> |
|--------------|---------------------------------|------------------------------|
|              | pmol/ml medium/h               | pmol/ml medium/h             |
| ChSy         | 1.3                             | 2.3                          |
| ChPF         | 0.2                             | ND<sup>b</sup>               |
| ChSy/ChPF    | 31                              | 188.4                        |
| ChSy + ChPF<sup>c</sup> | 0.5                             | 1.1                          |

<sup>a</sup> Polymer chondroitin was used as an acceptor substrate, and the values represent the averages of three independent experiments.

<sup>b</sup> ND, not detected (<0.1 pmol/ml medium/h).

<sup>c</sup> The values obtained by mixing soluble proteins derived from COS-1 cells separately transfected by ChPF and ChSy.

---

**FIG. 2. Comparison of the genomic organization of the human ChPF and human chondroitin GlcAT genes. Exon regions are denoted by boxes. Closed boxes represent the coding sequence, and open boxes denote the 5′- and 3′-untranslated sequences. The translation initiation (ATG) and termination (TGA or TAG) codons are also shown. Black horizontal bars denote the introns.**

---

Western blotting using IgG (data not shown). The fused protein expressed in the medium was adsorbed onto IgG-Sepharose beads to eliminate endogenous glycosyltransferases, and then the protein-bound beads were used as an enzyme source. Although the bound fusion protein was assayed for glycosyltransferase activity using a variety of acceptors and either UDP-GalNAc or UDP-GlcUA as a donor substrate, little glycosyltransferase activity was detected. However, coexpression of the soluble ChPF with the soluble ChSy augmented both the GalNAcT-II and GlcAT-II activities of ChSy over 20-fold, which is involved in the synthesis of the repeating disaccharide units of chondroitin (Table I). Notably, these effects of coexpression were not due to differences in the expression levels of these proteins, as assessed by Western blot analysis (data not

Identification of a Chondroitin Polymerizing Factor

FIG. 3. Comparison of the sizes of the chondroitin polymerization reaction products obtained using various acceptors containing different linkage tetrasaccharides. A, the linkage tetrasaccharide-serine GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xylβ1-O-Ser (closed circles), the linkage tetrasaccharide-peptide GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xylβ1-O-(Gly)Ser-(Gly-Glu) (crosses), and α-TM (open circles) were each tested as an acceptor for polymerization reactions as described under “Experimental Procedures.” [³H]GalNAc-labeled products isolated from each incubation were separately chromatographed on a Superdex peptide column. In the case of α-TM, [³H]GalNAc-labeled products were first isolated by gel filtration, subjected to reductive β-elimination using NaBH₄/NaOH, and then rechromatographed as shown in this figure. Effluent fractions were analyzed for radioactivity. Numbered arrowheads 10, 12, and 14 indicate the elution positions of chondroitin-derived authentic decasaccharides to tetradecasaccharides (17), respectively. The total volume was at ~60 (not shown). B, the ³H-labeled oligosaccharide chains obtained from α-TM in A were rechromatographed on a Superdex 75 column. Effluent fractions were monitored by ³H-radioactivity (open circles). Chondroitin with a mean molecular mass of ~30 kDa was also chromatographed and monitored by UV absorbance at 210 nm (closed triangles).

4Xylβ1-O-Ser and GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xylβ1-O-(Gly)Ser-(Gly-Glu). The reaction products obtained with α-TM as an acceptor were subjected to reductive β-elimination using NaBH₄/NaOH (25), and the released radiolabeled oligosaccharide chains were analyzed by gel chromatography using a column of Superdex peptide or 75 (Fig. 3). The saccharide chains synthesized on α-TM were much longer than those synthesized on the tetrasaccharide-serine or -peptide and were comparable with commercial polymer chondroitin chains (Fig. 3B). In contrast, simple mixing of the soluble proteins, which were expressed in COS-1 cells separately transfected with ChPF or ChSy, did not produce such chondroitin polymerizing activity. These results suggest that the ChPF and ChSy proteins need to be synthesized simultaneously in the same cell to polymerize chondroitin chains and that the core protein is required for the synthesis of the longer chondroitin chains.

Analysis of the Chondroitin Chains Newly Polymerized on the Tetrasaccharide Linkage Region of α-TM—The [³H]GalNAc-labeled chondroitin chains obtained from the polymerization reactions on α-TM were liberated by mild alkaline treatment using 0.5 M LiOH as described under “Experimental Procedures.” The resulting radiolabeled chondroitin chains were derivatized with 2-aminobenzamide and then isolated by gel filtration (4). The isolated chains were digested with chondroitinase ABC and subjected to gel chromatography, resulting in Fraction 1 containing the linkage hexasaccharides and Fraction 2 containing both di and monosaccharides in a molar ratio of 1:47 (Fig. 4A). These results suggested that the average size of the synthesized chondroitin chains was ~100-mer. Fraction 1 was then subjected to anion-exchange HPLC, resulting in only one ³H-labeled peak at

FIG. 4. Analysis of the protein-linkage region oligosaccharides derived from the [³H]GalNAc-labeled chondroitin chains newly synthesized on α-TM. A, the [³H]GalNAc-labeled polymerization reaction products were isolated by gel filtration, treated with alkali, and then derivatized with 2-aminobenzamide as described under “Experimental Procedures.” The ³H-labeled products derivatized with 2-aminobenzamide were digested with chondroitinase ABC and chromatographed on a Superdex peptide column. Fractions (Fr. 1 and 2; 0.4 ml each) were collected and monitored for ³H radioactivity by liquid scintillation counting. The arrowhead indicates the elution position of the authentic Δ⁴,⁵HexUAα1-3GalNAc. B, the radiolabeled fraction containing the linkage hexasaccharide (Fr. 1 in A) was pooled and analyzed before (open circles) and after glycuronidase digestion (closed circles) by anion-exchange HPLC on an amine-bound silica column using a linear gradient of 16–530 mM NaH₂PO₄ over a 60-min period as described under “Experimental Procedures.” The eluates were monitored for ³H radioactivity. Arrows indicate the elution positions of the 2-aminobenzamide-derivatized authentic linkage penta and hexasaccharides as follows: 1, GalNAcβ1-4GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xyl-2-aminobenzamide; and 2, ΔHexUAα1-3GalNAcβ1-4GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xyl-2-aminobenzamide.

FIG. 5. Northern blot analysis of ChPF and ChSy in human tissues. Northern blots with RNA from various human tissues were hybridized with probes for ChPF (top panel) or ChSy (bottom panel) as described under “Experimental Procedures.” Lane 1, brain; lane 2, heart; lane 3, skeletal muscle; lane 4, colon; lane 5, thymus; lane 6, spleen; lane 7, kidney; lane 8, liver; lane 9, small intestine; lane 10, placenta; lane 11, lung; and lane 12, peripheral blood leukocytes.

the elution position of the authentic linkage hexasaccharide ΔHexUAα1-3GalNAcβ1-4GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xyl-2-aminobenzamide, which was shifted to a position of GalNAcβ1-4GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xyl-2-aminobenzamide upon digestion with chondro-glycuronidase (12) (Fig. 4B). These results clearly indicated that the polymerization did take place on the truncated linkage tetrasaccharide sequence of α-TM.

Expression Pattern of ChPF—Northern blot analysis of mRNA demonstrated a single band of ~3.4 kb for all human tissues except peripheral blood leukocytes (Fig. 5). The gene

23670

**Identification of a Chondroitin Polymerizing Factor**

exhibited a differential expression in the human tissues examined, with strong expression in the placenta and heart in addition to moderate expression in the brain, skeletal muscle, kidney, and liver. Notably, the expression pattern was similar to that of ChSy.

---

### DISCUSSION

The findings of the present study demonstrated that the chondroitin polymerizing activity requires the coexpression of a unique protein, ChPF, with ChSy. Although ChPF itself harbors little GalNAcT-II or GlcAT-II activity, the protein sequence of ChPF is homologous to the four previously cloned glycosyltransferases involved in CS biosynthesis. Thus, *ChPF* is the fifth member of this novel gene family, which is responsible for initiation and elongation of CS chains.

In a previous study (5), *in vitro* chondroitin polymerization was demonstrated when α-TM was used as an acceptor together with a cell-free enzyme system, which was prepared from the serum-free culture medium of a human melanoma cell line. In addition, based on the substrate competition experiments described in a previous study (5), it was proposed that a chondroitin polymerase with three enzyme activities, *i.e.* GalNAcT-I for chondroitin chain initiation and GalNAcT-II and GlcAT-II for chain elongation, might exist. In view of the present finding that the coexpression of ChPF and ChSy was required for chondroitin polymerization on the linkage region tetrasaccharide of α-TM, the proposed chondroitin polymerase does not appear to be a single polypeptide but appears to be a protein complex consisting of ChPF and ChSy. In this context, the recently cloned chondroitin GalNAcT-1 and -2 (7, 8, 10), both of which harbored both GalNAcT-I and -II activities, were not required for the chondroitin polymerization on the linkage region tetrasaccharide sequence of α-TM. In addition, coexpression of chondroitin GalNAcT-1 or -2 and ChSy yielded no chondroitin polymerizing activity, even when α-TM was used as an acceptor substrate. Moreover, coexpression of chondroitin GalNAcT-1, ChSy, and ChPF or chondroitin GalNAcT-2, ChSy, and ChPF did not augment chondroitin polymerization activity (data not shown). Therefore, chondroitin GalNAcT-1 and -2 may be dispensable for the chondroitin polymerization itself, although their involvement in CS biosynthesis cannot be excluded. In fact, homologues of the human ChSy and ChPF are present in *C. elegans*, but those of GalNAcT-1 and -2 are absent despite the existence of chondroitin in the worm (26), supporting the present hypothesis. Thus, more efforts to determine the specific roles of chondroitin GalNAcT-1 and -2 in CS biosynthesis will be required.

As described previously (6), the GlcAT-II and GalNAcT-II activities observed for ChSy were low with polymer chondroitin and chondro-oligosaccharides as acceptor substrates (also see Table I). Considering that coexpression of the soluble ChPF with the soluble ChSy augmented both the GalNAcT-II and GlcAT-II activities of ChSy over 20-fold (Table I), it has become evident that coexpression of ChPF was also required for full GlcAT-II and GalNAcT-II activities of ChSy.

In addition, the present study confirmed the previous findings (5) that the chondroitin chain polymerization reactions were also influenced by the core protein portion. The oligosaccharide chains synthesized on α-TM were much longer than those synthesized on the linkage tetrasaccharide-derivatives GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xylβ1-O-Ser and GlcUAβ1-3Galβ1-3Galβ1-4Xylβ1-O-(Gly)Ser-(Gly-Glu) (see Fig. 3). In this regard, Oldberg *et al.* (27) reported that cells transformed with vectors encoding deletion variants of decorin synthesized proteoglycan with shorter glycosaminoglycan chains and suggested that such effects on the glycosaminoglycan chain length might be due to a lower affinity between the core protein and

the glycosyltransferases. Thus, in view of the present findings that the chondroitin chain polymerization reactions were markedly stimulated by the core protein of the acceptor, it is possible that the protein complex consisting of ChPF and ChSy interacts with the core protein and regulates the glycosaminoglycan chain length.

It should also be noted that animal cells utilize β-D-xylosides as primers for glycosaminoglycan synthesis, and, thus, the core protein can be substituted by the mildly hydrophobic xylosides such as 4-methylumbelliferyl- or p-nitrophenyl-β-D-xyloside (28). In addition, Fernández and Warren (29) demonstrated CS synthesis using reconstituted Golgi in the presence of 4-methylumbelliferyl-β-D-xyloside. In fact, *in vitro* chondroitin polymerization was also observed in this study when GlcAβ1-3Galβ1-O-C2H4NH-benzoyloxycarbonyl was used as an acceptor substrate with the recombinant soluble proteins secreted from COS-1 cells cotransfected with *ChPF* and *ChSy*. However, the oligosaccharide chains synthesized on GlcAβ1-3Galβ1-O-C2H4NH-benzoyloxycarbonyl were slightly shorter than those synthesized on α-TM (data not shown). It appears that hydrophobic aglycones mimic a recognition sequence on core proteins and interact with the protein complex consisting of ChPF and ChSy. Further work should be aimed at better defining the acceptor recognition requirements by the protein complex consisting of ChPF and ChSy.

Earlier studies have indicated that the sulfation of glycosaminoglycan moieties ordinarily proceeds together with polymerization at a single Golgi site and that there appears to be a close interrelation between sulfation and polymer elongation/termination (30). In fact, although it has been reported that prior sulfation of the growing CS chain profoundly affects chain polymerization (17, 18, 30), the present study clearly indicated that sulfation is not an absolute requirement for polymer elongation.

The protein-coding sequences of the human chondroitin GlcAT and *ChPF* genes are distributed among four exons that span ~7 kb (9) and 5 kb (this study), respectively. Comparison of the genomic organizations of these two genes shows a quite similar genetic exon-intron organization within the coding sequences (Fig. 2). Moreover, the amino acid sequence of ChPF was the most homologous to that of chondroitin GlcAT among the five identified proteins involved in CS biosynthesis (Fig. 1). However, coexpression of chondroitin GlcAT and ChSy yielded little chondroitin polymerization activity when α-TM was used as an acceptor substrate (data not shown). These findings suggest that ChPF acts as a specific activating factor for ChSy in chondroitin polymerization. The identification of ChPF, a unique protein factor required for chondroitin polymerization activity, may shed light on the molecular basis of CS biosynthesis and the evaluation of the biological functions of CS and dermatan sulfate because the gene knockout of either *ChPF* or *ChSy* or both would result in specific elimination of CS and dermatan sulfate.

---

### Acknowledgments—We thank Dr. T. Ogawa for the enzyme substrates. We also thank K. Tsurumoto for technical assistance.

---

### REFERENCES

1. Ohhira, A., Matsui, F., Tokita, Y., Yamauchi, S., and Aono, S. (2000) *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **374**, 24–34
2. Sugahara, K., and Yamada, S. (2000) *Trends Glycosci. Glycotechnol.* **12**, 321–349
3. Bradbury, E. J., Moon, L. D. F., Popat, R. J., King, V. R., Bennett, G. S., Patel, P. N., Fawcett, J. W., and McMahon, S. B. (2002) *Nature* **416**, 636–640
4. Nadanaka, S., Kitagawa, H., and Sugahara, K. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 33728–33734
5. Nadanaka, S., Kitagawa, H., Goto, F., Tamura, J., Newmann, K. W., Ogawa, T., and Sugahara, K. (1999) *Biochem. J.* **340**, 353–357
6. Kitagawa, H., Uyama, T., and Sugahara, K. (2001) *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 38721–38726
7. Uyama, T., Kitagawa, H., Tamura, J., and Sugahara, K. (2002) *J. Biol. Chem.*

8. Gotoh, M., Sato, T., Akashima, T., Iwasaki, H., Kameyama, A., Mochizuki, H., Yada, T., Inaba, N., Zhang, Y., Kikuchi, N., Kwon, Y., Togayachi, A., Kudo, T., Nishihara, S., Watanabe, H., Kimata, K., and Narimatsu, H. (2002) *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 38189–38196

9. Gotoh, M., Yada, T., Sato, T., Akashima, T., Iwasaki, H., Mochizuki, H., Inaba, N., Togayachi, A., Kudo, T., Watanabe, H., Kimata, K., and Narimatsu, H. (2002) *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 38179–38188

10. Uyama, T., Kitagawa, H., Tanaka, J., Tamura, J., Ogawa, T., and Sugahara, K. (2003) *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 3072–3078

11. Nawa, K., Sakano, K., Fujiwara, H., Sato, Y., Sugiyama, N., Teruuchi, T., Iwamoto, M., and Marumoto, Y. (1990) *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 171, 729–737

12. Hovingh, P., and Linker, A. (1977) *Biochem. J.* 165, 287–293

13. Tamura, J., Neumann, K. W., and Ogawa, T. (1996) *Liebigs Ann.* 1239–1257

14. Sakaguchi, H., Watanabe, M., Ueoka, C., Sugiyama, E., Taketomi, T., Yamada, S., and Sugahara, K. (2001) *J. Biochem.* 129, 107–118

15. Kitagawa, H., and Paulson, J. C. (1994) *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 1394–1401

16. Mizushima, S., and Nagata, S. (1990) *Nucleic Acids Res.* 18, 5322

17. Kitagawa, H., Tsutsumi, K., Ujikawa, M., Goto, F., Tamura, J., Neumann, K. W., Ogawa, T., and Sugahara, K. (1997) *Glycobiology* 7, 531–537

18. Kitagawa, H., Ujikawa, M., Tsutsumi, K., Tamura, J., Neumann, K. W., Ogawa, T., and Sugahara, K. (1997) *Glycobiology* 7, 905–911

19. Sugahara, K., Shigeno, K., Masuda, M., Fujii, N., Kurosaka, A., and Takeda, K. (1994) *Carbohydr. Res.* 255, 145–163

20. Sugahara, K., Okumura, Y., and Yamashina, T. (1989) *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 162, 189–197

21. Kozak, M. (1984) *Nucleic Acids Res.* 12, 857–872

22. Kyte, J., and Doolittle, R. F. (1982) *J. Mol. Biol.* 157, 105–132

23. Wiggins, S., and Munro, S. (1998) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 95, 7945–7950

24. Breathnach, R., and Chambon, P. (1981) *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* 50, 349–383

25. Sugahara, K., Masuda, M., Harada, T., Yamashina, I., de Waard, P., and Vliegenthart, J. F. G. (1991) *Eur. J. Biochem.* 202, 805–811

26. Yamada, S., Van Die, I., Van den Eijnden, D. H., Yokota, A., Kitagawa, H., and Sugahara, K. (1999) *FEBS Lett.* 459, 327–331

27. Oldberg, Å., Antonsson, P., Moses, J., and Fransson, L.-Å. (1996) *FEBS Lett.* 386, 29–32

28. Okayama, M., Kimata, K., and Suzuki, S. (1973) *J. Biochem.* 74, 1069–1073

29. Fernández, C. J., and Warren, G. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* 273, 19030–19039

30. Silbert, J. E., and Sugumaran, G. (1995) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1241, 371–384

Glycobiology and Extracellular Matrices:  
Molecular Cloning of a Chondroitin  
Polymerizing Factor That Cooperates with  
Chondroitin Synthase for Chondroitin  
Polymerization  

Hiroshi Kitagawa, Tomomi Izumikawa, Toru  
Uyama and Kazuyuki Sugahara  
J. Biol. Chem. 2003, 278:23666-23671.  
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M302493200 originally published online April 25, 2003  

Access the most updated version of this article at doi: [10.1074/jbc.M302493200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M302493200)  

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the [JBC Affinity Sites](https://www.jbc.org/site/affinity-sites).  

Alerts:  
- When this article is cited  
- When a correction for this article is posted  

[Click here](https://www.jbc.org/site/alerts) to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts  

This article cites 29 references, 15 of which can be accessed free at  
[http://www.jbc.org/content/278/26/23666.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/278/26/23666.full.html#ref-list-1)
