
Int. J. Cancer: 105, 661–668 (2003)

© 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

**REPRESSION OF SMAD-DEPENDENT TRANSFORMING GROWTH FACTOR-β SIGNALING BY EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS LATENT MEMBRANE PROTEIN 1 THROUGH NUCLEAR FACTOR-κB**

Naoki MORI${}^{1*}$, Mariko MORISHITA${}^{2}$, Tomoo TSUKAZAKI${}^{3}$ and Naoki YAMAMOTO${}^{4}$

${}^{1}$Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, Okinawa, Japan  
${}^{2}$Department of Surgery II, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, Nagasaki, Japan  
${}^{3}$Department of Oral Pathology, Nagasaki University School of Dentistry, Nagasaki, Japan  
${}^{4}$Department of Molecular Virology, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan  

EBV-encoded LMP-1 is absolutely required for EBV transformation of cells. Previous studies showed that LMP-1 is responsible for mediating resistance to the anti-proliferative effects of TGF-β that characterizes EBV-transformed cells. To clarify the mechanisms of resistance to TGF-β by LMP-1, we examined the effect of expression of LMP-1 on the activity of TGF-β-responsive promoters. Interestingly, LMP-1 inhibited TGF-β-responsive promoters activity despite lack of direct interaction of LMP-1 and Smad proteins, intracellular signaling molecules in the TGF-β signal transduction pathway. Although TGF-β treatment increased the expression of p15, TGF-β-induced gene, this effect was counteracted by expression of LMP-1. The repressive effect was mapped to the NF-κB activation domains in the cytoplasmic carboxyl terminus of LMP-1. Furthermore, LMP-1-mediated inhibition of TGF-β-responsive promoter was markedly restored after inhibition of NF-κB activity. LMP-1 failed to affect receptor-dependent formation of heteromers containing Smad proteins as well as the DNA-binding activity of Smad proteins. Overexpression of the transcriptional coactivator CBP and p300 abrogated the inhibitory effect of LMP-1 on the TGF-β-responsive promoter. Our results suggest that LMP-1 represses the TGF-β signaling through the NF-κB signaling pathway at transcriptional level by competing for a limited pool of transcriptional coactivators. These results enhance our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of viral pathogenesis in EBV-associated malignancies.

© 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

Key words: TGF-β; Smad; Epstein-Barr virus; LMP-1; NF-κB

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a ubiquitous human herpes-virus, is associated with several human malignancies of lymphoid and epithelial cell origin, including endemic Burkitt's lymphoma (BL), AIDS-related lymphoma, lymphoproliferative disease in transplant recipients, various T cell lymphomas, Hodgkin's disease and nasopharyngeal carcinoma. ${}^{1}$ The mechanisms responsible for oncogenic transformation of EBV-infected cells are incompletely understood and remain the focus of intense investigation. Latent EBV infection is characterized by restricted expression of viral gene products, including 6 nuclear antigens (EBNAs –1, –2, –3a, –3b, –3c and –LP) and 2 transmembrane proteins (latent membrane proteins, LMP-1 and -2) that function cooperatively to initiate and maintain transformation. ${}^{2,3}$ The precise role of each of these latent gene products in transformation is not fully understood. Latent membrane protein-1 most closely mimics a classical oncogene because rodent fibroblasts exhibit malignant transformation after transfection with LMP-1. ${}^{4}$ An important oncogenic function of LMP-1 is to protect cells from apoptotic cell death. ${}^{5,6}$ Gene transfer studies in EBV-negative Burkitt cells demonstrated that the anti-apoptotic effects of LMP-1 in B cells are mediated, in part, by induction of Bcl-2. ${}^{5,6}$ In addition, LMP-1 induces expression of other anti-apoptotic genes, including A20 and Mcl-1, a homologue of Bcl-2. ${}^{7,8}$ LMP-1 transactivates the expression of these anti-apoptotic proteins via activation of NF-κB.

LMP-1 is an integral membrane protein consisting of 386 amino acids. Six transmembrane-spanning domains (162 amino acids) connect the short N-terminal stretch (24 amino acids) with the long C-terminal domain (200 amino acids), both of which are located in the cytoplasm (see Fig. 9). ${}^{9}$ The C-terminal portion of LMP-1 contains 2 functional domains; the proximal domain, CTAR-1, located between amino acids 187 and 231, is a relatively weak activator of NF-κB and interacts with members of the TRAF family. ${}^{10-12}$ The distal domain, CTAR-2, located between amino acids 352 and 386, is not only the major NF-κB activation domain but also is responsible for the activation of c-Jun N terminal kinase and interacts with TRADD. ${}^{11-13}$ LMP-1 also activates p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase through both CTAR-1 and CTAR-2. ${}^{14}$

Proliferation and differentiation of cells are regulated tightly by a delicate balance of growth factors and growth-inhibitory factors. TGF-β is one of the best-characterized members of growth-inhibitory factors. TGF-β can inhibit the growth of cells of epithelial, endothelial and lymphoid origin. ${}^{15}$ In contrast, most malignant cells are refractory to TGF-β-mediated growth arrest. ${}^{16}$ This loss of sensitivity has been linked to tumor progression. Recent studies have shown that LMP-1 is responsible for mediating resistance to the anti-proliferating effects of TGF-β that characterized EBV-transformed B cells. ${}^{17-20}$ Over the last several years, several intracellular signaling mechanisms used by the TGF-β superfamily have been elucidated. ${}^{21-23}$ Their effects are elicited through oligomeric complexes of Type I and Type II serine/threonine kinase receptors. TGF-β binds primarily to TβR-II then stabilizes the heteromeric complex with the TβR-I and results in transphosphorylation and activation of TβR-I by TβR-II. The activated TβR-I then propagates the signal through transient interaction with and phosphorylation of receptor-restricted Smad proteins, Smad2 and Smad3. Once phosphorylated, receptor-restricted Smad proteins

---

**Abbreviations:** ARE, activin response element; BL, Burkitt’s lymphoma; CBP, cyclic AMP response element-binding protein-binding protein; CTAR, C-terminal activation region; EBV, Epstein-Barr virus; HA, hemagglutinin; EMSA, electrophoretic mobility shift assay; IKK, IkB kinase; LMP, latent membrane protein; NF-κB, nuclear factor κB; NIK, NF-κB-inducing kinase; RT-PCR, reverse transcription-PCR; TβR-I, Type I TGF-β receptor; TβR-II, Type II TGF-β receptor; TGF-β, transforming growth factor-β; TK, thymidine kinase; TRADD, tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated death domain protein; TRAF, tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor.

---

Grant sponsor: Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Scientific Research (C)

---

*Correspondence to:* Department of Virology, Faculty of Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, 207 Uehara, Nishihara, Okinawa 903-0215, Japan. Fax: +81-98-895-1410. E-mail: n-mori@med.u-ryukyu.ac.jp

---

Received 19 September 2003; Revised 6 February 2003; Accepted 6 February 2003

DOI 10.1002/ijc.11146
dimerize with Smad4 and translocate to the nucleus and modulate transcription of TGF-β target genes. Smad proteins interact functionally with the transcriptional coactivator CBP or p300, a process that is essential to their ability to function as transcriptional effectors.²⁴–²⁸

We demonstrate that LMP-1 can inhibit TGF-β signaling and that the ability of LMP-1 to antagonize TGF-β signaling is NF-κB dependent and involves a novel “competitive” interaction between Smad proteins and NF-κB that is mediated by the transcriptional coactivator CBP or p300. This cross-transcriptional interference indicates a new mechanism by which LMP-1 is involved in EBV-induced malignant transformation.

---

**MATERIAL AND METHODS**

### Plasmid constructions

The expression plasmids pSG5-LMP-1, pSG5-LMP-1Δ187-351, pSG5-LMP-1.349Δ and pSG5-LMP-1Δ194-386 were gifts from Dr. M. Rowe (University of Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff, UK).²⁹,³⁰ The expression plasmid p65 was kindly provided by Dr. K. Yamamoto (Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan). The expression constructs for Flag-Smad2, Flag-Smad3, Smad4-HA, TβR-I(WT)-HA, TβR-I(TD)-HA and the reporter construct ARE-Lux were generous gifts from Dr. J.L. Wrana (Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada). ARE-Lux contains the ARE from the *Xenopus Mix.2* gene. An expression plasmid for FAST-1 was provided by Dr. M. Whitman (Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA). The expression constructs for C-terminal Flag-tagged CBP and p300 were gifts from Dr. K. Miyazono (University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan). IkBaΔN³¹ and IkBβΔN³² (provided by Dr. D.W. Ballard, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN) are deletion mutants of IkBa and IkBβ lacking the N-terminal 36 amino acids and 23 amino acids, respectively. The reporter constructs, p3TP-Lux,³³ p15P113-Luc³⁴ and κB-Luc³⁵ were kindly provided by Dr. J. Massague (Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY), Dr. X.-F. Wang (Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC) and Dr. J. Fujisawa (Kansai Medical University, Osaka, Japan), respectively.

### Cell culture, transient transfection and luciferase assays

Cell lines used in our study, HepG2 (human hepatoma cell line), Mv1Lu (mink lung cell line) and COS-7 (SV40 transformed African green monkey kidney cell line), were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (HyClone Laboratories, Logan, UT), 50 U/ml penicillin and 50 μg/ml streptomycin (GIBCO BRL, Grand Island, NY) in a humidified incubator under 5% CO₂. These cells were plated at a density of 3 × 10⁵ cells/60-mm dish the day before transfection and were transfected by Lipofectamine (GIBCO-BRL) using various amounts of reporter and effector plasmids. To normalize transfection efficiencies, a TK promoter-driven *Renilla* luciferase plasmid (pRL-TK; Promega, Madison, WI) was cotransfected as an internal control plasmid. Total amounts of DNAs for various transfections were equalized by the addition of an empty vector. Cells were fed 7 hr later with equal volumes of DMEM containing 4% FBS and incubated for an additional 17 hr. Thereafter, cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline twice and incubated for 24 hr in the absence or presence of 5 ng/ml TGF-β in DMEM containing 0.2% FBS. Transfected cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline and lysed in reporter lysis buffer (Promega). Lysates were assayed for reporter gene activity with the dual luciferase reporter assay system (Promega). All assays were carried out in triplicate and represented as mean ± SD of 3 independent transfections.

### Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis

COS-7 cells transiently transfected with the indicated constructs were washed and lysed in TNTE buffer (20 mM TRIS-HCl [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% Triton X-100, 50 mM NaF, 10 mM Na₄P₂O₇, 20 mM PMSF, 10 mM sodium orthovanadate). Whole-cell extracts or immunoprecipitates produced with anti-Flag (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) were visualized by immunoblotting with anti-HA (Sigma), anti-Flag, or anti-LMP-1 (CS1-4; DAKO, Caterpillar, CA) antibodies.

### Electrophoretic mobility shift assay

Nuclear extracts were prepared from COS-7 cells transfected with an appropriate combination of plasmids. Smad binding activities were examined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) as described previously.³⁶ The probe was labeled with [α-³²P]dCTP and [α-³²P]dATP using Klenow enzyme. Five micrograms nuclear extracts were preincubated in a binding buffer containing 1 μg poly-deoxyinosinic-deoxycytidylic acid (Pharmacia, Piscataway, NJ) followed by addition of the labeled probe. These mixtures were incubated for 15 min at room temperature. The DNA-protein complexes were separated on a 4% polyacrylamide gel and visualized by autoradiography. To examine the specificity of the probe, unlabeled competitor oligonucleotides were preincubated with nuclear extracts for 15 min before incubation with probe. The probe or competitor used was prepared by annealing the sense and antisense synthetic oligonucleotides as follows: 5′-TCGAGAGCCAGACAAGGAGCCAGACAAGGA-GCCAGACAC-3′ for 3x CAGA probe and 5′-TCGAGAGCTA-CATAAAAAGCTACATATTTTAGCTACATAC-3′ for 3x CAGA mutant.

### RT-PCR

Total cellular RNA was extracted from cells using Trizol as described by the supplier (Life Technologies, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD). First-strand cDNA was synthesized in a 20-μl reaction volume using an RNA-PCR kit (Takara Shuzo, Kyoto, Japan) with random primers. Thereafter, cDNA was amplified for 40, 40 and 28 cycles for p15, LMP-1 and β-actin, respectively. The oligonucleotide primers used were as follows: for p15; sense, 5′-AACGGAGTCAACC GTT-TCGG-3′ and antisense, 5′-TGTGCGCAGGTACCCTGCAA-3′; for LMP-1; sense, 5′-GTGACTGGACTGGAGGAGCC-3′ and antisense, 5′-GAGGGAGTCATCGTGGTGGTG-3′; and for β-actin; sense, 5′-GTGGGGCGCCCCAGGCACCA-3′ and antisense, 5′-CTCCTTAATGTCACGCACGATTTC-3′. Product sizes were 282-bp for p15, 480-bp for LMP-1 and 548-bp for β-actin. Cycling conditions were as follows: denaturing at 95°C for 60 sec (p15 and LMP-1) and at 94°C for 30 sec (β-actin), annealing at 63°C for 60 sec (p15), at 62°C for 45 sec (LMP-1) and at 60°C for 30 sec (β-actin) and extension at 72°C for 60 sec (p15 and LMP-1) and for 90 sec (β-actin). The PCR products were fractionated on 2% agarose gels and visualized by ethidium bromide staining.

---

**RESULTS**

### LMP-1 suppresses TGF-β-mediated transcriptional responses

We examined the effects of LMP-1 on TGF-β-mediated transcriptional responses using transient cotransfection assays. We first used p3TP-Lux, a TGF-β-responsive reporter plasmid that contains 3 repeats of a 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate response element and a fragment from positions –636 to –740 of the human plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 promoter.³³ This construct is efficiently stimulated by TGF-β through its receptors.³³ p3TP-Lux was transiently transfected together with either empty (pSG5) or LMP-1 expression vector (pSG5-LMP-1) and luciferase activity was measured in extracts from untreated cells or cells treated with 5 ng/ml TGF-β for 24 hr. As a model for these experiments, we used HepG2 and Mv1Lu cells, which are often used in studies of TGF-β-induced transactivation because they express TGF-β receptors and are highly responsive to TGF-β and contain endogenous Smad2, Smad3 and Smad4. When p3TP-Lux alone was transfected into HepG2 or Mv1Lu cells, a significant increase in luciferase activity was observed in the presence of TGF-β (Fig. 1). These transactivations were repressed almost to control levels when LMP-1 was transfected with p3TP-Lux. Similar repression occurred when we used another natural TGF-β-responsive reporter, p15P113-Luc, which contained the p15 pro-
INHIBITION OF TGF-β SIGNALING BY LMP-1

**FIGURE 1—LMP-1 suppresses TGF-β-mediated transcriptional responses.** p3TP-Lux (0.1 μg) or p15P113-Luc (0.1 μg) was cotransfected into HepG2 or Mv1Lu cells together with either pSG5 (□) (1 μg) or pSG5-LMP-1 (■) (1 μg). Cells were incubated for 24 hr in the absence or presence of 5 ng/ml TGF-β. Relative luciferase activities were measured in cell extracts, normalized to the Renilla luciferase activity. Luciferase activity is presented as fold induction relative to the basal level measured in cells transfected with the reporter plasmid alone without further treatment. Data represent the mean ± SD of 3 separate experiments.

**TGF-β induction of p15 is counteracted by LMP-1**

To demonstrate the effect of LMP-1 on TGF-β-target gene expression, either empty or LMP-1 expression vector was transfected into HepG2 cell line and 24 hr later LMP-1 expressing HepG2 cells and control HepG2 cells were treated with TGF-β for 24 hr. Enhanced expression of p15 after TGF-β treatment was observed at the mRNA level in control cells (Fig. 2). TGF-β-induced expression of p15 in LMP-1 expressing HepG2 cells was not observed, however, suggesting that LMP-1 prevented TGF-β-mediated induction of p15 (Fig. 2).

**LMP-1 inhibits Smad-induced responses to TGF-β**

Smad proteins play an important role in mediating TGF-β-induced transcriptional activation of downstream genes. To investigate the effects of LMP-1 on Smad signaling, we assayed transcriptional responses in the presence of various Smad proteins. As shown in Figure 3, LMP-1 inhibited Smad2-, Smad3-, Smad4-, combination of Smad2 and Smad4 (Smad2/4)- and Smad3 and Smad4 (Smad3/4)-induced transcriptional activation of p3TP-Lux. These results suggest that LMP-1 inhibited TGF-β signaling by blocking the ability of the Smad2/Smad4 and Smad3/4 complex to activate the transcription of TGF-β-responsive genes.

**LMP-1 inhibits transcriptional activation induced by constitutively active TβR-I**

Smad2 and Smad3 are directly phosphorylated by activated TβR-I, associate with Smad4 and subsequently translocate into the nucleus.²¹⁻²³ To determine whether the activated TβR-I-induced transcription is affected by LMP-1, we used TβR-I(TD) (a constitutive active TGF-β type I kinase receptor). TβR-I(TD) induced transcription, which is likely mediated by endogenous Smad proteins. Elevation of luciferase activity by TβR-I(WT) (wild-type TβR-I) did not occur with the p3TP-Lux construct because TβR-I(WT) could not signal in the absence of the ligand. LMP-1 significantly reduced TβR-I(TD) induced transcription (Fig. 4a).

**Tax inhibits TGF-β-dependent induction of ARE**

In addition to analysis of the p3TP-Lux or p15P113-Luc construct, we examined induction of the ARE construct that contains Smad-responsive ARE sites from Xenopus Mix.2 gene driving the expression of a luciferase reporter in HepG2 cells. ARE is stimulated by either TGF-β or activin signaling, which induces assembly of a DNA-binding complex composed of Smad2, Smad4 and a member of the FAST family of Forkhead DNA-binding proteins.³⁷ Because HepG2 cells do not have endogenous FAST activity, in the absence of overexpressed FAST, the ARE-Lux reporter construct was not stimulated by overexpression of Smad2/Smad4, either in the presence or absence of TGF-β (Fig. 4b). In the presence of overexpressed FAST, the reporter gene activity was

FIGURE 4—LMP-1 inhibits TGF-β activation of Smad-responsive reporters. (a) LMP-1 inhibits transcriptional activation induced by the constitutively active TβR-I. pSG5 (□) and pSG5-LMP-1 (■) (1 μg each) were transfected with TβR-I(WT) or TβR-I(TD) (1 μg each) into HepG2 cells. Luciferase activity derived from the cotransfected p3TP-Lux (0.1 μg) is depicted. Luciferase activity is presented as fold induction relative to the basal level measured in cells transfected with p3TP-Lux alone. (b) LMP-1 inhibits FAST-1-mediated activation of a Xenopus Mix.2 promoter. HepG2 cells were transfected with the ARE-Lux reporter construct (0.1 μg), FAST-1 (0.1 μg), Smad2, Smad4 (0.2 μg) and either pSG5 (□) or pSG5-LMP1 (■) (1 μg each), as indicated. Cells were incubated in the absence or presence of 5 ng/mL TGF-β and luciferase activity was analyzed. Luciferase activity is presented as in Figures 1 and 3, except that control was based on untreated Smad2/4.

induced by TGF-β, which might be explained by endogenous Smad2 and Smad4 proteins. Furthermore, the coexpression of Smad2/Smad4 and FAST resulted in activation of the ARE-Lux construct, indicating that these 3 different proteins form a transcriptionally active complex. Furthermore, TGF-β enhanced these transcriptions. We investigated the effect of LMP-1 on transcriptional activation of ARE. Cotransfection of LMP-1 markedly inhibited the transcriptional activation of the ARE-Lux, mediated by a complex of Smad2, Smad4 and FAST (Fig. 4b).

**LMP-1 neither inhibits receptor-dependent formation of heteromers containing Smad proteins nor changes DNA-binding activity of Smad proteins**

To identify the target through which LMP-1 represses TGF-β signaling, we examined whether LMP-1 could interact with Smad proteins. We transfected Smad2 and Smad3 tagged with the Flag peptide (Flag-Smad2 and Flag-Smad3) and Smad4 tagged with the HA peptide (Smad4-HA) into COS-7 cells in the absence or presence of LMP-1. Whole extracts from these cells were immunoprecipitated with the anti-Flag and anti-HA antibodies and the precipitates were analyzed by immunoblotting with anti-LMP-1 antibody. No coprecipitation of LMP-1 was noted (data not shown). These results suggest that LMP-1 possibly antagonizes TGF-β signaling through an indirect mechanism that does not involve binding to Smad proteins.

Smad2 and Smad3 are directly phosphorylated by the activated TβR-I, associate with Smad4 and are subsequently translocated into the nucleus.²¹⁻²³ To determine which of these processes is affected by LMP-1, we first examined ligand-induced formation of heteromers containing Smad2 and Smad4. As shown in Figure 5a, Smad2 associated with Smad4 by the constitutively activated TβR-I, TβR-I(TD), in the presence of LMP-1 as strongly as it was in the absence of LMP-1, indicating that LMP-1 does not inhibit receptor-dependent heteromers formation of Smad2 and Smad4. The expression of Smad2 and Smad4 proteins was not affected by LMP-1 as determined by Western blotting in transfected COS-7 cells (Fig. 5a).

We also examined whether LMP-1 inhibited the formation of the Smad-containing complex, using 3xCAGA, an oligonucleotide

FIGURE 5—LMP-1 neither inhibits receptor-dependent formation of heteromers containing Smad proteins nor changes the DNA-binding activity of Smad proteins. (a) LMP-1 does not inhibit receptor-dependent formation of heteromers containing Smad2 and Smad4. COS-7 cells were transfected with the indicated combinations of Flag-Smad2, Smad4-HA, LMP-1 and TβR-I(TD)-HA (5 μg each). Cell extracts were subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti-Flag. This was followed by immunoblotting with anti-HA antibody (top panel). Top panel shows the receptor-dependent formation of heteromers containing Smad2 and Smad4 and lower panels show the expression of each protein as indicated. (b) Effect of LMP-1 on the DNA-binding activity of Smad3 and Smad4 assessed by EMSA. EMSA was carried out with 3xCAGA probe and extracts from COS-7 cells transiently transfected with either pSG5 or pSG5-LMP-1 (5 μg each), together with Flag-Smad3 and Smad4-HA (5 μg each). Where indicated, 100-fold excesses of non-radiolabeled oligonucleotides were added as competitors, including the wild-type (W) and mutated (M) CAGA sequences (lanes 6,7). EMSA supershifts using antibodies to Flag and HA were carried out (lanes 8,9).

encompassing a TGF-β-responsive element in the plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 promoter.³⁸ Nuclear extracts were prepared from the COS-7 cells transfected with Flag-Smad3 and Smad4-HA in the absence or presence of LMP-1. Transfection of Smad3 and Smad4 generated a complex visualized in EMSA and this complex was effectively competed and abrogated by excess unlabeled 3xCAGA oligonucleotides, but not by mutated 3xCAGA oligonucleotides. Furthermore, this complex could be supershifted with either Flag or HA antibodies (Fig. 5b), confirming that the complex contained Smad3 and Smad4. Coexpression of LMP-1 did not prevent the formation of the Smad-containing complex (Fig. 5b). These data indicate that LMP-1 does not interfere with the DNA binding of Smad.

**C-terminal domain of LMP-1 is required for its repressive activity**

Because the mechanism of LMP-1-induced inhibition of TGF-β signaling was not clarified, we examined whether cellular factors previously reported to be induced by LMP-1 could be involved in this event. To identify the region of LMP-1 essential for its inhibitory function on the TGF-β signaling, three truncated mutant

forms of LMP-1 were assayed in HepG2 cells, including LMP-1Δ187-351 (deletion of CTAR-1), LMP-1.349Δ (deletion of CTAR-2) and LMP-1Δ194-386 (deletion of CTAR-1 and CTAR-2) (Fig. 6a).

Wild-type LMP-1 strongly repressed the Smad3-mediated transactivation of p3TP-Lux (Fig. 6b). The mutant form LMP-1Δ194-386, however, was ineffective in the repressive ability, in which the entire C-terminus was deleted, including CTAR-1 and CTAR-2. In contrast, both mutant LMP-1Δ187-351, with deletion in CTAR-1 and mutant LMP-1.349Δ, deleted in CTAR-2, showed near wild-type inhibition. These results indicate that either CTAR-1 or CTAR-2 alone is sufficient for the inhibition of Smad3-mediated activation of p3TP-Lux. The activation level of NF-κB with various mutated forms LMP-1 was measured using the NF-κB-responsive reporter construct κB-Luc (Fig. 6b). Wild-type LMP-1 transactivated the κB-Luc promoter by 10-fold. Deletion of either CTAR-1 or CTAR-2 decreased the NF-κB transactivation whereas deletion of both regions completely abolished NF-κB activation. Taken together, these data indicate that the domains responsible for the repressive activity of LMP-1 colocalize those sequences important for NF-κB activation in HepG2 cells.

**Restoration of LMP-1 inhibitory activity on TGF-β signaling after cotransfection of a constitutively active form of κB inhibitory protein, IkBaΔN or IkBβΔN**

The C-terminal domains of LMP-1, which are important for NF-κB activation, were found to be responsible for its repressive activity on TGF-β signaling. Hence, we tested whether the event is mediated by the NF-κB signaling pathway. Under normal conditions, NF-κB exists in a cytoplasmic complex with the inhibitor protein IkB.³⁹ Activation of NF-κB requires phosphorylation of IkB at N-terminal serine residues. This phosphorylation targets IkB for ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated degradation, thereby releasing NF-κB to enter the nucleus and activate a series of genes. Therefore, we chose to inhibit NF-κB complexes specifically by transfection of constitutively active IkBa or IkBβ lacking the N-terminal amino acids to examine the involvement of the NF-κB signaling pathway in LMP-1-repressive activity on TGF-β signaling.

To evaluate the contribution of NF-κB to the mechanism of LMP-1-induced inhibition of TGF-β signaling, HepG2 cells were cotransfected with the p3TP-Lux reporter construct along with expression vectors for Smad3, LMP-1 and IkBaΔN or IkBβΔN. As shown in Figure 7b, the repressed Smad3-mediated p3TP-Lux promoter activity by LMP-1 was markedly enhanced and restored completely by the cotransfected IkBaΔN or IkBβΔN. The effectiveness of IkBaΔN and IkBβΔN in blocking NF-κB activity was evaluated using the κB-Luc. As shown in Figure 7a, NF-κB activation was strongly induced by LMP-1 or p65 subunit of NF-κB and the LMP-1- or p65-mediated transactivation was totally abolished by IkBaΔN and IkBβΔN. These findings suggest that LMP-1-induced inhibition of TGF-β signaling is mediated by a signaling cascade that leads to the activation of NF-κB. LMP-1 expression was steadily maintained at a high level when transfected with IkBaΔN or IkBβΔN (data not shown), indicating that the restoration of Smad3-mediated p3TP-Lux promoter activity even in the presence of LMP-1 was not caused by the depletion of LMP-1.

---

**FIGURE 6 – C-terminal domain of LMP-1 is required for its repressive activity.**
(a) Schematic diagrams of wild-type and mutant LMP-1 proteins. The 386-amino acid wild-type LMP-1 consists of 3 major regions: a 24-amino acid cytoplasmic N-terminus, a transmembrane region and a 200-amino acid cytoplasmic C-terminal region. The C-terminal region can be further divided into 2 CTAR regions. See Results section for detailed description of all LMP1 deletion mutants.
(b) Inhibition of Smad3-mediated activation of p3TP-Lux by C-terminal domain of LMP-1. Various LMP-1 mutants (1 μg each) were cotransfected with p3TP-Lux (0.1 μg) and Smad3 (1 μg) to identify the region essential for its inhibitory function. A negative control vector pSG5, a wild-type pSG5-LMP-1, pSG5-LMP-1Δ187-351, pSG5-LMP-1.349Δ and pSG5-LMP-1Δ194-386 are shown as vector, wild-type, Δ187-351, 349Δ and Δ194-386 on the abscissa, respectively. κB-Luc (0.1 μg) was cotransfected to confirm the activity of cotransfected LMP-1 mutants (1 μg each). Luciferase activity is presented as fold induction relative to the basal level measured in cells transfected with p3TP-Lux or κB-Luc alone. Data represent mean ± SD of 3 separate experiments.

---

**FIGURE 7 – Inhibitory effect of LMP-1 on Smad3-mediated activation of p3TP-Lux is markedly restored by a constitutively active form of the κB inhibitory protein, IkBaΔN or IkBβΔN.** Reporter construct, p3TP-Lux (0.1 μg), was cotransfected with Smad3 (1 μg), p65 (1 μg), or LMP-1 (1 μg) and either IkBaΔN or IkBβΔN (1 μg each) (b). κB-Luc (0.1 μg) was cotransfected to confirm the functions of cotransfected p65, LMP-1 and IkBaΔN or IkBβΔN (1 μg each) (a). Luciferase activity is presented as fold induction relative to the basal level measured in cells transfected with p3TP-Lux or κB-Luc alone. Data represent the mean ± SD of 3 separate experiments.

To further study the mechanism of NF-κB-induced inhibition of TGF-β signaling, HepG2 cells were transiently transfected by the p3TP-Lux reporter along with Smad3 and expression vector for p65. As shown in Figure 7b, p65 strongly inhibited the Smad3-mediated transactivation of p3TP-Lux promoter. Furthermore, the inhibition of Smad3 signaling to the p3TP-Lux promoter by p65 was totally reversed by overexpression of IkBαΔN or IkBβΔN. In conclusion, the findings of Figure 7 suggest that LMP-1-induced inhibition of TGF-β signaling seems to be mediated specifically by NF-κB.

**Overexpression of CBP or p300 overcomes the inhibitory effect of LMP-1**

Transcriptional coactivators are a class of proteins that participate in transcriptional regulation by directly interacting with cis-acting transcriptional activators, components of the basal transcriptional apparatus and chromatin.⁴⁰ CBP and p300 can interact with many regulated transcriptional effectors and these interactions have been postulated as important loci of signal integration. Both NF-κB and Smad proteins have been demonstrated to interact with CBP or p300, an event that is required for transcriptional activation by these proteins.²⁴⁻²⁸,⁴¹ Previous studies demonstrated that NF-κB can repress the transactivating activity of other transcription factors through sequestration of a limiting pool of CBP or p300. For example, NF-κB and p53 signaling pathways mutually repress each other’s transactivating activity by competing for CBP or p300.⁴² To examine if such a transcriptional sequestration of CBP and p300 may underlie the inhibitory effect of LMP-1 on Smad-mediated transcriptional activation, we overexpressed CBP or p300 in HepG2 cells in our experimental system. As shown in Figure 8a, overexpression of CBP or p300 augmented the expression of the Smad3-dependent reporter, consistent with previous reports that CBP and p300 are required for the transactivating activity of Smad proteins.²⁴⁻²⁸ Interestingly, increasing ratios of cotransfected CBP or p300 expression plasmid resulted in less inhibition of Smad-mediated transcriptional activation by LMP-1. To determine whether the results in luciferase assay described above could be reproduced in an endogenous TGF-β-induced gene, we examined the ability of overexpressed p300 to reverse the inhibition of TGF-β-induced p15 mRNA expression by LMP-1. Either empty or LMP-1 expression vector was transfected together with or without p300 into HepG2 cell line and 24 hr later cells were treated with TGF-β for 24 hr. We examined p15 mRNA expression in these cells. As shown in Figure 8b, overexpression of p300 partially reversed the inhibitory actions of LMP-1. Taken together, these data indicated that LMP-1 may inhibit the Smad-mediated transcription control by competing for a limited pool of CBP and p300.

---

DISCUSSION

TGF-β has been identified as a potent growth inhibitor of several cell types including cells of hematopoietic origin and epithelial lineage. TGF-β inhibits the growth of normal epithelial, endothelial and lymphoid origin cells by arresting the cell cycle at the G1 phase and, less commonly, by promoting apoptosis.¹⁵,⁴³,⁴⁴ In contrast, most malignant cells are refractory to TGF-β-mediated growth arrest.¹⁶ This loss of sensitivity has been linked to tumor progression and may be due to loss or mutation of TGF-β receptors or dysregulation of TGF-β signal transduction pathways.⁴⁴,⁴⁵ EBV interferes with the growth-suppressive pathway of TGF-β. In contrast to normal B cells, virtually, all EBV-transformed B cells are highly resistant to the anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects of TGF-β.¹⁷⁻²⁰ This resistance does not appear to involve alterations of TGF-β receptors.²⁰ In contrast, it has been reported that the lack of responsiveness to TGF-β correlates with down-regulation of TβR-II expression.⁴⁶ LMP-1 protein is essential for B lymphocyte transformation associated with EBV infection.⁴ A recent study showed that LMP-1 antisense treatment of EBV-positive lymphoblastoid cell lines partially restored the sensitivity to the anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects of TGF-β.⁴⁷

FIGURE 8 – Overexpression of transcriptional coactivators reversed the ability of LMP-1 to inhibit TGF-β signaling. (a) Overexpression of CBP and p300 overcomes the LMP-1-mediated repression of Smad3-dependent p3TP-Lux activation. Increasing amounts of CBP or p300 expression plasmid were cotransfected into HepG2 cells with Smad3 expression plasmid (1 μg), or with Smad3 (1 μg) and LMP-1 expression plasmids (1 μg) and the p3TP-Lux reporter (0.1 μg), as indicated. Luciferase activity is presented as fold induction relative to the basal level measured in cells transfected with p3TP-Lux. Data represent the mean ± SD of 3 separate experiments. (b) Overexpression of CBP reversed the ability of LMP-1 to inhibit TGF-β-induced p15 expression. HepG2 cells were transfected with the indicated combinations of LMP-1 and p300 expression plasmids and 24 hr later HepG2 cells were treated with 5 ng/ml TGF-β for 24 hr and RNA was prepared, followed by RT-PCR analysis. β-actin expression was used as a control.

To investigate the carcinogenic mechanism of EBV, we explored the influence of LMP-1 on TGF-β signaling. LMP-1 could prevent the induction of TGF-β-responsive gene p15. p3TP-Lux and p15 reporter assays, which test the integrity of the entire TGF-β signaling pathway, were inhibited substantially by LMP-1, clearly indicating that LMP-1 affects certain aspects of the TGF-β signal transduction cascade. In this regard, various oncoproteins are known to interact with Smad proteins and directly block key steps in Smad signaling.⁴⁸⁻⁵¹ LMP-1, however, does not physically interact with Smad2, Smad3 and Smad4 (data not shown). Rather, it inactivates Smad proteins through indirect interaction. LMP-1 does not inhibit receptor-dependent formation of heteromers containing Smad2 and Smad4. Moreover LMP-1 does not

change the DNA-binding activity of Smad proteins. Thus, LMP-1-Smads interactions cannot account for the inhibition of TGF-β signaling by LMP-1. Western blotting analysis of Smad proteins expressed in COS-7 cells transfected with LMP-1 did not reveal any major change in the expression of Smad2 and Smad4 compared to their expression in the absence of LMP-1. Therefore, the repression of TGF-β transcription activity by LMP-1 was not due to its ability to degrade Smad proteins.

LMP-1 is a powerful inducer of NF-κB-mediated transcription. The 2 activation domains of LMP-1, CTAR-1 and CTAR-2, both activate NF-κB yet also have distinct properties.¹⁰⁻¹²,²⁹,³⁰ NF-κB activation by CTAR-1 and CTAR-2 domains of LMP-1 is likely to be mediated by the binding of TRAF2 directly or indirectly to both the CTAR-1 and CTAR-2 domains and subsequent activation of the NIK and IKK complex (Fig. 9). Based on the results of deletion analysis of LMP-1 in the present study, CTAR-1 and CTAR-2 are responsible, but can act independently of each other, for the inhibition of TGF-β signaling. These results exactly mirror the situation of LMP-1-mediated activation of NF-κB; the repressive effect was mapped to the NF-κB activation domains in the cytoplasmic C-terminus of LMP-1. Overexpression of the p65 subunit of NF-κB also strongly inhibited Smad3-mediated transactivation of p3TP-Lux. Furthermore, dominant negative forms of IkBα and IkBβ were able to reverse the LMP-1 and p65 effects, further indicating that the inhibitory effect of LMP-1 on Smad3-mediated transactivation was mediated by NF-κB.

What is the molecular mechanism underlying the inhibitory effect of LMP-1 on TGF-β signaling through NF-κB activation? We propose that this inhibition occurs as a result of a competition for a limited amount of an essential transcriptional coactivator CBP or p300 between Smad proteins activated by TGF-β and NF-κB proteins activated by LMP-1 (Fig. 9). Overexpression of CBP or p300 can effectively reverse LMP-1-mediated inhibition of Smad3 transcriptional activity and TGF-β-induced p15 mRNA expression, supporting this novel mechanism of action for LMP-1.

Freshly isolated BL cell lines and BL biopsies exhibit a so-called Group I phenotype and are either EBV negative or have a restricted EBV gene expression profile limited to EBNA-1 and LMP-2A. During cultivation *in vitro*, this phenotype shifts toward the Group III phenotype, expressing the full complement of EBV

FIGURE 9 – A model of LMP-1-mediated inhibition of TGF-β-induced and Smad-mediated transcription.

latent genes. TGF-β inhibits the proliferation and induces apoptosis of Group I BL cell lines. The phenotypic shift of the cells toward a Group III phenotype coincides with increased resistance to the antiproliferative and proapoptotic activities of TGF-β.¹⁷⁻²⁰ Although LMP-1 may still contribute to cell transformation through other processes, our results established that LMP-1-mediated NF-κB activation is important for its inhibitory activity on TGF-β signaling. Our findings suggest a new paradigm that suppression of TGF-β signaling may contribute to carcinogenesis associated with EBV.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Drs. M. Rowe, K. Yamamoto, J.L. Wrana, M. Whitman, K. Miyazono, D.W. Ballard, J. Massague, X.-F. Wang and J. Fujisawa for providing plasmids.

REFERENCES

1. Rickison AB, Kieff E. Epstein-Barr virus. In: Fields BN, Knipe DM, Howley PM, eds. Fields virology. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1996. 2397–446.
2. Kieff E. Epstein-Barr virus and its replication. In: Fields BN, Knipe DM, Howley PM, eds. Fields virology. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1996. 2343–96.
3. Speck SH, Strominger JL. Transcription of Epstein-Barr virus in latently infected growth transformed lymphocytes. In: Klein G, ed. Advances in viral oncology. New York: Raven Press, 1989. 133–50.
4. Wang D, Liebowitz D, Kieff E. An EBV membrane protein expressed in immortalized lymphocytes transforms established rodent cells. Cell 1985;43:831–40.
5. Henderson S, Rowe M, Gregory C, Croom-Carter D, Wang F, Longnecker R, Kieff E, Rickinson A. Induction of bcl-2 expression by Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 protects infected B cells from programmed cell death. Cell 1991;65:1107–15.
6. Okan I, Wang Y, Chen F, Hu LF, Imreh S, Klein G, Wiman KG. The EBV-encoded LMP1 protein inhibits p53-triggered apoptosis but not growth arrest. Oncogene 1995;11:1027–31.
7. Laherty CD, Hu HM, Opipari AW, Wang F, Dixit VM. The Epstein-Barr virus LMP-1 gene product induces A20 zinc finger protein expression by activating nuclear factor κB. J Biol Chem 1992;267: 24157–60.
8. Wang S, Rowe M, Lundgren E. Expression of the Epstein Barr virus transforming protein LMP1 causes a rapid and transient stimulation of the Bcl-2 homologue Mcl-1 levels in B-cell lines. Cancer Res 1996; 56:4610–3.
9. Liebowitz D, Wang D, Kieff E. Orientation and patching of the latent infection membrane protein encoded by Epstein-Barr virus. J Virol 1986;58:233–7.
10. Kaye KM, Devergne O, Harada JN, Izumi KM, Yalamanchili R, Kieff

E, Mosialos G. Tumor necrosis factor receptor associated factor 2 is a mediator of NF-κB activation by latent infection membrane protein 1, the Epstein-Barr virus transforming protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1996;93:11085–90.
11. Brodeur SR, Cheng G, Baltimore D, Thorley-Lawson DA. Localization of the major NF-κB-activating site and the sole TRAF3 binding site of LMP-1 defines two distinct signaling motifs. J Biol Chem 1997;272:19777–84.
12. Sandberg M, Hammerschmidt W, Sugden B. Characterization of LMP-1’s association with TRAF1, TRAF2, and TRAF3. J Virol 1997;71:4649–56.
13. Kieser A, Kilger E, Gires O, Ueffing M, Kolch W, Hammerschmidt W. Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein-1 triggers AP-1 activity via the c-Jun N-terminal kinase cascade. EMBO J 1997;16: 6478–85.
14. Eliopoulos AG, Gallagher NJ, Blake SMS, Dawson CW, Young LS. Activation of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway by Epstein-Barr virus-encoded latent membrane protein 1 coregulates interleukin-6 and interleukin-8 production. J Biol Chem 1999;274: 16085–96.
15. Roberts AB, Sporn MB. The transforming growth factor-βs. In: Roberts AB, Sporn MB, eds. Peptide growth factors and their receptors. Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1990. 421–72.
16. Fynan TM, Reiss M. Resistance to inhibition of cell growth by transforming growth factor-β and its role in oncogenesis. Crit Rev Oncog 1993;4:493–540.
17. Blomhoff HK, Smeland E, Mustafa AS, Godal T, Ohlsson R. Epstein-Barr virus mediates a switch in responsiveness to transforming growth factor, type β, in cells of the B cell lineage. Eur J Immunol 1987;17: 299–301.
18. Janssen O, Gillis S, Kabelitz D. In vitro transformation by Epstein-

Barr virus induces a switch in growth factor and anti-IgM responsiveness in a human leukemic B cell clone. Eur J Immunol 1990;20:7–14.

19. Chaouchi N, Arvanitakis L, Auffredou MT, Blanchard DA, Vazquez A, Sharma S. Characterization of transforming growth factor-β1 induced apoptosis in normal human B cells and lymphoma B cell lines. Oncogene 1995;11:1615–22.

20. Arvanitakis L, Yaseen N, Sharma S. Latent membrane protein-1 induces cyclin D2 expression, pRb hyperphosphorylation, and loss of TGF-β1-mediated growth inhibition in EBV-positive B cells. J Immunol 1995;155:1047–56.

21. Massague J. TGFβ signaling: receptors, transducers, and Mad proteins. Cell 1996;85:947–50.

22. Piek E, Heldin CH, Ten Dijke P. Specificity, diversity, and regulation in TGF-β superfamily signaling. FASEB J 1999;13:2105–24.

23. Wrana JL. TGF-β receptors and signaling mechanisms. Miner Electrolyte Metab 1998;24:120–30.

24. Topper JN, DiChiara MR, Brown JD, Williams AJ, Falb D, Collins T, Gimbrone MA Jr. CREB binding protein is a required coactivator for Smad-dependent, transforming growth factor β transcriptional responses in endothelial cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998;95:9506–11.

25. Janknecht R, Wells NJ, Hunter T. TGF-β-stimulated cooperation of Smad proteins with the coactivators CBP/p300. Genes Dev 1998;12:2114–9.

26. Feng X-H, Zhang Y, Wu R-Y, Derynck R. The tumor suppressor Smad4/DPC4 and transcriptional adaptor CBP/p300 are coactivators for Smad3 in TGF-β-induced transcriptional activation. Genes Dev 1998;12:2153–63.

27. Pouponnot C, Jayaraman L, Massague J. Physical and functional interaction of SMADs and p300/CBP. J Biol Chem 1998;273:22865–8.

28. Nishihara A, Hanai J, Okamoto N, Yanagisawa J, Kato S, Miyazono K, Kawabata M. Role of p300, a transcriptional coactivator, in signaling of TGF-β. Genes Cells 1998;3:613–23.

29. Huen DS, Henderson SA, Croom-Carter D, Rowe M. The Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein-1 (LMP1) mediates activation of NF-κB and cell surface phenotype via two effector regions in its carboxy-terminal cytoplasmic domain. Oncogene 1995;10:549–60.

30. Floettmann JE, Rowe M. Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein-1 (LMP-1) C-terminus activation region 2 (CTAR2) maps to the far C-terminus and requires oligomerization for NF-κB activation. Oncogene 1997;15:1851–8.

31. Brockman JA, Scherer DC, McKinsey TA, Hall SM, Qi X, Lee WY, Ballard DW. Coupling of a signal response domain in IkBα to multiple pathways for NF-κB activation. Mol Cell Biol 1995;15:2809–18.

32. McKinsey TA, Brockman JA, Scherer DC, Al-Murrani SW, Green PL, Ballard DW. Inactivation of IkBβ by the Tax protein of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1: a potential mechanism for constitutive induction of NF-κB. Mol Cell Biol 1996;16:2083–90.

33. Wrana JL, Attisano L, Wieser R, Ventura F, Massague J. Mechanism of activation of the TGF-β receptor. Nature 1994;370:341–7.

34. Li J-M, Nichols MA, Chandrasekharan S, Xiong Y, Wang X-F. Transforming growth factor β activates the promoter of cyclin-depen-

dent kinase inhibitor p15INK4B through an Sp1 consensus site. J Biol Chem 1995;270:26750–3.

35. Suzuki T, Hirai H, Murakami T, Yoshida M. Tax protein of HTLV-1 destabilizes the complexes of NF-κB and IkB-α and induces nuclear translocation of NF-κB for transcriptional activation. Oncogene 1995;10:1199–207.

36. Mori N, Prager D. Transactivation of the interleukin-1α promoter by human T-cell leukemia virus type I and type II Tax proteins. Blood 1996;87:3410–7.

37. Chen X, Weisberg E, Fridmacher V, Watanabe M, Naco G, Whitman M. Smad4 and FAST-1 in the assembly of activin-responsive factor. Nature 1997;389:85–9.

38. Dennler S, Itoh S, Vivien D, ten Dijke P, Huet S, Gauthier J-M. Direct binding of Smad3 and Smad4 to critical TGFβ-inducible elements in the promoter of human plasminogen activator inhibitor-type 1 gene. EMBO J 1998;17:3091–100.

39. Ghosh S, May MJ, Kopp EB. NF-κB and Rel proteins: evolutionarily conserved mediators of immune responses. Annu Rev Immunol 1998;16:225–60.

40. Goodman R, Smolik S. CBP/p300 in cell growth, transformation, and development. Genes Dev 2000;14:1553–77.

41. Gerristen ME, Williams AJ, Neish AS, Moore S, Shi Y, Collins T. CREB-binding protein/p300 are transcriptional coactivators of p65. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997;94:2927–32.

42. Webster GA, Perkins ND. Transcriptional cross talk between NF-κB and p53. Mol Cell Biol 1999;19:3485–95.

43. Taipale J, Saharinen J, Keski-Oja J. Extracellular matrix-associated transforming growth factor-β: role in cancer cell growth and invasion. Adv Cancer Res 1998;75:87–134.

44. Alexandrow MG, Moses HL. Transforming growth factor β and cell cycle regulation. Cancer Res 1995;55:1452–7.

45. Yingling JM, Wang X-F, Bassing CH. Signaling by the transforming growth factor-β receptors. Biochim Biophys Acta 1995;1242:115–36.

46. Inman GJ, Allday MJ. Resistance to TGF-β1 correlates with a reduction of TGF-β type II receptor expression in Burkitt’s lymphoma and Epstein-Barr virus-transformed B lymphoblastoid cell lines. J Gen Virol 2000;81:1567–78.

47. Kenney JL, Guinness ME, Reiss M, Lacy J. Antisense to the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded latent membrane protein 1 (LMP-1) sensitizes EBV-immortalized B cells to transforming growth factor-beta and chemotherapeutic agents. Int J Cancer 2001;91:89–98.

48. Kurokawa M, Mitani K, Irie K, Matsuyama T, Takahashi T, Chiba S, Yazaki Y, Matsumoto K, Hirai H. The oncoprotein Evi-1 represses TGF-β signaling by inhibiting Smad3. Nature 1998;394:93–6.

49. Luo K, Stroschein SL, Wang W, Chen D, Martens E, Zhou S, Zhou Q. The Ski oncoprotein interacts with the Smad proteins to repress TGFβ signaling. Genes Dev 1999;13:2196–206.

50. Stroschein SL, Wang W, Zhou S, Zhou Q, Luo K. Negative feedback regulation of TGF-β signaling by the SnoN oncoprotein. Science 1999;286:771–4.

51. Nishihara A, Hanai J, Imamura T, Miyazono K, Kawabata M. ElA inhibits transforming growth factor-β signaling through binding to Smad proteins. J Biol Chem 1999;274:28716–23.
