
PRIMER IN MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

# MITOGENIC SIGNALING CASCADES IN GLIAL TUMORS

GLIOMAS ARE PRIMARY central nervous system tumors that arise from astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, or their precursors. Gliomas can be classified into several groups according to histological features. A number of genetic alterations have been identified in human gliomas; these generally affect either signal transduction pathways activated by receptor tyrosine kinases or cell cycle growth arrest pathways. These observed genetic alterations are now being used to complement histopathological diagnosis. The aim of the present review is to give a broad overview of the receptor tyrosine kinase signaling machinery involved in gliomagenesis, with an emphasis on the cooperative interaction between receptor tyrosine kinase signaling and the cell cycle-regulatory machinery. Understanding molecular features of primary glial tumors will eventually allow for target-selective intervention in distinct glioma subsets and a more rational approach to adjuvant therapies for these refractory diseases.

KEY WORDS: Epidermal growth factor, Mitogenic signaling cascades, Platelet-derived growth factor, Receptor tyrosine kinases

Neurosurgery 52:1425-1435, 2003 | DOI: 10.1227/01.NEU.0000065135.28143.39 | www.neurosurgery-online.com

Gurpreet S. Kapoor, Ph.D.
Department of Neurosurgery,
University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania

Donald M. O'Rourke,
M.D.
Department of Neurosurgery,
University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania

Reprint requests:
Donald M. O'Rourke, M.D.,
Department of Neurosurgery,
University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, 502 Stemmler Hall,
36th and Hamilton Walk,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, PA
19104.
Email:
orourked@mail.med.upenn.edu

Received, December 3, 2002.
Accepted, January 29, 2003.

One of the characteristics of all tumors, including brain tumors, is deregulated cell growth, which occurs because of perturbed signal transduction resulting from an accumulation of inherited and/or acquired defects in the genes for certain classes of signaling proteins and pathways that are targeted much more frequently by oncogenic mutations than others (60, 73). One illustrative example is provided by receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs), which play a critical role in normal cell proliferation and differentiation. RTKs constitute a family of at least 20 members containing an extracellular ligand-binding domain, a single transmembrane domain, and an intracellular cytoplasmic domain with intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity (128). Many studies have shown aberrant signaling by RTKs in a variety of cancers, including human brain tumors. Constitutive activation of RTKs is one of the important features of aberrant signaling leading to malignant transformation and tumor proliferation, and it can occur by several mechanisms (83). Deregulated RTK signaling can occur via gene amplification, overexpression, and activating mutations, including deletions in the extracellular domain or alterations in the RTK cytoplasmic domain. Another mechanism of aberrant RTK signaling involves the activation of autocrine growth factor/receptor loops (60).

In central nervous system tumors, in particular astrocytomas, the classic examples of autocrine growth factor/receptor loop involve production of platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), and their receptors (PDGFR and EGFR) (97). This article discusses mitogenic signaling cascades generated by PDGF/PDGFR and EGF/EGFR signaling with an emphasis on adult glial tumors and includes a brief analysis of how signaling modules may represent therapeutic targets in adult gliomas.

## PDGF/PDGFR SIGNALING IN HUMAN AND MOUSE GLIAL TUMORS

PDGF and PDGFR have a significant role in glial development and lineage commitment (141, 142). Although coexpression of PDGF and PDGFR has been shown in all brain tumor stages, including low-grade astrocytomas, anaplastic astrocytomas, and glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) (27, 62, 97, 134), PDGF/PDGFR overexpression has been most commonly observed in low-grade astrocytomas in association with loss of function of the p53 tumor suppressor (25, 131). These observations suggest a relationship between the PDGF/PDGFR and p53 signaling pathways. A recent study using cell
culture and a transgenic mouse model showed that overexpression of PDGF in neural progenitors induced the formation of oligodendrogliomas, whereas PDGF transfer in differentiated astrocytes induced the formation of either oligodendrogliomas or mixed oligoastrocytomas (33). The observed histologies of these glial tumors were consistent with low-grade neoplasms. Collectively, these reports suggest that the PDGF mitogenic signaling loop may be an early or initiating event in driving neural precursors or differentiated glial cells to low-grade astrocytomas and/or oligodendrogliomas before malignant transformation of low-grade clones. Therefore, most authors think that PDGF/PDGFR alterations are most commonly observed in “secondary GBM” or those malignant gliomas that arise from lower-grade tumors (63).

The PDGF family consists of four members, PDGF-A, -B, -C, and -D, which transduce signal through the receptors PDGFR-α and -β. Biosynthesis and processing of PDGFs involve the formation of dimers PDGF-AA, BB, CC, and DD and the heterodimer PDGF-AB (6). Numerous studies have demonstrated the expression of PDGF-A and -B ligands in glioblastomas and indicate that autocrine signaling by these isoforms is required for cell survival (54, 66, 130). Moreover, PDGF-A and -B and PDGFR have also been implicated in medulloblastomas and ependymomas (9). A recent study in glioma cell lines and primary glioblastoma tissues using quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction implicated PDGF-C and -D ligands in the formation of brain tumors and confirmed the existence of autocrine signaling by PDGF-A and -B in brain tumors (92). PDGF-AA and -CC selectively bind to PDGFRα, whereas PDGF-DD preferentially binds to PDGFβ, with PDGF-BB displaying affinity for both receptors (5, 6, 50, 85). Binding PDGF stabilizes PDGFR dimerization, which is followed by autophosphorylation of tyrosine residues, leading to increased tyrosine kinase activity (44, 79) and formation of docking sites for signal relay molecules containing src homology 2 (SH2) domains. A large number of SH2 domain-containing enzymes, such as phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase), phospholipase C-γ, the src family of tyrosine kinases, the protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) SHP-2, and a guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase)-activating protein for Ras, have been shown to bind SH2 sites on PDGFRα- and -β receptors and modulate different signaling pathways. PDGFRs bind to other molecules, such as Grb2, Grb7, Nck, and Shc, which lack enzymatic activities and have adapter functions, linking the activated receptor to downstream signaling molecules and distinct pathways. PDGFRs also bind to transcription factors belonging to the signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) family, which translocate to the nucleus to directly activate the transcription of several genes (64).

### EGFR/ERBB SIGNALING CASCADES IN HUMAN AND EXPERIMENTAL ASTROCYTOMAS

EGFR belongs to the ErbB family of Type I RTKs on the basis of structural homology to the v-ErbB oncogene carried by the avian erythroblastosis virus (117). The family includes four members: EGFR (also termed erbB1/human epidermal growth factor receptor 1 [HER1]), neu (erbB2 or HER2), erbB3 (HER3), and erbB4 (HER4). In high-grade astrocytomas or GBMs, the majority of gene amplification events involve EGFR (8, 90, 135), and it has been reported that approximately 50% of GBMs and only a small percentage of anaplastic astrocytomas express high levels of EGFR (135). These observations suggest that EGFR overexpression and/or gene alteration is a late event in gliomagenesis and is frequently observed in “primary” or “de novo” glioblastomas (81, 82, 102). Gene amplification and alternative splicing events commonly lead to coexpression of normal and mutated EGFR proteins, including the expression of oncogenic EGFRvIII (41, 123, 136). The activity of EGFRvIII is similar to v-ErbB, a viral homolog of EGFR, because both mutant oncoproteins have deletions in the extracellular domain and display constitutive kinase activities required for their increased tumorigenic potential (41, 72, 100, 133). We have previously shown that overexpression of EGFRvIII in U87MG glioblastoma cells increased cell proliferation in comparison with parental cells, whereas overexpression of truncated ErbB2 proteins reduced EGFR-induced cell proliferation and transformation (103, 104). These observations indicate that members of ErbB family interact with each other to regulate downstream signaling and that expression of defective receptor complexes could form the basis for anticancer therapy.

Overexpression of mutant EGFRs in astrocytes or their precursors in transgenic mice has been shown to promote the development of glioblastoma (69). Other major group alterations observed in gliomas are those that disrupt cell cycle arrest. The most common alterations are deletion of p16INK4a/p19ARF (48, 113), deletion of RB (65, 99), loss of function of p53 (65), and amplification of cyclin-dependent kinase-4 (70, 116), cyclin-dependent kinase-6 (29), cyclin D1 (14), and MDM2 (113). The associated genetic lesions that cooperate with enhanced EGFR signaling in the development of GBM have not been completely characterized. Many reports evaluating human tumor tissues have shown that combined loss of p16INK4a and p19ARF, but not of p53, p16INK4a, or p19ARF alone, is associated with EGFR activation in GBM (40, 61, 131). Similarly, p53 loss in combination with neurofibromatosis Type I loss was capable of inducing astrocytoma and glioblastoma formation in mice (114). Furthermore, approximately 80% of all human GBMs express activated Akt, an important cell survival kinase (58). Overexpression of constitutive activated Akt has been shown to convert anaplastic astrocytomas to GBM in a human astrocyte glioma model (122). A similar study in mice showed that combined activation of Ras and Akt in neural progenitors induces the formation of glioblastoma (68). A more recent study showed that p16INK4a/p19ARF loss cooperates with Ras and Akt activation in astrocyte precursors and neural progenitors to generate glioblastomas of various morphologies (127), indicating that gliomagenesis occurs through an intricate cooperativity between genetic alterations, often involving RTK signaling pathways and cell cycle regulation.
Elevated levels of activated Akt have also been associated with loss of phosphatase/tensin homolog on chromosome 10 (PTEN), a tumor suppressor, in many glioblastomas (36, 45, 58). Collectively, these studies suggest that robust signaling by overexpressed EGFR and/or loss of functional PTEN and other genes leads to increased activation of Akt in GBMs and, thus, increased transformation. However, it is unclear whether the specific state of glial cell differentiation plays a restrictive role in glioma progression. Recent work in mice has demonstrated that deregulation of specific genetic pathways (i.e., Ink4a/Arf inactivation and EGFR activation) may be more important than the distinct neural cell of origin in dictating the emergence and phenotype of high-grade gliomas (3).

Other ErbB proteins have been implicated in other central nervous system tumors. Both ErbB2 and ErbB4 expression levels have been shown to predict prognosis of childhood medulloblastoma and ependymoma (49, 51). In addition to their pathological role in brain tumors, EGFR and ErbB proteins have been implicated in many systemic human cancers, such as colon, head and neck, pancreas, lung, breast, kidney, ovary, and bladder (94). Studies in these cancers have linked prognosis with excessive receptor kinase activity, receptor overexpression, ligand-independent constitutive activation of receptor mutants, and/or autocrine stimulation (24, 52, 126, 144). Increased receptor activity leads to increased downstream signaling and enhanced cell transformation. Studies on ErbB family members have demonstrated that homodimerization and heterodimerization are the initial events in a variety of cellular signals required for cell growth and differentiation of many cell types under physiological conditions (17, 86). Thus, on ligand interaction, EGFR either forms a homodimer and/or heterodimer with other family members, which leads to auto-/trans-phosphorylation and activation of RTK activity, recruitment of various signaling relay molecules, and initiation of a variety of a intracellular signaling cascades, including Ras/Raf/mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK)/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), PI3-kinase/Akt, phospholipase C-γ (PLC-γ), and STATs.

## THE RAS/RAF/MEK/MAPK SIGNALING MODULE

Collective evidence shows that the Ras/Raf/MEK/MAPK pathway, one of the most important mitogenic pathways stimulated by PDGFR and EGFR and other RTKs, is involved in a variety of cellular processes such as proliferation, differentiation, development, and tumorigenesis. This pathway is highly conserved in evolution (47, 96). Upon receptor activation, adapter proteins such as Grb2 bring the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Sos to the receptor to form a stable complex, which is required for the activation of membrane-bound Ras, a small monomeric G-protein, by the exchange of guanosine diphosphate for GTP. In addition, EGF-induced activation of Ras may be transduced via another adapter protein, Shc, which binds to activated EGFR and becomes phosphorylated, creating an additional binding site for Grb2 (119). Recent work

indicates that the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 is recruited to EGFR-bound adapter Gab1 and facilitates Sos relocation to GTP-bound Ras (89, 140).

Mutated and constitutively activated forms of Ras are found in approximately 50% of all human metastatic tumors (18). In gliomas, specific mutations affecting Ras have not been detected. However, high levels of Ras-GTP have been documented in high-grade astrocytomas (55, 56). Ras transformation of mouse NIH3T3 cells resulted in elevated levels of cyclin D1 and accelerated G₁ progression (91). Thus, Ras overexpression can lead to increased levels of G₁-specific protein complex cyclin-dependent kinase-4/cyclin D in gliomas, which drives the cell into the S phase and mitosis. In neurofibromatosis Type I, Ras is constitutively active because of a mutation in the neurofibromatosis Type 1 gene, which encodes the Ras GTPase-activating protein-related protein neurofibromin, which is required to convert active GTP-bound Ras to inactive guanosine diphosphate-bound Ras (112, 143). Activation of other small G-proteins, such as Rap1, which also activates the Raf1/MEK/MAPK pathway, may result in increased cell proliferation in astrocytomas (57). Tuberin, a tuberous sclerosis complex 2 gene product, regulates the activity of Rap1 via a GTPase-activating protein-related domain at its C-terminus (76). Analysis of sporadic astrocytomas and ependymomas demonstrated either increased Rap1 or reduced/absent tuberin protein expression in 50 to 60% of different cohorts of gliomas compared with a small percentage of schwannomas and meningiomas and none of the oligodendrogliomas studied (57), suggesting that alterations in Rap1 signaling may play an important role in the development of certain sporadic human gliomas.

Ras primarily stimulates three main classes of effectors, Raf, PI3-kinase, and guanine nucleotide exchange factors for the Ral GTPases, with Raf thought to be critical in Ras-induced cell transformation (59, 78). In the classic pathway, Ras-activated Raf stimulates downstream MEK, which in turn phosphorylates MAPKs (also named ERKs) (10, 37, 71, 84). MAPKs or ERKs can translocate into the nucleus to phosphorylate and activate several transcription factors for activation of growth-inducing genes (*Fig.* 1). Guanine nucleotide exchange factors for the Ral GTPases have been associated with Ras-induced transformation in a very few cell lines (93, 132). Although their role in the development of brain tumors and other human cancers is still unclear, it may be more significant than originally thought (57).

Other MAPK family members, the stress-activated protein kinases such as c-jun N-terminal kinases, have been implicated in human tumorigenesis (4, 19). It has been reported that overexpression of EGFRvIII in mouse NIH3T3 cells leads to constitutive activation of the c-jun N-terminal kinase pathway, which correlates with enhanced transformation by EGFRvIII (2). Previously, we showed that overexpression of transforming ErbB receptor complexes in murine fibroblasts and human glioblastoma cells led to constitutive activation of Erk MAPK and c-jun N-terminal kinase MAPKs, thus suggesting that they play a role in the enhanced transformation and resistance

phosphorylates Akt at threonine 308 (1). It has been proposed that an unidentified protein kinase (a hypothetical PDK2) is responsible for phosphorylation of Akt at serine 473, thus leading to its complete activation. Activated Akt phosphorylates and inhibits several proapoptotic proteins, such as Bad (16), the Forkhead transcription factor (13), and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (31), to promote cell survival (Fig. 2).

It has been well documented that activation of the PI3-kinase/Akt axis is regulated by the lipid phosphatase activity of the PTEN tumor suppressor, which blocks Akt activation by converting PIP₃ to PIP₂, thereby promoting cell cycle arrest and apoptosis (36, 46, 88, 124). Interestingly, various groups have reported that a region including the PTEN locus on the long arm of chromosome 10 is deleted in many tumors, including glioblastoma, breast cancer, prostate cancer, endometrial carcinoma, and melanoma (15, 38, 111), thus suggesting a pathogenic role for the constitutively active Akt survival pathway in these cancers. Interestingly, it was shown that PTEN suppressed growth of U87MG glioblastoma cells by blocking cell cycle progression through G₁, which was correlated with a significant accumulation of the cell cycle kinase inhibitor p27kip1 (88), thus suggesting that loss of function of PTEN is one of the prerequisites for GBM development. It has been observed that PTEN mutations are more frequent in "primary" or "de novo" GBMs but not in secondary GBMs, which arise from low-grade (Grade II) or anaplastic astrocytomas (Grade III) (125). The observation that secondary glioblastomas

to apoptosis seen in primary human glioblastoma cells (139). Very recently, we observed that c-jun N-terminal kinase pathway activation may play an important and specific role in cell migration and motility in GBMs (D Kapitonov, DM O'Rourke, in preparation).

### PI3-KINASE/AKT PATHWAY

The PI3-kinase/Akt pathway is one of the major survival pathways in epithelial cells. In general, activation of the PI3-kinase/Akt pathway begins with receptor activation, rapid stimulation of phosphoinositol metabolism (32, 110), and coupling of PI3-kinase to phosphorylated docking proteins such as Gab1 (115). PI3-kinase is a phospholipid kinase composed of a regulatory subunit, p85, that contains two SH2 domains and one SH3 domain and a catalytic subunit designated p110. We recently documented that coupling of the SHP-2 protein tyrosine phosphatase to Gab1 is essential for EGFR-mediated PI3-kinase activation in glioblastoma cells (136–138; GS Kapoor, Y Zhan, GR Johnson, DM O'Rourke, submitted for publication). Activated PI3-kinase phosphorylates phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP₂) or PtdIns(4,5)P₂ via its p110 subunit to generate second messengers PtdIns(3,4)P₂ (PIP₂) and PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ (PIP₃). PIP₃ mediates membrane translocation of several signaling proteins, such as the serine-threonine kinases pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1 (PDK1) and Akt, the docking protein Gab1, and PLC-γ (32, 110). PDK1

FIGURE 2. EGFR-induced activation and regulation of PI3-kinase/Akt pathway. GSK, glycogen synthase kinase; FKHR, Forkhead/winged helix protein; PDK, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase.

MITOGENIC SIGNALING CASCADES IN GLIAL TUMORS

tomas have a p53 mutation as a genetic hallmark and a rare PTEN mutation suggests that primary and secondary GBMs develop through distinct genetic pathways involving RTK signaling (107, 125). Approximately 30% of GBMs are associated with deletions of the PTEN locus on chromosome 10. Earlier studies using minichromosome transfer experiments showed that introduction of human chromosome 10q into glioblastoma cells suppressed growth in soft agar or formation of tumors in nude mice (108). Overexpression of PTEN in glioblastoma cells via adenovirus-mediated gene delivery generated similar results in soft agar and in nude mice (21).

### PLC-γ PATHWAY

PLC-γ is a phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase that plays an important role in tumor cell migration occurring via PDGFR and EGFR by an undefined mechanism (20). A single study showed that inhibiting PLC-γ activation by a pharmacological inhibitor or a dominant-negative PLC-γ blocked glioma cell motility and invasion of fetal rat brain aggregates, thus suggesting PLC-γ as a potential target for anti-invasive therapy for GBMs (80). Upon receptor activation, PLC-γ is rapidly recruited to the receptor through the binding of its SH2 domains to pTyr sites in adapter proteins such as Gab1 (53). Coupling to the receptor activates PLC-γ, which hydrolyzes its substrate PIP₂ to generate two secondary messengers, diacylglycerol and inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (42). Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate binds to specific intracellular receptors and stimulates the release of intracellular Ca²⁺. Ca²⁺ then binds to calmodulin, which in turn activates a family of Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases. Diacylglycerol and Ca²⁺ also activate members of the protein kinase C (PKC) family (74, 77). Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases and PKCs in turn exert both stimulatory and inhibitory effects on downstream Ras/Raf/MEK/MAPK signaling (95) (Fig. 3). Several in vitro studies have supported the involvement of PKCs in glioma cell proliferation and invasion (22, 23, 30, 34, 121). A recent report suggests that PKC-α and -ε cooperate with EGFR in the induction of ornithine decarboxylase to increase glioma cell proliferation (35).

### STATs

It has been shown that EGFRs activate three STAT forms, STAT1, STAT3, and STAT5 (11), whereas PDGFR binds and activates only STAT5 (129). Upon receptor stimulation, STATs can be activated by phosphorylation via Janus kinase-dependent or -independent pathways (11, 75). Activated STATs bind to homotypic or heterotypic STATs through their SH2 domains to form homodimers or heterodimers and then translocate into the nucleus to bind to sequence-specific STAT-responsive elements on deoxyribonucleic acid and to activate the transcription of specific target genes such as p21<sup>CIP1</sup>, cyclin D1, myc, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, and caspase 1. Collectively, these target genes can regulate cell cycle progression and apoptosis (Fig. 4).

---

FIGURE 3. EGFR-induced PLC-γ pathway participating in the activation of different pathways. CaMK, Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase; DAG, diacylglycerol; IP₃, inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate.

Of the three STATs, STAT1 and STAT3 have been shown to be involved in EGFR-mediated cell cycle regulation (11). STAT1 has been implicated as a negative regulator of cell cycle progression and a promoter of apoptosis (12), whereas STAT3 acts as a positive regulator of cell cycle progression with antiapoptotic activities (7, 28). A constitutively activated STAT3α has been reported in a large percentage of gliomas and medulloblastomas, thus indicating that STAT3 may play an important role in EGFR-mediated oncogenesis (118).

### RTKs AND ANTI-CANCER THERAPY

Several approaches are being pursued to inhibit aberrant signaling by RTKs in cancer cells, and these effects may be enhanced by available crystallographic data on RTKs. These approaches include the development of molecules that specifically target either the extracellular ligand-binding domain, the intracellular tyrosine kinase, or a substrate-binding region. Several pharmacological agents, such as monoclonal antibodies, antibody conjugates, small chemical compounds, and antisense oligonucleotides that can be used to modulate and inhibit aberrant RTK signaling, are discussed below.

Generating monoclonal antibodies directed against the extracellular domain of RTKs has proven to be an effective strategy to kill tumor cells derived from systemic epithelial cancers (43). Well-known examples are Herceptin (Trastuzumab; Genentech, South San Francisco, CA), which acts against HER2 or ErbB2,

clinical trials against solid tumors (26, 67). STI571 (Gleevec; Novartis Pharmaceutical Corp., East Hanover, NJ), another tyrosine kinase inhibitor that inhibits the non-RTK bcr-abl kinase, and two RTKs, PDGFR and c-Kit, was approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration in 2001 for the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia (39). Gleevec is currently in clinical trials for malignant gliomas. In addition to tyrosine kinase inhibitors, several groups have tried to exploit the possibility of using small-molecule drugs targeting secondary signal relay molecules downstream of the receptor. PKCs are one of the potential targets for small-molecule therapy. Several PKC-inhibiting agents are in preclinical and Phase I trial evaluation for their ability to block EGFR-induced oncogenesis. In addition to tamoxifen, other PKC inhibitors, such as staurosporine, GF-109203X, and calphostin, are under laboratory testing for use in gliomas. Other targets include the FKBP12-rapamycin-associated protein (FRAP)/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) kinase, a downstream target of the PI3-kinase/Akt pathway (120) that is up-regulated in many cancers, particularly GBMs containing loss of functional PTEN. A derivative of rapamycin, CCI-779, showed growth inhibition of PTEN-deficient mouse and human cancer cells, indicating the possibility of using mTOR inhibitors for treating PTEN-null human cancers, including glioblastomas (98). CCI-779 is currently being evaluated in Phase I testing in human malignant gliomas.

We recently observed that overexpression of mutant EGFRvIII in human glioblastoma cells led to constitutive activation of the Erk/MEK pathway and that pharmacological inhibition of this pathway in turn down-regulated EGFRvIII phosphorylation (Y Zhan, DM O'Rourke, in preparation), thus indicating that the use of inhibitors of the MAPK pathway may be an alternative approach to treat malignant gliomas. There are several ongoing efforts to inhibit constituents of the Ras/Raf/MEK/MAPK pathway that may eventually achieve enhanced efficacy with reduced toxicity in the management of malignant gliomas that are often refractory to conventional therapy.

FIGURE 4. Activation of STAT pathway by EGFR or PDGFR. Jak, Janus kinase.

and C225 (Cetuximab), which acts against EGFR. The United States Food and Drug Administration has approved Herceptin for breast cancer treatment (106), but C225 is in Phase III clinical trials and has been shown to promote growth-inhibitory effects in a variety of tumors, including pancreatic, colorectal, renal, and breast carcinomas (105, 109). However, the fundamental issue with these strategies is that they may prove ineffective for central nervous system tumors such as GBMs, because the delivery of large monoclonal antibodies across the blood-brain barrier is problematic. Moreover, GBMs often express high levels of the constitutively active EGFR mutant EGFRvIII, which does not respond to ligand and has a prolonged cell surface half-life (72). To overcome this problem, signal transduction therapy may be a more rational alternative.

One promising approach to inhibit aberrant RTK signaling is the development of small-molecule drugs that selectively interfere with intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity and thereby inhibit receptor autophosphorylation and downstream signaling cascades (87). A number of synthetic small molecules such as tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been generated, particularly for the EGFR family. The most advanced of these are adenosine triphosphate analogs of the quinazoline and pyridopyrimidine family that compete with adenosine triphosphate for adenosine triphosphate-binding sites and thus block RTK activation (101). ZD-1839 (Iressa; AstraZeneca) and OSI-774 (Tarceva; Genentech) are two potent EGFR inhibitors currently being tested in Phase II

MEMBRANE

RECEPTOR

CYTOPLASM

NUCLEUS

STAT-responsive elements

p21<sup>CIP1</sup>, cyclin D1, c-myc, Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, and caspase 1

cell cycle progression and apoptosis

REFERENCES

1. Alessi DR, Andjelkovic M, Caudwell B, Cron P, Morrice N, Cohen P, Hemmings BA: Mechanism of activation of protein kinase B by insulin and IGF-1. EMBO J 15:6541–6551, 1996.
2. Antonyak MA, Moscatello DK, Wong AJ: Constitutive activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase by a mutant epidermal growth factor receptor. J Biol Chem 273:2817–2822, 1998.
3. Bachoo RM, Maher EA, Ligon KL, Sharpless NE, Chan SS, You MJ, Tang Y, DeFrances J, Stover E, Weissleder R, Rowitch DH, Louis DN, DePinho RA: Epidermal growth factor receptor and Ink4a/Arf: Convergent mechanisms governing terminal differentiation and transformation along the neural stem cell to astrocyte axis. Cancer Cell 1:269–277, 2002.
4. Behrens A, Jochum W, Sibilia M, Wagner EF: Oncogenic transformation by ras and fos is mediated by c-Jun N-terminal phosphorylation. Oncogene 19:2657–2663, 2000.
5. Bergsten E, Uutela M, Li X, Pietras K, Ostman A, Heldin CH, Alitalo K, Eriksson U: PDGF-D is a specific, protease-activated ligand for the PDGF β-receptor. Nat Cell Biol 3:512–516, 2001.
6. Betsholtz C, Karlsson L, Lindahl P: Developmental roles of platelet-derived growth factors. Bioessays 23:494–507, 2001.

7. Bienvenu F, Gascan H, Coqueret O: Cyclin D1 represses STAT3 activation through a Cdk4-independent mechanism. J Biol Chem 276:16840–16847, 2001.
8. Bigner SH, Humphrey PA, Wong AJ, Vogelstein B, Mark J, Friedman HS, Bigner DD: Characterization of the epidermal growth factor receptor in human glioma cell lines and xenografts. Cancer Res 50:8017–8022, 1990.
9. Black P, Carroll R, Glowacka D: Expression of platelet-derived growth factor transcripts in medulloblastomas and ependymomas. Pediatr Neurosurg 24:74–78, 1996.
10. Boulton TG, Nye SH, Robbins DJ, Ip NY, Radziejewska E, Morgenbesser SD, DePinho RA, Panayotatos N, Cobb MH, Yancopoulos GD: ERKs: A family of protein-serine/threonine kinases that are activated and tyrosine phosphorylated in response to insulin and NGF. Cell 65:663–675, 1991.
11. Bromberg J, Chen X: STAT proteins: Signal transducers and activators of transcription. Methods Enzymol 333:138–151, 2001.
12. Bromberg JF, Fan Z, Brown C, Mendelsohn J, Darnell JE Jr: Epidermal growth factor-induced growth inhibition requires Stat1 activation. Cell Growth Differ 9:505–512, 1998.
13. Brunet A, Bonni A, Zigmond MJ, Lin MZ, Juo P, Hu LS, Anderson MJ, Arden KC, Blenis J, Greenberg ME: Akt promotes cell survival by phosphorylating and inhibiting a Forkhead transcription factor. Cell 96:857–868, 1999.
14. Buschges R, Weber RG, Actor B, Lichter P, Collins VP, Reifenberger G: Amplification and expression of cyclin D genes (CCND1, CCND2 and CCND3) in human malignant gliomas. Brain Pathol 9:435–443, 1999.
15. Cantley LC, Neel BG: New insights into tumor suppression: PTEN suppresses tumor formation by restraining the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/ AKT pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96:4240–4245, 1999.
16. Cardone MH, Roy N, Stennicke HR, Salvesen GS, Franke TF, Stanbridge E, Frisch S, Reed JC: Regulation of cell death protease caspase-9 by phosphorylation. Science 282:1318–1321, 1998.
17. Carraway KL III, Cantley LC: A neu acquaintance for erbB3 and erbB4: A role for receptor heterodimerization in growth signaling. Cell 78:5–8, 1994.
18. Chambers AF, Tuck AB: Ras-responsive genes and tumor metastasis. Crit Rev Oncog 4:95–114, 1993.
19. Chen N, Nomura M, She QB, Ma WY, Bode AM, Wang L, Flavell RA, Dong Z: Suppression of skin tumorigenesis in c-Jun NH(2)-terminal kinase-2-deficient mice. Cancer Res 61:3908–3912, 2001.
20. Chen P, Xie H, Sekar MC, Gupta K, Wells A: Epidermal growth factor receptor-mediated cell motility: Phospholipase C activity is required, but mitogen-activated protein kinase activity is not sufficient for induced cell movement. J Cell Biol 127:847–857, 1994.
21. Cheney IW, Johnson DE, Vaillancourt MT, Avanzini J, Morimoto A, Demers GW, Wills KN, Shabram PW, Bolen JB, Tavitgian SV, Bookstein R: Suppression of tumorigenicity of glioblastoma cells by adenovirus-mediated MMAC1/PTEN gene transfer. Cancer Res 58:2331–2334, 1998.
22. Chintala SK, Kyritsis AP, Mohan PM, Mohanam S, Sawaya R, Gokslan Z, Yung WK, Steck P, Uhm JH, Aggarwal BB, Rao JS: Altered actin cytoskeleton and inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase expression by vanadate and phenylarsine oxide, inhibitors of phosphotyrosine phosphatases: Modulation of migration and invasion of human malignant glioma cells. Mol Carcinog 26:274–285, 1999.
23. Cho KK, Mikkelsen T, Lee YJ, Jiang F, Chopp M, Rosenblum ML: The role of protein kinase Cα in U-87 glioma invasion. Int J Dev Neurosci 17:447–461, 1999.
24. Chow NH, Liu HS, Lee EI, Chang CJ, Chan SH, Cheng HL, Tzai TS, Lin JS: Significance of urinary epidermal growth factor and its receptor expression in human bladder cancer. Anticancer Res 17:1293–1296, 1997.
25. Chung R, Whaley J, Kley N, Anderson K, Louis D, Menon A, Hettlich C, Freiman R, Hedley-Whyte ET, Martuza R: TP53 gene mutations and 17p deletions in human astrocytomas. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 3:323–331, 1991.
26. Ciardiello F, Caputo R, Bianco R, Damiano V, Pomatico G, De Placido S, Bianco AR, Tortora G: Antitumor effect and potentiation of cytotoxic drugs activity in human cancer cells by ZD-1839 (Iressa), an epidermal growth factor receptor-selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor. Clin Cancer Res 6:2053–2063, 2000.
27. Claesson-Welsh L: Signal transduction by the PDGF receptors. Prog Growth Factor Res 5:37–54, 1994.
28. Coqueret O, Gascan H: Functional interaction of STAT3 transcription factor with the cell cycle inhibitor p21WAF1/CIP1/SDI1. J Biol Chem 275:18794–18800, 2000.
29. Costello JF, Plass C, Arap W, Chapman VM, Held WA, Berger MS, Su Huang HJ, Cavenee WK: Cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (CDK6) amplification in human gliomas identified using two-dimensional separation of genomic DNA. Cancer Res 57:1250–1254, 1997.
30. Couldwell WT, Antel JP, Yong VW: Protein kinase C activity correlates with the growth rate of malignant gliomas: Part II—Effects of glioma mitogens and modulators of protein kinase C. Neurosurgery 31:717–724, 1992.
31. Cross DA, Alessi DR, Cohen P, Andjelkovich M, Hemmings BA: Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 by insulin mediated by protein kinase B. Nature 378:785–789, 1995.
32. Czech MP: Lipid rafts and insulin action. Nature 407:147–148, 2000.
33. Dai C, Celestino JC, Okada Y, Louis DN, Fuller GN, Holland EC: PDGF autocrine stimulation dedifferentiates cultured astrocytes and induces oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas from neural progenitors and astrocytes in vivo. Genes Dev 15:1913–1925, 2001.
34. da Rocha AB, Mans DR, Lenz G, Fernandes AK, de Lima C, Monteiro VF, Goncalves D, Moreira JC, Brunetto AL, Rodnight R, Schwartzmann G: Protein kinase C-mediated in vitro invasion of human glioma cells through extracellular-signal-regulated kinase and ornithine decarboxylase. Pathobiology 68:113–123, 2000.
35. da Rocha AB, Mans DR, Regner A, Schwartzmann G: Targeting protein kinase C: New therapeutic opportunities against high-grade malignant gliomas? Oncologist 7:17–33, 2002.
36. Davies MA, Lu Y, Sano T, Fang X, Tang P, LaPushin R, Koul D, Bookstein R, Stokoe D, Yung WK, Mills GB, Steck PA: Adenoviral transgene expression of MMAC/PTEN in human glioma cells inhibits Akt activation and induces anoikis. Cancer Res 58:5285–5290, 1998.
37. Dent P, Haser W, Haystead TA, Vincent LA, Roberts TM, Sturgill TW: Activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase by v-Raf in NIH 3T3 cells and in vitro. Science 257:1404–1407, 1992.
38. Di Cristofano A, Pandolfi PP: The multiple roles of PTEN in tumor suppression. Cell 100:387–390, 2000.
39. Druker BJ, Sawyers CL, Kantarjian H, Resta DJ, Reese SF, Ford JM, Capdeville R, Talpaz M: Activity of a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in the blast crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia with the Philadelphia chromosome. N Engl J Med 344:1038–1042, 2001.
40. Ekstrand AJ, James CD, Cavenee WK, Seliger B, Pettersson RF, Collins VP: Genes for epidermal growth factor receptor, transforming growth factor α, and epidermal growth factor and their expression in human gliomas in vivo. Cancer Res 51:2164–2172, 1991.
41. Ekstrand AJ, Sugawa N, James CD, Collins VP: Amplified and rearranged epidermal growth factor receptor genes in human glioblastomas reveal deletions of sequences encoding portions of the N- and/or C-terminal tails. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 89:4309–4313, 1992.
42. Falasca M, Logan SK, Lehto VP, Baccante G, Lemmon MA, Schlessinger J: Activation of phospholipase Cγ by PI 3-kinase-induced PH domain-mediated membrane targeting. EMBO J 17:414–422, 1998.
43. Fan Z, Mendelsohn J: Therapeutic application of anti-growth factor receptor antibodies. Curr Opin Oncol 10:67–73, 1998.
44. Fantl WJ, Escobedo JA, Williams LT: Mutations of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor that cause a loss of ligand-induced conformational change, subtle changes in kinase activity, and impaired ability to stimulate DNA synthesis. Mol Cell Biol 9:4473–4478, 1989.
45. Fujisawa H, Kurrer M, Reis RM, Yonekawa Y, Kleihues P, Ohgaki H: Acquisition of the glioblastoma phenotype during astrocytoma progression is associated with loss of heterozygosity on 10q25-qter. Am J Pathol 155:387–394, 1999.
46. Furnari FB, Lin H, Huang HS, Cavenee WK: Growth suppression of glioma cells by PTEN requires a functional phosphatase catalytic domain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94:12479–12484, 1997.
47. Garrington TP, Johnson GL: Organization and regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways. Curr Opin Cell Biol 11:211–218, 1999.
48. Giani C, Finocchiaro G: Mutation rate of the CDKN2 gene in malignant gliomas. Cancer Res 54:6338–6339, 1994.

KAPOOR AND O'ROURKE

49. Gilbertson RJ, Bentley L, Hernan R, Juntila TT, Frank AJ, Haapasalo H, Connelly M, Wetmore C, Curran T, Elenius K, Ellison DW: ERBB receptor signaling promotes ependymoma cell proliferation and represents a potential novel therapeutic target for this disease. Clin Cancer Res 8:3054–3064, 2002.

50. Gilbertson DG, Duff ME, West JW, Kelly JD, Sheppard PO, Hofstrand PD, Gao Z, Shoemaker K, Bukowski TR, Moore M, Feldhaus AL, Humes JM, Palmer TE, Hart CE: Platelet-derived growth factor C (PDGF-C), a novel growth factor that binds to PDGF α and β receptor. J Biol Chem 276:27406–27414, 2001.

51. Gilbertson RJ, Perry RH, Kelly PJ, Pearson AD, Lunec J: Prognostic significance of HER2 and HER4 coexpression in childhood medulloblastoma. Cancer Res 57:3272–3280, 1997.

52. Grandis JR, Melhem MF, Gooding WE, Day R, Holst VA, Wagener MM, Drenning SD, Tweardy DJ: Levels of TGF-α and EGFR protein in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and patient survival. J Natl Cancer Inst 90:824–832, 1998.

53. Gual P, Giordano S, Williams TA, Rocchi S, Van Obberghen E, Comoglio PM: Sustained recruitment of phospholipase C-γ to Gab1 is required for HGF-induced branching tubulogenesis. Oncogene 19:1509–1518, 2000.

54. Guha A, Dashner K, Black PMcL, Wagner JA, Stiles CD: Expression of PDGF and PDGF receptors in human astrocytoma operation specimens supports the existence of an autocrine loop. Int J Cancer 60:168–173, 1995.

55. Guha A, Feldkamp MM, Lau N, Boss G, Pawson A: Proliferation of human malignant astrocytomas is dependent on Ras activation. Oncogene 15:2755–2765, 1997.

56. Gutmann DH, Giordano MJ, Mahadeo DK, Lau N, Silbergeld D, Guha A: Increased neurofibromatosis 1 gene expression in astrocytic tumors: Positive regulation by p21-ras. Oncogene 12:2121–2127, 1996.

57. Gutmann DH, Saporito-Irwin S, DeClue JE, Wienecke R, Guha A: Alterations in the rap1 signaling pathway are common in human gliomas. Oncogene 15:1611–1616, 1997.

58. Haas-Kogan D, Shalev N, Wong M, Mills G, Yount G, Stokoe D: Protein kinase B (PKB/Akt) activity is elevated in glioblastoma cells due to mutation of the tumor suppressor PTEN/MMAC. Curr Biol 8:1195–1198, 1998.

59. Hamad NM, Elconin JH, Karnoub AE, Bai W, Rich JN, Abraham RT, Der CJ, Counter CM: Distinct requirements for Ras oncogenesis in human versus mouse cells. Genes Dev 16:2045–2057, 2002.

60. Hanahan D, Weinberg RA: The hallmarks of cancer. Cell 100:57–70, 2000.

61. Hayashi Y, Ueki K, Waha A, Wiestler OD, Louis DN, von Deimling A: Association of EGFR gene amplification and CDKN2 (p16/MTS1) gene deletion in glioblastoma multiforme. Brain Pathol 7:871–875, 1997.

62. Heldin CH, Westermark B: Platelet-derived growth factor: Mechanism of action and possible in vivo function. Cell Regul 1:555–566, 1990.

63. Heldin CH, Westermark B: Signal transduction by the receptors for platelet-derived growth factor. J Cell Sci 96:193–196, 1990.

64. Heldin CH, Ostman A, Ronnstrand L: Signal transduction via platelet-derived growth factor receptors. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1378:F79–F113, 1998.

65. Henson JW, Schnitker BL, Correa KM, von Deimling A, Fassbender F, Xu HJ, Benedict WF, Yandell DW, Louis DN: The retinoblastoma gene is involved in malignant progression of astrocytomas. Ann Neurol 36:714–721, 1994.

66. Hermanson M, Funa K, Hartman M, Claesson-Welsh L, Heldin CH, Westermark B, Nister M: Platelet-derived growth factor and its receptors in human glioma tissue: Expression of messenger RNA and protein suggests the presence of autocrine and paracrine loops. Cancer Res 52:3213–3219, 1992.

67. Hidalgo M, Siu LL, Nemenaitis J, Rizzo J, Hammond LA, Takimoto C, Eckhardt SG, Tolcher A, Britten CD, Denis L, Ferrante K, Von Hoff DD, Silberman S, Rowinsky EK: Phase I and pharmacologic study of OSI-774, an epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, in patients with advanced solid malignancies. J Clin Oncol 19:3267–3279, 2001.

68. Holland EC, Celestino J, Dai C, Schaefer L, Sawaya RE, Fuller GN: Combined activation of Ras and Akt in neural progenitors induces glioblastoma formation in mice. Nat Genet 25:55–57, 2000.

69. Holland EC, Hively WP, DePinho RA, Varmus HE: A constitutively active epidermal growth factor receptor cooperates with disruption of G1 cell-cycle arrest pathways to induce glioma-like lesions in mice. Genes Dev 12:3675–3685, 1998.

70. Holland EC, Hively WP, Gallo V, Varmus HE: Modeling mutations in the G1 arrest pathway in human gliomas: Overexpression of CDK4 but not loss of INK4a-ARF induces hyperploidy in cultured mouse astrocytes. Genes Dev 12:3644–3649, 1998.

71. Howe LR, Levers SJ, Gomez N, Nakielny S, Cohen P, Marshall CJ: Activation of the MAP kinase pathway by the protein kinase raf. Cell 71:335–342, 1992.

72. Huang HS, Nagane M, Klingbeil CK, Lin H, Nishikawa R, Ji XD, Huang CM, Gill GN, Wiley HS, Cavenee WK: The enhanced tumorigenic activity of a mutant epidermal growth factor receptor common in human cancers is mediated by threshold levels of constitutive tyrosine phosphorylation and unattenuated signaling. J Biol Chem 272:2927–2935, 1997.

73. Hunter T: Oncoprotein networks. Cell 88:333–346, 1997.

74. Hunter T: Signaling: 2000 and beyond. Cell 100:113–127, 2000.

75. Ihle JN, Kerr IM: Jaks and Stats in signaling by the cytokine receptor superfamily. Trends Genet 11:69–74, 1995.

76. Jin F, Wienecke R, Xiao GH, Maize JC Jr, DeClue JE, Yeung RS: Suppression of tumorigenicity by the wild-type tuberous sclerosis 2 (Tsc2) gene and its C-terminal region. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93:9154–9159, 1996.

77. Karin M, Hunter T: Transcriptional control by protein phosphorylation: Signal transmission from the cell surface to the nucleus. Curr Biol 5:747–757, 1995.

78. Katz ME, McCormick F: Signal transduction from multiple Ras effectors. Curr Opin Genet Dev 7:75–79, 1997.

79. Kazlauskas A, Cooper JA: Autophosphorylation of the PDGF receptor in the kinase insert region regulates interactions with cell proteins. Cell 58:1121–1133, 1989.

80. Khoshyomn S, Penar PL, Rossi J, Wells A, Abramson DL, Bhushan A: Inhibition of phospholipase C-γ1 activation blocks glioma cell motility and invasion of fetal rat brain aggregates. Neurosurgery 44:568–578, 1999.

81. Kleihues P, Ohgaki H: Primary and secondary glioblastomas: From concept to clinical diagnosis. Neuro-oncol 1:44–51, 1999.

82. Kleihues P, Lubbe J, Watanabe K, von Ammon K, Ohgaki H: Genetic alterations associated with glioma progression. Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol 78:43–47, 1994.

83. Kolibaba KS, Druker BJ: Protein tyrosine kinases and cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta 1333:F217–F248, 1997.

84. Kyriakis JM, Force TL, Rapp UR, Bonventre JV, Avruch J: Mitogen regulation of c-Raf-1 protein kinase activity toward mitogen-activated protein kinase-kinase. J Biol Chem 268:16009–16019, 1993.

85. LaRochelle WJ, Jeffers M, McDonald WF, Chillakuru RA, Giese NA, Lokker NA, Sullivan C, Boldog FL, Yang M, Vernet C, Burgess CE, Fernandes E, Deegler LL, Rittman B, Shimkets J, Shimkets RA, Rothberg JM, Lichenstein HS: PDGF-D, a new protease-activated growth factor. Nat Cell Biol 3:517–521, 2001.

86. Lemmon MA, Schlessinger J: Regulation of signal transduction and signal diversity by receptor oligomerization. Trends Biochem Sci 19:459–463, 1994.

87. Levitzki A: Protein tyrosine kinase inhibitors as novel therapeutic agents. Pharmacol Ther 82:231–239, 1999.

88. Li DM, Sun H: PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 suppresses the tumorigenicity and induces G1 cell cycle arrest in human glioblastoma cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95:15406–15411, 1998.

89. Li W, Nishimura R, Kashishian A, Batzer AG, Kim WJ, Cooper JA, Schlessinger J: A new function for a phosphotyrosine phosphatase: Linking GRB2-Sos to a receptor tyrosine kinase. Mol Cell Biol 14:509–517, 1994.

90. Libermann TA, Nusbaum HR, Razon N, Kris R, Lax I, Soreq H, Whittle N, Waterfield MD, Ullrich A, Schlessinger J: Amplification, enhanced expression and possible rearrangement of EGF receptor gene in primary human brain tumours of glial origin. Nature 313:144–147, 1985.

91. Liu JJ, Chao JR, Jiang MC, Ng SY, Yen JJ, Yang-Yen HF: Ras transformation results in an elevated level of cyclin D1 and acceleration of G1 progression in NIH 3T3 cells. Mol Cell Biol 15:3654–3663, 1995.

92. Lokker NA, Sullivan CM, Hollenbach SJ, Israel MA, Giese NA: Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) autocrine signaling regulates survival and mitogenic pathways in glioblastoma cells: Evidence that the novel PDGF-C and PDGF-D ligands may play a role in the development of brain tumors. Cancer Res 62:3729–3735, 2002.

93. Lu Z, Hornia A, Joseph T, Sukezane T, Frankel P, Zhong M, Bychenok S, Xu L, Feig LA, Foster DA: Phospholipase D and RalA cooperate with the epidermal growth factor receptor to transform 3Y1 rat fibroblasts. Mol Cell Biol 20:462–467, 2000.

94. Lui VW, Grandis JR: EGFR-mediated cell cycle regulation. Anticancer Res 22:1–11, 2002.

95. Luttrell LM, Daaka Y, Lefkowitz RJ: Regulation of tyrosine kinase cascades by G-protein-coupled receptors. Curr Opin Cell Biol 11:177–183, 1999.

96. Madhani HD, Fink GR: The riddle of MAP kinase signaling specificity. Trends Genet 14:151–155, 1998.

97. Maher EA, Furnari FB, Bachoo RM, Rowitch DH, Louis DN, Cavenee WK, DePinho RA: Malignant glioma: Genetics and biology of a grave matter. Genes Dev 15:1311–1333, 2001.

98. Neshat MS, Mellinghoff IK, Tran C, Stiles B, Thomas G, Petersen R, Frost P, Gibbons JJ, Wu H, Sawyers CL: Enhanced sensitivity of PTEN-deficient tumors to inhibition of FRAP/mTOR. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98:10314–10319, 2001.

99. Newcomb EW, Alonso M, Sung T, Miller DC: Incidence of p14ARF gene deletion in high-grade adult and pediatric astrocytomas. Hum Pathol 31:115–119, 2000.

100. Nishikawa R, Ji XD, Harmon RC, Lazar CS, Gill GN, Cavenee WK, Huang HJ: A mutant epidermal growth factor receptor common in human glioma confers enhanced tumorigenicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 91:7727–7731, 1994.

101. Noonberg SB, Benz CC: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors targeted to the epidermal growth factor receptor subfamily: Role as anticancer agents. Drugs 59:753–767, 2000.

102. Ohgaki H, Schauble B, zur Hausen A, von Ammon K, Kleihues P: Genetic alterations associated with the evolution and progression of astrocytic brain tumours. Virchows Arch 427:113–118, 1995.

103. O'Rourke DM, Nute EJ, Davis JG, Wu C, Lee A, Murali R, Zhang HT, Qian X, Kao CC, Greene MI: Inhibition of a naturally occurring EGFR oncoprotein by the p185neu ectodomain: Implications for subdomain contributions to receptor assembly. Oncogene 16:1197–1207, 1998.

104. O'Rourke DM, Qian X, Zhang HT, Davis JG, Nute E, Meinkoth J, Greene MI: Trans receptor inhibition of human glioblastoma cells by erbB family ectodomains. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94:3250–3255, 1997.

105. Overholser JP, Prewett MC, Hooper AT, Waksal HW, Hicklin DJ: Epidermal growth factor receptor blockade by antibody IMC-C225 inhibits growth of a human pancreatic carcinoma xenograft in nude mice. Cancer 89:74–82, 2000.

106. Pegram MD, Lipton A, Hayes DF, Weber BL, Baselga JM, Tripathy D, Baly D, Baughman SA, Twaddell T, Glaspy JA, Slamon DJ: Phase II study of receptor-enhanced chemosensitivity using recombinant humanized anti-p185HER2/neu monoclonal antibody plus cisplatin in patients with HER2/neu-overexpressing metastatic breast cancer refractory to chemotherapy treatment. J Clin Oncol 16:2659–2671, 1998.

107. Peraud A, Watanabe K, Plate KH, Yonekawa Y, Kleihues P, Ohgaki H: p53 mutations versus EGF receptor expression in giant cell glioblastomas. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 56:1236–1241, 1997.

108. Pershouse MA, Stubblefield E, Hadi A, Killary AM, Yung WK, Steck PA: Analysis of the functional role of chromosome 10 loss in human glioblastomas. Cancer Res 53:5043–5050, 1993.

109. Prewett M, Rothman M, Waksal H, Feldman M, Bander NH, Hicklin DJ: Mouse-human chimeric anti-epidermal growth factor receptor antibody C225 inhibits the growth of human renal cell carcinoma xenografts in nude mice. Clin Cancer Res 4:2957–2966, 1998.

110. Rameh LE, Cantley LC: The role of phosphoinositide 3-kinase lipid products in cell function. J Biol Chem 274:8347–8350, 1999.

111. Rasheed BK, Fuller GN, Friedman AH, Bigner DD, Bigner SH: Loss of heterozygosity for 10q loci in human gliomas. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 5:75–82, 1992.

112. Reed N, Gutmann DH: Tumorigenesis in neurofibromatosis: New insights and potential therapies. Trends Mol Med 7:157–162, 2001.


113. Reifenberger G, Liu L, Ichimura K, Schmidt EE, Collins VP: Amplification and overexpression of the MDM2 gene in a subset of human malignant gliomas without p53 mutations. Cancer Res 53:2736–2739, 1993.

114. Reilly KM, Loisel DA, Bronson RT, McLaughlin ME, Jacks T: Nf1;Trp53 mutant mice develop glioblastoma with evidence of strain-specific effects. Nat Genet 26:109–113, 2000.

115. Rodrigues GA, Falasca M, Zhang Z, Ong SH, Schlessinger J: A novel positive feedback loop mediated by the docking protein Gab1 and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in epidermal growth factor receptor signaling. Mol Cell Biol 20:1448–1459, 2000.

116. Rollbrocker B, Waha A, Louis DN, Wiestler OD, von Deimling A: Amplification of the cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) gene is associated with high cdk4 protein levels in glioblastoma multiforme. Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 92:70–74, 1996.

117. Salomon DS, Brandt R, Ciardiello F, Normanno N: Epidermal growth factor-related peptides and their receptors in human malignancies. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol 19:183–232, 1995.

118. Schaefer LK, Ren Z, Fuller GN, Schaefer TS: Constitutive activation of Stat3α in brain tumors: Localization to tumor endothelial cells and activation by the endothelial tyrosine kinase receptor (VEGFR-2). Oncogene 21:2058–2065, 2002.

119. Schlessinger J: Cell signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases. Cell 103:211–225, 2000.

120. Sekulic A, Hudson CC, Homme JL, Yin P, Otterness DM, Karnitz LM, Abraham RT: A direct linkage between the phosphoinositide 3-kinase-AKT signaling pathway and the mammalian target of rapamycin in mitogen-stimulated and transformed cells. Cancer Res 60:3504–3513, 2000.

121. Sharif TR, Sharif M: Overexpression of protein kinase Ce in astroglial brain tumor derived cell lines and primary tumor samples. Int J Oncol 15:237–243, 1999.

122. Sonoda Y, Ozawa T, Aldape KD, Deen DF, Berger MS, Pieper RO: Akt pathway activation converts anaplastic astrocytoma to glioblastoma multiforme in a human astrocyte model of glioma. Cancer Res 61:6674–6678, 2001.

123. Sugawa N, Ekstrand AJ, James CD, Collins VP: Identical splicing of aberrant epidermal growth factor receptor transcripts from amplified rearranged genes in human glioblastomas. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 87:8602–8606, 1990.

124. Tian XX, Pang JC, To SS, Ng HK: Restoration of wild-type PTEN expression leads to apoptosis, induces differentiation, and reduces telomerase activity in human glioma cells. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 58:472–479, 1999.

125. Tohma Y, Gratas C, Biernat W, Peraud A, Fukuda M, Yonekawa Y, Kleihues P, Ohgaki H: PTEN (MMAC1) mutations are frequent in primary glioblastomas (de novo) but not in secondary glioblastomas. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 57:684–689, 1998.

126. Turkeri LN, Erton ML, Cevik I, Akdas A: Impact of the expression of epidermal growth factor, transforming growth factor α, and epidermal growth factor receptor on the prognosis of superficial bladder cancer. Urology 51:645–649, 1998.

127. Uhrbom L, Dai C, Celestino JC, Rosenblum MK, Fuller GN, Holland EC: Ink4a-Arf loss cooperates with KRas activation in astrocytes and neural progenitors to generate glioblastomas of various morphologies depending on activated Akt. Cancer Res 62:5551–5558, 2002.

128. Ullrich A, Schlessinger J: Signal transduction by receptors with tyrosine kinase activity. Cell 61:203–212, 1990.

129. Valgeirsdottir S, Paukku K, Silvennoinen O, Heldin CH, Claesson-Welsh L: Activation of Stat5 by platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) is dependent on phosphorylation sites in PDGF β-receptor juxtamembrane and kinase insert domains. Oncogene 16:505–515, 1998.

130. Vassbotn FS, Ostman A, Langeland N, Holmsen H, Westermark B, Heldin CH, Nister M: Activated platelet-derived growth factor autocrine pathway drives the transformed phenotype of a human glioblastoma cell line. J Cell Physiol 158:381–389, 1994.

131. von Deimling A, Eibl RH, Ohgaki H, Louis DN, von Ammon K, Petersen I, Kleihues P, Chung RY, Wiestler OD, Seizinger BR: p53 mutations are associated with 17p allelic loss in grade II and grade III astrocytoma. Cancer Res 52:2987–2990, 1992.

132. Ward Y, Wang W, Woodhouse E, Linnoila I, Liotta L, Kelly K: Signal pathways which promote invasion and metastasis: Critical and distinct contributions of extracellular signal-regulated kinase and Ral-specific guanine exchange factor pathways. Mol Cell Biol 21:5958–5969, 2001.

line of research holds great promise for approval in the near future of new therapies for malignant gliomas.

**Gregory W. Canute**
Syracuse, New York

1. Eller JL, Longo SL, Hicklin DJ, Canute GW: Activity of anti-epidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody C225 against glioblastoma multiforme. Neurosurgery 51:1005–1014, 2002.

Kapoor and O’Rourke have done a great service to neurosurgeons by succinctly summarizing the current knowledge base on mitogenic signaling cascades in glial tumors. A mechanism in molecular biology that has stood the test of time as it relates to human astrocytomas is the interaction between receptors and ligands that stimulate cell growth. In astrocytomas, the interactions of note are growth factor and growth factor receptor binding. This binding subsequently leads to activation of downstream signaling elements, which are now becoming better elucidated.

The contribution here is supplemented by very comprehensive figures that capture the essence of the receptor-ligand interactions and how they ultimately lead to signals that alter transcription, cell growth, and proliferation. As can be appreciated by the different elements within the mitogenic signaling cascades, these have offered and will continue to offer avenues for therapeutic exploitation. This is another important article in the Primer on Molecular Medicine series that will characterize future volumes of *Neurosurgery*. The present contribution is written by experts in the field who have devoted their research careers to increasing the understanding of this topic.

**James T. Rutka**
Toronto, Ontario, Canada

In this article, Kapoor and O’Rourke review the signaling pathways triggered by platelet-derived growth factor/platelet-derived growth factor receptor and epidermal growth factor receptor/ErbB and provide an analysis of Ras/Raf/mitogen-activated protein kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt, and phospholipase C-γ signaling modules. The signal transduction and activators of transcription pathway is also described. Throughout the review, the relevance of these factors and signaling pathways in glial cell proliferation and migration (invasion) is discussed. The authors conclude the review on the potential development of a pharmacological and gene therapy approach to glial tumors on the basis of understanding these signaling pathways. Four figures that depict the above signaling pathways are provided.

As a whole, the article provides a good general review of some of the signaling mechanisms that are involved in glial tumor development, and it will be of particular interest for the basic scientist and clinician in the field. The article would have greatly benefited from incorporating more recent references (published in 2002 and 2003) and by adding a summary figure

**COMMENTS**

The authors have provided a well-written and thorough review of some very important concepts regarding signaling pathways in gliomas. What is remarkable is the complexity and variability of each of these pathways and how they relate to the initiation and progression of glial tumors. Reviews of this nature are very helpful to remind physicians of the work that has been done and the challenges to come in trying to find more effective therapy. This review will make a nice addition to the reading list for residents. It summarizes a lot of information in a very readable format.

**Joseph M. Piepmeier**
New Haven, Connecticut

This article represents an overview of receptor tyrosine kinases in human gliomas. The bibliography should provide a good reference source for those interested in delving deeper into this topic. The importance of receptor tyrosine kinases to tumors in general is reflected by the effort currently being expended in developing new therapeutics against these receptors and their kinases. Work in my laboratory has demonstrated the ability of the monoclonal antibody C225 (Erbitux) to cure mice of human glioblastomas (1; GW Canute, in preparation). I think that this

1434 | VOLUME 52 | NUMBER 6 | JUNE 2003
www.neurosurgery-online.com

Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

that depicts all the signaling pathways and that points out the  
level at which targeting might be possible.

Berislav V. Zlokovic  
Neuroscientist  
Rochester, New York  

Although clinical neuro-oncologists have struggled in the past  
several decades to make even small advances in the treatment  
of malignant gliomas, basic scientists have captured the  
moment of the molecular biology revolution by identifying numerous  
trans-membrane and intracellular pathways that ultimately  
control the complex process of malignant cell growth. Our  
understanding of the human genome, and now the proteome, has  
enabled scientists to understand defects at the gene  
and protein levels that ultimately result in uncontrolled cell  
growth because of aberrant signaling pathways. The authors  
describe several interactions between ligands and their binding  
sites that are mediated through receptor tyrosine kinases, which  
ultimately control cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis,  
and invasion, to name just a few processes that characterize  
malignant gliomas. Some of the more important pathways are  
highlighted in this review article, including the Ras, epidermal  
growth factor/epidermal growth factor receptor, phosphatase/

tensin homolog on chromosome 10/Akt, MEK/MAPK, and signal  
transducers and activators of transcription pathways. Ultimately, all of these pathways affect cell growth and proliferation,  
apoptosis, angiogenesis, and invasion. It is through the process of  
gene amplification that the mutations ultimately responsible for  
affecting the receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathways that are  
so prevalent in malignant gliomas will be identified. With our  
understanding of these detailed pathways comes the hope that  
we will be able to design small-molecule inhibitors that block key  
elements of these signaling mechanisms that will ultimately affect  
the processes that promote dysregulated cell growth. Currently, small-molecular inhibitor Phase I/Phase II trials are under  
way. It is astounding to see that with some of these single oral  
agents, we are getting responses against the most malignant  
gliomas that normally result in death shortly after the time of  
recurrence. It can only be imagined how close we are to the  
“magic bullet” when we think about the possibility of combining  
several of these inhibitors with (hopefully) very little toxicity to  
block several of these aberrant signaling pathways at once. Perhaps  
only then will we make the major impact in treating malignant  
gliomas that we have lacked for such a long period of time.

Mitchel S. Berger  
San Francisco, California  

---

**World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies Web Site**

On behalf of the World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies, I would like to invite you  
to log onto the web site of the WFNS at www.wfns.org. Our web site editor, Dr.  
Eduardo A. Karol of Argentina, has done a wonderful job in presenting on the web site  
not only information about the many activities of the WFNS, but also opportunities for  
young neurosurgeons all around the world to communicate with each other and to  
participate in web-based educational activities. These include interesting cases, clinico-  
pathological conferences, and the web-based journal Critical Reviews, the official electronic  
journal of the WFNS. We hope you will participate. Those of you who would like  
to become more involved in the WFNS web site activities are very welcome to volunteer  
your efforts, which will be much appreciated.

Edward R. Laws, Jr.  
President

---

NEUROSURGERY | VOLUME 52 | NUMBER 6 | JUNE 2003 | 1435  

Copyright © Congress of Neurological Surgeons. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
