
**TIMELINE**

# RAS oncogenes: the first 30 years

**Marcos Malumbres and Mariano Barbacid**

From the pioneering work with acute transforming retroviruses to the current post-genomic era, RAS genes have always been at the leading edge of signal transduction and molecular oncology. Yet, a complete understanding of RAS function and dysfunction — mainly in human cancer — is still to come. The knowledge that has accumulated since their discovery 30 years ago has, however, been remarkable, and should pave the way for not only solving the outstanding issues regarding RAS biology, but also for developing efficacious drugs that could have a significant impact on cancer treatment.

The beginning of RAS research can be traced back to 1964 when Jennifer Harvey observed that a preparation of a murine leukaemia virus, taken from a leukaemic rat, induced sarcomas in new-born rodents¹ (see TIMELINE). Three additional retroviruses, later shown to carry *ras* oncogenes, were subsequently identified. Kirsten-MSV was obtained in 1967 by serial passage of murine leukaemia viruses through Wister-Furth rats². BALB-MSV was isolated in 1974 from a leukaemic BALB/c mouse³, and the Rasheed strain of rat sarcoma virus was generated in 1978 from cultured rat cells⁴ (BOX 1).

The sequences responsible for the oncogenic properties of these acute transforming viruses were molecularly defined in the 1970s. In 1975, Ed Scolnick and his associates established that the Harvey (Ha-MSV) and Kirsten (Ki-MSV) strains were recombinant viruses that carry sequences derived from the rat genome (REF.5), but molecular characterization of these sequences had to wait until 1977, when the self-imposed restrictions on molecular cloning were lifted and the genomes of Ha-MSV and Ki-MSV could be limitlessly propagated in bacteria⁶,⁷. It was soon established that Ha-MSV and Ki-MSV were actually triple recombinants between the replication competent (helper) retrovirus that conferred on them infectious properties, rat cellular sequences of ancestral retroviral origin known as 30S RNA and rat cellular genes (*Hras* in Ha-MSV and *Kras* in Ki-MSV)⁸. The nucleotide sequences of the v-*h-ras* and v-*k-ras* oncogenes were not published until the autumn of 1982, a time when the excitement in the *ras* field was shifting towards the recently isolated human oncogenes.

### Human oncogenes...

In the early 1970s, scientists — mainly in the labs of Miroslav Hill and Jana Hillova, and Alex van der Eb — were interested in introducing foreign DNA into mammalian cells as a means of studying gene function. By 1978, Michael Wigler — then a graduate student in Bernie Weinstein’s lab — used a slightly modified version of van der Eb’s calcium-phosphate DNA-precipitation technique⁹ to successfully transfer a single-copy gene, thymidine kinase, from total cellular DNA into mammalian cells (mouse L cells) that were deficient for this enzyme. These studies inspired scientists to search for genes that are capable of inducing morphological transformation (as a detectable trait) in suitable recipient cells.

The first report came in 1979 when Robert Weinberg’s laboratory described the transformation of NIH-3T3 mouse fibroblasts with genomic DNA that was isolated from chemically transformed mouse cells¹⁰. This report was met with a great deal of scepticism, as NIH-3T3 cells were known to become spontaneously transformed in continuous culture, and no evidence for the integration of the donor DNA in the transformed cells was provided. This caveat was quickly resolved in the spring of 1981 when Weinberg’s group showed that Alu repetitive DNA sequences from humans were present in NIH-3T3 cells that had been transformed with DNA isolated from human tumour cell lines¹¹. Later that year, Perucho, Wigler and co-workers reported that foci derived from three different human tumour cell lines contained the same pattern of Alu-containing DNA fragments — showing, for the first time, that a defined genetic element was responsible for the transformation of NIH-3T3 cells¹². Any doubts regarding the existence of transforming genes in human tumour cells were resolved in the spring of 1982, when the laboratories of Robert Weinberg, Michael Wigler and Mariano Barbacid reported the molecular cloning of a human transforming gene from the T24 and EJ bladder carcinoma cell lines¹³⁻¹⁵.

...and the RAS connection

What was the molecular nature of these human oncogenes? The answer to this important question was provided just a few weeks later. Channing Der — then a postdoctoral fellow in Geoffrey Cooper’s laboratory — used retroviral oncogene probes to hybridize DNA isolated from NIH-3T3 cells that had been transformed with various human tumour DNAs¹⁶, so answering the question of whether or not these human oncogenes were related to the cellular homologues of the well-characterized retroviral oncogenes. Cells transformed with DNA isolated from EJ bladder (EJ) and lung (LX-1) carcinoma cells had additional sequences that hybridized to probes specific for the v-*h-ras* and the v-*k-ras* oncogenes, respectively. Similar results were independently reported by Weinberg’s group and by Barbacid’s group in collaboration with Stuart Aaronson’s lab¹⁷,¹⁸. But why did nobody hybridize a blot containing DNA from transfected NIH-3T3 cells with a v-*ras* probe until this time? Ironically, the first NIH-3T3 transformants reported by Weinberg’s group contained an activated *KRAS* oncogene¹⁹. Was it possible that nobody thought that those oncogenes that were transduced by retroviruses could be mutated in human cancer? Was it due to the frantic pace of research? Perhaps we wanted human cancer to be distinct from virus-induced tumours of rodents? Indeed, in our lab, we made the connection without even hybridizing a blot. During a joint seminar with Aaronson’s group, Steve Tronick noted that the pattern of restriction endonuclease sites of our human clones were remarkably similar to one of his. After returning to the lab, we went through the sites one at a time over the phone and realized that his clone — the human homologue of BALB v-*ras* — was indeed the same as ours. The Southern blot with the v-*ras* probe was done that very same afternoon. These observations, taken together, validate the pioneering work carried out with tumour viruses during the 1960s and 1970s — work that many thought to be ‘irrelevant’ to human cancer.

By 1983, a new human transforming gene was identified²⁰,²¹ and found to be a third member of the *RAS* gene family. This gene was designated *NRAS*.

### Mechanism of activation

Molecular cloning of the normal human *HRAS* gene and its oncogenic allele allowed investigators to establish that their functional differences were caused by a single point mutation²²⁻²⁴. These results took the scientific community by surprise. Transfection studies had already illustrated that a single *RAS* gene

### Timeline | A chronicle of RAS discovery

| 1964 | 1973 | 1979 | 1981 | 1982 | 1983 | 1984 | 1987 | 1988 | 1989 | 1990 | 1993 | 1994 | 1995 |
|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|------|
| Retroviral isolates were identified (also in 1967, 1974 and 1978) | Ha-MSV was cloned | Ki-MSV was cloned | Human oncogenes were found to be related to v-ras oncogenes | NRAS was identified | p21 RAS was found to be a GTPase | RAS was found to be activated by mitogenic factors | Ras transgenic mice were generated | RAS proteins were shown to be farnesylated | RAS was shown to interact with RAF | Famesyltransferase inhibitors were found to block Ras-induced tumours in mice | Ha-MSV and Ki-MSV were found to contain rat cellular sequences | p21 v-Ras was found to bind GTP | The first human transforming gene was cloned |
| The human HRAS oncogene was found to be activated by point mutation | Ras oncogenes were identified in carcinogen-induced animal tumours | RAS-GAP was identified | RAS structure was resolved | RAS-GEFs were identified | PBK was shown to be a RAS effector |
| RAS was shown to be frequently mutated in colon tumours | RAS was found to co-operate with MYC and E1A to transform primary cells |

---

could induce morphological transformation of NIH-3T3 cells in culture and could confer on them the ability to induce tumours in nude mice. Earlier retroviral work had also shown that a single genetic element — the retroviral oncogene — was responsible for the in vivo tumorigenic properties of acute transforming retroviruses. Even normal cellular homologues of the retroviral oncogenes v-mos and v-h-ras were shown to transform NIH-3T3 cells when driven by retroviral enhancers. However, the 'simplicity' of a single point mutation was too much to take: point mutations must occur every day in every cell and humans do not develop cancer until old age. This apparent conundrum led to a heated debate in the oncogene community.

The realization in 1983 that human RAS oncogenes, unlike their retroviral counterparts, could not transform primary cells in culture (unlike immortal cell lines such as NIH-3T3) helped to rationalize the molecular data that was later generated. Earl Ruley, along with Hartmut Land and co-workers, went on to show that malignant transformation of primary cells, using growth in nude mice as a criterion, requires cooperation by a second oncogene such as *MYC* or adenovirus E1A. This concept was instrumental in establishing our present view that cancer results from the activation of distinct oncogenic pathways.

In early 1984, the identification of a mutated KRAS oncogene in a tumour biopsy from a lung cancer patient, but not in his normal parenchyma or white blood cells, also helped to reassure the scientific community that RAS oncogenes were not a 'laboratory artefact'. Over the following years, many laboratories embarked on a massive search for RAS mutations in human cancers. Some of the most remarkable findings of the time were the frequent activation of KRAS oncogenes in some of the main types of human cancer, such as colon, lung, and pancreatic carcinomas. By that time, Ras oncogenes had also been identified in various carcinogen-induced animal tumour models. Their characterization and the use of transgenic and gene-targeted mouse models (BOX 2 and TABLE 1) has led to some important revelations regarding the role of these oncogenes in the multistep process of carcinogenesis.

#### Biochemical function

The protein products of the v-ras oncogenes were identified in the 1970s. In vitro translation of Ha-MSV and Ki-MSV RNA yielded a 21,000-Da polypeptide, known as p21 (REFS). These proteins could be immunoprecipitated with antisera raised against Ras-transformed cells. Definitive evidence that the p21 proteins were the product of the v-ras oncogenes was provided by analysis of cells transformed by a temperature-sensitive mutant of Ki-MSV. Identification of v-Ras proteins allowed their functional characterization. As early as 1979, Scolnick et al. reported that they had high affinity for guanine-containing nucleotides. Another key observation made at the time was that v-Ras proteins were associated with the inner side of the plasma membrane — a property that is known to be a key requirement for their transforming properties.

Molecular cloning of cellular RAS genes facilitated large-scale expression of RAS p21 proteins for biochemical studies. In the summer of 1984, three groups reported that RAS proteins were GTPases, having an enzymatic activity that was greatly reduced in the proteins encoded by their transforming alleles. These findings, along with the observed structural homologies between RAS and the

---

### Box 1 | Nomenclature

During the 1970s, retroviral oncogenes were generically known as v-src. The realization that these oncogenes were distinct molecular entities led to the proposal that each oncogene should be named with a three-letter acronym. In the case of the Harvey and Kirsten strains, the chosen acronym was ras for rat sarcoma. The finding that v-h-ras and v-k-ras were derived from different cellular loci led, for a brief period of time, to the use of the acronyms v-has for the oncogene present in Harvey-MSV, v-bas for the oncogene of BALB-MSV and v-kis for the Kirsten-MSV oncogene. Their cellular homologues c-has and c-bas corresponded to v-h-ras-1 (HRAS1 in humans) and c-kis to v-k-ras-2 (KRAS2 in humans). This nomenclature has not been used since 1984. Rodents and primates have two additional loci that are related to v-ras oncogenes, designated as Hras2 and Kras1 (HRAS2 and KRAS1 in humans). These loci represent processed pseudogenes. For simplicity, we will use the terms Hras (HRAS in humans) for Hras1 and Kras (KRAS in humans) for Kras2 throughout this article.

properties of RAS proteins in an *in vivo* cellular environment. They showed that the rate of GTPase activity of normal HRAS proteins was at least 300-fold higher than the activity of their oncogenic counterparts. More importantly, they identified a soluble cytosolic protein as the factor responsible for this stimulation. This factor — a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) — was subsequently purified and the gene cloned soon thereafter [55,56]. A second RAS-GAP protein was described a few years later [57–60], when *NF1* — the gene responsible for causing neurofibromatosis disease — was cloned and its sequence showed significant similarity to p120 RAS-GAP (FIG. 1). Subsequent experiments with recombinant NF1 protein (neurofibromin) showed that it could also function as a negative regulator of RAS p21 proteins [57–60].

RAS proteins and signal transduction

Once it was firmly established that normal RAS proteins became activated by binding to GTP, one of the key remaining issues was to determine how upstream signals, mainly mitogenic factors, induced GTP binding. Because of the homology with G proteins and translation initiation factors, scientists searched for guanine nucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs). The first evidence for the existence of upstream regulators of RAS was provided in 1987 by genetic studies on the *CDC25* protein in yeast [61,62]. In 1990, Wolfman and Macara, along with Julian Downward (who was then a postdoctoral fellow in Weinberg’s laboratory), reported the biochemical identification of mammalian cytosolic factors that greatly accelerated the release of GDP from RAS p21 proteins (RAS-GEFs), thereby enabling GTP (which is present at higher concentrations) to bind, and resulting in activated RAS proteins [63,64]. Mammalian RASGEF genes (mainly *SOS1*, *SOS2* and *RASGRF*) were first isolated in 1992 either by functional complementation of *CDC25* (REF. 65) or by sequence homology [66–68]. The missing piece of the puzzle — that is, ‘a connector’ between the tyrosine-kinase cell-surface receptors and the RAS-GEFs — was identified the following year by three different experimental approaches. In *Caenorhabditis elegans*, a genetic screen revealed the existence of *sem-5*, which was required for vulval induction, a process in which RAS (let-60) and the EGF receptor (let-23) were also known to participate [69].

In mammals, the very same molecule — designated as *GRB2* or ASH — was identified by screens for proteins that bind to the autophosphorylated tail of the EGF receptor [70] or that had homology to phosphotyrosine-binding ‘src-homology-2’ (SH2) domains [71], respectively. The rather peculiar nature of these proteins — just a single SH2 domain flanked by SH3 domains, which are known to be involved in protein-protein interactions through proline-rich regions — strongly indicated that they were adaptor molecules.

alpha subunit of G proteins [48], led to the proposition that RAS proteins are mediators of signal transduction across the plasma membrane. From an evolutionary point of view, it is interesting that, whereas in yeast RAS activates adenylate cyclase [49], in multicellular organisms that function has been transferred to G proteins and RAS has a central role in transducing mitogenic signals.

A connection between mitogens and RAS was first suggested by Kamata and Feramisco in 1984 when they observed that epidermal growth factor (*EGF*) stimulated GTP binding to RAS proteins [50]. Definitive proof of this connection was provided the following year by Stacey and co-workers, when they showed that microinjection of a monoclonal antibody against RAS blocked serum-induced DNA synthesis [51]. Subsequent work by the same group revealed that RAS activity was essential for transformation induced by oncogenes that were derived from growth-factor receptors or plasma-membrane-associated tyrosine kinases, but not by cytoplasmic serine/threonine kinases such as *RAF* [52]. These observations provided the first glimpse of the type of signalling pathways that we know today.

By the mid-1980s, scientists realized that the difference in GTPase activity found between oncogenic and wild-type RAS proteins *in vitro* could not explain their markedly different properties *in vivo*. Work by Wigler and co-workers showed that microinjection of oncogenic HRAS proteins induced maturation of frog oocytes almost 100-fold more efficiently than their normal counterparts [53]. These observations led Trahey and McCormick [54] to use Xenopus oocytes as a quantitative assay to study the biochemical

**Box 2 | Animal models**

One of the key issues raised by the mutational activation of *RAS* oncogenes in human tumours was whether they have an initiating — or at least causative — role in tumour development, or whether they are merely activated as a consequence of the genetic instability of malignant cells. As early as 1983, mutated *Ras* oncogenes were identified in experimental tumours of rodents that were exposed to chemical or physical carcinogens [36–38]. Balmain *et al.* [108] identified *Hras* mutations in benign papillomas of mice treated with the 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA) skin carcinogenesis protocol.

Evidence that *Ras* genes can be involved in the initiation of carcinogenesis was obtained in 1985 when Zarbl *et al.* [109] showed that *Hras* oncogenes that were activated in chemically induced mammary carcinomas of rats were activated by the type of mutation that is known to be caused by the initiating carcinogen. Similar results were subsequently obtained by Wiseman *et al.* [110] using mouse hepatomas induced by various carcinogens of known mutagenic spectra.

The generation of tumours in mice harbouring *Ras* transgenes has lent further proof to the oncogenic properties of these genes *in vivo*. In 1987, several groups reported the induction of tumours by *Ras* oncogenes expressed under the control of various tissue-specific promoters (TABLE 1). Direct proof for the requirement of continuous *Ras* expression for tumour maintenance has been obtained recently using mice carrying inducible *Ras* transgenes [111,112]. The advent of gene targeting in embryonic stem cells has allowed the generation of more physiological tumour models in recent years [113,114]. For instance, Tyler Jacks’ group has engineered a conditional mutation in the endogenous mouse *Kras* locus that can be activated by ectopic expression of a Cre recombinase [114]. Infection of these mice with adenoC vectors results in the efficient induction of lung tumours. Although this model does not completely mimic human tumorigenesis — for example, *Kras* becomes activated in a large number of cells — it represents a significant improvement in our quest to faithfully reproduce the human disease in a laboratory model.

PERSPECTIVES

Table 1 | Representative mouse models to study Ras function

| Model                | Description                                                                 | Features                                                                                   | References |
|----------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|
| **Transgenic mice**  |                                                                           |                                                                                           |            |
| MMTV-v-Hras          | Oncogenic Hras expression under the MMTV promoter                          | Mammary tumours, hyperplasia of the harderian gland and other malignancies                  | 115        |
| Elastase-I-Hras      | Oncogenic Hras expression under the elastase-I-regulating elements          | Rapid development (2 days) of neoplasia in the fetal exocrine pancreas                     | 116        |
| Tyr (Tet)-ras        | Oncogenic Hras under the control of the tyrosinase promoter and tetracycline regulatory sequences | Melanoma development; tumour regression after removal of activator                         | 111        |
| CCSP (Tet)-Kras G12D | Tet-regulated Kras oncogene driven by the Clara cell-secretory protein promoter | Adenocarcinomas of the lung and apoptotic regression after removal of inductor              | 112        |
| **Gene-targeted mice** |                                                                           |                                                                                           |            |
| Kras<sup>-/-</sup>   | Kras knockout                                                             | Embryonic lethality (E12–E14); fetal liver defects and anaemia                              | 102,103    |
| Nras<sup>-/-</sup>   | Nras knockout                                                             | Viable; defective immune response and T-cell function                                       | 117,118    |
| Hras<sup>-/-</sup>   | Hras knockout                                                             | No obvious phenotype; decreased tumour formation after carcinogenic treatments              | 104,119    |
| Kras<sup>LA</sup>    | Oncogenic Kras G12D after spontaneous recombination                         | 'Spontaneous' lung tumours, thymic lymphomas and skin papillomas                           | 113        |
| LSL-Kras G12D       | Cre-inducible form of an oncogenic Kras knock-in                            | Tumours after activation of the ras oncogenic form with Cre recombinase                    | 114        |

molecules. Evidence linking all these proteins — that is, tyrosine protein kinase receptors, GRB2/sem-5, RAS-GEFs and RAS — suddenly became obvious. In the spring of 1993, eight papers — cited in a commentary by Frank McCormick<sup>72</sup> — described how GRB2/sem-5 could bind via one end to activated tyrosine protein kinase receptors through its single SH2 domain and via the other end to SOS through its two SH3 domains. These papers closed an exciting chapter in our quest to understand RAS function by providing a mechanistic explanation as to how these molecules receive signals from the external world that exists on the other side of the plasma membrane (FIG. 1).

The next challenge was to identify the downstream mediators of RAS signalling. The wait was not long. The main breakthrough in mammalian cells came in 1993 when several groups reported that RAF — a serine/threonine kinase that was also identified as a retroviral oncogene<sup>73</sup> — specifically interacted with activated (GTP-bound) RAS proteins<sup>74–77</sup>. Genetic evidence for a role of Raf downstream of Ras was independently provided by Paul Sternberg's group in *C. elegans*<sup>78</sup>. These observations, along with a number of papers that linked RAF to the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway closed one of the most exciting periods in molecular oncology: to unveil how mitogenic signals, generated outside the cell, reach the nucleus and how this process can be aberrantly altered in tumour cells.

As exciting as the above findings might be, they by no means explain all of the roles that RAS proteins have in the cell, and we are still far from understanding all of the effectors and signalling pathways that are mediated by RAS proteins. In 1991, Lapetina and co-workers reported the association of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) activity with RAS<sup>79</sup>. These observations were largely ignored as, at that time, much of the emphasis was placed on the direct interaction of PI3K with cell-surface tyrosine protein kinase receptors<sup>80</sup>. It was not until 1994 that Downward's group identified the catalytic subunit of PI3K as a direct RAS effector<sup>81</sup>. A few months later, several groups identified RAL-GDS — a nucleotide dissociation factor for RAL proteins — as yet another RAS effector<sup>82–84</sup>. The list of RAS effectors has continued to grow and has provided a link between RAS activity and diverse biological responses, not only including cell proliferation, but also growth arrest, senescence, differentiation, apoptosis and survival (FIG. 2).

Figure 1 | Schematic representation of our current view of RAS regulation. RAS proteins are activated by various extracellular stimuli, which are mediated by, among others, receptor-tyrosine kinases (RTKs), G proteins, adhesion molecules and second messengers. These stimuli activate various guanine nucleotide-exchange factors (GEFs; green ovals). Inhibitors of RTK-mediated RAS activation include the SPROUTY and ACK protein families, which bind to GRB2 and impede the activation of SOS proteins. CBL proteins also bind and inactivate GRB2, by acting as ubiquitin ligases for RTKs. Several GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs; orange ovals) are also involved in the downregulation of RAS by catalysing the GTP hydrolysis. DAG, diacylglycerol; PLC, phospholipase C.

RAS isoprenylation

In two landmark papers that were published in 1989 and 1990 (REFS 85,86), Jasper Rine, Sang-Ho Kim and their associates reported important discoveries. They described isoprenylation as a novel mechanism of post-translational modification of

Figure 2 | Overview of known RAS effectors and their corresponding biological responses. Active RAS-GTP induces a wide variety of cellular processes, such as transcription, translation, cell-cycle progression, apoptosis or cell survival, through direct interaction with various effectors. GAP proteins also interact with RAS-GTP and might also act as effectors. Modulators of some of these pathways are also indicated. The blue boxes represent adaptor complexes.

molecule that is crucial for GTP hydrolysis. Mutations of this residue therefore result in reduced stabilization of the transition state and impaired GTPase activity⁹⁴,⁹⁶.

A better understanding of the structural dynamics of RAS proteins might pave the way for the design of ‘dream’ drugs that could restore GTPase activity and therefore neutralize constitutive signalling by RAS oncoproteins. For instance, such a drug could shift the side chain of the mutated residue at position 12 so that it no longer impedes GTP hydrolysis, or it could modify the position of mutated residues at position 61 so that the lost hydrophilic attack on the gamma-phosphate can be restored⁹⁷. More recently, the structure of RAS proteins has been resolved when bound to some of its regulators such as RAS-GAP⁹⁶ and SOS⁹⁸, or its downstream effectors such as RAL-GDS⁹⁹ and PI3K¹⁰⁰. These studies will undoubtedly provide information that can be used to design drugs that interfere with RAS function.

What lies ahead? Future challenges in RAS biology lie in three distinct, but overlapping, areas: to understand the individual role of NRAS, KRAS and HRAS, and, by extension, those of related members of the RAS family of proteins (such as RRAS, MRAS, RAP and RAL¹⁰¹); to assign each of the effector pathways to specific biological outputs; and to establish the relative contribution of each of these pathways to oncogenic transformation (FIG. 2). All of these challenges are important, but it is imperative that we don’t lose sight of the urgent need to devise effective drugs that block the pervasive action of RAS oncogenes in human tumours.

Among the various experimental approaches at hand, reverse genetics is likely to be the most instrumental in unveiling the specific roles of each RAS protein (BOX 2). Mice without *Kras* die during mid-gestation due to foetal liver defects and anaemia¹⁰²,¹⁰³ (TABLE 1). By contrast, mice survive without both *Hras* and *Nras* genes¹⁰⁴. Generation of mouse strains that carry conditional *Kras* alleles in various combinations of *Hras* and *Nras* backgrounds should provide valuable information, as well as key reagents, to define the role of these genes in specific tissues and/or developmental stages.

Until very recently, it was thought that RAS proteins became associated with the plasma membrane to relay extracellular signals to the cytoplasm. Emerging evidence indicates that some of the biological activities of RAS proteins might be determined by their specific location within endomembranes.

PERSPECTIVES

Indeed, subcellular compartmentalization might define the accessibility of RAS proteins to defined subsets of upstream activators and downstream effectors (reviewed in REF. 105). The possibility of studying the spatio-temporal dynamics of RAS activity in living cells should provide valuable information regarding the multifaceted aspects of RAS signalling.

The importance of the RAF-MEK-ERK pathway in RAS oncogenic signalling has been firmly established. Yet, recent studies have indicated that this pathway might be preferentially used in rodent cells, whereas the RAL-GDS pathway might be responsible for transformation of human cells, at least in culture<sup>106</sup>. The identification of **BRAF** oncogenes in most human melanomas, as well as in various other tumours<sup>107</sup>, ratifies the relevance of the RAF effector pathway in a significant number of human malignancies. Understanding the relative contributions of the multiple RAS effector pathways to oncogenic transformation is not only a challenging issue today, but is also a prerequisite for the rational design of therapeutic strategies for specific cancer types. With more than ten different effectors now reported (FIG. 2), inhibition or stabilization of RAS-effector interactions to prevent downstream signalling should provide many opportunities for therapeutic intervention. These approaches, however, must overcome two formidable obstacles: to identify suitable molecules that are capable of performing these tasks; and to make them as specific as possible for the mutated protein to minimize the effect on normal RAS signalling.

We can only hope that these challenges are solved within the next 30 years. Current therapeutic strategies, such as tyrosine-kinase inhibitors, inhibitors of farnesyltransferase or inhibitors of downstream kinases<sup>90</sup>, might yield encouraging results in the near future.

*Marcos Malumbres and Mariano Barbacid are members of the Molecular Oncology Programme, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas (CNIO), Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, 28029 Madrid, Spain.*

e-mails: marcos.malumbres@cnio.es; mariano.barbacid@cnio.es

doi:10.1038/nrc1097

1. Harvey, J. J. An unidentified virus which causes the rapid production of tumors in mice. *Nature* **204**, 1104–1105 (1964).
2. Kirsten, W. H. & Mayer, L. A. Morphologic responses to a murine erythroblastosis virus. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **39**, 311–335 (1967).
3. Peters, R. L., Rabstein, L. S., VanVleck, R., Kelloff, G. J. & Huebner, R. J. Naturally occurring sarcoma virus of the BALB/cCr mouse. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **53**, 1725–1729 (1974).
4. Rasheed, S., Gardner, M. B. & Huebner, R. J. *In vitro* isolation of stable rat sarcoma viruses. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **75**, 2972–2976 (1978).
5. Scolnick, E. M., Rands, E., Williams, D. & Parks, W. P. Studies on the nucleic acid sequences of Kirsten
6. Hager, G. L. *et al.* Molecular cloning of the Harvey sarcoma virus closed circular DNA intermediates: initial structural and biological characterization. *J. Virol.* **31**, 795–809 (1979).
7. Tsuchida, N. & Uesugi, S. Structure and functions of the Kirsten murine sarcoma virus genome: molecular cloning of biologically active Kirsten murine sarcoma virus DNA. *J. Virol.* **38**, 720–727 (1981).
8. Ellis, R. W. *et al.* The p21 *src* genes of Harvey and Kirsten murine sarcoma viruses originate from divergent members of a family of normal vertebrate genes. *Nature* **292**, 506–511 (1981).
9. Wigler, M., Pellicer, A., Silverstein, S. & Axel, R. Biochemical transfer of single-copy eucaryotic genes using total cellular DNA as donor. *Cell* **14**, 725–731 (1978).
10. Shih, C., Shilo, B. Z., Goldfarb, M. P., Dannenberg, A. & Weinberg, R. A. Passage of phenotypes of chemically transformed cells via transfection of DNA and chromatin. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **76**, 5714–5718 (1979).
11. Shih, C., Padhy, L. C., Murray, M. & Weinberg, R. A. Transforming genes of carcinomas and neuroblastomas introduced into mouse fibroblasts. *Nature* **290**, 261–264 (1981).
12. Perucho, M. *et al.* Human-tumor-derived cell lines contain common and different transforming genes. *Cell* **27**, 467–476 (1981).
13. Shih, C. & Weinberg, R. A. Isolation of a transforming sequence from a human bladder sarcoma cell line. *Cell* **29**, 161–169 (1982).
14. Goldfarb, M., Shimizu, K., Perucho, M. & Wigler, M. Isolation and preliminary characterization of a human transforming gene from T24 bladder carcinoma cells. *Nature* **296**, 404–409 (1982).
15. Pulciani, S. *et al.* Oncogenes in human tumor cell lines: molecular cloning of a transforming gene from human bladder carcinoma cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **79**, 2845–2849 (1982).
16. Der, C. J., Krontiris, T. G. & Cooper, G. M. Transforming genes of human bladder and lung carcinoma cell lines are homologous to the ras genes of Harvey and Kirsten sarcoma viruses. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **79**, 3637–3640 (1982).
17. Parada, L. F., Tabin, C. J., Shih, C. & Weinberg, R. A. Human EJ bladder carcinoma oncogene is homologue of Harvey sarcoma virus *ras*. *Nature* **297**, 474–478 (1982).
18. Santos, E., Tronick, S. R., Aaronson, S. A., Pulciani, S. & Barbacid, M. T24 human bladder carcinoma oncogene is an activated form of the normal human homologue of BALB- and Harvey-MSV transforming genes. *Nature* **298**, 343–347 (1982).
19. Parada, L. F. & Weinberg, R. A. Presence of a Kirsten murine sarcoma virus *ras* oncogene in cells transformed by 3-methylcholanthrene. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **3**, 2298–2301 (1983).
20. Shimizu, K., Goldfarb, M., Perucho, M. & Wigler, M. Isolation and preliminary characterization of the transforming gene of a human neuroblastoma cell line. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **80**, 383–387 (1983).
21. Hall, A., Marshall, C. J., Spurr, N. K. & Weiss, R. A. Identification of transforming gene in two human sarcoma cell lines as a new member of the *ras* gene family located on chromosome 1. *Nature* **303**, 396–400 (1983).
22. Reddy, E. P., Reynolds, R. K., Santos, E. & Barbacid, M. A point mutation is responsible for the acquisition of transforming properties by the T24 human bladder carcinoma oncogene. *Nature* **300**, 149–152 (1982).
23. Tabin, C. J. *et al.* Mechanism of activation of a human oncogene. *Nature* **300**, 143–147 (1982).
24. Taparowsky, E. *et al.* Activation of the T24 bladder carcinoma transforming gene is linked to a single amino acid change. *Nature* **300**, 762–765 (1982).
25. Muschel, R. J., Khoury, G., Lebowitz, P., Koller, R. & Dhar, R. The human c-ras1H oncogene: a mutation in normal and neoplastic tissue from the same patient. *Science* **219**, 853–856 (1983).
26. Duesberg, P. H. Activated proto-onc genes: sufficient or necessary for cancer? *Science* **228**, 669–677 (1985).
27. Land, H., Parada, L. F. & Weinberg, R. A. Tumorigenic conversion of primary embryo fibroblasts requires at least two cooperating oncogenes. *Nature* **304**, 596–602 (1983).
28. Newbold, R. F. & Overell, R. W. Fibroblast immortality is a prerequisite for transformation by EJ c-Ha-ras oncogene. *Nature* **304**, 648–651 (1983).
29. Ruley, H. E. Adenovirus early region 1A enables viral and cellular transforming genes to transform primary cells in culture. *Nature* **304**, 602–606 (1983).

30. Santos, E. *et al.* Malignant activation of a K-ras oncogene in lung carcinoma but not in normal tissue of the same patient. *Science* **223**, 661–664 (1984).
31. Bos, J. L. *ras* oncogenes in human cancer: a review. *Cancer Res.* **49**, 4682–4689 (1989).
32. Bos, J. L. *et al.* Prevalence of *ras* gene mutations in human colorectal cancers. *Nature* **327**, 293–297 (1987).
33. Forrester, K., Almoguera, C., Han, K., Grizzle, W. E. & Perucho, M. Detection of high incidence of K-ras oncogenes during human colon tumorigenesis. *Nature* **327**, 298–303 (1987).
34. Rodenhuis, S. *et al.* Mutational activation of the K-ras oncogene. A possible pathogenetic factor in adenocarcinoma of the lung. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **317**, 929–935 (1987).
35. Almoguera, C. *et al.* Most human carcinomas of the exocrine pancreas contain mutant c-K-ras genes. *Cell* **53**, 549–554 (1988).
36. Balmain, A. & Pragnell, I. B. Mouse skin carcinomas induced *in vivo* by chemical carcinogens have a transforming Harvey-ras oncogene. *Nature* **303**, 72–74 (1983).
37. Sukumar, S., Notario, V., Martin-Zanca, D. & Barbacid, M. Induction of mammary carcinomas in rats by nitroso-methyl-urea involves the malignant activation of the H-ras-1 locus by single point mutations. *Nature* **306**, 658–661 (1983).
38. Guerrero, I., Calzada, P., Mayer, A. & Pellicer, A. A molecular approach to leukemogenesis: mouse lymphomas contain an activated c-ras oncogene. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **81**, 202–205 (1984).
39. Parks, W. P. & Scolnick, E. M. *In vitro* translation of Harvey murine sarcoma virus RNA. *J. Virol.* **22**, 711–719 (1977).
40. Shih, T. Y., Weeks, M. O., Young, H. A. & Scolnick, E. M. p21 of Kirsten murine sarcoma virus is thermolabile in a viral mutant temperature sensitive for the maintenance of transformation. *J. Virol.* **31**, 546–546 (1979).
41. Shih, T. Y., Weeks, M. O., Young, H. A. & Scolnick, E. M. Identification of a sarcoma virus-coded phosphoprotein in nonproducer cells tranformed by Kirsten or Harvey murine sarcoma virus. *Virology* **96**, 64–79 (1979).
42. Scolnick, E. M., Papageorge, A. G. & Shih, T. Y. Guanine nucleotide-binding activity as an assay for src protein of rat-derived murine sarcoma viruses. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **76**, 5355–5359 (1979).
43. Willingham, M. C., Pastan, I., Shih, T. Y. & Scolnick, E. M. Localization of the src gene product of the Harvey strain of MSV to plasma membrane of transformed cells by electron microscopic immunocytochemistry. *Cell* **19**, 1005–1014 (1980).
44. Willumsen, B. M., Christensen, A., Hubbert, H. L., Papageorge, A. G. & Lowy, D. R. The p21ras c-terminus is required for transformation and membrane association. *Nature* **310**, 583–586 (1984).
45. Gibbs, J. B., Sigal, I. S., Poe, M. & Scolnick, E. M. Intrinsic GTPase activity distinguishes normal and oncogenic ras p21 molecules. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **81**, 5704–5708 (1984).
46. McGrath, J. P., Capon, D. J., Goeddel, D. V. & Levinson, A. D. Comparative biochemical properties of normal and activated human ras p21 protein. *Nature* **310**, 644–649 (1984).
47. Sweet, R. W. *et al.* The product of *ras* is a GTPase and the T24 oncogenic mutant is deficient in this activity. *Nature* **311**, 273–275 (1984).
48. Hurley, J. B., Simon, M. I., Teplow, D. B., Robishaw, J. D. & Gilman, A. G. Homologies between signal transducing G proteins and ras gene products. *Science* **226**, 860–862 (1984).
49. Toda, T. *et al.* In yeast, RAS proteins are controlling elements of adenylate cyclase. *Cell* **40**, 27–36 (1985).
50. Kamata, T. & Feramisco, J. R. Epidermal growth factor stimulates guanine nucleotide binding activity and phosphorylation of ras oncogene proteins. *Nature* **310**, 147–150 (1984).
51. Mulcahy, L. S., Smith, M. R. & Stacey, D. W. Requirement for ras proto-oncogene function during serum-stimulated growth of NIH 
56. Vogel, U. S. *et al.* Cloning of bovine GAP and its interaction with oncogenic ras p21. *Nature* **335**, 90–93 (1988).

57. Ballester, R. *et al.* The NF1 locus encodes a protein functionally related to mammalian GAP and yeast IRA proteins. *Cell* **63**, 851–859 (1990).

58. Martin, G. A. *et al.* The GAP-related domain of the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene product interacts with ras p21. *Cell* **63**, 843–849 (1990).

59. Wallace, M. R. *et al.* Type 1 neurofibromatosis gene: identification of a large transcript disrupted in three NF1 patients. *Science* **249**, 181–186 (1990).

60. Xu, G. *et al.* The neurofibromatosis type 1 gene encodes a protein related to GAP. *Cell* **62**, 599–608 (1990).

61. Broek, D. *et al.* The *S. cerevisiae* CDC25 gene product regulates the RAS/adenylate cyclase pathway. *Cell* **48**, 789–799 (1987).

62. Robinson, L. C., Gibbs, J. B., Marshall, M. S., Sigal, I. S. & Tatchell, K. CDC25: a component of the RAS-adenylate cyclase pathway in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *Science* **235**, 1218–1221 (1987).

63. Wolfman, A. & Macara, I. G. A cytosolic protein catalyzes the release of GDP from p21ras. *Science* **248**, 67–69 (1990).

64. Downward, J., Riehl, R., Wu, L. & Weinberg, R. A. Identification of a nucleotide exchange-promoting activity for p21ras. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **87**, 5998–6002 (1990).

65. Martegani, E. *et al.* Cloning by functional complementation of a mouse cDNA encoding a homologue of CDC25, a *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* RAS activator. *EMBO J.* **11**, 2151–2157 (1992).

66. Bowtell, D., Fu, P., Simon, M. & Senior, P. Identification of murine homologues of the *Drosophila* son of sevenless gene: potential activators of ras. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **89**, 6511–6515 (1992).

67. Shou, C., Farnsworth, C. L., Neel, B. G. & Feig, L. A. Molecular cloning of cDNAs encoding a guanine-releasing factor for ras p21. *Nature* **358**, 351–354 (1992).

68. Wei, W. *et al.* Identification of a mammalian gene structurally and functionally related to the CDC25 gene of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **89**, 7100–7104 (1992).

69. Clark, S. G., Stern, M. J. & Horvitz, H. R. C. *elegans* cell-signalling gene *Sem-5* encodes a protein with SH2 and SH3 domains. *Nature* **356**, 340–344 (1992).

70. Lowenstein, E. J. *et al.* The SH2 and SH3 domain-containing protein GRB2 links receptor tyrosine kinases to Ras signalling. *Cell* **70**, 431–442 (1992).

71. Matuoka, K., Shibata, M., Yamakawa, A. & Takenawa, T. Cloning of ASH, a ubiquitous protein composed of one Src homology region (SH) 2 and two SH3 domains, from human and rat cDNA libraries. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **89**, 9015–9019 (1992).

72. McCormick, F. Signal transduction. How receptors turn Ras on. *Nature* **363**, 15–16 (1993).

73. Rapp, U. R. & Todaro, G. J. Generation of oncogenic mouse type C viruses: *in vitro* selection of carcinoma-inducing variants. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **77**, 624–628 (1980).

74. Moodie, S. A., Willumsen, B. M., Weber, M. J. & Wolfman, A. Complexes of Ras. GTP with Raf-1 and mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase. *Science* **260**, 1658–1661 (1993).

75. Warne, P. H., Rodriguez-Viciana, P. & Downward, J. Direct interaction of Ras and the amino-terminal region of Raf-1 *in vitro*. *Nature* **364**, 352–355 (1993).

76. Zhang, X. F. *et al.* Normal and oncogenic p21ras proteins bind to the amino-terminal regulatory domain of c-Raf-1. *Nature* **364**, 308–313 (1993).

77. Vojtek, A. B., Hollenberg, S. M. & Cooper, J. A. Mammalian Ras interacts directly with the serine/threonine kinase Raf. *Cell* **74**, 205–214 (1993).

78. Han, M., Golden, A., Han, Y. & Sternberg, P. W. C. *elegans* *lin-45 raf* gene participates in let-60 ras-stimulated vulval differentiation. *Nature* **363**, 133–140 (1993).

79. Sjolander, A., Yamamoto, K., Huber, B. E. & Lapetina, E. G. Association of p21ras with phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **88**, 7908–7912 (1991).

80. Kazlauskas, A. Receptor tyrosine kinases and their targets. *Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.* **4**, 5–14 (1994).

81. Rodriguez-Viciana, P. *et al.* Phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase as a direct target for ras. *Nature* **370**, 527–532 (1994).

82. Hofer, F., Fields, S., Schneider, C. & Martin, G. S. Activated Ras interacts with the Ral guanine nucleotide dissociation stimulator. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **91**, 11089–11093 (1994).

83. Kikuchi, A., Demo, S. D., Ye, Z. H., Chen, Y. W. & Williams, L. T. *ralGDS* family members interact with the effector loop of ras p21. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **14**, 7483–7491 (1994).

84. Spaargaren, M. & Bischoff, J. R. Identification of the guanine nucleotide dissociation stimulator for Ral as a putative effector molecule of R-ras, H-ras, K-ras, and Rap. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **91**, 12609–12613 (1994).

85. Schafer, W. R. *et al.* Genetic and pharmacological suppression of oncogenic mutations in ras genes of yeast and humans. *Science* **245**, 379–385 (1989).

86. Schafer, W. R. *et al.* Enzymatic coupling of cholesterol intermediates to a mating pheromone precursor and to the ras protein. *Science* **249**, 1133–1139 (1990).

87. Reiss, Y., Goldstein, J. L., Seabra, M. C., Casey, P. J. & Brown, M. S. Inhibition of purified p21ras farnesylation transferase by Cys-AAX tetrapeptides. *Cell* **62**, 81–88 (1990).

88. Kohl, N. E. *et al.* Inhibition of farnesyltransferase induces regression of mammary and salivary carcinomas in ras transgenic mice. *Nature Med.* **1**, 792–797 (1995).

89. Nagasu, T., Yoshimatsu, K., Rowell, C., Lewis, M. D. & Garcia, A. M. Inhibition of human tumor xenograft growth by treatment with the farnesyl transferase inhibitor B956. *Cancer Res.* **55**, 5310–5314 (1995).

90. Downward, J. Targeting RAS signalling pathways in cancer therapy. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **3**, 11–22 (2003).

91. Vos, A. M. *et al.* Three-dimensional structure of an oncogene protein: catalytic domain of human c-H-ras p21. *Science* **239**, 888–893 (1988).

92. Pai, E. F. *et al.* Structure of the guanine-nucleotide-binding domain of the Ha-ras oncogene product p21 in the triphosphate conformation. *Nature* **341**, 209–214 (1989).

93. Schlichting, I. *et al.* Time-resolved X-ray crystallographic study of the conformational change in Ha-Ras p21 protein on GTP hydrolysis. *Nature* **345**, 309–315 (1990).

94. Krengel, U. *et al.* Three-dimensional structures of H-ras p21 mutants: molecular basis for their inability to function as signal switch molecules. *Cell* **62**, 539–548 (1990).

95. Tong, L. A., de Vos, A. M., Milburn, M. V. & Kim, S. H. Crystal structures at 2.2 Å resolution of the catalytic domains of normal ras protein and an oncogenic mutant complexed with GDP. *J. Mol. Biol.* **217**, 503–516 (1991).

96. Scheffzek, K. *et al.* The Ras-RasGAP complex: structural basis for GTPase activation and its loss in oncogenic Ras mutants. *Science* **277**, 333–338 (1997).

97. Ahmadian, M. R. *et al.* Guanosine triphosphatase stimulation of oncogenic Ras mutants. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **96**, 7065–7070 (1999).

98. Boriack-Sjodin, P. A. *et al.* The structural basis of the activation of Ras by Sos. *Nature* **394**, 337–343 (1998).

99. Huang, L., Hofer, F., Martin, G. S. & Kim, S. H. Structural basis for the interaction of Ras with RalGDS. *Nature Struct. Biol.* **5**, 422–426 (1998).

100. Pacold, M. E. *et al.* Crystal structure and functional analysis of Ras binding to its effector phosphoinositide 3-kinase gamma. *Cell* **103**, 931–943 (2000).

101. Reuther, G. W. & Der, C. J. The Ras branch of small GTPases: Ras family members don't fall far from the tree. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* **12**, 157–165 (2000).

102. Johnson, L. *et al.* K-ras is an essential gene in the mouse with partial functional overlap with N-ras. *Genes Dev.* **11**, 2468–2481 (1997).

103. Koera, K. *et al.* K-ras is essential for the development of the mouse embryo. *Oncogene* **15**, 1151–1159 (1997).

104. Esteban, L. M. *et al.* Targeted genomic disruption of H-ras and N-ras, individually or in combination, reveals the dispensability of both loci for mouse growth and development. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **21**, 1444–1452 (2001).

105. Bivona, T. G. & Philips, M. R. Ras pathway signaling on endomembranes. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* **15**, 136–142 (2003).

106. Hamad, N. M. *et al.* Distinct requirements for Ras oncogenesis in human versus mouse cells. *Genes Dev.* **16**, 2045–2057 (2002).

107. Davies, H. *et al.* Mutations of the BRAF gene in human cancer. *Nature* **417**, 949–954 (2002).

108. Balmain, A., Ramsden, M., Bowden, G. T. & Smith, J. Activation of the mouse cellular Harvey-ras gene in chemically induced benign skin papillomas. *Nature* **307**, 658–660 (1984).

109. Zarbl, H., Sukumar, S., Arthur, A., Martin-Zanca, D. & Barbacid, M. Direct mutagenesis of H-ras-1 oncogenes by N-nitroso-N-methylurea during initiation of mammary carcinogenesis in rats. *Nature* **315**, 382–385 (1985).

110. Wiseman, R. W., Stowers, S. J., Miller, E. C., Anderson, M. W. & Miller, J. A. Activating mutations of the c-Ha-ras protooncogene in chemically induced hepatomas of the male B6C3F1 mouse. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **83**, 5825–5829 (1986).

111. Chin, L. *et al.* Essential role for oncogenic Ras in tumour maintenance. *Nature* **400**, 468–472 (1999).

112. Fisher, G. H. *et al.* Induction and apoptotic regression of lung adenocarcinomas by regulation of a K-Ras transgene in the presence and absence of tumor suppressor genes. *Genes Dev.* **15**, 3249–3262 (2001).

113. Johnson, L. *et al.* Somatic activation of the K-ras oncogene causes early onset lung cancer in mice. *Nature* **410**, 1111–1116 (2001).

114. Jackson, E. L. *et al.* Analysis of lung tumor initiation and progression using conditional expression of oncogenic K-ras. *Genes Dev.* **15**,