
ELSEVIER

Cytokine & Growth Factor Reviews 14 (2003) 211–224

www.elsevier.com/locate/cytogfr

# Ectodysplasin signaling in development

**Marja L. Mikkola**, Irma Thesleff

*Developmental Biology Program, Institute of Biotechnology, Viikki Biocenter,
suffer much during hot weather form excessive dryness of the skin. It is remarkable that no instance has occurred of a daughter being thus affected.” [4]. The autosomal forms of HED may result from mutations in two different loci, the death domain containing Eda receptor Edar [5], or the death domain adapter signaling molecule Edaradd [6]. The triad of symptoms typical to HED includes missing
M.L. Mikkola, I. Thesleff / Cytokine & Growth Factor Reviews 14 (2003) 211–224

domain plays no direct role in receptor binding. Instead, it appears to have a role in multimerization of Eda trimers which may be required for efficient signaling through high valency receptor clustering. In accordance with this,
decrease Edar binding to Eda-A1 [27]. Mutations leading to dominant forms of HED have been mapped to the intracellular region of Edar both in humans and in mice [5,15]. These lead to truncations of the molecule before or at the death domain. Also, a non-conservative missense mutation within the death domain has been found. These mutations are predicted to have a
M.L. Mikkola, I. Thesleff / Cytokine & Growth Factor Reviews 14 (2003) 211–224

Wild type Edaradd binds to the DD of Edar but not to a truncated Edar mutant lacking the DD. A Glu142Lys point mutation within the DD of Edaradd was found in a
which are shared to a great extent between different organs. Many of these signals are expressed reiteratively during different stages of development. The best studied signal protein families include fibroblast growth factors (FGFs), bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and other TGFβ superfamily members, the Wnt family, and the Hedgehogs [70].

The initiation of organs developing as ectodermal append
M.L. Mikkola, I. Thesleff/Cytokine & Growth Factor Reviews 14 (2003) 211–224

**Fig. 5. Expression of *Eda* and *Edar* is confined to the epithelium in developing murine tooth and hair.** (A) Expression of *Eda* is localized to the
hair bulbs as well as in the epidermis whereas Eda-A2 is confined solely to the bulb region [26] suggesting that Xedar signaling might have a role in the differentiation but not in the initiation of hair development. During advanced molar tooth development, Edar is expressed at the tip of the bud which later forms the enamel knot signaling center, as well as in the secondary enamel knots [41]
mice indicating that Eda is not regulated by Edar signaling [43].

### 5.4. Consequences of the loss of Eda signaling in mice

The four spontaneous mouse mutants *Tabby*, *downless*, *Sleek* and *crinkled* in which the Eda signaling is blocked provide models for the analysis of the developmental function of the Eda–Edar pathway.
Fig. 6. Primary hair follicle development is inhibited both in *Tabby* (ectodysplasin null) and K14-*Edar* mice. Whole mount in situ hybridization with a probe specific for a mesenchymal placode marker Patched (receptor for Shh) on E14 mouse embryos. *Courtesy of Johanna Laurikkala and Tuija Mustonen
which resulted in comparable expression levels of Eda-A1
in transgenic skin and wild type skin. It appears that the
A1 isoform can rescue most of the defects found in *Tabby*
mice supporting its primary role in ectodermal appendage
development. However, the tooth phenotype was only par-
tially restored so that the number of molars was normal but
their size was still reduced
[9] Falconer DS. A totally sex-linked gene in the house mouse. Nature 1952;169:664–5.

[10] Grüneberg H. Genes and genotypes affecting the teeth of the mouse. J Embryol Exp Morph 1965;14:137–59.

[11] Sofaer JA
[50] Sinha SK, Zachariah S, Quiñones HI, Shindo M, Chaudhary PM. Role of Traf3 and -6 in the activation of the NF-κB and JNK pathways by X-linked ectodermal dysplasia receptor. J Biol Chem 2002;277:44953–61.

[51
[95] Andl T, Reddy ST, Gaddapara T, Millar SE. Wnt signals are required for the initiation of hair follicle development. Dev Cell 2002;2: 643–53.

[96] Srivastava AK, Durmowicz MC, Hartung AJ, et al. Ectodysplasin-A1