
ELSEVIER

Cytokine & Growth Factor Reviews 14 (2003) 289–296

www.elsevier.com/locate/cytogfr

---

**LIGHT-HVEM signaling and the regulation of T cell-mediated immunity**

Steve W. Granger*, Sandra Rickert

*Division of Molecular Immunology, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology
S.W. Granger, S. Rickert / Cytokine & Growth Factor Reviews 14 (2003) 289–296

HVEM displays a lymphoid-specific pattern of expression. Therefore, LIGHT-HVEM signaling mainly pertains to the immunomodulation of T cell effector functions. Gene disruption studies in mice and the use of blocking reagents have lead
and are generated by either alternative splicing or enzymatic cleavage [17]. Full-length LIGHT message encodes a typical TNF family transmembrane glycoprotein with a type II configuration of 240 amino acids and 29 kDa in size. An alternatively spliced isoform has been described that encodes a non-glycosylated molecule of 204 amino acids lacking the trans
time following T cell activation. Thus, as LIGHT levels increase, HVEM levels coordinately decrease at roughly the same rate. At day 5 post-activation, as LIGHT levels decline to baseline, HVEM begins to appear on the surface again, gradually reaching resting levels by days 6–7 post-activation [12,18]. Therefore, for reasons yet to be determined, this temporal reciprocal regulation of LIGHT
of lymphocyte subsets. In hindsight, it comes as no surprise that LIGHT promotes T lymphocyte proliferation as a co-stimulatory molecule [29] and regulates CTL responses [8,30]. Although LIGHT also induces the apoptosis of cells bearing the LTβR in vitro [7], the expression profile of LTβR does not include lymphocytes, therefore LIGHT is unlikely to contribute directly to the cellular elimination aspects of
are defective in splenic T and B lymphocyte organization. Therefore, it was quite unexpected that LTβ-deficient mice, which can no longer assemble the LTαβ complex and hence cannot signal through the LTβR, had normal splenic microarchitecture and organogenesis of mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) [41,42]. As LIGHT also signals through the LTβR, it was anticipated that
tumor nodule, by LIGHT encoding plasmid DNA inoculation, enhanced CTL-mediated anti-tumor immunity by increasing the antigenicity of the tumor [29]. Moreover, this treatment established long-term tumor-specific immunity in these mice. These effects were abolished upon CD8⁺ T cell depletion and accompanied by an increased tumor-specific CTL response, indicative of a T cell-dependent immune response involving LIGHT-HVEM signaling. The
signaling. The subtlety of the resulting phenotype when
the LIGHT gene is disrupted in mice suggests that the
LIGHT-HVEM signaling pathway may have a certain
degree of redundancy. More studies are needed using
HVEM blocking antibodies or HVEM gene disrupted mice
to directly prove roles suggested by the use of soluble
receptor fusion proteins. Regardless, recent studies have
illustrated the potential importance of LIGHT