
Eur. J. Biochem. 210, 241–248 (1992)

© FEBS 1992

# The O18 antigens (lipopolysaccharides) of *Escherichia coli*

## Structural characterization of the O18A, O18A1, O18B and O18B1-specific polysaccharides

Barbara JANN${}^{1}$, Alexander S. SHASHKOV${}^{2}$, Dhirendra S. GUPTA${}^{1}$ and Klaus JANN${}^{1}$

${}^{1}$ Max-Planck-Institut für Immunbiologie, Freiburg im Breisgau, Federal Republic of Germany  
${}^{2}$ Zelinsky Institute for Organic Chemistry, Moscow, Russia  

(Received June 15/July 30, 1992) — EJB 92 0838

The O-specific polysaccharide moieties (PS) of the O18A, O18A1, O18B, and O18B1 antigens (lipopolysaccharides, LPS) consist of L-rhamnose (Rha), N-acetyl-d-glucosamine, d-galactose, and d-glucose in different molar ratios. By using chemical fragmentation, methylation, as well as one- and two-dimensional NMR spectroscopy, the structures of these polysaccharides were found to be


C                     D                     A                     B
→6)-α-d-Glcp-(1→4)-α-d-Galp-(1→3)-α-d-GlcpNAc-(1→x)-α-L-Rhap-(1→
|                       |                       |
E                     (F)


In O18A-PS and O18A1-PS $x = 2$, whereas in O18B-PS and in O18B11-PS $x = 3$. In all four polysaccharides α-d-Galp (residue D) is substituted at O-3. This substituent L (residue E) is β-d-GlcpNAc-(1 in O18A-PS and O18A1-PS and it is α-d-Glcp-(1 in O18B-PS and O18B1-PS. Whereas there is no further substituent on the main chain of the O18A and O18B polysaccharides, in O18A1-PS and O18B1-PS the α-d-GlcpNAc residue A is substituted with α-Glcp-(1 (residue F), which is linked to O-6 in O18A1-PS and to O-4 in O18B1-PS. These results show that the O18 antigen comprises a group of four related LPS (O18A and O18B, with their glucosylated forms O18A1 and O18B1). The results are discussed with respect to epitope definition and biochemical implications.

The serological classification of *Escherichia coli* is based on their O antigens (lipopolysaccharides, LPS), K antigens (capsular polysaccharides), H antigens (flagellar proteins) [1–3] and, more recently also on their F antigens (fimbrial and fibrillar proteins) [4]. Additionally, such distinctive characteristics as biotype or isoenzyme pattern as detected by starch gel electrophoresis [5] are in use. In a clonal analysis of *E. coli*, strains with O antigens prevalent in extraintestinal infections, emphasis was put on the migration patterns of the major outer membrane proteins in sodium dodecyl sulfate/polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS/PAGE) [6]. In these and subsequent studies [7–9], it became apparent that many strains, even when belonging to different *E. coli* clones, were of the same O group. This was particularly evident with *E. coli* expressing the O1 or the O18 antigen. On the basis of their migration patterns in SDS/PAGE, the O1 antigens were divided into three groups (O1A, O1B and O1C). Of these, the O1A antigen seemed to be clonally restricted, whereas no clonality of the O1B and O1C (only one strain known) was detected with the same method. The O18 antigens which had been serologically classified into O18ac and O18ab [10] were subdivided into four groups [7]. They were termed O18A and O18A1 (formerly O18ac) and O18B and O18B1 (formerly O18ab).

Serological studies showed that the O18 antigens shared (at least) one epitope and were otherwise distinct.

To establish a molecular basis for the observed O antigen differences, we have set out to elucidate the structures of the respective LPS. Recently, we reported the structures of the O1A, O1B and O1C LPS [11, 11a]. In an earlier report we presented the structure of the O18ac LPS [12], which is now defined as the O18A antigen and which is expressed by *E. coli* O18ac:K5:H7. We have extended our structural studies to the O18B and O18B1 strains. During comparative NMR analyses, we found that the previously published structure of the O18A LPS was not correct, as had also been suggested by a computer-assisted structural analysis [12a]. We have therefore included the O18A LPS in our studies. Here we present the detailed structural analysis of the O18A, O18B and O18B1 LPS. Comparative, albeit less extensive, analysis revealed also the structure of the O18A1 LPS. The implications of these findings for the genetics and biochemistry of *E. coli* O18 antigens are discussed.

---

**Correspondence to** K. Jann, Max-Planck-Institut für Immunbiologie, Stübeweg 51, W-7800 Freiburg, Federal Republic of Germany  
Fax: +49 761 5108 221.

**Abbreviations.** 2D COSY, two-dimensional correlated NMR spectroscopy; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; PS, polysaccharide moiety of lipopolysaccharide; TOE, truncated driven mode of nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) NMR experiment; Rha, rhamnose.

---

### MATERIALS AND METHODS

#### Bacteria and cultivation

*E. coli* strains with the original designation 780141M (O18:K1:H⁻), IHE3042 (O18:K5:H7), M66/1-10 (O18:K?

:H14) and M64/1-2 (O18:K?:H14) were used. They have previously been described as RS 228 (O18A), A62 (O18A1), A80 (O18B) and A79 (O18B1), respectively [6]. The bacteria were grown to the stationary phase (about 5 h) in 14-l batch cultures at \(37^\circ \mathrm{C}\) with aeration of 1 l/min in a medium containing 7.5 g/l tryptone, 10 g/l yeast extract, 10 g/l glucose, 3 g/l NaCl, 8 g/l \(\mathrm{Na}_{2} \mathrm{HPO}_{4} \cdot 12 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}, 0.2\) g/l \(\mathrm{MgSO}_{4} \cdot 7 \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}\) and 0.3 g/l poly(ethylene glycol). Glucose and magnesium sulfate were sterilized separately. At the end of the cultivation, the bacteria were killed with phenol (1% final concentration) and harvested by centrifugation.

### Isolation of the lipopolysaccharides and preparation of the polysaccharides

The LPS were isolated from the bacteria with 45% aqueous phenol at \(65^{\circ} \mathrm{C}\) and were purified by repeated ultracentrifugation, as described [13]. The polysaccharides were obtained from the LPS by hydrolysis in 1% acetic acid \(\left(100^{\circ} \mathrm{C}, 90 \mathrm{~min}\right)\) and purified by chromatography on Sephadex G-50, as described [12, 14].

### Analytical methods

Rhamnose, glucose and galactose were determined as their alditol acetates by gas/liquid chromatography (GLC) and glucosamine was determined with as alditol acetate by GLC on PolyA103 at \(220^{\circ} \mathrm{C}\) [15]. Rhamnose was also determined with the cysteine/sulfuric acid reagent [16] and its absolute configuration was determined with the L-Rha-specific rhamnose isomerase [17].

Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GLC/MS) analyses were run on a Hewlett-Packard 59585 and a Finnigan MAT 1020B automatic system at \(70 \mathrm{eV}\) on a CB CP-SIL 5 \((25 \mathrm{~m} \times 0.25 \mathrm{~mm})\) column, with helium as the carrier gas.

### Methylation analysis

The polysaccharides were methylated with dimethylsulfoxide/potassium hydride/methyl iodide, as described [18]. To establish the linkage to N-acetylglucosamine, the hydrolysis procedure of Stellner et al. [19] was used. The mixture of methylated sugars was analyzed, after reduction and acetylation, by GLC/MS.

### Periodate oxidation

The oxidation of polysaccharides with sodium metaperiodate, followed by reduction with sodium borohydride, has been described [12].

### NMR spectroscopy

\({ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-\) and \({ }^{13} \mathrm{C}-\mathrm{NMR}\) spectra were recorded with a Bruker AM-300 spectrometer in \(\mathrm{D}_{2} \mathrm{O}\) by using acetone \((\delta \mathrm{H} 2.23, \delta \mathrm{C} 31.45)\) as the internal standard. Homonuclear 2D COSY spectra, H-relayed H,H-COSY spectra (one- and two-step), and heteronuclear \({ }^{13} \mathrm{C} /{ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-\mathrm{COSY}\) spectra were obtained by using standard Bruker software for ASPECT 3000 (COSYHG, COSYRCT, COSYRCT2 and XHCORRD, respectively). NOE experiments were performed in the truncated driven (TOE) mode [20] with the Bruker NOE-MULT program. The relaxation delay \(D_{1}\) was \(1 \mathrm{~s}\), the irradiation time of every component of multiplets \(\left(D_{2}\right)\) was \(0.1 \mathrm{~s}\), and the total pre-irradiation time of whole multiplets was \(1.0-1.2 \mathrm{~s}\).

---

**Table 1. Composition of the O18A, O18A1, O18B, and O18B1 polysaccharides before (PS) and after (PS-ox) periodate oxidation.**

| Preparation | Amount of sugar constituent |
|-------------|-----------------------------|
|             | N-acetyl-                   | rham-       | glu-     | galac-   |
|             | glucos-                     | nose        | cose     | tose     |
|             | amine                       |             |          |          |
|             | mol/mol                     |             |          |          |
| O18A-PS     | 2                           | 1           | 1        | 1        |
| O18A-PS-ox  | 1                           | 0           | 0        | 1        |
| O18A1-PS    | 2                           | 1           | 2        | 1        |
| O18A1-PS-ox | 1                           | 0           | 0        | 1        |
| O18B-PS     | 1                           | 1           | 2        | 1        |
| O18B-PS-ox  | 1                           | 1           | 0        | 1        |
| O18B1-PS    | 1                           | 1           | 3        | 1        |
| O18B1-PS-ox | 1                           | 1           | 0        | 1        |

---

**Fig. 1. 300-MHz \({ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-\mathrm{NMR}\) spectrum \((\delta 1.1-5.9)\) of the O18-specific polysaccharide moieties of (from top to bottom) O18A, O18A1, O18B and O18B1, recorded in \(\mathrm{D}_{2} \mathrm{O}(60^{\circ} \mathrm{C})\) with acetone \((\delta 2.23)\) as internal standard.**

Table 2. Results of methylation analyses obtained with the O18A, O18A1, O18B and O18B1 polysaccharides.

| Product from polysaccharide | Partially methylated alditol acetates (as identified by GLC/MS)                                                                                   | Interpretation | Molar ratio |
|-----------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|-------------|
| O18A                        | 1,2,5-tri-O-acetyl-3,4-di-O-methylrhamnitol                                                                                                   | 2-Rha         | 1           |
|                             | 1,5,6-tri-O-acetyl-2,3,4-tri-O-methylglucitol                                                                                                | 6-Glc         | 1           |
|                             | 1,3,4,5-tetra-O-acetyl-2,6-di-O-methylgalactitol                                                                                              | 3,4-Gal       | 1           |
|                             | 1,5-di-O-acetyl-2-deoxy-3,4,6-tri-O-methyl-N-methylacetamidoglucitol                                                                          | t-GlcNAc      | 1           |
|                             | 1,3,5-tri-O-acetyl-2-deoxy-4,6-di-O-methyl-N-methylacetamidoglucitol                                                                          | 3-GlcNAc      | 1           |
| O18A1                       | 1,2,5-tri-O-acetyl-3,4-di-O-methylrhamnitol                                                                                                   | 2-Rha         | 1           |
|                             | 1,5-di-O-acetyl-2,3,4,6-tetra-O-methylglucitol                                                                                                | t-Glc         | 1           |
|                             | 1,5,6-tri-O-acetyl-2,3,4-tri-O-methylglucitol                                                                                                | 6-Glc         | 1           |
|                             | 1,3,4,5-tetra-O-acetyl-2,6-di-O-methylgalactitol                                                                                              | 3,4-Gal       | 1           |
|                             | 1,5-di-O-acetyl-2-deoxy-3,4,6-tri-O-methyl-N-methylacetamidoglucitol                                                                          | t-GlcNAc      | 1           |
|                             | 1,3,5,6-tetra-O-acetyl-2-deoxy-4-O-methyl-N-methylacetamidoglucitol                                                                           | 3,6-GlcNAc    | 1           |
| O18B                        | 1,3,5-tri-O-acetyl-2,4-di-O-methylrhamnitol                                                                                                   | 3-Rha         | 1           |
|                             | 1,5-di-O-acetyl-2,3,4,6-tetra-O-methylglucitol                                                                                                | t-Glc         | 1           |
|                             | 1,5,6-tri-O-acetyl-2,3,4-tri-O-methylglucitol                                                                                                | 6-Glc         | 1           |
|                             | 1,3,4,5-tetra-O-acetyl-2,6-di-O-methylgalactitol                                                                                              | 3,4-Gal       | 1           |
|                             | 1,3,5-tri-O-acetyl-2-deoxy-2,5-di-O-methyl-N-methylacetamidoglucitol                                                                          | 3-GlcNAc      | 1           |
| O18B1                       | 1,5-di-O-acetyl-2,3,4,6-tetra-O-methylglucitol                                                                                                | t-Glc         | 2           |
|                             | 1,5,6-tri-O-acetyl-2,3,4-tri-O-methylglucitol                                                                                                | 6-Glc         | 1           |
|                             | 1,3,4,5-tetra-O-acetyl-2,6-di-O-methylgalactitol                                                                                              | 3,4-Gal       | 1           |
|                             | 1,3,4,5-tetra-O-acetyl-2-deoxy-6-O-methyl-N-methylacetamidoglucitol                                                                           | 3,4-GlcNAc    | 1           |

---

**RESULTS**

### Characterization of the polysaccharides

The O18 polysaccharides (PS), as obtained by mild acid degradation of the respective LPS (O18A, O18A1, O18B and O18B1 antigens), were purified by gel permeation chromatography on Sephadex G-50. They were eluted with water directly after the void volume ($K_{\mathrm{p}}$ 0.9–0.95). The rechromatographed materials did not contain undegraded LPS, as evidenced by ultracentrifugation (no pellet obtained) and by the absence of fatty acids. Since the NMR analysis revealed that the structure of the O18A polysaccharide differed in a sequence detail from the one reported previously [12], this polysaccharide was included in the present study.

The polysaccharides consisted of galactose, glucose, L-rhamnose (as identified with L-rhamnose isomerase), $N$-acetylglucosamine in the molar ratios shown in Table 1. The results of periodate oxidation are also given in the table.

The ${}^{1}$H-NMR spectra of the O18 polysaccharides (Fig. 1), were rather well resolved at $60^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ and showed five (O18A and O18B) or six (O18A1 and O18B1) signals of anomeric protons ($\delta 4.6-5.63$). The values of the coupling constants showed that the signal at $\delta 4.9\left(J_{1,2}<2 \mathrm{~Hz}\right)$ in every spectrum arises from H-1 of a sugar with manno configuration. The signal at $\delta 4.8\left(J_{1,2} 7.6-8.0 \mathrm{~Hz}\right)$ belonged to a sugar with $\beta$-gluco or $\beta$-galacto configuration and the signals at $\delta 5.0-5.63\left(J_{1,2} 3.4-4.0 \mathrm{~Hz}\right)$ to sugars with $\alpha$-gluco or $\alpha$-galacto configurations.

The ${}^{13}$C-NMR spectra of the O18A and O18B polysaccharides showed the presence of five anomeric carbons in the region of $\delta 110-95$ (pentasaccharide repeating units) and those of the O18A1 and O18B1 polysaccharides had one anomeric carbon more (hexasaccharide repeating units). Whereas the spectra of the O18A and O18A1 polysaccharides contained signals of two nitrogen-substituted (C-2) atoms in the region of $\delta 53-58$, indicative of the presence of two amino sugar residues/repeating unit, those of the O18B and O18B1 polysaccharides contained only one such signal each, indicative of the presence of one amino sugar residue/repeating unit. $N$-Acetyl substitution of the amino sugars was apparent from signals at $\delta 174-175$ and $\delta 23.1-23.2$. Signals at $\delta 17.8$ showed the presence of one residue of rhamnose/repeating unit. The NMR data are in accord with the analytical finding (Table 1) that the O18B polysaccharide contains one residue of $N$-acetylglucosamine less (and one residue of glucose more) than the O18A polysaccharide. A detailed signal assignment is presented below.

### Methylation analysis

The polysaccharides were subjected to methylation and the products were hydrolyzed, reduced with sodium borohydride and acetylated [18, 19]. The results of subsequent GLC/MS analysis (Table 2) showed that the O18A polysaccharide contained 2-substituted rhamnose, 3,4-disubstituted (branch point) galactose, 6-substituted glucose, 3-substituted $N$-acetylglucosamine, and terminal $N$-acetylglucosamine. The O18A1 polysaccharide had an additional terminal glucose/repeating unit linked to O-6 of the main-chain $N$-acetylglucomine, as evidenced by the presence of a 3,6-disubstituted (branch point), $N$-acetylglucosamine and the absence of the 3-substituted $N$-acetylglucosamine. The O18B polysaccharide differed from the O18A polysaccharide by the presence of a 3-substituted rhamnose instead of a 2-substituted one and the presence of a terminal glucose instead of a terminal $N$-acetylglucosamine. The O18B1 polysaccharide had an additional terminal glucose repeating unit linked to O-4 of the main-chain $N$-acetylglucosamine, as evidenced by the presence of a 3,4-disubstituted (branch point) $N$-acetylglucosamine and the absence of the 3-linked one. Thus, the O18 antigen seems to comprise a group of four closely related (lipo)polysaccharides.

Table 3. Signal assignments of the ${}^{1}$H-NMR spectra of the O18A, O18B, and O18B1 polysaccharides. Values are expressed with respect to acetone as internal standard ($\delta_{\mathrm{H}}$, 2.23). The multiplicities of the signals and their coupling constants are given in parentheses. The capital letters in parentheses refer to the formulae shown in Fig. 4. Symbols for the multiplicities are: s, singlet; d, doublet; t, triplet; q, quartet; dd, doublet of doublet; bd, broad signal; n.d., not determined.

| PS    | Unit          | H1                | H2                | H3                | H4                | H5                | H6                | $H6'$             |
|-------|---------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
|       |               | ppm (Hz)          |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| O18A  | 3-Glc*p*NAc   | 5.05(d, 3.6)      | 4.13(dd, 9.7)     | 4.02(dd, 9.7)     | 3.82(t, 9.7)      | 4.09              | 1.37(d)           | ~3.85             |
|       | 2-Rhap        | 4.89(bs, <2)      | 4.06(bd, 3.6)     | 3.96(dd, 9.6)     | 3.82(d, 6.2)      | 3.92(bd, $\approx$2) | 4.32(bdd, 5.6)    | ~3.85             |
|       | 6-Glcp        | 4.97(d, 3.5)      | 3.53(dd, 9.69)    | 3.74(t, 9.6)      | 3.57(t, 9.6)      | 4.31(bd, <2)      | 4.03              | 3.77(dd, 5.0)     |
|       | 4-Galp        | 5.51(d, 4.0)      | 4.00(dd, 9.8)     | 3.86(dd, 3.0)     | 3.57(t, 9.6)      | 3.99(bdd, 11)     | 3.97(dd, 11.9)    | 3.92(bd, $\approx$2) |
|       | t-Glc*p*NAc   | 4.68(d, 8.0)      | 3.65(dd, 10.0)    | 3.59(t, 10.0)     | 3.42(t, 10.0)     | 3.46(dd, 2.6)     | 3.73(dd, 5.0)     |                   |
| O18B  | 3-Glc*p*NAc   | 5.05(d, 3.6)      | 4.13(dd, 9.5)     | 4.02(t, 9.5)      | 3.80(t, 9.5)      | 4.00              | 1.34(d)           | 3.78              |
|       | 3-Rhap        | 4.86(d, 1.6)      | 4.14(dd, 3.4)     | 3.87(dd, 9.4)     | 3.55(t, 9.4)      | 3.78(dq, 6.1)     | 3.80(dd, $\approx$2) | 3.82              |
|       | 6-Glcp        | 5.03(d, 3.6)      | 3.52(dd, 9.5)     | 3.75(t, 9.5)      | 3.57(t, 9.5)      | 4.25(bd, $\approx$3) | 3.90(dd, 12)      | 3.96              |
|       | 4-Galp        | 5.49(d, 3.7)      | 4.08(dd, 10.0)    | 3.94(dd, 3.0)     | 3.32(bd, <2)      | 3.96              | 3.46(dd, 2.6)     | 3.73(dd, 5.3)     |
|       | t-Glcp        | 4.64(d, 7.6)      | 3.22(dd, 9.0)     | 3.53(t, 9.0)      | 3.38(t, 9.0)      | 3.93(dd, 12.1)    | 3.93(dd, 2.6)     | n.d.              |
| O18B1 | 3,4-Glc*p*NAc | 5.04(d, 3.8)      | 4.18(dd, 10.0)    | 4.03(t, 9.0)      | 3.56(t, 9.5)      | 4.14              | 1.35(d)           | n.d.              |
|       | 3-Rhap        | 4.87(bs, 1.6)     | 4.14(dd, 3.5)     | 3.87(dd, 9.5)     | 3.77(t, 9.7)      | 3.81(dq, 6.2)     | 3.81(bd, $\approx$2) | n.d.              |
|       | 6-Glcp        | 5.02(d, 3.8)      | 3.53(dd, 9.7)     | 3.60(t, 9.7)      | 4.27(bd, 4)       | 3.90(bd, 12.0)    | n.d.              | 3.79(dd, 5.0)     |
|       | 4-Galp        | 5.63(d, 3.5)      | 4.11(dd, 10.0)    | 3.94(dd, 3.2)     | 4.34(bd, <2)      | 4.11              | 3.47(dd, 3.1)     | n.d.              |
|       | t-Glcp        | 4.64(d, 7.6)      | 3.23(dd, 9.9)     | 3.54(t, 9.9)      | 3.39(t, 9.9)      | 3.95(dd, 12.0)    | 3.47(dd, 3.1)     | n.d.              |
|       |               | 5.56(d, 3.8)      | 3.60(dd, 9.9)     | 3.69(t, 9.9)      | 3.47(t, 9.9)      | 3.73              |                   |                   |

Fig. 2. 1D NOE experiments with pre-irradiation of the anomic protons from residues A–E of the O18A polysaccharide. Arrows indicate pre-irradiated protons. The designation of the sugar residues are those given in Fig. 4.

The nature and sequence of linkages within the polysaccharides was established by detailed NMR analysis.

### NMR analysis of the O18A polysaccharide

A complete assignment of the signals in the ${}^{1}$H-NMR spectrum (Table 3) was obtained by using 2D COSY, one- and two-step H-relayed coherence transfer (COSYRCT) 2D spectra [21, 22]. The visual multiplicities and coupling constants of the signals were determined with the help of 1D homonuclear double resonance performed in the difference mode [23]. This provided information as to the configuration of the sugar residues and confirmed their pyranose form [24].

The assignments of the ${}^{13}$C-NMR spectrum of the O18A polysaccharide were achieved by using 2D ${}^{13}$C/${}^{1}$H COSY spectra (Table 4). The glycosylation effects were calculated from the spectra and the absolute configuration of the sugar residues were determined [24].

The sequence of the sugar residues in the O18A polysaccharide was determined in a series of NOE experiments with pre-irradiation of the anomic protons (Fig. 2, Table 5). After irradiation of H-1 of residue D (Gal), the difference spectrum contained signals due to H-2 of the same residue and to H-3 of residue A (GlcNAc), indicating an $\alpha$-Gal-(1,3)-GlcNAc linkage. This interpretation uses the fact that in an $\alpha$-glycoside the only intra-ring proton contact is H-1/H-2. After irradiation of H-1 of residue A (GlcNAc), the difference spectrum contained signals due to H-2 of the same residue and of H-2 of residue B (L-Rha), indicative of a $\alpha$-GlcNAc-(1,2)-L-Rha linkage. An additional signal due to H-1 of residue B (L-Rha) indicated a conformation around the GlcNAc-Rha

Table 4. Signal assignments of the $^{13}$C-NMR spectra of the O18A, O18B, and O18B1 polysaccharides. Values are expressed relative to acetone as internal standard ($\delta_{\mathrm{c}}$, 31.45). The capital letters in parenthesis after the sugar units refer to the formulae shown in Fig. 4.

| PS    | Unit         | Chemical shift of | C-1   | C-2   | C-3   | C-4   | C-5   | C-6   |
|-------|--------------|-------------------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
|       |              | ppm               |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| O18A  | 3-GlcpNAc    | (A)               | 97.1   | 53.1   | 77.85  | 71.75  | 73.1   | 61.45  |
|       | 2-Rhap       | (B)               | 99.2   | 76.95  | 70.75  | 73.4   | 70.05  | 18.2   |
|       | 6-Glcp       | (C)               | 100.1  | 73.1   | 74.0   | 70.3   | 71.45  | 67.7   |
|       | 3,4-Galp     | (D)               | 100.1  | 69.25  | 79.7   | 77.0   | 72.9   | 60.95  |
|       | t-GlcpNAc    | (E)               | 104.6  | 57.0   | 75.4   | 71.75  | 76.95  | 62.2   |
| O18B  | 3-GlcpNAc    | (A)               | 95.5   | 53.1   | 78.2   | 71.65  | 72.7   | 61.2   |
|       | 3-Rhap       | (B)               | 101.8  | 67.8   | 76.3   | 72.85  | 70.0   | 18.2   |
|       | 6-Glcp       | (C)               | 100.5  | 71.65  | 73.85  | 70.0   | 71.65  | 67.35  |
|       | 3,4-Galp     | (D)               | 100.3  | 69.1   | 79.5   | 77.65  | 71.65  | 60.6   |
|       | t-Glcp       | (E)               | 105.85 | 74.9   | 76.9   | 71.05  | 77.1   | 61.95  |
| O18B1 | 3,4-GlcpNAc  | (A)               | 94.8   | 53.4   | 78.4   | 77.5   | 72.05  | 60.7   |
|       | 3-Rhap       | (B)               | 101.6  | 67.75  | 76.5   | 71.6   | 69.75  | 18.1   |
|       | 6-Glcp       | (C)               | 100.3  | 72.9   | 73.9   | 70.2   | 71.6   | 67.2   |
|       | 3,4-Galp     | (D)               | 99.5   | 69.0   | 79.3   | 77.5   | 72.9   | 61.9   |
|       | t-Glcp       | (E)               | 105.6  | 74.9   | 76.9   | 71.15  | 76.9   | 61.7   |
|       | t-Glcp       | (F)               | 99.7   | 72.6   | 73.9   | 70.55  | 73.9   | 62.1   |

Table 5. NOE data for the O18A polysaccharide. The sugar units are designated with capital letters according to the formulae shown in Fig. 4; the numbers refer to protons in the sugar rings.

| Unit NOE observed on | Signal with preirradiated proton |
|----------------------|----------------------------------|
|                      | 1A                              | 1B                              | 1C                              | 1D                              | 1E                              |
| 1A                   | +                               |                                 |                                 |                                 |                                 |
| 2A                   | +                               | +<sup>a</sup>                   |                                 |                                 |                                 |
| 3A                   |                                 |                                 | +                               |                                 |                                 |
| 1B                   | +                               |                                 |                                 |                                 |                                 |
| 2B                   | +                               | +                               |                                 |                                 |                                 |
| 2C                   |                                 |                                 | +                               |                                 |                                 |
| 4C                   |                                 | +<sup>a</sup>                   |                                 |                                 |                                 |
| 5C                   |                                 | +                               |                                 |                                 |                                 |
| 6+6'C                |                                 | +                               |                                 |                                 |                                 |
| 2D                   |                                 |                                 |                                 | +                               |                                 |
| 3D                   |                                 |                                 |                                 |                                 | +                               |
| 4D                   |                                 | +                               |                                 | +<sup>a</sup>                   |                                 |
| 5D                   |                                 |                                 | +<sup>a</sup>                   |                                 |                                 |
| 6+6'D                |                                 |                                 |                                 |                                 | +                               |
| 2+3E                 |                                 |                                 |                                 |                                 | +                               |
| 4+5E                 |                                 |                                 |                                 |                                 | +                               |
| 6+6E                 |                                 |                                 |                                 |                                 | +<sup>a</sup>                   |

<sup>a</sup> Small signal due to spin diffusion.

Fig. 3. 1D NOE experiments with pre-irradiation of the anomeric protons from residues A—E of the O18B polysaccharide. Arrows indicate pre-irradiated protons. The designations of the sugar residues are those given in Fig. 4.

Table 6. NOE data for the O18B polysaccharide. The sugars units are designated with capital letters according to the formulae shown in Fig. 4; the numbers refer to protons in the sugar rings.

| Unit NOE observed on | Signal with preirradiated proton |
|----------------------|----------------------------------|
|                      | 1A                             | 1B                             | 1C                             | 1D                             | 1E                             |
| 2A                   | +                               |                                |                                |                                |                                |
| 3A                   | +<sup>a</sup>                  |                                |                                | +                              |                                |
| 2B                   |                                | +                              |                                |                                |                                |
| 3B                   |                                | +                              |                                |                                |                                |
| 2C                   |                                |                                | +                              |                                |                                |
| 4C                   |                                |                                | +<sup>a</sup>                  |                                |                                |
| 5C                   | +                              |                                |                                |                                |                                |
| 5+6'C                | +                              |                                |                                |                                |                                |
| 2D                   |                                |                                |                                | +                              |                                |
| 3D                   |                                |                                |                                | +                              |                                |
| 4D                   |                                |                                | +                              |                                |                                |
| 6+6'D                |                                |                                | +                              |                                |                                |
| 2E                   |                                |                                |                                |                                | +                              |
| 3E                   |                                |                                |                                |                                | +                              |
| 4+5E                 |                                |                                |                                | +                              |                                |

<sup>a</sup> Small signal due to spin diffusion.

Table 7. NOE data for the O18B1 polysaccharide. The sugars units are designated with capital letters according to the formulae shown in Fig. 4; the numbers refer to protons in the sugar rings.

| Unit NOE observed on | Signal with preirradiated proton |
|----------------------|----------------------------------|
|                      | 1A                             | 1B                             | 1C                             | 1D                             | 1E                             | 1F                             |
| 2A                   | +                               |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                |
| 3A                   |                                |                                |                                | +                              |                                |                                |
| 4A                   |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                | +                              |
| 5A                   |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                | +<sup>a</sup>                  |
| 2B                   |                                | +                              | +                              |                                |                                |                                |
| 3B                   |                                | +                              |                                |                                |                                |                                |
| 2C                   |                                |                                |                                |                                | +                              |                                |
| 4C                   |                                |                                |                                | +<sup>a</sup>                  |                                |                                |
| 5C                   |                                |                                |                                | +                              |                                |                                |
| 6+6'C                |                                |                                |                                |                                | +                              |                                |
| 2D                   |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                | +                              |
| 3D                   |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                | +                              |
| 4D                   |                                |                                |                                | +                              |                                |                                |
| 6+6'D                |                                |                                |                                |                                | +                              |                                |
| 2E                   |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                | +                              |
| 3E                   |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                | +                              |
| 4+5E                 |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                | +                              |
| 2F                   |                                |                                |                                |                                |                                | +                              |

<sup>a</sup> Small signal due to spin diffusion.

(as O18B polysaccharides, substituted with β-Glc at O-4 of GlcNAc) is shown in Fig. 4.

Discussion

*Escherichia coli* strains expressing the O18 antigen (lipopolysaccharide, LPS) are prevalent in extraintestinal infections in man, notably sepsis and neonatal meningitis as well as urinary tract infections (pyelonephritis) [25–27]. The O18 antigens were originally divided into two subgroups, viz. O18ac and O18ab [10]. Whereas *E. coli* strains expressing the O18ac antigen are frequently isolated from pathogenic material, those expressing the O18ab antigen were isolated practically only from feces of normal individuals. In an extensive study of *E. coli* antigens, the O18 antigens were divided into four subgroups: O18A, O18A1, O18B and O18B1 [7]. As exemplified on *E. coli* O18 test strains, the former O18ac group are now described as O18A and O18A1, and the former O18ab group now became O18B and O18B1. The LPS of these strains

cassettes [31]. There may be four possible such cassettes, each including the glucosyl transferase which attaches the side-chain glucose to the main-chain *N*-acetylglucosamine. Alternatively, there may be two basic O18 antigen forms (O18A and O18B). Both can then be modified by an extragenic (*rfb*) modification gene, related in function to the *oaf* gene of *Salmonella* [31, 32]. This modification gene would be active (or present) in *E. coli* expressing either the O18A1 antigen or the O18B1 antigen, but inactive (or absent) in *E. coli* expressing either the O18A antigen or the O18B antigen. The fact that glucosylation is at O-6 of the main-chain *N*-acetyl-glucosamine in the O18A1 LPS and at O-4 of this residue in the O18B1 LPS, the specificity of the transglucosylase must either be different in the two strains or be of low specificity. The latter situation has been shown to exist in recombinant *E. coli* O4 (G. Kogan et al., unpublished results). The concept of exchangeable *rfb* cassettes has been the basis of recent molecular cloning and analysis of *E. coli* and *Salmonella* LPS [33–39].

A comparison of the structures shown in Fig. 4 permits the assumption that one of the differences between O18A and O18A1, on the one hand, and O18B and O18B1, on the other, may be due to a difference in polymerase specificity. With a putative biological repeating unit [30, 31] in which the main chain would be represented as -Rhap-Glcp-Galp-GlcpNAc-sequence, such a polymerase would link the repeating units with a GlcpNAc-(1,2)-Rha linkage in O18A and O18A1, and with a GlcpNAc-(1,3)-Rhap linkage in O18B and O18B1. These considerations underscore the fact that *E. coli* O18 will be a very interesting subject for the study of the biosynthesis and genetics of LPS.

We thank Mrs Helga Kochanowski for help with the NMR spectra and Mr Dietmar Borowiak for running the mass spectra. L-Rhamnose isomerase was a gift of Dr W. D. Fessner (Universität Freiburg). This work was in part supported by the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (to D.S.G.) and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (to A.S.S.).

**REFERENCES**

1. Edwards, P. R. & Ewing, W. H. (1972) in *Identification of Enterobacteriaceae*, 3rd edn, pp. 1–107, Burgess Publ. Co., Minneapolis MN.
2. Kauffmann, F. (1975) in *Classification of bacteria: a realistic scheme with special reference to the classification of Salmonella and Escherichia species*, pp. 19–49, Munksgaard, Copenhagen.
3. Ørskov, I., Ørskov, F., Jann, B. & Jann, K. (1977) *Bacteriol. Rev.* 41, 667–710.
4. Ørskov, I. & Ørskov, F. (1990) *Eur. Top. Microbiol. Immunol.* 151, 71–90.
5. Ochman, H., Whittam, T. S., Caugant, D. A. & Selander, R. K. (1983) *J. Gen. Microbiol.* 129, 2715–2726.
6. Achtman, M., Mercer, A., Kusecek, B., Pohl, A., Heuzenroeder, M., Aaronson, W., Sutton, A. & Silver, R. P. (1983) *Infect. Immun.* 39, 315–335.
7. Pluschke, G., Moll, A., Kusecek, B. & Achtman, M. (1986) *Infect. Immun.* 51, 286–293.
8. Kusecek, B., Wloch, H., Mercer, A., Vaisänen, V., Pluschke, G., Korhonen, T. & Achtman, M. (1984) *Infect. Immun.* 43, 368–379.
9. Moll, A., Kusecek, B., Pluschke, G., Morelli, G., Kamke, M., Jann, B., Jann, K. & Achtman, M. (1986) *Infect. Immun.* 53, 257–263.
10. Ewing, W. H., Tanner, K. E. & Tatum, H. W. (1956) *Publ. Health Lab.* 14, 106–115.
11. Jann, B., Shashkov, A. S., Gupta, D. S., Panasenko, S. M. & Jann, K. (1992) *Carbohydr. Polymers* 18, 51–57.

11a. Gupta, D. S., Shashkov, A. S., Jann, B. & Jann, K. (1992) *J. Bacteriol.*, in the press.
12. Gupta, D. S., Jann, B. & Jann, K. (1984) *Infect. Immun.* 45, 203–209.
12a. Jansson, P. E., Kenne, L. & Widmalm, G. (1989) *Carbohydr. Res.* 193, 322–325.
13. Westphal, O. & Jann, K. (1965) *Methods Carbohydr. Chem.* 5, 83–91.
14. Jann, B., Reske, K. & Jann, K. (1975) *Eur. J. Biochem.* 60, 239–246.
15. Niedermeier, W. & Tomana, M. (1974) *Anal. Biochem.* 57, 363–368.
16. Kabat, E. A. & Mayer, M. M. (1971) *Experimental immunochemistry*, pp. 538–541, C. C. Thomas, Springfield II.
17. Wilson, D. M. & Ajl, S. (1957) *J. Bacteriol.* 73, 410–414.
18. Phillips, L. R. & Fraser, B. A. (1981) *Carbohydr. Res.* 90, 149–152.
19. Stellner, K., Saito, H. & Hakomori, S. (1973) *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* 155, 464–472.
20. Wagner, G. & Wüthrich, K. (1979) *J. Magn. Reson.* 33, 675–680.
21. Jeener, J., Meier, B. H., Bachmann, P. & Ernst, E. E. (1979) *J. Chem. Phys.* 71, 4546–4553.
22. Dabrowski, J. (1987) in *Methods in stereochemical analysis*, vol. 9 (Croasmun, W. R. & Carlson, R. M. K., eds) pp. 349–386, VCH, New York.
23. Kochanova, N. A., Knirel, Y. A., Shashkov, A. S., Kochetkov, N. K. & Pier, G. B. (1988) *J. Biol. Chem.* 263, 11291–11295.
24. Lipkind, G. M., Shashkov, A. S., Mamyan, S. S. & Kochetkov, N. K. (1988) *Carbohydr. Res.* 181, 1–12.
25. Robbins, J. B., McCracken, G. H., Gotschlich, E. C., Ørskov, I., Ørskov, F. & Hanson, L. A. (1974) *New Engl. J. Med.* 290, 1216–1220.
26. Sarff, L. D., McCracken, G. H., Schiffer, M. S., Glode, M. P., Robbins, J. B., Ørskov, I. & Ørskov, F. (1975) *Lancet i*, 1090–1104.
27. Ørskov, I., Ørskov, F., Birch-Andersen, A., Kanamori, M. & Svanborg-Eden (1982) *Scand. J. Infect. Dis. Suppl.* 33, 18–25.
28. Tarcsay, L., Wang, C. S., Li, S. C. & Alaupovic, P. (1973) *Biochemistry* 12, 1948–1955.
29. Kauffmann, F. (1966) in *The bacteriology of Enterobacteriaceae*, pp. 55–305, Munksgaard, Copenhagen.
30. Lüderitz, O., Westphal, O., Staub, A. M. & Nikaido, H. (1971) in *Microbial toxins* (Weinbaum, G., Kadis, S. & Ajl, S. J., eds) vol. V, pp. 145–235, Academic Press, New York.
31. Stocker, B. A. D. & Mäkelä, P. H. (1978) *Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B202*, 5–30.
32. Nikaido, H., Nikaido, K., Nakae, T. & Mäkelä, P. H. (1971) *J. Biol. Chem.* 246, 3902–3911.
33. Sugiyama, T., Kido, N., Komatsu, T., Ohta, M. & Kato, N. (1991) *J. Bacteriol.* 173, 55–58.
34. Valvano, M. A. & Crossa, J. H. (1989) *Infect. Immun.* 57, 937–943.
35. Haraguchi, G. E., Zähringer, U., Jann, B., Jann, K., Hull, R. A. & Hull, S. I. (1991) *Microbial Pathogen.* 10, 351–361.
36. Cheah, K.-C., Beger, D. W. & Manning, P. A. (1991) *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.* 83, 213–218.
37. Jiang, X. M., Neal, B., Santiago, F., Lee, S. J., Romana, L. K. & Reeves, P. R. (1991) *Mol. Microbiol.* 5, 695–713.
38. Brown, P. K., Romana, L. K. & Reeves, P. R. (1991) *Mol. Microbiol.* 5, 1873–1881.
39. Bastin, D. A., Romana, L. K. & Reeves, P. R. (1991) *Mol. Microbiol.* 5, 2223–2231.
