
Leukocyte-endothelial-cell interactions in leukocyte transmigration and the inflammatory response

William A. Muller

Department of Pathology, and Laboratory Medicine, Graduate Program in Immunology, Weill Medical College, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA

Both the innate and adaptive immune responses are dependent on the migration of leukocytes across endothelial cells. The process of diapedesis, in which the leukocyte crawls between tightly apposed endothelial cells, is a unique and complex process. Several molecules concentrated at the junctions of endothelial cells, originally described as having a role in holding the endothelial monolayer together, have also been shown to have a role in the emigration of leukocytes. Several mechanisms have been proposed for 'loosening' the junctions between endothelial cells to enable leukocyte passage. These leukocyte-endothelial-cell adhesion molecules are probably involved in regulating the signaling as well as the adhesion events of diapedesis. In addition, this Review introduces a new and unified nomenclature for the junctional adhesion molecule (JAM) family.

Inflammation is the stereotyped response of vascularized tissue to injury of any kind. It is a major part of innate immunity but, as is now well recognized, it is also a crucial initiator and regulator of the adaptive immune response [1,2]. Inflammation involves the microvasculature of the affected tissue, principally postcapillary venules. Postcapillary venules are the site of the histamine-induced vascular leak early in the inflammatory response and are also the site of leukocyte extravasation shortly thereafter when the endothelium has regained its junctional integrity. Inflammatory stimuli activate the endothelial cells of these vessels to express adhesion molecules and chemokines that physically engage circulating leukocytes and promote their adhesion to these vessels. Because leukocytes cannot swim, the first step in their emigration out of the bloodstream into the affected tissue necessarily involves their adhesion to, and crawling on, the endothelium of these postcapillary venules. Leukocytes make their way to the borders of the endothelial cells, then pass across them in a process called transendothelial migration, or diapedesis. During diapedesis the leukocyte squeezes (in ameboid fashion) between the tightly apposed endothelial cells with minimal disruption of the vascular lining.

It is customary to introduce the topic of transendothelial migration with phrases, such as, 'While a great deal has been learned about the early steps in leukocyte extravasation – tethering, rolling and arrest of leukocytes – little is known about the next step in the process: diapedesis, when leukocytes migrate across the endothelial layer lining the blood vessels'. It is true that much less is known about this step than the others. It is more difficult to study and there are fewer investigators studying it. Nonetheless, substantial advances in our knowledge of diapedesis have been made in recent years. This Review will highlight some of these advances as well as the important questions yet to be answered.

The process

Diapedesis is a rapid process in which the leukocyte extends itself by a pseudopod across the endothelial border. This requires rapid disassembly of its cytoskeleton on the apical surface and reassembly on the abluminal side of the endothelium. *In vitro* neutrophils complete this process in ~90 seconds. Leukocytes, especially neutrophils, must be activated enough to adhere and carry out these functions but not activated so much that they are stimulated to undergo an oxidative burst.

Unique molecular mechanisms govern this step in leukocyte migration. Whereas tethering, rolling, adhesion and crawling on the apical surface all involve heterophilic interactions between one class of molecule on the leukocyte and another class of molecule on the endothelial cell, at least two molecular interactions of major importance to diapedesis involve homophilic interaction between a molecule on the leukocyte and the same molecule on the endothelium at the junctions. Platelet-endothelial-cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1, CD31) and CD99 act at sequential steps as the leukocyte crosses the endothelial barrier [3]. Junctional adhesion molecule (JAM)-A and JAM-C, expressed by leukocytes and endothelium, are also capable of homophilic interaction, although their roles in leukocyte migration could require heterophilic interactions.

Review
TRENDS in Immunology Vol.24 No.6 June 2003

The playing field
There are several well documented reports of leukocytes migrating into sites of inflammation by passing through endothelial cells [4]. However, most investigators agree that most leukocytes enter the sites of inflammation by passing between endothelial cells at their borders (reviewed in Ref. [5]). Endothelial cells are connected to each other by specific junctional structures at their borders [6]. These junctions must presumably be breached by transmigrating leukocytes, however, vascular integrity must be maintained during inflammation. Indeed, using *in vitro* models, considerable leukocyte traffic across endothelial-cell monolayers can occur without an increase in the permeability or decrease in the electrical resistance of the monolayers [7,8]. Experiments in which transendothelial migration led to a significant reduction in monolayer integrity or destruction of junctional components used high ratios of leukocytes to endothelial cells (≥10:1) [8–11].

Adherens junctions and tight junctions encircle endothelial cells where they adhere to adjacent endothelial cells in the monolayers. Adhesion molecules localized to the adherens junctions, such as the vascular endothelial-cadherin (VE-cadherin, cadherin 5, CD144), hold apposing endothelial cells together along these belts, with their cytoplasmic tails organizing actin-based cytoskeletal supports [6]. Tight junctions provide a true barrier to even small molecule movement across the junctions. Truly tight junctions are rare in endothelium, limited to cells comprising the blood-brain and blood-testis barriers. However, even the relatively leaky postcapillary venular endothelium has rudimentary tight junctions, which could act as a barrier to leukocyte passage.

Some studies suggest that neutrophils are more likely to migrate through a border where three endothelial cells meet (tricellular junction) rather than a border between two endothelial cells [12,13]. *In vitro* tight junctions are discontinuous at tricellular junctions [12,13]. Although this is an area of controversy, there are some data demonstrating tricellular migration of neutrophils *in vivo* as well [14]. This preference for migration at tricellular borders might be specific for neutrophils or for particular vascular beds. In a similar *in vitro* flow model, monocytes preferentially migrate across borders made by two endothelial cells [15] where adherens junctions appear to disorganize during transmigration of monocytes [16]. VE-cadherin and the catenin molecules associated with it transiently disappear from the endothelial membrane at the border surrounding the migrating leukocyte. Yet, the entire junctional complex re-establishes itself within five minutes of monocyte migration [15,16].

The players
Six molecules that are concentrated at the lateral borders of endothelial cells have been implicated in the process of transmigration, although possibly at different steps along the way. PECAM, CD99, VE-cadherin and JAM-A, -B and -C will be described now (Fig. 1). The nomenclature of the JAM family has been confusing because the human and murine forms of these molecules (particularly JAMs B and C) were cloned essentially simultaneously by different

http://treimm.trends.com

Fig. 1. Cell adhesion molecules at the endothelial-cell borders. (a) In resting endothelial cells homophilic interactions between vascular endothelial-cell specific cadherin [VE-cadherin (shown with five cadherin repeats as green rectangles)] on apposing cells, the immunoglobulin (Ig) gene superfamily molecules platelet-endothelial-cell adhesion molecule-1 [PECAM-1 (with six Ig domains indicated as circles)], junctional adhesion molecule (JAM)-A, -B and -C (with two Ig domains indicated) and CD99 (with O-linked sugars indicated by red 'whiskers') are established. (b) Under inflammatory conditions, there might be rearrangement of these molecules within the cell. A combination of the inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interferon-γ (IFN-γ) induces redistribution of JAM-A to the endothelial apical surface. The same combination reduces the expression of PECAM-1; IFN-γ alone (but not TNF-α or interleukin-1β) induces partial redistribution of PECAM-1 to the apical surface (not shown). (c) During leukocyte transendothelial migration, the density of VE-cadherin in the membrane adjacent to the advancing leukocyte decreases dramatically while the density of JAM-A and recycling PECAM-1 increases. It is not known whether total PECAM density increases locally or if just the density of the recycling pool increases.

investigators and given different names. This Review will use the nomenclature proposed in Table 1 for the common names of the JAM family proteins (not the genes) and agreed to by a committee of scientists in the JAM field. In this scheme, the predicted protein sequences of the human and mouse counterparts are most similar, issues of primacy are avoided and tissue distribution restrictions are not implied by the names (Table 1 lists the original designations and references to aid the reader).

PECAM and the three JAMs are members of the immunoglobulin (Ig) gene superfamily. VE-cadherin is obviously a member of the cadherin family and CD99 is a unique molecule [17]. All of these molecules are potentially capable of homophilic interaction; that is, a molecule on

Table 1. Getting out of a JAM: a consistent nomenclature for the JAM family$^{a,b}$

| New designation | Human genome map designation | Original designation | Species | Refs |
|-----------------|-------------------------------|----------------------|---------|------|
| JAM-A           | F11R                          | JAM                  | Mouse   | [49] |
| JAM-A           | F11R                          | F11 receptor         | Human   | [52] |
| JAM-A           | F11R                          | JAM                  | Human   | [51] |
| JAM-B           | JAM2                          | VE-JAM               | Human and mouse | [57] |
| JAM-B           | JAM2                          | JAM2                 | Human   | [18] |
| JAM-B           | JAM2                          | JAM-3                | Mouse   | [81] |
| JAM-C           | JAM3                          | JAM-2                | Mouse   | [82] |
| JAM-C           | JAM3                          | JAM3                 | Human   | [58] |
| JAM-C           | JAM3                          | JAM-3                | Human   | [62] |

$^a$ Abbreviations: F11R, F11 receptor; JAM, junctional adhesion molecule.

$^b$ This revised nomenclature has been discussed with, and approved by, in alphabetical order, E. Dejana, S. Fong, B. Imhof, E. Kornecki, F.W. Luscinskas, W.A. Muller, U. Naik, C. Parkos, K. Preissner, S. Rosen, C.W. Smith and D. Vestweber. The citations to published reports are meant to be representative and not inclusive.

one endothelial cell binding to the same molecule on the apposing endothelial cell. This has been demonstrated either directly or assumed by homology to JAM-A and their tendency to rapidly accumulate at borders where two cells expressing the molecule meet [18,19]. PECAM, CD99, JAM-A and JAM-C are also expressed on leukocytes. For both PECAM and CD99 homophilic engagement of the molecule on the leukocyte with the same molecule expressed by the endothelial cell is required for diapedesis to proceed. JAMs bind leukocyte integrins and this aspect of their biology has been recently implicated in their function during the inflammatory response (Table 2).

PECAM-1 is a member of the Ig gene superfamily that is expressed diffusely on the surfaces of most leukocytes and is concentrated at the borders of endothelial cells [20,21]. Homophilic interaction of the amino terminal portion (Ig domains 1 and 2) of leukocyte PECAM with the same domains of endothelial-cell PECAM is required for diapedesis. Blocking this interaction with a domain-specific monoclonal antibody or with a soluble form of

Table 2. Potential leukocyte-endothelial-cell adhesion molecule pairs in the junction$^a$

| Leukocyte molecule          | Endothelial-cell counter-receptor       |
|-----------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| PECAM-1(CD 31)              | PECAM-1                                 |
| CD99                        | CD99                                    |
| LFA-1(CD11aorCD 18)         | JAM-A                                   |
| JAM-A                       | JAM-A$^b$                              |
| Mac-1(CD11borCD 18)         | JAM-C$^{c,e}$                           |
| JAM-C                       | JAM-C$^b$                              |
| VLA-4(CD49dorCD 29)         | JAM-B$^{d,e}$                           |
| Endothelial-cell molecule   | Endothelial-cell counter-receptor      |
| VE-cadherin                 | VE-cadherin                            |
| PECAM-1                     | PECAM-1                                |
| CD99                        | CD99                                    |
| JAM-A                       | JAM-A                                  |
| JAM-C                       | JAM-C, JAM-B                           |
| JAM-B                       | JAM-B, JAM-C                           |

$^a$ Abbreviations: CD, cluster of differentiation (This designation actually applies to monoclonal antibodies that recognize the same antigen. However, in common practice, the antigen, especially if it is a cell surface molecule, is referred to by the same CD number.); JAM, junctional adhesion molecule; LFA-1, lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1; PECAM-1, platelet-endothelial-cell adhesion molecule-1; VE-cadherin, vascular endothelial-cell-specific cadherin; VLA-4, very late antigen-4.

$^b$ Homophilic JAM-JAM adhesion has not been directly demonstrated for leukocyte-endothelial-cell interactions but remain a possibility.

$^c$ The Mac-1-JAM-C adhesion has been demonstrated for Mac-1 on platelets.

$^d$ VLA-4-JAM-B adhesion has been demonstrated on JAM-B transfected cells.

$^e$ Heterophilic interactions of JAM-C and JAM-B with leukocyte integrins have been demonstrated but not directly with leukocytes and endothelial cells.

diapedesis by >90% in an in vitro model of transendothelial migration [3]. CD99 controls a step in diapedesis that is different from that controlled by PECAM-1. Blocking both CD99 and PECAM-1 gave an additive effect, essentially abolishing diapedesis completely [3]. The CD99-dependent step is distal to the one controlled by PECAM-1. Monocytes blocked at the CD99-dependent step are arrested partway across the endothelial junction. The leading edge of the monocyte is below the endothelial cell but a major portion of the cell is still in the junction itself and the trailing edge remains on the apical surface of the endothelial monolayer. This demonstrates that diapedesis is controlled by at least two separate sets of homophilic interactions acting at two separate steps.

VE-cadherin is located specifically at adherens junctions between endothelial cells [44,45], where, in a similar manner to its epithelial counterparts, it associates with catenin molecules that link it to the actin cytoskeleton [6,46,47]. Monoclonal antibodies against VE-cadherin increase the permeability of endothelial-cell monolayers, implicating VE-cadherin in the maintenance of the permeability barrier. A monoclonal antibody against VE-cadherin infused into mice before stimulation of peritonitis increases the rate at which neutrophils arrive at the site of inflammation [48]. These results suggested that integrity of the adherens junction was a barrier to neutrophil migration. However, in vitro studies performed under flow conditions demonstrate that VE-cadherin is transiently removed from the junctions during diapedesis [15,16] (Fig. 1c). It is not known whether the disappearance of VE-cadherin from the junction at the site of leukocyte emigration is a prerequisite for diapedesis or a consequence of it. In light of these in vitro data, the anti-VE-cadherin antibody in the animal experiments could have facilitated the transient clearance of VE-cadherin from the junction.

JAM-A is expressed at epithelial tight junctions and intercellular borders of endothelial cells, as well as on the surfaces of megakaryocytes [49]. In humans, JAM-A is also expressed by leukocytes [50,51] and platelets [52]. Antibody against murine JAM-A reduced inflammation in an air-pouch model [49] and a cytokine-induced meningitis model [53]. However, the same monoclonal antibody failed to block leukocyte emigration in a model of meningitis caused by *Listeria monocytogenes* or lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus [54]. In one report, monoclonal antibodies against the human form of JAM-A did not have an effect on leukocyte migration [51]. A recent paper using a polyclonal antibody against human JAM-A described a role for it in transmigration of T cells and polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) in vitro [55]. The novelty here was that JAM-A was engaging the leukocyte-integrin lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1, CD11a–CD18) in a heterophilic manner that involved the membrane-proximal domain of JAM-A, the immunoglobulin domain not involved in homophilic JAM–JAM adhesion. In these experiments, endothelial cells were treated with a combination of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interferon-γ in order to promote the redistribution of JAM-A out of the junctions and onto the surface of the cells [56] (Fig. 1b). This treatment might mimic conditions at sites of chronic inflammation. How efficiently JAM-A–LFA-1 interactions occur in the junction itself is not clear from these experiments.

JAM-B was originally reported to localize to the intercellular boundaries of high endothelial venules [57]. It has not yet been implicated in leukocyte–endothelial-cell interactions but it is probably just a matter of time. JAM-B interacts with JAM-C [58,59] and also binds very late antigen-4 (VLA-4, CD49d–CD29) [60], which is expressed on lymphocytes, monocytes and eosinophils. It is interesting that this binding is only efficient if JAM-B has already engaged JAM-C [60]. JAM-C was originally reported as a molecule expressed strongly by high endothelial venules [19] and subsequently by human umbilical-vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) [61]. It has recently been reported to have a role in lymphocyte transmigration. Antibody against JAM-C or soluble JAM-C blocked migration of human PMNs across HUVEC monolayers in response to a chemotactic gradient of stromal derived factor-1 (SDF-1, CXCL12) [61]. Because JAM-C is also expressed by subpopulations of human B cells, T cells and most monocytes [61], one might predict that homophilic interactions between leukocyte JAM-C and endothelial-cell JAM-C were involved in this process, similar to what has been shown for PECAM and CD99. However, a recent report that the leukocyte-restricted integrin Mac-1 (CD11b–CD18) binds to JAM-C, albeit JAM-C expressed on platelets [62], opens up the possibility that heterophilic interactions, such as those described for JAM-A [55], might be involved.

### The mechanisms

Transmigration requires a transient increase in intracellular free calcium within the endothelial cells [8]. If this intracellular free calcium rise is buffered, neutrophils can still adhere but cannot transmigrate endothelial monolayers [8]. The intracellular free calcium rise is restricted to endothelial cells that are adjacent to a transmigrating leukocyte [63]. The increase in intracellular free calcium activates myosin light chain kinase (MLCK), which leads to unfolding of myosin II, which leads to endothelial-cell retraction that might facilitate leukocyte passage [64] (Fig. 2). In support of this, the MLCK inhibitor ML-9 blocked transendothelial migration and the accompanying actin cytoskeletal changes in an in vitro model [65].

What triggers this increase in intracellular free calcium? Soluble cationic protein(s) released by stimulated neutrophils can trigger a rise in endothelial cytosolic free calcium concentration similar to those triggered by migrating neutrophils themselves [66]. This raises the possibility that soluble diffusible signals from activated leukocytes provide the trigger that enables their further transmigration. Recently, the heparin-binding protein azurocidin [also known as CAP37 (cationic antimicrobial protein of 37 kD) or HBP (heparin binding protein)] has been identified as one soluble product released from neutrophils that can trigger the rise in intracellular free calcium [67]. Soluble products of neutrophils might not be the only way of signaling the endothelial cells to permit transmigration. There is also a report that cross-linking E- or P-selectin or VCAM-1 on activated

Leukocyte

Endothelial
Cell

↑[Ca]i
MLCK
(inactive)
MLCK
(active)
Myosin II
Phospho-Myosin II
Actin filament
Retraction →

TRENDS in Immunology

Fig. 2. Increased intracellular calcium flux leads to increase in isometric tension in endothelial cells. A proposed sequence of events is depicted in which activation by crosslinking signals and/or soluble activators from the leukocyte stimulates a transient increase in endothelial intracellular free calcium ([Ca²⁺]i). This activates the calmodulin-dependent enzyme myosin light chain kinase (MLCK) by phosphorylation, thereby causing a conformational change in myosin II, facilitating contraction of actin-myosin bundles. This would put tension on actin filaments near the cell border enabling retraction of the endothelial cells at their borders and facilitating leukocyte passage.

endothelial cells can trigger this calcium rise [68]. This suggests a way in which the calcium flux could be exquisitely localized to the endothelial cells surrounding the migrating leukocyte [63].

We have recently reported a novel membrane compartment in endothelial cells that consists of a reticulum of 50 nm vesicles connected to each other and to the surface of the cell at intervals along the intercellular border [69]. This membrane compartment is located along the perimeter of the cell close to the cell borders. It contains around a third of the total cellular PECAM and the PECAM in this compartment constitutively recycles from this compartment evenly along the endothelial cell border.

When monocytes transmigrate, the trafficking pattern of PECAM in this compartment is drastically altered. Rather than recycling evenly along the endothelial borders, the recycling PECAM is now targeted directly to the zone of the endothelial-cell border where the monocyte is transmigrating [69]. Targeted recycling requires functional PECAM engagement between leukocytes and endothelial cells.

We do not know at this point whether it is the PECAM molecules or the entire membrane that recycles in this fashion. However, it is tempting to speculate that the targeted recycling of PECAM surrounding the transmigrating monocytes provided a source of membrane surface area that facilitated their passage through the intercellular border (Fig. 3). Alternatively, the recycling PECAM provided a source of PECAM that was not already ligated to PECAM on the opposing endothelial cell. This PECAM would be free to engage the PECAM on the leukocyte and trigger whatever signals were necessary to propagate the targeted recycling of PECAM to this zone.

We do not yet know which other junctional adhesion

http://treimm.trends.com

(a)

Leukocyte

Surface-connected
membrane compartment

Endothelial
cell

Endothelial
cell

PECAM (—)

(b)

Leukocyte

Surface-connected
membrane compartment

Endothelial
cell

Endothelial
cell

(c)

Leukocyte

Endothelial
cell

Endothelial
cell

TRENDS in Immunology

Fig. 3. Platelet-endothelial-cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) recycling from the surface-connected compartment. PECAM is normally distributed along the endothelial-cell border, with about a third in a membranous reticulum beneath the cell border (red line). In resting endothelial cells, PECAM cycles between the cell surface and this internal compartment evenly along the junction. During leukocyte diapedesis, the recycled PECAM is targeted directly to the zone of the junction through which the leukocyte is actively migrating. (a–c) show successive stages of diapedesis as the recycling PECAM-bearing membrane is brought to the vicinity of the advancing leukocyte. If the membrane traffics along with the PECAM, this mechanism would provide increased surface area to accommodate the leukocyte on its journey across the endothelial cell border.

molecules are located in this recycling reticulum. VE-cadherin seems to show the reverse pattern: It is evenly distributed along the endothelial-cell border but transiently disappears at the border with transmigrating monocytes [15,16]. This

would suggest that, although VE-cadherin is internalized from the endothelial-cell borders [69], it is either not internalized into this compartment or separates from it during the targeted recycling. One possibility is that VE-cadherin in the endothelial-cell plasma membrane along the intercellular border is diluted out by addition of PECAM and other molecules brought to the leukocyte interface by targeted recycling. This might account for the markedly decreased density of VE-cadherin surrounding transmigrating monocytes [15,16]. Using a different assay system, Luscinskas *et al.* have found that JAM-A, like recycling PECAM, appears to be concentrated along the endothelial-cell borders at the interface with transmigrating monocytes (F.W. Luscinskas *et al.*, unpublished; Fig. 1c). This could be explained by the presence of JAM-A in the same targeted recycling compartment as PECAM.

The caveats and remaining questions

The process of leukocyte extravasation has been subdivided into the sequential steps of tethering, rolling, activation, adhesion, diapedesis and migration across the basal lamina, each controlled by different molecules. Many authors refer to ‘transendothelial migration’ as the entire emigration process from the point at which the leukocyte adheres to the endothelial cell to the point at which the leukocyte traverses the subendothelial basal lamina. The term transendothelial migration is best restricted to the process of diapedesis. Some inconsistencies in the literature are a result of these semantics. Many ‘transmigration assays’, including the popular assay of migration across endothelial monolayers grown on Transwell™ filters, measure all of the steps in leukocyte extravasation plus the migration of the leukocytes through the pores of the filter and into the lower chamber [5,70]. Therefore, a reagent that blocks any one of these steps would be read out as blocking transmigration. For example, there are many reports that interfering with the function of β₂ integrins or VLA-4 on leukocytes, or their counter-receptors on endothelial cells, inhibits transmigration. However, the inhibition of transmigration seen in these cases was probably owing to the fact that these molecules mediate firm adhesion, the necessary prerequisite for transmigration. Blocking adhesion necessarily blocks transmigration [71]. In an assay that distinguishes the role for a molecule in adhesion versus transmigration, leukocyte integrins were found to have no specific role in diapedesis, only in adhesion to the apical surface [22,72]. In some cases, antibodies that blocked transmigration in a Transwell™ assay also blocked migration of the same leukocytes through bare Transwell™ filters [73,74]. Therefore, the effect of the antibody on transmigration probably reflected the effect on the ability of the leukocyte to move in general. By contrast, PECAM-1 and CD99 have no effect on adhesion of monocytes to the apical surface of endothelial cells or on migration in general [3,22] but act selectively in the borders between endothelial cells at the diapedesis step.

Another caveat regarding the roles of these molecules in transendothelial migration is that not all of them have yet been demonstrated to work *in vivo*. There is extensive literature on blocking PECAM *in vivo* [24–31]. The effect

of blocking JAM-A [49,53,54] and VE-cadherin [48] on inflammation has also been studied in murine models. However, although murine forms of JAM-B and JAM-C have been cloned, all of the published work has used *in vitro* systems. At this point, there are no reagents available to block murine CD99.

Another caveat is that *in vivo* the relative importance of the molecules we have discussed here could vary depending on the vascular bed, leukocyte type and inflammatory stimulus. It has been established that the inflammatory response to certain bacteria in the lung is independent of CD18 on the leukocyte [75–77]. Similarly, although blocking PECAM inhibits diapedesis of neutrophils and monocytes in most models tested, it does not seem to have a large role in the migration of lymphocytes [78], nor did it inhibit eosinophil migration in a murine model of asthma [79]. Neutrophils of PECAM-deficient mice in the cremaster muscle circulation will extravasate normally in response to an intrascrotal injection of TNF-α but are extensively blocked at the level of the subendothelial basement membrane if the injected cytokine is interleukin-1β (IL-1β) [80]. A monoclonal antibody against murine JAM-A blocked meningeal inflammation in a cytokine-induced model [53] but not when it was induced by *L. monocytogenes* or lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus [54]. These differences probably reflect the presence or absence of alternative adhesion molecules in those settings that are capable of carrying out the same step in diapedesis.

Diapedesis itself can be subdivided into at least two (and probably more) steps carried out sequentially by PECAM-1 and CD99. That is why blocking both molecules at the same time works better than blocking either one alone. A straightforward but important unanswered question is where, in relation to PECAM, CD99 and other molecules on the endothelial cell, do JAM-A and JAM-C have their effects? Do some of these molecules function in parallel pathways, enabling leukocytes to emigrate if the alternative is therapeutically blocked or genetically dysfunctional? There is precedence for this in the rolling and adhesion steps. It is only logical that there is more than one molecular pathway across the endothelial cells.

Concluding remarks

The fact that cell-adhesion molecules are far more than molecular glue has been appreciated for some time. However, the fact that cell-adhesion molecules concentrated in the intercellular junction have counterparts (in some cases the same molecule) on the leukocyte, and that they have major roles in diapedesis, has recently come to light. One long-term goal in this field is to identify how these molecules function in the process of diapedesis. Another is whether there are additional molecules awaiting discovery that mediate distinct steps in diapedesis that are intermediate or distal to those described here. With the recent awareness that several JAM molecules in the endothelial junction can have roles in this process and the discovery that PECAM (and probably other junctional molecules) traffic through the cell constitutively and during diapedesis, the next few years promise to yield

exciting new discoveries and insights into how diapedesis, and as a result how inflammation, is regulated.

**Acknowledgements**

I am supported by grants HL46849 and HL64774 from the National Institutes of Health. I wish to thank those scientists named in the legend to Table 1 for helping to formulate a new nomenclature for the JAM family of adhesion molecules.

**References**

1. Fox, A. and Harrison, L.C. (2000) Innate immunity and graft rejection. *Immunol. Rev.* 173, 141–147
2. Hoffmann, J. *et al.* (1999) Phylogenetic perspectives in innate immunity. *Science* 284, 1313–1318
3. Schenkel, A.R. *et al.* (2002) CD99 plays a major role in the migration of monocytes through endothelial junctions. *Nat. Immunol.* 3, 143–150
4. Feng, D. *et al.* (1998) Neutrophils emigrate from venules by a transendothelial cell pathway in response to fMLP. *J. Exp. Med.* 187, 903–915
5. Muller, W.A. (2001) Migration of leukocytes across endothelial junctions: some concepts and controversies. *Microcirculation* 8, 181–193
6. Dejana, E. *et al.* (1995) Endothelial cell-to-cell junctions. *FASEB J.* 9, 910–918
7. Huang, A.J. *et al.* (1988) Effects of human neutrophil chemotaxis across human endothelial cell monolayers on the permeability of these monolayers to ions and macromolecules. *J. Cell Physiol.* 135, 355–366
8. Huang, A.J. *et al.* (1993) Endothelial cell cytosolic free calcium regulates neutrophil migration across monolayers of endothelial cells. *J. Cell Biol.* 120, 1371–1380
9. Del Maschio, A. *et al.* (1996) Polymorphonuclear leukocyte adhesion triggers the disorganization of endothelial cell-to-cell adherens junctions. *J. Cell Biol.* 135, 497–510
10. Moll, T.E. *et al.* (1998) In vitro degradation of endothelial catenins by a neutrophil protease. *J. Cell Biol.* 140, 1
11. Allport, J.R. *et al.* (1997) Endothelial-dependent mechanisms regulate leukocyte transmigration: A process involving the proteasome and disruption of the vascular endothelial-cadherin complex and endothelial cell-to-cell junctions. *J. Exp. Med.* 186, 517–527
12. Burns, A.R. *et al.* (1997) Neutrophil transendothelial migration is independent of tight junctions and occurs preferentially at tricellular corners. *J. Immunol.* 159, 2893–2903
13. Burns, A.R. *et al.* (2000) Analysis of tight junctions during neutrophil transendothelial migration. *J. Cell Sci.* 113, 45–57
14. Burns, A.R. *et al.* (2001) Relationship between tight junctions and leukocyte transmigration. In *Tight Junctions* (Cereijido, M. and Anderson, J., eds) pp. 629–652, CRC Press
15. Shaw, S.K. *et al.* (2001) Real-time imaging of vascular endothelial-cadherin during transmigration across endothelium. *J. Immunol.* 167, 2323–2330
16. Allport, J.R. *et al.* (2000) Monocytes induce reversible focal changes in vascular endothelial cadherin complex during transendothelial migration under flow. *J. Cell Biol.* 148, 203–216
17. Gelin, C. *et al.* (1989) The E2 antigen, a 32 kd glycoprotein involved in T-cell adhesion processes, is the MIC2 gene product. *EMBO J.* 8, 3253–3259
18. Cunningham, S.A. *et al.* (2000) A novel protein with homology to the junctional adhesion molecule. Characterization of leukocyte interactions. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 34750–34756
19. Aurrand-Lions, M. *et al.* (2001) Heterogeneity of endothelial junctions is reflected by differential expression and specific subcellular localization of the three JAM family members. *Blood* 98, 3699–3707
20. Muller, W.A. *et al.* (1989) A human endothelial cell-restricted, externally disposed plasmalemmal protein enriched in intercellular junctions. *J. Exp. Med.* 170, 399–414
21. Newman, P.J. *et al.* (1990) PECAM-1 [CD31] cloning and relation to adhesion molecules of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily. *Science* 247, 1219–1222
22. Muller, W.A. *et al.* (1993) PECAM-1 is required for transendothelial migration of leukocytes. *J. Exp. Med.* 178, 449–460
23. Liao, F. *et al.* (1995) Migration of monocytes across endothelium and passage through extracellular matrix involve separate molecular domains of PECAM-1. *J. Exp. Med.* 182, 1337–1343
24. Bogen, S. *et al.* (1994) Monoclonal antibody to murine PECAM-1 (CD31) blocks acute inflammation in vivo. *J. Exp. Med.* 179, 1059–1064
25. Liao, F. *et al.* (1997) Soluble domain 1 of platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule (PECAM) is sufficient to block transendothelial migration in vitro and in vivo. *J. Exp. Med.* 185, 1349–1357
26. Vaporciyan, A.A. *et al.* (1993) Involvement of platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 in neutrophil recruitment in vivo. *Science* 262, 1580–1582
27. Christofidou-Solomidou, M. *et al.* (1997) Neutrophil platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 participates in neutrophil recruitment at inflammatory sites and is down-regulated after leukocyte extravasation. *J. Immunol.* 158, 4872–4878
28. Liao, F. *et al.* (1999) Transgenic mice expressing different levels of soluble platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-IgG display distinct inflammatory phenotypes. *J. Immunol.* 163, 5640–5648
29. Gumina, R.J. *et al.* (1996) Antibody to platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 reduces myocardial infarct size in a rat model of ischemia-reperfusion injury. *Circulation* 94, 3327–3333
30. Murohara, T. *et al.* (1996) Blockade of platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 protects against myocardial ischemia and reperfusion injury in cats. *J. Immunol.* 156, 3550–3557
31. Qing, Z. *et al.* (2001) Inhibition of antigen-specific T cell trafficking into the central nervous system via blocking PECAM1/CD31 molecule. *J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol.* 60, 798–807
32. Duncan, G.S. *et al.* (1999) Genetic evidence for functional redundancy of platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1): CD31-deficient mice reveal PECAM-1-dependent and PECAM-1-independent functions. *J. Immunol.* 162, 3022–3030
33. Dangerfield, J. *et al.* (2002) PECAM-1 (CD31) homophilic interaction up-regulates α6β1 on transmigrated neutrophils in vivo and plays a functional role in the ability of α6 integrins to mediate leukocyte migration through the perivascular basement membrane. *J. Exp. Med.* 196, 1201–1211
34. Wakelin, M.W. *et al.* (1996) An anti-platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 antibody inhibits leukocyte extravasation from mesenteric microvessels in vivo by blocking the passage through basement membrane. *J. Exp. Med.* 184, 229–239
35. Aubrit, F. *et al.* (1989) The biochemical characterization of E2, a T cell surface molecule involved in rosettes. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 19, 1431–1436
36. Bernard, G. *et al.* (1995) The E2 molecule (CD99) specifically triggers homotypic aggregation of CD4⁺ CD8⁺ thymocytes. *J. Immunol.* 154, 26–32
37. Bernard, A. (1997) CD99 workshop panel report. In *Leukocyte Typing VI In Proceedings of the VIth International Leukocyte Differentiation Antigen Workshop*, Kobe, Japan, 1996 (Kishimoto, T., ed.), pp. 75–77, Garland Publishers
38. Bernard, G. *et al.* (1997) Apoptosis of immature thymocytes mediated by E2/CD99. *J. Immunol.* 158, 2543–2550
39. Hahn, J-H. *et al.* (1997) CD99 (MIC2) regulates the LFA-1/ICAM-1-mediated adhesion of lymphocytes, and its gene encodes both positive and negative regulators of cellular adhesion. *J. Immunol.* 159, 2250–2258
40. Choi, E.Y. *et al.* (1998) Engagement of CD99 induces up-regulation of TCR and MHC class I and II molecules on the surface of human thymocytes. *J. Immunol.* 161, 749–754
41. Waclawieck, M. *et al.* (1998) CD99 engagement on human peripheral blood T cells results in TCR/CD3-dependent cellular activation and allows for Th1-restricted cytokine production. *J. Immunol.* 161, 4671–4678
42. Wingett, D. *et al.* (1999) A role for CD99 in T cell activation. *Cell. Immunol.* 193, 17–23
43. Bernard, G. *et al.* (2000) CD99 (E2) up-regulates α₄β₁-dependent T cell adhesion of inflamed vascular endothelium under flow conditions. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 30, 3061–3065
44. Lampugnani, M.G. *et al.* (1992) A novel endothelial-specific membrane protein is a marker of cell–cell contacts. *J. Cell Biol.* 118, 1511–1522
45. Ali, J. *et al.* (1997) Vascular endothelial cadherin (VE-Cadherin): cloning and role in endothelial cell–cell adhesion. *Microcirculation* 4, 267–277

http://treimm.trends.com

46 Navarro, P. *et al.* (1995) Catenin-dependent and independent functions of vascular endothelial cadherin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 30965–30972  
47 Breviario, F. *et al.* (1995) Functional properties of human vascular endothelial cell cadherin (7b4/cadherin-5), an endothelium-specific cadherin. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* 15, 1229–1239  
48 Gotsch, U. *et al.* (1997) VE-cadherin antibody accelerates neutrophil recruitment in vivo. *J. Cell Sci.* 110, 583–588  
49 Martin-Padura, I. *et al.* (1998) Junctional adhesion molecule, a novel member of the immunoglobulin superfamily that distributes at intercellular junctions and modulates monocyte transmigration. *J. Cell Biol.* 142, 117–127  
50 Williams, L.A. *et al.* (1999) Identification and characterization of human junctional adhesion molecule (JAM). *Mol. Immunol.* 36, 1175–1188  
51 Liu, Y. *et al.* (2000) Human junctional adhesion molecule regulates tight junction resealing in epithelia. *J. Cell Sci.* 113, 2363–2374  
52 Sobocka, M.B. *et al.* (2000) Cloning of the human platelet F11 receptor: a cell adhesion molecule member of the immunoglobulin superfamily involved in platelet aggregation. *Blood* 95, 2600–2609  
53 Del Maschio, A. *et al.* (1999) Leukocyte recruitment in the cerebrospinal fluid of mice with experimental meningitis is inhibited by an antibody to junctional adhesion molecule (JAM). *J. Exp. Med.* 190, 1351–1356  
54 Lechner, F. *et al.* (2000) Antibodies to the junctional adhesion molecule cause disruption of endothelial cells and do not prevent leukocyte influx into the meninges after viral or bacterial infection. *J. Infect. Dis.* 182, 978–982  
55 Ostermann, G. *et al.* (2002) JAM-1 is a ligand of the β₂ integrin LFA-1 involved in transendothelial migration of leukocytes. *Nat. Immunol.* 3, 151–158  
56 Ozaki, H. *et al.* (1999) Cutting edge: combined treatment of TNF-α and IFN-γ causes redistribution of junctional adhesion molecule in human endothelial cells. *J. Immunol.* 163, 553–557  
57 Palmeri, D. *et al.* (2000) Vascular endothelial junction-associated molecule, a novel member of the immunoglobulin superfamily, is localized to intercellular boundaries of endothelial cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 19139–19145  
58 Arrate, M.P. *et al.* (2001) Cloning of human junctional adhesion molecule 3 (JAM3) and its identification as the JAM2 counter-receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 45826–45832  
59 Liang, T.W. *et al.* (2002) Vascular endothelial-junctional adhesion molecule (VE-JAM)/JAM2 interacts with T, NK, and dendritic cells through JAM3. *J. Immunol.* 168, 1618–1626  
60 Cunningham, S.A. *et al.* (2002) JAM2 interacts with α4β1. Facilitation by JAM3. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 27589–27592  
61 Johnson-Leger, C. *et al.* (2002) Junctional adhesion molecule-2 (JAM-2) promotes lymphocyte transendothelial migration. *Blood* 100, 2479–2486  
62 Santoso, S. *et al.* (2002) The junctional adhesion molecule 3 (JAM-3) on human platelets is a counterreceptor for the leukocyte integrin Mac-1. *J. Exp. Med.* 196, 679–691  
63 Su, W-H. *et al.* (2000) Endothelial [Ca²⁺]i signaling during transmigration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes. *Blood* 96, 3816–3822  
64 Hixenbaugh, E.A. *et al.* (1997) Chemoattractant-stimulated neutrophils induce regulatory myosin light chain phosphorylation and isometric tension development in endothelial cells. *Am. J. Physiol.* 273, H981–H988  

65 Saito, H. *et al.* (1998) Endothelial myosin light chain kinase regulates neutrophil migration across human umbilical vein endothelial cell monolayer. *J. Immunol.* 161, 1533–1540  
66 Gautam, N. *et al.* (2000) Signaling via β₂ integrins triggers neutrophil-dependent alteration in endothelial barrier function. *J. Exp. Med.* 191, 1829–1839  
67 Gautam, N. *et al.* (2001) Heparin-binding protein (HBP/CAP37): a missing link in neutrophil-evoked alteration of vascular permeability. *Nat. Med.* 7, 1123–1127  
68 Lorenzon, P. *et al.* (1998) Endothelial cell E-and P-selectin and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 function as signaling receptors. *J. Cell Biol.* 142, 1381–1391  
69 Mamdouh, Z. *et al.* (2003) Targeted recycling of PECAM from endothelial cell surface-connected compartments during diapedesis. *Nature* 421, 748–753  
70 Muller, W.A. (1996) Transendothelial migration of leukocytes. In *Leukocyte Recruitment in Inflammatory Disease* (Peltz, G., ed.), pp. 3–18, R.G. Landis Company  
71 Muller, W.A. (1999) Leukocyte-endothelial cell adhesion molecules in transendothelial migration. In *Inflammation: Basic Principles and Clinical Correlates* (Gallin, J.I. and Snyderman, R., eds) pp. 585–592, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins  
72 Muller, W.A. and Weigl, S. (1992) Monocyte-selective transendothelial migration: dissection of the binding and transmigration phases by an in vitro assay. *J. Exp. Med.* 176, 819–828  
73 Cooper, D. *et al.* (1995) Transendothelial migration of neutrophils involves integrin-associated protein (CD47). *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 92, 3978–3982  
74 Parkos, C. *et al.* (1996) CD47 mediates post-adhesive events required for neutrophil migration across polarized intestinal epithelia. *J. Cell Biol.* 132, 437–450  
75 Hawkins, H.K. *et al.* (1992) Leukocyte adhesion deficiency: clinical and postmortem observations. *Pediatr. Pathol.* 12, 119–130  
76 Mizgerd, J.P. *et al.* (1997) Neutrophil emigration in the skin, lungs, and peritoneum: different requirements for CD11/CD18 revealed by CD18-deficient mice. *J. Exp. Med.* 186, 1357–1364  
77 Doerschuk, C.M. *et al.* (1990) CD18-dependent and -independent mechanisms of neutrophil emigration in the pulmonary and systemic microcirculation of rabbits. *J. Immunol.* 144, 2327–2333  
78 Bird, I.N. *et al.* (1993) Studies of lymphocyte transendothelial migration: analysis of migrated cell phenotypes with regard to CD31 (PECAM-1), CD45RA and CD45RO. *Immunology* 80, 553–560  
79 Miller, M. *et al.* (2001) Eosinophil tissue recruitment to sites of allergic inflammation in the lung is platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule independent. *J. Immunol.* 167, 2292–2297  
80 Thompson, R.D. *et al.* (2001) Platelet-endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1)-deficient mice demonstrate a transient and cytokine-specific role for PECAM-1 in leukocyte migration through the perivascular basement membrane. *Blood* 97, 1854–1860  
81 Aurrand-Lions, M. *et al.* (2000) Cloning of JAM-2 and JAM-3: an emerging junctional adhesion molecular family? *Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol.* 251, 91–98  
82 Aurrand-Lions, M. *et al.* (2001) JAM-2, a novel immunoglobulin superfamily molecule, expressed by endothelial and lymphatic cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 2733–2741  

Do you want to reproduce material from a Trends journal?

This publication and the individual contributions within it are protected by the copyright of Elsevier Science. Except as outlined in the terms and conditions (see p. ii), no part of any Trends journal can be reproduced, either in print or electronic form, without written permission from Elsevier Science. Please address any permission requests to:

Rights and Permissions,  
Elsevier Science Ltd,  
PO Box 800, Oxford, UK OX5 1DX.

http://treimm.trends.com
