
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY
© 2003 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

**Specificities of Three Distinct Human Chondroitin/Dermatan N-Acetylgalactosamine 4-O-Sulfotransferases Demonstrated Using Partially Desulfated Dermatan Sulfate as an Acceptor**

IMPLICATION OF DIFFERENTIAL ROLES IN DERMATAN SULFATE BIOSYNTHESIS*

Received for publication, June 9, 2003, and in revised form, July 3, 2003  
Published, JBC Papers in Press, July 7, 2003, DOI 10.1074/jbc.M306044200

Tadahisa Mikami‡, Shuji Mizumoto‡, Naohide Kago, Hiroshi Kitagawa, and Kazuyuki Sugahara§  
*From the Department of Biochemistry, Kobe Pharmaceutical University, Higashinada-ku, Kobe 658-8558, Japan*

---

4-O-Sulfation of GalNAc is a high frequency modification of chondroitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate (DS), and three major GalNAc 4-O-sulfotransferases including dermatan 4-O-sulfotransferase-1 (D4ST-1) and chondroitin 4-O-sulfotransferases-1 and -2 (C4ST-1 and -2) have been identified. 4-O-Sulfation of GalNAc during DS biosynthesis had long been postulated to be a prerequisite for iduronic acid (IdoUA) formation by C5-epimerization of GlcUA. This hypothesis has recently been argued based on enzymological studies using microsomes that C5-epimerization precedes 4-O-sulfation, which was further supported by the specificity of the cloned D4ST-1 with predominant preference for IdoUA-GalNAc flanked by GlcUA-GalNAc over IdoUA-GalNAc flanked by IdoUA-GalNAc in exhaustively desulfated dermatan. Whereas the counterproposal explains the initial reactions, apparently it cannot rationalize the synthetic mechanism of IdoUA-GalNAc(4-O-sulfate)-rich clusters typical of mature DS chains. In this study, we examined detailed specificities of the three recombinant human 4-O-sulfotransferases using partially desulfated DS as an acceptor. Enzymatic analysis of the transferase reaction products showed that D4ST-1 far more efficiently transferred sulfate to GalNAc residues in -IdoUA-GalNAc-IdoUA- than in -GlcUA-GalNAc-GlcUA- sequences. In contrast, C4ST-1 showed the opposite preference, and C4ST-2 used GalNAc residues in both sequences to comparable degrees, being consistent with its phylogenetic relations to D4ST-1 and C4ST-1. Structural analysis of the oligosaccharides, which were isolated after chondroitinase AC-I digestion of the ³⁵S-labeled transferase reaction products, revealed for the first time that D4ST-1, as compared with C4ST-1 and C4ST-2, most efficiently utilized GalNAc residues located not only in the sequence -IdoUA-GalNAc-IdoUA- but also in -GlcUA-GalNAc-IdoUA- and -IdoUA-GalNAc-GlcUA-. The isolated oligosaccharide structures also suggest that 4-O-sulfation promotes subsequent 4-O-sulfation of GalNAc in the neighboring disaccharide unit.

---

Dermatan sulfate (DS)¹ glycosaminoglycan chains are covalently bound to a variety of core proteins, forming various proteoglycans with widespread distribution in mammalian tissues (see Ref. 1 and references therein). DS proteoglycans are detected at cell surfaces in addition to extracellular matrices and intracellular storage granules of mast cells and macrophages (2), where they participate in various biological events including extracellular matrix assembly (3, 4), cell adhesion (5), migration (6–8), proliferation (9–11), neurite outgrowth (12, 13), wound repair (14, 15), and anticoagulant processes (16–18). Although biological activities of DS chains involved in these events are expressed through the interactions between DS proteoglycans and particular target molecules such as growth factors and heparin cofactor II, accumulating evidence suggests that some of the functions depend on DS glycosaminoglycan moieties rather than core proteins (4, 5, 11–13, 16, 17, 19–22).

DS glycosaminoglycan corresponds to a stereoisomeric form of chondroitin sulfate (CS) composed of the repeating disaccharide units containing GlcUA and GalNAc residue, with varying proportions of IdoUA in place of GlcUA. The general copolymeric hybrid structure tends to exhibit a periodic and wavelike distribution of GlcUA-containing disaccharide repeats and IdoUA-containing disaccharide repeats in a tissue-specific manner (23). The former region can be sulfated mainly at the C-4 or C-6 position of GalNAc residues. In addition, the C-2 or C-3 position of GlcUA residues may also be sulfated (24). In contrast, the latter region is largely sulfated at the C-4 position of GalNAc and contains occasional 6-O-sulfated GalNAc and 2-O-sulfated IdoUA residues (23).

In biosynthesis, the structural variability of CS/DS is generated under the control of multiple sulfotransferases and glucuronyl C5-epimerase converting GlcUA to IdoUA (for reviews,

---

* This work was supported in part by the Scientific Research Promotion Fund of the Japan Private School Promotion Foundation, by Grants-in-aid for Encouragement of Young Scientists 14771299 (to T. M.) and Scientific Research (B) 13470493 (to K. S.), and by the Sasagawa Scientific Research Grant from the Japan Science Society (to T. M.). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
* The nucleotide sequence(s) reported in this paper has been submitted to the GenBank™/EBI Data Bank with accession number(s) AB066595.
* ‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.
* § To whom correspondence should be addressed: Dept. of Biochemistry, Kobe Pharmaceutical University, 4-19-1 Motoyamakita-machi, Higashinada-ku, Kobe 658-8558, Japan. Tel.: 81-78-441-7570; Fax: 81-78-441-7569; E-mail: k-sugar@kobepharma-u.ac.jp.

---

1 The abbreviations used are: DS, dermatan sulfate; CS, chondroitin sulfate; C4ST, chondroitin 4-O-sulfotransferase; HNK-1ST, HNK-1 sulfotransferase; GalNAc4ST, N-acetylgalactosamine 4-O-sulfotransferase; PAPS, 3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate; ΔHexUA, 4,5-unsaturated hexuronic acid or 4-deoxy-α-L-three-hex-4-ene-pyrano-sulfuronic acid; ΔDi-0S, Δ⁴,⁵HexUAα1–3GalNAc; ΔDi-4S, Δ⁴,⁵HexUAα1–3GalNAc(4-O-sulfate); ΔDi-6S, Δ⁴,⁵HexUAα1–3GalNAc(6-O-sulfate); ΔDi-diS_D, Δ⁴,⁵HexUA(2-O-sulfate)α1–3GalNAc(6-O-sulfate); ΔDi-diS_E, Δ⁴,⁵HexUAα1–3GalNAc(4,6-O-disulfate); Di-triS, Δ⁴,⁵HexUA(2-O-sulfate)α1–3GalNAc(4,6-O-disulfate); EST, expressed sequence tag; HPLC, high performance liquid chromatography; DE MALDI-TOF, delayed extraction matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight; 4S, 4-O-sulfate; COSY, correlation spectroscopy; contig, group of overlapping clones.

This paper is available online at http://www.jbc.org

36116

Chondroitin/Dermatan GalNAc 4-O-Sulfotransferases

see Refs. 25–27). 4-O-Sulfation of GalNAc residues is a typical modification found in CS/DS at higher frequency and was once postulated to be a prerequisite for the adjacent IdoUA formation by glucuronyl C5-epimerase, and GalNAc 4-O-sulfotransferase(s) had been suggested to be a critical and rate-limiting factor during DS biosynthesis (28). However, it was recently demonstrated that human skin fibroblast microsomes exhibited GalNAc 4-O-sulfotransferase activity with a marked substrate preference to dermatan, chemically desulfated DS, rather than chondroitin (29), suggesting that C5-epimerization of GlcUA residues can precede 4-O-sulfation of GalNAc residues. Indeed, recent molecular cloning studies revealed that two chondroitin 4-O-sulfotransferases termed C4ST-1 and C4ST-2 also catalyzed the 4-O-sulfation of GalNAc in dermatan as well as in chondroitin (30–32). However, the detailed properties of C4STs and the precise spatial arrangement of IdoUA residues and 4-O-sulfation sites have not been investigated. In addition to C4ST-1 and C4ST-2, several other sulfotransferases that belong to the same HNK-1 sulfotransferase (HNK-1ST) family have also been cloned, although they catalyze different regioselective sulfations of other types of glycan chains: HNK-1ST, which facilitates 3-O-sulfation of a GlcUA residue in HNK-1 antigen precursor oligosaccharide chains of glycoproteins and/or glycolipids (33, 34), and N-acetylgalactosamine 4-O-sulfotransferases-1 and -2 (GalNAc4ST-1 and GalNAc4ST-2), which catalyze 4-O-sulfation at the nonreducing terminal GalNAc residues in the GalNAcβ1–4GlcNAcβ1-containing sequences in both N- and O-glycans (35–38).

In an attempt to identify additional sulfotransferase(s) by public data base searches, we found and identified another human GalNAc 4-O-sulfotransferase, which acted primarily on DS. During characterization of this enzyme, the cDNA and the catalytic activity of the identical gene product were reported, and the enzyme was designated as D4ST-1 (39). The acceptor specificity was also characterized to some extent using dermatan, nearly exhaustively desulfated DS, as an acceptor. In this study, we found that partially desulfated DS also serves as an excellent acceptor, which allowed us to investigate more detailed acceptor specificity toward the recognition sequences of D4ST-1 compared with those of C4ST-1 and -2.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES

Materials—³⁵S-Labeled 3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS) (1.69 mCi/mmol) was purchased from PerkinElmer Life Sciences. Unlabeled PAPS and GalNAc 4-O-sulfate were obtained from Sigma. The following sugars and enzymes were purchased from Seikagaku Corp. (Tokyo, Japan): chondroitin (a chemically desulfated derivative of whale cartilage CS-A); various CS preparations including CS-A, CS-B (porcine skin DS), CS-C, CS-D, and CS-E; six unsaturated standard disaccharides derived from CS (*i.e.* ΔDi-0S, ΔDi-4S, ΔDi-6S, ΔDi-diS<sub>D</sub>, ΔDi-diS<sub>E</sub>, and ΔDi-triS); conventional and highly purified (protease-free) chondroitinase ABC (EC 4.2.2.4) from *Proteus vulgaris*; chondroitinase AC-I (EC 4.2.2.5) from *Flavobacterium heparinum*; and chondroitinase B (EC 4.2.2) from *F. heparinum*. A Superdex™ peptide HR10/30 column was obtained from Amersham Biosciences. Partially desulfated DS preparations were prepared by solvolysis with dimethyl sulfoxide (40) for varying time periods using porcine skin DS, which contains ~90% and less than 1% 4-O-sulfated and nonsulfated disaccharide units, respectively. The disaccharide composition analysis by chondroitinase ABC digestion of the preparations, which were obtained after 1, 2.5, 5, 7, or 12 h of solvolysis, showed that they contained 4-O-sulfated disaccharide units at 80, 50, 31, 21, and 0.6%, respectively. For most assays, the preparation that contained 4-O-sulfated disaccharide units at 31% was used. The *K*<sub>m</sub> values of D4ST-1 for this partially desulfated DS and the exhaustively desulfated dermatan were 11 and 13 μg/ml, respectively.

Cloning of D4ST-1 cDNA—A TBLASTN search of the human EST data base at GenBank™ using the query sequence of human C4ST-1 (31, 32) retrieved a human EST (GenBank™ accession number R50932) corresponding to the IMAGE Consortium cDNA clone ID number 37420, which was obtained from Genome System, Inc. (St. Louis, MO).

The insert cDNA was sequenced and consisted of a partial open reading frame with significant sequence similarity to human C4ST-1, followed by a 3′-untranslated region containing a potential polyadenylation signal. Further BLASTN searches against a human genome data base using the obtained EST sequence as a query identified a human genomic clone (GenBank™ accession number AC013356) including one contig with 100% identity to the EST sequence. The genomic sequence was analyzed using a gene prediction program, GENSCAN (41), and the predicted complete coding sequence was obtained. The putative complete open reading frame encoding a putative sulfotransferase was amplified from human placenta cDNA library (λgt10) (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA, USA) by two-round PCR using specific primer sets corresponding to the 5′- and 3′-noncoding regions, based on the human genomic clone sequence. The first PCR was performed with a forward primer, 5′-CAA CTA CCC CCG GTC CCA GA-3′, and a reverse primer, 5′-CAT CCA GGA TCC TGA GAA GC-3′, followed by nested PCR with nested primers: a forward primer, 5′-ACC CCT TGA GCA CCA TGT TCC-3′, and a reverse primer, 5′-AGC TGG CGT TGA AAC CAG TC-3′. Each PCR was carried out with KOD-Plus (TOYOBO, Tokyo) in the presence of 5% (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide by 30 cycles at 94 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 42 s, and 68 °C for 2.5 min. The amplified cDNA fragment of an expected size (~1.1 kbp) was subcloned into a pGEM®-T Easy vector (Promega, Tokyo) and sequenced in a 377 DNA sequencer (PerkinElmer Life Sciences), which identified the clone as the recently reported D4ST-1 (39). The additional 5′-noncoding sequence was also amplified using a human placenta cDNA library as a template by PCR with a gene-specific reverse primer and a gt10 insert screen amplimer (Clontech).

Construction of Expression Vectors Encoding Soluble Forms of Sulfotransferases—The cDNA encoding a truncated form of D4ST-1 lacking the first NH<sub>2</sub>-terminal 62 amino acid residues was amplified by PCR with the pGEM®-T Easy vector containing the full coding sequence of the protein using a 5′ primer containing an in-frame *Bam*HI site (5′-GCG GAT CCG GCA TCC TGG CCG AGA TG-3′) and a 3′ primer containing a *Bam*HI site located 27 bp downstream from the stop codon (5′-GCG GAT CCG GCG TTG AAA CCA GTC CC-3′). PCR was carried out with *Pfu* polymerase (Promega) by 30 cycles at 95 °C for 42 s, 65 °C for 42 s, and 72 °C for 3.5 min. The PCR products of the expected size were digested with *Bam*HI, cloned into the *Bam*HI site of an expression vector, pEF-BOS/IP (42), and sequenced. The resultant vector contained the cDNA encoding a fusion protein that had an NH<sub>2</sub>-terminal cleavable insulin leader peptide and a protein A IgG-binding domain followed by a truncated form of D4ST-1.

Likewise, other expression constructs of the following sulfotransferases were designed to exclude the membrane-spanning segment and to include the stem region of the longest possible size. In the case of C4ST-1 (31, 32), the cDNA fragment encoding a truncated form of the protein, lacking the NH<sub>2</sub>-terminal first 57 amino acid residues, which contained a putative proteolytic cleavage site in mouse C4ST-1 (30), was amplified by PCR using a human placenta cDNA library (Clontech) as the template with a 5′ primer containing an in-frame *Bam*HI site (5′-CGG GAT CCC TGC AGG AAC TCT ACA AC-3′) and a 3′ primer corresponding to 16 bp downstream from the stop codon (5′-CGG GAT CCT AAA AAG CAT GAT TCT CTC-3′).

In the case of human C4ST-2 (31), the cDNA encoding a truncated form of the protein, lacking the NH<sub>2</sub>-terminal first 76 amino acid residues, was amplified by PCR using the EST clone (GenBank™ accession number AA182540, IMAGE Consortium cDNA clone, ID number 613430) obtained from Genome System, Inc. as the template with a 5′ primer containing an in-frame *Bam*HI site (5′-CGG GAT CCG GCG TGA AGC AGA GCG AC-3′) and a 3′ primer corresponding to 21 bp downstream from the stop codon (5′-CGG GAT CCC GTC AGG TTC CAG GCA CG-3′).

Expression of the Soluble Forms of the Recombinant Sulfotransferases—Each expression plasmid (6.7 μg) was transfected into COS-1 cells in 100-mm plates using FuGENE™6 (Roche Applied Science) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Two days after transfection, a 1-ml aliquot of the culture medium was incubated with 10 μl of IgG-Sepharose beads (Amersham Biosciences) for 1 h at 4 °C. The enzyme-bound beads were washed with and resuspended in each assay buffer described below and used as enzyme sources for sulfotransferase assays.

Sulfotransferase activities toward CS/DS variants were assayed by the method described previously (43) with slight modifications. Briefly, the standard reaction mixture (60 μl) contained 10 μl of the resuspended beads, 50 mM imidazole-HCl, pH 6.8, 2 mM dithiothreitol, 10 μM [³⁵S]PAPS (~1 or 3 × 10⁵ dpm), and an acceptor polysaccharide preparation (10 nmol as GlcUA). The reaction mixtures were incubated at

Chondroitin/Dermatan GalNAc 4-O-Sulfotransferases

37°C for 1 h and subjected to gel filtration using a syringe column packed with Sephadex G-25 (superfine) (44). \[^{35}S\]Sulfate incorporation into polysaccharides was quantified by determination of the radioactivity in the flow-through fractions by liquid scintillation counting.

**Identification of the Transferase Reaction Products—** The \[^{35}S\]-labeled chondroitin and partially desulfated DS were isolated by gel filtration as described above, dried, and subjected to exhaustive digestion with chondroitinase ABC, AC-I, or B (45). The digest was analyzed by anion exchange HPLC on an amine-bound silica PA03 column (46) or by gel filtration on a Superdex™ Peptide column (Amersham Biosciences) equilibrated with 0.2 M NH₄HCO₃ (47) as described previously. Chondro-4-O-sulfatase digestion was conducted as previously reported (48).

A large scale D4ST-1 reaction product, required for a detailed analysis of the sulfation sites, was prepared using partially desulfated DS (8 μmol as GlcUA) as an acceptor. The reaction sample was exhaustively digested with chondroitinase AC-I, and the digest was fractionated by gel filtration on a Superdex™ Peptide column as described above. Radioactive fractions corresponding to tetra- and hexasaccharides were pooled and further fractionated by anion exchange HPLC on an amine-bound silica column as described above. Eluates were monitored by absorption at 232 nm. Each radioactive tetra- or hexasaccharide fraction was pooled and desalted through a column (0.8 × 57 cm) of Sephadex G-25 (fine) (Amersham Biosciences). The disaccharide composition of each isolated fraction was determined by HPLC analysis of the chondroitinase ABC digest. Digestion of the isolated hexasaccharide fractions with a highly purified chondroitinase ABC preparation was carried out as described previously (49).

**Delayed Extraction Matrix-assisted Laser Desorption Time-of-flight (DE MALDI-TOF) Mass Spectrometry—** DE MALDI-TOF mass spectra in the positive ion mode of the isolated tetra- and hexasaccharide fractions were recorded in the linear mode in a Voyager DE-RP/Pro (PerSeptive Biosystems, Framingham, MA) (50). Each oligosaccharide fraction (30 pmol) was mixed with a small volume of an aqueous solution (10 mg/ml) of a matrix, 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid. An aliquot (1 μl) of this sample-matrix mixture was placed on the sample plate well, dried under an air stream, and analyzed.

**500-MHz \({ }^{1} \mathrm{H}\) NMR—** The isolated oligosaccharide fractions for NMR analysis were repeatedly exchanged in \({ }^{2} \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}\) with intermittent lyophilization. The 500-MHz \({ }^{1} \mathrm{H}\) NMR spectra of the oligosaccharide fractions 4-III and 6-II were recorded in a Varian VXR-500 spectrometer at a probe temperature of \(26^{\circ} \mathrm{C}\) as reported previously (45, 51, 52). Chemical shifts are given relative to sodium 4,4-dimethyl-4-silapentane-1-sulfonate but were actually measured indirectly relative to acetone (δ 2.225) in \({ }^{2} \mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{O}\) (53).

---

**RESULTS**

**Evolutionary Relations of Chondroitin/Dermatan 4-O-Sulfotransferases—** A TBLASTN search, using the catalytic domain of a previously cloned human C4ST-1 (31, 32), showed two human cDNAs encoding putative sulfotransferases with PAPS binding motifs (54) and a type II transmembrane topology. The deduced amino acid sequence of one of the two cDNAs (GenBank™ accession number AB066595) was identical to D4ST-1, which catalyzes preferentially 4-O-sulfation of GalNAc residues in dermatan rather than chondroitin (39). It showed a significant homology to the HNK-1ST family members of human origin (C4ST-1 (31, 32), C4ST-2 (31), GalNAc4ST-1 (35, 36, 38), GalNAc4ST-2 (37, 38), and HNK-1ST (34)) and is the sixth family member. The other cDNA also shared significant sequence identities and structural similarities with the same family members and was identified as chondroitin 4-O-sulfotransferase-3 (C4ST-3) recently reported as the seventh member (55). As shown in Fig. 1, the evolutionary relations of these gene products showed that D4ST-1 was the closest to C4ST-2, and C4ST-3 was most similar to C4ST-1, suggesting that the sulfotransferases responsible for 4-O-sulfation of CS/DS should be categorized as a “CS/DS 4-O-sulfotransferase subfamily.”

**Differential Preferences of D4ST-1, C4ST-1, and C4ST-2 toward Chondroitin and Partially Desulfated DS—** To facilitate the functional analysis of D4ST-1, a soluble form of the protein was generated by replacing the first 62 amino acids with a cleavable insulin signal sequence and a protein A IgG-binding domain as described under “Experimental Procedures,” and

FIG. 1. The apparent evolutionary relations of seven HNK-1ST family members. The predicted amino acid sequences of seven HNK-1ST family members are compared using the GENETYX-MAC (version 10) software. The length of each horizontal line is proportional to the degree of the amino acid sequence divergence.

TABLE I

Comparison of acceptor specificity of D4ST-1, C4ST-1, and C4ST-2

The recombinant D4ST-1, C4ST-1, C4ST-2, and C4ST-3 were assayed using each of various GAG polysaccharides as the acceptor (10 nmol as GlcUA) under the reaction conditions described under “Experimental Procedures.” The reaction products were separated from \[^{35} \mathrm{~S}\]PAPS by gel filtration on a syringe column packed with Sephadex G-25 (superfine). The radioactivity was measured by liquid scintillation counting.

| Acceptor           | Activity\(a,b\) |
|--------------------|------------------|
|                    | D4ST-1           | C4ST-1          | C4ST-2          | C4ST-3          |
|                    | pmol/ml medium/h |                |                |                |
| Chondroitin        | 58               | 609             | 55              | <1\(c\)         |
| Partially desulfated DS | 748             | 206             | 84              | <1\(c\)         |
| CS-A              | <1               | 81              | 6               | <1              |
| CS-B\(d\)         | 17               | 12              | 2               | <1              |
| CS-C              | <1               | 54              | 8               | <1              |
| CS-D              | <1               | 81              | 18              | <1              |
| CS-E              | <1               | <1              | <1              | <1              |

\(a\) The values represent the averages of two independent experiments.  
\(b\) No detectable sulfotransferase activities were detected towards CS/DS variants tested when the vector-control was used as an enzyme source.  
\(c\) When sulfotransferase activity of C4ST-3 was assessed at \(28^{\circ} \mathrm{C}\) as reported previously (55) for 12 h, the appreciable incorporation of sulfate into chondroitin (4.7 pmol) and partially desulfated DS (2.9 pmol), respectively, was detected. Under the same conditions, negligible activities were detected toward natural CS variants A-E.  
\(d\) Porcine skin DS.

then the soluble chimeric sulfotransferase was transiently expressed in COS-1 cells. The recombinant enzyme secreted into the culture medium was adsorbed to IgG-Sepharose beads for elimination of endogenous sulfotransferases, and then the enzyme-bound beads were used for enzyme assays.

In view of its evolutionary relation to the CS/DS 4-O-sulfotransferase subfamily members (Fig. 1), sulfotransferase activity of the purified fusion protein was examined using various CS/DS acceptor substrates. As shown in Table I, the enzyme preferentially transferred \[^{35} \mathrm{~S}\]sulfate from \[^{35} \mathrm{~S}\]PAPS to partially desulfated DS, chondroitin, and DS. The sulfate incorporation into partially desulfated DS was ~10-fold greater than that into chondroitin, with negligible activity toward several CS variants. The activities toward partially desulfated DS preparations, which contained 4-O-sulfated disaccharide units at 21, 31, or 50%, were comparable (±15%) with that toward exhaustively desulfated DS, when measured at an acceptor concentration of 10 μg/ml, whereas the activities toward less desulfated DS containing 4-O-sulfated disaccharide units at 80% were significantly (30–50%) lower than that toward exhaustively desulfated DS (data not shown). Therefore, subsequent assays were carried out using the partially desulfated DS

Chondroitin/Dermatan GalNAc 4-O-Sulfotransferases

**FIG. 2.** Gel filtration chromatographic analysis of $^{35}$S-labeled sulfotransferase reaction products prepared using three different sulfotransferases as enzyme sources and partially desulfated DS as the sulfate acceptor. An aliquot of $^{35}$S-labeled sulfotransferase reaction products, prepared using D4ST-1 (A and B), C4ST-1 (C and D), or C4ST-2 (E and F) with partially desulfated DS as the sulfate acceptor, was digested with chondroitinase AC-I (A, C, and E) or chondroitinase B (B, D, and F). One-half of each digest was analyzed by gel filtration on a Superdex™ Peptide column as described under "Experimental Procedures." The broken line in A indicates the elution profile of the intact $^{35}$S-labeled sulfotransferase reaction products obtained with D4ST-1 and partially desulfated DS. The vertical lines at the top of each panel indicate the elution positions of standard even-numbered oligosaccharides derived from porcine skin DS or GalNAc 4-O-sulfate: 1, octasaccharides; 2, hexasaccharides; 3, tetrasaccharides; 4, disaccharides; 5, GalNAc 4-O-sulfate.

containing 4-O-sulfated units at 31%. No detectable sulfotransferase activity was observed when a control sample prepared from the pEF-BOS/IP expression vector-transfected cells was used as an enzyme source.

We also examined sulfotransferase activities of C4ST-1 and C4ST-2 toward a series of CS/DS substrates using truncated forms of recombinant C4ST-1 and C4ST-2 under the same assay conditions as those for D4ST-1 for comparison. As shown in Table I, a soluble form of the recombinant C4ST-1 efficiently transferred sulfate to both chondroitin and partially desulfated DS with ~2-fold greater incorporation into the former than into the latter with far less activity toward other CS variants. Although a soluble form of C4ST-2 exhibited lower activity compared with D4ST-1 and C4ST-1, it also exhibited appreciable activity toward CS variants in addition to partially desulfated DS as in the case of C4ST-1. A soluble form of C4ST-3 showed negligible activity toward all the tested acceptors when compared with the other enzymes in our assay system (Table I). However, when assayed at 28°C as reported previously (55), appreciable activities could be detected with chondroitin and

**Fraction numbers**

**FIG. 3.** Anion exchange HPLC analysis of $^{35}$S-labeled sulfotransferase reaction products prepared using three different sulfotransferases as enzyme sources and partially desulfated DS as the sulfate acceptor. An aliquot of $^{35}$S-labeled sulfotransferase reaction products, prepared using D4ST-1 (A and B), C4ST-1 (C and D), or C4ST-2 (E and F) with partially desulfated DS as the sulfate acceptor, was digested with chondroitinase AC-I (A, C, and E) or chondroitinase B (B, D, and F). One-half of each digest was analyzed by anion exchange HPLC on an amine-bound silica PA03 column using a linear NaH₂PO₄ gradient from 16 to 530 mM over a 60-min period. The vertical lines indicate the elution positions of authentic unsaturated disaccharides: 1, ΔDi-0S; 2, ΔDi-6S; 3, ΔDi-4S; 4, ΔDi-diS_D; 5, ΔDi-diS_E; 6, ΔDi-triS.

**[35S]Radioactivity (dpm x 10⁻³)**

| Retention time (min) |

**FIG. 4.** Comparison of sulfation sites within partially desulfated DS chains by D4ST-1, C4ST-1, and C4ST-2. The trisaccharide sequences, -GlcUAβ1-3GalNAcβ1-4GlcUA- (open bar) and -IdoUAα1-3GalNAcβ1-4IdoUA- (solid bar), which served as 4-O-sulfation sites within partially desulfated DS chains upon incubation with D4ST-1, C4ST-1, or C4ST-2, were individually quantified by digestions using chondroitinase AC-I or B, respectively, followed by HPLC determination of $^{35}$S-labeled ΔDi-4S as shown in Figs. 2 and 3.

partially desulfated DS but not with other CS variants (see Footnote c for Table I). Due to the extremely low activity near the detection limit, further characterization of the substrate specificity of C4ST-3 was not carried out.

**[35S]Sulfate incorporation (% of total radioactivity)**

| D4ST-1 | C4ST-1 | C4ST-2 |

Chondroitin/Dermatan GalNAc 4-O-Sulfotransferases

**FIG. 5. Subfractionation of the tetra- and hexasaccharide fractions by anion exchange HPLC.** The ${}^{35}$S-labeled sulfotransferase reaction products, which were obtained on a large scale using D4ST-1 and partially desulfated DS as the acceptor, were digested with chondroitinase AC-I and fractionated by gel filtration as described in the legend to Fig. 2. The tetra- (A) and hexasaccharide (B) fractions obtained by size fractionation were individually chromatographed on an amine-bound silica PA-03 column using a linear salt gradient, as indicated by the dashed line. Vertical lines indicate the elution positions of the authentic unsaturated CS disaccharides as described in the legend to Fig. 3.

**4-O-Sulfation Sites within DS—To further distinguish the acceptor specificity of D4ST-1 from those of C4ST-1 and C4ST-2, an aliquot of ${}^{35}$S-labeled reaction products, which were obtained by incubation of a truncated form of D4ST-1, C4ST-1, or C4ST-2 with partially desulfated DS, was structurally characterized.** The ${}^{35}$S-labeled products, obtained from each transferase reaction, were digested exhaustively with either chondroitinase AC-I or chondroitinase B, which cleaves GalNAcβ1–4GlcUA linkages or GalNAcβ1–4IdoUA linkages, respectively. It should be noted that the sulfation of GalNAc residues flanking a target IdoUA residue is essential for the action of chondroitinase B (45, 56), although chondroitinase AC-I reactions are not much influenced by the sulfation pattern of neighboring sugar residues (58). One-half of each digest was analyzed by gel filtration (Fig. 2) or anion exchange HPLC (Fig. 3).

The gel filtration chromatograms revealed that the depolymerized ${}^{35}$S-labeled products eluted at positions corresponding to disaccharides, tetrasaccharides, hexasaccharides, and larger oligosaccharides (Fig. 2). The integrated radioactivity of each disaccharide peak (Fig. 2, A–F) observed on gel filtration was in good agreement with that of ΔDi-4S detected by anion exchange HPLC using the other half of each lyase digest (Fig. 3, A–F), demonstrating that ${}^{35}$S-labeled ΔDi-4S was released from –GlcUA-GalNAc(4S)-GlcUA– or –IdoUA-GalNAc(4S)-IdoUA– sequence by chondroitinase AC-I or chondroitinase B digestion, respectively (4S represents 4-O-sulfate).

In the analysis of radiolabeled products from the D4ST-1

**FIG. 6. DE MALDI-TOF mass spectra of fractions 4-III and 6-II.** Representative DE MALDI-TOF mass spectra of fractions 4-III (A) and 6-II (B) were recorded in a positive ion mode with 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid as the matrix. Major molecular ion signals were assigned as summarized in Table II.

reaction, only a small proportion (8%) of the total radioactivity was detected at the position of ΔDi-4S for the chondroitinase AC-I digest, whereas as much as 32% of the total radioactivity was identified as ΔDi-4S for the chondroitinase B digest (Fig. 2, A and B), suggesting the strong preference of D4ST-1 for the sequence –IdoUA-GalNAc(4S)-IdoUA– over –GlcUA-GalNAc(4S)-GlcUA–. In contrast, chondroitinase AC-I or B digestion of the ${}^{35}$S-labeled products from the C4ST-1 reaction gave rise to the radiolabeled ΔDi-4S, which accounted for 50 or 2% of the total radioactivity, respectively (Fig. 2, C and D), suggesting the marked preference of C4ST-1 for the sequence –GlcUA-GalNAc(4S)-GlcUA– over –IdoUA-GalNAc(4S)-IdoUA–. Interestingly, in the case of the C4ST-2 reaction products, comparable proportions of radioactivity (nearly 20–25% of the total) were recovered as ΔDi-4S after digestion with chondroitinase AC-I or B (Fig. 2, E and F). These results are summarized in Fig. 4, which revealed marked differences among the three sulfotransferases in terms of the preference for the isomeric structures of the uronic acids flanking the target GalNAc residue. C4ST-1 showed a marked preference for GalNAc residues in the GlcUA-rich regions typical of CS, which are also dispersed in DS chains, being consistent with previous findings (30–32). In contrast, D4ST-1 was found to utilize mainly GalNAc residues in the IdoUA-rich repeating region. C4ST-2, whose substrate preference was not fully characterized previously (31), catalyzes the sulfation of GalNAc residues in the IdoUA-rich region in addition to those in the GlcUA-rich regions.

**Structural Determination of the Tetra- and Hexasaccharides Generated from D4ST-1 Reaction Products—Gel filtration analysis of the exhaustive chondroitinase AC-I digest of D4ST-1, C4ST-1, or C4ST-2 sulfotransferase reaction products showed several radioactive peaks including tetrasaccharides, hexasaccharides, octasaccharides, and higher oligosaccharides in addition to disaccharides (Fig. 2, A, C, and E). These oligosaccharides were generated most likely from the oligosaccharide sequences containing two, three, four, or more consecutive

Chondroitin/Dermatan GalNAc 4-O-Sulfotransferases

TABLE III  
Disaccharide composition of the isolated oligosaccharides derived  
from the D4ST-1 reaction products  

After digestion of each oligosaccharide fraction with chondroitinase ABC, the reaction products were analyzed by anion exchange HPLC (46).

| Fraction | Composition | % molar proportion$^a$ |
|----------|-------------|------------------------|
|          | ΔDi-0S      | ΔDi-4S                 |
| 4-III    | ΔHexUA$_1$HexUA$_1$HexNAc$_2$(OSO$_3$H) | 102           | 102                    |
| 4-V      | ΔHexUA$_1$HexUA$_1$HexNAc$_2$(OSO$_3$H) | ND$^b$        | 204                    |
| 6-I      | ΔHexUA$_1$HexUA$_2$HexNAc$_3$(OSO$_3$H) | 269           | 135                    |
| 6-II     | ΔHexUA$_1$HexUA$_2$HexNAc$_3$(OSO$_3$H) | 133           | 276                    |
| 6-III    | ΔHexUA$_1$HexUA$_2$HexNAc$_3$(OSO$_3$H) | 123           | 262                    |
| 6-IV     | ΔHexUA$_1$HexUA$_2$HexNAc$_3$(OSO$_3$H) | ND            | 415                    |

$a$ Recoveries of the disaccharides relative to each parent oligosaccharide were calculated based on absorption at 232 nm.  
$b$ ND, not detected.

Chondroitin/Dermatan GalNAc 4-O-Sulfotransferases

A
4     3     2     1
ΔHexUA-GalNAc-IdoUA-GalNAc
anomeric protons
ΔHexUA-4
H-4
1α4
2α2β
GalNAc-1α
H-4
GalNAc-1α
H-2
GalNAc-3
IdoUA-2
H-4
NAc
31
x 0.24
5.8    5.2    5.0    4.8    4.6    4.4    4.2    4.0    3.8    3.6    2.0
(ppm)

FIG. 7. Structural-reporter-group regions of one-dimensional 500-MHz <sup>1</sup>H NMR spectra of fractions 4-III (A) and 6-II (B) recorded in <sup>2</sup>H<sub>2</sub>O at 26 °C. The numbers and letters in the spectra refer to the corresponding sugar residues in the structures.

B
6     5     4     3     2     1
ΔHexUA-GalNAc-IdoUA-GalNAc-IdoUA-GalNAc
anomeric protons
ΔHexUA-6
H-4
1α6
2α42β
35
GalNAc-3
H-4
GalNAc-1α
H-4
GalNAc-1α
H-2
GalNAc-5
H-4
NAc
3,5
IdoUA-2,-4
H-2
x 0.24
5.8    5.2    5.0    4.8    4.6    4.4    4.2    4.0    3.8    3.6    2.0
(ppm)

The digestion of fractions 4-V and 6-IV with chondroitinase ABC gave a single peak at the elution position of ΔDi-4S (Table III). Based on these and the results from the DE MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry analysis (Table II), the following structures are proposed as the major compounds in fractions 4-V and 6-IV, respectively: fraction 4-V, ΔHexUAα1–3GalNAc(4S)β1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc(4S); fraction 6-IV, ΔHexUAα1–3GalNAc(4S)β1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc(4S)β1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc(4S).

The digestion of fraction 4-III or 6-II with chondroitinase ABC gave two major products, ΔDi-0S and ΔDi-4S, in a molar ratio of 1.0:1.0 or 1.0:2.1, respectively, as determined by HPLC (Table III). Hence, fractions 4-III and 6-II contained monosulfated tetrasaccharide and disulfated hexasaccharide, respectively, as major components, being consistent with the results from the DE MALDI-TOF analysis. The oligosaccharide fractions 4-III and 6-II were then analyzed using 500-MHz <sup>1</sup>H NMR spectroscopy. The one-dimensional and two-dimensional correlation spectroscopy (COSY) spectra of these fractions (4-III and 6-II) are depicted in Figs. 7 and 8, respectively. The proton chemical shifts were assigned by the analysis of the two-dimensional COSY spectra. These NMR findings are summarized in Table IV.

The chemical shifts of most of the protons of the tetrasaccharide in fraction 4-III and the hexasaccharide in fraction 6-II were identical with those reported for the corresponding protons of analogous tetra- and hexasaccharides (52). All of the internal uronic acid residue(s) of the oligosaccharides in fractions 4-III and 6-II were confirmed as IdoUA residues based upon the chemical shifts (δ 4.926 and 4.881 for fraction 4-III; δ 4.911, 4.867, and 4.881 for fraction 6-II) and the coupling constants $J_{1,2}$ (2.5 and 2.0 Hz for fraction 4-I; 3.5, 3.5, and 3.5 Hz for fraction 6-II) of the anomeric proton signals. The coupling constants $J_{1,2}$ of αIdoUA and βGlcUA of CS/DS have been reported to be 3.0 and 8.0 Hz, respectively (59, 60). Compared with the proton chemical shifts reported for the reference compound, ΔHexUAα1–3GalNAc(4S)β1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc(4S) (52), a large upfield shift of H-4 of GalNAc-3 (Δ0.534 ppm) was observed on NMR of fraction 4-I, suggesting that the GalNAc-1 was 4-O-sulfated, whereas the C-4 position of the GalNAc-3 residue was not. Likewise, compared with the proton chemical shifts reported for the reference compound, ΔHexUAα1–

36122

Chondroitin/Dermatan GalNAc 4-O-Sulfotransferases

(ppm)

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 3.2 | A |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 3.4 |  |  |  |  |  | GalNAc-3 | IdoUA-2 |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | H-2/3 | H-2/3 |  |  |  |
| 3.6 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 3.8 |  |  |  |  | IdoUA-2, GalNAc-3 |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | H-3/4 |  |  |  |  |
| 4.0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 4.2 |  |  |  |  | GalNAc-1α |  |  | ΔHexUA-4 |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | H-2/3 |  |  | H-2/3 |  |
| 4.4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 4.6 |  |  |  |  | GalNAc-1α |  | GalNAc-3 |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | H-3/4 |  | H-1/2 |  |  |
| 4.8 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 5.0 |  |  |  |  | GalNAc-1α |  |  | IdoUA-2β |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | H-2/3 |  |  | H-1/2 |  |
| 5.2 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 5.4 |  |  |  |  | GalNAc-1α |  | ΔHexUA-4 |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | H-1/2 |  | H-1/2 |  |  |
| 5.6 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 5.8 |  |  |  |  |  |  | ΔHexUA-4 |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  | H-3/4 |  |  |
| 6.0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

6.0 5.8 5.6 5.4 5.2 5.0 4.8 4.6 4.4 4.2 4.0 3.8 3.6 3.4 3.2 (ppm)

(ppm)

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 3.2 | B |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 3.4 |  |  |  |  |  |  | IdoUA-2,-4 |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  | H-2/3 | H-2/3 |  |  |
| 3.6 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 3.8 |  |  |  |  | IdoUA-2,-4 | GalNAc-3 |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | H-3/4 | H-2/3 |  |  |  |
| 4.0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 4.2 |  |  |  |  | GalNAc-1α |  |  | GalNAc-5 |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | H-2/3 |  |  | H-2/3 |  |
| 4.4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 4.6 |  |  |  |  | GalNAc-1α |  | GalNAc-5 |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | H-3/4 |  | H-1/2 |  |  |
| 4.8 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 5.0 |  |  |  |  | GalNAc-1α |  | IdoUA-2α,-2β,-4 |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | H-1/2 |  | H-1/2 |  |  |
| 5.2 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 5.4 |  |  |  |  |  |  | ΔHexUA-6 |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  | H-1/2 |  |  |
| 5.6 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 5.8 |  |  |  |  |  |  | ΔHexUA-6 |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  | H-3/4 |  |  |
| 6.0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 6.2 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

6.2 6.0 5.8 5.6 5.4 5.2 5.0 4.8 4.6 4.4 4.2 4.0 3.8 3.6 3.4 3.2 (ppm)

FIG. 8. Two-dimensional COSY spectra of fractions 4-III and 6-II recorded in $^{2}$H$_{2}$O at 26 °C. The numbers and letters in the spectra refer to the corresponding sugar residues in the structures. A, two-dimensional COSY spectra of fraction 4-III; B, two-dimensional COSY spectra of fraction 6-II.

suggested that fraction 6-I and 6-III contained mono- and disulfated hexasaccharides, respectively, as major components. Further enzymatic characterization of these fractions was carried out using a highly purified preparation of chondroitinase ABC, which exerts an exolytic action when acting on CS hexasaccharide unlike a conventional preparation of chondroitinase from the same bacterial source; it does not degrade tetrasaccharides, but it degrades hexasaccharides into disaccharides and tetrasaccharides, which are generated from the nonreducing and reducing terminus of the parent hexasaccharide, respectively (49). The digestion of fraction 6-I (1 nmol as hexasaccharide) with the enzyme preparation gave 1.04 nmol of ΔDi-0S and two unsaturated tetrasaccharides (0.48 and 0.61 nmol) (Fig. 9A), which eluted at the same positions as fractions 4-III and 4-IV, respectively. The disaccharide composition of fraction 4-IV was identical to that of fraction 4-III (data not shown), suggesting that fraction 4-IV had the monosulfated tetrasaccharide structure of ΔHexUAα1–3GalNAc(4S)β1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc. These results suggest that fraction 6-I contains the following two hexasaccharide structures (designated fractions 6-Ia and 6-Ib) at a molar ratio of 1.0:1.3: fraction 6-Ia, ΔHexUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–3GalNAc(4S); fraction 6-Ib, ΔHexUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc(4S)β1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc.

Likewise, fraction 6-III (1 nmol) yielded 1.02 nmol ΔDi-4S and two tetrasaccharide species (0.62 and 0.48 nmol), which eluted at the same positions as fraction 4-III and the aforementioned fraction 4-IV after digestion with highly purified chondroitinase ABC (Fig. 9B). Thus, the following two hexasaccharide structures are proposed as the major compounds (designated fraction 6-IIIa and 6-IIIb) in fraction 6-III at a molar ratio of 1.3:1.0: fraction 6-IIIa, ΔHexUAα1–3GalNAc(4S)β1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc(4S); fraction 6-IIIb, ΔHexUAα1–3GalNAc(4S)β1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc(4S)β1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc.

**Determination of the Sulfation Sites Catalyzed by D4ST-1 within the Tetra- and Hexasaccharide Sequences—Table V** summarizes the structures of the major tetra- and hexasaccharide components, which were isolated in this study from the radiolabeled partially desulfated DS after digestion with chondroitinase AC-I. Therefore, the ΔHexUA at the nonreducing ends in individual oligosaccharide structures are derived from GlcUA residues, and the reducing GalNAc residues are derived from GalNAc-GlcUA linkages. Since the partially desulfated DS used as an acceptor substrate was 4-O-sulfated on 31% of the component GalNAc residues, the newly formed $^{35}$S-labeled sulfation sites by the action of D4ST-1 within several structurally defined oligosaccharides were determined as follows.

The structure of $^{35}$S-labeled fraction 6-I suggests that D4ST-1 transferred sulfate to the GalNAc residue in the disaccharide unit on the reducing side and/or to that in the internal disaccharide unit of the following sequence, -GlcUAβ1–3GalNAcβ1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–4GlcUA-. The structure of $^{35}$S-labeled fraction 4-III provides direct evidence that the D4ST-1 transferred sulfate to the GalNAc residue on the reducing side of the nonsulfated sequence -GlcUAβ1–3GalNAcβ1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–4Gl-cUA-. Hence, D4ST-1 can catalyze 4-O-sulfation of GalNAc residues not only in the -IdoUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–4IdoUA- but also in the -IdoUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–4GlcUA- sequence.

Fractions 4-V and 6-III contained disulfated structures with 4-O-sulfated GalNAc residues on the reducing and nonreducing side of IdoUA residue(s). Interestingly, the specific radioactivity of fraction 4-V was ~6.8-fold higher than that of fraction 4-III (Table V), suggesting that the GalNAc residues on the

3GalNAc(4S)β1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc(4S)β1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc(4S) (52), a large upfield shift of H-4 of GalNAc-5 (Δ0.502 ppm) was observed for fraction 6-II, suggesting that the GalNAc-1 and GalNAc-3 residues were 4-O-sulfated, whereas the C-4 position of the GalNAc-5 residue was not. Thus, the following structures have been elucidated for the major compounds in fractions 4-III and 6-II, respectively: fraction 4-III, ΔHexUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc(4S); fraction 6-II, ΔHexUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc(4S)β1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc(4S).

The data from the DE MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (Table II) and disaccharide composition analysis (Table III)

Chondroitin/Dermatan GalNAc 4-O-Sulfotransferases

TABLE IV

<sup>1</sup>H-Chemical shifts of the constituent monosaccharides of the oligosaccharides isolated from D4ST-1 reaction products

Chemical shifts are given in ppm downfield from internal sodium 4,4-dimethyl-4-silapentane-1-sulfonate, but actually measured indirectly in reference to acetone (δ 2.225 ppm) in <sup>2</sup>H<sub>2</sub>O at 26°C. The estimated error for the values to two decimal places was only ±0.01 ppm because of partial overlap of signals. That for the values to three decimal places was ±0.002 ppm. Coupling constants $J_{1,2}$ (in Hz) of GalNAc, IdoUA, and ΔHexUA residues are given in parentheses. ND, not determined; —, not occurring.

| Sugar and proton | Fraction 4-III | Fraction 6-II |
|------------------|----------------|---------------|
|                  | α              | β             | α             | β             |
| GalNAc-1         |                |               |               |               |
| H-1             | 5.210(2.5)     | ND            | 5.210(3.5)    | ND            |
| H-2             | 4.356          | ND            | 4.351         | ND            |
| H-3             | 4.169          | ND            | 4.169         | ND            |
| H-4             | 4.73           | ND            | 4.73          | ND            |
| H-5             | 4.188          | ND            | 4.09          | ND            |
| H-6             | ND             | ND            | ND            | ND            |
| H-6'            | ND             | ND            | ND            | ND            |
| NAc             | 2.053          |               | 2.051         |               |
| IdoUA-2         |                |               |               |               |
| H-1             | 4.926(2.5)     | 4.881(2.0)    | 4.911(3.5)    | 4.867(3.5)    |
| H-2             | 3.533          | 3.548         |               | 3.543         |
| H-3             |                | 3.911         |               | 3.900         |
| H-4             |                | 4.101         |               | 4.108         |
| H-5             |                | 4.778         |               | 4.727         |
| GalNAc-3        |                |               |               |               |
| H-1             | 4.613(8.5)     |               | 4.66(ND)      |               |
| H-2             | 3.986          |               | 4.05          |               |
| H-3             | 3.910          |               | 4.05          |               |
| H-4             | 4.090          |               | 4.67          |               |
| H-5             | 3.737          |               | ND            |               |
| H-6             | ND             |               | ND            |               |
| H-6'            | ND             |               | ND            |               |
| NAc             | 2.078          |               | 2.077         |               |
| IdoUA-4         |                |               |               |               |
| H-1             |                |               | 4.881(3.5)    |               |
| H-2             |                |               | 3.521         |               |
| H-3             |                |               | 3.900         |               |
| H-4             |                |               | 4.095         |               |
| H-5             |                |               | 4.727         |               |
| GalNAc-5        |                |               |               |               |
| H-1             |                |               | 4.611(8.0)    |               |
| H-2             |                |               | 3.981         |               |
| H-3             |                |               | 4.09          |               |
| H-4             |                |               | 3.92          |               |
| H-5             |                |               | 3.52          |               |
| H-6             |                |               | ND            |               |
| H-6'            |                |               | ND            |               |
| NAc             |                |               | 2.077         |               |
| ΔHexUA-6<sup>a</sup> |                |               |               |               |
| H-1             | 5.189(3.5)     |               | 5.185(3.5)    |               |
| H-2             | 3.794          |               | 3.798         |               |
| H-3             | 4.094          |               | 4.090         |               |
| H-4             | 5.895          |               | 5.896         |               |

<sup>a</sup> Values for fraction 4-III represent those of ΔHexUA-4.

nonreducing side of IdoUA residues (i.e. in -GlcUAB1-3Gal-NAcB1-4IdoUA- sequences) may be sulfated by D4ST-1, although the opposite possibility also exists. To clarify this point, the trisulfated hexasaccharide (6-IV) was digested with highly purified chondroitinase ABC, taking advantage of its exolytic action on a hexasaccharide to produce a disaccharide and a tetrasaccharide from the nonreducing and reducing sides of the parent hexasaccharide, respectively. The enzyme yielded two radioactive peaks corresponding to the elution positions of ΔDi-4S and disulfated tetrasaccharide [ΔHexUAα1-3GalNAc-(4S)β1-4IdoUAα1-3GalNAc(4S)] with ~33 and 67% of the total radioactivity of the parent oligosaccharide, respectively (Fig. 10), suggesting that D4ST-1 at least catalyzed to a considerable degree the 4-O-sulfation of the GalNAc residue located at the nonreducing side of the hexasaccharide sequence GlcUAα1-3GalNAc(4S)β1-4IdoUAα1-3GalNAc(4S)β1-4IdoUAα1-3GalNAc(4S) that had been embedded in the parent DS polysaccharide. Namely, D4ST-1 was involved in 4-O-sulfation of a GalNAc residue in the sequence -GlcUAB1-3GalNAcB1-4IdoUA-. In the case of disulfated oligosaccharide fractions (6-II and 6-III), the positions of radioactive sulfate group(s) in their sequences could not be determined in this study due to the low incorporated radioactivity. Although fraction 4-V had a high specific radioactivity, the location of the radiolabeled sulfate was not analyzed due to the difficulty in discriminating the two sulfate groups.

In strong contrast to the radioactive peaks corresponding to the sulfated tetra- and hexasaccharides with retention times between 24 and 55 min, which were generated by chondroitinase AC-I (Fig. 3A) or B (Fig. 3B) digestion of the D4ST-1 transferase reaction products, the C4ST-1 reaction products, prepared with partially desulfated DS as an acceptor, yielded radiolabeled ΔDi-4S as a predominant peak along with much smaller proportions of radioactive tetra- and hexasaccharide peaks upon digestion with chondroitinase AC-I (Fig. 3C), and the chondroitinase B digest gave no significant radioactive peaks (Fig. 3D). These results suggested that C4ST-1 utilized predominantly the sequences containing consecutive GlcUA residues but not those adjacent to IdoUA. Chromatographic patterns of the chondroitinase AC-I and B digests of the

Chondroitin/Dermatan GalNAc 4-O-Sulfotransferases

**Figure 9.** HPLC analysis of the enzyme digests of the fractions 6-I (A) and 6-III (B) prepared using a highly purified preparation of chondroitinase ABC. The enzyme digests of fractions 6-I (A) and 6-III (B) (1 nmol each) prepared using a highly purified preparation of chondroitinase ABC were analyzed by HPLC on an amine-bound silica column using a linear gradient of NaH₂PO₄ as described under "Experimental Procedures." Fractions were monitored by absorbance at 232 nm. Arrow 1, ΔDi-0S; arrow 2, ΔHexUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc(4S); arrow 3, ΔHexUAα1–3GalNAc(4S)β1–4IdoUAα1–3GalNAc; arrow 4, ΔDi-4S. The peaks marked by asterisks are derived from the reaction buffer and represent unidentified impurities.

C4ST-2 reaction products were very similar to those obtained from the D4ST-1 reaction products, except for the disaccharide peak (Figs. 2, A, B, E, F, and 3, A, B, E, and F). These results suggest that C4ST-2 may possess both properties of D4ST-1 and C4ST-1. Hence, C4ST-2 can be considered as C4ST-2/D4ST-2.

### DISCUSSION

The evolutionary relations shown in Fig. 1 suggest that D4ST-1 and C4ST-1, -2, and -3 constitute a CS/DS 4-O-sulfotransferase subfamily in the HNK-1ST family as proposed in this study. The close evolutionary relation between D4ST-1 and C4ST-2/D4ST-2 is consistent with their substrate specificities as discussed below. D4ST-1, C4ST-1, C4ST-2, and C4ST-3, cloned from mouse and human (30–32, 39, 55), exhibit GalNAc 4-O-sulfotransferase activity toward dermatan and chondroitin. However, their specificities, especially toward DS lineage, have not been fully clarified. In this study, we investigated the acceptor specificities of these enzymes except for C4ST-3, which was phylogenetically closest to C4ST-1 but showed negligible catalytic activity toward the above-mentioned substrates. Although the low activity was reportedly due to its thermal instability (55), specific substrates other than chondroitin may exist for C4ST-3 in view of its restricted expression profile in tissues such as liver and kidney (55).

The acceptor specificity of D4ST-1 toward CS/DS variants was clearly distinct from those of C4ST-1 and -2 (Table I). Among natural CS/DS variants, only CS-B (DS) was utilized by D4ST-1, whereas C4ST-1 and -2 showed broader specificity, exhibiting significant activities toward various natural CS/DS variants. With chondroitin and partially desulfated DS as an acceptor, significantly higher activities were detected for all three enzymes compared with those obtained with natural CS/DS as acceptors. D4ST-1 exhibited a stronger preference to partially desulfated DS. In contrast, C4ST-1 showed a greater preference for chondroitin, and C4ST-2 exhibited comparable preferences for both acceptors, although C4ST-2 activity especially toward partially desulfated DS was significantly lower than those of D4ST-1 and C4ST-1. Whereas these results are basically consistent with those reported recently by Evers et al. (39), the novel acceptor specificity of D4ST-1 was also revealed in this study, as described below, when the reaction products were analyzed in detail.

Analysis of the transferase reaction products clearly showed that the observed differential specificities of the three enzymes represent differences in their preferences for the GalNAc residues flanked by either IdoUA or GlcUA residue(s) in the polymers, as evidenced by the relative abundance of ³⁵S-labeled disaccharide (ΔDi-4S) in the chondroitinase AC-I or B digest of the ³⁵S-labeled DS product (Fig. 4). D4ST-1 predominantly utilized GalNAc residues in the -IdoUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–4IdoUA- sequence, whereas C4ST-1 efficiently worked on GalNAc residues in -GlcUAβ1–3GalNAcβ1–4GlcUA-. C4ST-2 used GalNAc residues in both sequences to comparable extents. Chondroitinase AC-I digestion of the D4ST-1 reaction products, obtained with partially desulfated DS as acceptor, yielded multiple radioactive tetra- and larger oligosaccharides containing internal IdoUA residue(s) in addition to disaccharides. The structural determination of the isolated tetra- and hexasaccharides provided detailed information about the 4-O-sulfation sites within the sugar chain. It was clearly demonstrated for the first time that D4ST-1 could catalyze 4-O-sulfation of GalNAc residues not only in the sequence -IdoUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–4IdoUA- but also in -IdoUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–4GlcUA- and -GlcUAβ1–3GalNAcβ1–4IdoUA-. The demonstrated sequence preferences of D4ST-1, C4ST-1, and C4ST-2 are illustrated in Fig. 11.

During the course of this study, Evers et al. (39) reported the acceptor specificity of the same enzyme, which acted preferentially on nearly exhaustively desulfated dermatan prepared from porcine intestine. After digestion of the transferase reaction products with chondroitinases AC-I and B, a tetrasaccharide ΔHexUA-GalNAc-IdoUA-GalNAc(4S) and a hexasaccharide ΔHexUA-GalNAc-GlcUA-GalNAc-GlcUA-GalNAc were isolated, respectively, as major fragments, suggesting that they were derived from a parent sequence, -GlcUA-GalNAc-IdoUA-GalNAc(4S)-GlcUA-GalNAc-GlcUA-GalNAc-IdoUA-GalNAc-. Thus, they concluded that D4ST-1 shows a strong preference for IdoUA-GalNAc flanked by GlcUA-GalNAc but not for IdoUA-GalNAc flanked by IdoUA-GalNAc, IdoUA-rich repeating regions containing -IdoUAα1–3GalNAcβ1–4IdoUA- sequences that were scarcely utilized as sulfation sites. The contradictory findings between their and our studies are probably due to the structural differences of the acceptors. In contrast to the nonsulfated dermatan used in their study, our partially desulfated DS containing 4-O-sulfated GalNAc at 31% also served as an excellent acceptor for D4ST-1, and the GalNAc residues located on both reducing and nonreducing sides of internal IdoUA residues were efficiently sulfated by the enzyme, despite its lower frequency of free GalNAc residues in the polymer compared with the exhaustively desulfated form. Although the reactions observed with nonsulfated dermatan probably represent initial sulfation reactions, they probably do not display an overall picture of the DS synthetic processes involving D4ST-1 to form a mature highly sulfated chain. In contrast, the reactions observed with partially desulfated DS appear to include multiple distinct sulfation reactions of D4ST-1 in terms of the sulfate acceptor sequence, which take place at various stages of the biosynthetic process required for the maturation of DS chains as discussed below.

Chondroitin/Dermatan GalNAc 4-O-Sulfotransferases

**TABLE V**

Structure of the radioactive tetra- and hexasaccharides isolated from D4ST-1 reaction products, which were prepared using partially desulfated DS as the acceptor substrate

| Fraction no. | Specific $^{35}$S radioactivity | Structures |
|--------------|----------------------------------|------------|
|              | $dpm/nmol$                       |            |
| 4-III        | 70                               | $\Delta \text{HexUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}\beta 1-4\text{IdoUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}(4S)^a$ |
| 4-V          | 477                              | $\Delta \text{HexUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}(4S)\beta 1-4\text{IdoUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}(4S)$ |
| 6-Ia         | 82$^b$                           | $\Delta \text{HexUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}\beta 1-4\text{IdoUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}\beta 1-4\text{IdoUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}(4S)$ |
| 6-Ib         |                                  | $\Delta \text{HexUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}\beta 1-4\text{IdoUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}(4S)\beta 1-4\text{IdoUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}$ |
| 6-II         | 482                              | $\Delta \text{HexUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}\beta 1-4\text{IdoUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}(4S)\beta 1-4\text{IdoUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}(4S)$ |
| 6-IIIa       | 192$^b$                          | $\Delta \text{HexUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}(4S)\beta 1-4\text{IdoUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}\beta 1-4\text{IdoUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}(4S)$ |
| 6-IIIb       |                                  | $\Delta \text{HexUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}(4S)\beta 1-4\text{IdoUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}(4S)\beta 1-4\text{IdoUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}$ |
| 6-IV         | 998                              | $\Delta \text{HexUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}(4S)\beta 1-4\text{IdoUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}(4S)\beta 1-4\text{IdoUA}\alpha 1-3\text{GalNAc}(4S)$ |

$a$ 4S represents the 4-O-sulfate group.

$b$ Values represent the specific radioactivities of hexasaccharide subfractions 6-I and 6-III.

---

**FIG. 10.** HPLC analysis of an enzyme digest of fraction 6-IV using a highly purified preparation of chondroitinase ABC. Fraction 6-IV (3 nmol) was digested with a highly purified preparation of chondroitinase ABC and analyzed by HPLC on an amine-bound silica column as described under “Experimental Procedures.” The eluates were monitored by absorption at 232 nm (A) and by $^{35}$S radioactivity (B). The arrow in B indicates the elution position of the $\Delta \text{HexUA-GalNAc}(4S)\text{-IdoUA-GalNAc}(4S)$. The vertical lines at the top of A indicate the elution positions of the authentic unsaturated CS disaccharides as described in the legend to Fig. 3. The peak marked by an asterisk is derived from the enzyme reaction buffer.

Comparison of the specific radioactivity of the isolated tetra- and hexasaccharide fractions revealed the effects of preexisting sulfate groups on the subsequent sulfation reactions. The specific radioactivity of fraction 4-V was 6.8-fold higher than that of fraction 4-III, and that of 6-IV was 5.2-fold higher than that of fraction 6-III (Table V). These results suggest that preexisting sulfate group(s) promoted the following sulfation of the GalNAc residue immediately adjacent to the sulfated disaccharide unit, although the order of incorporation of the sulfate groups to different GalNAc residues, for example, in fractions 4-V and 6-IV was not determined. Thus, initial 4-O-sulfation of GalNAc residues either at random or at stringently defined positions promotes further 4-O-sulfation of the GalNAc residues in the -IdoUA-GalNAc-IdoUA-GalNAc(4S)- and/or -GalNAc(4S)-IdoUA-GalNAc-IdoUA- sequences by D4ST-1, consequently forming IdoUA-GalNAc(4S)-rich regions.

Another role of sulfation in DS biosynthesis appears to inhibit possible back-epimerization of IdoUA to GlcUA. Although the epimerization reaction in the nonsulfated chondroitin and dermatan is reversible, the epimerase hardly works on CS or

---

**FIG. 11.** Schematic representation of the acceptor sequence specificities of D4ST-1, C4ST-1, and C4ST-2/D4ST-2 toward a CS/DS polysaccharide backbone. The arrows indicate the potential sulfation sites in the schematic repeating disaccharide sequence of a CS/DS hybrid structure catalyzed by D4ST-1, C4ST-1, and C4ST-2/D4ST-2. The thickness of each arrow represents the relative preference of each enzyme for -IdoUA-GalNAc-IdoUA-, -IdoUA-GalNAc-GlcUA-, and -GlcUA-GalNAc-IdoUA-. Possible effects of sulfate groups on the depicted sulfation reactions are not considered here. The activity of C4ST-1 toward the -GlcUA-GalNAc-IdoUA- sequence has been reported in Ref. 57.

initial reactions for the formation of isolated IdoUA-GalNAc(4S) units, it appears that the synthetic mechanism of the above mentioned consecutive IdoUA-GalNAc(4S)-rich clusters typical of mature DS chains cannot be explained only by the proposal of successive actions of C5-epimerase and D4ST-1 (39, 63), provided that D4ST-1 barely works on IdoUA-GalNAc flanked by IdoUA-GalNAc as reported previously (39). In contrast, the strong preference of D4ST-1 for IdoUA-GalNAc-IdoUA revealed in the present study is ideal for rationalizing the formation of IdoUA-GalNAc(4S)-rich clusters. The application of PAPS to the epimerase assay in a cell-free system increases the IdoUA content (28), and DS formation is strongly enhanced by sulfate concentrations in a fibroblast culture (64). These findings suggest tight coupling of sulfation and epimerization. A possibility remains that 4-O-sulfation stimulates the epimerization of GlcUA to IdoUA in addition to 4-O-sulfation, which would facilitate the formation of highly sulfated IdoUA-rich clusters, as previously discussed by Hiraoka *et al.* (31) for possible roles of C4ST-1 and C4ST-2 in DS synthesis.

The microsome fractions prepared from three different tissues, which contain distinct proportions of IdoUA and GlcUA in the DS chains of decorin and biglycan proteoglycans, exhibited adequate GalNAc 4-O-sulfotransferase activities toward both dermatan and chondroitin (63). Thus, multiple CS and DS sulfotransferases characterized in this study are probably expressed in these tissues, and their concerted actions with C5-epimerase are most likely involved in the formation of the highly sulfated IdoUA-GalNAc(4S) cluster in DS. In addition to D4ST-1, C4ST-1 may be essential for the sulfation modification of GlcUA-rich regions (30–32) but also in IdoUA-containing regions in DS. It may trigger modification reactions if 4-O-sulfation stimulates C5-epimerase as discussed above. In fact, Habuchi *et al.* (57) reported that C4ST-1 also transferred sulfate to C-4 positions located on the nonreducing sides of IdoUA residues in partially desulfated DS (Fig. 11), supporting the involvement of C4ST-1 in the synthesis of the IdoUA-containing region of DS. Furthermore, the present study demonstrated that C4ST-2/D4ST-2 might also be required for the sulfation of both IdoUA- and GlcUA-rich regions in DS (Fig. 11). Taken together, the collaborative or competitive contributions of these three sulfotransferases in different ratios in distinct tissues probably takes part in tissue-specific structural expression of DS, although the expression level of C5-epimerase is probably the rate-limiting factor for the DS formation. Molecular cloning of C5-epimerase(s) will make it possible to investigate possible concerted actions between the C5-epimerization and 4-O-sulfation reactions, which will allow us to depict an overall picture of the modification reactions required for the synthesis of mature DS chains.

Acknowledgments—We thank Dr. K. Tsuchida for preparation of the expression vector pEF-BOS/IP and Dr. S. Nadanaka for preparation of partially desulfated DS. We also thank M. Hattori for technical assistance.

### REFERENCES

1. Rosenberg, L. C., Choi, H. U., Tang, L. H., Johnson, T. L., Pal, S., Webber, C., Reiner, A., and Poole, A. R. (1985) *J. Biol. Chem.* **260**, 6304–6313
2. Kolset, S. O., and Gallagher, J. T. (1990) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1032**, 191–211
3. Iozzo, R. V. (1999) *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 18843–18846
4. Elefteriou, F., Exposito, J. Y., Garrone, R., and Lethias, C. (2001) *FEBS Lett.* **495**, 44–47
5. Lewandowska, K., Choi, H. U., Rosenberg, L. C., Sasse, J., Neame, P. J., and Culp, L. A. (1999) *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 11431–11438
6. Kinsella, M. G., Tsoi, C. K., Järveläinen, H. T., and Wight, T. N. (1997) *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 318–325
7. Merle, B., Durussel, L., Delmas, P. D., and Clezardin, P. (1999) *J. Cell Biochem.* **75**, 538–546
8. Qi, M., Ikematsu, S., Maeda, N., Chihara-Tanaka, K., Sakuma, S., Noda, M., Muramatsu, T., and Kadomatsu, K. (2001) *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 15868–15875
9. Yamaguchi, Y., Mann, D. M., and Ruoslahti, E. (1990) *Nature* **346**, 281–284
10. Santra, M., Skorski, T., Calabretta, B., Lattime, E. C., and Iozzo, R. V. (1995) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **92**, 7016–7020
11. Lyon, M., Deakin, J. A., Rahmoune, H., Fernig, D. G., Nakamura, T., and Gallagher, J. T. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 271–278
12. Lafont, F., Rouget, M., Triller, A., Prochiantz, A., and Rousselet, A. (1992) *Development* **114**, 17–29
13. Faissner, A., Clement, A., Lochter, A., Streit, A., Mandl, C., and Schachner, M. (1994) *J. Cell Biol.* **126**, 783–799
14. Penc, S. F., Pomahac, B., Winkler, T., Dorschner, R. A., Eriksson, E., Herndon, M., and Gallo, R. L. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 28116–28121
15. Trowbridge, J. M., Rudisill, J. A., Ron, D., and Gallo, R. L. (2002) *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 42815–42820
16. Tollefsen, D. M., Pestka, C. A., and Monafo, W. J. (1983) *J. Biol. Chem.* **258**, 6713–6716
17. Maimone, M. M., and Tollefsen, D. M. (1990) *J. Biol. Chem.* **265**, 18263–18271
18. Liaw, P. C., Becker, D. L., Stafford, A. R., Fredenburgh, J. C., and Weitz, J. I. (2001) *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 20959–20965
19. Hirose, J., Kawashima, H., Yoshie, O., Tashiro, K., and Miyasaka, M. (2001) *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 5228–5234
20. Sugahara, K., Hikino, M., Mikami, T., Deepa, S. S., Vilela-Silva, A. E. S., Pavao, M. S. G., Tamura, J., Uyama, T., Kitagawa, H., Mizuguchi, S., and Nomura, K. (2003) *Abstracts of XVII International Symposium of Glycoconjugates, Bangalore, India, January 12–16, 2003*, Abstr. I#12, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India
21. Bao, X., Nishimura, S., Yamada, S., and Sugahara, K. (2003) *Seikagaku*, in press
22. Nandini, C. D., Mikami, T., Itoh, N., Seno, N., and Sugahara, K. (2003) *Seikagaku*, in press
23. Cheng, F., Heinegård, D., Malmström, A., Schmidtchen, A., Yoshida, K., and Fransson, L. Å. (1994) *Glycobiology* **4**, 685–696
24. Sugahara, K., and Yamada, S. (2000) *Trends Glycosci. Glycotechnol.* **12**, 321–349
25. Fransson, L. Å., Belting, M., Jönsson, M., Mani, K., Moses, J., and Oldberg, Å. (2000) *Matrix Biol.* **19**, 367–376
26. Habuchi, O., (2000) *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1474**, 115–127
27. Silbert, J. E., and Sugumaran, G. (2002) *IUBMB Life* **54**, 177–186
28. Malmström, A., and Fransson, L. Å. (1975) *J. Biol. Chem.* **250**, 3419–3425
29. Eklund, E., Rodén, L., Malmström, M., and Malmström, A. (2000) *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **383**, 171–177
30. Yamauchi, S., Mita, S., Matsubara, T., Fukuta, M., Habuchi, H., Kimata, K., and Habuchi, O. (2000) *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 8975–8981
31. Hiraoka, N., Nakagawa, H., Ong, E., Akama, T. O., Fukuda, M. N., and Fukuda, M. (2000) *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 20188–20196
32. Okuda, T., Mita, S., Yamauchi, S., Matsubara, T., Yagi, F., Yamamori, D., Fukuta, M., Kuroiwa, A., Matsuda, Y., and Habuchi, O. (2000) *J. Biochem. (Tokyo)* **128**, 763–770
33. Bakker, H., Friedmann, I., Oka, S., Kawasaki, T., Nifant'ev, N., Schachner, M., and Mantei, N. (1997) *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 29942–29946
34. Ong, E., Yeh, J. -C., Ding, Y., Hindsgaul, O., and Fukuda, M. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 5190–5195
35. Xia, G., Evers, M. R., Kang, H.-G., Schachner, M., and Baenziger, J. U. (2000) *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 38402–38409
36. Okuda, T., Mita, S., Yamauchi, S., Fukuta, M., Nakano, H., Sawada, T., and Habuchi, O. (2000) *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 40605–40613
37. Kang, H.-G., Evers, M. R., Xia, G., Baenziger, J. U., and Schachner, M. (2001) *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 10861–10869
38. Hiraoka, N., Misra, A., Belot, F., Hindsgaul, O., and Fukuda, M. (2001) *Glycobiology* **11**, 495–504
39. Evers, M. R., Xia, G., Kang, H.-G., Schachner, M., and Baenziger, J. U. (2001) *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 36344–36353
40. Nagasawa, K., Inoue, Y., and Tokuyasu, T. (1979) *J. Biochem. (Tokyo)* **86**, 1323–1329
41. Burge, C. B., and Karlin, S. (1998) *Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.* **8**, 346–354
42. Kitagawa, H., Egusa, N., Tamura, J., Kusche-Gullberg, M., Lindahl, U., and Sugahara, K. (2001) *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 4834–4838
43. Yamauchi, S., Hirahara, Y., Usui, H., Takeda, Y., Hoshino, M., Fukuta, M., Kimura, J. H., and Habuchi, O. (1999) *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 2456–2463
44. Kitagawa, H., Tsuchida, K., Ujikawa, M., and Sugahara, K. (1995) *J. Biochem. (Tokyo)* **117**, 1083–1087
45. Sugahara, K., Ohkita, Y., Shibata, Y., Yoshida, K., and Ikegami, A. (1995) *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 7204–7212
46. Sugahara, K., Okumura, Y., and Yamashina, I. (1989) *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **162**, 189–197
47. Kim, B.-T., Kitagawa, H., Tamura, J., Saito, T., Kusche-Gullberg, M., Lindahl, U., and Sugahara K. (2001) *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* **98**, 7176–7181
48. Nadanaka, S., Fujita, M., and Sugahara, K. (1999) *FEBS Lett.* **452**, 185–189
49. Sugahara, K., Nadanaka, S., Takeda, K., and Kojima, T. (1996) *Eur. J. Biochem.* **239**, 871–880
50. Sugiyama, E., Hara, A., Uemura, K., and Taketomi, T. (1997) *Glycobiology* **7**, 719–724
51. Sugahara, K., Tohno-oka, R., Yamada, S., Khoo, K.-H. Morris, H. R., and Dell, A. (1994) *Glycobiology* **4**, 535–544
52. Yamada, S., Yamane, Y., Sakamoto, K., Tsuda, H., and Sugahara, K. (1998) *Eur. J. Biochem.* **258**, 775–783
53. Vliegenthart, J. F. G., Dorland, L., and Von Halbeek, H. (1983) *Adv. Carbohydr. Chem. Biochem.* **41**, 209–374
54. Kakuta, Y., Pedersen, L. G., Pedersen, L. C., and Negishi, M. (1998) *Trends Biochem. Sci.* **23**, 129–130
55. Kang, H.-G., Evers, M. R., Xia, G., Baenziger, J. U., and Schachner, M. (2002) *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 34766–34772

Chondroitin/Dermatan GalNAc 4-O-Sulfotransferases

56. Yoshida, K., Arai, M., Kohno, Y., Maeyama, K., Miyazono, H., Kikuchi, H., Morikawa, K., Tawada, A., and Suzuki, S. (1993) in *Dermatan Sulfate Proteoglycans* (Scott, J. E., ed) pp. 55–70, Portland Press, London

57. Habuchi, O. (2000) *Seikagaku* **72**, 427–436

58. Yamagata, T., Saito, H., Habuchi, O., and Suzuki, S. (1998) *J. Biol. Chem.* **243**, 1523–1535

59. Sugahara, K., Tanaka, Y., Yamada, S., Seno, N., Kitagawa, H., Haslam, S. M., Morris, H. R., and Dell, A. (1996) *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 26745–26754

60. Gatti, G., Casu, B., Torri, G., and Vercellotti, J. R. (1979) *Carbohydr. Res.* **68**, C3–C7

61. Malmström, A. (1984) *J. Biol. Chem.* **259**, 161–165

62. Malmström, A., and Fransson, L. Å. (1971) *Eur. J. Biochem.* **18**, 431–435

63. Tiedemann, K., Larsson, T., Heinegård, D., and Malmström, A. (2001) *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **391**, 65–71

64. Silbert, J. E., Palmer, M. E., Humphries, D. E., and Silbert, C. K. (1986) *J. Biol. Chem.* **261**, 13397–13400

Glycobiology and Extracellular Matrices:  
Specificities of Three Distinct Human  
Chondroitin/Dermatan N  
-Acetylgalactosamine 4-O-Sulfotransferases  
Demonstrated Using Partially Desulfated  
Dermatan Sulfate as an Acceptor:  
IMPLICATION OF DIFFERENTIAL  
ROLES IN DERMATAN SULFATE  
BIOSYNTHESIS  

Tadahisa Mikami, Shuji Mizumoto, Naohide  
Kago, Hiroshi Kitagawa and Kazuyuki  
Sugahara  
J. Biol. Chem. 2003, 278:36115-36127.  
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M306044200 originally published online July 7, 2003  

Access the most updated version of this article at doi: [10.1074/jbc.M306044200](http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M306044200)  

Find articles, minireviews, Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the [JBC Affinity Sites](https://www.jbc.org/site/affinitysites).  

Alerts:  
- When this article is cited  
- When a correction for this article is posted  

Click [here](https://www.jbc.org/site/alerts) to choose from all of JBC's e-mail alerts  

This article cites 60 references, 40 of which can be accessed free at  
[http://www.jbc.org/content/278/38/36115.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.jbc.org/content/278/38/36115.full.html#ref-list-1)
