
Immunologic Research 2003;27/2–3:521–527

# Induction and Regulation of IL-12-Dependent Host Resistance to *Toxoplasma gondii*

## Abstract

Resistance to the intracellular protozoan parasite *Toxoplasma gondii* is initiated by the induction of interleukin-12 (IL-12), which stimulates interferon (IFN)-γ synthesis by natural killer (NK) cells and T lymphocytes. This review summarizes the work of our laboratory on the mechanisms by which the parasite triggers IL-12 synthesis, and how this response is regulated to avoid the lethal effects of excessive tissue inflammation. In addition, we present an overview of our studies investigating the mechanisms by which the IFN-γ produced as a consequence of IL-12 stimulation controls intracellular replication of the parasite in host cells.

---

**Alan Sher***  
Carmen Collazzo  
Charles Scanga  
Dragana Jankovic  
George Yap$^1$  
Julio Aliberti  

National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD  
$^1$Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Brown University, Providence, RI

---

### Key Words

* Toxoplasma gondii
* Host resistance
* IL-12
* IFN-γ
* Dendritic cells
* IGTP

---

## Introduction

Cell-mediated immunity (CMI) plays a major role in host resistance to most intracellular protozoa and pathogens. Although cellular effector mechanisms directed against these pathogens have been defined in vitro, their relevance to immunity in vivo has, in many cases, been difficult to establish. Moreover, little is known about how pathogens trigger

---

*Alan Sher, PhD  
Laboratory of Parasitic Disease  
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, Bldg 50, Room 6140  
Bethesda, MD 20892-8003  
E-mail: asher@niaid.nih.gov*

© 2003  
Humana Press Inc.  
0257–277X/03/  
27/2–3:521–527/$20.00

ger CMI, and, subsequently, how we can
develop vaccines and other forms of immuno-
logic intervention based on the specific induc-
tion or enhancement of such responses. A
major goal of our research during the past
15yr has been to delineate pathways for the
initiation, regulation, and effector functions
of CMI against intracellular pathogens in vivo,
using well-defined murine experimental
models.

Much of our current work is focused around
studies on the host response to *Toxoplasma*
*gondii*. This apicomplexan protozoan is con-
trolled by IFN-γ-dependent cell-mediated
mechanisms. In turn, the induction of host-
protective IFN-γ is stimulated by IL-12.
Because of its pivotal role in host resistance,
we have devoted a major effort in under-
standing how IL-12 is induced and regulated
in this infection, and how it controls effector
responses. A second major research effort has
been to define mechanisms by which IFN-γ
mediates in vivo control of intracellular
pathogen growth, a process that in the case of
*Toxoplasma* is poorly understood.

### Initiation and Regulation
#### of IL-12-Dependent Host Resistance
#### by Dendritic Cells

Because the induction of IL-12 is critical
to the expression of host resistance against
*Toxoplasma* and strongly influences the Th1
character of the subsequent adaptive immune
response, we have considered the elucidation
of the pathways by which this pathogen initi-
ates IL-12 synthesis as a fundamental
issue in understanding its immunobiology.
Although our initial work in the *T. gondii*
system had demonstrated that peritoneal
macrophages can provide an important source
of IL-12, significant responses to the parasite
were observed only when these cells were
elicited with thioglycolate or primed with

IFN-γ. However, we had previously determined
that the spleen contains a cell population that
produces IL-12 in response to *T. gondii* in the
absence of priming or costimulation and, there-
fore, can be considered a naive initiator of
cytokine synthesis. To identify this popula-
tion, we developed a protocol in which
*T. gondii* tachyzoites or extracts were injected
intravenously, and the IL-12p40-producing
cells in spleen were identified *in situ* by
immunocytochemistry and ex vivo by intra-
cytoplasmic staining and flow cytometry. As
reported previously (1), we found that inter-
digitating dendritic cells (DC) are the exclu-
sive source of IL-12 in spleen after *T. gondii*
stimulation. As expected, this response was
not dependent on endogenous IFN-γ or the
presence of T cells, and occurred exclusively
in the CD8α+ subset of DC. Moreover, puri-
fied splenic CD8α+ DC from naive mice were
found to respond directly to stimulation with
tachyzoites or tachyzoite extract (STAg). Sig-
nificantly, the levels of IL-12 produced by
splenic DC far exceeded that produced by other
microbial stimuli, such as lipopolysaccha-
rides (LPS), CpG oligonucleotides, SAC,
or mycobacterial extracts.

In addition to producing IL-12, tachyzoite-
stimulated DC were found to undergo other
changes associated with activation. These
include the upregulation of the costimulatory
molecules, CD40, B7-1, and B7-2, and a strik-
ing anatomical redistribution of the cells from
their resting location in splenic red pulp and
marginal zone into the T cell areas, where they
form compact clusters surrounding the cen-
tral arteriole. In the process of identifying the
chemokine requirements for this intrasplenic
migration of DC, Julio Aliberti made a fun-
damental discovery about the regulation of
tachyzoite-induced IL-12 synthesis (2). He
found that splenic CD8α+ DC in mice defi-
cient for the chemokine receptor CCR5 were
partially impaired in their STAg-induced
migration in vivo, but also showed greatly reduced IL-12 production both in vivo and in vitro. Moreover, naive DC purified from CCR 5 knockout (KO) mice were highly (but not completely) defective in their ability to produce IL-12 in response to in vitro stimulation with STAg. These results implicated CCR 5 signaling in the induction of IL-12 from DC by *T. gondii*. The latter hypothesis is supported by the finding that pertussis toxin (which uncouples G protein-mediated chemokine signaling) strongly inhibits STAg-induced DC IL-12 responses. Moreover, we have recently confirmed that *G*~i2α~ deficient mice, which are genetically defective in the same signaling pathway, show IL-12 response impairments to STAg equivalent to those displayed by CCR 5 KO mice (unpublished results).

One possible mechanism that explains the role of CCR 5 in *T. gondii*-induced IL-12 production involves the induction by the parasite of CCR 5 chemokine ligands (e.g., MIP-1β), which would then trigger an IL-12 response by binding the receptor on DC. Indeed, STAg was found to be an excellent inducer of MIP-1β from both DC and endothelial cells. Nevertheless, this same chemokine-inducing activity is also displayed by LPS, which triggers IL-12 through a mechanism not dependent on CCR 5. An important clue concerning the role of CCR 5 in IL-12 triggering by STAg has come from purification studies performed by Jose Ribeiro and Jesus Valenzuela in the NIAID (manuscript in preparation). They have obtained a highly purified tachyzoite supernatant component that stimulates IL-12 production from DC and identified the major protein constituent by mass spectroscopy. When cloned and expressed in *E. coli*, this parasite molecule induced only low levels of IL-12 production. Nevertheless, the recombinant molecule was found to bind to human CCR 5. We believe that this parasite-derived CCR 5 ligand mimic working together with

another, as yet undefined, molecule explains the high level induction of IL-12 by *T. gondii*. Having demonstrated that CCR 5-dependent triggering of CD8α+ DC provides the major initiating step for *T. gondii*-induced IL-12 production in the iv injection model, it was important to confirm the relevance of this response to host resistance to parasite infection. An important piece of supporting evidence has come from studies on mice deficient for the IRF family transcription factor interferon consensus sequence binding protein (ICSBP). In collaborative studies with Dr. Keiko Ozato (NICHD), we showed that ICSBP KO mice display a complete loss in resistance to the parasite owing to their failure to produce an IL-12 response (3). In our recent work (unpublished results), we have demonstrated that this defect is associated with a selective deficiency in the ability to generate IL-12-producing DC. A second line of evidence for the role of chemokine receptor-dependent triggering of IL-12 production in host resistance comes from *T. gondii* infection studies in CCR5 KO, *G*~i2α~ KO, and pertussis toxin-treated mice (see above). These animals show highly increased susceptibility to infection along with severely impaired parasite-induced IL-12 and IFN-γ production (He, Aliberti, Sher, and Kelsall, unpublished results). A final piece of supporting in vivo evidence comes from the effects of paralysis of DC function on infection-induced IL-12 production and immunopathology (described below).

Recently, we obtained evidence for the role of an additional signaling pathway in IL-12 induction by *T. gondii* (4). MyD-88 is an adaptor molecule utilized by most toll-like receptors (TLR) in the induction of host cytokines. MyD-88-deficient mice were found to mount defective IL-12 responses to STAg injection and rapidly succumbed to acute infection with the parasite. When tested in vitro, DC, macrophages, and neutrophils from uninfected
STAg

TLR?
MyD88
signal

Gi protein
coupled signal

p40

CD8α+ DC

= Toxo PAMP
= Pattern recognition
receptor
= Toxo CCR5 ligand mimic
= CCR5

Fig. 1. Dual regulation of *T. gondii*-induced IL-12 production in DC by CCR5 and Myd88 signaling pathways. In this model, IL-12 p40 induction is coordinately triggered in DC by the interaction of an unknown pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) and MyD88-dependent TLR receptor, as well as the binding of a *T. gondii*-derived chemokine ligand mimic to CCR5. The stimulation of the p40 promoter by both pathways explains the high level of cytokine induced from these cells.

KO mice all showed impaired IL-12 production. Additional experiments suggested that the MyD-88-triggered signal for IL-12 synthesis (presumably mediated by an as yet identified TLR signal) is at least in part independent from that mediated by CCR5. Thus, our current hypothesis is that the high level induction of IL-12 by *T. gondii* is the result of its simultaneous stimulation of TLR and CCR5 signaling pathways (Fig. 1).

In addition to studying the mechanism of induction of IL-12 from DC by *T. gondii*, we also examined its regulation. Kinetic experiments revealed that the IL-12p40 response from DC following STAg injection is short-lived, peaking at 3–6 h and returning to baseline by 24 h (5). Interestingly, when we attempted to restimulate IL-12 production at 24 h by reinjecting the same dose of STAg, no response was observed. Indeed, it took a full week after the initial STAg injection for responsiveness to restimulation to be restored. We termed this STAg-induced refractory state for IL-12 production DC paralysis (6). Paralysis could be distinguished from other forms of impaired DC function on the basis of its lack of dependence on the presence of T cells, IL-10, and cell death. Importantly, the induction of paralysis was shown to impact on the subsequent response to live parasite challenge, resulting in reduced systemic IL-12 and IFN-γ production. Although these reductions were not sufficient to impair host resistance, in a different setting, that of the IL-10 KO mouse which normally succumbs to avirulent *T. gondii* infection because of an excessive IL-12 response, the induction of paralysis resulted in protection from pathology and host mortality.

An important aspect of DC paralysis is its in vivo dependence. Thus, when paralyzed DC are placed into culture, they regain their ability to produce IL-12 in response to STAg. Thus, paralysis requires contact of DC with unknown elements in the in vivo milieu. Dr. Aliberti hypothesized that the phenomenon might result from the downregulation of CCR5 on

DC and, indeed, went on to show the loss of
the receptor on DC freshly recovered from par-
alyzed mice, as well as its reappearance once
the paralyzed state had waned 1 wk later (7).
Importantly, he also demonstrated the reex-
pression of CCR5 on paralyzed DC after in
vitro culture, suggesting that the role of the in
vivo environment in paralysis is to induce and
maintain downregulation of this chemokine
receptor, previously shown to be critical for
optimal IL-12-triggering by STAg. Because
lipoxins have been shown to downregulate
CCR5 expression, Dr. Aliberti decided to test
whether the production of these mediators in
response to STAg might be responsible for the
induction of paralysis in vivo. In support of
this hypothesis, he has demonstrated that (1)
lipoxin A4 suppresses both IL-12 production
and CCR5 expression in purified splenic DC
in vitro; (2) paralysis cannot be induced in
mice deficient in 5-lipoxygenase (an enzyme
important for the generation of lipoxins from
arachidonic acid) and (3) (in collaboration with
Charles Serhan, Brigham and Women's Hos-
pital, Boston) lipoxins are produced in vivo in
response to STAg injection (7). Thus, our cur-
rent hypothesis is that lipoxins synthesized by
non-DC represent the in vivo element neces-
sary for maintaining DC paralysis. The in vivo
relevance of this concept is supported by more
recent studies (unpublished results) demon-
strating that, after infection with T. gondii,
5-lipoxygenase-deficient mice develop dys-
regulated IL-12 responses, leading to accel-
erated mortality.

Effectors Mechanisms Responsible
for IFN-γ Dependent Control
of Pathogen Growth

Although IL-12-dependent induction of
IFN-γ is critical for host resistance to both
T. gondii and mycobacterial infections, the
mechanisms by which the latter cytokine medi-
ates intracellular control of pathogen have not
been fully delineated. For example, although
the production of nitrogen oxide (NO) was
demonstrated many years ago to be important
for macrophage killing of T. gondii tachy-
zoites, we showed in our in vivo model that
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)-
deficient mice display normal control of acute
infection, succumbing only in the chronic
phase (8). George Yap reasoned that an expla-
nation for this discrepancy between the in vitro
and in vivo roles of iNOS in acute resistance
to the parasite lay in the fact that T. gondii can
infect many different nucleated cell types, in
addition to monocyte/macrophages. To eval-
uate the importance of IFN-γ-dependent
control of infection by these cells, he con-
structed reciprocal bone marrow chimeras
between wild-type and IFN-γ receptor-
deficient mice, then infected the animals with
T. gondii (9). Resistance to acute and persis-
tent infection was displayed only by animals
in which IFN-γ receptors were expressed in
both cellular compartments. Parallel chimera
experiments performed with tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) receptor-deficient mice also indi-
cated a codependence on hemopoietic and non-
hemopoietic lineages for optimal control of
the parasite. In contrast, in mice chimeric for
iNOS, expression by cells of hemopoietic
origin was sufficient for host resistance to
chronic infection. Together, these findings
suggested that, in concert with bone marrow-
derived effectors, nonhemopoietic cells
can directly mediate IFN-γ- and TNF-α-
dependent host resistance to intracellular
infection in the absence of endogenous iNOS.
An important clue as to the nature of this
iNOS-independent effector mechanism came
from a collaborative study (10) with Gregory
Taylor, now at Duke University. Taylor has
been studying a family of 47–48 kDa GTP
binding proteins that are strongly induced after
IFN-γ stimulation of macrophages, as well as
nonhemopoietic cell lines. He has been systematically knocking out individual members of this family, with the aim of evaluating their role in host resistance. A mouse generated to be deficient in one family member, IGTP, failed to display acute resistance to *T. gondii*, whereas developing normal control of *Listeria monocytogenes* and cytomegalovirus (MCMV). The *T. gondii*-infected IGTP KO mice developed normal levels of IL-12 and IFN-γ, arguing that the gene regulates a downstream effector function. Carmen Collazo has gone on to show that this function is STAT-1-dependent and primarily affects acute, rather than chronic, resistance to infection. In support of its role as a critical IFN-γ-dependent effector activity, Dr. Collazo employed the chimera approach to show that IGTP must be expressed in both the hemopoietic and nonhemopoietic cell lineages for the development of acute resistance to infection (unpublished results). She and Taylor have now extended this analysis to two other members of the 47–48 kDa GTP family, LRG-47 and IRG-47. LRG-47-deficient mice displayed decreased resistance to both acute *T. gondii* and *L. monocytogenes* infections, whereas maintaining normal resistance to MCMV. Conversely, IRG-47-deficient mice displayed only partially decreased resistance to *T. gondii* during the chronic phase of infection and completely normal resistance to *L. monocytogenes* and MCMV (11). These

findings are intriguing because they suggest that the IGTP gene family may have evolved and diversified to provide specialized IFN-γ host defense functions against distinct pathogens.

### Conclusions

The studies summarized in this brief review emphasize the immense power of the *T. gondii* mouse model for studying pathways of host resistance to acute infection. A major advantage is the rapid induction of a potent cell-mediated response that is essential for host survival and which facilitates short-term studies of immune response initiation and effector mechanisms limiting parasite growth. The murine *T. gondii* system also provides a superb model for studying the immunologic basis of microbial latency, which in the case of chronic toxoplasma infection, also appears to be dependent on host IL-12-dependent mechanisms (12). This as yet underexploited aspect of the *T. gondii* mouse model represents an excellent direction for future research.

### Acknowledgments

We thank Caetano Reis e Sousa, Charles Serhan, Gregory Taylor, Brian Kelsall, Keiko Ozato, Ruslan Medzhitov, Ron Germain, Oliver Schulz, and Eric Denkers for their important contributions to this work.

### References

1. Sousa CR, Hiény S, Scharton-Kersten T, Jankovic D, Charest H, German RN, Sher A: In vivo microbial stimulation induces rapid CD40 ligand-independent production of interleukin 12 by dendritic cells and their redistribution to T cell areas. J Exp Med 1997; 186:1819–1829.
2. Alberti J, Reis e Sousa C, Schito M, Hiény S, Wells T, Huffnagle GB, Sher A: CCR5 provides a signal for microbial induced pro-
3. Scharton-Kersten T, Contursi C, Masumi A, Sher A, Ozato K: Interferon consensus sequence binding

Sher et al.
protein-deficient mice display
impaired resistance to intracellu-
lar infection due to a primary defect
in interleukin12p 40 induction.
J Exp Med 1997; 186:1523-1534.

4. Scanga C, Aliberti J, Jankovic D,
Tilloy F, Bennouna S, Denkers EY,
et al.: MyD 88 is required for resis-
tance to *Toxoplasma gondii* infec-
tion and regulates parasite-induced
IL-12 production by dendritic cells.
J Immunol 2002; 168; 5997-6001.

5. Schulz O, Edwards AD, Schito M,
Aliberti J, Manickasingham S, Sher
A, et al.: CD 40 triggering of het-
erodimeric IL-12 p 70 production
by dendritic cells in vivo requires
a microbial priming signal. Immuni-
ty 2000; 13:453-462.

6. Reise Sousa C, Yap G, Schulz O,
Rogers N, Schito M, Aliberti J, et
al.: Paralysis of dendritic cell
IL-12 production by microbial
products prevents infection-

induced immunopathology. Immuni-
ty 1999; 11:637-647.

7. Aliberti J, Hiény S, Reise Sousa
C, Serhan CN, Sher A: Lipoxin-
mediated inhibition of IL-12 pro-
duction by DCs: a mechanism for
regulation of microbial immunity.
Nat Immunol 2002; 3:76-82.

8. Scharton-Kersten TM, Yap G,
Magram J, Sher A: Inducible nitric
oxide is essential for host control
of persistent but not acute infec-
tion with the intracellular pathogen
*Toxoplasma gondii*. J Exp Med
1997; 185:1261-1283.

9. Yap GS, Sher A: Effector cells of
both nonhemopoietic and hemo-
poietic origin are required for inter-
feron (IFN)-gamma-and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha-
dependent host resistance to the
intracellular pathogen, *Toxo-
plasma gondii*. J Exp Med 1999;
189:1083-1092.

10. Taylor GA, Collazo CM, Yap GS,
Nguyen K, Gregorio TA, Taylor
LS, et al.: Pathogen-specific loss
of host resistance in mice lacking
the IFN-gamma-inducible gene
IGTP. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2000; 97:751-755.

11. Collazo CM, Yap GS, Sempowski
GD, Lusby KC, Tessarollo L,
Woude GF, et al.: Inactivation of
LRG-47 and IRG-47 reveals a
family of interferon gamma-
inducible genes with essential,
pathogen-specific roles in resis-
tance to infection. J Exp Med
2001; 194:181-188.

12. Yap G, Pesin M, Sher A: Cutting
edge: IL-12 is required for the
maintenance of IFN-gamma pro-
duction in T cells mediating
chronic resistance to the intracel-
lular pathogen, *Toxoplasma*
gondii. J Immunol 2000; 165:
628-631.
