
PERGAMON
Journal of Steroid Biochemistry & Molecular Biology 85 (2003) 389–396

The Journal of  
Steroid Biochemistry  
&  
Molecular Biology  

www.elsevier.com/locate/jsbmb

---

### Dissecting mineralocorticoid receptor structure and function

Fraser M. Rogerson, Francine E. Brennan,
for these steroids than does the classical GR. It is believed that the MR and GR genes arose from a common ancestor before the evolution of aldosterone [7]. It therefore appears that aldosterone evolved to bind (and activate) the MR which retained its affinity for glucocorticoids. Conversely, aldosterone has a low affinity for the GR. Antagonists such as spironolactone and eplerenone [
F.M. Rogerson et al./Journal of Steroid Biochemistry & Molecular Biology 85 (2003) 389–396

EC<sub>50</sub>(nM)

(A)
| aldosterone (nM) | 0 | 0.1 | 1.0 | 3.0 | 10 | 30 | 1
co-activator complex, interacts with the AF-1 region of the rat MR N-terminal domain [17]. The interaction of this complex with the MR was ligand-dependent, occurring in the presence of aldosterone but not in the presence of cortisol. These results are consistent with our findings that the role of the MR N/C interaction is significant only when the receptor binds aldosterone. In certain systems cortisol-bound MR appears
initial suggestions that it may directly phosphorylate ENaC have proven incorrect.

### 8. Nedd4-2

The clinical syndrome of monogenic hypertension, Liddle's syndrome, results from disruption of ENaC turnover, as described above. The turnover of the ENaC subunits is clearly an important component of their cellular regulation. Neuronal precursor cell-expressed, developmentally downregulated (Nedd
10. Na.K-ATPase

Although Na.K-ATPase activity in the basolateral membrane has long been known to be increased by aldosterone treatment, expression of the α- and β-subunit genes of Na.K-ATPase is not increased acutely by aldosterone [33]. The increase in activity is thought to be secondary to an increase in intracellular sodium levels, i.e
predominant isoform. As in the amphibian system, we find acute upregulation of K-ras2A mRNA levels in the rat distal colon in response to both aldosterone and dexamethasone (Brennan and Fuller, unpublished observations). K-ras2A could act through PI 3-kinase to enhance sgk phosphorylation, however, in amphibian cells the MAPK
[24] E. Kamynina, C. Debonneville, M. Bens, A. Vandewalle, O. Staub, A novel mouse Nedd4 protein suppresses the activity of the epithelial Na⁺ channel, FASEB J. 15 (2001) 204–214.

[25] F.E. Brennan, P