
THE ROLE OF FLT3 IN HAEMATOPOIETIC MALIGNANCIES

**Derek L. Stirewalt and Jerald P. Radich**

Normal haematopoietic cells use complex systems to control proliferation, differentiation and cell death. The control of proliferation is, in part, accomplished through the ligand-induced stimulation of receptor tyrosine kinases, which signal to downstream effectors through the RAS pathway.

Recently, mutations in the FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) gene, which encodes a receptor tyrosine kinase, have been found to be the most common genetic lesion in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), occurring in ~25% of cases. Exploring the mechanism by which these FLT3 mutations cause uncontrolled proliferation might lead to a better understanding of how cells become cancerous and provide insights for the development of new drugs.

Haematopoiesis involves the complex regulation of proliferation and differentiation of many cell types — from the parent stem cell to the functional components of the bone marrow and peripheral blood, including the erythroid, myeloid, lymphoid and platelet lineages (FIG. 1). Despite the many genetic checks and balances that are in place to regulate haematopoiesis, mutations of crucial regulatory genes can occur that disrupt normal haematopoiesis and promote leukemogenesis.

The FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (**FLT3**) gene encodes a membrane-bound receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) that has a crucial role in normal haematopoiesis. Recently, **FLT3** mutations have been found in patients with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL; 1–3% of patients), myelodysplasia (5–10%) and acute myeloid leukaemia (AML; 15–35%), making **FLT3** one of the most frequently mutated genes in haematological malignancies. A flurry of research has increased our understanding of the biology of these **FLT3** mutations and how they affect clinical outcome, but many questions concerning the aetiology of the mutations and how they cause leukaemia remain unanswered. What regulatory pathways does mutated **FLT3** disrupt and how does the activation of **FLT3** mutants differ from that of wild-type **FLT3**? What is the prognostic strength of mutations in **FLT3** and should we use them to guide treatment decisions? Is **FLT3** a reasonable target for small-molecule inhibitors? Exploring these issues could lead to a better understanding of leukemogenesis, more-specific prognostic classifications for haematological malignancies and, most importantly, new treatments that target the pathways involved.

**Structure and expression of FLT3**

The **Flt3** (also known as fetal liver kinase 2, **Flk2**) gene was cloned independently by two groups using enriched mouse fetal liver cells¹ and placenta cells². The cloning of the human **FLT3** gene soon followed³⁴. The human **FLT3** gene is located on chromosome 13q12, and has 85% amino-acid sequence homology with mouse **Flt3** (REF. 5). **FLT3** encodes an RTK of 993 amino acids in length that belongs to the RTK subclass III family, which comprises membrane-bound receptors with five immunoglobulin-like extracellular domains, a transmembrane domain, a juxtamembrane domain and two intracellular tyrosine-kinase domains (TKDs) linked by a kinase-insert domain⁶ (FIG. 2). All members of the RTK subclass III family have important roles in the proliferation, differentiation and survival of normal haematopoietic cells⁷. Other members of the RTK subclass III family include the macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) receptor (**FMS**), Steel factor receptor (**KIT**) and the receptors for platelet-derived growth factors A and B (**PDGFRA** and **PDGFRB**)⁶.

Originally, the **FLT3** gene was thought to contain 21 exons, mimicking the intron-exon boundaries of **KIT**.

Summary

- FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) is a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) involved in the proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis of haematopoietic cells. It is mainly expressed by early myeloid and lymphoid progenitor cells.
- Many cells of the haematopoietic system produce FLT3 ligand (FLT3L), which promotes dimerization and activation of FLT3. The activated receptor then activates the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and RAS signal-transduction cascades.
- The FLT3 internal tandem duplication (ITD) results from a head-to-tail duplication of 3–400 base pairs in exons 14 or 15, which encode the juxtamembrane domain of FLT3.
- Point mutations in FLT3 occur in heavily conserved areas of the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain (TKD), homologous to point mutations that are seen in other RTKs such as KIT and FMS.
- FLT3 mutations are the most frequent genetic lesion seen in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). The prevalence of FLT3 ITDs is 15–35%, with an additional 5–10% of patients having FLT3 TKD mutations.
- Both types of FLT3 mutation cause ligand-independent activation of the receptor and activation of downstream signalling pathways.
- The presence of a FLT3 ITD is associated with poor clinical outcome in both paediatric and adult patients with AML.
- Several drugs that target FLT3 are in early clinical trials.

However, recent studies indicate that the intron-exon boundaries of the first three extracellular immunoglobulin domains differ between FLT3 and KIT, with FLT3 encoding eight exons in this region compared with five exons for KIT. Two forms of human FLT3 have been described — a 158–160-kDa membrane-bound protein that is glycosylated at N-linked glycosylation sites in the extracellular domain and an unglycosylated 130–143-kDa protein that is not membrane bound (FIG. 2).

In normal human cells, expression of FLT3 occurs mainly in early myeloid and lymphoid progenitors, and not in erythroid cells, megakaryocytes or mast cells (FIG. 1). FLT3 messenger RNA has also been found in other lympho-haematopoietic organs, such as the liver, spleen, thymus and placenta. However, expression in these organs might be due to contamination from haematopoietic cells rather than actual expression in the organ tissue.

Many types of leukaemia express FLT3. In most types, FLT3 expression by the leukaemic cell mirrors that by the normal cell counterpart (FIG. 1). So, FLT3 is expressed by normal myeloid and lymphoid progenitors, and by the leukaemic cells of 70–90% of patients with AML (which originates from primitive, multipotent colony-forming cells or myeloid-committed colony-forming unit cells) and ALL (the common B-cell form of ALL derives from immature, progenitor B cells). B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) probably arises from a more mature lymphocyte population, and CLL cells do not express FLT3. Similarly, although chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) arises from an early progenitor stem cell, a large percentage of CML cells retain differentiation capacity, and expression of FLT3 is lost during differentiation. However, FLT3 expression does not always correlate with the presumed cell of origin of the leukaemia. For example, most T-cell ALLs evolve from early thymocytes, which normally express FLT3 (REF. 20), but FLT3 expression is uncommon in this type of leukaemia. Recently, Armstrong et al. found that patients with ALL with translocations involving the mixed-lineage leukaemia (MLL) gene had a unique gene-expression profile of a distinct subtype of acute leukaemia. Overexpression of the wild-type FLT3 gene distinguished this subtype with MLL translocations from other types of ALL and AML. These findings raise the possibility that specific genetic disturbances, such as MLL translocations, might influence the expression of FLT3.

Structure and expression of FLT3 ligand

After cloning the Flt3 gene, two groups independently used soluble mouse Flt3 to clone the gene encoding mouse Flt3 ligand (Flt3l). The mouse Flt3l cDNA was then used to clone the human FLT3L gene. Mouse and human FLT3L encode proteins of 231 and 235 amino acids, respectively. There is 72% identity at the amino-acid level between mouse and human FLT3L. The identity seems to be greatest (73%) for the extracellular region of the protein and least (52%) for the cytoplasmic domain.

The FLT3L gene encodes a type 1 transmembrane protein, which contains an amino-terminal signalling peptide, four extracellular helical domains, spacer and tether regions, a transmembrane domain and a small cytoplasmic domain. Other type 1 transmembrane proteins include KIT ligand (Steel factor or stem-cell factor) and M-CSF (CSF1) — all three proteins have similar intron-exon boundaries, sizes and structures, which indicates that they are ancestrally related. Ligand activity resides mainly in the extracellular domains, with the spacer and tether regions linking the active extracellular component to the transmembrane domain and, thereby, anchoring the ligand to the cell. The function of the cytoplasmic domain remains unknown, but it does not seem to have a crucial role in stimulation of FLT3 (REF. 15).

There are several different isoforms of both mouse and human FLT3L. Human FLT3L occurs mainly as the full-length transmembrane isoform, which can be proteolytically cleaved in the spacer and tether region to generate a second soluble isoform. This second isoform does not contain the carboxyl end of the transmembrane isoform and consists mainly of the extracellular domains of the protein. A third, rare isoform of FLT3L has an alternatively spliced exon 6 that creates a premature stop codon, resulting in a slightly different soluble form of the protein.

Unlike human FLT3L, the most abundant isoform of mouse Flt3l is a 220-amino-acid, membrane-associated protein. This membrane-associated isoform results from the failure to splice out an intron, creating a reading-frame shift that encodes a stretch of hydrophobic amino acids. As a result, the membrane-associated isoform does not include the spacer, tether, transmembrane or cytoplasmic domains that normally anchor the ligand. Instead, the stretch of hydrophobic amino acids anchors the ligand to the cell surface. The absence of the spacer and tether

Self-renewing
pluripotent stem cell

Committed stem cell

Early myeloid
progenitor

Early lymphoid
progenitor

CFU-E
RBC

CFU-MK
MK

Platelets

CFU-GM
+/- CFU-B
- CFU-G
+/- CFU-M
+/- CFU-D
+ Granulocyte
Monocyte
Dendritic cell
Mast cell/basophil

ProB
PreB
B cell

ProT
PreT
T cell

Early
NK cell
NK cell
? 

Figure 1 | Expression of FLT3 in normal haematopoiesis. The maturation and differentiation of cells during normal haematopoiesis is shown, indicating how expression of FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) is linked to this process (shown as +, -, +/- or ? (unknown)). FLT3 is mainly expressed by early myeloid and lymphoid progenitor cells, with some expression by the more mature monocytic lineage cells. Colony-forming units for the erythroid (CFU-E), megakaryocytic (CFU-MK), granulocytic-monocytic (CFU-GM), basophilic (CFU-B), granulocytic (CFU-G), monocytic (CFU-M), and dendritic (CFU-D) lineages are shown. NK cell, natural killer cell; RBC, red blood cell.

regions also prohibits the normal proteolytic cleavage that occurs in the human full-length transmembrane isoform²⁵,²⁶. A soluble variant of mouse Flt3l, similar to the soluble variant of human FLT3L with an alternatively spliced exon 6, has also been identified. The biological relevance of these various isoforms is unknown, and studies have not looked in any detail at whether specific isoforms are preferentially expressed by subtypes of tissue. All human and mouse isoforms of FLT3L are biologically active, although the relative activity of the different isoforms remains to be clarified¹⁵. Unlike other RTK ligands (for example, Steel factor), FLT3L does not have species specificity²⁷; soluble human FLT3L can activate mouse Flt3, and vice-versa.

FLT3L is expressed by most tissues, including haematopoietic organs (spleen, thymus, peripheral blood and bone marrow), prostate, ovary, kidney, lung, colon, small intestine, testis, heart and placenta, with the highest level of expression by peripheral-blood mononuclear cells. The brain is one of the few tissues without demonstrable expression of FLT3L. Most immortalized haematopoietic cell lines express FLT3L²⁸,²⁹, and expression has even been detected in immortalized colorectal cancer cell lines³⁰. There are no large studies of expression of FLT3L in primary tumour samples.

The expression of FLT3L by a wide variety of tissues is in contrast to the limited expression pattern of FLT3, which is found mainly in early haematopoietic progenitor cells. This indicates that the expression of

Figure 2 | Structure and activation of wild-type FLT3. Transcription of the FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) gene produces FLT3 mRNA, which is translated to FLT3 protein. FLT3 contains five extracellular immunoglobulin-like domains (E), a transmembrane domain (TM), a juxtamembrane domain (J M) and two tyrosine-kinase domains (K) that are linked through the tyrosine-kinase insert (KI). Cytoplasmic FLT3 undergoes glycosylation (G), which promotes localization of the receptor to the membrane. Wild-type FLT3 remains as a monomeric, inactivated protein on the cell surface until FLT3 ligand (L), probably in a dimeric form, binds the receptor and induces receptor dimerization. FLT3 dimerization promotes phosphorylation (P) of the tyrosine-kinase domains, thereby activating the receptor and downstream effectors. The dimerized receptors are quickly internalized and degraded.

---

FLT3 is a more rate-limiting step in determining the tissue specificity of FLT3 activation than is expression of FLT3L. All expression data, however, must be interpreted with caution, because most studies have examined expression of FLT3L mRNA, which might not fully predict the associated protein levels.

**Regulation of FLT3 activation by FLT3L**

Most unstimulated FLT3 receptors reside as monomers in the plasma membrane (FIG. 2). In this inactive state, the conformation of the receptor might result in steric inhibition of dimerization and exposure of phosphoryl acceptor sites in the TKD by the juxtamembrane domain; a similar mechanism of inhibition between regulatory domains and catalytic domains has been found in other families of tyrosine kinases<sup>31</sup>. After stimulation with FLT3L, membrane-bound FLT3 quickly changes conformation, forming a homodimer and exposing phosphoryl acceptor sites in the TKD<sup>32</sup> (FIG. 2). Dimerization stabilizes this conformational change, which further enhances activation of the receptor<sup>33</sup>. Phosphorylation of FLT3 occurs within 5–15 minutes after FLT3L binding. The FLT3L–FLT3-phosphate complex is then rapidly internalized, starting within 5 minutes of stimulation and reaching a maximum after 15 minutes<sup>32</sup>. Degraded by-products of the ligand-receptor complex are seen as early as 20 minutes after stimulation<sup>32</sup>. So, the entire process of activation, internalization and degradation of FLT3 occurs rapidly in cells, similar to the rapid activation and turnover of other RTK subclass III receptors such as KIT<sup>34</sup>. The rate of FLT3 production, the rapidity of degradation of the activated FLT3L–FLT3 complex and the downstream effects of activation probably participate in a complex feedback loop that regulates normal receptor activity.

Exposure to FLT3L is a crucial component of the regulation of FLT3 activity. Although serum levels of FLT3L are usually low in normal adults<sup>35</sup>, they are inducible. Patients who have low white-blood-cell counts secondary to either haematopoietic disease (for example, FANCONI ANAEMIA or APLASTIC ANAEMIA) or chemotherapy have markedly increased levels of FLT3L in the serum, indicating that the systemic release of FLT3L might be an attempt to promote haematopoiesis<sup>35</sup>. However, although systemic administration of FLT3L has been shown to mobilize primitive haematopoietic stem cells in mouse models<sup>36</sup>, clinical use of FLT3L in humans has not been attempted.

---

FANCONI ANAEMIA  
An autosomal-dominant disorder that is characterized by skeletal growth abnormalities and a high incidence of malignancies, especially of the bone marrow.

APLASTIC ANAEMIA  
An acquired injury to the bone marrow that causes a decrease in normal haematopoiesis. This leads to potentially fatal complications from low numbers of red and white blood cells and platelets.

The low concentrations of FLT3L in the serum of normal adults and the proximity of cells that express FLT3L at a high level to early progenitor haematopoietic cells indicate that a PARACRINE feedback loop might control FLT3 activation. Primitive haematopoietic cells would be stimulated by the local secretion of FLT3L or by direct contact with FLT3L on the cell surface of neighbouring mononuclear cells. In addition, the co-expression of both FLT3L and FLT3 by the same cells indicates that an AUTOCRINE feedback loop might function in some haematopoietic cells²⁸, so that an individual cell can determine its own level of FLT3 activation. Such autocrine activation has been proposed for other growth-factor receptors, such as granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and its receptor³⁷.

Many questions regarding the activation of FLT3 by FLT3L and degradation of the FLT3L-FLT3 complex remain unanswered. Do cells require long-term exposure to FLT3L to induce the desired effects of FLT3 activation? Do the kinetics of FLT3 activation and degradation differ between the various types of normal haematopoietic cell or between normal and malignant haematopoietic cells?

### The FLT3 signal-transduction pathway

Before the discovery of FLT3L, the RTK-RAS signal-transduction pathway was studied using chimeric receptors containing the extracellular ligand-binding domains of human FMS fused to the intracellular catalytic domains of mouse Flt3 (REFS 38,39). Activation of the chimeric receptor with CSF1 transformed mouse cell lines led to a full proliferative response in the absence of other growth factors³⁸,³⁹. Co-precipitation assays found that the chimeric FMS-Flt3 protein directly associated with the Src-homology 2 (SH2) domain of the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K; a regulatory protein of phospholipid metabolism) and with growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (Grb2; an adaptor protein)³⁸,³⁹. This physical association also extended to other effectors of phospholipid metabolism and proliferation, including phospholipase Cγ1 (Plcy1; a regulatory protein of phosphoinositol metabolism), SH2-containing sequence proteins (SHCs; coupling proteins that are involved in numerous phospholipid and proliferative pathways) and GTPase-activating protein (Gap; an important regulatory protein of the proliferative Ras-Raf-Mek-Erk pathway)³⁸,³⁹. These interactions led to phosphorylation of the associated proteins and activation of downstream effectors such as Vav (which is involved in haematopoiesis)³⁸,³⁹. More recently, the stimulated FMS-Flt3 receptor was found to be associated with SH2-domain-containing inositol phosphatase (Ship)⁴⁰. Although Ship is involved in phospholipid metabolism, it might also act as a negative regulator of proliferation by competitively binding phosphorylated SHC proteins that would otherwise activate the Ras-Raf-Mek-Erk pathway⁴¹.

The cloning of FLT3L allowed more-direct study of the molecular pathways involved in FLT3 activation²²,²⁴. Similar to findings with the chimeric models, SHC proteins were rapidly phosphorylated⁴²,

interacting or forming complexes with numerous other proteins including GRB2 (REF.41), GRB2-associated binder 2 (GAB2)⁴³ and SHIP⁴⁰. FLT3 and these adaptor-protein complexes probably stimulate downstream effectors in the RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway⁴¹,⁴⁴ and PI3K pathway⁴¹,⁴³,⁴⁵ (FIG. 3). However, unlike the FMS-Flt3 chimeric receptor, wild-type human FLT3 does not directly bind the p85 subunit of PI3K. Instead, it forms complex associations with many proteins, such as GRB2, GAB2, SHIP, SHP2 (a protein tyrosine phosphatase), CBL (a proto-oncogene) and CBLB (CBL-related protein), that ultimately act on p85 (REFS 41, 43, 45) (FIG. 3). FLT3 activation also modulates crucial downstream signal transducers and activators of transcription, such as STAT5A⁴⁶, and prevents the upregulation of expression of genes that can induce apoptosis, such as BCL2-associated X protein (BAX)⁴⁷. However, all of the signalling-pathway data must be interpreted with caution, because most of these experiments were carried out in either mouse cell models or human cell lines artificially induced by gene transduction. In addition, FLT3 pathways seem to be highly species and tissue specific³⁸,⁴¹, which indicates that it might be difficult to generalize the above findings to normal human haematopoietic cells. Nevertheless, these studies show that FLT3 has a crucial role in many of the regulatory processes of haematopoietic cells, including phospholipid metabolism, transcription, proliferation and apoptosis, and they have established a possible link between FLT3 and the RAS pathway — which is thought to be involved in leukemogenesis⁴⁸–⁵⁰.

#### FLT3 function in normal cells

Activation of FLT3 by FLT3L promotes the *in vitro* growth of early progenitor cells⁵¹⁻⁵³. FLT3-mediated responses are highly dependent on the cell type and other growth factors that are acting on the cell. Gabbianelli *et al.*¹² and others⁵³ found that stimulation with FLT3L without the addition of other growth factors promoted the monocytic differentiation of early haematopoietic progenitor cells, without a marked proliferative response. However, FLT3L stimulation in combination with other growth factors such as interleukin-3 (IL-3), G-CSF, CSF1, GM-CSF, erythropoietin (EPO) and KIT ligand produced a more vigorous proliferative response⁵⁴ and greatly enhanced the development of granulocytic-monocytic colony-forming units¹²,⁵³. In experiments comparing these various combinations of growth factors, Rusten *et al.*,⁵³ found that the combination of FLT3L, KIT ligand, and IL-3 produced the most robust proliferative effect, with the growth of primitive and more committed myeloid progenitor cells. Stimulation with FLT3L has no significant effect on erythropoiesis or megakaryopoiesis¹², owing to the fact that FLT3 is not expressed by these cell lineages.

Stimulation of FLT3 is also important in lymphocyte development. FLT3L stimulation in combination with IL-7 and IL-11 promoted the long-term clonal expansion and differentiation of uncommitted mouse haematopoietic progenitor cells⁵¹. Similar experiments using human fetal bone marrow found that stimulation

PARACRINE  
An effect in a cell that is caused  
by stimulation by hormones  
secreted from another cell.

AUTOCRINE  
An effect in a cell that is caused  
by stimulation by hormones  
secreted from the same cell.

with FLT3L in combination with IL-7 promoted stromal-cell-independent growth of pro-B cells and the differentiation of pro-B cells to pre-B cells<sup>55</sup>. FLT3L-mediated activation might also induce the proliferation and differentiation of early T cells<sup>23,56</sup>. A combination of IL-3, IL-6, IL-7 and FLT3L generated a two-sixfold increase in the number of the most primitive thymic progenitors compared with cells grown under the same conditions without FLT3L<sup>56</sup>.

Given the widespread expression of FLT3 and the functional effects observed, it is surprising that Flt3-knockout mice had relatively normal haematopoiesis, without gross morphological changes in the bone marrow<sup>57</sup>. The only apparent cellular abnormality in Flt3-knockout mice was a small reduction in the size of the pro-B-cell and pre-B-cell compartments. Transplantation of a mixture of early haematopoietic progenitor cells expressing either non-functioning Flt3 or wild-type Flt3 led to reconstitution of the bone marrow with cells that mostly expressed wild-type Flt3, which indicates that these cells had a significant growth advantage<sup>57</sup>. This advantage occurred across all cell lineages, indicating that Flt3 disruption caused a global disturbance in the haematopoietic system<sup>57</sup>. In addition, mice with knockouts of both Kit and Flt3 developed lethal haematopoietic deficiencies. So, FLT3 has an important, but not absolute, role in normal haematopoiesis, working in conjunction with other growth factors to foster the proliferation and differentiation of myeloid and lymphoid cells. These findings indicate that selective FLT3 inhibitors might block inappropriate FLT3 activation in leukaemia cells without too severe haematopoietic side-effects.

### FLT3 and the immune system

Stimulation with FLT3L promotes dendritic-cell development<sup>58,59</sup>, leading to the clonal expansion of dendritic cells in the bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes and peripheral blood<sup>60,61</sup>. Given the central role of dendritic cells as antigen-presenting cells in the immune system, these findings indicate that stimulation with FLT3L might enhance the immune response to malignancies. It is of note that FLT3L-mediated clonal expansion of dendritic cells promotes the regression of both solid and haematopoietic tumours in mouse models<sup>62–66</sup>.

Studies in humans combining FLT3L stimulation with immunization with cancer antigens have yielded mixed results<sup>67,68</sup>. Fong *et al.*<sup>68</sup> examined the ability of FLT3L-mobilized dendritic cells to induce an immune response against a carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) self-peptide, which is often overexpressed in solid malignancies. Twelve patients with solid tumors (nine with colon tumours, one with a tumour of the rectum and two with lung tumours) participated in the Phase I study. Stimulation with FLT3L expanded the dendritic-cell population by 20-fold *in vivo* and increased the production of cytotoxic CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells specific for the CEA peptide. In addition, two of the 12 patients had complete resolution of their metastatic disease, and one patient had a partial response. Clinical responses correlated with the clonal expansion of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells specific for the CEA peptide.

However, Disis et al. 67 were unable to show a significant beneficial immune response as a result of FLT3L stimulation in their Phase I study. Ten patients (nine with breast cancer and one with ovarian cancer, all overexpressing HER2/NEU) were vaccinated with HER2/NEU peptides while receiving either FLT3L, or FLT3L and GM-CSF. FLT3L alone was ineffective at promoting cytotoxic T-cell responses specific for HER2/NEU, and it led to the development of autoimmune disease, perhaps through the clonal expansion of interferon-γ-secreting T cells 67. However, unlike the study by Fong et al. 68, FLT3L-mobilized dendritic cells were not infused before vaccination in this study, which might have compromised immune responses.

Although pre-clinical and early clinical studies indicate an immunological benefit from FLT3L-mediated priming of dendritic cells under some circumstances, any therapeutic use of FLT3L must be carefully weighed against the potential side effect of autoimmune disease. In addition, there is a possibility of stimulating malignant cell growth through activation of the RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, especially in haematological malignancies. After all, FLT3L stimulates the proliferation of immortalized AML cell lines and primary AML samples 47,69, and FLT3L stimulation of malignant haematopoietic cells could potentially provide them with a growth advantage over normal haematopoietic cells.

FLT3 mutations in haematopoietic malignancies

Nakao et al. 70 first described FLT3 mutations in haematopoietic malignancies in 1996, which stimulated a large amount of research characterizing the frequency and relevance of FLT3 mutations 70–78. The most common form of FLT3 mutation is an internal tandem duplication (ITD) in exons 14 and 15 (previously known as exons 11 and 12), which occurs in 15–35% of patients with AML 70–77,79–81 and 5–10% of patients with myelodysplasia (MDS) 78,82. FLT3 ITDs are formed when a fragment of the juxtamembrane domain coding sequence is duplicated and inserted in a direct head-to-tail orientation (FIG. 4; BOX.1). The length of the ITD varies from 3 to ≥400 base pairs, and the reading frame of the transcript is always preserved, either by a faithful in-frame duplication or by the insertion of nucleotides at the ITD junction to maintain the original reading frame 75.

The second most common type of FLT3 mutation is a missense point mutation in exon 20 (previously known as exon 17) of the TKD. TKD mutations occur in patients with AML (5–10%), MDS (2–5%) and ALL (1–3%) 76,83,84, and the most common nucleotide substitution (GAT → TAT) changes an aspartic acid to tyrosine (D835Y). Other mutations in codon 835, such as deletions, have also been described, but these are far less common. In addition, point mutations, deletions and insertions in the codons surrounding codon 835 have also been found 76,83,85. Similar to the ITDs, all TKD mutations maintain the same open reading frame. A single patient will occasionally have both an ITD and TKD point mutation of FLT3, but most patients have

Figure 4 | Structure and location of FLT3 mutations. A | Internal tandem duplications (ITDs) occur in exons 14 or 15 of the juxtamembrane domain (JM), which lies directly between the transmembrane domain (TM) and the first tyrosine-kinase domain (K1). Point mutations, insertions and deletions are found in exon 20 of K2. B | A comparison of the possible modes of activation of wild-type FLT3 and mutant FLT3. a | Without ligand (L), receptors remain mostly in the inactivated monomeric form. The conformation of the monomeric receptor probably involves repulsive forces that prevent dimerization and possibly block adaptor proteins (green) from docking. b | After ligand binding, conformational changes in FLT3 promote dimerization, phosphorylation (P) and adaptor-protein docking, transmitting signals to downstream effectors (green arrow). c | ITDs probably promote ligand-independent dimerization and activation of FLT3 through changing the conformation of the expressed receptor. Experiments indicate that ITD-containing FLT3 might activate both similar (blue) and unique (red) pathways compared with wild-type FLT3. The conformational changes associated with ITDs might change the structure of the receptor such that unique adaptor proteins can now dock. d | Missense mutations in TKD2 might also promote ligand-independent activation. It is unknown if dimerization is required or if the downstream effectors are similar to those activated through the wild-type cascade.
only one type of FLT3 mutation ${}^{76,86}$. In total, ~25–45% of patients with AML will have some form of mutation in FLT3, making disturbances in this gene the most common form of genetic abnormality in AML.

**Biology of FLT3 ITDs.** *In vitro* transduction studies have shown that FLT3 ITDs promote ligand-independent dimerization, auto-phosphorylation and constitutive activation of the receptor ${}^{71,87-89}$. How FLT3 ITDs promote constitutive activation is unknown. Experiments indicate that mutations in the juxtamembrane domain probably eliminate the naturally occurring repressive regions of FLT3, which normally prevent dimerization without ligand stimulation (FIG. 4B). Various mutations (insertions, deletions or duplications) in several regions of the juxtamembrane domain cause constitutive activation of the receptor. In addition, FLT3 engineered with an ITD, but without a TKD region, dimerizes with wild-type receptors without the addition of ligand and can activate wild-type FLT3 ${}^{88}$. A similar repressive sequence has been identified in the juxtamembrane domain of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (VEGFR1), and disruption of this repressive sequence promotes activation of a VEGFR1–VEGFR2 chimeric protein ${}^{90}$. So, the loss of repressor function with subsequent constitutive receptor activation might be a relatively common event. Another possible explanation is that FLT3 ITDs disrupt the intrinsic negative regulatory effects of the juxtamembrane domain on its own TKDs, whereby FLT3 ITDs change the conformation of the monomeric receptor, exposing the phosphoryl acceptor sites in the TKDs. Once these sites are exposed, phosphoryl donors dock and activate the receptor. In this model, receptors with FLT3 ITDs would not require dimerization for activation. It should be emphasized that these models of mutant FLT3 activation have not been completely proven.

The constitutive activation induced by FLT3 ITDs promotes ligand-independent proliferation and blocks myeloid differentiation of early haematopoietic cells in mouse model systems ${}^{71,87,88,91}$. Recently, Kelly et al. ${}^{92}$ found that FLT3 ITDs induce a myeloproliferative-like disease in mouse bone-marrow transplant models. These experiments indicate that FLT3 ITDs are sufficient to promote a phenotypical change associated with enhanced proliferation, but they are not sufficient to induce overt acute leukaemia. Other genetic lesions that are common in acute leukaemia have been found to induce a similar myeloproliferative (but not leukaemic) phenotype in mouse models. Of particular interest is t(15;17) — a balanced, reciprocal chromosome translocation of the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) gene at 15q22 and the retinoic acid receptor-$\alpha$ (RAR$\alpha$) gene at 17q12 — which causes a myeloproliferative-like syndrome in mouse models, with ~15–20% of the mice progressing to a leukaemia-like disease ${}^{93,94}$. In human AML, FLT3 ITDs are often found in patients with t(15;17). It is of note that mice transplanted with haematopoietic cells with both t(15;17) and a FLT3 ITD universally develop a leukaemia-like syndrome, with a marked reduction in the latency time of disease onset ${}^{95}$.

It has been hypothesized that the development of AML requires at least two classes of genetic abnormality that independently disrupt at least two regulatory processes in haematopoietic cells. For example, one primary genetic event such as the PML-RARA translocation might impair differentiation, whereas another ‘hit’ such as an FLT3 ITD promotes proliferation and survival ${}^{95}$. This theory derives from Knudson’s ‘two hit’ hypothesis, which proposes that most cancers require at least two mutations, with the first being either germline or somatic, whereas the second is always somatic ${}^{96}$. However, although this concept is intellectually satisfying, it is unclear how FLT3 mutations actually cooperate to cause cancer. For example, FLT3 mutations disrupt differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis ${}^{71,87,89,91}$, and the components of these regulatory pathways have a tremendous amount of both redundancy and ‘cross-talk’ between pathways (FIG. 3). Therefore, a single mutation might not completely disrupt an entire pathway or its regulatory function, or might not simply affect a single functional pathway. In some cases, there might be a ‘pathway dosage’ effect, whereby different mutations must act on the same regulatory pathway to promote a more complete disruption of its normal activity. For example, both FLT3 ITDs and t(15;17) disrupt differentiation ${}^{91,95}$, but these mutations are often found together in patients with AML. The implications of these findings for treatment are important. If multiple genetic abnormalities are required to induce AML, then the removal of one of these abnormalities by novel therapeutic agents might be sufficient to partially reverse the survival advantage of the malignant clone.

Simple models of FLT3 ITDs indicate inappropriate signal activation of its usual transduction pathway. However, it might be that FLT3 ITDs recruit new pathways as part of their pathogenic properties. Mutant FLT3 activates many downstream effectors, including RAS, ERK, protein kinase B (PKB/AKT) and STAT5 (REFS ${}^{71,87,89}$). In mouse transduction models, wild-type and mutant Flt3 affect these downstream regulatory proteins in a different manner ${}^{89}$. For example, Flt3I stimulation of mouse haematopoietic cells transduced with wild-type Flt3 results in only weak phosphorylation of Stat5, without any evidence of Stat5 binding to DNA, whereas haematopoietic cells transduced with Flt3 ITD have high-level Stat5 phosphorylation and Stat5 DNA binding ${}^{89}$. Recently, Mizuki et al. ${}^{97}$ used DNA microarrays to compare the RNA-expression profiles of mouse haematopoietic cell lines transduced with either wild-type Flt3 or Flt3 ITD. Marked differences in gene expression were found between the wild-type and ITD Flt3-transduced cells. Pu.1 and C/EBP$\alpha$ — two proteins that are involved in the regulation of haematopoietic-cell differentiation and proliferation — were significantly repressed in Flt3 ITD-transduced cells but were expressed in the wild-type Flt3-transduced cells ${}^{97}$. Together, these data indicate that activation of FLT3 ITD and wild-type receptors might affect downstream effectors in unique ways. If so, these differences, however subtle, might be used to develop targeted treatments for patients with AML with FLT3 ITDs and for patients with other haematopoietic malignancies.
Table 1 | Clinical relevance of FLT3 ITDs in patients with AML*

| Number of patients in study | Frequency of FLT3 ITDs (%) | Mean age of patients (years) | CR wild-type:ITD (%) | DFS wild-type:ITD (months) | OS wild-type:ITD (months) | 5-year DFS wild-type:ITD (%) | 5-year OS wild-type:ITD (%) | Reference |
|-----------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|----------------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|------------|
| 64                          | 11                        | 6                         | 93:57                | N.D.                     | N.D.                     | 69:14                       | N.D.                       | 104        |
| 94                          | 5                         | 6.8                       | N.D.                 | N.D.                     | N.D.                     | 60:20                       | N.D.                       | 103        |
| 91                          | 17                        | 10.5                      | 74:40                | N.D.                     | N.D.                     | N.D.                        | N.D.                       | 74         |
| 201                         | 23                        | N.D.                      | 75:71 (N.S.)         | N.D.                     | N.D.                     | 50:18                       | 45:14                       | 80         |
| 979                         | 20                        | N.D.                      | 67:71 (N.S.)         | 18:13                    | 14:10 (N.S.)             | N.D.                        | N.D.                       | 76         |
| 106                         | 13                        | 41                        | N.D.                 | N.D.                     | 29:13                    | N.D.                        | N.D.                       | 77         |
| 854                         | 27                        | 41                        | 84:78                | N.D.                     | N.D.                     | 46:30                       | 44:32                       | 81         |
| 1003                        | 23                        | 57                        | 70:70 (N.S.)         | 13:7                     | 15:12 (N.S.)             | N.D.                        | N.D.                       | 75         |
| 140                         | 27                        | 67                        | 40:55 (N.S.)         | 8:8 (N.S.)               | 7:8 (N.S.)               | N.D.                        | N.D.                       | 73         |

*All results are statistically significant unless labelled as (N.S.). ML, acute myeloid leukaemia; CR, complete response; DFS, disease-free survival; FLT3, FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3; ITD, internal tandem duplication; N.D., not determined; N.S., not statistically significant (*P* > 0.05); OS, overall survival.

Biology of FLT3 TKD point mutations. Mutations in the TKD region of FLT3 also promote constitutive phosphorylation of the receptor and ligand-independent cell growth 83-85. It is not known how FLT3 TKD mutations activate the receptor or whether the activation of TKD-mutant FLT3 more closely resembles that of wild-type FLT3 or of FLT3 ITD. There is ~80% identity between the TKDs of FMS, KIT and FLT3 (REF.6), and TKD mutations have also been found in both FMS and KIT 98-100. In TKD-mutated FMS and KIT, the tyrosine-kinase activity is highly dependent on the type of amino-acid substitution in the TKD, such that some point mutations cause a marked increase in activity, whereas others inhibit activity 101, 102. These experiments are in sharp contrast to the mutational experiments in the juxtamembrane domain of FLT3, which show that any mutation in the juxtamembrane region causes an increase in activity 88. On the basis of experiments with other RTK subclass III receptors, FLT3 TKD mutations probably increase the level of intrinsic tyrosine-kinase activity, rather than interfering with repressive domains and promoting dimerization.

Clinical relevance of FLT3 ITDs. FLT3 mutations are of clinical importance 70-77,79-82,103,104 (TABLE 1). FLT3 ITDs have been strongly associated with LEUKOCYTOSIS, high blast counts, normal cytogenetics, t(15;17) and t(6;9). Recently, one study indicated that FLT3 ITDs might also be associated with duplications and/or double-strand DNA breaks in the breakpoint cluster region of the MLL gene 105.

The prevalence of FLT3 ITDs in patients with AML increases with age, ranging from 5-15% in paediatric patients to 25-35% in adults. Most studies in paediatric patients with AML have found that FLT3 ITDs are strong, independent predictors of poor clinical outcome 74,103,104 (TABLE 1). Studies in adult patients with AML are not as conclusive but still show an overall trend for poor clinical outcome in patients with FLT3 ITDs 75-77,80 (TABLE 1). However, all of these studies potentially suffer from the inherent biases of retrospective analyses. For example, most of these

LEUKOCYTOSIS
An abnormal increase in the number of white blood cells.

Box 1 | The detection of FLT3 mutations

Fortunately, the detection of mutations in the FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) gene is relatively straightforward, fast and cheap. Internal tandem duplications (ITDs) of FLT3 can usually be detected by gel electrophoresis of the polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) products generated from amplifying exons 14 and 15 of the FLT3 gene, in which most ITDs occur (see figure, part a). The PCR primers will generate a wild-type band and a larger FLT3 ITD band, which can be separated by gel electrophoresis.

The detection of FLT3 point mutations is more complicated, but can also be achieved by PCR. The double-strand PCR product is denatured, then run on a single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) gel, which allows the single strands to re-anneal, forming a unique secondary structure. A base-pair mutation results in a different secondary structure, which migrates differently on the gel than the structure of the wild-type sequence (see figure, part b). The abnormal bands can then be excised from the gel and sequenced for confirmation.

There is some evidence that the ratio of mutant to wild-type alleles might determine the pathogenesis of FLT3 mutations. This can be assessed by fluorescent-labelled PCR, whereby the labelled PCR products are separated according to size by migration through a capillary system, with the intensity of the products (relating to relative abundance) determined by laser excitation. In part c of the figure, lane A shows a PCR of a wild-type FLT3 allele; the corresponding fluorescent signal is shown below. Lane B and panel B show a PCR of a leukaemia sample with a low ITD:wild-type FLT3 ratio (0.9). Lane C and panel C show a PCR of a leukaemia sample with mainly mutated FLT3 (giving a high ITD:wild-type ratio of 2.4) and lane D and panel D show a sample with equal amounts of the wild-type and mutated FLT3 allele (images courtesy of S. Meschichi).

a Duplication of exon 14 in FLT3 ITD

Normal: Exon 14 Intron Exon 15  
Patient: Exon 14 Intron Exon 15  
ITD  

b FLT3 point mutations in exon 20  

c ITD:wild-type FLT3 allelic ratio  

A B C D  
Allelic ratio  
240 280 320 360 400  
A 0.0  
B 0.9  
C 2.4  
D 0.5  

in cases of AML with t(15;17), FLT3 ITDs are mainly found in the heterozygous state, but they are sometimes found in a single-copy, homozygous state after loss of the normal FLT3 allele. The FLT3 'allelic ratio' of mutated to wild-type FLT3 might explain some of the prognostic variability of FLT3 ITDs. Several studies have indicated that patients with AML having high ITD:wild-type FLT3 ratios have the worst clinical prognosis ${}^{76,109}$. Whitman *et al.* ${}^{109}$ found that three patients with an extremely high ITD:wild-type ratio had LOSS OF HETEROZYGOSITY (LOH) of the wild-type FLT3 allele, which indicates that LOH might explain some of the differences in the ITD:wild-type ratio between patients. However, Thiede *et al.* ${}^{76}$ were unable to detect LOH of the wild-type allele in nine patients with strong over-representation of the FLT3 ITD, indicating that LOH might not account for most of the differences in ITD:wild-type ratios. It has been proposed that an increased ITD:wild-type ratio might be due to HOMOLOGOUS RECOMBINATION of the FLT3 ITD allele, thereby creating more copies of the FLT3 ITD allele than of the wild-type allele ${}^{76}$. Gene amplification of the wild-type FLT3 gene has been shown in one leukaemia cell line ${}^{110}$, but this has not been examined in actual patient samples. The most plausible explanation for the variation of allelic ratios between leukaemia cases lies in the observation that, in many cases, leukaemia might be a polyclonal process. Some sub-populations of AML cells might have an FLT3 ITD, whereas others contain only wild-type FLT3. For example, FLT3 mutational

LOSS OF HETEROZYGOSITY (LOH). A loss of one of the alleles at a given locus as a result of a genomic change, such as mitotic deletion, gene conversion or chromosome missegregation.

HOMOLOGOUS RECOMBINATION The process by which segments of DNA are exchanged between two DNA duplexes that share high sequences similarity.

status can change between diagnosis and relapse, with some patients developing a new or different FLT3 mutation on relapse, whereas other patients lose their FLT3 mutation altogether ${ }^{106,108}$. If a leukaemia contained two clones with different FLT3 mutation status (one with cells containing an FLT3 ITD, and one with wild-type FLT3), then patients having a higher percentage of clones with FLT3 ITDs would have higher ITD:wild-type ratios. If the cells with the FLT3 ITD are more resistant to therapy, then patients with higher ITD:wild-type ratios would be more likely to have a poor clinical outcome than patients with a lower ratio.

It is not known how a high FLT3 ITD:wild-type allelic ratio affects mRNA and protein expression of the mutant and wild-type alleles. It would be expected that those samples with a high FLT3 ITD:wild-type allelic ratio would also have a higher level of FLT3 ITD mRNA and of FLT3 ITD protein expression. Recently, Libura et al. ${ }^{105}$ examined the relative mRNA expression of 31 patients with AML with FLT3 ITDs compared with 100 patients with AML with wild-type FLT3. Overall, the mean FLT3 mRNA expression of the ITD group was not significantly different from that of the wild-type group, but there was a wide range of FLT3 expression within the patients with FLT3 ITD and wild-type FLT3. As noted previously, wild-type FLT3 expression is increased in high-risk patients with MLL translocations ${ }^{21}$. Taken together, these studies indicate that overexpression of FLT3, whether wild-type or mutated, might be a common thread in high-risk acute leukaemia.

**Clinical relevance of FLT3 TKD mutations.** Although both FLT3 ITDs and FLT3 TKD mutations cause ligand-independent activation *in vitro*, the clinical relevance of these mutations might be different. One study of 201 patients with AML found no significant association between FLT3 TKD mutations and age, white-blood-cell counts, leukaemic-blast counts or cytogenetics; however, there was a trend for shorter disease-free survival for patients with FLT3 TKD mutations ${ }^{83}$. In a larger study of 979 patients, subgroup analyses in patients of less than 60 years of age found that FLT3 TKD mutations were associated with a higher white-blood-cell count, higher blast percentage and a relative reduction in overall survival ${ }^{76}$, but no significant differences in disease-free or overall survival could be established for the entire AML population. Libura et al. ${ }^{105}$ have found that, similar to FLT3 ITDs, FLT3 TKD mutations occur more commonly in AML samples with MLL duplications or a double-strand break in the BCR of the MLL gene. In addition, samples with FLT3 TKD mutations tend to have higher levels of FLT3 expression than samples with either FLT3 ITDs or wild-type FLT3 (REF. 105). It is not known how these latest findings factor into any prognostic relevance of FLT3 TKD mutations, but as FLT3 TKD mutations are less frequent than FLT3 ITDs, extremely large studies will be required to determine the impact, if any, of FLT3 TKD mutations on clinical outcome.

FLT3 inhibitors

After the success of imatinib (Glivec; Novartis) — a small-molecule tyrosine-kinase inhibitor (TKI) used to treat CML ${ }^{111}$ — there has been a tremendous effort to discover other small-molecule inhibitors that could be efficacious for other malignancies. Given the high frequency of activating FLT3 mutations in patients with AML, FLT3 and its downstream pathway are attractive targets for directed inhibition. Recent experiments indicate that MLL rearrangements might exert some of their neoplastic effects through upregulation of expression of wild-type FLT3 (REF. 21). Therefore, TKIs specific for FLT3 might have an even broader use in AML and/or other haematopoietic malignancies than first predicted on the basis of FLT3 mutation analyses. Non-specific TKIs (such as herbimycin A, AG1295, and AG1296) block the constitutive activation of FLT3 ITDs, as well as other proteins such as heat shock protein 90 (HSP90), thereby inhibiting the growth of cells that express FLT3 ITDs ${ }^{112-115}$. However, many of these non-specific compounds are highly toxic in humans, prompting searches for more selective compounds for clinical use.

Several promising TKIs have been identified recently that might change the treatment of haematopoietic malignancies (TABLE 2). CEP-701 and CEP-5214 (Cephalon) are two orally bioavailable TKIs derived from indolocarbazole ${ }^{116,117}$. Both compounds preferentially inhibit autophosphorylation of wild-type and mutant FLT3, and show limited inhibition of KIT, FMS and PDGFR. Levis et al. ${ }^{116}$ found that CEP-701 is cytotoxic to leukaemia blasts from patients with AML *in vitro* and *in vivo*, and prolongs the survival of mice injected with BaF3/ITD cells. A Phase I/II trial is now underway in patients with refractory and relapsed AML with FLT3 mutations, and preliminary results have been presented in abstract form at the American Society of Hematology ${ }^{118}$. In eight patients, CEP-701 seemed to be relatively well tolerated, with nausea, fatigue and neutropenia being the most commonly described side-effects. CEP-701 dosage has now been titrated to 80 mg twice a day. At this early stage, it is difficult to discern the potential efficacy of CEP-701, but one patient did normalize his peripheral-blood counts, with <5% blasts in his bone marrow, which indicates that this agent might be beneficial in some patients with AML.

Sugen has also identified several compounds (SU5416, SU5614 and SU11248) that block FLT3 activation ${ }^{119-121}$. Unlike the compounds developed by Cephalon, these agents also inhibit other RTKs such as KIT, PDGFR and VEGFR ${ }^{119-121}$. After initial Phase I trials, Giles et al. ${ }^{122}$ recently examined SU5416 at a dose of 145 mg m ${ }^{-2}$ in 55 patients with refractory or relapsed AML regardless of FLT3 status. The main toxicities included headaches (14% of patients), dyspnoea (14%), infusion-related reactions (11%) and thrombotic episodes (7%). Three patients (5%) had a partial response. An early Phase I trial examined SU11248 in 32 patients with advanced AML. Again, FLT3 mutations were not necessary for inclusion in the trial. SU11248 was relatively well tolerated, with fatigue being the main dose-limiting toxicity ${ }^{121,123}$. Approximately half of the

Table 2 | Tyrosine-kinase inhibitors in early clinical trials

| Compound     | Company   | Route | Receptor                                      | Side effects                                   | Responses                                                                 | Clinical development                                           |
|--------------|-----------|-------|-----------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| CEP-701      | Cephalon  | Oral  | FLT3 (wild-type and mutant)                   | Nausea, fatigue and neutropenia                 | 1 of 8 patients: <5% blasts in bone marrow                          | Phase II trial in adult AML*, accrual in progress                |
| SU5416       | Sugen     | IV    | FLT3 (wild-type and mutant), KIT, FMS and PDGFR | Headaches, dyspnoea, infusion reaction and thrombosis | 3 of 55 patients: partial remission with 6–25% bone-marrow blasts | Phase II trial in adult AML and high-grade MDS                    |
| SU11248      | Sugen     | Oral  | FLT3 (wild-type and mutant), KIT, FMS and PDGFR | Fatigue                                       | 32 patients, 13 of 16 evaluable patients: >50% reduction in peripheral blasts | Phase I trial in adult AML; accrual in progress                  |
| MLN518       | Millenium | Oral  | FLT3 (wild-type and mutant), KIT and PDGFR     | Not reported yet                              | 8 patients, 2 of 3 evaluable patients: 50% reduction in marrow blasts | Phase I trial in adult AML and high-grade MDS; accrual in progress |
| PKC412       | Novartis  | Oral  | FLT3 (wild-type and mutant), PKC, VEGFR and PDGFR | Nausea; two deaths of uncertain aetiology; pulmonary toxicity; lethargy | 1 of 8 patients: >50% reduction in marrow blasts                   | Phase II trial in adult AML                                     |
| L-000021649  | Merck     | Oral  | FLT3 (wild-type and mutant) and VEGFR          | Not reported yet                              | Not reported yet                                                       | Phase I trial in paediatric AML and ALL: starting accrual         |

*Patients with AML had to have either an FLT3 internal tandem duplication or a mutation in the tyrosine-kinase domain. ALL, acute lymphocytic leukaemia; AML, acute myeloid leukaemia; FLT3, FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3; IV, intravenous; MDS, myelodysplasia; PDGFR, platelet-derived growth factor receptor; PKC, protein kinase C; VEGFR, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor.

patients had some form of haematological response as shown by a >50% reduction in their percentage of leukaemia blasts.

MLN518 (otherwise known as CT53518 from Millenium) is a novel piperarazinyl quinazoline that inhibits the growth of FLT3 ITD-transformed cells in vitro and in vivo. Similar to the Sugen compounds, MLN518 also inhibits wild-type FLT3, PDGFRB and KIT. In a Phase I study of patients with relapsed or refractory AML, preliminary findings showed that two of six patients had >50% reduction in the number of bone blasts. This study is currently in progress with additional patients.

Lastly, PKC412 (Novartis) is a benzoylstaurosporine—initially developed as a VEGFR inhibitor—that blocks the activity of wild-type and mutant FLT3 mutations. On the basis of Phase I dosing studies in solid tumours, a Phase II trial has begun studying PKC412 at a dose of 75 mg three times a day in patients with relapsed or refractory AML with FLT3 mutations. All patients were poor candidates for myelosuppressive chemotherapy and had a poor performance status of less than 3. Mild nausea was the most common side effect in the first eight patients, but three of the eight patients discontinued use of the drug for reasons other than progression of disease (liver toxicity, fatal pulmonary toxicity and severe lethargy). It is unclear if these complications were related to drug administration. No partial or complete responses were obtained in this heavily pre-treated and debilitated patient population. Analysis of results is continuing, and additional data should be available in the near future. Of additional interest is the fact that PKC412 has been found to kill leukaemia cells with MLL translocations that overexpress wild-type FLT3 (REFS 21, 110). These findings indicate that PKC412 (and possibly other TKIs) might be effective for the treatment of a wide range of haematopoietic malignancies that overexpress FLT3, even if they do not have activating FLT3 mutations. If similar experiments can validate these findings in other types of cell line and primary AML samples, then the therapeutic use of TKIs might broaden to include other malignancies, such as AML and B-cell ALL, or any haematopoietic disease that overexpresses FLT3.

Compared with the results of initial clinical trials of imatinib for the treatment of CML, early reports of FLT3 TKIs for the treatment of AML might seem unimpressive. This should not be surprising. AML is an aggressive, heterogeneous disease, with various cytogenetic abnormalities and mutations. CML, especially in the chronic phase, is far less aggressive and more homogeneous, uniformly characterized by a single genetic abnormality, the Philadelphia chromosome, which is a reciprocal translocation of the BCR and ABL genes (t(9;22)). In animal models, the BCR-ABL translocation is necessary and sufficient to promote leukemogenesis; moreover, there is evidence that BCR-ABL alone both drives differentiation and blocks apoptosis, so that disruption of the activity of the BCR-ABL fusion protein could undermine the leukemic process. By contrast, FLT3 mutations alone are not sufficient to promote leukemogenesis in mouse models. Finally, all studies of FLT3 inhibitors have involved heavily pre-treated patients who have failed chemotherapy—a therapy-resistant and severely ill group of patients. So, in this patient cohort, a reduction in blast counts can be considered a success, and this is

Box 2 | Mutations in the RTK–RAS signalling pathway

Point mutations of the GTPase oncogene NRAS occur in ~15% of cases of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML); KRAS mutations occur less often (<5% of cases) and HRAS mutations are rare. Interest in the receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)–RAS pathway increased with the description of FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) mutations, which are found in 15–30% of cases of AML.

However, it is probable that the RTK–RAS pathway (see figure) is even more central to the pathogenesis of AML than indicated by these percentages. A limitation of most published studies is that the particular gene of interest was generally studied in one set of AML cases, then the next gene was studied in another set (a scientific process akin to ‘this year’s model’). Several studies have now looked for mutations in either the RTKs — FLT3, FMS, KIT and vascular endothelial growth-factor receptor genes (VEGFRs) — or in RAS in the same cases. The results show a surprising prevalence of mutations in both paediatric and adult AML, with mutations of some component of the pathway occurring in >50% of cases. As expected, mutations of two members of the pathway (FLT3 and RAS) in the same leukaemia are rare, as an additional mutation of this pathway in a cell already harbouring one mutation would not be expected to confer any selection advantage.

With further studies, mutations of downstream members of this pathway (such as MEK and RAF) might be detected, making this pathway even more inviting as a target for new therapeutic agents.
BAD, BCL2 antagonist of cell death; ERK, extracellular-signal-regulated kinase; GRB2, growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2; MEK, MAPK/ERK kinase; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; SHC, SH2-containing sequence protein.


Future directions

Many questions remain to be answered with regards to the biology of FLT3 and its role in leukemogenesis. There is the fundamental question of how FLT3 mutations actually promote leukemogenesis, and what other molecular pathways are recruited or compromised for this process to occur. As discussed, preliminary data indicate that FLT3 mutations are not sufficient for leukemogenesis but might cooperate with other genetic disturbances to facilitate its development. First, do subtle differences between the pathways that are activated by wild-type FLT3 and mutant FLT3 account for the leukemogenic potential of FLT3 mutations? Initial evidence indicates that there might be biological differences between activated wild-type and mutant FLT3. If identified, these differences could be exploited in future treatments. Second, why are FLT3 mutations common in AML but not B-cell ALL (given that normal B cells express FLT3)? Does this reflect the baseline mitotic or apoptotic activity of myeloid versus lymphoid progenitors, or does it reflect fundamental molecular differences in the pathway that give myeloid cells, but not lymphoid cells, with FLT3 mutations a proliferative advantage? Exploring these curious phenomena might provide an insight into the aetiology of FLT3 mutations, as well as the general problem of cell-type-specific mutations. In addition, a more fundamental understanding of how various mutations influence interrelated pathways should allow drug targeting at crucial biological ‘checkpoints’. Microarray analyses, which allow the examination of expression of thousands of genes simultaneously, will have a crucial role in showing the similarities and differences in gene expression due to different mutations. However, many of the complex interactions in the FLT3 pathway are probably not regulated at the level of either mRNA or protein expression, rather by changes in the phosphorylation of proteins or complexes of proteins. A detailed interrogation of such a complex system will require methods that examine both gene expression and protein activation.

The clinical relevance of FLT3 mutations also needs to be explored in more detail in trials with patients receiving various treatments. Larger prospective trials will better clarify the effects of FLT3 mutations in patients with AML treated with standard chemotherapy or dose-intensification chemotherapy. These studies also need to be expanded to include other treatment schemes, such as autologous and allogeneic transplantation. It will be crucial to couple the FLT3 mutation analyses to FLT3 expression results and mutational analyses of other genes, such as KIT, FMS and RAS, that act on similar pathways (BOX 2). These studies might provide an insight into the relationships between various mutated genes and begin to genetically characterize leukaemia, identifying subgroups of patients that can be prognostically classified on the basis of mutation status. As most FLT3 mutations occur in patients with normal cytogenetics, any prognostic relevance of these mutations could help dictate future treatment plans.

supported by accompanying molecular studies showing that these inhibitors do indeed block activation of the mutant receptor. Therefore, there is guarded optimism that FLT3 inhibitors might become a successful therapeutic tool for patients with leukaemia, particularly AML. Moreover, the recent discovery that the RTK–RAS signalling pathway is frequently mutated in AML (BOX 2) has promoted the strategy of finding inhibitors for targets further downstream of FLT3. Such inhibitors might equally block inappropriate activation by either FLT3 or RAS mutations.
Finally, new TKIs are being developed rapidly. These need to be quickly screened in pre-clinical trials, choosing those that have the greatest potential for success, and then moved rapidly to Phase I trials. Ultimately, the pre-clinical biological data available so far indicate that TKIs alone might not be sufficient for the treatment of leukaemia; therefore, the use of combinations of TKIs with other agents will probably need to be pursued.

Cancer is a genetic disease. It is unlikely, however, that every defined mutation will have a unique prognostic impact, cause a singular aberration in a cellular pathway or require a specific targeted therapy. The careful study of specific mutations such as in FLT3, and how these mutations are different from or similar to other classes of mutation, will probably lead to new schemes of cancer classification and new therapies directed at specific subsets of molecular lesion.

1. Matthews, W., Jordan, C. T., Wiegand, G. W., Pardoll, D. & Lemischka, I.R. A receptor tyrosine kinase specific to hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell-enriched populations. *Cell* **65**, 1143–1152 (1991).
2. Rosnet, O., Marchetto, S., deLapeyriere, O. & Birnbaum, D. Murine *Flt3*, a gene encoding a novel tyrosine kinase receptor of the PDGFR/CSF1R family. *Oncogene* **6**, 1641–1650 (1991). References 1 and 2 describe the initial cloning and expression of the mouse Fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 (*Flt3*) gene.
3. Rosnet, O. *et al.* Human *FLT3/FLK2* gene: cDNA cloning and expression in hematopoietic cells. *Blood* **82**, 1110–1119 (1993).
4. Small, D. *et al.* STK-1, the human homolog of Flk-2/Flt-3, is selectively expressed in CD34+ human bone marrow cells and is involved in the proliferation of early progenitor/stem cells. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **91**, 459–463 (1994). References 3 and 4 describe the initial cloning and expression of the human *FLT3* gene.
5. Rosnet, O. *et al.* Close physical linkage of the *FLT1* and *FLT3* genes on chromosome 13 in man and chromosome 5 in mouse. *Oncogene* **8**, 173–179 (1993).
6. Agnes, F. *et al.* Genomic structure of the downstream part of the human *FLT3* gene: exon/intron structure conservation among genes encoding receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) of subclass III. *Gene* **145**, 283–288 (1994).
7. Rosnet, O. & Birnbaum, D. Hematopoietic receptors of class III receptor-type tyrosine kinases. *Crit. Rev. Oncog.* **4**, 595–613 (1993).
8. Abu-Duhier, F. M. *et al.* Genomic structure of human FLT3: implications for mutational analysis. *Br. J. Haematol.* **113**, 1076–1077 (2001). References 6 and 8 discuss the exon and intron structure of *FLT3*, comparing *FLT3* with other members of the receptor tyrosine kinase subclass III family.
9. Lyman, S. D. *et al.* Characterization of the protein encoded by the *flt3* (*flk2*) receptor-like tyrosine kinase gene. *Oncogene* **8**, 815–822 (1993).
10. Carow, C. E. *et al.* Expression of the hematopoietic growth factor receptor FLT3 (STK-1/Flk2) in human leukemias. *Blood* **87**, 1089–1096 (1996).
11. Rosnet, O. *et al.* Human *FLT3/FLK2* receptor tyrosine kinase is expressed at the surface of normal and malignant hematopoietic cells. *Leukemia* **10**, 238–248 (1996).
12. Gabbianelli, M. *et al.* Multi-level effects of flt3 ligand on human hematopoiesis: expansion of putative stem cells and proliferation of granulomonocytic progenitors/monocytic precursors. *Blood* **86**, 1661–1670 (1995).
13. Ratajczak, M. Z. *et al.* FLT3/FLK-2 (STK-1) ligand does not stimulate human megakaryopoiesis *in vitro*. *Stem Cells* **14**, 146–150 (1996).
14. Hjertson, M., Sundstrom, C., Lyman, S. D., Nilsson, K. & Nilsson, G. Stem cell factor, but not flt3 ligand, induces differentiation and activation of human mast cells. *Exp. Hematol.* **24**, 748–754 (1996).
15. Lyman, S. D. & J. acobsen, S. E. c-kit ligand and Flt3 ligand: stem/progenitor cell factors with overlapping yet distinct activities. *Blood* **91**, 1101–1134 (1998). An excellent review that outlines the cloning, structure, biology and possible clinical implications of FLT3 ligand (FLT3L). Comparisons between FLT3L and KIT ligand are made, which help to further characterize the importance of FLT3L.
16. Sabbath, K. D., Ball, E. D., Larcom, P., Davis, R. B. & Griffin, J. D. Heterogeneity of clonogenic cells in acute myeloblastic leukemia. *J. Clin. Invest.* **75**, 746–753 (1985).
17. Nadler, L. M. *et al.* B cell origin of non-T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. A model for discrete stages of neoplastic and normal pre-B cell differentiation. *J. Clin. Invest.* **74**, 332–340 (1984).
18. Rubartelli, A., Sitia, R., Zacca, A., Grossi, C. E. & Ferrarini, M. Differentiation of chronic lymphocytic leukemia cells:

19. Martin, P. J. *et al.* Involvement of the B-lymphoid system in chronic myelogenous leukaemia. *Nature* **287**, 49–50 (1980).
20. Uckun, F. M. *et al.* Clinical features and treatment outcome of childhood T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia according to the apparent maturation stage of T-lineage leukemic blasts: a Children's Cancer Group study. *J. Clin. Oncol.* **15**, 2214–2221 (1997).
21. Armstrong, S. A. *et al.* MLL translocations specify a distinct gene expression profile that distinguishes a unique leukemia. *Nature Genet.* **30**, 41–47 (2002).
22. Lyman, S. D. *et al.* Molecular cloning of a ligand for the flt3/flk-2 tyrosine kinase receptor: a proliferative factor for primitive hematopoietic cells. *Cell* **75**, 1157–1167 (1993).
23. Hannum, C. *et al.* Ligand for FLT3/FLK2 receptor tyrosine kinase regulates growth of haematopoietic stem cells and is encoded by variant RNAs. *Nature* **368**, 643–648 (1994).
24. Lyman, S. D. *et al.* Cloning of the human homologue of the murine flt3 ligand: a growth factor for early hematopoietic progenitor cells. *Blood* **83**, 2795–2801 (1994).
25. Lyman, S. D. *et al.* Structural analysis of human and murine flt3 ligand genomic loci. *Oncogene* **11**, 1165–1172 (1995).
26. Lyman, S. D. *et al.* Identification of soluble and membrane-bound isoforms of the murine flt3 ligand generated by alternative splicing of mRNAs. *Oncogene* **10**, 149–157 (1995).
27. Lyman, S. D., Brasel, K., Rousseau, A. M. & Williams, D. E. The flt3 ligand: a hematopoietic stem cell factor whose activities are distinct from steel factor. *Stem Cells* **12** (Suppl. 1), 99–107; 108–110 (1994).
28. Brasel, K. *et al.* Expression of the flt3 receptor and its ligand on hematopoietic cells. *Leukemia* **9**, 1212–1218 (1995).
29. Meierhoff, G. *et al.* Expression of FLT3 receptor and FLT3-ligand in human leukemia-lymphoma cell lines. *Leukemia* **9**, 1368–1372 (1995).
30. Spagnoli, G. C. *et al.* FLT3 ligand gene expression and protein production in human colorectal cancer cell lines and clinical tumor specimens. *Int. J. Cancer* **86**, 238–243 (2000).
31. Gonfloni, S., Weijland, A., Kretzschmar, J. & Superti-Furga, G. Crosstalk between the catalytic and regulatory domains allows bidirectional regulation of Src. *Nature Struct. Biol.* **7**, 281–286 (2000).
32. Turner, A. M., Lin, N. L., Issarachai, S., Lyman, S. D. & Broudy, V. C. FLT3 receptor expression on the surface of normal and malignant human hematopoietic cells. *Blood* **88**, 3383–3390 (1996).
33. Weiss, A. & Schlessinger, J. Switching signals on or off by receptor dimerization. *Cell* **94**, 277–280 (1998).
34. Yee, N. S., Langen, H. & Besmer, P. Mechanism of kit ligand, phorbol ester, and calcium-induced down-regulation of c-kit receptors in mast cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **268**, 14189–14201 (1993).
35. Lyman, S. D. *et al.* Plasma/serum levels of flt3 ligand are low in normal individuals and highly elevated in patients with Fanconi anemia and acquired aplastic anemia. *Blood* **86**, 4091–4096 (1995).
36. Ashihara, E. *et al.* FLT-3 ligand mobilizes hematopoietic primitive and committed progenitor cells into blood in mice. *Eur. J. Haematol.* **60**, 86–92 (1998).
37. Rogers, S. Y., Bradbury, D., Kozlowski, R. & Russell, N. H. Evidence for internal autocrine regulation of growth in acute myeloblastic leukemia cells. *Exp. Hematol.* **22**, 593–598 (1994).
38. Dosil, M., Wang, S. & Lemischka, I.R. Mitogenic signalling and substrate specificity of the Flk2/Flt3 receptor tyrosine kinase in fibroblasts and interleukin-3-dependent hematopoietic cells. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **13**, 6572–6585 (1993).
39. Rottapel, R. *et al.* Substrate specificities and identification of a putative binding site for PI3K in the carboxy tail of the murine Flt3 receptor tyrosine kinase. *Oncogene* **9**, 1755–1765 (1994).

References 38 and 39 were two of the first papers to describe the downstream effectors of wild-type FLT3, using a chimeric receptor.

40. Marchetto, S. *et al.* SHC and SHIP phosphorylation and interaction in response to activation of the FLT3 receptor. *Leukemia* **13**, 1374–1382 (1999).
41. Zhang, S., Mantel, C. & Broxmeyer, H. E. Flt3 signaling involves tyrosyl-phosphorylation of SHP-2 and SHIP and their association with Grb2 and Shc in Baf3/Flt3 cells. *J. Leukocyte Biol.* **65**, 372–380 (1999).
42. Lavagna-Sevenier, C., Marchetto, S., Birnbaum, D. & Rosnet, O. FLT3 signaling in hematopoietic cells involves CBL, SHC and an unknown P115 as prominent tyrosine-phosphorylated substrates. *Leukemia* **12**, 301–310 (1998).
43. Zhang, S. & Broxmeyer, H. E. Flt3 ligand induces tyrosine phosphorylation of gab1 and gab2 and their association with shp-2, grb2, and PI3 kinase. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **277**, 195–199 (2000).
44. Srinivas, S. P. & Doshi, P. D. Extracellular signal-regulated kinase and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways cooperate in mediating cytokine-induced proliferation of a leukemic cell line. *Leukemia* **16**, 244–253 (2002).
45. Zhang, S. & Broxmeyer, H. E. p85 subunit of PI3 kinase does not bind to human Flt3 receptor, but associates with SHP2, SHIP, and a tyrosine-phosphorylated 100-kDa protein in Flt3 ligand-stimulated hematopoietic cells. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **254**, 440–445 (1999).
46. Zhang, S. *et al.* Essential role of signal transducer and activator of transcription (Stat)5a but not Stat5b for Flt3-dependent signaling. *J. Exp. Med.* **192**, 719–728 (2000).
47. Lisovsky, M. *et al.* Flt3 ligand stimulates proliferation and inhibits apoptosis of acute myeloid leukemia cells: regulation of Bcl-2 and Bax. *Blood* **88**, 3987–3997 (1996).
48. Radich, J. P. *et al.* N-ras mutations in adult de novo acute myelogenous leukemia: prevalence and clinical significance. *Blood* **76**, 801–807 (1990).
49. Nakagawa, T. *et al.* Multiple point mutation of N-ras and K-ras oncogenes in myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myelogenous leukemia. *Oncology* **49**, 114–122 (1992).
50. Bustelo, X. R., Ledbetter, J. A. & Barbacid, M. Product of vav proto-oncogene defines a new class of tyrosine protein kinase substrates. *Nature* **356**, 68–71 (1992).
51. Ray, R. J.,
59. Maraskovsky, E. *et al.* Dramatic increase in the numbers of functionally mature dendritic cells in Flt3 ligand-treated mice: multiple dendritic cell subpopulations identified. *J. Exp. Med.* 184, 1953–1962 (1996).

60. Morse, M. A. *et al.* Preoperative mobilization of circulating dendritic cells by Flt3 ligand administration to patients with metastatic colon cancer. *J. Clin. Oncol.* 18, 3883–3893 (2000).

61. Manfra, D. J. *et al.* Conditional expression of murine flt3 ligand leads to expansion of multiple dendritic cell subsets in peripheral blood and tissues of transgenic mice. *J. Immunol.* 170, 2843–2852 (2003).

62. Lynch, D. H. *et al.* Flt3 ligand induces tumor regression and antitumor immune responses *in vivo*. *Nature Med.* 3, 625–631 (1997).

63. Chen, K. *et al.* Antitumor activity and immunotherapeutic properties of Flt3-ligand in a murine breast cancer model. *Cancer Res.* 57, 3511–3516 (1997).

64. Chakravarty, P. K. *et al.* Flt3-ligand administration after radiation therapy prolongs survival in a murine model of metastatic lung cancer. *Cancer Res.* 59, 6028–6032 (1999).

65. Pawlowska, A. B. *et al.* In vitro tumor-pulsed or *in vivo* Flt3 ligand-generated dendritic cells provide protection against acute myelogenous leukemia in nontransplanted or syngeneic bone marrow-transplanted mice. *Blood* 97, 1474–1482 (2001).

66. Parajuli, P. *et al.* Immunization with wild-type p53 gene sequences coadministered with Flt3 ligand induces an antigen-specific type 1 T-cell response. *Cancer Res.* 61, 8227–8234 (2001).

67. Disis, M. L. *et al.* Flt3 ligand as a vaccine adjuvant in association with HER-2/neu peptide-based vaccines in patients with HER-2/neu-overexpressing cancers. *Blood* 99, 2845–2850 (2002).

68. Fong, L. *et al.* Altered peptide ligand vaccination with Flt3 ligand expanded dendritic cells for tumor immunotherapy. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 98, 8809–8814 (2001).

69. Dehmel, U. *et al.* Effects of FLT3 ligand on human leukemia cells. I. Proliferative response of myeloid leukemia cells. *Leukemia* 10, 261–270 (1996).

70. Nakao, M. *et al.* Internal tandem duplication of the *flt3* gene found in acute myeloid leukemia. *Leukemia* 10, 1911–1918 (1996). The first article to describe ITDs of FLT3 in leukaemia, leading the way for future articles that examined the prognostic impact of FLT3 mutations.

71. Kiyoi, H. *et al.* Internal tandem duplication of the *FLT3* gene is a novel modality of elongation mutation which causes constitutive activation of the product. *Leukemia* 12, 1333–1337 (1998). One of the first papers to show that FLT3 ITDs cause constitutive activation and ligand-independent growth in mouse transduction models. It led to the use of mouse transduction models for molecular-biology investigations of the mutated receptor and potential FLT3 inhibitors.

72. Kiyoi, H. *et al.* Internal tandem duplication of FLT3 associated with leukocytosis in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Leukemia Study Group of the Ministry of Health and Welfare (Kohseisho). *Leukemia* 11, 1447–1452 (1997).

73. Stirewalt, D. L. *et al.* FLT3, RAS and TP53 mutations in elderly patients with acute myeloid leukemia. *Blood* 97, 3589–3595 (2001). The only study to examine specifically the prognostic impact of FLT3 ITDs in older adults with AML, which showed that single-strand conformational analyses were more sensitive than previously published means for detecting FLT3 ITDs.

74. Meshinchi, S. *et al.* Prevalence and prognostic significance of FLT3 internal tandem duplication in pediatric acute myeloid leukemia. *Blood* 97, 89–94 (2001).

75. Schnittger, S. *et al.* Analysis of FLT3 length mutations in 1003 patients with acute myeloid leukemia: correlation to cytogenetics, FAB subtype, and prognosis in the AMLCG study and usefulness as a marker for the detection of minimal residual disease. *Blood* 100, 59–66 (2002).

76. Thiede, C. *et al.* Analysis of FLT3-activating mutations in 979 patients with acute myelogenous leukemia: association with FAB subtypes and identification of subgroups with poor prognosis. *Blood* 99, 4326–4335 (2002). References 74–76 are three of the largest studies to examine FLT3 ITDs in paediatric and adult AML.

77. Abu-Duhier, F. M. *et al.* FLT3 internal tandem duplication mutations in adult acute myeloid leukaemia define a high-risk group. *Br. J. Haematol.* 111, 190–195 (2000).

78. Horiike, S. *et al.* Tandem duplications of the FLT3 receptor gene are associated with leukemic transformation of myelodysplasia. *Leukemia* 11, 1442–1446 (1997).

79. Xu, F. *et al.* Tandem duplication of the FLT3 gene is found in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia as well as acute myeloid leukaemia but not in myelodysplastic syndrome or juvenile chronic myelogenous leukaemia in children. *Br. J. Haematol.* 105, 155–162 (1999).

80. Kiyoi, H. *et al.* Prognostic implication of FLT3 and N-RAS gene mutations in acute myeloid leukemia. *Blood* 93, 3074–3080 (1999).

81. Kottaridis, P. D. *et al.* The presence of a FLT3 internal tandem duplication in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) adds important prognostic information to cytogenetic risk group and response to the first cycle of chemotherapy: analysis of 854 patients from the United Kingdom Medical Research Council AML 10 and 12 trials. *Blood* 98, 1752–1759 (2001).

82. Yokota, S. *et al.* Internal tandem duplication of the FLT3 gene is preferentially seen in acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome among various hematological malignancies. A study on a large series of patients and cell lines. *Leukemia* 11, 1605–1609 (1997).

83. Yamamoto, Y. *et al.* Activating mutation of D835 within the activation loop of FLT3 in human hematologic malignancies. *Blood* 97, 2434–2439 (2001).

84. Abu-Duhier, F. M. *et al.* Identification of novel FLT-3 Asp835 mutations in adult acute myeloid leukaemia. *Br. J. Haematol.* 113, 983–988 (2001). References 83 and 84 describe new missense mutations in exon 17 (now referred to as exon 20) of *FLT3* in patients with leukaemia.

85. Spiekermann, K. *et al.* A new and recurrent activating length mutation in exon 20 of the *FLT3* gene in acute myeloid leukemia. *Blood* 100, 3423–3425 (2002).

86. Meshinchi, S. *et al.* Activating mutations of RTK/ras signal transduction pathway in pediatric acute myeloid leukemia. *Blood* 102, 1474–1479 (2003).

87. Hayakawa, F. *et al.* Tandem-duplicated Flt3 constitutively activates STAT5 and MAP kinase and introduces autonomous cell growth in IL-3-dependent cell lines. *Oncogene* 19, 624–631 (2000). One of the first studies to describe the downstream effects of constitutively activated FLT3 ITDs.

88. Kiyoi, H., Ohno, R., Ueda, R., Saito, H. & Naoe, T. Mechanism of constitutive activation of FLT3 with internal tandem duplication in the juxtamembrane domain. *Oncogene* 21, 2555–2563 (2002). This paper showed that FLT3 ITDs could constitutively activate wild-type FLT3, providing an insight into the mechanism of action of the mutant receptor.

89. Mizuki, M. *et al.* FLT3 mutations from patients with acute myeloid leukemia induce transformation of 32D cells mediated by the Ras and STAT5 pathways. *Blood* 96, 3907–3914 (2000).

90. Gille, H. *et al.* A repressor sequence in the juxtamembrane domain of Flt-1 (VEGFR-1) constitutively inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor-dependent phosphatidylinositol 3′-kinase activation and endothelial cell migration. *EMBO J.* 19, 4064–4073 (2000).

91. Zheng, R., Friedman, A. D. & Small, D. Targeted inhibition of FLT3 overcomes the block to myeloid differentiation in 32Dcl3 cells caused by expression of *FLT3/ITD* mutations. *Blood* 100, 4154–4161 (2002).

92. Kelly, L. M. *et al.* FLT3 internal tandem duplication mutations associated with human acute myeloid leukemias induce myeloproliferative disease in a murine bone marrow transplant model. *Blood* 99, 310–318 (2002).

93. Brown, D. *et al.* A PMLRARα transgene initiates murine acute promyelocytic leukemia. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 94, 2551–2556 (1997). This study eloquently examines the molecular biology and function of FLT3 ITDs, through blocking their effects in transduction models. The results show that FLT3 ITDs probably affect many different cellular processes, including differentiation, which had not been investigated extensively previously.

94. Grisolano, J. L., Wesselschmidt, R. L., Pellici, P. G. & Ley, T. J. Altered myeloid development and acute leukemia in transgenic mice expressing PML-RARα under control of cathepsin G regulatory sequences. *Blood* 89, 376–387 (1997).

95. Kelly, L. M. *et al.* PML/RARα and FLT3-ITD induce an APL-like disease in a mouse model. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 99, 8283–8288 (2002). This paper shows that the combination of an FLT3 ITD and t(15;17) causes a leukaemia-like phenotype in mice, which supports the theory that multiple genomic abnormalities might be necessary in most leukaemia cells.

96. Knudson, A. G. Jr, Hethcote, H. W. & Brown, B. W. Mutation and childhood cancer: a probabilistic model for the incidence of retinoblastoma. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* 72, 5116–5120 (1975).

97. Mizuki, M. *et al.* Suppression of myeloid transcription factors and induction of STAT response genes by AML-specific *Flt3* mutations. *Blood* 101, 3164–3173 (2002).

98. Beghini, A. *et al.* C-kit mutations in core binding factor leukemias. *Blood* 95, 726–727 (2000).

99. Sperri, W. R. *et al.* Systemic mastocytosis associated with acute myeloid leukaemia: report of two cases and detection of the c-kit mutation Asp-816 to Val. *Br. J. Haematol.* 103, 740–749 (1998).

100. Tsujimura, T. *et al.* Ligand-independent activation of c-kit receptor tyrosine kinase in a murine mastocytoma cell line P-815 generated by a point mutation. *Blood* 83, 2619–2626 (1994).

101. Morley, G. M., Uden, M., Gullick, W. J. & Dibb, N. J. Cell specific transformation by c-fms activating loop mutations is attributable to constitutive receptor degradation. *Oncogene* 18, 3076–3084 (1999).

102. Moriyama, Y. *et al.* Role of aspartic acid 814 in the function and expression of c-kit receptor tyrosine kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 271, 3347–3350 (1996).

103. Iwai, T. *et al.* Internal tandem duplication of the *FLT3* gene and clinical evaluation in childhood acute myeloid leukemia. The Children's Cancer and Leukemia Study Group, Japan. *Leukemia* 13, 38–43 (1999).

104. Kondo, M. *et al.* Prognostic value of internal tandem duplication of the *FLT3* gene in childhood acute myelogenous leukemia. *Med. Pediatr. Oncol.* 33, 525–529 (1999).

105. Libura, M. *et al.* FLT3 and MLL intragenic abnormalities in AML reflect a common category of genotoxic stress. *Blood* Jun 5 2003 (doi: 10.1182/blood-2003-01-0162). This paper was the first to examine the possible correlations between MLL abnormalities and expression of FLT3 in patient samples.

106. Shih, L. Y. *et al.* Internal tandem duplication of *FLT3* in relapsed acute myeloid leukemia: a comparative analysis of bone marrow samples from 108 adult patients at diagnosis and relapse. *Blood* 100, 2387–2392 (2002).

107. Alsabeh, R., Brynes, R. K., Slovak, M. L. & Arber, D. A. Acute myeloid leukemia with t(6;9) (p23;q34): association with myelodysplasia, basophilia, and initial CD34 negative immunophenotype. *Am. J
116. Levis, M. *et al.* A FLT3-targeted tyrosine kinase inhibitor is cytotoxic to leukemia cells *in vitro* and *in vivo*. *Blood* 99, 3885-3891 (2002).

117. Levis, M. *et al.* FLT3-targeted inhibitors kill FLT3-dependent modeled cells, leukemia-derived cell lines, and primary AML blasts *in vitro* and *in vivo*. *Blood* 89, 721a (2001).

118. Smith, B. D. *et al.* Single agent CEP-701, a novel FLT-3 inhibitor, shows initial response in patients with refractory acute myeloid leukemia. *Blood* 100, 314a (2002).

119. O'Farrell, A. M. *et al.* SU11248 is a novel FLT3 tyrosine kinase inhibitor with potent activity *in vitro* and *in vivo*. *Blood* 101, 3597-3605 (2003).

120. Yee, K. W. *et al.* SU5416 and SU5614 inhibit kinase activity of wild-type and mutant FLT3 receptor tyrosine kinase. *Blood* 100, 2941-2949 (2002).

121. Foran, J. *et al.* An innovative single dose clinical study shows potent inhibition of FLT3 phosphorylation by SU11248 *in vivo*: a clinical and pharmacodynamic study in AML patients. *Blood* 100, 2196a (2002).

122. Giles, F. J. *et al.* SU5416, a small molecule tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitor, has biologic activity in patients with refractory acute myeloid leukemia or myelodysplastic syndromes. *Blood* 102, 795-801 (2003). One of the first articles to show inhibition of growth and induction of apoptosis in FLT3 ITD-transduced cells using more-selective tyrosine-kinase inhibitors.

123. Foran, J. *et al.* A phase I study of repeated oral dosing with SU11248 for the treatment of patients with acute myeloid leukemia who have failed, or are not eligible for conventional chemotherapy. *Blood* 100, 2195a (2002).

124. Kelly, L. M. *et al.* CT53518, a novel selective FLT3 antagonist for the treatment of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). *Cancer Cell* 1, 421-432 (2002).

125. Heinrich, M. C. *et al.* A “first in man” study of the safety and PK/PD of an oral FLT3 inhibitor (MLN518) in patients with AML or high risk myelodysplasia. *Blood* 100, 1305a (2002).

126. Weisberg, E. *et al.* Inhibition of mutant FLT3 receptors in leukemia cells by the small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor PKC412. *Cancer Cell* 1, 433-443 (2002).

127. Stone, R. M. *et al.* PKC412, an oral FLT3 inhibitor, has activity in mutant FLT3 acute myeloid leukemia (AML): a phase I clinical trial. *Blood* 100, 316a (2002).

Acknowledgements  
This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health.

Online links  
The following terms in this article are linked online to:  
Cancer.gov: http://www.cancer.gov/search/  
leukaemia  
LocusLink: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/  
ABL | BAX | BCR | CBL | CBLB | CSF1 | EPO | FLT3 | Flt3 | FLT3L |  
Flt3l | GAB2 | G-CSF | GM-CSF | Grb2 | HER2/NEU | HSP90 | IL-3 |  
IL-6 | IL-7 | IL-11 | FMS | KIT | KIT ligand | MLL | p85 | PDGFRA |  
PDGFRB | Plcγ1 | PML | RARA | Ship | SHP2 | STAT5A | Vav |  
VEGFR1 | VEGFR2  

Access to this interactive links box is free online.

Biography
Derek L. Stirewalt and Jerald P. Radich are members of the Clinical Research Division at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center. The Radich laboratory is interested in the genetics of leukaemia, with particular interest in the interface of genetics and patient care. Much of their work has been on the detection of minimal residual disease as a predictor of relapse in patients with acute and chronic leukaemia. More recently, their work has focused on the gene-expression profiles that are associated with response and progression in leukaemia. In addition, the lab is active in the area of signal-transduction changes in acute leukaemia, especially stemming from mutations in the FLT3 gene.

Links
leukaemia
http://www.cancer.gov/cancerinfo/types/leukemia

ABL
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=25
BAX
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=581
BCR
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=613
CBL
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=867
CBLB
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=868
CSF1
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=1435
EPO
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=2056
FLT3
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=2322
Flt3
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=14255
FLT3L
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=2323
Flt3l
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=14256
GAB2
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=9846
G-CSF
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=1440
GM-CSF
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=1437
Grb2
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=14784
HER2/NEU
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=2064
HSP90
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/list.cgi?&Q=hspca[sym]%20or%20hspcb[sym]&ORG=Hs
IL-3
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=3562
IL-6
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=3569
IL-7
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=3574
IL-11
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=3589
FMS

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=1436
KIT
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=3815
KIT ligand
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=4254
MLL
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=4297
p85
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/list.cgi?&Q=pik3r1%20or%20pik3r2&ORG=Mm
PDGFRA
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=5156
PDGFRB
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=5159
Plcy1
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=18803
PML
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=5371
RARα
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=5914
Ship
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=16331
SHP2
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=5781
STAT5A
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=6776
Vav
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=22324
VEGFR1
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=2321
VEGFR2
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/LocRpt.cgi?l=3791
