
Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy (2003) 52, 576–582  
DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkg406  
Advance Access publication 1 September 2003  

**β-Lactam resistance modulated by the overexpression of response regulators of two-component signal transduction systems in Escherichia coli**

Hidetada Hirakawa${}^{1-3}$, Kunihiko Nishino${}^{1-3}$, Junko Yamada${}^{1-3}$, Takahiro Hirata${}^{1-3}$ and Akihito Yamaguchi${}^{1-3*}$

${}^{1}$Department of Cell Membrane Biology, Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047; ${}^{2}$Faculty of Pharmaceutical Science, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871; ${}^{3}$CREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation, Osaka 567-0047, Japan

Received 27 March 2003; returned 18 June 2003; revised 4 July 2003; accepted 9 July 2003

**Objectives:** In *Escherichia coli*, there are 32 open reading frames assumed, on the basis of sequence similarities, to be response regulator genes of two-component signal transduction systems. We cloned all 32 response regulators and examined whether or not response regulator-overexpressing cells confer resistance to β-lactam antibiotics in *E. coli*.

**Methods:** *E. coli* KAM3 (*acrB*), a drug-hypersusceptible mutant, was used as a host strain for the overproduction of response regulators. MICs were determined by the agar dilution method.

**Results:** Thirteen response regulators out of 32 genes, namely *baeR*, *cheY*, *cpxR*, *creB*, *evgA*, *fimZ*, *narL*, *ompR*, *rcsB*, *rstA*, *yedW*, *yehT* and *dcuR*, conferred increased β-lactam resistance. Among them, overexpression of *baeR*, *evgA*, *rcsB* and *dcuR* conferred high-level resistance. The *baeR*- and *evgA*-mediated resistance is due to up-regulation of the expression of multidrug exporter genes, *acrD* and *mdtABC* for *baeR*, and *yhiUV* for *evgA*, because *baeR*- and *evgA*-mediated resistance was completely absent in strains lacking these exporter genes. The *fimZ*-mediated cefalothin resistance is due to the chromosomal *ampC* gene, because the *ampC* deletion strain did not show *fimZ*-mediated resistance.

**Conclusions:** Two-component signal transduction systems contribute to β-lactam resistance in *E. coli*. Multidrug exporters play roles in two-component signal transduction system-mediated β-lactam resistance.

**Keywords:** β-lactams, multidrug exporters, drug resistance, *E. coli*

---

**Introduction**

Two-component systems comprise signal transduction pathways in prokaryotic organisms that respond to environmental conditions. A typical two-component system consists of two types of signal transducers, a sensor kinase and its cognate response regulator. The sensor kinase monitors some environmental conditions and accordingly modulates the phosphorylation state of the response regulator. The response regulator controls gene expression and/or cell behaviour. Overproduction of response regulators is often thought to mimic the physiological phosphorylation response. In *Escherichia coli*, the existence of 32 response regulators and 30 sensor kinases has been assumed on the basis of the results of genome sequence analysis.

We previously found that the overexpression of response regulators of two-component signal transduction systems confers resistance to a number of chemical compounds, such as detergents, basic dyes and bile salts, in addition to many antibiotics, such as kanamycin, fosfomycin, erythromycin and novobiocin, via regulated expression of some drug exporter genes, *acrD*, *emrKY*, *mdtABC* and *yhiUV* in *E. coli*.

In this study, we systematically investigated the β-lactam antibiotic resistance mediated by overexpression of the response regulators. The AcrAB multidrug exporter is constitutively expressed in *E. coli* and confers a wide range and moderate levels of β-lactam antibiotic resistance. However, the expression of AcrAB was not affected by the overexpression of any response regulator. Therefore, in this study, we cloned all 32 open reading frames (ORFs) of a putative response regulator in *E. coli* into an expression vector carrying

*Correspondence address.* Institute of Scientific and Industrial Research, Osaka University, 8-1 Mihogaoka, Ibaraki-shi, Osaka 567-0047, Japan. Tel: +81-6-6879-8545; Fax: +81-6-6879-8549; E-mail: akihito@sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp

© The British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy 2003; all rights reserved.

# Signal-transduction-mediated β-lactam resistance

## Table 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study

| Strain or plasmid | Relevant characteristics | Reference or source |
|-------------------|--------------------------|---------------------|
| **E. coli strains** |  |  |
| W3104 | wild-type, chromosomal DNA used for PCR amplification | Yamamoto et al.¹¹ |
| TG1 | supE hsdD5 thiΔ(lac-proAB) F′[traD36 proAB+ lacIq lacZΔM15] | Taylor et al.¹³ |
| KAM3 | derivative of TG1 that lacks a restriction system and acrB | Morita et al.¹² |
| KAM3ΔacrD | derivative of KAM3 that lacks acrD | Hirakawa et al.⁶ |
| KAM3ΔmdtABC | derivative of KAM3 that lacks mdtABC | Hirakawa et al.⁶ |
| KAM3ΔacrDmdtABC | derivative of KAM3 that lacks acrD and mdtABC | Hirakawa et al.⁶ |
| KAM3ΔyhiUV | derivative of KAM3 that lacks yhiUV | Nishino & Yamaguchi⁹ |
| KAM3ΔemrKY | derivative of KAM3 that lacks emrKY | this study |
| KAM3ΔemrKYyhiUV | derivative of KAM3 that lacks emrKY and yhiUV | this study |
| KAM3ΔampC | derivative of KAM3 that lacks ampC | this study |
| **Plasmids** |  |  |
| pTrc99A | expression vector: Ap<sup>r</sup>; multiple cloning site downstream of trc promoter | Pharmacia |
| pUC4K | multicopy vector carrying kanamycin and ampicillin resistance genes | Pharmacia |
| pTrc99K | expression vector: Km<sup>r</sup>; multiple cloning site downstream of trc promoter | this study |
| pKO3 | repA(Ts) Cm<sup>r</sup> sacB<sup>+</sup> | Link et al.¹⁴ |

Ap, ampicillin; Km, kanamycin.

The kanamycin resistance marker, and response regulator-mediated β-lactam resistance was then investigated in a strain lacking the *acrB* gene.

DNA fragments were ligated into the pTrc99K vector digested with *Nco*I and *Bam*HI. These plasmids are designated as pK plus the cloned gene name, such as pKarcA. Competent KAM3 cells were transformed with at least three of the constructed plasmids that had been extracted from independent colonies.

## Materials and methods

### Bacterial strains and plasmids

The bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are shown in Table 1. Chromosomal DNA of *E. coli* W3104¹¹ was used as a PCR template. *E. coli* KAM3,¹² a derivative of TG1¹³ that lacks a restriction system and *acrB*, was used as the host for the drug susceptibility test. KAM3Δ*acrD*, KAM3Δ*mdtABC*, KAM3Δ*acrDmdtABC* and KAM3Δ*yhiUV*⁶,⁹ were constructed previously. The construction of an *ampC* deletion mutant of *E. coli* KAM3, KAM3Δ*ampC*, was performed by the gene replacement method as described previously using pKO3.¹⁴ *E. coli* cells were grown in 2× YT medium (tryptone 16 g/L, yeast extract 10 g/L, sodium chloride 5 g/L),¹⁵ supplemented with kanamycin (25 mg/L) when necessary, under aerobic conditions at 37°C.

### Construction of an expression vector, pTrc99K, for the cloning of response regulators

Expression vector pTrc99K, a derivative of pTrc99A, which has the kanamycin resistance marker instead of that for ampicillin, was constructed as follows. The kanamycin resistance gene was amplified from the pUC4K vector using primers that introduced *Sca*I and *Avi*II sites at the ends of the amplified fragment. This PCR product was ligated into the same restriction sites of pTrc99A with most of the ampicillin resistance gene eliminated.

### Drug susceptibility assay

The MIC was determined on YT agar (tryptone 8 g/L, yeast extract 5 g/L, sodium chloride 5 g/L, agar 15 g/L) containing various concentrations of β-lactams (penicillin G, ampicillin, oxacillin, cloxacillin, carbenicillin, nafcillin, cefalothin, cefaloridine, cefmetazole, cefamandole, cefuroxime, cefotaxime, ceftazidime, flomoxef, aztreonam, carumonam, imipenem, biapenem, faropenem, meropenem and panipenem), by a two-fold serial dilution technique with the standard method of the Japanese Society of Chemotherapy.⁶ Various concentrations of isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) (1, 0.1 or 0.01 mM) were added to the agar plates as an inducer. Ten thousand cells were inoculated with the microplanter (MIT-60P; Sakuma Seisakusyo, Tokyo, Japan), a specially designed device for MIC determination, and incubated at 37°C for 16 h. The MIC was determined as the lowest concentration at which growth was largely prevented. The results were highly reproducible even in the case of a two-fold difference. MIC measurements were performed at least three times.

### Results and discussion

#### Identification of the response regulators conferring β-lactam resistance

The AcrAB multidrug efflux pump is constitutively expressed in *E. coli* and confers intrinsic β-lactam resistance.¹⁰,¹⁶ The *acrB* gene deletion mutant, KAM3, showed higher susceptibility to oxacillin, cloxacillin and nafcillin than the parent strain, TG1 (Table 2). We previously reported that response regulators do not up-regulate the expression of *acrA* and *acrB*. In this study, we investigated whether or not β-lactam resistance determinants other than *acrAB* are modulated by response regulator overexpression. The 32 ORFs of putative response regulators were cloned under the *trc* promoter in the kana-

| IPTG(mM) | vector only | pKbaeR | pKcheY | pKcpxR |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| β-Lactam | TG1 cells | 0.01, 0.1, 1 | 0.01 | 0.1 | 1 | 0.01 | 0.1, 1 | 0.1, 1 |
| Penicillin G | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 |
| Ampicillin | 3.13 | 1.56 | 1.56 | 1.56 | 1.56 | 1.56 | 1.56 | 1.56 |
| Oxacillin | 400 | 1.56 | 25 | 50 | 25 | 1.56 | 1.56 | 3.13 |
| Cefalothin | 12.5 | 12.5 | 6.25 | 6.25 | 3.13 | 12.5 | 12.5 | 12.5 |
| Cefaloridine | 3.13 | 3.13 | 3.13 | 3.13 | 3.13 | 3.13 | 3.13 | 3.13 |
| Cefmetazole | 1.56 | 0.78 | 1.56 | 1.56 | 1.56 | 0.78 | 1.56 | 1.56 |
| Cefamandole | 1.56 | 0.20 | 0.39 | 0.78 | 0.78 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.20 |
| Cefuroxime | 6.25 | 0.39 | 0.78 | 0.78 | 0.78 | 0.39 | 0.39 | 0.39 |
| Cefotaxime | 0.10 | 0.025 | 0.025 | 0.05 | 0.05 | 0.025 | 0.025 | 0.025 |
| Ceftazidime | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.78 | 0.78 | 0.78 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.20 |
| Flomoxef | 0.10 | 0.05 | 0.05 | 0.05 | 0.05 | 0.10 | 0.10 | 0.10 |
| Aztreonam | 0.10 | 0.10 | 0.78 | 0.78 | 0.78 | 0.10 | 0.10 | 0.20 |
| Imipenem | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.10 | 0.10 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.20 |
| Cloxacillin | 400 | 3.13 | 25 | 50 | 50 | ND | ND | 3.13 |
| Carbenicillin | 12.5 | 6.25 | 25 | 50 | 50 | ND | ND | 12.5 |
| Nafcillin | 800 | 3.13 | ND | 50 | ND | ND | ND | 6.25 |
| Carumonam | 0.10 | 0.20 | 1.56 | 1.56 | 1.56 | ND | ND | 0.20 |
| Biapenem | 0.05 | 0.05 | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| Faropenem | 0.78 | 0.20 | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| Meropenem | 0.025 | 0.025 | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| Panipenem | 0.20 | 0.20 | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND |

| IPTG(mM) | pKcreB | pKevgA | pKfimZ | pKnarL |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| β-Lactam | 0.1, 1 | 0.01 | 0.1 | 1 | 0.01 | 0.1 | 1 | 1 |
| Penicillin G | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 25 |
| Ampicillin | 1.56 | 1.56 | 3.13 | 1.56 | 1.56 | 3.13 | 1.56 | 1.56 |
| Oxacillin | 1.56 | 6.25 | 25 | 3.13 | 1.56 | 3.13 | 1.56 | 1.56 |
| Cefalothin | 12.5 | 12.5 | 12.5 | 12.5 | 25 | 12.5 | 12.5 | 12.5 |
| Cefaloridine | 3.13 | 3.13 | 1.56 | 1.56 | 3.13 | 3.13 | 3.13 | 3.13 |
| Cefmetazole | 0.78 | 1.56 | 0.78 | 0.78 | 1.56 | 1.56 | 1.56 | 0.78 |
| Cefamandole | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.39 | 0.39 | 0.20 | 0.20 |
| Cefuroxime | 0.39 | 0.39 | 0.39 | 0.39 | 0.39 | 0.78 | 0.39 | 0.39 |
| Cefotaxime | 0.025 | 0.025 | 0.025 | 0.025 | 0.025 | 0.025 | 0.025 | 0.025 |
| Ceftazidime | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.39 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.20 |
| Flomoxef | 0.05 | 0.05 | 0.05 | 0.05 | 0.10 | 0.05 | 0.05 | 0.05 |
| Aztreonam | 0.20 | 0.10 | 0.20 | 0.10 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.20 |
| Imipenem | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.10 | 0.10 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.20 |
| Cloxacillin | ND | 12.5 | 25 | 1.56 | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| Carbenicillin | ND | 6.25 | 12.5 | 1.56 | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| Nafcillin | ND | ND | 50 | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| Carumonam | ND | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.10 | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| Biapenem | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| Faropenem | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| Meropenem | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND |
| Panipenem | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND | ND |

Signal-transduction-mediated β-lactam resistance

Table 2. (Continued)

| IPTG (mM) | pKompR | pKrcsB | pKrstA | pKyedW | pKyehT | pKdcuR |
|-----------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
|           | 0.1    | 1      | 0.01   | 0.1    | 1      | 0.01   | 0.1, 1 |
| β-Lactam  |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| Penicillin G | 25    | 25     | 25     | 25     | 25     | 25     | 25     |
| Ampicillin | 1.56   | 1.56   | 1.56   | 3.13   | 1.56   | 1.56   | 1.56   |
| Oxacillin | 1.56   | 3.13   | 1.56   | 3.13   | 1.56   | 1.56   | 3.13   |
| Cefalothin | 12.5   | 12.5   | 12.5   | 12.5   | 12.5   | 12.5   | 6.25   |
| Cefaloridine | 3.13  | 3.13   | 3.13   | 6.25   | 3.13   | 3.13   | 3.13   |
| Cefmetazole | 0.78  | 0.78   | 1.56   | 1.56   | 1.56   | 0.78   | 0.78   |
| Cefamandole | 0.20  | 0.20   | 0.20   | 0.39   | 0.20   | 0.20   | 0.20   |
| Cefuroxime | 0.39  | 0.39   | 0.39   | 0.39   | 0.39   | 0.39   | 0.39   |
| Cefotaxime | 0.025 | 0.025  | 0.025  | 0.025  | 0.025  | 0.025  | 0.012  |
| Ceftazidime | 0.39  | 0.39   | 0.20   | 0.20   | 0.20   | 0.20   | 0.20   |
| Flomoxef | 0.05   | 0.05   | 0.10   | 0.10   | 0.05   | 0.10   | 0.10   |
| Aztreonam | 0.20   | 0.20   | 0.10   | 0.10   | 0.10   | 0.10   | 0.10   |
| Imipenem | 0.20   | 0.20   | 0.20   | 1.56   | 0.20   | 0.39   | 0.78   |
| Cloxacillin | ND    | ND     | ND     | ND     | ND     | ND     | ND     |
| Carbenicillin | ND   | ND     | ND     | ND     | ND     | ND     | ND     |
| Nafcillin | ND     | ND     | ND     | ND     | ND     | ND     | ND     |
| Carumonam | ND     | ND     | ND     | ND     | ND     | ND     | ND     |
| Biapenem | ND     | ND     | ND     | 1.56   | ND     | ND     | 0.78   |
| Faropenem | ND     | ND     | ND     | 0.78   | ND     | ND     | 0.78   |
| Meropenem | ND     | ND     | ND     | 0.05   | ND     | ND     | 0.05   |
| Panipenem | ND     | ND     | ND     | 1.56   | ND     | ND     | 1.56   |

*MICs (mg/L). Values in bold are larger than the KAM3 control strain values. IPTG 0.01, 0.1 or 1 mM was added to the agar plates for regulator expression. pKarcA, pKatoC, pKb2381, pKbasR, pKcheB, pKcitB, pKglnG, pKhydG, pKkdpE, pKnarP, pKphoB, pKphoP, pKrssB, pKtorR, pKuhpA, pKuvrY, pKyfhA, pKygiX and pKylcA conferred no resistance. ND, not determined.

| Strain | Genotype | Regulator expression | MIC (mg/L) $^a$ |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | acrD | mdtABC | yhiUV | emrKY | AMP | OXA | CLO | NAF | FAM | CAR | CMZ | FAM | CAZ | FMOX | ATM | CRMN |
| KAM3 | + | + | + | + | none | 1.56 | 1.56 | 3.13 | 3.13 | 6.25 | 0.78 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.05 | 0.10 | 0.20 |
| KAM3ΔacrD | - | + | + | + | none | 1.56 | 0.78 | 1.56 | 3.13 | 1.56 | 0.78 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.05 | 0.10 | 0.10 |
| KAM3ΔmdtABC | + | - | + | + | none | 1.56 | 1.56 | 3.13 | 3.13 | 6.25 | 0.78 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.05 | 0.10 | 0.20 |
| KAM3ΔacrDmdtABC | - | - | + | + | none | 1.56 | 0.78 | 1.56 | 3.13 | 1.56 | 0.78 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.05 | 0.10 | 0.10 |
| KAM3ΔyhiUV | + | + | - | + | none | 1.56 | 1.56 | 3.13 | 3.13 | 6.25 | 0.78 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.05 | 0.10 | 0.20 |
| KAM3ΔemrKY | + | + | + | - | none | 1.56 | 1.56 | 3.13 | 3.13 | 6.25 | 0.78 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.05 | 0.10 | 0.20 |
| KAM3ΔemrKYyhiUV | + | + | + | + | none | 0.78 | 1.56 | 3.13 | 3.13 | 6.25 | 0.39 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.025 | 0.10 | 0.20 |
| KAM3/pKbaeR | + | + | + | + | BaeR | 1.56 | 50 | 50 | 50 | 50 | 1.56 | 0.78 | 0.5 | 0.5 | 0.78 | 1.56 |
| KAM3ΔacrD/pKbaeR | - | + | + | + | BaeR | 1.56 | 6.25 | 25 | 25 | 12.5 | 1.56 | 0.39 | 0.39 | 0.39 | 0.39 | 0.78 |
| KAM3ΔmdtABC/pKbaeR | + | - | + | + | BaeR | 1.56 | 12.5 | 25 | 25 | 50 | 1.56 | 0.39 | 0.39 | 0.39 | 0.5 | 0.78 |
| KAM3ΔacrDmdtABC/pKbaeR | - | - | + | + | BaeR | 1.56 | 0.78 | 1.56 | 3.13 | 1.56 | 0.78 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.05 | 0.10 | 0.20 |
| KAM3/pKevgA | + | + | + | + | EvgA | 3.13 | 25 | 25 | 50 | 12.5 | 1.56 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.39 | 0.20 | 0.20 |
| KAM3ΔyhiUV/pKevgA | + | + | - | + | EvgA | 3.13 | 25 | 25 | 25 | 12.5 | 1.56 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.39 | 0.20 | 0.20 |
| KAM3ΔemrKY/pKevgA | + | + | + | - | EvgA | 3.13 | 25 | 25 | 50 | 12.5 | 1.56 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.39 | 0.20 | 0.20 |
| KAM3ΔemrKYyhiUV/pKevgA | + | + | + | + | EvgA | 1.56 | 3.13 | 3.13 | 3.13 | 12.5 | 0.78 | 0.20 | 0.20 | 0.39 | 0.05 | 0.20 |

*Values in bold are larger than that of host strains, the control strain. The values are maximum MIC listed.

Signal-transduction-mediated β-lactam resistance

oxacillin, carbenicillin, cefmetazole, ceftazidime, flomoxef and aztreonam resistance, even in the yhiUV deletion strain. The EvgA-overexpression-mediated low-level resistance to these drugs remained even when both the emrKY and yhiUV genes were deleted (Table 3). Therefore, the evgA-mediated low-level β-lactam resistance may involve resistance determinants other than YhiUV and EmrKY. Regarding baeR-mediated resistance, single deletion mutants, KAM3ΔacrD and KAM3ΔmdtABC, showed lower β-lactam resistance than that of KAM3, but moderate baeR-mediated resistance remained. The acrD and mdtABC double-deletion mutant, KAM3ΔacrDmdtABC, had completely lost baeR-mediated β-lactam resistance, indicating that baeR-mediated β-lactam resistance is a result of the induction of multidrug exporter AcrD and MdtABC gene expression.

**Contribution of AmpC chromosomal β-lactamase induced by overexpression of the FimZ response regulator**

The *E. coli* chromosome carries an intrinsic β-lactamase gene, *ampC*, which mainly confers intrinsic resistance to cefalothin and cefaloridine. We suspected that fimZ-mediated cefalothin resistance might be a result of AmpC β-lactamase. The *ampC*-deleted KAM3 strain exhibited cefalothin hypersusceptibility (MIC 0.78 mg/L) compared with the parental KAM3 strain (12.5 mg/L), similar to the results obtained by Mazzariol et al.¹⁰ In the KAM3ΔampC strain, FimZ overexpression did not cause cefalothin resistance at all (0.78 mg/L), suggesting that fimZ-mediated cefalothin resistance is a result of AmpC β-lactamase; however, FimZ-overexpressing cells did not confer resistance to cefaloridine. Mazzariol et al.¹⁰ reported that AmpC-mediated cefaloridine resistance is lower than cefalothin resistance. Thus, fimZ-mediated AmpC-dependent cefaloridine resistance might have been lower than the limit of detection in this experiment.

We also examined whether or not baeR- and evgA-mediated oxacillin resistance, and rcsB- and dcuR-mediated carbapenem resistance, is observed even in the *ampC*-deficient genetic background. As a result, these resistances were observed as well as *ampC* plus background, indicating that these response regulator-mediated β-lactam resistances are independent of AmpC (data not shown).

Which determinants contribute to rcsB- and dcuR-mediated carbapenem resistance? A decrease in the OmpF outer membrane protein is known to cause resistance to carbapenems in addition to large lipophilic compounds.¹⁹–²¹ If RcsB and DcuR repress *ompF* expression, they might confer resistance to carbapenems and lipophilic compounds. However, this was not the case, since *rcsB*- and *dcuR*-overexpressing cells did not confer resistance to lipophilic compounds.⁶ The resistance determinants responsible for *rcsB*- and *dcuR*-mediated resistance remain unknown.

Recently, it has been shown that some two-component systems regulate β-lactam resistance in different bacterial species. In *Streptococcus pneumoniae*, a constitutively activated sensor kinase CiaH mutant caused cefotaxime and penicillin resistance.²²,²³ In *Stenotrophomonas maltophilia*, response regulator SmeR positively regulates multidrug exporter SmeABC, conferring intrinsic β-lactam resistance.²⁴ In *Listeria monocytogenes*, response regulator LisR overexpression suppresses the susceptibility to cephalosporins for sensor kinase LisK deletion mutant.²⁵ However, to the best of our knowledge our study is the first to comprehensively investigate the putative response regulator gene-mediated β-lactam resistance in total. In addition, it is the first case showing that some response regulators contribute to β-lactam resistance in Gram-negative bacterial species. Two-component system-mediated β-lactam resistance may become a problem in future chemotherapy, and we hope that our comprehensive study will be informative in determining a strategy for overcoming possible multidrug resistance pathogens.

**Note added in proof**

After submitting this report, YLiU and YhiV have recently been renamed MdtE and MdtF by the systematic nomenclature indicated at http://bmb.med.miami.edu/ecogene/ecoweb/.

**Acknowledgements**

We wish to thank Tomofusa Tsuchiya of Okayama University for providing us with the *E. coli* KAM3 strain, Takeshi Nishino of Kyoto Pharmaceutical University for most of the β-lactam antibiotics examined in this study, and George M. Church for plasmid pKO3. K.N. was supported by a research fellowship from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science for Young Scientists. This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan, and the Zoonosis Control Project of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries of Japan.

**References**

1. Mizuno, T. (1998). His-Asp phosphotransfer signal transduction. *Journal of Biochemistry* **123**, 555–63.
2. Hoch, J. A. & Varughese, K. I. (2001). Keeping signals straight in phosphorelay signal transduction. *Journal of Bacteriology* **183**, 4941–9.
3. Parkinson, J. S. (1993). Signal transduction schemes of bacteria. *Cell* **73**, 857–71.
4. Aguilar, P. S., Hernandez-Arriaga, A. M., Cybulski, L. E. *et al.* (2001). Molecular basis of thermosensing: a two-component signal transduction thermometer in *Bacillus subtilis*. *EMBO Journal* **20**, 1681–91.
5. Mizuno, T. (1997). Compilation of all genes encoding two-component phosphotransfer signal transducers in the genome of *Escherichia coli*. *DNA Research* **4**, 161–8.
6. Hirakawa, H., Nishino, K., Hirata, T. *et al.* (2003). Comprehensive studies on the drug-resistance mediated by the overexpression of response regulators of two-component signal transduction systems in *Escherichia coli*. *Journal of Bacteriology* **185**, 1851–6.
7. Nagakubo, S., Nishino, K., Hirata, T. *et al.* (2002). The putative response regulator BaeR stimulates multidrug resistance of *Escherichia coli* via a novel multidrug exporter system, MdtABC. *Journal of Bacteriology* **184**, 4161–7.
8. Nishino, K. & Yamaguchi, A. (2001). Overexpression of the response regulator evgA of the two-component signal transduction system modulates multidrug resistance conferred by multidrug resistance transporters. *Journal of Bacteriology* **183**, 1455–8.
9. Nishino, K. & Yamaguchi, A. (2002). EvgA of the two-component signal transduction system modulates production of the YhiUV multidrug transporter in *Escherichia coli*. *Journal of Bacteriology* **184**, 2319–23.
10. Mazzariol, A., Cornaglia, G. & Nikaido, H. (2000). Contributions of the AmpC β-lactamase and the AcrAB multidrug efflux system in intrinsic resistance of *Escherichia coli* K-12 to β-lactams. *Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy* **44**, 1387–90.
11. Yamamoto, T., Tanaka, M., Nohara, C. *et al.* (1981). Transposition of the oxacillin-hydrolyzing penicillinase gene. *Journal of Bacteriology* **145**, 808–13.
12. Morita, Y., Kodama, K., Shiota, S. *et al.* (1998). NorM, a putative multidrug efflux protein, of *Vibrio parahaemolyticus* and its homolog in *Escherichia coli*. *Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy* **42**, 1778–82.

H. Hirakawa *et al.*

13. Taylor, J. W., Ott, J. & Eckstein, F. (1985). The rapid generation of oligonucleotide-directed mutations at high frequency using phosphorothioate-modified DNA. *Nucleic Acids Research* **13**, 8765–85.

14. Link, A. J., Phillips, D. & Church, G. M. (1997). Methods for generating precise deletions and insertions in the genome of wild-type *Escherichia coli*: application to open reading frame characterization. *Journal of Bacteriology* **179**, 6228–37.

15. Sambrook, J., Frisch, E. F. & Maniatis, T. (1989). *Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual*, 2nd edn. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, USA.

16. Nikaido, H. (1996). Multidrug efflux pumps of gram-negative bacteria. *Journal of Bacteriology* **178**, 5853–9.

17. Baranova, N. & Nikaido, H. (2002). The *baeSR* two-component regulatory system activates transcription of the *yegMNOB (mdtABCD)* transporter gene cluster in *Escherichia coli* and increases its resistance to novobiocin and deoxycholate. *Journal of Bacteriology* **184**, 4168–76.

18. Kato, A., Ohnishi, H., Yamamoto, K. *et al.* (2000). Transcription of *emrKY* is regulated by the EvgA-EvgS two-component system in *Escherichia coli* K-12. *Bioscience Biotechnology and Biochemistry* **64**, 1203–9.

19. Balague, C. & Vescovi, E. G. (2001). Activation of multiple antibiotic resistance in uropathogenic *Escherichia coli* strains by aryloxoalcanic acid compounds. *Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy* **45**, 1815–22.

20. Okamoto, K., Gotoh, N. & Nishino, T. (2001). *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* reveals high intrinsic resistance to penem antibiotics: penem resistance mechanisms and their interplay. *Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy* **45**, 1964–71.

21. Pratt, L. A., Hsing, W., Gibson, K. E. *et al.* (1996). From acids to osmZ: multiple factors influence synthesis of the OmpF and OmpC porins in *Escherichia coli*. *Molecular Microbiology* **20**, 911–7.

22. Giammarinaro, P., Sicard, M. & Gasc, A. M. (1999). Genetic and physiological studies of the CiaH-CiaR two-component signal-transducing system involved in cefotaxime resistance and competence of *Streptococcus pneumoniae*. *Microbiology* **145**, 1859–69.

23. Guenzi, E., Gasc, A. M., Sicard, M. A. *et al.* (1994). A two-component signal-transducing system is involved in competence and penicillin susceptibility in laboratory mutants of *Streptococcus pneumoniae*. *Molecular Microbiology* **12**, 505–15.

24. Li, X. Z., Zhang, L. & Poole, K. (2002). SmeC, an outer membrane multidrug efflux protein of *Stenotrophomonas maltophilia*. *Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy* **46**, 333–43.

25. Cotter, P., Guinane, C. & Hill, C. (2002). The LisRK signal transduction system determines the sensitivity of *Listeria monocytogenes* to nisin and cephalosporins. *Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy* **46**, 2784–90.
