
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

**SCIENCE DIRECT®**

Autoimmunity Reviews 2 (2003) 235–240

---

**The anti-Sm immune response in autoimmunity and cell biology**

Gary W. Zieve*, Permanan R. Khusial

*Department of Pathology, SUNY Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-8691, USA*

Accepted 15 January 2003

---

### Abstract

Anti-Sm antibodies are found in greater than 30% of the patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and are diagnostic of SLE. The Sm autoantigens are the small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) common core proteins. The seven core proteins, B, D1, D2, D3, E, F and G, shared by a majority of the snRNP particles, form a heptamer ring approximately 20 nm in diameter, with the snRNA passing through the center. The Sm epitopes are distributed on the outside surface of the ring. A repeated proline rich motif with homology to an Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen in the B protein and a gly-arg-gly motif including a symmetrical dimethylarginine post-translational modification in the B, D1 and D3 proteins are major Sm epitopes. The anti-Sm response has features typical of an antigen-driven immune response. SnRNP proteins share several characteristics with other autoantigens including their assembly into ribonucleoprotein particles, homologies to known viral proteins, presence of post-translational modifications, a high abundance and great stability and the presence of repeated motifs. Current work on the snRNP particles is attempting to identify the features that predispose the common core proteins to become autoantigens in vulnerable individuals.

© 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.

#### Keywords: Sm; snRNPs; Lupus

---

The anti-Sm autoimmune response, a polyclonal humoral immune response against protein components of the small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) particles, is found in greater than 30% of the patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and is specific for SLE. It is named after Stephanie Smith, the first patient in whom this activity was identified. Although the anti-Sm antibodies are not correlated with clinical symptoms, as much as 20% of the immunoglobulins in a SLE patient may bind Sm epitopes [1]. The Sm antibodies are powerful tools for diagnosing SLE and

*Corresponding author. Fax: +1-631-444-3424.
E-mail address: gary.zieve@stonybrook.edu (G.W. Zieve).

valuable reagents for studying the snRNP particles which are essential cofactors for pre-mRNA splicing in the cell nucleus.

### 1. Detection of anti-Sm antibodies

Anti-Sm antibodies and antibodies against double-stranded DNA are common anti-nuclear antibodies (ANAs) found in patients with SLE. The presence of ANAs is one of the 11 parameters used to identify SLE [2]. The presence of at least 4 of the 11 SLE parameters suggests a diagnosis of SLE. The clinical identification of the anti-Sm antibodies and other ANAs usually begins with

1568-9972/03/$ - see front matter © 2003 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S1568-9972(03)00018-1

G.W. Zieve, P.R. Khusial / Autoimmunity Reviews 2 (2003) 235–240

Fig. 1. Model structures of the U1 snRNP and the snRNP common core proteins. A cartoon of the U1 snRNP (panel a) illustrates the snRNA, U1 specific proteins and the snRNP common core proteins. A ribbon diagram (panel b) and space filling model (panel c) of the snRNP common core are also shown [5].

immunofluorescence staining to identify antibodies that recognize nuclear antigens. This is typically done by indirect immunofluorescent staining of the human larynx carcinoma cell line HEp2 (ATCC CCL-32) with serial dilutions of patient serum. If a distinct nuclear staining pattern is observed in serum dilutions of 1:160 or greater this is classified as a significant ANA response. A coarse speckled pattern, of 10–20 bright staining foci on a diffuse background, is observed with anti-Sm antibodies. This represents the distribution of the snRNP particles in the non-chromosomal regions of the nucleus, or nucleoplasm. However, sera often contain multiple activities and the specific antibody response is determined by analyzing the antibody activity against purified antigens in an ELISA assay. Several companies make ELISA plates with purified snRNPs (Sm), U1 snRNP (nRNP) and other specific antigens immobilized on plastic to detect the presence of a specific antibodies.

in approximately \(1 \times 10^6\) copies per nucleus. The U1, U2, U4 and U5 snRNPs share the set of seven common core proteins, B, D1, D2, D3, E, F and G which are the Sm antigens and are designated the Sm class of snRNPs. In addition to the common core proteins each particle has several snRNP specific proteins (Fig. 1a). The anti-nRNP autoimmune response typical of mixed connective tissue disease is directed against the U1 specific proteins. The four snRNP particles, U1, U2, U4/U6 and U5 are essential cofactors for pre-mRNA splicing and assist in the removal of introns from pre-mRNA [3,4].

The seven core proteins B, D1, D2, D3, E, F and G range in size from 13 to 28 kDa and with the exception of F, are quite basic [4] (Table 1 Scheme 1). The proteins are highly conserved in eukaryotes. All the core proteins are homogenous and are expressed from a single gene except for the B protein. The B protein has three variants (B, B' and N) expressed from two closely related genes. However, the significance of the different B proteins is not known.

One copy of the seven core proteins associates with each snRNA and forms a ring structure 7 nm in diameter with a 2 nm central hole through which the snRNA passes (Fig. 1b,c) [5]. All the snRNA core proteins share a sequence motif des-

2. The snRNP particles

The U1–U12 snRNP particles are designated by their snRNA components which range in size from 80 to 260 nucleotides. U1–U6 are the most abundant snRNP particles and U1 and U2 are present

Table 1  
The SmRNP common core proteins (Sm proteins)

| Sm | M<sub>r</sub> | PI |
|----|-------------|----|
| B  | 29 kD       | 10.7 |
| D3 | 18 kD       | 10.4 |
| D2 | 16.5 kD     | 9.9  |
| D1 | 16 kD       | 10.5 |
| E  | 12 kD       | 10.3 |
| F  | 11 kD       | 3.3  |
| G  | 9 kD        | 8.8  |

sDMA

| 17 | 48 | 67 | 80 | GRG | GRG | GRGG | GRGG | GRG | GRG | PPGMRRPP | PPGMRRPP | PPPGMRRPP | B:N |
|----|----|----|----|-----|-----|------|------|-----|-----|----------|----------|-----------|-----|
|    |    |    |    |     |     |      |      |     |     |          |          |           |     |
| 18 | 49 | 58 | 71 |     |     |      |      |     |     |          |          |           | 126 |
|    |    |    |    |     |     |      |      |     |     |          |          |           |     |
| 42 | 73 | 96 | 110| 118 |     |      |      |     |     |          |          |           |     |
|    |    |    |    |     |     |      |      |     |     |          |          |           |     |
| 15 | 46 | 55 | 68 |     |     |      |      |     |     |          |          |           | 119 |
|    |    |    |    |     |     |      |      |     |     |          |          |           |     |
| 33 | 64 | 74 | 87 | 92  |     |      |      |     |     |          |          |           |     |
|    |    |    |    |     |     |      |      |     |     |          |          |           |     |
| 19 | 50 | 59 | 72 |     |     |      |      |     |     |          |          |           | 86  |
|    |    |    |    |     |     |      |      |     |     |          |          |           |     |
| 17 | 48 | 57 | 70 | 76  |     |      |      |     |     |          |          |           |     |
|    |    |    |    |     |     |      |      |     |     |          |          |           |     |
| p1 | p2 | p3 |    |     |     |      |      |     |     |          |          |           | p4p5 |

ignated the Sm motif of 31 amino acids (Sm1) separated by approximately 10–20 amino acids from a second conserved 13 amino acid (Sm2) segment. This motif forms a five stranded anti-parallel beta sheet with the core proteins interacting with their neighbors through an anti-parallel β4–β5 pairing (Table 1). The Sm domains are tilted at an angle and resemble the fan blades on a turbine [6].

The snRNP particles are found throughout the nucleus in both a dispersed distribution and clustered in speckles. The dispersed particles are actively involved in the slicing of newly transcribed pre-mRNA and the denser speckles are stored pools of particles. The snRNAs are extremely stable, with half lives of greater than 48 h and they cycle continually between the active and stored pools. During mitosis the snRNPs distribute throughout the cytoplasm after the nuclear envelope breaks down in prophase, and then return to the reforming nuclei in telophase and early G1 [3].

The Sm class of snRNP particles assemble in the cytoplasm. The snRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase II in the nucleus and are transported into the cytoplasm immediately after transcription where they assemble with the snRNP core proteins before returning to the nucleus [4]. The Sm class of snRNAs share a conserved Sm RNA sequence motif (Pu A U<sub>n</sub> G Pu, n=4–6, Pu=purine), in a single stranded region of the RNA, which directs assembly with the snRNP core proteins [7]. The snRNAs undergo several post transcriptional modifications in the cytoplasm including cap hypermethylation, base modifications and 3′ shortening.

The newly synthesized snRNP core proteins are stored in the cytoplasm in three RNA-free subcore complexes of (1) a pentamer of (D1, D2, E, F and G) at 6S complex (2) B, D3, D1 and a 70 kDa protein recently identified as a type 5 arginine methyltransferase (PRMT5) at 20S and (3) apparently homogenous B protein at 2S–5S complexes. SnRNP core particle assembly occurs by initial binding of the 6S complex to the snRNA followed by addition of the B and D3 proteins [4,8]. The nuclear localization signal is a combination of the

2,2,7 m3G cap and determinants on the assembled core particle. Most snRNP specific proteins assemble with the particles after they enter the nucleus. The PRMT5 methyltransferase in the 20S cytoplasmic pre-snRNP complex generates the sDMA post translational modification on arginines found in GRG motifs (gly–arg–gly) in the C terminus of the D1, D3 and B snRNP core proteins (Table 1) [9,10]. There are approximately 13 GRG motifs in D1, 7 in D3 and 6 in B [11]. The sDMA modified GRG forms a motif that interacts with the survival of motor neuron protein. This protein, which is defective in the disease spinal muscular atrophy, is a hypothetical chaperone that helps localize and transport the snRNP particles [12].

## 3. The anti-Sm immune response

The anti-Sm autoimmune response is directed against multiple epitopes on the snRNP common core proteins. The B protein is the major antigen followed by the D1 and D2 proteins. The anti-Sm immune response displays the characteristics of a typical antigen driven response. The T cell epitopes supporting the response are specific to the snRNP core proteins and the anti-Sm Abs show evidence of affinity maturation [13,14]. Because the snRNP particles is a large multi-protein complex, the B and T cell Sm epitopes can reside on different proteins in the complex. A single T cell epitope generated from one protein in the snRNP particle, can support the production of a large family of antibodies that recognize multiple determinants on the snRNP particles. The process in which a single initiating antibody response can then expand to a large polyclonal antibody response against the snRNP particles, as seen with the anti-Sm response, has been called epitope spreading [15].

Hoffman and co-workers recently identified the T cell epitopes in the anti-Sm response as regions of the B and D1 protein that lie within the Sm1 and Sm2 protein motifs [14]. These motifs are likely to be on the inside of the mature snRNP

particle because they are the sites of protein–
protein interaction between the snRNP proteins. A
variety of approaches have been used over the last
decade to identify the B cell epitopes recognized
by the anti-Sm antibodies [8,11,16,17].

The proline rich sequence PPPGMRPP which is
repeated three times in the C terminus of the B
protein is the major Sm epitope in patient sera.
This sequence is similar to the PPPGRRP
sequence, in the Epstein–Barr nuclear antigen 1
(EBNA-1) in Epstein Barr virus (EBV) and has
generated the hypothesis that infection with EBV
predisposes vulnerable individuals to develop
lupus through a cross reaction of between the two
epitopes [18]. Many other Sm epitopes, primarily
on the C terminus of the B, D1 and D3 proteins,
regions of the proteins that appear on the outside
of the snRNP core particle have also been identi-
fied [16]. A large library of anti-Sm monoclonal
antibodies generated from the MRL mouse has
proven to be valuable tools in this work [8,11].

The observation that several anti-Sm mAbs rec-
ognize more than one snRNP core protein in
immunoblots was the first suggestion that Sm
epitopes are shared among the snRNP core pro-
teins. The recent identification of the sDMA mod-
ified GRG repeats on the B, D1 and D3 proteins
as major epitopes has helped to explain this cross
reactivity [11]. However, there must be other
factors contributing to these epitopes because the
D2 core protein, which lacks sDMA modified
GRG repeats is also recognized by some of these
antibodies and several epitopes include the GRG
motifs and unique flanking sequences.

4. Origins of the anti-Sm response

The etiology of lupus is unknown. A large
number of genetic factors and several environmen-
tal factors are hypothesized as risk factors for the
disease [19]. This suggests a variety of different
paths can lead to lupus, thus it is a syndrome
rather than a specific disease. However, in many
lupus patients anti-Sm autoantibodies are generat-
ed. This suggests there are some unusual features
of the snRNP particles that predispose them to
becoming autoantigens in SLE. Comparisons with
other autoantigens identify at least seven charac-
teristics of the snRNP particles that may contribute
to them becoming autoantigens. They are (1) the
abundance and stability of the particles (2) the
highly conserved nature of the snRNP proteins (3)
the inclusion of both protein and RNA in the
complexes including extensive double stranded
RNA (4) localization of the mature particles in
the nucleus (5) extensive post translational modi-
fication of the snRNP core proteins (6) presence
of polyvalent epitopes on the particles and (7) the
presence of motifs that mimic viral epitopes.

Several studies have suggested that stable and
abundant cellular proteins are presented to the
immune system during normal cell death. Their
availability makes them vulnerable to immune
recognition when other factors lead to a loss of
tolerance and their continued availability helps
perpetuate the immune response once it begins
[20]. A recent report suggested protein–nucleic
acid complexes may stimulate receptors in dentritic
cells that are specifically designed to detect single
and double stranded nucleic acids and boost the
immune response against the associated proteins
[21]. The snRNP proteins are extensively post-
translationally modified by the sDMA modification
and other as yet unidentified modifications. Several
reports have suggested these modifications predis-
pose proteins to autoimmune recognition [22].
Similarly the snRNP particles have a variety of
shared motifs and this polyvalent nature is
unknown to increase immunogenicity. Finally, the
snRNP B protein has the poly-proline motif that
is similar to the motif in the EBNA-1 protein which
may predispose people to developing anti-
bodies against the snRNP B protein. In a model
system immunization with this motif led to the
development of anti-Sm antibodies and there is a
strong correlation with EBV virus in patients with
anti-Sm antibodies [18].

However, there must be a combination of factors
including a vulnerable genotype and viral infec-
tion, inflammatory response or stochastic events
that initiates the anti-Sm response in vulnerable
individuals. Understanding what predisposes the
snRNP protein to becoming autoantigens in the
anti-Sm response will help identify some of the
factors that lead to the development of SLE.

Take-home messages

- Sm antigens are the seven snRNP common core proteins.
- SnRNP common core proteins form a heptamer ring of approximately 20 nm in diameter.
- Anti-Sm immune response is antigen driven.
- A polyproline motif with homology to Epstein bar nuclear antigen is a major Sm epitope.
- A post-translational modification of symmetrical dimethylarginine is a major Sm epitope.

References

[1] Maddison PJ, Reichlin M. Quantitation of precipitating antibodies to certain soluble nuclear antigens in SLE. Arthritis Rheum 1977;20:819–24.

[2] Hochberg MC. Updating the American College of Rheumatology revised criteria for the classification of systemic lupus erythematosus. Arthritis Rheum 1997;40:1725.

[3] Zieve GW, Sauterer RS. Cell biology of the snRNP particles. Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 1990;25:1–46.

[4] Will CL, Luhrmann R. Spliceosomal UsnRNP biogenesis, structure and function. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2001;13:290–301.

[5] Mura C, Cascio M, Sawaya MR, Eisenberg DS. The crystal structure of a heptameric archael Sm protein: implications for the eukaryotic snRNP core. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001;98:5532–7.

[6] Urlaub H, Raker VA, Koster S, Luhrmann R. Sm protein-Sm site interactions within the inner ring of the spliceosomal snRNP core structure. EMBO 2001;20:187–96.

[7] Raker VA, Hartmuth K, Kastner B, Luhrmann R. Spliceosomal U snRNP core assembly: Sm proteins assemble onto an Sm site RNA nonanucleotide in a specific and thermodynamically stable manner. Mol Cell Biol 1999;19:6554–65.

[8] Fury M, Andersen J, Ponda P, Aimes R, Zieve GW. Thirteen anti-Sm monoclonal antibodies immunoprecipitate the three cytoplasmic snRNP core protein precursors in six distinct subsets. J Autoimmun 1999;12:91–100.

[9] Friesen WJ, Paushkin S, Wyce A, et al. The methylosome, a 20S complex containing JBP1 and pICln, produces dimethylarginine-modified Sm proteins. Mol Cell Biol 2001;21:8289–300.

[10] Branscombe TL, Frankel A, Lee J-H, et al. PRMT5 (Janus kinase-binding protein 1) catalyzes the formation of symmetric dimethylarginine residues in proteins. J Biol Chem 2001;276:32971–6.

[11] Brahms H, Raymakers J, Union A, de Keyser F, Meheus L, Luhrmann R. The C-terminal RG dipeptide repeats of the spliceosomal Sm proteins D1 and D3 contain symmetrical dimethylarginines, which form a major B-cell epitope for anti-Sm autoantibodies. J Biol Chem 2000;275:17122–9.

[12] Friesen WJ, Dreyfuss G. Specific sequences of the Sm and Sm-like (Lsm) proteins mediate their interaction with the spinal muscular atrophy (SMN) disease gene product. J Biol Chem 2000;271:26370–5.

[13] Bloom DD, Davignon JL, Retter MW, et al. V region gene analysis of anti-Sm hybridomas and MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr mice. J Immunol 1993;150:1591–610.

[14] Talken BL, Schafermeyer KR, Bailey CW, Lee DR, Hoffman RW. T cell epitope mapping of the Smith antigen reveals that highly conserved Smith antigen motifs are the dominant target of T cell immunity in systemic lupus erythematosus. J Immunol 2001;167:562–8.

[15] Fatenejad S, Bennett M, Moslehi J, Craft J. Influence of antigen organization on the development of lupus autoantibodies. Arthritis Rheum 1998;41:603–12.

[16] McClain MT, Ramsland PA, Kaufman KM, James JA. Anti-sm autoantibodies in systemic lupus target highly basic surface structures of complexed spliceosomal autoantigens. J Immunol 2002;168:2054–62.

[17] Brahms H, Raker VA, van Venrooij WJ, Luhrmann R. A major, novel systemic lupus erythematosus autoantibody class recognizes E, F, and G Sm snRNP proteins as an E–F–G complex but not in their denatured states. Arthritis Rheum 1997;40:672–82.

[18] Arbuckle MR, Reichlin M, Harley JB, James JA. Shared early autoantibody recognition events in the development of anti-SmB/B′ in human lupus. Scand J Immunol 1999;50:447–55.

[19] Wakeland EK, Liu K, Graham K, Behrens T. Delineating the genetic basis of systemic lupus erythematosus. Immunity 2001;15:397–408.

[20] Tan EM. Autoantibodies as reporters identifying aberrant cellular mechanisms in tumorigenesis. J Clin Invest 2001;108:1411–5.

[21] Leadbetter EA, Rifkin IR, Hohlbaum AM, Beaudette BC, Shlomchik MJ, Marshak-Rothstein A. Chromatin-IgG complexes activate B cells by dual engagement of IgM and Toll-like receptors. Nature 2002;416:603–7.

[22] Utz P, Anderson P. Post-translational protein modifications, apoptosis, and the bypass of tolerance to autoantigens. Arthritis Rheum 1998;41:1152–60.
