
THE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY  
Vol. 237, No. 3, March 1962  
Printed in U.S.A.

# Biosynthesis of Uronic Acids by Skin Enzymes*

## I. URIDINE DIPHOSPHATE-D-GLUCOSE DEHYDROGENASE OF RABBIT SKIN

BERNARD JACOBSON† AND EUGENE A. DAVIDSON  

From the Department of Biochemistry and the Center for the Study of Aging,  
Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina  

(Received for publication, October 13, 1961)

Uridine diphosphate-d-glucose is important as a glycosyl donor in glycogen and starch synthesis (2, 3), and via the action of uridine diphosphate-d-glucose dehydrogenase, as a precursor of uridine diphosphate-d-glucuronic acid, an intermediate in mucopolysaccharide synthesis (4). The major uronic acid-containing polymers in skin are hyaluronic acid, which contains d-glucuronic acid, and chondroitin sulfate B, which contains L-iduronic acid. UDP-d-glucose dehydrogenase has been isolated from calf liver acetone powder, plants, and microorganisms (5–7). This report describes the properties of a UDP-d-glucose dehydrogenase purified from rabbit skin extracts and indicates the importance of this enzyme in the synthesis of L-iduronic acid.

### EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE

#### Methods and Materials

UDP-d-glucose, DPN, and p-hydroxymercuribenzoate were purchased from the Sigma Chemical Company. Detergent extractions were carried out with p-isooctylphenoxypolyethoxy ethanol (cutscum) purchased from the Fisher Scientific Company. d-Glucuronic acid was a product of the Pfanstiehl Chemical Company, and d-glucose oxidase was obtained from the Worthington Biochemical Corporation. UDP-glucose dehydrogenase activity was assayed spectrophotometrically in glycine buffer of pH 9.0 by observing the increase in absorption at 340 mμ in the presence of UDP-glucose and DPN. Uronic acid was assayed by the carbazole reaction (8), and glucuronic acid was identified by descending paper chromatography on Whatman No. 1 filter paper in a butanol-ethanol-water solvent system (5:1:4 top layer) (9), and on Whatman No. 3 MM filter paper in a tert-amyl alcohol-formic acid-water solvent system (4:1:1.5) (10). Nucleotides were identified by their ultraviolet absorption spectra and reducing sugar spots on paper chromatograms developed with the AgNO₃-NaOH spray reagents (11). Hydroxylapatite was prepared by the method of Tiselius, Hjerten, and Leven (12), and protein was determined by the method of Warburg and Christian (13).

The skin was removed, cut into thin strips, and put through a Wiley Mill under liquid nitrogen. Since the resulting powder did not store well, the milled skin was acetone-powdered in a jacketed Waring Blender at 0°. After this treatment, the powder could be stored in the deep freeze for as long as 45 days without noticeable loss in the activity of extracts prepared from it. All subsequent operations were carried out at 3–5°.

Ten grams of acetone-powdered skin were extracted with 150 ml of an aqueous solution of 0.4% cutscum for 2 minutes at half speed in a Virtis model 45 homogenizer. Small scale extractions, e.g., 2 g of acetone powder per 30 ml of cutscum, were generally more effective and preparations were combined at this stage. The resulting suspensions were centrifuged at 8000 × *g* for 10 minutes and the precipitate discarded.

The supernatant fraction from the detergent extraction was treated with 0.1 volume of 2% protamine sulfate, allowed to stand for 10 minutes, and centrifuged at 12,000 × *g* for 20 minutes. The precipitate was discarded.

The supernatant solution from the protamine sulfate step was taken to 40% saturation of (NH₄)₂SO₄ by the addition of the solid salt. The solution was stirred for 20 minutes and then centrifuged at 12,000 × *g* for 30 minutes.

The supernatant solution from the 0 to 40% step was taken to 90% saturation by the addition of solid (NH₄)₂SO₄, allowed to stir for 20 minutes, and centrifuged at 12,000 × *g* for 30 minutes. The precipitate was taken up in the minimal volume of 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 6.5, and dialyzed overnight against 1 liter of 10⁻³ M phosphate buffer, pH 6.5, with one change of buffer.

The dialyzed solution was made 40% saturated with (NH₄)₂SO₄, centrifuged, and the small precipitate discarded. The supernatant solution was adjusted to 60% (NH₄)₂SO₄ saturation and the resulting precipitate was harvested, dissolved in phosphate buffer, and dialyzed as above.

The dialyzed solution was transferred to a 25.4 × 1.25-cm hydroxylapatite column which was eluted with a linear gradient consisting of 250 ml of 0.02 M potassium phosphate buffer, pH 6.5, in the mixing vessel, and an equal volume of 0.60 M potassium phosphate buffer, pH 6.5, in the reservoir. The enzyme was eluted from the column at 0.1 M phosphate and although of low activity, it could be stored in the cold for a month without further loss in specific activity. A sample purification scheme is outlined in Table I.

Preparation of Enzyme—Three- to four-week-old rabbits were shaved with electric clippers and killed by a blow on the neck.

* This investigation was supported by Grants A2903 (C2), A4315, M2109, and H3582 from the National Institutes of Health, United States Public Health Service, Bethesda 14, Maryland. A preliminary report has been presented (1).

The material presented is taken from a thesis to be submitted by Bernard Jacobson to the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences of Duke University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.

Properties of Dehydrogenase—The pH optimum was 9 as shown in Fig. 1 and is the same as that reported for both the liver and plant UDP-glucose dehydrogenases; the bacterial enzyme shows

Biosynthesis of Uronic Acids by Skin Enzymes. I

Vol. 237, No. 3

**TABLE I**

*Purification of UDP-d-glucose dehydrogenase*

UDP-glucose dehydrogenase assayed by increasing optical density at 340 mμ. One unit is the amount of enzyme causing a change in optical density of 0.001 per minute. The determinations were carried out with the following incubation mixture: UDP-glucose, 0.2 μmole; DPN, 1.0 μmole; MgCl₂, 10 μmoles; glycine, pH 9, 50 μmoles; enzyme, 0.05 ml; and water to a volume of 1 ml.

| Treatment                          | Total units | Total protein | Specific activity | Fold |
|------------------------------------|-------------|---------------|-------------------|------|
| Detergent extract                  | 5460        | 2470          | 2.21              |      |
| Protamine sulfate                  | 4862        | 1820          | 2.68              | 1.2  |
| (NH₄)₂SO₄, 0–40%*                 | 2860        | 975           | 2.94              | 1.3  |
| (NH₄)₂SO₄, 40–90% dialysis         | 2000        | 250           | 8.00              | 3.6  |
| (NH₄)₂SO₄, 0–40%                   | 1800        | 200           | 9.20              | 4.1  |
| (NH₄)₂SO₄, 40–60% dialysis         | 1400        | 51            | 28.0              | 13.0 |
| Hydroxylapatite                    | 768         | 20            | 38.0              | 18.0 |

* *UDP-d-glucuronic acid-5-epimerase precipitated at this step (16).*

**FIG. 1. pH study of skin UDP-d-glucose dehydrogenase.** pH 6.5 and 7.5 determinations were carried out in 0.5 M potassium phosphate buffer. pH 8.5 was carried out in 0.5 M Tris buffer, and pH 9.0, 9.5, and 10.0 in 0.5 M glycine. The incubation mixture was the same as that described in Table I except for the different buffers.

**FIG. 2. Kₘ of UDP-d-glucose for rabbit skin UDP-d-glucose dehydrogenase in 0.10 M glycine buffer, pH 9.**

optimal activity at pH 8.4. The Kₘ value for UDP-glucose is 2.4 × 10⁻⁵ M (Fig. 2), which is similar to the value of 2 × 10⁻⁵ M reported for the liver enzyme in the same buffer (14), whereas

---

**TABLE II**

*Stoichiometry of skin UDP-d-glucose dehydrogenase*

Experiment 1 contained 5 μmoles of UDP-glucose, 15 μmoles of DPN, 10 μmoles of MgCl₂, and 100 μmoles of pH 9 glycine buffer. Enzyme, 0.5 ml, was added and the reaction was allowed to proceed for 1 hour at 37°.

Experiment 2 contained 18 μmoles of UDP-glucose, 40 μmoles of DPN, 50 μmoles of MgCl₂, and 700 μmoles of glycine buffer, pH 9. Two milliliters of enzyme were added and the reaction was allowed to proceed for 2 hours at 37°.

UDP-glucose dehydrogenase was separated from UDP-glucuronic acid-5-epimerase as mentioned in the text. DPNH was measured by absorbance at 340 mμ and UDP-glucuronic acid was estimated after hydrolysis with Dowex 50-H⁺ resin-0.05 N HCl for 20 minutes at 100°. The free glucuronic acid produced was measured by carbazole colorimetric analysis.

| Experiment | + DPNH       | + UDP-glucuronic acid |
|------------|--------------|------------------------|
|            | μmoles       | μmoles                |
| 1          | 0.612        | 0.350                  |
| 2          | 0.20         | 0.07                   |

that reported for the plant enzyme is 7 × 10⁻⁵ M (7). The skin dehydrogenase was completely inhibited by p-hydroxymercuribenzoate at a final concentration of 1.2 × 10⁻⁵ M; this inhibition was not reversed by cysteine. In contrast, the inhibition of the liver enzyme can be reversed by cysteine and is partially prevented by DPN but not by UDP-glucose,¹ whereas p-chloromercuribenzoate inhibition of the plant enzyme is not reversed by cysteine (7).

*Identification of Reaction Product—A mixture containing 20 μmoles of UDP-glucose, 50 μmoles of DPN, 10 μmoles of MgCl₂, and 200 μmoles of glycine, pH 9, was allowed to incubate for 3 hours at 37° with the addition, each half hour, of 1 ml of protamine sulfate-treated enzyme. At the end of the reaction time, the enzyme was denatured by the addition of 0.1 volume of 2.5 N HClO₄, protein was removed by centrifugation, the mixture was neutralized with KOH, and KClO₄ was removed. The nucleotides were adsorbed on acid-washed Darco G-60 (20 mg of charcoal per μmole of nucleotide), and the charcoal was washed extensively with water, and was eluted with a mixture of 50% ethanol-1% ammonia. The resulting eluate was concentrated to dryness in a vacuum, taken up in 5 ml of a mixture of 0.05 N HCl-Dowex 50-H⁺ resin (200 to 400 mesh) 2:1 (volume per weight), and hydrolyzed for 20 minutes in a boiling water bath. This procedure results in less destruction of hexuronic acid than other hydrolytic methods (15). After hydrolysis, the mixture was filtered, the pH was adjusted to between 4 and 5, and the aliquots were examined by paper chromatography. Essentially identical results were obtained for both solvent systems described above.*

Elution of a parallel strip gave the following results. A spot near the origin migrated as UDP or UMP and exhibited a uridine spectrum; a second spot corresponded to standard glucose and showed only carbohydrate end absorption in the ultraviolet; a third spot migrated as glucurone. A fast moving ultraviolet-absorbing spot showed a nucleotide spectrum on elution and was not further identified.

Colorimetric uronic acid analysis was performed after elution of the glucurone and glucose areas. The glucurone area gave a

¹ E. A. Davidson, unpublished observations.

March 1962                                                                 B. Jacobson and E. A. Davidson                                                                 637

typical uronic acid absorption spectrum, which was quenched upon addition of water. The material eluted from the glucose area gave a spectrum corresponding to that given by authentic d-glucose; the addition of water caused the color to intensify markedly as is typical of hexoses; the glucose area eluate reacted with d-glucose oxidase, whereas the glucurone eluate did not.

A complete incubation inactivated at zero time showed the presence of UDP or UMP and glucose areas only.

The stoichiometry of the dehydrogenase reaction was measured with the supernatant fraction from the first 0 to 40% (NH₄)₂SO₄ step as enzyme. UDP-d-glucuronic acid-5-epimerase is removed at this step and thus all uronic acid formed is UDP-d-glucuronic acid (16). The results are presented in Table II.

### DISCUSSION

The role of UDP-glucose as an intermediate in L-iduronic acid biosynthesis was indicated by the following observations. UDP-glucose dehydrogenase activity was evident in crude rabbit skin extracts, the product of the enzymatic reaction is UDP-glucuronic acid, and the partially purified enzyme shows several characteristics similar to those reported for the other UDP-glucose dehydrogenases from other sources. It should be pointed out that the specific activity of the best preparation obtained is considerably lower than that exhibited by the equivalent enzymes from liver and plants.

In the absence of stoichiometric amounts of DPN, UDP-glucose itself is inert in the rabbit skin system (16). The product of the dehydrogenase reaction, UDP-glucuronic acid, has been shown to be incorporated into hyaluronic acid in a bacterial system and may serve in a similar capacity in the synthesis of skin hyaluronate. Through an epimerization at carbon 5, UDP-d-glucuronic acid can also be converted to UDP-L-iduronic acid, which would be a logical intermediate in the biosynthesis of chondroitin sulfate B.

The role of glucuronolactone as a precursor of ascorbate in rats has been described (17). Pogell and Krisman (18) in describing a UDP-glucuronic acid pyrophosphatase and glucuronic acid-1-phosphatase of rat skin suggested that these enzymes may serve in an ascorbate-synthesizing pathway as a glucuronolactone-generating system.

Although ascorbate synthesis in skin systems has not been described, the UDP-glucose dehydrogenase present may produce intermediates for this pathway as well.

### SUMMARY

A uridine diphosphate-d-glucose dehydrogenase has been isolated and purified from the skin of young rabbits. The properties of the skin enzyme are quite similar in several respects to those reported for the same enzyme isolated from liver, plant, and microbial sources.

Analysis of the products of the reaction indicated the stoichiometric formation of UDP-d-glucuronic acid from UDP-d-glucose and diphosphopyridine nucleotide. UDP-d-glucose is relatively inert in the absence of DPN.

The possible significance of this reaction in the synthesis of the L-iduronic acid moiety of chondroitin sulfate B and in the biosynthesis of hyaluronic acid is discussed.

### REFERENCES

1. JACOBSON, B., *Federation Proc.*, **20**, 162 (1961).
2. LELOIR, L., AND CARDINI, C., *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, **79**, 6340 (1957).
3. DE FEKETE, M. A., LELOIR, L. F., AND CARDINI, C. E., *Nature*, **187**, 918 (1960).
4. MARKOVITZ, A., CIFONELLI, J. A., AND DORFMAN, A., *J. Biol. Chem.*, **234**, 2343 (1959).
5. STROMINGER, J., KALCKAR, H., AXELROD, J., AND MAXWELL, E., *J. Am. Chem. Soc.*, **76**, 6411 (1954).
6. SMITH, E. E. B., MILLS, G., BERNHEIMER, H., AND AUSTRIAN, R., *Biochim. et Biophys. Acta*, **28**, 211 (1958).
7. STROMINGER, J. L., AND MAPSON, L. W., *Biochem. J.*, **66**, 567 (1957).
8. DISCHE, Z., *J. Biol. Chem.*, **167**, 189 (1947).
9. HIRST, E., AND JONES, J. K. N., *Discussions Faraday Soc.*, **1**, 271 (1949).
10. CIFONELLI, J., LUDOWIEG, J., AND DORFMAN, A., *J. Biol. Chem.*, **233**, 541 (1958).
11. TREVELYAN, W. E. AND HARRISON, J. S., *Biochem. J.*, **50**, 298 (1952).
12. TISELIUS, A., HJERTEN, S., AND LEVEN, O., *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.*, **65**, 132 (1956).
13. WARBURG, O., AND CHRISTIAN, W., *Biochem. Z.*, **310**, 384 (1942).
14. MAXWELL, E., KALCKAR, H., AND STROMINGER, J., *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.*, **65**, 1 (1956).
15. ANASTASSIADIS, P., AND COMMON, R., *Can. J. Biochem.*, **36**, 413 (1958).
16. JACOBSON, B., AND DAVIDSON, E. A., *J. Biol. Chem.*, **237**, 638 (1962).
17. HOROWITZ, H., AND KING, C., *J. Biol. Chem.*, **205**, 815 (1953).
18. POGELL, B. M., AND KRISMAN, C. R., *Biochim. et Biophys. Acta*, **41**, 349 (1960).
