
doi:10.1016/S0022-2836(03)00970-7

JMB Available online at www.sciencedirect.com SCIENCE @DIRECT®

The X-ray Structure of *Escherichia coli* RraA (MenG),  
A Protein Inhibitor of RNA Processing  

Arthur F. Monzingo${}^{1,2}$, Junjun Gao${}^{1,3}$, Ji Qiu${}^{1,3}$, George Georgiou${}^{1,3,4}$  
and Jon D. Robertus${}^{1,2*}$  

${}^{1}$Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology  
1 University Station  
University of Texas at Austin  
Austin, TX 78712, USA  

${}^{2}$Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, 1 University Station, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712 USA  

${}^{3}$Department of Chemical Engineering, 1 University Station, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712 USA  

${}^{4}$Department of Biomedical Engineering, 1 University Station, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712 USA  

${}^{*}$Corresponding author  

The *Escherichia coli* protein regulator of RNase E activity A (RraA) has recently been shown to act as a trans-acting modulator of RNA turnover in bacteria; it binds to the essential endonuclease RNase E and inhibits RNA processing in vivo and in vitro. Here, we report the 2.0 Å X-ray structure of RraA. The structure reveals a ring-like trimer with a central cavity of approximately 12 Å in diameter. Based on earlier sequence analysis, RraA had been identified as a putative S-adenosylmethionine:2-demethylmenaquinone and was annotated as MenG. However, an analysis of the RraA structure shows that the protein lacks the structural motifs usually required for methylases. Comparison of the observed fold with that of other proteins (and domains) suggests that the RraA fold is an ancient platform that has been adapted for a wide range of functions. An analysis of the amino acid sequence shows that the *E. coli* RraA exhibits an ancient relationship to a family of aldolases.

© 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: crystal structure; degradosome; three-layer sandwich; disulfide bond formation

---

Introduction

In the NCBI database, the *Escherichia coli* genome includes a gene annotated as *menG*. This gene is predicted to encode a 17.4 kDa polypeptide that has close homologs (>40% amino acid identity) to putative proteins from a wide range of Gram-negative bacteria, mycobacteria, including *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*, and plants, such as *Arabidopsis thaliana* and *Oryza sativa*. The locus annotated as *menG* is located downstream from *menA*, which encodes 1,4-dihydroxy-2-naphthoate octaprenyltransferase. This enzyme catalyzes the addition of a prenyl chain to 1,4-dihydroxy-2-naphthoic acid, resulting in the synthesis of demethylmenaquinone. ${}^{1}$ The latter compound is the precursor of menaquinone (vitamin K2), a molecule which plays an essential role in several anaerobic electron transport systems. The chromosomal location of the *menG* gene and the presence of a GXGXG amino acid sequence motif, which is also found in some methyltransferases, led to the hypothesis that the corresponding protein is involved in menaquinone biosynthesis. Specifically, Meganathan proposed that the putative MenG protein functions as an S-adenosylmethionine:2-demethylmenaquinone methyltransferase that catalyzes the transfer of a methyl group to demethylmenaquinone in the final step of menaquinone formation. ${}^{1}$ *menG* was isolated recently in a screen for multicopy genes that increase the synthesis of the disulfide isomerase DsbC, ${}^{2}$ whose transcript is very short-lived (X. Zhan et al., unpublished results). Extensive subsequent experimentation revealed that this polypeptide binds to the essential *E. coli*

Abbreviations used: CTH, carboxyl terminal half.  
E-mail address of the corresponding author: jrobertus@mail.utexas.edu

0022-2836/$ - see front matter © 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Table 1. Crystallographic data

| Parameter                     | Native    | Hg       |
|-------------------------------|-----------|----------|
| Resolution (Å)                | 2.0       | 2.0      |
| $R_{\text{merge}}$ (%)        | 7.1 (32.8)| 5.5 (18.8)|
| $\langle I / \sigma_I \rangle$| 13.4 (2.2)| 15.7 (4.3)|
| Completeness (%)              | 95.5 (71.8)| 99.4 (98.0)|
| Completeness (%)              | 67.8 (47.1)| 77.4 (48.3)|
| Unique reflections            | 28,089    | 57,705   |
| Redundancy                    | 2.9       | 2.9      |
| Phasing FOM                   |           | 0.53     |
| Phasing power                 |           | 1.11     |
| No. residues                  | 473       |          |
| No. atoms                      | 3820      |          |
| $R_{\text{working}}$          | 0.23      |          |
| $R_{\text{free}}$             | 0.27      |          |
| rms deviation from ideality   |           |          |
| Bond length (Å)               | 0.006     |          |
| Angles (deg.)                 | 1.246     |          |

a Last shell.  
b $I / \sigma_I > 3$.

Ribonuclease E is an essential multifunctional endonuclease that is known to be broadly implicated in processing of the bulk of RNA in *E. coli*. RNase E is a 1061 amino acid residue protein that consists of an amino-terminal catalytic domain and a carboxyl terminal half (CTH) region. The N-terminal catalytic domain contains the endonuclease and 3′ polyadenylase activities of the protein and is essential for growth. The C-terminal half serves as a scaffold for the assembly of a large multienzyme complex called the degradosome. The major protein components of the degradosome, which are found in stoichiometric amounts, are: enolase, the RNA helicase RhlB, and polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase).

Here, we report the crystal structure of RraA and compare its structure to other proteins related in amino acid sequence and folding topology.

### Results and Discussion

#### X-ray structure determination

The *E. coli* RraA crystallized in space group C2 with cell constants, $a = 94.4$ Å, $b = 93.9$ Å, $c = 67.9$ Å, $\beta = 132.7^\circ$. There are three molecules per asymmetric unit, giving a $V_M$ of 2.1 Å³/Da. Crystallographic data for the *E. coli* RraA are summarized in Table 1. A Ramachandran plot has 87% of residues in the most favorable region, 12% in additionally allowed space and 1% in generously allowed space. The refined model includes 245 solvent molecules. RraA crystallizes as a homotrimer, and the final model includes residues 2–161 in monomer A,

Figure 1. Electron density for the *E. coli* RraA protein. This stereo picture displays a section of β-sheet against a 2.0 Å $2F_o - F_c$ electron density map; the map is contoured at 1σ. Three strands of sheet are shown, residues 60–65, 87–93, and 108–112; each segment is labeled at its C-terminal end.

residues 2–159 in monomer B, and residues 2–156 in monomer C. The N-terminal Met residue is probably processed away from the expressed protein. The missing residues at the C termini of monomers B and C are not visible in the electron density maps and are most likely disordered. The refinement R-factor is rather modest, and this probably reflects the fact that a number of regions in the trimer are disordered. A section of the final electron density map, indicating the map quality, is shown in Figure 1.

## Structure of RraA

A ribbon drawing representation of the RraA monomer is shown in Figure 2(a). The structure of the *E. coli* RraA molecule can be characterized as a three-layer sandwich. In the middle of the sandwich is a four-stranded parallel β sheet which is part of an α/β structure. The three return helices of the α/β structure are all on one side of the sheet and form a second layer of the sandwich. On the opposite side of the parallel sheet is a four-stranded antiparallel β-sheet, lying roughly perpendicular to the parallel sheet.

A two-dimensional map of the secondary structure is shown in Figure 3A. Helix A precedes the antiparallel sheet which is made up of strands a1, j, i, and a3. The parallel sheet is composed of strands e, d, c, and b. In the α/β structure, helix B returns strand b to c, helix C returns c to d, and helix D returns d to e. Strands a2 and f bond to the end strands of the parallel sheet in an anti-parallel fashion: a2 to strand e and f to b. Strands g and h form a β-loop which links the parallel sheet to the completion of the antiparallel sheet with strands i and j.

The *E. coli* RraA protein crystallizes with a trimer as the asymmetric unit. The packing of these three chains around a molecular 3-fold axis is shown in Figure 2B. Formation of the trimer buries ~1000 Å² of accessible surface area per monomer. The interaction between monomers is mostly hydrophilic in nature with several hydrogen bonds formed as well as a salt-bridge between conserved residues Arg97 and Asp10. There is also an interaction of Pro116 with several hydrophobic residues across the interface.

The trimer has a hole in the center which is approximately 12 Å across. PNase, characterized as part of the degradosome, is also trimeric with a similarly sized channel in the center. It has been suggested that its channel may be involved in the processivity of the single-strand RNA substrate of PNase.¹² It is reasonable to ask if the central hole of RraA might accommodate RNA, given RraA's apparent interaction with the degradosome. While single-stranded RNA which maintains A-form helix stacking and curvature cannot be accommodated in the narrow hole of the RraA trimer, extended RNA, such as residues 21–25 of yeast phenylalanine tRNA,¹³ can be physically accommodated. However, the chemical and electrostatic nature of

the RraA central hole is not suggestive of any RNA-binding role. Figure 2(c) and (d) shows the electrostatic potential of the two RraA trimer faces. One face, which interacts with an adjacent trimer related by a 2-fold rotation in the crystal, is almost completely neutral. The other, exposed face is largely a neutral surface, with weak electro-negative stripes radiating from the center; this is inconsistent with binding a negatively charged RNA strand.

### RraA (MenG) is not a methyltransferase

Although we now know that RraA is an inhibitor of RNase E, its mode of action remains unclear. Earlier, the proximity of the *rraA* (*menG*) gene to *menA* on the *E. coli* chromosome led to speculation that the polypeptide product of the gene was involved in the menaquinone biosynthesis pathway.¹ It was hypothesized that the MenG protein was S-adenosylmethionine:2-demethylmenaquinone methyltransferase, which catalyzes the transfer of a methyl group from S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) to 2-demethylmenaquinone to give menaquinone. However, our structure shows that RraA (MenG) lacks the Rossmann fold which forms the AdoMet-binding site in AdoMet-dependent methyltransferases, and thus it is highly unlikely to have this activity.

The 2-demethylmenaquinone methyltransferase activity of *Bacillus stearothermophilus* has been attributed to a 234 amino acid residue protein which shows no sequence homology to RraA (MenG) but shows homology to other AdoMet-dependent methyltransferases, such as UbiG (2-octaprenyl-3-methyl-5-hydroxy-6-methoxy-1,4-benzoquinone methyltransferase) and UbiE (2-octaprenyl-6-methoxy-1,4-benzoquinone methyltransferase) in the ubiquinone synthesis pathway in *E. coli* and GerC2 from *Bacillus subtilis*.¹⁴ A homolog of GerC2 in *Synechocystis* has been shown to have the AdoMet-dependent 2-phytyl-1,4-naphthoquinone methyltransferase activity.¹⁵ To add to the confusion, both the *B. stearothermophilus* and *Synechocystis* proteins have been referred to in the literature as MenG, as well as MenH. Studies with *ubiE* mutant strains indicate that UbiE, in addition to its methyltransferase role in the ubiquinone synthesis pathway, likely also contains the 2-demethylmenaquinone methyltransferase activity in *E. coli*.¹⁶ Taken together, it appears that *E. coli* RraA (MenG) was originally misidentified as the AdoMet-dependent 2-demethylmenaquinone methyltransferase, and in fact, this activity in *E. coli* is likely supplied by UbiE.

### Structural homologies

In an effort to discern RraA's likely mode of action, we sought to identify structural homologs. A Dali search revealed that the RraA fold is similar to other known proteins, or protein domains, which have a diversity of functions. RraA most

Figure 2. Models of RraA. (a) The backbone model of a RraA monomer. This stereo picture illustrates the fold of the protein and displays its secondary structural elements. Residues along the backbone are labeled to aid in following the polypeptide path. (b) The trimeric arrangement of RraA. RraA functions as a trimer, and a trimer is the asymmetric unit of the crystal. Three monomers pack around a pseudo 3-fold axis. (c) and (d) Surface electrostatic potential of the faces of the RraA trimer. Electronegative charges are shown in red, and positive charges are shown in blue. (c) The face of the trimer which interacts with an adjacent trimer in the RraA crystal. (d) The trimer face which is exposed to solution.

The X-ray Structure of E. coli RraA

Figure 3. A representation of secondary structure for RraA and related proteins. In this two-dimensional display, α-helices are shown as cylinders and labeled with capital letters, while β-strands are shown as arrows and labeled with lower case letters. A, RraA; the secondary structural elements are named roughly in order, but the first three β-strands are labeled as a1–a3 so as to match the labels for the helices and sheet strands which form the systematic α/β domain. B, The phosphohistidine domain of pyruvate phosphate dikinase from C. symbiosum. C, A domain of unknown function from carbamoyl phosphate synthetase, and (d) is the apical domain of GroEL.

closely resembles the fold of the phosphohistidine domains of pyruvate phosphate dikinase (PPDK) from *Clostridium symbiosum*,<sup>17</sup> illustrated in Figure 3B, and of enzyme I of the phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP):sugar phosphotransferase system of *E. coli*.<sup>18</sup> In both, strand f bonds in an antiparallel manner to strand g rather than b. RraA lacks the histidine which is phosphorylated in PPDK and enzyme I, indicating this an unlikely function for RraA. Comparisons of the amino acid sequence of RraA with the dikinase phosphohistidine domain show that the protein sequences are at most 16% identical. Although this is not statistically significant, the fact that there are numerous conserved hydrophobic core residues suggests that the proteins are in fact related by an ancient divergence.

The structural homology of RraA with the phosphohistidine domains of PPDK and enzyme I is, at least suggestive of a possible interaction of RraA with the enolase of the degradosome. The phosphohistidine domains of PPDK and enzyme I are both phosphorylated by PEP, which is bound to an adjacent C-terminal domain. The crystal structure of PPDK has shown this PEP/pyruvate-binding domain to be an eight-stranded α/β-barrel.<sup>17</sup> By sequence homology, this is also likely the case for the C-terminal domain of enzyme I.<sup>18</sup> The enolase known to be associated with the degradosome is also a PEP-binding eight-stranded α/β-barrel, although it is not currently understood if or how its glycolytic activity is related to RNA degradation.<sup>19</sup> It is plausible that RraA may interact with the PEP-binding α/β-barrel enolase as has been observed with

the phosphohistidine and PEP-binding domains of PPDK and inferred with enzyme I.

Additional structural homologies of RraA were investigated. A domain of unknown function from carbamoyl phosphate synthetase,<sup>20</sup> illustrated in Figure 3C, and the ectodomain of the transferrin receptor,<sup>21</sup> have a similar fold to RraA. Both of these domains have a helix connecting the major parallel and antiparallel sheets rather than a beta structure. Also, both have an additional N-terminal strand rather than the j strand participating in the antiparallel sheet.

The apical domain of GroEL (p60 class),<sup>22</sup> shown in Figure 3D, also has a similar fold to RraA. It also has a helix connecting the parallel and antiparallel sheets rather than a beta structure, but does have a strand j in the antiparallel sheet. GroEL holoenzyme is a cylinder made from two heptameric rings, stacked back-to-back, with a ~45 Å diameter central cavity.<sup>23</sup> The cavity is thought to act as a peptide “folding cage” *in vivo*.<sup>24</sup> The peptide-binding helices of the apical domain are at the opening of the cavity of the ring, and it is easy to see how they could participate in chaperone activity.<sup>25</sup> In the crystal, RraA oligomerizes as two back-to-back trimeric rings. However, the resulting cavity is only ~15 Å wide, and the RraA helices which correspond to the GroEL peptide-binding helices (B and C) are oriented away from the cavity. As a consequence, it seems unlikely that RraA could function as a protein-folding chaperone.

It is apparent from the above comparisons that the RraA fold is an ancient one, used as a scaffold for many protein domains. It is not possible to

assign a catalytic function to RraA based solely on an examination of its structural homologs.

### Sequence homology analysis

Amino acid sequence comparisons using BLAST and HMMER revealed RraA homologs (annotated as MenG) in numerous bacterial species as well as the plant species *A. thaliana*. All of the homologous RraA (MenG) proteins consist of between 157 and 166 amino acid residues. The *E. coli* RraA is 98% identical in sequence with that from *Salmonella enterica*, 88% identical with that from *Yersinia pestis*, and 41% identical with the protein from *A. thaliana*.

In addition to this clear homology, there is also weaker homology to a second family of proteins, some of which have been characterized as aldolases (as shown in Figure 4). Typically, these are proteins of 210–234 amino acid residues. Several members of this family have been identified as 4-oxalocitramalate aldolase (also called 4-carboxy-4-hydroxy-2-oxoadipate aldolase), which catalyzes the cleavage of 4-oxalocitramalate to yield oxalocitate and pyruvate in the last step of the *meta*-protocatechuate catabolic pathway, found in bacteria which degrade aromatic compounds under aerobic conditions. These putative aldolase proteins have no homology with either established class I or class II aldolases and therefore may represent a new class of aldolases. No members of this new family have had their X-ray structures determined and consequently cannot be compared with RraA on the tertiary structure level.

Genes of the *meta*-protocatechuate pathway have, thus far, been identified in five bacterial species: *Sphingomonas paulimobilis,*²⁶ *Sphingomonas sp.* strain LB126,²⁷ *Pseudomonas ochraceae,*²⁸ *Comamonas testosteronei,*²⁹ and *Arthrobacter keyseri.*³⁰ A sequence alignment of the 4-oxalocitramalate aldolase from each of these species along with RraA from *E. coli* and other species is shown in Figure 4. In general, the amino acid sequence of RraA is only 15–20% identical but is 30–35% conserved, when compared to these aldolase proteins. The aldolase proteins contain inserts of ~25 and ~45 amino acid residues at the amino and carboxyl termini, respectively.

The gene products corresponding to 4-oxalocitramalate aldolase from *S. paulimobilis* and *P. ochraceae* have been isolated and characterized.³¹,³² The enzyme has been shown to aggregate as a hexamer and to require a divalent cation such as Mg²⁺ to catalyze not only the cleavage of 4-oxalocitramalate to oxaloacetate and pyruvate but also the cleavage of oxaloacetate to pyruvate and CO₂.

In general, the genes of the *meta*-protocatechuate pathway have been found at a single locus. *E. coli* does not appear to have this locus of genes, and thus, is very unlikely to have this particular catabolic pathway. Therefore, it does not appear that RraA is an oxalocitramalate aldolase as part

of a *meta*-protocatechuate pathway but may possibly be an enzyme catalyzing a similar reaction.

#### Comparison with the MenG (RraA) from *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*

The X-ray structure of a putative MenG from mycoplasma was solved contemporaneously with that of the RraA (formerly MenG) from *E. coli.*³³ The two proteins are very similar, sharing 42% amino acid identity; it is very likely that the *M. tuberculosis* protein is also a regulator of RNase E in that species and should be renamed. A superposition of the Cα backbones of the two proteins show they differ by an rms value of just 0.86 Å. The threefold symmetry of that crystal arranges monomers in a very similar fashion to those in the pseudo 3-fold arrangement of the *E. coli* protein; a superposition of the Cα backbones of the two trimers differs by an rms value of 1.37 Å.

Two putative ligands were found bound to the *M. tuberculosis* MenG (RraA), neither of which is found with the *E. coli* RraA. In both cases, the ligands bound to the side-chains of amino acid residues which are not conserved in *E. coli*. Tartrate, which was included in the *M. tuberculosis* MenG crystallization condition, was observed bound to Asn48 and Lys124. These residues correspond to Asn45 and Gly121 in the *E. coli* RraA. Glyoxylate was modeled in another pocket of the molecule bound to Arg27 (Ser 24 in *E. coli*) and Thr117 (Ala114 in *E. coli*).

### Conclusions

The X-ray analysis of RraA shows that its overall fold is related to that of several other proteins, or protein domains, including pyruvate phosphate dikinase, carbamoyl phosphate synthetase, and the ectodomain of the transferrin receptor. These structural homologs possess a wide range of functions; and this suggests, that like α/β-barrels, the RraA fold may be a stable scaffold upon which nature has built a wide range of activities. Structural comparisons alone cannot, therefore, determine the likely role of this protein. However, the lack of an AdoMet cofactor-binding site clearly illustrates that RraA is not a methylase as originally postulated. RraA also appears, from its sequence, to be distantly related to a family of aldolases. It is not clear if RraA evolved from these aldolases, or if the aldolase activity is simply another of the numerous enzyme acuities built on this ancient scaffold.

Biochemical studies in our laboratory have clearly revealed that RraA binds to RNase E, the major component of the RNA degradosome and inhibits its endonuclease activity.³ We do not yet understand the detailed interactions of RraA with the degradosome complex or how this might regulate its activity in RNA processing.

The X-ray Structure of E. coli RraA

RraA-Ecoli
MENG_SALTY
MENG_YERPE
MENG_MYCTU
MEG1_ARATH
FldZ
LigK
PcmE
PmdF
ProA

$\alpha A$

5 10
MKYDTSELCDIYQE---
MKYDTSELCDIYHE---
MKYDTSCLCDIYHE---
MAISFRPTADLVDDIGP---
MAFVTTAEVCDANQEMIRS
---MSGIVVQNIERASLSVV DGLAKCGVATVHEAQG---
MRGAAMGVVVVQNIERAPLEVIDGLAACGVATVHEAQG---
MRLNNLGIVRTNIERPDPADV KRLSQFGVATIHEAMG---
---MYELGVVYRNIQRADRAAADGLAALGSATVHEAMG---
---MYELGVVYRNIQRADRAAADGLAALGSATVHEAMG---

$\beta a1$ $\beta a2$ $\beta a3$ $\beta b$ $\alpha B$

15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
DVNVVEPLFSNFGGRASF GQII TVKCFEDNGLLYDLLLEQ
DVNVVEPLFSNFGGRSSF GGQII TVKCFEDNGLLYDLLLEQ
EVNVVEPLFSNFGGRTSF GGKIT TVKCFEDNGLLFDLLLEE
DVRSCDLQFRQFGGRSQF AGPIST VRCFQDNALLKSVLSQL
GQLRALQPVIYGRRQIFS GPVVTVKVFE-DNGLI RHFLLEE
-RTGLLAPTMRPIYGARIA GSAVT ISAPPGDNWMVHVAIEQ
-RTGLLASYMRPIYRGARV ASALT ISAPPGDNWMVHVAIEQ
-RVGLLRPYIRPAYTGAKLC GPAVT VLLQPGDNWMFHVAAEQ
-RVGLLKPYMRPIYAGKQVS GTA VT VLLQPGDNWMMHVAAEQ
-RVGLLKPYMRPIYAGKQVS GTA VT VLLQPGDNWMMMHVAAEQ

$\beta c$ $\alpha C$ $\beta d$

55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
NGRG RVLVVDGGGSVRRAL VDAELARLAVQNEWEGLV IYGAV
NGRG RVLLVDGGGSVRRAL VDAELARLATQNEWEGIV VYGAV
NGLG RVLVVDGGGSVRRAL INAELAELALKNEWEGIV VYGAV
PSAG GVLVIDGAGSLHTAL VGDIVAELARSTGWTEGL IVHGAV
KGNR RVLVVDGGGSLRCAI LGGNPVVQAQNNGWA GIINVNGCI
LKEG DVLLLAPTPSCTDG YFGDLLATSQAQARGCR GLIIDAAGV
LKAG DILL LAPTPSPCEDGYFGDLLATSQAQARGCR GLV IDAAGV
VQEG DIVVAGCTTESEDDGF FELLATSLTARGCKGLV IDGGV
IQPG DIVVAAVTAECSDGY FGDLLATSFQARGARAL II DAAGV
IQPG DIVVAAVTAECTDG YFGDLLATSFQARGARAL II DAAGV

$\alpha D$ $\beta e$ $\beta f$ $\beta g$ $\beta h$

100 105 110 115 120 125 130 135
RQVDDLEELDIGIQAAMAIPVGAAAGEGIGESDVRVNFGGVTF
RQVDDLEELDIGIQAIAAIPVGAAAGEGIGESDVRVNFGGVTF
RQVDDLAELDIGIQAAMAIPVGAAADEGVGESDIRVNFGGVTF
RDAALARGIDIGIKALGTNPRKSTKTGAGERDVEITLGGVTF
RDVEINGCDIGVRALASHPIKASKKLGGEQRVSLNIAGTRI
DVRDLKQMNF PVWSKAIH AQGTIKATLGSVNIPVV CANALV
DVRDLTEMNFPVWSKAIYAQGTVKNTLGSVNIPVV CANALV
DVADLEKMDFPVFSRAVNAKGTVKATLGSVNIPVVVANAVV
DVKT LQEMDFPVWSKAISSKGTIKATLGSVNIPVCAAGMLV
DVKT LQEMDFPVWSKAISSKGTIKATLGSVNIPVCAAGMLV

$\beta i$ $\beta j$

140 145 150 155 160
FSGDHLYADNTGILSEDPLDIE
FSGDHLYADNTGILSEDPLDIE
FSGDHLYADNTGILSEDPLDIE
VPGDAYSDDDGIIVV
CDGEWLYADTDGILVSQIELSV
NPGDVVIA DDDGVCVVPRANAAAAVLEKAQAREAAEEAKRVRLL
NPGDVIVA DDDGVCVVPLANAEKVLEAARAREANE GDKREKM
TPGDVIVA DDDGVCVVPRELVGAVADASQKREDNEEAKRVKF
TPGDVIVA DDDGVCVPAARAVEVLAAAQKRESFEGEKRAKL

RraA-Ecoli
MENG_SALTY
MENG_YERPE
MENG_MYCTU
MEG1_ARATH
FldZ
LigK
PcmE
PmdF
ProA
ASGELGLDIYNMRPRLEEMGLKYV
ANGVLGLDLYKMRERLKEGLKYV
REGVLGLDVYGMRGPLAKAGLEYVEN
ASGVLGLDMYKMREPLEKAGLKYYID
ASGVLGLDMYKMREPLEKAGLKYYID

Figure 4. The sequence alignment of representatives of the RraA (MenG) and oxalocitramalate aldolase families. The sequence numbering and labeled secondary structural elements of the *E. coli* RraA are shown. Identical residues are highlighted in black and conserved residues in gray. The aligned sequences are: RraA (MenG) from *E. coli* (labeled RraA-Ecoli), ${}^{56}$ *S. enterica* (MENG_SALTY), ${}^{57}$ *Y. pestis* (MENG_YERPE), ${}^{58}$ *M. tuberculosis* (MENG_MYCTU), ${}^{59}$ *A. thaliana* (MEG1_ARATH), ${}^{60}$ and oxalocitramalate aldolase from *Sphingomonas* sp. LB126 (FldZ), ${}^{27}$ *S. paulimobilis* (LigK), ${}^{26}$ *A. keyseri* (PcmE), ${}^{30}$ *C. testosteroni* (PmdF), ${}^{29}$ *P. ochraceae* (ProA). ${}^{28}$ This Figure was made using ALSCRIPT. ${}^{61}$

# Materials and Methods

## Overexpression and purification of RraA

The full-length *rraA* gene was PCR amplified from the *E. coli* genome and subcloned into the expression vector pET-28a (Novagen, Madison, WI) using restriction enzyme sites *NcoI/HindIII* (Roche, Indianapolis, IN). The plasmid was then transformed into *E. coli* strain BL21 (DE3) for protein expression. The transformed cells were grown in LB medium until mid-log phase and induced with 1 mM IPTG. After three hours of induction, cells were harvested and lysed with BugBuster Protein Extraction Reagent (Novagen, Madison, WI) following the manufacturer's instructions. Target proteins were purified by ion-exchange chromatography using a Mono Q® HR 5/5 anion-exchange column mounted on an AKTA FPLC system (Pharmacia, Piscataway, NJ). The eluted proteins were concentrated by Centricon® YM-3 Centrifugal Filter Devices (Millipore, Billerica, MA).

## Crystallization and data collection

RraA was crystallized at room temperature using the hanging-drop method from 0.8 M ammonium phosphate, 0.1 M sodium citrate, pH 5.2.

Prior to data collection, crystals were treated with cryoprotectant by transferring to artificial mother liquor (0.8 M ammonium phosphate, 50 mM sodium citrate, pH 5.2) containing 50% saturated sorbitol for one to five seconds. Crystals, mounted in a cryoloop (Hampton Research, Laguna Niguel, CA), were frozen by dipping into liquid nitrogen and placed in the cold stream on the goniostat.

A Hg derivative crystal was prepared by soaking an RraA crystal in artificial mother liquor containing 1 mM *p*-chloromercuriphenylsulfonic acid (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) for 11 days and backsoaking in artificial mother liquor for 1.5 hours just prior to freezing.

Native and derivative data were collected at 100 K on a Rigaku RAXIS IV with X-rays generated by a Rigaku RU200 rotating anode generator operated at 50 mV, 100 mA. Diffraction images were processed using DENZO, and data were reduced using SCALEPACK. [34]

## Structure determination and analysis

Six mercury sites were determined from the Hg derivative diffraction and anomalous data (10–3.5 Å resolution) using SOLVE (version 1.18). [35] The resulting SIRAS phases were submitted to RESOLVE (Version 2.0) for density modification. [36] RESOLVE identified and applied a non-crystallographic 3-fold rotation axis relating the heavy-atom sites. The identified non-crystallographic operator was consistent with the largest peak in a self-rotation function calculated using X-PLOR (version 3.851). [37] The resulting density-modified map was skeletonized with MAPMAN. [38] The backbone of a single monomer of the homotrimer was traced from the density-modified map using the skeleton as a guide. The Hg sites were used to mark the two cysteine residues in assigning the amino acid sequence to the chain trace.

Model building was done on a Silicon Graphics Indy computer (Mountain View, CA) using O. [39] Refinement of models was performed with the Crystallography and NMR System (CNS) (version 1.0) using the slow-cooling protocol. [40] There were several rounds of refinement followed by rebuilding of the model. To facilitate manual rebuilding of the model, a difference map and a \(2F_{o} - F_{c}\) map, SIGMAA-weighted to eliminate bias from the model, [41] were prepared. Five percent of the diffraction data were set aside throughout refinement for cross-validation. [42] Non-crystallographic symmetry restraints were used in the early rounds of refinement but were removed in the final rounds. PROCHECK [43] was used to determine areas of poor geometry. For the purpose of locating bound solvent molecules, MAPMAN was used to select peaks of height 3.5 standard deviations above the mean from a difference map, and X-PLOR was used to eliminate those peaks that were not within 3.5 Å of a protein nitrogen or oxygen atom. O was used to manually view and accept water sites. Accessible surface area was determined using SURFACE. [44] Computations were done on an Alpha computer (Digital Equipment Co., Palo Alto, CA) and an AMD Athlon computer (Sunnyvale, CA).

Structural searches of the Protein Data Bank [45] were done using Dali. [46] Additional structural analysis was done using the CATH [47] and VAST [48] databases. Sequence searches were done using BLAST [49] and HMMER. [50] Sequence alignments were done using HMMER and CLUSTALW. [51] The SWISS-PROT [52] and Pfam [53] databases were used for sequence analysis.

Model pictures were made using MOLSCRIPT, BOBSCRIPT, [55] and DS Viewer Pro (Accelrys, San Diego, CA).

## Atomic coordinates

Coordinates of the refined model of *E. coli* RraA have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank with entry code 1Q5X.

---

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by grants NIH GM 63593, the Foundation for Research and the Welch Foundation to JDR, NIH GM-55090 (to G.G.) and by the College of Natural Sciences support to the Center for Structural Biology. We thank S.N. Cohen for many constructive comments.

## References

1. Meganathan, R. (1996). Biosynthesis of the isoprenoid quinones menaquinone (vitamin K2) and ubiquinone (coenzyme Q). *Escherichia coli and Salmonella: Cellular and Molecular Biology* (Neidhardt, F. C., Curtiss, R., Ingraham, J. L., Lin, E. C. C., Low, K. B., Magasanik, B., et al.), pp. 642–656, American Society for Microbiology, Washington, DC.
2. Qiu, J. (2001). Genetic and biochemical analysis of disulfide bond isomerization in *Escherichia coli*. PhD thesis, University of Texas at Austin
3. Lee, K., Zhan, X., Gao, J., Qiu, J., Fang, Y., Cohen, S. N. & Georgiou, G. (2003). RraA: a protein inhibitor of RNase E activity that globally modulates RNA abundance in *E. coli*. *Cell*, **114**, in the press.
4. McDowall, K. J. & Cohen, S. N. (1996). The N-terminal domain of the me gene product has RNase E

activity and is non-overlapping with the arginine-rich RNA-binding site. J. Mol. Biol. 255, 349–355.

5. Ow, M. C., Liu, Q. & Kushner, S. R. (2000). Analysis of mRNA decay and rRNA processing in *Escherichia coli* in the absence of RNase E-based degradosome assembly. Mol. Microbiol. 38, 854–866.

6. Cohen, S. N. & McDowall, K. J. (1997). RNase E: still a wonderfully mysterious enzyme. Mol. Microbiol. 23, 1099–1106.

7. Grunberg-Manago, M. (1999). Messenger RNA stability and its role in control of gene expression in bacteria and phages. Annu. Rev. Genet. 33, 193–227.

8. Carpousis, A. J. (2002). The *Escherichia coli* RNA degradosome: structure, function and relationship in other ribonucleolytic multienzyme complexes. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 30, 150–155.

9. Carpousis, A. J., Van Houwe, G., Ehretsmann, C. & Krisch, H. M. (1994). Copurification of *E. coli* RNase E and PNPAse: evidence for a specific association between two enzymes important in RNA processing and degradation. Cell, 76, 889–900.

10. Py, B., Higgins, C. F., Krisch, H. M. & Carpousis, A. J. (1996). A DEAD-box RNA helicase in the *Escherichia coli* RNA degradosome. Nature, 381, 169–172.

11. Miczak, A., Kaberdin, V. R., Wei, C. L. & Lin-Chao, S. (1996). Proteins associated with RNase E in a multi-component ribonucleolytic complex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 3865–3869.

12. Symmons, M. F., Jones, G. H. & Luisi, B. F. (2000). A duplicated fold is the structural basis for polynucleotide phosphorylase catalytic activity, processivity, and regulation. Structure, 8, 1215–1226.

13. Robertus, J. D., Ladner, J. E., Finch, J. T., Rhodes, D., Brown, R. S., Clark, B. F. C. & Klug, A. (1974). Structure of yeast phenylalanine tRNA at 3 Å resolution. Nature, 250, 546–551.

14. Koike-Takeshita, A., Koyama, T. & Ogura, K. (1997). Identification of a novel gene cluster participating in menaquinone (vitamin K2) biosynthesis. Cloning and sequence determination of the 2-heptaprenyl-1,4-naphthoquinone methyltransferase gene of *Bacillus stearothermophilus*. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 12380–12383.

15. Sakuragi, Y., Zybailov, B., Shen, G., Jones, A. D., Chitnis, P. R., van der Est, A. *et al.* (2002). Insertional inactivation of the menG gene, encoding 2-phytyl-1,4-naphthoquinone methyltransferase of *Synechocystis* sp. PCC 6803, results in the incorporation of 2-phytyl-1,4-naphthoquinone into the A(1) site and alteration of the equilibrium constant between A(1) and F(X) in photosystem I. Biochemistry, 41, 394–405.

16. Lee, P. T., Hsu, A. Y., Ha, H. T. & Clarke, C. F. (1997). A C-methyltransferase involved in both ubiquinone and menaquinone biosynthesis: isolation and identification of the *Escherichia coli* ubiE gene. J. Bacteriol. 179, 1748–1754.

17. Herzberg, O., Chen, C. C., Kapadia, G., McGuire, M., Carroll, L. J., Noh, S. J. & Dunaway-Mariano, D. (1996). Swiveling-domain mechanism for enzymatic phototransfer between remote reaction sites. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 2652–2657.

18. Liao, D. I., Silverton, E., Seok, Y. J., Lee, B. R., Peterkofsky, A. & Davies, D. R. (1996). The first step in sugar transport: crystal structure of the amino terminal domain of enzyme I of the *E. coli* PEP: sugar phosphotransfer system and a model of the phosphotransfer complex with HPr. Structure, 4, 861–872.

19. Kühnel, K. & Luisi, B. F. (2001). Crystal structure of

the *Escherichia coli* RNA degradosome component enolase. J. Mol. Biol. 313, 583–592.

20. Thoden, J. B., Miran, S. G., Phillips, J. C., Howard, A. J., Raushel, F. M. & Holden, H. M. (1998). Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase: caught in the act of glutamine hydrolysis. Biochemistry, 37, 8825–8831.

21. Bennett, M. J., Lebron, J. A. & Bjorkman, P. J. (2000). Crystal structure of the hereditary haemochromatosis protein HFE complexed with transferrin receptor. Nature, 403, 46–53.

22. Zahn, R., Buckle, A. M., Perrett, S., Johnson, C. M., Corrales, F. J., Golbik, R. & Fersht, A. R. (1996). Chaperone activity and structure of monomeric polypeptide binding domains of GroEL. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 15024–15029.

23. Braig, K., Otwinowski, Z., Hegde, R., Boisvert, D. C., Joachimiak, A., Horwich, A. L. & Sigler, P. B. (1994). The crystal structure of the bacterial chaperonin GroEL at 2.8 Å. Nature, 371, 578–586.

24. Agard, D. A. (1993). To fold or not to fold. Science, 260, 1903–1904.

25. Buckle, A. M., Zahn, R. & Fersht, A. R. (1997). Structural model for GroEL-polypeptide recognition. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 94, 3571–3575.

26. Hara, H., Masai, E., Katayama, Y. & Fukuda, M. (2000). The 4-oxalomesaconate hydratase gene, involved in the protocatechuate 4,5-cleavage pathway, is essential to vanillate and syringate degradation in *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* SYK-6. J. Bacteriol. 182, 6950–6957.

27. Wattiau, P., Bastiaens, L., van Herwijnen, R., Daal, L., Parsons, J. R., Renard, M.-E. *et al.* (2001). Fluorene degradation by *Sphingomonas* sp. LB126 proceeds through protocatechuic acid: a genetic analysis. Res. Microbiol. 152, 861–872.

28. Maruyama, K., Miwa, M., Tsujii, N., Nagai, T., Tomita, N., Harada, T. *et al.* (2001). Cloning, sequencing, and expression of the gene encoding 4-hydroxy-4-methyl-2-oxoglutarate aldolase from *Pseudomonas ochraceae* NGJ1. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 65, 2701–2709.

29. Providenti, M. A., Mampel, J., MacSween, S., Cook, A. M. & Wyndham, R. C. (2001). *Comamonas testosteroni* BR6020 possesses a single genetic locus for extradiol cleavage of protocatechuate. Microbiology, 147, 2157–2167.

30. Eaton, R. W. (2001). Plasmid-encoded phthalate catabolic pathway in *Arthrobacter keyseri* 12B. J. Bacteriol. 183, 3689–3703.

31. Hara, H., Masai, E., Miyauchi, K., Katayama, Y. & Fukuda, M. (2003). Characterization of the 4-carboxy-4-hydroxy-2-oxoadipate aldolase gene and operon structure of the protocatechuate 4,5-cleavage pathway genes in *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* SYK-6. J. Bacteriol. 185, 41–50.

32. Maruyama, K. (1990). Purification and properties of 4-hydroxy-4-methyl-2-oxoglutarate aldolase from *Pseudomonas ochraceae* grown on phthalate. J. Biochem. 108, 327–333.

33. Johnston, J. M., Arcus, V. L., Morton, C. J., Parker, M. W., Baker, E. N. (2003). The crystal structure of a putative methyltransferase from *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*: misannotation of a genome suggested by protein structural analysis. J. Bacteriol. 185, 4057–4065.

34. Otwinowski, Z. & Minor, W. (1997). Processing of X-ray diffraction data collected in oscillation mode. Methods Enzymol. 27, 307–326.

35. Terwilliger, T. C. & Berendzen, J. (1999). Automated

structure solution for MIR and MAD. *Acta Crystallogr.* sect. *D*, 55, 849–861.

36. Terwilliger, T. C. (2000). Maximum likelihood density modification. *Acta Crystallogr.* sect. *D*, 56, 965–972.

37. Brünger, A. T. (1992). X-PLOR version 3.1: A System for X-ray Crystallography and NMR, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.

38. Kleywegt, G. J. & Jones, T. A. (1996). xdlMAPMAN and xdlDATAMAN—programs for reformatting, analysis, and manipulation of biomolecular electron-density maps and reflection data sets. *Acta Crystallogr.* sect. *D*, 5, 826–828.

39. Jones, T. A., Zou, J. Y., Cowan, S. W. & Kjeldgaard, M. (1991). Improved methods for building models in electron density maps and the location of errors in these models. *Acta Crystallogr.* sect. *A*, 47, 110–119.

40. Brünger, A. T., Adams, P. D., Clore, G. M., DeLano, W. L., Gros, P., Grosse-Kunstleve, R. W. *et al.* (1998). Crystallography & NMR system (CNS): a new software system for macromolecular structure determination. *Acta Crystallogr.* sect. *D*, 54, 905–921.

41. Read, R. J. (1986). Improved Fourier coefficients for maps using phases from partial structures with errors. *Acta Crystallogr.* sect. *A*, 42, 140–149.

42. Kleywegt, G. J. & Brünger, A. T. (1996). Cross-validation in crystallography: practice and applications. *Structure*, 4, 897–904.

43. Laskowski, R. A., MacArthur, M. W., Moss, D. S. & Thornton, J. M. (1993). PROCHECK: a program to check the stereochemical quality of protein structures. *J. Appl. Crystallogr.* 26, 283–291.

44. Lee, B. & Richards, F. M. (1971). The interpretation of protein structures: estimation of static accessibility. *J. Mol. Biol.* 55, 379–400.

45. Berman, H. M., Westbrook, J., Feng, Z., Gilliland, G., Bhat, T. N., Weissig, H. *et al.* (2000). The Protein Data Bank. *Nucl. Acids Res.* 28, 235–242.

46. Holm, L. & Sander, C. (1994). Searching protein structure databases has come of age. *Proteins: Struct. Funct. Genet.* 19, 165–173.

47. Orengo, C. A., Michie, A. D., Jones, S., Jones, D. T., Swindells, M. B. & Thornton, J. M. (1997). CATH—a hierarchic classification of protein domain structures. *Structure*, 5, 1093–1108.

48. Gibrat, J. F., Madej, T. & Bryant, S. H. (1996). Surprising similarities in structure comparison. *Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.* 6, 377–385.

49. Altschul, S. F., Gish, W., Miller, W., Myers, E. W. &

Lipman, D. J. (1990). Basic local alignment search tool. *J. Mol. Biol.* 215, 403–410.

50. Durbin, R., Eddy, S., Krogh, A. & Mitchison, G. (1998). *Biological Sequence Analysis: Probabilistic Models of Proteins and Nucleic Acids*, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

51. Thompson, J. D., Higgins, D. G. & Gibson, T. J. (1994). CLUSTAL W: improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting, positions-specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice. *Nucl. Acids Res.* 22, 4673–4680.

52. Bairoch, A. & Apweiler, R. (2000). The SWISS-PROT protein sequence database and its supplement TrEMBL in 2000. *Nucl. Acids Res.* 28, 45–48.

53. Bateman, A., Birney, E., Cerruti, L., Durbin, R., Eddy, S. R. *et al.* (2002). The Pfam protein families databases. *Nucl. Acids Res.* 30, 276–280.

54. Kraulis, P. J. (1991). MOLSCRIPT: a program to produce both detailed and schematic plots of protein structure. *J. Appl. Crystallogr.* 2, 946–950.

55. Esnouf, R. M. (1999). Further additions to MolScript version 1.4, including reading and contouring of electron-density maps. *Acta Crystallogr.* sect. *D*, 55, 938–940.

56. Suvarna, K., Stevenson, D., Meganathan, R. & Hudspeth, M. E. (1998). Menaquinone (vitamin K2) biosynthesis: localization and characterization of the *menA* gene from *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.* 180, 2782–2787.

57. McClelland, M., Sanderson, K. E., Spieth, J., Clifton, S. W., Latreille, P., Courtney, L. *et al.* (2001). Complete genome sequence of *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium LT2. *Nature*, 413, 852–856.

58. Parkhill, J., Wren, B. W., Thomson, N. R., Titball, R. W., Holden, M. T., Prentice, M. B. *et al.* (2001). Genome sequence of *Yersinia pestis*, the causative agent of plague. *Nature*, 413, 523–527.

59. Cole, S. T., Brosch, R., Parkhill, J., Garnier, T., Churcher, C., Harris, D. *et al.* (1998). Deciphering the biology of *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* from the complete genome sequence. *Nature*, 393, 537–544.

60. Salanoubat, M., Lemcke, K., Rieger, M., Ansorge, W., Unseld, M., Fartmann, B. *et al.* (2000). Sequence and analysis of chromosome 3 of the plant *Arabidopsis thaliana*. *Nature*, 408, 820–822.

61. Barton, G. J. (1993). ALSCRIPT: a tool to format multiple sequence alignments. *Protein Eng.* 6, 37–40.
