
ELSEVIER

# The JAM family of junctional adhesion molecules

Gianfranco Bazzoni

Junctional adhesion molecules are a family of glycoproteins characterised by two immunoglobulin folds (VH- and C2-type) in the extracellular domain. Junctional adhesion molecule proteins localise to intercellular junctions of polarised endothelial and epithelial cells but can also be expressed on circulating leukocytes and platelets. In addition, they bind several ligands, in both a homophilic and heterophilic manner, and associate with several cytoplasmic partners. All these features represent the likely determinants for the role of junctional adhesion molecule proteins in processes as diverse as junction assembly, leukocyte transmigration and platelet activation.

## Addresses

Department of Immunology and Cell Biology, Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Via Eritrea 62, I-20157, Milano, Italy  
e-mail: bazzoni@marionegri.it

---

**Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2003, 15:525–530**

This review comes from a themed issue on Cell-to-cell contact and extracellular matrix  
Edited by Eric Brown and Elisabetta Dejana  
0955-0674/$ – see front matter  
© 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
DOI 10.1016/S0955-0674(03)00104-2

### Abbreviations

- CAR: coxsackie and adenovirus receptor
- ESAM: endothelial-selective adhesion molecule
- HEV: high endothelial venule
- JAM: junctional adhesion molecule
- TJ: tight junction
- ZO-1: zonula occludens-1

## Introduction

Immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domains are a modular component of several cell adhesion molecules. In past years, accumulating evidence has highlighted the existence of a family of adhesion molecules that are characterised by two Ig-like folds (one VH- and one C2-type) in the extracellular domain, as well as two extra cysteine residues and a potential N-glycosylation site in the C2 fold [1]. Although Xenopus CTX and its orthologues, which are markers of cortical thymocytes, were chosen as prototypes of this family, it is now clear that members of this VH-C2 family are not restricted to the immune system.

In this review, I describe in detail a subgroup of this family, which comprises three homologous junctional adhesion molecule (JAM) proteins. I also provide basic information on the related proteins endothelial-selective adhesion molecule (ESAM; [2]), coxsackie and adeno-

virus receptor (CAR; [3]) and A33 [4]. Although some of these proteins are also expressed on circulating leukocytes and platelets, a common biological trait is their localisation to the intercellular junctions of polarised endothelial and epithelial cells.

## General features of the JAM family

### Nomenclature

After the first report in 1998 [5], the independent discovery of JAM proteins in different laboratories has led to a puzzling nomenclature. To avoid confusion, and following recent recommendations of researchers in the field (see also Update), this review adopts a simplified system that designates JAM proteins as JAM-A, -B and -C. However, to assist readers interested in the original articles, Table 1 reports the original designations, together with the related accession numbers and references.

### Structural determinants

Primary structure analysis predicts molecular masses of 30–40 kDa (and higher masses in mature proteins, owing to glycosylation), a signal peptide, an extracellular domain, a transmembrane segment and a short cytoplasmic tail. JAM-B and -C (but not JAM-A) contain the two extra cysteine residues in the C2 fold; however, the three JAM proteins lack the N-glycosylation site characteristic of CTX-like molecules. In addition, they are more homologous to each other (with identities ranging from 31 to 36%) than they are to ESAM, CAR and A33 (for instance, JAM-A and A33 are 23% identical). The crystal structure of the extracellular domain of murine JAM-A has been solved at 2.5 Å resolution and has confirmed the prediction of two immunoglobulin-like folds. In addition, the study has revealed that a short linker (VLV [single letter amino acid code]), at position 127–129, connects the two Ig-like folds and imposes a bent conformation of 125°, which is stabilised by extensive hydrogen bonding to adjacent residues [6]. Remarkably, the VLV linker is conserved in all members of the family, but is absent in the distantly related Ig-like molecule CD2.

### Tissue and subcellular distribution

JAM-A localises to the intercellular junctions of murine [5] and human [7,8] endothelial and epithelial cells. In these cells, JAM-A localises in close proximity of tight junction (TJ) strands. JAM-A is not restricted to cells that form junctions, however. It is also expressed in platelets and cells of the immune system. For instance, murine JAM-A is expressed in platelets and MHC class II antigen-presenting cells of lymphoid organs [9], whereas human JAM-A is expressed on circulating neutrophils, monocytes, lymphocytes and platelets [10].

Table 1

Nomenclature of published JAM molecules and related proteins.

| Name   | Species       | GeneBank accession | Original designation | References |
|--------|---------------|--------------------|----------------------|------------|
| JAM-A  | M. musculus   | U89915             | JAM                  | [5]        |
|        | H. sapiens    | AF111713           | JAM                  | [7]        |
|        |               | AF154005           | JAM                  | [8]        |
|        |               | AF207907           | F11R                 | [47]       |
|        | B. taurus     | AF111714           | JAM                  | [7]        |
| JAM-B  | M. musculus   | AF255911           | VE-JAM               | [11]       |
|        |               | AJ291757           | JAM-3                | [50]       |
|        | H. sapiens    | AF255910           | VE-JAM               | [11]       |
|        |               | AY016009           | JAM-2                | [22]       |
| JAM-C  | M. musculus   | AJ300304           | JAM-2                | [13]       |
|        | H. sapiens    | AF356518           | JAM-3                | [14]       |
|        |               | AJ344431           | JAM-2                | [28]       |
| ESAM   | M. musculus   | AF361882           | ESAM                 | [2]        |
|        | H. sapiens    | AF361746           | ESAM                 | [2]        |
| CAR    | M. musculus   | NM_009988          | CAR                  | [3]        |
|        | H. sapiens    | NM_001338          | CAR                  | [3]        |
| A33    | M. musculus   | AF247659           | A33                  | [18]       |
|        | H. sapiens    | U79725             | A33                  | [4]        |

JAM-B has a more restricted distribution. It localises to the junctions of endothelial cells from different vessels, but mostly in high endothelial venules (HEVs; [11]), which are portals of entry into lymphatic tissues for blood-borne lymphocytes responding to processed antigens. Like JAM-A, JAM-C has a wide distribution—it is expressed in vascular endothelial cells, including HEVs, and in lymphatic vessels [12–14], but also in platelets, T, natural killer and dendritic cells [15].

ESAM is specifically expressed in endothelial cells [2], whereas CAR and A33 are detectable in epithelial cells. ESAM and CAR co-localise with the TJ component zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) in brain and muscle capillaries [16] and in airway epithelia [17], respectively. By contrast, A33 localises to basal and lateral surfaces away from TJs [18].

JAM extracellular ligands

Accumulating evidence supports the notion that the extracellular domains of JAM proteins engage in several interactions (Table 2). It is conceivable that homophilic interactions linking adjacent endothelial and epithelial cells primarily stabilise intercellular junctions. By contrast, heterophilic interactions with leukocyte integrins chiefly facilitate leukocyte extravasation (Figure 1).

### Homophilic binding interactions

Both JAM-A [19,20,21] and JAM-B [22], but not JAM-C [14], mediate homophilic binding. Crystal structure analysis has demonstrated that JAM-A forms *in cis* homodimers and has suggested that dimerisation is the structural basis for homophilic binding. Dimerisation requires the RVE residues, at positions 58–60 of the V_H fold, because the two charged residues on one monomer form two salt bridges with the complementary residues on the other monomer [6]. Hence, together with the bent conformation imposed by the VLV linker, the RVE motif may induce expression of homodimers that emanate from the cell surface with the shape of an inverted U. In turn, these *in cis* dimers predictably bind homophilically *in trans* with JAM-A dimers that emanate from an opposite cell surface. In support of the prediction, an antibody specific for the dimeric state of JAM-A blocks JAM-A self-assembly *in vitro* [19].

It remains unknown whether the homophilic binding of JAM-A supports either homotypic adhesion (e.g., between adjacent endothelial cells) or heterotypic adhesion (e.g., between endothelial cells and leukocytes), or both. In addition, although the tripeptide is conserved in JAM-B (RLE) and JAM-C (RIE), we still do not know whether dimerisation is a common feature to all these molecules.

### Heterophilic binding interactions

As well as binding the reovirus attachment protein σ1 [23], JAM-A binds the leukocyte integrin αLβ2 (remarkably, via the C_2 fold; [24]). As discussed below, cytokines disperse junctional JAM-A on the endothelial surface [7]. Hence, by interacting with αLβ2, endothelial JAM-A might contribute both to leukocyte transmigration across the junctions and to leukocyte arrest on the luminal surface.

Table 2

Extracellular ligands of JAM proteins.

| Molecule | Ligand | Experimental systems *in vitro* (solid- and fluid-phase ligands) | References |
|----------|--------|---------------------------------------------------------------|------------|
| JAM-A    | JAM-A  | Soluble JAM-A binds soluble JAM-A-coated surfaces              | [19]       |
|          |        | Fc-JAM-A binds purified JAM-A-coated surfaces                   | [20]       |
|          |        | Soluble JAM-A captures platelets                               | [21]       |
|          | αLβ2   | Purified αLβ2 captures JAM-A-expressing CHO cells               | [24]       |
|          | σ1     | Fc-JAM-A binds reovirus protein σ1 (plasmon resonance)          | [23]       |
| JAM-B    | JAM-B  | Fc-JAM-B captures JAM-B-expressing CHO cells                    | [22]       |
|          | JAM-C  | Fc-JAM-B binds purified JAM-C-coated surfaces                    | [14]       |
|          | α4β1   | Fc-JAM-B captures α4β1-expressing cells                         | [26]       |
| JAM-C    | αMβ2   | Soluble JAM-C binds αMβ2-coated surfaces                        | [15]       |

The JAM family of junctional adhesion molecules Bazzoni 527

Second, expression of JAM proteins is often associated with recruitment of TJ components. For instance, JAM-A precedes other junctional markers at the cell–cell borders [29] and, in CHO cells, even enhances the junctional accumulation of ZO-1 and occludin [30]. In turn, however, the adherens junction component nectin might recruit JAM-A to the TJ, a process that involves nectin-associated afadin and JAM-A-associated ZO-1 [31].

Third, support for JAM-A participation to TJ assembly is provided by the presence of the carboxy-terminal residues FLV, at position 298–300, which represent a consensus motif for binding type II PDZ domains. To date, JAM-A has been reported to associate with five PDZ proteins, ZO-1 [30,32], AF-6 [32], CASK [29], PAR-3 [33,34] and MUPP-1 [35]. The PDZ domains of all these proteins interact directly with JAM-A, as evaluated by in vitro binding assays. Importantly, these partners potentially play a central role in TJ assembly, because they can cause reorganisation of the actin cytoskeleton. For example, ZO-1 [36] and AF-6 [37] directly bind to F-actin and profilin, respectively. CASK interacts with protein 4.1 and nucleates actin and spectrin filaments [38]. AF-6 is an effector of the G proteins Ras and Rap [39]. Finally, PAR-3 nucleates the PAR-3–PAR-6–aPKC–Cdc42 complex, which regulates cell polarity [40]. Interestingly, other members of the JAM family display potential motifs for binding both type II (JAM-B, FII; and JAM-C, FVI) and type I (ESAM, SLV; and CAR, T/SV/IV) PDZ domains. This issue, however, still awaits experimental verification.

Leukocyte transmigration

Being strategically located at the apical part of intercellular spaces, the JAM proteins play an important role in inflammation and, in particular, during diapedesis (i.e. the passage of leukocytes across interendothelial spaces). As the topic has been recently reviewed elsewhere [41,42], here I will just emphasise that a direct role in leukocyte recruitment has been attributed to JAM-C using in vitro assays [28] and to JAM-A, using both in vitro and in vivo systems [5]. In mice, anti-JAM-A monoclonal antibody BV11 attenuates cytokine-induced accumulation of leukocytes in cerebrospinal fluid, as well as in perivascular and submeningeal areas of the brain parenchyma [43], even if the antibody does not protect mice from more severe forms of bacterial and viral meningitis [44]. Clearly, more extensive analysis of in vivo models of inflammation — possibly, using knockout mice — is needed to obtain a more complete picture.

In addition, the mechanisms of JAM action during leukocyte transmigration are not yet fully understood, and alternative scenarios might occur during inflammation. First, JAM proteins, which bind leukocyte integrins, might actively guide leukocytes across intercellular

Figure 1

| Endothelial cells | Leukocytes | Platelets |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Reovirus protein σ1 | JAM-A | JAM-A | JAM-A |
|  | JAM-A | αLβ2 |  |
|  | JAM-B | α4β1 |  |
|  | JAM-B |  |  |
|  | JAM-C | JAM-C αMβ2 | JAM-C |
|  |  | αXβ2 |  |

Current Opinion in Cell Biology

The homophilic and heterophilic interactions of JAM proteins are depicted schematically in the context of their plausible role in cell–cell adhesion. Solid lines indicate adhesive events specifically reported in the literature; dashed lines indicate predicted adhesive events.

Endothelial JAM-B binds two leukocyte ligands. First, JAM-B binds JAM-C [22], which facilitates adhesion of T, natural killer and dendritic cells to the endothelium [25]. Second, JAM-B binds the α4β1 integrin, as supported by the use of selective α4β1 inhibitors. Interestingly, the V_H fold in JAM-B binds both JAM-C and α4β1, even if the interaction with α4β1 requires previous binding of JAM-B to JAM-C [26].

Finally, besides binding JAM-B, JAM-C binds the αMβ2 and — to a lesser extent — αXβ2 integrins, but not αLβ2 or β1 integrins [15]. Although potentially involved in endothelial–leukocyte adhesion, this binding has been studied in the context of the adhesion between JAM-C on platelets and αMβ2 on leukocytes, which might favour the formation of platelet–neutrophil aggregates in thrombotic states.

### JAM function

#### Junction assembly and stabilisation

In Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, exogenously expressed JAM-A [5], JAM-B [22], JAM-C [13] and CAR [17] readily localise to newly formed cell–cell borders. Evidence supports the concept that, at this location, most of these proteins facilitate TJ assembly [27]. First, appearance of these proteins often correlates with functional changes that are distinctive of junction formation, such as reduced paracellular permeability and enhanced electrical resistance. In addition, anti-JAM-A antibodies [8] or soluble Fc–JAM-A [20] delay the recovery of electrical resistance in epithelial cells following transient depletion of extracellular calcium. The notable exception is represented by JAM-C, which, albeit localised to new junctions, unexpectedly increases both paracellular permeability [12] and lymphocyte transmigration [28], which might be related to JAM-C inability to bind homophilically.

spaces. Second, JAM proteins could be dispersed passively from the junctions, with two possible consequences: on one hand, JAM proteins might no longer ensure interendothelial adhesion, thus leading to junction loosening; on the other hand, JAM proteins might relocate to the apical surface of endothelial cells, thus becoming available for adhesive interactions with leukocyte integrins. Obviously, it is also possible that all these effects balance each other out. For instance, combined treatment with tumour necrosis factor α (TNFα) and interferon γ (IFN-γ) induces complete dispersal of JAM-A from the junctions [7] but leaves leukocyte transmigration unchanged [45]. Here too, further studies are needed to unravel such mechanistic intricacy.

### Platelet activation

In human platelets, JAM-A is also known as F11R—that is, the receptor for monoclonal antibody F11. Once bound to JAM-A (via Fab), the antibody engages the Fc receptor (via Fc) and triggers platelet secretion, exposure of the αIIbβ3 integrin, and αIIbβ3-dependent aggregation. Interestingly, anti-JAM-A antibodies are detectable in some patients with thrombocytopenia [46]. In addition, JAM-A induces platelet adhesion. Platelets adhere to immobilised JAM-A and to endothelial cells stimulated with TNF-α and IFN-γ [21*]. In turn, platelet adhesion to monoclonal antibody F11 results in protrusion formation and spreading, independently of αIIbβ3 and FcγRII [47]. Two peptides that correspond to the amino terminus (Ser1–Cys23) and to the V_H fold (Lys70–Cys82) block both monoclonal antibody F11-induced aggregation and adhesion [48].

Finally, study of JAM-A in platelets has highlighted phosphorylation as a potential mechanism of JAM regulation. Phosphorylation is induced by thrombin and collagen (but not ADP), is likely to require classical protein kinase Cs, and occurs on Ser284 [47,49]. However, it remains to be established whether JAM-A phosphorylation has functional consequences, both in platelets and in other cell types.

### Conclusions

During the past five years, a large body of evidence has accumulated showing that JAM-A and its extended family are involved in several molecular interactions with broad functional consequences. Accordingly, several issues are still open to investigation, as discussed herein. In addition to the generation and analysis of null deletions in mice, it is foreseeable that much effort will be devoted to discovering novel members of the JAM family (see also Update), and to defining the structural determinants of adhesive interactions in the extracellular domains and the functional role of the numerous cytoplasmic associations, as well as the outside-in consequences and the inside-out regulation of ligand binding (see also Update).

---

### Update

A recently published review now reports the novel nomenclature of JAM proteins that has been adopted here [51*]. Moreover, another putative member of the JAM family, termed ‘JAM-4’ (which, according to the new nomenclature, would probably be known as JAM-D), has been identified, which localizes to cell–cell contacts, restricts permeability and binds the PDZ protein MAGI-1 [52*]. It should be stressed, however, that JAM-4 displays a low degree of homology (10–14%) with the other three JAM proteins, lacks distinctive determinants (i.e. the VLV linker, the RV/L/IE dimerisation motif and the pair of extra cysteine residues), and displays a type I (instead of a type II) PDZ-binding motif.

In addition, crystal structure analysis of human JAM-A, as well as confirming the previous work on the murine homologue [6], has highlighted putative regions that might mediate binding to the reovirus protein σ1 [53]. Finally, the recent finding that the CagA protein from *Helicobacter pylori* associates with JAM-A and ZO-1 and disrupts junctions in gastric epithelial cells provides a very interesting example of the role of JAM proteins in epithelial barrier function, under both normal and pathological conditions [54**].

### Acknowledgements

The contribution of Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro and the Ministero dell'Istruzione, Università e Ricerca (projects RBNE01T8C8_004 and RBAU01E5F5) is gratefully acknowledged.

### References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

- • of special interest
- •• of outstanding interest

1. Chretien I, Marcuz A, Courtet M, Katevuo K, Vainio O, Heath JK, White SJ, Du Pasquier L: CTX, a Xenopus thymocyte receptor, defines a molecular family conserved throughout vertebrates. *Eur J Immunol* 1998, **28**:4094-4104.
2. Hirata K, Ishida T, Penta K, Rezaee M, Yang E, Wohlgemuth J, Quertermous T: Cloning of an immunoglobulin family adhesion molecule selectively expressed by endothelial cells. *J Biol Chem* 2001, **276**:16223-16231.
3. Bergelson JM, Cunningham JA, Droguett G, Kurt-Jones EA, Krithivas A, Hong JS, Horwitz MS, Crowell RL, Finberg RW: Isolation of a common receptor for Coxsackie B viruses and adenoviruses 2 and 5. *Science* 1997, **275**:1320-1323.
4. Heath JK, White SJ, Johnstone CN, Catimel B, Simpson RJ, Moritz RL, Tu G-F, Ji H, Whitehead RH, Groenen LC *et al.*: The human A33 antigen is a transmembrane glycoprotein and a novel member of the immunoglobulin superfamily. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1997, **94**:469-474.
5. Martin-Padura I, Lostaglio S, Schneemann M, Williams L, Romano M, Fruscella P, Panzeri C, Stoppacciaro A, Ruco L, Villa A *et al.*: Junctional adhesion molecule, a novel member of the immunoglobulin superfamily that distributes at intercellular junctions and modulates monocyte transmigration. *J Cell Biol* 1998, **142**:117-127.
6. Kostrewa D, Brockhaus M, D'Arcy A, Dale GE, Nelboeck P, Schmid G, Mueller F, Bazzoni G, Dejana E, Bartfai T *et al.*: X-ray structure of junctional adhesion molecule: structural basis for homophilic adhesion via a novel dimerization motif. *EMBO J* 2001, **20**:4391-4398.

7. Ozaki H, Ishii K, Horiuchi H, Arai H, Kawamoto T, Okawa K, Iwamatsu A, Kita T: Combined treatment of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma causes redistribution of junctional adhesion molecule in human endothelial cells. *J Immunol* 1999, **163**:553-557.

8. Liu Y, Nusrat A, Schnell FJ, Reaves TA, Walsh S, Pochet M, Parkos CA: Human junction adhesion molecule regulates tight junction resealing in epithelia. *J Cell Sci* 2000, **113**:2363-2374.

9. Malergue F, Galland F, Martin F, Mansuelle P, Aurrand-Lions M, Naquet P: A novel immunoglobulin superfamily junctional molecule expressed by antigen presenting cells, endothelial cells and platelets. *Mol Immunol* 1998, **35**:1111-1119.

10. Williams LA, Martin-Padura I, Dejana E, Hogg N, Simmons DL: Identification and characterisation of human junctional adhesion molecule (JAM). *Mol Immunol* 1999, **36**:1175-1188.

11. Palmeri D, Van Zante A, Huang C-C, Hemmerich S, Rosen SD: Vascular endothelial junction-associated molecule, a novel member of the immunoglobulin superfamily, is localized to intercellular boundaries of endothelial cells. *J Biol Chem* 2000, **275**:19139-19145.

12. Aurrand-Lions M, Johnson-Leger C, Wong C, Du Pasquier L, Imhof BA: Heterogeneity of endothelial junctions is reflected by differential expression and specific subcellular localization of the three JAM family members. *Blood* 2001, **98**:3699-3707.

13. Aurrand-Lions MA, Duncan L, Ballestrem C, Imhof BA: JAM-2, a novel Immunoglobulin Superfamily Molecule, expressed by endothelial and lymphatic cells. *J Biol Chem* 2001, **276**:2733-2741.

14. Arrate MP, Rodriguez JM, Tran TM, Brock TA, Cunningham SA: Cloning of human junctional adhesion molecule 3 (JAM3) and its identification as the JAM2 counter-receptor. *J Biol Chem* 2001, **276**:45826-45832.

15. Santoso S, Sachs UJH, Kroll H, Linder M, Ruf A, Preissner KT, Chavakis T: The junctional adhesion molecule 3 (JAM-3) on human platelets is a counter-receptor for the leukocyte integrin Mac-1. *J Exp Med* 2002, **196**:679-691.

16. Nasdala I, Wolburg-Buchholz K, Wolburg H, Kuhn A, Ebnet K, Brachtendorf G, Samulowitz U, Kuster B, Engelhardt B, Vestweber D et al.: A transmembrane tight junction protein selectively expressed on endothelial cells and platelets. *J Biol Chem* 2002, **277**:16294-16303.

17. Cohen CJ, Shieh JT, Pickles RJ, Okegawa T, Hsieh JT, Bergelson JM: The coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor is a transmembrane component of the tight junction. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2001, **98**:15191-15196.

18. Johnstone CN, Tebbutt NC, Abud HE, White ASJ, Stenvers KL, Hall NE, Cody SH, Whitehead RH, Catimel B, Nice EC et al.: Characterization of mouse A33 antigen, a definitive marker for basolateral surfaces of intestinal epithelial cells. *Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol* 2000, **279**:G500-G510.

19. Bazzoni G, Martinez-Estrada OM, Mueller F, Nelboeck P, Schmid G, Bartfai T, Dejana E, Brockhaus M: Homophilic interaction of junctional adhesion molecule. *J Biol Chem* 2000, **275**:30970-30976.

20. Liang TW, DeMarco RA, Mrsny RJ, Gurney A, Gray A, Hooley A, Aaron HL, Huang A, Klassen T, Tumas DB et al.: Characterization of huJAM: evidence for involvement in cell-cell contact and tight junction regulation. *Am J Physiol Cell Physiol* 2000, **279**:1733-1743.

21. Babinska A, Kedees MH, Athar H, Ahmed T, Batuman O, Ehrlich YH, Hussain MM, Kornecki E: F11-receptor (F11R/JAM) mediates platelet adhesion to endothelial cells: role in inflammatory thrombosis. *Thromb Haemost* 2002, **88**:843-850.

22. Cunningham SA, Arrate MP, Rodriguez JM, Bjerce RJ, Vanderslice P, Morris AP, Brock TA: A novel protein with homology to the junctional adhesion molecule. Characterization of leukocyte interactions. *J Biol Chem* 2000, **275**:34750-34756.

23. Barton ES, Forrest JC, Connolly JL, Chappell JD, Liu Y, Schnell FJ, Nusrat A, Parkos CA, Dermody TS: Junction adhesion molecule is a receptor for reovirus. *Cell* 2001, **104**:441-451.

24. Ostermann G, Weber KS, Zernecke A, Schroder A, Weber C: JAM-1 is a ligand of the beta(2) integrin LFA-1 involved in transendothelial migration of leukocytes. *Nat Immunol* 2002, **3**:151-158.

25. Liang TW, Chiu HH, Gurney A, Side A, Tumas DB, Schow P, Foster J, Klassen T, Dennis K, DeMarco RA et al.: Vascular endothelial-junctional adhesion molecule (VE-JAM)/JAM 2 interacts with T, NK, and dendritic cells through JAM 3. *J Immunol* 2002, **168**:1618-1626.

26. Cunningham SA, Rodriguez JM, Arrate MP, Tran TM, Brock TA: JAM2 interacts with α4β1. Facilitation by JAM3. *J Biol Chem* 2002, **277**:27589-27592.

27. Bazzoni G, Dejana E: Pores in the sieve and channels in the wall: control of paracellular permeability by junctional proteins in endothelial cells. *Microcirculation* 2001, **8**:143-152.

28. Johnson-Leger CA, Aurrand-Lions M, Beltraminelli N, Fasel N, Imhof BA: Junctional adhesion molecule-2 (JAM-2) promotes lymphocyte transendothelial migration. *Blood* 2002, **100**:2479-2486.

29. Martinez-Estrada OM, Villa A, Breviario F, Orsenigo F, Dejana E, Bazzoni G: Association of junctional adhesion molecule with calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine protein kinase (CASK/LIN-2) in human epithelial Caco-2 cells. *J Biol Chem* 2001, **276**:9291-9296.

30. Bazzoni G, Martinez Estrada OM, Orsenigo F, Cordenonsi M, Citi S, Dejana E: Interaction of junctional adhesion molecule with the tight junction components ZO-1, cingulin, and occludin. *J Biol Chem* 2000, **275**:20520-20526.

31. Fukuhara A, Irie K, Nakanishi H, Takekuni K, Kawakatsu T, Ikeda W, Yamada A, Katata T, Honda T, Sato T et al.: Involvement of nectin in the localization of junctional adhesion molecule at tight junctions. *Oncogene* 2002, **21**:7642-7655.

32. Ebnet K, Schulz CU, Meyer zu Brickwedde M-K, Pendl GG, Vestweber D: Junctional adhesion molecule interacts with the PDZ-domain-containing proteins AF-6 and ZO-1. *J Biol Chem* 2000, **275**:27979-27988.

33. Ebnet K, Suzuki A, Horikoshi Y, Hirose T, Meyer Zu Brickwedde MK, Ohno S, Vestweber D: The cell polarity protein ASIP/PAR-3 directly associates with junctional adhesion molecule (JAM). *EMBO J* 2001, **20**:3738-3748.

34. Itoh M, Sasaki H, Furuse M, Ozaki H, Kita T, Tsukita S: Junctional adhesion molecule (JAM) binds to PAR-3: a possible mechanism for the recruitment of PAR-3 to tight junctions. *J Cell Biol* 2001, **154**:491-497.

35. Hamazaki Y, Itoh M, Sasaki H, Furuse M, Tsukita S: Multi-PDZ domain protein 1 (MUPP1) is concentrated at tight junctions through its possible interaction with claudin-1 and junctional adhesion molecule. *J Biol Chem* 2002, **277**:455-461.

36. Fanning AS, Ma TY, Anderson JM: Isolation and functional characterization of the actin binding region in the tight junction protein ZO-1. *FASEB J* 2002, **16**:1835-1837.

37. Boettner B, Govek EE, Cross J, Van Aelst L: The junctional multidomain protein AF-6 is a binding partner of the Rap1A GTPase and associates with the actin cytoskeletal regulator profilin. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:9064-9069.

38. Cohen AR, Wood DF, Marfatia SM, Walther Z, Chishti AH, Anderson JM: Human CASK/LIN-2 binds syndecan-2 and protein 4.1 and localizes to the basolateral membrane of epithelial cells. J Cell Biol 1998, 142:129-138.

39. Linnemann T, Geyer M, Jaitner BK, Block C, Kalbitzer HR, Wittinghofer A, Hermann C: Thermodynamic and kinetic characterization of the interaction between the Ras binding domain of AF6 and members of the Ras subfamily. J Biol Chem 1999, 274:13556-13562.

40. Ohno S: Intercellular junctions and cellular polarity: the PAR-aPKC complex, a conserved core cassette playing fundamental roles in cell polarity. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2001, 13:641-648.

41. Vestweber D: Regulation of endothelial cell contacts during leukocyte extravasation. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2002, 14:587-593.

42. Chavakis T, Preissner KT, Santoso S: Leukocyte trans-endothelial migration: JAMs add new pieces to the puzzle. Thromb Haemost 2003, 89:13-17.

43. Del Maschio A, De Luigi A, Martin-Padura I, Brockhaus M, Bartfai T, Fruscella P, Adorini L, Martino GV, Furlan R, De Simoni MG et al.: Leukocyte recruitment in the cerebrospinal fluid of mice with experimental meningitis is inhibited by an antibody to junctional adhesion molecule (JAM). J Exp Med 1999, 190:1351-1356.

44. Lechner F, Sahrbacher U, Suter T, Frei K, Brockhaus M, Koedel U, Fontana A: Antibodies to the junctional adhesion molecule cause disruption of endothelial cells and do not prevent leukocyte influx into the meninges after viral or bacterial infection. J Infect Dis 2000, 182:978-982.

45. Shaw SK, Perkins BN, Lim YC, Liu Y, Nusrat A, Parkos CA, Luscinskas FW: Reduced expression of junctional adhesion molecule and platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (CD31) at human vascular endothelial junctions by cytokines tumor necrosis factor-alpha plus interferon-gamma does not reduce leukocyte transmigration under flow. Am J Pathol 2001, 159:2281-2291.

46. Naik UP, Ehrlich YH, Kornecki E: Mechanisms of platelet activation by a stimulatory antibody: cross-linking of a novel

47. Sobocka MB, Sobocki T, Banerjee P, Weiss C, Rushbrook JL, Norin AJ, Hartwig J, Salifu MO, Markell MS, Babinska A et al.: Cloning of the human platelet F11 receptor: a cell adhesion molecule member of the immunoglobulin superfamily involved in platelet aggregation. Blood 2000, 95:2600-2609.

48. Babinska A, Kedees MH, Athar H, Sobocki T, Sobocka MB, Ahmed T, Ehrlich YH, Hussain MM, Kornecki E: Two regions of the human platelet F11-receptor (F11R) are critical for platelet aggregation, potentiation and adhesion. Thromb Haemost 2002, 87:712-721.

49. Ozaki H, Ishii K, Arai H, Horiuchi H, Kawamoto T, Suzuki H, Kita T: Junctional adhesion molecule (JAM) is phosphorylated by protein kinase C upon platelet activation. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2000, 276:873-878.

50. Aurrand-Lions MA, Duncan L, Du Pasquier L, Imhof BA: Cloning of JAM-2 and JAM-3: An emerging junctional adhesion molecular family? Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2000, 251:91-98.

51. Muller WA: Leukocyte-endothelial-cell interactions in leukocyte transmigration and the inflammatory response. Trends Immunol 2003, 24:326-333. Together with Vestweber (2002) [41] and Chavakis et al. (2003) [42], this paper reviews recent advances on the molecular mechanisms underlying leukocyte transmigration. In addition, the authors of this paper introduce the novel nomenclature of JAM proteins.

52. Hyrabayashi S, Tajima M, Yao I, Nishimura W, Mori H, Hata Y: JAM4, a junctional cell adhesion molecule interacting with a tight junction protein, MAGI-1. Mol Cell Biol 2003, 23:4267-4282. The authors report a novel immunoglobulin-like molecule that localises to tight junctions and binds the PDZ protein MAGI-1.

53. Prota AE, Campbell JA, Schelling P, Forrest JC, Watson MJ, Peters TR, Aurrand-Lions M, Imhof BA, Dermody TS, Stehle T: Crystal structure of human junctional adhesion molecule 1: implications for reovirus binding. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2003, 100:5366-5371.

54. Amieva MR, Vogelmann R, Covacci A, Tompkins LS, Nelson WJ, Falkow S: Disruption of the epithelial apical-junctional complex by Helicobacter pylori CagA. Science 2003, 300:1430-1434. The association of JAM-A and ZO-1 with a protein from *Helicobacter pylori*, the causative agent of peptic ulcer disease, provides an additional indication (together with Barton et al. [2001] [23]) of a potential role of JAM-A in pathology.
