
ELSEVIER

# Synaptic adhesion molecules

Masahito Yamagata*, Joshua R Sanes† and Joshua A Weiner‡

Formation, differentiation and plasticity of synapses, the specialized cell–cell contacts through which neurons communicate, all require interactions between pre- and post-synaptic partners. Several synaptically localized adhesion molecules potentially capable of mediating these interactions have been identified recently. Functional studies suggest roles for some of them in target recognition (e.g. SYG-1 and sidekicks), formation and alignment of synaptic specializations (e.g. SynCAM, neuroligin and neurexin), and regulation of synaptic structure and function (e.g. cadherins and syndecan).

For the synapse to function efficiently, pre- and post-synaptic specializations must be precisely apposed across a cleft. At the best-studied synapse, the vertebrate skeletal neuromuscular junction (NMJ), the ~50-nm-wide synaptic cleft contains a basal lamina, several components of which are required for synapse formation, maturation and maintenance [2]. By contrast, neuron–neuron synapses, on which we focus here, have a narrower cleft (~20 nm) and lack a basal lamina. At these synapses, therefore, direct linkage via transmembrane adhesion molecules might play predominant roles [3].

Adhesion molecules, as we discuss them here, are membrane-anchored molecules whose extracellular domains directly interact to help hold the membranes of two cells together. Adhesion might be a primary role of the interaction or it could be an epiphenomenon of ligand–receptor interactions whose primary purpose is to transmit signals to the cell interior. While the roles of numerous adhesion molecules in axon outgrowth and fasciculation have been well characterized over the past two decades [4], data on the presumed roles of such molecules at synapses have begun to accumulate only over the past few years. In this review, we briefly summarize these advances in our understanding of synaptic adhesion.

**Roles of adhesion at the synapse**

Before considering particular adhesion molecules, it may be helpful to outline some of the tasks for which such molecules might be required. Four distinct but interrelated roles can be envisioned (Figure 1). The first, and most obvious, function is common to all types of intracellular junctions: adhesion molecules maintain the integrity of the junction and promote the stability of synapses by linking pre- and post-synaptic membranes. The requirement for mechanical stability is most clear at the NMJ, which is maintained for a lifetime in the face of constant mechanical stress from muscle contraction. Mechanical integrity of neuron–neuron synapses is apparent from the ability to recover intact synaptosomes — pinched-off pre- and post-synaptic membranes that remain tightly adherent — from mechanically homogenized brain tissue (Figure 1a) [5]. Importantly, maintained apposition of pre- and post-synaptic membranes maximizes interactions among other molecules in the synaptic cleft.

A second likely role for adhesion molecules is in target recognition (Figure 1b). Much of the specific connectivity among neurons results from the cues that guide axons to target regions [4]. Once they arrive, however, axons must choose synaptic partners from a network of closely spaced

**Addresses**

Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA  
*e-mail*: yamagatm@pcg.wustl.edu  
†*e-mail*: sanesj@pcg.wustl.edu  
‡*e-mail*: weinerj@pcg.wustl.edu  

**Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2003, 15:621–632**

This review comes from a themed issue on Cell-to-cell contact and extracellular matrix Edited by Eric Brown and Elisabetta Dejana 0955-0674/$ – see front matter © 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. DOI 10.1016/S0955-0674(03)00107-8

**Abbreviations**

CNS | central nervous system  
ECM | extracellular matrix  
FNIII | fibronectin type III  
GPI | glycosylphosphatidylinositol  
NCAM | neural cell adhesion molecule  
NMDA | N-methyl-D-aspartate  
NMJ | neuromuscular junction  
RPTP | receptor-type protein tyrosine phosphatase  

**Introduction**

Synapses, the sites of communication between neurons and their targets, are in some respects specialized variants of the cell–cell junctions formed by other cell types [1]. Like other junctions, they contain a wide variety of transmembrane proteins, cytoskeletal elements and signaling molecules. They differ from most other junctions, however, in being intrinsically asymmetric: the pre-synaptic specialization, usually on the axon, contains a complex apparatus (the active zone) for neurotransmitter release, whereas the post-synaptic specialization, usually on dendrites, contains receptors, ion channels and associated proteins (the post-synaptic density) that together transduce the neurotransmitter signal.

262 Cell-to-cell contact and extracellular matrix

Figure 1

(a)  
Homogenize  

(b)  

(c)  

(d)  

Synaptosome  

Adhesion molecule  
Neurotransmitter receptor  
Cytoskeleton  
Synaptic vesicle  

Potential roles of adhesion molecules at the synapses. (a) Stability: the ability to isolate synaptosomes demonstrates the tight association of pre- and post-synaptic membranes. (b) Target recognition: axons not only choose target cells but also particular portions of cells. (c) Synaptic differentiation: initially unspecialized regions of axons and dendrite acquire perfectly apposed pre- and post-synaptic specializations as synaptogenesis proceeds. (d) Regulation of synaptic structure: changes in adhesive strength or signaling affect the size and shape of synaptic contacts, leading to changes in synaptic efficacy.

neuronal processes [6–8]. In some cases, axons even synapse preferentially on a particular portion of the target cell’s surface — for example, on spines versus shafts, or dendrites versus somata. Of course, not all adhesion molecules subserving target recognition need to be localized to the synapse. Expression along the entire length of future pre- and post-synaptic processes would be sufficient for recognition between particular neurons within a molecularly heterogeneous group. The recognition of a particular domain on a neuron, however, might require that some adhesion molecules be concentrated at synaptic sites.

Third, synaptic adhesion could promote differentiation of pre- and post-synaptic specializations (Figure 1c). After initial contact between synaptic partners, growth cones transform into nerve terminals, and underlying regions of the target cell surface acquire high densities of neurotransmitter receptors along with associated signaling complexes [3,9]. The development of these synaptic specializations requires reciprocal interaction between the presumptive synaptic partners, and these are likely to be mediated by cell–cell or cell–matrix adhesion.

Finally, adhesion molecules are probably involved in the regulation of synaptic structure and function (Figure 1d). Such involvement would be of importance both to synapse maturation, which requires the elaboration of pre-synaptic boutons and post-synaptic spines, and to synaptic plasticity, which is believed to involve changes in spine density and synaptic size. As discussed below, several adhesion molecules regulate spine morphology [10], as well as electrophysiological measures of altered synaptic efficacy, such as long-term potentiation [11].

An inventory of adhesion molecules at the synapse

Structures of adhesion molecules reported to be concentrated at neuron–neuron synapses are shown in Figure 2. The majority are members of the cadherin [12] and immunoglobulin superfamilies [13]; for each of these, several subfamilies are represented. Another major family of adhesion molecules, the integrins [14], is also represented, along with members of families that are adhesive but are not generally thought of in this context — for example, the Eph receptors and their ephrin ligands [15], and the neurexins and their binding partners, the neuroligins [1].

Of these, the most extensively studied have been the ‘classic’ cadherins. Cadherins are Ca²⁺-dependent, single-pass transmembrane molecules with five ectodomain repeats, which mediate mainly homophilic (more rarely heterophilic) adhesion [12]. Strong cadherin adhesion is believed to be dependent on the formation of cis dimers,

Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2003, 15:621–632 www.current-opinion.com

Figure 2

| Intracellular ligand | Adhesion molecules |
|---------------------|--------------------|
| Catenins            | - Cadherin -       |
| Fyn, Dab1, PP1      | - Protocadherin    |
| Spectrin            | - NCAM -           |
| CASK, syntenin      | - SynCAM -         |
| Afadin              | - Nectin -         |
|                     | - IgLON -          |
| SHP-1, SHP-2        | P84                |
|                     | Nephrin            |
|                     | SYG-1/NEPH1        |
|                     | - Sidekick -       |
| Liprin-α            | RPTP LAR           |
|                     | EphB2 kinase       |
| PSD 95, S-SCAM      | Neuroligin         |
|                     | Neurexin           |
|                     | Dystroglycan       |
|                     | SN-Agrin           |
| CASK, syntenin      | Syndecan           |
| synectin, synbindin |                    |
| Talin               | Integrin           |
| FAK, vinculin       |                    |

| Cadherin            | Fibronectin        | Immunoglobulin     | Laminin             | Glycosaminoglycan   | PDZ-domain-        |
| Extracellular       | type III           | globular           |                     |                     | binding motif      |

Current Opinion in Cell Biology

An inventory of synaptic adhesion molecules. Known ligands are also shown in the figure. Many of these adhesion molecules possess a binding motif (small orange circle) that binds to PDZ proteins. For immunoglobulin superfamily molecules, we have included 'broken' immunoglobulin motifs and neglected differences between C2 and V subdomains. The left side shows adhesion molecules that are present post-synaptically or whose sub-synaptic localization is unknown. The right side shows molecules believed to be present in the pre-synaptic membrane. The molecules in grey are known to be counter-receptors for the synaptic molecules in other systems, but their synaptic localization has not been demonstrated.

www.current-opinion.com
which then bind in *trans* to form adhesive ‘zippers’ [16]. The cytoplasmic domains of the cadherins contain binding sites for the catenins, which provide links to the cytoskeleton and mediate signaling [17]. N-cadherin was one of the first adhesion molecules shown to be concentrated in the synaptic cleft [18], a localization subsequently shown for catenins and several other cadherins at several synaptic types [19–21].

The protocadherins have varying numbers of cadherin-related repeats in their extracellular segments but divergent cytoplasmic domains that do not appear to signal through catenins [22]. Recent attention has focused on three large clusters of protocadherin genes (*Pcdh-α*, *β*, and *γ*), with 15 (*α*, *β*) or 22 (*γ*) members each, that lie in tandem on a single chromosome. Each protocadherin protein contains six cadherin ectodomain repeats, which are all encoded, along with transmembrane and proximal cytoplasmic sequences, in single exons [23]. Each of these exons in the *α* and *γ* clusters can be spliced to common exons that encode the remainder of the cytoplasmic domain [24,25]. Individual isoforms are expressed by distinct, although partially overlapping, neuronal subsets [26,27]. This striking genomic organization and regulation led to speculation that protocadherin diversity underlies synaptic specificity [7,22]. Indeed, members of the *α* and *γ* subfamilies are concentrated at synapses, although not confined to them [26,27]. In addition to the three large clusters, there are several other protocadherins whose genes lie singly or in small groups on other chromosomes. At least one, arcadlin/*Pcdh-8*, is present at synapses and could play a role in synaptic function [28].

Immunoglobulin superfamily molecules contain varying numbers of extracellular cysteine-looped domains first described in immunoglobulins. Many have one or more fibronectin type III (FNIII) repeats between the immunoglobulin domains and the membrane [13]. For example, neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM), the prototypical member of this diverse family, has three FNIII and five immunoglobulin domains. NCAM has been implicated in numerous aspects of synaptic development and function (e.g. [29]); however, although a unique polysialylated form of NCAM (often called PSA-NCAM) is concentrated at some synaptic types [30], it is lost during synapse formation at others [31], and other forms of NCAM are more abundant extrasynaptically than synaptically. By contrast, the NCAM orthologues fasciclin II in *Drosophila* and apCAM in *Aplysia* are present at neuromuscular and sensorimotor synapses, respectively, and have been implicated in the control of synapse structure and plasticity [13].

More recent work has identified at least seven other groups of immunoglobulin-domain molecules at the synapse: SynCAMs [32], nectins [33,34], the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored IgLONs (e.g. limbic

system-associated membrane protein [LAMP], opioid-binding cell adhesion molecule [OBCAM], neurotrimin/CEPU-1 and kilon/neurotractin) [35], P84 (SHPS-1/BIT/signal regulatory protein α [SIRPα]) [36], *Caenorhabditis elegans* SYG-1 [37], the sidekicks [38], and the receptor-type tyrosine phosphatase (RPTP)-LAR (leukocyte common antigen-related protein) (type IIA RPTP) [39,40]. Disruption of several other immunoglobulin superfamily members leads to defects in synaptic plasticity [11,41], raising the possibility that they also are present at synapses; however, this has not been shown. Overall, it seems likely that all synapses bear at least one cadherin-like adhesion molecule and at least one immunoglobulin superfamily molecule.

Outside the nervous system, integrins mediate adhesion of cells to the extracellular matrix (ECM) and to other cells. Integrins are present at the vertebrate NMJ, where they presumably interact with the basal lamina [42], and they are clearly involved in growth and function of the *Drosophila* NMJ [43,44]. They might not be expected to be present at synapses that lack a basal lamina. However, several integrins have been localized to vertebrate central nervous system (CNS) synapses (e.g. [45]) and they have been implicated in vertebrate synaptic function [46]. The best-studied ligands of integrins, ECM molecules such as fibronectin and laminin, do not appear to be prominent in the neuropil of the CNS. It remains a challenge to identify the ligands of integrins at neuron-neuron synapses.

In addition to members of the three major adhesion molecule superfamilies, two other smaller families have synaptic representatives. First are Eph receptor tyrosine kinases and their ephrin ligands, which can be grouped into two families: ephrinA ligands are tethered to the plasma membrane by a GPI-linkage and bind to EphA receptors; whereas ephrinB ligands are transmembrane proteins that bind preferentially to EphB receptors [15]. EphB receptors have been localized to the synapse, where they bind *N*-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate receptors [47]. The typical Eph–ephrin interaction is not an example of classical adhesion, but rather leads to repulsion [15]. However, metalloprotease cleavage resulting in localized membrane shedding of ephrin can convert initial adhesion to repulsion [48].

Second are the three neurexins, which undergo extensive alternative splicing to generate a bewildering array of isoforms. The larger α-neurexins are receptors for α-latrotoxin, a component of black widow spider venom, as well as for the neuropeptide-like neurexophilins; the smaller β-neurexins bind neuroligins and dystroglycan, which also plays a role at the NMJ [1,49,50]. Subcellular fractionation suggests that neurexins are enriched in synaptic membranes, although their exact location at the junction is not clear [1]. Neuroligins are also enrichedat the synapse, with immunoelectron microscopy indicating a post-synaptic localization [51].

Finally, several glycoconjugates are present at synapses. These include the syndecans, a family of transmembrane heparan sulfate/chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans [52]; densusin180, a synaptically localized molecule with a large glycosylated ectodomain [53] for which ligands have not yet been reported; and the proteoglycan agrin, which is found at CNS synapses [54]. Interestingly, agrin is matrix-associated at the NMJ but is membrane-tethered, via a distinct amino terminus, in neurons [55].

All of these molecules are localized ‘at synapses’. It should be noted, however, that there are actually two classes of adhesive structures at many synapses: synaptic junctions and puncta adherentia. Synaptic junctions are the actual sites of neurotransmission, including the pre-synaptic active zone, which is apposed to the post-synaptic density. Puncta adherentia are a neuronal form of cadherin-based adherens junctions found in many epithelia [56]; at synapses, they flank the active zone. The localization of some adhesion molecules varies depending on which synapse or stage of development is examined. For example, N-cadherin and nectins are present at active zones of developing synapses, but concentrated in the puncta adherentia of mature synapses [18,19,33*].

### Intracellular anchoring of synaptic adhesion molecules

Given the fluid nature of the membrane, restriction of a transmembrane protein to the synapse requires an anchoring mechanism. One key to this anchoring appears to be the ability of many synaptic adhesion molecules to interact with scaffolding proteins that contain multiple protein-binding motifs called PDZ domains [57]. The vertebrate genome encodes a few hundred proteins with one or more PDZ domains, many of which are localized at cell–cell contacts, including synapses. Different membrane proteins selectively associate with different PDZ domains within a scaffolding protein, and molecules containing PDZ modules associate with each other via distinct protein-interaction domains; together, these interactions lead to the formation of a multimolecular scaffold beneath both the pre- and post-synaptic membranes. The pre-synaptic PDZ proteins Rim and Bassoon have been hypothesized to organize the active zone cytomatrix [58,59], and post-synaptic transmembrane ion channels such as glutamate receptors are clustered along with associated signaling apparatus via interaction with PSD95 and GRIP [57].

Proteins generally bind PDZ domains via a carboxy-terminal consensus sequence: either S/TXV/I/L (class I, single letter amino acid code, where X can be any residue), or ΦXΦ (class II; where Φ represents a hydrophobic residue). Each particular sequence, along with a

few flanking amino acids, imparts PDZ-domain binding specificity, even to domains within the same protein [57]. For example, neuroligin selectively binds to the third PDZ domain of PSD95, whereas the NMDA-type glutamate receptor subunit 2B binds to the first and second PDZ domain [1,57]. Among the immunoglobulin superfamily members at the synapse, nectins bind to a particular PDZ protein, afadin [34], whereas SynCAM, like neurexins and syndecans, binds calcium/calmodulin-dependent serine protein kinase (CASK) [1,32**,52]. Sidekicks are quite striking in that all orthologues in mice, humans, chickens, *C. elegans* and *Drosophila* share the same carboxy-terminal PDZ-binding hexapeptide [38**]. Conservation of a tripeptide PDZ-binding motif is also found among many SYG-1 orthologues [37**]. Binding partners for these proteins, however, have not yet been identified. Some ephrinsB and Eph kinases also have carboxy-terminal PDZ-binding sites and have been shown to interact with PDZ proteins [15].

Anchoring through PDZ-domain–protein interactions is not the sole mechanism by which adhesion molecules could be synaptically localized. Elements of the actin cytoskeleton are concentrated in post-synaptic dendritic spines. Cadherins have long been known to be linked intracellularly to the actin cytoskeleton via the catenins [17]. Since β-catenin is also concentrated at synapses [19], this mechanism is probably employed to localize cadherins to synaptic sites. Integrins and some immunoglobulin superfamily members such as NCAM are also linked to the cytoskeleton through actin-binding proteins such as vinculin and spectrin [60]. In some cases, PDZ-dependent and -independent mechanisms might interact: for example, β- and δ-catenins bind to synaptic PDZ-domain-containing proteins [61,62].

### Adhesion molecule signaling at the synapse

Adhesion molecules were named, and many were identified, on the basis of their ability to hold cells to each other or to the ECM. It is now widely recognized, however, that most adhesion molecules are primarily signaling molecules. Some synaptically localized receptors possess catalytic domains of their own; examples include the EphB receptor tyrosine kinases and the RPTP LAR. The signaling cascades initiated by these domains are likely to be important for their functions at synapses.

Other adhesion molecules signal by associating with cytoplasmic kinases and phosphatases, including Fyn for protocadherin-α [26], phosphatases for P84 [63], and focal adhesion kinase (FAK) for integrins [14]. NCAM can activate signaling pathways via interactions with fibroblast growth factor receptors, mitogen-activated protein kinase, and cAMP-dependent kinase [13,60]. These pathways function at synapses in vertebrates and invertebrates, and in at least some cases are activated via adhesive receptors (e.g. [64]). A very recent review by

www.current-opinion.com   Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2003, 15:621–632
Schieffele [65] discusses signaling through synaptic adhesion molecules in detail.

**Target recognition**

We now highlight recent studies that have implicated synaptic adhesion molecules in the functions outlined in Figure 1.

Sperry’s influential ‘chemoaffinity hypothesis’ [8] has commonly been viewed as implying the existence of specific adhesion molecules that underlie a ‘lock and key’ type specification of synaptic connections. Although numerous examples are now known of receptor-ligand pairs that guide growth of axons toward their targets—and thus contribute significantly to specific connectivity [4]—evidence for roles of synaptic adhesion molecules in target recognition has been slow in coming. During the past year, however, two studies appear to have broken the logjam.

SYG-1 was isolated in a genetic screen for *C. elegans* mutants defective in synaptic positioning [37**]. In SYG-1 mutants, the neurons that synapse on vulval muscles (called HSN) fail to cluster synaptic vesicles at their normal sites of synaptic contact; instead, vesicles are clustered at several ectopic sites. Vesicle clustering (and thus presumably synapse formation) at the correct location requires SYG-1-dependent contact with vulval epithelial ‘guidepost’ cells, before post-synaptic differentiation of the HSN muscle target. SYG-1 is likely to be the *C. elegans* orthologue of NEPH1, a five-immunoglobulin-domain-containing protein implicated in kidney glomerular filtration [66]. Two exciting implications of this finding are, first, that the guidepost cells are likely to bear specific counter-receptors for SYG-1, and, second, that the vertebrate NEPH genes, which are expressed in the CNS [66], could play roles in synaptogenesis. In vertebrates, NEPH1 binds an immunoglobulin/FNIII-containing molecule called nephrin [67]; and in flies, a SYG-1/NEPH orthologue, the product of *Duf/Kirre*, binds a nephrin orthologue, the protein product of *Sticks and Stones* [68]. Thus, the SYG-1 counter-receptor might be a worm orthologue of nephrin. The *Drosophila* orthologues have been implicated in several cell–cell interactions [68], but their roles in synapse formation have not been examined.

Another branch of the immunoglobulin superfamily, the sidekicks, have been implicated in selective synapse formation in the chick retina. Distinct subsets of retinal ganglion cells display laminar specificity both at their synaptic inputs, by confining their dendritic arbors to specific layers of the retinal inner plexiform layer, and at their outputs, by projecting axons to one of four tectal laminae [6]. To seek molecular determinants of such laminar specificity, Yamagata *et al.* [38**] screened a single-cell library to isolate genes differentially expressed between subsets of chick retinal ganglion cells. They identified two immunoglobulin superfamily molecules orthologous to the product of the *Drosophila* sidekick gene, which had been isolated in a screen for patterning defects in retina [69]. The two homologous sidekicks act as homophilic adhesion molecules *in vitro* and are highly concentrated at synaptic sites *in vivo*. Each sidekick is expressed in non-overlapping subsets of retinal ganglion cells, and in non-overlapping subsets of amacrine and bipolar cells, which synapse on the retinal ganglion cells. Sidekick-rich synapses are concentrated in narrow sublaminae of the inner plexiform layer, suggesting that homophilic sidekick interactions may promote lamina-specific connectivity. In support of this idea, ectopic expression of sidekicks in the retina diverted neuronal processes from sidekick-negative to sidekick-positive synaptic layers (Figure 3a).

Sidekicks and SYG-1 are probably the tip of the iceberg. For example, sidekicks label only two of the more than ten sublaminae in the inner plexiform layer. What other molecules might be involved? Excellent candidates are the classical cadherins (type I and II). There are many of them (~20), at least some are concentrated at synapses, and they display complex combinatorial expression patterns that delineate interconnected nuclei and layers [21]. For example, N-cadherin localizes to ‘barrels’ in somatosensory cortex and is expressed in the thalamic nucleus, sending afferents to the barrels, whereas cadherin-8 is confined to the surrounding barrel septa and is expressed by the nucleus sending afferents to the septa [70]. Likewise, multiple cadherins are expressed in distinct combinations by retinal ganglion cell subsets, and similarly label specific subsets of tectal laminae [71,72]. Observations such as these provide a rationale for the hypothesis that a cadherin ‘code’ might influence wiring specificity.

A problem in obtaining decisive evidence for such roles is that cadherins are involved in so many other aspects of neuronal differentiation (e.g. axon growth [73], migration [74] and lamination [75]). However, use of blocking reagents to perturb cadherin function at late developmental stages has produced some results. N-cadherin function-blocking antibodies applied to the chick optic tectum *in vivo* resulted in ‘overshooting’ retinal axons that failed to stop in their normal target layers [76]. Similarly, in a thalamocortical slice culture, both function-blocking antibodies and cadherin inhibitory peptides caused thalamic afferents to overshoot their normal layer IV targets and grow to the pial surface [77*]. Genetic analysis in the *Drosophila* visual system has also demonstrated that R7 photoreceptor axons lacking *Drosophila* N-cadherin mis-targeted to the R8 layer in the optic lobe [78]. Although these studies do not conclusively demonstrate a role for cadherins in synaptogenesis *per se*, the synaptic localization of cadherins and the well-characterized laminar patterns of synapses in the models examined favor such roles.

Synaptic adhesion molecules Yamagata et al. 627

Figure 3

(a) Laminar specificity

![Diagram for Laminar specificity]

(b) Synaptic differentiation

![Diagram for Synaptic differentiation]

+ Neuroligin  
or + SynCAM  

(c) Synaptic plasticity

![Diagram for Synaptic plasticity]

- N-cadherin  
+ N-cadherin  

Adhesion molecule  
Synaptic vesicle  

Demonstrated roles of synaptic adhesion molecules. (a) Target recognition: in the inner plexiform layer in the retina, neurons expressing the same sidekick send processes to the same sublamina, thereby establishing lamina-specific synaptic connections. Overexpression of sidekick shifts connectivity [38**]. (b) Differentiation of synaptic specializations: heterologous cells transfected with neuroligin or SynCAM promote pre-synaptic differentiation in co-cultured hippocampal neurons [32**,80,93]. Adhesion mediated by homophilic SynCAM also assembles recombinant glutamate receptors in the heterologous cells, to elicit a functional post-synaptic response. (c) Regulation of synaptic structure: blockade of N-cadherin alters the shape of post-synaptic dendrite spines and attenuates pre-synaptic differentiation [87*].

The 52 protocadherin genes of the tandemly arrayed α, β and γ clusters are also attractive candidate mediators of synaptic specificity; indeed, their initial description set off a frenzy of speculation along these lines. Unfortunately, genetic perturbation of the α and β clusters has yet to be reported, and the most striking phenotype in mice lacking the entire γ cluster, which die shortly after birth, is a remarkable degeneration and apoptosis of select neuronal subpopulations, particularly spinal interneurons [27*]. Apoptosis also occurs in neurons cultured from mutants, suggesting that it might not be simply a secondary consequence of aberrant synaptic connectivity. It remains very possible that protocadherins are required separately for survival and for synaptic specificity, but genetic analysis of this possibility awaits a means of circumventing perinatal lethality.

www.current-opinion.com                                                                 Current Opinion in Cell Biology 2003, 15:621–632

Differentiation of synaptic specializations

Many axons can release small amounts of neurotransmitter even before they contact a post-synaptic partner, and many post-synaptic cells bear functional neurotransmitter receptors before they are innervated [2]. Once pre- and post-synaptic processes establish contact, however, the machineries for release of and response to neurotransmitter are enhanced, focused at sites of contact, and placed in precise apposition to each other. Key features of pre-synaptic differentiation include aggregation of synaptic vesicles and association with active zones; key features of post-synaptic differentiation include clustering of post-synaptic receptors and association with signaling proteins [9]. The facts that these specializations form specifically at sites of contact, and that they form in precise apposition, demonstrate that intercellular communication is required for synaptogenesis. At no synapse are the signaling mechanisms well understood, but a few of the synaptic organizing molecules have been identified at the skeletal NMJ: the nerve-derived proteoglycan z-agrin is a key organizer of post-synaptic differentiation; and muscle-derived laminin trimers containing the β2 subunit are required for complete pre-synaptic differentiation [2]. Importantly, both of these molecules are stably anchored in the basal lamina that forms the cleft material of this synapse, and both interact with receptors, including integrins, on the nerve and muscle membranes. In other words, they are adhesion molecules. Therefore, in considering how synaptogenesis is regulated at neuron-neuron synapses, adhesion molecules are likely suspects.

A valuable method for assaying synaptic organizing molecules is to express them in heterologous cells, co-culture these with neurons, and then ask if pre- or post-synaptic specializations form at sites of contact. Indeed, this approach was taken with agrin itself several years ago and used to show that in addition to its post-synaptic effects, it can arrest elongation of, and promote vesicle clustering in, motor axons [79]. This assay was adopted by Scheiffele *et al.* [80], who showed that expression of the post-synaptic proteins neuroligin-1 and -2 in non-neuronal cells was sufficient to induce pre-synaptic differentiation (synaptic vesicle clusters that underwent turnover) in axons that contacted them (Figure 3b). Application of a soluble version of β-neurexin, a pre-synaptic neuroligin ligand, reduced vesicle clustering in co-cultures of pontine neurons and their *in vivo* targets, cerebellar granule cells. The recent report that mutations in two neuroligin genes are found in a small number of autistic individuals [81] suggests that disruption of synaptic adhesion might be an underlying cause of complex neurological disorders.

More recently, Biederer *et al.* [32] used this assay to characterize an immunoglobulin superfamily member, SynCAM-1, which had previously been characterized as a tumor suppressor gene, TSLC-1 [82]. SynCAM, as we will call it here, is a homophilic adhesion molecule expressed in brain and localized on both sides of the synapse. Expression of SynCAM in non-neuronal cells induced pre-synaptic differentiation in hippocampal neurons at the sites of contact (Figure 3b). In an elegant experiment, the authors also co-expressed GluR2 glutamate receptors along with SynCAM in non-neuronal cells, and showed that these receptors clustered opposite synaptic vesicle release sites (stained with FM dyes) in hippocampal neuron co-cultures. Excitation of the neurite led to glutamatergic depolarization in the non-neuronal cells. In other words, a synapse had been reconstituted.

The neuroligin and SynCAM data together indicate that adhesive interactions could be sufficient for at least some aspects of CNS synaptic differentiation and/or stabilization. A shared feature of SynCAM, neurexin and neuroligin is that they bind to PDZ-scaffolding proteins, suggesting a model in which adhesion-mediated clustering of key PDZ proteins forms a rudimentary scaffold around which further synaptic specializations are developed. The most important next experiment is to ask whether such interactions are necessary *in vivo*. A cautionary note is struck by the agrin results mentioned above [79]: their relevance to formation of the NMJ *in vivo* remains unclear (see Update).

Another pair of membrane-associated molecules recently implicated in synaptic differentiation are the EphB receptor tyrosine kinases and their ligands, the ephrinBs. Addition of ephrinB ligand to cultured neurons induces an interaction between the extracellular domains of EphBs and of NMDA-type glutamate receptors [47]. This interaction results in increased synaptic density and in NMDA-receptor-mediated calcium influx and gene expression [83]; conversely, disruption of Eph/ephrin signaling interferes with synaptic plasticity [84]. Because ephrin/Eph binding can result in bidirectional signaling events, such interactions at the synapse might be important for coordinating pre-and post-synaptic development, although EphB2 mutant mice have normal synaptic morphology [15]. In a potentially analogous interaction, the RPTP LAR associates with receptors at synapses, via intracellular interactions: the LAR cytoplasmic domain associates with liprin-α/SYD-2, which binds receptor-associated PDZ protein GRIP (glutamate-receptor-interacting protein) [39]. This interaction appears to be important for the surface expression and clustering of receptors at synaptic sites.

Together, these data underscore the importance of tyrosine phosphorylation for synaptic differentiation, and suggest that intercellular interactions could act, in part, to regulate phosphorylation. This view is reminiscent of NMJ development, where the muscle-specific receptor tyrosine kinase (MuSK) is critical for all aspects of post-synaptic differentiation, including local synthesis and clustering of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors [2].

Regulation of synaptic structure

Most excitatory synapses in the CNS are made onto dendritic spines, knobby protrusions of the dendritic shaft that act as signaling microdomains. Spines are highly dynamic and undergo a variety of actin-cytoskeleton-based shape changes both during synaptogenesis, where they appear to be derived from motile filopodia, and in response to activity changes [85,86]. Because changes in spine morphology have been suggested to be an underlying mechanism of long-term potentiation, much research has focused on identifying molecules involved in their regulation.

Two recent papers implicate the cadherin/catenin adhesion system in the control of spine structure in cultured hippocampal neurons. Togashi *et al.* [87] showed that expression of a dominant-negative form of N-cadherin resulted in longer, filopodia-like spines and reductions in synaptic puncta (Figure 3c). In cultures from mice lacking αN-catenin, which is critical for cadherins to link to the actin cytoskeleton, spines were also abnormally elongated, but other aspects of spine structure and synaptic components were not affected.

A companion study by Murase *et al.* [88] examined the localization and function of β-catenin at the synapse. When neurons were depolarized, β-catenin staining intensity increased within spines, and decreased in the adjacent dendritic shaft. This β-catenin shift is dependent on its phosphorylation state: a mutant that could not be phosphorylated was concentrated in spines, whereas a mutant that behaved as if it were constitutively phosphorylated was concentrated in shafts. In neurons transfected with the phosphorylation-blocked mutant, PSD95 clusters were larger, as were adjacent synaptic vesicle clusters.

These new studies implicating cadherin/catenin signaling in control of spine structure are especially intriguing in light of earlier results suggesting changes in N-cadherin localization and adhesive strength in response to activity [89,90].

Similar studies in hippocampal neurons have also implicated the heparan sulfate proteoglycan syndecan-2 in the formation of mature spines [52,91,92]. Syndecan-2 is localized to maturing spines, and transfection of immature neurons with syndecan-2 speeds spine maturation. Syndecan-2 is a phosphorylation target of the EphB2 kinase, and this phosphorylation is critical for both syndecan-2 localization and mature spine formation in culture. Thus, one of the mechanisms by which ephrin/Eph signaling promotes synaptic differentiation (see above) could be through syndecan-2-dependent spine formation.

Conclusions

Over the past few years, several adhesion molecules have been identified at CNS synapses. A rapidly accumulating body of experimental evidence, obtained mainly through studies of *in vitro* models, has suggested likely roles in synapse formation and function for many of these molecules. Emerging technologies — genomics, proteomics, interaction screens, expression profiling, and so on — will surely lead to many more, and to their binding partners, scaffolding molecules and signaling cascades. The challenge for the future will be to sift through all of these data and to assess the actual functions of synaptic adhesion molecules *in vivo*.

Update

Recent work has demonstrated that neurexins are concentrated at synapses, that neuroligin-mediated β-neurexin clustering induces pre-synaptic differentiation [93], and that targeted deletion of all three α-neurexins in mice impairs calcium channel function but does not prevent synapse formation [94].

Acknowledgements

Work in our laboratory is supported by the National Institutes of Health.

References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

- of special interest
- of outstanding interest

1. Südhof TC: The synaptic cleft and synaptic cell adhesion. In Synapses. Edited by Cowan WM, Südhof TC, Stevens CF. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press; 2001:275-313.
2. Sanes JR, Lichtman JW: Development of the vertebrate neuromuscular junction. Annu Rev Neurosci 1999, 22:389-442.
3. Vaughn JE: Fine structure of synaptogenesis in the vertebrate central nervous system. Synapse 1989, 3:255-285.
4. Mueller BK: Growth cone guidance: first steps towards a deeper understanding. Annu Rev Neurosci 1999, 22:351-388.
5. Gray EG, Whitaker VP: The isolation of nerve endings from brain. J Anat 1962, 96:79-88.
6. Sanes JR, Yamagata M: Formation of lamina-specific synaptic connections. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1999, 9:79-87.
7. Benson DL, Colman DR, Huntley GW: Molecules, maps and synapse specificity. Nat Rev Neurosci 2001, 2:899-909.
8. Sperry RW: Chemoaffinity in the orderly growth of nerve fiber patterns and connections. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1963, 50:703-710.
9. Garner CC, Zhai RG, Gundelfinger ED, Ziv NE: Molecular mechanisms of CNS synaptogenesis. Trends Neurosci 2002, 25:243-251.
10. Benson DL, Schnapp LM, Shapiro L, Huntley GW: Making memories stick: cell-adhesion molecules in synaptic plasticity. Trends Cell Biol 2000, 10:473-482.
11. Sanes JR, Lichtman JW: Can molecules explain long-term potentiation? Nat Neurosci 1999, 2:597-604.
12. Tepass U, Truong K, Godt D, Ikura M, Peifer M: Cadherins in embryonic and neural morphogenesis. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2000, 1:91-100.
13. Rougon G, Hobert O: New insights into the diversity and function of neuronal immunoglobulin superfamily molecules. Annu Rev Neurosci 2003, 26:207-238.
14. Hynes RO: Integrins: bidirectional, allosteric signaling machines. Cell 2002, 110:673-687.

15. Kullander K, Klein R: Mechanisms and functions of Eph and ephrin signalling. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2002, 3:475-486.

16. Shan WS, Tanaka H, Phillips GR, Arndt K, Yoshida M, Colman DR, Shapiro L: Functional cis-heterodimers of N- and R-cadherins. J Cell Biol 2000, 148:579-590.

17. Yap AS, Kovacs EM: Direct cadherin-activated cell signaling: a view from the plasma membrane. J Cell Biol 2003, 160:11-16.

18. Yamagata M, Herman JP, Sanes JR: Lamina-specific expression of adhesion molecules in developing chick optic tectum. J Neurosci 1995, 15:4556-4571.

19. Uchida N, Honjo Y, Johnson KR, Wheelock MJ, Takeichi M: The catenin/cadherin adhesion system is localized in synaptic junctions bordering transmitter release zones. J Cell Biol 1996, 135:767-779.

20. Fannon AM, Colman DR: A model for central synaptic junctional complex formation based on the differential adhesive specificities of the cadherins. Neuron 1996, 17:423-434.

21. Redies C: Cadherins in the central nervous system. Prog Neurobiol 2000, 61:611-648.

22. Frank M, Kemler R: Protocadherins. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2002, 14:557-562.

23. Wu Q, Maniatis T: A striking organization of a large family of human neural cadherin-like cell adhesion genes. Cell 1999, 97:779-790.

24. Tasic B, Nabholz CE, Baldwin KK, Kim Y, Rueckert EH, Ribich SA, Cramer P, Wu Q, Axel R, Maniatis T: Promoter choice determines splice site selection in protocadherin alpha and gamma pre-mRNA splicing. Mol Cell 2002, 10:21-33.

25. Wang X, Su H, Bradley A: Molecular mechanisms governing Pcdh-gamma gene expression: evidence for a multiple promoter and cis-alternative splicing model. Genes Dev 2002, 16:1890-1905.

26. Kohmura N, Senzaki K, Hamada S, Kai N, Yasuda R, Watanabe M, Ishii H, Yasuda M, Mishina M, Yagi T: Diversity revealed by a novel family of cadherins expressed in neurons at a synaptic complex. Neuron 1998, 20:1137-1151.

27. Wang X, Weiner JA, Levi S, Craig AM, Bradley A, Sanes JR: Gamma protocadherins are required for survival of spinal interneurons. Neuron 2002, 36:843-854. In mutant mice lacking all 22 protocadherin γ genes, neuronal migration, axon outgrowth, and synapse formation proceeded, but apoptosis of some neuronal populations, including spinal interneurons, led to neonatal death. Thus, protocadherin γ genes are dispensable for some aspects of synaptic connectivity but are required for survival of specific neuronal types.

28. Yamagata K, Andreasson KL, Sugiura H, Maru E, Dominique M, Irie Y, Miki N, Hayashi Y, Yoshioka M, Kaneko *et al.*: Arcadlin is a neural activity-regulated cadherin involved in long term potentiation. J Biol Chem 1999, 274:19473-19479.

29. Sytnyk V, Leshchyns’ka I, Delling M, Dityateva G, Dityatev A, Schachner M: Neural cell adhesion molecule promotes accumulation of TGN organelles at sites of neuron-to-neuron contacts. J Cell Biol 2002, 159:649-661.

30. Uryu K, Butler AK, Chesselet MF: Synaptogenesis and ultrastructural localization of the polysialylated neural cell adhesion molecule in the developing striatum. J Comp Neurol 1999, 405:216-232.

31. Bruses JL, Chauvet N, Rubio ME, Rutishauser U: Polysialic acid and the formation of oculomotor synapses on chick ciliary neurons. J Comp Neurol 2002, 446:244-256.

32. Biederer T, Sara Y, Mozhayeva M, Atasoy D, Liu X, Kavalali ET, Sudhof TC: SynCAM, a synaptic adhesion molecule that drives synapse assembly. Science 2002, 297:1525-1531. SynCAM is a CNS-specific, immunoglobulin superfamily protein that binds to intracellular PDZ-domain proteins and functions as a homophilic cell adhesion molecule at the synapse. Overexpression of the cytoplasmic tail of SynCAM in neurons perturbed synapse assembly, and expression of full-length SynCAM in heterologous cells induced synaptogenesis by co-cultured hippocampal neurons.

33. Mizoguchi A, Nakanishi H, Kimura K, Matsubara K, Ozaki-Kuroda K, Katata T, Honda T, Kiyohara Y, Heo K, Higashi M *et al.*: Nectin: an adhesion molecule involved in formation of synapses. J Cell Biol 2002, 156:555-565. Nectins co-localize with the cadherin-catenin system. Two distinct nectins, -1 and -3, localize ‘asymmetrically’ at the pre- and post-synaptic sides of puncta adherentia, respectively. Inhibition of the nectin-based adhesion in cultured hippocampal neurons results in modest changes in synapse size and number.

34. Takai Y, Nakanishi H: Nectin and afadin: novel organizers of intercellular junctions. J Cell Sci 2003, 116:17-27.

35. Miyata S, Matsumoto N, Taguchi K, Akagi A, Iino T, Funatsu N, Maekawa S: Biochemical and ultrastructural analyses of IgLON cell adhesion molecules, kilon and OBCAM in the rat brain. Neuroscience 2003, 117:645-658.

36. Mi ZP, Jiang P, Weng WL, Lindberg FP, Narayanan V, Lagenauf CF: Expression of a synapse-associated membrane protein, P84/SHPS-1, and its ligand, IAP/CD47, in mouse retina. J Comp Neurol 2000, 416:335-344.

37. Shen K, Bargmann CI: The immunoglobulin superfamily protein SYG-1 determines the location of specific synapses in *C. elegans*. Cell 2003, 112:619-630. Post-synaptic neurons and muscles are dispensable for proper placement of synaptic vesicle clusters in neurons that innervate the vulva (HSN). Instead, vulval epithelial cells act as ‘guidepost’ cells to direct pre-synaptic differentiation. SYG-1 mutants have defects in HSN that phenocopy ablation of the vulval epithelial cells. SYG-1 encodes an immunoglobulin superfamily protein related to vertebrate NEPH1 proteins, and appears to serve as a receptor for the vulval-derived cue.

38. Yamagata M, Weiner JA, Sanes JR: Sidekicks: synaptic adhesion molecules that promote lamina-specific connectivity in the retina. Cell 2002, 110:649-660. Two homologous immunoglobulin superfamily members, Sidekick (Sdk)-1 and -2, mediate homophilic adhesion *in vitro* and are concentrated at synaptic sites *in vivo*. Sdk-1 and -2 are expressed by non-overlapping subsets of pre- and post-synaptic retinal neurons that project to common inner plexiform (synaptic) sublaminae. Ectopic expression of Sdk in Sdk-negative cells redirects their processes to a Sdk-positive sublamina.

39. Wyszynski M, Kim E, Dunah AW, Passafaro M, Valtschanoff JG, Serra-Pages C, Streuli M, Weinberg RJ, Sheng M: Interaction between GRIP and liprin-α/SYD2 is required for AMPA receptor targeting. Neuron 2002, 34:39-52. The tyrosine phosphatase LAR interacts with liprin-α/SYD2 proteins that bind to PDZ-domain proteins. In hippocampal neurons, LAR and liprin-α are enriched at synapses and co-immunoprecipitate with GRIP and AMPA-type glutamate receptors.

40. Kaufmann N, DeProto J, Ranjan R, Wan H, Van Vactor D: *Drosophila* liprin-α and the receptor phosphatase DLAR control synapse morphogenesis. Neuron 2002, 34:27-38. *Drosophila* LAR, like vertebrate LAR [39], binds liprin-α. Their interaction regulates size and shape of the pre-synaptic active zone at the fly neuromuscular junction.

41. Murai KK, Misner D, Ranscht B: Contactin supports synaptic plasticity associated with hippocampal long-term depression but not potentiation. Curr Biol 2002, 12:181-190.

42. Cohen MW, Hoffstrom BG, DeSimone DW: Active zones on motor nerve terminals contain alpha 3beta 1 integrin. J Neurosci 2000, 20:4912-4921.

43. Beumer K, Matthies HJ, Bradshaw A, Broadie K: Integrins regulate DLG/FAS2 via a CaM kinase II-dependent pathway to mediate synapse elaboration and stabilization during postembryonic development. Development 2002, 129:3381-3391.

44. Suzuki K, Grinnell AD, Kidokoro Y: Hypertonicty-induced transmitter release at *Drosophila* neuromuscular junctions is partly mediated by integrins and cAMP/protein kinase A. J Physiol 2002, 538:103-119.

45. Einheber S, Schnapp LM, Salzer JL, Cappiello ZB, Milner TA: Regional and ultrastructural distribution of the alpha 8 integrin subunit in developing and adult rat brain suggests a role in synaptic function. J Comp Neurol 1996, 370:105-134.

46. Chavis P, Westbrook G: Integrins mediate functional pre- and postsynaptic maturation at a hippocampal synapse. Nature 2001, 411:317-321.

47. Dalva MB, Takasu MA, Lin MZ, Shamah SM, Hu L, Gale NW, Greenberg ME: EphB receptors interact with NMDA receptors and regulate excitatory synapse formation. *Cell* 2000, 103:945-956.

48. Hattori M, Osterfield M, Flanagan JG: Regulated cleavage of a contact-mediated axon repellent. *Science* 2000, 289:1360-1365.

49. Südhof TC: α-Latrotoxin and its receptors: neurexins and CIRL/latrophilins. *Annu Rev Neurosci* 2001, 24:933-962.

50. Sugita S, Saito F, Tang J, Satz J, Campbell K, Südhof TC: A stoichiometric complex of neurexins and dystroglycan in brain. *J Cell Biol* 2001, 154:435-445.

51. Song JY, Ichtchenko K, Südhof TC, Brose N: Neuroligin 1 is a postsynaptic cell-adhesion molecule of excitatory synapses. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1999, 96:1100-1105.

52. Yamaguchi Y: Glycobiology of the synapse: the role of glycans in the formation, maturation, and modulation of synapses. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 2002, 1573:369-376.

53. Apperson ML, Moon IS, Kennedy MB: Characterization of densin-180, a new brain-specific synaptic protein of the O-sialoglycoprotein family. *J Neurosci* 1996, 16:6839-6852.

54. Koulen P, Honig LS, Fletcher EL, Kroger S: Expression, distribution and ultrastructural localization of the synapse-organizing molecule agrin in the mature avian retina. *Eur J Neurosci* 1999, 11:4188-4196.

55. Burgess RW, Dickman DK, Nunez L, Glass DJ, Sanes JR: Mapping sites responsible for interactions of agrin with neurons. *J Neurochem* 2002, 83:271-284.

56. Perez-Moreno M, Jamora C, Fuchs E: Sticky business: orchestrating cellular signals at adherens junctions. *Cell* 2003, 112:535-548.

57. Sheng M, Sala C: PDZ domains and the organization of supramolecular complexes. *Annu Rev Neurosci* 2001, 24:1-29.

58. Schoch S, Castillo PE, Jo T, Mukherjee K, Geppert M, Wang Y, Schmitz F, Malenka RC, Südhof TC: RIM1α forms a protein scaffold for regulating neurotransmitter release at the active zone. *Nature* 2002, 415:321-326.

59. Dick O, Tom Dieck S, Altrock WD, Ammermuller J, Weiler R, Garner GC, Gundelfinger ED, Brandstatter JH: The presynaptic active zone protein bassoon is essential for photoreceptor ribbon synapse formation in the retina. *Neuron* 2003, 37:728-730.

60. Juliano RL: Signal transduction by cell adhesion receptors and the cytoskeleton: functions of integrins, cadherins, selectins, and immunoglobulin-superfamily members. *Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol* 2002, 42:283-323.

61. Nishimura W, Yao I, Junko L, Tanaka N, Hata Y: Interaction of synaptic scaffolding molecule and β-catenin. *J Neurosci* 2002, 22:757-765.

62. Jones SB, Lanford GW, Chen YH, Moribito M, Kim K, Lu Q: Glutamate-induced δ-catenin redistribution and dissociation from postsynaptic receptor complexes. *Neuroscience* 2002, 115:1009-1021.

63. Kharitonkov A, Chen Z, Sures I, Wang H, Schilling J, Ullrich A: A family of proteins that inhibit signaling through tyrosine kinase receptors. *Nature* 1997, 386:181-186.

64. Koh YH, Ruiz-Canada C, Gorczyca M, Budnik V: The Ras1-mitogen-activated protein kinase signal transduction pathway regulates synaptic plasticity through fasciclin-II-mediated cell adhesion. *J Neurosci* 2002, 22:2496-2504.

65. Scheiffele P: Cell-cell signaling during synapse formation in the CNS. *Annu Rev Neurosci* 2003, 26:485-508.

66. Donoviel DB, Freed DD, Vogel H, Potter DG, Hawkins E, Barrish JP, Mathur BN, Turner CA, Geske R, Montgomery CA et al.: Proteinuria and perinatal lethality in mice lacking NEPH1, a novel protein with homology to NEPHRIN. *Mol Cell Biol* 2001, 21:4829-4836.

67. Barletta GM, Kovari IA, Verma RK, Kerjaschki D, Holzman LB: Nephrin and Neph1 co-localize at the podocyte foot process

intercellular junction and form cis hetero-oligomers. *J Biol Chem* 2003, 278:19266-19271.

68. Dworak HA, Sink H: Myoblast fusion in *Drosophila*. *Bioessays* 2002, 24:591-601.

69. Nguyen DN, Liu Y, Litsky ML, Reinke R: The sidekick gene, a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily, is required for formation in the *Drosophila* eye. *Development* 1997, 124:3303-3312.

70. Gil OD, Needleman L, Huntley GW: Developmental patterns of cadherin expression and localization in relation to compartmentalized thalamocortical terminations in rat barrel cortex. *J Comp Neurol* 2002, 453:372-388.

71. Miskevich F, Zhu Y, Ranscht B, Sanes JR: Expression of multiple cadherins and catenins in the chick optic tectum. *Mol Cell Neurosci* 1998, 12:240-255.

72. Wohrn JC, Puelles L, Nakagawa S, Takeichi M, Redies C: Cadherin expression in the retina and retinofugal pathways of the chicken embryo. *J Comp Neurol* 1998, 396:20-38.

73. Riehl R, Johnson K, Bradley R, Grunwald GB, Cornel E, Lilienbaum A, Holt CE: Cadherin function is required for axon outgrowth in retinal ganglion cells *in vivo*. *Neuron* 1996, 17:837-848.

74. Price SR, De Marco Garcia NV, Ranscht B, Jessell TM: Regulation of motor neuron pool sorting by differential expression of type II cadherins. *Cell* 2002, 109:205-216.

75. Park C, Falls W, Finger JH, Longo-Guess CM, Ackerman SL: Deletion in Catna2, encoding alpha N-catenin, causes cerebellar and hippocampal lamination defects and impaired startle modulation. *Nat Genet* 2002, 31:279-284.

76. Inoue A, Sanes JR: Lamina-specific connectivity in the brain: regulation by N-cadherin, neurotrophins, and glycoconjugates. *Science* 1997, 276:1428-1431.

77. Poskanzer K, Needleman LA, Bozdagi O, Huntley GW: N-cadherin regulates ingrowth and laminar targeting of thalamocortical axons. *J Neurosci* 2003, 23:2294-2305.

Thalamocortical axons synapse in cortical layer IV. Interference with N-cadherin function in thalamic-cortical slice co-cultures suggest that N-cadherin initially promotes thalamic axon ingrowth and later functions as a stop signal in layer IV.

78. Lee CH, Herman T, Clandinin TR, Lee R, Zipursky SL: N-cadherin regulates target specificity in the *Drosophila* visual system. *Neuron* 2001, 30:437-450.

79. Campagna JA, Ruegg MA, Bixby JL: Agrin is a differentiation-inducing ‘stop signal’ for motoneurons *in vitro*. *Neuron* 1995, 15:1365-1374.

80. Scheiffele P, Fan J, Choih J, Fetter R, Serafini T: Neuroligin expressed in nonneuronal cells triggers presynaptic development in contacting axons. *Cell* 2000, 101:657-669.

81. Jamain S, Quach H, Betancur C, Rastam M, Colineaux C, Gillberg IC, Soderstrom H, Giros B, Leboyer M, Gillberg C et al.: Mutations of the X-linked genes encoding neuroligins NLGN3 and NLGN4 are associated with autism. *Nat Genet* 2003, 34:27-29.

This paper reports mutations in neuroligin NLGN3 and NLGN4 genes in a small subset of people with autism-spectrum disorders.

82. Kuramochi M, Fukuhara H, Nobukuni T, Kanbe T, Maruyama T, Ghosh HP, Pletcher M, Isomura M, Onizuka M, Kitamura T et al.: TSLC1 is a tumor-suppressor gene in human non-small-cell lung cancer. *Nat Genet* 2001, 27:427-430.

83. Takasu MA, Dalva MB, Zigmond RE, Greenberg ME: Modulation of NMDA receptor-dependent calcium influx and gene expression through EphB receptors. *Science* 2002, 295:491-495.

84. Contractor A, Rogers C, Maron C, Henkemeyer M, Swanson GT, Heinemann SF: Trans-synaptic Eph receptor-ephrin signaling in hippocampal mossy fiber LTP. *Science* 2002, 296:1864-1869.

85. Fiala JC, Spacek J, Harris KM: Dendritic spine pathology: cause or consequence of neurological disorders? *Brain Res Brain Res Rev* 2002, 39:29-54.

86. Bonhoeffer T, Yuste R: Spine motility: Phenomenology, mechanisms, and function. *Neuron* 2002, 35:1019-1027.

87. Togashi H, Abe K, Mizoguchi A, Takaoka K, Chisaka O, Takeichi M: Cadherin regulates dendritic spine morphogenesis. *Neuron* 2002, 35:77-89.
   - Cadherin blockade in hippocampal neurons *in vitro* resulted in alterations of dendritic spine morphology, as well as inhibition of synaptic vesicle accumulation.

88. Murase S, Mosser E, Schuman EM: Depolarization drives β-catenin into neuronal spines promoting changes in synaptic structure and function. *Neuron* 2002, 35:91-105.
   - Neural activity (depolarization) induces redistribution of β-catenin from dendritic shafts into spines, where it interacts with cadherin to influence synaptic size and strength. This neural-activity-dependent β-catenin shift is dependent on its phosphorylation state.

89. Tanaka H, Shan W, Phillips GR, Arndt K, Bozdagi O, Shapiro L, Huntley GW, Benson DL, Colman DR: Molecular modification of N-cadherin in response to synaptic activity. *Neuron* 2000, 25:93-107.

90. Bozdagi O, Shan WS, Tanaka H, Benson DL, Huntley GW: Increasing numbers of synaptic puncta during late-phase LTP: N-cadherin is synthesized, recruited to synaptic sites, and required for potentiation. *Neuron* 2000, 28:245-259.

91. Ethell IM, Yamaguchi Y: Cell-surface heparan sulfate proteoglycan syndecan-2 induces the maturation of dendritic spines in rat hippocampal neurons. *J Cell Biol* 1999, 144:575-586.

92. Ethell IM, Irie F, Kalo MS, Couchman JR, Pasquale EB, Yamaguchi Y: EphB/syndecan-2 signaling in dendritic spine morphogenesis. *Neuron* 2001, 31:1001-1013.

93. Dean C, Scholl FG, Choih J, DeMaria S, Berger J, Isacoff E, Scheiffele P: Neurexin mediates the assembly of presynaptic terminals. *Nat Neurosci* 2003, 6:708-716.

94. Missler M, Zhang W, Rohlmann A, Kattenstroth G, Hammer RE, Gottmann K, Südhof TC: α-Neurexins couple Ca²⁺ channels to synaptic vesicle exocytosis. *Nature* 2003, 424:939-948.
