
Erratum

Simanis, V. (2003). Events at the end of mitosis in the budding and fission yeasts. *J. Cell Sci.* 116, 4263-4275.

Table 1 was omitted from both the online and print versions of this Commentary. We apologise for any inconvenience caused.

**Table 1. Nomenclature of SIN and MEN components and regulators**

| S. pombe SIN | S. cerevisiae MEN | Higher eukaryotes |
|---------------|-------------------|--------------------|
| Plo1          | Protein kinase    | CDC 5              | Polo-like kinases |
| Cdc7          | Protein kinase    | CDC 15             | ?                  |
| Spg1          | GTPase            | TEM1               | ?                  |
| Cdc11         | Coiled-coil scaffold | NUD1              | Centriolin        |
| Sid4          | Coiled-coil scaffold | CNM 67?           | ?                  |
| Sid1          | Protein kinase    | ?                  | ?                  |
| Cdc14         | Novel, binds Sid1p | ?                  | ?                  |
| Sid2          | Protein kinase    | DBF2/DBF20         | WARTS/LATS        |
| Mob1          | Novel, binds Sid2p | MOB1               | MOB1              |
| Cdc16         | GAP               | BUB2               | GAPCENA?          |
| Byr4          | GAP scaffold      | BFA1               | ?                  |
| Dma1          | FHA-RING finger   | (YHR115c/YNL116w)  | CHFR              |
| Zfs1          | Novel             | ?                  | ?                  |
| Scw1          | RNA binding       | WHI3/4             |                    |
| Par1          | PP2A regulatory   | (RTS1)             | B'-regulatory subunit of PP2A |
| Flp1          | Phosphatase       | CDC14              | CDC14A/B          |
| ?             | NET1              | Nucleolar protein  | ?                  |
| ?             | LTE1              | Putative GEF       | ?                  |
| Spo12/Mts3    | SPO12             | Conserved          | ?                  |
| Cdc2          | Protein kinase    | CDC28              | Protein kinase    | CDK1 |

The table shows the main components of the SIN discussed in the text, and their equivalents in S. cerevisiae and higher eukaryotes. A lone question mark indicates that no convincing orthologue has been identified. A question mark after a gene name indicates significant homology, but no direct evidence for a role in cytokinesis or mitotic exit. The function of each gene product is indicated, where known. Abbreviations: FHA, forkhead-associated domain; RING finger, subclass of Zinc-fingers, associated with ubiquitin ligase activity. In S. cerevisiae MEN, brackets indicate that though these genes are orthologues of the S. pombe SIN protein, it is not known whether they are regulators of the MEN, or cytokinesis. Additional details are given in the text.

# Events at the end of mitosis in the budding and fission yeasts

## Viesturs Simanis

Cell Cycle Control Laboratory, Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC), 1066 Epalinges, Switzerland  
(e-mail: viesturs.simanis@isrec.unil.ch)

Journal of Cell Science 116, 4263-4275 © 2003 The Company of Biologists Ltd  
doi:10.1242/jcs.00807

## Summary

The mitotic exit network (MEN) and the septation initiation network (SIN) control events at the end of mitosis in *S. cerevisiae* and *S. pombe*, respectively. SIN initiates contraction of the actin ring and synthesis of the division septum, thereby bringing about cytokinesis. The MEN is also required for cytokinesis, but its main role is to control inactivation of mitotic cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) at the end of mitosis, and thereby regulate mitotic exit. Each revolves around a Ras-family GTPase and involves several protein kinases, and SIN and MEN proteins are localised to the spindle pole body. In *S. cerevisiae*, a second network, known as FEAR, cooperates with the MEN to bring about mitotic exit, and a third, AMEN, contributes to switching the MEN off. Some of the central components of the FEAR, SIN and MEN have been conserved through evolution, which suggests that aspects of their function in controlling events at the end of mitosis might be conserved in higher eukaryotes.

Key words: *S. pombe*, *S. cerevisiae*, Cell cycle, Cytokinesis, Mitotic exit

---

## Introduction

Coordination of mitosis and cytokinesis is a problem that all eukaryotes must resolve if they are to assure stable transmission of the genome during cell division. The *S. pombe* septation initiation network (SIN) and the *S. cerevisiae* mitotic exit network (MEN) are signal transduction pathways that contribute to achieving this. The role of the SIN is to initiate contraction of the actin ring and synthesis of the division septum, thereby bringing about cytokinesis. The MEN also plays a role in regulating cytokinesis, and has a second role as part of a checkpoint that monitors orientation of the mitotic spindle during anaphase. It controls inactivation of mitotic cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) at the end of mitosis and thereby regulates exit from mitosis. Components of both the SIN and the MEN are localised to the spindle pole body and the division site, and many of the proteins segregate asymmetrically on the spindle pole bodies during anaphase, emphasising the essential role played by changes in protein localisation in the function of these networks. In this Commentary, I discuss the importance of these topics in SIN and MEN regulation. Here, and the accompanying Cell Science at a Glance poster, I have tried to paint a ‘broad brush strokes’ picture, rather than providing a comprehensive review of the subtleties of these networks, and highlight differences and similarities between the SIN and the MEN. Nomenclature in this field is confusing: a list of gene name-equivalents in *S. cerevisiae* MEN and *S. pombe* SIN is given in Table 1.

### The *S. pombe* septation initiation network (SIN)

*S. pombe* is a rod-shaped organism that grows mainly by elongation at its tips. It divides by formation of a centrally placed division septum, producing two daughter cells of equal size. The position of the future division site, where the septum will form at the end of mitosis, is defined early in mitosis by the assembly of a contractile actomyosin ring (CAR) at the cell cortex. Contraction of the ring, which is thought to guide deposition of the division septum (reviewed by Ishiguro, 1998; Rajagopalan et al., 2003), is triggered by the SIN (reviewed by Bardin and Amon, 2001; McCollum and Gould, 2001; Yeong et al., 2002).

#### Components of the SIN

Signaling by the SIN is mediated through the GTPase Spg1p (Schmidt et al., 1997), which, in its GTP-bound form, binds the protein kinase Cdc7p (Fankhauser and Simanis, 1994). Signal transduction requires two other kinases, Sid1p and Sid2p, and their associated subunits, Cdc14p and Mob1p, respectively (Fankhauser and Simanis, 1993; Guertin et al., 2000; Hou et al., 2000; Sparks et al., 1999). Note that *S. pombe* Cdc14p is unrelated to *S. cerevisiae* Cdc14p, which encodes a phosphoprotein phosphatase (see below). The GTPase-activating protein (GAP) for Spg1p comprises two proteins: Cdc16p (Fankhauser et al., 1993), which has homology to other GAP proteins, and Byr4p (Song et al., 1996), a scaffold protein that interacts with both Spg1p and Cdc16p, and promotes the GAP activity of Cdc16p in vitro (Furge et al., 1998). In the absence of Cdc16p, Byr4p inhibits both GTP release and hydrolysis by Spg1p in vitro, thereby locking it into the active state (Furge et al., 1998). It is assumed that this also applies in vivo. Activation of the SIN is one of the mitotic roles of the Polo-family kinase Plo1p (Ohkura et al., 1995; Tanaka et al., 2001), which is recruited to the spindle pole body at the onset of mitosis (Bahler et al., 1998; Mulvihill et al., 1999). To date, no guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor (GEF) specific for

4264 Journal of Cell Science 116 (21)

Fig. 1. The effects of altering SIN and MEN activity. Panel A shows wild-type S. pombe cells stained with DAPI (to reveal the DNA) and Calcofluor (to reveal the position of the division septum). Panel B shows cells in which SIN signaling is defective. Note that cells become elongated and multinucleated, as nuclear division continues in the absence of cytokinesis. Panel C shows the effects of increased SIN activity. Note that the cells undergo multiple rounds of septum formation without cell cleavage. The red cross indicates that loss-of-function mutations produce the indicated phenotype. The bold black type 'OP' indicates that increased expression of a gene produces the indicated phenotype. Scale bar, 10 μm. Panel D shows an arrested S. cerevisiae cdc15 mutant. The cells are stained with DAPI (blue) and antibody to tubulin (red). Note that the chromosomes are separated, and that the spindle is highly elongated. This image is provided by Rosella Visintin and Angelika Amon (MIT, Cambridge, MA). Panel E shows the mutant dbf2-2. The phosphoprotein phosphatase has been tagged with GFP. Note that in the arrested cells, Cdc14p remains in the nucleolus. This image is provided by Elmar Schiebel (Patterson Institute for Cancer Research, Christie Hospital, Manchester, UK).

Spg1p has been identified in screens for SIN mutants. However, analysis of the localization of the GAP components during mitosis (Cerutti and Simanis, 1999; Li et al., 2000) is consistent with a mechanism in which modulation of GAP activity, together with spontaneous exchange of GTP for GDP on Spg1p, is sufficient for regulation of the signaling status of Spg1p, without the requirement for a specific GEF. It must be emphasized that this concept has not yet been validated. SIN signaling is mediated from a scaffold composed of Cdc11p and Sid4p (Chang and Gould, 2000; Krapp et al., 2001; Tomlin et al., 2002).

Finally, two additional putative SIN components have been identified genetically: pld6 (Cullen et al., 2000) has not been cloned, whereas etd1 has been cloned but not characterized (Jimenez and Oballe, 1994). It is noteworthy that these genes, and mutations in mob1 (Salimova et al., 2000), were isolated by either novel selection methods for conditional mutants or screens using specifically sensitized genetic backgrounds, which suggests that further ‘targeted’ screens may reveal additional components and regulators of the SIN. Whether this represents the full set of genes required for SIN signaling is not known. However, the fact that many have been isolated only once in genetic screens, indicates that the screens are not yet saturated and that additional components remain to be found.

Ectopic activation of the SIN in interphase cells – for example, by overexpression of spgl – promotes formation of the contractile ring and septum independently of entry into mitosis (Schmidt et al., 1997). In contrast, loss-of-function mutations in any of the SIN kinases, their associated subunits, Spg1p or the Sid4p-Cdc11p scaffold leads to formation of elongated, multinucleated cells, because cell growth and elongation, S phase and mitosis all continue in the absence of cytokinesis (Balasubramanian et al., 1998; Nurse et al., 1976) (Fig. 1). Cells possessing null mutations of these genes form contractile rings that either do not contract or do so only to a limited extent (Chang and Gould, 2000; Fankhauser and Simanis, 1993; Fankhauser and Simanis, 1994; Guertin et al., 2000; Hou et al., 2000; Krapp et al., 2001; Salimova et al., 2000; Schmidt et al., 1997; Sparks et al., 1999; Tomlin et al., 2002). Increased expression of byr4 also inhibits SIN signaling (Song et al., 1996). It is not clear whether all the required ring components are present in a CAR assembled in the absence of SIN signaling; indeed there is some suggestion that they may not be (Mulvihill et al., 2001). Plo1p is involved in multiple events during mitosis and plo1 null mutants have a complex phenotype (Ohkura et al., 1995). However, shut-off of plo1 expression (Ohkura et al., 1995), and some alleles of plo1 (Tanaka et al., 2001), produce a phenotype characteristic of SIN mutants.

The effects of altering SIN activity

Increased expression of spgl, plo1 or cdc7, or loss-of-function mutants in either subunit of the GAP, causes multiple rounds of septum formation without cell cleavage (Fankhauser and Simanis, 1994; Ohkura et al., 1995; Schmidt et al., 1997).

Localization of SIN components emphasizes the importance of the spindle pole body as a co-ordinator of cellular signaling

All the SIN proteins and most of their regulators localize to the spindle pole body at some point in the cell cycle (Fig. 2). This

is mediated by a scaffold composed of Cdc11p and Sid4p (Krapp et al., 2001; Tomlin et al., 2002). Localization studies suggest that Sid4p is the primary link between this scaffold and structural components of the spindle pole body, whereas the binding of all other SIN components except Plo1p requires Cdc11p; this implies that Cdc11p provides the primary link to the SIN signaling module. Plo1p interacts with the core spindle pole body component Cut12p (Grallert and Hagan, 2002; MacIver et al., 2003), which may mediate its activity and regulate its association with the spindle pole body; however, Plo1p can still associate with the spindle pole body in a *cut12* mutant, so it is likely that it has other partners on the spindle pole body. Whether there are any interactions between Cut12p and other components of the SIN remains to be investigated.

Sid4p and Cdc11p are present at the spindle pole body throughout the cell cycle (Chang and Gould, 2000; Krapp et al., 2001). Both Byr4p and Cdc16p are found at the spindle pole body in interphase (Cerutti and Simanis, 1999; Li et al., 2000), when Spg1p is predominantly in the GDP-bound form (Sohrmann et al., 1998). After entry into mitosis, Byr4p remains on the spindle pole body whereas Cdc16p is not detectable (Cerutti and Simanis, 1999). At this time Spg1p is in the GTP-bound form and associates with Cdc7p on both poles of the mitotic spindle (Sohrmann et al., 1998). Concurrently with the onset of anaphase B and inactivation of mitotic cyclin activity, one pole of the spindle pole body reassembles the Byr4p-Cdc16p GAP, and inactivates Spg1p signaling, while the other retains Spg1p-GTP and Cdc7p (Sohrmann et al., 1998). This ‘active’ spindle pole also now recruits the Sid1p-Cdc14p protein kinase. This transition is inhibited by mitotic Cdc2p activity (Guerin et al., 2000). The protein kinase Sid2p is also on the spindle pole body throughout interphase (Sparks et al., 1999), but its partner Mob1p is not (Hou et al., 2000; Salimova et al., 2000). Upon entry into mitosis, Mob1p appears on the spindle pole body, and is then seen on both spindle poles throughout mitosis (Hou et al., 2000; Salimova et al., 2000). At the end of anaphase, as the spindle breaks down, Sid2p-Mob1p is also localized at the site of the CAR, and remains there during ring contraction, flanking the developing septum (Hou et al., 2000; Salimova et al., 2000; Sparks et al., 1999). It is presumed, but not proven, that Sid2p-Mob1p supplies the signal for ring contraction, and that the population of the protein that appears at the ring must first pass through the spindle pole body. Once septation has been completed, the GAP reappears on the ‘active’ pole and signaling is shut down. The γ-tubulin-ring complex, which is essential for nucleation of microtubules at the spindle pole body, also affects the SIN, perhaps at the level of Sid1p (Vardy et al., 2002); the molecular basis for this is unclear.

A recent study (Lu et al., 2002) has described a new thermosensitive mutation in *cdc7*, which raises the possibility that Cdc7p can function effectively in the cytoplasm. Although cells expressing a fusion of GFP to this mutant Cdc7p are viable, the protein does not appear to localize on the spindle pole body during mitosis. Note, however, that this protein might nevertheless still associate with the spindle pole body, but transiently.

---

How is the asymmetry of SIN components in anaphase generated?

Asymmetry seems to be achieved at the level of the GAP,

although the mechanism remains unclear. Nonetheless, it is clear that the anaphase-promoting complex (APC/C; also known as the cyclosome) must act for SIN components to become asymmetric (Chang et al., 2001; Guertin et al., 2000); whether this is due to inactivation of Cdc2p, degradation of another substrate, or both, is unclear. The two spindle poles are clearly not equivalent (Bridge et al., 1998; Cerutti and Simanis, 1999), and differences between them may be generated during the conservative division of the spindle pole body. Resolution of which of the two spindle pole bodies is active in SIN signaling awaits experiments using slow-folding red-fluorescent-protein-tagged spindle pole body components to distinguish old and new spindle pole bodies, as described in an elegant study of spindle pole body inheritance in *S. cerevisiae* (Pereira et al., 2001).

---

Regulators of the SIN

SIN signaling is negatively regulated by Dmalp (Guerin et al., 2002; Murone and Simanis, 1996), and strongly increased expression of *dmal* inhibits septum formation. It has been suggested that Dmalp prevents inappropriate localization of Plo1p (Guerin et al., 2002). It interacts with the scaffold protein Sid4p, which is thought to anchor it at the spindle pole body (Guerin et al., 2002). Dmalp also appears at the CAR during anaphase; its role and anchors there are unknown. Two other putative negative regulators of SIN signaling, *zfs1* (Beltraminelli et al., 1999) and *scw1* (Jin and McCollum, 2003; Karagiannis et al., 2002), have also been identified. Zfs1p is a zinc-finger protein, whereas Scw1p is an RNA-binding protein. Loss of either protein reduces, but does not eliminate, the requirement for SIN signaling. Their mode of action is unclear. However, mutation of *scw1* does not restore activity to SIN mutants and may stabilize microtubules (Jin and McCollum, 2003), which suggests that the rescue is indirect.

Phosphoprotein phosphatases have been implicated in signaling by the SIN, although in no case is it clear what the relevant substrate is. Loss of Flp1p, the *S. pombe* orthologue of the phosphatase Cdc14p, which is the main effector of the MEN (see below), produces cytokinesis defects, and a *flpl*-null mutant exhibits strong genetic interactions with SIN mutants (Cueille et al., 2001; Trautmann et al., 2001). Mutations in regulatory subunits of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), such as Par1p, can rescue some SIN mutants, which suggests that PP2A is a negative regulator of the SIN (Jiang and Hallberg, 2001; Le Goff et al., 2001), although additional genetic interactions suggest that PP2A functions at multiple levels in the SIN (Kinoshita et al., 1996; Le Goff et al., 2001; Tanabe et al., 2001). Par1p-PP2A localizes first to the spindle pole body and then to the contractile ring during mitosis, showing a pattern similar to that of Mob1p (Le Goff et al., 2001). The calcium-dependent phosphatase calcineurin (Yoshida et al., 1994) also interacts genetically with SIN components (Lu et al., 2002).

---

Are there other roles for the SIN?

The SIN may play a role in interphase, since Plo1p is recruited to the spindle pole body prematurely in SIN mutants (Mulvihill et al., 1999), and Plo1p kinase activity is increased in *cdc7* mutants (Tanaka et al., 2001), which implies that the SIN

4266 Journal of Cell Science 116 (21)

Cdc14p-Sid1p  
Spg1p, Cdc7p  

Byr4p, Cdc16p  

Plo1p  

INTERPHASE  

EARLY  
MITOSIS  

ANAPHASE  
B ONSET  

LATE  
ANAPHASE  

SEPTATION  

CELL  
SEPARATION  

Cdc7p  
GTP-Spg1p  
GDP-Spg1p  
Cdc14p  
Sid1p  

Sid2p, Mob1p  

Dma1p  

Sid4p-Cdc11p  

Flp1p  

INTERPHASE  

EARLY  
MITOSIS  

ANAPHASE  
B ONSET  

LATE  
ANAPHASE  

SEPTATION  

CELL  
SEPARATION  

Sid2p  
Mob1p  

Dma1p  

Sid4p  
Cdc11p  

Flp1p  

Fig. 2. Localization of SIN proteins. The figure shows schematically the localization of SIN proteins and some of the regulators through the cell cycle. The data are taken from references cited in the text. The colored cutout within the nucleus in the localization sequence for S. pombe flp1 represents the nucleolus. In the S. pombe cells, the grey horizontal bar within them represents the mitotic spindle, while the short bar at the cell center represents the position of the contractile ring. The localization of Par1p is similar to that of Mob1p, whereas Scw1p is cytoplasmic throughout the cell cycle. There is also a significant cytoplasmic pool of Mob1p and Par1p that is not indicated, for reasons of clarity. It is noteworthy that signal intensity of some of the proteins at the spindle pole body varies significantly through the cell cycle. To convey this, the intensity has been assigned on a arbitrary scale of 1 (present, but very faint) to 5 (present, strongest signals observed). The absolute signal strengths vary from protein to protein, and so the numbers give no indication of the amounts of protein relative to each other.

negatively regulates Plo1p. The SIN may also respond to the intra-mitotic control on the duration of anaphase B uncovered by Hagan et al. (Hagan et al., 1990). It would clearly be of interest to study the localization of SIN components in these

Spindle pole body

Plo1p
Cut12p
Sid4p
Dma1p
Flp1p
Cdc11p
Byr4p
Spg1p
GDP
Cdc16p
Spg1p
GTP
Cdc7p
Cdc2p
Cdc13p
γ-tubulin
complex
Sid1p
Cdc14p
Par1p-PP2A
Mob1p
Sid2p
Scw1p
Zfs1p
CONTRACTILE ACTIN RING
AND
SEPTUM FORMATION

SIN and MEN functions in mitosis 4267

cells. Increased expression of cdc14 arrests cells in G2 phase in a wee1-dependent fashion (Fankhauser and Simanis, 1993). The mitotic inhibitor wee1 is also required for the function of the actin ring checkpoint (Le Goff et al., 1999; Liu et al., 2000). The role of Wee1p is to phosphorylate and inhibit Cdc2p and to control the timing of mitosis (Nurse, 1990). These observations suggest there is a link between the SIN and the mitotic control, although its nature is unclear.

How do components of the SIN interact?

It has been suggested that the SIN kinases act in a linear order: Cdc7p, Sid1p and Sid2p (Guerin et al., 2000). This idea is based primarily upon localization studies, and assays of Sid2p kinase activity, and to date no biochemical evidence supports the existence of a linear MAP-kinase-like module. Therefore, a more complicated arrangement of the elements of the SIN cannot be excluded (Fig. 3). Cdc11p is a phosphoprotein and becomes hyperphosphorylated when the SIN is activated during anaphase. This depends upon Cdc7p (Krapp et al., 2003) and Plo1p (A. Krapp, E. Cano and V. Simanis, unpublished), and may contribute to activation of the SIN. The effectors through which the SIN brings about ring contraction are unknown, although it does regulate the appearance of glucan synthases at the division site (Liu et al., 2002).

Events at the end of mitosis in S. cerevisiae:
FEAR, MEN and AMEN

The SIN signal transduction network has counterparts in other organisms. The best characterized of these is the MEN in S. cerevisiae (Fig. 4). Note that, in S. cerevisiae, the Cdc2p equivalent is named Cdc28p, and mitotic cyclins are named CLBs. In addition to using the MEN to regulate formation of the actin ring and cytokinesis at the

Fig. 3. How the SIN is wired. This figure is a representation of how the principal components of the SIN might interact. This is based upon localization studies, and the activity of proteins in different mutant backgrounds. For the sake of simplicity, the signal transduction event is portrayed as being linear, although there is no biochemical evidence to rule out a more complex arrangement, such as branching at the level of Spg1p. With the exception of the action of Byr4p-Cdc16p on Spg1p, direct regulation of one protein by another in vitro has not been demonstrated. Green arrows indicate septum-promoting events. Orange ball and stick symbols indicate the presumed point of action of negative regulators of SIN signaling. Inhibitors of SIN signaling are indicated in red, protein kinases in yellow, and phosphoprotein phosphatases in mauve. The roles and targets of Flp1p, Etd1p and Pld6p are unclear. Plo1p acts at or near the top of the network but its target has not been identified. Spg1p is shown twice, since it can form at least two complexes on the spindle pole body, one with Cdc7p, and the other with Byr4p-Cdc16p. Note that it is likely that Plo1p interacts with other spindle pole body components in addition to Cut12p. The large gray box represents the spindle pole body. The Mob1p-Sid2p complex is shown twice, once on the spindle pole body and once at the cell cortex, associated with the contractile actin ring. Zfs1 and Scw1 are shown downstream of the main SIN signaling module; their point of action is unclear.

4268 Journal of Cell Science 116 (21)

Fig. 4. How the MEN is wired. The basic interactions among components of the MEN and some of its regulators are shown. Orange ball and stick symbols indicate inhibitory events. Green arrows indicate activating events. Purple arrows indicate substrates of Cdc14p. In all the cases indicated (except Lte1p, where this has not been assessed), the protein is activated to perform its function as a result of dephosphorylation by Cdc14p. The large purple arrows indicate that events are brought about by the indicated proteins, while the black arrow represents release of Cdc14p from the nucleolus. The grey ovals indicate functional groups of proteins. The gray box is meant to represent the Nud1p-based scaffold, upon which the MEN signaling proteins assemble at the spindle pole body. As in Fig. 3, red boxes indicate inhibitors of MEN components, and protein kinases are in yellow boxes. Panel A shows the state of the regulators of mitotic exit in early mitosis, before all the chromosomes have attached to the spindle. The spindle checkpoint blocks both the degradation of Cdc28p-CLB and activation of the FEAR proteins. The phosphoprotein phosphatase Cdc14p is sequestered in the nucleolus, and activated Cdc28p-CLB inhibits formation of APC/C<sup>Cdh1p</sup> and activation of Cdc15p. Panel B shows the state of the regulators of mitotic exit during anaphase. The FEAR proteins release Cdc14p from the nucleolus. Cdc5p also inhibits Bfa1p, allowing Tem1p to accumulate in the GTP-bound form. One of the substrates of Cdc14p is Cdc15p, activating MEN signaling. This keeps Cdc14p out of the nucleolus and activates Dbf2p-Mob1p, which bring about cytokinesis and help maintain Cdc14p outside the nucleolus. Cdc14p increases the level of the CKI Sic1p, both by increasing its expression via Swi5p and by preventing degradation of Sic1p. It also targets Cdh1p, allowing formation of APC/C<sup>Cdh1p</sup> to promote mitotic cyclin destruction during the M-G1 transition. Further details are given in the text. Panel C shows how this self perpetuating mitotic exit circuit is broken to allow B-type cyclins to accumulate in preparation for S-phase. Cdc14 promotes expression of Amn1p (see text for details), which directly interferes with the association of Cdc15p and Tem1p. Another target of Cdc14p is Bfa1p, which reactivates it, thereby promoting GTP hydrolysis by Tem1p and inactivation of signaling. Finally, the FEAR proteins Spo12p and Cdc5p are targets of APC/C<sup>Cdh1p</sup>, which decreases FEAR activity. The reduction of MEN and FEAR activity is presumed to result in the return of Cdc14p to the nucleolus, although how this is achieved is not clear. Finally, Amn1p degradation is promoted through phosphorylation by activated Cdc28p-CLN, which allows Tem1p-Cdc15p interaction to occur later in the cycle.

SIN and MEN functions in mitosis 4269

Fig. 5. Localization of MEN proteins. The localization of the principal components of the MEN is shown, following the style of Pereira and Schiebel (Pereira and Schiebel, 2001). Since different studies do not always agree regarding the intensity of different protein signals, this is not indicated.

nucleolus
spindle
pole body

been made, a number of proteins are degraded after ubiquitylation by the APC/C, its specificity being conferred by targeting subunits called Cdc20p (APC/CCdc20p) and Cdh1p (APC/CCdh1p). Recent reviews describe proteolysis during mitosis (Irniger, 2002), and the spindle assembly checkpoint, which governs the metaphase-anaphase transition (Zhou et al., 2002). The initial wave of degradation is APC/CCdc20p dependent and targets the securin Pds1p, and mitotic and S-phase B-type cyclins (Wasch and Cross, 2002). Elimination of securin liberates separase (Esp1p) to cleave the cohesin complex and permit sister chromatid separation (Nasmyth, 2002; Petronczki et al., 2003). Esp1p also cleaves other proteins during mitosis that may contribute to spindle stability and orderly anaphase progression (Sullivan et al., 2001). As anaphase proceeds, the APC/C switches specificity factors, and APC/CCdh1p completes ubiquitylation of the remaining B-type cyclin pools, and also targets other proteins for destruction. In the context of mitotic exit, the most notable are Spo12p and Cdc5p.

Complete inactivation of mitotic CDK activity is not essential for sister chromatid separation and anaphase onset, but it is required for normal exit from mitosis (Irniger, 2002). Once B-type cyclin CDK activity is reduced to low levels, cytokinesis can occur, origins of replication can be reset by formation of pre-replication complexes, and cdk inhibitors (CKIs) such as Sic1p can accumulate to establish and maintain a G1 state. The phosphoprotein phosphatase Cdc14p is a key element in bringing about mitotic exit in *S. cerevisiae*. Its main job seems to be to reverse phosphorylation events by proline-directed protein kinases, including Cdc28p (Gray et al., 2003; Visintin et al., 1998). The known substrates of Cdc14p that contribute to mitotic exit include Cdh1p, which it dephosphorylates to permit it to interact with the APC/C, thereby promoting B-type cyclin degradation during late mitosis and G1 phase. Cdc14p also dephosphorylates the transcription factor Swi5p, which permits it to enter the nucleus and activate expression of the CKI Sic1p, which is then dephosphorylated by Cdc14p and protected from ubiquitylation by the Skp1-Cullin-F-box (SCF) ubiquitin ligase complex and therefore protected from degradation. These two events promote Sic1p accumulation and lower the activity of the Cdc28p-CLB complex. Cdc14p also targets components of the MEN (see below).

Changes in subcellular localization play a major role in regulating the access of Cdc14p to its substrates (Fig. 5). During interphase Cdc14p is sequestered in the nucleolus, tethered to the RENT complex by Net1p. Early in mitosis four proteins, Spo12p, Cdc5p, Esp1p and Slk19p, collectively referred to as the FEAR network, bring about the release of Cdc14p from the nucleolus (Dumitrescu and Saunders, 2002; Stegmeier et al., 2002). How this is achieved remains unclear, but the role of Esp1p in FEAR function may not require its proteolytic activity

end of mitosis, budding yeast also uses it to control the degradation of CLBs to bring about mitotic exit. The MEN is part of a checkpoint that monitors spindle position in anaphase. MEN mutants arrest with separated chromosomes, elevated mitotic CDK activity and an elongated spindle (Fig. 1D). Since a decrease in CDK activity is required for mitotic exit and cytokinesis, involvement of the MEN in cytokinesis was not recognised initially because the mitotic exit defect predominates (see below). The following section is simply an overview of events at the end of mitosis in *S. cerevisiae* and the role played by the MEN in them; exhaustive reviews are available elsewhere (Bardin and Amon, 2001; Geymonat et al., 2002; Jensen and Johnston, 2002; Yeong et al., 2002).

When all the sister chromatids are attached properly to the mitotic spindle, and the decision to commit to anaphase has

4270 Journal of Cell Science 116 (21)

(Sullivan and Uhlmann, 2003). The polo-like kinase Cdc5p can promote release of Cdc14p from the RENT complex in vitro, but whether this is the in vivo mechanism is unclear (Shah et al., 2001; Yoshida and Toh-e, 2002).

The activity of the MEN is then required to keep Cdc14p out of the nucleolus (Stegmeier et al., 2002) and to allow it to associate with the spindle pole body during mitosis (Yoshida et al., 2002). In MEN mutants, Cdc14p remains in the nucleolus (Fig. 1E). Signaling by the MEN is mediated by the GTPase Tem1p, which binds to a protein kinase, Cdc15p (Asakawa et al., 2001; Bardin et al., 2000; Lee et al., 2001c). Cdc15p then directly activates the Dbf2p-Mob1p complex (Mah et al., 2001). Tem1p is negatively regulated by the two-component GAP Bfa1p-Bub2p (Geymonat et al., 2003; Ro et al., 2002). Mitotic exit requires the GEF Lte1p, but only at low temperatures (Shirayama et al., 1994). Bfa1p is a substrate of the FEAR component Cdc5p, which inactivates the Bfa1-Bub2p GAP (Geymonat et al., 2003; Hu et al., 2001). Bub2p is also phosphorylated during mitosis, but the role of this remains unclear (Hu and Elledge, 2002). Cdc5p is also required downstream of Tem1p in the MEN, to provide full activation of Dbf2p (Lee et al., 2001a). Cdc14p activates Cdc15p, which provides a potential positive feedback loop to maintain Cdc14p outside the nucleolus, and acts on Lte1p to release it from the cell cortex (Jensen et al., 2002); its effect on Lte1p activity is unclear.

This system of CDK inactivation also contains the seeds of its own inactivation: as already mentioned, Bfa1p is dephosphorylated and reactivated by Cdc14p, thereby limiting signaling by the MEN (Hu et al., 2001; Pereira et al., 2002). Likewise, activation of APC/C<sup>Cdh1p</sup> promotes destruction of Spo12p and Cdc5p, both components of the FEAR network, thus curtailing FEAR activity. Furthermore, Cdc14p also promotes expression of AMNI, whose product interferes with formation of the Tem1p-Cdc15p complex (Wang, Y. et al., 2003), thus blocking MEN signaling (the so-called AMEN network). Amn1p is synthesized only after the MEN has acted, and its activity is in turn limited by its being a Cdc28p-CLB substrate, which promotes its SCF-mediated destruction (Wang, Y. et al., 2003). What causes Cdc14p to return to the nucleolus is unknown, although inactivation of the MEN and FEAR and activation of AMEN might all contribute. Mutations in nuclear transport machinery have been shown to cause inappropriate release of Cdc14p from the nucleus (Asakawa and Toh-e, 2002), but the identities of the importins and exportins that control its transport to and from the nucleus are unknown.

Like its fission yeast counterpart, the MEN is also associated with the spindle pole body (reviewed by Bardin and Amon, 2001; Pereira and Schiebel, 2001), where it is anchored to a scaffold protein, Nud1p (Gruneberg et al., 2000): see Fig. 4. Although there are subtle differences in how the conserved components of these networks behave, a common theme is asymmetry, the signaling components being associated with the spindle pole body that is directed into the daughter cell. The GEF Lte1p is spatially restricted to the daughter cell, where it is associated with the cortex. The current model is that conversion of Tem1p to the GTP-bound form, and therefore activation of the MEN, only occurs when one spindle pole body enters the daughter cell and encounters Lte1p, although this view has recently been challenged (see below). However, since

Lte1p is essential for mitotic exit only at low temperatures, other mechanisms must also play a role (Adames et al., 2001). Cell polarity proteins such as Kel1p and Kel2p also regulate mitotic exit. Their role is unclear, but studies indicate that they act as inhibitors of mitotic exit (Hofken and Schiebel, 2002), and it has also been suggested that they anchor Lte1p in the bud (Seshan et al., 2002). Cells carrying mutations in both S. cerevisiae RAS genes are unable to exit from mitosis (Morishita et al., 1995). Structure-function analysis of Lte1p has led to the proposition that it is an effector of RAS2, and that its GEF domain is essential for binding to Ras2p to anchor it at the cortex, rather than acting as a GEF for Tem1p (Yoshida et al., 2003). The role of Lte1p is therefore unclear, although it has been suggested that Lte1p inhibits Kel1p and Kel2p (Yoshida et al., 2003).

The cell polarity proteins Ste20p and Cla4p also play an important role in regulating mitotic exit. The GTPase Cdc42p, its activator Cdc24p and its effector, the protein kinase Cla4p, are all required for association of Lte1p with the cell cortex but not its subsequent retention there (Hofken and Schiebel, 2002; Jensen et al., 2002; Seshan et al., 2002). This appears to require its phosphorylation, which is mediated by a combination of Cdc28p-CLN activity and Cla4p. Cla4-null cells have a defect in mitotic exit at low temperatures (Hofken and Schiebel, 2002). Ste20p, another Cdc42p effector, is also implicated in mitotic exit. It may activate the FEAR component Cdc5p (Hofken and Schiebel, 2002), or contribute to activation of APC/C<sup>Cdc20p</sup> (Chiroli et al., 2003). Whether S. pombe cell polarity proteins control the SIN is unknown.

The MEN controls not only cyclin degradation but also cytokinesis. Classical MEN mutants arrest with extended spindles, separated chromosomes, and elevated Cdc28p-CLB activity. However, some alleles of MEN genes permit mitotic exit, but not cytokinesis (Jimenez et al., 1998). Furthermore, mutations in Net1p that bypass the requirement for MEN in cyclin degradation still leave cells with a defect in cytokinesis (Lippincott et al., 2001). The MEN has been implicated in regulation of septin and actomyosin ring dynamics (Lee et al., 2001b; Lippincott et al., 2001), although the relevant substrates are unknown. Cells possessing null mutations in the PP2A B' regulatory subunit RTS1 (the orthologue of Par1) are stress sensitive and arrest in G2 phase with an undivided nucleus. It is not clear whether this protein has any role in regulating the MEN (Shu et al., 1997). Interestingly, PP2A-Rts1 acts downstream of the MEN to regulate septin dynamics (Dobbelaere et al., 2003). Increased expression of CDC5 can promote formation of septal structures in S. cerevisiae (Song et al., 2000), and increased expression of BFA1 arrests cells in late anaphase (Li, 1999; Ro et al., 2002). Thus the effects produced by increased expression of these MEN proteins are similar to that of their S. pombe counterparts (Fig. 1).

The role of the Cdc14p-like phosphatase Flp1p in S. pombe

In contrast to its S. cerevisiae counterpart (Cdc14p), S. pombe Flp1p (also referred to as Clp1p) (Cueille et al., 2001; Trautmann et al., 2001) is not essential for mitotic exit, cyclin degradation, CKI stabilization in G1 phase, or cell proliferation. However, flp1 mutants show defects in cytokinesis (Cueille et al., 2001; Trautmann et al., 2001), and
signal transduction by the SIN is less effective (Cueille et al., 2001). *Flp1*-null cells divide at a reduced size, indicating that mitosis is advanced, since in rapid exponential growth the G2-M transition is limiting for cell cycle progression in *S. pombe*. Furthermore, strong overexpression of *flp1* causes a *weel*-dependent G2 arrest. The biological relevance of the latter result remains to be established, but it is clear that Flp1p can influence the activity of mitotic regulators in fission yeast.

Flp1p is present at multiple locations in the cell. During interphase it is associated with the spindle pole body and also in the nucleolus. Upon entry into mitosis it is released from the nucleus and associates with the spindle and contractile ring. Its substrates and anchors are unknown. By analogy with Cdc14p of *S. cerevisiae*, it is reasonable to assume that changes in localization are important for its regulation, although this remains to be proven. SIN activity is not required for release of Flp1p from the nucleolus, but inactivation of SIN signaling seems to be needed for it to return to the nucleolus at the end of mitosis. By analogy with *S. cerevisiae*, one would predict that Flp1p should be required for dephosphorylation of Ste9p, the orthologue of Cdh1p: this is not the case (Cueille et al., 2001). Equally, one would predict that both Byr4p and Cdc7p are substrates of Flp1p. Although there is a very strong genetic interaction between *cdc7* and *flp1* mutants, neither protein has yet been shown to be regulated by Flp1p. The role of the *S. pombe* equivalents of the FEAR components in release of Flp1p from the nucleolus remains to be assessed.

The role of the SIN and MEN in checkpoint function

The SIN and Flp1p are also important for an “actin ring checkpoint” in fission yeast, which prevents ring contraction and mitosis in the subsequent cell cycle if the CAR is defective (Le Goff et al., 1999; Liu et al., 2000; Liu et al., 1999). Their exact role in this checkpoint is unclear: they may participate in the transduction process; alternatively, if the SIN never signals that the ring should contract, then this checkpoint might not be activated.

In *S. cerevisiae*, the MEN forms one branch of the spindle assembly checkpoint, preventing mitotic exit if the spindle is misoriented (Bardin and Amon, 2001; Pereira and Schiebel, 2001; Yeong et al., 2002). In *S. pombe* the SIN and its regulators Dmalp and Zfslp have also been implicated in preventing cytokinesis if the mitotic spindle is defective (Beltraminelli et al., 1999; Fankhauser et al., 1993; Guertin et al., 2002; Murone and Simanis, 1996). In both *S. pombe* and *S. cerevisiae*, the spindle assembly checkpoint prevents sister chromatid separation, anaphase onset and B-type cyclin degradation until all sister chromatids are attached to the spindle in a bipolar fashion, and the kinetochores are under tension (Zhou et al., 2002). How the spindle checkpoint impinges on the SIN is unclear, but inactivation of Cdc2p in spindle-assembly-checkpoint-arrested cells promotes septum formation (He et al., 1997), which suggests that Cdc2p prevents septation. The APC/C must also act to bring about septum formation (Chang et al., 2001), although it is not known whether this is by inactivation of Cdc2p through promoting ubiquitylation of Cdc13p (the major mitotic B-type cyclin), some other substrate, or both. Inactivation of Cdc28p in mitotically arrested cells also promotes mitotic exit and cytokinesis in *S. cerevisiae* (Ghiara et al., 1991).

Why does the MEN, but not the SIN, regulate Cdc13 destruction?

In *S. pombe*, degradation of Cdc13p after ubiquitylation by the APC/C at the metaphase-anaphase transition reduces Cdc2p activity to low levels, permitting origin resetting and the initiation of cytokinesis. Its continued degradation during the M-G1 transition requires the Cdh1p orthologue Ste9p (Blanco et al., 2000; Yamaguchi et al., 2000). In contrast to *S. cerevisiae*, the SIN does not regulate the degradation of the mitotic cyclin Cdc13p (Guertin et al., 2000). Indeed, it seems that elevated Cdc2p activity inhibits the SIN (see above).

In addition to controlling cytokinesis, *S. cerevisiae* has adapted the MEN to a second role, namely regulation of mitotic exit, in part through regulating degradation of mitotic cyclins, in response to a spindle orientation checkpoint. Since in the budding mode of division, the cells choose the division site at the onset of the cell cycle, it is essential to ensure that the spindle is correctly positioned with one end in the mother and the other in the daughter cell, before permitting inactivation of mitotic cyclins, mitotic exit and cytokinesis. Thus, while a large part of the B-type cyclins are degraded at anaphase onset, the rest are not degraded unless the anaphase spindle is correctly positioned. A signal transduction system, such as the MEN, that is located upon the spindle pole body is an ideal way to monitor the position of the anaphase spindle. In *S. pombe*, where the division site is fixed early in mitosis by the position of the interphase nucleus (Chang and Nurse, 1996), the separated chromosomes need only be moved apart by extension of the spindle to ensure that each cell will receive one nucleus. What delays septation until the time of spindle breakdown is not clear. It is interesting to note that *S. pombe* cells also monitor orientation of the mitotic spindle early in mitosis (Gachet et al., 2001) (reviewed by Wang, H. et al., 2003). Whether the SIN participates in this checkpoint is unknown.

Why are some SIN and MEN proteins asymmetrically distributed during mitosis?

Both transduction networks show asymmetric distribution of proteins on the spindle pole bodies (Figs 2 and 5). In *S. cerevisiae*, the logic for this is obvious, for it assures that the mitotic spindle has traversed the bud neck and entered the daughter cell before the MEN is activated. Although the asymmetry of protein segregation in these networks was first discovered in the fission yeast (Sohrmann et al., 1998), it is less clear what purpose it serves.

In the absence of GAP regulation of the SIN, its components segregate symmetrically during mitosis (Sohrmann et al., 1998) but, if SIN signaling is attenuated, the cells are viable in spite of this (Fournier et al., 2001). Thus asymmetry is not essential, the caveat being that we do not know whether both spindle pole bodies can signal. Assuming that the amount of SIN protein at the spindle pole body is reflected by the immunofluorescence/GFP signals, a common theme for all the asymmetric components (Byr4p, Cdc16p, Cdc7p, Sid1p and Cdc14p) is that the signal is weak at the onset of anaphase B and strong at the end of anaphase. It is tempting to draw an analogy with the control of mitosis, where Cdc25p activity eventually overwhelms the inhibitory effects of Wee1p on Cdc2p, to suggest that the gradual accumulation of SIN
proteins at this pole titrates an inhibitor of SIN signaling, thereby delaying septum formation until the end of mitosis. Asymmetry of rate-limiting components would permit cells to control the signaling machinery at one place. In *S. cerevisiae*, elevated Cdc28p-CLB activity prevents cytokinesis until the end of mitosis. Since *S. pombe* B-type cyclins are destroyed at the onset of anaphase B (Alfa et al., 1990; Decottignies et al., 2001), some other timing mechanism must operate to prevent septum formation until nuclear separation has been completed. Proteins such as Dmalp may fulfil this role. It is also possible that asymmetry is not necessary for regulation of septum formation and simply reflects the fact that spindle pole bodies are different.

*S. pombe* is not dimorphic, although some related strains are (reviewed by Sipiczki, 2000). It is possible that the asymmetry played a role in ancestral yeasts that grew as filaments, perhaps ensuring that the growth machinery was correctly orientated to the growing end of the cell at the end of mitosis.

### The SIN/MEN in other organisms

Orthologues of the SIN proteins are found in filamentous fungi, where they perform a similar function to the SIN in controlling cytokinesis (reviewed by Harris, 2001). Some of these genes have been identified in multicellular organisms, such as *C. elegans*, and functional inactivation has demonstrated that some are essential for life, although their roles remain to be elucidated (Gruneberg et al., 2002). Orthologues of the SIN components Plo1p, Mob1p, and Sid2p are found in all eukaryotes. The counterparts of Cdc5p/Plo1p are known as Polo-like kinases and are required for formation of a bipolar spindle, exit from mitosis, and cytokinesis (reviewed by Donaldson et al., 2001; Glover et al., 1998). The counterpart of the Dbf2p/Sid2p-like protein kinases in *Drosophila* is called Warts and is a tumor suppressor (Justice et al., 1995; Xu et al., 1995). Its equivalent in human cells, LATS1, interacts with the mitosis inducer CDK1 (Tao et al., 1999). Both Polo and Warts proteins associate with the centrosome, then the spindle (which determines the position of the cleavage furrow) and finally the midbody. The function of Mob1p-like proteins is less well understood, at present, although they are found as components of multiple protein complexes in human cells (Moreno et al., 2001). Proteins containing GAP domains that have significant homology to Bub2p/Cdc16p exist in higher eukaryotes and are present at the centrosome (Cuif et al., 1999). Whether these function in mitotic exit is unknown. Cloning of the centrosomal protein centriolin reveals the presence of a small region that has sequence similarity to Cdc11p and Nud1p (Gromley et al., 2003). Increased expression of this domain, or siRNA-mediated knock-down of expression reveals roles for centriolin in cytokinesis and G1 progression. The domain homologous to Cdc11p/Nud1p can also interact with Bub2p, which raises the possibility that functional counterparts of all the SIN and MEN regulators exist in higher eukaryotes.

Higher eukaryotes have orthologues of the Cdc14p phosphoprotein phosphatase. In *C. elegans*, it is involved in cytokinesis (Gruneberg et al., 2002). In human cells, there are two proteins. One of these is located in the nucleolus, whereas the other is associated with centrosomes and may control their duplication. As is the case in *C. elegans*, these proteins play a role in cytokinesis (Kaiser et al., 2002; Mailand et al., 2002).

A protein with a similar arrangement of domains to Dmalp, called Chfr, has been identified in mammalian cells (Scolnick et al., 2000). This seems to be part of a checkpoint that monitors microtubule integrity in prophase (reviewed by Cortez and Elledge, 2000). Chfrp can act as a ubiquitin ligase in vitro, and Polo-like kinases may be among its targets in some systems (Chaturvedi et al., 2002; Kang et al., 2002). Its expression is also altered in some tumours (Shibata et al., 2002; Toyota et al., 2003).

#### Perspectives

Further advances in our understanding of SIN and MEN function will come from several directions. Genome-wide and proteomic analyses in both yeasts will undoubtedly reveal new components of the SIN and MEN signaling networks, and this will surely be complemented by screens for new mutants, perhaps using strategies other than thermosensitivity. Detailed structure-function analysis of SIN and MEN proteins has already begun to provide insights into their regulation (Bardin et al., 2003; Guertin and McCollum, 2001), and 3D structures will add further insight (Gray et al., 2003). An area that is only beginning to be explored at present is roles for these proteins in meiosis. In *S. pombe*, cells do not septate during meiotic divisions, but nothing is known about how the SIN and its regulators behave during meiosis. In *S. cerevisiae*, recent studies have implicated components of the FEAR network in meiotic chromosome segregation (Buonomo et al., 2003; Clyne et al., 2003; Lee and Amon, 2003; Marston et al., 2003). Analysis of the human orthologues of these proteins may well reveal roles for some of them in tumour development and cell cycle progression.

Work in my lab is funded by the Swiss Cancer League, The Swiss National Science Foundation, The Fondation Forez and ISREC. I am grateful to Rosella Visintin and Angelika Amon (Center for Cancer Research, MIT, Cambridge USA) for providing the image of an *S. cerevisiae* MEN mutant shown in Fig. 1D, and to Elmar Schiebel (Patterson Institute for Cancer Research, Christie Hospital, Manchester, UK), for that shown in 1E. I apologise for citing reviews at the expense of all the relevant original literature. I am also grateful to members of my lab for many discussions about SIN and in particular to Andrea Krapp, Iain Hagan, and Richard Sever for critical reading of the text.

#### References

Adames, N. R., Oberle, J. R. and Cooper, J. A. (2001). The surveillance mechanism of the spindle position checkpoint in yeast. *J. Cell Biol.* **153**, 159-168.

Alfa, C. E., Ducommun, B., Beach, D. and Hyams, J. S. (1990). Distinct nuclear and spindle pole body population of cyclin-cdc2 in fission yeast. *Nature* **347**, 680-682.

Asakawa, K., Yoshida, S., Otake, F. and Toh-e, A. (2001). A novel functional domain of Cdc15 kinase is required for its interaction with Tem1 GTPase in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. *Genetics* **157**, 1437-1450.

Asakawa, K. and Toh-e, A. (2002). A Defect of Kap104 alleviates the requirement of mitotic exit network gene functions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. *Genetics* **162**, 1545-1556.

Bahler, J., Steever, A. B., Wheatley, S., Wang, Y., Pringle, J. R., Gould, K. L. and McCollum, D. (1998). Role of polo kinase and Mid1p in determining the site of cell division in fission yeast. *J. Cell Biol.* **143**, 1603-1616.

Balasubramanian, M. K., McCollum, D., Chang, L., Wong, K. C., Naqvi, N. I., He, X., Sazer, S. and Gould, K. L. (1998). Isolation and characterization of new fission yeast cytokinesis mutants. *Genetics* **149**, 1265-1275.

Bardin, A. J. and Amon, A. (2001). Men and sin: what’s the difference? *Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* 2, 815-826.

Bardin, A. J., Visintin, R. and Amon, A. (2000). A mechanism for coupling exit from mitosis to partitioning of the nucleus. *Cell* 102, 21-31.

Bardin, A. J., Boselli, M. G. and Amon, A. (2003). Mitotic Exit Regulation through Distinct Domains within the Protein Kinase Cdc15. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* 23, 5018-5030.

Beltraminelli, N., Murone, M. and Simanis, V. (1999). The S. pombe zfsl gene is required to prevent septation if mitotic progression is inhibited. *J. Cell. Sci.* 112, 3103-3114.

Blanco, M. A., Sanchez-Diaz, A., de Prada, J. M. and Moreno, S. (2000). APC(ste9/srw1) promotes degradation of mitotic cyclins in G(1) and is inhibited by cdc2 phosphorylation. *EMBO J.* 19, 3945-3955.

Bridge, A. J., Morpew, M., Bartlett, R. and Hagan, I. M. (1998). The fission yeast SPB component Cut12 links bipolar spindle formation to mitotic control. *Genes Dev.* 12, 927-942.

Buonomo, S. B., Rabitsch, K. P., Fuchs, J., Gruber, S., Sullivan, M., Uhlmann, F., Petronczki, M., Toth, A., Nasmyth, K., Marston, A. L. et al. (2003). Division of the nucleolus and its release of CDC14 during anaphase of meiosis I depends on separase, SPO12, and SLK19. *Dev. Cell* 4, 727-739.

Cerutti, L. and Simanis, V. (1999). Asymmetry of the spindle pole bodies and spg1p GAP segregation during mitosis in fission yeast. *J. Cell Sci.* 112, 2313-2321.

Chang, F. and Nurse, P. (1996). How fission yeast fission in the middle. *Cell* 84, 191-194.

Chang, L. and Gould, K. L. (2000). Sid4p is required to localize components of the septation initiation pathway to the spindle pole body in fission yeast. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 97, 5249-5254.

Chang, L., Morrell, J. L., Feoktistova, A. and Gould, K. L. (2001). Study of cyclin proteolysis in anaphase-promoting complex (APC) mutant cells reveals the requirement for APC function in the final steps of the fission yeast septation initiation network. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 21, 6681-6694.

Chaturvedi, P., Sudakin, V., Bobiak, M. L., Fisher, P. W., Mattern, M. R., Jablonski, S. A., Hurle, M. R., Zhu, Y., Yen, T. J., Zhou, B. B. et al. (2002). Chfr regulates a mitotic stress pathway through its RING-finger domain with ubiquitin ligase activity. *Cancer Res.* 62, 1797-1801.

Chiorli, E., Fraschini, R., Beretta, A., Tonelli, M., Lucchini, G. and Piatti, S. (2003). Budding yeast PAK kinases regulate mitotic exit by two different mechanisms. *J. Cell Biol.* 160, 857-874.

Clyne, R. K., Katis, V. L., Jessop, L., Benjamin, K. R., Herskowitz, I., Lichten, M., Nasmyth, K., Lee, B. H. and Amon, A. (2003). Polo-like kinase Cdc5 promotes chiasmata formation and cosegregation of sister centromeres at meiosis I. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 5, 480-485.

Cortez, D. and Elledge, S. J. (2000). Conducting the mitotic symphony. *Nature* 406, 354-356.

Cueille, N., Salimova, E., Esteban, V., Blanco, M., Moreno, S., Bueno, A. and Simanis, V. (2001). Flp1, a fission yeast orthologue of the s. cerevisiae CDC14 gene, is not required for cyclin degradation or rum1p stabilisation at the end of mitosis. *J. Cell Sci.* 114, 2649-2664.

Cuif, M. H., Possmayer, F., Zander, H., Bordes, N., Jollivet, F., Couedel-Courteille, A., Janoueix-Lerosey, I., Langsley, G., Bornens, M. and Goud, B. (1999). Characterization of GAPCenA, a GTPase activating protein for Rab6, part of which associates with the centrosome. *EMBO J.* 18, 1772-1782.

Cullen, C. F., May, K. M., Hagan, I. M., Glover, D. M. and Ohkura, H. (2000). A new genetic method for isolating functionally interacting genes: high plo1(+)-dependent mutants and their suppressors define genes in mitotic and septation pathways in fission yeast. *Genetics* 155, 1521-1534.

Decottignies, A., Zarzov, P. and Nurse, P. (2001). In vivo localisation of fission yeast cyclin-dependent kinase cdc2p and cyclin B cdc13p during mitosis and meiosis. *J. Cell Sci.* 114, 2627-2640.

Dobbelaere, J., Gentry, M. S., Hallberg, R. L. and Barral, Y. (2003). Phosphorylation-Dependent Regulation of Septin Dynamics during the Cell Cycle. *Dev. Cell* 4, 345-357.

Donaldson, M. M., Tavares, A. A., Hagan, I. M., Nigg, E. A. and Glover, D. M. (2001). The mitotic roles of Polo-like kinase. *J. Cell Sci.* 114, 2357-2358.

Dumitrescu, T. P. and Saunders, W. S. (2002). The FEAR Before MEN: networks of mitotic exit. *Cell Cycle* 1, 304-307.

Fankhauser, C., Marks, J., Reymond, A. and Simanis, V. (1993). The S. pombe cdc16 gene is required both for maintenance of p34cdc2 kinase activity and regulation of septum formation: a link between mitosis and cytokinesis? *EMBO J.* 12, 2697-2704.

Fankhauser, C. and Simanis, V. (1993). The Schizosaccharomyces pombe cdc14 gene is required for septum formation and can also inhibit nuclear division. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 4, 531-539.

Fankhauser, C. and Simanis, V. (1994). The cdc7 protein kinase is a dosage dependent regulator of septum formation in fission yeast. *EMBO J.* 13, 3011-3019.

Fournier, N., Cerutti, L., Beltraminelli, N., Salimova, E. and Simanis, V. (2001). Bypass of the requirement for cdc16p GAP function in Schizosaccharomyces pombe by mutation of the septation initiation network genes. *Arch. Microbiol.* 175, 62-69.

Furge, K. A., Wong, K., Armstrong, J., Balasubramanian, M. and Albright, C. F. (1998). Byr4 and Cdc16 form a two-component GTPase-activating protein for the Spgl GTPase that controls septation in fission yeast. *Curr. Biol.* 8, 947-954.

Gachet, Y., Tournier, S., Millar, J. B. and Hyams, J. S. (2001). A MAP kinase-dependent actin checkpoint ensures proper spindle orientation in fission yeast. *Nature* 412, 352-355.

Geymonat, M., Jensen, S. and Johnston, L. H. (2002). Mitotic exit: the Cdc14 double cross. *Curr. Biol.* 12, R482-R484.

Geymonat, M., Spanos, A., Walker, P. A., Johnston, L. H. and Sedgwick, S. G. (2003). In Vitro Regulation of Budding Yeast Bfa1/Bub2 GAP Activity by Cdc5. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 14591-14594.

Ghiara, J. B., Richardson, H. E., Sugimoto, K., Henze, M., Lew, D. J., Wittenberg, C. and Reed, S. I. (1991). A cyclin B homolog in S. cerevisiae: chronic activation of the Cdc28 protein kinase by cyclin prevents exit from mitosis. *Cell* 65, 163-174.

Glover, D. M., Hagan, I. M. and Tavares, A. A. (1998). Polo-like kinases: a team that plays throughout mitosis. *Genes Dev.* 12, 3777-3787.

Grallert, A. and Hagan, I. M. (2002). Schizosaccharomyces pombe NIMA-related kinase, Fin1, regulates spindle formation and an affinity of Polo for the SPB. *EMBO J.* 21, 3096-3107.

Gray, C. H., Good, V. M., Tonks, N. K. and Barford, D. (2003). The structure of the cell cycle protein Cdc14 reveals a proline-directed protein phosphatase. *EMBO J.* 22, 3524-3535.

Gromley, A., Jurczyk, A., Sillibourne, J., Halilovic, E., Mogensen, M., Groisman, I., Blomberg, M., Doxsey, S., Pihan, G. A., Wallace, J. et al. (2003). A novel human protein of the maternal centriole is required for the final stages of cytokinesis and entry into S phase. *J. Cell Biol.* 161, 535-545.

Gruneberg, U., Campbell, K., Simpson, C., Grindlay, J. and Schiebel, E. (2000). Nud1p links astral microtubule organization and the control of exit from mitosis. *EMBO J.* 19, 6475-6488.

Gruneberg, U., Glotzer, M., Gartner, A. and Nigg, E. A. (2002). The CeCDC-14 phosphatase is required for cytokinesis in the Caenorhabditis elegans embryo. *J. Cell Biol.* 158, 901-914.

Guerin, D. A. and McCollum, D. (2001). Interaction between the noncatalytic region of Sid1p kinase and Cdc14p is required for full catalytic activity and localization of Sid1p. *J. Biol. Chem.* 276, 28185-28189.

Guerin, D. A., Chang, L., Irshad, F., Gould, K. L. and McCollum, D. (2000). The role of the sid1p kinase and cdc14p in regulating the onset of cytokinesis in fission yeast. *EMBO J.* 19, 1803-1815.

Guerin, D. A., Venkatram, S., Gould, K. L. and McCollum, D. (2002). Dma1 prevents mitotic exit and cytokinesis by inhibiting the septation initiation network (SIN). *Dev. Cell* 3, 779-790.

Hagan, I. M., Riddle, P. N. and Hyams, J. S. (1990). Intramitotic controls in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe: the effect of cell size on spindle length and the timing of mitotic events. *J. Cell Biol.* 110, 1617-1621.

Harris, S. D. (2001). Septum formation in Aspergillus nidulans. *Curr. Opin. Microbiol.* 4, 736-739.

He, X., Patterson, T. E. and Sazer, S. (1997). The Schizosaccharomyces pombe spindle checkpoint protein mad2p blocks anaphase and genetically interacts with the anaphase-promoting complex. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 94, 7965-7970.

Hofken, T. and Schiebel, E. (2002). A role for cell polarity proteins in mitotic exit. *EMBO J.* 21, 4851-4862.

Hou, M. C., Salek, J. and McCollum, D. (2000). Mob1p interacts with the Sid2p kinase and is required for cytokinesis in fission yeast. *Curr. Biol.* 10, 619-622.

Hu, F. and Elledge, S. J. (2002). Bub2 is a cell cycle regulated phosphoprotein controlled by multiple checkpoints. *Cell Cycle* 1, 351-355.

Hu, F., Wang, Y., Liu, D., Li, Y., Qin, J. and Elledge, S. J. (2001). Regulation of the Bub2/Bfa1 GAP complex by Cdc5 and cell cycle checkpoints. *Cell* 107, 655-665.

Irniger, S. (2002). Cyclin destruction in mitosis: a crucial task of Cdc20. *FEBS Lett.* 532, 7-11.

Ishiguro, J. (1998). Genetic control of fission yeast cell wall synthesis: the genes involved in wall biogenesis and their interactions in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. *Genes Genet. Syst.* **73**, 181-191.

Jensen, S. and Johnston, L. H. (2002). Complexity of mitotic exit. *Cell Cycle* **1**, 300-303.

Jensen, S., Geymonat, M., Johnson, A. L., Segal, M. and Johnston, L. H. (2002). Spatial regulation of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Lte1 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. *J. Cell Sci.* **115**, 4977-4991.

Jiang, W. and Hallberg, R. L. (2001). Correct regulation of the septation initiation network in Schizosaccharomyces pombe requires the activities of par1 and par2. *Genetics* **158**, 1413-1429.

Jimenez, J. and Oballe, J. (1994). Ethanol-hypersensitive and ethanol-dependent cdc- mutants in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. *Mol. Gen. Genet.* **245**, 86-95.

Jimenez, J., Cid, V. J., Cenamor, R., Yuste, M., Molero, G., Nombela, C. and Sanchez, M. (1998). Morphogenesis beyond cytokinetic arrest in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. *J. Cell Biol.* **143**, 1617-1634.

Jin, Q. W. and McCollum, D. (2003). Scw1p Antagonizes the Septation Initiation Network To Regulate Septum Formation and Cell Separation in the Fission Yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. *Eukaryot. Cell* **2**, 510-520.

Justice, R. W., Zilian, O., Woods, D. F., Noll, M. and Bryant, P. J. (1995). The Drosophila tumor suppressor gene warts encodes a homolog of human myotonic dystrophy kinase and is required for the control of cell shape and proliferation. *Genes Dev.* **9**, 534-546.

Kaiser, B. K., Zimmerman, Z. A., Charbonneau, H. and Jackson, P. K. (2002). Disruption of centrosome structure, chromosome segregation, and cytokinesis by misexpression of human Cdc14A phosphatase. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **13**, 2289-2300.

Kang, D., Chen, J., Wong, J., Fang, G., Scolnick, D. M., Halazonetis, T. D., Cortez, D. and Elledge, S. J. (2002). The checkpoint protein Chfr is a ligase that ubiquitinates Plk1 and inhibits Cdc2 at the G2 to M transition. *J. Cell Biol.* **156**, 249-259.

Karagiannis, J., Oulton, R. and Young, P. G. (2002). The Scw1 RNA-binding domain protein regulates septation and cell-wall structure in fission yeast. *Genetics* **162**, 45-58.

Kinoshita, K., Nemoto, T., Nabeshima, K., Kondoh, H., Niwa, H. and Yanagida, M. (1996). The regulatory subunits of fission yeast protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) affect cell morphogenesis, cell wall synthesis and cytokinesis. *Genes Cells* **1**, 29-45.

Krapp, A., Schmidt, S., Cano, E. and Simanis, V. (2001). S. pombe cdc11p, together with sid4p, provides an anchor for septation initiation network proteins on the spindle pole body. *Curr. Biol.* **11**, 1559-1568.

Krapp, A., Cano, E. and Simanis, V. (2003). Mitotic Hyperphosphorylation of the Fission Yeast SIN Scaffold Protein cdc11p Is Regulated by the Protein Kinase cdc7p. *Curr. Biol.* **13**, 168-172.

Le Goff, X., Woollard, A. and Simanis, V. (1999). Analysis of the cps1 gene provides evidence for a septation checkpoint in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. *Mol. Gen. Genet.* **262**, 163-172.

Le Goff, X., Buvelot, S., Salimova, E., Guerry, F., Schmidt, S., Cueille, N., Cano, E. and Simanis, V. (2001). The protein phosphatase 2A B'-regulatory subunit par1p is implicated in regulation of the S. pombe septation initiation network. *FEBS Lett.* **508**, 136-142.

Lee, B. H. and Amon, A. (2003). Role of Polo-like kinase CDC5 in programming meiosis I chromosome segregation. *Science* **300**, 482-486.

Lee, S. E., Frenz, L. M., Wells, N. J., Johnson, A. L. and Johnston, L. H. (2001a). Order of function of the budding-yeast mitotic exit-network proteins Tem1, Cdc15, Mob1, Dbf2, and Cdc5. *Curr. Biol.* **11**, 784-788.

Lee, S. E., Jensen, S., Frenz, L. M., Johnson, A. L., Fesquet, D. and Johnston, L. H. (2001b). The Bub2-dependent mitotic pathway in yeast acts every cell cycle and regulates cytokinesis. *J. Cell Sci.* **114**, 2345-2354.

Lee, S. E., Jensen, S., Frenz, L. M., Johnson, A. L., Fesquet, D., Johnston, L. H. and Wells, N. J. (2001c). The Bub2-dependent mitotic pathway in yeast acts every cell cycle and regulates cytokinesis. *J. Cell Sci.* **114**, 2345-2354.

Li, C., Furge, K. A., Cheng, Q. C. and Albright, C. F. (2000). Byr4 localizes to spindle-pole bodies in a cell cycle-regulated manner to control Cdc7 localization and septation in fission yeast. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 14381-14387.

Li, R. (1999). Bifurcation of the mitotic checkpoint pathway in budding yeast. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **96**, 4989-4994.

Lippincott, J., Shannon, K. B., Shou, W., Deshaies, R. J. and Li, R. (2001). The Tem1 small GTPase controls actomyosin and septin dynamics during cytokinesis. *J. Cell Sci.* **114**, 1379-1386.

Liu, J., Wang, H., McCollum, D. and Balasubramanian, M. K. (1999). Drclp/Cpslp, a 1,3-beta-glucan synthase subunit, is essential for division septum assembly in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. *Genetics* **153**, 1193-1203.

Liu, J., Wang, H. and Balasubramanian, M. K. (2000). A checkpoint that monitors cytokinesis in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. *J. Cell Sci.* **113**, 1223-1230.

Liu, J., Tang, X., Wang, H., Oliferenko, S. and Balasubramanian, M. K. (2002). The localization of the integral membrane protein Cpslp to the cell division site is dependent on the actomyosin ring and the septation-inducing network in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **13**, 989-1000.

Lu, Y., Sugiura, R., Yada, T., Cheng, H., Sio, S. O., Shuntoh, H. and Kuno, T. (2002). Calcineurin is implicated in the regulation of the septation initiation network in fission yeast. *Genes Cells* **7**, 1009-1019.

MacIver, F. H., Tanaka, K., Robertson, A. M. and Hagan, I. M. (2003). Physical and functional interactions between polo kinase and the spindle pole component Cut12 regulate mitotic commitment in S. pombe. *Genes Dev.* **17**, 1507-1523.

Mah, A. S., Jang, J. and Deshaies, R. J. (2001). Protein kinase Cdc15 activates the Dbf2-Mob1 kinase complex. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **98**, 7325-7330.

Mailand, N., Lukas, C., Kaiser, B. K., Jackson, P. K., Bartek, J. and Lukas, J. (2002). Deregulated human Cdc14A phosphatase disrupts centrosome separation and chromosome segregation. *Nat. Cell Biol.* **4**, 317-322.

Marston, A. L., Lee, B. H., Amon, A., Clyne, R. K., Katis, V. L., Jessop, L., Benjamin, K. R., Herskowitz, I., Lichten, M. and Nasmyth, K. (2003). The Cdc14 phosphatase and the FEAR network control meiotic spindle disassembly and chromosome segregation. *Dev. Cell* **4**, 711-726.

McCollum, D. and Gould, K. L. (2001). Timing is everything: regulation of mitotic exit and cytokinesis by the MEN and SIN. *Trends Cell Biol.* **11**, 89-95.

Moreno, C. S., Lane, W. S. and Pallas, D. C. (2001). A mammalian homolog of yeast MOB1 is both a member and a putative substrate of striatin family-protein phosphatase 2A complexes. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 24253-24260.

Morishita, T., Mitsuzawa, H., Nakafuku, M., Nakamura, S., Hattori, S. and Anraku, Y. (1995). Requirement of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Ras for completion of mitosis. *Science* **270**, 1213-1215.

Mulvihill, D. P., Petersen, J., Ohkura, H., Glover, D. M. and Hagan, I. M. (1999). Plol kinase recruitment to the spindle pole body and its role in cell division in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **10**, 2771-2785.

Mulvihill, D. P., Barretto, C. and Hyams, J. S. (2001). Localization of fission yeast type II myosin, Myo2, to the cytokinetic actin ring is regulated by phosphorylation of a C-terminal coiled-coil domain and requires a functional septation initiation network. *Mol. Biol. Cell* **12**, 4044-4053.

Murone, M. and Simanis, V. (1996). The fission yeast dmal gene is a component of the spindle assembly checkpoint, required to prevent septum formation and premature exit from mitosis if spindle function is compromised. *EMBO J.* **15**, 6605-6616.

Nasmyth, K. (2002). Segregating sister genomes: the molecular biology of chromosome separation. *Science* **297**, 559-565.

Nurse, P. (1990). Universal control mechanism regulating onset of M-phase. *Nature* **344**, 503-508.

Nurse, P., Thuriaux, P. and Nasmyth, K. (1976). Genetic control of the cell division cycle in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe. *Mol. Gen. Genet.* **146**, 167-178.

Ohkura, H., Hagan, I. M. and Glover, D. M. (1995). The conserved Schizosaccharomyces pombe kinase plol, required to form a bipolar spindle, the actin ring, and septum, can drive septum formation in Gl and G2 cells. *Genes Dev.* **9**, 1059-1073.

Pereira, G. and Schiebel, E. (2001). The role of the yeast spindle pole body and the mammalian centrosome in regulating late mitotic events. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* **13**, 762-769.

Pereira, G., Tanaka, T. U., Nasmyth, K. and Schiebel, E. (2001). Modes of spindle pole body inheritance and segregation of the Bfa1p-Bub2p checkpoint protein complex. *EMBO J.* **20**, 6359-6370.

Pereira, G., Manson, C., Grindlay, J. and Schiebel, E. (2002). Regulation of the Bfa1p-Bub2p complex at spindle pole bodies by the cell cycle phosphatase Cdc14p. *J. Cell Biol.* **157**, 367-379.

Petronczki, M., Siomos, M. F. and Nasmyth, K. (2003). Un menage a quatre: the molecular biology of chromosome segregation in meiosis. *Cell* **112**, 423-440.

Rajagopalan, S., Wachtler, V. and Balasubramanian, M. (2003). Cytokinesis in fission yeast: a story of rings, rafts and walls. *Trends Genet.* **19**, 403-408.

Ro, H. S., Song, S. and Lee, K. S. (2002). Bfa1 can regulate Tem1 function independently of Bub2 in the mitotic exit network of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **99**, 5436-5441.

Salimova, E., Sohrmann, M., Fournier, N. and Simanis, V. (2000). The S. pombe orthologue of the S. cerevisiae mob1 gene is essential and functions in signaling the onset of septum formation. *J. Cell Sci.* 113, 1695-1704.

Schmidt, S., Sohrmann, M., Hofmann, K., Woollard, A. and Simanis, V. (1997). The Spg1p GTPase is an essential, dosage-dependent inducer of septum formation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. *Genes Dev.* 11, 1519-1534.

Scolnick, D. M., Halazonetis, T. D., Cortez, D. and Elledge, S. J. (2000). Chfr defines a mitotic stress checkpoint that delays entry into metaphase. *Nature* 406, 430-435.

Seshan, A., Bardin, A. J. and Amon, A. (2002). Control of lte1 localization by cell polarity determinants and cdc14. *Curr. Biol.* 12, 2098-2110.

Shah, R., Jensen, S., Frenz, L. M., Johnson, A. L. and Johnston, L. H. (2001). The Spo12 protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae: a regulator of mitotic exit whose cell cycle-dependent degradation is mediated by the anaphase-promoting complex. *Genetics* 159, 965-980.

Shibata, Y., Haruki, N., Kuwabara, Y., Ishiguro, H., Shinoda, N., Sato, A., Kimura, M., Koyama, H., Toyama, T., Nishiwaki, T. et al. (2002). Chfr expression is downregulated by CpG island hypermethylation in esophageal cancer. *Carcinogenesis* 23, 1695-1699.

Shirayama, M., Matsui, Y., Tanaka, K. and Toh-e, A. (1994). Isolation of a CDC25 family gene, MSI2/LTE1, as a multicopy suppressor of iral1. *Yeast* 10, 451-461.

Shu, Y., Yang, H., Hallberg, E. and Hallberg, R. (1997). Molecular genetic analysis of Rtslp, a B' regulatory subunit of Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein phosphatase 2A. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 17, 3242-3253.

Sipiczki, M. (2000). Where does fission yeast sit on the tree of life? *Genome Biol.* 1, REVIEWS1011.

Sohrmann, M., Schmidt, S., Hagan, I. and Simanis, V. (1998). Asymmetric segregation on spindle poles of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe septum-inducing protein kinase Cdc7p. *Genes Dev.* 12, 84-94.

Song, K., Mach, K. E., Chen, C. Y., Reynolds, T. and Albright, C. F. (1996). A novel suppressor of ras1 in fission yeast, byr4, is a dosage-dependent inhibitor of cytokinesis. *J. Cell Biol.* 133, 1307-1319.

Song, S., Grenfell, T. Z., Garfield, S., Erikson, R. L. and Lee, K. S. (2000). Essential function of the polo box of Cdc5 in subcellular localization and induction of cytokinetic structures. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 20, 286-298.

Sparks, C. A., Morpew, M. and McCollum, D. (1999). Sid2p, a spindle pole body kinase that regulates the onset of cytokinesis. *J. Cell Biol.* 146, 777-790.

Stegmeier, F., Visintin, R. and Amon, A. (2002). Separase, polo kinase, the kinetochore protein Slk19, and Spo12 function in a network that controls Cdc14 localization during early anaphase. *Cell* 108, 207-220.

Sullivan, M. and Uhlmann, F. (2003). A non-proteolytic function of separase links the onset of anaphase to mitotic exit. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 5, 249-254.

Sullivan, M., Lehane, C. and Uhlmann, F. (2001). Orchestrating anaphase and mitotic exit: separase cleavage and localization of Slk19. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 3, 771-777.

Tanabe, O., Hirata, D., Usui, H., Nishito, Y., Miyakawa, T., Igarashi, K. and Takeda, M. (2001). Fission yeast homologues of the B' subunit of protein phosphatase 2A: multiple roles in mitotic cell division and functional interaction with calcineurin. *Genes Cells* 6, 455-473.

Tanaka, K., Petersen, J., MacIver, F., Mulvihill, D. P., Glover, D. M. and

Hagan, I. M. (2001). The role of Plol kinase in mitotic commitment and septation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. *EMBO J.* 20, 1259-1270.

Tao, W., Zhang, S., Turenchalk, G. S., Stewart, R. A., St John, M. A., Chen, W. and Xu, T. (1999). Human homologue of the Drosophila melanogaster lats tumour suppressor modulates CDC2 activity. *Nat. Genet.* 21, 177-181.

Tomlin, G. C., Morrell, J. L. and Gould, K. L. (2002). The spindle pole body protein cdc11p links sid4p to the fission yeast septation initiation network. *Mol. Biol. Cell* 13, 1203-1214.

Toyota, M., Sasaki, Y., Satoh, A., Ogi, K., Kikuchi, T., Suzuki, H., Mita, H., Tanaka, N., Itoh, F., Issa, J. P. et al. (2003). Epigenetic inactivation of CHFR in human tumors. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 100, 7818-7823.

Trautmann, S., Wolfe, B. A., Jorgensen, P., Tyers, M., Gould, K. L. and McCollum, D. (2001). Fission yeast Clplp phosphatase regulates G2/M transition and coordination of cytokinesis with cell cycle progression. *Curr. Biol.* 11, 931-940.

Vardy, L., Fujita, A. and Toda, T. (2002). The gamma-tubulin complex protein Alp4 provides a link between the metaphase checkpoint and cytokinesis in fission yeast. *Genes Cells* 7, 365-373.

Visintin, R., Craig, K., Hwang, E. S., Prinz, S., Tyers, M. and Amon, A. (1998). The phosphatase Cdc14 triggers mitotic exit by reversal of Cdk-dependent phosphorylation. *Mol. Cell* 2, 709-718.

Wang, H., Oliferenko, S. and Balasubramanian, M. K. (2003). Cytokinesis: relative alignment of the cell division apparatus and the mitotic spindle. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.* 15, 82-87.

Wang, Y., Shirogane, T., Liu, D., Harper, J. W. and Elledge, S. J. (2003). Exit from Exit. Resetting the Cell Cycle through Amn1 Inhibition of G Protein Signaling. *Cell* 112, 697-709.

Wasch, R. and Cross, F. R. (2002). APC-dependent proteolysis of the mitotic cyclin Clb2 is essential for mitotic exit. *Nature* 418, 556-562.

Xu, T., Wang, W., Zhang, S., Stewart, R. A. and Yu, W. (1995). Identifying tumor suppressors in genetic mosaics: the Drosophila lats gene encodes a putative protein kinase. *Development* 121, 1053-1063.

Yamaguchi, S., Okayama, H. and Nurse, P. (2000). Fission yeast Fizzy-related protein srwlp is a G(1)-specific promoter of mitotic cyclin B degradation. *EMBO J.* 19, 3968-3977.

Yeong, F. M., Lim, H. H. and Surana, U. (2002). MEN, destruction and separation: mechanistic links between mitotic exit and cytokinesis in budding yeast. *Bioessays* 24, 659-666.

Yoshida, S., Asakawa, K. and Toh-e, A. (2002). Mitotic exit network controls the localization of Cdc14 to the spindle pole body in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. *Curr. Biol.* 12, 944-950.

Yoshida, S., Ichihashi, R. and Toh-e, A. (2003). Ras recruits mitotic exit regulator Lte1 to the bud cortex in budding yeast. *J. Cell Biol.* 161, 889-897.

Yoshida, S. and Toh-e, A. (2002). Budding yeast Cdc5 phosphorylates Net1 and assists Cdc14 release from the nucleolus. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 294, 687-691.

Yoshida, T., Toda, T. and Yanagida, M. (1994). A calcineurin-like gene ppbl+ in fission yeast: mutant defects in cytokinesis, cell polarity, mating and spindle pole body positioning. *J. Cell Sci.* 107, 1725-1735.

Zhou, J., Yao, J. and Joshi, H. C. (2002). Attachment and tension in the spindle assembly checkpoint. *J. Cell Sci.* 115, 3547-3555.
