
# Oxidative Stress: a common denominator in the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

Ericka P. Simpson, Albert A. Yen and Stanley H. Appel

## Purpose of review

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig disease, is a progressive neurodegenerative disease of adult onset characterized by a loss of motor neurons in the spinal cord and motor cortex. In the last several years, substantial progress has been made in defining the pathogenesis of motor neuron injury and relationships between disease mechanisms and the selective vulnerability of the motor neuron in both familial and sporadic forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

## Recent findings

Current theories have shifted from a neuron-centered pathology to a focus on the interaction between motor neurons and glia, and their respective contributions to pathways implicated in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Although multiple mechanisms clearly can contribute to the pathogenesis of motor neuron injury, recent advances suggest that oxidative stress may play a significant role in the amplification, and possibly the initiation, of disease.

## Summary

This article reviews the clinical aspects of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and potential mechanisms of disease pathogenesis in the context of recent data supporting a major role for oxidative stress throughout the disease course. Evidence suggesting an important role for intercellular signaling is emphasized.

## Keywords

amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, oxidative stress, excitotoxicity, immune activation

Curr Opin Rheumatol 15:730–736 © 2003 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

Department of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

Correspondence to Stanley H. Appel, MD, 6501 Fannin, NB 302, Houston, TX 77030, USA

Tel: 713 798 4072; fax: 713 798 3854; e-mail: sappel@bcm.tmc.edu

This review is dedicated to the memory of Dr. George Kozmetsky.

Reported studies from the authors' laboratory were supported by grants from the Muscular Dystrophy Association, the Hamill Foundation, Dr. and Mrs. George Kozmetsky, and Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Research Grant.

Current Opinion in Rheumatology 2003, 15:730–736.

## Abbreviations

- ALS: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
- AMPA: α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid
- EAAT2: excitatory amino acid transporter 2
- MCP: monocyte chemoattractant protein
- SOD1: superoxide dismutase gene

© 2003 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

1040–8711

730

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

## Clinical features and epidemiology

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is caused by the degeneration of both upper (corticospinal) and lower (spinal) motor neurons, resulting in skeletal muscle atrophy and weakness, and culminating in respiratory insufficiency. Onset is usually insidious, over months, with limb onset occurring in 56 to 75% of patients. Bulbar involvement (dysarthria) occurs as the primary symptom in 25 to 44% of patients, with such involvement uncommon when ALS presents in the third and fourth decade, and representing more than 50% of patients when ALS presents in the sixth and seventh decades, especially in women [1,2•,3].

The incidence and prevalence are 1 to 2 cases and 4 to 6 cases per 100,000, respectively [4•,5,6]. There is an overall male predominance of 1.5 to 1 in sporadic cases, with a ratio of 3–4:1 when ALS presents in the third and fourth decades, and 1:1 when ALS presents in the sixth and seventh decades [6]. The gender difference in ALS suggests a hormonal influence on disease onset in which estrogen is protective, although one study found that postmenopausal women with ALS who were taking estrogen replacement had an earlier onset of disease than those not receiving hormone therapy [7]. The interval between first symptom and diagnosis ranges from 9 to 20 months, with an average interval of 13 months [4•,8]. The overall survival is 3 to 5 years for more than 50% of patients, although this can vary between 1 and 20 years. Age of onset is clearly a prognostic factor for survival. Patients with onset of symptoms before the fifth decade survive longer than those with onset after the fifth decade [1]. It is unclear what role certain factors play in determining this difference, but it may be related to the ability to compensate for pathologic and clinical changes at the level of the motor neuron or skeletal muscle, which naturally declines with age [9,10]. Improved survival is also associated with limb onset and slow rate of progression, whereas a poorer prognosis is associated with bulbar onset and a faster rate of progression [1].

## Etiology and pathogenesis

The cause of ALS is unknown, but 10% of cases are transmitted as a dominant or recessive trait, whereas 90% of cases are sporadic (Table 1). Of the familial cases, 25% are caused by mutations of the copper-zinc superoxide dismutase gene (*SOD1*) located on chromosome 21 [11,12]. The *SOD1* enzyme catalyzes the conversion of

Table 1. Genes associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

| Category | Designation | Mode of inheritance | Locus | Gene product |
|----------|-------------|--------------------|-------|--------------|
| Familial | ALS1        | Dominant           | 21q22.1-22.2 | SOD1         |
|          | ALS2        | Recessive          | 2q33   | alsin        |
|          | ALS3        | Dominant           | 18q    | ?            |
|          | ALS4        | Dominant           | 9q34   | ?            |
|          | ALS5        | Recessive          | 15q15-22 | ?            |
|          | ALS FTD     | Dominant           | 9q21-22 | ?            |
|          |             | Dominant           | 17q21  | tau          |
|          |             | Dominant           | Xp11-q12 | ?            |
| Sporadic |             |                    | 11p13  | EAAT2        |
|          |             |                    | 14q11  | APEX nuclease |
|          |             |                    | 22q12  | NF-H         |
|          |             | Mitochondrial      |        | Cytochrome c oxidase subunit I |

ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; EAAT2, excitatory amino acid transporter 2; SOD1, superoxide dismutase gene; APEX nuclease, apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease; NHF, high molecular weight neurofilament; FTD, frontotemporal dementia.

the superoxide anion radical (O₂⁻) to hydrogen peroxide, which is then converted to water. More than 100 different mutations of the SOD1 gene have been linked to familial ALS. For many of these mutations, SOD1 enzyme activity is actually normal or elevated, and SOD1 knockout mice have no disease phenotype. These findings indicate that SOD1-associated ALS is not caused by a loss of function, but rather a toxic gain of function that has not yet been elucidated.

Even in sporadic ALS, genetics likely play a significant role in terms of susceptibility factors that may predispose to disease [13•] or modify onset and progression [14•]. A few cases of sporadic ALS have been directly linked to mutations of the SOD1 gene [15] and genes that encode for proteins necessary for axonal transport [16], mitochondrial respiration [17], and DNA repair [18], but these cases are rare. Overall, the mechanisms responsible for the initiation and progression of sporadic ALS likely reflect an interaction of genetic factors, environmental factors, and age.

Several mechanisms are implicated in the pathogenesis of motor neuron degeneration, including excitotoxicity, immune activation, mitochondrial dysfunction, protein aggregation, altered proteosomal function, and apoptosis. Although disturbances in each of these pathways may contribute to amplification or even initiation of motor neuron injury, the temporal relation of these pathways and their primacy in dictating disease onset and progression are unclear. Recent investigations support that these mechanisms are not mutually exclusive but are activated as a communal response that may be coordinated by oxidative stress [19•–23•]. It is our hypothesis that oxidative stress has a prominent role in the initiation of ALS and is capable of activating pathways that elicit additional oxidative stress and propagate disease (Fig. 1). Furthermore, this communal response requires an interaction and exchange of intercellular signals between neurons and distinct cell populations.

The mutant SOD1 transgenic mouse, which ubiquitously expresses the human SOD1 gene mutation, develops a subsequent motor neuron disease that is similar to that of ALS [24,25]. When the mutation is expressed solely in motor neurons, the mice remain asymptomatic, suggesting that extraneuronal expression of the mutation may be necessary to cause disease [26•,27]. However, the possibility of low copy number of mutant transgene expression in motor neurons has not been ruled out as an explanation for the lack of disease in these mice. When the mutant transgene is expressed solely in astrocytes, the mouse also remains normal [28]. These data suggest that mSOD1 expression in motor neurons or astroglia is not sufficient to cause disease. The consequence of expressing mSOD1 solely in microglia remains to be studied. Thus, the pathogenesis of motor neuron disease may not be mediated by pathways intrinsic to motor neurons but may require interactions with other cells. The intercellular signals involved are currently being investigated.

This review discusses the evidence for increased oxidative stress in ALS, its reciprocal role in modulating pathways leading to motor neuron injury, and the pertinent cells involved in these processes.

### Oxidative stress in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

Oxidative stress may play a significant role in neurodegeneration by modifying DNA, lipids, and proteins, which are involved in many processes important for cell function and viability. These processes include signal transduction, mitochondrial respiration, receptor kinetics, and protein degradation, which, when altered, can activate pathways leading to cellular injury and degeneration [29–33].

Early evidence suggesting a role for oxidative injury in ALS was derived from identifying markers of oxidative damage in the cortex and spinal cord of patients with ALS [34–37]. Increased oxidative stress is also present

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

732 Myositis and myopathies

Figure 1. Model of potential interacting pathways leading to motor neuron death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

| Age |
| --- |
| Genetic Factors |
| Environmental Factors |

Excitotoxicity  
↑  
↓  

Oxidative  
Stress  

Mitochondrial  
Dysfunction  

Immune  
Activation  

↑  
↓  

Protein  
Aggregation  

Motor Neuron Death  

of the inability to initiate therapy at presymptomatic stages, as in the animal model.

Whether oxidative stress is involved in both the initiation and amplification of ALS is not clear, but it does have a role in the modulation of pathways related to excitotoxicity and immune activation, which can further enhance oxidative stress or directly result in motor neuron death.

### Oxidative stress and excitotoxicity

The amino acid L-glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system and is likely involved in most aspects of normal brain function [46]. Excessive activation of glutamate receptors, however, can harm and damage neurons via a mechanism involving the disruption of calcium homeostasis [47]. In a process termed *excitotoxicity*, the binding of glutamate to ionotropic receptors leads to an inflow of calcium; this rise in cytosolic calcium then triggers changes in mitochondria that enhance the production of free radicals and may also lead to the activation of programmed cell death pathways and subsequent cell death.

Several lines of evidence support a role for excitotoxicity as a relevant mechanism of selective motor neuron death. It has been shown that motoneurons are more susceptible to α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) receptor-mediated slow neuronal death than other neuronal types in rat and mouse spinal cord cultures [48, 49] and in the adult rat spinal cord [50]. Low concentrations of glutamate, at levels found in CSF from ALS patients (5.8 μM), induced apoptosis in cultured neuronal cells, and this neurotoxic effect was blocked by an AMPA receptor antagonist [51•].

AMPA receptors are ionotropic glutamate receptors that mediate most fast synaptic transmission in the mammalian central nervous system and play a key role in synapse stabilization and plasticity. They are thought to exist *in vivo* as pentameric transmembrane structures composed of various combinations of four subunits, GluR1 to GluR4 [52]. AMPA receptors typically exhibit very low permeability to calcium, based upon the composition of its receptor subunits. Receptors that contain at least one GluR2 subunit have low calcium (Ca²⁺) conductance; those that lack GluR2 are permeable to calcium. The properties of the GluR2 subunit that confer low Ca²⁺ conductance are generated posttranscriptionally by RNA editing (Fig. 2). In a recent study, spinal motor neurons, in comparison with other types of neurons, were found to express relatively lower amounts of GluR2 [53•]. In combination with the deficient GluR2 mRNA editing demonstrated in the ventral gray of ALS spinal cords [54], the AMPA receptors on motor neurons may be more permeable to Ca²⁺ entry and, consequently, more susceptible to excitotoxic stimulation by glutamate.

systemically in ALS. A lipid peroxidation product, malondialdehyde, and a marker of DNA damage, 8-hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanosine, are significantly elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma of patients with ALS [38, 39]. The significance of these findings, both centrally and peripherally, to ALS pathogenesis is not clear. However, studies from our laboratory show that levels of 4-hydroxynonenal, a lipid peroxidation product, are also significantly elevated in the sera of patients with ALS; these findings are similar to findings in the CSF and spinal cord [38]. The serum levels are elevated throughout the disease course and correlate with progression, implicating 4-hydroxynonenal as a potential biomarker of the disease (Simpson, Unpublished data, April 2003).

In the *mSOD1* transgenic mouse, markers for protein and lipid oxidation are also elevated in the spinal cord at both presymptomatic and symptomatic ages, supporting a contributory role for oxidative stress in this model [22•, 40]. The beneficial effect of antioxidants and free radical scavengers on survival lends further support to a contributory role in pathogenesis [41•, 42•]. Oxidative stress is present early and likely contributes to pathogenesis. However, in contrast with the mouse model, in patients with ALS, antioxidant therapy has not been proven beneficial [43–45]. This finding may be a result

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Figure 2. α-Amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptor permeability to calcium is determined by its subunit composition

| Normal GluR2 | No GluR2 | Unedited GluR2 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Ca²⁺ | Ca²⁺ | Ca²⁺ |
| [Glu] | [Glu] | [Glu] |
| GluR2 | OUTER | OUTER |
| R2 | INNER | INNER |
| R3 | R1 | R3 |
| No Ca²⁺ entry | ↓ | ↓ |
|  | Ca²⁺ | Ca²⁺ |
|  | Excitotoxicity | Excitotoxicity |

The binding of the ligand, L-glutamate, to the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) receptor normally results in the fast influx of the monovalent ions Na⁺, K⁺, and Cl⁻, but no calcium flux. AMPA receptors that do not contain at least one GluR2 subunit, however, can allow calcium entry and potential excitotoxic effects. Even in AMPA receptors that do not contain GluR2, calcium conductance may be abnormally high because of deficient posttranscriptional RNA editing, as observed in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis spinal cords. (Note that AMPA receptors are thought to exist *in vivo* as a pentameric structure, not shown in this figure.)

The extracellular glutamate level is normally kept at low levels by uptake into glial cells, predominantly into astrocytes via the glutamate transporter excitatory amino acid transporter 2 (EAAT2; GLT-1 in rodents). A selective loss of EAAT2 in the spinal cord and motor cortex of patients with ALS was first demonstrated in 1995 [55]. Spinal cord glutamate uptake capacity was then shown to be impaired in *mSOD1* mice [56]. Since then, several conflicting reports have emerged about whether GLT-1 expression is indeed decreased. The explanation may lie in the discovery that glutamate transporters, including GLT-1, are redox modulated, with oxidative modification resulting in decreased glutamate transport [57]. In the early stages of disease, decreased glutamate uptake capacity via oxidative modulation may occur, followed later by decreases in transporter expression. Consistent with this idea, Dunlop *et al.* [58•] showed a 27% reduction in glutamate transport in synaptosomes prepared from *mSOD1* rat spinal cords at disease onset, and a 43% reduction at disease end-stage. Expression analysis of GLT-1 showed a significant decrease of 45% in end-stage cervical spinal cord of the mutant transgenic rats compared with controls.

The redox modulation of EAAT2 provides an important link between oxidative stress and excitotoxic pathways (Fig. 3). Rao *et al.* [20•] recently demonstrated that reactive oxygen species generated within motoneurons in response to glutamate can disrupt the glutamate transport function of neighboring astrocytes. A reactive oxygen species-induced decrease in glutamate transport would cause additional rises in extracellular glutamate, which, in turn, would lead to further excitotoxic activation of neurons. Similarly, this cycle could be initiated by reactive oxygen species arising in microglial cells. Preliminary studies in the authors’ laboratory document that microglia activated by ALS patient immune complexes, or by lipopolysaccharide, release nitric oxide (NO) and hydrogen peroxide (H₂O₂), which can be toxic to motor neurons. The motor neuron injury elicited in this man-

Figure 3. Model of a potential intercellular link between excitotoxicity and oxidative stress

| MTCROGLJA |
| --- |
| Mitochondria |
| ROS |
| Activating Stimulus |
| (? immune complex) |
| AMPA Receptor |
| MOTOR NEURON |
| Apoptotic Cell Death |
| ASTROCYTE |
| Glutamate |
| Glutamate |
| Ca²⁺ |
| ROS |
| Ca²⁺ |
| Mitochondria |

(–) Diffusing reactive oxygen species, acting through redox modulation of excitatory amino acid transporter 2 (EAAT2), may decrease the glutamate uptake capacity of nearby astrocytes. Diffusing reactive oxygen species (ROS, eg, superoxide anion, hydrogen peroxide, nitric oxide, peroxynitrite) may also directly or indirectly induce motor neuron injury. AMPA, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid.

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

creases expression. Soluble signals from neighboring neurons and microglia, therefore, may exert other regulatory influences on astrocyte glutamate uptake and further emphasize the importance of intercellular crosstalk.

**Oxidative stress and immune activation**

The hallmark of immune activation in ALS is the presence of activated microglia and macrophages in affected areas of the CNS, with increased expression of major histocompatibility complexes, beta 2 integrins, leukocyte common antigen, and Fcγ receptor. In addition, complement fragments (C3d, C4d) and small numbers of T cells are also evident in ALS CNS tissue [60–62]. This immune infiltration is accompanied by an increase in pro-inflammatory proteins, including prostaglandins [63] and the chemokine, monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1 (Henkel, Unpublished data), while serving as a significant source of oxidative stress [35].

Activated microglia/macrophages generate large numbers of toxic free radicals [21•,64] that are capable of killing neurons *in vitro* and *in vivo* [65,66]. On activation, they are also capable of releasing prostaglandins [63,67,68], glutamate [69•], cytokines (*ie*, interleukin-1β, interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor-α), and chemokines (*ie*, MCP-1, MIP-1α, MIP-1β) [70], which are known to have roles in inflammation and injury. Likewise, moderately oxidized proteins (*eg*, lipoproteins, enzymes, membrane proteins and receptors) are selectively degraded by both microglia and macrophages [71•], which can increase microglial reactive oxygen species formation and lead to motor neuron death *in vitro* [72,73]. This deleterious cycle may be pertinent to any chronic, progressive neurodegenerative disease that involves the inefficient degradation of strongly oxidized proteins because of excess cross-linkage and aggregation [71•]. In this situation, oxidized protein aggregates may act as a perpetual trigger of inflammation and increasing oxidative stress.

Although it is unclear whether the earliest reaction is oxidative stress activating immune mechanisms or immune mechanisms enhancing oxidative stress, recent evidence suggests that oxidative stress may have a more significant role in modulating immune activation. Similar to the findings with 4-hydroxynonenal, serum levels of MCP-1α are elevated in patients with ALS. MCP-1α is a β-chemokine involved in the recruitment of monocytes/microglia, activated T cells, and myeloid dendritic cells to sites of injury and inflammation [74,75]. In contrast with 4-hydroxynonenal, MCP-1α levels decreased with disease progression, suggesting an inverse relation between the two. In an *in vitro* assay of MCP-1α release, the authors exposed human macrophages to varying concentrations of 4-hydroxynonenal. At low concentrations of 4-hydroxynonenal, MCP-1α release was significantly elevated above baseline. With increasing concentrations of 4-hydroxynonenal, comparable with those measured in the authors’ patients, MCP-1α levels significantly decreased, suggesting that immune activation, specifically mononuclear cell recruitment, is modulated by oxidative stress in ALS (Simpson, Unpublished data).

The importance of oxidative stress as an early event does not minimize the significance of the immune-inflammatory response on cellular function and pathways involved in neurodegeneration. There is increasing evidence to support a multidirectional communication and regulation between microglia/macrophages, neurons, and astroglia, which involve diffusible signals that translate into pathologic consequences, as discussed.

**Oxidative stress and susceptibility factors**

Oxidative stress in ALS is not limited to interactions related to excitotoxicity and neuroinflammation. It also plays a role in pathways related to apoptosis, mitochondrial damage, and protein aggregation—intracellular events that are capable of generating oxidative stress *de novo*. This has made it difficult to determine what process is upstream in both the human and animal model. The widespread distribution of oxidative stress in patients, and its intimate interaction with many mechanisms implicated in ALS, suggest that it is likely a dominant process in the initiation of events leading to motor neuron death.

Accordingly, susceptibility factors that predispose to increased oxidative stress may be relevant to processes leading to disease. This proposal is based on the presumption that ALS is likely caused by the interaction of genetic and environmental factors and age-dependent changes that may be involved in lowering the threshold of intrinsically vulnerable motor neurons to injury [76]. Several environmental factors have been investigated, including viral infection [77], pesticide exposure [78], and smoking [79] as possible links to ALS. Similarly, gene polymorphisms and mutations have been studied as possible susceptibility factors in ALS, including those related to DNA repair [18], iron regulation [80•], and glutamate transport [81], yet none have been defined to date. Interestingly, many of these factors are linked to systems involved in the generation and regulation of oxidative stress and therefore remain as pertinent areas of research in ALS pathogenesis.

**Conclusion**

Oxidative stress clearly plays a central role in the pathologic processes involved in motor neuron death in ALS. Given the complex interactions between oxidative stress and many of the pathways implicated in the disease and the requirement for intercellular signaling, it is unlikely that a single therapeutic modality will arrest disease progression. Ideally, as new information is uncovered about these intertwined pathways, more effective cocktail treatments will emerge.

References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

- Of special interest
- Of outstanding interest

1. Magnus T, Beck M, Giess R, et al.: Disease progression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: predictors of survival. Muscle Nerve 2002, 25:709–714.

2. Iwasaki Y, Ikeda K, Ichikawa Y, et al.: The diagnostic interval in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 2002, 104:87–89.
   Bulbar onset ALS is more frequent in the older female population and shortens the interval between symptom onset and diagnosis.

3. Haverkamp LJ, Appel V, Appel SH: Natural history of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in a database population: validation of a scoring system and a model for survival prediction. Brain 1995, 118:707–719.

4. Sorenson EJ, Stalker AP, Kurland LT, et al.: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1925 to 1998. Neurology 2002, 59:280–282.
   Prospective study of incidence of ALS over a period of 70 years in a single community, showing the stability of ALS case incidence, survival time, and time to diagnosis over time.

5. Annegers JF, Appel S, Lee JR, et al.: Incidence and prevalence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Harris County, Texas, 1985-88. Arch Neurol 1991, 48:589–593.

6. Traynor BJ, Codd MB, Corr B, et al.: Incidence and prevalence of ALS in Ireland, 1995-97: a population-based study. Neurology 1999, 52:504–509.

7. Rudnicki SA: Estrogen replacement therapy in women with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Sci 1999, 169:126–127.

8. Mandrioli J, Faglioni P, Merelli E, et al.: The epidemiology of ALS in Modena, Italy. Neurology 2003, 60:683–689.

9. Rogers M, Evans W: Changes in skeletal muscle with aging: effects of exercise training. Exerc Sport Sci Rev 1993, 21:65–102.

10. Tomlinson B, Irving D: The numbers of limb motor neurons in the human lumbar sacral cord throughout life. J Neurol Sci 1977, 35:213–219.

11. Siddique T, Figlewicz DA, Pericak-Vance MA, et al.: Linkage of a gene causing familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis to chromosome 21 and evidence of genetic-locus heterogeneity. N Engl J Med 1991, 324:1381–1384.

12. Rosen DR, Siddique T, Patterson D, et al.: Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nature 1993, 362:59–62.

13. Corcia P, Mayeux-Portas V, Khoris J, et al.: Abnormal SMN1 gene copy number is a susceptibility factor for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 2002, 51:243–246.
    A study documenting increased percentage of patients with ALS with an abnormal copy for survival motor neuron 1 gene compared with controls.

14. Lacomblez L, Doppler V, Beucler I, et al.: APOE: a potential marker of disease progression in ALS. Neurology 2002, 58:1112–1114.
    Apolipoprotein E (APOE) lipoprotein plasma levels are significantly elevated in patients with ALS and correlate with poorer survival and faster rate of progression.

15. Andersen PM: Genetics of sporadic ALS. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 2001, 2(suppl 1):S37–S41.

16. Al-Chalabi A, Andersen PM, Nilsson P, et al.: Deletions of the heavy neurofilament subunit tail in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Hum Mol Genet 1999, 8:157–164.

17. Comi GP, Bordoni A, Salani S, et al.: Cytochrome c oxidase subunit I microdeletion in a patient with motor neuron disease. Ann Neurol 1998, 43:110–116.

18. Hayward C, Colville S, Swingler RJ, et al.: Molecular genetic analysis of the APEX nuclease gene in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurology 1999, 52:1899–1901.

19. Singh P, Mann KA, Mangat HK, et al.: Prolonged glutamate excitotoxicity: effects on mitochondrial antioxidants and antioxidant enzymes. Mol Cell Biochem 2003, 243:139–145.
    This is a recent study of glutamate excitotoxicity in Wistar rat brains mediated by mitochondrial impairment and increased lipid peroxidation.

20. Rao SD, Yin HZ, Weiss JH: Disruption of glial glutamate transport by reactive oxygen species produced in motor neurons. J Neurosci 2003, 23:2627–2633.
    This article emphasizes the importance of interactions between motor neurons and glia.

21. Koutsilieri E, Scheller C, Trübl F, et al.: Degeneration of neuronal cells due to oxidative stress-microglial contribution. Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2002, 8:401–406.


This article discusses the role of oxidative stress in neurodegeneration and the intracellular signals involved in activating pathways leading to neuronal injury. Microglia are discussed as sources of oxidative stress.

22. Cutler RG, Pedersen WA, Camandola S, et al.: Evidence that accumulation of ceramides and cholesterol esters mediates oxidative stress-induced death of motor neurons in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 2002, 52:448–457.
    This article documents a specific pathway, involving abnormal sphingolipid metabolism, by which oxidative stress causes motor neuron death.

23. Rakhit R, Cunningham P, Furtos-Matei A, et al.: Oxidation-induced misfolding and aggregation of superoxide dismutase and its implications for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Biol Chem 2002, 277:47551–47556.
    This study links oxidative stress with protein misfolding and aggregation.

24. Dal Canto MC, Gurney ME: Neuropathological changes in two lines of mice carrying a transgene for mutant human Cu,Zn SOD, and in mice overexpressing wild type human SOD: a model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS). Brain Res 1995, 676:25–40.

25. Dal Canto MC, Gurney ME: Development of central nervous system pathology in a murine transgenic model of human amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Am J Pathol 1994, 145:1271–1279.

26. Lino MM, Schneider C, Caroni P: Accumulation of SOD1 mutants in postnatal motoneurons does not cause motoneuron pathology or motoneuron disease. J Neurosci 2002, 22:4825–4832.
    Mutant SOD1 gene restricted expression in mouse motor neurons does not cause disease, implicating nonneuronal cells in the disease.

27. Pramatarova A, Laganiere J, Roussel J, et al.: Neuron-specific expression of mutant superoxide dismutase 1 in transgenic mice does not lead to motor impairment. J Neurosci 2001, 21:3369–3374.

28. Gong YH, Parsadanian AS, Andreeva A, et al.: Restricted expression of G86R Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase in astrocytes results in astrocytosis but does not cause motoneuron degeneration. J Neurosci 2000, 20:660–665.

29. Gu Z, Kaul M, Yan B, et al.: S-nitrosylation of matrix metalloproteinases: signaling pathway to neuronal cell death. Science 2002, 297:1186–1190.

30. Lu C, Chan SL, Haughey N, et al.: Selective and biphasic effect of the membrane lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxy-2,3-nonenal on N-methyl-D-aspartate channels. J Neurochem 2001, 78:577–589.

31. Picklo MJ, Amarnath V, McIntyre JO, et al.: 4-Hydroxy-2(E)-nonenal inhibits CNS mitochondrial respiration at multiple sites. J Neurochem 1999, 72:1617–1624.

32. Pedersen WA, Cashman NR, Mattson MP: The lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal impairs glutamate and glucose transport and choline acetyltransferase activity in NSC-19 motor neuron cells. Exp Neurol 1999, 155:1–10.

33. Shringarpure R, Grune T, Sitte N, et al.: 4-Hydroxynonenal-modified amyloid-beta peptide inhibits the proteasome: possible importance in Alzheimer's disease. Cell Mol Life Sci 2000, 57:1802–1809.

34. Bowling AC, Schulz JB, Brown RH Jr, et al.: Superoxide dismutase activity, oxidative damage, and mitochondrial energy metabolism in familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 1993, 61:2322–2325.

35. Shibata N, Nagai R, Uchida K, et al.: Morphological evidence for lipid peroxidation and protein glycoxidation in spinal cords from sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients. Brain Res 2001, 917:97–104.

36. Ferrante RJ, Browne SE, Shinobu LA, et al.: Evidence of increased oxidative damage in both sporadic and familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 1997, 69:2064–2074.

37. Pedersen WA, Fu W, Keller JN, et al.: Protein modification by the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal in the spinal cords of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients. Ann Neurol 1998, 44:819–824.

38. Oteiza PI, Uchitel OD, Carrasquedo F, et al.: Evaluation of antioxidants, protein, and lipid oxidation products in blood from sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients. Neurochem Res 1997, 22:535–539.

39. Bogdanov M, Brown RH, Matson W, et al.: Increased oxidative damage to DNA in ALS patients. Free Radic Biol Med 2000, 29:652–658.

40. Andrus PK, Fleck TJ, Gurney ME, et al.: Protein oxidative damage in a transgenic mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 1998, 71:2041–2048.

41. Nagano S, Fujii Y, Yamamoto T, et al.: The efficacy of trientine or ascorbate alone compared to that of the combined treatment with these two agents in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis model mice. Exp Neurol 2003, 179:176–180.
    Specific therapy targeted to pro-oxidant effect of mutant SOD1 toxicity prolonged survival in transgenic mouse only when started before disease.

Copyright © Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

736 Myositis and myopathies

42 Wu AS, Kiaei M, Aguirre N, et al.: Iron porphyrin treatment extends survival in  
    a transgenic animal model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem  
    2003, 85:142–150.  
    Broad range antioxidant therapy is beneficial in the mutant SOD1 transgenic  
    mouse.

43 Desnuelle C, Dib M, Garrel C, et al.: A double-blind, placebo-controlled ran-  
    domized clinical trial of alpha-tocopherol (vitamin E) in the treatment of amy-  
    trophic lateral sclerosis. ALS Riluzole-Tocopherol Study Group. Amyotroph  
    Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 2001, 2:9–18.

44 Lange DJ, Murphy PL, Diamond B, et al.: Selegiline is ineffective in a collabo-  
    rative double-blind, placebo-controlled trial for treatment of amyotrophic lat-  
    eral sclerosis. Arch Neurol 1998, 55:93–96.

45 Vyth A, Timmer JG, Bossuyt PM, et al.: Survival in patients with amyotrophic  
    lateral sclerosis, treated with an array of antioxidants. J Neurol Sci 1996,  
    139(suppl):99–103.

46 Headley PM, Grillner S: Excitatory amino acids and synaptic transmission: the  
    evidence for a physiological function. Trends Pharmacol Sci 1990, 11:205–211.

47 Mattson MP, Mark RJ: Excitotoxicity and excitoprotection in vitro. Adv Neurol  
    1996, 71:1–37.

48 Rothstein JD, Jin L, Dykes-Hoberg M, et al.: Chronic inhibition of glutamate  
    uptake produces a model of slow neurotoxicity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A  
    1993, 90:6591–6595.

49 Vandenberghe W, Robberecht W, Brorson JR: AMPA receptor calcium per-  
    meability, GluR2 expression, and selective motoneuron vulnerability. J Neurosci  
    2000, 20:123–132.

50 Nakamura R, Kamakura K, Kwak S: Late-onset selective neuronal damage in  
    the rat spinal cord induced by continuous intrathecal administration of AMPA.  
    Brain Res 1994, 654:279–285.

51 Cid C, Alvarez-Cermeno JC, Regidor I, et al.: Low concentrations of glutamate  
    induce apoptosis in cultured neurons: implications for amyotrophic lateral  
    sclerosis. J Neurol Sci 2003, 206:91–95.  
    This article provides *in vitro* evidence that AMPA receptors can mediate glutamate  
    neurotoxicity.

52 Heath PR, Shaw PJ: Update on the glutamatergic neurotransmitter system  
    and the role of excitotoxicity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Muscle Nerve  
    2002, 26:438–458.

53 Kawahara Y, Kwak S, Sun H, et al.: Human spinal motoneurons express low  
    relative abundance of GluR2 mRNA: an implication for excitotoxicity in ALS. J  
    Neurochem 2003, 85:680–689.  
    Quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction and laser microdis-  
    section techniques are used to examine AMPR receptor subunit mRNA levels in  
    different neuronal subsets and tissues.

54 Takuma H, Kwak S, Yoshizawa T, et al.: Reduction of GluR2 RNA editing, a  
    molecular change that increases calcium influx through AMPA receptors, se-  
    lective in the spinal ventral gray of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.  
    Ann Neurol 1999, 46:806–815.

55 Rothstein JD, Van Kammen M, Levey AI, et al.: Selective loss of glial glutamate  
    transporter GLT-1 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1995,  
    38:73–84.

56 Canton T, Pratt J, Stutzmann J-M, et al.: Glutamate uptake is decreased tar-  
    dively in the spinal cord of FALS mice. Neuroreport 1998, 9:775–778.

57 Trotti D, Danbolt NC, Volterra A: Glutamate transporters are oxidant-  
    vulnerable: a molecular link between oxidative and excitotoxic neurodegen-  
    eration? Trends Pharmacol Sci 1998, 19:328–334.

58 Dunlop J, McIlvain HB, She Y, et al.: Impaired spinal cord glutamate transport  
    capacity and reduced sensitivity to riluzole in a transgenic superoxide dismu-  
    tase mutant rat model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurosci 2003,  
    23:1688–1696.  
    Glutamate transport function is studied at different stages of disease in the G93A  
    mSOD1 rat model.

59 Su Z, Leszczyniecka M, Kang D, et al.: Insights into glutamate transport regu-  
    lation in human astrocytes: cloning of the promoter for excitatory amino acid  
    transporter 2 (EAAT2). Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2003, 100:1955–1960.  
    This article describes the cloning and characterization of the human EAAT2 pro-  
    moter. Regulators of EAAT2 transport are also detailed.

60 McGee PL, Itagaki S, McGee EG: Expression of the histocompatibility gly-  
    coprotein HLA-DR in neurological disease. Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 1988,  
    76:550–557.

61 Kawamata T, Akiyama H, Yamada T, et al.: Immunologic reactions in amyotro-  
    phic lateral sclerosis brain and spinal cord tissue. Am J Pathol 1992,  
    140:691–707.

62 Troost D, Van den Oord JJ, Vianney de Jong JM: Immunohistochemical char-  
    acterization of the inflammatory infiltrate in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neu-  
    ropathol Appl Neurobiol 1990, 16:401–410.

63 Almer G, Teismann P, Stevic Z, et al.: Increased levels of the pro-inflammatory  
    prostaglandin PGE2 in CSF from ALS patients. Neurology 2002, 58:1277–  
    1279.

64 Liu B, Gao HM, Wang JY, et al.: Role of nitric oxide in inflammation-mediated  
    neurodegeneration. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2002, 962:318–331.

65 Bal-Price A, Brown GC: Inflammatory neurodegeneration mediated by nitric  
    oxide from activated glia-inhibiting neuronal respiration, causing glutamate  
    release and excitotoxicity. J Neurosci 2001, 21:6480–6491.

66 Le W, Rowe D, Xie W, et al.: Microglial activation and dopaminergic cell  
    injury: an in vitro model relevant to Parkinson’s disease. J Neurosci 2001,  
    21:8447–8455.

67 Almer G, Guegan C, Teismann P, et al.: Increased expression of the pro-  
    inflammatory enzyme cyclooxygenase-2 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann  
    Neurol 2001, 49:176–185.

68 Yasojima K, Tourtellotte WW, McGee EG, et al.: Marked increase in cyclo-  
    oxygenase-2 in ALS spinal cord: implications for therapy. Neurology 2001,  
    57:952–956.

69 Nakamura Y, Ohmaki M, Murakami K, et al.: Involvement of protein kinase C in  
    glutamate release from cultured microglia. Brain Res 2003, 962:122–128.  
    Activated microglia-associated toxicity is mediated by glutamate and nitric oxide  
    release through pathways involving protein kinase C. These pathways may be ame-  
    nable to therapy targeted to these pathways.

70 Lee YB, Nagai A, Kim SU: Cytokines, chemokines, and cytokine receptors in  
    human microglia. J Neurosci Res 2002, 69:94–103.

71 Stolzing A, Wengner A, Grune T: Degradation of oxidized extracellular pro-  
    teins by microglia. Arch Biochem Biophys 2002, 400:171–179.  
    This study describes the mechanism by which microglia degrade oxidized proteins  
    and the potential for chronic microglial activation and toxicity in response to signifi-  
    cantly oxidized proteins.

72 Keller JN, Hanni KB, Gabbita SP, et al.: Oxidized lipoproteins increase reac-  
    tive oxygen species formation in microglia and astrocyte cell lines. Brain Res  
    1999, 830:10–15.

73 Keller JN, Hanni KB, Markesbery WR: Oxidized low-density lipoprotein in-  
    duces neuronal death: implications for calcium, reactive oxygen species, and  
    caspases. J Neurochem 1999, 72:2601–2609.

74 Glabinski AR, Balasingam V, Tani M, et al.: Chemokine monocyte chemoat-  
    tractant protein-1 is expressed by astrocytes after mechanical injury to the  
    brain. J Immunol 1996, 156:4363–4368.

75 McTigue DM, Tani M, Krivic K, et al.: Selective chemokine mRNA accumu-  
    lation in the rat spinal cord after contusion injury. J Neurosci Res 1998,  
    53:368–376.

76 Shaw PJ, Eggett CJ: Molecular factors underlying selective vulnerability of  
    motor neurons to neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol  
    2000, 247(suppl 1):I17–I27.

77 Pamphlett R: Detection and cellular localization of enterovirus RNA sequences in  
    spinal cord of patients with ALS. Neurology 2000, 55:1420–1421.

78 Brooks BR: Risk factors in the early diagnosis of ALS: North American epi-  
    demiological studies. ALS CARE Study Group. Amyotroph Lateral Scler  
    Other Motor Neuron Disord 2000, 1(suppl 1):S19–S26.

79 Nelson LM, McGuire V, Longstreth WT Jr, et al.: Population-based case-  
    control study of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in western Washington State, I:  
    cigarette smoking and alcohol consumption. Am J Epidemiol 2000,  
    151:156–163.

80 Perry G, Sayre LM, Atwood CS, et al.: The role of iron and copper in the  
    aetiology of neurodegenerative disorders: therapeutic implications. CNS  
    Drugs 2002, 16:339–352.  
    This article reviews the role of metals in neurodegeneration as initiators of oxidative  
    stress.

81 Jackson M, Steers G, Leigh PN, et al.: Polymorphisms in the glutamate trans-  
    porter gene EAAT2 in European ALS patients. J Neurol 1999, 246:1140–  
    1144.
