
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Molecular Brain Research 119 (2003) 144–151

Research report

**Phosphorylation of G<sub>β</sub> is augmented by chronic morphine and enhances G<sub>βγ</sub> stimulation of adenylyl cyclase activity**

Sumita Chakrabarti, Alan R. Gintzler*

Department of Biochemistry, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, State University of New York, Box 8, 450 Clarkson Ave., Brooklyn, NY 11203-2098, USA

Accepted 10 September 2003

---

### Abstract

We previously demonstrated (Chakrabarti, et al., 2001) that in vivo phosphorylation of the G<sub>β</sub> subunit of G proteins, via protein kinase A (PKA) and protein kinase C (PKC), is dramatically increased following chronic morphine. The present study investigates the PKC isoform selectivity of G<sub>β</sub> phosphorylation and the consequences thereof on the ability of G<sub>βγ</sub> to stimulate adenylyl cyclase II (ACII). The catalytic subunit of PKC and PKA, as well as the conventional PKC isoform PKCγ, was effective in phosphorylating G<sub>β</sub>. In contrast, G<sub>β</sub> was only minimally phosphorylated by another conventional isoform, PKCα or the atypical isoform PKCζ. In the presence of activated recombinant G<sub>sα</sub>, ACII activity was dose dependently stimulated by G<sub>βγ</sub>, the magnitude of which was dependent upon its phosphorylation state. The increment in ACII activity produced by G<sub>βγ</sub> was increased ≈ 2-fold following in vitro phosphorylation by the catalytic subunit of either PKA or PKC. In contrast, the concomitant or sequential phosphorylation of G<sub>βγ</sub> by PKA and PKC catalytic subunits did not result in an additive enhancement of its ability to stimulate ACII and, in fact, negated the observed enhancing effect of each kinase, individually. Threonine phosphorylated G<sub>β</sub> occurs naturally in the spinal cord, the levels of which are augmented (≈ 60%) by chronic morphine. The natural occurrence of phosphorylated G<sub>β</sub> in spinal cord, its up-regulation following chronic morphine and the augmented ability of phosphorylated G<sub>βγ</sub> to stimulate ACII activity, in the aggregate, indicate that phosphorylation of G<sub>β</sub> could be a regulatory mechanism causally associated with altered cellular signaling.

© 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

**Theme:** D: Neurotransmitters, modulators, transporters and receptors  
**Topic:** Signal transduction  

**Keywords:** Phosphorylation; G<sub>βγ</sub>; Adenylyl cyclase; Protein kinase A; Protein kinase C; Opioid; Tolerance

---

### 1. Introduction

Heterotrimeric G protein-derived G<sub>βγ</sub> subunits have very diverse and complex roles in signal transduction [6], arising in part from the diversity of effectors that are regulated by these subunits. These include ion channels, e.g., calcium [14] and potassium channels [7,13,16] as well as a plethora of enzymes central to signal transduction pathways. Signal transduction enzymes modulated by G<sub>βγ</sub> include phospholipase A<sub>2</sub>, phospholipase Cβ, mitogen-activated protein kinase, and several isoforms of adenylyl cyclase (AC). [6,9,23]. Thus, altered signaling via these G

---

**Abbreviations:** AC, adenylyl cyclase; PKA, protein kinase A; PKC, protein kinase C  
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-718-270-2129; fax: +1-718-270-3316.  
E-mail address: alan.gintzler@downstate.edu (A.R. Gintzler).

protein subunits could have diverse and wide spread physiological consequences.

There are several parameters that can influence G<sub>βγ</sub> signaling. With respect to AC, these include the relative abundance of specific AC isoforms. For example, ACII, IV and VII are activated conditionally by G<sub>βγ</sub> derived from G<sub>i</sub> proteins [10,11,23,26,30], whereas ACI is inhibited. [23–25]. Additionally, the phosphorylation state of G<sub>βγ</sub>-stimulated AC isoforms is also a critical determinant of the magnitude of its stimulation by G<sub>βγ</sub>. Specifically, protein kinase C (PKC)-mediated phosphorylation of ACII and ACVII markedly augment their activity as well as their stimulatory responsiveness to both G<sub>sα</sub> and G<sub>βγ</sub> [15,31]. Notably, chronic morphine induces a shift from predominantly G<sub>iα</sub> inhibitory to G<sub>βγ</sub> stimulatory AC signaling, previously reported by this laboratory [12], which derives in part from the up-regulation of ACIV and ACVII [3,22] and increased AC phosphorylation [4].

0169-328X/$ - see front matter © 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.molbrainres.2003.09.002

More recently, the phosphorylation state of $G_{\beta}$ has also been shown to exhibit plasticity. Specifically, chronic morphine augments $G_{\beta}$ phosphorylation, which decreases its association with G protein receptor kinase 2/3 [5]. The resulting increased availability of $G_{\beta \gamma}$ subunits to interact with effectors such as the type II family of AC isoforms would further contribute to increased $G_{\beta \gamma}$ stimulatory AC signaling.

Phosphorylation is the prototypic mechanism for regulating the activity of varied proteins (e.g., enzymes, ion channels, receptors). This suggests that the phosphorylation state of $G_{\beta}$ might also be a parameter directly relevant to its ability to activate AC. This possibility was investigated in the present study. The results reveal an unexpected bimodal regulatory action of $G_{\beta}$ phosphorylation on the ability of $G_{\beta \gamma}$ to stimulate AC activity. Furthermore, demonstration of the presence of (threonine) phosphorylated $G_{\beta}$ in spinal cord membranes that is upregulated by chronic morphine suggests that modulating the state of $G_{\beta}$ phosphorylation could be a physiologically relevant regulatory mechanism.

sponsiveness to nonphosphorylated $G_{\beta \gamma}$, which was treated identically to kinase-treated samples but not exposed to the catalytic subunit of PKA or PKC ('mock phosphorylated'), was determined in every experiment in parallel with the determination of responsiveness to its phosphorylated counterpart. Assessment of the time dependence of ${}^{32}\mathrm{P}$ incorporation catalyzed by the catalytic subunit of PKA or PKC indicated that phosphorylation plateaued between 90 and 120 min. In order to ensure maximal incorporation in each experiment, the 120-min time point of phosphorylation by the catalytic subunit of either PKC or PKA, alone and when added sequentially, was utilized.

In order to determine if observed effects of phosphorylating purified $G_{\beta \gamma}$ were additive, we determined the effect of its dual phosphorylation on ACII stimulation. Dual phosphorylation was accomplished via either the concomitant addition of PKA and PKC catalytic subunits (2 h after which, reactions were terminated via the addition of H89 and chelerythrine) or their sequential addition. For sequential phosphorylation, 2 h after the addition of the catalytic subunit of PKA, its activity was terminated via the addition of H-89. The catalytic subunit of PKC was then added for an additional 2 h, after which the reaction was terminated by the addition of chelerythrine (or vice versa). Autoradiographic analysis revealed that inhibition of PKA via H-89 did not diminish the ${}^{32}\mathrm{P}$ incorporation into $G_{\beta}$ catalyzed by PKC and inhibition of PKC via chelerythrine did not diminish the ${}^{32}\mathrm{P}$ incorporation into $G_{\beta}$ catalyzed by PKA.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Purification of $G_{\beta \gamma}$ subunits

$G_{\beta \gamma}$ dimers (generously supplied by Dr. William Simonds, NIDDK/NIH, Bethesda, MD) were purified from bovine brain as previously described [17]. Briefly, following extraction from bovine brain membranes, $G_{\beta \gamma}$ proteins were separated using DEAE-Sepharose, Ultrogel AcA-34 and DEAE-Toyopearl 650S column chromatography. Fractions containing free $G_{\beta \gamma}$ dimer were pooled and further purified using Mono-Q FPLC. Final protein was obtained in a buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 100 mM NaCl, and 0.7% CHAPS. Protein (~2 mg/ml) was stored at -80°C.

2.2. In vitro phosphorylation of purified $G_{\beta \gamma}$ by catalytic subunit of PKA and/or PKC

Phosphorylation of purified $G_{\beta \gamma}$ (0.5 μg) by protein kinase A (PKA) or PKC catalytic subunits was carried out (at 30°C) in a final volume of 0.1 ml reaction mixture containing 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.6), 10 mM MgCl₂, 1.0 mM CaCl₂, 0.25% bovine serum albumin, 1 mM DTT, 40 μg/ml leupeptin, 40 μg/ml PMSF, the phosphatase inhibitors 0.1 mM sodium vanadate, 0.5 μM okadaic acid, 25 nM calyculin A and 100 μM ATP. The reaction was initiated by addition of either PKA (150 U) or PKC (18 mU) catalytic subunits (as recommended by the manufacturer, Calbiochem, San Diego, CA), 2 h after which activity was terminated by the addition of either 1 μM H-89 (for PKA) or 5 μM chelerythrine (for PKC). In their presence, there was no detectable activity of either catalytic subunit (determined by phosphorimager analysis). ACII stimulatory re-

2.3. Stoichiometry of $G_{\beta}$ phosphorylation

In separate, parallel experiments, the stoichiometry of ${}^{32}\mathrm{P}$ incorporation into $G_{\beta}$ following incubation of $G_{\beta \gamma}$ dimer with the catalytic subunits of either PKA or PKC or both concomitantly was determined under identical conditions by incubating the purified protein with [$\gamma$-${}^{32}\mathrm{P}$]ATP (2.5 μCi per reaction). Additionally, stoichiometry of $G_{\beta}$ phosphorylation by conventional as well as atypical PKC isoforms was also assessed.

Phosphorylation of $G_{\beta}$ by the conventional PKC isoforms, PKCα or PKCγ, as well as the atypical isoform PKCζ was assessed according to the protocol supplied by the manufacturer (Panvera, Madison, WI). Briefly, reactions were carried out (at 30°C) in a final volume of 50 μl reaction mixture containing 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.6), 10 mM MgCl₂, 100 μM CaCl₂, 100 μg/ml phosphatidylserine, 20 μg/ml diacylglycerol, 0.03% Triton X-100 and 100 μM ATP. The reaction was initiated by the addition of 30 mU of each PKC isoform and [$\gamma$-${}^{32}\mathrm{P}$]ATP (2.5 μCi per reaction). Reactions were terminated by the addition of gel electrophoresis sample buffer and heating at 85°C for 10 min.

Phosphorylated $G_{\beta}$ protein was resolved by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (10% SDS PAGE), visualized by PhosphorImager analysis and quantified by liquid scintillation spectroscopy. In some experiments, PKA or

PKC phosphorylated G<sub>βγ</sub> was subjected to 12% Bis-Tris gel electrophoresis utilizing MES buffer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) prior to PhosphorImager analysis. This enabled both the G<sub>β</sub> and G<sub>γ</sub> subunits to be concomitantly visualized via either PhosphorImager analysis (for assessment of G<sub>γ</sub> phosphorylation) or G<sub>γ</sub> Western analysis (to confirm its presence in the absence of phosphorylation).

### 2.4. Cell culture and transient transfection

Human embryonic kidney cells stably transfected with the μ-opioid receptor (HEK293-MOR cells) were utilized in order to establish a foundation for investigating the effects of chronic morphine exposure on phosphorylated G<sub>βγ</sub> stimulatory responsiveness. These were maintained in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM)/Ham's F12 medium (1:1) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, penicillin (100 units/ml), streptomycin (100 µg/ml) and gentamicin (0.2 mg/ml) in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO<sub>2</sub> at 37 °C. To investigate G<sub>βγ</sub> stimulation of AC activity, HEK293-MOR cells were transiently transfected with ACII cDNA (ACII-pRC/CMV) using FuGene lipofection reagent (Roche Molecular Biochemicals, Indianapolis, IN) as per manufacturer’s instruction.

### 2.5. Preparation of ACII-HEK293-MOR cell membranes and determination of AC activity

Forty-eight hours after transient transfection of ACII in HEK293-MOR cells, membranes were prepared. Cells were homogenized in Na-HEPES buffer (25 mM, pH 8.0) containing 10% sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and protease inhibitors Bacitracin (0.2 mg/ml), leupeptin and soybean trypsin inhibitor (3.2 µg/ml), aprotinin (2 µg/ml), benzamidine (1 mM), 20 µg/l each of N-tosyl-L-phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone, Na-p-tosyl-L-lysine chloromethyl ketone and phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and complete inhibitor cocktail (one tablet/50 ml). Supernatants from two low-speed spins (1000 g for 10 min) were collected and centrifuged at a higher speed (30000 × g) for 40 min. Membrane pellets were re-suspended in the same buffer without sucrose and stored in aliquots at –80 °C for future use. AC activity was determined in ACII-HEK293 membranes using recombinant G<sub>sα</sub> (rG<sub>sα</sub>)-GTPγS (10 nM) as described previously [3,23] in the presence of either phosphorylated or nonphosphorylated G<sub>βγ</sub>. Approximately 90% of the G<sub>β</sub> phosphorylation was retained during the assay for ACII activity.

### 2.6. Chronic morphine administration and spinal cord membrane preparation

Experiments employed male Sprague–Dawley rats (Charles River, Kingston, NY; 250–300 g) that were maintained in an approved controlled environment on a 12-h light/dark cycle. Food and water were available ad libitum. Studies were carried out in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals as adopted and promulgated by the U.S. National Institutes of Health. All experimental procedures were reviewed and approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of SUNY Downstate Medical Center.

Morphine pellets were supplied by the National Institute on Drug Abuse. Morphine tolerance was induced by subcutaneous implantation of one morphine pellet on day 1, two pellets on day 3 and three pellets on day 5 (each containing 75 mg morphine base; [1]) under sodium pentobarbital anesthesia (40 mg/kg, i.p., Anpro Pharmaceutical). On the 7th day following pellet implantation, rats were decapitated, spinal cords were quickly expelled, washed extensively in Krebs buffer (4 °C) and homogenized in Tris buffer, 10 mM, pH 7.6 containing 10% sucrose, 2 mM DTT, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, the cocktail of protease inhibitors used to prepare membranes from ACII-HEK293-MOR cells and a mixture of protein phosphatase inhibitors (25 nM calyculin A, 0.5 µM okadaic acid, 10 mM sodium fluoride, and 100 µM sodium orthovanadate). Membrane fractions were obtained as described above, which were re-suspended in Tris buffer (50 mM) containing DTT (1 mM), sodium pyrophosphate (10 mM) and the above-mentioned protease and phosphatase inhibitors.

### 2.7. Immunoprecipitation (IP) of G<sub>β</sub> protein and Western analysis

Membranes were solubilized in the above-mentioned buffer containing 1% Nonidet P-40 (NP-40), 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 10% glycerol and 150 mM NaCl (60 min on ice) by occasional mixing, after which they were centrifuged (14 K for 30 min). Protein amounts were determined by Bradford method [2] using bovine serum albumin as a standard. IP of G<sub>β</sub> was accomplished using an antibody generated against the C-terminal last 11 amino acid residues of G<sub>β</sub> (BC1; [19]). This antibody was generously supplied by Dr. J. Hildebrandt (Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC) and utilized as previously described by this laboratory [5]. Nonspecific ‘pull down’ experiments were accomplished by immunoprecipitating with non-immune serum at a dilution comparable to that of the G<sub>β</sub> antiserum. Solubilized membrane protein (1.0 mg) from each sample was incubated with a 1:200 dilution of anti-G<sub>β</sub> antibodies (for 60 min at 4 °C). Afterwards, 50 µl of pre-washed protein A-agarose slurry (Invitrogen) was added. The mixture was agitated and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Next day, the beads were washed extensively with wash buffer (50 mM Tris and 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.6) containing 1 mM DTT, 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.1% NP-40 and the same protease inhibitors used in the lysis buffer. Immunoprecipitates were eluted using 50 µl sample buffer and heating samples at 85 °C for 10 min.

Immunoprecipitates and solubilized membrane samples were subjected to 10% SDS PAGE. Proteins were electro-transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes, which were incubated with blocking solution (3% BSA in Tris-buffered saline containing 0.1% Tween-20; 4 °C, overnight). Thereafter, selected lanes were incubated (room temperature for 2 h) with either an affinity-purified monoclonal anti-phosphothreonine antibody (Zymed Laboratories, San Francisco, CA) or affinity-purified polyclonal anti-$G_{\beta}$ antibodies. Antibody–substrate complex was visualized using an enhanced chemiluminescence detection kit (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) and Kodak X-Omat film, (Perkinelmer Life Sciences, Boston, MA). Additionally, Western blots of $G_{\beta}$ immunoprecipitate that had been stained with anti-phosphothreonine antibody were stripped using Tris buffer (62.5 mM; pH 6.8) containing 0.1 M $\beta$-mercaptoethanol and 2% SDS and heating at 70 °C for 30 min. Subsequently, blots were re-probed with anti-$G_{\beta}$ antibodies.

All protein kinase and phosphatase inhibitors were purchased from LC Laboratories (Woburn, MA). All protease inhibitors were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO) except for Complete Protease Inhibitor cocktail, which was purchased from Roche Molecular Biochemicals.

### 2.8. Statistical analysis

The difference in ACII activity in the presence of r$G_{\mathrm{s} \alpha}$ vs. combinations of r$G_{\mathrm{s} \alpha}$ and $G_{\beta \gamma}$ was calculated in each experiment and was used to reflect the $G_{\beta \gamma}$-induced increment in AC activity. Significance of differences in the increment in AC stimulation produced by phosphorylated vs. non-phosphorylated $G_{\beta \gamma}$ and differences in the content of threonine-phosphorylated $G_{\beta}$ in spinal cord obtained from naive vs. chronic morphine-treated rats were assessed using paired two-tailed Student’s $t$-test.

## 3. Results

### 3.1. In vitro $G_{\beta}$ phosphorylation

The activities of PKA and PKC were previously shown to contribute to the increase in $G_{\beta}$ phosphorylation induced by the chronic systemic administration of morphine [5]. Accordingly, the effect of $G_{\beta}$ phosphorylation via these kinases, alone and in combination, on its ability to activate ACII was assessed. The stoichiometry of $G_{\beta}$ phosphorylation produced by the catalytic subunit of PKC, PKA, or both together saturated at $0.34 \pm 0.05$, $0.5 \pm 0.06$ and $0.80 \pm 0.13$ mol of phosphate incorporated/mol of $G_{\beta}$ subunit, respectively ($n = 3$ for each). A previous study utilizing purified $G_{\beta \gamma}$ and purified PKC greatly enriched with the $\beta$ isoform of PKC failed to demonstrate PKC phosphorylation of $G_{\beta}$ [20]. This suggested the possibility that $G_{\beta}$ phosphorylation by PKC might be isoform-selective. According-

ly, the ability of two additional conventional PKC isoforms ($\gamma$ and $\alpha$) and one atypical isoform ($\zeta$) to phosphorylate $G_{\beta}$ was ascertained. The stoichiometry of $G_{\beta}$ phosphorylation produced by PKC$\gamma$ saturated at $0.486 \pm 0.03$ mol/mol ($n = 3$). In contrast, phosphorylation by PKC$\alpha$ and PKC$\zeta$ only resulted in a phosphorylation stoichiometry of $0.092 \pm 0.01$ and $0.09 \pm 0.007$, respectively ($n = 3$ for each). Collectively, these observations underscore the PKC isoform selectivity of $G_{\beta}$ phosphorylation. Interestingly, although the $G_{\beta}$ subunit is readily phosphorylated by the catalytic subunits of PKC and PKA, they only weakly phosphorylate or fail to phosphorylate, respectively, $G_{\gamma}$ (Fig. 1).

### 3.2. Phosphorylation of $G_{\beta \gamma}$ alters its ability to stimulate ACII activity

Since we do not know the identity of the PKC or PKA isoform(s) responsible for $G_{\beta}$ phosphorylation in vivo, we utilized catalytic subunits derived from a mixture of isoforms purified from brain to determine the effect of $G_{\beta \gamma}$ phosphorylation on its ability to stimulate ACII. This was assessed using ACII-HEK293 membranes in the presence of recombinant $G_{\mathrm{s} \alpha}$-GTP$\gamma$S (r$G_{\mathrm{s} \alpha}^{*}$). As expected, r$G_{\mathrm{s} \alpha}^{*}$ (10 nM) stimulated ACII activity, producing an increment in cAMP of $108 \pm 7.8$ pmol/mg protein/min ($\approx 86\%$ increase). In contrast, up to 10 nM $G_{\beta \gamma}$, alone, failed to alter its activity. As previously reported [23], in the presence of r$G_{\mathrm{s} \alpha}^{*}$ (10 nM), $G_{\beta \gamma}$ produced a dose-dependent ($1-10$ nM) increment in ACII activity. Interestingly, the magnitude of this increment was dependent upon the phosphorylation state of $G_{\beta \gamma}$.

---

**Western blot**  
**Autorad**

| kDa |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 62 |  |  |
| 49 |  |  |
| 38 |  |  |
| 28 |  |  |
| 17 |  |  |
| 14 |  |  |
| 6 |  |  |

Fig. 1. Western analysis of G$\beta$ and G$\gamma$ subunits and autographic analysis of their phosphorylation. Purified G$\beta \gamma$ was subjected to 12% Bis-Tris gel electrophoresis and immunoblotted onto nitrocellulose membranes. The top and bottom halves were blotted with anti-G$\beta$ and anti-G$\gamma$, antibodies, respectively. Bands were visualized using ECL detection. To visualize ${ }^{32}$P incorporation into G$\beta \gamma$, purified G$\beta \gamma$ was in vitro phosphorylated using either purified PKC (lane 1) or PKA (lane 2) catalytic units as described in Materials and methods. G$\beta$ and G$\gamma$ subunits were resolved by gel electrophoresis and ${ }^{32}$P incorporation was visualized by autoradiography.

mg protein/min. At the lowest concentration of $G_{\beta\gamma}$ employed (1 nM), phosphorylation by PKA, but not PKC, more than doubled the mean increment in ACII activity. However, variability in the magnitude of this difference precluded reaching statistical significance. Interestingly, phosphorylation of $G_\beta$ by PKC$\gamma$, the specific isoform shown to be capable of phosphorylating $G_\beta$, also increased its ability to stimulate ACII activity by $\approx 2$-fold ($n = 2$).

In contrast to the consequences of the individual phosphorylation by PKA or PKC, phosphorylation of $G_{\beta\gamma}$ via the concomitant incubation with the catalytic subunit of PKA and PKC did not result in an additive enhancement of its ability to stimulate ACII activity. In fact, this dual phosphorylation of $G_{\beta\gamma}$ negated the observed enhancing effect of each kinase, individually. Identical results were obtained when $G_{\beta\gamma}$ was sequentially phosphorylated by PKA followed by PKC and vice versa. SDS PAGE combined with autoradiographic analysis as well as stoichiometric determination of incorporation confirmed that PKC continued to catalyze the ${}^{32}$P incorporation into $G_{\beta\gamma}$ following its phosphorylation by PKA ($0.22 \pm 0.02$ mol/mol; $n = 3$), and vice versa ($0.36 \pm 0.03$ mol/mol; $n = 3$).

### 3.3. Phosphorylated $G_\beta$ is present in spinal cord, which is positively modulated by chronic systemic morphine

The previous demonstration of $G_\beta$ phosphorylation and its augmentation by chronic morphine in the guinea pig longitudinal muscle myenteric plexus preparation utilized ${}^{32}$Pi incorporation [5]. In the current study, phosphorylation of $G_\beta$ was assessed via Western analyses of spinal cord $G_\beta$ immunoprecipitate utilizing anti-phosphothreonine antibodies. This epitope was targeted to reflect the natural occurrence of $G_\beta$ based on the ability of PKA and PKC to in vitro phosphorylate $G_\beta$. Western blots revealed phosphorylated bands of $\approx 42$, $39$ and $36$ kDa (Fig. 3, lanes 1 and 2). Notably, this molecular mass range is comparable to that previously reported for histidine phosphorylated $G_\beta$ [21].

---

Fig. 3. Spinal cord tissue contains threonine-phosphorylated $G_\beta$, which is enhanced by chronic morphine. Spinal cord membranes were prepared as described in Materials and methods. Lanes 1 and 2: $G_\beta$ immunoprecipitate from solubilized spinal cord membranes (1 mg), obtained from opioid naïve and chronic morphine-treated animals, respectively, were subjected to Western analysis using anti-phosphothreonine antibodies. Lane 3: The 42-, 39- and 36-kDa bands were not detected when the $G_\beta$ immunoprecipitate used in lane 1 was immunoblotted with the anti-phosphothreonine antibody while in the presence of an excess of antibody inhibitor. Lane 4: Phosphorylated bands were not detected when immunoprecipitate that had been obtained using non-immune serum (non-immune pull down) was immunoblotted using anti-phosphothreonine antibodies. Lanes 5 and 6: The anti-phosphothreonine stained Westerns shown in lanes 1 and 2 were stripped and re-probed with anti-$G_\beta$ common antibody. Lanes 7 and 8: Anti-$G_\beta$ immunoblots of spinal cord membranes (1 µg) obtained from opioid naïve and chronic morphine-treated animals, respectively. Lane 9: Anti-$G_\beta$ immunoblot of $G_\beta$ (300 ng) purified from bovine brain. Representative of three replications.

Multiple considerations indicate that the ≈ 42-, 39- and 36-kDa species represent threonine-phosphorylated G<sub>β</sub>. First, threonine-phosphorylated bands were not observed when an excess of an inhibitor of the phosphothreonine antibody (Zymed Laboratories) was present during incubation with the primary antibody (Fig. 3, lane 3.). Second, neither the ≈ 42-, 39- nor 36-kDa phosphoprotein band was detected in Western analyses of immunoprecipitate obtained with non-immune serum (non-immune pull down, Fig. 3, lane 4). Third, the ≈ 42-, 39- and 36-kDa bands were coincident with the signal obtained when the anti-phosphothreonine-stained blots shown in panels 1 and 2 were stripped and re-probed with anti G<sub>β</sub> antibodies (Fig. 3, lanes 5 and 6). Additionally, the ≈ 36-kDa molecular mass of the phosphothreonine-stained band is consonant with that obtained in Western analyses of either spinal cord membranes (Fig. 2, lanes 7 and 8) or purified G<sub>β</sub> protein (Fig. 3, lane 9). The ≈ 42- and 39-kDa molecular mass band most likely represents greater degrees of phosphorylated G<sub>β</sub> than the 36-kDa band and/or other G<sub>β</sub> isoforms. In either case, the inability to detect them in G<sub>β</sub> immunoblots of spinal cord membrane or G<sub>β</sub> purified from bovine brain most likely indicates that they represent relatively minor forms of spinal G<sub>β</sub>.

Notably, the labeling intensity of the ≈ 42-, 39- and 36-kDa threonine phosphorylated G<sub>β</sub> bands was significantly increased following chronic morphine (174 ± 7.2, 167 ± 6.6 and 140 ± 12.1 percent of control, respectively; *p* < 0.05; Fig. 3, lanes 2 vs. 1; *n* = 3). This occurred in the absence of any change in G<sub>β</sub> protein (Fig. 2, lane 5 vs. 6; 42-, 39- and 36-kDa bands were 100 ± 5.2, 83 ± 7.5 and 81 ± 27.9 percent of control, respectively; *p* > 0.5). Collectively, these data underscore the naturally occurring presence of phosphorylated G<sub>β</sub>, as well as its plasticity, in spinal cord tissue. Such observations, however, do not permit assessment of the relative abundance of phosphorylated forms of G<sub>β</sub>.

brain, placental tissue [21] as well as human leukemia (HL-60) cells [28]. It is also consistent with the more recent report of <sup>32</sup>P incorporation into G<sub>β</sub> in the longitudinal muscle myenteric plexus preparation [5]. Collectively, these observations underscore the generality of G<sub>β</sub> phosphorylation.

Enhanced stimulation of ACII by G<sub>βγ</sub> following its phosphorylation could result from changes in the phosphorylation state of the β and/or γ subunit. Indeed, Gγ phosphorylation was observed following PKC phosphorylation of purified bovine brain G<sub>βγ</sub>, which is consistent with the ability of this kinase to phosphorylate Gγ<sub>12</sub> [29]. It is unlikely, however, that G<sub>γ</sub> phosphorylation by PKC contributes to the enhanced stimulation of ACII that was observed following PKC phosphorylation of the G<sub>βγ</sub> dimer. Phosphorylation of Gγ<sub>12</sub> by itself has been shown to inhibit G<sub>βγ</sub> activation of ACII [29]. Moreover, PKA phosphorylation of purified bovine brain G<sub>βγ</sub> followed by 12% Bis-Tris gel electrophoresis (which enables the simultaneous visualization of both the G<sub>β</sub> and G<sub>γ</sub> subunit; confirmed by Western blot analysis, and autoradiographic analysis) revealed phosphorylation of G<sub>β</sub> but not G<sub>γ</sub> (Fig. 1).

Phosphorylation of G<sub>β</sub> was previously shown to decrease interactivity with GRK2/3, and thereby augment its availability to interact with other effectors such as AC [5]. Additionally, phosphorylated G<sub>β</sub> has been reported to participate in an enzymatic transfer of a phosphate to GDP at G protein α-subunits and thereby prevent re-association with G<sub>βγ</sub> subunits [8,28]. This would also maintain the pool of free G<sub>βγ</sub> subunits available for signaling. The current report reveals that G<sub>β</sub> phosphorylation can also directly modulate G<sub>βγ</sub> signaling by augmenting its G<sub>sα</sub>-dependent stimulation of ACII activity. Thus, phosphorylation of the G<sub>β</sub> subunit of G proteins has multiple effects that have convergent consequences.

We previously reported that opioid receptor-coupled G<sub>βγ</sub> stimulatory signaling is augmented following chronic morphine [3,12]. The current results underscore that this too results from multiple integrated perturbations. Previously, these were shown to include effector modification such as increased content of G<sub>βγ</sub>-stimulated AC isoforms and their phosphorylation [4,12,22]. Results from the current study reveal that the previously demonstrated chronic morphine-induced phosphorylation of G<sub>βγ</sub> not only increases its availability for interaction with effectors such as AC [5] but also augments its potency to stimulate AC, further contributing to the switch from predominantly G<sub>iα</sub>-inhibitory to G<sub>βγ</sub> stimulatory AC signaling (see Ref. [12] for review).

The increment in rG<sub>sα</sub>-dependent G<sub>βγ</sub> stimulation of ACII produced by G<sub>β</sub> phosphorylation that is revealed in the current study, although statistically significant, is relatively modest (≈ 2-fold). Admittedly, statistically significant modest differences are not necessarily physiologically relevant. Notably, however, since phosphorylated G<sub>βγ</sub> also constitutes a pool of this G protein subunit that has enhanced availability for interaction with AC [5], the

## 4. Discussion

This study demonstrates (a) the natural occurrence of threonine phosphorylated G<sub>β</sub> in spinal cord and (b) in vitro phosphorylation of G<sub>β</sub> by PKA or PKC facilitates its G<sub>sα</sub>-dependent stimulation of ACII activity. Moreover, the in vitro phosphorylation of G<sub>β</sub> by PKC exhibits isoform selectivity. For example, it is substantially phosphorylated by the catalytic subunit of PKC and by PKCγ, but minimally by PKCα and PKCζ, as has previously been reported for PKCβ [20]. These observations are consonant with the presence of multiple consensus sequences for PKC and PKA scattered throughout G<sub>β</sub> (predicted by NetPhos 2.0).

The current demonstration of in vitro phosphorylation of purified bovine brain G<sub>β</sub> is consonant with previous reports of its GTP-dependent histidine phosphorylation. This has been demonstrated in rod outer segment membranes of bovine retinas [27], cell membranes obtained from liver,

observed magnitude of the increment in AC stimulation by \( G_{\beta \gamma} \) following its phosphorylation is most likely an underestimate of the increment that would result in vivo. Moreover, as illustrated by the related neurochemical sequelae of chronic morphine, it is unlikely that augmented \( G_{\beta} \) phosphorylation occurs in isolation but rather as part of a mosaic of changes that promote stimulatory \( G_{\beta \gamma} \) AC signaling such as augmented synthesis and phosphorylation of \( G_{\beta \gamma} \)-stimulated AC isoforms. The strength of \( G_{\beta \gamma} \) stimulatory AC signaling is determined by a confluence of factors, which in the aggregate are multiplicative. Moreover, since the generation of cAMP is an initial event in a cascade of changes, each step of which is catalytic, the physiological effects of modest changes in cAMP production such as those that result from \( G_{\beta} \) phosphorylation (17–40 pmol/mg protein/min) would be expected to be disproportionately large and thus could achieve physiological significance.

Chronic morphine significantly up-regulates \( G_{\beta} \) phosphorylation in spinal tissue, extending the previous demonstration of the same in the LMMP tissue using \({ }^{32}\)P incorporation as the indicator of phosphorylation [5]. This underscores its putative significance and relevance to addictive processes. Furthermore, the current data indicate that the phosphorylation state of \( G_{\beta} \) is dynamically regulated and could be a generalizable physiological parameter, the modulation of which contributes to the regulation of \( G_{\beta \gamma} \) stimulatory AC signaling.

The enhancement of AC stimulation by \( G_{\beta \gamma} \) following its phosphorylation by PKA or PKC, individually, was mitigated by their concomitant phosphorylation by these kinases. This did not result from the cross phosphorylation and consequent inactivation of PKA and PKC since the stoichiometry of the phosphorylation that resulted from the concomitant action of PKA and PKC revealed their continued activity. Moreover, \( G_{\beta \gamma} \) sequentially phosphorylated by PKA followed by PKC, and vice versa, also ceased to manifest enhanced AC stimulatory activity. These data suggest that maximal \({ }^{32}\)P incorporation into PKA and PKC sites could represent a novel mechanism for limiting the size of the phosphorylated \( G_{\beta \gamma} \) pool that manifests augmented AC stimulatory signaling capability. However, the relevance of this turn off mechanism to the in vivo regulation of \( G_{\beta \gamma} \) signaling remains to be elucidated. Convergent regulation of \( G_{\beta \gamma} \) AC stimulating activity by PKA and PKC is reminiscent of their concomitant regulation of voltage-gated sodium channels. Here, reduction of peak sodium currents by PKA requires activation of PKC and phosphorylation of Ser\(^{1506}\) [18]. To the best of our knowledge, the current report is the first demonstration of conditional effects of two kinases, which are the antithesis of their effects when acting individually.

Heterotrimeric G protein-derived \( G_{\beta \gamma} \) subunits have very diverse and complex roles in signal transduction [6], arising in part from the diversity of effectors that are regulated by these subunits. This diversity is compounded by the existence of multiple \( G_{\beta} \) isoforms that exhibit selectivity in the

modulation of many effectors. The influence of \( G_{\beta} \) phosphorylation on their ability to modulate effector activity is not known at this time. It is conceivable that particular \( G_{\beta} \) isoforms devoid of modulatory function, when present in combination with specific \( G_{\gamma} \) subunits, can be activated by phosphorylation. Additionally, or alternatively, phosphorylation state of \( G_{\beta} \) could be linked to a graded increase in its ability to stimulate ACII and possibly other effectors. Future investigations should resolve these important possibilities. Altered activity of divergent signaling cascades resulting from \( G_{\beta} \) phosphorylation would have functional implications that are wide spread, which could underlie, in part, the multiplicity of systems that are affected by chronic morphine and the resulting complexity of opioid tolerance and dependence.

### References

[1] H.N. Bhargava, V.M. Villar, Tolerance-dependence and serum elimination of morphine in rats implanted with morphine pellets, General Pharmacology 22 (1991) 1033–1042.

[2] M.M. Bradford, A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding, Analytical Biochemistry 72 (1976) 248–254.

[3] S. Chakrabarti, M. Rivera, S.-Z. Yan, W.-J. Tang, A.R. Gintzler, Chronic morphine augments \( G_{\beta \gamma}/G_{\mathrm{s} \alpha} \) stimulation of adenylyl cyclase: relevance to opioid tolerance, Molecular Pharmacology 54 (1998) 655–662.

[4] S. Chakrabarti, L. Wang, W.-J. Tang, A.R. Gintzler, Chronic morphine augments adenylyl cyclase phosphorylation: relevance to altered signaling during tolerance/dependence, Molecular Pharmacology 54 (1998) 949–953.

[5] S. Chakrabarti, M. Oppermann, A.R. Gintzler, Chronic morphine induces the concomitant phosphorylation and altered association of multiple signaling proteins: a novel mechanism for modulating cell signaling, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 98 (2001) 4209–4214.

[6] D. Clapham, E.J. Neer, New roles for G-protein \(\beta \gamma\) dimers in transmembrane signalling, Nature 365 (1993) 403–406.

[7] N.A. Cohen, Q. Sha, E.N. Makhina, A.N. Lopatin, M.E. Linder, S.H. Snyder, C.G. Nichols, Inhibition of an inward rectifier potassium channel (Kir2.3) by G-protein betagamma subunits, Journal of Biological Chemistry 271 (1996) 32301–32305.

[8] F. Cuello, R.A. Schulze, F. Heemeyer, H.E. Meyer, S. Lutz, K.H. Jakobs, F. Niroomand, T. Wieland, Activation of heterotrimeric G proteins by a high energy phosphate transfer via nucleoside diphosphate kinase (NDPK) B and Gbeta subunits. Complex formation of NDPK B with \( G_{\beta \gamma} \) dimers and phosphorylation of His-266 IN Gbeta, Journal of Biological Chemistry 278 (2003) 7220–7226.

[9] Y. Daaka, L.M. Luttrell, R.J. Lefkowitz, Switching of the coupling of the \(\beta_2\)-adrenergic receptor to different G proteins by protein kinase A, Nature 390 (1997) 88–91.

[10] A.D. Federman, B.R. Conklin, K.A. Schrader, R.R. Reed, H.R. Bourne, Hormonal stimulation of adenylyl cyclase through Gi-protein \(\beta \gamma\) subunits, Nature 356 (1992) 159–161.

[11] B. Gao, A.G. Gilman, Cloning and expression of a widely distributed (type IV) adenylyl cyclase, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 88 (1991) 10178–10182.

[12] A.R. Gintzler, S. Chakrabarti, Opioid tolerance and the emergence of new opioid receptor-coupled signaling, Molecular Neurobiology 21 (2000) 21–33.

[13] C. He, H. Zhang, T. Mirshahi, D.E. Logothetis, Identification of a

potassium channel site that interacts with G protein betagamma sub-
units to mediate agonist-induced signaling, Journal of Biological
Chemistry 274 (1999) 12517–12524.
[14] S.R. Ikeda, Voltage-dependent modulation of N-type calcium chan-
nels by G-protein beta gamma subunits, Nature 380 (1996) 255–258.
[15] O. Jacobowitz, R. Iyengar, Phorbol ester-induced stimulation and
phosphorylation of adenylyl cyclase 2, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 91 (1994)
10630–10634.
[16] J. Jing, D. Chikvashvili, D. Singer-Lahat, W.B. Thornhill, E. Reu-
veny, I. Lotan, Fast inactivation of a brain K+ channel composed of
Kv1.1 and Kvbetal.1 subunits modulated by G protein beta gamma
subunits, EMBO Journal 18 (1999) 1245–1256.
[17] T. Katada, M. Oinuma, K. Kusakabe, M. Ui, A new GTP-binding
protein in brain tissues serving as the specific substrate of islet-acti-
vating protein, pertussis toxin, FEBS Letters 213 (1987) 353–358.
[18] M. Li, J.W. West, R. Numann, B.J. Murphy, T. Scheuer, W.A. Catter-
all, Convergent regulation of sodium channels by protein kinase C and
cAMP-dependent protein kinase, Science 261 (1993) 1439–1442.
[19] M. Makhlouf, S.H. Ashton, J. Hildebrandt, N. Mehta, T. Gettys, P.
Halushka, J. Cook, Alterations in macrophage G proteins are associ-
ated with endotoxin tolerance, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1312
(1996) 163–168.
[20] R. Morishita, H. Nakayama, T. Isobe, T. Matsuda, Y. Hashimoto, T.
Okano, Y. Fukada, K. Mizuno, S. Ohno, O. Kozawa, et al, Primary
structure of a γ subunit of G protein, γ12, and its phosphorylation
by protein kinase C, Journal of Biological Chemistry 270 (1995)
29469–29475.
[21] B. Nurnberg, R. Harhammer, T. Exner, R.A. Schulze, T. Wieland,
Species- and tissue-dependent diversity of G-protein β subunit phos-
phorylation: evidence for a cofactor, Biochemical Journal 318 (Pt 2)
(1996) 717–722.
[22] M. Rivera, A.R. Gintzler, Differential effect of chronic morphine on
mRNA encoding adenylyl cyclase isoforms: relevance to physio-
logical sequela of tolerance/dependence, Molecular Brain Research
54 (1998) 165–169.
[23] W.-J. Tang, A.G. Gilman, Type-specific regulation of adenylyl cy-
clase by G protein βγ subunits, Science 254 (1991) 1500–1503.
[24] R. Taussig, J.A. Iniguez-Lluhi, A.G. Gilman, Inhibition of adenylyl
cyclase by Gi alpha, Science 261 (1993) 218–221.
[25] R. Taussig, L.M. Quarmby, A.G. Gilman, Regulation of purified type
I and type II adenylyl cyclases by G protein βγ subunits, Journal of
Biological Chemistry 268 (1) (1993) 9–12.
[26] P.A. Watson, J. Krupinski, A.M. Kempinski, C.D. Frankfiedl, Mo-
lecular cloning and characterization of the type VII isoform of mam-
malian adenylyl cyclase expressed widely in mouse tissues and in S49
mouse lymphoma cells, Journal of Biological Chemistry 269 (1994)
28893–28898.
[27] T. Wieland, I. Ulibarri, P. Gierschik, K.H. Jakobs, Activation of sig-
nal-transducing guanine-nucleotide-binding regulatory proteins by
guanosine 5′-[gamma-thio]triphosphate. Information transfer by in-
termediately thiophosphorylated beta gamma subunits, European
Journal of Biochemistry 196 (1991) 707–716.
[28] T. Wieland, B. Nurnberg, I. Ulibarri, S. Kaldenberg-Stasch, G. Schulz,
K.H. Jakobs, Guanine nucleotide-specific phosphate transfer by gua-
nine nucleotide-binding regulatory protein beta-subunits. Charac-
terization of the phosphorylated amino acid, Journal of Biological Chem-
istry 268 (1993) 18111–18118.
[29] H. Yasuda, M.A. Lindorfer, C.S. Myung, J.C. Garrison, Phosphory-
lation of the G protein γ12 subunit regulates effector specificity, Jour-
nal of Biological Chemistry 273 (1998) 21958–21965.
[30] M. Yoshimura, H. Ikeda, B. Tabakoff, μ-Opioid receptors inhibit
dopamine-stimulated activity of type V adenylyl cyclase but enhance
dopamine-stimulated activity of type VII adenylyl cyclase, Molecular
Pharmacology 50 (1996) 43–51.
[31] G. Zimmermann, R. Taussig, Protein kinase C alters the responsive-
ness of adenylyl cyclase to G protein α and βγ subunits, Journal of
Biological Chemistry 271 (1996) 27161–27166.
