
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

SCIENCE DIRECT®

Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 420 (2003) 142–152

Rabbit aorta converts 15-HPETE to trihydroxyeicosatrienoic acids: potential role of cytochrome P450

Sandra L. Pfister,${}^{a}$ Nancy Spitzbarth,${}^{a}$ Darryl C. Zeldin,${}^{b}$ Pierre Lafite,${}^{c}$ Daniel Mansuy,${}^{c}$ and William B. Campbell${}^{a,*}$

${}^{a}$ Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA  
${}^{b}$ Laboratory of Pulmonary Pathobiology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA  
${}^{c}$ Laboratoire de Chimie et Biochimie Pharmacologiques et Toxicologiques, UMR 8601 CNRS, Université Paris V 45 Rue des Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, France  

Received 17 July 2003, and in revised form 25 August 2003

---

### Abstract

Previous work showed that rabbit aorta metabolizes arachidonic acid via 15-lipoxygenase to 15-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid (15-HPETE), which undergoes an enzymatic rearrangement to 11-hydroxy-14,15-epoxyeicosatrienoic acid (11-H-14,15-EETA) and 15-hydroxy-11,12-epoxyeicosatrienoic acid (15-H-11,12-EETA). Hydrolysis of the epoxy group results in the formation of 11,14,15- and 11,12,15-trihydroxyeicosatrienoic acids (THETAs). Endothelial cells have several heme-containing enzymes including cytochromes P450 (CYP), nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), and prostacyclin (PGI₂) synthase that catalyze the rearrangement of 15-HPETE to HEETAs. Incubation of arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase, or 15-HPETE with rabbit aortic microsomes or rat liver microsomes, a rich source of CYP, resulted in the formation of a product that comigrated with THETAs and HEETAs on HPLC. Immunoblot analysis showed the presence of CYP2C8 and CYP2J2 in aortic tissue and when CYP2J2 or CYP2C8 was incubated with arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase, the major products were 11,12,15- and 11,14,15-THETAs. Incubation of purified hematin, CYP2C11, eNOS or PGI₂ synthase enzymes with arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase produced a different pattern of metabolites from rabbit aortic microsomes. Clotrimazole, a non-specific CYP inhibitor, and ebastine and terfenadone, specific CYP2J2 inhibitors, blocked the ability of aortic microsomes to produce THETAs while specific inhibitors of PGI₂ synthase, eNOS or CYP2C8/2C9 had no effect on THETA production. We suggest that a CYP, possibly CYP2J2, may function as the hydroperoxide isomerase converting 15-HPETE to HEETAs in rabbit vascular tissue. Further hydrolysis of the epoxy group of the HEETAs results in the formation of 11,12,15- and 11,14,15-THETAs. The HEETAs and THETAs are both vasodilators and may function as important regulators of vascular tone.

© 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Cytochrome P450; Lipoxygenase; Arachidonic acid; Rabbit aorta; Endothelium

---

Many studies have documented the importance of the vascular endothelium in the regulation of vascular tone. A number of endothelium-derived relaxing factors (EDRFs) ${}^{1}$ have been identified including NO [1], PGI₂ [2], and the epoxyeicosatrienoic acids [3]. Arachidonic acid causes relaxation of blood vessels, which is dependent on the presence of the endothelium [4–7]. Our previous work supported this observation and described an endothelium-dependent, lipoxygenase metabolite of arachidonic acid that elicited relaxation of rabbit aorta [8]. Lipoxygenases are non-heme, iron-containing enzymes that catalyze the conversion of arachidonic acid to hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HPETEs), which may be reduced to hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HETEs) [9–11]. The various lipoxygenases differ in positional specificity for oxidation. For example, the hydroperoxy group is added at C-12 by the platelet

* Corresponding author. Fax: 1-414-456-6545.
E-mail address: wbcamp@mcw.edu (W.B. Campbell).
${}^{1}$ Abbreviations used: EDRFs, endothelium-derived relaxing factors; eNOS, nitric oxide synthase; HPETEs, hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acids; HETEs, hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids; ODS, octadecylsilyl.

0003-9861/$ - see front matter © 2003 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.abb.2003.09.026

12-lipoxygenase and at C-15 by reticulocyte 15-lipoxygenase [10, 11]. Some tissues contain several lipoxygenases and synthesize several HETEs. We have previously shown that in rabbit aorta and aortic endothelial cells, arachidonic acid is metabolized by 15-lipoxygenase to 15(S)-HPETE, which undergoes an enzymatic rearrangement to hydroxy-epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (HEETAs), either 11-H-14, 15-EETA and 15-H-11, 12-EETA [12]. Hydrolysis of the epoxy group results in the formation of 11,14,15- and 11,12,15-THETAs. The HEETAs and THETAs relax the rabbit aorta and one or both may mediate the relaxations to arachidonic acid [12].

Hydroxy-epoxy fatty acids are readily formed from fatty acid hydroperoxides by an intramolecular rearrangement with heme-containing proteins such as hematin [13]. However, Weiss et al. [14] provided the first evidence that the conversion of 15-HPETE to HEETAs occurs by CYPs. In this study, 15-HPETE was converted to 13-H-14, 15-EETA and 11-H-14, 15-EETA, which were hydrolyzed to 13,14,15-THETA and 11,14,15-THETA or 11,12,15-THETA, respectively. Pace-Asciak and co-workers [15, 16] have shown in platelets and lungs that 12(S)-HPETE undergoes a similar rearrangement in the presence of a heme-containing protein, a hydroperoxide isomerase, to 8-H-11,12-EETA and 10-H-11,12-EETA, which are also called hepoxilin A₃ and B₃, respectively [15]. Hydrolysis of the 11,12-epoxide group by epoxide hydrolase leads to the formation of 8,11,12-THETA and 10,11,12-THETAs called trioxilin A₃ and B₃, respectively.

If the biosynthetic pathway in rabbit aorta is similar to the synthesis of hepoxilins and trioxilins, 15-HPETE will be converted to 11-H-14, 15-EETA and 15-H-11, 12-EETA by a hydroperoxide isomerase. Little is known about this enzyme. Several heme containing proteins, hemoglobin and hematin, can function as hydroperoxide isomerases and catalyze this rearrangement [13, 15]. Similarly, PGI₂ synthase is a heme-containing CYP-like enzyme that catalyzes the rearrangement of PGH₂ to PGI₂ [17]. These rearrangements do not require cofactors such as O₂ or NADPH, or reductases. Endothelial cells have several enzymes that contain heme including CYPs, eNOS, and PGI₂ synthase. This study is designed to test the hypothesis that one of these heme-containing enzymes may function as a hydroperoxide isomerase and catalyze the formation of HEETAs and THETAs in vascular tissue.

Rabbitry (New Franken, WI). The animals were housed in the Medical College of Wisconsin Animal Care Facilities, maintained on a standard rabbit chow diet, and given tap water ad libitum.

**Tissue preparation and incubations**

Rabbits were sacrificed (pentobarbital 120 mg/kg, IV), thoracic aorta was removed and cleaned of adhering connective tissue and fat. In some cases, aortas were purchased from Pel-Frez Biologicals (Rogers, AR). The vessels were rinsed in Tris buffer (0.05 M, pH 7.5) and then cut into small pieces. Aortic tissue was homogenized in cold 0.25 M sucrose solution using a Potter-Elvehjem tissue grinder with a Teflon pestle. Subcellular fractions were prepared by differential centrifugation [18]. The homogenate was centrifuged at 5000 g for 20 min to remove cellular debris, mitochondria, and nuclei. The supernatant was centrifuged further at 100,000 g for 60 min. The microsomal pellet was resuspended in 1.15% KCl and homogenized. The homogenate was centrifuged at 100,000 g for 60 min. The pelleted microsomes were resuspended in microsome incubation buffer (Tris 50 mM, KCl 150 mM, and MgCl₂ 10 mM, pH 7.5) and stored at -80°C. Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford technique (Bio-Rad) with IgG as the standard. Aliquots of microsomal protein (2 mg/ml) were incubated with [¹⁴C(U)]arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase (soybean lipoxidase, 0.2 mg/ml) or [¹⁴C(U)]15-HPETE in Hepes buffer containing indomethacin (10⁻⁵ M) at 37°C for 15 min.

In an additional series of experiments, aortic tissue was homogenized (five passes with a mechanical homogenizer) in Tris buffer (500 mg of tissue/10 ml of buffer). The homogenate was centrifuged at 750 g for 15 min and the supernatant was used. Aliquots (5 mg/ml) of the homogenate were incubated for 20 min in Tris-HCl buffer containing indomethacin (10⁻⁵ M) and [¹⁴C(U)]15-HPETE (77 μg/ml, 4.33 × 10⁵ cpm/ml). In some incubations, 15-lipoxygenase was incubated with [¹⁴C]arachidonic acid and the homogenate.

To investigate further the enzyme responsible for the conversion of 15-HPETE to HEETAs and THETAs, aliquots of microsomal protein (2 mg/ml) were incubated with [¹⁴C(U)]arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase in Hepes buffer at 37°C for 15 min. Boiled microsomes were used as a control. These studies were repeated in the presence of inhibitors of eNOS (L-NA and L-NMMA 10–100 μM), CYP (clotrimazole, SKF 525a, sulfaphenazole, compound 11 [19], compound 24 [19], 10–100 μM), ebastine [20] (10–100 μM) or terfenadone (10–100 μM), and PGI₂ synthase (U-51605, 10–100 μM).

Additional experiments investigated the production of THETAs by [¹⁴C(U)]arachidonic acid and

**Materials and methods**

**Animals**

Two-month-old female or male New Zealand White (NZW) rabbits were obtained from New Franken

15-lipoxygenase in incubations containing hematin (20 μM), purified PGI₂ synthase (250 U/ml), eNOS or CYP isozymes. In some cases, rat liver microsomes were used as the source of CYP enzymes and prepared as described above for the rabbit aortic microsomes. In another series of experiments, purified CYP2C8 and CYP2C11 or recombinant CYP2J2 [21], CYP2J5 [22], and CYP2J9 [23] (0.3 μM each) were used in incubations with arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase.

Following the incubations, all reactions were stopped by adding ethanol to a final concentration of 15%. The samples were acidified (pH < 3.5) and extracted using octadecylsilyl (ODS) extraction columns as previously described [8]. The extracted metabolites were evaporated to dryness under a stream of nitrogen and stored at -40°C until analysis by high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC).

### Purification of THETAs and HEETAs by HPLC

The biological samples were first resolved by reverse phase (Nucleosil-C18 column, 5 μ, 4.6 × 250 mm) HPLC using solvent system I. Solvent A was water and solvent B was acetonitrile containing 0.1% glacial acetic acid. The program was a 40 min linear gradient from 50% solvent B in A to 100% solvent B. The flow rate was 1 ml/min. The fractions (0.2 ml) corresponding to the THETAs (fractions 27–35, 5–7.5 min) and HEETAs (fractions 70–83, 14–16.5 min) were pooled, acidified, and extracted with cyclohexane/ethyl acetate (50/50). The THETA fraction was rechromatographed on reverse phase HPLC using solvent system II. In solvent system II, solvent A was water containing 0.1% glacial acetic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile. The program consisted of a 5 min isocratic phase with 35% B in A, followed by a 35 min linear gradient to 85% B. Flow rate was 1 ml/min. Radioactivity of the column eluate was collected in 0.2 ml aliquots and measured by liquid scintillation spectrometry. The fractions containing the THETAs (fractions 87–93) (17.5–18.5 min) were collected and extracted with cyclohexane/ethyl acetate (50/50). The THETA fraction was purified further by normal phase HPLC using a Nucleosil silica column (5 μ, 4.6 × 250 mm). Solvent system III consisted of an isocratic separation using hexane, isopropanol, and glacial acetic acid (995:4:1) at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. The column eluate was collected in 0.5 ml fractions and the radioactivity was determined as described above.

### Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry

The pooled fractions were isolated from solvent system II (fractions 88–94), which corresponded to the THETAs previously described [8]. The pooled fractions were extracted with cyclohexane/ethyl acetate, evaporated to dryness under nitrogen, and derivatized for gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) as previously described [24, 25]. For positive ion chemical ionization (PCI) MS analysis, the sample was dissolved in 120 μl acetonitrile and then esterified with ethereal diazomethane for 6 min at room temperature. The reaction mixture was evaporated to dryness under nitrogen and the hydroxyl groups were then silylated with 15 μl bis-TMS-trifluoroacetamide for 60 min at 37°C. In some cases, the sample was saturated by reacting with rhodium on aluminum and bubbling for 1 min with hydrogen gas. After a 60 min incubation at room temperature, the sample was filtered through a Celite column and the fatty acids were eluted with diethyl ether. The reaction mixture was evaporated to dryness with nitrogen and reacted with ethereal diazomethane and bis-TMS-trifluoroacetamide as described above. GC/MS was performed with a Hewlett Packard 5989A mass spectrometer coupled with a 5890 Series 2 gas chromatograph. Ionization of the samples was performed chemically using methane as the reagent gas. The derivatized material was resolved using a 14 m capillary DB-5 column (J&W Scientific, Folsom, CA) with a linear gradient from 100 to 300°C. Standards were derivatized and analyzed by GC/MS using the identical methods described for the biological samples.

### Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and Western blotting

Rabbit aorta was obtained as described above. Aortic tissue lysates were prepared by homogenizing samples in a buffer containing 20 mmol/L Hepes, 255 mmol/L sucrose, 1 mmol/L EDTA, and 100 μmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, pH 7.4. Aortic microsomes were prepared as described above. The protein lysates (30 μg) were analyzed by SDS-PAGE by the method of Laemmli [26] and Coligan et al. [27] using a 10% SDS-PAGE Ready gel (Bio-Rad). The proteins were electrophoretically transferred to nitrocellulose and the nitrocellulose membrane was blocked for 3 h at 25°C with 5% non-fat dried milk in Tris-buffered saline (20 mmol/L Tris hydrochloride; 500 mmol/L NaCl, pH 7.5) with Tween 20 (TTBS) before incubation with an antibody to recombinant human CYP2J2 [28]. The CYP2J2 antibody has been previously shown to immunoreact with recombinant CYP2J2 in human, rat, and mouse but does not recognize other CYP isoforms including the members of the 1A, 2A, 2B, 2C, 2D, 2E, and 4A subfamilies [21]. The primary antibody was used at a dilution of 1:1000 for 1 h at 4°C. Following washing, the blot was incubated for 1 h at 25°C with the secondary antibody (horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody) at a dilution of 1:5000. After washing again with TTBS, the blot was incubated for 1 min with Dupont Renaissance Chemiluminescent reagents. The membrane was subsequently exposed to Kodak Biomax MR imaging film and developed.

Prestained protein markers (Bio-Rad) were used for molecular mass determination. These experiments were repeated using a polyclonal CYP2C8 antibody [29] as the primary antibody.

### Statistics

Data are expressed as means ± SEM. Statistical analysis of the data was performed with an analysis of variance to determine differences within the groups and a Student's *t* test to determine differences between groups.

### Materials

Arachidonic acid, 15-lipoxygenase (soybean lipoxygenase, Type I-B), hematin, clotrimazole, nitro-L-arginine, and indomethacin were all from Sigma Chemical, St. Louis, MO. PGI₂ synthase was from Oxford Biomedical Research, Oxford, MI. SKF 525A was from RBI, Natick, MA. U-51605 was from Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI. Sulfaphenazole and the two other inhibitors of CYP2Cs used in this study, compounds 11 and 24, were synthesized as described previously [19]. Anti-CYP2J2 antibody and recombinant CYP2J2, 2J5, and 2J9 were produced as previously described [21]. Anti-CYP2C8 antibody and purified CYP2C11 and 2C8 were obtained from Dr. Jorge H. Capdevila, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN [29]. Purified eNOS was obtained from Dr. Owen Griffith, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI. \[^{14}C(U)\]Arachidonic acid (specific activity 920 mCi/mmol) was obtained from New England Nuclear, Boston, MA. All solvents were of HPLC grade and purchased from Burdick and Jackson, Muskegan, MI. \[^{14}C(U)\]15-HPETE was synthesized by incubating \[^{14}C\]arachidonic acid in 4 ml of borate buffer, pH 9.0, with 15-lipoxygenase under a stream of oxygen for 30 min at room temperature. The reaction was acidified to pH 5 with 5% hydrochloric acid and extracted with diethyl ether. The combined extracts were washed with saturated NaCl, dried with MgSO₄, filtered, and evaporated to dryness. The extract was purified by silica gel column chromatography using hexane/diethyl ether/acetic acid (2.5/10/0.25) at 4°C. The yield was approximately 50%.

### Results

Aortic microsomes were incubated with \[^{14}C(U)\]arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase, and extracted metabolites were analyzed by reverse phase HPLC using solvent system I (Fig. 1A). Radioactive products were observed that comigrated with THETAs, HEETAs, and HETEs. The conversion of the total added arachidonic acid to THETAs and HEETAs was 3 and 4.3%, respectively.

---

**Fig. 1. Metabolism of \[^{14}C\]-arachidonic acid by rabbit aortic microsomes. Aortic microsomes were incubated with \[^{14}C\]arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase, and metabolites were separated using reverse phase HPLC with solvent system I (A). Metabolites corresponding to fractions 27–35 (5–7.5 min) were collected, extracted using cyclohexane/ethyl acetate, and rechromatographed using solvent system II (B). Metabolites corresponding to fractions 87–93 (17.5–18.5 min) were collected, extracted using cyclohexane/ethyl acetate, and rechromatographed using normal phase HPLC with solvent system III (C). Migration times of known standard eicosanoids are shown above the chromatogram and are not meant to identify the corresponding radioactive peaks.**

Fractions 27–35 (5–7.5 min) were collected and analyzed further by reverse phase HPLC using solvent system II (Fig. 1B). The major peak migrated at 17.5–18.5 min (fractions 87–93) and comigrated with the THETAs. Fractions 87–93 were collected and analyzed further by normal phase HPLC using solvent system III. The THETAs were resolved into four radioactive products (peaks A–D) (Fig. 1C). There was a greater than 75% inhibition of THETA production in boiled rabbit aortic microsomes incubated with \[^{14}C(U)\]arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase (data not shown). Additionally, the only product synthesized by 15-lipoxygenase alone (in the absence of added aortic tissue)

comigrated with 15-HETE on HPLC using solvent system I [12].

Incubation of aortic tissue from rabbits with \[^{14}C\]15-HPETE resulted in the synthesis of radioactive products that migrated with authentic THETAs, HEETAs, and HETEs (Fig. 2A). The conversion of total added arachidonic acid to THETAs and HEETAs was 12.5 and 19.8%, respectively. Fractions 27–35 (5–7.5 min) were collected and analyzed further by reverse phase HPLC using solvent system II (Fig. 2B). The major peak migrated at 17.5–18.5 min (fractions 87–93) and comigrated with the THETAs. The 14–16.5 min fraction (fractions 70–83) isolated using solvent system I corresponds to the HEETAs (Fig. 2A).

The radioactive product comigrating with the THETAs was converted to its methyl ester-TMS ether derivative and analyzed by GC/MS (Fig. 3). The PCI GC/

Fig. 2. Metabolism of \[^{14}C\]15-HPETE by rabbit aorta. Aortic homogenates were incubated with \[^{14}C\]15-HPETE for 20 min and metabolites were separated using reverse phase HPLC with solvent system I (A). Metabolites corresponding to fractions 27–35 (5–7.5 min) were collected, extracted using cyclohexane/ethyl acetate, and rechromatographed using solvent system II (B). Migration times of known standard eicosanoids are shown above the chromatogram and are not meant to identify the corresponding radioactive peaks.

Fig. 3. Mass spectrum of THETAs (17.5–18.5 min) collected from reverse phase HPLC (Fig. 2B). THETAs were derivatized to the methyl ester-TMS ether and analyzed by PCI GC/MS. (A,B) show the PCI mass spectra for 11,12,15- and 11,14,15-THETA, respectively. The proposed structure of each derivatized compound is given and its prominent ions are indicated. \(m/z\), mass/charge.

MS analysis of the methyl ester-TMS ether derivative showed major products eluting at 14.08 and 14.22 min (data not shown). The mass spectrum of the 14.08 min product (Fig. 3A) revealed the presence of major ions at \(m/z\) 569 (\(M^+ - 15\); loss of \(\mathrm{CH}_3\)), 405 (\(M^+ - 179\); loss of \((\mathrm{CH}_3)_3\mathrm{SiOH}\) and \((\mathrm{CH}_3)_3\mathrm{SiO}\)), 301 (\(M^+ - 283\); loss of \((\mathrm{CH}_3)_3\mathrm{SiO}-\mathrm{CH}-(\mathrm{CH}_2-\mathrm{CH}=\mathrm{CH})_2-(\mathrm{CH}_2)_3-\mathrm{COOCH}_3\)), 283, and 173 (loss of \((\mathrm{CH}_3)_3\mathrm{SiO}-(\mathrm{CH}_2)_4-\mathrm{CH}_3\)). The mass spectrum of the product that had a GC retention time of 14.22 min showed a similar mass spectrum (Fig. 3B). The two mass spectra differed in the intensities of the 173 and 283 \(m/z\) ions. The mass spectra indicated a molecular weight of 584 for the methyl ester-TMS ether of both products. Based on these mass spectra and the intensities of the 173 and 283 ions, the 14.08 min and 14.22 min products were identified as the methyl ester-TMS ether derivatives of 11,12,15-THETA and 11,14,15-THETA, respectively. In a separate study, PCI GC/MS analysis of products A-D isolated from normal phase HPLC (Fig. 1C) indicated that the mass spectra for peak A and B were consistent with these peaks being the

11,12,15-THETA and 11,14,15-THETA, respectively (data not shown). Peaks C and D were a mixture of both 11,12,15-THETA and 11,14,15-THETA. These are probably stereoisomers of peaks A and B.

The mass spectra of the hydrogenated derivatives are shown in Fig. 4 and are consistent with the proposed structures for 11,12,15-THETA and 11,14,15-THETA. The molecular ion of the saturated derivatives is 590. The mass spectrum of 11,12,15-THETA (Fig. 4A) revealed the presence of major ions at \( m/z \) 575 (\( M^+ - 15 \); loss of \( \mathrm{CH}_3 \)), 417 (\( M^+ - 173 \); loss of \([(\mathrm{CH}_3)_3\mathrm{SiO}]-(\mathrm{CH}_2)_4-\mathrm{CH}_3 \)), 303 (\( M^+ - 287 \); loss of \((\mathrm{CH}_3)_3\mathrm{SiO}-\mathrm{CH}-(\mathrm{CH}_2)_9-\mathrm{COOCH}_3 \)), 287 (\( M^+ - 303 \)), and 173 (\( M^+ - 417 \)). For the 11,14,15-THETA (Fig. 4B), the mass spectrum showed prominent ions at \( m/z \) 575 (\( M^+ - 15 \); loss of \( \mathrm{CH}_3 \)), 417 (\( M^+ - 173 \)), 303 (\( M^+ - 287 \)), 287 (\( M^+ - 303 \)), and 173 (\( M^+ - 417 \)). Based on these mass spectra and the intensities of the 173 and 287 ions, the products were identified as the saturated, methyl ester-TMS ether derivatives of 11,12,15-THETA and 11,14,15-THETA, respectively.

Since heme-containing enzymes and proteins can convert HPETEs to HEETAs and THETAs [13–15], we tested the effect of several heme proteins and endothelial heme-containing enzymes for this activity. \({ }^{[14]}\mathrm{C}\) Arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase were incubated with either hematin (Fig. 5A), rat liver microsomes as a source of CYP enzymes [18] (Fig. 5B), eNOS (Fig. 5C), or PGI \(_2\) synthase (Fig. 5D). The metabolites were extracted and purified by reverse phase-HPLC using solvent system I followed by solvent system II and in some cases by

Fig. 4. Mass spectrum of saturated THETAs (17.5–18.5 min) collected from reverse phase HPLC (Fig. 2B). THETAs were saturated and derivatized to the methyl ester-TMS ether and analyzed by PCI GC/MS. (A,B) PCI mass spectra for 11,12,15- and 11,14,15-THETA, respectively. The proposed structure of each derivatized compound is given and its prominent ions are indicated. \( m/z \), mass/charge.

Fig. 5. Production of THETAs by heme-containing enzymes. \({ }^{[14]}\mathrm{C}\) Arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase were incubated with hematin (A), rat liver microsomes (B), eNOS (C) or PGI \(_2\) synthase (D). Metabolites were separated using reverse phase HPLC with use of solvent system I (data not shown). Metabolites corresponding to fractions 27–35 were collected, extracted using cyclohexane/ethyl acetate, rechromatographed using solvent system II, and illustrated in the figure.

normal phase-HPLC using solvent system III. Using solvent system I, all of the proteins produced a pattern of metabolites similar to incubations of 15-lipoxygenase with the aortic homogenate (data not shown). Analysis of the 5–7.5 min peak (fractions 27–35) from system I by system II indicated a product that comigrated with the THETAs (Fig. 5). The conversion of total added arachidonic acid to THETAS incubated with microsomes, hematin, eNOS, and PGI₂ synthase was 18.3, 6.0, 6.4, and 3.6%, respectively. While incubations with rat liver microsomes produced only one radioactive metabolite that comigrated with the THETAs (Fig. 5B), incubations with hematin (Fig. 5A), eNOS (Fig. 5C), and PGI₂ synthase (Fig. 5D) produced a number of other radioactive products. The pattern of metabolite(s) observed with rat liver microsomes is similar to that observed with rabbit aortic microsomes (Fig. 1B).

We investigated the effect of specific inhibitors of eNOS, PGI₂ synthase, and CYPs on the production of THETAs by rabbit aortic microsomes incubated with arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase. In the absence of any inhibitors, rabbit aortic microsomes produced a major radioactive product that comigrated with THE-TAs (Fig. 6, left panels). Pretreatment with the NOS inhibitor, L-NA or the PGI₂ synthase inhibitor, U-51605, did not affect the production of THETAs (Figs. 6B and C, and H and I). Similar results were obtained with another eNOS inhibitor, L-NMMA (10–100 μM) (data not shown). L-NA and L-NMMA did block the synthesis of THETAs by purified eNOS and U51605 blocked PGI₂ synthase catalyzed THETA synthesis (data not shown). In contrast, increasing concentrations of clotrimazole (Figs. 6E and F) blocked the synthesis of THETAs by rabbit aortic microsomes in a concentration-related manner. Clotrimazole binds the heme portion of CYP [30]. A different CYP inhibitor, SKF 525a, which does not bind heme, had no effect on THETA production (data not shown). When aortic microsomes were incubated with the specific CYP2C inhibitor sulfaphenazole (30 μM), THETA production also was not blocked (Fig. 7B). Pretreatment with compound 24, which selectively inhibits CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 at 100 μM [19] or compound 11, which selectively inhibits CYP2C8 at 10 μM [19] also did not block THETA production (Figs. 7C and D). Sulfaphenazole, compound 11, and compound 24 inhibited synthesis of THETAs by purified CYP2C8 and CYP2C9. These compounds were better inhibitors of CYP2C9 than CYP2C8 (data not shown). In contrast, when aortic microsomes were incubated with specific CYP2J2 inhibitors, ebastine or terfenadone [20], THE-TA production was reduced in a concentration-dependent manner (Fig. 8). Ebastine and terfenadone inhibited synthesis of THETAs by purified CYP2J2 (data not shown).

The next series of experiments looked specifically at which CYP isoforms may function as a hydroperoxide isomerase. Endothelial cells contain CYP enzymes of the 2J and 2C subfamilies [28, 31]. Incubations were performed with \[^{14}C\]arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase and CYP2J2 (Fig. 9A), CYP2J9 (Fig. 9B), or CYP2C8 (Fig. 9C). The metabolites were extracted and purified by reverse phase-HPLC using solvent system I, followed by solvent system II (top panel). The metabolites collected from solvent system II were purified further using normal phase-HPLC with solvent system III (bottom panels). Chromatograms showed a product that comigrated with the THETAs (Fig. 9) in all incubations with the CYP isoforms. The pattern of metabolites closely resembled the pattern of metabolites observed in rabbit aortic microsomes (Fig. 1C). Two other CYP isoforms, CYP2J5 and CYP2C11, were also tested. The pattern of metabolites observed with CYP2J5 was identical to that observed with the other CYP2J isoforms (data not shown). In contrast, the purified CYP2C11 enzyme produced a product that comigrated with the THETAs but many other unidentified radioactive products were

Fig. 6. Effect of various inhibitors on the synthesis of THETAs by rabbit aortic microsomes. Rabbit aortic microsomes were incubated with \[^{14}C\]arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase in the presence of varying concentrations of L-NA (top panels A–C), clotrimazole (middle panels D–F) or U51605 (bottom panels G–I). Metabolites were separated using reverse phase HPLC with solvent system I (data not shown). Metabolites corresponding to fractions 27–35 were collected, extracted using cyclohexane/ethyl acetate, rechromatographed using solvent system II, and illustrated in the figure.

S.L. Pfister et al. / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 420 (2003) 142–152

Fig. 7. Effect of specific inhibitors of CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 on the production of THETAs. \[^{14}C\]Arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase were incubated with sulfaphenazole (30 μM) (B), compound 24 (100 μM) (C) or compound 11 (10 μM) (D). Metabolites were separated using reverse phase HPLC with use of solvent system I (data not shown). Metabolites corresponding to fractions 27–35 were collected, extracted using cyclohexane/ethyl acetate, rechromatographed using solvent system II, and illustrated in the figure.

also observed (data not shown). The pattern of metabolites with CYP2C11 more closely resembled the products observed with purified PGI₂ synthase and eNOS (Fig. 5). The radioactive metabolites from CYP2J2 and CYP2J9 were collected, derivatized, and analyzed by GC/MS. The mass spectra were identical to those shown in Fig. 3 confirming the production of 11,12,15- and 11,14,15-THETAs by these isozymes.

Specific polyclonal anti-CYP2C8 or anti-CYP2J2 antibodies were used for Western blot analysis in lysates prepared from rabbit aortas and rabbit aortic microsomes. Immunoreactive bands in the molecular weight range of 54–56 kDa were observed in the aortic lysates and microsomes with both the anti-CYP2J2 antibody and anti-CYP2C8 antibody (data not shown). This experiment was repeated two times and similar results were observed and indicate the presence of rabbit isoforms analogous to human CYP2C8 and CYP2J2 in the rabbit aorta. The expression of both enzymes was similar when equal amounts of protein were analyzed.

Discussion

The present study indicates that 15-HPETE is converted by a microsomal hydroperoxide isomerase to 11-H-14,15- and 15-H-11,12-EETA and their hydrolysis products, 11,14,15- and 11,12,15-THETAs. Several endothelial enzymes function as hydroperoxide isomerases including CYPs, NOS, and PGI₂ synthase. Results showed that incubation of arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase with rat liver microsomes, a rich source of CYP enzymes, resulted in the formation of a product that comigrated with THETAs on HPLC. If rabbit

S.L. Pfister et al. / Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 420 (2003) 142–152

Fig. 9. Production of THETAs by CYP2J and CYP2C. \[^{14}C\]Arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase was incubated with CYP2J2 (A), CYP2J9 (B), or CYP2C8 (C). Metabolites were separated using reverse phase HPLC with use of solvent system I (data not shown). Metabolites corresponding to fractions 27–35 were collected, extracted using cyclohexane/ethyl acetate, and rechromatographed using solvent system II (A, B, and C). Metabolites corresponding to fractions 87–93 (17.5–18.5 min) of (A), (B), and (C) were collected, extracted using cyclohexane/ethyl acetate, and rechromatographed using normal phase HPLC with solvent system III (D, E, and F).

aortic microsomes were used as the source of hydroperoxide isomerases, incubations with arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase also produced THETAs. Furthermore, rabbit aortic microsomes converted 15-HPETE to THETAs. If purified CYP isozyymes were incubated with arachidonic acid and 15-lipoxygenase, the major product comigrated with the THETAs. Finally, clotrimazole, a CYP inhibitor, blocked the ability of aortic microsomes to produce THETAs. Miconazole, another CYP inhibitor, also blocked THETA synthesis [12].

Since several other heme-containing enzymes besides CYPs can function as hydroperoxide isomerases and catalyze the rearrangement of 15-HPETE to the THETAs, we also examined the role of hematin, and two endothelial heme-containing enzymes, eNOS and PGI₂ synthase, in the production of THETAs. Cyclo-oxygenase was not tested, since previous studies indicate that indomethacin increases rather than inhibits THETA synthesis [8,12]. Reverse phase-HPLC analysis of the incubations with these enzymes indicated a pattern of metabolites similar to incubations of 15-lipoxygenase plus rabbit aortic microsomes. Further purification indicated that there was a product that comigrated with the THETAs. However, a number of other products were also produced by hematin, eNOS, and PGI₂ synthase. This was in contrast to the incubation of rat liver microsomes with 15-lipoxygenase and arachidonic acid, which produced only one major metabolite similar to that produced by rabbit aortic homogenates incubated with 15-HPETE. We used inhibitors of NOS and PGI₂ synthase to determine if these enzymes were involved in aortic THETA synthesis. Neither the NOS inhibitors, L-NA or L-NMMA, nor the PGI₂ synthase inhibitor, U-51605, affected THETA production by aortic microsomes. However, the synthesis of the THETAs by aortic microsomes was blocked by the heme-binding CYP inhibitor, clotrimazole. Another CYP inhibitor, SKF 525A, which does not bind to the heme portion of the enzyme, was ineffective as an inhibitor of THETA production from the rabbit aortic microsomes. Previous studies showed that miconazole, a CYP inhibitor that is similar in structure to clotrimazole, did not alter eNOS activity [32] but inhibited THETA synthesis [12]. Metyrapone, a CYP2B inhibitor, did not inhibit THETA synthesis [8]. These results would support the conclusion that clotrimazole is a specific inhibitor of CYPs and does not inhibit all heme-containing enzymes.

Weiss et al. [14] provided the first evidence that the conversion of 15-HPETE to HEETAs occurs by an enzymatic transformation involving CYPs. Chang et al. [33] looked at the CYP-dependent metabolism of 15(S)-HPETE and found that rat liver microsomes obtained from control or phenobarbital-treated rats, or purified CYP2B1 enzyme converted 15(S)-HPETE to 11-H-14,15-EETA. When they examined CYP-mediated metabolism using 15(R)-HPETE as a substrate, a different product was formed, 13-H-14,15-EETA. The results of their experiments are important in that they

present a model system for mammalian CYPs in the
stereoselective synthesis of HEETAs and may be ex-
tended to the hydroperoxide isomerase in vascular tis-
sue. We have previously shown that the major
stereoisomer of 15-HETE in rabbit aorta was 15(S)-
HETE [25], supporting other observations that a 15(S)-
lipoxygenase is the enzyme producing 15(S)-HPETE in
rabbit aorta. Consistent with 15(S)-HPETE synthesis
and the aortic hydroperoxide isomerase having a CYP-
like mechanism, rabbit aorta synthesizes 11-H-14,15-
EETA and 15-H-11,12-EETA and not 13-H-14,15-
EETA [12].

CYP is a family of enzymes with preferential speci-
ficity for different substrates [34]. Understanding the role
of CYP in arachidonic acid metabolism is particularly
important considering the vast array of biological ac-
tivities associated with arachidonic acid metabolites.
For example, the CYP2C8 isoform was isolated and
cloned from human endothelial cells [35]. This isoform
produces the vasodilator epoxyeicosatrienoic acid de-
rivatives of arachidonic acid [28, 35]. Wu and coworkers
have recently reported the expression of CYP2J sub-
family enzymes that also metabolize arachidonic acid
[21, 22, 28]. In the human heart, CYP2J2 metabolizes
arachidonic acid to EETs [21] while CYP2J5 is highly
expressed in mouse kidney and catalyzes the formation
of EETs [22]. CYP2J9 is expressed in mouse brain and
converts arachidonic acid to 19-HETE [23]. There is
recent evidence that the CYP2J2 isoform is responsible
for EET biosynthesis in human endothelial cells [28, 36].
Using rabbit aortic tissue, we examined the expression
of CYP enzymes to determine which specific isoform
may be responsible for the conversion of 15-HPETE to
the HEETAs. Immunoblot analysis showed the presence
of both CYP2C8 and CYP2J in aortic tissue. CYP2J2
and CYP2C8 are human isozymes; however, the pres-
ence of 55 kDa immunoreactive proteins to several anti-
CYP2J2 and anti-CYP2C8 antibodies in rabbit aorta
suggests the presence of orthologous rabbit isoforms.
While CYP2C8 protein is expressed in the aortas, it does
not appear to be the major isoform involved in the
production of THETAs. This conclusion is based on the
observation that incubation of purified CYP2C8 and
CYP2C11 enzymes with arachidonic acid and 15-li-
poxygenase did not produce a pattern of metabolites
resembling those seen in rabbit aortic microsomes. Ad-
ditionally, sulfaphenazole, compound 24, and com-
pound 11 [19], specific inhibitors of CYP2C8 and 2C9,
did not block THETA production. There is recent evi-
dence that N-alkylated sulfaphenazole derivatives, sim-
ilar to compounds 11 and 24, inhibit rabbit liver
CYP2C5 [37]. There is evidence that CYP2J2 may rep-
resent the aortic hydroperoxide isomerase. CYP2J pro-
tein is expressed in rabbit aorta and the major products
formed in incubations with recombinant CYP2J2,
CYP2J5, and CYP2J9 enzymes were identified as

11,12,15-and 11,14,15-THETAs. There was no evidence
of other metabolites as with rabbit vascular tissue. Ad-
ditionally, two specific inhibitors of CYP2J2, ebastine
and terfenadone, produced a concentration-dependent
inhibition of THETA production in rabbit aortic mi-
crosomes. At the present time, it appears that CYP2J
and not CYP2C represents the hydroperoxide isomerase
in rabbit aorta.

While 15-lipoxygenase is a non-heme-containing en-
zyme [11], it would not be predicted to have hydroper-
oxide isomerase activity. However, there is evidence that
under certain experimental conditions such as low oxy-
gen, the enzyme can convert 15-HPETE to a short chain
aldehyde, 14,15-epoxide, 15-ketone or a HEETA [11, 38–
40]. Specifically, when Bryant et al. [38] incubated
purified rabbit reticulocyte 15-lipoxygenase-1 with ara-
chidonic acid, 13-hydroxy-14,15-epoxyeicosatrienoic
acid (13-H-14,15-EETA) was the only HEETA formed.
Recently, epidermal 12-lipoxygenase-3 (ALOXE3)
which is devoid of lipoxygenase activity was shown to
have hydroperoxide isomerase activity and produce 13-
H-14,15-EETA from 15-HPETE [41]. In the current
study, 13-H-14,15-EETA was not produced by the
rabbit aortic homogenates or homogenates incubated
with 15-lipoxygenase, suggesting that aortic 15-lipoxy-
genase is not responsible for the hydroperoxide isom-
erase activity. Furthermore, we find that the aortic
hydroperoxide isomerase activity is associated with the
microsomal fraction. Since 15-lipoxygenase is a cyto-
solic enzyme [11], it cannot account for the microsomal
hydroperoxide isomerase activity of aorta.

The degradation of 15-HPETE to 15-HETE may be
catalyzed by glutathione peroxidase, phospholipids hy-
droperoxide glutathione peroxidase and thioredoxin
reductase [40, 42]. Each of these enzymes is present in the
vascular endothelium and may promote the degradation
of 15-HPETE to 15-HETE rather than metabolism of
15-HPETE to HEETAs and THETAs [43, 44]. In fact, in
platelets and insulinoma cells, inhibition of glutathione
peroxidase enhances the production of THETAs and
hepoxilins [45–47]. These studies suggest that the pres-
ence of glutathione peroxidases and thioredoxin reduc-
tase in the endothelium may regulate the synthesis of
THETAs and HEETAs and inhibition of these enzymes
may increase their synthesis.

In summary, we propose that arachidonic acid is
metabolized by 15-lipoxygenase to 15-HPETE, which
undergoes an enzymatic rearrangement by a hydroper-
oxide isomerase to either 11-H-14,15-, 15-H-11,12-
EETA or both. We provide evidence that a CYP,
probably of the CYP2J subfamily, may act as a hydro-
peroxide isomerase. Further hydrolysis of the epoxy
group results in the formation of 11,12,15-and 11,14,15-
THETA. The HEETAs and THETAs are both vasodi-
lators and may function as important regulators of
vascular tone [12].

Acknowledgments

We thank Ms. Blythe Holmes, Mrs.Laura Kreckler, Mr. Erik Edwards, Ms. Sarah Hittner, and Mr. David Kachelmeyer for technical help and Mrs. Gretchen Barg for secretarial assistance. These studies were supported by a grant from the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (HL-37981) and the NIEHS Division of Intramural Research.

References

[1] R.F. Furchgott, P.M. Vanhoutte, FASEB J. 3 (1989) 2007–2018.
[2] S. Moncada, J.R. Vane, Pharmacol. Rev. 30 (1979) 293–331.
[3] W.B. Campbell, D. Gebremedhin, P.F. Pratt, D.R. Harder, Circ. Res. 78 (1996) 415–423.
[4] J.G. DeMey, M. Claeys, P.M. Vanhoutte, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 222 (1982) 166–173.
[5] A. Pinto, N.G. Abraham, K.M. Mullane, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 236 (1986) 445–451.
[6] G.M. Rubanyi, P.M. Vanhoutte, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 235 (1985) 81–86.
[7] H.A. Singer, M.J. Peach, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 226 (1983) 790–795.
[8] S.L. Pfister, N. Spitzbarth, W. Edgemond, W.B. Campbell, Am. J. Physiol. 270 (1996) H1021–H1030.
[9] C.R. Pace-Asciak, S. Asotra, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 7 (1989) 409–433.
[10] H. Kuhn, T. Schewe, S.M. Rapoport, Adv. Enzymol. Mol. Biol. 58 (1986) 273–311.
[11] H. Kuhn, S. Borngraber, Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 447 (1999) 5–28.
[12] S.L. Pfister, N. Spitzbarth, K. Nithipatikom, W.S. Edgemond, J.R. Falck, W.B. Campbell, J. Biol. Chem. 273 (1998) 30879–30887.
[13] H.W. Gardner, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 7 (1989) 65–86.
[14] R.H. Weiss, J.L. Arnold, R.W. Estabrook, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 252 (1987) 334–338.
[15] C.R. Pace-Asciak, E. Granstrom, B. Samuelsson, J. Biol. Chem. 258 (1983) 6835–6840.
[16] C.R. Pace-Asciak, Prostaglandins Leuk. Med. 22 (1986) 1–9.
[17] S.K. Shyue, K.H. Ruan, L.H. Wang, K.K. Wu, J. Biol. Chem. 272 (1997) 3657–3662.
[18] J.H. Capdevila, J.R. Falck, E. Dishman, A. Karara, Methods Enzymol. 187 (1990) 385–394.
[19] N.T. Ha-Duong, S. Dijols, C. Marques-Soares, C. Minoletti, P.M. Dansette, D. Mansuy, J. Med. Chem. 44 (2001) 3622–3631.
[20] T. Hashizume, S. Imaoka, M. Mise, Y. Terauchi, T. Fujii, H. Miyazaki, T. Kamataki, Y. Funae, J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 300 (2002) 298–304.
[21] S. Wu, C.R. Moomaw, K.B. Tomer, J.R. Falck, D.C. Zeldin, J. Biol. Chem. 271 (1996) 3460–3468.
[22] J. Ma, W. Qu, P.E. Scarborough, K.B. Tomer, C.R. Moomaw, R. Maronpot, L.S. Davis, M.D. Breyer, D.C. Zeldin, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (1999) 17777–17788.
[23] W. Qu, J.A. Bradbury, C.C. Tsao, R. Maronpot, G.J. Harry, C.E. Parker, L.S. Davis, M.D. Breyer, M.P. Waalkes, J.R. Falck, J. Chen, R.L. Rosenberg, D.C. Zeldin, J. Biol. Chem. 276 (2001) 25467–25479.
[24] S.L. Pfister, J.M. Schmitz, J.T. Willerson, W.B. Campbell, Prostaglandins 36 (1988) 515–531.
[25] S.L. Pfister, J.R. Falck, W.B. Campbell, Am. J. Physiol. 261 (1991) H843–H852.
[26] U.K. Laemmli, Nature 227 (1970) 680–685.
[27] J.E. Coligan, A.M. Kruisbeek, D.H. Marglies, E.M. Shevach, W. Strober, Curr. Prot. Immunol. 1 (1992) 8.4.1–8.4.17.
[28] K. Node, Y. Huo, X. Ruan, B. Yang, M. Spiecker, K. Ley, D.C. Zeldin, J.K. Liao, Science 285 (1999) 1276–1279.
[29] D.C. Zeldin, R.N. DuBois, J.R. Falck, J.H. Capdevila, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 322 (1995) 76–86.
[30] H. Vanden Bossche, P. Marichal, J. Gorrens, M.C. Coene, G. Willemssens, D. Bellens, I. Roels, H. Moereels, P.A. Janssen, Mycoses 32 (1989) 35–52.
[31] B. Fisslthaler, R. Popp, L. Kiss, M. Potente, D.R. Harder, I. Fleming, R. Busse, Nature 401 (1999) 493–497.
[32] W.B. Campbell, D. Gebremadhin, P. Pratt, D.R. Harder, Circ. Res. 78 (1996) 415–423.
[33] M.S. Chang, W.E. Boeglin, F.P. Guengerich, A.R. Brash, Biochemistry 35 (1996) 464–471.
[34] J.H. Capdevila, V. Holla, C. Helvig, J.R. Falck, Mol. Aspects Med. 20 (1999) 42–137.
[35] J.H.C. Lin, Y. Kobari, Y. Zhu, M.B. Stemerman, K.A. Pritchard, Endothelium 4 (1995) 219–229.
[36] T.J. Yang, K.W. Krausz, Y. Sai, F.J. Gonzalez, H.Y. Gelboin, Drug Metab. Dispos. 27 (1999) 102–109.
[37] C. Marques-Soares, S. Dijols, A.C. Macherey, M.R. Wester, E.F. Johnson, P.M. Dansette, D. Mansuy, Biochemistry 42 (2003) 6363–6369.
[38] R.W. Bryant, T. Schewe, S.M. Rapoport, J.M. Bailey, J. Biol. Chem. 260 (1985) 3548–3555.
[39] G.J. Garssen, G.A. Veldink, J.F. Vliegenthart, J. Boldingh, Eur. J. Biochem. 62 (1976) 33–36.
[40] H. Kuhn, Prog. Lipid Res. 35 (1996) 203–226.
[41] Z. Yu, C. Schneider, W.E. Boeglin, L.J. Marnett, A.R. Brash, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 100 (2003) 9162–9167.
[42] K. Schnurr, J. Belkner, F. Ursini, T. Schewe, H. Kuhn, J. Biol. Chem. 27 (1996) 4653–4658.
[43] M.H. Lewin, J.R. Arthur, R.A. Riemersma, F. Nicol, S.W. Walker, E.M. Millar, A.F. Howie, G.J. Beckett, Biochem. Biophys. Acta 1593 (2002) 85–92.
[44] S. Miller, S.W. Walker, J.R. Arthur, M.H. Lewin, K. Pickard, F. Nicol, A.F. Howie, G.J. Beckett, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1588 (2002) 85–93.
[45] R.W. Bryant, M.J. Bailey, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 92 (1980) 268–276.
[46] M. Sutherland, P. Shankaranarayanan, T. Schewe, S. Nigam, Biochem. J. 353 (2001) 91–100.
[47] P. Shankaranarayanan, R. Ciccoli, S. Nigam, FEBS Lett. 538 (2003) 107–112.
