
Getting to the membrane: how is co-translational protein targeting to the endoplasmic reticulum regulated?

M.R. Pool¹

School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, 2.205 Stopford Building, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, U.K.

---

### Abstract

Co-translational protein targeting to the endoplasmic reticulum requires the signal-recognition particle, its cognate receptor and the translocation channel. Co-ordination of the targeting process necessitates the interaction of these components with each other and with the ribosome. These interactions are regulated by three GTPases, which act in concert, ensuring the fidelity of the targeting process.

---

### Background

Secretory proteins are synthesized with a hydrophobic N-terminal signal sequence, which directs them into the secretory pathway. In eukaryotes, this first involves the targeting of the protein to the ER (endoplasmic reticulum), where it is translocated into the lumen. At least two different ER targeting pathways have been identified. The first, and experimentally the best defined, is the co-translational pathway [1,2]. Here, the targeting and translocation process is tightly coupled to protein synthesis, such that it proceeds while the nascent chain is still being synthesized. For this to happen, the components of the targeting and translocation machinery have to interact with the ribosome itself. This mode of targeting brings the advantage of preventing the nascent chain from becoming folded/misfolded in the cytosol prior to translocation. This review is focused upon recent progress in understanding how the co-translational pathway is regulated.

The second pathway, which will not be discussed here, is the ‘post-translational pathway’ [2,3]. This system, which has been particularly well studied in the yeast *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*, can be uncoupled from protein synthesis and involves targeting factors distinct from the co-translational pathway to deliver precursor proteins to the translocation channel. Properties of the signal sequence, in particular its hydrophobicity, determine which targeting pathway a particular protein utilizes [4].

---

### The targeting reaction

As the signal sequence emerges from the ribosome, it is recognized by the SRP (signal-recognition particle) [1,5]. The SRP binds to the signal sequence (Figure 1A) and induces a transient retardation in protein synthesis, termed ‘elongation arrest’ [6]. This slows down synthesis of the nascent chain, prolonging the time during which it is competent to be targeted to the membrane. SRP then targets the ribosome, together with the nascent chain, to the ER. This is mediated by the interaction of SRP with the SR (SRP receptor), a heterodimeric integral ER membrane protein [7] (Figure 1). SR catalyses the transfer of the RNC (ribosome-nascent chain) complex from SRP to the translocation pore, formed by the Sec61p complex [2,8,9]. This releases the block in elongation, and translation resumes with the newly synthesized chain passing through the translocation pore into the ER lumen.

---

### The targeting machinery

SRP is a ribonucleoprotein particle composed of a 300-nt 7 S RNA molecule and six polypeptides with masses of 9, 14, 19, 54, 68 and 72 kDa [1,5] (Figure 1B). SRP has a flexible rod-like structure, organized into two domains, which can be separated by mild ribonuclease treatment [10]. The S-domain comprises helices 6–8 and part of helix 5 of the 7 S RNA together with SRP19, SRP54, SRP68 and SRP72. The Alu domain includes SRP9, SRP14, RNA helices 2–4 and the remaining part of helix 5. Signal sequence binding and interaction with SR is mediated by components of the S-domain, and in particular SRP54, which contains the binding site for the signal sequence and also contacts SR directly [11–13]. In contrast, the Alu domain is responsible for elongation arrest [14].

Homologues of SRP and SR exist in prokaryotes, where they function to insert integral membrane proteins into the inner membrane, and transport secretory proteins across it into the periplasmic space [15]. Bacterial SRP is simpler than its eukaryotic counterpart, being composed of an SRP54 homologue (Ffh) and a 114-nt 4.5 S RNA with identity with helices 5 and 8 of the 7 S RNA (Figure 1B). Consistent with the lack of an Alu domain, bacterial SRP does not induce elongation arrest. Bacterial SR is composed of a single polypeptide, FtsY, a homologue of the α subunit of SR.

---

Key words: cross-linking, endoplasmic reticulum, ribosome, signal recognition particle, translocon.

Abbreviations used: ER, endoplasmic reticulum; SRP, signal-recognition particle; SR, SRP receptor; RNC, ribosome-nascent chain; p[NH]ppG, guanosine 5′-[β,γ-imido]triphosphate.

e-mail martin.pool@man.ac.uk

©2003 Biochemical Society

Figure 1 | (A) Co-translational targeting to the ER membrane and (B) components of the targeting machinery

(A) Three GTPases, SRP54, SRα and SRβ, regulate the targeting reaction. The scheme depicts a current model for the sequence of events in the delivery of RNC complexes bearing signal sequences to the translocation channel. The GTP (T)- and GDP (D)-bound states of the GTPases are indicated. The complete GTPase cycle of SRβ is not yet fully understood and so for clarity is omitted. See text for further details. (B) Schematic representation showing the compositions of the higher eukaryotic and bacterial SRPs and SRs. GTPases are indicated in bold. M, SRP54/Ffh M-domain which contains the signal-peptide-binding groove; NG, related GTPase domain found in SRP54, Ffh, SRα and FtsY. The position of residue U84, which could be cross-linked to the ribosome, is indicated.

**Signal sequence recognition**

SRP can bind to all ribosomes independently of a signal sequence with a modest affinity (Kd ≈70 nM) [16,17]. However, SRP has an approx. 9-fold higher affinity for ribosomes that are actively translating [17], indicating that it can discriminate between active and inactive ribosomes. Consistent with this, SRP has been shown to interact with the ribosome at a distinct stage in the translation cycle [18]. Once the signal peptide emerges from the ribosome, the affinity of SRP for the RNC complex increases considerably, to ≈0.2 nM [17]. Such a two-phase binding to ribosomes led to the proposal of a ‘sampling model’, whereby SRP binds dynamically to ribosomes and scans the nascent chain for the presence of signal sequences [18]. This explains how SRP can function efficiently despite the 10–100-fold excess of ribosomes over SRP [18].

Progress has been made recently in identifying where on the ribosome SRP binds. Cross-linking has been used to

Figure 2 | (A) Location of SRP-binding sites on the bacterial ribosome and (B) location of SRP54- and Sec61p-binding sites on the eukaryotic ribosome

(A) Backbone representation of 50 S subunit from *Haloarcula* [20] (light grey); SRP-interaction sites are highlighted in dark grey in the space-fill representation. Ffh could be cross-linked to ribosomal protein L23, located close to the exit site. 4.5 S RNA could be cross-linked to the residues 2845–2854 of the 23 S rRNA (helices 100 and 101), located below the L7/L12 stalk.

(B) Backbone representation of the 60 S subunit (ribosomal proteins, light grey; rRNA, off-white) viewed looking towards the exit site. Left-hand panel: features implicated in SRP54 and Sec61p binding are indicated. Right-hand panel: their arrangement into the different contact sites. SRP54 could be cross-linked to L23a and L35 (dark grey). The Sec61p complex forms four contacts with the ribosome (black): C1 involving L19 and helix 59 of the 28 S rRNA; C2 involving L19, L23a and helices 53 and 50; C3 involving L26 and helix 24; and C4 involving L23a, L35 and helix 7. Note the overlap between the SRP54-interaction site and C4 of the Sec61-binding site.

---

probe the molecular environment of SRP54 when SRP is bound to the ribosome. SRP54 could be cross-linked to ribosomal proteins L23a and L35 [19]. These proteins are located together on the surface of the large ribosomal subunit close to where the nascent chain emerges from the ribosomal exit tunnel [20,21] (Figure 2B). This location of SRP54 on the ribosome rationalizes previous data, which revealed that SRP54 contacts the signal sequence shortly after it emerges from the exit tunnel [22]. The positioning of SRP54 relative to the ribosome appears to be largely independent of the presence of a signal sequence, as SRP54 can be cross-linked to L23a and L35 when bound to RNCs which lack a signal peptide [19]. Therefore SRP54 is orientated on the ribosome such that it can sample the emerging nascent chain for signal sequences, in accordance with the scanning model.

Similar cross-linking studies revealed that the bacterial SRP54, Ffh, could be cross-linked to the ribosomal homologue of L23a, L23 [23,24] (Figure 2A). Gu and colleagues [23] used cross-linking probes introduced at specific sites in Ffh via unique cysteines. Cross-linking to L23 was only observed from positions in the N-domain, suggesting that this domain may interact directly with the ribosome.

RNA cross-linking studies using bacterial SRP identified a contact between residue 84 of the 4.5 S RNA (Figure 1B)
and residues 2828–2837 of the 23 S rRNA in the large subunit [25]. This site is located relatively close to the exit site, below the L7/L12 stalk (Figure 2A). This position of the 4.5 S RNA is compatible with the cross-link between Ffh and L23, although the 4.5 S RNA would have to be in an extended conformation to bridge both sites [23]. The RNA cross-link was formed only in the presence of a nascent chain, again indicating that SRP senses actively translating ribosomes [25].

SRP54 is a GTPase and it has been shown that when SRP binds to the ribosome, the affinity of SRP54 for GTP is increased [26]. This is mediated by a component of the ribosome rather than by the signal sequence itself. As SRP54 must bind GTP in order to interact with the SR [27], the ribosome has been proposed to act to prime SRP54 [26]. The ribosomal component responsible for priming remains obscure, although cross-linking of SRP54 to L35 correlates with activation of SRP54 and is therefore a strong candidate [19]. Although the activation mechanism is unclear, the increase in affinity for GTP, but not GDP [26], suggests there may be rearrangements around the γ-phosphate of the bound nucleotide. Interestingly, when free SRP54 binds GTP, the γ-phosphate is kinked away from the canonical position, observed in other GTPases [28]. An attractive possibility is that ribosomal activation involves changes in SRP54, which reorientate the γ-phosphate into the canonical position.

To date, no other components of SRP have been localized with respect to the ribosome. The Alu domain has been proposed to interact with the elongation factor-binding site at the subunit interface, where it can antagonize translation [29]. SRP is ≈230 Å in length, which is long enough to span the distance from the exit site, where SRP54 is positioned, to the elongation factor-binding site (≈160 Å) [30]. The extreme C-terminus of SRP14 is essential for the elongation arrest, suggesting that it might interact with a component of the ribosome [31,32].

### Docking at the membrane

SRP targets the RNC complex to the membrane via its interaction with SR. As mentioned above, this reaction requires SRP54 to be loaded with GTP (Figure 1). Both the α and β subunits of the SR are also GTPases. The GTPase domain of SRα is closely related to that of SRP54 and likewise has a low affinity for nucleotide (K<sub>d</sub> ≈ 14 μM). Contact of SRP54 with SRα [27,33] (Figure 1A). SRP RNA is required for this interaction and functions catalytically, accelerating the formation of the SRP–SR complex [34,35]. GTP binding to SRP54 and SRα is necessary but not sufficient to release the nascent chain from SRP54 [27,36]. The presence of the Sec61p complex is required to induce release of the nascent chain from the primed SRP–SR complex [36]. Limited proteolysis of microsomal membranes indicated that cleavage of the cytoplasmic loops of Sec61α correlated precisely with a block in the release of the signal peptide from the SRP–SR complex [36], inferring that Sec61α triggers transfer of the RNC from SRP to the translocon.

SRβ must also bind GTP for the nascent chain to be transferred from SRP to the translocon [37,38]. SRβ appears to interact with the ribosome, leading to a reduction in its affinity for nucleotide and increase in GTP hydrolysis [39]. Furthermore, SRβ could be cross-linked to an as yet unidentified protein of the large subunit in the absence of nucleotide or with GDP but not with GTP [38]. This interaction was not observed in the presence of the Sec61p complex. This led to the proposal that the ribosome regulates nucleotide binding to SRβ such that it stabilizes the nucleotide-free form of the protein. The presence of the Sec61p complex antagonizes the SRβ–ribosome interaction, thereby permitting nucleotide binding to SRβ. This suggests that SRβ acts to co-ordinate release of the signal sequence from SRP with the presence of the translocon.

Recent data obtained using the yeast SRβ, without SRα, have suggested an alternative model, whereby the translocon directly induces GTP binding to SRβ. Helmers and colleagues [40] reported that the cytosolic domain of Sec61β acts as a nucleotide exchange factor for SRβ. However, if this model is correct, it is not completely clear why yeast strains lacking both copies of Sec61β exhibit translocation defects which are slight and distinct from the much more severe phenotypes of SRβ mutants [37,41]. Moreover, experiments using proteolysed canine microsomes indicated that cleavage of Sec61α, but not Sec61β, blocked the release of the nascent chain from SRP [36]. Thus, while it appears likely that the translocon induces nucleotide binding to SRβ, further experiments are required to pinpoint precisely which component(s) is(are) responsible.

Bacteria do not possess a homologue of SRβ. The N-terminus of SRα, which interacts with SRβ, is replaced by a lipid-binding domain in FtsY [42]. FtsY is found both free in the cytosol and associated with the inner membrane [43]. Binding to anionic phospholipids appears to trigger a conformational change in the GTPase domain of FtsY, thereby activating it when it contacts the membrane [42]. It is not clear why the eukaryotic SR requires an additional GTPase. It may be that the targeting reaction must be more tightly regulated in eukaryotes and that this is provided in two ways: first, by the elongation arrest activity of SRP, retarding synthesis during targeting; and secondly, by SRβ co-ordinating the release from SRP with the presence of the translocation channel.

### Transfer to the translocon

The translocation channel bound to the ribosome has recently been visualized by cryo-electron microscopy. The channel forms a doughnut-shaped structure bound to the surface of the ribosome around the exit site. The indentation in the translocon, which most likely forms the aqueous channel through which the nascent chain passes, is aligned with the ribosomal exit channel [44,45]. Four strong contacts are observed between the ribosome and the translocon (see Figure 2B for details) [44–46]. Intriguingly, the strongest of these contacts is centred upon ribosomal proteins L23a(Rpl25p in yeast) and L35 (Figure 2B) [45,46]. These are the very proteins that are proposed to form the SRP54-binding site, indicating that the SRP and Sec61 ribosome-binding sites at least partially overlap. Consistent with this, SRP has been shown to block binding of RNCs to the Sec61p complex in the absence of either SR or GTP [22,34]. Only in the presence of both SR and GTP can the ribosome bind to Sec61p complex. Cross-linking studies revealed that in the presence of SR and p[NH]ppG (guanosine 5′-[β,γ-imido]triphosphate), SRP54 remains in proximity to the nascent chain and L35 but distal to L23a [19]. The formation of the primed RNC–SRP–SR complex appears to lead to the reorientation of SRP54 relative to the ribosome. An attractive model would be that this rearrangement permits approach of Sec61p to the ribosome, while retaining SRP and the nascent chain in proximity so that the signal sequence can be readily transferred to the translocon [19]. Experiments using a targeting assay, which is independent of SRP, indicate the translocon itself can recognize the signal sequence [22]. This suggests that the signal sequence is transferred to a specific binding site in the Sec61p complex [22].

Displacement of SRP from the ribosome may also involve an expansion element of the 28 S rRNA (ES27), which forms a 150 Å helix close to the exit site. Binding of the translocon to the ribosome induces a dramatic repositioning of ES27, involving a 90° rotation [45]. This might provide a further mechanism that promotes release of SRP from the ribosome, although alternative functions, such as recruiting processing factors to the translocon, are also possible [45].

### GTP hydrolysis

Nucleotide hydrolysis is required for multiple rounds of targeting; however, a single round can occur in its absence, as evidenced by the ability of p[NH]ppG to support targeting [47]. SRP54 and SRα act as reciprocal GTPase-activating proteins, stimulating GTP hydrolysis in each other [27,48]. Once nucleotide hydrolysis has occurred, SRP dissociates from SR permitting further rounds of targeting [47]. GTP hydrolysis by SRβ is poorly understood. It is neither clear when hydrolysis in SRβ occurs, nor how it is regulated. However, considering SRβ’s intrinsically low GTPase activity, it is likely that hydrolysis will involve a GTPase-activating protein [49].

### Conclusions

The co-translational targeting machinery provides an example of an exquisite regulatory network that serves to coordinate protein synthesis with targeting and translocation. SRP54 is activated upon signal sequence recognition at the ribosome. Arrival of the SRP–RNC complex at the membrane then triggers activation of SRα. Activation of the third GTPase, SRβ, is dependent upon the presence of the translocation channel. The interaction of these three molecular switches ensures that the events of targeting occur in the correct sequence, such that the signal sequence is recognized, targeted to the membrane and then released into translocation channel.

I thank Bernhard Dobberstein and Louise Owen for critical reading of the manuscript.

### References

1. Keenan, R.J., Freymann, D.M., Stroud, R.M. and Walter, P. (2001) Annu. Rev. Biochem. **70**, 755–775
2. Johnson, A.E. and van Waes, M.A. (1999) Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. **16**, 799–842
3. Matlack, K.E., Mothes, W. and Rapoport, T.A. (1998) Cell **92**, 381–390
4. Ng, D.T., Brown, J.D. and Walter, P. (1996) J. Cell Biol. **134**, 269–278
5. Lütcke, H. (1995) Eur. J. Biochem. **228**, 531–550
6. Walter, P. and Blobel, G. (1981) J. Cell Biol. **91**, 557–561
7. Gilmore, R., Walter, P. and Blobel, G. (1982) J. Cell Biol. **95**, 470–477
8. Görlich, D., Prehn, S., Hartmann, E., Kalies, K.-U. and Rapoport, T.A. (1992) Cell **71**, 489–503
9. Stirling, C.J., Rothblatt, J., Hosobuchi, M., Deshaies, R. and Schekman, R. (1992) Mol. Biol. Cell **3**, 129–142
10. Andrews, D.W., Walter, P. and Ottensmeyer, F.P. (1987) EMBO J. **6**, 3471–3477
11. Zopf, D., Bernstein, H.D., Johnson, A.E. and Walter, P. (1990) EMBO J. **9**, 4511–4517
12. Miller, J.D., Wilhelm, H., Gierasch, L., Gilmore, R. and Walter, P. (1993) Nature (London) **366**, 351–354
13. Keenan, R.J., Freymann, D.M., Walter, P. and Stroud, R.M. (1998) Cell **94**, 181–191
14. Siegel, V. and Walter, P. (1988) Cell **52**, 39–49
15. Dalbey, R.E. and Kuhn, A. (2000) Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. **16**, 51–87
16. Walter, P. and Blobel, G. (1983) J. Cell Biol. **97**, 1693–1699
17. Flanagan, J.J., Chen, J.C., Miao, Y., Shao, Y., Lin, J., Bock, P.E. and Johnson, A.E. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. **278**, 18628–18637
18. Ogg, S.C. and Walter, P. (1995) Cell **81**, 1075–1084
19. Pool, M.R., Stumm, J., Fulga, T.A., Sinning, I. and Dobberstein, B. (2002) Science **297**, 1345–1348
20. Ban, N., Nissen, P., Hansen, J., Moore, P.B. and Steitz, T.A. (2000) Science **289**, 905–920
21. Spahn, C.M.T., Beckmann, R., Eswar, N., Penczek, P.A., Sali, A., Blobel, G. and Frank, J. (2001) Cell **107**, 373–386
22. Jungnickel, B. and Rapoport, T.A. (1995) Cell **82**, 261–270
23. Gu, S.Q., Peske, F., Wieden, H.J., Rodnina, M.V. and Wintermeyer, W. (2003) RNA **9**, 566–573
24. Ullers, R.S., Houben, E.N.G., Raine, A., ten Hagen-Jongman, C.M., Ehrenberg, M., Brunner, J., Oudega, B., Harms, N. and Luirink, J. (2003) J. Cell Biol. **161**, 679–684
25. Rinke-Appel, J., Osswald, M., von Knoblauch, K., Mueller, F., Brimacombe, R., Sergiev, P., Avdeeva, O., Bogdanov, A. and Dontsova, O. (2002) RNA **8**, 612–625
26. Bacher, G., Lütcke, H., Jungnickel, B., Rapoport, T.A. and Dobberstein, B. (1996) Nature (London) **381**, 248–251
27. Rapiejko, P.J. and Gilmore, R. (1997) Cell **89**, 703–713
28. Padmanabhan, S. and Freymann, D.M. (2001) Structure **9**, 859–867
29. Weichenrieder, O., Wild, K., Strub, K. and Cusack, S. (2000) Nature (London) **408**, 167–173
30. Andrews, D.W., Walter, P. and Ottensmeyer, F.P. (1985) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. **82**, 785–789
31. Thomas, Y., Bui, N. and Strub, K. (1997) Nucleic Acids Res. **25**, 1920–1929
32. Mason, N., Ciufó, L.F. and Brown, J.D. (2000) EMBO J. **19**, 4164–4174
33. Shan, S.O. and Walter, P. (2003) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. **100**, 4480–4485
34. Hauser, S., Bacher, G., Dobberstein, B. and Lütcke, H. (1995) EMBO J. **14**, 5485–5493
35. Peluso, P., Herschlag, D., Nock, S., Freymann, D., Johnson, A.E. and Walter, P. (2000) Science **288**, 1640–1643
36. Song, W., Raden, D., Mandon, E.C. and Gilmore, R. (2000) Cell **100**, 333–343
37. Ogg, S.C., Barz, W.P. and Walter, P. (1998) J. Cell Biol. **142**, 341–354
38. Fulga, T.A., Sinning, I., Dobberstein, B. and Pool, M.R. (2001) EMBO J. **20**, 2338–2347

©2003 Biochemical Society
39 Bacher, G., Pool, M. and Dobberstein, B. (1999) J. Cell Biol. **146**, 723–730  
40 Helmers, J., Schmidt, D., Glavy, J.S., Blobel, G. and Schwartz, T. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. **278**, 23686–23690  
41 Finke, K., Plath, K., Panzner, S., Prehn, S., Rapoport, T.A., Hartmann, E. and Sommer, T. (1996) EMBO J. **15**, 1482–1494  
42 de Leeuw, E., te Kaat, K., Moser, C., Menestrina, G., Demel, R., de Kruijff, B., Oudega, B., Luirink, J. and Sinning, I. (2000) EMBO J. **19**, 531–541  
43 Luirink, J., ten Hagen-Jongman, C.M., van der Weijden, C.C., Oudega, B., High, S., Dobberstein, B. and Kusters, R. (1994) EMBO J. **13**, 2289–2296  
44 Menetret, J., Neuhof, A., Morgan, D.G., Plath, K., Radermacher, M., Rapoport, T.A. and Akey, C.W. (2000) Mol. Cell **6**, 1219–1232  

45 Beckmann, R., Spahn, C.M.T., Eswar, N., Helmels, J., Penczek, P.A., Sall, A., Frank, J. and Blobel, G. (2001) Cell **107**, 361–372  
46 Morgan, D.G., Menetret, J.F., Neuhof, A., Rapoport, T.A. and Akey, C.W. (2002) J. Mol. Biol. **324**, 871–886  
47 Connolly, T., Rapiejko, P.J. and Gilmore, R. (1991) Science **252**, 1171–1173  
48 Powers, T. and Walter, P. (1995) Science **269**, 1422–1424  
49 Legate, K.R. and Andrews, D.W. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. **278**, 27712–27720  

Received 4 July 2003
