
The dark side of Ras: regulation of apoptosis

Adrienne D Cox${}^{1,2}$ and Channing J Der${}^{*,1}$

${}^{1}$Department of Pharmacology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA; ${}^{2}$Department of Radiation Oncology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA

Mutational activation of Ras promotes oncogenesis by disrupting a multitude of normal cellular processes. Perhaps, best characterized and understood are the mechanisms by which oncogenic Ras promotes deregulated cell cycle progression and uncontrolled cellular proliferation. However, it is now clear that oncogenic Ras can also deregulate processes that control apoptosis. In light of the diversity of downstream effector targets known to facilitate Ras function, it is perhaps not surprising that Ras regulation of cell survival is complex, involving the balance and interplay of multiple signaling networks. While our understanding of these events is still far from complete, and is complicated by cell type and signaling context differences, several important mechanisms have begun to emerge. We review the role and mechanism of specific effectors in regulating the antiapoptotic (Raf, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and Tiam1) and apoptotic (Nore1 and RASSF1) actions of oncogenic Ras, and discuss the possibility that the effector actions of p120RasGAP make a significant contribution to Ras regulation of apoptotic events.

Oncogene (2003) 22, 8999–9006. doi:10.1038/sj.onc.1207111

Keywords: Ras; apoptosis; signal transduction; small GTPase

---

Introduction

Ras proteins are the prototype members of a large family of ~21 kDa GTP-regulated molecular switches for signaling pathways that modulate many aspects of cell behavior, including proliferation, differentiation, motility and death (reviewed in Shields *et al.*, 2000). Normally, these proteins are tightly regulated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) that cause the exchange of GDP for GTP to produce the active, GTP-bound state, and by GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) that catalyse hydrolysis of bound GTP to turn off Ras activity and return Ras to its resting state. In many tumors, oncogenic mutations, particularly at positions 12, 13 or 61, cause Ras to become insensitive to negative regulation by GAP and to remain constitutively GTP bound and active. In other tumors, deregulated signaling from upstream activators or downstream negative regulators can also result in excessive levels of Ras-GTP. Active, GTP-bound Ras then associates with a wide diversity of effector targets that transmit signals downstream. As Ras regulates so many pathways, it has been thought that the selection of distinct effectors may confer the ability to produce distinct outcomes. However, how the appropriate effector is chosen is only part of the story; the balance between conflicting signals when multiple effectors are activated in the same cell determines the ultimate conclusion.

The ability of oncogenic Ras proteins to cause increased proliferation has long been considered critical to Ras transformation. However, tumor development and maintenance also depends on continued expression of activated Ras to avoid apoptosis: withdrawal of doxycycline-inducible oncogenic H-Ras(G12V) expression in transgenic mice bearing melanomas causes apoptosis in both tumor cells and endothelial cells, followed by regression of the melanomas (Chin *et al.*, 1999). Similarly, withdrawal of doxycycline-inducible activated K-Ras(12D) expression from type II pneumocytes causes apoptosis and regression of both early proliferative lesions and lung cancers (Fisher *et al.*, 2001). Similar results were obtained in animals deficient in p53 or Arf (Fisher *et al.*, 2001); thus, activated K-Ras is required for tumor maintenance in either the presence or absence of tumor suppressors, because withdrawal of oncogenic K-Ras leads to apoptosis in either case.

Recently, there has been an increasing appreciation that Ras, and other oncogenes, paradoxically induce both pro- and antiapoptotic signaling (reviewed in Hueber and Evan, 1998). The ultimate outcome of these contradictory signals depends greatly on the cell type and context. The balance of positive and negative signals may differ according to kinetics, stoichiometry, availability of different binding partners and activation of other similar or countervailing forces. In normal cells, a high level of activated Ras has been thought to be more likely to induce a protective proapoptotic response to prevent oncogenesis in response to hyperproliferative signals, whereas in cells that are already transformed, the activity of oncogenic Ras is likely to mediate survival rather than death. This review summarizes our current understanding of several major pathways important to Ras-modulated apoptosis: protection via

*Correspondence: CJ Der; E-mail: cjder@med.unc.edu

The dark side of Ras
AD Cox and CJ Der

phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K) and NF-$\kappa$B,
promotion via RASSF1/Nore1/Mst1 and the Raf/
MEK/ERK pathway that straddles these two states.

Ras-mediated protection against apoptosis via
PI3-K/Akt, Rac and NF-$\kappa$B

PI3-K, a critical effector of Ras function in many cell
types, appears to provide a universal survival signal
downstream of Ras (reviewed in Marte and Downward,
1997; Downward, 1998). That PI3-K is so strongly
linked to prosurvival signaling is largely due to its ability
to activate the serine/threonine (S/T) kinase Akt, also
known as PKB (Kennedy *et al.*, 1997) (see Figure 1).
The importance of PI3-K/Akt signaling to survival has
been shown repeatedly by both the ability of activated
PI3-K or Akt to abrogate apoptosis and the ability of a
dominant-negative Akt to enhance it. Further, a
common method of inducing or enhancing apoptosis is
by treatment with the PI3-K inhibitor LY294002, which
prevents the activation of endogenous Akt. In normal
human thyroid epithelial cells, the activation of PI3-K is
necessary to suppress oncogenic Ras-induced apoptosis
(Gire *et al.*, 2000). Akt phosphorylates a number of
substrates important for the regulation of apoptosis
(reviewed in Datta *et al.*, 1999), the most important of
which may be Bad, a proapoptotic member of the Bcl-2
family of apoptotic regulators. Akt phosphorylation of
Bad causes it to bind preferentially to 14-3-3 in an
inactive complex, thereby preventing it from sequestering
and inactivating the antiapoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and
Bcl-X$_L$ (Figure 1).

Attachment to matrix normally provides a survival
signal through the activation of PI3-K, and Ras can
overcome this loss by restoring the PI3-K signal
(Khwaja *et al.*, 1997). Ras also activates the S/T kinase
Raf that activates the MEK/ERK MAP kinase cascade
(Figure 1). In fibroblasts, ectopic expression of activated
Raf or MEK can also overcome apoptosis due to loss of
attachment (Le Gall *et al.*, 2000), although Raf and Akt
rescue appear to act at different levels. Loss of matrix
attachment causes the translocation of the proapoptotic
Bcl-2 family protein Bax to and the release of
cytochrome $c$ from the mitochondria (Rytomaa *et al.*,
2000). However, Akt, but not Raf, blocks the release of
cytochrome $c$ (Rytomaa *et al.*, 2000). In Rat-1
fibroblasts, B-Raf can also suppress apoptosis due to
growth factor withdrawal or inhibition of PI3-K, but
this is at a level downstream of cytochrome $c$ release; in
B-Raf-expressing cells, cytochrome $c$ is still released
upon the apoptotic insult, but caspases are not activated
and apoptosis does not result (Erhardt *et al.*, 1999). The
process of apoptosis induced specifically by epithelial
cell deprivation of matrix interaction is referred to as
anoikis (Frisch and Francis, 1994). In epithelial cell
types such as IEC-18 intestinal cells, oncogenic Ras
restores resistance to anoikis (Rak *et al.*, 1995) in part by
downregulating the proapoptotic Bcl-2 family member
Bak in a PI3-K-dependent manner (Rosen *et al.*, 1998),

Oncogene

Figure 1 Anti- and proapoptotic functions of oncogenic Ras
mediated by distinct effector pathways. Depending on cell context,
Ras may have pro- or antiapoptotic functions. Activated, GTP-
bound Ras can bind to and regulate functionally diverse down-
stream effector targets. One of the most well-studied Ras effectors
is the serine/threonine (S/T) kinase Raf-1. Activation of the Raf/
MEK/ERK MAP kinase cascade may lead to ERK phosphoryla-
tion of p90Rsk (RSK) and of transcription factors, resulting in
either apoptosis or survival. Ras also binds to and activates the
p110 catalytic subunit of the lipid kinase PI3-K. A major activity of
PI3-K is the conversion of membrane-bound phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate (PIP$_2$) to phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trispho-
sphate (PIP$_3$), whose formation then regulates the activities of
many downstream targets, including the S/T kinase Akt (also called
PKB) and GEFs for the Rac small GTPase, such as Tiam1. The
antiapoptotic activity of Akt is mediated through the phosphor-
ylation of multiple substrates. Akt phosphorylation of Bad
prevents its inhibition of the Bcl-2 and Bcl-X$_L$ survival factors.
Akt phosphorylation inhibits the activity of caspase 9 (casp9) and
the forkhead (FKH) transcription factors such as FKHLR1,
whereas it activates IKK to phosphorylate and inactivate IkB, thus
leading to the activation of NF-$\kappa$B. Whether oncogenic Ras
activation of Akt causes all of these events has not been
established. Ras can activate the related small GTPase Rac via
binding to and activation of distinct effectors, either PI3-K or the
Rac-specific GEF, Tiam1. Antiapoptotic activity of Rac may be
facilitated by the production of ROS, which then cause activation
of NF-$\kappa$B and/or by the activation of PI3-K and Akt. In contrast
to these antiapoptotic effectors of Ras, the effectors Nore1 and
RASSF1 upregulate apoptosis. Activated Ras can bind directly to
Nore1 and to the related protein RASSF1. RASSF1 and Nore1
form homo- and heterodimers, and these dimers form a complex
with and regulate the activity of the S/T kinase Mst1. Finally, in
addition to serving as negative regulators of normal Ras function,
Ras GTPase-activating proteins (RasGAPs) may also serve as
positive and negative effector functions in Ras-regulated apoptosis.
The precise mechanisms utilized by Ras to control cell survival are
varied and can be influenced significantly by cell context (see text)

and in part by preventing downregulation of the
antiapoptotic protein Bcl-X$_L$ in a PI3-K- and Raf-
independent manner (Rosen *et al.*, 2000). In RIE-1
intestinal epithelial cells, oncogenic Ras causes resis-
tance to anoikis in a PI3-K-independent and mostly
Raf-independent manner (McFall *et al.*, 2001). Clearly,
additional pathways mediating Ras regulation of
apoptosis have yet to be uncovered.
Another pathway activated by PI3-K downstream of
Ras is the Ras-related GTPase, Rac, which can activate
NF-$\kappa$B in a redox-dependent manner (Sulciner *et al.*,


1996; Irani *et al.*, 1997; Joneson and Bar-Sagi, 1999) (Figure 1). Alternatively, Ras can also activate Rac independently of PI3-K through direct interaction with the Rac GEF, Tiam1 (Lambert *et al.*, 2002), and the loss of Tiam1 is associated with increased Ras-induced apoptosis (Malliri *et al.*, 2002). However, Rac activation of PI3-K protects MDCK cells from anoikis (Coniglio *et al.*, 2001). NF-κB is a transcription factor activated downstream of Ras and Rac that produces potent prosurvival signals by promoting the transcription of antiapoptotic proteins such as inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) (reviewed in Mayo and Baldwin, 2000). In addition to activation by Rac, NF-κB can also be activated downstream of Ras by Akt, which then phosphorylates and stimulates the I-κB kinase (IKK) to release NF-κB from cytoplasmic sequestration, whereupon it can enter the nucleus to promote transcription of antiapoptotic proteins (Romashkova and Makarov, 1999). Conversely, inhibiting NF-κB by using a super-repressor form of I-κBα that cannot be degraded leads to apoptosis in Ras-transformed fibroblasts (Mayo *et al.*, 1997). However, in some cell types, Ras may have an entirely different consequence on NF-κB activity. In epidermal cells, inhibition of either Ras or NF-κB causes cell cycle arrest. Recently, Khavari and co-workers (Dajee *et al.*, 2003) elegantly demonstrated that super-repressor I-κBα blockade of NF-κB abrogates Ras-mediated cell cycle arrest to produce malignant tissue mimicking squamous cell carcinoma. Thus, NF-κB is not antiapoptotic in this system, and drugs that block NF-κB function may promote, rather than prevent, cancer in this cell type.

### Ras signaling to Raf/MEK/ERK: antiapoptotic or proapoptotic?

Generally, PI3-K/Akt and NF-κB signaling are considered to protect against apoptosis. In contrast, Raf/ERK signaling can be either anti- or proapoptotic, depending on the circumstances (Figure 1). Thus, the combined outcomes of Ras signaling determine whether cells live or die. Ras specifically utilizes a PI3-K/Akt pathway to promote cell survival in the presence of apoptotic signals such as those induced by c-Myc (Kauffmann-Zeh *et al.*, 1997). However, in this system, where fibroblasts were induced to undergo apoptosis by serum withdrawal, Ras also activates a death-inducing pathway mediated by Raf/ERK that can be rescued by activated PI3-K. In a related study using 3Y1 rat fibroblasts where oncogenic Ras or c-Myc are separately inducible, activated MEK1 has opposing effects on apoptosis, depending on whether apoptosis is induced by removal of oncogenic Ras expression or by removal of serum support (Tsuneoka and Mekada, 2000). It is interesting that the activity of oncogenic Ras itself can promote proapoptotic signaling that is then rescued by the antiapoptotic signals that it induces (such as Rac, Joneson and Bar-Sagi, 1999; or NF-κB, Mayo *et al.*, 1997). Defects or interference in the ability of Ras

The dark side of Ras  
AD Cox and CJ Der  

to activate the antiapoptotic signals can allow its proapoptotic activity to take over.

The ability of Ras to provide a prosurvival function in IL-3-dependent hematopoietic cells depends on Raf/MEK/ERK (Kinoshita *et al.*, 1997; Terada *et al.*, 2000). Constitutively, active Raf-1 or MEK1 represses apoptosis caused by withdrawal of IL-3 from 32D myeloid and BaF3 pro-B cells, whereas pharmacological inhibition of MEK using U0126 enhances death (von Gise *et al.*, 2001). However, Akt is still required for full protection, as constitutively active Akt synergizes with Raf, whereas dominant-negative Akt and the PI3-K inhibitor wortmannin suppress the ability of Raf to promote survival upon loss of growth factor (von Gise *et al.*, 2001).

Excessive apoptosis in *raf-1* null mice that display normal ERK activation in the absence of MEK activity (Huser *et al.*, 2001) demonstrates that Raf may not always require MEK to produce its effects on apoptosis. Indeed, in skeletal myoblasts, where Raf abrogates apoptosis only when signaling at high levels, this is MEK independent, as shown by the failure of a MEK inhibitor to block Raf-mediated suppression of apoptosis (DeChant *et al.*, 2002). There does not appear to be any consensus as to whether Raf signaling downstream of oncogenic Ras is MEK dependent or independent, and this will likely turn out to be controlled by differences in cell context.

In many contexts, excessive signaling due to oncogenic Ras provokes a response from p53 designed to cause arrest or apoptosis and thereby remove the threat of unbalanced oncogenic stimuli. The ability of oncogenic Ras to suppress p53 by inducing its degradation via Mdm2 in a Raf-dependent manner may thus contribute to the resistance of Ras-transformed cells to p53-mediated apoptosis (Ries *et al.*, 2000). Raf may also contribute to the ability of oncogenic Ras to provide a prosurvival function by downregulating transcription of Par-4, a proapoptotic transcriptional repressor. Oncogenic Ras downregulates Par-4 in a MEK-dependent manner that can be mimicked by constitutively activated Raf-1, MEK or PKCζ, but not by PI3-K (Nalca *et al.*, 1999). Ectopic expression of Par-4 at normal levels in Ras-transformed NIH 3T3 cells or primary fibroblasts not only resensitizes them to the induction of apoptosis basally (Nalca *et al.*, 1999) or when stimulated by TNFα (Barradas *et al.*, 1999), but also reduces their tumorigenic capacity (Barradas *et al.*, 1999). These results suggest that the ability of Ras to decrease apoptosis by downregulating Par-4 is an important component of its ability to transform cells. Further, Par-4 interferes with the ability of Ras to upregulate transcriptional activity of NF-κB (although it does not interfere with DNA-binding activity) (Nalca *et al.*, 1999). Therefore, Par-4 may alter the ability of Ras to stimulate the transcription of antiapoptotic proteins such as Bcl-2.

Both Ras and Raf alter the expression and activity of Bcl-2 family members. Loss of K-Ras protein expression following targeting by an anti-K-Ras ribozyme in Capan-1 pancreatic cancer cells results in reduced levels of Bcl-2 and increased apoptosis (Tsuchida *et al.*, 2000).

The dark side of Ras
AD Cox and CJ Der

Ras has been linked to changes in Bcl-X<sub>L</sub> expression (Grad *et al.*, 2000). Both Ras and Raf associate with phosphorylated Bcl-2 as shown by coimmunoprecipitation experiments in brown adipocytes, in which constitutively active H-Ras(12K) induces apoptosis under conditions of serum deprivation. Dominant-negative Raf, but not pharmacological inhibition of MEK, blocks the ability of Ras to cause apoptosis, which is accompanied by a decrease in the levels of Bcl-2 and an increase in the levels of Bcl-X<sub>S</sub> (Navarro *et al.*, 1999). In addition to its ability to block alterations in mitochondrial membrane potential, Bcl-2 can also associate directly with (mitochondrial) Ras via its BH4 domain to block Ras-mediated apoptotic signaling (Denis *et al.*, 2003). Raf-1 can also associate directly with Bcl-2 upon translocation to the mitochondria (Wang *et al.*, 1996). However, mitochondrial-associated Raf-1 does not suppress apoptosis by activating ERK but by inactivating the proapoptotic Bcl-2 family protein Bad (von Gise *et al.*, 2001).

Raf and PI3-K signaling may also converge downstream of oncogenic Ras to prevent apoptosis (Figure 1). One obvious convergence point is the phosphorylation of Bad. Both the Akt kinase and the Rsk kinases, which are substrates for ERK MAPK phosphorylation, can suppress the proapoptotic activity of Bad by phosphorylating it at Ser136 or Ser112, respectively (Blume-Jensen *et al.*, 1998; Bonni *et al.*, 1999; Fang *et al.*, 1999; Tan *et al.*, 1999). Further, both Akt and Rsk can phosphorylate the CREB transcription factor at Ser133 to increase its ability to upregulate transcription of prosurvival genes in 293T cells (Du and Montminy, 1998) and in neurons (Bonni *et al.*, 1999), respectively. Another point of convergence for Raf and PI3-K signaling downstream of oncogenic Ras is the stabilization of the Myc transcription factor by phosphorylation on Ser62 by ERK and subsequently on Thr58 by GSK-3, a target of Akt (Sears *et al.*, 2000). Whether this convergence point is critical to oncogenic Ras regulation of apoptosis is a subject of debate. Interestingly, one report suggests that Ras and Myc interaction may actually be more important for induction and maintenance of transformation than for the regulation of apoptosis, because a 50% reduction in Myc expression in Rat-1 cells following homologous recombination caused a 10-fold decrease in transformation by Ras (or Raf) but had little effect on apoptosis (Bazarov *et al.*, 2001).

In addition to regulating some of the same targets as Raf, although not always in the same direction, Akt can also regulate the activity of Raf kinases themselves. Akt phosphorylation of Raf-1 at Ser259 (not present in B-Raf) results in a loss of Raf kinase activity and ERK phosphorylation (Zimmermann and Moelling, 1999; Reusch *et al.*, 2001). Akt phosphorylation of B-Raf at Ser364, Ser428 and Thr439 (the latter two of which are unique to B-Raf) similarly results in downregulation of B-Raf kinase activity (Guan *et al.*, 2000). Conversely, Raf may also regulate Akt activity, as shown by a reduction in Akt phosphorylation in the presence of H-Ras(35S/61L/186S), a cytosolic Ras effector domain mutant that acts as a dominant negative for Raf signaling (Fiordalisi *et al.*, 2002).

Interestingly, whether Ras induces a PI3-K-dependent or a Raf-dependent pathway to protect against apoptosis may depend on the nature of the apoptotic insult. In sympathetic neurons, protection against apoptosis induced by nerve growth factor (NGF) deprivation is dependent upon PI3-K, because the PI3-K-binding effector domain mutant H-Ras(12V/40C), which is impaired in the activation of Raf and RalGEF, could still protect against loss of NGF as well as either H-Ras(12V) (Mazzoni *et al.*, 1999; Xue *et al.*, 2000) or activated Akt (Xue *et al.*, 2000). However, apoptosis induced by the DNA-damaging agent cytosine arabinoside was inhibited not by the expression of H-Ras(12V/40C), but by the Raf-binding effector domain mutant H-Ras(12V/35S) (which is impaired in PI3-K activation) (Xue *et al.*, 2000), and this protection was abrogated by the MEK inhibitor PD98059, which had little effect (Mazzoni *et al.*, 1999) or no effect (Xue *et al.*, 2000) on NGF deprivation-induced apoptosis.

### Ras promotion of apoptosis via its effectors
#### RASSF1/Nore1/Mst1

Not all Ras effectors are mediators of survival signaling (reviewed in Feig and Buchsbaum, 2002). RASSF1 is a Ras association domain-containing putative tumor suppressor protein whose expression is frequently lost due to promoter methylation in a wide variety of cancers (Dammann *et al.*, 2000; reviewed in Pfeifer *et al.*, 2002). Activated Ras-GTP directly binds the effector RASSF1C, and activated Ras enhances, whereas dominant-negative Ras reduces, RASSF1-induced apoptosis in 293T cells (Vos *et al.*, 2000). These results suggest that RASSF1 is a Ras effector that positively modulates Ras-mediated apoptosis. RASSF1 exists as several splice variants, and the closely related protein Nore1 can heterodimerize with RASSF1A (Ortiz-Vega *et al.*, 2002). Both Nore1 and RASSF1 are found in pre-existing complexes with the Mst1 protein, a proapoptotic Ste20-related S/T protein kinase of the GCKI class (Khokhlatchev *et al.*, 2002). Mst1 is both a caspase-3 cleavage target and an enhancer of caspase-3 activation (Lee *et al.*, 2001). Upon serum stimulation or other activation of Ras, Ras binds the preformed RASSF1/Nore1/Mst1 complex to stimulate apoptosis. In this system, K-Ras(12V) is a more potent stimulator of apoptosis than is H-Ras(12V), but H-Ras(12V/37G), an effector domain mutant that binds Nore1 but not Raf or PI3-K, is as potent as K-Ras(12V) (Khokhlatchev *et al.*, 2002). These results are interesting in light of the report that the analogous effector domain mutant of N-Ras(37G) protects N-Ras knockout cells from apoptotic insults, possibly by restoring transient rather than sustained JNK/p38 activation (Wolfman *et al.*, 2002). Other effectors that bind the 37G mutant, including RalGDS, Rin1, AF-6 and phospholipase C epsilon, do not appear to regulate apoptosis.

p120RasGAP – an effector for Ras regulation of apoptosis?

p120RasGAP serves both as a negative regulator of Ras, by catalysing the hydrolysis of bound GTP, and also as an effector of Ras (Tocque *et al.*, 1997). Considerable evidence suggests that p120RasGAP itself is an important mediator of apoptosis. First, p120RasGAP knockout mice have high basal levels of apoptosis, particularly in neuronal cells (Henkemeyer *et al.*, 1995). Second, inhibition of p120RasGAP by an anti-RasGAP Src homology 3 (SH3) domain monoclonal antibody induces apoptosis in tumor but not in normal cells (Leblanc *et al.*, 1999). Also, p120RasGAP is a substrate for caspase cleavage following a variety of apoptotic insults, including Fas, TRAIL and DNA-damaging agents (Wen *et al.*, 1998; Widmann *et al.*, 1998). Low levels of caspase activity cleave RasGAP into N- and C-terminal fragments. The N-terminal fragment generates potent antiapoptotic signals by activating the PI3-K/Akt pathway (although NF-κB plays no role in the antiapoptotic signal) (Yang and Widmann, 2002). However, higher levels of caspase activity further cleave the N-terminal fragment into two smaller fragments, N1 and N2, which then become potent proapoptotic potentiators (Yang and Widmann, 2001). Finally, p120RasGAP is cleaved into proapoptotic fragments following induction of apoptosis by TRAIL (Wen *et al.*, 1998; Widmann *et al.*, 1998) and reovirus-induced apoptosis is mediated by TRAIL (Clarke *et al.*, 2000). Therefore, it is tempting to speculate that such consequences to p120RasGAP function in its role as an effector rather than as a negative regulator of Ras may also contribute to the ability of reovirus (Coffey *et al.*, 1998) and even vesicular stomatitis virus (Balachandran *et al.*, 2001) to cause apoptosis preferentially in Ras-transformed cells and tumors.

One mechanism by which p120RasGAP may affect apoptosis is via direct protein:protein interactions with modulators of apoptotic events. p120RasGAP interacts with both the cytoplasmic precursor and mature mitochondrial forms of mTid-1, DnaJ-type chaperone proteins that correspond to the Drosophila tumor suppressor l(2)tid and the human hTid-1 (Trentin *et al.*, 2001). Along with the findings mentioned previously that mitochondrial Ras interacts with Bcl-2, the colocalization of p120RasGAP and mTid-1 at perinuclear mitochondrial membranes upon growth factor treatment suggests that alteration of the localization of Ras and its immediate downstream effectors may directly affect the relative availability of binding partners that mediate apoptosis. Further, p120RasGAP forms a ternary complex with the apoptosis-modulator Survivin, an IAP family protein, as well as with the cell cycle regulatory protein Aurora kinase, via kinase/SH3 domain interactions (Gigoux *et al.*, 2002). These results also support the idea that whether Ras acts as a stimulator of or protector against death may depend in part on the regulation of p120RasGAP as a Ras effector rather than as a negative regulator of GTP binding.

D4-GDI, also known as Rho-GDI2, is a target for caspase cleavage upon apoptotic induction by Fas (Na *et al.*, 1996) or by taxol or epirubicin (Essmann *et al.*, 2000). In contrast, Rho-GDI1 is not cleaved by caspase-3 (Essmann *et al.*, 2000). It is not yet clear whether such cleavage affects RhoGDI regulation of Rho protein activation or localization. Interestingly, the Rho family protein CDC42 also contains a consensus caspase cleavage site (DLRD, residues 118–121 immediately upstream of the Rho insert region) that can be targeted for cleavage in both fibroblasts and epithelial cells by caspase-3 and -7, but not by caspase-6 or -8 (Tu and Cerione, 2001). The highly related GTPase Rac can also be a caspase substrate, but Ras and Rho cannot. Mutations of the cleavage site (D118N, D121N) result in CDC42 proteins that are both strongly transforming and confer greatly increased survival in the presence of apoptotic signals (Tu *et al.*, 2002). Together, these results suggest that much interesting work remains to be carried out to unravel the complex relationship between Ras superfamily transformation and mediation of apoptotic events.

### Conclusions

The delineation of both positive and negative functions of Ras in modulating cell growth and death emphasizes a theme that has emerged with virtually all regulators of cellular proliferation. Whether an oncogenic protein promotes proliferation or cell death can be influenced by the intensity of the signal, the context in which that signaling occurs, as well as by differences in cell type and tissue origin. Thus, earlier attempts to categorize proteins into straightforward, well-defined and separate functional classes of either proliferation- or apoptosis-inducing components do not fit our current understanding. The way oncogenic Ras achieves the seemingly opposed cellular consequences of inducing or abrogating apoptosis is facilitated, in part, by the utilization and activation of distinct effector targets. However, many questions remain to be answered. How Ras effector utilization is regulated is far from understood. The mechanism by which Norel/RASSF1 effector function, via Mst1, promotes apoptosis is not known. Whether p120RasGAP modulation of apoptosis is a significant contributor to the ability of Ras to mediate apoptosis is still uncertain. Thus, future studies of the function and regulation of Ras effector activation will be essential to understand which face of Ras function will emerge in different cellular settings.

### Acknowledgements

We apologize for not being able to cite original work of many colleagues due to space constraints. Our studies were supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (CA42978, CA69577 and CA67771), and from the Lustgarten Foundation for Pancreatic Cancer Research (LF-056).

### References

Balachandran S, Porosnicu M and Barber GN. (2001). *J. Virol.*, **75**, 3474–3479.

Barradas M, Monjas A, Diaz-Meco MT, Serrano M and Moscat J. (1999). *EMBO J.*, **18**, 6362–6369.

Bazarov AV, Adachi S, Li SF, Mateyak MK, Wei S and Sedivy JM. (2001). *Cancer Res.*, **61**, 1178–1186.

Blume-Jensen P, Janknecht R and Hunter T. (1998). *Curr. Biol.*, **8**, 779–782.

Bonni A, Brunet A, West AE, Datta SR, Takasu MA and Greenberg ME. (1999). *Science*, **286**, 1358–1362.

Chen Z, Sun J, Pradines A, Favre G, Adnane J and Sebti SM. (2000). *J. Biol. Chem.*, **275**, 17974–17978.

Chin L, Tam A, Pomerantz J, Wong M, Holash J, Bardeesy N, Shen Q, O'Hagan R, Pantginis J, Zhou H, Horner II JW, Cordon-Cardo C, Yancopoulos GD and DePinho RA. (1999). *Nature*, **400**, 468–472.

Clarke P, Meintzer SM, Gibson S, Widmann C, Garrington TP, Johnson GL and Tyler KL. (2000). *J. Virol.*, **74**, 8135–8139.

Coffey MC, Strong JE, Forsyth PA and Lee PW. (1998). *Science*, **282**, 1332–1334.

Coniglio SJ, Jou TS and Symons M. (2001). *J. Biol. Chem.*, **276**, 28113–28120.

Dajee M, Lazarov M, Zhang JY, Cai T, Green CL, Russell AJ, Marinkovich MP, Tao S, Lin Q, Kubo Y and Khavari PA. (2003). *Nature*, **421**, 639–643.

Dammann R, Li C, Yoon JH, Chin PL, Bates S and Pfeifer GP. (2000). *Nat. Genet.*, **25**, 315–319.

Datta SR, Brunet A and Greenberg ME. (1999). *Genes. Dev.*, **13**, 2905–2927.

DeChant AK, Dee K and Weyman CM. (2002). *Oncogene*, **21**, 5268–5279.

Denis GV, Yu Q, Ma P, Deeds L, Faller DV and Chen CY. (2003). *J. Biol. Chem.*, **278**, 5775–5785.

Downward J. (1998). *Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.*, **8**, 49–54.

Du K and Montminy M. (1998). *J. Biol. Chem.*, **273**, 32377–32379.

Du W and Prendergast GC. (1999). *Cancer Res.*, **59**, 5492–5496.

Ehrhardt GR, Leslie KB, Lee F, Wieler JS and Schrader JW. (1999). *Blood*, **94**, 2433–2444.

Erhardt P, Schremser EJ and Cooper GM. (1999). *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, **19**, 5308–5315.

Essmann F, Wieder T, Otto A, Muller EC, Dorken B and Daniel PT. (2000). *Biochem. J.*, **346** (Part 3), 777–783.

Fang X, Yu S, Eder A, Mao M, Bast Jr RC, Boyd D and Mills GB. (1999). *Oncogene*, **18**, 6635–6640.

Feig LA and Buchsbaum RJ. (2002). *Curr. Biol.*, **12**, R259–R261.

Fiordalisi JJ, Holly SP, Johnson II RL, Parise LV and Cox AD. (2002). *J. Biol. Chem.*, **277**, 10813–10823.

Fisher GH, Wellen SL, Klimstra D, Lenczowski JM, Tichelaar JW, Lizak MJ, Whitsett JA, Koretsky A and Varmus HE. (2001). *Genes Dev.*, **15**, 3249–3262.

Frisch SM and Francis H. (1994). *J. Cell. Biol.*, **124**, 619–626.

Fritz G and Kaina B. (2000). *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.*, **268**, 784–789.

Fritz G and Kaina B. (2001). *J. Biol. Chem.*, **276**, 3115–3122.

Gigoux V, L'Hoste S, Raynaud F, Camonis J and Garbay C. (2002). *J. Biol. Chem.*, **277**, 23742–23746.

Gire V, Marshall C and Wynford-Thomas D. (2000). *Oncogene*, 19, 2269–2276.

Grad JM, Zeng XR and Boise LH. (2000). *Curr. Opin. Oncol.*, 12, 543–549.

Guan KL, Figueroa C, Brtva TR, Zhu T, Taylor J, Barber TD and Vojtek AB. (2000). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 275, 27354–27359.

Henkemeyer M, Rossi DJ, Holmyard DP, Puri MC, Mbamalu G, Harpal K, Shih TS, Jacks T and Pawson T. (1995). *Nature*, 377, 695–701.

Hueber AO and Evan GI. (1998). *Trends Genet.*, 14, 364–367.

Huser M, Luckett J, Chiloeches A, Mercer K, Iwobi M, Giblett S, Sun XM, Brown J, Marais R and Pritchard C. (2001). *EMBO J.*, 20, 1940–1951.

Irani K, Xia Y, Zweier JL, Sollott SJ, Der CJ, Fearon ER, Sundaresan M, Finkel T and Goldschmidt-Clermont PJ. (1997). *Science*, 275, 1649–1652.

Joneson T and Bar-Sagi D. (1999). *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 19, 5892–5901.

Kauffmann-Zeh A, Rodriguez-Viciana P, Ulrich E, Gilbert C, Coffer P, Downward J and Evan G. (1997). *Nature*, 385, 544–548.

Kennedy SG, Wagner AJ, Conzen SD, Jordan J, Bellacosa A, Tsichlis PN and Hay N. (1997). *Genes Dev.*, 11, 701–713.

Khokhlatchev A, Rabizadeh S, Xavier R, Nedwidek M, Chen T, Zhang XF, Seed B and Avruch J. (2002). *Curr. Biol.*, 12, 253–265.

Khwaja A, Rodriguez-Viciana P, Wennstrom S, Warne PH and Downward J. (1997). *EMBO J.*, 16, 2783–2793.

Kinoshita T, Shirouzu M, Kamiya A, Hashimoto K, Yokoyama S and Miyajima A. (1997). *Oncogene*, 15, 619–627.

Lambert JM, Lambert QT, Reuther GW, Malliri A, Siderovski DP, Sondek J, Collard JG and Der CJ. (2002). *Nat. Cell. Biol.*, 4, 621–625.

Le Gall M, Chambard JC, Breittmayer JP, Grall D, Pouyssegur J and Van Obberghen-Schilling E. (2000). *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 11, 1103–1112.

Leblanc V, Delumeau I and Tocque B. (1999). *Oncogene*, 18, 4884–4889.

Lee KK, Ohyama T, Yajima N, Tsubuki S and Yonehara S. (2001). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 276, 19276–19285.

Liu A, Cerniglia GJ, Bernhard EJ and Prendergast GC. (2001). *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, 98, 6192–6197.

Malliri A, van der Kammen RA, Clark K, van der Valk M, Michiels F and Collard JG. (2002). *Nature*, 417, 867–871.

Marte BM and Downward J. (1997). *Trends Biochem. Sci.*, 22, 355–358.

Mayo MW and Baldwin AS. (2000). *Biochim. Biophys. Acta*, 1470, M55–M62.

Mayo MW, Wang CY, Cogswell PC, Rogers-Graham KS, Lowe SW, Der CJ and Baldwin Jr AS. (1997). *Science*, 278, 1812–1815.

Mazzoni IE, Said FA, Aloyz R, Miller FD and Kaplan D. (1999). *J. Neurosci.*, 19, 9716–9727.

McFall A, Ulku A, Lambert QT, Kusa A, Rogers-Graham K and Der CJ. (2001). *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 21, 5488–5499.

Na S, Chuang TH, Cunningham A, Turi TG, Hanke JH, Bokoch GM and Danley DE. (1996). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 271, 11209–11213.

Nalca A, Qiu SG, El-Guendy N, Krishnan S and Rangnekar VM. (1999). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 274, 29976–29983.

Navarro P, Valverde AM, Benito M and Lorenzo M. (1999). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 274, 18857–18863.

Ortiz-Vega S, Khokhlatchev A, Nedwidek M, Zhang XF, Dammann R, Pfeifer GP and Avruch J. (2002). *Oncogene*, 21, 1381–1390.


Osada M, Tolkacheva T, Li W, Chan TO, Tsichlis PN, Saez R, Kimmelman AC and Chan AM. (1999). *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 19, 6333–6344.

Pfeifer GP, Yoon JH, Liu L, Tommasi S, Wilczynski SP and Dammann R. (2002). *Biol. Chem.*, 383, 907–914.

Prendergast GC. (2001). *Nat. Rev. Cancer*, 1, 162–168.

Rak J, Mitsuhashi Y, Erdos V, Huang SN, Filmus J and Kerbel RS. (1995). *J. Cell. Biol.*, 131, 1587–1598.

Reusch HP, Zimmermann S, Schaefer M, Paul M and Moelling K. (2001). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 276, 33630–33637.

Reuther GW and Der CJ. (2000). *Curr. Opin. Cell. Biol.*, 12, 157–165.

Ries S, Biederer C, Woods D, Shifman O, Shirasawa S, Sasazuki T, McMahon M, Oren M and McCormick F. (2000). *Cell*, 103, 321–330.

Romashkova JA and Makarov SS. (1999). *Nature*, 401, 86–90.

Rong R, He Q, Liu Y, Sheikh MS and Huang Y. (2002). *Oncogene*, 21, 1062–1070.

Rosen K, Rak J, Jin J, Kerbel RS, Newman MJ and Filmus J. (1998). *Curr. Biol.*, 8, 1331–1334.

Rosen K, Rak J, Leung T, Dean NM, Kerbel RS and Filmus J. (2000). *J. Cell. Biol.*, 149, 447–456.

Rusyn EV, Reynolds ER, Shao H, Grana TM, Chan TO, Andres DA and Cox AD. (2000). *Oncogene*, 19, 4685–4694.

Rytomaa M, Lehmann K and Downward J. (2000). *Oncogene*, 19, 4461–4468.

Sears R, Nuckolls F, Haura E, Taya Y, Tamai K and Nevins JR. (2000). *Genes Dev.*, 14, 2501–2514.

Shields JM, Pruitt K, McFall A, Shaub A and Der CJ. (2000). *Trends Cell. Biol.*, 10, 147–154.

Sulciner DJ, Irani K, Yu ZX, Ferrans VJ, Goldschmidt-Clermont P and Finkel T. (1996). *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 16, 7115–7121.

Suzuki J, Kaziro Y and Koide H. (1998). *FEBS Lett.*, 437, 112–116.

Tan Y, Ruan H, Demeter MR and Comb MJ. (1999). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 274, 34859–34867.

Terada K, Kaziro Y and Satoh T. (2000). *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.*, 267, 449–455.

Tocque B, Delumeau I, Parker F, Maurier F, Multon MC and Schweighoffer F. (1997). *Cell Signal.*, 9, 153–158.

Trentin GA, Yin X, Tahir S, Lhotak S, Farhang-Fallah J, Li Y and Rozakis-Adcock M. (2001). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 276, 13087–13095.

Tsuchida T, Kijima H, Hori S, Oshika Y, Tokunaga T, Kawai K, Yamazaki H, Ueyama Y, Scanlon KJ, Tamaoki N and Nakamura M. (2000). *Cancer Gene Ther.*, 7, 373–383.

Tsuneoka M and Mekada E. (2000). *Oncogene*, 19, 115–123.

Tu S and Cerione RA. (2001). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 276, 19656–19663.

Tu SS, Wu WJ, Yang W, Nolbant P, Hahn K and Cerione RA. (2002). *Biochemistry*, 41, 12350–12358.

von Gise A, Lorenz P, Wellbrock C, Hemmings B, Berberich-Siebelt F, Rapp UR and Troppmair J. (2001). *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 21, 2324–2336.

Vos MD, Ellis CA, Bell A, Birrer MJ and Clark GJ. (2000). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 275, 35669–35672.

Wang HG, Millan JA, Cox AD, Der CJ, Rapp UR, Beck T, Zha H and Reed JC. (1995). *J. Cell. Biol.*, 129, 1103–1114.

Wang HG, Rapp UR and Reed JC. (1996). *Cell*, 87, 629–638.

Wen LP, Madani K, Martin GA and Rosen GD. (1998). *Cell Death Differ.*, 5, 729–734.

The dark side of Ras

AD Cox and CJ Der

Widmann C, Gibson S and Johnson GL. (1998). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 273, 7141–7147.

Wolfman JC, Palmby T, Der CJ and Wolfman A. (2002). *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 22, 1589–1606.

Xue L, Murray JH and Tolkovsky AM. (2000). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 275, 8817–8824.

Yang JY and Widmann C. (2001). *Mol. Cell. Biol.*, 21, 5346–5358.

Yang JY and Widmann C. (2002). *J. Biol. Chem.*, 277, 14641–14646.

Zimmermann S and Moelling K. (1999). *Science*, 286, 1741–1744.
