
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Molecular Immunology 40 (2004) 861–868

**TIR domain-containing adaptors define the specificity of TLR signaling**

Masahiro Yamamoto${}^{a}$, Kiyoshi Takeda${}^{a,b}$, Shizuo Akira${}^{a,b,*}$

${
M. Yamamoto et al./Molecular Immunology 40 (2004) 861–868

Fig. 1. TLRs recognize molecular pattern associated with bacterial pathogens. triacylated lipoprotein for TLR1; peptidoglycan for TLR2; double-stranded RNA for TLR3; lipopolysaccharide (LPS
genes and maturation of dendritic cells with slow activation
of NF-κB and MAPK. TLR3 has also been shown to utilize
the MyD88-independent pathway, since poly(I:C)-induced
NF-κB activation and maturation of dendritic cells were
observed normally in MyD88-deficient mice (Alexopoulou
et al., 200
cells, dimeric forms of IRF3 were detected normally in response to LPS. Thus, LPS-induced IRF3 activation was not affected by the absence of TIRAP. However, the possibility that TIRAP deficiency might be compensated by MyD88 could not be ruled out. To exclude this, mice lacking both TIRAP and MyD88 were generated. Macrophages from T
M. Yamamoto et al./Molecular Immunology 40 (2004) 861–868

Fig. 3. TIRAP is an adaptor molecule shared with TLR2 and TLR4 signaling cascade. Other adaptors may also exist downstream of TLR5, TLR7, and TLR9 in the MyD88-dependent pathways like TIRAP
MyD88-independent pathway. Nevertheless, there is the possibility that TRIF is involved in other TLR-mediated pathways, since epitope-tagged TRIF interacted with TLR2 as well as TLR3 and dominant negative forms of TRIF had negative effects on various TLRs-mediated NF-κB activation (Yamamoto et al., 2002a,b; Oshiumi et
Barton, G.M., Medzhitov, R., 2003. Linking Toll-like receptors to IFN-alpha/beta expression. Nat. Immunol. 4 (5), 432–433.

Bin, L.H., Xu, L.G., Shu, H.B., 2003. TIRP: a novel TIR domain-containing adapter protein
Suzuki, N., Suzuki, S., Yeh, W.C., 2002b. IRAK-4 as the central TIR signaling mediator in innate immunity. Trends. Immunol. 23 (10), 503.

Takeda, K., Kaisho, T., Akira, S., 2003. Toll-like receptors. Annu.