
THE NEUROBIOLOGY OF NICOTINE  
ADDICTION: BRIDGING THE GAP  
FROM MOLECULES TO BEHAVIOUR  

Steven R. Laviolette and Derek van der Kooy  

Nicotine, the primary psychoactive component of tobacco smoke, produces diverse  
neurophysiological, motivational and behavioural effects through several brain regions and  
neurochemical pathways. Recent research in the fields of behavioural pharmacology, genetics  
and electrophysiology is providing an increasingly integrated picture of how the brain processes  
the motivational effects of nicotine. The emerging characterization of separate dopamine- and  
GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid)-dependent neural systems within the ventral tegmental area (VTA),  
which can mediate the acute aversive and rewarding psychological effects of nicotine, is  
providing new insights into how functional interactions between these systems might determine  
vulnerability to nicotine use.  

The addictive nature of nicotine remains a global health  
epidemic. Over three million smoking-related deaths  
are reported annually, worldwide. In the Western world,  
illness related to smoking is believed to be the cause of  
20% of all deaths, making nicotine addiction the single  
largest cause of preventable mortality¹,². Despite these  
grim statistics, tobacco use is increasing in many devel-  
oping countries³, with smoking-related mortalities  
predicted to exceed 10 million per year over the coming  
30–40 years¹. Although nicotine is generally not classi-  
fied among ‘harder’ addictive drugs, such as cocaine  
or heroin, with continued use tobacco often becomes as  
difficult to abandon. As anybody who has ever struggled  
with repeated attempts at smoking cessation can attest  
to, nicotine is exceptionally intractable to quitting  
interventions.  

Since the identification of nicotine as the primary  
psychoactive component of tobacco smoke, a great  
amount of research has been undertaken to unravel the  
neuropharmacological, anatomical and behavioural  
underpinnings of its psychoactive effects. Various  
neural pathways and transmitter systems have emerged  
as compelling candidates for the processing of the  
psychoactive and addictive properties of nicotine.  
Here, we will examine research that implicates specific  

Neurobiology Research  
Group, Department of  
Anatomy and Cell Biology,  
University of Toronto,  
Toronto, Canada,  
M5S 1A8, USA.  
email:  
laviolette@bns.pitt.edu  
doi:10.1038/nrn1298  

neurotransmitter systems, the potential roles of specific  
neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR)  
subtypes and specific neuroanatomical regions that  
have been implicated in mediating the addictive prop-  
erties of nicotine. In particular, we will review the con-  
siderable body of evidence that implicates dopamine  
(DA) and non-DA neuronal substrates in the ventral  
tegmental area (VTA) as crucial for the rewarding and  
aversive motivational properties of nicotine. Whereas  
previous research has implicated DA-mediated neuro-  
transmission as a direct mediator of a nicotine reward  
signal⁴⁻⁷, more recent evidence points to a more com-  
plex role for DA systems in the motivational effects of  
nicotine, including the aversive effects of nicotine and  
drug-induced plastic changes at the synapse⁸⁻¹⁰.  
We propose an integrated model that might account  
for the vulnerability to the rewarding and addictive  
properties of nicotine through acute actions on non-  
DA reward pathways. With continued nicotine expo-  
sure, plastic molecular alterations in central DA  
systems might underlie the continued propensity to  
consume nicotine by inducing craving, the aversive  
effects of withdrawal, and aberrant incentive-salience  
attribution to environmental stimuli that are associated  
with nicotine.

signalling properties of nicotine in various CNS regions. In particular, studies on the actions of nicotine on DA pathways, specifically within the VTA, have provided insights into how nicotine might modify signalling through DA and non-DA VTA systems.

**The VTA and its input and output pathways** The mammalian VTA is a midbrain region that has been implicated in the rewarding motivational effects of a wide variety of addictive drugs, including cocaine<sup>19</sup>, alcohol<sup>20</sup>, opiates<sup>21,22</sup> and nicotine<sup>8,23,24</sup>. Much evidence implicates the VTA and its associated efferent and afferent projections as an integrative centre for the psychoactive effects of nicotine. Within the VTA, DA neurons (designated as the A10 DA group), and their associated ascending projections to the nucleus accumbens and prefrontal cortex (PFC), comprise the well-characterized mesolimbic and mesocortical pathways. In addition, a population of VTA GABA neurons provide inhibitory input to the A10 DA neurons<sup>25</sup>, and there is anatomical evidence for descending projections to the brainstem mesopontine region, including the tegmental pedunculopontine nucleus (TPP)<sup>26,27</sup> — a brain region that is important in DA-independent reward signalling. Both of these neuronal populations — the DA and GABA neurons — are involved in signalling reward<sup>19,21,28,29</sup>. The VTA also receives excitatory glutamatergic and cholinergic projections from both the TPP and the adjacent laterodorsal tegmental nucleus (LDT)<sup>25,30</sup>, as well as inhibitory GABA inputs from the TPP<sup>31</sup>. In FIG. 2, the ascending anatomical DA projections from the VTA to the nucleus accumbens and prefrontal cortex, as well as the VTA's GABA connections with the TPP are shown. Recent electrophysiological work on brain slices has provided insights into the cellular mechanisms by which nicotine interacts with both of these neuronal populations in the VTA, and has implicated the VTA as a crucial site for central nicotine signalling through several pre- and postsynaptic substrates.

**Neurophysiology of nicotine signalling in the VTA** Neurons within the VTA have a wide variety of nAChRs<sup>17</sup>, and nicotine can activate both the DA and GABA neurons of the VTA<sup>32,33</sup>. The nAChR receptor profiles that are associated with these DA and GABA neurons differ considerably, and these differences might have important functional consequences for nicotine signalling in the mesolimbic system. For example, DA neurons of the VTA express the α2–α7 and β2–β4 subunits<sup>34,35</sup>, which can give rise to at least three pharmacologically distinct nAChR subtypes, of which one is probably a homomeric α7 receptor. Although less than half of the VTA neurons express nAChRs that contain α7 (REF. 17), this subunit is preferentially localized within the midbrain in the VTA, relative to the adjacent substantia nigra<sup>17</sup>. By contrast, less than 25% of the GABA neurons express the α3, α5, α6 and β4 subunits<sup>35</sup>, indicating that most nAChRs of these VTA neurons contain the α4 and β2 subunits.

The administration of nicotine within concentration ranges that are readily self-administered in rodents and humans has been shown to increase DA release in the nucleus accumbens<sup>24,36</sup>. Furthermore, within the

Figure 1 | **The structure of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs).**  
a | Although the precise molecular structure of nAChRs is not known, they are believed to be pentameric ion channels. Each nAChR is composed of five subunits arranged in either homomeric or heteromeric complexes of α- or β-subunit arrangements (left). Different subunit combinations confer unique functional properties to the ubiquitously distributed nAChRs throughout the brain. The schematic on the right shows the transmembrane topology of a single nAChR subunit. The transmembrane domains are labelled M1–M4. The larger amino-terminal domain contains the acetylcholine-binding site, whereas the M2 domain determines the ionic selectivity of the receptor and faces the inside of the channel pore. b | nAChRs are located at the soma, on presynaptic terminals and on postsynaptic boutons. This widespread localization confers the receptor with a wide range of functions, influencing neuronal signalling at the pre- and postsynaptic levels.

Nicotine signalling: pharmacology and anatomy  
Nicotine acts on endogenous nAChRs that are found ubiquitously throughout the central (CNS) and peripheral nervous systems in almost all vertebrate and invertebrate species. The nAChRs are pentameric receptor complexes that serve as ligand-gated ion channels (FIG. 1). So far, 12 different neuronal nAChR subunits have been identified: α2–α10 and β2–β4 (REFS 11–15). The nAChR receptors form different combinations of α- and β-subunits. However, the α7–α9 subunits can also form homomeric nAChRs<sup>16,17</sup>.

Functionally, the nAChR receptor complex can exist in three conformational states, which are dynamically regulated by exposure to the agonist: closed, open and desensitized<sup>11</sup>. When agonists bind to the nAChR, the receptor complex undergoes a conformational change in its structure, which allows the channel gate to open, permitting the passage of cations (such as Na<sup>+</sup>, K<sup>+</sup> and also Ca<sup>2+</sup>, which might account for 1–10% of the nAChR-mediated current<sup>18</sup>) through the channel pore.

Ligand binding can produce a diverse range of neurophysiological effects. For example, nAChRs made of different subunit combinations can be located either on the soma and/or neuronal processes, enabling nAChR to act at the cell body and at the presynaptic and postsynaptic regions (FIG. 1). In vitro studies have examined the

activity of both DA and GABA neurons, leading to interesting findings about how nicotine affects the functional relationship between these two neuronal groups.

Whereas the early, acute effects of nicotine in the VTA predominantly affect GABA neurons, the nAChRs that are associated with these cells desensitize rapidly, leading to a long-lasting excitation of the DA neurons through removal of the inhibitory influence of GABA. In addition, the desensitization of inhibitory inputs to the DA system correlates with enhanced glutamatergic input to the DA neurons through the actions of nicotine on presynaptic nAChRs that are located on VTA glutamatergic terminals, which show a lesser degree of desensitization after nicotine exposure. Extracellular recordings of DA neurons of the VTA *in vivo* after intravenous nicotine administration lead to a similar conclusion; nicotine can modify the activity of DA neurons through its actions on inhibitory GABA neurons.

Functionally, nicotine activation of GABA neurons would be expected to initially increase inhibitory input to the DA neurons (FIG. 2). However, with continued exposure to nicotine and the subsequent desensitization of the nAChRs of the GABA neurons, nicotine would presumably bypass these inhibitory cells and act directly on the DA neurons. These findings indicate that there might be a net shift in the activity level of DA neurons relative to the GABA cells in the VTA (FIG. 2) after prolonged *in vitro* or *in vivo* exposure to nicotine at concentrations that are comparable to those observed in the plasma of smokers. This shift would favour increased activity of the mesolimbic DA pathway. Although future studies are required to clarify these issues, the differences in desensitization kinetics between the distinct nAChR subunits and their divergent expression patterns on DA and GABA neurons in the VTA might account for the functional differences between these cells in response to nicotine exposure.

In addition to the actions of nicotine on DA and GABA neurons, considerable evidence indicates that the actions of nicotine within the VTA might be mediated by glutamatergic transmission. Anatomically, the VTA receives substantial glutamatergic inputs from cortical and subcortical structures. These excitatory inputs synapse on DA and GABA neurons, and can therefore modulate the activity of both cell types. Various studies have indicated that α7-containing nAChRs might have a specific role in mediating the presynaptic actions of nicotine in the CNS, and, in particular, might regulate the release of glutamate. Systemic nicotine has been shown to elevate glutamate levels in the VTA, and this effect is blocked by the relatively selective α7-subunit antagonist methyllycaconitine (MLA). In addition, lesions of the prefrontal cortex — a region that provides glutamatergic inputs to the VTA — reduce binding of the nAChR antagonist α-bungarotoxin in the VTA. This observation provides further evidence for the presynaptic localization of α7-containing nAChRs in the VTA, presumably in glutamatergic terminals.

Blockade of NMDA (*N*-methyl-*D*-aspartate) receptors and α7-containing nAChRs in the VTA diminishes the increase in mesolimbic DA release that is induced by

Figure 2 | The ventral tegmental area (VTA), and its efferent and afferent systems.
a | Human (left) and rat (right) brains, showing the mesolimbic and mesocortical dopamine (DA) pathways, which originate in the VTA and send ascending projections to the nucleus accumbens (NAc) and prefrontal cortex (PFC), respectively. These pathways are strongly activated by nicotine and are implicated in its rewarding and aversive psychological properties. The VTA also sends a descending projection to the tegmental pedunculopontine nucleus (TPP), a brain region that is involved in non-DA-mediated reward signalling. The rewarding effects of nicotine are blocked by lesions or GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid)-mediated inhibition of this nucleus. Ascending cholinergic and glutamatergic projections from the TPP also influence VTA neuronal activity and can regulate the activity of DA neurons in the VTA. b | Schematic showing the DA and GABA neuronal populations within the VTA. GABA neurons send descending projections to the TPP and provide inhibitory input to DA neurons. Both neuronal populations are activated by nicotine. In addition, both neuronal populations receive excitatory glutamatergic inputs, which can regulate the relative activity of DA and GABA activity in the VTA.

physiological range of plasma nicotine concentrations that are obtained by smokers (~0.5 μM), nicotine potently activates DA neurons of the VTA, an activation that is followed by desensitization of nAChRs after continued exposure to nicotine. This observation indicates that, whereas the acute excitatory action of nicotine on DA neurons might signal its reinforcing, rewarding effect, the long-lasting desensitization of VTA nAChRs might represent a cellular basis of nicotine tolerance. Such a characterization seems reasonable, given the anecdotal reports that smokers tend to enjoy most the first cigarette of the day (at a time when nAChRs would not be in a state of prolonged desensitization). However, activation of DA neurons is not a scalar index of reward, nor is the corresponding increase in DA release in the target regions of the mesolimbic system a simple reinforcement signal (see later in text). As we will discuss, mesolimbic DA signalling also mediates aversive motivational events and is involved in associative learning processes.

Because of the important functional relationship between the DA and GABA neurons in the VTA, it is imperative to examine the effects of nicotine on both of these neuronal populations. Recent studies on VTA slices have investigated the actions of nicotine on the

nicotine^{44}. This apparently unique role for the α7 subunit in the VTA might have important implications for the psychoactive effects of nicotine. Indeed, as we will discuss, various studies have indicated that functional interactions between DA, GABA and glutamate within the VTA are vital for the mediation of the motivational properties of nicotine.

**Cholinergic modulation of DA function in the VTA through brainstem projections.** The functional connections between the brainstem nuclei TPP and LDT with the VTA have been studied extensively (FIG. 2). Ascending inputs from the TPP and LDT to the VTA comprise cholinergic and glutamatergic fibres that synapse on DA and GABA neuronal populations of the VTA^{30}. The cholinergic neurons of the TPP and LDT have been termed the Ch5 and Ch6 cell groups, respectively^{45}, and these inputs can modulate the activity of the mesolimbic DA system. For example, electrical stimulation of the TPP elicits striatal DA efflux as measured by MICRODIALYSIS^{46}, whereas LDT stimulation elicits a similar DA efflux in the nucleus accumbens through the activation of cholinergic and glutamatergic receptors in the VTA^{47}.

The behavioural effects of these ascending cholinergic inputs to the VTA seem to depend more importantly on signalling through muscarinic acetylcholine receptors than through nAChRs. For example, ANTISENSE KNOCKDOWN of muscarinic M5 receptors in the VTA of rats reduces the rewarding efficacy of stimulating the MEDIAL FOREBRAIN BUNDLE^{48}. Similarly, pharmacological blockade of muscarinic receptors in the VTA is more effective than blockade of nAChRs at attenuating the rewarding effects of this stimulation^{49}. These *in vivo* findings point to the behavioural complexity of cholinergic signalling in the VTA. Indeed, the functional balance between DA and GABA VTA neuronal substrates might have important implications for the central processing of the motivational properties of nicotine.

---

MICRODIALYSIS  
A technique that allows the sampling of neurochemicals in the brain of live animals. It commonly uses a small U-shaped cannula that serves a dual function: it allows the injection of molecules of interest to test their effect, and it provides a pathway for the flow and subsequent collection of perfusate from a small brain area.

ANTISENSE KNOCKDOWN  
Oligonucleotides with a sequence that is complementary to the mRNA of a given molecule can be used to block its translation. The subsequent temporary elimination of the protein of interest often provides useful information on its biological function.

MEDIAL FOREBRAIN BUNDLE  
Complex fibre tract that runs through the diencephalon. It contains descending fibres from telencephalic structures such as the basal olfactory regions, the periamygdaloid region and the septal nuclei, and ascending fibres from the aminergic brainstem nuclei. Intracranial stimulation along this tract can simulate motivational states and reinforce behaviour.

---

addiction is the delineation of the neuronal mechanisms that might be involved in transmitting the rewarding and aversive motivational effects of nicotine. Understanding how these neural systems interact might yield important clues as to how the brain initially responds to acute nicotine exposure (as a rewarding or an aversive stimulus), and how the continued exposure to the drug might eventually lead to dependence (compulsive nicotine craving and withdrawal symptoms).

**Defining the role of DA: reward or aversion?** For many years, a common theme in the literature on behavioural neuropharmacology has been the hypothesis that DA and its associated neural pathways serve as specific transducers of central reward signals. In its most simplistic form, this view of DA implies that any drug or stimulus that can produce reward as measured by behavioural reinforcement tests, such as conditioned place preference (CPP) or intravenous self-administration of the drug (BOX 1), does so by increasing levels of DA through activation of the mesolimbic pathway^{61}. In this sense, DA was considered a direct, scalar index of reward. However, recent research has called into question this conceptualization of DA in motivational signalling, particularly in light of the fact that DA signalling also correlates with aversive, noxious stimuli^{38,39}, and might serve to signal conditioned stimuli that predict reward (or errors in reward prediction), rather than the rewarding events *per se*^{62}. A role for DA-mediated transmission in such cognitive processes might transcend drug-naive versus drug-dependent states and might be relevant for motivationally important learning processes, independent of their rewarding or aversive emotional valence. However, a large body of research has supported the idea that the rewarding effects of several psychoactive drugs, including nicotine, are dependent on mesolimbic DA-mediated transmission. Indeed, DA neural systems have arguably received the greatest amount of experimental attention as potential mediators of the rewarding effects of nicotine.

Using an intravenous procedure for the self-administration of nicotine, several studies have reported that blocking DA-mediated transmission, pharmacologically or by lesions of the mesolimbic DA pathway, is sufficient to reduce or completely block the reinforcing effects of nicotine. For example, Corrigall *et al.*^{4} showed that pretreatment with specific antagonists of D1 or D2 DA receptor subtypes strongly attenuated nicotine self-administration. Lesions of the mesolimbic DA system caused by 6-hydroxydopamine, a molecule that selectively destroys DA neurons, also attenuate nicotine self-administration^{5}. Similarly, microinfusions of the nAChR antagonist dihydro-β-erythroidine directly into the VTA attenuate nicotine self-administration, but not the reinforcing effects of food or cocaine, implicating that the mesolimbic DA projection from the VTA is a crucial mediator of the reinforcing effects of nicotine^{6}.

Work using gene knockout technology has further implicated mesolimbic DA-mediated transmission in nicotine reward. Elimination of specific nAChR subunits has shown that the nAChR subunits that are

**The dual motivational effects of nicotine**  
We tend to think about drugs of abuse in terms of their ability to produce feelings of pleasure. Indeed, nicotine is known to induce feelings of pleasure and reward in humans and other species. But like many other addictive drugs, nicotine also has potent, aversive, unpleasant effects^{50–52}. Nicotine can produce powerful anxiogenic effects systematically and centrally^{53,54} through activation of nAChR that contain α4, α7 or β2 subunits^{55}. Many people experience noxious effects such as nausea, coughs and dizziness on their initial experience with tobacco^{56,57}. Interestingly, tolerance to the aversive effects of nicotine develops with repeated exposure^{52,58}. Although the precise neurobiological mechanism that underlies this tolerance to nicotine aversion is unknown, its existence indicates that chronic nicotine exposure might induce a functional alteration in neural systems that mediate the aversive and/or rewarding effects of nicotine.

It has been suggested that relative sensitivity to the rewarding or aversive properties of nicotine might serve as a predictor of who might become addicted to tobacco^{59,60}. So, an important goal in the study of nicotine

Box 1 | Tasks used to study the motivational properties of nicotine

A behavioural test that is commonly used to study the motivational properties of nicotine and other drugs is conditioned place preference (CPP; a). In this procedure, animals receive a specific drug and are placed in a unique environment that has a specific odour, colour and/or texture. On the next day, the animal receives the vehicle instead of the drug and is placed in another conditioning environment. After several such cycles, animals are given the opportunity to spend time in either the environment previously paired with the drug or with the vehicle. A key advantage of this task is that the experimenter controls the precise amount and time course of exposure to the drug in question. More importantly, CPP allows the testing of both the rewarding properties of a drug (the animal can show a preference for the previously drug-paired environment) and its aversive properties (the animal can actively avoid an environment previously paired with the drug). An important drawback of CPP is that drugs are passively administered by the experimenter, instead of being self-administered, as is the case for real-life drug-taking behaviour. However, the associative learning that takes place during the CPP task might resemble the strong associations that smokers develop between the environmental cues that are associated with smoking and the reinforcing effects of nicotine.

Another commonly used model is the intravenous self-administration of drugs (b). Animals can be trained to reliably press a lever to receive a discrete infusion of drug. Lesions to specific brain regions or pre-treatments with specific pharmacological agents, such as dopamine (DA) receptor antagonists, can be performed to examine their effects on self-administration. This model has been successfully used to measure nicotine reinforcement in rodents and primates. One of the primary advantages of the self-administration model is its resemblance to real-life drug-taking behaviour in humans: just like human smokers, animals trained in this task will consistently and compulsively self-administer nicotine. The lever presses are termed operant responses. Most studies on nicotine reinforcement rely on a 'fixed-ratio' schedule of operant responding in which the animal must make a fixed number of bar presses to receive a single infusion of nicotine.

A third task that is used in studies on the motivational effects of nicotine is conditioned taste aversion (CTA; c). CTA is believed to tap directly into the aversive properties of a drug by taking advantage of the fact that animals seem intrinsically able to associate specific tastes with aversive states. By pairing a specific drug with a particular taste, animals might learn to avoid such a taste, as the unpleasant effects of the drug become associated with it. By contrast, a taste that is paired with the injection of vehicle is not avoided when the animal is given a choice between the two tastes. Many studies have used nicotine as a drug stimulus in this task and have reported that, like many other addictive drugs, it produces potent aversive effects. Such reports, in combination with studies using the self-administration or CPP procedures, have conclusively shown the dual nature of the motivational effects of nicotine in animals, consistent with the reported aversive and rewarding psychological effects of nicotine in humans.

nicotine^{51}, or no apparent motivational effects at all^{64}. But a limitation of these studies is that they relied exclusively on systemic nicotine administration, which also targeted peripheral nAChRs. The activation of these receptors could potentially produce toxic and noxious effects, leading to the expression of such a conditioned place aversion. Intravenous nicotine self-administration also activates peripheral nAChRs, and high concentrations of intravenously administered nicotine do produce aversive effects^{50}.

An early study reported that infusions of the nicotinic agonist cytisine directly in the VTA to exclude peripheral effects could produce reward as measured in the CPP test^{65}. A more recent study reported that both rewarding and aversive effects could be measured using the same test after microinfusions of nicotine itself into the VTA^{8}. This study reported a dose-dependent, biphasic curve for the motivational effects of nicotine in the CNS; whereas a lower nicotine concentration in the VTA produced an aversive effect, higher concentrations produced potent rewarding effects (FIG. 3c). So, within a single brain region, nicotine can have rewarding or aversive effects as a function of nicotine concentration.

Surprisingly, when the rewarding effects of higher nicotine concentrations were challenged by blocking DA-mediated transmission, either systemically or directly in the nucleus accumbens, there was no attenuation of the rewarding effects of nicotine. However, under these conditions, levels of nicotine in the VTA that previously produced no motivational effects now had rewarding effects, whereas the effects of lower nicotine concentrations switched from aversive to rewarding (FIG. 3d). In addition, when the aversive effects of nicotine were examined in the CTA test, DA receptor blockade prevented the aversive nicotine signal^{8}. So, by contrast to previous studies of intravenous nicotine self-administration, these studies have indicated that the rewarding and aversive effects of nicotine are mediated within the VTA by separate and dissociable systems. Whereas the acute rewarding properties of nicotine were independent of DA signalling, the aversive effects of nicotine were crucially dependent on DA-mediated transmission^{8}.

Although these results from the CPP model point to an opposing functional role for DA signalling in the motivational effects of nicotine within the VTA, there are crucial differences between the CPP and the self-administration studies. The most important of these differences is that in studies of self-administration^{4-6,63} the animals receive chronic exposure to nicotine, often over several weeks. By contrast, in most CPP studies, animals are naive to nicotine at the beginning of the experiment, and the drug is passively administered by the experimenter in controlled doses (BOX 1). So, whereas DA receptor blockade seems to attenuate nicotine reinforcement in animals that are chronically exposed to nicotine, the acute rewarding effects of nicotine can be mediated through a non-DA system in the VTA. In addition, when the acute aversive effects of nicotine are blocked by interfering with mesolimbic DA receptor signalling, the rewarding effects of nicotine are potentiated, presumably by the removal of an aversive signal^{8}. As we will discuss, the motivational

required for nicotine-induced DA release are also necessary for nicotine self-administration^{7,63}. For example, mice that lack the β2 nAChR subunit showed decreased DA release in response to nicotine exposure, and this effect correlated with a strong attenuation of nicotine self-administration^{63}, indicating that the ability of this subunit to produce nicotine reward might be tightly linked to its functional regulation of DA release in the mesolimbic pathway (FIG. 3a,b). Interestingly, these mutant mice also showed a strong reduction in nicotine-induced conditioned taste aversion (CTA)^{10} (BOX 1), indicating that a specific nAChR subunit that is linked to mesolimbic DA-mediated transmission is also involved in the aversive effects of nicotine. But studies using CPP, a test that is sensitive to both the aversive and rewarding properties of drugs, have disclosed a far more complex role for DA in the motivational properties of nicotine.

**A common neural substrate for nicotine reward and aversion.** Many early studies on the motivational effects of nicotine using the CPP test reported that, rather than producing a rewarding effect, nicotine produced aversive effects, as manifest by the development of conditioned aversions to environments paired with
state — drug-naive, drug-dependent or withdrawn — might be vital to determine the role of DA in nicotine addiction.

### Beyond DA: new players in nicotine addiction

As DA does not exclusively transmit a nicotine reward signal, what other substrates are involved in the addictive properties of nicotine? As previously noted, nicotine produces the physiological activation of both DA and GABA neurons in the VTA ${ }^{32,33,40}$. As GABA neurons serve as a substrate for non-DA-mediated reward transmission ${ }^{28,29}$ and are acutely activated by nicotine ${ }^{32,33,40}$, this neuronal population is a good candidate for the mediation of nicotine reward signalling in the VTA. A recent report has found that GABA receptors in the VTA might be important mediators of the reinforcing properties of nicotine. Corrigall et al. ${ }^{23}$ reported that direct microinfusions of $G A B A_{A}$ or $G A B A_{B}$ receptor agonists into the VTA caused a significant reduction in nicotine self-administration, indicating that GABA receptors in the VTA can also mediate nicotine reinforcement. Whereas $G A B A_{A}$ receptors in the VTA are predominantly localized to GABA neurons ${ }^{25,28}$, $G A B A_{B}$ receptors are primarily localized on DA neurons and can strongly modulate the activity of the mesolimbic DA system ${ }^{25,66,67}$. Activation of $G A B A_{B}$ receptors in the VTA can strongly decrease mesolimbic DA activity ${ }^{66,67}$ and attenuate nicotine-induced DA release in the mesolimbic pathway ${ }^{67,68}$. These data are consistent with a role for $G A B A_{B}$ receptors in the control of VTA DA neurons. These results are also consistent with observations in animals that chronically self-administered nicotine, as blockade of DA signalling or direct inactivation of the mesolimbic DA system with a $G A B A_{B}$ receptor agonist can block nicotine reward in this model.

### The TPP

The TPP is crucially involved in the transmission of drug-related ${ }^{21,69,70}$ and natural reward information ${ }^{70,72}$. Notably, the TPP seems to be especially important in the early, acute phase of drug exposure. For example, lesions of the TPP block opiate reward, as measured in the CPP and self-administration tasks, only during the early stage of drug exposure ${ }^{21,71}$. Although the TPP has been implicated in the rewarding effects of opiates ${ }^{21,70}$, food ${ }^{70}$ and sex ${ }^{72}$, the rewarding properties of drugs such as cocaine ${ }^{73}$ do not seem to require this region. In the case of nicotine, several reports have implicated the TPP in the mediation of its rewarding effects.

Anatomically, the TPP and VTA are connected by descending GABA inputs from the VTA, and by ascending cholinergic and glutamatergic inputs from the TPP (FIG. 2). Although these ascending cholinergic inputs from the TPP to the VTA DA neurons can influence the activity of the mesolimbic DA system ${ }^{46,47}$, it is unlikely that these inputs are directly involved in nicotine reward for several reasons. First, the cholinergic inputs to the VTA are topographically organized such that most of the cholinergic brainstem projections to the VTA arise from the adjacent LDT, rather than from the TPP, which projects more heavily to the adjacent substantia nigra ${ }^{74}$. Second, acutely administered nicotine predominantly activates non-cholinergic TPP cells, including GABA and glutamate neurons ${ }^{75}$. In addition, intracranial self-stimulation activates GABA neurons of the TPP, rather than the cholinergic Ch6 cells ${ }^{76}$, further indicating that non-cholinergic TPP mechanisms might be involved in reward signalling.

Together, this evidence indicates that descending VTA inputs to the TPP might be the primary transducers of the nicotine reward signal. For example, bilateral excitotoxic lesions of the TPP block nicotine reward in the VTA and switch the motivational valence of nicotine from rewarding to aversive, as measured in the CPP model ${ }^{69}$. This result indicates that, whereas the TPP seems to selectively mediate a nicotine reward signal, the aversive effects of nicotine in the VTA (which are dependent on DA-mediated transmission in the acute state) remain intact after removal of the TPP pathway. An early report found that partial lesions of the dorsal TPP did not affect nicotine self-administration ${ }^{6}$, but a subsequent report from the same group claimed that more extensive and localized TPP lesions strongly attenuated nicotine self-administration ${ }^{77}$. Within the TPP, GABA receptors seem to be crucial for transmission of a nicotine reward signal. Corrigall et al. ${ }^{78}$ reported that $G A B A_{A}$ and $G A B A_{B}$ receptor agonists that were infused into the TPP attenuated nicotine self-administration on a fixed-ratio schedule of operant responding (see BOX 1). In addition, infusions of nicotine into the TPP induce CPP, further implicating the TPP as a non-DA system that is important for the motivational effects of nicotine ${ }^{79}$.

So, increasing evidence indicates that non-DA neural substrates, including a GABA-mediated system within the TPP, might be important for the reinforcing and addictive properties of nicotine. Future studies are required to map out the functional pathways from the VTA to these non-DA neuronal reward substrates.

### Emerging roles for the α7 subunit and glutamate

As described previously, α7-containing nAChRs might be preferentially involved in the regulation of the presynaptic effects of nicotine on glutamate release ${ }^{41-43}$. Such a role for the α7 subunit has been shown in various brain regions, including the VTA ${ }^{41-43}$. Until recently, no direct behavioural evidence had linked this particular subunit to the motivational effects of nicotine. However, several reports now indicate that α7 might be preferentially involved in the acute rewarding effects of nicotine. Panagis et al. ${ }^{80}$ reported that direct microinfusions of MLA in the VTA attenuated nicotine-induced potentiation of reward in an intracranial self-stimulation experiment. However, Grottick et al. ${ }^{81}$ found that blockade of α7-containing receptors had no effect on intravenous nicotine self-administration in animals chronically treated with nicotine, nor on the hyperlocomotor effects of chronic nicotine exposure, indicating that α7 might not be involved in the motivational signalling of nicotine after chronic exposure. Similarly, a recent study using MLA over a wide concentration range found that this antagonist blocked the acute effects of nicotine administered directly into the VTA, and switched its motivational valence from rewarding to aversive ${ }^{82}$. By contrast, β2-containing nAChRs are implicated in both the rewarding
and aversive effects of nicotine^{6,8,10,63}, and seem to block its reinforcing effects in both the acute and chronic stages of exposure^{6,8,63}. A caveat of these studies is that MLA at low concentrations interacts with nAChRs that do not contain the α7 subunit^{35}.

Several studies have found that blockade of glutamatergic transmission with specific NMDA receptor antagonists that are administered systemically or directly in the VTA can block the rewarding^{82–84} and aversive^{82} effects of nicotine. Interestingly, blockade of NMDA receptors is effective in reducing the reinforcing effects of nicotine in both the acute and chronic phases of nicotine exposure^{82–84}.

**An integrated model of nicotine addiction**

The complexity of the motivational and physiological effects of nicotine makes it a formidable task to develop a unifying model of nicotine addiction. Owing to the ubiquity of central nAChR distribution, nicotine exerts multiple effects in many brain regions beyond the VTA. But as the studies that we reviewed in this article attest to, the VTA and its associated input and output pathways seem to be integral to the transmission of the motivational properties of nicotine.

By comparing the results of molecular, electrophysiological and behavioural investigations on the central actions of nicotine, an integrated picture of the nicotine addiction process is beginning to emerge. A consistent theme is the dichotomy in the roles of DA in the motivational properties as a function of the stage of nicotine dependence. Indeed, whereas the rewarding effects of nicotine within the VTA can be mediated through DA-independent mechanisms in the early, acute phases of nicotine exposure^{8,69,75}, blockade of DA-mediated transmission seems to attenuate its reinforcing properties once chronic exposure and dependence have taken place^{4–6,63}. What mechanism could account for this apparent shift in the role of DA-mediated transmission as a function of nicotine exposure? Do the effects of DA receptor blockade in nicotine-dependent animals interfere with a rewarding effect of nicotine or with some other psychological process?

FIGURE 4 presents a simplified model that summarizes some of the known functional differences between the role of DA and non-DA systems of the VTA in relation to the motivational effects of nicotine in the acute versus the chronic (addicted) state. We suggest that the shift from the acute effects of nicotine to the development of a dependence state involves a switch in the functional role of DA signalling in the VTA. In the acute state, activation of DA neurons by nicotine induces aversive effects, whereas GABA neurons and the associated descending inputs to the TPP mediate its rewarding effects^{8,69,75}. Nicotine transiently activates GABA neurons, the nAChRs of which rapidly desensitize^{33}. Simultaneously, nicotine potentiates glutamatergic transmission through nAChRs that show slower desensitization, leading to a functional shift in the actions of nicotine from the GABA to the DA neurons^{33}. The balance between these separate systems might determine the initial vulnerability to the addictive properties of

nicotine by determining the relative sensitivity to the rewarding or aversive psychological effects of nicotine. But how do alterations in DA signalling during prolonged exposure ultimately lead to a role for DA in the motivational effects of nicotine in the drug-dependent state? Here, we consider two alternative possibilities.

First, considerable evidence indicates that, rather than transmitting an acute reward signal during the early exposure to drugs, DA is specifically involved in the late phases of the drug-addiction process, and mediates drug craving or wanting. This view, proposed by Berridge and Robinson^{85,86}, states that, after repeated drug exposure, sensitization of the DA systems, which signal the INCENTIVE SALIENCE of the drug (that is, how much the drug is craved), leads to a pathological amplification of this salience, leading to compulsive drug seeking and use. Indeed, repeated nicotine exposure induces sensitization of DA pathways^{87,88} and increases DA receptor expression in the projection areas of the VTA DA system^{89}. In addition, specific blockade of D3 DA receptors has recently been shown to prevent nicotine-induced relapse to nicotine-seeking behaviours, indicating that alterations of this particular DA receptor subtype might be specifically involved in nicotine craving and relapse^{90}. However, there is little evidence to suggest that the sensitized DA-mediated psychomotor responses to repeated nicotine represent an enhancement in the rewarding properties of nicotine *per se*. In addition, prolonged nicotine exposure might have profound effects on nAChR expression. Indeed, many studies have reported that chronic nicotine exposure increases the number of nAChR receptor subtypes in various brain regions^{91}. Although it is not known if such nAChR receptor upregulation is related to an increased DA responsiveness after chronic nicotine exposure, upregulation of α4, β2 and α7 nAChR subunits^{92} within the VTA^{93} or other DA systems could conceivably contribute to such a heightened response.

A related possibility is that plastic processes that increase DA responsivity to nicotine within the VTA might represent an aberrant form of drug-induced associative learning. Interestingly, exposing humans to imagery of stimuli that are associated with smoking (and so with the incentive properties of nicotine) activates neural regions that are linked to drug-induced DA sensitization processes, including the prefrontal cortex, amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex^{94}. Although direct functional comparisons between *in vivo* behavioural studies and *in vitro* neuronal recording studies are tenuous, it is possible that plastic alterations at DA synapses in the VTA lead to a prolonged activation of DA pathways. This activation might result in persistent nicotine craving owing to the pathological amplification of an incentive-learned association between nicotine and environmental stimuli that are associated with nicotine exposure (such as the sight of a cigarette or the smell of tobacco smoke). Blockade of this DA-mediated incentive learning signal in animals that are chronically exposed to nicotine would be expected to reduce nicotine self-administration, as indeed shown by most self-administration studies^{4–7,63}. So, once dependence to nicotine has developed after

INCENTIVE SALIENCE  
A psychological process whereby the perception of stimuli is transformed by increasing their salience, making them more attractive or wanted.

behavioural tolerance to nicotine that has been reported in vivo. Indeed, whereas nAChR desensitization can take place in the order of seconds to minutes after nicotine exposure in vitro, behavioural nAChR tolerance in vivo develops over days or weeks.

Chronic nicotine exposure and withdrawal can induce profound alterations in the mesolimbic DA system in rodents^{87-89,95} and humans^{96}. It is possible that chronic nicotine causes a long-term reduction of the baseline level of DA-mediated signalling as a compensatory response after heightened DA-mediated transmission during continued nicotine exposure. Indeed, medications that increase DA concentrations have proven efficacious in preventing nicotine relapse and craving in smokers^{97}. However, DA receptor antagonists and agonists have been reported to reduce nicotine intake in healthy smokers^{98} and in chronic smokers with schizophrenia^{99,100}. In addition, DA receptor agonists and antagonists increase subjective measures of nicotine craving in chronic smokers^{101}. If a lowered level of DA tone were responsible for the aversive nature of nicotine withdrawal, it seems unlikely that blocking or activating DA receptors would increase nicotine intake and subjective measures of craving. If a lowered baseline level of DA-mediated signalling were responsible for the aversive effects of nicotine withdrawal, it might be predicted that blocking DA-mediated transmission would worsen withdrawal and craving, in which case animals that self-administer nicotine might be expected to increase, rather than decrease, their intake.

In addition, several studies have found that chronic nicotine does not lead to a decreased DA tone in response to subsequent nicotine exposure^{102,103}, but rather to an enhanced DA release in response to nicotine after chronic nicotine exposure^{104}. NEUROLEPTICS have also been reported to increase smoking rates in people with schizophrenia; this effect might represent a potentiation of the rewarding properties of nicotine, or a compensatory response owing to a decrease in such rewarding effects^{105}. The exceedingly high rates of nicotine addiction that are observed in people with schizophrenia^{106} might indicate that abnormalities in DA-mediated signalling, which are considered to be a cardinal underlying pathology of schizophrenia, might increase the motivational salience and rewarding effects of nicotine^{8,106}.

These findings raise the possibility that by pharmacologically regulating DA-mediated transmission during nicotine withdrawal, the unpleasant psychological effects of withdrawal and craving after chronic nicotine exposure might be alleviated. By extension, the ability of DA receptor blockade to reduce nicotine self-administration in animals chronically exposed to nicotine might be due to a blockade of the aversive effects of nicotine withdrawal. In other words, by blocking the aversive effects of nicotine withdrawal and craving, self-administration of nicotine would be reduced. Interestingly, chronic opiate exposure and withdrawal also alter DA-mediated signalling^{107,108}, and DA-mediated transmission is involved in the acute aversive effects of opiate exposure and withdrawal^{109,110}, pointing to possible similarities in the functional role of DA in both nicotine and opiate addiction. Although future studies are required to

Figure 4 | An integrated model for nicotine reward signalling in the ventral tegmental area (VTA). a | In the acute stage, the initial activation by nicotine of GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) neurons in the VTA^{32,33,40} produces rewarding effects through a GABA-dependent system that projects to the tegmental pedunculopontine nucleus (TPP)^{69,76,77}. These effects might involve the activation of presynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) that contain the α7 subunit, as blockade of this subunit interferes with the acute rewarding effects of nicotine^{80,82}, but leaves the aversive signal intact^{82}. However, nicotine might also exert its motivational effects through direct actions on nAChRs containing the β2 subunit and located on GABA or dopamine (DA) neurons, as pharmacological blockade or genetic deletion of this subunit blocks both the aversive and rewarding effects of nicotine^{8,63,82}. In this model, nAChRs are distributed on both VTA neuronal populations, and nicotine-induced activation of these receptors can therefore regulate the motivational effects of nicotine through either non-DA or DA systems. b | With repeated nicotine exposure, however, the GABA system that signals reward becomes desensitized, leading to a net shift in the action of nicotine to the DA neurons^{33,40}. This shift is mediated at least partly by increased glutamatergic input to the DA system^{33}. The shift in the functional balance between GABA and DA neuronal populations in the VTA might lead to a dysregulated DA signal in the VTA, which in turn leads to the aversive psychological effects of nicotine craving and withdrawal, and/or to the potentiation of the incentive salience of nicotine and its compulsive use. NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate.

prolonged nicotine exposure, the learned associations between its incentive motivational properties and the environmental stimuli that become associated with these effects might become dependent on DA signalling. However, this idea does not explain why DA-mediated transmission seems to carry a specific aversive signal in the acute phase of nicotine exposure^{8,10}, and a reinforcing signal after chronic nicotine exposure.

A second explanation for the role of DA-mediated signalling on the motivational effects of nicotine argues for a consistent role for DA in the aversive aspects of nicotine in both the acute and chronic phases of nicotine exposure. The underlying idea is that a dysregulation of DA-mediated signalling during nicotine dependence and withdrawal after chronic exposure might be responsible for the aversive effects of nicotine withdrawal. Whereas activation of the nAChRs of DA neurons can signal an aversive effect in the early phase of nicotine exposure^{8,10}, the eventual desensitization of these nAChRs, which takes place after the desensitization of the nAChRs in VTA GABA neurons^{33}, might account for the tolerance to the aversive properties of nicotine over time. Note, however, that it is not known whether the nAChR desensitization that is observed in vitro is analogous to the

NEUROLEPTIC  
This term was originally coined to refer to the effects of early antipsychotic agents on cognition and behaviour.

examine more closely the functional role of DA-mediated
signalling in the early phases of nicotine exposure versus
the chronic state, the available studies in humans and
animals consistently indicate that chronic nicotine
exposure might lead to alterations in DA-mediated sig-
nalling, which might in turn lead to nicotine craving
and compulsive drug-seeking behaviours.

Conclusions and future directions
Despite the widespread effects of nicotine in the CNS,
converging evidence at the behavioural, molecular,
genetic and physiological levels points to the VTA and its
associated DA and non-DA systems as crucial mediators
of the motivational effects of nicotine. However, many
important questions remain to be answered. What func-
tional interactions take place between the systems that
subserve the aversive and rewarding effects of nicotine
during the development of nicotine dependence? Does
this functional interaction determine the vulnerability

to the addictive potential of nicotine? Studies on the
neurophysiological effects of nicotine within the VTA
provide new insights into how nicotine induces synaptic
plasticity within the mesolimbic DA system. These
studies might disclose a mechanism to account for the
shift from non-DA-mediated reward signalling in
the acute state to the involvement of DA-mediated
transmission in the development of compulsive nicotine
use. However, it will be important to examine how
these *in vitro* effects of nicotine might relate to what
happens *in vivo* during the development of addiction.
Finally, research that allows the dissection of the
contribution of specific subunits of the nAChR to the
motivational effects of nicotine and the development of
addiction might ultimately lead to a clear understanding
of which nAChR subunits are involved in the vulnera-
bility to the rewarding properties of nicotine, and how
alterations in specific nAChRs might lead to chronic
nicotine use and dependence.

1. Peto, R. *et al.* Mortality from smoking worldwide. *Br. Med.*
   *Bull.* **52**, 12–21 (1996).
2. Annual smoking-attributable mortality, years of potential
   life lost, and economic costs — United States, 1995–1999.
   *MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep.* **51**, 300–303
   (2002).
3. Dani, J. A., Daoyun, J. & Zhou, F. Synaptic plasticity and
   nicotine addiction. *Neuron* **31**, 349–352 (2001).
4. Corrigall, W. A. & Coen, K. M. Selective dopamine
   antagonists reduce nicotine self-administration.
   *Psychopharmacology* **104**, 171–176 (1991).
   First experimental demonstration that systemic
   blockade of DA-mediated transmission could strongly
   inhibit the intravenous self-administration of nicotine
   in rodents.
5. Corrigall, W. A., Franklin, K. B., Coen, K. M. & Clarke, P. B.
   The mesolimbic dopaminergic system is implicated in the
   reinforcing effects of nicotine. *Psychopharmacology*
   **107**, 285–289 (1992).
6. Corrigall, W. A., Coen, K. M. & Adamson, K. L. Self-
   administered nicotine activates the mesolimbic dopamine
   system through the ventral tegmental area. *Brain Res.*
   **653**, 278–284 (1994).
7. Picciotto, M. & Corrigall, W. A. Neuronal systems underlying
   behaviors related to nicotine addiction: neural circuits and
   molecular genetics. *J. Neurosci.* **22**, 3338–3341 (2002).
8. Laviolette, S. R. & van der Kooy, D. Blockade of mesolimbic
   dopamine transmission dramatically increases sensitivity to
   the rewarding effects of nicotine in the ventral tegmental area.
   *Mol. Psychiatry* **8**, 50–59 (2003).
   First experimental demonstration that a single brain
   region (the VTA) can mediate both the acute rewarding
   and aversive effects of nicotine, and that DA receptor
   blockade can potentiate nicotine reward signals in the
   VTA.
9. Mansvelder, H. B. & McGeehee, D. S. Cellular and synaptic
   mechanisms of nicotine addiction. *J. Neurobiol.*
   **53**, 606–617 (2002).
10. Shoaib, M. *et al.* The role of nicotinic receptor β-2 subunits in
    nicotine discrimination and conditioned taste aversion.
    *Neuropharmacology* **42**, 530–539 (2002).
11. Salamone, F. & Zhou, M. Aberrations in nicotinic
    acetylcholine receptor structure, function and expression:
    implications in disease. *McGill J. Med.* **5**, 90–97 (2000).
12. McGeehee, D. S. & Role, L. W. Physiological diversity of
    nicotinic acetylcholine receptors expressed by vertebrate
    neurons. *Annu. Rev. Physiol.* **57**, 521–546 (1995).
13. Role, L. W. & Berg, D. K. Nicotinic receptors in the
    development and modulation of CNS synapses. *Neuron*
    **16**, 1077–1085 (1996).
14. Jones, S., Sudweeks, S. & Yakel, J. L. Nicotinic receptors in
    the brain: correlating physiology with function. *Trends*
    *Neurosci.* **22**, 555–561 (1999).
15. Gotti, C., Fornasari, D. & Clementi, F. Human neuronal
    nicotinic receptors. *Prog. Neurobiol.* **53**, 199–237 (1997).
16. Yu, C. R. & Role, L. W. Functional contribution of the α7
    subunit to multiple subtypes of nicotinic receptors in
    embryonic chick sympathetic neurons. *J. Physiol. (Lond.)*
    **509**, 651–665 (1998).

17. Woolferton, J. R. A., Pidoplichko, V. I., Broide, R. S. & Dani, J. A.
    Differential desensitization and distribution of nicotinic
    acetylcholine receptor subtypes in midbrain dopamine
    neurons. *J. Neurosci.* **23**, 3176–3185 (2003).
18. Rogers, M., Colquhon, L. M., Patrick, J. W. & Dani, J. A.
    Calcium flux through predominantly independent purinergic
    ATP and nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. *J. Neurophysiol.*
    **77**, 1407–1417 (1997).
19. Philips, P. E., Stuber, G. D., Heien, M. L., Wightman, R. M. &
    Carelli, R. M. Subsecond dopamine release promotes
    cocaine seeking. *Nature* **10**, 614–618 (2003).
20. Diana, M. *et al.* Enduring effects of chronic ethanol in the
    CNS: basis for alcoholism. *Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res.*
    **27**, 354–361 (2003).
21. Nader, K. & van der Kooy, D. Deprivation state switches the
    neurobiological substrates mediating opiate reward in the
    ventral tegmental area. *J. Neurosci.* **17**, 383–390 (1997).
22. Carlezon, W. A. *et al.* Distinct sites of opiate reward or
    aversion within the midbrain identified using a herpes simplex
    virus vector expressing GluR1. *J. Neurosci.* **20**, RC62 (2002).
23. Corrigall, W. A., Coen, K. M., Adamson, K. L., Chow, B. L. C.
    & Zhang, J. Response of nicotine self-administration in the rat
    to manipulations of μ-opioid and γ-aminobutyric acid
    receptors in the ventral tegmental area. *Psychopharmacology*
    **149**, 107–114 (2000).
24. Nisell, M., Nomikos, G. G. & Svensson, T. H. Systemic
    nicotine-induced dopamine release in the rat nucleus
    accumbens is regulated by nicotinic receptors in the ventral
    tegmental area. *Synapse* **16**, 36–44 (1994).
25. Kalivas, P. W. Neurotransmitter regulation of dopamine
    neurons in the ventral tegmental area. *Brain Res. Brain Res.*
    *Rev.* **18**, 75–113 (1993).
26. Steinerger, T. L., Rye, D. B. & Wainer, B. H. Afferent projections
    to the cholinergic pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus and
    adjacent midbrain regions in the albino rat. 1. Retrograde
    tracing studies. *J. Comp. Neurol.* **321**, 515–543 (1992).
27. Semba, K. & Fibiger, H. Afferent connections of the
    laterodorsal and pedunculopontine tegmental nuclei in the rat:
    a retro and anterograde transport and immunohistochemical
    study. *J. Comp. Neurol.* **323**, 387–410 (1992).
28. Laviolette, S. R. & van der Kooy, D. GABA~A~ receptors in the
    ventral tegmental area control bidirectional reward signaling
    through dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic neural
    motivational systems. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* **13**, 1009–1015
    (2001).
29. Steffensen, S. C., Lee, R. S., Stobbs, S. H. & Henriksen, S. J.
    Responses of ventral tegmental area GABA neurons to brain
    stimulation reward. *Brain Res.* **906**, 190–197 (2001).
30. Garzon, M., Vaughn, R. A., Uhl, G. R., Kuhar, M. J. & Pickel,
    V. M. Cholinergic axon terminals in the ventral tegmental area
    target a subpopulation of neurons expressing low levels of the
    dopamine transporter. *J. Comp. Neurol.* **410**, 197–210
    (1999).
31. Charara, A., Smith, Y. & Parent, A. Glutamatergic inputs from
    the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus to midbrain
    dopaminergic neurons in primates: *Phaseolus vulgaris-*
    leucoagglutinin anterograde labeling combined with post
    embedding glutamate and GABA immunohistochemistry.
    *J. Comp. Neurol.* **364**, 254–266 (1996).

32. Yin, R. & French, E. D. A comparison of the effects of nicotine
    on dopamine and non-dopamine neurons in the rat ventral
    tegmental area: an electrophysiological study. *Brain Res. Bull.*
    **51**, 507–514 (2000).
33. Mansvelder, H. D. & McGeehee, D. S. Synaptic mechanisms
    underlie nicotine-induced excitability of brain reward areas.
    *Neuron* **33**, 905–919 (2002).
    The first *in vitro* study to examine the synaptic
    organization and time course of the functional
    interactions between GABA, DA and glutamate in the
    VTA in response to nicotine.
34. Charpantier, E., Barneoud, P., Moser, P., Besnard, F. & Sgard, F.
    Nicotinic acetylcholine subunit mRNA expression in
    dopaminergic neurons of the rat substantia nigral and ventral
    tegmental area. *Neuroreport* **9**, 3097–3101 (1998).
35. Klink, R., de Kerchove d'Exaerde, A., Zoli, M. & Changeux, J. P.
    Molecular and physiological diversity of nicotinic acetylcholine
    receptors in the midbrain dopaminergic nuclei. *J. Neurosci.*
    **21**, 1452–1463 (2001).
    A comprehensive study examining the anatomical
    distribution and nAChR receptor subunit within the
    substantia nigra and VTA DA cell groups in the
    midbrain.
36. Imperato, A., Mulas, A. & Di Chiara G. Nicotine preferentially
    stimulates dopamine release in the limbic system of freely
    moving rats. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* **132**, 337–338 (1986).
37. Pidoplichko, V. I., DeBiasi, M., Williams, J. T. & Dani, J. A.
    Nicotine activates and desensitizes midbrain dopamine
    neurons. *Nature* **390**, 401–404 (1997).
    First *in vitro* investigation to examine the direct actions
    of nicotine on VTA DA neurons using nicotine
    concentrations that are comparable to those obtained
    by human smokers, and the first study to look at the
    time course of nicotine-induced nAChR desensitization
    on VTA DA neurons.
38. Wickelgren, I. Getting the brain's attention. *Science* **278**,
    35–37 (1997).
39. Horvitz, J. C. Mesolimbocortical and nigrostriatal dopamine
    responses to salient non-reward events. *Neuroscience*
    **96**, 651–656 (2000).
    A comprehensive review that examines the evidence
    for a role for DA-mediated transmission in signalling
    both aversive and emotionally salient, non-reward-
    related behavioural events.
40. Erhardt, S., Schweiler, L. & Engberg, G. Excitatory and
    inhibitory responses of dopamine neurons in the ventral
    tegmental area to nicotine. *Synapse* **43**, 227–237 (2002).
41. Girod, R., Barazangi, N., McGeehee, D. & Role, L. W.
    Facilitation of glutamatergic neurotransmission by presynaptic
    nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. *Neuropharmacology*
    **39**, 2715–2725 (2000).
42. McGeehee, D. S., Heath, M. J. S., Gelber, S., Devay, P. & Role,
    L. W. Nicotine enhancement of fast excitatory synaptic
    transmission in CNS by presynaptic receptors. *Science*
    **269**, 1692–1696 (1995).
    An important study on the role of nanomolar nicotine
    concentrations in the enhancement of glutamatergic
    and cholinergic transmission through presynaptic
    α7-containing nAChRs.

43. Schilstrom, B. *et al.* Putative role of presynaptic α7 nicotinic receptors in nicotine stimulated increases of extracellular levels of glutamate and aspartate in the ventral tegmental area. *Synapse* **38**, 375–383 (2000).

44. Schilstrom, B., Svennson, H. M., Svennson, T. H. & Nomikos, G. G. Nicotine and food-induced dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens of the rat: putative role of α7 nicotinic receptors in the ventral tegmental area. *Neuroscience* **85**, 1005–1009 (1998).

45. Mesulam, M. M., Mufson, E. J., Wainer, B. H. & Levey, A. I. Central cholinergic pathways in the rat: an overview based on an alternative nomenclature (Ch1–Ch6). *Neuroscience* **10**, 1185–1201 (1983).

46. Forster, G. L. & Blaha, C. D. Pedunculopontine tegmental stimulation evokes striatal dopamine efflux by activation of acetylcholine and glutamate receptors in the midbrain and pons of the rat. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* **17**, 751–762 (2003).

47. Forster, G. L. & Blaha, C. D. Laterodorsal tegmental stimulation elicits dopamine efflux in the rat nucleus accumbens by activation of acetylcholine and glutamate receptors in the ventral tegmental area. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* **12**, 3596–3604 (2000).

48. Yeomans, J. S. *et al.* Brain stimulation reward thresholds raised by antisense oligonucleotides for the M5 muscarinic receptor infused near dopamine cells. *J. Neurosci.* **20**, 8861–8867 (2000).

49. Yeomans, J. S. & Baptista, M. Both nicotinic and muscarinic receptors in the ventral tegmental area contribute to brain stimulation reward. *Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav.* **57**, 915–921 (1997).

50. Rose, J. E. & Corrigall, W. A. Nicotine self-administration in animals and humans: similarities and differences. *Psychopharmacology* **130**, 28–40 (1997).

51. Jorenby, D. E., Steinpreis, R. E., Sherman, J. E. & Baker, T. B. Aversion instead of preference learning indicated by nicotine place conditioning in rats. *Psychopharmacology* **101**, 533–538 (1990).

52. Shoaib, M. & Stolerman, I. P. Conditioned taste aversion in rats after intracerebral administration of nicotine. *Behav. Pharmacol.* **6**, 375–385 (1995).

53. File, S. E., Cheeta, S. & Kenny, P. J. Neurobiological mechanisms by which nicotine mediates different types of anxiety. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* **393**, 231–236 (2000).

54. Ouagazzal, A. M., Kenny, P. J. & File, S. E. Stimulation of nicotinic receptors in the lateral septal nucleus increases anxiety. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* **11**, 3957–3962 (1999).

55. Tucci, S., Genn, R. F., Marco, E. & File, S. E. Do different mechanisms underlie two anxiogenic effects of systemic nicotine? *Behav. Pharmacol.* **14**, 323–329 (2003).

56. Kozlowski, L. T. & Harford, M. R. On the significance of never using a drug: an example from cigarette smoking. *J. Abnorm. Psych.* **85**, 433–434 (1976)

57. Pomerleau, O. F. Individual differences in sensitivity to nicotine: implications for genetic research on nicotine dependence. *Behav. Genet.* **25**, 161–177 (1995).

58. Iwamoto, E. T. & Williamson, E. C. Nicotine-induced taste aversion: characterization and pre-exposure effects in rats. *Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav.* **21**, 527–532 (1984).

59. Pomerleau, O. F., Pomerleau, C. S. & Namenek, R. J. Early experiences with tobacco among women smokers, ex-smokers and never smokers. *Addiction* **93**, 595–599 (1998).

60. Pomerleau, O. F. Why some people smoke and others do not: new perspectives. *J. Consult. Clin. Psych.* **61**, 723–731 (1993).

61. Wise, R. A. The anhedonia hypothesis. *Behav. Brain Sci.* **8**, 178–186 (1985). A classic treatise that postulated a central role for DA in the transmission of both natural and drug-related neural reward signals.

62. Schultz, W. Getting formal with dopamine and reward. *Neuron* **36**, 241–263 (2002).

63. Picciotto, M. *et al.* Acetylcholine receptors containing the β2 subunit are involved in the reinforcing properties of nicotine. *Nature* **391**, 173–177 (1998). The first study to show that deletion of a specific nAChR subunit was vital for the reinforcing effects of intravenously self-administered nicotine and that this behavioural effect was correlated with a blockade of nicotine-induced DA release.

64. Clarke, P. B. S. & Fibiger, H. C. Apparent absence of nicotine-induced conditioned place preference in rats. *Psychopharmacology* **92**, 84–88 (1987).

65. Museo, E. & Wise, R. A. Place preference conditioning with ventral tegmental injections of cytisine. *Life Sci.* **55**, 1179–1186 (1994).

66. Xi, Z. X. & Stein, E. A. Nucleus accumbens dopamine release modulation by mesolimbic GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors — an *in vivo* electrochemical study. *Brain Res.* **798**, 156–165 (1998)

67. Westerink, B. H., Enrico, P., Feimann, J. & De Vries, J. B. The pharmacology of mesocortical dopamine neurons: a dual probe microdialysis study in the ventral tegmental area and

68. Fadda, P, Scherma, M., Fresu, A., Collu, M. & Fratta, W. Baclofen antagonizes nicotine, cocaine and morphine-induced dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens of rat. *Synapse* **50**, 1–6 (2003).

69. Laviolette, S. R., Alexson, T. O. & van der Kooy, D. Lesions of the tegmental pedunculopontine nucleus block the rewarding effects and reveal the aversive effects of nicotine in the ventral tegmental area. *J. Neurosci.* **22**, 8653–8660 (2003).

70. Bechara, A. & van der Kooy, D. A single brainstem substrate mediates the motivational effects of both opiates and food in non-deprived rats but not in deprived rats. *Behav. Neurosci.* **106**, 351–363 (1992).

71. Olmstead, M. C., Munn, E. M., Franklin, K. B. & Wise, R. A. Effects of pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus lesions on responding for intravenous heroin under different schedules of reinforcement. *J. Neurosci.* **18**, 5035–5044 (1998).

72. Kippen, T. E. & van der Kooy, D. Blockade of sexually-rewarded conditioned place preference by tegmental pedunculopontine nucleus lesions. *Behav. Pharmacol.* **12**, S52 (2001).

73. Parker, J. L. & van der Kooy, D. Tegmental pedunculopontine nucleus lesions do not block cocaine reward. *Pharm. Biochem. Behav.* **52**, 77–83 (1995).

74. Oakman, S. A., Faris, P. L., Kerr, P. E., Cozzari, C. & Hartman, B. K. Distribution of pontomesencephalic cholinergic neurons projecting to the substantia nigra differ significantly from those projecting to the ventral tegmental area. *J. Neurosci.* **15**, 5859–5869 (1995).

75. Lanca, J. A., Sanelli, T. R. & Corrigall, W. A. Nicotine-induced fos expression in the pedunculopontine mesencephalic tegmentum in the rat. *Neuropharmacology* **39**, 2808–2817 (2000).

76. Nakahara, D., Ishida, Y., Nakamura, M., Furuno, N. & Nishimori, T. Intracranial self-stimulation induces fos expression in GABAergic neurons in the rat mesopontine tegmentum. *Neuroscience* **106**, 633–641 (2001).

77. Lanca, A. J., Adamson, K. L., Coen, K. M., Chow, B. L. & Corrigall, W. A. The pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus and the role of cholinergic neurons in nicotine self-administration in the rat: a correlative neuroanatomical and behavioural study. *Neuroscience* **96**, 735–742 (2000).

78. Corrigall, W. A, Coen, K. M., Zhang, J. & Adamson, K. L. GABA mechanisms in the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus influence particular aspects of nicotine self-administration selectively in the rat. *Psychopharmacology* **158**, 190–197 (2001).

79. Iwamoto, E. T. Nicotine conditions place preferences after intracerebral administration in rats. *Psychopharmacology* **100**, 251–257 (1990).

80. Panagis, G., Kastellakis, G., Spyraki, C. & Nomikos, G. G. Effects of methyllycaconitine (MLA), an α7 nicotinic receptor antagonist, on nicotine and cocaine-induced potentiation of brain stimulation reward. *Psychopharmacology* **149**, 388–396 (2000).

81. Grottick, A. J. *et al.* Evidence that nicotinic α7 receptors are not involved in the hyperlocomotor and rewarding effects of nicotine. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* **294**, 1112–1119 (2000)

82. Laviolette, S. R. & van der Kooy, D. The motivational valence of nicotine in the rat ventral tegmental area is switched from rewarding to aversive following blockade of the α7 subunit-containing nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. *Psychopharmacology* **166**, 306–313 (2003).

83. Paterson, N. E., Semenova, S., Gasparini, F. & Markou, A. The mGluR5 antagonist MPEP decreased nicotine self-administration in rats and mice. *Psychopharmacology* **167**, 257–264 (2003).

84. Papp, M., Gruca, P. & Willner, P. Selective blockade of drug-induced place preference conditioning by ACPC, a functional NMDA receptor antagonist. *Neuropsychopharmacology* **27**, 727–743 (2002).

85. Robinson, T. E. & Berridge, K. C. Incentive sensitization and addiction. *Addiction* **96**, 103–114 (2001).

86. Berridge, K. C. & Robinson, T. E. What is the role of dopamine in reward: hedonic impact, reward learning or incentive salience? *Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev.* **28**, 306–369 (1998). A comprehensive review and description of the incentive-salience theory of reward motivation.

87. Benwell, M. E. M. & Balfour, D. J. K. The effects of acute and repeated nicotine treatment on nucleus accumbens dopamine and locomotor activity. *Br. J. Pharmacol.* **105**, 849–856 (1992).

88. Clarke, P. B. S., Fu, D. S., Jakubovic, A. & Fibiger, H. C. Evidence that mesolimbic dopaminergic activation underlies the locomotor stimulant action of nicotine in rats. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* **246**, 701–708 (1988).

89. Le Foll, B., Diaz, J. & Sokoloff, P. Increased dopamine D3 receptor expression accompanying behavioral sensitization to nicotine in rats. *Synapse* **47**, 176–183 (2003).

90. Andreoli, M. *et al.* Selective antagonism at dopamine D3 receptors prevents nicotine-triggered relapse to nicotine-seeking behaviour. *Neuropsychopharmacology* **28**, 1272–1280 (2003).

91. Gentry, C. L. & Lukas, R. J. Regulation of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor numbers and function by chronic nicotine exposure. *Curr. Drug Targets CNS Neurol. Disord.* **1**, 359–385 (2002).

92. Olale, F., Gerzanich V., Kuryatov, A., Wang, F. & Lindstrom, J. Chronic nicotine exposure differentially affects the function of human α3, α4 and α7 neuronal nicotinic receptor subtypes. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* **283**, 675–683 (1997).

93. Ryan, R. E. & Loiacono, R. E. Nicotine regulates α7 nicotinic receptor subunit mRNA: implications for nicotine dependence. *Neuroreport* **12**, 569–572 (2001).

94. Brody, A. L. *et al.* Brain metabolic changes during cigarette craving. *Arch. Gen. Psych.* **59**, 1162–1172 (2002).

95. Rada, P., Jensen, K. & Hoebel, B. G. Effects of nicotine and mecamylamine-induced withdrawal on extracellular dopamine and acetylcholine in the rat nucleus accumbens. *Psychopharmacology* **157**, 105–110 (2001).

96. Dagher, *et al.* Reduced dopamine D1 receptor binding in the ventral striatum of cigarette smokers. *Synapse* **42**, 48–53 (2001).

97. Richmond, R. & Zwar, N. Review of bupropion for smoking cessation. *Drug. Alcohol Rev.* **22**, 203–220 (2003).

98. Brauer, L. H., Cramblett, M. J., Paxton, D. A. & Rose, J. E. Haloperidol reduces smoking of both nicotine-containing and denicotinized cigarettes. *Psychopharmacology* **159**, 31–37 (2001).

99. McEvoy, J. P. Freudenrich, O. & Wilson, W. H. Smoking and therapeutic response to clozapine in patients with schizophrenia. *Biol. Psychiatry* **46**, 125–129 (1999).

100. Procyshyn, R. M. Ihsan, N. & Thompson, D. A comparison of smoking behaviours between patients treated with clozapine and depot neuroleptics. *Int. Clin. Psychopharmacol.* **16**, 291–294 (2001).

101. Reuter, M., Netter, P., Toll, C. & Henning, J. Dopamine agonist and antagonist responders as related to types of nicotine craving and facets of extraversion. *Prog. Neuropsychopharm. Biol. Psych.* **26**, 845–853 (2002).

102. Damsma, G., Day, J. & Fibiger, H. C. Lack of tolerance to nicotine-induced dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* **168**, 363–368 (1989).

103. Zernig, G., O’Laughlin, I. A. & Fibiger, H. C. Nicotine and heroin augment cocaine-induced dopamine overflow in nucleus accumbens. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* **337**, 1–10 (1997).

104. Benwell, M. E., Balfour, D. J. & Khadra, L. F. Studies on the influence of nicotine infusions on mesolimbic dopamine and locomotor responses to nicotine. *Clin. Invest.* **72**, 233–239 (1994).

105. McEvoy, J. P., Freudenreich, O., Levin, E. D. & Rose, J. E. Haloperidol increases smoking in patients with schizophrenia. *Psychopharmacology* **119**, 124–126 (1995).

106. Dalack, G. W., Healy, D. J. & Meador-Woodruff, J. H. Nicotine dependence in schizophrenia: clinical phenomena and laboratory findings. *Am. J. Psychiatry* **155**, 1490–1501 (1998).

107. Spanagel, R., Almeida, O. F. X. & Shippenberg, T. S. Long lasting changes in morphine-induced mesolimbic dopamine release after chronic morphine exposure. *Synapse* **14**, 242–245 (1993).

108. Harris, G. C. & Aston-J ones, G. Involvement of D2 dopamine receptors in the nucleus accumbens in the opiate withdrawal syndrome. *Nature* **371**, 155–157 (1994).

109. Zito, K. A., Bechara, A., Greenwood, C. & van der Kooy, D. The dopamine innervation of the visceral cortex mediates the aversive effects of opiates. *Pharm. Biochem. Behav.* **30**, 693–699 (1988).

110. Laviolette, S. R., Nader K. & van der Kooy, D. Motivational state determines the functional role of the mesolimbic dopamine system in the mediation of opiate reward processes. *Behav. Brain Res.* **129**, 17–29 (2002).

111. Geier, A., Mucha, R. F. & Pauli, P. Appetitive nature of drug cues confirmed with physiological measures in a model using pictures of smoking. *Psychopharmacology* **150**, 283–291 (2000).


Acknowledgements  
The authors thank CIHR for their support.


Competing interests statement  
The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.


Online links


DATABASES  
The following terms in this article are linked online to:  
LocusLink: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/LocusLink/ nAChR


FURTHER INFORMATION  
Encyclopedia of Life Sciences: http://www.els.net/ addiction |dopamine |nicotinic acetylcholine receptors  
Access to this interactive links box is free online.
