
LECTURE

Dynamics of calcium and its roles in the dendrite  
of the cerebellar Purkinje cell  

Takafumi Inoue  

*Division of Molecular Neurobiology, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan*

(Received for publication on April 24, 2003)

Abstract. The calcium ion (Ca²⁺) serves as an important cellular messenger with spatio-temporally highly dynamic patterns. Not only Ca²⁺ entering from the plasma membrane but also Ca²⁺ released from intracellular store sites play crucial roles in neurons as well as in other cell types. The cerebellar Purkinje cell shows a variety of spatio-temporal Ca²⁺ dynamics in its rich arborization, and the Ca²⁺ release mechanism mediated by IP₃ receptors and ryanodine receptors has been shown to be crucial for the induction of long-term depression, a form of synaptic plasticity, in this neuron. Purkinje cells in a model mouse line of human neurodegenerative disease, spinocerebellar ataxia type 1, showed abnormal Ca²⁺ release properties, which indicated tight regulation of Ca²⁺ dynamics in the wild type Purkinje cell. Quantitative analysis of the complex Ca²⁺ dynamics in the Purkinje cell dendrite is still in progress to elucidate the link between external stimuli and the resultant biochemical changes. (Keio J Med 52 (4): 244–249, December 2003)

Key words: calcium, cerebellar Purkinje cell, dendrite, IP3 receptor, Ca release

Introduction

In contrast to their simple structure and ubiquity, calcium ions (Ca²⁺) are postulated to be potent intracellular signaling messenger molecules. Ca²⁺ concentration ([Ca²⁺]i) in the cytosol ([Ca²⁺]i) is strictly maintained at about 50–100 nM in the resting state. This low range of [Ca²⁺]i is remarkable when compared to the [Ca²⁺] in the extra-cellular space (1–2 mM). The plasma membrane forms a tight barrier against this chemical gradient. When channel proteins on the plasma membrane are opened by several signaling mechanisms on stimuli, Ca²⁺ rushes into the cell from the outer space and [Ca²⁺]i rises rapidly. Ca²⁺ is also stored intracellularly in certain kinds of organelles, namely the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and mitochondria. Ca²⁺ stored in the ER is released upon stimulation through the ER membrane Ca²⁺ channels, namely inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP₃R) and the ryanodine receptor. IP₃R opens when a second messenger molecule IP₃ binds to it, which is generated through the phospholipase C-activation pathway.¹ Both the IP₃R and ryanodine receptors are sensitive to cytosolic Ca²⁺ concentration,² which property adds a feature of “Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release” to the functions of these receptors.³ The ability of Ca²⁺ to stimulate the ryanodine receptor is modulated by cyclic ADP ribose in neurons⁴⁻⁶ as well as in other tissues.⁷ Since prolonged high [Ca²⁺]i states lead to cytotoxic events,⁸ extrusion mechanisms for Ca²⁺ immediately start to pump out the excess Ca²⁺ when cytosolic [Ca²⁺] is raised by these Ca²⁺ channels on the plasma and ER membranes. The extrusion mechanism for Ca²⁺ includes Ca²⁺-binding proteins in the cytosol and Ca²⁺ pumps (e.g., Ca-ATPase and Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger) on the plasma membrane, ER and mitochondria. [Ca²⁺]i is thus strictly controlled, and [Ca²⁺]i is actively increased to change the cell’s state and its subsequent fate through affecting the activities of Ca²⁺-dependent proteins. High [Ca²⁺]i activates numerous Ca²⁺-dependent enzymes, e.g., calcineurin, calmodulin-dependent protein kinases, protein kinase C, and many other important proteins. For instance, calmodulin is activated by binding with up to four Ca²⁺ molecules and controls the activity of numerous channels and enzymes. Increase in [Ca²⁺]i finally leads to fertilization, proliferation, exocytosis,

Presented at the 1287th Meeting of the Keio Medical Society in Tokyo, November 1, 2002.

Reprint requests to: Dr. Takafumi Inoue, Division of Molecular Neurobiology, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan, e-mail: tinoue@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Keio J Med 2003; 52 (4): 244–249

muscle contraction, cell death, and numerous other consequences.³ Thus Ca²⁺ regulation is very important from the clinical point of view. Mutations in Ca²⁺ channels on the plasma membrane cause a variety of symptoms, e.g., migraine, ataxia and epilepsy, which form a part of channelopathy.⁹ [Ca²⁺]ᵢ needs to be increased for cellular functions, but it has to be brought back right away. Therefore a change of [Ca²⁺]ᵢ is usually observed as a single transient or as multiple transients, the latter of which is sometimes referred to as Ca²⁺ oscillation or Ca²⁺ wave according to the pattern. Ca²⁺ oscillation in an egg at fertilization is a very well-known phenomenon that is crucial in commencing the initial steps of ontogeny.¹⁰ The temporal pattern of Ca²⁺ oscillation has been shown to be important for the specificity of downstream targets for Ca²⁺ increase.¹¹

In this lecture, I will focus on the significance and dynamics of [Ca²⁺] in the cerebellar Purkinje cell. The Purkinje cell in the cerebellar cortex is a neuron with a large dendritic arborization, which is very interesting in terms of Ca²⁺ dynamics. Various types of Ca²⁺ dynamics are known in the Purkinje cell dendrite. The Ca²⁺ spike is a regenerative Ca²⁺ influx that repeats periodically over the entire dendritic structure.¹² Widespread Ca²⁺ influx is observed on activation of one of the two excitatory synaptic connections, the climbing fiber input.¹³,¹⁴ Activation of the other excitatory synapse, the parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapse, results in Ca²⁺ increase in a relatively restricted area in the dendrite mediated by Ca²⁺ influx and Ca²⁺ release.¹⁴⁻¹⁶ From a molecular biological point of view, many proteins involved in Ca²⁺ handling are abundantly expressed in the Purkinje cell. Calbindin D28k and parvalbumin are Ca²⁺-binding proteins, rich in the Purkinje cell, that serve as Ca²⁺ buffers. Calsequestrin, a well-known low-affinity/high-capacity intraluminal ER protein, is not found in neurons other than the Purkinje cell.¹⁷ Subtypes of ryanodine receptor are expressed.¹⁸ In particular, the IP₃ receptor type 1 (IP₃R1) is predominantly expressed in the Purkinje cell.¹⁹

**IP₃ receptor type 1 is required for Purkinje cell function**

The molecular function and the expression pattern of IP₃ receptors had already been well-researched by the mid 1990’s.¹ It had been shown that IP₃ receptors in the Purkinje cell certainly release Ca²⁺ from intracellular Ca²⁺ store sites in the neuron as well as in other cells by agonist stimulation²⁰ or by means of caged-IP₃ which releases active IP₃ molecules by UV-photolysis.²¹ The molecular basis for the Ca²⁺ release by IP₃R through synaptic stimulation had been well established by this period. The excitatory synaptic transmitter, glutamate, activates a metabotropic type of glutamate receptor (mGluR),²² which activates phospholipase C through

trimeric G proteins, then IP₃ is produced. However, the physiological significance of the IP₃ receptor in the neuron was unclear. Ca²⁺ increase in the Purkinje cell dendrite was known to play an important role in the induction of a form of synaptic plasticity, long-term depression (LTD) at the parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapse.²³,²⁴ However, the amount of Ca²⁺ entering through Ca²⁺ channels on the plasma membrane was thought to suffice for the formation of LTD, since Ca²⁺ influx by synaptic activation was very large¹³ and there had been no evidence showing that Ca²⁺ release actually occurred by synaptic activation. On the assumption that IP₃R should have some physiological roles in the Purkinje cell because of its Ca²⁺ releasing function and its abundant amount of expression, our group generated an IP₃R1-deficient mouse line by gene-targeting to understand its physiological functions.²⁵ Homozygous IP₃R1 deficient (IP₃R1-/-) mice had severe ataxia and tonic or tonic-clonic seizures and died by the weaning period. These neurological symptoms indicate that IP₃R1 is indeed an important molecule in the central nervous system. There was no obvious histological impairment in the IP₃R1-/- brain. Purkinje cells in cerebellar slice preparations from IP₃R1-/- mice showed normal electrophysiological properties, e.g., Na⁺ spike and Ca²⁺ spike firing, paired pulse facilitation of parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapses, or paired pulse depression of the climbing fiber-Purkinje cell synapse.²⁵ Combined electrophysiological and imaging experiments showed that not Ca²⁺ influx by evoked depolarization but Ca²⁺ release evoked by flash photolysis of caged-IP₃ was lost in the IP₃R1-/- Purkinje cell.²⁶ All of these results indicate that the Purkinje cells in IP₃R1-/- mice develop without significant alteration in structure, excitability or synaptic connections except for the IP₃-induced Ca²⁺ release activity. LTD experiments were performed using these IP₃R1-/- Purkinje cells and it was revealed that LTD was totally lost in these IP₃R1-/- Purkinje cells.²⁶ To further confirm this result, another approach was taken. The monoclonal antibody 18A10 raised against IP₃R1 was shown to be a function-blocking antibody *in vitro*²⁷ and *in vivo*.²⁸ 18A10 was introduced into wild-type Purkinje cells in a slice through a recording patch pipette, and an LTD experiment was performed. LTD was blocked by 18A10.²⁶ Altogether, IP₃R1 was shown to be essential in the formation of LTD at the parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapse. This finding was the earliest study giving solid evidence for a physiological role of IP₃R in the central nervous system.

**Ryanodine receptor is also important in LTD**

Ryanodine receptors are another class of Ca²⁺ release channel on the ER. Since ryanodine receptors are

also expressed in the Purkinje cell dendrite,²⁹ and they function as a Ca²⁺-induced Ca²⁺ release channel in the Purkinje cell,³⁰ they were also thought to be one of the candidates responsible for the Ca²⁺ signaling in the LTD induction. To clarify this question, we performed LTD experiments in Purkinje cells in primary culture preparation with various blockers against ryanodine receptors. A high concentration of ryanodine, which keeps the ryanodine receptor/channel open and blocks the receptor activity, and ruthenium red, which inhibits the ryanodine receptor, blocked the LTD induction,³¹ showing the possibility that ryanodine receptors are also involved in LTD induction. Though it is still unclear whether ryanodine receptors play a role in LTD induction in slice preparation, ryanodine receptors could work in concert with IP₃Rs by enhancing Ca²⁺ released by IP₃Rs or enhancing Ca²⁺ that entered the cytoplasm through Ca²⁺ channels on the plasma membrane. Together with the importance of IP₃R in LTD induction, Ca²⁺ release mechanisms have been shown to play an important role in neuronal function. This view posed a question: What is the difference between the Ca²⁺ dynamics generated solely by Ca²⁺ influx and those by the combination of Ca²⁺ influx and Ca²⁺ release? Ca²⁺ influx could have compensated for Ca²⁺ release with stronger stimulation, but it seemed not to be the case. The answer was thought to come from understanding the precise nature of the Ca²⁺ dynamics in various situations in the Purkinje cell dendrite.

**Aberrant Ca²⁺ release in Purkinje cells of the SCA1 model mouse**

A mutant mouse line provided an example showing tight regulation of the patterns in Ca²⁺ dynamics in the Purkinje cell dendrite. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is an autosomal dominant neurological disorder in humans characterized by ataxia and brain stem dysfunction. Like several other neurodegenerative diseases, SCA1 is caused by the expansion of a CAG trinucleotide repeat resulting in an expanded polyglutamine tract in its gene product, ataxin-1.³² In SCA1, the consistent neuropathological finding is loss of Purkinje cells in the cerebellar cortex and loss of neurons in the pontine nuclei.³³ Lines of transgenic mice that expressed the mutant form of the SCA1 gene developed ataxia and Purkinje cell pathology. Importantly, the eventual development of ataxia is attributable not to cell death *per se* but to cellular dysfunction and morphological alterations that occur long before neuronal death.³⁴ It was found that several key neuronal genes are specifically altered in the Purkinje cells of the mutant cerebellum prior to any clinicopathologic manifestations.³⁵ Some of these genes are important for regulating intracellular Ca²⁺ dynamics. Among them,

Inoue T: Dynamics and role of Ca in Purkinje cell dendrite

IP₃R1 and sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺ ATPase (SERCA2) are greatly reduced.³⁵ Therefore, it was of interest to study the electrophysiological and synaptic properties of SCA1 Purkinje cells, particularly those that affect stimulus-evoked [Ca²⁺]ᵢ changes. Purkinje cells in SCA1 mice had Na⁺ spikes and Ca²⁺ spikes, electrical responses of the parallel and climbing fibers, that were qualitatively similar to those recorded from wild type mice.¹⁴ The membrane resistance of SCA1 Purkinje cells was 3.3 times higher than that of wild type cells which correlated with the 1.7 times smaller cell body size. mGluR-mediated parallel fiber-evoked Ca²⁺ release from intracellular stores was observed in SCA1 Purkinje cells as well as in wild type Purkinje cells, and it was slightly easier to evoke the mGluR-mediated [Ca²⁺]ᵢ release in SCA1 Purkinje cells. In response to climbing fiber stimulation, most Purkinje cells in mutant and wild type mice had rapid widespread [Ca²⁺]ᵢ changes, recovering in less than 200 ms. Some SCA1 Purkinje cells showed a slow, localized, secondary Ca²⁺ transient following the initial climbing fiber Ca²⁺ transient, which may reflect release of Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores. Recently climbing fiber stimulation was shown to activate IP₃ production³⁶ and to evoke Ca²⁺ release³⁷ in the Purkinje cell dendrites. The latter study was performed by enhancing the mGluR activity with a glutamate uptake inhibitor. The Ca²⁺ release observed in the SCA1 Purkinje cell is an exceptional case in that climbing fiber stimulation evoked apparent Ca²⁺ release without pharmacological enhancement. In conclusion, the basic physiological properties of the mutant Purkinje cells other than Ca²⁺ release were similar to those of wild type neurons, even with the dramatic alteration in their morphology. It was furthermore surprising that Ca²⁺ release activity was more hyperactive than depressed in spite of the downregulation of Ca²⁺ handling molecules. This study conversely suggests that the Ca²⁺ release mechanism is tightly regulated in wild type Purkinje cells.

**Ca²⁺ influx in the Purkinje cell dendrite**

Ca²⁺ influx from the extra-cellular space and Ca²⁺ release from the intra-cellular Ca²⁺ store form a variety of Ca²⁺ dynamics in the Purkinje cell dendrite. This variation of Ca²⁺ dynamics may result in different consequences in the dendrite, e.g., LTD or LTP in synaptic efficacy³⁸ and protein synthesis.³⁹ Furthermore, the Ca²⁺ increase events in the dendrite may be transmitted to the nucleus thereby affecting gene transcription patterns. A potent candidate for such information transmission mechanism from synapse to nucleus is the calmodulin (CaM)-Ca²⁺/CaM-dependent protein kinase IV (CaMK IV)-cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB; a transcription factor) pathway.⁴⁰ It

Keio J Med 2003; 52 (4): 244–249

A
parallel fiber

B
control
+ MCPG : influx
+ CNQX: release

[Ca²⁺]i
stim
500 ms

dendrite of Purkinje cell

[Ca²⁺]i
stim

Fig. 1 Ca²⁺ dynamics in the Purkinje cell dendrite. A. Molecular mechanisms underlying Ca²⁺ dynamics in the parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapse are shown. Excitatory synaptic transmitter, glutamate (glu; filled triangle), released from the parallel fiber terminal activates the AMPA-type glutamate receptor (AMPAR) and metabotropic glutamate receptor type 1 (mGluR1). AMPAR depolarizes the membrane potential by passing Na⁺. The depolarization then opens the P/Q type voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channel (P/Q). Activated mGluR1 produces IP₃ and diacylglycerol (DAG) through the trimeric G protein (G) and phospholipase C pathway. IP₃ then opens IP₃R on the ER and Ca²⁺ is released from the ER. The ryanodine receptor (RyR) is another Ca²⁺ release channel on the ER which is activated by high [Ca²⁺]. B. Time course of [Ca²⁺]; in a small area of the Purkinje cell dendrite evoked by parallel fiber stimulation. Upper panel: when the parallel fiber is modestly stimulated (50 Hz × 5 times), Ca²⁺ transient shows a biphasic pattern. The first phase derives from Ca²⁺ influx and the second phase from Ca²⁺ release, since the first phase was blocked by CNQX, an AMPAR antagonist (broken line) and the second phase was blocked by MCPG, an antagonist against mGluR1 (dotted line).¹⁵ Lower panel: when the parallel fiber is intensively stimulated (50 Hz × 50 times), the Ca²⁺ transient becomes very large in intensity and monotonous. Ca²⁺ influx mostly contributes to this large Ca²⁺ increase, because CNQX diminished the Ca²⁺ transient but MCPG affected it little.⁴⁷ The ordinate of the plots ([Ca²⁺]i) are scaled. Stimulation patterns are indicated at bottoms of the plots (stim).

has been shown that the activation of CREB depends on the stimulation pattern and types of Ca²⁺ influx pathway.⁴⁰⁻⁴² Thus it is important to describe the pattern of Ca²⁺ dynamics in the dendrite before discussing the relationship between Ca²⁺ changes and biological consequences. So far, numerous studies have been performed on the Ca²⁺ dynamics in this particular neuron. The dynamic change of Ca²⁺ in the Purkinje cell dendrite was measured optically by means of Ca²⁺-sensitive dyes in the late 1980's by the pioneering attempts of Ross's⁴³ and Llinas's groups.⁴⁴ Since then, with refinement of the technique, various aspects of Ca²⁺ dynamics in Purkinje cell dendrite have been described. A Ca²⁺ spike was found to be a synchronized Ca²⁺ transient over the entire dendrite of the Purkinje cell.¹² Climbing fiber input induces widespread Ca²⁺ transients similar to a Ca²⁺ spike while parallel fiber input results in a local Ca²⁺ increase.¹³ In the late 1990's, spatial resolution of the imaging technique was improved by means of the confocal microscope to resolve single spines on dendrites where parallel fibers from synapses. Ca²⁺ increase was observed in the spine.⁴⁵ Ca²⁺ release was measured by parallel fiber stimulation in fine dendrites (Fig. 1).¹⁵,¹⁶ However, the current knowledge about Ca²⁺ dynamics in this particular neuron is insufficient in the quantitative point due to technical difficulties in estimating absolute [Ca²⁺] in small structures such as neuronal dendrites,⁴⁶ which is essential to discuss the link between Ca²⁺ dynamics and the resultant biochemical consequences. To approach this issue, we started with a quantitative analysis of Ca²⁺ dynamics in the Purkinje cell dendrite.

Whole-cell patch clamp and imaging with fluorescent Ca²⁺ and Na⁺ indicators were performed in mouse

Purkinje cells in slice preparation. [Ca²⁺] and [Na⁺] were observed simultaneously. High frequency parallel fiber stimulation (50 Hz 3–50 times) depolarized Purkinje cells and caused a large increase in [Ca²⁺] at anatomically expected sites in dendrites for seconds that turned out to reach ~200 μM of Ca²⁺. This amplitude of [Ca²⁺] was much higher than ever reported in the neuron by synaptic activation. The [Ca²⁺] increase was confined to a small area in the dendrite and sustained for a longer period of time as more stimuli were applied. However, increase in [Na⁺] was sustained for tens of seconds and diffused away from the activated site. Ca²⁺ release was observed as a separate delayed peak to the preceding peak formed by Ca²⁺ influx at fewer parallel fiber stimuli (3–5 times), and the delayed peak was hidden by the initial Ca²⁺ influx at larger numbers of parallel fiber stimuli (Fig. 1). It was shown by pharmacological experiments that not Ca²⁺ release but rather Ca²⁺ influx contributes to most of the large Ca²⁺ increase brought about by 50 shocks of parallel fibers. Although it had already been reported that the AMPA-type glutamate receptor (AMPA receptor) and the P/Q-type Ca²⁺ channel are major players at the postsynaptic side of the parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapse, pharmacological interventions with this simultaneous Na⁺ and Ca²⁺ imaging study clearly demonstrated that the AMPA receptor and the P/Q-type Ca²⁺ channel exclusively pass Na⁺ and Ca²⁺ respectively, at the very distal end of the dendritic tree. Ca²⁺ concentration had a linear relationship with the number of parallel fiber stimuli. Thus, at a smaller number of parallel fiber stimuli, Ca²⁺ dynamics were comprised a complex of Ca²⁺ influx and Ca²⁺ release, and at intensive stimuli, Ca²⁺ dynamics became simple and followed the number of parallel fiber stimuli. Thus different patterns of parallel fiber input produce different patterns of Ca²⁺ dynamics, which difference could lead to different biochemical consequences. Observing changes in localizations and activities in Ca²⁺-dependent proteins with such a variety of Ca²⁺ dynamics will link the variety of stimuli and the variety of cell responses and fates.

### Conclusion

Ca²⁺ plays an important role as a messenger with very dynamic spatial-temporal patterns in the neuron as well as other cells. The fact that Ca²⁺ release is a requisite for the induction of LTD in cerebellar Purkinje cell provides an example of the complex nature of Ca²⁺ signaling. Different types and combinations of stimuli yield a variety of Ca²⁺ signaling patterns, which in turn lead to differential biochemical effects. To clarify this flow of information process, a precise description of the Ca²⁺ dynamics is indispensable.

---

### References

1. Berridge MJ: Inositol trisphosphate and calcium signalling. Nature 1993; 361: 315–325
2. Bezprozvanny I, Watras J, Ehrlich BE: Bell-shaped calcium-response curves of Ins(1,4,5)P₃- and calcium-gated channels from endoplasmic reticulum of cerebellum. Nature 1991; 351: 751–754
3. Berridge MJ, Lipp P, Bootman MD: The versatility and universality of calcium signalling. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2000; 1: 11–21
4. Hua SY, Tokimasa T, Takasawa S, Furuya Y, Nohmi M, Okamoto H, Kuba K: Cyclic ADP-ribose modulates Ca²⁺ release channels for activation by physiological Ca²⁺ entry in bullfrog sympathetic neurons. Neuron 1994; 12: 1073–1079
5. Mothet JP, Fossier P, Meunier FM, Stinnakre J, Tauc L, Baux G: Cyclic ADP-ribose and calcium-induced calcium release regulate neurotransmitter release at a cholinergic synapse of Aplysia. J Physiol 1998; 507: 405–414
6. Morikawa H, Khodakhah K, Williams JT: Two intracellular pathways mediate metabotropic glutamate receptor-induced Ca²⁺ mobilization in dopamine neurons. J Neurosci 2003; 23: 149–157
7. Lee HC: Physiological functions of cyclic ADP-ribose and NAADP as calcium messengers. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2001; 41: 317–345
8. Nicotera P, Orrenius S: The role of calcium in apoptosis. Cell Calcium 1998; 23: 173–180
9. Pietrobon D: Calcium channels and channelopathies of the central nervous system. Mol Neurobiol 2002; 25: 31–50
10. Miyazaki S, Shirakawa H, Nakada K, Honda Y: Essential role of the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor/Ca²⁺ release channel in Ca²⁺ waves and Ca²⁺ oscillations at fertilization of mammalian eggs. Dev Biol 1993; 158: 62–78
11. Dolmetsch RE, Xu K, Lewis RS: Calcium oscillations increase the efficiency and specificity of gene expression. Nature 1998; 392: 933–936
12. Lev-Ram V, Miyakawa H, Lasser-Ross N, Ross WN: Calcium transients in cerebellar Purkinje neurons evoked by intracellular stimulation. J Neurophysiol 1992; 68: 1167–1177
13. Miyakawa H, Lev-Ram V, Lasser-Ross N, Ross WN: Calcium transients evoked by climbing fiber and parallel fiber synaptic inputs in guinea pig cerebellar Purkinje neurons. J Neurophysiol 1992; 68: 1178–1189
14. Inoue T, Lin X, Kohlmeier KA, Orr HT, Zoghbi HY, Ross WN: Calcium dynamics and electrophysiological properties of cerebellar Purkinje cells in SCA1 transgenic mice. J Neurophysiol 2001; 85: 1750–1760
15. Takechi H, Eilers J, Konnerth A: A new class of synaptic response involving calcium release in dendritic spines. Nature 1998; 396: 757–760
16. Finch EA, Augustine GJ: Local calcium signalling by inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate in Purkinje cell dendrites. Nature 1998; 396: 753–756
17. Takei K, Stukenbrok H, Metcalf A, Mignery GA, Sudhof TC, Volpe P, De Camilli P: Ca²⁺ stores in Purkinje neurons: endoplasmic reticulum subcompartments demonstrated by the heterogeneous distribution of the InsP₃ receptor, Ca²⁺-ATPase, and calsequestrin. J Neurosci 1992; 12: 489–505
18. Furuichi T, Kohda K, Miyawaki A, Mikoshiba K: Intracellular channels. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1994; 4: 294–303
19. Nakanishi S, Maeda N, Mikoshiba K: Immunohistochemical localization of an inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor, P₄₀₀, in neural tissue: studies in developing and adult mouse brain. J Neurosci 1991; 11: 2075–2086
20. Yuzaki M, Mikoshiba K: Pharmacological and immunocytochemical characterization of metabotropic glutamate receptors in cultured Purkinje cells. J Neurosci 1992; 12: 4253–4263

Keio J Med 2003; 52 (4): 244–249

21. Khodakhah K, Ogden D: Functional heterogeneity of calcium release by inositol trisphosphate in single Purkinje neurones, cultured cerebellar astrocytes, and peripheral tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993; 90: 4976–4980

22. Anwyl R: Metabotropic glutamate receptors: electrophysiological properties and role in plasticity. Brain Res Brain Res Rev 1999; 29: 83–120

23. Sakurai M: Calcium is an intracellular mediator of the climbing fiber in induction of cerebellar long-term depression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1990; 87: 3383–3385

24. Ito M: Cerebellar long-term depression: characterization, signal transduction, and functional roles. Physiol Rev 2001; 81: 1143–1195

25. Matsumoto M, Nakagawa T, Inoue T, Nagata E, Tanaka K, Takano H, Minowa O, Kuno J, Sakakibara S, Yamada M, *et al*: Ataxia and epileptic seizures in mice lacking type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. Nature 1996; 379: 168–171

26. Inoue T, Kato K, Kohda K, Mikoshiba K: Type 1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor is required for induction of long-term depression in cerebellar Purkinje neurons. J Neurosci 1998; 18: 5366–5373

27. Nakade S, Maeda N, Mikoshiba K: Involvement of the C-terminus of the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor in Ca²⁺ release analysed using region-specific monoclonal antibodies. Biochem J 1991; 277: 125–131

28. Miyazaki S, Yuzaki M, Nakada K, Shirakawa H, Nakanishi S, Nakade S, Mikoshiba K: Block of Ca²⁺ wave and Ca²⁺ oscillation by antibody to the inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor in fertilized hamster eggs. Science 1992; 257: 251–255

29. Kuwajima G, Futatsugi A, Niinobe M, Nakanishi S, Mikoshiba K: Two types of ryanodine receptors in mouse brain: skeletal muscle type exclusively in Purkinje cells and cardiac muscle type in various neurons. Neuron 1992; 9: 1133–1142

30. Llano I, DiPolo R, Marty A: Calcium-induced calcium release in cerebellar Purkinje cells. Neuron 1994; 12: 663–673

31. Kohda K, Inoue T, Mikoshiba K: Ca²⁺ release from Ca²⁺ stores, particularly from ryanodine-sensitive Ca²⁺ stores, is required for the induction of LTD in cultured cerebellar Purkinje cells. J Neurophysiol 1995; 74: 2184–2188

32. Orr HT, Chung MY, Banfi S, Kwiatkowski TJ Jr, Servadio A, Beaudet AL, McCall AE, Duvick LA, Ranum LP, Zoghbi HY: Expansion of an unstable trinucleotide CAG repeat in spinocerebellar ataxia type 1. Nat Genet 1993; 4: 221–226

33. Gilman S, Sima AA, Junck L, Klüin KJ, Koepp RA, Lohman ME, Little R: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 with multiple system degeneration and glial cytoplasmic inclusions. Ann Neurol 1996; 39: 241–255

34. Clark HB, Burright EN, Yunis WS, Larson S, Wilcox C, Hartman B, Matilla A, Zoghbi HY, Orr HT: Purkinje cell expression of a mutant allele of SCA1 in transgenic mice leads to disparate effects on motor behaviors, followed by a progressive cerebellar dysfunction and histological alterations. J Neurosci 1997; 17: 7385–7395

35. Lin X, Antalfy B, Kang D, Orr HT, Zoghbi HY: Polyglutamine expansion down-regulates specific neuronal genes before pathologic changes in SCA1. Nat Neurosci 2000; 3: 157–163

36. Okubo Y, Kakizawa S, Hirose K, Iino M: Visualization of IP₃ dynamics reveals a novel AMPA receptor-triggered IP₃ production pathway mediated by voltage-dependent Ca²⁺ influx in Purkinje cells. Neuron 2001; 32: 113–122

37. Dzubay JA, Otis TS: Climbing fiber activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors on cerebellar purkinje neurons. Neuron 2002; 36: 1159–1167

38. Lisman J: A mechanism for the Hebb and the anti-Hebb processes underlying learning and memory. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1989; 86: 9574–9578

39. Richter JD, Lorenz LJ: Selective translation of mRNAs at synapses. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2002; 12: 300–304

40. Deisseroth K, Heist EK, Tsien RW: Translocation of calmodulin to the nucleus supports CREB phosphorylation in hippocampal neurons. Nature 1998; 392: 198–202

41. Deisseroth K, Bito H, Tsien RW: Signaling from synapse to nucleus: postsynaptic CREB phosphorylation during multiple forms of hippocampal synaptic plasticity. Neuron 1996; 16: 89–101

42. Dolmetsch RE, Pajvani U, Fife K, Spotts JM, Greenberg ME: Signaling to the nucleus by an L-type calcium channel-calmodulin complex through the MAP kinase pathway. Science 2001; 294: 333–339

43. Ross WN, Werman R: Mapping calcium transients in the dendrites of Purkinje cells from the guinea-pig cerebellum *in vitro*. J Physiol 1987; 389: 319–336

44. Tank DW, Sugimori M, Connor JA, Llinas RR: Spatially resolved calcium dynamics of mammalian Purkinje cells in cerebellar slice. Science 1988; 242: 773–777

45. Eilers J, Augustine GJ, Konnerth A: Subthreshold synaptic Ca²⁺ signaling in fine dendrites and spines of cerebellar Purkinje neurons. Nature 1995; 373: 155–158

46. Maravall M, Mainen ZF, Sabatini BL, Svoboda K: Estimating intracellular calcium concentrations and buffering without wavelength ratioing. Biophys J 2000; 78: 2655–2667

47. Kuruma A, Inoue T, Mikoshiba K: Calcium dynamics evoked by parallel fiber stimulation in cerebellar Purkinje cell dendrites. Jpn J Physiol 2002; 52(suppl): S125

48. Nakanishi S: Molecular diversity of glutamate receptors and implications for brain function. Science 1992; 258: 597–603
