
Seminars in Immunology 16 (2004) 55–67

**A systems approach to dissecting immunity and inflammation**

Alan Aderem ${}^{a,*}$, Kelly D. Smith ${}^{a,b}$

${}^{a}$ Institute for Systems Biology, 1441 N. 34th Street, Seattle, WA 981
Toll-like Receptors

- triacyl-lipopeptide
  - TLR1
  - TLR2
- diacyl-lipopeptide
  - TLR6
- dsRNA
  - TLR3
- LPS
  - TLR4
    - CD14
      - MD2
        - LBP
          - AOAH
- flag
A. Aderem, K.D. Smith / Seminars in Immunology 16 (2004) 55–67

### 2.1.1. The Toll-like family of receptors

Mammalian TLRs are a family of 10 pattern recognition receptors that are central to effective innate immunity [4]. TLRs recognize a broad spectrum of ligands, including
Additional complexity in signaling is derived from the multifunctional nature of many PRRs [5]. As mentioned above, the MR both recognizes foreign pathogens and binds and removes glycosylated hormones from the blood. Similarly, SR-A functions as a PRR, and mediates the uptake of modified LDL. The CR3 receptor is an innate immune receptor, and has a role in cell motility and extravasation from
5. Global technologies for dissecting immunity and inflammation

5.1. Genomics

5.1.1. Genotyping

The understanding of complex biological processes is facilitated by global analyses of genetic variation and gene regulation. The mouse is the best characterized mammalian model organism. Several phenotypes have arisen spontaneously, and have been characterized through breeding, but the majority of phenotypes have been engineered using gene deletion and transgenic
6. Proteomics

Proteomics can be defined as the systematic analysis of all the proteins expressed by a cell or a tissue. Quantitative measurements are particularly useful for the study of biological systems and pathways, since they reveal dynamic changes in the proteome. The traditional method for quantitative proteome analysis combines protein separation by high resolution two-dimensional gel electrophoresis with mass spectrometric or tandem mass spectrometric analysis
A. Aderem, K.D. Smith / Seminars in Immunology 16 (2004) 55–67

heavy or light ICAT reagent. These peptides are released enzymatically and analyzed using tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). This method is particularly important when analyzing secreted proteins since it permits the removal of albumin, and other high abundance, non-g
This integrative network analysis defines regulatory constriction points within the pathways and predicts the effect of perturbation on the network.

To reconstruct and understand both signal transduction and transcriptional regulatory networks, it is necessary to develop:

- A list of all the components of the system. This step is typically carried out with high-throughput global technologies and the resulting information is stored in a local database; in the case of the ISB
A. Aderem, K.D. Smith / Seminars in Immunology 16 (2004) 55–67

Fig. 5. Architecture of SBEAMS and Cytoscape; integration of data acquisition, management and analysis tools. Two modules are demonstrated; the proteomic pipeline and the microarray pipeline. In the proteomics pipeline, Sequest is a high throughput
Fig. 7. Integration of molecular interactions with gene expression data using Cytoscape. (A) Cytoscape view of the macrophage activation interaction network. A close-up of the network (circled region), shows LPS (B) and CpG (C) regulated genes (green: induced, and red: repressed) within the context of the molecular interaction network.

A. Aderem, K.D. Smith / Seminars in Immunology 16 (2004) 55–67

## 9.1. Modular structure of bionetworks

Our genome-scale understanding of immunity suggests a hierarchical view of the cell in which groups of interacting molecules form biological modules, and biological modules interact in complex networks that control the properties of a cell. Biological
SBEAMS

Microarray

Cytoscape

Comparative Genomics

Global Knowledge

Structure Explorer

Human
Mouse
Xenopus
Zebrafish
Fugu

Fig. 8. Computational integration, data analysis, visualization, and model refinement. High-throughput data is processed and transcribed into a structured database (SBEAMS). Database information is translated into graphical forms suitable for input to
A. Aderem, K.D. Smith / Seminars in Immunology 16 (2004) 55–67

preventive, and personalized medicine. Thus, human genetic variation predicts susceptibility to disease, and a complete knowledge of the pathways leading to disease will serve to design diagnostics for disease progression and rationally define drug targets.

Acknowledgements

The article relies on a large number of