
Molecular and Integrative Physiology of Intestinal Peptide Transport

Hannelore Daniel  
Molecular Nutrition Unit, Technical University of Munich, D-85350  
Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany; email: daniel@wzw.tum.de  

Key Words small intestine, protein digestion, peptide absorption, peptide transporter  

Abstract Intestinal protein digestion generates a huge variety and quantity of short chain peptides that are absorbed into intestinal epithelial cells by the PEPT1 transporter in the apical membrane of enterocytes. PEPT1 operates as an electrogenic proton/peptide symporter with the ability to transport essentially every possible di- and tripeptide. Transport is enantio-selective and involves a variable proton-to-substrate stoichiometry for uptake of neutral and mono- or polyvalently charged peptides. Neither free amino acids nor peptides containing four or more amino acids are accepted as substrates. The structural similarity of a variety of drugs with the basic structure of di- or tripeptides explains the transport of aminocephalosporins and aminopenicillins, selected angiotensin-converting inhibitors, and amino acid-conjugated nucleoside-based antiviral agents by PEPT1. The high transport capacity of PEPT1 allows fast and efficient intestinal uptake of the drugs but also of amino acid nitrogen even in states of impaired mucosal functions. Transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of PEPT1 occurs in response to alterations in the nutritional status and in disease states, suggesting a prime role of this transporter in amino acid absorption.

Generation of Peptide Transporter Substrates by the Intestinal Degradation of Dietary Proteins

Understanding the digestive and absorptive processes underlying human protein assimilation in the gut requires a journey almost 40 years back in time, when digestion and absorption were the focus of research by physiologists and gastroenterologists. Although today we have a much better understanding of the structure and function of the enzymes involved in hydrolysis of proteins and of the carriers responsible for intestinal uptake of free amino acids and peptides, our knowledge of what makes up the intestinal phase of protein degradation still relies on fairly old studies in experimental animals and humans. Research on protein digestion and absorption was energized in the mid-1970s by a highly controversial discussion

about the existence and importance of peptide transport in mammalian intestines. The emerging new concept that not only the monomers of the proteins, the free amino acids, but also their oligomers—at least di- and tripeptides—could be taken up by intestinal epithelial cells in intact form was against the contemporary belief that only the final end products of digestion are absorbed. This historical period of research on protein digestion and absorption was comprehensively reviewed by Matthews—one of the pioneers in peptide transport—in 1991 (1). However, even after the general recognition that di- and tripeptides are taken up into intestinal epithelial cells in intact form by a transport protein for peptides designated as PEPT1, we still do not know the quantitative importance of peptide transport in overall amino acid absorption.

Before focusing on the cellular and molecular aspects of peptide transport processes, some basics on protein digestion need to be recapitulated. The average protein intake can vary considerably, but a western diet typically provides between 70 and 100 g of protein/day. In addition, endogenous protein from the secretions along the oro-gastrointestinal tract, amounts to around 50 to 60 g/day. These proteins are subjected to hydrolysis by a spectra of proteases and peptidases either secreted from stomach and pancreas or bound to the brush border membrane of enterocytes, which generates a large quantity and variety of short- and medium-sized peptides, as well as free amino acids. The jejunal contents of humans or animals, recovered after administration of model proteins such as albumin, showed that, the major fraction consisted of peptides typically with three to six amino acid residues, which, based on a mean molecular weight, corresponds to a concentration of 120 to 145 mM. The concentration of individual free amino acids in the digest varied between 0.6 and 16 mM, with a total concentration of all amino acids of 30 to 60 mM (2). Protein digestion and the absorption of the end products are generally not considered to be limited, and even quantities of 320 to 480 g of protein equivalent to 1.5 to 2.8 kg of lean meat eaten by human volunteers within 8 h did not yield evidence for a limitation in protein assimilation (1). Most proteins and oligopeptides are rapidly degraded. However, some structures are fairly resistant to hydrolysis, and the extent and the velocity by which a dietary protein is broken down to its constituents is dependent on its composition (amino acid sequence) and on post-translational modifications such as glycosylation, which render peptides more resistant to hydrolysis (3). The latter also includes thermal effects of food processing that may cause the formation of Maillard products or that lead to cross-linking reactions. In particular, glycosylated peptides and those containing multiple prolyl residues appear to resist the attack of proteases and peptidases. The presence of prolyl residues is particularly relevant, when it comes to understanding the generation and resistance of the immunodominant epitopes from alpha-gliadin, which are exceptionally rich in proline and glutamine residues (4–6). The very low activity of dipeptidyl peptidase IV and dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase I, as rate-limiting enzymes in the gastrointestinal tract, determine the digestive breakdown of these peptides (6). Other biologically active peptides containing multiple prolyl residues have also been identified in digests, for example, dietary proteins
(mainly milk proteins), which led to the suggestion that those peptides released during digestion of proteins in the gut may affect body functions by their opioid, immunomodulatory or angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitory activity (7). Some peptides derived from dietary proteins have indeed been shown to reduce blood pressure after ingestion, which is explained by their ACE-inhibitory activity after absorption into circulation. However, studies in monolayer systems (Caco-2 cells) and intact tissue preparations have shown that the size of the peptides with identified ACE-inhibitory activity and their susceptibility to degradation are critical in determining their survival in the gut and the ability to reach the circulation in intact form (8). The most potent antihypertensive effects in spontaneously hypertensive rats were elicited by orally administered dipeptides such as Val-Tyr, Ile-Tyr, Phe-Tyr, and Ile-Trp, suggesting that the intestinal peptide transporter here allows efficient delivery into circulation (9).

# The Final Stages of Extracellular and Intracellular Hydrolysis of Peptides

Although oligopeptides of medium chain length are the primary products of the luminal phase of protein digestion, they are further cleaved by a spectra of membrane anchored peptidases at the brush border of intestinal epithelial cells (Figure 1). By measuring hydrolytic activity of peptidases in homogenates of the mucosa and in isolated brush border membranes, it became obvious that impressive differences in the activity and the subcellular location of the enzymes existed depending on the chain length of the peptide substrates (10–12). When dipeptides were used as substrates, almost 90% of total mucosal activity could be attributed to cytosolic enzymes, whereas with tripeptides, only around 50% of the hydrolytic activity originated from the soluble cytosolic fraction. In the case of tetrapeptides and those with more than four amino residues, essentially all activity was brush border membrane bound (1, 10, 11). The high activity of intracellular peptidases with the strict specificity for the hydrolysis of di- and tripeptides suggests that di- and tripeptides, but not larger ones, may be absorbed in intact form followed by the intracellular release of free amino acids. The extent to which a di- or tripeptide that is released during digestion is finally broken down at the brush border membrane or is taken up into the cell followed by intracellular hydrolysis is not known. These two pathways of course depend on the affinity and the substrate concentration of thousands of peptides, which compete simultaneously for the binding sites of either the membrane-bound enzymes or the peptide transporter. Although there is limited dipeptidase activity at the brush border membrane, luminal hydrolysis of normal di- and tripeptides occurs rapidly, in particular, when the enzymes are not overloaded with substrates that would enable peptides to bypass hydrolysis. Enzymatic cleavage is a problem whenever dipeptides are used as probes to characterize peptide transport processes, because these probes can gradually be hydrolyzed to the constitutive labeled amino acid residues and then transported by amino acid carriers. The use of glycine-proline, β-alanine-histidine (carnosine) and glycyl-sarcosine orD-amino acids containing dipeptides—which all are more resistant to hydrolysis based on their unusual structures—reduces the hydrolysis problem and, therefore, these substrates have been employed in numerous transport studies. However, their exceptional structures not only render them more resistant to enzymatic hydrolysis but also reduce their affinity for interaction with the peptide transporter-substrate binding site. Under physiological conditions (i.e., when large scale proteolysis occurs in the lumen), the brush border peptide hydrolases are exposed to an enormous variety of substrates of variable concentrations but with a total substrate load that may be higher than their apparent \( V_{\text{max}} \) for hydrolysis. In addition, as has been shown experimentally, certain free amino acids released during hydrolysis may serve as inhibitors of the dipeptidases, and therefore a substantial quantity of di- and tripeptides may bypass enzymatic cleavage and reach the peptide transporter. This protein is then challenged again with a huge variety of substrates. On the basis of the 20 amino acids making up a protein, thousands of di- and tripeptides exist that differ in structure, molecular size, polarity, net charge, stereochemistry, and even the mesomeric structure of the peptide bond. The molecular mass for example can vary between 132 kDa for a di-glycine and 577 kDa for a tri-tryptophane, and the net charge can range (at pH 7) from neutral to trivalently anionic, as for a tri-glutamate, or trivalently cationic, as for a tri-lysine. For a transport physiologist it is hard to imagine that a single carrier protein in its thermodynamic setting would be able to transport these quite different substrates. Consequently, multiple peptide transporters for the different substrate groups were initially postulated in analogy to the different amino acid transporter classes. Indeed, some experimental findings in intact tissue preparations have suggested, on the basis of cross-inhibition studies, that there could be more than one type of peptide carrier. However, cloning of the cDNA of the intestinal di-tripeptide carrier, now designated as PEPT1, extensive analysis of mammalian genome databases, screening of intestinal tissue banks, and immunohistology have not yet provided evidence for more than one peptide carrier in the brush border membrane of intestinal epithelial cells.

# THE PEPTIDE CARRIER PEPT1 IN THE APICAL MEMBRANE OF ENTEROCYTES

An important characteristic that allowed the identification of PEPT1 by expression cloning, using *Xenopus* oocytes and a cDNA library from rabbit small intestine, was its unique feature of utilizing an inwardly directed proton gradient to allow peptides to enter the cell even against a concentration gradient. The electrogenic nature of proton-peptide symport had been demonstrated unequivocally in earlier studies employing brush border membrane vesicles by Ganapathy et al. in the early 1980s (14–17). This demonstration of a H⁺-peptide cotransport process shared by di- and tripeptides, but not by free amino acids or tetrapeptides, ended a long-lasting discussion on the nature of the driving forces for peptide uptake. This discussion emerged on the basis of findings of a partial Na⁺ dependency of peptide uptake in intact tissue preparations. When reviewing studies with dipeptide transport in
1985, Cheeseman & Devlin found 10 papers demonstrating a $\mathrm{Na}^{+}$ dependency and 12 papers that showed no $\mathrm{Na}^{+}$ effects (18). Work in vesicles finally proved that peptide transport is a proton-coupled process and that the $\mathrm{Na}^{+}$ dependency seen in vitro and in vivo is explained by the $\mathrm{Na}^{+}$-proton antiporter activity (NHE-3) in apical membrane, which exports protons entering the cell via PEPT1 in exchange for extracellular $\mathrm{Na}^{+}$ ions (14, 19). The acid-loading activity of PEPT1 in intestinal epithelial cells and the requirement of the apical $\mathrm{Na}^{+}/\mathrm{H}^{+}$ exchanger activity for the recovery from the acid load has been clearly demonstrated in Caco-2 cells by use of a fluorescent reporter to monitor the intracellular pH changes (19).

By screening of oocytes expressing proteins from cRNA-batches for $\mathrm{Na}^{+}$-independent but pH-activated dipeptide uptake, the cDNA of the peptide carrier was isolated (13). Following expression cloning of the first mammalian cDNA from rabbit intestine that encoded peptide transport activity (13), the way was paved for isolation of PEPT1 clones from other species such as human, mouse, rat, chicken, cow, and *Caenorhabditis elegans* (20–25). The high-affinity isoform, PEPT2, was independently isolated by expression cloning and homology screening from a kidney cDNA library (26, 27). PEPT2 is not expressed in the intestine but in epithelial cells of the kidney tubule, lung, mammary gland, and choroid plexus, as well as in glia cells in the central nervous system and other cell types (28).

PEPT1 is a prototype transporter of the so called POT (proton-oligopeptide transporter) or PTR (peptide transporter) family with members in almost every genera (29–31). The gene encoding hPEPT1 maps to human chromosome 13q33–34 (20) and consists of 23 exons (32). The open reading frame of hPEPT1 encodes 708 amino acids with a 50% overall sequence identity and 70% similarity to the high-affinity transporter isoform PEPT2. The amino acid sequence predicts 12 transmembrane domains in PEPT1 with both amino and carboxy termini facing the cytoplasmic side. A closely related transcript, termed hPEPT1-RF (for hPEPT1-regulating factor) was also cloned (34). The DNA of hPEPT1-RF has six exons, and the coding sequence of hPEPT1-RF shares three exons completely and two exons partially with hPEPT1. Amino acid residues 18–195 in hPEPT1-RF are identical to residues 8–185 in hPEPT1, whereas residues 1–17 and 196–208 are unique. hPEPT1-RF alone does not induce any peptide transport activity when expressed heterologously, but the coexpression with hPEPT1 in Xenopus oocytes led to a shift in the pH sensitivity profile for Gly-Sar uptake, with a more pronounced inactivation at lower pH than for PEPT1 alone (24).

A high degree of similarity in both gene-clustering and -coding sequences is found between the mammalian PEPT1 gene orthologues. A comparison of membrane topology predictions and genomic structures indicates that human and mouse PEPT1 genes are modular, with each transmembrane segment and loop unit encoded by a different exon, and it is thought that this modular structure may have evolved by exon shuffling and rearrangements of functional modules (32). The putative regulatory region of the hPEPT1 gene reveals TATA boxes in unusual locations at 511 bp and 517 bp upstream from the transcription start site, whereas GC boxes are located near the start site at –29 bp and a number of others within 300 bp. This structure suggests that the GC box is a more important promoter

element in the regulation of *hPEPT1* than is the TATA box with its location so far upstream from the transcription start site (32). However, there may also be more than one transcription start site.

Protein structure and membrane topology of PEPT1 have not been systematically analyzed. However, preliminary epitope insertion studies suggest that the membrane topology is identical with or similar to that predicted by hydropathy analysis (35). PEPT1 transporters with single point mutations, and functional analysis of chimeras of PEPT1 and PEPT2 with their distinctly different affinities for the same substrates, have provided evidence that the amino-terminal region with the first 4 transmembrane regions and the domains 7 to 9 play an important role in determining the substrate affinity and other characteristic features (36–39). Of central importance for PEPT1 activity is the extracellular histidine residue (H57) on the interface of the second transmembrane domain and the extracellular side that, when mutated, abolishes PEPT1 function (40–42). The histidine residue at position 121 seems to be involved in substrate binding as well (41), whereas histidine residues such as H111 and H260 did not yield evidence for an essential role in the transport process. Peptide transport was shown to be inactivated efficiently by diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC) as a histidine-modifying agent (43, 44). However, the DEPC effects on transport can be prevented by PEPT1 substrates that contain a free terminal amino group but not by those substrate that lack the nitrogen function (45). This strongly suggests that a critical His-residue in PEPT1 lies within the substrate-binding domain and interferes with the amino function of the substrates. Adjacent to H57 is a tyrosine residue (Y56) shown to reduce the affinity for differently charged dipeptides when mutated to a phenylalanine (42). Another tyrosine residue predicted to lie in the central region of the second transmembrane domain (Y64) also appears to be involved in substrate translocation because the subtle change to a phenylalanine residue almost abolished transport (42). Moreover, Y167 in the fifth transmembrane domain also seems to be essential for PEPT1 activity (46). A mutation at residue W294 reduced substrate affinity markedly, and E595 also appears to be involved in the transport process (47). Whereas site-directed mutagenesis and the use of chimeras identified the amino-terminal half of PEPT1 as the most critical region encoding most of the functions, the role of the large extracellular domain between transmembrane domains 9 and 10 and the carboxy-terminal regions is unknown. Figure 2 summarizes the current understanding of PEPT1 membrane topology and depicts protein domains and individual amino acid residues that have been identified as relevant in determining the functional characteristics of the carrier.

## UNIQUE FEATURES OF PEPT1

Extensive analysis of PEPT1 functions in heterologous expression systems, mainly in oocytes expressing either the rabbit or human transporters, has provided new insights into its unique features. There are two intriguing questions with regard to PEPT1 function. The first relates to its substrate specificity or its lack of speci-

ficity because thousands of di- and tripeptides, as well as an impressive number
of peptidomimetics with differing molecular size, polarity, charge and conformation,
appear to be transported. The second question relates to its character as an
electrogenic symporter; that regardless of the net charge of the substrate, transport
with positive inward currents requires, for thermodynamic reasons, a variable
substrate-to-ion (H⁺ or H₃O⁺) coupling ratio.

# Unraveling the Substrate Specificity

Unlike other organic solute transporters, PEPT1 can be analyzed with respect to
substrate specificity by the enormous number of dipeptides and tripeptides and
derivatives available. Consequently, several hundred substrates have been tested
in competition assays with tracer dipeptides for uptake via PEPT1 into Caco-2 cells
or in yeast cells expressing the mammalian carriers. In addition, a large number
of compounds has also been analyzed for electrogenicity of transport by applying
the two-electrode voltage-clamp technique in Xenopus oocytes expressing PEPT1.
The combination of competition studies and electrophysiology has proven to be
valuable because it allows for easy identification of compounds that are transported
and those that compete for uptake but are not transported. Although no peptide
transport inhibitors were known until recently, some inhibitors where found by
chance when screening for transport substrates (48), others were later synthesized
and optimized by a rational approach. This has led to high-affinity type inhibitors
that competitively block dipeptide transport via PEPT1, with affinities around 100-
fold higher than those of normal substrates (49). Relevant inhibitors that may alter
PEPT1 function in vivo in humans are the orally active sulfonylurea-antidiabetics
that block transporter function with high affinity (50, 51). The conformational
analysis of large sets of dipeptides, tripeptides, and amino acid derivatives, as
well as peptidomimetic drugs, all shown to be transported by PEPT1, provides
a solid basis for predictions of the substrate-binding template (52). Small and
relatively rigid structures such as the aminocephalosporins, which can adopt only
few conformations, are particularly helpful in defining the critical structural motifs
in a substrate. What is important for understanding how a substrate-binding site in
a transporter can accommodate such a large number of different structures is that
water comes into play, with a critical role in the docking process of a substrate.
The ability of water to shield electric charges of amino acid side chains in the
carrier’s substrate-binding domain allows both charged and polar, as well as large
apolar substrates, to be accommodated at the same site. In analogy to the role of
water molecules in bacterial periplasmic dipeptide (i.e., DppA) or oligopeptide
binding proteins (i.e., OppA) with pleiotropic substrate-binding patterns similar to
those of PEPT1 (53–55), it has to be envisaged that water acts as a versatile space-
filling buffer between the substrate and the carrier-binding site, which weakens
unfavorable interactions between charged substrate groups and the protein. When
lysine side chains in a dipeptide are made more hydrophobic by addition of a
terminal apolar ring system attached to the ε-amino group, the affinity of the
compound increases substantially and renders the native substrate an efficient

inhibitor of PEPT1 (49). It can be envisaged that the attached hydrophobic side chain-modifying groups expel water from the substrate-binding site and thus block the transport cycle.

The $\alpha$-amino group of the peptide transporter substrates and its spatial location play a crucial role in binding affinity and translocation. This group may form a salt bridge with either an acidic residue or a histidine residue located in the substrate-binding pocket. However, there are substrates in which the $\alpha$-amino group is not present, such as in some $\beta$-lactams and ACE-inhibitors that are transported by PEPT1. Therefore, other groups in these compounds possibly interact with different residues in the binding domain, but this is not yet understood.

PEPT1 can transport simple omega-amino fatty acids (56, 57) that do not contain a peptide bond, and affinities are similar to those of normal dipeptides (Figure 3). Therefore, it is not surprising that the peptide bond can be replaced by an isosteric thioxo bond or that the peptide-bond nitrogen can be methylated with only a minor reduction in substrate affinity. The carbonyl oxygen in the peptide bond is the relevant functional component because it can form additional hydrogen bonds with the substrate-binding domain. Incorporation of this carbonyl-function into an omega-amino fatty acid increases the affinity around fivefold (Figure 3). Peptides containing proline residues possess pronounced differences in the mesomeric structure of the peptide bond (58). This led to the determination that the *trans*-conformation of the peptide bond alone allows transport of a dipeptide. In the *trans*-form, the peptide bond has a rigid, planar double-bond structure of 0.132-nm intramolecular length, and the carbonyl-oxygen—known to increase the affinity of substrates—becomes negatively charged. Peptides containing proline residues are critical substrates not only with respect to the conformation of the peptide bond but also with respect to other structural constraints. When provided in an amino-terminal position in peptides, the $\alpha$-amino group is embedded into the pyrrolidine ring system, and this impairs interaction with the transporter with the consequence of a marked reduction in substrate affinity (59).

The essential and minimal structural features identified in substrates of PEPT1 that allow binding and electrogenic transport are therefore two oppositely charged head groups (i.e., amino and carboxy groups) separated by a carbon backbone with a distance of 5.5 to 6.3 Å between the centers of the head groups (56). This explains why neither free amino acids nor tetrapeptides can be bound or transported. The side chains in normal substrates formed by the 20 different amino acids most likely project into spacious and hydrated pockets in which a few contacts are made with the PEPT1 protein so that side chains differing in size and charge are accommodated with minimal adjustments of the surrounding protein structure. However, these pockets appear to be asymmetric, and therefore the protein can discriminate substrates based on the polarity and size of identical residues when those are located either in the amino-terminal or the carboxy-terminal position of a substrate. The accommodation of a peptide in the binding pocket is strongly stereoselective. D-amino acid residues in a peptide affect affinity differently when provided in either amino- or carboxy-terminal positions. In the amino-terminal

| compound                     | structure                                                                 | apparent affinity [mM] | transport currents ($I_{\text{max}}$ % of control) |
|------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| 4-aminobutyric acid          | $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{~N}-\mathrm{CH}_{2}-\mathrm{COOH}$                          | $>50$                | $0$                                               |
| 5-aminopentanoic acid        | $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{~N}-\mathrm{CH}_{2}-\mathrm{CH}_{2}-\mathrm{CH}_{2}-\mathrm{COOH}$ | $1.14 \pm 0.06$      | $100$                                             |
| 5-amino-4-oxo-pentanoic acid | $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{~N}-\mathrm{CH}-\mathrm{COOH}$                              | $0.27 \pm 0.04$      | $100$                                             |
| Gly-Gly                      | $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{~N}-\mathrm{CH}-\mathrm{NH}-\mathrm{COOH}$                  | $0.20 \pm 0.02$      | $100$                                             |
| L-Ala-L-Ala                  | $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{~N}-\mathrm{CH}-\mathrm{NH}-\mathrm{COOH}$                  | $0.16 \pm 0.03$      | $100$                                             |
| D-Ala-L-Ala                  | $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{~N}-\mathrm{CH}-\mathrm{NH}-\mathrm{COOH}$                  | $0.80 \pm 0.06$      | $70$                                              |
| L-Ala-D-Ala                  | $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{~N}-\mathrm{CH}-\mathrm{NH}-\mathrm{COOH}$                  | $6.12 \pm 0.34$      | $30$                                              |
| D-Ala-D-Ala                  | $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{~N}-\mathrm{CH}-\mathrm{NH}-\mathrm{COOH}$                  | $>25$                | $0$                                               |

Figure 3 The key structural and conformational elements in PEPT1 substrates and how they affect substrate affinity and electrogenic transport. This series of model compounds has been analyzed with respect to substrate affinity and electrogenic transport under identical experimental conditions in *Pichia pastoris* cells and *Xenopus* oocytes expressing PEPT1, as described previously (56, 57). Apparent substrate affinities are derived from competition experiments with the model compounds in *P. pastoris* cells with a radioactive dipeptide serving as substrate. Inward currents generated by the compounds in *Xenopus* oocytes expressing PEPT1, determined by the two-voltage-clamp technique, are used to express the maximal transport rate. The test compounds have been applied under substrate saturation conditions and maximal transport currents are expressed as $I_{\text{max}}$ in percent of that elicited by 10 mM Gly-(L)-Gln serving as a control in the same batch of oocytes. The comparison shows the most critical structural elements in substrates such as the intramolecular distance between the centers of the amino- and carboxy-terminal head groups and the central carbonyl function. Moreover, the stereoselective recognition of substrate side chains is demonstrated on basis of alanyl-peptides with D- and L-residues at different positions in the dipeptide.

location, D-enantiomers are fairly well accepted with hydrophobic residues giving good affinity, whereas when located in the carboxy-terminal position of a dipeptide, affinity is markedly reduced. Peptides containing solely D-enantiomers of amino acids are not transported. Figure 3 provides insights into the key substrate features that determine affinity and transport by PEPT1.

Through the systematic analysis of substrate specificity, employing hundreds of compounds, PEPT1 requirements for substrate binding and transport are fairly well defined, although they can not yet be related to domains in the carrier protein. However, even without structural data for PEPT1, certain predictions can be made on binding and transport of novel compounds based on our current understanding. This has led to PEPT1 being a prime target for efficient intestinal absorption of rational designed drugs or specially designed prodrugs (60). Broad substrate specificity and also high transport rate make PEPT1 a good drug delivery system, and known drug substrates such as the aminocephalosporins or selected ACE-inhibitors show oral availability rates of up to 90% when used in doses of up to 1 g (61, 62).

# The Mode of Transport

Knowledge about the transport cycle and the electrogenic nature of the transport step was derived from electrophysiological studies employing the two-electrode voltage-clamp or giant patch-clamp techniques in oocytes expressing human or rabbit PEPT1. Both steady-state currents with various substrates as well as presteady-state currents have been analyzed (63–67). As already discussed, PEPT1 is a rheogenic carrier irrespective of the substrate’s net charge. The substrate’s net charge is, of course, dependent on pH and the dissociation constants of the ionizable groups, and these can be at various positions within a di- or tripeptide. Whenever PEPT1 transport activity is assessed by tracer flux studies, there is a pronounced increase in substrate uptake when the extracellular pH is decreased from neutrality to pH values of 6.5 to 6.0. This influx is completely independent of the luminal presence of Na⁺, K⁺, or Cl⁻, only the proton-motive force that accounts for more then –50 mV at a luminal pH of 6.0 enables uphill uptake of peptides. A further lowering of the extracellular pH (<6.0) decreases transport activity, and this is generally explained as a pH-dependent inactivation of the carrier. However, the bell-shaped pH-dependence is observed only in the case of zwitterionic substrates (zwitterionic at neutral pH) and at low substrate concentrations. When anionic or even dianionic substrates are used, the transport rate increases only at low external pH (<6.0), and even at a pH of 4.5, the uptake optimum was not yet reached (68). Therefore, PEPT1 possesses a high acid resistance. But what causes the decline of transport at low pH when neutral substrates are employed? This observation can be taken as the first indicator that the substrate net charge affects the transport mode of PEPT1. More generally, it has been observed that anionic substrates are transported with higher transport rate at more acidic pH and cationic substrates at more neutral or slightly alkaline extracellular pH. In the latter case, however, the

decline in the proton-motive force in alkaline conditions counteracts the effects on
the substrate charge, and transport rates do not increase proportionally. From the
detailed electrophysiological analysis of PEPT1 transporting charged and neutral
substrates, the following conclusions have been derived: There is clearly a prefer-
ence in any given peptide for transport of the substrate species that carries no
net charge. Compounds with no net charge are translocated with a 1:1 stoichiom-
etry in proton to substrate flux (65). In the case of dipeptides with glutamate or
aspartate residues, two protons enter the cell with each substrate, but the second
proton appears to be carried by the side chain carboxyl group, which is protonated
prior to transport (65, 67). Cationic peptides containing lysine or arginine groups
are also transported preferentially in their neutral form but in addition also in the
charged form, in both cases with a 1:1 stoichiometry. However, when the positive
charge is located in the carboxy-terminal side chain (i.e., Gly-Lys), the charged
species can not bind to the transporter, and only the neutral form is transported
in a 1:1 stoichiometry (67). Transport of the non-ionized species of cationic pep-
tides occurs only at neutral or slightly alkaline luminal pH. Presteady-state current
analysis has provided the basis for a model of the transport cycle in which pro-
tons bind first to the transporter in its outward facing conformation, followed by a
change in substrate-binding affinity, and after substrate accommodation, the final
conformational change follows with the translocation step (63). This model can
explain most but not all of the experimental findings on the transport process. Elec-
trophysiology, using the giant patch configuration and applied to rabbit PEPT1,
has demonstrated that PEPT1 can be forced to transport bidirectionally and sym-
metrically (69). At saturating substrate concentrations, transport occurs in both
directions with the same velocity, and only the membrane potential determines
the direction and rate of transport. However, substrate binding to PEPT1 occurs
in its outward facing state with a 5- to 100-fold higher affinity than on the inside
(under identical experimental conditions). The differences depend on the substrate
and are much more pronounced with charged dipeptides that have almost no affin-
ity when provided from the cytosolic side. This asymmetry in the conformation
of the substrate-binding domain favors the intracellular release of the substrate,
which is independent of the fact that under normal physiological conditions an
outward-directed transport mode with a cell inside negative membrane potential is
unlikely.

## TAKING PEPT1 FUNCTION BACK INTO PHYSIOLOGY

For over 40 years, starting with the first report in 1959 suggesting that dipeptides
may be absorbed intact into the intestinal epithelium (70), numerous studies in
experimental animals and also in humans have been carried out to characterize
peptide transport processes. With the use of brush border membrane vesicles in
the mid-1980s, the fundamentals of the transport process were elucidated, and the
post-cloning research efforts have delivered substantial knowledge on the kinetics

of PEPT1, its substrate specificity, flux coupling, and the regulation at the mRNA or protein expression level. Therefore, it is a challenge to combine knowledge gathered with the cloned PEPT1 with the physiological processes that characterize the intestinal absorption of peptides released from breakdown of dietary proteins. Although PEPT1 displays most of the expected functional characteristics, some of its features are not necessarily mirrored by findings obtained in tissue preparations or even in perfusion studies in humans. This holds true for pH dependence and substrate specificity. However, the pH dependence is difficult to relate to the intact epithelium where there is a fairly stable but slightly acidic surface pH compartment (71–73), and any changes in luminal pH are not transmitted in a linear fashion to the pH in the vicinity of the membrane. In Caco-2 cells (a model for the human small intestinal epithelium), peptide uptake across the apical membrane closely resembles the phenotypical characteristics of the cloned PEPT1 studied in heterologous expression systems. Even the dependence on the luminal pH—most likely due to a lack in a significant microclimate in Caco-2 cells—is similar to that found for PEPT1 in other expression systems. In Caco-2 cells, the interdependence of peptide uptake and the Na⁺/H⁺ exchanger activity has been demonstrated. The recovery of the epithelial cells from the peptide transport-induced acid load is mediated by the apical NHE-3 exchanger isoform (19, 74, 75) and the Na⁺ dependence of this pH recovery process is taken as the explanation for the findings on the Na⁺ dependence of peptide transport in intact tissue preparations.

The differences in substrate specificities and apparent affinities for identical substrates as obtained in intact tissues or with the cloned PEPT1 are difficult to interpret. In the intact epithelium, unstirred layer effects and hydrolysis of the peptides can lead to an underestimation of the true affinity of a substrate. For example, the apparent affinity for glycyl-glycine disappearance from the in situ perfused human intestine was determined as 43 mM (76), whereas the affinity of heterologously expressed hPEPT1 for the same substrate is at least 100-fold higher. However, what can be defined as a common theme is that the intestinal peptide transporter has a sufficiently broad substrate specificity that allows essentially every possible di- and tripeptide released during protein digestion to be transported in intact form. Whether and to which extent hydrolysis takes place at the membrane surface or in the intracellular compartment depends on the structure of the substrate and the concentration presented to the enzymes and transporters that compete for the same substrates.

Studies in human volunteers with perfusion of a segment of the small intestine with a series of glycyl-peptides with different carboxy-terminal residues have demonstrated that dipeptides are usually absorbed faster than a corresponding mixture of the same amino acids provided in free form (77). This may be attributed to the very high capacity of PEPT1 resulting from its high turn-over number (64) and high expression level. These findings on the efficient uptake of peptide-bound amino acids in human gut and the fact that peptide solutions have a lower osmolarity provide the rationale for using protein hydrolysates with short-chain peptides rather

than free amino acids in enteral nutrition solutions (78, 79).

Although a rapid luminal disappearance of di- and tripeptides has been shown in human intestine, it is not known to what extent the peptides are undergoing enzymatic cleavage and what finally leaves the intestinal epithelial cell. Transepithelial movement of di- and tripeptides can be observed in tissue preparations and in monolayer cultures (i.e., Caco-2 cells) with hydrolysis-resistant dipeptides, and functional data from basolateral membrane vesicles (80) and Caco-2 cells (81, 82) have demonstrated an exit pathway for di- and tripeptides that is shared by peptidomimetics (83, 84), with characteristics similar but not identical to PEPT1. However, the molecular nature of the basolateral transporter is not known. Recently, photolabeling studies identified a protein for which peptide mapping of a fragment yielded the first sequence information that could not be related to any of the known peptide transporter genes (85). Although significant quantities of intact di- and tripeptides may leave the epithelial cell, peptide transfer from the gut lumen into the peripheral blood could be detected only in humans when large quantities of fairly stable glycyyl-peptides were administered orally (86, 87). The importance of PEPT1 in the transfer of peptides from the gut lumen into circulation can most convincingly be demonstrated by the pharmacokinetics of the aminocephalosporins or ACE-inhibitors that utilize PEPT1 for intestinal absorption. These compounds are resistant to hydrolysis, and therefore their rapid appearance in circulation and almost complete absorption demonstrate the efficiency of PEPT1 for oral delivery of its substrates.

One of the most interesting question regarding peptide transport in the gut is the importance of PEPT1 in overall amino acid absorption from the diet. Demonstration of its general importance comes from studies in patients suffering from cystinuria or from Hartnup disease (88–92). In both disease types, intestinal absorption of certain amino acid is lacking or is markedly reduced by the malfunction of the underlying transporters. Whereas in case of cystinuria, a variety of missense and frameshift mutations have been identified that cause the malfunction of the two proteins, rBAT and its light chain, b<sup>0,+AT</sup>, which operate as heterodimers to mediate transport of dibasic and neutral amino acids in kidney and gut (92); the molecular basis of Hartnup disease is not yet defined. Patients suffering from cystinuria lack sufficient intestinal transport of cystine and amino acids such as arginine and lysine (93). The latter is as an essential amino acid but, surprisingly, the patients do not develop a lysine deficiency. That they receive the essential lysine from the diet by the peptide transporter was substantiated in situ by perfusion of the jejunum of the patients providing lysine and leucine in free form or as leucyl-lysine. Whereas the absorption of lysine but not of leucine was drastically reduced in all cystinuria patients, absorption rates of lysine, when provided as a lysyl-dipeptide, form did not different from those in healthy controls (89). The same findings were obtained for lack of absorption of free arginine but efficient uptake from arginy-leucine (90, 91). Similarly, in Hartnup patients with impaired absorption of amino acids such as histidine, tryptophan, and phenylalanine, absorption rates in vivo were far greater when the amino acids were provided
in dipeptides than when perfused in free form (88). This clearly establishes that PEPT1 is important or even essential to life in humans suffering from inherited gene defects causing malfunctions of individual amino acid transporters. Another link between transport of peptides and that of free amino acids was demonstrated in Caco-2 cells (94). A dose-dependent stimulation of uptake of free arginine, but not of alanine, was observed with dipeptides containing neutral (alanine) or cationic amino acids (lysine, arginine). This phenomenon is best explained by a rapid intracellular hydrolysis of the absorbed peptides with the free amino acids binding to the b<sup>0,+ </sup> system that operates as an obligatory exchanger and in turn enhances the apical influx of system b<sup>0,+ </sup> substrates such as arginine. The opposite, an inhibition of dipeptide uptake by free amino acids—particularly by leucine—was also shown in different types of tissue preparations (95, 96), but this could not be demonstrated with the cloned PEPT1. Therefore it is not known how the free amino acids reduced dipeptide uptake into the intact epithelium.

# REGULATION AND ADAPTATION OF PEPT1 TRANSPORT ACTIVITY

Chronic as well as acute regulation of PEPT1 activity has been demonstrated in numerous studies employing Caco-2 cells, animal models, and in human small and large intestine. Acute changes in transport activity can be induced by affecting intracellular signaling pathways with agonists or antagonists of protein kinase A (PKA) and C (PKC). An activation of PKC causes a rapid decline in apical peptide uptake based on a decreased V<sub>max</sub> without changes in substrate affinity. Increasing intracellular cAMP levels by cholera toxin or forskolin treatment also inhibits peptide transport (97), whereas a decrease in the cAMP-level, for example, by the adrenoreceptor agonist clonidine stimulates transport as shown in Caco2–3B cells and in the rat jejunum (98, 99); a sigma-receptor agonist causes upregulation of PEPT1 (100). A reciprocal control of activity of PEPT1 is observed by alterations in intracellular free calcium concentration. An increase in free calcium rapidly decreases activity, whereas a decrease in free calcium causes an increased V<sub>max</sub> of PEPT1 (101). These regulatory effects of second messengers on transporter activity can not yet be related to the PEPT1-protein, which in the human variant contains two canonical PKC recognition sites but no PKA site, whereas rat and the mouse PEPT1 possess one PKA and PKC consensus site. None of these motifs has been analyzed yet with respect to functionally transmitting the observed effects of second messengers at the protein level.

A regulation of PEPT1 abundance and activity in epithelial cells can also be observed by hormones such as insulin, leptin, growth hormone, and thyroid hormone (102–104). Dipeptide uptake into Caco-2 cells was stimulated by treatment with 5-nM insulin with an observed increase in the V<sub>max</sub> and no alteration of K<sub>m</sub> (102). Similarly, leptin, which is secreted into the stomach and gut lumen and binds to an apical membrane receptor, was shown to enhance dipeptide uptake into Caco-2
cells and in the rat intestine (103). Both hormones appear to increase the PEPT1 protein density in the apical membrane by recruitment of preformed transporters, because the colchicine-mediated disruption of the microtubular structures, but not inhibition of protein synthesis, prevented the incorporation of transporters into the membrane compartment in the presence of the hormones. Whereas insulin and leptin increase peptide transport activity without changes at the transcriptional level, treatment of Caco-2 cells with 3,5,3′-triiodothyronine (T3) reduced the \(V_{\text{max}}\) for dipeptide influx significantly with a concomitant reduction in the PEPT1 mRNA to 30% of control level (104). Recombinant human growth hormone has recently been shown to increase peptide transport activity in Caco-2 cells (105) and in combination with epidermal growth factor also increased PEPT1 expression in the rabbit small intestine after midgut resection (106).

Several studies have demonstrated that the expression level of PEPT1 and its function is altered by dietary treatments and in disease states. PEPT1 also shows a pronounced circadian alteration in protein expression followed by less pronounced but still significant changes in transport activity in rats (107). Protein concentration in the intestinal tissue was shown to be more than three times higher at 8:00 PM than at 8:00 AM in animals kept under a fixed light/dark cycle.

In rats, a brief fast (108), as well as sustained starvation and malnourishment (109), has been shown to be associated with a high expression level of PEPT1. The latter is important with respect to protein assimilation in states of impaired jejunal structure and function. Although other transporters such as SGLT1 displayed reduced expression levels, PEPT1 expression was sustained at a high level. Similarly, intestinal tissue damage by the chemotherapeutic agent 5-fluorouracil in rats revealed that PEPT1 protein levels in the brush border membrane remained unaffected, whereas those of sucrase and SGLT1 decreased (110). Animals treated with 5-fluorouracil showed higher PEPT1 mRNA levels, suggesting that the high resistance of the intestinal peptide transport activity to tissue damage is based on an increased protein synthesis rate. Diabetes, induced by treatment of rats with streptozotocin, also caused an increased protein expression level of PEPT1 in the small intestine and increased almost twofold the maximal peptide transport activity (111).

Dietary protein levels as well as certain free amino acids and peptides are able to change PEPT1 expression in the small intestine and its maximal transport activity (112). In rats fed increasing quantities of dietary protein for three days, the abundance of PEPT1 in the brush border membrane increased almost proportionally to the protein intake followed by a concomitant increase in peptide transport activity. Moreover, free phenylalanine and a dipeptide (Gly-Phe) administered in the diet could also induce the same changes, and a rat *pept1*-promoter-driven luciferase reporter assay applied in transfected cells with different deletion constructs identified certain elements in the promoter that also responded to phenylalanine and Gly-Phe with increased activity. Although several other free amino acids and selected dipeptides had some minor activity, the effects of Phe and Gly-Phe were most pronounced. It was suggested for rat *PEPT1* that the promoter region respon-

sive to dietary protein involved the AP-1 binding site (TGACTCAG, nt –295),  
the AARE-like element-binding site (CATGGTG, nt –277) identified next to an  
AP-2 binding site, and an octamer-binding protein site for Oct1/Oct2. AP-1 is a  
transcription factor associated with the regulation of gene expression under amino  
acid deprivation conditions (113), and a similar AARE-like element was shown to  
control asparagine synthetase gene expression under essential amino acid depri-  
vation (114). PEPT1 protein expression levels and transport activity significantly  
increased in Caco-2 cells that were cultured in a medium containing dipeptides  
(115, 116), suggesting that the substrates per se can alter the function of PEPT1 in  
the Caco-2 cells at the transcriptional and translation level.

PEPT1 is expressed throughout the small intestine but is virtually absent or  
expressed at very low levels in the human colonic mucosa under normal condi-  
tions (117). However, in patients suffering from short-bowel syndrome (SBS),  
interesting changes in intestinal PEPT1 expression are observed. Northern blot  
analysis, in situ hybridization, and immunohistochemistry indicated a high level  
of PEPT1 mRNA and protein confined to the epithelial cells in colonic sam-  
ples obtained from patients with SBS (118). In these patients, the compensatory  
PEPT1 expression in colon may allow effective absorption of dietary amino acids  
from the diet or for treatment of SBS in enteral nutrition solutions as protein  
hydrolysates.

The unusual high colonic expression of PEPT1 has also been demonstrated  
in colon mucosa samples of patients with chronic ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s  
disease (119). The aberrant expression of PEPT1 in chronic disease states has  
raised interest in a potential role of PEPT1 in inflammatory bowel diseases. PEPT1  
was shown to transport the *n*-formylated peptide fMLP (formyl-Met-Leu-Phe),  
a major neutrophil chemotactic factor produced by *Escherichia coli* (119, 120).  
The transport of fMLP by hPEPT1 in Caco-2 monolayers showed a close link to  
neutrophil transepithelial migration and epithelial expression of immune molecules  
such as MHC-1 (119, 120) suggesting that the transporter may be involved in  
inflammatory processes (120, 121).

Bacterial infections have also been demonstrated to alter PEPT1 expression  
level and function in the gut. Endotoxin treatment in rats was shown to reduce  
PEPT1 expression at the protein level, which could be almost fully reversed by  
dexamethasone administration. It was suggested that the downregulation of PEPT1  
by lipopolysaccharide involves proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis  
factor alpha and various interleukins (122). More recently, studies in suckling rats  
infected with *Cryptosporidium parvum*, which causes diarrhea in children and may  
lead to malnutrition, was studied with respect to the effects on PEPT1 expression.  
The data obtained suggested a transcriptional upregulation of the peptide trans-  
porter during acute cryptosporidiosis in response to malnutrition and the parasite  
implantation (123). Taken together, regulation of intestinal peptide transport activ-  
ity occurs by transcriptional changes and altered protein translocation to the brush  
border membrane induced by a variety of hormones, second messengers, and in  
various disease states but PEPT1 shows an impressive resistance and sustained

high expression level in the gut with impaired morphology and function.

# CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES

The post-cloning efforts in characterization of PEPT1 functions have substantially increased our understanding of some of its unique features. Recently, numerous studies have demonstrated that PEPT1 is subject to profound changes in gene and protein expression involving numerous hormones and different intracellular signaling pathways. There is also a growing scientific interest in intestinal peptide transport in pharmacology, with PEPT1 as a prime target for efficient oral delivery of drugs. Moreover, on the basis of the proposed role of the transporter in inflammatory processes and its increased colonic expression in disease states, a possible application to clinical medicine has appeared. Although demonstrated as essential to life in patients suffering from inherited diseases of amino acid transporters, the role of PEPT1 in overall amino acid absorption is not fully understood, and animal models lacking the gene encoding PEPT1 are not yet available. We also do not know how polymorphisms in the *pept1*-gene in different populations affect the function of the transporter. Programs under way in pharmacogenomics with a focus on PEPT1 will eventually provide information on the importance of this transporter for interindividual variations in oral drug availability, with an expected spin-off for its significance in protein nutrition. Meanwhile, we wait for the successful identification of the molecular nature of the basolateral peptide transporter.

The Annual Review of Physiology is online at http://physiol.annualreviews.org

## LITERATURE CITED

1. Matthews DM. 1991. Protein absorption. Development and present state of the subject. New York: Willey-Liss
2. Adibi SA, Mercer DW. 1973. Protein digestion in human intestine as reflected in luminal, mucosal, and plasma amino acid concentrations after meals. *J. Clin. Invest.* 52:1586–94
3. Kuwata H, Yamauchi K, Teraguchi S, Ushida Y, Shimokawa Y, et al. 2001. Functional fragments of ingested lactoferrin are resistant to proteolytic degradation in the gastrointestinal tract of adult rats. *J. Nutr.* 131:2121–27
4. McLachlan A, Cullis PG, Cornell HJ. 2002. The use of extended amino acid
5. Shan L, Molberg O, Parrot I, Hausch F, Filiz F, et al. 2002. Structural basis for gluten intolerance in celiac sprue. *Science* 297:2275–79
6. Hausch F, Shan L, Santiago NA, Gray GM, Khosla C. 2002. Intestinal digestive resistance of immunodominant gliadin peptides. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 283:G996–1003
7. Meisel H, Bockelmann W. 1999. Bioactive peptides encrypted in milk proteins: proteolytic activation and tropho-functional properties. *Antonie Van Lee-

8. Vermeirssen V, Deplancke B, Tappenden KA, Van Camp J, Gaskins HR, Verstraete W. 2002. Intestinal transport of the lactokinin Ala-Leu-Pro-Met-His-Ile-Arg through a Caco-2 Bbe monolayer. *J. Pept. Sci.* 8:95–100

9. Sato M, Hosokawa T, Yamaguchi T, Nakano T, Muramoto K, et al. 2002. Angiotensin I-converting enzyme inhibitory peptides derived from wakame (*Undaria pinnatifida*) and their antihypertensive effect in spontaneously hypertensive rats. *J. Agric. Food Chem.* 9:6245–52

10. Sterchi EE, Woodley JF. 1980. Peptide hydrolases of the human small intestinal mucosa: distribution of activities between brush border membranes and cytosol. *Clin. Chim. Acta* 14:49–56

11. Kania RK, Santiago NA, Gray GM. 1977. Intestinal surface amino-oligopeptidases. II. Substrate kinetics and topography of the active site. *J. Biol. Chem.* 252:4929–34

12. Piggott CO, O'Cuinn G, Fottrell PF. 1976. Similarities between a dipeptide hydrolyase from brush-border and cytosol fractions of guinea-pig intestinal mucosa. *Biochem. J.* 1:715–17

13. Fei YJ, Kanai Y, Nussberger S, Ganapathy V, Leibach FH, et al. 1994. Expression cloning of a mammalian proton-coupled oligopeptide transporter. *Nature*. 7:563–66

14. Ganapathy V, Leibach FH. 1985. Is intestinal peptide transport energized by a proton gradient? *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 249:G153–60

15. Ganapathy V, Burckhardt G, Leibach FH. 1985. Peptide transport in rabbit intestinal brush-border membrane vesicles studied with a potential-sensitive dye. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 27:234–40

16. Ganapathy V, Burckhardt G, Leibach FH. 1984. Characteristics of glycylsarcosine transport in rabbit intestinal brush-border membrane vesicles. *J. Biol. Chem.* 25:8954–59

17. Ganapathy V, Leibach FH. 1983. Role of pH gradient and membrane potential in dipeptide transport in intestinal and renal brush-border membrane vesicles from the rabbit. Studies with L-carnosine and glycyL-L-proline. *J. Biol. Chem.* 10:14189–92

18. Cheeseman CI, Devlin D. 1985. The effect of amino acids and dipeptides on sodium-ion transport in rat enterocytes. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 14:767–73

19. Kennedy DJ, Leibach FH, Ganapathy V, Thwaites DT. 2002. Optimal absorptive transport of the dipeptide glycylsarcosine is dependent on functional Na⁺/H⁺ exchange activity. *Pflügers Arch.* 445:139–46

20. Liang R, Fei YJ, Prasad PD, Ramamoorthy S, Han H, et al. 1995. Human intestinal H⁺/peptide cotransporter. Cloning, functional expression, and chromosomal localization. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270:6456–63

21. Chen H, Pan Y, Wong EA, Bloomquist JR, Webb KEJR. 2002. Molecular cloning and functional expression of a chicken intestinal peptide transporter (cPepT1) in Xenopus oocytes and Chinese hamster ovary cells. *J. Nutr.* 132:387–93

22. Pan Y, Wong EA, Bloomquist JR, Webb KEJR. 2001. Expression of a cloned ovine gastrointestinal peptide transporter (oPepT1) in Xenopus oocytes induces uptake of oligopeptides in vitro. *J. Nutr.* 131:1264–70

23. Deleted in proof

24. Saito H, Okuda M, Terada T, Sasaki S, Inui K. 1995. Cloning and characterization of a rat H⁺/peptide cotransporter mediating absorption of beta-lactam antibiotics in the intestine and kidney. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* 275:1631–37

25. Fei YJ, Fujita T, Lapp DF, Ganapathy V, Leibach FH. 1998. Two oligopeptide transporters from *Caenorhabditis elegans*: molecular cloning and functional expression. *Biochem. J.* 1:565–72

26. Liu W, Liang R, Ramamoorthy S, Fei YJ, Ganapathy ME, et al. 1995. Molec-

ular cloning of PEPT 2, a new member
of the H⁺/peptide cotransporter family,
from human kidney. *Biochim. Biophys.*
Acta 4:461–66

27. Boll M, Herget M, Wagener M, Weber
WM, Markovich D, et al. 1996. Expression
cloning and functional characterization
of the kidney cortex high-affinity
proton-coupled peptide transporter. *Proc.*
*Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 9:284–89

28. Rubio-Aliaga I, Daniel H. 2002. Mammalian
peptide transporters as targets for
drug delivery. *Trends Pharmacol. Sci.*
23:434–40

29. Steiner HY, Naider F, Becker JM. 1995.
The PTR family: a new group of peptide
transporters. *Mol. Microbiol.* 16:825–34

30. Paulsen IT, Skurray RA. 1994. The
POT family of transport proteins. *Trends*
*Biochem. Sci.* 19:404

31. Stacey G, Koh S, Granger C, Becker JM.
2002. Peptide transport in plants. *Trends*
*Plant Sci.* 7:257–63

32. Urtti A, Johns SJ, Sadee W. 2001.
Genomic structure of proton-coupled
oligopeptide transporter hPEPT1 and pH-
sensing regulatory splice variant. *AAPS*
*Pharm. Sci.* 3:E6

33. Fei YJ, Sugawara M, Liu JC, Li HW,
Ganapathy V, et al. 2000. cDNA structure,
genomic organization, and promoter analysis
of the mouse intestinal peptide transporter
PEPT1. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta*
21:145–54

34. Saito H, Motohashi H, Mukai M, Inui
K. 1997. Cloning and characterization
of a pH-sensing regulatory factor that modulates
transport activity
of the human H⁺/peptide cotransporter,
PEPT1. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.*
28:577–82

35. Covitz KM, Amidon GL, Sadee W. 1998.
Membrane topology of the human dipeptide
transporter, hPEPT1, determined by epitope
insertions. *Biochemistry*
27:15214–21

36. Doring F, Martini C, Walter J, Daniel H.
2002. Importance of a small N-terminal

region in mammalian peptide transporters
for substrate affinity and function. *J.*
*Membr. Biol.* 15:55–62

37. Terada T, Saito H, Sawada K, Hashimoto
Y, Inui K. 2000. N-terminal halves of
rat H⁺/peptide transporters are responsible
for their substrate recognition. *Pharm.*
*Res.* 17:15–20

38. Fei YJ, Liu JC, Fujita T, Liang R, Ganapathy
V, Leibach FH. 1998. Identification
of a potential substrate binding domain
in the mammalian peptide transporters
PEPT1 and PEPT2 using PEPT1-PEPT2
and PEPT2-PEPT1 chimeras. *Biochem.*
*Biophys. Res. Commun.* 8:39–44

39. Doring F, Dorn D, Bachfischer U,
Amasheh S, Herget M, Daniel H. 1996.
Functional analysis of a chimeric mammalian
peptide transporter derived from
the intestinal and renal isoforms. *J. Physiol.*
15:773–79

40. Fei YJ, Liu W, Prasad PD, Kekuda R,
Oblak TG, et al. 1997. Identification of the
histidyl residue obligatory for the catalytic
activity of the human H⁺/peptide cotransporters
PEPT1 and PEPT2. *Biochemistry*
14:452–60

41. Terada T, Saito H, Mukai M, Inui
KI. 1996. Identification of the histidine
residues involved in substrate recognition
by a rat H⁺/peptide cotransporter, PEPT1.
*FEBS Lett.* 30:196–200

42. Chen XZ, Steel A, Hediger MA. 2000.
Functional roles of histidine and tyrosine
residues in the H⁺-peptide transporter
PepT1. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.*
16:726–30

43. Kato M, Maegawa H, Okano T, Inui K,
Hori R. 1989. Effect of various chemical
modifiers on H⁺ coupled transport of
cephradine via dipeptide carriers in rabbit
intestinal brush-border membranes: role
of histidine residues. *J. Pharmacol. Exp.*
*Ther.* 251:745–49

44. Brandsch M, Brandsch C, Ganapathy ME,
Chew CS, Ganapathy V, Leibach FH. 1997.
Influence of proton and essential
histidyl residues on the transport kinetics

of the H⁺/peptide cotransport systems in
intestine (PEPT1) and kidney (PEPT2).
*Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 13:251–62

45. Terada T, Saito H, Inui K. 1998. Interaction of beta-lactam antibiotics with histidine residue of rat H⁺/peptide cotransporters, PEPT1 and PEPT2. *J. Biol. Chem.* 6:5582–85

46. Yeung AK, Basu SK, Wu SK, Chu C, Okamoto CT, et al. 1998. Molecular identification of a role for tyrosine 167 in the function of the human intestinal proton-coupled dipeptide transporter (hPepT1). *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 8:103–7

47. Bolger MB, Haworth IS, Yeung AK, Ann D, von Graffenstein H, et al. 1998. Structure, function, and molecular modeling approaches to the study of the intestinal dipeptide transporter PEPT1. *J. Pharm. Sci.* 87:1286–91

48. Meredith D, Boyd CA, Bronk JR, Bailey PD, Morgan KM, et al. 1998. 4-aminomethylbenzoic acid is a non-translocated competitive inhibitor of the epithelial peptide transporter PepT1. *J. Physiol.* 1:629–34

49. Knutter I, Theis S, Hartrodt B, Born I, Brandsch M, et al. 2001. A novel inhibitor of the mammalian peptide transporter PEPT1. *Biochemistry* 10:4454–58

50. Sawada K, Terada T, Saito H, Hashimoto Y, Inui K. 1999. Effects of glibenclamide on glycylsarcosine transport by the rat peptide transporters PEPT1 and PEPT2. *Br. J. Pharmacol.* 128:1159–64

51. Terada T, Sawada K, Saito H, Hashimoto Y, Inui K. 2000. Inhibitory effect of novel oral hypoglycemic agent nateglinide (AY4166) on peptide transporters PEPT1 and PEPT2. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* 24:11–17

52. Bailey PD, Boyd CA, Bronk JR, Collier ID, Meredith D, et al. 2000. How to make drugs orally active: a substrate template for peptide transporter PepT1. *Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.* 39:505–8

53. Tame JR, Dodson EJ, Murshudov G, Higgins CF, Wilkinson AJ. 1995. The crystal structures of the oligopeptide-binding protein OppA complexed with tripeptide and tetrapeptide ligands. *Structure* 15:1395–406

54. Nickitenko AV, Trakhanov S, Quicho FA. 1995. 2 Å resolution structure of DppA, a periplasmic dipeptide transport/chemosensory receptor. *Biochemistry* 26:16585–95

55. Wang T, Wade RC. 2002. Comparative binding energy (COMBINE) analysis of OppA-peptide complexes to relate structure to binding thermodynamics. *J. Med. Chem.* 24:4828–37

56. Döring F, Will J, Amasheh S, Clauss W, Ahlbrecht H, Daniel H. 1998. Minimal molecular determinants of substrates for recognition by the intestinal peptide transporter. *J. Biol. Chem.* 4:23211–18

57. Döring F, Walter J, Will J, Focking M, Boll M, et al. 1998. Delta-aminolevulinic acid transport by intestinal and renal peptide transporters and its physiological and clinical implications. *J. Clin. Invest.* 15:2761–67

58. Brandsch M, Thunecke F, Kullertz G, Schutkowski M, Fischer G, Neubert K. 1998. Evidence for the absolute conformational specificity of the intestinal H⁺/peptide symporter, PEPT1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 13:3861–64

59. Brandsch M, Knutter I, Thunecke F, Hartrodt B, Born I, et al. 1999. Decisive structural determinants for the interaction of proline derivatives with the intestinal H⁺/peptide symporter. *Eur. J. Biochem.* 266:502–8

60. Han HK, Amidon GL. 2000. Targeted drug design to optimize drug delivery. *AAPS Pharm. Sci.* 2:E6

61. Mazzei T, Dentico P. 2000. The pharmacokinetics of oral cephalosporins. *Clin. Microbiol. Infect.* 6:53–54

62. Zhang H, Zhang J, Streisand JB. 2002. Oral mucosal drug delivery: clinical pharmacokinetics and therapeutic applications.

cations. *Clin. Pharmacokinetics*. 41:661–80

63. Mackenzie B, Loo DD, Fei Y, Liu WJ, Ganapathy V, et al. 1996. Mechanisms of the human intestinal H⁺-coupled oligopeptide transporter hPEPT1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 8:5430–37

64. Nussberger S, Steel A, Trotti D, Romero MF, Boron WF, Hediger MA. 1997. Symmetry of H⁺ binding to the intra- and extracellular side of the H⁺-coupled oligopeptide cotransporter PepT1. *J. Biol. Chem.* 21:7777–85

65. Steel A, Nussberger S, Romero MF, Boron WF, Boyd CA, Hediger MA. 1997. Stoichiometry and pH dependence of the rabbit proton-dependent oligopeptide transporter PepT1. *J. Physiol.* 1:563–69

66. Amasheh S, Wenzel U, Boll M, Dorn D, Weber W, et al. 1997. Transport of charged dipeptides by the intestinal H⁺/peptide symporter PepT1 expressed in *Xenopus laevis* oocytes. *J. Membr. Biol.* 1:247–56

67. Kottra G, Stamfort A, Daniel H. 2002. PEPT1 as a paradigm for membrane carriers that mediate electrogenic bidirectional transport of anionic, cationic, and neutral substrates. *J. Biol. Chem.* 6:32683–91

68. Wenzel U, Gebert I, Weintraut H, Weber WM, Clauss W, Daniel H. 1996. Transport characteristics of differently charged cephalosporin antibiotics in oocytes expressing the cloned intestinal peptide transporter PepT1 and in human intestinal Caco-2 cells. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* 277:831–39

69. Kottra G, Daniel H. 2001. Bidirectional electrogenic transport of peptides by the proton-coupled carrier PEPT1 in *Xenopus laevis* oocytes: its asymmetry and symmetry. *J. Physiol.* 15:495–503

70. Newey H, Smyth DH. 1960. Intracellular hydrolysis of dipeptides during intestinal absorption. *J. Physiol.* 152:367–80

71. Lucas M. 1983. Determination of acid surface pH in vivo in rat proximal jejunum. *Gut* 24:734–39

72. Daniel H, Neugebauer B, Kratz A, Rehner G. 1985. Localization of acid microcli-

mate along intestinal villi of rat jejunum. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 248:G293–98

73. McEwan GT, Daniel H, Fett C, Burgess MN, Lucas ML. 1988. The effect of *Escherichia coli* STa enterotoxin and other secretagogues on mucosal surface pH of rat small intestine in vivo. *Proc. R. Soc. London Ser. B* 22:219–37

74. Thwaites DT, Kennedy DJ, Raldua D, Anderson CM, Mendoza ME, et al. 2002. H/dipeptide absorption across the human intestinal epithelium is controlled indirectly via a functional Na/H exchanger. *Gastroenterology* 122:1322–33

75. Thwaites DT, Ford D, Glanville M, Simmons NL. 1999. H⁺/solute-induced intracellular acidification leads to selective activation of apical Na⁺/H⁺ exchange in human intestinal epithelial cells. *J. Clin. Invest.* 104:629–35

76. Adibi SA, Soleimanpour MR. 1974. Functional characterization of dipeptide transport system in human jejunum. *J. Clin. Invest.* 53:1368–74

77. Adibi SA. 1986. Kinetics and characteristics of absorption from an equimolar mixture of 12 glycyl-dipeptides in human jejunum. *Gastroenterology* 90:577–82

78. Steinhardt HJ, Wolf A, Jakober B, Schmuelling RM, Langer K, et al. 1989. Nitrogen absorption in pancreatotomized patients: protein versus protein hydrolysate as substrate. *J. Lab. Clin. Med.* 113:162–67

79. Boza JJ, Moennoz D, Vuichoud J, Jarret AR, Gaudard-de-Weck D, Ballevre O. 2000. Protein hydrolysate vs free amino acid-based diets on the nutritional recovery of the starved rat. *Eur. J. Nutr.* 39:237–43

80. Dyer J, Beechey RB, Gorvel JP, Smith RT, Wootton R, Shirazi-Beechey SP. 1990. Glycyl-L-proline transport in rabbit enterocyte basolateral-membrane vesicles. *Biochem. J.* 1:565–71

81. Saito H, Hashimoto Y, Inui K. 1999. Functional characteristics of basolateral pep-

382 DANIEL

- **tide transporter in the human intestinal cell line Caco-2. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 276:G1435–41**
- **82. Saito H, Inui K. 1993. Dipeptide transporters in apical and basolateral membranes of the human intestinal cell line Caco-2. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 265:G289–94**
- **83. Matsumoto S, Saito H, Inui K. 1994. Transcellular transport of oral cephalosporins in human intestinal epithelial cells, Caco-2: interaction with dipeptide transport systems in apical and basolateral membranes. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 270:498–504**
- **84. Irie M, Terada T, Sawada K, Saito H, Inui K. 2001. Recognition and transport characteristics of nonpeptidic compounds by basolateral peptide transporter in Caco-2 cells. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 298:711–17**
- **85. Shepherd EJ, Lister N, Affleck JA, Bronk JR, Kellett GL, et al. 2002. Identification of a candidate membrane protein for the basolateral peptide transporter of rat small intestine. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 30:918–22**
- **86. Adibi SA. 1971. Intestinal transport of dipeptides in man: relative importance of hydrolysis and intact absorption. J. Clin. Invest. 50:2266–75**
- **87. Adibi SA, Morse EL, Masilamani SS, Amin PM. 1975. Evidence for two different modes of tripeptide disappearance in human intestine. Uptake by peptide carrier systems and hydrolysis by peptide hydrolases. J. Clin. Invest. 56:1355–63**
- **88. Asatoor AM, Cheng B, Edwards KD, Lant AF, Matthews DM, et al. 1970. Intestinal absorption of dipeptides and corresponding free amino acids in Hartnup disease. Clin. Sci. 39:1P**
- **89. Hellier MD, Perrett D, Holdsworth CD, Thirumalai C. 1971. Absorption of dipeptides in normal and cystinuric subjects. Gut 12:496–97**
- **90. Asatoor AM, Harrison BD, Milne MD, Prosser DI. 1972. Intestinal absorption of an arginine-containing peptide in cystinuria. Gut 13:95–98**
- **91. Silk DB, Perrett D, Clark ML. 1975. Jejunal and ileal absorption of dibasic amino acids and an arginine-containing dipeptide in cystinuria. Gastroenterology 68:1426–32**
- **92. Chillaron J, Roca R, Valencia A, Zorzano A, Palacin M. 2001. Heteromeric amino acid transporters: biochemistry, genetics, and physiology. Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol. 281:F995–1018**
- **93. De Sanctis L, Bonetti G, Bruno M, De Luca F, Bisceglia L, et al. 2001. Cystinuria phenotyping by oral lysine and arginine loading. Clin. Nephrol. 56:467–74**
- **94. Wenzel U, Meissner B, Doring F, Daniel H. 2001. PEPT1-mediated uptake of dipeptides enhances the intestinal absorption of amino acids via transport system b0+. J. Cell. Physiol. 186:251–59**
- **95. Radhakrishnan AN. 1977. Intestinal dipeptidases and the dipeptide transport in the monkey and in man. Ciba Found. Symp. 50:37–59**
- **96. Himukai M, Kano-Kameyama A, Hoshi T. 1982. Mechanisms of inhibition of glycylglycine transport by glycyl-L-leucine and L-leucine in guinea-pig small intestine. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 7:170–78**
- **97. Muller U, Brandsch M, Prasad PD, Fei Y-J, Ganapathy V, Leibach FH. 1996. Inhibition of the H+/peptide cotransporter in the human intestinal cell line Caco-2 by cyclic AMP. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 218:461–65**
- **98. Berlioz F, Maoret JJ, Paris H, Laburthe M, Farinotti R, Roze C. 2000. Alpha2-adrenergic receptors stimulate oligopeptide transport in a human intestinal cell line. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 294:466–72**
- **99. Berlioz F, Julien S, Tsocas A, Chariot J, Carbon C, et al. 1999. Neural modulation of cephalixin intestinal absorption through the di- and tripeptide brush border transporter of rat jejunum in vivo. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 288:1037–44**

100. Fujita T, Majikawa Y, Umehisa S, Okada N, Yamamoto A, et al. 1999. sigma Receptor ligand-induced up-regulation of the H⁺/peptide transporter PEPT1 in the human intestinal cell line Caco-2. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 2:242–46

101. Wenzel U, Kuntz S, Diestel S, Daniel H. 2002. PepT1-mediated cefixime uptake into human intestinal epithelial cells is increased by Ca²⁺ channels blockers. *Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.* 46:1375–80

102. Thamotharan M, Bawani SZ, Zhou X, Adibi SA. 1999. Hormonal regulation of oligopeptide transporter Pept-1 in a human intestinal cell line. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.* 276:C821–26

103. Buyse M, Berlioz F, Guilmeau S, Tso-cas A, Voisin T, et al. 2001. PepT1-mediated epithelial transport of dipeptides and cephalixin is enhanced by luminal leptin in the small intestine. *J. Clin. Invest.* 108:1483–94

104. Ashida K, Katsura T, Motohashi H, Saito H, Inui K. 2002. Thyroid hormone regulates the activity and expression of the peptide transporter PEPT1 in Caco-2 cells. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 282:G617–23

105. Sun BW, Zhao XC, Wang GJ, Li N, Li JS. 2003. Hormonal regulation of dipeptide transporter (PepT1) in Caco-2 cells with normal and anoxia/reoxygenation management. *World J. Gastroenterol.* 9:808–12

106. Avissar NE, Ziegler TR, Wang HT, Gu LH, Miller JH, et al. 2001. Growth factors regulation of rabbit sodium-dependent neutral amino acid transporter ATB0 and oligopeptide transporter 1 mRNAs expression after enterotomy. *J. Parenter. Enteral. Nutr.* 25:65–72

107. Pan X, Terada T, Irie M, Saito H, Inui K. 2002. Diurnal rhythm of H⁺-peptide cotransporter in rat small intestine. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 283:G57–64

108. Thamotharan M, Bawani SZ, Zhou X, Adibi SA. 1999. Functional and molecular expression of intestinal oligopeptide transporter (Pept-1) after a brief fast. *Metabolism* 48:681–84

109. Ihara T, Tsujikawa T, Fujiyama Y, Bamba T. 2000. Regulation of PepT1 peptide transporter expression in the rat small intestine under malnourished conditions. *Digestion* 61:59–67

110. Tanaka H, Miyamoto KI, Morita K, Haga H, Segawa H, et al. 1998. Regulation of the PepT1 peptide transporter in the rat small intestine in response to 5-fluorouracil-induced injury. *Gastroenterology* 114:714–23

111. Gangopadhyay A, Thamotharan M, Adibi SA. 2002. Regulation of oligopeptide transporter (Pept-1) in experimental diabetes. *Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol.* 283:G133–8

112. Shiraga T, Miyamoto K, Tanaka H, Yamamoto H, Taketani Y, et al. 1999. Cellular and molecular mechanisms of dietary regulation on rat intestinal H⁺/peptide transporter PepT1. *Gastroenterology* 116:354–62

113. Pohjanpelto P, Holtta E. 1990. Deprivation of a single amino acid induces protein synthesis-dependent increase in c-jun, c-myc and ornithine decarboxylase mRNAs in Chinese hamster ovary cells. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 10:5814–21

114. Guerrini L, Gong SS, Mangasarian K, Basilico C. 1993. Cis- and trans-acting elements involved in amino acid regulation of asparagine synthetase gene expression. *Mol. Cell Biol.* 13:3202–12

115. Walker D, Thwaites DT, Simmons NL, Gilbert HJ, Hirst BH. 1998. Substrate upregulation of the human small intestinal peptide transporter, hPepT1. *J. Physiol.* 15:697–706

116. Thamotharan M, Bawani SZ, Zhou X, Adibi SA. 1998. Mechanism of dipeptide stimulation of its own transport in a human intestinal cell line. *Proc. Assoc. Am. Physicians* 110:361–68

117. Ford D, Howard A, Hirst BH. 2003. Expression of the peptide transporter hPepT1

in human colon: a potential route for
colonic protein nitrogen and drug ab-
sorption. *Histochem. Cell Biol.* 119:37–
43

118. Ziegler TR, Fernandez-Estivariz C, Gu
LH, Bazargan N, Umeakunne K, et al.
2002. Distribution of the H⁺/peptide
transporter PepT1 in human intestine: up-
regulated expression in the colonic mu-
cosa of patients with short-bowel syn-
drome. *Am. J. Clin. Nutr.* 75:922–30

119. Merlin D, Si-Tahar M, Sitaraman SV,
Eastburn K, Williams I, et al. 2001.
Colonic epithelial hPepT1 expression
occurs in inflammatory bowel disease:
transport of bacterial peptides influences
expression of MHC class 1 molecules.
*Gastroenterology* 120:1666–79

120. Merlin D, Steel A, Gewirtz AT, Si-
Tahar M, Hediger MA, Madara JL. 1998.
hPepT1-mediated epithelial transport of

bacteria-derived chemotactic peptides en-
hances neutrophil-epithelial interactions.
*J. Clin. Invest.* 1:2011–18

121. Buyse M, Tsocas A, Walker F, Merlin
D, Bado A. 2002. PepT1-mediated fMLP
transport induces intestinal inflammation
in vivo. *Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.*
283:C1795–800

122. Shu HJ, Takeda H, Shinzawa H, Takahashi
T, Kawata S. 2002. Effect of lipopolysac-
charide on peptide transporter 1 expres-
sion in rat small intestine and its attenua-
tion by dexamethasone. *Digestion* 65:21–
29

123. Barbot L, Windsor E, Rome S, Tricotet
V, Reynes M, et al. 2003. Intestinal pep-
tide transporter PepT1 is over-expressed
during acute cryptosporidiosis in suckling
rats as a result of both malnutrition and
experimental parasite infection. *Parasitol.*
Res. 89:364–70

INTESTINAL PEPTIDE TRANSPORT

See legend on next page

C-2 DANIEL

Figure 1 Integrated model depicting the generation of di- and tripeptides from the hydrolysis of luminal proteins and the pathways involved in cellular uptake of peptides mediated by PEPT1 in the apical membrane of intestinal epithelial cells. Following apical influx, di- and tripeptides are sequentially hydrolyzed by multiple cytosolic hydrolases followed by basolateral efflux of the amino acids via different amino acid-transporting systems. Peptides not undergoing hydrolysis can exit the cell by a basolateral peptide-transporting system not yet identified on a molecular basis.

hPEPT1

extracellular

intracellular

PKC

critical/essential residues
residues modulating affinity
PTR-family signature motif
residues in domains identified by chimeric approach
putative glycosylation sites

See legend on next page

Figure 2 Model of the human PEPT1 secondary structure highlighting amino acid residues and protein domains with importance for the transport process. Individual amino acid residues identified by site-directed mutagenesis in PEPT1 proteins of various species and found to be either essential for transport or to alter substrate interaction with the protein are indicated by their distinct position and color code. Protein domains that are important for the phenotypical characteristics of PEPT1, as identified by the analysis of PEPT1/PEPT2 chimeras, are highlighted in yellow. The signature motif of the PTR-family of proton-dependent peptide transporters is projected into hPEPT1 and marked in blue. Putative glycosylation sites and PKC recognition sides, although not yet experimentally verified as used for post-translational modification, are also marked.

Frontispiece—S. Jonathan Singer  xiv

PERSPECTIVES, Joseph F. Hoffman, Editor

Some Early History of Membrane Molecular Biology,  
S. Jonathan Singer  1

CARDIOVASCULAR PHYSIOLOGY, Jeffrey Robbins, Section Editor

Myocardial Aging and Senescence: Where Have the Stem Cells Gone?,  
Mark A. Sussman and Piero Anversa  29

Viral-Based Myocardial Gene Therapy Approaches to Alter  
Cardiac Function, Matthew L. Williams and Walter J. Koch  49

CELL PHYSIOLOGY, Paul De Weer, Section Editor

Developmental Regulation of Lung Liquid Transport, Richard E. Olver,  
Dafydd V. Walters, and Stuart M. Wilson  77

Mechanism of Rectification in Inward-Rectifier K⁺ Channels, Zhe Lu  103

Metabolic Regulation of Potassium Channels, Xiang Dong Tang,  
Lindsey Ciali Santarelli, Stefan H. Heinemann,  
and Toshinori Hoshi  131

Structure and Function of Glutamate Receptor Ion Channels,  
Mark L. Mayer and Neali Armstrong  161

COMPARATIVE PHYSIOLOGY, George N. Somero, Section Editor

Biochemical Indicators of Stress and Metabolism: Applications  
for Marine Ecological Studies, Elizabeth P. Dahlhoff  183

Field Physiology: Physiological Insights from Animals in Nature,  
Daniel P. Costa and Barry Sinervo  209

Metabolic Rate and Body Temperature Reduction  
During Hibernation and Daily Torpor, Fritz Geiser  239

Sleep and Circadian Rhythms in Mammalian Torpor, H. Craig Heller  
and Norman F. Ruby  275

viii CONTENTS

ENDOCRINOLOGY, Bert W. O'Malley, Section Editor
- Estrogens in the Nervous System: Mechanisms and Nonreproductive Functions, Adriana Maggi, Paolo Ciana, Silvia Belcredito, and Elisabetta Vegeto 291
- The Role of Corepressors in Transcriptional Regulation by Nuclear Hormone Receptors, Martin L. Privalsky 315

GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY, John Williams, Section Editor
- Molecular and Integrative Physiology of Intestinal Peptide Transport, Hannelore Daniel 361
- Oral Rehydration Therapy: New Explanations for an Old Remedy, Mrinalini C. Rao 385
- Recent Advances in Carrier-Mediated Intestinal Absorption of Water-Soluble Vitamins, Hamid M. Said 419

NEUROPHYSIOLOGY, Richard Adrich, Section Editor
- Learning Mechanisms in Addiction: Synaptic Plasticity in the Ventral Tegmental Area as a Result of Exposure to Drugs of Abuse, Julie A. Kauer 447
- Localization of Voltage-Gated Ion Channels in Mammalian Brain, James S. Trimmer and Kenneth J. Rhodes 477
- Myosin-1c, the Hair Cell's Adaptation Motor, Peter G. Gillespie and Janet L. Cyr 521

RENAL AND ELECTROLYTE PHYSIOLOGY, Steven C. Hebert, Section Editor
- Regulation of Renal K Transport by Dietary K Intake, WenHui Wang 547
- The Extracellular Cyclic AMP-Adenosine Pathway in Renal Physiology, Edwin K. Jackson and Dubey K. Raghvendra 571

RESPIRATORY PHYSIOLOGY, Carole R. Mendelson, Section Editor
- Alterations in SP-B and SP-C Expression in Neonatal Lung Disease, Lawrence M. Nogee 601
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Interactions in the Developing Lung, John M. Shannon and Brian A. Hyatt 625
- Genetically Engineered Mouse Models for Lung Cancer, I. Kwak, S.Y. Tsai, and F.J. DeMayo 647

SPECIAL TOPIC: PROTON AND ELECTRON TRANSPORTERS, Janos K. Lanyi, Special Topic Editor
- Bacteriorhodopsin, Janos K. Lanyi 665
- The Cytochrome $bc_1$ Complex: Function in the Context of Structure, Antony R. Crofts 689

SPECIAL TOPIC: FUNCTIONAL IMAGING IN PHYSIOLOGY,  
Stephen J Smith, Special Topic Editor  

Interpreting the BOLD Signal, Nikos K. Logothetis and Brian A. Wandell 735  
Live Optical Imaging of Nervous System Development,  
Cristopher M. Niell and Stephen J Smith 771  

SPECIAL CHAPTER: MUSCLE PHYSIOLOGY, Joseph F. Hoffman, Editor  
Control of the Size of the Human Muscle Mass, Michael J. Rennie,  
Henning Wackerhage, Espen E. Spangenburg, and Frank W. Booth 799  

INDEXES  
Subject Index 829  
Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors, Volumes 62–66 879  
Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles, Volumes 62–66 882  

ERRATA  
An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Physiology chapters  
may be found at http://physiol.annualreviews.org/errata.shtml
