
Will the Real Cholesterol Transporter Please Stand Up  
Eric L. Klett and Shailesh B. Patel  
Science 303, 1149 (2004);  
DOI: 10.1126/science.1095519  

This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only.

If you wish to distribute this article to others, you can order high-quality copies for your colleagues, clients, or customers by clicking here.

Permission to republish or repurpose articles or portions of articles can be obtained by following the guidelines here.

The following resources related to this article are available online at www.sciencemag.org (this information is current as of August 23, 2014):

Updated information and services, including high-resolution figures, can be found in the online version of this article at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/303/5661/1149.full.html

A list of selected additional articles on the Science Web sites related to this article can be found at:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/303/5661/1149.full.html#related

This article cites 10 articles, 2 of which can be accessed free:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/303/5661/1149.full.html#ref-list-1

This article has been cited by 16 article(s) on the ISI Web of Science

This article has been cited by 4 articles hosted by HighWire Press; see:
http://www.sciencemag.org/content/303/5661/1149.full.html#related-urls

This article appears in the following subject collections:
Medicine, Diseases
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/medicine

Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published weekly, except the last week in December, by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright 2004 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved. The title Science is a registered trademark of AAAS.

patterns, define the X inactivation center as a single essential control region that governs the entire length of that chromosome. The dramatic initiation and spreading of mammalian X inactivation—now known to involve the large *Xist* noncoding RNA and presumably associated chromatin modification factors—suggests that dosage compensation can occur on any chromosome as long as the X inactivation center containing the *Xist* transcription unit is attached (4–6).

In flies, the evidence for spreading of dosage compensation is more recent and less direct. Flies have proteins that modify histones as well as at least two noncoding RNAs (*roX1* and *roX2*) that decorate the single male X chromosome. Like the *Xist* RNA in mammals, *roX* RNAs are normally transcribed from the X chromosome. However, when *roX* genes are inserted into autosomes, their RNAs can spread into flanking sequences that are long distances from the sites of *roX* transcription (7, 8). Whether spreading is the main mechanism of X chromosome dosage compensation in flies is not yet known (9).

Csankovszki *et al.* now show that spreading is likely to be an important mechanism by which nematode X chromosomes are decorated by DCCs (see the figure). The authors systematically surveyed chromosome translocations to determine whether worm DCCs could bind to segments of the X chromosome detached from the X and reattached to autosomes. Their results identify a few large segments that cannot attract DCCs when detached from the X chromosome, but are clearly bound by DCCs in their normal locations. These segments are also known to encompass dosage-compensated genes. Their results strongly suggest that the identified segments are normally filled in by complexes that have spread along the chromosome from neighboring X chromatin. Another important finding is that multiple, discrete sites are capable of attracting DCCs when detached from the X, and they narrow one of these X-recognition elements down to 793 base pairs. As yet, it is not clear how this particular sequence is recognized by the DCC.

The new work addresses the global question of whether chromatin organization in this type of dosage compensation occurs by spreading, but also raises new questions. The spreading described in *C. elegans* is not of the potency seen in mammalian X inactivation, because there is no evidence of spreading into autosomal sequences attached to the newly discovered X-recognition element that recruits the DCC. Thus, beyond the presence or absence of specific DCC binding sites, additional functional distinctions between X chromosomes and autosomes remain to be understood. It is also not apparent how the spreading of chromatin organization is propagated in any of the systems discussed here.

---

**PERSPECTIVES**

Is movement of repressive or activating complexes linear? Chromosome regions and genes can clearly be skipped in position effect variegation in fruit flies (10, 11) and in X inactivation (12, 13); the banded pattern of DCCs on fly chromosomes also suggests discontinuous binding of DCCs (7).

Finally, noncoding RNAs and histone modifications are key players in the spreading of mammalian and fly DCCs, as well as in the spreading of silenced centromeric chromatin in the fission yeast *Schizosaccharomyces pombe* (14, 15). An urgent priority is to determine whether analogous components are involved in the spreading of X chromosome repression in *C. elegans*.

**References**

1. G. Csankovszki, P. McDonel, B. J. Meyer, *Science* **303**, 1182 (2004).
2. J. D. Lieb *et al.*, *Cell* **92**, 265 (1998).
3. K. D. Tartof *et al.*, *Cell* **37**, 869 (1984).
4. S. Rastan, *J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol.* **78**, 1 (1983).
5. S. Rastan, S. D. Brown, *Genet. Res.* **56**, 99 (1990).
6. M. F. Lyon, *Nature* **379**, 116 (1996).
7. R. L. Kelley *et al.*, *Cell* **98**, 513 (1999).
8. Y. Park *et al.*, *Science* **298**, 1620 (2002).
9. H. Oh *et al.*, *Genes Dev.* **17**, 1334 (2003).
10. E. S. Belyaeva, I. F. Zhimulev, *Chromosoma* **100**, 453 (1991).
11. P. B. Talbert, S. Henikoff, *Genetics* **154**, 259 (2000).
12. C. M. Disteche, *Trends Genet.* **11**, 17 (1995).
13. W. M. White *et al.*, *Am. J. Hum. Genet.* **63**, 20 (1998).
14. T.A. Volpe *et al.*, *Science* **297**, 1833 (2002).
15. I. M. Hall *et al.*, *Science* **297**, 2232 (2002).
16. H. E. Dawes *et al.*, *Science* **284**, 1800 (1999).
17. D. S. Chu *et al.*, *Genes Dev.* **16**, 796 (2002).

---

**BIOMEDICINE**

**Will the Real Cholesterol Transporter Please Stand Up**

Eric L. Klett and Shailesh B. Patel

More than 75 years ago, Schoenheimer reported that mammals not only synthesize cholesterol de novo, but also selectively absorb dietary cholesterol from the small intestine while excluding dietary plant sterols and other noncholesterol sterols (1). Subsequent studies have built on this work, demonstrating that cholesterol homeostasis depends on a balance between de novo cholesterol synthesis, the absorption of dietary cholesterol, and excretion of excess cholesterol via the hepatobiliary system. Although cholesterol synthesis and breakdown pathways are well defined, the pathway of dietary cholesterol absorption remains to be elucidated. We still need mechanistic insights to explain Schoenheimer’s observations of selective sterol absorption—that is, the absorption of cholesterol but not plant sterols by intestinal epithelial cells (enterocytes). Given the link between plasma cholesterol levels and heart disease, the mechanism of dietary cholesterol absorption is of great interest (2). Some knowledge has been gained by investigating cellular processes as disparate as vesicular transport, molecular chaperones in the endoplasmic reticulum, lipid-transfer proteins, sterol-esterification enzymes, and rare genetic disorders (see the figure). The pharmaceutical industry is actively seeking drugs that specifically inhibit cholesterol absorption without affecting the absorption of other dietary lipids. The discovery of the drug ezetimibe (Zetia)—which specifically blocks intestinal cholesterol absorption by binding to a protein on the apical surface of enterocytes—has garnered much interest. Elucidating the target protein of ezetimibe may reveal the identity of a putative cholesterol transporter. On page 1201 of this issue, Altmann *et al.* (3) report the discovery of a protein that has the characteristics of a cholesterol transporter, perhaps bringing the search for this elusive protein to a close.

Given that ezetimibe specifically blocks cholesterol absorption, Altmann and colleagues reasoned that its target must have the structural characteristics of a cholesterol transporter. They searched human and rodent expressed sequence tag (EST) databases for protein sequences that are highly expressed in the intestine and that contain characteristic features of transporters (transmembrane domains, an extracellular signal peptide, and N-linked glycosylation sites). But, crucially, they also sought proteins containing a “sterol-sensing” domain as found in other proteins known to interface with cholesterol, such as Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1), HMG CoA reductase, and the Patched receptor. They identified a single rodent protein with these features and discovered that it is homologous to human Niemann-Pick C1 Like 1 protein (NPC1L1, also known as NPC3). To test whether NPC1L1 is required for cholesterol absorption in vivo, they created a mouse deficient in the *Npc1l1* gene. Absorp

---

The authors are in the Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Medical Genetics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29403, USA. E-mail: patelsb@musc.edu

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 303 20 FEBRUARY 2004 1149

The absorption of dietary cholesterol and non-cholesterol sterols. NPC1L1, expressed at the apical surface of enterocytes, may be the transporter that selectively absorbs dietary cholesterol (C) from micelles in the lumen of the small intestine, a step that is blocked by the drug ezetimibe. We propose a model for NPC1L1 action, in which this transporter permits the uptake of cholesterol (and noncholesterol sterols) into vesicles that then move through a subapical endosomal sorting compartment (6). Mutations in either of the transporters ABCG5 or ABCG8 cause the hyperabsorption of dietary plant sterols (PS) and other noncholesterol sterols from the small intestine, resulting in the human disease sitosterolemia (4, 5). The endosomal sorting compartment allows cholesterol to progress to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where it is esterified (CE) by ACAT-2 and then transferred to chylomicrons (pink) ready for secretion into the bloodstream; plant sterols are shunted through a pathway resulting in their transport back to the gut lumen via ABCG5 and ABCG8. Cholesterol that is synthesized de novo is also esterified by ACAT-2 and enters chylomicrons (7). Mutations in the microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) result in the human disorder abetalipoproteinemia characterized by secretion of chylomicrons (8). When bound to the protein disulfide isomerase, MTP transfers neutral lipids into newly formed chylomicrons in the ER, a necessary step in the pathway of lipid secretion. Mutations in the small guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) Sar1, which is involved in trafficking of chylomicrons in the ER, causes chylomicron retention disease (9). Although no human disease has been linked to ARF-1 (ADP-ribosylation factor 1), this GTPase appears to be important for lipoprotein secretion by regulating vesicle budding from the Golgi (10). The parts played by SRB1 (scavenger receptor type B1), expressed on the apical and basolateral enterocyte surface, and ABCA1, expressed on the basolateral enterocyte surface, remain unclear. (TG, triglyceride; B48, apolipoprotein B48; HDL, high density lipoprotein.)

Intestinal lumen

Ezetimibe

Micelles

NPC1L1

ABCG5

ABCG8

SRB1

Endosomal sorting compartment

De novo cholesterol synthesis

Sorting compartment

Subapical compartment

ER

Golgi

Blood

Lymph

References

1. R. Schoenheimer, Z. Physiol. Chem. 180, 1 (1929).
2. E.L. Klett et al., Curr. Opin. Lipidol. 14, 341 (2003).
3. S.W. Altmann et al., Science 303, 1201 (2004).
4. K.E. Berge et al., Science 290, 1771 (2000).
5. M-H. Lee et al., Nature Genet. 27, 79 (2001).
6. E.M. Danielsen et al., Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1617, 1 (2003).
7. D.A. Gordon et al., Trends Cell Biol. 5, 317 (1995).
8. T.Y. Chang et al., Curr. Opin. Lipidol. 12, 289 (2001).
9. B. Jones et al., Nature Genet. 34, 29 (2003).
10. C. Barlowe, Traffic 1, 371 (2000).

tion of dietary cholesterol was almost completely abolished in these mice, and the animals were insensitive to ezetimibe. The Npc1l1-deficient mice appeared normal, except for their inability to absorb dietary cholesterol. Limited biochemical and immunohistological analyses revealed that NPC1L1 is expressed at the enterocyte apical surface (see the figure). Although highly expressed in the small intestine, NPC1L1 is not expressed by neighboring cells. In rodents, Npc1l1 is expressed predominantly in the intestine, whereas in humans it is expressed almost equally in the small intestine and the liver.

Exciting as these data are, a number of questions still need to be addressed. Although NPC1L1 may be the bona fide dietary cholesterol transporter, the authors have yet to provide solid biochemical evidence that ezetimibe binds to this protein. In addition, they have yet to demonstrate that ezetimibe does not bind to the enterocytes of Npc1l1-deficient mice. Ezetimibe is effective in the treatment of a rare autosomal recessive disease called sitosterolemia. This human disease is caused by mutations in either the ABCG5 or ABCG8 transporter, resulting in hyperabsorption of plant sterols from the small intestine (4, 5) (see the figure). Apparently, ezetimibe is an effective treatment because it is able to block the uptake of plant sterols and other noncholesterol sterols as well as cholesterol from the small intestine. An obvious experiment is to examine whether the simultaneous loss of Npc1l1 and Abcg5 or Abcg8 prevents sitosterolemia. Finally, as the human liver seems to express NPC1L1, perhaps the liver is another site of ezetimibe action, although this still needs to be investigated. Thus, identification of the cholesterol transporter is important both from a therapeutic standpoint and for gaining molecular insights into the mechanism of cholesterol absorption. The findings of Altmann et al. raise important questions that should be addressed in future studies. How are dietary cholesterol and other sterols transported inside the cell? Where in the enterocyte does sorting between cholesterol and noncholesterol sterols (mainly plant sterols) take place? Finally, what are the functions of the other components of the intracellular sterol-trafficking pathway in the absorption of cholesterol.
