
Molecular Microbiology (2004) 51(5), 1401–1412

doi:10.1046/j.1365-2958.2004.03913.x

# Excretion and uptake of cadaverine by CadB and its physiological functions in *Escherichia coli*

Waraporn Soksawatmaekhin, Aiko Kuraishi, Kaori Sakata, Keiko Kashiwagi and Kazuei Igarashi*
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chiba University, 1–33 Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba 263-8522, Japan.

## Summary

The functions of the putative cadaverine transport protein CadB were studied in *Escherichia coli*. CadB had both cadaverine uptake activity, dependent on proton motive force, and cadaverine excretion activity, acting as a cadaverine-lysine antiporter. The *Km* values for uptake and excretion of cadaverine were 20.8 and 303 μM respectively. Both cadaverine uptake and cadaverine-lysine antiporter activities of CadB were functional in cells. Cell growth of a polyamine-requiring mutant was stimulated slightly at neutral pH by the cadaverine uptake activity and greatly at acidic pH by the cadaverine-lysine antiporter activity. At acidic pH, the operon containing *cadB* and *cadA*, encoding lysine decarboxylase, was induced in the presence of lysine. This caused neutralization of the extracellular medium and made possible the production of CO₂ and cadaverine and aminopropylcadaverine instead of putrescine and spermidine. The induction of the *cadBA* operon also generated a proton motive force. When the *cadBA* operon was not induced, the expression of the *speF-potE* operon, encoding inducible ornithine decarboxylase and a putrescine-ornithine antiporter, was increased. The results indicate that the *cadBA* operon plays important roles in cellular regulation at acidic pH.

## Introduction

The *Escherichia coli cadBA* operon and the adjacent *cadC* gene encode lysine decarboxylase (*cadA*), a putative cadaverine-lysine antiporter (*cadB*), and CadC, a positive regulator of *cadBA* expression (Meng and Bennett, 1992; Watson *et al.*, 1992). Expression of the *cadBA* operon is induced by acidic pH and lysine (Neely and Olson, 1996). It is thought that production and excretion of cadaverine and the consumption of a proton during the decarboxylation reaction contribute to an increase in pH of the extracellular medium and to cell growth. We also proposed that the *cadBA* operon functions as a supplier of carbon dioxide (Takayama *et al.*, 1994).

Several secondary transporters that catalyse antiport of a weak acid and its product such as malate and lactate, coupled with decarboxylation, have been reported as secondary proton motive force generation systems (Harold and Maloney, 1996; Lolkema *et al.*, 1998). The basis for energy coupling was first characterized in *Oxalobacter* by Anantharam *et al.* (1989). Furthermore, one antiport system for a basic amino acid and its amine product (histidine/histamine), coupled with decarboxylation, has been reported to generate a proton motive force in *Lactobacillus buchneri* (Molenaar *et al.*, 1993). Thus, it is conceivable that the cadaverine-lysine antiporter system, coupled with decarboxylation, also functions as a proton motive force generation system in *E. coli*.

To understand the role of the products of the *cadBA* operon, it is important to elucidate the function of the cadaverine transport protein CadB, which has not yet been studied in detail. We recently delineated the structure and function of PotE, which functions as a putrescine-ornithine antiporter and a putrescine transporter and is encoded by the pPT71 (*speF-potE*) operon consisting of *speF*, a gene for inducible ornithine decarboxylase, and *potE* (Kashiwagi *et al.*, 1991; 1992; 1997; 2000). As the amino acid sequences of PotE and CadB show high similarity, CadB was hypothesized to be a cadaverine-lysine antiporter. In this study, we have investigated the properties of cadaverine transport by CadB and its physiological functions in cells, particularly at acidic pH.

## Results

### Uptake and excretion of cadaverine by CadB

Chromosomal location and schematics of the *cadC* gene, *cadBA* operon and *speF-potE* operon are shown in Fig. 1A. A positive or negative regulator gene for the *speF-potE* operon is not located close to the operon, and is so far unidentified. Homology between the amino acid sequences of CadB and PotE was compared, and high sequence similarity was observed (30.7% overall identity)

Accepted 21 October, 2003. *For correspondence.* E-mail iga16077@p.chiba-u.ac.jp; Tel. (+81) 43 290 2897; Fax (+81) 43 290 2900.

© 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

1402 W. Soksawatmaekhin et al.

A

| Location |
|----------|
| (min)    |


cadC
Positive regulator



cadB
Cadaverine-lysine antiporter



cadA
Lysine decarboxylase


93.9


speF
Ornithine decarboxylase



potE
Ornithine-putrescine antiporter


15.5

B


CadB: MSAAK--RIG EFACFGVAG NMMGSGIALL RANLASIGI AIWGIIISII GAMSALAVVA
PotE: MSQAKSNOMG VVQLTILTMV NMMGSGIML PTKLAEVGTI SIISLVTAW GSMALAWFA 58



CadB: RLATKNPQQG EPIAYAGEIS PARF-EQTGV LYYHANWIGN DAIGITAMSY ISTFFPVLDN
PotE: KCGMFSRKSQ GMGGYAEYAF GKSFEMANY TYGVSLLIAN VAIAISAWGY GTELLGASLS 120



CadB: PVPAEITACIA TVWVFVFVM IGGTWVSRLT TIGIVMLIR VWMTAITVGWH WFDAATYAN
PotE: PVQIGLATIG VLWICTVRDF GGARITGQIS STVWGMIIIB VUGLCIIGWF WESPTLYDS 180



CadB: MNTADTTDGH AIIKSILLCL WAFVGVESAA VSTGMVKNEK RTVEIATMLG TGLRGIVYIA
PotE: MHPHHAPFFS AVGSSTANTL WAFIGIESAC ANDWENEEN FNVPIAVLGG TLGRAVITYV 240



CadB: ATQVESGMYF SSVMASGAF EATSASTILG NWAAPLVSRF TAFACLTSIG SNMMILVGAG
PotE: STNUJACIVP NMEIANSTAR FGIAFAQMFT PEVGKVIMAL MVMSCCGSLL GNQFTTAAVF 300



CadB: VRAANDGNEF KVYGEDSNG IPKKGLLDA A VKMTALMILI TMNSAGGKA SDLGEETGI
PotE: KSSSDEGYEF KIFSRVTKVD APVQG-MLTI VIQSGLAIM TISPS----L NSQFNVLNL 355



CadB: AVLITMLPYF YSCVDLIRFE GV----NIRN FVSLICSVLG CVFCRIALMG ASSFEIAGTF
PotE: AVVTNIIPYI ISMAALVIIQ KVANVPPSKA KVANFVAEVG AMYSFYAL-- YSSGEEA--- 413



CadB: IVSLITLMFY ARKMHERQSH SMDNH TASNA H-
PotE: MLYGSLVTFL GWTLYGIVS- --PRFELKHK HG        444


Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the cadC gene, cadBA operon and speF-potE operon (A) and alignment of the amino acid sequence of CadB and PotE (B).

A. Chromosomal location and encoding proteins of the cadC gene, cadBA operon and speF-potE operon are shown.

B. Sequence similarities of CadB and PotE were analysed according to the method of Needleman and Wunsch (1970) using a DNASIS program (Hitachi Software Engineering). The identical amino acid residues are shown by black boxes with white lettering, and the similar residues by grey boxes. Transmembrane segments are labelled I to XII.

especially in the NH₂-terminal region (Fig. 1B), suggesting that CadB has structure and function similar to PotE and that it may be involved in both uptake and excretion of cadaverine.

The cadB gene was cloned into the vector pMW119 under the control of the lacUV promoter. pMW119 and pMWcadB were introduced into MA261cadC::Km, which is deficient in positive regulator CadC, and into JM109. Uptake and excretion of cadaverine by CadB were measured using intact cells of MA261cadC::Km/pMW119 or pMWcadB, and lysine-loaded inside-out membrane vesicles prepared from JM109/pMW119 or pMWcadB respectively. The results are shown in Fig. 2. Uptake of cadaverine by CadB was observed at neutral pH, and uptake was immediately inhibited by CCCP (carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone), a proton uncoupler, suggesting that uptake is dependent on the proton motive force (Fig. 2A). Putrescine and lysine inhibited cadaverine uptake by CadB about 20% at 25 times higher concentration (250 μM) of substrate (10 μM). Ornithine and agmatine inhibited cadaverine uptake to a lesser extent than did putrescine and lysine, and arginine had no effect on uptake (data not shown). The results suggest that CadB has a high specificity for cadaverine as the uptake substrate. Cadaverine uptake activity was low at acidic pH (data not shown). The Km value for cadaverine was calculated as 20.8 μM from Lineweaver-Burk plots. Excretion was measured by cadaverine uptake into lysine-loaded inside-out membrane vesicles. Inside-out membrane vesicles prepared from JM109/pMWcadB showed high activity compared with the vesicles from JM109/pMW119, and the activity was not inhibited by CCCP, indicating that cadaverine is excreted by CadB through cadaverine-lysine antiporter activity (Fig. 2B). When cadaverine uptake was measured using unloaded inside-out membrane vesicles of JM109/pMWcadB, the activity was less than 5% compared with lysine-loaded inside-out membrane vesicles. Cadaverine uptake activity with

© 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 51, 1401–1412

inside-out membrane vesicles prepared at pH 7.5 rather than at pH 6.6 was low (data not shown). The $K_{m}$ value for cadaverine was calculated as 303 μM from Lineweaver–Burk plots.

### Function and properties of CadB at neutral pH

CadB catalyses the uptake of cadaverine at neutral pH. Polyamines [putrescine (1,4-diaminobutane), spermidine and spermine] are necessary for normal cell growth (Tabor and Tabor, 1984; Cohen, 1998), and putrescine and spermidine are usually present in *E. coli*. We therefore examined whether cadaverine (1,5-diaminopentane), taken up by CadB, contributes to cell growth in a polyamine-deficient mutant MA261 similar to the effects of exogenous polyamines in this mutant. The *E. coli* polyamine-deficient mutant MA261 is deficient in the *speB* gene encoding agmatine ureohydrolase and the *speC* gene encoding ornithine decarboxylase (Cunningham-Rundles and Maas, 1975). Thus, MA261 cells cannot synthesize putrescine, although putrescine transported into cells can be converted to spermidine. When MA261 cells were cultured in the presence of cadaverine, cell growth was stimulated compared with cells cultured in the absence of cadaverine, but the effect of cadaverine on cell growth was smaller than that of putrescine (Table 1). The stimulatory effect of cadaverine on the growth of MA261cadC::Km cells, deficient in the *cadC* gene, a positive regulator of the *cadBA* operon, became smaller (Table 1). The difference in the stimulation effect of cell growth between putrescine and cadaverine became greater in MA261cadC::Km than in MA261. Cadaverine uptake activity of MA261cadC::Km cells was also low compared with MA261 cells (data not shown). Then, the polyamine content was measured under these conditions (Table 2). Cadaverine and aminopropylcadaverine accu-

**Table 1. Cell growth of *E. coli* MA261 and MA261cadC::Km at neutral pH.**

| Cells           | Addition                | Generation time (h) | Growth stimulation (-fold) |
|-----------------|-------------------------|---------------------|----------------------------|
| MA261           | None                    | 5.25 ± 0.59         | 1.0                        |
|                 | Putrescine (10 μg ml⁻¹) | 1.68 ± 0.09         | 3.1                        |
|                 | Putrescine (30 μg ml⁻¹) | 1.68 ± 0.07         | 3.1                        |
|                 | Cadaverine (10 μg ml⁻¹) | 3.11 ± 0.23         | 1.7                        |
|                 | Cadaverine (30 μg ml⁻¹) | 3.03 ± 0.15         | 1.7                        |
| MA261cadC::Km   | None                    | 4.92 ± 0.71         | 1.0                        |
|                 | Putrescine (10 μg ml⁻¹) | 1.88 ± 0.03         | 2.6                        |
|                 | Putrescine (30 μg ml⁻¹) | 1.71 ± 0.02         | 2.9                        |
|                 | Cadaverine (10 μg ml⁻¹) | 3.98 ± 0.33         | 1.2                        |
|                 | Cadaverine (30 μg ml⁻¹) | 3.90 ± 0.33         | 1.3                        |

Cells were grown in medium A in the absence and presence of cadaverine or putrescine. Cell growth was followed by measuring $A_{540}$. Values are mean ± SE of four determinations.

1404 W. Soksawatmaekhin et al.

Table 2. Polyamine content in *E. coli* MA261 and MA261cadC::Km cultured at neutral pH.

| Cells          | Addition                | Putrescine (nmol mg⁻¹ protein) | Cadaverine (nmol mg⁻¹ protein) | Spermidine (nmol mg⁻¹ protein) | Aminopropylcadaverine (nmol mg⁻¹ protein) |
|----------------|-------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|
| MA261          | None                    | 0.08 ± 0.02                     | 0.63 ± 0.09                     | 5.22 ± 0.57                       | 4.02 ± 0.46                                 |
|                | Putrescine (10 μg ml⁻¹) | 19.8 ± 2.34                     | 0.37 ± 0.05                     | 15.5 ± 1.83                       | ND                                           |
|                | Cadaverine (10 μg ml⁻¹) | ND                              | 8.55 ± 0.97                     | 3.58 ± 0.53                       | 16.4 ± 1.77                                  |
| MA261cadC::Km  | None                    | 0.13 ± 0.03                     | 0.03 ± 0.01                     | 6.45 ± 0.74                       | 4.61 ± 0.52                                  |
|                | Putrescine (10 μg ml⁻¹) | 24.9 ± 3.35                     | ND                              | 14.8 ± 1.64                       | ND                                           |
|                | Cadaverine (10 μg ml⁻¹) | ND                              | 1.03 ± 0.18                     | 4.78 ± 0.62                       | 8.43 ± 0.95                                  |

Cells were cultured for 11 h in the presence and absence of putrescine or cadaverine, and polyamine content was measured as described in Experimental procedures. Values are mean ± SE of triplicate determinations.  
ND, not detected.

Function and properties of CadB at acidic pH

The growth of MA261 and MA261cadC::Km cells was compared at pH 5.2 in the presence and absence of lysine or cadaverine (Fig. 4A) in a synthetic medium. When MA261 cells were cultured at an initial acidic pH (5.2) in the presence of 5 mM lysine, stimulation of cell growth and neutralization of the medium were observed compared with cells cultured in the absence of lysine. Under this condition, expression of CadB mRNA increased greatly (see Fig. 7). Cadaverine did not support growth of MA261 cells at pH 5.2. Growth of MA261cadC::Km cells was not affected by lysine or cadaverine, and neutralization of medium did not occur (Fig. 4A). Similar results were obtained with MA261cadB::Km (data not shown). When MA261 cells were cultured in the presence of lysine, the ATP content of the cells also increased (Fig. 4B). The contents of polyamines, cadaverine and aminopropylcadaverine in cells and medium were also measured (Table 3). When MA261 was cultured in the presence of lysine or cadaverine, an increase in cadaverine and aminopropylcadaverine was observed, although cadaverine content was much higher with cells cultured in the presence of lysine than in the presence of cadaverine. In addition, the cadaverine content in the medium increased greatly when MA261 cells were cultured with lysine. Almost all lysine added to the medium was converted to cadaverine. As a control, the cadaverine content in MA261cadC::Km cells and in medium was measured after culturing with lysine. The increase in cadaverine in these cells was small, and no cadaverine was excreted into the medium (Table 3). The results indicate that the cadBA operon was induced under acidic conditions in the presence of lysine, promoting decarboxylation of lysine to cadaverine by lysine decarboxylase encoded by cadA and excretion of cadaverine by the cadaverine–lysine antiport activity of CadB, effects that support cell growth. The results also suggest that cadaverine and aminopropylcadaverine may be transported with protons, although the stoichiometry of proton and cadaverine transport is not known.

The characteristics of the cadaverine-lysine antiport activity of CadB were studied (Fig. 5). Inside-out membrane vesicles of JM109/pMWcadB were loaded with \[^{14}C\]-lysine or unlabelled lysine, and the stoichiometry of

A Cell growth

![Graph]

B ATP content

![Bar Chart]

Fig. 3. Effect of ionophores (A) and artificially imposed ion gradients (B) on cadaverine uptake by right side-out membrane vesicles of JM109/pUCcadB.

A. The effect of various ionophores on cadaverine uptake was measured in the presence of the electron donor system consisting of potassium–ascorbate–phenazine methosulphate. Right side-out membrane vesicles were prepared from JM109/pUCcadB (●, ◆, ▲, ■) or from JM109/pUC119 (□). Cadaverine uptake activity was measured in the absence (●, □) and presence of 10 μM nigericin (◆), 8 μM valinomycin (▲) or 40 μM CCCP (■).

B. Cadaverine uptake by right side-out membrane vesicles prepared from JM109/pUCcadB was measured under artificial ion gradients as described in Experimental procedures. ●, Δp; ▲, ΔΨ; ◆, ΔpH; ■, none. Values are mean ± SE of triplicate determinations.

daverine are used instead of putrescine and spermidine as polyamines for cell growth, because putrescine and spermidine contents decreased greatly in cells cultured in the presence of lysine.

© 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, 51, 1401–1412

Fig. 4. Cell growth and ATP content in cells cultured in acidic conditions.

A. MA261 and MA261cadC::Km cells were cultured in medium A, pH 5.2, containing 62 mM KH₂PO₄ instead of 40 mM K₂HPO₄ plus 22 mM KH₂PO₄ in the presence and absence of lysine or cadaverine. Cell growth was followed by measuring A₅₄₀. After 11 h, pH of the medium was measured. MA261 (■, ◆, ●) and MA261cadC::Km (□, ◇, ○) were cultured in the absence (■, □) and presence of 5 mM lysine (◆, ◇) or cadaverine (●, ○). Each point represents the mean of duplicate measurements.

B. MA261 cells were cultured at acidic pH as described above in the absence and presence of 5 mM cadaverine or lysine for 11 h, and ATP content of cells was measured as described in Experimental procedures. CAD, cadaverine. Values are mean ± SE of triplicate determinations.

1406 W. Soksawatmaekhin et al.

Table 3. Polyamine content in E. coli cells and medium cultured at acidic pH.

| Strain          | Addition         | Putrescine       | Cadaverine        | Spermidine        | Aminopropylcadaverine |
|-----------------|------------------|-------------------|--------------------|--------------------|------------------------|
|                 |                  | (nmol mg⁻¹ protein) |                    |                    |                        |
| Cells           |                  |                   |                    |                    |                        |
| MA261           | None             | 1.82 ± 0.32       | 4.19 ± 0.55        | 16.1 ± 1.78        | ND                     |
|                 | Lysine (5 mM)    | ND                | 192 ± 20.5         | 0.29 ± 0.05        | 5.05 ± 0.64            |
|                 | Cadaverine (5 mM)| 0.11 ± 0.04       | 63.7 ± 7.54        | 3.60 ± 0.39        | 6.03 ± 0.74            |
| MA261cadC::Km   | None             | 1.83 ± 0.23       | 23.2 ± 2.56        | 10.9 ± 1.23        | ND                     |
|                 | Lysine (5 mM)    | 0.83 ± 0.09       | 44.1 ± 5.23        | 11.2 ± 1.33        | ND                     |
|                 | Cadaverine (5 mM)| ND                | 76.3 ± 8.21        | 6.10 ± 0.45        | 4.90 ± 0.43            |
| Medium          |                  | μM                |                    |                    |                        |
| MA261           | None             | ND                | 30.6 ± 4.5         | ND                 | ND                     |
|                 | Lysine (5 mM)    | ND                | 4660 ± 533         | ND                 | ND                     |
|                 | Cadaverine (5 mM)| ND                | 4750 ± 567         | ND                 | ND                     |
| MA261cadC::Km   | None             | ND                | ND                 | ND                 | ND                     |
|                 | Lysine (5 mM)    | ND                | ND                 | ND                 | ND                     |
|                 | Cadaverine (5 mM)| ND                | 4890 ± 440         | ND                 | ND                     |

Cells were cultured in medium A, pH 5.2, containing 62 mM KH₂PO₄ instead of 40 mM K₂HPO₄ plus 22 mM KH₂PO₄ for 11 h in the presence and absence of lysine or cadaverine, and polyamine content was measured as described in Experimental procedures. Values are mean ± SE of triplicate determinations.

ND, not detected.

exchange of lysine with cadaverine was measured by adding unlabelled cadaverine or [¹⁴C]-cadaverine respectively. The amount of lysine retained in the membrane vesicles decreased as cadaverine uptake increased. The exchange ratio of lysine with cadaverine was nearly 1:1 (Fig. 5A). To examine whether CadB has not only cadaverine-lysine antiporter activity but also cadaverine-cadaverine and lysine-lysine exchange activity, lysine-loaded and cadaverine-loaded inside-out membrane vesicles were prepared, and cadaverine or lysine uptake activity was measured. As shown in Fig. 5B, significant cadaverine or lysine uptake activity was observed in vesicles loaded with cadaverine or lysine, indicating that

CadB has cadaverine-lysine, cadaverine-cadaverine and lysine-lysine antiporter activities. [¹⁴C]-Cadaverine uptake by lysine-loaded inside-out membrane vesicles was inhibited strongly by 10-fold excess of cadaverine and lysine (1 mM) of substrate (100 μM), about 20% by putrescine and only slightly (about 5%) by ornithine, agmatine and arginine (data not shown). This suggests that the antiporter activity of CadB has a high substrate specificity for cadaverine and lysine.

We next tested whether electrogenic exchange of lysine with cadaverine takes place (Molenaar et al., 1993; Abe et al., 2002). To examine this possibility, right side-out membrane vesicles of JM109/pUCcadB were loaded

Fig. 5. Exchange of cadaverine (CAD) with lysine (Lys) (A), and cadaverine and lysine uptake (B) by inside-out membrane vesicles.
A. To measure the exchange ratio of lysine with cadaverine, inside-out membrane vesicles of JM109/pMWcadB prepared in the absence of amino acid were preloaded with 1 mM [¹⁴C]-lysine (○) or unlabeled lysine (●) for 1 h. Exchange activity was then measured by diluting the membrane vesicles by 1:10 and adding 100 μM cadaverine (○) or [¹⁴C]-cadaverine (●) respectively.
B. Inside-out membrane vesicles of JM109/pMWcadB were prepared in the absence (○) and presence of 2.5 mM lysine (●) or cadaverine (▲). [¹⁴C]-Cadaverine (left) or [¹⁴C]-lysine (right) uptake activity was measured as described in Experimental procedures. CAD, cadaverine.
Values are mean ± SE of triplicate determinations.

Properties of cadaverine transport by CadB 1407

was generated (■). Accordingly, the process of cadaverine excretion with lysine uptake catalysed by CadB will result in the generation of an interior negative membrane potential. When right side-out membrane vesicles were prepared without cadaverine, no significant lysine uptake was observed (□), indicating that this process is dependent on the presence of cadaverine as a countersubstrate.

### Expression of cadBA and speF–potE operons

It has been reported that expression of the cadBA operon is induced by lysine at acidic pH (Neely and Olson, 1996). Expression of the cadBA operon was compared at neutral and acidic pH using MA261 cells cultured in synthetic medium in the presence and absence of lysine or cadaverine (Fig. 7A). Expression of the cadBA operon was greatly stimulated only when cells were cultured at acidic pH in the presence of lysine. Expression of the cadBA operon was low at neutral pH even in the polyamine-requiring mutant MA261. Expression of the cadBA and speF–potE operons was then compared in *E. coli* B and *BcadC::Km* cultured at acidic pH in rich medium. In *E. coli* B, the degree of induction of CadB mRNA by lysine was 3.5-fold. Using *BcadC::Km* cells, in which *cadC*, a positive regulator of *cadBA* expression, is disrupted, there was no induction of CadB mRNA by lysine. Similarly, PotE mRNA could be induced 4.5-fold by ornithine. Although the precise comparison of the degree of expression of two operons is difficult by dot-blot analysis, the level of PotE mRNA in the presence of ornithine seems to be about 25% of the level of CadB mRNA in the presence of lysine. At acidic pH, the level of CadB mRNA may be equal to or greater than that of PotE mRNA regardless of the presence of lysine or ornithine, unless *cadC* was disrupted. When the *cadC* gene was disrupted, the level of PotE mRNA was increased fivefold. The results suggest that PotE and ornithine decarboxylase have functions that can compensate for the loss of CadB and lysine decarboxylase.

---

Fig. 6. Electrogenic exchange of lysine with cadaverine in right side-out membrane vesicles of JM109/pUCcadB. Right side-out membrane vesicles were loaded with 1 mM cadaverine (●, ○, △, ■) or without cadaverine (□) plus 100 mM phosphate as the NMG salt (●, ○, △, □) or the potassium salt (■) and diluted 10-fold by the reaction mixture containing 100 μM \[^{14}C\]-lysine along with 100 mM sulphate plus 100 mM phosphate as the potassium salt (●) or the NMG salt (○, △, ■, □) in the presence (●, △, ■, □) and absence (○) of 1 μM valinomycin. Values are mean ± SE of triplicate determinations.

with cadaverine together with either *N*-methylglucamine (NMG) salts or potassium salts. Addition of NMG salts or potassium salts together with valinomycin generates a membrane potential, the polarity of which was either interior positive (potassium outside, NMG inside) or interior negative (NMG outside, potassium inside). As shown in Fig. 6, when a membrane potential was not generated (○, △), significant cadaverine–lysine exchange activity was observed. When an interior positive membrane potential was generated (●), cadaverine–lysine exchange activity was greatly stimulated, whereas it was inhibited when an interior negative membrane potential

---

Fig. 7. Expression of CadB and PotE mRNAs.
A. Expression of CadB mRNA in MA261 cultured at acidic and neutral pH in the presence and absence of lysine or cadaverine. MA261 cells were cultured at pH 5.2 or pH 7.0 as described in the legend to Fig. 5, and dot-blot analysis of CadB mRNA was performed as described in Experimental procedures.
B. Comparison of expression of CadB and PotE mRNAs in *E. coli* B and *BcadC::Km* cultured at acidic pH in the presence and absence of ornithine or lysine. Culture of *E. coli* B and *BcadC::Km*, and dot-blot analysis of CadB and PotE mRNAs were performed as described in Experimental procedures. CAD, cadaverine.

© 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, 51, 1401–1412

1408 W. Soksawatmaekhin et al.

# Discussion

In this study, we have shown that CadB has not only cadaverine uptake activity but also cadaverine-lysine antiport activity. These data were obtained using *E. coli* MA261 intact cells, which are deficient in polyamine biosynthesis, and right side-out and inside-out membrane vesicles prepared from *E. coli* JM109 cells. This was because preparation of right side-out and inside-out membrane vesicles of MA261 strain was difficult and more active membrane vesicles could be made from *E. coli* JM109 cells. At neutral pH, CadB is involved in cadaverine uptake consuming a proton motive force as an energy source (Fig. 8). Cadaverine and aminopropylcadaverine can presumably substitute for the intracellular functions of putrescine and spermidine if these two polyamines are not available. However, expression of the *cadBA* operon was low at neutral pH. Consequently, the physiological effect of CadB at neutral pH is thought to be small, and the effect would appear only in the specific polyamine-deficient strain. At acidic pH, CadB functions as a cadaverine-lysine antiporter (Fig. 8). The process of cadaverine excretion and lysine uptake catalysed by CadB generates a membrane potential, and decarboxylation of lysine by lysine decarboxylase generates a pH gradient through consumption of a cytoplasmic proton. This proton motive metabolic cycle causes neutralization of acidic conditions and an increase in the level of ATP in cells (Figs 4 and 8). CO₂ produced by lysine decarboxylase may also contribute to the various metabolic pathways including nucleotide biosynthesis. Although the surrounding concentration of protons is much higher at acidic pH, CadB functions as a cadaverine-lysine antiporter, which benefits bacterial cell growth. Thus, the *cadBA* operon plays important roles in cell growth at acidic pH. In this respect, CadB may contribute more than PotE because the *cadBA* operon seems to be expressed more than the *speF-potE* operon. This seems rational because lysine in nature is more common than ornithine. However, in a *cadC*-disrupted mutant, expression of the *speF-potE* operon is enhanced. These results suggest that the *speF-potE* operon replaces the function of the *cadBA* operon at acidic pH or that *cadC* is a negative regulator of the *speF-potE* operon. As for the enhancement of expression of the *speF-potE* operon, we have reported previously that RNase III increases the translational efficiency of iODC-PotE mRNA by cutting the 5′ untranslated region of the mRNA (Kashiwagi et al., 1994). However, it remains to be clarified whether RNase III is activated at acidic pH or not.

With regard to uptake activity, PotE may be more efficient than CadB, because the *Km* value of PotE for putrescine is 1.8 μM (Kashiwagi et al., 1997), whereas that of CadB for cadaverine is 20.8 μM. Polyamines (putrescine, spermidine and spermine) are known to stimulate protein synthesis (Yoshida et al., 1999; 2001; 2002; Igarashi and Kashiwagi, 2000). The effective concentrations required for stimulation of protein synthesis are in the order putrescine > spermidine > spermine (Igarashi et al., 1974). Cadaverine and aminopropylcadaverine also stimulate protein synthesis, and their effective concentrations are similar to those of putrescine and spermidine respectively (Kakegawa et al., 1988). Thus, the slower growth of cells with cadaverine than with putrescine in the polyamine-requiring mutant MA261 (Table 1) was probably the result of less accumulation of cadaverine than putrescine in the cells (Table 2). At acidic pH, cadaverine and aminopropylcadaverine accumulate in cells through the function of CadB and lysine decarboxylase, but the synthesis of putrescine and spermidine was inhibited to maintain an optimal concentration of ‘polyamines’ including cadaverine and aminopropylcadaverine.

Polyamine content in cells was regulated by polyamine biosynthesis, degradation and transport. Although polyamine biosynthesis and degradation are well characterized, properties of polyamine transport are not. In *E. coli*, we reported that there are two ATP-dependent polyamine uptake systems in addition to PotE and CadB (Igarashi and Kashiwagi, 1999), but only a PotE (or CadB)-like protein exists as a polyamine transport system in *Rickettsia prowazekii* (Andersson et al., 1998). Similarly, only PotE (or CadB)-like proteins have been found thus far as polyamine transport systems in Sac...

---

**Neutral conditions**

| Cadaverine | H⁺ |
|------------|----|
| Out        |    |
|            | CadB |
| Plasma     |    |
| membrane   |    |
| In         |    |

---

**Acidic conditions**

| Lys (in excess) | Cadaverine |
|------------------|------------|
| Out             |            |
|                 | CadB       |
| In              |            |
|                 | +NH₃       |
|                 | CCOO⁻      |
|                 | (CH₂)₄     |
|                 | +NH₃       |
| Lys             |            |
|                 | H⁺         |
|                 | CadA       |
|                 | +NH₃       |
|                 | (CH₂)₅     |
|                 | +NH₃       |
|                 | CO₂        |
|                 | Cadaverine |

---

**Fig. 8. Physiological functions of CadB in *E. coli*.** CadA, lysine decarboxylase; CadB, cadaverine transporter. In neutral conditions, CadB functions as a cadaverine and proton symporter, and cell growth was stimulated by cadaverine. In acidic conditions, CadB functions as an electrogenic cadaverine-lysine antiporter, and pH in the medium is increased by cadaverine. CadA (lysine decarboxylase) generates a pH gradient by consumption of a cytoplasmic proton. This process causes the increase in the level of ATP in cells.

© 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **51**, 1401–1412

charomyces cerevisiae (Tomitori et al., 1999; 2001). Thus, the secondary polyamine uptake systems such as PotE or CadB may be the major polyamine uptake systems in certain cell types.

### Experimental procedures

#### Bacterial strains and plasmids

A polyamine-requiring mutant, *E. coli* MA261 (*speB speC thr leu ser thi*; Cunningham-Rundles and Maas, 1975), was provided by Dr W. K. Maas, New York University School of Medicine. For disruption of the *cadC* gene, a 3.7 kb *SalI* fragment containing the *cadC* gene of Kohara's #648 (5G7) λ DNA (Kohara et al., 1987) was inserted into the same restriction site of pUC9 (Gibco BRL) to construct pUC*cadC*. A 1.3 kb *HincII* fragment conferring kanamycin (*Km*) resistance of pUC4K (Amersham Biosciences) was inserted into the *SnaBI* site of pUC*cadC* to construct pUC*cadC::Km*. pUC*cadC::Km* was then digested with *SalI*, and the 5 kb fragment containing *cadC::Km* was introduced into W3110*recD::Tn10* to obtain W3110*recD::Tn10 cadC::Km*. *E. coli* MA261*cadC::Km* and *E. coli* B*cadC::Km* were constructed by means of P₁ transduction, in which W3110*recD::Tn10 cadC::Km* was used as a donor and MA261 and B (laboratory stock) were used as recipient strains. MA261*cadB::Km* was also constructed by means of P₁ transduction from a *cadB* gene-disrupted mutant JW4093, which was kindly provided by Drs T. Baba and H. Mori, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, and Research and Education Center for Genetic Information, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Japan.

For the construction of pMW*cadB*, a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed using 5′-CAGTGGA*TCCCTG GTCAGGAAATAGTTA-3′ and 5′-CCTAGGAATTCAATATTG CAATAACGTTC-3′ as primers and Kohara’s #648 (5G7) λ DNA as a template. After digesting the PCR product with *BamHI* and *EcoRI*, a 1.5 kb fragment containing the *cadB* gene was inserted into the same restriction sites of pMW119 (Nippon Gene). pUC*cadB* was constructed by inserting the 1.5 kb *BamHI* and *EcoRI* fragments of pMW*cadB* into the same restriction sites of pUC119 (Takara Shuzo).

#### Culture conditions

*Escherichia coli* MA261, MA261*cadC::Km*/pMW*cadB* were cultured in medium A, containing 4 g of glucose, 7 g of K₂HPO₄, 3 g of KH₂PO₄, 500 mg of trisodium citrate/2H₂O, 1 g of (NH₄)₂SO₄, 100 mg of MgSO₄/7H₂O, 2 mg of thiamine, 10 mg of biotin and 100 mg each of leucine, threonine, methionine, serine, glycine and ornithine per litre of water, in the presence and absence of putrescine or cadaverine as described previously except that pH in the medium was adjusted by changing the ratio of K₂HPO₄ and KH₂PO₄ at the total phosphate concentration of 62 mM (Kashiwagi et al., 1990). *E. coli* JM109 [recA1 supE44 endA1 gyrA96 relA1 thi Δ(lac-proAB)/F′ ΔtraD36 proAB⁺ lacIq lacZΔM15] (Sambrook et al., 2001a) containing pMW*cadB* or pUC*cadB* was cultured in a 19-amino-acid-supplemented medium containing 1% glycerol (Kashiwagi and Igarashi, 1988). For isolation of RNA, *E. coli* B and B*cadC::Km* were

© 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **51**, 1401–1412

---

Properties of cadaverine transport by CadB 1409

cultured without shaking in a medium containing 1% tryptone, 0.5% yeast extract, 0.5% NaCl and 50 mM MES-NaOH, pH 5.5, in the presence and absence of 20 mM ornithine or 20 mM lysine. Ampicillin (100 μg ml⁻¹), kanamycin (50 μg ml⁻¹) and/or tetracycline (15 μg ml⁻¹) were added to the medium, if necessary.

#### Cadaverine uptake by intact cells and by right side-out membrane vesicles

*Escherichia coli* MA261*cadC::Km*/pMW119 or pMW*cadB* cells grown in medium A containing 0.5 mM IPTG were suspended in buffer I containing 0.4% glucose, 62 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.0, 1.7 mM sodium citrate, 7.6 mM (NH₄)₂SO₄ and 0.41 mM MgSO₄ to yield a protein concentration of 0.1 mg ml⁻¹. The cell suspension (0.48 ml) was preincubated at 30°C for 5 min, and the reaction was started by the addition of 0.02 ml of 0.25 mM [¹⁴C]-cadaverine (370 MBq mmol⁻¹; Sigma). Thus, the concentration of [¹⁴C]-cadaverine in the reaction mixture was 10 μM. After incubation at 30°C for 30 s to 3 min, the cells were collected on cellulose acetate filters (0.45 μm; Advantec Toyo), and the filters were washed three times with a total of 12 ml of buffer I. The radioactivity on the filters was measured with a liquid scintillation spectrometer. Protein content was determined by the method of Lowry et al. (1951).

To determine the energy source for cadaverine uptake, cadaverine uptake activity by right side-out membrane vesicles was measured according to the method of Tolner et al. (1995). *E. coli* JM109/pUC*cadB* cells were cultured until A₅₄₀ = 0.5 in the presence of 0.5 mM IPTG. Right side-out membrane vesicles were prepared by the method of Kaback (1971) and suspended in 0.1 M potassium phosphate, pH 6.6, at a protein concentration of 5–10 mg ml⁻¹. The reaction mixture (0.1 ml) for the uptake by right side-out membrane vesicles contained 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 50 mM potassium phosphate, pH 6.6, 10 mM MgSO₄, 50 mM KCl, 20 mM ascorbic acid, 10 mM phenazine methosulphate (PMS) and 100 μg of right side-out membrane vesicle protein. Nigericin (10 μM), valinomycin (8 μM) or CCCP (40 μM) was added to abolish the transmembrane proton gradient (∆pH), transmembrane electrical potential (∆Ψ) or the proton motive force (∆p) respectively (Tolner et al., 1995). The membrane suspension (0.095 ml) was preincubated at 30°C for 5 min, and the reaction was started by the addition of 5 μl of 1 mM [¹⁴C]-cadaverine (1.48 GBq mmol⁻¹). Thus, the concentration of [¹⁴C]-cadaverine in the reaction mixture was 50 μM. After incubation at 30°C for 30 s to 3 min, membrane vesicles were collected on cellulose nitrate filters (0.45 μm; Advantec Toyo) and washed with 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, and 0.5 M LiCl.

Cadaverine uptake by artificial ion gradients was also measured (Tolner et al., 1995). Right side-out membrane vesicles prepared as described above were resuspended in buffer II [20 mM MES (morpholinoethanesulphonic acid), 100 mM acetic acid, 100 mM potassium hydroxide, 5 mM MgSO₄, pH adjusted to 6.0 by H₂SO₄] to make a protein concentration of ≈40 mg ml⁻¹. The reaction mixture (0.1 ml) (buffer II to V) containing 50 μM [¹⁴C]-cadaverine (1.48 GBq mmol⁻¹) and 100 μg of right side-out membrane vesicle protein was incubated at 30°C for 10 s to 2 min. Buffers used to generate ∆p,

1410 W. Soksawatmaekhin et al.

ΔΨ and ΔpH were buffer III (120 mM MES, 100 mM methylglucamine, 1 μM valinomycin and 5 mM MgSO₄, pH 6.0), buffer IV (20 mM MES, 100 mM acetic acid, 100 mM methylglucamine, 1 μM valinomycin and 5 mM MgSO₄, pH 6.0) and buffer V (120 mM MES, 100 mM KOH, 1 μM valinomycin and 5 mM MgSO₄, pH 6.0) respectively. Membrane vesicles were then collected on cellulose nitrate filters and washed with 0.1 M KCl.

### Preparation of inside-out membrane vesicles and cadaverine or lysine uptake by the vesicles

Cadaverine–lysine, cadaverine–cadaverine and lysine–lysine antiport activities by CadB were estimated by measuring cadaverine or lysine uptake by inside-out membrane vesicles prepared according to the method of Houng *et al.* (1986). *E. coli* JM109/pMWcadB cells were cultured until A₅₄₀ = 0.5 in the presence of 0.5 mM IPTG. Inside-out membrane vesicles were prepared by French press treatment (10 000 p.s.i.) of the cells suspended in a buffer containing 100 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 6.6, 10 mM EDTA in the presence and absence of 2.5 mM lysine or cadaverine (Kashiwagi *et al.*, 1992). After removal of unbroken cells and cell debris, membrane vesicles were collected by ultracentrifugation (170 000 g, 1 h). Membrane vesicles were washed with a buffer containing 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 0.14 M KCl, 2 mM 2-mercaptoethanol and 10% glycerol, collected by ultracentrifugation and suspended in the same buffer at the protein concentration of 5–10 mg ml⁻¹. The reaction mixture (0.1 ml) for the uptake by inside-out membrane vesicles contained 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.14 M KCl, 100 μM [¹⁴C]-cadaverine or [¹⁴C]-lysine (1.48 GBq mmol⁻¹) and 100 μg of inside-out membrane vesicle protein. After incubation at 22°C for 10 s to 1 min, membrane vesicles were collected on cellulose nitrate filters and washed twice with a total of 9 ml of washing buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and 0.14 M KCl). The radioactivity on the filters was measured with a liquid scintillation spectrometer.

NMG inside) or interior negative (NMG outside, potassium inside). After incubation at 17°C for 10 s to 2 min, membrane vesicles were collected on cellulose nitrate filters and washed with the same buffer as the reaction buffer without [¹⁴C]-lysine. The radioactivity on the filters was measured with a liquid scintillation spectrometer.

#### Dot-blot analysis of mRNA

Total RNA was isolated by the method of Emory and Belasco (1990). Dot-blot analysis of CadB and PotE mRNAs was performed according to the method of Sambrook *et al.* (2001b). The 1.5 kb BamHI and EcoRI fragment of pMWcadB or the 1.6 kb *SphI*-BamHI fragment of pUCpotE (Kashiwagi *et al.*, 1997) was labelled with [α-³²P]-dCTP using a BcaBEST™ labelling kit (Takara Shuzo) and used as a probe. The radioactivity on the blot was quantified by BAS2000II imaging analyser (Fuji Film).

#### Measurement of polyamines

Polyamine levels in *E. coli* were determined by high-pressure liquid chromatography as described previously (Igarashi *et al.*, 1986) after homogenization and extraction of the polyamines with 5% trichloroacetic acid and centrifugation at 27 000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The retention times for putrescine, cadaverine, spermidine, aminopropylcadaverine and spermine were 6.7, 9.3, 13, 18 and 25 min respectively.

#### Measurement of ATP

ATP levels in *E. coli* were determined using the luciferase enzyme assay system according to the method of Kimmich *et al.* (1975). The luminescence was determined by TD-20/20 luminometer (Turner Designs).

### Acknowledgements

We thank Drs K. Williams and A. J. Michaels for their help in preparing the manuscript. Thanks are also due to Drs W. K. Maas, New York University School of Medicine, Y. Kohara, National Institute of Genetics, Japan, Drs T. Baba and H. Mori, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, and Research and Education Center for Genetic Information, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Japan, for their generous contributions of *E. coli* MA261, Kohara’s #648 (5G7) λ phage and *cadB* gene-disrupted mutant, JW4093. This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture, Japan, and by Terumo Life Science Foundation, Japan.

### References

Abe, K., Ohnishi, F., Yagi, K., Nakajima, T., Higuchi, T., Sano, M., *et al.* (2002) Plasmid-encoded *asp* operon confers a proton motive metabolic cycle catalyzed by an aspartate-alanine exchange reaction. *J Bacteriol* **184**: 2906–2913.

Anantharam, V., Allison, M.J., and Maloney, P.C. (1989) Oxalate: formate exchange. The basis for energy coupling in Oxalobacter. J Biol Chem 264: 7244–7250.

Andersson, S.G., Zomorodipour, A., Andersson, J.O., Sicheritz-Ponten, T., Alsmark, U.C., Podowski, R.M., *et al.* (1998) The genome sequence of *Rickettsia prowazekii* and the origin of mitochondria. Nature 396: 133–140.

Cohen, S. (1998) A Guide to the Polyamines. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 1–543.

Cunningham-Rundles, S., and Maas, K. (1975) Isolation, characterization, and mapping of *Escherichia coli* mutants blocked in the synthesis of ornithine decarboxylase. J Bacteriol 124: 791–799.

Emory, S.A., and Belasco, J.G. (1990) The ompA 5′ untranslated RNA segment functions in *Escherichia coli* as a growth-rate-regulated mRNA stabilizer whose activity is unrelated to translational efficiency. J Bacteriol 172: 4472–4481.

Harold, F.M., and Maloney, P.C. (1996) Energy transduction by ion currents. In *Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhimurium: Cellular and Molecular Biology*. Neidhardt, F., *et al.* (eds). Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology Press, Chap. 19, pp. 283–306.

Houng, H.S., Lynn, A.R., and Rosen, B.P. (1986) ATP-driven calcium transport in membrane vesicles of *Streptococcus sanguis*. J Bacteriol 168: 1040–1044.

Igarashi, K., and Kashiwagi, K. (1999) Polyamine transport in bacteria and yeast. Biochem J 344: 633–642.

Igarashi, K., and Kashiwagi, K. (2000) Polyamines: mysterious modulators of cellular functions. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 271: 559–564.

Igarashi, K., Sugawara, K., Izumi, I., Nagayama, C., and Hirose, S. (1974) Effect of polyamines of polyphenylalanine synthesis by *Escherichia coli* and rat-liver ribosomes. Eur J Biochem 48: 495–502.

Igarashi, K., Kashiwagi, K., Hamasaki, H., Miura, A., Kakegawa, T., Hirose, S., and Matsuzaki, S. (1986) Formation of a compensatory polyamine by *Escherichia coli* polyamine-requiring mutants during growth in the absence of polyamines. J Bacteriol 166: 128–134.

Kaback, H.R. (1971) Bacterial membranes. Methods Enzymol 22: 99–120.

Kakegawa, T., Takayama, K., Ogawa, T., Hayashi, Y., Hirose, S., Niitsu, M., *et al.* (1988) Effect of various polyamine analogs on in vitro polypeptide synthesis. Arch Biochem Biophys 261: 250–256.

Kashiwagi, K., and Igarashi, K. (1988) Adjustment of polyamine contents in *Escherichia coli*. J Bacteriol 170: 3131–3135.

Kashiwagi, K., Yamaguchi, Y., Sakai, Y., Kobayashi, H., and Igarashi, K. (1990) Identification of the polyamine-induced protein as a periplasmic oligopeptide binding protein. J Biol Chem 265: 8387–8391.

Kashiwagi, K., Suzuki, T., Suzuki, F., Furuchi, T., Kobayashi, H., and Igarashi, K. (1991) Coexistence of the genes for putrescine transport protein and ornithine decarboxylase at 16 min on *Escherichia coli* chromosome. J Biol Chem 266: 20922–20927.

Kashiwagi, K., Miyamoto, S., Suzuki, F., Kobayashi, H., and Igarashi, K. (1992) Excretion of putrescine by the putrescine-ornithine antiporter encoded by the *potE* gene

Properties of cadaverine transport by CadB 1411

of *Escherichia coli*. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89: 4529–4533.

Kashiwagi, K., Watanabe, R., and Igarashi, K. (1994) Involvement of ribonuclease III in the enhancement of expression of the *speF-potE* operon encoding inducible ornithine decarboxylase and polyamine transport protein. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 200: 591–597.

Kashiwagi, K., Shibuya, S., Tomitori, H., Kuraishi, A., and Igarashi, K. (1997) Excretion and uptake of putrescine by the PotE protein in *Escherichia coli*. J Biol Chem 272: 6318–6323.

Kashiwagi, K., Kuraishi, A., Tomitori, H., Igarashi, A., Nishimura, K., Shirahata, A., and Igarashi, K. (2000) Identification of the putrescine recognition site on polyamine transport protein PotE. J Biol Chem 275: 36007–36012.

Kimmich, G.A., Randles, J., and Brand, J.S. (1975) Assay of picomole amounts of ATP, ADP, and AMP using the luciferase enzyme system. Anal Biochem 69: 187–206.

Kohara, Y., Akiyama, K., and Isono, K. (1987) The physical map of the whole *E. coli* chromosome: application of a new strategy for rapid analysis and sorting of a large genomic library. Cell 50: 495–508.

Lolkema, J.S., Poolman, B., and Konings, W.N. (1998) Bacterial solute uptake and efflux systems. Curr Opin Microbiol 1: 248–253.

Lowry, O.H., Rosebrough, N.J., Farr, A.L., and Randall, R.J. (1951) Protein measurement with the Folin phenol reagent. J Biol Chem 193: 265–275.

Meng, S.Y., and Bennett, G.N. (1992) Nucleotide sequence of the *Escherichia coli cad* operon: a system for neutralization of low extracellular pH. J Bacteriol 174: 2659–2669.

Molenaar, D., Bosscher, J.S., ten Brink, B., Driessen, A.J.M., and Konings, W.N. (1993) Generation of a proton motive force by histidine decarboxylation and electrogenic histidine/histamine antiport in *Lactobacillus buchneri*. J Bacteriol 175: 2864–2870.

Needleman, S.B., and Wunsch, C.D. (1970) A general method applicable to the search for similarities in the amino acid sequence of two proteins. J Mol Biol 48: 443–453.

Neely, M.N., and Olson, E.R. (1996) Kinetics of expression of the *Escherichia coli cad* operon as a function of pH and lysine. J Bacteriol 178: 5522–5528.

Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E.F., and Maniatis, T. (2001a) Appendix 3: vectors and bacterial strains. In *Molecular Cloning: a Laboratory Manual*, 3rd edn. Sambrook, J., and Russell, D.W. (eds). Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, pp. A3.6–A3.10.

Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E.F., and Maniatis, T. (2001b) Dot and slot hybridization of purified RNA. In *Molecular Cloning: a Laboratory Manual*, 3rd edn. Sambrook, J., and Russell, D.W. (eds). Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, pp. 7.46–7.50.

Tabor, C.W., and Tabor, H. (1984) Polyamines. Annu Rev Biochem 53: 749–790.

Takayama, M., Ohyama, T., Igarashi, K., and Kobayashi, H. (1994) *Escherichia coli cad* operon functions as a supplier of carbon dioxide. Mol Microbiol 11: 913–918.

Tolner, B., Ubbink-Kok, T., Poolman, B., and Konings, W.N. (1995) Characterization of the proton/glutamate symport

1412 W. Soksawatmaekhin et al.

protein of *Bacillus subtilis* and its functional expression in  
*Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* **177**: 2863–2869.  

Tomitori, H., Kashiwagi, K., Sakata, K., Kakinuma, Y., and Igarashi, K. (1999) Identification of a gene for a polyamine transport protein in yeast. *J Biol Chem* **274**: 3265–3267.  

Tomitori, H., Kashiwagi, K., Asakawa, T., Kakinuma, Y., Michael, A.J., and Igarashi, K. (2001) Multiple polyamine transport systems on the vacuolar membrane in yeast. *Biochem J* **353**: 681–688.  

Watson, N., Dunnyak, D.S., Rosey, E.L., Slonczewski, J.L., and Olson, E.R. (1992) Identification of elements involved in transcriptional regulation of the *Escherichia coli cad* operon by external pH. *J Bacteriol* **174**: 530–540.  

Yoshida, M., Meksuriyen, D., Kashiwagi, K., Kawai, G., and  

Igarashi, K. (1999) Polyamine stimulation of the synthesis of oligopeptide-binding protein (OppA). Involvement of a structural change of the Shine-Dalgarno sequence and the initiation codon AUG in OppA mRNA. *J Biol Chem* **274**: 22723–22728.  

Yoshida, M., Kashiwagi, K., Kawai, G., Ishihama, A., and Igarashi, K. (2001) Polyamine enhancement of the synthesis of adenylate cyclase at the translational level and the consequential stimulation of the synthesis of the RNA polymerase σ²⁸ subunit. *J Biol Chem* **276**: 16289–16295.  

Yoshida, M., Kashiwagi, K., Kawai, G., Ishihama, A., and Igarashi, K. (2002) Polyamines enhance synthesis of the RNA polymerase σ³⁸ subunit by suppression of an amber termination codon in the open reading frame. *J Biol Chem* **277**: 37139–37146.
