
# Parasite–host cell interactions in toxoplasmosis: new avenues for intervention?

**Isabelle Coppens and Keith A. Joiner**

*Toxoplasma gondii* is a protozoan parasite that is uniquely adapted for penetrating and surviving within a wide range of host cells. This parasite invades mammalian cells by an active actin-dependent mechanism, and after entry establishes a vacuole with the assistance of products secreted by the parasite’s apical organelles. Simultaneously, *Toxoplasma* sets about gaining access to cellular nutrients by forming pores in the vacuolar membrane. In this manner it enjoys a rich and comfortable lifestyle at the host cell’s expense. Understanding the *Toxoplasma*-host interaction may reveal unusual mechanisms for exploiting host cell pathways and diverting host organelle functions. These novel modifications could also be potential targets for new drugs.

*Toxoplasma gondii* is one of the most widespread parasites of wild and domestic animals. The parasite infects up to 50% of the world’s human population (Refs 1, 2). *T. gondii* belongs to the phylum Apicomplexa, a large group of mostly intracellular parasites. The group includes some deadly pathogens, the most virulent being *Plasmodium* spp., which are agents of malaria. Humans contract toxoplasmosis by ingesting undercooked meat that harbours parasite cysts containing the slow-growing bradyzoite form of the parasite, or by contact with cats that carry intestinal oocysts containing sporozoites

generated as a consequence of sexual reproduction (Ref. 1). Upon entering a new host, differentiation to the rapidly growing tachyzoite form of the parasite occurs (life cycle detailed in Refs 1, 3, 4; see also Fig. 1, fig002jac).

Morphology of intracellular development The Apicomplexa are characterised by an unusual organelle, a plastid (Fig. 2) acquired by secondary endosymbiosis of an alga, which is indispensable for parasite replication (Refs 5, 6). These protozoa also have a common set of apical structures (Fig. 2) involved in parasite

---

**Isabelle Coppens**  
Associate Research Scientist, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, 810 LCI, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8022, USA. Tel: +1 203 785 7573; Fax: +1 203 785 3864; E-mail: isabelle.coppens@yale.edu  

**Keith A. Joiner (corresponding author)**  
Professor, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, 808 LCI, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8022, USA. Tel: +1 203 785 4140; Fax: +1 203 785 3864; E-mail: keith.joiner@yale.edu

---

Accession information: (01)00227-7a.pdf (short code: txt001kjy); 15 January 2001  
ISSN 1462-3994 © 2001 Cambridge University Press

Host (e.g. domestic cat) in which sexual cycle occurs

a Ingestion of tissue cysts

b Invasion of enterocytes: rounds of division

c Formation of microgametocytes and macrogametocytes

d Oocyst formation and defecation

e Sporozoite formation

f Ingestion by secondary host (e.g. mouse)

g Sporozoite differentiation to rapidly dividing tachyzoites

Acute infection

k Carnivorism

i Conversion to slowly dividing bradyzoites in tissue cysts

Chronic infection

j Carnivorism and nonsexual propagation

h Congenital transmission to fetuses

Naive host (e.g. rat)

The Toxoplasma gondii life cycle

Expert Reviews in Molecular Medicine ©2001 Cambridge University Press

Figure 1. The Toxoplasma gondii life cycle. T. gondii is an obligate intracellular parasite and its life cycle includes both sexual and asexual modes of proliferation and transmission. The sexual cycle takes place exclusively in the intestinal enterocytes of many members of the cat family (Felidae). (a, b) After ingestion of tissue cysts, the parasites invade the enterocytes, undergo several rounds of division and (c) differentiate into microgametocytes and macrogametocytes. (d) The gametocytes fuse to form a zygote or ‘oocyst’ that is shed into the environment with the cat’s faeces. (e) The oocyst undergoes meiosis, producing an octet of highly infectious ‘sporozoites’ that are resistant to environmental damage and may persist for years in a moist environment. (f) After ingestion (by a secondary host such as a mouse), (g) sporozoites differentiate into the rapidly dividing ‘tachyzoite’ form, which establishes and sustains the acute infection. (h) During the acute infection, congenital transmission to the developing fetus can occur. (i) In many hosts, a chronic phase of the disease ensues, as the tachyzoite changes into a slowly dividing form known as the ‘bradyzoite’. Latent bradyzoite tissue cysts persist for the life of the host, re-emerging occasionally, but do not produce overt disease in healthy individuals. (j) Carnivorous ingestion of tissue cysts can lead to the infection of a naive host, allowing for an indefinite nonsexual propagation of T. gondii. (k) In the cat, this will initiate the sexual cycle. The solid lines indicate parasite differentiation and the dashed lines indicate modes of transmission. Adapted from Ref. 1 (fig002jac). First published in Ajioka, J.W., Fitzpatrick, J.M. and Reitter, C.P. (2001) Toxoplasma gondii genomics: shedding light on pathogenesis and chemotherapy. Exp. Rev. Mol. Med. 6 January, http://www-ermm.cbcu.cam.ac.uk/01002204h.htm

Accession information: (01)00227-7a.pdf (short code: txt001kjy); 15 January 2001 ISSN 1462-3994 ©2001 Cambridge University Press

expert reviews
in molecular medicine

http://www-ermm.cbuc.am.ac.uk

Host cell
hMT
PV
Mi
A
R
N
DG
TVM
hER
hN
0.5 μm

Electron micrograph of the tachyzoite form of *Toxoplasma gondii* within a parasitophorous vacuole formed during invasion of a green monkey kidney VERO cell

Expert Reviews in Molecular Medicine © 2001 Cambridge University Press

Figure 2. Electron micrograph of the tachyzoite form of *Toxoplasma gondii* within a parasitophorous vacuole formed during invasion of a green monkey kidney VERO cell. In the host (h) cytoplasm, three parasites are visualised in a parasitophorous vacuole (PV) that is surrounded by host mitochondria (hMT) and endoplasmic reticulum (hER). Located at the apical end of the parasites are the rhoptries (elongated secretory organelles, designated by R) and the micronemes (ovoid organelles, designated by Mi). The apical conoid is also visible (designated by C), as well as two apicoplasts (designated by A) close to the nucleus (N). The spherical secretory dense granules (DG) are dispersed throughout the cytoplasm. An elaborate network of membranous tubules, including the tubulovesicular membranes (TVM), is found in the vacuole space (fig001kjy).

Accession information: (01)00227-7a.pdf (short code: txt001kjy); 15 January 2001
ISSN 1462-3994 © 2001 Cambridge University Press

penetration and intracellular survival, as detailed below. T. gondii can actively invade both phagocytic and nonphagocytic cells and requires an intracellular replicative niche, which is a specialised membrane-bound vacuole termed the parasitophorous vacuole (PV). This is isolated from the host cell vesicular transport system (Refs 7, 8, 9, 10). Pores, whose function is discussed below, are inserted into the PV membrane (PVM; Ref. 11).

The parasite also elaborates or induces an extensive array of membranous tubules within the vacuolar space, which form a network connecting with the vacuolar membrane (Fig. 2; Ref. 12). The membrane of the vacuole is tightly enshrouded by host mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum (ER; Fig. 2; Refs 7, 13, 14, 15). All of these features are believed but not proven to serve the metabolic requirements for intravacuolar tachyzoite forms of T. gondii

**Opportunistic pathogenicity**

Toxoplasma infections in humans typically produce only mild clinical symptoms and progress to a chronic state without major complications (Ref. 2). The latent stage of the parasite persists for the life of the host, and remains clinically unapparent. In pregnant women, acute, primary infections with T. gondii can induce congenital infections in the unborn fetus, leading to either spontaneous abortion or mild to devastating congenital defects. T. gondii also causes spontaneous abortion in domestic animals (Refs 1, 16).

Toxoplasma is also a major opportunistic pathogen in patients with advanced human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection [i.e. patients who have acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)], and remains the leading cause of focal central nervous system (CNS) infections. Computed tomography scans show multiple bilateral cerebral lesions in 70–80% of HIV patients with toxoplasmic encephalitis, which tend to occur at the corticomedullary junction and are characteristically hypodense with ring-enhancement after intravenous contrast (reviewed in Ref. 17). The reported lifetime risk for the development of CNS toxoplasmosis in an AIDS patient with positive serology for Toxoplasma is 6–12%, with a mortality rate of >50% (Ref. 18).

**Aim of the review**

Given the high prevalence of chronic infections, and the recent explosive rise in the number of individuals who are immunocompromised as a consequence of HIV infections, there is an increased need to understand the adaptations that enable Toxoplasma to invade and survive within host cells. This review focuses on several interactions of this intracellular parasite with its host mammalian cell that lie at the interface between parasite metabolism and host response. The adaptive strategies developed by the parasite may range from passive avoidance mechanisms to extremely active modulation of host cell functions. Three broad areas will be discussed: (1) parasite invasion and establishment of the replication-competent vacuole in the host cell; (2) intravacuolar parasite development and modifications of host cell components; and (3) parasite auxotrophies and scavenging of host nutrients. Potential opportunities for controlling parasite invasion or multiplication are highlighted in the discussion of each of these areas.

**Interactions between Toxoplasma and its mammalian host cell**

T. gondii is a highly cosmopolitan protozoan parasite capable of invading and replicating within nucleated cells of essentially all warm-blooded animals (Refs 3, 19). The tachyzoites replicate intracellularly with a generation time of 6–9 h in vitro until exiting the cell to infect neighbouring cells, usually after accumulating 64–128 parasites per cell (Ref. 20). However, the degree of attraction of this parasite to vertebrate cells varies with cell age and phase: older cells are more refractory to penetration than young cells (Ref. 21), and infection is greatest at the mid-S-phase (Ref. 22).

**Attachment and internalisation**

**Outline of the invasion process**

The broad host range of this parasite suggests the presence of either a common host cell receptor across different cell types or multiple receptors (reviewed in Ref. 23). Although no receptor has yet been identified on the host plasma membrane, T. gondii has been shown to bind to the extracellular matrix protein laminin, which mediates attachment to β₁ integrin receptors on fibroblasts (Refs 24, 25). A recent study reveals that sulphated proteoglycans, which have a widespread cell distribution, are one determinant used for substrate and cell recognition by the parasite (Ref. 26). The tachyzoite surface comprises five major surface antigens that belong to either

**Accession information:** (01)00227-7a.pdf (short code: txt001kjy); 15 January 2001  
ISSN 1462-3994 © 2001 Cambridge University Press

the SAG (for surface antigen) or SAG-related sequence (SRS) families and are implicated as possible mediators of parasite attachment (Refs 27, 28, 29, 30).

Parasites exhibit saltatory gliding movement powered by adenosine triphosphate (ATP; Ref. 31) and elements of the cytoskeleton (Refs 32, 33, 34, 35), allowing their reorientation with the apical end attached to the host cell surface (Refs 36, 37, 38).

Active invasion is a parasite-driven process, dependent upon the actin–myosin motor in the parasite cytoskeleton (Refs 38, 39). Underlying the parasite plasma membrane is a tightly associated system of flattened cisternae and microtubules, named the inner membrane complex (Ref. 40). This continuous cortical skeleton is interrupted at the apical ring of microtubules, which connects to a fibrillar protrusive cone-like structure, the conoid (Fig. 2; Ref. 41). Parasite actin is encoded by a single gene and is found beneath the parasite cell membrane as well as in clusters in the tachyzoite cytosol (Refs 42, 43). Four types of myosin have been cloned (Refs 44, 45) and their subcellular localisation partially determined (Ref. 45): myosin A is localised right beneath the plasma membrane, whereas myosin D shows a peripheral although not as sharply defined staining. Truncation of myosin A and D tail domains abolishes the peripheral localisation. Furthermore, the C-terminal domain of myosin A carries a dibasic motif that is involved in specific interaction with a proteinaceous component of the parasite plasma membrane (Ref. 45).

Invasion is concomitant with the sequential discharge of proteins from the two secretory organelles of the parasite: first micronemes (Refs 46, 47, 48) and then rhoptries (Ref. 49). Some parasite enzymatic activities have been implicated in the invasion process, and include a calcium-dependent phospholipase A2 (PLA₂; Refs 50, 51), a phosphatidylcholine-specific phospholipase C (PLC; Ref. 52) and a serine protease (Ref. 53). The secreted microneme protein MIC3, containing a chitin-binding-like domain, is able to bind to both the host plasma membrane and parasite surface after exocytosis (Ref. 54). The possible roles of the parasite enzymatic activities and MIC3 in invasion signalling events are discussed below. The MIC2 protein is a candidate bridging molecule between an extracellular ligand and the parasite actin–myosin motor for cell locomotion. This protein contains thrombospondin- and integrin-

like motifs (Refs 55, 56) that probably mediate interaction with the host cell. Moreover, MIC2 is secreted into the external medium by extracellular parasites and that release is coincident with proteolytic processing of the protein at the parasite surface, which may be a common mechanism for releasing adhesive proteins from invasive apicomplexan parasites (Ref. 57).

No noticeable modification such as membrane ruffling, actin microfilament reorganisation or tyrosine phosphorylation is detected in the host cytoskeleton. Moreover, the exclusive role of a parasite actin-based motor during the invasion steps was clearly demonstrated using host cells resistant to the microfilament-depolymerising agent cytochalasin D (Refs 38, 58).

Invasion is rapid and is completed within 15–30 s (Refs 58, 59). The parasite attached by its conoid forms an invagination in the host plasma membrane, which enlarges as the parasite squeezes through a tight constriction known as a moving junction (Refs 60, 61, 62, 63). This transient structure represents a focal point at which the parasite and host cell cytoskeletons are apparently linked together.

### Establishment of the replication-competent vacuole

The PVM lining the nascent vacuole containing recently internalised parasite is devoid of host plasma transmembrane proteins (e.g. Na⁺/K⁺-ATPase, CD44, β₁-integrin), which must therefore be rapidly and actively removed soon after parasite invasion (Refs 64, 65, 66). By contrast, the vacuole is enriched, by an unknown mechanism of sorting, in host glycosylphosphatidylinositol-(GPI-) anchored proteins capable of transiting through the moving junction (Ref. 67). The absence of any proteins of the SNARE family (involved in vesicle fusion) within the vacuole membrane probably explains the failure of the *T. gondii* vacuole to fuse with any compartment in the endocytic cascade, or to acidify. The best evidence for this hypothesis is that alteration of the route of entry by forcing the parasite to utilise a host-cell-dictated phagocytic pathway results in inclusion of representative plasma membrane proteins in the PVM, which is in turn followed by fusion, acidification and parasite killing (Ref. 9).

The origin of the lipids contained within the PVM has long been a matter of interest. This membrane is rapidly formed and has a surface

area around each parasite estimated at 30 μm² (Ref. 68). Generation of such a membrane by a phagocytic process would typically take several minutes. It is apparent that host cell lipids can rapidly 'flow' past the moving junction to generate the bulk of the PVM (Ref. 67). At least three lines of experimental evidence indicate that the nascent PVM is formed principally from host cell lipids. First, electrophysiological studies show that there is no significant increase of total host cell capacitance during the formation of the vacuole, which implies that the vacuole internalises part of the host cell membrane (Ref. 68). Second, fluorescence analyses using labelled lipophilic dyes inserted into the host cell plasma membrane before invasion reveal their subsequent incorporation into the PVM (Refs 67, 69). Third, endogenous host plasma membrane lipids such as G<sub>M1</sub> sphingolipid (Ref. 67) and cholesterol (I. Coppens and K.A. Joiner, unpublished) are also inserted into the PVM. Moreover, removal of cholesterol from the host plasma membrane, by pharmacological inhibition of cholesterol synthesis followed by extraction of residual cholesterol from the host plasma membrane, prior to infection leads to a reduction in parasite invasion and PV formation (I. Coppens and K.A. Joiner, unpublished). The possibility that rhoptries contain internal membrane or at least lipid stores such as cholesterol (Refs 70, 71) that could participate in the de novo formation of the PVM has been evoked, because selected rhoptry proteins including ROP2 are present on the cytoplasmic face of the PVM shortly after invasion (Ref. 72). However, depletion of rhoptry cholesterol by depriving host cells of an exogenous source of cholesterol markedly decreases the rate of parasite growth yet is without effect on invasion (I. Coppens and K.A. Joiner, unpublished).

in the rhoptries (Ref. 73). This enzyme seems to be activated in the presence of calcium by a parasite mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase. Its products (arachidonic acid) are generated from the host membrane phospholipids and may cause local lysis, affect membrane fluidity or liberate further intracellular stored calcium (Refs 73, 75). The treatment of host cells with exogenous PLA<sub>2</sub> disrupts the morphology of their membranes and augments the frequency of invasion by *T. gondii* (Ref. 76), indicating an involvement of this enzyme in membrane remodelling in newly formed vacuoles.

It is hypothesised, but not proven, that secreted microneme protein MIC3, which contains five epidermal growth factor-(EGF-) like domains (Ref. 77), could induce phosphorylation of a host cell PLCγ, leading to activation of the inositol phospholipid signalling pathway and the release of internal stored calcium. Simultaneously, as a result of the activated pathway, this signal could induce MAP kinase phosphorylation via GTP-Ras, activating gene transcription (Ref. 73).

### Potential interference

Pharmacological or immunological perturbations decrease the ability of *T. gondii* to penetrate host cells actively. For example, excess soluble glucosaminoglycans including heparin, heparan sulphate or chondroitin sulphates decrease parasite attachment to human host cells from a variety of lineages (Ref. 26).

Nearly a 90% decrease in parasite attachment is observed in a SAG3 knockout parasite mutant in the presence of anti-SAG1 antibodies, suggesting that the two surface proteins SAG1 and SAG3 are crucial for attachment (Ref. 78). Antibodies recognising other surface components, or rhoptry, dense-granule and microneme molecules, have no effect on invasion rates, perhaps because these targets are inaccessible to antibody (Ref. 28). Also, a genetically engineered knockout parasite mutant of ROP1, a rhoptry protein discharged at the time of invasion (Refs 76, 79, 80), showed no defect in invasion (Ref. 81).

Calmodulin antagonists reduce *T. gondii* invasion by preventing the stimulation of certain calcium-calmodulin-dependent enzymes (Ref. 82). Chelation of extracellular calcium blocks the penetration of *T. gondii* into cells (Ref. 73). In addition, chelation of intracellular calcium prevents release of microneme proteins whose secretion is triggered by calcium ionophores

### Possible regulation

Invasion is critically dependent on the mobilisation of calcium from the extracellular medium and from intraparasite stores (Fig. 3; reviewed in Ref. 73) such as the acidocalcisomes (Ref. 74). A parasite calcium-calmodulin complex concentrated at the apical end before invasion might regulate the functions required for the invasion process: motility, secretion and enzymatic activity of a parasite-soluble calcium-dependent PLA<sub>2</sub>, which has been detected mainly

a Invasion of the host cell by the parasite

Toxoplasma  
parasite  

MAP kinases  
Inactive  
PLA₂  
Calmodulin  
+ Ca²⁺  

Active  
PLA₂  

Microneme  
proteins (MICs)  
e.g. MIC3 (EGF-like)  

Conoid  

Host membrane  
phospholipid  

Membrane fluidification  
Ca²⁺ influx  
Ca²⁺ release  
from internal pools  

Rhoptry proteins  
(ROPs)  

MIC3  
GTP—Ras  

IP signal pathway  
Phosphorylation of  
MAP kinases  

Activation of gene  
transcription  

Host cell  

b Development of the parasite inside the host cell  

Host cell  

Plasma  
membrane  

Cytosol  

Ca²⁺↓ (after 48 h)  

Host ATP, purines,  
pyrimidines  

Porous PVM  

Lipids  

Host  
mitochondrion  

Host vimentin  
(cytoskeleton)  

LDL-C  

Host endoplasmic  
reticulum  

Lipids  

TVMs  

Cholesterol  

Parasite  

K⁺  
Na⁺  

K⁺  
Ca²⁺  
Na⁺  

ROPs  

GRAs  

SAG1  

(parasite surface protein)  

Endolysosomes  

Fatty acids,  
Amino acids  
(e.g. Trp)  

Parasitophorous  
vacuole  

Extension  
into cytoplasm  

Potential interactions between Toxoplasma and its mammalian host cell  
Expert Reviews in Molecular Medicine ©2001 Cambridge University Press  

Figure 3. Potential interactions between Toxoplasma and its mammalian host cell (see next page for legend) (fig002kjy).  

(Ref. 83). The depletion of intratachyzooite calcium inhibits invasion, whereas calcium ionophores that increase calcium concentrations in the cytosol of host cells significantly decrease tachyzoite invasion (Refs 73, 84).  

Pretreatment of parasites with inhibitors that are specific for the following is reported to reduce tachyzoite penetration, suggesting their putative function in the invasion process: phosphatidylcholine-specific PLC (Ref. 52), serine  

Accession information: (01)00227-7a.pdf (short code: txt001kjy); 15 January 2001 ISSN 1462-3994 ©2001 Cambridge University Press

Figure 3. Potential interactions between *Toxoplasma* and its mammalian host cell. Although most of what is illustrated remains to be proven, this diagram provides a model for conceptualising the interaction between the parasite and host cell. (a) Invasion. The invasion and secretion processes in the parasite might be regulated by a complex formed between calcium ($\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$) and calmodulin. A $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$-dependent phospholipase A2 ($\mathrm{PLA}_{2}$), activated by mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, is secreted and may release arachidonic acid (AA) from host membrane phospholipid, inducing the fluidification of the host plasma membrane. AA could affect the influx of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ into the host cell. Proteins from micronemes (MICs) and rhoptries (ROPs) are also secreted at the apex by the parasite. After exocytosis of the microneme protein MIC3, an epidermal growth factor- (EGF-) like signal could activate the inositol phosphate (IP) signal pathway, leading to the release of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ from internal pools, and thus increase the $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ concentration in the cell. Moreover, via GTP–Ras protein, this signal would induce MAP kinase phosphorylation and activate transcription. (b) Development. After tachyzoite penetration, both the host cell and parasite have an increased potassium ($\mathrm{K}^{+}$) to sodium ($\mathrm{Na}^{+}$) ratio. Host cytosolic $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ also varies, increasing at the beginning of the infection and decreasing after 48 h post-infection. An increase in $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ concentration is observed in the parasitophorous vacuole. The parasitophorous vacuole membrane (PVM) is porous and surrounded by host mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum, and a cytoskeleton of vimentin. An intravacuolar membranous network is connected to the PVM, generating either deep invaginations inside the vacuole or extensions in the host cytosol. Secreted proteins from ROPs and dense-granule proteins (GRAs) might be involved in the acquisition or transport of host vital compounds, including adenosine triphosphate (ATP), purines, pyrimidines, amino acids [e.g. tryptophan (Trp)] or lipids. A vesicular trafficking of the surface protein SAG1 is observed from intravacuolar parasites to the host cell and exterior. The parasite secretory activities and the parasite-host cell exchange activities are indicated in brown and purple, respectively. Dashed lines are hypothetical or uncharacterised pathways. Abbreviations: LDL-C, low-density lipoprotein-derived cholesterol; TVMs, tubulovesicular membranes (modified from Ref. 73) (fig002kjy).

protease (Ref. 53), $\mathrm{PLA}_{2}$ (Refs 85, 86), actin polymerisation (Ref. 36), actin depolymerisation (Ref. 43), and myosin ATPase and light-chain kinase (Refs 39, 40).

**Alterations in the host cell**

**Exchange between the vacuole and the host cytoplasm**

The PV provides an unusual and highly specialised environment for parasite growth and development. Its membrane serves as an important barrier between the host cytoplasm and the vacuolar space within which the parasites reside (reviewed in Ref. 87). Nevertheless, there are clear indications of communication between the vacuole and the host cell cytoplasm. Microinjection experiments using fluorescent dextrans, lucifer yellow or fluorescein-isothiocyanate-labelled peptides suggest that the vacuole membrane functions as a molecular sieve, allowing small molecules (<1400 Da) to diffuse freely from the host cytoplasm to the vacuolar space and vice versa (Ref. 11). The vacuolar space is filled with a tubulovesicular network, elements of which become continuous with the PVM (Refs 12, 88), which probably increases the exchange surface between the host cytoplasm and intravacuolar parasites. This network, rapidly modified by the protein secretion from dense granules, could participate in nutrient salvage.

Although the host cell contributes little to the vacuole, the intravacuolar environment is modified considerably by secretion from parasite rhoptries and dense granules (reviewed in Refs 89, 90), which alters the biochemistry of this compartment (Ref. 47). The exact functions of the majority of secreted proteins are not defined. A dense-granule soluble nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase (NTPase) secreted in the lumen of the vacuole might play a part in the processing of high-energy phosphate nucleotides and be involved in purine salvage by the parasite (detailed below; Refs 91, 92). Interestingly, the oxidation-reduction status of this disulphide-bond-containing enzyme is tightly controlled within the vacuolar space and might influence parasite exit from cells (Ref. 93). The precise function(s) of the NTPase in *T. gondii* biology remains to be determined (Ref. 94).

Immunolocalisation of some dense-granule proteins in the growing vacuole reveals the presence of long filamentous extensions of the PVM in the host cytoplasm (Refs 95, 96). These might act to increase the surface area of the vacuole for probable protein trafficking and exchanges with the host cytoplasm. Direct evidence of protein trafficking is provided by morphological analysis of SAG1 expression during intracellular development (Ref. 28). This molecule is shed from the surface of the invading

Accession information: (01)00227-7a.pdf (short code: txt001kjy); 15 January 2001 ISSN 1462-3994 © 2001 Cambridge University Press

tachyzoite, but resynthesised within the vacuole and distributed over the surface membrane of the new parasite progenies. As the infection progresses, SAG1 changes from being membrane bound to being particulate, becomes localised principally in PV extensions in the host cytoplasm, and is finally situated outside the host cell (Ref. 28). However, this finding has not yet been confirmed by other laboratories.

**Hijacking of host constituents**

Each PV is overcoated with vimentin and is anchored to the network of intermediate filaments in the host cell (Ref. 97). As the parasites divide, the vacuole enlarges and seems to induce changes in the distribution of these host cell filaments. The vimentin cytoskeleton is normally distributed throughout the uninfected cell, but it appears redistributed in the vicinity of the PV in heavily infected cells. It is suggested that this host intermediate filament network could serve to dock the parasite compartment to the host cell nuclear surface and/or to bring nutrients and metabolites within the vicinity of the parasite.

As the nascent PVM is being formed, intimate associations occur between the PVM and the host cell mitochondria and ER, which contain machinery for lipid biosynthesis. This association may contribute by steric blockade to the establishment and/or maintenance of the nonfusogenic state of the PV (Refs 7, 13, 14, 15, 89). ROP2, which is secreted at the time of invasion, localises at the PVM and acts as a mediator for association of the PVM to host mitochondria and ER. Indeed, the N-terminal domain of this protein, exposed to the host cell cytosol, has characteristics of a mitochondrial-targeting signal, is translocated across the mitochondrial outer membrane by a 'non-conservative' mechanism and behaves like an integral membrane protein. Deletion of the 30 amino acid N-terminal signal from ROP2 results in robust localisation of the truncated protein to the ER (Ref. 98). By analogy with mammalian sites of direct membrane-membrane continuity between mitochondria and ER, this organelle association might play a role in lipid, and possibly membrane, scavenging from these host organelles to the intravacuolar parasites (Ref. 99).

**Modifications of host cell physiology**

T. gondii can modify its ionic environment as well as that of the host cell during its intracellular state.

When the parasite enters the cell, a decrease in Na⁺ and an increase in K⁺ are observed in the tachyzoite cytosol (Ref. 73). Because T. gondii lacks a Na⁺/K⁺-ATPase (Ref. 100), Na⁺ efflux and K⁺ influx are determined by their concentration gradients across the tachyzoite membrane.

MAP kinase activity is stimulated in cells that are infected with T. gondii (Ref. 101). These events can be compared with those occurring following infection of bovine lymphocytes with *Theileria parva*; in this process, a parasite protein kinase C (PKC) and host signal transduction pathways are required for sporozoite entry (Ref. 102). In T. gondii infections, a decrease in MAP kinase activity in infected cells can be caused by interferon γ (Ref. 101). This suggests that MAP kinase pathways participate in the infection by T. gondii and that the decrease in MAP kinase activity in infected cells caused by interferon γ might be involved in mediating protective signals.

The intracellular concentration of free calcium in the host also varies in infected cells (Ref. 103). A positive [Ca²⁺] gradient from the host cytoplasm to the PV is observed 24 h post-infection. It appears that once T. gondii has entered the cell, it is able to activate the pumping of calcium from the host to its environment. The porous PVM would allow free diffusion of calcium across the membrane, and implicates the presence of products secreted into the vacuole that are able to bind calcium. A candidate for this activity is the dense-granule protein GRA1, which is closely associated with the tubulovesicular network of the PV and has a high affinity for calcium (Ref. 104). As a consequence, 48 h post-infection, when the parasites have replicated and formed rosettes, host cytoplasmic [Ca²⁺] is significantly lower in infected than in uninfected cells (Ref. 105). A rise in host [Ca²⁺] and the release of parasites from the host appear to be linked. An increase of [Ca²⁺] in the PV may be the signal that triggers the egress of T. gondii, during which the parasite pushes the host plasma membrane out from the surface; the membrane is then ruptured as the parasite escapes, resulting in lysis of the host cell (Refs 105, 106). Exposure of parasites to dithiothreitol can induce their egress by activation of parasite NTPase, suggesting the involvement of this enzyme in the calcium influx (Refs 93, 107). Thus, calcium regulation in the host cell and in the vacuolar compartment appears to be correlated to both the growth and the release of the parasite.

Potential interference

The expression of ROP2 can be specifically abrogated (V. Nakaar et al., Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA, pers. commun.), using an antisense RNA strategy (Ref. 94). This leads to the failure of the PVM-mitochondria and ER association and, as a consequence, the antisense-modified parasites are partially impaired in their lipid uptake as well as in intracellular and in vivo survival.

Interestingly, poisoning the *T. gondii* apicoplast by inhibitors of prokaryotic gyrases induces a 'delayed-death' phenotype, and slows down parasite division (to a doubling time of 21 h) immediately upon exit from the vacuole and entry into a new host cell (Ref. 108). This might result from improper establishment of the PV within the new host cell (Ref. 109).

---

Parasite auxotrophies and host nutrient scavenging

It is a logical assumption that the obligate intracellular *T. gondii* relies heavily on essential compounds from the nutrient-rich soup of the host cell cytoplasm. The PVM is presumed to have a dual function: to protect the parasite from potential harmful substances such as the final products of glycolysis, and to facilitate access and intravacuolar concentration of nutrients by active or passive means. The restricted size of the pores of this membrane prevents access of host proteins to the vacuole space but allows the diffusion of the entire range of small molecules from cytosolic pools, independently of their physicochemical properties. As a bidirectional channel, the pore also prevents the accumulation of parasite waste metabolites within the PV (Ref. 11), allowing the parasite to remain in PVs for indefinite periods.

---

Nucleoside metabolism and transport

*T. gondii* is a purine auxotroph (Ref. 110). The parasite must salvage adenine nucleobases, nucleosides or nucleotides for macromolecular synthesis because it is unable to convert guanine to adenine-based substituants. The pathways for adenosine salvage, in particular, are well characterised. A high-capacity, low-affinity adenosine transporter within the parasite plasma membrane has been identified by biochemical assays (Ref. 111) and cloned by insertional mutagenesis (Ref. 112). The parasite adenosine kinase (AK) is extremely active and can rapidly convert transported adenosine to adenine nucleotides. A model for adenosine salvage in *T. gondii* has been proposed: host cell ATP diffuses passively through the PVM pores, and enters the vacuolar lumen where it is sequentially hydrolysed to adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and adenosine monophosphate (AMP) by the intravacuolar NTPase. AMP is subsequently cleaved to adenosine by a 5'-nucleotidase and is transported into the parasite (Refs 113, 114, 115, 116). However, the importance of this model for purine salvage is somewhat controversial because both chemical and insertional knockouts of the parasite AK do not slow parasite growth, and *T. gondii* appears to be deficient in ecto-5'-nucleotidase activity as determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) cloning and cytochemistry (Ref. 117).

The parasite also takes up hypoxanthine, xanthine, adenine, inosine and guanine, but cannot use adenine as a purine source given the absence of adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (Refs 111, 114). The hypoxanthine-guanine-xanthine-phosphoribosyltransferase (HGXPRT) is not essential for parasite replication (Ref. 118). However, it is impossible to generate AK and HGXPRT double-knockout strains of *T. gondii* (J. Darling et al., University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA, pers. commun.); therefore, the most likely host sources for purine salvage are adenosine and hypoxanthine (Refs 118, 119).

Although *T. gondii* is not deficient in pyrimidine synthesis (Ref. 120), it is able to accumulate these compounds efficiently from the host cytoplasm, indicating the presence of specific uptake mechanisms (Refs 113, 120). Nevertheless, pyrimethamine, the conventional anti-*Toxoplasma* drug, targets the parasite dihydrofolate reductase and inhibits DNA replication by starving the parasite of pyrimidines (Ref. 121), suggesting the importance of parasite mechanisms of pyrimidine synthesis.

---

Lipid metabolism and transport

*T. gondii* cannot synthesise selected phospholipids de novo (A.S. Sinai, K.A. Joiner and D.R. Voelker, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA, unpublished). The close association of the PVM to host mitochondria and the ER offers an attractive mechanism to situate the host cell lipid biosynthesis machinery in close proximity to the vacuole. Nevertheless, it remains to be

Accession information: (01)00227-7a.pdf (short code: txt001kjy); 15 January 2001 ISSN 1462-3994 © 2001 Cambridge University Press
determined whether lipids are obtained from the associated organelles.

The addition of labelled fatty acids to cells that are infected with *T. gondii* leads to an incorporation of these lipids into GPI-anchored proteins in parasites (Refs 122, 123). This suggests that intracellular *T. gondii* is able to scavenge lipids from the host cell by as yet unknown pathways. *T. gondii* cannot synthesise sterols de novo via the mevalonate pathway (Ref. 71), yet cholesterol is the main sterol in parasite membranes (Refs 70, 124, 125, 126). Cholesterol concentrations are especially high in rhoptries, which have a cholesterol to phospholipid molar ratio of 1.5 (Ref. 70). Thus, *T. gondii* is dependent on actively intercepting low-density lipoprotein- (LDL-) derived cholesterol that has transited through host lysosomes. Exogenous cholesterol is then rapidly delivered to the PV and is concentrated in the parasite. LDL-receptor-mediated endocytosis is specifically increased in infected cells compared with noninfected cells.

Incubation of extracellular *T. gondii* in the presence of free cholesterol results in a specific temperature-, concentration- and time-dependent incorporation of this lipid in the parasite sterol fraction (I. Coppens and K.A. Joiner, unpublished). Two cyclophilin A isoforms have been characterised in this parasite, including cyclophilin 18, a dense-granule protein secreted into the vacuolar space (Ref. 127). This protein may play a role in cholesterol trafficking to the parasite, by analogy with the mammalian cytosolic complex of caveolin, heat-shock protein 56, cyclophilin 40, cyclophilin A and cholesterol, which is involved in cholesterol transport to caveolae in higher eukaryotic cells (Ref. 128).

**Amino acid metabolism and transport**

Very little is known about the requirement or auxotrophies of *T. gondii* for amino acids. However, one well-defined auxotrophy is that for tryptophan (Refs 129, 130), which has been used as the basis for a genetic selection analysis (Ref. 131). *T. gondii* probably requires other essential amino acids, as well as a carbon source (e.g. glucose) for growth (Ref. 132), and it is likely that transporters for these small molecules are present in the parasite plasma membrane.

**Potential interference**

The purine salvage pathway offers several attractive targets for antiparasitic chemotherapy.

As a result of the original concept that adenosine nucleotides were the major precursors of parasite purines, considerable efforts have been devoted to the synthesis of toxic adenosine analogues (Ref. 133). It now seems clear that subversive substrates of both AK or HGPRT or the dual inhibition of these enzymes (whose crystal structures are resolved) provides the most attractive prospect for inhibiting parasite growth (Refs 134, 135, 136, 137).

Metabolic inhibitors that interfere in pyrimidine salvage and consequently block the replication of *T. gondii* are efficiently incorporated into the parasite, probably using the transport mechanisms for thymidine (Ref. 138). The crystal structure of the parasite uracil phosphoribosyltransferase is now known, and should facilitate the design of specific substrate inhibitors (Ref. 139).

Interference with endocytosis or lysosomal degradation of LDL, as well as with cholesterol translocation from lysosomes, blocks cholesterol delivery to the PV and significantly reduces parasite replication. Similarly, incubation of *T. gondii* mutant cells that cannot mobilise cholesterol from lysosomes leads to a decrease of parasite cholesterol content and proliferation (Ref. 71).

Supporting the ideas that immunophilins play a role in cholesterol trafficking and that their characteristic peptidyl isomerase enzymatic activity is inhibitable by cyclosporin A or rapamycin, parasites incubated with cyclosporin A or its analogues show a dose-dependent reduction in cholesterol acquisition (Ref. 71). However, a direct involvement of parasite cyclophilin in cholesterol transport remains to be determined. The identification of parasite proteins homologous to those in the cytosolic sterol-carrier complex in mammalian cells would readily permit further dissection of the process of scavenging of host cholesterol in the PV.

**Encystation and persistence in the mammalian cell**

Although tachyzoites and bradyzoites are similar in structure, they produce a very different phenotype in the host cell (reviewed in Ref. 4). Like tachyzoites, bradyzoites remain intracellular and divide by the unique binary fission termed endodyogeny. However, the tachyzoite divides rapidly and synchronously, forming rosettes and lysing the cell within 48 h, whereas the slower-
growing bradyzoite exhibits asynchronous divisions and forms tissue cysts. Encystation is thought to provide protection from stressful environments, and to be associated with profound metabolic and morphological changes that reduce bradyzoite replication (Ref. 140).

Once encystation is initiated, the enclosed bradyzoites are packed together in dense matrix material (Ref. 141), and secrete cyst wall components. The cyst wall is derived from the modified PVM. This membrane is deeply convoluted and is thickened on the vacuolar side with dense material and tubular structures that may extend to the surface of the bradyzoites. Outside the cyst wall the PV is wrapped in host intermediate filaments (Ref. 142). In brain, the glial filaments are present in close apposition to the cyst wall and arranged around cysts in a concentric layer, measuring 5–10 μm in thickness. The layer of glial filaments excludes host mitochondria and ER from the cytoplasmic surface of the cysts (Ref. 13). It is proposed but not proven that the association of host cell intermediate filaments with *T. gondii* cysts may play a role in bradyzoite differentiation and/or cyst stabilisation in the host cell cytoplasm (Ref. 142).

The size of mature tissue cysts is variable, depending on the cyst age, the type of host cell parasitised and the strain of *T. gondii* (reviewed in Ref. 143), but on average is 50–70 μm, and each cyst contains 1000–2000 crescent-shaped bradyzoites. Bradyzoites develop in cysts within host cells in a variety of tissues, but they are more common in neural and muscular tissues [brain (including neurons and glial cells), heart, skeletal muscle and retina]. However, it is unclear which is the preferred or predominant cell in which cysts form and whether host cells influence cyst formation. It is now agreed that cysts are not static structures; they regularly break down or rupture host cells and reinvade others (Ref. 144). When tissue cysts rupture, however, they elicit a strong inflammatory response resulting in the formation of glial nodules in the brains of chronically infected hosts.

**Induction of differentiation**

Bradyzoite differentiation from tachyzoites is unusual in that it is reversible, and it is likely to be a programmed response related to a slowing of replication and lengthening of the cell cycle (Ref. 145). Bradyzoite differentiation is a stress-related response of *T. gondii* to environmental conditions such as the inflammatory response of the host to the tachyzoite stage. Inhibiting the rapid growth of tachyzoites, by drugs (pyrimethamine, mitochondrial inhibitors), immunomodulatory agents or anti-*Toxoplasma* serum, allows the percentage of bradyzoites in vitro to gradually increase, consistent with the slower replication rate of bradyzoites. Conditions such as temperature stress (43°C), pH stress (pH 6.6–6.8 or 8.0–8.2) or chemical stress (sodium arsenite) are associated with the induction of bradyzoite development (reviewed in Refs 143, 146, 147).

Differentiation into the cyst-forming latent forms probably shares features common to other stress-induced differentiation systems such as glucose starvation in *Dictyostelium* (Ref. 148) or cholesterol deprivation in *Giardia* (Ref. 149). Indeed, as in a number of model systems, cyclic nucleotide signalling in stress-induced differentiation is implicated in bradyzoite formation (Ref. 150). The contribution of the host cell to stage conversion remains to be elucidated. However, exposure of extracellular tachyzoites to stress conditions might also result in an enrichment in bradyzoites, consistent with a direct effect of stress on the parasite (Ref. 151). In conclusion, the cyst burden generated by *T. gondii* is undoubtedly influenced by multiple factors including the genetic background of both the host and parasite, as well as epigenetic factors. Clearly, defining the factors or signalling pathways that influence stage interconversion may lead to new therapeutic modalities aimed at preventing reactivation.

Stage conversion involves the coordinated expression of genes that can induce or suppress a broad spectrum of other genes in both developmental stages (Refs 143, 151, 152, 153, 154). The high density of rhoptries and accumulation of micronemes in bradyzoites also suggests a decrease or an arrest in the secretory function of these forms (Ref. 141). Given the slower rate of growth of bradyzoites and location of bradyzoites in a thick-walled vacuole, it is likely that the energy metabolism of tachyzoites and bradyzoites is different. Both tachyzoites and bradyzoites utilise the glycolytic pathway for energy, but (in contrast to tachyzoites) bradyzoites lack a functional tricarboxylic acid cycle and respiratory chain (Refs 155, 156). Although a large percentage of bradyzoite-specific antigens are of unknown function, some of them appear to code for

Accession information: (01)00227-7a.pdf (short code: txt001kjy); 15 January 2001 ISSN 1462-3994 © 2001 Cambridge University Press

metabolic enzymes, consistent with a different
utilisation of the glycolytic pathway by the two
stage forms of T. gondii.

**Concluding remarks**

T. gondii has evolved a remarkable ability to
survive in its host, typically for long periods of
time, with minimal pathogenicity and in a variety
of cell types. However, the mechanisms by which
this obligate intracellular parasite becomes a
master at manipulating the structures and
pathways of the host cell for its own nefarious
purposes to create a hospitable environment
remain difficult to analyse in the background of a
nucleated host cell.

T. gondii is readily grown in nearly all
cultured cells. The host–parasite relationship can
be explored using mutant host cells or mutant
parasites. In parallel, using the microarray
technology, it is possible to reveal the nature of
the host cell genes that are up- or downregulated
upon parasitisation. The marriage of insights
gained into the biochemical mechanisms and
cell biology of intracellular parasitism of
apicomplexans with the arrival of genetic tools
for dissecting genes carrying out these process
(Ref. 157) will allow further analysis of the parasite
exploitations of the host cell machineries. In this
respect, the molecular genetics of Toxoplasma are
exceedingly powerful and well developed (Ref.
157). This parasite thus provides a highly
amenable system for probing basic mechanisms
common to all apicomplexan parasites related to
their dialogue with their specific host cells.

**Acknowledgements and funding**

The authors thank Dominique Soldati (University
of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany), John
Boothroyd (Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
USA) and Ira Blader (Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA) for critical comments on the
manuscript. The work was supported by the
National Institutes of Health Grants R01-AI30060
and R01-AI48443, and a Burrough Wellcome
Fund Molecular Parasitology Scholar Award to
K.A. Joiner.

**References**

1 Dubey, J.P. (1977) Toxoplasma, Hammondia,
   Besnotia, Sarcocystis, and other tissue cyst-
   forming coccidia of man and animals. In Parasitic
   Protozoa III (Kreier, J.P., ed.), pp. 101-237,
   Academic Press, New York, NY, USA

2 Krahenbuhl, J.L. and Remington, J.S. (1982) The
   immunology of Toxoplasma and toxoplasmosis.
   In Immunology of Parasitic Infections (Cohen, S.
   and Warren, K.S., eds), pp. 356-421, Blackwell
   Science, Oxford, UK

3 Dubey, J.P. and Beattie, C.P. (1988) Toxoplasmosis
   of Animals and Man, CRC, Boca Raton, FL, USA

4 Dubey, J.P., Lindsay, D.S. and Speer, C.A. (1998)
   Structures of Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites,
   bradyzoites, and sporozoites and biology and
   development of tissue cysts. Clin Microbiol Rev
   11, 267-299, PubMed ID: 98225751

5 Jomaa, H. et al. (1999) Inhibitors of the
   nonmevalonate pathway of isoprenoid
   biosynthesis as antimalarial drugs. Science 285,
   1573-1576, PubMed ID: 99407027

6 McFadden, G.I. and Roos, D.S. (1999)
   Apicomplexan plastids as drug targets. Trends
   Microbiol 7, 328-333, PubMed ID: 99362812

7 Jones, T.C., Yeh, S. and Hirsch, J.G. (1972) The
   interaction between Toxoplasma gondii and
   mammalian cells. I. Mechanism of entry and
   intracellular fate of the parasite. J Exp Med 136,
   1157-1172, PubMed ID: 73030933

8 Sibley, L.D., Weidner, E. and Krahenbuhl, J.L.
   (1985) Phagosome acidification blocked by
   intracellular Toxoplasma gondii. Nature 315, 416-
   419, PubMed ID: 85213866

9 Joiner, K.A. et al. (1990) Toxoplasma gondii:
   fusion competence of parasitophorous vacuoles
   in Fc receptor-transfected fibroblasts. Science 249,
   641-646, PubMed ID: 90341792

10 Mordue, D.G. et al. (1999) Toxoplasma gondii
    resides in a vacuole that avoids fusion with host
    cell endocytic and exocytic vesicular trafficking
    pathways. Exp Parasitol 92, 87-99, PubMed ID:
    99296818

11 Schwab, J.C., Beckers, C.J. and Joiner, K.A. (1994)
    The parasitophorous vacuole membrane
    surrounding intracellular Toxoplasma gondii
    functions as a molecular sieve. Proc Natl Acad
    Sci USA 91, 509-513, PubMed ID: 94119916

12 Sibley, L.D. et al. (1995) Regulated secretion of
    multi-lamellar vesicles leads to formation of a
    tubulo-vesicular network in host-cell vacuoles
    occupied by Toxoplasma gondii. J Cell Sci 108,
    1669-1677, PubMed ID: 95340695

13 de Melo, E.J., de Carvalho, T.U. and de Souza, W.
    (1992) Penetration of Toxoplasma gondii into
    host cells induces changes in the distribution of
    the mitochondria and the endoplasmic
    reticulum. Cell Struct Funct 17, 311-317, PubMed
    ID: 93113698

Accession information: (01) 00227-7a.pdf (short code: txt001kjy); 15 January 2001
ISSN 1462-3994 © 2001 Cambridge University Press

14 Lindsay, D.S. et al. (1993) Association of host cell mitochondria with developing Toxoplasma gondii tissue cysts. Am J Vet Res 54, 1663-1667, PubMed ID: 94071260

15 Sinai, A.P., Webster, P. and Joiner, K.A. (1997) Association of host cell endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria with the Toxoplasma gondii parasitophorous vacuole membrane: a high affinity interaction. J Cell Sci 110, 2117-2128, PubMed ID: 98017833

16 Desmonts, G. and Couvreur, J. (1974) Congenital toxoplasmosis. A prospective study of 378 pregnancies. N Engl J Med 290, 1110-1116, PubMed ID: 74138485

17 Beaman, M.H. et al. (1995) Toxoplasma gondii. In Principles and Practice of Infectious Diseases (Mandell, G.L., Bennett, J.E. and Dolin, R., eds), pp. 2455-2475, Churchill Livingston, New York, NY, USA

18 Wong, S.Y. and Remington, J.S. (1993) Biology of Toxoplasma gondii. Aids 7, 299-316, PubMed ID: 93228876

19 Jacobs, L. (1956) Propagation, morphology and biology of Toxoplasma. Ann NY Acad Sci 64, 154-179

20 Radke, J.R. and White, M.W. (1998) A cell cycle model for the tachyzoite of Toxoplasma gondii using the Herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase. Mol Biochem Parasitol 94, 237-247, PubMed ID: 98418770

21 Dvorak, J.A. and Howe, C.L. (1977) Toxoplasma gondii-vertebrate cell interactions. I. The influence of bicarbonate ion, CO2, pH and host cell culture age on the invasion of vertebrate cells in vitro. J Protozool 24, 416-419, PubMed ID: 78028711

22 Youn, J.H. et al. (1991) Cell cycle-dependent entry of Toxoplasma gondii into synchronized HL-60 cells. Kisaengchunghak Chapchi 29, 121-128, PubMed ID: 92062640

23 Siverman, J.A. and Joiner, K.A. (1996) Toxoplasma-host cell interaction. In Host Response to Intracellular Pathogens (Kaufman, S.H.E., ed.), pp. 313-338, Landers, Austin, TX, USA

24 Furtado, G.C., Cao, Y. and Joiner, K.A. (1992) Laminin on Toxoplasma gondii mediates parasite binding to the beta 1 integrin receptor alpha 6 beta 1 on human foreskin fibroblasts and Chinese hamster ovary cells. Infect Immun 60, 4925-4931, PubMed ID: 93014216

25 Furtado, G.C. et al. (1992) Laminin enhances binding of Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites to J774

murine macrophage cells. Infect Immun 60, 2337-2342, PubMed ID: 92267647

26 Carruthers, V.B. et al. (2000) Toxoplasma gondii uses sulfated proteoglycans for substrate and host cell attachment. Infect Immun 68, 4005-4011, PubMed ID: 20316026

27 Grimwood, J. and Smith, J.E. (1992) Toxoplasma gondii: the role of a 30-kDa surface protein in host cell invasion. Exp Parasitol 74, 106-111, PubMed ID: 92111672

28 Grimwood, J. and Smith, J.E. (1996) Toxoplasma gondii: the role of parasite surface and secreted proteins in host cell invasion. Int J Parasitol 26, 169-173, PubMed ID: 96231050

29 Mineo, J.R. et al. (1993) Antibodies to Toxoplasma gondii major surface protein (SAG-1, P30) inhibit infection of host cells and are produced in murine intestine after peroral infection. J Immunol 150, 3951-3964, PubMed ID: 93232602

30 Boothroyd, J.C. et al. (1998) The surface of Toxoplasma: more and less. Int J Parasitol 28, 3-9, PubMed ID: 98162855

31 Kimata, I. and Tanabe, K. (1982) Invasion by Toxoplasma gondii of ATP-depleted and ATP-restored chick embryo erythrocytes. J Gen Microbiol 128, 2499-2501, PubMed ID: 83110892

32 Schwartzman, J.D. and Pfefferkorn, E.R. (1983) Immunofluorescent localization of myosin at the anterior pole of the coccidian, Toxoplasma gondii. J Protozool 30, 657-661, PubMed ID: 84114527

33 Schwartzman, J.D. et al. (1985) Detection of the microtubule cytoskeleton of the coccidian Toxoplasma gondii and the hemoflagellate Leishmania donovani by monoclonal antibodies specific for beta-tubulin. J Protozool 32, 747-749, PubMed ID: 86062324

34 Werk, R. (1985) How does Toxoplasma gondii enter host cells? Rev Infect Dis 7, 449-457, PubMed ID: 85300091

35 Endo, T. et al. (1988) Detection and localization of actin in Toxoplasma gondii. Parasitol Res 75, 102-106, PubMed ID: 89184358

36 Ryning, F.W. and Remington, J.S. (1978) Effect of cytochalasin D on Toxoplasma gondii cell entry. Infect Immun 20, 739-743, PubMed ID: 78217362

37 Russell, D.G. and Sinden, R.E. (1981) The role of the cytoskeleton in the motility of coccidian sporozoites. J Cell Sci 50, 345-359, PubMed ID: 82098306

38 Dobrowolski, J.M. and Sibley, L.D. (1996) Toxoplasma invasion of mammalian cells is

powered by the actin cytoskeleton of the
parasite. Cell 84, 933-939, PubMed ID:
96182653

39 Dobrowolski, J.M., Carruthers, V.B. and Sibley,
L.D. (1997) Participation of myosin in gliding
motility and host cell invasion by Toxoplasma
gondii. Mol Microbiol 26, 163-173, PubMed ID:
98043546

40 Morrissette, N.S., Murray, J.M. and Roos, D.S.
(1997) Subpellicular microtubules associate with
an intramembranous particle lattice in the
protozoan parasite Toxoplasma gondii. J Cell Sci
110, 35-42, PubMed ID: 97164035

41 Nichols, B.A. and Chiappino, M.L. (1987)
Cytoskeleton of Toxoplasma gondii. J Protozool
34, 217-226, PubMed ID: 87225830

42 Dobrowolski, J.M., Niesman, I.R. and Sibley, L.D.
(1997) Actin in the parasite Toxoplasma gondii is
encoded by a single copy gene, ACT1 and exists
primarily in a globular form. Cell Motil
Cytoskeleton 37, 253-262, PubMed ID: 97371641

43 Poupel, O. and Tardieux, I. (1999) Toxoplasma
gondii motility and host cell invasiveness are
drastically impaired by jasplakinolide, a cyclic
peptide stabilizing F-actin. Microbes Infect 1,
653-662, PubMed ID: 20079440

44 Heintzelman, M.B. and Schwartzman, J.D. (1997)
A novel class of unconventional myosins from
Toxoplasma gondii [published erratum appears
in J Mol Biol 2000 Mar 31; 297(3): 829]. J Mol Biol
271, 139-146, PubMed ID: 97445175

45 Hettmann, C. et al. (2000) A dibasic motif in the
tail of a class XIV apicomplexan myosin is an
essential determinant of plasma membrane
localization. Mol Biol Cell 11, 1385-1400, PubMed
ID: 20214828

46 Achbarou, A. et al. (1991) Differential targeting of
dense granule proteins in the parasitophorous
vacuole of Toxoplasma gondii. Parasitology 103
Pt 3, 321-329, PubMed ID: 92140872

47 Carruthers, V.B. and Sibley, L.D. (1997)
Sequential protein secretion from three distinct
organelles of Toxoplasma gondii accompanies
invasion of human fibroblasts. Eur J Cell Biol 73,
114-123, PubMed ID: 97351942

48 Ngo, H.M., Hoppe, H.C. and Joiner, K.A. (2000)
Differential sorting and post-secretory targeting
of proteins in parasitic invasion. Trends Cell Biol
10, 67-72, PubMed ID: 20126820

49 Nichols, B.A., Chiappino, M.L. and O'Connor,
G.R. (1983) Secretion from the rhoptries of
Toxoplasma gondii during host-cell invasion. J
Ultrastruct Res 83, 85-98, PubMed ID: 83216268

50 Saffer, L.D., Long Krug, S.A. and Schwartzman,
J.D. (1989) The role of phospholipase in host
cell penetration by Toxoplasma gondii. Am J
Trop Med Hyg 40, 145-149, PubMed ID:
89148557

51 Saffer, L.D. and Schwartzman, J.D. (1991) A
soluble phospholipase of Toxoplasma gondii
associated with host cell penetration. J Protozool
38, 454-460, PubMed ID: 92014877

52 Ricard, J. et al. (1999) Toxoplasma gondii: role of
the phosphatidylcholine-specific phospholipase
C during cell invasion and intracellular
development. Exp Parasitol 91, 231-237, PubMed
ID: 99172325

53 Conseil, V., Soete, M. and Dubremetz, J.F. (1999)
Serine protease inhibitors block invasion of host
cells by Toxoplasma gondii. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 43, 1358-1361, PubMed ID:
99277993

54 Garcia-Régue, N. et al. (2000) The microneme
protein MIC3 of Toxoplasma gondii is a secretory
adhesin that binds to both the surface of the host
cells and the surface of the parasite. Cell
Microbiol 2, 353-364

55 Robson, K.J. et al. (1988) A highly conserved
amino-acid sequence in thrombospondin,
properdin and in proteins from sporozoites and
blood stages of a human malaria parasite. Nature
335, 79-82, PubMed ID: 88318952

56 Wan, K.L. et al. (1997) Molecular characterisation
of an expressed sequence tag locus of
Toxoplasma gondii encoding the micronemal
protein MIC2. Mol Biochem Parasitol 84, 203-214,
PubMed ID: 97237562

57 Carruthers, V.B., Sherman, G.D. and Sibley, L.D.
(2000) The Toxoplasma adhesive protein MIC2 is
proteolytically processed at multiple sites by two
parasite-derived proteases. J Biol Chem 275,
14346-14353, PubMed ID: 20261559

58 Morisaki, J.H., Heuser, J.E. and Sibley, L.D. (1995)
Invasion of Toxoplasma gondii occurs by active
penetration of the host cell. J Cell Sci 108, 2457-
2464, PubMed ID: 95403585

59 Schwartzman, J.D. and Saffer, L.D. (1992) How
Toxoplasma gondii gets in and out of host cells.
Subcell Biochem 18, 333-364, PubMed ID:
93134654

60 Aikawa, M. et al. (1977) Transmission and
scanning electron microscopy of host cell entry
by Toxoplasma gondii. Am J Pathol 87, 285-296,
PubMed ID: 77154871

61 Michel, R. et al. (1980) Formation of a close
junction during invasion of erythrocytes by


Accession information: (01) 00227-7a.pdf (short code: txt001kjy); 15 January 2001
ISSN 1462-3994 © 2001 Cambridge University Press
15

Toxoplasma gondii in vitro. Int J Parasitol 10, 309-313, PubMed ID: 81093050

62 Nichols, B.A. and O'Connor, G.R. (1981) Penetration of mouse peritoneal macrophages by the protozoon Toxoplasma gondii. New evidence for active invasion and phagocytosis. Lab Invest 44, 324-335, PubMed ID: 81146799

63 Chiappino, M.L., Nichols, B.A. and O'Connor, G.R. (1984) Scanning electron microscopy of Toxoplasma gondii: parasite torsion and host-cell responses during invasion. J Protozool 31, 288-292, PubMed ID: 84292093

64 Porchet-Hennere, E. and Torpier, G. (1983) Relations entre Toxoplasma et sa cellule-hôte. Protistologica 19, 357-370

65 de Carvalho, L. and de Souza, W. (1989) Cytochemical localization of plasma membrane enzyme markers during interiorization of tachyzoites of Toxoplasma gondii by macrophages. J Protozool 36, 164-170, PubMed ID: 89258550

66 Sibley, L.D. et al. (1994) Invasion and intracellular survival by Toxoplasma gondii. In Strategies for Intracellular Survival of Microbes (Kaufman, S.H.E., ed.), pp. 245-264, Bailleire Tindall, London, UK

67 Mordue, D.G. et al. (1999) Invasion by Toxoplasma gondii establishes a moving junction that selectively excludes host cell plasma membrane proteins on the basis of their membrane anchoring. J Exp Med 190, 1783-1792, PubMed ID: 20069886

68 Suss-Toby, E., Zimmerberg, J. and Ward, G.E. (1996) Toxoplasma invasion: the parasitophorous vacuole is formed from host cell plasma membrane and pinches off via a fission pore. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93, 8413-8418, PubMed ID: 96323236

69 Pacheco-Soares, C. and De Souza, W. (2000) Labeled probes inserted in the macrophage membrane are transferred to the parasite surface and internalized during cell invasion by Toxoplasma gondii. Parasitol Res 86, 11-17, PubMed ID: 20132614

70 Foussard, F., Leriche, M.A. and Dubremetz, J.F. (1991) Characterization of the lipid content of Toxoplasma gondii rhoptries. Parasitology 102 Pt 3, 367-370, PubMed ID: 91326512

71 Coppens, I., Sinai, A.P. and Joiner, K.A. (2000) Toxoplasma gondii exploits host low-density lipoprotein receptor-mediated endocytosis for cholesterol acquisition. J Cell Biol 149, 167-180, PubMed ID: 20211644

72 Beckers, C.J. et al. (1994) The Toxoplasma gondii rhoptry protein ROP2 is inserted into the parasitophorous vacuole membrane, surrounding the intracellular parasite, and is exposed to the host cell cytoplasm. J Cell Biol 127, 947-961, PubMed ID: 95050975

73 Bonhomme, A. et al. (1999) Signaling during the invasion of host cells by Toxoplasma gondii. FEMS Microbiol Rev 23, 551-561, PubMed ID: 99454739

74 Moreno, S.N. and Zhong, L. (1996) Acidocalcisomes in Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites. Biochem J 313, 655-659, PubMed ID: 96152555

75 Lin, L.L. et al. (1993) cPLA2 is phosphorylated and activated by MAP kinase. Cell 72, 269-278, PubMed ID: 93145328

76 Saffer, L.D. et al. (1992) Localization of a Toxoplasma gondii rhoptry protein by immunoelectron microscopy during and after host cell penetration. J Protozool 39, 526-530, PubMed ID: 93020598

77 Fourmaux, M.N. et al. (1996) Toxoplasma gondii microneme proteins: gene cloning and possible function. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 219, 55-58, PubMed ID: 96383528

78 Dziarszinski, F. et al. (2000) Targeted disruption of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored surface antigen SAG3 gene in Toxoplasma gondii decreases host cell adhesion and drastically reduces virulence in mice. Mol Microbiol 37, 574-582, PubMed ID: 20392212

79 Schwartzman, J.D. (1986) Inhibition of a penetration-enhancing factor of Toxoplasma gondii by monoclonal antibodies specific for rhoptries. Infect Immun 51, 760-764, PubMed ID: 86138602

80 Kimata, I. and Tanabe, K. (1987) Secretion by Toxoplasma gondii of an antigen that appears to become associated with the parasitophorous vacuole membrane upon invasion of the host cell. J Cell Sci 88, 231-239, PubMed ID: 88087512

81 Soldati, D. et al. (1995) Complementation of a Toxoplasma gondii ROP1 knock-out mutant using phleomycin selection. Mol Biochem Parasitol 74, 87-97, PubMed ID: 96360465

82 Tanaka, T., Ohmura, T. and Hidaka, H. (1983) Calmodulin antagonists' binding sites on calmodulin. Pharmacology 26, 249-257, PubMed ID: 83221960

83 Carruthers, V.B. and Sibley, L.D. (1999) Mobilization of intracellular calcium stimulates

microneme discharge in Toxoplasma gondii. Mol Microbiol 31, 421-428, PubMed ID: 99157550
84 Vieira, M.C. and Moreno, S.N. (2000) Mobilization of intracellular calcium upon attachment of Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites to human fibroblasts is required for invasion. Mol Biochem Parasitol 106, 157-162, PubMed ID: 20208022
85 Dubremetz, J.F. and Schwartzman, J.D. (1993) Subcellular organelles of Toxoplasma gondii and host cell invasion. Res Immunol 144, 31-33, PubMed ID: 93197668
86 Pezzella, N. et al. (1997) Involvement of calcium and calmodulin in Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoite invasion. Eur J Cell Biol 74, 92-101, PubMed ID: 97454989
87 Lingelbach, K. and Joiner, K.A. (1998) The parasitophorous vacuole membrane surrounding Plasmodium and Toxoplasma: an unusual compartment in infected cells. J Cell Sci 111, 1467-1475, PubMed ID: 98248433
88 Sibley, L.D. et al. (1986) Toxoplasma modifies macrophage phagosomes by secretion of a vesicular network rich in surface proteins. J Cell Biol 103, 867-874, PubMed ID: 86304565
89 Sinai, A.P. and Joiner, K.A. (1997) Safe haven: the cell biology of nonfusogenic pathogen vacuoles. Annu Rev Microbiol 51, 415-462, PubMed ID: 98001521
90 Stedman, T.T. and Joiner, K.A. (1999) En route to the vacuole: tracing the secretory pathway of Toxoplasma gondii. Adv Cell Mol Biol Membr Org 6, 233-261
91 Asai, T., O'Sullivan, W.J. and Tatibana, M. (1983) A potent nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase from the parasitic protozoan Toxoplasma gondii. Purification, some properties, and activation by thiol compounds. J Biol Chem 258, 6816-6822, PubMed ID: 83213415
92 Sibley, L.D. et al. (1994) Toxoplasma gondii: secretion of a potent nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase into the parasitophorous vacuole. Exp Parasitol 79, 301-311, PubMed ID: 95046143
93 Silverman, J.A. et al. (1998) Induced activation of the Toxoplasma gondii nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase leads to depletion of host cell ATP levels and rapid exit of intracellular parasites from infected cells. J Biol Chem 273, 12352-12359, PubMed ID: 98241603
94 Nakaar, V. et al. (1999) Targeted reduction of nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase by antisense RNA inhibits Toxoplasma gondii proliferation. J Biol Chem 274, 5083-5087, PubMed ID: 99143176

95 Dubremetz, J.F. et al. (1993) Kinetics and pattern of organelle exocytosis during Toxoplasma gondii/host-cell interaction. Parasitol Res 79, 402-408, PubMed ID: 94022185
96 Lecordier, L. et al. (1993) Molecular structure of a Toxoplasma gondii dense granule antigen (GRA 5) associated with the parasitophorous vacuole membrane. Mol Biochem Parasitol 59, 143-153, PubMed ID: 93295432
97 Halonen, S.K. and Weidner, E. (1994) Overcoating of Toxoplasma parasitophorous vacuoles with host cell vimentin type intermediate filaments. J Eukaryot Microbiol 41, 65-71, PubMed ID: 94169889
98 Sinai, A.P. and Joiner, K.A. The Toxoplasma gondii protein ROP2 mediates host organelle association with the parasitophorous vacuole membrane. J Cell Biol (in revision)
99 Vance, J.E. and Shiaio, Y.J. (1996) Intracellular trafficking of phospholipids: import of phosphatidylserine into mitochondria. Anticancer Res 16, 1333-1339, PubMed ID: 96273094
100 Takeuchi, T., Fujiwara, T. and Akao, S. (1980) Na+, K+-dependent ATPase activity and effect of K+ on in vitro protein synthesis and NAD pyrophosphorylase in Toxoplasma gondii. J Parasitol 66, 591-595, PubMed ID: 81027778
101 Gomez-Marin, J.E. et al. (1998) Interferon-gamma signal transduction during parasite infection: modulation of MAP kinases in the infection of human monocyte cells (THP1) by Toxoplasma gondii. Parasite Immunol 20, 631-635, PubMed ID: 99144459
102 Shaw, M.K. (1995) Mobilization of intrasporozoite Ca2+ is essential for Theileria parva sporozoite invasion of bovine lymphocytes. Eur J Cell Biol 68, 78-87, PubMed ID: 96105631
103 Bouchot, A. et al. (1999) Tachyzoite calcium changes during cell invasion by Toxoplasma gondii. Parasitol Res 85, 809-818, PubMed ID: 99422997
104 Cesbron-Delauw, M.F. et al. (1989) Molecular characterization of a 23-kilodalton major antigen secreted by Toxoplasma gondii. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86, 7537-7541, PubMed ID: 90017513
105 Pingret, L. et al. (1996) Relationship between intracellular free calcium concentrations and the intracellular development of Toxoplasma gondii. J Histochem Cytochem 44, 1123-1129, PubMed ID: 96408032
106 Endo, T., Sethi, K.K. and Piekarski, G. (1982)

Accession information: (01) 00227-7a.pdf (shortcode: txt001kjy); 15 January 2001 ISSN 1462-3994 © 2001 Cambridge University Press

Toxoplasma gondii: calcium ionophore A23187-
mediated exit of trophozoites from infected
murine macrophages. Exp Parasitol 53, 179-188,
PubMed ID: 82139303

107 Stommel, E.W. et al. (1997) Toxoplasma gondii:
dithiol-induced Ca2+ flux causes egress of
parasites from the parasitophorous vacuole. Exp
Parasitol 87, 88-97, PubMed ID: 97467675

108 Fichera, M.E. and Roos, D.S. (1997) A plastid
organelle as a drug target in apicomplexan
parasites. Nature 390, 407-409, PubMed ID:
98049349

109 Fichera, M.E., Bhopale, M.K. and Roos, D.S.
(1995) In vitro assays elucidate peculiar kinetics
of clindamycin action against Toxoplasma
gondii. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 39, 1530-
1537, PubMed ID: 96104895

110 Berens, R.L., Krug, E.C. and Marr, J.J. (1995)
Purine and pyrimidine metabolism. In
Biochemistry of Parasitic Organisms and Its
Molecular Foundations (Marr, J.J. and Muller, M.,
eds), pp. 89-117, Academic Press, London, UK

111 Schwab, J.C. et al. (1995) Toxoplasma gondii
tachyzoites possess an unusual plasma
membrane adenosine transporter. Mol Biochem
Parasitol 70, 59-69, PubMed ID: 95364852

112 Chiang, C.W. et al. (1999) The adenosine
transporter of Toxoplasma gondii. Identification
by insertional mutagenesis, cloning, and
recombinant expression. J Biol Chem 274, 35255-
35261, PubMed ID: 20044795

113 Perrotto, J., Keister, D.B. and Gelderman, A.H.
(1971) Incorporation of precursors into
Toxoplasma DNA. J Protozool 18, 470-473,
PubMed ID: 72076026

114 Krug, E.C., Marr, J.J. and Berens, R.L. (1989)
Purine metabolism in Toxoplasma gondii. J Biol
Chem 264, 10601-10607, PubMed ID: 89278126

115 Bermudes, D. et al. (1994) Tandemly repeated
genes encode nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase
isoforms secreted into the parasitophorous
vacuole of Toxoplasma gondii. J Biol Chem 269,
29252-29260, PubMed ID: 95050750

116 Asai, T. et al. (1995) Biochemical and molecular
characterization of nucleoside triphosphate
hydrolase isozymes from the parasitic protozoan
Toxoplasma gondii. J Biol Chem 270, 11391-
11397, PubMed ID: 95263459

117 Ngo, H.M. et al. (2000) Toxoplasma gondii: are
host cell adenosine nucleotides a direct source
for purine salvage? Exp Parasitol 95, 148-153,
PubMed ID: 20372614

118 Donald, R.G.K. et al. (1996) Insertional tagging,

cloning, and expression of the Toxoplasma
gondii hypoxanthine-xanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase gene. Use as a
selectable marker for stable transformation. J Biol
Chem 271, 14010-14019, PubMed ID: 96278850

119 Schwartzman, J.D. and Pfefferkorn, E.R. (1982)
Toxoplasma gondii: purine synthesis and salvage
in mutant host cells and parasites. Exp Parasitol
53, 77-86, PubMed ID: 82117403

120 Asai, T. et al. (1983) Enzymes of the de novo
pyrimidine biosynthetic pathway in Toxoplasma
gondii. Mol Biochem Parasitol 7, 89-100, PubMed
ID: 83219079

121 McCabe, R.E. and Oster, S. (1989) Current
recommendations and future prospects in the
treatment of toxoplasmosis. Drugs 38, 973-987,
PubMed ID: 90126405

122 Nagel, S.D. and Boothroyd, J.C. (1989) The major
surface antigen, P30, of Toxoplasma gondii is
anchored by a glycolipid. J Biol Chem 264, 5569-
5574, PubMed ID: 89174601

123 Tomavo, S., Dubremetz, J.F. and Schwarz, R.T.
(1992) Cell-free synthesis of glycolipid candidate
precursor(s) for glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol
anchors of Toxoplasma gondii surface proteins.
Biochem Soc Trans 20, 166S, PubMed ID:
93012306

124 Cintra, W.M. and de Souza, W. (1985)
Distribution of intramembranous particles and
filipin-sterol complexes in the cell membranes of
Toxoplasma gondii. Eur J Cell Biol 37, 63-69,
PubMed ID: 85285128

125 Gallois, Y. et al. (1988) Membrane fluidity of
Toxoplasma gondii: a fluorescence polarization
study. Biol Cell 62, 11-15, PubMed ID: 88209757

126 Foussard, F. et al. (1991) Lipids and fatty acids of
tachyzoites and purified pellicles of Toxoplasma
gondii. Parasitol Res 77, 475-477, PubMed ID:
92020784

127 High, K.P., Joiner, K.A. and Handschumacher,
R.E. (1994) Isolation, cDNA sequences, and
biochemical characterization of the major
cyclosporin-binding proteins of Toxoplasma
gondii. J Biol Chem 269, 9105-9112, PubMed ID:
94179329

128 Uittenbogaard, A., Ying, Y. and Smart, E.J. (1998)
Characterization of a cytosolic heat-shock
protein-caveolin chaperone complex.
Involvement in cholesterol trafficking. J Biol
Chem 273, 6525-6532, PubMed ID: 98165843

129 Pfefferkorn, E.R. (1984) Interferon gamma blocks
the growth of Toxoplasma gondii in human
fibroblasts by inducing the host cells to degrade

tryptophan. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 81, 908-912, PubMed ID: 84144813

130 Pfefferkorn, E.R., Eckel, M. and Rebhun, S. (1986) Interferon-gamma suppresses the growth of Toxoplasma gondii in human fibroblasts through starvation for tryptophan. Mol Biochem Parasitol 20, 215-224, PubMed ID: 87014565

131 Sibley, L.D., Messina, M. and Niesman, I.R. (1994) Stable DNA transformation in the obligate intracellular parasite Toxoplasma gondii by complementation of tryptophan auxotrophy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91, 5508-5512, PubMed ID: 94261615

132 Fulton, J.D. and Spooner, D.F. (1960) Metabolic studies on Toxoplasma gondii. Exp Parasitol 9, 293-301

133 Iltsch, M.H. et al. (1995) Structure-activity relationship for the binding of nucleoside ligands to adenosine kinase from Toxoplasma gondii. Biochem Pharmacol 49, 1501-1512, PubMed ID: 95283588

134 Heroux, A. et al. (1999) Crystal structure of Toxoplasma gondii hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase with XMP, pyrophosphate, and two Mg(2+) ions bound: insights into the catalytic mechanism. Biochemistry 38, 14495-14506, PubMed ID: 20014542

135 Heroux, A. et al. (1999) Crystal structures of the Toxoplasma gondii hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase-GMP and -IMP complexes: comparison of purine binding interactions with the XMP complex. Biochemistry 38, 14485-14494, PubMed ID: 20014541

136 Schumacher, M.A. et al. (1996) Crystal structures of Toxoplasma gondii HGXPRTase reveal the catalytic role of a long flexible loop. Nat Struct Biol 3, 881-887, PubMed ID: 96433078

137 Schumacher, M.A. et al. (2000) Crystal structures of Toxoplasma gondii adenosine kinase reveal a novel catalytic mechanism and prodrug binding. J Mol Biol 298, 875-893, PubMed ID: 20263887

138 Youn, J.H. et al. (1990) Effects of pyrimidine salvage inhibitors on uracil incorporation of Toxoplasma gondii. Kisaengchunghak Chapchi 28, 79-84, PubMed ID: 91104654

139 Schumacher, M.A. et al. (1998) Crystal structures of Toxoplasma gondii uracil phosphoribosyltransferase reveal the atomic basis of pyrimidine discrimination and prodrug binding. Embo J 17, 3219-3232, PubMed ID: 98292442

140 Bohne, W., Heesemann, J. and Gross, U. (1994) Reduced replication of Toxoplasma gondii is necessary for induction of bradyzoite-specific antigens: a possible role for nitric oxide in triggering stage conversion. Infect Immun 62, 1761-1767, PubMed ID: 94222542

141 Ferguson, D.J. and Hutchison, W.M. (1987) An ultrastructural study of the early development and tissue cyst formation of Toxoplasma gondii in the brains of mice. Parasitol Res 73, 483-491, PubMed ID: 88097304

142 Halonen, S.K., Weiss, L.M. and Chiu, F.C. (1998) Association of host cell intermediate filaments with Toxoplasma gondii cysts in murine astrocytes in vitro. Int J Parasitol 28, 815-823, PubMed ID: 98313748

143 Weiss, L.M. and Kim, K. (2000) The development and biology of bradyzoites of Toxoplasma gondii. Front Biosci 5, D391-405, PubMed ID: 20227955

144 Dubey, J.P. (1997) Bradyzoite-induced murine toxoplasmosis: stage conversion, pathogenesis, and tissue cyst formation in mice fed bradyzoites of different strains of Toxoplasma gondii [published erratum appears in J Eukaryot Microbiol 1998 May-Jun; 45(3): 367]. J Eukaryot Microbiol 44, 592-602, PubMed ID: 98096857

145 Jerome, M.E. et al. (1998) Toxoplasma gondii bradyzoites form spontaneously during sporozoite-initiated development. Infect Immun 66, 4838-4844, PubMed ID: 98427152

146 Smith, J.E. (1995) A ubiquitous intracellular parasite: the cellular biology of Toxoplasma gondii. Int J Parasitol 25, 1301-1309, PubMed ID: 96229271

147 Bohne, W., Holpert, M. and Gross, U. (1999) Stage differentiation of the protozoan parasite Toxoplasma gondii. Immunobiology 201, 248-254, PubMed ID: 20097149

148 Thomason, P., Traynor, D. and Kay, R. (1999) Taking the plunge. Terminal differentiation in Dictyostelium. Trends Genet 15, 15-19, PubMed ID: 99187892

149 Lujan, H.D. et al. (1996) Cholesterol starvation induces differentiation of the intestinal parasite Giardia lamblia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93, 7628-7633, PubMed ID: 96353868

150 Choi, W.Y. et al. (1994) Culture of tissue-cyst forming strain of Toxoplasma gondii and the effect of cyclic AMP and pyrimidine salvage inhibitors. Korean J Parasitol 32, 19-26, PubMed ID: 94220433

Accession information: (01) 00227-7a.pdf (short code: txt001kjy); 15 January 2001 ISSN 1462-3994 © 2001 Cambridge University Press

expert reviews
in molecular medicine

http://www-ermm.cbcu.cam.ac.uk

151 Yahiaoui, B. et al. (1999) Isolation and ID: 95203405
characterization of a subtractive library enriched 155 Denton, H. et al. (1996) Enzymes of energy
for developmentally regulated transcripts metabolism in the bradyzoites and tachyzoites of
expressed during encystation of Toxoplasma Toxoplasma gondii. FEMS Microbiol Lett 137,
gondii. Mol Biochem Parasitol 99, 223-235, 103-108, PubMed ID: 97089755
PubMed ID: 99270311 156 Dzierzinski, F. et al. (1999) The protozoan
152 Kasper, L.H. (1989) Identification of parasite Toxoplasma gondii expresses two
stage-specific antigens of Toxoplasma gondii. functional plant-like glycolytic enzymes.
Infect Immun 57, 668-672, PubMed ID: 89138631 Implications for evolutionary origin of
153 Woodison, G. and Smith, J.E. (1990) Identification apicomplexans. J Biol Chem 274, 24888-24895,
of the dominant cyst antigens of Toxoplasma PubMed ID: 99386970
gondii. Parasitology 100 Pt 3, 389-392, PubMed 157 Ajioka, J.W., Fitzpatrick, J.M. and Reitter, C.P.
ID: 90301393 (2001) Toxoplasma gondii genomics: shedding light
154 Zhang, Y.W. and Smith, J.E. (1995) Toxoplasma on pathogenesis and chemotherapy. Exp Rev Mol
gondii: identification and characterization of a Med 6 January, http://www-
cyst molecule. Exp Parasitol 80, 228-233, PubMed ermm.cbcu.cam.ac.uk/01002204h.htm


Further reading, resources and contacts

Montoya, J.G. and Remington, J.S. (1999) Toxoplasma gondii. In Principles and Practice of Infectious
Diseases (5th edn) (Vol. 2) (Mandell, G.L., Bennett, J.E. and Dolin, R., eds), pp. 2858-2887, Churchill
Livingstone, New York, NY, USA. This is an informative chapter on the medical aspects of toxoplasmosis.

The NIH MEDLINEplus health information site for toxoplasmosis summarises the work of relevant
organisations.
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/toxoplasmosis.html

The American Veterinary Medical Association provides information on toxoplasmosis from the perspective of
pet care.
http://www.avma.org/care4pets/antoxo.htm


Features associated with this article

Figures
Figure 1. The Toxoplasma gondii life cycle (fig002jac).
First published in Ajioka, J.W., Fitzpatrick, J.M. and Reitter, C.P. (2001) Toxoplasma gondii genomics:
shedding light on pathogenesis and chemotherapy. Exp Rev Mol Med 6 January,
http://www-ermm.cbcu.cam.ac.uk/01002204h.htm
Figure 2. Electron micrograph of the tachyzoite form of Toxoplasma gondii within a parasitophorous vacuole
formed during invasion of a green monkey kidney VERO cell (fig001kjj).
Figure 3. Potential interactions between Toxoplasma and its mammalian host cell (fig002kjj).


Citation details for this article

Isabelle Coppens and Keith A. Joiner (2001) Parasite-host cell interactions in toxoplasmosis: new avenues
for intervention? Exp. Rev. Mol. Med. 15 January, http://www-ermm.cbcu.cam.ac.uk/01002277h.htm


Accession information: (01) 00227-7a.pdf (shortcode: txt001kjy); 15 January 2001
ISSN 1462-3994 © 2001 Cambridge University Press
