
The fifth gene of the *iol* operon of *Bacillus subtilis*, *iolE*, encodes 2-keto-*myo*-inositol dehydratase

Ken-ichi Yoshida,${}^{1}$ Masanori Yamaguchi,${}^{2}$ Hideki Ikeda,${}^{1}$ Kaoru Omae,${}^{1}$ Ken-ichi Tsurusaki${}^{3}$ and Yasutaro Fujita${}^{1}$

${}^{1}$Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Life Science and Biotechnology, Fukuyama University, 985 Sanzo, Higashimura-cho, Fukuyama-shi, Hiroshima 729-0292, Japan  
${}^{2}$Central Research Laboratories, Hokko Chemical Industry Co., Ltd, 2165 Toda, Atsugi-shi, Kanagawa 243-0023, Japan  
${}^{3}$Department of Environment and Information Science, Faculty of Human Culture and Sciences, Fukuyama University, 985 Sanzo, Higashimura-cho, Fukuyama-shi, Hiroshima 729-0292, Japan  

Correspondence  
Ken-ichi Yoshida  
kyoshida@bt.fubt.fukuyama-u.ac.jp  

Received 16 September 2003  
Revised 10 November 2003  
Accepted 11 November 2003  

The *myo*-inositol catabolism pathway of *Bacillus subtilis* has not been fully characterized but was proposed to involve step-wise multiple reactions that finally yielded acetyl-CoA and dihydroxyacetone phosphate. It is known that the *iolABCDEFGHJIJ* operon is responsible for the catabolism of inositol. *IolG* catalyses the first step of *myo*-inositol catabolism, the dehydrogenation of *myo*-inositol, producing 2-keto-*myo*-inositol (inosose). The second step was thought to be the dehydration of inosose. Genetic and biochemical analyses of the *iol* genes led to the identification of *iolE*, encoding the enzyme for the second step of inositol catabolism, inosose dehydratase. The reaction product of inosose dehydratase was identified as D-2,3-diketo-4-deoxy-epi-inositol.

---

### INTRODUCTION

*myo*-Inositol is abundant in soil and also common and essential in plants. Several micro-organisms, including *Bacillus subtilis* (Yoshida *et al.*, 1997), *Cryptococcus melibiosum* (Vidal-Leiria & van Uden, 1973), *Aerobacter aerogenes* (reclassified as *Enterobacter aerogenes/Klebsiella mobilis*) (Berman & Magasanik, 1966a), *Rhizobium leguminosarum* bv. *viciae* (Poole *et al.*, 1994), *Sinorhizobium meliloti* (Galbraith *et al.*, 1998) and *Sinorhizobium fredii* (Jiang *et al.*, 2001), can grow on inositol as the carbon source. It was thought that bacterial inositol catabolism is only required for efficient utilization of this compound. However, the inositol dehydrogenase of *S. fredii* not only catalyses the initial reaction step of inositol catabolism but also is involved in nitrogen fixation and competitiveness to nodulate soybeans (Jiang *et al.*, 2001). Furthermore, MocA and MocC of *S. meliloti* which participate in degradation of rhizopine (L-3-O-methyl-scyllo-inosamine), a symbiosis-specific compound found in alfalfa nodules, exhibited significant similarities to *IolG* and *IolE* involved in inositol catabolism of *B. subtilis*, respectively (Rossbach *et al.*, 1994; Yoshida *et al.*, 1997), and the inositol catabolism pathway was tightly linked with rhizopine utilization in *S. meliloti* (Galbraith *et al.*, 1998). These facts implied an interesting relationship between bacterial inositol catabolism and plant-bacteria symbiosis for nitrogen fixation.

Inositol catabolism in *A. aerogenes* was studied biochemically, and a pathway of the catabolism finally yielding acetyl-CoA and dihydroxyacetone phosphate has been proposed as illustrated in Fig. 1 (Anderson & Magasanik, 1971a, b; Berman & Magasanik, 1966a, b). However, our knowledge of the molecular genetics of bacterial inositol catabolism has been restricted to *B. subtilis* (Fujita *et al.*, 1991; Yoshida *et al.*, 1997, 1999, 2002). In *B. subtilis*, the *iol* divergon, comprising the operons *iolABCDEFGHJIJ* and *iolRS* (Fig. 2a) (Yoshida *et al.*, 1997), and the *iolT* gene (Yoshida *et al.*, 2002) were shown to be involved in inositol catabolism. A repressor encoded by *iolR* was responsible for transcriptional regulation of both the *iol* divergon and *iolT* (Yoshida *et al.*, 1999, 2002). In the absence of inositol in the growth medium, the IolR repressor bound to the operator site within the promoter regions to repress the transcription, while in its presence inositol was taken into the cell and converted to a catabolic intermediate that acted as an inducer antagonizing IolR for induction of the *iol* divergon and *iolT* (Yoshida *et al.*, 1999, 2002). Thus, inactivation of *iolR* made the *iol* transcriptions constitutive (Yoshida *et al.*, 1997).

The enzymes involved in inositol catabolism in *B. subtilis* have not been completely elucidated. Inositol dehydrogenase encoded by *iolG* was responsible for the first step of the

Abbreviation: ESI-TOF, electrospray ionization-time-of-flight.

K.-i. Yoshida and others

Cell membrane

(1)  
$\text{iolT and iolF}$

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Fig. 1. myo-Inositol catabolism pathway and function of the B. subtilis iol genes. The pathway of inositol catabolism in A. aerogenes based on the previous proposal of Anderson & Magasanik (1971b) is shown with the structures of the intermediates [compounds (1) to (8)]. Assuming that the pathway in B. subtilis is similar to that in A. aerogenes, B. subtilis iol genes proven and deduced (underlined and parenthesized, respectively) to encode the enzymes involved in some of the reaction steps are shown (Yoshida et al., 1997, 2002). Compounds: (1), myo-inositol (carbon numbering is indicated); (2), inosose; (3), D-2,3-diketo-4-deoxy-epi-inositol; (4), 2-deoxy-5-keto-D-gluconic acid; (5), 2-deoxy-5-keto-D-gluconic acid 6-phosphate; (6), dihydroxyacetone phosphate; (7), malonic semialdehyde; (8), acetyl-CoA.

degradation cascade [conversion of compound (1) to (2) in Fig. 1] (Ramaley et al., 1979; Fujita et al., 1991; Yoshida et al., 1997), and iolT and iolF encoded the primary and secondary inositol transporters, respectively (Fig. 1) (Yoshida et al., 2002). Based on an assumption that the catabolism proceeded similarly as in A. aerogenes (Berman & Magasanik, 1966a) and the results of the homology search for the iol genes (Yoshida et al., 1999), iolC, iolJ and iolA were deduced to be involved in the fourth, fifth and sixth steps, respectively (Fig. 1). The second step was thought to be the dehydration of inosose catalysed by inosose dehydratase [conversion of compound (2) to (3) in Fig. 1]. Inosose dehydratase activity was demonstrated in A. aerogenes (Berman & Magasanik, 1966a), S. meliloti (Galbraith et al., 1998) and R. leguminosarum bv. viciae (Poole et al., 1994). However, no such gene encoding the enzyme in these bacteria has been identified so far. In this study, we found that B. subtilis iolE encoded inosose dehydratase, the reaction product of which was identified as D-2,3-diketo-4-deoxy-epi-inositol [compound (3) in Fig. 1].

---

### METHODS

#### Bacterial strains, plasmids and growth media
Strains and plasmids used in this work are listed in Table 1. B. subtilis cells were grown on tryptose blood agar base (Difco) plates supplemented with 0·18% glucose (TBABG) at 30°C and in S6 medium (Fujita & Freese, 1981) containing 0·5% Casamino acids with or without 10 mM inositol at 37°C with shaking. Escherichia coli cells were grown in Luria–Bertani (LB) (Sambrook & Russell, 2001) and TGA (Kaempfer & Magasanik, 1967) media at 37°C with shaking. When needed to select and grow the mutants and transformants, chloramphenicol (10 mg l⁻¹), erythromycin (0·3 mg l⁻¹) and ampicillin (50 mg l⁻¹) were added to the culture media.

#### Construction of B. subtilis strains
Each of the iol genes was disrupted through integration of plasmid pMUTIN as described previously (Yoshida et al., 2000). Part of each of the iol genes was amplified by PCR with a specific primer pair and DNA of strain 168 as a template; nucleotide sequences of the primers used are available at the BSORF website (http://bacillus.genome.ad.jp/). The PCR products were trimmed with an appropriate enzyme set of HindIII and BamHI (or BglII), and ligated with the HindIII–BamHI arm of pMUTIN1 (or pMUTIN2) (Vagner et al., 1998). Each of the recombinant plasmids was used to transform strain 168 to erythromycin-resistance to obtain pMUTIN integrants into each of iol genes. The resulting disruptant strains were IOLAd, IOLBd, IOLCd, IOLDd, IOLEd, IOLFd, IOLGd, IOLHd, IOLId and IOLJd (http://bacillus.genome.ad.jp/). DNA of these strains was then used to transform 60015 to erythromycin-resistance to get a series of the 10 iol disruptant strains (FU428 to FU437 in Table 1).

Strain YF111 is one of the iol mutants defective in inositol utilization obtained by ethyl methanesulfonate mutagenesis and subsequent detection of colonies unable to ferment inositol on tetrazolium-containing plates as described previously (Fujita & Fujita, 1983). This iol mutation was localized to iolE by its complementation test through transformation using various PCR fragments covering each of the iol genes, as described previously (Fujita et al., 1998). Nucleotide sequencing revealed a missense mutation of iolE[Pro242 (CCC) to Leu

Table 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study

| Strains       | Genotype                                                                 | Reference or source                     |
|---------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------|
| **B. subtilis** |                                                                         |                                        |
| 168           | trpC2                                                                   | Lab. stock                            |
| 60015         | trpC2metC7                                                              | Lab. stock                            |
| FU428         | trpC2metC7iolA::pMUTIN2                                                 | This study                            |
| FU429         | trpC2metC7iolB::pMUTIN2                                                 | This study                            |
| FU430         | trpC2metC7iolC::pMUTIN2                                                 | This study                            |
| FU431         | trpC2metC7iolD::pMUTIN2                                                 | This study                            |
| FU432         | trpC2metC7iolE::pMUTIN2                                                 | This study                            |
| FU433         | trpC2metC7iolF::pMUTIN1                                                 | This study                            |
| FU434         | trpC2metC7iolG::pMUTIN1                                                 | This study                            |
| FU435         | trpC2metC7iolH::pMUTIN1                                                 | This study                            |
| FU436         | trpC2metC7iolI::pMUTIN1                                                 | This study                            |
| FU437         | trpC2metC7iolJ::pMUTIN1                                                 | This study                            |
| YF111         | trpC2metC7iolE41                                                        | Fujita & Fujita (1983)                 |
| YF244         | trpC2metC7iolR::cat                                                     | Yoshida et al. (1999)                  |
| YF256         | trpC2metC7iolR::catiolE41                                               | This study                            |
| **E. coli**   |                                                                         |                                        |
| JM109         | recA1supE44endA1hsdR17gyrA96relA1thiΔ(lac-proAB) F'(traD36proAB⁺lacI⁺lacZΔM15) | Yanisch-Perron et al. (1985)          |
| **G. oxydans** |                                                                         |                                        |
| ATCC 621      |                                                                         | Posternak (1962)                      |
| **Plasmids**  |                                                                         |                                        |
| pMUTIN1       | ampermlacIlacZ                                                          | Vagner et al. (1998)                   |
| pMUTIN2       | ampermlacIlacZ                                                          | Vagner et al. (1998)                   |
| pUC18         | amplacZM15                                                              | Yanisch-Perron et al. (1985)          |
| pIOLB         | ampPlac-iolB                                                            | This study                            |
| pIOLC         | ampPlac-iolC                                                            | This study                            |
| pIOLD         | ampPlac-iolD                                                            | This study                            |
| pIOLE         | ampPlac-iolE                                                            | This study                            |

(CTC)], which was designated iolE41. Strain YF111 (iolE41) was transformed with DNA of strain YF244 (iolR::cat), resulting in strain YF256 (iolR::catiolE41).

Expression of each iol gene in E. coli cells. DNA fragments covering each of the iolB, iolC, iolD and iolE coding regions associated with its Shine-Dalgarno sequence with flanking EcoRI and BamHI sites at the head and tail, respectively, were amplified from DNA of strain 60015 by PCR using a specific primer pair (Table 2). Each of the fragments was trimmed with EcoRI and BamHI, and ligated with the EcoRI-BamHI arm of pUC18. The ligated DNA was used for the transformation of E. coli strain JM109 to ampicillin-resistance to result in plasmids pIOLB, pIOLC, pIOLD and pIOLE, which carried the respective iol genes placed under the control of the pUC18-borne lac promoter. Correct construction of the plasmids was confirmed by nucleotide sequencing. To determine the expression of the iolB, iolC, iolD and iolE genes, E. coli JM109 cells carrying plasmid pIOLB, pIOLC, pIOLD or pIOLE were grown in TGA medium containing ampicillin with and without 1 mM IPTG. Protein extracts of the cells were prepared as described previously (Yoshida et al., 1999) and analysed by SDS-PAGE.

Enzyme assay. β-Galactosidase activity in crude protein extracts of B. subtilis cells was determined spectrophotometrically as described previously (Yoshida et al., 2000). For assaying of inosose dehydratase, E. coli JM109 cells carrying pUC18, pIOLB, pIOLC, pIOLD or

Table 2. PCR primers used for cloning the iol gene

| Primer* | Nucleotide sequence (5'→3')† |
|---------|-----------------------------|
| iolB1   | CCGGAATTCTAGAAAGAGGAGGGCCTTCTC |
| iolB2   | CGCGGATCCAAAACAGCCACTCCTCAC TTG |
| iolC1   | CCGGAATTCTAACAAAGTGAGGAGTGGCTG |
| iolC2   | CGCGGATCCCGATCCCACC TTTACTCGATC |
| iolD1   | CCGGAATTCAAAGATCGAGTAAAGGTGGG |
| iolD2   | CGCGGATCCTTTCATTTTTGCCCATCTATGG |
| iolE1   | CCGGAATTCTCTGCGAAGCAGTATTAGAG |
| iolE2   | CGCGGATCCCCCATTGGTATTGCCCATATG |

* Primers are named after the respective genes to be cloned. The sense and antisense primers for the PCR are indicated with the suffixes 1 and 2, respectively.
† Underlined are restriction enzyme sites designed to be generated at the head and tail of the PCR products.

K.-i. Yoshida and others

The dehydrogenase assay (Yoshida *et al.*, 1997). The dehydratase assay was performed by the procedures modified from those of Berman & Magasanik (1966a). The assay mixture contained the protein extract, 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 8·0), 0·1 mM glutathione, 0·05 mM CoCl₂ and 0·5 mM inosose (3 mM for *B. subtilis* extracts). Inosose was prepared by the bacterial oxidation of inositol using *Gluconobacter oxydans* ATCC 621 as described by Posternak (1962). Dehydration of inosose was determined by monitoring the ultraviolet absorbance of the reaction product at 260 nm. Upon addition of inosose, the rate of increase of the absorbance was measured, and the molar concentration of the product was calculated from its estimated molar absorption coefficient of 6000 (Berman & Magasanik, 1966a).

**Isolation and identification of the IolE reaction product.** The IolE reaction product was produced and isolated as follows. In a test tube with a screw-cap, 400 mg (2·25 mmol) inosose was dissolved in 8 ml water. The solution was adjusted to pH 7·5, mixed with 2 ml of enzyme solution containing approximately 30 mg of protein extract of strain JM109(pIOLe) grown with 1 mM IPTG, saturated with nitrogen gas and incubated at 26°C for 12 h. The reaction was terminated by the addition of 0·5 ml Duolite C20 resin (Auchtel Products). After the solution had been acidified, the tube was incubated at 55°C for 10 min, then centrifuged to remove denatured proteins. The supernatant was successively passed through activated charcoal (2 ml), Duolite C20 (4 ml) and Duolite A368S (7 ml), which had been layered in a small column, to remove hydrophobic and ionic substances. The solution eluted from the column was concentrated and freeze-dried, to obtain the IolE reaction product as white crystals.

Reduction of the IolE reaction product was carried out as follows. One hundred milligrams (0·625 mmol) of the product was dissolved in 5 ml water, and 14·3 mg (0·375 mmol) NaBH₄ was added, which was enough to reduce 1·25 mmol of carbonyl groups. The reaction mixture was stirred in an ice-bath for 10 min and then at room temperature for 10 min. The solution was acidified by the addition of 0·2 ml of 1 M HCl, and mixed with 1 ml Duolite C20 resin to remove basic substances. The solution was passed through a paper filter, to remove the resin, and mixed with 1 ml Duolite A116 resin, to remove acidic substances. The solution was filtered once again, then aliquots of it were subjected to HPLC analysis. HPLC was performed on a Wakosil 5NH₂ column, 4·6 × 250 mm (Wako Pure Chemical Industries), kept at 40°C with 80% acetonitrile as solvent at a flow rate of 2 ml min⁻¹. Refractive index and optical rotation detectors were used to monitor the elution profile. Four quercitol stereoisomers [(+)-proto-quercitol, (-)-vibo-quercitol, (+)-epi-quercitol and scyllo-quercitol (custom preparation, Hokko Chemical Industry) (Takahashi *et al.*, 1998)] were used as authentic samples to identify the compounds produced by the reduction. The eluted fractions corresponding to a peak at retention time 7·4 min were collected, concentrated and dried to obtain 2·5 mg of the reduced compound [(+)-proto-quercitol]. Its 300 MHz ¹H-NMR and 75 MHz ¹³C-NMR spectra were obtained in D₂O (JNM-LA300 FT NMR System; JEOL).

Phenylhydrazone of the IolE reaction product was obtained as follows. Thirty milligrams (0·19 mmol) of the product was dissolved in 1 ml water, and 0·25 ml of 2·4 M phenylhydrazine in acetic acid (0·6 mmol) was added and mixed well. After being chilled for 5 h, phenylhydrazone appearing in the form of a reddish-yellow precipitate was collected by filtration and washed with a small amount of 50% methanol to obtain greenish-yellow needle-like crystals. Its 300 MHz ¹H-NMR spectrum was obtained in CD₃OD.

Mass spectra of the IolE reaction product and its phenylhydrazone were determined by ESI-TOF/MS (Mariner Biospectrometry Workstation; Applied Biosystems). The IolE reaction product was dissolved in 50%

acetonitrile containing 1% triethylamine for anion analysis, while the phenylhydrazone was in 50% acetonitrile containing 0·5% formic acid for cation analysis.

---

**RESULTS**

IolB, IolC, IolD, IolE and IolG were involved in the initial steps of inositol catabolism

myo-Inositol and inosose, the product of the first reaction step, did not antagonize the operator-binding of IolR, indicating that neither of them functioned as the inducer (Yoshida *et al.*, 1999). Thus, the second step presumably catalysed by inosose dehydratase had to be involved in the inducer production. In order to find the inosose dehydratase gene, we first attempted to systematically select out the genes required for the inducer production. Each of the *iol* genes was disrupted through integration of plasmid pMUTIN, resulting in strains FU428 to FU437 (Table 1). As an example, chromosomal arrangement of the *iol* region of strain FU429 with the disruption of *iolB* is shown in Fig. 2(b). The pMUTIN-borne *lacZ* reporter gene (Vagner *et al.*, 1998) integrated into each of the disrupted genes was used to monitor transcription from the *iol* promoter. In addition, the *spac* promoter under the control of LacI drove expression of the genes downstream of the disrupted one so that they were induced in the presence of IPTG (Vagner *et al.*, 1998). Therefore, only when the disrupted gene was not required for the inducer production would β-galactosidase be induced in the presence of inositol alone and/or both inositol and IPTG. The disruptants were grown in the presence and absence of inositol and/or IPTG, then β-galactosidase activity in the cell extracts was measured (Fig. 2c). Only in the *iolA* and *iolF* disruptants were both inositol and IPTG required for induction of β-galactosidase, suggesting that neither *iolA* nor *iolF* but some of their downstream genes might be involved in inducer production. [*iolF* encodes one of the two inositol transporters, which was dispensable when the other one (*iolT*) functioned (Yoshida *et al.*, 2002). The relatively higher activity detected in the *iolF* disruptant grown with inositol alone was probably due to leaky expression of *iolG* encoding inositol dehydrogenase owing to read-through of transcription from the erythromycin-resistance gene, which was detected in the integrants of plasmid pMUTIN1 (Vagner *et al.*, 1998).] However, only inositol was enough to induce β-galactosidase in the *iolH*, *iolI* and *iolJ* disruptants, suggesting that none of the three genes might be required for the inducer production. On the other hand, β-galactosidase was never induced in the *iolB*, *iolC*, *iolD*, *iolE* and *iolG* disruptants even in the presence of both inositol and IPTG. Therefore, it was highly likely that IolB, IolC, IolD, IolE and IolG were all involved in the initial reaction steps of inositol catabolism to produce the inducer. As IolG is inositol dehydrogenase which catalyses the first reaction step (Fujita *et al.*, 1991; Yoshida *et al.*, 1997), one of IolB, IolC, IolD and IolE could be inosose dehydratase catalysing the second step.

(a)
iolRS operon                      iol operon
PiolRS Piol
iolS iolR   iolA   iolB   iolC   iolD   iolE   iolF   iolG   iolH   iolJ

(b)
PiolRS Piol
Pspac
iolS iolR iolA iolB' lacZ    lacI (ori) (amp) erm' iolB iolC iolD iolE iolF iolG iolH iolJ
pMUTIN2

(c)
![Image of β-Galactosidase activity graph]

Fig. 2. Gene organization of the iol region and β-galactosidase synthesis in strains of B. subtilis. (a) Gene organization of the iol region of B. subtilis 60015. Gene organization and transcription of the iol divergon, the iol and iolRS operons, are shown schematically. Piol and PiolRS denote the iol and iolRS promoters, respectively. (b) Chromosomal arrangement of the iol region of a pMUTIN-integrant FU429. The iolB gene was split into iolB' and 'iolB and disrupted after Campbell-type integration of a pMUTIN2 derivative. Instead of iolB, lacZ is expressed under the control of Piol. The spac promoter (Pspac), regulated by LacI and thus induced in the presence of IPTG, is responsible for the expression of the other iol genes downstream of iolB. (ori) and (amp) are not functioning in B. subtilis. (c) β-Galactosidase activity in protein extracts of the cells of strains 60015 and FU428 to FU437 (Table 1, each iol gene disrupted by pMUTIN integration is shown beneath in parentheses), grown in S6 medium containing 0·5 % Casamino acids supplemented with 10 mM inositol (iol), 1 mM IPTG (IPTG) or 10 mM inositol plus 1 mM IPTG (iol + IPTG), or no additional compounds (None), was measured. Mean values ± SD of three independent measurements are shown.

http://mic.sgmjournals.org

K.-i. Yoshida and others

| kDa | M | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 97·4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 66·2 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 45·0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 31·0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

IPTG  
- + - + - +

| kDa | M | 7 | 8 | 9 | 10 | 11 | 12 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 97·4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 66·2 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 45·0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 31·0 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

lolC  
lolB  
lolD  
lolE  

- + - + - +

Fig. 3. Production of the *iolB*, *iolC*, *iolD* and *iolE* gene products in *E. coli*. Cells of *E. coli* JM109 carrying pUC18 (lanes 1, 2, 7 and 8), pIOLB (lanes 3 and 4), pIOLC (lanes 5 and 6), pIOLD (lanes 9 and 10) or pIOLE (lanes 11 and 12) were grown in the presence (lanes 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12) and absence (lanes 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11) of 1 mM IPTG. Protein extracts from the cells were prepared and analysed by SDS-PAGE; each of the lanes contained 50 μg of the protein extract. Lane M, size marker proteins. Protein bands of lolB, lolC, lolD and lolE are indicated with arrows on the right-hand side of both panels.

### *iolE* encoded inosose dehydratase

Each of the *iolB*, *iolC*, *iolD* and *iolE* coding regions together with its Shine–Dalgarno sequence was cloned into the multi-cloning site of pUC18 to provide pIOLB, pIOLC, pIOLD and pIOLE, respectively. Thus, the cloned genes were placed under the control of the *lac* promoter in *E. coli*. The production of the *iol* gene products in *E. coli* cells was confirmed by the appearance of extra protein bands on SDS-PAGE corresponding to the expected sizes from their respective amino acid sequences (Fig. 3). We found, unexpectedly, that the open reading frame (ORF) of *iolD* was probably 171 bp longer toward upstream than that reported (Kunst et al., 1997) due to misassignment of its translation start site, because expression of the reported ORF of *iolD* in *E. coli* cells produced no extra protein detected upon SDS-PAGE (data not shown). However, when we cloned a DNA fragment into pUC18, which contained not only the previously reported *iolD* gene but also the 171 bp located upstream of it as well as an almost-perfect ribosome-binding site (AAAGGTGG) located a further 8 bp upstream of the newly presumed GTG start codon, we observed an additional protein band in crude extracts of the *E. coli* transformant exhibiting the size (70 kDa) expected for the protein encoded by the ‘5′-extended’ *iolD* gene (Fig. 3, lane 10).

Inosose dehydratase activity in the protein extracts of the *E. coli* cells expressing one of *iolB*, *iolC*, *iolD* and *iolE* was measured (Table 3). The results clearly indicated that only the extract prepared from cells expressing *iolE* contained a large amount of inosose dehydratase. On the other hand, the enzyme activity in the cells of *B. subtilis* 60015 (wild-type) was induced when the cells were grown with inositol (Table 3). The activity in strain YF244 (*iolR::cat*) was high and constitutive, whereas that in a mutant, YF256 (*iolR::cat*

*iolE41*), turned out to be negligible in spite of the constitutive *iol* transcription caused by the *iolR* inactivation (Yoshida et al., 1999). From these results, we concluded that the *iolE* gene encoded *B. subtilis* inosose dehydratase, which was induced in the presence of inositol in the growth medium.

#### Properties of *B. subtilis* inosose dehydratase produced in *E. coli* cells

The inosose dehydratase activity in the crude extract of *E. coli* cells expressing *iolE* was remarkably high, while those in the other extracts were negligible (Table 3). Thus, we attempted to determine the basic characteristics of *B. subtilis* inosose dehydratase produced in *E. coli* cells without its purification. The assay was conducted under the conditions analogous to those established in an earlier study (Berman & Magasanik, 1966a). The activity peak was seen at pH 7·5–8 (Fig. 4). A Lineweaver–Burk plot for the enzyme gave an apparent *K*ₘ value for inosose of 1·65 ± 0·27 mM at pH 8 (data not shown). It was reported that *A. aerogenes* inosose dehydratase required 0·1 mM glutathione and 0·05 mM Co²⁺ or Mn²⁺ ions for maximal activity (Berman & Magasanik, 1966a). The enzyme activity in the protein extract was about twice higher in the presence of 0·1 mM glutathione plus 0·05 mM CoCl₂ or MnCl₂ than in their absence (data not shown). MnCl₂ appeared to be less suitable to this enzyme reaction than CoCl₂ (data not shown). In addition, EDTA was able to counteract these effects of the metal ions partially (data not shown).

#### Identification of the product of the *iolE* inosose dehydratase reaction

The enzymic conversion of inosose by the extract of *E. coli* expressing *iolE* was so efficient that inosose was completely

Table 3. Inosose dehydratase activity in *E. coli* cells expressing the *B. subtilis iol* genes and in strains of *B. subtilis*

| Plasmid in JM109 | Inosose dehydratase activity [nmol min⁻¹ (mg protein)⁻¹]* |
|------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| pUC18            | 2·6 ± 1·6                                             |
| pIOLB            | 1·2 ± 1·0                                             |
| pIOLC            | 1·0 ± 1·0                                             |
| pIOLD            | 4·2 ± 1·8                                             |
| pIOLE            | 1243·2 ± 156·4                                        |

| Strain (relevant genotype) | Inosose dehydratase activity [nmol min⁻¹ (mg protein)⁻¹]† | With inositol | Without inositol |
|----------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|---------------|-------------------|
| 60015 (wild-type)           |                                                          | 21·9 ± 3·2    | 5·2 ± 2·0         |
| YF244 (*iolR::cat*)         |                                                          | 92·6 ± 11·0   | 138·3 ± 20·4      |
| YF256 (*iolR::cat iolE41*)  |                                                          | 1·1 ± 1·0     | 1·5 ± 1·0         |

* The activity in *E. coli* JM109 carrying each of the plasmids grown in TGA medium containing ampicillin and 1 mM IPTG was determined. Mean values ± SD of three independent measurements are shown.
† The activity in strains of *B. subtilis* grown in S6 medium containing 0·5% Casamino acids with and without 10 mM inositol was determined. Mean values ± SD of three independent measurements are shown.

Fig. 4. pH dependency of *B. subtilis* inosose dehydratase. The protein extract prepared from *E. coli* JM109 expressing *B. subtilis iolE* was used for the inosose dehydratase assay at various pH values with 0·5 mM inosose. The relative activities (percentages to the activity at pH 8) determined in 50 mM potassium/HEPES and 50 mM Tris/HCl buffers are shown with open and solid bars, respectively. Because the reaction product decayed rapidly at higher pH values, it was hard to determine the optimum pH accurately. Representative results from three independent experiments are shown.

consumed after 12 h of the reaction under the conditions described above. The conversion of 400 mg (2·25 mmol) of inosose allowed us to isolate 245 mg (1·53 mmol) of the product. The IolE reaction product was expected to be D-2,3-diketo-4-deoxy-*epi*-inositol (C₆H₈O₅). The ESI-TOF mass spectrum of the isolated product gave a peak of an anion at *m/z* 159·0297. This anion was probably the molecular ion of D-2,3-diketo-4-deoxy-*epi*-inositol ([C₆H₈O₅-H]⁻, calculated mass *m/z* 159·0288). Then, the product was reduced with NaBH₄ and subjected to HPLC analysis as described above. Since the product was expected to possess two carbonyl groups, the reduction could give four stereoisomers of quercitol. The HPLC elution profile gave four peaks at retention times of 7·4, 8·6, 9·0 and 9·3 min exhibiting optical rotation in 80% acetonitrile [α]²⁵₅₈₉ +21·9 ± 1·9°, −61·1 ± 2·3°, +6·0 ± 0·6° and +0·6 ± 0·7° (mean ± SD of seven independent experiments), respectively, while the authentic samples of four stereoisomers of quercitol, (+)-*proto*-quercitol, (−)-*vibo*-quercitol, (+)-*epi*-quercitol and *scyllo*-quercitol [compounds (9), (10), (11) and (12), respectively, in Fig. 5], gave peaks at 7·4, 8·6, 9·0 and 9·3 min exhibiting [α]²⁵₅₈₉ +23·8 ± 0·9°, −64·5 ± 0·8°, +4·7 ± 0·8° and +0·2 ± 1·0°, respectively. Furthermore, we isolated the compound contained in the first peak at retention time of 7·4 min, and its ¹H-NMR and ¹³C-NMR spectra (data not shown) coincided with those reported for (+)-*proto*-quercitol (McCasland *et al.*, 1968). These results strongly suggested that the IolE reaction product could be reduced to become the four stereoisomers of quercitol, implying that the reduced two carbonyl groups could have been located at the positions corresponding to C-2 and C-3 of the quercitols (Fig. 5) [carbon numbering was defined according to that of *myo*-inositol, compound (1) in Fig. 1].

K.-i. Yoshida and others

Summary of ${}^{1}$H-NMR (300 MHz, CD$_{3}$OD)

| $\delta$ 4.25 (1 H, d, H-1) |
| $\delta$ 3.67 (1 H, t, H-2) |
| $\delta$ 3.88 (1 H, dt, H-3) |
| $\delta$ 2.53 (1 H, dd, H-4) |
| $\delta$ 3.07 (1 H, dd, H-5) |
| $J_{1,2}=7.1$ Hz, $J_{2,3}=J_{3,4}=8.0$ Hz, $J_{3,5}=6.0$ Hz, $J_{4,5}=17.2$ Hz |

Fig. 5. Four stereoisomers of quercitol produced after the reduction of the lolE reaction product. Compounds: (9), (+)-proto-quercitol [carbon numbering was defined according to that of myo-inositol, compound (1) in Fig. 1]; (10), (-)-vibo-quercitol; (11), (+)-epi-quercitol; (12), scyllo-quercitol. Hydroxyl groups judged to be produced by the reduction of the two carbonyl groups are indicated with asterisks.

Fig. 6. Structure determination of the phenylhydrazone of the lolE reaction product. A summarized table for the ${}^{1}$H-NMR spectrum analysis of the phenylhydrazone of the lolE reaction product and its defined structural formula are given. Carbon numbering was defined according to that of myo-inositol [compound (1) in Fig. 1].

Since the ${}^{1}$H-NMR spectrum of the IolE reaction product itself (data not shown) was too complicated to identify the product, probably due to keto-enol tautomerization, the product was converted to its phenylhydrazone for determination of its structure. Starting from 30 mg (0.19 mmol) of the product, we obtained 29 mg (0.086 mmol) of its phenylhydrazone. The ESI-TOF mass spectrum of the phenylhydrazone gave a peak of a cation at $m/z$ 341.1615. This cation corresponded to the molecular ion of a bisphenylhydrazone ([C$_{18}$H$_{20}$N$_{4}$O$_{3}$ + H]$^{+}$, calculated mass $m/z$ 341.1608), confirming the two carbonyl groups. The ${}^{1}$H-NMR spectrum of the bisphenylhydrazone revealed five protons contained in it, and the coupling patterns of the two primary protons (H-4 and H-5 in Fig. 6) suggested that both of them could belong to a -CH$_{2}$- group vicinal to one of the carbonyl groups. Thus, the two carbonyl groups were assigned to C-2 and C-3, and the -CH$_{2}$- group was assigned to C-4 (Fig. 6), referring to the structures of inosose [2-keto-myo-inositol (1,3,5/4,6-pentahydroxycyclohexan-2-one), compound (2) in Fig. 1] and the four stereoisomers of quercitol produced by the reduction of the IolE reaction product (Fig. 5). Starting from the -CH$_{2}$- protons, the other three protons (H-3, H-2 and H-1) were assigned one by one to the positions according to their chemical shift and coupling patterns (Fig. 6). The assignment was also confirmed by the appearance of cross peaks in a COSY

DISCUSSION

We identified that the B. subtilis iolE gene encoded inosose dehydratase (Table 3) for the second reaction step of the inositol catabolism pathway (Fig. 1). The reaction product was identified, by determination of the structure of its reduced forms (Fig. 5) and its bisphenylhydrazone (Fig. 6), to be D-2,3-diketo-4-deoxy-epi-inositol [compound (3) in Fig. 1], which was identical to that reported for the A. aerogenes enzyme (Berman & Magasanik, 1966a). The protein extract of E. coli cells producing the B. subtilis inosose dehydratase (Fig. 3) was used to determine some properties of the enzyme. The apparent pH optimum for this enzyme was pH 7.5–8 (Fig. 4), and its $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ value for inosose was 1.65 ± 0.27 mM at pH 8, while the A. aerogenes
one gave a pH optimum at pH 6–6·2 and a $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ value of 0·15 mM at pH 6 (Berman & Magasanik, 1966a). These differences in the pH optima and $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ values for inosose might possibly reflect those in the actual environmental conditions of the two micro-organisms. However, the *B.* subtilis enzyme required 0·1 mM glutathione and 0·05 mM Co²⁺ or Mn²⁺ for maximal activity, and the cofactor requirement was almost the same as reported for the *A.* aerogenes enzyme. We did not examine substrate specificities for the *B.* subtilis enzyme, because other substrates such as stereoisomers of inosose, which could be utilizable for our assay system depending on the ultraviolet absorbance of the product, were not available.

A protein similarity search in the SWISSPROT database (Release 40.0+/02-10) using the FASTA program (Pearson & Lipman, 1988) revealed that *B.* subtilis IolE exhibited the highest optimized score of 677 to *S.* meliloti MocC (Rossbach *et al.*, 1994). The amino acid residue Pro242 of IolE (substituted to Leu in the *iolE41* mutation) was indispensable for the enzyme activity. In the amino acid sequence of MocC, not only the residue corresponding to Pro242 but also its flanking residues were well conserved. MocC is responsible for the utilization of rhizopine (Rossbach *et al.*, 1994), which might function as a dehydratase for an inosose-like intermediate formed in rhizopine catabolism in *S.* meliloti. Furthermore, MocA, another enzyme needed for rhizopine utilization, shares a high similarity with IolG, inositol dehydrogenase (Rossbach *et al.*, 1994). Hence, it is assumable that the substrate of MocC might be the MocA reaction product. These facts support well the previous idea of Galbraith *et al.* (1998) that the inositol catabolism pathway was tightly linked with rhizopine utilization in *S.* meliloti. IolE was found to possess a sequence motif for the inner-membrane component signature of the binding-protein-dependent transport systems (PROSITE: PS00402) from the 33rd to 61st residues. However, this motif was not conserved in MocC, so its significance remained to be examined. On the other hand, the paralogue of IolE exhibiting the highest FASTA optimized score of 118 was IolH. IolH was unlikely to be another inosose dehydratase, because the *iolE41* mutant did not possess this enzyme activity and could not grow on inositol (data not shown). We do not know the function of IolH, but it might be an enzyme which catalyses a reaction involving a compound related to inosose.

The *B.* subtilis *iolB*, *iolC*, *iolD*, *iolE* and *iolG* genes were all found to be indispensable for the production of the inducer (Fig. 2). Also, the first and second reaction steps in the inositol catabolism pathway were proven to be catalysed by inositol dehydrogenase and inosose dehydratase encoded by *iolG* and *iolE*, respectively (Fig. 1). Thus, the remaining three genes, *iolB*, *iolC* and *iolD*, could be responsible for the later steps leading to the production of the inducer. In *A.* aerogenes, the product of the inosose dehydratase reaction was successively hydrolysed by a hydrolase, phosphorylated by a kinase, then cleaved by an aldolase (Fig. 1) (Anderson

& Magasanik, 1971a, b; Berman & Magasanik, 1966b). *B.* subtilis IolC exhibited high similarity to fructokinases (Yoshida *et al.*, 1997). IolJ, exhibiting significant similarity to aldolases (Yoshida *et al.*, 1997), was not required for inducer production (Fig. 2). In addition, *B.* subtilis IolR, the repressor of the *iol* operon, belongs to the DeoR family of repressors. Members of this family are known to interact with an inducer of phosphorylated sugar (van Rooijen & de Vos, 1990). Therefore, it is likely that IolB, IolC and IolD might be involved in the successive hydrolysis and phosphorylation steps (Fig. 1). If the inositol catabolism of *B.* subtilis was taking place similar to that in *A.* aerogenes, the phosphorylated intermediate acting as the inducer interacting with *B.* subtilis IolR might be 2-deoxy-5-keto-D-gluconic acid 6-phosphate [compound (5) in Fig. 1]. Further studies to prove the above hypothesis are in progress.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We wish to thank D. Aoyama, Y. Fujii, S. Goto, H. Hara, Y. Ihori, I. Ishio, S. Inoue, J. Kawai and C. Setogawa for their technical assistance. We also thank F. Matsuura, M. Ohta and A. Tonari, Department of Biotechnology, Fukuyama University, for their indispensable contributions in inosose preparation. We are indebted to P. Pujic, M. Pujic and Y. Yamada for critical reading of the manuscript. This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for the Encouragement of Young Scientists to K. Yoshida from the Ministry of Education, Science and Sports and Culture of Japan.

## REFERENCES

Anderson, W. A. & Magasanik, B. (1971a). The pathway of myo-inositol degradation in *Aerobacter aerogenes*. Identification of the intermediate 2-deoxy-5-keto-D-gluconic acid. *J Biol Chem* 246, 5653–5661.

Anderson, W. A. & Magasanik, B. (1971b). The pathway of myo-inositol degradation in *Aerobacter aerogenes*. Conversion of 2-deoxy-5-keto-D-gluconic acid to glycolytic intermediates. *J Biol Chem* 246, 5662–5675.

Berman, T. & Magasanik, B. (1966a). The pathway of myo-inositol degradation in *Aerobacter aerogenes*. Dehydrogenation and dehydration. *J Biol Chem* 241, 800–806.

Berman, T. & Magasanik, B. (1966b). The pathway of myo-inositol degradation in *Aerobacter aerogenes*. Ring scission. *J Biol Chem* 241, 807–813.

Fujita, Y. & Freese, E. (1981). Isolation and properties of a *Bacillus subtilis* mutant unable to produce fructose-bisphosphatase. *J Bacteriol* 145, 760–767.

Fujita, Y. & Fujita, T. (1983). Genetic analysis of a pleiotropic deletion mutation (*Δigf*) in *Bacillus subtilis*. *J Bacteriol* 154, 864–869.

Fujita, Y., Shindo, K., Miwa, Y. & Yoshida, K. (1991). *Bacillus subtilis* inositol dehydrogenase-encoding gene (*idh*): sequence and expression in *Escherichia coli*. *Gene* 108, 121–125.

Fujita, Y., Yoshida, K., Miwa, Y., Yanai, N., Nagakawa, E. & Kasahara, Y. (1998). Identification and expression of the *Bacillus subtilis* fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase gene (*fbp*). *J Bacteriol* 180, 4309–4313.

Galbraith, M. P., Feng, S. F., Borneman, J., Triplett, E. W., de Bruijn, F. J. & Rossbach, S. (1998). A functional myo-inositol catabolism
pathway is essential for rhizopine utilization by Sinorhizobium meliloti. Microbiology 144, 2915–2924.

Jiang, G., Krishnan, A. H., Kim, Y.-M., Wacek, T. J. & Krishnan, H. B. (2001). A functional myo-inositol dehydrogenase gene is required for efficient nitrogen fixation and competitiveness of Sinorhizobium fredii USDA191 to nodulate soybean (Glycine max [L.] Merr.). J Bacteriol 183, 2595–2604.

Kaempfer, R. O. & Magasanik, B. (1967). Effect of infection with T-even phage on the inducible synthesis of beta-galactosidase in Escherichia coli. J Mol Biol 27, 453–468.

Kunst, F., Ogasawara, N., Moszer, I. & 148 other authors (1997). The complete genome sequence of the gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis. Nature 390, 249–256.

McCasland, G. E., Naumann, M. O. & Durham, L. J. (1968). Alicyclic carbohydrates. XXXV. Synthesis of proto-quercitol. 220-MHz proton spectrum with the superconducting solenoid. J Org Chem 33, 4220–4227.

Pearson, W. R. & Lipman, D. J. (1988). Improved tools for biological sequence comparison. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85, 2444–2448.

Poole, P. S., Blyth, A., Reid, C. J. & Walters, K. (1994). myo-Inositol catabolism and catabolite regulation in Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae. Microbiology 140, 2787–2795.

Posternak, T. (1962). scyllo-inosose (myo-inosose-2), Bacterial oxidation of myo-inositol. In Methods in Carbohydrate Chemistry, vol. I, pp. 294–297. Edited by R. L. Whistler & M. L. Wolform. New York & London: Academic Press.

Ramaley, R., Fujita, Y. & Freese, E. (1979). Purification and properties of Bacillus subtilis inositol dehydrogenase. J Biol Chem 254, 7684–7690.

Rossbach, S., Kulpa, D. A., Rossbach, U. & de Bruijn, F. J. (1994). Molecular and genetic characterization of rhizopine catabolism (mocABCR) genes of Rhizobium meliloti L5-30. Mol Gen Genet 245, 11–24.

Sambrook, J. & Russell, D. W. (2001). Molecular Cloning: a Laboratory Manual, 3rd edn. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory.

Takahashi, A., Kanbe, K., Tamamura, Y. & Sato, K. (1998). Bioconversion of myo-inositol to rare cyclic sugar alcohols. In Abstracts of The First International Symposium on Disease Prevention by IP6 & other Rice Components, Kyoto, Japan (June 8–9), abstract no. PS-64, p. 116.

Vagner, V., Dervyn, E. & Ehrlich, S. D. (1998). A vector for systematic gene inactivation in Bacillus subtilis. Microbiology 144, 3097–3104.

van Rooijen, R. J. & de Vos, W. M. (1990). Molecular cloning, transcriptional analysis, and nucleotide sequence of lacR, a gene encoding the repressor of the lactose phosphotransferase system of Lactococcus lactis. J Biol Chem 265, 18499–18503.

Vidal-Leiria, M. & van Uden, N. (1973). Inositol dehydrogenase from the yeast Cryptococcus melibiosum. Biochim Biophys Acta 293, 295–303.

Yanisch-Perron, C., Vieira, J. & Messing, J. (1985). Improved M13 phage cloning vectors and host strain: nucleotide sequences of M13mp18 and pUC19 vectors. Gene 33, 103–119.

Yoshida, K., Aoyama, D., Ishio, I., Shibayama, T. & Fujita, Y. (1997). Organization and transcription of the myo-inositol operon, iol, of Bacillus subtilis. J Bacteriol 179, 4591–4598.

Yoshida, K., Shibayama, T., Aoyama, D. & Fujita, Y. (1999). Interaction of a repressor and its binding sites for regulation of the Bacillus subtilis iol divergon. J Mol Biol 285, 917–929.

Yoshida, K., Ishio, I., Nagakawa, E., Yamamoto, Y., Yamamoto, M. & Fujita, Y. (2000). Systematic study of gene expression and transcription organization in the gntZ-ywaA region of the Bacillus subtilis genome. Microbiology 146, 573–579.

Yoshida, K., Yamamoto, Y., Omae, K., Yamamoto, M. & Fujita, Y. (2002). Identification of two myo-inositol transporter genes of Bacillus subtilis. J Bacteriol 184, 983–991.
