
Pharmacological Research 49 (2004) 503–508

**Endothelium-dependent hyperpolarizations: the history**

Paul M. Vanhoutte*

*Department of Pharmacology, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong*

Accepted 17 November 2003

---

### Abstract

Endothelial cells control the tone and the growth of the
P.M. Vanhoutte / Pharmacological Research 49 (2004) 503–508

Fig. 1. Release of endothelium-derived factors. Endothelial receptor (R) activation induces an influx of Ca²⁺ into the cytoplasm of the endothelial cell. When agonists activate the endothelial cells, an increase in inositol phosphate (
P.M. Vanhoutte / Pharmacological Research 49 (2004) 503–508

(A)
(B)

endothelium

without
bradykinin
$10^{-7}$ M
-47 mV
-48 mV
10 mV
1 min

with
$10^{-7}$ M
-4
Fig. 5. Multiplicity of mechanisms leading to endothelium-dependent hyperpolarization. Substances such as acetylcholine (ACh), bradykinin (BK), and substance P (SP), through the activation of M₃-muscarinic, B₂-bradykinin, and NK₁-neurokinin receptor subtypes, respectively, and agents that increase intracellular calcium,
tonic negative influence on the release of EDHF, and that blockade or absence of NO synthase activity favors the occurrence of endothelium-dependent relaxations attributed to EDHF [42–44].

### 4. What about prostacyclin?

Similar conclusions as for NO can be reached concerning the role of prostacyclin in endothelium-dependent hyperpolarizations. These are unaffected, in most blood vessels
[27] Vanhoutte PM. In: Vanhoutte PM, editor. Endothelium-derived hyperpolarizations. Harwood Academic Publishers; 1999. p. 1–436.

[28] Vanhoutte PM. In: Vanhoutte PM, editor. EDHF 2000. London and New York: Taylor &