
Molecular Neurobiology  
Copyright © 2004 Humana Press Inc.  
All rights of any nature whatsoever reserved.  
ISSN 0893-7648/04/29(1): 31–39/$25.00  

# Multiple Signal Transduction Pathways Mediated by 5-HT Receptors  

**Mami Noda**,*,1 Haruhiro Higashida,2 Shunsuke Aoki,3 and Keiji Wada3  

*1Laboratory of Pathophysiology, Kyushu University Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fukuoka 812-8582; *2Department of Biophysical Genetics, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medicine, Kanazawa 920-8640; *3Department of Degenerative Neurological Diseases, National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan  

## Abstract  

Among human serotonin (5-HT) receptor subtypes, each G protein-coupled receptor subtype is reported to have one G protein-signaling cascade. However, the signaling may not be as simple as previously thought to be. 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors are probably the least well understood among the 5-HT receptors, but the authors found that 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors couple to multiple signaling cascades. When the 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors were expressed in undifferentiated C6 glioma cells, they modulated the level of second messengers. For example, activation of 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors inhibited the adenylyl cyclase activity and subsequently reduced the cAMP level, as previously reported. In addition to this known signaling via G<sub>i</sub>/G<sub>o</sub>, 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors are coupled to the inhibition of ADP-ribosyl cyclase and cyclic ADP ribose formation. On the other hand, activation of 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors transiently opened the K<sup>+</sup> channels, presumably due to the increase in intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> after formation of inositol (1,4,5) trisphosphate. The K<sup>+</sup> currents were inhibited by both heparin and pretreatment with pertussis toxin, suggesting the cross-talk between G<sub>i</sub>/G<sub>o</sub> protein and phospholipase C cascade. Thus, the authors' results indicate that 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors couple to multiple second messenger systems and may contribute to the complicated physiological and pathophysiological states. Although this multiple signaling has been reported only for 5-HT<sub>5A</sub>/5-HT<sub>1</sub> receptors so far, it is possible that other 5-HT receptor subtypes bear similar complexity. As a result, in addition to the wide variety of expression patterns of each 5-HT receptor subtype, it is possible that multiple signal transduction systems may add complexity to the serotonergic system in brain function. The investigation of these serotonergic signaling and its impairment at cellular level may help to understand the symptoms of brain diseases.

Index Entries: 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors; G<sub>i</sub>/G<sub>o</sub>; adenylyl cyclase; cyclic AMP; ADP ribosyl cyclase; cyclic ADP ribose; IP3; K<sup>+</sup> channels.

Received 6/6/03; Accepted 7/17/03  
* Author to whom all correspondence and reprint requests should be addressed: E-mail: noda@phar.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Molecular Neurobiology 31 Volume 29, 2004

Introduction

Mammalian 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT; serotonin) receptors have seven subfamilies (5-HT₁-7), comprising at least 15 molecularly identified subtypes, some with splice variants and others with isoforms created by mRNA editing. Genomic structure, distribution, pharmacology, and functional responses attributed to each 5-HT receptor in the brain have been reviewed in detail previously (1). Briefly, the majority of the 5-HT receptors belong to the large family of receptors interacting with G proteins, except for the 5-HT₃ receptors, which are ligand-gated ion channel receptors. The 5-HT receptors belonging to the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily are characterized by the presence of seven transmembrane domains and the ability to alter G protein-dependent processes. The amino acid sequence of the membrane-spanning domains shows the least amount of variability compared with other cloned biogenic amine receptors. The 5-HT receptors can be divided into distinct subfamilies based on their coupling to second messengers (see Fig. 1). The 5-HT₁ receptor subfamily is coupled to inhibitory pathways; inhibition of adenylate cyclase and regulation of ion channels. They are also coupled to stimulate phospholipase C and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) growth signaling pathway (2). The 5-HT₂ receptor subfamily contains three receptors that share striking amino acid homology and the same coupling with the activation of phospholipase C. In contrast, the 5-HT receptors that are positively coupled to adenylate cyclase are a heterogeneous group, including the 5-HT₄, 5-HT₆, and 5-HT₇ receptor subtypes. The 5-HT₅ receptor group contains two types, 5-HT₅A and 5-HT₅B receptors, and represents a new subfamily of 5-HT receptors that do not resemble the 5-HT₁ and 5-HT₂ subfamilies in amino acid sequence. The 5-HT₅ receptor was shown to be negatively coupled to adenylate cyclase, similar to 5-HT₁ receptor subfamily. Although the 5-HT₅ receptor subfamily still remains probably the

least well understood of all the 5-HT receptor family, it was recently shown that the cellular signaling attributed to the 5-HT₅ receptor was not restricted to the inhibition of adenylate cyclase (3), but also extended to the inhibition of ADP-ribosyl cyclase and the formation of IP₃. Activation of phospholipase C (PLC) was partly due to the cross talk between Gi/Go and PLC, which appears to be mediated by βγ-subunits released from activated Gi/Go. Activation of PLS might also partly be due to the activation of conventional Gq/G₁₁ (Fig. 1, dotted line), because pretreatment of the cells with pertussis toxin did not completely block the 5-HT₅A receptor-induced currents. These multiple signalings suggest the activation of metabotropic effects and subsequent functions of 5-HT are not simple.

### 5-HT₅ Receptors

The two members of the 5-HT₅ receptors subfamily, 5-HT₅A and 5-HT₅B receptors, were identified in mice (4,5) and subsequently in rats (6,7). A cDNA encoding the 5-HT₅A receptors has been cloned from human tissues (8) and mapped on chromosome 7q34-q36 (9), while the 5-HT₅B receptors do not seem to be functionally expressed in humans (10). Pharmacologically, the 5-HT₅ receptors resemble the 5-HT₁ receptor subfamily, displaying high affinities for the agonists, 5-carbamidotryptamine (5-CT) and ergot derivatives, such as lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and ergotamine (8,11). However, for various reasons, 5-HT₅ receptors may represent a distinct subfamily. In contrast to 5-HT₁ receptor genes, 5-HT₅ receptor genes contain an intron in the region encoding the third intracellular loop (4). Furthermore, 5-HT₅ receptors exhibit a rather low affinity for 5-HT and the percentage of amino acid sequence homology in the transmembrane domains to other 5-HT receptors is less than 50% (12).

Many physiological roles of 5-HT₅A receptors have been suggested; 5-HT₅A receptors might be involved in learning, memory and

Multiple Signaling by 5-HT Receptors

$G$-protein coupled receptors

| Family | Subtype | $G$ protein | Effector pathways |
|--------|---------|-------------|-------------------|
| $5-\mathrm{HT}_{1}$ | $5-\mathrm{HT}_{1 \mathrm{~A}}$<br>$5-\mathrm{HT}_{1 \mathrm{~B}}$<br>$5-\mathrm{HT}_{1 \mathrm{D}}$<br>$5-\mathrm{HT}_{1 \mathrm{E}}$<br>$5-\mathrm{HT}_{1 \mathrm{~F}}$ | $\mathrm{G}_{\mathrm{i}} / \mathrm{G}_{\mathrm{o}}$ | $\mathrm{PLC} \uparrow$<br>$\mathrm{IP}_{3} \uparrow$<br>[$\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}]_{i} \uparrow$<br>$\mathrm{MAPK}$<br>$\mathrm{AC} \downarrow$<br>$\mathrm{cAMP} \downarrow$<br>$\mathrm{I}_{\mathrm{k}(\mathrm{Ca})}$<br>$\mathrm{GIRK}$ |
| $5-\mathrm{HT}_{5}$ | $5-\mathrm{HT}_{5 \mathrm{~A}}$<br>$5-\mathrm{HT}_{5 \mathrm{~B}}$ | $\mathrm{G}_{\mathrm{i}} / \mathrm{G}_{\mathrm{o}}$ | $\mathrm{ADPR} \downarrow$<br>$\mathrm{cADPR} \downarrow$ |
| $5-\mathrm{HT}_{2}$ | $5-\mathrm{HT}_{2 \mathrm{~A}}$<br>$5-\mathrm{HT}_{2 \mathrm{~B}}$<br>$5-\mathrm{HT}_{2 \mathrm{C}}$ | $\mathrm{G}_{\mathrm{q}} / \mathrm{G}_{11}$ | $\mathrm{PLC} \uparrow$<br>$\mathrm{IP}_{3} \uparrow$<br>[$\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}]_{i} \uparrow$ |
| $5-\mathrm{HT}_{4}$ |  |  |  |
| $5-\mathrm{HT}_{6}$ |  |  |  |
| $5-\mathrm{HT}_{7}$ |  | $\mathrm{G}_{\mathrm{s}}$ | $\mathrm{AC} \uparrow$<br>$\mathrm{cAMP} \uparrow$ |

Ligand-gated ion channels

$5-\mathrm{HT}_{3}$

Fig. 1. Mammalian 5-HT receptor subtypes and their signal transduction pathways. The dotted lines show the proposed new signal cascade. AC, adenylyl cyclase; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; GIRK, G protein-gated inwardly rectifying K⁺ channel; ADPR, ADP-ribosyl cyclase; cADPR, cyclic adenosine diphosphate ribose; PLC, phospholipase C.

emotional behaviors (4,6,13), motor coordination and control (4,13,14), the acquisition of adaptive behavior under stressful situations (15), and arterial chemoreception (16). In 5-HT₅A receptor knockout mice, increased exploratory activity (but no change in anxiety-related behaviors) were observed, while stimulatory effect of LSD on exploratory activity was attenuated, suggesting that some of the psychotropic effects of LSD may be mediated by 5-HT₅A receptors (17). Furthermore, the allelic variation in the human 5-HT₅A receptor gene may be involved in susceptibility to schizophrenia and affective disorders (18,19), though the controversial result has also been reported that polymorphisms analyzed in the 5-HT₅A receptor gene do not play a major role in the pathogenesis of affective disorders (20).

### 5-HT₅A Receptor Distribution

The 5-HT₅A receptors were initially reported to be expressed predominantly by astrocytes (14). However, the expression of 5-HT₅A receptor mRNA in cultured glial cells and C6 glioma cells is negligibly low compared to the expression level in the whole rat brain (Noda et al., unpublished data). In situ hybridization histochemistry in human brain showed that the main site of 5-HT₅A receptors mRNA expression were the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum suggesting that 5-HT₅A receptors may have an important role in high cortical, limbic, and cerebeller function (13). Expression in the olfactory bulb and medial habenula was also reported in mice (17). In rat brain, 5-HT₅A-like immunoreactivity was widely detected

Molecular Neurobiology

Volume 29, 2004

Fig. 2. Signal cascade leading to inhibition or activation of ADP-ribosyl cyclase from 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors and other receptors. Phosphorylation (P) of the cytosolic or membrane-bound form of ADP-ribosyl cyclase increases enzymatic activity via cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG) and cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). The inhibition of ADP-ribosyl cyclase by the activation of 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptor may also be due to the possible inhibition of PKA via inhibition of adenylate cyclase (AC) and cAMP formation. The activation of 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors may compete with other receptor activation which activate the formation of cyclic ADP ribose (cADPR), and in turn elicit Ca<sup>2+</sup> release via type II ryanodine receptors (RyRII).

(21), including hypothalamic and amygdaloid nuclei, which have significant serotonergic input. These results indicate that 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors show broad distribution in the whole brain, mediating a wide range of serotonergic effects. Immunoreactivity was also detected in the suprachiasmatic nucleus, suggesting a possible role in the regulation of circadian rhythms (22,23). Besides the expression in the brain, RT-PCR showed that 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors were also expressed in carotid body, petrosal ganglion, and the superior cervical ganglion in rat, suggesting that 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors play fundamental roles in arterial chemoreception (16). Furthermore, while the physiological meaning was not suggested, 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors as well as 5-HT<sub>2C</sub> receptors were shown in human-resting lymphocytes by RT-PCR. The presence of these receptors in an easily available tissue can be considered potentially useful for future quantitative analyses in patients with different psychiatric conditions (24).

### Activation of Multiple Signal Transduction Cascades by 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> Receptors

The mouse, rat, and human 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors have been investigated in various mammalian cells using transfection method and functional coupling to effectors was analyzed. Inhibition of adenylate cyclase via coupling to PTX-sensitive G<sub>i</sub>/G<sub>o</sub> has been reported (25–27). Recently, it was reported that the human 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors were able to couple to the inwardly rectifying K<sup>+</sup> channel, GIRK, when expressed in Xenopus oocytes (10). More recently, in addition to the inhibition of cAMP accumulation, other signal transduction pathways and affective second messengers were found (3).

One is the inhibition of ADP-ribosyl cyclase activity (see Fig. 2), which was measured in the membrane preparation. This result indicates that the inhibition by 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors was

Multiple Signaling by 5-HT Receptors

Fig. 3. Outward current and transient increase in IP3 formation after activation of 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors. (A) Whole-cell patch-clamp recording showed the outward membrane currents induced by 3 μM 5-HT at the holding potential of -40 mV in 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptor-transfected C6 glioma cells (2). (B) Determination of IP3 in 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptor-transfected C6 glioma cells were performed as described previously (3,42).

considered to be rather direct on the membrane-bound form of ADP-ribosyl cyclase. This inhibition of ADP-ribosyl cyclase was nullified by treatment of the cells with pertussis toxin, suggesting the involvement of Gi/Gs. The consequence of the inhibition of ADP-ribosyl cyclase was presumably a decrease in the cyclic adenosine diphosphate ribose (cADPR) level. Cyclic ADPR is produced from NAD+ by ADP-ribosyl cyclase and targets type-II ryanodine receptors to release Ca<sup>2+</sup> (28–30). Therefore, cADPR is suggested as an intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> modulating second messenger (31). Its modulatory role was shown in neurotransmitter release (32–34) and insulin release (35), and inducing the long-term synaptic depression in hippocampus (36).

The formation of cADPR is regulated by the phosphorylation of ADP-ribosyl cyclase, dependent on either cAMP- or cGMP-dependent protein kinase. As for the latter signaling, the NO/cGMP-mediated pathway to ADP-ribosyl cyclase has been suggested to play a key role in inducing long-term depression (37), while cGMP-independent inhibition of ADP-ribosyl cyclase by nitric oxide was observed in airway smooth muscle (38). On the other hand, activation of ADP-ribosyl cyclase by cAMP-dependent protein kinase was suggested in the heat-stress signaling cascade (39). Since inhibition of adenyl cyclase activity and cAMP accumulation by 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors was observed, cAMP-dependent protein kinase was also predicted to be inhibited, which in turn might attenuate ADP-ribosyl cyclase activity (Fig. 2). Therefore, the dual inhibitions of ADP-ribosyl cyclase due to both direct and indirect effect of 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors may affect cellular functions related to cADPR.

Electrophysiological measurements using the patch-clamp technique in whole-cell configuration showed pronounced 5-HT-induced transient outward currents in 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptor-expressing C6 glioma cells (see Fig. 3A). The current-voltage relationships obtained at the peak by applying 50 ms step pulses were

Molecular Neurobiology
Volume 29, 2004

Inward rectifying K⁺ channel

5-HT₅AR

GIRK

Ca²⁺-dependent K⁺ channel

Fig. 4. Summary of proposed signaling mediated by 5-HT₅A receptors.

almost linear with reversal potential at around –100 mV, and were not inward-rectifying. The 5-HT-induced outward current was observed in 84% of the patched 5-HT₅A receptor-expressing cells and was concentration-dependent. The 5-HT-induced current was inhibited when intracellular K⁺ was replaced with Cs⁺ but was not significantly inhibited by typical K⁺ channel blockers. On the other hand, the 5-HT-induced current was significantly attenuated by BAPTA in the patch pipet. Similarly, depleting the intracellular Ca²⁺ store by application of caffeine or thapsigargin also blocked the 5-HT-induced current. From these results, the 5-HT-induced outward currents were most likely Ca²⁺-dependent K⁺ currents. Since the ryanodine-sensitive Ca²⁺ release was presumably inhibited, a possible Ca²⁺ source was inositol (1,4,5) trisphosphate (IP3)-sensitive Ca²⁺ release from sarcoplasmic reticulum. In fact, the 5-HT-induced outward currents were inhibited by heparin, a blocker of IP3 receptors (40). The formation of IP3 was confirmed by radioligand-binding assay, showing the transient increase in IP3 formation within 20 s (see Fig. 3B). The time course of IP3 formation was in accordance with the observed membrane current change (Fig. 3A). Interestingly, the 5-HT-induced outward currents were also inhibited by pretreatment of the cells with pertussis toxin, though not completely. This result suggests that the formation of IP3 was partly due to the activation of Gᵢ/G₀, as observed in muscarinic 2 and 4 (m2 and m4) acetylcholine receptor subtypes (41,42). The contribution of the coupling of 5-HT₅A receptors to Gq was also possible, as in the conventional IP3-signaling cascade. The transient increase in IP3 and consequent increase in intracellular Ca²⁺ may have an important physiological meaning when the 5-HT₅A receptors are activated, because many cellular functions are Ca²⁺-dependent.

It was concluded that in addition to the inhibition of adenyl cyclase and ADP-ribosyl cyclase activities—which leads to the inhibition of Ca²⁺ release from ryanodine-sensitive stores—5-HT₅A receptors regulate intracellular Ca²⁺ mobilization due to the IP3-sensitive Ca²⁺ store. The difference in the time-course of these contradicting signals for the intracellular Ca²⁺ concentration might result in transient membrane outward currents. These multiple signal transduction systems were summarized

Multiple Signaling by 5-HT Receptors

in Fig. 4. These new aspects of multiple signaling induced by a single 5-HT receptor subtype may contribute to a better understanding of diverse 5-HT function in the brain.

### Physiological and Pathophysiological Implication of Multiple Signaling

Here the authors described multiple coupling preferences of 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors at cellular level. However, it is not easy to assess the physiological effects due to the activation of 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors in the brain. One reason is that some 5-HT receptors, including 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors, still lack selective ligands and antagonists. Also, the cellular functions of 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> are partly similar to those of 5-HT<sub>1A/1D</sub> receptors and it is thus difficult to distinguish them. Moreover, the signaling cascade of one 5-HT receptor subtype may not be restricted to one, as observed in 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors, making it more difficult to define the functional responses attributed to each receptor in the brain. Furthermore, the regional distributions of each 5-HT receptor subtype have a wide variety and are largely overlapped. Given these complex viewpoints, it is difficult to clarify the physiological and pathophysiological role of each 5-HT receptor subtype. However, 5-HT receptor polymorphism found in patients would make it possible to investigate the pathophysiological role of 5-HT receptors in brain diseases. The total 5-HT response is most likely in good harmony and finely tuned, and once the balance is destroyed it may be easy to induce symptoms of the central nervous system (CNS), including physical and psychological disorders (43,44). The signaling study obtained in recent works may help to understand the mechanisms of serotonergic dysfunction and will contribute to therapeutic strategy.

### Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by grants-in-aid for Scientific Research of the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture, Japan, Kyushu University Foundation; grants-in-aid for Scientific Research of the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare.

### References

1. Barnes N. M. and Sharp T. (1999) A review of central 5-HT receptors and their function. *Neuropharmacology* 38, 1083–1152.
2. Albert P. R. and Tiberi M. (2001) Receptor signaling and structure: insights from serotonin-1 receptors. *Trends Endocrinol. Metab.* 12, 453–460.
3. Noda M., Yasuda S., Okada M., et al. (2003) Recombinant human serotonin 5A receptors stably expressed in C6 glioma cells couple to multiple signal transduction pathways. *J. Neurochem.* 84, 222–232.
4. Plassat J.-L., Boschert U., Amlaiky N., and Hen R. (1992) The mouse 5-HT<sub>5</sub> receptor reveals a remarkable heterogeneity within the 5-HT<sub>1D</sub> receptor family. *EMBO J.* 11, 4779–4786.
5. Matthes H., Boschert U., Amlaiky N., et al. (1993) Mouse 5-hydroxytryptamine5A and 5-hydroxytryptamine5B receptors define a new family of serotonin receptors: cloning, functional expression, and chromosomal localization. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 43, 313–319.
6. Erlander M. G., Lovenberg T. W., Baron B. M., et al. (1993) Two members of a distinct subfamily of 6-hydroxytryptamine receptors differentially expressed in rat brain. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 90, 3452–3456.
7. Wisden W., Parker E. M., Mahle C. D., et al. (1993) Cloning and characterization of the rat 5-HT<sub>5B</sub> receptor. Evidence that the 5-HT<sub>5B</sub> receptor couples to a G protein in mammalian cell membranes. *FEBS Lett.* 333, 25–31.
8. Rees S., den Daas I., Foord S., Goodson S., Bull D., Kilpatrick G., and Lee M. (1994) Cloning and characterization of the human 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> serotonin receptor. *FEBS Lett.* 355, 242–246.
9. Shimron-Abarbanell D., Erdmann J., Vogt I. R., et al. (1997) Human 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptor gene: systematic screening for DNA sequence variation and linkage mapping on chromosome 7q34-q36 using a polymorphism in the 5′ untranslated region. *Biochem Biophys. Res. Commun.* 233, 6–9.
10. Grailhe R., Grabtree G. W., and Hen R. (2001) Human 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptor; the 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptor is

functional but the 5-HT<sub>5B</sub> receptor was lost during mammalian evolution. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* 418, 157–167.

11. Weiβ H. M., Haase W., Michel H., and Reiländer H. (1995) Expression of functional mouse 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> serotonin receptor in the methylotrophic yeast *Pichia pastoris*: pharmacological characterization and localization. *FEBS Lett.* 377, 451–456.

12 Humphrey P. P. A. (1997) The characterization and classification of neurotransmitter receptors. *Ann. NY Acad. Sci.* 812, 1–13.

13 Pasqualetti M., Ori M., Nardi I., Castagna M., Cassano G. B., and Marazzoto D. (1998) Distribution of the 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> serotonin receptor mRNA in the human brain. *Mol. Brain Res.* 56, 1–8.

14 Carson M. J., Thomas E. A., Danielson P. E., and Sutcliffe J. G. (1996) The 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> serotonin receptor is expressed predominantly by astrocytes in which it inhibits cAMP accumulation: A mechanism for neuronal suppression of reactive astrocytes. *GLIA* 17, 317–326.

15. Branchet T. A. and Zgombick J. M. (1997) Molecular biology and potential functional role of 5-HT<sub>5</sub>, 5-HT<sub>6</sub>, and 5-HT<sub>7</sub> receptors, in *Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology. Serotonergic Neurons and 5-HT Receptors in the CNS*, Baumgarten H. G. and Güthert M., eds., Springer-Verlag, Berlin pp. 475–497.

16 Wang Z. Y., Keith I. M., Beckman M. J., Brownfield M. S., Vidruk E. H., and Bisfard G. E. (2000) 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptors in the carotid body chemoreception pathway of rat. *Neurosci Lett.* 278, 9–12.

17 Grailhe R., Waeber C., Dulawa S. C., Hornung J. P., Zhuang X., Brunner D., Geyer M. A., and Hen R. (1999) Increased exploratory activity and altered response to LSD in mice lacking the 5-HT(5A) receptor. *Neuron* 22, 581–591.

18 Iwata N., Ozaki N., Inada T., and Goldman D. (2001) Association of a 5-HT(5A) receptor polymorphism, Pro15Ser, to schizophrenia. *Mol. Psychiatry* 6, 217–219.

19 Birkett J. T., Arranz M. J., Munro J., Osbourn S., Kerwin R. W., and Collier D. A. (2000) Association analysis of the 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> gene in depression, psychosis and antipsychotic response. *NeuroReport* 11, 2017–2020.

20 Arias B., Collier D. A., Gasto C., Pintor L., Gutierrez B., Valles V., and Fananas L. (2001) Genetic variation in the 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptor gene in patients with bipolar disorder and major depression. *Neurosci. Lett.* 303, 111–114.

21 Kinsey A. M., Wainwright A., Heavens R., Sirinathsinghji D. J., and Oliver K. R. (2001) Distribution of 5-ht(5A), 5-ht(5B), 5-ht(6) and 5-HT(7) receptor mRNAs in the rat brain. *Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res.* 88, 194–198.

22 Oliver K. R., Kinsey A. M., Wainwright A., and Sirinathsinghji D. J. (2000) Localization of 5-ht(5A) receptor-like immunoreactivity in the rat brain. *Brain Res.* 867, 131–142.

23 Duncan M. J., Jennes L., Jefferson J. B., and Brownfield M. S. (2000) Localization of serotonin(5A) receptors in discrete regions of the circadian timing system in the Syrian hamster. *Brain Res.* 869, 178–185.

24 Marazziti D., Ori M., Nardini M., Rossi A., Nardi I., and Cassano G. B. (2001) mRNA expression of serotonin receptors of type 2C and 5A in human resting lymphocytes. *Neuropsychobiology* 43, 123–126.

25 Hurley P. T., McMahon R. A., Fanning P., O'Boyle K. M., Rogers M., and Martin F. (1998) Functional coupling of a recombinant human 5-HT5a receptor to G-proteins in HEK-293 cells. *Br. J. Pharmacol.* 124, 1238–1244.

26 Francken B. J. B., Jurzak M., Vanhauwe J. F. M., Luyten W. H. M. L., and Leysen J. E. (1998) The human 5-HT5A receptor couples to Gi/Gs proteins and inhibits adenylate cyclase in HEK293 cells. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* 361, 299–309.

27 Thomas E. A., Matli J. R., Hu J. L., Carson M. J., and Sutcliffe J. G. (2000) Pertussis toxin treatment prevents 5-HT<sub>5A</sub> receptor-mediated inhibition of cyclic AMP Accumulation in rat C6 glioma cells. *J. Neurosci. Res.* 61, 75–81.

28 Galione A., Lee H. C., and Busa W. B. (1991) Ca(2+)-induced Ca<sup>2+</sup> release in sea urchin egg homogenates: modulation by cyclic ADP-ribose. *Science* 253, 1143–1146.

29 Lee H. C., Aarhus R., and Walseth T. F. (1993) Calcium mobilization by dual receptors during fertilization of sea urchin eggs. *Science* 261, 352–355.

30 Meszaros L. G., Bak J., and Chu A. (1993) Cyclic ADP-ribose as an endogenous regulator of the non-skeletal type ryanodine receptor Ca<sup>2+</sup> channel. *Nature* 364, 76–79.

31 Higashida H., Hashii M., Yokoyama S., Hoshi N., Chen X. L., Egorova A., Noda M., and Zhang J. S. (2001) Cyclic ADP-ribose as a second messenger revisited from a new aspect of signal transduction from receptors to ADP-ribosyl cyclase. *Pharmacol. Ther.* 90, 283–296.

32 Morita K., Kitayama S., and Dohi T. (1997) Stimulation of cyclic ADP-ribose synthesis by acetylcholine and its role in catecholamine

Molecular Neurobiology

release in bovine adrenal chromaffin cells. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 21,002–21,009.

33 Mothet J. P., Fossier P., Meunier F. M., Stinnakre J., Tauc L., and Baux G. (1998) Cyclic ADP-ribose and calcium-induced calcium release regulate neurotransmitter release at a cholinergic synapse of Aplysia. J. Physiol. 507, 405–414.

34 Brailoiu E. and Miyamoto M. D. (2000) Inositol trisphosphate and cyclic adenosine diphosphate-ribose increase quantal transmitter release at frog motor nerve terminals: possible involvement of smooth endoplasmic reticulum. Neuroscience 95, 927–931.

35 Kato I., Takasawa S., Akabane A., et al. (1995) Regulatory role of CD38 (ADP-ribosyl cyclase/cyclic ADP-ribose hydrolase) in insulin secretion by glucose in pancreatic beta cells. Enhanced insulin secretion in CD38-expressing transgenic mice. J. Biol. Chem. 270, 30,045–30,050.

36 Reyes-Harde M., Empson R., Potter B. V., Galione A., and Stanton P. K. (1999a) Evidence of a role for cyclic ADP-ribose in long-term synaptic depression in hippocampus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci USA 96, 4061–4066.

37 Reyes-Harde M., Potter B. V., Galion A., and Stanton P. K. (1999b) Induction of hippocampal LTD requires nitric-oxide-stimulated PKG activity and Ca²⁺ release from cyclic ADP-ribose-sensitive stores. J. Neurophysiol. 82, 1569–1576.

38 White T. A., Walseth T. F., and Kannan M. S. (2002) Nitric oxide inhibits ADP-ribosyl cyclase

through a cGMP-independent pathway in airway smooth muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell Mol. Physiol. 283, L1065–1071.

39 Zocchi E., Carpaneto A., Cerrano C., et al. (2001) The temperature-signaling cascade in sponges involves a heat-gated cation channel, abscisic acid, and cyclic ADP-ribose. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci USA 98, 14,859–14,864.

40 Ehrlich B. E., Kaftan E., Bezprozvannaya S., and Bezprozvanny I. (1994) The pharmacology of intracellular Ca(2+)-release channels. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 15, 145–149.

41 Noda M., Katayama M., Brown D. A., et al. (1993) Coupling of m2 and m4 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes to Ca²⁺-dependent K+ channels in transformed NL308 neuroblastoma × fibroblast hybrid cells. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B. 251, 215–224.

42 Ishizaka N., Noda M., Kimura Y., et al. (1995) Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate formation and ryanodine-sensitive oscillations of cytosolic free Ca²⁺ concentrations in neuroblastoma x fibroblast hybrid NL308 cells expressing m2 and m4 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes. Pflügers Arch. Eur. J. Physiol. 429, 426–433.

43 Mann J. J. (2003) Neurobiology of suicidal behaviour. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 4, 819–828.

44 Muller C. P., Carey R. J., Huston J. P. (2003) Serotonin as an important mediator of cocaine's behavioral effects. Drugs Today (Barc) 39, 497–511.
