
Mol. Cells, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp. 1-9

Minireview

Osteoimmunology: Interactions of the Immune and Skeletal Systems

Jaerang Rho¹, Masamichi Takami², and Yongwon Choi*

Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA;

¹ Department of Microbiology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 305-764, Korea;

² Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, Showa University, Shinagawaku 142-8555, Japan.

(Received January 13, 2004; Accepted January 15, 2004)

Bone is a dynamic tissue that provides mechanical support, physical protection, and enables movement. Bone also serves as a storage site for minerals and is where blood cells are produced. Bone homeostasis is regulated by the balance between bone formation and resorption, and involves the coordinated action of osteoblasts and osteoclasts. Osteoblasts are bone-forming cells that secrete organic matrix molecules, while osteoclasts are derived from hematopoietic precursors and resorb bone matrix. Although osteoblasts and osteoclasts are the major regulators of bone metabolism and are regulated by the local microenvironment, it has recently come to be appreciated that skeletal system homeostasis is greatly influenced by components of the immune system. For example, some pathological bone resorption observed under inflammatory conditions has been shown to be due, in part, to direct and indirect effects of activated T cells on osteoclasts. In this regard, we would like to review current progress and perspectives in “osteoimmunology”, an interdisciplinary research principle governing the cross-talk between the bone and immune systems. Better understanding of how the osteoimmune system operates in normal and pathological situations is likely to lay the groundwork for future therapies for the variety of diseases that affect both bone and the immune system.

Keywords: OPG; Osteoblast; Osteoclast; TRANCE.

* To whom correspondence should be addressed.
Tel: 1-215-746-6404; Fax: 1-215-573-0888
E-mail: ychoi3@mail.med.upenn.edu

Introduction

The term Osteoimmunology has been coined to encourage an interdisciplinary approach to understanding the cross-talk between bone and the immune system (Arron and Choi, 2000). It has recently come to be appreciated that the skeletal and immune systems regulate each other to a much greater degree than previously believed. In particular, various pathological conditions which lead to excessive bone loss, such as rheumatoid arthritis, periodontal diseases, and some tumor-associated bone abnormalities have been shown to be influenced by cellular components (e.g., T lymphocytes) as well as by soluble factors produced by infiltrating lymphocytes (e.g., interferon produced by infiltrating lymphocytes) (Edwards, 2002; O’Gradaigh and Compston, 2003; Sordillo and Pearse, 2003; Taubman and Kawai, 2001; Teitelbaum and Ross, 2003; Walsh and Choi, 2003; Wiebe et al., 1996). The role of T cells in bone biology has been largely accepted since the discovery of the TNF family member, TRANCE (TNF-related activation cytokine)/RANKL (receptor activator of NF-κB ligand)/OPGL (osteoprotegerin ligand)/ODF (osteoclast differentiation factor). TRANCE was initially identified as expressed on activated T cells, and as a regulator of T cell function (Wong et al., 1997).

Abbreviations: ATL, adult T-cell leukemia; BMP-2, bone morphogenetic protein 2; IFN, interferon; JNK, c-Jun kinase; M-CSF, macrophage colony-stimulating factor; MIP, macrophage inflammatory protein; MM, multiple myeloma; OPG, Osteoprotegerin; PRG2, prostaglandin E2; PTH, parathyroid hormone; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; TGF-β transforming growth factor-β; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; TNFR, tumor necrosis factor receptor; TRAF, TNFR-associated factors; TRANCE, TNF (tumor necrosis factor)-related activation cytokine; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.

However, it was subsequently shown that TRANCE is expressed on activated osteoblasts, as well, and is an essential factor for osteoclastogenesis (Kim et al., 2000b; Kong et al., 1999; Lacey et al., 1998; Wong et al., 1999; Yasuda et al., 1998). These and other studies convincingly showed that the skeletal and immune systems are closely interrelated (Arron and Choi, 2000; Takayanagi et al., 2000; 2002b; Targonska et al., 2001; Teng, 2003; Theill et al., 2002; Walsh and Choi, 2003). Furthermore, immune cells are derived from bone marrow cells, and the cytokines expressed in immune cells can regulate bone metabolism. Therefore, the role of the immune system in regulating bone homeostasis has generated considerable interest. Given the intricacies of these interactions, understanding of the inter-regulatory networks of the bone and immune system remains incomplete. Progress in this area appears largely to be limited by difficulties in crossing conventional boundaries of scientific principles in each field - bone biology and immunology. Hence, establishment of the cross-disciplinary field of osteoimmunology has been proposed as a means of encouraging and nurturing a cross-boundary approach to better understanding how bone homeostasis is maintained in normal physiological conditions, and how it goes awry under pathological conditions. Although it will not be discussed in this review, it is also important to understand how bone metabolism affects the immune system beyond the scope of hematopoiesis.

### Bone cells

The bone matrix consists of both organic and inorganic materials. The organic matrix is mostly comprised of a type I collagen and proteoglycan layer, whereas the inorganic matrix includes a hydroxylapatite layer -- a crystal of calcium phosphate. In adults, over 10% of total bone is remodeled every year through the action of bone forming and resorbing cells.

Osteoblasts are cells of mesodermal origin that primarily function in the formation of bone (Fig. 1). Osteoblasts secrete organic matrix and induce calcification in the process of making new bone which predominantly contains collagen (Harada and Rodan, 2003). Osteoblasts also rebuild the bone matrix in regions where bone has been resorbed by osteoclasts. Osteoblasts are cuboid cells that form a contiguous layer located on the outer surface of bone tissue, where new bone is created (Suda et al., 2003). The lifespan of osteoblasts at a particular site ranges from 3 months to 1.5 years (Roodman, 1996). The bone forming activity of osteoblasts is slow and occurs continuously in all living bones. Therefore, new bone is constantly being formed by osteoblasts. The differentiation and function of osteoblasts are regulated by growth factors and cytokines, and mediated via their interactions with various matrix

Fig. 1. Schematic summary of bone cell development. Hematopoietic stem cells committed to the monocyte/macrophage lineage differentiate into pre-osteoclasts by the stimulation with M-CSF and TRANCE. Activated osteoclasts are derived from the fusion of pre-osteoclasts and multinucleated osteoclasts. Other hematopoietic stem cells differentiate into mesenchymal progenitors, which also give rise to myoblasts, pre-adipocytes, and pre-chondrocytes. Osteoprogenitor cells give rise to pre-osteoblasts and then into osteoblasts. Osteoblasts either incorporated into bone as osteocytes or remain on the surface as lining cells. Osteocytes are terminally differentiated cells in bone matrix.

proteins. Osteoblasts either incorporate into bone as osteocytes or remain on the bone surface as lining cells (Harada and Rodan, 2003; Roodman, 1996).

Osteocytes are the differentiated form of osteoblasts (Fig. 1) that become entrapped in the newly formed bone matrix (Aarden et al., 1994; van der Plas et al., 1994). Osteocytes are terminally differentiated cells that do not divide in cell culture systems. Osteocytes reside in lacunae, or spaces within either the osteoid or bony tissue (Pockwinse et al., 1992). Once osteocytes become entrapped, they lose their ability to secrete bone matrix. However, osteocytes can synthesize certain bone matrix molecules, such as osteocalcin, and transport minerals within bone tissue. Osteocytes also develop long, fine meshwork processes, or narrow channels, that form a network of communication with adjacent osteocytes and cells on the bone surface, such as osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and lining cells.

Osteoclasts differ dramatically from osteoblasts, osteocytes, and lining cells. Osteoclasts are distinctly larger than the other types of bone cells and are multinucleated, with 2 to 100 nuclei per cell. The multiple nuclei result from the fusion of mononuclear osteoclasts (Roodman,
1996; 1999). The major function of osteoclasts is to destroy the surface of old or fractured bone during the process of bone remodeling (Teitelbaum *et al.*, 1995; Zaidi *et al.*, 2001). Multinucleated giant osteoclasts are derived from the lineage of circulating monocytes/macrophages (Fig. 1). Osteoclasts resorb mineralized bone matrix, rather than inducing bone formation and growth. Osteoclasts are extremely rare cells within the bone matrix, with two to three per $\mu$m³ and have a lifespan of up to 7 weeks (Suda *et al.*, 1997b). Osteoclasts are located on the bone surface, in shallow pits in trabecular bone, or in cylindrical tunnels in cortical bone. The resorption pits in this region are created by the activity of osteoclasts.

Osteoclasts have several unique morphological characteristics that distinguish them from macrophage polykaryons. The most characteristic feature is that osteoclasts have a discoid shape, with a ruffled border and clear zone or sealing zone, which is not exhibited by macrophage polykaryons (Boyle *et al.*, 2003; Roodman, 1996; Suda *et al.*, 1997b). The ruffled border contains elements that resorb organic and inorganic components of bone. Osteoclasts secrete enzymes, such as tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP), through a ruffled border, thereby decalcifying the bone, and other enzymes, such as cathepsin K, that digest bone matrix protein (Roodman, 1996; Teitelbaum *et al.*, 1995; Zaidi *et al.*, 2001). Osteoclasts can also release protons directly via vacuolar H⁺-ATPase located within the ruffled border. The resulting acidification favors dissolution of bone mineral in areas of resorption (Li *et al.*, 1999; Toyomura *et al.*, 2000; Zaidi *et al.*, 2003). Various proteolytic enzymes, such as lysosomal enzymes and cysteine proteases, are also released from the ruffled border into the resorbing zone.

### Regulation of bone homeostasis

Bone homeostasis is regulated by the balanced action of osteoblasts and osteoclasts. Bone formation by osteoblasts and bone resorption by osteoclasts are tightly coupled to maintaining healthy bone features. The bone-forming activity of osteoblasts increases bone mass, whereas the bone-resorbing activity of osteoclasts reduces bone mass (Suda *et al.*, 2001; Walsh and Choi, 2003). The action of these cells is tightly regulated by growth factors and cytokines. Loss of this balance generally leads to bone disease, such as osteoporosis or osteopetrosis (Teitelbaum and Ross, 2003; Zelzer and Olsen, 2003).

Osteoporosis is a metabolic disease in which bone mass and bone mineral density continuously decrease due to increased osteoclast activity. Osteoporosis leads to a higher risk of bone fractures. In contrast, Osteopetrosis refers to heterogeneous conditions generally characterized by increased bone density, and caused by impaired bone resorption. Osteoclasts resorb bone at specific sites, and

osteoblasts are activated to replace the bone loss. In osteoporosis, bone resorption takes place to a greater extent than bone formation, resulting in a net loss of bone mass. This imbalance could result from changes in hormones, cytokines, nutrition, metabolism, mechanical factors, or a combination of any or all of these factors. The following discussion focuses primarily on the regulation of osteoclastogenesis by cytokines expressed on osteoblasts and T-cells.

#### Cellular signaling pathways involved in osteoclastogenesis

The requirement for osteoblasts or T-cells in mediating bone metabolism is linked to the role of osteotropic hormones and cytokines in regulating bone formation, and the development of osteoclasts or activation of bone resorption. Osteoclasts are derived from the circulating monocyte/macrophage lineage in response to the coordinated actions of several osteotropic hormones, including active vitamin D₃ (1,25(OH)₂D₃) and parathyroid hormone (PTH). These hormones have been identified from genetic studies of diseases that cause skeletal abnormalities in mice, rats, and humans (Teitelbaum and Ross, 2003; Zelzer and Olsen, 2003).

Mice with a disruption in the M-CSF gene (*op/op* mice) exhibit an osteopetrotic phenotype (Yoshida *et al.*, 1990). Studies of these mice have clearly shown that M-CSF plays an important role in osteoclastogenesis. M-CSF is required for the early stages of osteoclast development. Osteoblasts derived from *op/op* mice do not support the formation of osteoclasts in vitro culture system (Suda *et al.*, 1997a). In addition to its role in early osteoclast development, M-CSF has also been shown to play an important role in the spreading, and survival of mature osteoclasts. This suggests that M-CSF is involved not only in the early stages of osteoclast development, but also in osteoclast mobility and survival. However, the recombinant human vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) can induce osteoclast recruitment and formation in *op/op* mice (Kaku *et al.*, 2001; Nakagawa *et al.*, 2000; Niida *et al.*, 1999; Sundquist *et al.*, 1995). FLT3 ligand also substitutes for M-CSF to induce osteoclast development under specific conditions (Lean *et al.*, 2001).

TRANCE was originally identified as a survival factor for dendritic cells and cloned during a search for TCR-mediated cell signaling in activated T-cells (Wong *et al.*, 1997). TRANCE is also expressed on the surface of osteoblasts and mammary gland epithelial cells, as well as on activated T-cells (Kim *et al.*, 2000a; 2000b; Kong *et al.*, 1999; Theill *et al.*, 2002). Expression of TRANCE is induced in response to osteotropic cytokines secreted by immune cells, including interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6, and IL-11 (Walsh and Choi, 2003). Similar to mice with adisruption in the M-CSF gene, mice deficient in TRANCE exhibit a phenotype consistent with osteopetrosis. TRANCE-deficient mice also completely fail to develop lymph nodes and mammary glands (Kim et al., 2000b; Theill et al., 2002). The function of TRANCE was originally characterized as regulating the development and function of T-cells, dendritic cells, and mammary gland epithelial cells.

A combination of recombinant TRANCE and M-CSF induces osteoclast formation from monocytes derived from spleen and bone marrow in the absence of osteoblasts (Kim et al., 2002; Rho et al., 2002; Takami et al., 2002). Although M-CSF has been identified as a crucial factor for early osteoclast development, M-CSF alone does not support osteoclast formation. This suggests that TRANCE plays an essential role in inducing osteoclast development. In addition to its role in osteoclast formation, TRANCE also regulates osteoclast function, including osteoclast survival, fusion, and pit-formation activity.

The TRANCE receptor, also called TRANCE-R/RANK/OPGLR/ODFR, is expressed in osteoclast progenitors, T-cells, B-cells, dendritic cells, and mammary gland epithelial cells. TRANCE-R is a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) superfamily, and shares high homology with CD40 (Walsh and Choi, 2003). TRANCE-R is a type I transmembrane protein with a long cytoplasmic tail (383 amino acids). Upon activation of TRANCE-R, TRANCE signaling is mediated by specific adaptor molecules, termed TNFR-associated factors (TRAFs). Among the six known TRAFs (TRAF1-6), TRAFs-1, -2, -3, -5, and -6 interact with a specific region of the cytoplasmic tail of TRANCE-R (Darnay et al., 1998; Galibert et al., 1998; Wong et al., 1998). Although five different TRAFs bind to the cytoplasmic tail of TRANCE-R, TRAF6 signaling, in particular, seems to be crucial for the formation of osteoclasts. Mice that lack TRAF6 exhibit defects in osteoclast formation and exhibit osteopetrosis (Lomaga et al., 1999; 2000; Naito et al., 2002).

NF-κB (p50/p52) is a signaling molecule and transcription factor that acts downstream of TRAF6. The activation of NF-κB signaling is completely blocked in TRAF6-deficient mice. However, activation of c-Jun kinase (JNK) is only partially impaired in TRAF6-deficient mice because of the overlapping role of TRAF2-mediated signaling (Darnay et al., 1999; Lomaga et al., 1999; Naito et al., 2002). These observations are very similar to those observed in TRANCE-R-deficient mice (Dougall et al., 1999). NF-κB-deficient mice exhibit a phenotype consistent with osteopetrosis and are defective in osteoclast formation (Iotsova et al., 1997). Other studies have demonstrated that TRANCE activates the anti-apoptotic serine/threonine kinase Akt/PKB through a signaling complex involving c-Src and TRAF6, and induces TRAF6-mediated activation of the TAB2/TAK1 cascade (Arron et al., 2001; Lee et al., 2002; Wong et al., 1999). Taken together, a large body of evidence suggests that TRAF6 plays a major role in TRANCE/TRANCE-R signaling by activating downstream elements such as the Src/Cbl/Akt and TAB2/TAK1 cascades.

Osteoprotegerin (OPG)/osteoclast inhibitory factor (OCIF) is a member of the TNFR superfamily that negatively regulates osteoclast formation and activation (Bucay et al., 1998; Mizuno et al., 1998; Walsh and Choi, 2003). OPG is produced primarily by osteoblast/stromal cells and their precursors, but it can also be expressed by B-cells and dendritic cells (Berenson, 2002; Bucay et al., 1998). OPG is a decoy receptor, which interrupts the interaction between TRANCE and TRANCE-R by binding to TRANCE. OPG production is up-regulated in response to bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2), IL-1, IL-6, IL-11, TNF, transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), and estrogen (Ahlen et al., 2002; Hofbauer et al., 1998; 1999a; 1999b; Murakami et al., 1998; Palmqvist et al., 2002; Yasuda et al., 1998). The induction of OPG is inhibited by PTH, glucocorticoid, and prostaglandin E2 (PEG2) (Brandstrom et al., 1998; Gao et al., 1998; Lee and Lorenzo, 1999). Overexpression of OPG in transgenic mice resulted in severe osteopetrosis, and OPG-deficient mice exhibit profound osteoporosis as a result of an increased number of functional osteoclasts (Chagraoui et al., 2003). These findings demonstrate that OPG negatively regulates osteoclast formation and function. Thus, the TRANCE/ TRANCE-R/ OPG signaling axis, along with M-CSF, plays a crucial role in controlling bone homeostasis. Furthermore, these mouse models suggest that OPG may be useful for treating bone diseases caused by increased osteoclast function.

# Involvement of the immune system in osteoclastogenesis

Understanding the regulation of osteoclast development is central to understanding the pathogenesis and potential treatment(s) of bone diseases like autoimmune arthritis and osteoporosis. Many studies have investigated the relationship between these two systems in various animal models of human disease, including RA, periodontal disease, and bone cancer (Firestein, 2003; O’Gradaigh and Compston, 2003; Reddi et al., 2003; Roodman, 2001; Teitelbaum and Ross, 2003; Theill et al., 2002). However, the cellular and molecular basis of the link between the bone and immune systems remains unknown. It has now been well established that osteoclasts, which are important cellular mediators of skeletal homeostasis, are derived from the hematopoietic precursors that also give rise to immune cells.

Osteoclastogenesis is positively regulated by the axis of TRANCE-TRANCE-R signaling and negatively regulated by OPG (Theill et al., 2002; Walsh and Choi, 2003). As discussed previously, many studies show that activated T-
cells can induce osteoclastogenesis through expression of TRANCE. In contrast, activated T-cells that produce interferon-γ (IFN-γ) also can suppress osteoclastogenesis by interfering with the TRANCE-TRANCE-R signaling pathway via rapid degradation of TRAF6 (Fig. 2). This suggests that activated T-cells both positively and negatively regulate osteoclastogenesis. The involvement of T-cells in osteoclastogenesis may depend on the balance between the positive action of TRANCE and the negative action of IFN-γ. This balance may also be affected by local and systemic factors, including microbial infections, nutrition, metabolism, mechanical factors, osteotropic hormones, and cytokines, such as TNFs and interleukins.

Various inflammatory cytokines have also been shown to play a role in osteoclastogenesis, including IFN-α, IFN-β, and IFN-γ (Takayanagi et al., 2000; 2002a; 2002b). Among these inflammatory cytokines, the negative effect of IFN-γ on osteoclastogenesis has been most extensively characterized. Mice injected with IFN-γ show defects in the formation of multinucleated osteoclasts. These data were confirmed by Takayanagi et al. who showed that IFN-γ produced by T-cells blocks osteoclastogenesis by interfering with TRANCE/TRANCE-R signaling (Fig. 2). IFN-γ induces degradation of TRAF6, a critical element in the TRANCE/TRANCE-R signaling pathway, via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, and resulting in the blockade of downstream signaling pathways like NF-κB and JNK. Furthermore, mice that lack IFNGR1, a component of the IFN-γ receptor, exhibit decreased bone mass due to increased osteoclast formation and bone resorption (Manoury-Schwartz et al., 1997; Takayanagi et al., 2000; Vermeire et al., 1997). IFN-α may also function as a negative modulator of TRANCE/TRANCE-R signaling, by blocking the activation of NF-κB and JNK (Takayanagi et al., 2000). A recent study demonstrates that IFN-β also inhibits osteoclastogenesis by interfering with the TRANCE-induced expression of c-Fos, a transcription factor that is essential for osteoclast formation (Takayanagi et al., 2002a). Mice that lack IFNAR1, a component of the IFN α/β receptor, have a much higher level of functional osteoclasts as compared to their wild-type littermates, resulting in a phenotype consistent with osteoporosis (Takayanagi et al., 2002a).

Inflammation is known to increase osteoclastogenesis. Inflammatory cytokines secreted by immune cells, such as TNF-α or IL-1, can markedly up-regulate the expression of TRANCE in osteoblasts (Theill et al., 2002; Walsh and Choi, 2003). T-cell-derived TRANCE plays a central role in inflammatory bone loss. IL-7 can also act as a potent osteoclastogenic factor in inflammatory bone loss, by inducing the gene expression of TRANCE and TNF-α from T-cells (Lee et al., 2003; Toraldo et al., 2003). It has been shown that the concentration of soluble TRANCE secreted by T-cells is substantially elevated in response to IL-7, regardless of whether IL-7 regulates OPG. Similarly,

Fig. 2. Role of activated T-cells in osteoclast formation and function. The binding of TRANCE to the TRANCE-R leads to the formation and activation of osteoclasts, through a TRAF6-dependent signaling cascade. TRAF6 binds to the cytoplasmic tail of TRANCE-R, and serves as an important signaling adaptor protein for osteoclast differentiation, activation and survival. The TRAF6-mediated signaling is negatively regulated by the inflammatory cytokine IFN-γ, which induces ubiquitin-dependent degradation of TRAF6. Activated T-cells not only positively regulate, but also negatively control osteoclastogenesis.

TRANCE derived from activated T-cells has been shown to be necessary for the bone loss that occurs in animal models of RA.

Numerous cytokines and osteotropic hormones have been reported to regulate osteoclast formation and function *in vitro*, but their functional relevance *in vivo* has not been well established. For example, although cytokines derived from T-cells or macrophages, such as IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, IL-17, IL-18, CD40L, granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and macrophage inflammatory protein-1 (MIP-1), have been reported to modulate osteoclast formation and function in cell culture (Arron et al., 2001; Choi et al., 2001; Han et al., 2001; Horwood et al., 1998; 2001; Lee et al., 2003; Lubberts et al., 2003; Miyamoto et al., 2001; Ross, 2003; Toraldo et al., 2003; Udagawa et al., 1997; Wei et al., 2002), the molecular and cellular roles of these cytokines *in vivo* have not been clearly delineated. IL-6 potently stimulates osteoclast formation through the induction of TNF-α and IL-1, which are secreted by multiple myeloma (MM), and lead to increased expression of TRANCE. MM is a B-cell ma-

lignancy characterized by the accumulation of plasma cells in bone marrow and the development of osteolytic bone disease (Anderson *et al.*, 2002; Callander and Roodman, 2001; Reddi *et al.*, 2003). Chemokine MIP-1α mRNA was elevated in MM patients, as compared to normal controls (Choi *et al.*, 2001; Han *et al.*, 2001). MIP-1α may act as an osteoclastogenic factor in MM, but it is independent of TRANCE expression (Han *et al.*, 2001). Hypercalcemia is one of the most frequent and serious complications experienced by patients with adult T-cell leukemia (ATL), leading to accumulation of osteoclasts and marked bone resorption (Berenson, 2002; Stewart, 2002). The secretion of cytokines like IL-1 and PTH-related protein in patients with ATL is thought to be involved in the accumulation of osteoclasts via induction of TRANCE, thereby leading to high serum Ca²⁺ levels.

IL-4 is thought to suppress osteoclast development and mature osteoclast function by a STAT6-dependent mechanism -- irreversible inhibition of the differentiation program of osteoclasts activated by TRANCE (Wei *et al.*, 2002). IL-18 and IL-12 may also synergistically inhibit osteoclastic bone-resorbing activity, but the mechanisms have not been well defined *in vivo* (Horwood *et al.*, 1998; 2001). Taken together, considerable evidence suggests that T-cells play a critical role in osteoclast development and function, through signaling cross-talk between IFNs and TRANCE in bone remodeling. However, many questions remain unanswered regarding how cytokines or chemokines secreted by T-cells or other immune cells can regulate bone metabolism *in vivo*.

### Perspectives

Over the past five years, since the TRANCE axis was first shown to be crucial to the signaling cascade regulating osteoclast development, we have learned a great deal about the mechanisms by which osteoclasts are formed and how they resorb bone. It is now clear that osteoclasts, which are critical components in mediating bone homeostasis, are derived from the same hematopoietic precursors that give rise to immune cells. We now have a much clearer picture of the cytokine-dependent cross-talk that occurs between the immune and bone systems. Numerous cytokines that were first shown to regulate immune cell function have now been shown to regulate the function of osteoclasts to influence skeletal homeostasis either positively or negatively. Here, we have provided a general overview of osteoimmunology, a new field that studies the molecular links between the bone and immune systems, from the perspective of bone biology. However, it is important to keep in mind that this field is still emerging and much work is needed before a full understanding of the interface between these two systems will be realized. Nevertheless, the study of osteoimmunology may lead to

the development of new drugs to treat common diseases that affect both the bone and the immune systems.

#### Acknowledgments

This work was supported by Korea Research Foundation Grant (KRF-2003-003-E000420). We thank the members of Dr. Choi’s laboratory for vital contributions and discussion.

---

### References

Aarden, E. M., Burger, E. H., and Nijweide, P. J. (1994) Function of osteocytes in bone. *J. Cell. Biochem.* **55**, 287–299.

Ahlen, J., Andersson, S., Mukohyama, H., Roth, C., Backman, A., Conaway, H. H., and Lerner, U. H. (2002) Characterization of the bone-resorptive effect of interleukin-11 in cultured mouse calvarial bones. *Bone* **31**, 242–251.

Anderson, K. C., Shaughnessy, J. D. Jr., Barlogie, B., Harousseau, J. L., and Roodman, G. D. (2002) Multiple myeloma. *Hematology (Am. Soc. Hematol. Educ. Program)*, 214–240.

Arron, J. R. and Choi, Y. (2000) Bone versus immune system. *Nature* **408**, 535–536.

Arron, J. R., Vologodkaia, M., Wong, B. R., Naramura, M., Kim, N., Gu, H., and Choi, Y. (2001) A positive regulatory role for Cbl family proteins in tumor necrosis factor-related activation-induced cytokine (trance) and CD40L-mediated Akt activation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 30011–30017.

Berenson, J. R. (2002) Treatment of hypercalcemia of malignancy with bisphosphonates. *Semin. Oncol.* **29**, 12–18.

Boyle, W. J., Simonet, W. S., and Lacey, D. L. (2003) Osteoclast differentiation and activation. *Nature* **423**, 337–342.

Brandstrom, H., Jonsson, K. B., Ohlsson, C., Vidal, O., Ljunghall, S., and Ljunggren, O. (1998) Regulation of osteoprotegerin mRNA levels by prostaglandin E2 in human bone marrow stroma cells. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **247**, 338–341.

Bucay, N., Sarosi, I., Dunstan, C. R., Morony, S., Tarpley, J., Capparelli, C., Scully, S., Tan, H. L., Xu, W., Lacey, D. L., Boyle, W. L., and Simonet, W. S. (1998) Osteoprotegerin-deficient mice develop early onset osteoporosis and arterial calcification. *Genes Dev.* **12**, 1260–1268.

Callander, N. S. and Roodman, G. D. (2001) Myeloma bone disease. *Semin. Hematol.* **38**, 276–285.

Chagraoui, H., Tulliez, M., Smayra, T., Komura, E., Giraudier, S., Yun, T., Lassau, N., Vainchenker, W., and Wendling, F. (2003) Stimulation of osteoprotegerin production is responsible for osteosclerosis in mice overexpressing TPO. *Blood* **101**, 2983–2989.

Choi, S. J., Oba, Y., Gazitt, Y., Alsina, M., Cruz, J., Anderson, J., and Roodman, G. D. (2001) Antisense inhibition of macrophage inflammatory protein 1-alpha blocks bone destruction in a model of myeloma bone disease. *J. Clin. Invest.* **108**, 1833–1841.

Darnay, B. G., Haridas, V., Ni, J., Moore, P. A., and Aggarwal, B. B. (1998) Characterization of the intracellular domain of receptor activator of NF-kappaB (RANK). Interaction with tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factors and activation of NF-kappab and c-Jun N-terminal kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 20551–20555.

Darnay, B. G., Ni, J., Moore, P. A., and Aggarwal, B. B. (1999) Activation of NF-kappaB by RANK requires tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor (TRAF) 6 and NF-kappaB-inducing kinase. Identification of a novel TRAF6 interaction motif. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 7724–7731.

Dougall, W. C., Glaccum, M., Charrier, K., Rohrbach, K., Brasel, K., De Smedt, T., Daro, E., Smith, J., Tometsko, M. E., Maliszewski, C. R., Armstrong, A., Shen, V., Bain, S., Cosman, D., Anderson, D., Morrissey, P. J., Peschon, J. J., and Schuh, J. (1999) RANK is essential for osteoclast and lymph node development. *Genes Dev.* **13**, 2412–2424.

Edwards, J. C. (2002) Importance of T cells in rheumatoid synovitis, comment on the review by Firestein and Zvaifler. *Arthritis Rheum.* **46**, 3105–3106; author reply 3106.

Firestein, G. S. (2003) Evolving concepts of rheumatoid arthritis. *Nature* **423**, 356–361.

Galibert, L., Tometsko, M. E., Anderson, D. M., Cosman, D., and Dougall, W. C. (1998) The involvement of multiple tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)-associated factors in the signaling mechanisms of receptor activator of NF-kappaB, a member of the TNFR superfamily. *J. Biol. Chem.* **273**, 34120–34127.

Gao, Y. H., Shinki, T., Yuasa, T., Kataoka-Enomoto, H., Komori, T., Suda, T., and Yamaguchi, A. (1998) Potential role of cbfα1, an essential transcriptional factor for osteoblast differentiation, in osteoclastogenesis, regulation of mRNA expression of osteoclast differentiation factor (ODF). *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **252**, 697–702.

Han, J. H., Choi, S. J., Kurihara, N., Koide, M., Oba, Y., and Roodman, G. D. (2001) Macrophage inflammatory protein-1alpha is an osteoclastogenic factor in myeloma that is independent of receptor activator of nuclear factor kappaB ligand. *Blood* **97**, 3349–3353.

Harada, S. and Rodan, G. A. (2003) Control of osteoblast function and regulation of bone mass. *Nature* **423**, 349–355.

Hattersley, G., Owens, J., Flanagan, A. M., and Chambers, T. J. (1991) Macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF) is essential for osteoclast formation in vitro. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **177**, 526–531.

Hofbauer, L. C., Dunstan, C. R., Spelsberg, T. C., Riggs, B. L., and Khosla, S. (1998) Osteoprotegerin production by human osteoblast lineage cells is stimulated by vitamin D, bone morphogenetic protein-2, and cytokines. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **250**, 776–781.

Hofbauer, L. C., Khosla, S., Dunstan, C. R., Lacey, D. L., Spelsberg, T. C., and Riggs, B. L. (1999a) Estrogen stimulates gene expression and protein production of osteoprotegerin in human osteoblastic cells. *Endocrinology* **140**, 4367–4370.

Hofbauer, L. C., Lacey, D. L., Dunstan, C. R., Spelsberg, T. C., Riggs, B. L., and Khosla, S. (1999b) Interleukin-1beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha, but not interleukin-6, stimulate osteoprotegerin ligand gene expression in human osteoblastic cells. *Bone* **25**, 255–259.

Horwood, N. J., Udagawa, N., Elliott, J., Grail, D., Okamura, H., Kurimoto, M., Dunn, A. R., Martin, T., and Gillespie, M. T. (1998) Interleukin 18 inhibits osteoclast formation via T cell production of granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor. *J. Clin. Invest.* **101**, 595–603.

Horwood, N. J., Elliott, J., Martin, T. J., and Gillespie, M. T. (2001) IL-12 alone and in synergy with IL-18 inhibits osteoclast formation in vitro. *J. Immunol.* **166**, 4915–4921.

Iotsova, V., Caamano, J., Loy, J., Yang, Y., Lewin, A., and Bravo, R. (1997) Osteopetrosis in mice lacking NF-kappaB1 and NF-kappaB2. *Nat. Med.* **3**, 1285–1289.

Kaku, M., Kohno, S., Kawata, T., Fujita, I., Tokimasa, C., Tsutsui, K., and Tanne, K. (2001) Effects of vascular endothelial growth factor on osteoclast induction during tooth movement in mice. *J. Dent. Res.* **80**, 1880–1883.

Kim, D., Mebius, R. E., MacMicking, J. D., Jung, S., Cupedo, T., Castellanos, Y., Rho, J., Wong, B. R., Josien, R., Kim, N., Rennert, P. D., and Choi, Y. (2000a) Regulation of peripheral lymph node genesis by the tumor necrosis factor family member TRANCE. *J. Exp. Med.* **192**, 1467–1478.

Kim, N., Odgren, P. R., Kim, D. K., Marks, S. C. Jr., and Choi, Y. (2000b) Diverse roles of the tumor necrosis factor family member TRANCE in skeletal physiology revealed by TRANCE deficiency and partial rescue by a lymphocyte-expressed TRANCE transgene. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **97**, 10905–10910.

Kim, N., Takami, M., Rho, J., Josien, R., and Choi, Y. (2002) A novel member of the leukocyte receptor complex regulates osteoclast differentiation. *J. Exp. Med.* **195**, 201–209.

Kodama, H., Yamasaki, A., Nose, M., Niida, S., Ohgame, Y., Abe, M., Kumegawa, M., and Suda, T. (1991) Congenital osteoclast deficiency in osteopetrotic (op/op) mice is cured by injections of macrophage colony-stimulating factor. *J. Exp. Med.* **173**, 269–272.

Kong, Y. Y., Feige, U., Sarosi, I., Bolon, B., Tafuri, A., Morony, S., Capparelli, C., Li, J., Elliott, R., McCabe, S., Wong, T., Campagnuolo, G., Moran, E., Bogoch, E. R., Van, G., Nguyen, L. T., Ohashi, P. S., Lacey, D. L., Fish, E., Boyle, W. J., and Penninger, J. M. (1999) Activated T cells regulate bone loss and joint destruction in adjuvant arthritis through osteoprotegerin ligand. *Nature* **402**, 304–309.

Lacey, D. L., Timms, E., Tan, H. L., Kelley, M. J., Dunstan, C. R., Burgess, T., Elliott, R., Colombero, A., Elliott, G., Scully, S., Hsu, H., Sullivan, J., Hawkins, N., Davy, E., Capparelli, C., Eli, A., Qian, Y. X., Kaufman, S., Sarosi, I., Shalhoub, V., Senaldi, G., Guo, J., Delaney, J., and Boyle, W. J. (1998) Osteoprotegerin ligand is a cytokine that regulates osteoclast differentiation and activation. *Cell* **93**, 165–176.

Lean, J. M., Fuller, K., and Chambers, T. J. (2001) FLT3 ligand can substitute for macrophage colony-stimulating factor in support of osteoclast differentiation and function. *Blood* **98**, 2707–2713.

Lee, S. K. and Lorenzo, J. A. (1999) Parathyroid hormone stimulates TRANCE and inhibits osteoprotegerin messenger ribonucleic acid expression in murine bone marrow cultures, correlation with osteoclast-like cell formation. *Endocrinology* **140**, 3552–3561.

Lee, S. W., Han, S. I., Kim, H. H., and Lee, Z. H. (2002) TAK1-dependent activation of AP-1 and c-Jun N-terminal kinase by receptor activator of NF-kappaB. *J. Biochem. Mol. Biol.* **35**, 371–376.

Lee, S. K., Kalinowski, J. F., Jastrzebski, S. L., Puddington, L., and Lorenzo, J. A. (2003) Interleukin-7 is a direct inhibitor of in vitro osteoclastogenesis. *Endocrinology* **144**, 3524–3531.

Li, Y. P., Chen, W., Liang, Y., Li, E., and Stashenko, P. (1999) Atp6i-deficient mice exhibit severe osteopetrosis due to loss of osteoclast-mediated extracellular acidification. *Nat. Genet.* **23**, 447–451.

Lomaga, M. A., Yeh, W. C., Sarosi, I., Duncan, G. S., Furlonger, C., Ho, A., Morony, S., Capparelli, C., Van, G., Kaufman, S., van der Heiden, A., Itie, A., Wakeham, A., Khoo, W., Sasaki, T., Cao, Z., Penninger, J. M., Paige, C. J., Lacey, D. L., Dunstan, C. R., Boyle, W. J., Goeddel, D. V., and Mak, T. W. (1999) TRAF6 deficiency results in osteopetrosis and defective interleukin-1, CD40, and LPS signaling. *Genes Dev.* 13, 1015–1024.

Lomaga, M. A., Henderson, J. T., Elia, A. J., Robertson, J., Noyce, R. S., Yeh, W. C., and Mak, T. W. (2000) Tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) deficiency results in exencephaly and is required for apoptosis within the developing CNS. *J. Neurosci.* 20, 7384–7393.

Lubberts, E., van den Bersselaar, L., Oppers-Walgreen, B., Schwarzenberger, P., Coenen-de Roo, C. J., Kolls, J. K., Joosten, L. A., and van den Berg, W. B. (2003) IL-17 promotes bone erosion in murine collagen-induced arthritis through loss of the receptor activator of NF-kappa B ligand/osteoprotegerin balance. *J. Immunol.* 170, 2655–2662.

Manoury-Schwartz, B., Chiocchia, G., Bessis, N., Abehsira-Amar, O., Batteux, F., Muller, S., Huang, S., Boissier, M. C., and Fournier, C. (1997) High susceptibility to collagen-induced arthritis in mice lacking IFN-gamma receptors. *J. Immunol.* 158, 5501–5506.

Miyamoto, T., Ohneda, O., Arai, F., Iwamoto, K., Okada, S., Takagi, K., Anderson, D. M., and Suda, T. (2001) Bifurcation of osteoclasts and dendritic cells from common progenitors. *Blood* 98, 2544–2554.

Mizuno, A., Amizuka, N., Irie, K., Murakami, A., Fujise, N., Kanno, T., Sato, Y., Nakagawa, N., Yasuda, H., Mochizuki, S., Gomibuchi, T., Yano, K., Shima, N., Washida, N., Tsuda, E., Morinaga, T., Higashio, K., and Ozawa, H. (1998) Severe osteoporosis in mice lacking osteoclastogenesis inhibitory factor/osteoprotegerin. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 247, 610–615.

Murakami, T., Yamamoto, M., Ono, K., Nishikawa, M., Nagata, N., Motoyoshi, K., and Akatsu, T. (1998) Transforming growth factor-beta1 increases mRNA levels of osteoclastogenesis inhibitory factor in osteoblastic/stromal cells and inhibits the survival of murine osteoclast-like cells. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 252, 747–752.

Naito, A., Yoshida, H., Nishioka, E., Satoh, M., Azuma, S., Yamamoto, T., Nishikawa, S., and Inoue, J. (2002) TRAF6-deficient mice display hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 99, 8766–8771.

Nakagawa, M., Kaneda, T., Arakawa, T., Morita, S., Sato, T., Yomada, T., Hanada, K., Kumegawa, M., and Hakeda, Y. (2000) Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) directly enhances osteoclastic bone resorption and survival of mature osteoclasts. *FEBS Lett.* 473, 161–164.

Niida, S., Kaku, M., Amano, H., Yoshida, H., Kataoka, H., Nishikawa, S., Tanne, K., Maeda, N., and Kodama, H. (1999) Vascular endothelial growth factor can substitute for macrophage colony-stimulating factor in the support of osteoclastic bone resorption. *J. Exp. Med.* 190, 293–298.

O’Gradaigh, D. and Compston, J. E. (2003) T-cell involvement in osteoclast biology, implications for rheumatoid bone erosion. *Rheumatology (Oxford)*.

Palmqvist, P., Persson, E., Conaway, H. H., and Lerner, U. H. (2002) IL-6, leukemia inhibitory factor, and oncostatin M

stimulate bone resorption and regulate the expression of receptor activator of NF-kappa B ligand, osteoprotegerin, and receptor activator of NF-kappa B in mouse calvariae. *J. Immunol.* 169, 3353–3362.

Pockwinse, S. M., Wilming, L. G., Conlon, D. M., Stein, G. S., and Lian, J. B. (1992) Expression of cell growth and bone specific genes at single cell resolution during development of bone tissue-like organization in primary osteoblast cultures. *J. Cell. Biochem.* 49, 310–323.

Reddi, A. H., Roodman, D., Freeman, C., and Mohla, S. (2003) Mechanisms of tumor metastasis to the bone, challenges and opportunities. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* 18, 190–194.

Rho, J., Altmann, C. R., Socci, N. D., Merkov, L., Kim, N., So, H., Lee, O., Takami, M., Brivanlou, A. H., and Choi, Y. (2002) Gene expression profiling of osteoclast differentiation by combined suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH) and cDNA microarray analysis. *DNA Cell Biol.* 21, 541–549.

Roodman, G. D. (1996) Advances in bone biology, the osteoclast. *Endocr. Rev.* 17, 308–332.

Roodman, G. D. (1999) Cell biology of the osteoclast. *Exp. Hematol.* 27, 1229–1241.

Roodman, G. D. (2001) Biology of osteoclast activation in cancer. *J. Clin. Oncol.* 19, 3562–3571.

Ross, F. P. (2003) Interleukin 7 and estrogen-induced bone loss. *Trends Endocrinol. Metab.* 14, 147–149.

Sordillo, E. M. and Pearse, R. N. (2003) RANK-Fc, a therapeutic antagonist for RANK-L in myeloma. *Cancer* 97, 802–812.

Stewart, A. F. (2002) Hyperparathyroidism, humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy, and the anabolic actions of parathyroid hormone and parathyroid hormone-related protein on the skeleton. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* 17, 758–762.

Suda, T., Jimi, E., Nakamura, I., and Takahashi, N. (1997a) Role of 1 alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 in osteoclast differentiation and function. *Methods Enzymol.* 282, 223–235.

Suda, T., Nakamura, I., Jimi, E., and Takahashi, N. (1997b) Regulation of osteoclast function. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* 12, 869–879.

Suda, T., Kobayashi, K., Jimi, E., Udagawa, N., and Takahashi, N. (2001) The molecular basis of osteoclast differentiation and activation. *Novartis Found. Symp.* 232, 235–247; discussion 247–250.

Suda, T., Ueno, Y., Fujii, K., and Shinki, T. (2003) Vitamin D and bone. *J. Cell. Biochem.* 88, 259–266.

Sundquist, K. T., Cecchini, M. G., and Marks, S. C. Jr. (1995). Colony-stimulating factor-1 injections improve but do not cure skeletal sclerosis in osteopetrotic (op) mice. *Bone* 16, 39.

Takami, M., Kim, N., Rho, J., and Choi, Y. (2002) Stimulation by toll-like receptors inhibits osteoclast differentiation. *J. Immunol.* 169, 1516–1523.

Takayanagi, H., Ogasawara, K., Hida, S., Chiba, T., Murata, S., Sato, K., Takaoka, A., Yokochi, T., Oda, H., Tanaka, K., Nakamura, K., and Taniguchi, T. (2000) T-cell-mediated regulation of osteoclastogenesis by signalling cross-talk between RANKL and IFN-gamma. *Nature* 408, 600–605.

Takayanagi, H., Kim, S., Matsuo, K., Suzuki, H., Suzuki, T., Sato, K., Yokochi, T., Oda, H., Nakamura, K., Ida, N., Wagner, E. F., and Taniguchi, T. (2002a) RANKL maintains bone homeostasis through c-Fos-dependent induction of interferon-beta. *Nature* 416, 744–749.

Takayanagi, H., Kim, S., and Taniguchi, T. (2002b) Signaling crosstalk between RANKL and interferons in osteoclast differ-

entiation. *Arthritis Res.* 4, Suppl. 3, S227–232.

Targonska, M., Kochanowska, I., Ostrowski, K., and Gorski, A. (2001) Osteoimmunology, new area of research on the associations between the immune and bone systems. *Pol. Arch. Med. Wewn.* 105, 435–440.

Taubman, M. A. and Kawai, T. (2001) Involvement of T-lymphocytes in periodontal disease and in direct and indirect induction of bone resorption. *Crit. Rev. Oral Biol. Med.* 12, 125–135.

Teitelbaum, S. L. and Ross, F. P. (2003) Genetic regulation of osteoclast development and function. *Nat. Rev. Genet.* 4, 638–649.

Teitelbaum, S. L., Abu-Amer, Y., and Ross, F. P. (1995) Molecular mechanisms of bone resorption. *J. Cell. Biochem.* 59, 1–10.

Teng, Y. T. (2003) The role of acquired immunity and periodontal disease progression. *Crit. Rev. Oral Biol. Med.* 14, 237–252.

Theill, L. E., Boyle, W. J., and Penninger, J. M. (2002) RANK-L and RANK, T cells, bone loss, and mammalian evolution. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 20, 795–823.

Toraldo, G., Roggia, C., Qian, W. P., Pacifici, R., and Weitzmann, M. N. (2003) IL-7 induces bone loss *in vivo* by induction of receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand and tumor necrosis factor alpha from T cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 100, 125–130.

Toyomura, T., Oka, T., Yamaguchi, C., Wada, Y., and Futai, M. (2000) Three subunit a isoforms of mouse vacuolar H(+)-ATPase. Preferential expression of the a3 isoform during osteoclast differentiation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 8760–8765.

Udagawa, N., Horwood, N. J., Elliott, J., Mackay, A., Owens, J., Okamura, H., Kurimoto, M., Chambers, T. J., Martin, T. J., and Gillespie, M. T. (1997) Interleukin-18 (interferon-gamma-inducing factor) is produced by osteoblasts and acts via granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor and not via interferon-gamma to inhibit osteoclast formation. *J. Exp. Med.* 185, 1005–1012.

van der Plas, A., Aarden, E. M., Feijen, J. H., de Boer, A. H., Wiltink, A., Alblas, M. J., de Leij, L., and Nijweide, P. J. (1994) Characteristics and properties of osteocytes in culture. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* 9, 1697–1704.

Vermeire, K., Heremans, H., Vandeputte, M., Huang, S., Billiau, A., and Matthys, P. (1997) Accelerated collagen-induced arthritis in IFN-gamma receptor-deficient mice. *J. Immunol.* 158,

5507–5513.

Walsh, M. C. and Choi, Y. (2003) Biology of the TRANCE axis. *Cytokine Growth Factor Rev.* 14, 251–263.

Wei, S., Wang, M. W., Teitelbaum, S. L., and Ross, F. P. (2002) Interleukin-4 reversibly inhibits osteoclastogenesis via inhibition of NF-kappa B and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 6622–6630.

Wiebe, S. H., Hafezi, M., Sandhu, H. S., Sims, S. M., and Dixon, S. J. (1996) Osteoclast activation in inflammatory periodontal diseases. *Oral Dis.* 2, 167–180.

Wong, B. R., Rho, J., Arron, J., Robinson, E., Orlinick, J., Chao, M., Kalachikov, S., Cayani, E., Bartlett, F. S. 3rd, Frankel, W. N., Lee, S. Y., and Choi, Y. (1997) TRANCE is a novel ligand of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family that activates c-Jun N-terminal kinase in T cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 25190–25194.

Wong, B. R., Josien, R., Lee, S. Y., Vologodskaia, M., Steinman, R. M., and Choi, Y. (1998) The TRAF family of signal transducers mediates NF-kappaB activation by the TRANCE receptor. *J. Biol. Chem.* 273, 28355–28359.

Wong, B. R., Besser, D., Kim, N., Arron, J. R., Vologodskaia, M., Hanafusa, H., and Choi, Y. (1999) TRANCE, a TNF family member, activates Akt/PKB through a signaling complex involving TRAF6 and c-Src. *Mol. Cell* 4, 1041–1049.

Yasuda, H., Shima, N., Nakagawa, N., Yamaguchi, K., Kinosaki, M., Mochizuki, S., Tomoyasu, A., Yano, K., Goto, M., Murakami, A., Tsuda, E., Morinaga, T., Higashio, K., Udagawa, N., Takahashi, N., and Suda, T. (1998) Osteoclast differentiation factor is a ligand for osteoprotegerin/osteoclastogenesis-inhibitory factor and is identical to TRANCE/RANKL. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* 95, 3597–3602.

Yoshida, H., Hayashi, S., Kunisada, T., Ogawa, M., Nishikawa, S., Okamura, H., Sudo, T., and Shultz, L. D. (1990) The murine mutation osteopetrosis is in the coding region of the macrophage colony stimulating factor gene. *Nature* 345, 442–444.

Zaidi, M., Troen, B., Moonga, B. S., and Abe, E. (2001) Cathepsin K, osteoclastic resorption, and osteoporosis therapy. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* 16, 1747–1749.

Zaidi, M., Blair, H. C., Moonga, B. S., Abe, E., and Huang, C. L. (2003) Osteoclastogenesis, bone resorption, and osteoclast-based therapeutics. *J. Bone Miner. Res.* 18, 599–609.

Zelzer, E. and Olsen, B. R. (2003) The genetic basis for skeletal diseases. *Nature* 423, 343–348.
