
Plant Molecular Biology 53: 733–743, 2003.
© 2004 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.

# Isoflavonoid biosynthesis and accumulation in developing soybean seeds

Sangeeta Dhaubhadel, Brian D. McGarvey, Ruthanne Williams and Mark Gijzen*
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 1391 Sandford Street, London, Ontario, Canada N5V 4T3 (*author for correspondence; e-mail gijzenm@agr.gc.ca)

Received 30 September 2003; accepted in revised form 11 November 2003

**Key words:** F₁ hybrids, Glycine max, isoflavonoid inheritance, phenylpropanoid, secondary metabolism, seed development

## Abstract

Isoflavonoids are biologically active natural products that accumulate in soybean seeds during development. The amount of isoflavonoids present in soybean seed is variable, depending on genetic and environmental factors that are not fully understood. Experiments were conducted to determine whether isoflavonoids are synthesized within seed tissues during development, or made in other plant organs and transported to the seeds where they accumulate. An analysis of isoflavonoids by HPLC detected the compounds in all organs of soybean plant, but the amount of isoflavonoids present varied depending on the tissue and developmental stage. The greatest concentrations were found in mature seeds and leaves. The 2-hydroxyisoflavanone synthase genes *IFS1* and *IFS2* were studied to determine their pattern of expression in different tissues and developmental stages. The highest level of expression of *IFS1* was observed in the root and seed coat, while *IFS2* was most highly expressed in embryos and pods, and in elicitor-treated or pathogen-challenged tissues. Incorporation of radiolabel into isoflavonoids was observed when developing embryos and other plant organs were fed with \[^{14}C\]phenylalanine. Embryos excised from developing soybean seeds also accumulated isoflavonoids from a synthetic medium. A maternal effect on seed isoflavonoid content was noted in reciprocal crosses between soybean cultivars that differ in seed isoflavonoids. From these results, we propose that developing soybean embryos have an ability to synthesize isoflavonoids *de novo*, but that transport from maternal tissues may in part contribute to the accumulation of these natural products in the seed.

**Abbreviations:** BLAST, basic local alignment search tool; CHI, chalcone isomerase; CHR, chalcone reductase; DAP, days after pollination; EST, expressed sequence tag; HPLC, high-performance liquid chromatography; IFS, isoflavone synthase

## Introduction

Isoflavonoids constitute a distinct group of plant natural products derived from the phenylpropanoid pathway. They are abundant in soybeans and other leguminous plants. These compounds have diverse biological activities and play numerous roles in the interaction between plants and the environment. For example, soybean isoflavonoids that are constitutively present in root tissues are powerful chemottractants towards zoospores of the root-rot pathogen *Phytophthora sojae* (Morris and Ward, 1992). In response to infection soybean plants produce iso-

flavonoid phytoalexins that inhibit pathogen growth (Bhattacharyya and Ward, 1987; Graham, 1995; Graham and Graham, 2000). Isoflavonoids can act as inducers of nodulation genes of *Rhizobium* species in the early steps of symbiosis between soybean root and soil bacteria (Phillips, 1992). These studies also provide evidence that soybean roots secrete isoflavonoids into the rhizosphere, and infer that transport systems for intercellular delivery of isoflavonoids operate in soybean cells.

Isoflavonoids accumulate in soybean seeds during development and may occur in soy-based food products. In man, dietary intake of isoflavonoids has

Phenylalanine

↓ PAL  
↓ C4H  
↓ 4CL  

CHS + CHR  

naringenin chalcone  

HO  
|  
HO—C—C—OH  
|  
O  

naringenin  

↓ CHI  

HO  
|  
HO—C—C—OH  
|  
O  

liquiritigenin  

↓ CHI  

HO  
|  
HO—C—C—OH  
|  
O  

6,7,4'-trihydroxyflavone  

IFS  

HO  
|  
HO—C—C—OH  
|  
O  

genistein  

↓ IFS  

HO  
|  
HO—C—C—OH  
|  
O  

daidzein  

↓ GT  

Glu—O  
|  
HO—C—C—OH  
|  
O  

genistin  

↓ GT  

Glu—O  
|  
HO—C—C—OH  
|  
O  

daidzin  

↓ MT  

Mal-Glu—O  
|  
HO—C—C—OH  
|  
O  

malonylgenistin  

↓ MT  

Mal-Glu—O  
|  
HO—C—C—OH  
|  
O  

malonyldaidzin  

↓ IFS, IMT  

HO  
|  
HO—C—C—OH  
|  
O  

glycitein  

↓ GT  

Glu—O  
|  
HO—C—C—OH  
|  
O  

glycitin  

↓ MT  

Mal-Glu—O  
|  
HO—C—C—OH  
|  
O  

malonylglycitin  

Figure 1. Pathways to soybean seed isoflavonoids: 4CL, 4-coumarate-CoA-ligase; C4H, cinnamate-4-hydroxylase; CHI, chalcone isomerase; CHR, chalcone reductase; CHS, chalcone synthase; F6H, flavonone-6-hydroxylase; GT, glucosyl-transferase; IFS, 2-hydroxyisoflavanone synthase; IMT, isoflavone methyl-transferase; MT, malonyl-transferase; PAL, phenylalanine ammonia-lyase.

been associated with lower incidences of hormonally dependent cancers (Messina and Barnes, 1991; Peterson and Barnes, 1991), relief from symptoms of post-menopausal problems (Cassidy and Bingham, 1995), and a reduction in the risk of osteoporosis (Civitelli, 1997) and cardiovascular disease (Anderson *et al.*, 1995). Thus, there is considerable interest in soybean foods and purified soybean isoflavonoids as health-promoting agents. Isoflavonoids may also be undesirable components in some foods, such as soy-based infant formulas (Setchell *et al.*, 1997). However, recent evidence suggests that early exposure to soy isoflavonoids has no adverse effects in adulthood (Strom *et al.*, 2001). A detailed study following infants fed soy-based formulae into adulthood is necessary (Mendez *et al.*, 2002).

There are at least nine known isoflavonoids that occur in soybean seeds. As shown in Figure 1, three types of isoflavone aglycones (genistein, daidzein and glycitein) may each be derivatized to corresponding glucosides (genistin, daidzin and glycitin); and malonyl glucosides (6″-O-malonylgenistin, 6″-O-malonyldaidzin and 6″-O-malonylglycitin) (Kudou *et al.*, 1991). The acetylglucoside (6″-O-acetylgenistin, 6″-O-acetyldaidzin and 6″-O-acetylglycitin) forms arise from malonyl glucosides during processing of soybeans and soy foods (Griffith and Collison, 2001). Recently, the isoflavonoid content of soybeans has been an important consideration in breeding programs, and high-throughput analysis methods have been developed to make selections (Ghosh and Fenner, 1999). However, the amount of isoflavonoids present in soybean seeds is variable and influenced by genetic

and environmental factors that are not fully understood (Eldridge and Kwolek, 1983). Low temperatures (Tsukamoto *et al.*, 1995) and potassium fertilization (Vyn *et al.*, 2002) have been reported to increase seed isoflavonoid content. Soybean lines that differ in seed isoflavonoid content have also been used to construct crosses in attempts to map quantitative trait loci that control this trait (Meksem *et al.*, 2001).

A branch point enzyme in isoflavonoid biosynthesis is 2-hydroxyisoflavanone synthase (isoflavone synthase, IFS). This enzyme catalyzes a 2,3 aryl ring migration of flavanones to their corresponding isoflavones (Heller and Forkmann, 1994), followed by formation of double bond between C-2 and C-3 by a dehydratase (Hakamatsuka *et al.*, 1998). The isolation of cDNA transcripts encoding IFS from soybean and other plant species has demonstrated that this enzyme is a P450 monooxygenase of the CYP93C class (Akashi *et al.*, 1999; Steele *et al.*, 1999; Jung *et al.*, 2000). Two *IFS* genes from soybean, *IFS1* and *IFS2*, encode proteins that differ from one another by 14 amino acids. Both *IFS1* and *IFS2* convert the flavanones naringenin and liquiritigenin to the corresponding isoflavones genistein and daidzein, respectively (Jung *et al.*, 2000).

The developing seed is a sink for many products synthesized in other plant tissues. There is strong evidence that other natural products, such as glucosinolates in *Brassica* species, are simply delivered to seeds after synthesis in other plant organs (Gijzen *et al.*, 1989; Du and Halkier, 1998). The purpose of this study was to determine whether soybean isoflavonoids are synthesized within the seed during the development, or made in other plant tissues and transported to the developing seed where they accumulate. Our results show that soybean seed tissues express key genes involved in isoflavonoid synthesis, and that excised embryos can make these compounds from simple precursors. Nonetheless, excised embryos have an ability to take up exogenously supplied isoflavonoids. Reciprocal crosses between low- and high-isoflavonoid cultivars also show that the isoflavonoid content of F₁ hybrid seed more closely resembles that of the maternal parent. Overall, we conclude that developing soybean embryos have a capability for isoflavonoid biosynthesis, but that transport from maternal tissues augments total seed isoflavonoid content.

---

Materials and methods

**Plant materials**

Soybean (*Glycine max* [L.] Merr.) seeds were from collections at Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, or were provided by Dr Istvan Rajcan (University of Guelph, Ontario). Plants were grown outdoors in field plots. Soybean seedlings challenged with *Phytophthora sojae* (Kaufmann and Gerdemann) were prepared according to Qutob *et al.* (2000). For reciprocal crosses, soybean plants were grown in a growth chamber at 27 °C under a 23 h light/1 h dark cycle for first 6–8 weeks, and then transferred to 23 °C under 16 h light conditions (130 μmol photons m⁻² s⁻¹) to induce flowering.

**Transcript profiles of *IFS* genes using EST database**

Nucleotide sequences of the *IFS1* and *IFS2* genes were used to search *G. max* expressed sequence tags (ESTs) in GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) by BLASTN analysis (Altschul *et al.*, 1997). Highly significant matches were then compared to *IFS1* and *IFS2* sequences using an assembly and alignment program (SeqMan, Lasergene, DNASTAR). Transcripts matching *IFS1* and *IFS2* were distinguished from one another and grouped according to source cDNA library.

**RNA extraction and RT-PCR**

Total RNA was isolated from tissues following the procedure of Wang and Vodkin (1994). RNA samples were treated with DNaseI (Promega) for 30 min at 37 °C prior to RT-PCR. Samples were further purified by phenol/chloroform 3:1 v/v extraction and precipitated with ethanol. Samples of total RNA (2 μg each) were electrophoretically separated in formaldehyde gels and stained with ethidium bromide to ensure equal loading of samples prior to RT-PCR. RT-PCR reactions were performed with the Thermoscript RT-PCR System (Life Technologies) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Primer sequences for PCR were: *IFS1*, 5′-TAACCTCACTCAAACCTCGG-3′, 5′-GCGATGGCAAGACACTACTATTGT-3′; *IFS2*, 5′-TCAAACAAACCAAGGACGAGAA-3′, 5′-CATAAAAAGTAGATGAATGAG-3′; *CHI*, 5′-TGGACAGTAA GAACAACAC-3′, 5′-GGTCTCTTGGGATTATAC-3′; and *CHR*, 5′-GTGCTTCCCTCCTTTGAC-3′, 5′-GTTCCCTCCTCCCATCTT-3′. PCR conditions were as follows: 94 °C for 1 min, 60 °C for 30 s and 72 °C

for 2 min (35 cycles) for *IFS1* and *IFS2*, and 94 °C for 1 min, 60 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 45 s (40 cycles) for *CHI* and *CHR*. PCR reactions were carried out separately with an individual primer combination.

### Isoflavonoid extraction and analysis

Plant tissues were ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen, extracted with acetonitrile/water 1:1 v/v, and sonicated for 30 min in an ice water bath. Pod exudates were collected by cutting the distal tip of the pod where the marginal veins coalesce. The samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 3000 × g and the supernatant was then filtered (Acrodisc, nylon, 0.45 μm). To convert malonyl- and acetyl-isoflavonoid conjugates to their corresponding glucosides, 80 μl of 5% KOH was added to 300 μl of extract and the sample was incubated at room temperature for 3 h, followed by neutralization with 80 μl of 14% KH₂PO₄. The solvent was then evaporated and samples were re-dissolved in 40% dimethyl sulfoxide. HPLC analysis was conducted by injecting 10 μl of the samples on a C₁₈ column (Waters, Symmetry, 5 μm). A guard column containing identical packing material preceded the analytical column. Chromatography was done at room temperature, employing a mobile-phase gradient of 10–35% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid over 45 min at a flow rate of 1 ml/min (Hewlett-Packard 1090 Liquid Chromatograph). The overall separation time, including a 3 min wash and 10 min equilibration, was 58 min. Spectra of eluted compounds were measured with a diode array detector. Isoflavonoids were identified and quantified by comparison of retention time and UV spectra to authentic standards of genistein, genistin, daidzein, daidzin, glycitein and glycitin (LC Laboratories, MA). Peaks corresponding to malonyl- and acetyl-glucoside derivatives were also collected from non-hydrolysed samples and hydrolysed to confirm their identity.

### In vivo feeding of \[^{14}C\]Phe to soybean tissues

The level of isoflavonoids in soybeans has been found to increase in response to cold temperatures (Tsukamoto *et al.*, 1995). To improve incorporation of radiolabel into isoflavonoids, soybean plants 8–10 weeks old were first cold-stressed at 8 °C for 3 days prior to feeding with \[^{14}C\]Phe. To determine incorporation into isoflavonoids, dissected embryos as well as excised leaves and pods were incubated with 111 kBq of \[^{14}C\]Phe in microfuge tubes and placed in a humid chamber at 23 °C under fluorescent light. Water was added to the tubes when tracer solution was taken up. After incubation for 24 h, the tissues were rinsed with water and blotted dry on filter paper (Whatman, Maidstone, UK). The pod wall was separated from the seed and all the tissues were quick frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at –80 °C. To confirm incorporation of radiolabel into isoflavonoids, samples were extracted as described above and run in HPLC both before and after hydrolysis. HPLC fractions were collected and \[^{14}C\] radiolabel quantified by liquid scintillation counting (Beckman LS 5801, USA).

### In vitro uptake of isoflavonoids by developing soybean embryos

Isoflavonoid uptake by embryos over a 24 h period was examined by excising embryos (20, 40 and 50 days after pollination, DAP) from seeds and placing them in 500 μl of uptake medium containing 0.35 M sucrose, 10 mM MES/KOH buffer pH 6.5, and various concentrations of isoflavonoids. Commercially available isoflavonoid capsules (SISU Enterprises) were extracted and diluted in uptake buffer to provide total isoflavonoid substrate concentrations in a range of 0 to 2860 μM. The isoflavonoid preparation contained mostly glycosides, and was comprised of daidzin (45%), glycitin (15%), genistin (37%) and daidzein (3%) plus other components. Uptake experiments were performed under fluorescent light at 24 °C. After incubation in the uptake medium, the embryos were rinsed twice with sterile water, blotted dry on filter paper, weighed, and frozen in liquid nitrogen. The total content of isoflavonoids in the embryos was determined, and uptake was calculated as the difference in content between embryos incubated in the presence and absence of isoflavonoid substrates.

### Reciprocal crosses

Soybean cultivars RCAT-Angora and Harovinton were grown in growth chambers and crosses were made before flowers opened. Flowers were emasculated by removing sepals and petals prior to fertilization and tagging. The plants were grown to maturity and seeds corresponding to F₁ hybrids or self-fertilized parental types were harvested from plants grown under the same conditions and weighed. Isoflavonoids were extracted and measured as previously described.

Results

Soybean IFS1 and IFS2 genes are regulated differently

As a first step to determine the expression pattern of the soybean IFS genes, we analyzed ESTs for sequences exhibiting similarities to IFS genes. Nucleotide sequences corresponding to IFS1 and IFS2 were used in BLASTN searches of 284,714 soybean ESTs (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/) originating from more than 80 different cDNA libraries (Shoemaker et al., 2002). This resulted in the identification of 116 matching ESTs from 33 different source cDNA libraries, as listed in Table 1. Alignment of the ESTs with the IFS1 and IFS2 genes showed that 48 ESTs matched IFS1 while 68 ESTs corresponded to IFS2. These data were pooled according to the tissue type of the source cDNA library, as shown in Figure 2A. The results show that EST matches to IFS1 and IFS2 occurred in a wide variety of tissue types. Most numerous were ESTs corresponding to IFS2 from cDNA libraries constructed from stressed, elicitor-treated, or pathogen-challenged plant tissues. The IFS1 gene was represented most frequently by ESTs from root tissues.

To examine IFS1 and IFS2 transcript levels along with other genes upstream in the phenylpropanoid pathway, such as chalcone isomerase (CHI) and chalcone reductase (CHR), and to determine the tissue specificity of these genes during development, we designed gene-specific primers and performed RT-PCR. Representative results shown in Figure 2B indicate that CHI was expressed in all the tissues and developmental stages studied. However, CHR expression was lower in young seed coats, roots, early leaves, and stems when compared to other tissues. The IFS1 transcripts were present in all the tissues and developmental stages examined, but appeared to be highest in seed coat and root tissues. By contrast, transcripts corresponding with IFS2 were not detected in many tissues analyzed. When detected, the IFS2 transcript levels were highest in embryo and pod tissues during late stages of development. Similar results were obtained by northern analysis, except that we were not able to distinguish IFS1 from IFS2 expression by hybridization because the two genes are nearly identical in sequence. Thus, hybridization patterns represented the sum of expression of IFS1 and IFS2. Attempts to make gene-specific hybridization probes were not successful (not shown).

Figure 2. Analysis of IFS transcripts and isoflavonoid content in soybean tissues during development. A. Number of occurrences of soybean ESTs corresponding to IFS1 and IFS2 according to source cDNA library. B. Transcript detection of IFS1, IFS2, CHI, and CHR by RT-PCR with gene-specific primers. Template for RT-PCR was total RNA (2 μg) isolated from reproductive organs (5–50 DAP), or from leaves or stems at early (E) to mid (M) developmental stages. Shown as control is rRNA visualized by staining with ethidium bromide (EtBr). C. Total isoflavonoid content in soybean organs during reproductive development (5–50 DAP), or other tissues during early (E), mid (M), or late (L) stage, determined by HPLC. Data are mean values from three independent experiments.

Figure 3. Analysis of IFS transcripts in response to pathogen attack in soybean. Total RNA (2 μg) isolated from uninfected (C) or *P. sojae*-infected hypocotyls (T) at 3, 6, 12, 24 or 48 h after infection. Expression analysis was conducted by RT-PCR with IFS1 and IFS2 gene-specific primers. Shown as control is rRNA visualized by staining with ethidium bromide (EtBr).

To compare IFS expression patterns with isoflavonoid content in various tissues during development, we extracted isoflavonoids from different tissues, performed complete hydrolysis of malonyl derivatives to their glucosides, and measured the amount of six different isoflavonoids (genistein, daidzein, glycitein, and their glucosides) by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Figure 2C shows that the greatest amount of these compounds were present in mature seed, leaf and embryo tissues at late stages of development. Relatively high levels of isoflavonoids were also detected in pod exudates. The isoflavonoid content was comparatively low in tissues from early developmental stages. The isoflavonoid profile also varied among the samples (not shown). Daidzin was most abundant in embryos up to 45 DAP. However, the amount of genistin rapidly increased during the final stages of embryo development and was the most abundant type in mature seeds. Genistin also predominated in leaf tissues and pod exudates. The results show that the amount of genistin, daidzin and glycitin present in soybean tissues is variable, and not closely correlated with IFS transcript accumulation patterns.

To determine whether the large increase in embryo isoflavonoid content (on a fresh-weight (FW) basis) at the final stages of seed development was simply due to seed desiccation, we also calculated the content on a per embryo basis. The results indicate that there is a net accumulation of isoflavonoids in embryos during the late stages of seed development, and that water loss alone cannot account for the rapid increase in concentration observed during this period (not shown).

To determine the pattern of IFS1 and IFS2 gene expression upon pathogen attack, the expression of each IFS gene was monitored by RT-PCR with gene-

Figure 4. Incorporation of \[^{14}C\]Phe into isoflavonoids in soybean tissues. Isoflavonoid analysis of excised embryos (30–35 DAP) (A), pod walls (B), and leaves (C) fed with \[^{14}C\]Phe for 24 h. Shown are HPLC chromatograms (upper graphs) and radioactivity of the fractions (lower graphs) detected in relative units of absorbance (Abs 260 nm) or disintegrations per minute (dpm), respectively. Peaks corresponding to diadzin (D), genistin (G), 6′-*O*-malonyldaidzin (MD), and 6′-*O*-malonylgenistin (MG) are labelled.

Figure 6. Maternal effects on isoflavonoid content in soybean seeds. Soybean cultivars Harovinton and RCAT-Angora (Angora) were self-fertilized and reciprocally crossed. Shown is the isoflavonoid content and the parentage of seeds analyzed. Data from a representative experiment are shown, values are means and standard errors for 5–8 seeds. An analysis of variance (Tukey procedure, \( P < 0.05 \)) indicates that the isoflavonoid content of the F₁ seed from Harovinton × Angora is significantly different form that of Angora × Harovinton. M, male parent; F, female parent.

Feeding soybean embryos with \({}^{14}\)C]Phe results in incorporation into isoflavonoids

To explore the isoflavonoid biosynthetic capability of different plant organs, detached leaves, pods and excised embryos were fed directly with \({}^{14}\)C]Phe. Isoflavonoids were then extracted, separated, and tested for incorporation of radiolabel. Malonated derivates were collected and hydrolysed to glucosides to confirm their identity. Figure 4 shows that a substantial amount of radioactivity was incorporated into daidzin, 6″-O-malonyldaidzin and 6′-O-malonylgenistin in excised embryos compared to podwalls. Detached leaves were able to convert \({}^{14}\)C]Phe to genistin, 6″-O-malonyldaidzin, and 6″-O-malonylgenistin.

Maternal effects may influence seed isoflavonoid content

An in vitro uptake assay was used to determine whether developing soybean embryos are able to take up exogenously supplied isoflavonoids. Results in Figure 5 show that embryos excised at 20 DAP were able to accumulate isoflavonoids from a synthetic medium. Uptake kinetics showed a saturation effect with increasing isoflavonoid concentration. However, a time-course analysis of isoflavonoid accumulation indicated that the uptake was not linear over a 26 h incubation period. Embryos from later developmental stages were also able to accumulate exogenously supplied isoflavonoid substrate, as shown in Table 2. The rate of isoflavonoid uptake for embryos excised at 40

Figure 5. In vitro uptake of isoflavonoids by soybean embryos. Each graph shows values that are means of three independent experiments. Isoflavonoid content was measured by HPLC analysis, as described in Materials and methods. a. Effect of isoflavonoid concentration on rate of uptake by young soybean embryos. Excised soybean embryos (20 DAP) were incubated in the presence of 50–670 μM of isoflavonoids at 24 °C for 24 h. b. Time course analysis of total isoflavonoid uptake by soybean embryos. Excised soybean embryos (20 DAP) were incubated in the presence of 670 μM of isoflavonoids at 24 °C for 3–26 h.

specific primers. Transcripts from water-inoculated plants were compared to those from *P. sojae*-infected soybean hypocotyls at 3, 6, 12, 24 or 48 h after inoculation with a virulent race of the pathogen. Figure 3 shows that *IFS1* transcripts are present in control and pathogen-infected tissues, whereas only trace amounts of *IFS2* transcripts were detected in control plants. Expression of *IFS2* was induced within 6 h of infection.

Table 1. Source and distribution of expressed sequence tags matching IFS1 and IFS2.

| Library | Tissue type | IFS1 | IFS2 | Total number of ESTs in library |
|---------|-------------|------|------|---------------------------------|
| Gm-c1084 | infected hypocotyl | 6 | 9 | 4688 |
| Gm-c1027 | cotyledons, 3–7 days old | 5 | 1 | 7583 |
| Gm-c1028 | root | 3 | 5 | 9074 |
| Gm-c1036 | somatic embryos | 3 | 2 | 10581 |
| Gm-c1082 | root | 3 | 1 | 3156 |
| Gm-c1009 | root | 3 | 1 | 2513 |
| Gm-c1075 | somatic embryo | 3 | 0 | 3790 |
| Gm-c1063 | germinating shoot | 3 | 0 | 4138 |
| Gm-c1076 | wounded cotyledons | 2 | 6 | 4484 |
| Gm-c1004 | root | 2 | 1 | 8162 |
| Gm-c1025 | 3-day-old hypocotyl | 2 | 0 | 1154 |
| Gm-c1072 | elicitor-treated seedlings | 1 | 11 | 4370 |
| Gm-c1059 | whole seedling | 1 | 7 | 4381 |
| Gm-c1074 | HR-induced seedlings | 1 | 4 | 7102 |
| Gm-c1080 | root and nodules | 1 | 1 | 5018 |
| Gm-c1081 | root | 1 | 1 | 3554 |
| Gm-c1064 | epicotyls, 2 weeks old | 1 | 0 | 3037 |
| Gm-c1031 | whole seedling | 1 | 0 | 1608 |
| Gm-c1033 | root | 1 | 0 | 1328 |
| Gm-c1035 | leaves | 1 | 0 | 1786 |
| Century | cotyledons | 1 | 0 | 87 |
| Peking | roots and leaves | 1 | 0 | 766 |
| Gm-c1087 | roots | 0 | 4 | 5551 |
| Gm-c1065 | germinating shoots | 0 | 4 | 8008 |
| Gm-c1051 | floral meristem | 0 | 3 | 6467 |
| Gm-c1061 | flower | 0 | 3 | 4148 |
| Gm-c1014 | leaves | 0 | 2 | 2278 |
| Gm-c1015 | flower | 0 | 2 | 5338 |
| Gm-c1073 | elicitor-treated seedlings | 0 | 2 | 3912 |
| Gm-c1077 | seedlings | 0 | 2 | 1760 |
| Gm-c1041 | senescing leaves | 0 | 1 | 921 |
| Gm-c1056 | whole seedling | 0 | 1 | 5019 |
| Gm-c1057 | cotyledons, 2 weeks old | 0 | 1 | 4202 |

Table 2. In vitro uptake of isoflavonoids by excised embryos.

| Age of embryos | Concentration of isoflavonoids in uptake media (mM) | Total isoflavonoids in embryos after incubation (μmol per gram FW) | Uptake (nmol per h per gram FW) |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| 40DAP          | 0                                                | 0.60 ± 0.02                                                        | –                               |
|                | 1.43                                             | 1.08 ± 0.05                                                        | 20.0                            |
|                | 2.83                                             | 1.35 ± 0.20                                                        | 31.25                           |
| 50DAP          | 0                                                | 2.27 ± 0.82                                                        | –                               |
|                | 2.83                                             | 2.90 ± 0.17                                                        | 26.25                           |

1 Values are mean ± SE from three sets of embryos with three independent analyses for each set.
or 50 DAP ranged from 20 to 31 nmol per gram FW per hour.

To determine whether isoflavonoids produced in maternal tissues may contribute to their accumulation in soybean seeds, reciprocal crosses were made between cultivars of low (Harovinton) and high (RCAT-Angora) seed isoflavonoid content. Seeds were collected and isoflavonoid content was compared among F₁ hybrids and self-pollinated parental types. Representative results are shown in Figure 6. Total isoflavonoid content of seed from self-pollinated RCAT-Angora was ca. 1.5-fold of that in Harovinton seeds. Higher seed isoflavonoid levels were detected in F₁ hybrid seeds when RCAT-Angora was the maternal parent compared to the reciprocal cross where Harovinton was the maternal parent. This pattern, pointing to a maternal effect, was observed in three independent experiments. However, total isoflavonoid levels varied greatly from one experiment to another, despite that all plants were grown in controlled environments (not shown). This indicates that seed isoflavonoid content can vary substantially even under seemingly identical conditions, and that comparisons between experiments may not be possible. Nonetheless, data from individual experiments indicated that the maternal parent serves as the best indicator for F₁ seed isoflavonoid content in these crosses.

## Discussion

Because of the numerous health benefits attributed to the consumption of soybean food products, there is considerable interest in defining the factors that control seed composition. This is particularly true for seed isoflavonoids, since these compounds have phyto-oestrogen activity. Past studies have demonstrated that genetic and environmental effects may influence isoflavonoid content of soybean seeds (Elridge and Kwolek, 1983; Wang and Murphy, 1994; Tsukamoto *et al.*, 1995). There have also been detailed descriptions of isoflavonoid profiles in germinating soybean seedlings, roots, and tissues responding to pathogen attack (Graham 1991, 1995). The isolation of the soybean *IFS* genes (Steele *et al.*, 1999; Jung *et al.*, 2000), the production of isoflavonoids in non-leguminous plants via genetic transformation (Jung *et al.*, 2000; Yu *et al.*, 2000, Liu *et al.*, 2002), and the characterization of active site residues within the IFS protein (Sawada *et al.*, 2002) are all important recent accomplishments. The objectives of this work were:

to define the expression patterns of the soybean *IFS* genes in various plant organs during development and in response to pathogen infection; to assess the ability of developing soybean embryos for isoflavonoid biosynthesis; and to determine whether there is a maternal effect in seed isoflavonoid content.

Previous studies have demonstrated that natural products are often transported in plants from a site of synthesis to a site of accumulation. For example, nicotine and caffeine are transported to leaves from roots. In *Tropaeolum majus*, glucosinolates are synthesized in leaves and translocated to seeds during development (Lykkesfeldt and Moller, 1990). Similarly, a carrier-mediated system has been proposed to account for the accumulation of glucosinolates in developing *Brassica napus* embryos (Gijzen *et al.*, 1989; Chen and Halkier, 2000). Thus, it is important to learn whether soybean seed isoflavonoids follow a similar pattern of transport and accumulation, and to reconcile this with existing models of vacuolar localization.

The isoflavonoid biosynthetic capability of soybean tissues was first assessed by determining the expression pattern of the two known *IFS* genes, by analysis of ESTs and by RT-PCR. The results were generally congruent, except that few ESTs matching either of the *IFS* genes were detected in developing seed tissues, whereas both *IFS1* and *IFS2* were present in the seed coat and embryo as determined by RT-PCR. This discrepancy may simply be due to bias of the EST databases, and the paucity of seed ESTs in general. Overall, expression analysis indicated that *IFS1* is expressed in a wider variety of plant organs, but that *IFS2* may be strongly induced in response to stress. The results shown in Figure 2B also suggest that the seed coat may be an important site of isoflavonoid biosynthesis in developing seeds, since *IFS1* was expressed in this organ throughout seed development. The seed coat arises directly from the maternal tissues of the inner and outer integument of the ovule.

The pattern of the *IFS* gene transcript accumulation was then compared to the content of isoflavonoids in a number of plant organs. Clearly, expression of *IFS* transcripts did not correlate closely with the isoflavonoid content, at least for the products we were able to extract and measure. Mature leaves had high levels of isoflavonoids, despite that *IFS* gene transcript levels were low in the leaf compared to the embryo and seed coat. Net accumulation of a product is affected by rates of synthesis and turnover, and by transport to or from other sites. These factors may account for the some of the differences we observed between *IFS* transcript
levels and tissue isoflavonoid content. Direct measurements of IFS enzyme activity and protein levels were also performed but did not yield useful data. The sensitivity of the enzyme assay was insufficient to detect activity in anything other than pathogen-infected tissues, whereas antibodies to IFS displayed substantial cross-reactivity with other plant proteins (not shown).

We also studied *IFS* transcript accumulation in response to pathogen attack, since it is known that isoflavonoid glyceollins are phytoalexins produced in large amounts in elicitor-treated or infected tissues (Graham, 1995). As expected, infection of soybean hypocotyls with *P. sojae* induced *IFS* gene expression. This was especially noticeable for *IFS2*, since expression of this gene was barely detectable in control tissues. *IFS2* transcripts were also more prevalent among ESTs from infected or elicitor-treated tissues than were matches to *IFS1*. Furthermore, the *IFS2* cDNA was originally isolated from *P. sojae*-infected tissues (Steele *et al.*, 1999; Qutob *et al.*, 2000). Thus, most of the evidence suggests that *IFS2* is subject to greater up-regulation upon stress or pathogen attack.

The analysis of the *IFS1* and *IFS2* gene transcripts show that both are expressed in developing embryos, but the \[^{14}C\]Phe feeding experiments provide the first direct evidence that embryos have an isoflavonoid biosynthetic capability. Despite that equal amounts of radiolabelled Phe was fed to all the soybean tissues under study, the greatest amount of radioactivity was incorporated into isoflavonoids in embryos (30–35 DAP) compared to pod wall and leaf tissues. This data correlates with the higher *IFS2* transcript accumulation observed in embryos (30 DAP) than in leaf and pod wall tissues.

Nevertheless, developing embryos were also able to take-up exogenously supplied isoflavonoid substrate. The rate of uptake showed a saturation effect with increasing isoflavonoid concentration. We observed that the genistin level in the embryos after 9 h of incubation exceeded that in the incubation medium (not shown). Total uptake, however, also reached saturation after 9 h incubation, indicating that there may be limits to the amount of isoflavonoids that excised embryos can accumulate under these conditions.

The results from the reciprocal crosses demonstrate that maternal effects may be important determinants of seed isoflavonoid content. This is not surprising since the seed is a strong sink for metabolites synthesized in other plant organs. Maternal effects on the sugar content of soybean seeds (Openshaw and Hadley, 1978) and on glucosinolate content of *Brassica*

napus* seeds (Magrath and Mithen, 1993) provide useful examples for comparison. Isoflavonoids are small molecules and the glycosylated derivatives are reasonably soluble, so phloem mobility is certainly feasible. The detection of relatively high concentrations of isoflavonoid glucosides in pod exudates provides evidence that transport between different organs may occur within the plant. Also, *IFS* gene expression observed in developing seed coats could impart a maternal effect on seed isoflavonoid content, since the seed coat is maternal tissue.

To summarize, this work has demonstrated that soybean embryos have an ability to synthesize isoflavonoids from simple precursors. But it is also shown that there are large amounts of isoflavonoids present in leaf tissues and pod exudates, that developing embryos may take up isoflavonoids from a synthetic medium, and that there are maternal effects on seed isoflavonoid content. We conclude that the biosynthesis of isoflavonoids in maternal tissues may contribute substantially to total seed isoflavonoid content at maturity. Therefore, in designing soybean cultivars with specific seed isoflavonoid contents, whether by conventional breeding or by genetic transformation, the routes of synthesis and accumulation of these natural products within seed tissues should be considered.

## Acknowledgements

We thank Istvan Rajcan (University of Guelph) and Vaino Poysea (Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Harrow) for soybean seed; Ed Topp for assistance with the \[^{14}\]C work; Jackie Hill for help with statistical analysis; and Aldona Gaidauskas-Scott, John Hendel, Kufiom Kuflu, Pat Moy, Bob Pocs, and Shannon Daradick for technical assistance.

## References

Akashi, T., Aoki, T. and Ayabe, S. 1999. Cloning and functional expression of a cytochrome P450 cDNA encoding 2-hydroxyisoflavanone synthase involved in biosynthesis of the isoflavonoid skeleton in licorice. Plant Physiol. 121: 821–828.

Altschul, S.F., Madden, T.L., Schaffer, A.A., Zhang, J., Zhang, Z., Miller, W. and Lipman, D.J. 1997. Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs. Nucl. Acids Res. 25: 3389–3402.

Anderson, J.W., Johnstone, B.M. and Cook-Newell, M.E. 1995. Meta-analysis of the effects of soy protein intake on serum lipids. N. Engl. J. Med. 333: 276–282.

Bhattacharyya, M.K. and Ward, E.W.B. 1987. Biosynthesis and metabolism of glyceollin I in soybean hypocotyls following wounding or inoculation with *Phytophthora megasperma* f.sp. *glycinea*. Physiol. Mol. Plant Path. 31: 387–405.

Cassidy, A. and Bingham, S. 1995. Biological effects of isoflavones in young women: importance of the chemical composition of soybean products. Br. J. Nutr. 74: 587–601.

Chen, S. and Halkier, B.A. 2000. Characterization of glucosinolate uptake by leaf protoplasts of *Brassica napus*. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 22955–22960.

Civitelli, R. 1997. *In vitro* and *in vivo* effects of ipriflavone on bone formation and bone biomechanics. Calcif. Tissue Int. 61: 12s–14s.

Du, L. and Halkier, B.A. 1998. Biosynthesis of glucosinolates in the developing silique walls. Phytochemistry 48: 1145–1150.

Eldridge, A.C. and Kwolek, W.F. 1983. Soybean isoflavones: effect of environment and variety on composition. J. Agric. Food Chem. 31: 394–396.

Ghosh, P. and Fenner, G.P. 1999. Improved method for gas chromatographic analysis of genistein and daidzein from soybean (*Glycine max*) seeds. J. Agric. Food Chem. 47: 3455–3456.

Gijzen, M., McGregor, I. and Seguin-Swart, G. 1989. Glucosinolate uptake by developing rapeseed embryos. Plant Physiol. 89: 260–263.

Graham, T.L. 1991. Flavonoid and isoflavonoid distribution in developing soybean seedlings tissues and in seed and root exudates. Plant Physiol. 95: 594–603.

Graham, T.L. 1995. Cellular biochemistry of phenylpropanoid responses of soybean to infection by *Phytophthora sojae*. In: M. Daniel and R.P. Purkayastha (Eds.) Handbook of Phytoalexin Metabolism and Action, Marcel Dekker, New York, pp. 85–116.

Graham, T.L. and Graham, M.Y. 2000. Defence potential and competency: redox conditioning effects of salicylic acid genistein. In: G. Stacey and N. Keen (Eds.) Plant-Microbe Interactions, APS Press, St. Paul, MN, Vol. 5, pp. 181–219.

Griffith, A.P. and Collison, M.W. 2001. Improved methods for the extraction and analysis of isoflavones from soy-containing foods and nutritional supplements by reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. J. Chromatogr. A 913: 397–413.

Hakamatsuka, T., Mori, K., Ishida, S., Ebizuka, Y. and Sankawa, U. 1998. Purification of 2-hydroxyisoflavanone dehydratase from the cell cultures of *Pueraria lobata*. Phytochemistry 49: 497–505.

Heller, W. and Forkmann, G. 1994. Biosynthesis of flavonoids. In: J.B. Harborne (Ed.) The Flavonoids: Advances in Research since 1986, Chapman and Hall, London, pp. 499–535.

Jung, W., Yu, O., Lau, S.C., O’Keefe, D.P., Odell, J., Fader, G. and McGonigle, B. 2000. Identification and expression of isoflavone synthase, the key enzyme for biosynthesis of isoflavones in legumes. Nature Biotech. 18: 208–212.

Kudou, S., Fleury, Y., Welt, D., Magnolato, D., Uchida, T. and Kitamura, K. 1991. Malonyl isoflavone glycosides in soybean seeds (*Glycine max* Merrill). Agric. Biol. Chem. 55: 2227–2233.

Liu, C., Blount, J.W., Steele, C.L. and Dixon, R.A. 2002. Bottlenecks for metabolic engineering of isoflavone glycoconjugates in *Arabidopsis*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99: 14578–14583.

Lykkesfeldt, J. and Moller, B.L. 1993. Synthesis of benzylglucosinolate in *Tropaeolum majus* L.: isothiocyanates as potent enzyme inhibitors. Plant Physiol. 102: 609–613.

Magrath, R. and Mithen, R. 1993. Maternal effects on the expression of individual aliphatic glucosinolates in seeds and seedlings of *Brassica napus*. Plant Breed. 111: 249–252.

Meksem, K., Njiti, V.N., Banz, W.J., Iqbal, M.J., Kasem, M.M., Hyten, D.L., Yuan, J., Winters, T.A. and Lightfoot, D.A. 2001. Genomic regions that underlie soybean seed isoflavone content. J. Biomed. Biotech. 1: 38–44.

Mendez, M.A., Anthony, M.S. and Arab, L. 2002. Soy-based formulae and infant growth and development: a review. J. Nutr. 132: 2127–2130.

Messina, M. and Barnes, S. 1991. The role of soy products in reducing cancer risk. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 83: 541–546.

Morris, P.F. and Ward, E.W.B. 1992. Chemoattraction of zoospores of the soybean pathogen, *Phytophthora sojae*, by isoflavones. Physiol. Mol. Plant Path. 40: 17–22.

Openshaw, S.J. and Hadley, H.H. 1978. Maternal effects on sugar content in soybean seeds. Crop Sci. 18: 581–584.

Peterson, G. and Barnes, S. 1991. Genistein inhibition of the growth of human breast cancer cells: independence from estrogen receptors and the multi-drug resistance gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 179: 661–667.

Phillips, D.A. 1992. Flavonoids: Plant signals to soil microbes. In: H.A. Stafford and R.K. Ibrahim (Eds.) Recent advances in Phytochemistry, Vol 26. Phenolic Metabolism in Plants, Plenum Press, New York, pp. 201–231.

Qutob, D., Hraber, P.T., Sobral, B.W.S. and Gijzen, M. 2000. Comparative analysis of expressed sequences in *Phytophthora sojae*. Plant Physiol. 123: 243–253.

Sawada, Y., Kinoshita, K., Akashi, T., Aoki, T. and Ayabe, S. 2002. Key amino acid residues required for aryl migration catalysed by the cytochrome P450 2-hydroxyisoflavanone synthase. Plant J. 31: 555–564.

Setchell, K.D.R., Zimmer-Nechemias, L., Cai, J. and Heubi, J.E. 1997. Exposure of infants to phytoestrogens from soy-based infant formula. Lancet 350: 23–27.

Shoemaker, R., Keim, P., Vodkin, L., Retzel, E., Clifton, S.W., Waterson, R., Smoller, D., Coryell, V., Khanna, A., Erpelding, J., Gai, X., Brendel, V., Raph-Schmidt, C., Shoop, E.G., Vielweber, C.J., Schmatz, M., Pape, D., Bowers, Y., Theising, B., Martin, J., Dante, M., Wylie, T. and Granger, C. 2002. A compilation of soybean ESTs: generation and analysis. Genome 45: 329–338.

Steele, C.L., Gijzen, M., Qutob, D. and Dixon, R.A. 1999. Molecular characterization of the enzyme catalyzing the aryl migration reaction of isoflavonoid biosynthesis in soybean. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 367: 146–150.

Strom, B.L., Schinnar, R., Ziegler, E.E., Barhard, K.T., Sammel, M.D., Macones, G.A., Stallings, V.A., Drulis, J.M., Nelson, S.E. and Hanson, S.A. 2001. Exposure to soy-based formula in infancy and endocrinological and reproductive outcomes in young adulthood. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 286: 807–814.

Tsukamoto, C., Shimada, S., Igita, K., Kudou, S., Kokubun M., Okubo, K. and Kitamura, K. 1995. Factors affecting isoflavone content in soybean seeds: changes in isoflavones, saponins and composition of fatty acids at different temperatures during seed development. J. Agric. Food Chem. 43: 1184–1192.

Vyn, T.J., Yin, X.H., Brauulsema, T.W., Jackson, C.J.C., Rajcan, I. and Broder, S.M. 2002. Potassium fertilization effects on isoflavone concentration in soybean [*Glycine max* (L.) Merr.]. J. Agric. Food Chem. 50: 3501–3506.

Wang, H.J. and Murphy, P.A. 1994. Isoflavone content in commercial soybean foods. J. Agric. Food Chem. 42: 1666–1673.

Wang, C.S. and Vodkin, L.O. 1994. Extraction of RNA from tissues containing high levels of procyanidins that bind RNA. Plant Mol. Biol. 12: 132–145.

Yu, O., Jung, W., Shi, J., Croes, R.A., Fader, G.M., McGonigle, B. and Odell, J.T. 2000. Production of the isoflavones genistein and daidzein in non-legume dicot and monocot tissues. Plant Physiol. 124: 781–793.
