
Malaria sporozoite: migrating for a living

Olivier Silvie¹, Jean-François Franetich¹, Laurent Rénia² and Dominique Mazier¹

¹Inserm U511, Immunobiologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire des Infections Parasitaires, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Pitié-Salpêtrière, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 75013 Paris, France  
²Département d'Immunologie, Institut Cochin, Inserm U567, CNRS UMR 8104, Université René Descartes, Hôpital Cochin, 75014 Paris, France  

Plasmodium sporozoite invasion of host hepatocytes is an initial key step of infection by the malaria parasite. Sporozoites can enter hepatocytes via two distinct pathways: by disruption of the plasma membrane followed by parasite migration through cells, or by the formation of a vacuole essential for further differentiation of the parasite. For *Plasmodium falciparum*, this differentiation requires the presence of CD81 on the hepatocyte surface. Recent findings with rodent parasites also suggest that migration through cells has an effect on both the sporozoite infectivity and the permissiveness of surrounding cells.

Invasion of hepatocytes is an initial key step during infection with the malaria parasite. Following transmission by *Anopheles* mosquito, sporozoites enter the bloodstream and are rapidly sequestered in the liver through the specific interaction of parasite surface proteins, primarily the circumsporozoite protein (CSP) with the hepatic heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPG) [1]. Subsequent invasion of hepatocytes involves the binding of sporozoite adhesins, including the thrombospondin-related adhesive protein (TRAP) [2,3], to as yet unidentified hepatocyte surface receptor(s). In the hepatocyte, the parasite develops as a replicative exo-erythrocytic form (EEF) within a parasitophorous vacuole (PV) (Figure 1a). *Plasmodium* sporozoites actively move on solid substrates and invade cells using gliding motility (Figure 1b). Gliding motility is based on an actomyosin motor located beneath the sporozoite surface driving the antero-posterior translocation of adhesive proteins secreted from micronemes, a set of specialized vesicles located at the apical extremity of the sporozoites. Major progress has been achieved in the comprehension of the gliding machinery, and is reviewed elsewhere [4]. As demonstrated for *Plasmodium* merozoites and other apicomplexan parasites such as *Toxoplasma* tachyzoites, *Plasmodium* sporozoite invasion via PV formation presumably involves a moving junction formed by sporozoite ligands bound to their cognate receptors on the hepatocyte surface. The antero-posterior translocation of this moving junction leads to the internalization of the parasite through an invagination of the host cell plasma membrane. Gliding sporozoites can also enter cells directly without PV formation, by disrupting the cell plasma membrane (Figure 1c). After gliding through the cell cytoplasm, the parasites eventually egress by rupturing the plasma membrane. Sporozoites migrate, both *in vitro* and *in vivo*, through several hepatocytes before infecting one via PV formation for EEF development [5]. Interestingly, host cell components are not essential for the transformation of sporozoites into early EEFs [6], suggesting that the

---

**Figure 1.** *Plasmodium* sporozoites can enter hepatocytes either by forming a vacuole, essential for further differentiation, or via disruption of the cell plasma membrane followed by parasite migration. (a) Inside hepatocytes, *Plasmodium* sporozoites differentiate into exo-erythrocytic forms (EEF, here stained with anti-HSP70 antibodies, in green, next to the host cell nucleus stained with DAPI, in blue) within a parasitophorous vacuole (PV, indicated with arrowheads). (b) Sporozoites enter cells and move on substrate using gliding motility, a process based on the antero-posterior translocation of adhesive proteins secreted at the apical extremity (arrow) of the parasite (here stained with anti-CSP antibodies, in green). Sporozoites gliding on substrate leave trails of parasite material shed behind them (arrowheads). (c) Sporozoites (green) can also enter hepatocytes by rupturing their plasma membrane, enabling the entry of rhodamine-labeled dextran tracer (red). Scale bars: 10 µm.

Corresponding authors: Olivier Silvie (silvie@ext.jussieu.fr), Dominique Mazier (mazier@ext.jussieu.fr).

www.sciencedirect.com

initial steps of the parasite differentiation involve mechanisms independent from host cell invasion.

The nature of the hepatocyte receptors involved during invasion remains elusive. The tetraspanin CD81 was recently identified as essential on the hepatocyte surface for *Plasmodium falciparum* and *Plasmodium yoelii* sporozoite entry through PV formation [7]. By contrast, *Plasmodium berghei* sporozoites [7] readily infect cells lacking CD81 by forming a PV, suggesting that CD81 is not directly required for PV formation. Because there is no evidence that CD81 can act as a receptor for the sporozoites, it seems more likely that CD81 functions by regulating the expression of associated receptors within the tetraspanin web [8].

Although sporozoites are able to invade many cell types, at least in vitro [9], *Plasmodium* EEF development is restricted to hepatocytes. An example of this dichotomy is the human hepatoma cell line HepG2, widely used for *P. falciparum* sporozoite invasion assays, but which does not support EEF development of this parasite [10]. The recent demonstration that *Plasmodium* sporozoites can enter cells by two distinct pathways [5] puts into doubt the relevance of assays based on sporozoite invasion of non-permissive cells [11].

### Why migrate?

First, sporozoite ability to traverse cells may reflect the need for the parasite to cross several cell barriers en route to its target, the hepatocyte. Following release in the skin by a probing mosquito, sporozoites must migrate until they gain access to the bloodstream [12]. Furthermore, once sequestered in the liver, sporozoites must cross the layer of sinusoidal liver cells to reach the underlying hepatocytes. There is some evidence that sporozoites might pass through Kupffer cells before hepatocyte invasion [13].

### Why migrate through hepatocytes?

It is possible that hepatocytes are not equally susceptible to infection, requiring sporozoites to migrate until they encounter a cell expressing a set of receptors suitable for invasion through PV formation. However, in vitro EEFs have been observed in hepatocytes previously crossed by sporozoites, demonstrating, in some cases, that one cell can be crossed by a sporozoite and also support PV formation and subsequent EEF development. Furthermore, sporozoite migration through hepatocytes might provide activation signals for the parasite. Mota et al. recently demonstrated that migration through cells activates exocytosis of sporozoite micronemes [14]. This results in exposure of adhesins on the parasite surface, which, according to the prevalent model, would bind to hepatocyte receptors and form a moving junction, leading to penetration via vacuole formation. The molecular signals responsible for sporozoite activation have not been elucidated, but probably rely on cytosolic components that can interact with migrating sporozoites [14]. Mota et al. concluded that migration through hepatocytes is a necessary step preceding invasion via PV formation. However, microneme exocytosis is also required for gliding, and thus for migration. If migration is an obligatory step preceding entry by vacuole formation,

then distinct micronemal components must be involved for gliding on one hand, and cell entry via PV formation on the other. Alternatively, migration through cells might induce a quantitative burst of microneme exocytosis required to establish the moving junction and thus cell entry via PV formation. It cannot be ruled out that both cell entry modes initially proceed from the formation of a junction between the sporozoite and the hepatocyte. Depending on the success of subsequent hepatocyte plasma membrane invagination, the sporozoite would then enter either through PV formation or by membrane disruption followed by migration.

Sporozoites can cross the sinusoidal cell layer by passing through Kupffer cells [13], and sporozoite entry and passage through these cells involves the formation of a vacuole. Assuming that sporozoites entering the liver sinusoid are already activated for invasion via PV formation, then these observations suggest that sporozoites might exhaust their invasive capacity during passage through Kupffer cells and need to be reactivated by migrating through hepatocytes. Alternatively, invasion of Kupffer cells and hepatocytes might rely on distinct mechanisms and require exocytosis of different sets of molecules.

Recently, Carrolo et al. demonstrated that sporozoite migration through hepatocytes provides signals to both the parasite as well as the surrounding cells [15]. Indeed, they showed that wounding of hepatocytes by sporozoite migration induces the release of an ‘infection susceptibility-inducing factor’ (ISIF) into the medium, and identified hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) as the mediator of ISIF activity. HGF secretion and activation of its receptor, Met, is a classic feature during liver regeneration, and HGF/Met activation results in pleiotropic effects, including cell proliferation, motility, extracellular matrix degradation and survival [16]. During sporozoite migration, the induction of HGF secretion by wounded cells is very efficient: one hour of migration is sufficient to induce the release of HGF by hepatic cells, which do not express HGF mRNA or protein in the basal state [15]. Inhibition assays using cytochalasin D, a reversible actin polymerization inhibitor, indicate that HGF/Met signaling induces a remodeling of the host actin cytoskeleton that is required during the early stages of *P. berghei* EEF development in HepG2 cells [15]. However, cytochalasin D has no inhibitory activity on *P. yoelii* EEF development in primary cultures of mouse hepatocytes or in HEPA 1–6 mouse hepatoma cells when added early after invasion (Silvie et al., unpublished results). This discrepancy between *P. berghei* and *P. yoelii* sporozoites might result from differences in the pathways used for PV formation. Notably, *P. yoelii* (like *P. falciparum*) invades hepatocytes via PV formation through a CD81-dependent pathway, whereas *P. berghei* can infect cells that do not express CD81 [7]. It is not known whether this discrepancy results from a distinct receptor usage, from different requirements concerning the conformation or activity of receptors, or from an alternative mechanism of PV formation. Nevertheless, this difference in invasion mechanism might account for distinct requirements during subsequent EEF development.

Careful analysis of the results from Carrolo *et al.* suggests another possible mechanism of action of HGF/Met signaling during infection by *Plasmodium* sporozoites. HGF is not involved in the mechanism of sporozoite invasion, because anti-HGF antibodies added after invasion still inhibit EEF development. However, the addition of HGF before hepatocyte inoculation with sporozoites increases the number of EEFs seen 24 h post-infection. This means that a fraction of the parasites (and/or infected cells) disappear from the cultures in the absence of HGF supplementation, but are rescued when HGF is added. Because HGF/Met signaling is known to induce hepatocyte resistance to apoptosis [17], it is probable that HGF, through Met signaling, prevents the death of a proportion of infected cells that would otherwise undergo apoptosis. In this regard, it would be particularly informative to analyze the kinetics of parasite loss in the control group versus that of HGF treated cultures, following infection with sporozoites. Accordingly, the number of *P. falciparum* EEFs *in vitro* often decreases over time following infection of human hepatocyte cultures [18].

In malaria sporozoite studies, knowledge of the limit of the experimental model is crucial. Most of the results from Carrolo *et al.* have been generated using the HepG2 tumoral hepatoma cell line, and *P. berghei* sporozoites. Hepatoma cells differ from hepatocytes, notably in terms of differentiation status, extracellular matrix composition and production, and proliferative capacity, and they might be more susceptible to parasite-induced cell death. *P. falciparum* can enter both primary human hepatocytes and HepG2 cells, but only develops further in normal human hepatocytes. Moreover, some antibodies to the CSP that completely prevent sporozoite invasion into HepG2 cells enhance sporozoite invasion into normal human hepatocytes [11]. Thus, caution should be taken when analyzing data gathered using this artificial system.

Aware of this caveat, Carrolo *et al.* confirmed the HGF/Met signaling requirement for *P. berghei* EEF development, both *in vitro* and *in vivo*, in BALB/c mouse hepatocytes. BALB/c mice are more resistant to *P. berghei* sporozoite infection than the C57BL/6 strain [19,20]. Furthermore, *P. yoelii* are much more infective to mice than *P. berghei* sporozoites, a difference that does not result from different invasion rates, but from a superior development of *P. yoelii* in hepatocytes [21]. Together, these observations suggest that the survival of EEFs and/or infected hepatocytes could depend on the parasite-host interaction. In other words, the survival of *P. berghei* infected cells might differ from that of *P. yoelii* infected cells, but could be enhanced through HGF/Met activation. Also, mice are not natural hosts for rodent plasmodia: the tree rats *Thamnomys gazellae* and *Grammomys surdaster* are the natural hosts for *P. yoelii* and *P. berghei*, respectively [22]. Therefore, the requirement for the HGF/Met signaling pathway might reflect differential adaptation to a non-natural host. Before concluding that HGF and Met represent potential targets for malaria prevention, the HGF/Met requirement must be confirmed in other models, including *P. yoelii* in normal mouse hepatocytes and, more importantly, *P. falciparum* in

normal human hepatocytes. Finally, it should be noted that the need for both sporozoite and hepatocyte activation is not obvious. It has been shown that experimentally induced activation of sporozoites increases the number of EEFs and reduces the number of wounded cells [14]. This would decrease HGF production, which in turn would be detrimental for EEF development. Further studies are needed to clarify this discrepancy.

### Concluding remarks

In summary, although significant progress has been made in the understanding of liver infection with malaria sporozoites, new questions have arisen. What are the molecular mechanisms involving CD81 during sporozoite invasion? What is the basis for the differences between *P. yoelii* and *P. falciparum*, and *P. berghei* regarding CD81-dependence and hepatocyte invasion? Is HGF/Met signaling a general feature of *Plasmodium* liver infection? What makes the sporozoite cease gliding once it has entered by forming a vacuole? Hopefully, future studies will provide answers and facilitate the development of effective strategies to prevent malaria infection.

### References

1. Pradel, G. *et al.* (2002) Proteoglycans mediate malaria sporozoite targeting to the liver. *Mol. Microbiol.* 45, 637–651
2. Menard, R. (2000) The journey of the malaria sporozoite through its hosts: two parasite proteins lead the way. *Microbes Infect.* 2, 633–642
3. Matuschewski, K. *et al.* (2002) *Plasmodium* sporozoite invasion into insect and mammalian cells is directed by the same dual binding system. *EMBO J.* 21, 1597–1606
4. Kappe, S.H. *et al.* (2004) Apicomplexan gliding motility and host cell invasion: overhauling the motor model. *Trends Parasitol.* 20, 13–16
5. Mota, M.M. *et al.* (2001) Migration of *Plasmodium* sporozoites through cells before infection. *Science* 291, 141–144
6. Kaiser, K. *et al.* (2003) Transformation of sporozoites into early exoerythrocytic malaria parasites does not require host cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 197, 1045–1050
7. Silvie, O. *et al.* (2003) Hepatocyte CD81 is required for *Plasmodium falciparum* and *Plasmodium yoelii* sporozoite infectivity. *Nat. Med.* 9, 93–96
8. Boucheix, C. and Rubinstein, E. (2001) Tetraspanins. *Cell. Mol. Life Sci.* 58, 1189–1205
9. Mazier, D. (1986) Use of cultured hepatocytes in parasitology. In *Research in Isolated and Cultured Hepatocytes* (Guillouzo, A. and Guguen-Guillouzo, C., eds), pp. 377–398, John Libbey Eurotext/Inserm
10. Hollingdale, M.R. *et al.* (1984) Inhibition of entry of *Plasmodium falciparum* and *P. vivax* sporozoites into cultured cells; an *in vitro* assay of protective antibodies. *J. Immunol.* 132, 909–913
11. Hollingdale, M.R. *et al.* (1990) Activity of human volunteer sera to candidate *Plasmodium falciparum* circumsporozoite protein vaccines in the inhibition of sporozoite invasion assay of human hepatoma cells and hepatocytes. *Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg.* 84, 325–329
12. Matsuo, H. *et al.* (2002) A rodent malaria, *Plasmodium berghei*, is experimentally transmitted to mice by merely probing of infective mosquito, *Anopheles stephensi*. *Parasitol. Int.* 51, 17–23
13. Pradel, G. and Frevert, U. (2001) Malaria sporozoites actively enter and pass through rat Kupffer cells prior to hepatocyte invasion. *Hepatology* 33, 1154–1165
14. Mota, M.M. *et al.* (2002) Migration through host cells activates *Plasmodium* sporozoites for infection. *Nat. Med.* 8, 1318–1322
15. Carrolo, M. *et al.* (2003) Hepatocyte growth factor and its receptor are required for malaria infection. *Nat. Med.* 9, 1363–1369
16. Trusolino, L. and Comoglio, P.M. (2002) Scatter-factor and semaphorin receptors: cell signalling for invasive growth. *Nat. Rev. Cancer* 2, 289–300
17. Amicone, L. *et al.* (1997) Transgenic expression in the liver of truncated

Met blocks apoptosis and permits immortalization of hepatocytes.
EMBO J. 16, 495–503

18 Silvie, O. *et al.* (2002) Effects of irradiation on *Plasmodium falciparum* sporozoite hepatic development: implications for the design of pre-erythrocytic malaria vaccines. *Parasite Immunol.* 24, 221–223

19 Scheller, L.F. *et al.* (1995) *Plasmodium berghei*: production and quantitation of hepatic stages derived from irradiated sporozoites in rats and mice. *J. Parasitol.* 81, 58–62

20 Jaffe, R.I. *et al.* (1990) Differences in susceptibility among mouse strains to infection with *Plasmodium berghei* (ANKA clone) sporozoites and its relationship to protection by gamma-irradiated sporozoites. *Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg.* 42, 309–313

21 Briones, M.R. *et al.* (1996) The large difference in infectivity for mice of *Plasmodium berghei* and *Plasmodium yoelii* sporozoites cannot be correlated with their ability to enter into hepatocytes. *Mol. Biochem. Parasitol.* 77, 7–17

22 Landau, I. and Boulard, Y. (1978) Life cycles and morphology. In *Rodent Malaria* (Vol. 69) (Killick-Kendrick, R. and Peters, W., eds), pp. 53–84, Academic Press

1471-4914/$ - see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2004.01.004

---

Research Focus Response

# Malaria sporozoite: migrating for a living – a response

## Maria M. Mota

Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal

Silvie *et al.* offer a very interesting report on their interpretation of the most recent discoveries concerning the early development process of *Plasmodium* species invasion. In their article, the authors highlight the major differences concerning infection requirements between *Plasmodium yoelii* and *Plasmodium falciparum* on the one hand and *Plasmodium berghei* on the other. In fact, it has been known for over 30 years that, unlike *P. yoelii* and *P. falciparum*, *P. berghei* fully develops in a human hepatoma cell line, HepG2. In addition, we have shown recently that *P. berghei* is much more promiscuous, as parasite development seems to occur in many cell types where the other two *Plasmodium* species cannot replicate [1]. We have also shown that hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and its receptor, MET, are essential for malaria infection as they are required for parasite development inside host cells at the hepatic stages [1]. Silvie *et al.* argue that this might not be a general feature for all *Plasmodium* species, but restricted to *P. berghei*. However, our initial experiments were, in fact, performed with *P. yoelii* sporozoites. We show that Hepa1-6 cells that suffer wounding (mechanically or by migrating sporozoites) produce ISIF (infection susceptibility inducing factor, later identified as HGF), which increases infection of *P. yoelii* sporozoites. In addition, we have also shown that primary hepatocytes are able to produce de novo HGF as a reaction to wounding and independent of the *Plasmodium* species. It is difficult to envisage, therefore, that the HGF system will differ significantly between the two species, especially when considering that it increases the infection of hepatocytes by both *P. yoelii* and *P. berghei*, and that primary hepatocytes produce and respond to it.

With this argument, we do not contend that there are no differences between the two species of parasites. Silvie *et al.* have described, in a very elegant manner, that differential CD81 requirement explains a phenotypic difference that remained unexplained for many years [2].

However, we do not think there are data supporting the argument that HGF/MET signaling might also operate differentially in these *Plasmodium* species. As the authors mention, it would be of great interest should other laboratories that maintain *P. falciparum* infections perform similar experiments in this parasite.

Silvie *et al.* also mention that cytochalasin D in *P. yoelii* infection does not have any effect on parasite development, as we observed for *P. berghei*. Our most recent results support the idea that several effects of HGF/MET signaling coordinate this susceptibility to infection, and that the host cytoskeleton is just one of them. Thus, it is possible that sporozoites from different *Plasmodium* species have different requirements for full and successful development, but that HGF/MET signaling always works as a susceptibility factor owing to its pleiotropic effects.

Finally, the authors support their argument with a result published by us in a previous paper. We have shown that migration through hepatocytes leads to activation of sporozoites and subsequently greater infection. In addition, we have shown that if we activate sporozoites chemically, they will migrate through fewer cells but infection will be greater [3]. Thus, we would expect to have less HGF but higher infection. How can we reconcile these results? The initial results seem to contradict our most recent findings. However, there are two plausible explanations. First, the cell type used for the activated sporozoite experiments (Hepa1-6) might have a background level of MET activation high enough to support infection. Second, and more important, although the number of cells traversed by chemically activated sporozoites is quite low, it is never zero, and we know that the few traversed cells are located next to infected cells. Thus, although the general HGF concentration must be very low, the local concentration between the traversed cell (which secretes it) and the neighboring cell (which receives the signal) is probably still quite high, and far from being

Corresponding author: Maria M. Mota (mmota@igc.gulbenkian.pt).

www.sciencedirect.com
