
involved in intermediary metabolism. Nishizuika's finding that PKC is activated by another endogenous second messenger, this one being formed in response to activation of phospholipase C by what turned out to be a distinct family of G-protein-coupled receptors, led to the recognition that this kinase also plays a crucial role in signal transduction.

PKC is a therapeutic target for pathological signaling through hormones, growth factors, neurotransmitters and an abundance of other inputs. Although it has been difficult to ascribe specific functions to specific PKC isoforms and thus to target them for therapeutic intervention, the next 25 years are likely to provide key insight into the raison d'être and selectivity of this ubiquitous family of enzymes.

### Acknowledgements

I thank Joan Heller Brown and Alex Toker for helpful comments on the manuscript. This work was supported in part by NIH GM 43154.

### References

1. Takai, Y. *et al.* (1979) Unsaturated diacylglycerol as a possible messenger for the activation of calcium-activated, phospholipid-dependent protein kinase system. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 91, 1218–1224
2. Hokin, M.R. and Hokin, L.E. (1953) Enzyme secretion and the incorporation of P32 into phospholipids of pancreas slices. *J. Biol. Chem.* 203, 967–977
3. Inoue, M. *et al.* (1977) Studies on a cyclic nucleotide-independent protein kinase and its proenzyme in mammalian tissues. *J. Biol. Chem.* 252, 7610–7616
4. Takai, Y. *et al.* (1979) Calcium-dependent activation of a multifunctional protein kinase by membrane phospholipids. *J. Biol. Chem.* 254, 3692–3695
5. Creba, J.A. *et al.* (1983) Rapid breakdown of phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate and phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate in rat hepatocytes stimulated by vasopressin and other Ca2+-mobilizing hormones. *Biochem. J.* 212, 733–747
6. Streb, H. *et al.* (1983) Release of Ca2+ from a nonmitochondrial intracellular store in pancreatic acinar cells by inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate. *Nature* 306, 67–69
7. Castagna, M. *et al.* (1982) Direct activation of calcium-activated, phospholipid-dependent protein kinase by tumor-promoting phorbol esters. *J. Biol. Chem.* 257, 7847–7851
8. Driedger, P.E. and Blumberg, P.M. (1980) Specific binding of phorbol ester tumor promoters. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 77, 567–571
9. Kraft, A.S. *et al.* (1982) Decrease in cytosolic calcium/phospholipid-dependent protein kinase activity following phorbol ester treatment of EL4 thymoma cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 257, 13193–13196
10. Kraft, A.S. and Anderson, W.B. (1983) Phorbol esters increase the amount of Ca²⁺, phospholipid-dependent protein kinase associated with plasma membrane. *Nature* 301, 621–623
11. Huang, K.-P. *et al.* (1986) Isozymic forms of rat brain Ca²⁺-activated and phospholipid-dependent protein kinase. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 83, 8535–8539
12. Coussens, L. *et al.* (1986) Multiple, distinct forms of bovine and human protein kinase C suggest diversity in cellular signaling pathways. *Science* 233, 859–866
13. Knopf, J.L. *et al.* (1986) Cloning and expression of multiple protein kinase C cDNAs. *Cell* 46, 491–502
14. Borner, C. *et al.* (1989) Biosynthesis and posttranslational modifications of protein kinase C in human breast cancer cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 264, 13902–13909
15. Cazaubon, S.M. and Parker, P.J. (1993) Identification of the phosphorylated region responsible for the permissive activation of protein kinase C. *J. Biol. Chem.* 268, 17559–17563
16. Dutil, E.M. *et al.* (1994) In vivo regulation of protein kinase C by transphosphorylation followed by autophosphorylation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 269, 29359–29362
17. Chou, M.M. *et al.* (1998) Regulation of protein kinase C zeta by PI 3-kinase and PDK-1. *Curr. Biol.* 8, 1069–1077
18. Le Good, J.A. *et al.* (1998) Protein kinase C isoforms controlled by phosphoinositide 3-kinase through the protein kinase PDK1. *Science* 281, 2042–2045
19. Dutil, E.M. *et al.* (1998) Regulation of conventional protein kinase C isoforms by phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK-1). *Curr. Biol.* 8, 1366–1375
20. Kiley, S.C. *et al.* (1995) Intracellular targeting of protein kinase C isoforms: functional implications. *Biochem. Soc. Trans.* 23, 601–605
21. Mochly-Rosen, D. (1995) Localization of protein kinases by anchoring proteins: a theme in signal transduction. *Science* 268, 247–251
22. Leitges, M. *et al.* (1996) Immunodeficiency in protein kinase beta-deficient mice. *Science* 273, 788–791
23. Hodge, C.W. *et al.* (1999) Supersensitivity to allosteric GABA(A) receptor modulators and alcohol in mice lacking PKCepsilon. *Nat. Neurosci.* 2, 997–1002
24. Kazanietz, M.G. (2002) Novel ‘nonkinase’ phorbol ester receptors: the C1 domain connection. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 61, 759–767
25. Sakai, N. *et al.* (1997) Direct visualization of the translocation of the gamma-subspecies of protein kinase C in living cells using fusion proteins with green fluorescent protein. *J. Cell Biol.* 139, 1465–1476
26. Oancea, E. and Meyer, T. (1998) Protein kinase C as a molecular machine for decoding calcium and diacylglycerol signals. *Cell* 95, 307–318
27. Violin, J.D. *et al.* (2003) A genetically encoded fluorescent reporter reveals oscillatory phosphorylation by protein kinase C. *J. Cell Biol.* 161, 899–909
28. Ohno, S. and Nishizuka, Y. (2002) Protein kinase C isoforms and their specific functions: prologue. *J. Biochem. (Tokyo)* 132, 509–511
29. Newton, A.C. (2003) Regulation of the ABC kinases by phosphorylation: protein kinase C as a paradigm. *Biochem. J.* 370, 361–371

0165-6147/$ - see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.tips.2004.02.010

---

p53: 25 years after its discovery

Lorne J. Hofseth¹,², S. Perwez Hussain¹ and Curtis C. Harris¹

¹Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA  
²Present address: College of Pharmacy, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA  

Since its discovery 25 years ago, the p53 protein has emerged as a key tumor suppressor protein at the crossroads of cellular stress response pathways. Through these pathways, which can lead to cell-cycle arrest, DNA repair, cellular senescence, differentiation and apoptosis, p53 facilitates the repair and survival of damaged cells or eliminates severely damaged cells from the replicative pool to protect the organism. Because of

Corresponding author: Curtis C. Harris (Curtis_Harris@nih.gov).

www.sciencedirect.com

these dynamic and multiple functions of p53, which are largely lost following mutations in the gene encoding p53, this molecule continues to be studied intensively in biomedical research, including the fields of toxicology and pharmacology. In this article, we briefly review the first 25 years of research on p53.

Previous reviews have highlighted the first 20 years of p53 research [1,2]. Briefly, p53 was first identified in 1979 as a cellular protein that bound to the simian virus (SV40) large T antigen and accumulated in the nuclei of cancer cells [3–5] (Figure 1). The gene encoding p53 (TP53) was cloned from neoplastic rodent and human cells, and found to have weak oncogenic activity when expressed in rodent cells. In the late 1980s, however, researchers discovered that they were studying missense mutants of the TP53 gene instead of the wild-type gene. The missense mutations found in the original TP53 cDNA clones proved to be the key to understanding the pathobiological activity of p53. The ability of p53 to form tetramers allows this protein to behave in a dominant-negative fashion, where the allele-producing mutant p53 suppresses the activity of wild-type p53. Oncogenic human DNA viruses have also evolved a mechanism to inactivate p53 functions (e.g. enhanced ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis of p53 by the E6 protein of human papilloma virus types 16 and 18 [6]). Finally, certain missense p53 mutants can ‘gain oncogenic activity’ [7], which could explain the high frequency of missense mutants (75%) in human cancers compared with more-frequent frame-shift and nonsense mutations found in other tumor suppressor genes, such as APC (adenomatosis polyposis coli) [8,9].

Tumor suppressor functions of p53

By the early 1990s, TP53 was widely recognized as a tumor suppressor gene, mutated or lost in ~50% of all human

cancer cases worldwide [9,10]. Not surprisingly, mice deficient in TP53 are susceptible to spontaneous tumorigenesis [11] and germ-line TP53 mutations occur in individuals with the cancer-prone Li-Fraumeni syndrome [12,13]. With this information, the search for the precise function of p53 as a tumor suppressor intensified, and there was an explosion of >20 000 scientific reports in the literature during the 1990s and early part of this millennium, aimed at improving our understanding of the role of p53 in tumorigenesis.

p53 has multiple functions, many of which can be traced to its activity as a transcription factor. It was first shown to be involved in cell-cycle regulation and apoptosis, and then in development, differentiation, gene amplification, DNA recombination, chromosomal segregation and cellular senescence [1,2]. In the mid-to-late-1990s, it was discovered that wild-type p53 facilitates DNA repair, including nucleotide excision repair and base excision repair [14–16] (Figure 2). Most recently, it was discovered that chronic constitutive expression of p53 accelerates aging in mice [17]. However, mice age normally when transgenic TP53 is under the control of its own promoter and not constitutively expressed [18].

p53 is clearly at the crossroads in the cellular response to a wide variety of stresses, including DNA damage, hypoxia and oncogenes (Figure 2). This is observed in cell culture, animal models and humans. To this end, one of the most-studied biochemical responses to stress is the induction of apoptosis. Wild-type p53 can react to environmental insult by driving the cell into programmed cell death.

p53 and apoptosis

p53 is a cellular gatekeeper [19,20]. One of its roles is to survey cellular stress and to induce apoptosis, if necessary (Figure 3). Although the biochemical mechanisms underlying p53-dependent apoptotic responses remain incompletely characterized, p53 is involved in both the extrinsic and the intrinsic pathways of apoptosis by initiating apoptosis through mitochondrial depolarization and sensitizing cells to inducers of apoptosis. For example, p53 increases the expression of cellular death receptors, and stimulates the apoptotic infrastructure by increasing the expression of apoptotic protease-activating factor 1 (APAF-1), a crucial component of the apoptosome.

The observation that mutations in TP53 in human cancer are generally missense and map to the DNA-binding domain of the protein [9,10,21] suggests that p53 transcriptional activity is involved in its effects on apoptosis. Examples of apoptosis-associated genes that are transcriptionally upregulated in response to activation by p53 include p53-inducible genes (PIGs), in addition to those encoding Bax, Fas/CD95, death receptor 4 (DR4), DR5 and Bid [22]. With the advent of serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) and microarray analyses, numerous novel, apoptosis-associated genes that are activated transcriptionally by p53 have been identified. These include those encoding PUMA (p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis), NOXA (meaning ‘damage’), APAF-1 and the serine protease PRSS25 (also known as HTRA2). Recently, the gene encoding phosphatase PAC1 has also been identified as a target of p53; this gene is induced following

**Figure 1.** Paradigm of p53 functions since its discovery in 1979. Examples of fields of study during the past 25 years of p53 research are shown. For example, TP53 was considered to be a proto-oncogene during most of the 1980s before it was defined as a tumor suppressor gene and ‘guardian of the genome’.

DNA damage  
(e.g. nitric oxide,  
irradiation)  

Hypoxia  
iNOS  

ATM, ATR, CHK2 | p53  

Cell-cycle  
checkpoints  
p21WAF1  
14-3-38  
GADD45  

DNA repair  
GADD45  
p48  
p53R2  
APE1  
Polβ  

Apoptosis  
PUMA  
NOXA  
Bax  
APAF-1  

Senescence  
p21WAF1  
Others  

Oncogene activation  
E2F  
p14ARF  
HDM2  

TRENDS in Pharmacological Sciences

Figure 2. p53 is at the crossroads of multiple cellular stress pathways. Examples of upstream sensors of stress [e.g. the ATM (ataxia-telangiectasia mutated) or ATR (ATM and Rad3-related) kinase cascades] and negative feedback loops [e.g. inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) upstream and HDM2 (human double minute 2) downstream of p53] are shown. Following activation, by post-translational modifications including phosphorylation and acetylation, p53 plays a key role in the protection of cells from further stress, through the activation of genes that play a role in cell-cycle checkpoints, apoptosis, DNA repair or cellular senescence. Examples of proteins that are encoded by these effector genes are listed. Abbreviations: APAF-1, apoptotic protease-activating factor 1; APE1, APEX nuclease (multifunctional DNA repair enzyme) 1; Bax, Bcl-2-associated X protein; BLM, Bloom syndrome; CHK2, checkpoint 2 protein; GADD45, growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible, alpha; p53R2, p53 inducible reductase small subunit 2 homolog; Polβ, DNA polymerase β; PUMA, p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis; WRN, Werner syndrome; XPB, xeroderma pigmentosum group B; XPD, xeroderma pigmentosum group D.

the binding of p53 to a novel palindromic binding site in response to oxidative stress [23].

p53 can also promote apoptosis through transcription-independent mechanisms [24]. Mitochondria play a central role in apoptotic events through the release of

the pro-apoptotic factors cytochrome c, SMAC (second mitochondria-derived activator of caspases), apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) and endonuclease G. The Bcl-2 family of proteins, comprising both anti-apoptotic (Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL) and pro-apoptotic (Bax, Bak, Bid, NOXA and

Bid  
Oxidative  
stress  

Casapse-8  
PIG  
PUMA  
NOXA  
Bax  
Bid  

APAF-1  
Fas/CD95  
DR4,5  
HTRA2  

Fas  
Fas-L  
Extrinsic  
apoptotic  
pathway  

p53  

p53  

Bcl-2  
Bcl-XL  
tBid  
Mitochondrial  
depolarization  
NOXA  
Bax PUMA  

Intrinsic  
apoptotic  
pathway  

Cyt c  
APAF-1  
Caspase-9  
Apoptosome  

IAPs  
Executioner  
caspases  
Apoptosis  

TRAIL  

TRENDS in Pharmacological Sciences

Figure 3. A model for p53-mediated apoptosis. p53 can regulate the expression of several genes involved in both the extrinsic and the intrinsic pathways of apoptosis. For example, p53 can increase the expression of receptors for pro-apoptotic molecules [Fas/CD95 (cell-death signaling receptor), death receptor 4 (DR4) and DR5] and lead to inhibition of the production of inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs). Executioner caspases, such as caspase-3, -6 and -7, are members of the CED-3 (a caspase-related enzyme from *Caenorhabditis elegans*), have short prodomains and are regulated by IAPs. These executioner caspases cleave substrates, resulting in apoptotic cell death. Inhibition of IAPs by p53 leads to an increase in apoptosis. p53 also regulates the expression of pro-apoptotic proteins that control mitochondrial membrane permeability [e.g. Bax (Bcl-2-associated X protein), Bid (BH3-interacting death agonist), PUMA (p53-upregulated modulator of apoptosis) and NOXA (Latin for 'harm' or 'damage')], and thus modulates the release of mitochondrial proteins during apoptosis. p53 also regulates the gene encoding apoptotic protease-activating factor 1 (APAF-1), a key component of the apoptosome, and PIGs (p53-inducible genes), which might cause oxidative stress resulting in DNA damage and mitochondrial depolarization. p53 can also inhibit the activity of anti-apoptotic molecules (e.g. Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL) in mitochondria. Abbreviation: TRAIL, tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand.

PUMA) members, integrate diverse cell death signals and regulates the integrity of the mitochondrial membrane. Activated p53 can directly or indirectly modulate the expression of these proteins and other proteins that control mitochondrial membrane permeability and, therefore, can modulate the release of mitochondrial proteins during apoptosis. Recently, a small fraction of the p53 protein was shown to allow permeabilization of the outer mitochondrial membrane directly by forming complexes with, and inhibiting, the protective Bcl-XL and Bcl-2 proteins, leading to the release of cytochrome c [25]. This lends further support to the hypothesis that p53, in cooperation with its family members p63 and p73, plays a central role in programmed cell death [26,27].

p53 as an intermediate biomarker of carcinogenesis

p53 protein alterations (i.e. amino acid substitutions) as a result of missense mutations and, less frequently, loss of the p53 protein by nonsense or frame-shift mutations, provide a selective advantage for clonal expansion of pre-neoplastic and neoplastic cells. The findings that these mutations can occur early in carcinogenesis, and that p53 can have a molecular signature based on the type of cancer and exposure linked to that cancer [28], make p53 an attractive target as an intermediate biomarker for carcinogenesis. Indeed, p53 has been used in this fashion to study both target tissues and surrogate fluids, such as blood, in high-risk cancer populations [29,30].

To use p53 as a biomarker of cancer risk, we can also take advantage of the intrinsic property of this molecule: p53 is at the crossroads of multiple cellular stress pathways and post-translational modifications of p53 can reflect the type and magnitude of the stress [31] (Figure 2). We have recently used post-translational modification of p53 as a marker of inflammatory stress in patients with the oxyradical overload disease ulcerative colitis [32]. TP53 mutation load (frequency of mutated TP53 alleles before clonal expansion of the mutated cells) and protein accumulation and post-translational modification endpoints could prove useful in studying the efficacy of chemopreventive agents.

p53 as a target for cancer therapy

In addition to p53 being used as an intermediate biomarker of carcinogenesis and in potentially testing the efficacy of chemopreventive agents, p53 could have value as a tumor prognosis marker of several sites of human cancer [33,34]. Towards this end, the p53 molecule is an attractive target for therapy ranging from traditional radiation and chemotherapies to novel and promising rational therapies. Recent reviews detail the specific pathways that are targets of p53, therapeutic strategies and how far the drugs that target these pathways have progressed down the clinical pipeline [35,36]. Briefly, in TP53-null or mutant tumors, therapeutic approaches include re-instating the wild-type TP53 gene, increasing the functional capacity of the p53 protein, having selective replication of a virus in p53-deficient cells, the use of small-molecule mimics of functional targets of p53, inhibitors of HPV-E6 (human papilloma virus E6) ubiquitin ligase activity, inhibitors of p53-HDM2 (human double minute 2) protein-protein binding, and the reactivation of the mutant p53 protein. A recent example of the latter approach is a 'proof-of-principle' experiment using poly-peptides designed with the structure of the complex between the p53 core and p53-binding protein 2 (53BP2) [37]. Another interesting approach uses the principle that endogenous p53 drives the expression of a repressor gene. If the 'therapeutic' gene is driven by a promoter that is sensitive to the repressor, the construct should be expressed only in the tumor lacking wild-type p53 [38]. If the TP53 gene or the p53 pathway is present and functional in tumors, therapeutic strategies can be devised to take advantage of this. Overall, tumors that possess wild-type p53 protein could be more responsive to cancer therapy [39]. Interestingly, members of the p53 pathway could also be suitable targets for therapy. In tumors with wild-type p53 protein, introducing p14ARF or inhibiting HDM2 have p53-dependent cytostasis and apoptotic effects [40]. Similarly, peptides that inhibit the interaction between p53 and HDM2 or prevent HDM2 expression could prevent p53 degradation and prove useful in cancer therapy [41]. The scientific community holds biannual p53 workshops and examples of the numerous p53-related websites are available (Table 1).

Concluding remarks

During the past quarter of a century, TP53 was initially viewed as an oncogene, and now as a tumor suppressor gene. p53 is a molecular node at the crossroads of a complex network of stress response pathways. p53 has been one of the most-studied molecules during the careers of most of us who are currently in the field of biomedical sciences. The identification of molecular signatures of TP53 gene mutations that are associated with specific environmental exposures has pioneered our understanding of gene-environment interactions in the molecular epidemiology of human cancer. Dissecting the p53

Table 1. p53-related websites

| Websites                                                                 | Description of website                                                                 |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| http://www.dcms.co.nz/p53                                                | 12th International p53 Workshop in Dunedin, New Zealand (November 2004)                |
| http://www.iarc.fr/p53/index.html                                         | IARC TP53 Mutation Database                                                          |
| http://bioinformatics.weizmann.ac.il/hotmolecbase/entries/p53.htm         | HotMolecBase Web Review for the p53 Tumor Suppressor                                    |
| http://www3.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov:80/htbin-post/Omim/dispmim?191170            | NCBI (NIH Website for p53)                                                            |
| http://www.bioscience.org/news/slist.htm                                  | Frontiers in Bioscience (Daily Medical Headline News)                                 |
| http://www.lf2.cuni.cz/projects/germline_mut_p53.htm                      | Database of Germline p53 Mutations                                                   |
| http://p53.curie.fr/                                                     | p53 Mutation Database of Institut Curie, France                                       |
| http://www3.cancer.gov/intra/LHC/p53ref.htm                               | Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, NCI-p53 Resource Page                              |
| http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi-bin/jissue/103020637               | Special Issue of Human Mutation on p53                                                |

www.sciencedirect.com

pathway that leads from cellular stress to growth arrest, apoptosis, senescence, differentiation, DNA repair and aging holds promise for the development of novel drugs for cancer chemoprevention and therapy.

**Acknowledgements**

We thank Karen MacPherson for bibliographic assistance and Dorothea Dudek for editorial and graphic assistance. Because of space limitations, many original important studies have not been cited directly but instead through recent reviews. Researchers in the p53 field have held biannual meetings for more than 20 years. A summary of the 2002 meeting is published [42].

**References**

1. Harris, C.C. (1996) p53 Tumor suppressor gene: from the basic research laboratory to the clinic—an abridged historical perspective. *Carcinogenesis* 17, 1187–1198
2. Oren, M. and Rotter, V. (1999) Introduction: p53—the first twenty years. *Cell. Mol. Life Sci.* 55, 9–11
3. DeLeo, A.B. *et al.* (1979) Detection of a transformation-related antigen in chemically induced sarcomas and other transformed cells of the mouse. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 76, 2420–2424
4. Lane, D.P. and Crawford, L.V. (1979) T antigen is bound to a host protein in SV40-transformed cells. *Nature* 278, 261–263
5. Linzer, D.I. and Levine, A.J. (1979) Characterization of a 54K dalton cellular SV40 tumor antigen present in SV40-transformed cells and uninfected embryonal carcinoma cells. *Cell* 17, 43–52
6. Scheffner, M. *et al.* (1990) The E6 oncoprotein encoded by human papillomavirus types 16 and 18 promotes the degradation of p53. *Cell* 63, 1129–1136
7. Sigal, A. and Rotter, V. (2000) Oncogenic mutations of the p53 tumor suppressor: the demons of the guardian of the genome. *Cancer Res.* 60, 6788–6793
8. Greenblatt, M.S. *et al.* (1994) Mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene: clues to cancer etiology and molecular pathogenesis. *Cancer Res.* 54, 4855–4878
9. Hollstein, M. *et al.* (1991) p53 mutations in human cancers. *Science* 253, 49–53
10. Levine, A.J. *et al.* (1991) The p53 tumour suppressor gene. *Nature* 351, 453–456
11. Donehower, L.A. *et al.* (1992) Mice deficient for p53 are developmentally normal but susceptible to spontaneous tumours. *Nature* 356, 215–221
12. Malkin, D. *et al.* (1990) Germ line p53 mutations in a familial syndrome of breast cancer, sarcomas, and other neoplasms. *Science* 250, 1233–1238
13. Srivastava, S. *et al.* (1990) Germ-line transmission of a mutated p53 gene in a cancer-prone family with Li-Fraumeni syndrome. *Nature* 348, 747–749
14. Adimoolam, S. and Ford, J.M. (2003) p53 and regulation of DNA damage recognition during nucleotide excision repair. *DNA Repair (Amst.)* 2, 947–954
15. Offer, H. *et al.* (1999) Direct involvement of p53 in the base excision repair pathway of the DNA repair machinery. *FEBS Lett.* 450, 197–204
16. Zhou, J. *et al.* (2001) A role for p53 in base excision repair. *EMBO J.* 20, 914–923
17. Tyner, S.D. *et al.* (2002) p53 mutant mice that display early ageing-associated phenotypes. *Nature* 415, 45–53
18. Garcia-Cao, I. *et al.* (2002) ‘Super p53’ mice exhibit enhanced DNA damage response, are tumor resistant and age normally. *EMBO J.* 21, 6225–6235

19 Kinzler, K.W. and Vogelstein, B. (1997) Gatekeepers and caretakers. *Nature* 386, 761–763
20 Levine, A.J. (1997) p53, the cellular gatekeeper for growth and division. *Cell* 88, 323–331
21 Raycroft, L. *et al.* (1990) Transcriptional activation by wild-type but not transforming mutants of the p53 anti-oncogene. *Science* 249, 1049–1051
22 Vousden, K.H. and Lu, X. (2002) Live or let die: the cell's response to p53. *Nat. Rev. Cancer* 2, 594–604
23 Yin, Y. *et al.* (2003) PAC1 phosphatase is a transcription target of p53 in signalling apoptosis and growth suppression. *Nature* 422, 527–531
24 Haupt, S. *et al.* (2003) Apoptosis—the p53 network. *J. Cell Sci.* 116, 4077–4085
25 Mihara, M. *et al.* (2003) p53 has a direct apoptogenic role at the mitochondria. *Mol. Cell* 11, 577–590
26 Flores, E.R. *et al.* (2002) p63 and p73 are required for p53-dependent apoptosis in response to DNA damage. *Nature* 416, 560–564
27 Urist, M. and Prives, C. (2002) p53 leans on its siblings. *Cancer Cell* 1, 311–313
28 Hussain, S.P. and Harris, C.C. (1998) Molecular epidemiology of human cancer: contribution of mutation spectra studies of tumor suppressor genes. *Cancer Res.* 58, 4023–4037
29 Hussain, S.P. *et al.* (2000) Increased p53 mutation load in non-tumorous human liver of Wilson disease and hemochromatosis: oxyradical overload diseases. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 97, 12770–12775
30 Kirk, G.D. *et al.* (2000) Ser-249 p53 mutations in plasma DNA of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma from The Gambia. *J. Natl. Cancer Inst.* 92, 148–153
31 Appella, E. and Anderson, C.W. (2001) Post-translational modifications and activation of p53 by genotoxic stresses. *Eur. J. Biochem.* 268, 2764–2772
32 Hofseth, L.J. *et al.* (2003) Nitric oxide-induced cellular stress and p53 activation in chronic inflammation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 100, 143–148
33 Borresen-Dale, A.L. (2003) TP53 and breast cancer. *Hum. Mutat.* 21, 292–300
34 Iacopetta, B. (2003) TP53 mutation in colorectal cancer. *Hum. Mutat.* 21, 271–276
35 Bykov, V.J. *et al.* (2003) Small molecules that reactivate mutant p53. *Eur. J. Cancer* 39, 1828–1834
36 Woods, Y.L. and Lane, D.P. (2003) Exploiting the p53 pathway for cancer diagnosis and therapy. *Hematol. J.* 4, 233–247
37 Issaeva, N. *et al.* (2003) Rescue of mutants of the tumor suppressor p53 in cancer cells by a designed peptide. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 100, 13303–13307
38 Zhu, J. *et al.* (2000) Targeting gene expression to tumor cells with loss of wild-type p53 function. *Cancer Gene Ther.* 7, 4–12
39 Fojo, T. (2002) p53 as a therapeutic target: unresolved issues on the road to cancer therapy targeting mutant p53. *Drug Resist. Updat.* 5, 209–216
40 Weber, J.D. *et al.* (1999) Nucleolar Arf sequesters Mdm2 and activates p53. *Nat. Cell Biol.* 1, 20–26
41 Lu, W. *et al.* (2001) Activation of p53 by roscovitine-mediated suppression of MDM2 expression. *Oncogene* 20, 3206–3216
42 Haupt, Y. *et al.* (2002) Deconstruction of p53 functions and regulation. *Oncogene* 21, 8223–8231

0165-6147/$ - see front matter. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
doi:10.1016/j.tips.2004.02.009
