
BIOLOGY OF REPRODUCTION 71, 375–391 (2004)  
Published online before print 28 April 2004.  
DOI 10.1095/biolreprod.104.028225  

---

### Minireview

#### Extracellular Matrix: Recent Advances on Its Role in Junction Dynamics in the Seminiferous Epithelium During Spermatogenesis¹

**Michelle K.Y. Siu and C. Yan Cheng²**

*Population Council, Center for Biomedical Research, New York, New York 10021*

---

### ABSTRACT

Spermatogenesis takes place in the seminiferous epithelium of the mammalian testis in which one type A1 spermatogonium (diploid, 2n) gives rise to 256 spermatids (haploid, 1n). To accomplish this, developing germ cells, such as preleptotene and leptotene spermatocytes, residing in the basal compartment of the seminiferous epithelium must traverse the blood-testis barrier (BTB) entering into the adluminal compartment for further development into round, elongating, and elongate spermatids. Recent studies have shown that the basement membrane in the testis (a modified form of extracellular matrix, ECM) is important to the event of germ cell movement across the BTB because proteins in the ECM were shown to regulate BTB dynamics via the interactions between collagens, proteases, and protease inhibitors, possibly under the regulation of cytokines. While these findings are intriguing, they are not entirely unexpected. For one, the basement membrane in the testis is intimately associated with the BTB, which represents the basolateral region of Sertoli cells. Also, Sertoli cell tight junctions (TJs) that constitute the BTB are present side-by-side with cell-cell actin-based adherens junctions (AJs), such as basal ectoplasmic specialization [ES]) and intermediate filament-based desmosome-like junctions. As such, the relative morphological layout between TJs, AJs, and desmosome-like junctions in the seminiferous epithelium is in sharp contrast to other epithelia where TJs are located at the apical portion of an epithelium or endothelium, furthest away from ECM, to be followed by AJs and desmosomes, which in turn constitute the junctional complex. For another, anchoring junctions between a cell epithelium and ECM found in multiple tissues, also known as focal contacts (or focal adhesion complex, FAC, an actin-based cell-matrix anchoring junction type), are the most efficient junction type that permits rapid junction restructuring to accommodate cell movement. It is therefore physiologically plausible, and perhaps essential, that the testis is using some components of the focal contacts to regulate rapid restructuring of AJs between Sertoli and germ cells when germ cells traverse the seminiferous epithelium. Indeed, recent findings have shown that the apical ES, a testis-specific AJ type in the seminiferous epithelium, is equipped with proteins of FAC to regulate its restructuring. In this review, we provide a timely update on this exciting yet rapidly developing field regarding how the homeostasis of basement membrane in the tunica propria regulates BTB dynamics and spermatogenesis in the testis, as well as a critical review on the molecular architecture and the regulation of ES in the seminiferous epithelium.

kinases, Sertoli cells, signal transduction, spermatogenesis, testis

---

### INTRODUCTION

During spermatogenesis, preleptotene and leptotene spermatocytes residing at the basal compartment of the seminiferous epithelium adjacent to the basement membrane must traverse the blood-testis barrier (BTB) at late stage VIII through early stage IX of the epithelial cycle, entering the adluminal compartment for further development (Figs. 1 and 2) [1–3]. These primary spermatocytes continue to differentiate into round, elongating, and eventually elongate spermatids while moving to the luminal edge of the epithelium and to be released into the tubule lumen at spermiation [2]. These events of cell movement across the seminiferous epithelium are also associated with extensive remodeling of actin-based cell-cell and cell-matrix anchoring junctions, also known as adherens junctions (AJs) and focal contacts, respectively; as well as intermediate filament-based cell-cell desmosome-like junctions and cell-matrix hemidesmosomes [3]. Ectoplasmic specializations (ES) (Fig. 2) are testis-specific specialized actin-based AJ structures found between Sertoli cells and developing spermatids (namely round, elongating, and elongate spermatids) at the apical sites (apical ES) of the seminiferous epithelium and between adjacent Sertoli cells at the basal compartment (basal ES) at the BTB site [3–5] in the rat testis. The extensive restructuring of basal and apical ES are essential for the movement of spermatids, across the epithelium, and the release of fully developed spermatids (spermatozoa) into the tubule lumen at spermiation [3, 5, 6]. Yet, the mechanism(s) and the molecules that regulate these events remain largely unknown.

Sertoli cell tight junctions (TJs) in the seminiferous epithelium are located adjacent to the basement membrane, a modified form of the extracellular matrix (ECM) in the testis (Fig. 1) [7], coexisting side-by-side with anchoring junctions, such as basal ES and desmosome-like junctions [3–

FIG. 1. An electron micrograph showing the cross-section of a seminiferous tubule from an adult rat testis. This micrograph also illustrates the intimate relationship between the seminiferous epithelium (composed of Sertoli cells and germ cells) and the basement membrane (asterisks) of the tunica propria. Underneath the basement membrane is the collagen fibril network (arrowheads), to be followed by the myoid cell layer and the lymphatic structures. GC, Germ cell; SC, Sertoli cell; L, lipid droplet; V, vacuole. The inter-Sertoli cell tight junctions (TJs) in the seminiferous epithelium that create the blood-testis barrier (BTB) physically divides the epithelium into the basal and adluminal compartment (see Fig. 2 for the schematic illustration of the seminiferous epithelium and the relative locations of different junction types). Bar = 2.5 μm.

Seminiferous  
Epithelium  

Tunica Propria  

ABBREVIATIONS USED

Csk, C-terminal Src kinase; p120<sup>ctn</sup>, p120 catenin; pFAK, phosphorylated (activated) FAK, also shown are the two proline rich region I (PRI) and PRII and the crucial phosphorylation (P) sites at Y (Tyr) 397 and 576; ILK, integrin-linked kinase; JAM, junctional adhesion molecules; Keap 1, Kelch-like ECH Associating Protein 1; p130Cas, an adaptor protein (note: adaptors are proteins that recruit other proteins to a multiprotein complex to assist a cellular response) encoded by Crkas gene (Crk-associated protein) with a SH3 domain; PI 3-kinase, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PIP<sub>2</sub>, PtdIns(4,5)P<sub>2</sub>, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate; PKC, protein kinase C; PLCγ, phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase Cγ; Src, a family of proto-oncogenes of the Rous retrovirus which cause sarcoma-like tumors in chickens, there are three most studied Src members, namely, v-Src, c-Src and e-erb, and each encodes a protein that stimulates protein tyrosine kinases or induces phosphorylation of AJ-associated proteins at the site of AJs; other Src family proteins includes Fyn, Yes, Fgr, Lyn, Hck, Lck, Blk and Yrk proteins; ZO-1, zonula occludens-1; ASAP1, ADP ribosylation factor (ARF)-GAP containing SH3, ANK repeats, the PH domain 1; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; GAP, GTPase activating protein; Grb2, growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2; Grb7, growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 7; LMw-PTP, low molecular weight protein tyrosine phosphatase; Nck-2, small adaptor protein with SH2 and SH3 domains, similar to Crk and Grb2 but its function is not known; PDGFR, platelet-derived growth factor receptor; PSGAP, PH and SH3 domain containing Rho GAP; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10, it is a protein tyrosine phosphatase displaying homology with tensin and

ECM AND JUNCTION DYNAMICS IN THE TESTIS

TJ
AJ
ES
GJ
TBC

Desmosome
Hemidesmosome (α6β4 Integrin ?)

Sertoli cell

α-actinin
Actin
Cadherin
p120ctn
α-catenin
Fer
β-catenin
Nectin
Afadin
Ponsin
Sertoli cell membrane
Extracellular space
Sertoli/Germ cell membrane

Round
spermatid

Pachytene
spermatocyte

BTB

Preleptotene/
Leptotene
spermatocyte

Spermatogonium

TJ

Cingulin
ZO-2/3
AF-6
ZONAB
ZAK
Occludin
Claudin
JAM
PKC
Symplekin
ASIP
Rab 3B
Rab 13
Ga

Sertoli cell

Elongate
spermatid

Nectin-2
Nectin-3
Myosin VIa
Keap 1
Fimbrin
Elongating
spermatid
Testin
PLCy
Espn
Actin
α-actinin
Laminin γ3
PIP₂
Vinculin
Gelsolin
Paxillin
ES
Integrin
Talin
Y397 Y576
PI-3K
p130Cas
FAK
PRI PRL
ILK
Csk
Fyn

Adluminal compartment

Basal compartment

Basement membrane
Type I collagen layer
Myoid cell layer
Lymphatic endothelium
Tunica Propria

FIG. 2. A schematic drawing that illustrates the current molecular architecture of tight junctions (TJ) and cell-cell actin-based adherens junctions (AJ), such as ectoplasmic specialization (ES) in the seminiferous epithelium of the testis. This figure also illustrates the relative locations of different junction types in the seminiferous epithelium. TJs and AJs (such as basal ES and basal TBC) between adjacent Sertoli cells create the blood-testis barrier (BTB), which physically divides the seminiferous epithelium into the basal and the adluminal (or apical) compartments. The basal compartment is adjacent to the tunica propria, which is composed of an acellular (basement membrane and type I collagen fibril layer) and a cellular (myoid cell layer and the lymphatic structure) zone. The basement membrane is a modified form of ECM in the testis. This figure also illustrates there are extensive restructuring of TJs and AJs, such as ES, during spermatogenesis when developing germ cells traverse the seminiferous epithelium, moving from the basal to the adluminal compartment. The molecular components of TJs (blue background), AJs (yellow background), and ESs (green background) are shown. Recent studies have shown that the nectin/afadin/ponsin complex and the cadherin/catenin complex are also the constituent proteins of the ES [3]. This schematic drawing clearly illustrates that the timely translocation of developing germ cells across the epithelium must coordinate with the events of junction assembly and disassembly and is crucial for the completion of spermatogenesis. Also, a disruption of either cell adhesive function or the pertinent junction restructuring event at AJs and TJs will lead to a loss of fertility.

a tumor suppressor gene located on chromosome 10q23; Stat-1, signal transducer and activator of transcription-1; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase; GSK-3, glycogen synthase kinase-3; MMP-9, matrix metalloprotease 9; TIMP-1, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1.

ly, in the testis are largely unknown, let alone their regulation. Furthermore, it is not known if focal contacts are found in the testis.

THE FUNCTIONAL UNIT THAT CONFERS CELL ADHESION FUNCTION IN THE SEMINIFEROUS EPITHELIUM

Cell adhesive function that permits the attachment of developing germ cells onto Sertoli cells in the seminiferous epithelium, similar to other epithelia, is conferred by the cell adhesion unit. This unit is composed of three separate entities. First are the transmembrane adhesion receptors, which bind to ECM components or counter receptors on other cells. They also determine the specificity of cell-matrix and cell-cell interactions, which include integrins, cadherins, and nectins [3, 5]. Second are ECM proteins, which are largely glycoproteins that interact with multiple cell sur-

CELL JUNCTIONS IN THE TESTIS

The three types of junctions (such as occludin, anchoring and gap junctions) [3, 8] that are found in the seminiferous epithelium of mammalian testes and their relative location are shown in Figure 2. It is noted that anchoring junctions consist of actin-based cell-cell and cell-matrix adherens junction (AJs) and focal contacts, respectively. ES and tubulobular complexes are two modified actin-based AJ types unique to the testis [3]. Yet the nature and biochemical composition of the intermediate filament-based cell-cell and cell-matrix desmosomes and hemidesmosomes, respective-

ECM component     $M_{r}$ (kDa)   Chain assembly          Special property                          Testicular location                              References
Collagen IV       550            Triple helical structure composed of three $\alpha$ chains    Backbone of basement membranes                Seminiferous tubule basement membrane        [7, 8, 38, 39]
Laminin           400–900        Heterotrimers composed of three disulfide-linked sub-units, $\alpha$, $\beta$, and $\gamma$ chains    Backbone of basement membranes (12 isoforms are identified)    Seminiferous tubule basement membrane (a novel laminin $\gamma$ 3 chain located inside the seminiferous epithelium)    Synthesized by Sertoli cells                    [7, 8, 39, 133, 134]
Entactin          150            Monomer                  Found in all basement membranes; Binds tightly to laminin and generally forming a complex with laminin    Seminiferous tubule basement membrane         Synthesized by Sertoli cells and peritubular myoid cells      [7, 135]
Heparan sulfate proteoglycans (such as perlecan) 600 (core protein size) Monomer                  Found in all basement membranes; Has a filtration function in basement membranes    Seminiferous tubule basement membrane         [7, 8, 136]
Fibulin-1         90             Monomer                  Ca²⁺ binding; Assembly to form 10–12 nm microfibrils in the connective tissue    Only found in the prenatal seminiferous tubule basement membrane (before Day 5 after birth)    [136, 137]
Fibulin-2         450            Homodimers              Ca²⁺ binding    Only found in the prenatal seminiferous tubule basement membrane (before Day 20 after birth)    [136, 138]
Fibronectin       240            Dimers                  Noncollagen adhesive protein in basement membranes assisting cells to attach to the matrix    In the connective tissue adjacent to the peritubular myoid cells    Synthesized by peritubular myoid cells      [8, 39, 136]

face receptors. Third are intracellular peripheral proteins, which link adhesion receptors to the underlying actin-, intermediate filament- or microtubule-based cytoskeleton [11, 12].

EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX (ECM)

At the cell-cell contact sites, the extracellular space is filled with macromolecules, largely glycoproteins and polysaccharides, that constitute the ECM [8], and it is known as the basement membrane in the testis [7].

THE BASEMENT MEMBRANE

In rodent testes, tunica propria surrounding each seminiferous tubule are composed of acellular (the basement membrane and type I collagen fibrils) and cellular (the peritubular myoid cells and lymphatic endothelial cells along with fibroblasts) zones (Figs. 1 and 2). The basement membrane, which is in physical contact with the base of Sertoli cells and spermatogonia, is a thin sheet-like structure (0.15 μm thick), largely composed of ECM proteins: type IV collagen, laminin, heparan sulfate proteoglycans, and entactin (Table 1).

FUNCTIONS OF THE TESTICULAR BASEMENT MEMBRANE

Maintain Sertoli and Leydig cell function. In vitro studies have shown that ECM plays a crucial role in Sertoli cell function. For instance, ECM affects the morphology and behavior of Sertoli cells. Sertoli cell function, such as differentiation, cell growth, and migration are dependent on the substratum on which cells are attached [7]. ECM also affects Leydig cell proliferation, testosterone production, and gene expression [13, 14].

A Platform for Signal Transduction

The basement membrane is a platform for signal transduction through transmembrane receptors, such as integrins. For instance, the Gs complex of adenylate cyclase and the FSH-induced cAMP response were stimulated when Sertoli cells were cultured on ECM substrates [15]. Moreover, the intracellular [Ca²⁺] level can also be induced in Sertoli cells (note: Sertoli cell TJ dynamics are known to be modulated by Ca²⁺ in vitro [16]) cultured on ECM proteins, which can be downregulated by FSH [17, 18]. Also, cAMP has been shown to have a biphasic effect on the Sertoli cell-TJ barrier in vitro [19]. Furthermore, G protein, an important regulator of cAMP, has been localized to the site of TJs in the BTB. As such, Sertoli cell TJ dynamics are modulated by ECM proteins via multiple signaling molecules, such as cAMP.

Maintain the Seminiferous Epithelium Integrity

Modifications of the basement membrane functionality by passive transfer of antibodies raised against seminiferous tubule basement membrane (STBM) [20] or its noncollagenous fraction [21] can cause focal sloughing of the seminiferous epithelium in rats. Laminin, a component of ECM, is known to regulate Sertoli cell TJ-barrier function possibly by providing the functional linkage between ECM and intracellular cytoskeleton [22]. Also, passive immunization of guinea pigs with antilaminin IgG can perturb spermatogenesis, inducing germ cell loss from the epithelium [23].

ECM AND JUNCTION DYNAMICS IN THE TESTIS

FIG. 3. A schematic drawing that illustrates the three possible pathways by which ECM-mediated proteolysis can affect junction dynamics. A) ECM remodeling directly alters cell-matrix interactions via integrin-mediated signaling. Furthermore, proteolysis of ECM proteins results in the release of biologically active ECM fragments, which can in turn activate integrin-mediated signaling different from that induced by intact molecules. B) ECM molecules also act as binding reservoirs for various growth factors and cytokines, such as TGF-β and TNFα, which are released once ECM molecules are cleaved. The growth factors can then bind to their cell surface receptors to initiate downstream signaling events. It is of note that TGF-β3 in the rat testis has been shown to regulate the dynamics of Sertoli cell TJs via the p38 MAP kinase pathway. C) Cell adhesion proteins, such as cadherins and syndecans, can also be degraded by ECM proteases, resulting in the disruption of adherens junctions and alteration of signal transduction and is accompanied by dissociation of adaptors and peripheral signaling molecules from the cadherin/catenin protein complex.

Defects in the Basement Membrane Can Lead to Infertility

In infertile men, abnormal basement membrane structures and immune complexes can sometimes be detected [9, 10, 24] in their testes. The basement membranes are also thickened in testes of men with cryptorchidism [25], vasectomy [26], and varicoceles [27].

COLLAGEN IV: A MAJOR ECM COMPONENT IN THE BASEMENT MEMBRANE

Collagens are ubiquitous structural proteins found in ECM of all mammalian tissues including the testis, with 19 collagen subtypes known to date. Type IV collagen, a network-forming collagen type [28], and laminins are the most abundant building blocks of the basement membrane [7, 8, 29, 30]. Type IV collagen is composed of three α chains, which in turn form a triple helical structure. This triple helical molecule forms the building block (monomer) of the collagen network. Six genetically distinct α chains, designated α1–α6, are known. Each monomer is characterized by a noncollagenous 7S domain (~15 amino acid residues from the N-terminus), a middle collagenous domain (~1400 residues of Gly-Xaa-Yaa repeats), and a carboxyl terminal noncollagenous (NC1) domain (~230 residues). By different combinations of these monomers, as many as 56 isoforms of triple helical monomer can be assembled. These monomers in turn associate with each other to form a suprastructure. The carboxyl terminal NC1 domains of the monomers associate with others to form dimers and the amino terminal 7S domain also associates with others to form spiderlike tetramers [31, 32].

EXPRESSION AND LOCALIZATION OF COLLAGEN IV IN THE TESTIS

The tissue distribution of α1(IV) and α2(IV) chains is ubiquitous, whereas α3(IV), α4(IV), α5(IV), and α6(IV)

chains have restricted tissue distribution. α1(IV)–α5(IV) chains are found in rodent testes [33–36]. In bovine testes, the basement membrane is constituted largely by α3(IV) and α4(IV) chains, which accounts for ~80% of the collagen chains instead of the α1(IV) and α2(IV) chains found in nongonadal basement membrane [37]. In rodent testes, the expression of α3(IV) chain peaked at 10–20 days after birth, coinciding with the BTB assembly at ~13 days postnatal [34, 38]. α3(IV) and α4(IV) chains are colocalized to the basement membrane of seminiferous tubules, myoid cells, and tunica albuginea in 15-day-old rats [35]. α1(IV) and α2(IV) chains are products of Sertoli and myoid cells [33, 39, 40]. α3(IV) is a product of Sertoli and germ cells in the rat [38].

FUNCTIONS OF COLLAGEN IV IN THE BASEMENT MEMBRANE

From Simple Scaffolding to Signaling Function: The Involvement of NC1 Fragments

Collagen, a scaffolding protein in ECM, can take part in signal transduction via transmembrane receptors, such as integrins [8, 41]. Of the 24 known integrin receptors, five integrins, namely α1β1, α2β1, α3β1, α10β1, and α11β1, are putative collagen receptors. Different collagen subtypes can also be recognized by specific cell surface collagen receptors. For instance, the basement membrane type IV collagen can be recognized by α1β1 and α2β1 integrins [42, 43]. It is likely that additional collagen cell surface receptors will be identified [44]. Recent studies have shown that NC1 fragments of collagen generated by limited proteolysis are physiologically active peptides with functions different from that of intact collagens. For instance, it was shown that NC1 fragments inhibited angiogenesis and tumorigenesis [32]. Furthermore, the NC1 domain of collagen IV (e.g., α3NC1(IV), also called tumstatin), also takes part in the regulation of adhesion, proliferation, and apoptosis

FIG. 4. This is a schematic drawing that shows the three possible pathways by which TNFα affects the opening and closing of the Sertoli cell tight junction barrier. TNFα appears to affect Sertoli cell TJ dynamics via its effects on occludin and possibly other yet-to-be identified TJ constituent proteins or the homeostasis of the ECM proteins in the basement membrane using one of the three different mechanisms. These include: i) the integrin/ILK/GSK-3/p130Cas/JNK signaling pathway that regulates the level of occludin at the site of the BTB; ii) regulating the level of TIMP-1; and/or iii) the level of MMP-9, which can in turn affect the stability of the ECM via changes in the homeostasis of the collagens in the basement membrane. The net result of these can perturb the stability of the TJ barrier.

in various cell types via their interactions with integrins, such as α6β1 and αvβ3 integrins [32]. These recent findings have clearly illustrated the signaling function of collagen IV.

Role of Collagen IV in Junction Dynamics

A mixture of type I and III collagens has been shown to enhance the sealing capacity of TJs in A6 cells in vitro, a kidney epithelial cell line, by inducing phosphorylation of ZO-1, an adaptor at the TJ site, during TJ assembly [45]. Collagen IV is also known to stimulate occludin expression in human brain endothelial cells [46]. These results thus implicate the significance of collagens in TJ dynamics. However, it is not certain if these reported effects are mediated by other molecules, such as cytokines, that were trapped in the collagen network.

It was recently shown that an antibody against collagen IV could perturb Sertoli cell TJ-barrier in vitro [38]. While the underlying mechanism is presently not known, subsequent studies have shown that this is likely the result of an intricate interaction between TNFα, collagen α3(IV), MMP-9, and TIMP-1 [38] (Fig. 4). What remains to be determined in this model (Fig. 4) is what triggers the production of TNFα when BTB needs to be opened to the migrating germ cells at late stage VIII and early stage IX of the epithelial cycle. Would that be preleptotene and leptotene spermatocytes?

ECM HOMEOSTASIS IS REGULATED BY THE SYNERGISTIC ACTION OF MMPs AND TIMPs

ECM remodeling is critical for developmental processes, inflammation, tumor invasion, metastasis, cell movement,

TABLE 2. MMPs that are found in the testis and their putative substrates.

| MMPs                     | ECM components                                                                                   | Other proteins                                                                                          | Testicular localization                                                                 |
|--------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Gelatinases              |                                                                                                  |                                                                                                        |                                                                                         |
| MMP-2/gelatinase A       | Collagen I/III/IV/V/VI/X/XI, laminin, entactin, fibulins, fibronectin, vitronectin, elastin, fibrillin, gelatin I, tenascin | Pro-TNF-α, pro-TGF-β2, pro-IL1-β, fibrinogen, pro-MMP-1, 2, 13                                 | Sertoli cell, peritubular cell and Leydig cell secretory product in rats [52, 53, 139] |
| MMP-9/gelatinase B       | Collagen IV/V/XI/XIV, laminin, vitronectin, elastin, fibrillin, gelatin I                              | Pro-TNF-α, pro-TGF-β2, pro-IL1-β, plasminogen, α1-proteinase inhibitor (PI), fibrinogen, casein         | Human fetal tests [55]                                                                  |
| Collagenases             |                                                                                                  |                                                                                                        |                                                                                         |
| MMP-1/collagenase-1      | Collagen I/II/III/VI/IX/X/XI, laminin, fibronectin, vitronectin, gelatin I, tenascin                    | Pro-TNF-α, pro-IL1-β, α1-PI, α2-macroglobulin (MG), fibrinogen, casein, pro-MMP-1, 2                  | Human fetal tests [55]                                                                  |
| MMP-18/collagenase-4     | Collagen I                                                                                      | Not determined                                                                                          | Human fetal tests mRNA [140]                                                            |
| Stromelysins             |                                                                                                  |                                                                                                        |                                                                                         |
| MMP-3/stromelysin-1      | Collagen III/IV/V/VI/IX/X/XI, laminin, entactin, fibronectin, vitronectin, elastin, fibrillin, gelatin I, tenascin | Pro-TNF-α, pro-IL1-β, plasminogen, α1-PI, α2-MG, fibrinogen, casein, pro-MMP-1, 3, 7, 8, 9, 13, E-cadherin | Rat Sertoli and peritubular cells, but not germ cells [139]                             |
| Membrane associated      |                                                                                                  |                                                                                                        |                                                                                         |
| MMP-14/MT1-MMP           | Collagen I/II/III, laminin, entactin, fibronectin, vitronectin, gelatin I                               | Pro-TNF-α, α1-PI, α2-MG, fibrinogen, pro-MMP-2, 13                                                   | In rat Sertoli cells, peritubular cells, Leydig cells, and germ cells [53]               |
| MMP-17/MT4-MMP           | Gelatin                                                                                        | Pro-MMP-2                                                                                               | Human tests mRNA [141]                                                                  |
| MMP-23                   | Gelatin                                                                                        | Not determined                                                                                          | Human tests mRNA [142]                                                                  |
| MMP-24/MT5-MMP           | Gelatin                                                                                        | Pro-MMP-2                                                                                               | Fish tests mRNA [143]                                                                   |
| MM-28/epilysin           | Not determined                                                                                 | Casein                                                                                                  | Human tests mRNA [144]                                                                  |

and Sertoli cell TJ-barrier function, which are largely regulated by the synchronized activity between proteases, such as MMPs, and protease inhibitors, such as TIMPs [38, 47].

MMPs

About 25 MMPs are found in mammalian cells. Each has distinct but often overlapping substrate specificities and can cleave multiple substrates, which include other proteases, protease inhibitors, latent growth factors, growth factor-binding proteins, cell adhesion molecules, cell surface receptors, and virtually all structural ECM proteins [47, 48]. Most MMP genes are inducible, such as by cytokines [49]. Moreover, MMPs can also be regulated by their own substrates via a negative feedback mechanism. For instance, MMP-1 can be induced by intact type I collagen via dis-coidin domain-containing receptor-like tyrosine kinases but inhibited by its cleaved collagen fragments [50] which function as biologically-active peptides.

TIMPs

TIMPs (~20- to 29-kDa single-chained polypeptides) are major endogenous metalloprotease inhibitors in ECM. To date, four TIMPs (TIMP-1, 2, 3, and 4) have been identified. They inhibit MMPs reversibly in a 1:1 stoichiometric ratio by limiting the activation of latent MMPs and/or inhibiting the activities of activated MMPs [47]. Different TIMPs inhibit different MMPs [51].

MMPs AND TIMPs IN THE TESTIS

Among the 25 different MMPs known to date, 10 are found in the testis (Table 2). MMP-2 is the most extensively studied MMP in the testis. Both its pro-(72-kDa) and active (62-kDa) forms are detected in Sertoli cell cultures [52]. The activation of MMP-2 in the testis involves MT1-MMP and TIMP-2 [53], all of which are localized to the apical ES in the rat testis [53]. Furthermore, there is evidence that the expression and/or activation of MMP-2 and TIMP-2, but not MT1-MMP, can be induced by FSH in Sertoli cells in vitro [52, 53]. (MT1-MMP is a membrane-bound protease; when it forms a complex with TIMP-2, it acts as a receptor for pro-MMP-2 and is crucial for MMP2 activation.) In addition to Sertoli cells, peritubular myoid and Leydig cells also contribute to the pool of MMP-2, MT1-MMP, and TIMP-2 in the testis [52–54]. Germ cells also contribute to the level of MT1-MMP, but not MMP-2, in the testis [53]. Another gelatinase, MMP-9 (92 and 84 kDa for the pro and active forms, respectively), is also a putative Sertoli (but not myoid) cell product. Unlike MMP-2 and TIMP-2, MMP-9 is not stimulated by FSH [52]. TIMP 1, 2, 3, and 4 have also been identified in the testis [54–57]. For instance, TIMP-1 is a product of Sertoli, myoid, and germ (but not Leydig) cells and residual bodies. Like MMP-2 and TIMP-2, TIMP-1 expression can be induced by FSH in vivo and in vitro. Treatment of Sertoli cells with IL-1α, cAMP, and germ cell residual bodies can also induce TIMP-1 expression [56]. Because MMPs and TIMPs are known regulators of tissue restructuring, recent findings described here imply that MMPs and TIMPs are possibly involved in junction restructuring during spermatogenesis [53, 58–60] through a yet-to-be defined pathway(s).

ROLES OF ECM PROTEOLYSIS IN JUNCTION DYNAMICS

ECM remodeling and cell surface proteolysis induced by MMPs are involved in the regulation of i) cell-matrix and cell-cell adhesion; ii) the release, activation, or inactivation of autocrine or paracrine signaling molecules; and iii) the activation or inactivation of cell surface receptors (Fig. 3). The net result can affect junction dynamics [47, 48]. Figure 3 depicts the three mechanisms by which proteolysis of ECM proteins (Fig. 3, A and B) and cell surface adhesion molecules, such as cadherins (Fig. 3C), can affect junction dynamics in the testis. Indeed, recent studies have shown that MMP2, MT1-MMP, and TIMP-2 are colocalized to the same site at apical ES in the rat testis and structurally interact with the integrin/laminin (but not the cadherin/catenin or the nectin/afadin) complexes [61], suggesting that MMPs are crucial to integrin/laminin-based ES dynamics. It is of interest to note that plasmin activated by urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) following cleavage of plasminogen can in turn become an activator of pro-MMPs in vivo [62]. Plasminogen is synthesized by seminiferous tubules in rats [58] and uPA is also a stage-specific Sertoli cell product, being highest at stages VII–VIII [63]. Furthermore, an induction in uPA is associated with Sertoli cell TJ assembly in vitro [60]. Thus, uPA may take part in the regulation of germ cell movement and spermiation by activating MMPs via plasmin.

Furthermore, claudin-1, -2, -3, and -5 (all are TJ-integral membrane proteins) can facilitate the activation of pro-MMP-2 mediated by MT1-MMP in human embryonic kidney 293T cells. While the mechanism of this activation remains to be elucidated, it is likely that physical interactions between claudins and MT1-MMP promotes MMP-2 activation, thereby changing the vascular permeability [64]. Although claudin-1, -3, and -5 are found in the testis by Northern blots, their localization at the TJ sites in the testis has yet to be reported [3].

REGULATION OF ECM DYNAMICS BY CYTOKINES

ECM proteins, MMPs and TIMPs, are apparently regulated by cytokines [47, 49]. For instance, TGFβ1 has been shown to regulate the expression of collagen, MMPs, and TIMPs in human mesangial cells [65]. TNFα was also shown to regulate collagen and MMPs in rat cardiac fibroblasts and rat Sertoli cells cultured in vitro and also in transgenic mice with cardiac-specific overexpression of TNFα [38, 66, 67].

TNFα: ITS ROLE IN JUNCTION DYNAMICS

TNFα (17 kDa) is produced largely by activated monocytes and macrophages in the systemic circulation and plays a crucial role in inflammation, cell proliferation, antiviral responses, and junction dynamics [68, 69].

Expression, Production, and Function of TNFα in the Testis

Germ cells and testicular macrophages are the sources of TNFα in the testis. A recent study has reported that Sertoli cells also produce TNFα [38]. Rats receiving chronic administration of TNFα via intravenous infusion displayed massive germ cell loss from the seminiferous epithelium, in particular, spermatocytes and spermatids but not spermatogonia; testicular weight reduced significantly within 24 h, coupled with a plunge in plasma testosterone and a surge in LH and FSH levels [70]. It was suggested that the TNFα-induced germ cell loss might be either a direct effect on germ cells or mediated through dysfunctional Leydig and/or Sertoli cells [70]. The precise mechanism
that mediates these TNFα-induced effects in the testis is not known. For instance, it remains to be determined if the integrity of BTB and AJs are compromised [70, 71]. And if it is, can the damaged BTB barrier be reassembled? Once these questions are addressed, this can become a novel model to study BTB dynamics. Nonetheless, other studies have shown that TNFα may have a direct effect on germ cells by reducing the level of Fas ligand (note: Fas ligand is a ligand of the *Fas* antigen, which is a 35-kDa transmembrane receptor of the TNF receptor family) that modulates apoptosis [72, 73].

### TNFα and Junction Dynamics

There are several reports implicating TNFα plays a crucial role in junction dynamics in both epithelial and endothelial cells [69]. For instance, TNFα induces a breakdown of the blood-retinal-barrier in retinal vascular endothelia. It also affects the epithelial barrier function in human intestinal cell lines HT-29/B6 and HT29 cl.19A in vitro. Treatment of human endothelial cells with both TNFα and IFNγ induces redistribution of JAM, a TJ-integral membrane protein. The other two TJ-integral membrane proteins, occludin and claudin-11, have also been shown to be downregulated by TNFα in HT-29/B6 [74] and in mouse Sertoli cells [75], respectively. In addition, TNFα downregulates E-cadherin and β-catenin in celiac disease [76]. Furthermore, TNFα was shown to perturb the Sertoli cell TJ-barrier function in vitro [38].

### TNFα Regulates Sertoli Cell TJ Dynamics Via its Effects on the Homeostasis of Collagen α3(IV), MMP-9, and TIMP-1 in ECM

During the assembly of Sertoli cell TJ barrier in vitro, the presence of TNFα can perturb the TJ barrier dose dependently. This perturbing effect appears to be specific because the disrupted barrier can be resealed when TNFα is removed. More important, the disruption of the Sertoli cell TJ barrier induced by TNFα is associated with an induction in Sertoli cell collagen α3(IV), MMP-9, and TIMP-1, but not MMP-2, production. TNFα also promotes the activation of pro-MMP-9. Collectively, these results seemingly suggest that the activated MMP-9 induced by TNFα is being used to cleave the existing collagen network in the ECM, thereby perturbing the Sertoli cell TJ-permeability barrier (note: the presence of a collagen antibody in these Sertoli cell cultures can indeed perturb the TJ barrier, illustrating the significance of ECM integrity and the role of collagen on the TJ-barrier function). This in turn creates a negative feedback that causes TNFα to induce the production of collagen α3(IV) and TIMP-1 by Sertoli cells so as to replenish the collagen network in the disrupted TJ barrier and limit MMP-9 activity (Fig. 4) [38]. This speculation is not unprecedented. For instance, fragments of type I collagen are known to induce rapid disassembly of FAC in smooth muscle cells, which is mediated via the integrin-dependent cleavage of FAK, paxillin, and talin [15, 38]. Moreover, these biologically active fragments from collagen can have a negative feedback effect that inhibits the production of collagenase and degradation of collagen [50]. As such, an induction of collagen α3(IV) and TIMP-1 when TNFα perturbs the Sertoli cell TJ barrier may be a negative feedback mediated by the biologically active fragments, which are the cleavage products of the TNFα-induced MMP-9 on collagen α3(IV). Equally important, TNFα apparently exerts its effects on the ECM homeostasis via the β1-integrin/ILK/

GSK-3β/JNK signaling pathway [38], the downstream of such activation perhaps also reduces the production of occludin by Sertoli cells, thereby perturbing the TJ-barrier function in vitro (see Fig. 4) [38]. As such, TNFα can affect Sertoli cell TJ dynamics either by inducing the production of MMP and TIMP, reducing the production of occludin, or both [38] (see Fig. 4), suggesting it can mediate its effects on TJ dynamics in the seminiferous epithelium via either one of the three separate yet interacting pathways. The current model of action of TNFα on Sertoli cell TJ dynamics shown in Figure 4 also illustrates several potential candidates that can be targeted for male contraceptive development. For instance, if the downstream signaling event of the TNFα is blocked, such as the function of GSK-3β, this will induce a temporary BTB shutdown, denying the access of preleptotene and leptotene spermatocytes to traverse the BTB, disrupting spermatogenesis. The net result is transient infertility. It is obvious that these results must be vigorously validated in future studies as follows. First, can synthetic peptides based on the NC1 domains of collagen α3(IV) affect the production of MMP-9 (or activation of pro-MMP-9 to MMP-9) and/or TIMP-1 by Sertoli cells? Second, can the synthetic peptide(s) that has (have) a biological effect on Sertoli cell MMP-9 and/or TIMP-1 production indeed regulate the TJ-barrier function? Third, can a blockade of the GSK or JNK signaling pathway by a specific inhibitor abolish the effects of TNFα on the Sertoli and/or germ cell function? Once these questions are answered, more practical research can be conducted, such as synthesizing specific inhibitors to block ILK or GSK in the TNFα-integrin-JNK signaling pathway (see Fig. 4).

### INTEGRINS: TRANSMEMBRANE RECEPTORS OF THE ECM

Integrins are members of a large family of cell-surface receptor glycoproteins, which together with superfamilies of cadherins, immunoglobulin cell adhesion molecules (IgCAM), and selectins, constitute four major categories of cell adhesion receptors for mediating cell adhesions and signaling. Integrins integrate ECM proteins or counterreceptors on neighboring cells with the intracellular cytoskeleton networks, which in turn regulates cell-matrix and cell-cell interactions at the corresponding sites, known as FAs and AJs [11, 77].

Integrins are heterodimers composed of noncovalently linked α and β subunits. In mammals, there are 18 α and 8 β subunits that can heterodimerize in various combinations to form at least 24 integrin receptors [11].

#### Expression and Localization of Integrins in the Testis

In the testis, α6β1 integrin is the most extensively studied integrin receptor. It is colocalized with the actin filament bundles in the rat testis at the sites of basal and apical ES [3, 5]. There is a stage-dependent β1-integrin expression at the basal ES, with lesser immunoreactive β1-integrin detected in stages VII–VIII at the time of spermiation [78, 79]. Other than α6β1 integrin, several integrin α subunits are found in the testis. For instance, α3 and α5 integrin subunits are localized to the same sites as of α6β1 integrin in human testes, whereas, α1, -2, and -4 subunits have been detected in endothelial cells, leukocytes, and basement membranes [80]. In rat Sertoli cell cultures, α3 and α6 integrin subunits, but not the α5, have been detected by [81]. For the β subunit, a recent study has demonstrated the expression of the β3 integrin subunit in pig Leydig cells [82].
ECM AND JUNCTION DYNAMICS IN THE TESTIS

TABLE 3. Effects of integrin subunit deletion on development in null mice.*

| Integrin subunit | Viability                     | Phenotype associated with mutation of the integrin genes                                                                                   | Reference     |
|------------------|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| α1               | Viable                       | Defects in the feedback regulation of collagen synthesis, and in matrix metalloprotease expression, tumor-related angiogenesis, and lymphocyte function | [145–147]     |
| α2               | Viable and fertile           | Partial defects in platelet adhesion to fibrillar, soluble collagen type I                                                                     | [148]         |
| α3               | Died soon after birth        | Kidney and lung defects                                                                                                                     | [149, 150]    |
| α4               | Died by Day 11–14 postcoitus | Placental and heart defects                                                                                                                 | [151]         |
| α5               | Died by Day 10–11 postcoitus | Embryonic mesodermal defects                                                                                                                | [118]         |
| α6               | Died soon after birth        | Severe skin blistering                                                                                                                      | [152]         |
| β1               | Died by Day 5.5 postcoitus   | Peri-implantation lethality                                                                                                                 | [153, 154]    |
| β3               | Died soon after birth        | Placental defect                                                                                                                            | [155]         |

*Only results on integrin subunits that are found in the testis are shown.

### Integrin Ligand-Binding Function

Integrins act as both signaling acceptors and donors. Ligand binding to integrins induces signal transduction into cells, signals inside cells can also regulate extracellular integrin activities. The known extracellular ligands for integrins include ECM proteins, such as collagen, laminin, fibronectin, vitronectin, and fibrinogen. Some integrin receptors also participate in the regulation of extracellular ligand synthesis. For instance, α1β1 and α2β1 integrins have been shown to regulate collagen synthesis, and they can also affect the expression of collagenases and matrix metalloproteases [43]. A recent study has shown that laminin γ3 is largely restricted to germ cells, in particular elongating/elongate spermatids, in the rat seminiferous epithelium and is the putative binding partner of the α6β1 integrin [61]. It is likely that this α6β1 integrin/laminin γ3 protein complex confers cell adhesive function between Sertoli and developing spermatids in the epithelium.

### Signal Transduction Via the Cytoplasmic Tail of Integrins

Integrins not only function as transmembrane linkers, they also act as signaling transducers activating multiple signaling pathways. They mediate signals through cell membranes bidirectionally, including outside-in and inside-out signaling. For outside-in signaling, ligands outside of cells bind to integrins, inducing signal transduction into cells, causing cytoskeleton rearrangement and gene expression. For inside-out signaling, signals within cells transduce via integrins, which in turn induce conformational changes and clustering of integrin, altering the ligand-binding affinity [11, 83, 84]. The cytoplasmic domains of both α and β subunits contribute to the bidirectional signaling process. An array of actin-binding, signaling, and adaptor proteins can interact with these cytoplasmic domains to induce integrin-mediated signaling (Fig. 2) [11, 85]. Very few integrin binding proteins have been found in the testis to date. Those that are known to be present in the testis include actin-binding proteins (e.g., talin, α-actinin and F-actin), signaling molecules (e.g., FAK and ILK) and adaptors (e.g., paxillin) [78, 86, 87]. Figure 2 depicts the most current molecular architecture of the integrin/laminin complex in the testis at the ES site.

### Integrins and Junction Dynamics

Integrin receptors act as the bridge that links extracellular ligands to the intracellular cytoskeleton network, activating multiple signaling pathways for the control of cell matrix and cell-cell adhesion function, cell migration, gene expression, cell cycle progression, and cell survival [11, 77, 83, 84].

#### Actin Reorganization and Adhesion Complex Remodeling Contribute to Cell Migration

Integrins are the major transmembrane receptors at the sites of cell adhesion to ECM. ECM in turn is linked to the actin cytoskeleton via peripheral proteins. These specialized attachment and signaling complexes are known as focal adhesions (FAs) or focal contacts [77, 83, 88]. Over 50 proteins have been identified as putative FA components. These include cytoskeleton proteins (e.g., talin, α-actinin, vinculin, and paxillin), tyrosine kinases (e.g., FAK, PI 3-kinase), serine/threonine kinases (e.g., ILK), tyrosine phosphatases (e.g., SHP-2), and modulators of GTPases (e.g., Graf and ASAP1) [88]. Integrins are linked to the underlying actin network via their interactions with actin-binding proteins such as talin, α-actinin, and vinculin [89]. Additionally, integrin-mediated activation of Rho GTPases also affects the actin cytoskeleton [11, 77, 89]. The FAC remodeling is also regulated by integrin-mediated activation of the FAK signaling pathway [11, 77, 89]. The intricate relationship between actin dynamics and FAC remodeling in turn contributes to cell movement.

#### Activation of MAP Kinase, Lipase Kinases, and Other Proteins to Regulate Gene Expression, Cell Cycle, and Cell Survival

Integrin-mediated activation of the Ras family GTPase-extracellular signal regulated kinase (ERK) pathway is the key regulator of gene expression and cell cycle progression [83]. Integrins also play an important role in cell survival, which is mediated by the PI 3-kinase-Akt kinase pathway [83].

#### Role of Integrins on Junction Dynamics: Regulation of AJ Dynamics at the Site of ES

Although the roles of integrins in mediating cell-matrix adhesion have been extensively investigated, how integrins affect junction dynamics remains unclear. β1-integrin is the first integrin subunit found at the keratinocyte cell-cell contact site in the 1990’s [90]. Subsequent studies have shown that the α6β1 integrin is the putative cell adhesion receptor at the ES site that mediates Sertoli cell-elongating/elongate spermatid adhesion [78, 79]. Recent studies have shown that β1-integrin indeed is involved in ES dynamics, using the FAK signaling pathway [91]. Besides, RhoB GTPase is also involved in AJ dynamics in the testis via the integrin/

Activation of FAK Can Mediate Cell Adhesion and Migration

FAK has six putative phosphorylation sites at Tyr-397, -407, -576, -577, -861, and -925 [98], yet Tyr³⁹⁷ is a critical and apparently the only autophosphorylation site. It has been suggested that the interaction of FAK with β1-integrin can induce conformational changes in FAK, exposing the Tyr³⁹⁷ site [98, 101]. The autophosphorylation at Tyr³⁹⁷ creates a high affinity-binding site for numerous molecules, including Src family kinases [102], effectors, such as the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol (PI)-3-kinase [103], and phospholipase C (PLC)-γ [104], and adaptors, such as growth-factor-receptor-bound protein (Grb)7 [105] and Nck-2 [106]. It is unlikely that these proteins can have access to the Tyr³⁹⁷ site simultaneously, suggesting cell-type-specific FAK-associated complexes are present in FAs [88]. FAK also acts as a scaffolding protein and a signal inducer in FAs, regulating cell adhesion and migration through its interaction with different binding partners [77, 89, 97–99]. The FAK-mediated effects on cell movement in epithelia are summarized in Table 4.

The Phosphorylation of FAK at TYR⁹²⁵ is Crucial to Cell Growth and Apoptosis

Except for the Tyr³⁹⁷ autophosphorylated site, the remaining tyrosine phosphorylation sites in FAK are targets of the Src family protein kinases. Phosphorylation of FAK at Tyr⁵⁷⁶ and Tyr⁵⁷⁷ in the kinase domain maximizes FAK catalytic activity [107]. Whereas the phosphorylation at Tyr⁹²⁵ generates a binding site for the adaptor protein Grb2, which links FAK to Sos, the guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) of Ras, to induce the downstream ERK/JNK MAPK signaling events [108], contributing to the FAK-mediated cell growth and cell survival [11, 77, 97, 98].

Expression and Localization of FAK in the Testis

FAK was first identified in the early 1990’s and was shown to be abundantly expressed in adult rat testes during development [109]. Studies by RNase protection assay have revealed that FAK is also expressed in a variety of adult tissues, but the expression in nongonadal organs is at least 20- to 100-fold less than that of the testis [110]. FAK was also shown to be highly expressed in the brain and in osteoclasts [98]. FAK is largely restricted to the basal compartment in the seminiferous epithelium between Sertoli and germ cells in all stages of the cycle, with very weak signal being detected at the apical compartment [78, 91]. Yet intensive p-FAK-Tyr³⁹⁷ and -Tyr⁵⁷⁶ was shown to associate with apical ES at stages VII through early VIII of the epithelial cycle [91].

Potential Roles of FAK in Junction Dynamics: its Phosphorylation is Crucial to ES Dynamics

FAK is a focal adhesion complex (FAC)-associated protein localized at the cell-matrix contact sites in many epithelia. FAK is implicated in the development and/or maintenance of the myotendinous junction (MTJ) via integrin-mediated signaling. MTJ is characterized by deep membrane invaginations where tendon microfibrils attach to the salcolemma, side-by-side with FA components [111]. ES is a putative cell-cell actin-based AJ-type unique to the testis, yet many proteins recently found at the ES site are components of FAs. These include β1-integrin, vinculin, c-Src, Csk, ILK, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (Ptd-

| Binding partner of FAK | $M_{r}$ (kDa) | Binding site | Detection | Functional changes as a result of interactions between FAK and its binding partner(s) | Cellular/testicular localization | References |
|------------------------|--------------|--------------|-----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|---------------|
| N-terminal region      |              |              |           |                                                                                                                             |                                    |               |
| $\beta 1$-Integrin     | 140          | Cytoplasmic tail | COIP, PEP | Clustering of integrins induces FAK targeting to FA, enhancing tyrosine phosphorylation of FAK and its intrinsic kinase activity | At the site of ES                  | [77–79, 91, 108] |
| PDGFR/EGFR             | 170–180/180  | ND            | COIP      | In FAK$^{-/-}$ fibroblasts, PDGF and EGF stimulated cell migration is distorted, which indicates FAK is a crucial linker for the growth-factor-receptor and integrin signaling pathways | MC/SC, LC, MC                      | [156–158]      |
| Tyr$^{397}$ autophosphorylation site |              |              |           |                                                                                                                             |                                    |               |
| Src family NRPTKs      | 59–62        | SH2 domain    | COIP      | Overexpression of FAK and its association with Src and Fyn stimulate cell migration                                              | At the site of ES                  | [159–161]      |
| p85 subunit of PI3-kinase | 80         | SH2 domain    | GST       | Combination inhibition of PI3-kinase and Src in CHO$\alpha$5 cells decreases phosphorylation of FAK                                 | SC, GC                              | [103, 162]     |
| PLC-$\gamma$1          | 148          | SH2 domain    | COIP, GST, FW | 1. Overexpression of FAK and PLC-$\gamma$1 in COS-7 cells induces PLC-$\gamma$1 enzymatic activity via the phosphorylation of FAK at Tyr$^{397}$<br>2. In PLC-$\gamma$1$^{-/-}$ fibroblasts, cells assume more round morphology, bearing phenotype like FAK$^{-/-}$cells | At the site of ES                  | [104, 113]     |
| PTEN                   | 55           | ND            | TM        | FAK phosphorylated at Tyr$^{397}$ creates a binding site for PTEN, which in turn dephosphorylates the tyrosine-phosphorylated FAK | Testis                             | [163, 164]     |
| Proline-rich region I (PRI) at the C-terminal region |              |              |           |                                                                                                                             |                                    |               |
| p130Cas (also binds to the Proline-rich region II at C-terminal) | 130        | SH3 domain    | COIP, GST, FW | 1. The binding and phosphorylation of p130Cas is involved in FAK-mediated cell migration<br>2. In p130Cas$^{-/-}$ fibroblasts, the actin stress fibers are disorganized | SC, SG                              | [165–167]      |
| Proline-rich region II (PRII) at the C-terminal region |              |              |           |                                                                                                                             |                                    |               |
| Graf                   | 95           | SH3 domain    | EC        | Graf interacts with FAK and acts as a cross-talk between FAK and the small GTPase Rho to regulate actin cytoskeleton | TE                                  | [168]          |
| PSGAP                  | 75–90        | ND            | COIP      | Overexpression of PSGAP in fibroblasts induces actin cytoskeleton reorganization in Rho GTPase-dependent manner | TE                                  | [169]          |
| Tyr$^{925}$ phosphorylation site at C-terminal region |              |              |           |                                                                                                                             |                                    |               |
| Grb2                   | 25           | SH2 domain    | COIP, GST | Grb2 interacts with FAK, which in turn activates integrin-mediated ERK activation | TE                                  | [108]          |
| FAT domain at C-terminal region |              |              |           |                                                                                                                             |                                    |               |
| Paxillin               | 68           | LD2 motif     | COIP, GST | In paxillin-null embryonic stem (ES) cells, tyrosine phosphorylation of FAK is reduced and cell spreading is impaired | TE, SC, GC                          | [91, 170, 171] |

| Binding partner of FAK | $M_{r}$ (kDa) | Binding site | Detection | Functional changes as a result of interactions between FAK and its binding partner(s) | Cellular/testicular localization | References |
|------------------------|--------------|--------------|-----------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|---------------|
| talin                  | 270          | ND           | COIP, BA  | Talin mediates FAK activation                                                                                              | FA in the testis                   | [87, 172]      |
| Stat-1                 | 84/91        | ND           | COIP, BA  | FAK activates STAT signaling pathway, which in turn diminishes cell-matrix adhesion and increases cell migration               | SC                                 | [173, 174]     |
| Other interacting proteins |
| Ponsin (SH3P 12 and CAP) | 93           | SH3 domain   | COIP, GST | Overexpression of CAP in fibroblasts induces stress fiber and FA formation, which is correlated with the decline in FAK tyrosine phosphorylation upon integrin-mediated adhesion | TE                                 | [175]          |
| Gelsolin               | 93           | ND           | COIP      | Gelsolin recruits FA components (including FAK) to the plasma membrane in a Ptd-Ins(4, 5) P-dependent manner and modulates their phosphorylation in cooperation with PTP-PEST in osteoclasts | At the site of ES                   | [113, 176]     |
| α-Actinin              | 105          | ND           | COIP      | FAK phosphorylates α-actinin at its actin-binding domain, which inhibits the binding of α-actinin to actin and affects the cytoskeleton in platelets | Cell-cell AJs and at the site of ES | [177]          |
| LM<sub>r</sub>-PTP      | 18           | ND           | COIP      | 1. Overexpression of LM<sub>r</sub>-PTP in fibroblasts diminishes FAK phosphorylation, which in turn induces cell migration<br>2. In LM<sub>r</sub>-PTP<sup>-/-</sup> fibroblasts, an increase in FAK phosphorylation induces a loss of cell migration | SC, GC                               | [178, 179]     |

* Only binding partners that are found in the testis are shown. PDGFR, Platelet-derived growth factor receptor; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; PI3, kinase, phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase; PLC-γ1, phospholipase C-γ1; Grb7, growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 7; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog on chromosome 10; Cas, Crk-associated substrate; Graf, GTPase-activating protein (GAP) for Rho associated with FAK; PSGAP, PH and SH3 domain containing RhoGAP; ASAP1-ADP ribosylation factor (ARF), GAP containing SH3, ANK repeats, the PH domain; Grb2, growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2; Stat-1, signal transducer and activator of transcription-1; CAP-c, Cbl associated protein; LM<sub>r</sub>, PTP-low M<sub>r</sub> protein, tyrosine phosphatase; ND, not determined; COIP, coimmunoprecipitation; PEP, synthetic peptide studies; GST, glutathione S-transferase pull-down assay; FW, far Western blot analysis; MS, mutation strategy; TM, trapping mutant; EC, expression cloning; 2HYB, yeast two-hybrid screen; BA, in vitro binding assay; ES, ectoplasmic specialization; MC, myoid cells; SC, Sertoli cells; LC, Leydig cells; GC, germ cells; SG, Sertoli-germ cell cocultures; TE, testis extracts; FA, focal adhesion.

Ins(4, 5) P<sub>2</sub>, PLCγ, Fyn, and Keap1 in addition to FAK [78, 86, 112–114]. These findings suggest that ES shares some common features of the cell-matrix anchoring junction regarding its biochemical composition and possibly regulation.

In the testis, intensive phospho-Tyr staining was detected at the ES site [78, 86], indicating Tyr phosphorylation of ES proteins are crucial to junction restructuring events at spermiation. Indeed, pFAK was concentrated at the site of apical ES and mostly at stages VII through early stage VIII (but not at late stage VIII, when spermiation occurs) [91]. Furthermore, pFAK is a potential linker for β1-integrin to recruit proteins to the site of apical ES during its remodeling [91]. A recent study has suggested that Rho GTPases may be the downstream signal of FAK for mediating cell adhesion and migration [115]. Remaining to be investigated are the interactions of FAK and Rho in the regulation of ES dynamics.

**FAK Null Mice**

In FAK<sup>-/-</sup> mice, virtually all embryos died ~Day 8.5 postcoitus, similar to fibronectin<sup>-/-</sup> or α5-integrin<sup>-/-</sup> null

**VINCLULIN**

Vinculin is a ubiquitous actin-binding protein found in cell-cell and cell-matrix anchoring junctions, involved in junction assembly, stabilization, and regulation [3, 119]. Vinculin and β1-integrin do not interact with each other directly but through talin, α-actinin, or paxillin that act as a bridging protein. Furthermore, vinculin is also a putative substrate of protein kinases [120]. As such, β1-integrin-mediated cytoskeleton regulation may use vinculin to exert its effects on AJs and FAs [77, 121].

**Structure of Vinculin and its Associated Proteins**

Structurally, vinculin is characterized by a 90-kDa globular head, with a long rodlike 30-kDa tail, connected through a proline-rich neck region. Vinculin is a putative actin-binding protein, yet its actin binding ability is dependent on the conformational change from a closed (inactive)

to an open (active) state [88, 119]. In the inactive state, the intramolecular interactions between the head and tail of vinculin mask the binding sites for i) α-actinin and talin in the head region, ii) VASP (vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein, a 45–50 kDa protein and a substrate of cAMP- and cGMP-dependent protein kinases) in the proline-rich neck, and iii) F-actin in the tail, while the binding of paxillin to its tail is apparently unaffected. This inhibitory interaction can be disrupted by the binding of PtdIns(4,5)P₂ to the tail of vinculin [88, 122].

### Expression and Localization of Vinculin in the Testis

Vinculin colocalizes with actin at the site of ES [78, 91, 123]. Besides ES, vinculin is also found in the tubulobulbar complexes and in myoid and small muscle cells of the blood vessels in the interstitium [78, 123]. While the precise role of vinculin in ES dynamics is not entirely clear, recent studies have shown that vinculin colocalizes with p-FAK to the same site in the ES in the rat testis [91]. Also, an induction of vinculin was detected, coinciding with the assembly of Sertoli-germ cell AJs in vitro [91].

### Potential Roles of Vinculin in Junction Dynamics

Vinculin is a crucial regulator of the cadherin/catenin complex either by interacting or even substituting α-catenin at AJs. α-Catenin per se is an adaptor linking the cadherin/catenin complex to the actin cytoskeleton [124]. α-Catenin has three regional sequence homologies with vinculin, and both proteins can bind to α-actinin and actin. Unlike vinculin, α-catenin is restricted to cell-cell AJs but not cell-matrix FAs [124]. Yet vinculin is localized largely to the E-cadherin-catenin complex, but not the N-cadherin-catenin complex at the cell-cell AJ site [124]. Vinculin binds to the SH3 domains of ponsin [125] and vinexin [126] via its proline-rich region. The vinculin-ponsin/vinexin complex has been found in both AJs and FAs. Ponsin is an 1-afadin-binding protein that constitutes the nectin-afadin-ponsin (NAP) cell-cell adhesion complex, which is colocalized with the cadherin-catenin complex in selected epithelia, including the ES [125, 127]. Because vinculin and 1-afadin binds to ponsin in a competitive manner, ponsin can only form a binary complex with either vinculin or 1-afadin but not a vinculin-ponsin-afadin tertiary complex [125]. As such, ponsin is not responsible for linking the cadherin-catenin-vinculin complex to the NAP complex. Instead, α-catenin in the cadherin-catenin protein complex and 1-afadin in the NAP complex are the molecules that link these two adhesion protein complexes together in epithelia [127, 128]. Because of the affinity of vinculin to both α-catenin and ponsin, it is logical to speculate that vinculin is crucial to the cell adhesion function of the cadherin/catenin and the NAP protein complexes; however, this exciting possibility remains to be confirmed in the ES.

### Vinculin Null Mice

Vinculin⁻/⁻ embryos died at ~Day 10 postcoitus, displaying heart and brain defects [129]. Fibroblasts isolated from vinculin⁻/⁻ embryos were devoid of cell adhesion function with higher cell migration rate. Furthermore, vinculin null cells have enriched FAK activity [129], raising a controversy regarding a correlation between enhanced FAK activity and a decline in cell migration activity. As such, the significance of FAK in vinculin⁻/⁻ cells remains to be investigated. Overexpression of vinculin in Balb/c 3T3 cells

resulted in an increase in the number and the size of FAs, which also associated with reduced cell motility [130]. Also, vinculin suppression leads to increased cell migration with fewer and smaller FAs [131].

## CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES

In this review, we have summarized recent advances regarding the roles of ECM-associated proteins in regulating junction dynamics in the testis. The most exciting findings are that ECM proteins can indeed affect Sertoli cell TJ dynamics via the interactions between cytokines (e.g., TNF-α), proteases (e.g., MMPs), protease inhibitors (e.g., TIMPs), and ECM component proteins, such as collagen [38]. These results also suggest that the basement membrane in the testis serves as a reservoir of uniquely important cytokines to TJ dynamics. Equally important is the finding that the testis consists of and uses some of the same components usually restricted to the FAC site, an actin-based cell-matrix anchoring junction type, in other epithelia, to regulate ES dynamics [78, 91], which is an actin-based AJ type in the testis. While the morphology of ES has been characterized since the late 1970's [132], it is only recently that the biochemical nature of the ES has begun to unfold, in particular its regulation and molecular architecture. The precise cascade of events and the underlying regulatory mechanisms that regulate ES dynamics in the testis remain unknown. For instance, what are the downstream effectors of the activated FAK at the ES that contribute to the changes in ES dynamics during spermatogenesis? If phosphorylation of FAK occurs at or near the site of apical ES, what are positive and negative regulators that determine its phosphorylation status? If the α6β1 integrin at the site of apical ES confers to cell adhesion function, what is the corresponding binding ligand besides the laminin γ3 chain? Once these questions are answered, these results will provide new insights not only into the regulation of ES dynamics but also into the roles of ECM proteins in junction dynamics. These studies will also lead to the discovery of key molecule(s) and signaling pathway(s) that can regulate junction dynamics in vivo, which can, in turn, be used for novel male contraceptive development. For instance, if the pathways that regulate Sertoli cell TJ dynamics are known, the BTB can be manipulated to deny access of preleptotene and leptotene spermatocytes to traverse the BTB at late stage VIII and early stage IX of the epithelial cycle [1], leading to aspermatogenesis.

## REFERENCES

1. Russell LD. Movement of spermatocytes from the basal to the adluminal compartment of the rat testis. Am J Anat 1977; 148:313–328.
2. de Kretser DM, Kerr JB. The cytology of the testis. In: Knobil E, Neill J (eds.), The Physiology of Reproduction, vol. I. New York: Raven Press; 1988:837–932.
3. Cheng CY, Mruk D. Cell junction dynamics in the testis: Sertoli-germ cell interactions and male contraceptive development. Physiol Rev 2002; 82:825–874.
4. Toyama Y, Maekawa M, Yuasa S. Ectoplasmic specializations in the Sertoli cell: new vistas based on genetic defects and testicular toxicology. Anat Sci Int 2003; 78:1–16.
5. Vogl AW, Pfeiffer DC, Mulholland D, Kimel G, Gutman J. Unique and multifunctional adhesion junctions in the testis: ectoplasmic specializations. Arch Histol Cytol 2000; 63:1–15.
6. Russell LD, Peterson RN. Sertoli cell junctions: morphological and functional correlates. Int Rev Cytol 1985; 94:177–211.
7. Dym M. Basement membrane regulation of Sertoli cells. Endocr Rev 1994; 15:102–115.
8. Alberts B, Bray D, Lewis J, Raff M, Roberts K, Watson JD. Cell junctions, cell adhesion, and the extracellular matrix. In: Molecular

Biology of the Cell. New York: Garland Publishing Inc; 2002:949–1009.

9. Salomon F, Saresmalani P, Jakob M, Hedinger CE. Immune complex orchitis in infertile men. Immunoelectron microscopy of abnormal basement membrane structures. Lab Invest 1982; 47:555–567.

10. Lehmann D, Temminck B, Da Rugna D, Leibundgut B, Sulmoni A, Muller HJ. Role of immunological factors in male infertility: immunohistochemical and serological evidence. Lab Invest 1987; 57:21–28.

11. Juliano RL. Signal transduction by cell adhesion receptors and the cytoskeleton: functions of integrins, cadherins, selectins, and immunoglobulin-superfamily members. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 2002; 42:283–323.

12. Gumbiner BM. Cell adhesion: the molecular basis of tissue architecture and morphogenesis. Cell 1996; 84:345–357.

13. Diaz ES, Pellizzari E, Meroni S, Cigorraga S, Lustig L, Denduchis B. Effect of extracellular matrix proteins on in vitro testosterone production by rat Leydig cells. Mol Reprod Dev 2002; 61:493–503.

14. Vernon RB, Lane TF, Angello JC, Sage H. Adhesion, shape, proliferation, and gene expression of mouse Leydig cells are influenced by extracellular matrix in vitro. Biol Reprod 1991; 44:157–170.

15. Dym M, Lamsam-Casalotti S, Jia M-C, Kleinman HK, Papadopoulos V. Basement membrane increases G-protein levels and follicle-stimulating hormone responsiveness of Sertoli cell adenyl cyclase activity. Endocrinology 1991; 128:1167–1176.

16. Grima J, Wong CCS, Zhu LJ, Zong SD, Cheng CY. Testin secreted by Sertoli cells is associated with the cell surface, and its expressions correlates with the Sertoli-germ cell junctions but not the inter-Sertoli tight junction. J Biol Chem 1998; 273:21040–21053.

17. Ravindranath N, Papadopoulos V, Brooker G, Dym M. Rat Sertoli cell calcium response to basement membrane and follicle-stimulating hormone. Biol Reprod 1996; 54:130–137.

18. Taranta A, Teti A, Stefanini M, D’Agostino A. Immediate cell signal induced by laminin in rat Sertoli cells. Matrix Biol 2000; 19:11–18.

19. Janecki A, Jakubowiak A, Steinberger A. Effects of cAMP and phorbol ester on transepithelial electrical resistance of Sertoli cell monolayer in two-compartment culture. Mol Cell Endocrinol 1991; 82:61–69.

20. Lustig L, Denduchis B, González NN, Puig RP. Experimental orchitis induced in rats by passive transfer of an antiserum to seminiferous tubule basement membrane. Arch Androl 1978; 1:333–343.

21. Denduchis B, Satz ML, Sztein MB, Puig RP, Doncel G, Lustig L. Multifocal damage of the testis induced in rats by passive transfer of antibodies prepared against noncollagenous fraction of basement membrane. J Reprod Immunol 1985; 7:59–75.

22. Tung PS, Fritz IB. Interactions of Sertoli cells with laminin are essential to maintain integrity of the cytoskeleton and barrier functions of cells in culture in the two-chambered. J Cell Physiol 1993; 156:1–11.

23. Lustig L, Denduchis B, Ponzio R, Lauzon M, Pelletier RM. Passive immunization with anti-laminin immunoglobulin G modifies the integrity of the seminiferous epithelium and induces arrest of spermatogenesis in the guinea pig. Biol Reprod 2000; 62:1505–1514.

24. Salomon F, Hedinger CE. Abnormal basement membrane structures of seminiferous tubules in infertile men. Lab Invest 1982; 47:543–554.

25. Amat P, Paniagua R, Montero J. Seminiferous tubule degeneration in human cryptorchid tests. J Androl 1985; 6:1–9.

26. Jarow JP, Budin RE, Dym M, Zirkin BR, Noren S, Marshall FF. Quantitative pathologic changes in the human testis after vasectomy. A controlled study. N Engl J Med 1985; 313:1252–1256.

27. Santoro G, Romeo C, Impellizzeri P, Gentile C, Anastasi G, Santoro A. Ultrastructural and immunohistochemical study of basal lamina of the testis in adolescent varicocele. Fertil Steril 2000; 73:699–705.

28. Prockop DJ, Kivirikko KI. Collagens: molecular biology, diseases, and potentials for therapy. Annu Rev Biochem 1995; 64:403–434.

29. Timpl R, Brown JC. Supramolecular assembly of basement membranes. Bioessays 1996; 18:123–132.

30. Timpl R. Macromolecular organization of basement membranes. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1996; 8:618–624.

31. Hudson BG, Reeders ST, Tryggvason K. Type IV collagen: structure, gene organization, and role in human diseases. Molecular basis of Goodpasture and Alport syndromes and diffuse leiomyomatosis. J Biol Chem 1993; 268:26033–26036.

32. Ortega N, Werb Z. New functional roles for noncollagenous domains of basement membrane collagens. J Cell Sci 2002; 115:4201–4214.

33. Davis CM, Papadopoulos V, Sommers CL, Kleinman HK, Dym M. Differential expression of extracellular matrix components in rat Sertoli cells. Biol Reprod 1990; 43:860–869.

34. Enders GC, Kahsai TZ, Lian G, Funabiki K, Killen PD, Hudson BG. Developmental changes in seminiferous tubule extracellular matrix components of the mouse testis: α3 (IV) collagen chain expressed at the initiation of spermatogenesis. Biol Reprod 1995; 53:1489–1499.

35. Fröjdman K, Pelliniemi LJ, Virtanen I. Differential distribution of type IV collagen chains in the developing rat testis and ovary. Differentiation 1998; 63:125–130.

36. Miner JH, Sanes RJ. Molecular and functional defects in kidneys of mice lacking collagen α3(IV): implications for Alport Syndrome. J Cell Biol 1996; 135:1403–1413.

37. Kahsai TZ, Enders GC, Gunwar S, Brunmark C, Wieslander J, Kalluri R, Zhou J, Noelken ME, Hudson BG. Seminiferous tubule basement membrane. Composition and organization of type IV collagen chains, and the linkage of α3(IV) and α5(IV) chains. J Biol Chem 1997; 272: 17023–17032.

38. Siu MKY, Lee WM, Cheng CY. The interplay of collagen IV, tumor necrosis factor-α, gelatinase B (matrix metalloproteinase-9) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteases-1 in the basal lamina regulates Sertoli cell tight junction dynamics in the rat testis. Endocrinology 2003; 144: 371–387.

39. Richardson LL, Kleinman HK, Dym M. Basement membrane gene expression by Sertoli and peritubular myoid cells in vitro in the rat. Biol Reprod 1995; 52:320–330.

40. Skinner MK, Tung PS, Fritz IB. Cooperativity between Sertoli cells and testicular peritubular cells in the production and deposition of extracellular matrix components. J Cell Biol 1985; 100:1941–1947.

41. Streuli C. Extracellular matrix remodelling and cellular differentiation. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1999; 11:634–640.

42. Heino J. The collagen receptor integrins have distinct ligand recognition and signaling functions. Matrix Biol 2000; 19:319–323.

43. Plow EF, Haas TA, Zhang L, Loftus J, Smith JW. Ligand binding to integrins. J Biol Chem 2000; 275:21785–21788.

44. Hynes RO. Cell adhesion: old and new questions. Trends Cell Biol 1999; 9:M33–M37.

45. Jaeger MMM, Kalinec G, Dodane V, Kachar B. A collagen substrate enhances the sealing capacity of tight junctions of A6 cell monolayers. J Membrane Biol 1997; 159:263–270.

46. Savettieri G, Di Liegro I, Catania C, Licata L, Pitarresi GL, D’Agostino S, Schiera G, De Caro V, Giandalia G, Giannola LI, Cestelli A. Neurons and ECM regulate occludin localization in brain endothelial cells. Neuroreport 2000; 11:1081–1084.

47. Sternlicht MD, Werb Z. How matrix metalloproteinases regulate cell behavior? Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 2001; 17:463–516.

48. McCawley LJ, Matrisian LM. Matrix metalloproteinases: they’re not just for matrix anymore! Curr Opin Cell Biol 2001; 13:534–540.

49. Fini ME, Cook JR, Mohan R, Brinckerhoff CE. Regulation of matrix metalloproteinase gene expression. In: Parks WC, Mecham RP (eds.), Matrix Metalloproteinases. New York: Academic Press; 1998:299–356.

50. Vogel W, Gish GD, Alves F, Pawson T. The discoidin domain receptor tyrosine kinases are activated by collagen. Mol Cell 1997; 1:13–23.

51. Woessner JF, Nagase H. Matrix Metalloproteinases and TIMPs. New York: Oxford University Press; 2000.

52. Hoeben E, Van Aelst I, Swinnen JV, Opdenakker G, Verhoeven G. Gelatinase A secretion and its control in peritubular and Sertoli cell cultures: effects of hormones, second messengers and inducers of cytokine production. Mol Cell Endocrinol 1996; 118:37–46.

53. Longin J, Guillaumot P, Chauvin MA, Morera AM, Le Magueresse-Battistoni B. MT1-MMP in rat testicular development and the control of Sertoli cell proMMP-2 activation. J Cell Sci 2001; 114:2125–2134.

54. Grima J, Calcagno K, Cheng CY. Purification, cDNA cloning, and developmental changes in the steady-state mRNA level of rat testicular tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 (TIMP-2). J Androl 1996; 17:263–275.

55. Robinson LL, Sznajder NA, Riley SC, Anderson RA. Matrix metalloproteinases and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases in human fetal testis and ovary. Mol Hum Reprod 2001; 7:641–648.

56. Gronning LM, Wang JE, Ree AH, Haugen TB, Tasken K, Tasken KA. Regulation of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 in rat Sertoli cells: induction by germ cell residual bodies, interleukin-1α, and second messengers. Biol Reprod 2000; 62:1040–1046.

57. Mruk DD, Siu MKY, Conway AM, Lee NPY, Lau ASN, Cheng CY. Role of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 in junction dynamics in the testis. J Androl 2003; 24:510–523.

58. Fritz IB, Tung PS, Ailenberg M. Proteases and anti-proteases in the

seminiferous tubule. In: Russell LD, Griswold MD (eds.), The Sertoli Cell. Clearwater, FL: Cache River Press; 1993:217–235.

59. Mruk D, Zhu LJ, Silvestrini B, Lee WM, Cheng CY. Interactions of proteases and protease inhibitors in Sertoli-germ cell co-cultures preceding the formation of specialized Sertoli-germ cell junctions in vitro. J Androl 1997; 18:612–622.

60. Wong CCS, Chung SSW, Grima J, Zhu LJ, Mruk D, Lee WM, Cheng CY. Changes in the expression of junctional and nonjunctional complex component genes when inter-Sertoli tight junctions are formed in vitro. J Androl 2000; 21:227–237.

61. Siu MKY, Cheng CY. Interactions of proteases, protease inhibitors, and the β1 integrin/laminin γ3 protein complex in the regulation of ectoplasmic specialization dynamics in the rat testis. Biol Reprod 2004; 70:945–964.

62. Carmeliet P, Moons L, Lijnen R, Baes M, Lemaitre V, Tipping P, Drew A, Eeckhout Y, Shapiro S, Lupu F, Collen D. Urokinase-generated plasmin activates matrix metalloproteinases during aneurysm formation. Nat Genet 1997; 17:439–444.

63. Vihko KK, Kristensen P, Dano K, Parvinen M. Immunohistochemical localization of urokinase-type plasminogen activator in Sertoli cells and tissue-type plasminogen activator in spermatogenic cells in the rat seminiferous epithelium. Dev Biol 1988; 126:150–155.

64. Miyamori H, Takino T, Kobayashi Y, Tokai H, Itoh Y, Seiki M, Sato H. Claudin promotes activation of pro-matrix metalloproteinase-2 mediated by membrane-type matrix metalloproteinases. J Biol Chem 2001; 276:28204–28211.

65. Poncelet AC, Schnaper HW. Regulation of human mesangial cell collagen expression by transforming growth factor-β1. Am J Physiol 1998; 275:F458–F466.

66. Li YY, Feng YQ, Kadokami T, McTiernan CF, Draviam R, Watkins SC, Feldman AM. Myocardial extracellular matrix remodeling in transgenic mice overexpressing tumor necrosis factor α can be modulated by anti-tumor necrosis factor α therapy. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000; 97:12746–12751.

67. Siwik DA, Chang DL, Colucci WS. Interleukin-1β and tumor necrosis factor-α decrease collagen synthesis and increase matrix metalloproteinase activity in cardiac fibroblasts in vitro. Circulation Res 2000; 86:1259–1265.

68. Fiers W. Tumor necrosis factor. Characterization at the molecular, cellular and in vivo level. FEBS Lett 1991; 285:199–212.

69. Walsh SV, Hopkins AM, Nusrat A. Modulation of tight junction structure and function by cytokines. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2000; 41:303–313.

70. Mealy K, Robinson B, Millette CF, Majzoub J, Wilmore DW. The testicular effects of tumor necrosis factor. Ann Surg 1990; 211:470–475.

71. Gnessi L, Fabbri A, Spera G. Gonadal peptides as mediators of development and functional control of the testis: an integrated system with hormones and local environment. Endocr Rev 1997; 18:541–609.

72. Pentikainen V, Dunkel L, Erkkila K. Male germ cell apoptosis. Endocr Dev 2003; 5:56–80.

73. Mauduit C, Besset V, Caussanel V, Benahmed M. Tumor necrosis factor α receptor p55 is under hormonal (follicle-stimulating hormone) control in testicular Sertoli cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1996; 224:631–637.

74. Mankertz J, Tavalali S, Schmitz H, Mankertz A, Riecken EO, Fromm M, Schulzke JD. Expression from the human occludin promoter is affected by tumor necrosis factor α and interferon γ. J Cell Sci 2000; 113:2085–2090.

75. Hellani A, Ji J, Mauduit C, Deschildre C, Tabone E, Benahmed M. Developmental and hormonal regulation of the expression of oligodendrocyte-specific protein/claudin 11 in mouse testis. Endocrinology 2000; 141:3012–3019.

76. Tabibzadeh S, Kong QF, Kapur S, Satyaswaroop PG, Aktories K. Tumor necrosis factor-α-mediated dyscohesion of epithelial cells is associated with disordered expression of cadherin/β-catenin and disassembly of actin filaments. Hum Reprod 1995; 10:994–1004.

77. Burridge K, Chrzanowska-Wodnicka M. Focal adhesions, contractility, and signaling. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1996; 12:463–518.

78. Mulholland DJ, Dedhar S, Vogl AW. Rat seminiferous epithelium contains a unique junction (ectoplasmic specialization) with signaling properties both of cell/cell and cell/matrix junctions. Biol Reprod 2001; 64:396–407.

79. Salanova M, Stefanini M, De Curtis I, Palombi F. Integrin receptor α6β1 is localized at specific sites of cell-to-cell contact in rat seminiferous epithelium. Biol Reprod 1995; 52:79–87.

80. Schaller J, Glander HJ, Dethloff J. Evidence of β1 integrins and fi-

bronectin on spermatogetic cells in human testis. Hum Reprod 1993; 8:1873–1878.

81. Lustig L, Meroni S, Cigorraga S, Casanova MB, Vianello SE, Denuchis B. Immunodetection of cell adhesion molecules in rat Sertoli cell cultures. Am J Reprod Immunol 1998; 39:399–405.

82. Merono A, Lucena C, Lopez A, Garrido JJ, Perez de LL, Llanes D. Immunohistochemical analysis of β3 integrin (CD61): expression in pig tissues and human tumors. Histol Histopathol 2002; 17:347–352.

83. Martin KH, Slack JK, Boerner SA, Martin CC, Parsons JT. Integrin connections map: to infinity and beyond. Science 2002; 296:1652–1653.

84. Schwartz MA, Ginsberg MH. Networks and crosstalk: integrin signaling spreads. Nat Cell Biol 2002; 4:E65–E68.

85. Liu S, Calderwood DA, Ginsberg MH. Integrin cytoplasmic domain-binding proteins. J Cell Sci 2000; 113:3563–3571.

86. Wine RN, Chapin RE. Adhesion and signaling proteins spatiotemporally associated with spermiogenesis in the rat. J Androl 1999; 20:198–213.

87. Santoro G, Romeo C, Impellizzeri P, Cutroneo G, Micali A, Trimarchi F, Gentile C. Immunofluorescence distribution of actin-associated proteins in human seminiferous tubules of adolescent tests, normal and pathologic. J Endocrinol Invest 2000; 23:369–375.

88. Zamir E, Geiger B. Molecular complexity and dynamics of cell-matrix adhesions. J Cell Sci 2001; 114:3583–3590.

89. Webb DJ, Parsons JT, Horwitz AF. Adhesion assembly, disassembly and turnover in migrating cells—over and over and over again. Nat Cell Biol 2002; 4:E97–E100.

90. Larjava H, Peltonen J, Akiyama SK, Yamada SS, Gralnick HR, Uitto J, Yamada KM. Novel function for beta 1 integrins in keratinocyte cell-cell interactions. J Cell Biol 1990; 110:803–815.

91. Siu MKY, Lee WM, Cheng CY. Adhering junction dynamics in the testis are regulated by an interplay of β1-integrin and focal adhesion complex-associated proteins. Endocrinology 2003; 144:2141–2163.

92. Lui WY, Lee WM, Cheng CY. Sertoli-germ cell adherens junction dynamics in the testis are regulated by RhoB GTPase via the ROCK/LIMK signaling pathway. Biol Reprod 2003; 68:2189–2206.

93. Weitzman JB, Chen A, Hemler ME. Investigation of the role of β1 integrins in cell-cell adhesion. J Cell Sci 1995; 108:3635–3644.

94. Chen MS, Almeida EA, Huovila AP, Takahashi Y, Shaw LM, Mercurio AM, White JM. Evidence that distinct states of the integrin α6β1 interact with laminin and an ADAM. J Cell Biol 1999; 144:549–561.

95. Bouvard D, Brakebusch C, Gustafsson E, Aszodi A, Bengtsson T, Berna A, Fassler R. Functional consequences of integrin gene mutations in mice. Circ Res 2001; 89:211–223.

96. Giancotti FG, Ruoslahti E. Integrin signaling. Science 1999; 285:1028–1032.

97. Schwartz MA. Integrin signaling revisited. Trends Cell Biol 2001; 11:466–470.

98. Ilic D, Damsky CH, Yamamoto T. Focal adhesion kinase: at the crossroads of signal transduction. J Cell Sci 1997; 110:401–407.

99. Parsons JT. Focal adhesion kinase: the first ten years. J Cell Sci 2003; 116:1409–1416.

100. Thomas SM, Brugge JS. Cellular functions regulated by Src family kinases. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1997; 13:513–609.

101. Schlaepfer DD, Hunter T. Integrin signalling and tyrosine phosphorylation: just the FAKs? Trends Cell Biol 1998; 8:151–157.

102. Schaller MD, Hildebrand JD, Shannon JD, Fox JW, Vines RR, Parsons JT. Autophosphorylation of the focal adhesion kinase, pp125FAK, directs SH2-dependent binding of pp60src. Mol Cell Biol 1994; 14:1680–1688.

103. Chen HC, Appeddu PA, Isoda H, Guan JL. Phosphorylation of tyrosine 397 in focal adhesion kinase is required for binding phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. J Biol Chem 1996; 271:26329–26334.

104. Zhang X, Chattopadhyay A, Ji QS, Owen JD, Ruest PJ, Carpenter G, Hanks SK. Focal adhesion kinase promotes phospholipase C-γ1 activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999; 96:9021–9026.

105. Han DC, Guan JL. Association of focal adhesion kinase with Grb7 and its role in cell migration. J Biol Chem 1999; 274:24425–24430.

106. Goicoechea SM, Tu Y, Hua Y, Chen K, Shen TL, Guan JL, Wu C. Nck-2 interacts with focal adhesion kinase and modulates cell motility. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2002; 34:791–805.

107. Calaleb MB, Polte TR, Hanks SK. Tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase at sites in the catalytic domain regulates kinase activity: a role for Src family kinases. Mol Cell Biol 1995; 15:954–963.

108. Schlaepfer DD, Hanks SK, Hunter T, van der Geer P. Integrin-me-

diated signal transduction linked to Ras pathway by GRB2 binding
to focal adhesion kinase. Nature 1994; 372:786–791.
109. Hanks SK. Messenger ribonucleic acid encoding an apparent isoform
of phosphorylase kinase catalytic subunit is abundant in the adult
testis. Mol Endocrinol 1989; 3:110–116.
110. Calab MB, Fox DT, Hanks SK. Molecular cloning and enzymatic
analysis of the rat homolog of “PhK-gamma T,” an isoform of phos-
phorylase kinase catalytic subunit. J Biol Chem 1992; 267:1455–
1463.
111. Baker LP, Daggett DF, Peng HB. Concentration of pp125 focal ad-
hesion kinase (FAK) at the myotendinous junction. J Cell Sci 1994;
107:1485–1497.
112. Velichkova M, Guttman J, Warren C, Eng L, Kline K, Vogl AW,
Hasson T. A human homologue of Drosophila kelch associates with
myosin-VIIa in specialized adhesion junctions. Cell Motil Cytoskel-
eton 2002; 51:147–164.
113. Guttman JA, Janmey P, Vogl AW. Gelsolin-evidence for a role in
turnover of junction-related actin filaments in Sertoli cells. J Cell Sci
2002; 115:499–505.
114. Maekawa M, Toyama Y, Yasuda M, Yagi T, Yuasa S. Fyn tyrosine
kinase in Sertoli cells is involved in mouse spermatogenesis. Biol
Reprod 2002; 66:211–221.
115. Chen BH, Tzen JT, Bresnick AR, Chen HC. Roles of Rho-associated
kinase and myosin light chain kinase in morphological and migratory
defects of focal adhesion kinase-null cells. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:
33857–33863.
116. Furuta Y, Ilic D, Kanazawa S, Takeda N, Yamamoto T, Aizawa S.
Mesodermal defect in late phase of gastrulation by a targeted mu-
tation of focal adhesion kinase, FAK. Oncogene 1995; 11:1989–
1995.
117. George EL, Georges-Labouesse EN, Patel-King RS, Rayburn H, Hy-
nes RO. Defects in mesoderm, neural tube and vascular development
in mouse embryos lacking fibronectin. Development 1993; 119:
1079–1091.
118. Yang JT, Rayburn H, Hynes RO. Embryonic mesodermal defects in
α 5 integrin-deficient mice. Development 1993; 119:1093–1105.
119. Critchley DR. Focal adhesions—the cytoskeletal connection. Curr
Opin Cell Biol 2000; 12:133–139.
120. Perez-Moreno M, Avila A, Islas S, Sanchez S, Gonzalez-Mariscal
L. Vinculin but not alpha-actinin is a target of PKC phosphorylation
during junctional assembly induced by calcium. J Cell Sci 1998; 111:
3563–3571.
121. Rudiger M. Vinculin and α-catenin: shared and unique functions in
adherens junctions. Bioessays 1998; 20:733–740.
122. Gilmore AP, Burridge K. Regulation of vinculin binding to talin and
actin by phosphatidylinositol-4-5-bisphosphate. Nature 1996; 381:
531–535.
123. Pfeiffer DC, Vogl AW. Evidence that vinculin is co-distributed with
actin bundles in ectoplasmic (“junctual”) specializations of mam-
malian Sertoli cells. Anat Rec 1991; 231:89–100.
124. Provost E, Rimm DL. Controversies at the cytoplasmic face of the
cadherin-based adhesion complex. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1999; 11:
567–572.
125. Mandai K, Nakanishi H, Satoh A, Takahashi K, Satoh K, Nishioka
H, Mizoguchi A, Takai Y. Ponsin/SH3P12: an l-afadin- and vinculin-
binding protein localized at cell-cell and cell-matrix adherens junc-
tions. J Cell Biol 1999; 144:1001–1017.
126. Kioka N, Sakata S, Kawauchi T, Amachi T, Akiyama SK, Okazaki
K, Yaen C, Yamada KM, Aota S. Vinexin: a novel vinculin-binding
protein with multiple SH3 domains enhances actin cytoskeletal or-
ganization. J Cell Biol 1999; 144:59–69.
127. Tachibana K, Nakanishi H, Mandai K, Ozaki K, Ikeda W, Yamamoto
Y, Nagafuchi A, Tsukita S, Takai Y. Two cell adhesion molecules,
nectin and cadherin, interact through their cytoplasmic domain-as-
sociated proteins. J Cell Biol 2000; 150:1161–1176.
128. Pokutta S, Drees F, Takai Y, Nelson WJ, Weis WI. Biochemical and
structural definition of the 1-afadin- and actin-binding sites of α-
catenin. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:18868–18874.
129. Xu W, Baribault H, Adamson ED. Vinculin knockout results in heart
and brain defects during embryonic development. Development
1998; 125:327–337.
130. Rodriguez Fernanedez JL, Geiger B, Salomon D, Ben-Ze’ev A.
Overexpression of vinculin suppresses cell motility in Balb/c 3T3
cells. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 1992; 22:127–134.
131. Rodriguez Fernanedez JL, Geiger B, Salomon D, Ben-Ze’ev A. Sup-
pression of vinculin expression by antisense transfection confers
changes in cell morphology, motility, and anchorage-dependent
growth of 3T3-cells. J Cell Biol 1993; 122:1285–1294.
132. Russell L. Observations on rat Sertoli ectoplasmic ('junctional') spe-
cializations in their association with germ cells of the rat testis. Tis-
sue Cell 1977; 9:475–498.
133. Koch M, Olson PF, Albus A, Jin W, Hunter DD, Brunken WJ, Burge-
son RE, Champliaud MF. Characterization and expression of the lam-
inin γ3 chain: a novel, nonbasement membrane-associated, laminin
chain. J Cell Biol 1999; 145:605–618.
134. Fujiwara H, Kikkawa Y, Sanzen N, Sekiguchi K. Purification and
characterization of human laminin-8. Laminin-8 stimulates cell ad-
hesion and migration through α3β1 and α6β1 integrins. J Biol Chem
2001; 276:17550–17558.
135. Lian G, Enders GC. Entactin ultrastructural immunolocalization in
the basal laminae of mouse seminiferous tubules and with only subtle
changes following hypophysectomy. J Androl 1994; 15:52–60.
136. Loveland K, Schlatt S, Sasaki T, Chu ML, Timpl R, Dziadek M.
Developmental changes in the basement membrane of the normal
and hypothyroid postnatal rat testis: segmental localization of fibulin-
2 and fibronectin. Biol Reprod 1998; 58:1123–1130.
137. Handford PA. Fibillin-1, a calcium binding protein of extracellular
matrix. Biochim Biophys Acta 2000; 1498:84–90.
138. Pan TC, Sasaki T, Zhang RZ, Fassler R, Timpl R, Chu ML. Structure
and expression of fibulin-2, a novel extracellular matrix protein with
multiple EGF-like repeats and consensus motifs for calcium binding.
J Cell Biol 1993; 123:1269–1277.
139. Longin J, Le Magueresse-Battistoni B. Evidence that MMP-2 and
TIMP-2 are at play in the FSH-induced changes in Sertoli cells. Mol
Cell Endocrinol 2002; 189:25–35.
140. Cossins J, Dudgeon TJ, Catlin G, Gearing AJ, Clements JM. Iden-
tification of MMP-18, a putative novel human matrix metalloprotei-
nase. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1996; 228:494–498.
141. Puente XS, Pendas AM, Llano E, Velasco G, Lopez-Otin C. Molec-
ular cloning of a novel membrane-type matrix metalloproteinase
from a human breast carcinoma. Cancer Res 1996; 56:944–949.
142. Velasco G, Pendas AM, Fueyo A, Knauper V, Murphy G, Lopez-
Otin C. Cloning and characterization of human MMP-23, a new ma-
trix metalloproteinase predominantly expressed in reproductive tis-
sues and lacking conserved domains in other family members. J Biol
Chem 1999; 274:4570–4576.
143. Kimura A, Shinohara M, Ohkura R, Takahashi T. Expression and
localization of transcripts of MT5-MMP and its related MMP in the
ovary of the medaka fish *Oryzias latipes*. Biochim Biophys Acta
2001; 1518:115–123.
144. Lohi J, Wilson CL, Roby JD, Parks WC. Epilysin, a novel human
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP-28) expressed in testis and kerati-
nocyes and in response to injury. J Biol Chem 2001; 276:10134–
10144.
145. Gardner H, Kreidberg J, Koteliansky V, Jaenisch R. Deletion of in-
tegrin α1 by homologous recombination permits normal murine de-
velopment but gives rise to a specific deficit in cell adhesion. Dev
Biol 1996; 175:301–313.
146. Gardner H, Broberg A, Pozzi A, Laato M, Heino J. Absence of
integrin α1β1 in the mouse causes loss of feedback regulation of
collagen synthesis in normal and wounded dermis. J Cell Sci 1999;
112:263–272.
147. Pozzi A, Moberg PE, Miles LA, Wagner S, Soloway P, Gardner HA.
Elevated matrix metalloprotease and angiostatin levels in integrin α1
knockout mice cause reduced tumor vascularization. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 2000; 97:2202–2207.
148. Holtkotter O, Nieswandt B, Smyth N, Muller W, Hafner M, Schulte
V, Krieg T, Eckes B. Integrin α2-deficient mice develop normally,
are fertile, but display partially defective platelet interaction with
collagen. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:10789–10794.
149. DiPersio CM, Hodivala-Dilke KM, Jaenisch R, Kreidberg JA, Hynes
RO. α3β1 integrin is required for normal development of the epi-
dermal basement membrane. J Cell Biol 1997; 137:729–742.
150. Kreidberg JA, Donovan MJ, Goldstein SL, Rennke H, Shepherd K,
Jones RC, Jaenisch R. α3β1 integrin has a crucial role in kidney and
lung organogenesis. Development 1996; 122:3537–3547.
151. Yang JT, Rayburn H, Hynes RO. Cell adhesion events mediated by
α4 integrins are essential in placental and cardiac development. De-
velopment 1995; 121:549–560.
152. Georges-Labouesse E, Messaddeq N, Yehia G, Cadalbert L, Dierich
A, Le Meur M. Absence of the integrin α6 leads to epidermolysis
bullosa and neonatal death in mice. Nat Genet 1996; 13:370–373.

153. Fässler R, Meyer M. Consequences of lack of β1 integrin gene expression in mice. Genes Dev 1995; 9:1896–1908.
154. Stephens LE, Sutherland AE, Klimanskaya IV, Andrieux A, Meneses J, Pedersen RA, Damsky CH. Deletion of β1 integrins in mice results in inner cell mass failure and peri-implantation lethality. Genes Dev 1995; 9:1883–1895.
155. Hodivala-Dilke KM, McHugh KP, Tsakiris DA, Rayburn H, Crowley D, Ullman-Cullere M, Ross FP, Coller BS, Teitelbaum S, Hynes RO. B3-integrin-deficient mice are a model for Glanzmann thrombasthenia showing placental defects and reduced survival. J Clin Invest 1999; 103:229–238.
156. Sieg DJ, Hauck CR, Ilic D, Klingbeil CK, Schaefer E, Damsky CH, Schlaepfer DD. FAK integrates growth-factor and integrin signals to promote cell migration. Nat Cell Biol 2000; 2:249–256.
157. Gnessi L, Emidi A, Jannini EA, Carosa E, Maroder M, Arizzi M, Ulisse S, Spera G. Testicular development involves the spatiotemporal control of PDGFs and PDGF receptors gene expression and action. J Cell Biol 1995; 131:1105–1121.
158. Suarez-Quian CA, Dai MZ, Onoda M, Kriss RM, Dym M. Epidermal growth factor receptor localization in the rat and monkey testes. Biol Reprod 1989; 41:921–932.
159. Cary LA, Chang JF, Guan JL. Stimulation of cell migration by overexpression of focal adhesion kinase and its association with Src and Fyn. J Cell Sci 1996; 109:1787–1794.
160. Eide BL, Turck CW, Escobedo JA. Identification of Tyr-397 as the primary site of tyrosine phosphorylation and pp60 src association in the focal adhesion kinase, pp125FAK. Mol Cell Biol 1995; 15:2819–2827.
161. Chapin RE, Wine RN, Harris MW, Borchers CH, Haseman JK. Structure and control of a cell-cell adhesion complex associated with spermiation in rat seminiferous epithelium. J Androl 2001; 22:1030–1052.
162. Wierzbicka-Patynowski I, Schwarzbauer JE. Regulatory role for SRC and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in initiation of fibronectin matrix assembly. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:19703–19708.
163. Wu Y, Dowbenko D, Pisabarro MT, Dillard-Telm L, Koeppen H, Lasky LA. PTEN2, a Golgi-associated testis-specific homologue of the PTEN tumor suppressor lipid phosphatase. J Biol Chem 2001; 276:21745–21753.
164. Tamura M, Gu J, Danen EH, Takino T, Miyamoto S, Yamada KM. PTEN interactions with focal adhesion kinase and suppression of the extracellular matrix-dependent phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt cell survival pathway. J Biol Chem 1999; 274:20693–20703.
165. Harte MT, Hildebrand JD, Burnham MR, Bouton AH, Parsons JT. p130Cas, a substrate associated with v-Src and v-Crk, localizes to focal adhesions and binds to focal adhesion kinase. J Biol Chem 1996; 271:13649–13655.
166. Honda H, Oda H, Nakamoto T, Honda Z, Sakai R, Suzuki T, Saito T, Nakamura K, Nakao K, Isikawa T, Katsuki M, Yazaki Y, Hirai H.

Cardiovascular anomaly, impaired actin bundling and resistance to Src-induced transformation in mice lacking p130Cas. Nat Genet 1998; 19:361–365.
167. Cary LA, Han DC, Polte TR, Hanks SK, Guan JL. Identification of p130Cas as a mediator of focal adhesion kinase-promoted cell migration. J Cell Biol 1998; 140:211–221.
168. Taylor JM, Macklem MM, Parsons JT. Cytoskeletal changes induced by GRAF, the GTPase regulator associated with focal adhesion kinase, are mediated by Rho. J Cell Sci 1999; 112:231–242.
169. Ren XR, Du QS, Huang YZ, Ao SZ, Mei L, Xiong WC. Regulation of CDC42 GTPase by proline-rich tyrosine kinase 2 interacting with PSGAP, a novel pleckstrin homology and Src homology 3 domain containing rhoGAP protein. J Cell Biol 2001; 152:971–984.
170. Wade R, Bohl J, Vande Pol S. Paxillin null embryonic stem cells are impaired in cell spreading and tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase. Oncogene 2002; 21:96–107.
171. Hildebrand JD, Schaller MD, Parsons JT. Paxillin, a tyrosine phosphorylated focal adhesion-associated protein binds to the carboxyl terminal domain of focal adhesion kinase. Mol Biol Cell 1995; 6: 637–647.
172. Chen HC, Appeddu PA, Parsons JT, Hildebrand JD, Schaller MD, Guan JL. Interaction of focal adhesion kinase with cytoskeletal protein talin. J Biol Chem 1995; 270:16995–16999.
173. Xie B, Zhao J, Kitagawa M, Durbin J, Madri JA, Guan JL, Fu XY. Focal adhesion kinase activates Stat1 in integrin-mediated cell migration and adhesion. J Biol Chem 2001; 276:19512–19523.
174. Jenab S, Morris PL. Transcriptional regulation of Sertoli cell intermediate early genes by interleukin-6 and interferon-gamma is mediated through phosphorylation of STAT-3 and STAT-1 proteins. Endocrinology 1997; 138:2740–2746.
175. Ribon V, Herrera R, Kay BK, Saltiel AR. A role for CAP, a novel, multifunctional Src homology 3 domain-containing protein in formation of actin stress fibers and focal adhesions. J Biol Chem 1998; 273:4073–4080.
176. Chellaiah MA, Biswas RS, Yuen D, Alvarez UM, Hruska KA. Phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate directs association of Src homology 2-containing signaling proteins with gelsolin. J Biol Chem 2001; 276:47434–47444.
177. Izaguirre G, Aguirre L, Hu YP, Lee HY, Schlaepfer DD, Aneskievich BJ, Haimovich B. The cytoskeletal/nonmuscle isoform of alpha-actinin is phosphorylated on its actin-binding domain by the focal adhesion kinase. J Biol Chem 2001; 276:28676–28685.
178. Vanha-Perttula T, Mather JP, Bardin CW, Moss SB, Bellve AR. Acid phosphatases in germinal and somatic cells of the testes. Biol Reprod 1986; 35:1–9.
179. Rigacci S, Rovida E, Sbarba PD, Berti A. Low Mr. phosphotyrosine protein phosphatase associates and dephosphorylates p125 focal adhesion kinase, interfering with cell motility and spreading. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:41631–41636.
