
Full text provided by www.sciencedirect.com

ELSEVIER

T-cell-receptor- and B-cell-receptor-mediated activation of NF-κB in lymphocytes

Robert Weil and Alain Israël*

---

B and T cells sense antigens through specific receptors, which, when activated, induce signalling cascades leading to the activation of a series of transcription factor families, such as NF-κB. These transcription factors control differentiation, cytokine production and proliferation, and they protect against apoptosis. Much progress has been made during the past two years in the understanding of the molecular events leading to NF-κB activation, but, although most of the molecules in this signalling cascade have now been identified, the detailed molecular events remain obscure; in particular regarding the molecules that specifically connect the T-cell receptor (TCR)-and B-cell receptor (BCR)-proximal adaptors and kinases to the central core of the NF-κB cascade, the IκB kinase complex. As these events are likely to be specific for both extremities of the signalling cascade (the TCR or BCR on one end, and NF-κB target genes on the other) they will ultimately represent the best targets to specifically manipulate this response in lymphocytes.

**Addresses**

Unité de Biologie Moléculaire de l'Expression Génique, Unité de Recherche Associée, 2582 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut Pasteur, 25 Rue du Dr. Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France  
*e-mail: aisrael@pasteur.fr*

---

PTK protein tyrosine kinase  
RIP2 receptor-interacting protein 2  
SH2 Src homology 2  
SLP SH2-domain-containing leukocyte protein  
Syk spleen tyrosine kinase  
TCR T-cell receptor  
TNF tumour necrosis factor  
ZAP-70 zeta-chain-associated protein of 70 kDa  

---

### Introduction

Nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) is the generic name of a family of transcription factors that function as dimers and regulate genes involved in the immune, inflammatory and anti-apoptotic responses. The NF-κB proteins are sequestered in the cytoplasm through physical interaction with inhibitors of the IκB (inhibitor of κB) family. Following several extracellular signals, IκB kinase (IKK), a cytoplasmic kinase complex, becomes activated and phosphorylates the IκB molecules, leading to their degradation through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway [1]. NF-κB dimers then translocate to the nucleus and activate their target genes. The IKK complex encompasses three known subunits: two protein kinases (IKKα and IKKβ) and a structural/regulatory subunit (called NF-κB essential modulator [NEMO] or IKKγ [Au:OK?]), in an unknown stoichiometry.

Recently, a so-called ‘alternative’ pathway has been uncovered, which causes NF-κB activation in response to a specific set of stimuli, including B-cell activating factor belonging to the TNF family (BAFF), lymphotoxin β (LTβ) and CD40L, and seems to be more specifically involved in B-cell maturation and lymphoid organ formation, whereas the classical pathway is involved in the response of multiple cell types to pro-inflammatory cytokines and pathogen-associated molecular patterns. The alternative pathway targets p100, a member of a second family of cytoplasmic NF-κB inhibitors, which is also the precursor of the NF-κB protein p52 and retains NF-κB subunits, such as relB, in the cytoplasm. Following stimulation, p100 is partially degraded in a NF-κB-inducing kinase (NIK)- and IKKα-dependent manner, thereby liberating p52/relB complexes, which activate a subset of NF-κB target genes [2].

It is important to note that a second layer of regulation of the NF-κB activity exists: the transcriptional activity of the transactivating subunits of NF-κB (p65, c-rel and relB) is controlled by serine/threonine phosphorylation on several residues [3]. This has been particularly studied in the case of the p65 subunit, and it has been suggested

---

**Abbreviations**

BCAP B-cell adaptor for PI3K  
BCR B cell receptor  
Btk Bruton's tyrosine kinase  
CARD caspase recruitment domain  
Carma 1 CARD/MAGUK 1  
IκB inhibitor of κB  
IKK IκB kinase  
IL interleukin  
JNK c-Jun amino-terminal kinase  
LAT linker for activation of T cells  
MAGUK membrane-associated guanylate kinase  
MALT mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue  
NEMO NF-κB essential modulator  
NF-κB nuclear factor-κB  
NFAT nuclear factor of activated T cells  
PI3K phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase  
PLC phospholipase C  
PMA phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate

---

Current Opinion in Immunology 2004, 16:374–381 www.sciencedirect.com

Activation of NF-κB in lymphocytes Weil and Israël 375

Table 1

Molecules in NF-κB signalling pathways identified by mouse knockout experiments.

| Abbreviation | Definition | Reference |
|--------------|------------|-----------|
| ZAP-70       | Zeta-chain-associated protein of 70 kDa | [4] |
| SLP-76       | SH2-domain-containing leukocyte protein of 65 kDa | [4, 55] |
| PLCγ1        | Phospholipase Cγ1 | [55] |
| PLCγ2        | Phospholipase Cγ2 | [20] |
| PI3K         | Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase | [27] |
| PKCθ         | Protein kinase Cθ | [7, 8*] |
| PKCβ         | Protein kinase Cβ | [23**] |
| PKCζ         | Protein kinase Cζ | [28*, 29] |
| Syk          | Spleen tyrosine kinase | [19] |
| Btk          | Bruton's tyrosine kinase | [27, 56, 57] |
| BLNK         | B-cell linker protein | [21] |
| BCAP         | B-cell adaptor for PI3K | [30] |
| Vav1         | N/A | [58] |
| Bcl-10       | B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia/lymphoma 10 | [31, 32**] |
| CARMA1       | CARD-MAGUK1 | [38**, 41***, 42**] |
| MALT1/paracaspase | Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma translocation gene 1 | [46*, 47*] |
| RIP-2        | Receptor-interacting protein 2 | [50**, 51**] |

CARD, caspase recruitment domain; MAGUK1, membrane-associated guanylate kinase 1; N/A, not applicable.

that some of these sites are important for NF-κB-induced transcriptional activation. Some of the kinases responsible for these phosphorylation events have been identified. Interestingly the IKK complex itself seems to be involved, either directly or indirectly, in at least some of these inducible phosphorylation events.

Understanding the early events in T- and B-cell activation is an active area of research. Some members of these signalling cascades have been unequivocally identified by mouse knockout experiments (see Table 1). During the past two years, several specific events involving these molecules have been elucidated through biochemical and genetic approaches, both in the T-cell receptor (TCR) and B-cell receptor (BCR) pathways and, although the molecular details are still missing, a coherent picture has begun to emerge and will allow more pertinent experiments to be designed (Figure 1).

The early events of T-cell-receptor-mediated NF-κB activation

One of the key signalling protein involved in the first steps of T-cell activation is zeta-chain-associated protein 70 (ZAP-70), a 70 kDa protein tyrosine kinase of the spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) family. ZAP-70 influences downstream events by phosphorylating the linker/adaptor proteins linker for activation of T cells (LAT) and SH2-domain-containing leukocyte protein of 76 kDa (SLP-76). These proteins play an important role in organizing multimolecular signalling complexes in the lipid raft subdomains of the plasma membrane. Another important protein in this process is Vav1, a member of the Dbl superfamily of Rac/Rho-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factors. In T cells, Vav1 undergoes rapid tyrosine phosphorylation in response to TCR ligation and forms a stable complex with SLP-76. This association between tyrosine-phosphorylated SLP-76 and Vav1 seems to be required for NF-κB activation in response to co-engagement of CD3 and CD28 [4]. Recent data suggest that Vav1 constitutively associates with IKKα, targets it to the membrane and activates it in response to CD28 stimulation, although the molecular details of this pathway are still unknown [5].

Emerging evidence suggests that protein kinase Cθ (PKCθ), a novel Ca²⁺-independent PKC isoform essentially expressed in skeletal muscle and lymphoid tissue (but not in B cells), is required for TCR-mediated activation of mature T cells [6], and has been so far selectively implicated in NF-κB and c-Jun amino-terminal kinase (JNK) activation. Inactivation of the pkcθ gene in the mouse identified this kinase as a critical participant in the NF-κB pathway leading to IL-2 transcription in mature but not immature T lymphocytes [7]. However, these results have been recently challenged by a second study [8*], in which nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) transactivation was completely abrogated following CD3 and CD28 co-engagement, but NF-κB transactivation was only slightly reduced. The reasons for these discrepancies might involve differences in the inactivation strategies used by the two groups, but further experiments are clearly required to resolve this issue.

Despite the conflicting data obtained in mice, a large body of evidence suggests that PKCθ is indeed involved in TCR-mediated NF-κB activation. Some of this evidence, however, relies on overexpression experiments and the use of relatively non-specific kinase inhibitors. The activity of PKCθ is essentially regulated by conformational changes and by its membrane recruitment and

376 Lymphocyte activation

Figure 1

(a)

APC
MHC
α β
ε δ ε ζ ζ
TCR
LAT
3
1 Lck
2 ZAP-70
4 PLCγ1
4 Vav1
3 SLP76
5 PKCθ
6 CARMA1
7 Bcl10
8 MALT1
9 NEMO-IKK
IkB
10 NF-κB
NF-κB
B7-1
B7-2
CD28
1 Fyn
RIP2
PI3K
Akt
?

(b)
Ag
BCR
βα αβ
1 Blk
1 Lyn
2 Syk
5 BCAP
3 BLNK
4 PLCγ2
7 Btk
6 PI3K
9 CARMA1
10 Bcl10
8 PKCβ
11 MALT1
12 NEMO-IKK
IkB
PKCζ
?
13 NF-κB
NF-κB

Antigen-mediated NF-κB activation in T and B lymphocytes. (a) Model for TCR-mediated activation of NF-κB. The stimulation of T cells via TCR/CD28 co-stimulation elicits the sequential activation of two classes of protein tyrosine kinases: Src family kinases Lck and Fyn first phosphorylate the TCR, and ZAP-70 is recruited to the phosphorylated TCR. ZAP-70 then phosphorylates the adaptor proteins LAT and SLP76. These phosphorylations organize multimolecular complexes containing PLCγ1 and the nucleotide exchange factor Vav1. Active PLCγ1 generates inositol-3 phosphate (IP3), which induces the release of Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores, and diacylglycerol (DAG) which stimulates PKCs. Emerging evidence suggests that PKCθ is the most abundant PKC isoform in T cells. Following T-cell activation, PKCθ is translocated to the immunological synapse through a mechanism requiring Vav1 and the PI3K/Akt pathway. Co-stimulation causes the recruitment of the NEMO-IKK complex to the immunological synapse. Downstream of PKCθ, activation of the NEMO-IKK complex requires Carma1, Bcl10 and MALT1. In activated T cells, Carma1 is recruited to the TCR where it interacts with Bcl10. Bcl10 then gets phosphorylated, probably by RIP2, and interacts with MALT1.

Current Opinion in Immunology 2004, 16:374–381
www.sciencedirect.com
redistribution into insoluble membrane microdomains called rafts, where a variety of intracellular molecules (such as Lck, ZAP-70 and LAT) accumulate. The presence of PKCθ in these structures is necessary for NF-κB activation [9], and requires Vav1 and Lck but not Fyn or ZAP-70 [9–11]. In addition, the raft-resident fraction of PKCθ is physically associated with Lck, thereby facilitating its phosphorylation by Lck on Tyr90, an important event in NF-κB activation [9,12]. The membrane recruitment and activation of PKCθ in response to TCR and CD28 co-engagement is also mediated by a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)- and Vav/Rac-dependent (but phospholipase C [PLC]-independent) pathway, and is enhanced by constitutively active phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1; [11,13]). Activation of this pathway leads to recruitment and activation of Akt, which binds to PKCθ and cooperates with it to activate NF-κB. Therefore, signals that emanate from the TCR (Lck) and from CD28 (PI3K/Akt) are required for efficient translocation of PKCθ to the immune synapse.

It has been suggested that the induction of NF-κB by PKCθ is mediated through the selective activation of IKKβ [14,15], but the direct substrates of PKCθ in the NF-κB cascade are still unknown. Several studies suggest that PKCθ might contribute to the dynamic organization of the immune synapse by regulating the phosphorylation of actin-interacting proteins [16,17]. The generation of PKCθ-deficient T-cell lines will be a powerful tool to further examine these points.

### The early events of B-cell-receptor-mediated NF-κB activation

The survival and proliferation of peripheral B cells is critically dependent on the surface expression of the BCR and its ability to generate a signal. The BCR triggers the activation of NF-κB, which controls the expression of anti-apoptotic proteins of the Bcl-2 family (Bcl-xL, Bcl2) and of cell cycle proteins, such as cyclin D2.

The engagement of the BCR is known to activate protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) of the Src, Syk and Tec families. The Src-family PTKs, such as Lyn, Fyn, Blk, Hck, Fgr and Lck, are located immediately downstream of the BCR, and their activation is followed by the activation of proteins such as Syk, the Tec-family Bruton's tyrosine kinase (Btk; see below) and Vav1. Among Src-family kinases, Blk, Fyn and Lyn are the most abundant and their absence completely abrogates pre-BCR-mediated NF-κB activation [18]. Syk is also required in B-cell lines for BCR-mediated NF-κB activation, but not for PI3K, Ras or mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation [19]. It does not, however, seem to be essential for NF-κB activation in pro-B cells [18]. Similar to adaptor proteins in T cells, B-cell-specific adaptor proteins connect PTK activation to downstream molecules. One such adaptor molecule, BLNK (B-cell linker protein, also called SLP-65) integrates the activities of Btk and Syk into downstream effectors such as PLCγ2. BLNK and PLCγ2 are required for BCR-mediated survival and NF-κB activation [20,21].

Mice that are deficient in PI3K, Btk, PKCβ, PKCζ and B-cell adaptor for PI3K (BCAP) show a defect in BCR-induced NF-κB activation and B-cell survival. Inactivation of Btk results in X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) in humans and X-linked immunodeficiency (Xid) in mice [22]. These Xid mice show B-cell developmental defects that include reduced number of follicular mature and peritoneal B1 cells. Mice that are deficient in PKCβ show the same defects [23**,24,25], but, in contrast to Btk−/− mice, IKK activation cannot be rescued by phorbol ester treatment nor by CD40 engagement [25,26], suggesting that PKCβ might act downstream of Btk. As described for PKCθ in TCR-stimulated T cells, engagement of the BCR initiates the recruitment of PKCβ and IKK into lipid rafts [23**]. Deficiency in PKCβ has a dramatic impact on the phosphorylation of IKKα and, to a lesser extent, IKKβ [25], and also affects their recruitment into lipid rafts [23**]. In pre-B cells, the impaired NF-κB activation observed in Blk, Fyn and Lyn triple-deficient mice (see above) can be overcome by PKCλ activation, suggesting the participation of this PKC isoform in pre-BCR-mediated NF-κB activation [18]. BCR-induced activation of Btk is not affected by the disruption of the PI3K gene (which also results in a defect in NF-κB activation and BCR-induced proliferation, but can be rescued by transgenic bcl-xL expression) and Akt phosphorylation can occur in the absence of Btk [27]. These observations suggest that PI3K acts independently of Btk to activate NF-κB and, consistently, the disruption of both PI3K and Btk has more severe defects (reduced number of mature

Bcl10 activates the NEMO-IKK complex through the MALT1-dependent ubiquitination of NEMO. When activated, the IKK kinases phosphorylate the IκB inhibitors of NF-κB, which in turn are ubiquitinated and degraded. Following this process, NF-κB translocates to the nucleus to activate its target genes. (b) Model for BCR-mediated activation of NF-κB. The stimulation of B cells via the BCR causes activation of Syk, Btk and Src family protein kinases (essentially Lyn, Fyn and Blk). The translocation of Btk to the membrane is dependent on the activation of PI3K which requires BCAP. This translocation puts Btk in close proximity to Syk which subsequently phosphorylates it. Then, Btk, BLNK and Syk cooperate to activate PLCγ2 and induce IP3 production and sustained Ca²⁺ flux. These second messengers activate PKCβ. Engagement of the BCR initiates the recruitment of PKCβ into lipid rafts. It has been convincingly demonstrated that the Carma1/Bcl10/MALT1 trio is involved in NF-κB activation in B cells, but it has not been determined whether it connects PKCβ to the IKK complex (by analogy with the T-cell situation). Finally PKCζ activates NF-κB at the transcriptional level through an unknown mechanism. The numbers indicate in which order the sequential events of the activation take place, based on published biochemical and genetic evidence. No number indicates either unknown epistasis relationships, or a parallel pathway.B cells and BCR-induced proliferation) than either single mutation [27].

As described for PKCβ, mice deficient in PKCζ exhibit alterations in the development of secondary lymphoid tissues that could result from defects in B-cell function [28]. The loss of PKCζ significantly impairs BCR-induced B-cell proliferation. In contrast to PKCθ and PKCβ, however, the effect of PKCζ on NF-κB activation is not restricted to a specific cell type: PKCζ affects NF-κB activation in embryonic fibroblasts as well as in B cells. In addition, the role of PKCζ in NF-κB activation seems to be different from that of PKCθ or PKCβ, as it is not involved in NF-κB nuclear translocation but apparently controls the transcriptional activity of NF-κB proteins [29]. Whether this kinase is directly or indirectly involved in the phosphorylation of p65 or c-rel remains to be demonstrated.

Another NF-κB-linked transcriptional defect has been observed in mice deficient in BCAP, a molecule involved in BCR-dependent activation of PI3K/Akt. These mice are defective for c-rel expression, a protein whose abundance is regulated during B-cell maturation and, consequently, they present defects in the survival and proliferation of mature B lymphocytes [30]. It is unclear, however, whether this defect is due to an impairment of the NF-κB signalling cascade.

### Carma1, Bcl10 and MALT1 connect upstream signalling events to the NEMO-IKK complex

The proteins Carma1, Bcl10, and MALT1 are involved in NF-κB activation downstream of PKCs, but little is known either about the precise function of these molecules or how they connect to upstream PKCs. Bcl10 was originally identified as a target of a recurrent chromosomal translocation associated with aggressive mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphomas. Bcl10-deficient mice exhibit defects in neural tube closure, humoral and cellular immune responses, antigen-induced proliferation and activation of NF-κB, but no impairment of activator protein 1 (AP-1) activation in T or B cells [31]. TNF-α, IL-1 and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced NF-κB activation is also normal. Bcl10 is essential not only for the function but also for the maturation of B cells [32], and its impairment results in a reduction of the number of follicular and marginal zone B cells. The signalling defect in Bcl10−/− cells cannot be overcome by treatment with direct PKC activators (such as phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate [PMA] or PMA/ionomycin), indicating that Bcl10 acts downstream of PKCs in T and B cells.

Carma1 (CARD/MAGUK1; also called CARD11 or Bimp3) was identified by several groups as a Bcl10-interacting protein [33–36], and it represents the only lymphocyte-specific member in a family of membrane-associated guanylate kinase (MAGUK) proteins that interact with Bcl10 through caspase recruitment domain (CARD)-CARD interactions. Overexpression of Carma1 induces NF-κB activation as well as Bcl10 phosphorylation [34]. This activation does not take place in Bcl10−/− cells, suggesting that Carma1 is an upstream regulator of Bcl10 [35]. In T cells, Carma1 is constitutively associated with lipid rafts, interacts with Bcl10 and the TCR complex upon TCR stimulation [37], and is required for the recruitment of Bcl10 to clustered TCR complexes [38]. Inactivation of Carma1 in cell lines by somatic mutagenesis or RNA interference results in selectively impaired activation of NF-κB by the TCR [39,40]. The defect in Carma1-deficient T cells was found to lie downstream of PKCθ, and it was further demonstrated that Carma1 connects PKCθ to Bcl10 [39]. Genetic inactivation of Carma1 in the mouse results in a complete block in T- and B-cell immunity, including inactivation of the NF-κB and JNK pathways in response to TCR and BCR crosslinking [38,41,42,43]. Knockout mice exhibit a profound defect in the development and/or survival of B1 and NK cells, and a complete loss of B-cell response to LPS, anti-IgM, CD40L and antigen, as well as a decreased T-cell response to the TCR [41]. Further work is required to determine whether Carma1 connects PKCβ to Bcl10 in B cells, as is the case with PKCθ in T cells.

A member of the paracaspase family called MALT1 has recently been identified as a Bcl10-interacting protein involved in NF-κB activation [44,45]. Similar to bcl10, the gene encoding this protein is involved in a chromosomal translocation seen in some MALT lymphomas. In addition to their common implication in the pathogenesis of MALT lymphoma, Bcl10 and MALT1 physically and functionally interact to synergistically activate NF-κB [44,45]. Recently, two papers have reported the analysis of MALT1-deficient mice, albeit with conflicting results [46,47]. Although they both show that, in contrast to Bcl10 deficiency, inactivation of MALT1 does not cause defects during neurodevelopment, they present conflicting results regarding the immune system. In one paper, the phenotype of these mice was reminiscent of that of CARMA1- or Bcl10-deficient mice, with profound defects in proliferation, cytokine production and NF-κB activation in antigen-stimulated T cells, and defects in BCR-, LPS- and CD40-induced stimulation of B cells [46]. However, these mice demonstrated intact JNK activation after T- and B-cell stimulation. In the second paper, the T-cell defects were nearly identical (despite impairment of the JNK pathway, which was a bit unexpected as this pathway was not affected by the absence of the upstream molecule Bcl10), but the B-cell situation was different: MALT1 was required for B1 and marginal zone B-cell development, but dispensable for anti-IgM-, LPS- and anti CD40-induced proliferation of mature splenic B2 cells and activation of NF-κB in response to BCR stimulation. This discrepancy might be due to the different
strategies used by the two groups to inactivate the MALT1 gene. Nevertheless, all immunoglobulin iso-
types tested were found to be reduced and MALT1−/−
mice failed to mount an immune response after immu-
nization [47*]. A breakthrough in the field came with a
recent paper from the Dixit laboratory [48**], showing
that Bcl10 induces NEMO polyubiquitination (through
Lys63-linked chains) in a MALT1- and Ubc13-depen-
dent manner. This step seems to be important for the
‘activation’ of NEMO, as a mutant form of this protein
that cannot be ubiquitinated inhibits Bcl10-induced
NF-κB activation.

RIP2, a CARD-containing serine/threonine
kinase essential for T-cell-receptor-
mediated NF-κB activation
Receptor-interacting protein 2 (RIP2; also known as Rick,
CARDIAK or CCK) is a serine/threonine kinase that
carries a CARD domain at its carboxy terminus, and
shares sequence similarity with RIP, a kinase that is
essential for NF-κB activation by TNF [49]. RIP2 is a
signal transducer for both the innate and adaptive
immune systems. RIP2-deficient T cells show severely
reduced proliferation upon CD3 or CD3 and CD28
stimulation, as well as reduced NF-κB activation and
IL-2 production [50**,51**]. They also show impaired
differentiation into T helper type 1 cells. A recent paper
suggests that RIP2 associates with and phosphorylates
Bcl10 in response to TCR engagement [52].

Conclusions
In antigen-stimulated lymphocytes, NF-κB controls the
expression of multiple genes essential for the immuno-
genic response. The signalling pathways leading to the
activation of NF-κB in this context have been the subject
of intense studies. A plausible mechanism of action in T
cells is as follows: PKC activation in response to antigen
receptor stimulation ensures Bcl10 recruitment to
Carmal in the immune synapse and phosphorylation
by a putative kinase, possibly RIP2 [52]. Then, Bcl10
activates the NEMO-IKK complex through a MALT1-
dependent ubiquitination mechanism [48**]. Interest-
ingly, it has been shown that the key players that mediate
NF-κB activation in response to antigen stimulation of T
cells (namely PKCθ, Bcl10 and CARMA1) are localized in
the T cell–antigen-presenting cell contact area [9,37**].
Recently, it has also been demonstrated that the NEMO–
IKK complex is recruited to this area following T-cell
activation [53*]. Moreover, the localization of the signa-
losome to the TCR or to the membrane of T cells is
sufficient to activate NF-κB [53*]. Among other ques-
tions, the precise function of RIP2 in this signalling
cascade needs to be clarified. RIP2 is recruited to toll-
like receptor 2 (TLR2) in response to peptidoglycan
stimulation, but nothing is known concerning its recruit-
ment to the TCR. However, RIP2, Carmal and MALT1
are unique components capable of integrating signals

from both the innate and the adaptive immune system
[41**,50**,51**]. Another unanswered question regards
the possible role of members of the TNF-receptor-asso-
ciated factor (TRAF) family (whose activity as an ubiqui-
tin ligase seems to be required for NF-κB activation by
IL-1 or TNF) in antigen-induced NF-κB activation.

It is interesting to notice that most of the molecules
involved in NF-κB activation through antigen receptor
stimulation (Vav1, PKCθ, Carmal and RIP2) also play an
important role in JNK activation. It is important to
identify the exact point of divergence between these
two pathways, as they control the apoptotic response in
an antagonistic manner. In addition, in B cells, the cou-
pling between the NF-κB and the JNK pathways is
important to mediate the B-cell immunogenic response
to foreign antigens, uncoupling the two pathways leading
to clonal anergy. In T cells, the tolerogenic response to
antigen is characterized by diminished JNK and NF-κB
activation [54]. Thus, the response to antigens and patho-
gens is the result of a precisely balanced interaction
between adaptors, enzymes and downstream targets that
modulate the fate of lymphocytes.

References and recommended reading
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of
review, have been highlighted as:
• of special interest
• • of outstanding interest

1. Israël A: The IKK complex: an integrator of all signals that
activate NF-κB? Trends Cell Biol 2000, 10:129-133.
2. Ghosh S, Karin M: Missing pieces in the NF-κB puzzle. Cell 2002,
109:S81-S96.
3. Vermeulen L, De Wilde G, Notebaert S, Vanden Berghe W,
Haegeman G: Regulation of the transcriptional activity of the
nuclear factor-kappaB p65 subunit. Biochem Pharmacol 2002,
64:963-970.
4. Herndon TM, Shan XC, Tsokos GC, Wange RL: ZAP-70 and
SLP-76 regulate protein kinase C-theta and NF-kappaB
activation in response to engagement of CD3 and CD28.
J Immunol 2001, 166:5654-5664.
5. Piccolella E, Spadaro F, Ramoni C, Marinari B, Costanzo A,
Levrero M, Thomson L, Abraham RT, Tuosto L: Vav-1 and the
IKK α subunit of IkB kinase functionally associate to induce
NF-κB activation in response to CD28 engagement.
J Immunol 2003, 170:2895-2903.
6. Isakov N, Altman A: Protein kinase C theta in T cell activation.
Annu Rev Immunol 2002, 20:761-794.
7. Sun Z, Arendt CW, Ellmeier W, Schaeffer EM, Sunshine MJ,
Gandhi L, Annes J, Petrzilka D, Kupfer A, Schwartzberg PL et al.: 
PKC-theta is required for TCR-induced NF-kappaB activation
in mature but not immature T lymphocytes. Nature 2000,
404:402-407.
8. Pfeifhofer C, Kofler K, Gruber T, Tabrizi NG, Lutz C, Maly K,
Leitges M, Baier G: Protein kinase C theta affects Ca2+
mobilization and NFAT cell activation in primary mouse
T cells. J Exp Med 2003, 197:1525-1535.
These two studies [7,8*] report the analysis of PKCθ-deficient mice, but
present conflicting data regarding the role of this kinase in NF-κB and
NFAT signalling.
9. Bi K, Tanaka Y, Coudronniere N, Sugie K, Hong S,
van Stipdonk MJ, Altman A: Antigen-induced translocation of
PKC-theta to membrane rafts is required for T cell activation.
Nat Immunol 2001, 2:556-563.

10. Huang J, Lo PF, Zal T, Gascoigne NR, Smith BA, Levin SD, Grey HM: CD28 plays a critical role in the segregation of PKC-theta within the immunologic synapse. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2002, **99**:9369-9373.

11. Villalba M, Bi K, Hu J, Altman Y, Bushway P, Reits E, Neefjes J, Baier G, Abraham RT, Altman A: Translocation of PKC-theta in T cells is mediated by a nonconventional, PI3-K- and Vav-dependent pathway, but does not absolutely require phospholipase C. *J Cell Biol* 2002, **157**:253-263.

12. Liu Y, Witte S, Liu YC, Doyle M, Elly C, Altman A: Regulation of protein kinase C-theta function during T cell activation by Lck-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation. *J Biol Chem* 2000, **275**:3603-3609.

13. Villalba M, Coudronniere N, Deckert M, Teixeiro E, Mas P, Altman A: A novel functional interaction between Vav and PKC-theta is required for TCR-induced T cell activation. *Immunity* 2000, **12**:151-160.

14. Coudronniere N, Villalba M, Englund N, Altman A: NF-kB activation induced by T cell receptor/CD28 costimulation is mediated by protein kinase C-theta. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 2000, **97**:3394-3399.

15. Lin X, O'Mahony A, Mu Y, Geleziunas R, Greene WC: Protein kinase C-theta participates in NF-kappaB activation induced by CD3-CD28 costimulation through selective activation of IkappaB kinase beta. *Mol Cell Biol* 2000, **20**:2933-2940.

16. Thome M: The immunological synapse and actin assembly: a regulatory role for PKC theta. *Dev Cell* 2003, **4**:3-5.

17. Sasahara Y, Rachid R, Byrne MJ, de la Fuente MA, Abraham RT, Ramesh N, Geha RS: Mechanism of recruitment of WASP to the immunological synapse and of its activation following TCR ligation. *Mol Cell* 2002, **10**:1269-1281.
    - This elegant study shows that the WASP-interacting protein (WIP) inhibitor of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP), a molecule involved in F actin polymerisation, is a substrate of PKCθ. Through this process, PKCθ induces dissociation of WASP from a ZAP-70-CrkL-WIP-WASP complex localized in the immunological synapse.

18. Saijo K, Schmedt C, Su IH, Karasuyama H, Lowell CA, Reth M, Adachi T, Patke A, Santana A, Tarakhovsky A: Essential role of Src-family protein tyrosine kinases in NF-kappaB activation during B cell development. *Nat Immunol* 2003, **4**:274-279.

19. Yokozeki T, Adler K, Lankar D, Bonnerot C: B cell receptor-mediated Syk-independent activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, Ras, and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways. *J Immunol* 2003, **171**:1328-1335.

20. Hikida M, Johmura S, Hashimoto A, Takezaki M, Kurosaki T: Coupling between B cell receptor and phospholipase C-gamma2 is essential for mature B cell development. *J Exp Med* 2003, **198**:581-589.

21. Tan JE, Wong SC, Gan SK, Xu S, Lam KP: The adaptor protein BLNK is required for B cell antigen receptor-induced activation of nuclear factor-kappaB and cell cycle entry and survival of B lymphocytes. *J Biol Chem* 2001, **276**:20055-20063.

22. Khan WN: Regulation of B lymphocyte development and activation by Bruton's tyrosine kinase. *Immunol Res* 2001, **23**:147-156.

23. Su TT, Guo B, Kawakami Y, Sommer K, Chae K, Humphries LA, Kato RM, Kang S, Patron L, Wall R et al.: PKC-beta controls I kappa B kinase lipid raft recruitment and activation in response to BCR signaling. *Nat Immunol* 2002, **3**:780-786.
    - This paper shows that PKCβ is required for BCR-mediated NF-κB activation, and that it controls the recruitment of the IkB kinase complex into lipid rafts.

24. Leitges M, Schmedt C, Guinamard R, Davoust J, Schaal S, Stabel S, Tarakhovsky A: Immunodeficiency in protein kinase C beta-deficient mice. *Science* 1996, **273**:788-791.

25. Saijo K, Mecklenbrauker I, Santana A, Leitger M, Schmedt C, Tarakhovsky A: Protein kinase C beta controls nuclear factor kappaB activation in B cells through selective regulation of the IkappaB kinase alpha. *J Exp Med* 2002, **195**:1647-1652.


26. Mizuno T, Rothstein TL: CD40 engagement eliminates the need for Bruton's tyrosine kinase in B cell receptor signaling for NF-kappaB. *J Immunol* 2003, **170**:2806-2810.

27. Suzuki H, Matsuda S, Terauchi Y, Fujiwara M, Ohteki T, Asano T, Behrens TW, Kouro T, Takatsu K, Kadowaki T et al.: PI3K and Btk differentially regulate B cell antigen receptor-mediated signal transduction. *Nat Immunol* 2003, **4**:280-286.

28. Martin P, Duran A, Minguet S, Gaspar ML, Diaz-Meco MT, Rennert P, Leitges M, Moscat J: Role of zeta-PKC in B-cell signaling and function. *EMBO J* 2002, **21**:4049-4057.
    - These two studies [28**,29] demonstrate that PKCζ deficiency results in defective transactivating potential of NF-κB, and selectively impairs signalling through the BCR.

29. Leitges M, Sanz L, Martin P, Duran A, Braun U, Garcia JF, Camacho F, Diaz-Meco MT, Rennert PD, Moscat J: Targeted disruption of the zetaPKC gene results in the impairment of the NF-κB pathway. *Mol Cell* 2001, **8**:771-780.

30. Yamazaki T, Kurosaki T: Contribution of BCAP to maintenance of mature B cells through c-Rel. *Nat Immunol* 2003, **4**:780-786.

31. Ruland J, Duncan GS, Elia A, del Barco Barrantes I, Nguyen L, Plyte S, Millar DG, Bouchard D, Wakeham A, Ohashi PS et al.: Bcl10 is a positive regulator of antigen receptor-induced activation of NF-κB and neural tube closure. *Cell* 2001, **104**:33-42.

32. Xue L, Morris SW, Orihuela C, Tuomanen E, Cui X, Wen R, Wang D:
    - Defective development and function of Bcl10-deficient follicular, marginal zone and B1 B cells. *Nat Immunol* 2003, **4**:857-865.
    - These two papers [31,32**] present genetic evidence that Bcl10 is implicated in antigen receptor and PMA/ionomycin-induced NF-κB activation, and is essential for the development of all mature B-cell subsets.

33. Bertin J, Wang L, Guo Y, Jacobson MD, Poyet JL, Srinivasula SM, Merriam S, DiStefano PS, Alnemri ES: CARD11 and CARD14 are novel caspase recruitment domain (CARD)/membrane-associated guanylate kinase (MAGUK) family members that interact with BCL10 and activate NF-kappaB. *J Biol Chem* 2001, **276**:11877-11882.

34. Gaide O, Martinon F, Micheau O, Bonnet D, Thome M, Tschopp J: Carma1, a CARD-containing binding partner of Bcl10, induces Bcl10 phosphorylation and NF-kappaB activation. *FEBS Lett* 2001, **496**:121-127.

35. McAllister-Lucas LM, Inohara N, Lucas PC, Ruland J, Benito A, Li Q, Chen S, Chen FF, Yamaoka S, Verma IM et al.: Bimp1, a MAGUK family member linking PKC activation to Bcl10-mediated NF-kappaB induction. *J Biol Chem* 2001, **276**:30589-30597.

36. Wang L, Guo Y, Huang WJ, Ke X, Poyet JL, Manji GA, Merriam S, Glucksman MA, DiStefano PS, Alnemri ES et al.: Card10 is a novel caspase recruitment domain/membrane-associated guanylate kinase family member that interacts with BCL10 and activates NF-kappaB. *J Biol Chem* 2001, **276**:21405-21409.

37. Gaide O, Favier B, Legler DF, Bonnet D, Brissoni B, Valitutti S, Bron C, Tschopp J, Thome M: CARMA1 is a critical lipid raft-associated regulator of TCR-induced NF-kappa B activation. *Nat Immunol* 2002, **3**:836-843.
    - See annotation to [39**].

38. Egawa T, Albrecht B, Favier B, Sunshine MJ, Mirchandani K, O'Brien W, Thome M, Littman DR: Requirement for CARMA1 in antigen receptor-induced NF-kappaB activation and lymphocyte proliferation. *Curr Biol* 2003, **13**:1252-1258.
    - See annotation to [42**].

39. Wang D, You Y, Case SM, McAllister-Lucas LM, Wang L, DiStefano PS, Nunez G, Bertin J, Lin X: A requirement for CARMA1 in TCR-induced NF-kappaB activation. *Nat Immunol* 2002, **3**:830-835.
    - These two papers [37**,39**] present the first evidence that CARMA1 is critically involved in TCR-mediated NF-κB activation, and that it controls the subcellular localisation of Bcl10.

40. Pomerantz JL, Denny EM, Baltimore D: CARD11 mediates factor-specific activation of NF-kappaB by the T cell receptor complex. *EMBO J* 2002, **21**:5184-5194.

41. Hara H, Wada T, Bakal C, Kozieradzki I, Suzuki S, Suzuki N,  
    Nghiêm M, Griffiths EK, Krawczyk C, Bauer B *et al.*: The MAGUK  
    family protein CARD11 is essential for lymphocyte activation.  
    *Immunity* 2003, **18**:763-775.  
    See annotation to [42**].

42. Jun JE, Wilson LE, Vinuesa CG, Lesage S, Blery M, Miosge LA,  
    Cook MC, Kucharska EM, Hara H, Penninger JM *et al.*: Identifying  
    the MAGUK protein Carma-1 as a central regulator of humoral  
    immune responses and atopy by genome-wide mouse  
    mutagenesis. *Immunity* 2003, **18**:751-762.  
    Three studies [38**,41**,42**] demonstrate, through a genetic approach,  
    that CARMA1 is essential for antigen-receptor-induced NF-κB activation  
    and lymphocyte proliferation.

43. Jun JE, Goodnow CC: Scaffolding of antigen receptors for  
    immunogenic versus tolerogenic signaling. *Nat Immunol* 2003,  
    **4**:1057-1064.

44. Lucas PC, Yonezumi M, Inohara N, McAllister-Lucas LM,  
    Abazeed ME, Chen FF, Yamaoka S, Seto M, Nunez G: Bcl10 and  
    MALT1, independent targets of chromosomal translocation  
    in MALT lymphoma, cooperate in a novel NF-kappaB  
    signaling pathway. *J Biol Chem* 2001, **276**:19012-19019.

45. Uren AG, O'Rourke K, Aravind LA, Pisabarro MT, Seshagiri S,  
    Koonin EV, Dixit VM: Identification of paracaspases and  
    metacaspases: two ancient families of caspase-like proteins,  
    one of which plays a key role in MALT lymphoma. *Mol Cell* 2000,  
    **6**:961-967.

46. Ruefli-Brasse AA, French DM, Dixit VM: Regulation of  
    • NF-kappaB-dependent lymphocyte activation and  
    development by Paracaspase. *Science* 2003, **302**:1581-1584.  
    See annotation to [47*].

47. Ruland J, Duncan GS, Wakeham A, Mak TW: Differential  
    • requirement for Malt1 in T and B cell antigen receptor signaling.  
    *Immunity* 2003, **19**:749-758.  
    These two papers [46*,47*] present genetic evidence for the role of  
    MALT1 in TCR-induced NF-κB activation. However, conflicting data  
    are presented regarding the activation of NF-κB through the BCR.

48. Zhou H, Wertz I, O'Rourke K, Ultsch M, Xiao W, Dixit VM: Bcl10  
    • activates NF-kappaB pathway through paracaspase/MALT1  
    dependent ubiquitination of NEMO/IKKgamma. *Nature* 2004,  
    **427**:167-171.  
    This study demonstrates that Bcl10 induces NEMO ubiquitination in a  
    MALT1-dependent manner, and that this event is required for TCR-  
    induced NF-κB activation.

49. Kelliher MA, Grimm S, Ishida Y, Kuo F, Stanger BZ, Leder P:  
    The death domain kinase RIP mediates the TNF-induced  
    NF-κB signal. *Immunity* 1998, **8**:297-303.

50. Chin AI, Dempsey PW, Bruhn K, Miller JF, Xu Y, Cheng G:  
    • Involvement of receptor-interacting protein 2 in innate and  
    adaptive immune responses. *Nature* 2002, **416**:190-194.  
    See annotation to [51**].

51. Kobayashi K, Inohara N, Hernandez LD, Galan JE, Nunez G,  
    • Janeway CA, Medzhitov R, Flavell RA: RICK/Rip2/CARDIAK  
    mediates signalling for receptors of the innate and adaptive  
    immune systems. *Nature* 2002, **416**:194-199.  
    These two papers [50**,51**] report the essential role of RIP2 in signalling  
    from receptors of the innate and adaptive response.

52. Ruefli-Brasse AA, Lee WP, Hurst S, Dixit VM: Rip2 participates in  
    Bcl10 signaling and T-cell receptor-mediated NF-kappaB  
    activation. *J Biol Chem* 2004, **279**:1570-1574.

53. Weil R, Schwamborn K, Alcover A, Bessia C, Di Bartolo V, Israël A:  
    • Induction of the NF-kappaB cascade by recruitment of the  
    scaffold molecule NEMO to the T cell receptor. *Immunity* 2003,  
    **18**:13-26.  
    This paper demonstrates that NEMO is normally recruited to the activated  
    TCR at the immunological synapse. Artificial targeting of NEMO to the  
    TCR in a ZAP-70-deficient T-cell line is sufficient to specifically restore  
    NF-κB activation in response to anti-CD3. In addition, it shows that the  
    presence of NEMO at the cell membrane is sufficient to induce NF-κB  
    activation.

54. Guerder S, Rincon M, Schmitt-Verhulst AM: Regulation of  
    activator protein-1 and NF-kappa B in CD8⁺ T cells  
    exposed to peripheral self-antigens. *J Immunol* 2001,  
    **166**:4399-4407.

55. Dienz O, Moller A, Strecker A, Stephan N, Krammer PH,  
    Droge W, Schmitz ML: Src homology 2 domain-containing  
    leukocyte phosphoprotein of 76 kDa and phospholipase C  
    gamma 1 are required for NF-kappaB activation and lipid  
    raft recruitment of protein kinase C theta induced by T cell  
    costimulation. *J Immunol* 2003, **170**:365-372.

56. Bajpai UD, Zhang K, Teutsch M, Sen R, Wortis HH:  
    Bruton's tyrosine kinase links the B cell receptor to  
    nuclear factor kappaB activation. *J Exp Med* 2000,  
    **191**:1735-1744.

57. Petro JB, Rahman SM, Ballard DW, Khan WN: Bruton's tyrosine  
    kinase is required for activation of IkappaB kinase and nuclear  
    factor kappaB in response to B cell receptor engagement.  
    *J Exp Med* 2000, **191**:1745-1754.

58. Costello PS, Walters AE, Mee PJ, Turner M, Reynolds LF,  
    Prisco A, Sarner N, Zamoyska R, Tybulewicz VLJ: The Rho-family  
    GTP exchange factor Vav is a critical transducer of T cell  
    receptor signals to the calcium, ERK, and NF-kappaB  
    pathways. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1999, **96**:3035-3040.
