
European Journal of Endocrinology (2004) 150 605–618

INVITED REVIEW

# The environment and autoimmune thyroid diseases

Mark F Prummel, Thea Strieder and Wilmar M Wiersinga

*Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, F5-171, Academic Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands*

(Correspondence should be addressed to M F Prummel; Email: m.f.prummel@amc.uva.nl)

## Abstract

Genetic factors play an important role in the pathogenesis of autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) and it has been calculated that 80% of the susceptibility to develop Graves' disease is attributable to genes. The concordance rate for AITD among monozygotic twins is, however, well below 1 and environmental factors thus must play an important role. We have attempted to carry out a comprehensive review of all the environmental and hormonal risk factors thought to bring about AITD in genetically predisposed individuals. Low birth weight, iodine excess and deficiency, selenium deficiency, parity, oral contraceptive use, reproductive span, fetal microchimerism, stress, seasonal variation, allergy, smoking, radiation damage to the thyroid gland, viral and bacterial infections all play a role in the development of autoimmune thyroid disorders. The use of certain drugs (lithium, interferon-α, Campath-1H) also increases the risk of the development of autoimmunity against the thyroid gland. Further research is warranted into the importance of fetal microchimerism and of viral infections capable of mounting an endogenous interferon-α response.

*European Journal of Endocrinology 150 605–618*

## Introduction

Graves' hyperthyroidism, Hashimoto's hypothyroidism and post-partum thyroid dysfunction are common disorders. They have an autoimmune origin and are therefore also alluded to as autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD). Like other organ-specific autoimmune endocrinopathies, e.g. type I diabetes mellitus (IDDM), they have a multifactorial etiology. Genes are certainly involved and in order to develop AITD a subject will have a certain genetic susceptibility, probably involving multiple genes of which only a few have been identified. Most notably, certain human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR genes determine this genetic susceptibility, but there are other genes involved and AITD thus has a polygenic background. Nevertheless, non-genetic (environmental, hormonal) factors must also play an important etiologic role, because the concordance rate for AITD in monozygotic twins is not 100%. Another argument is that immigrants coming from countries with a low incidence of autoimmune diseases will adopt the incidence rate of the new country. For instance, type I diabetes mellitus is 10 times more frequent in Pakistanis living in the UK than in those living in Pakistan (1).

In recent years, a number of excellent reviews have been published on the genetic background of AITD (2–6). Here we will attempt to review the environmental factors that may be involved in the development of AITD (Table 1). In this review we will consider both

## Fetal growth

Reduced fetal growth is a risk factor for several common disorders, such as chronic heart disease (9), and famine exposure during fetal life is associated with subsequent glucose intolerance during adult life (10). Prenatal malnutrition is associated with a lower thymic and splenic weight (11), and this may cause earlier maturation of the thymus resulting in a decline in T suppressor cells (12). Indeed, Phillips *et al.* (12) found that among 305 women aged 60–71 years born in the UK the presence of TPO antibodies was positively related to lower birth weights (but not to weight at 1 year of age). The prevalence of TPO antibodies was 2.4 times higher in women with a birth weight of less than 5.5 lbs (2.49 kg) compared with those with a higher birth weight. In a twin study, the same group found that among monozygous twins, the smaller twin had higher levels of TPO antibodies (13). Because of the genetic identity of monozygous twins, this study strongly suggests

Table 1 Environmental factors involved in the etiology of AITD.

| Environmental factor                | Mechanism                                      | Phenotype         |
|-------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|-------------------|
| Low birth weight                    | Insufficient thymic maturation                 | TPO antibodies    |
| Iodine excess                       | No escape from Wolff-Chaikoff effect          | HT                |
|                                     | Jod-Basedow                                   | GD                |
| Selenium deficiency                 | Unknown; viral infections?                    | HT                |
| Longer reproductive span            | Estradiol effect?                             | HT                |
| Oral contraceptives                 | Protective                                    | TPO antibodies    |
| Fetal microchimerism                | Male cells in thyroid elicit antithyroid attack | HT and GD         |
| Stress                              | Upregulation HPA axis                         | GD                |
| Allergy                             | Unknown; high IgE levels                      | GD                |
| Smoking                             | Hypoxia? High IgE levels                      | GD; esp. GO       |
| Yersinia enterocolitica infection   | Molecular mimicry                             | GD                |

See text for explanation and references. GD, Graves' disease; HT, Hashimoto's thyroiditis; GO, Graves' ophthalmopathy.

that certain intrauterine factors causing reduced fetal growth are the first environmental risk factors for AITD in later life. However, this was not confirmed in another twin study where birth weight was not found to be a determinant for clinically overt AITD (14).

### Iodine intake

Iodine intake seems to influence the prevalence rates of hyper- and hypothyroidism. In areas with sufficient iodine intake, hypothyroidism is more common than in iodine-deficient regions (15), whereas the overall prevalence of thyrotoxicosis is greater in iodine-deficient areas (16). Looking at the different causes of hyperthyroidism, Graves' hyperthyroidism as the cause of thyrotoxicosis is seen more frequently in iodine-replete areas (17), and TPO antibodies as a marker for impending thyroid failure are more prevalent in iodine-deficient regions (18).

Excessive iodine intake can cause dysthyroidism, especially in patients with underlying autoimmune thyroiditis (19). Due to a failure to escape from the Wolff-Chaikoff effect, iodine excess can cause hypothyroidism and/or goiter, but if autonomously functioning nodules or a subclinical form of Graves' disease are present, it can also induce hyperthyroidism (Jod-Basedow effect) (20, 21). Both phenomena are thought to lead to some thyroid destruction and hence presentation of thyroidal antigens to the immune system leading to an autoimmune reaction (22). It thus appears that iodine intake is indeed a risk factor for the development of AITD. This is in agreement with animal studies showing that a high iodine intake aggravates autoimmune thyroiditis in several genetically susceptible animal strains (23–25).

### Selenium intake

Selenium is a trace mineral and an essential nutrient for selenocysteine synthesis and is also called the 21st

www.eje.org

EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ENDOCRINOLOGY (2004) 150

The environment and autoimmune thyroid diseases 607

Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is 5–10:1 (33). The reason for this is unclear and genetic factors must play a role, although it is noteworthy that Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is very prevalent among girls with Turner’s syndrome (XO karyotype), but not in men with Klinefelter’s syndrome (XXY karyotype) (6). The influence of the X chromosome is thus limited and hormonal influences may also be operative in the induction of AITD. It is interesting to note the female preponderance in non-autoimmune-mediated thyroid disease, such as multinodular goiter, but this is outside the scope of this review.

**Parity**

Silent thyroiditis frequently occurs in the post-partum period, hence the name post-partum thyroid dysfunction, but Graves’ disease is also often seen in the first months post-partum. During pregnancy, the immune system is suppressed with a fall in the T-helper/suppressor-cell ratio, whereas in the first post-partum months T-cell activation occurs and thyroid autoantibody production rises (34). The immune suppression during pregnancy suggests that high levels of estradiol (E₂) may prevent autoimmunity, which is indeed true in several animal models for T-helper (Th)-mediated diseases (35). This immune suppression is associated with a decrease in the severity of Th1-mediated autoimmune diseases such as type I diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis, whereas systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) often worsens or remains unchanged during pregnancy (36). This has been attributed to a shift in the Th1/Th2 balance towards Th2 immunity to protect the fetus. This paradigm has recently been challenged and does not explain why Graves’ disease, as a clearly autoantibody-mediated disease, also abates during pregnancy.

On the other hand, the hyperprolactinemia of the post-partum period suggests that prolactin may act as an immunostimulant, although prolactin levels are also clearly elevated during pregnancy. In a large survey among 1877 subjects, hyperprolactinemia was found not to be associated with AITD (37).

It is possible, therefore, that parity itself is responsible for the gender difference in AITD, but no relation could be found between Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and parity (38). In this study, however, a lower risk for Hashimoto’s thyroiditis was found in subjects with a later age at menarche (≥15 years) and a higher risk with a later age at menopause (≥51 years), resulting in a higher risk for Hashimoto’s thyroiditis in women with longer reproductive spans.

**Oral contraceptives**

Another link to explain the sex difference would be the use of oral contraceptives or hormone replacement therapy (HRT). The latter, however, was found not to be associated with either subclinical hypothyroidism or the presence of TPO antibodies (39), although in one case report an exacerbation of eye symptoms was seen in a woman with Graves’ ophthalmopathy starting HRT (40). As for oral contraceptives, used by over 100 million women worldwide (41), there are remarkably few studies on their use and the development of AITD and in contrast to what one intuitively may think their use seems to protect against AITD. In an early large study among 46 000 women, cases of hypo- or hyperthyroidism together were seen less frequently among oral contraceptive users than in controls (relative risk (RR), 0.68; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.52–0.85) (42). Two large population-based studies found that thyroid volume was smaller in oral contraceptive users than in controls (43, 44). We found that estrogen use protected against the development of hyperthyroidism, independently of the number of previous pregnancies (7). This is in agreement with the observation that the use of contraceptives had a protective effect for the development of Graves’ disease (odds ratio (OR), 0.68; 95% CI, 0.49–0.93), but not for Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (45).

**Fetal microchimerism**

Lastly, a new concept has emerged that may explain the female preponderance: fetal microchimerism. This involves the transfer of fetal cells into the maternal circulation. These fetal cells can persist for a long time (46), and the consequences of the presence of semi-allogeneic cells for autoimmunity are currently being explored, also in the field of AITD (47). Imazumi *et al.* (48) found fetal cells in the thyroid glands of 12/46 (46%) of Tg-immunized pregnant mice as compared with only a small number in 2/10 (20%) of control pregnant mice. The same group then found that fetal cells were more often present in thyroid glands of patients affected by Graves’ disease than in nodular thyroids (49). Klintschar *et al.* (50) found intrathyroidal fetal cells in 8/17 (47%) Hashimoto patients compared with only 1/25 controls.

This is an exciting new discovery, and it may be that these engrafted semi-allogeneic cells trigger autoimmunity towards the organ in which they live and it has now been implicated in several other autoimmune diseases including systemic sclerosis and Sjögren’s syndrome (47, 51).

**Stress**

Stress has a profound influence on the immune system through neuroendocrine networks (52, 53). During stress the hypothalamo–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis becomes activated, which would imply that stress has an immunosuppressive effect. However, it is becoming clear that stress and corticosteroids have a differential

effect on Th1 and Th2 cells, driving the immune system towards a Th2 response. It thus suppresses cellular immunity and facilitates the persistent presence of certain viruses (such as Coxsackie B), while humoral immunity is enhanced. This may explain why certain autoimmune diseases are often preceded by severe stress (54, 55), and Graves' disease seems to be one of them.

The possible relation between stress and Graves' hyperthyroidism was noted in the early descriptions by Parry, Graves and von Basedow. Later it was noted that there was always a major increase in the occurrence of Graves' disease during wartime, a condition called 'Kriegsbasedow' (56). For example, the incidence of Graves' disease in Denmark became 4-fold higher in 1942 as compared with 1940 (57). A good recent example for this is the increase in Graves' disease during the civil war in Yugoslavia (58). However, there are exceptions because no increased frequency of Graves' disease was found in Belfast during the civil unrest there (59). Apart from war, the association has also been studied in a number of formal case-control studies. The first study from Sweden established an association between negative life events in the year preceding the diagnosis of Graves' hyperthyroidism (60). This was later confirmed by various other studies (61–63). However, these case-control studies can and have been criticized because of their retrospective nature, the influence of recall bias and the fact that hyperthyroidism itself is associated with increased anxiety (64, 65). Nevertheless, treatment with a benzodiazepine reduced the relapse rate in a retrospective study from 74% in untreated patients to 29% in treated patients (66). In a recent prospective study, it was shown that four personality traits (hypochondria, depression, paranoia and mental fatigue) were positively related to the relapse rate after antithyroid drugs in Graves' disease, and that stressful life events correlated with the titer of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)-receptor antibodies (67). Another case-control study found that Graves' disease patients had had a significantly greater number of stressful life events than patients with toxic nodular goiter or controls (the latter two groups were not different from each other in terms of stressful life events) (68).

Whether stress is also related to Hashimoto's disease is unknown, but we could not find a relationship between stressful life events and daily hassles with the presence of TPO antibodies in euthyroid subjects (T Strieder, unpublished observations).

### Seasonal variation

The incidence of myxedema coma is higher in the winter (provoked by lower ambient temperatures), whereas thyrotoxicosis is more often diagnosed in the warmer periods of the year (69, 70). The seasonality of thyrotoxicosis may not be related to the warmer temperatures (71), but to the fact that milk (in the UK the major source of iodine) contains more iodine in winter than in summer (72). Another factor responsible for seasonal differences may be the seasonal variation in viral infections or in allergen exposure.

### Allergy

Allergic diseases (being Th2 disorders) and autoimmune diseases (Th1 mediated) are usually considered as the opposites in immune reactions, but this contention is now less evident because allergy-associated mechanisms can contribute to the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis (73). A recent study showed that there is an association between the presence of wheezing as a measure of asthma and the occurrence of type I diabetes (74). Similarly, an association was found between an allergic constitution (asthma, atopic eczema) and AITD with OR values of 2.54 (95% CI, 1.16–5.57) and 2.95 (95% CI, 1.37–6.34) (75). Furthermore, there is a correlation between elevated levels of immunoglobulin E (IgE) and a slower decrease in TSH-receptor autoantibody levels in patients with Graves' disease (76). Patients with elevated IgE levels also have a lower chance of remission of Graves' disease after antithyroid drug treatment: remission levels of 20/41 (49%) versus 53/66 (80%; P = 0.0014) were reported in patients with elevated and normal levels of IgE respectively (77). In addition, patients with a relapse of Graves' hyperthyroidism had a higher rate of allergic rhinitis attacks (34%) than those who went into remission (7%) (78). The same authors reported on a TPO-antibody-positive patient who developed Graves' disease shortly after a severe allergic rhinitis due to an allergy to Japanese cedar pollen, with a concomitant rise in IgE levels, and suggested that allergic rhinitis is another risk factor for Graves' disease (79).

There is also an association between another allergic disease, chronic urticaria, and Hashimoto's thyroiditis (80). TPO and/or Tg autoantibodies were found more frequently in patients with chronic urticaria and angioedema (11.7%) than in controls (3.7%) (81), confirming an earlier report that found that 14% of urticaria patients had evidence for thyroid autoimmunity, more than statistically expected (82).

### Smoking

Apart from being a risk factor for cardiovascular diseases and lung carcinoma, cigarette smoking also has an influence on the immune system. Smoking induces a polyclonal activation of both B and T cells enhancing interleukin (IL)-2 production (83); it can also stimulate the HPA axis (84). Smoking (including passive smoking) increases serum IgE levels (85) and increases

the risk of allergic symptoms (86). Smoking may also increase the presentation of antigens by damaging cells and this mechanism has been proposed in the pathogenesis of Goodpasture's syndrome (83). It may also explain why anti-heat shock protein (hsp) 72 antibodies are more frequently found in smokers than in non-smokers (87). Smoking also appears to induce the production of several cytokines such as soluble IL (sIL)-2-receptor (88), sIL-1-receptor antagonist (89), soluble Intracellular Adhesion Molecule (sICAM)-1 (90), and IL-4 but not interferon-γ (IFN-γ) (91).

Smoking is linked to autoimmune diseases and increases the risk for rheumatoid arthritis, with an RR of 3.8 (92). It is also associated with Graves' hyperthyroidism with an RR of 2.62 (95% CI, 2.01–3.38) (93), but it is especially related to Graves' ophthalmopathy as was first reported by Hägg & Asplund (94). In our own study (95), we found an RR for ophthalmopathy of 7.7 (95% CI, 4.3–13.7), and the RR increased significantly from 2.5 for mild eye disease to 27.2 for severe eye disease (95). Similar results were obtained by others, with an RR for ophthalmopathy of 4.66 (95% CI, 3.46–6.27) in Italy (96) and 8.15 (95% CI, 2.81–23.64) in Taiwan (97). In most studies a dose-response relationship between smoking and disease severity was found (98–101). In a recent meta-analysis, the overall OR associated with smoking was 4.40 (95% CI, 2.88–6.73) (93).

If smoking increases the risk for Graves' ophthalmopathy via immunological mechanisms, one would expect it to be also related to autoimmune hypothyroidism. Although one study found an RR of 3.9 (95% CI, 1.6–9.1) (102), a meta-analysis could not confirm this: OR, 1.71 (95% CI, 0.87–3.39) (93). On the other hand, smoking was found to be a risk factor for the development of post-partum thyroid dysfunction: OR, 1.97 (95% CI, 1.23–3.17) (93). We recently found that smoking is negatively associated with the presence of TPO antibodies in euthyroid females and thus seems to protect against autoimmune thyroiditis (7).

The association between smoking and Graves' disease is further underscored by the fact that smoking increases the risk for a relapse of Graves' hyperthyroidism (103, 104). Smoking also increases the chances of an exacerbation of the eye disease after treatment with ¹³¹I, and it reduces the efficacy of radiotherapy and corticosteroid treatment of the ophthalmopathy (105, 106).

The reason for the strong association of smoking with Graves' ophthalmopathy is largely unknown (107). Hypoxia may play a role (108), because fibroblasts show a significant increase in proliferation and glycosaminoglycan production when cultured under hypoxic circumstances (109). Nicotine itself may also be involved, since nicotine addition to cultured orbital fibroblasts increased the expression of HLA-DR (110).


Drugs

Several drugs are known to induce AITD in genetically predisposed individuals, but the mechanisms by which they have this effect are different (Table 2).

Amiodarone

Thyroid dysfunction is a frequent side-effect of amiodarone, occurring in approximately 15% of patients (111). Neither amiodarone-induced hypothyroidism nor thyrotoxicosis are autoimmune mediated, although both do occur more frequently in females with thyroid antibodies (112). Whether amiodarone can induce autoimmunity is uncertain (111, 113). An early report that amiodarone induced a transient presence of TPO antibodies (114), could not be confirmed by others (115, 116).

Antiretroviral therapy

Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has been found to be associated with Graves' disease, occurring 16–19 months after initiation of different combinations of indinavir, stavudine, lamivudine and ritonavir (117). It may be related to HAART-induced changes in CD4 T cells (118).

Campath-1H

This humanized anti-CD52 monoclonal antibody induced Graves' disease in one-third of patients with multiple sclerosis treated with this compound (119). The reason for this is unknown, but since multiple sclerosis is not associated with AITD and the patients in whom Graves' disease occurred were not predisposed to the development of AITD (they lacked TPO antibodies), the effect should be related to the antibody. Campath-1H suppresses Th1 lymphocytes and thus shifts the Th1/Th2 balance towards antibody production and hence apparently towards a humoral immune response against the TSH-receptor (22).

Table 2 Drugs associated with the induction of AITD.

| Drug        | Mechanism                          | Phenotype |
|-------------|------------------------------------|-----------|
| Amiodarone  | Thyroid damage, iodine excess      | Uncertain: HT |
| HAART       | Changes in CD4+ cells              | GD        |
| Campath-1H  | Decrease in Th1/Th2 ratio          | GD        |
| IFN-α       | Stimulation of ADCC               | HT        |
|             | Stimulation of Th1 cells           | GD        |
| IL-2        | Activation of T cells              | HT        |

For explanations and references see text. HAART, highly active antiretroviral therapy; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; ADCC, antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity; HT, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis; GD, Graves’ disease.

IFN-α

IFN-α is widely used in the treatment of hepatitis C virus infection (120). Unlike IFN-γ (121), it is strongly associated with the induction of AITD (122). Risk factors for the development of autoimmune thyroid dysfunction include the female sex (RR, 4.4; 95% CI, 3.2–5.9) and the pretreatment presence of TPO antibodies (RR, 3.9; 95% CI, 1.9–8.1) (122). IFN-α treatment can induce three types of thyroid dysfunction: autoimmune hypothyroidism, destructive thyroiditis and hyperthyroidism. These can occur at any time after the start of treatment with a median of 17 weeks (123). Hypothyroidism is slightly more frequent than thyrotoxicosis, and in the large majority of cases it is of autoimmune origin leading to permanent thyroid failure in approximately 60% of patients (124, 125). Graves’ hyperthyroidism is the cause of thyrotoxicosis in about half of the patients; the rest suffer from silent thyroiditis.

IFN-α is a type I interferon (like IFN-β, but not IFN-γ which is a type II IFN) and stimulates Th1 development (126). It has strong antiviral activity by promoting HLA-I class I expression leading to recognition of virus-infected cells by cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (127). It also enhances antibody-dependent cell-mediated immunity by upregulating Fc-receptor density on lymphoid cells (128). Since infections with various viruses stimulate endogenous IFN-α production (129), we postulated that viral infections may also precipitate AITD via this IFN pathway (see below) (122).

IL-2

IL-2 is used in the treatment of HIV infection and in metastatic renal carcinoma and melanoma. Its pleiotropic immune effects include activation of T cells and among them autoreactive lymphocytes (130). IL-2 is involved in autoimmunity and it was shown recently that labeled IL-2 could be used to visualize sites of autoimmune inflammation in the pancreas of pre-diabetics and in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis patients (131). Short-term IL-2 administration induces an increase in serum thyroxine (T₄), 3,5,3′-triiodothyronine (T₃) and TSH levels, probably via a direct central stimulation of the pituitary (132); long-term use is associated with hypothyroidism, occurring in as many as 16% of patients (130). However, in most of these patients other therapies (lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cell infusion) were used concomitantly and the hypothyroidism was not always of autoimmune origin (133, 134).

(130). Nevertheless, such a side-effect has been reported only rarely (135). In one study among 25 patients, only two patients with pre-existing TPO antibodies suffered from transient hypothyroidism (136). In another study, however, no thyroid dysfunction was found among 20 patients treated with GM-CSF despite the fact that two had positive antithyroidal antibodies (137).

Irradiation

Irradiation of the thyroid gland may expose thyroidal antigens to the immune system and thus induce autoimmunity by stimulation of dendritic cells (138). Both external irradiation and internal irradiation by ¹³¹I are associated with AITD.

External irradiation

External irradiation is a clear risk factor for the induction of thyroid cancer, but also of hypothyroidism. In a large series of 1677 patients irradiated to the neck because of Hodgkin’s disease, hypothyroidism was found in 47% after a median of 4.0 (0.2–23.7) years after treatment (139). This is probably caused by damage to the gland and is not autoimmune mediated. However, external irradiation is also associated with Graves’ disease, occurring in 3.3% of the patients in the same study. This was confirmed in another study, where Graves’ disease was diagnosed in 5% of 1791 irradiated patients; an 8-fold greater incidence rate than in controls (140). The reason for this association may lie in the exposure of TSH-receptor protein to the immune system and this may also be the reason that external neck irradiation also enhances the risk for Graves’ ophthalmopathy (141–144).

¹³¹I therapy

Radioactive iodine is frequently used in the treatment of Graves’ hyperthyroidism and multinodular goiter. In the last decade, it has become clear that it can induce the occurrence of Graves’ hyperthyroidism in patients treated for (non-)toxic multinodular goiter (145, 146). This complication typically occurs after 3–6 months and is seen in 4–5% of cases; it occurs in parallel to an increase in TSH-receptor autoantibodies (147, 148). Interestingly, TSH-receptor antibodies were not induced in ten patients without this complication, indicating that this induction only occurs in otherwise – genetically – predisposed individuals (147).

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)

GM-CSF may activate mature lymphocytes and hence aggravate or induce autoimmunity against the thyroid

Environmental radiation (nuclear fall-out)

In addition, environmental radiation exposure such as occurred after the dropping of the nuclear bombs on

Nagasaki and Hiroshima, or the Chernobyl nuclear plant accident, may also damage the thyroid and expose antigen to the immune system. Indeed, the survivors of the atomic bomb on Nagasaki not only have an increased risk of thyroid cancer, but also of antibody-positive hypothyroidism (149). The same appears to be true for the people exposed to the Chernobyl fallout. In one case-control study, the OR for the development of TPO antibodies was 6.89 (95% CI, 3.17–14.99) and was higher in girls (9.64) than in boys (4.19) (150). This was confirmed in another case-control study, where 18.9% of children in the exposed area had TPO antibodies versus only 5% of controls from a non-exposed region in southwestern Russia (151). There was no difference in thyroid volume or function. However, there are also a number of studies that failed to find an association with TPO antibodies (152–155). Nevertheless, when Eheman *et al.* (156) reviewed the literature they concluded that low-dose environmental radiation exposure may be associated with the development of AITD.

### Viral infections

In view of the association between IFN-α and AITD, it has been suggested that viruses causing high endogenous IFN-α levels may also be associated with the induction of AITD. One such virus is the Coxsackie B virus, which has been implicated in the induction of type I or insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM). Evidence of a recent Coxsackie B infection was found more frequently in children who developed IDDM than in controls (157–159). In another study, 39/56 (70%) patients with IDDM of recent onset had high IFN-α levels and in half of them the Coxsackie B virus could be detected, while the virus was absent in IDDM patients with low IFN-α levels (160). In line with this, IFN-α induction by injection of polyinosinic polycytidylic acid (Poly IC) could induce IDDM in a rat strain that does not spontaneously develop IDDM (161).

IFN-α may thus act as a non-specific stimulus of the induction of autoimmunity. However, whether AITD is associated with viral infections is unknown since no studies like those mentioned above have been done in this field. Only congenital rubella infection, a strong

risk factor for IDDM (162), is known to be associated with the presence of TPO antibodies in children, but this syndrome is very rare (163). In addition, there have been reports on the presence of retroviral sequences and proteins in thyroid glands from patients with AITD such as the gag protein from the human foamy virus (HFV) (164). The importance of this virus is doubtful, because HFV sequences can be found in blood lymphocytes from both Graves' disease patients and healthy controls (165). Viruses are thought to induce De Quervain's thyroiditis; however, this is not an autoimmune condition but rather an inflammatory disorder with high levels of C-reactive protein (166).

### Bacterial infections

Several autoimmune diseases have been linked to bacterial infections, including Graves' disease (Table 3) (167). There are several hypotheses to explain this association. The first implies molecular mimicry (168). Bacterial pathogens can have an antigen sharing homology with a self-antigen and an immune reaction against the bacterial antigen may then lead to a breakdown of self-tolerance resulting in autoimmunity. This mimicry is not restricted to similarity in amino acid sequences. An autoreactive T cell line derived from a patient with multiple sclerosis, recognizing myelin basic protein (the autoantigen in multiple sclerosis) presented by a certain HLA-DR 2b protein, also recognized an Epstein-Barr virus peptide (with no homology to myelin basic protein) presented by a different HLA-DR 2a molecule (169). Here, it was not the two antigens but the two antigen-HLA complexes that shared the homology (170).

The hsps present on bacteria, but also expressed by human cells in response to inflammation and other stresses (171), provide another link between bacterial infections and autoimmunity (172). T-cell reactivity against hsp60 present on *Salmonella typhimurium* is thought to cause reactive arthritis because of cross-reactivity (173). A link with thyroid autoimmunity may be suggested by the observation that Graves' disease patients have higher levels of anti-hsp72 antibodies than controls (87, 174).

**Table 3** Some examples of autoimmune disease linked to bacterial infections via molecular mimicry; adapted from Ebringer & Wilson (167).

| Disease                | Autoantigen         | Bacterial pathogen               |
|------------------------|---------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Rheumatic fever        | Cardiac myosin      | *Streptococcus pyogenes*         |
| Ankylosing spondylitis | HLA-B27             | *Klebsiella pneumoniae*          |
| Rheumatoid arthritis   | Type XI collagen    | *Proteus mirabilis*              |
| Rheumatoid arthritis   | hsp60               | *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*     |
| Graves' disease        | TSH-receptor        | *Yersinia enterocolitica*       |

Another explanation linking autoimmunity to bacterial infections is the release of sequestered antigens by local infection and inflammation (175). In this respect it seems worth noting that TSH-receptor protein is expressed by intestinal lymphocytes (176, 177).

Whether bacterial infections play a role in AITD has not been studied, with one noticeable exception: *Yersinia enterocolitica*.

### Y. enterocolitica infection

This is an intestinal Gram-negative pathogen from the same family as the notorious *Y. pestis* (178). It mostly causes a self-limiting enterocolitis, but may persist as a low-grade infection of the mesenteric lymph nodes characterized by the persistence of antibodies against *Yersinia* outer membrane proteins (YOPs) (179, 180). This may be common, because in one case-control study approximately 25% of both cases (with chronic fatigue syndrome) and controls had IgG anti-YOP antibodies (179).

In the 1970s two studies reported a higher prevalence of *Y. enterocolitica* (especially serotype O:3) antibodies in Graves' disease patients (50 and 66% respectively) than in controls (28 and 8% respectively) (181, 182). These findings prompted an investigation into the possibility of shared antigens with the thyroid and it was found that *Y. enterocolitica* had specific binding sites for TSH in the \(10^{-8}\) M range (183). These binding sites were also recognized by TSH-receptor autoantibodies (184). Antibodies against YOPs raised in rabbits displaced TSH from binding to TSH-receptor protein, and these antibodies stained thyroid epithelial cells in immunohistochemistry (185, 186). Cellular immunity is also involved, because *Y. enterocolitica* can inhibit the migration of lymphocytes from patients with Graves' disease (181), and in a mouse model *Y. enterocolitica* acts as a superantigen (187).

The cross-reacting protein(s), at first thought to be the TSH-receptor itself, has not been identified yet, but appears to have conformational homology with the TSH-receptor, and one may be hsp70 (188). Others have found two low molecular weight envelope proteins (of 5.5 and 8 kDa) that are cross-reactive with the extracellular part of the TSH-receptor (189). The protein(s) do not seem to be *Y. enterocolitica* specific, since TSH binding sites were also found on other intestinal pathogens (190).

*Y. enterocolitica* infections are common. In a large Danish study, 8.3% of 48 857 patients with bacterial enteritis had a *Y. enterocolitica* infection (191). In Canada, the annual incidence of *Y. enterocolitica* infections is 3/100 000 subjects (192); in The Netherlands the yearly incidence is 1.2/100 000 inhabitants (193). In view of the high incidence of AITD, *Y. enterocolitica* infections may thus play a role in its development. With more specific assays using YOPs, there is indeed an association between antibodies against YOPs and AITD. IgA antibodies are thought to indicate that the primary immune response is mounted in the gut, and not in the thyroid, suggesting the *Y. enterocolitica* infection is causative (194). In a German study, IgG class antibodies were found in 72% of Graves' patients and in 66% of patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis as compared with 35% in controls; IgA antibodies were found in respectively 33, 37 and 11% (195). In Greece, 25% of Hashimoto patients had IgG antibodies and 2.8% had IgA antibodies, compared with 2 and 0% respectively in controls (196). A higher incidence of *Y. enterocolitica* antibodies in Graves and Hashimoto patients than in controls was also found in Japan and Turkey (197, 198). However, there are also studies that could not confirm these findings and found a similar rate of seropositivity in AITD patients and controls (199, 200). We recently found that 40% of 803 female relatives of patients with documented AITD had IgG antibodies against *Y. enterocolitica* YOPs (22% had IgA antibodies), as compared with only 24% of controls (13% had IgA antibodies), but the presence of these antibodies was unrelated to the presence of thyroid autoimmunity (201). We hypothesized that this high rate of probably persisting, low-grade *Y. enterocolitica* infections in relatives of AITD patients is related to a particular genetic make-up facilitating *Y. enterocolitica* infections independently from conferring a risk for AITD.

### Concluding remarks

AITD is a polygenetic disease and currently only a few genes have been identified as causing AITD, all with a rather low RR which is seldom higher than 3.0. Nevertheless, it has been calculated that 79% of the susceptibility to develop Graves' disease can be attributed to genetic factors, leaving 21% for environmental factors (202). Reviewing these non-genetic factors, it appears that multiple environmental factors are involved in the induction of AITD in genetically predisposed individuals (Table 4). It follows that there must be an interplay at work between different genes and different environmental factors. For instance, the post-partum period is a clear risk factor for Graves' disease but cannot explain its occurrence in males and only a minority of women will develop Graves' disease in the postpartum period. In other words, one gene may predispose for AITD in general while a second gene may dictate whether childbirth will precipitate its onset or not, while in another woman with the same first susceptibility gene the trigger may lie in a stress-coping gene. This would explain the rather low OR values of individual – genetic and environmental – risk factors: a specific environmental risk factor may have a very large RR in a person with a certain genetic make-up. This implies that the true importance of both genes and environment can only be discerned when studied

EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ENDOCRINOLOGY (2004) 150

The environment and autoimmune thyroid diseases 613

Table 4 Odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) of several environmental factors associated with the occurrence of AITD.

| Environmental factor (phenotype) | OR    | 95% CI       | Cases/controls | Reference                |
|----------------------------------|-------|--------------|----------------|--------------------------|
| Low birth weight                 | 5.5   | 1.0–30.1     | 113/190        | Phillips et al. (12)     |
| (< 5.5 lb; Tg antibodies)        |       |              |                |                          |
| High selenium levels             | 0.2   | 0.06–0.7     | Logistic regression | Derumeaux et al. (30)   |
| (hypoechoogenicity)              |       |              |                |                          |
| High age at menopause            | 3.0   | 2.0–6.0      | 47/47          | Phillips et al. (38)     |
| (> 50 years; HT)                 |       |              |                |                          |
| Use of                           | 0.68  | 0.49–0.93    | 617/617        | Vestergaard et al. (45)  |
| oral contraceptives (GD)         |       |              |                |                          |
| Fetal microchimerism             |       |              |                |                          |
| (HT)                             | 21.3  | 2.3–195      | 17/25          | Klintschar et al. (50)   |
| (GD)                             | 5.3   | 0.58–48      | 27/10          | Ando et al. (49)         |
| Stress (GD)                      | 3.37  | 2.4–4.7      | 387/524        | Winsa et al. (60)        |
|                                  |       |              |                | Sonino et al. (61)       |
|                                  |       |              |                | Kung (62)                |
| Smoking                          |       |              |                |                          |
| (GD)                             | 3.3   | 2.1–5.2      | 949/5781       | Vestergaard (93)         |
| (GO)                             | 4.4   | 2.9–6.7      | 768/1775       |                          |
| Allergy (relapse rate GD)        | 4.3   | 1.8–10.1     | 44/73          | Komiya et al. (77)       |
| Y. enterocolitica* (GD)          | 4.3   | 3.2–5.9      | 245/749        | Bech et al. (181)        |
|                                  |       |              |                | Shenkman & Bottone (182) |
|                                  |       |              |                | Wenzel et al. (195)      |
|                                  |       |              |                | Corapcioglu et al. (198)  |
|                                  |       |              |                | Arscott et al. (199)     |

* Studies reporting positive IgA antibodies, or antibodies against serogroup O:3. GD, Graves’ disease; GO, Graves’ ophthalmopathy; HT, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.

in conjunction. Such an approach requires a much larger sample size and probably multi-center cooperation. The good news is, however, that we now have powerful computers to perform the necessary multivariate analyses. It also means that we need a much more rigorous phenotype definition. Environmental risk factors are more likely to be important in older patients with AITD than in younger ones, their influence may also differ between patients who come from a family of AITD patients and isolated cases, or between males and females.

This does not mean that a further search for specific risk factors is useless. When reviewing all factors, one of the most promising is fetal microchimerism. To date this has been limited to the search for remnants of male fetuses (the Y chromosome), but female fetuses are likely to have the same impact. This implies further studies into the genetic make-up of partners of AITD patients. A second area holding promise is the importance of viral infections in the induction of AITD. They appear to be of importance in the induction of IDDM, lead to an endogenous surge in IFN-α (a clear risk factor for AITD when administered as a drug) and are more likely to occur in selenium deficiency (which is itself another risk factor for AITD).

The ultimate goal of this research is to find a feasible way of preventing the occurrence of AITD; for this we will need progress both in delineating the genetic background and in clarifying the precipitating environmental factors.

### References

1. Bach JF. The effect of infections on susceptibility to autoimmune and allergic diseases. *New England Journal of Medicine* 2002 **347** 911–920.
2. Gough SCL. The immunogenetics of Graves’ disease. *Current Opinion in Endocrinology and Diabetes* 1999 **6** 270–276.
3. Tait KF & Gough SC. The genetics of autoimmune endocrine disease. *Clinical Endocrinology* 2003 **59** 1–11.
4. Vaidya B, Kendall-Taylor P & Pearce SH. The genetics of autoimmune thyroid disease. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 2002 **87** 5385–5397.
5. Gough SC. The genetics of Graves’ disease. *Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of North America* 2000 **29** 255–266.
6. Barbesino G & Chiovato L. The genetics of Hashimoto’s disease. *Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of North America* 2000 **29** 357–374.
7. Strieder TG, Prummel MF, Tijssen JG, Endert E & Wiersinga WM. Risk factors for and prevalence of thyroid disorders in a cross-sectional study among healthy female relatives of patients with autoimmune thyroid disease. *Clinical Endocrinology* 2003 **59** 396–401.
8. Dayan CM & Daniels GH. Chronic autoimmune thyroiditis. *New England Journal of Medicine* 1996 **335** 99–107.
9. Forsen T, Eriksson JG, Tuomilehto J, Osmond C & Barker DJ. Growth in utero and during childhood among women who develop coronary heart disease: longitudinal study. *British Medical Journal* 1999 **319** 1403–1407.
10. Roseboom TJ, van der Meulen JH, Ravelli AC, Osmond C, Barker DJ & Bleker OP. Effects of prenatal exposure to the Dutch famine on adult disease in later life: an overview. *Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology* 2001 **185** 93–98.
11. Winick M & Noble A. Cellular response in rats during malnutrition at various ages. *Journal of Nutrition* 1966 **89** 300–306.
12. Phillips DI, Cooper C, Fall C, Prentice L, Osmond C, Barker DJ et al. Fetal growth and autoimmune thyroid disease. *Quarterly Journal of Medicine* 1993 **86** 247–253.

614 M F Prummel and others

EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ENDOCRINOLOGY (2004) 150

13 Phillips DI, Osmond C, Baird J, Huckle A & Rees-Smith B. Is birthweight associated with thyroid autoimmunity? A study in twins. *Thyroid* 2002 **12** 377–380.

14 Brix TH, Kyvik KO & Hegedus L. Low birth weight is not associated with clinically overt thyroid disease: a population based twin case-control study. *Clinical Endocrinology* 2000 **53** 171–176.

15 Laurberg P, Pedersen KM, Hreidarsson A, Sigfusson N, Iversen E & Knudsen PR. Iodine intake and the pattern of thyroid disorders: a comparative epidemiological study of thyroid abnormalities in the elderly in Iceland and in Jutland, Denmark. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 1998 **83** 765–769.

16 Laurberg P, Nohr SB, Pedersen KM, Hreidarsson AB, Andersen S, Bulow P *et al.* Thyroid disorders in mild iodine deficiency. *Thyroid* 2000 **10** 951–963.

17 Laurberg P, Pedersen KM, Vestergaard H & Sigurdsson G. High incidence of multinodular toxic goitre in the elderly population in a low iodine intake area vs. high incidence of Graves' disease in the young in a high iodine intake area: comparative surveys of thyrotoxicosis epidemiology in East-Jutland Denmark and Iceland. *Journal of Internal Medicine* 1991 **229** 415–420.

18 Pedersen IB, Knudsen N, Jorgensen T, Perrild H, Ovesen L & Laurberg P. Thyroid peroxidase and thyroglobulin autoantibodies in a large survey of populations with mild and moderate iodine deficiency. *Clinical Endocrinology* 2003 **58** 36–42.

19 Wiersinga WM & Braverman LE. Iodine-induced thyroid disease. In *Contemporary Endocrinology: Diseases of the Thyroid*, edn 2, pp 347–362. Ed. LE Braverman. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press Inc., 2003.

20 Roti E & Uberti ED. Iodine excess and hyperthyroidism. *Thyroid* 2001 **11** 493–500.

21 Markou K, Georgopoulos N, Kyriazopoulou V & Vagenakis AG. Iodine-induced hypothyroidism. *Thyroid* 2001 **11** 501–510.

22 Weetman AP. Autoimmune thyroid disease: propagation and progression. *European Journal of Endocrinology* 2003 **148** 1–9.

23 Ruwhof C & Drexhage HA. Iodine and thyroid autoimmune disease in animal models. *Thyroid* 2001 **11** 427–436.

24 Sundick RS, Bagchi N & Brown TR. The role of iodine in thyroid autoimmunity: from chickens to humans: a review. *Autoimmunity* 1992 **13** 61–68.

25 Lam-Tse WK, Lernmark A & Drexhage HA. Animal models of endocrine/organ-specific autoimmune diseases: do they really help us to understand human autoimmunity? *Springer Seminars in Immunopathology* 2002 **24** 297–321.

26 Rayman MP. The importance of selenium to human health. *Lancet* 2000 **356** 233–241.

27 Beck MA, Shi Q, Morris VC & Levander OA. Rapid genomic evolution of a non-virulent coxsackievirus B3 in selenium-deficient mice results in selection of identical virulent isolates. *Nature Medicine* 1995 **1** 433–436.

28 Zimmermann MB & Kohrle J. The impact of iron and selenium deficiencies on iodine and thyroid metabolism: biochemistry and relevance to public health. *Thyroid* 2002 **12** 867–878.

29 Barrington JW, Lindsay P, James D, Smith S & Roberts A. Selenium deficiency and miscarriage: a possible link? *British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology* 1996 **103** 130–132.

30 Derumeaux H, Valeix P, Castetbon K, Bensimon M, Boutron-Ruault MC, Arnaud J *et al.* Association of selenium with thyroid volume and echostructure in 35- to 60-year-old French adults. *European Journal of Endocrinology* 2003 **148** 309–315.

31 Gartner R, Gasnier BC, Dietrich JW, Krebs B & Angstwurm MW. Selenium supplementation in patients with autoimmune thyroiditis decreases thyroid peroxidase antibodies concentrations. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 2002 **87** 1687–1691.

32 Duntas LH, Mantzou E & Koutras DA. Effects of a six month treatment with selenomethionine in patients with autoimmune thyroiditis. *European Journal of Endocrinology* 2003 **148** 389–393.

33 Vanderpump MP, Tunbridge WM, French JM, Appleton D, Bates D, Clark F *et al.* The incidence of thyroid disorders in the community: a twenty-year follow-up of the Whickham Survey. *Clinical Endocrinology* 1995 **43** 55–68.

34 Stagnaro-Green A, Roman SH, Cobin RH, el Harazy E, Wallenstein S & Davies TF. A prospective study of lymphocyte-initiated immunosuppression in normal pregnancy: evidence of a T-cell etiology for postpartum thyroid dysfunction. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 1992 **74** 645–653.

35 Draca S. Is pregnancy a model how we should control some autoimmune diseases? *Autoimmunity* 2002 **35** 307–312.

36 Beagley KW & Gockel CM. Regulation of innate and adaptive immunity by the female sex hormones oestradiol and progesterone. *FEMS Immunology and Medical Microbiology* 2003 **38** 13–22.

37 Vanderpump MP, French JM, Appleton D, Tunbridge WM & Kendall-Taylor P. The prevalence of hyperprolactinaemia and association with markers of autoimmune thyroid disease in survivors of the Whickham Survey cohort. *Clinical Endocrinology* 1998 **48** 39–44.

38 Phillips DI, Lazarus JH & Butland BK. The influence of pregnancy and reproductive span on the occurrence of autoimmune thyroiditis. *Clinical Endocrinology* 1990 **32** 301–306.

39 Massoudi MS, Meilahn EN, Orchard TJ, Foley TP Jr, Kuller LH, Costantino JP *et al.* Prevalence of thyroid antibodies among healthy middle-aged women. Findings from the thyroid study in healthy women. *Annals of Epidemiology* 1995 **5** 229–233.

40 Ogard CG, Ogard C & Almdal TP. Thyroid-associated orbitopathy developed during hormone replacement therapy. *Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica* 2001 **79** 426–427.

41 Petitti DB. Clinical practice. Combination estrogen-progestin oral contraceptives. *New England Journal of Medicine* 2003 **349** 1443–1450.

42 Frank P & Kay CR. Incidence of thyroid disease associated with oral contraceptives. *British Medical Journal* 1978 **2** 1531.

43 Knudsen N, Bulow I, Laurberg P, Perrild H, Ovesen L & Jorgensen T. Low goitre prevalence among users of oral contraceptives in a population sample of 3712 women. *Clinical Endocrinology* 2002 **57** 71–76.

44 Barrere X, Valeix P, Preziosi P, Bensimon M, Pelletier B, Galan P *et al.* Determinants of thyroid volume in healthy French adults participating in the SU.VI.MAX cohort. *Clinical Endocrinology* 2000 **52** 273–278.

45 Vestergaard P, Rejnmark L, Weeke J, Hoeck HC, Nielsen HK, Rungby J *et al.* Smoking as a risk factor for Graves' disease, toxic nodular goiter, and autoimmune hypothyroidism. *Thyroid* 2002 **12** 69–75.

46 Bianchi DW, Zickwolf GK, Weil GJ, Sylvester S & DeMaria MA. Male fetal progenitor cells persist in maternal blood for as long as 27 years postpartum. *PNAS* 1996 **93** 705–708.

47 Khosrotehrani K & Bianchi DW. Fetal cell microchimerism: helpful or harmful to the parous woman? *Current Opinion in Obstetrics and Gynecology* 2003 **15** 195–199.

48 Imazumi M, Pritsker A, Unger P & Davies TF. Intrathyroidal fetal microchimerism in pregnancy and postpartum. *Endocrinology* 2002 **143** 247–253.

49 Ando T, Imazumi M, Graves PN, Unger P & Davies TF. Intrathyroidal fetal microchimerism in Graves' disease. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 2002 **87** 3315–3320.

50 Klintschar M, Schwaiger P, Mannweiler S, Regauer S & Kleiber M. Evidence of fetal microchimerism in Hashimoto's thyroiditis. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 2001 **86** 2494–2498.

51 Badenhoop K. Intrathyroidal microchimerism in Graves' disease or Hashimoto's thyroiditis: regulation of tolerance or alloimmunity by fetal-maternal immune interaction. *European Journal of Endocrinology* 2003 (in press).

52 Besedovsky HO & del Rey A. Immune-neuro-endocrine interactions: facts and hypotheses. *Endocrine Reviews* 1996 **17** 64–102.

53 Sternberg EM. Neuroendocrine regulation of autoimmune/inflammatory disease. *Journal of Endocrinology* 2001 **169** 429–435.

EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ENDOCRINOLOGY (2004) 150

The environment and autoimmune thyroid diseases 615

interleukin 13. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 2001 **86** 3540–3544.

54 Elenkov IJ & Chrousos GP. Stress hormones, Th1/Th2 patterns, pro/anti-inflammatory cytokines and susceptibility to disease. *Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism* 1999 **10** 359–368.

55 Elenkov IJ & Chrousos GP. Stress hormones, proinflammatory and antiinflammatory cytokines, and autoimmunity. *Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences* 2002 **966** 290–303.

56 Rosch PJ. Stressful life events and Graves’ disease. *Lancet* 1993 **342** 566–567.

57 Gorman CA. A critical review of the role of stress in hyperthyroidism. In *The Thyroid Gland, Environment and Autoimmunity*, pp 191–200. Eds HA Drexhage, JJM de Vijlder & WM Wiersinga. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers, 1990.

58 Paunkovic N, Paunkovic J, Pavlovic O & Paunovic Z. The significant increase in incidence of Graves’ disease in eastern Serbia during the civil war in the former Yugoslavia (1992 to 1995). *Thyroid* 1998 **8** 37–41.

59 Hadden DR & McDevitt DG. Environmental stress and thyrotoxicosis. Absence of association. *Lancet* 1974 **2** 577–578.

60 Winsa B, Adami HO, Bergstrom R, Gamstedt A, Dahlberg PA, Adamson U *et al.* Stressful life events and Graves’ disease. *Lancet* 1991 **338** 1475–1479.

61 Sonino N, Girelli ME, Boscaro M, Fallo F, Busnardo B & Fava GA. Life events in the pathogenesis of Graves’ disease. A controlled study. *Acta Endocrinologica (Copenh)* 1993 **128** 293–296.

62 Kung AW. Life events, daily stresses and coping in patients with Graves’ disease. *Clinical Endocrinology* 1995 **42** 303–308.

63 Radosavljevic VR, Jankovic SM & Marinkovic JM. Stressful life events in the pathogenesis of Graves’ disease. *European Journal of Endocrinology* 1996 **134** 699–701.

64 Dayan CM. Stressful life events and Graves’ disease revisited. *Clinical Endocrinology* 2001 **55** 13–14.

65 Chiovato L & Pinchera A. Stressful life events and Graves’ disease. *European Journal of Endocrinology* 1996 **134** 680–682.

66 Benvenega S. Benzodiazepine and remission of Graves’ disease. *Thyroid* 1996 **6** 659–660.

67 Fukao A, Takamatsu J, Murakami Y, Sakane S, Miyauchi A, Kuma K *et al.* The relationship of psychological factors to the prognosis of hyperthyroidism in antithyroid drug-treated patients with Graves’ disease. *Clinical Endocrinology* 2003 **58** 550–555.

68 Matos-Santos A, Nobre EL, Costa JG, Nogueira PJ, Macedo A, Galvao-Teles A *et al.* Relationship between the number and impact of stressful life events and the onset of Graves’ disease and toxic nodular goitre. *Clinical Endocrinology* 2001 **55** 15–19.

69 Wiersinga WM. Environmental factors in autoimmune thyroid disease. *Experimental and Clinical Endocrinology and Diabetes* 1999 **107** (Suppl 3) S67–S70.

70 Westphal SA. Seasonal variation in the diagnosis of Graves’ disease. *Clinical Endocrinology* 1994 **41** 27–30.

71 Phillips DI, Barker DJ & Morris JA. Seasonality of thyrotoxicosis. *Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health* 1985 **39** 72–74.

72 Phillips DI, Nelson M, Barker DJ, Morris JA & Wood TJ. Iodine in milk and the incidence of thyrotoxicosis in England. *Clinical Endocrinology* 1988 **28** 61–66.

73 Pedotti R, De Voss JJ, Steinman L & Galli SJ. Involvement of both ‘allergic’ and ‘autoimmune’ mechanisms in EAE, MS and other autoimmune diseases. *Trends in Immunology* 2003 **24** 479–484.

74 Stene LC & Nafstad P. Relation between occurrence of type 1 diabetes and asthma. *Lancet* 2001 **357** 607–608.

75 Moens HJ, Wiersinga WM & Drexhage HA. Association between autoimmune thyroid disease, atopy, and urticaria? *Lancet* 1984 **2** 582–583.

76 Sato A, Takemura Y, Yamada T, Ohtsuka H, Sakai H, Miyahara Y *et al.* A possible role of immunoglobulin E in patients with hyperthyroid Graves’ disease. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 1999 **84** 3602–3605.

77 Komiya I, Yamada T, Sato A, Kouki T, Nishimori T & Takasu N. Remission and recurrence of hyperthyroid Graves’ disease during and after methimazole treatment when assessed by IgE and

78 Hidaka Y, Amino N, Iwatani Y, Itoh E, Matsunaga M & Tamaki H. Recurrence of thyrotoxicosis after attack of allergic rhinitis in patients with Graves’ disease. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 1993 **77** 1667–1670.

79 Hidaka Y, Masai T, Sumizaki H, Takeoka K, Tada H & Amino N. Onset of Graves’ thyrotoxicosis after an attack of allergic rhinitis. *Thyroid* 1996 **6** 349–351.

80 Rottem M. Chronic urticaria and autoimmune thyroid disease: is there a link? *Autoimmunity Review* 2003 **2** 69–72.

81 Turktaş I, Gokcora N, Demirsoy S, Cakir N & Onal E. The association of chronic urticaria and angioedema with autoimmune thyroiditis. *International Journal of Dermatology* 1997 **36** 187–190.

82 Leznoff A & Sussman GL. Syndrome of idiopathic chronic urticaria and angioedema with thyroid autoimmunity: a study of 90 patients. *Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology* 1989 **84** 66–71.

83 George J, Levy Y & Shoenfeld Y. Smoking and immunity: an additional player in the mosaic of autoimmunity. *Scandinavian Journal of Immunology* 1997 **45** 1–6.

84 McAllister-Sistilli CG, Caggiula AR, Knopf S, Rose CA, Miller AL & Donny EC. The effects of nicotine on the immune system. *Psychoendocrinology* 1998 **23** 175–187.

85 Ronchetti R, Macri F, Ciofetta G, Indinnimeo L, Cutrera R, Bonci E *et al.* Increased serum IgE and increased prevalence of eosinophilia in 9-year-old children of smoking parents. *Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology* 1990 **86** 400–407.

86 Weitzman M, Gortmaker S, Walker DK & Sobol A. Maternal smoking and childhood asthma. *Pediatrics* 1990 **85** 505–511.

87 Prummel MF, Van Pareren Y, Bakker O & Wiersinga WM. Anti-heat shock protein (hsp)72 antibodies are present in patients with Graves’ disease (GD) and in smoking control subjects. *Clinical and Experimental Immunology* 1997 **110** 292–295.

88 Prummel MF, Wiersinga WM, Van der Gaag R, Mourits MP & Koornneef L. Soluble IL-2 receptor levels in patients with Graves’ ophthalmopathy. *Clinical and Experimental Immunology* 1992 **88** 405–409.

89 Hofbauer LC, Muhlberg T, König A, Heufelder G, Schworm HD & Heufelder AE. Soluble interleukin-1 receptor antagonist serum levels in smokers and nonsmokers with Graves’ ophthalmopathy undergoing orbital radiotherapy. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 1997 **82** 2244–2247.

90 Wakelkamp IM, Gerding MN, van der Meer JW, Prummel MF & Wiersinga WM. Smoking and disease severity are independent determinants of serum adhesion molecule levels in Graves’ ophthalmopathy. *Clinical and Experimental Immunology* 2002 **127** 316–320.

91 Byron KA, Varigos GA & Wootton AM. IL-4 production is increased in cigarette smokers. *Clinical and Experimental Immunology* 1994 **95** 333–336.

92 Heliovaara M, Aho K, Aromaa A, Knekt P & Reunanen A. Smoking and risk of rheumatoid arthritis. *Journal of Rheumatology* 1993 **20** 1830–1835.

93 Vestergaard P. Smoking and thyroid disorders—a meta-analysis. *European Journal of Endocrinology* 2002 **146** 153–161.

94 Hagg E & Asplund K. Is endocrine ophthalmopathy related to smoking? *British Medical Journal* 1987 **295** 634–635.

95 Prummel MF & Wiersinga WM. Smoking and risk of Graves’ disease. *Journal of the American Medical Association* 1993 **269** 479–482.

96 Bartalena L, Martino E, Marcocci C, Bogazzi F, Panicucci M, Velluzzi F *et al.* More on smoking habits and Graves’ ophthalmopathy. *Journal of Endocrinological Investigation* 1989 **12** 733–737.

97 Chen YL, Chang TC & Chen CJ. Influence of smoking on Graves’ disease with or without ophthalmopathy and nontoxic nodular goiter in Taiwan. *Journal of the Formosan Medical Association* 1994 **93** 40–44.

98 Shine B, Fells P, Edwards OM & Weetman AP. Association between Graves’ ophthalmopathy and smoking. *Lancet* 1990 **335** 1261–1263.

99 Winsa B, Mandahl A & Karlsson FA. Graves’ disease, endocrine ophthalmopathy and smoking. *Acta Endocrinologica* 1993 **128** 156–160.

100 Tellez M, Cooper J & Edmonds C. Graves’ ophthalmopathy in relation to cigarette smoking and ethnic origin. *Clinical Endocrinology* 1992 **36** 291–294.

101 Pfeilschifter J & Ziegler R. Smoking and endocrine ophthalmopathy: impact of smoking severity and current vs lifetime cigarette consumption. *Clinical Endocrinology* 1996 **45** 477–481.

102 Nystrom E, Bengtsson C, Lapidus L, Petersen K & Lindstedt G. Smoking—a risk factor for hypothyroidism. *Journal of Endocrinological Investigation* 1993 **16** 129–131.

103 Orgiazzi J & Madec AM. Reduction of the risk of relapse after withdrawal of medical therapy for Graves’ disease. *Thyroid* 2002 **12** 849–853.

104 Glinoer D, de Nayer P & Bex M. Effects of l-thyroxine administration, TSH-receptor antibodies and smoking on the risk of recurrence in Graves’ hyperthyroidism treated with antithyroid drugs: a double-blind prospective randomized study. *European Journal of Endocrinology* 2001 **144** 475–483.

105 Bartalena L, Marcocci C, Tanda ML, Manetti L, Dell’Unto E, Bartolomei MP *et al.* Cigarette smoking and treatment outcomes in Graves ophthalmopathy. *Annals of Internal Medicine* 1998 **129** 632–635.

106 Eckstein A, Quadbeck B, Mueller G, Rettenmeier AW, Hoermann R, Mann K *et al.* Impact of smoking on the response to treatment of thyroid associated ophthalmopathy. *British Journal of Ophthalmology* 2003 **87** 773–776.

107 Bartalena L, Pinchera A & Marcocci C. Management of Graves’ ophthalmopathy: reality and perspectives. *Endocrine Reviews* 2000 **21** 168–199.

108 Weetman AP. Determinants of autoimmune thyroid disease. *Nature Immunology* 2001 **2** 769–770.

109 Metcalfe RA & Weetman AP. Stimulation of extraocular muscle fibroblasts by cytokines and hypoxia: possible role in thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy. *Clinical Endocrinology* 1994 **40** 67–72.

110 Mack WP, Stasior GO, Cao HJ, Stasior OG & Smith TJ. The effect of cigarette smoke constituents on the expression of HLA-DR in orbital fibroblasts derived from patients with Graves ophthalmopathy. *Ophthalmic and Plastic Reconstructive Surgery* 1999 **15** 260–271.

111 Wiersinga WM. Amiodarone and the thyroid. In *Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology*, vol 128, pp 225–287. Eds AP Weetman & A Grossman. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1997.

112 Trip MD, Wiersinga W & Plomp TA. Incidence, predictability, and pathogenesis of amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis and hypothyroidism. *American Journal of Medicine* 1991 **91** 507–511.

113 Daniels GH. Amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 2001 **86** 3–8.

114 Monteiro E, Galvao-Teles A, Santos ML, Mourao L, Correia MJ, Lopo TJ *et al.* Antithyroid antibodies as an early marker for thyroid disease induced by amiodarone. *British Medical Journal* 1986 **292** 227–228.

115 Trip MD, Duren DR & Wiersinga WM. Two cases of amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis successfully treated with a short course of antithyroid drugs while amiodarone was continued. *British Heart Journal* 1994 **72** 266–268.

116 Weetman AP, Bhandal SK, Burrin JM, Robinson K & McKenna W. Amiodarone and thyroid autoimmunity in the United Kingdom. *British Medical Journal* 1988 **297** 33.

117 Gilquin J, Viard JP, Jubault V, Sert C & Kazatchkine MD. Delayed occurrence of Graves’ disease after immune restoration with HAART. Highly active antiretroviral therapy. *Lancet* 1998 **352** 1907–1908.

118 Weetman AP. Graves’ disease. *New England Journal of Medicine* 2000 **343** 1236–1248.

119 Coles AJ, Wing M, Smith S, Coraddu F, Greer S, Taylor C *et al.* Pulsed monoclonal antibody treatment and autoimmune thyroid disease in multiple sclerosis. *Lancet* 1999 **354** 1691–1695.

120 Lauer GM & Walker BD. Hepatitis C virus infection. *New England Journal of Medicine* 2001 **345** 41–52.

121 Bhakri H, Sriskandan K, Davis T, Pettingale K & Tee D. Recombinant gamma interferon and autoimmune thyroid disease. *Lancet* 1985 **2** 457.

122 Prummel MF & Laurberg P. Interferon-alpha and autoimmune thyroid disease. *Thyroid* 2003 **13** 547–551.

123 Okanoue T, Sakamoto S, Itoh Y, Minami M, Yasui K, Sakamoto M *et al.* Side effects of high-dose interferon therapy for chronic hepatitis C. *Journal of Hepatology* 1996 **25** 283–291.

124 Fattovich G, Giustina G, Favaro S & Ruol A. A survey of adverse events in 11,241 patients with chronic viral hepatitis treated with alfa interferon. *Journal of Hepatology* 1996 **24** 38–47.

125 Koh LK, Greenspan FS & Yeo PP. Interferon-alpha induced thyroid dysfunction: three clinical presentations and a review of the literature. *Thyroid* 1997 **7** 891–896.

126 Farrar JD & Murphy KM. Type I interferons and T helper development. *Immunology Today* 2000 **21** 484–489.

127 Parkin J & Cohen B. An overview of the immune system. *Lancet* 2001 **357** 1777–1789.

128 Burman P, Totterman TH, Oberg K & Karlsson FA. Thyroid autoimmunity in patients on long term therapy with leukocyte-derived interferon. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 1986 **63** 1086–1090.

129 Biron CA. Interferons alpha and beta as immune regulators—a new look. *Immunity* 2001 **14** 661–664.

130 Vial T & Descotes J. Immune-mediated side-effects of cytokines in humans. *Toxicology* 1995 **105** 31–57.

131 Signore A, Picarelli A, Annovazzi A, Britton KE, Grossman AB, Bonanno E *et al.* 123I-interleukin-2: biochemical characterization and in vivo use for imaging autoimmune diseases. *Nuclear Medicine Communications* 2003 **24** 305–316.

132 Witzke O, Winterhagen T, Saller B, Roggenbuck U, Lehr I, Philipp T *et al.* Transient stimulatory effects on pituitary-thyroid axis in patients treated with interleukin-2. *Thyroid* 2001 **11** 665–670.

133 Atkins MB, Mier JW, Parkinson DR, Gould JA, Berkman EM & Kaplan MM. Hypothyroidism after treatment with interleukin-2 and lymphokine-activated killer cells. *New England Journal of Medicine* 1988 **318** 1557–1563.

134 Meloni G, Trisolini SM, Capria S, Torelli GF, Baldacci E, Torromeo C *et al.* How long can we give interleukin-2? Clinical and immunological evaluation of AML patients after 10 or more years of IL-2 administration. *Leukemia* 2002 **16** 2016–2018.

135 Hansen PB, Johnsen HE & Hippe E. Autoimmune hypothyroidism and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. *European Journal of Haematology* 1993 **50** 183–184.

136 Hoekman K, von Blomberg-van der Flier BM, Wagstaff J, Drexhage HA & Pinedo HM. Reversible thyroid dysfunction during treatment with GM-CSF. *Lancet* 1991 **338** 541–542.

137 Van Hoef ME & Howell A. Risk of thyroid dysfunction during treatment with G-CSF. *Lancet* 1992 **340** 1169–1170.

138 Goodnow CC. Pathways for self-tolerance and the treatment of autoimmune diseases. *Lancet* 2001 **357** 2115–2121.

139 Hancock SL, Cox RS & McDougall IR. Thyroid diseases after treatment of Hodgkin’s disease. *New England Journal of Medicine* 1991 **325** 599–605.

140 Sklar C, Whitton J, Mertens A, Stovall M, Green D, Marina N *et al.* Abnormalities of the thyroid in survivors of Hodgkin’s disease: data from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 2000 **85** 3227–3232.

141 Jacobson DR & Fleming BJ. Graves’ disease with ophthalmopathy following radiotherapy for Hodgkin’s disease. *American Journal of the Medical Sciences* 1984 **288** 217–220.

EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF ENDOCRINOLOGY (2004) 150

The environment and autoimmune thyroid diseases 617

142 Wasnich RD, Grumet FC, Payne RO & Kriss JP. Graves' ophthalmopathy following external neck irradiation for nonthyroidal neoplastic disease. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 1973 **37** 703–713.

143 Jackson R, Rosenberg C, Kleinmann R, Vagenakis AG & Braverman LE. Ophthalmopathy after neck irradiation therapy for Hodgkin's disease. *Cancer Treatment Reviews* 1979 **63** 1393–1395.

144 Loeffler JS, Tarbell NJ, Garber JR & Mauch P. The development of Graves' disease following radiation therapy in Hodgkin's disease. *International Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology, Physics* 1988 **14** 175–178.

145 Soule J & Mayfield R. Graves' disease after 131I therapy for toxic nodule. *Thyroid* 2001 **11** 91–92.

146 Niepomniszcze H, Pitoia F, Goodall C, Manavela M & Bruno OD. Development of Graves' hyperthyroidism after radioiodine treatment for a toxic nodule: is the hyperthyroidism always triggered by 131I therapy? *Thyroid* 2001 **11** 991.

147 Nygaard B, Knudsen JH, Hegedus L, Scient AV & Hansen JE. Thyrotropin receptor antibodies and Graves' disease, a side-effect of 131I treatment in patients with nontoxic goiter. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 1997 **82** 2926–2930.

148 Huysmans AK, Hermus RM, Edelbroek MA, Tjabbes T, Oostdijk, Ross HA *et al.* Autoimmune hyperthyroidism occurring late after radioiodine treatment for volume reduction of large multinodular goiters. *Thyroid* 1997 **7** 535–539.

149 Nagataki S, Shibata Y, Inoue S, Yokoyama N, Izumi M & Shimaoka K. Thyroid diseases among atomic bomb survivors in Nagasaki. *Journal of the American Medical Association* 1994 **272** 364–370.

150 Pacini F, Vorontsova T, Molinaro E, Kuchinskaya E, Agate L, Shavrova E *et al.* Prevalence of thyroid autoantibodies in children and adolescents from Belarus exposed to the Chernobyl radioactive fallout. *Lancet* 1998 **352** 763–766.

151 Vermiglio F, Castagna MG, Volnova E, Lo PV, Moleti M, Violi MA *et al.* Post-Chernobyl increased prevalence of humoral thyroid autoimmunity in children and adolescents from a moderately iodine-deficient area in Russia. *Thyroid* 1999 **9** 781–786.

152 Kerber RA, Till JE, Simon SL, Lyon JL, Thomas DC, Preston-Martin S *et al.* A cohort study of thyroid disease in relation to fallout from nuclear weapons testing. *Journal of the American Medical Association* 1993 **270** 2076–2082.

153 Yoshimoto Y, Ezaki H, Etoh R, Hiraoka T & Akiba S. Prevalence rate of thyroid diseases among autopsy cases of the atomic bomb survivors in Hiroshima, 1951–1985. *Radiation Research* 1995 **141** 278–286.

154 Morimoto I, Yoshimoto Y, Sato K, Hamilton HB, Kawamoto S, Izumi M *et al.* Serum TSH, thyroglobulin, and thyroidal disorders in atomic bomb survivors exposed in youth: 30-year follow-up study. *Journal of Nuclear Medicine* 1987 **28** 1115–1122.

155 Fujiwara S, Carter RL, Akiyama M, Akahoshi M, Kodama K, Shimaoka K *et al.* Autoantibodies and immunoglobulins among atomic bomb survivors. *Radiation Research* 1994 **137** 89–95.

156 Eheman CR, Garbe P & Tuttle RM. Autoimmune thyroid disease associated with environmental thyroidal irradiation. *Thyroid* 2003 **13** 453–464.

157 Lonnrot M, Korpela K, Knip M, Ilonen J, Simell O, Korhonen S *et al.* Enterovirus infection as a risk factor for beta-cell autoimmunity in a prospectively observed birth cohort: the Finnish Diabetes Prediction and Prevention Study. *Diabetes* 2000 **49** 1314–1318.

158 Lonnrot M, Salminen K, Knip M, Savola K, Kulmala P, Leinikki P *et al.* Enterovirus RNA in serum is a risk factor for beta-cell autoimmunity and clinical type 1 diabetes: a prospective study. Childhood Diabetes in Finland (DiMe) Study Group. *Journal of Medical Virology* 2000 **61** 214–220.

159 Sadeharju K, Hamalainen AM, Knip M, Lonnrot M, Koskela P, Virtanen SM *et al.* Enterovirus infections as a risk factor for type I diabetes: virus analyses in a dietary intervention trial. *Clinical and Experimental Immunology* 2003 **132** 271–277.

160 Chehadeh W, Weill J, Vantyghem MC, Alm G, Lefebvre J, Wattre P *et al.* Increased level of interferon-alpha in blood of patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: relationship with coxsackievirus B infection. *Journal of Infectious Diseases* 2000 **181** 1929–1939.

161 Ellerman KE & Like AA. Susceptibility to diabetes is widely distributed in normal class IIu haplotype rats. *Diabetologia* 2000 **43** 890–898.

162 Moriyama H & Eisenbarth GS. Genetics and environmental factors in endocrine/organ-specific autoimmunity: have there been any major advances? *Springer Seminars in Immunopathology* 2002 **24** 231–242.

163 Tomer Y & Davies TF. Infection, thyroid disease, and autoimmunity. *Endocrine Reviews* 1993 **14** 107–120.

164 Wick G, Trieb K, Aguzzi A, Recheis H, Anderl H & Grubeck-Loebenstein B. Possible role of human foamy virus in Graves' disease. *Intervirology* 1993 **35** 101–107.

165 Lee H, Kim S, Kang M, Kim W & Cho B. Prevalence of human foamy virus-related sequences in the Korean population. *Journal of the Biomedical Sciences* 1998 **5** 267–273.

166 Pearce EN, Farwell AP & Braverman LE. Thyroiditis. *New England Journal of Medicine* 2003 **348** 2646–2655.

167 Ebringer A & Wilson C. HLA molecules, bacteria and autoimmunity. *Journal of Medical Microbiology* 2000 **49** 305–311.

168 Albert LJ & Inman RD. Molecular mimicry and autoimmunity. *New England Journal of Medicine* 1999 **341** 2068–2074.

169 Lang HL, Jacobsen H, Ikemizu S, Andersson C, Harlos K, Madsen L *et al.* A functional and structural basis for TCR cross-reactivity in multiple sclerosis. *Nature Immunology* 2002 **3** 940–943.

170 Wekerle H & Hohlfeld R. Molecular mimicry in multiple sclerosis. *New England Journal of Medicine* 2003 **349** 185–186.

171 Pockley AG. Heat shock proteins as regulators of the immune response. *Lancet* 2003 **362** 469–476.

172 Purcell AW, Todd A, Kinoshita G, Lynch TA, Keech CL, Gething MJ *et al.* Association of stress proteins with autoantigens: a possible mechanism for triggering autoimmunity? *Clinical and Experimental Immunology* 2003 **132** 193–200.

173 Lo WF, Woods AS, DeCloux A, Cotter RJ, Metcalf ES & Soloski MJ. Molecular mimicry mediated by MHC class Ib molecules after infection with gram-negative pathogens. *Nature Medicine* 2000 **6** 215–218.

174 Paggi A, Di Prima MA, Paparo BS, Pellegrino C, Faralli AR, Sinopoli MT *et al.* Anti 70kDa heat shock protein antibodies in sera of patients affected by autoimmune and non-autoimmune thyroid diseases. *EndocrineResearch* 1995 **21** 555–567.

175 Davidson A & Diamond B. Autoimmune diseases. *New England Journal of Medicine* 2001 **345** 340–350.

176 Wang J, Whetsell M & Klein JR. Local hormone networks and intestinal T cell homeostasis. *Science* 1997 **275** 1937–1939.

177 Shanahan F. A gut reaction: lymphoepithelial communication in the intestine. *Science* 1997 **275** 1897–1898.

178 Bottone EJ. Yersinia enterocolitica: overview and epidemiologic correlates. *Microbes and Infection* 1999 **1** 323–333.

179 Swanink CM, Stolk-Engelaar VM, van der Meer JW, Vercoulen JH, Bleijenberg G, Fennis JF *et al.* Yersinia enterocolitica and the chronic fatigue syndrome. *Journal of Infection* 1998 **36** 269–272.

180 de Koning J, Heesemann J, Hoogkamp-Korstanje JA, Festen JJ, Houtman PM & van Oijen PL. Yersinia in intestinal biopsy specimens from patients with seronegative spondyloarthropathy: correlation with specific serum IgA antibodies. *Journal of Infectious Diseases* 1989 **159** 109–112.

181 Bech K, Clemmensen O, Larsen JH, Thyme S & Bendixen G. Cell-mediated immunity of Yersinia enterocolitica serotype 3 in patients with thyroid diseases. *Allergy* 1978 **33** 82–88.

182 Shenkman L & Bottone EJ. Antibodies to Yersinia enterocolitica in thyroid disease. *Annals of Internal Medicine* 1976 **85** 735–739.

183 Weiss M, Ingbar SH, Winblad S & Kasper DL. Demonstration of a saturable binding site for thyrotropin in Yersinia enterocolitica. *Science* 1983 **219** 1331–1333.

184 Heyma P, Harrison LC & Robins-Browne R. Thyrotrophin (TSH) binding sites on Yersinia enterocolitica recognized by immunoglobulins from humans with Graves' disease. *Clinical and Experimental Immunology* 1986 **64** 249–254.

185 Wenzel BE, Peters A & Zubaschev I. Bacterial virulence antigens and the pathogenesis of autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITD). *Experimental Clinical Endocrinology and Diabetes* 1996 **104** (Suppl 4) 75–78.

186 Wenzel E, Franke TF, Heufelder AE & Heesemann J. Autoimmune thyroid diseases and enteropathogenic Yersinia enterocolitica. *Autoimmunity* 1990 **7** 295–303.

187 Stuart PM & Woodward JG. Yersinia enterocolitica produces superantigenic activity. *Journal of Immunology* 1992 **148** 225–233.

188 Wenzel BE, Heesemann J, Heufelder A, Franke TF, Grammerstorf S, Stemerowicz R *et al.* Enteropathogenic Yersinia enterocolitica and organ-specific autoimmune diseases in man. *Contributions to Microbiology and Immunology* 1991 **12** 80–88.

189 Zhang H, Kaur I, Niesel DW, Seetharamaiah GS, Peterson JW, Justement LB *et al.* Yersinia enterocolitica envelope proteins that are crossreactive with the thyrotropin receptor (TSHR) also have B-cell mitogenic activity. *Journal of Autoimmunity* 1996 **9** 509–516.

190 Byfield PG, Davies SC, Copping S, Barclay FE & Borriello SP. Thyrotrophin (TSH)-binding proteins in bacteria and their cross-reaction with autoantibodies against the human TSH receptor. *Journal of Endocrinology* 1989 **121** 571–577.

191 Helms M, Vastrup P, Gerner-Smidt P & Molbak K. Short and long term mortality associated with foodborne bacterial gastrointestinal infections: registry based study. *British Medical Journal* 2003 **326** 357.

192 Lee MB & Middleton D. Enteric illness in Ontario, Canada, from 1997 to 2001. *Journal of Food Protection* 2003 **66** 953–961.

193 van Pelt W, de Wit MA, Wannet WJ, Ligtvoet EJ, Widdowson MA & van Duynhoven YT. Laboratory surveillance of bacterial gastroenteric pathogens in The Netherlands, 1991–2001. *Epidemiology and Infection* 2003 **130** 431–441.

194 Toivanen P & Toivanen A. Does Yersinia induce autoimmunity? *International Archives of Allergy and Immunology* 104 107–111.

195 Wenzel BE, Heesemann J, Wenzel KW & Scriba PC. Antibodies to plasmid-encoded proteins of enteropathogenic Yersinia in patients with autoimmune thyroid disease. *Lancet* 1988 **1** 56.

196 Chatzipanagiotou S, Legakis JN, Boufidou F, Petroyianni V & Nicolaou C. Prevalence of Yersinia plasmid-encoded outer protein (Yop) class-specific antibodies in patients with Hashimoto's thyroiditis. *Clinical Microbiology and Infection* 2001 **7** 138–143.

197 Asari S, Amino N, Horikawa M & Miyai K. Incidences of antibodies to Yersinia enterocolitica: high incidence of serotype O5 in autoimmune thyroid diseases in Japan. *Endocrinology Journal* 1989 **36** 381–386.

198 Corapcioglu D, Tonyukuk V, Kiyan M, Yilmaz AE, Emral R, Kamel N *et al.* Relationship between thyroid autoimmunity and Yersinia enterocolitica antibodies. *Thyroid* 2002 **12** 613–617.

199 Arscott P, Rosen ED, Koenig RJ, Kaplan MM, Ellis T, Thompson N *et al.* Immunoreactivity to Yersinia enterocolitica antigens in patients with autoimmune thyroid disease. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 1992 **75** 295–300.

200 Resetkova E, Notenboom R, Arreaza G, Mukuta T, Yoshikawa N & Volpe R. Seroreactivity to bacterial antigens is not a unique phenomenon in patients with autoimmune thyroid diseases in Canada. *Thyroid* 1994 **4** 269–274.

201 Strieder TG, Wenzel BE, Prummel MF, Tijssen JG & Wiersinga WM. Increased prevalence of antibodies to enteropathogenic Yersinia enterocolitica virulence proteins in relatives of patients with autoimmune thyroid disease. *Clinical and Experimental Immunology* 2003 **132** 278–282.

202 Brix TH, Kyvik KO, Christensen K & Hegedus L. Evidence for a major role of heredity in Graves' disease: a population-based study of two Danish twin cohorts. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* 2001 **86** 930–934.

Received 15 December 2003  
Accepted 10 February 2004
