
Progress in Biophysics & Molecular Biology 85 (2004) 261–278

**Mechanistic systems models of cell signaling networks: a case study of myocyte adrenergic regulation**

Jeffrey J. Saucerman, Andrew D. McCulloch*

Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093-0412, USA

---

### Abstract

Signal transduction networks coordinate a wide variety of cellular functions, including gene expression, metabolism, and cell fate processes. Understanding biological networks quantitatively is a major challenge to post-genomic biology, and mechanistic systems models will be crucial for this task. Here, we review approaches towards developing mechanistic systems models of established cell signaling networks. The ability of mechanistic system models to generate testable biological hypotheses and experimental strategies is discussed. As a case study of model development and analysis, we examined the functional roles of phospholamban, the L-type calcium channel, the ryanodine receptor, and troponin I phosphorylation upon β-adrenergic stimulation in the rat ventricular myocyte. Model analysis revealed that while protein kinase A-mediated phosphorylation of the ryanodine receptor greatly increases its calcium sensitivity, calcium autoregulation may adapt quickly by negating potential increases in contractility. Systematic combinations of in silico perturbations supported the conclusion that phospholamban phosphorylation is the primary mechanism for increased sarcoplasmic reticulum load and calcium relaxation rate during β-adrenergic stimulation, while both phospholamban and the L-type calcium channel contribute to increased systolic calcium. Combined with detailed experimental studies, mechanistic systems models will be valuable for developing a quantitative understanding of cell signaling networks.

© 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Myocyte; Adrenergic regulation; Mathematical model

---

### 1. Introduction

#### 1.1. Cell signaling networks

Signaling networks serve as decentralized communications networks in the cell. By transducing a variety of environmental cues such as hormones, neurotransmitters and extracellular matrix,

*Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-858-534-2547; fax: +1-858-534-6896.
E-mail address: amcculloch@ucsd.edu (A.D. McCulloch).

0079-6107/$-see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2004.01.005
they coordinate many of the physiological responses to changes in the cell environment. While it has been estimated that signal transduction proteins make up 12.2% of annotated genes in the human genome (Venter et al., 2001), signaling networks remain poorly characterized compared with other areas of cell function such as metabolism (Gilman et al., 2002). These regulatory networks, hypothesized to have evolved for robustness to perturbations, account for a large portion of biological complexity (Csete and Doyle, 2002). Understanding the function of complex signaling networks presents a major challenge to modern biology, requiring a synthesis of quantitative experiments and modeling.

Rather than working in isolation, signaling networks are tightly interwoven with a variety of physiological processes in the cell. Signaling networks control aspects of gene regulation, metabolism, chemotaxis, electrical activity and contractile behavior (Katz, 2001). Physiological processes feed back to regulate signaling networks too, creating interdependencies that are difficult to predict from network diagrams alone. While quantitative measurements of signaling are difficult at the single cell level, well-described physiological measurements such as ionic currents serve as excellent readouts of signaling function. Therefore, examining the functional integration of signaling networks and the physiological processes they regulate may help to develop an improved understanding of signal transduction pathways.

### 1.2. Mechanistic systems models of cell signaling

To gain a quantitative understanding of how signaling networks control cellular physiology, computational models may be useful. For the purposes of discussion, we will distinguish between systems models of cell signaling at two levels of detail: abstract top-down models and mechanistic systems analyses. Each approach has advantages and disadvantages, while some hybrid approaches such as Bayesian network modeling confer advantages from each modeling strategy (Sachs et al., 2002). Top-down modeling, often based on protein interaction data such as yeast two-hybrid studies, shows great promise for understanding the qualitative, topological features of signaling networks (Ideker and Lauffenburger, 2003; Wuchty et al., 2003). Top-down models may also be useful for identifying novel pathways (Ideker et al., 2002), creating a framework for future work to identify specific mechanisms.

Once a signaling network is fairly well characterized, mechanistic models may be able to provide a quantitative understanding of how these networks function. Mechanistic systems models most often start at the biochemical level, describing biochemical reactions with kinetic rate laws and differential equations. While mechanistic models rely on a body of experimental work describing reaction kinetics and parameters, they are able to make a variety of quantitative, testable predictions that can be evaluated with experimental validation. The iterative cycle of model formulation, validation and refinement, as exemplified by the long history of cardiac myocyte modeling (Noble, 2002), helps to consolidate experimental knowledge and identify potential gaps in our understanding.

In silico analysis of network perturbations allows one to develop biological hypotheses regarding novel signaling mechanisms. Hoffman et al. used perturbations of a kinetic model to predict functional differences between IκB isoforms in silico, and then used the model to design an experiment to test this prediction (Hoffmann et al., 2002). Bhalla and Iyengar showed that feedback and crosstalk between signaling pathways in the neuron result in emergent properties
such as bistability, which may lead to long-term potentiation (Bhalla and Iyengar, 1999). When mechanisms are unknown and several hypotheses are plausible, systems models representing the alternatives may be compared quantitatively to identify network topology. This approach was used to identify transitions between mode 1 and 2 gating of the L-type calcium channel during β-adrenergic stimulation (Herzig et al., 1993). These examples are representative of the experimentally relevant, detailed predictions possible with mechanistic systems models.

Mechanistic models provide an opportunity to leverage existing analysis techniques from control theory and dynamical systems. Sensitivity analysis can be used to determine which parameter perturbations are most likely to cause large changes in the network (Khalil, 1996). Such parameters require an accurate description, while lesser accuracy may be required for parameters robust to perturbations. Bifurcation analysis can be used to predict the range of qualitative dynamic behaviors exhibited by a network with changes in parameter values (Sastry, 1999). Concepts from perturbation theory (Khalil, 1996) and the small gain theorem (Angeli and Sontag, 2003) have also been applied to models at this level of detail. These techniques provide a rich toolbox for the analysis of mechanistic systems models.

However, mechanistic systems models are often data-limited, posing obstacles towards this approach for less characterized cell signaling networks. Optimizing a reduced model with sparse data is possible, although it is often difficult to discriminate between model candidates using limited data sets. Experimental data obtained from a variety of sources may not be consistent, preventing a single model from predicting all observations. While high-throughput genomic and proteomic approaches promise vast amounts of data, the data will be at the cellular rather than biochemical level. These findings suggest that mechanistic models of new signaling networks will require uniform high-throughput data, and that future models may be primarily composed of effective parameters such as EC50's and apparent rate constants rather than detailed biochemical measurements.

## Techniques for developing mechanistic systems models

Numerous approaches are possible for developing mechanistic systems models of signal transduction. Here, we overview the process of model development and validation while highlighting some details that have not been covered significantly elsewhere.

### Mechanistic network diagrams

While diagrams of cell signaling networks in review articles and textbooks are conceptually useful, the formulation of a model necessitates an unambiguous description of all mechanisms in the network. To begin this process, pathway diagrams are collected and integrated to define the scope of the model. Pathway diagrams are available from a variety of sources, including the Alliance for Cellular Signaling ([http://www.signaling-gateway.org](http://www.signaling-gateway.org)), Science’s STKE ([http://www.stke.org](http://www.stke.org)), and KEGG ([http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/](http://www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/)). Breaking down large networks into a hierarchy of subnetworks or modules may facilitate model development (Asthagiri and Lauffenburger, 2000; Bhalla and Iyengar, 1999). When possible, components of the same signaling module should have common time scales, cellular localization, and network

J.J. Saucerman, A.D. McCulloch / Progress in Biophysics & Molecular Biology 85 (2004) 261–278

(a)

![Diagram]

(b)

![Diagram]

Fig. 1. A simple model of an enzyme regulated by an activating molecule. (a) Mapping from a typical, ambiguous description of this system to a mechanistic representation, with detail required for developing a model. (b) QE pools for enzyme (left), activator (center), and substrate (right) in our example network, representing conservation relationships. An algebraic equation is written for each pool by summing together the concentrations of species (Eqs. (2)–(4)). Here, the total concentrations of the enzyme pool [E<sub>tot</sub>] and activator pool [A<sub>tot</sub>] are fixed. Enzyme catalysis reduces the total concentration of the substrate pool, [S<sub>tot</sub>], which is represented by a differential equation (Eq. (6)).

connectivity. All combinations of activity levels and binding states should be described for each signaling protein. Using an unambiguous and descriptive notation, reactions and protein state conversions may be represented graphically by binding, transformation, or transport type. Fig. 1a demonstrates a simple example of the mapping from a pathway diagram to a mechanistic representation for a single enzyme modified by an activating regulatory molecule (A). While several general-purpose formats have been proposed for graphically representing signaling network diagrams (Kohn, 2001; Sambrano, 2003), none have reached broad acceptance or made a direct connection to the model’s underlying mathematical form.

### 2.2. Formulation of model equations

A variety of techniques can be used to translate a detailed signaling map into a system of equations suitable for mathematical analysis. One of the most general and widely accepted is mass-action kinetics, which also requires the most data to parameterize a model. Mass-action kinetics are generally appropriate in the deterministic regime (large numbers of signaling proteins) when modeling a homogeneous three-dimensional environment. Most other techniques, unless completely phenomenological, are based on mass-action kinetics yet make further assumptions regarding the reaction fluxes or concentrations of species. The most common of these is the quasi-steady-state assumption (QSSA), often used to describe Michaelis–Menten enzyme catalysis. The QSSA is appropriate after an initial transient (catalysis has reached a steady state) and when enzyme concentration is much less than substrate concentration. While these assumptions are often suitable for typical in vitro enzymatic assays with purified components, the validity of these assumptions in the context of the in vivo cellular environment has been questioned (Savageau, 1995; Schnell and Maini, 2000).

An alternative approximation is the quasi-equilibrium assumption (QEA), in which one assumes that, due to large differences in time scales in the network, some modules or subnetworks equilibrate rapidly, while other subnetworks change more slowly. This assumption is often appropriate when multiple types of reactions are present in a biochemical network, such as binding reactions (usually on the millisecond time-scale) and transformations (e.g. phosphorylation, hydrolysis; usually on the second time-scale). The QEA is conceptually similar to singular perturbation theory, which provides a mathematical framework for dealing with systems on multiple time scales (Khalil, 1996). The validity of the QEA does not depend on concentrations, which can be drastically different in vivo than in vitro, but rather on fixed rate constants. When applied, the QEA reduces both the number of state variables (reducing computational expense, computational stiffness, and initial conditions required) and parameters (reducing the amount of experimental data required to formulate the model). Unlike the QSSA, mathematically representing networks of arbitrary complexity is straightforward with the QEA.

While the QEA is often used for modeling single enzyme systems, several important aspects are often overlooked when applied to larger biochemical networks. These aspects are discussed in the context of a simple example, in which an enzyme (E) converts a substrate (S) into a product (P) only when bound to an activating regulatory molecule (A) (Fig. 1a). We will assume that the binding reactions between E, S, and A rapidly equilibrate, while enzyme catalysis occurs more slowly. This abstract scheme is analogous to the cAMP regulation of protein kinase A activity or calcium regulation of protein kinase C. Segel (1975) has shown a simple method for formulating rate laws to describe this and similar systems

\[
\frac{\mathrm{d}[P]}{\mathrm{d}t} = k_{\text{cat}}[EAS] = k_{\text{cat}}[E_{\text{tot}}]\frac{[EAS]}{[E_{\text{tot}}]} = \frac{k_{\text{cat}}[E_{\text{tot}}][S]}{K_S(1 + K_A/[A]) + [S]}.
\]

However, Eq. (1) alone is insufficient to solve this system. Eq. (1) requires the knowledge of [A] and [S], but these cannot be obtained from a differential equation because they are rapidly equilibrating with [E]. Therefore, an algebraic solution for [A], [S], and [E] must be obtained, either numerically or analytically. Even at this low level of complexity, analytical solutions to the nonlinear algebraic equations are generally impractical. The algebraic equations are formulated by identifying QE pools ([A_{\text{tot}}], [S_{\text{tot}}], and [E_{\text{tot}}]), among which conservation relationships exist in terms of [A], [S], and [E] (Fig. 1b). Briefly, a QE pool consists of all states with which a specie rapidly equilibrates. In the case of the substrate pool [S_{\text{tot}}], these states are the free substrate [S] and the enzyme–activator–substrate complex [EAS]. Differential equations can be formed from the fluxes in and out of quasi-equilibrium (QE) pools. Here, [A_{\text{tot}}] and [E_{\text{tot}}] are fixed, but the QE pool [S_{\text{tot}}] decreases as [P] rises (the differential equation for [S_{\text{tot}}] (Eq. (6)) is redundant owing to the simplicity of this simple network). A common error here is to inaccurately identify QE pools, making [S] the differential variable in Eq. (6) and consequently violating conservation of mass. The correct algebraic equations and a reduced ODE (Eqs. (2)–(5)) form a differential–algebraic system of equations:

\[
[A_{\text{tot}}] - [A] - \frac{[E][A]}{K_A} - \frac{[E][A][S]}{K_A K_S} = 0,
\]

\[
[E_{\text{tot}}] - [E] - \frac{[E][A]}{K_A} - \frac{[E][A][S]}{K_A K_S} = 0,
\]

J.J. Saucerman, A.D. McCulloch / Progress in Biophysics & Molecular Biology 85 (2004) 261–278

\[
[S_{\text{tot}}] - [S] - \frac{[E][A][S]}{K_A K_S} = 0,
\]

\[
\frac{\mathrm{d}[P]}{\mathrm{d}t} = k_{\text{cat}} \frac{[E][A][S]}{K_A K_S},
\]

\[
\frac{\mathrm{d}[S_{\text{tot}}]}{\mathrm{d}t} = -k_{\text{cat}} \frac{[E][A][S]}{K_A K_S},
\]

where Eq. (5) is an equivalent yet perhaps more convenient form of Eq. (1).

While use of the QEA for modeling signaling networks is often practical and sufficiently justified, most experimental data characterizing enzymes in vitro provide a Michaelis constant ($K_M = (k_{1-} + k_2)/k_{1+}$) rather than the dissociation constant ($K_S = k_{1-}/k_{1+}$). For many enzymes with relatively slow catalytic rate constants, both QEA and QSSA may be justified when describing in vitro experiments. In such cases, $k_{1-} \gg k_2$, reducing $K_M \sim K_S$. Although the QSSA may no longer be valid when modeling such an enzyme in the cell, the QEA may be appropriate and $K_S$ will remain unchanged. It should be noted that some enzymes (e.g., carbonic anhydrase, acetylcholinesterase) operate near the diffusion-limited regime, where $k_{1-} \sim k_2$ and thus the QEA would not be appropriate.

The use of differential-algebraic equations presents a minor obstacle in obtaining numerical solutions. Either a stand-alone root solver must be used for solving the algebraic equations separately from the ODEs or a differential-algebraic solver must be used. Several DAE solvers are available (Matlab, Mathematica, DASPK 3.0 (Li and Petzold, 2000), RADAU (Hairer and Wanner, 1996)), but these are not currently integrated with biological network modeling packages. With such solvers, consistent initial conditions for the algebraic variables can be an issue. The singular perturbation method provides an analytical solution to this problem through asymptotic time-scale matching (Khalil, 1996), while DASPK 3.0 provides facilities for numerical computation of consistent initial conditions given the initial conditions of differential variables (Li and Petzold, 2000).

### 2.3. Parameterization and validation

Once the equations have been formulated, a major task lies in determining model parameters and validating the predictions. Conceptually, the simplest approach is to use parameters obtained exclusively from the literature. Given parameters such as cellular volume and conversion factors specific to cell type (see Bers (2001) for cardiac myocytes), one can compute concentrations of species from experimental measurements of enzyme activities, moles per mg protein, etc. Detailed knowledge of experimental conditions may be required to evaluate the quality and appropriateness of such measurements. An advantage of this approach is that all available subcellular and cellular-level experimental data can be used to validate the model. One drawback is the uncertainty that the biochemical parameters, obtained from a variety of laboratories and conditions, are consistent. Obtaining these biochemical parameters generally relies on many years of experimental work, and high-throughput technologies such as proteomics are not yet able to provide these parameters for poorly characterized networks.

Most models are data-limited, requiring a hybrid of alternatives and striking a balance between predictive power and practicality. For fairly well-characterized networks, a modular approach towards model development allows one to perform optimization for just a few unknown parameters at the single module level. Once several modules are parameterized, the modules can be functionally integrated and validated with independent cellular-level experimental data. This approach was used to estimate 11 of 56 parameters in Saucerman et al. (2003). One could use this approach for less characterized networks as well by training entire modules with biochemical or otherwise isolated data sets and validating with cellular-level data. This may help alleviate concerns that large models optimized entirely from cellular-level data may be able to reproduce the training set yet have large errors at the single module level. Other approaches for less-characterized networks include simplifying the model to a complexity more appropriate for the amount of experimental data and using other modeling techniques such as Bayesian networks (Sachs et al., 2002).

## 3. Case study: β-adrenergic signaling and cardiac excitation–contraction coupling

Saucerman et al. (2003) recently modeled the β-adrenergic control of cardiac myocyte contractility. The β-adrenergic signaling pathway plays a fundamental role in the stress response of the heart, transducing neurohumoral stimulation into coordinated phosphorylation of regulatory proteins involved in calcium handling (Katz, 2001). Agonists such as norepinephrine or isoproterenol bind to the β-adrenergic receptor (β-AR), initiating a cascade of events including the synthesis of cyclic AMP by adenylyl cyclase (AC), activation of protein kinase A (PKA), and the phosphorylation of phospholamban (PLB), the L-type calcium channel (LCC), the ryanodine receptor complex (RyR), and troponin I (TnI) (Bers, 2001). While RyR and TnI phosphorylations were not included in the model, PLB and LCC phosphorylation were found to account for the majority of the changes in calcium handling observed experimentally in rat ventricular myocytes, including increased action potential duration (APD), systolic calcium, sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) calcium load, and calcium relaxation rate (Saucerman et al., 2003).

As a case study in model development and analysis, the model of Saucerman et al. (2003) is extended here to include PKA phosphorylation of RyR and TnI (see Fig. 2 for a schematic of the extended model). This allows systematic comparison of the contributions of all four major PKA targets to the observed changes in excitation-contraction coupling. While PLB and LCC phosphorylation are well accepted as important to the β-adrenergic control of contractility, the roles of RyR and TnI are more controversial (Bers et al., 2003; Konhilas et al., 2003; Marks, 2003). To address difficulties in reconciling experimental data obtained in different conditions, systems models may be useful.

### 3.1. Functional role of ryanodine receptor phosphorylation by PKA

The ryanodine receptor, which controls calcium release from the SR, is part of a large macromolecular complex that is regulated by stimuli including calcium, pH, PKA, PKC, and CaMKII (Bers, 2001). In vitro studies of PKA-mediated RyR phosphorylation in lipid bilayers show increased open probabilities due to an increased calcium sensitivity of RyRs (Marx et al.,

J.J. Saucerman, A.D. McCulloch / Progress in Biophysics & Molecular Biology 85 (2004) 261–278

Fig. 2. Schematic of the $\beta_1$-adrenergic signaling network and its regulation of rat ventricular myocyte excitation–contraction coupling. AC, adenylyl cyclase; AKAP, A-kinase anchoring protein; $\beta_1$-AR, $\beta_1$-adrenergic receptor; $\beta$ARK, $\beta$-adrenergic receptor kinase; Ca, calcium; cAMP, cyclic AMP; Fsk, forskolin; Gs$_{\alpha,\beta_y}$, G protein subunits; I1, inhibitor-1; IBMX, 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine; Iso, isoproterenol; LCC, L-type calcium channel; NE, norepinephrine; PDE, phosphodiesterase; PKA, protein kinase A; PKI, heat-stable protein kinase inhibitor; PLB, phospholamban; RyR, ryanodine receptor; SERCA, sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca$^{2+}$ ATPase; TnC, troponin C; TnI, troponin I.

2000). In heart failure conditions, the RyR may become hyperphosphorylated, further increasing calcium sensitivity and causing diastolic SR leak (Reiken et al., 2003). However, recent studies in intact myocytes have shown no significant increase in resting calcium spark frequency (Li et al., 2002), with either an increase (Viatchenko-Karpinski and Gyorke, 2001) or decrease in excitation–contraction coupling gain (Song et al., 2001).

Here, we explore the hypothesis that nonpathological RyR phosphorylation increases calcium sensitivity as seen in vitro, yet has little or no effect on calcium handling. The RyR was modeled as part of a complex including type II PKA, PP1, and PP2A, consistent with findings that these proteins are localized to mAKAP, an A-kinase anchoring protein (Michel and Scott, 2002). Reactions between complexed proteins were modified by a coefficient $\varepsilon$ to represent an increased probability of interaction (Saucerman et al., 2003). The association and dissociation of PKA, PP1, and PP2A with their corresponding substrates were assumed to be at QE (formulated algebraically), as these events take place on a millisecond time-scale. Since PKA phosphorylation or phosphatase dephosphorylation occurs with a time constant of several seconds (Stemmer et al., 2000), RyR phosphorylation was modeled with a differential equation, with terms for PKA phosphorylation and dephosphorylation by both PP1 and PP2A.

\[
[\text{PKACII}_{\text{tot}}] - [\text{PKACII}] - \frac{\varepsilon [\text{RyR}][\text{PKACII}]}{K_{\text{S_RyR_PKAC}}} = 0,
\]

J.J. Saucerman, A.D. McCulloch / Progress in Biophysics & Molecular Biology 85 (2004) 261–278

[PP1<sub>tot</sub>] − [PP1] − $\frac{\varepsilon[\text{RyRp}][\text{PP1}]}{K_{S\_RyR\_PP1}} = 0,$

[PP2A<sub>tot</sub>] − [PP2A] − $\frac{\varepsilon[\text{RyRp}][\text{PP2A}]}{K_{S\_RyR\_PP2A}} = 0,$

[RyR<sub>tot</sub>] − [RyR] − $\frac{\varepsilon[\text{RyR}][\text{PKACII}]}{K_{S\_RyR\_PKAC}} = 0,$

[RyRp<sub>tot</sub>] − [RyRp] − $\frac{\varepsilon[\text{RyRp}][\text{PP1}]}{K_{S\_RyR\_PP1}} - \frac{\varepsilon[\text{RyRp}][\text{PP2A}]}{K_{S\_RyR\_PP2A}} = 0,$

$\frac{\mathrm{d}[\text{RyRp}_{\text{tot}}]}{\mathrm{d}t} = k_{\text{PKA\_RyR}} \frac{\varepsilon[\text{RyR}][\text{PKACII}]}{K_{S\_RyR\_PKAC}}$

$- k_{\text{PP1\_RyR}} \frac{\varepsilon[\text{RyRp}][\text{PP1}]}{K_{S\_RyR\_PP1}} - k_{\text{PP2A\_RyR}} \frac{\varepsilon[\text{RyRp}][\text{PP2A}]}{K_{S\_RyR\_PP2A}},$

[RyR<sub>tot</sub>] = [RyR<sub>sum</sub>] − [RyRp<sub>tot</sub>],

$K_{\text{Mrel}} = \frac{1.64}{1 + 4 \frac{[\text{RyRp}_{\text{tot}}]}{[\text{RyR}_{\text{sum}}]}} K_{\text{MrelO}}.$

Eqs. (7)–(12) were parameterized with biochemical data from the literature (Table 1), assuming one PKA/PP1/PP2A complex for every 4 RyRs (results are insensitive to moderate changes in this assumption). The increase in RyR calcium sensitivity due to phosphorylation was modeled phenomenologically by changes to $K_{\text{Mrel}}$ (Eq. (14)), consistent with recent in vitro estimates (Bers et al., 2003; Marx et al., 2000). $K_{\text{Mrel}}$ is a parameter from the excitation–contraction coupling model describing the concentration of calcium at which half-maximal calcium flux through RyR is achieved (Luo and Rudy, 1994). While RyR gating kinetics are not mechanistically detailed, modifying other parameters characterizing RyR function such as $\Delta[\text{Ca}^{2+}]_{\text{i},\text{th}}$ or $G_{\text{relmax}}$ was unable to reproduce the uniform leftward shift in the calcium dependence of steady-state RyR flux suggested by experimental data (Bers et al., 2003; Marx et al., 2000).

Eqs. (7)–(12) were first validated in the signaling model alone (Figs. 3a and b), verifying that the response of RyR phosphorylation to β-adrenergic stimulation could be predicted reasonably (Li et al., 2002). Knowing that the signaling model predicted 50% phosphorylation of RyR (Fig. 3a), we included Eq. (14) with the excitation–contraction coupling model to determine how an instantaneous increase in RyR phosphorylation alters calcium dynamics (Fig. 3c). The instantaneous increase in RyR phosphorylation was predicted to increase systolic calcium by 10% initially, but systolic calcium returned to normal levels ($t_{1/2}$~4 s) due to a consequent 8% decrease in SR calcium load (from 102 to 94 μmol/l cytosol, see Fig. 5b). The decreased calcium gradient across the SR membrane negates the functional role of increased RyR $P_{o}$, bringing the system back to a steady state close to the original conditions. This adaptive behavior, termed calcium autoregulation, has been hypothesized to occur with changes in RyR function (Eisner et al., 2000) and is supported quantitatively here. These tests allowed an understanding of the

Table 1  
Parameters used to model $\beta$-adrenergic regulation of the RyR and TnI  

| Parameter          | Value   | Units | References                                                                 |
|--------------------|---------|-------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| $\varepsilon$      | 10.0    | None  | (Zhang et al., 2001)                                                     |
| $[\text{RyR}_{\text{sum}}]$ | 0.135 | $\mu$M | (Bers and Stiffel, 1993)                                             |
| $[\text{PKAII}_{\text{RyRtot}}]$ | 0.034 | $\mu$M | (Bers and Stiffel, 1993; Marx et al., 2000)                      |
| $[\text{PP1}_{\text{RyRtot}}]$ | 0.034 | $\mu$M | (Bers and Stiffel, 1993; Marx et al., 2000)                      |
| $[\text{PP2A}_{\text{RyRtot}}]$ | 0.034 | $\mu$M | (Bers and Stiffel, 1993; Marx et al., 2000)                      |
| $K_{S\_RyR\_PKAC}$ | 21.0    | $\mu$M | (Cohen et al., 1977; Gibson et al., 1997)                               |
| $K_{S\_RyR\_PP1}$  | 7.0     | $\mu$M | (Takai et al., 2000)                                                    |
| $K_{S\_RyR\_PP2A}$ | 4.1     | $\mu$M | (Takai et al., 2000)                                                    |
| $k_{\text{PKA\_RyR}}$ | 54.0   | $s^{-1}$ | (Gibson et al., 1997)                                                |
| $k_{\text{PP1\_RyR}}$ | 8.52   | $s^{-1}$ | (Steenaart et al., 1992; Takai et al., 2000)                         |
| $k_{\text{PP2A\_RyR}}$ | 10.1   | $s^{-1}$ | (Takai et al., 2000)                                                  |
| $[\text{TnI}_{\text{tot}}]$ | 70.0   | $\mu$M | (Bers, 2001; Puglisi and Bers, 2001)                              |
| $k_{\text{PKA\_TnI}}$ | 54.0   | $s^{-1}$ | (Gibson et al., 1997)                                                |
| $k_{\text{PP2A\_TnI}}$ | 10.1   | $s^{-1}$ | (Takai et al., 2000)                                                  |
| $K_{M\_PKA\_TnI}$ | 21.0    | $\mu$M | (Cohen et al., 1977; Gibson et al., 1997)                               |
| $K_{M\_PP2A\_TnI}$ | 3.0     | $\mu$M | (Takai et al., 2000)                                                    |

Parameters are taken directly from the sources above when available and converted into appropriate units. Remaining parameters were estimated from experimental measurements from rat ventricular myocytes or biochemical data from similar proteins.

characteristics of each model subsystem, which may have been more difficult if these components had been fully integrated into the model without prior evaluation.

Once the behavior of these components was understood, the signaling and excitation–contraction coupling models were connected to predict the changes by $\beta$-adrenergic stimulated RyR phosphorylation (Fig. 3d). As opposed to the immediate increase seen in Fig. 3c, RyR phosphorylation increased gradually (Fig. 3d, upper tracing), primarily due to the dynamics of cyclic AMP accumulation. The gradual increase in RyR phosphorylation ($t_{1/2} \sim 10 \, \text{s}$) caused a small, transient increase in systolic calcium (Fig. 3d, lower tracing). The decrease in systolic calcium change compared with Fig. 3c can be explained by comparing the dynamics of input change (RyR phosphorylation, $t_{1/2} \sim 10 \, \text{s}$) with the dynamics of the negative feedback (calcium autoregulation, $t_{1/2} \sim 4 \, \text{s}$). The system is able to adapt faster than the RyR phosphorylation is able to cause significant changes in systolic calcium, making it difficult to detect the feedback involved in calcium autoregulation from calcium transients alone.

The results in Fig. 3 suggest two testable predictions. The first is that using intact myocytes from PLB knockout mice in conditions similar to those used by Li et al. (2002), flash photolysis of caged cAMP (but not $\beta$-adrenergic stimulation) may increase RyR phosphorylation quickly enough to detect a transient increase is resting calcium spark frequency. Second, the model predicted that calcium autoregulation resulted in an 8% decrease in SR calcium load (Fig. 5b). Li et al. found a similar decrease in SR calcium load in mice with nonphosphorylatable PLB, although it was not significant ($n = 11$; 2002). The successful experimental validation of these predictions would support calcium autoregulation as responsible for the differences between reported in vitro and whole cell data. An unsuccessful validation would suggest either that the

J.J. Saucerman, A.D. McCulloch / Progress in Biophysics & Molecular Biology 85 (2004) 261–278

Fig. 3. The functional role of RyR phosphorylation by PKA. (a) Concentration response of RyR phosphorylation to the β-AR agonist isoproterenol, with (dotted line) and without (solid line) 10 μM okadaic acid (OA), an inhibitor of PP1 and PP2A. (b) Effects of 10 μM cAMP and 10 μM OA on RyR phosphorylation, compared with experimental data (Li et al., 2002). Panels (a) and (b) demonstrate the ability of the β-AR network to regulate PKA phosphorylation of RyR. (c) Immediate yet transient response in myocyte calcium transients (lower tracing) to a step increase in RyR phosphorylation at 10 s (upper tracing). This experiment demonstrates the dynamics of calcium autoregulation due to a sudden increase in the RyR calcium sensitivity. (d) The response of the signaling network to 1 μM isoproterenol at 10 s with RyR as the only available PKA target, causing a gradual increase in RyR phosphorylation (upper tracing) and a small, transient increase in systolic calcium (lower tracing).

data are inconsistent (motivating changes towards more physiological experiments) or that currently uncharacterized mechanisms are responsible. A final possibility, currently untested experimentally, is that the role of RyR phosphorylation is significant only when cooperating with other PKA targets, such as LCC or PLB phosphorylation. This hypothesis is discussed below (Section 3.3, Fig. 6).

### 3.2. Functional role of troponin I phosphorylation by PKA

Troponin I acts as a key regulator of the myofilaments, stabilizing the interaction between the troponin complex and actin of during diastole (Bers, 2001). With β-adrenergic stimulation,

phosphorylation of troponin I decreases myofilament sensitivity to calcium (negative inotropy), primarily by increasing the dissociation rate of calcium for TnC (Robertson et al., 1982; Solaro et al., 1976). This decreased calcium affinity is also often described to enhance lusitropy (relaxation rate) during β-adrenergic stimulation (Katz, 2001). This possibility appears reasonable, as an increased rate of calcium dissociation from TnC might increase the rate at which that calcium is pumped into the SR or out of the myocyte by the Na⁺/Ca²⁺ exchanger. However, several studies indicate that PKA-mediated TnI phosphorylation does not play a major role in unloaded relaxation rate, contributing to lusitropy only during significant force development (Fentzke et al., 1999; Konhilas et al., 2003; Li et al., 2000).

To explore the role of TnI phosphorylation in enhanced lusitropy of calcium transients, we modeled PKA phosphoregulation of TnI and the reported decreases in calcium/TnC affinity. No known AKAPs colocalize to TnI, although AKAP/PKA disruption with the peptide Ht31 has been shown to decrease TnI phosphorylation (Fink et al., 2001). Similar to PLB phosphorylation (Saucerman et al., 2003), [PKAC] ≪ [TnItot], allowing TnI phosphorylation to be represented with a single differential equation:

\[
\frac{\mathrm{d}[TnIp]}{\mathrm{d}t} = \frac{k_{\text{PKA\_TnI}}[\text{PKAC}][\text{TnI}]}{K_{\text{M\_PKA\_TnI}} + [\text{TnI}]} - \frac{k_{\text{PP2A\_TnI}}[\text{PP2A}][\text{TnIp}]}{K_{\text{M\_PP2A\_TnI}} + [\text{TnIp}]},
\]

\[
[\text{TnI}] = [\text{TnItot}] - [\text{TnIp}],
\]

\[
K_{\text{M\_TnC}} = (1.0 + 0.45[\text{TnIp}]/[\text{TnItot}]) K_{\text{M\_TnCO}}.
\]

Although the dependence of TnC affinity on TnI phosphorylation was modeled phenomenologically (Eq. (17)), the qualitative features are consistent with the reported 45% increase in calcium/TnC dissociation rate after phosphorylation (Robertson et al., 1982). The concentration response of TnI phosphorylation to isoproterenol was consistent from experimental data from isolated myocytes (Stemmer et al., 2000) (Fig. 4a), which had a noticeably higher EC50 than backphosphorylation data from the intact heart (Karczewski et al., 1990). When integrated with the model of excitation–contraction coupling, isoproterenol stimulated a slow, apparent second-order increase in TnI phosphorylation (Fig. 4b, upper tracing) yet had little effect on the magnitude of calcium transients (lower tracing). TnI phosphorylation also caused a negligible 2.3% decrease (378 vs. 387 ms) in calcium decline \( t_{80} \) compared with the much larger 20.5% decrease caused by PLB phosphorylation (Fig. 5b). However, TnI phosphorylation did reduce the amount of calcium bound to TnC by 20%, which may have become significant to force development if a model of crossbridge cycling had been included. Thus, the decrease in calcium/TnC affinity upon TnI phosphorylation appears not to contribute significantly to the enhanced rate of calcium decline. These results are consistent with findings that PLB rather than TnI is responsible for the majority of lusitropic response (Fentzke et al., 1999; Li et al., 2000), and that TnI phosphorylation may have significant functional consequences only at higher mechanical loads (Konhilas et al., 2003).

### 3.3. Contributions of PLB, LCC, RyR, and TnI to inotropy and lusitropy

With four major PKA targets included in the model of β-adrenergic signaling and excitation–contraction coupling, comparisons can be drawn to determine relative functional roles both

J.J. Saucerman, A.D. McCulloch / Progress in Biophysics & Molecular Biology 85 (2004) 261–278

Fig. 4. The functional role of TnI phosphorylation by PKA. (a) Concentration response of TnI phosphorylation to isoproterenol, compared with experimental data (Stemmer et al., 2000). (b) With TnI as the only available PKA target, the response of the signaling network to 1 μM isoproterenol at 10 s. TnI phosphorylation (upper tracing) increases to a high phosphorylation level with apparent second-order response (noticeable toe region from 10–20 s), yet no significant changes occur in myocyte calcium transients (lower tracing).

Fig. 5. (a) Calcium transients with 1 μM isoproterenol added at 10 s, including PKA phosphoregulation of PLB, LCC, RyR, and TnI in the model. The majority of the increase in systolic calcium occurs within 40 s of isoproterenol exposure. (b) Contribution of individual PKA targets PLB, LCC, RyR, and TnI to measures of inotropy (systolic calcium, SR load) and lusitropy (calcium decline $t_{80}$). With this analysis, one can determine how much of the total PKA response (+, +, +, +) can be achieved with phosphoregulation of a single target.
individually and when acting in conjunction with other targets. Such a quantitative understanding would be valuable for understanding the mechanisms underlying the observed inotropic and lusitropic changes in the cardiac myocyte. To gain this type of insight, we performed systematic perturbations to the model while quantifying systolic calcium, rate of calcium decline ($t_{80}$), and SR calcium load.

Under physiological conditions, the application of isoproterenol results in a dramatic increase in contractility within 40 s (Fig. 5a). Measures of inotropy (systolic calcium, SR load) and lusitropy (calcium decline $t_{80}$) change substantially (Fig. 5b; +, +, +, +). Here, disruption of PKA phosphorylation of all four targets (−, −, −, −) is equivalent to a control without isoproterenol. By disrupting phosphorylation of three targets at a time, we identified the influence of individual PKA targets towards changes in inotropy and lusitropy (Fig. 5b). From this analysis, PLB and LCC phosphorylation appeared to account for the increases in systolic calcium, while PLB dominated the increase in SR load. RyR phosphorylation alone had no substantial effect on steady-state systolic calcium, with a small decrease in SR load. Lusitropy, as measured by decreases in calcium decline $t_{80}$, was most strongly influenced by PLB. LCC phosphorylation appeared to increase lusitropy as well, with only a nominal lusitropic response with TnI phosphorylation. These perturbations provided insight into the sensitivity of calcium handling to the adrenergic regulation of channels, pumps, and buffers.

While the above analysis examined individual contributions to $\beta$-adrenergic response, another series of perturbations tested network robustness. Due to the nonlinear relationships between targets, disruption of individual PKA targets demonstrated somewhat different behavior (Fig. 6). Analyzing complementary sets of perturbation data may facilitate the discovery of cooperative or robust behavior.

For example, disruption of LCC phosphorylation resulted in little change to calcium decline $t_{80}$ (Fig. 6), while the LCC appeared to contribute to lusitropy when acting alone (Fig. 5b). While LCC phosphorylation does not directly enhance muscle relaxation, the elevated calcium levels indirectly enhanced lusitropy by causing the SR Ca${}^{2+}$ ATPase and the Na${}^{+}$/Ca${}^{2+}$ exchanger to work at higher rates. This suggests that experimental studies designed to isolate the lusitropic effects of TnI phosphorylation (often using PLB mutants) should be careful to eliminate possible influences from LCC phosphorylation. Such influences could be prevented by the use of permeabilized myocytes, which have been used to study RyR phosphorylation independently of the LCC (Li et al., 2002).

### 3.4. Summary

We extended a computational model of $\beta$-adrenergic signaling and excitation–contraction coupling (Saucerman et al., 2003) to investigate the functional roles of PLB, LCC, RyR, and TnI phosphorylation. PLB and LCC appear to be the primary PKA targets responsible for inotropy and lusitropy of calcium handling during $\beta$-adrenergic stimulation in the rat ventricular myocyte. PLB and LCC contributed similarly to increased systolic calcium, while PLB phosphorylation accounted for the dominant changes in SR calcium load and calcium decline $t_{80}$. RyR phosphorylation was predicted to have only a transient effect on systolic calcium, causing a small decrease in SR load, while TnI phosphorylation appeared to have little functional role in the conditions described. However, several simplifications in the excitation–contraction coupling
J.J. Saucerman, A.D. McCulloch / Progress in Biophysics & Molecular Biology 85 (2004) 261–278

Fig. 6. Phosphoregulatory deletions of individual PKA targets PLB, LCC, RyR, and TnI. By deleting phosphoregulation of a single PKA target, one can gain a measure of network robustness. For example, the disruption of LCC phosphoregulation has little effect on lusitropy (calcium decline $t_{80}$), while the corresponding addition of LCC phosphoregulation alone decreased $t_{80}$ significantly (see Fig. 5b). Comparing Fig. 5b with Fig. 6 in this manner provides insight into the nonlinear nature of these regulatory interactions.

model should be considered when interpreting these predictions. The model of RyR, based on Luo and Rudy (Luo and Rudy, 1994), exhibits graded $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ release yet does not exhibit stochastic calcium sparks. This is not expected to greatly influence calcium autoregulation, which allowed systolic calcium adaptation to RyR phosphorylation. The kinetics of calcium buffers were not modeled, and $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$/TnC binding has not been connected to a crossbridge cycling model such as Rice et al. (1999), which may increase the apparent role of TnI phosphorylation somewhat. However, recent studies indicate that a large influence is unlikely except at high mechanical loads (Konhilas et al., 2003). These potential changes represent an interesting future direction for extension of the current model.

## 4. Conclusions

While mechanistic models of cell signaling rely on a body of experimental data, they are able to make novel testable predictions, leading to quantitative hypotheses and new experimental strategies. By investigating the functional integration of signaling networks with cell physiology, we can begin to understand the consequences of signaling interactions at the whole cell level. As a case study of model development and analysis, we examined the functional roles of PLB, LCC, RyR, and TnI phosphorylation upon $\beta$-adrenergic stimulation in the cardiac myocyte. Systematic in silico perturbations were used to characterize the adaptive response to RyR phosphorylation

and support proposed mechanisms responsible for PKA-mediated changes in excitation-contraction coupling. Analysis of mechanistic systems models provides a valuable tool for bringing a quantitative understanding to cell signaling networks.

# Acknowledgements

This work was supported by a Whitaker Foundation Graduate Fellowship (to J.J.S), the National Space Biomedical Research Institute (CA00261, to A.D.M.), the National Biomedical Computation Resource (P41 RR08605, to A.D.M.), and the National Science Foundation (BES-0096492, to A.D.M).

# References

Angeli, D., Sontag, E., 2003. Monotone control systems. IEEE Trans. Automat. Control 48, 1684–1698.

Asthagiri, A.R., Lauffenburger, D.A., 2000. Bioengineering models of cell signaling. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 02, 31–53.

Bers, D.M., 2001. Excitation–Contraction Coupling and Cardiac Contractile Force. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, pp. 427.

Bers, D.M., Stiffel, V.M., 1993. Ratio of ryanodine to dihydropyridine receptors in cardiac and skeletal muscle and implications for E–C coupling. Am. J. Physiol. 264, C1587–C1593.

Bers, D.M., Eisner, D.A., Valdivia, H.H., 2003. Sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca²⁺ and heart failure: roles of diastolic leak and Ca²⁺ transport. Circ. Res. 93, 487–490.

Bhalla, U.S., Iyengar, R., 1999. Emergent properties of networks of biological signaling pathways. Science 283, 381–387.

Cohen, P., Nimmo, G.A., Burchell, A., Antoniw, J.F., 1977. The substrate specificity and regulation of the protein phosphatases involved in the control of glycogen metabolism in mammalian skeletal muscle. Adv. Enzyme Regul. 16, 97–119.

Csete, M.E., Doyle, J.C., 2002. Reverse engineering of biological complexity. Science 295, 1664–1669.

Eisner, D.A., Choi, H.S., Diaz, M.E., O’Neill, S.C., Trafford, A.W., 2000. Integrative analysis of calcium cycling in cardiac muscle. Circ. Res. 87, 1087–1094.

Fentzke, R.C., Buck, S.H., Patel, J.R., Lin, H., Wolska, B.M., Stojanovic, M.O., Martin, A.F., Solaro, R.J., Moss, R.L., Leiden, J.M., 1999. Impaired cardiomyocyte relaxation and diastolic function in transgenic mice expressing slow skeletal troponin I in the heart. J. Physiol. 517 (Pt 1), 143–157.

Fink, M.A., Zakhary, D.R., Mackey, J.A., Desnoyer, R.W., Apperson-Hansen, C., Damron, D.S., Bond, M., 2001. AKAP-mediated targeting of protein kinase a regulates contractility in cardiac myocytes. Circ. Res. 88, 291–297.

Gibson, R.M., Ji-Buechler, Y., Taylor, S.S., 1997. Interaction of the regulatory and catalytic subunits of cAMP-dependent protein kinase. Electrostatic sites on the type Ialpha regulatory subunit. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 16343–16350.

Gilman, A.G., Simon, M.I., Bourne, H.R., Harris, B.A., Long, R., Ross, E.M., et al., 2002. Overview of the alliance for cellular signaling. Nature 420, 703–706.

Hairer, E., Wanner, G., 1996. Solving Ordinary Differential Equations II. Stiff and Differential–Algebraic Problems. Springer Series in Computational Mathematics, Vol. 14, 2nd Edition, Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

Herzig, S., Patil, P., Neumann, J., Staschen, C.M., Yue, D.T., 1993. Mechanisms of beta-adrenergic stimulation of cardiac Ca²⁺ channels revealed by discrete-time Markov analysis of slow gating. Biophys. J. 65, 1599–1612.

Hoffmann, A., Levchenko, A., Scott, M.L., Baltimore, D., 2002. The IkappaB-NF-kappaB signaling module: temporal control and selective gene activation. Science 298, 1241–1245.

Ideker, T., Lauffenburger, D., 2003. Building with a scaffold: emerging strategies for high- to low-level cellular modeling. Trends Biotechnol. 21, 255–262.

J.J. Saucerman, A.D. McCulloch / Progress in Biophysics & Molecular Biology 85 (2004) 261–278

Ideker, T., Ozier, O., Schwikowski, B., Siegel, A.F., 2002. Discovering regulatory and signalling circuits in molecular interaction networks. Bioinformatics 18 (Suppl 1), S233–S240.

Karczewski, P., Bartel, S., Krause, E.G., 1990. Differential sensitivity to isoprenaline of troponin I and phospholamban phosphorylation in isolated rat hearts. Biochem. J. 266, 115–122.

Katz, A.M., 2001. Physiology of the Heart. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, New York.

Khalil, H.K., 1996. Nonlinear Systems, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, pp. 734.

Kohn, K.W., 2001. Molecular interaction maps as information organizers and simulation guides. Chaos 11, 84–97.

Konhilas, J.P., Irving, T.C., Wolska, B.M., Jweied, E.E., Martin, A.F., Solaro, R.J., de Tombe, P.P., 2003. Troponin I in the murine myocardium: influence on length-dependent activation and interfilament spacing. J. Physiol. 547, 951–961.

Li, S., Petzold, L.R., 2000. Software and algorithm for sensitivity analysis of large-scale differential algebraic systems. J. Comput. Appl. Math. 125, 131–145.

Li, L., Desantiago, J., Chu, G., Kranias, E.G., Bers, D.M., 2000. Phosphorylation of phospholamban and troponin I in beta-adrenergic-induced acceleration of cardiac relaxation. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 278, H769–H779.

Li, Y., Kranias, E.G., Mignery, G.A., Bers, D.M., 2002. Protein kinase a phosphorylation of the ryanodine receptor does not affect calcium sparks in mouse ventricular myocytes. Circ. Res. 90, 309–316.

Luo, C.H., Rudy, Y., 1994. A dynamic model of the cardiac ventricular action potential. I. Simulations of ionic currents and concentration changes. Circ. Res. 74, 1071–1096.

Marks, A.R., 2003. A guide for the perplexed: towards an understanding of the molecular basis of heart failure. Circulation 107, 1456–1459.

Marx, S.O., Reiken, S., Hisamatsu, Y., Jayaraman, T., Burkhoff, D., Rosemblit, N., Marks, A.R., 2000. PKA phosphorylation dissociates FKBP12.6 from the calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor): defective regulation in failing hearts. Cell 101, 365–376.

Michel, J.J., Scott, J.D., 2002. AKAP mediated signal transduction. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 42, 235–257.

Noble, D., 2002. Modelling the heart: insights, failures and progress. Bioessays 24, 1155–1163.

Puglisi, J.L., Bers, D.M., 2001. LabHEART: an interactive computer model of rabbit ventricular myocyte ion channels and Ca transport. Am. J. Physiol. Cell. Physiol. 281, C2049–C2060.

Reiken, S., Gaburjakova, M., Guatimosim, S., Gomez, A.M., D’Armiento, J., Burkhoff, D., et al., 2003. Protein kinase a phosphorylation of the cardiac calcium release channel (ryanodine receptor) in normal and failing hearts. Role of phosphatases and response to isoproterenol. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 444–453.

Rice, J.J., Winslow, R.L., Hunter, W.C., 1999. Comparison of putative cooperative mechanisms in cardiac muscle: length dependence and dynamic responses. Am. J. Physiol. 276, H1734–H1754.

Robertson, S.P., Johnson, J.D., Holroyde, M.J., Kranias, E.G., Potter, J.D., Solaro, R.J., 1982. The effect of troponin I phosphorylation on the Ca²⁺-binding properties of the Ca²⁺-regulatory site of bovine cardiac troponin. J. Biol. Chem. 257, 260–263.

Sachs, K., Gifford, D., Jaakkola, T., Sorger, P., Lauffenburger, D.A., 2002. Bayesian network approach to cell signaling pathway modeling. Sci STKE 2002, PE38.

Sambrano, G.R., 2003. Developing a navigation and visualization system for signaling pathways. AfCS Research Reports 1, Access: [http://www.signaling-gateway.org/reports/v1/da0003](http://www.signaling-gateway.org/reports/v1/da0003).

Sastry, S., 1999. Nonlinear Systems: Analysis, Stability, and Control. Springer, New York, pp. 704.

Saucerman, J.J., Brunton, L.L., Michailova, A.P., McCulloch, A.D., 2003. Modeling beta-adrenergic control of cardiac myocyte contractility in silico. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 47997–48003.

Savageau, M.A., 1995. Michaelis–Menten mechanism reconsidered: implications of fractal kinetics. J. Theoret. Biol. 176, 115–124.

Schnell, S., Maini, P.K., 2000. Enzyme kinetics at high enzyme concentration. Bull. Math. Biol. 62, 483–499.

Segel, I.H., 1975. Enzyme kinetics: behavior and analysis of rapid equilibrium and steady state enzyme systems. Wiley, New York, pp. xxii, 957.

Solaro, R.J., Moir, A.J., Perry, S.V., 1976. Phosphorylation of troponin I and the inotropic effect of adrenaline in the perfused rabbit heart. Nature 262, 615–617.

Song, L.S., Wang, S.Q., Xiao, R.P., Spurgeon, H., Lakatta, E.G., Cheng, H., 2001. Beta-adrenergic stimulation synchronizes intracellular Ca(2+) release during excitation-contraction coupling in cardiac myocytes. Circ. Res. 88, 794–801.

Steenaart, N.A., Ganim, J.R., Di Salvo, J., Kranias, E.G., 1992. The phospholamban phosphatase associated with cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum is a type 1 enzyme. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 293, 17–24.

Stemmer, P.M., Ledyard, T.H., Watanabe, A.M., 2000. Protein dephosphorylation rates in myocytes after isoproterenol withdrawal. Biochem. Pharmacol. 59, 1513–1519.

Takai, A., Tsuboi, K., Koyasu, M., Isobe, M., 2000. Effects of modification of the hydrophobic C-1–C-16 segment of tautomycin on its affinity to type-1 and type-2A protein phosphatases. Biochem. J. 350 (Pt 1), 81–88.

Venter, J.C., Adams, M.D., Myers, E.W., Li, P.W., Mural, R.J., Sutton, G.G., et al., 2001. The sequence of the human genome. Science 291, 1304–1351.

Viatchenko-Karpinski, S., Gyorke, S., 2001. Modulation of the Ca(2+)-induced Ca(2+) release cascade by beta-adrenergic stimulation in rat ventricular myocytes. J. Physiol. 533, 837–848.

Wuchty, S., Oltvai, Z.N., Barabasi, A.L., 2003. Evolutionary conservation of motif constituents in the yeast protein interaction network. Nat. Genet. 35, 176–179.

Zhang, J., Ma, Y., Taylor, S.S., Tsien, R.Y., 2001. Genetically encoded reporters of protein kinase A activity reveal impact of substrate tethering. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 14997–15002.
