
ments. In any case, the questions remain: What kind of elements associated with these processes would have arrived relatively early in chordate evolution and then become practically frozen in birds and mammals? And what mechanisms would underlie this, allowing them to resist virtually all further change?

**Note added in proof:** We recently became aware of related observations made by Boffelli *et al.* (37).

---

### References and Notes

1. E. S. Lander *et al.*, Nature **409**, 860 (2001).
2. J. C. Venter *et al.*, Science **291**, 1304 (2001).
3. Human Genome Sequencing Consortium, in preparation.
4. R. H. Waterston *et al.*, Nature **420**, 520 (2002).
5. K. M. Roskin, M. Diekhans, D. Haussler, in *Proceedings of the 7th Annual International Conference on Research in Computational Molecular Biology* (ACM, New York, NY, 2003), pp. 257–266.
6. F. Chiaromonte *et al.*, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. **68**, 245 (2003).
7. R. C. Hardison, Trends Genet. **16**, 369 (2000).
8. G. G. Loots *et al.*, Science **288**, 136 (2000).
9. L. A. Pennacchio, E. M. Rubin, Nature Rev. Genet. **2**, 100 (2001).
10. K. A. Frazer *et al.*, Genome Res. **11**, 1651 (2001).
11. U. DeSilva *et al.*, Genome Res. **12**, 3 (2002).
12. E. T. Dermitzakis *et al.*, Nature **420**, 578 (2002).
13. E. T. Dermitzakis *et al.*, Science **302**, 1033 (2003).
14. Rat Genome Sequencing Consortium, Nature **428**, 493 (2004).
15. G. M. Cooper *et al.*, Genome Res. **14**, 539 (2004).
16. J. W. Thomas *et al.*, Nature **424**, 788 (2003).
17. E. H. Margulies, M. Blanchette, D. Haussler, E. D. Green, Genome Res. **13**, 2507 (2003).
18. K. A. Frazer *et al.*, Genome Res. **14**, 367 (2004).
19. M. Ashburner *et al.*, Nature Genet. **25**, 25 (2000).
20. N. J. Mulder *et al.*, Nucleic Acids Res. **31**, 315 (2003).
21. M. A. Nobrega, I. Ovcharenko, V. Afzal, E. M. Rubin, Science **302**, 413 (2003).
22. S. Plaza, C. Dozier, M. C. Langlois, S. Saule, Mol. Cell. Biol. **15**, 892 (1995).
23. L. Rahman, V. Bliskovski, F. J. Kaye, M. Zajac-Kaye, Genomics **83**, 76 (2004).
24. I. L. Hofacker, Nucleic Acids Res. **31**, 3429 (2003).
25. H. Jumaa, P. J. Nielsen, EMBO J. **16**, 5077 (1997).
26. B. Sommer *et al.*, Science **249**, 1580 (1990).
27. P. J. Aruscavage, B. L. Bass, RNA **6**, 257 (2000).
28. E. H. Sherr, Curr. Opin. Pediatr. **15**, 567 (2003).
29. C. Sabarinadh, S. Subramanian, R. Mishra, Genome Biol. **4** (2003).
30. M. Kellis, N. Patterson, M. Endrizzi, B. Birren, E. S. Lander, Nature **423**, 241 (2003).
31. G. Bejerano, D. Haussler, M. Blanchette, Bioinformatics (Suppl.), in press.
32. J. S. Mattick, M. J. Gagen, Mol. Biol. Evol. **18**, 1611 (2001).
33. E. T. Dermitzakis *et al.*, Genome Res. **14**, 852 (2004).
34. K. H. Wolfe, P. M. Sharp, W. H. Li, Nature **337**, 283 (1989).
35. R. C. Hardison *et al.*, Genome Res. **13**, 13 (2003).
36. J. H. Chuang, H. Li, PLoS Biol. **2**, E29 (2004).
37. D. Boffelli, M. Nobrega, E. M. Rubin, Nature Rev. Genet., in press.
38. F. Spitz, F. Gonzalez, D. Duboule, Cell **113**, 405 (2003).
39. We thank the Genome Sequencing Consortia for the human, mouse, rat, dog, chicken, and other genome sequences we used in this analysis; W. Miller, M. Diekhans, A. Hinrichs, K. Rosenbloom, D. Thomas, and the members of the University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) browser team for providing the genome alignments and other tracks of genome annotation available on the UCSC genome browser; M. Blanchette, S. Salama, T. Lowe, M. Ares, K. Pollard, and B. Cohen for helpful discussions; A. Siepel for the neutral substitution rate analysis involving chicken and chimp; K. Roskin for the calculation of the percent identity in ancestral re-

peat sites for 1-Mb windows; and S. Walton for help in preparing the manuscript. G.B., W.J.K., and D.H. were supported by National Human Genome Research Institute grant 1P41HG02371 and National Cancer Institute contract 22XS013A, and D.H. was additionally supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. S.S., M.P., I.M., and J.S.M. were supported by the Australian Research Council and the Queensland State Government.

---

### Supporting Online Material

www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/1098119/DC1

---

### A Family with Severe Insulin Resistance and Diabetes Due to a Mutation in AKT2

#### Stella George,$^{1\ast}$ Justin J. Rochford,$^{1\ast}$ Christian Wolfrum,$^{3}$ Sarah L. Gray,$^{1}$ Sven Schinner,$^{1}$ Jenny C. Wilson,$^{1}$ Maria A. Soos,$^{1}$ Peter R. Murgatroyd,$^{1}$ Rachel M. Williams,$^{2}$ Carlo L. Acerini,$^{2}$ David B. Dunger,$^{2}$ David Barford,$^{4}$ A. Margot Umpleby,$^{5}$ Nicholas J. Wareham,$^{6}$ Huw Alban Davies,$^{7}$ Alan J. Schafer,$^{8}$ Markus Stoffel,$^{3}$ Stephen O’Rahilly,$^{1\dagger}$ Inês Barroso$^{8,9}$

Inherited defects in signaling pathways downstream of the insulin receptor have long been suggested to contribute to human type 2 diabetes mellitus. Here we describe a mutation in the gene encoding the protein kinase AKT2/PKBβ in a family that shows autosomal dominant inheritance of severe insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus. Expression of the mutant kinase in cultured cells disrupted insulin signaling to metabolic end points and inhibited the function of coexpressed, wild-type AKT. These findings demonstrate the central importance of AKT signaling to insulin sensitivity in humans.

Most forms of diabetes are likely to be polygenic in origin, although a number of monogenic forms are being recognized (1, 2). Although rare, these monogenic examples offer insight into the function of the affected gene in humans as well as offering important clues to understanding more common forms.

We have been screening genomic DNA from 104 unrelated subjects with severe insulin resistance for mutations in genes that are implicated in insulin signaling. We identified a missense mutation in the serine/threonine kinase gene AKT2 in one Caucasian proband. AKT2 (also known as PKBβ) is highly expressed in insulin-sensitive tissues and is activated in response to growth factors and related stimuli (3, 4), a process that requires its phosphorylation by the phosphoinositide-3 phosphate-dependent kinase activities designated PDK1 and PDK2 (3). The proband (Fig. 1D, iii/1) is a nonobese 34-year-old female who developed diabetes mellitus at 30 years of age. The proband, her nonobese mother, her maternal grandmother, and a maternal uncle were all heterozygous for a G-to-A substitution predicted to result in an R-to-H substitution at amino acid 274 (Fig. 1, A and B) (5). All were markedly hyperinsulinemic (table S1), and the mother and maternal grandmother developed diabetes mellitus in their late thirties. Three other first-degree relatives available for study were all clinically normal, with normal fasting glucose and insulin, and were homozygous for the wild-type AKT2 sequence (Fig. 1D and table S1). This mutation was not found in the genomic DNA of 1500 Caucasian control subjects from the United Kingdom.

R<sup>274</sup> forms part of an RD sequence motif within the catalytic loop of the AKT2 kinase

---

### Department of Clinical Biochemistry,$^{1}$ Department of Paediatrics, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK. $^{3}$Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, USA. $^{4}$Section of Structural Biology, Institute of Cancer Research, Chester Beatty Laboratories, London SW3 6JB, UK. $^{5}$Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Guy’s, King’s and St. Thomas’ School of Medicine, London, UK. $^{6}$Medical Research Council Epidemiology Unit, Strangeways Research Laboratory, Worts Causeway, Cambridge CB1 8RN, UK. $^{7}$Darent Valley Hospital, Darenth Wood Road, Dartford, Kent DA2 8DA, UK. $^{8}$Incyte, 3160 Porter Drive, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA. $^{9}$Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK.

*These authors contributed equally to this work.

†To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: sorahill@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

---

### SOM Text
Figs. S1 to S3
Tables S1 to S7
References and Notes
19 March 2004; accepted 27 April 2004
Published online 6 May 2004;
10.1126/science.1098119
Include this information when citing this paper.

domain that is invariant in AKT isoforms in all species and is also highly conserved within the protein kinase family (Fig. 1C) (6). The RD motif includes the invariant D residue (D²⁷⁵ of AKT2) that performs an essential catalytic function in all protein kinases.

R²⁷⁴ is positioned in the core of the catalytic domain, forming critical hydrogen bonds with the phosphate moiety of phosphoT309 in the activation segment permitting correct positioning of the substrate peptide relative to the catalytic base and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) (7). A model of the mutant protein AKT2H274 (Fig. 2A) indicates that this mutation would disrupt the conformation of both the activation segment and the catalytic loop, misaligning the substrate peptide relative to catalytic residues and ATP and hence ablating catalytic activity. Consistent with these predictions, unlike the wild-type AKT2, AKT2H274 was unable to phosphorylate a peptide substrate based on the AKT target sequence of glycogen synthase kinase 3 in an in vitro kinase assay (Fig. 2B).

To examine the effect of the R²⁷⁴H mutation on the signaling ability of AKT2, we studied the regulation of the FOXA2 transcription factor, a substrate of AKT2 (8). FOXA2 activity is inhibited by phosphorylation, which leads to its exclusion from the nucleus. Treatment of HepG2 human liver cells with insulin induced the translocation of endogenous FOXA2 from the nucleus to the cytosol (Fig. 3A). Overexpression of wild-type AKT2 mimicked this effect (Fig. 3A). In contrast, in cells transfected with mutant AKT2H274, FOXA2 remained entirely nuclear (Fig. 3A). Consistent with this, although cotransfected wild-type AKT2 ablated FOXA2-mediated transcription from the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PCK1) promoter in HepG2 cells, AKT2H274 had no effect (Fig. 3B). AKT2H274 also prevented wild-type AKT2 from inhibiting FOXA2-driven transcription from the PCK1 promoter, in a dose-dependent manner, when both AKT2 proteins were coexpressed (Fig. 3C). In the same assay, AKT2H274 also inhibited the effect of wild-type AKT1, which also contributes substantially to AKT activity in the liver (Fig. 3D) (9).

AKT overexpression in preadipocytes augments differentiation to adipocytes (10). We therefore examined the effect of AKT2H274 on adipocyte differentiation. 3T3-L1 mouse preadipocytes overexpressing wild-type AKT2 showed increased accumulation of lipid during adipogenesis (Fig. 3E), whereas cells overexpressing the mutant AKT2H274 showed markedly decreased lipid accumulation. The fatty acid transport protein aP2 is a well-defined marker of adipogenesis (11). Expression of aP2 was augmented by expression of wild-type AKT2 but reduced by expression of AKT2H274 (Fig. 3F). Thus,

AKT2H274 may also exert dominant-negative effects over endogenous AKT proteins during adipocyte differentiation.

To allow closer examination of the in vivo consequences of the AKT2H274 mutation, the proband underwent a two-step hyperinsulinemic/euglycemic clamp. This revealed extreme insulin resistance (fig. S1), with the glucose infusion rate remaining very low even in the second step, despite an insulin concentration of 7346 pmol/l. Examination of the effects of insulin on hepatic glucose production and peripheral glucose use revealed severe insulin resistance in this subject in both the liver and peripheral tissues (supporting online text).

Analysis of the proband’s body composition revealed a –35% difference in total body fat compared to that predicted for her height and weight, consistent with both the ability of AKT2H274 to impair adipogenesis and the recently reported observation that AKT2 knockout mice develop lipoatrophy as they age (12).

This family provides an example of a monogenic inherited defect in post-receptor insulin signaling that leads to human insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus. Genetic variants in IRS1 and PIK3R1 have been previously reported in subjects with insulin resistance and/or type 2 diabetes mellitus, but they have not clearly segregated with insulin resistance in a pedigree or seriously disrupted signal transduction (13, 14). Dominant-negative mutations in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARγ) are associated with autosomal, dominant, severe insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus. However, the mechanisms whereby they result in insulin resistance are unclear and are unlikely to be due to simple impairment of insulin signal transduction (15).

AKT2−/− mice show resistance to insulin’s effects on glucose metabolism in muscle and liver, and a subset of these mice go on to develop frank diabetes (12, 16). In view of the abnormal fat distribution in our proband, it is of interest that atrophy of adipose tissue with age has been described in one strain of these mice (12, 16). AKT2−/+ mice show little metabolic phenotype, and even in (−/−) animals, the degree of insulin resistance is only moderate. This contrasts with the extreme hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance seen in humans heterozygous for the AKT2H274 mutation. This may result from this mutant inhibiting other coexpressed AKT isoforms in a dominant-negative manner or from interference with other functions of upstream kinases such as PDK1.

Apart from lipodystrophy, there are no other overt structural or functional alterations in AKT2-expressing tissues from patients with this mutation. This suggests that, at least

in those tissues where AKT2 is highly expressed, insulin signal transduction represents the major role for AKT. Frank diabetes mellitus developed in three of the four human carriers of the AKT2 mutation. In the fourth, a middle-aged male, marked hyperinsulin-

Fig. 3. Functional properties of wild-type AKT2 and AKT2H274 in cultured human liver and rodent fat cells. (A) HepG2 cells were treated in the (i) absence or (ii) presence of 50 nM insulin, then fixed and probed with antibodies to FOXA2 to determine intracellular localization (8). The same assay was performed with cells transfected with (iii) wild-type AKT2 or (iv) AKT2H274. Scale bars, 40 μm. (B) Luciferase activity was determined in extracts of HepG2 cells transfected with the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase reporter construct, pPCK1, with or without FOXA2 and in the absence or presence of wild-type AKT2 or AKT2H274. ns, no significant difference. (C and D) Alternatively, HepG2 cells were transfected with the pPCK1 reporter construct with or without FOXA2 and either (C) wild-type AKT2 (125 ng) or (D) wild-type AKT1 (100 ng). In each case, AKT2H274 was cotransfected in increasing quantities as indicated. *, a significant difference from activity in cells transfected with FOXA2 alone (*P* < 0.05); †, no significant difference in this comparison. In all cases, data are mean ± SD of four experiments. All data were normalized to coexpressed β-galactosidase activity. (E) 3T3-L1 preadipocytes were stably transfected with empty vector (mock), wild-type AKT2, or AKT2H274. Top: Two-day post-confluent cells (Day 0) or cells induced to differentiate for 12 days were fixed and stained with oil red O to assess lipid accumulation. Bottom: Images of day 12 differentiated cells were obtained by light microscopy; scale bars, 200 μm. (F) Lysates were prepared from cells transfected with empty vector (E), wild-type AKT2 (W), or AKT2H274 (M) at 2 days post-confluence (Day 0) or at various intervals up to day 12 after the induction of differentiation. Day 0 samples were Western blotted (W.) for AKT2 expression, and all lysates were Western blotted for aP2 expression.

**R E P O R T S**

emia occurred simultaneously with normal glucose tolerance. Moreover, in our proband, severe hyperinsulinemia preceded diabetes by many years. Although we cannot exclude an effect of the AKT2 mutation on beta-cell function, it is clear that the major effect of this mutation was on insulin action.

Germline loss-of-function mutations in genes that encode intracellular signaling kinases are being increasingly recognized as causes of human inherited disease. Thus, JAK3 mutations cause severe combined immunodeficiency disease (17), *RPS6KA3* mutations cause Coffin Lowry Syndrome (18), and *WNK4* mutations cause an inherited form of hypertension (19). The kindred described here demonstrate that AKT2 can be added to this list, the R<sup>274</sup>H mutation in this enzyme causing a rare form of human diabetes due to a post-receptor defect in insulin signaling. Although AKT2 mutations are unlikely to explain most common forms of diabetes, this mutant uniquely demonstrates the critical role

### References and Notes

1. A. L. Gloyn, M. I. McCarthy, *Best Pract. Res. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.* **15**, 293 (2001).
2. M. I. McCarthy, A. T. Hattersley, *Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn.* **1**, 403 (2001).
3. B. Vanhaesebroeck, D. R. Alessi, *Biochem. J.* **346**, 561 (2000).
4. D. P. Brazil, B. A. Hemmings, *Trends Biochem. Sci.* **26**, 657 (2001).
5. Single-letter abbreviations for the amino acid residues are as follows: A, Ala; C, Cys; D, Asp; E, Glu; F, Phe; G, Gly; H, His; I, Ile; K, Lys; L, Leu; M, Met; N, Asn; P, Pro; Q, Gln; R, Arg; S, Ser; T, Thr; V, Val; W, Trp; and Y, Tyr.
6. L. N. Johnson, M. E. Noble, D. J. Owen, *Cell* **85**, 149 (1996).
7. J. Yang et al., *Nature Struct. Biol.* **9**, 940 (2002).
8. C. Wolfrum, D. Besser, E. Luca, M. Stoffel, *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **100**, 11624 (2003).
9. K. S. Walker et al., *Biochem. J.* **331**, 299 (1998).
10. A. D. Kohn, S. A. Summers, M. J. Birnbaum, R. A. Roth, *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 31372 (1996).
11. S. M. Rangwala, M. A. Lazar, *Annu. Rev. Nutr.* **20**, 535 (2000).
12. R. S. Garofalo et al., *J. Clin. Invest.* **112**, 197 (2003).

13. O. Pedersen, *Exp. Clin. Endocrinol. Diabetes* **107**, 113 (1999).
14. K. C. Baynes, J. Whitehead, A. Krook, S. O’Rahilly, *QJM* **90**, 557 (1997).
15. I. Barroso et al., *Nature* **402**, 880 (1999).
16. H. Cho et al., *Science* **292**, 1728 (2001).
17. M. Vihinen et al., *Clin. Immunol.* **96**, 108 (2000).
18. E. Trivier et al., *Nature* **384**, 567 (1996).
19. F. H. Wilson et al., *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **100**, 680 (2003).
20. We thank D. Alessi for AKT2 cDNA and B. Hemmings for helpful discussions. Supported by the Wellcome Trust (S.O.R., J.J.R., M.S., J.C.W., D.B.D., and A.M.U.), the U.K. Medical Research Council (S.G. and P.R.M.), the Canadian Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (S.L.G.), the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (S.S.), the Raymond and Beverly Sackler Foundation (S.G.), Cancer Research–UK (D.B.), and Diabetes UK (R.W.). The GenBank accession number of AKT2 is M77198.

---

### Supporting Online Material

www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/304/5675/1325/

DC1

Materials and Methods  
SOM Text  
Fig. S1  
Tables S1 and S2  
References and Notes  

11 February 2004; accepted 16 April 2004

---

## S-Nitrosylation of Parkin Regulates Ubiquitination and Compromises Parkin’s Protective Function

### Kenny K. K. Chung<sup>1,2</sup>, Bobby Thomas<sup>1,2</sup>, Xiaojie Li<sup>1,2</sup>, Olga Pletnikova<sup>3</sup>, Juan C. Troncoso<sup>2,3</sup>, Laura Marsh<sup>2,4</sup>, Valina L. Dawson<sup>1,2,5,6</sup>, Ted M. Dawson<sup>1,2,5,*</sup>

Parkin is an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in the ubiquitination of proteins that are important in the survival of dopamine neurons in Parkinson’s disease (PD). We show that parkin is S-nitrosylated in vitro, as well as in vivo in a mouse model of PD and in brains of patients with PD and diffuse Lewy body disease. Moreover, S-nitrosylation inhibits parkin’s ubiquitin E3 ligase activity and its protective function. The inhibition of parkin’s ubiquitin E3 ligase activity by S-nitrosylation could contribute to the degenerative process in these disorders by impairing the ubiquitination of parkin substrates.

Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder that leads to the progressive loss of dopamine (DA) neurons (1). The majority of PD is sporadic and is thought to be due in part to oxidative stress through derangements in mitochondrial complex-I activity (1–3). There are also rare familial causes of PD due to mutations in α-synuclein, parkin, and DJ1 (4–6). Several indices of oxidative stress are also present in PD, including increased nitrotyrosine immunoreactivity (7, 8), reduced glutathione and ferritin levels, increased lipid peroxidation, and increased levels of iron (1, 3, 8).

Baculovirus recombinant parkin protein (BV-parkin) and human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells transfected with myc-parkin were treated with S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO), and both samples were subjected to the S-nitrosylation biotin switch assay (Fig. 1A) (19, 20). HEK293-expressed parkin was readily S-nitrosylated, whereas S-nitrosylation of BV-parkin was not detectable. The absence of S-nitrosylated parkin in samples treated with glutathione devoid of NO (GSH) demonstrated the specificity of this modification of parkin. A similar result was observed when we used another NO donor, NOC18, with NOC18 depleted of NO [NOC18(–NO)] as a control (Fig. 1B).

To further control for the specificity of the S-nitrosylation of parkin, we examined whether myc–α-synuclein, which contains no cysteines, or myc–ITCH-1, an unrelated ubiquitin E3 ligase, are S-nitrosylated. Under conditions that lead to S-nitrosylation of parkin, neither α-synuclein (Fig. 1C) nor ITCH-1 (Fig. 1D) were S-nitrosylated. Because parkin expressed in HEK293 cells was S-nitrosylated but BV-parkin was not, we wondered whether the cellular extract contained a factor that facilitated the S-nitrosylation of parkin. Accordingly, we subjected BV-parkin to the S-nitrosylation biotin switch assay in the presence or absence of HEK293 cell lysate (Fig. 1E). BV-parkin was S-nitrosylated only in the presence of cell lysate. The factor is likely to be proteinaceous, because denaturing the cell lysate by boiling completely blocked the S-nitrosylation of BV-parkin (Fig. 1E). To further confirm that parkin is S-nitrosylated, we used the 2,3-diaminonaphthalene (DAN) assay on HEK293 cells transfected with myc-parkin (21). This assay showed that parkin was S-nitrosylated, whereas ITCH-1 and α-synuclein were not (Fig.

---

### Footnotes

<sup>1</sup>Institute for Cell Engineering, Departments of <sup>2</sup>Neurology, <sup>3</sup>Pathology, <sup>4</sup>Psychiatry, <sup>5</sup>Neuroscience, and <sup>6</sup>Physiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: tdawson@jhmi.edu

1328 28 MAY 2004 VOL 304 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org

A Family with Severe Insulin Resistance and Diabetes Due to a Mutation in AKT2  
Stella George et al.  
Science 304, 1325 (2004);  
DOI: 10.1126/science.1096706  

This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only.

If you wish to distribute this article to others, you can order high-quality copies for your colleagues, clients, or customers by [clicking here](http://www.sciencemag.org).

Permission to republish or repurpose articles or portions of articles can be obtained by following the guidelines [here](http://www.sciencemag.org).

The following resources related to this article are available online at www.sciencemag.org (this information is current as of March 10, 2015):

Updated information and services, including high-resolution figures, can be found in the online version of this article at:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/304/5675/1325.full.html](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/304/5675/1325.full.html)

Supporting Online Material can be found at:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2004/05/27/304.5675.1325.DC1.html](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2004/05/27/304.5675.1325.DC1.html)

A list of selected additional articles on the Science Web sites related to this article can be found at:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/304/5675/1325.full.html#related](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/304/5675/1325.full.html#related)

This article cites 18 articles, 5 of which can be accessed free:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/304/5675/1325.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/304/5675/1325.full.html#ref-list-1)

This article has been cited by 102 article(s) on the ISI Web of Science

This article has been cited by 58 articles hosted by HighWire Press; see:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/304/5675/1325.full.html#related-urls](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/304/5675/1325.full.html#related-urls)

This article appears in the following subject collections:  
Genetics  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/genetics](http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/genetics)

Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published weekly, except the last week in December, by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright 2004 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved. The title *Science* is a registered trademark of AAAS.
