
Molecular Membrane Biology, March–April 2004, 21, 77–92

Cholera toxin: a paradigm for multi-functional engagement of cellular mechanisms (Review)

Lolke de Haan† and Timothy R. Hirst‡*

Department of Pathology & Microbiology, School of Medical Sciences, University of Bristol, University Walk, Bristol BS8 1TD, United Kingdom

### Summary

Cholera toxin (Ctx) from *Vibrio cholerae* and its closely related homologue, heat-labile enterotoxin (Etx) from *Escherichia coli* have become superb tools for illuminating pathways of cellular trafficking and immune cell function. These bacterial protein toxins should be viewed as conglomerates of highly evolved, multi-functional elements equipped to engage the trafficking and signalling machineries of cells. Ctx and Etx are members of a larger family of A-B toxins of bacterial (and plant) origin that are comprised of structurally and functionally distinct enzymatically active A and receptor-binding B sub-units or domains. Intoxication of mammalian cells by Ctx and Etx involves B pentamer-mediated receptor binding and entry into a vesicular pathway, followed by translocation of the enzymatic A1 domain of the A sub-unit into the target cell cytosol, where covalent modification of intracellular targets leads to activation of adenylate cyclase and a sequence of events culminating in life-threatening diarrhoeal disease. Importantly, Ctx and Etx also have the capacity to induce a wide spectrum of remarkable immunological processes. With respect to the latter, it has been found that these toxins activate signalling pathways that modulate the immune system. This review explores the complexities of the cellular interactions that are engaged by these bacterial protein toxins, and highlights some of the new insights to have recently emerged.

#### Keywords: cholera toxin, heat-labile enterotoxin, receptor-interaction, protein trafficking, cell signalling.

Cholera toxin (Ctx) and *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin (Etx) are hexameric protein toxins comprised of a single A sub-unit (240 amino acids, M<sub>r</sub> ≈ 27,500) and five B sub-units (103 amino acids, M<sub>r</sub> ≈ 11,800). The A sub-units of the two toxins share over 82% sequence identity, while the B sub-units exhibit 83% sequence identity (Lai 1977, Dallas and Falkow 1980, Spicer and Noble 1981, Spicer et al. 1981, Lockman and Kaper 1983, Mekalanos et al. 1983, Lockman et al. 1984, Yamamoto et al. 1984, 1987, Dykes et al. 1985, Domenighini et al. 1995). The determination of the X-ray crystallographic structures of the Etx and Ctx was a major advance in the understanding of the structure-function relationships of these molecules (Figure 1; Sixma et al. 1991, 1993, Zhang et al. 1995a,b). The X-ray structures revealed that the five B sub-units form a doughnut-shaped ring, and that the toxin A sub-unit is composed of two distinct domains, A1 and A2. The A1-domain is folded into a triangular-shaped structure and is responsible for the enzymatic activity of the molecule, whereas the largely α-helical A2-domain is responsible for tethering the A1 domain to the pentameric B sub-unit. In doing so, the A2 domain protrudes right through the central pore of the B pentamer complex (Sixma et al. 1991, 1993, Zhang et al. 1995a, Zhang et al. 1995b).

#### Receptor binding and localization in detergent-insoluble glycosphingolipid-rich membrane microdomains (DIGs)

Following production and release of Ctx and Etx from their respective bacteria, toxin action is initiated upon binding to epithelial cells of the small intestine. The subsequent events that occur are dependent on the multi-functional attributes of the toxin A and B sub-units. CtxB and EtxB are lectins that bind to apical membrane receptors, which in turn trigger toxin uptake and delivery of the A sub-unit in the target cell cytosol (for a schematic overview of the trafficking pathway of Ctx and Etx, see Figure 2). Both CtxB and EtxB have a high affinity for GM1 ganglioside (Galβ1-3GalNAcβ1-4(NeuAcα2-3)Galβ1-4Glcβ1-1ceramide), which is found in the outer leaflet of the plasma membranes of virtually all cell types, including enterocytes and lymphocytes (Van Heyningen et al. 1971, Cuatrecasas 1973, Holmgren et al. 1973, 1975, Staerk et al. 1974, Donta and Viner 1975, Wiegandt et al. 1976, Sattler et al. 1977, Critchley et al. 1981, Moss et al. 1981, Fukuta et al. 1988, Angstrom et al. 1994). The X-ray structure of the CtxB pentamer complexed with GM1 pentasaccharide and of Etx holotoxin complexed with lactose revealed that each B sub-unit has a GM1 binding pocket, with the B sub-units interacting mainly with the terminal galactose, and, to a lesser extent, with the sialic acid and N-acetylgalactosamine of GM1 (Lanne et al. 1994, Merritt et al. 1994a,b, Zhang et al. 1995b). Upon receptor binding, a flexible loop comprising amino acids 51–58 becomes more ordered owing to hydrogen-bond interactions with the GM1 pentasaccharide and water molecules that occupy the binding site, and it is thought that these interactions stabilize the toxin-GM1 complex (Merritt et al. 1994b). A mutational analysis of this loop using scanning alanine mutagenesis revealed that substitution of His57 → Ala causes the loop to move inwards towards the central pore of the B pentamer and to adopt a more rigid structure even in the absence of saccharide binding (Aman et al. 2001). This did not appear to interfere with the ability of the mutant B sub-unit to bind to GM1-coated microtitre plates, HeLa-, BHK-, or T-cells (Aman et al. 2001, Fraser et al. 2002). However, the mutation was found to influence the downstream events of cell intoxication,

*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
e-mail: T.Hirst@vcc.usyd.edu.au
†Present addresses: †AstraZeneca R&D Charnwood, Loughborough, Leicestershire LE11 5RH, UK.
‡University of Sydney, The Main Quadrangle A14, Sydney NSW 2006, Australia.

Molecular Membrane Biology
ISSN 0968-7688 print/ISSN 1464-5203 online © 2004 Taylor & Francis Ltd
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/09687680410001663267


L. de Haan and T. R. Hirst

Fig. 1

Fig. 2

A1
A2
B5
GP
DIGs
clathrin coated pits
early endosomes
late
endosome
lysosome
COPI coated
vesicle
Golgi cisternae
ER
N
U
S
PFA
PLA2
PKA
cAMP
Na:K:2Cl
VIP
5-HT
PG
Cl-
K+
adenylate cyclase
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT
AT

and, remarkably, the cell signalling and immunomodulatory properties of the mutants were abolished, suggesting that GM1 binding alone does not suffice for toxin action and that the 51–58 loop is likely to play an important role in the mechanism of toxin action (see also below; Aman *et al.* 2001, Rodighiero *et al.* 2001, Fraser *et al.* 2002).

The interaction of CtxB or EtxB with GM1 can be readily monitored *in vitro* by tryptophan fluorescence as the addition of soluble GM1 causes a characteristic 12-nm blue shift in the emission spectrum of CtxB and EtxB (Mullin *et al.* 1976, Moss *et al.* 1977, Fishman *et al.* 1978, De Wolf *et al.* 1981). This is due to a change in the environment of the sole Trp-residue (Trp88) present in each B monomer, which is located close to the interface between the B sub-unit monomers and forms the floor of the receptor-binding pocket (Moss *et al.* 1977, 1981, Merritt *et al.* 1994b). Upon receptor binding, the galactose moiety of GM1 is positioned adjacent to the side-chain of Trp88, and this stacking creates a more hydrophobic environment for the indole ring, leading to a blue shift in the emission spectrum of the B sub-units (Merritt *et al.* 1994b). Interestingly, EtxB(H57S) and EtxB(H57A) display similar shifts in their tryptophanyl fluorescence spectrum upon GM1 binding, indicating that the altered position of the 51–58 loop does not influence the ability of the molecule to interact with GM1 pentasaccharide (Fraser *et al.* 2002).

Both CtxB and EtxB bind to GM1 with remarkably high affinity. Early studies using radioactively labelled Ctx on whole cells revealed a dissociation constant (*K*<sub>D</sub>) of 4.6 × 10<sup>−10</sup>, while more recent surface plasmon resonance studies revealed *K*<sub>D</sub>s of 7.3 × 10<sup>−10</sup>M and 5.7 × 10<sup>−10</sup>M for CtxB and Etx, respectively (Kuziemko *et al.* 1996, MacKenzie *et al.* 1997, Cooper *et al.* 2000). Importantly, however, these *K*<sub>D</sub>s were derived simply by dividing the kinetic rate constants for dissociation and association, and were based on a single-site binding model at a single receptor density. Therefore, these *K*<sub>D</sub>s do not represent true equilibrium constants, and will depend on the receptor density. Furthermore, the above studies failed to take pentavalent receptor cross-linking and cooperativity into account. Although it is not clear if cross-linking of GM1 receptor molecules on the target cell surface is required for toxin action, this would be consistent with the patching and capping observed upon binding of CtxB to lymphocytes (Craig and Cuatrecasas 1975, Revesz and Greaves 1975,

Sedlacek *et al.* 1976, Sattler *et al.* 1978). Furthermore, experiments involving the use of monomeric EtxB and Ctx hybrids containing 3–4 chemically inactivated B sub-units per CtxB pentamer, suggested that pentamerization is required to achieve appreciable cell binding and for triggering downstream events (Fishman *et al.* 1978, De Wolf *et al.* 1994, Tsuji *et al.* 1995). A recent study by Lauer *et al.* (2002), in which binding of Ctx to GM1-coated glass microspheres was analysed by flow cytometric techniques, was the first to describe a multi-step binding model that does take receptor cross-linking into account, and revealed a *K*<sub>D</sub> of 5.6 × 10<sup>−8</sup>M. Furthermore, it was found that the interaction of Ctx holotoxin with GM1 is of considerably higher avidity than that of the B sub-unit alone (Lauer *et al.* 2002). It is not clear what the explanation is for this approximately 100-fold difference in avidity; but it has been suggested from structural data and accessibility studies with antibodies that the A2 sub-unit may interact with the membrane surface and thus enhance avidity (Jacob *et al.* 1984, Sixma *et al.* 1991, Orlandi and Fishman 1993, Zhang *et al.* 1995a,b).

In addition to binding to GM1, CtxB has been found to bind with lower affinity to a number of other gangliosides. These include, in order of binding affinity: GD1b, asialoGM1, GQ1b, GD1a, GT1b, and GM2 (Fukuta *et al.* 1988, Masserini *et al.* 1992, Angstrom *et al.* 1994, Kuziemko *et al.* 1996, MacKenzie *et al.* 1997, Lauer *et al.* 2002). EtxB, on the other hand, displays even more promiscuous receptor binding activity, and in addition to binding to the above-mentioned gangliosides, also binds to non-ganglioside glycolipid receptors, and to *N*-acetyl lactosamine residues on as yet unidentified glycoprotein receptors (Holmgren 1973, 1982, Morita *et al.* 1980, Holmgren *et al.* 1985, Griffiths *et al.* 1986, Fukuta *et al.* 1988, Zemelman *et al.* 1989, Griffiths and Critchley 1991, Angstrom *et al.* 1994, Orlandi *et al.* 1994, Teneberg *et al.* 1994, Shida *et al.* 1994a,b, 1996a,b, Karlsson *et al.* 1996, Kuziemko *et al.* 1996, MacKenzie *et al.* 1997). The significance of the binding CtxB and EtxB to other ganglioside receptors, or indeed the binding of EtxB to non-ganglioside receptors remains unknown. Early studies in ganglioside-deficient cell lines by Fishman and colleagues provided evidence that GM1 is the functional receptor for toxin action, at least as far as triggering an elevation in cAMP levels is concerned (Fishman *et al.* 1976, Moss *et al.* 1976a, 1979, 1981, Fishman 1980, Fishman and Atikkan 1980,

Figure 1. Ribbon diagram of the X-ray crystal structure of *E. coli* heat-labile enterotoxin. The A sub-unit (illustrated in blue) is comprised of an enzymatically active A1 domain and an α-helical A2-domain. The C-terminal portion of the A2 domain penetrates into the central pore of the B pentamer (*B*<sub>5</sub>). The B pentamer is comprised of five receptor-binding B sub-units (illustrated in green, yellow, orange, red and turquoise). (Reprinted from *Immunology Today*, vol. 20, Williams, N.A., Hirst, T.R. and Nashar, T.O. Immune modulation by cholera-like enterotoxins: from adjuvant to therapeutic. (1999), 95–101, with permission from Elsevier.)

Figure 2. Intoxication of cholera toxin and *E. coli* heat-labile enterotoxin involves multi-functional engagement with diverse cellular mechanisms. It is now thought that high-affinity interaction of *B*<sub>5</sub> with GM1 ganglioside receptors in lipid rafts of the plasma membrane triggers membrane re-ordering, sequestration of membrane constituents and toxin internalization into smooth endocytic vesicles that are targeted by a Rab- and COPI-dependent pathway to the TGN and ER. Within the ER, PDI-catalysed disulphide interchange leads to release and unfolding of the A1-domain from A2/*B*<sub>5</sub>, which is subsequently released from the A1-PDI intermediate by Ero1, a Sec61p-associated oxidase. Retro-translocation via the Sec61p secretory channel leads to entry of the A1-domain into the cell cytosol where NAD-dependent ADP-ribosylation of GS<sub>a</sub> occurs. This leads to activation of adenylate cyclase and an ensuing elevation in cyclic AMP levels which triggers a wide spectrum of events including a changes ion flux, prostaglandin synthesis and altered gene regulation. The combination of changes in ion flux, 5-HT and prostaglandin secretion results in profuse diarrhoea, whist cAMP-mediated alterations in gene expression promote an anti-inflammatory environment.

Pacuszka *et al.* 1991). Furthermore, studies investigating the enterotoxicity of a GM1-binding mutant of Etx, Etx(G33D), which contained a Gly33 → Asp substitution in the B sub-unit, also clearly showed that GM1 binding is essential for toxin action (Tsuji *et al.* 1985, Jobling and Holmes 1991, Guidry *et al.* 1997, Nashar *et al.* 1998).

GM1 ganglioside is predominantly clustered in detergent-insoluble glycosphingolipid-rich membrane microdomains (DIGs), which play a significant role in clathrin-independent receptor-mediated endocytosis, and also in signal transduction. Depending on the presence of caveolins in such membrane microdomains, two different types of DIGs can be distinguished: (i) caveolae, non-coated, caveolin-containing cholesterol-rich invaginations on the plasma membrane, which are only present in specific cell types, such as fibroblasts, adipocytes, and endothelial, epithelial, and muscle cells, but not in lymphocytes and neurons (Anderson 1998, Kurzchalia and Parton 1999); and (ii) non-caveolar DIGs or lipid rafts, membrane structures that are enriched in glycosphingolipids but do not contain caveolin and are found in essentially all cell types (Brown and London 1998, Ikonen, 2001). Importantly, molecules found in caveolae are also present in lipid rafts (Kurzchalia and Parton 1999). Unsurprisingly, Ctx has been found to associate with both caveolae and lipid rafts (Parton 1994, Schnitzer *et al.* 1996, Oh *et al.* 1998, Orlandi and Fishman 1998, Wolf *et al.* 1998, Badizadegan *et al.* 2000, Shogomori and Futerman 2001a). Early electron microscopy studies demonstrated that Ctx associates with and internalizes through small, non-coated microinvaginations that contain caveolin-1 (Montesano *et al.* 1982, Tran *et al.* 1987). More recently, an elegant study by Wolf *et al.* (1998), involving the use of *E. coli* heat-labile type-IIb enterotoxin (LTIIb) and hybrids of Ctx and LTIIb, provided direct evidence for Ctx binding to DIGs being essential for toxin action in human intestinal epithelial T84 cells. In this study, it was shown using membrane fractionation techniques that Ctx fractionated with DIGs, and that it induced a potent secretory response in these cells (Wolf *et al.* 1998). By contrast, the GD1a-binding LTIIb toxin was found not to be present in DIGs and failed to trigger a secretory response, despite the fact that this toxin clearly bound to T84-cells and has an A sub-unit homologous to the CtxA sub-unit (Wolf *et al.* 1998). Analysis of the Ctx/LTIIb hybrid toxins confirmed that cell intoxication depended critically on the binding specificity of the B sub-unit. Accordingly, only a hybrid toxin composed of the enzymatic A1 domain of LTIIb and the A2 domain and B sub-unit of Ctx was capable of intoxicating T84-cells, whereas a hybrid toxin composed of the enzymatic A1 domain of CT and the A2 domain and B sub-unit of LTIIb was inactive. This led to the conclusion that internalization and activation of Ctx is critically dependent on and mediated through DIGs. Furthermore, these findings suggest that GM1 acts as a sorting molecule or motif and regulates subsequent downstream events.

Although GM1 is enriched in DIGs, it is present over the entire cell surface (Parton 1994), and toxin-induced relocation of GM1 has been demonstrated in different cell types. Thus, Ctx(B) cannot be used routinely to determine the normal cellular distribution of this glycolipid (Harder *et al.* 1998). The fact that GM1 is also found in clathrin-coated pits underscores this point, and this has led to the suggestion that clathrin-coated pits represent a means by which Ctx gains access to the endocytic pathway (see below; Shogomori and Futerman 2001a, Torgersen *et al.* 2001).

### Toxin endocytosis

Upon binding to GM1, Ctx is internalized in endocytic vesicles and then rapidly sorted to the trans-Golgi network (TGN) to enter a retrograde trafficking pathway to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER; Joseph *et al.* 1979, Montesano *et al.* 1982, Tran *et al.* 1987, Orlandi and Fishman 1998, Sandvig *et al.* 1994, Nichols *et al.* 2001). The endocytosis of Ctx, and its trafficking to the Golgi is dependent on the presence of DIGs and/or cholesterol in the target membrane (Wolf *et al.* 1998, 2002, Orlandi and Fishman 1998). Sterol-binding agents that immobilize or sequester cholesterol and disrupt DIGs, such as filipin or β-cyclodextrin, completely inhibit toxin transport to the TGN (Orlandi and Fishman 1998, Wolf *et al.* 2002). Surprisingly, however, only a partial displacement of Ctx-GM1 complexes from DIGs was observed under these conditions (Wolf *et al.* 2002). The trafficking of anthrax oedema toxin, which does not bind to receptors present in DIGs, is not affected by filipin or β-cyclodextrin treatment (Wolf *et al.* 2002). Chaotropic agents, which neutralize endosomal pH, also have no effect on Ctx action, even though such agents inhibit cell intoxication by anthrax oedema toxin and diphtheria toxin (Pacuszka and Fishman 1992, Orlandi *et al.* 1993, Lencer *et al.* 1993, Wolf *et al.* 2002). Taken together, these findings indicate that trafficking of Ctx depends on: (i) its association with DIGs; (ii) that transport of Ctx to the TGN being initiated in early endosomes; and (iii) that cholesterol may play a direct role in the sorting of Ctx-GM1 complexes.

Although cholesterol would appear to play an essential role in the endocytosis of Ctx and the sorting of GM1-toxin complexes, it should be borne in mind that this does not necessarily mean that entry of Ctx and Etx is exclusively mediated by DIGs. It has been suggested that the high concentration of toxin-receptor complexes in caveolae is due to the stability of caveolar structures and the slow rate of toxin internalization from these sites (Torgersen *et al.* 2001, Thomsen *et al.* 2002). Indeed, there is some evidence for entry via clathrin-coated pits since Ctx-containing vesicles have been identified that contain co-localized α2-macroglobulin and transferrin receptor, ligands that are normally internalized via clathrin-coated pits (Montesano *et al.* 1982, Parton 1994, Tran *et al.* 1987). Moreover, clathrin-dependent entry of Ctx has been suggested from recent studies in hippocampal neurons (Sofer and Futerman 1995, Shogomori and Futerman 2001a,b). These studies showed that cationic amphiphilic drugs, which disrupt the assembly of clathrin at the plasma membrane and on endosomes, inhibited Ctx action (Sofer and Futerman 1995). Furthermore, in hippocampal neurons, cholesterol-depleting drugs such as filipin and β-cyclodextrin inhibited transport of Ctx from early endosomal compartments to the Golgi, but not the initial entry of Ctx into endosomes (Shogomori and Futerman 2001a,b). This latter finding is in agreement with our recent

observation that upon filipin or β-cyclodextrin treatment of dendritic cells, all cell-surface-located EtxB is still capable of entering an early endosomal compartment, but does not progress further along the trafficking pathway. Notwithstanding these observations, a consensus of evidence is emerging that a distinct class of smooth, non-coated endosomes mediates the endocytosis of Ctx from DIGS/lipid rafts in a clathrin-independent manner (Torgersen et al. 2001, Nichols 2002).

The role played by cholesterol in determining the trafficking route taken by Ctx and Etx has not been elucidated. Because GM1 is inserted in the outer leaflet of the plasma bilayer and thus unable to interact with cytoplasmic proteins, it seems likely that additional membrane constituents, such as cholesterol, mediate interaction with a membrane structure of greater complexity than GM1 ganglioside alone and facilitate toxin entry. An early study, which showed that cholesterol derivatives of GM1 are more effective receptors for Ctx action than native GM1 or phospholipid derivatives of GM1, supports this notion (Pacuszka et al. 1991). It is possible that cholesterol is involved in the recruitment of raft constituents that interact with and facilitate the internalization of Ctx-GM1 complexes. In this respect, it is known that some membrane proteins depend on cholesterol for association with or displacement from raft domains (Furuchi and Anderson 1998, Vainio et al. 2002), and this would explain why Ctx fails to induce a Cl⁻ secretory response in β-cyclodextrin-treated T84-cells, despite its association with rafts (Wolf et al. 2002). The fact that β-cyclodextrin treatment was found to diminish the relative enrichment in caveolin-1 and pp60src of lipid raft fractions, and specifically affected the protein-lipid ratio of Ctx-associated rafts also lends support to the concept of cholesterol-mediated recruitment of membrane components (Wolf et al. 2002). In this respect, it is interesting to note that CtxB-GM1 complexes and glucosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored proteins co-localize both on the cell surface and in endocytic vesicles (Kenworthy et al. 2000, Nichols et al. 2001), and it is tempting to speculate that recruitment of a GPI-anchored protein would be required for cell entry. It is also possible that the cross-linking of GM1 receptors by Ctx itself induces the formation or coalescence of raft-like domains and results in an apparent enrichment of Ctx-GM1 complexes in rafts after cholesterol depletion. Such coalescence of membrane domains could potentially result in the formation of a lipid raft with a unique structure and function, and in this respect it is worth noting that in T84-cells Ctx-GM1 complexes were found to fractionate with a discrete raft domain that does not contain caveolin-1 as a structural component (Badizadegan et al. 2000). It is also possible that cholesterol may affect the activity of membrane-associated proteins by direct interaction or simply by indirectly affecting membrane fluidity and thus preventing lateral movement and GM1 cross-linking (Green et al. 1999, Sooksawate and Simmonds 2001). However, this seems unlikely, as cholesterol-depleting agents do not prevent all membrane trafficking events, and, for example, do not significantly affect clathrin-dependent entry (Nichols et al. 2001, Puri et al. 2001, Wolf et al. 2002).

The observation that Ctx with a His57 → Ala substitution in its B sub-unit exhibits attenuated activity may in part be due

to a failure to orchestrate the assembly of a fully functional membrane-raft complex that ensures intoxication and targeting to the ER (Rodighiero et al. 2001). In this regard, it is conceivable that the 51–58 loop might interact with discrete membrane proteins that determine the efficiency of sorting in the endocytic pathway or TGN.

Toxin trafficking to the trans-Golgi network

There are at least two pathways leading from endosomes to the TGN, each of which has a different requirement for small GTPase Rab proteins (Ghosh et al. 1998, Mallard et al. 1998, 2002, Mallet and Maxfield 1999). One of these pathways is Rab9-dependent and is involved in the transport of the mannose-6-phosphate receptors (Lombardi et al. 1993); while the other pathway is Rab7- and Rab9-independent and involves translocation from an earlier endosomal compartment (Sandvig et al. 2002). Each of these pathways is dependent on vesicle- and target-organelle-soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion attachment protein receptor complexes (v-SNAREs and t-SNAREs, respectively) to achieve fusion of intracellular vesicular compartments (Iversen et al. 2001, Mallard et al. 2002). It is unclear at this moment, which of the above Rab proteins are required for the intracellular trafficking of Ctx and Etx; however, it was recently found that Ctx enters the cell in vesicles that contain the early endosome marker Rab5 (Sugimoto et al. 2001). Furthermore, these vesicles were not labelled with transferrin-Texas Red or Lysotracker, indicating that they represent early endosomes (Sugimoto et al. 2001).

Studies on the transport of TGN38 and other bacterial toxins have shown that transport from the endosome to the Golgi may also require Rab6a and Rab11 (Iversen et al. 2001, Mallard et al. 2002). Interestingly, Golgi targeting of endogenous GM1 has been found to involve Rab7 and Rab9 (Choudhury et al. 2002), and it seems likely that Ctx exploits this pathway to gain access to the TGN. More recent studies have shown that Ctx transport from early endosomes to the Golgi complex is temperature sensitive and is dependent on the GTPases Sar1 and ADP-ribosylation factor 1 (ARF1) (Lencer et al. 1992, Richards et al. 2002), and this sheds new light on the possible role of vesicles coated with coat protein I (or COPI) in toxin action (see below).

It has recently been suggested that inhibition of Ctx action by the dipeptide metalloprotease inhibitor N-benzoyl-oxycarbonyl-Gly-Phe-amide (Cbz-Gly-Phe-NH2) is due to inhibition of endosome-to-Golgi transport (De Wolf 2000, Richards et al. 2002). Cbz-Gly-Phe-NH2 is known to cause a depletion of intracellular calcium stores and lowers cytosolic calcium (Brostrom et al. 1991). However, although this may inhibit membrane trafficking between the ER and Golgi complex, and the Golgi complex and plasma membrane (Brostrom et al. 1991), inhibition of Golgi-to-ER traffic has not previously been demonstrated. Therefore, a more thorough understanding of the basis of the mechanism of inhibition mediated by Cbz-Gly-Phe-NH2 is required in order to be able to draw significant conclusions with respect to the trafficking of Ctx and related toxins.

Retrograde transport to the endoplasmic reticulum

Once transported to the TGN, Ctx is thought to enter a retrograde trafficking pathway to the ER. One of the best characterized pathways of retrograde transport through the Golgi complex is via COPI-coated vesicles (Cosson and Letourneur 1997). COPI is a large cytosolic protein complex that forms a coat around vesicles budding from the Golgi. The budding process is driven by the assembly of the COPI coat from cytoplasmically derived coatomer sub-units. These sub-units attach to Golgi membranes via the GTP-bound form of GTPases ARF1 and Sar1, and then polymerize into a COPI coat, forming an approximately spherical template that shapes the adherent membrane into a vesicle. Upon hydrolysis of GTP, the coatomers dissociate, thus allowing fusion of the uncoated vesicle via exposed v-SNARE complexes on the vesicle and cognate t-SNARE complexes on the target membrane (Barlowe 2000, Pelham and Rothman 2000). Conversely, anterograde transport into the Golgi from the ER, is mediated by a distinct coated vesicle, termed COPII, which also employs a GTP-switch mechanism for coating and uncoating (Barlowe 2000).

Under normal conditions, retrograde cargo of COPI vesicles includes luminal ER-resident proteins that carry a C-terminal KDEL motif, and interact with KDEL receptor (or Erd2p), which is abundantly expressed in the cis-Golgi (Munro and Pelham 1987, Pelham 1988, Tang et al. 1993, Griffiths et al. 1994) and is also found in COPI vesicles (Sonnicchsen et al. 1996, Orci et al. 1997, Majoul et al. 1998). Interestingly, the active domains of a number of bacterial toxins, including the A sub-unit of Ctx, contain a C-terminal KDEL sequence (RDEL in Etx), and it would therefore seem likely that retrograde transport of these toxins through the ER would involve COPI-coated vesicles. The involvement of such vesicles in the trafficking of Ctx was confirmed by studies showing that toxin trafficking to the ER can be blocked by micro-injection of antibodies specific for sub-units of the COPI coatomer (Lencer et al. 1993, Nambiar et al. 1993, Majoul et al. 1998, Girod et al. 1999). Furthermore, the requirement of GTPases Sar1 and ADP-ribosylation factor ARF1 for the trafficking of Ctx is also suggestive of an involvement of COPI vesicles in the retrograde trafficking pathway (Richards et al. 2002). ARFs were originally identified because of their ability to stimulate Ctx- and Etx-catalysed ADP-ribosylation of G proteins and guanidino compounds (Kahn and Gilman 1984, 1986, Tsai et al. 1987, Lee et al. 1991). In so doing, ARFs interact directly with the reduced catalytic A1 domain to lower the apparent \(K_m\) for NAD, and stimulate the rate of auto ADP-ribosylation and ADP-ribosylation of acceptor proteins in a GTP-dependent manner (Tsai et al. 1987, 1988, Moss et al. 1993). As indicated above, under normal conditions ARF1 is involved in recruitment of the COPI coat, and packaging of cargo proteins into budding vesicles (Serafini et al. 1991, Aridor et al. 1995, Rowe et al. 1996, Zhao et al. 1997, Pepperkok et al. 1998, Malsam et al. 1999). Like other GTPases, ARF1 is only active in its GTP-bound state, and its activation is regulated by specific guanine nucleotide-exchange proteins (GEPs), which accelerate the binding of GTP to ARF1, and thereby binding of ARF1 to membranes and recruitment of

COPI proteins from the cytosol (Morinaga et al. 1996, Moss and Vaughan 1998). Conversely, ARF1-GTP is de-activated by an ARF1 GTPase-activating protein (GAP), which is recruited from the cell cytosol by the KDEL receptor (Makler et al. 1995). The interaction between GAP and the KDEL receptor is enhanced by KDEL-containing proteins, and this triggers uncoating of the vesicle and relocation of ARF1-GDP to the cytosol (Aoe et al. 1997, 1998).

Interestingly, the drug Brefeldin A, which inhibits a Golgi-associated GEP and thus the rate of guanine nucleotide exchange exhibited by ARF1 (Donaldson et al. 1992, Helms and Rothman 1992, Morinaga et al. 1996), completely inhibits toxin-induced cAMP production and \(\mathrm{Cl}^{-}\)secretion without affecting cell binding or internalization (Donta et al. 1993, Lencer et al. 1993, Nambiar et al. 1993, Orlandi et al. 1993). This suggests that Ctx orchestrates ARF1-GEP-GAP-KDEL receptor interactions, and this presumably leads to optimized trafficking. Interestingly, ARFs have not only been found to be associated with the Golgi-ER complex, but also with uncoated and clathrin-coated vesicles, which suggests that toxin-ARF interactions may also play a role during toxin endocytosis (Serafini et al. 1991, Lenhard et al. 1992). Recent studies have identified motifs in the A sub-units of Ctx and Etx involved in interaction with ARF3 and ARF6, which are involved in intra-Golgi and endosomal transport, respectively (Peters et al. 1995, Jobling and Holmes 2000, Zhu and Kahn 2001, Zhu et al. 2001). These studies suggest that indeed interaction of the toxin A sub-units with ARFs directs the trafficking process, as it was found that EtxA increases the GTP binding affinity of ARFs, and that EtxA-ARF interactions result in the concentration of EtxA in Golgi membranes (Jobling and Holmes 2000, Zhu et al. 2000, 2001, Zhu and Kahn 2001). Furthermore, these EtxA-ARF interactions mediated an alteration of Golgi morphology and subsequently resulted in a collapse of the Golgi structure in a fashion reminiscent of the actions of Brefeldin A (Zhu and Kahn 2001). Presumably, the disruption of the Golgi structure is the consequence of toxin-mediated sequestration of ARFs, and the subsequent lack of sufficient activated ARF to maintain Golgi morphology. Surprisingly, EtxA mutants that were deficient in ARF-binding but retained ADP-ribosyltransferase activity were no longer capable of altering Golgi structure or increasing intracellular cAMP levels, suggesting that the binding of EtxA to ARFs is essential for cellular transport and localization, as well as for the activation of adenylate cyclase (Zhu and Kahn 2001).

Although the above suggests that COPI vesicles are involved in toxin transport, four lines of evidence suggest that retrograde transport of Ctx through the Golgi may not involve COPI-coated vesicles. First, it was found that mutation or replacement of the KDEL in Ctx or the RDEL in Etx resulted in a delay, but not in a complete inhibition of toxin-induced \(\mathrm{Cl}^{-}\)secretion and trafficking to the basolateral membrane (Lencer et al. 1995a, Cieplak et al. 1995). Second, CtxB and EtxB alone have been found to traffic to the various Golgi cisternae and do not appear to require the KDEL sequence (Parton 1994, Sandvig et al. 1994, 1996). Third, a recent study showed that a mutant CHO cell line, which expresses a point-mutated form of the ε-COP sub-unit of the COPI coatomer and as a consequence has a severely

disorganized Golgi complex, was still sensitive to Ctx treatment (Chen *et al.* 2002a). Finally, treatment of Vero cells with 1,3-cyclohexanebis(methylamine) (CBM), a drug that interacts with COPI coatomer and inhibits coatomer binding to Golgi membranes, failed to inhibit trafficking of Ctx to the ER, its entry into the cell cytosol, or Ctx-mediated elevation of intracellular cAMP levels (Chen *et al.* 2002a). Although these above findings are not consistent with Ctx transport in COPI-coated vesicles, they also do not exclude the possibility that Ctx is transported in COPI-coated vesicles without being bound to the KDEL receptor. In this respect, it is possible that Ctx exploits the ganglioside recycling pathway, which would allow it to enter the endocytic and retrograde pathway simply by binding to GM1. However, it is worth noting that Ctx induces a clear redistribution of KDEL receptors to the ER, presumably as a consequence of Ctx-ARF1 interaction, and this redistribution can be blocked by CBM (Majoul *et al.* 1998, Chen *et al.* 2002a). Altogether, these findings suggest that under normal conditions Ctx follows a COPI-dependent trafficking pathway, without binding to KDEL receptors being essential. However, toxin binding to the KDEL receptor presumably increases the efficiency of A sub-unit delivery. Possibly, alternative trafficking pathways for Ctx exist, and in this respect it is interesting that recent findings have shown that Shiga toxin—which does not have a KDEL sequence—exploits a COPI-independent retrograde pathway that is controlled by the small G protein Rab6 (Girod *et al.* 1999, White *et al.* 1999).

### A sub-unit translocation

Upon delivery of Ctx to the ER, it has been suggested that the A1 domain is released from the A2-B pentamer complex, and ER-resident chaperones and enzymes are then thought to be involved in facilitating translocation of an unfolded A1 domain into the cell cytosol via the Sec61p channel (Hazes and Read 1997, Lencer *et al.* 1999). Early studies demonstrated that in order to achieve full enzymatic activity, the A sub-unit needs to undergo proteolytic cleavage and disulfide bond reduction to liberate the enzymatically active A1-domain from the AB₅ holotoxin complex (Gill 1976, Mekalanos *et al.* 1979, Kassis *et al.* 1982). The proteolytic cleavage of an exposed loop (residues 187–199), which connects the A1 and A2 domains of the A sub-unit, is presumed to occur prior to translocation across the ER membrane. A secreted Zn metalloprotease from *V. cholerae* can mediate this proteolytic cleavage, whereas it has been suggested that cleavage of Etx is mediated by gut proteases such as trypsin (Booth *et al.* 1984, Spangler 1992, Naka *et al.* 1998). A conserved Arg residue at position 192 would appear to be the site of cleavage since Ctx and Etx mutants in which Arg192 was replaced with His or Gly were found to be highly resistant to trypsin treatment *in vitro*, and displayed markedly reduced toxic activity in a variety of *in vitro* and *in vivo* assays (Grant *et al.* 1994, Dickinson and Clements 1995, Giannelli *et al.* 1997, Lencer *et al.* 1997). The contribution of either bacterial proteases or gut-derived trypsin in mediating cleavage was recently challenged by Lencer and co-workers (Lencer *et al.* 1997), who demonstrated that an endogenous protease is present within apically derived endosomes of epithelial cells and is able to cleave and activate Ctx and Etx (Lencer *et al.* 1997).

Once cleaved, the enzymatic A1 domain remains covalently linked to the A2-B₅ complex via a single disulfide bond present in the A sub-unit. Orlandi showed that this bond is a substrate for the ER-located enzyme, protein-disulfide isomerase (PDI; Moss *et al.* 1980, Orlandi 1997). Accordingly, PDI inhibitors or PDI-specific antibodies strongly inhibited the reduction of Ctx *in vitro* in post-nuclear supernatants and microsomal membranes in the presence of Triton X-100 (Moss *et al.* 1980, Orlandi 1997). Until recently, however, it was unclear at what stage of the retrograde process the disulfide bridges between the A1 and A2 domain would be reduced by PDI, to result in toxin disassembly and transport of the A1 domain through the Sec61p channel. Initial studies had suggested that CtxA traffics to the ER, whereas the CtxB sub-unit persists in the Golgi compartment (Bastiaens *et al.* 1996) or, in polarized epithelial cells, is transcytosed (Lencer *et al.* 1995b). However, these studies failed to establish the exact mechanism of disulfide bond reduction, unfolding and translocation. Although it was known that the ER contains luminal chaperones involved in the folding of proteins, such as BiP, Hsp94, PDI, and calnexin/calreticulin, none of these chaperones had been demonstrated to be capable of unfolding a protein. However, recently, Tsai *et al.* (2001) showed that ER-localized PDI is largely responsible for Ctx disassembly and unfolding (Tsai *et al.* 2001, Tsai and Rapoport 2002). In this reaction, PDI acts as a redox-dependent chaperone. Reduced PDI binds to the toxin and catalyses disulphide interchange with release of an A1-PDI intermediate from the A2-B5 complex (Tsai *et al.* 2001). Release of the A1 domain from PDI involves reduction of the intermediate with concomitant PDI oxidation, and must occur prior to its translocation across the ER membrane. It would therefore appear that separation of the A1 from the A2-B5 complex takes place at the final stage of the trafficking process. The ER oxidase Ero1 was recently found to be responsible for inducing the release of the A1 domain from PDI, by mediating the oxidation of the carboxyterminal disulfide bond in PDI (Tsai and Rapoport 2002). As the A1 domain alone, even when unfolded, does not have a high affinity for the ER membrane, it is thought that PDI may also be required for targeting of the toxin to the luminal side of the ER membrane, and that subsequent oxidation of the CtxA1-PDI complex by Ero1 commits the toxin to translocation across the ER membrane (Tsai and Rapoport 2002).

It had been speculated that the Ctx A1 fragment is translocated into the cell cytosol through the Sec61p channel (Hazes and Read 1997). This protein complex is normally involved in transport of newly synthesized proteins from the cytosol into the ER, but has also been shown to be required for the transport of misfolded proteins for proteasomal degradation in the cytosol (Kopito 1997, Matlack *et al.* 1998,). Therefore, this pathway of retrotranslocation may constitute part of a normal cellular process known as ER-associated degradation (ERAD; Werner *et al.* 1996). Export of CtxA1 from microsomes has been shown to involve direct association of CtxA1 with the Sec61p complex, and to require ATP (Schmitz *et al.* 2000). Transport of CtxA1 was
inhibited when the Sec61p complexes were blocked by nascent polypeptides arrested during import, directly demonstrating the Sec61p-dependence of CtxA1 translocation (Schmitz et al. 2000). Furthermore, in agreement with the involvement of PDI and Ero1 in toxin unfolding, export of CtxA1 from microsomes was found to be dependent on luminal ER proteins (Schmitz et al. 2000). Thus, it would appear that A sub-unit translocation involves interaction with luminal ER proteins such as PDI and Ero1, an ATPase, as well as the Sec61p complex. The oxidase Ero1, which is required for the release of CtxA1 from PDI, is possibly associated with the Sec61p channel (Tsai and Rapoport 2002), and this would provide a potential explanation for the targeting of the A1 domain to these translocation channels. However, it has also been proposed that a small hydrophobic sub-domain, termed A1₃, would facilitate translocation (Zhang et al. 1995a, Hazes and Read 1997). This domain is normally stabilized by packing interactions in the holotoxin and by the disulfide bond connecting the A1 and A2 domains (Zhang et al. 1995a). Upon disulfide bond reduction and holotoxin disassembly, this domain would adopt an unfolded state and identify the toxin as a misfolded protein and promote its translocation (Hazes and Read 1997).

Surprisingly, translocation of CtxA1 into the cytosol does not lead to detectable ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation. Possibly, CtxA1 escapes proteasomal degradation because it has a paucity of the lysine residues that are required for ubiquitination (London and Luongo 1989, Hazes and Read 1997). A recent study, in which the kinetics of translocation and degradation of farnesylated CtxA1 was investigated, showed that its processing involved both efficient export from the ER and efficient degradation in the cytosol (Teter et al. 2002). Furthermore, the rapid degradation of CtxA1 could not be blocked with proteasome inhibitors (Teter et al. 2002). This is suggestive of an ubiquitin-independent mechanism for toxin degradation and implies that very little CtxA1 would be found in the cytosol at any given time.

### ADP-ribosylation, activation of Gsα, cAMP accumulation, and diarrhoea

Once the toxin A1 fragment reaches the target cell cytosol, it exhibits ADP-ribosyltransferase and NAD-glycohydrolase activity, and irreversibly ADP-ribosylates G proteins (Moss and Vaughan 1977, Gill and Meren 1978, Moss and Richardson 1978, Moss et al. 1981, Gill and Coburn 1987). As G proteins are involved in the regulation of a huge number of essential metabolic pathways in eukaryotic cells, this has an impact on numerous metabolic processes. The main intracellular target that is directly associated with the induction of fluid secretion is Gs, a G protein involved in the activation of the stimulatory sub-unit of the adenylate cyclase complex (Sharp and Hynie 1971, Guerrant et al. 1972, Johnson et al. 1978). Formation of an A1 sub-unit-ARF-Gs complex leads to transfer of the ADP-ribose moiety of NAD to Arg201 in Gsα (Gill 1975, Moss et al. 1976b, Gill and Meren 1978, Van Dop et al. 1984, Bourne et al. 1991). This irreversible ADP-ribosylation inhibits the GTPase activity of the α sub-unit of Gs and results in constitutive activation of the adenylate cyclase complex and elevated intracellular cAMP levels (Schafer et al. 1970, Kimberg et al. 1971, Field et al. 1972, Cassel and Selinger 1978, Randazzo et al. 1994). This in turn leads to a complex series of cAMP-mediated events (summarized in Figure 2) involving: (i) activation of protein kinase A (PKA), which phosphorylates the major chloride channel identified in intestinal epithelial cells, namely the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), which stimulates active chloride secretion (Field et al. 1989a,b, Burch et al. 1988, Cheng et al. 1991, Denning et al. 1992, Picciotto et al. 1992); (ii) activation of an apically located chloride channel and basolaterally located barium-sensitive potassium channel and Na/K/2Cl cotransporter (McRoberts et al. 1985, Halm et al. 1988, Matthews et al. 1992); (iii) activation of the secretagogue platelet activating factor (PAF), which induces the synthesis of PLA2-activating protein, resulting in the activation of phospholipase A2 (PLA2; Burch et al. 1988, Peterson et al. 1996, Thielman et al. 1997)—this in turn stimulates the release of arachidonic acid from membrane phospholipids and results in the production and release of prostaglandins (PGs), notably prostaglandin E1 and E2, which amplify the Cl⁻ secretory response (Kimberg et al. 1971, Speelman et al. 1985, Burch et al. 1988, Peterson and Ochoa 1989, Thielman et al. 1997); (iv) stimulation of the release of the secretagogue 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) by intestinal enterochromaffin cells (Nilsson et al. 1983)—this is thought to initiate signals from subepithelial neurons to crypt epithelial cells and circular smooth muscles, resulting in PG synthesis, increased Cl⁻ transport and muscle contraction (Nilsson et al. 1983, Eklund et al. 1986, 1987, Felder et al. 1990); (v) inhibition of micro-tubule organization and a remodelling or dissociation of actin filaments in intestinal epithelial cells, resulting in apical membrane recruitment of the CFTR, contributing to chloride secretion (Shapiro et al. 1991, Tousson et al. 1996); and (vi) a widening of tight junctions, which also contributes to the loss of electrolytes (Field et al. 1972, Powell 1974). The resultant net increase in Cl⁻ secretion and inhibition of Na⁺ adsorption leads to the osmotic movement of a large quantity of water into the intestinal lumen, and results in a severe form of secretory diarrhoea that is characterized by a lack of influx of inflammatory cells into the lamina propria (reviewed in Field et al. 1989a,b, Sears and Kaper 1996).

Despite the well-established fact that Ctx ADP-ribosylates Gs, the exact sequence of events leading up to adenylate cyclase activation remains unclear. In particular, it is unclear how Gs, which is mainly located in the brush borders of the intestinal epithelium, activates the basolaterally located adenylate cyclase complex. The exact mechanism of induction of PG production by Ctx and the role of prostaglandins in cholera-like diarrhoea is also controversial. It is known that the PG content of the luminal fluids of patients with acute cholera and of animals challenged with Ctx is markedly increased (Speelman et al. 1985, Peterson and Ochoa 1989, Van Loon et al. 1992). In vitro experiments using cell lines and in vivo experiments in ligated rabbit ileal loops have shown that cAMP-enhancing agents, such as forskolin and membrane-permeable cAMP derivatives (e.g. dibutyryl
cAMP), can stimulate PG production, whereas PAF antagonists and inhibitors of PLA2 activity can inhibit the secretory response to Ctx (Burch et al. 1988, Guerrant et al. 1994, Thielman et al. 1997). This is suggestive of a direct link between PG secretion and cAMP production. However, a number of studies have suggested that PG production is unrelated to cAMP elevation. For example, the chaotropic agent chloroquine was found to inhibit Ctx-mediated PLA2 activation and consequent PG release, whereas it had no effects on Ctx-mediated stimulation of cAMP production (Liang et al. 1990). Furthermore, a Ctx mutant devoid of ADP-ribosyltransferase activity as well as recombinant CtxB were found to be capable of activating PG production in a mutant lymphoma cell line lacking the gene for Gsα (Peterson et al. 1999). However, in the same study, Ctx, but not the Ctx mutant or CtxB, induced PG synthesis in rabbit ileal loops (Peterson et al. 1999). This suggests that different mechanisms exist for the activation of PG production, and that in enterocytes PG production may well be cAMP-dependent.

Although diarrhoeal disease mediated by Ctx is characterized as non-inflammatory, the toxin does induce cytokine production by epithelial cells. Early studies showed that Ctx increases IL-6 production by intestinal epithelial cells. Furthermore, *in vitro* studies using epithelial cell lines have shown that Ctx strongly promotes the production of IL-6 (Bromander et al. 1993, McGee et al. 1993a,b). More recently, we found that Etx-mediated promotion of IL-6 production by T84-cells was dependent on activation of adenylate cyclase and PKA (Soriani et al. 2002). Furthermore, Etx was found to induce the expression of IL-10 and IL-1R antagonist (Soriani et al. 2002), which is consistent with these toxins exerting an anti-inflammatory effect. As PGs are also known to serve as an important stimulus for IL-6 production (Hinson et al. 1996, Portanova et al. 1996), Ctx-mediated cAMP and PGs may act synergistically and enhance IL-6 production.

Interestingly, there is a clear difference in the clinical severity of diarrhoeal disease caused by *V. cholerae* and ETEC. Cholera is characterized by severe watery diarrhoea, with patients losing as much as 10–20 litres of fluid per day (Black 1994). ETEC-mediated diarrhoea, also known as traveller's diarrhoea or Montezuma’s revenge, is generally milder and of shorter duration (Rowe et al. 1970, Black et al. 1981). The reason for this difference in disease severity is unclear, but many factors may play a role, for example: (i) the production of additional virulence factors—certain *V. cholerae* strains produce zonula occludens toxin (Zot; Fasano et al. 1991), accessory cholera enterotoxin (Ace; Trucksis et al. 1993), WO7 toxin (Walia et al. 1999), and, like some ETEC strains, a heat-stable toxin (Takeda et al. 1991), all of which can contribute to chloride secretion; (ii) differences in efficiency of bacterial colonization or toxin secretion as *V. cholerae* secretes Ctx, while in ETEC Etx is retained in the periplasm (Hirst et al. 1984); (iii) Etx does not appear to induce 5-HT release and associated Cl⁻ secretion and bowel contraction, which may also partially account for the observed differences in clinical severity of diarrhoea (Turville et al. 1998); and (iv) structural differences between Ctx and Etx. Indeed, despite the high sequence homology and structural similarities between these molecules, we found

that the differences in the magnitude of the Cl⁻ secretory response and the lag phase between the addition of toxin to T84-cells and the onset of the Cl⁻ secretory response observed *in vitro* (Bennett and Cuatrecasas 1975, Gill and King 1975, Fishman 1980, Fishman et al. 1983, Lencer et al. 1992) could be mapped to a 10-amino-acid segment of the A2 fragment that penetrates the central pore of the B sub-unit pentamer (Rodighiero et al. 1999). It was found that this 10-amino-acid segment in Ctx conferred a greater stability to the interaction between the A and B sub-units than the corresponding segment from Etx (Rodighiero et al. 1999). Remarkably, X-ray crystallography studies revealed that this segment is also the most structurally different region of the two toxins. Whereas in Ctx this segment is α-helical, in Etx it comprises an extended chain (Sixma et al. 1991, Zhang et al. 1995a,). In conclusion, it is unclear why the severity of the diarrhoeal disease mediated by *V. cholerae* and ETEC is different, but it seems likely that the basis of these differences is complex and multi-factorial.

### Toxin-mediated cell signalling

The capacity of Ctx and Etx to activate signalling pathways is not limited to the induction of cAMP production and other second messenger molecules. Recent findings suggest that the B sub-units of these molecules are not simply inert receptor-binding molecules, but also possess signalling properties in their own right. For example, binding of EtxB to B cells was found to stimulate activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases (Erk1 and Erk2, respectively), leading to up-regulation of major histocompatibility class II (MHC-II) and CD25 expression, respectively (Bone et al. 2002). The activation of Erk kinases by EtxB was shown to be dependent on phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3-kinase) and protein kinase C (PKC) activity (Bone et al., 2002). Furthermore, in CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ T-cells, EtxB was found to activate nuclear translocation of NF-κB (Salmond et al. 2002). In CD8⁺ T-cells, NF-κB activation was found to lead to activation of the transcription factor c-Myc and caspases 3 and 8 and trigger T-cell apoptosis by a process that is independent of Fas and tumour necrosis factor receptor (Soriani et al. 2001, Salmond et al. 2002). The treatment of macrophages with CtxB was recently shown to induce MAP kinase phosphatase-1 (MKP-1), which is involved in the regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokine production (Chen et al. 2002b). Interestingly, LPS-induced synthesis of IL-12 by monocytes is inhibited by EtxB and CtxB treatment, whereas treatment of monocytes with CtxB or EtxB triggers IL-10 secretion (Turcanu et al. 2002).

The capacity of the B sub-units to modulate the signalling pathways of immune cell populations is dependent on the 51–58 loop of the B sub-unit, since a His-57 to Ala substitution renders the B sub-units unable to trigger caspase 3-mediated CD8(+) -T-cell apoptosis or activate nuclear translocation of NF-kappaB in Jurkat T-cells even though the mutant proteins bind to cell surface GM1 (Aman et al. 2001, Fraser et al. 2002). This indicates that binding to GM1 is not sufficient to trigger B-subunit-mediated signalling and implies that secondary interactions with other membrane

constituents are involved. In this respect, it is interesting to note that gangliosides have been shown to interact with transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinases (Rampersaud *et al.* 1999), and it is feasible that the B sub-unit interacts with such proteins. Furthermore, GM1 can interact with intracellular membrane-bound proteins, such as the Src-family kinases, and facilitate their localization to lipid rafts to generate so-called signalling platforms (Kasahara and Sanai 2000). Interestingly, it was recently demonstrated that cross-linking of surface-bound CtxB with CtxB-specific antibodies stimulates the formation of large raft-like structures, which can accumulate filamentous actin and tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins and serve as a platform for signal transduction in lymphocytes (Harder *et al.* 1998, Harder and Simons 1999). A role for raft coalescence and the formation of large rafts has been implicated in T-cell activation, and in this respect cross-linking of membrane-bound CtxB with specific antibodies has been shown to lead to higher-level and more stable tyrosine phosphorylation and higher consumption of Lck, and was capable of substituting for co-stimulation upon T-cell activation (Viola *et al.* 1999). This may represent a more general mechanism for amplifying receptor signalling by reorganization of membrane micro-domains. Furthermore, it seems likely that the modulation of the immune system that follows administration of Ctx, Etx, and their B sub-units *in vivo* results from signalling processes triggered after initial binding to GM1.

### Concluding remarks

The multi-functional features of the A and B sub-units of Ctx and Etx enable them to engage the cellular machineries of enterocytes and immune cells with a precision that leads to effective targeting and the activation of various signalling cascades. The potency of both sub-units in triggering anti-inflammatory cytokines by enterocytes and immune cell populations lends increasing credence to the view that these molecules are superbly evolved anti-inflammatory agents. Not surprisingly, their capabilities as vehicles for cellular entry and down-regulation of inflammatory reactions is provoking considerable interest in their use as novel drug delivery vehicles and as therapeutics for modulating human immune disorders (Williams *et al.* 1999, Sun *et al.* 2000, De Haan and Hirst 2002, De Haan *et al.* 2002).

### References

Aman, A. T., Fraser, S., Merritt, E. A., Rodighiero, C., Kenny, M., Ahn, M., Hol, W. G. J., Williams, N. A., Lencer, W. I. and Hirst, T. R., 2001, A mutant cholera toxin B subunit that binds GM1-ganglioside but lacks immunomodulatory or toxic activity. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **98**, 8536–8541.

Anderson, R. G. W., 1998, The caveolae membrane system. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.*, **67**, 199–225.

Angstrom, J., Teneberg, S. and Karlsson, K. A., 1994, Delineation and comparison of ganglioside-binding epitopes for the toxins of *Vibrio cholerae*, *Escherichia coli*, and *Clostridium tetani*: evidence for overlapping epitopes. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **91**, 11859–11863.

Aoe, T., Cukierman, E., Lee, A., Cassel, D., Peters, P. J. and Hsu, V. W., 1997, The KDEL receptor, ERD2, regulates intracellular traffic

by recruiting a GTPase-activating protein for ARF1. *EMBO J.*, **16**, 7305–7316.

Aoe, T., Lee, A. J., van Donselaar, E., Peters, P. J. and Hsu, V. W., 1998, Modulation of intracellular transport by transported proteins: insight from regulation of COPI-mediated transport. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **95**, 1624–1629.

Aridor, M., Bannykh, S. I., Rowe, T. and Balch, W. E., 1995, Sequential coupling between COPII and COPI vesicle coats in endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi transport. *J. Cell Biol.*, **131**, 875–893.

Badizadegan, K., Dickinson, B. L., Wheeler, H. E., Blumberg, R. S., Holmes, R. K. and Lencer, W. I., 2000, Heterogeneity of detergent-insoluble membranes from human intestine containing caveolin-1 and ganglioside GM1. *Am. J. Physiol.*, **278**, G895–G904.

Barlowe, C., 2000, Traffic COPs of the early secretory pathway. *Traffic*, **1**, 371–377.

Bastiaens, P. I., Majoul, I. V., Verveer, P. J., Soling, H. D. and Jovin, T. M., 1996, Imaging the intracellular trafficking and state of the AB5 quaternary structure of cholera toxin. *EMBO J.*, **15**, 4246–4253.

Bennett, V. and Cuatrecasas, P., 1975, Mechanism of action of *Vibrio cholerae* enterotoxin. Effects on adenylate cyclase of toad and rat erythrocyte plasma membranes. *J. Membr. Biol.*, **22**, 1–28.

Black, R. E., 1994, Epidemiology of diarrhoeal disease: implications for control by vaccines. *Vaccine*, **11**, 100–106.

Black, R. E., Merson, M. H., Huq, I., Alim, A. R. and Yunus, M., 1981, Incidence and severity of rotavirus and *Escherichia coli* diarrhoea in rural Bangladesh. Implications for vaccine development. *Lancet*, **1**, 141–143.

Bone, H., Eckholdt, S. and Williams, N. A., 2002, Modulation of B lymphocyte signalling by the B subunit of *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin. *Int. Immunol.*, **14**, 647–658.

Booth, B. A., Boesman-Finkelstein, M. and Finkelstein, R. A., 1984, *Vibrio cholerae* hemagglutinin/protease nicks cholera enterotoxin. *Infect. Immun.*, **45**, 558–560.

Bourne, H. R., Sanders, D. A. and McCormick, F., 1991, The GTPase superfamily: conserved structure and molecular mechanism. *Nature*, **349**, 117–127.

Bromander, A. K., Kjerrulf, M., Holmgren, J. and Lycke, N., 1993, Cholera toxin enhances alloantigen presentation by cultured intestinal epithelial cells. *Scand. J. Immunol.*, **37**, 452–458.

Brostrom, M. A., Prostko, C. R., Gmitter-Yellen, D., Grandison, L. J., Kuznetsov, G., Wong, W. L. and Brostrom, C. O., 1991, Inhibition of translational initiation by metalloendoprotease antagonists. Evidence for involvement of sequestered Ca2+ stores. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **266**, 7037–7043.

Brown, D. A. and London, E., 1998, Functions of lipid rafts in biological membranes. *Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.*, **14**, 111–136.

Burch, R. M., Jelsema, C. and Axelrod, J., 1988, Cholera toxin and pertussis toxin stimulate prostaglandin E2 synthesis in a murine macrophage cell line. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.*, **244**, 765–773.

Cassel, D. and Selinger, Z., 1978, Mechanism of adenylate cyclase activation through the beta-adrenergic receptor: catecholamine-induced displacement of bound GDP by GTP. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **75**, 4155–4159.

Chen, A., Hu, T., Mikoryak, C. and Draper, R. K., 2002a, Retrograde transport of protein toxins under conditions of COPI dysfunction. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta*, **1589**, 124–139.

Chen, P., Li, J., Barnes, J., Kokkonen, G. C., Lee, J. C. and Liu, Y., 2002b, Restraint of proinflammatory cytokine biosynthesis by mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-1 in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated macrophages. *J. Immunol.*, **169**, 6408–6416.

Cheng, S. H., Rich, D. P., Marshall, J., Gregory, R. J., Welsh, M. J. and Smith, A. E., 1991, Phosphorylation of the R domain by cAMP-dependent protein kinase regulates the CFTR chloride channel. *Cell*, **66**, 1027–1036.

Choudhury, A., Dominguez, M., Puri, V., Sharma, D. K., Narita, K., Wheatley, C. L., Marks, D. L. and Pagano, R. E., 2002, Rab proteins mediate Golgi transport of caveola-internalized glycosphingolipids and correct lipid trafficking in Niemann-Pick C cells. *J. Clin. Invest.*, **109**, 1541–1550.

Cieplak, W., Messer, R. J., Konkel, M. E. and Grant, C. C. R., 1995, Role of a potential endoplasmic reticulum retention sequence (RDEL) and the Golgi complex in the cytotoxic activity of Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin. Mol. Microbiol., 16, 789–800.

Cooper, M. A., Hanson, A., Lofas, S. and Williams, D. H., 2000, A vesicle capture sensor chip for kinetic analysis of interactions with membrane-bound receptors. Anal. Biochem., 277, 196–205.

Cosson, P. and Letourneur, F., 1997, Coatamer (COPI)-coated vesicles: role in intracellular transport and protein sorting. Curr Opin. Cell Biol., 9, 484–487.

Craig, S. W. and Cuatrecasas, P., 1975, Mobility of cholera toxin receptors on rat lymphocyte membranes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 72, 3344–3348.

Critchley, D. R., Magnani, J. L. and Fishman, P. H., 1981, Interaction of cholera toxin with rat intestinal brush border membranes. Relative roles of gangliosides and galactoproteins as toxin receptors. J. Biol. Chem., 256, 8724–8731.

Cuatrecasas, P., 1973, Gangliosides and membrane receptors for cholera toxin. Biochemistry, 12, 3558–3566.

Dallas, W. S. and Falkow, S., 1980, Amino acid sequence homology between cholera toxin and Escherichia coli heat-labile toxin. Nature, 288, 499–501.

de Haan, L. and Hirst, T. R., 2002, Bacterial toxins as versatile delivery vehicles. Curr. Opin. Drug. Discov. Devel., 5, 269–78.

Denning, G. M., Ostedgaard, L. S., Cheng, S. H., Smith, A. E. and Welsh, M. J., 1992, Localization of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator in chloride secretory epithelia. J. Clin. Invest., 89, 339–349.

De Wolf, M. J. S., 2000, A dipeptide metalloendoprotease substrate completely blocks the response of cells in culture to cholera toxin. J. Biol. Chem., 275, 30240–30247.

De Wolf, M. J. S., Fridkin, M. and Kohn, L. D., 1981, Tryptophan residues of cholera toxin and its A and B protomers. Intrinsic fluorescence and solute quenching upon interacting with the ganglioside GM1, oligo-GM1, or dansylated oligo-GM1. J. Biol. Chem., 256, 5489–5496.

De Wolf, M. J. S., Dams, E. and Dierick, W. S. H., 1994, Interaction of a cholera toxin derivative containing a reduced number of receptor binding sites with intact cells in culture. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1223, 296–305.

Dickinson, B. L. and Clements, J. D., 1995, Dissociation of Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin adjuvanticity from ADP-ribosyltransferase activity. Infect. Immun., 63, 1617–1623.

Domenighini, M., Pizza, M., Jobling, M. G., Holmes, R. K. and Rappuoli, R., 1995, Identification of errors among database sequence entries and comparison of correct amino acid sequences for the heat-labile enterotoxins of Escherichia coli and Vibrio cholerae. Mol. Microbiol., 15, 1165–1167.

Donaldson, J. G., Finazzi, D. and Klausner, R. D., 1992, Brefeldin A inhibits Golgi membrane-catalysed exchange of guanine nucleotide onto ARF protein. Nature, 360, 350–352.

Donta, S. T. and Viner, J. P., 1975, Inhibition of the steroidogenic effects of cholera and heat-labile Escherichia coli enterotoxins by GM1 ganglioside: evidence for a similar receptor site for the two toxins. Infect. Immun., 11, 982–985.

Donta, S. T., Beristan, S. and Tomicic, T. K., 1993, Inhibition of heat-labile cholera and Escherichia coli enterotoxins by Brefeldin A. Infect. Immun., 61, 3282–3286.

Dykes, C. W., Halliday, I. J., Hobden, A. N., Read, M. J. and Harford, S., 1985, A comparison of the nucleotide sequence of heat-labile enterotoxin and cholera toxin. FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 26, 171–174.

Eklund, S., Jodal, M. and Lundgren, O., 1986, The net fluid secretion caused by cyclic 3′5′-guanosine monophosphate in the rat jejunum in vivo is mediated by a local nervous reflex. Acta Physiol. Scand., 128, 57–63.

Eklund, S., Brunsson, I., Jodal, M. and Lundgren, O., 1987, Changes in cyclic 3′5′-adenosine monophosphate tissue concentration and net fluid transport in the cat’s small intestine elicited by cholera toxin, arachidonic acid, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, and 5-hydroxytryptamine. Acta Physiol. Scand., 129, 115–125.


Fasano, A., Baudry, B., Pumplin, D. W., Wasserman, S. S., Tall, B. D., Ketley, J. M. and Kaper, J. B., 1991, Vibrio cholerae produces a second enterotoxin, which affects intestinal tight junctions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 88, 5242–5246.

Felder, C. C., Kanterman, R. Y., Ma, A. L. and Axelrod, J., 1990, Serotonin stimulates phospholipase A2 and the release of arachidonic acid in hippocampal neurons by a type 2 serotonin receptor that is independent of inositolphospholipid hydrolysis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 87, 2187–2191.

Field, M., Fromm, D., al-Awqati, Q. and Greenough, W. B., 1972, Effect of cholera enterotoxin on ion transport across isolated ileal mucosa. J. Clin. Invest., 51, 796–804.

Field, M., Rao, M. C. and Chang, E. B., 1989a, Intestinal electrolyte transport and diarrheal disease (1). N. Engl. J. Med., 321, 879–883.

Field, M., Rao, M. C. and Chang, E. B., 1989b, Intestinal electrolyte transport and diarrheal disease (2). N. Engl. J. Med., 321, 879–883.

Fishman, P. H., 1980, Mechanism of action of cholera toxin: studies on the lag period. J. Membr. Biol., 54, 61–72.

Fishman, P. H. and Atikkan, E. E., 1980, Mechanism of action of cholera toxin: effect of receptor density and multivalent binding on activation of adenylate cyclase. J. Membr. Biol., 54, 51–60.

Fishman, P. H., Moss, J. and Vaughan, M., 1976, Uptake and metabolism of gangliosides in transformed mouse fibroblasts. Relationship of ganglioside structure to choleragen response. J. Biol. Chem., 251, 4490–4494.

Fishman, P. H., Moss, J. and Osborne, J. C., 1978, Interaction of choleragen with the oligosaccharide of ganglioside GM1: evidence for multiple oligosaccharide binding sites. Biochemistry, 17, 711–716.

Fishman, P. H., Bradley, R. M., Hom, B. E. and Moss, J., 1983, Uptake and metabolism of exogenous gangliosides by cultured cells: effect of choleragen on the turnover of GM1. J. Lipid Res., 24, 1002–1011.

Fraser, S. A., de Haan, L., Hearn, A. R., Bone, H. K., Salmond, R. J., Rivett, A. J., Williams, N. A. and Hirst, T. R., 2002, Mutant E. coli heat-labile toxin B subunit that separates toxoid-mediated signaling and immunomodulatory action from trafficking and delivery functions. Infect. Immun., 71, 1527–1537.

Fukuta, S., Magnani, J. L., Twiddy, E. M., Holmes, R. K. and Ginsburg, V., 1988, Comparison of the carbohydrate-binding specificities of cholera toxin and Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxins LTh-I, LT-IIa, and LT-IIb. Infect. Immun., 56, 1748–1753.

Furuchi, T. and Anderson, R. G. W., 1998, Cholesterol depletion of caveolae causes hyperactivation of extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK). J. Biol. Chem., 273, 21099–21104.

Ghosh, R. N., Mallet, W. G., Soe, T. T., McGraw, T. E. and Maxfield, F. R., 1998, An endocytosed TGN38 chimeric protein is delivered to the TGN after trafficking through the endocytic recycling compartment in CHO cells. J. Cell Biol., 142, 923–936.

Giannelli, V., Fontana, M. R., Giuliani, M. M., Guangcai, D., Rappuoli, R. and Pizza, M., 1997, Protease susceptibility and toxicity of heat-labile enterotoxins with a mutation in the active site or in the protease-sensitive loop. Infect. Immun., 65, 331–334.

Gill, D. M., 1975, Involvement of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide in the action of cholera toxin in vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 72, 2064–2068.

Gill, D. M., 1976, The arrangement of subunits in cholera toxin. Biochemistry, 15, 1242–1248.

Gill, D. M. and Coburn, J., 1987, ADP-ribosylation by cholera toxin: functional analysis of a cellular system that stimulates the enzymatic activity of cholera toxin fragment A1. Biochemistry, 26, 6364–6371.

Gill, D. M. and King, C. A., 1975, The mechanism of action of cholera toxin in pigeon erythrocyte lysates. J. Biol. Chem., 250, 6424–6432.

Gill, D. M. and Meren, R., 1978, ADP-ribosylation of membrane proteins catalyzed by cholera toxin: basis of the activation of adenylate cyclase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 75, 3050–3054.

Girod, A., Storrie, B., Simpson, J. C., Johannes, L., Goud, B., Roberts, L. M., Lord, J. M., Nilsson, T. and Pepperkok, R., 1999,

Evidence for a COP-I-independent transport route from the Golgi complex to the endoplasmic reticulum. *Nat. Cell Biol.*, **1**, 423–430.

Grant, C. C. R., Messer, R. J. and Cieplak, W., 1994, Role of trypsin-like cleavage at arginine 192 in the enzymatic and cytotoxic activities of *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin. *Infect. Immun.*, **62**, 4270–4278.

Green, J. M., Zhelesnyak, A., Chung, J., Lindberg, F. P., Sarfati, M., Frazier, W. A. and Brown, E. J., 1999, Role of cholesterol in formation and function of a signaling complex involving (v3, integrin-associated protein (CD47), and heterotrimeric G proteins. *J. Cell Biol.*, **146**, 673–682.

Griffiths, G., Ericsson, M., Krijnse-Locker, J., Nilsson, T., Goud, B., Soling, H. D., Tang, B. L., Wong, S. H. and Hong, W., 1994, Localization of the Lys, Asp, Glu, Leu tetrapeptide receptor to the Golgi complex and the intermediate compartment in mammalian cells. *J. Cell Biol.*, **127**, 1557–1574.

Griffiths, S. L. and Critchley, D. R., 1991, Characterisation of the binding sites for *Escherichia coli* heat-labile toxin type I in intestinal brush borders. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta*, **1075**, 154–161.

Griffiths, S. L., Finkelstein, R. A. and Critchley, D. R., 1986, Characterisation of the receptor for cholera toxin and *Escherichia coli* heat-labile toxin in rabbit intestinal brush borders. *Biochem. J.*, **238**, 313–322.

Guerrant, R. L., Chen, L. C. and Sharp, G. W., 1972, Intestinal adenyl-cyclase activity in canine cholera: correlation with fluid accumulation. *J. Infect. Dis.*, **125**, 377–381.

Guerrant, R. L., Fang, G. D., Thielman, N. M. and Fonteles, M. C., 1994, Role of platelet activating factor in the intestinal epithelial secretory and Chinese hamster ovary cell cytoskeletal responses to cholera toxin. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **91**, 9655–9658.

Guidry, J. J., Cardenas, L., Cheng, E. and Clements, J. D., 1997, Role of receptor binding in toxicity, immunogenicity, and adjuvanticity of *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin. *Infect. Immun.*, **65**, 4943–4950.

Halm, D. R., Reckemmer, G. R., Schoumacher, R. A. and Frizzell, R. A., 1988, Apical membrane chloride channels in a colonic cell line activated by secretory agonists. *Am. J. Physiol.*, **254**, C505–C511.

Harder, T. and Simons, K., 1999, Clusters of glycolipid and glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins in lymphoid cells: accumulation of actin regulated by local tyrosine phosphorylation. *Eur. J. Immunol.*, **29**, 556–562.

Harder, T., Scheiffele, P., Verkade, P. and Simons, K., 1998, Lipid domain structure of the plasma membrane revealed by patching of membrane components. *J. Cell Biol.*, **141**, 929–942.

Hazes, B. and Read, R. J., 1997, Accumulating evidence suggests that several AB-toxins subvert the endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation pathway to enter target cells. *Biochemistry*, **36**, 11051–11054.

Helms, J. B. and Rothman, J. E., 1992, Inhibition by brefeldin A of a Golgi membrane enzyme that catalyses exchange of guanine nucleotide bound to ARF. *Nature*, **360**, 352–354.

Hinson, R. M., Williams, J. A. and Shacter, E., 1996, Elevated interleukin 6 is induced by prostaglandin E2 in a murine model of inflammation: possible role of cyclooxygenase-2. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **93**, 4885–4890.

Hirst, T. R., Sanchez, J., Kaper, J. B., Hardy, S. J. S. and Holmgren, J., 1984, Mechanism of toxin secretion by *Vibrio cholerae* investigated in strains harboring plasmids that encode heat-labile enterotoxins of *Escherichia coli*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **81**, 7752–7756.

Holmgren, J., 1973, Comparison of the tissue receptors for *Vibrio cholerae* and *Escherichia coli* enterotoxins by means of gangliosides and natural cholera toxoid. *Infect. Immun.*, **8**, 851–859.

Holmgren, J., Lonngroth, I. and Svennerholm, L., 1973, Tissue receptor for cholera exotoxin: postulated structure from studies with GM1 ganglioside and related glycolipids. *Infect. Immun.*, **8**, 208–214.

Holmgren, J., Lonngroth, I., Mansson, J. and Svennerholm, L., 1975, Interaction of cholera toxin and membrane GM1 ganglioside of small intestine. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **72**, 2520–2524.

Holmgren, J., Fredman, P., Lindblad, M., Svennerholm, A. M. and Svennerholm, L., 1982, Rabbit intestinal glycoprotein receptor for *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin lacking affinity for cholera toxin. *Infect. Immun.*, **38**, 424–433.

Holmgren, J., Lindblad, M., Fredman, P., Svennerholm, L. and Myrvold, H., 1985, Comparison of receptors for cholera and *Escherichia coli* enterotoxins in human intestine. *Gastroenterology*, **89**, 27–35.

Ikonen, E., 2001, Roles of lipid rafts in membrane transport. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.*, **13**, 470–477.

Iversen, T.-G., Skretting, G., Llorente, A., Nicoziani, P., van Deurs, B. and Sandvig, K., 2001, Endosome to Golgi transport of ricin is independent of clathrin and of the Rab9- and Rab11-GTPases. *Mol. Biol. Cell*, **12**, 2099–2107.

Jacob, C. O., Sela, M., Pines, M., Hurwitz, S. and Arnon, R., 1984, Both cholera toxin-induced adenylate cyclase activation and cholera toxin biological activity are inhibited by antibodies against related synthetic peptides. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **81**, 7893–7896.

Jobling, M. G. and Holmes, R. K., 1991, Analysis of structure and function of cholera toxin B subunit of cholera toxin by the use of site-directed mutagenesis. *Mol. Microbiol.*, **5**, 1755–1767.

Jobling, M. G. and Holmes, R. K., 2000, Identification of motifs in cholera toxin A1 polypeptide that are required for its interaction with human ADP-ribosylation factor 6 in a bacterial two-hybrid system. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **97**, 14662–14667.

Johnson, G. L., Kaslow, H. R. and Bourne, H. R., 1978, Genetic evidence that cholera toxin substrates are regulatory components of adenylate cyclase. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **253**, 7120–7123.

Joseph, K. C., Stieber, A. and Gonatas, N. K., 1979, Endocytosis of cholera toxin in GERL-like structures of murine neuroblastoma cells pretreated with GM1 ganglioside. Cholera toxin internalization into neuroblastoma GERL. *J. Cell Biol.*, **81**, 543–554.

Kahn, R. A. and Gilman, A. G., 1984, Purification of a protein cofactor required for ADP-ribosylation of the stimulatory regulatory component of adenylate cyclase by cholera toxin. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **259**, 6228–6234.

Kahn, R. A. and Gilman, A. G., 1986, The protein cofactor necessary for ADP-ribosylation of Gs( by cholera toxin is itself a GTP binding protein. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **261**, 7906–7911.

Karlsson, K. A., Teneberg, S., Angstrom, J., Kjellberg, A., Hirst, T. R., Berstrom, J. and Miller-Podraza, H., 1996, Unexpected carbohydrate cross-binding by *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin. Recognition of human and rabbit target cell glycoconjugates in comparison with cholera toxin. *Bioorg. Med. Chem.*, **4**, 1919–1928.

Kasahara, K. and Sanai, Y., 2000, Functional roles of glycosphingolipids in signal transduction via lipid rafts. *Glycoconj. J.*, **17**, 153–162.

Kassis, S., Hagmann, J., Fishman, P. H., Chang, P. P. and Moss, J., 1982, Mechanism of action of cholera toxin on intact cells. Generation of A1 peptide and activation of adenylate cyclase. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **257**, 12148–12152.

Kenworthy, A. K., Petranova, N. and Edidin, M., 2000, High-resolution FRET microscopy of cholera toxin B-subunit and GPI-anchored proteins in cell plasma membranes. *Mol. Biol. Cell.*, **11**, 1645–1655.

Kimberg, D. V., Field, M., Johnson, J., Henderson, A. and Gershon, E., 1971, Stimulation of intestinal mucosal adenyl cyclase by cholera enterotoxin and prostaglandins. *J. Clin. Invest.*, **50**, 1218–1230.

Kopito, R. R., 1997, ER quality control: the cytoplasmic connection. *Cell*, **88**, 427–430.

Kurzchalia, T. V. and Parton, R. G., 1999, Membrane microdomains and caveolae. *Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.*, **11**, 424–431.

Kuziemko, G. M., Stroh, M. and Stevens, R. C., 1996, Cholera toxin binding affinity and specificity for gangliosides determined by surface plasmon resonance. *Biochemistry*, **35**, 6375–6384.

Lai, C. Y., 1977, Determination of the primary structure of cholera toxin B subunit. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **252**, 7249–7256.

Lanne, B., Schierbeck, B. and Karlsson, K. A., 1994, On the role of the carboxyl group of sialic acid in binding of cholera toxin to the receptor glycosphingolipid, GM1. *J. Biochem.*, **116**, 1269–1274.

Lauer, S., Goldstein, B., Nolan, R. L. and Nolan, J. P., 2002, Analysis of cholera toxin-ganglioside interactions by flow cytometry. *Biochemistry*, **41**, 1742–1751.

Lee, C. M., Chang, P. P., Tsai, S. C., Adamik, R., Price, S. R., Kunz, B. C., Moss, J., Twiddy, E. M. and Holmes, R. K., 1991, Activation of Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxins by native and recombinant adenosine diphosphate-ribosylation factors, 20-kD guanine nucleotide-binding proteins. *J. Clin. Invest.*, **87**, 1780–1786.

Lencer, W. I., Delp, C., Neutra, M. R. and Madara, J. L., 1992, Mechanism of cholera toxin action on a polarized human intestinal epithelial cell line: role of vesicular traffic. *J. Cell Biol.*, **117**, 1197–1209.

Lencer, W. I., de Almeida, J. B., Moe, S., Stow, J. L., Ausiello, D. A. and Madara, J. L., 1993, Entry of cholera toxin into polarized human intestinal epithelial cells: identification of an early brefeldin A sensitive event required for A1-peptide generation. *J. Clin. Invest.*, **92**, 2941–2951.

Lencer, W. I., Constable, C., Moe, S., Jobling, M. G., Webb, H. M., Ruston, S., Madara, J. L., Hirst, T. R. and Holmes, R. K., 1995a, Targeting of cholera toxin and Escherichia coli heat labile toxin in polarized epithelia: role of COOH-terminal KDEL. *J. Cell Biol.*, **131**, 951–962.

Lencer, W. I., Moe, S., Rufo, P. A. and Madara, J. L., 1995b, Transcytosis of cholera toxin subunits across model human intestinal epithelia. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **92**, 10094–10098.

Lencer, W. I., Constable, C., Moe, S., Rufo, P. A., Wolf, A., Jobling, M. G., Ruston, S. P., Madara, J. L., Holmes, R. K. and Hirst, T. R., 1997, Proteolytic activation of cholera toxin and Escherichia coli labile toxin by entry into host epithelial cells. Signal transduction by a protease-resistant toxin variant. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **272**, 15562–15568.

Lencer, W. I., Hirst, T. R. and Holmes, R. K., 1999, Membrane traffic and the cellular uptake of cholera toxin. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta*, **1450**, 177–190.

Lenhard, J. M., Kahn, R. A. and Stahl, P. D., 1992, Evidence for ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) as a regulator of in vitro endosome fusion. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **267**, 13047–13052.

Liang, Y. F., Peterson, J. W., Jackson, C. A. and Reitmeyer, J. C., 1990, Chloroquine inhibition of cholera toxin. *FEBS Lett.*, **275**, 143–145.

Lockman, H. and Kaper, J. B., 1983, Nucleotide sequence analysis of the A2 and B subunits of Vibrio cholerae enterotoxin. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **258**, 13722–13726.

Lockman, H. A., Galen, J. E. and Kaper, J. B., 1984, Vibrio cholerae enterotoxin genes: nucleotide sequence analysis of DNA encoding ADP-ribosyltransferase. *J. Bacteriol.*, **159**, 1086–1089.

Lombardi, D., Soldati, T., Riederer, M. A., Goda, Y., Zerial, M. and Pfeffer, S. R., 1993, Rab9 functions in transport between late endosomes and the trans Golgi network. *EMBO J.*, **12**, 677–682.

London, E. and Luongo, C. L., 1989, Domain-specific bias in arginine/lysine usage by protein toxins. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.*, **160**, 333–339.

McGee, D. W., Beagley, K. W., Aicher, W. K. and McGhee, J. R., 1993a, Transforming growth factor-beta and IL-1 beta act in synergy to enhance IL-6 secretion by the intestinal epithelial cell line, IEC-6. *J. Immunol.*, **151**, 970–978.

McGee, D. W., Elson, C. O. and McGhee, J. R., 1993b, Enhancing effect of cholera toxin on interleukin-6 secretion by IEC-6 intestinal epithelial cells: mode of action and augmenting effect of inflammatory cytokines. *Infect. Immun.*, **61**, 4637–4644.

MacKenzie, C. R., Hirama, T., Lee, K. K., Altman, E. and Young, N. M., 1997, Quantitative analysis of bacterial toxin affinity and specificity for glycolipid receptors by surface plasmon resonance. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **272**, 5533–5538.

McRoberts, J. A., Beuerlein, G. and Dharmasathaphorn, K., 1985, Cyclic AMP and Ca2+-activated K+ transport in a human colonic epithelial cell line. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **260**, 14163–14172.

Majoul, I., Sohn, K., Wieland, F. T., Pepperkok, R., Pizza, M., Hillemann, J. and Soling, H. D., 1998, KDEL receptor (Erd2p)-mediated retrograde transport of the cholera toxin A subunit from the Golgi involves COPI, p23, and the COOH terminus of Erd2p. *J. Cell Biol.*, **143**, 601–612.

Makler, V., Cukierman, E., Rotman, M., Admon, A. and Cassel, D., 1995, ADP-ribosylation factor-directed GTPase-activating protein. Purification and partial characterization. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **270**, 5232–5237.

Mallard, F., Antony, C., Tenza, D., Salamero, J., Goud, B. and Johannes, L., 1998, Direct pathway from early/recycling endosomes to the Golgi apparatus revealed through the study of shiga toxin B-fragment transport. *J. Cell Biol.*, **143**, 973–990.

Mallard, F., Tang, B. L., Galli, T., Tenza, D., Saint-Pol, A., Yue, X., Antony, C., Hong, W., Goud, B. and Johannes, L., 2002, Early recycling endosomes-to-TGN transport involves two SNARE complexes and a Rab6 isoform. *J. Cell Biol.*, **156**, 653–664.

Mallet, W. G. and Maxfield, F. R., 1999, Chimeric forms of furin and TGN38 are transported with the plasma membrane in the trans-Golgi network via distinct endosomal pathways. *J. Cell Biol.*, **146**, 345–359.

Malsam, J., Gommel, D., Wieland, F. T. and Nickel, W., 1999, A role for ADP ribosylation factor in the control of cargo uptake during COPI-coated vesicle biogenesis. *FEBS Lett.*, **462**, 267–272.

Masserini, M., Freire, E., Palestini, P., Calappi, E. and Tettamanti, G., 1992, Fuc-GM1 ganglioside mimics the receptor function of GM1 for cholera toxin. *Biochemistry*, **31**, 2422–2426.

Matlack, K. E. S., Mothes, W. and Rapoport, T. A., 1998, Protein translocation: tunnel vision. *Cell*, **92**, 381–390.

Matthews, J. B., Awtrey, C. S. and Madara, J. L., 1992, Microfilament-dependent activation of Na+/K+/2Cl− cotransport by cAMP in intestinal epithelial monolayers. *J. Clin. Invest.*, **90**, 1608–1613.

Mekalanos, J. J., Collier, R. J. and Romig, W. R., 1979, Enzymic activity of cholera toxin. II. Relationships to proteolytic processing, disulfide bond reduction, and subunit composition. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **254**, 5855–5861.

Mekalanos, J. J., Swartz, D. J., Pearson, G. D. N., Harford, N., Groyne, F. and De Wilde, M., 1983, Cholera toxin genes: nucleotide sequence, deletion analysis and vaccine development. *Nature*, **306**, 551–557.

Merritt, E. A., Sarfaty, S., VandenAkker, F., L’Hoir, C., Martial, J. A. and Hol, W. G. J., 1994a, Crystal structure of cholera toxin B-pentamer bound to receptor GM1 pentasaccharide. *Protein Sci.*, **3**, 166–175.

Merritt, E. A., Sixma, T. K., Kalk, K. H., Van Zanten, B. A. M. and Hol, W. G. J., 1994b, Galactose-binding site in Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin (LT) and cholera toxin (CT). *Mol. Microbiol.*, **13**, 745–753.

Montesano, R., Roth, J., Robert, A. and Orci, L., 1982, Non-coated membrane invaginations are involved in binding and internalization of cholera and tetanus toxins. *Nature*, **296**, 651–653.

Morinaga, N., Tsai, S. C., Moss, J. and Vaughan, M., 1996, Isolation of a brefeldin A-inhibited guanine nucleotide-exchange protein for ADP ribosylation factor (ARF) 1 and ARF3 that contains a Sec7-like domain. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **93**, 12856–12860.

Morita, A., Tsao, D. and Kim, Y. S., 1980, Identification of cholera toxin binding glycoproteins in rat intestinal microvillus membranes. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **255**, 2549–2953.

Moss, J. and Vaughan, M., 1998, Molecules in the ARF orbit. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **273**, 21431–31434.

Moss, J., Fishman, P. H., Manganiello, V. C., Vaughan, M. and Brady, R. O., 1976a, Functional incorporation of ganglioside into intact cells: induction of choleragen responsiveness. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **73**, 1034–1037.

Moss, J. and Richardson, S. H., 1978, Activation of adenylate cyclase by heat-labile Escherichia coli enterotoxin. Evidence for ADP-ribosyltransferase activity. *J. Clin. Invest.*, **62**, 281–285.

Moss, J. and Vaughan, M., 1977, Mechanism of action of cholera-gen. Evidence for ADP-ribosyltransferase activity with arginine as an acceptor. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **252**, 2455–2457.

Moss, J., Manganiello, V. C. and Vaughan, M., 1976b, Hydrolysis of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide by choleragen and its A protomer: possible role in the activation of adenylate cyclase. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **73**, 4424–4427.

Moss, J., Osborne, J. C., Fishman, P. H., Brewer, H. B., Vaughan, M. and Brady, R. O., 1977, Effect of gangliosides and substrate

analogues on the hydrolysis of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide by choleraen. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **74**, 74–78.

Moss, J., Garrison, S., Fishman, P. H. and Richardson, S. H., 1979, Gangliosides sensitize unresponsive fibroblasts to *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin. *J. Clin. Invest.*, **64**, 381–384.

Moss, J., Stanley, S. J., Morin, J. E. and Dixon, J. E., 1980, Activation of choleraen by thiol:protein disulfide oxidoreductase. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **255**, 11085–11087.

Moss, J., Osborne, J. C., Fishman, P. H., Nakaya, S. and Robertson, D. C., 1981, *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin. Ganglioside specificity and ADP-ribosyltransferase activity. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **256**, 12861–12865.

Moss, J., Stanley, S. J., Vaughan, M. and Tsuji, T., 1993, Interaction of ADP-ribosylation factor with *Escherichia coli* enterotoxin that contains an inactivating lysine 112 substitution. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **268**, 6383–6387.

Mullin, B. R., Aloj, S. M., Fishman, P. H., Lee, G., Kohn, L. D. and Brady, R. O., 1976, Cholera toxin interactions with thyrotropin receptors on thyroid plasma membranes. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **73**, 1679–1683.

Munro, S. and Pelham, H. R., 1987, A C-terminal signal prevents secretion of luminal ER proteins. *Cell*, **48**, 899–907.

Naka, A., Iida, T., Ohara, T., Yamamoto, K., Miwatani, T. and Honda, T., 1998, Nicking sites in a subunit of cholera toxin and *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin for *Vibrio cholerae* hemagglutinin/protease. *Toxicon*, **36**, 1001–1005.

Nambiar, M. P., Oda, T., Chen, C., Kuwazuru, Y. and Wu, H. C., 1993, Involvement of the Golgi region in the intracellular trafficking of cholera toxin. *J. Cell. Physiol.*, **154**, 222–228.

Nashar, T. O., Williams, N. A. and Hirst, T. R., 1998, Importance of receptor binding in the immunogenicity, adjuvanticity and therapeutic properties of cholera toxin and *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin. *Med. Microbiol. Immunol.*, **187**, 3–10.

Nichols, B. J., 2002, A distinct class of endosome mediates clathrin-independent endocytosis to the Golgi complex. *Nat. Cell Biol.*, **4**, 374–378.

Nichols, B. J., Kenworthy, A. K., Polishchuk, R. S., Lodge, R., Roberts, T. H., Hirschberg, K., Phair, R. D. and Lippincott-Schwartz, J., 2001, Rapid cycling of lipid raft markers between the cell surface and Golgi complex. *J. Cell Biol.*, **153**, 529–542.

Nilsson, O., Cassuto, J., Larsson, P. A., Jodal, M., Lidberg, P., Ahlman, H., Dahlstrom, A. and Lundgren, O., 1983, 5-Hydroxytryptamine and cholera secretion: a histochemical and physiological study in cats. *Gut*, **24**, 542–548.

Oh, P., McIntosh, D. P. and Schnitzer, J. E., 1998, Dynamin at the neck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP-driven fission from the plasma membrane of endothelium. *J. Cell Biol.*, **141**, 101–114.

Orci, L., Stamnes, M., Ravazzola, M., Amherdt, M., Perrelet, A., Sollner, T. H. and Rothman, J. E., 1997, Bidirectional transport by distinct populations of COPI-coated vesicles. *Cell*, **90**, 335–349.

Orlandi, P. A., 1997, Protein-disulfide isomerase-mediated reduction of the A subunit of cholera toxin in a human intestinal cell line. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **272**, 4591–4599.

Orlandi, P. A. and Fishman, P. H., 1993, Orientation of cholera toxin bound to target cells. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **268**, 17038–17044.

Orlandi, P. A. and Fishman, P. H., 1998, Filipin-dependent inhibition of cholera toxin: evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveolae-like domains. *J. Cell Biol.*, **141**, 905–915.

Orlandi, P. A., Curran, P. K. and Fishman, P. H., 1993, Brefeldin A blocks the response of cultured cells to cholera toxin. Implications for intracellular trafficking in toxin action. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **268**, 12010–12016.

Orlandi, P. A., Critchley, D. R. and Fishman, P. H., 1994, The heat-labile enterotoxin of *Escherichia coli* binds to polylactosaminoglycan-containing receptors in CaCo-2 human intestinal epithelial cells. *Biochemistry*, **33**, 12886–12895.

Pacuszka, T. and Fishman, P. H., 1992, Intoxication of cultured cells by cholera toxin: evidence for different pathways when bound to ganglioside GM1 or neoganglioproteins. *Biochemistry*, **31**, 4773–4778.


Pacuszka, T., Bradley, R. M. and Fishman, P. H., 1991, Neoglycolipid analogues of ganglioside GM1 as functional receptors of cholera toxin. *Biochemistry*, **30**, 2563–2570.

Parton, R. G., 1994, Ultrastructural localization of gangliosides; GM1 is concentrated in caveolae. *J. Histochem. Cytochem.*, **42**, 155–166.

Pelham, H. R. B., 1988, Evidence that luminal ER proteins are sorted from secreted proteins in a post-ER compartment. *EMBO J.*, **7**, 913–918.

Pelham, H. R. and Rothman, J. E., 2000, The debate about transport in the Golgi: two sides of the same coin? *Cell*, **102**, 713–719.

Pepperkok, R., Lowe, M., Burke, B. and Kreis, T. E., 1998, Three distinct steps in transport of vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein from the ER to the cell surface *in vivo* with differential sensitivities to GTP gamma S. *J. Cell Sci.*, **111**, 1877–1888.

Peters, P. J., Hsu, V. W., Ooi, C. E., Finazzi, D., Teal, S. B., Oorschot, V., Donaldson, J. G. and Klausner, R. D., 1995, Overexpression of wild-type and mutant ARF1 and ARF6: distinct perturbations of nonoverlapping membrane compartments. *J. Cell Biol.*, **128**, 1003–1017.

Peterson, J. W. and Ochoa, L. G., 1989, Role of prostaglandins and cAMP in the secretory effects of cholera toxin. *Science*, **245**, 857–859.

Peterson, J. W., Saini, S. S., Dickey, W. D., Klimpel, G. R., Bomalaski, J. S., Clark, M. A., Xu, X. J. and Chopra, A. K., 1996, Cholera toxin induces synthesis of phospholipase A2-activating protein. *Infect. Immun.*, **64**, 2137–2143.

Peterson, J. W., Finkelstein, R. A., Cantu, J., Gessell, D. L. and Chopra, A. K., 1999, Cholera toxin B subunit activates arachidonic acid metabolism. *Infect. Immun.*, **67**, 794–799.

Picciotto, M. R., Cohn, J. A., Bertuzzi, G., Greengard, P. and Nairn, A. C., 1992, Phosphorylation of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **267**, 12742–12752.

Portanova, J. P., Zhang, Y., Anderson, G. D., Hauser, S. D., Masferrer, J. L., Seibert, K., Gregory, S. A. and Isakson, P. C., 1996, Selective neutralization of prostaglandin E2 blocks inflammation, hyperalgesia, and interleukin 6 production *in vivo*. *Med. J. Exp.*, **184**, 883–891.

Powell, D. W., 1974, Intestinal conductance and permselectivity changes with theophylline and choleraen. *Am. J. Physiol.*, **227**, 1436–1443.

Puri, V., Watanabe, R., Singh, R. D., Dominguez, M., Brown, J. C., Wheatley, C. L., Marks, D. L. and Pagano, R. E., 2001, Clathrin-dependent and -independent internalization of plasma membrane sphingolipids initiates two Golgi targeting pathways. *J. Cell Biol.*, **154**, 535–547.

Rampersaud, A. A., Oblinger, J. L., Ponnappan, R. K., Barry, R. W. and Yates, A. J., 1999, Gangliosides and growth factor receptor regulation. *Biochem. Soc. Trans.*, **27**, 415–422.

Randazzo, P. A., Terui, T., Sturch, S. and Kahn, R. A., 1994, The amino terminus of ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) 1 is essential for interaction with Gs and ARF GTPase-activating protein. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **269**, 29490–29494.

Revesz, T. and Greaves, M., 1975, Ligand-induced redistribution of lymphocyte membrane ganglioside GM1. *Nature*, **257**, 103–106.

Richards, A. A., Stang, E., Pepperkok, R. and Parton, R. G., 2002, Inhibitors of COP-mediated transport and cholera toxin action inhibit simian virus 40 infection. *Mol. Biol. Cell*, **13**, 1750–1764.

Rodighiero, C., Aman, A. T., Kenny, M. J., Moss, J., Lencer, W. I. and Hirst, T. R., 1999, Structural basis for the differential toxicity of cholera toxin and *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin. Construction of hybrid toxins identifies the A2-domain as the determinant of differential toxicity. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **274**, 3962–3969.

Rodighiero, C., Fujinaga, Y., Hirst, T. R. and Lencer, W. I., 2001, A cholera toxin B-subunit variant that binds ganglioside GM1 but fails to induce toxicity. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **276**, 36939–36945.

Rowe, B., Taylor, J. and Bettelheim, K. A., 1970, An investigation of traveller’s diarrhoea. *Lancet*, **1**, 1–5.

Rowe, T., Aridor, M., McCaffery, J. M., Plutner, H., Nuoffer, C. and Balch, W. E., 1996, COPII vesicles derived from mammalian endoplasmic reticulum microsomes recruit COPI. *J. Cell Biol.*, **135**, 895–911.

Salmond, R. J., Pitman, R. S., Jimi, E., Soriani, M., Hirst, T. R., Ghosh, S., Rincon, M. and Williams, N. A., 2002, CD8+ T cell apoptosis induced by *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin B subunit occurs via a novel pathway involving NF-(B-dependent caspase activation. *Eur. J. Immunol.*, **32**, 1737–1747.

Sandvig, K., Ryd, M., Garred, O., Schweda, E., Holm, P. K. and van Deurs, B., 1994, Retrograde transport from the Golgi complex to the ER of both Shiga toxin and the nontoxic Shiga B-fragment is regulated by butyric acid and cAMP. *J. Cell Biol.*, **126**, 53–64.

Sandvig, K., Garred, O. and van Deurs, B., 1996, Thapsigargin-induced transport of cholera toxin to the endoplasmic reticulum. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **93**, 12339–12343.

Sandvig, K., Grimmer, S., Lauvrak, S. U., Torgersen, M. L., Skretting, G., van Deurs, B. and Iversen, T. G., 2002, Pathways followed by ricin and Shiga toxin into cells. *Histochem. Cell Biol.*, **117**, 131–141.

Sattler, J., Schwarzmann, G., Staerk, J., Ziegler, W. and Wiegandt, H., 1977, Studies of the ligand binding to cholera toxin II. The hydrophilic moiety of sialoglycolipids. *Hoppe Seylers Z. Physiol. Chem.*, **358**, 159–163.

Sattler, J., Schwarzmann, G., Knack, I., Rohm, K. H. and Wiegandt, H., 1978, Studies of ligand binding to cholera toxin III. Cooperativity of oligosaccharide binding. *Hoppe Seylers Z. Physiol. Chem.*, **359**, 719–723.

Schafer, D. E., Lust, W. D., Sircar, B. and Goldberg, N. D., 1970, Elevated concentration of adenosine 3′:5′-cyclic monophosphate in intestinal mucosa after treatment with cholera toxin. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **67**, 851–856.

Schmitz, A., Herrgen, H., Winkeler, A. and Herzog, V., 2000, Cholera toxin is exported from microsomes by the Sec61p complex. *J. Cell Biol.*, **148**, 1203–1212.

Schnitzer, J. E., Oh, P. and McIntosh, D. P., 1996, Role of GTP hydrolysis in fission of caveolae directly from plasma membranes. *Science*, **274**, 239–242.

Sears, C. L. and Kaper, J. B., 1996, Enteric bacterial toxins: mechanisms of action and linkage to intestinal secretion. *Microbiol. Rev.*, **60**, 167–215.

Sedlacek, H. H., Stark, J., Seiler, F. R., Ziegler, W. and Wiegandt, H., 1976, Cholera toxin induced redistribution of sialoglycolipid receptor at the lymphocyte membrane. *FEBS Lett.*, **61**, 272–276.

Serafini, T., Orci, L., Amherdt, M., Brunner, M., Kahn, R. A. and Rothman, J. E., 1991, ADP-ribosylation factor is a subunit of the coat of Golgi-derived COP-coated vesicles: a novel role for a GTP-binding protein. *Cell*, **67**, 239–253.

Shapiro, M., Matthews, J., Hecht, G., Delp, C. and Madara, J. L., 1991, Stabilization of F-actin prevents cAMP-elicted Cl⁻ secretion in T84 cells. *J. Clin. Invest.*, **87**, 1903–1909.

Sharp, G. W. and Hyne, S., 1971, Stimulation of intestinal adenyl cyclase by cholera toxin. *Nature*, **229**, 266–269.

Shida, K., Takamizawa, K., Nagaoka, M., Kushiro, A., Osawa, T. and Tsuji, T., 1994a, Enterotoxin-binding glycoproteins in a proteose-peptide fraction of heated bovine milk. *J. Dairy Sci.*, **77**, 930–939.

Shida, K., Takamizawa, K., Nagaoka, M., Tsuji, T. and Osawa, T., 1994b, *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin binds to glycosylated proteins with lactose by amino carbonyl reaction. *Microbiol. Immunol.*, **38**, 273–279.

Shida, K., Takamizawa, K. and Osawa, T., 1996a, Inhibition of *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin by an amino carbonyl product, lactose-alpha-lactalbumin. *Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem.*, **60**, 1492–1494.

Shida, K., Takamizawa, K., Takeda, T. and Osawa, T., 1996b, Characterization by Western blotting of mouse intestinal glycoproteins bound by *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin type I. *Microbiol. Immunol.*, **40**, 71–75.

Shogomori, H. and Futerman, A. H., 2001a, Cholera toxin is found in detergent-insoluble rafts/domains at the cell surface of hippocampal neurons but is internalized via a raft-independent mechanism. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **276**, 9182–9188.

Shogomori, H. and Futerman, A. H., 2001b, Cholesterol depletion by methyl-(cyclodextrin blocks cholera toxin transport from endosomes to the Golgi apparatus in hippocampal neurons. *J. Neurochem.*, **78**, 991–999.

Sixma, T. K., Pronk, S. E., Kalk, K. H., Wartna, E. S., Van Zanten, B. A. M. and Hol, W. G. J., 1991, Crystal structure of a cholera toxin-related heat-labile enterotoxin from *E. coli*. *Nature*, **351**, 371–377.

Sixma, T. K., Kalk, K. H., Van Zanten, B. A. M., Dauter, Z., Kingma, J., Witholt, B. and Hol, W. G. J., 1993, Refined structure of *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin, a close relative of cholera toxin. *J. Mol. Biol.*, **230**, 890–918.

Sofer, A. and Futerman, A. H., 1995, Cationic amphiphilic drugs inhibit the internalization of cholera toxin to the Golgi apparatus and the subsequent elevation of cyclic AMP. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **270**, 12117–12122.

Sonnenichsen, B., Watson, R., Clausen, H., Misteli, T. and Warren, G., 1996, Sorting by COP I-coated vesicles under interphase and mitotic conditions. *J. Cell Biol.*, **134**, 1411–1425.

Sooksawate, T. and Simmonds, M. A., 2001, Effects of membrane cholesterol on the sensitivity of the GABA(A) receptor to GABA in acutely dissociated rat hippocampal neurones. *Neuropharmacology*, **40**, 178–184.

Soriani, M., Williams, N. A. and Hirst, T. R., 2001, *Escherichia coli* enterotoxin B subunit triggers apoptosis of CD8+ T cells by activating transcription factor c-Myc. *Infect. Immun.*, **69**, 4923–4930.

Soriani, M., Bailey, L. and Hirst, T. R., 2002, Contribution of the ADP-ribosylating and receptor-binding properties of cholera-like enterotoxins in modulating cytokine secretion by human intestinal epithelial cells. *Microbiology*, **148**, 667–676.

Spangler, B. D., 1992, Structure and function of cholera toxin and the related *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin. *Microbiol. Rev.*, **56**, 622–647.

Speelman, P., Rabbani, G. H., Bukhave, K. and Rask-Madsen, J., 1985, Increased jejunal prostaglandin E2 concentrations in patients with acute cholera. *Gut*, **26**, 188–193.

Spicer, E. K. and Noble, J. A., 1981, *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin. Nucleotide sequence of the A subunit gene. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **257**, 5716–5721.

Spicer, E. K., Kavanaugh, W. M., Dallas, W. S., Falkow, S., Konigsberg, W. H. and Schafer, D. E., 1981, Sequence homologies between A subunits of *Escherichia coli* and *Vibrio cholerae* enterotoxins. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **78**, 50–54.

Staerk, J., Ronneberger, J., Wiegandt, H. and Ziegler, W., 1974, Interaction of ganglioside G Gtet1 and its derivatives with choleragen. *Eur. J. Biochem.*, **48**, 103–110.

Sugimoto, Y., Ninomiya, H., Ohsaki, Y., Higaki, K., Davies, J. P., Ioannou, Y. A. and Ohno, K., 2001, Accumulation of cholera toxin and GM1 ganglioside in the early endosome of Niemann-Pick C1-deficient cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA*, **98**, 12391–12396.

Sun, J. B., Xiao, B. G., Lindblad, M., Li, B. L., Link, H., Czerkinsky, C. and Holmgren, J., 2000, Oral administration of cholera toxin B subunit conjugated to myelin basic protein protects against experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by inducing transforming growth factor-beta-secreting cells and suppressing chemokine expression. *Int. Immunol.*, **12**, 1449–1457.

Takeda, T., Peina, Y., Ogawa, A., Dohi, S., Abe, H., Nair, G. B. and Pal, S. C., 1991, Detection of heat-stable enterotoxin in a cholera toxin gene-positive strain of *Vibrio cholerae* O1. *FEMS Microbiol. Lett.*, **64**, 23–27.

Tang, B. L., Wong, S. H., Qi, X. L., Low, S. H. and Hong, W., 1993, Molecular cloning, characterization, subcellular localization and dynamics of p23, the mammalian KDEL receptor. *J. Cell Biol.*, **120**, 325–328.

Teneberg, S., Hirst, T. R., Angstrom, J. and Karlsson, K. A., 1994, Comparison of the glycolipid-binding specificities of cholera toxin and porcine *Escherichia coli* heat-labile enterotoxin: identification of a receptor-active non-ganglioside glycolipid for the heat-labile toxin in infant rabbit small intestine. *Glycocon. J.*, **11**, 533–540.

Teter, K., Allyn, R. L., Jobling, M. G. and Holmes, R. K., 2002, Transfer of the cholera toxin A1 polypeptide from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cytosol is a rapid process facilitated by the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation pathway. *Infect. Immun.*, **70**, 6166–6171.

Thielman, N. M., Marcinkiewicz, M., Sarosiek, J., Fang, G. D. and Guerrant, R. L., 1997, Role of platelet-activating factor in Chinese

hamster ovary cell responses to cholera toxin. J. Clin. Invest., 99, 1999–2004.

Thomsen, P., Roepstorff, K., Stahlhut, M. and van Deurs, B., 2002, Caveolae are highly immobile plasma membrane microdomains, which are not involved in constitutive endocytic trafficking. Mol. Biol. Cell, 13, 238–250.

Torgersen, M. L., Skretting, G., van Deurs, B. and Sandvig, K., 2001, Internalization of cholera toxin by different endocytic mechanisms. J. Cell Sci., 114, 3737–3747.

Tousson, A., Fuller, C. M. and Benos, D. J., 1996, Apical recruitment of CFTR in T-84 cells is dependent on cAMP and microtubules but not Ca2+ or microfilaments. J. Cell Sci., 109, 1325–1334.

Tran, D., Carpentier, J. L., Sawano, F., Gorden, P. and Orci, L., 1987, Ligands internalized through coated or noncoated invaginations follow a common intracellular pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 84, 7957–7961.

Trucksis, M., Galen, J. E., Michalski, J., Fasano, A. and Kaper, J. B., 1993, Accessory cholera enterotoxin (Ace), the third toxin of a Vibrio cholerae virulence cassette. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 90, 5267–5271.

Tsai, B. and Rapoport, T. A., 2002, Unfolded cholera toxin is transferred to the ER membrane and released from protein disulfide isomerase upon oxidation by Ero1. J. Cell Biol., 159, 207–216.

Tsai, B., Rodighiero, C., Lencer, W. I. and Rapoport, T. A., 2001, Protein disulfide isomerase acts as a redox-dependent chaperone to unfold cholera toxin. Cell, 104, 937–948.

Tsai, S.-C., Noda, M., Adamik, R., Moss, J. and Vaughan, M., 1987, Enhancement of choleraen ADP-ribosyltransferase activities by guanyl nucleotides and a 19-kDa membrane protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 84, 5139–5142.

Tsai, S.-C., Noda, M., Adamik, R., Chang, P. P., Chen, H. C., Moss, J. and Vaughan, M., 1988, Stimulation of choleraen enzymatic activities by GTP and two soluble proteins purified from bovine brain. J. Biol. Chem., 263, 1768–1772.

Tsuji, T., Honda, T., Miwatani, T., Wakabayashi, S. and Matsubara, H., 1985, Analysis of receptor-binding site in Escherichia coli enterotoxin. J. Biol. Chem., 260, 8552–8558.

Tsuji, T., Watanabe, K. and Miyama, A., 1995, Monomer of the B subunit of heat-labile enterotoxin from enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli has little ability to bind to GM(1) ganglioside compared to its coligenoid. Microbiol. Immunol., 39, 817–819.

Turcanu, V., Hirst, T. R. and Williams, N. A., 2002, Modulation of human monocytes by Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin B-subunit; altered cytokine production and its functional consequences. Immunology, 106, 316–325.

Turvill, J. L., Mourad, F. H. and Farthing, M. J. G., 1998, Crucial role for 5-HT in cholera toxin but not Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin-intestinal secretion in rats. Gastroenterology, 115, 883–890.

Vainio, S., Heino, S., Mansson, J. E., Fredman, P., Kuismanen, E., Vaarala, O. and Ikonen, E., 2002, Dynamic association of human insulin receptor with lipid rafts in cells lacking caveolae. EMBO Rep., 3, 95–100.

Van Dop, C., Tsubokawa, M., Bourne, H. R. and Ramachandran, J., 1984, Amino acid sequence of retinal transducin at the site ADP-ribosylated by cholera toxin. J. Biol. Chem., 259, 696–698.

Van Heyningen, W. E., Carpenter, C. C., Pierce, N. F. and Greenough, W. B., 1971, Deactivation of cholera toxin by ganglioside. J. Infect. Dis., 124, 415–418.

Van Loon, F. P. L., Rabbani, G. H., Bukhave, K. and Rask-Madsen, J., 1992, Indomethacin decreases jejunal fluid secretion in addition to luminal release of prostaglandin E2 in patients with acute cholera. Gut, 33, 643–645.

Viola, A., Schroeder, S., Sakakibara, Y. and Lanzavecchia, A., 1999, T lymphocyte costimulation mediated by reorganization of membrane microdomains. Science, 283, 680–682.

Walia, K., Ghosh, S., Singh, H., Nair, G. B., Ghosh, A., Sahni, G., Vohra, H. and Ganguly, N. K., 1999, Purification and character-

ization of novel toxin produced by Vibrio cholerae O1. Infect. Immun., 67, 5215–5222.

Werner, E. D., Brodsky, J. L. and McCracken, A. A., 1996, Proteasome-dependent endoplasmic reticulum-associated protein degradation: an unconventional route to a familiar fate. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 93, 13797–13801.

White, J., Johannes, L., Mallard, F., Girod, A., Grill, S., Reinsch, S., Keller, P., Tzschaschel, B., Echard, A., Goud, B. and Stelzer, E. H., 1999, Rab6 coordinates a novel Golgi to ER retrograde transport pathway in live cells. J. Cell Biol., 147, 743–760.

Wiegandt, H., Ziegler, W., Staerk, J., Kranz, T., Ronneberger, H. J., Zilg, H., Karlsson, K. A. and Samuelsson, B. E., 1976, Studies of the ligand binding to cholera toxin I. The lipophilic moiety of sialoglycolipids. Hoppe Seylers Z. Physiol. Chem., 357, 1637–1646.

Williams, N. A., Hirst, T. R. and Nashar, T. O., 1999, Immune modulation by the cholera-like enterotoxins: from adjuvant to therapeutic. Immunol. Today, 20, 95–101.

Wolf, A. A., Jobling, M. G., Wimer Mackin, S., Ferguson Maltzman, M., Madara, J. L., Holmes, R. K. and Lencer, W. I., 1998, Ganglioside structure dictates signal transduction by cholera toxin and association with caveolae-like membrane domains in polarized epithelia. J. Cell Biol., 141, 917–927.

Wolf, A. A., Fujinaga, Y. and Lencer, W. I., 2002, Uncoupling of the cholera toxin GM1 ganglioside-receptor complex from endocytosis, retrograde Golgi trafficking, and downstream signal transduction by depletion of membrane cholesterol. J. Biol. Chem., 277, 16249–16256.

Yamamoto, T., Nakazawa, T., Miyata, T., Kaji, A. and Yokota, T., 1984, Evolution and structure of two ADP-ribosylation enterotoxins, Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin and cholera toxin. FEBS Lett., 169, 241–246.

Yamamoto, T., Gojobori, T. and Yokota, T., 1987, Evolutionary origin of pathogenic determinants in enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli and Vibrio cholerae O1. J. Bacteriol., 169, 1352–1357.

Zemelman, B. V., Chu, S. H. and Walker, W. A., 1989, Host response to Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin via two microvillus membrane receptors in the rat intestine. Infect. Immun., 57, 2947–2952.

Zhang, R. G., Scott, D. L., Westbrook, M. L., Nance, S., Spangler, B. D., Shipley, G. G. and Westbrook, E. M., 1995a, The three-dimensional crystal structure of cholera toxin. J. Mol. Biol., 251, 563–573.

Zhang, R. G., Westbrook, M. L., Westbrook, E. M., Scott, D. L., Otwinowski, Z., Maulik, P. R., Reed, R. A. and Shipley, G. G., 1995b, The 2.4 Angstrom crystal structure of cholera toxin B subunit pentamer: choleraenoid. J. Mol. Biol., 251, 550–562.

Zhao, L., Helms, J. B., Brugger, B., Harter, C., Martoglio, B., Graf, R., Brunner, J. and Wieland, F. T., 1997, Direct and GTP-dependent interaction of ADP ribosylation factor 1 with coatamer subunit beta. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 94, 4418–4423.

Zhu, X. and Kahn, R. A., 2001, The E. coli heat-labile toxin (LTA1) binds to Golgi membranes and alters Golgi and cell morphologies using ARF-dependent processes. J. Biol. Chem., 276, 25014–25021.

Zhu, X., Boman, A. L., Kuai, J., Cieplak, W. and Kahn, R. A., 2000, Effectors increase the affinity of ADP-ribosylation factor for GTP to increase binding. J. Biol. Chem., 275, 13465–13475.

Zhu, X., Kim, E., Boman, A. L., Hodel, A., Cieplak, W. and Kahn, R. A., 2001, ARF binds the C-terminal region of the Escherichia coli heat-labile toxin (LTA(1)) and competes for the binding of LTA(2). Biochemistry, 40, 4560–4568.

Received 3 December 2003; and in revised form 18 December 2003.
