
ARTICLES

The RNA helicase RIG-I has an essential function in double-stranded RNA-induced innate antiviral responses

Mitsutoshi Yoneyama¹, Mika Kikuchi¹, Takashi Natsukawa¹, Noriaki Shinobu¹, Tadaatsu Imaizumi², Makoto Miyagishi³, Kazunari Taira³, Shizuo Akira⁴ & Takashi Fujita¹

Intracellular double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) is a chief sign of replication for many viruses. Host mechanisms detect the dsRNA and initiate antiviral responses. In this report, we identify retinoic acid inducible gene I (RIG-I), which encodes a DExD/H box RNA helicase that contains a caspase recruitment domain, as an essential regulator for dsRNA-induced signaling, as assessed by functional screening and assays. A helicase domain with intact ATPase activity was responsible for the dsRNA-mediated signaling. The caspase recruitment domain transmitted ‘downstream’ signals, resulting in the activation of transcription factors NF-κB and IRF-3. Subsequent gene activation by these factors induced antiviral functions, including type I interferon production. Thus, RIG-I is key in the detection and subsequent eradication of the replicating viral genomes.

Type I interferon (IFN), which comprises IFN-β and the IFN-α family, is central in the antiviral innate immunity of mammals and also has a preparatory function for the subsequent adaptive immunity¹⁻³. The expression of type I interferon is strictly regulated by the activation of pre-existing transcription factors, such as interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3)⁴⁻⁸, nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB)⁹⁻¹¹ and ATF-2–c-Jun¹². An essential function for IRF-3 was demonstrated by analysis of IRF-3-deficient cells¹³. After viral infection of cells, IRF-3, which is normally in the cytoplasm, is immediately phosphorylated at specific serine residues in its C-terminal regulatory domain. It then dimerizes and translocates to the nucleus. The dimerized IRF-3 interacts with the transcriptional coactivator p300 or CREB-binding protein in the nucleus, resulting in specific DNA-binding activity⁴⁻⁸,¹⁴. Two members of the inhibitor of NF-κB (IkB) kinase (IKK) family, TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and IKK-i (also known as IKKε), have been identified as potential activators for IRF-3 (refs. 15,16). These kinases directly phosphorylate the C-terminal serine residues of IRF-3 (ref. 17). However, their regulatory mechanisms are still unknown.

Type I interferon is induced by bacterial components such as lipopolysaccharide and CpG DNA in leukocytes, such as macrophages and dendritic cells¹⁸,¹⁹, as well as by viral infection. Targeted gene-disruption studies have shown that Toll-like receptors (TLRs) recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns. TLR3, TLR4, mouse TLR7 (TLR8, for humans) and TLR9 function as signaling receptors for extracellular double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)²⁰, lipopolysaccharide²¹,²², viral single-stranded RNA²³⁻²⁵ and CpG DNA²⁶, respectively. The interaction of these pathogen-associated molecular patterns with the extracellular leucine-rich repeat of the TLR facilitates the recruitment of adaptor molecules to the cytoplasmic Toll-interleukin 1 receptor domain of the TLR. Adaptors MyD88, IRAK and TRAF6 are recruited by many TLRs and activate signaling cascades²⁷. For TLR7 and TLR9, type I interferon is induced by this MyD88-dependent pathway²⁵,²⁸; however, the precise mechanism of this pathway has been poorly characterized. TLR4 and TLR3 activate additional signaling pathway called the MyD88-independent pathway, which recruits another adaptor molecule, Trif (also known as TICAM-1), and activates a second set of genes, including those of type I interferon, through activation of IRF-3 (refs. 29–32). Trif has the potential to associate directly with IKK-i and TBK1 (ref. 15).

For most types of cells it has been postulated that the replication of viruses results in an accumulation of intracellular dsRNA, which triggers host response mechanisms that include expression of type I interferon. This signaling pathway is apparently distinct from that mediated by TLR3 (ref. 33) and constitutes a chief pathway activated by viral infection. No evidence at present, however, supports the idea that dsRNA-dependent protein kinase or its activator or 2′-5′ oligoadenylate synthase are involved³³⁻³⁵.

---

¹Department of Tumor Cell Biology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo Metropolitan Organization for Medical Research, 3-18-22 Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan. ²Department of Vascular Biology, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, 5 Zaifu-cho, Hirosaki 036-8562, Japan. ³Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan. ⁴Department of Host Defense, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, 3-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. Correspondence should be addressed to T.F. (fujita@rinshoken.or.jp).

Published online 20 June 2004; doi:10.1038/ni1087

Figure 1 Identification of the CARD of RIG-I as a positive regulator for type I interferon. (a) RIG-I constructs, including the CARD and helicase domain. ΔRIG-I contains an additional 22 amino acids derived from the vector sequence (filled box). (b,c) L929 cells were transiently transfected with reporter constructs containing repeated IRF-binding sites (p-55C1BLuc; C1B-Luc; b) or the natural IFN-β promoter (p-125Luc; IFN-β-Luc; c) together with empty vector pEF-BOS (Control), ΔRIG-I or RIG-Ifull. The reporter/effecter ratio was 1:1. As an internal control, a Renilla luciferase construct was transfected with each of the three. Transfected cells were mock treated (Mock), transfected with poly(I:C) for 6 h (I:C) or treated with NDV for 12 h (NDV) and were subjected to the Dual-Luciferase assay. Data represent relative firefly luciferase activity, normalized to Renilla luciferase activity; error bars show s.d. of triplicate transfections. (d) Constitutive activity of p-55C1BLuc determined as described in b, except that the reporter/effecter ratio was varied (1:0.2, 1:0.4, 1:0.6 and 1:0.8; wedges) or without effecter (-). (e,f) 293T cells were transfected with control vector or ΔRIG-I. (e) IFN-β in culture medium was quantified by ELISA. (f) Cell lysates were separated by SDS-PAGE and probed with anti-RIG-I; transfected ΔRIG-I (arrowhead) and endogenous RIG-I (arrow) were detected. Data are representative of two independent experiments.

Here we demonstrate that the DExD/H box-containing RNA helicase retinoic acid inducible gene I (RIG-I) is important in virus-induced activation of type I interferon. The DExD/H box RNA helicases, defined by their ability to unwind dsRNA with their intrinsic ATPase activity, are found in almost all organisms from viruses to mammals and are involved in many important processes, including RNA interference (RNAi)³⁶,³⁷. RIG-I has an interesting structural feature: it has two copies of a caspase recruitment domain (CARD) at its N terminus in addition to its C-terminal helicase domain³⁸,³⁹. We provide several lines of evidence to show that the CARD of RIG-I transduces signals that lead to the activation of IRF-3 and NF-κB. Full-length RIG-I can interact with dsRNA and augment interferon production in response to viral infection in an ATPase-dependent way. These results suggest that RIG-I functions as an essential regulator for virus-induced antiviral immunity.

### RESULTS

#### Activation of interferon promoter by the CARD of RIG-I
To identify the molecule(s) involved in intracellular dsRNA-induced expression of interferon, we generated an expression cDNA library from IFN-β-treated human K562 cells, which lack the entire locus encoding multiple type I interferon molecules. We chose this library based on our observation that K562 cells do not activate IRF-3 after virus infection; however, this hyporesponsiveness can be overcome by IFN-β pre-treatment (Supplementary Fig. 1 online). We transfected the RNA duplex poly(rI):poly(rC) (poly(I:C)) into mouse L929 cells to induce a reporter regulated by repeated IRF-binding sites (p-55C1BLuc), and screened the library for its ability to enhance expression of this reporter. Of 1 × 10⁵ cDNAs, we isolated one clone that notably enhanced the induction by dsRNA transfection. The clone seemed to encode N-terminal residues of the DExD/H box helicase RIG-I (ΔRIG-I; Fig. 1a). Full-length RIG-I consists of a helicase domain and tandem CARD motifs. As ΔRIG-I encompassed two copies of CARD but was devoid of the helicase domain, we also constructed expression vector for full-length RIG-I (RIG-Ifull) and examined the activities of these constructs. Expression of either protein enhanced the induction of p-55C1BLuc after either dsRNA transfection or infection of L929 cells with Newcastle disease virus (NDV; Fig. 1b). Expression of RIG-Ifull or ΔRIG-I did not affect expression of a reporter gene linked to a control thymidine kinase gene promoter

#### Activation of IRF-3 and NF-κB by ΔRIG-I
Activation of IRF-3 is essential for primary induction of type I interferon¹³. To test whether the RIG-I CARD activates IRF-3, we transfected a fusion protein of IRF-3 and the Gal4 DNA-binding domain along with either control vector or the ΔRIG-I expression vector into L929 cells. The reporter gene, regulated by the Gal4 upstream activation sequence, was activated by expression of ΔRIG-I, and the activation was moderately augmented by transfection of dsRNA (Fig. 2a). We do not know the reason for the poor inducibility by poly I:C or NDV in cells expressing ΔRIG-I. One possible explanation is that the activation by ΔRIG-I was saturated because of high intracellular accumulation of the Gal4–IRF-3 fusion (data not shown). Next, we examined IRF-3 dimerization. When we ‘tagged’ IRF-3 with an epitope of peptides derived from the p50 subunit of NF-κB⁸ and transfected this together with ΔRIG-I into L929 cells, we detected the constitutive formation of the IRF-3-dimer and its further augmentation by dsRNA (Fig. 2b), consistent with the results of the reporter assay (Fig. 1b). In addition, we also noted DNA-binding activity, which involves the IRF-3-dimer and p300 or CREB-binding protein, in 293T cells expressing ΔRIG-I (Fig. 2c, left), approximately consistent with the results of the reporter assay using L929 cells (Fig. 1b). These data indicate that ΔRIG-I activates a signaling pathway leading to activation of IRF-3.

ARTICLES

Figure 2 The RIG-I CARD constitutively activates both IRF-3 and NF-κB. (a) L929 cells were transfected with the reporter and the effector plasmids p-55UAS<sub>G</sub>Luc (UAS-Luc) and pEFGal4–IRF-3 (Gal4–IRF-3) together with empty vector (Control) or ΔRIG-I. Luciferase activity was normalized to the internal control. Error bars represent s.d. of triplicate transfections. (b) IRF-3 tagged with the p50 epitope was transiently expressed in L929 cells with control or ΔRIG-I plasmid. After stimulation by poly(I:C) transfection for 6 h, lysates were separated by native PAGE and monomeric or dimerized IRF-3 (right margin) was detected by immunoblot with anti-p50. (c) 293T cells were transfected with p50-tagged IRF-3 and either control vector or ΔRIG-I plasmid, then were mock treated (−) or were infected with NDV for 9 h (+). Extracts were subjected to EMSA with <sup>32</sup>P-labeled oligonucleotides containing the IRF-binding sequence of the ISG15 promoter (left) or the NF-κB-binding site of IFNB1 (PRDII; right) as probes. (d) The reporter construct regulated by the NF-κB-binding site (p-55A2Luc; (κB)<sub>3</sub>-Luc) was transfected together with control vector or ΔRIG-I. Luciferase activity was determined as described in a. (e) Nod1, Nod2 and mutant proteins (top). NOD, nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain; LRR, leucine-rich repeat; Nod1N, truncated Nod1. p50-tagged IRF-3 expressed with proteins (above lanes) in 293T cells was detected by native PAGE followed by immunoblot (middle). Portions of the lysates were subjected to EMSA with NF-κB oligonucleotide as probe (bottom).

Because NF-κB is also activated by virus-induced signaling and participates in IFN-β expression<sup>9–11</sup>, we tested the effect of ΔRIG-I on NF-κB activation. Expression of ΔRIG-I resulted in activation of a reporter gene containing NF-κB-binding sites (Fig. 2d). Again, this activation was further enhanced by induction by transfection of dsRNA or by viral infection. Also, in 293T cells expressing ΔRIG-I, we noted constitutive NF-κB DNA-binding activity as well as its enhancement by viral stimulation (Fig. 2c, right), consistent with the results of the reporter assay (Fig. 2d). These data suggest that ΔRIG-I can activate both IRF-3 and NF-κB, leading to constitutive expression of type I interferon.

The CARD is found in other signaling molecules, such as Nod1 and Nod2, which are linked to the signaling triggered by cytoplasmic pathogen-associated molecular patterns<sup>41</sup>. Notably, Nod2 contains a tandem CARD, similar to RIG-I (ref. 42). The CARDs of RIG-I, Nod1 and Nod2 all activated NF-κB; however, IRF-3 activation was induced only by the CARD of RIG-I, suggesting a divergence of common and specific signaling (Fig. 2e). We conclude therefore that the observed activity inducing IRF-3 was specific to the CARD of RIG-I.

### Function of the helicase domain in signaling

The observation that overexpression of ΔRIG-I, which does not have C-terminal helicase domain, resulted in constitutive activation of the signal, led us to hypothesize that the CARD acts as an effector domain activating a downstream molecule. Although expression of RIG-Ifull also resulted in enhanced gene induction after transfection of dsRNA or viral infection, we found no basal activity, in contrast to results with ΔRIG-I (Fig. 1d). Furthermore, treatment of cells with type I interferon increased the amount of endogenous RIG-I (ref. 40; Supplementary Fig. 1 online), but interferon treatment does not trigger the activation of interferon expression<sup>43</sup>. These observations suggest that the C-terminal helicase domain of

RIG-I contains a regulatory function for signal transduction. To analyze the function of the helicase domain, we constructed an expression vector encoding only the helicase domain of RIG-I (RIG-IC; Fig. 3a). As a control we used eIF-4A, a DExD/H box RNA helicase distantly related to RIG-I. Although the RIG-Ifull augmented the reporter gene induction after infection of NDV, RIG-IC blocked virus-induced activation of the reporter (Fig. 3b) without inhibition of viral replication in infected cells (data not shown). We also found this dominant negative effect in L929 cells stimulated by dsRNA transfection (Supplementary Fig. 2 online). Expression of eIF-4A produced neither a positive nor a negative effect on the reporter induction (Fig. 3b). To further address the function of the helicase domain of RIG-I, we introduced an empirical inactivating point mutation at the Walker-type ATP-binding site<sup>44</sup> using the full-length protein as the template (Fig. 3a). Reporter gene analysis again showed that the mutation inhibited the ability of RIG-I to accelerate virus-induced reporter activation and conferred dominant negative activity to RIG-I (Fig. 3b). These results suggest that the helicase activity of RIG-I was indispensable for these molecules to function as signal transducers.

The ATPase activity of DExD/H box RNA helicases is dsRNA dependent<sup>36</sup> and RIG-I was located exclusively in cytoplasm (unpublished data). Therefore, we speculated that RIG-I directly interacts with dsRNA in the cytoplasm and that this recognition acts as direct trigger of the signaling cascade. To examine the interaction with dsRNA, we produced RIG-I in 293T cells and subjected it to a poly(I:C)-agarose ‘pulldown’ assay. We detected interaction between poly(I:C) and RIG-I (Fig. 3c). To address the recognition specificity of RIG-I, we did a competition assay. RIG-I specifically recognized poly(I:C) and poly(rA):poly(rU), with relative preference for the former, but we found no substantial competition with single-stranded RNA (poly(A)) and dsDNA (Fig. 3d).

a

| RIG-1full: | 1 | 925 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| RIG-1C: | 218 |  |
| RIG-1KA: | K270A |  |
| eIF-4A: | 1 | 406 |

c

| Control | RIG-I |
| --- | --- |
| Input | poly(I:C) 'pulldown' |

d

| Competitor: | – | poly(I:C) | poly(A:U) | poly(A) | dsDNA |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

Figure 3 Helicase activity is indispensable for signal transduction by RIG-I. (a) RIG-I mutants and eIF-4A. The black dot shows a point mutation at the Walker type ATP-binding site<sup>44</sup> to inactivate the ATPase activity of the protein. (b) L929 cells were transfected (plasmids, below graph) and were mock treated (–) or were infected with NDV for 12 h (+). The luciferase assay was done as described in Figure 1b. Error bars represent s.d. of triplicate transfections. (c) Empty vector (Control) or RIG-I full was transfected into 293T cells; cell lysates were mixed with poly(I:C)-agarose and bound proteins were analyzed by immunoblot with anti-FLAG Tag (right). Approximately 3% of the extract used for the ‘pulldown’ assay was similarly separated and detected without ‘pulldown’ (left). (d) The reaction mixture of RIG-I and poly(I:C)-agarose was supplemented with polynucleotides (above blot) at increasingly higher concentrations (12.5, 25, 50 μg/ml; wedges) or without polynucleotides and precipitated as described in c. Bound RIG-I was detected by SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblot with anti-RIG-I. poly(A:U), poly(rA):poly(rU). Data are representative of two independent experiments.

---

RIG-I is essential for virus-induced gene expression

To investigate the function of RIG-I in signal transduction in cells, we used the RNAi technique to inhibit endogenous expression of RIG-I. Expression of small interfering RNA (siRNA) for mouse RIG-I mRNA, but not control siRNA, inhibited expression of endogenous RIG-I in mouse L929 cells (Fig. 4a). In these cells, activation of endogenous IRF-3 after viral infection was impaired (Fig. 4b). Furthermore, quantitative RT-PCR experiment showed that virus-induced expression of type I interferon (Ifna4 and Ifnb), Cxcl10 (encoding the chemokine IP-10) and Ccl5 (encoding the chemokine RANTES) was also inhibited (Fig. 4c). The inhibition of gene induction, particularly of Ifna4 and Ifnb, was substantial compared with the suppression of RIG-I protein by RNAi. This result was presumably because of the autoamplification property of RIG-I expression; that is, low abundance of RIG-I uncouples the amplification loop through autocrine type I interferon, resulting in considerable impairment of Ifn gene induction. These results indicate that RIG-I is essential in virus-induced expression of genes associated with innate antiviral responses.

Reduction in viral yield by RIG-I

The results described above indicate that expression of full-length RIG-I sensitized cells to respond after viral infection to activate a set

---

Figure 4 RIG-I is required for activation of IRF-3 and virus-induced gene expression. L929 cells transfected with RNAi vector alone (Vector), vector for nonspecific siRNA (Control) or vector for siRNA targeting mouse RIG-I (RIG-I) were mock-infected (–) or were infected with NDV for 9 h (+). (a) Endogenous RIG-I or actin in uninfected cells monitored by SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblot. (b) Activation of IRF-3 assessed by native PAGE followed by immunoblot. (c) Expression of Ifna4, Ifnb, Cxc10 and Ccl5 detected by real-time PCR. Data were normalized to the abundance of internal 18S rRNA. These results were reproducibly obtained in two independent transfection experiments. Error bars indicate triplicate samples of experiments.

ARTICLES

a
MOI (VSV PFU/cell): None 0.01 0.1 1
Control
RIG-Ifull

b
MOI (EMCV PFU/cell): None 0.01 0.1 1
Control
RIG-Ifull

Figure 5 Reduction in viral yield by RIG-I. L929-derived stable transformants by empty vector (Control) or RIG-Ifull were infected with VSV (a) or EMCV (b) at the indicated MOI. After 24 h of infection, cells were stained with amido black (top). Virus yield in the supernatant at 24 h after infection was determined by plaque assay (bottom). The same results were reproducibly obtained in two independent experiments (Supplementary Fig. 3 online). Error bars indicate triplicate samples of experiments. PFU, plaque-forming unit.

RIG-I-mediated signaling and other signaling pathways

Viral infection or transfection of poly(I:C) leads to activation of IRF-3 and subsequent gene induction in the presence or absence of functional Tlr3 (ref. 33; unpublished observations and discussed below). We therefore investigated the involvement of RIG-I in the TLR3-mediated signaling pathway. For this, we first used HeLa cells, which can be stimulated through TLR3 by the addition of poly(I:C) to the culture medium³⁰. Alternatively, HeLa cells can be stimulated by cytoplasmic signaling triggered by viral infection. We transfected human IRF-3 tagged with p50 epitope into HeLa cells in the presence or absence of RIG-IC, which functions as a dominant negative inhibitor (Fig. 3a), stimulated cells with poly(I:C) or viral infection and analyzed cell lysates by native PAGE. Virus-induced activation of IRF-3 was inhibited by RIG-IC; however, induction by poly(I:C) treatment was unaffected (Fig. 6a). As an alternative model, we used 293T cells (Fig. 6b). The 293T cells did not show responsiveness to poly(I:C) added to the culture medium; however, ectopic expression of TLR3 conferred responsiveness to poly(I:C). NDV infection induced reporter gene expression in 293T cells irrespective of TLR3 expression. The dominant negative RIG-IC selectively blocked NDV-induced gene induction.

Trif is essential in the activation of IRF-3 triggered by TLR3 and TLR4 (refs. 29,32). Further downstream, TBK1 functions as an IRF-3 kinase¹⁵–¹⁷. We explored the involvement of these molecules by use of primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from wild-type, TLR3-deficient, Trif-deficient and TBK1-deficient mice (Fig. 7). These mutant cells showed dimerization and nuclear translocation of IRF-3 after NDV infection similar to that of wild-type cells.

The normal response of TBK1-deficient cells was unexpected, as we found reduced responsiveness in TBK1-deficient cells with a different culture history (H. Hemmi and S.A., unpublished observations). We confirmed the lack of TBK1 protein in the TBK1-deficient cells (Supplementary Fig. 4 online). Although the existence of unidentified IRF-3 kinases was not strictly ruled out, we speculate that IKK-i, a structurally and functionally related kinase, compensated for the deficiency in the TBK1-deficient cells used in this experiment. In all these primary cells, ectopic expression of dominant negative RIG-IC blocked NDV-induced gene activation (Fig. 7c). These results suggest that TLR3- and RIG-I-mediated signals function independently.

Figure 6 Dominant negative RIG-I inhibits NDV-induced but not TLR3-mediated activation of IRF-3. (a) HeLa cells were transiently transfected with p50-tagged IRF-3 along with either control vector (Control) or dominant negative RIG-I (RIG-IC). Cells were mock treated (Mock), stimulated by the addition of poly(I:C) to the culture medium for 1 h (poly(I:C)) or infected with NDV for 9 h (NDV). Lysates were separated by native PAGE and transfected IRF-3 was detected by immunoblot with anti-p50. (b) 293T cells were transiently transfected with p-55C1BLuc together with empty vector (Control), pEFTLR3 (TLR3) or pEF-flagRIG-IC (TLR3 + RIG-IC). After 24 h of transfection, cells were split and were mock treated (Mock) or were induced by the addition of poly(I:C) in the medium (I:C; 20 μg/ml for 3 h) or by NDV infection (NDV; 12 h). Luciferase activity is presented as ‘fold induction’. These results were reproducibly obtained in two independent transfection experiments. Error bars indicate triplicate samples of experiments.

MEF:
NDV:  
WT TLR3- Trif- TBK1-
deficient deficient deficient

Dimer
Monomer

IRF-3

WT TLR3-deficient Trif-deficient TBK1-deficient

Relative luciferase activity

Control RIG-IC Control RIG-IC Control RIG-IC Control RIG-IC

NDV (-)
NDV (+)

MEF: WT TLR3-deficient Trif-deficient TBK1-deficient

Figure 7 Dominant negative RIG-I inhibits NDV-induced activation of IRF-3 in primary mouse fibroblasts. (a) MEFs (identified above lanes) were mock infected (-) or were infected with NDV for 12 h (+). Cell lysates were separated by native PAGE and endogenous IRF-3 was detected by immunoblot with anti-IRF-3. (b) The MEFs from a, stained with anti-IRF-3. (c) MEFs were transiently transfected with p-55C1BLuc with (RIG-IC) or without (Control) the expression vector for dominant negative RIG-I. Cells were split into two aliquots and were mock infected (NDV-) or were infected with NDV for 12 h (NDV+). Luciferase activity was normalized to Renilla luciferase activity as described in Figure 1b. This result was reproducibly obtained in two independent transfections. WT, wild-type.

DISCUSSION

Here we used two independent cell lines and primary cells to obtain evidence that the DExD/H box helicase RIG-I mediated signals triggered by cytoplasmic dsRNA, resulting in activation of NF-kB and IRF-3, critical regulators of innate immune responses. This seems to be an alternative to TLR3-mediated signaling. Among the more than 100 helicases in the human genome, DExD/H box helicases may have the potential to unwind dsRNA by virtue of intrinsic ATPase activity³⁶. Although their core sequence motifs are conserved, in overall structure these proteins diverge considerably. Thus, different helicases are linked to various biological processes such as transcription, translation, mRNA splicing and RNAi³⁶,³⁷. RIG-I is different from other helicases in containing two tandem CARD motifs. The CARD has been identified as a domain acting as an interface between molecules that signal the need for critical processes such as apoptosis and gene regulation⁴⁵. We hypothesized that the CARD of RIG-I interacts with downstream molecules to further signaling. Consistent with this, overexpression of CARD alone activated the downstream signaling. Moreover, the mutant of RIG-I lacking CARD was not capable of transmitting signals. The CARDs of RIG-I, Nod1 and Nod2 activated NF-kB; however, activation of IRF-3 was selectively promoted by the CARD of RIG-I, suggesting target specificity of each CARD.

In the GenBank database we found another interferon-inducible, CARD-containing helicase, MDA5 (refs. 40, 46), which is the closest relative of RIG-I, showing 23% and 35% amino acid identity in the N-terminal tandem CARD and C-terminal helicase domain, respectively. In our preliminary experiments, MDA5 CARD also augmented the constitutive as well as NDV- or dsRNA-stimulated expression of the C1B reporter gene, suggesting functional similarity for RIG-I and MDA5 in dsRNA-induced signaling. Furthermore, we found another DExD/H box RNA helicase, LGP2, in GenBank, which is homologous to the helicase portions of RIG-I (31% identity) and MDA5 (41% identity) but is completely devoid of a CARD. Like RIG-IC, LGP2 blocked signaling in certain conditions, suggesting it has a negative regulatory function (data not shown). Further examination is required to elucidate the overall picture of cytoplasmic dsRNA-mediated signaling pathway. A mouse locus has been identified that determines responsiveness to dsRNA in Trif-independent way⁴⁷. Although this locus does not coincide with genes encoding any of the helicases described above, it is possible that the corresponding gene product expressed by this locus functions in signaling pathway triggered by RIG-I. In contrast, mouse TLR7 or human TLR8 recognizes viral single-stranded RNA or uridine-rich single-stranded RNA in the lysosomal compartment and activates expression of type I interferon in monocytes and macrophages²³⁻²⁵. As 293T cells apparently lack TLR7 (ref. 23) and MEFs did not respond to transfection of poly(U) (Supplementary Fig. 5 online), the RIG-I-mediated signaling pathway is independent of TLR7.

Although the abundance of RIG-I protein was augmented considerably by interferon treatment, this effect was insufficient to activate signals downstream. This suggests that in physiological conditions, the CARD is under negative regulation as an integral part of the full-length protein. This hypothesis was supported by the observation that the mutant of RIG-I with a disrupted ATP-binding motif was unable to transmit signals downstream, irrespective of whether an intact CARD was retained. We speculate that this repression is caused by the C-terminal helicase domain. The repression is nonproteolytically reversed when the molecule is stimulated appropriately, such as by interaction with dsRNA. Indeed, RIG-I specifically recognizes dsRNA. However, physical interaction with dsRNA itself was not sufficient, as the mutation in the ATP-binding motif, which did not affect the dsRNA binding (data not shown), resulted in the generation of a dominant negative inhibitor. These results suggest that helicase activity is involved in the generation of signaling-competent RIG-I. A possible scenario for this is that dsRNA binds to the helicase domain, resulting in activation of the ATP-hydrolyzing function and a conformational change of the substrate dsRNA, helicase domain and CARD. Then the CARD is conferred an ability to transmit signals downstream by the recruitment of other molecules.

Ectopic expression of RIG-I alone could confer antiviral resistance to VSV and EMCV, which replicate differently in many ways but commonly produce dsRNA in cells. Stable RIG-I transformants do
not produce interferon constitutively; however, once viral dsRNA is generated in cells, primary activation of cytokines including interferon and subsequent secondary signaling by these cytokines may take place, thus resulting in the inhibition of viral replication. These results suggest a potential application for RIG-I for therapeutic and diagnostic purposes.

Organisms have mechanisms that detect and destroy infecting viruses. In plants, the main antiviral response is due to RNAi, in which several RNA helicases are reported to be involved ${ }^{37}$. In higher vertebrates, the interferon system is responsible for the early phase of innate immunity and is eventually taken over by antigen-specific acquired immune responses. Although the interferon system is restricted to vertebrates, primordial forms of its components, such as NF-$\kappa$B and the transcription factor STAT, are found in invertebrates. The considerable structural conservation between the C-terminal domain of IRF-3 and the Mad homology domain 2 of the transcription factor Smad suggests an evolutionary relationship between IRF-3 and Smad ${ }^{48,49}$. Dicer-related helicase 1 of *Caenorhabditis elegans*, which is homologous to RIG-I in the CARD and helicase domain, is essential in RNAi ${ }^{50}$. Thus, the interferon system and RNAi make use of RNA helicases to detect 'foreign' dsRNA to initiate their respective responses.

### METHODS

Cells, DNA transfection, preparation of cell extracts and luciferase assay. K562 cells were cultured in RPMI 1641 medium supplemented with FBS (10%), penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100 $\mu$g/ml). L929 cells were maintained in MEM with 5% FBS and penicillin-streptomycin. HeLa and 293T cells were maintained in DMEM with 10% FBS and penicillin-streptomycin. L929 and 293T cells were transiently transfected with the DEAE-dextran method and the calcium-phosphate method, respectively, as described ${ }^{8}$. MEFs were obtained from wild-type, TLR3-deficient, Trif-deficient ${ }^{32}$ and TBK1-deficient (H. Hemmi and S.A., unpublished data) mice and were maintained in DMEM with FBS and penicillin-streptomycin. MEFs were transfected with FuGENE6 (Roche). Stable transformants of L929 cells were established by transfection of linearized empty vector (pEF-BOS) or expression plasmid for RIG-I full (pEF-flagRIG-I full) with pCDM8neo, followed by selection with G418 (1 mg/ml). NDV infection and poly(I:C) transfection were done as reported ${ }^{8}$. For preparation of cell extracts, cells were lysed with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.1 mg/ml of leupeptin, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate) and were centrifuged at 245,000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was used for immunoblots, electrophoretic mobility-shift assay (EMSA) and poly(I:C) ‘pulldown’ assay. The Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega) was used for luciferase assays. As internal control for the Dual-Luciferase assay, the Renilla luciferase construct pRL-TK (Promega) was used.

cDNA for RIG-I, Nod1, Nod2 and eIF-4A was isolated by RT-PCR and inserted into the XbaI-ClaI sites of pEF-BOS(+), constructed by the insertion of multiple cloning sequences at the XbaI site, with oligonucleotides for N-terminal FLAG tag (pEF-flagRIG-I, pEF-flagNod1N, pEF-flagNod2CARD and pEF-flageIF-4A). The nucleotide sequence for the entire cDNA of each was confirmed with the BigDye DNA sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems). Deleted and site-directed mutants were obtained by insertion of the appropriate oligonucleotides and the Kunkel method ${ }^{51}$, respectively (pEF-flagRIG-IC and pEF-flagRIG-IKA).

EMSA. These assays were done as described ${ }^{8}$.

Antibodies, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), immunoblots and immunostaining. Anti-RIG-I, anti-mouse IRF-3, anti-p50-tag and anti-mouse type I interferon antibodies have been described ${ }^{8,52,53}$. The monoclonal antibodies to FLAG (M2, SIGMA) and actin (Chemicon) are commercial products. Culture supernatants of transfected 293T cells were subjected to ELISA with a human IFN-$\beta$ ELISA kit (Fujirebio). SDS-PAGE, native PAGE and immunoblots were done as described ${ }^{8,54}$. To detect RIG-I, we used horseradish peroxidase-conjugated protein A (Amersham) and an ECL Plus detection system (Amersham). Immunostaining was done as described ${ }^{8}$ with anti-mouse IRF-3.

The poly(I:C) ‘pulldown’ assay. Cell lysates extracted from transfected 293T cells were mixed for 1 h at 4 $^{\circ}$C with poly(I:C)-agarose (Amersham), washed extensively with lysis buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE, followed by immunoblot with anti-FLAG. For competition assays, poly(I:C), poly(rA):poly(rU), poly(A) or sonicated herring sperm DNA (dsDNA) was added to the binding reaction at a specified concentration.

RNAi. RNAi vectors were constructed by the insertion of oligonucleotides into BspMI sites of the piGENE hU6 as described ${ }^{55}$. The target sequences for siRNA are 5'-GAATTTAAAAACCAGAATTATC-3' (control, human RIG-I sequence, which diverges considerably from the mouse) and 5'-GCC-CATTGAAACCAAGAAATT-3' (mouse RIG-I). Mouse L929 cells ($1 \times 10^{6}$) were transfected with RNAi vector (10 $\mu$g) together with a puromycin-resistance gene (1 $\mu$g) with the TransIT-LT1 transfection reagent (Mirus). After incubation for 87 h in the presence of puromycin (10 $\mu$g/ml), cells were infected for 9 h with NDV. Cell extracts were separated by SDS-PAGE or native PAGE and endogenous RIG-I, actin and IRF-3 were detected by immunoblot. Total RNA was prepared with TRIzol reagent (Gibco), treated with DNase I (Roche) and amplified by real-time PCR with the ABI PRISM 7700 Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems). TaqMan Reverse Transcription reagents and the TaqMan Universal PCR Mix (Applied Biosystems) were used for cDNA synthesis and PCR, respectively. We used commercial TaqMan primer-probe sets (Applied Biosystems) for mouse *Ifnb*, *Cxcl10* and *Ccl5*. To detect IFN-$\alpha 4$ mRNA, we used the primer-probe set reported ${ }^{56}$. As an internal control for the comparative threshold cycle method, a primer-probe set for eukaryotic 18S rRNA (Applied Biosystems) was used.

Molecular cloning of $\Delta$RIG-I. We generated an expression cDNA library with the Creator SMART cDNA Library Construction kit (Clontech) with several modifications. The mRNA of IFN-$\beta$-treated ($1 \times 10^{3}$ IU/ml for 10 h) K562 cells was prepared with TRIzol (Gibco) and an mRNA Purification kit (Amersham). The synthesized cDNA was introduced into pEF-BOS at two *Sfi*I sites generated by the insertion of oligonucleotides. The library was split into about 5,000 pools containing 20 independent clones each (total, $1 \times 10^{5}$ clones), and plasmid DNA was prepared with NucleoSpin Robot-96 Plasmid (Macherey-Nagel). L929 cells were seeded into 96-well plates ($5 \times 10^{4}$ cells/well) and were transfected with p-55C1BLuc (100 ng), pRL-TK (1 ng) and library DNA (~300 ng). At 24 h after transfection, cells were stimulated by poly(I:C) transfection for 6 h and were subjected to the Dual-Luciferase assay. The cDNA clones with enhanced luciferase activity were isolated from the pools by the same assay.

Plasmid constructs. The p-55C1BLuc, p-125Luc, p-55A2Luc, p-55UAS$_{G}$Luc, pEFGal4-IRF-3 and pEF-flagTLR3 plasmids have been described ${ }^{8,31}$. The

Virus infection and plaque assay. L929-derived stable transformants were treated with culture medium ('mock-infected') throughout for all experiments or were infected with VSV or EMCV. Culture supernatants were recovered and cells were stained with amido black. Virus yield in culture supernatants was determined by standard plaque assay. Freshly prepared L929 cells were infected with serial dilutions of the recovered viruses. The cells were overlaid with MEM containing 1% agarose and were incubated for 24 h. Vital staining was done with neutral red and plaques were counted.

Note: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Immunology website.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
We thank E.L. Barsoumian for critical reading of the manuscript; S. Saito and M. Kohase for plaque assay protocol and suggestions; and M. Kohara for suggestions on real-time PCR. Supported by the Research for the Future Program; Japan Society for the Promotion of Science; Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan; Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim; and Toray Industries.
COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT
The authors declare competing financial interests (see the Nature Immunology website for details).

Received 20 January; accepted 5 May 2004
Published online at http://www.nature.com/natureimmunology/

1. De Maeyer, E. & De Maeyer-Guignard, J. Type I interferons. *Int. Rev. Immunol.* **17**, 53–73 (1998).
2. Farrar, J.D. & Murphy, K.M. Type I interferons and T helper development. *Immunol. Today* **21**, 484–489 (2000).
3. Samuel, C.E. Antiviral actions of interferons. *Clin. Microbiol. Rev.* **14**, 778–809 (2001).
4. Lin, R., Heylbroeck, C., Pitha, P.M. & Hiscott, J. Virus-dependent phosphorylation of the IRF-3 transcription factor regulates nuclear translocation, transactivation potential, and proteasome-mediated degradation. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **18**, 2986–2996 (1998).
5. Sato, M., Tanaka, N., Hata, N., Oda, E. & Taniguchi, T. Involvement of the IRF family transcription factor IRF-3 in virus-induced activation of the IFN-β gene. *FEBS Lett.* **425**, 112–116 (1998).
6. Wathelet, M.G. *et al.* Virus infection induces the assembly of coordinately activated transcription factors on the IFN-β enhancer *in vivo*. *Mol. Cell* **1**, 507–518 (1998).
7. Weaver, B.K., Kumar, K.P. & Reich, N.C. Interferon regulatory factor 3 and CREB-binding protein/p300 are subunits of double-stranded RNA-activated transcription factor DRAF1. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **18**, 1359–1368 (1998).
8. Yoneyama, M. *et al.* Direct triggering of the type I interferon system by virus infection: activation of a transcription factor complex containing IRF-3 and CBP/p300. *EMBO J.* **17**, 1087–1095 (1998).
9. Fujita, T., Miyamoto, M., Kimura, Y., Hammer, J. & Taniguchi, T. Involvement of a cis-element that binds an H2TF-1/NF-κB like factor(s) in the virus-induced interferon-β gene expression. *Nucl. Acids Res.* **17**, 3335–3346 (1989).
10. Lenardo, M.J., Fan, C.M., Maniatis, T. & Baltimore, D. The involvement of NF-κB in β-interferon gene regulation reveals its role as widely inducible mediator of signal transduction. *Cell* **57**, 287–294 (1989).
11. Visvanathan, K.V. & Goodbourn, S. Double-stranded RNA activates binding of NF-κB to an inducible element in the human β-interferon promoter. *EMBO J.* **8**, 1129–1138 (1989).
12. Du, W. & Maniatis, T. An ATF/CREB binding site is required for virus induction of the human interferon β gene. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **89**, 2150–2154 (1992).
13. Sato, M. *et al.* Distinct and essential roles of transcription factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 in response to viruses for IFN-α/β gene induction. *Immunity* **13**, 539–548 (2000).
14. Suhara, W., Yoneyama, M., Kitabayashi, I. & Fujita, T. Direct involvement of CREB-binding protein/p300 in sequence-specific DNA binding of virus-activated interferon regulatory factor-3 holocomplex. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 22304–22313 (2002).
15. Fitzgerald, K.A. *et al.* IKKε and TBK1 are essential components of the IRF3 signaling pathway. *Nat. Immunol.* **4**, 491–496 (2003).
16. Sharma, S. *et al.* Triggering the interferon antiviral response through an IKK-related pathway. *Science* **300**, 1148–1151 (2003).
17. McWhirter, S.M. *et al.* IFN-regulatory factor 3-dependent gene expression is defective in Tbk1-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 233–238 (2004).
18. Krieg, A.M. CpG motifs in bacterial DNA and their immune effects. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **20**, 709–760 (2002).
19. Sing, A. *et al.* Bacterial induction of β interferon in mice is a function of the lipopolysaccharide component. *Infect. Immun.* **68**, 1600–1607 (2000).
20. Alexopoulou, L., Holt, A.C., Medzhitov, R. & Flavell, R.A. Recognition of double-stranded RNA and activation of NF-κB by Toll-like receptor 3. *Nature* **413**, 732–738 (2001).
21. Poltorak, A. *et al.* Defective LPS signaling in C3H/HeJ and C57BL/10ScCr mice: mutations in Tlr4 gene. *Science* **282**, 2085–2088 (1998).
22. Hoshino, K. *et al.* Cutting edge: Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-deficient mice are hyporesponsive to lipopolysaccharide: evidence for TLR4 as the *Lps* gene product. *J. Immunol.* **162**, 3749–3752 (1999).
23. Heil, F. *et al.* Species-specific recognition of single-stranded RNA via Toll-like receptors 7 and 8. *Science* **303**, 1526–1529 (2004).
24. Diebold, S.S., Kaisho, T., Hemmi, H., Akira, S. & Reis, E.S.C. Innate antiviral responses by means of TLR7-mediated recognition of single-stranded RNA. *Science* **303**, 1529–1531 (2004).
25. Lund, J.M. *et al.* Recognition of single-stranded RNA viruses by Toll-like receptor 7. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 5598–5603 (2004).
26. Hemmi, H. *et al.* A Toll-like receptor recognizes bacterial DNA. *Nature* **408**, 740–745 (2000).
27. Akira, S., Takeda, K. & Kaisho, T. Toll-like receptors: critical proteins linking innate and acquired immunity. *Nat. Immunol.* **2**, 675–680 (2001).

28. Hoshino, K., Kaisho, T., Iwabe, T., Takeuchi, O. & Akira, S. Differential involvement of IFN-β in Toll-like receptor-stimulated dendritic cell activation. *Int. Immunol.* **14**, 1225–1231 (2002).
29. Hoebe, K. *et al.* Identification of Lps2 as a key transducer of MyD88-independent TIR signalling. *Nature* **424**, 743–748 (2003).
30. Oshiumi, H., Matsumoto, M., Funami, K., Akazawa, T. & Seya, T. TICAM-1, an adaptor molecule that participates in Toll-like receptor 3-mediated interferon-β induction. *Nat. Immunol.* **4**, 161–167 (2003).
31. Yamamoto, M. *et al.* Cutting edge: a novel Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adapter that preferentially activates the IFN-β promoter in the Toll-like receptor signaling. *J. Immunol.* **169**, 6668–6672 (2002).
32. Yamamoto, M. *et al.* Role of adaptor TRIF in the MyD88-independent toll-like receptor signaling pathway. *Science* **301**, 640–643 (2003).
33. Diebold, S.S. *et al.* Viral infection switches non-plasmacytoid dendritic cells into high interferon producers. *Nature* **424**, 324–328 (2003).
34. Smith, E.J., Marie, I., Prakash, A., Garcia-Sastre, A. & Levy, D.E. IRF3 and IRF7 phosphorylation in virus-infected cells does not require double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase R or IkB kinase but is blocked by vaccinia virus E3L protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 8951–8957 (2001).
35. Iwamura, T. *et al.* PACT, a double-stranded RNA binding protein acts as a positive regulator for type I interferon gene induced by Newcastle disease virus. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **282**, 515–523 (2001).
36. Tanner, N.K. & Linder, P. DExD/H box RNA helicases: from generic motors to specific dissociation functions. *Mol. Cell* **8**, 251–262 (2001).
37. Tijsterman, M., Ketting, R.F. & Plasterk, R.H. The genetics of RNA silencing. *Annu. Rev. Genet.* **36**, 489–519 (2002).
38. Sun, Y.W. RIG-I, a Human Homolog Gene of RNA Helicase, Is Induced by Retinoic Acid During the Differentiation of Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia Cell. Thesis, Shanghai Second Medical Univ. (1997).
39. Zhang, X., Wang, C., Schook, L.B., Hawken, R.J. & Rutherford, M.S. An RNA helicase, RHIV-1, induced by porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) is mapped on porcine chromosome 10q13. *Microb. Pathog.* **28**, 267–278 (2000).
40. Kang, D.C. *et al.* mda-5: An interferon-inducible putative RNA helicase with double-stranded RNA-dependent ATPase activity and melanoma growth-suppressive properties. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **99**, 637–642 (2002).
41. Inohara, N. & Nunez, G. NODs: intracellular proteins involved in inflammation and apoptosis. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **3**, 371–382 (2003).
42. Ogura, Y. *et al.* Nod2, a Nod1/Apaf-1 family member that is restricted to monocytes and activates NF-κB. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 4812–4818 (2001).
43. Watanabe, N., Sakakibara, J., Hovanessian, A.G., Taniguchi, T. & Fujita, T. Activation of IFN-β element by IRF-1 requires a posttranslational event in addition to IRF-1 synthesis. *Nucl. Acids Res.* **19**, 4421–4428 (1991).
44. Walker, J.E., Saraste, M., Runswick, M.J. & Gay, N.J. Distantly related sequences in the α- and β-subunits of ATP synthase, myosin, kinases and other ATP-requiring enzymes and a common nucleotide binding fold. *EMBO J.* **1**, 945–951 (1982).
45. Bouchier-Hayes, L. & Martin, S.J. CARD games in apoptosis and immunity. *EMBO Rep.* **3**, 616-621 (2002).
46. Kovacsovics, M. *et al.* Overexpression of Helicard, a CARD-containing helicase cleaved during apoptosis, accelerates DNA degradation. *Curr. Biol.* **12**, 838–843 (2002).
47. Hoebe, K. *et al.* Upregulation of costimulatory molecules induced by lipopolysaccharide and double-stranded RNA occurs by Trif-dependent and Trif-independent pathways. *Nat. Immunol.* **4**, 1223–1229 (2003).
48. Takahasi, K. *et al.* X-ray crystal structure of IRF-3 and its functional implications. *Nat. Struct. Biol.* **10**, 922–927 (2003).
49. Qin, B.Y. *et al.* Crystal structure of IRF-3 reveals mechanism of autoinhibition and virus-induced phosphoactivation. *Nat. Struct. Biol.* **10**, 913–921 (2003).
50. Tabara, H., Yigit, E., Siomi, H. & Mello, C.C. The dsRNA binding protein RDE-4 interacts with RDE-1, DCR-1, and a DExH-box helicase to direct RNAi in *C. elegans*. *Cell* **109**, 861–871 (2002).
51. Kunkel, T.A. Rapid and efficient site-specific mutagenesis without phenotypic selection. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **82**, 488–492 (1985).
52. Imaizumi, T. *et al.* Retinoic acid-inducible gene-I is induced in endothelial cells by LPS and regulates expression of COX-2. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **292**, 274–279 (2002).
53. Yoneyama, M. *et al.* Autocrine amplification of type I interferon gene expression mediated by interferon stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3). *J. Biochem. (Tokyo)* **120**, 160–169 (1996).
54. Mori, M. *et al.* Identification of Ser-386 of interferon regulatory factor 3 as critical target for inducible phosphorylation that determines activation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 9698–9702 (2004).
55. Miyagishi, M. & Taira, K. Strategies for generation of an siRNA expression library directed against the human genome. *Oligonucleotides* **13**, 325–333 (2003).
56. Karaghiosoff, M. *et al.* Central role for type I interferons and Tyk2 in lipopolysaccharide-induced endotoxin shock. *Nat. Immunol.* **4**, 471–477 (2003).
