
Cell, Vol. 117, 887–898, June 25, 2004, Copyright ©2004 by Cell Press

# Cln3 Activates G1-Specific Transcription via Phosphorylation of the SBF Bound Repressor Whi5

Robertus A.M. de Bruin,$^{1}$ W. Hayes McDonald,$^{2,3}$ Tatyana I. Kalashnikova,$^{1}$ John Yates III,$^{2}$ and Curt Wittenberg$^{1,2,*}$

$^{1}$Department of Molecular Biology  
$^{2}$Department of Cell Biology  
The Scripps Research Institute  
10550 North Torrey Pines Road  
La Jolla, California 92037

## Summary

G1-specific transcriptional activation by Cln3/CDK initiates the budding yeast cell cycle. To identify targets of Cln3/CDK, we analyzed the SBF and MBF transcription factor complexes by multidimensional protein interaction technology (MudPIT). Whi5 was identified as a stably bound component of SBF but not MBF. Inactivation of Whi5 leads to premature expression of G1-specific genes and budding, whereas overexpression retards those processes. Whi5 inactivation bypasses the requirement for Cln3 both for transcriptional activation and cell cycle initiation. Whi5 associates with G1-specific promoters via SBF during early G1 phase, then dissociates coincident with transcriptional activation. Dissociation of Whi5 is promoted by Cln3 in vivo. Cln/CDK phosphorylation of Whi5 in vitro promotes its dissociation from SBF complexes. Mutation of putative CDK phosphorylation sites, at least five of which are phosphorylated in vivo, strongly reduces SBF-dependent transcription and delays cell cycle initiation. Like mammalian Rb, Whi5 is a G1-specific transcriptional repressor antagonized by CDK.

## Introduction

In budding yeast, as in most cells of metazoan organisms, cell proliferation is regulated during late G1 phase in response to a variety of environmental and internal conditions (reviewed by Wittenberg and Flick [2003]). Preconditions must be met prior to initiation of a new cell cycle. In budding yeast, failure to satisfy those criteria can lead to aberrant or incomplete cell cycle events (Mendenhall and Hodge, 1998). In metazoans, the loss of control over cell cycle initiation can, in addition, lead to errors in development, proliferative diseases, and ultimately death (reviewed by Ho and Dowdy [2002]).

The temporally controlled accumulation of families of genes encoding components of the cellular machinery required for subsequent events ensures that their functions are implemented during the appropriate interval. In fact, the transcriptional activation of G1-specific genes is the earliest indicator of cell cycle initiation, often referred to as Start (reviewed by Breeden [2003] and Wittenberg and Flick [2003]). More than 200 genes fall into the G1-specific gene family (Cho et al., 1998; Spellman et al., 1998). Together, they govern the events associated with cell cycle initiation, including DNA replication, bud morphogenesis, and duplication of spindle pole bodies and thereby impact most subsequent events of the cell cycle.

Expression of G1-specific genes depends upon the heterodimeric transcription factors SBF and MBF, each comprised of Swi6 and a sequence-specific DNA binding protein, Swi4 or Mbp1, respectively (Breeden, 2003). Binding of those transcription factors to one or more cognate sequences in the promoters of G1-specific genes is essential for the proper temporal pattern of transcription. Consequently, inactivation of Mbp1 and Swi4 leads to loss of viability and arrest during G1 phase (Koch et al., 1993). However, neither Swi4 nor Mbp1 alone is essential. Nevertheless, there are distinct differences in the patterns of gene expression in the individual mutants (Costanzo et al., 2003; Koch et al., 1993), consistent with the distribution of MBF and SBF binding sites among G1-specific genes (Iyer et al., 2001; Simon et al., 2001; Spellman et al., 1998). Finally, SBF and MBF appear to be subject to differential regulation (Amon et al., 1993; Costanzo et al., 2003). Nevertheless, the two factors do show limited functional overlap under some conditions (Flick et al., 1998; Partridge et al., 1997).

Despite their well-established roles in G1-specific transcription, binding of SBF and MBF is insufficient for transcriptional activation (Cosma et al., 2001; Harrington and Andrews, 1996; Koch et al., 1993). Instead, efficient and timely transcriptional activation requires the G1 cyclin Cln3 (Dirick et al., 1995; Stuart and Wittenberg, 1995; Tyers et al., 1993) and its cognate cyclin-dependent protein kinase (CDK), Cdc28 (Koch et al., 1996; Marini and Reed, 1992). Activation of the Cln3/CDK promotes the formation of the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme at the basal promoters of SBF and MBF bound genes and thereby transcriptional activation (Cosma et al., 2001).

Consistent with its role in G1-specific transcription, Cln3 is a dose-dependent activator of cell cycle initiation (Cross, 1988; Nash et al., 1988; Tyers et al., 1993). Inactivation of CLN3 causes a dramatic cell size increase, whereas additional copies of CLN3 promote budding at progressively smaller cell size. Those effects result largely from its effect on G1-specific transcription (Dirick et al., 1995; Stuart and Wittenberg, 1995; Tyers et al., 1993) exerted via SBF and MBF (Wijnen et al., 2002). In the most extreme case, hyperstabilization of Cln3 leads not only to an dramatic decrease in the cell size required for budding and entry into S phase but also to resistance to mating pheromone-induced G1 arrest (Cross, 1988; Nash et al., 1988). Although CLN3 is expressed throughout the cell cycle, expression is maximal as cells enter G1 phase (MacKay et al., 2001; McInerny et al., 1997). Cln3 protein levels are low and highly sensitive to changes in the nutritional and protein-synthetic capacity to cells (Gallego et al., 1997; Polymenis and Schmidt, 1997). Because of the tight coupling between Cln3 abundance and its synthesis rate and because transcriptional

*Correspondence: curtw@scripps.edu  
$^{3}$Present address: Chemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, P.O. Box 2008, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831.

activation is highly sensitive to Cln3 level, it is well suited as a sensor of cell growth.

Despite the requirement for Cln3 for timely activation of G1-specific genes, it is not absolutely required for expression of those genes or for cell viability. However, it becomes essential in the absence of CLN1 and CLN2 (Richardson et al., 1989), G1-specific genes encoding G1 cyclins, or BCK2 (Di Como et al., 1995; Epstein and Cross, 1994). BCK2 also becomes essential in cells lacking SWI4 or SWI6 (Wijnen and Futcher, 1999). CLN1 and CLN2 are sufficient for transcriptional activation when CLN3 is inactive (Dirick et al., 1995; Stuart and Wittenberg, 1995; Tyers et al., 1993). The mechanism by which Bck2 promotes transcription and cell cycle initiation is unclear, but it appears to be at least partially independent of SBF and MBF. Despite its apparent redundancy with Cln3 and Swi6, Bck2 plays a relatively modest role in their presence.

The mechanism of transcriptional activation via Cln3/CDK has yet to be established. Although both Swi4 and Swi6 are phosphorylated in a cell cycle-dependent manner at CDK consensus phosphorylation sites, those sites appear not to be required for transcriptional activation (Koch et al., 1996; Sidorova et al., 1995; Wijnen et al., 2002). Furthermore, Cln3/CDK appears not to bind directly to SBF or MBF or to promoters of target genes (Wijnen et al., 2002; K. Flick and C.W., unpublished data). This has led to the suggestion that one or more regulatory factors intervene between the G1 cyclin/CDK and the G1-specific transcription factors. A similar system has been well established in metazoans, in which the tumor suppressor Rb represses E2F-dependent transcription during G1 phase but is then inactivated via phosphorylation by cyclin D/Cdk4, leading to the activation of genes required for entry into S phase (reviewed by Dyson [1998] and Nevins [2001]). In fact, that mammalian regulatory cascade has been reconstructed at least in part in yeast cells (Hatakeyama et al., 1994).

In the interest of identifying putative targets of the Cln3/CDK, we have isolated and characterized components of the SBF transcription factor complex. Among the proteins forming a complex with SBF was Whi5, identified in genomic screens for mutants that result in an abnormally small cell size (Jorgensen et al., 2002; Zhang et al., 2002). We show here that Whi5 associates with the promoter bound SBF transcription factor to repress transcription. Furthermore, Cln3 antagonizes binding of Whi5 to SBF-responsive promoters and its activity as a transcriptional repressor. We suggest that Whi5, like Rb, represses G1-specific transcription during early G1 phase and thereby restrains cell cycle initiation and cell proliferation until it is inactivated by G1 cyclin-dependent protein kinase.

---

(D) Whi5 does not interact with Mbp1. Extracts were prepared from wild-type strains carrying MBP1-3xHA, WHI5-13xmyc, or both. Anti-HA (αHA-IP) and anti-myc (αmyc-IP) immune complexes from asynchronous cultures were probed with anti-myc to detect Whi5-13xmyc or with anti-HA to detect Mbp1-3xHA.

(E) Whi5 associates specifically with Swi6 and Swi4. The number of spectra representing known SBF and MBF components obtained from the MudPIT analysis of Whi5-TAP was normalized to Swi6 (based upon both spectra number and protein size).

Cl n3 Activates SBF by Inactivating Whi5
889

## Results

### Identification of Components of SBF and MBF

To identify potential targets of Cl n3/CDK required for activation of G1-specific transcription, we sought to define components of the SBF and MBF transcription factors from cells that were either arrested in G1 phase prior to transcriptional activation or released into late G1 phase, during which G1-specific transcription is maximally activated. To achieve this, Swi4, Swi6, and Mbp1, the known components of the G1-specific transcription factors, were tagged at the carboxyterminus with the tandem affinity purification (TAP) epitope at their genomic loci in a cln1Δ cln2Δ strain carrying CLN3 under control of the GAL1 promoter as its only source of G1 cyclin. Cells expressing each of the epitope-tagged transcription factor subunits were either arrested during G1 phase by depletion of Cl n3 on raffinose or released from G1 phase arrest for 20 min (the predetermined interval required for maximal transcriptional activation) by addition of galactose and protein complexes purified by TAP (Rigaut et al., 1999). Silver-stained SDS-PAGE of the TAP-purified fractions shows that each contains, in addition to the epitope-tagged component, the expected SBF or MBF components plus additional unknown copurified proteins (Figure 1A).

Identification of the components of the transcription factor complexes was accomplished using the mass spectrometry-based multidimensional protein interaction technology (MudPIT; Wolters et al., 2001), resulting in the identification of each of the expected SBF and MBF components (Swi6, Swi4, and/or Mbp1; Figure 1B) along with several components that, to our knowledge, are novel. Those components were classified as SBF specific (Swi4 and Swi6 fractions), MBF specific (Mbp1 and Swi6 fractions), Swi4 specific, or Mbp1 specific. No Swi6-specific interactors were identified. Unexpectedly, all but one of those interactors detected in this screen occur with comparable confidence in cells having active or inactive SBF/MBF (data not shown).

Two previously studied proteins, Stb1 and Whi5, were shown to interact predominantly with MBF or specifically with SBF, respectively. Stb1 has been reported to be an MBF-specific transcriptional activator (Costanzo et al., 2003). Whi5 was identified with the highest confidence of any component in SBF complexes other than the known subunits Swi4 and Swi6 (Figure 1B), based upon both peptide sequence coverage and spectral quality. In contrast, Whi5 was not identified in any of the Mbp1-containing complexes analyzed. Surprisingly, despite prior analysis of SBF complexes, an interaction with Whi5 had not been reported (Gavin and Superti-Furga, 2003; Ho et al., 2002).

### Whi5 Is a Component of SBF

To confirm the specific interaction of Whi5 with SBF detected by MudPIT, we evaluated the interaction of those proteins by coimmunoprecipitation (coIP). Immune complexes containing TAP-tagged Whi5 also contained Myc-tagged Swi6 (data not shown) and Myc-tagged Swi4 (Figure 1C), whereas no Mbp1-HA was detected (Figure 1D). Accordingly, Whi5-TAP coimmunoprecipitated with Swi6-6xmyc (data not shown) and Swi4-

### Whi5 Inhibits SBF-Dependent G1-Specific Transcription

WHI5 (YOR083w) was identified previously based upon the small cell size caused by a null mutation (Jorgensen et al., 2002). Further analysis suggested that Whi5 might act as an inhibitor of G1-specific transcription. We find

---

**Figure 2. Cell Size Analysis of Whi5 Mutants**

The cell volume distribution (fl) of log phase cultures of each of the indicated strains grown in YEPD (except as indicated) was determined using a Coulter Z2 Particle Analyzer. (A) Small cell size of whi5Δ depends upon SBF. (B) Overexpression of WHI5 increases cell size. Cells were grown in galactose to induce GAL-WHI5. (C) The size increase resulting from cln3Δ is suppressed by whi5Δ.

6xmyc (Figure 1C) but not with Mbp1-3xHA (Figure 1D). To determine whether Whi5 interacts with the intact SBF complex or with Swi6 or Swi4 independently, we repeated the immunoprecipitation in strains carrying a deletion mutant of the untagged SBF component. We observed that inactivation of either SWI6 or SWI4 abolishes the interaction between Whi5 and the remaining SBF component (Figure 1C and data not shown). Finally, analysis of Whi5-TAP complexes by MudPIT resulted in the identification of both Swi6 and Swi4 with high confidence, whereas Mbp1 was not detected (Figure 1E). Together, these data establish that Whi5 is a component of SBF.

that whi5Δ results in a dramatic reduction in cell size in both wild-type (Figure 2A) and mbp1Δ mutant strains (data not shown) but does not affect the size of swi4Δ mutants (Figure 2A), consistent with the hypothesis that Whi5 negatively regulates SBF but not MBF. Furthermore, as expected, expression of GAL1-WHI5 results in an increase in cell size in otherwise wild-type cells (Figure 2B) but has little or no effect on swi4Δ mutants, which are already large (data not shown). Together, these observations suggest that the inhibitory effect of Whi5 is exerted exclusively via SBF. In fact, simply integrating a second allele of WHI5 in tandem with the wild-type allele results in a significant increase in cell size (data not shown), suggesting that WHI5 acts as a dose-dependent inhibitor of Start, much like CLN3 acts as a dose-dependent activator (Wijnen et al., 2002).

ClN3 Acts via Whi5 to Promote Cell Cycle Initiation

To evaluate whether Cln3 antagonizes Whi5 activity, we compared the cell size of asynchronous populations of whi5Δ and cln3Δ mutants to cln3Δ whi5Δ mutants (Figure 2C). Inactivation of Whi5 was not only sufficient to suppress the increase in cell size caused by inactivation of Cln3 but resulted in a cell size distribution identical to that caused by whi5Δ. This epistasis relationship suggests that Cln3 acts via Whi5 to regulate cell cycle initiation.

To eliminate the potential contributions to cell size of cell cycle defects outside of G1 phase, we evaluated the critical cell size (cell volume) at which bud emergence occurs in small G1 daughter cells isolated by centrifugal elutriation. Previous analysis has shown critical cell size at budding to be directly related to the activation of G1-specific transcription and to be a sensitive assay for the G1-specific function of Cln3 (Dirick et al., 1995; Stuart and Wittenberg, 1995). Small G1 daughter cells were isolated from asynchronous populations of wild-type and whi5Δ strains by centrifugal elutriation and allowed to progress through the cell cycle. Whereas wild-type cells budded at ~35 fl, whi5Δ resulted in a dramatic reduction in the cell size required for budding (<20 fl; Figure 3A, top panel). In fact, isolation of the smallest cells from the asynchronous population failed to yield greater than 80% unbudded cells, many of which budded within the first 20 min of growth. We conclude that the whi5Δ mutation results in a dramatic advancement of Start and that a large fraction of the small G1 daughter cells in the whi5Δ population have already executed Start prior to abscission from the mother cell.

To more precisely establish the relationship between Whi5 and Cln3, we determined the effect of whi5Δ on the timing of cell cycle initiation in cln3Δ mutants. As shown previously, cln3Δ mutants bud at almost twice the size of wild-type cells (~60 fl; Figure 3A, top panel) (Cross, 1988; Nash et al., 1988), consistent with the dependency upon Cln3 for cell cycle initiation during G1 phase. Strikingly, cln3Δ whi5Δ double mutants bud at

(C) whi5Δ bypasses the lethality caused by bck2Δcln3Δ. (Left panel) Growth of the indicated strain carrying YCpCLN3::URA3 under selective conditions. (Right panel) Growth of the same strains on 5-FOA to select against the YCpCLN3::URA3 plasmid.
a comparable size to whi5Δ mutants (<20 fl; Figure 3A, top panel). As with whi5Δ mutants, it is difficult to isolate a pure unbudded population. Both of these observations demonstrate that whi5Δ is epistatic to cln3Δ, suggesting a pathway in which Cln3 exerts its positive effect on cell cycle initiation by antagonizing the negative effect of Whi5.

Whi5 Represses G1-Specific Transcriptional Activation Upstream of SBF

The early initiation of budding, as observed in whi5Δ mutants, often reflects premature activation of G1-specific transcription. To evaluate SBF-dependent transcription, we measured the level of transcripts from CLN2, a well-characterized SBF-dependent gene (Figure 3A, bottom panel). The level of the CLN2 transcript in wild-type cells peaks at 35 fl, corresponding with bud emergence, and is subsequently rapidly lost, presumably due to transcriptional inactivation associated with cell cycle progression (Amon et al., 1993). In contrast, the CLN2 transcript is high in the smallest whi5Δ mutant cells and, as observed in wild-type cells, rapidly decreases as budding increases to the maximum level. We believe this unexpected behavior to be a consequence of our failure to isolate a whi5Δ population in which the majority of cells are pre-Start and, therefore, undergoing transcriptional activation of G1-specific genes. Consistent with that interpretation, the inactivation of G1-specific transcription observed during the first cell cycle in the whi5Δ population is followed by the accumulation of the CDC20 transcript (solid gray line, Figure 3B), which accumulates only after cells have passed Start and entered the budded phase of the cell cycle in wild-type cells (dashed gray line, Figure 3C) (Spellman et al., 1998). CDC20 expression decreases when a second peak of accumulation of the CLN2 transcript is observed.

Consistent with its effect on the minimal cell size at budding, inactivation of CLN3 in wild-type cells results in a dramatic delay in transcriptional induction of CLN2 (Figure 3A, bottom panel). Analysis of the CLN2 transcript in a whi5Δ cln3Δ double mutant revealed that, like bud emergence, CLN2 expression is coincident with that observed in the strain carrying whi5Δ alone (Figure 3A, bottom panel).

Together, these findings demonstrate that inactivation of whi5Δ bypasses the requirement for Cln3 for SBF-dependent transcriptional activation. We conclude that Whi5 delays G1-specific transcriptional activation and thereby cell cycle initiation and that Cln3 antagonizes that inhibition.

Inactivation of Whi5 Bypasses the Lethality of bck2Δ cln3Δ Mutants

Because inactivation of WHI5 was sufficient to bypass the requirement for CLN3 for activation of SBF-dependent transcription, we sought to determine whether it could also bypass the lethality resulting from bck2Δ cln3Δ (Figure 3C). Whereas a bck2Δ cln3Δ mutant is unable to survive under conditions that select for loss of the YEpURA3-CLN3 plasmid, the bck2Δ cln3Δ whi5Δ mutant remains viable following loss of that plasmid. To determine whether SBF, MBF, or both are required for that bypass, we evaluated the requirement for SWI4 and

MBP1 (Figure 3C). While bck2Δ cln3Δ whi5Δ mbp1Δ mutants are able to proliferate in the absence of YEpURA3-CLN3, bck2Δ cln3Δ whi5Δ swi4Δ mutants are not. Thus, bypass of the lethality of bck2Δ cln3Δ mutants depends upon the activity of SBF. Consistent with this finding, the level of CLN2 gene expression in an asynchronous population of bck2Δ cln3Δ whi5Δ mutants is comparable to that observed in wild-type cells, whereas expression is negligible in a bck2Δ cln3Δ (GAL1-CLN3) strain grown on glucose (data not shown). In contrast, we find that inactivation of WHI5 is insufficient to support the viability of either bck2Δ swi6Δ GAL1-CLN2 or cln1Δ cln2Δ cln3Δ GAL1-CLN3 strains in the presence of glucose (data not shown). These data provide additional support for the SBF-specific role of Whi5 and, more importantly, show that inactivation of WHI5 abolishes the requirement for the G1-specific transcriptional activators CLN3 and BCK2.

Whi5 Binds via SBF to Promoters of Transcriptionally Inactive G1-Specific Genes

The identification of Whi5 as an SBF bound inhibitor of transcriptional activation suggests that it may act directly at the level of SBF-dependent promoters. Binding of epitope-tagged Swi4, Swi6, and Whi5 to two G1-specific promoters, CLN2 (SBF specific) and CLB5 (MBF specific), and the HXT3 promoter (SBF/MBF independent) was assessed by ChIP analysis. Like Swi4 (Cosma et al., 2001; Cross et al., 1994; Koch et al., 1996), Whi5 binds to the CLN2 promoter (Figure 4A) and only weakly, or not at all, to the CLB5 promoter. As previously demonstrated, Swi6 binds efficiently to both of the CLN2 and CLB5 promoters (Harrington and Andrews, 1996; Koch et al., 1996), whereas none of those proteins binds detectably to the HXT3 promoter (Figure 4A and data not shown). Binding of Whi5 to the CLN2 promoter is not observed in a swi4Δ strain (Figure 4B), and, as predicted, that binding is independent of Mbp1. We conclude that Whi5 binds to G1-specific promoters via SBF.

To evaluate the relationship between Whi5 binding to SBF-dependent promoters and G1-specific transcriptional activation, we analyzed timing of Whi5 binding to the promoters of three SBF targets, CLN2, CLN1, and PCL1, by ChIP analysis following release from G1 phase arrest by mating pheromone. We find that, like Swi6, Whi5 is bound to the CLN2 promoter in mating pheromone-arrested cells. However, in contrast to Swi6, it dissociates just prior to transcriptional activation (Figure 4C, upper panel). As indicated by Swi6 binding, SBF remains associated with the CLN2 promoter until cells enter the budded phase of the cell cycle and transcription is inactivated (Figure 4C, lower panel). A similar pattern of Whi5 binding was observed at the CLN1 and PCL1 promoters. Thus, association of Whi5 with SBF-dependent promoters early in G1 phase correlates with transcriptional repression, and its subsequent dissociation correlates with Cln3/CDK-dependent G1-specific transcriptional activation.

We evaluated whether Cln3 was sufficient for dissociation from SBF-dependent promoters or whether additional cyclins were required. Binding of Whi5 to the same three promoters was evaluated by chromatin immunoprecipitation in cells that lack CLN3, express CLN3 as
Figure 4. Whi5 Hyperphosphorylation Correlates with Disassociation of Whi5 from SBF Bound to Transcriptionally Active G1-Specific Gene Promoters

(A) Whi5 binds to CLN2 promoter DNA. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of CLN2 (SBF dependent), CLB5 (MBF dependent), and HXT3 (SBF/ MBF independent) promoter DNA by Swi4-myc and Whi5-myc immunoprecipitation. Immunoprecipitation from a strain containing no epitope- tagged genes is presented as a negative control.

(B) Whi5 binds CLN2 promoter via SBF. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of CLN2 and CLB5 promoter DNA from a wild-type (wt), mbp1Δ, or swi4Δ strain by Whi5-myc immunoprecipitation.

(C) Whi5 disassociation from CLN2 promoter correlates with transcription activation of SBF-dependent promoters. (Top panel) Chromatin immunoprecipitation of the CLN2 promoter DNA by Swi6-myc and of CLN1, CLN2, and PCL1 promoter DNA by Whi5-myc from cells arrested by α factor (0') or released from the arrest for the indicated interval (10'–60'). (Bottom panel) Budding index and CLN2 RNA levels in cells from the same time course.

(D) Slower-migrating form of Whi5 accumulates during late G1 phase. Western blot analysis of Whi5 protein from samples taken during the α factor arrest and release time course shown in (C).

(E) Whi5 disassociation from SBF-dependent promoters is Cln3 dependent. (Top panel) Chromatin immunoprecipitation of CLN2, CLN1, and PCL1 promoter DNA by Whi5-myc immunoprecipitation from cln1Δ cln2Δxs CLN3, CLN1 CLN2 cln3Δ, and cln1Δ cln2Δxs cln3Δ TRP1::GAL1- CLN3 (cln-less) strains during α factor arrest and release in glucose-containing medium. (Bottom panel) Budding index and CLN2 RNA levels in the same samples.

(F) Whi5 binds SBF throughout the cell cycle. Coimmunoprecipitation of Swi6-myc in Whi5-TAP immune complexes from asynchronous cells (As) or following α factor arrest (0') and release for the indicated intervals (20' and 60').

their only G1 cyclin, or express no G1 cyclins. As predicted, a decrease in the binding of Whi5 to all three promoters correlated with the activation of G1-specific transcription (Figure 4E). In cells lacking G1 cyclins, CLN2 expression remained repressed, and Whi5 remained bound to the CLN2 promoter. In cells having

only CLN3 (Figure 4E), the rapid activation of CLN2 expression following release from arrest was coordinate with the dissociation of Whi5 from each of the SBF-dependent promoters, as observed in wild-type cells. In contrast, cells lacking CLN3 only activated CLN2 expression after a significant delay and did so more gradually than either wild-type or cln1Δ cln2Δ cells. Consistent with the pattern of expression, a marked decrease in the extent and rate of dissociation of Whi5 was observed. Whereas dissociation appears rapid and concerted in the wild-type strain (Figure 4C), the decrease is more gradual in the cln1Δ cln2Δ strain (Figure 4E), suggesting a contribution of other G1 cyclins. Nevertheless, CLN1 and CLN2 are insufficient in the absence of CLN3, since Whi5 appears to remain bound in that strain until late in the time course. Together, these data strongly suggest that transcriptional activation via Cln3 is exerted via its capacity to antagonize Whi5 binding to G1-specific promoters.

Whereas the dissociation of Whi5 from SBF-bound promoters at the time of transcriptional activation is consistent with its behavior as a transcriptional repressor of SBF-dependent genes, it does not explain the results of our MudPIT analysis that shows that Whi5 is present in a complex with SBF from cells actively transcribing CLN2. To address this issue, we analyzed Whi5 binding to Swi6 in synchronized cells by coimmunoprecipitation (Figure 4F). Whi5 was found in a complex with Swi6 even subsequent to the dissociation of both proteins from promoters. We conclude that Whi5 forms a complex with SBF independent of its binding to G1-specific promoters.

Whi5 Hyperphosphorylation Is Associated with G1-Specific Transcriptional Activation

Our data suggest that Whi5 might be a direct target for phosphorylation by Cln3-associated CDK. Several minor species of reduced mobility are apparent in HA-tagged Whi5 from asynchronous cells (Figure 5A). Consistent with their identity as phosphorylated species, treatment of immune complexes containing Whi5-HA with lambda phosphatase resulted in conversion of those species.

(C) Whi5 is a target of cyclin-dependent kinase Cdc28 in vitro. (Left panel) Full-length Whi5-13xmyc prepared under denaturing conditions was used as a substrate for phosphorylation by purified Cdc28-TAP complexes from asynchronous cells (As) and cdc34-3 mutant cells synchronized during late G1 phase by release from an α factor arrest at the restrictive temperature (37°C) for 60 min (late G1). Arrows indicate phosphorylated Whi5-myc species. The mobility of the full-size Whi5-13xmyc protein and a degradation product (*) is indicated. (Right panel) Protein kinase activity of purified soluble Cdc28 CDK was determined using histone H1 as a substrate. Histone H1 (1 μg) was used in each kinase assay. The exposure shown for histone H1 is 1/100 of that shown for Whi5.

(D) Whi5 disassociates from SBF complex when phosphorylated by cyclin-dependent kinase Cdc28. Calmodulin beads containing TAP-purified SBF prepared from cells expressing Swi4-TAP and Whi5-13xmyc and arrested during G1 by α factor were treated with soluble purified Cdc28 CDK complexes from either asynchronous cells (As) or late G1 cells as indicated in (C). Following treatment, the calmodulin bead bound fraction (B) or the fraction released into the supernatant (S) were analyzed by immunoblotting with anti-myc antibody. Arrows indicate different mobility forms of Whi5-13xmyc protein.
cies to a single species of higher mobility than those observed in untreated samples or in samples treated with phosphatase in the presence of phosphatase inhibitors. The well-characterized phosphoprotein Cln2 is provided as a positive control (Lanker et al., 1996).

To determine the relationship between phosphorylation of Whi5 and its disassociation from G1-specific promoters, we examined the mobility of the Whi5 protein in the same population of synchronized cells used for the ChIP analysis of Swi6 (Figure 4D). Whereas Whi5-TAP migrates as a single species during early G1 phase (Figure 4C), a slower-migrating form of Whi5-TAP appears and becomes increasingly apparent as cells progress into the budded phase of the cell cycle. Phosphatase treatment of Whi5-TAP demonstrates that, like the Whi5-HA protein shown in Figure 5A, even the highest-mobility species is phosphorylated (data not shown). We conclude that Whi5 is phosphorylated at one or more positions during all cell cycle phases but that a portion of that protein becomes hyperphosphorylated as cells progress through G1 phase.

To establish the form of the CDK responsible for Whi5 phosphorylation, we compared the mobility of Whi5 in cells in which specific cyclins accumulate. Whereas all three G1 cyclins accumulate in a cdc34-ts strain arrested during late G1 phase at the restrictive temperature, a cln1Δ cln2Δ cdc34-ts strain accumulates only Cln3. B-type cyclins fail to accumulate due to the inability of cdc34 mutants to degrade the Clb/CDK inhibitor Sic1 (Schwob and Nasmyth, 1993). Those strains were arrested in late G1 phase by shifting to the restrictive temperature for 3 hr, and the electrophoretic mobility of Whi5 was compared to Whi5 from the same cells either arrested by α factor to inactivate all forms of the CDK or allowed to progress into G2/M phase (Figure 5B). That analysis revealed that, whereas Cln3/CDK promotes only a small shift in mobility, the accumulation of all three G1 cyclins results in more extensive retardation, similar to that observed at the permissive temperature where B-type cyclin-associated forms of the CDK accumulate. These data suggest that Cln3/CDK promotes quantitative phosphorylation of Whi5, then leads to progressively greater phosphorylation by Cln1- and Cln2-associated CDK and then by Clb/CDK. This is consistent with the effect of Cln3 activity on Whi5 binding to G1-specific promoters and with the finding that dissociation of Whi5 from those promoters is less concerted in the absence of CLN1 and CLN2 (Figure 4E).

Whi5 Phosphorylation by Cdc28 Kinase Promotes Dissociation from SBF In Vitro

We evaluated whether Whi5 could act as a target for the Cdc28 CDK in vitro. TAP-tagged Cdc28 was purified from either asynchronous cells or cells expressing only G1 cyclins (cdc34-ts mutants arrested following release from α factor arrest). Both preparations of Cdc28 CDK kinase were active against histone H1 and immunoprecipitated 13xmyc-tagged Whi5 (Figure 5C). Based upon their relative kinase activity, measured using histone H1 as a substrate, the Cln-associated CDK appeared to be more efficient than the total CDK at phosphorylating Whi5. No phosphorylation of Whi5 was observed when the immune complexes were prepared from a strain expressing untagged Whi5 or when no Cdc28 CDK was added. Thus, Whi5 is a substrate of the Cdc28 CDK in vitro. This agrees with a recent study (Ubersax et al., 2003), in which Whi5 was detected among the budding yeast proteins that are directly phosphorylated by the Cdc28 CDK in vitro.

To evaluate whether phosphorylation by the Cdc28 CDK promotes dissociation of Whi5 from SBF in vitro, we prepared SBF complexes containing Whi5-myc by purification of Swi4-TAP from cells arrested during G1 by depletion of G1 cyclins. The Whi5-SBF complexes retained on calmodulin beads were treated with either Cln-CDK complexes or Cdc28 CDK from asynchronous cells (Figure 5D). In both cases, Whi5-myc was phosphorylated and released into the supernatant, whereas it was retained on the beads in the untreated samples. We conclude that Cln-CDK-dependent phosphorylation is sufficient to promote dissociation of Whi5 from SBF, consistent with the timing of its dissociation from promoters in vivo.

Phosphorylation of Whi5 Determines the Timing of SBF-Dependent Transcriptional Activation and Cell Cycle Progression

Whi5 contains four perfect CDK consensus sites (S/T-P-X-K/R; sites 1, 2, 11, and 12) and eight minimal consensus sequences (S/T-P; sites 3–10; Figure 6A). Analysis of TAP-purified Whi5 obtained from transcriptionally active G1 phase cells by mass spectrometry revealed the presence of phosphopeptides representing five putative CDK sites (sites 2, 4, 5, 10, and 12; data not shown). We mutated the phosphoacceptor amino acid at those sites, along with two other sites (sites 8 and 9), to alanine. Surprisingly, we were unable to introduce the mutant gene (designated WHI5^7A) under control of the endogenous WHI5 promoter into cells, either alone or in tandem with a wild-type copy of the gene. The basis for that lethality has not been established. To obviate that problem, the mutant and wild-type open reading frame were placed under control of the conditional MET3 promoter and integrated into the genome of whi5Δ mutant cells. As expected, both strains exhibited the small cell size phenotype of the whi5Δ mutant when grown on methionine-containing medium (+Met) to repress MET3-dependent transcription. Although cells expressing either MET3-WHI5 or MET3-WHI5^7A became larger than wild-type cells after the shift to methionine-deficient medium (−Met) for several generations, the increase in cell size observed in the strain expressing WHI5^7A was substantially greater (data not shown). Analysis of Whi5-myc expressed from the MET3 promoter revealed that the level of expression of both Whi5 and Whi5^7A was comparable to that expressed from the endogenous promoter (Figure 6B). This suggests that the effect of expression of MET3-WHI5 might result from misregulation of WHI5 expression rather than from overexpression.

To evaluate the importance of phosphorylation during G1 phase, cells expressing either MET3-WHI5 or MET3-WHI5^7A were pregrown in +Met medium and shifted to −Met medium to induce the MET3 promoter, and then small cells were isolated by centrifugal elutriation and evaluated for cell size, G1-specific gene expression,
and budding (Figure 6C). As expected, both the timing and extent of transcriptional activation and budding observed in the MET-WHI5 strain were comparable to wild-type cells. In contrast, the MET-WHI5<sup>7A</sup> mutant budded at a substantially larger cell size, and the expression of the SBF-dependent CLN2 transcript was delayed and reduced relative to that in cells expressing wild-type WHI5. Consistent with the specificity of Whi5 for SBF, the MBF-dependent transcript RNR1 was expressed at a comparable level to cells expressing mutant or wild-type WHI5. Finally, the lower-mobility phosphorylated forms of Whi5 observed following release from α factor arrest in wild-type cells (Figure 4D) and cells expressing MET-WHI5-myc fail to accumulate in the MET-WHI5<sup>7A</sup>-myc mutant (data not shown). We conclude that phosphorylation of Whi5 at one or more sites affected by the CDK site mutations is required for efficient and timely activation of SBF-dependent genes.

## Discussion

We have shown that Whi5 interacts specifically with SBF but not independently with either of its known subunits or MBF. Whi5 binds to SBF at G1-specific promoters and acts as a repressor of G1-specific transcriptional activation. As cells progress into late G1 phase, Whi5 dissociates from promoters in a Cln3-dependent manner (Figure 7A). Dissociation is promoted by and dependent upon Cln3 in vivo and is promoted by Cln/CDK in vitro. Consistent with its behavior as an in vitro substrate for the Cdc28 CDK, mass spectrometric analysis of Whi5 demonstrates that it is phosphorylated in vivo at CDK consensus sites during late G1 phase (data not shown). Mutational analysis of a subset of the putative CDK sites in Whi5 demonstrates that Whi5 phosphorylation is required for efficient transcriptional activation of SBF-dependent genes and, consequently, for timely cell cycle initiation.

Whi5 is not simply required to keep SBF-dependent gene expression low outside of G1 phase but acts as a component of the mechanism governing periodic transcription. The pattern and extent of transcriptional activation of CLN2 in whi5Δ and cln3Δwhi5Δ mutants is substituted with alanine (A).

(B) Whi5 protein expressed from the inducible MET3 promoter accumulates to a similar level to wild-type Whi5. Western blot analysis of Whi5 protein isolated from asynchronous cells expressing WHI5 from the endogenous promoter or WHI5 or WHI5<sup>7A</sup> from the MET3 promoter under repressing (+Met) or inducing (-Met) conditions. Cdc28 is presented as loading control.

(C) Mutation of CDK phosphorylation sites in Whi5 delays cell cycle initiation and reduces and delays SBF-dependent transcriptional activation. Cells were grown in -Met medium for 25' prior to centrifugal elutriation to induce WHI5 and WHI5<sup>7A</sup> transcription. Small unbudded cells were isolated by centrifugal elutriation, inoculated into fresh -Met medium, and allowed to progress synchronously through the cell cycle. (Top panel) Cell size, budding index and RNA levels were determined at 20' intervals. (Middle panel) RNR1 RNA levels determined in the synchronized cells by RT-PCR. (Bottom panel) CLN2 RNA levels determined by RT-PCR. The transcript levels are presented as a percentage relative to the highest level observed in both time courses after normalization of all values to the ACT1 RNA level in the same samples.

that assumption into question. In fact, there is evidence that transcriptional repression of SBF- and MBF-dependent genes subsequent to Start occurs via distinct mechanisms (Amon et al., 1993). A recent study shows that Stb1, an established Swi6 binding protein, specifically affects MBF-dependent transcriptional activation (Costanzo et al., 2003). Although it was found to specifically associate with MBF in that study, we identified Stb1 with a high degree of confidence by MudPIT analysis in both SBF- and MBF-containing samples (data not shown). Preliminary analysis is consistent with a role for Stb1 in addition to its role in MBF-dependent transcription (data not shown). However, its importance in wild-type cells and whether that role is SBF dependent are unclear.

Additional factors found by MudPIT analysis to interact specifically with SBF, MBF, Swi4, and Mbp1 are currently under investigation. Preliminary data show that several of the SBF/MBF interactors have an effect on cell size either when inactivated or overexpressed, consistent with effects on SBF- and MBF-dependent transcription. Efforts are underway to unravel the biological significance of those interactions.

The existence of an inhibitor of G1-specific transcription that is antagonized by Cln3/CDK has been hypothesized based upon analogy of metazoan Rb. The identification of Whi5 as such an inhibitor shows yet again that there is a close functional homology between the regulatory components involved in G1-specific transcriptional activation in yeast and mammalian cells. The similarities between Whi5 and Rb are striking (Figure 7). In mammalian cells, passage through the restriction point and entry into S phase is determined at least in part by the phosphorylation of Rb by cyclin D-Cdk4/Cdk6 and subsequently cyclin E-Cdk2 (reviewed by Stevens and La Thangue [2003]). In yeast, phosphorylation of Whi5 by Cln3/CDK, and possibly subsequently by Cln1-2/CDK, leads to transcriptional activation of SBF-responsive genes promoting passage through Start, the primary gating event of the yeast cell cycle. Cln3 and Cln1/2 have been equated to mammalian cyclin D1 and cyclin E, respectively (Hatakeyama et al., 1994). Furthermore, like the effect of Whi5 on G1-specific transcription factors in yeast, the effect of Rb association with E2F is only one of several pathways regulating E2F activity. It is clear that resolution of the seemingly complex network of transcriptional regulators involved in G1-specific gene regulation and, more generally, in cell cycle-dependent regulation of gene expression in both yeast and metazoans remains a major goal.

## Experimental Procedures

### Strains and DNAs

All yeast strains used in this study were derived from 15Daub (MATa ade1 leu2-3,112 his2 trp1-1 ura3Δns bar1Δ). The table of yeast strains used is presented in Supplemental Data (see Table S1 at http://www.cell.com/cgi/content/full/117/7/887/DC1). TAP strategy was carried out in CWY 747 (15Daub TRP1::GAL1-CLN3 cln1Δ cln2Δ cln3Δ pep4::LEU2). The strategy of Rigaut et al. (1999) was used to append a TAP tag to SWI6, SWI4, MBP1, WHI5 (carboxyterminus), and CDC28 (aminoterminus) at their endogenous loci. The PCR-based gene disruption method of Reid et al. (2002) was used to create the cln3Δ bck2Δ bypass strain. The PCR method of Longtine et al. (1998) was used to disrupt WHI5, SWI4, and SWI6, GAL1

promoter integrate, and 3xHA, 13xmyc, or 11xmyc tag at the car-
boxyterminus WHI5. 6xmyc-tagged alleles of SWI4 and SWI6; dis-
ruption of PEP4, MBP1, and SWI4; 3xHA tagging of MBP1; and
6xHIS tagging of SWI6 was done by plasmid integration. The WHI5
ORF was cloned by PCR into the pCR 2.1-TOPO vector (Invitrogen).
Phosphorylation site mutations were introduced by PCR, resulting
in amino acid substitutions T47A, S59A, S62A, S155A, S157A,
S161A, and S262A, mutating putative CDK sites 2, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10,
and 12, respectively. The WHI5 ORF, including 36 bp upstream
sequence cloned into an integration plasmid containing the MET3
promoter sequence, was integrated into the URA3 locus.

TAP Affinity Purification and MudPIT Analysis
TAP purification and analysis was carried out as described by Boddy
et al. (2001). MudPIT was carried out as described by McDonald and
Yates (2002). Identification by MudPIT of potentially phosphorylated
peptides was done as described (MacCoss et al., 2002).

Coimmunoprecipitation
Immunoprecipitations were carried out using TAP purification
buffers. Immunoprecipitated proteins were resolved by 12.5%
SDS-PAGE.

Cell Synchronization
The conditional cln-deficient strain (CWY747) was arrested during
G1 phase by growth in YEP-raffinose and released into Start by
addition of 2% galactose to induce expression of GAL-CLN3 as
described by Stuart and Wittenberg (1995). A population of small
G1-synchronized cells was obtained by centrifugal elutriation as
described by Stuart and Wittenberg (1995), except that the sonica-
tion step was omitted and cells were grown in YEPD throughout
the experiment. Mating pheromone arrest synchrony experiments
were also carried out as described by Stuart and Wittenberg (1995).

Analysis of Whi5 Phosphorylation
Phosphorylation analysis of the Whi5 protein was performed as
described by Flick et al. (2003).

Real-Time RT-PCR
Total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Kit (Qiagen). The Quan-
tiTech SYBR Green RT-PCR Kit (Qiagen) was used for RT-PCR
experiments. Reactions were run on the Smart Cycler II System
(Cepheid) using standard RT-PCR conditions. Data were analyzed
using Smart Cycler Software 2.0. The Lux Fluorogenic Primers (In-
vitrogen), used to detect CDC20 and ACT1 transcript levels with the
SuperScript III Platinum One-Step RT-PCR System, were a kind gift
of Bryan Olson, TSRI.

ChIP Analysis
Chromatin immunoprecipitation was performed as described by
Flick et al. (2003).

In Vitro Kinase Assay
Soluble Cdc28 protein was purified from culture (YEPD containing
0.2 mM CuSO₄), expressing N-terminal TAP-tagged CDC28 under
the control of the CUP1 promoter (Kesti et al., 2004) by the TAP
purification method described by Boddy et al. (2001) from an
asynchronize culture, and from cells, released from an α factor
arrest and arrested during late G1 by cdc34-3 at the restricted
temperature (37°C) for 60 min. α-myc immunoprecipitate from α
factor-arrested cells of Whi5 or 13xmyc-Whi5 fusion protein was
used as substrate. Kinase assays were carried out as described by
Deshaines and Kirschner (1995). Reactions were resolved by 12.5%
SDS-PAGE. Phosphorylation of Whi5 was analyzed using a Phos-
phorImager (Molecular Diagnostics). In vitro kinase assay on SBF
was carried out as described above. SBF was prepared by TAP
purification from cells expressing Swi4-TAP and Whi5-myc arrested
during G1 by mating pheromone. Phosphorylation and disassocia-
tion from SBF of Whi5-myc was analyzed by anti-myc Western blot.


Other Methods
Cell size analysis was performed using a Coulter Z2 Particle Cell
Analyzer (Beckman-Coulter). Cell size distribution was analyzed us-
ing the Z2 AccuComp software (Beckman-Coulter).

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Marisela Guaderrama for technical
support; and Tapio Kesti, Karin Flick, David Stuart, Bryan Olson,
and Fred Cross for materials used in this study. We thank Tapio
Kesti, Nick Boddy, Karin Flick, Peter Kaiser, and Steve Reed for
comments on the manuscript; and members of the TSRI Cell Cycle
Group for helpful discussion. This work was supported by USPHS
grant GM59941 to C.W.

Received: December 19, 2003
Revised: April 21, 2004
Accepted: April 22, 2004
Published: June 24, 2004

References
Amon, A., Tyers, M., Futcher, B., and Nasmyth, K. (1993). Mecha-
nisms that help the yeast cell cycle clock tick: G2 cyclins transcrip-
tionally activate G2 cyclins and repress G1 cyclins. Cell 74, 993–
1007.
Boddy, M.N., Gaillard, P.H., McDonald, W.H., Shanahan, P., Yates,
J.R., Ill, and Russell, P. (2001). Mus81-Eme1 are essential compo-
nents of a Holliday junction resolvase. Cell 107, 537–548.
Breeden, L.L. (2003). Periodic transcription: a cycle within a cycle.
Curr. Biol. 13, R31–R38.
Cho, R.J., Campbell, M.J., Winzeler, E.A., Steinmetz, L., Conway,
A., Wodicka, L., Wolfsberg, T.G., Gabrielian, A.E., Landsman, D.,
Lockhart, D.J., and Davis, R.W. (1998). A genome-wide transcrip-
tional analysis of the mitotic cell cycle. Mol. Cell 2, 65–73.
Cosma, M.P., Panizza, S., and Nasmyth, K. (2001). Cdk1 triggers
association of RNA polymerase to cell cycle promoters only after
recruitment of the mediator by SBF. Mol. Cell 7, 1213–1220.
Costanzo, M., Schub, O., and Andrews, B. (2003). G1 transcription
factors are differentially regulated in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by
the Swi6-binding protein Stb1. Mol. Cell. Biol. 23, 5064–5077.
Cross, F.R. (1988). DAF1, a mutant gene affecting size control, pher-
omone arrest, and cell cycle kinetics of Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 8, 4675–4684.
Cross, F.R., Hoek, M., McKinney, J.D., and Tinkelenberg, A.H. (1994).
Role of Swi4 in cell cycle regulation of CLN2 expression. Mol. Cell.
Biol. 14, 4779–4787.
Deshaines, R.J., and Kirschner, M. (1995). G1 cyclin-dependent acti-
vation of p34CDC28 (Cdc28p) in vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
92, 1182–1186.
Di Como, C.J., Chang, H., and Arndt, K.T. (1995). Activation of CLN1
and CLN2 G1 cyclin gene expression by BCK2. Mol. Cell. Biol. 15,
1835–1846.
Dirick, L., Bohm, T., and Nasmyth, K. (1995). Roles and regulation
of Cln-Cdc28 kinases at the start of the cell cycle of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. EMBO J. 14, 4803–4813.
Dyson, N. (1998). The regulation of E2F by pRB-family proteins.
Genes Dev. 12, 2245–2262.
Epstein, C.B., and Cross, F.R. (1994). Genes that can bypass the
CLN requirement for Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle START.
Mol. Cell. Biol. 14, 2041–2047.
Flick, K., Chapman-Shimshoni, D., Stuart, D., Guaderrama, M., and
Wittenberg, C. (1998). Regulation of cell size by glucose is exerted
via repression of the CLN1 promoter. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18, 2492–2501.
Flick, K.M., Spielewoy, N., Kalashnikova, T.I., Guaderrama, M., Zhu,
Q., Chang, H.C., and Wittenberg, C. (2003). Grr1-dependent inactiva-
tion of Mth1 mediates glucose-induced dissociation of Rgt1 from
HXT gene promoters. Mol. Biol. Cell 14, 3230–3241.
Gallego, C., Gari, E., Colomina, N., Herrero, E., and Aldea, M. (1997).
The Cln3 cyclin is down-regulated by translational repression and

degradation during the G1 arrest caused by nitrogen deprivation in budding yeast. EMBO J. 16, 7196–7206.

Gavin, A.C., and Superti-Furga, G. (2003). Protein complexes and proteome organization from yeast to man. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 7, 21–27.

Harrington, L.A., and Andrews, B.J. (1996). Binding to the yeast Swi4,6-dependent cell cycle box, CACGAAA, is cell cycle regulated in vivo. Nucleic Acids Res. 24, 558–565.

Hatakeyama, M., Brill, J.A., Fink, G.R., and Weinberg, R.A. (1994). Collaboration of G1 cyclins in the functional inactivation of the retinoblastoma protein. Genes Dev. 8, 1759–1771.

Ho, A., and Dowdy, S.F. (2002). Regulation of G(1) cell-cycle progression by oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 12, 47–52.

Ho, Y., Gruhler, A., Heilbut, A., Bader, G.D., Moore, L., Adams, S.L., Millar, A., Taylor, P., Bennett, K., Boutilier, K., et al. (2002). Systematic identification of protein complexes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae by mass spectrometry. Nature 415, 180–183.

Iyer, V.R., Horak, C.E., Scafe, C.S., Botstein, D., Snyder, M., and Brown, P.O. (2001). Genomic binding sites of the yeast cell-cycle transcription factors SBF and MBF. Nature 409, 533–538.

Jorgensen, P., Nishikawa, J.L., Breitkreutz, B.J., and Tyers, M. (2002). Systematic identification of pathways that couple cell growth and division in yeast. Science 297, 395–400.

Kesti, T., McDonald, W.H., and Yates, J.R., III, and C., W. (2004). Cell cycle-dependent phosphorylation of the DNA polymerase epsilon subunit, Dpb2, by the Cdc28 cyclin-dependent protein kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 14,245–14,255.

Koch, C., Moll, T., Neuberg, M., Ahorn, H., and Nasmyth, K. (1993). A role for the transcription factors Mbp1 and Swi4 in progression from G1 to S phase. Science 261, 1551–1557.

Koch, C., Schleiffer, A., Ammerer, G., and Nasmyth, K. (1996). Switching transcription on and off during the yeast cell cycle: Cln/Cdc28 kinases activate bound transcription factor SBF (Swi4/Swi6) at start, whereas Clb/Cdc28 kinases displace it from the promoter in G2. Genes Dev. 10, 129–141.

Lanker, S., Valdivieso, M.H., and Wittenberg, C. (1996). Rapid degradation of the G1 cyclin Cln2 induced by CDK-dependent phosphorylation. Science 271, 1597–1601.

Longtine, M.S., McKenzie, A., III, Demarini, D.J., Shah, N.G., Wach, A., Brachat, A., Philippsen, P., and Pringle, J.R. (1998). Additional modules for versatile and economical PCR-based gene deletion and modification in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 14, 953–961.

MacCoss, M.J., McDonald, W.H., Saraf, A., Sadygov, R., Clark, J.M., Tasto, J.J., Gould, K.L., Wolters, D., Washburn, M., Weiss, A., et al. (2002). Shotgun identification of protein modifications from protein complexes and lens tissue. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 7900–7905.

MacKay, V.L., Mai, B., Waters, L., and Breeden, L.L. (2001). Early cell cycle box-mediated transcription of CLN3 and SWI4 contributes to the proper timing of the G(1)-to-S transition in budding yeast. Mol. Cell. Biol. 21, 4140–4148.

Marini, N.J., and Reed, S.I. (1992). Direct induction of G1-specific transcripts following reactivation of the Cdc28 kinase in the absence of de novo protein synthesis. Genes Dev. 6, 557–567.

McDonald, W.H., and Yates, J.R., III (2002). Shotgun proteomics and biomarker discovery. Dis. Markers 18, 99–105.

McInerny, C.J., Partridge, J.F., Mikesell, G.E., Creemer, D.P., and Breeden, L.L. (1997). A novel Mcm1-dependent element in the SWI4, CLN3, CDC6, and CDC47 promoters activates M/G1-specific transcription. Genes Dev. 11, 1277–1288.

Mendenhall, M.D., and Hodge, A.E. (1998). Regulation of Cdc28 cyclin-dependent protein kinase activity during the cell cycle of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 62, 1191–1243.

Nash, R., Tokiwa, G., Anand, S., Erickson, K., and Futcher, A.B. (1988). The WHI1+ gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae tethers cell division to cell size and is a cyclin homolog. EMBO J. 7, 4335–4346.

Nevins, J.R. (2001). The Rb/E2F pathway and cancer. Hum. Mol. Genet. 10, 699–703.

Partridge, J.F., Mikesell, G.E., and Breeden, L.L. (1997). Cell cycle-dependent transcription of CLN1 involves swi4 binding to MCB-like elements. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 9071–9077.

Polymenis, M., and Schmidt, E.V. (1997). Coupling of cell division to cell growth by translational control of the G1 cyclin CLN3 in yeast. Genes Dev. 11, 2522–2531.

Reid, R.J., Sunjevaric, I., Keddache, M., Rothstein, R., and Kedache, M. (2002). Efficient PCR-based gene disruption in Saccharomyces strains using intergenic primers. Yeast 19, 319–328.

Richardson, H.E., Wittenberg, C., Cross, F., and Reed, S.I. (1989). An essential G1 function for cyclin-like proteins in yeast. Cell 59, 1127–1133.

Rigaut, G., Shevchenko, A., Rutz, B., Wilm, M., Mann, M., and Seraphin, B. (1999). A generic protein purification method for protein complex characterization and proteome exploration. Nat. Biotechnol. 17, 1030–1032.

Schwob, E., and Nasmyth, K. (1993). CLB5 and CLB6, a new pair of B cyclins involved in DNA replication in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genes Dev. 7, 1160–1175.

Sidorova, J.M., Mikesell, G.E., and Breeden, L.L. (1995). Cell cycle-regulated phosphorylation of Swi6 controls its nuclear localization. Mol. Biol. Cell 6, 1641–1658.

Simon, I., Barnett, J., Hannett, N., Harbison, C.T., Rinaldi, N.J., Volkert, T.L., Wyrick, J.J., Zeitlinger, J., Gifford, D.K., Jaakkola, T.S., and Young, R.A. (2001). Serial regulation of transcriptional regulators in the yeast cell cycle. Cell 106, 697–708.

Spellman, P.T., Sherlock, G., Zhang, M.Q., Iyer, V.R., Anders, K., Eisen, M.B., Brown, P.O., Botstein, D., and Futcher, B. (1998). Comprehensive identification of cell cycle-regulated genes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae by microarray hybridization. Mol. Biol. Cell 9, 3273–3297.

Stevens, C., and La Thangue, N.B. (2003). E2F and cell cycle control: a double-edged sword. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 412, 157–169.

Stuart, D., and Wittenberg, C. (1995). CLN3, not positive feedback, determines the timing of CLN2 transcription in cycling cells. Genes Dev. 9, 2780–2794.

Tyers, M., Tokiwa, G., and Futcher, B. (1993). Comparison of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae G1 cyclins: Cln3 may be an upstream activator of Cln1, Cln2 and other cyclins. EMBO J. 12, 1955–1968.

Ubersax, J.A., Woodbury, E.L., Quang, P.N., Paraz, M., Blethrow, J.D., Shah, K., Shokat, K.M., and Morgan, D.O. (2003). Targets of the cyclin-dependent kinase Cdk1. Nature 425, 859–864.

Wijnen, H., and Futcher, B. (1999). Genetic analysis of the shared role of CLN3 and BCK2 at the G(1)-S transition in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics 153, 1131–1143.

Wijnen, H., Landman, A., and Futcher, B. (2002). The G(1) cyclin Cln3 promotes cell cycle entry via the transcription factor Swi6. Mol. Cell. Biol. 22, 4402–4418.

Wittenberg, C., and Flick, K. (2003). Cell cycle regulation during G1 phase in yeast: decisions, decisions, decisions. In G1 Phase Progression, J. Boonstra, ed. (Georgetown, TX: Landes Biosciences), pp. 14–39.

Wolters, D.A., Washburn, M.P., and Yates, J.R., III (2001). An automated multidimensional protein identification technology for shotgun proteomics. Anal. Chem. 73, 5683–5690.

Zhang, J., Schneider, C., Ottmers, L., Rodriguez, R., Day, A., Markwardt, J., and Schneider, B.L. (2002). Genomic scale mutant hunt identifies cell size homeostasis genes in S. cerevisiae. Curr. Biol. 12, 1992–2001.
