
British Journal of Dermatology 2004; 151: 157–164.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2004.06048.x

# Dermatopathology

## Nuclear β-catenin in basal cell carcinoma correlates with increased proliferation

G.SALDANHA, V.GHURA,* L.POTTER AND A.FLETCHER†

*University of Leicester, Department of Cancer Studies and Molecular Medicine, Level 3, Robert Kilpatrick Clinical Sciences Building, Leicester, LE2 7LX, U.K.

*Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Wales, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XW, U.K.

†University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust, Department of Pathology, Sandringham Building, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Infirmary Close, Leicester, LE1 5WW, U.K.

Accepted for publication 22 December 2003

### Summary

**Background** Virtually all BCCs have deregulation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signalling pathway and a proportion show nuclear β-catenin accumulation. The latter is thought to be due to Hh pathway-directed Wnt expression but this has not been tested. An alternative cause of nuclear β-catenin accumulation is gene mutation, which stabilizes the protein. Theoretically, reduced E-cadherin expression could also be important because it can sequester β-catenin at the cell membrane. In turn, nuclear β-catenin can increase expression of MYC and cyclin D1, thus potentially altering proliferation.

**Objectives** To assess whether nuclear β-catenin occurs in BCC, and to look at potential causes and consequences.

**Methods** Nuclear β-catenin was assessed by immunohistochemistry, and its causes by analysis of E-cadherin expression, β-catenin exon 3 mutation and WNT5A expression. Its consequences were assessed by analysing proliferation.

**Results** We found nuclear β-catenin in 20 of 86 paraffin-embedded sections of BCCs using immunohistochemistry. BCCs showed increased WNT5A relative to the surrounding skin. No mutations in exon 3 of the β-catenin gene were found in 10 cases. There was no association between β-catenin localization and E-cadherin expression. Tumours with nuclear β-catenin had significantly higher proliferation (*P* < 0·01).

**Conclusions** The absence of β-catenin gene mutations indicate that the Hh pathway-directed Wnt signalling remains the most likely cause of nuclear β-catenin accumulation in BCC. Additionally, the correlation with increased proliferation is the first evidence that nuclear β-catenin may have a biological effect. However, a causal link between Hh pathway deregulation, Wnt ligand overexpression, nuclear β-catenin accumulation and increased proliferation remains to be confirmed.

**Key words:** β-catenin, CCND1, GLI, Hedgehog, Wnt, WNT5A

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the commonest human malignancy, displaying an unusual phenotype of relentless invasion but rare metastases. An understanding of the molecular basis of this behaviour remains elusive, although the discovery that deregulation of the Hedgehog (Hh) signalling pathway, usually via PTCH gene mutation, occurs in most tumours, represents an important advance. This has led to the evaluation of Wnt signalling in BCC because the ligands that head this pathway are conserved Hh pathway target genes. Cytoplasmic accumulation of β-catenin with subsequent translocation to the nucleus is an important consequence of Wnt signalling. Nuclear β-catenin, in association with tcf/lef proteins, increases transcription of genes that mediate key

Correspondence: Dr G.Saldanha.
E-mail: gss4@le.ac.uk

© 2004 British Association of Dermatologists

cancer cell processes. These include $MYC^{3}$ and cyclin D1 (CCND1), ${ }^{4}$ both important in cell cycle control, and matrix metalloproteinase 7, ${ }^{5}$ which plays a role in stromal degradation. Studies looking for nuclear $\beta$-catenin in BCC have given variable results. In two studies, cytoplasmic but not nuclear staining was reported, ${ }^{6,7}$ though Yamazaki *et al.* ${ }^{8}$ found nuclear protein in 14 of 20 cases and El-Bahrawy *et al.* found it in 48 of 80 cases. ${ }^{9}$

No study has yet addressed whether nuclear $\beta$-catenin accumulates because of Hh pathway-directed overexpression. However, there is evidence of increased Wnt expression in BCC ${ }^{10,11}$ and WNT1 expression correlates with cytoplasmic $\beta$-catenin. ${ }^{6}$ Of the potential target genes, WNT5A is an important candidate because it is a known target in hair follicle morphogenesis ${ }^{12}$ and BCC shows evidence of hair follicle differentiation. ${ }^{13-15}$ However, there is evidence that WNT5A acts through a noncanonical pathway involving protein kinase C in another skin cancer, melanoma. ${ }^{16}$ Hh pathway-independent mechanisms have not been excluded, such as $\beta$-catenin gene mutation, which occurs in other skin tumours, namely melanoma ${ }^{17}$ and pilomatrixoma. ${ }^{18}$ Changes in E-cadherin expression, as described in infiltrative BCC, ${ }^{19}$ may be relevant because in an experimental model system the protein can sequester $\beta$-catenin away from the cell nucleus. ${ }^{20}$ Whether this mechanism is important *in vivo* has not been established.

The aims of this study were to confirm that nuclear $\beta$-catenin accumulation occurs in BCC and to explore possible mechanisms, namely WNT5A expression, mutations in exon 3 of the $\beta$-catenin gene, and alterations in E-cadherin expression. Finally, to assess whether accumulation of $\beta$-catenin might have any biological significance, we examined its relationship to proliferation in view of its ability to transactivate genes such as CCND1 and MYC.

matched surrounding tissue. Finally, to identify the possible biological significance of nuclear $\beta$-catenin in BCC, we looked at the proliferation index using immunohistochemistry for Ki-67.

### Cases

Eighty-six paraffin-embedded tissue blocks from consecutive cases of BCC were obtained from the Leicester Royal Infirmary Histopathology archive. The mean age (years ± SD) of cases was $68 \cdot 6 \pm 11 \cdot 4$. The number of male and female cases was 41 (48%) and 45 (52%), respectively. The BCC growth pattern, assigned as described, ${ }^{15,21}$ comprised five (6%) infiltrative, 68 (79%) nodular and 13 (15%) superficial tumours. The mean tumour size (mean ± SD) was $1 \cdot 0 \pm 0 \cdot 5 \mathrm{~cm}$. The site of tumour origin was the head and neck in 70 cases (81%), trunk in 11 cases (13%) and limbs in five cases (6%). The tumours were fully excised in 66 cases (77%), incompletely excised in 14 cases (16%), and six cases (7%) were punch biopsies. The patients were treated in 1986, and of these, two lesions recurred after 4 and 5 years, respectively, whereas there was no evidence of recurrence after 15 years in 64. Details of clinical follow-up could not be found for the remaining 20 cases.

### Immunoperoxidase staining

Avidin-biotin complex (ABC) immunoperoxidase was performed on 5-$\mu \mathrm{m}$ paraffin-embedded tissue sections mounted on silane-coated slides, based on a method described. ${ }^{22}$ Briefly, sections were dewaxed in xylene and then rehydrated through graded alcohols. Antigen retrieval was performed by pressure-cooking the sections in citrate buffer ($10 \mathrm{mmol} \mathrm{L}^{-1}$ citric acid pH 6·0) for 2 min. Endogenous peroxidase was blocked by incubating the sections in 2% hydrogen peroxide for 30 min at room temperature. Nonspecific staining was blocked with normal rabbit serum diluted 1 in 5 in Tris-buffered saline, pH 7·6 with 0·1% bovine serum albumin (TBS/BSA). One hundred microlitres of primary antibody, diluted in 20% normal rabbit serum, was applied to the test sections and incubated at $4^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ overnight. All primary antibodies were mouse monoclonal. E-cadherin (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, U.S.A., clone HECD-1) was diluted 1 in 150, $\beta$-catenin (Transduction Laboratories, Lexington, KY, U.S.A., clone 14), 1 in 500, and Ki-67 (Immunotech, Marseille, France, clone MIB1), 1 in 50. Sections were then incubated with $100 \mu \mathrm{L}$ of biotinylated rabbit antimouse

### Materials and methods

A range of methods was used to explore the above aims. Immunohistochemistry was done to assess the localization of $\beta$-catenin protein. To identify possible influences on the distribution of $\beta$-catenin, we used immunohistochemistry for E-cadherin to determine whether it might play a role in sequestering $\beta$-catenin away from the nucleus. We sequenced exon 3 of the $\beta$-catenin gene to look for mutations that are known to stabilize the protein. We used the reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to look for increased WNT5A expression in BCC compared with
secondary antibody diluted 1 in 400 in TBS/BSA at room temperature for 30 min. After this, sections were incubated with 100 μL of the ABC solution (Dako, High Wycombe, Bucks, U.K.) at room temperature for 30 min, followed by 100 μL of diaminobenzidine tetra-chloride solution at room temperature for 5 min, then counterstained in Mayer's haematoxylin. Sections were dehydrated, transferred to fresh xylene and then mounted in a resinous mountant.

### Immunoperoxidase scoring

E-cadherin and β-catenin were scored using a semi-quantitative system. For membranous E-cadherin, an arbitrary scale was used where negative cases had no staining, and weak, moderate and strongly positive cases were defined as <25%, 25–50% and >50% tumour cell staining, respectively. For nuclear and cytoplasmic β-catenin fewer cells were stained; therefore, to maximize information from the data a different arbitrary scale was used. Negative cases had no staining, while weak, moderate and strongly positive cases were defined as <20%, 20–40% and >40% tumour cell staining, respectively. However, for statistical tests β-catenin was scored as positive or negative. This was to maximize group sizes to allow valid comparisons. The cut-offs for each score were assigned arbitrarily by determining where the highest score lay for a given marker, and then using this to form three equal intervals corresponding to weak, moderate and strong. This was done before statistical tests were performed. Proliferation was measured as the percentage of positively stained tumour cells counted in 20 fields using a ×40 objective. Immunohistochemistry was done in batches. In order to control for staining variability between batches, the same internal and external positive controls were used. Internal positive controls for membranous E-cadherin and β-catenin were keratinocytes; for nuclear and cytoplasmic β-catenin, hair matrix cells and keratinocytes of hair infundibula; and for assessing the adequacy of Ki-67 staining, basal keratinocytes. The external positive control, used for each batch of staining, was a section of normal skin for E-cadherin and a section of colorectal carcinoma for β-catenin and Ki-67. For every section, a paired negative control was included. Scoring was done by a pathologist (GS) after initially agreeing reference examples of strong, moderate and weak staining with a second pathologist (AF). The immunostain for a given primary antibody was assessed without reference to scores for other primary antibodies.

---

DNA sequencing

Areas of BCC were microdissected from eosin-stained paraffin-embedded tissue sections using a sterile drawn out capillary tube and transferred to 25 μL of DNA extraction buffer [200 μg mL⁻¹ proteinase K, 1 mmol L⁻¹ ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) and 100 mmol L⁻¹ Tris–HCl pH 8·8] as described.²³ Of this sample, 2 μL was added to PCR buffer [45 mmol L⁻¹ Tris, pH 8·8, 11 mmol L⁻¹ (NH₄)₂SO₄, 4·5 mmol L⁻¹ MgCl₂, 200 μmol L⁻¹ deoxyribonucleo-side triphosphates (dNTPs), 110 μg μmL⁻¹ ultrapure BSA, 6·7 mmol L⁻¹ β-mercaptoethanol, 4·4 μmol L⁻¹ EDTA, pH 8·0] and amplified using hot start PCR as follows: 94 °C for 3 min, 80 °C for addition of 1 unit Taq DNA polymerase, 67 °C for 30 s, 72 °C for 30 s and then 34 cycles of 94 °C for 30 s, 67 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 30 s, followed by 72 °C for 7 min. Primers were as described²⁴ and flanked the exon 3-encoded phosphorylation sites of the β-catenin gene. The PCR product was purified with the QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen, Crawley, U.K.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Automated fluorescent sequencing of both strands of the PCR product was performed using the ABI prism Big-Dye terminator cycle sequencing ready reaction kit (PE Biosystems, Foster City, C.A., U.S.A.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions using an internal reverse primer (5′ TCC TCA GGA TTG CCTTTA CCA 3′) and the forward PCR primer.

---

Extraction of mRNA and reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction

Extraction of mRNA from paraffin-embedded tissue was performed by dewaxing a 5-μm section with two 5-min washes in xylene, two 2-min washes in 99% alcohol, and one 2-min wash in 95% alcohol. The pellet was dried completely in a vacuum dryer and then incubated overnight at 60 °C in 200 μL of RNA extraction buffer (0·01 mol L⁻¹ Tris, pH 8, 0·1 mol L⁻¹ EDTA, 2% sodium dodecyl sulphate, 0·5 mg mL⁻¹ proteinase K). One millilitre of Tri-Reagent (Sigma-Aldrich Gillingham, U.K.) was mixed with the lysate and allowed to stand at room temperature for 5 min, then mixed with 200 μL of chloroform and left for 3 min. After spinning the sample in a microfuge for 15 min at 4 °C, the aqueous phase was removed and mixed with 500 μL of fresh Tri-Reagent and a further chloroform extraction was performed with 100 μL of reagent. One

© 2004 British Association of Dermatologists, *British Journal of Dermatology*, **151**, 157–164
microlitre of glycogen (1 mg mL⁻¹) and 500 μL isopropanol was added and left for 10 min, then spun in a microfuge for 10 min at 4 °C. The pellet was washed in 1 mL of 70% ethanol and finally suspended in 100 μL of ultrapure water. From this, mRNA was extracted with oligo(dT)₂₅ Dynabeads and reagents (Dynal, Bromborough, U.K.) as described in the manufacturer’s protocol using 20 μL of Dynabeads. After extraction, Dynabead-bound mRNA was finally resuspended in 20 μL of sterile diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC)-treated water.

The reverse transcription reaction consisted of 10 μL of the Dynabead-bound mRNA mixed in 1 × AMV RT buffer, 1·6 mmol L⁻¹ of each dNTP, 40 U RNasin, 8 U AMV reverse transcriptase (all from Promega, Southampton, Hants, U.K.), made up to 25 μL with DEPC-treated water. The remaining 10 μL of the Dynabead-bound mRNA was used in a negative control reaction, with DEPC-treated water replacing reverse transcriptase.

PCR was performed using primers (all given in 5′ to 3′ orientation) for human GAPD (forward: GCA AGA GCA CAA GAG GAA GA; reverse: ACT GTG AGG AGG GGA GAT TC), GLI (forward: CAC AGA TCG CAT TTC CTA AG; reverse: TCA AAT TTC TCC TCA AAA CG), PTCH (forward: GAC TTC CCT CTG GCT CCT G; reverse: CTC CCT TTG CCA ATG TGA CT), and WNT5A (forward: AGA GTT GAG TTT AAC AAT CCT AGC; reverse: TAC AAA TCA CGC AAG ACA GA). These primers were designed for amplifying degraded mRNA from paraffin-embedded tissues by having an amplicon < 200 base pairs long and close to the poly(A) tail from which the RT reaction was primed. PCR was performed as described for sequencing except that primers were annealed at 60 °C and amplified for 40 cycles.

### Statistical analysis

Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS for Windows, version 9·0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, U.S.A.). Quantitative variables were compared using a Mann–Whitney test for two independent samples and the Kruskall–Wallis test for greater than two samples. Qualitative data were compared using a two-tailed χ²-test, and P < 0·05 was considered significant.

---

### Results

#### Nuclear β-catenin is present in basal cell carcinoma

Nuclear β-catenin was identified in 20 of 86 cases (23%). A detailed breakdown is given in Table 1. Nuclear β-catenin was found in a distinctive pattern that was characterized by accentuation at the periphery of tumour nests (Fig. 1a), but other patterns were seen less frequently. In one case, nuclear β-catenin was present in cells that had a complex pattern characterized by intermingling of tumour and stroma (Fig. 1b). Another case had nuclear β-catenin in foci of larger cells with more squamous morphology at the centre of tumour islands (Fig. 1c). There was no relationship between β-catenin localization and BCC histological subtype, although samples were biased towards the solid type because answering this question was not one of our aims.

In surrounding tissue, nuclear β-catenin was seen occasionally in fibroblasts directly adjacent to the tumour islands. Hair matrix cells showed striking nuclear and cytoplasmic β-catenin, while the cells of dermal papillae showed less intense nuclear staining (Fig. 1d). β-catenin was localized to the cell membrane in interfollicular epidermis adjacent to BCC, although very occasional suprabasal, interfollicular keratinocytes contained nuclear β-catenin. Cells of hair infundibula frequently contained nuclear β-catenin.

Cytoplasmic and nuclear β-catenin tended to be seen together (P < 0·001). This was reflected in a similar number of positive cases, 17 of 86 (20%), and a similar distribution of weak, moderate and strong immunostaining (Table 1). Membranous β-catenin expression was mostly strong or moderate except for two cases with weak expression. Membranous E-cadherin was at least moderately expressed in all cases.

#### Causes of nuclear β-catenin accumulation

We looked at WNT5A as a candidate for linking the findings of Hh pathway deregulation and nuclear β-catenin in BCC. Two BCCs and their matched surrounding skin were compared using RT-PCR, one of which is shown in Figure 2. This confirmed that the

---

| Negative | Weak       | Moderate    | Strong      |
|----------|------------|-------------|-------------|
| Nuclear β-catenin | 66 (76.7%) | 13 (15.1%) | 4 (4.7%)   | 3 (3.5%)   |
| Cytoplasmic β-catenin | 69 (80.2%) | 10 (11.6%) | 5 (5.8%)   | 2 (2.3%)   |
| Membranous β-catenin | 0          | 2 (2.3%)   | 32 (37.2%) | 52 (60.5%) |
| Membranous E-cadherin | 0          | 0          | 46 (53.5%) | 40 (46.5%) |

© 2004 British Association of Dermatologists, *British Journal of Dermatology*, **151**, 157–164

NUCLEAR β-CATENIN IN BCC 161

Figure 1. Nuclear β-catenin in BCC. Nuclear β-catenin is shown in (a) highlighting peripheral accentuation; bar = 30 μm. (b) Shows a case with a complex interaction between tumour and stroma; bar = 30 μm. In (c), tumour cells containing nuclear β-catenin were centrally placed in a tumour island; bar = 90 μm. (d) Shows nuclear β-catenin in hair matrix and papilla; bar = 90 μm.

GAPDH GlI1 Ptch1 Wnt5a

Figure 2. Increased Hh pathway activity and WNT5A expression in basal cell carcinoma (BCC) vs. surrounding tissue. For each indicated primer set, the left lane is BCC and the right lane is matched surrounding tissue.

Hh pathway was active in BCC because there was increased expression of the known target genes, GLI and PTCH. In addition, we found increased levels of WNT5A expression in BCC.

We looked for alternative causes of nuclear β-catenin accumulation. Exon 3 of the β-catenin gene was sequenced because it is a mutation hotspot containing key phosphorylation sites. No mutations were found in 10 BCCs showing nuclear β-catenin expression, including seven with strong and moderate expression. As a positive control, three pilomatrixxomas were sequenced and one of these had an A to G transition mutation at codon 41 resulting in alanine substituting for threonine.

Figure 3. Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) shows absence of mutations in exon 3 of the β-catenin gene. The codon numbers are shown at the top of the figure. (a) Shows a pilomatrixoma with an A to G transition (codon denoted as N), and (b) is a BCC with strong nuclear β-catenin expression. No mutation is present in the BCC.

The results, shown in Figure 3, suggest that β-catenin exon 3 mutations are not likely to be common in BCC.

Table 2 shows that E-cadherin expression had no relationship to the location of β-catenin protein. In particular, 40% (eight of 20) of cases with nuclear β-catenin retained strong membranous E-cadherin, thus arguing against the proposal that the latter has any ability to sequester β-catenin away from the BCC nuclei.

© 2004 British Association of Dermatologists, *British Journal of Dermatology*, **151**, 157–164

162 G.SALDANHA et al.

| Nuclear β-catenin | Negative | Positive | P-value |
|-------------------|----------|----------|---------|
| Cytoplasmic β-catenin<sup>a</sup> | Negative | 63 (95·5%) | 6 (30%) |  |
|  | Positive | 3 (4·5%) | 14 (70%) | *P* < 0·001 |
| Membranous β-catenin<sup>a</sup> | Weak | 2 (3%) | 0 (0%) |  |
|  | Moderate | 27 (40·9%) | 5 (25%) |  |
|  | Strong | 37 (56·1%) | 15 (75%) | NS |
| Membranous E-cadherin<sup>a</sup> | Moderate | 34 (51·5%) | 12 (60%) |  |
|  | Strong | 32 (48·5%) | 8 (40%) | NS |
| Proliferation<sup>b</sup> |  | 14·0% ± 6·8% | 21·8% ± 10·5% | *P* < 0·01 |
|  |  | (*n* = 66) | (*n* = 20) |  |

NS, not statistically significant. <sup>a</sup>Data are shown as actual counts with percentages in brackets.  
<sup>b</sup>Data are expressed as mean percentage of positive cells per 20 high power fields ± SD.

### Nuclear β-catenin correlates with an increased proliferation in basal cell carcinoma

Nuclear β-catenin increases transcription of *CCND1* and *MYC* in colorectal carcinoma cells, both of which positively affect proliferation. We therefore assessed whether there was a relationship between nuclear β-catenin and proliferation in BCC. Tumours were immunostained with the proliferation marker Ki-67. They showed a mean proliferation index of 15·8% with a range from 4·6% to 41·5%. The Ki-67-positive cells were generally distributed evenly throughout the tumours. We did not do a formal mitotic count, although we did note that Ki-67 was seen in mitotically active cases.

A statistically significant association was observed between the presence of nuclear β-catenin and increased proliferation (*P* < 0·01, Table 2), with positive cases showing a 50% increase in proliferation. A wide range of proliferation scores was noted, with some positive cases having low proliferation and vice versa. This was partly accounted for by breaking down proliferation by the strength of nuclear β-catenin staining. This showed that negative through to strongly positive tumours had proliferation counts of 14·0%, 18·6%, 24·1% and 32·8%, respectively (*P* < 0·01). Increased proliferation was also seen with cytoplasmic β-catenin (*P* < 0·01). This reflected the fact that cytoplasmic and nuclear β-catenin covaried with each other. Interestingly, the distribution of nuclear β-catenin-positive cells and Ki-67-positive cells was not the same. In particular, Ki-67 was distributed in cells throughout tumour islands, whereas nuclear β-catenin was most marked at the periphery of tumour islands. This would argue against a causal relationship between the two. Figure 4 shows corresponding fields demonstrating E-cadherin and Ki-67 in two BCCs, one with and one without nuclear β-catenin.

### Discussion

We identified nuclear β-catenin in 20 of 86 BCCs. A previous study found nuclear β-catenin in none of 195 BCCs.<sup>7</sup> More recently, Yamazaki *et al.* used a sensitive immunofluorescent method on frozen tissue and were able to detect nuclear β-catenin in 14 of 20 BCC samples,<sup>8</sup> but were unable reliably to detect nuclear β-catenin in paraffin-embedded samples, while El-Bahrawy *et al.*, using the same primary antibody as us, saw nuclear β-catenin in 48 of 80 cases.<sup>9</sup> However, their cases were a more even mix of BCC subtypes. The precise reasons for these discrepancies are not apparent, but differences in tissue fixation and processing between laboratories could be a possibility. Hh pathway deregulation is an almost universal feature of BCC,<sup>1,2,25</sup> while its putative consequence, nuclear β-catenin accumulation, occurs at a lower frequency according to our own data and that cited above. Indeed, more than three-quarters of our cases lacked nuclear β-catenin. This could be taken as evidence that Hh pathway deregulation is not the cause. Alternatively, other additional alterations may be needed for immunohistochemically detectable amounts of nuclear β-catenin to accumulate, with Hh pathway deregulation merely having a permissive effect.

In support of Hh pathway-directed Wnt signalling as the cause for nuclear β-catenin accumulation, we demonstrated that BCC had higher levels of Hh pathway target genes *GLI* and *PTCH*, and increased levels of *WNT5A*. Increased *WNT5A* expression has been previously documented in BCC, but this was compared with unrelated normal skin samples or with squamous cell carcinoma, whereas we used surrounding skin matched to the tumour, which is more likely to provide a valid comparison. However, a causal association between these findings still needs to be

© 2004 British Association of Dermatologists, *British Journal of Dermatology*, **151**, 157–164

NUCLEAR β-CATENIN IN BCC 163

Figure 4. β-catenin expression correlates with proliferation, but not E-cadherin expression. (a–c) Show membranous E-cadherin and low proliferation in a basal cell carcinoma (BCC) lacking nuclear β-catenin. (d–f) Illustrate membranous E-cadherin and high proliferation in a BCC showing peripheral accentuation of nuclear β-catenin staining, indicated by the arrow. Bar = 50 μm.

established, as does the nature of the precise Wnt ligand(s) that might be involved. Nevertheless, the Hh pathway-induced accumulation of nuclear β-catenin remains likely because our data demonstrate that the most important alternative mechanism in skin cancer, β-catenin mutation in exon 3, was not present in 10 BCCs with nuclear β-catenin expression. This suggests that these mutations are not frequent in BCC. However, the possibility that mutations are present in other members of the Wnt pathway, such as Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC), has not been excluded. Loss of E-cadherin might allow more β-catenin to be released into the cytoplasm, tipping the balance in favour of nuclear localization. However, our data do not support this, because E-cadherin expression had no correlation with nuclear β-catenin. However, the effect of E-cadherin on the cellular localization of β-catenin is complicated by the expression of other cadherin family members. P-cadherin, normally present in basal keratinocytes, is widely expressed in BCC, even when E-cadherin is lost.¹⁹ Importantly, P-cadherin can bind to β-catenin²⁶ and could tether β-catenin to the cell membrane, substituting for reduced E-cadherin.

We also assessed whether β-catenin accumulation had any functional significance. Because nuclear β-catenin is known to affect transcription of genes such as MYC and CCND1, its relationship to proliferation was analysed and a positive correlation was found. However, the distribution of nuclear β-catenin and proliferating cells differed, which argues against a causal relationship unless β-catenin upregulates expression of a diffusible mitogen. In addition, Hh pathway stimulation may have a direct cytoplasmic effect, distinct from activation of putative target genes such as WNT5A. For instance, PTCH mutation can directly affect the cellular distribution of cyclin D1 with a favourable effect on cell cycle progression.²⁷

© 2004 British Association of Dermatologists, *British Journal of Dermatology*, **151**, 157–164

In summary, we found that accumulation of β-catenin in BCC nuclei was significantly associated with increased proliferation, this being the first demonstration that nuclear accumulation may have a biological effect. No studies have addressed the mechanism behind accumulation in BCC, and for the first time, we show that mutations in exon 3 of the β-catenin gene and changes in E-cadherin expression are unlikely to be involved. WNT5A, a potential regulator of β-catenin distribution, is increased in BCC, but a causal link between Hh pathway deregulation, Wnt ligand over-expression, nuclear β-catenin accumulation and increased proliferation remains to be confirmed.

# Acknowledgments

We wish to thank Rachel Powis and Karen Conway who performed a large proportion of the immunostaining. We also thank Dr Louise Jones and Professor Rosemary Walker for their helpful comments during this study. This work has been supported by funding for a clinical research fellowship from the University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust (formerly Leicester Royal Infirmary NHS Trust).

# References

1. Dahmane N, Lee J, Robins P *et al.* Activation of the transcription factor Gli1 and the Sonic hedgehog signalling pathway in skin tumours. *Nature* 1997; **389**: 876–81.
2. Unden AB, Zaphiropoulos PG, Bruce K *et al.* Human patched (PTCH) mRNA is overexpressed consistently in tumor cells of both familial and sporadic basal cell carcinoma. *Cancer Res* 1997; **57**: 2336–40.
3. He TC, Sparks AB, Rago C *et al.* Identification of c-MYC as a target of the APC pathway. *Science* 1998; **281**: 1509–12.
4. Tetsu O, McCormick F. Beta-catenin regulates expression of cyclin D1 in colon carcinoma cells. *Nature* 1999; **398**: 422–6.
5. Crawford HC, Fingleton BM, Rudolph Owen LA *et al.* The metalloproteinase matrilysin is a target of beta-catenin transactivation in intestinal tumors. *Oncogene* 1999; **18**: 2883–91.
6. Lo Muzio L, Pannone G, Staibano S *et al.* WNT-1 expression in basal cell carcinoma of head and neck. An immunohistochemical and confocal study with regard to the intracellular distribution of beta-catenin. *Anticancer Res* 2002; **22**: 565–76.
7. Boonchai W, Walsh M, Cummings M *et al.* Expression of beta-catenin, a key mediator of the WNT signaling pathway, in basal cell carcinoma. *Arch Dermatol* 2000; **136**: 937–8 (Letter).
8. Yamazaki F, Aragane Y, Kawada A *et al.* Immunohistochemical detection for nuclear beta-catenin in sporadic basal cell carcinoma. *Br J Dermatol* 2001; **145**: 771–7.
9. El-Bahrawy M, El-Masry N, Alison M *et al.* Expression of beta-catenin in basal cell carcinoma. *Br J Dermatol* 2003; **148**: 964–70.
10. Bonifas JM, Pennypacker S, Chuang PT *et al.* Activation of expression of hedgehog target genes in basal cell carcinomas. *J Invest Dermatol* 2001; **116**: 739–42.
11. Mullor JL, Dahmane N, Sun T *et al.* Wnt signals are targets and mediators of Gli function. *Curr Biol* 2001; **11**: 769–73.
12. Reddy S, Andl T, Bagasra A *et al.* Characterization of Wnt gene expression in developing and postnatal hair follicles and identification of Wnt5a as a target of Sonic hedgehog in hair follicle morphogenesis. *Mech Dev* 2001; **107**: 69–82.
13. Callahan CA, Oro AE. Monstrous attempts at adnexogenesis: regulating hair follicle progenitors through Sonic hedgehog signaling. *Curr Opin Genet Dev* 2001; **11**: 541–6.
14. Oro AE, Scott MP. Splitting hairs: dissecting roles of signaling systems in epidermal development. *Cell* 1998 **95**: 575–8.
15. Saldanha G, Fletcher A, Slater DN. Basal cell carcinoma: a dermatopathological and molecular biological update. *Br J Dermatol* 2003; **148**: 195–202.
16. Weeraratna AT, Jiang Y, Hostetter G *et al.* Wnt5a signaling directly affects cell motility and invasion of metastatic melanoma. *Cancer Cell* 2002; **1**: 279–88.
17. Rimm DL, Caca K, Hu G *et al.* Frequent nuclear/cytoplasmic localization of beta-catenin without exon 3 mutations in malignant melanoma. *Am J Pathol* 1999; **154**: 325–9.
18. Chan EF, Gat U, McNiff JM *et al.* A common human skin tumour is caused by activating mutations in beta-catenin. *Nat Genet* 1999; **21**: 410–13.
19. Pizarro A, Gamallo C, Benito N *et al.* Differential patterns of placental and epithelial cadherin expression in basal cell carcinoma and in the epidermis overlying tumours. *Br J Cancer* 1995; **72**: 327–32.
20. Orsulic S, Huber O, Aberle H *et al.* E-cadherin binding prevents beta-catenin nuclear localization and beta-catenin/LEF-1-mediated transactivation. *J Cell Sci* 1999; **112**: 1237–45.
21. Rippey JJ. Why classify basal cell carcinomas? *Histopathology* 1998; **32**: 393–8.
22. Heryet AR, Gatter KC. Immunohistochemistry for light microscopy. In: *Diagnostic Molecular Pathology* (Herrington CS, McGee JOD, eds), Vol. 1. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.
23. Walsh T, Chappell SA, Shaw JA *et al.* Microsatellite instability in ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast. *J Pathol* 1998 **185**: 18–24.
24. Saito T, Oda Y, Sakamoto A *et al.* Prognostic value of the preserved expression of the E-cadherin and catenin families of adhesion molecules and of beta-catenin mutations in synovial sarcoma. *J Pathol* 2000; **192**: 342–50.
25. Green J, Leigh IM, Poulson R *et al.* Basal cell carcinoma development is associated with induction of the expression of the transcription factor Gli-1. *Br J Dermatol* 1998; **139**: 911–15.
26. Sanders DS, Perry I, Hardy R *et al.* Aberrant P-cadherin expression is a feature of clonal expansion in the gastrointestinal tract associated with repair and neoplasia. *J Pathol* 2000; **190**: 526–30.
27. Barnes EA, Kong M, Ollendorff V *et al.* Patched1 interacts with cyclin B1 to regulate cell cycle progression. *EMBO J* 2001; **20**: 2214–23.
