
This article was downloaded by: [Umeå University Library]
On: 06 October 2014, At: 04:40
Publisher: Taylor&Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

---

**Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry**

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
[http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tbbb20](http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tbbb20)

Cloning and Characterization of the Genes Encoding Enzymes for the Protocatechuate Meta-degradation Pathway of Pseudomonas ochraceae NGJ 1

Kiyofumi MARUYAMA${}^{a}$, Tomohiko SHIBAYAMA${}^{a}$, Aki ICHIKAWA${}^{a}$, Yukari SAKOU${}^{a}$, Satsue YAMADA${}^{a}$ & Hiroyuki SUGISAKI${}^{b}$

${}^{a}$ Department of Biomolecular Science, Faculty of Engineering, Gifu University  
${}^{b}$ Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University  

Published online: 22 May 2014.

---

To cite this article: Kiyofumi MARUYAMA, Tomohiko SHIBAYAMA, Aki ICHIKAWA, Yukari SAKOU, Satsue YAMADA & Hiroyuki SUGISAKI (2004) Cloning and Characterization of the Genes Encoding Enzymes for the Protocatechuate Meta-degradation Pathway of Pseudomonas ochraceae NGJ 1, Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry, 68:7, 1434-1441, DOI: [10.1271/bbb.68.1434](https://doi.org/10.1271/bbb.68.1434)

To link to this article: [http://dx.doi.org/10.1271/bbb.68.1434](http://dx.doi.org/10.1271/bbb.68.1434)

---

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor&Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor&Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor&Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at [http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions](http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions)

Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 68 (7), 1434–1441, 2004

# Cloning and Characterization of the Genes Encoding Enzymes for the Protocatechuate Meta-degradation Pathway of *Pseudomonas ochraceae* NGJ1

Kiyofumi MARUYAMA,$^{1,\dagger}$ Tomohiko SHIBAYAMA,$^{1}$ Aki ICHIKAWA,$^{1}$ Yukari SAKOU,$^{1}$ Satsue YAMADA,$^{1}$ and Hiroyuki SUGISAKI$^{2}$

$^{1}$Department of Biomolecular Science, Faculty of Engineering, Gifu University, Yanagido 1-1, Gifu 501-1193, Japan  
$^{2}$Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, Uji, Kyoto 611-0011, Japan  

Received December 17, 2003; Accepted April 28, 2004

The 2-pyrone-4,6-dicarboxylate lactonase gene (*proL*), the protocatechuate 4,5-dioxygenase α and β subunits genes (*proOa* and *proOb*), and the 4-carboxy-2-hydroxymuconate-6-semialdehyde dehydrogenase gene (*proD*) were cloned from the chromosomal DNA of *Pseudomonas ochraceae* NGJ1. These genes were in the order *proLOaObD* on the DNA, and a possible transcription terminator sequence followed. The *proL* and *proD* genes were over-expressed in *Escherichia coli*, and their gene products were purified for identification, while the expression of *proOaOb* was at a lower level. The protocatechuate meta-degradation operon was reconstituted with the recombinant plasmids and expressed successfully in *E. coli*.

Key words: protocatechuate meta-degradation operon; protocatechuate 4,5-dioxygenase; 2-pyrone-4,6-dicarboxylate

Protocatechuate (PCA) is a common intermediate in the biodegradation of various aromatic compounds including phthalate,$^{1)}$ terephthalate,$^{2)}$ fluorene,$^{3)}$ 3- and 4-hydroxybenzoate,$^{4,5)}$ 3- and 4-nitrobenzoate,$^{6,7)}$ 3-chlorobenzoate,$^{8)}$ 4-sulfobenzoate,$^{9)}$ and various methoxy derivatives of benzoate.$^{10)}$ Some microorganisms metabolize PCA through the meta-degradation pathway (the α-keto acid pathway) (Fig. 1). In this pathway, PCA undergoes 4,5-cleavage by PCA 4,5-dioxygenase (EC 1.13.11.8), a non-heme iron protein with a subunit composition of $α_2β_2$, to give 4-carboxy-2-hydroxymuconate-6-semialdehyde (CHMS).$^{11)}$ CHMS is converted to 2-pyrone-4,6-dicarboxylate (PDC) by NAD(P)$^+$-dependent CHMS dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.45).$^{12-14)}$ PDC is hydrolyzed by PDC lactonase (EC 3.1.1.57) to give 4-oxalomesaconate,$^{15)}$ which is hydrated by 4-oxalome-

---

$\dagger$ To whom correspondence should be addressed. Fax: +81-58-293-3061; E-mail: maruyama@cc.gifu-u.ac.jp

Abbreviations: PCA, protocatechuate; CHMS, 4-carboxy-2-hydroxymuconate-6-semialdehyde; PDC, 2-pyrone-4,6-dicarboxylate; SDS-PAGE, sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; DIG, digoxigenin; IPTG, isopropyl β-thiogalactopyranoside; ORF, open reading frame

The nucleotide sequence reported in this paper has been submitted to DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank Nucleotide Sequence Databases under accession no. AB127969. It should be noted that *Pseudomonas ochraceae* was registered as *Pseudomonas straminea* in the databases.

Genes of the Protocatechuate Meta-degradation Pathway

Fig. 2. Gene Clusters Involved in PCA Meta-degradation Pathway.
A, *ligl* gene cluster in lignin-assimilating *S. paucimobilis* SYK-6 (GenBank accession no. AB073227); B, *fld* gene cluster in fluorene-mineralizing *Sphingomonas* sp. LB126C (GenBank accession no. AJ277295); C, *pmd* gene cluster in *C. testosteroni* BR6020 (GenBank accession no. AF305325); D, *pcm* gene cluster in *A. keyseri* catabolic plasmid pRE1 for phthalate degradation (GenBank accession no. AF331043); E, *pro* operon of *P. ochraceae* NGJ1 (present study). Bars show the cloned DNA regions, in which the genes of the PCA meta-degradation pathway are located. Genes definitely unrelated to the protocatechuate meta-degradation pathway are not shown. Shaded and unshaded arrows show the positions of identified and unidentified genes respectively. Homologous genes are shown with the same pattern. Possible promoter and terminator sequences are marked with open and closed triangles respectively.

suggested in *Arthrobacter keyseri* 12B.²⁷) In these cases, however, most coding regions were assigned based only on the nucleotide sequences without direct biochemical identification.

In previous work,¹⁹) we cloned an *EcoRI* 7.5-kb DNA fragment from the chromosomal DNA of *P. ochraceae* NGJ1 (GenBank accession no. AB050935), and found a promoter-like sequence and five *pro* genes, including an unidentified gene (*proX*), a transporter gene (*proT*), a 4-oxalomesaconate hydratase gene (*proH*), a 4-hydroxy-4-methyl-2-oxoglutarate aldolase gene (*proA*), and a 3′-truncated PDC lactonase gene (*proL*) on the DNA fragment (Fig. 3A). In the present study, we examined a 4.7-kb DNA region including the region downstream of the *EcoRI* 7.5-kb DNA region, and showed that the region carried PCA 4,5-dioxygenase α and β subunit genes (*proOa* and *proOb*) and CHMS dehydrogenase gene (*proD*) along with the entire *proL*. Gene expression in *E. coli* was also investigated to show that (1) *proOa* and *proOb* were expressed at lower levels than *proL* and *proD*, and (2) the whole *pro* operon was composed of *proXTHALOaObD*.

### Materials and Methods

#### Microorganisms
*P. ochraceae* (NGJ1, Faculty of Engineering, Gifu University) was cultured in the

Fig. 3. Restriction Digest Maps of the Cloned DNA Fragments.
(A) pBEE7.5 and (B) pCHH12. Bars show the DNA fragments. The names of the recombinant plasmids carrying each DNA fragment are shown at the right or left side of each bar. The positions of the possible promoter and transcription terminator are shown by “p” and “t” respectively. Triangles on the bars show the hybridization site of OLG1. Bold arrows below the bars show the positions of *pro* genes. Below pCHH12, the leftmost *HindIII-KpnI* 4.7-kb region with the location of the subcloned DNA fragments is shown. The direction of the *lac* promoter of plasmid vector is shown with arrows (*plac*). Abbreviations: A, *ApaI*; E, *EcoRI*; H, *HindIII*; K, *KpnI*; N, *NotI*; S, *SmaI*; X, *XhoI*.

phthalate medium as described previously.¹²) *E. coli* XL1-Blue MRA (P2) was used as the host for Charomid vector, and XL1-Blue MRF′ and MV1184 for plasmid vectors. *E. coli* BMH71-18 *mutS* was used in site-directed mutagenesis.

#### DNA preparation and manipulation
The chromosomal DNA of *P. ochraceae* NGJ1 was prepared as described previously.¹⁹) Charomid 9-28 and pMW239 were obtained from Nippon Gene (Tokyo, Japan), pUC19 and pKF19k from TaKaRa (Kusatsu, Japan), and pBluescript SK from Stratagene (La Jolla, California, U.S.A.). An oligonucleotide OLG1 (5′-TCCTGGG-CCTGGATATGTACAAGATGCGCG-3′) was prepared for the sense sequence of nucleotide nos. 6,443–6,472 of the *EcoRI* 7.5-kb region, labeled at the 3′-terminal with digoxigenin (DIG)-dUTP using a DIG-tailing label kit (Boehringer Mannheim GmbH, Germany), and used as a probe for hybridization. Southern and colony hybridizations were done at 53 °C. Hybridization signals on nylon membranes were detected with a DIG luminescent detection kit according to the protocols. Gigapack (Stratagene) was used for in vitro packaging. All enzymes used in DNA manipulation were obtained

from TaKaRa. Extraction of DNA from agarose gel was done with GeneClean (Qbiogene, Carlsbad, California, U.S.A.). Site-directed mutagenesis was done by the oligonucleotide-directed dual amber method using a Mutan-express Km (TaKaRa).²⁸) DNA digestion, ligation, transformation, and plasmid isolation were done as described by Sambrook *et al.*²⁹)

**Analysis of nucleotide sequence.** The deletion mutants for DNA sequencing were prepared with a Kilo-sequence deletion kit (TaKaRa) after digestion with appropriate restriction enzymes. Both strands were sequenced on the denatured double-stranded DNA templates with a BigDye terminator cycle sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, U.K.) and M13 universal forward and reverse primers (TaKaRa). The nucleotide sequence was determined with an ABI Prism 377 DNA sequencer (Perkin-Elmer, Norwalk, Connecticut, U.S.A.). Alignments of overlapping sequence data were made using the DNASIS program (Hitachi Software Engineering, Yokohama, Japan). The nucleotide sequence and the deduced amino acid sequence were analyzed using the BLAST program with the GenBank database.³⁰) Protein sequence similarities were searched using the FASTA program with the SwissProt or the PIR database.³¹)

**Analysis of amino acid sequence.** The purified enzyme was put on sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). After electroblotting to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Atto, Tokyo, Japan), the protein band, stained with Coomassie brilliant blue R-250, was excised and analyzed with a Procise 492 protein sequencing system (Perkin-Elmer).

**Gene expression in E. coli.** Recombinant *E. coli* was cultured at 37°C in 500 ml of Luria–Bertani medium containing appropriate antibiotics (50 μg/ml ampicillin or 100 μg/ml kanamycin). When *A*₆₀₀ reached 0.11–0.13, isopropyl β-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) was added at a final concentration of 5 mM and the culture was continued. At the late log phase, the bacterial cells were collected by centrifugation at 4°C, washed once with 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (KPB), pH 7.0, and resuspended in about 6 ml of the same buffer. The cells were disrupted at 4°C with a Sonifier (Branson, Danbury, Connecticut, U.S.A.). The cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 15,000 × *g* for 15 min at 4°C, and the supernatant (crude extract) was used for enzyme preparation.

**Purification of pBHA2.0-derived PDC lactonase.** The following manipulations were done at 0–4°C with 20 mM KPB, pH 8.0. The crude extract was diluted with the buffer, so that *A*₂₈₀ was about 1.0. Then the solution was treated with solid ammonium sulfate. The fraction obtained in 50–60% saturation was collected by centrifugation, dissolved in 5 ml of the buffer, and dialyzed against 500 ml of the buffer. The solution was put on the gel filtration with Bio-Gel P-150 (3 × 30 cm) (Bio-Rad, Hercules, California, U.S.A.) previously equilibrated with the buffer. The active fractions were pooled and put on a DEAE-cellulose column (2 × 12 cm) (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) previously equilibrated with the buffer. The column was washed with the buffer. The enzyme was eluted after the breakthrough peak. The active fractions were pooled and stored at –25°C.

**Purification of pBNK3.1-derived CHMS dehydrogenase.** The following manipulations were done at 0–4°C with 50 mM KPB, pH 7.0, unless otherwise noted. The crude extract was diluted with the buffer, so that *A*₂₈₀ was about 1.0. Then the solution was treated with solid ammonium sulfate. The fraction obtained in 55–75% saturation was collected by centrifugation, dissolved in 5 ml of the buffer, and dialyzed against 2 liters of the buffer. NaCl was dissolved in the solution at a final concentration of 0.1 M. The solution was put on a Blue Sepharose CL-6B column (1.2 × 5 cm) (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, New Jersey, U.S.A.) previously equilibrated with the buffer containing 0.1 M NaCl. The column was washed with 100 ml of the equilibration buffer. Then the enzyme was eluted with the equilibration buffer containing 1 mM NADP⁺. The active fractions were pooled, dialyzed against the buffer, and stored at –25°C.

**Determination of molecular mass.** The molecular mass of the enzyme was estimated by gel filtration on Sephadex G-200 (Pharmacia Biotech, Uppsala, Sweden), as described by Andrews.³²) A calibration curve was prepared from the elution volumes of bovine liver catalase (*M*ᵣ = 250 kDa), yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (141 kDa), bovine serum albumin (66 kDa), ovalbumin (45 kDa), and soybean trypsin inhibitor (21 kDa). The subunit molecular mass was estimated by SDS-PAGE, which was done by the method of Laemmli³³) using a 12 or 15% acrylamide gel and the molecular mass marker proteins (Nacalai Tesque, Kyoto, Japan).

**Determination of enzyme activity.** All enzyme reactions were done at 25°C. The activities of PDC lactonase, CHMS dehydrogenase, 4-oxalomesaconate hydratase, and 4-hydroxy-4-methyl-2-oxoglutarate aldolase were measured as described previously.¹²,¹⁵,¹⁶,¹⁸) PCA 4,5-dioxygenase activity was determined by measuring O₂-consumption with a biological oxygen monitor model 5300 (YSI Scientific, Yellow Springs, Ohio, U.S.A.). The reaction mixture (9 ml) contained 50 mM KPB (pH 8.0), 1.3 mM PCA, and the enzyme. One unit of the enzyme was defined as that amount which degraded 1 μmol of substrates per min at 25°C, and the specific activity was expressed as units per mg of protein. Protein was determined by the method of Lowry *et al.*,³⁴) as modified by Bennett.³⁵) Bovine serum albumin was used as a standard.

Results

**Cloning and sequencing of a DNA fragment carrying pro genes**

P. ochraceae chromosomal DNA was digested with HindIII. Southern hybridization of the HindIII-digest with a DIG-labeled OLG1 showed a single hybridization signal on a 12-kb DNA fragment. The fragment was extracted from agarose gel, ligated into the HindIII site of Charomid 9-28, and packaged with a packaging extract. The recombinant phages were infected to E. coli XL1-Blue MRA (P2). Among about \(3 \times 10^3\) colonies formed, seven positive clones were isolated by colony hybridization. The recombinant Charomid DNA, designated pCHH12, was prepared from one of them. Sequencing of pCHH12 with OLG1 as primer gave a sequence coincident with that of the 3′-truncated proL gene reported previously.¹⁹ A restriction map of the 12-kb DNA region is shown in Fig. 3B. To sequence the leftmost HindIII-KpnI 4.7-kb region, pCHH12 was digested with various restriction enzymes, and HindIII-ApaI 2.0-kb, EcoRI-ApaI 1.0-kb, EcoRI 2.5-kb, NotI-EcoRI 1.9-kb, NotI-KpnI 3.1-kb, and XhoI-KpnI 2.1-kb DNA fragments were prepared and subcloned into pBluescript SK to obtain the plasmids pBHA2.0, pBEA1.0, pBEE2.5, pBNE1.9, pBNK3.1, and pBXK2.1 respectively. Deletion mutants for sequencing were prepared from these plasmids, and subsequently the leftmost HindIII-KpnI 4.7-kb region (4,711 bp) was sequenced in both directions (data not shown).

**Assignment of coding regions**

The HindIII-KpnI 4.7-kb region contained a scrap of proA gene (nucleotide nos. 1–108) and four complete open reading frames (ORFs) oriented in the same direction. No appreciable ORF was found in the opposite direction. A probable ribosome-binding sequence (GAGG, GGAG, or GGAA)³⁶ was located 6–13 bp upstream from the first ATG codon of each ORF.

ORF1 (nucleotide nos. 276–1,193) encoded a 305-amino acid protein (\(M_r = 34,345\) Da). The N-terminal 12 amino acid sequence coincided with that of PDC lactonase purified from P. ochraceae NGJ1 except for the N-terminal methionine. The deduced amino acid sequence contained an α/β hydrolase motif (amino acid nos. 77–81),³⁷ and showed 99, 75, 52, and 35% identity to those of C. testosteroni PmdD,²⁶ A. keyseri PcmC,²⁷ S. paucimobilis LigI,²² and Yersinia pestis C092 dicarboxylate hydrolase (PIR accession no. AH0235) respectively. Hence ORF1 might be the PDC lactonase gene (proL).

ORF2 (nucleotide nos. 1,276–1,725) encoded a 149-amino acid protein (\(M_r = 16,920\) Da) with a relatively high methionine content (7.4%). The deduced amino acid sequence contained an AraC-type helix-turn-helix motif (amino acid nos. 78–109),³⁸ and showed 97 and 64% identity to those of C. testosteroni PmdA and S. paucimobilis LigA respectively.²⁰,²⁶

ORF3 (nucleotide nos. 1,729–2,598) encoded a 289-amino acid protein (\(M_r = 31,862\) Da). The deduced amino acid sequence indicated an ATP/GTP-binding site motif (amino acid nos. 18–25),³⁹ and showed 99 and 60% identity to those of C. testosteroni PmdB and S. paucimobilis LigB respectively.²⁰,²⁶ Since PmdAB and LigAB have been purified and identified as PCA 4,5-dioxygenase,²⁶,⁴⁰ a very high degree of identity in the deduced amino acid sequences strongly supported the identification of ORFs 2 and 3 as PCA 4,5-dioxygenase α and β subunits genes (proOa and Ob) respectively.

ORF4 (nucleotide nos. 2,688–3,647) encoded a 319-amino acid protein (\(M_r = 35,197\) Da). The first 13 amino acid sequence deduced from the nucleotide sequence coincided with that obtained by Edman degradation of CHMS dehydrogenase purified from P. ochraceae NGJ1 except for the N-terminal methionine. The deduced amino acid sequence indicated a motif (amino acid nos. 11–16) essential for the dinucleotide-binding domain,⁴¹ and showed 97 and 74% identity to those of C. testosteroni PmdC and S. paucimobilis LigC respectively.²³,²⁶ These results suggested that ORF4 might be the CHMS dehydrogenase gene (proD). Immediately downstream of ORF4, a 14-bp inverted sequence followed by a T-rich sequence (nucleotide nos. 3,685–3,723), a possible ρ-independent transcription terminator, was found.

**Expression of pro genes in E. coli**

Recombinant E. coli cells were grown in the presence of IPTG, and the crude extracts were prepared to measure the enzyme activity of PDC lactonase, PCA 4,5-dioxygenase, or CHMS dehydrogenase (Table 1). None of these activities was detected in E. coli cells harboring plasmid without insert DNA, whereas markedly high activities of PDC lactonase and CHMS dehydrogenase were found in E. coli XL1-Blue MRF' harboring pBHA2.0 and pBNK3.1 respectively. SDS-PAGE showed high expression of the 31-kDa protein of PDC lactonase and the 35-kDa protein of CHMS dehydrogenase (Fig. 4, A and C). E. coli XL1-Blue MRF' harboring pBXK2.1 or pBEE2.5 gave lower expression of proD or proOaOb respectively, as judged by enzyme activity and SDS-PAGE. The crude extract from E. coli XL1-Blue MRF' harboring pBEA1.0 or pBNE1.9 showed no significant protein band of ProOa.

**Table 1. Expression of Recombinant Enzyme in E. coli**

| E. coli strain          | Enzyme                | Specific activity (\(\mu\)mol/min/mg) |
|-------------------------|-----------------------|----------------------------------------|
| XL1-Blue MRF':pBHA2.0   | PDC lactonase         | 49.6                                   |
| XL1-Blue MRF':pBEE2.5   | PCA 4,5-dioxygenase   | 0.71                                  |
| MV1184:pKEE2.5          | PCA 4,5-dioxygenase   | 13.1                                  |
| MV1184:pKEE2.5m         | PCA 4,5-dioxygenase   | 3.83                                  |
| XL1-Blue MRF':pBNK3.1   | CHMS dehydrogenase    | 62.7                                  |
| XL1-Blue MRF':pBXK2.1   | CHMS dehydrogenase    | 0.11                                  |

Fig. 4. Expression and Purification of Recombinant Enzymes.

Fractions (6–30 μg) obtained during enzyme purification were analyzed by SDS-PAGE. A, pBHA2.0-derived PDC lactonase: lane 1, crude extract; lane 2, ammonium sulfate fraction; lane 3, Bio-Gel P-150 fraction; lane 4, DEAE-cellulose fraction. B, pKEE2.5-derived PCA 4,5-dioxygenase: the crude extract obtained from *E. coli* MV1184 harboring pKEE2.5 (lane 1) or pKF19k (lane 2). Protein bands, assumed to be ProOa and ProOb, are marked with arrows. C, pBNK3.1-derived CHMS dehydrogenase: lane 1, crude extract; lane 2, ammonium sulfate fraction; lane 3, Blue Sepharose CL-6B fraction. Lane M shows the marker proteins.

or ProOb (data not shown). Considerable activity of PCA 4,5-dioxygenase and the obvious expression of two protein bands (21 kDa and 34 kDa), possibly derived from proOa and proOb, were observed in *E. coli* MV1184 harboring pKEE2.5, which was prepared by cloning of the EcoRI 2.5-kb DNA into pKF19k (Table 1, Fig. 4B). PCA 4,5-dioxygenase is an inducible enzyme, and its production in bacterial cells varies with the growth substrates and the bacterial strains. The specific activities reported for crude extracts from PCA-grown *C. testosteroni* BR6020, ${}^{8)}$ phthalate-grown *P. ochraceae* NGJ1, ${}^{12)}$ and 4-hydroxybenzoate-grown *P. testosteroni* Pt-L5 ${}^{11)}$ are 0.41, 1.5, and 5.9 μmol/min/mg respectively. The activity (13.1 μmol/min/mg) in the recombinant *E. coli* was higher than these values. Therefore, *proOaOb* appears to be expressed under the action of vector's lac promoter more strongly than under the *pro* operon promoter, although expression is still insufficient.

ORF2 contains a rare codon (AGG) for Arg 23, which may repress the translation, ${}^{42)}$ while *C. testosteroni* PmdA and *S. paucimobilis* LigA have a Lys residue at this position. ${}^{20,26)}$ In expectation of higher expression of *proOaOb*, the AGG codon of Arg 23 was altered to the AAG codon of Lys residue by oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis, ${}^{28)}$ in which an oligonucleotide (5′-AGCCAGTAGCCCTTGGCGGGACTGCT-3′) and pKEE2.5 were used as the mutagenic primer and the template plasmid respectively. The resulting mutant plasmid pKEE2.5m was introduced in *E. coli* MV1184 by transformation, and *proOaOb* was expressed as above. Expression remained at low level, however, as judged by enzyme activity and SDS-PAGE (Table 1).

**Purification and properties of recombinant enzymes**

Although ORFs 1–4 are highly homologous to the corresponding *C. testosteroni pmd* genes, PmdC and D proteins have not been purified from *E. coli*. Hence, pBHA2.0-derived PDC lactonase was purified from the crude extract to homogeneity (Table 2A, Fig. 4A). The

Table 2. Purification of (A) pBHA2.0-Derived PDC Lactonase and (B) pBNK3.1-Derived CHMS Dehydrogenase

| Step | Total protein (mg) | Total activity (unit) | Specific activity (unit/mg) | Purification (fold) | Yield (%) |
|------|---------------------|-----------------------|-------------------------------|---------------------|-----------|
| (A)  |                     |                       |                               |                     |           |
| Crude extract | 70.0 | 3,470 | 49.6 | 1 | 100 |
| Ammonium sulfate | 5.51 | 2,180 | 396 | 7.98 | 62.8 |
| Bio-Gel P-150 | 3.36 | 1,440 | 429 | 8.65 | 41.5 |
| DEAE-cellulose | 1.91 | 945 | 495 | 9.98 | 27.2 |
| (B)  |                     |                       |                               |                     |           |
| Crude extract | 57.5 | 3,580 | 62.3 | 1 | 100 |
| Ammonium sulfate | 13.5 | 2,780 | 206 | 3.31 | 77.6 |
| Blue Sepharose | 2.96 | 1,150 | 389 | 6.24 | 32.1 |

molecular mass (about 30 kDa) of the enzyme indicated that the enzyme was a monomer. The purified enzyme catalyzed reversible conversion between PDC and 4-oxalomesaconate. Forward (hydrolysis of PDC) and reverse (lactonization of 4-oxalomesaconate) reactions showed an optimum pH at 8.5 (Tris-acetate buffer) and 6.5 (Na-acetate buffer) respectively. Kinetic constants estimated at the respective optimal pH levels were as follows: $K_{\text{m}}$ for PDC = 94 μM and $V_{\text{max}}$ = 851 μmol/min/mg for the forward reaction; $K_{\text{m}}$ for 4-oxalomesaconate = 25 μM and $V_{\text{max}}$ = 164 μmol/min/mg for the reverse reaction.

pBNK3.1-derived CHMS dehydrogenase was also purified to homogeneity (Table 2B, Fig. 4C). The molecular mass (67 kDa) and the subunit molecular mass (35 kDa) suggested that the enzyme was a dimer. When 0.15 mM CHMS was used, NADP⁺ ($K_{\text{m}}$ = 6.1 μM, $V_{\text{max}}$ = 391 μmol/min/mg) was more effective than NAD⁺ ($K_{\text{m}}$ = 314 μM, $V_{\text{max}}$ = 385 μmol/min/mg). When 0.1 mM NADP⁺ was used, $K_{\text{m}}$ for CHMS and $V_{\text{max}}$ were estimated to be 75 μM and 549 μmol/min/mg respectively.

Although pKEE2.5-derived PCA 4,5-dioxygenase was not purified, the following results obtained with

the crude extract were consistent with those of *P. testosteroni* Pt-L5 PCA 4,5-dioxygenase: ${}^{11)}$ a molecular mass of about 140 kDa; an optimum pH of about 7 in KPB; $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ (0.18 mM) for PCA. The reaction product, showing an absorption maximum at 410 nm at pH 8.0, served as substrate for CHMS dehydrogenase.

### Expression of the pro operon in E. coli

The HindIII-KpnI 4.7-kb DNA carrying *proLOaObD* was subcloned into pMW239 to obtain pMHK4.7 (Fig. 3B). On the other hand, the SmaI-EcoRI 5.8-kb DNA was subcloned from pBEE7.5 into pUC19 to obtain pUSE5.8, in which *proXTHA* was under the control of the lac promoter (Fig. 3A). pMHK4.7 was introduced in *E. coli* MV1184 harboring pUSE5.8 by transformation. To examine its ability to grow on PCA, the transformant was inoculated on M9 agar plate containing PCA (0.1%, w/v) in place of glucose as the carbon source. The transformant harboring both pUSE5.8 and pMHK4.7 grew on the plate in the presence or absence of IPTG, while the recombinant *E. coli* harboring either of these plasmids showed no significant growth (Fig. 5). The crude extract, prepared from the transformant cells after growth in Luria-Bertani medium containing ampicillin and IPTG, showed significant activities of five enzymes of the PCA meta-degradation pathway. The specific activities ($\mu \mathrm{mol} / \mathrm{min} / \mathrm{mg}$) were 3.5 for PCA 4,5-dioxygenase, 32.9 for CHMS dehydrogenase, 12.4 for PDC lactonase, 14.9 for 4-oxalomesaconate hydratase, and 11.0 for 4-hydroxy-4-methyl-2-oxoglutarate aldolase.

## Discussion

In this study, *proOa*, *Ob*, *D*, and *L* genes were cloned, and the latter two were over-expressed in *E. coli* to identify the gene products. By overlapping the EcoRI

7.5-kb region of pBEE7.5 with the leftmost HindIII-KpnI 4.7-kb region of pCHH12 (Fig. 3), the gene organization of entire *pro* operon was identified as *proXTHALOaObD*. Actually, *E. coli* harboring both pUSE5.8 and pMHK4.7 grew on PCA due to the expression of the *pro* operon.

The *C. testosteroni* BR6020 *pmd* gene cluster ${}^{26)}$ and the *A. keyseri* 12B *pcm* gene cluster ${}^{27)}$ appear to be equivalent to the *pro* operon, and the gene cluster corresponding to *proOaObD* appears to be conserved in all cases, including the *S. paucimobilis* SYK-6 *lig* gene cluster and the *Sphingomonas* sp. LB126 *fld* gene cluster (Fig. 2). A high degree of sequence homology between *pro* genes and *pmd* genes suggested that *P. ochraceae* NGJ1 is a close relative of *C. testosteroni* BR6020. This was further confirmed by phylogenetic analysis of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene (Yamada, S., et al., GenBank accession no. AB127967).

*ProL* appeared to be over-expressed in *E. coli* independently, while the expressions of the *proD*, *Oa*, and *Ob* genes were somewhat complex. The over-expression of *proD* required an upstream region of *proD*, since pBNK3.1 was more effective in expression of *proD* than pBXK2.1 (Table 1). The intergenic region between *proOb* and *proD* contains two inverted repeats (nucleotide nos. 2,634–2,667), which may interfere with the efficient binding of ribosomes to the ribosome-binding sequences of *proD*. On the other hand, the 3′-region of *proOa* remaining in pBNK3.1 contains the sequences complementary to the 5′-region of *proD*: the nucleotide sequences 1,629–1,639 and 1,689–1,697 are complementary to the 2,726–2,736 and 2874–2882 sequences respectively. This probably allows the formation of stem structures in mRNA and in turn destroys the secondary structure around the ribosome-binding sequence of *proD* to stimulate translation. Such a view also suggests that the gene arrangement of *proOaObD* is necessary for expression of *proD*.

pBHA2.0 carrying *proL* and *proOa* over-expressed only *proL*, and pBNK3.1 carrying *proOb* and *proD* over-expressed only *proD* (Fig. 4). Such lower efficiency in translation of *proOaOb* may be explained in terms of the secondary structure of mRNA. A computer-aided analysis predicted the formation of a secondary structure in the *proOaOb* region (particularly around nucleotide nos. 2,000–2,800). A significant, but still low, expression of *proOaOb* observed in *E. coli* MV1184 harboring pKEE2.5 may be due to the effective interaction of the translational machinery with mRNA in *E. coli* cells.

Although the transcriptional regulators (*ligR*, *fldY*, and *pcmR*) were assumed in the *lig*, *fld*, and *pcm* gene clusters (Fig. 2), no regulatory gene was found in or around the *pro* operon. The unidentified gene *proX* appears not to be a regulatory gene, since it encodes a hydrophobic protein having no helix-turn-helix motif to interact with DNA. ${}^{19)}$ It is interesting that *proOa* has an AraC-type helix-turn-helix motif. This motif is found in the three-dimensional structure of *S. paucimobilis*

---

**Fig. 5.** Expression of *Pro* Operon in *E. coli.*

*E. coli* MV1184 harboring various plasmids was inoculated on a PCA-agar plate and incubated at $30^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ for 2 d. 1, no plasmid; 2, pUSE5.8; 3, pMHK4.7; 4, pUSE5.8 and pMHK4.7.

LigAB PCA 4,5-dioxygenase; it is apparently in the peripheral area of the enzyme molecule in order to interact smoothly with DNA.⁴³⁾ If ProOb binds ATP/GTP at the predicted binding site motif,³⁹⁾ it may play a role in the regulation of intracellular cyclic AMP levels. Previously, Masai *et al.* suggested that PDC is a possible inducer for LigAB PCA 4,5-dioxygenase.²³⁾ These possibilities should be investigated further. At this juncture, the *pro* operon reconstituted with two plasmids in *E. coli* may serve as a useful experimental system to examine the regulatory aspect of the *pro* operon.

### Acknowledgments

We thank Dr. T. Suzuki and Dr. H. Suga of the Life Science Research Center of Gifu University for helpful advice in the phylogenetic analysis of bacterial 16S rRNA.

### References

1) Pujar, B. G., and Ribbons, D. W., Phthalate metabolism in *Pseudomonas fluorescens* PHK: purification and properties of 4,5-dihydroxyphthalate decarboxylase. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.*, **49**, 374–376 (1985).

2) Schläfli, H. R., Weiss, M. A., Leisinger, T., and Cook, A. M., Terephthalate 1,2-dioxygenase system from *Comamonas testosteroni* T-2: purification and some properties of the oxygenase component. *J. Bacteriol.*, **176**, 6644–6652 (1994).

3) Wattiau, P., Bastiaens, L., van Herwijnen, R., Daal, L., Parsons, J. R., Renard, M.-E., Springael, D., and Cornelis, G. R., Fluorene degradation by *Sphingomonas sp.* LB126 proceeds through protocatechuic acid: a genetic analysis. *Res. Microbiol.*, **152**, 861–872 (2001).

4) Michalover, J. L., and Ribbons, D. W., 3-Hydroxybenzoate 4-hydroxylase from *Pseudomonas testosteroni*. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.*, **55**, 888–896 (1973).

5) Howell, L. G., Spector, T., and Massey, V., Purification and properties of *p*-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase from *Pseudomonas fluorescens*. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **247**, 4340–4350 (1972).

6) Nadeau, L. J., and Spain, J. C., Bacterial degradation of *m*-nitrobenzoic acid. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.*, **61**, 840–843 (1995).

7) Hughes, M. A., and Williams, P. A., Cloning and characterization of the *pnb* genes, encoding enzymes for 4-nitrobenzoate catabolism in *Pseudomonas putida* TW3. *J. Bacteriol.*, **183**, 1225–1232 (2001).

8) Providenti, M. A., and Wyndham, R. C., Identification and functional characterization of CbaR, a MarR-like modulator of the *cbaABC*-encoded chlorobenzoate catabolism pathway. *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.*, **67**, 3530–3541 (2001).

9) Locher, H. H., Leisinger, T., and Cook, A. M., 4-Sulphobenzoate 3,4-dioxygenase: purification and properties of a desulphonative two-component enzyme system from *Comamonas testosteroni* T-2. *Biochem. J.*, **274**, 833–842 (1991).

10) Sutherland, J. B., Crawford, D. L., and Pometto, A. L. 3rd., Metabolism of cinnamic, *p*-coumaric, and ferulic

acids by *Streptomyces setonii*. *Can. J. Microbiol.*, **29**, 1253–1257 (1983).

11) Arciero, D. M., Orville, A. M., and Lipscomb, J. D., Protocatechuate 4,5-dioxygenase from *Pseudomonas testosteroni*. *Methods Enzymol.*, **188**, 89–95 (1990).

12) Maruyama, K., Ariga, N., Tsuda, M., and Deguchi, K., Purification and properties of α-hydroxy-γ-carboxymuconic ε-semialdehyde dehydrogenase. *J. Biochem.*, **83**, 1125–1134 (1978).

13) Maruyama, K., Isolation and identification of the reaction product of α-hydroxy-γ-carboxymuconic ε-semialdehyde dehydrogenase. *J. Biochem.*, **86**, 1671–1677 (1979).

14) Kersten, P. J., Dagley, S., Wittaker, J. W., Arciero, D. M., and Lipscomb, J. D., 2-Pyrone-4,6-dicarboxylic acid, a catabolite of gallic acids in *Pseudomonas* species. *J. Bacteriol.*, **152**, 1154–1162 (1982).

15) Maruyama, K., Purification and properties of 2-pyrone-4,6-dicarboxylate hydrolase. *J. Biochem.*, **93**, 557–565 (1983).

16) Maruyama, K., Purification and properties of γ-oxalomesaconate hydratase from *Pseudomonas ochraceae* grown with phthalate. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.*, **128**, 271–277 (1985).

17) Tack, B. F., Chapman, P. J., and Dagley, S., Purification and properties of 4-hydroxy-4-methyl-2-oxoglutarate aldolase. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **247**, 6444–6449 (1972).

18) Maruyama, K., Purification and properties of 4-hydroxy-4-methyl-2-oxoglutarate aldolase from *Pseudomonas ochraceae* grown on phthalate. *J. Biochem.*, **108**, 327–333 (1990).

19) Maruyama, K., Miwa, M., Tsujii, N., Nagai, T., Tomita, N., Harada, T., Sobajima, H., and Sugisaki, H., Cloning, sequencing and expression of the gene encoding 4-hydroxy-4-methyl-2-oxoglutarate aldolase from *Pseudomonas ochraceae* NGJ1. *Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem.*, **65**, 2701–2709 (2001).

20) Noda, Y., Nishikawa, S., Shiozuka, K., Kadokura, H., Nakajima, H., Yoda, K., Katayama, Y., Morohoshi, N., Haraguchi, T., and Yamasaki, M., Molecular cloning of the protocatechuate 4,5-dioxygenase genes of *Pseudomonas paucimobilis*. *J. Bacteriol.*, **172**, 2704–2709 (1990).

21) Nishikawa, S., Katayama, Y., Masai, E., Hanashiro, K., Yamasaki, M., and Morohoshi, N., Cloning of the gene cluster involved in protocatechuate meta-cleavage pathway. In “Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on Wood and Pulping Chemistry” 2nd ed., pp. 311–313 (1991).

22) Masai, E., Shinohara, S., Hara, H., Nishikawa, S., Katayama, Y., and Fukuda, M., Genetic and biochemical characterization of a 2-pyrone-4,6-dicarboxylic acid hydrolase involved in the protocatechuate 4,5-cleavage pathway of *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* SYK-6. *J. Bacteriol.*, **181**, 55–62 (1999).

23) Masai, E., Momose, K., Hara, H., Nishikawa, S., Katayama, Y., and Fukuda, M., Genetic and biochemical characterization of 4-carboxy-2-hydroxymuconate-6-semialdehyde dehydrogenase and its role in the protocatechuate 4,5-cleavage pathway in *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* SYK-6. *J. Bacteriol.*, **182**, 6651–6658 (2000).

24) Hara, H., Masai, E., Katayama, Y., and Fukuda, M., The 4-oxalomesaconate hydratase gene, involved in the

protocatechuate 4,5-cleavage pathway, is essential to vanillate and syringate degradation in *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* SYK-6. *J. Bacteriol.*, **182**, 6950–6957 (2000).

25) Hara, H., Masai, E., Miyauchi, K., Katayama, Y., and Fukuda, M., Characterization of the 4-carboxy-4-hydroxy-2-oxoadipate aldolase gene and operon structure of the protocatechuate 4,5-cleavage pathway genes in *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* SYK-6. *J. Bacteriol.*, **183**, 41–50 (2003).

26) Providenti, M. A., Mampel, J., MacSween, S., Cook, A. M., and Wyndham, R. C., *Comamonas testosteroni* BR6020 possesses a single genetic locus for extradiol cleavage of protocatechuate. *Microbiol.*, **147**, 2157–2167 (2001).

27) Eaton, R.W., Plasmid-encoded phthalate catabolic pathway in *Arthrobacter keyseri* 12B. *J. Bacteriol.*, **183**, 3689–3703 (2001).

28) Hashimoto-Gotoh, T., Mizuno, T., Ogasahara, Y., and Nakagawa, M., An oligodeoxyribonucleotide-directed dual amber method for site-directed mutagenesis. *Gene*, **152**, 271–275 (1995).

29) Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T., Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 2nd ed., Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y. (1989).

30) Altschul, S. F., Madden, T. L., Schaffer, A. A., Zhang, J., Zhang, Z., Miller, W., and Lipman, D. J., Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs. *Nucleic Acid Res.*, **25**, 3389–3402 (1997).

31) Pearson, W. R., and Lipman, D. J., Improved tools for biological sequence comparison. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.*, **85**, 2444–2448 (1988).

32) Andrews, P., Determination of molecular weight of proteins. *Biochem. J.*, **91**, 222–233 (1964).

33) Laemmli, U. K., Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4. *Nature (London)*, **227**, 680–685 (1970).

34) Lowry, O. H., Rosebrough, N. J., Farr, A. L., and

Randall, R. J., Protein measurement with the Folin phenol reagent. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **193**, 265–275 (1951).

35) Bennett, T. P., Membrane filtration for determining protein in the presence of interfering substances. *Nature*, **18**, 1131–1132 (1967).

36) Shine, J., and Dalgarno, L., The 3′-terminal sequence of *Escherichia coli* 16S ribosomal RNA: complementarity to nonsense triplets and ribosome binding sites. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.*, **71**, 1342–1346 (1974).

37) Ollis, D. L., Cheah, E., Cygler, M., Dijkstra, B., Frolow, F., Franken, S. M., Harel, M., Remington, S. J., Silman, I., Schrag, J., Sussman, J. L., Verschueren, K. H. G., and Goldman, A., The α/β hydrolase fold. *Protein Eng.*, **5**, 197–211 (1992).

38) Lee, N. L., Gielow, W. O., and Wallace, R. G., Mechanism of *araC* autoregulation and the domains of two overlapping promoters, *P<sub>c</sub>* and *P<sub>BAD</sub>*, in the L-Arabinose regulatory region of *Escherichia coli*. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.*, **78**, 752–756 (1981).

39) Saraste, M., Sibbald, P. R., and Wittinghofer, A., The p-loop—a common motif in ATP- and GTP-binding proteins. *Trends Biochem. Sci.*, **15**, 430–434 (1990).

40) Sugimoto, K., Aoshima, H., Senda, T., Masai, E., Fukuda, M., and Mitsui, Y., Purification and crystallization of a protocatechuate 4,5-dioxygenase LigAB from *Sphingomonas paucimobilis* SYK-6. *Protein Peptide Lett.*, **6**, 55–58 (1999).

41) Wierenga, R. K., and Hol, W. G. J., Predicted nucleotide-binding properties of p21 protein and its cancer-associated variant. *Nature*, **302**, 842–844 (1983).

42) Brinkmann, U., Mattes, R. E., and Buckel, P., High-level expression of recombinant genes in *Escherichia coli* is dependent on the availability of the *dnaY* gene product. *Gene*, **85**, 109–114 (1989).

43) Sugimoto, K., Senda, T., Aoshima, H., Masai, E., Fukuda, M., and Mitsui, Y., Crystal structure of an aromatic ring opening dioxygenase LigAB, a protocatechuate 4,5-dioxygenase, under aerobic conditions. *Structure*, **7**, 953–965 (1999).
