
Review
TRENDS in Molecular Medicine Vol.10 No.8 August 2004

Lessons from models of SOD1-linked familial ALS

Caterina Bendotti¹ and Maria Teresa Carri²,³

¹Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Neuroscience, Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Via Eritrea 62, 20157 Milan, Italy  
²Department of Biology, University of Rome 'Tor Vergata', Via della Ricerca Scientifica, 00133 Rome, Italy  
³Centro di Neurobiologia Sperimentale 'Mondino-Tor Vergata-Santa Lucia', Fondazione Santa Lucia IRCCS, Via Ardeatina 306, 00179 Rome, Italy  

Ten years ago, the linkage between mutations in the gene coding for the antioxidant enzyme Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) and the neurodegenerative disease known as familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS) was established. This finding has prompted a myriad of new studies in experimental models aimed at investigating the toxic function of the mutant enzymes. The cellular functions that are impaired in motoneurons as a consequence of molecular alterations induced by the expression of FALS SOD1 converge on pathways that might be activated in sporadic ALS by other toxic factors. Recent data demonstrate that, although motoneurons are lost in patients, other cell types are also affected and actively contribute to the pathogenesis of the disease.

In 1874, Charcot described, for the first time, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, also known as Lou Gherig's disease), which is one of the most common neurodegenerative disorders, with an incidence of 4–6 per 100,000. The average age of onset is ~50 years, but juvenile cases are also observed. Using the current standard (support) therapy, the typical survival time for patients after diagnosis is three years, although large deviations have been observed. The most typical feature of this progressive lethal disease is the degeneration of cortical, bulbar and spinal motoneurons, except for the neurons that control the bladder (Onuf’s nuclei) and the oculomotoneurons. This leads to generalised muscle weakness, fasciculations, muscle atrophy, speech and swallowing disabilities, progressive paralysis and, ultimately, death caused by respiratory failure. The loss of motoneurons is associated with the activation of astrocytes and microglia, as well as with the intracellular accumulation of ubiquitinated skein-like inclusions in the axons and cell bodies of the remaining atrophic motoneurons. Approximately 10% of ALS cases are inherited (familial ALS, FALS), and in the vast majority of patients, ALS is sporadic; the clinical expression of sporadic and familial ALS are very similar, although the age of onset is often lower for FALS.

A major breakthrough in deciphering the molecular mechanisms underlying ALS was provided ten years ago by the observation that mutations in the gene coding for the antioxidant enzyme Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) are carried by one-fifth of FALS patients (i.e., ~2% of all ALS cases) [1]. This enabled the development of novel experimental models, and numerous studies have been performed to investigate the toxic function of the mutant enzymes. What have these models taught us? Although many results merely confirmed and substantiated what was already known from observations in postmortem samples, others offered a new rationale for this obscure pathology. Recent data have provided evidence that the ‘environment’ of motoneurons is crucial for establishing the pathological phenotype. Molecular signals are exchanged among different cell types and trigger a cascade of events leading to the degeneration of motoneurons. This review will focus on how data obtained using experimental models for SOD1-linked FALS have prompted novel therapeutic approaches aimed at preventing damage to motoneurons and their neighbouring cells.

The function of SOD1 and FALS SOD1

SOD1 is a well-characterized homodimeric enzyme that is present in virtually every cell type as an abundant cytoplasmic protein, as well as within the intermembrane space of mitochondria. SOD1 binds to one zinc and one copper ion per monomer, with the Cu²⁺ having the active scavenging activity; that is, removing physiologically generated superoxide and preventing the further generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS).

More than 100 different SOD1 point mutations have been reported in families with ALS; most of them are autosomal dominant, with only two exceptions acting as recessive mutations ([http://www.alsod.org](http://www.alsod.org)) (Figure 1). What, therefore, is the common toxic function that is shared by these mutated proteins? The mutations are distributed among all five exons of the gene and result in the alteration of amino acids scattered throughout the SOD1 structure (Figure 1). Some mutations affect the active site, whereas others are positioned at the dimer interface or inside the β-strands or connecting loops. It is known that SOD1-linked FALS arises through a gain-of-function mechanism [2]. However, experimental data obtained with recombinant proteins suggest the existence of heterogeneity among mutations, and the mechanisms through which the expression of mutant SOD1 results in

Corresponding author: Maria Teresa Carri (carri@Bio.uniroma2.it).  
Available online 17 July 2004

www.sciencedirect.com 1471-4914/$ - see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2004.06.009

V
T FQ GA G
S GEV V R M S CKL
ATKAVCVLKG DGPVQGIINF EQKESNGPVKVWGSIKGLTE GLHGFHVHEFGDNTAGCTSA GPHFNPLSRKHGGPKDEERH
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
# # * # *
N-terminus I II III Greek key IV S-S sub-loop Zn sub-loop

V
R
D
S G
F A VV C GH Δ MT Δ
VRSMATA A TNM KN FLV V TFAG L↓ GHS↓ ST FG I S
VGDLGNVTAD KDGVADVSIEDSVISLSGDHC IGRTLVVHEKA DDLGKGGNEESTKTGNA GSRACGVIGIAQ
90 100 110 120 130 140 150
* #
V VI Greek key VII Electrostatic channel loop C-terminus

Figure 1. Mutations of superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) observed in patients with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS). More than 100 point mutations of the gene coding for SOD1 have been found in families with FALS. Most mutations are dominant, with the exception of those causing the substitutions D90A and N86S, which act as recessive. Mutations are distributed among all five exons of the gene and result in the alteration of amino acids throughout the SOD1 homodimeric β-barrel structure; whereas some mutations affect the active site, others are positioned at the dimer interface or inside β strands or connecting loops. Mutations found in patients are indicated above the main sequence (wild type). Copper-binding residues are indicated by #, zinc-binding residues are indicated by *. ↓ indicates a point of the sequence where an insertion has been detected in some patients; Δ indicates a deletion; ST indicates a stop codon, generating a truncated protein. Highlights: green, positions mutated in patients with FALS; blue, mutations introduced in cultured cells; yellow: mutations in transgenic rodents; grey: mutations introduced both in cell culture models and transgenic rodents.

motoneuron injury and death are still unresolved. The acquisition of the toxic function might reside in the propensity of mutant enzymes to form insoluble aggregates hindering intracellular functions or in a novel enzymatic activity, prompting a pro-oxidative chemistry in a typically anti-oxidant enzyme, or both [2].

The aggregation hypothesis is particularly attractive because protein aggregates are frequently associated with neurodegenerative diseases and are also observed in ALS. Evidence that the folding properties of mutant SOD1s are altered with respect to the wild-type enzyme has been obtained for a large set of mutants in vitro [3–5] and it has been demonstrated that mutant SOD1 can form amyloid-like fibrillary structures [6].

Alternatively, elevated oxidative stress has been demonstrated in patients with ALS; two independent groups have reported oxidative reactions of hydrogen peroxide (or other peroxidic species) catalyzed by FALS SOD1 proteins, and the bicarbonate anion has been implicated as an activating cofactor for the peroxidase function of SOD1 at physiological pH [2]. The oxidative damage hypothesis requires copper to be bound to the protein, because SOD1 does not promote oxidative-damage reactions in its absence. Most copper ions are chaperoned into the active site of SOD1 (both wild type and FALS) by the protein CCS (copper chaperone for SOD1), but the genetic removal of CCS is not effective in preventing motoneuron degeneration in a transgenic mouse model for FALS [7]. Furthermore, evidence that motoneuron specific toxicity does not require a normally configured active site has been obtained from mice expressing an artificial mutant SOD1 that lacks all four

Cu²⁺-binding residues [8]. This can be explained by the observation that alternative routes exist for Cu²⁺-loading of SOD1 [9] and that copper might promote an oxidative chemistry even when bound to spurious SOD1 sites. The metal content of FALS SOD1 has been investigated in vitro [10], and some of the mutant proteins are isolated with very little copper or zinc, whereas others behave as wild-type-like enzymes. This observation is interesting, because it is known that zinc-deficient SOD1 has the tendency to aggregate upon oxidation [4] and to promote the nitration of protein tyrosine by peroxynitrite [11]; this aberrant reaction has also been proposed to be relevant for ALS, despite the fact that increased nitrotyrosine levels, but not nitrated proteins, have been reported in the spinal cord of patients with sporadic and familial ALS, and in mice models [12,13].

A caveat in interpreting these results is that the state of metallation of the protein used for experiments is influenced by the methods used for protein expression and purification. Therefore, studies with recombinant proteins often yield contradictory results. It is worth noting that an alteration in the metal content of FALS SOD1 might influence both the enzymatic activity and the propensity to form aggregates. Therefore, the demonstration that such a phenomenon is a general feature of mutant SOD1 and that it occurs in vivo would be crucial in understanding SOD1-linked FALS.

Studies of neuronal cell types Many researchers have focused on studies with transgenic mice overexpressing human FALS SOD1. The most compelling evidence supporting a toxic gain of function

Review
TRENDS in Molecular Medicine Vol. 10 No. 8 August 2004

comes from studies with mice (and more recently, of
transgenic rats) that develop a severe and progressive
motoneuron degenerative syndrome [14, 15], whereas
transgenic mice overexpressing wild-type human SOD1
or lacking their constitutive SOD1 do not [16]. As do
human sufferers, transgenic mice carrying mutant
human SOD1 develop a progressive adult-onset disease
affecting mainly the grey matter of the anterior horn of the
spinal cord and the motoneurons of brainstem, even
though the mutant SOD1 transgene is expressed ubiqui-
tously. Only occasionally, at the advanced stage of the
disease, are other cells (i.e. neurons of the substantia
nigra) affected [17].
All FALS SOD1 rodents develop progressive muscular
weakness and paralysis until death. Several transgenic
lines have been developed, carrying mutations at different
positions in SOD1 (Figure 1). Differences in the age of
disease onset among those lines seem to depend pre-
dominantly on the transgene copy number, whereas the
severity of the disease depends on the type of mutation.
For example, the progression of the disease is much more
rapid in mice that are transgenic for the G86R mutation of
the mouse SOD1 (three days) or for the human G85R
mutation (7–14 days) than in mice that are transgenic for
human SOD1G93A (60–110 days) [18]. Transgenic mice
carrying ~20 copies of SOD1 with the G93A mutation are
the most widely studied. Figure 2 represents the pro-
gression of symptoms in these mice, which is preceded and
paralleled by a sequence of alterations in the structure
and function of motoneurons.
As for many other diseases, the great advantage of an
animal model that mimics the human pathology is the
possibility to follow the stepwise progression of the
disease, as well as for the design of potential therapeutics.
However, the level of expression needed in heterozygous
patients for mutant SOD1 to exert its toxic effect is
much lower than for FALS transgenic rodents, in which a
10–30-fold increase of mutant protein level is necessary to
induce the pathological phenotype. This is due to
differences between mice and men; differences that should
not be overlooked when using mice models.

Mitochondrial alterations and oxidative stress
Mitochondrial alteration (membrane depolarization,
decreased activity of respiratory complexes and cyto-
chrome c release) in motoneurons is a prime candidate
for involvement in the many facets of ALS, because of its
occurrence at the asymptomatic stage in FALS SOD1
transgenic mice with a relatively slow progression of the
disease [19, 20] and in cultured cells expressing the
mutant protein [21, 22]. Interestingly, mitochondrial
abnormalities have also been observed in motor axon
terminals of muscle biopsies from patients with early-
diagnosed sporadic ALS [22, 23]. Mitochondrial alterations
might contribute to the generation of a condition of
oxidative stress, and markers of oxidative damage
(increased ROS flux and oxidatively modified proteins)
have been found in cultured neuronal cells, in both
transgenic mice and patients with ALS [21, 24–26].
Impairments in the respiratory chain, leading to
bioenergetic failure in the motoneurons [20, 27] and to
alterations in the mitochondrial permeability transition
pore (MPTP), causing the leakage of cytochrome c and
apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) [28], were suggested to
have a role in mitochondria-dependent motoneuron death
(Box 1). The consequence of this is the activation of a
caspase-mediated cascade leading to programmed cell
death (apoptosis), but data supporting an apoptotic form of
death of motoneurons in models and patients with ALS
are contradictory [28, 29]. Converging data indicate
that the death of cultured cells expressing FALS SOD1
typically follows the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway, via
activation of executioner caspases (i.e. caspase-3) [30–32].
However, although components of the programmed


| Birth | Days | 50 | 100 | 150 | Death |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| MN loss% |  | 8 | 44 | 54 |  |
| Gliosis | + | ++ | +++ |  |  |
| Mitochondria swelling | + | ++ | +++ | ++ |  |
| Intracellular aggregates | + | ++ | +++ |  |  |
| Limbs adduction |  |  |  |  |  |
| EMG changes |  |  |  |  |  |
| Tremors |  |  |  |  |  |
| Rotarod performance impairment |  |  |  |  |  |
| Gait impairment |  |  |  |  |  |
| Paralysis |  |  |  |  |  |

Figure 2. Graphic representation of the behavioural and neuropathological progression of the disease in superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) G93A-transgenic mice. These mice
develop the first signs of muscular dysfunction around two months of age, with an impairment of the evoked response tested electromiographically (EMG). Thereafter,
tremors appear in the hind limb, associated with a progressive reduction in the extension reflex when the mice are raised by the tail. At ~4 months of age, the mice show a
progressive muscular weakness starting from the hind limb, revealed by the increasing difficulty to stay on a rotating bar and by a reduction in stride length on an inclined
ramp. At this stage, more than 50% of motoneurons (MN) of the lumbar spinal cord are lost and one month later these mice die. Mitochondrial vacuolisation and the swelling
of motoneurons are among the earliest events and are accompanied by a decreased function of the mitochondria. Later, but still at the asymptomatic stage, the SOD1G93A
mice show signs of cytoskeletal disorganization in the motoneurons, with the accumulation of phosphorylated neurofilaments. The accumulation of detergent-insoluble
proteins and ubiquitinated intracellular inclusions are particularly evident at advanced stages of the disease. Reactive gliosis, which involves hypertrophy and the activation
of astrocytes, and the proliferation and activation of microglia, is detectable with the degeneration of motoneurons and becomes prominent when the cell loss is remarkable.
Hypertrophic astrocytes and reactive microglia are usually located around degenerating motoneurons.


www.sciencedirect.com

Box 1. MPTP opening as a cause of mitochondria degeneration?

A probable cause of mitochondrial swelling is the change in the reactive oxygen species (ROS)] and excitotoxicity. These factors can permeability of the mitochondrial membrane resulting from a be altered in motoneurons by the presence of mutant human SOD1. dysfunction in mitochondrial permeability transition pores (MPTPs). MPTP comprises numerous components, including the adenine The MPTP is a voltage-gated, cation-permeable proteinaceous nucleotide translocator, the voltage-dependent anion channel, cyclo- channel whose opening can trigger two pathways of death. One of philin D, the antiapoptotic protein Bcl2 and creatine kinase, a key these pathways begins with the release of cytochrome c, which enzyme that uses creatine as substrate for the energy supply of the cell activates a cascade of caspases leading to apoptotic death; the other through ATP production. Interestingly, a series of agents such as pathway causes the dissipation of the inner membrane potential, cyclosporin A, minocycline and overexpressed Bcl2, which are able to followed by the alteration of redox potentials, ATP consumption and interact with the different components of the MPTP and inhibit its depletion, and an energetic catastrophe followed by necrotic cell activation, were shown to produce a delay in disease onset and/or death [73]. increase the survival in mice that were transgenic for mutant SOD1 MPTP opening is favoured by several factors including depolaris- [28,74,75], therefore suggesting that alterations of these proteins ation, intramatrix calcium accumulation, oxidising agents [including might have a relevant role in the pathogenesis of the disease.

cell-death machinery are recruited and interception of Calcineurin (PP2B), a protein phosphatase, is involved in the caspase pathway seems to be beneficial to FALS the modulation of tau and is oxidatively inactivated by SOD1-transgenic mice [32–34], many groups reported FALSSOD1 in experimental systems, such as human cells that dying neurons in FALS mice exhibit a non-apoptotic expressing the mutant SOD1H46R or G93A as well as in morphology [19,32]. This suggests that an alternative SOD1G93A mice [24]. The accumulation of pNF might mechanism to ‘classic’ apoptosis is involved in the disrupt the axonal transport of substrates that are needed motoneuron death of SOD1 mutant mice, and, possibly, for neuronal viability. in patients with ALS.
Protein aggregates might also impair the activity of Why are mitochondria the earliest sites of injury in proteasomes, as suggested by studies carried out in SOD1 mutant mice (and possibly in patients)? Many (if not neuronal cell lines [41,42]. In turn, proteasome inhibition all) mutant SOD1s have altered metal-binding ability. could lead to the further accumulation of aberrant Therefore, it has been suggested that metal-deficient aggregates, which sequester other proteins and lead to SOD1, which is more readily taken up by mitochondria, the formation of cytoplasmic ubiquitinated inclusion might acquire copper in the intermembrane space [35]. bodies, similar to those found in the SOD1 mutant mice Through aberrant reactions and/or improper aggregation, at advanced stages of the disease and in postmortem the mutant proteins generate reactive molecules that tissue from patients with ALS [38]. damage the mitochondria. Alternatively, damaged mito- chondria might increase the production of substrates for the pro-oxidant function of mutant SOD1, and generate massive oxidative damage inside the neurons. For this latter possibility, other (unidentified) factors might trigger oxidative damage inside the mitochondria of patients with sporadic ALS or non-SOD1-linked FALS, inducing the dysfunction of these organelles and further intracellular oxidative damage in a self-amplifying process, leading to cell death.

Cytoskeleton abnormalities and protein aggregation

The propensity of misfolded, metal-free SOD1 mutants to Excitotoxicity form insoluble aggregates in motoneurons is also considered an early event in the pathogenesis of ALS [36]. Protein aggregation (Lewy-body-like inclusions containing SOD1 and ubiquitin, and an altered neurofilament pattern) has been observed in cultured cells expressing FALS SOD1 [37] and SOD1 is a major component of the neuronal hyaline inclusion (NHI) found in postmortem tissues of patients with SOD1-linked FALS [38]. A pathological hallmark that is common to all forms of ALS and to animal models is cytoskeletal disorganization in the motoneurons, which is often associated with the accumulation of phosphorylated neurofilaments (pNF). Cytoskeletal abnormalities might arise through the alteration of protein phosphorylation by kinases; p38 MAPK (mitogen activated protein kinase) is activated in the motoneurons of asymptomatic SOD1G93A mice [39] and in skein-like inclusions of patients with sporadic ALS [40].

Excitotoxicity due to excessive glutamate levels was one of the first hypotheses that was proposed to explain the pathogenesis of ALS, before the discovery of the genes responsible for FALS. In patients with sporadic ALS, increased levels of glutamate in the cerebrospinal fluid were ascribed to the reduced transport of glutamate into astrocytes resulting from the selective decrease of the glial glutamate transporter EAAT2 (excitatory amino acid transporter 2) [43]. Interestingly, the function of this glutamate transporter is oxidatively impaired by FALS SOD1 in an in vitro model [44] and the loss of EAAT2 has been reproduced in several lines of mutant SOD1-transgenic mice and rats [45,46]. It is not clear whether the loss of EAAT2 is a primary cause of ALS or a consequence of oxidative damage, but it is possible that the impairment of its function is a trigger for neurotoxicity and/or that the oxidative loss of the transporter contributes to the rapid progression of the disease. SOD1 mutant mice overexpressing EAAT2 show a delay in grip-strength decline and motoneuron loss [47].

The neurotoxic activity of glutamate largely results through the over-activation of its receptors, which causes an elevated cytosolic Ca²⁺ concentration. Although motoneurons possess all three different types of glutamate receptor, the ionotropic (NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate and AMPA, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionate) [48] and the metabotropic [49] receptors, in vitro

studies have demonstrated that they are particularly sensitive to glutamate excitotoxicity exerted through the AMPA receptors [50]. In this context, the selective vulnerability of motoneurons in ALS has been explained by a higher permeability to calcium of these cells compared with other neurons, resulting from a defect in the RNA editing of the AMPA GluR2 subunit, or from a lack of this receptor [51]. A role for AMPA receptors in the pathology of SOD1 mutant mice has been postulated, because treatments with AMPA receptor antagonists can slow the disease and prolong the survival of these mice [52]. Therefore, AMPA receptors might be a promising target for the development of new therapies.

Studies of non-neuronal cell types

Evidence from experimental models supports the view that a functional cross-talk between neurons and non-neuronal cells is crucial for the induction of motoneuronal death in ALS. Although motoneurons are induced to die by the expression of mutant SOD1, other cell types actively participate in the generation of the pathological phenotype by releasing a series of neurotoxic factors that include inflammatory cytokines, glutamate and nitric oxide (NO) [53].

An early event in the neurodegeneration process, upstream of the expression of the apoptosis markers found in SOD1G93A mice, is the inflammatory response [54]. In particular, the expression of tumour necrosis factor (TNF) α, which, in the central nervous system (CNS), is mainly secreted by astrocytes and microglia, is increased in the spinal cord of SOD1 mutant mice prior to clear evidence of motoneuron loss and reactive gliosis. Because of the pleiotropic effects of TNFα in the CNS, such as affecting the level or function of growth factors, cytokines, monoamines, glutamate, AMPA receptors, peripherin and a wide range of second messenger signaling pathways (including p38 MAPK), this cytokine is believed to have a major role in ALS. TNFα also contributes to the control of the immune response, and recently it has been reported that the chronic stimulation of innate immunity by the repeated injection of lipopoly-saccharide causes exacerbation of the motoneuron disease of SOD1 mutant mice [55]. NO also aggravates the toxic effects of mutant FALS SOD1 in several experimental models for ALS [25, 53] and neuronal NO synthase is upregulated in astrocytes from FALS mice [56]. This upregulation might be secondary to the activation of the redox-sensitive transcription factor NF-κB that is observed in astrocytes from patients with ALS [57] and in human cells expressing mutant FALS SOD1 [58]. NF-κB also regulates the expression of cyclooxygenase type 2 (COX2), which might cause an increase in the synthesis of prostaglandins, which, in turn, trigger astro-cytic glutamate release and induce free-radical formation, thus contributing to both excitotoxicity and oxidative damage. COX2 expression is significantly increased in the spinal cord of the transgenic FALS SOD1 mice, in which the time course of COX2 upregulation parallels that of motoneuron loss [59], and treatment with COX2 inhibitors markedly protects motoneurons and significantly prolongs the survival of ALS mice [60]. COX2 activity is dramatically increased in postmortem spinal cord samples and in the cerebrospinal fluid from patients with sporadic ALS [61].

The concept that glial cells are activated early in FALS SOD1 mice, even before changes in their morphology become evident, suggests that neuroinflammation has a relevant role in the cascade of events that trigger the death of motoneurons, and that the neurotoxic effect of mutant SOD1 might not just be a direct consequence of its expression inside the neuron, but requires the alteration of non-neuronal cells. Intriguingly, although mice over-expressing the mutant enzyme ubiquitously develop motoneuron disease, animals in which FALS SOD1 is targeted exclusively to neurons [62, 63] or to astrocytes [64] are healthy. Although this might simply reflect insufficient expression of the mutant SOD1 in these mice, these studies drew attention to the potential role of interplay between different cell types in the pathogenesis of ALS and prompted a novel line of research. A new model has recently been developed, in which human neuroblastoma cells expressing wild-type SOD1 or SOD1G93A are co-cultured with human glioblastoma cells also expressing wild-type SOD1 or SOD1G93A. The existence of a functional cross-talk between glial and neuronal cells expressing the FALS mutant SOD1G93A was reported. Molecular signals exchanged between different cell types trigger the activation of a vicious cycle, in which the inflammatory reaction of glial cells induces neurons to release pro-inflammatory signals back to glia and to enter the apoptotic pathway [65].

The protection offered by minocycline, a tetracycline-derivative compound that attenuates microgliosis and slows down disease in FALS SOD1 mice [66], might be related to several effects, such as the inhibition of p38 MAPK in proliferating glial cells, the reduction of inducible nitric oxide synthase, the inhibition of cytochrome c release and the alleviation of caspase activation.

The idea of cross-talk between neurons and glia is further supported by other recent studies. In an elegant work using chimeric SOD1^FALS-SOD1^wild-type mice, it has been demonstrated that toxicity to motoneurons requires damage from mutant SOD1 acting within non-neuronal cells [67]. Support for a feed-forward model, involving reciprocal interactions between motoneurons and glia, has also been provided in mixed neuron and astrocyte cultures, in which the disruption of glial glutamate transport by the reactive oxygen species produced in motoneurons occurs [68]. Finally, monocytic, macrophage and microglial transcripts were increased in ALS spinal cord, and activated CD68+ cells were demonstrated in close proximity to motoneurons [69], supporting the involvement of immune and inflammatory responses in amplifying motoneuron degeneration in ALS.

Concluding remarks

Mutations in the gene coding for SOD1 account for a minute fraction of cases of human ALS and, unlike in humans, mice must express many copies of the mutant gene to develop motoneuron pathology. However, some features of FALS SOD1 mice are found in human sporadic ALS and in non-SOD1-linked FALS. For example, despite

Activation

(iv)

Glutamate

Ca²⁺

Proliferation

Cytokines

(v)

Microglia

Astrocyte

NOs

(v) COX2

ROS

Excitotoxicity

Protein nitration

NF phosphorylation

(iii)

Protein aggregation and cytoskeletal abnormalities

Oxidative stress

UPP impairment

Energy depletion

Cell death

Mitochondrial dysfunction

(i)

(ii)

Caspases activation

Motoneuron

TRENDS in Molecular Medicine

Figure 3. Converging molecular mechanisms in the motoneuron death that is induced by familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS) superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1). Evidence from experimental models supports the view that cell-cell interactions are crucial determinants for the induction of motoneuronal death in ALS. Although motoneurons are induced to die by the expression of mutant SOD1 (green), other cell types actively participate in the generation of the pathological phenotype. Mutant SOD1 might act at different levels: (i) by exacerbating the production of oxygen radicals and nitrotyrosine with consequent alterations of intracellular proteins and lipids (oxidative stress). Protein oxidation might cause the modification of redox-sensitive enzymes, such as protein phosphatase calcineurin (PP2B); (ii) by inducing mitochondrial dysfunction and the further production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), the activation of caspases and energy depletion, which results in the impairment of different ATP-dependent cellular processes, such as the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway (UPP) that is necessary for the degradation and elimination of aberrant or misfolded cellular proteins; (iii) by facilitating the formation of ubiquitinated aggregates due to the misfolding of mutant protein and increased phosphorylation of cytoskeletal proteins; (iv) by inhibiting the activity of the glial glutamate transporter EAAT2 (excitatory amino acid transporter 2). An increase in extracellular glutamate might determine an over-activation of glutamate receptors with consequent increase in the calcium influx. An excess of intracellular calcium might cause mitochondrial toxicity and alter a series of calcium-dependent enzymatic pathways leading to the dysfunction of the cell machinery; (v) by activating microglia and astrocytes to produce and release pro-inflammatory cytokines and other potential toxic factors (nitric oxide, NO). These factors might activate different intracellular enzymes, such as the mitogen activated kinase p38, that phosphorylate neurofilaments (NF) with consequent alterations of the cytoskeleton and formation of ubiquitinated (Ub)-inclusions (purple). COX2, cyclooxygenase 2.

minimal vacuolisation in the motoneurons of patients with ALS, swollen mitochondria that are similar to those in mice have been reported in motor axon terminals from muscular biopsies of patient with sporadic ALS at the early diagnosis of the disease, suggesting that this effect might be an initial step of the disease cascade. Furthermore, the intracellular spheroid-like ubiquitinated inclusions that are observed in the spinal cord of SOD1 mutant mice at the end stage of the disease are found in the damaged motoneurons of postmortem ALS tissue, and activated p38 MAPK is a component of these inclusions [40]. Finally, the activation of inflammatory factors, such as COX2, seems to be involved in FALS SOD1 mice as well as the human disease [54,61].

These observations represent an initial, but promising, step in finding common pathological factors that might shed light on the aetiopathogenesis of ALS and help to identify potential markers for the early diagnosis of the disease and potential targets for the development of effective therapies.

Studies from animal and cell culture models have suggested that the interception of several converging pathways must be the rationale for any therapeutic approach aimed at preventing the damage that is associated with ALS. In particular, the idea of a functional interplay between neurons and non-neuronal cells (Figure 3) supports the concept that any therapeutic trial for the treatment of ALS should be aimed at the contemporary interception of pro-oxidant, pro-inflammatory and death-inducing (pro-apoptotic?) signals. Support for this concept has come from studies using disease models; the efficacy of creatine administration has relatively small effects in the FALS mouse model and combined treatment with creatine and anti-inflammatory drugs has more relevant effects [70]. Therefore, this approach constitutes a much more promising therapy.

An alternative promising approach to the treatment of ALS is represented by RNA silencing of specific crucial targets; this strategy is successful in the case of cell death induced by FALS SOD1 in experimental models [71–72] and, in principle, might be used as a ‘molecular surgery’ aimed at the removal of other noxious products in sporadic ALS.

Acknowledgements

We wish to apologise with the many authors whose original contribution has not been cited owing to space restrictions. C.B. is supported by grants from Fondazione Monzino, Fondazione Cariplo, the Italian Ministry for Health, the Italian Ministry for University and Research (MIUR) and Telethon Grants GP002401 and GP0222Y01. M.T.C. is supported by grants from the Italian Ministry for Health, the Italian Ministry for University and Research (MIUR) and from Telethon Grant GGP030066. Thanks are due to Tilmann Achsel and Alberto Ferri for valuable comments on the manuscript.

References

1. Rosen, D.R. *et al.* (1993) Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Nature* 362, 59–62
2. Valentine, J.S. (2002) Do oxidatively modified proteins cause ALS? *Free Radic. Biol. Med.* 33, 1314–1320
3. Rodriguez, J.A. *et al.* (2002) Familial ALS-associated mutations decrease the thermal stability of distinctly metallated species of human copper-zinc superoxide dismutase. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 15932–15937
4. Rakhit, R. *et al.* (2002) Oxidation-induced misfolding and aggregation of superoxide dismutase and its implications for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 47551–47556
5. Stathopulos, P.B. *et al.* (2003) Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase mutants associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis show enhanced formation of aggregates in vitro. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 100, 7021–7026
6. Elam, J.S. *et al.* (2003) Amyloid-like filaments and water-filled nanotubes formed by SOD1 mutant proteins linked to familial ALS. *Nat. Struct. Biol.* 10, 461–467
7. Subramaniam, J.R. *et al.* (2002) Mutant SOD1 causes motor neuron disease independent of copper chaperone-mediated copper loading. *Nat. Neurosci.* 5, 301–307
8. Wang, J. *et al.* (2003) Copper-binding-site-null SOD1 causes ALS in transgenic mice:aggregates of non-native SOD1 delineate a common feature. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 12, 2753–2764
9. Carroll, M.C. *et al.* (2004) Mechanisms for activating Cu- and Zn-containing superoxide dismutase in the absence of the CCS Cu chaperone. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 101, 5964–5969
10. Hayward, L.J. *et al.* (2002) Decreased metallation and activity in subsets of mutant superoxide dismutases associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 15923–15931
11. Beckman, J.S. *et al.* (2001) Superoxide dismutase and the death of motoneurons in ALS. *Trends Neurosci.* 24, S15–S20
12. Beal, M.F. *et al.* (1997) Increased 3-nitrotyrosine in both sporadic and familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Ann. Neurol.* 42, 644–654
13. Bruijn, L.I. *et al.* (1997) Elevated free nitrotyrosine levels, but not protein-bound nitrotyrosine or hydroxyl radicals throughout amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)-like disease implicate tyrosine nitration as an aberrant in vivo property of one familial ALS-linked superoxide dismutase 1 mutant. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 94, 7606–7611
14. Gurney, M.E. *et al.* (1994) Motor neuron degeneration in mice that express a human Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase mutation. *Science* 264, 1772–1775
15. Nagai, M. *et al.* (2001) Rats expressing human cytosolic copper–zinc superoxide dismutase transgenes with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis–associated mutations develop motor neuron disease. *J. Neurosci.* 21, 9246–9254
16. Newbery, H. and J.and Abbott, C.M. (2002) Of mice, men and motor neurons. *Trends Mol. Med.* 8, 88–92.
17. Kostic, V. *et al.* (1997) Midbrain dopaminergic neuronal degeneration in a transgenic mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Ann. Neurol.* 41, 497–504
18. Shibata, N. (2001) Transgenic mouse model for familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with superoxide dismutase-1 mutation. *Neuropathology* 21, 82–92
19. Bendotti, C. *et al.* (2001) Early vacuolization and mitochondrial damage in motor neurons of FALS mice are not associated with apoptosis or with changes in cytochrome oxidase histiochemical reactivity. *J. Neurol. Sci.* 191, 25–33
20. Jung, C. *et al.* (2002) Mitochondrial electron transport chain complex dysfunction in a transgenic mouse model for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *J. Neurochem.* 83, 535–545
21. Carri, M.T. *et al.* (1997) Expression of a Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase typical of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis induces mitochondrial alteration and increase of cytosolic Ca²⁺ concentration in transfected neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. *FEBS Lett.* 414, 365–368
22. Beal, M.F. (2000) Mitochondria and the pathogenesis of ALS. *Brain* 123, 1291–1292
23. Siklos, L. *et al.* (1996) Ultrastructural evidence for altered calcium in motor nerve terminals in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Ann. Neurol.* 39, 203–216

24 Ferri, A. *et al.* (2000) Calcineurin activity is regulated both by redox compounds and by mutant FALS-SOD1. *J. Neurochem.* 75, 606–613
25 Ciriolo, M.R. *et al.* (2000) Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase-dependent apoptosis induced by nitric oxide in neuronal cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 5065–5072
26 Liu, D. *et al.* (1999) The roles of free radicals in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: reactive oxygen species and elevated oxidation of protein, DNA, and membrane phospholipids. *FASEB J.* 13, 2318–2328
27 Mattiazzi, M. *et al.* (2002) Mutated human SOD1 causes dysfunction of oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria of transgenic mice. *J. Biol. Chem.* 277, 29626–29633
28 Friedlander, M. (2003) Apoptosis and caspases in neurodegenerative diseases. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 348, 1365–1375
29 Migheli, A. *et al.* (1999) Lack of apoptosis in mice with ALS. *Nat. Med.* 5, 966–967
30 Ghadge, G.D. *et al.* (1997) Mutant superoxide dismutase-1-linked familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: molecular mechanisms of neuronal death and protection. *J. Neurosci.* 17, 8756–8766
31 Pasinelli, P. *et al.* (2000) Caspase-1 and -3 are sequentially activated in motor neuron death in Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase-mediated familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 97, 13901–13906
32 Guégan, C. and Przedborski, S. (2003) Programmed cell death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *J. Clin. Invest.* 111, 153–161
33 Li, M. *et al.* (2000) Functional role of caspase-1 and caspase-3 in an ALS transgenic mouse model. *Science* 288, 335–339
34 Inoue, H. *et al.* (2003) The crucial role of caspase-9 in the disease progression of a transgenic ALS mouse model. *EMBO J.* 22, 6665–6674
35 Okado-Matsumoto, A. and Fridovich, I. (2002) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a proposed mechanism. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 99, 9010–9014
36 Johnston, J.A. *et al.* (2000) Formation of high molecular weight complexes of mutant Cu, Zn-superoxide dismutase in a mouse model for familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 97, 12571–12576
37 Julien, J-P. (2001) Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. unfolding the toxicity of the misfolded. *Cell* 104, 581–591
38 Kato, S. *et al.* (2000) New consensus research on neuropathological aspects of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene mutations: inclusions containing SOD1 in neurons and astrocytes. *Amyotroph. Lateral Scler. Other Motor Neuron Disord.* 1, 163–184
39 Tortarolo, M. *et al.* (2003) Persistent activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in a mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis correlates with disease progression. *Mol. Cell. Neurosci.* 23, 180–192
40 Bendotti, C. *et al.* (2004) Activated p38MAPK is a novel component of the intracellular inclusions found in human amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and mutant SOD1 transgenic mice. *J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol.* 63, 113–119
41 Allen, S. *et al.* (2003) Analysis of the cytosolic proteome in a cell culture model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis reveals alterations to the proteasome, antioxidant defenses, and nitric oxide synthetic pathways. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 6371–6383
42 Urushitani, M. *et al.* (2002) Proteasomal inhibition by misfolded mutant superoxide dismutase 1 induces selective motor neuron death in FALS. *J. Neurochem.* 83, 1030–1042
43 Rothstein, J.D. *et al.* (1992) Decreased glutamate transport by the brain and spinal cord in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 326, 1464–1468
44 Trotti, D. *et al.* (1999) SOD1 mutants linked to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis selectively inactivate a glial glutamate transporter. *Nat. Neurosci.* 2, 427–433
45 Bendotti, C. *et al.* (2001) Transgenic SOD1 G93A mice develop reduced GLT-1 in spinal cord without alterations in cerebrospinal fluid glutamate levels. *J. Neurochem.* 79, 737–746
46 Howland, D.S. *et al.* (2002) Focal loss of the glutamate transporter EAAT2 in a transgenic rat model of SOD1 mutant-mediated amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 99, 1604–1609

47 Guo, H. *et al.* (2003) Increased expression of the glial glutamate transporter EAAT 2 modulates excitotoxicity and delays the onset but not the outcome of ALS in mice. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 12, 2519–2532

48 Mennini, T. *et al.* (2002) Expression of glutamate receptor subtypes in the spinal cord of control and mnd mice, a model of motor neuron disorder. *J. Neurosci. Res.* 70, 553–560

49 Anneser, J.M. *et al.* (1999) Differential expression of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors in rat spinal cord somatic and autonomic motoneurons: possible implications for the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Neurobiol. Dis.* 6, 140–147

50 Carriedo, S.G. *et al.* (1996) Motor neurons are selectively vulnerable to AMPA/kainate receptor-mediated injury *in vitro*. *J. Neurosci.* 16, 4069–4079

51 Kawahara, Y. *et al.* (2004) Glutamate receptors: RNA editing and death of motor neurons. *Nature* 427, 801

52 Van Damme, P. *et al.* (2003) The AMPA receptor antagonist NBQX prolongs survival in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Neurosci. Lett.* 343, 81–84

53 Raoul, C. *et al.* (2002) Motoneuron death triggered by a specific pathway downstream of Fas. Potentiation by ALS-linked SOD1 mutations. *Neuron* 35, 1067–1083

54 Hensley, K. *et al.* (2002) Temporal patterns of cytokine and apoptosis-related gene expression in spinal cords of the G93A-SOD1 mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *J. Neurochem.* 82, 365–374

55 Nguyen, M.D. *et al.* (2004) Exacerbation of motor neuron disease by chronic stimulation of innate immunity in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *J. Neurosci.* 24, 1340–1349

56 Cha, C.I. *et al.* (2000) Immunocytochemical study on the distribution of nitrotyrosine in the brain of the transgenic mice expressing a human Cu/Zn SOD mutation. *Brain Res.* 853, 156–161

57 Migheli, A. *et al.* (1997) c-Jun, JNK/SAPK kinases and transcription factor NF-κB are selectively activated in astrocytes, but not motor neurons, in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol.* 56, 1314–1322

58 Casciati, A. *et al.* (2002) Oxidative modulation of nuclear factor-κB in human cells expressing mutant fALS-typical superoxide dismutases. *J. Neurochem.* 83, 1019–1029

59 Almer, G. *et al.* (2001) Increased expression of the pro-inflammatory enzyme cyclooxygenase-2 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Ann. Neurol.* 49, 176–185

60 Drachman, D.B. *et al.* (2002) Cyclooxygenase 2 inhibition protects motor neurons and prolongs survival in a transgenic mouse model of ALS. *Ann. Neurol.* 52, 771–778

61 Almer, G. *et al.* (2002) Increased levels of the pro-inflammatory prostaglandin PGE2 in CSF from ALS patients. *Neurology* 58, 1277–1279

62 Pramatarova, A. *et al.* (2001) Neuron-specific expression of mutant superoxide dismutase 1 in transgenic mice does not lead to motor impairment. *J. Neurosci.* 21, 3369–3374

63 Lino, M.M. *et al.* (2002) Accumulation of SOD1 mutants in postnatal motoneurons does not cause motoneuron pathology or motoneuron disease. *J. Neurosci.* 22, 4825–4832

64 Gong, Y.H. *et al.* (2000) Restricted expression of G86R Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase in astrocytes results in astrocytosis but does not cause motoneuron degeneration. *J. Neurosci.* 20, 660–665

65 Ferri, A. *et al.* (2004) Cell death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: interplay between neuronal and glial cells. *FASEB J.* Doi: 10.1096/fj.03-1199fje (http://www.fasebj.org/)

66 Zhu, S. *et al.* (2002) Minocycline inhibits cytochrome c release and delays progression of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in mice. *Nature* 417, 74–78

67 Clement, A.M. *et al.* (2003) Wild-type nonneuronal cells extend survival of SOD1 mutant motor neurons in ALS mice. *Science* 302, 113–117

68 Rao, S.D. *et al.* (2003) Disruption of glial glutamate transport by reactive oxygen species produced in motor neurons. *J. Neurosci.* 23, 2627–2633

69 Henkel, J.S. *et al.* (2004) Presence of dendritic cells, MCP-1, and activated microglia/macrophages in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis spinal cord tissue. *Ann. Neurol.* 55, 221–235

70 Klivnyi, P. *et al.* (2004) Additive neuroprotective effects of creatine and cycloxygenase inhibitors in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *J. Neurochem.* 88, 576–582

71 Ding, H. *et al.* (2003) Selective silencing by RNAi of a dominant allele that causes amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Aging Cell* 2, 209–217

72 Maxwell, M.M. *et al.* (2004) RNA interference-mediated silencing of mutant superoxide dismutase rescues cyclosporin A-induced death in cultured neuroblastoma cells. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 101, 3178–3183

73 Newmeyer, D.D. and Ferguson-Miller, S. (2003) Mitochondria: releasing power for life and unleashing the machineries of death. *Cell* 112, 481–490

74 Kostic, V. *et al.* (1997) Bcl-2: prolonging life in a transgenic mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. *Science* 277, 559–562

75 Kirkinezos, I.G. *et al.* (2004) An ALS mouse model with a permeable blood-brain barrier benefits from systemic cyclosporine A treatment. *J. Neurochem.* 88, 821–826

---

**Reproduction of material from Elsevier articles**

Interested in reproducing part or all of an article published by Elsevier, or one of our article figures? If so, please contact our Global Rights Department with details of how and where the requested material will be used. To submit a permission request on-line, please visit:

http://www.elsevier.com/wps/find/obtainpermissionform.cws_home/obtainpermissionform

Alternatively, please contact:

Elsevier  
Global Rights Department  
PO Box 800,  
Oxford OX5 1DX, UK.  
Phone: (+44) 1865-843830  
Fax: (+44) 1865-853333  
permissions@elsevier.com

www.sciencedirect.com
