
This article was downloaded by: [Universite Laval]
On: 04 July 2014, At: 02:25
Publisher: Taylor&Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

---

**Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry**

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
[http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tbbb20](http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/tbbb20)

**A Genome-Wide View of the Escherichia coli BasS-BasR Two-component System Implicated in Iron-responses**

Daisuke HAGIWARA${}^{a}$, Takafumi YAMASHINO${}^{a}$ & Takeshi MIZUNO${}^{a}$

${}^{a}$ Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, School of Agriculture, Nagoya University

Published online: 22 May 2014.

---

To cite this article: Daisuke HAGIWARA, Takafumi YAMASHINO & Takeshi MIZUNO (2004) A Genome-Wide View of the Escherichia coli BasS-BasR Two-component System Implicated in Iron-responses, Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry, 68:8, 1758-1767, DOI: [10.1271/bbb.68.1758](10.1271/bbb.68.1758)

To link to this article: [http://dx.doi.org/10.1271/bbb.68.1758](http://dx.doi.org/10.1271/bbb.68.1758)

---

PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at [http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions](http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions)

Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 68 (8), 1758–1767, 2004

# A Genome-Wide View of the Escherichia coli BasS–BasR Two-component System Implicated in Iron-responses

Daisuke HAGIWARA, Takafumi YAMASHINO, and Takeshi MIZUNO†

Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, School of Agriculture, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan

Received April 23, 2004; Accepted May 12, 2004

Histidine-to-aspartate (His→Asp) phosphorelay (or two-component) systems are very common signal transduction mechanisms that are implicated in a wide variety of cellular responses to environmental stimuli in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Determination of the entire genomic sequence of *Escherichia coli* revealed that this gram-negative bacterium has 29 His-kinases and 32 response regulators. Of the 29 His-kinases, 23 have already been experimentally characterized at least to some extent in terms of their physiological functions. No physiological stimulus has yet been identified for each of the remaining 6 His-kinases (BasS, CreC, RstB, YfhK, YehU, and YpdA). Here we characterized the BasS–BasR two-component system with reference to its physiological function, taking genetic approaches together with genome-wide transcriptome profiling. First we showed that the hypothetical *yfbE* operon that appears to be implicated in the modification of lipopolysaccharides is regulated at the level of transcription in response to external iron, and then we showed that the BasS–BasR system is essential for this iron-dependent induction of *yfbE*. Another PhoQ–PhoP two-component system was also implicated in the full induction of *yfbE* in response to iron, but it was not essential. To gain more insight into the BasS–BasR system, we conducted genome-wide transcriptome analysis by microarray, finding that many of the uncovered putative iron-induced and BasS–BasR-dependent genes are somehow associated with acidic and/or anaerobic growth conditions. In this respect, it was found that mutant cells defective in the BasS–BasR system were sensitive to mild-acid growth conditions in the presence of a relatively high concentration of iron. These results are discussed with regard to a comprehensive picture of the His→Asp phosphorelay signaling network in *E. coli*.

Key words: *Escherichia coli*; His-kinase; iron response; phosphorelay; two-component

Histidine-to-aspartate (His→Asp) phosphorelay (or two-component) systems are very common signal transduction mechanisms that are implicated in a wide variety of cellular responses to environmental stimuli.¹ A His-kinase is the central player of a His→Asp phosphorelay signal transduction system. In some cases, another common histidine-containing phosphotransfer intermediate (HPt) plays a crucial role in a sequential His→Asp→His→Asp phosphorelay that is generally referred to as a multi-step phosphorelay.²³ A His-kinase serves as a sensor for a certain stimulus, and regulates the function of a cognate response regulator containing a phospho-accepting Asp residue. Employing *Escherichia coli* as a model microorganism, it is time to adopt new approaches to the comprehensive understanding of the His→Asp phosphorelay signal transduction network by adopting systematic genomics. In 1997, determination of the entire genomic sequence of *E. coli* revealed that this gram-negative bacterium has 29 His-kinases, 1 HPt factor, and 32 response regulators.⁴ Except for 2 response regulators (named FimZ and RssB), all the other 30 regulators are assigned to cognate His-kinases, as “two-component.”⁵ In short, *E. coli* is equipped with many His→Asp phosphorelay signal transduction systems, each of which is involved in a different type of stress response and/or adaptation. For instances the first discovered EnvZ→OmpR system is responsible for osmotic regulation of outer membrane protein composition,⁶ the ArcB→ArcA system is essential for the aerobic/anaerobic regulation of respiration/fermentation,⁷ and the CheA→CheY and CheA→CheB systems are involved in the regulation of chemotaxis,⁸ as has been well documented.

To clarify the whole picture of the *E. coli* phosphorelay signal transduction network, we previously constructed deletion mutations for all 29 His-kinase genes.⁹ Then, employing a DNA microarray, a preliminary result of systematic transcriptome analyses for these 29 deletion strains was also presented, suggesting that there is a complex network among individual His→Asp phosphorelay signaling pathways to regulate *E. coli* physiology globally.⁹¹⁰ To understand these bioinformatic data, however, we need more experimental information about each signaling pathway. Of the 29 His-kinases, in this respect, 23 has been experimentally

† To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +81-52-789-4089; Fax: +81-52-789-4091; E-mail: tmizuno@agr.nagoya-u.ac.jp

characterized at least to some extent in terms of their physiological stimuli (see Table 3), each of which specifically propagates a given His-kinase (*e.g.*, medium osmolarity → EnvZ, hexose → UhpB). Nonetheless, no stimulus has yet been identified for the remaining 6 His- kinases (BasS, CreC, RstB, YfhK, YehU, and YpdA). As emphasized above, it remains to characterize these 6 His-kinases with special reference to *E. coli* physiology.

Of these 6 unknown *E. coli* His-kinases, a decade ago we identified the *basS* gene as a multicopy-suppressor for an *envZ* deletion mutant, although its physiological function remained unknown. Since then, no experiment has been conducted for this hypothetical BasS-BasR system to clarify its physiological role. But, His- kinases highly homologous to BasS were recently identified in several bacterial species other than *E. coli*. Among them, the PmrB-PmrA system of *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium is particularly interesting in that this His → Asp phosphorelay system appeared to respond to external iron in this bacterium. In *Salmonella*, the PmrB-PmrA system appears to be implicated in the control of modification of lipopolysaccharides (LPS). Taking this hint, it was speculated that the *E. coli* BasS-BasR system might play a similar role. But, we must confirm this speculation experimentally in order correctly and convincingly to integrate the BasS-BasR system into the whole picture of the *E. coli* phosphorelay network. For this reason, we characterized the BasS-BasR system here at the molecular level.

### Materials and Methods

#### Bacterial strains and media. The *E. coli* K12 strain (designated HD001) and its derivatives were mainly used, as listed in Table 1. The HD001 [yfbE::lacZYA thi ara Δ(pro-lac)] strain was constructed from the laboratory-stocked CSH26 strain. A set of 37 two-component mutants was constructed previously in the *E. coli* K12 BW25113 background. This was carried out according to the standard *E. coli* genetic procedures and/or the newly developed rapid procedures for constructing deletion mutants. These mutant alleles were transferred one by one into the HD001 background by means of P1-transduction. In this study, a ΔpmrD derivative of HD001 was newly constructed, to yield HD004. In this construct, the kanamycin resistant cassette replaced the entire *pmrD* gene. The primers used to construct an appropriate deletion cassette were

5′-AATTGATGTGAAAAACTCTTAGCAAACAGGAT- AATGCAATGGTGTTAGGCTGGAGCTGCTTC- CTGCCACACGACAAAACAACGTTACTGAGTTTTC- CCTGCCAATTCCGGGGATCCGTCGACC. These *E. coli* cells were mainly grown at 37°C with Luria- Bertani (LB) medium. To adjust the pH of LB to 5.5, 50 mM of 2-morpholin ethanesulfonic acid monohydrate (MES) was used. The plasmids used in this study are derivative form pACYC184 carrying the tetracycline-resistant gene (see Table 1).

#### Enzyme assays. β-Galactosidase activity was measured by Miller's method with slight modifications. Cells were grown in LB medium as described above (beyond this, the growth conditions are noted in the legends). They were suspended in 250 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.1) for accurate measurement of cell density. A portion of the cell suspension was used for β-galactosidase assay after permeabilization with toluene.

#### RNA isolation. Cells were grown as noted in the text. They were harvested at the mid-logarithmic growth phase. Total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy® Maxi Kit (Qiagen), according to the supplier's instructions.

#### Preparation of *E. coli* DNA microarrays. Custom glass slide microarrays (from Takara Shuzo, Kyoto, Japan) were spotted with 4095 PCR products corresponding to full-length *E. coli* ORFs, together with human β-actin genes as a negative reference. The other details were the same as described previously.

#### Preparation of labeled cDNA, hybridization, data capture, and analysis. The RNA samples, prepared from an appropriate pair of cells, were labeled with Cy-3 and Cy-5, respectively. Each preparation was then tested twice by microarray analysis. Thus two values were obtained for each gene (or spot). Detailed procedures for hybridization, data capture and data analysis were essentially the same as those described previously. Briefly, by subtracting the local background, we first corrected the intensity of each spot. In addition, a mean value of the intensity of the 24 negative control spots (human β-actin gene) was determined, together with the standard deviation (SD). Then, the spots were classified into three groups. [Group 1]: both Cy3 and Cy5 signal intensity were higher than the mean +1 SD of the negative control. [Group 2]: either Cy3 or Cy5 signal

---

**Table 1. E. coli K12 Strains and Plasmids Used in This Study**

| Strains/Plasmids | Characteristics                          | Source/reference |
|------------------|------------------------------------------|------------------|
| CSH26            | thi ara Δ(pro-lac)                      | Ref. 10)         |
| HD001            | CHS26 yfbE::lacZYA                       | This study       |
| HD002            | CHS26 yfbE::lacZYA Δ(basS-basR)          | This study       |
| HD003            | CHS26 yfbE::lacZYA Δ(phoQ-phoP)          | This study       |
| HD004            | CHS26 yfbE::lacZYA ΔpmrD                 | This study       |
| pBasSR           | pACYC184 with the basS-basR genes        | This study       |

---

Table 2. List of Iron-induced and BasS-BasR-dependent Genes

| Genes<sup>a)</sup> | Characteristics<sup>b)</sup> | Ratio in microarray<sup>c)</sup> |
|------------------|--------------------------------|-------------------------------|
|                  |                                | Fe-up                        |
|                  |                                | ΔbadSR-down                  |
| yfbF             | LPS modification operon       | ND                           |
| yfbG             | LPS modification operon       | 8.24                         |
| yfbH             | LPS modification operon       | 9.56                         |
| lacZ<sup>a)</sup> | β-Galactosidase operon        | 11.69                        |
| lacY<sup>a)</sup> | β-Galactosidase operon        | 18.37                        |
| lacA<sup>a)</sup> | β-Galactosidase operon        | 22.59                        |
| aceE             | Pyruvate dehydrogenase operon | 2.68                         |
| aceF             | Pyruvate dehydrogenase operon | 2.52                         |
| brnQ             | Transport of branched amino acids | 3.94                        |
| hyaA             | Hydrogenase-1 operon          | 3.18                         |
| hyaB             | Hydrogenase-1 operon          | 2.98                         |
| trpA             | Tryptophan synthase           | 3.08                         |
| gadC             | Glutamate-dependent enzyme    | 3.17                         |
| gadB             | Glutamate decarboxylase       | 3.24                         |
| yfID             | Putative formate acetyltransferase | 2.74                        |
| ygjJ             | Unknown                       | 5.78                         |
| tdcD             | Threonine/serine permease operon | 2.44                        |
| tdcC             | Threonine/serine permease operon | 3.51                        |
| tdcB             | Threonine/serine permease operon | 5.48                        |
| tdcA             | Threonine/serine permease operon | 3.91                        |
| yhiU             | Acid-induced gene-cluster      | 2.31                         |
| yhiV             | Acid-induced gene-cluster      | 2.75                         |
| gadA             | Acid-induced gene-cluster (Glutamate decarboxylase) | 3.12 |
| hdeA             | Acid-induced gene-cluster      | 2.72                         |
| hdeD             | Acid-induced gene-cluster      | 2.28                         |
| yhiE             | Acid-induced gene-cluster (Transcriptional activator) | 2.86 |
| slp              | Acid-induced gene-cluster      | 2.26                         |
| hdeB             | Acid-induced gene-cluster      | 2.06                         |
| zntA             | Metal-transporting P-type ATPase | 3.91                        |

a) The 29 genes revealed by microarray analysis, and shown in Fig. 4A are listed. When a set of genes constituted an operon and/or gene-cluster, they were grouped into the same column. The *lacZYA* operon is not the true target of the BasS-BasR system (see the text).

b) For each gene-product, its characteristic feature is noted. For each reference, see text.

c) The experimental mean values of the microarray data (fluctuation ratio) are listed. In the case of *yfbF*, the gene clearly fluctuated in response to iron in a manner dependent on the BasS-BasR system, but the microarray data were too low to calculate the fluctuation ratio, denoted as ND.

E. coli Two-component System

**Fig. 1. Assays of β-Galactosidase Activities by Monitoring the yfbE::lacZYA Reporter Gene.**

(A) E. coli strain HD001 was constructed, as schematically shown, which carries a yfbE::lacZYA fusion gene on the chromosome. The yfbE operon consists of at least 7 contiguous genes, as indicated. An about 400-bp sequence upstream of the yfbE operon was fused to the promoter-less lacZYA operon, as also shown schematically.

(B) Assays of β-galactosidase activities by monitoring the yfbE::lacZYA reporter gene. HD001 cells were grown in LB medium in the presence and absence of FeSO₄ (0.4 mM) at 37°C. Their growth curves are shown, during which β-galactosidase activities were measured. FeSO₄ was added at each indicated growth phase, and β-galactosidase activities were followed.

(C) Essentially the same experiments as in (B) were also carried out with FeCl₃.

effective stimulus for transcription of the yfbE operon. There are two major forms of iron: Fe(III) in aerobic atmospheres, and Fe(II) in reducing intracellular environments. FeSO₄ [i.e., Fe(II)] in aerobic LB medium would be oxidized spontaneously to Fe(III), at least in part. As shown in Fig. 1C, FeCl₃ was as effective as FeSO₄, suggesting that Fe(III) might be a direct stimulus that induces the transcription of yfbE. We examined a variety of other divalent cations, but the other cations tested (except for zinc) were not effective inducers for the yfbE operon (Fig. 2). Although zinc served as a stimulus for the yfbE operon, it was far less effective than iron. In short, we found that the expression of yfbE was specifically and dramatically induced in an iron-responsive manner.

**The BasS-BasR two-component system is essential for the iron-dependent induction of yfbE**

A derivative of HD001 was constructed that lacks both the basS and basR genes on the chromosome, to yield HD002 (see Table 1). These genes reside next to each other on the chromosome. The basS gene encodes a His-kinase whereas the basR gene encodes a cognate response regulator.¹¹⁾ Even when this Δ(basS-basR) mutant strain was treated with FeSO₄ in LB medium, no induction of yfbE was observed (Fig. 3A). Provided that HD002 was transformed with a plasmid carrying both the basS and basR genes (designated pBasSR, see Table 1), the transformed cells became fully potent to respond to FeSO₄, as efficiently as in the case of wild-type cells (Fig. 3A). By employing a series of 29 deletion mutants of two-component systems, we examined whether other E. coli two-component systems (e.g., EnvZ-OmpR, ArcB-ArcA) is also involved in the regulation of yfbE. In these mutants, the E. coli His-kinase genes were deleted one by one as described previously.⁹⁾ Besides the BasS-BasR system, none of the others was significantly implied in the iron-dependent induction of yfbE (data not shown), except for the PhoQ-PhoP two-component system (Fig. 3B). In the mutant (HD003) lacking the phoQ-phoP genes, the iron-dependent induction of yfbE was markedly but not completely impaired. It has been suggested that PmrD is a downstream signaling component of the PhoQ-PhoP system in Salmonella.¹⁷⁾ Indeed, the mutant (HD004)

**Fig. 2. Assays of β-Galactosidase Activities by Monitoring the yfbE::lacZYA Reporter Gene for the Cells Grown in Each Different Type of Divalent Cations.**

HD001 cells were grown in LB medium containing each indicated divalent cation (FeSO₄, ZnCl₂, MnCl₂, CaCl₂, MgSO₄, CuSO₄ and NiCl₂), followed by measuring β-galactosidase activities at the mid-logarithmic growth phase. Other details were essentially the same as those in Fig. 1.

Fig. 3. Assays of β-Galactosidase Activities by Monitoring the yfbE::lacZYA Reporter Gene for Certain Mutants of Two-component Regulatory Systems.

(A) HD001 (WT, wild-type) and its ΔbasSR derivative (named HD002) were grown in LB medium containing varied concentrations of FeSO₄, followed by measuring β-galactosidase activities at the mid-logarithmic growth phase. Note that these cells carried an appropriate vector-plasmid (control). HD001 was transformed with a plasmid carrying both the basS and basR gene, and then the transformant was also analyzed. (B) HD003 (ΔphoQP) and HD004 (ΔpmrD) cells carrying the yfbE::lacZYA reporter gene were also examined in terms of iron-response.

lacking the E. coli pmrD gene also showed the same phenotype, as in the case of Δ(phoQ-phoP). These results suggest that the yfbE operon is under the control of the BasS-BasR system, which is essential for iron-induced expression of yfbE. Also, the PhoQ-PhoP-PmrD signaling system is implicated for the full induction of yfbE in response to iron, but it is not essential.

### Genome-wide microarray analysis

The above results supported the view that the physiological element iron primarily propagates the BasS-BasR signal transduction, resulting in the activation of yfbE at the level of transcription. In this view, the BasR response regulator is a member of the OmpR family of DNA-binding proteins, and it was thus assumed that BasR acts as a transcriptional regulator through binding to the promoter region of yfbE (although this remains to be proven). To gain more insight into the BasS-BasR regulatory system, we conducted genome-wide analyses by microarray. Custom glass slide microarrays were spotted with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products corresponding to 4,095 full-length E. coli open-reading frames, as has been described previously. With this microarray system, systematic profiling of E. coli transcripts was carried out after one RNA sample was labeled with Cy3 and the other with Cy5 (see "Materials and Methods"). First, the labeled transcripts were prepared from HD001 cells grown in LB medium in the presence of 0.4 mM FeSO₄, and compared with transcripts from cells grown in the absence of iron. Then, the transcripts of HD001 cells grown in the presence of iron were compared with those of HD002 [Δ(basS-basR)] grown under the same conditions. The results of these analyses are schematically summarized (Fig. 4). First, 61 genes were identified as iron-induced genes (>2 induction). Then, 145 genes were identified as ones the expression levels of which were significantly reduced in the Δ(basS-basR) background (<1/3 reduction). When compared these

Fig. 4. Schematic Representation of Microarray Data with Mutant Cells of the BasS-BasR Signaling System.

Two types of microarray analyses were carried out, as indicated. First, the transcriptome of HD001 (wild-type) cells grown for 6 h at 37°C in LB medium containing 0.4 mM FeSO₄ (labeled by Cy-5) were compared with that of cells grown in the absence of iron (labeled by Cy-3). The data analyses revealed that 61 genes showed the mean values (Cy-5/Cy-3) higher than 2. These were assumed to be the genes, the expressions of which were up-regulated by iron (designated as “Fe-up”). Second, the transcriptome of HD002 (ΔbasSR) cells grown at 37°C in LB medium containing 0.4 mM FeSO₄ (labeled by Cy-5) were compared with that of HD001 (wild-type) cells grown under the same conditions (labeled Cy-3). The data analyses revealed that 145 genes showed the mean values (Cy-5/Cy-3) lower than 0.33. These were assumed to be the genes, the expressions of which were down-regulated in the ΔbasSR background (designated as “ΔbasSR-down”). (B) From the same microarray data, “Fe-down” and “ΔbasSR-up genes” were also inspected, based on the same logic, as described above.
uncovered genes, of 61 iron-induced genes, 29 genes (48%) were significantly affected in the Δ(basS–basR) background (Fig. 4A). These genes are listed in Table 2. Three genes belonging to the *yfbE* operon were in this group, as anticipated. Furthermore, the *lacZYA* genes were also in it, as expected on the basis of the fact that these *lacZYA* genes in HD001 and HD002 were under the control of the *yfbE* promoter (see Fig. 1). These results strongly support the view that our microarray data are reliable. The other 23 genes, newly uncovered here, are also likely to be target genes, which are activated directly or indirectly through the iron-mediated BasS–BasR signaling pathway. A large number (116) of genes were down-regulated in the Δ(basS–basR) background, but they were not up-regulated by iron. The significance of these genes is not known, but such an event is not surprising, because the defect in the BasS–BasR system would cause many secondary physiological effects that might result in a global change in gene expression.

In our microarray data, theoretically, one can search for genes whose expression is negatively regulated by the BasS–BasR system in response to iron. We analyzed the same microarray data to search for the iron-repressed and BasS–BasR-dependent genes. Only 6 genes were found as such candidates, including *yajD*, *ynfK*, *yrbL*, *yiiD*, *melA*, and *mgtA* (Fig. 4B). The *melA* and *mgtA* genes encode α-galactosidase and the Mg²⁺-transporter respectively, whereas each of others encodes an unknown protein. Interestingly, it was previously reported that the *yrbL* and *mgtA* genes were activated in a manner dependent on the PhoQ–PhoP system. But, the physiological relevance of these and other iron-repressed genes is unclear. Hence this study mainly concerned the iron-induced genes.

### Characteristic features of the putative iron-induced and BasS–BasR-dependent genes

It is worth mentioning that many of these identified genes constitute a distinctive operon and/or gene-cluster (Table 2). Inspection of them revealed interesting features, as follows. (1) Both the *aceF* and *aceE* genes are members of the pyruvate-dehydrogenase operon that is involved in acetate metabolism. (2) The *brnQ* gene encodes a branched chain amino acid transport system carrier protein. (3) The *hyaA* and *hyaB* genes encode the small and large subunits of hydrogenase 1 respectively. The expression levels of these genes are enhanced under acidic growth conditions. (4) GadB is glutamate decarboxylase, whereas GadC is a glutamate-dependent enzyme that may function for protection against cytoplasmic acidification. (5) The *yfiD* gene encodes a putative formate acetyltransferase. The expression level of *yfiD* is enhanced during growth at pH 4.4 and upon the addition of propionate at pH 6. (6) The *tdc* operon is implicated in the expression of anaerobically-induced threonine/serine permease. (7) The *zntA* gene encodes a metal-transporting P-type

ATPase, the expression of which is regulated by Cd, Pb, and Zn. Among the listed genes, 8 are located on the chromosome as a cluster (*yhiU*, *yhiV*, *gadA*, *hdeA*, *hdeD*, *yhiE*, *slp* and *hdeB*). There is solid evidence that these genes are components of a regulatory network of acid resistance genes. For instance, YhiE (or GadE) is a crucial activator for the glutamate decarboxylase-dependent acid resistance genes, including *gadABC*. Furthermore, these genes were collectively identified as “acid-induced genes” through previous whole-genome expression profiling. It should also be noted that the *yfbE* operon genes in question were identified as acid-induced genes in the previous genome-wide profiling. It is clear, then, that most of these BasS–BasR-dependent genes, if not all, are closely associated with acidic and/or anaerobic growth conditions. In this study, we did not prove experimentally that these listed genes are indeed direct targets of the BasS–BasR signal transduction system, and this issue remains to be addressed. But, the results of genome-wide profiling provided us with some insight into the physiological role of the BasS–BasR system.

#### The Mutant defective of the BasS–BasR two-component system is sensitive to mild-acid conditions in the presence of iron

As explained above, many of the putative iron-induced and BasS–BasR-dependent genes are associated with acidic and/or anaerobic growth conditions. Based on this view, we examined the phenotype of HD002 [Δ(basS–basR)] with reference to acidic growth conditions in the presence of iron. When HD002 cells were grown on LB-agar medium (pH 7.0) containing a high concentration of FeSO₄ (1.5 mM), both the wild-type and mutant cells formed colonies (Fig. 5). But, when the pH of LB medium was lowered to 5.5, the HD002 cells no longer formed colonies, while the wild-type cells were fully resistant to such mild-acidic conditions. Provided that the HD002 cells were complemented with the plasmid-born *basS–basR* genes, they became fully resistant to acidic conditions even in the presence of iron. Thus, it was found that a characteristic phenotype of the Δ(basS–basR) strain is mild-acid sensitive in the presence of a relatively high concentration of external iron. This is apparently consistent with the observation that many of the putative iron-induced and BasS–BasR-dependent genes are acid-induced.

## Discussion

In general, iron is essential for biological processes but toxic in excess. *E. coli* has the well-characterized Fur-mediated signal transduction pathway, which is activated during iron limitation and is responsible for iron uptake. This Fur-mediated pathway also responds to the Fe(II) form of iron in the cytosol and participates in the adaptation to oxidative stress by interacting with the OxyR and SoxRS regulatory systems, which are not
-FeSO₄                                      +FeSO₄
WT     ΔbasSR                               WT     ΔbasSR
+vector +vector +basSR                      +vector +vector +basSR

LB

WT     ΔbasSR                               WT     ΔbasSR
+vector +vector +basSR                      +vector +vector +basSR

LB pH5.5

Fig. 5. Mild-acid Sensitivity of Δ(basS-basR) Cells on LB-Agar Plates Containing a Relatively High Concentration of Iron.

HD001 (WT, wild-type), HD002 (ΔbasSR) and HD002 transformed with a plasmid carrying both the basS and basR genes were grown in LB medium (0.4 OD at 600 nm). The cultures were serially diluted (×10², ×10⁴ and ×10⁶), and the suspensions were spotted (from top to bottom) on LB-agar plates with and without FeSO₄ (1.5 mM), adjusted either pH 7.0 or 5.5, as indicated. The plates were incubated at 37°C for 24 h, and then they were photographed.

bacterium.

Little is known about the molecular mechanism by which the mutant cells defective in the BasS-BasR system show the phenotype of mild-acid sensitivity in the presence of a relatively high concentration of external iron. Groisman and his co-workers suggested that the Fe(III) form of iron is a toxic substance that acts on an extracytoplasmic target of the cell surface in a manner independent of intracellular oxidative stress.¹²) The E. coli BasS-BasR system appears to be an important signaling system in the physiological sense that certain enteric bacteria might encounter a high concentration of toxic iron in their natural habitats, such as the mammalian gastrointestinal tract, where iron is present at relatively high concentrations. In this respect, the results of our microarray analysis provided new information, suggesting that the BasS-BasR system controls, directly and indirectly, a certain set of genes that are associated with acidic and/or anaerobic growth conditions. This is interesting because the mammalian gastrointestinal tract is generally acidic and anaerobic. BasS-BasR might be a pleiotropic two-component system that participates in adaptations to complicated natural habitats in hosts.

Two decades ago, the first two-component envZ-ompR genes were cloned as the crucial regulators for osmoregulation in E. coli.³³) Since then, many E. coli two-component genes have been identified in rapid succession. When the entire genomic sequence was determined in 1997, it was eventually found that E. coli K12 has 29 His-kinases, each of which must participate in a characteristic signal transduction pathway in response to a variety of environmental stimuli.⁴,⁵) During the last decade, many of these two-component systems have been characterized in terms of their physiological roles, by many independent researchers (Table 3). In this study, we newly clarified the physiological role of the least characterized BasS-BasR system so far. Including this system, here it might be worthwhile to compile these E. coli 29 two-component systems with special reference to their physiological functions (Table 3). Such an update and compiled overview is not available currently. To gain an insight into the E. coli two-component network, we classified these systems into several groups based on their physiological functions (although it is somewhat arbitrary): 8 two-component systems are implicated in metabolic responses, other 8 systems are involved in ion/metal responses, 6 systems are responsible for stress responses. All of these 22 systems function as the transcriptional regulators. Interestingly, the CheA-CheY system controls the cell behavior, chemotaxis. With regard to the remaining 5 systems, so far we have no information concerning their physiological roles. Clarification of their physiological roles must await further research.

Of the metabolic-response group, the ArcB-ArcA system is the best-characterized one. It is involved in a

Table 3. Summary View of E. coli Two-component Systems

| Two-component systems$^{a)}$ | Characteristic functions | References$^{b)}$ |
|-----------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------|
| **Metabolic responses**     |                          |                   |
| ArcB→ArcA                  | aerobic/anaerobic metabolism | 7)               |
| AtoS→AtoC                  | acetoacetate metabolism   | 35)              |
| DcuS→DcuR                  | C4-dicarboxylate metabolism | 36)              |
| DpiB→DpiA (CitA→CitB)      | citrate metabolism        | 37)              |
| NarQ→NarP                  | nitrate metabolism        | 38)              |
| NarX→NarL                  | nitrate metabolism        | 39)              |
| TorS→TorR                  | trimethylamine metabolism | 40)              |
| UhpB→UhpA                  | hexose phosphate uptake   | 41)              |
| **Ion/metal responses**    |                          |                   |
| BasS→BasR                  | iron (Fe) response       | This study       |
| CopS→CopR                  | copper (Cu) (or metal) response | 42)              |
| CusS→CusR                  | copper (Cu) (or metal) response | 42)              |
| KdpD→KdpE                  | potassium (K) assimilation | 43)              |
| NtrB→NtrC                  | nitrogen (N) assimilation | 44)              |
| PhoQ→PhoP                  | magnesium (Mg) assimilation | 18)              |
| PhoR→PhoB                  | phosphate (P) assimilation | 45)              |
| ZraS→ZraR (HydH→HydG)      | zinc (Zn) (or metal) response | 46)              |
| **Stress responses**       |                          |                   |
| BaeS→BaeR                  | drag resistance          | 47)              |
| BarA→UvrY                  | oxidative stress response | 48)              |
| CpxA→CpxR                  | envelope stress response | 49)              |
| EnvZ→OmpR                  | osmotic stress response  | 50)              |
| EvgS→EvgA                  | drag resistance          | 27)              |
| QseC→QseB                  | quorum sensing           | 51)              |
| RcsC→YojN→RcsB             | capsule synthesis        | 52)              |
| **Motility**               |                          |                   |
| CheA→CheY (CheB)           | chemotaxis               | 8)               |
| **Unknown**                |                          |                   |
| CreC→CreB                  | unknown                 |                   |
| RstB→RstA                  | unknown                 |                   |
| YehU→YehT                  | unknown                 |                   |
| YfhK→YfhA                  | unknown                 |                   |
| YpdA→YpdB                  | unknown                 |                   |

---

$^{a)}$ For the details of each two-component system, see the references.

$^{b)}$ Only one representative of each is cited, due to limited space (see the references therein, and also see a review, ref. 3).

the PhoQ–PhoP system, presumably to respond properly to both iron and magnesium in the environment. The results of our present and previous studies provide evidence that there is a network among the PhoQ–PhoP, BasS–BasR, and RcsC–RcsB regulatory systems, which appears to be physiologically meaningful in the sense that this network is implicated in a coordinate synthesis/ modification of cell-surface polysaccharides in response to the status of external divalent cations, including magnesium, iron, and zinc. There must be further instances of such physiological cross-regulation within the *E. coli* two-component systems. Clarification of such instances remains a major challenge in *E. coli* physiology. To this end, the genome-wide view as to the *E. coli* two-component systems, complied in Table 3, might be useful.

### Acknowledgments

This study was supported by Grants-in-Aid from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan, and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries of Japan. Thanks are due also to T. Mori, T. Oshima, and H. Aiba for valuable advice with regard to microarray analysis.

### References

1) Hoch, J. A., and Silhavy, T. J., “Two-Component Signal Transduction”, American Society for Microbiology Press, Washington, D.C., pp. 1–473 (1995).

2) Appleby, J. L., Parkinson, J. S., and Bourret, R. B., Signal transduction via the multi-step phosphorelay: not necessarily a road less traveled. *Cell*, **86**, 845–848 (1996).

3) Mizuno, T., His-Asp phosphotransfer signal transduction. *J. Biochem.*, **123**, 555–563 (1998).

4) Mizuno, T., Compilation of all genes encoding two-component phosphotransfer signal transducers in the genome of *Escherichia coli*. *DNA Res.*, **4**, 161–168 (1997).

5) Mizuno, T., Aiba, H., Oshima, T., Mori, H., and Wanner, B. L., Genome-wide analysis of *Escherichia coli* histidine kinases. In “Histidine Kinases in Signal Transduction”, eds. Inouye, M., and Dutta, R., Academic Press, New York, pp. 192–202 (2003).

6) Pratt, L., and Silhavy, T. J., Porin regulation of *Escherichia coli*. In “Two-Component Signal Transduction”, eds. Hoch, J. A., and Silhavy, T. J., American Society for Microbiology Press, Washington D.C., pp. 105–107 (1995).

7) Lynch, A. S., and Lin, E. C. C., Responses to molecular oxygen. In “*Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella*” 2<sup>nd</sup> ed., ed. Neidhardt, F. C., American Society for Microbiology Press, Washington D.C., pp. 1526–1538 (1996).

8) Stock, J. B., and Surette, M. G., In “*Escherichia coli* and *Salmonella*” 2<sup>nd</sup> ed., ed. Neidhardt, F. C., American Society for Microbiology Press, Washington D.C., pp. 1103–1129 (1996).

9) Oshima, T., Aiba, H., Masuda, Y., Kanaya, S., Sugiura, M., Wanner, B. L., Mori, H., and Mizuno, T., Transcriptome analysis of all two-component regulatory system mutants of *Escherichia coli* K-12. *Mol. Microbiol.*, **46**, 281–291 (2002).

10) Hagiwara, D., Sugiura, M., Oshima, T., Mori, H., Aiba, H., Yamashino, T., and Mizuno, T., Genome-wide analyses revealing a signaling network of the RcsC-YojN-RcsB phosphorelay system in *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.*, **185**, 5735–5746 (2003).

11) Nagasawa, S., Ishige, K., and Mizuno, T., Novel members of the two-component signal transduction genes in *Escherichia coli*. *J. Biochem.*, **114**, 350–357 (1993).

12) Chamnongpol, S., Dodson, W., Cromie, M. J., Harris, L., and Groisman, E. A., Fe(III)-mediated cellular toxicity. *Mol. Microbiol.*, **45**, 711–719 (2002).

13) Gunn, J. S., Lim, K. B., Krueger, J., Kim, K., Guo, L., Hackett, M., and Miller, S. I., PmrA-PmrB-regulated genes necessary for 4-aminoribose lipid A modification and polymyxin resistance. *Mol. Microbiol.*, **27**, 1171–1182 (1998).

14) Datsenko, K. A., and Wanner, B. L., One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in *Escherichia coli* K-12 using PCR products. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.*, **97**, 6640–6645 (2000).

15) Miller, J. H., “Experiments in Molecular Genetics”, Cold Spring Harbor Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y., pp. 356–360 (1972).

16) Oshima, T., Wada, C., Kawagoe, Y., Ara, T., Maeda, M., Masuda, Y., Hiraga, S., and Mori, H., Genome-wide analysis of deoxyadenosine methyltransferase-mediated control of gene expression in *Escherichia coli*. *Mol. Microbiol.*, **45**, 673–695 (2002).

17) Kox, L. F., Wosten, M. S., and Groisman, E. A., A small protein that mediates the activation of a two-component system by another two-component system. *EMBO J.*, **19**, 1861–1872 (2000).

18) Groisman, E. A., The pleiotropic two-component regulatory system PhoP-PhoQ. *J. Bacteriol.*, **183**, 1835–1842 (2001).

19) Quail, M. A., Haydon, D. J., and Guest, J. R., The *pdhR-aceEF-lpd* operon of *Escherichia coli* expresses the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. *Mol. Microbiol.*, **12**, 95–104 (1994).

20) Yamamoto, I., and Anraku, Y., Genetic and biochemical studies of transport systems for branched-chain amino acids in *Escherichia coli* K-12: Isolation and properties of mutants defective in leucine-repressible transport activities. *J. Bacteriol.*, **144**, 36–44 (1980).

21) King, P. W., and Przybyla, A. E., Response of *hya* expression to external pH in *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.*, **181**, 5250–5256 (1999).

22) De Biase, D., Tramonti, A., Bossa, F., and Visca, P., The response to stationary-phase stress conditions in *Escherichia coli*: Role and regulation of the glutamic acid decarboxylase system. *Mol. Microbiol.*, **32**, 1198–1211 (1999).

23) Wyborn, N. R., Messenger, S. L., Henderson, R. A., Sawers, G., Roberts, R. E., Attwood, M. M., and Green, J., Expression of the *Escherichia coli yfiD* gene responds to intracellular pH and reduces the accumulation of acidic metabolic end products. *Microbiol.*, **148**, 1015–1026 (2002).

24) Chattopadhyay, S., Wu, Y., and Datta, P., Involvement of Fnr and ArcA in anaerobic expression of the *tdc* operon of *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.*, **179**, 4868–4873 (1997).

25) Binet, M. R. B., and Poole, R. K., Cd(II), Pb(II) and Zn(II) ions regulate expression of the metal-transporting P-type ATPase ZntA in *Escherichia coli*. *FEBS Lett.*, **473**, 67–70 (2000).

26) Masuda, N., and Church, G. M., Regulatory network of acid resistance genes in *Escherichia coli*. *Mol. Microbiol.*, **48**, 699–712 (2003).

27) Eguchi, Y., Oshima, T., Mori, H., Aono, R., Yamamoto, K., Ishihama, A., and Utsumi, R., Transcriptional regulation of drug efflux genes by EvgAS, a two-component system in *Escherichia coli*. *Microbiol.*, **149**, 2819–2828 (2003).

28) Ma, A., Gong, S., Richard, H., Tucker, D. L., Conway, T., and Foster, J. W., GadE (YhiE) activates glutamate decarboxylase-dependent acid resistance in *Escherichia coli* K-12. *Mol. Microbiol.*, **49**, 1309–1320 (2003).

29) Tucker, D. L., Tucker, N., and Conway, T., Gene expression profiling of the pH response in *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.*, **184**, 6551–6558 (2002).

30) Hantke, K., Iron and metal regulation. *Curr. Opin. Microbiol.*, **4**, 172–177 (2001).

31) Wosten, M. S., Kox, L. F., Chamnongpol, S., Soncini, F. C., and Groisman, E. A., A signal transduction system that responds to extracellular iron. *Cell*, **103**, 113–125 (2000).

32) Garcia, V. E., Soncini, F. C., and Groisman, E. A., Mg²⁺ as an extracellular signal: environmental regulation of *Salmonella* virulence. *Cell*, **84**, 165–174 (1996).

33) Mizuno, T., Wurtzel, E. T., and Inouye, M., Osmoregulation of gene expression. II: DNA sequence of the *envZ* gene of the *ompB* operon of *Escherichia coli* and characterization of its gene product. *J. Biol. Chem.*, **257**, 13692–13698 (1982).

34) Matsubara, M., Kitaoka, S., Takeda, S., and Mizuno, T., Tuning of the porin expression under anaerobic growth conditions by His-to-Asp cross-phosphorelay through both the EnvZ-osmosensor and ArcB-anaerosensor in *Escherichia coli*. *Genes Cells*, **5**, 555–569 (2000).

35) Jenkins, L. S., and Nunn, W. D., Regulation of the *ato* operon by the *atoC* gene in *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.*, **169**, 2096–2102 (1987).

36) Abo-Amer, A. E., Munn, J., Jackson, K., Aktas, M., Golby, P., Kelly, D. J., and Andrews, S. C., DNA interaction and phosphotransfer of the C4-dicarboxylate-responsive DcuS-DcuR two-component regulatory system from *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.*, **186**, 1879–1889 (2004).

37) Kaspar, S., and Bott, M., The sensor kinase CitA (DpiB) of *Escherichia coli* functions as a high-affinity citrate receptor. *Arch. Microbiol.*, **177**, 313–321 (2002).

38) Stewart, V., Chen, L.-L., and Wu, H.-C., Response to culture aeration mediated by the nitrate and nitrite sensor NarQ of *Escherichia coli* K-12. *Mol. Microbiol.*, **50**, 1391–1399 (2003).

39) Lee, A. I., Delgado, A., and Gunsalus, R. P., Signal-dependent phosphorylation of the membrane-bound NarX two-component sensor-transmitter protein of *Escherichia coli*: Nitrate elicits a superior anion ligand response compared to nitrite. *J. Bacteriol.*, **181**, 5309–

40) Bordi, C., and Theraulaz, L., Anticipating an alkaline stress through the Tor phosphorelay system in *Escherichia coli*. *Mol. Microbiol.*, **48**, 211–223 (2000).

41) Verhamme, D. T., Postma, P. W., Crielaard, W., and Hellingwerf, K. J., Cooperativity in signal transfer through the Uhp system of *Escherichia coli*. *J. Bacteriol.*, **184**, 4205–4210 (2002).

42) Munson, G. P., Lam, D. L., Outten, F. W., and O’Halloran, T. V., Identification of a copper-responsive two-component system on the chromosome of *Escherichia coli* K-12. *J. Bacteriol.*, **182**, 5864–5871 (2000).

43) Jung, K., and Altendorf, K., Towards an understanding of the molecular mechanisms of stimulus perception and signal transduction by KdpD/KdpE system of *Escherichia coli*. *J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol.*, **4**, 223–228 (2002).

44) Zimmer, D. P., Soupene, E., Lee, H. L., Wendisch, V. F., Khodursky, A. B., Peter, B. J., Bender, R. A., and Kustu, S., Nitrogen regulatory protein C-controlled genes of *Escherichia coli*: Scavenging as a defense against nitrogen limitation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.*, **97**, 14674–14679 (2000).

45) Wanner, B. L., Phosphorus assimilation and control of the phosphate regulon. In “*Escherichia coli and Salmonella*” 2nd ed., ed. Neidhardt, F. C., American Society for Microbiology Press, Washington D.C., pp. 1357–1381 (1996).

46) Leonhartsberger, S., Huber, A., Lottspeich, F., and Bock, A., The *hydH/G* genes from *Escherichia coli* code for a zinc and lead responsive two-component regulatory system. *J. Mol. Biol.*, **307**, 93–105 (2001).

47) Baranova, N., and Nikaido, H., The BaeSR two-component regulatory system activates transcription of the *yegMNOB (mdtABCD)* transporter gene cluster in *Escherichia coli* and increases its resistance to novobiocin and deoxycholate. *J. Bacteriol.*, **184**, 4168–4176 (2002).

48) Pernestig, A.-K., Georgellis, D., Romeo, T., Suzuki, K., Tomenius, H., Normark, S., and Melefors, O., The *Escherichia coli* BarA-UvrY two-component system is needed for efficient switching between glycolytic and gluconeogenic carbon sources. *J. Bacteriol.*, **185**, 843–853 (2003).

49) Raivio, T. L., and Silhavy, T. J., Periplasmic stress and ECF sigma factors. *Annu. Rev. Microbiol.*, **55**, 591–624 (2001).

50) Mizuno, T., and Mizushima, S., Signal transduction and gene regulation through the phosphorylation of two regulatory components: The molecular basis for the osmotic regulation of porin genes. *Mol. Microbiol.*, **4**, 1077–1082 (1990).

51) Sperandio, V., Torres, A. G., and Kaper, J. B., Quorum sensing *Escherichia coli* regulators B and C (QseBC): A novel two-component regulatory system involved in the regulation of flagella and motility by quorum sensing in *E. coli*. *Mol. Microbiol.*, **43**, 809–821 (2002).

52) Takeda, S., Fujisawa, Y., Matsubara, M., Aiba, H., and Mizuno, T., A novel feature of the multistep phosphorelay in *Escherichia coli*: A revised model of the RcsC→YojN→RcsB signalling pathway implicated in capsular synthesis and swarming behaviour. *Mol. Microbiol.*, **40**, 440–450 (2001).
