
Int. J. Dev. Biol. 48: 477-487 (2004)

# The Wnt connection to tumorigenesis

JÜRGEN BEHRENS$^{*,1}$ and BARBARA LUSTIG$^{2}$

$^{1}$Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for Molecular Medicine, University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany and $^{2}$Clinic for Abdominal, Endocrine and Thoracic Surgery, Klinikum Nürnberg, Nürnberg, Germany

**ABSTRACT** Wnt signaling has been identified as one of the key signaling pathways in cancer, regulating cell growth, motility and differentiation. Because of its widespread activation in diverse human tumor diseases, the Wnt pathway has gained considerable and growing interest in tumor research over recent years. Evidence that altered Wnt signaling is important for human tumor development came from three major findings: (i) the tumor suppressor adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) binds to the Wnt pathway component β-catenin and is involved in its degradation, (ii) mutations of APC in colon tumors lead to stabilization of the β-catenin protein and (iii) tumor-associated mutations of β-catenin in colorectal cancer as well as in other tumor types lead to its stabilization, qualifying β-catenin as a proto-oncogene. Here we will describe the biochemical interactions which shape the Wnt pathway and focus on its role in tumorigenesis.

**KEY WORDS:** wnt, tumor, β-catenin, APC, mutation

## Introduction

In mammals, the first *Wnt* gene to be identified was called *int-1* because it was activated by integration of the LTR of the mouse mammary tumor virus resulting in the development of mammary tumors in mice. In *Drosophila* the homologous gene of *int-1* is called *wingless*, and the combination of both names led to the term Wnt (Rijsewijk *et al.*, 1987a). In the so-called canonical Wnt signaling pathway, the cytoplasmic protein β-catenin becomes stabilized and then associates with transcription factors of the LEF/TCF family (hereafter collectively referred to as TCF). The TCF/β-catenin complexes regulate expression of specific target genes thereby transmitting the Wnt signal to the cell nucleus. Besides canonical signaling, there are two more main branches of the Wnt pathway: the planar cell polarity pathway, which controls cytoskeletal rearrangements, involving RhoA and Jun Kinase, and the Wnt/Ca$^{2+}$ pathway, which acts via calmodulin-dependent kinase, calcineurin, and the transcription factor NF-AT (Veeman *et al.*, 2003; Kuhl, 2004). In the following, we will focus on the canonical Wnt pathway and its implication in cancer development and progression. The possible roles of the planar cell polarity and Ca$^{2+}$ pathways in tumorigenesis are less defined and will not be discussed here.

Wnt signaling has been identified and studied extensively in embryonal development. In *Xenopus* embryos, ectopic expression of Wnts induces dorsalization of the embryos and formation of a secondary body axis, resulting in double-headed embryos. This phenomenon is also observed with other activating components of the Wnt pathway while inhibitors lead to defects in axis formation. Thus, if the amount of β-catenin is increased, e.g., by injecting β-catenin mRNA, a secondary body-axis forms, whereas if negative regulators such as axin are expressed, axis formation is disturbed and ventralization of the embryos occurs. In addition to *Xenopus* embryology, studies in *Drosophila melanogaster* and *Caenorhabditis elegans* have been most powerful in identifying and characterizing new components of the pathway. Mice mutated in Wnt pathway components have contributed to our understanding of the physiological role of the Wnt pathway in mammals, and more recently, zebrafish genetics has also entered the Wnt field.

### Molecular mechanisms of the canonical Wnt signal transduction pathway

A combination of biochemical and developmental studies together with tumor genetics have contributed to the model of molecular interactions of the Wnt pathway that will be described here. Our model is simplified as it contains only a selection of components for which an essential role has been suggested by different functional studies (Fig. 1).

---

**Abbreviations used in this paper:** APC, adenomatous polyposis coli tumor suppressor; FAP, familial adenomatous polyposis.

*Address correspondence to:* Dr. Jürgen Behrens. Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center, Glückstrasse 6, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. Fax: ++49-9131-852-9111.  
e-mail: jbehrens@molmed.uni-erlangen.de

0214-6282/2004/$25.00  
© UBC Press  
Printed in Spain  
www.ijdb.ehu.es

J. Behrens and B. Lustig

**Signaling at the plasma membrane**

Wnts are secreted glycoproteins which are produced by different cell types and are thought to act mostly in a paracrine fashion (Cadigan and Nusse 1997). There are 19 Wnt proteins known only some of which, such as Wnt-1, Wnt-3a and Wnt-8 activate the canonical Wnt/β-catenin pathway. Wnts bind to seven transmembrane receptors called frizzleds and to co-receptors LRP-5 and LRP-6, which are essential for signal transmission (Bhanot *et al.*, 1996, Tamai *et al.*, 2000, Wehrli *et al.*, 2000, Mao *et al.*, 2001a). The interaction of Wnts with frizzled receptors can be modulated by secreted factors, which act as direct or indirect antagonists. While WIF-1, Cerberus and FrzB bind to Wnts and thereby directly prevent its interaction with frizzleds (Miller 2002), members of the Dickkopf family (Dkk-1, DKK-2, but not DKK-3) prevent Wnt binding in an indirect fashion by reducing availability of the LRP co-receptors. Dkk was shown to promote endocytosis of LRP by interacting with the transmembrane protein Kremen (Mao *et al.*, 2001a, Mao *et al.*, 2002).

**Signaling in the cytoplasm**

The molecular events taking place immediately after activation of frizzleds remain largely elusive. It is clear from most of the genetic as well as biochemical data that the cytoplasmic phosphoprotein dishevelled plays a crucial role (Wharton 2003). After activation of Wnt signaling dishevelled becomes recruited to the plasma membrane possibly by interaction with phospholipids (Capelluto *et al.*, 2002). It is thought that this step leads to activation of dishevelled which can then interfere with β-catenin degradation. The precise nature of the activation mechanism of dishevelled is not known although phosphorylation of dishevelled might be important. A number of dishevelled interacting proteins have been identified, such as Dapper, Frodo, Daam1, Stbm, PAR-1, and Nkd,

WIF-1  
Cerberus  
FrzB  

$\downarrow$  

Dkk/Kremen $\quad$ Frizzled/LRP  

$\downarrow$  

Dapper  
Stbm  
Par-1  
Nkd  

Dishevelled $\quad$ Frodo  

$\downarrow$  

Diversin $\quad$ Axin/APC/ $\quad$ FRAT-1  
$\qquad\qquad$ GSK/CK1  

Chibby  
ICAT  

$\beta$-Catenin $\quad$ Legless ($bcl-9$)  
$\qquad\qquad$ Pygopus  

$\downarrow$  

Groucho $\quad$ TCF $\quad$ CBP  

Fig. 1. Overview of the Wnt pathway. The central components of the canonical Wnt signaling cascade are shown in bold type. Factors which modulate Wnt signaling at different levels of the cascade are shown in italics. Inhibitors are depicted to the left (stippled lines) and activators to the right (straight lines).
pattern in embryonic development with a ubiquitous expression of axin and a very defined expression pattern of conductin, but conductin in contrast to axin is upregulated in colon, liver, and ovarian tumors (Jho *et al.*, 2002, Leung *et al.*, 2002, Lustig *et al.*, 2002). The promoter of the conductin/axin2 gene contains functional TCF binding sites and biochemical experiments demonstrate that conductin is a direct target of the Wnt pathway that acts in a negative feedback mechanism.

APC has first been identified as the responsible gene mutated in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), an inherited disease characterized by the development of thousand of polyps in the colon, eventually leading to colon cancer (Kinzler and Vogelstein 1996). The elucidation of the role of APC as a negative regulator of β-catenin in the Wnt pathway has greatly helped in understanding its function as a tumor suppressor (Polakis 2000). The *APC* gene is very large containing 21 exons that encode a 2843 amino acid protein. The central region of APC is most directly implicated in Wnt signaling. It contains three 15-amino-acids repeats and seven 20-amino-acid repeats which all bind to β-catenin. Unlike the 20-amino-acid repeats the 15-amino acid repeats are not essential for downregulation of β-catenin and are retained in most APC-truncated tumors (Polakis 2000). Three so-called SAMP repeats containing the core sequence serine-alanine-methionine-proline interact with the RGS domain of the axin proteins (Behrens *et al.*, 1998, Spink *et al.*, 2000). Thus APC, like axin/conductin can be considered a scaffold protein associating with different components of the β-catenin destruction complex. In colorectal tumors mutations of the *APC* gene occur mostly in a mutation cluster region which is located closely 5′ to the sequence encoding the first SAMP repeat. These mutations generate stop codons or frameshifts leading to the deletion of the C-terminal half of the APC protein and thereby removing the interaction sites with axin/conductin (Polakis 2000). In addition, the truncated APC also lacks several nuclear export sequences (NES) which are thought to be important for the distribution of APC between cytoplasm and the nucleus. Besides its function in regulating β-catenin degradation APC is also involved in shuttling β-catenin from the nucleus to the cytoplasm thereby interfering with its transcriptional activity. It has been speculated that this function of APC is important for its role as a tumor suppressor and that lack of β-catenin shuttling contributes to the aberrant activation of the Wnt pathway in tumors (Rosin-Arbesfeld *et al.*, 2003).

β-Catenin has a core domain of twelve so-called arm-repeats which were first identified in the Drosophila homologue armadillo (Peifer *et al.*, 1994). Structurally the arm repeats are built up by three α-helices, which arrange in a superhelical fashion to generate a rod-like structure (Huber and Weis 2001). Arm repeats are also found in several other proteins including APC and have a widespread function as protein interaction domains. In β-catenin different segments of the arm domain bind to cadherins, APC, axin/conductin, and TCFs (von Kries *et al.*, 2000). Most of these interactions appear to be mutually exclusive, in particular the associations with cadherins and components of the destruction complex (Hulsken *et al.*, 1994).

### Signaling in the nucleus

Stabilized β-catenin enters the cell nucleus and associates with TCF/LEF transcription factors, leading to the transcription of Wnt target genes. TCFs bind to DNA via an HMG domain and to β-catenin with a short stretch of amino acids at their N-terminus. TCFs lack transactivation function, however, in β-catenin, the N- and in particular the C-terminal regions that flank the arm repeat domain exhibit transcriptional activation function (Behrens *et al.*, 1996, Huber *et al.*, 1996, Molenaar *et al.*, 1996, van de Wetering *et al.*, 1997, Hsu *et al.*, 1998).

The interaction between stabilized β-catenin and TCFs can be modulated by various direct and indirect mechanisms (Fig.1). In the absence of β-catenin, TCFs can repress gene transcription either as naturally occurring dominant-negative variants or in association with transcriptional repressors such as groucho (Roose *et al.*, 1998). Transcriptional activity of TCF/β-catenin complexes is increased by activators such as p300/CBP, a histone acetyl transferase, and by the chromatin-remodeling SWI/SNF complex (Hecht *et al.*, 2000, Barker *et al.*, 2001). A pair of factors containing DNA-induced ATPase and DNA helicase activity, pontin52 (also called TIP49) and reptin52 (TIP48) was shown to bind to β-catenin and modulate its activity in an opposite fashion, i.e. pontin52 activates while reptin52 represses activity (Bauer *et al.*, 2000). A dominant-negative mutant of TIP49 interfered with oncogenic transformation (Feng *et al.*, 2003). Legless/bcl-9 recruits the nuclear protein pygopus to β-catenin thereby activating the complex by a yet unknown mechanism (Kramps *et al.*, 2002, Thompson *et al.*, 2002). Several nuclear effectors of the TCF/β-catenin interaction have been identified. ICAT is a small protein that binds to the central and C-terminal segments of the arm repeat domain with different parts and thereby blocks interaction of β-catenin with both TCFs and CBP (Tago *et al.*, 2000). Similarly, the nuclear factor Chibby binds to the β-catenin arm repeats and blocks its association with TCF thereby interfering with Wnt signaling in mammalian cells and in *Drosophila* (Takemaru *et al.*, 2003). Taken together the transcriptional control exerted by TCF/β-catenin complexes is under stringent positive and negative regulation which might determine cell type specificities of Wnt signaling under physiological conditions and in tumor development. The various interaction partners of β-catenin in the nucleus are promising candidates to be tested for a putative role in tumorigenesis.

## Other tumor-related functions of Wnt pathway components

APC has been shown recently to be associated with multiple other functions. The N-terminal part of APC harbors an oligomerization domain and a so-called armadillo domain. This domain interacts with the APC-stimulated guanine nucleotide exchange factor (ASEF) thereby activating Rac (Kawasaki *et al.*, 2000), with the kinesin superfamily protein KAP3A (Jimbo *et al.*, 2002), and with the regulatory subunit of the phosphatase 2A (Seeling *et al.*, 1999). The interaction of mutated but not wild-type APC with ASEF was shown to promote migration of epithelial cells, suggesting a role of ASEF in tumor invasion and metastasis (Kawasaki *et al.*, 2003).

Recently, several components of the Wnt pathway, in particular those involved in degradation of β-catenin were shown to be associated with microtubules and the mitotic spindle apparatus. Endogenous APC was located at the distal ends of microtubules in migrating mammalian tissue-culture cells and in epithelial inner ear cells (Nathke *et al.*, 1996, Mogensen *et al.*, 2002). Exogenously expressed wild-type APC stabilizes microtubules *in vitro* and *in*
vivo (Zumbrunn *et al.*, 2001). APC has also been localized to the mitotic spindle and to kinetochores, and mutation of APC in embryonic stem cells was associated with defects in chromosome segregation (Fodde *et al.*, 2001, Kaplan *et al.*, 2001). Thus loss of APC could lead to chromosomal instability and thereby promote cancer progression. Similar to APC, axin was detected at microtubules and shown to protect microtubules against depolymerization by nocodazole. Furthermore, dishevelled seems to cooperate with axin in the control of microtubule stability (Ciani *et al.*, 2004). Also, both GSK3 and β-catenin were found to be associated with the mitotic spindle (Olmeda *et al.*, 2003, Kaplan *et al.*, 2004), and interference with β-catenin through RNAi led to disturbance of centrosome separation and formation of monoastral spindles (Kaplan *et al.*, 2004), while inhibition of GSK activity with specific drugs led to disturbances in chromosome movements and development of astral microtubules (Wakefield *et al.*, 2003). Taken together it appears that the members of the β-catenin destruction complex reunite at microtubules and in particular at the mitotic spindle. Whether this reflects a new functional properties of the complex connected to the Wnt pathway remains to be determined. Obviously, localization of these components at a delicate structure such as the mitotic spindle might have functional consequences for cancer development.

β-Catenin is also involved in the control of cell-cell adhesion by binding to cadherin cell adhesion molecules. It is not yet clear to which degree the cell adhesion function of β-catenin plays a role in Wnt signaling, but it is well established from many studies that disturbances of cell junctions is a prerequisite for tumor invasion and metastasis (Behrens 1999, Christofori 2003).

### Wnt target genes and cancer development

Meanwhile a large list of Wnt target genes has been compiled by investigations in model organisms and cellular systems (see http://www.stanford.edu/~rnusse/wntwindow.html for an updated list). Wnt targets include genes regulating cell proliferation and developmental processes as well as tumor progression (Fig. 2). Here we will highlight only some of those targets for which a role in tumorigenesis was shown, or can be assumed from their known function. The promoters of the *c-myc* and *cyclinD1* genes contain TCF binding sites and are controlled by TCF/β-catenin complexes (He *et al.*, 1998, Shtutman *et al.*, 1999, Tetsu and McCormick 1999). Through both targets Wnt signaling may promote progression of cells through the cell cycle. While upregulation of c-myc leads to repression of the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor p21<sup>CLP</sup> and thus stimulates G1/S progression (van de Wetering *et al.*, 2002), cyclin D1 can directly activate G1 phase CDKs. Obviously, regulation of cell cycle by Wnt might play a role not only in tumorigenesis but also during normal tissue regeneration and stem cell proliferation as seen in the gut (Fig. 2). Another way by which Wnt signaling could lead to accumulation of transformed cells is inhibition of apoptosis. Expression of the anti-apoptotic gene *survivin* was downregulated by APC and analysis of its promoter revealed TCF-4 binding sites (Zhang *et al.*, 2001a, Kim *et al.*, 2003). Survivin is mainly expressed at the base of the crypts of normal colon epithelium and upregulated in colon tumors, again reflecting similar roles for Wnt signalling in the normal epithelium and tumors (Fig. 2). Wnt signaling also interferes with apoptosis induced by chemotherapeutic drugs, such as vinblastine and vincristine in Rat-1 fibroblasts, and inhibition of TCF/β-catenin increased the sensitivity of colorectal tumor cells to these compounds (Chen *et al.*, 2001).

Wnt signaling might also affect cell proliferation by induction of expression of growth factors and their receptors. For instance, FGF18 was found to be upregulated in colorectal cancer and its promoter shown to be activated by TCF/β-catenin (Shimokawa *et al.*, 2003). The tyrosine kinase c-met is upregulated in polyps of FAP patients and could be down-regulated experimentally by dominant-negative TCF in colorectal tumor cells (Boon *et al.*, 2002). c-Met is the receptor for the mesenchyme-derived Scatter Factor/HGF which is an epithelial growth factor but also promotes cell motility and invasion. Thus, upregulation of c-met could allow a cross-talk of tumor cells with the surrounding stroma and thereby promote cell proliferation and tumor cell invasion. A similar cross-talk, albeit in the opposite direction, might be generated by the upregulation of VEGF in colorectal tumor cells by TCFs, which could lead to stimulation of tumor-induced angiogenesis in the stroma and thus provide the basis for tumor growth and metastasis (Zhang *et al.*, 2001b). These examples show that aberrant Wnt signaling is not only important for the initial expansion of the transformed cell compartment as implied by the loss of the “gatekeeper” function of APC, but might also be related to the acquisition of properties required for tumor progression. In this respect it is of significance that several proteases capable of degrading extracellular matrix such as matrilysin/MMP7 and MMP-26 were identified as Wnt targets (Brabletz *et al.*, 1999, Crawford *et al.*, 1999, Marchenko *et al.*, 2002). The matrix metalloproteinase matrilysin has an impact on cancer progression since deficiency of matrilysin in the APC-deficient *min* mice resulted in a decrease of total tumor number and size (Crawford *et al.*, 1999). Interestingly a strong nuclear accumulation of β-catenin occurs at the invasive front of colorectal carcinomas (Fig. 2). Moreover nuclear accumulation of β-catenin together with MMP-7 expression at the invasion front was related to unfavorable outcome in colon cancer (Ougolkov *et al.*, 2002).

The motility of tumor cells and their capacity to metastasize might also be stimulated by the Wnt-induced expression of cell adhesion and extracellular matrix proteins. For instance, CD 44, a protein implicated in metastasis formation through interaction with proteoglycans was shown to be strongly overexpressed already in aberrant crypt foci, and its expression was lost in TCF-4 knockout mice (Wielenga *et al.*, 1999). Similarly, Nr-CAM a member of the Ig superfamily of adhesion receptors was shown to be induced by either β-, or γ-catenin (plakoglobin) in colon and melanoma cell lines. Nr-CAM can transform fibroblasts and increase their motility. Finally, the γ2 chain of laminin is also upregulated in the invasive areas of colon cancer and its gene promoter contains functional TCF binding sites (Hlubek *et al.*, 2001).

TCFs control cell differentiation in the gut as revealed by the finding that EphB2 and EphB3 receptors were downregulated by dominant-negative TCF while their ligand ephrinB1 was upregulated. Further analysis in *EphB* knock-out mice showed that this differential regulation served to prevent the intermingling of cells within the intestinal epithelium (Batlle *et al.*, 2002). This role in sorting out of cells could be of relevance for the development of intestinal adenomas as seen in the *min* mouse because mutant APC cells invaginate around the crypt-villus junction and avoid migration into the area of high ephrinB expression at the top of the crypt.

this is also important for human colon tumor formation remains to be determined.

The Wnt pathway, similar to other signal transduction cascades, includes mechanisms for negative feedback control. The scaffold component of the β-catenin destruction complex, conductin/axin2 is a direct target gene of Wnt signaling and might be induced to attenuate the Wnt signal in normal embryonic development (Jho *et al.*, 2002; Leung *et al.*, 2002; Lustig *et al.*, 2002). Conductin is massively over-expressed in early colorectal adenomas and in carcinomas as well as in other tumors. Whether this upregulation has a functional role in the tumors in which β-catenin degradation is apparently prevented by mutations of APC or β-catenin remains to be determined. Negative control of the pathway is also achieved through the induction of dominant-negative forms of TCF-1 (Roose *et al.*, 1999).

In the future, more candidate Wnt target genes will be deciphered from gene expression profiling studies of cellular systems and from comparisons of tumors with normal tissues. An example of such an analysis is given by Schwartz *et al.*, who could identify Wnt targets by microarray analysis of ovarian endometrioid adenocarcinomas (Schwartz *et al.*, 2003). Since direct targets are likely to be of particular functional significance, detailed analysis of their promoter sequences for functional interaction with TCFs by reporter assays, chromatin IP, and footprinting methods will be one criterion to sort out “key players” from “bystanders” in such studies.

### Effects of Wnt signaling on transformation in cell culture

Cell culture experiments have proven useful in establishing the biochemistry of the pathway as well as determining the contribution of individual components for oncogenic transformation. Given the potential to interfere with aberrant Wnt signaling for therapeutic purposes, the establishment of Wnt-dependent cellular transformation systems is also of importance for drug screening purposes.

Since the discovery of *int-1* as a protooncogene, a number of cell biological studies have shown that Wnts can induce transformation *in vitro* depending on the cell culture system and target cells. For instance, transfection of int-1 in cuboidal RAC mammary cell line resulted in morphological transformation and tumorigenicity (Rijsewijk *et al.*, 1987b). Following the discovery of the other Wnt family members, differences in their capacity to induce transformation were revealed, which could be related to the activity in inducing stabilization of β-catenin (Shimizu *et al.*, 1997). Transformation was also achieved by directly activating the Wnt signal in the nucleus. For instance, fusion of LEF-1 to β-catenin or to transcriptional activation domains from other transcription factors was sufficient to transform chicken embryo fibroblasts (Aoki *et al.*, 1999). Expression of the dominant-active version of β-catenin mutated in the GSK phosphorylation sites led to anchorage-independent growth and suppression of anoikis (apoptosis after loss of cell-substrate adhesion) in MDCK cells (Orford *et al.*, 1999), although it should be noted that in a similar experimental setting, expression of β-catenin in an inducible system did not lead to anchorage-independent growth of MDCK cells (Barth *et al.*, 1999). β-Catenin was unable to transform 3T3 cells, while it was a potent oncogene for the RK3E epithelial cell line, indicating cell type specificity (Kolligs *et al.*, 1999). In addition, while exogenous expression of Wnts was able to transform Rat-1 fibroblasts, expression of activated β-catenin was not sufficient, possibly because Wnts have additional activities required for transformation in these cells (Young *et al.*, 1998). Collectively, these results suggest that the oncogenic capacity of the Wnt pathway *in vitro* depends on the target cell as well as the readout used to determine transformation.

Several studies have shown that interference with TCF/β-catenin signaling leads to inhibition of cell proliferation in tumor cells, in particular in colorectal cancer cell lines. For example, the expression of E-cadherin was sufficient to arrest cell growth.

---

**Fig. 2. Role of Wnt signaling in normal homeostasis of the colonic epithelium and in cancer.** A scheme of a colon crypt with an adjacent invasive tumor is shown. The left part schematically depicts the normal sequence of epithelial proliferation, migration, and apoptosis which occurs from the bottom to the top of the crypt. A gradient of physiological Wnt signaling, presumably originating from secreted Wnt factors of the surrounding stroma, is indicated. The right part shows development of a colon tumor by aberrant Wnt signaling i.e., after mutations in either APC or β-catenin. A selection of Wnt target genes with their presumed role in proliferation, cell survival, and invasion is shown (see text for details). Shaded nuclei indicate increasing levels of nuclear β-catenin in the normal crypt epithelium (probably reflecting the stem cell compartment), in the central tumor areas, and at the invasive front (cf. Brabletz *et al.*, 2002).

| Apoptosis | Migration | Proliferation |
|-----------|-----------|---------------|
|           | ↑         |               |

**Physiological Wnt signal**  
Normal epithelium  

**Aberrant Wnt signal**  
Tumor  

**Target genes**

| Anti-Apoptosis | Proliferation | Invasion | Angiogenesis |
|----------------|---------------|----------|--------------|
| Survivin       | c-Myc         | ASEF     | VEGF         |
|                | CyclinD1      | MMPs     |              |
|                | c-met         | γLaminin |              |
|                | FGF18         | CD44     |              |

apparently by interfering with β-catenin signaling (Stockinger *et al.*, 2001). Expression of a dominant-negative mutant of TCF, or knock-down of β-catenin by antisense or RNAi strategies blocks colon cancer cells in G1, providing proof of principle that interference with aberrant Wnt signaling could be of therapeutic value (van de Wetering *et al.*, 2003). Recently, low molecular weight compounds were found in high throughput screens that interfere with TCT/β-catenin complex formation and activation of target gene transcription. In addition these compounds blocked proliferation of colorectal cancer cell lines (Lepourcelet *et al.*, 2004).

### Mutations of Wnt signaling components in tumors

As mentioned above the initial clue for a role of Wnt signaling in cancer came from the discovery of the *Wnt-1* (*int-1*) gene being transcriptionally activated in mouse mammary tumors. Whether upregulation of Wnts in human cancer plays a functional role is not known, although there are occasional reports that Wnts were found to be expressed in certain tumors. The essential finding that led to the addition of the Wnt pathway to the list of cancer relevant signaling pathways was the discovery of mutations of *APC* or β-catenin in colorectal cancer and later in other tumor types. Mutations of *APC* occur in a high proportion of colorectal carcinomas, while β-catenin is mutated in a small percentage of colorectal carcinomas and to a higher ratio in a variety of other tumors. Mutations in the *APC* gene are nonsense or frame shift mutations leading to a truncated APC protein. About 60% of these mutations are clustered in a 700 bp “mutation cluster region” corresponding to the β-catenin/axin binding domain. Hypermethylation of the wild-type *APC* allele are also found in some sporadic CRC and may constitute an alternative mechanism for *APC* inactivation (Hiltunen *et al.*, 1997, Esteller *et al.*, 2000). Most of the β-catenin mutations are activating mutations, mainly occurring in exon 3 at one of the 4 phosphorylation sites (Polakis 2000).

In most cases *APC* and β-catenin mutations are linked to an increase of transcriptionally active β-catenin and are mutually exclusive, reflecting their role in a common pathway (Korinek *et al.*, 1997, Morin *et al.*, 1997). For instance colon tumors with mutations in *APC* have a wild-type β-catenin gene, and vice versa, tumors with mutations in β-catenin are wild-type for *APC*. In the following we will briefly summarize some of the mutational analyses that have been performed so far in tumors from different tissues. We will concentrate on frequent tumor diseases in which a high proportion of samples show evidence of Wnt pathway activation (for more detailed reviews see (Giles *et al.*, 2003, Lustig and Behrens 2003)).

Mutations of *APC* were first identified in the germline of FAP (familial adenomatous polyposis) patients. These patients develop hundreds of polyps in the colon after loss of the remaining wild-type allele demonstrating that *APC* behaves as a classical tumor suppressor and follows the Knudson two-hit hypothesis. There are different phenotypes and thus subclasses of FAP associated tumors which correlate with the position of the mutations within the *APC* gene (for details on the genetics of *APC* see the article by Fodde in this issue). Since *APC* mutations are detected very early in the adenoma-carcinoma sequence, the APC protein has been suggested to act as a gatekeeper of colorectal carcinogenesis, which means that functional loss of *APC* is a prerequisite for the further progression towards malignancy (Kinzler and Vogelstein 1996). Importantly, about 80% of the non-inherited, sporadic CRC carry mutations of *APC*.

Colorectal adenomas have been the first tumors in which nuclear localization of β-catenin was demonstrated (Inomata *et al.*, 1996). Interestingly, the nuclear staining for β-catenin often shows a heterogeneous pattern with strong nuclear enrichment at the invasion front and mainly cytoplasmic and membrane staining in the central tumor area. This indicates that high levels of nuclear β-catenin play a role in the transition to the invasive state of tumor cells. The molecular basis for this differential distribution of β-catenin is not known. Obviously, one possibility is that signals coming from the mesenchyme that surround the invasive tumor cells might lead to additional stabilization and nuclear enrichment of β-catenin (Brabletz *et al.*, 2002).

Mutations of β-catenin have been mainly detected in microsatellite instable colorectal tumors (Kitaeva *et al.*, 1997, Sparks *et al.*, 1998). These tumors are characterized by either sporadic or, as in the case of HNPCC patients, inherited mutations in DNA mismatch repair components. It appears that mutations in *APC* occur less frequently in these tumors than in mismatch repair proficient cases although numbers vary between different studies (Miyaki *et al.*, 1999, Domingo *et al.*, 2004). Mismatch repair-deficient CRC also show heterozygous mutations in the *axin2* gene which resulted in truncated protein with a dominant-negative action (Liu *et al.*, 2000, Domingo *et al.*, 2004). However, mutations in error-prone nucleotide repeats are frequent in mismatch repair deficient tumors and may not always be of functional relevance. For instance, mutations in the *TCF-4* gene found in microsatellite-instable tumors had no effect on transcriptional activity, suggesting that they are not relevant for tumor formation (Ruckert *et al.*, 2002).

A plethora of studies of the recent years have shown that aberrant Wnt signaling is not restricted to colorectal tumorigenesis but might play a role in a variety of other tumor types of gastrointestinal origin. Liver tumors seem to be particularly prone to harbor mutations in the β-catenin gene. Up to 70% of hepatoblastomas, which are early childhood liver tumors, and about 25% of hepatocellular carcinomas contain activated β-catenin (de La Coste *et al.*, 1998, Koch *et al.*, 1999, Park *et al.*, 2001, Taniguchi *et al.*, 2002). In addition, mutations in the *axin* and *axin2* genes resulting in truncated proteins were also found although at a lower frequency (Satoh *et al.*, 2000, Taniguchi *et al.*, 2002). *APC* mutations are present in 76% of sporadic gastric adenomas (Groves *et al.*, 2002, Lee *et al.*, 2002), while gastric carcinomas showed only few *APC* mutations (Lee *et al.*, 2002). Gastric adenomas also occur in FAP patients (Groves *et al.*, 2002). Activating β-catenin mutations were found in about one third of gastric tumor samples (Park *et al.*, 1999, Clements *et al.*, 2002).

In endometrial carcinomas β-catenin mutations were found in about 40% of cases and were associated with the endometrioid phenotype (Mirabelli-Primdahl *et al.*, 1999, Moreno-Bueno *et al.*, 2002). In ovarian carcinomas β-catenin mutations were found in 7 of 11 cases (Gamallo *et al.*, 1999). In another study 14 of 45 ovarian endometrioid carcinomas carried mutations in β-catenin. Mutations in *APC*, *axin*, and *axin2* were also found in a few cases (Wu *et al.*, 2001).

Prostate cancer has been shown to carry mutations in β-catenin, *APC*, and the E3 Ubiquitin ligase of β-catenin, βTrCP.
total in about 30% of cases (Voeller *et al.*, 1998, Chesire *et al.*, 2000, Gerstein *et al.*, 2002). Functional interaction of β-catenin with the androgen receptor was also shown indicating a cross-talk of both pathways in the development of prostate cancer (Chesire *et al.*, 2000, Truica *et al.*, 2000, Mulholland *et al.*, 2002, Yang *et al.*, 2002). In transgenic animal models stabilized β-catenin induced lesions reminiscent of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (Gounari *et al.*, 2002).

In sporadic anaplastic thyroid carcinomas immunofluorescence staining showed nuclear localization of β-catenin in 42% and mutations in 61% of the analyzed samples. In a further study exon 3 mutations and nuclear β-catenin localization were restricted to poorly differentiated (25%) or undifferentiated (66%) carcinomas (Garcia-Rostan *et al.*, 1999, Garcia-Rostan *et al.*, 2001). Wilms tumor as one of the most common childhood renal malignancy, has been shown to harbor β-catenin mutations with a preference for mutation of β-catenin at codon 45, which occurred in more than 90% of the cases (Koesters *et al.*, 1999, Maiti *et al.*, 2000, Kusafuka *et al.*, 2002).

In melanomas immunohistochemistry showed increased β-catenin levels, however, mutations in β-catenin were rarely detected, indicating that other components of the pathway might be affected (Rimm *et al.*, 1999). The Microphthalmia associated transcription factor (MITF), a factor that is involved in melanocyte differentiation is a direct target of TCF/β-catenin complexes and can rescue suppression of melanoma growth by dominant-negative TCF (Widlund *et al.*, 2002).

There is evidence that the Wnt pathway plays a role in several tumors of mesenchymal origin. β-Catenin mutations associated with nuclear localization of β-catenin are found in desmoid tumors, which represent an infiltrative form of fibromatosis; these tumors also occur in a subgroup of FAP patients. Furthermore, transgenic expression of β-catenin in mice led to development of aggressive fibromatosis (Cheon *et al.*, 2002). Analysis of osteosarcomas revealed a cytoplasmic/nuclear accumulation of β-catenin in 33 cases out of 47 samples, but β-catenin mutations were not detected (Haydon *et al.*, 2002).

Finally, various mutations of Wnt pathway components including APC, β-catenin, and axin have been found in medulloblastomas (Zurawel *et al.*, 1998, Huang *et al.*, 2000, Dahmen *et al.*, 2001, Koch *et al.*, 2001, Baeza *et al.*, 2003).

### References

BATLLE, E., HENDERSON, J.T., BEGHTEL, H., VANDEN BORN, M.M., SANCHO, E., HULS, G., MEELDIJK, J., ROBERTSON, J., VAN DE WETERING, M., PAWSON, T. and CLEVERS, H. (2002). Beta-catenin and TCF mediate cell positioning in the intestinal epithelium by controlling the expression of EphB/ ephrinB. *Cell* 111: 251-263.

BAUER, A., CHAUVET, S., HUBER, O., USSEGLIO, F., ROTHBACHER, U., ARAGNOL, D., KEMLER, R. and PRADEL, J. (2000). Pontin52 and reptin52 function as antagonistic regulators of beta-catenin signalling activity. *EMBO J* 19: 6121-6130.

BEHRENS, J. (1999). Cadherins and catenins: role in signal transduction and tumor progression. *Cancer Metastasis Rev* 18: 15-30.

BEHRENS, J., JERCHOW, B.A., WURTELE, M., GRIMM, J., ASBRAND, C., WIRTZ, R., KUHL, M., WEDLICH, D. and BIRCHMEIER, W. (1998). Functional interaction of an axin homolog, conductin, with beta-catenin, APC, and GSK3beta. *Science* 280: 596-599.

BEHRENS, J., VON KRIES, J.P., KUHL, M., BRUHN, L., WEDLICH, D., GROSSCHEDL, R. and BIRCHMEIER, W. (1996). Functional interaction of beta-catenin with the transcription factor LEF-1. *Nature* 382: 638-642.

BHANOT, P., BRINK, M., SAMOS, C.H., HSIEH, J.C., WANG, Y., MACKE, J.P., ANDREW, D., NATHANS, J. and NUSSE, R. (1996). A new member of the frizzled family from Drosophila functions as a Wingless receptor. *Nature* 382: 225-230.

BOON, E.M., VAN DER NEUT, R., VAN DE WETERING, M., CLEVERS, H. and PALS, S.T. (2002). Wnt signaling regulates expression of the receptor tyrosine kinase met in colorectal cancer. *Cancer Res* 62: 5126-5128.

BRABLETZ, T., JUNG, A., DAG, S., HLUBEK, F. and KIRCHNER, T. (1999). beta-catenin regulates the expression of the matrix metalloproteinase-7 in human colorectal cancer. *Am J Pathol* 155: 1033-1038.

BRABLETZ, T., JUNG, A. and KIRCHNER, T. (2002). Beta-catenin and the morphogenesis of colorectal cancer. *Virchows Arch* 441: 1-11.

CADIGAN, K.M. and NUSSE, R. (1997). Wnt signaling: a common theme in animal development. *Genes Dev* 11: 3286-3305.

CAPELLUTO, D.G., KUTATELADZE, T.G., HABAS, R., FINKIELSTEIN, C.V., HE, X. and OVERDUIN, M. (2002). The DIX domain targets dishevelled to actin stress fibres and vesicular membranes. *Nature* 419: 726-729.

CHEN, S., GUTTRIDGE, D.C., YOU, Z., ZHANG, Z., FRIBLEY, A., MAYO, M.W., KITAJEWSKI, J. and WANG, C.Y. (2001). Wnt-1 signaling inhibits apoptosis by activating beta-catenin/T cell factor-mediated transcription. *J Cell Biol* 152: 87-96.

CHEON, S.S., CHEAH, A.Y., TURLEY, S., NADESAN, P., POON, R., CLEVERS, H. and ALMAN, B.A. (2002). beta-Catenin stabilization dysregulates mesenchymal cell proliferation, motility, and invasiveness and causes aggressive fibromatosis and hyperplastic cutaneous wounds. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 99: 6973-6978.

CHESIRE, D.R., EWING, C.M., SAUVAGEOT, J., BOVA, G.S. and ISAACS, W.B. (2000). Detection and analysis of beta-catenin mutations in prostate cancer. *Prostate* 45: 323-334.

CHEYETTE, B.N., WAXMAN, J.S., MILLER, J.R., TAKEMARU, K., SHELDALH, L.C., KHLEBTSOVA, N., FOX, E.P., EARNEST, T. and MOON, R.T. (2002). Dapper, a Dishevelled-associated antagonist of beta-catenin and JNK signaling, is required for notochord formation. *Dev Cell* 2: 449-461.

CHRISTOFORI, G. (2003). Changing neighbours, changing behaviour: cell adhesion molecule-mediated signalling during tumour progression. *EMBO J* 22: 2318-2323.

CIANI, L., KRYLOVA, O., SMALLEY, M.J., DALE, T.C. and SALINAS, P.C. (2004). A divergent canonical WNT-signaling pathway regulates microtubule dynamics: Dishevelled signals locally to stabilize microtubules. *J Cell Biol* 164: 243-253.

CLEMENTS, W.M., WANG, J., SARNAIK, A., KIM, O.J., MACDONALD, J., FENOGLIO-PREISER, C., GRODEN, J. and LOWY, A.M. (2002). beta-Catenin mutation is a frequent cause of Wnt pathway activation in gastric cancer. *Cancer Res* 62: 3503-3506.

CRAWFORD, H.C., FINGLETON, B.M., RUDOLPH-OWEN, L.A., GOSS, K.J., RUBINFELD, B., POLAKIS, P. and MATRISIAN, L.M. (1999). The metalloproteinase matrilysin is a target of beta-catenin transactivation in intestinal tumors. *Oncogene* 18: 2883-2891.

AMIT, S., HATZUBAI, A., BIRMAN, Y., ANDERSEN, J.S., BEN-SHUSHAN, E., MANN, M., BEN-NERIAH, Y. and ALKALAY, I. (2002). Axin-mediated CKI phosphorylation of beta-catenin at Ser 45: a molecular switch for the Wnt pathway. *Genes Dev* 16: 1066-1076.

AOKI, M., HECHT, A., KRUSE, U., KEMLER, R. and VOGT, P.K. (1999). Nuclear endpoint of Wnt signaling: neoplastic transformation induced by transactivating lymphoid-enhancing factor 1. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 96: 139-144.

BAEZA, N., MASUOKA, J., KLEIHUES, P. and OHGAKI, H. (2003). AXIN1 mutations but not deletions in cerebellar medulloblastomas. *Oncogene* 22: 632-636.

BARKER, N., HURLSTONE, A., MUSISI, H., MILES, A., BIENZ, M. and CLEVERS, H. (2001). The chromatin remodelling factor Brg-1 interacts with beta-catenin to promote target gene activation. *EMBO J* 20: 4935-4943.

BARTH, A.I., STEWART, D.B. and NELSON, W.J. (1999). T cell factor-activated transcription is not sufficient to induce anchorage-independent growth of epithelial cells expressing mutant beta-catenin. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 96: 4947-4952.
DAHMEN, R.P., KOCH, A., DENKHAUS, D., TONN, J.C., SORENSEN, N., BERTHOLD, F., BEHRENS, J., BIRCHMEIER, W., WIESTLER, O.D. and PIETSCH, T. (2001). Deletions of AXIN1, a component of the WNT/wingless pathway, in sporadic medulloblastomas. *Cancer Res* 61: 7039-7043.

DE LA COSTE, A., ROMAGNOLO, B., BILLUART, P., RENARD, C.A., BUENDIA, M.A., SOUBRANE, O., FABRE, M., CHELLY, J., BELDJORD, C., KAHN, A. and PERRET, C. (1998). Somatic mutations of the beta-catenin gene are frequent in mouse and human hepatocellular carcinomas. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 95: 8847-8851.

DOMINGO, E., ESPIN, E., ARMENGOL, M., OLIVEIRA, C., PINTO, M., DUVAL, A., BRENNETOT, C., SERUCA, R., HAMELIN, R., YAMAMOTO, H. and SCHWARTZ, S., JR. (2004). Activated BRAF targets proximal colon tumors with mismatch repair deficiency and MLH1 inactivation. *Genes Chromosomes Cancer* 39: 138-142.

ESTELLER, M., SPARKS, A., TOYOTA, M., SANCHEZ-CESPEDES, M., CAPELLA, G., PEINADO, M.A., GONZALEZ, S., TARAFÁ, G., SIDRANSKY, D., MELTZER, S.J., BAYLIN, S.B. and HERMAN, J.G. (2000). Analysis of adenomatous polyposis coli promoter hypermethylation in human cancer. *Cancer Res* 60: 4366-4371.

FENG, Y., LEE, N. and FEARON, E.R. (2003). TIP49 regulates beta-catenin-mediated neoplastic transformation and T-cell factor target gene induction via effects on chromatin remodeling. *Cancer Res* 63: 8726-8734.

FODDE, R., KUIPERS, J., ROSENBERG, C., SMITS, R., KIELMAN, M., GASPAR, C., VAN ES, J.H., BREUKEL, C., WIEGANT, J., GILES, R.H. and CLEVERS, H. (2001). Mutations in the APC tumour suppressor gene cause chromosomal instability. *Nat Cell Biol* 3: 433-438.

GAMALLO, C., PALACIOS, J., MORENO, G., CALVO DE MORA, J., SUAREZ, A. and ARMAS, A. (1999). Beta-catenin expression pattern in stage I and II ovarian carcinomas: relationship with beta-catenin gene mutations, clinicopathological features, and clinical outcome. *Am J Pathol* 155: 527-536.

GARCIA-ROSTAN, G., CAMP, R.L., HERRERO, A., CARCANGIU, M.L., RIMM, D.L. and TALLINI, G. (2001). Beta-catenin dysregulation in thyroid neoplasms: down-regulation, aberrant nuclear expression, and CTNNB1 exon 3 mutations are markers for aggressive tumor phenotypes and poor prognosis. *Am J Pathol* 158: 987-996.

GARCIA-ROSTAN, G., TALLINI, G., HERRERO, A., D'AQUILA, T.G., CARCANGIU, M.L. and RIMM, D.L. (1999). Frequent mutation and nuclear localization of beta-catenin in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. *Cancer Res* 59: 1811-1815.

GERSTEIN, A.V., ALMEIDA, T.A., ZHAO, G., CHESS, E., SHIH IE, M., BUHLER, K., PIENTA, K., RUBIN, M.A., VESSELLA, R. and PAPADOPOULOS, N. (2002). APC/CTNNB1 (beta-catenin) pathway alterations in human prostate cancers. *Genes Chromosomes Cancer* 34: 9-16.

GILES, R.H., VAN ES, J.H. and CLEVERS, H. (2003). Caught up in a Wnt storm: Wnt signaling in cancer. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 1653: 1-24.

GLOY, J., HIKASA, H. and SOKOL, S.Y. (2002). Frodo interacts with Dishevelled to transduce Wnt signals. *Nat Cell Biol* 4: 351-357.

GOUNARI, F., SIGNORETTI, S., BRONSON, R., KLEIN, L., SELLERS, W.R., KUM, J., SIERMANN, A., TAKETO, M.M., VON BOEHMER, H. and KHAZAIE, K. (2002). Stabilization of beta-catenin induces lesions reminiscent of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia, but terminal squamous transdifferentiation of other secretory epithelia. *Oncogene* 21: 4099-4107.

GROVES, C., LAMLUM, H., CRABTREE, M., WILLIAMSON, J., TAYLOR, C., BASS, S., CUTHBERT-HEAVENS, D., HODGSON, S., PHILLIPS, R. and TOMLINSON, I. (2002). Mutation cluster region, association between germline and somatic mutations and genotype-phenotype correlation in upper gastrointestinal familial adenomatous polyposis. *Am J Pathol* 160: 2055-2061.

HABAS, R., KATO, Y. and HE, X. (2001). Wnt/Frizzled activation of Rho regulates vertebrate gastrulation and requires a novel Formin homology protein Daam1. *Cell* 107: 843-854.

HART, M.J., DE LOS SANTOS, R., ALBERT, I.N., RUBINFELD, B. and POLAKIS, P. (1998). Downregulation of beta-catenin by human Axin and its association with the APC tumor suppressor, beta-catenin and GSK3 beta. *Curr Biol* 8: 573-581.

HAYDON, R.C., DEYRUP, A., ISHIKAWA, A., HECK, R., JIANG, W., ZHOU, L., FENG, T., KING, D., CHENG, H., BREYER, B., PEABODY, T., SIMON, M.A., MONTAG, A.G. and HE, T.C. (2002). Cytoplasmic and/or nuclear accumulation of the beta-catenin protein is a frequent event in human osteosarcoma. *Int J Cancer* 102: 338-342.

HE, T.C., SPARKS, A.B., RAGO, C., HERMEKING, H., ZAWEL, L., DA COSTA, L.T., MORIN, P.J., VOGELSTEIN, B. and KINZLER, K.W. (1998). Identification of c-MYC as a target of the APC pathway. *Science* 281: 1509-1512.

HECHT, A., VLEMINCKX, K., STEMMLE-R, M.P., VAN ROY, F. and KEMLER, R. (2000). The p300/CBP acetyltransferases function as transcriptional coactivators of beta-catenin in vertebrates. *EMBO J* 19: 1839-1850.

HEISENBERG, C.P. (2002). Wnt signalling: refocusing on Strabismus. *Curr Biol* 12: R657-659.

HILTUNEN, M.O., ALHONEN, L., KOISTINAHO, J., MYOHANEN, S., PAAKKONEN, M., MARIN, S., KOSMA, V.M. and JANNE, J. (1997). Hypermethylation of the APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene promoter region in human colorectal carcinoma. *Int J Cancer* 70: 644-648.

HLUBEK, F., JUNG, A., KOTZOR, N., KIRCHNER, T. and BRABLETZ, T. (2001). Expression of the invasion factor laminin gamma2 in colorectal carcinomas is regulated by beta-catenin. *Cancer Res* 61: 8089-8093.

HSU, S.C., GALCERAN, J. and GROSSSCHEDL, R. (1998). Modulation of transcriptional regulation by LEF-1 in response to Wnt-1 signaling and association with beta-catenin. *Mol Cell Biol* 18: 4807-4818.

HUANG, H., MAHLER-ARAUJO, B.M., SANKILA, A., CHIMELLI, L., YONEKAWA, Y., KLEIHUES, P. and OHGAKI, H. (2000). APC mutations in sporadic medulloblastomas. *Am J Pathol* 156: 433-437.

HUBER, A.H. and WEIS, W.I. (2001). The structure of the beta-catenin/E-cadherin complex and the molecular basis of diverse ligand recognition by beta-catenin. *Cell* 105: 391-402.

HUBER, O., KORN, R., MCLAUGHLIN, J., OHSUGI, M., HERRMANN, B.G. and KEMLER, R. (1996). Nuclear localization of beta-catenin by interaction with transcription factor LEF-1. *Mech Dev* 59: 3-10.

HULSKEN, J., BIRCHMEIER, W. and BEHRENS, J. (1994). E-cadherin and APC compete for the interaction with beta-catenin and the cytoskeleton. *J Cell Biol* 127: 2061-2069.

IKEDA, S., KISHIDA, S., YAMAMOTO, H., MURAI, H., KOYAMA, S. and KIKUCHI, A. (1998). Axin, a negative regulator of the Wnt signaling pathway, forms a complex with GSK-3beta and beta-catenin and promotes GSK-3beta-dependent phosphorylation of beta-catenin. *EMBO J* 17: 1371-1384.

INOMATA, M., OCHIAI, A., AKIMOTO, S., KITANO, S. and HIROHASHI, S. (1996). Alteration of beta-catenin expression in colonic epithelial cells of familial adenomatous polyposis patients. *Cancer Res* 56: 2213-2217.

JHO, E.H., ZHANG, T., DOMON, C., JOO, C.K., FREUND, J.N. and COSTANTINI, F. (2002). Wnt/beta-catenin/Tcf signaling induces the transcription of Axin2, a negative regulator of the signaling pathway. *Mol Cell Biol* 22: 1172-1183.

JIMBO, T., KAWASAKI, Y., KOYAMA, R., SATO, R., TAKADA, S., HARAGUCHI, K. and AKIYAMA, T. (2002). Identification of a link between the tumour suppressor APC and the kinesin superfamily. *Nat Cell Biol* 4: 323-327.

KAPLAN, D.D., MEIGS, T.E., KELLY, P. and CASEY, P.J. (2004). Identification of a role for beta-catenin in the establishment of a bipolar mitotic spindle. *J Biol Chem.*

KAPLAN, K.B., BURDS, A.A., SWEDLOW, J.R., BEKIR, S.S., SORGER, P.K. and NATHKE, I.S. (2001). A role for the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli protein in chromosome segregation. *Nat Cell Biol* 3: 429-432.

KAWASAKI, Y., SATO, R., AKIYAMA, T., SENDA, T., ISHIDATE, T., KOYAMA, R., MORISHITA, T., IWAYAMA, Y. and HIGUCHI, O. (2003). Mutated APC and Asef are involved in the migration of colorectal tumour cells. *Nat Cell Biol* 5: 211-215.

KAWASAKI, Y., SENDA, T., ISHIDATE, T., KOYAMA, R., MORISHITA, T., IWAYAMA, Y., HIGUCHI, O. and AKIYAMA, T. (2000). Asef, a link between the tumor suppressor APC and G-protein signaling. *Science* 289: 1194-1197.

KIM, P.J., PLESCIA, J., CLEVERS, H., FEARON, E.R. and ALTIERI, D.C. (2003). Survivin and molecular pathogenesis of colorectal cancer. *Lancet* 362: 205-209.

KINZLER, K.W. and VOGELSTEIN, B. (1996). Lessons from hereditary colorectal cancer. *Cell* 87: 159-170.

KISHIDA, S., YAMAMOTO, H., IKEDA, S., KISHIDA, M., SAKAMOTO, I., KOYAMA, S. and KIKUCHI, A. (1998). Axin, a negative regulator of the wnt signaling pathway, directly interacts with adenomatous polyposis coli and regulates the stabilization of beta-catenin. *J Biol Chem* 273: 10823-10826.

KITAEVA, M.N., GROGAN, L., WILLIAMS, J.P., DIMOND, E., NAKAHARA, K., HAUSNER, P., DENOBILE, J.W., SOBALLE, P.W. and KIRSCH, I.R. (1997). Mutations in beta-catenin are uncommon in colorectal cancer occurring in occasional replication error-positive tumors. *Cancer Res* 57: 4478-4481.

KITAGAWA, M., HATAKEYAMA, S., SHIRANE, M., MATSUMOTO, M., ISHIDA, N., HATTORI, K., NAKAMICHI, I., KIKUCHI, A. and NAKAYAMA, K. (1999). An F-box protein, FWD1, mediates ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis of beta-catenin. *EMBO J* 18: 2401-2410.

KOCH, A., DENKHAUS, D., ALBRECHT, S., LEUSCHNER, I., VON SCHWEINITZ, D. and PIETSCH, T. (1999). Childhood hepatoblastomas frequently carry a mutated degradation targeting box of the beta-catenin gene. *Cancer Res* 59: 269-273.

KOCH, A., WAHA, A., TONN, J.C., SORENSEN, N., BERTHOLD, F., WOLTER, M., REIFENBERGER, J., HARTMANN, W., FRIEDL, W., REIFENBERGER, G., WIESTLER, O.D. and PIETSCH, T. (2001). Somatic mutations of WNT/wingless signaling pathway components in primitive neuroectodermal tumors. *Int J Cancer* 93: 445-449.

KOESTERS, R., RIDDER, R., KOPP-SCHNEIDER, A., BETTS, D., ADAMS, V., NIGGLI, F., BRINER, J. and VON KNEBEL DOEBERITZ, M. (1999). Mutational activation of the beta-catenin proto-oncogene is a common event in the development of Wilms’ tumors. *Cancer Res* 59: 3880-3882.

KOLLIGS, F.T., HU, G., DANG, C.V. and FEARON, E.R. (1999). Neoplastic transformation of RK3E by mutant beta-catenin requires deregulation of Tcf/Lef transcription but not activation of c-myc expression. *Mol Cell Biol* 19: 5696-5706.

KORINEK, V., BARKER, N., MORIN, P.J., VAN WICHEN, D., DE WEGER, R., KINZLER, K.W., VOGELSTEIN, B. and CLEVERS, H. (1997). Constitutive transcriptional activation by a beta-catenin-Tcf complex in APC-/– colon carcinoma. *Science* 275: 1784-1787.

KRAMP, T., PETER, O., BRUNNER, E., NELLEN, D., FROESCH, B., CHATTERJEE, S., MURONE, M., ZULLIG, S. and BASLER, K. (2002). Wnt-wingless signaling requires BCL9/legless-mediated recruitment of pygopus to the nuclear beta-catenin-TCF complex. *Cell* 109: 47-60.

KUHL, M. (2004). The WNT/Calcium pathway: biochemical mediators, tools and future requirements. *Front Biosci* 9: 967-974.

KUSAFUKA, T., MIAO, J., KURODA, S., UDATSU, Y. and YONEDA, A. (2002). Codon 45 of the beta-catenin gene, a specific mutational target site of Wilms’ tumor. *Int J Mol Med* 10: 395-399.

LEE, J.H., ABRAHAM, S.C., KIM, H.S., NAM, J.H., CHOI, C., LEE, M.C., PARK, C.S., JUHNG, S.W., RASHID, A., HAMILTON, S.R. and WU, T.T. (2002). Inverse relationship between APC gene mutation in gastric adenomas and development of adenocarcinoma. *Am J Pathol* 161: 611-618.

LEPOURCELET, M., CHEN, Y.N., FRANCE, D.S., WANG, H., CREWS, P., PETERSEN, F., BRUSEO, C., WOOD, A.W. and SHIVDASANI, R.A. (2004). Small-molecule antagonists of the oncogenic Tcf/beta-catenin protein complex. *Cancer Cell* 5: 91-102.

LEUNG, J.Y., KOLLIGS, F.T., WU, R., ZHAI, Y., KUICK, R., HANASH, S., CHO, K.R. and FEARON, E.R. (2002). Activation of AXIN2 expression by beta-catenin-T cell factor. A feedback repressor pathway regulating Wnt signaling. *J Biol Chem* 277: 21657-21665.

LIU, C., LI, Y., SEMENOV, M., HAN, C., BAEG, G.H., TAN, Y., ZHANG, Z., LIN, X. and HE, X. (2002). Control of beta-catenin phosphorylation/degradation by a dual-kinase mechanism. *Cell* 108: 837-847.

LIU, W., DONG, X., MAI, M., SEELAN, R.S., TANIGUCHI, K., KRISHNADATH, K.K., HALLING, K.C., CUNNINGHAM, J.M., BOARDMAN, L.A., QIAN, C., CHRISTENSEN, E., SCHMIDT, S.S., ROCHE, P.C., SMITH, D.I. and THIBODEAU, S.N. (2000). Mutations in AXIN2 cause colorectal cancer with defective mismatch repair by activating beta-catenin/TCF signalling. *Nat Genet* 26: 146-147.

LUSTIG, B. and BEHRENS, J. (2003). The Wnt signaling pathway and its role in tumor development. *J Cancer Res Clin Oncol* 129: 199-221.

LUSTIG, B., JERCHOW, B., SACHS, M., WEILER, S., PIETSCH, T., KARSTEN, U., VAN DE WETERING, M., CLEVERS, H., SCHLAG, P.M., BIRCHMEIER, W. and BEHRENS, J. (2002). Negative feedback loop of Wnt signaling through upregulation of conductin/axin2 in colorectal and liver tumors. *Mol Cell Biol* 22: 1184-1193.

MAITI, S., ALAM, R., AMOS, C.I. and HUFF, V. (2000). Frequent association of beta-catenin and WT1 mutations in Wilms tumors. *Cancer Res* 60: 6288-6292.

MAO, B., WU, W., DAVIDSON, G., MARHOLD, J., LI, M., MECHLER, B.M., DELIUS, H., HOPPE, D., STANNEK, P., WALTER, C., GLINKA, A. and NIEHRS, C. (2002). Kremen proteins are Dickkopf receptors that regulate Wnt/beta-catenin signalling. *Nature* 417: 664-667.

MAO, B., WU, W., LI, Y., HOPPE, D., STANNEK, P., GLINKA, A. and NIEHRS, C. (2001a). LDL-receptor-related protein 6 is a receptor for Dickkopf proteins. *Nature* 411: 321-325.

MAO, J., WANG, J., LIU, B., PAN, W., FARR, G.H., 3RD, FLYNN, C., YUAN, H., TAKADA, S., KIMELMAN, D., LI, L. and WU, D. (2001b). Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-5 binds to Axin and regulates the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. *Mol Cell* 7: 801-809.

MARCHENKO, G.N., MARCHENKO, N.D., LENG, J. and STRONGIN, A.Y. (2002). Promoter characterization of the novel human matrix metalloproteinase-26 gene: regulation by the T-cell factor-4 implies specific expression of the gene in cancer cells of epithelial origin. *Biochem J* 363: 253-262.

MILLER, J.R. (2002). The Wnts. *Genome Biol* 3: REVIEWS 3001.

MIRABELLI-PRIMDAHL, L., GRYFE, R., KIM, H., MILLAR, A., LUCERI, C., DALE, D., HOLOWATY, E., BAPAT, B., GALLINGER, S. and REDSTON, M. (1999). Beta-catenin mutations are specific for colorectal carcinomas with microsatellite instability but occur in endometrial carcinomas irrespective of mutator pathway. *Cancer Res* 59: 3346-3351.

MIYAKI, M., IIJIMA, T., KIMURA, J., YASUNO, M., MORI, T., HAYASHI, Y., KOIKE, M., SHITARA, N., IWAMA, T. and KUROKI, T. (1999). Frequent mutation of beta-catenin and APC genes in primary colorectal tumors from patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. *Cancer Res* 59: 4506-4509.

MOGENSEN, M.M., TUCKER, J.B., MACKIE, J.B., PRESCOTT, A.R. and NATHKE, I.S. (2002). The adenomatous polyposis coli protein unambiguously localizes to microtubule plus ends and is involved in establishing parallel arrays of microtubule bundles in highly polarized epithelial cells. *J Cell Biol* 157: 1041-1048.

MOLENAAR, M., VAN DE WETERING, M., OOSTERWEGEL, M., PETERSON-MADURO, J., GODSAVE, S., KORINEK, V., ROOSE, J., DESTREE, O. and CLEVERS, H. (1996). XTcf-3 transcription factor mediates beta-catenin-induced axis formation in Xenopus embryos. *Cell* 86: 391-399.

MORENO-BUENO, G., HARDISSON, D., SANCHEZ, C., SARRIO, D., CASSIA, R., GARCIA-ROSTAN, G., PRAT, J., GUO, M., HERMAN, J.G., MATIAS-GUIU, X., ESTELLER, M. and PALACIOS, J. (2002). Abnormalities of the APC/beta-catenin pathway in endometrial cancer. *Oncogene* 21: 7981-7990.

MORIN, P.J., SPARKS, A.B., KORINEK, V., BARKER, N., CLEVERS, H., VOGELSTEIN, B. and KINZLER, K.W. (1997). Activation of beta-catenin-Tcf signaling in colon cancer by mutations in beta-catenin or APC. *Science* 275: 1787-1790.

MULHOLLAND, D.J., CHENG, H., REID, K., RENNIE, P.S. and NELSON, C.C. (2002). The androgen receptor can promote beta-catenin nuclear translocation independently of adenomatous polyposis coli. *J Biol Chem* 277: 17933-17943.

NATHKE, I.S., ADAMS, C.L., POLAKIS, P., SELLIN, J.H. and NELSON, W.J. (1996). The adenomatous polyposis coli tumor suppressor protein localizes to plasma membrane sites involved in active cell migration. *J Cell Biol* 134: 165-179.

OLMEDA, D., CASTEL, S., VILARO, S. and CANO, A. (2003). Beta-catenin regulation during the cell cycle: implications in G2/M and apoptosis. *Mol Biol Cell* 14: 2844-2860.

ORFORD, K., ORFORD, C.C. and BYERS, S.W. (1999). Exogenous expression of beta-catenin regulates contact inhibition, anchorage-independent growth, anoikis, and radiation-induced cell cycle arrest. *J Cell Biol* 146: 855-868.

OUGOLKOV, A.V., YAMASHITA, K., MAI, M. and MINAMOTO, T. (2002). Oncogenic beta-catenin and MMP-7 (matrilysin) cosegregate in late-stage clinical colon cancer. *Gastroenterology* 122: 60-71.

PARK, W.S., OH, R.R., PARK, J.Y., KIM, P.J., SHIN, M.S., LEE, J.H., KIM, H.S., LEE, S.H., KIM, S.Y., PARK, Y.G., AN, W.G., JANG, J.J., YOO, N.J. and LEE, J.Y. (2001). Nuclear localization of beta-catenin is an important prognostic factor in hepatoblastoma. *J Pathol* 193: 483-490.

PARK, W.S., OH, R.R., PARK, J.Y., LEE, S.H., SHIN, M.S., KIM, Y.S., KIM, S.Y., LEE, H.K., KIM, P.J., OH, S.T., YOO, N.J. and LEE, J.Y. (1999). Frequent somatic mutations of the beta-catenin gene in intestinal-type gastric cancer. *Cancer Res* 59: 4257-4260.

PEIFER, M., BERG, S. and REYNOLDS, A.B. (1994). A repeating amino acid motif shared by proteins with diverse cellular roles. *Cell* 76: 789-791.

POLAKIS, P. (2000). Wnt signaling and cancer. *Genes Dev* 14: 1837-1851.

RIJSEWIJK, F., SCHUERMANN, M., WAGENAAR, E., PARREN, P., WEIGEL, D. and NUSSE, R. (1987a). The Drosophila homolog of the mouse mammary oncogene int-1 is identical to the segment polarity gene wingless. *Cell* 50: 649-657.

RIJSEWIJK, F., VAN DEEMTER, L., WAGENAAR, E., SONNENBERG, A. and NUSSE, R. (1987b). Transfection of the int-1 mammary oncogene in cuboidal RAC mammary cell line results in morphological transformation and tumorigenicity. *EMBO J* 6: 127-131.

RIMM, D.L., CACA, K., HU, G., HARRISON, F.B. and FEARON, E.R. (1999). Frequent nuclear/cytoplasmic localization of beta-catenin without exon 3 mutations in malignant melanoma. *Am J Pathol* 154: 325-329.

ROOSE, J., HULS, G., VAN BEEST, M., MOERER, P., VAN DER HORN, K., GOLDSCHMEDING, R., LOGTENBERG, T. and CLEVERS, H. (1999). Synergy between tumor suppressor APC and the beta-catenin-Tcf4 target Tcf1. *Science* 285: 1923-1926.

ROOSE, J., MOLENAAR, M., PETERSON, J., HURENKAMP, J., BRANTJES, H., MOERER, P., VAN DE WETERING, M., DESTREE, O. and CLEVERS, H. (1998). The Xenopus Wnt effector XTcf-3 interacts with Groucho-related transcriptional repressors. *Nature* 395: 608-612.

ROSIN-ARBESFELD, R., CLIFFE, A., BRABLETZ, T. and BIENZ, M. (2003). Nuclear export of the APC tumour suppressor controls beta-catenin function in transcription. *EMBO J* 22: 1101-1113.

ROUSSET, R., MACK, J.A., WHARTON, K.A., JR., AXELROD, J.D., CADIGAN, K.M., FISH, M.P., NUSSE, R. and SCOTT, M.P. (2001). Naked cuticle targets dishevelled to antagonize Wnt signal transduction. *Genes Dev* 15: 658-671.

RUBINFELD, B., ALBERT, I., PORFIRI, E., FIOLO, C., MUNEMITSU, S. and POLAKIS, P. (1996). Binding of GSK3beta to the APC-beta-catenin complex and regulation of complex assembly. *Science* 272: 1023-1026.

RUCKERT, S., HIENDLMEYER, E., BRUECKL, W.M., OSWALD, U., BEYSER, K., DIETMAIER, W., HAYNL, A., KOCH, C., RUSCHOFF, J., BRABLETZ, T., KIRCHNER, T. and JUNG, A. (2002). T-cell factor-4 frameshift mutations occur frequently in human microsatellite instability-high colorectal carcinomas but do not contribute to carcinogenesis. *Cancer Res* 62: 3009-3013.

SATOH, S., DAIGO, Y., FURUKAWA, Y., KATO, T., MIWA, N., NISHIWAKI, T., KAWASOE, T., ISHIGURO, H., FUJITA, M., TOKINO, T., SASAKI, Y., IMAOKA, S., MURATA, M., SHIMANO, T., YAMAOKA, Y. and NAKAMURA, Y. (2000). AXIN1 mutations in hepatocellular carcinomas, and growth suppression in cancer cells by virus-mediated transfer of AXIN1. *Nat Genet* 24: 245-250.

SCHWARTZ, D.R., WU, R., KARDIA, S.L., LEVIN, A.M., HUANG, C.C., SHEDDEN, K.A., KUICK, R., MISEK, D.E., HANASH, S.M., TAYLOR, J.M., REED, H., HENDRIX, N., ZHAI, Y., FEARON, E.R. and CHO, K.R. (2003). Novel candidate targets of beta-catenin/T-cell factor signaling identified by gene expression profiling of ovarian endometrioid adenocarcinomas. *Cancer Res* 63: 2913-2922.

SCHWARZ-ROMOND, T., ASBRAND, C., BAKKERS, J., KUHL, M., SCHAEFFER, H.J., HUELSKEN, J., BEHRENS, J., HAMMERSCHMIDT, M. and BIRCHMEIER, W. (2002). The ankyrin repeat protein Diversin recruits Casein kinase lepsilon to the beta-catenin degradation complex and acts in both canonical Wnt and Wnt/JNK signaling. *Genes Dev* 16: 2073-2084.

SEEILING, J.M., MILLER, J.R., GIL, R., MOON, R.T., WHITE, R. and VIRSHUP, D.M. (1999). Regulation of beta-catenin signaling by the B56 subunit of protein phosphatase 2A. *Science* 283: 2089-2091.

SEIDENSTICKER, M.J. and BEHRENS, J. (2000). Biochemical interactions in the wnt pathway. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 1495: 168-182.

SHIMIZU, H., JULIUS, M.A., GIARRE, M., ZHENG, Z., BROWN, A.M. and KITAJEWSKI, J. (1997). Transformation by Wnt family proteins correlates with regulation of beta-catenin. *Cell Growth Differ* 8: 1349-1358.

SHIMOKAWA, T., FURUKAWA, Y., SAKAI, M., LI, M., MIWA, N., LIN, Y.M. and NAKAMURA, Y. (2003). Involvement of the FGF18 gene in colorectal carcinogenesis, as a novel downstream target of the beta-catenin/T-cell factor complex. *Cancer Res* 63: 6116-6120.

SHTUTMAN, M., ZHURINSKY, J., SIMCHA, I., ALBANESE, C., D'AMICO, M., PESTELL, R. and BEN-ZE'EVE, A. (1999). The cyclin D1 gene is a target of the beta-catenin/LEF-1 pathway. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 96: 5522-5527.

SPARKS, A.B., MORIN, P.J., VOGELSTEIN, B. and KINZLER, K.W. (1998). Mutational analysis of the APC/beta-catenin/Tcf pathway in colorectal cancer. *Cancer Res* 58: 1130-1134.

SPINK, K.E., POLAKIS, P. and WEIS, W.I. (2000). Structural basis of the Axin-adenomatous polyposis coli interaction. *EMBO J* 19: 2270-2279.

STOCKINGER, A., EGER, A., WOLF, J., BEUG, H. and FOISNER, R. (2001). E-cadherin regulates cell growth by modulating proliferation-dependent beta-catenin transcriptional activity. *J Cell Biol* 154: 1185-1196.

SUN, T.Q., LU, B., FENG, J.J., REINHARD, C., JAN, Y.N., FANTL, W.J. and WILLIAMS, L.T. (2001). PAR-1 is a Dishevelled-associated kinase and a positive regulator of Wnt signalling. *Nat Cell Biol* 3: 628-636.

TAGO, K., NAKAMURA, T., NISHITA, M., HYODO, J., NAGAI, S., MURATA, Y., ADACHI, S., OHWADA, S., MORISHITA, Y., SHIBUYA, H. and AKIYAMA, T. (2000). Inhibition of Wnt signaling by ICAT, a novel beta-catenin-interacting protein. *Genes Dev* 14: 1741-1749.

TAKEMARU, K., YAMAGUCHI, S., LEE, Y.S., ZHANG, Y., CARTHEW, R.W. and MOON, R.T. (2003). Chibby, a nuclear beta-catenin-associated antagonist of the Wnt/Wingless pathway. *Nature* 422: 905-909.

TAMAI, K., SEMENOV, M., KATO, Y., SPOKONY, R., LIU, C., KATSUYAMA, Y., HESS, F., SAINT-JEANNET, J.P. and HE, X. (2000). LDL-receptor-related proteins in Wnt signal transduction. *Nature* 407: 530-535.

TANIGUCHI, K., ROBERTS, L.R., ADERCA, I.N., DONG, X., QIAN, C., MURPHY, L.M., NAGORNEY, D.M., BURGART, L.J., ROCHE, P.C., SMITH, D.I., ROSS, J.A. and LIU, W. (2002). Mutational spectrum of beta-catenin, AXIN1, and AXIN2 in hepatocellular carcinomas and hepatoblastomas. *Oncogene* 21: 4863-4871.

TETSU, O. and MCCORMICK, F. (1999). Beta-catenin regulates expression of cyclin D1 in colon carcinoma cells. *Nature* 398: 422-426.

THOMPSON, B., TOWNSLEY, F., ROSIN-ARBESFELD, R., MUSISI, H. and BIENZ, M. (2002). A new nuclear component of the Wnt signalling pathway. *Nat Cell Biol* 4: 367-373.

TRUICA, C.I., BYERS, S. and GELMANN, E.P. (2000). Beta-catenin affects androgen receptor transcriptional activity and ligand specificity. *Cancer Res* 60: 4709-4713.

VAN DE WETERING, M., CAVALLO, R., DOOIJES, D., VAN BEEST, M., VAN ES, J., LOUREIRO, J., YPMA, A., HURSH, D., JONES, T., BEJSOVEC, A., PEIFER, M., MORTIN, M. and CLEVERS, H. (1997). Armadillo coactivates transcription driven by the product of the Drosophila segment polarity gene dTCF. *Cell* 88: 789-799.

VAN DE WETERING, M., OVING, I., MUNCAN, V., PON FONG, M.T., BRANTJES, H., VAN LEENEN, D., HOLSTEGE, F.C., BRUMMELKAMP, T.R., AGAMI, R. and CLEVERS, H. (2003). Specific inhibition of gene expression using a stably integrated, inducible small-interfering-RNA vector. *EMBO Rep* 4: 609-615.

VAN DE WETERING, M., SANCHO, E., VERWEIJ, C., DE LAU, W., OVING, I., HURLSTONE, A., VAN DER HORN, K., BATLLE, E., COUDREUSE, D., HARAMIS, A.P., TJON-PON-FONG, M., MOERER, P., VAN DEN BORN, M., SOETE, G., PALS, S., EILERS, M., MEDEMA, R. and CLEVERS, H. (2002). The beta-catenin/TCF-4 complex imposes a crypt progenitor phenotype on colorectal cancer cells. *Cell* 111: 241-250.

VEEMAN, M.T., AXELROD, J.D. and MOON, R.T. (2003). A second canon. Functions and mechanisms of beta-catenin-independent Wnt signaling. *Dev Cell* 5: 367-377.

VOELLER, H.J., TRUICA, C.I. and GELMANN, E.P. (1998). Beta-catenin mutations in human prostate cancer. *Cancer Res* 58: 2520-2523.

VON KRIES, J.P., WINBECK, G., ASBRAND, C., SCHWARZ-ROMOND, T., SOCHNIKOVA, N., DELL'ORO, A., BEHRENS, J. and BIRCHMEIER, W. (2000). Hot spots in beta-catenin for interactions with LEF-1, conductin and APC. *Nat Struct Biol* 7: 800-807.

WAKEFIELD, J.G., STEPHENS, D.J. and TAVARE, J.M. (2003). A role for glycogen synthase kinase-3 in mitotic spindle dynamics and chromosome alignment. *J Cell Sci* 116: 637-646.

WEHRLI, M., DOUGAN, S.T., CALDWELL, K., O'KEEFE, L., SCHWARTZ, S., VAIZEL-OHAYON, D., SCHEJTER, E., TOMLINSON, A. and DINARDO, S. (2000). arrow encodes an LDL-receptor-related protein essential for Wingless signalling. *Nature* 407: 527-530.

WHARTON, K.A., JR. (2003). Runnin' with the Dvl: proteins that associate with Dsh/ Dvl and their significance to Wnt signal transduction. *Dev Biol* 253: 1-17.

WIDLUND, H.R., HORSTMANN, M.A., PRICE, E.R., CUI, J., LESSNICK, S.L., WU, M., HE, X. and FISHER, D.E. (2002). Beta-catenin-induced melanoma growth requires the downstream target Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor. *J Cell Biol* 158: 1079-1087.

WIELENGA, V.J., SMITS, R., KORINEK, V., SMIT, L., KIELMAN, M., FODDE, R., CLEVERS, H. and PALS, S.T. (1999). Expression of CD44 in Apc and Tcf mutant mice implies regulation by the WNT pathway. *Am J Pathol* 154: 515-523.

WINSTON, J.T., STRACK, P., BEER-ROMERO, P., CHU, C.Y., ELLEDGE, S.J. and HARPER, J.W. (1999). The SCFbeta-TRCP-ubiquitin ligase complex associates specifically with phosphorylated destruction motifs in IkappaBalpha and beta-catenin and stimulates IkappaBalpha ubiquitination in vitro. *Genes Dev* 13: 270-283.

WU, R., ZHAI, Y., FEARON, E.R. and CHO, K.R. (2001). Diverse mechanisms of beta-catenin deregulation in ovarian endometrioid adenocarcinomas. *Cancer Res* 61: 8247-8255.

YAMAMOTO, H., KISHIDA, S., KISHIDA, M., IKEDA, S., TAKADA, S. and KIKUCHI, A. (1999). Phosphorylation of axin, a Wnt signal negative regulator, by glycogen synthase kinase-3beta regulates its stability. *J Biol Chem* 274: 10681-10684.

YANG, F., LI, X., SHARMA, M., SASAKI, C.Y., LONGO, D.L., LIM, B. and SUN, Z. (2002). Linking beta-catenin to androgen-signaling pathway. *J Biol Chem* 277: 11336-11344.

YOST, C., FARR, G.H., 3RD, PIERCE, S.B., FERKEY, D.M., CHEN, M.M. and KIMELMAN, D. (1998). GBP, an inhibitor of GSK-3, is implicated in Xenopus development and oncogenesis. *Cell* 93: 1031-1041.

YOUNG, C.S., KITAMURA, M., HARDY, S. and KITAJEWSKI, J. (1998). Wnt-1 induces growth, cytosolic beta-catenin, and Tcf/Lef transcriptional activation in Rat-1 fibroblasts. *Mol Cell Biol* 18: 2474-2485.

ZENG, L., FAGOTTO, F., ZHANG, T., HSU, W., VASICEK, T.J., PERRY, W.L., 3RD, LEE, J.J., TILGHMAN, S.M., GUMBINER, B.M. and COSTANTINI, F. (1997). The mouse Fused locus encodes Axin, an inhibitor of the Wnt signaling pathway that regulates embryonic axis formation. *Cell* 90: 181-192.

ZHANG, T., OTEVREL, T., GAO, Z., EHRLICH, S.M., FIELDS, J.Z. and BOMAN, B.M. (2001a). Evidence that APC regulates survivin expression: a possible mechanism contributing to the stem cell origin of colon cancer. *Cancer Res* 61: 8664-8667.

ZHANG, X., GASPARD, J.P. and CHUNG, D.C. (2001b). Regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor by the Wnt and K-ras pathways in colonic neoplasia. *Cancer Res* 61: 6050-6054.

ZUMBRUNN, J., KINOSHITA, K., HYMAN, A.A. and NATHKE, I.S. (2001). Binding of the adenomatous polyposis coli protein to microtubules increases microtubule stability and is regulated by GSK3 beta phosphorylation. *Curr Biol* 11: 44-49.

ZURAWEL, R.H., CHIAPPAA, S.A., ALLEN, C. and RAFFEL, C. (1998). Sporadic medulloblastomas contain oncogenic beta-catenin mutations. *Cancer Res* 58: 896-899.
