
Reverse Methanogenesis: Testing the Hypothesis with Environmental Genomics  
Steven J. Hallam et al.  
Science 305, 1457 (2004);  
DOI:10.1126/science.1100025  

This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only.

If you wish to distribute this article to others, you can order high-quality copies for your colleagues, clients, or customers by [clicking here](https://www.sciencemag.org).

Permission to republish or repurpose articles or portions of articles can be obtained by following the guidelines [here](https://www.sciencemag.org).

The following resources related to this article are available online at www.sciencemag.org (this information is current as of March 3, 2013):

Updated information and services, including high-resolution figures, can be found in the online version of this article at:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/305/5689/1457.full.html](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/305/5689/1457.full.html)

Supporting Online Material can be found at:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2004/09/01/305.5689.1457.DC1.html](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2004/09/01/305.5689.1457.DC1.html)

This article cites 21 articles, 14 of which can be accessed free:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/305/5689/1457.full.html#ref-list-1](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/305/5689/1457.full.html#ref-list-1)

This article has been cited by 151 article(s) on the ISI Web of Science

This article has been cited by 41 articles hosted by HighWire Press; see:  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/content/305/5689/1457.full.html#related-urls](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/305/5689/1457.full.html#related-urls)

This article appears in the following subject collections:  
Microbiology  
[http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/microbio](http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/collection/microbio)

Science (print ISSN 0036-8075; online ISSN 1095-9203) is published weekly, except the last week in December, by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright 2004 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved. The title *Science* is a registered trademark of AAAS.

ture to corundum has been that a corresponding feature expected at 22 μm is not observed. However, the amplitude of the 22-μm feature is known to vary with grain shape (37) and is much lower in intensity than the 13-μm feature, and thus it may be too weak to resolve. Based on the structure and oblong shape of T103, crystalline corundum appears to be a likely contributor to the 13-μm feature. The assignment of the broad asymmetric feature peaking near 12 μm to amorphous Al₂O₃ is less debated, and this assignment gains further support from the amorphous nature of T96.

### References and Notes

1. L. R. Nittler, *Earth Planet. Sci. Lett.* **209**, 259 (2003).
2. E. Zinner, *Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci.* **26**, 147 (1998).
3. D. D. Clayton, L. R. Nittler, *Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.*, **42**, 39 (2004).
4. T. J. Bernatowicz et al., *Astrophys. J.* **472**, 760 (1996).
5. E. E. Salpeter, *Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.* **15**, 267 (1977).
6. K. Lodders, B. Fegley, in *Astrophysical Implications of the Laboratory Study of Presolar Materials*, E. K. Zinner, Ed. (American Institute of Physics, Woodbury, NY, 1997), vol. 402, pp. 391–450.
7. A. G. G. M. Tielens, in *From Miras to Planetary Nebulae: Which Path for Stellar Evolution?*, M. O. Mennessier, A. Omont, Eds. (Editions Frontières, Gir-sur-Yvette, France, 1990), pp. 186–200.
8. H.-P. Gail, in *Astromineralogy*, T. K. Henning, Ed. (Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, Germany, 2003), vol. 609, pp. 55–120.
9. H.-P. Gail, E. Sedlmayr, *Faraday Discussions*, **109**, 303 (1998).
10. K. S. Jeong, J. M. Winters, E. Sedlmayr, in *Asymptotic Giant Branch Stars*, A. Lebre, C. Waelkens, T. Le Bertre, Eds. (Astronomical Society of the Pacific, San Francisco, CA, 1999), pp. 233–238.
11. H. Sogawa, T. Kozasa, *Astrophys. J.* **516**, L33 (1999).
12. T. L. Daulton et al., *Science* **296**, 1852 (2002).
13. T. L. Daulton, D. D. Eisenhour, T. J. Bernatowicz, R. S. Lewis, P. Buseck, *Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta* **60**, 4853 (1996).
14. T. K. Croat, T. Bernatowicz, S. Amari, S. Messenger, F. Stadermann, *Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta* **67**, 4705 (2003).
15. The term corundum refers to only rhombohedral Al₂O₃. Several forms of Al₂O₃ can be produced synthetically, but corundum is the only natural terrestrial form. All previously reported mineral classifications of presolar oxides, including corundum, spinel, and hibonite, were based on composition measurements and an assumption of the stable crystal structure. Our data demonstrate the danger of this historic assumption and argue for a return to the stricter terminology.
16. L. Nittler, C. M. O'D. Alexander, X. Gao, R. M. Walker, E. Zinner, *Astrophys. J.* **483**, 475 (1997).
17. B.-G. Choi, G. R. Huss, G. J. Wasserburg, *Science* **282**, 1282 (1998).
18. R. M. Stroud, C. M. O'D. Alexander, L. R. Nittler, *Meteoritics* **37**, A137 (2002).
19. M. R. Lee, P. A. Bland, G. Graham, *Mineral. Mag.* **67**, 581 (2003).
20. P. J. Heaney, E. P. Vicenzi, L. A. Giannuzzi, K. J. T. Livi, *Am. Mineral.* **86**, 1094 (2001).
21. Materials and methods are available as supporting material on Science Online.
22. L. R. Nittler, C. M. O'D. Alexander, F. Tera, *Meteor. Planet. Sci. Supp.* **36**, A149 (2001).
23. A. I. Boothroyd, I.-J. Sackmann, *Astrophys. J.* **510**, 232 (1999).
24. Subgrains in the portion of the grains destroyed by the FIB process, and thus not observed by TEM, are unlikely (21).
25. A. G. G. M. Tielens, C. F. McKee, C. G. Seab, D. J. Hollenbach, *Astrophys. J.* **431**, 321 (1994).

---

26. A. P. Jones, A. G. G. M. Tielens, D. J. Hollenbach, *Astrophys. J.* **469**, 740 (1996).
27. I. Levin, D. Brandon, *J. Am. Ceram. Soc.* **81**, 1995 (1998).
28. B. T. Draine, *Annu. Rev. Astron. Astrophys.* **41**, 241 (2003).
29. E. Dwek, S. M. Foster, O. Vancura, *Astrophys. J.* **457**, 244 (1996).
30. C. Jäger et al., *Astron. Astrophys.* **401**, 57 (2003).
31. S. X. Wang, L. M. Wang, R. C. Ewing, R. H. Doremus, *J. Appl. Phys.* **81**, 587 (1997).
32. S. J. Zinkle, L. L. Snead, *Nucl. Instrum. Methods* **B116**, 92 (1996).
33. K. Lodders, B. Fegley, in *Asymptotic Giant Branch Stars*, A. Lebre, C. Waelkens, T. Le Bertre, Eds. (Astronomical Society of the Pacific, San Francisco, CA, 1999), pp. 279–289.
34. A. K. Speck, M. J. Barlow, R. J. Sylvester, A. M. Hofmeister, *Astron. Astrophys. Suppl. Ser.* **146**, 437 (2000).
35. I. R. Little-Marenin, S. D. Price, "The shapes of silicate features," *NASA Tech. Memo.* **88342** (1986) pp. 137–138.
36. W. Glaccum, in *Airborne Astronomy Symposium on the Galactic Ecosystem: From Gas to Stars to Dust*, M. R. Haas, J. A. Davidson, E. F. Erickson, Eds. (Astronomical Society of the Pacific, San Francisco, CA, 1995), vol. 73, pp. 395–396.
37. G. C. Sloan, K. E. Kraemer, J. H. Goebel, S. D. Price, *Astrophys. J.* **594**, 483 (2003).
38. T. Posch et al., *Astron. Astrophys.* **352**, 609 (1999).
39. This paper is dedicated to the memory of Dr. Robert M. Walker, without whom presolar oxide grains might not have been discovered. We acknowledge funding from the Office of Naval Research and NASA.

Supporting Online Material  
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/305/5689/1455/DC1  
Materials and Methods  
References and Notes  

4 June 2004; accepted 27 July 2004

# Reverse Methanogenesis: Testing the Hypothesis with Environmental Genomics

Steven J. Hallam${}^{1}$ Nik Putnam${}^{2}$ Christina M. Preston${}^{1}$ John C. Detter${}^{2}$ Daniel Rokhsar${}^{2}$ Paul M. Richardson${}^{2}$ Edward F. DeLong${}^{1\ast\dagger}$

Microbial methane consumption in anoxic sediments significantly impacts the global environment by reducing the flux of greenhouse gases from ocean to atmosphere. Despite its significance, the biological mechanisms controlling anaerobic methane oxidation are not well characterized. One current model suggests that relatives of methane-producing Archaea developed the capacity to reverse methanogenesis and thereby to consume methane to produce cellular carbon and energy. We report here a test of the “reverse-methanogenesis” hypothesis by genomic analyses of methane-oxidizing Archaea from deep-sea sediments. Our results show that nearly all genes typically associated with methane production are present in one specific group of archaeal methanotrophs. These genome-based observations support previous hypotheses and provide an informed foundation for metabolic modeling of anaerobic methane oxidation.

Anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM) in marine sediments has been estimated to consume more than 70 billion kilograms of methane annually (1). Analyses of pore waters from methane-oxidizing sediments along continental margins have mapped extensive zones of sulfate and methane depletion, which define the geographic and geochemical boundary conditions for AOM (2–4). Combined geochemical and biological evidence indicate that microbial consortia, largely composed of archaea and sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB), can couple methane oxidation to sulfate reduction (5, 6). Current models suggest that methane is converted by methanotrophic archaea to carbon dioxide and reduced by-products (possibly including molecular hydrogen), which are subsequently consumed by sulfate-reducing bacteria (6). In anoxic deep-sea sediments, AOM catalyzes the formation of authigenic carbonates with highly depleted ${}^{13}$C content, thereby providing an enduring geochemical signature for past and present methane oxidation (7–9). Microbial mediation of AOM significantly influences both local and global biological and biogeochemical processes. The process reduces methane flux to the water column, stimulates subsurface microbial metabolism, and also supports vigorous deep-sea chemolithotrophic communities that derive energy from one of its by-products, hydrogen sulfide.

Although no archaeal methanotrophs have yet been isolated in pure culture, phylogenetic, isotopic, and biochemical analyses indicate that several different methanogen-related archaeal groups are involved in AOM (10–13). Two groups of putative anaerobic methane-oxidizing Archaea (ANME-1 and

---

${}^{1}$Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, Moss Landing, CA 95064, USA. ${}^{2}$Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA 94598, USA.  
*Present address: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.  
†To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: delong@mit.edu

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 305 3 SEPTEMBER 2004 1457

ANME-2) (10, 11) and several SRB groups typically occur together in methane-rich marine sediments, although environmental surveys and incubation studies have identified distinct population structures and distributions associated with specific habitats (10, 14–17). The extent to which ANME and SRB groups cooperate in AOM is uncertain, but specific physical associations between them have been observed (11, 15).

To better define the process of AOM, we used environmental genomic techniques (18) to analyze methane-oxidizing archaeal populations found in deep-sea methane seeps. Our samples originated from a 6- to 9-cm-deep sediment pushcore interval (PC45) obtained from the Eel River Basin off the Mendocino California coastline (19). Previous geochemical and chemotaxonomic analyses of the sampling site determined that ANME and SRB groups represent active and abundant members of a microbial community associated with AOM in Eel River sediments (14, 15, 17). Microbial cells, including ANME-1, ANME-2, and associated SRB, were enriched from the sediment using density centrifugation and size selection (19). High-molecular-weight DNA purified from this cell enrichment was used to construct several 3000- to 4000-base pair (3- to 4-kbp) insert whole-genome shotgun (WGS) libraries, and one 32- to 45-kbp insert fosmid library (19). A total of 111.3 million base pairs (Mbp) of DNA sequence generated from 224,736 reads (averaging 732 bp per read) was derived from the WGS libraries. Paired-end sequencing of the fosmid library generated 4.6 Mbp of DNA sequence from 7104 reads (averaging 700 bp per read). Then, 191 fosmids encompassing 7.4 Mbp of DNA were selected for subcloning and sequencing on the basis of the results of paired-end sequencing, small-subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA), and functional gene screening (19). Fosmid-sequencing efforts focused on archaeal clones to maximize large-insert coverage depth of ANME genomes.

The cell purification procedure used in sample preparation was intended to reduce the complexity in the original, diverse sediment-associated microbial community and to enrich for the AOM microbial consortia. Based on SSU rRNA gene representation in both the WGS and fosmid libraries, the microbial community structure was dominated by ANME-1, ANME-2, and SRB groups (Fig. 1). The dominance of ANME-1 in the purified cell population is also supported by the distribution and types of methane-oxidizing Archaea (MOA)-specific methyl coenzyme M reductase (MCR) subunit A (*mcrA*) genes present in the library (figs. S1 and S2)

(17). This enrichment of ANME cells and genomic DNA facilitated detailed genomic analyses of this population subset.

ANME-1 and ANME-2 SSU rRNA and *mcrA* genes encoded on large genomic fragments formed distinct groups and subdivisions, each showing specific substitutions, transpositions, and indels. However, over the length of each fragment, gene content and operon organization were highly conserved within any given subdivision (Fig. 2 and fig. S1). In several instances, gene content was shared among fosmids from different groups containing SSU rRNA or *mcrA*, or between fosmids containing SSU rRNA and *mcrA* (Fig. 2). On average, the G+C content of ANME-1 fosmids containing SSU rRNA and *mcrA* was 45.1%, compared with 51.1% for those of ANME-2 (table S2). Subgroups of ANME-1 and ANME-2 fosmids containing SSU rRNA or *mcrA* harbored additional methanogenesis-associated genes (Figs. 2 and 3; table S2), providing linkage information used in determining the origin of related sequences in the WGS and fosmid libraries.

Surveys of the environmental libraries revealed the presence and relative abundance of many genes encoding enzymes typically associated with the methanogenic pathway (Table 1, Fig. 4, and fig. S2) (19–21). With the exception

**Fig. 1. Taxonomic distribution of SSU rRNA sequences identified in whole-genome shotgun sequencing (*n* = 114) and fosmid DNA libraries (*n* = 18).**

| Number of SSU rRNA IDs |
| --- |
| 70 |
| 60 |
| 50 |
| 40 |
| 30 |
| 20 |
| 10 |
| 0 |

- **Fosmid end**
- **Completed Fosmid**
- **Whole Genome Shotgun**

| Alpha | Epsilon | Actinobacteria | Bacteroides | Chloroflexus | Green non-sulfur | OP8 | Gamma | Planktomycete | Unaffiliated | Delta SRB | Delta Eel-1 | Delta Eel-2 | Crenarchaea | Unaffiliated | Thermoplasma | ANME-2b | ANME-2c | ANME-1 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

**Bacteria**  
**Archaea**

of step 5, encoded by F<sub>420</sub>-dependent N<sup>5</sup>, N<sup>10</sup>- methenyltetrahydromethanopterin (methylene- H4MPT) reductase (*mer*), components of all enzymatic steps (steps 1 to 4 and steps 6 to 7, Table 1) were represented in both WGS and fosmid library data sets (Table 1 and table S2). Four sequences encoding *mer* were encountered only in the WGS data set, but these probably reflect a low-level presence of bona fide methanogens in the sample. This observation is consistent with previous SSU rRNA surveys in Eel River sediments, where a few acetoclastic methanogen sequences occurred together with ANME-1 and/or ANME-2 ribotypes (14). Although no bona fide methanogen SSU rRNAs

A
ANME-2
GZfos26E7
GZfos18C8

ANME-1
GZfos1C11
GZfos34G5
GZfos25D1
GZfos10C7
GZfos27G5
GZfos12E1

B
ANME-2
GZfos26B2
GZfos35D7
GZfos18B6
GZfos24D9
GZfos30H9
GZfos11H11
GZfos33H6
GZfos9C4
GZfos19C7
GZfos17A3
GZfos13E1

Fig. 2. Comparison of ANME-1 and ANME-2 fosmids containing SSU rRNA (A) or *mcrA* (B) based on predicted gene content and order. Genes shared in common among or between fosmids are connected by shaded boxes. ANME-1 *mcrBGA* subunits are separated from the *mcrC* component by a spacer region varying between ~1 and 14 kbp from the predicted *mcrB* start site. In every case, the *mcrC* component is linked to a tandem duplication of the *atw* locus, an adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP)-binding protein associated with activation of the MCR holoenzyme in vitro (26).

Fig. 3. Determination of ANME-1 or ANME-2 fosmid identity based on G+C content and depth of WGS coverage. Bin I bounded by red ellipse corresponds to ANME-1. Bin II bounded by orange ellipse corresponds to ANME-2. Fosmids containing SSU rRNA (filled circle), *mcr* (filled square), and *mch* (open circle) genes are highlighted in red (ANME-1) or orange (ANME-2). Read depth corresponds to the total number of WGS nucleotides aligning to a given fosmid, divided by the length (in bps) of that fosmid (19).

RE PORTS

Fig. 4. Hypothetical model for reverse methanogenesis in ANME-1.
(A) A combined pathway for methanogenesis. Gene identifications are shown in black.
(B) A reconstructed pathway for ANME-1 based solely on predicted gene content of identified ANME-1 fosmids. Positive gene identifications are shown in red. Negative gene identifications are shown in gray.

were identified in either the WGS or fosmid library sequences, several mcr subunit sequences affiliated with the Methanosarcinales lineage were identified (fig. S2). These are readily distinguished from ANME gene fragments by both their phylogeny and WGS coverage.

Fosmid sequences were compared on the basis of their G+C content and WGS coverage (19). This approach was chosen on the basis of the clear G+C bias between ANME-1 and ANME-2, as well as the apparent high representation of ANME-1 genomic DNA (Fig. 1) in the WGS and fosmid libraries. Two bin distributions, I and II, were evident from using this approach (Fig. 3 and table S2). The depth of WGS coverage for bin I ranged between 0.3 and 7.9 × and between 0.4 and 1.4 × for bin II (Fig. 3). All ANME-1 fosmids containing SSU rRNA or *mcrA* mapped to bin I, and all ANME-2 fosmids containing SSU rRNA or *mcrA* mapped to bin II (Fig. 3 and table S2). Independent phylogenetic and linkage analyses clearly identified a total of 16 ANME-1 fosmids, all of which grouped in bin I (Fig. 3). Similarly, all five fosmids that could be unambiguously identified as ANME-2 grouped into bin II (Fig. 3). Assembly of binned fosmids generated 13 unique scaffolds from within bin I, and one from within bin II, with no cross-assembly between the bins (22). Together, these data provide strong support for the assignment of fosmids encoding methanogenesis-associated genes to ANME-1 or ANME-2 groups, according to their bin distribution. Specific identification of many ANME-1–derived genome fragments provided the framework necessary for modeling a presumptive pathway for methane consumption within this group.

The available data strongly suggest that the ANME-1 group contains all steps in the canonical seven-step methanogenic pathway with the exception of step 5, encoded by *mer* (Table 1 and Fig. 4).

Although this gene is required for methanogenesis from CO₂ and one carbon (C1) compounds including methanol and methylamines, loss of *mer* activity in ANME-1 could promote AOM by increasing the activation barrier for conversion of methylene-H₄MPT to methyl-H₄MPT. Given this observation, identification of methanofuran (MF)/H₄MPT-dependent C1 transfer enzymes mediating steps 1 to 4 of methanogenesis in ANME-1 sequences is intriguing. It is possible that methylene-H₄MPT derived from reduced CO₂ becomes a substrate for assimilatory metabolism via the serine cycle (23). Alternatively, the C1 transfer module in ANME-1 could play a role in formaldehyde detoxification, analogous to the properties of other methylotrophic (24) or nonmethylo-trophic bacteria (25).

An F₄₂₀-dependent quinone oxidoreductase (*fqo*) and numerous iron-sulfur cluster proteins were identified among the ANME-1

Table 1. Identification of methanogenesis-associated genes in Eel River sediment genomic DNA libraries. Step numbers indicate points in the H4MPT-dependent methanogenic pathway. Total number of gene ids among

| Step | Gene name                                                                                   | Locus   | Shotgun | Fosmid ends | Completed fosmids |
|------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|----------|-------------|-------------------|
| 1    | Formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase, subunit A                                                | fmdA    | 55       | 12          | 4                 |
|      | subunit B                                                                                  | fmdB    | 69       | 6           | 4                 |
|      | subunit C                                                                                  | fmdC    | 50       | 1           | 4                 |
|      | subunit D                                                                                  | fmdD    | 23       | 1           | 2                 |
|      | subunit E                                                                                  | fmdE    | 26       | 2           | 2                 |
|      | subunit F                                                                                  | fmdF    | 9*       | 2           | –                 |
|      | subunit G                                                                                  | fmdG    | –        | –           | –                 |
|      | subunit H                                                                                  | fmdH    | –        | –           | –                 |
| 2    | Formylmethanofuran-tetrahydromethanopterin formyltransferase                               | ftr     | 67       | 7           | 3                 |
| 3    | $N^5,N^{10}$-methenyltetrahydromethanopterin cyclohydrolase                                | mch     | 29       | 1           | 5                 |
| 4    | $F_{420}$-dependent methylenetetrahydromethanopterin dehydrogenase                         | mtd     | 25       | 2           | 2                 |
|      | H2-forming $N^5,N^{10}$-methylene-tetrahydromethanopterin cyclohydrolase                   | hmd     | –        | –           | –                 |
| 5    | Coenzyme $F_{420}$-dependent $N^5,N^{10}$-methenyltetrahydromethanopterin reductase         | mer†    | 4        | –           | –                 |
| 6    | $N^5$-methyltetrahydromethanopterin-coenzyme M methyltransferase, subunit A                | mtrA    | 9        | –           | 8                 |
|      | subunit B                                                                                  | mtrB    | 3        | 1           | 3                 |
|      | subunit C                                                                                  | mtrC    | 10       | 1           | 3                 |
|      | subunit D                                                                                  | mtrD    | 10       | 2           | 3                 |
|      | subunit E                                                                                  | mtrE    | 11       | –           | 3                 |
|      | subunit F                                                                                  | mtrF    | –        | –           | –                 |
|      | subunit G                                                                                  | mtrG    | 7        | –           | 4                 |
|      | subunit H                                                                                  | mtrH    | 39       | 4           | 6                 |
| 7    | Methyl coenzyme M reductase, subunit $\alpha$                                              | mcrA    | 45       | 3           | 11                |
|      | subunit $\beta$                                                                            | mcrB    | 28       | 9           | 11                |
|      | protein C                                                                                  | mcrC    | 33       | 1           | 13                |
|      | protein D                                                                                  | mcrD    | 2        | 1           | 3                 |
|      | subunit $\gamma$                                                                           | mcrG    | 31       | 1           | 11                |
|      | Heterodisulfide reductase, subunit A                                                       | hdrA    | 319*     | 22          | 4                 |
|      | subunit B                                                                                  | hdrB    | 80       | 3           | 8                 |
|      | subunit C                                                                                  | hdrC    | 45       | 4           | 3                 |
|      | subunit D                                                                                  | hdrD    | 67*      | 4           | –                 |
|      | subunit E                                                                                  | hdrE†   | 7        | –           | –                 |
|      | CO dehydrogenase/acetyl-CoA synthase, subunit $\alpha$                                     | cdhA    | 74       | 8           | 8                 |
|      | subunit $\beta$                                                                            | cdhC    | 52       | 1           | 3                 |
|      | subunit $\gamma$                                                                           | cdhD    | 38       | 3           | 1                 |
|      | subunit $\delta$                                                                           | cdhE    | 56       | 3           | 4                 |
|      | subunit $\varepsilon$                                                                      | cdhB    | 16       | –           | 4                 |
|      | ADP-forming acetyl-CoA synthetase                                                          | acd     | 139†     | 9           | 4                 |

*Includes related iron-sulfur [Fe-S] proteins.
†Includes related coenzyme A-binding proteins.
‡Identified only in shotgun.

sequences (fig. S4, table S2). Moreover, electron input modules encoded by coenzyme $F_{420}$-reducing hydrogenase subunit B ($frhB$) were identified on 12 ANME-1 fosmids containing methanogenesis-associated genes (table S2), which suggested possible coupled expression and functioning of these enzymes, as well as the generation of a proton motive force derived from reduced $F_{420}$ or ferredoxin. Given these observations, the “unfavorable” thermodynamics of methane activation in AOM might be overcome by metabolic coupling to the energy conservation reactions driven by the $F_{420}$-dependent respiratory chain. In ANME-1, $fgo$ is most similar in operon structure and gene sequence to homologous genes in *Archaeoglobus fulgidus* (fig. S3), which indicates that ANME-1 contains genomic features of both sulfate-reducing and methanogenic Archaea.

The identification of most of the genes associated with methanogenesis in the ANME-1 group (and to a lesser extent,

References and Notes

1. W. S. Reeburgh, in *Microbial Growth on C1 Compounds*, M. E. Lidstrom, F. R. Tabita, Eds. (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1996), pp. 334–342.
2. N. Iverson, B. B. Jorgensen, *Limnol. Oceanogr.* **30**, 944 (1985).
3. W. S. Borowski, C. K. Paull, W. Ussler III, *Mar. Geol.* **159**, 131 (1999).
4. S. D’Hondt, S. Rutherford, A. J. Spivack, *Science* **295**, 2067 (2002).
5. A. J. Zehnder, T. D. Brock, *J. Bacteriol.* **137**, 420 (1979).
6. T. M. Hoehler, M. J. Alperin, in *Microbial Growth on C1 Compounds*, M. E. Lidstrom, F. R. Tabita, Eds. (Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 1996), pp. 326–333.
7. L. D. Kulm *et al.*, *Science* **231**, 561 (1986).
8. C. K. Paull, J. P. Chanton, A. C. Neumann, J. A. Coston, C. S. Martens, *Palaios* **7** (1992).
9. G. Jiang, M. J. Kennedy, N. Christie-Blick, *Nature* **426**, 822 (2003).
10. K. U. Hinrichs, J. M. Hayes, S. P. Sylva, P. G. Brewer, E. F. DeLong, *Nature* **398**, 802 (1999).
11. A. Boetius *et al.*, *Nature* **407**, 623 (2000).
12. V. J. Orphan, C. H. House, K. U. Hinrichs, K. D. McKeegan, E. F. DeLong, *Science* **293**, 484 (2001).
13. M. Kruger *et al.*, *Nature* **426**, 878 (2003).
14. V. J. Orphan *et al.*, *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **67**, 1922 (2001).
15. V. J. Orphan, C. H. House, K. U. Hinrichs, K. D. McKeegan, E. F. DeLong, *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* **99**, 7663 (2002).
16. W. Michaelis *et al.*, *Science* **297**, 1013 (2002).
17. S. J. Hallam, P. R. Girguis, C. M. Preston, P. M. Richardson, E. F. DeLong, *Appl. Environ. Microbiol.* **69**, 5483 (2003).
18. E. F. DeLong, *Curr. Opin. Microbiol.* **5**, 520 (2002).

www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 305 3 SEPTEMBER 2004 1461

19. Materials and methods are available as supporting material on Science Online.
20. J. N. Reeve, J. Nolling, R. M. Morgan, D. R. Smith, *J. Bacteriol.* **179**, 5975 (1997).
21. R. K. Thauer, *Microbiology* **144**, 2377 (1998).
22. S. J. Hallam *et al.*, data not shown.
23. S. Angelaccio *et al.*, *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 41789 (2003).
24. L. Chistoserdova *et al.*, *Microbiology* **146**, 233 (2000).
25. C. J. Marx, J. A. Miller, L. Chistoserdova, M. E. Lidstrom, *J. Bacteriol.* **186**, 2173 (2004).
26. C. H. Kuhner, B. D. Lindenbach, R. S. Wolfe, *J. Bacteriol.* **175**, 3195 (1993).
27. Special thanks to L. Christianson, P. Girguis, and V. Orphan at MBARI for technical assistance, and the pilots of the ROV Tiburon and the captain and crew of the R/V Western Flyer. We also thank S. Pitluck and the Joint Genome Institute staff for technical assistance, and W. Ussler and D. Graham, who provided insight and commentary. This study was supported by the David and Lucille Packard Foundation, NSF grant MCB-0236541, and the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science, Biological and Environmental Research Program, and the University of California, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, under contract W-7405-ENG-48, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory contract DE-AC03-765F00098, and Los Alamos National Laboratory contract W-7405-ENG-36. Sequences have been submitted to GenBank under accession numbers AY714814 to AY714873. Additional data are available at www.jgi.doe.gov/aom.

Supporting Online Material  
www.science.org/cgi/content/full/305/5689/1457/DC1  
Materials and Methods  
Figs. S1 to S3  
Tables S1 and S2  
References and Notes  

6 May 2004; accepted 23 July 2004

# Bmp4 and Morphological Variation of Beaks in Darwin's Finches

**Arhat Abzhanov,**¹ **Meredith Protas,**¹ **B. Rosemary Grant,**² **Peter R. Grant,**² **Clifford J. Tabin**¹*

Darwin’s finches are a classic example of species diversification by natural selection. Their impressive variation in beak morphology is associated with the exploitation of a variety of ecological niches, but its developmental basis is unknown. We performed a comparative analysis of expression patterns of various growth factors in species comprising the genus *Geospiza*. We found that expression of *Bmp4* in the mesenchyme of the upper beaks strongly correlated with deep and broad beak morphology. When misexpressed in chicken embryos, *Bmp4* caused morphological transformations paralleling the beak morphology of the large ground finch *G. magnirostris*.

Darwin’s finches are a group of 14 closely related songbird species on the Galápagos Islands and Cocos Island (1–3) collected by Charles Darwin and other members of the Beagle expedition in 1835 (4). Many biology textbooks use these birds to illustrate the history of evolutionary theory as well as adaptive radiation, natural selection, and niche partitioning (5–7). The diverse shapes and sizes of the finch beaks are believed to be maximally effective for exploiting particular types of food, including seeds, insects, and cactus flowers (3, 7). The external differences in beak morphology reflect differences in their respective craniofacial skeletons (3, 8). The specialized beak shapes are apparent at hatching (3, 8) and thus are genetically determined.

To study the craniofacial development of Darwin’s finches, we first developed a staging system by which we could compare them to each other and to the chicken, the existing avian model system (fig. S1) (9). We used this system to compare beak development in six species of Darwin’s finches belonging to the monophyletic ground finch genus *Geospiza*. The sharp-beaked finch *G. difficilis*, with a small symmetrical beak, is the most basal species.

---

¹Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.  
²Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.

*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
