
Molecular interactions regulate BCR signal inhibition by CD22 and CD72

Lars Nitschke¹ and Takeshi Tsubata²

¹Institute for Virology and Immunobiology, University of Würzburg, Versbacherstr. 7, 97078 Würzburg, Germany  
²Laboratory of Immunology, School of Biomedical Science, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan

The inhibitory coreceptors CD22 and CD72 downmodulate B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling and function as a molecular switch, determining whether antigen-stimulated B cells undergo apoptosis or proliferation. These coreceptors carry an intrinsic property for associating with the BCR, and this association is crucial for the initiation of signal inhibition through phosphorylation of these coreceptors by BCR-associated kinases. Recent findings have demonstrated that signal inhibition by these coreceptors is regulated by ligands for the coreceptors and by molecules binding to the coreceptors or the BCR. Moreover, signal inhibition by CD22 depends on the BCR isotype. These findings suggest a dynamic regulation of these coreceptors through molecular interactions on the B-cell surface.

When B cells interact with antigens, transmembrane signal transduction takes place through the B-cell receptor (BCR), leading to modulation of gene expression involved in the activation, anergy or apoptosis of B cells. Accessory coreceptors on the B-cell surface modulate BCR signaling either positively or negatively. Among these, molecules such as the low affinity receptors for IgG (FcγRII), CD22 and CD72 negatively regulate BCR signaling and are thus called inhibitory BCR coreceptors. Inhibitory coreceptors are thought to set the BCR signaling threshold and thereby prevent overstimulation of the B cells. These inhibitory coreceptors contain immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motifs (ITIMs) in the cytoplasmic tails. When phosphorylated, ITIMs recruit inhibitory intracellular signaling proteins, including protein tyrosine phosphatases Src-homology domain 2 (SH2)-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase-1 (SHP-1) and SHP-2 and the lipid phosphatase SH2-containing inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase (SHIP). The phosphatases counteract the BCR-induced activation signaling cascades mediated by phosphorylation of various signaling molecules. Phosphorylation of ITIMs in these coreceptors occurs only when the coreceptors associate with the BCR. FcγRII becomes associated with the BCR when the B cell interacts with the antigen complexed with IgG. This complex coligates the BCR with FcγRII by binding to both of these molecules [1]. By contrast, CD22 and CD72 exert an inhibitory effect on BCR signaling without coligation, as a result of their ability to associate with the BCR. Previously, CD22 and CD72 were thought to undergo a stable association with the BCR. However, new evidence suggests that inhibition of BCR signaling by CD22 and CD72 is a regulated process and depends on various factors, such as ligand binding, nature of the BCR agonists and BCR isotypes. These novel findings about the regulation of B-cell signaling by inhibitory receptors are discussed in this review.

Inhibition of B cell signaling by CD22

CD22 is a 140 kDa type I membrane protein and is a member of the Sialic acid-binding immunoglobulin-like lectin (Siglec) family, a family of inhibitory adhesion receptors on leukocytes. CD22 is expressed in a B-cell lineage-specific fashion, starting at the pre-B-cell stage. CD22 has seven Ig-like extracellular domains and a cytoplasmic tail containing six tyrosines, three of which belong to the ITIM sequences with the consensus sequence (Ile/Val/Leu/Ser)-x-Tyr-x-x-(Leu/Val). After ligation of membrane-bound IgM, CD22 is quickly tyrosine phosphorylated on its cytoplasmic tail [2] as a result of its association with membrane-bound IgM [3,4]. The tyrosine kinase mainly involved in CD22 phosphorylation is Lyn, a member of the Src kinase family activated by BCR ligation, as was demonstrated by reduced CD22 phosphorylation in Lyn-deficient mice [5,6]. The phosphorylated ITIMs of CD22 recruit the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 [2], an important negative regulator of many signaling pathways in hematopoietic cells. SHP-1 is the most prominent intracellular binding partner of CD22 and appears to have a crucial role in signal inhibition by CD22. Indeed, CD22-deficient B cells show a strongly increased Ca²⁺ mobilization after BCR crosslinking [7–10], and higher tyrosine phosphorylation of Vav-1 [11], CD19 [12] and SLP 65/BLNK (B-cell linker protein) [13], all positively involved in Ca²⁺ signaling (Figure 1). However, the higher tyrosine phosphorylation of these possible SHP-1 substrates could not fully explain the increased Ca²⁺ signaling in CD22-deficient mice. Recently, some interesting experiments demonstrated that CD22 stimulates Ca²⁺ efflux from B cells and thereby negatively regulates Ca²⁺ signaling [14]. CD22 interacts with and activates a Ca²⁺ pump, called plasma membrane Ca²⁺-ATPase-4 (PMCA 4), and this activation is dependent on CD22

Corresponding authors: Lars Nitschke (nitschke@vim.uni-wuerzburg.de), Takeshi Tsubata (tsubata.imm@mri.tmd.ac.jp).

Available online 20 August 2004
www.sciencedirect.com 1471-4906/$ - see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.it.2004.08.002

Figure 1. Regulation of signaling through membrane-bound IgM by CD22 and CD72. Intracellular CD22- and CD72-binding proteins are shown. The tyrosines that have been mapped as interaction sites for CD22 or CD72 are indicated. Upon ligation of membrane-bound IgM, these tyrosines are phosphorylated by the B-cell receptor (BCR)-associated kinase Lyn, probably due to an association between CD22 and CD72 and membrane-bound IgM. For both of the inhibitory coreceptors, a clear function has only been shown for the binding of tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1. SHP-1 dephosphorylates intracellular signaling molecules (indicated by -). BCR signaling triggers depletion of intracellular Ca²⁺ stores in the endoplasmic reticulum. This activates the opening of Ca²⁺ release-activated channels and triggers Ca²⁺ influx. CD22 activates (indicated by +) the Ca²⁺ pump PMCA 4 and thereby controls Ca²⁺ efflux. Abbreviations: DAG, diacylglycerol; CRAC, Ca²⁺ release-activated channel; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; IP3, inositol 3,4,5-triphosphate; IP3R, IP3 receptor; ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif; ITIM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motif; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase; PLC, phospholipase C; Ptl-(3,4,5) P₃, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate; SHP-1, Src-homology domain 2(SH2)-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase-1.

tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of SHP-1 [14]. Although some details are still not clear, this seems to be a crucial mechanism for Ca²⁺ regulation by CD22 (Figure 1). In addition to SHP-1, other proteins that are normally positively involved in BCR signaling are also recruited via their SH2 domains to the tyrosine-phosphorylated tail of CD22. These include Syk, phospholipase Cγ2 (PLCγ2), phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K), Grb-2 and Shc [15–17] (Figure 1). Apart from Grb-2, which binds to a distinct, non-ITIM tyrosine, these intracellular proteins have overlapping CD22 binding sites with SHP-1. Is CD22 also a positive regulator of BCR signaling? From CD22-deficient mice, it is clear that the overall function of CD22 is inhibitory [7–10,18]. However, CD22-deficient mice also have impaired responses to thymus-independent type II (TI-II) antigens and show impaired B-cell proliferation following anti-IgM stimulation; this could result from the loss of positive regulatory functions of CD22. Yet the impaired response of CD22⁻/⁻ mice to TI-II antigens can be explained by the finding that their marginal zone (MZ) B-cell population is reduced [19], a population which is crucial for TI-II responses (Table 1). This phenotype therefore does not point to a positive signaling function

for CD22 in the regulation of TI-II response but can be explained by the loss of a crucial B-cell population in CD22-deficient mice. The impaired anti-IgM-induced proliferation was interpreted as evidence that CD22 could directly stimulate mitogenic signaling pathways. However, CD22-deficient B cells have no strong impairment of the ERK (extracellular signal-regulated kinase)-mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway, and impairment of JNK (Jun NH2-terminal kinase) phosphorylation is controversial [17,20]. Therefore, a clear positive regulation of MAP kinase pathways by CD22 has not been demonstrated. In addition to SHP-1, the lipid phosphatase SHIP is also recruited to the CD22 cytoplasmic tail [17]. SHIP cannot bind directly to phosphopeptides of CD22 but requires both Grb-2 and Shc for binding. Because B cells of SHIP-deficient mice do not show increased Ca²⁺ mobilization after BCR ligation [21,22], this indicates that SHIP does not have a major role in CD22-mediated negative regulation of BCR signaling.

BCR signal inhibition by CD72
CD72, also known as Lyb-2, is a 45 kDa type II membrane protein expressed predominantly in B lineage cells. CD72

Review
TRENDS in Immunology Vol. 25 No. 10 October 2004

Table 1. B-cell differentiation and immune responses in CD22-deficient and in CD72-deficient mice

|  | CD22⁻/⁻ mice [7-10] | CD72⁻/⁻ mice [29] |
| --- | --- | --- |
| BM<sup>a</sup> |  |  |
| proB, preB, imm. B cells | Normal | Normal (preB increase) |
| mature, recir. B cells | Reduced | Reduced |
| Spleen |  |  |
| imm., transitional B cells | Reduced | Normal |
| mature B cells | Normal | Reduced |
| MZ B cells | Reduced [19] | Normal-increased |
| Per.cav.B1a cells | Normal [7, 9], Increased [8, 10] | Increased |
| TI-2 immune response | Reduced | Normal |
| TD immune response | Rormal | Normal |

<sup>a</sup> Abbreviations: BM, bone marrow; imm., immature; MZ, marginal zone; per.cav., peritoneal cavity; recir., recirculating; TI-2, thymus-independent type 2; TD, thymus-dependent.

induced by enhanced ‘tonic BCR signaling’, that is, BCR signaling generated in the absence of antigen stimulation, as a result of the loss of negative regulation.

Regulation of inhibitory signaling of CD22 and CD72 by ligand binding

Recently, interesting new results have been found concerning the ligand-binding functions of CD22 and CD72. The Siglec CD22 binds with its N-terminal V-set Ig domain specifically to Neu5Aca2–6Galβ1–4Glc(NAc) or α2–6-linked sialic acid (2,6Sia) [34,35], a common structure on N-linked glycans. This structure is abundantly expressed on the surface of many cells but is also present on soluble plasma proteins such as haptoglobin or IgM [36–38]. The affinity of CD22 for sialic acid is very low (10⁻⁴M) and does not differ greatly for several sialylated proteins or even for a 2,6Sia-carrying polyacrylamide [39]. This suggests that it is only the presence and density of the carbohydrate, but not the protein backbone, that determines binding. It is now evident that CD22 is bound to ligands *in cis*, that is, to ligands on the same cellular surface, on the majority of B cells [40–42]. Ligand binding was previously proposed to inactivate signal inhibition by CD22 [43]. However, this model was questioned by the recent findings demonstrating that destroying ligand interactions abrogates both tyrosine phosphorylation of CD22 and CD22-mediated signal inhibition. In one approach, a CD22 protein with a mutated 2,6Sia-binding domain was expressed in a B-cell line [44]; in another approach, a CD22-specific sialic acid analog, which inhibits ligand binding with high affinity, was used [45]. In both cases, CD22 was less tyrosine phosphorylated, recruited less SHP-1 protein and the Ca²⁺ mobilization was increased after BCR stimulation. Thus, ligand binding *in cis* is involved in both CD22 tyrosine phosphorylation and signal inhibition. Various membrane glycoproteins, including BCR and CD45, which dephosphorylates and activates Lyn, contain 2,6Sia. CD22 might thus recognize 2,6Sia on BCR or CD45 on the same plasma membrane, so that CD22 is placed in close vicinity to Lyn, activated by BCR ligation (Figure 2).

A recent report demonstrated that ligand interactions of CD22 *in trans* can also control BCR signaling by regulating CD22 activation. This study showed that B-cell activation by antigen displayed on the surface of a target cell was depressed if the target cell coexpressed 2,6Sia [46]. An interpretation of this is that interaction with the cells that coexpress antigens and 2,6Sia induces coligation of BCR with CD22, leading to enhanced phosphorylation of CD22 and augmented recruitment of SHP-1 to the BCR. As suggested by Lanoue *et al.*, the CD22–2,6Sia trans interaction could be physiologically relevant for dampening the B-cell response to self-antigens displayed on the neighboring cell [46], whereas microorganisms do usually not express sialic acid on their surface [47] (Figure 2).

The ligand interaction of CD22 *in trans* was also demonstrated between recirculating B cells and endothelium in bone marrow sinusoids. The endothelium of bone marrow sinusoids is unique in expressing 2,6Sia constitutively on the surface [48]. This ligand expression has been directly implicated in bone marrow homing of

contains a C-type lectin-like domain in the extracellular part, although it is not yet clear whether CD72 carries lectin activity. CD72 contains an ITIM and an ITIM-like sequence in the cytoplasmic part, and negatively regulates BCR signaling [23–25]. Upon BCR ligation, CD72 is phosphorylated by BCR-associated kinases probably because CD72 associates with the BCR either directly or indirectly. The ITIM and the ITIM-like sequence in the cytoplasmic region are substrates of Lyn, at least *in vitro* [23]. The phosphorylated ITIM-like sequence associates with Grb2 but not with SH2-containing phosphatases [26], although the functional significance of Grb2 binding is not yet clear. By contrast, the phosphorylated ITIM in CD72 recruits SHP-1, leading to downmodulation of BCR signaling by dephosphorylating various signaling molecules activated by BCR ligation (Figure 1) [23–25,27,28]. Although B-cell development in CD72-deficient mice is largely unaffected, B cells from CD72-deficient mice are hyperreactive and show enhanced Ca²⁺ mobilization after BCR ligation [29], further supporting the negative regulatory role of CD72. All of these functional features of CD72 are shared with CD22. In the presence of CD22, CD72 therefore has a redundant role in the negative regulation of BCR signaling. However, CD72 does not associate with the binding partners of CD22, other than SHP-1 and Grb2. This might cause minor functional differences between CD22 and CD72. Indeed, CD72-deficient mice show small alterations in B-cell populations in the spleen that are distinct from those of CD22-deficient mice (Table 1).

Treatment of B cells with anti-CD72 antibody promotes the survival and proliferation of BCR-ligated B cells [30,31]. This stimulatory effect of anti-CD72 antibody does not appear to be due to a positive signaling role of CD72. Rather, anti-CD72 antibody stimulates B cells by abrogating the inhibitory function of CD72 on BCR signaling, because anti-CD72 antibody blocks both BCR ligation-induced phosphorylation of CD72 and its recruitment of SHP-1 required for signal inhibition [32]. Although treatment with anti-CD72 antibody alone induces phosphorylation of CD19 and PLCγ2 [33], this is not sufficient to prove a positive signaling function of CD72 independent of the BCR. Phosphorylation of CD19 and PLCγ2 could be

www.sciencedirect.com

Other cell

Self-antigen

IgM

CD22
(c)

B cell

SHP-1

α2,6 linked sialic acid

CD22
(a)
(b)

CD45

Lyn

Ptase 1

B cell

TRENDS in Immunology

Figure 2. Model for the regulation of CD22 inhibition by ligand binding. CD22 can undergo *cis* and *trans* interactions with its ligand α2–6-linked sialic acid (shown as blue circles). Most CD22 is bound ('masked') by endogenous ligands *in cis*. Ligand binding *in cis* increases tyrosine phosphorylation and tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 recruitment to CD22. Possible ligands *in cis* are sialylated membrane-bound IgM (a) and CD45 (b). CD45 is known to activate Lyn, the tyrosine kinase responsible for phosphorylation of CD22. *Trans* interactions might be important, if the B-cell receptor (BCR) binds to self-antigens on other cells. In this case, additional CD22 could be recruited into the cellular contact zone (c), resulting in a stronger inhibition of the BCR signal. Abbreviations: Ptase 1; phosphatase 1 domain; SHP-1, Src-homology domain 2 (SH2)-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase-1.

recirculating B cells, which are strongly depleted in the bone marrow of CD22⁻/⁻ mice (Table 1). For such an interaction, CD22 ligands *in trans* would have to compete with ligands *in cis*, on the B cell surface. The homing might be possible because the bone marrow contains an enriched population of B cells in which CD22 is not bound by *cis*-ligands [49].

The ligand for CD72 was initially suggested to be CD5, as anti-CD72 antibody blocked the binding of a fusion protein containing CD5 to B cells [50]. However, later studies questioned this observation. Recently, Shi *et al.* and Kumanogoh *et al.* demonstrated that CD100, a membrane-bound semaphorin, is the ligand for CD72 [51,52]. Various members of the semaphorin family are expressed in the neuronal system, and have crucial functions, including axon repulsion. By contrast, some semaphorins, including CD100, are expressed in immune cells. CD100 is expressed abundantly in T cells, activated B cells and activated antigen-presenting cells, including dendritic cells, whereas resting B cells and antigen-presenting cells weakly express CD100 [52,53]. Moreover, soluble CD100 is released from the cell surface by proteolysis [54]. Interaction with CD100, either in a membrane-bound form or in a soluble form, reduces both phosphorylation of CD72 and its recruitment of SHP-1 [51,52], as is the case for anti-CD72 antibody, suggesting that CD100 positively regulates B-cell activation by abrogating signal inhibition by CD72 (Figure 3b).

In B cells from CD100-deficient mice and cell lines that do not express CD100, CD72 is constitutively phosphorylated. However, antigen stimulation markedly enhances both phosphorylation of CD72 and its recruitment of SHP-1, not only in CD100-expressing cells but also in those lacking CD100 expression, such as BCR-expressing myeloma cells (Adachi *et al.* unpublished). Thus, regardless of the presence or absence of CD100, signal inhibition by CD72 appears to be triggered by its phosphorylation induced by BCR ligation, as is the case for CD22-mediated signal inhibition. Although phosphorylation of CD72 upon BCR ligation might be due to an association between BCR and CD72, it is not yet known how CD72 associates with BCR. Although dectin-1 contains a C-type lectin domain that lacks the conserved residues involved in binding to

Review TREND$ in Immunology Vol. 25 No. 10 October 2004 547

(a)                                                                 (b)

Antigen                                                                 e.g. T cells

CD72                                                                    CD22

IgM                                                                     IgM

B cell                                                                  Anti-Ig Ab

Anti-CD72Ab                                                             Anti-Ig Ab

Lyn                                                                     Lyn

P-Y Y-P                                                                 P-Y Y-P

Syk                                                                     Syk

P-Y Y-P                                                                 P-Y Y-P

SHP-1                                                                   SHP-1

Y ITIM                                                                  C SH2

Figure 3. Signal inhibition by coreceptors depends on the B-cell receptor (BCR) agonist. Although antigen stimulation induces phosphorylation of CD22 and CD72 and signal inhibition by these coreceptors (a), BCR ligation by anti-Ig antibodies phosphorylates these coreceptors and activates signal inhibition only weakly, probably because anti-Ig antibodies that bind to the membrane-proximal domain of BCR disrupt the interaction between BCR and coreceptors (b). Both anti-CD72 antibodies and CD100, a ligand for CD72, either in cell-bound or soluble form, reduce CD72 phosphorylation, probably due to disruption of CD72-BCR interactions (b). This leads to reduced signal inhibition. Abbreviations: ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif; ITIM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motif; SHP-1, Src-homology domain 2 (SH2)-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase-1.

Ca²⁺ and carbohydrates, as is also the case with CD72, it can nevertheless bind to β-glucans [55]. Thus, CD72 might recognize sugar chains on either BCR or its associated molecules. Alternatively, it could be possible that CD72 associates with BCR through protein-protein interactions on the plasma membrane. Probably by disrupting the interaction between CD72 and BCR, anti-CD72 antibody and CD100 blocks CD72-mediated signal inhibition in B cells.

Signal inhibition by CD22 and CD72 depends on BCR agonists and regulates B-cell fate

In normal individuals, antigen specificity of BCR is highly diverse among B cells. Antigen specificity of the BCR is not known in most of the B cell lines. Therefore, anti-Ig antibodies but not antigens are often used as BCR agonists. It is assumed that the anti-Ig antibody gives rise to BCR signaling similar to that generated by antigens. However, Hokazono et al. demonstrated a significant difference between signaling generated by anti-Ig antibody and that by antigens, especially in the activation of CD22 and CD72, and in the fate of BCR-ligated B cells [32]. BCR ligation by antigens induces strong phosphorylation of both CD22 and CD72 and their efficient recruitment of SHP-1, whereas stimulation with anti-Ig antibody induced rather enhanced ERK activation but only weak phosphorylation of both CD22 and CD72 (Figure 3). This suggests that the inhibitory signaling function of CD22 and CD72 is efficiently activated by antigen stimulation but not by anti-Ig antibody. Antigens bind to the membrane-distal domain of the BCR, that is, the variable region of membrane-bound Ig, whereas anti-Ig antibodies mostly bind to the membrane-proximal domain of the BCR. Because CD22 is suggested to associate with the BCR through an interaction with its extracellular lectin domain, antibody binding to the membrane-proximal domain of the BCR might physically perturb the interaction between CD22 and the BCR, thereby keeping away ITIMs of CD22 from BCR-associated kinase Lyn. Although it is not yet known how CD72 interacts with the BCR, this could occur via the extracellular domain of the BCR, and this interaction might be hindered by anti-Ig antibody.

The fate of antigen-stimulated B cells is distinct from anti-Ig-treated B cells, at least in vitro. Hapten-reactive B cells can be stimulated with various antigens of different size, epitope density and affinity by coupling the hapten or hapten derivatives to various carrier proteins.

Stimulation of hapten-specific B cells with various antigens results in apoptosis but not proliferation, whereas anti-Ig antibody induces proliferation without apoptosis. Anti-Ig-stimulated B cells undergo apoptosis with much reduced proliferation when CD22 and CD72 are activated by coligating these molecules to BCR [32]. This finding clearly demonstrates that reduced activation of CD22 and CD72 is responsible for survival and proliferation of anti-Ig-stimulated B cells. Under the conditions in which CD22 and CD72 are activated, BCR-ligated B cells can survive and proliferate in the copresence of CD40 signaling. Thus, CD22 and CD72 function as molecular switches that change the fate of BCR-ligated B cells from proliferation to apoptosis, and create the requirement for co-stimulation for proliferation. However, these functions have not yet been proven by studies using mice deficient either in CD22 or CD72, probably because these molecules are redundant in the presence of each other.

Regulation of BCR signaling by CD22 depends on the BCR isotype

There are five isotypes of Ig, which are IgM, IgG, IgA, IgE and IgD. These different antibody isotypes carry distinct functions. The five different isotypes of membrane-bound Ig serve as components of BCRs, indicating that B cells producing different antibody isotypes express distinct BCRs. However, different isotypes of membrane-bound Ig associate with the Igα/Igβ heterodimer, the signaling component of the BCR [56] and, upon BCR ligation, activate the same cytoplasmic signaling molecules through Igα/Igβ. As a result of this finding, isotype-specific BCR signaling was not addressed until recently. Distinct signaling through IgG-BCR was first realized by the finding that IgG transgenic mice show distinct phenotypes in B-cell maturation compared with mice transgenic for IgM or IgD [57, 58]. More recently, Martin et al. demonstrated that IgG-positive B cells show enhanced clonal expansion upon antigen stimulation in vivo compared with IgM-positive B cells [59]. CD22 appears to be involved in isotype-specific BCR signaling. CD22 is not phosphorylated upon ligation of membrane-bound IgG by antigens, and does not inhibit signaling through IgG, whereas CD22 negatively regulates signaling through IgM or IgD. By contrast, CD72 regulates signaling regardless of Ig isotypes [60] (Figure 4). This has been deduced from experiments mostly carried out in B cell lines, and still awaits confirmation by in vivo studies. Nonetheless, these findings suggest that CD22-mediated signal inhibition is lost when naïve IgM⁺IgD⁺B cells undergo class switching to IgG. In the absence of CD22-mediated signal inhibition, IgG-expressing B cells might vigorously expand upon antigen stimulation.

Whereas IgM and IgD contain only three amino acid residues in the cytoplasmic domain, IgG contains 28 amino acids in its cytoplasmic tail. The amino acid sequence of the IgG tail is conserved among IgG subtypes and between human and mouse [61], suggesting a crucial role. Indeed, Kaisho et al. generated mutant mice in which the cytoplasmic tail of IgG1 was truncated, and demonstrated a marked reduction in IgG1 production in these mice upon immunization [62]. Martin et al. [59]

Wakabayashi et al. [60] looked at the role of the IgG tail in distinct IgG–BCR signaling using B cells expressing the IgM/G chimera containing the extracellular domain of IgM and cytoplasmic tail of IgG, and those expressing the IgG/M chimera containing the extracellular domain of IgG and cytoplasmic tail of IgM. The cytoplasmic tail of IgG is required and sufficient for both suppressing CD22 phosphorylation, which is crucial for signal inhibition, and augmenting IgG response. The IgG tail might enhance the IgG response by silencing CD22-mediated signal inhibition. During primary immune responses, the production of a small amount of IgM is followed by vigorous IgG production. In the secondary response, following the primary response or vaccination, a large amount of specific IgG is rapidly produced. This rapid IgG production has a crucial role in protective immunity generated by natural infection or vaccination. Turning off CD22-mediated signal inhibition during Ig class switching might have a crucial role in host defense through vigorous IgG production in both late primary and secondary responses.

Conclusion

The inhibitory coreceptors CD22 and CD72 control BCR signaling strength and determine the fate of the B cells. New evidence shows that the inhibition of BCR signaling is regulated by various molecular interactions on the B-cell surface. For CD22, binding to the ligand 2,6Sia on the same plasma membrane has been shown to regulate its tyrosine phosphorylation by the BCR-associated kinase Lyn, and the degree of CD22-mediated signal inhibition. This finding suggests that CD22 recognizes 2,6Sia expressed on the membrane molecules involved in activation of Lyn, such as BCR itself and CD45. In the case of CD72, binding of its ligand CD100 and anti-CD72 antibody reduces signal inhibition, probably by disrupting the interaction between CD72 and BCR. It has been clearly shown that the activation of the coreceptors depends on the nature of the BCR agonists, that is, antigen versus anti-Ig antibodies. Anti-Ig antibody does not efficiently activate coreceptor-mediated signal inhibition, probably as a result of disrupting the BCR-coreceptor interaction on the B-cell surface. Finally, signal inhibition by CD22 depends on the BCR isotype. CD22 did not inhibit signals induced by membrane-bound IgG. BCR signal regulation by both CD22 and CD72 thus appears to be regulated by dynamic molecular interactions on the B-cell surface.

Open questions remain about the molecular interactions of both CD22 and CD72 which need to be addressed in the future. For CD22, it is important to determine the crucial sialylated glycoprotein ligand on the B-cell surface to understand the sugar-dependent regulation of the Ca²⁺ response. For CD72, future experiments should address the molecular interaction with the BCR in more detail. It would also be interesting to investigate how the function of CD22 and CD72 as molecular switches, determining survival or death, contribute to normal immune versus autoimmune responses. Moreover, Ig isotype-specific regulation by CD22 also needs to be

Review TREND$ in Immunology Vol.25 No.10 October 2004 549

Figure 4. Regulation of B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling by CD22 depends on the BCR isotype. Although CD22 negatively regulates signaling through membrane-bound IgM, ligation of membrane-bound IgG induces CD22 phosphorylation and CD22-mediated signal inhibition only weakly. This causes augmented signaling through membrane-bound IgG. The cytoplasmic tail of IgG perturbs phosphorylation of CD22, possibly by removing CD22 from the BCR. By contrast, CD72 regulates both signaling through membrane-bound IgM and IgG equally. Abbreviations: ITAM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif; ITIM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motif; SHP-1, Src-homology domain 2 (SH2)-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase-1.

studied further *in vivo*, to elucidate its role in efficient antibody production in memory responses.

Acknowledgements

We thank both current and previous members of the authors' laboratories, and colleagues who have contributed to the results reviewed here. This work is supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and Wilhelm-Sanderstiftung (L.N.); the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sport, Science and Technology of Japan and the Nakatomi Foundation (T.T.).

References

1 Ravetch, J.V. and Lanier, L.L. (2000) Immune inhibitory receptors. Science 290, 84–89
2 Doody, G.M. *et al.* (1995) A role in B cell activation for CD22 and the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP. Science 269, 242–244
3 Leprince, C. *et al.* (1993) CD22 associates with the human surface IgM-B-cell antigen receptor complex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 90, 3236–3240
4 Peaker, C.J. and Neuberger, M.S. (1993) Association of CD22 with the B cell antigen receptor. Eur. J. Immunol. 23, 1358–1363
5 Smith, K.G.C. *et al.* (1998) Inhibition of the B cell by CD22: a requirement for Lyn. J. Exp. Med. 187, 807–811
6 Chan, V.W. *et al.* (1998) Defective negative regulation of antigen receptor signaling in Lyn-deficient B lymphocytes. Curr. Biol. 8, 545–553

www.sciencedirect.com

7 Nitschke, L. *et al.* (1997) CD22 is a negative regulator of B-cell receptor signalling. Curr. Biol. 7, 133–143
8 O’Keefe, T.L. *et al.* (1996) Hyperresponsive B cells in CD22-deficient mice. Science 274, 798–801
9 Otipoby, K.L. *et al.* (1996) CD22 regulates thymus-independent responses and the lifespan of B cells. Nature 384, 634–637
10 Sato, S. *et al.* (1996) CD22 is both a positive and negative regulator of B lymphocyte antigen receptor signal transduction: altered signaling in CD22-deficient mice. Immunity 5, 551–562
11 Sato, S. *et al.* (1997) CD19 and CD22 expression reciprocally regulates tyrosine phosphorylation of Vav protein during B lymphocyte signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94, 13158–13162
12 Fujimoto, M. *et al.* (1999) Modulation of B lymphocyte antigen receptor signal transduction by a CD19/CD22 regulatory loop. Immunity 11, 191–200
13 Gerlach, J. *et al.* (2003) B cell defects in SLP 65/BLNK-deficient mice can be partially corrected by the absence of CD22, an inhibitory coreceptor for BCR signaling. Eur. J. Immunol. 33, 3418–3426
14 Chen, J. *et al.* (2004) CD22 attenuates calcium signaling by potentiating plasma membrane calcium-ATPase activity. Nat. Immunol. 5, 651–657
15 Law, C.L. *et al.* (1996) CD22 associates with protein tyrosine phosphatase 1C, Syk, and phospholipase C-gamma(1) upon B cell activation. J. Exp. Med. 183, 547–560
16 Yohannan, J. *et al.* (1999) Analysis of tyrosine phosphorylation-dependent interactions between stimulatory effector proteins and the B cell co-receptor CD22. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 18769–18776
17 Poe, J.C. *et al.* (2000) CD22 forms a quaternary complex with SHIP, Grb2, and Shc. A pathway for regulation of B lymphocyte antigen receptor-induced calcium flux. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 17420–17427
18 O’Keefe, T.L. *et al.* (1999) Deficiency in CD22, a B cell-specific inhibitory receptor, is sufficient to predispose to development of high affinity autoantibodies. J. Exp. Med. 189, 1307–1313
19 Samardzic, T. *et al.* (2002) Reduction of marginal zone B cells in CD22-deficient mice. Eur. J. Immunol. 32, 561–567
20 Otipoby, K.L. *et al.* (2001) CD22 regulates B cell receptor-mediated signals via two domains that independently recruit Grb2 and SHP-1. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 44315–44322
21 Liu, Q. *et al.* (1998) The inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatase ship is a crucial negative regulator of B cell antigen receptor signaling. J. Exp. Med. 188, 1333–1342
22 Brauweiler, A. *et al.* (2000) Differential regulation of B cell development, activation, and death by the src homology 2 domain-containing 5′ inositol phosphatase (SHIP). J. Exp. Med. 191, 1545–1554
23 Adachi, T. *et al.* (1998) The B cell surface protein CD72 recruits the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 upon tyrosine phosphorylation. J. Immunol. 160, 4662–4665
24 Adachi, T. *et al.* (2000) CD72 negatively regulates signaling through the antigen receptor of B cells. J. Immunol. 164, 1223–1229
25 Wu, Y. *et al.* (1998) The B-cell transmembrane protein CD72 binds to and is an *in vivo* substrate of the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1. Curr. Biol. 8, 1009–1017
26 Fusaki, N. *et al.* (2000) BLNK is associated with the CD72/SHP-1/Grb2 complex in the WEHI 231 cell line after membrane IgM cross-linking. Eur. J. Immunol. 30, 1326–1330
27 Adachi, T. *et al.* (2001) SHP-1 requires inhibitory co-receptors to down-modulate B cell antigen receptor-mediated phosphorylation of cellular substrates. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 26648–26655
28 Mizuno, K. *et al.* (2000) Src homology region 2 (SH2) domain-containing phosphatase-1 dephosphorylates B cell linker protein/SH2 domain leukocyte protein of 65 kDa and selectively regulates c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase activation in B cells. J. Immunol. 165, 1344–1351
29 Pan, C. *et al.* (1999) CD72-deficient mice reveal nonredundant roles of CD72 in B cell development and activation. Immunity 11, 495–506
30 Subbarao, B. and Mosier, D.E. (1984) Activation of B lymphocytes by monovalent anti-Lyb-2 antibodies. J. Exp. Med. 159, 1796–1801
31 Nomura, T. *et al.* (1996) Antigen receptor-mediated B cell death is blocked by signaling via CD72 or treatment with dextran sulfate and is defective in autoimmunity-prone mice. Int. Immunol. 8, 867–875
32 Hokazono, Y. *et al.* (2003) Inhibitory co-receptors activated by antigens but not by anti-immunoglobulin heavy chain antibodies install requirement of co-stimulation through CD40 for survival and proliferation of B cells. J. Immunol. 171, 1835–1843

33 Venkataraman, C. *et al.* (1998) CD72-mediated B cell activation involves recruitment of CD19 and activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 28, 3003–3016

34 Powell, L.D. *et al.* (1995) Characterization of sialyloligosaccharide binding by recombinant soluble and native cell-associated CD22. Evidence for a minimal structural recognition motif and the potential importance of multisite binding. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 7523–7532

35 Kelm, S. *et al.* (1994) Sialoadhesin, myelin-associated glycoprotein and CD22 define a new family of sialic acid-dependent adhesion molecules of the immunoglobulin superfamily. *Curr. Biol.* 4, 965–972

36 Engel, P. *et al.* (1993) The same epitope on CD22 of B lymphocytes mediates the adhesion of erythrocytes, T and B lymphocytes, neutrophils, and monocytes. *J. Immunol.* 150, 4719–4732

37 Hanasaki, K. *et al.* (1995) CD22-mediated cell adhesion to cytokine-activated human endothelial cells. Positive and negative regulation by alpha 2-6-sialylation of cellular glycoproteins. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 7533–7542

38 Hanasaki, K. *et al.* (1995) Binding of human plasma sialoglycoproteins by the B cell-specific lectin CD22. Selective recognition of immunoglobulin M and haptoglobin. *J. Biol. Chem.* 270, 7543–7550

39 Bakker, T.R. *et al.* (2002) Comparison of CD22 binding to native CD45 and synthetic oligosaccharide. *Eur. J. Immunol.* 32, 1924–1932

40 Razi, N. and Varki, A. (1998) Masking and unmasking of the sialic acid-binding lectin activity of CD22 (Siglec-2) on B lymphocytes. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.* 95, 7469–7474

41 Collins, B.E. *et al.* (2002) Constitutively unmasked CD22 on B cells of ST6Gal I knockout mice: novel sialoside probe for murine CD22. *Glycobiology* 12, 563–571

42 Danzer, C.P. *et al.* (2003) Transitional and marginal zone B cells have a high proportion of unmasked CD22: implications for BCR signaling. *Int. Immunol.* 15, 1137–1147

43 Cyster, J.G. and Goodnow, C.C. (1997) Tuning antigen receptor signaling by CD22: integrating cues from antigens and the microenvironment. *Immunity* 6, 509–517

44 Jin, L. *et al.* (2002) Sialic acid binding domains of CD22 are required for negative regulation of B cell receptor signaling. *J. Exp. Med.* 195, 1199–1205

45 Kelm, S. *et al.* (2002) The ligand-binding domain of CD22 is needed for inhibition of the B cell receptor signal, as demonstrated by a novel human CD22-specific inhibitor compound. *J. Exp. Med.* 195, 1207–1213

46 Lanoue, A. *et al.* (2002) Interaction of CD22 with alpha 2,6-linked sialoglycoconjugates: innate recognition of self to dampen B cell autoreactivity? *Eur. J. Immunol.* 32, 348–355

47 Crocker, P.R. and Varki, A. (2001) Siglecs, sialic acids and innate immunity. *Trends Immunol.* 22, 337–342

48 Nitschke, L. *et al.* (1999) Identification of CD22 ligands on bone marrow sinusoidal endothelium implicated in CD22-dependent homing of recirculating B cells. *J. Exp. Med.* 189, 1513–1518

49 Floyd, H. *et al.* (2000) A novel subset of murine B cells that expresses unmasked forms of CD22 is enriched in the bone marrow: implications for B-cell homing to the bone marrow. *Immunology* 101, 342–347

50 Van de Velde, H. *et al.* (1991) The B-cell surface protein CD72/Lyb-2 is the ligand for CD5. *Nature* 351, 662–665

51 Shi, W. *et al.* (2000) The class IV semaphorin CD100 plays nonredundant roles in the immune system: defective B and T cell activation in CD100-deficient mice. *Immunity* 13, 633–642

52 Kumanogoh, A. *et al.* (2000) Identification of CD72 as a lymphocyte receptor for the class IV semaphorin CD100: a novel mechanism for regulating B cell signaling. *Immunity* 13, 621–631

53 Delaire, S. *et al.* (1998) CD100 is a leukocyte semaphorin. *Cell. Mol. Life Sci.* 54, 1265–1276

54 Elhabazi, A. *et al.* (2001) Biological activity of soluble CD100. I. The extracellular region of CD100 is released from the surface of T lymphocytes by regulated proteolysis. *J. Immunol.* 166, 4341–4347

55 Brown, G.D. and Gordon, S. (2001) Immune recognition. A new receptor for beta-glucans. *Nature* 413, 36–37

56 Venkitaraman, A.R. *et al.* (1991) The B-cell antigen receptor of the five immunoglobulin classes. *Nature* 352, 777–781

57 Kurtz, B.S. *et al.* (1997) Gamma 2b provides only some of the signals normally given via mu in B cell development. *Int. Immunol.* 9, 415–426

58 Pogue, S.L. and Goodnow, C.C. (2000) Gene dose-dependent maturation and receptor editing of B cells expressing immunoglobulin (Ig) G1 or IgM/IgG1 tail antigen receptors. *J. Exp. Med.* 191, 1031–1044

59 Martin, S.W. and Goodnow, C.C. (2002) Burst-enhancing role of the IgG membrane tail as a molecular determinant of memory. *Nat. Immunol.* 3, 182–188

60 Wakabayashi, C. *et al.* (2002) A distinct signaling pathway used by the IgG-containing B cell antigen receptor. *Science* 298, 2392–2395

61 Reth, M. (1992) Antigen receptors on B lymphocytes. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 10, 97–121

62 Kaisho, T. *et al.* (1997) The roles of gamma 1 heavy chain membrane expression and cytoplasmic tail in IgG1 responses. *Science* 276, 412–415

---

**Forthcoming conference**

**British Society for Immunology**

Harrogate, UK – 7–10 December 2004  
http://immunology.org/Congress/Progme.htm  

Plenary session: Presentation & cross presentation of antigen  

Sessions include: Respiratory pathogens & vaccination strategies; Macrophages: polarisation during immune responses and tissue damage; Signalling in inflammatory immune cells: cell surfaces to nucleus; Viral & tumour recognition by NK cells; Mechanisms of allergic disease; Observing immunity: implications for rational vaccine design; Liver immunology; Immune regulation; Heat shock proteins & immunity; Primary immunodeficiency: fundamental insights from human disease; Host pathogen interactions: opportunities for immune suppression versus immunopathology; Signalling mechanisms underlying development and function of the immune response; Novel roles of complement regulators & receptors; Memory; Aging & the immune system *in vivo*; Chemokine receptors: friend or foe?; The immunobiology of sepsis; Clinical immunology of psoriasis; Good practise in undergraduate education
