
Molecular Microbiology (2004) 53(5), 1423–1436

doi:10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04210.x

# MexAB-OprM hyperexpression in NalC-type multidrug-resistant *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: identification and characterization of the *nalC* gene encoding a repressor of PA3720-PA3719

Lily Cao, Ramakrishnan Srikumar and Keith Poole*
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada, K7L 3N6.

## Summary

MexAB-OprM is a multidrug efflux system that contributes to intrinsic and acquired multidrug resistance in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*, the latter as a result of mutational hyperexpression of the *mexAB-oprM* operon. While efflux gene hyperexpression typically results from mutations in the linked *mexR* repressor gene, it also occurs independently of *mexR* mutations in so-called *nalC* mutants that demonstrate more modest *mexAB-oprM* expression and, thus, more modest multidrug resistance than do *mexR* strains. Using a transposon insertion mutagenesis approach, *nalC* mutant strains were selected and the disrupted gene, PA3721, identified. Amplification and sequencing of this gene from previously isolated spontaneous *nalC* mutants revealed the presence of mutations in all instances and as such, PA3721 has been renamed *nalC*. PA3721 (*nalC*) encodes a probable repressor of the TetR/AcrR family and occurs upstream of an apparent two-gene operon, PA3720–PA3719, whose expression was negatively regulated by PA3721. Thus, PA3720-PA3719 was hyperexpressed in transposon insertion and spontaneous *nalC* mutants. The loss of PA3719 but not of PA3720 expression in a spontaneous *nalC* mutant reduced MexAB-OprM expression to wild-type levels and compromised multidrug resistance, an indication that hyperexpression of PA3719 only was necessary for the *nalC* phenotype. Introduction of PA3719 into wild-type *P. aeruginosa* on a multicopy plasmid was, in fact, sufficient to promote elevated MexAB-OprM expression and multidrug resistance characteristic of a *nalC* strain. Thus, the *nalC* (PA3721) mutation serves only to enhance PA3720-PA3719 expression, with expression of PA3719 (encodes a 53 amino acid protein of predicted

pl 10.4) directly or indirectly impacting MexAB-OprM expression. Intriguingly, *nalC* strains produce markedly elevated levels of stable MexR protein suggesting that PA3720-PA3719 hyperexpression somehow modulates MexR repressor activity. The deduced products of PA3720-PA3719 show no homology to sequences presently in the GenBank databases, however, and as such provide no clues as to how this might occur.

## Introduction

*Pseudomonas aeruginosa* is an opportunistic human pathogen characterized by an innate resistance to multiple antimicrobials (Hancock and Speert, 2000). Historically attributed to the presence in this organism of an outer membrane of low permeability (Nikaido, 1989), it is increasingly clear that resistance owes much to the operation of the broadly specific, so-called multidrug efflux systems (Poole, 2001a,b; 2002; 2004; Poole and Srikumar, 2001) that work synergistically with limited outer membrane permeability (Germ et al., 1999; Li et al., 2000; Poole, 2002). Seven multidrug efflux systems have been described to date in *P. aeruginosa* including MexAB-OprM (Poole et al., 1993a,b; Gotoh et al., 1995; Li et al., 1995), MexCD-OprJ (Poole et al., 1996a), MexEF-OprN (Köhler et al., 1997), MexXY-OprM (Aires et al., 1999; Mine et al., 1999; Westbrock-Wadman et al., 1999), MexJK-OprM (Chuanchuen et al., 2002) and most recently MexHI-OpmD (Aendekerk et al., 2002; Sekiya et al., 2003) and MexVW-OprM (Li et al., 2003). Only MexAB-OprM (Poole et al., 1993b; Li et al., 1995; Köhler et al., 1996; Srikumar et al., 1997; Li et al., 1998a; Li et al., 2003a) and MexXY-OprM (Aires et al., 1999) contribute to intrinsic multidrug resistance, however, owing to constitutive (MexAB-OprM) and antibiotic inducible (MexXY-OprM) (Masuda et al., 2000a) efflux gene expression in wild-type cells. Antibiotic resistance provided by the remaining systems is typically reliant on mutations, often within regulatory genes, leading to efflux gene hyperexpression (Masuda et al., 1995; Poole et al., 1996a; Köhler et al., 1997; Chuanchuen et al., 2002).

These tripartite efflux systems consist of a cytoplasmic membrane drug–proton antiporter of the resistance–

Accepted 15 April, 2004. *For correspondence.* E-mail poolek@post.queensu.ca; Tel. 613-533-6677; Fax 613-533-6796.

© 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

1424 L. Cao, R. Srikumar and K. Poole

nodulation–cell division (RND) family of efflux transporters (MexB, MexD, MexF, MexY, MexK) that typically operate in conjunction with outer membrane channel-forming components (the so-called outer membrane factors (OMFs)) (OprM, OprJ, OprN) and periplasmic membrane fusion proteins (MFPs) (MexA, MexC, MexE, MexX, MexJ) (Zgurskaya and Nikaido, 2000; Poole, 2001a, b; Poole and Srikumar, 2001; Zgurskaya, 2002). Apparently, the RND and OMF components associate *in vivo* to form an export pathway from the cytoplasmic membrane through the periplasm and outer membrane, with the MFP serving to facilitate the association of these components (Murakami et al., 2002).

MexAB-OprM contributes to intrinsic resistance to a number of antimicrobials including fluoroquinolones, β-lactams, tetracyclines, macrolides, chloramphenicol, novobiocin, lincomycin, trimethoprim, sulphonamides and the recently described glycylcycline, tigecycline (Köhler et al., 1996; Srikumar et al., 1997; Li et al., 1998a; Masuda et al., 2000b; Dean et al., 2003). The systems are also hyperexpressed in *in vitro*-selected (Rella and Haas, 1982; Masuda and Ohya, 1992; Masuda et al., 1995; Köhler et al., 1996; Poole et al., 1996b) and clinical (Pidock et al., 1992; Jalal and Wretlind, 1998; Jalal et al., 1999; 2000; Ziha-Zarifi et al., 1999; Cavallo et al., 2002; Higgins et al., 2003) *nalB* mutants, which are highly resistant to these agents. In addition to medically relevant antimicrobials, MexAB-OprM also exports a variety of dyes and detergents (Srikumar et al., 1997; Srikumar and Poole, 1999; Li et al., 2003a), inhibitors of fatty acid biosynthesis (Schweizer, 1998), organic solvents (Li et al., 1998b; Li and Poole, 1999), homoserine lactones associated with quorum sensing (Evans et al., 1998; Pearson et al., 1999) and, possibly, virulence factor(s) (Hirakata et al., 2002). Despite the contribution to intrinsic and acquired resistance to clinically relevant antimicrobials, it is far from clear that this is the intended function for MexAB-OprM or, indeed, the other RND–MFP–OMF-type multidrug transporters in *P. aeruginosa*. Given the broad substrate range of these systems (which includes non-antimicrobials), their multiplicity and overlapping substrate specificities, and the fact that these systems are each regulated by distinct regulatory genes linked to individual efflux operons, it seems more likely that each has a unique function in *P. aeruginosa* that is independent of their common contribution to antimicrobial resistance.

The regulatory gene that occurs upstream of *mexAB-oprM* is *mexR* (Poole et al., 1996b), which encodes a repressor of the efflux genes (Poole et al., 1996b; Srikumar et al., 2000) and is the target of mutations in *nalB* multidrug resistant mutants (Poole et al., 1996b; Jalal and Wretlind, 1998; Saito et al., 1999; Ziha-Zarifi et al., 1999; Srikumar et al., 2000). MexR is a member of the MarR family of regulators (Miller and Sulavik, 1996) and binds as an apparent dimer (since confirmed by the MexR crystal structure (Lim et al., 2002)) to two sites in the *mexR-mexA* intragenic region, near *mexR* and overlapping promoters for *mexR* and *mexAB-oprM* (Saito et al., 2001; Adewoye et al., 2002; Sanchez et al., 2002). Expression of *mexAB-oprM* is also impacted by growth phase, though this is unrelated to MexR (Evans and Poole, 1999; Sanchez et al., 2002), and *mexAB-oprM* hyperexpression independent of mutations in *mexR* or the *mexR* and *mexAB-oprM* promoter regions has also been reported (Ziha-Zarifi et al., 1999; Srikumar et al., 2000). These latter *nalC* mutants (Srikumar et al., 2000) presumably carry mutations in one or more genes that trigger *mexAB-oprM* expression and whose identification may provide insights into the intended function of the MexAB-OprM multidrug transporter. We report here the identification of the *nalC* gene and demonstrate that *mexAB-oprM* hyperexpression in *nalC* mutants is a response to increased expression of the PA3719 gene, encoding a product of unknown function, in such mutants.

### Results

#### Isolation of transposon insertion mutants displaying the *nalC* phenotype

While multidrug resistance owing to MexAB-OprM hyperexpression in *P. aeruginosa* typically results from mutations in the *mexR* repressor gene (in so-called *nalB* mutants), some MexAB-OprM hyperexpressing strains lack mutations in this gene (Srikumar et al., 2000). To identify the mutated gene(s), then, in these so-called *nalC* mutants, an attempt was made to select for such mutants following transposon mutagenesis since this would provide a ready means of recovering and identifying the disrupted gene(s). Recognizing that the *nalC* phenotype might result from activation rather than inactivation of a gene or genes, we nonetheless generated a library of some 4000 mini-Tn5-tet insertion mutants of *P. aeruginosa* strain K870 and screened these for increased resistance to representative antibiotic substrates of MexAB-OprM at concentrations characteristic of *nalC* strains (e.g. Table 1). Forty chloramphenicol-/carbenicillin-resistant mutants were subsequently recovered and MexAB-OprM hyperexpression was confirmed in MexB immunoblots (see Fig. 1A lanes 4–7 for representative examples; cf. spontaneous *nalC* mutant, lane 2). MexB expression, though elevated relative to wild type (Fig. 1A, lane 1) in these mutants, was still less than that seen in a *nalB* mutant (see strain OCR1, Fig. 1A, lane 3) as is expected for a *nalC* strain. While *nalB* mutants often produce an unstable MexR protein, such that while *mexR* expression increases (Srikumar et al., 2000), no increase in MexR is visible (Adewoye et al., 2002); e.g. OCR1, Fig. 1B, lane

Multidrug resistant nalC mutants of P. aeruginosa 1425

Table 1. Drug susceptibility of *P. aeruginosa* strains.

| Strain$^a$ | CAR | CAM | NOV | NAL | TET |
|------------|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| K767       | 128 | 32  | 512 | 64  | 16  |
| OCR1       | 1024| 256 | >2048| 512 | 64  |
| K1454      | 512 | 128 | 2048| 256 | 32  |
| K2198$^c$  | 512 | 128 | 2048| 256 | 512$^d$ |
| K1454/pDSK519 | 512 | 128 | 2048| 256 | 32  |
| K1454/pLC1 | 128 | 32  | 512 | 64  | 16  |
| K2198/pDSK519 | 512 | 128 | 2048| 256 | 512$^d$ |
| K2198/pLC1 | 128 | 32  | 512 | 64  | 128$^d$ |
| K2220      | 128 | 32  | 512 | 64  | 16  |
| K2220/pDSK519 | 128 | 32  | 512 | 64  | 32  |
| K2220/pLC2 | 512 | 128 | 2048| 512 | 32  |
| K2276      | 128 | 32  | 512 | 64  | 16  |
| K2277      | 128 | 32  | 512 | 64  | 16  |
| K767/pDSK519 | 128 | 32  | 512 | 64  | 16  |
| K767/pLC2  | 512 | 128 | 2048| 512 | 32  |
| K767/pLC14 | 512 | 256 | 2048| 512 | 32–64 |
| K767/pLC18 | 512 | 512 | >2048| 1024| 64  |
| K767/pLC25 | 128 | 32  | 512 | 64  | 16  |
| K767/pLC19 | 256 | 128 | 2048| 256 | 32  |
| K767/pLC23 | 512 | 256 | 2048| 512 | 32  |
| K767/pLC24 | 128 | 32  | 512 | 64  | 16  |
| K2276/pDSK519 | 128 | 32  | 512 | 64  | 16  |
| K2276/pLC21 | 128 | 32  | 512 | 64  | 16  |
| K2276/pLC23 | 512 | 256 | 2048| 512 | 32  |
| K2276/pLC24 | 128 | 32  | 512 | 64  | 16  |
| K2277/pDSK519 | 128 | 32  | 512 | 64  | 16  |
| K2277/pLC23 | 256 | 128 | 2048| 256 | 32  |

a. K767, prototroph; OCR1, *nalB*; K1454 and K2198, *nalC*; K2220, K1454ΔPA3720-PA3719; K2276, K1454ΔPA3719; K2277, K1454ΔPA3720; pLC1, pDSK519::PA3721; pLC2, pDSK519::PA3720-PA3719 (including 282 bp of sequence upstream of PA3720; opposite orientation to *plac*); pLC14, pDSK519::PA3720-PA3719 (with PA3720 truncated at the 5′ end); pLC18, pDSK519::PA3720′-PA3719 (same orientations as *plac*); pLC25, same as pLC18 but opposite orientation to *plac*; pLC19, same as pLC18 but with stop codon in PA3720′; pLC21, pDSK519::PA3719 (opposite orientation to *plac*); pLC23, same as pLC21 but in same orientation as *plac*; pLC24, same as pLC23 but with a stop codon in PA3719. See Fig. 4B for a detailed description of the various pLC constructs.
b. CAR, carbenicillin; CAM, chloramphenicol; NOV, novobiocin; NAL, naladixic acid; TET, tetracycline.
c. All 39 putative *nalC* mini-Tn5-tet insertion mutants exhibited the same susceptibility profile.
d. Tetracycline MICs are elevated owing to the presence of the mini-Tn5-tet element in the chromosome of strain K2198.

Fig. 1. Western immunoblot of cell envelope (A) and soluble (B) fractions of *P. aeruginosa* strains developed with antibodies specific to MexB (A) and MexR (B). Lane 1, K767 (wild type); lane 2, K1454 (*nalC*); lane 3, OCR1 (*nalB*); lane 4, K2198; lane 5, K2200; lane 6, K2202; lane 7, K2215; lane 8, K1454 (*nalC*); lane 9, K1454/pLC1; lane 10, K1454/pDSK519; lane 11, K2198 (*nalC*::mini-Tn5-tet); lane 12, K2198/pLC1; lane 13, K2198/pDSK519. The strains shown in lanes 4–7 are representative *nalC*-type multidrug-resistant mini-Tn5-tet insertion mutants of K870. Equal loading of all wells was verified by running duplicate gels that were coomassie stained.

mutants (A and C; see Fig. 2, lanes 1 and 3). Representatives of these latter patterns were employed in the recovery of the mini-Tn5-tet disrupted gene and reengineering of the respective mutations in wild-type *P. aeruginosa*, ultimately confirming that the *nalC* phenotype was, indeed, linked to the transposon insertion in these mutants (data not shown).

Fig. 2. Southern blot of *PstI*- (A) and *SalI*- (B) restricted chromosomal DNA of representative *nalC*-type mini-Tn5-tet insertion mutants of K767 developed with a *tet* probe. Only one example each of the four hybridization patterns seen for all 39 mutants isolated is shown. Lane 1, K2198 (pattern A); lane 2, K2200 (pattern B); lane 3, K2215 (pattern C); lane 4, K2202 (pattern D). Note that patterns A–C are distinguishable solely in hybridizations of the *SalI* digest (panel B) while pattern D is distinguishable from A and B in both digests and from pattern C in the *PstI* digest (panel A).

K1454, K1459 and K1460, revealed the presence of mutations in PA3721 in all three strains. Single base pair substitutions were found in the PA3721 genes of K1454 and K1459, leading to Ser127Pro and Thr50Pro changes, respectively, in the PA3721 gene products of these strains. K1460 carries a 13 bp deletion near the 5′ end of PA3721 (ΔC₃₆-C₄₈) which effectively eliminates production of a PA3721 gene product. Introduction of the cloned PA3721 gene on plasmid pLC1 into a representative transposon insertion (K2198; PA3721 expression confirmed by RT-PCR, Fig. 3C, lane 5) and spontaneous (K1454; PA3721 expression confirmed by RT-PCR, Fig. 3C, lane 3) nalC mutant effectively reverted the nalC phenotype, reducing MexB (as a measure of MexAB-OprM) (Fig. 1A, lanes 9 and 12) and MexR (Fig. 1B, lanes 9 and 12) production and antibiotic resistance (Table 1) to wild-type levels. Clearly, then, mutations in PA3721 are responsible for MexAB-OprM hyperexpression and multidrug resistance in nalC mutants and, as such, we propose renaming PA3721 as nalC.

### NalC negatively regulates PA3720-PA3719 gene expression

The nalC (PA3721) gene occurs upstream of a divergently transcribed putative two-gene operon, PA3720-PA3719 (Fig. 4A), and is predicted to encode a 213 amino acid transcriptional regulator of the TetR/AcrR family (Aramaki *et al.*, 1995; Ma *et al.*, 1996) (23.1% identical to the 215 amino acid AcrR repressor of the *acrAB* multidrug efflux operon of *Escherichia coli*). PA3720 and PA3719 are separated by 7 bp and are expected to encode proteins of 195 and 53 amino acids with predicted pIs of 8.09 and 10.37, respectively. A BLAST search failed, however, to identify any proteins in the GenBank databases with even a modicum of similarity to the PA3720-PA3719 gene products though codon usage of both genes are characteristic of *P. aeruginosa* and they are, thus, likely to encode proteins. To assess a possible role for NalC as a repressor of this putative operon, PA3720-PA3719 expression was assessed in wild-type *P. aeruginosa* strain K767, as well as spontaneous and transposon insertion of nalC mutants. Using RT-PCR, expression of both PA3720 (Fig. 3B) and PA3719 (Fig. 3A) were shown to be low in *P. aeruginosa* K767 (lane 1) but increased markedly in spontaneous (K1454; lane 2) and mini-Tn5-tet insertion (K2198 and K2215; lanes 4 and 6) nalC mutants. Introduction of the cloned nalC gene into K1454 (Fig. 3A and B, lane 3), K2198 (Fig. 3A and B, lane 5) and K2215 (Fig. 3A and B, lane 7) on plasmid pLC1 reduced PA3720 and PA3719 message to wild-type levels, confirming the negative impact of nalC on PA3720-PA3719 expression. RT-PCR using a PA3720-forward and PA3719-reverse primer pair also confirmed that these genes were encoded

### Identification of the nalC gene

Since the majority of the nalC insertion mutants were represented by insertions at one of two sites in the *P. aeruginosa* chromosome (hybridization patterns A and C; Fig. 2), the mini-Tn5-tet element and flanking chromosomal DNA was recovered from two representatives of each and the disrupted genes subsequently identified following sequencing of the flanking DNA with a transposon-specific primer. Representatives of pattern A mini-Tn5-tet nalC mutants were disrupted within an open-reading-frame dubbed PA3721 by the Pseudomonas Genome Sequencing Project (http://www.pseudomonas.com) while pattern C mutants carried transposon insertions immediately upstream of this open-reading-frame (lack of PA3721 expression was also confirmed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), see Fig. 3C, lanes 4 and 6). Amplification and sequencing of PA3721 from three previously-described spontaneous nalC mutants,

Multidrug resistant *nalC* mutants of *P*. aeruginosa 1427

Fig. 4. Organization of the PA3720-PA3719 operon.

A. Schematic showing organization of the PA3720-PA3719 genes relative to PA3721 (i.e. *nalC*).

B. Nucleotide sequence of PA3720-PA3719 with regions cloned into plasmids and studied indicated by vertical arrows. With the exception of the last arrow following PA3719, which defines the 3'end point of all plasmid-cloned fragments described here, the arrows define the start point of individual PA3720–PA3719-bearing fragments and are labelled with the corresponding designation of the plasmid(s) carrying these fragments. Putative start codons are boxed, with the ATG of the originally annotated PA3720 indicated with a shaded box. A second, smaller PA3720 ORF that appears to be the correct PA3720', PA3720', begins 160 bp downstream of this at a boxed but unshaded ATG. Residues mutated to create TGA stop codons at codon 7 of PA3720' and codon 2 of PA3719 in plasmids pLC19 and pLC24, respectively, are bolded and the base changes highlighted below these. Stop codons and a putative Shine-Dalgarno (SD) sequence are underlined. A predicted prokaryotic promoter sequence and transcription initiation site within this (using neural network promoter prediction software provided by M.G. Reese at http://www.fruitfly.org/seq_tools/promoter.html) are italicized and bolded, respectively. Primer sequences used in RT-PCR are underlined and identified with numbers above the sequence ((1) = RT primer 3720UP1-RT; (2) = RT primer PA3720-forward; (3) = RT primer PA3720-reverse; (4) = RT primer PA3719-reverse).

C. RT-PCR results obtained using total RNA isolated from wild-type strain K767 (lanes 1, 3 and 5) and *nalC* strain K1454 (lanes 2, 4 and 6) and primer pairs (from (B)) 2 and 3 (lanes 1 and 2), 1 and 3 (lanes 3 and 4) or 2 and 4 (lanes 5 and 6). A 100 bp ladder is shown at left with the 500 bp marker highlighted.

D. Detection of proteins produced by PA3720-PA3719 cloned into the pT7-5 expression vector. *E*. coli K38 cells harbouring pLC15 (pT7-5::PA3720-PA3719) were pulse labelled with \[^{35}\]S-methionine following induction of the cloned genes and subjected to SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and autoradiography as described in Experimental Procedures. Lane 1, K38 (pT7-5); lane 2, K38 (pLC15). Molecular weight standards are shown at left and a pLC15-specific band is highlighted with an arrow.


on a polycistronic mRNA, whose production, as expected, markedly increased in *nalC* strain K1454 relative to K767 (Fig. 4C, lanes 5 and 6). Interestingly, *nalC* (PA3721) message also increases relative to wild type in a spontaneous *nalC* mutant (K1454; Fig. 3C, lane 2 cf. lane 1) indicating that *nalC* is negatively autoregulated.

Enhanced expression of PA3720-PA3719 required for multidrug resistance and MexAB-OprM hyperexpression in *nalC* mutants

Despite the increased expression of PA3720-PA3719 in *nalC* strains it was possible that the mutation in *nalC* (PA3721) directly impacted *mexAB-oprM* expression and, thus, resistance was independent of PA3720–PA3719. To assess the importance, then, of PA3720-PA3719 expression for the *nalC* phenotype, these genes were deleted from *nalC* mutant strain K1454 and the impact on MexAB-OprM and MexR production and multidrug resistance determined. As seen in Fig. 5, elimination of these genes


© 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **53**, 1423–1436

Fig. 5. Western immunoblot of cell envelope (A) and soluble (B) fractions of *P*. aeruginosa strains developed with antibodies specific to MexB (A) and MexR (B). Lane 1, K767 (wild type); lane 2, K1454 (*nalC*); lane 3, K2220 (*nalC ΔPA3720-PA3719*); lane 4, K2220/pLC2 (pDSK519::PA3720-PA3719); lane 5, K2220/pDSK519; lane 6, K767 (wild type); lane 7, K767/pLC2 (pDSK519::PA3720-PA3719); lane 8, K767/pDSK519; lane 9, K767/pDSK519; lane 10, K767/pLC18 (pDSK519::PA3720'-PA3719; same orientation as *plac*); lane 11, K767/pLC25 (pDSK519::PA3720'-PA3719; opposite orientation to *plac*); lane 12, K767/pLC19 (pDSK519::PA3720'-PA3719 with a stop codon in PA3720'; same orientation as *plac*); lane 13, K767/pLC23 (pDSK519::PA3719; same orientation as *plac*); lane 14, K767/pLC24 (pDSK519::PA3719 with a stop codon in PA3719; same orientation as *plac*); lane 15, K2276 (*nalC ΔPA3719*)/pDSK519; lane 16, K2276/pLC23 (pDSK519::PA3719; same orientation as *plac*); lane 17, K2276/pLC21 (pDSK519::PA3719; opposite orientation to *plac*); lane 18, K2276/pLC24 (pDSK519::PA3719 with a stop codon in PA3719; same orientation as *plac*). See Fig. 4B for a detailed description of the genes present in each vector. Blots depicted in lanes 1–5, 6–8 and 9–18 were carried out separately, hence the inclusion of the K767 control for each set. Equal loading of all wells was verified by running duplicate gels, one of which was coomassie-stained.
(in strain K2220) abrogated the increased production of MexAB-OprM (Fig. 5A compare lane 3 with lane 2) and MexR (Fig. 5B compare lane 3 with lane 2) seen in K1454, reducing these to at/below wild-type levels (Fig. 5A and B, lane 1) despite retention of the *nalC* mutation in this strain. Drug susceptibility also increased to wild-type levels in the PA3720-PA3719 deletion strain K2220 (Table 1). Similarly, when the genes were deleted individually from K1454 (∆PA3720 in K2277; ∆PA3719 in K2276) both resultant strains exhibited enhanced drug susceptibility (Table 1) and reduced MexAB-OprM and MexR production (data not shown), indicating that overexpression of both is required for the *nalC* phenotype. Introduction of the cloned PA3720-PA3719 genes on plasmid pLC2 into K2220 restored MexAB-OprM (Fig. 5A, lane 4) and MexR (Fig. 5B, lane 4) hyperproduction and multidrug resistance (Table 1), highlighting the importance of increased PA3720-PA3719 expression for the *nalC* phenotype. Indeed, increased PA3720-PA3719 production afforded by introduction of multicopy pLC2 into wild-type *P. aeruginosa* strain K767 was sufficient to create a *nalC* phenotype, enhancing MexAB-OprM (Fig. 5A, lane 7 cf. lane 6) and MexR (Fig. 5B, lane 7 cf. lane 6) production and multidrug resistance (Table 1) in the absence of a *nalC* mutation. Apparently, then, the *nalC* mutation serves only to increase PA3720-PA3719 levels which then directly or indirectly influence MexAB-OprM and MexR production and multidrug resistance.

---

### Identification of the PA3720 gene

The lack of homology of the deduced PA3720-PA3719 products to any known gene products might be explained if the region encompassing these putative open reading frames (ORFs) was active as RNA and did not function as genes *per se* involved in protein production. To assess this, a stop codon was introduced at codon 3 of PA3720 in a plasmid carrying PA3720-PA3719 and the impact on resistance and MexAB-OprM/MexR expression in K767 carrying this vector assessed. Intriguingly, this vector still promoted increased production of MexB and MexR and multidrug resistance (data not shown), as did a subsequent construct (pLC14) in which the cloned PA3720-PA3719 genes began at codon 4 of PA3720 (i.e. lacked all upstream sequence and the first 9 bp of PA3720) (Table 1). This is despite the fact that PA3720-PA3719 in pLC14 was in the opposite orientation relative to the lac promoter of this vector and would be expected to lack a promoter to drive expression of PA3720-PA3719. These data suggested that, regardless of whether the PA3720-PA3719 region was intended ultimately for RNA or protein production, a promoter region for these must occur downstream of the predicted (by the Pseudomonas project; http://www.pseudomonas.com) ATG start for a PA3720

---

'gene'. Intriguingly, a strong prokaryotic promoter is predicted downstream of this ATG (Fig. 4B) and, in fact, upstream of a second putative ATG start that is in the same reading frame but 160 bp downstream of the originally suggested ATG start for PA3720 (Fig. 4B). When a fragment that encompassed this shorter PA3720 (dubbed PA3720'), including 16 bp of upstream sequence, and the entirety of PA3719 (on plasmid pLC18) was introduced into K767, the *nalC* phenotype was again observed (Table 1 and Fig. 5A and B, lane 10), but only when PA3720'-PA3719 was in the same orientation as *plac* (compare with pLC25, Table 1 and Fig. 5A and B, lane 11). Consistent with the prediction of a promoter upstream of PA3720', RT-PCR studies using a primer (Fig. 4B, primer (1)) that anneals just upstream of a predicted transcription initiation site (Fig. 4B) failed to yield a RT-PCR product from a wild type (K767; Fig. 4C, lane 3) or *nalC* (K1454; Fig. 4C, lane 4) strain, while a primer that anneals only 8 bp downstream of this site yielded the expected product in both strains, with higher levels occurring for K1454 as expected (Fig. 4C, lanes 1 and 2). Consistent, too, with PA3720' functioning as a gene and encoding a protein product, expression of PA3720-PA3719 from the pT7-5 expression vector yielded a protein of c. 15 kDa (Fig. 4D, lane 2), in excellent agreement with the expected molecular mass of 15 463 for the predicted PA3720' product and evidence that PA3720 actually begins at the second ATG shown in Fig. 4B.

---

### Enhanced production of a PA3719 protein is sufficient for the *nalC* phenotype

Although a PA3719 product (expected mass of 5970 kDa) was not detectable in *E. coli* carrying the pT7-5::PA3720-PA3719 construct (Fig. 4D, lane 2) (the predicted PA3719 protein lacks methionines and, so, would not be labelled), PA3719 may, nonetheless, encode a protein whose expression is key to the *nalC* phenotype. To assess this, then, the gene was first cloned alone (pLC23) and shown to complement the PA3719-deficiency of K2276 (*nalC* ∆PA3719) (i.e. restore multidrug resistance (Table 1) and Mex protein overproduction (Fig. 5A and B, lane 16 cf. lane 15)) and then mutated by engineering a stop codon at codon 2 of the cloned gene (in pLC24). The stop codon blocked the ability of the cloned PA3719 to restore the *nalC* phenotype to K2276 (Table 1 and Fig. 5, lane 18) consistent with the need for PA3719 to be translated to effect its contribution to this phenotype. Interestingly, pLC23 also restored the *nalC* phenotype to strain K2277 (*nalC* ∆PA3720) (see Table 1) and was sufficient to impart this phenotype onto K767 (Table 1 and Fig. 5A and B, lane 13). Again, premature termination of PA3719 owing to the early stop codon engineered into pLC24 prevented this in K767 (Table 1 and Fig. 5A and B, lane 14). RT-PCR sub-
sequentially and unexpectedly confirmed that expression of PA3719, as well as PA3720, was compromised in K2277 (data not shown), despite the introduction of an in-frame deletion in PA3720 in this strain (verified by nucleotide sequencing of PCR amplified PA3720 from K2277). Increased production of a multicopy PA3719 alone is therefore sufficient for restoring/imparting the *nalC* phenotype to K2277 and K767. In contrast, hyperexpression of PA3720 alone (in K2276, the *nalCΔPA3719* strain) is not sufficient for the *nalC* phenotype (Table 1 and Fig. 5A and B, lane 15) and, indeed, is not even required, given that its absence from a *nalC* strain that overproduces PA3719 (i.e. K2277 carrying the PA3719 plasmid, pLC23) does not adversely impact resistance (Table 1) or MexB/MexR protein production (data not shown). Consistent with these conclusions, a vector carrying PA3720-PA3719 but with a stop codon at the seventh codon of PA3720 (pLC19) was still able to increase production of the Mex proteins (Fig. 5A and B, lane 12 cf. lane 9) and impart multidrug resistance (Table 1) to K767. Still, expression of PA3719 is clearly dependent upon a promoter upstream of PA3720, inasmuch as any PA3719-containing fragment cloned into pDSK519 in orientation opposite to the resident *lac* promoter of this vector failed to impart the *nalC* phenotype on K767 (e.g. pLC25, which extends 16 bp upstream of PA3720′; Table 1 and Fig. 5A and B, lane 11) or restore the *nalC* phenotype in K2276 (e.g. pLC21, which extends 15 bp upstream of PA3719; Table 1 and Fig. 5A and B, lane 17) unless sequence extending upstream of the predicted PA3720 promoter was present (e.g. pLC14 which extends 138 bp upstream of PA3720′; Table 1).

### Discussion

Despite the contribution of multidrug efflux system of the RND–MFP–OMF type to resistance to clinically relevant antimicrobials in a wide range of Gram-negative bacteria (Poole, 2001a; 2002; 2004), including *P. aeruginosa* (Poole and Srikumar, 2001; Poole, 2001b), there is substantial doubt as to this being the intended function of many of these (Neyfakh, 1997; Neyfakh, 2002). While MexAB-OprM contributes to intrinsic and acquired resistance to a broad range of antimicrobials, this efflux system is not inducible by antimicrobials but is overproduced in several different mutant strains including those with disruptions in *mexR* (Poole et al., 1996b; Jalal and Wretlind, 1998; Saito et al., 1999; Ziha-Zarifi et al., 1999; Srikumar et al., 2000) and *nalC* (this study) and its expression is also influenced by growth phase (Evans and Poole, 1999; Sanchez et al., 2002). In addition, mini-Tn5-tet insertion mutations yielding a *nalC* phenotype but with insertions not in the *nalC* gene (i.e. K2202; hybridization pattern D, Fig. 2, lane 4) are disrupted in yet another gene, PA3574, which like *nalC* encodes a repressor of the TetR/AcrR family. Insertion in this gene does not, however, impact expression of PA3720–PA3719, indicating that *mexAB-oprM* hyperexpression in PA3574 mutants does not occur via PA3720–PA3719. The transposon insertion in K2200 (a pattern B mutant; Fig. 2, lane 2) occurs in the small intergenic region separating *mexA* and *mexB*, and hyperexpression of MexB in this mutant must result from a promoter activity within the transposon itself. While the *mexR* connection to *mexAB-oprM* expression is obvious, the significance of the *nalC* and PA3574 mutations or the growth phase effect is at present unknown (the PA3574 target gene(s) are undefined and the NalC PA3720-PA3719 targets are of undetermined function). The virtually complete lack of homology between the PA3720-PA3719 gene products and any sequences currently present in the GenBank databases is surprising and, in fact, led us to re-sequence these genes ourselves, which merely confirmed that the sequence provided by the Pseudomonas Genome Project was correct. Still, it is clear that regulation of *mexAB-oprM* is complex and not immediately explained by a direct and intended role in export of and resistance to antimicrobials. Indeed, it was suggested some time ago that metabolites might be an intended substrate for many of these multidrug transporters (Poole, 1994). The recent demonstration that auxotrophs of *E. coli* likely to accumulate intermediates of amino acid or nucleotide biosynthesis show enhanced expression of the AcrAB-TolC multidrug efflux system of this organism (Helling et al., 2002) is certainly consistent with this idea.

The current paper clearly shows that enhanced production of PA3719, albeit from a promoter upstream of its operon partner PA3720, is alone sufficient to promote the *nalC* phenotype, which is characterized by stable overproduction of MexR and multidrug resistance owing to increased expression of MexAB-OprM. That the overproduced MexR does not limit *mexAB-oprM* expression suggests that the MexR protein is inactive as a repressor and that some modification of the protein occurs in *nalC* strains. We cannot, however, rule out that the PA3719 gene product in a *nalC* strain binds the *mexAB-oprM* promoter region and interferes with MexR binding, though it certainly shows no homology to known DNA-binding proteins. Moreover, the cloned PA3720-PA3719 genes did not impact expression of a *mexA-lacZ* fusion in a heterologous host, *E. coli* (data not shown), although cloned *mexR* clearly represses *mexA-lacZ* in *E. coli* (Srikumar et al., 2000). Intriguingly, MexR shows limited homology to a number of proteins for which phosphorylation of a conserved aspartate residue (Asp 34 in MexR) has been demonstrated (Stock et al., 1990; Whitchurch et al., 2002). This residue occurs within a loop region of MexR between two alpha helices (Lim et al., 2002), where it would, in fact, be accessible for phosphorylation. Whether PA3719 over-

1430 L. Cao, R. Srikumar and K. Poole

production ultimately influences MexR activity via phosphorylation remains to be determined. If phosphorylation is not involved, overproduction of PA3719 may instead directly or, via an influence on other genes/proteins, promote production of effector molecules whose interaction with MexR alleviates repression of *mexAB-oprM*. Identification of such genes/proteins and/or the effector molecule(s) would certainly provide insights regarding the regulation and, thus, role of MexAB-OprM in *P. aeruginosa*. At present, we are identifying other genes whose expression is influenced by mutations in *nalC* and/or overproduction of PA3720–PA3719, as well as genes required for *nalC*/-PA3720-PA3719-dependent *mexAB-oprM* hyperexpression. Hopefully, these, too, will shed light on the intended function of MexAB-OprM in *P. aeruginosa*.

### Experimental procedures

#### Bacterial strains and growth conditions

The bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table 2. Bacterial cells were cultivated in/on Luria broth (L-broth; Miller’s Luria broth base (Difco) and 2 g of NaCl per litre of H₂O) and agar (L-broth containing 1.5% (wt/vol) agar) with antibiotics as necessary, at 37°C. Plasmid pDSK519 and its derivatives were maintained with 50 μg of kanamycin per ml in *E. coli* and with 100 (in strain K1120) or 750 (in strain K767 and all *nalC* strains) μg of kanamycin per ml in *P. aeruginosa*. Plasmid pEX18Tc and its derivatives were maintained in *E. coli* with 5 μg of tetracycline per ml while plasmid pUT-mini-Tn5-tet was maintained in *E. coli* with either ampicillin (100 μg ml⁻¹) or tetracycline (10 μg ml⁻¹). Finally, plasmid pK18MobSacB was maintained in *E. coli* with 30–50 μg per ml of kanamycin.

#### DNA manipulations

Standard protocols were used for restriction endonuclease digestions, ligations, transformation, plasmid isolation and agarose gel electrophoresis, as described by Sambrook and Russell (2001). Genomic DNA of *P. aeruginosa* was extracted following the protocol of Barcak *et al.* (1991). DNA fragment used for cloning were extracted from agarose gels using Prep-A-Gene (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Richmond, CA, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. *E. coli* cells were made competent using the CaCl₂ (Sambrook and Russell, 2001) or Inoue *et al.* (1991) methods. Chromosomal DNA flanking the mini-Tn5-tet element in putative *nalC* insertion mutants was sequenced using primer mini-Tn5-Right (5′-GCTTGCTCAATCAATCAC-3′), which is specific to the end of the element, following the cloning of the transposon element and flanking DNA into pK18MobSacB (see below). Oligonucleotide synthesis and nucleotide sequencing was carried out by Cortec DNA Services, Kingston, Ontario, Canada. Once the flanking DNA sequences were obtained, disrupted genes were identified by BLASTN (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/) searches of the available *P. aeruginosa* genome sequence (Stover *et al.*, 2000; http://www.pseudomonas.com).

---

### Transposon mutagenesis

*P. aeruginosa* strain K870, a streptomycin-resistant derivative of the wild-type *P. aeruginosa* PAO1 strain K767 was mutagenized with mini-Tn5-tet (de Lorenzo *et al.*, 1990) following mobilization of mini-Tn5-tet-carrying plasmid pUT from *E. coli* SM10(ëpir) using a previously described mating protocol (Poole *et al.*, 1993a) with modifications. Briefly, 300 μl each of log-phase donor and unshaken stationary-phase recipient cells (grown in L-broth with appropriate antibiotics) were mixed in a microfuge tube, centrifuged and resuspended in 100 μl L-broth before being spotted in the centre of an L-agar plate. Following incubation at 37°C for 2.5 h, bacteria were recovered from the plate in 1 ml L-broth and insertion mutants of *P. aeruginosa* strain K870 carrying mini-Tn5-tet in the chromosome were then selected on L-agar plates containing 100 μg of tetracycline (to select mini-Tn5-tet) and 250 μg of streptomycin (to counter-select donor *E. coli*) per ml. To identify *nalC*-type multidrug-resistant mutants overexpressing MexAB-OprM, the mutagenized cells were individually screened on L-agar plates containing carbenicillin (64 μg ml⁻¹), chloramphenicol (32 μg ml⁻¹) or tetracycline (100 μg ml⁻¹) and mutants exhibiting resistance to all three drugs were saved for further study.

---

### SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting

Putative *nalC* mini-Tn5-tet mutants were screened for MexAB-OprM hyperexpression using a MexB-specific antiserum following Western immunoblotting of electrophoretically separated cell envelopes (Srikumar *et al.*, 1998). Immunodetection of MexR with MexR-specific antibodies (Evans *et al.*, 2001) was also carried out in these mutants following electrophoresis of soluble cell extracts obtained as the supernatant following the last centrifugation step (300 000 xg for 15 min) of cell envelope preparation as described (Adewoye *et al.*, 2002).

---

### Expression of cloned genes in pT7-5

To identify the products of the cloned PA3720-PA3719 genes, the genes were cloned on expression vector pT7-5 (see below) and expressed in *E. coli* as described (Poole *et al.*, 1993a).

---

### Southern blotting

Southern blotting of restriction digests of chromosomal DNA from putative *nalC* insertion mutants was performed as described (Li *et al.*, 2003b) both to ensure that the mini-Tn5-tet had been stably integrated into the chromosome of the mutants and to assess the number of different chromosomal insertion sites producing the *nalC* phenotype. To prepare the hybridization probe, the tetracycline-resistant gene of plasmid pH45WTc (same as that found in the mini-Tn5-tet) was excised with restriction enzyme HindIII and digoxigenin (DIG) labelled using the DIG High Prime DNA Labeling and Detection Starter Kit II (Roche Molecular Biochemicals) in accordance with the instructions provided by the manufacturer. Genomic DNA of the *nalC* mutants was subsequently digested separately with *PstI* or *SalI* and the restricted DNA electrophoresed on agarose gels, blotted to nitrocellulose mem-

Table 2. Bacterial strains and plasmids.

| Strain or plasmid | Relevant characteristics$^a$ | Reference or source |
|-------------------|----------------------------|---------------------|
| E. coli           |                             |                     |
| Sm10($\lambda_{pir}$) | $thi-1$ $thr$ $leu$ $tonA$ $lacY$ $supE$ $recA::RP4-2-Tc::Mu$; $Km^{r} \lambda_{pir}$ | (Miller and Mekalanos, 1988) |
| DH5$\alpha$      | $\phi 80d$ $lacZ\Delta M15$ $endA1$ $recA1$ $hsdR17$ ($r_K^{-}$ $m_K^{+}$) $supE44$ $thi-1$ $gyrA96$ $relA1$ $F^{-}$ $\Delta(lacZYA-argF)$ $U169$ | (Ausubel et al., 1992) |
| S17-1            | $thi$ $pro$ $hsdR$ $recA$ $Tra^{+}$ | (Simon et al., 1983) |
| P. aeruginosa    |                             |                     |
| K767             | PAO1 prototroph | (Masuda and Ohya, 1992) |
| OCR1             | K767 $nalB$ | (Masuda and Ohya, 1992) |
| K870             | $Sm^{r}$ derivative of K767 | (Poole et al., 1996b) |
| K1120            | K767$\Delta aphA$ | N. Gotoh, Kyoto Pharmaceutical University |
| K1454            | Spontaneous $nalC$ mutant of K767 | (Srikumar et al., 2000) |
| K1459            | Spontaneous $nalC$ mutant of K767 | (Srikumar et al., 2000) |
| K1460            | Spontaneous $nalC$ mutant of K767 | (Srikumar et al., 2000) |
| K2198            | mini-$Tn5-tet$ insertion mutant of K870; MDR $MexAB-OprM^{++}$ | This study |
| K2200            | mini-$Tn5-tet$ insertion mutant of K870; MDR $MexAB-OprM^{++}$ | This study |
| K2202            | mini-$Tn5-tet$ insertion mutant of K870; MDR $MexAB-OprM^{++}$ | This study |
| K2215            | mini-$Tn5-tet$ insertion mutant of K870; MDR $MexAB-OprM^{++}$ | This study |
| K2220            | K1454$\Delta PA3720-PA3719$ | This study |
| K2276            | K1454$\Delta PA3719$ | This study |
| K2277            | K1454$\Delta PA3720$ | This study |
| Plasmid          |                             |                     |
| pEX18Tc          | Broad-host-range gene replacement vector; $sacB$ $Tc^{r}$ | (Hoang et al., 1998) |
| pDSK519          | Broad-host-range cloning vector; $IncQ$ $Km^{r}$ | (Keen et al., 1988) |
| pK18MobSacB      | Broad-host-range gene replacement vector; $sacB$ $Km^{r}$ | (Simon, Priefer and Puehler, 1983) |
| pUT::mini-$Tn5-tet$ | mini-$Tn5-tet$ delivery vector; $Ap^{r}$ $Tc^{r}$ | (de Lorenzo et al., 1990) |
| pLC1             | pDSK519::PA3721 | This study |
| pLC2             | pDSK519::PA3720-PA3719 (+282 bp of upstream sequence relative to 1st identified ATG of PA3720) | This study |
| pLC5             | pEX18Tc::$\Delta PA3720-PA3719$ | This study |
| pLC8             | pEX18Tc::$\Delta PA3719$ | This study |
| pLC11            | pEX18Tc::$\Delta PA3720$ | This study |
| pLC14            | pDSK519::PA3720-PA3719 (beginning 9 bp downstream of original PA3720 ATG); opposite orientation to vector-borne $plac$ | This study |
| pLC18            | pDSK519::PA3720'-PA3719 (beginning 16 bp upstream of 2nd PA3720 ATG); same orientation as vector-borne $plac$ | This study |
| pLC25            | pDSK519::PA3720'-PA3719 (beginning 16 bp upstream of 2nd PA3720 ATG); opposite orientation to vector-borne $plac$ | This study |
| pLC19            | pLC18 derivative in which a TGA stop introduced at the 7th codon (counting the ATG initiation codon) of PA3720 | This study |
| pLC21            | pDSK519::PA3719 (beginning 15 bp upstream of the PA3719 ATG start); opposite orientation to vector-borne $plac$ | This study |
| pLC23            | pDSK519::PA3719 (beginning 15 bp upstream of the PA3719 ATG start); same orientation as vector-borne $plac$ | This study |
| pLC24            | pLC23 derivative in which a TGA stop codon replaces the 2nd codon (counting the ATG) of PA3719 | This study |
| pT7-5            | pBR322 derivative carrying an MCS downstream of the strong gene 10 promoter of phage T7; $Ap^{r}$ | S. Tabor |
| pLC15            | pT7-5:PA3720-PA3719 (beginning 9 bp downstream of original PA3720 ATG) | This study |

$a.$ $Ap^{r}$, ampicillin resistant; $Sm^{r}$, streptomycin resistant; $Tc^{r}$, tetracycline resistant; $Km^{r}$, kanamycin resistant; MDR, multidrug resistant; $MexAB-OprM^{++}$, hyperexpresses $MexAB-OprM$.

branes, and hybridized with the DIG-labelled transposon probe according to a protocol supplied with the High Prime Kit.

Reconstruction of $nalC::mini-Tn5-tet$ mutants

To confirm that the multidrug resistance and $MexAB-OprM$ hyperexpression of putative mini-$Tn5-tet$-derived $nalC$ mutants were linked to the transposon insert and were not a result of spontaneous mutation(s) in these mutants, the mini-$Tn5-tet$-disrupted genes were recovered from representative mutants and re-introduced into $P$. aeruginosa K1120. To this end, genomic DNA of the $nalC::mini-Tn5-tet$ mutants was isolated, digested with $PstI$ (does not cut within the transpo-

son) and shotgun-cloned into $PstI$-restricted pK18MobSacB. Transformants of $E$. coli DH5$\alpha$-carrying pK18MobSacB with inserts of mini-$Tn5-tet$ and flanking chromosomal DNA were selected on tetracycline ($10 \mu g \, ml^{-1}$) and following confirmation of the mini-$Tn5-tet$ insert, the recombinant plasmids were introduced into $E$. coli S17-1 and mobilized into K1120 as described (Li and Poole, 2001). K1120 transconjugants carrying the pK18MobSacB derivatives in the chromosome were selected on L-agar plates containing kanamycin ($75-100 \mu g \, ml^{-1}$) and imipenem ($1 \mu g \, ml^{-1}$; to counter-select donor $E$. coli) and the re-engineered mini-$Tn5-tet$ $nalC$ mutants subsequently selected on L-agar containing $10\%$ (wt/vol) sucrose and $100 \mu g \, ml^{-1}$ tetracycline.

1432 L. Cao, R. Srikumar and K. Poole

RT-PCR

Total bacterial RNA was isolated from 1 ml of late-log-phase cultures of *P. aeruginosa* using the Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Inc., Mississauga, Ontario, Canada) as described in a protocol provided by the manufacturer. The isolated RNA was resuspended in 60 μl of RNase-free water and then treated with RNase-free DNase (2 U of enzyme μg⁻¹ of RNA for 60 min at 37°C followed by 15 min at 65°C; Promega, Madison, WI, USA). DNase-treated RNA was subsequently used as the template for RT-PCR with the Qiagen OneStep RT-PCR kit (Qiagen, Inc.), again according to a protocol supplied by the manufacturer. Expression of ORFs PA3719, PA3720 and PA3721 was assessed using primer pairs 5′-CCTGAACACTCCGCGCAAC-3′ (forward) and 5′-GTGC TCGCCGTAGAGGTCC-3′ (reverse), 5′-GCAAGCACTTCC GCTCATTC-3 (forward) and 5′-CGCTCAGCAGTGCCCTTCG- 3′ (reverse), and 5′-CATGCTCGACGCCGCTACC-3′ (for- ward) and 5′-GGTTGTTCCAGGTAGCAGGCG (reverse), respectively. Expression of the constitutively expressed con- trol, *rpsL*, was assessed using primer pairs 5′-GCAACTAT CAACCAGCTG-3′ (forward) and 5′-GCTGTTGCTCTTGCAG GTTGTG-3′ (reverse). Thirty picomoles of each primer were used per 50 μl of reaction mixture, prepared as described in the Qiagen OneStep RT-PCR Kit Handbook (Qiagen, Inc.). Reaction mixtures were incubated for 30 min at 50°C, fol- lowed by 15 min at 95°C, and then 25–27 cycles (*rpsL*) or 23–27 cycles (PA genes) of 45 s at 94°C, 45 s at 58°C, and 60 s at 72°C, before finishing with 10 min at 72°C. To assess whether PA3720-PA3719 were encoded on a polycistronic message, RNA was also amplified using the above PA3720- forward and PA3719-reverse primers. Finally, to approximate the 5′ boundary of the PA3720-PA3719 message a second RT-PCR was performed using primers 3720UP1-RT (5′- GACGCTGGTCATTTAAGAACTGTATCG-3′) and PA3720- reverse.

Cloning of the PA3721 (*nalC*) and PA3720-PA3719 genes

PA3721 (*nalC*) was amplified by PCR using primers 3721F (5′-GATCGAATT CGAATGAGCGGAAGTGCTTGC-3′; EcoRI site underlined) and 3721R (5′-GCTAAAGCTTCGAGATCC ACCTCACCGAAC-3′; HindIII site underlined) in a reaction mixture (100 μl) containing 1 μg of PAO1 strain K767 chromosomal DNA as template, 2.5 U of Vent DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada), 0.2 mM of each deoxynucleotide triphosphate, 1X ThermoPol buffer (New England Biolabs), 30 pmol of each primer, 2 mM MgSO₄, and 10% (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide. The reaction mixture was subjected to an initial 3-min denaturation step at 95°C, followed by 25 cycles of 45 s at 95°C, 20 s at 57°C, and 1 min at 72°C, before finishing with a 10-min elongation at 72°C. PCR products were subsequently digested with EcoRI and HindIII and cloned into EcoRI-HindIII-restricted pDSK519 to yield pLC1. Nucleotide sequencing was subsequently carried out to ensure that no mutation had been introduced into PA3721 during the PCR. Similarly, the putative PA3720-PA3719 operon, including 282 bp of sequence upstream of the originally annotated (http://www.pseudomonas.com) PA3720 start, was PCR-amplified as above using primers 3719/20F (5′-GATCGAATTCCTGATCGGCGCTGT CGTCG-3′; EcoRI site underlined) and 3719/20R (5′-GCTAAAGCTTCTGCGCGGATTCTGATAGCTC-3′; HindIII site underlined) and cloned into EcoRI-HindIII-restricted pDSK519 to yield pLC2. Again, nucleotide sequencing confirmed the absence of PCR-generated mutations in PA3720– PA3719. Plasmids pLC1 and pLC2 were mobilized into *P.* aeruginosa strains from *E. coli* S17-1 using a previously described mating protocol (Poole et al., 1993a), and transconjugants were selected on L-agar plates containing kanamycin (750 μg ml⁻¹) and tetracycline (5 μg ml⁻¹; to counter-select *E. coli*).

Construction of truncated variants of PA3720 and PA3719

A fragment carrying PA3720-PA3719 that began, however, with the fourth codon (i.e. lacked the ATG start and the next two codons) of the originally annotated PA3720 was amplified via PCR as above using primers 3720/19TRUF (5′-GATC GAATTCCGT CGGGACGGTCCGTTC-3′; EcoRI sites under- lined) and 3719/20R2 (5′-GATCAAGCTTAAGCTTCTGC GCGGATTCTGATAGCTC-3′; HindIII sites underlined) and the EcoRI-HindIII-digested fragment cloned into pDSK519, to yield plasmid pLC14, in which PA3720-PA3719 was in the opposite orientation to the resident *plac* of pDSK519. This same fragment was cloned into the pT7-5 expression vector and was also restricted with EcoRI and HindIII to produce pLC15, in which, however, PA3720-PA3719 was in the same orientation as the strong phage T7 promoter of this vector. A fragment carrying PA3720-PA3719 but beginning 16 bp upstream of a second putative ATG start for PA3720 that is present 160 bp downstream of the originally annotated start for this gene was amplified using primers CO3720/ 19SHORTF (5′-GATCAAGCTTAAGCTTCCGCA GGGAGTCC CCCCATGAATGCC-3′; HindIII sites underlined) and CO3719/20R, and following appropriate restriction cloned into PDSK519 to yield pLC18, with PA3720-PA3719 again in the same orientation as *plac*. The same fragment was ampli- fied for cloning into pDSK519 so that PA3720-PA3719 were in orientation opposite to *plac* using primers NEW3720/ 10SHORTF (5′-GATCGAATTCCC GCAGGAGTCCCCCAT GAATGCC-3′; EcoRI site underlined) and 3719/20R2. Diges- tion of this fragment with EcoRI and HindIII and insertion into appropriately restricted pDSK519 yielded pLC25. A fragment carrying PA3720-PA3719 but in which a stop codon (TGA) replaced the seventh codon of the PA3720 ORF that begins at the second putative ATG start (counting ATG as codon 1) was amplified using primers CO3720/19STOPF (5′-GATCA AGCTTAAGCTTCCGCAGGAGTCCCCCCATGAATGCCC CGCTAAGTGACTGTTGGATATCG-3′; HindIII sites under- lined; stop codon in bold) and CO3719/20R. This fragment was again cloned into pDSK519 with PA3720-PA3719 in the same orientation as *plac*, producing pLC19. A fragment car- rying PA3719 alone and beginning 15 bp upstream of the gene was amplified using primers 3719F (5′-GATCGAATT CACTGGTGACGCCGCCATG-3′; EcoRI site underlined) and 3719/20R, and following digestion with EcoRI and HindIII cloned into pDSK519, yielding plasmid pLC21 in which PA3719 was in the opposite orientation to *plac*. The same fragment was amplified using primers CO3719F (5′-GAT CAAGCTTAAGCTTACTGGTGACGCCGCCATG-3′; HindIII sites underlined) and CO3719/20R, which following digestion
with HindIII and EcoRI and cloning into pDSK519 yielded a plasmid (pLC23) in which PA3719 was in the same orientations as *plac*. Finally, a derivative of PA3719 in which the second codon was changed to a TGA stop was amplified using primers CO3719STOPF (5′-GATCAAGCTTAAGCTT ACTGGTGACGCCGCCATGTGACTGAACACTCCGCGC-3′; HindIII sites underlined; stop codon in bold) and CO3719/ 20R, and cloned into pDSK519 in the same orientation as *plac* to produce pLC24. All PCR reactions were formulated and carried out as described above, all cloned products sequenced to ensure no unintended mutations had been introduced during PCR and all pDSK derivatives ultimately introduced into *P. aeruginosa* strains K767 and/or K2276, again, as above.

### Construction of a ΔPA3720-PA3719 mutant of *P. aeruginosa*

To introduce a deletion of the PA3720-PA3719 genes into strains of *P. aeruginosa*, a deletion construct was first prepared in plasmid pEX18Tc by cloning PCR-amplified 1-kb DNA fragments corresponding to the regions upstream and downstream, respectively, of the PA3720-PA3719 sequence to be deleted. Sequences 5′ to the deletion were amplified using primers 3719/20DDF (5′-GCTAGGTACC GGAGGCTT GAACGGACCG-3′; anneals 15–32 bp downstream of the PA3720 start site; *KpnI* site underlined) and 3719/20DDR (5′-GATCAAGCTTCCTGGTCCTGGCGACACG-3′; anneals 962–979 bp upstream of the PA3720 start site; *HindIII* site underlined). Sequences 3′ to the deletion were amplified using primers 3719/20DUF (5′-GCTAGAATT CGATCGCG GTGCTCGCCAG-3′; anneals 997–1014 bp downstream of the PA3719 stop site; *EcoRI* site underlined) and 3719/ 20DUR (5′-GCTAGGTACCGGACCTCTACGGCGAGCAC-3′; anneals 7–25 bp upstream of the PA3719 stop site; *KpnI* site underlined). The reaction mixtures were formulated as above for amplification of the PA3720-PA3719 and PA3721 genes using the same parameters. The PCR products were subsequently digested with *KpnI* and *HindIII* or *EcoRI* and *KpnI*, as appropriate, and separately cloned into appropriately restricted pEX18Tc, yielding plasmids pLC3 (5′ upstream fragment) and pLC4 (3′ downstream fragment). Following nucleotide sequencing to confirm the absence of mutations in the cloned DNAs the 3′ downstream fragment was excised from pLC4 by digestion with *EcoRI-KpnI* and was cloned into *EcoRI-KpnI*-restricted pLC3, yielding pLC5. This latter plasmid carried an in-frame deletion of the PA3720-PA3719 gene as confirmed by nucleotide sequencing. The pLC5 vector was then introduced into *E. coli* S17-1 and mobilized into *P. aeruginosa* strain K1454 (*nalC*) as above and transconjugants carrying the plasmid in the chromosome were selected on L-agar plates containing tetracycline (100 µg ml⁻¹) and imipenem (1 µg ml⁻¹; to counter-select *E. coli*). Tetracycline-resistant colonies were streaked onto L-agar plates containing 10% (wt/vol) sucrose, and sucrose-resistant colonies were screened for the presence of the PA3720-PA3719 deletion using PCR with primers PA371920DUF and PA371920DDR. The PCRs were carried out as described above for the construction of the ΔPA3720-PA3719 derivatives of *P. aeruginosa*, with the exception of a 3 min elongation at 72°C.

---

Multidrug resistant *nalC* mutants of *P. aeruginosa* 1433

#### Construction of DPA3720 and ΔPA3719 mutants

Individual deletions of PA3720 and PA3719 were also engineered into K1454, producing strains K2277 and K2276, respectively. For the ΔPA3719 construct, sequences 5′-to the PA3719 deletion endpoint were amplified using primers 3719DF (5′-GCTAGGTACC GGTGCGCGGAGTGTT CAGG-3′; *KpnI* site underlined) and 3719DR (5′-GATCAAGCTTGG CGATAGAGGCTCTGGC AG′; *HindIII* site underlined) while sequences 3′ to the PA3719 deletion endpoint were amplified using primers 3719/20DUF (5′-GCTAGAATT CGATCGCG GTGCTCGCCAG-3′; *EcoRI* site underlined) and 3719/ 20DUR (5′-GCTAGGTACCGGACCTCTACGGCGAGCAC-3′; *KpnI* site underlined). The reaction mixtures were formulated as above and for amplification of the PA3720-PA3719 and PA3721 genes using the same parameters. The PCR products were subsequently digested with *KpnI* and *HindIII* or *EcoRI* and *KpnI*, as appropriate, and separately cloned into appropriately restricted pEX18Tc, yielding plasmids pLC6 (5′ upstream fragment) and pLC7 (3′ downstream fragment). Following nucleotide sequencing to confirm the absence of mutations in the cloned DNAs, the 3′ downstream fragment was excised from pLC7 by digestion with *EcoRI-KpnI* and was cloned into *EcoRI-KpnI*-restricted pLC6, yielding pLC8. This latter plasmid carried an in-frame deletion of the PA3719 gene as confirmed by nucleotide sequencing. The pLC8 vector was then introduced into *E. coli* S17-1 and mobilized into *P. aeruginosa* strain K1454 (*nalC*) as above for the construction the PA3720-PA3719 knockout, with sucrose-resistant colonies subsequently recovered and those carrying the PA3719 deletion identified using PCR with primers 3719/20F and 3719/20R.

Similarly, for the ΔPA3720 construct, sequence 5′-to the PA3720 deletion endpoint were amplified using primers 3719/ 20DDF (5′-GCTAGGTACC GGAGGCTT GAACGGACCG-3′; *KpnI* site underlined) and 3719/20DDR (5′-GATCAAGCTTCCTGGTCCTGGCGACACG-3′; *HindIII* site underlined) while sequences 3′ to the PA3720 deletion endpoint were amplified using primers 3720UF (5′-GCTAGAATT CGTAGGTGGT GAAGCCGAGC-3′; *EcoRI* site underlined) and 3720UR (5′-GCTAGGTACC GGCGAAAGGC ACTGCTGAG-3′; *KpnI* site underlined), again using the parameters and formulation described above. The PCR products were subsequently cloned separately into pEX18Tc, yielding plasmids pLC9 (5′ upstream fragment) and pLC10 (3′ downstream fragment). Following nucleotide sequencing to confirm the absence of mutations in the cloned DNAs, the 3′ downstream fragment was excised from pLC10 by digestion with *EcoRI-KpnI* and was cloned into *EcoRI-KpnI*-restricted pLC9, yielding pLC11. Following nucleotide sequencing to confirm the PA3720 deletion, pLC11 was mobilized into *P. aeruginosa* strain K1454 from *E. coli* S17-1 as above and the presence of the PA3720 deletion confirmed using PCR with primers 3719/20F and 3719/20R.

---

### Acknowledgements

This work was supported by an operating grant from the Canadian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CCFF). L.C. holds an Ontario Graduate Scholarship. K.P. is a CCFF scholar.

© 2004 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **53**, 1423–1436
References

Adewoye, L., Sutherland, A., Srikumar, R., and Poole, K. (2002) The MexR repressor of the mexAB-oprM multidrug efflux operon in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: characterization of mutations compromising activity. *J Bacteriol* 184: 4308–4312.

Aendekerk, S., Ghysels, B., Cornelis, P., and Baysse, C. (2002) Characterization of a new efflux pump, MexGHI-OpmD, from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* that confers resistance to vanadium. *Microbiology* 148: 2371–2381.

Aires, J.R., Köhler, T., Nikaido, H., and Plesiat, P. (1999) Involvement of an active efflux system in the natural resistance of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* to aminoglycosides. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother* 43: 2624–2628.

Aramaki, H., Yagi, N., and Suzuki, M. (1995) Residues important for the function of a multihelical DNA binding domain in the new transcription factor family of Cam and Tet repressors. *Protein Eng* 8: 1259–1266.

Ausubel, F.M., Brent, R., Kingston, R.E., Moore, D.D., Seidman, J.G., Smith, J.A., and Struhl, K. (1992) *Short Protocols in Molecular Biology*, 2nd edn. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Barcak, G.J., Chandler, M.S., Redfield, R.J., and Tomb, J.F. (1991) Genetic systems in *Haemophilus influenzae*. *Methods Enzymol* 204: 321–342.

Cavallo, J.D., Plesiat, P., Couetdic, G., Leblanc, F., and Fabre, R. (2002) Mechanisms of β-lactam resistance in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: prevalence of OprM-overproducing strains in a French multicentre study (1997). *J Antimicrob Chemother* 50: 1039–1043.

Chuanchuen, R., Narasaki, C.T., and Schweizer, H.P. (2002) The MexJK efflux pump of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* requires OprM for antibiotic efflux but not for efflux of triclosan. *J Bacteriol* 184: 5036–5044.

Dean, C.R., Visalli, M.A., Projan, S.J., Sum, P.-E., and Bradford, P.A. (2003) Efflux-mediated resistance to tigecycline (GAR-936) in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO1. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother* 47: 972–978.

Evans, K., Adewoye, L., and Poole, K. (2001) MexR repressor of the mexAB-oprM multidrug efflux operon of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: identification of MexR binding sites in the mexA-mexR intergenic region. *J Bacteriol* 183: 807–812.

Evans, K., Passador, L., Srikumar, R., Tsang, E., Nezezon, J., and Poole, K. (1998) Influence of the MexAB-OprM multidrug efflux system on quorum-sensing in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *J Bacteriol* 180: 5443–5447.

Evans, K., and Poole, K. (1999) The MexA-MexB-OprM multidrug efflux system of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* is growth-phase regulated. *FEMS Microbiol Lett* 173: 35–39.

Germ, M., Yoshihara, E., Yoneyama, H., and Nakae, T. (1999) Interplay between the efflux pump and the outer membrane permeability barrier in fluorescent dye accumulation in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 261: 452–455.

Gotoh, N., Tsujimoto, H., Poole, K., Yamagishi, J.-I., and Nishino, T. (1995) The outer membrane protein OprM of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* is encoded by oprK of the mexA-mexB-oprK multidrug resistance operon. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother* 39: 2567–2569.

Hancock, R.E.W., and Speert, D.P. (2000) Antibiotic resistance in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: mechanisms and impact on treatment. *Drug Res Updat* 3: 247–255.

Helling, R.B., Janes, B.K., Kimball, H., Tran, T., Bundemann, M., Check, P., et al. (2002) Toxic waste disposal in *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* 184: 3699–3703.

Higgins, P.G., Fluit, A.C., Milatovic, D., Verhoef, J., and Schmitz, F.J. (2003) Mutations in GyrA, ParC, MexR and NfxB in clinical isolates of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *Int J Antimicrob Agents* 21: 409–413.

Hirakata, Y., Srikumar, R., Poole, K., Gotoh, N., Suematsu, T., Kohno, S., et al. (2002) Multidrug efflux systems play an important role in the invasiveness of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *J Exp Med* 196: 109–118.

Hoang, T.T., Karkhoff-Schweizer, R.R., Kutchma, A.J., and Schweizer, H.P. (1998) A broad-host-range Flp-FRT recombination system for site-specific excision of chromosomally-located DNA sequences: application for isolation of unmarked *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* mutants. *Gene* 212: 77–86.

Inoue, H., Nojima, H., and Okayama, H. (1991) High efficiency transformation of *Escherichia coli* with plasmids. *Gene* 96: 23–28.

Jalal, S., Ciofu, O., Hoiby, N., Gotoh, N., and Wretlind, B. (2000) Molecular mechanisms of fluoroquinolone resistance in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* isolates from cystic fibrosis. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother* 44: 710–712.

Jalal, S., and Wretlind, B. (1998) Mechanisms of quinolone resistance in clinical strains of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *Microbiol Drug Resist* 4: 257–261.

Jalal, S., Wretlind, G., Gotoh, N., and Wretlind, B. (1999) Rapid identification of mutations in a multidrug efflux pump in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *APMIS* 107: 1109–1116.

Keen, N.T., Tamaki, S., Kobayashi, D., and Trollinger, D. (1988) Improved broad-host-range plasmids for DNA cloning in Gram-negative bacteria. *Gene* 70: 191–197.

Köhler, T., Kok, M., Michea-Hamzehpour, M., Plesiat, P., Gotoh, N., Nishino, T., et al. (1996) Multidrug efflux in intrinsic resistance to trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother* 40: 2288–2290.

Köhler, T., Michea-Hamzehpour, M., Henze, U., Gotoh, N., Curty, L.K., and Pechere, J.-C. (1997) Characterization of MexE-MexF-OprN, a positively regulated multidrug efflux system of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *Mol Microbiol* 23: 345–354.

Li, Y., Mima, T., Komori, Y., Morita, Y., Kuroda, T., Mizushima, T., and Tsuchiya, T. (2003) A new member of the tripartite multidrug efflux pumps, MexVW-OprM, in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *J Antimicrob Chemother* 52: 572–575.

Li, X.-Z., Nikaido, H., and Poole, K. (1995) Role of MexA-MexB-OprM in antibiotic efflux in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother* 39: 1948–1953.

Li, X.Z., and Poole, K. (1999) Organic solvent-tolerant mutants of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* display multiple antibiotic resistance. *Can J Microbiol* 45: 18–22.

Li, X.Z., and Poole, K. (2001) Mutational analysis of the OprM outer membrane component of the MexA-MexB-OprM multidrug efflux system of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. *J Bacteriol* 183: 12–27.

Li, X.-Z., Poole, K., and Nikaido, H. (2003a) Contributions of

MexAB-OprM and an EmrE homologue to intrinsic resistance of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* to aminoglycosides and dyes. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 47: 27–33.

Li, X.Z., Zhang, L., McKay, G.A., and Poole, K. (2003b) Role of the acetyltransferase AAC (6′)-Iz modifying enzyme in aminoglycoside resistance in *Stenotrophomonas maltophilia*. J Antimicrob Chemother 51: 803–811.

Li, X.-Z., Zhang, L., and Poole, K. (1998b) Role of the multidrug efflux systems of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* in organic solvent tolerance. J Bacteriol 180: 2987–2991.

Li, X.-Z., Zhang, L., and Poole, K. (2000) Interplay between the MexAB-OprM multidrug efflux system and the outer membrane barrier in the multiple antibiotic resistance of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J Antimicrob Chemother 45: 433–436.

Li, X.-Z., Zhang, L., Srikumar, R., and Poole, K. (1998a) β-lactamase inhibitors are substrates of the the multidrug efflux pumps of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 42: 399–403.

Lim, D., Poole, K., and Strynadka, N.C. (2002) Crystal structure of the MexR repressor from the multidrug efflux operon in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J Biol Chem 277: 29253–29259.

de Lorenzo, V., Herrero, M., Jakubzik, U., and Timmis, K.N. (1990) Mini-Tn5 transposon derivatives for insertion mutagenesis, promoter probing, and chromosomal insertion of cloned DNA in Gram-negative eubacteria. J Bacteriol 172: 6568–6572.

Ma, D., Alberti, M., Lynch, C., Nikaido, H., and Hearst, J.E. (1996) The local repressor AcrR plays a modulating role in the regulation of *acrAB* genes of *Escherichia coli* by global stress signals. Mol Microbiol 19: 101–112.

Masuda, N., and Ohya, S. (1992) Cross-resistance to meropenem, cephalosporins, and quinolones in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 36: 1847–1851.

Masuda, N., Sakagawa, E., and Ohya, S. (1995) Outer membrane proteins responsible for multiple drug resistance in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 39: 645–649.

Masuda, N., Sakagawa, E., Ohya, S., Gotoh, N., Tsujimoto, H., and Nishino, T. (2000a) Contribution of the MexX-MexY-OprM efflux system to intrinsic resistance in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 44: 2242–2246.

Masuda, N., Sakagawa, E., Ohya, S., Gotoh, N., Tsujimoto, H., and Nishino, T. (2000b) Substrate specificities of MexAB-OprM, MexCD-OprJ, and MexXY-OprM efflux pumps in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 44: 3322–3327.

Miller, V.L., and Mekalanos, J.J. (1988) A novel suicide vector and its use in construction of insertion mutations: osmoregulation of outer membrane proteins and virulence determinants in *Vibrio cholerae* requires *toxR*. J Bacteriol 170: 2575–2583.

Miller, P.F., and Sulavik, M.C. (1996) Overlaps and parallels in the regulation of intrinsic multiple-antibiotic resistance in *Escherichia coli*. Mol Microbiol 21: 441–448.

Mine, T., Morita, Y., Kataoka, A., Mitzushima, T., and Tsuchiya, T. (1999) Expression in *Escherichia coli* of a new multidrug efflux pump, MexXY, from *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 43: 415–417.


Multidrug resistant nalC mutants of *P. aeruginosa* 1435

Murakami, S., Nakashima, R., Yamashita, E., and Yamaguchi, A. (2002) Crystal structure of bacterial multidrug efflux transporter AcrB. Nature 419: 587–593.

Neyfakh, A.A. (1997) Natural functions of bacterial multidrug transporters. Trends Microbiol 5: 309–313.

Neyfakh, A.A. (2002) Mystery of multidrug transporters: the answer can be simple. Mol Microbiol 44: 1123–1130.

Nikaido, H. (1989) Outer membrane barrier as a mechanism of antimicrobial resistance. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 33: 1831–1836.

Pearson, J.P., Van Delden, C., and Iglewski, B.H. (1999) Active efflux and diffusion are involved in transport of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* cell-to-cell signals. J Bacteriol 181: 1203–1210.

Piddock, L.J.V., Hall, M.C., Bellido, F., Bains, M., and Hancock, R.E.W. (1992) A pleiotropic, posttherapy, enoxacin-resistant mutant of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 36: 1057–1061.

Poole, K. (1994) Bacterial multidrug resistance – emphasis on efflux mechanisms and *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J Antimicrob Chemother 34: 453–456.

Poole, K. (2001a) Multidrug resistance in Gram-negative bacteria. Curr Opin Microbiol 4: 500–508.

Poole, K. (2001b) Multidrug efflux pumps and antimicrobial resistance in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* and related organisms. J Mol Microbiol Biotechnol 3: 255–264.

Poole, K. (2002) Outer membranes and efflux: the path to multidrug resistance in gram-negative bacteria. Curr Pharm Biotechnol 3: 77–98.

Poole, K. (2004) Efflux-mediated multiresistance in Gram-negative bacteria. Clin Microbiol Infect 10: 12–26.

Poole, K., Gotoh, N., Tsujimoto, H., Zhao, Q., Wada, A., Yamasaki, T., et al. (1996a) Overexpression of the *mexC-mexD-oprJ* efflux operon in *nfxB* multidrug resistant strains of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Mol Microbiol 21: 713–724.

Poole, K., Heinrichs, D.E., and Neshat, S. (1993a) Cloning and sequence analysis of an EnvCD homologue in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: regulation by iron and possible involvement in the secretion of the siderophore pyoverdine. Mol Microbiol 10: 529–544.

Poole, K., Krebes, K., McNally, C., and Neshat, S. (1993b) Multiple antibiotic resistance in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: evidence for involvement of an efflux operon. J Bacteriol 175: 7363–7372.

Poole, K., and Srikumar, R. (2001) Multidrug efflux in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: components, mechanisms and clinical significance. Curr Top Med Chem 1: 59–71.

Poole, K., Tetro, K., Zhao, Q., Neshat, S., Heinrichs, D., and Bianco, N. (1996b) Expression of the multidrug resistance operon *mexA-mexB-oprM*. *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: *mexR* encodes a regulator of operon expression. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 40: 2021–2028.

Rella, M., and Haas, D. (1982) Resistance of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PAO to nalidixic acid and low levels of β-lactam antibiotics: mapping of chromosomal genes. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 22: 242–249.

Saier, M.H., Jr. (2000) A functional phylogenetic classification system for transmembrane solute transporters. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 64: 354–411.

Saito, K., Eda, S., Maseda, H., and Nakae, T. (2001) Molecular mechanism of MexR-mediated regulation of MexAB-

OprM efflux pump expression in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. FEMS Microbiol Lett 195: 23–28.

Saito, K., Yoneyama, H., and Nakae, T. (1999) *nalB*-type mutations causing the overexpression of the MexAB-OprM efflux pump are located in the *mexR* gene of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* chromosome. FEMS Microbiol Lett 179: 67–72.

Sambrook, J., and Russell, D.W. (2001) *Molecular Cloning: a Laboratory Manual*, 3rd edn. Cold Spring Harbor, New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

Sanchez, P., Rojo, F., and Martinez, J.L. (2002) Transcriptional regulation of *mexR*, the repressor of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa mexAB-oprM* multidrug efflux pump. FEMS Microbiol Lett 207: 63–68.

Schweizer, H.P. (1998) Intrinsic resistance to inhibitors of fatty acid biosynthesis in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* is due to efflux: application of a novel technique for generation of unmarked chromosomal mutations for the study of efflux systems. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 42: 394–398.

Sekiya, H., Mima, T., Morita, Y., Kuroda, T., Mizushima, T., and Tsuchiya, T. (2003) Functional cloning and characterization of a multidrug efflux pump, MexHl-OpmD, from a *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* mutant. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 47: 2990–2992.

Simon, R., Priefer, U., and Puehler, A. (1983) A broad host range mobilization system for *in vivo* genetic engineering: transposon mutagenesis in Gram-negative bacteria. Biotechnology 1: 784–791.

Srikumar, R., Kon, T., Gotoh, N., and Poole, K. (1998) Expression of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* multidrug efflux pumps MexA-MexB-OprM and MexC-MexD-OprJ in a multidrug-sensitive *Escherichia coli* strain. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 42: 65–71.

Srikumar, R., Li, X.-Z., and Poole, K. (1997) Inner membrane efflux components are responsible for the β-lactam speci-

ficity of multidrug efflux pumps in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J Bacteriol 179: 7875–7881.

Srikumar, R., Paul, C.J., and Poole, K. (2000) Influence of mutations in the *mexR* repressor gene on expression of the MexA-MexB-OprM multidrug efflux system of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J Bacteriol 182: 1410–1414.

Srikumar, R., and Poole, K. (1999) Demonstration of ethidium bromide efflux by multiresistant pumps of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Clin Microbiol Infect 5: 5S58–5S59.

Stock, J.B., Stock, A.M., and Mottonen, J.M. (1990) Signal transduction in bacteria. Nature 344: 395–400.

Stover, C.K., Pham, X.Q., Erwin, A.L., Mizoguchi, S.D., Warrener, P., Hickey, M.J., *et al.* (2000) Complete genome sequence of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* PA01, an opportunistic pathogen. Nature 406: 959–964.

Westbrook-Wadman, S., Sherman, D.R., Hickey, M.J., Coulter, S.N., Zhu, Y.Q., Warrener, P., *et al.* (1999) Characterization of a *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* efflux pump contributing to aminoglycoside impermeability. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 43: 2975–2983.

Whitchurch, C.B., Erova, T.E., Emery, J.A., Sargent, J.L., Harris, J.M., Semmler, A.B., *et al.* (2002) Phosphorylation of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* response regulator AlgR is essential for type IV fimbria-mediated twitching motility. J Bacteriol 184: 4544–4554.

Zgurskaya, H.I. (2002) Molecular analysis of efflux pump-based antibiotic resistance. Int J Med 292: 95–105.

Zgurskaya, H.I., and Nikaido, H. (2000) Multidrug resistance mechanisms: drug efflux across two membranes. Mol Microbiol 37: 219–225.

Ziha-Zarifi, I., Llanes, C., Köhler, T., Pechere, J.-C., and Plesiat, P. (1999) *In vivo* emergence of multidrug-resistant mutants of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* overexpressing the active efflux system MexA-MexB-OprM. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 43: 287–291.
