
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Clinical Immunology 113 (2004) 4–13

**Short Analytical Review**

**T cells in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus**

Robert W. Hoffman*

Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Department of Medicine, University of Miami and the Miami Veterans Affairs Medical Center,  
Miami, FL 33136, USA

Received 4 April 2004; accepted with revision 6 May 2004  
Available online 15 June 2004

---

### Abstract

Recent studies in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have demonstrated that autoantigen-reactive T cells can be isolated from peripheral blood and that such cells can support autoantibody production ex vivo, suggesting that they may have a central role in the pathogenesis of disease. In addition, recent work has identified and characterized signaling abnormalities in T cells from SLE that may be fundamental to the disease. This review will examine the role of T cells in the pathogenesis of SLE and it will consider pathogenic mechanisms by which T cells escape normal of immunological tolerance. The focus will be on recent studies characterizing autoantigen-reactive human T cells and signaling abnormalities identified in T cells from patients with SLE.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

---

### Keywords: Systemic lupus erythematosus; T cell; Human; Autoimmune

---

### Introduction

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a systemic autoimmune disease characterized clinically by protean manifestations, most commonly including arthralgia, arthritis, rash, alopecia, oral ulcers, serositis, leukopenia, central nervous system, and renal involvement [1]. It is an important prototype of systemic autoimmunity and it causes significant disability and premature death in those patients who suffer from it [1].

Systemic lupus erythematosus has a complex etiology with both genetic and environmental factors implicated in the disease. Several disease-associated genetic loci have been identified by candidate gene studies and genome-wide surveys [2–14]. The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) has been associated with susceptibility to SLE using both approaches. While alternative interpretations are possible, these findings are consistent with a central role for T cells in immune pathogenesis in lupus, either through direct effects on T cell–peptide–MHC interactions or through indirect effects on T cell repertoire selection. To conceptualize the complex genetics of SLE, a so-called threshold liability or gene dose model has been proposed that could help explain the participation of multiple different genetic loci in susceptibility to SLE [15]. In this model, combinations of genes contribute to susceptibility and disease occurs when a threshold is reached. In addition to genetics, several environmental factors have been reported to modify disease expression; most convincing among these is the influence of female sex hormones on expression of SLE [16]. Despite numerous advances, however, our understanding of the overall pathogenesis of SLE remains incomplete.

To better understand the pathogenesis of SLE, the contributions of various cell types have been examined. A model of possible T cell–antigen-presenting cell interactions is shown in Fig. 1. Potential abnormal signaling points or pathways that could lead to loss of T cell tolerance in SLE are indicated. There is evidence for contributions by B cells, dendritic cells, nonlymphoid cells at sites of tissue injury, and T cells to the development of SLE [17,18]. B cell are important in SLE as they produce antibodies against nuclear and cell surface antigens. B cell hyperreactivity is present in SLE and this results in the production of a variety of autoantibodies, including those against nuclear antigens that contain chromatin (DNA histone) and uridylate-rich (U) small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (U-RNP or U-snRNP that are ribonucleoproteins contained within the spliceosome

* Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Department of Medicine, University of Miami and the Miami Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 1400 NW 10th Avenue, Suite 602A, PO Box 016960, Miami, FL 33136. Fax: +1-305-243-7414.  
E-mail address: rhoffman@med.miami.edu.

1521-6616/$ - see front matter. Published by Elsevier Inc.  
doi:10.1016/j.clim.2004.05.001

R.W. Hoffman / Clinical Immunology 113 (2004) 4–13

Apoptosis with  
exposure of cryptic  
or neo-epitopes on  
antigen (Ag)?

Surface Ig or FcR or  
other receptor  

Abnormal apoptosis with  
delayed clearance &  
prolonged antigen  
exposure?

CD4+  
T Cell  

Abnormal Ag  
processing?  

Process  
Ag  

HLA Synthesis  

Antigen  
Presenting Cell  
(B cell,  
dendritic,  
macrophage)  

Toll-like  
receptor  
(TLR)  
signal?  

T Cell  
Receptor  

HLA-Ag  
Complex  

Accessory  
molecules  

Excess co-stimulation?  

Signal  

Cytokines  

Abnormal activation  
threshold for cell  
signaling?  

T cell help?  

CD4+, CD8+  
T cells, B cells,  
Neutrophils,  
other cells  

Tissue  
damage  

Fig. 1. This figure illustrates hypothetical points where abnormalities of T cell–antigen-presenting cell interaction could lead to loss of immunological tolerance in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In SLE, it appears that there may be multiple immunological abnormalities that can lead to breaking immunological self-tolerance and several of these may be simultaneously operative. In this model, self-antigen (Ag) is taken up by an antigen-presenting cell, processed and presented to T cells. T cell receptor signaling events lead to T cell activation and the production of soluble factors, such as cytokines, that may in turn provide help to autoantibody-producing B cells, assist in the recruitment of other cells to sites of inflammation, or in some instances directly mediate tissue damage. Structural modification of antigen, abnormalities of antigen processing, excess costimulation via accessory molecules, adjuvant-like signals through Toll-like receptors, or abnormal activation threshold of T cell receptor could each contribute to breaking immunological tolerance and be important in the pathogenesis of SLE.

complex) [19–22]. Antinuclear antibody-producing cells exhibit evidence of having undergone T-cell-derived, cytokine-driven affinity maturation, as they are of the immunoglobulin G (IgG) isotype and can be present in high levels in serum [21]. Immunoglobulin heavy and light chain gene rearrangements in autoantibody-producing murine B cells, and where examined in human B cells, demonstrate nucleotide substitutions typical of antigen-driven T-cell-dependent immune responses, supporting a central role for T cell–B cell interactions in autoantibody production [19,20]. Autoantibodies against chromatin and ribonucleoprotein are serological hallmarks of SLE and their presence is used to help define the syndrome [24]. While virtually 100% of SLE patients will have antibodies against a nuclear antigen [25–27], only 30–50% of patients will have antibodies against one of the two nuclear antigens that are considered pathognomonic of SLE, double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), and the Sm antigen of the U-small nuclear ribonucleoprotein complex [25–27]. A higher percentage of SLE patients will have antibodies against single-stranded DNA and histones, although the presence of these antibodies is not specific for SLE. Antinuclear antibodies can be detected months to years preceding the development of SLE; however, the development of some autoantibodies (such as those to ribonucleoprotein, Sm, and dsDNA) is temporally closely linked to disease onset, suggesting that they play a role in pathogenesis [23].

Antigen-presenting cells, including B cells and dendritic cells, appear to be important in lupus pathogenesis. B cells and dendritic cells can present autoantigen to T cells, and dendritic cells may be of particular importance in their position at the interface of innate and adaptive immunity. Chromatin-containing CpG motif-rich DNA or ribonucleoprotein antigens containing double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) could potentially trigger adaptive immune responses in the pathogenesis of SLE by providing accessory signals through Toll-like receptor (TLR) 9 TLR9 on human dendritic cells, macrophages, or B cells, or through TLR 3 on human dendritic cells [28–32]. Recent studies suggesting a role for TLR9 and TLR3 in SLE have been published [30–32]. The type I interferons and interferon-gamma (IFN γ) have been implicated in the pathogenesis of SLE, and recently it has been proposed that their effects in lupus might be mediated through TLRs [33–35]. Local tissue factors and other cells may also be important in the pathogenesis of lupus by enhancing or attenuating local tissue injury. Soluble factors, such as complement components, participate in local tissue injury; these may have additional importance in

pathogenesis by their influence on the clearance of apoptotic debris [36, 37]. A variety of additional cells, including T cells, could participate in inflammation and tissue injury either directly or through recruitment of other cells; however, there is limited work that has defined the nature of these to date.

T cells appear to have a central role in the immune pathogenesis of SLE based on a large body of observations in human disease and murine models of lupus. Pathological studies of tissues obtained at autopsy or biopsy of involved tissues have demonstrated intense lymphocytic infiltration. Studies have documented infiltration of affected organs, such as the salivary glands and kidneys with T cells [1, 19, 20]. Recent studies using renal biopsy in SLE have shown that infiltrating T cells in the kidneys of SLE patients can be oligoclonal based upon T cell receptor (TCR) usage [38]. Expansion of oligoclonal T cells in peripheral blood of SLE patients has been demonstrated in studies using TCR analysis of unselected T cells and using T cell cloning against specific autoantigens [39, 40]. Consistent with an extensive body of data on T cell–B cell interactions in mice and humans, it is widely believed that T cells can provide help to autoantibody-producing B cells in SLE; this will be reviewed below [41]. Finally, in numerous murine models of lupus, a central role for T cells has been demonstrated, including T cell help of autoantibody production [42–45]. The focus of this review will be on examining the evidence for a role of human T cells in the pathogenesis of SLE and to review possible mechanisms by which T cells may escape immunological tolerance leading to clinical manifestations of the disease.

### T cells in SLE

#### Breaking immunological tolerance

A critical question in our understanding of SLE is how immunological self-tolerance is overcome. Mechanisms by which immunological tolerance may be overcome in SLE are shown in Table 1. It is now established that low-affinity autoreactive T cells can be detected in the periphery of patients with autoimmune disease against a variety of self-antigens, including many that have been implicated in the pathogenesis of SLE. Autoantigen-reactive cells can also be detected in peripheral blood of healthy individuals [46–48]. Normally, autoreactive cells are anergic or undergo activation-induced cell death upon stimulation and are thereby functionally eliminated. Exposure to cryptic epitopes on self-antigens during apoptosis, abnormal antigen processing, inappropriate T cell help, or excess costimulation could potentially contribute to the development of SLE [49–58]. Abnormal activation thresholds for T cell signaling and abnormalities of activation-induced cell death could also be important in overcoming immunological tolerance in SLE. Theoretically, the absence of sufficient or appropriate T regulatory cells could also contribute to the pathogenesis of SLE. The evidence for each of these mechanisms in the pathogenesis of SLE will be considered.

##### Autoantigen-reactive T cells

T cells reactive with several lupus nuclear autoantigens, including DNA-histones, the small nuclear ribonucleoprotein antigens Sm-B, Sm-D, U1-70kD, and U1-A, and heterogeneous ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) A2 have been isolated from the peripheral blood of SLE patients and characterized (see Tables 2 and 3) [46, 59–75].

Rajaogopalan et al. [59] first described T cell lines reactive with dsDNA from patients with SLE. The activated T cells that they identified selectively augmented the production of pathogenic IgG anti-DNA antibodies ex vivo [59]. Subsequently, Datta and colleagues have extensively characterized such chromatin-reactive T cells in SLE and also have characterized a chromatin-reactive murine model.

---

**Table 1**

Breaking immune tolerance in systemic lupus erythematosus

| Potential mechanism                     | Reference          |
|------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| Exposure of cryptic or neoepitopes       | [50–53]           |
| Abnormal antigen processing              | [80–82]           |
| Inappropriate help                       | [59, 60, 67, 68, 75] |
| Excess costimulation                    | [62, 63, 83, 84]   |
| Abnormal activation threshold for cell signaling | [62, 63, 88]     |
| Insufficient or inappropriate T regulatory cells | [108–110]        |

---

**Table 2**

T cells reactive with autoantigens isolated from peripheral blood of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus

| Autoantigen                          | Reference         |
|--------------------------------------|-------------------|
| Double-stranded DNA                  | [59, 60, 67]      |
| Histones                             | [60, 61]          |
| Sm-B small nuclear ribonucleoprotein  | [39, 46, 68–71]   |
| Sm-D small nuclear ribonucleoprotein  | [39, 68–71]       |
| U1-70kD small nuclear ribonucleoprotein | [46, 64, 68–71]   |
| U1-A small nuclear ribonucleoprotein  | [66]              |
| Heterogeneous ribonucleoprotein A2    | [75]              |

---

**Table 3**

Characteristics of autoantigen-reactive T cell in systemic lupus erythematosus

| Characteristic                                      | Reference                        |
|-----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| CD4+ phenotype                                     | [46, 65, 71]                     |
| αβ T cell receptor usage                           | [46, 65, 71]                     |
| Provide help to autoantibody-producing cells ex vivo | [59, 60, 67, 68, 75]             |
| Produce interferon-γ in substantial quantities      | [59, 68, 75]                     |
| Produce variable quantities of Th2 cytokines        | [68, 75]                         |
| Recognize a limited number of epitopes on the autoantigen | [39, 61, 66, 68, 69, 71, 73–75] |
| Recognize regions of protein-nucleic acid interaction on antigen | [39, 73, 78]                     |
| Limited T cell receptor usage                      | [38, 40, 69, 70, 72, 74]         |
| Clones expressing highly similar or identical T cell receptor persistent in peripheral blood | [39]                              |

of lupus in parallel studies [59–63]. They have reported that these T cells are typically CD4+, can provide help to anti-DNA and antihistone antibody-producing B cells, and that they have restricted CDR3 usage with characteristic of antigen selection by a limited number of cationically charged antigenic epitopes [60]. They mapped the major epitopes present on the core nucleosomal histone protein complex to four regions: histone H2B amino acid residues10–33, histone H3 residues 85–105, histone H4 residues 16–39, and histone H4 residues 71–94 [61]. They demonstrated that these autoantigenic peptides can be promiscuously presented by several HLA-DR alleles [61]. Furthermore, they found that nucleosome-reactive human T cells produce substantial quantities of IFN γ and that nephrogenic complement-fixing murine antinucleosome autoantibodies belong to IFN-γ-dependent IgG subclasses. Importantly, they have also found that there are abnormalities of CD40 ligand (CD40L, also known as CD154) expression on lupus B and T cell that leads to prolonged costimulation of these cells [62]. They have postulated that hyperexpression of CD40L leads to triggering of lupus T cells by subthreshold stimuli and the presentation of apoptotic material by APC (including dendritic cells, macrophages and B cells) [63]. They proposed that expansion of these low-affinity chromatin autoantigen-reactive T cells is essential for sustaining anti-DNA/histone autoantibody producing B cells in lupus and that this in part occurs from prolonged costimulation via CD40–CD40L interaction and signaling [63]. Finally, they reported that T cells from SLE patients exhibited regulatory defects in the Cbl and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway, which is key to prolonged overexpression of CD40L [63].

Human T cells reactive with various snRNP antigens, including Sm-B, Sm-D, U1-70kD, and U1-A, have been identified and characterized [64–74]. These snRNPs are ubiquitous self-antigens that are components of the spliceosome complex, which normally functions to excise intervening introns and generate mature messenger RNA transcripts [22]. Sm-reactive T cell lines and T cell clones reactive with the Sm-D or Sm-B snRNPs were first described by Hoffman et al. [46] from patients with SLE. U1-RNP-reactive peripheral blood T cells were first reported by O’Brien et al. [64] from patients classified as SLE and mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD). T cell clones from connective tissue disease (CTD) patients reactive with the U1-70kD snRNP antigen were described by Hoffman et al. [65], while Okubo et al. [66] were first to report that peripheral blood mononuclear cell derived CD4+ T cells from SLE or MCTD patients could respond to the U1-A snRNP. Subsequently, Holyst et al. [68] have extensively characterized T cell clones from CTD patients that are reactive with the U1-70kD, Sm-B, or Sm-D snRNP antigen. The snRNP reactive human T cell clones typically exhibit a CD4+, CD45RO+, TCR alpha/beta+ phenotype, although rare CD8+ cells have been cloned. These clones typically produced substantial amounts of

IFN γ, moderate quantities of interleukin (IL)-2, and variable quantities of IL-4 and IL-10 [68]. The snRNP-reactive T clones recognized antigen in the context of HLA-DR; specifically, T cell clones have been described that utilize the DRB1*0101, *0401, or *1302 alleles in autoantigen recognition [68,69,71,73–75]. Studies have provided evidence that T and B cell responses are linked in SLE. For example, Holyst et al. [68] have shown that the ability to clone human T cells ex vivo can be predicted by the presence or absence of antibodies against the specific snRNP peptide detected in patient sera. Greidinger et al. [75] have recently reported that U1-70kD snRNP reactive T cell clones can provide help ex vivo for anti-U1-70kD and anti-hnRNP antibody production.

T cell epitope mapping studies of human T cell clones reactive with the snRNPs U1-70kD, Sm-B, and Sm-D revealed that there are limited T cell epitopes on these proteins and that almost all reside within functional regions of the protein; either within the Sm motifs for Sm-B and Sm-D or within the RNA binding domain for U1-70kD [76,77]. While the full implications of these findings are under investigation, the linkage between RNA binding domains and autoimmunity is an intriguing one. Monneaux and Muller [78] have recently reviewed this topic and speculate that a unifying feature of autoimmunity in SLE may be immune recognition of RNA binding domains.

Recent studies have examined TCR usage from snRNP-reactive human T cell clones and found that TCR use is highly restricted to a limited number of receptors [70–74]. This is consistent with the observations that there are limited T cell epitopes on the snRNP antigens, but it is unclear whether this reflects a limited T cell repertoire against the autoantigens or antigen selection of T cells expressing highly restricted TCR. The utilization of limited TCR by pathogenic T cells suggests the possibility that focused therapy targeting these cells could be developed.

A novel mechanism for autoantigen “cross reactivity” by T cells in SLE has recently been reported. De Silva-Udawatta et al. [74] reported that TCR usage by snRNP-reactive T cells can exhibit significant plasticity of TCR used by autoantigen-reactive T cells in SLE. They found that a single TCR can recognize two distinct snRNP autoantigenic peptides that have no apparent sequence homology. This cross-reactivity was limited to a U1-70kD and a Sm-B peptide, as a series of other related peptides did not cross-stimulate the TCR.

T cell clones have recently been identified and characterized from patients with SLE that are reactive with another nuclear antigen, hnRNP A2 [75]. These studies revealed that such cells can provide help ex vivo to hnRNP autoantibody producing human cells and that they can also provide help to U1-70kD autoantibody producing cells [75]. Cytokine profiles of these hnRNP-reactive T cells revealed that they produced substantial quantities of IFN γ, but it did not

appear that IFN γ alone could be substituted for T cells in helping autoantibody production [75].

Finally, while beyond the scope of this review, studies in spontaneous models of murine lupus and in mice transgenic for HLA-DR molecules examining anti-snRNP responses support the concept that T cells play a key role in SLE [79].

### Antigen processing and presentation

There is currently limited information on the molecular details of autoantigen processing and presentation in SLE. These could have important effects on breaking T cell tolerance [80–82]. There is an emerging body of evidence supporting the hypothesis that during apoptosis, autoantigens can be modified by protease cleavage (caspases or granzyme B) or by oxidative cleavage, and that these modifications of self-antigens might reveal previously cryptic epitopes or neoepitopes to the immune system [55–58]. The findings from T cell epitope mapping studies (reviewed above) that there are limited numbers of T cell epitopes on histones H2B, H3, and H4, and snRNPs Sm-B, Sm-D, and U1-70kD could reflect selective antigen processing and presentation of cryptic epitopes by APCs to T cells. Recent studies indicating that TLR4, TLR9, and TLR3 can upregulate MHC and can influence antigen-processing pathways potentially link antigen epitope selection to activation of TLRs via CpG DNA or dsRNA through the binding of TLR9 to CpG DNA-chromatin or TLR3 to dsRNA–snRNP complexes, respectively (also see below) [28–32, 82]. Defects in the clearance of apoptotic material have been reported in SLE and it has also been proposed that prolonged exposure to apoptotic material could be an important factor in breaking T cell tolerance in a genetically susceptible individual [36,37].

### T cell accessory molecules and costimulation

Abnormalities of costimulation could contribute to breaking T cell tolerance and there is evidence for abnormal costimulation in SLE. Croww et al. and Datta et al. (see above) were the first to identify impaired regulation of expression of CD40L in T cells from patients with SLE [63,84]. Subsequently, they and other investigators have confirmed and extended these findings [63,83–86]. Overexpression of the accessory molecule lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1) (also known as CD11a/CD18) has been reported to occur in SLE [87]. Experimental overexpression of LFA-1 via DNA hypomethylation induces autoreactivity and a lupus-like syndrome in vivo. Candidate gene studies examining the programmed cell death receptor 1 gene (PD1) in SLE have recently reported statistical association between an intronic single-nucleotide polymorphism and susceptibility to disease [88]. Finally, at the interface of innate and adaptive immunity, TLRs participation in costimulation may play a role in breaking T cell tolerance and inducing autoimmunity (also see above).

---

Table 4  
T cell abnormalities identified in systemic lupus erythematosus  

| Abnormality | Reference |
|-------------|-----------|
| Exaggerated intracellular calcium responses | [89,90] |
| Increased intracellular phosphorylation | [89,90] |
| Decreased TCR/CD3ζ chain expression | [91,92,100–102] |
| FcR γ chain up-regulation | [91] |
| Syk recruitment to TCR complex | [92] |
| Mutations in type I protein kinase A regulatory subunit alpha | [94–96] |
| CD40L (CD152) overexpression | [62,63,83–86] |
| Resistance to apoptosis through a COX-2 dependent pathway | [105] |
| Decreased activation-induced cell death | [106] |

---

### T cell signal transduction

Signal transduction events, following T cell receptor complex activation, have been shown to be abnormal in SLE and these are summarized in Table 4 [89–97]. Tsokos and colleagues have identified and elegantly characterized a series of defects in intracellular signal transduction pathways in T cells from patients with SLE [89–93]. Yi et al. [63] have identified defects in C1b signaling that could be important in the pathogenesis of T cell abnormalities in SLE; Kammer and colleagues have identified mRNA mutation of type I protein kinase A regulatory subunit alpha in T cells of patients with SLE and suggested that these might contribute to pathogenesis of SLE by preventing effective signal transduction and impairing T cell effector functions [94,96]. In support of the importance of these findings in patients with SLE, Craft, Datta, and colleagues have described signaling defects in T lymphocytes in murine models of lupus that demonstrate T cell signaling abnormalities appear involved in the initiation of systemic autoimmune disease [97–99].

Tsokos and colleagues have reported that T cells from patients with lupus exhibit increased and sustained distal signaling as measured by exaggerated calcium responses and increased intracellular phosphorylation in response to stimulation by mitogens or antigen [89,90]. These abnormalities are independent of disease activity indexes, suggesting that they may be intrinsic defect in SLE T cells. In characterizing these abnormalities, they reported that SLE T cells have decreased TCR/CD3-ζ expression, with concomitant FcRγ chain up regulation, which replaces the TCR/CD3ζ chain and forms signaling aggregates on the cell surface [91]. There is also associated Syk recruitment to the TCR complex. Other investigators have subsequently reported similar abnormalities of decreased TCR/CD3 ζ chain production among SLE patients from Japan and South America [100–102].

In studies delineating the mechanism of decreased TCR/CD3 ζ chain production, Juang et al. [92] demonstrated that decreased TCR/CD3 ζ chain production was the result of decreased production of the ζ chain promoter binding form of the transcription factor Elf-1. Transcription of the

IL-2 gene is decreased because of the presence of transcriptional repressor cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element modulator (CREM) [93]. Additional T cell signaling defects have been reported, including mRNA mutation of type I protein kinase A regulatory subunit alpha in T cells of patients with SLE [94–96]. Finally, in support of the concept that T cell signaling abnormalities have a central role in SLE are a series of elegant observations in murine models of lupus demonstrating functional T cell hyperresponsiveness and mapping susceptibility loci to genes influencing T cell hyperreactivity [15, 42–45, 97–100, 103–105].

### T cell activation-induced cell death

Two recently published studies have identified abnormalities in T cell activation-induced cell death in SLE that could contribute to disease pathogenesis [106, 107]. A study by Lu et al. [106] identified defects of activation-induced cell death in T cells from SLE patients and reported that these T cells resist anergy and apoptosis by upregulating and sustaining cyclooxygenase-2 expression. They demonstrate that this defect could be overcome by inhibiting this pathway using a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor as a blocking agent. Budagyan et al. [106] have recently reported that T cells of patients with SLE exhibit greater resistance ex vivo than activated T cells from healthy blood donors to the induction of apoptosis using PHA activation in coculture with a human thymic stromal cell line of epithelial origin. Consistent with these observations, spontaneous murine models of lupus and knockout mice with lupus-like phenotypes have been characterized and found to have genetic abnormalities that lead to defects in activation-induced cell death [15, 42–45, 103–105].

### T regulatory cells

There has been a recent resurgence of interest in the role of T regulatory cells, although the topic of T-cell-mediated suppression has a long history [110–112]. Early studies describing ex vivo abnormalities of T cell suppression in SLE were published by many investigators. Although other subsets of T cells have been described with suppressor activity, recent interest has focused on CD4+ T cells expressing the alpha chain of the IL-2 receptor (CD4+CD25+) [108, 109]. One recent study quantitating CD4+CD25+ T cells in SLE has reported that such cells are decreased in peripheral blood during active disease, when compared to control subjects and patients with inactive disease [110]. Such studies are potentially complicated by the fact that the CD4+CD25+ T cell phenotype is expressed by both activated T cells and T regulatory cells and there currently is no reagent that is completely specific for the identification of T regulatory cells [111, 112]. The contribution of regulatory T cells in SLE is a topic of considerable interest and awaits further investigation [113].

---

### Synthesis and future perspectives

A unified model of pathogenesis in SLE requires incorporation of a large number of complex and somewhat disparate observations (see Fig. 1). A unified model must consider how immunological self-tolerance is overcome. There is emerging evidence that exposure to cryptic epitopes on self-antigens generated during apoptosis and excess costimulation may contribute to the development of SLE [55, 56]. There is also evidence that prolonged exposure to antigen in a genetically susceptible individual may be important in overcoming immunological tolerance [36]. Once tolerance is overcome, T cells reactive with a variety of self-antigens, including DNA-histone, small nuclear ribonucleoproteins-RNA, and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein-RNA complexes can be detected in the peripheral blood of patients with SLE [46, 59–75]. Following activation, these T cells are available to provide T cell help to autoantibody-producing cells as well as to help expand other self-reactive T cells [62, 67, 75]. These self-reactive T cells appear to be directed against a limited number of antigenic epitopes and react with regions on the antigens that are functionally important in nucleic acid-protein interactions. While the full implications of these observations remain to be explained, the possibility that autoantigen-associated RNA or DNA may provide a costimulator signal for antigen-presenting cells through TLRs is an intriguing one. Furthermore, recent research has demonstrated that T cells from patients with SLE have abnormalities in their activation thresholds for T cell signaling and that T cells from some patients with SLE exhibit abnormalities of activation-induced cell death [89–98]. The ongoing definition of these pathways continues to advance our understanding of the pathogenesis of SLE and may reveal novel therapeutic targets. While, theoretically, the absence of sufficient or appropriate T regulatory cells, abnormalities of antigen processing or presentation, or the presence of inappropriate or excess cytokine production could all be important in the pathogenesis of SLE, convincing evidence for these is currently limited.

It appears reasonable to anticipate that further delineation of T cell activation pathway in SLE will emerge, including the possibly of identification of one or more genetic abnormality in SLE that may underlay signaling abnormalities. We may also anticipate further characterization of autoantigen-reactive T cells in SLE and the development of animal models constructed by the genetic insertion of components of the human immune system into mice that may be particularly relevant to human disease, including combinations of human MHC, TCR, and autoantigen. Such models may also assist in the development of new reagents for manipulation of immune tolerance in SLE. Thus, while the full details of the pathogenesis of SLE remain to be elucidated, important recent advances have occurred in the identification and

characterization of autoantigen-reactive T cells in SLE and in the delineation of signaling pathway defects in SLE.

# Acknowledgments

This work was supported by NIH grants AR43308 and AR48055, and the Department of Veterans Affairs.

# References

[1] R.G. Lahita, Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, fourth ed., Academic Press, New York, NY, 2004.

[2] R.R. Graham, W.A. Ortmann, C.D. Langefeld, D. Jawaheer, S.A. Selby, P.R. Rodine, E.C. Baechler, K.E. Rohlfs, K.B. Shark, K.J. Espe, L.E. Green, R.P. Nair, P.E. Stewart, J.T. Elder, R.A. King, K.L. Moser, P.M. Gaffney, T.L. Bugawan, H.A. Erlich, S.S. Rich, P.K. Gregersen, T.W. Behrens, Visualizing human leukocyte antigen class II risk haplotype in human systemic lupus erythematosus, Am J Hum Genet. 71 (2002) 543–553.

[3] J.B. Harley, K.L. Moser, P.M. Gaffney, T.W. Behrens, The genetics of human systemic lupus erythematosus, Curr Opin Immunol 10 (1998) 690–696.

[4] F.K. Tan, F.C. Arnett, The genetics of lupus, Curr Opin Immunol 10 (1998) 399–408.

[5] J.D. Reveille, Major histocompatibility complex class II and non-major histocompatibility genes in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus, in: R.G. Lahita (Ed.), Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, fourth ed., Academic Press, New York, NY, 2004, pp. 109–151.

[6] J.M. Ahearn, T.T. Provost, C.A. Dorsch, M.B. Stevens, W.B. Bias, F.C. Arnett, Interrelationships of HLA-DR, MB and MT phenotypes, autoantibody expression, and clinical features in systemic lupus erythematosus, Arthritis Rheum 25 (1982) 1031–1040.

[7] A. Alvarez, J.M. Ahearn, T.T. Provost, C.A. Dorsch, M.B. Stevens, W.B. Bias, F.C. Arnett, Relationships of HLA-DR and MT antigens to autoantibody expression in systemic lupus erythematosus, Arthritis Rheum. 26 (1983) 1533–1535.

[8] P.H. Schur, I. Meyer, M. Garovoy, C.B. Carpenter, Associations between systemic lupus erythematosus and the major histocompatibility complex: clinical and immunological considerations, Clin Immunol Immunopathol 24 (1982) 263–275.

[9] J.S. Smolen, J.H. Klippel, E. Penner, M. Reichlin, A.D. Steinberg, T.M. Chused, O. Scherak, W. Graniger, E. Hartter, C.C. Zielinski, A. Wolf, R.J. Davey, D.L. Mann, W.R. Mayr, HLA-DR antigens in systemic lupus erythematosus: association with specificity of autoantibody responses to nuclear antigens, Ann. Rheum. Dis. 46 (1987) 457–462.

[10] R.W. Hoffman, L.J. Rettenmaier, Y. Takeda, J.E. Hewett, I. Pettersson, U. Nyman, A.M. Luger, G.C. Sharp, Human autoantibodies against the 70kD polypeptide of U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein are associated with HLA-DR4 among connective tissue disease patients, Arthritis Rheum. 33 (1990) 666–673.

[11] H.A.F. Stephens, N.J. McHugh, P.J. Maddison, D.A. Isenberg, K.I. Welsh, G.S. Panayi, HLA class II restriction of autoantibody production in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, Immunogenetics 33 (1991) 276–280.

[12] H. Kaneoka, K.C. Hsu, Y. Takeda, G.C. Sharp, R.W. Hoffman, Molecular genetic analysis of HLA-DR and HLA-DQ genes among anti-U1-70kD autoantibody positive connective tissue disease patients, Arthritis Rheum. 35 (1992) 83–94.

[13] M.L. Olsen, F.C. Arnett, J.D. Reveille, Contrasting molecular patterns of MHC class II alleles associated with the anti-Sm and anti-RNP precipitin autoantibodies in systemic lupus erythematosus, Arthritis Rheum. 36 (1993) 94–104.

[14] M.L. Olsen, F.C. Arnett, J.D. Reveille, Contrasting molecular patterns of MHC class II alleles associated with the anti-Sm and anti-RNP autoantibodies in systemic lupus erythematosus, Arthritis Rheum. 36 (1993) 94–104.

[15] L. Morel, U.H. Rudofsky, J.A. Longmate, J. Schiffenbauer, E.K. Wakeland, Polygenic control of susceptibility to murine systemic lupus erythematosus, Immunity 1 (1994) 219–229.

[16] R.G. Lahita, Gender and age in lupus, in: R.G. Lahita (Ed.), Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, fourth ed., Academic Press, New York, NY, 1999, pp. 203–221.

[17] G.C. Tsokos, Overview of cellular immune function in systemic lupus erythematosus, in: R.G. Lahita (Ed.), Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, fourth ed., Academic Press, New York, NY, 2004, pp. 29–92.

[18] D.A. Horowitz, W. Stohl, J.D. Gray, T lymphocytes, natural killer cells, cytokines, and immune regulation, in: D.J. Wallace, B.H. Hahn (Eds.), Dubois’ Lupus Erythematosus, Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, MD, 1997, pp. 155–194.

[19] R.W. Hoffman, Mixed connective tissue disease, in: J. Belch, R. Zuriel (Eds.), Connective Tissue Diseases, Chapman and Hall, London, England, 1995, pp. 151–178.

[20] R.W. Hoffman, Overlap syndromes: mixed connective tissue disease and Sjogren’s syndrome, in: R.G. Lahita (Ed.), Systemic Lupus Erythematosus, fourth ed., Academic Press, New York, NY, 2004, pp. 717–756.

[21] P.J. Maddison, M. Reichlin, Quantitation of precipitating antibodies to certain soluble nuclear antigens in SLE, Arthritis Rheum. 20 (1977) 819–824.

[22] A. Kramer, The structure and function of proteins involved in mammalian pre-mRNA-splicing, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65 (1996) 367–409.

[23] M.R. Arbuckle, M.T. McClain, M.V. Rubertone, R.H. Scofield, G.J. Dennis, J.A. James, J.B. Harley, Development of autoantibodies before the clinical onset of systemic lupus erythematosus, N. Engl. J. Med. 349 (2003) 1499–1500.

[24] E.M. Tan, A.S. Cohen, J.F. Fries, A.T. Masi, D.J. McShane, N.F. Rothfield, J.G. Schaller, N. Talal, R.J. Winchester, The 1982 revised criteria for the classification of systemic lupus erythematosus, Arthritis Rheum. 11 (1982) 1271–1277.

[25] S.L. Peng, J.L. Craft, Spliceosomal snRNPs autoantibodies, in: J.B. Peter, Y. Schoenfeld (Eds.), Autoantibodies, Elsevier Science Inc., New York, NY, 1996, pp. 774–782.

[26] M.M. Holyst, R.W. Hoffman, U-small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (RNP)-reactive autoantibodies: diagnostic testing and clinical interpretation, Clin. Immunol. Newsl. 18 (1998) 53–57.

[27] E.L. Greidinger, R.W. Hoffman, Antinuclear antibody testing: methods, indications, and interpretations, Lab. Med. 34 (2003) 113–117.

[28] D.S. Pisetsky, Immune activation by bacterial DNA: a new genetic code, Immunity 5 (1996) 303–310.

[29] C.A. Janeway Jr., R. Medzhitov, Innate immune recognition, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 20 (2002) 197–216.

[30] E.A. Leadbetter, I.R. Rifkin, A.M. Hohlbaum, B.C. Beaudette, M. Shlomchik, A. Marshak-Rothstein, Chromatin-IgG complexes activate B cells by dual engagement of IgM and Toll-like receptors, Nature 416 (2002) 595–598.

[31] G.A. Viglianti, C.M. Lau, T.M. Hanley, B.A. Miko, M.J. Shlomchik, A. Marshak-Rothstein, Activation of autoreactive T cells by CpG dsDNA, Immunity 19 (2003) 837–847.

[32] R.W. Hoffman, T. Gazitt, M.F. Foecking, R.A. Ortmann, M. Misfeldt, R. Jorgenson, S.L. Young, E.L. Greidinger, U1-RNA induced innate immunity signaling, Arthritis Rheum. (2004) (in press).

[33] L. Bennet, A.K. Palucka, E. Arce, V. Cantrell, J. Bancherau, V. Pascual, Interferon and granulopoiesis signatures in

systemic lupus erythematosus blood, J. Exp. Med. 197 (2003) 711–723.

[34] S.J. Rozzo, J.D. Allard, D. Choubey, T.J. Vyse, S. Izui, G. Peltz, B.L. Kotzin, Evidence for an interferon-induced gene, Ifi202, in the susceptibility to systemic lupus, Immunity 15 (2001) 435–443.

[35] E.C. Baechler, F.M. Batliwalla, G. Karypis, et al., Interferon-inducible gene expression signature in peripheral blood cells of patients with severe lupus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100 (2003) 2610–2615.

[36] M.J. Walport, Complement and systemic lupus erythematosus, Arthritis Res 4 (2002) S279–S293.

[37] M. Herrmann, R.E. Voll, O.M. Zoller, M. Hagenhofer, B.B. Ponner, J.R. Kalden, Impaired phagocytosis of apoptotic cell material by monocyte-derived macrophages from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, Arthritis Rheum. 41 (1998) 1241–1250.

[38] H. Murata, R. Matsumura, A. Koyama, T. Sugiyama, M. Sueishi, K. Shibuya, A. Tsutsumi, T. Sumida, T cell receptor repertoire of T cells in the kidneys of patients with lupus nephritis, Arthritis Rheum. 46 (2002) 2141–2147.

[39] B.L. Talken, K.R. Schafermeyer, C.W. Bailey, D.R. Lee, R.W. Hoffman, T cell epitope mapping of the Sm autoantigen reveals that highly conserved Sm motifs are the dominant target of T cell immunity in systemic lupus erythematosus, J. Immunol. 167 (2001) 562–568.

[40] M.R. Holbrook, P.J. Tighe, R.J. Powell, Restriction of T cell receptor beta chain repertoire in the peripheral blood of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, Ann. Rheum. Dis. 55 (1996) 627–631.

[41] A. Lanzavecchia, Antigen specific interaction between T and B cells, Nature 314 (1985) 537–539.

[42] R.R. Singh, Prevention and control of reciprocal T–B cell diversification: implications for lupus-like autoimmunity, Mol Immunol 40 (2004) 1137–1145.

[43] B.W. Busser, B.S. Adair, J. Erikson, T.M. Laufer, Activation of diverse repertoires of autoreactive T cells enhance the loss of anti-dsDNA B cell tolerance, J. Clin. Invest. 112 (2003) 1361–1371.

[44] M.L. Fields, S.J. Seo, S.A. Nish, J.H. Tsai, A.J. Caton, J. Erikson, The regulation and activation potential of autoreactive B cells, Immunol. Res. 27 (2003) 219–234.

[45] C. Mohan, Y. Yu, L. Morel, P. Yang, E.K. Wakeland, Genetic dissection of Sle pathogenesis: Sle3 on murine chromosome 7 impacts T cell activation, differentiation, and cell death, J. Immunol. 162 (1999) 6492–6502.

[46] R.W. Hoffman, Y. Takeda, G.C. Sharp, D.R. Lee, K. Kaneoka, C.W. Caldwell, Human T cell clones reactive against U-small nuclear ribonucleoprotein autoantigens from connective tissue disease patients and healthy individuals, J. Immunol. 151 (1993) 6460–6469.

[47] S. Fenning, G. Wolff-Vorbeck, W. Hackl, U. Krawinkel, R. Luhrmann, W. Northemann, H.H. Peter, M. Schlesier, T cell lines recognizing the 70kD protein of U1 small nuclear ribonuclearprotein (U1snRNP), Clin. Exp. Immunol. 101 (1995) 408–413.

[48] G. Wolff-Vorbeck, W. Hackl, S. Fenning, U. Krawinkel, R. Luhrmann, H.H. Peter, M. Schlesier, Characterization of an HLA-DR4-restricted T cell clone recognizing a protein moiety of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (UsnRNP), Clin. Exp. Immunol. 95 (1994) 378–384.

[49] A.W. Goldrath, M.J. Bevan, Selecting and maintaining a diverse T-cell repertoire, Nature 402 (1999) 255–262.

[50] A. Lanzavecchia, How can cryptic epitopes trigger autoimmunity? J. Exp. Med. 181 (1995) 1945–1948.

[51] E.E. Sercaz, P.V. Lehmann, A. Amentani, G. Benichou, A. Miller, K. Moudgil, Dominance and crypticity of T cell antigenic determinants, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 11 (1993) 729–766.

[52] G. Dighiero, N.R. Rose, Critical self-epitopes are key to the understanding of self-tolerance and autoimmunity, Immunol. Today 20 (1999) 423–428.

[53] H.A. Doyle, M.J. Mamula, Posttranslational protein modifications:

new flavors in the menu of autoantigens, Curr. Opin. Rheumatol. 14 (2002) 244–249.

[54] M.J. Shlomchik, J.E. Craft, M.J. Mamula, From T to B and back again: positive feedback in systemic autoimmune disease, Nat. Rev. Immunol. 1 (2001) 147–153.

[55] L.A. Casciola-Rosen, G. Anhalt, A. Rosen, Autoantigens targeted in systemic lupus erythematosus are clustered in two populations of surface structures on apoptotic keratinocytes, J. Exp. Med. 179 (1994) 1317–1330.

[56] F. Andrade, L. Casciola-Rosen, A. Rosen, Apoptosis in systemic lupus erythematosus: clinical implications, Rheum. Dis. Clin. North Am. 26 (2000) 215–227.

[57] E.L. Greidinger, R.W. Hoffman, The appearance of U1 RNP antibody specificities in sequential autoimmune human antisera follows a characteristic order that implicates the U1-70kD and B'/B proteins as predominant U1 RNP immunogens, Arthritis Rheum. 44 (2001) 368–375.

[58] E.L. Greidinger, M.F. Foecking, S. Ranatunga, R.W. Hoffman, Apoptotic U1-70kD is antigenically distinct from the intact form of the U1-70kD molecule, Arthritis Rheum. 45 (2002) 1264–1269.

[59] S. Rajagopalan, T. Zordan, G.C. Tsokos, S.K. Datta, Pathogenic anti-DNA autoantibody-inducing T helper cell lines from patients with active lupus nephritis: isolation of CD4-8-T helper cell lines that express the gamma delta T-cell antigen receptor, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 87 (1990) 7020–7024.

[60] A. Desai-Mehta, C. Mao, S. Rajagopalan, T. Robinson, S.K. Datta, Structure and specificity of T cell receptors expressed by potentially pathogenic anti-DNA autoantibody-inducing T cells in human lupus, J. Clin. Invest. 95 (1994) 531–541.

[61] L. Lu, A. Kaliyaperumal, D.T. Boumpas, S.K. Datta, Major peptide autoepitopes for nucleosome-specific T cells of human lupus, J. Clin. Invest. 104 (1999) 345–355.

[62] A. Desai-Mehta, L. Lu, R. Ramsey-Goldman, S.K. Datta, Hyperexpression of CD40 ligand by B and T cells in human lupus and its role in pathogenic autoantibody production, J. Clin. Invest. 97 (1996) 2063–2071.

[63] Y. Yi, M. McNuerney, S.K. Datta, Regulatory defects in Cbl and mitogen-activated protein kinase (extracellular signal-related kinase) pathways cause persistent hyperexpression of CD40 ligand in human lupus T cells, J. Immunol. 165 (2000) 6627–6634.

[64] R.M. O'Brien, D.S. Cram, R.L. Coppel, L.C. Harrison, T-cell epitopes on the 70-kDa protein of the (U1)RNP complex in autoimmune rheumatologic disorders, J. Autoimmun. 3 (1990) 747–757.

[65] R.W. Hoffman, H. Kaneoka, K.C. Hsu, Y. Takeda, C.W. Caldwell, G.C. Sharp, Molecular analysis of the human immune response to the U1-70kD antigen, Mol. Biol. Rep. 15 (1991) 132.

[66] M. Okubo, K. Yammamoto, T. Kato, N. Matsuura, T. Nishimaki, R. Kasukawa, K. Ito, Y. Mizushima, K. Nishioka, Detection and epitope analysis of autoantigen-reactive T cells to the U1-small nuclear ribonucleoprotein A protein in autoimmune disease patients, J. Immunol. 151 (1993) 1108–1115.

[67] M. Takeno, H. Nagafuchi, S. Kaneko, S. Wakisaka, K. Oneda, Y. Takeba, N. Yamashita, N. Suzuki, H. Kaneoka, T. Sakane, Auto-reactive T cell clones from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus support polyclonal autoantibody production, J. Immunol. 158 (1997) 3529–3538.

[68] M.M. Holyst, D.L. Hill, S.O. Hoch, R.W. Hoffman, Analysis of human T cell and B cell responses against U-small nuclear ribonucleoprotein 70kD, B, and D polypeptides among patients with systemic lupus erythematosus and mixed connective tissue disease, Arthritis Rheum. 40 (1997) 1493–1503.

[69] B.L. Talken, M.M. Holyst, D.L. Hill, R.W. Hoffman, T cell receptor beta-chain third complementarity-determining region gene usage is highly restricted among Sm-B autoantigen-specific human T cell clones derived from patients with connective tissue disease, Arthritis Rheum. 42 (1999) 703–709.

[70] B.L. Talken, D.R. Lee, C.W. Caldwell, T.P. Quinn, K.R.

Schafermeyer, R.W. Hoffman, Analysis of T cell receptors specific for U1-70kD small nuclear ribonucleoprotein autoantigen: the alpha chain complementarity determining region three is highly conserved among connective tissue disease patients, Hum. Immunol. 60 (1999) 200–208.

[71] R.W. Hoffman, T cells in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus, Front. Biosci. 4 (1999) 1–9.

[72] B.L. Talken, C.W. Bailey, S.L. Reardon, C.W. Caldwell, R.W. Hoffman, Structural analysis of T cell receptor (TCR) alpha and beta chains from human T cell clones specific for small nuclear ribonucleoprotein polypeptides Sm-D, Sm-B, and U1-70kD: TCR complementarity determining region 3 usage appears highly conserved, Scand. J. Immunol. 54 (2001) 204–210.

[73] E.L. Greidinger, C.W. Bailey, K.R. Schafermeyer, S.L. Reardon, D.R. Lee, R.W. Hoffman, RNA binding domain is target of T cell immunity by U1-70kD specific human T cell clones, J. Immunol. 169 (2002) 3429–3437.

[74] M. DeSilva-Udawatta, S.R. Kumar, E.L. Greidinger, R.W. Hoffman, Cloned human TCR from patients with autoimmune disease can respond to two structurally distinct autoantigens, J. Immunol. 172 (2004) 3940–3947.

[75] E.L. Greidinger, T. Gazitt, K.F. Jaimes, R.W. Hoffman, Human T cell clones specific for heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2 autoantigen from connective tissue disease patients provide help for autoantibody production, Arthritis Rheum. (2004) (in press).

[76] M.G. Fury, W. Zang, I. Christodoulopoulos, G.W. Zieve, Multiple protein–protein interactions between the snRNP common core proteins, Exp. Cell Res. I (1997) 63–69.

[77] H. Hermann, P. Fabrizio, V.A. Raker, K. Foulaki, H. Homig, H. Brahms, R. Luhrmann, SnRNP Sm proteins share two evolutionary conserved sequence motifs which are involved in Sm protein–protein interactions, EMBO J. 14 (1995) 2076–2088.

[78] F. Monneaux, S. Muller, Key sequences involved in the spreading of the systemic autoimmune response to spliceosomal proteins, Scand. J. Immunol. 54 (2001) 45–54.

[79] E.L. Greidinger, M.F. Foecking, J. Magee, L. Wilson, S. Ranatunga, R.A. Ortmann, R.W. Hoffman, A major B cell epitope present on the apoptotic but not the intact form of the U1-70kd ribonucleoprotein antigen, J. Immunol. 172 (2004) 709–716.

[80] J. Yan, M.J. Mamula, Autoreactive T cells revealed in the normal repertoire: escape from negative selection and peripheral tolerance, J. Immunol. 168 (2002) 3188–3194.

[81] J. Kuchtey, M. Pennini, R.K. Pai, C.V. Harding, CpG DNA induces a class II transactivator-independent increase in class II MHC by stabilizing class II MHC mRNA in B lymphocytes, J. Immunol. 171 (2003) 2320–2325.

[82] C. Scheinecker, B. Zwolfer, M. Koller, G. Manner, J.S. Smolen, Alterations of dendritic cells in systemic lupus erythematosus: phenotypic and functional deficiencies, Arthritis Rheum. 44 (2001) 856–865.

[83] M.J. Yellin, U. Thienel, T cells in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus: potential roles of CD154–CD40 interactions and costimulatory molecules, Curr. Rheumatol. Rep. 2 (2000) 24–31.

[84] M.K. Crow, K.A. Kirou, Regulation of CD40 ligand expression in systemic lupus erythematosus, Curr. Opin. Rheumatol. 13 (2001) 361–369.

[85] C.G. Katsiari, S.N. Liosis, A.M. Dimopoulos, D.V. Charalambo-poulo, M. Mavrikakis, P.P. Sfikakis, CD40L overexpression on T cells and monocytes from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus is resistant to calcineurin inhibition, Lupus 11 (2002) 370–378.

[86] M. Bijl, G. Horst, P.C. Limburg, C.G.M. Kallenberg, Expression of costimulatory molecules on peripheral blood lymphocytes of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, Ann. Rheum. Dis. 60 (2001) 523–526.

[87] B. Richardson, DNA methylation and autoimmune disease, Clin. Immunol. 109 (2003) 72–79.

[88] L. Prokunina, C. Castillejo-Lopez, F. Oberg, I. Gunnarsson, L. Berg, V. Magnusson, A.J. Brooks, D. Tentler, H. Kristjansdottir, et al., A regulatory polymorphism in PDCD1 is associated with susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus in humans, Nat. Gen. 32 (2002) 666–669.

[89] S.N. Liosis, X.Z. Ding, G.J. Dennis, G.C. Tsokos, Altered pattern of TCR/CD3-mediated protein-tyrosol phosphorylation in T cells from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: deficient expression of the T cell receptor ζ chain, J. Clin. Invest. 101 (1998) 1448–1457.

[90] G.C. Tsokos, S.N. Liosis, Immune cell signaling defects in lupus: activation, anergy, and death, Immunol. Today 20 (1999) 119–124.

[91] E.J. Enyedy, M.P. Nambiar, S.N. Liosis, G. Dennis, G.M. Kammer, G.C. Tsokos, Fcε receptor type I γ chain replaces the deficient T cell receptor ζ chain in T cells of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, Arthritis Rheum. 44 (2001) 1114–1121.

[92] Y.T. Juang, K. Tenbrock, M.P. Nambiar, M.F. Gourley, G.C. Tsokos, Defective production of functional 98-kDa form of Elf-1 is responsible for the decreased expression of TCR ζ-chain in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, J. Immunol. 169 (2002) 6048–6055.

[93] M.R. Elliot, M. Tolnay, G.C. Tsokos, G.M. Kammer, Protein kinase A regulatory subunit type II beta directly interacts with and suppresses CREB transcriptional activity in activated T cells, J. Immunol. 171 (2003) 3636–3644.

[94] G.M. Kammer, High prevalence of T cell type I protein kinase A deficiency in systemic lupus erythematosus, Arthritis Rheum. 42 (1999) 1458–1465.

[95] I.U. Khan, D. Laxminarayana, G.M. Kammer, A genetic mechanism underlying deficient type I protein kinase A activity in systemic lupus erythematosus T lymphocytes, in: G.M. Kammer, G.C. Tsokos (Eds.), Lupus Molecular and Cellular Pathogenesis, Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, 1999, pp. 257–277.

[96] G.M. Kammer, Deficient protein kinase A in systemic lupus erythematosus: a disorder of T lymphocyte signal transduction, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 968 (2002) 96–105.

[97] A. Kaliyaperumal, M.A. Michaels, S.K. Datta, Antigen-specific therapy of murine lupus nephritis using nucleosomal peptides: tolerance spreading impairs pathogenic function of autoimmune T and B cells, J. Immunol. 162 (1999) 5775–5783.

[98] G.S. Vrantsanos, S. Jung, Y.M. Park, J. Craft, CD4+ cells from lupus-prone mice are hyperresponsive to T cell receptor engagement with low and high affinity peptide antigens: a model to explain spontaneous T cell activation in lupus, J. Exp. Med. 193 (2001) 329–338.

[99] F. Bouzahzah, S. Jung, J. Craft, CD4+ T cells from lupus-prone mice avoid antigen-specific tolerance induction in vivo, J. Immunol. 170 (2003) 741–748.

[100] K. Tsuzaka, T. Takeuchi, N. Onoda, M. Pang, T. Abe, Mutations in T cell receptor zeta chain mRNA of peripheral blood T cells from systemic lupus erythematosus patients, J. Autoimmun. 11 (1998) 381–385.

[101] T. Takeuchi, K. Tsuzaka, M. Pang, K. Amano, T. Abe, TCR zeta chain lacking exon 7 in two patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, Int. Immunol. 10 (1998) 911–912.

[102] V. Brundula, L.J. Rivas, A.M. Paris, S. Salazar, I.L. Stekman, M.A. Rodriguez, Diminished levels of T cell receptor zeta chain in peripheral blood T lymphocytes from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, Arthritis Rheum. 42 (1999) 1908–1916.

[103] Y. Zhang, S.F. Schlossman, R.A. Edwards, C.N. Ou, J. Gu, M.X. Wu, Impaired apoptosis, extended duration of immune response, and a lupus-like autoimmune disease in IEX-1-transgenic mice, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99 (2002) 878–883.

[104] H. Sun, B. Lu, R.-Q. Li, R.A. Flavell, R. Taneja, Defective T cell activation and autoimmune disorder in Stra13-deficient mice, Nat. Immunol. 2 (2001) 1040–1047.

[105] K.M. Pollard, P. Hultman, D.H. Kono, Using single-gene deletions

to identify checkpoints in the progression of systemic autoimmunity,  
Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 987 (2003) 236–239.  

[106] L. Lu, L. Zhang, Y. Yi, H.-K. Kang, S.K. Datta, Human lupus T  
cells resist inactivation and escape death by upregulating COX-2,  
Nat. Med. (2004) 1–5.  

[107] M. Budagyan, E.G. Bulanova, N.I. Sharova, M.F. Nikonova,  
M.L. Stanislav, A.A. Yarylin, The resistance of activated T-cells  
from SLE patients to apoptosis induced by human thymic stromal  
cells, Immunol. Lett. 60 (1998) 1–5.  

[108] K.A. Gershon, A disquisition of suppressor T cells, Transplant Rev.  
26 (1975) 170–185.  

[109] E.M. Shevach, Regulatory T cells in autoimmunity, Annu. Rev.  
Immunol. 18 (2000) 432–449.  

[110] F. Powrie, K.J. Maloy, Regulating the regulators, Science 299 (2003)  
1030–1031.  

[111] J.C. Crispin, A. Martinez, J. Alcocer-Varela, Quantification of  
regulatory T cells in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus,  
J. Autoimmun. 21 (2003) 273–276.  

[112] M.F. Liu, C.R. Wang, L.L. Fung, C.R. Wu, Decreased  
CD4+CD25+ T cells in peripheral blood of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, Scand. J. Immunol. 59 (2004)  
198–02.  

[113] A. Horwitz, J.D. Gray, S.G. Zheng, The potential of human  
regulatory T cells generated ex vivo as a treatment for lupus  
and other chronic inflammatory diseases, Arthritis Res. 4 (2002)  
241–246.
