
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Microbes and Infection 6 (2004) 1084–1093

Review

Cellular stress and signal transduction responses  
to human cytomegalovirus infection

David L. Evers${}^{a}$, Xin Wang${}^{a}$, Eng-Shang Huang${}^{a,b,c,d,*}$

${}^{a}$ Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, CB No. 7295, Room 32-026, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA  
${}^{b}$ Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA  
${}^{c}$ Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA  
${}^{d}$ Curriculum of Genetics and Molecular Biology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA  

Available online 30 July 2004

---

### Abstract

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) receptor-ligand interactions and viral entry excite cellular responses such as receptor tyrosine kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling, cytoskeletal rearrangement, and the induction of transcription factors, prostaglandins, and cytokines. Bi-phasic stimulation of these pathways, excepting interferon, facilitates productive viral infection and likely contributes to viral pathogenesis.

© 2004 Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

### Keywords: Cytomegalovirus; Signal transduction; Cytokine; Antiviral

---

### 1. Introduction

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is an enveloped, double-stranded DNA virus that belongs to the Herpesviridae family and is classified as a β-herpesvirus due to its narrow cell tropism in cell culture, relatively slow replication cycle, and “cytomegalo” enlargement of infected cells [1]. Approximately 60–90% of adults worldwide have antibodies to HCMV, indicating that they are carriers because, like all herpesviruses, the virus is never cleared from the host and remains latent until periodic reactivation opportunities are presented [2]. HCMV is transmitted by contact with any and all bodily secretions.

The vast majority of individuals infected with HCMV are asymptomatic. HCMV is best known for causing significant morbidity and mortality in immunocompromised populations. This virus is a leading cause of birth defects, often causing mental retardation and deafness. HCMV is a common opportunistic pathogen in transplant recipients and is associated with allograft rejection. Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients can be blinded by HCMV retinitis. There may also be an etiological role for HCMV in atherosclerosis, coronary artery restenosis, and inflammatory bowel diseases [2,3].

The life cycle of every virus has seven stages: attachment, entry, uncoating, replication, assembly, maturation, and egress. The replication stage of herpesviruses is further divided into sequential cascades of immediate-early (IE), early (E), and late (L) gene expression [1]. This review focuses upon two major contributions to HCMV pathogenesis at the molecular level. First, the cell signaling and cytokine responses to HCMV attachment and entry. Second, HCMV immediate-early proteins that perturb cell growth and appear to reactivate cellular signaling. Our discussion of HCMV replication and immune response evasion is limited. These subjects are elegantly reviewed elsewhere [1,4].

---

### 2. Phase I: receptor-ligand interactions and HCMV entry

#### 2.1. Cellular receptor and co-receptor for HCMV

Despite the narrow cell tropism observed for HCMV in vitro, this virus infects nearly all cell types in human hosts, suggesting the use of receptor(s) common to most cells.

D.L. Evers et al. / Microbes and Infection 6 (2004) 1084–1093

1. Non-specific binding
2. Specific binding
3. Lipid raft domain: receptor clustering
4. Fusion/endocytosis and entry

gM/N gH
gB gH
gB gH?
gB gH?

plasma membrane

AG1478
wortmannin LY294002
PI3-K
PLCγ MAPK NF-κB Sp1 AP-1
Akt p70S6K
Src PP2
Rac RhoA Y-27632

priming cell for viral replication
stress fiber disruption

nuclear translocation

innate immune signaling

Fig. 1. Model for HCMV attachment and entry. Non-specific binding of HCMV to cell surfaces is mediated by viral glycoprotein(s) such as gB binding to HSPG. Specific binding of gB to the EGFR tyrosine kinase stimulates multiple cellular proliferative responses [7] and likely “primes” host cells for subsequent viral replication. Specific binding to αvβ3 integrin (αvβ3) stimulates signaling pathway(s) that result in stress fiber disruption [8]. Specific interaction(s) of HCMV glycoprotein ligand(s) with TLR2 and CD14 may mediate innate immune signaling [46]. Receptor clustering and coordinated signaling is associated with the recruitment of αvβ3 to lipid raft microdomains. Fusion of the cellular plasma membrane with the HCMV envelope is likely mediated by viral glycoproteins gB and gH, enabling viral entry. αvβ3-mediated disruption of actin microfilaments facilitates virus transit to the nucleus.

Transient attachment of HCMV is likely mediated by heparin sulfate proteoglycan (HSPG), while stable attachment and entry are mediated by proteinaceous receptor(s) [5]. Entry occurs by pH-insensitive membrane fusion [6]. Various cellular receptors for HCMV were proposed, then discarded, because they were neither necessary nor sufficient for viral infection [1]. Recent evidence implicates the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and αvβ3 integrin as an HCMV receptor and co-receptor (Fig. 1), respectively [7,8].

HCMV transiently and specifically activated EGFR in a manner similar to native ligands [7]. A requirement for EGFR in HCMV infection was demonstrated by correlating cellular presence or absence of EGFR to HCMV permissiveness using matched and transfected cell lines. Conversion of EGFR-negative breast cancer cells to EGFR-positive cells by DNA transfection rendered them susceptible to HCMV infection. Direct interactions between HCMV surface glycoprotein gB and EGFR in a manner competitive with EGF were shown. Neutralizing antibody to EGFR or EGFR kinase inhibitor AG1478 blocked HCMV entry and replication [7].

Rapid disruption of actin stress fibers by HCMV and the recognition of integrins as key mediators of extracellular stimuli to stress fiber rearrangement prompted the examination of possible integrin requirements for viral replication. Blocking antibody experiments identified αvβ3 as the integrin species required for HCMV infectivity [8]. Soluble αvβ3 protein and αvβ3 ligands, but not other integrins or integrin ligands, inhibited HCMV replication. Cell tropism correlated with the presence of both EGFR and αvβ3. Viral susceptibility was conferred by transfection of the appropriate receptor and/or co-receptor to cells lacking either or both EGFR and αvβ3. EGFR and αvβ3 co-immunoprecipitated upon HCMV binding, and a complex of EGFR, PI3-K, αvβ3, and Src was detected in the lipid raft microdomains of HCMV-infected cells. Initial experiments suggested that the HCMV ligand(s) for αvβ3 integrin might involve gH glycoprotein [8].

### 2.2. EGFR receptor tyrosine kinase signaling

EGFR (ErbB1) is an integral membrane protein with extracellular ligand binding and intracellular signaling domains. Activation results in the recruitment of a variety of signaling proteins [9]. Among these is the p85/p110 kDa phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3-K), which phosphorylates the three position of inositol on phospholipid substrates, such as the conversion of PIP to PIP₂, that in turn recruit signaling proteins to the cell membrane. Activated PI3-K phosphorylates (activates) ribosomal S6 kinases (such as p70S6K) and Akt (protein kinase B). Akt prevents apoptosis and regulates cellular metabolism. Autophosphorylated EGFR activates PLCγ to hydrolyze PIP₂ to diacylglycerol (DG) and inositol-triphosphate (IP₃), both of which are second messengers. DG induces protein kinase C (PKC), and IP₃ mediates a calcium influx [9].

Hydrolysis of inositol phospholipids and intracellular calcium increases in response to HCMV infection were first reported in 1988 [10]. Minutes after infecting fibroblasts with HCMV, phosphorylated forms of PI3-K p85, p70S6K, and Akt were detected. This burst of RTK activation was reproducible with UV-inactivated HCMV [11]. Activation of p70S6K and Akt was sensitive to PI3-K inhibitors wortmannin and LY294002, but not to other kinase inhibitors, and was reversible upon treatment with 3-phospho-inositol phospholipids [11]. EGFR kinase inhibitor AG1478 inhibited PI3-K phosphorylation, but LY294002 did not inhibit EGFR phosphorylation, indicating that PI3-K was downstream of EGFR in this HCMV-induced signaling pathway [7]. The antiviral activity of LY294002 implied a requirement for PI3-K activation for productive HCMV replication [11]. Similarly, inhibitors of PKC blocked HCMV replication and activators of PKC facilitated HCMV replication [12].

### 2.3. Integrin αvβ3 induced signaling

Phosphorylation of the β3 integrin subunit was observed 5–10 min post HCMV infection [8]. Virus-mediated Src activation was blocked in cells treated with soluble αvβ3 or stably transfected with a phosphorylation-incompetent mutant of β3. Inhibition of EGFR resulted in less Src activation in response to HCMV, and inhibition of αvβ3 resulted in less PI3-K activation in response to HCMV. Similarly, inhibition of PI3-K by LY294002 resulted in less β3 phosphorylation in response to HCMV, and inhibition of Src by PP2 resulted in less EGFR phosphorylation in response to HCMV. EGFR, αvβ3, PI3-K, and Src could be co-immunoprecipitated following HCMV treatment. This multimeric complex was specific to HCMV activation and found only in lipid raft microdomains. The lipid rafts were required for coordinated signaling through both receptors in HCMV-infected cells [8].

### 2.4. Trafficking of virus to the nucleus

Following entry, HCMV capsids must travel to the nucleus prior to permissive replication. Host cell stress fibers are disrupted rapidly following HCMV infection. Actin depolymerization correlated with nuclear translocation of viral particles. Treatment of infected cells with cytochalasin B, a disruptor of actin microfilaments, enhanced viral nuclear translocation [13]. Recent evidence suggested that coordinated signaling through EGFR and αvβ3 reduced the activity and steady-state levels of RhoA GTPase, a regulator of cytoskeletal reorganization, and the phosphorylation of its downstream target cofillin [8]. Inhibition of RhoA with Y-27632 reversed the block to HCMV-induced disruption of actin stress fibers and nuclear translocation of viral particles produced by EGFR neutralizing antibody, soluble αvβ3, LY294002, and PP2 [8]. HCMV nuclear translocation appears to require intact microtubule networks, but disrupted microfilaments. Disruption of microtubules with nocodazole or colchicine blocked HCMV immediate-early gene expression [14].

### 2.5. Mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling

Three families of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) have been extensively studied in mammalian cells: extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2), p38, and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). Each MAPK is the third in a cascade of three sequential kinases. MKKK phosphorylates MKK, which phosphorylate MAPK in conserved activation pathways [15]. HCMV infection activated ERK1/2 through MEK1/2 in a time frame consistent with virus-receptor interactions (10–30 min post infection) [16]. These results were reproducible with soluble gB [17]. A likely requirement for MEK1/2 activation in HCMV replication was evidenced by the antiviral activity of U0126 and PD098059, both MEK1/2 inhibitors [16,18]. p38 activation was induced in permissive fibroblasts infected with HCMV. Interestingly, p38 activation was produced by receptor-ligand interactions in monocytes, but this initial phase of p38 induction was not seen in fibroblasts [17,19]. Selective antiviral activity was shown for FHPI, a specific inhibitor of p38 MAPK, suggesting a requirement for this kinase in viral replication [20]. HCMV may also activate JNK, but this has not been reported.

### 2.6. Transcription factor induction

Classical nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) is a DNA-binding protein composed of p50 and p65 subunits [21]. NF-κB is normally sequestered in the cytoplasm because a bound inhibitory protein, IκB, masks its nuclear localization region. Phosphorylation of IκB by IκB kinase (IKK) frees NF-κB to translocate to the nucleus. There NF-κB activates the transcription of at least 150 cellular genes, including inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, immunoreceptors, and cell adhesion molecules [21]. It was suggested that the global “function” of NF-κB may be to regulate cellular responses to stresses, directing them toward the promotion of cell growth and survival [22].

In 1989 transcriptional activation of the major immediate-early promoter (MIEP) of HCMV was shown to require functional NF-κB responsive elements [23]. Subsequent reporter gene, mRNA and protein level, and electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) experiments established that NF-κB was stimulated in response to HCMV infection [24–26]. Activation of the specific promoter (Sp)1 protein was also shown by EMSA, and was required for NF-κB p65 promoter activation [26]. Activation of these transcription factors was reproduced with UV-inactivated HCMV, virion membrane extracts, purified gB protein, and an anti-idiotypic antibody mimicking gH [17,24,27]. In contrast to NF-κB, Sp1 promotes the transcription of relatively few genes. Among those upregulated are those associated with transcription (such as the TATA-box binding protein, E2F, and thymidine kinase) and cell cycle regulation (such as Rb and p107) [28].

HCMV attachment/entry also stimulates activator protein-1 (AP-1) [29]. This is a large and heterogeneous

Fig. 2. HCMV activation of prostaglandins. Sensitivity to pertussis toxin indicates that prostaglandin induction by HCMV is mediated by G-protein coupled receptor(s) coupled to G-proteins i and/or o (G$_{i/o}$) [37]. The ligand(s) for this activation may be on HCMV virus particles or may result from autocrine or paracrine cellular signaling in response to receptor-ligand interactions. PKC and mitogen-activated protein kinases 1 and 2 (MEK1/2) are implicated in the translocation of cPLA$_2$ to release membrane-bound AA. Prostaglandin H synthases, also known as COX, convert AA to PGH$_2$ [35]. This common prostaglandin precursor is converted into other effector species. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE$_2$) is produced in HCMV-infected cells [84], and acts upon prostaglandin E2 receptors 1–4 (EP$_{1-4}$) coupled to G-proteins G$_i$, G$_p$, or G$_s$. This results in increased adenylate cyclase (AC) activity that produces cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). This signaling also results in a calcium influx, the production of ROS, and possibly NF-κB induction.

group of dimeric basic-region leucine zipper (bZip) DNA-binding proteins whose individual subunits are members of the ATF, Jun, Fos, and Maf families. AP-1 induction results in up- or downregulation of a variety of proteins involved in cellular proliferation and apoptosis (such as cyclins, p16$^{INK}$, p19$^{ARF}$, p53, Bcl/Bax, and Fas) [30]. The predominant AP-1 species activated by HCMV in monocytes are c-Fos/Jun-D heterodimers [31].

Many other cellular transcription factors, such as ATF/CRE and IRF-3, are most likely induced by HCMV attachment/entry. It has been hypothesized that transcription factor stimulation by HCMV functions to “prime” cells for subsequent viral replication. This is supported by the plethora of responsive DNA elements in the promoter/enhancer regions of HCMV genes. At least one consensus sequence/binding site for 11 different cellular transcription factors has been identified in the MIEP [1].

2.7. Prostaglandin activation

Marketed non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) that block prostaglandin biosynthesis have been known since 1988 to inhibit HCMV replication [32–34]. Prostaglandin activation (Fig. 2) begins with cytosolic phospholipase 2 (cPLA$_2$) translocation to the nuclear envelope or endoplasmic reticulum, where it hydrolyzes the lipid anchor of arachidonic acid (AA). Cyclooxygenases (“basal” COX-1 and “induced” COX-2) convert AA to the common precursor prostaglandin H2 (PGH$_2$) which is converted into a variety of prostaglandins that are released from the cell as activating ligands for specific G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) [35]. As depicted in Fig. 2, shortly following infection with live or UV-inactivated virus, AA was released and reactive oxygen species (ROS) were elevated [25,36]. HCMV infection induced cPLA$_2$ and COX-2 and produced PGE$_2$ secretion [32,34,37,38]. Prostaglandin induction by HCMV is probably mediated by unidentified GPCR(s) that are sensitive to pertussis toxin [37].

2.8. Cytokine and interferon induction

Interferons (IFNs) are cytokines that produce effectors to inhibit transcription and translation, activate signal transduction, and in some cases, produce apoptosis. Knockout mice lacking IFNs or their cognate receptors had poorer prognoses when infected with numerous RNA and DNA viruses. IFN-inducing drugs and IFN treatments (in vitro and in vivo) have broad-spectrum antiviral activities against RNA and DNA viruses—including HCMV [39].

An initial IFN-$\alpha/\beta$ response is mounted in HCMV-infected cells. Microarray and differential display analyses

correlated early events in the HCMV replication cycle with the accumulation of type I IFN-responsive mRNAs [34,38,40–42]. The binding of HCMV surface glycoprotein gB to cellular receptors was sufficient to stimulate multiple IFN-responsive gene [40]. Two strategies of IFN downregulation have been described for HCMV. First, HCMV-infected cells had reduced steady-state levels of two components of type I IFN signaling: Jak1 and p48 [43]. Second, HCMV tegument protein pp65 decreased the expression of multiple IFN-responsive genes [42].

A number of pro-inflammatory cytokines are produced from HCMV-infected host cells. Most of these responses have been traced to receptor-ligand interactions. In response to HCMV infection of monocytes, TNF-α and IL1-β were rapidly induced and secreted [17,44]. Monocytes are not readily infected with HCMV in vitro, and viral gene expression is generally not detected beyond immediate-early proteins. Cytokine induction in fibroblasts is probably more delayed and monophasic, reaching detectable/maximal levels from 8 to 24 h post infection. For example, interleukin-6 (IL-6) was induced in HCMV-infected fibroblasts, reaching maximal levels some 20 h post infection. This induction was reproducible with UV-inactivated virus and was sensitive to pertussis toxin and an inhibitor of NF-κB [45]. More recently HCMV activation of IL-6 and IL-8 at 18 h post infection was traced to pattern recognition receptors Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and CD14. These receptors probably form at least part of the cell membrane detection machinery for HCMV [46].

**Fig. 3.** The activation of cellular signaling and stress responses to HCMV infection is bi-phasic. The first phase of activation is due to viral glycoprotein ligands interacting with cell surface receptors. The second phase of activation likely follows from the expression of HCMV immediate-early proteins.

creased AP-1 activity, and IE1-72 activated the transcription of a reporter gene from a plasmid containing AP-1 promoter sites [31]. Others described independent and synergistic up-regulation of an AP-1 responsive promoter by IE1-72 and IE2-86 [47]. It is possible that MEK1/2 mediates AP-1 induction by HCMV. Increased AP-1 dependent transcription in cells transfected with HCMV IE1-72 was increased by co-transfection with a constitutively active form of MEK1 [31].

From 24 h through 7 days post HCMV infection of monocytes, increased intracellular Ca²⁺ levels were observed, along with secretion of AA and PGE₂ into the extracellular media [48]. HCMV IE1-72 and IE2-86 independently and synergistically upregulated reporter gene expression from the COX-2 promoter [32]. PGE₂, ROS, and acute inflammatory cytokines upregulated MIEP activity [25,49]. The cytokine response to HCMV infection in monocytes may have a second tier of activation. Activation of IL-1β, TNF-α, and colony-stimulating factor (CSF)-1 was detected from 24 to 72 h post infection in activated monocytes [50]. Transfection of a promyelocytic cell line with an HCMV immediate-early region 2 construct stimulated reporter gene activity from the pro-IL-1β promoter [50]. NF-κB and AP-1 regulatory elements in the IL-8 promoter were required for sustained IL-8 upregulation in HCMV-infected monocytes [51]. Upon exposure to virus, some 1–8% of monocytes expressed persistently high levels of IL-1β mRNA, a proportion similar to those expressing immediate-early genes [50]. These results suggest that HCMV-infected individuals may chronically secrete inflammatory cytokines from a subpopulation of monocytes—an important reservoir for latent HCMV infection [2]. Possible consequences include chronic inflammation and autocrine or paracrine differentiation into macrophages.

A second tier of PI3-K activation in response to HCMV infection was manifested in fibroblasts [11]. In addition to its roles in PI3-K signaling and prostaglandin activation, another function for PKC in productive CMV replication has been described. Murine cytomegalovirus protein M50/p35 recruited PKC for phosphorylation and dissolution of the nuclear lamina, enabling capsid egress [52]. The second phase of ERK1/2 and MEK1/2 activation was present from

**3. Phase II: HCMV immediate-early proteins and viral replication**

**3.1. Reactivation of cellular signaling pathways**

In general, the stress and signaling responses that are activated in response to HCMV attachment and/or entry return to baseline levels some 2–4 h post infection, and are reactivated some 4–12 h post infection, remaining elevated for the duration of infection (Fig. 3). This model fits experimental data on PI3-K, p38 and ERK1/2 MAPKs, transcription factors, and prostaglandins. IFN and most other cytokine responses probably do not fit this model. They are induced more slowly then gradually decrease as infection proceeds. HCMV immediate early proteins are probably responsible for the second tier of signaling/stress responses. However, it is not clear how closely transfection and promoter/reporter gene experiments parallel the steady-state levels and/or physiological context of these proteins in productive (or abortive) HCMV infections.

Transfection of fibroblasts with plasmids encoding HCMV immediate-early proteins caused increased reporter gene expression from Sp1-responsive promoters [26]. IE2-55 transactivated the p105/p50 NF-κB promoter [26]. Astrocytoma cells expressing IE1-72 demonstrated in-

4 to 12 h post infection and declined thereafter [16,18]. <sup>32</sup>P-pulse chase experiments indicated that the second phase of ERK1/2 upregulation was due to inhibition of cellular phosphatases that would otherwise metabolize phosphorylated ERK1/2 [18]. Similarly, the sustained second peak of p38 upregulation was due to increased p38 upstream kinase (MKK3 and MKK6) activities [19].

### 3.2. Cell cycle perturbation

Cell cycle progression is altered in HCMV-infected fibroblasts. Upon HCMV infection, quiescent cells were stimulated from G₀ and subsequently arrested in late G₁ or G₂/M phases [53,54]. Key cell cycle regulatory proteins, such as cyclin-dependent kinases, are altered in HCMV-infected cells [1,2]. Cell cycle arrest could make available an abundance of macromolecular precursors to facilitate HCMV replication. IE1-72 and IE2-86 may be responsible for HCMV alteration of cell growth and the activation of host genes involved in DNA replication (Fig. 4a).

Tumor suppressor protein retinoblastoma susceptibility gene product (pRb), and related pocket proteins (such as p107) bind E2F transcription factors and prevent E2F transactivation of genes involved in cell growth [55]. HCMV IE1-72 bound p107 and alleviated p107-mediated suppression of an E2F-responsive promoter [56]. Both IE1-72 and cyclin E/cdk 2 bind to the N-terminal region of p107. The binding of IE1-72 to p107 released cyclin E/cdk 2 and allowed the latter to function as an active kinase [57]. IE1-72 transactivated the dihydrofolate reductase promoter in an E2F-dependent manner, while IE2-86 displayed less transactivation in an E2F-independent manner [58]. Using purified proteins, IE1-72 directly phosphorylated E2F₁, -₂, and -₃ (but not E2F₄ or -₅) and the pRb-related pocket proteins p130 and p107 (but not pRb) [59]. The binding of IE2-86 to pRb correlated with E2F-responsive transcriptional activation [60]. Microarray analysis determined that multiple E2F-responsive genes were upregulated in cells transfected with IE2-86 [61]. IE2-86 activated the cyclin E promoter independently of E2F [62]. Cells transfected with IE2-86 were arrested in late G₁ phase [63]. IE2-86 also bound cell cycle inhibitor p21 and functionally coupled to p21 in a yeast two-hybrid system [64].

Steady-state levels of the p53 tumor suppressor protein [65] were increased in HCMV-infected fibroblasts and cardiac smooth muscle cells [3,66], most likely due to protein stabilization [67]. Either IE1-72 or IE2-86 induced p53 to levels reflecting those produced by HCMV infection [66]. IE2-86 bound p53 [3] but did not interfere with p53 binding to target sequences. Instead, IE2-86 blocked p53-dependent transcription [68]. The fate of p53 in HCMV infection may depend upon cell type. In human umbilical vein endothelial cells, p53 was only slightly induced and remained sequestered in the cytoplasm [69]. In fibroblasts, p53 was sequestered in viral replication centers (nuclear PML bodies), probably keeping p53 from its cellular effector target sequences

Fig. 4. (a) HCMV immediate-early proteins alter cell cycle progression. Pocket protein p107 binds and sequesters cyclin E (cycE)/cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (cdk2) complexes. IE1-72 binds to p107 and releases cyclin E/cdk2, allowing these complexes to promote progression of the cell cycle from G₁ toward early S phase [57]. Pocket protein pRb binds and keeps the E2 transcription factor/DP (E2F) heterodimers inactive. IE2-86 binds to pRb and releases E2Fs, allowing these complexes to promote the expression of genes associated with cell growth [60]. (b) HCMV replication causes damage to cellular DNA, and cells respond by either or both arrest/repair and apoptosis. However, HCMV encodes multiple proteins to block the apoptotic response, favoring arrest/repair.

[67]. The ability of HCMV to replicate in U373 astrocytoma cells [70] that express a transcriptionally inactive p53 mutant suggests that p53 may not be required for HCMV replication. Taken together, the data suggest that HCMV immediate-early proteins and cellular DNA damage induce p53, and HCMV gene products block, either directly or indirectly, those p53 responses that would otherwise lead to apoptosis (Fig. 4b).

### 3.3. Inhibition of apoptosis

HCMV-infected cells are resistant to apoptosis [69,71]. Anti-apoptotic activity has been traced to multiple HCMV proteins employing different strategies. HeLa cells transfected with HCMV IE1-72 and IE2-86 were resistant to mutant adenovirus- or TNF-α-, but not UV light-mediated apoptosis [71]. Their stimulation of PI3-K/Akt signaling was

consistent with anti-apoptotic effects in ts13 cells [72]. Elsewhere PI3-K/Akt signaling delayed the onset of p53-mediated apoptosis [73], suggesting that HCMV might employ a similar strategy to facilitate viral replication. The m41 gene product of murine CMV (there is no HCMV homologue) was shown to encode a Golgi-localized inhibitor of apoptosis. m41 rescued the premature cell death phenotype of a mutant virus independent of cellular p53 status [74]. Viral inhibitor of caspase 8-induced apoptosis (vICA) and the viral mitochondria-localized inhibitor of apoptosis (vMIA) are transcribed from the HCMV UL36 and UL37 genes, respectively. These proteins prevent Fas-ligation-mediated apoptosis. vMIA blocks permeabilization of the mitochondrial outer membrane, thereby inhibiting cytochrome c release [75]. vICA binds to the pro-domain of caspase-8 and prevents its activation [76]. The anti-apoptotic effects of HCMV may permit prolonged viral infection, and perhaps facilitate chronic inflammation.

### 3.4. HCMV-encoded chemokines and chemokine receptors

HCMV infection results in IL-8 chemoattractant cytokine (chemokine) induction [46,51]. Interestingly, a fully functional IL-8 homolog is encoded by HCMV UL146 [77]. The UL146 gene product was secreted into the extracellular media of HCMV-infected fibroblasts and induced calcium mobilization, chemotaxis, and neutrophil degranulation. This protein bound to CXCR2, an α chemokine receptor, with an affinity similar to native ligand IL-8. This viral IL-8 mimetic may disrupt normal cell migration patterns or preferentially attract leukocytes that cannot efficiently clear HCMV [77].

HCMV US27, US28, and US33 genes are homologous to CC chemokine GPCRs. Cells transfected with US27 and US28 gene products bound a variety of CC (β), but not CXC (α) chemokines [78,79]. Constitutively produced or cytokine-superinduced CC chemokines were depleted from the extracellular media of HCMV-infected fibroblasts. Extracellular chemokine depletion was absent upon infection with HCMV mutants deleted of US28 [78]. CC chemokine sequestration was proposed to prevent leukocyte recruitment to HCMV-infected cells and block effector mechanisms of leukocytes in neighboring cells [78]. In the presence of CC chemokines, HCMV-infection induced chemotaxis-dependent migration of arterial smooth muscle cells. Migration was absent when cells were infected with US28-negative HCMV mutants and was recovered upon transfection with US28 [80]. Endothelial cell migration may recruit HCMV-infected cells toward sites of vascular injury, consistent with a role for HCMV infection in atherosclerosis, restenosis, and allograft rejection [80].

---

**Table 1**

Selected small molecule inhibitors of cell stress and signaling responses that display activity against HCMV

| Inhibitor         | Putative molecular target                                      | Reference |
|-------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|
| AG1478            | EGFR kinase                                                    | [7]       |
| Aspirin           | COX-1 and -2; cyclooxygenase-1 and -2                          | [32]      |
| BMS-279654        | COX-2                                                          | [34]      |
| Colchicine        | Microtubule networks                                           | [14]      |
| FHPI              | P38 MAPK                                                       | [20]      |
| Genistein         | Protein tyrosine kinases                                       | [82]      |
| Go6976            | PKC; protein kinase C                                          | [83]      |
| H-7, H-8          | PKC                                                            | [36]      |
| Indomethacin      | COX-1/COX-2                                                    | [33,34]   |
| LY294002          | PI3-K                                                          | [11]      |
| N-acetyl-L-cysteine | Reactive oxygen species (ROS)                                 | [25]      |
| NGIC-I            | PKC                                                           | [83]      |
| Nifedipine        | Ca²⁺ channels                                                  | [84]      |
| Nocodazole        | Microtubule networks                                           | [14]      |
| NS-398            | COX-2                                                          | [32]      |
| Oxypurinol        | Xanthine oxidase (peroxide generation)                         | [25]      |
| Papaverine        | Phosphodiesterase 3,4,5; K⁺ channels, cyclic nucleotide metabolism? | [10,84]   |
| PD098059         | MEK1/2                                                         | [18]      |
| Resveratrol       | ROS, COX, PKC, EGFR kinase?                                     | [82]      |
| RO 31-8220        | PKC                                                           | [12]      |
| Roscovitine       | Cyclin-dependent kinases                                       | [70]      |
| Tetracaine        | PLA₂; phospholipase 2                                         | [33,36]   |
| U0126             | MEK1/2                                                         | [16]      |

Contact between viral surface glycoprotein(s) and cellular receptor(s), or events associated with viral entry, is sufficient to produce a diverse cascade of excitatory cellular responses. These initial transient responses to infection include mobilization of transcription factors, cellular signaling pathways, and the induction of prostaglandins and cytokines like interferon. Initiation of viral replication coincides with the start of a second and sustained phase of signaling that includes E2Fs, cyclins, and p53 induction. HCMV immediate-early proteins are probably responsible for this second tier of activation. A variety of small molecule inhibitors of cellular stress/signaling responses inhibit productive HCMV infection (Table 1). These drugs vary in potency and selectivity, but do indicate a trend. Most of the excitatory cellular responses to HCMV infection appear to be beneficial, if not required, for HCMV replication.

The cellular stress and signal transduction pathways induced by HCMV infection are likely to be interactive and interdependent. Future investigations are likely to distinguish those stress and signal transduction pathways that are directly activated by specific HCMV effectors from their downstream pathways. Discerning the order of progression of chickens and eggs is not trivial. The case of NF-κB is illustrative.

The activation of NF-κB in HCMV-infected cells probably requires prostaglandin induction. Antioxidants such as N-acetyl-L-cysteine blocked NF-κB activation by HCMV [25]. NF-κB activation was also sensitive to treatment with pertussis toxin, implying that the pertussis toxin-sensitive

---

### 4. Conclusions

We have described a biphasic pattern for HCMV activation of cellular signaling/stress responses (Fig. 3). There are some notable exceptions, such as ERK1/2 and cytokines.

GPCR(s) (i.e., coupled to G<sub>i/o</sub>) mediating prostaglandin activation also controlled HCMV induction of NF-κB [37]. Others reported that the prostaglandin and NF-κB pathways were independent in retinal pigment epithelial cells infected with HCMV [81]. More recently, TLR2 and CD14 were necessary for HCMV activation of NF-κB [46]. Reporter gene assays from NF-κB-driven promoters showed that an NF-κB response to HCMV infection of non-permissive cell lines was mounted in cells transfected with TLR2, and increased when transfected with TRL2 and CD14 [46]. In our laboratory, we found that NF-κB and Sp1 activation was sensitive to PI3-K inhibitor LY294002 [82]. We also determined that HCMV infection causes IkB ubiquitination and targeting of this NF-κB inhibitor for proteosomal degradation. This suggests yet another mechanism governing viral induction of NF-κB via the IKK pathway during the first phase of activation induced by receptor-ligand interactions [82].

It is possible that some of the cellular stress and signaling activities directly attributed to HCMV infection are artifacts of unresolved materials present in infectious virus preparations. Unpurified supernatants from HCMV-infected cells are often employed for subsequent infections. As discussed above, HCMV-infected cells secrete inflammatory cytokines and prostaglandins. Factors such as these might obscure virion-specific cellular stress and signaling measurements.

The data support a model where phase I of HCMV cellular stress and signaling suffices to “prime” cells for subsequent replication. Once replication is under way, phase II provides optimal cellular conditions for viral replication: an S-phase environment and cell cycle arrest/repair. This outcome probably provides an environment conducive to viral replication, such as an abundance of macromolecular precursors. It is also consistent with studies that have described cell cycle arrest (in either late G<sub>1</sub> or G<sub>2</sub>/M phases) in response to HCMV infection [53,54]. In response to the heavy stresses imposed by HCMV, infected cells might be directed toward apoptotic response (Fig. 4b). This might explain the multiple strategies employed by HCMV to thwart apoptosis.

This model rests on the assumption that HCMV must inevitably activate signaling and stress pathways, and has produced solutions that direct these cellular pathways to its own benefit. Inflammatory responses are generally considered to clear pathogens from infected hosts. It is plausible that these cellular responses were once virus-inhibitory and that viral evolution resulted in their corruption. However, lacking data to the contrary, it is no less plausible that cytomegalovirus originated from rogue cellular stress or signaling pathway(s). Cytomegaloviruses may be at least as old as vertebrates, but some cell signaling pathways, such as MAPK, may be at least as old as eukaryotes.


### Acknowledgments

We apologize to the many scientists whose research contributions have been curtailed or omitted due to restrictions


on length and references. A series of thoughtful reviews by T. Albrecht and co-workers circa 1989–1993 had a large impact upon the formulation of this publication. We thank S.M. DeWire and T.E. Morrison for manuscript critiques. E.-S. Huang thanks the National Institutes of Health, USA (NIH) for support from grants AI47678 and CA19014. D.L. Evers was supported by NIH training grant CA09156.


### References

[1] E.S. Mocarski, C.T. Courcelle, Cytomegaloviruses and their replication, fourth ed., in: D.M. Knipe, P.M. Howley (Eds.), Fields Virology, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, 2001, pp. 2629–2673.

[2] E.-S. Huang, T.F. Kowalik, The pathogenicity of human cytomegalovirus: an overview, Y. Becker, G. Darai, E.-S. Huang (Eds.), Molecular aspects of human cytomegalovirus diseases, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1993, pp. 1–45.

[3] E. Speir, R. Modali, E.-S. Huang, M.B. Leon, F. Shawl, T. Finkel, S.E. Epstein, Potential role of human cytomegalovirus and p53 interaction in coronary restenosis, Science 265 (1994) 391–394.

[4] A. Alcami, U.H. Koszinowski, Viral mechanisms of immune evasion, Immunol. Today 21 (2000) 447–455.

[5] K.A. Boyle, T. Compton, Receptor-binding properties of a soluble form of human cytomegalovirus glycoprotein B, J. Virol. 72 (1998) 1826–1833.

[6] T. Compton, R.R. Nepomuceno, D.M. Nowlin, Human cytomegalovirus penetrates host cells by pH-independent fusion at the cell surface, Virology 191 (1992) 387–395.

[7] X. Wang, S.-M. Huong, M.L. Chiu, N. Raab-Traub, E.-S. Huang, Epidermal growth factor receptor is a cellular receptor for human cytomegalovirus, Nature 424 (2003) 456–461.

[8] X. Wang, D.Y. Huang, S.-M. Huong, E.-S. Huang, Integrin αvβ3 is a coreceptor for human cytomegalovirus infection, Cell (submitted).

[9] J. Schlessinger, Cell signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases, Cell 103 (2000) 211–225.

[10] T. Valy-Nagy, Z. Bandi, I. Boldogh, T. Albrecht, Hydrolysis of inositol phospholipids: an early signal of human cytomegalovirus infection, Arch. Virol. 101 (1988) 199–207.

[11] R.A. Johnson, X. Wang, X.L. Ma, S.-M. Huong, E.-S. Huang, Human cytomegalovirus up-regulates the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K) pathway: inhibition of PI3-K activity inhibits viral replication and virus-induced signaling, J. Virol. 75 (2001) 6022–6032.

[12] M.E. Slobbe-van Drunen, R.C. Vossen, F.M. Couwenberg, M.M. Hulsbosch, J.W. Heemskerk, M.C. van Dam-Mieras, C.A. Bruggeman, Activation of protein kinase C enhances the infection of endothelial cells by human cytomegalovirus, Virus Res. 48 (1997) 207–213.

[13] N.L. Jones, J.C. Lewis, B.A. Kilpatrick, Cytoskeletal disruption during human cytomegalovirus infection of human lung fibroblasts, Eur. J. Cell Biol. 41 (1986) 304–312.

[14] K. Ogawa-Goto, K. Tanaka, W. Gibson, E. Moriishi, Y. Miura, T. Kurata, S. Irie, T. Sata, Microtubule network facilitates nuclear targeting of human cytomegalovirus capsid, J. Virol. 77 (2003) 8541–8547.

[15] C. Widmann, S. Gibson, M.B. Jarpe, G.L. Johnson, Mitogen-activated protein kinase: conservation of a three-kinase module from yeast to human, Physiol. Rev. 79 (1999) 143–180.

[16] R.A. Johnson, X.L. Ma, A.D. Yurochko, E.-S. Huang, The role of MKK1/2 kinase activity in human cytomegalovirus infection, J. Gen. Virol. 82 (2001) 493–497.

[17] A.D. Yurochko, E.-S. Huang, Human cytomegalovirus binding to human monocytes induces immunoregulatory gene expression, J. Immunol. 162 (1999) 4806–4816.

[18] S.M. Rodems, D.H. Spector, Extracellular signal-regulated kinase activity is sustained early during human cytomegalovirus infection, J. Virol. 72 (1998) 9173–9180.

[19] R.A. Johnson, S.-M. Huong, E.-S. Huang, Activation of the mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) p38 by HCMV infection through two distinct pathways: a novel mechanism for activation of p38, J. Virol. 74 (2000) 1158–1167.

[20] R.A. Johnson, S.-M. Huong, E.-S. Huang, Inhibitory effect of 4-(4-fluorophenyl)-2-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-5-(4-pyridyl)1H-imidazole on HCMV DNA replication and permissive infection, Antivir. Res. 41 (1999) 101–111.

[21] A.S. Baldwin Jr, The NF-κB and IκB proteins: New discoveries and insights, Annu. Rev. Immunol. 14 (1996) 649–681.

[22] H.L. Pahl, Activators and target genes of Rel/NF-κB transcription factors, Oncogene 18 (1999) 6853–6866.

[23] J.M. Cherrington, E.S. Mocarski, Human cytomegalovirus IE1 transactivates the α promoter-enhancer via an 18-base-pair repeat element, J. Virol. 63 (1989) 1435–1440.

[24] T.F. Kowalik, B. Wing, J.S. Haskill, J.C. Azizkhan, A.S. Baldwin Jr, E.-S. Huang, Multiple mechanisms are implicated in the regulation of NF-κB activity during human cytomegalovirus infection, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90 (1993) 1107–1111.

[25] E. Speir, T. Shibutani, Z.-X. Yu, V.J. Ferrans, S.E. Epstein, Role of reactive oxygen intermediates in cytomegalovirus gene expression and in the response of human smooth muscle cells to viral infection, Circ. Res. 79 (1996) 1143–1152.

[26] A.D. Yurochko, T.F. Kowalik, S.-M. Huong, E.-S. Huang, Human cytomegalovirus upregulates NF-κB activity by transactivating the NF-κB p105/p50 and p65 promoters, J. Virol. 69 (1995) 5391–5400.

[27] A.D. Yurochko, E.S. Hwang, L. Rasmussen, S. Keay, L. Periera, E.-S. Huang, The human cytomegalovirus UL55 (gB) and UL75 (gH) glycoprotein ligands initiate the rapid activation of Sp1 and NF-κB during infection, J. Virol. 71 (1997) 5051–5059.

[28] G. Suske, The Sp-family of transcription factors, Gene 238 (1999) 291–300.

[29] I. Boldogh, S. AbuBakar, T. Albrecht, Activation of proto-oncogenes: an immediate early event in human cytomegalovirus infection, Science 247 (1990) 561–564.

[30] E. Shaulian, M. Karin, AP-1 in cell proliferation and survival, Oncogene 20 (2001) 2390–2400.

[31] S. Kim, S.S. Yu, I.S. Lee, S. Ohno, J. Yim, S. Kim, H.S. Kang, Human cytomegalovirus IE1 protein activates AP-1 through a cellular protein kinase(s), J. Gen. Virol. 80 (1999) 961–969.

[32] E. Speir, Z.-X. Yu, V.J. Ferrans, E.-S. Huang, S.E. Epstein, Aspirin attenuates cytomegalovirus infectivity and gene expression mediated by cyclooxygenase-2 in coronary artery smooth muscle cells, Circ. Res. 83 (1998) 210–216.

[33] J. Tanaka, H. Iida, H. Sato, M. Hatano, Inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis inhibit growth of human cytomegalovirus and reactivation of latent virus in a productively and latently infected human cell line, Virology 163 (1988) 205–208.

[34] H. Zhu, J.P. Cong, D. Yu, W.A. Bresnahan, T.E. Shenk, Inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 blocks human cytomegalovirus replication, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 99 (2002) 3932–3937.

[35] C.D. Funk, Prostaglandins and leukotrienes: advances in eicosanoid biology, Science 294 (2001) 1871–1875.

[36] S. AbuBakar, I. Boldogh, T. Albrecht, Human cytomegalovirus stimulates arachidonic acid metabolism through pathways that are affected by inhibitors of phospholipase A2 and protein kinase C, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm. 166 (1990) 953–959.

[37] T. Shibutani, T.M. Johnson, Z.-X. Yu, V.J. Ferrans, J. Moss, S.E. Epstein, Pertussis toxin-sensitive G proteins as mediators of the signal transduction pathways activated by cytomegalovirus infection of smooth muscle cells, J. Clin. Invest. 15 (1997) 2054–2061.

[38] H. Zhu, J.P. Cong, G. Mantora, T. Gingeras, T. Shenk, Cellular gene expression altered by human cytomegalovirus: global monitoring with oligonucleotide arrays, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 95 (1998) 14470–14475.

[39] G.R. Stark, I.M. Kerr, B.R.G. Williams, R.H. Silverman, R.D. Schreiber, How cells respond to interferon, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67 (1998) 227–264.

[40] K.A. Boyle, R.L. Pietropaolo, T.A. Compton, Engagement of the cellular receptor for glycoprotein B of human cytomegalovirus activates the interferon-responsive pathway, Mol. Cell. Biol. 19 (1999) 3607–3613.

[41] H. Zhu, J.P. Cong, T. Shenk, Use of differential display analysis to assess the effect of human cytomegalovirus infection on the accumulation of cellular RNAs: induction of interferon-responsive RNAs, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94 (1997) 13985–13990.

[42] E.P. Browne, T. Shenk, Human cytomegalovirus UL83-coded pp65 virion protein inhibits antiviral gene expression in infected cells, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100 (2003) 11439–11444.

[43] D.M. Miller, Y. Zhang, B.M. Rahill, W.J. Waldman, D.D. Sedmak, Human cytomegalovirus inhibits IFN-α stimulated antiviral and immunoregulatory responses by blocking multiple levels of IFN-α signal transduction, J. Immunol. 162 (1999) 6107–6113.

[44] J. Baillie, D.A. Sahlender, J.H. Sinclair, Human cytomegalovirus infection inhibits tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) signaling by targeting the 55-kilodalton TNF-alpha receptor, J. Virol. 77 (2003) 7007–7016.

[45] J.F. Carlquist, L. Edelman, D.W. Bennion, J.L. Anderson, Cytomegalovirus induction of interleukin-6 in lung fibroblasts occurs independently of active infection and involves a G protein and the transcription factor, NF-κB, J. Infect. Dis. 179 (1999) 1094–1100.

[46] T. Compton, E.A. Kurt-Jones, K.W. Boehme, J. Belko, E. Latz, D.T. Golenbock, R.W. Finberg, Human cytomegalovirus activates inflammatory cytokine responses via CD14 and Toll-like receptor 2, J. Virol. 77 (2003) 4588–4596.

[47] C. Hagemeier, S.M. Walker, P.J. Sissons, J.H. Sinclair, The 72K IE1 and 80K IE2 proteins of human cytomegalovirus independently transactivate the c-fos, c-myc and hsp70 promoters via basal promoter elements, J. Gen. Virol. 73 (1992) 2385–2393.

[48] M.A. Nokta, M.I. Hassan, K. Loesch, R.B. Pollard, Human cytomegalovirus-induced immunosuppression. Relationship to tumor necrosis factor-dependent release of arachidonic acid and prostaglandin E2 in human monocytes, J. Clin. Invest. 97 (1996) 2635–2641.

[49] J.N. Kline, G.M. Hunninghake, B. He, M.M. Monick, G.W. Hunninghake, Synergistic activation of the human cytomegalovirus major immediate early promoter by prostaglandin E2 and cytokines, Exp. Lung. Res. 24 (1998) 3–14.

[50] L.R. Dudding, S. Haskill, B.D. Clark, P.E. Auron, S. Sporn, E.-S. Huang, Cytomegalovirus infection stimulates expression of monocyte-associated mediator genes, J. Immunol. 143 (1989) 3343–3352.

[51] T. Murayama, Y. Ohara, M. Obuchi, K.A. Khabar, H. Higashi, N. Mukaida, K. Matsushima, Human cytomegalovirus induces interleukin-8 production by a human monocytic cell line, THP-1, through acting concurrently on AP-1- and NF-κB-binding sites of the interleukin-8 gene, J. Virol. 71 (1997) 5692–5695.

[52] W. Muranyi, J. Haas, M. Wagner, G. Krohne, U.H. Koszinowski, Cytomegalovirus recruitment of cellular kinases to dissolve the nuclear lamina, Science 297 (2002) 778–779.

[53] D. Dittmer, E.S. Mocarski, HCMV infection inhibits G1/S transition, J. Virol. 71 (1997) 1629–1634.

[54] F.M. Jault, J.-M. Jault, F. Ruchti, E.A. Fortunato, C. Clark, J. Corbeil, D.D. Richman, D.H. Spector, Cytomegalovirus infection induces high levels of cyclins, phosphorylated RB, and p53, leading to cell cycle arrest, J. Virol. 69 (1995) 6697–6704.

[55] J.R. Nevins, Toward an understanding of the functional complexity of the E2F and retinoblastoma families, Cell Growth Differen. 9 (1998) 585–593.

[56] E.E. Poma, T.F. Kowalik, L. Zhu, J.H. Sinclair, E.-S. Huang, The human cytomegalovirus IE1-72 protein interacts with the cellular p107 protein and relieves p107-mediated repression of an E2F-responsive promoter, J. Virol. 70 (1996) 7867–7877.

[57] Z. Zhang, S.-M. Huong, X. Wang, D.Y. Huang, E.-S. Huang, Interactions between human cytomegalovirus IE1-72 and cellular p107: functional domains and mechanisms of up-regulation of cyclin E/cdk2 kinase activity, J. Virol. 77 (2003) 12660–12670.

[58] M.J. Margolis, S. Pajovic, E.L. Wong, M. Wade, R. Jupp, J.A. Nelson, J.C. Azizkhan, Interaction of the 72-kilodalton human cytomegalovirus IE1 gene product with E2F1 coincides with E2F-dependent activation of dihydrofolate reductase transcription, J. Virol. 69 (1995) 7759–7767.

[59] S. Pajovic, E. Wong, A. Black, J.C. Azizkhan, Identification of a viral kinase that phosphorylates specific E2Fs and pocket proteins, Mol. Cell. Biol. 17 (1997) 6459–6464.

[60] C. Hagemeier, R. Caswell, G. Hayhurst, J. Sinclair, T. Kouzarides, Functional interaction between the HCMV IE2 transactivator and the retinoblastoma protein, EMBO J. 13 (1994) 2897–2903.

[61] Y.-J. Song, M.F. Stinski, Effect of the human cytomegalovirus IE86 protein on expression of E2F-responsive genes: a DNA microarray analysis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99 (2002) 2836–2841.

[62] W.A. Bresnahan, T. Albrecht, E.A. Thompson, The cyclin E promoter is activated by human cytomegalovirus 86-kDa immediate early protein, J. Biol. Chem. 273 (1998) 22075–22082.

[63] L. Wiebusch, C. Hagemeier, Human cytomegalovirus 86-kilodalton IE2 protein blocks cell cycle progression in G1, J. Virol. 73 (1999) 9274–9283.

[64] J. Sinclair, J. Baillie, L. Bryant, R. Caswell, Human cytomegalovirus mediates cell cycle progression through G(1) into early S phase in terminally differentiated cells, J. Gen. Virol. 81 (2000) 1553–1565.

[65] A.J. Levine, p53, the cellular gatekeeper for growth and division, Cell 88 (1997) 323–331.

[66] P. Muganda, O. Mendoza, J. Hernandez, Q. Qian, Human cytomegalovirus elevates levels of the cellular protein p53 in infected fibroblasts, J. Virol. 68 (1994) 8028–8034.

[67] E.A. Fortunato, D.H. Spector, p53 and RPA are sequestered in viral replication centers in the nuclei of cells infected with human cytomegalovirus, J. Virol. 72 (1998) 2033–2039.

[68] H.L. Tsai, G.H. Kou, S.C. Chen, C.W. Wu, Y.S. Lin, Human cytomegalovirus immediate-early protein IE2 tethers a transcriptional repression domain to p53, J. Biol. Chem. 271 (1996) 3534–3540.

[69] A. Kovacs, M.L. Weber, L.J. Burns, H.S. Jacob, G.M. Vercellotti, Cytoplasmic sequestration of p53 in cytomegalovirus-infected human endothelial cells, Am. J. Pathol. 149 (1996) 1531–1539.

[70] W.A. Bresnahan, I. Boldogh, P. Chi, E.A. Thompson, T. Albrecht, Inhibition of cellular Cdk2 activity blocks human cytomegalovirus replication, Virology 231 (1997) 239–247.

[71] H. Zhu, Y. Shen, T. Shenk, Human cytomegalovirus IE1 and IE2 proteins block apoptosis, J. Virol. 69 (1995) 7960–7970.

[72] Y. Yu, J.C. Alwine, Human cytomegalovirus major immediate-early proteins and simian virus 40 large T antigen can inhibit apoptosis through activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3′-OH kinase pathway and the cellular kinase Akt, J. Virol. 76 (2002) 3731–3738.

[73] P. Sabbatini, F. McCormick, Phosphoinositide 3-OH kinase (PI3K) and PKB/Akt delay the onset of p53-mediated, transcriptionally dependent apoptosis, J. Biol. Chem. 274 (1999) 24263–24269.

[74] W. Brune, M. Nevels, T. Shenk, Murine cytomegalovirus m41 open reading frame encodes a Golgi-localized antiapoptotic protein, J. Virol. 77 (2003) 11633–11643.

[75] V.S. Goldmacher, L.M. Bartle, A. Skaletskaya, C.A. Dionne, N.L. Kedersha, C.A. Vater, J.W. Han, R.J. Lutz, S. Watanabe, C.E.D. McFarland, E.D. Kieff, E.S. Mocarski, T. Chittenden, A cytomegalovirus-encoded mitochondria-localized inhibitor of apoptosis structurally unrelated to Bcl-2, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96 (1999) 12536–12541.

[76] A. Skaletskaya, L.M. Bartle, T. Chittenden, A.L. McCormick, E.S. Mocarski, V.S. Goldmacher, A cytomegalovirus-encoded inhibitor of apoptosis that suppresses caspase-8 activation, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98 (2001) 7829–7834.

[77] M.E.T. Penfold, D.J. Dairaghi, G.M. Duke, N. Saederup, E.S. Mocarski, G.W. Kemble, T.J. Schall, Cytomegalovirus encodes a potent alpha chemokine, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96 (1999) 9839–9844.

[78] B. Bodaghi, T.R. Jones, D. Zipeto, C. Vita, L. Sun, L. Laurent, F. Arenzana-Seisdedos, J.L. Virelizier, S. Michelson, Chemokine sequestration by viral chemoreceptors as a novel viral escape strategy: withdrawal of chemokines from the environment of cytomegalovirus-infected cells, J. Exp. Med. 188 (1998) 855–866.

[79] K. Neote, D. DiGregorio, J.Y. Mak, R. Horuk, T.J. Schall, Molecular cloning, functional expression, and signaling characteristics of a C-C chemokine receptor, Cell 72 (1993) 415–425.

[80] D.N. Streblow, C. Soderberg-Naucler, J. Vieira, P. Smith, E. Wakabayashi, F. Ruchti, K. Mattison, Y. Altschuler, J.A. Nelson, The human cytomegalovirus chemokine receptor US28 mediates vascular smooth muscle cell migration, Cell 99 (1999) 511–520.

[81] J. Cinatl Jr, S. Margraf, J.U. Vogel, M. Scholz, J. Cinatl, H.W. Doerr, Human cytomegalovirus circumvents NF-κB dependence in retinal pigment epithelial cells, J. Immunol. 167 (2001) 1900–1908.

[82] X. Wang, E.-S. Huang, unpublished results.

[83] M. Marschall, M. Stein-Gerlach, M. Freitag, R. Kupfer, M. van Den Bogaard, T. Stamminger, Inhibitors of human cytomegalovirus replication drastically reduce the activity of the viral protein kinase pUL97, J. Gen. Virol. 82 (2001) 1439–1450.

[84] T. Albrecht, I. Boldogh, M. Fons, S. AbuBakar, C.Z. Deng, Cell activation signals and the pathogenesis of human cytomegalovirus, Intervirology 3 (1990) 68–75.
