
Structure, Vol. 12, 1865–1875, October, 2004, ©2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. DOI 10.1016/j.str.2004.08.002

# The Crystal Structure of the actIII Actinorhodin Polyketide Reductase: Proposed Mechanism for ACP and Polyketide Binding

Andrea T. Hadfield,$^{1,*}$ Claire Limpkin,$^{1}$ Watchrra Teartasin,$^{2}$ Thomas J. Simpson,$^{2}$ John Crosby,$^{2}$ and Matthew P. Crump$^{2,*}$

$^{1}$Department of Biochemistry  
University of Bristol  
School of Medical Sciences  
University Walk  
Bristol, BS8 1TD  
United Kingdom  

$^{2}$School of Chemistry  
University of Bristol  
Cantock’s Close  
Bristol BS8 1TS  
United Kingdom  

## Summary

We have determined the 2.5 Å crystal structure of an active, tetrameric *Streptomyces coelicolor* type II polyketide ketoreductase (actIII) with its bound cofactor, NADP⁺. This structure shows a Rossman dinucleotide binding fold characteristic of SDR enzymes. Of two subunits in the crystallographic asymmetric unit, one is closed around the active site. Formate is observed in the open subunit, indicating possible carbonyl binding sites of the polyketide intermediate. Unlike previous models we observe crystal contacts that may mimic the KR-ACP interactions that may drive active site opening. Based on these observations, we have constructed a model for ACP and polyketide binding. We propose that binding of ACP triggers a conformational change from the closed to the open, active form of the enzyme. The polyketide chain enters the active site and reduction occurs. The model also suggests a general mechanism for ACP recognition which is applicable to a range of protein families.

## Introduction

Polyketides are a chemically diverse group of secondary metabolites produced by bacteria, fungi, plants, and marine organisms (Hopwood, 1990, 1997; Staunton and Weissman, 2001). These natural products are of enormous pharmaceutical interest and include antibiotic (oxytetracycline, a tetracycline), anticancer (doxorubicin, an anthracycline), and antifungal (resveratrol, a stilbene) compounds. Analogous to fatty acid syntheses (FASs) (Smith, 1994), the polyketide synthase (PKS) biosynthetic complex is organized as either a covalent (type I) or noncovalent (type II) assembly of catalytic domains. Both fatty acid and polyketide biosynthesis proceed via the iterative decarboxylative condensation of (normally) malonyl or methyl-malonyl extender units to a starter unit, usually acetate. Polyketide synthases achieve their structural diversity by selecting primer and extension units, exerting control on the overall chain length, the degree of reductive modification, and guiding the regiospecific cyclization of the growing chain.

In type II PKSs, the minimal set of enzymes required in vivo to form a polyketide of the requisite chain length is the ketosynthase (KS), chain length factor (CLF), and the acyl carrier protein (ACP) (McDaniel et al., 1994, 1995). The KS catalyzes the decarboxylative condensation of malonyl extender units, while CLF is involved in formation of acetyl ACP (from the decarboxylation of malonyl-ACP) (Bisang et al., 1999) and may also influence the chain length of the final polyketide. The growing polyketide is attached as a thioester via a phosphopantetheine group to a serine at the N terminus of helix 2 in ACP. The ACP may have several roles: to sequester the polyketide chain, protecting it from acid/base enolization and cyclization, and to act as an extended substrate for the other enzymes in the polyketide synthase. The molecular details of the interactions between ACP and the type II enzymes are only just beginning to be understood (Worsham et al., 2003; Zhang et al., 2001). It is evident, however, that in any one biosynthetic pathway, the ACP has the task of recognizing many different enzymes.

The type II aromatic PKS from *Streptomyces coelicolor* that produces actinorhodin (act) has been extensively studied (Hopwood, 1997). As well as producing a 16 carbon polyketide chain, the minimal system can partially control the first cyclization, though products from aberrant cyclizations may also be observed (Fu et al., 1994a, 1994b). The act minimal PKS produces two products, SEK4 (Figure 1) with the correct first cyclization (C7-C12), and SEK4b with an alternate C10-C15 ring closure (Fu et al., 1994b). The act ketoreductase (act KR) is the first enzyme to modify the polyketide, its primary function being to reduce the carbonyl group at C-9. Addition of the act KR to the minimal system, both in vivo and in vitro, yields predominantly mutactin, which arises from the correctly cyclized and reduced intermediate (Figure 1) (Fu et al., 1994c; Zhang et al., 1990). The elimination of incorrectly cyclized products suggests that the KR may aid the minimal complex in directing the correct aldol condensation between C7 and C12. The mechanisms for regiospecific control of cyclization and reduction are unknown at present. In the presence of the act KR, there is an overall increase in polyketide production when compared with the minimal system, possibly suggesting stabilization of the complex or more efficient intermediate channelling (Zawada and Khosla, 1999). The influence of the KR in other minimal systems has also been reported. An increase in misfolded polyketides is seen in ketoreductase-deficient mutants of some synthases (Kunnari et al., 1999), and in extreme cases the minimal system produces no polyketide in the absence of the KR (Hertweck et al., 2004).

To date, the structures of five type II aromatic PKS components have been solved. These are the X-ray structures of the unusual priming β-ketosynthase (a KASI homolog) from the R1128 polyketide biosynthetic

*Correspondence: matt.crump@bristol.ac.uk (M.P.C.); a.t.hadfield@ bristol.ac.uk (A.T.H.)

pathway (Pan et al., 2002), the ActVA-Orf6 monooxygenase involved in actinorhodin biosynthesis (Sciara et al., 2003), and NMR solution structures of three ACPs: act (Crump et al., 1997), otc (oxytetracycline), (Findlow et al., 2003) and fren (frenolicin) (Li et al., 2003). There is currently no three-dimensional structure for a polyketide type II ketoreductase; however, the act KR is a member of the short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase evolutionary family (SDR) of NADP(H)-dependent enzymes (Figure 2) (Jornvall et al., 1995; Kallberg et al., 2002; Oppermann et al., 2001, 2003). Over 2000 primary SDR sequences across varied genomes have been reported, and over 20 related crystal structures have been solved (Oppermann et al., 2003). The sequence homology between individual enzymes is low (10%–30%), but they all possess a high degree of three-dimensional structural homology, based around an α/β Rossman fold. The most closely related sequences to the act PKS KR are those of fatty acid ketoreductase enzymes. These reduce the β-keto carbonyl of the β-ketoacyl-ACP in the first reductive step of de novo fatty acid biosynthesis (Cohen-Gonsaud et al., 2002; Fisher et al., 2000; Price et al., 2001, 2004). A conserved triad consisting of serine, tyrosine, and lysine has been identified in the active site of the SDR enzymes (Ghosh et al., 1994). A catalytic mechanism of reduction is thought to proceed via a hydride transfer from the NADPH followed by proton donation from the nearby phenolic hydroxyl group of the tyrosine (Jornvall et al., 1995). The Lys may lower the pKa of the Tyr-OH and promote proton transfer, while the Ser group can interact with the keto group of the substrate.

Here, we report the first three-dimensional structure of a type II polyketide reductase, act KR, from the S. coelicolor actinorhodin pathway. The crystal structure, which has been determined in an NADP⁺-bound form at 2.5 Å resolution, reveals a tetrameric arrangement of subunits. The two subunits in the crystallographic asymmetric unit have different conformations. Crystal contacts and population of the active site with polar solvent in one of the two subunits provide clues to the mechanism of ACP and substrate binding. This structure provides insights into the possible interaction of the act KR and the ACP and the nascent polyketide chain.

## Results and Discussion

### Activity of the His₆-Tagged Act KR

To test whether the act KR was active, this enzyme was reconstituted with the act minimal PKS in vitro using the method described by Zawada et al. (Zawada and Khosla, 1999) (Figure 1). The appearance of a new peak characteristic of mutactin and the loss of signal from SEK4 and SEK4b indicated that the enzyme was active in the extended minimal complex. The monomeric molecular weight of the act KR is 27,265 Da for a 261 residue gene product. The enzyme that was crystallized in this study had the N-terminal his tag intact and was therefore 281 residues long with an expected molecular mass of 29,291 Da.

Act Ketoreductase
1867

| ACT | MATQDS-EVALVTGATSGIGLEIARRLGKEGLRVFV-CARCEEGLRTTLKELREAGVE |
| --- | --- |
| GRA | MTTATATATATP GTA AAKPV ALVTGATSGIGLAIARRLAALGARTFL-CARDEERLAQTVKELRGEGFD |
| MON | MTQS-TSR-VALVTGATSGIGLATARLLAAQGHLVF-GARTESDVIATVKALRNDGLE |
| FREN | MTTAAPHTRPGEAGTTRGPALVTGATRGIGLAVAEALVARGYPVVV-CARDAEAAVRTVKELAAGGAR |
| E.coli | MNFEGKIALVTGASRGIGRAIAETLAARGAKVIG-TATSENGAQAISDYLGANG-K |
| B.Napus | -SFATSTVVKAQATAVEQSTGEAVPKVESPVVVVTGASRGIGKIAISLGTKAGCKVLVN YARSAKEAEVSKQIEAYGGQ |
| Trop II | -MAGRWNLEGCTALVTGSSRGIGYGIVEELASLGASVYT-CSRNQKELNDCLTQWRSKGFK |
| TriHNR | MAAVTQPRGESKYDAIPGPLGPQSASLEGKV ALVTGAGRGRGIREMAMELGRGCKVIVNYANSTESAAEEVVAAIKKNGSD |
| TetHNR | --MAPSADITS---SGPSD-ASKPLAGKVALTTGAGRGRGIAIELGRRGASVVVNYGSSSKAAEEVVAAELKKLGAQ |

ruler 1........10........20........30........40........50........60........70........80

| ACT | ADGRTC DVRSVPEIEALVAAVVERYG-PVDVLVNNAGRP GGGATAELADELWLDVVETNLTGVFRVTKQVLKAGGMLERG |
| --- | --- |
| GRA | VDGTVCDVADPAQIRAYVAAAVQRYG-TVDILVNNAGRS GGGATAEIADELWLDVITTNLTSVFLMTKEVLNAGGMLAKK |
| MON | AEGQVLDVVRDGASVTAFVQAAVDRYG-RIDVLVNNAGRS GGGVTADLTDDELWDDVIDTNLSVFRMTRAVLTTGGMRTRE |
| FREN | VEVVADVTDAASVHELVATTVARFG-PVEVLVNNAGRS GGGVTAAELSESLWDVVIATNLKSVFLVTREVLTGGGMTGRG |
| E.coli | GLMLN--VTDPAIESVLEKIRAEFG-EVDILVNNAGITRDNLLMRMKDEEWNDIIETNILSSVFR LSKAVMRA--MMKKR |
| B.Napus | AITFGGDVSKEADVEAMMKTADAWG-TIDVVVNNAGITRDTLLIRMKKSQWDEVIDLNL TGVLCLTQAATKI--MMKKR |
| Trop II | VEASVCDLSSRSERQELMNTVANHFHGKLNILVNNAGIVIYKEAKDYTVEDYS LIMSINEAEAYHLS--VLAHPFLKASE |
| TriHNR | AACVKANVGVVEDIVRMFEEAVKIFG-KLDIVCSNSGVVSFGHVKDVTPEEFD RVFTINTRGQFFVAREAYKH----LEI |
| TetHNR | GVAIQADISKPSEVVALFDKAVSHFG-GLDFVMSNSGMEWWCDELEVTQELFDKVFNLTRGQFFVAQQGLKH----CRR |

ruler ........90........100........110........120........130........140........150........160

| ACT | TGRIVNIASTGGKQ-GVVHAAAPYSASKHGVVGFTKALGLELARTGITVNAVC PGFVETPMAASVREHYSDIW-EVSTEEA |
| --- | --- |
| GRA | RGRININIASTGGKQ-GVVHAVPYSASKHGVVGFTKALGLELARTGITVNAVC PGFVETPMAERVREHYAGIW-QVSEEEET |
| MON | RGRININVASTAGKQ-GVVLGAPYSASKHGVVGFTKALGNELAPTGITVNAVC PGYVETPMAQRVRQYAAAY-DTTEEAI |
| FREN | RG-VVNIASTGGKQ-GVVFGAPYSASKHGVVGFTKALGLELARSGITVNAVC PGYVETPMAAGVRRHYADLW-DVTEEDV |
| E.coli | HGRITTIGSVVGTM-GNGGQANYAAA KAGLIGFSKSLAREVASRGI TVNVVAAPGFIETDMTRALS----------DDQ |
| B.Napus | KGRIINIASVVGLI-GNIGQANYAAA KAGVIGFSKTAAREGASRNINVN VVCPGFIASDMTAKLG----------EDM |
| Trop II | RGNVVFISSVSGAL-AVPYEAVYGATKGAMDQLTRCLA FEWAKDNIRVNGVGPGVIATSLVEMTIQ----------DPEQKEN |
| TriHNR | GGRLLILMGSITGQAKAVPKHAVYSGSKGAIETFARCMAIDMADKKITVN VVAAPGGIKTDMYHAVCREYIPNG-ENLSNEE |
| TetHNR | GGRILLTSSIAAVMTGIPNHALYAGSKAAVEGFCRAFAVDCGAKGVTVN CIAPGGVKTDMDENDSWHYAPGGYKGMPQEK |

ruler ........170........180........190........200........210........220........230........240

| ACT | FDRITAR--VPIGRYVQPSEVAEMVAYLI-GPGA AAVTAQALNVCGGLGNY--- |
| --- | --- |
| GRA | FDRITNR--VPLGRYVETREVAAMVEYLV-ADDA AA AVTAQALNVCGGLGNY--- |
| MON | LTKFQAK--IPLGRYSTPEEVAGLIGYLA-SDTAA ASITSQALNVCGGLGNY--- |
| FREN | LARFEAK--IPLGRYTRPDEVAALVDYLV-TDAAAA AVTAQALNVCGGLGNY--- |
| E.coli | RAGILAQ--VPAGRLGGAQEIANAVAF LA-SDEEAYITGETLHVN GGYMV--- |
| B.Napus | EKKILGT IPLGRYGQPEDVALGLVEFLALSPAASYITGQO AFTIDGGIAI---- |
| Trop II | LNKLIDR--CALRRMGEPKELAMVAF LC-FPAASYVTGQIIYVDGGLMANCGF |
| TriHNR | VDEYAAVQWSPLRRVGLPIDIARVVCFLA-SNDGGWVTGKVIGIDGGACM---- |
| TetHNR | IDEGLAN-MNPLKRIGYPADIGRAVSALC-QEESEWINGQVIKL TGGGI----- |

ruler ........250........260........270........280........290.......

Figure 2. Sequence Alignment of the Act KR with Other Enzymes in the SDR Family

Sequence-based multiple alignment of SDR sequences. Four representative PKS type II KRs are shown (from a pileup of 28) from *S. coelicolor* (act), *S. violaceoruber* (gra), *S. cinnamonensis* (mon), and *S. roseofulvus* (fren). Residues that are >95% conserved are shaded with red for the NADP⁺ binding site, green for the active site, blue for the outside surface/tetramer interface, and magenta for structural roles. If the residue is conserved in the most closely related FAS and other reductases, it is also shaded with the same color code. The additional sequences are *E. coli* β-keto acyl-ACP ketoreductase (labeled *E. coli*), *B. napus* β-keto acyl-ACP reductase (*B. napus*), Tropinone reductase from *Datura stramonium* (Trop II), trihydroxynaphthalene reductase from *Magnaporthe grisea* (TriHNR), and tetrahydroxynaphthalene reductase from *Magnaporthe grisea* (TetHNR). The sequence alignment was produced using ClustalX.

Quaternary Structure

In the crystal, the oligomeric arrangement is clearly a tetramer made up from a dimer of dimers, which therefore has three perpendicular 2-fold symmetry axes (2,2,2 symmetry). A dimer lies in each asymmetric unit, and one of the tetrameric 2-fold axes coincides with a crystallographic 2-fold axis (Figure 3A). There are two types of dimer interface as described for the structure of β-ketoacyl-ACP reductase from *E. coli* (Price et al., 2001). The model for subunit A comprises residues 3 to 261, while subunit B includes residues –6 to 261 (except for residues 203 to 209, where there is no visible electron density). Residues –6 to 0 are part of the N-terminal histidine tag and are numbered to allow the N-terminal methionine to be designated as residue 1.

Subunit Structure

The ketoreductase has the overall short-chain SDR fold with a single subunit dimension of 40 × 35 × 60 Å (Figures 3B and 3C). The α helices and the β strands are arranged in a Rossman fold with a parallel, twisted seven-stranded β sheet flanked on one side by helices α1, α2, and by helices α3, α4, and α5 on the other. Helices α6 and α7 lie above the sheet, with the axis of helix α6 parallel to the β strands and helix α7 lying perpendicularly. Helices α6 and α7 form a helix-turn-helix motif on the top edge of the core of the protein.

**Dinucleotide Binding Site**

NADP⁺ was clearly visible in the original phase improved electron density maps. It is bound in an extended conformation at the C-terminal ends of the strands in the Rossmann fold in a manner often described for dinucleotide binding enzymes (Figures 3C and 3D) (Oppermann et al., 2003). At the N terminus of helix α1, the characteristic GxGxxG motif observed in the general NAD binding family is replaced in the SDR family by the sequence ${}^{13}\mathrm{G}_{\mathrm{A}} / \mathrm{G} \mathrm{TSGIG}^{19}$, which is conserved in many type II PKS KRs (Figure 2). Arg38 (which is conserved in type II PKSs) stacks against the adenine and also makes direct

Structure
1868

Figure 3. Three-Dimensional Structure of the Act KR

(A) Tetrameric arrangement of ketorductase drawn with helices and strands shown in cartoon style. The A subunit is drawn in magenta. The B subunit is drawn in green. NADP⁺ is shown in gold in each of the four subunits.

(B) Topology diagram.

(C) Cartoon representation of a single subunit with NADP⁺ and the catalytic triad shown in bond representation.

(D) Space-filling representation of the active site and surrounding regions. Conserved residues of type II aromatic PKS reductases are colored according to the following: red, NADP⁺ binding site; green, active site; blue, surface residues. The other three subunits in the tetramer are shown in cartoon representation colored green (B subunit), magenta (C subunit), and dark green (D subunit).

hydrogen bonds with the 2′ phosphate (front of Figure 3B, bottom of Figure 3D). The pyrophosphate is lying at the N-terminal end of helix α1 and helix α6. The pyrophosphate group forms one main-chain interaction (Ile18, N), one side-chain interaction (Ser16 OH), and an interaction with the amide nitrogen of its own nicotinamide group. Both of the 3′,4′ sugar hydroxyls interact with residue Lys161, which is a conserved residue in the SDR family and part of the catalytic triad along with Ser144 and Tyr157. The 3′ OH also hydrogen bonds with the main chain carbonyl oxygen of Asn90. The orientation of the nicotinamide group is well defined. The amide carbonyl hydrogen bonds with the main-chain nitrogen of Val190, and the amide nitrogen hydrogen bonds with the side-chain OH of Thr192 as well as an oxygen from its own phosphate. The pyridine ring of the nicotinamide base stacks against Pro187, which is part of the PG motif that is highly conserved across the SDR family.

Substrate Binding Site

By analogy with other SDR structures, the substrate binding site lies at the carboxyl ends of the β strands in the Rossmann fold, above the NADP⁺ cofactor and

Act Ketoreductase
1869

Figure 4. Open and Closed Forms and Active Site Configuration of the Act KR Subunit

(A) Superposition of subunit A (Open, magenta) and subunit B (Closed, green) in cartoon representation shown looking along the central β sheet. Side chains shown in gray superimpose in the two active sites. Side chains shown in green are specific to the B subunit active site (Met B194), and side chains shown in magenta are specific to the A subunit active site (Met A194, S2, S3, S4).

(B) Stereoview of active site of subunit A. Helices 4 and 5 are show in cartoon representation; catalytic residues are shown in bonds representation, with bonds shown as gray lines where atoms lie within 3.4 Å. Electron density is shown within 7 Å of Tyr157 from a difference map calculated by omitting Tyr157 (from subunits A and B), S2, and S3.

(C) A similar view of the active site in subunit B.

toward the C-terminal end of the subunit (Figures 3B and 3C). This is well defined in the electron density of both subunits apart from the loop linking helix α6 to helix α7, which was too disordered to model in subunit B (residues B203–B209). The substrate binding pocket is formed by the C termini of strands β4, β5, and β6, the N terminus of helix α5 on one side and the helix α6-loop-helix α7 subdomain on the other (Figure 4A). Despite the large size of the cavity, water is completely excluded. The C terminus of strand β4 forms the entrance to the active site and has the sequence GR<sup>93</sup>P<sup>G95</sup>GG (Figure 3D), which is highly conserved in type II polyketide ketoreductases (Figure 2). Ser144 is located at the C terminus of strand β5 within the conserved sequence ASTxGKQGV. Tyr157 and Lys161, the remaining residues of the catalytic triad, are located at the N terminus of helix α5. Adjacent to Ser144 is Thr145, whose hydroxyl group points into the active site. On the opposite side, helices α6 and α7 extend the classical NADP<sup>+</sup> binding fold and make the active site cleft more pronounced. This subdomain is >10 residues longer than the analogous structure in the FAS ketoreductases (Fisher et al., 2000; Price et al., 2001). There are three conserved residues among the type II polyketide KRs in this subdomain. Arg199 forms a salt bridge with Glu191 on the outside face of the subdomain and presumably plays a structural role. Val198 and Tyr202 point into the active site. This side of the active site cleft is lined with a mixture of hydrophobic (e.g., Ile205, Ile217, and Val198) and aromatic polar side chains (Tyr202, Tyr226, and Trp206). Two charged groups, His201 and Arg220, are close to the cavity but do not point toward the inside. An electrostatic surface map was calculated with GRASP for the whole cavity, revealing that it is predominantly hydrophobic with strategically placed polar side chains facing inwards. Stabilization of oligo-keto acids is best achieved under highly controlled conditions where intra- and intermolecular aldol condensations are avoided (Harris and Harris, 1986). Polyketide stability is maximized in solvents of low dielectric con-

Structure
1870

stant where enolate ions are poorly stabilized and where the environment is acid or base free. The predominantly hydrophobic cavity may therefore be a requirement for polyketide stabilization.

Comparison of A and B Subunits

**The Hinge Region**

When the A and B subunits are overlaid via the central β sheet (see Experimental Procedures), the catalytic residues superimpose closely. The major structural differences between the two subunits are limited to one side of the substrate binding site. In subunit A (open), helices α6 and α7 are rotated 19° as a rigid body compared to the B subunit (closed) (Figure 4A), with conserved residues Pro193 at the N terminus of α6 and Pro222 at the C terminus of α7 acting as a hinge. This rotation has the effect of opening the active site cleft in the A subunit compared to the conformation in subunit B. Methionine 194 at the entrance of the active site is in a compact rotamer in the open A subunit, whereas it adopts a more extended conformation in the closed B subunit. The extended conformation in the closed B subunit effectively restricts access to the active site.

Despite the variability of the size of this subdomain among different SDRs, the ability of the helix α6 and helix α7 to form a hinge region that opens up the active site appears to be quite common. These hinge regions/binding loops are always on the outer surface of the homotetramer, where conformational changes will not interfere with the association of the subunits. Movement of the loops outward to increase binding cavity space and flexibility may allow different sized substrates to enter the binding site and yet be retained in a solvent-free environment (Rozwarski et al., 1999). Previously, comparisons of two FAS β-keto acyl carrier protein reductases suggested that the α6/α7 subunit swings out to create an open form in response to the binding of NADP⁺ (Price et al., 2001, 2004).

**Population of the Active Site with Formate Molecules**

The enzyme was crystallized in >4 M sodium formate. Three formate molecules are bound in the active site of the open A subunit. These formates may indicate favorable binding sites for the carbonyl oxygens of a nascent polyketide chain. The S2 formate has one of its oxygens 3.4 Å from both the hydroxyl groups of the catalytic Ser144 and Tyr157 (Figures 4A and 4B). Formate S2 may be positioning its carbonyl group at the same position as the C9 that is reduced in the polyketide chain. Two analogous enzymes, tropinone reductase I and II (TR-I and TR-II), are well-characterized SDR enzymes for which enzyme-substrate complexes are available (Protein Data Bank [PDB] ID codes 1ac1 for TR-I and 2ac1 for TR-II; Nakajima et al., 1998). Both reductases reduce the carbonyl group of their cyclized substrate tropinone, but yield an α-hydroxyl group with a different diastereomeric configuration. In both cases, the Pro-(S) hydride is delivered from NADPH, and the orientation of tropinone (and hence the face that is presented to the NADPH) governs the diastereoselectivity. TR-II performs a stereoselective reduction of tropinone to give ψ-tropine, where the hydroxyl group is equatorial

on the six-membered ring (PDB code 2AE2, Yamashita et al., 1999). Although it is not a polyketide, we propose that this might mimic the positioning of the reduced six-membered ring of a C7-C12 cyclized polyketide intermediate. The active site of TR-II was superimposed on the act KR by aligning the Cα atoms. When this was done, the reduced oxygen of ψ-tropine and the oxygen of the formate S2 lie within 0.5 Å of each other, further suggesting that this formate mimics the position of the C9 carbonyl. The other oxygen of formate S2 lies 3.4 Å from Thr145. Formate S3 lies above Tyr157 with an oxygen atom 3.4 Å from the amide nitrogen of residue Gly95 (Figure 4B), and formate S4 hydrogen bonds to the phenolic hydroxyl of Tyr226. Gly95, Thr145, and Tyr226 (shown in gray in Figures 4A and 4C) are 100% conserved in a sequence alignment of 28 aromatic type II reductases (data not shown). In contrast, there are no water molecules or other solvent molecules (e.g., formate) in the closed B subunit active site, and no unexplained electron density features above 3 σ in the difference electron density maps (Figure 4C).

**Crystal Contacts: A Novel Mechanism of Active Site Opening**

In the act KR, cofactor binding does not appear to drive opening of the A subunit, since both open and closed active sites have bound NADP⁺. In fact, the arrangement around the active site in the closed B subunit of the act KR is very similar to the NADP⁺ complex structure in the FAS β-keto acyl carrier protein reductase (PDB ID code 1EDO; Fisher et al., 2000). Examination of the crystal structure suggests that, in the case of act KR, the opening is driven by a crystal contact with a crystal-symmetry-related B subunit (B′) that impinges on the NADP⁺ binding region and the active site of subunit A (Figure 5A). The neighboring B′ subunit has two four-residue N-terminal helices, helix αa in the N-terminal his tag (residues –4 to –1) and αb (residues 1–4) (shown in green, Figure 5A). Helix αa inserts between helix α6 and strand β4 at the top of the active site of the A subunit. This turn of helix packs against Met 194, precluding the more extended conformation of this side chain observed in the B subunit. The turn αb binds along the adenine of the NADP⁺, and the edge of the central β sheet of the B′ subunit lies along the top of the bound nicotinamide, with helix α2 and strand β3 forming the majority of the contacts.

The equivalent N terminus of the A subunit is disordered where it lies in a different crystallographic environment. No such crystal contact is seen in the active site of subunit B, suggesting that protein-protein interactions are essential for active site opening. Such a mechanism has not been previously observed or proposed for this class of enzyme. The overall organization of the active site region in the open A subunit is very similar to a tropinone reductase structure which was determined in the presence of both a substrate analog and the cofactor NADP⁺ (2AE2) (Yamashita et al., 1999). For the act KR, therefore, both the protein-protein interactions and the formate binding may be mimicking a substrate-bound complex. Crystal contacts have been observed at the α6/α7 subunit of the open NADP⁺-bound form of E. coli FAS β-keto acyl carrier protein reductase (Price et al., 2004), but the change in conformation observed was attributed to NADP⁺ binding.

Act Ketoreductase
1871

Figure 5. ACP Binding to the Act KR

(A) Location of crystal contacts from an adjacent B subunit (cartoon representation, shown in green), with location of N termini of helices 1, 2, and 3 in ACP shown in blue. Top half of A subunit shown in magenta in cartoon representation.

(B) Cartoon of ACP carrying a polyketide substrate (not to scale).

(C) View of model of ACP docking. ACP is shown in blue cartoon representation, with E47, the phosphopantetheine chain, and a model polyketide substrate shown in ball and stick representation. Subunit A is shown in magenta, with important active site residues shown in ball-and-stick representation.

(D) Close-up of interface between E47 from helix 2 in ACP and subunit A.

Modeling of ACP Binding

The polyketide substrate for the KR is presented to the enzyme by ACP (Figure 5B). We therefore looked for possible interaction sites on the structure we have determined. The turn of helix αa from the B′ subunit includes a serine residue that could be mimicking Ser42 of helix 2 of ACP. This residue is known to carry the nascent polyketide chain via a phosphopantetheine linker. NMR studies of the *E. coli* ACP binding to the FAS KR, cocrystallization of the *B. subtilis* phosphopantetheinyl transferase-ACP complex, and mutations of ACP have all implicated the helix2-loop-helix3 of ACP in protein-protein interactions (Parris et al., 2000; Roujeinikova et al., 2002; Worsham et al., 2003; Zhang et al., 2001, 2003). The positioning of the B′ subunit close to the major portal may therefore suggest a possible position for this motif in the act KR-ACP interaction. The N terminus of helix 2 in the act ACP structure was manually overlaid with αa of subunit B′, helix 1 of ACP with αb of subunit B′, and helix 3 with helix α2 (Figure 5A). The model positions helix 2 from ACP parallel with the top of the β sheet and the NADP⁺ of subunit A (Figure 5C). The docked structure provided good steric complementarity between the ACP and subunit A and positions Ser 42 at the end of the active site ready to deliver substrate. Evidence for ACP binding at the major portal also comes from the structure of the *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* enoyl-ACP reductase, InhA in complex with NAD⁺, and a C16 substrate (trans-2-hexadecenoyl-(N-acetylcyste- amine)-thioester) (Rozwarski et al., 1999). The C16 binds in a U-turn conformation, with the thioester bond pointing back out of the major portal toward the proposed ACP binding site.

Further inspection of the ACP docking model showed that Glu47 of the ACP helix 2 was located in a positively charged pocket made up from the terminal groups of three arginines, Arg38, Arg65, and Arg93, and lined by the adenine base of NADP⁺ (Figure 5D). In the crystal structure, Glu56 from the crystallographically related B subunit lies in a similar position to Glu47 in the model of ACP, making a hydrogen bond with Arg38. There are structurally similar residues which are conserved in the FAS KRs (Fisher et al., 2000; Price et al., 2001; Zhang et al., 2001).

It has been shown recently that mutation of two conserved Arg residues (Arg172 and Arg129) in the *E. coli* KR (FabG) abrogates fatty acid biosynthesis (Zhang et al., 2003). The authors proposed that these residues are essential for ACP binding to the FAS KR. They are not, however, conserved in PKS KRs, their closest counterparts being Arg177 and Arg134, which lie surprisingly far from the active site on the opposite side of the SDR fold. Arg134 lies close to a dimer interface and is involved in a salt bridge with Glu85 from the same subunit on the surface of the molecule. In addition, Arg177 makes a hydrogen bond with the carbonyl oxygen of the conserved proline at the end of helix α7, which we postulate to be a hinge allowing the opening of the active site cleft. Mutations in these residues might be expected to affect tetramerization and possibly mobility of the

Structure
1872

Figure 6. Modeling the Bound Polyketide Substrate within the Act KR Active Site

(A) Space-filling representation of the ACP-bound octaketide in the KR active site. The KR surface is shown in magenta, the NADP⁺ is shown in yellow, the phosphopantetheine side arm is shown in marine blue, formates S2–4 are shown in cyan, and the polyketide is shown in dark blue. The first C7–C12 cyclization has been made in this model, and the (R) stereochemistry at C9 was assumed.

(B) Identical to (A), except that no C7–C12 cyclization has been made.

(C) Stereoview of close-up of the cyclized polyketide substrate modeled into the active site, with oxygen substituents interacting in similar positions to the observed formates.

(D) Cartoon of the approach and binding of ACP. In the absence of ACP (i), the active site is closed with water excluded. A positively charged patch is presented on the surface of the KR (blue), which is complementary to a negatively charged patch that lies on helix 2 of ACP (red). (ii) ACP docks, via steric and charge complementarity, the active site is opened, and the unstable substrate is extruded into the active site.

α6-α7 unit and could therefore affect ACP binding and enzyme activity.

Possible Positioning of the Substrate within the Active Site

The presence of formate in the open active site of subunit A suggests that this subunit is a pseudo-substrate complex, where one or other of the formate oxygen atoms mimics a carbonyl group of the bound oligoketoacid. Using the information provided by the positioning of the formate molecules, we constructed a model of the putative polyketide intermediate bound to the KR (Figures 6A–6C). The unreduced octaketide with a single condensation between C7–C12 was used as the docked intermediate (Figure 5B). Using the docked position of the ACP derived by crystal contacts, the phosphopantetheine cofactor was built and the polyketide was added by a thioester linkage to its end. There are, however, two possible orientations of the cyclized polyketide that will give alternate stereochemistry for the reduced alcohol. For the type I modular PKSs, the KRs have a recognizable motif that enables the prediction of alcohol stereochemistry. The presence of Trp141 is classed as “A”-type, while the presence of an Leu-Asp-Asp motif is classed as “B”-type (Caffrey, 2003; Ostergaard et al., 2002; Reid et al., 2003), and both give opposite stereochemistry. However, sequence comparisons indicate that no similar motif exists in the type II KRs, precluding this type of prediction. It is also possible that the stereochemistry of the hydroxyl group in mutactin could indicate the correct orientation of the polyketide, but to date the absolute configuration of mutactin has not been determined (Zhang et al., 1990).

We have instead drawn comparisons with the Wailupemycin A biosynthetic pathway, which proceeds through a similar C7-C12 cyclization and is reduced at C9 by EntD, a homolog of KR. In this case, the absolute stereochemistry has been determined as R (Sitachitta et al., 1996; Xiang et al., 2002). We therefore restricted the orientation of the ring in the docked polyketide such that reduction of the C9 carbonyl generated the (R)-configuration.

With this limitation, the polyketide was positioned in the cavity so that the C9 carbonyl was close to the

Act Ketoreductase
1873

formate (S2) and was interacting with Thr145, Tyr157, and Ser144. The phosphopantetheine-bound polyketide chain now forms a hairpin turn where C1 lies next to helix α6 and helix α7, with the C1–C9 section of the polyketide adjacent to the minor portal. The free C12–C16 end of the polyketide projects back toward the major portal and the ACP entry point. The orientation of the polyketide now positions the C1 carbonyl close to formate S4 and within hydrogen bonding distance of the Tyr226 (Figures 6A and 6C). The terminal oxygen attached to C15 in the model lies within hydrogen bonding distance of the main chain of the conserved Gly95, and is close to the oxygen in formate S3. Restrained minimization was then applied to remove poor geometry and van der Waals’ contacts and bring the C1(O), C9(O), and C15(O) of the polyketide as close as possible to formate oxygens. It was found that the cavity allowed ample space for the phosphopantetheine arm and bound intermediate, and each of the three formate binding sites could be utilized by the polyketide to within less than 0.5 Å. A model was also built in the same way using a linear octaketide. In this model, the C9 oxygen interacts with Tyr157 and Ser144, but the additional flexibility of the linear chain allows Thr145 to interact with the C7 oxygen (Figure 6B). The other interactions are similar to those seen with the cyclic intermediate.

In order to make a comparison with other known KR-substrate complexes, we superimposed the active site of the tropinone-II-ψ-tropine complex onto the act KR-polyketide complex. As expected, the carbonyl of ψ-tropine is positioned very similarly with the C9 carbonyl of the polyketide. The C1–C7 portion of the polyketide chain forces the ring to twist compared to tropine, but the cavity allows it to accommodate this, and the carbonyl is still positioned suitably for hydride transfer.

The hydrogen bonds the polyketide makes within the active site are all with conserved residues, as is observed for the formates in the crystal structure. The side-chain hydroxyls of residues Tyr157, Ser144, Thr145, and Y226 are the major polar side chains that point into the cavity and may play a potential role in polyketide chain recognition/stabilization. The synthesis of suitable polyketide mimics should allow us to cocrystallize the act-KR with these substrates and examine the specificity of the active site more closely.

ity. The substrate is restrained in a favorable conformation by interactions between its carbonyl oxygens and with a limited number of conserved polar groups arranged around the hydrophobic cavity. An attractive feature of this model of ACP binding is that the essential features of the binding site are preserved in a range of proteins that bind NADP(H). This is necessary to explain the promiscuity of different ACPs that are to be able to interact with reductases from different synthetic pathways, including fatty acid biosynthesis.

### Experimental Procedures

#### Expression, Purification, and Crystallization
The expression, purification, and crystallization of the act KR proceeded as described previously (Teartasin et al., 2004). Briefly, recombinant *actIII* was expressed in *E. coli* BL21(DE3) in the pET15b vector (Novagen) with an N-terminal his-tag. The fully active enzyme was purified in a single step by affinity chromatography on Ni²⁺ column (Novagen). Crystals were grown using 5 mg/ml protein in 25 mM phosphate buffer at pH 8 with 10% glycerol and 2.5 mM NADP⁺. Crystals were obtained at 18°C by hanging drop vapor diffusion against wells containing 4.0–4.4 M sodium formate. The crystals belong to the space group P3₂21 with cell dimensions a = b = 103.9 c = 123.1 α = β = 90.0 γ = 120.0. Diffraction data, 100% complete to 2.5 Å resolution, were collected at 100 K using synchrotron radiation at station 14.2 at the Daresbury Laboratory SRS (25,369 reflections from 20–2.5 Å) and reduced using HKL-2000 (HKL Industries, plc).

#### Structure Determination and Refinement
The structure was solved by molecular replacement with Amore (CCP4, 1994) using the protein coordinates of *Brassica napus* β-keto acyl carrier protein reductase (PDB ID code 1EDO; Fisher et al., 2000). Phase improvement, taking advantage of the 2-fold NCS, was performed using Resolve. The starting model was built using a combination of the molecular replacement model and the PDB file that was automatically built within Resolve. The structure was built using O (Jones et al., 1991) and refined in Refmac, with 5% of the data set aside as a free set. Solvent sites were identified using CCP4 programs (CCP4, 1994). The secondary structure is formed from eight α helices (46%), seven β strands (14.7%), and a series of turns, loops, and short 3₁₀ helices (4.6%). The final model comprises 3988 atoms in 2 protein chains, 2 molecules of NADP⁺, 9 formate molecules, and 44 water molecules, and has an R<sub>cryst</sub> = 18.9% (21%) (R<sub>free</sub> = 22.2% [26.4%]). Overall, the model shows good stereochemistry. All nonglycine and nonproline residues lie within the allowed regions of the Ramachandran plot, with 91.1% lying in the most favored regions and 8.9% in the additional allowed regions. The root-mean-square deviation for bond lengths is 0.012 Å and for angles is 1.5°.

The crystal structures of related short-chain dehydrogenases were overlaid on polyketide ketoreductase for comparison. Because of conformational variability in the active site, which was one property we wanted to compare, the overlays were performed by superimposing the residues in the β strands of the Rossmann fold using “lsq_exp” in O (Jones et al., 1991). The rms deviation between the positions of the Cα carbons for these residues was around 0.5 Å² in each case for the PKS and FAS ketoreductases and around 0.8 Å² for the FAS enoyl reductase.

### Conclusions

In summary, the structure suggests a model where NADPH binds, which stabilizes the tetramer (Teartasin et al., 2004). In this tetrameric state, the cofactor is in place and the enzyme is primed (Figure 6D). While the catalytic residues are correctly positioned, the substrate binding site remains closed, with water excluded. ACP recognizes a positive patch on the surface of the ketoreductase, which is only preformed when the cofactor is bound. In this way, the substrate is only delivered when the enzyme is ready for catalysis. Binding of the ACP along the top of the nicotinamide triggers a conformational change in the active site of the enzyme, opening the substrate binding cleft to allow insertion of the reactive substrate into the predominantly hydrophobic cavity.

### Molecular Modeling
Putative polyketide substrates were modeled into the active site using the DISCOVER forcefield and InsightII (Accelrys). Using the ACP-ketoreductase model derived from the crystal contacts, the phosphopantetheine arm and C16 polyketide chain was covalently linked to the ACP Ser 42 and extruded into the active site by manual manipulation of the chain. Two different C16 chains were considered, the first with the C7-C12 cyclization and the second a linear polyketide. On the premise that the bound formate molecules may indicate favorable positions for the polyketide carbonyl groups,

Structure
1874

eral distance restraints were added to the minimizations of the substrate. These attempted to force the polyketide carbonyls to the same point in space as the formate oxygens. For the ring closed polyketide, a restraint to mimic the positioning of S4 was added between the C1(O) of the polyketide (numbering as in Figure 6) and Tyr226 hydroxyl group. The C9(O) was restrained with multiple restraints to Thr145, Ser144, and Tyr157, and the C15(O) with a restraint to Gly95 NH. For the linear polyketide, C9(O) had no restraint to Thr145 hydroxyl, and instead a restraint was included for C7(O). All atoms of the tetramer were fixed, and the polyketide was minimized in the open form active site of the A subunit. Steepest descents minimization was performed until the RMS derivative for the energy change converged.

Acknowledgments

We thank the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council for support (B20055) and the Thai Royal Government for a scholarship (W.T.).

Received: July 16, 2004  
Accepted: August 2, 2004  
Published: October 5, 2004  

References

Bisang, C., Long, P.F., Cortes, J., Westcott, J., Crosby, J., Matharu, A.L., Cox, R.J., Simpson, T.J., Staunton, J., and Leadlay, P.F. (1999). A chain initiation factor common to both modular and aromatic polyketide synthases. Nature 401, 502–505.

Caffrey, P. (2003). Conserved amino acid residues correlating with ketoreductase stereospecificity in modular polyketide synthases. Chembiochem 4, 654–657.

CCP4 (Collaborative Computational Project, Number 4) (1994). The CCP4 suite: programmes for protein crystallography. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 50, 760–763.

Cohen-Gonsaud, M., Ducasse, S., Hoh, F., Zerbib, D., Labesse, G., and Quemard, A. (2002). Crystal structure of MabA from *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*, a reductase involved in long-chain fatty acid biosynthesis. J. Mol. Biol. 320, 249–261.

Crump, M.P., Crosby, J., Dempsey, C.E., Parkinson, J.A., Murray, M., Hopwood, D.A., and Simpson, T.J. (1997). Solution structure of the actinorhodin polyketide synthase acyl carrier protein from *Streptomyces coelicolor* A3(2). Biochemistry 36, 6000–6008.

Findlow, S.C., Winsor, C., Simpson, T.J., Crosby, J., and Crump, M.P. (2003). Solution structure and dynamics of oxytetracycline polyketide synthase acyl carrier protein from *Streptomyces rimosus*. Biochemistry 42, 8423–8433.

Fisher, M., Kroon, J.T.M., Martindale, W., Stuitje, A.R., Slabas, A.R., and Rafferty, J.B. (2000). The X-ray structure of *Brassica napus* β-keto acyl carrier protein reductase and its implications for substrate binding and catalysis. Struct. Fold. Des. 8, 339–347.

Fu, H., McDaniel, R., Hopwood, D.A., and Khosla, C. (1994a). Engineered biosynthesis of novel polyketides - stereochemical course of 2 reactions catalyzed by a polyketide synthase. Biochemistry 33, 9321–9326.

Fu, H., McDaniel, R., Hopwood, D.A., and Khosla, C. (1994b). Engineered biosynthesis of novel polyketides: evidence for temporal, but not regiospecific, control of cyclization of an aromatic precursor. Chem. Biol. 1, 205–210.

Fu, H., Ebertkhosla, S., Hopwood, D.A., and Khosla, C. (1994c). Engineered biosynthesis of novel polyketides - dissection of the catalytic specificity of the act ketoreductase. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 116, 4166–4170.

Ghosh, D., Wawrzak, Z., Weeks, C.M., Duax, W.L., and Erman, M. (1994). The refined 3-dimensional structure of 3-α,20-β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and possible roles of the residues conserved in short-chain dehydrogenases. Structure 2, 629–640.

Harris, T.M., and Harris, C.M. (1986). Biomimetic syntheses of aromatic polyketide metabolites. Pure Appl. Chem. 58, 283–294.

Hertweck, C., Xiang, L., Kalaitzis, J.A., Cheng, Q., Palzer, M., and Moore, B.S. (2004). Context-dependent behavior of the enterocin interative polyketide synthase: a new model for ketoreduction. Chem. Biol. 11, 461–468.

Hopwood, D.A. (1990). Molecular-genetics of polyketides and its comparison to fatty-acid biosynthesis. Annu. Rev. Genet. 24, 37–66.

Hopwood, D.A. (1997). Genetic contributions to understanding polyketide synthases. Chem. Rev. 97, 2465–2497.

Jones, T.A., Zou, J.-Y., Cowan, S.W., and Kjeldgaard, M. (1991). Improved methods for building protein models in electron-density maps and the location of errors in these models. Acta Crystallogr. A 47, 110–119.

Jornvall, H., Persson, B., Krook, M., Atrian, S., Gonzalezduarte, R., Jeffery, J., and Ghosh, D. (1995). Short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (SDR). Biochemistry 34, 6003–6013.

Kallberg, Y., Oppermann, U., Jornvall, H., and Persson, B. (2002). Short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR) relationships: a large family with eight clusters common to human, animal, and plant genomes. Protein Sci. 11, 636–641.

Kunnari, T., Ylihonko, K., Hautala, A., Klika, K.D., Mantsala, P., and Hakala, J. (1999). Incorrectly folded aromatic polyketides from polyketide reductase deficient mutants. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett. 9, 2639–2642.

Li, Q., Khosla, C., Puglisi, J.D., and Liu, C.W. (2003). Solution structure and backbone dynamics of the holo form of the frenolicin acyl carrier protein. Biochemistry 42, 4648–4657.

McDaniel, R., Ebertkhosla, S., Fu, H., Hopwood, D.A., and Khosla, C. (1994). Engineered biosynthesis of novel polyketides - influence of a downstream enzyme on the catalytic specificity of a minimal aromatic polyketide synthase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 11542–11546.

McDaniel, R., Ebertkhosla, S., Hopwood, D.A., and Khosla, C. (1995). Rational design of aromatic polyketide natural-products by recombinant assembly of enzymatic subunits. Nature 375, 549–554.

Nakajima, K., Yamashita, A., Akama, H., Nakatsu, T., Kato, H., Hashimoto, T., Oda, J., and Yamada, Y. (1998). Crystal structures of two tropinone reductases: different reaction stereospecificities in the same protein fold. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95, 4876–4881.

Oppermann, U.C.T., Filling, C., and Jornvall, H. (2001). Forms and functions of human SDR enzymes. Chem. Biol. Interact. 130, 699–705.

Oppermann, U., Filling, C., Hult, M., Shafqat, N., Wu, X.Q., Lindh, M., Shafqat, J., Nordling, E., Kallberg, Y., Persson, B., and Jornvall, H. (2003). Short-chain dehydrogenases/reductases (SDR): the 2002 update. Chem. Biol. Interact. 143, 247–253.

Ostergaard, L.H., Kellenberger, L., Cortes, J., Roddis, M.P., Deacon, M., Staunton, J., and Leadlay, P.F. (2002). Stereochemistry of catalysis by the ketoreductase activity in the first extension module of the erythromycin polyketide synthase. Biochemistry 41, 2719–2726.

Pan, H., Tsai, S.C., Meadows, E.S., Miercke, L.J.W., Keatinge-Clay, A.T., O’Connell, J., Khosla, C., and Stroud, R.M. (2002). Crystal structure of the priming β-ketosynthase from the R1128 polyketide biosynthetic pathway. Structure 10, 1559–1568.

Parris, K.D., Lin, L., Tam, A., Mathew, R., Hixon, J., Stahl, M., Fritz, C.C., Seehra, J., and Somers, W.S. (2000). Crystal structures of substrate binding to *Bacillus subtilis* holo-(acyl carrier protein) synthase reveal a novel trimeric arrangement of molecules resulting in three active sites. Struct. Fold. Des. 8, 883–895.

Price, A.C., Zhang, Y.M., Rock, C.O., and White, S.W. (2001). Structure of β-ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein reductase from *Escherichia coli*: negative cooperativity and its structural basis. Biochemistry 40, 12772–12781.

Price, A.C., Zhang, Y.M., Rock, C.O., and White, S.W. (2004). Cofactor-induced conformational rearrangements establish a catalytically competent active site and a proton relay conduit in Fab. G. Structure 12, 417–428.

Reid, R., Piagentini, M., Rodriguez, E., Ashley, G., Viswanathan, N., Carney, J., Santi, D.V., Hutchinson, C.R., and McDaniel, R. (2003).

Act Ketoreductase
1875

A model of structure and catalysis for ketoreductase domains in modular polyketide synthases. Biochemistry 42, 72–79.

Roujeinikova, A., Baldock, C., Simon, W.J., Gilroy, J., Baker, P.J., Stuitje, A.R., Rice, D.W., Slabas, A.R., and Rafferty, J.B. (2002). X-ray crystallographic studies on butyryl-ACP reveal flexibility of the structure around a putative acyl chain binding site. Structure 10, 825–835.

Rozwarski, D.A., Vilcheze, C., Sugantino, M., Bittman, R., and Sacchettini, J.C. (1999). Crystal structure of the *Mycobacterium tuberculosis* enoyl-ACP reductase, InhA, in complex with NAD(+) and a C16 fatty acyl substrate. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 15582–15589.

Sciara, G., Kendrew, S.G., Miele, A.E., Marsh, N.G., Federici, L., Malatesta, F., Schimperna, G., Savino, C., and Vallone, B. (2003). The structure of ActVA-Orf6, a novel type of monoxygenase involved in actinorhodin biosynthesis. EMBO J. 22, 205–215.

Sitachitta, N., Gadepalli, M., and Davidson, B.S. (1996). New α-pyrone-containing metabolites from a marine-derived Actinomycete. Tetrahedron 52, 8073–8080.

Smith, S. (1994). The animal fatty-acid synthase—one gene, one polypeptide, 7 enzymes. FASEB J. 8, 1248–1259.

Staunton, J., and Weissman, K.J. (2001). Polyketide biosynthesis: a millennium review. Nat. Prod. Rep. 18, 380–416.

Teartasin, W., Limpkin, C., Glod, F., Spencer, J., Cox, R.J., Simpson, T.J., Crosby, J., Crump, M.P., and Hadfield, A.T. (2004). Expression, purification and preliminary X-ray diffraction analysis of a ketoreductase from a type II polyketide synthase. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 60, 1137–1138.

Worsham, L.A.S., Earls, L., Jolly, C., Langston, K.G., Trent, M.S., and Ernst-Fonberg, M.L. (2003). Amino acid residues of *Escherichia coli* acyl carrier protein involved in heterologous protein interactions. Biochemistry 42, 167–176.

Xiang, L., Kalaitzis, J.A., Nilsen, G., Chen, L., and Moore, B.S. (2002). Mutational analysis of the enterocin Favorskii biosynthetic rearrangement. Org. Lett. 4, 957–960.

Yamashita, A., Kato, H., Wakatsuki, S., Tomizaki, T., Nakatsu, T., Nakajima, K., Hashimoto, T., Yamada, Y., and Oda, J. (1999). Structure of tropinone reductase-II complexed with NADP⁺ and pseudo-tropine at 1.9 Å resolution: implication for stereospecific substrate binding and catalysis. Biochemistry 38, 7630–7637.

Zawada, R.J.X., and Khosla, C. (1999). Heterologous expression, purification, reconstitution and kinetic analysis of an extended type II polyketide synthase. Chem. Biol. 6, 607–615.

Zhang, H.-I., He, X.-G., Adefarati, A., Gallucci, J., Cole, S.P., Beale, J.M., Keller, P.J., Chang, C.-J., and Floss, H.G. (1990). Mutactin, a novel polyketide from *Streptomyces coelicolor*. Structure and biosynthetic relationship to actinorhodin. J. Org. Chem. 55, 1682–1684.

Zhang, Y.M., Rao, M.S., Heath, R.J., Price, A.C., Olson, A.J., Rock, C.O., and White, S.W. (2001). Identification and analysis of the acyl carrier protein (ACP) docking site on β-ketoacyl-ACP synthase III. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 8231–8238.

Zhang, Y.M., Wu, B.N., Zheng, J., and Rock, C.O. (2003). Key residues responsible for acyl carrier protein and β-ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein reductase (FabG) interaction. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 52935–52943.

Accession Numbers

Coordinates and structure factors have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank under accession codes 1w4z and r1w4zsf.
