
American Journal of Medical Genetics Part C (Semin. Med. Genet.) 131C:82–92 (2004)

ARTICLE

# The Genetics of Skin Cancer

KENNETH Y. TSAI AND HENSIN TSAO*

Recent advances in molecular genetics have led to a better understanding of the biological underpinnings of skin cancer formation. As with most cancers, the RB, p53, and RAS pathways appear to play prominent roles in the pathogenesis of several skin cancer types. Although various components of these pathways may be differentially altered in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), basal cell carcinoma (BCC), and cutaneous melanoma, the final biochemical expression of these defects may be the same. With the unraveling of these genetic mechanisms, a more targeted approach to diagnosis and treatment may be possible in the near future.

KEY WORDS: basal cell carcinoma; squamous cell carcinoma; melanoma; cutaneous lymphoma

## INTRODUCTION

Much of our knowledge about the genetics of skin cancer comes from identification of causative mutations in genes involved in familial cancer syndromes. The relatively small number of genes established to cause familial cancer syndromes belies the complexity of the genetic pathways involved in much more common sporadic cases. Here, we review the main genetic determinants of primary skin cancers as well as genes involved in conferring photosensitivity and predisposition to skin cancer. The interaction of ultraviolet radiation with cells in the skin plays a critical role in many of these cancers. Relevant data gleaned from animal models are also discussed. In addition, we also briefly comment on evidence concerning auxiliary genetic pathways involved in these skin cancers.

Genetic studies of melanoma and basal cell carcinoma (BCC) have been aided by the identification of familial syndromes predisposing to these specific cancers. Nevertheless, evidence gathered from animal models and genome screens have strongly implicated many more genes including apoptotic effectors and classic proto-oncogenes. For other cancers, such as squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, potential viral etiologies and the use of genome-wide surveys have played an important role in outlining the relevant cellular pathways. Finally, as we continue to conceptualize cancer as a disease resulting from successive genetic derangements in susceptible cell populations, it is important to note that multiple mechanisms exist for alterations in gene function that ultimately contribute to tumorigenesis.

### Basal cell cancer of the skin is the most common human cancer, accounting for almost a third of all cancer diagnoses in the United States. The vast majority of BCC cases is sporadic, though there is a rare familial syndrome basal cell nevus syndrome that predisposes to development of BCC. In addition, there is strong epidemiological and genetic evidence that demonstrates UV exposure as a risk factor of prime importance.

---

Kenneth Y. Tsai, M.D., Ph.D., is a resident in the Department of Dermatology at Harvard Medical School.

Hensin Tsao, M.D., Ph.D., is a research scientist within the Wellman Center for Photomedicine at the Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH). He is also clinical director of the MGH Melanoma Genetics Program, codirector of the MGH Pigmented Lesion Clinic and assistant professor of Dermatology at Harvard Medical School.

*Correspondence to: Hensin Tsao, Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Bartlett Hall, 622, 48 Blossom St., Boston, MA 02114.

E-mail: htsao@partners.org

DOI 10.1002/ajmg.c.30037

---

### BCC

Basal cell cancer of the skin is the most common human cancer, accounting for almost a third of all cancer diagnoses in the United States. The vast majority of BCC cases are sporadic, though there is a rare familial syndrome basal cell nevus syndrome (BCNS, or Gorlin syndrome OMIM 109400) that predisposes to development of BCC. In addition, there is strong epidemiological and genetic evidence that demonstrates UV exposure as a risk factor of prime importance.

Non syndromatic hereditary BCC has been reported in a handful of kindreds, including ones exhibiting unilateral distribution and male-to-male transmission, however, it is not known whether these cases reflect consequences of unusual patterns of mosaicism in genes known to be involved in BCC or mutations involving other genes [Happle, 2000]. There are at least two additional familial syndromes, which have varied clinical presentations and predispose

© 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

individuals to development of BCC, for which the responsible genetic defects remain unknown. They include Rombo syndrome (OMIM 180730) [Michaels- son et al., 1981; van Steensel et al., 2001] and Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome (OMIM 301845) [Bazex et al., 1966; Vabres et al., 1995; Kidd et al., 1996], which most likely includes BCC with milia and coarse, sparse hair (OMIM 109390) [Oley et al., 1992; Vabres and de Prost, 1993].

**Patched and the hedgehog pathway**

Mutations in components of hedgehog pathway leading to aberrant activation of signaling have been implicated in BCNS and sporadic BCC. Inactivation of the *PTCH1* gene on chromosome 9q22, a negative regulator of hedgehog signaling, is responsible for BCNS [Hahn et al., 1996; Johnson et al., 1996]. Loss of function of the PTCH1 protein is thought to account for the panoply of defects in BCNS, including multiple early-onset BCC's, mandibular bone cysts, palmar and plantar pitting, and medulloblastoma [Bale, 2002]. Biallelic mutations and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in *PTCH1* have been observed in sporadic BCC as well [Gailani et al., 1996b; Aszterbaum et al., 1998; Evans et al., 2000].

Normally, ligand-dependent signaling by Hedgehog (Hh) homologs proceeds through binding to the Patched receptor (Fig. 1). This binding relieves the Patched-mediated inhibition of signaling through the Smoothened (*SMOH*) gene product in a series of complex events that may be catalytically regulated [Taipale et al., 2002]. This signaling ultimately results in the dissociation of the Gli1 transcription factor from an inhibitory complex in the cytoplasm, its subsequent translocation to the nucleus, and activation of target gene expression (Fig. 1B) [Wetmore, 2003]. Constitutive activation of this pathway, resulting in unrestrained Gli1 activity, has been shown to occur in various tumor types [Dahmane et al., 1997, 2001], though recent evidence implicates the related Gli2 transcription factor as an important transducer of hedgehog signaling specifically in tumor cells [Bai et al., 2002]. Potential Gli target genes such as *PDGFRA* [Xie et al., 2001] and *FOXM1* [Teh et al., 2002] have been identified, and analysis of gene expression arrays [Yoon et al., 2002] and tumor samples [Bonifas et al., 2001] have been used to find other targets, though the individual contribution of these genes to the development of BCC is unknown.

Results from experiments in genetically engineered animals have not only confirmed the importance of the Hedgehog pathway but have also elucidated genetic mechanisms of BCC development. Consistent with the phenotype in humans, mice heterozygous for *PTCH* are susceptible to BCC, SCC, and medulloblastoma, especially upon radiation challenge [Goodrich et al., 1997; Hahn et al., 1998; Aszterbaum et al., 1999; Pazzaglia et al., 2002]. Furthermore, transgenic mice [Oro et al., 1997] and transgenic human skin [Fan et al., 1997] overexpressing Sonic Hedgehog develop tumors resembling human BCC, as do mice overexpressing Gli2 [Grachtchouk et al., 2000].

While biallelic deletions in *PTCH1* have been observed in sporadic BCC, there are instances where LOH is not observed [Aszterbaum et al., 1998]. Indeed in *PTCH+/-* mice, tumor cells often express the wild-type allele [Wetmore et al., 2000; Zurawel et al., 2000; Calzada-Wack et al., 2002]. Although this may reflect haploinsufficiency of *PTCH1* for tumor suppression, there may also be other mechanisms of gene silencing at play here, notably hypermethylation [Berman et al., 2002]. Nevertheless, while *PTCH1* has been regarded as a tumor suppressor, it may not always behave in classic Knudson two-hit fashion in all tumor types.

At a cellular level, sonic hedgehog signaling promotes cell proliferation. In human epithelial cells, this proceeds in part through the inhibition of p21CIP1 [Fan and Khavari, 1999] and in cerebellar granule cell progenitors, through upregulation of cyclin D1 (*CCND1*), cyclin D2 (*CCND2*), and *NMYC*

![Figure 1. The hedgehog pathway in basal cell carcinoma (BCC). A: In the absence of SHH signaling, PTCH inhibits SMO, and Gli1 remains tethered to a cytoplasmic complex that includes SUFU (suppressor of fused), Fu (fused), and Cos2. B: Once SHH binds, this inhibition is relieved leading to Gli1 translocation to the nucleus and activation of target genes. Mutations in PTCH and SMO (lightening flashes) have been implicated in human BCC.](image.png)

[Kenney and Rowitch, 2000; Kenney et al., 2003]. Patched1 has been found to bind cyclin B1, negatively regulating its nuclear translocation in the absence of signaling [Barnes et al., 2001]. Although these biochemical activities are potentially important in tumor suppression, it has been difficult to establish convincing genotype-phenotype correlations between mutations in PTCH1 and clinical findings [Wicking et al., 1997].

Other components of the pathway appear to be involved in BCC as well though their role is less clearly defined. As might be expected, dominant activating mutations in Smoothened (SMO), again conferring ligand-independent signaling, have been identified in sporadic BCC [Reifenberger et al., 1998; Xie et al., 1998; Lam et al., 1999]. The recently identified and co-expressed PTCH1 homolog, PTCH2, has not been strongly implicated in BCC [Motoyama et al., 1998; Smyth et al., 1999].

### TP53 and p53 family members

Mutations in TP53 are found with high frequency (>50%) in sporadic BCC, and these usually bear the so-called UV signature CC → TT and C → T transitions indicative of ultraviolet radiation B (UV-B) exposure [Rady et al., 1992; Moles et al., 1993; Ziegler et al., 1993; Gailani et al., 1996a; D'Errico et al., 1997; Zhang et al., 2001]. The characteristic DNA lesions created by such exposure occur at adjacent pyrimidines resulting in cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers or 6-4 photoproducts that, when inappropriately repaired, can give rise to mutations [Mullenders et al., 1993]. Interestingly, while UV signature lesions have also been detected frequently in PTCH1 [Gailani et al., 1996b; Hahn et al., 1996; Johnson et al., 1996; Unden et al., 1996; Wolter et al., 1997] and p53 [Rady et al., 1992; Moles et al., 1993; Ziegler et al., 1993; Gailani et al., 1996a; D'Errico et al., 1997; Zhang et al., 2001], even within the same tumor [Ratner et al., 2001], the best evidence for a strong genetic interaction in tumor suppression comes from PTCH1+/− mice, in which concomitant loss of p53 dramatically accelerates tumorigenesis [Wetmore et al., 2001].

#### Cutaneous Melanoma

Significant advances in our understanding of the genetic abnormalities associated with melanoma tumorigenesis have transpired in the past few years. Starting with classical molecular genetic studies in familial melanoma and continuing with the development and use of animal models, these insights have resulted in the identification of key genetic pathways in melanoma tumorigenesis. As in BCC and SCC, exposure to UV radiation is implicated in the process, particularly intermittent intense exposure [Gilchrest et al., 1999].

##### CDKN2A locus: links to the RB and p53 pathways

While familial melanoma accounts for some 10% of all cases of melanoma, a significant proportion of these kindreds have germline mutations in CDKN2A. Estimates of this proportion vary but are in the range of 40% [Haluska and Hodi, 1998], though it is not clear how some of these mutations affect p16INK4A protein function biochemically. Interestingly, penetrance of CDKN2A mutations varies geographically, implying that a similar set of factors modifies geographic variation and CDKN2A mutation penetrance [Bishop et al., 2002].

Studies of a number of melanoma prone kindreds, employing cytogenetic and LOH analyzes, led to the identification of the CDKN2A/MTS1 locus on chromosome 9p21 as the susceptibility locus for familial melanoma.

The CDKN2A locus encodes two different proteins (p16INK4A and p14ARF) each with a unique first exon and shared second and third exons translated in different reading frames [Lowe and Sherr, 2003]. The protein product first identified, p16INK4A, is an inhibitor of the cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK) 4 and 6 and is thought to function primarily through pRB-mediated regulation of the G1-S transition of the cell cycle [Serrano et al., 1993, 1995; Koh et al., 1995]. Many of the identified mutations compromise this ability to negatively regulate CDK4 [Koh et al., 1995]. Consistent with the biochemical importance of this interaction, familial melanoma has also been linked, though rarely, to a particular dominant activating mutation of CDK4 (R24C) that renders it relatively insensitive to p16INK4A inhibition [Wolfel et al., 1995; Zuo et al., 1996; Soufir et al., 1998]. Mutations of arginine 24 Lysine 22 have also been noted in cell lines [Tsao et al., 1998]. No clear phenotype differences have been noted between families with germline CDKN2A and CDK4 mutations [Goldstein et al., 2000].

p14ARF functions, in part, by stabilizing p53 through inhibition of MDM2 activity, although p53-independent activities of p14ARF clearly exist [Lowe and Sherr, 2003]. p14ARF can be upregulated by oncogenes such as MYC and RAS [Lowe and Sherr, 2003]. Strong evidence implicating p14ARF in melanoma is lacking though there are reports of a family with melanoma-astrocytoma susceptibility with germline deletion of exon 1β specific for p14ARF [Randerson-Moor et al., 2001] and one with melanoma susceptibility bearing a germline insertion in exon 1β also inactivating p14ARF [Rizos et al., 2001]. The role of TP53 in melanoma remains somewhat controversial with some groups reporting mutation rates between 13–25% [Sparrow et al., 1995; Akslen et al., 1998] and others documenting much lower rates [Castresana

et al., 1993; Albino et al., 1994; Lubbe et al., 1994; Papp et al., 1996]. This lack of consistently strong selection against TP53 may be accounted for by compromised p14ARF function, though it is not clear how many of the CDKN2A mutations found in melanoma affect p14ARF. It is possible that p14ARF function may be mildly compromised as noted in one report of germline CDKN2A exon 2 mutation which also affected p16INK4A function [Hashemi et al., 2002], and that is sufficient to confer tumor susceptibility. Interestingly, the mouse homolog p19ARF appears to be haploinsufficient for melanoma suppression on a p16Ink4a-null background implying that partial loss of function of ARF may be sufficient to predispose to melanoma in certain genetic backgrounds [Krimpenfort et al., 2001]. Yet another means of bypassing the p53 pathway may be MDM2 overexpression, a frequent occurrence in melanomas correlating with stage of disease [Polsky et al., 2001].

Low risk melanoma susceptibility loci

Several recent lower risk melanoma susceptibility loci have been described. Variants in the melanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R) gene are associated with red hair [Valverde et al., 1995] and a 2–4-fold increase in melanoma risk [Valverde et al., 1996; Palmer et al., 2000; Box et al., 2001a; Kennedy et al., 2001] (see below). There is also a single report of a G/A single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) 382 nucleotides upstream of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) gene that determines the level of EGF in the blood. The G allele is apparently overrepresented in the melanoma population thus conferring a 2.7-fold relative risk for developing melanoma [Shahbazi et al., 2002]. The risk of other cancers among with BRCA2 mutation families was recently determined in a cohort of 3,728 individuals, among whom 681 persons had breast or ovarian cancer and 3,047 persons either were known mutation carriers, were first-degree relatives of known mutation carriers, or were first-degree relatives of breast or ovarian cancer patients. Melanoma was over-

represented with a relative risk of 2.58 [Consortium, 1999].

### RAS pathway

The RAS pathway has long been implicated in development of melanoma. It has been known for some time that activating RAS mutations, particularly in NRAS [van't Veer et al., 1989; Ball et al., 1994; Carr and Mackie, 1994; Platz et al., 1994; Jiveskog et al., 1998; Demunter et al., 2001; Omholt et al., 2002], are present in melanoma, that HRAS can transform normal human melanocytes [Albino et al., 1992], and

---

**The RAS pathway has long been implicated in development of melanoma. It has been known for some time that activating RAS mutations, particularly in NRAS, are present in melanoma, that HRAS can transform normal human melanocytes, and that HRAS is critical for tumor induction and maintenance in genetically-engineered mice.**

that HRAS is critical for tumor induction and maintenance in genetically-engineered mice [Chin et al., 1999]. Recently, a downstream effector of the RAS pathway been strongly implicated in human melanoma. The identification of dominant activating mutations in the BRAF proto-oncogene in a majority of both melanoma samples, melanoma cell lines, and nevi [Davies et al., 2002; Pollock et al., 2003] has served as valuable confirmation of the involvement of the RAS pathway in human melanoma tumorigenesis and perhaps specifically implicates the RAF effector pathway downstream of RAS. Interestingly, germline BRAF mutations have not been identified [Lang et al., 2003], consistent with the relative paucity of

germline activating mutations in familial cancer predisposition syndromes. Finally, in a genomic study of melanoma, RhoC overexpression was identified as important in the transition to progressively metastatic phenotypes [Clark et al., 2000] implicating another potential RAS pathway effector.

### Effectors of apoptosis

Recently, the antiapoptotic factor, BCL2, was identified as a target gene of the melanocyte-specific transcription factor, microphthalmia (Mitf) [McGill et al., 2002]. In melanoma samples examined, it appeared that both of these genes were overexpressed, and enforced BCL2 expression could rescue melanocytes following introduction of dominant-negative Mitf [McGill et al., 2002]. Allelic loss and hypermethylation, but not deleterious mutations of the pro-apoptotic gene APAF1 have been noted in metastatic melanoma samples and melanoma cell lines [Soengas et al., 2001], respectively, perhaps offering explanation for the characteristic chemoresistance of this tumor type.

### SCC

As in BCC, SCC of the skin is also quite common. A critically important difference between the two is that while BCC does not arise in a precursor lesion, SCC arises in actinic keratoses up to 60% of the time [Marks et al., 1988]. SCC in anogenital regions can be caused by oncogenic human papillomavirus (HPV) strains. As with the other common non-melanoma skin cancer, BCC, risk for development of SCC is strongly influenced by the nature and dose of UV radiation and genetic backgrounds that regulate that interaction.

### HPV

The association between oncogenic HPV and anogenital SCC, particularly Bowenoid papulosis, has been known for some time [Frisch, 2002]. In addition, there are cases of HPV-associated digital cutaneous squamous carcinoma [Alam et al., 2003]. Here, the cellular consequences of the high-risk HPV E7
and E6 proteins functionally inactivate the RB and p53 proteins, respectively [zur Hausen, 2002]. Indeed, numerous experiments using mouse models also implicate these viral oncoproteins as important in the development of SCC [Arbeit et al., 1993; Griep et al., 1993; Herber et al., 1996; Song et al., 1999].

**TP53 and TP53L (p63)**

Mutations in TP53 have been described in actinic keratoses, in situ SCC, and invasive SCC with UV signature lesions common, and a reported mutation rate as high as 45% [Brash et al., 1991; Campbell et al., 1993; Kubo et al., 1994; Taguchi et al., 1994; Ziegler et al., 1994; Rehman et al., 1996]. Furthermore, a significant association has been reported between the Arg/Arg polymorphism at p53 codon 72 and non-melanoma skin cancer in renal transplant recipients but not in immunocompetent patients compared with skin type matched controls [McGregor et al., 2002]. These data are corroborated by results in mice deficient for p53, in which UV irradiation gives rise to tumors in the skin resembling SCC [Ziegler et al., 1994; Li et al., 1998; Jiang et al., 1999]. It was noted that in the absence of p53, there was a compromised apoptotic response normally induced by radiation indicating that p53 functions to eliminate incipient cancer cells in this context [Ziegler et al., 1994]. Interestingly, individuals who have Li-Fraumeni syndrome due to a germline mutation in TP53 do not appear to be at increased risk for SCC [Malkin et al., 1990]. Taken together, these results suggest that while loss of p53 function may be important in the development of actinic keratoses and subsequent SCC, this may not be a critical rate-limiting step.

The TP53 homolog, TP53L (p63), has been found to be highly-expressed in basal cells of squamous epithelia [Yang et al., 1999]. Aberrant expression of p63 beyond the basal layers has been noted by a number of groups in SCC [Parsa et al., 1999; Senoo et al., 2001; Reis-Filho et al., 2002]. Some of the isoforms are known to have dominant negative activity perhaps reflecting an alternative route to p53 inactivation [Senoo et al., 2001].

**CDKN2A locus**

Several studies have implicated this locus in SCC and mutations in exon 2, common to both p16INK4A and p14ARF, have been documented in a significant proportion of SCCs [Kubo et al., 1997; Soufir et al., 1999]. In addition, hypermethylation of the locus, in the absence of mutation was also demonstrated. Some attempts have been made to correlate changes at the CDKN2A locus to the progression from AK to SCC, but one group reported loss of expression corresponding to deletion of 9p21 in SCC but not in AK [Mortier et al., 2002], while one group reported stronger immunohistochemical staining for p16INK4A in deeper, invasive portions of progressively advanced lesions [Hodges and Smoller, 2002].

**RAS and RAS pathway**

As with TP53, UV-induced mutations in HRAS and KRAS have also been characterized in both actinic keratoses and SCC [Pierceall et al., 1991; Spencer et al., 1995]. An important pathogenic role for RAS activation in SCC is corroborated by mouse models in which oncogenic HRAS, coupled with NF-KB inhibition, leads to lesions resembling invasive SCC [Dajee et al., 2003]. This system, using human skin implanted into nude mice, also implicates α6β4 integrin and laminin 5 in the establishment of these tumors [Dajee et al., 2003].

**Cutaneous Lymphoma**

In contrast to many lymphomas and leukemias, pathogenetic chromosomal abnormalities have not been definitively characterized in cutaneous lymphomas. Nevertheless, characteristic, non-random chromosomal abnormalities have been reported, and some have been associated with prognostic implications.

**Characteristic chromosomal abnormalities**

The advent of technologies such as comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) methods have extended the reach of traditional methods such as G-banding and metaphase spreads in the identification of characteristic chromosomal abnormalities in cutaneous lymphomas.

The cutaneous T cell lymphomas (CTCL) are a heterogeneous group of diseases that include mycosis fungoides (MF) and Sézary syndrome (SS). Within this larger grouping, the most frequent chromosomal aberrations in one recent study were losses are on chromosomes 1p (38%) and 17p (21%), gain of chromosome 4/4p, losses of 10q/10 and 19, and gains of 18 and 17q/17 [Mao et al., 2002b]. In general, late stage MF resembles SS in terms of chromosomal abnormalities [Mao et al., 2002b]. Candidate genes in 1p are numerous, and finer mapping will be required to define minimal common regions of deletions, but 17p contains the well-known tumor suppressor gene TP53. In addition, 10q contains the tumor suppressor gene PTEN, which has also been found deleted in MF [Scarisbrick et al., 2000].

In studies specifically of SS, consistent abnormalities noted involve chromosomes 1, 10, 17, and 19 [Mao et al., 2003a]. In one 5-year follow-up study CTCL patients, it was found that aberrations of chromosomes 1, 6, and 11 were markers of known disease, even in remission, whereas abnormalities in chromosomes 8 and 17 were correlated with active disease or progression [Karlenko et al., 2003]. Although less well-studied, primary cutaneous B cell lymphoma also appears to exhibit certain reproducible changes notably on chromosomes 18/18q, 7/7p, 3/3q, 1p, 12/12q, 13/13q, and 6q as well as frequent amplification of BCL2 [Mao et al., 2002a].

**Candidate proto-oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes**

The candidate tumor suppressor gene approach has yielded some information on genetic pathways that may be involved in CTCL. p53 protein expression has been studied in primary CTCL, with abnormally high expression noted in late stages of disease [Lauritzen et al., 1995; McGregor et al., 1995] and 17p chromosomal loss in SS [Marks et al., 1996]. Interestingly, some of the TP53 mutations noted bear the UV signature, implying a role for radiation exposure in these diseases [McGregor et al., 1999].
ARTICLE

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF MEDICAL GENETICS (SEMIN. MED. GENET.) 87

MDM2 overexpression was also found in some samples highlighting another means of p53 pathway inactivation [Marks et al., 1996]. Similar studies have been conducted on the CDKN2A and CDKN2B loci demonstrating mutation, hypermethylation, and gross deletion in both T and B cell lymphomas [Child et al., 2002; Scarisbrick et al., 2002]. Reduced p16INK4AmRNA expression has been noted in some cases of MF [Peris et al., 1999; Navas et al., 2000]. Recently, it has been reported that JUNB is amplified and overexpressed, along with a number of other proto-oncogenes in primary cutaneous lymphomas [Mao et al., 2003b].

Photosensitivity and Photosensitivity Syndromes

Photosensitivity and photocarcinogenesis

It has been clear for many years that the type, duration, and dose of radiation exposure modifies the risk of many primary skin cancers, particularly BCC, SCC, and melanoma. Polymorphisms in genes regulating skin pigmentation modify the risk of these tumors significantly, and indeed, fair skin and red hair color are considered strong overall genetic risk factors for skin cancer.

modify the risk of these tumors significantly, and indeed, fair skin and red hair color are considered strong overall genetic risk factors for skin cancer [Kricker et al., 1991].

---

It has been clear for many years that the type, duration, and dose of radiation exposure modifies the risk of many primary skin cancers, particularly BCC, SCC, and melanoma. Polymorphisms in genes regulating skin pigmentation modify the risk of these tumors significantly, and indeed, fair skin and red hair color are considered strong overall genetic risk factors for skin cancer.

---

As described earlier, MC1R gene encodes the receptor for alpha-melanocyte stimulating hormone (α-MSH). Upon ligand binding, downstream signaling via cAMP leads to the synthesis of brown eumelanin while certain receptor polymorphisms impair signaling thereby shifting synthesis to red pheomelanin, the principal component of red hair [Schaffer and Bologna, 2001]. For the non-melanoma skin cancers, there is an overall enhanced risk of almost 3-fold for individuals homozygous for variant alleles relative to individuals homozygous for wild-type alleles [Bastiaens et al., 2001; Box et al., 2001b]. For melanoma, certain alleles confer an approximately 2-fold risk per allele [Palmer et al., 2000; Kennedy et al., 2001]. Interestingly, a significant component of the enhanced risk of skin cancers due to MC1R polymorphisms is independent of skin type, indicating that the mechanism of this interaction is imprecisely understood [Palmer et al., 2000; Bastiaens et al., 2001; Kennedy et al., 2001].

---

| Mutation (Syndrome) | Melanoma | BCC | SCC/KA |
|---------------------|----------|-----|--------|
| Germline            | CDKN2A, CDK4 (FAMM syndrome) <br> XP genes (Xeroderma pigmentosum) <br> BRCA2 (Breast/ovarian Cancer syndrome) <br> WRN (Werner syndrome) <br> MC1R | PTCH (Gorlin's syndrome) <br> XP genes (Xeroderma pigmentosum) <br> MC1R | MSH2; MLH1 (Muir Torre Syndrome) <br> XP genes (Xeroderma pigmentosum) <br> MC1R |
|                     |          |     |        |
| Somatic             | CDKN2A, CDK4 <br> NRAS <br> BRAF <br> TP53 (APAF-1) | PTCH, SMO <br> TP53 <br> RAS | TP53 <br> RAS |

Figure 2. Germline and somatic mutations in skin cancer. Germline mutations, which are most readily detected in genetic material from peripheral blood, define skin cancer susceptibility while somatic mutations, which are restricted to analysis of genetic material from tumors, speak to cancer progression and mechanism. Genes that have been implicated in melanoma, BCC and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) — including keratoacanthomas (KA) — are outlined in the side table. Syndromes associated with germline mutations in these genes are shown in parenthesis.

MUTATION  
DELETION  
METHYLATION  

p16INK4A  

Cyclin D1 : CDK4, 6  

PHOSPHORYLATION  

MUTATION  
AMPLIFICATION  

p21CIP1  

RAS  

BRAF  

ARF  

MUTATION  
DELETION  

MDM2  

OVEREXPRESSION  
AMPLIFICATION  

INCREASED  
DEGRADATION  

pRB  

VIRAL ONCOPROTEINS  

p53  

differentiation  

E2F  

S phase  

target genes  

apoptosis  

Figure 3. Convergence of the genetic lesions in skin cancers on the RB and p53 pathways. Mechanisms of genetic alterations in human cancers are described in italics. The CDKN2A locus, which encodes both p16INK4A and ARF is mutated, deleted, and methylated human skin cancers. p16INK4A functions through restraining CDK4 and CDK6 activity that in turn inhibits pRB-mediated restraint of E2F activity and cell cycle entry through G1. ARF can be induced by proto-oncogenes such as RAS and RAF, and proceeds to activate p53 through inhibition of MDM2. p53, in turn, activates a transcriptional program that results in cell cycle arrest (P21CIP1) or apoptosis.

Photosensitivity syndromes

Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is a heterogeneous group of inherited disorders characterized by sun sensitivity, photophobia, early development of skin cancers (3–5 years vs. 50–60 years), and neurodegeneration of varying degrees. These disorders are caused by defects in the UV-responsive nucleotide excision DNA repair system, and the identified XP genes appear to all be components of this repair apparatus [Giglia-Mari and Sarasin, 2003]. It is thought that the accumulation of DNA photoproducts is vastly accelerated in XP, increasing the rate of development of potentially carcinogenic mutations. The risk of developing non-melanoma skin cancers is about 4,000-fold greater than normal [Kraemer et al., 1987]. Interestingly, the mutation spectra identified in genes known to be involved differ in XP versus non-XP patients. In XP patients, these UV-induced mutations are often CC→TT tandem mutations, and in non-XP patients, they are often C→T transitions [Mullenders et al., 1993; Soufir et al., 2000].

CONCLUSION

Significant progress in our understanding of the genetic abnormalities in skin cancer has been made in the last several years (Fig. 2). For BCC and melanoma, the key pathways involved have been identified through studies of familial predisposition phenotypes. Through other studies, such pathways have been identified for SCC and characteristic chromosomal abnormalities found in the cutaneous lymphomas. Some common themes emerge.

The RB and p53 pathways play almost universal roles in these skin cancers (Fig. 3). Multiple elements of these pathways can be involved but the end result appears to be consistent compromise of the tumor suppressor function of the entire pathway. For instance, the loss of RB function is frequently due to inactivation of p16 in melanoma and SCC. On the other hand, direct mutation of TP53 is more common in BCC and SCC than melanoma though the p53 pathway is functionally abrogated in melanoma through loss of

p14ARF. Oncogenic insults, such as RAS mutagenesis occurs in both SCC and melanoma; however, mutations in BRAF can also activate the RAS pathway but is specific to melanoma. In many instances, use of genome-wide studies and animal models have not only corroborated findings in tumor samples, but have provided insight into the interaction of these pathways and implicated new genes in the genesis of skin cancer.

REFERENCES

Akslen LA, Monstad SE, Larsen B, Straume O, Ogreid D. 1998. Frequent mutations of the p53 gene in cutaneous melanoma of the nodular type. Int J Cancer 79:91–95.

Alam M, Caldwell JB, Eliezri YD. 2003. Human papillomavirus-associated digital squamous cell carcinoma: Literature review and report of 21 new cases. J Am Acad Dermatol 48: 385–393.

Albino AP, Sozzi G, Nanus DM, Jhanwar SC, Houghton AN. 1992. Malignant transformation of human melanocytes: Induction of a complete melanoma phenotype and genotype. Oncogene 7:2315–2321.

Albino AP, Vidal MJ, McNutt NS, Shea CR, Prieto VG, Nanus DM, Palmer JM, Hayward NK. 1994. Mutation and expression of the p53 gene in human malignant melanoma. Melanoma Res 4:35–45.

Arbeit JM, Munger K, Howley PM, Hanahan D. 1993. Neuroepithelial carcinomas in mice transgenic with human papillomavirus type 16E6/E7 ORFs. Am J Pathol 142:1187–1197.

Aszterbaum M, Rothman A, Johnson RL, Fisher M, Xie J, Bonifas JM, Zhang X, Scott MP, Epstein EH Jr. 1998. Identification of mutations in the human PATCHED gene in sporadic basal cell carcinomas and in patients with the basal cell nevus syndrome. J Invest Dermatol 110:885–888.

Aszterbaum M, Beech J, Epstein EH Jr. 1999. Ultraviolet radiation mutagenesis of hedgehog pathway genes in basal cell carcinomas. J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc 4:41–45.

Bai CB, Auerbach W, Lee JS, Stephen D, Joyner AL. 2002. Gli2, but not Gli1, is required for initial Shh signaling and ectopic activation of the Shh pathway. Development 129:4753–4761.

Bale AE. 2002. Hedgehog signaling and human disease. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 3:47–65.

Ball NJ, Yohn JJ, Morelli JG, Norris DA, Golitz LE, Hoeffler JP. 1994. Ras mutations in human melanoma: A marker of malignant progression. J Invest Dermatol 102:285–290.

Barnes EA, Kong M, Ollendorff V, Donoghue DJ. 2001. Patched1 interacts with cyclin B1 to regulate cell cycle progression. EMBO J 20:2214–2223.

Bastiaens MT, ter Huurne JA, Kielich C, Gruis NA, Westendorp RG, Vermeer BJ, Bavinck JN. 2001. Melanocortin-1 receptor gene variants determine the risk of nonmelanoma skin cancer independently of fair skin and red hair. Am J Hum Genet 68:884–894.

Bazex A, Dupre A, Christol B. 1966. Follicular atrophoderma, baso-cellular proliferations, and hypotrichosis. Ann Dermatol Syphiligr (Paris) 93:241–254.

Berman DM, Karhadkar SS, Hallahan AR, Pritchard JI, Eberhart CG, Watkins DN, Chen JK, Cooper MK, Taipale J, Olson JM, Beachy PA. 2002. Medulloblastoma growth inhibition by hedgehog pathway blockade. Science 297:1559–1561.

Bishop DT, Demenais F, Goldstein AM, Bergman W, Bishop JN, Bressac-de Paillerets B, Chompret A, Ghiorzo P, Gruis N, Hansson J, Harland M, Hayward N, Holland EA, Mann GJ, Mantelli M, Nancarrow D, Platz A, Tucker MA. 2002. Geographical variation in the penetrance of CDKN2A mutations for melanoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 94:894–903.

Bonifas JM, Pennypacker S, Chuang PT, McMahon AP, Williams M, Rosenthal A, De Sauvage FJ, Epstein EH Jr. 2001. Activation of expression of hedgehog target genes in basal cell carcinomas. J Invest Dermatol 116:739–742.

Box NF, Duffy DL, Chen W, Stark M, Martin NG, Sturm RA, Hayward NK. 2001a. Mc1r genotype modifies risk of melanoma in families segregating cdkn2a mutations. Am J Hum Genet 69:765–773.

Box NF, Duffy DL, Irving RE, Russell A, Chen W, Griffyths LR, Parsons PG, Green AC, Sturm RA. 2001b. Melanocortin-1 receptor genotype is a risk factor for basal and squamous cell carcinoma. J Invest Dermatol 116:224–229.


Brash DE, Rudolph JA, Simon JA, Lin A, McKenna GJ, Baden HP, Halperin AJ, Ponten J. 1991. A role for sunlight in skin cancer: UV-induced p53 mutations in squamous cell carcinoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:10124–10128.

Calzada-Wack J, Kappler R, Schnitzbauer U, Richter T, Nathrath M, Rosemann M, Wagner SN, Hein R, Hahn H. 2002. Unbalanced overexpression of the mutant allele in murine Patched mutants. Carcinogenesis 23:727–733.

Campbell C, Quinn AG, Ro YS, Angus B, Rees JL. 1993. p53 mutations are common and early events that precede tumor invasion in squamous cell neoplasia of the skin. J Invest Dermatol 100:746–748.

Cannon-Albright LA, Goldgar DE, Meyer LJ, Lewis CM, Anderson DE, Fountain JW, Hegi ME, Wiseman RW, Petty EM, Bale AE, et al. 1992. Assignment of a locus for familial melanoma, MLM, to chromosome 9p13-p22. Science 258:1148–1152.

Carr J, Mackie RM. 1994. Point mutations in the N-ras oncogene in malignant melanoma and congenital naevi. Br J Dermatol 131:72–77.

Castresana JS, Rubio MP, Vazquez JJ, Idoate M, Sober AJ, Seizinger BR, Barnhill RL. 1993. Lack of allelic deletion and point mutation as mechanisms of p53 activation in human malignant melanoma. Int J Cancer 55:562–565.

Child FJ, Scarisbrick JJ, Calonje E, Orchard G, Russell-Jones R, Whittaker SJ. 2002. Inactivation of tumor suppressor genes p15(INK4b) and p16(INK4a) in primary cutaneous B cell lymphoma. J Invest Dermatol 118:941–948.

Chin L, Tam A, Pomerantz J, Wong M, Holash J, Bardeesy N, Shen Q, O’Hagan R, Pantginis J, Zhou H, Horner JW II, Cordon-Cardo C, Yancopoulos GD, DePinho RA. 1999. Essential role for oncogenic Ras in tumour maintenance. Nature 400:468–472.

Clark EA, Golub TR, Lander ES, Hynes RO. 2000. Genomic analysis of metastasis reveals an essential role for RhoC. Nature 406:532–535.

Consortium TBCL. 1999. Cancer risks in BRCA2 mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst 91:1310–1316.

D’Errico M, Calcagnile AS, Corona R, Fucci M, Annessi G, Baliva G, Tosti ME, Pasquini P, Dogliotti E. 1997. p53 mutations and chromosome instability in basal cell carcinomas developed at an early or late age. Cancer Res 57:747–752.

Dahmane N, Lee J, Robins P, Heller P, Ruiz i Altaba A. 1997. Activation of the transcription factor Gli1 and the Sonic hedgehog signalling pathway in skin tumours. Nature 389:876–881.

Dahmane N, Sanchez P, Gitton Y, Palma V, Sun T, Beyna M, Weiner H, Ruiz i Altaba A. 2001. The Sonic Hedgehog-Gli pathway regulates dorsal brain growth and tumorigenesis. Development 128:5201–5212.

Dajee M, Lazarov M, Zhang JY, Cai T, Green CL, Russell AJ, Marinkovich MP, Tao S, Lin Q, Kubo Y, Khavari PA. 2003. NF-kappaB blockade and oncogenic Ras trigger invasive human epidermal neoplasia. Nature 421:639–643.


Davies H, Bignell GR, Cox C, Stephens P, Edkins S, Clegg S, Teague J, Woffinden H, Garnett MJ, Bottomley W, Davis N, Dicks E, Ewing R, Floyd Y, Gray K, Hall S, Hawes R, Hughes J, Kosmidou V, Menzies A, Mould C, Parker A, Stevens C, Watt S, Hooper S, Wilson R, Jayatilake H, Gusterson BA, Cooper C, Shipley J, Hargrave D, Pritchard-Jones K, Maitland N, Chenevix-Trench G, Riggins GJ, Bigner DD, Palmieri G, Cossu A, Flanagan A, Nicholson A, Ho JW, Leung SY, Yuen ST, Weber BL, Seigler HF, Darrow TL, Paterson H, Marais R, Marshall CJ, Wooster R, Stratton MR, Futreal PA. 2002. Mutations of the BRAF gene in human cancer. Nature 417:949–954.

Demunter A, Stas M, Degreef H, De Wolf-Peeters C, van den Oord JJ. 2001. Analysis of N-and K-ras mutations in the distinctive tumor progression phases of melanoma. J Invest Dermatol 117:1483–1489.

Evans T, Boonchai W, Shanley S, Smyth I, Gillies S, Georgas K, Wainwright B, Chenevix-Trench G, Wicking C. 2000. The spectrum of patched mutations in a collection of Australian basal cell carcinomas. Hum Mutat 16:43–48.

Fan H, Khavari PA. 1999. Sonic hedgehog opposes epithelial cell cycle arrest. J Cell Biol 147:71–76.

Fan H, Oro AE, Scott MP, Khavari PA. 1997. Induction of basal cell carcinoma features in transgenic human skin expressing Sonic Hedgehog. Nat Med 3:788–792.

Fountain JW, Karayiorgou M, Ernstoff MS, Kirkwood JM, Vlock DR, Titus-Ernstoff L, Bouchard B, Vijayasardhi S, Houghton AN, Lahti J, et al. 1992. Homozygous deletions within human chromosome band 9p21 in melanoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 89:10557–10561.

Frisch M. 2002. On the etiology of anal squamous carcinoma. Dan Med Bull 49:194–209.

Gailani MR, Leffell DJ, Ziegler A, Gross EG, Brash DE, Bale AE. 1996a. Relationship between sunlight exposure and a key genetic alteration in basal cell carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 88:349–354.

Gailani MR, Stahle-Backdahl M, Leffell DJ, Glynn M, Zaphiropoulos PG, Pressman C, Unden AB, Dean M, Brash DE, Bale AE, Toftgard R. 1996b. The role of the human homologue of Drosophila patched in sporadic basal cell carcinomas. Nat Genet 14:78–81.

Giglia-Mari G, Sarasin A. 2003. TP53 mutations in human skin cancers. Hum Mutat 21:217–228.

Gilchrest BA, Eller MS, Geller AC, Yaar M. 1999. The pathogenesis of melanoma induced by ultraviolet radiation. N Engl J Med 340:1341–1348.

Goldstein AM, Struewing JP, Chidambaram A, Fraser MC, Tucker MA. 2000. Genotype-phenotype relationships in U.S. melanoma-prone families with CDKN2A and CDK4 mutations. J Natl Cancer Inst 92:1006–1010.

Goodrich LV, Milenkovic L, Higgins KM, Scott MP. 1997. Altered neural cell fates and medulloblastoma in mouse patched mutants. Science 277:1109–1113.

Grachtchouk M, Mo R, Yu S, Zhang X, Sasaki H, Hui CC, Dlugosz AA. 2000. Basal cell

carcinomas in mice overexpressing Gli2 in
skin. Nat Genet 24:216–217.
Griep AE, Herber R, Jeon S, Lohse JK, Dubielzig
RR, Lambert PF. 1993. Tumorigenicity by
human papillomavirus type 16E6 and E7 in
transgenic mice correlates with alterations
in epithelial cell growth and differentiation.
J Virol 67:1373–1384.
Hahn H, Wicking C, Zaphiropoulos PG,
Gailani MR, Shanley S, Chidambaram A,
Vorechovsky I, Holmberg E, Unden AB,
Gillies S, Negus K, Smyth I, Pressman C,
Lefell DJ, Gerrard B, Goldstein AM,
Dean M, Toftgard R, Chenevix-Trench G,
Wainwright B, Bale AE. 1996. Mutations of
the human homolog of Drosophila patched
in the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome.
Cell 85:841–851.
Hahn H, Wojnowski L, Zimmer AM, Hall J,
Miller G, Zimmer A. 1998. Rhabdomyo-
sarcomas and radiation hypersensitivity in a
mouse model of Gorlin syndrome. Nat Med
4:619–622.
Haluska FG, Hodi FS. 1998. Molecular genetics of
familial cutaneous melanoma. J Clin Oncol
16:670–682.
Happle R. 2000. Nonsyndromic type of here-
ditary multiple basal cell carcinoma. Am J
Med Genet 95:161–163.
Hashemi J, Lindstrom MS, Asker C, Platz A,
Hansson J, Wiman KG. 2002. A melanoma-
predisposing germline CDKN2A mutation
with functional significance for both p16
and p14ARF. Cancer Lett 180:211–221.
Herber R, Liem A, Pitot H, Lambert PF. 1996.
Squamous epithelial hyperplasia and carci-
noma in mice transgenic for the human
papillomavirus type 16E7 oncogene. J Virol
70:1873–1881.
Hodges A, Smoller BR. 2002. Immunohisto-
chemical comparison of p16 expression in
actinic keratoses and squamous cell carcino-
mas of the skin. Mod Pathol 15:1121–1125.
Jiang W, Ananthaswamy HN, Muller HK, Kripke
ML. 1999. p53 protects against skin cancer
induction by UV-B radiation. Oncogene
18:4247–4253.
Jiveskog S, Ragnarsson-Olding B, Platz A,
Ringborg U. 1998. N-ras mutations are
common in melanomas from sun-exposed
skin of humans but rare in mucosal mem-
branes or unexposed skin. J Invest Dermatol
111:757–761.
Johnson RL, Rothman AL, Xie J, Goodrich LV,
Bare JW, Bonifas JM, Quinn AG, Myers
RM, Cox DR, Epstein EH Jr, Scott MP.
1996. Human homolog of patched, a candi-
date gene for the basal cell nevus syndrome.
Science 272:1668–1671.
Kamb A, Gruis NA, Weaver-Feldhaus J, Liu Q,
Harshman K, Tavtigian SV, Stockert E, Day
RS III, Johnson BE, Skolnick MH. 1994.
A cell cycle regulator potentially involved
in genesis of many tumor types. Science
264:436–440.
Karenko L, Sarna S, Kahkonen M, Ranki A.
2003. Chromosomal abnormalities in re-
lation to clinical disease in patients with
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: A 5-year
follow-up study. Br J Dermatol 148:55–
64.
Kennedy C, ter Huurne J, Berkhout M, Gruis N,
Bastiaens M, Bergman W, Willemze R,
Bavinck JN. 2001. Melanocortin 1 receptor

(MC1R) gene variants are associated with an
increased risk for cutaneous melanoma
which is largely independent of skin type
and hair color. J Invest Dermatol 117:294–
300.
Kenney AM, Rowitch DH. 2000. Sonic hedge-
hog promotes G(1) cyclin expression and
sustained cell cycle progression in mamma-
lian neuronal precursors. Mol Cell Biol
20:9055–9067.
Kenney AM, Cole MD, Rowitch DH. 2003.
Nmyc upregulation by sonic hedgehog
signaling promotes proliferation in develop-
ing cerebellar granule neuron precursors.
Development 130:15–28.
Kidd A, Carson L, Gregory DW, de Silva D,
Holmes J, Dean JC, Haites N. 1996. A
Scottish family with Bazex-Dupre-Christol
syndrome: Follicular atrophoderma, conge-
nital hypotrichosis, and basal cell carcinoma.
J Med Genet 33:493–497.
Koh J, Enders GH, Dynlacht BD, Harlow E.
1995. Tumour-derived p16 alleles encoding
proteins defective in cell-cycle inhibition.
Nature 375:506–510.
Kraemer KH, Lee MM, Scotto J. 1987. Xeroderma
pigmentosum. Cutaneous, ocular, and neu-
rologic abnormalities in 830 published cases.
Arch Dermatol 123:241–250.
Kricker A, Armstrong BK, English DR, Heenan
PJ. 1991. Pigmentary and cutaneous risk
factors for non-melanocytic skin cancer—A
case-control study. Int J Cancer 48:650–
662.
Krimpenfort P, Quon KC, Mooi WJ, Loonstra A,
Berns A. 2001. Loss of p16Ink4a confers
susceptibility to metastatic melanoma in
mice. Nature 413:83–86.
Kubo Y, Urano Y, Yoshimoto K, Iwahana H,
Fukuhara K, Arase S, Itakura M. 1994. p53
gene mutations in human skin cancers and
precancerous lesions: Comparison with
immunohistochemical analysis. J Invest
Dermatol 102:440–444.
Kubo Y, Urano Y, Matsumoto K, Ahsan K, Arase
S. 1997. Mutations of the INK4a locus in
squamous cell carcinomas of human skin.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 232:38–
41.
Lam CW, Xie J, To KF, Ng HK, Lee KC,
Yuen NW, Lim PL, Chan LY, Tong SF,
McCormick F. 1999. A frequent activated
smoothened mutation in sporadic basal cell
carcinomas. Oncogene 18:833–836.
Lang J, Boxer M, MacKie R. 2003. Absence of
exon15BRAF germline mutations in familial
melanoma. Hum Mutat 21:327–330.
Lauritzen AF, Vejlsgaard GL, Hou-Jensen K,
Ralfkiaer E. 1995. p53 protein expression in
cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. Br J Dermatol
133:32–36.
Li G, Tron V, Ho V. 1998. Induction of squamous
cell carcinoma in p53-deficient mice after
ultraviolet irradiation. J Invest Dermatol
110:72–75.
Lowe SW, Sherr CJ. 2003. Tumor suppression by
Ink4a-Arf: Progress and puzzles. Curr Opin
Genet Dev 13:77–83.
Lubbe J, Reichel M, Burg G, Kleihues P. 1994.
Absence of p53 gene mutations in cutaneous
melanoma. J Invest Dermatol 102:819–821.
Malkin D, Li FP, Strong LC, Fraumeni JF Jr,
Nelson CE, Kim DH, Kassel J, Gryka MA,
Bischoff FZ, Tainsky MA, et al. 1990. Germ

line p53 mutations in a familial syndrome of
breast cancer, sarcomas, and other neo-
plasms. Science 250:1233–1238.
Mao X, Lillington D, Child F, Russell-Jones R,
Young B, Whittaker S. 2002a. Comparative
genomic hybridization analysis of primary
cutaneous B-cell lymphomas: Identification
of common genomic alterations in disease
pathogenesis. Genes Chromosomes Cancer
35:144–155.
Mao X, Lillington D, Scarisbrick JJ, Mitchell T,
Czepulkowski B, Russell-Jones R, Young B,
Whittaker SJ. 2002b. Molecular cytogenetic
analysis of cutaneous T-cell lymphomas:
Identification of common genetic altera-
tions in Sézary syndrome and mycosis
fungoides. Br J Dermatol 147:464–475.
Mao X, Lillington DM, Czepulkowski B, Russell-
Jones R, Young BD, Whittaker S. 2003a.
Molecular cytogenetic characterization of
Sézary syndrome. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 36:250–260.
Mao X, Orchard G, Lillington DM, Russell-Jones
R, Young BD, Whittaker SJ. 2003b. Ampli-
fication and overexpression of JUNB is
associated with primary cutaneous T-cell
lymphomas. Blood 101:1513–1519.
Marks R, Rennie G, Selwood TS. 1988. Malignant
transformation of solar keratoses to squa-
mous cell carcinoma. Lancet 1:795–797.
Marks DI, Vonderheid EC, Kurz BW, Bigler RD,
Sinha K, Morgan DA, Sukman A, Nowell
PC, Haines DS. 1996. Analysis of p53 and
mdm-2 expression in 18 patients with
Sézary syndrome. Br J Haematol 92:890–
899.
McGill GG, Horstmann M, Widlund HR, Du J,
Motyckova G, Nishimura EK, Lin YL,
Ramaswamy S, Avery W, Ding HF, Jordan
SA, Jackson II, Korsmeyer SJ, Golub TR,
Fisher DE. 2002. Bcl2 regulation by the
melanocyte master regulator Mitf modulates
lineage survival and melanoma cell viability.
Cell 109:707–718.
McGregor JM, Dublin EA, Levison DA, Mac-
Donald DM, Smith NP, Whittaker S. 1995.
p53 immunoreactivity is uncommon in
primary cutaneous lymphoma. Br J Dermatol
132:353–358.
McGregor JM, Crook T, Fraser-Andrews EA,
Rozycka M, Crossland S, Brooks L,
Whittaker SJ. 1999. Spectrum of p53 gene
mutations suggests a possible role for ultra-
violet radiation in the pathogenesis of
advanced cutaneous lymphomas. J Invest
Dermatol 112:317–321.
McGregor JM, Harwood CA, Brooks L, Fisher
SA, Kelly DA, O’Nions J, Young AR,
Suretheran T, Breuer J, Millard TP, Lewis
CM, Leigh IM, Storey A, Crook T. 2002.
Relationship between p53 codon 72 poly-
morphisms and susceptibility to sunburn and
skin cancer. J Invest Dermatol 119:84–90.
Michaelsson G, Olsson E, Westermark P. 1981.
The Rombo syndrome: A familial disorder
with vermiculate atrophoderma, milia,
hypotrichosis, trichoepitheliomas, basal cell
carcinomas, and peripheral vasodilation
with cyanosis. Acta Derm Venereol 61:
497–503.
Moles JP, Moyret C, Guillot B, Jeanteur P,
Guilhou JJ, Theillet C, Basset-Seguin N.
1993. p53 gene mutations in human epithe-
lial skin cancers. Oncogene 8:583–588.

Mortier L, Marchetti P, Delaporte E, Martin de Lassalle E, Thomas P, Piette F, Formstecher P, Polakowska R, Danze PM. 2002. Progression of actinic keratosis to squamous cell carcinoma of the skin correlates with deletion of the 9p21 region encoding the p16(INK4a) tumor suppressor. Cancer Lett 176:205–214.

Platz A, Ringborg U, Brahme EM, Lagerlof B. 1994. Melanoma metastases from patients with hereditary cutaneous malignant melanoma contain a high frequency of N-ras activating mutations. Melanoma Res 4: 169–177.

Pollock PM, Harper UL, Hansen KS, Yudt LM, Stark M, Robbins CM, Moses TY, Hostetter G, Wagner U, Kakareka J, Salem G, Pohida T, Heenan P, Duray P, Kallioniemi O, Hayward NK, Trent JM, Meltzer PS. 2003. High frequency of BRAF mutations in nevi. Nat Genet 33:19–20.

Polsky D, Bastian BC, Hazan C, Melzer K, Pack J, Houghton A, Busam K, Cordon-Cardo C, Osman I. 2001. HDM2 protein overexpression, but not gene amplification, is related to tumorigenesis of cutaneous melanoma. Cancer Res 61:7642–7646.

Rady P, Scinicariello F, Wagner RF Jr, Tyring SK. 1992. p53 mutations in basal cell carcinomas. Cancer Res 52:3804–3806.

Randerson-Moor JA, Harland M, Williams S, Cuthbert-Heavens D, Sheridan E, Aveyard J, Sibley K, Whitaker L, Knowles M, Bishop JN, Bishop DT. 2001. A germline deletion of p14(ARF) but not CDKN2A in a melanoma-neural system tumour syndrome family. Hum Mol Genet 10:55–62.

Ratner D, Peacocke M, Zhang H, Ping XL, Tsou HC. 2001. UV-specific p53 and PTCH mutations in sporadic basal cell carcinoma of sun-exposed skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 44:293–297.

Rehman I, Takata M, Wu YY, Rees JL. 1996. Genetic change in actinic keratoses. Oncogene 12:2483–2490.

Reifenberger J, Wolter M, Weber RG, Megahed M, Ruzicka T, Lichter P, Reifenberger G. 1998. Missense mutations in SMOH in sporadic basal cell carcinomas of the skin and primitive neuroectodermal tumors of the central nervous system. Cancer Res 58: 1798–1803.

Reis-Filho JS, Torio B, Albergaria A, Schmitt FC. 2002. p63 expression in normal skin and usual cutaneous carcinomas. J Cutan Pathol 29:517–523.

Rizos H, Puig S, Badenas C, Malvehy J, Darmanian AP, Jimenez L, Mila M, Kefford RF. 2001. A melanoma-associated germline mutation in exon 1beta inactivates p14ARF. Oncogene 20:5543–5547.

Scarisbrick JJ, Woolford AJ, Russell-Jones R, Whittaker SJ. 2000. Loss of heterozygosity on 10q and microsatellite instability in advanced stages of primary cutaneous T-cell lymphoma and possible association with homozygous deletion of PTEN. Blood 95: 2937–2942.

Scarisbrick JJ, Woolford AJ, Calonje E, Photiou A, Ferreira S, Orchard G, Russell-Jones R, Whittaker SJ. 2002. Frequent abnormalities of the p15 and p16 genes in mycosis fungoides and Sézary syndrome. J Invest Dermatol 118:493–499.

Schaffer JV, Bologna JL. 2001. The melanocortin-1 receptor: Red hair and beyond. Arch Dermatol 137:1477–1485.

Senoo M, Tsuchiya I, Matsumura Y, Mori T, Saito Y, Kato H, Okamoto T, Habu S. 2001. Transcriptional dysregulation of the p73L/p63/p51/p40/KET gene in human squamous cell carcinomas: Expression of Delta

Motoyama J, Takabatake T, Takeshima K, Hui C. 1998. *Ptc*2, a second mouse Patched gene is co-expressed with Sonic hedgehog. Nat Genet 18:104–106.

Mullenders LH, Hazekamp-van Dokkum AM, Kalle WH, Vrieling H, Zdzienicka MZ, van Zeeland AA. 1993. UV-induced photolesions, their repair and mutations. Mutat Res 299:271–276.

Navas IC, Ortiz-Romero PL, Villuendas R, Martinez P, Garcia C, Gomez E, Rodriguez JL, Garcia D, Vanaclocha F, Iglesias L, Piris MA, Algara P. 2000. *p16(INK4a)* gene alterations are frequent in lesions of mycosis fungoides. Am J Pathol 156:1565–1572.

Nobori T, Miura K, Wu DJ, Lois A, Takabayashi K, Carson DA. 1994. Deletions of the cyclin-dependent kinase-4 inhibitor gene in multiple human cancers. Nature 368: 753–756.

Oley CA, Sharpe H, Chenevix-Trench G. 1992. Basal cell carcinomas, coarse sparse hair, and milia. Am J Med Genet 43:799–804.

Omholt K, Karsberg S, Platz A, Kanter L, Ringborg U, Hansson J. 2002. Screening of N-ras codon 61 mutations in paired primary and metastatic cutaneous melanomas: Mutations occur early and persist throughout tumor progression. Clin Cancer Res 8:3468–3474.

Oro AE, Higgins KM, Hu Z, Bonifas JM, Epstein EH Jr, Scott MP. 1997. Basal cell carcinomas in mice overexpressing sonic hedgehog. Science 276:817–821.

Palmer JS, Duffy DL, Box NF, Aitken JF, O’Gorman LE, Green AC, Hayward NK, Martin NG, Sturm RA. 2000. Melanocortin-1 receptor polymorphisms and risk of melanoma: Is the association explained solely by pigmentation phenotype? Am J Hum Genet 66:176–186.

Papp T, Jafari M, Schiffmann D. 1996. Lack of p53 mutations and loss of heterozygosity in non-cultured human melanocytic lesions. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol 122:541–548.

Parsa R, Yang A, McKeon F, Green H. 1999. Association of p63 with proliferative potential in normal and neoplastic human keratinocytes. J Invest Dermatol 113:1099–1105.

Pazzaglia S, Mancuso M, Atkinson MJ, Tanori M, Rebessi S, Majo VD, Covelli V, Hahn H, Saran A. 2002. High incidence of medulloblastoma following X-ray-irradiation of newborn Ptc1 heterozygous mice. Oncogene 21:7580–7584.

Peris K, Stanta G, Fargnoli MC, Bonin S, Felli A, Amantea A, Chimenti S. 1999. Reduced expression of CDKN2a/P16INK4a in mycosis fungoides. Arch Dermatol Res 291:207–211.

Pierceall WE, Goldberg LH, Tainsky MA, Mukhopadhyay T, Ananthaswamy HN. 1991. Ras gene mutation and amplification in human nonmelanoma skin cancers. Mol Carcinog 4:196–202.

Np73L, a novel dominant-negative isoform, and loss of expression of the potential tumour suppressor p51. Br J Cancer 84: 1235–1241.

Serrano M, Hannon GJ, Beach D. 1993. A new regulatory motif in cell-cycle control causing specific inhibition of cyclin D/CDK4. Nature 366:704–707.

Serrano M, Gomez-Lahoz E, DePinho RA, Beach D, Bar-Sagi D. 1995. Inhibition of ras-induced proliferation and cellular transformation by p16INK4. Science 267:249–252.

Shahbazi M, Pravica V, Nasreen N, Fakhoury H, Fryer AA, Strange RC, Hutchinson PE, Osborne JE, Lear JT, Smith AG, Hutchinson IV. 2002. Association between functional polymorphism in *EGF* gene and malignant melanoma. Lancet 359:397–401.

Smyth I, Narang MA, Evans T, Heimann C, Nakamura Y, Chenevix-Trench G, Pietsch T, Wicking C, Wainwright BJ. 1999. Isolation and characterization of human patched 2 (*PTCH2*), a putative tumour suppressor gene in basal cell carcinoma and medulloblastoma on chromosome 1p32. Hum Mol Genet 8:291–297.

Soengas MS, Capodieci P, Polsky D, Mora J, Esteller M, Opitz-Araya X, McCombie R, Herman JG, Gerald WL, Lazebnik YA, Cordon-Cardo C, Lowe SW. 2001. Inactivation of the apoptosis effector Apaf-1 in malignant melanoma. Nature 409:207–211.

Song S, Pitot HC, Lambert PF. 1999. The human papillomavirus type 16 E6 gene alone is sufficient to induce carcinomas in transgenic animals. J Virol 73:5887–5893.

Soufir N, Avril MF, Chompret A, Demenais F, Bombled J, Spatz A, Stoppa-Lyonnet D, Benard J, Bressac-de Pailletets B. 1998. Prevalence of p16 and CDK4 germline mutations in 48 melanoma-prone families in France. The French Familial Melanoma Study Group. Hum Mol Genet 7:209–216.

Soufir N, Moles JP, Vilmer C, Moch C, Verola O, Rivet J, Tesniere A, Dubertret L, Basset Seguin N. 1999. P16 UV mutations in human skin epithelial tumors. Oncogene 18:5477–5481.

Soufir N, Daya-Grosjean L, de La Salmoniere P, Moles JP, Dubertret L, Sarasin A, Basset Seguin N. 2000. Association between INK4a-ARF and p53 mutations in skin carcinomas of xeroderma pigmentosum patients. J Natl Cancer Inst 92:1841–1847.

Sparrow LE, Soong R, Dawkins HJ, Iacopetta BJ, Heenan PJ. 1995. p53 gene mutation and expression in naevi and melanomas. Melanoma Res 5:93–100.

Spencer JM, Kahn SM, Jiang W, DeLeo VA, Weinstein IB. 1995. Activated ras genes occur in human actinic keratoses, premalignant precursors to squamous cell carcinomas. Arch Dermatol 131:796–800.

Taguchi M, Watanabe S, Yashima K, Murakami Y, Sekiya T, Ikeda S. 1994. Aberrations of the tumor suppressor p53 gene and p53 protein in solar keratosis in human skin. J Invest Dermatol 103:500–503.

Taipale J, Cooper MK, Maiti T, Beachy PA. 2002. Patched acts catalytically to suppress the activity of Smoothened. Nature 418:892–897.

Teh MT, Wong ST, Neill GW, Ghali LR, Philpott MP, Quinn AG. 2002. FOXM1 is a downstream target of Gli1 in basal cell carcinomas. Cancer Res 62:4773–4780.

Tsao H, Benoit E, Sober AJ, Thiele C, Haluska FG. 1998. Novel mutations in the p16/CDKN2A binding region of the cyclin-dependent kinase-4 gene. Cancer Res 58: 109–113.

Unden AB, Holmberg E, Lundh-Rozell B, Stahle-Backdahl M, Zaphiropoulos PG, Toftgard R, Vorechovsky I. 1996. Mutations in the human homologue of Drosophila patched (PTCH) in basal cell carcinomas and the Gorlin syndrome: Different in vivo mechanisms of PTCH inactivation. Cancer Res 56:4562–4565.

Vabres P, de Prost Y. 1993. Bazex-Dupre-Christol syndrome: A possible diagnosis for basal cell carcinomas, coarse sparse hair, and milia. Am J Med Genet 45:786.

Vabres P, Lacombe D, Rabinowitz LG, Aubert G, Anderson CE, Taieb A, Bonafe JL, Hors-Cayla MC. 1995. The gene for Bazex-Dupre-Christol syndrome maps to chromosome Xq. J Invest Dermatol 105:87–91.

Valverde P, Healy E, Jackson I, Rees JL, Thody AJ. 1995. Variants of the melanocyte-stimulating hormone receptor gene are associated with red hair and fair skin in humans. Nat Genet 11:328–330.

Valverde P, Healy E, Sikkink S, Haldane F, Thody AJ, Carothers A, Jackson IJ, Rees JL. 1996. The Asp84Glu variant of the melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) is associated with melanoma. Hum Mol Genet 5:1663–1666.

van’t Veer LJ, Burgering BM, Versteeg R, Boot AJ, Ruiter DJ, Osanto S, Schrier PI, Bos JL. 1989. N-ras mutations in human cutaneous melanoma from sun-exposed body sites. Mol Cell Biol 9:3114–3116.

van Steensel MA, Jaspers NG, Steijlen PM. 2001. A case of Rombo syndrome. Br J Dermatol 144:1215–1218.

Wetmore C. 2003. Sonic hedgehog in normal and neoplastic proliferation: Insight gained from human tumors and animal models. Curr Opin Genet Dev 13:34–42.

Wetmore C, Eberhart DE, Curran T. 2000. The normal patched allele is expressed in medulloblastomas from mice with heterozygous germ-line mutation of patched. Cancer Res 60:2239–2246.

Wetmore C, Eberhart DE, Curran T. 2001. Loss of p53 but not ARF accelerates medulloblastoma in mice heterozygous for patched. Cancer Res 61:513–516.

Wicking C, Shanley S, Smyth I, Gillies S, Negus K, Graham S, Suthers G, Haites N, Edwards M, Wainwright B, Chenevix-Trench G. 1997. Most germ-line mutations in the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome lead to a premature termination of the PATCHED protein, and no genotype-phenotype correlations are evident. Am J Hum Genet 60:21–26.

Wolfel T, Hauer M, Schneider J, Serrano M, Wolfel C, Klehmann-Hieb E, De Plaen E, Hankeln T, Meyer zum Buschenfelde KH, Beach D. 1995. A p16INK4a-insensitive CDK4 mutant targeted by cytolytic T lymphocytes in a human melanoma. Science 269:1281–1284.

Wolter M, Reifenberger J, Sommer C, Ruzicka T, Reifenberger G. 1997. Mutations in the human homologue of the Drosophila segment polarity gene patched (PTCH) in sporadic basal cell carcinomas of the skin and primitive neuroectodermal tumors of the central nervous system. Cancer Res 57:2581–2585.

Xie J, Murone M, Luoh SM, Ryan A, Gu Q, Zhang C, Bonifas JM, Lam CW, Hynes M, Goddard A, Rosenthal A, Epstein EH Jr, de Sauvage FJ. 1998. Activating Smoothened mutations in sporadic basal-cell carcinoma. Nature 391:90–92.

Xie J, Aszterbaum M, Zhang X, Bonifas JM, Zachary C, Epstein E, McCormick F. 2001. A role of PDGFRA in basal cell carci-

noma proliferation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:9255–9259.

Yang A, Schweitzer R, Sun D, Kaghad M, Walker N, Bronson RT, Tabin C, Sharpe A, Caput D, Crum C, McKeon F. 1999. p63 is essential for regenerative proliferation in limb, craniofacial and epithelial development. Nature 398:714–718.

Yoon JW, Kita Y, Frank DJ, Majewski RR, Konicek BA, Nobrega MA, Jacob H, Walterhouse D, Iannaccone P. 2002. Gene expression profiling leads to identification of GLI1-binding elements in target genes and a role for multiple downstream pathways in GLI1-induced cell transformation. J Biol Chem 277:5548–5555.

Zhang H, Ping XL, Lee PK, Wu XL, Yao YJ, Zhang MJ, Silvers DN, Ratner D, Malhotra R, Peacocke M, Tsou HC. 2001. Role of PTCH and p53 genes in early-onset basal cell carcinoma. Am J Pathol 158:381–385.

Ziegler A, Leffell DJ, Kunala S, Sharma HW, Gailani M, Simon JA, Halperin AJ, Baden HP, Shapiro PE, Bale AE, et al. 1993. Mutation hotspots due to sunlight in the p53 gene of nonmelanoma skin cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90:4216–4220.

Ziegler A, Jonason AS, Leffell DJ, Simon JA, Sharma HW, Kimmelman J, Remington L, Jacks T, Brash DE. 1994. Sunburn and p53 in the onset of skin cancer. Nature 372:773–776.

Zuo L, Weger J, Yang Q, Goldstein AM, Tucker MA, Walker GJ, Hayward N, Dracopoli NC. 1996. Germline mutations in the p16INK4a binding domain of CDK4 in familial melanoma. Nat Genet 12:97–99.

zur Hausen H. 2002. Papillomaviruses and cancer: From basic studies to clinical application. Nat Rev Cancer 2:342–350.

Zurawel RH, Allen C, Wechsler-Reya R, Scott MP, Raffel C. 2000. Evidence that haploinsufficiency of Ptch leads to medulloblastoma in mice. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 28: 77–81.
