
Polyglutamine repeats of spinocerebellar ataxia 6 impair the cell-death-preventing effect of Caᵥ2.1 Ca²⁺ channel—loss-of-function cellular model of SCA6

Zenjiro Matsuyama,${}^{a,g,*}$ Naomi Kimoto Yanagisawa,${}^{a}$ Yoko Aoki,${}^{a}$ John L. Black III,${}^{b}$ Vanda A. Lennon,${}^{c}$ Yasuo Mori,${}^{d}$ Keiji Imoto,${}^{e,f}$ and Takashi Inuzuka${}^{a}$

${}^{a}$Department of Neurology and Geriatrics Gifu University, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu 501-1194, Japan  
${}^{b}$Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA  
${}^{c}$Department of Neurology and Immunology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA  
${}^{d}$Department of Synthetic and Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto University, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan  
${}^{e}$Department of Information Physiology, National Institute for Physiological Sciences, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), Okazaki 444-8585, Japan  
${}^{f}$School of Life Science, The Graduate University for Advanced Studies (SOKENDAI), Okazaki 444-8585, Japan  
${}^{g}$Department of Neurology, Hyogo Brain and Heart Center, Himeji 670-0981, Japan  

Received 21 February 2004; revised 9 June 2004; accepted 20 July 2004

Spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) 6 is caused by small expansion of a polyglutamine sequence, encoded by CAG trinucleotide repeats, at the C-terminal end of the human Caᵥ2.1 (P/Q-type) Ca²⁺ channel α₁2.1 subunit and it manifests itself as slowly progressive cerebellar ataxia. To elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms underlying SCA6, we introduced CAG repeats of various lengths into the Ca²⁺ channel α₁2.1 subunit cDNA and expressed them in baby hamster kidney cells stably expressing the auxiliary subunits (α₂δ and β₄). The occurrence of cell death differed between cells transfected with the normal and mutant Ca²⁺ channels under the condition of serum starvation plus potassium-induced depolarization, and Cdk inhibition elucidated the differences more clearly. The Caᵥ2.1 (P/Q-type) Ca²⁺ channel-specific blocker ω-agatoxin IVA abolished the cell-death-preventing effect of the normal Ca²⁺ channel. Together with our previous finding that the polyglutamine expansion in SCA6 interferes with the Ca²⁺ channel to reduce Ca²⁺ influx, these results indicate that impaired function of the mutant Ca²⁺ channels rendered them unable to prevent cell death.

© 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: SCA6; Caᵥ2.1 Ca²⁺ channel; Polyglutamine; Apoptosis; Depolarization

---

Introduction

Spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) 6 is caused by small expansion of a polyglutamine sequence, encoded by CAG trinucleotide repeats,

* Corresponding author. Department of Neurology, Hyogo Brain and Heart Center, 520 Saisyo, Himeji City, 670-0981, Japan. Fax: +81 792 92 7138.
E-mail address: genjiha@yahoo.co.jp (Z. Matsuyama).

Available online on ScienceDirect (www.sciencedirect.com.)

at the C-terminal end of the human Caᵥ2.1 (P/Q-type) Ca²⁺ channel α₁2.1 subunit (Zhuchenko et al., 1997). SCA6 manifests itself as slowly progressive cerebellar ataxia, and has a higher frequency in western Japan than in Western Europe (Matsuyama et al., 1997). SCA6 shares common features with other glutamine repeat disorders: inheritance is autosomal dominant (except for X-linked spinobulbar muscular atrophy); the disorders are progressive; age of onset inversely correlates with CAG repeat number; and the central nervous system (CNS) shows neuronal loss in a distinctive distribution. However, SCA6 exhibits two unique features: the CAG repeat number is exceptionally small, ranging from 21 to 30 (wild type: ranging from 4 to 17) (Matsuyama et al., 1997) as opposed to over 30 in other diseases; and cerebellar symptoms predominate, as opposed to more extensive brain involvement in other diseases. SCA6 is also unique among the glutamine repeat disorders in that the functional properties of the affected gene product, the Caᵥ2.1 voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channel, have been quantitatively investigated.

The Ca²⁺ channel α₁2.1 subunit was first cloned and functionally characterized in 1991 (Mori et al., 1991). Defects in this voltage-dependent Ca²⁺ channel have been implicated in causing several human diseases such as SCA6 (Zhuchenko et al., 1997), progressive ataxia (PA) (Yue et al., 1997), episodic ataxia type 2 (EA2) (Ophoff et al., 1996), and familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) (Ophoff et al., 1996), as well as mouse phenotypes tottering (tg) (Fletcher et al., 1996), leaner ($tg^{la}$) (Fletcher et al., 1996), and rolling mouse Nagoya ($tg^{rol}$) (Mori et al., 2000). Mutations of the auxiliary subunits also cause abnormal mouse phenotypes, such as lethargic ($lh$) (Burgess et al., 1997). The human mutations commonly cause episodic cerebellar ataxia, epilepsy, or migraine, but in SCA6 and PA the main clinical

0969-9961/$ - see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2004.07.013

manifestation is slowly progressive and persistent (non-episodic) cerebellar ataxia.

We previously reported that Ca²⁺ channels with 30 or 40 polyglutamines exhibited an 8-mV hyperpolarizing shift in the voltage dependence of inactivation, while Ca²⁺ channels with 24 polyglutamines or fewer showed normal gating properties. We suggested that the polyglutamine expansion in SCA6 compromises the ability of the channel and reduces the Ca²⁺ influx that triggers subsequent intracellular events in Purkinje cells and other neurons, consequently leading to neuronal death and cerebellar atrophy (Matsuyama et al., 1999).

In this study, we constructed a loss-of-function cellular model stably expressing the auxiliary subunits with transient expression of the various control and mutant channels tagged at the C-terminus with green fluorescent protein (GFP) under serum starvation plus potassium-induced depolarization conditions to prove this hypothesis. The results of our experiments indicated that the pathogenesis of SCA6 is caused by the calcium channel dysfunction.

**Materials and methods**

**Construction of cDNAs**

The 7.9-kb HindIII (on vector)-BamHI (7739) fragment of pSPCBI-I carrying the entire protein-coding sequence of the BI-1 Ca²⁺ channel cDNA (GenBank accession number X57476) (Mori et al., 1991) was inserted into the HindIII-BamHI site of pK4K (Niidome et al., 1994) to yield pK4KBI-1. (Nucleotide residues are numbered from the first residue of the ATG-initiating triplet of the unmodified BI-1. Restriction endonuclease sites are identified by numbers indicating the 5′-terminal nucleotide generated by cleavage.) To insert the sequence of GGCAG between nucleotide residues 6819 and 6820, the Eco47III(6770)-KpnI(6862) fragment of pK4K BI-1 was replaced by the synthetic oligonucleotides to yield pK4KBI-1-CAG(4); the wild-type sequence contains four CAG trinucleotide repeats. To insert longer CAG repeats, the PpuMI(6963)-BalI(6990) fragment was replaced with synthetic oligonucleotides to yield pK4KBI-1-CAG(n) (n = 12, 24, 30, or 40).

The HindIII and SrfI fragments of PK4K BI-1CAG(n) (n = 4, 12, 24, 30, or 40), carrying the entire protein-coding sequence of the rabbit Ca²⁺ channel α₁.2.1 subunit cDNA BI-1 (GenBank accession number X57476) with the C-terminal polyglutamine sequence, were inserted into the HindIII and EcoRI site of GFPN3 (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA; the EcoRI site was blunted) to yield BI-1CAG(n) (n = 4, 12, 24, 30, or 40, respectively; Fig. 1) to use GFP as reporter protein producer. For construction of BI-1G, which was used as another normal control in addition to BI-1CAG(4), the HindIII and KpnI fragment of PK4K BI-1CAG(4) carrying the entire protein-coding sequence of BI-1 without a polyglutamine sequence was inserted into the HindIII and KpnI site of GFPN3 to yield BI-1G (Fig. 1). The plasmid pCMV-Cipl encoding the human cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A was purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC No. 79928).

**Expression of Cav2.1 Ca²⁺ channels in BHK cells**

BHK cells were transfected with cDNAs encoding the skeletal muscle α₂δ subunit (Niidome et al., 1994) and the β₄

**Fig. 1.** Schematic presentation of the cDNA constructs encoding the calcium channel α₁.2.1 subunit (BI-1) with the C-terminal GFP epitope, with or without CAG repeats. Numbers in parentheses indicate the CAG repeat number. Open bars, protein-coding sequences of BI-1; hatched boxes, CAG repeats encoding polyglutamine sequences; filled boxes, GFP epitope sequence.

magnification of 400× using a fluorescent microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).

**Quantification of apoptosis**

We examined cell death ratio in more than three independent transfections and counted more than 150 GFP-positive cells. Also, these experiments were done blinded to the experimental conditions to avoid the subjectivity of the examiner. The ratios of apoptotic cells were represented as means ± SEM. In general, morphological characteristics of apoptosis include chromatin condensation, loss of cell volume, smooth-surfaced protuberances, blebbing, loss of microvilli, nuclear fragmentation, nuclear and cytoplasmic condensation, apoptotic body, and phagocytosis. Among GFP-positive cells, the apoptotic phenotype was scored based on the morphology of the DAPI-stained nucleus. Especially, the presence of a pyknotic or fragmented nucleus was judged as indicating the apoptotic phenotype.

**Statistics**

Statistical comparison between two groups (Figs. 2a and 6) was performed by unpaired *t* test with significance accepted at *P* values less than 0.05. For statistical comparison among more than three groups (Figs. 2b, 3, and 4), we applied across all values in a given experiment by nonrepeated measures ANOVA (with significance accepted at *P* values less than 0.05) and if the results were significant, we used Dunnett's test (with significance accepted at *P* values less than 0.05) as a post hoc test to determine which conditions were significantly different from the control-BI-1 CAG(12).

**Results**

**BHK cell death is increased in serum-starved cultures**

In our previous study, we found no significant difference in the rate of cell death when we transiently expressed the normal Ca²⁺ channel α₁2.1 subunit and mutants with polyglutamine repeats in BHK (baby hamster kidney) cells stably expressing the α₂δ and β₁a subunits [BHK (+α₂δβ₁a)] in culture medium containing 10% serum (Matsuyama et al., 1999). It is one of the most important factors for letting BHK cells resemble neuronal cells, which is the main lesion in SCA6, to arrest the BHK cell cycle using serum starvation (Talavera and Basilico, 1978). To detect possible differences in cell-death-inducing or -protecting effects between the normal and mutant Caᵥ2.1 channels, we therefore transiently expressed the normal or mutant α₁2.1 subunits in BHK cells stably expressing the α₂δ and β₄ subunits [BHK (+α₂δβ₄)], and examined cell death in 0.5% serum (serum starvation) culture medium. Cell death was much more frequent under serum starvation than in 10% serum culture (Fig. 2a), but no difference in cell death rate was detected between the normal and mutant channels (Fig. 2b).

**Cell death under serum-starved, depolarizing conditions**

Voltage-gated Ca²⁺ channels have been reported to prevent cell death, when depolarization is induced with high-potassium culture medium (Ono et al., 1997). When we added depolarizing medium, the normal Ca²⁺ channel in BHK (+α₂δβ₄) certainly reduced

**Fig. 2.** (a) Apoptotic cell death in BHK (+α₂δ/β₄) cells with or without serum starvation (0.5% FBS). No significant differences of ratios for cell death were detected between control BI-ICAG(12) and mutant BI-ICAG(30) channels with or without serum starvation, even though serum-starvation culture condition (0.5% serum) significantly enhanced cell death ratios beyond those seen in 10% serum cultures (*P* < 0.05). We used unpaired *t* test to determine if there was a significant difference of the cell death ratio. The bars represent mean ± SEM. Each column was obtained from more than three independent experiments. BHK, baby hamster kidney; GFP, green fluorescence protein; FBS, fetal bovine serum. (b) Apoptotic cell death in BHK (+α₂δ/β₄) cells with or without serum starvation (0.5% FBS). Significant differences of ratios for cell death were detected between only GFP and BI-ICAG(*n*) (*n* = 12 and 30) channels (*P* < 0.05). We applied across all values in a given experiment by nonrepeated measures ANOVA, and if the result was significant, we used Dunnett’s test as a post hoc test to determine which conditions were significantly different from the only GFP. The bars represent mean ± SEM. Each column was obtained from more than three independent experiments.

serum-starvation-induced cell death. The mutant Ca²⁺ channels with polyglutamine repeats also reduced cell death, but the cell-death-preventing effect was significantly weaker than that of the normal Ca²⁺ channel (Fig. 3).

Z. Matsuyama et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 17 (2004) 198–204

blocked by more than 50% by 200 nM ω-agatoxin IVA (Sather et al., 1993), we added 300 nM ω-agatoxin IVA to the culture medium at 5 h after α₁2.1 subunit transfection. The cells were then incubated for an additional 43 h, and the cell death ratio of BHK(+α₂δβ₄) transfected with plasmids encoding the control and mutant Ca²⁺ channels [BI-IG, BI-1-CAG(12), and BI-1-CAG(30)] was compared in the absence and presence of ω-agatoxin IVA. Addition of ω-agatoxin IVA increased the cell death rate to almost 100%, thus confirming that the Cav2.1 channels are responsible for preventing serum starvation-induced cell death (Fig. 6).

## Discussion

It is more controversial whether Ca²⁺ influx in the cells is increased or decreased by the SCA6 mutation. Our previous report using recombinant rabbit BI I cDNA found a hyperpolarizing shift (-8 mV) in the inactivation curve that would reduce Ca²⁺ channel function, not increase it (Matsuyama et al., 1999). Our characterization of the P/Q-type Ca²⁺ channels with an expanded stretch of glutamines revealed direct effects of polyglutamine expansion on channel properties. This is the first indication that expanded poly Q directly alters functions of the affected gene product, providing a hint about why relatively small Q repeats induce ataxia in the SCA6 mutant. More recently, the above functional alteration has been shown to be specific for the SCA6 mutant of the Purkinje neuron-type α₁2.1 splice variant, which lacks the asparagines-proline (NP) insertion in the S3-S4 linker of channel domain IV (Toru et al., 2000). In contrast to these reductions in channel

### Cell death under serum-starved, depolarizing conditions with Cdk inhibition

In SCA3, whose pathological mechanism is different from that of the SCA6, caused by expansion of polyglutamine, the cell death caused by the mutant gene is significantly increased by cell cycle arrest under condition of serum starvation and cyclin dependent kinase (Cdk) inhibition (Yoshizawa et al., 2000). Although both tamoxifen and staurosporine are apoptosis-inducing agents, they also affect the cell cycle and cause cell cycle arrest in the G1 phase (Orr et al., 1998; Osborne et al., 1983). The increased susceptibility to cell death induced by these agents may be caused in part through effects on the cell cycle.

Taking these reports into account, in our cellular model of SCA6, we used conditions of serum starvation and Cdk inhibition to arrest the cell cycle, thereby mimicking neuronal conditions, to detect differences of the cell death ratio among the control and mutant channels. Accordingly, we co-transfected BHK (+α₂δ/β₄) cells with the two plasmids encoding the Ca²⁺ channel α₁2.1 subunit and the cyclin-Cdk inhibitor p21, respectively, and examined cell death under 0.5% serum starvation in depolarization medium. The co-expression of the cyclin-Cdk inhibitor enhanced cell death, but the increase in cell death rate was striking for the cells transfected with the α₁2.1 subunits with 30 and 40 polyglutamines (Figs. 4 and 5).

### Ca²⁺ channel blocker ω-agatoxin IVA abolished the cell-death-preventing effect

Because BHK cells lack endogenous Ca²⁺ channel activity (Niidome et al., 1994) and the Cav2.1 (P/Q-type) Ca²⁺ channel is

Fig. 3. Apoptotic cell death in BHK (+α₂δ/β₄) cells under serum-starved, depolarized conditions. Mutant channels [BI-I-CAG(n) (n = 30 and 40)] were unable to prevent cell death from serum starvation (0.5% serum) even with depolarization high-potassium medium, while the other channels were cytoprotective. * indicates significant differences of cell death ratios between control-BI-ICAG(12) channel and the others (*P < 0.05). We applied across all values in a given experiment by nonrepeated measures ANOVA, and if the result was significant, we used Dunnett’s test as a post hoc test to determine which conditions were significantly different from the control-BI-ICAG(12). The bars represent mean ± SEM. Each column was obtained from more than three independent experiments. BHK, baby hamster kidney; GFP, green fluorescence protein.

Fig. 4. Apoptotic cell death in BHK (+α₂δ/β₄) cells under serum-starved, depolarized conditions with a Cdk inhibitor. * indicates significant differences of cell death ratios between control-BI-1CAG(12) and mutant-BI-ICAG(n) (n = 30, 40) channels (*P < 0.05). We applied across all values in a given experiment by nonrepeated measures ANOVA, and if the result was significant, we used Dunnett’s test as a post hoc test to determine which conditions were significantly different from the control-BI-1CAG(12). Significant differences in the ratio for cell death were more clearly apparent between control and mutant channels in comparison to without a Cdk inhibitor (see Fig. 3). The bars represent mean ± SEM. Each column was obtained from more than three independent experiments. BHK, baby hamster kidney; Cdk, cyclin-dependent kinase; GFP, green fluorescence protein.

Fig. 5. Expression of the control and mutant calcium channel $\alpha_{1}2.1$ subunits detected by fluorescence microscopy in BHK $(+\alpha_{2}\delta/\beta_{4})$ cells under serum-starved, depolarized conditions with a Cdk inhibitor. Panels a and b: GFP. Panels c and d: BI-IG. Panels e and f: BI-ICAG(4). Panels g and h: BI-ICAG(12). Panels i and j: BI-ICAG(24). Panels k and l: BI-ICAG(30). Panels m and n: BI-ICAG(40). Panels a, c, e, g, i, k, and m: GFP epitopes at C termini of the channels. Panels b, d, f, h, j, l and n: Nuclear DNA stained by DAPI. Each pair of panels [(a, b), (c, d), (e, f), (g, h), (i, j), (k, l), and (m, n)] is the same field of vision. Panels j and l: Nuclear DNA staining showing apoptotic features.

availabilities, there is a report that has demonstrated changes in $Ca_{V}2.1$ channel gating or current densities consistent with enhanced $Ca^{2+}$ entry ([Restituito et al., 2000](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M006899200)). Various explanations for the discrepancies among previous papers may be considered: the choice of animal species (rabbit or human) of $\alpha_{1}2.1$ subunit, cell lines (BHK, HEK or *Xenopus* oocytes), and different structural variants of the $\alpha_{1}2.1$ subunits, etc. The functional studies were done exclusively in recombinant systems that necessarily involve a certain degree of nonphysiological conditions. Although CAG(24) is above threshold for the human disease, CAG(24) behaves more like CAG(4) than CAG(30) or CAG(40) in our present study, which may reflect our previous study ([Matsuyama et al., 1999](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.11.6316)) that there was no significant differences of the channel property between CAG(4) and CAG(24) in the BHK cells. So, it will be necessary to examine to use neuronal cells, human $Ca_{v}2.1$ $Ca^{2+}$ channel gene, and gamma subunit, etc., to let the model more resemble to human disease.

In this study, we examined the pathogenic mechanism of SCA6 using recombinant rabbit BI-I cDNA, which we previously found a hyperpolarizing shift ($-8 \mathrm{mV}$) in the inactivation curve that would reduce $Ca^{2+}$ channel function.

Because SCA6 shows the autosomal dominant form of inheritance, we first considered a dominant-negative cellular model, in which the mutant gene product exerts cytotoxic effects. In our previous investigation, we transfected cDNAs encoding the channels driven by the SV40 promoter into BHK6 cells that stably expressed the $Ca^{2+}$ channel $\alpha_{2}\delta$ and $\beta_{1a}$ subunits. However, in 10% FBS cultures, we could not detect differences

in cell death between the normal and mutant channels ([Matsuyama et al., 1999](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.11.6316)).

We then substituted a stronger promoter, the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter, for the SV40 promoter ([Foecking and Hofstetter, 1986](https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-1119(86)90452-5)). We also substituted serum-starvation medium (0.5%), which arrests BHK cells in the G$_{0}$/G$_{1}$ phase, mimicking neuronal conditions. Finally, instead of BHK6 cells, we used BHK $(\alpha_{2}\delta\beta_{4})$ cells, which stably express the $Ca^{2+}$ channel $\alpha_{2}\delta$ and $\beta_{4}$ subunits, because the $\beta_{4}$ subunit is the native partner of the $Ca_{V}2.1$ channel ([Walker et al., 1998, 1999](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.11.6316)). Even then, we could not detect differences in cell death between the normal control channel and mutant channels.

From these results, we considered that a dominant-negative model of SCA6, in which cell death results from cytotoxic products of the mutant gene, does not describe SCA6. Instead, we considered a loss-of-function model, given our previous result that the polyglutamine expansion in SCA6 compromises the ability of the $Ca_{V}2.1$ $Ca^{2+}$ channel to mediate $Ca^{2+}$ influx ([Matsuyama et al., 1999](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.11.6316)). In general, a disease model showing an autosomal dominant form of inheritance is explained using the dominant-negative model. However, SCA6 may show the autosomal dominant form of inheritance despite of the loss-of-function mechanism, because the $Ca_{V}2.1$ $Ca^{2+}$ channel is indispensable for the neuronal survival and even a subtle change would influence Purkinje cells, where the channel is expressed abundantly.

Depolarization using high-potassium medium reduces death of cerebellar granule cells in culture by activating a voltage-gated $Ca^{2+}$ channel ([Ono et al., 1997](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.11.6316)). We therefore hypothesized that the

that cerebellar ataxia is the main feature, although EA2 is paroxysmal and PA is persistent and progressive cerebellar ataxia.

EA2 shows the autosomal dominant form of inheritance and is associated with channel dysfunction (haploinsufficiency) resulting from protein truncation (Denier et al., 1999; Guida et al., 2001; Matsuyama et al., 2003; Ophoff et al., 1996; Wappl et al., 2002). Almost all reported EA2 mutations are splice-site mutations, nonsense mutations, or deletions (Denier et al., 1999; Matsuyama et al., 2003), leading to truncation of the channel protein. Although a few missense mutations have also been reported, complete loss of the channel functions was reported in the missense EA2 mutant channels (Guida et al., 2001). Progressive ataxia (PA), which shows the autosomal dominant form of inheritance, in which the channel function is lost completely, like EA2 (Wappl et al., 2002), is caused by a missense mutation, and manifests persistent and progressive cerebellar ataxia, like SCA6.

EA2 and PA are caused by a loss-of-function mechanism of the channel, but show the autosomal dominant form of inheritance. In SCA6, the polyglutamine expansion alters the function of the Ca²⁺ channels, causing a reduction in Ca²⁺ influx (Matsuyama et al., 1999). Furthermore, though PA is channelopathy caused by the missense mutation, it manifests as not paroxysmal but persistent and progressive cerebellar ataxia, like SCA6.

From such observations, we consider that SCA6 is more likely a channelopathy, like PA and EA2, than a typical polyglutamine disorder (Frontali, 2001). Furthermore, loss of function appears to characterize FHM, an allelic disorder of SCA6, mutations that are associated with cerebellar ataxia (Hans et al., 1999). Loss of function may underlie cerebellar involvement in all four CACNA1A allelic disorders. Additional evidence suggesting loss of function in SCA6, PA, and EA2 patients was obtained from CACNA1A knockout mice (Fletcher et al., 2001; Jun et al., 1999), which developed ataxia and late-onset cerebellar degeneration similar to that observed in PA, EA2, and SCA6.

We constructed a loss-of-function cellular model of SCA6 using BHK cells stably expressing auxiliary subunits under serum-starved, depolarizing, and cell-cycle-arrested conditions. Our results indicate that neuronal death in SCA6 is caused by Cav2.1 Ca²⁺ channel dysfunction.

### Acknowledgments

This study was supported in part by grants from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan, the Brain Science Foundation, and the Japan Research Foundation for Clinical Pharmacology.

### References

Berjukow, S., Doring, F., Frotschmayr, M., Grabner, M., Glossmann, H., Hering, S., 1996. Endogenous calcium channels in human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cells. Br. J. Pharmacol. 118, 748–754.

Burgess, D.L., Jones, J.M., Meisler, M.H., Noebels, J.L., 1997. Mutation of the Ca²⁺ channel beta subunit gene Cchb4 is associated with ataxia and seizures in the lethargic (lh) mouse. Cell 88, 385–392.

Denier, C., Ducros, A., Vahedi, K., Joutel, A., Thierry, P., Ritz, A., Castelnovo, G., Deonna, T., Gerard, P., Devoize, J.L., Gayou, A., Perrouty, B., Soisson, T., Autret, A., Warter, J.M., Vighetto, A., Van Bogaert, P., Alamowitch, S., Roullet, E., Tournier-Lasserve, E., 1999. High prevalence of CACNA1A truncations and broader clinical spectrum in episodic ataxia type 2. Neurology 52, 1816–1821.

Fletcher, C.F., Lutz, C.M., O’Sullivan, T.N., Shaughnessy Jr., J.D., Hawkes, R., Frankel, W.N., Copeland, N.G., Jenkins, N.A., 1996. Absence epilepsy in tottering mutant mice is associated with calcium channel defects. Cell 87, 607–617.

Fletcher, C.F., Tottene, A., Lennon, V.A., Wilson, S.M., Dubel, S.J., Paylor, R., Hosford, D.A., Tessarollo, L., McEnery, M.W., Pietrobon, D., Copeland, N.G., Jenkins, N.A., 2001. Dystonia and cerebellar atrophy in Cacna1a null mice lacking P/Q calcium channel activity. FASEB J. 15, 1288–1290.

Foecking, M.K., Hofstetter, H., 1986. Powerful and versatile enhancer-promoter unit for mammalian expression vectors. Gene 45, 101–105.

Frontali, M., 2001. Spino-cerebellar ataxia type 6: channelopathy or glutamine repeat disorder? Brain Res. Bull. 56, 227–231.

Guida, S., Trettel, F., Pagnutti, S., Mantuano, E., Tottene, A., Veneziano, L., Fellin, T., Spadaro, M., Stauderman, K., Williams, M., Volsen, S., Ophoff, R., Frants, R., Jodice, C., Frontali, M., Pietrobon, D., 2001. Complete loss of P/Q calcium channel activity caused by a CACNA1A missense mutation carried by patients with episodic ataxia type 2. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68, 759–764.

Hans, M., Luvisetto, S., Williams, M.E., Spagnolo, M., Urrutia, A., Tottene, A., Brust, P.F., Johnson, E.C., Harpold, M.M., Stauderman, K.A., Pietrobon, D., 1999. Functional consequences of mutations in the human alpha1A calcium channel subunit linked to familial hemiplegic migraine. J. Neurosci. 19, 1610–1619.

Jun, K., Piedras-Renteria, E.S., Smith, S.M., Wheeler, D.B., Lee, S.B., Lee, T.G., Chin, H., Adams, M.E., Scheller, R.H., Tsien, R.W., Shin, H.S., 1999. Ablation of P/Q-type Ca(2+) channel currents, altered synaptic transmission, and progressive ataxia in mice lacking the alpha(1A)-subunit. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 96, 15245–15250.

Liu, H., De Waard, M., Scott, V.E., Gurnett, C.A., Lennon, V.A., Campbell, K.P., 1996a. Identification of three subunits of the high affinity omega-conotoxin MVIIIC-sensitive Ca²⁺ channel. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 13804–13810.

Liu, H., Felix, R., Gurnett, C.A., De Waard, M., Witcher, D.R., Campbell, K.P., 1996b. Expression and subunit interaction of voltage-dependent Ca²⁺ channels in PC12 cells. J. Neurosci. 16, 7557–7565.

Matsuyama, Z., Kawakami, H., Maruyama, H., Izumi, Y., Komure, O., Udaka, F., Kameyama, M., Nishio, T., Kuroda, Y., Nishimura, M., Nakamura, S., 1997. Molecular features of the CAG repeats of spinocerebellar ataxia 6 (SCA6). Hum. Mol. Genet. 6, 1283–1287.

Matsuyama, Z., Wakamori, M., Mori, Y., Kawakami, H., Nakamura, S., Imoto, K., 1999. Direct alteration of the P/Q-type Ca²⁺ channel property by polyglutamine expansion in spinocerebellar ataxia 6. J. Neurosci. 19, RC14.

Matsuyama, Z., Murase, M., Shimizu, H., Aoki, Y., Hayashi, M., Hozumi, I., Inuzuka, T., 2003. A novel insertion mutation of acetazolamide-responsive episodic ataxia in a Japanese family. J. Neurol. Sci. 210, 91–93.

Mori, Y., Friedrich, T., Kim, M.S., Mikami, A., Nakai, J., Ruth, P., Bosse, E., Hofmann, F., Flockerzi, V., Furuichi, T., Mikoshiba, K., Imoto, K., Tanabe, T., Numa, S., 1991. Primary structure and functional expression from complementary DNA of a brain calcium channel. Nature 350, 398–402.

Mori, Y., Wakamori, M., Oda, S., Fletcher, C.F., Sekiguchi, N., Mori, E., Copeland, N.G., Jenkins, N.A., Matsushita, K., Matsuyama, Z., Imoto, K., 2000. Reduced voltage sensitivity of activation of P/Q-type Ca²⁺ channels is associated with the ataxic mouse mutation rolling Nagoya (tg(rol)). J. Neurosci. 20, 5654–5662.

Niidome, T., Teramoto, T., Murata, Y., Tanaka, I., Seto, T., Sawada, K., Mori, Y., Katayama, K., 1994. Stable expression of the neuronal BI (class A) calcium channel in baby hamster kidney cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 203, 1821–1827.

Ono, T., Kudo, Y., Kohara, K., Kawashima, S., Ogura, A., 1997. Activity-dependent survival of rat cerebellar granule neurons is not associated with sustained elevation of intracellular Ca²⁺. Neurosci. Lett. 228, 123–126.

Ophoff, R.A., Terwindt, G.M., Vergouwe, M.N., van Eijk, R., Oefner, P.J., Hoffman, S.M., Lamerding, J.E., Mohrenweiser, H.W., Bulman, D.E., Ferrari, M., Haan, J., Lindhout, D., van Ommen, G.J., Hofker, M.H., Ferrari, M.D., Frants, R.R., 1996. Familial hemiplegic migraine and episodic ataxia type-2 are caused by mutations in the Ca²⁺ channel gene CACNL1A4. Cell 87, 543–552.

Orr, M.S., Reinhold, W., Yu, L., Schreiber-Agus, N., O’Connor, P.M., 1998. An important role for the retinoblastoma protein in staurosporine-induced G1 arrest in murine embryonic fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 3803–3807.

Osborne, C.K., Boldt, D.H., Clark, G.M., Trent, J.M., 1983. Effects of tamoxifen on human breast cancer cell cycle kinetics: accumulation of cells in early G1 phase. Cancer Res. 43, 3583–3585.

Restituito, S., Thompson, R.M., Eliet, J., Raike, R.S., Riedl, M., Charnet, P., Gomez, C.M., 2000. The polyglutamine expansion in spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 causes a beta subunit-specific enhanced activation of P/Q-type calcium channels in *Xenopus* oocytes. J. Neurosci. 20, 6394–6403.

Rousset, M., Cens, T., Restituito, S., Barrere, C., Black III, J.L., McEnery, M.W., Charnet, P., 2001. Functional roles of gamma2, gamma3 and gamma4, three new Ca²⁺ channel subunits, in P/Q-type Ca²⁺ channel expressed in Xenopus oocytes. J. Physiol. 532, 583–593.

Sather, W.A., Tanabe, T., Zhang, J.F., Mori, Y., Adams, M.E., Tsien, R.W., 1993. Distinctive biophysical and pharmacological properties of class A (BI) calcium channel alpha 1 subunits. Neuron 11, 291–303.

Talavera, A., Basilico, C., 1978. Requirements of BHK cells for the exit from different quiescent states. J. Cell. Physiol. 97, 429–439.

Toru, S., Murakoshi, T., Ishikawa, K., Saegusa, H., Fujigasaki, H., Uchihara, T., Nagayama, S., Osanai, M., Mizusawa, H., Tanabe, T., 2000. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 mutation alters P-type calcium channel function. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 10893–10898.

Walker, D., Bichet, D., Campbell, K.P., De Waard, M., 1998. A beta 4 isoform-specific interaction site in the carboxyl-terminal region of the voltage-dependent Ca²⁺ channel alpha 1A subunit. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 2361–2367.

Walker, D., Bichet, D., Geib, S., Mori, E., Cornet, V., Snutch, T.P., Mori, Y., De Waard, M., 1999. A new beta subtype-specific interaction in alpha1A subunit controls P/Q-type Ca²⁺ channel activation. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 12383–12390.

Wappl, E., Koschak, A., Poteser, M., Sinnegger, M.J., Walter, D., Eberhart, A., Groschner, K., Glossmann, H., Kraus, R.L., Grabner, M., Striessnig, J., 2002. Functional consequences of P/Q-type Ca²⁺ channel Caᵥ2.1 missense mutations associated with episodic ataxia type 2 and progressive ataxia. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 6960–6966.

Yoshizawa, T., Yamagishi, Y., Koseki, N., Goto, J., Yoshida, H., Shibasaki, F., Shoji, S., Kanazawa, I., 2000. Cell cycle arrest enhances the in vitro cellular toxicity of the truncated Machado-Joseph disease gene product with an expanded polyglutamine stretch. Hum. Mol. Genet. 9, 69–78.

Yue, Q., Jen, J.C., Nelson, S.F., Baloh, R.W., 1997. Progressive ataxia due to a missense mutation in a calcium-channel gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61, 1078–1087.

Zhuchenko, O., Bailey, J., Bonnen, P., Ashizawa, T., Stockton, D.W., Amos, C., Dobyns, W.B., Subramony, S.H., Zoghbi, H.Y., Lee, C.C., 1997. Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia (SCA6) associated with small polyglutamine expansions in the alpha 1A-voltage-dependent calcium channel. Nat. Genet. 15, 62–69.
