
# FORKHEAD-BOX TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS AND THEIR ROLE IN THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

**Paul J. Coffer* and Boudewijn M. T. Burgering†**

Abstract | It is more than a decade since the discovery of the first forkhead-box (FOX) transcription factor in the fruit fly *Drosophila melanogaster*. In the intervening time, there has been an explosion in the identification and characterization of members of this family of proteins. Importantly, in the past few years, it has become clear that members of the FOX family have crucial roles in various aspects of immune regulation, from lymphocyte survival to thymic development. This review focuses on FOXP3, FOXN1, FOXJ1 and members of the FOXO subfamily and their function in the immune system.

Forkhead proteins are a large family of functionally diverse transcription factors that have been implicated in a variety of cellular processes¹. The name forkhead is derived from the *Drosophila melanogaster* fork head (*fkh*) gene product, which is required for terminal pattern formation in the embryo². Shortly after this discovery, a novel group of liver-specific transcription factors was identified (the hepatic nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) family), and these have DNA-binding domains with a high degree of similarity to that of the *fkh* gene product³. The discovery of this forkhead motif led to the definition of a new family of transcription factors that have now been identified in organisms ranging from yeast to humans. Forkhead transcription factors are commonly associated with the regulation of development, and it has been proposed that, with evolution, the increase in complexity of organisms has provided the driving force for the expansion of this protein family.

In the past ten years, more than 100 members of the forkhead transcription-factor family have been identified. This led to a recent revision of the nomenclature used to identify these proteins⁴. FOX (forkhead box) is now used as the symbol for all chordate forkhead transcription factors. A phylogenetic analysis has resulted in the definition of 15 classes for all known FOX proteins, so these transcription factors are classified in terms of structure not function. In each subfamily (or class), a gene is identified by a number; the genes that encode human transcription factors are denoted by uppercase letters (that is, FOX), whereas only the first letter is capitalized for the genes that encode mouse transcription factors (Fox). Both human and mouse proteins are denoted by uppercase letters (that is, FOX).

The crystal structure of the forkhead domain bound to DNA has been solved and has been described as a ‘winged helix’ owing to its double-wing structure similar to the shape of a butterfly⁵ (FIG. 1a). It is a relatively invariant structure, with most of the amino acids being conserved between family members. This has made it difficult to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the sequence specificity of the DNA-binding domains of different FOX proteins. Although all FOX proteins can bind DNA, the functional effect of this can be either the activation (transactivation) or the inhibition of gene transcription. In contrast to the DNA-binding domains, there is almost no sequence homology between the transactivation or repression domains of members of the FOX family (FIG. 1b), and little is known about their interactions with the transcriptional machinery.

The growth of the FOX family during the past decade has been paralleled by an increased understanding of the importance of FOX proteins in the regulation of developmental processes. FOX gene mutations have

unwanted autoimmune reaction. Autoreactive lymphocytes are normally deleted in the thymus, but self-reactive T cells are still found in the periphery in normal healthy individuals. However, these cells do not normally attack organs that express the corresponding autoantigen, and self-tolerance is generally maintained. Instead, T cells seem to be actively maintained in an unresponsive state. Recently, this has been shown to be mediated by REGULATORY T (T<sub>Reg</sub>) CELLS, which are characterized by expression of CD25 (the interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor α-chain). These cells comprise ~5–10% of the total population of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells in mice and are thought to be crucial in the repression of autoimmune disorders, transplant rejection and inflammatory bowel disease<sup>7,8</sup>. Autoimmune diseases arise when self-reactive T cells somehow overcome the usual restraining mechanisms, leading to clonal expansion and activation. The activation of T<sub>Reg</sub> cells is antigen specific; however, these lymphocytes can inhibit both CD4<sup>+</sup> and CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells in an antigen non-specific manner. This is thought to be through a combination of cell–cell contact and cytokine production, with a role for IL-10 and transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β).

Scurfy mice and human IPEX. Scurfy (*sf*) is an X-linked recessive mutation in mice that results in lethality of hemizygous males at 16–25 days after birth. There is an overproliferation of activated CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells, resulting in multi-organ infiltration, and scurfy mice seem unable to properly regulate lymphocyte activity<sup>9,10</sup>. Adoptive transfer of CD4<sup>+</sup>CD8<sup>-</sup> T cells, but not CD4<sup>-</sup>CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells, leads to disease, indicating that it is CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells that are crucial for mediating the development of the scurfy phenotype in mice<sup>9</sup>. An intriguing early observation was that adoptive transfer of wild-type lymphocytes can control the T cells of scurfy mice, thereby preventing the development of disease<sup>9</sup>. So, a normal lymphoid compartment is somehow able to repress the scurfy phenotype.

Recently, the gene that is defective in scurfy mice was identified and was found to encode FOXP3, a novel

Figure 1 | The FOX protein winged-helix DNA-binding domain. **a** | Three-dimensional structure of the DNA-binding domain of forkhead box C2 (FOXC2), showing helical (H) sections and winged (W) sections. This image is redrawn with permission from REF. 79 © (2002) Elsevier. **b** | A schematic representation of the location of the forkhead DNA-binding domain (FKH) of the various FOX factors described in this review. These proteins are classified in terms of structure, not function, and the location of the DNA-binding domain can vary. The FKH domain of FOXP3 is unique in that it is located very close to the carboxyl terminus of the protein. This has led to the proposal that FOXP3 might lack a bona fide transactivation domain and could function as a transcriptional inhibitor.

been found to be responsible for diverse phenotypes — from craniopharyngeal development (*FOXEL*), to speech and language development (*FOXP2*) and hearing (*Foxi1*)<sup>6</sup>. However, it has also become clear that these winged-helix proteins have crucial roles in various aspects of immune regulation. In the past few years, there have been many reports describing roles for distinct FOX transcription factors in the regulation of various aspects of the adaptive immune response. This article focuses on several members of the FOX family from different classes that have recently been shown to regulate diverse functions in the immune system: *FOXP3*, *FOXN1*, *FOXJ1* and members of the FOXO subfamily. It reviews our current knowledge of the regulation and function of these important transcriptional regulators (TABLE 1).

REGULATORY T (T<sub>Reg</sub>) CELLS  
A subset of CD4<sup>+</sup> suppressor T cells that express high levels of CD25 (the interleukin-2 receptor α-chain), the role of which is to maintain self-tolerance.

FOXP3 and regulatory T cells  
Immune responses need to be constantly regulated — a balancing act that ensures appropriate reactivity to pathogens while preventing the development of an

Table 1 | Fox gene-knockout mice and their immune-related phenotypes

| Gene       | Phenotype                                                                                          | Role in immune system                                                                                   | Disease                              | References |
|------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|------------|
| *Foxp3*<sup>-/-</sup> | Scurfy-mouse phenotype; aggressive lymphoproliferative autoimmune syndrome; T cells have an activated phenotype; and lack of CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup>T<sub>Reg</sub> cells | Development and function of CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup>T<sub>Reg</sub> cells                                  | IPEX; scurfy-mouse phenotype          | 11, 13–17   |
| *Foxn1*<sup>-/-</sup> | Congenital absence of hair and severe immunodeficiency; rudimentary thymus with lack of T-cell development; and defective thymic epithelial-cell differentiation and proliferation | Differentiation of thymic epithelial cells                                                              | Nude phenotype                       | 30, 33, 37  |
| *Foxj1*<sup>-/-</sup> | Embryonic lethal; fetal-liver chimerization results in systemic autoimmune inflammation with lymphocytic pathology, T<sub>H</sub>1-cell hyperactivation, NF-κB hyperactivation and cytokine overproduction | Suppression of T-cell activation and prevention of autoimmunity                                           | Protein expression levels decreased in SLE-prone mouse strains | 42–44      |
| *Foxo3a*<sup>-/-</sup>| Spontaneous lymphoproliferation; mild, multi-system, non-lethal inflammation; T<sub>H</sub>1- and/or T<sub>H</sub>2-cell hyperactivation; NF-κB hyperactivation; and cytokine overproduction | Regulation of lymphocyte proliferation and apoptosis, suppression of T-cell activation and prevention of autoimmunity | Protein activity decreased in SLE-prone mouse strains | 54, 55     |

Fox, forkhead box; IPEX, immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy and enteropathy, X-linked syndrome; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; T<sub>H</sub> cell, T helper cell; T<sub>Reg</sub> cell, regulatory T cell.

member of the FOX transcription-factor family¹¹. Analysis of Foxp3 expression revealed that it was most highly expressed in lymphoid organs, such as the thymus and spleen, and more specifically by CD4⁺ T cells. In scurfy mice, a frameshift mutation in the gene encoding FOXP3 results in the production of a functionally inactive, truncated protein product that lacks the DNA-binding domain. Interestingly, mice that lack a functional

Foxp3 gene product have a much more severe phenotype than would be predicted from studies analysing the role of T<sub>Reg</sub> cells. Scurfy mice die within a few weeks, whereas depletion of T<sub>Reg</sub>-cell populations (by selecting for CD25⁺ cells) leads to autoimmunity but not rapid death. One possible explanation is that the expression of FOXP3 is essential in the thymic environment during development, allowing the differentiation of a crucial population of T<sub>Reg</sub> cells. Loss of functional FOXP3 might result in the escape of self-reactive cells that would normally differentiate to become T<sub>Reg</sub> cells, thereby greatly exacerbating the autoimmune phenotype¹². Alternatively, FOXP3 might induce another, as-yet-undefined population of regulatory T cells, or perhaps depletion of CD25⁺ cell populations is insufficient to remove all Foxp3-expressing cells, so the resultant autoimmune disease is milder.

Immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy and enteropathy, X-linked syndrome (IPEX; also known as X-linked autoimmunity and allergic dysregulation syndrome, XLAAD) is a fatal recessive disorder of humans that develops in early childhood. Symptoms manifest as protracted diarrhoea, dermatitis, insulin-dependent diabetes, thyroiditis and anaemia. Massive T-cell infiltration into the skin and gastrointestinal tract is also observed, as well as high serum levels of autoantibodies, which is indicative of autoimmune disease. Affected children also suffer from allergic manifestations including severe eczema, high IgE levels, eosinophilia and food allergies. Recent linkage studies have mapped the gene responsible for the development of IPEX to a conserved region on the X chromosome that contains the *sf* gene in mice¹³,¹⁴. Importantly, the scurfy syndrome in mice has several characteristics that are similar to IPEX, which leads to the possibility that FOXP3 mutations might be responsible for this fatal human disease (FIG. 2a). In various family studies, analysis of FOXP3 has revealed single nucleotide changes in the forkhead domain of FOXP3 in affected individuals, indicating disruption of DNA binding¹³,¹⁴. A further study identified a 3-base-pair deletion in the leucine-zipper dimerization domain, which might allow FOXP3 to homo- or heterodimerize; therefore, mutation could result in aberrant function¹⁵. Because the clinical phenotype of this patient is as severe as those with truncated FOXP3 proteins, this indicates that interaction with other proteins is crucial for transcription-factor function. Identification of such interacting proteins in these patients will certainly aid our understanding of the role of FOXP3 in autoimmune disease.

Linking FOXP3 with T<sub>Reg</sub> cells. The autoimmune pathologies observed in both humans and mice that lack functional FOXP3 indicate that this transcription factor has a crucial role in the regulation of T-cell function. Indeed, Fontenot *et al.* have generated *Foxp3*⁻/⁻ mice, which succumb to an aggressive lymphoproliferative autoimmune syndrome almost identical to that of scurfy mice¹⁶. It was found that *Foxp3*⁻/⁻ mice lack a discrete CD4⁺CD25⁺ T-cell population that is observed in wild-type mice, and *Foxp3*⁻/⁻ mice have many activated CD4⁺ T cells.

RECOMBINATION-ACTIVATING-GENE-KNOCKOUT MICE

Recombination-activating genes (Rag1 and Rag2) are expressed by developing lymphocytes. Mice that are deficient in either RAG protein fail to produce B and T cells owing to a developmental block in the gene rearrangement that is required for receptor expression.

Several recent reports have attempted to determine whether expression of FOXP3 is sufficient to confer $T_{\text{Reg}}$-cell activity on naive CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{-}$ T cells ${ }^{16-18}$. Stimulation of Foxp3-transduced cells through the T-cell receptor (TCR) resulted in reduced proliferation relative to controls, as well as greatly reduced cytokine production. Furthermore, ectopic expression of FOXP3 resulted in increased expression of GITR (glucocorticoid-induced tumour-necrosis factor (TNF)-receptor-related protein) and CTLA4 (cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4), both of which are present on the cell surface of naturally occurring CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{+}$ T cells. These transduced cells could also suppress CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{-}$ responder T cells when stimulated with CD3-specific monoclonal antibody. CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{-}$ T cells that are retrovirally transduced with Foxp3 have also been injected intravenously into RECOMBINATION-ACTIVATING-GENE-KNOCKOUT MICE together with non-transduced CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{-}$ T-cell populations ${ }^{16}$. Control animals that received CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{-}$ T-cell populations transduced with an ‘empty’ virus developed severe wasting disease, whereas those that received Foxp3-transduced and non-transduced T cells were healthy. In contrast to control animals, mice that received Foxp3-transduced cells generated a population of CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{+}$ $T_{\text{Reg}}$ cells, which were found to express increased levels of mRNA encoding IL-10. Because protection against inflammatory bowel disease can be mediated by wild-type CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{+}$ T cells and depends on the expression of IL-10 (REF. 19), IL-10 production might be an important mechanism of action of FOXP3. However, the relevance of IL-10 remains unclear because, in a separate study, the levels of IL-10 were found to be markedly decreased in Foxp3-transduced cells ${ }^{17}$.

Although there have been numerous studies investigating the *in vivo* role of FOXP3, there are still few clues to the molecular mechanisms that underlie its function as a transcription factor. Schubert *et al.* have found that FOXP3 binds DNA and localizes mainly in the nucleus and that this requires the presence of its forkhead domain ${ }^{20}$. The forkhead domain of FOXP3 is unique in that it is located in close proximity to the carboxyl terminus of the protein. This has led to the proposal that FOXP3 might lack a bona fide transactivation domain and could function as a transcriptional inhibitor. Indeed, experiments have shown that FOXP3 can, to some degree, reduce the transcriptional activity of a synthetic forkhead reporter construct ${ }^{20}$. Furthermore, the expression of FOXP3 by Jurkat cells resulted in a marked reduction in IL-2 production after the crosslinking of cell-surface CD3 (REF. 20). Normally, the expression of IL-2 depends on NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells), and a significant reduction in the level of transcription of an NFAT reporter construct was also observed in FOXP3-expressing cells. Importantly, the binding site of FOXP3 in the IL-2 promoter overlaps with that of NFAT, indicating a potential ‘competitive mechanism’ of inhibition. Potential FOXP3-binding sites have also been identified in the promoters of the genes encoding IL-4, TNF and GM-CSF (granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor), all cytokines that are dysregulated in scurfy mice. However, the functional consequences of these observations have not yet been fully determined.

Most of the studies described so far were carried out using mice and examined FOXP3 expression by mouse $T_{\text{Reg}}$ cells. But is there evidence for a similar role for this transcription factor in humans? CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{+}$ $T_{\text{Reg}}$ cells in humans comprise ~1–3% of the total number of CD4${}^{+}$ T cells. In humans, FOXP3 has been found to be expressed by both CD4${}^{+}$ and CD8${}^{+}$ T cells, although the level of expression by CD4${}^{+}$ T cells is much higher ${ }^{21}$. Similar to the observations made for mice, FOXP3 was found to be expressed only by CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{+}$ T cells and not by CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{-}$ T cells, and the addition of CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{+}$ T cells to CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{-}$ T-cell cultures suppressed proliferation triggered by TCR ligation. However, in humans, it is specifically a population of CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{\text{hi}}$ T cells that has suppressor activity ${ }^{22}$. So, it seems that at least some of the lessons learned from the study of scurfy mice are applicable to the human immune system.

Stimulation of human CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{-}$ T cells through ligation of the TCR and co-stimulation of CD28 leads to proliferation, production of cytokines and expression of CD25. However, in contrast to mice, this can also lead to FOXP3 expression. Furthermore, CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{+}$ T cells generated from activated CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{-}$ T cells could suppress the proliferation of freshly isolated CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{-}$ T cells ${ }^{21}$. The observed differences between mice and humans could result from the tendency to use peripheral-blood-derived T cells in studies of humans compared with T cells derived from the spleen or lymph nodes in studies of mice. The data indicate two possible pathways for the generation of $T_{\text{Reg}}$ cells in humans: thymic selection or peripheral development through immune stimulation. Indeed, Khattri *et al.* showed that limiting Foxp3 expression to the thymus failed to rescue scurfy mice from disease ${ }^{18}$. This lends support to the idea that constant expression of Foxp3 is required for suppressive function.

**Regulation of FOXP3 expression.** What is the precise signal that triggers T cells to express FOXP3? In the mouse thymus, CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{+}$ thymocytes preferentially transcribe Foxp3, and similarly in the periphery, CD4${}^{+}$, but not CD8${}^{+}$, T cells were found to express Foxp3 (REFS 16, 17). Expression does not seem to be a consequence of T-cell activation in mice, because *in vitro* stimulation of CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{-}$ T cells did not result in the expression of Foxp3 (in contrast to humans). Importantly, this separates FOXP3 from other $T_{\text{Reg}}$-cell markers (such as CD25, CTLA4 and GITR), the expression of which can also be upregulated by activated T cells. It should be noted that CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{-}$ T-cell populations can also express low levels of FOXP3; however, these levels are about 100-fold lower than those of CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{+}$ T cells ${ }^{17}$. Interestingly, after TCR ligation, the level of FOXP3 can also increase in CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{+}$ T cells, apparently through a post-transcriptional mechanism ${ }^{16}$. This indicates a potentially important link between TCR signalling and the level of FOXP3 expression.
Although its precise role remains controversial, TGF-β has been implicated in the regulation of $T_{\text{Reg}}$-cell function ${ }^{23}$. Recent studies have shown that the conversion of human and mouse peripheral naive CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{-}$ T cells to CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{+}$ $T_{\text{Reg}}$ cells correlates with TGF-β-mediated induction of *Foxp3* expression when cells are stimulated through the TCR and CD28 (REFS 24,25). By contrast, Peng *et al.* found that TGF-β promotes the clonal expansion of a FOXP3-expressing CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{+}$ $T_{\text{Reg}}$-cell pool but not a pool of CD25${}^{-}$ T cells ${ }^{26}$. The mechanisms underlying this unusual pro-proliferative role of TGF-β are unknown, but a recent study has indicated that there might be a link between FOXP3 and **SMAD7** (mothers against decapentaplegic homologue 7), which is an inhibitor of TGF-β-mediated signalling ${ }^{25}$. In primary CD4${}^{+}$ T cells, mRNA encoding SMAD7 was induced by TGF-β in control cells, but this was abrogated in cells ectopically expressing FOXP3 (REF. 25). This indicates that FOXP3 might induce a positive autoregulatory loop of TGF-β-mediated signalling in the absence of SMAD7 (FIG. 2b). This might function to stabilize the regulatory phenotype of these $T_{\text{Reg}}$ cells induced in the periphery or to expand the FOXP3-expressing population of $T_{\text{Reg}}$ cells. Mamura and co-workers have recently shown that CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{+}$ T cells that express FOXP3 develop normally in TGF-β1-deficient mice ${ }^{27}$. These TGF-β1-deficient CD4${}^{+}$CD25${}^{+}$ T cells were found to be functional as suppressors, but they did have a reduced capacity to suppress inflammation *in vivo*. So, the *in vivo* relevance of TGF-β in the regulation of $T_{\text{Reg}}$-cell clonal expansion and function is still unclear. Most recently, a report showed that oestrogen can also increase FOXP3 expression both *in vitro* and *in vivo*, and this correlates with the clonal expansion of the $T_{\text{Reg}}$-cell compartment ${ }^{28}$. During pregnancy, there is an increased challenge to peripheral tolerance from fetal antigens. Concomitantly, levels of oestrogen rise, and it is possible that oestrogen-mediated induction of FOXP3 expression might be responsible for expanding the $T_{\text{Reg}}$-cell compartment, thereby resulting in increased immunosuppression and preventing fetal rejection (FIG. 2b).

In summary, although FOXP3 seems to be crucial for the generation of $T_{\text{Reg}}$ cells, the molecular mechanisms that regulate the expression and function of this transcription factor remain elusive. TGF-β probably has an important role in modulating the expression of FOXP3; however, it is probable that T cells can respond to various extracellular signals that result in the upregulation of FOXP3 expression and the clonal expansion of $T_{\text{Reg}}$-cell populations when appropriate. Identifying these signals, and importantly the target genes of FOXP3 activation, is crucial for understanding the function of $T_{\text{Reg}}$ cells in the maintenance of immune tolerance.

### ARREST
Any process by which progression through the cell cycle is halted during one of the normal phases — G1 (gap 1), S (synthesis), G2 (gap 2) or M (mitosis).

### WNT PROTEINS
WNTs are glycoproteins related to the *Drosophila melanogaster* protein Wingless, a ligand that regulates the temporal and spatial development of the embryo. WNT-mediated signalling has been shown to regulate cell-fate determination, proliferation, adhesion, migration and polarity during development. In addition to their crucial role in embryogenesis, WNTs and their downstream signalling molecules have been implicated in tumorigenesis and have causative roles in human colon cancers.

### BONE MORPHOGENETIC PROTEINS (BMPs)
The genes encoding BMPs constitute a subfamily of the transforming growth factor-β gene superfamily. BMPs have a crucial role in the modulation of mesenchymal differentiation and the induction of cartilage and bone formation.

## FOXN1 and thymic development
The development and selection of T cells in the thymus requires both cell-intrinsic signals and extrinsic signals delivered by the stroma of the thymus. In the stroma, thymic epithelial cells (TECs) create the correct microenvironment for the unique function of the thymus ${ }^{29}$. Histologically, the stroma can be divided into the cortex and the medulla, which contain distinct types of TEC. These distinct types of TEC support, in a spatially defined manner, the different stages of T-cell development. The ‘nude’ phenotype is due to a recessive mutation in the *Foxn1* gene that causes hairlessness and, importantly, also results in congenital athymia in mice, rats and humans ${ }^{30}$. A nucleotide deletion in the *Foxn1* gene of nude mice causes the reading frame to shift, resulting in loss of the DNA-binding domain of this FOX transcription factor.

Athymia resulting from a loss of *Foxn1* function is characterized by the absence of all of the main TEC types, indicating that *Foxn1* regulates the growth and differentiation of all TECs in a cell-autonomous manner. In nude mice, cells that are thought to be the progenitors of TECs undergo **ARREST** at a stage corresponding to a putative multipotent TEC progenitor ${ }^{29}$. So, what could be the functional targets of FOXN1 that regulate thymic development? Microdissection-based gene-expression profiling has been carried out comparing wild-type and nude mice to identify FOXN1-regulated genes ${ }^{31}$. In addition to several as-yet-uncharacterized cDNAs, a member of the B7 family, PD1 (programmed death 1) ligand, was identified, which binds to the immunoinhibitory receptor PD1. Expression of mRNA that encodes PD1 is restricted to the thymus in adult mice, and cell-surface expression of PD1 has been shown on activated T and B cells, myeloid-lineage cells and also endothelial cells treated with inflammatory agents such as interferon-γ (IFN-γ) or TNF. In the thymus, PD1 is thought to have a role in positive selection and prevention of autoimmunity ${ }^{32}$. However, the relevance of this observation to the development of the athymic nude phenotype remains unclear.

At present, there is limited understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which *FOXN1* activity is regulated. Recently, **WNT PROTEINS** and **BONE MORPHOGENETIC PROTEINS** (BMPs) have been implicated in the transcriptional control of *Foxn1* expression ${ }^{33}$. BMPs are members of the TGF-β superfamily and have been implicated in cell-fate determination and patterning of the embryo. Treatment of intact thymic lobes with BMP4 results in upregulation of *Foxn1* expression. It is suggested that FOXN1 might subsequently upregulate the expression of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptors, which then modulate the thymic stroma and regulate thymopoiesis ${ }^{34}$ (FIG. 3).

WNTs are a large group of secreted glycoproteins that have important roles in cell-fate specification ${ }^{35}$. They are expressed by TECs and developing thymocytes, and co-culture experiments and transfection studies show that WNT-mediated signalling can induce *Foxn1* transcription ${ }^{33}$. Overexpression of β-catenin (a downstream target of WNT) was in itself sufficient to increase the expression of *Foxn1*. In addition, this study showed that WNT-induced signalling through phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (**PI3K**) contributes to *Foxn1* expression ${ }^{33}$. PI3K can inhibit glycogen-synthase kinase 3β, the kinase that phosphorylates and destabilizes
DNA-binding domain — was described<sup>37</sup>. *Foxn1*<sup>Δ/Δ</sup> mice seem to be normal with respect to hair and skin but show a thymus-specific phenotype that is milder than that observed in the case of complete loss of expression of *Foxn1*. In *Foxn1*<sup>Δ/Δ</sup> mice, TEC differentiation is initiated but does not progress, apparently being halted at the stage at which TEC–thymocyte crosstalk is required for TEC differentiation. As a result, some lymphoid progenitors do enter the thymus, but development of these progenitors is severely impaired. The *Foxn1*<sup>Δ/Δ</sup> mice do not show signs of autoimmune disease, indicating either that negative selection is occurring normally or that there is a decreased repertoire of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells being produced<sup>37</sup>. These results indicate that the N-terminal region of FOXN1 is involved in a thymus-specific function and that FOXN1 expression is not only required for the initial stages of TEC development but also for the later stages. Interestingly, evolutionary evidence supports a specific function for the N-terminal domain of FOXN1 in the thymus. The cephalochordate *Branchiostoma lanceolatum* does not have a thymus or hair, but it has a *Foxn1* orthologue that is conserved with vertebrate homologues with respect to the DNA-binding domain but not the N-terminal regulatory domain<sup>38</sup>.

Although FOXN1 expression seems to be regulated by factors that are important in cell-fate specification (such as WNTs), the functional targets of FOXN1 activity still remain unclear. The observation that, in *Foxn1*<sup>Δ/Δ</sup> mice, TEC development is halted at the stage of TEC–thymocyte crosstalk indicates that thymocyte-derived signals might affect the N-terminal domain of FOXN1. Alternatively, it is also possible that the N-terminal domain of FOXN1 interacts with cofactors that are crucial for the transactivation of specific target genes. Understanding the precise role of this functional domain will not only shed light on the process of TEC differentiation but might also highlight yet another possible mode of FOX-mediated regulation.

**FOXJ1 and T-helper-1-cell activation**

FOXJ1 is a FOX-family member the expression of which was, until recently, thought to be restricted to the lungs, spermatsids, oviducts and choroid plexus — all structures that contain ciliated cells<sup>39,40</sup>. FOXJ1 seems to be a potent transcriptional activator that can bind a DNA sequence distinct from that recognized by other FOX transcription factors<sup>41</sup>. *Foxj1*<sup>−/−</sup> mice die during embryonic development or within a few days of birth, and any surviving animals are readily distinguished from their litter-mates by their smaller size, wasted appearance and poor post-natal weight gain<sup>42,43</sup>. These animals have both severe internal abnormalities, with reversal of abdominal organs, and a complete absence of ciliated epithelia.

Although FOXJ1 has previously been linked with epithelial-cell development in the lungs, its role in the differentiation of other cell types has only recently been characterized. Peng and co-workers made the surprising observation that *Foxj1* expression was markedly down-regulated by lymphocytes isolated from mice prone to

Figure 3 | Thymic development and FOXN1. WNT proteins and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) have been implicated in the transcriptional control of forkhead box N1 (FOXN1). BMP4 has been shown to upregulate the expression of FOXN1, and it has been suggested that FOXN1 might subsequently upregulate the expression of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptors (FGFRs), which are then responsible for modulating the thymic stroma and regulating thymopoiesis. WNT proteins expressed by thymic epithelial cells and developing thymocytes can induce the expression of FOXN1. This seems to result from stabilization of β-catenin, and it can be further regulated by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) through an undefined mechanism. TCF/LEF, member of the T-cell factor (TCF)/lymphoid-enhancer-binding factor (LEF) family.

T-cell stimulation

Cytoplasm

Nucleus

Figure 4 | Regulation of T<sub>H</sub>1-cell activation by FOXJ1 and FOXO3A. Mice with a targeted mutation in the gene encoding forkhead box J1 (FOXJ1) have systemic autoimmune inflammation, including activated CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells. In *Foxj1*<sup>−/−</sup> mice, nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) activity was found to be greatly increased, resulting in the overproduction of T helper 1 (T<sub>H</sub>1)-cell cytokines. These mice also had reduced levels of the β-subunit of inhibitor of NF-κB (IκBβ). It is proposed that FOXJ1 can directly induce the expression of IκB, resulting in repression of NF-κB activation. This can be further modulated by FOXO3A. IκB kinase (IKK) can phosphorylate IκB, resulting in its proteasomal degradation and the activation of NF-κB. IKK can also phosphorylate and thereby inhibit FOXO3A. Importantly, FOXO3A can also inhibit NF-κB activity through indirectly modulating IκB expression, possibly by interacting with FOXJ1. So, T-cell stimulation results in a decrease in expression of FOXJ1 and in inactivation of FOXO3A, leading to NF-κB activation, cytokine-gene transcription and T-cell activation. IFN-γ, interferon-γ; IL-2, interleukin-2.

systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), indicating a possible role for FOXJ1 in the prevention of autoimmune reactions<sup>44</sup>. Because *Foxj1*<sup>−/−</sup> mice die *in utero* or in the early neonatal period, a fetal-liver chimerization approach was used to allow the generation of a *Foxj1*<sup>−/−</sup> lymphoid system. Mice with this targeted mutation of *Foxj1* showed evidence of systemic autoimmune inflammation. Although these *Foxj1*<sup>−/−</sup> chimeric mice had relatively normal lymphocyte development, their CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells were found to have an activated phenotype. Indeed, when stimulated with CD3-specific antibody, CD4<sup>+</sup> T helper (T<sub>H</sub>) cells from these *Foxj1*<sup>−/−</sup> chimeric mice produced more IL-2 and IFN-γ, but not IL-4, than wild-type mice, indicating skewing to a T<sub>H</sub>1-type response. Furthermore, during primary stimulation, *Foxj1*<sup>−/−</sup> CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells upregulated expression of the T<sub>H</sub>1-cell transcription factor T-bet, which is also consistent with a T<sub>H</sub>1-cell bias<sup>44</sup>.

How could FOXJ1 regulate the proliferation and differentiation of CD4<sup>+</sup> T<sub>H</sub> cells? One possibility is that it could directly regulate the genes that are involved in these processes. Another possibility is that it could modulate the function of other crucial transcription factors (FIG. 4). NFAT and nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) have both been shown to have an important role in the differentiation of CD4<sup>+</sup> T<sub>H</sub> cells that is induced following TCR ligation<sup>45,46</sup>. Because other FOX transcription factors have been found to be transcriptional repressors, it is possible that FOXJ1 could inhibit NF-κB- or NFAT-mediated transcription. NF-κB has been shown to be crucial for the production of IFN-γ, and it is thought to be required for T<sub>H</sub>1-cell responses<sup>47</sup>. Constitutive activation of this transcription factor is found in various inflammatory conditions: for example, in rheumatoid arthritis. FOXJ1 was found to inhibit both constitutive and TNF-induced NF-κB activity, but not NFAT activity, in a lymphoma cell line<sup>44</sup>. In *Foxj1*<sup>−/−</sup> CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells, there were increased levels of expression of NF-κB target genes, including those encoding cyclin D1 (a cell-cycle regulator), GADD45β (growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible 45β), IL-2 and IFN-γ. The activity of NF-κB is regulated through binding the cytosolic inhibitor protein IκB (inhibitor of NF-κB), which blocks nuclear translocation. Overexpression of FOXJ1 was shown to result in a marked upregulation of expression of the β-subunit of IκB at both the mRNA and protein levels<sup>44</sup>. The expression pattern of *IκBβ* also correlates with that of *Foxj1*, being reduced in response to T-cell stimulation with CD3-specific antibody or IL-2. These data support a model in which FOXJ1 regulates NF-κB activity and CD4<sup>+</sup> T<sub>H</sub>-cell activation through modulating the expression levels of IκBβ (FIG. 4).

It is still not known what could trigger T cells to downregulate their expression of FOXJ1. Brody and coworkers have reported analysis of transcriptional regulatory regions in the 5′ flanking region of *Foxj1* (REF. 48). Potential regulatory elements include an NF-κB-binding site, an AP2 (activator protein 2)-binding site, an AP1-binding site and E-box motifs. The NF-κB-binding site could regulate a negative-feedback pathway by which NF-κB could downregulate its own activity by upregulating the expression of *IκB* and in inhibition of NF-κB-mediated transcription. The FOS and JUN transcription factors form tight complexes of homo- or heterodimers (known as AP1) that bind specifically to the AP1-recognition sequence. Recent studies have determined that the strength of TCR signalling can lead to differential expression and/or activation of AP1 components<sup>49,50</sup>, so it is possible that TCR-mediated changes in AP1 activity are crucial for the downregulation of *Foxj1* expression that is observed after activation of naive CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells.

The initial observation that *Foxj1* expression was downregulated in mice prone to SLE led to the suggestion that FOXJ1 might have a role in the prevention of autoimmune reactions. Indeed, *Foxj1*<sup>−/−</sup> chimeric mice have systemic autoimmune inflammation, including activated T cells. As discussed earlier, this seems to result from the ability of FOXJ1 to inhibit the transcription factor NF-κB, which is itself known to have a role in the production of inflammatory cytokines. The current data indicate that modulation of the function of FOXJ1 might have important therapeutic implications for various inflammatory disorders.

REVIEW S

a
Cytoplasm
- PI3K
  - SGK
  - PKB
    - FOXO
      - Cyclin G2
      - p27
      - RBL2
      - Cyclin D
      - BIM
      - FASL
      - TRAIL
      - SOD2
      - Catalase
      - GADD45
Nucleus
Cell-cycle arrest
Apoptosis
Cell protection

b
PKB
SGK
IKK
P
P
P
FOXO1
T24
T32
T28?
FKH
S256
S319
S253
S315
S193
S258

c
- NF-κB
- ER
- Glucocorticoid receptor
- Progesterone receptor
- STAT3
- ER
- Retinoic acid
- Thyroid hormone
- SMAD3/SMAD4
FOXO
- PPAR-γ-C1α
- SMAD3/SMAD4
- FOXG1
- ER

Figure 5 | Regulation and function of FOXO transcription factors.
a | Forkhead box O (FOXO) transcription factors are regulated through direct phosphorylation by several intracellular kinases, including serum/glucocorticoid-regulated kinase (SGK), protein kinase B (PKB) and IKK (inhibitor of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) kinase). This results in inhibition of DNA binding and nuclear export (PKB and SGK) or targeting for proteasomal degradation (IKK), thereby preventing FOXO-mediated transcription. In resting, unstimulated cells, FOXO transcription factors are active and can modulate the expression of genes regulating diverse processes, including proliferation, apoptosis and response to cellular stress.
b | Schematic representation of the phosphorylation sites in FOXO and the respective kinases that mediate this phosphorylation. The identity of the phosphorylated amino acids and their locations are indicated for several members of the FOXO subfamily.
c | FOXO proteins have been shown to interact with a large variety of transcription factors. These interactions can result in activation or repression of either binding partner as indicated. BCL-6, B-cell lymphoma 6; BIM, BCL-2-interacting mediator of cell death; ER, oestrogen receptor; FASL, FAS ligand; FKH, forkhead DNA-binding domain; GADD45, growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible 45; PPAR-γ-C1α, peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor-γ co-activator 1α; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; RBL2, retinoblastoma-like 2; SMAD, mothers against decapentaplegic homologue; SOD2, superoxide dismutase 2; STAT3, signal transducer and activator of transcription 3; TNF, tumour-necrosis factor; TRAIL, TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand.

---

FOXOs and immune homeostasis

FOX transcription factors of the O class (FOXOs) have been the subject of a recent burst of research interest: first, because the *Caenorhabditis elegans* FOXO homologue DAF-16 seems to be an important regulator of longevity in this organism; and second, because FOXO1, **FOXO3A** and FOXO4 are regulated by the PI3K and **PKB** (also known as AKT) signalling pathway in mammalian cells (FIG. 5a). Several recent reviews have highlighted the role of DAF-16 or FOXOs in cellular signalling and disease<sup>51–53</sup>. Here, we restrict our discussion to recent advances in our understanding of the biological role of FOXO proteins in the immune system and, in particular, the regulation of these transcription factors in T and B cells.

FOXO proteins are ubiquitously expressed, but there is some tissue-specific expression of different isoforms. In many cell types, FOXO proteins might function in a redundant manner, and for *in vitro* studies, no clear functional differences between the isoforms have been reported with respect to gene regulation and cellular responses. Whereas FOXO1 is relatively ubiquitously expressed, recent reports indicate that FOXO3A is probably the main isoform that is expressed by cells of the immune system<sup>54</sup>. However, there have been no published studies that have carefully investigated the expression patterns of FOXOs in myeloid- and lymphoid-cell lineages. Here, we focus mainly on FOXO3A, but it is probable that other FOXO isoforms also have a role in the regulation of immune-cell function.

Despite the overlapping tissue expression, and the apparent redundancy of function *in vitro*, genetic loss of the different FOXOs does result in specific phenotypes. *Foxo3a*<sup>−/−</sup> mice provide a starting point for understanding the general roles of FOXOs that might be relevant to immune homeostasis. *Foxo3a*<sup>−/−</sup> mice were initially described to have a defect in ovarian function owing to the accelerated differentiation of ovarian follicles, which rapidly depletes the pool of these cells<sup>55</sup>. Primordial follicles can be regarded as being in a state of developmental arrest, and to maintain this arrest, FOXO3A seems to be required. In mammalian cells in culture, activation of FOXO3A also induces a reversible arrest in the G1 (gap 1) phase of the cell cycle<sup>56–58</sup>. To maintain this quiescent state, it is important that arrested cells can protect themselves against possible damaging insults, such as oxidative stress. In *C. elegans* and mammalian cells, the gene that encodes superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2; also known as MnSOD) — which is involved in protection against oxidative stress — is regulated by DAF-16 and FOXO3A, respectively, and it is required for maintaining quiescence<sup>59</sup>. Although *Foxo3a*<sup>−/−</sup> mice are initially healthy, after 8 months they develop lymphoproliferative disease with multi-organ infiltrates, resulting in

896 | NOVEMBER 2004 | VOLUME 4
©2004 Nature Publishing Group
www.nature.com/reviews/immunol

multisystem inflammation<sup>54</sup>: increased lymphocyte proliferation was evident in these animals, resulting in an enlarged spleen and lymph nodes. Furthermore, Lin *et al.* reported that FOXO3A activity was greatly reduced in T cells from SLE-prone mouse strains compared with non-autoimmune animals<sup>54</sup>. These data indicate that, *in vivo*, FOXO3A can regulate lymphocyte homeostasis, and the molecular mechanism underlying these observations is discussed next (FIG. 4).

Within the immune system, various cells can become reversibly arrested, being able to re-enter proliferation and/or differentiation programmes. A well-known example of this is anergic T cells<sup>60</sup>. Induction of T-cell anergy has been associated with increased expression of the cell-cycle inhibitor p27 (also known as KIP1)<sup>61</sup>. p27 is a direct transcriptional target of all FOXOs, indicating a possible role for FOXOs in the maintenance of this immune-unresponsive state<sup>58,62</sup>. Co-stimulation of T cells through cell-surface CD28 can block the induction of anergy, and ligation of CD28 has also been shown to both activate the PI3K–PKB signalling pathway (which is known to regulate FOXOs) and reduce p27 expression levels<sup>63</sup>. However, FOXOs have not been definitively determined to have a role in T-cell anergy, and it is unclear whether the observed events are crucial for co-stimulation through CD28 and reversal of the anergic state<sup>64</sup>. FOXO3A has also been shown to regulate cell division through a cyclin-G2-dependent mechanism<sup>65</sup>. Cyclin G2 inhibits cell-cycle progression, and it has been shown to have a role in maintaining the quiescent state of differentiated cells. In lymphocytes, cyclin G2 has been proposed to be an important negative regulator of proliferation: for example, it is upregulated during B-cell receptor (BCR)-mediated growth arrest<sup>66</sup>. Similar to p27, regulation of cyclin G2 expression by FOXO3A might be important in the regulation of lymphocyte anergy. It is also probable that FOXO-mediated induction of expression of stress-response genes (such as those encoding SOD2, catalase or GADD45) could help to maintain anergic T cells in a quiescent state without the acquisition of cellular damage.

The regulation of PROGRAMMED CELL DEATH has an important role in the homeostasis of the immune system. For example, the number of T cells that eventually enters the periphery is only a fraction of the total that is initially generated, and to enable fast and robust responses, the haematopoietic system is continuously counterbalancing stem-cell renewal and differentiation with apoptosis. During all stages of T- and B-cell development, lineage-specific survival factors and/or death-inducing factors are operating. Important survival factors such as IL-2 and IL-3 have been shown to inactivate FOXO3A through PI3K–PKB-mediated phosphorylation<sup>62,67</sup>, and activated FOXO3A has been shown to control the expression of several pro-apoptotic genes, including FAS ligand (also known as CD95 ligand), BCL-6 (B-cell lymphoma 6) and BIM (BCL-2-interacting mediator of cell death). For example, specific ligand-independent activation of FOXO3A is sufficient to induce BIM expression and to recapitulate all known elements of the apoptotic programme<sup>67</sup>. In T<sub>H</sub>2 cells,

co-stimulatory signals induced by ligation of CTLA4 can activate PI3K and result in the inhibition of FOXO3A, leading to increased cell survival<sup>68</sup>. Consistent with the role of the PI3K–PKB signalling pathway and FOXO-mediated signalling in balancing anti- and pro-apoptotic signalling in the immune system, respectively, expression of a HYPERMORPHIC PKB allele (known as gagPKB) by T cells results in increased lymphocyte survival, most probably owing to the upregulation of expression of BCL-X<sub>L</sub><sup>69</sup>. Interestingly, the FOXO target BCL-6 has been shown to function as a repressor of BCL-X<sub>L</sub> expression, so inactivation of FOXO in gagPKB-expressing T cells (through PKB-mediated phosphorylation) might relieve the inhibition of BCL-X<sub>L</sub> expression by BCL-6, thereby resulting in increased survival<sup>70</sup>. However, although deletion of *Foxo3a* results in increased lymphocyte proliferation, *Foxo3a*<sup>−/−</sup> lymphocytes have a surprising lack of apoptotic defects<sup>54</sup>. It is possible that FOXO3A is not a physiological regulator of lymphocyte apoptosis *in vivo*, but we think it is more probable that the lack of FOXO3A is compensated for by FOXO1, which can also regulate programmed cell death.

The nuclear exclusion and inhibition of FOXOs seems not to be mediated exclusively through PKB-mediated phosphorylation (FIG. 5b). A recent study found that IkB kinase-β (IKK-β) could also induce phosphorylation of FOXO3A, resulting in nuclear exclusion accompanied by proteasome-mediated degradation<sup>71</sup>. IKK-β has itself been implicated in various immune functions, including the maintenance of mature B cells<sup>72</sup>. Most of these functions have been attributed to the role of IKK-β in regulating NF-κB transcriptional activity, but it now seems that some of these functions might be mediated by FOXOs. There might also be a feedback loop between FOXOs and NF-κB. In *Foxo3a*<sup>−/−</sup> cells, NF-κB transcriptional activity is increased, indicating that FOXO3A expression might modulate NF-κB activity<sup>54</sup>. Although the molecular mechanism by which this could occur is unclear, in *Foxo3a*<sup>−/−</sup> cells, expression of some Ikβ isoforms (IkBβ and IkBε) is reduced. Alternatively, FOXO3A might regulate other proposed regulators of IkBβ and IkBε gene expression such as FOXJ1, although FOXJ1 has been shown to regulate IkBβ but not IkBε<sup>44</sup> (FIG. 4).

Until recently, most studies of FOXOs have been carried out using established T- or B-cell lines, and these studies might not accurately represent the situation *in vivo*. Recent studies are extending the established paradigms by using primary immune cells. Yusuf *et al.* have shown that the inactivation of FOXO1 and FOXO3A by PI3K–PKB signalling is functionally important in BCR-triggered proliferation of primary B cells<sup>73</sup>. Consistent with this, they also observed regulation of several known FOXO target genes — those encoding retinoblastoma-like 2 (RBL2; also known as p130) and cyclin G2 — through BCR signalling. Finally, although most studies of FOXO function in the immune system have focused on the T- and B-cell lineages of the haematopoietic compartment, FOXO function is not restricted to these lineages. During erythroid differentiation of the p53-deficient I/11 erythroid cell line,

BCR-ABL
A tyrosine-kinase oncogene. The Abelson leukaemia-virus protein (ABL) is fused with the breakpoint-cluster region (BCR) in the Philadelphia-chromosome translocation found in chronic myeloid leukaemia.

increased expression and nuclear localization of FOXO3A is observed, indicating that FOXO3A activation is required for erythropoiesis. In these I/11 cells, FOXO3A regulates expression of B-cell translocation gene 1 (*BTG1*), which encodes an arginine methyltransferase<sup>74</sup>. The precise molecular targets of this methyltransferase activity and their potential role in erythropoiesis remain unclear at present.

Taken together, the studies discussed here start to provide a basis for our understanding of the PI3K–PKB signalling module and the role of FOXO inactivation in the immune system. Central to this is the reciprocal effect of FOXO and PI3K–PKB on cell-cycle progression and survival, which allows regulated switching between an arrested state and a proliferative state by extracellular signals. Importantly, in immune cells, it seems that FOXO3A activity tends to be inversely correlated with cellular activation.

### FOX hunting: the future of forkhead

The importance of FOX transcription factors in the immune system is highlighted not only by the various null-mutant mice described here but also by the linkage of different FOX proteins to specific disease phenotypes. The autoimmune disorder of scurfy mice and patients with IPEX results from mutations in the gene encoding FOXP3, and mice with a *Foxj1*<sup>−/−</sup> lymphoid system have systemic autoimmune inflammation. In addition, nude mice lack *Foxn1*, and a human equivalent of this nude phenotype has also been described<sup>75</sup>. But what about FOXOs? Spontaneous autoimmune disease and T-cell hyperactivity were observed in *Foxo3a*<sup>−/−</sup> animals, and diminished FOXO3A activity was found in SLE-prone strains of mice<sup>54</sup>. So far, no diseases have been directly linked to mutations in specific FOXO transcription factors, perhaps owing to their more generalized function in the regulation of cellular proliferation and survival. However, a recent study showed that, in an *in vitro* model of acute myeloid leukaemia, constitutive inhibition of FOXO3A promotes cellular proliferation, inhibits apoptosis and blocks the differentiation of transformed cells<sup>76</sup>. Similarly, BCR-ABL-induced loss of FOXO3A function has been proposed to be involved in the oncogenic transformation that occurs in chronic myeloid leukaemia, partially through downregulation of expression of the cell-cycle inhibitor p27 (REF. 77). FOXOs themselves could be considered potential tumour suppressors, with an inhibitory mutation possibly contributing to neoplasia. So far, no such role has been described, but future studies might identify disease-causing mutations in members of the FOXO subfamily that are similar to those found for other FOX transcription factors.

Although studies have focused on the regulation of FOX function and the generation of null-mutant mice, little is known about the specific target genes of these proteins. Owing to the general function of FOXO proteins in the regulation of cell survival and proliferation of various cell types, several FOXO-regulated genes have now been identified. However, for FOXP3, FOXN1 and FOXJ1, the identification of target genes is still in its infancy. This is a crucial step for fully appreciating the important function of these transcription factors in regulating immune homeostasis.

FOX proteins can function as monomeric transcription factors and hetero- or homodimerization is not required for DNA-binding specificity. However, studies using FOXO mutants that can no longer bind DNA have indicated that FOXOs can also regulate transcription indirectly<sup>78</sup>. In support of this, several transcription factors have recently been proposed to bind FOXOs with specific functional consequences (FIG. 5c). FOXP3 contains a leucine-zipper dimerization domain, indicating that it can also associate with accessory molecules. Furthermore, a point mutation in this region was found in a family with IPEX, indicating that it is indeed crucial for normal FOXP3 function<sup>15</sup>. The hunt for FOX-associated proteins is likely to be crucial for clarifying the molecular mechanisms underlying the diverse functions of the FOX proteins.

In the past few years, we have started to fully appreciate the importance of this large family of FOX transcription factors for immune homeostasis. The evolutionary conservation and diverse biological functions of the family members highlight the importance of these proteins in developmental processes. With a greater understanding of the molecular mechanisms that regulate FOX activity and the identification of specific target genes, the design of targeted therapies for immune disorders that directly affect FOX function might become a reality.

---

1. Kaufmann, E. & Knochel, W. Five years on the wings of fork head. *Mech. Dev.* **57**, 3–20 (1996).
2. Weigel, D., Jurgens, G., Kuttner, F., Seifert, E. & Jackle, H. The homeotic gene *fork head* encodes a nuclear protein and is expressed in the terminal regions of the *Drosophila* embryo. *Cell* **57**, 645–658 (1989).
3. Lai, E., Prezioso, V. R., Smith, E., Litvin, O., Costa, R. H. & Darnell, J. E. HNF-3A, a hepatocyte-enriched transcription factor of novel structure is regulated transcriptionally. *Genes Dev.* **4**, 1427–1436 (1990).
4. Kaestner, K. H., Knochel, W. & Martinez, D. E. Unified nomenclature for the winged helix/forkhead transcription factors. *Genes Dev.* **14**, 142–146 (2000).
5. Clark, K. L., Halay, E. D., Lai, E. & Burley, S. K. Co-crystal structure of the HNF-3/fork head DNA-recognition motif resembles histone H5. *Nature* **364**, 412–420 (1993).
6. Lehmann, O. J., Sowden, J. C., Carlsson, P., Jordan, T. & Bhattacharya, S. S. Fox's in development and disease. *Trends Genet.* **19**, 339–344 (2003).
7. Maloy, K. J. & Powrie, F. Regulatory T cells in the control of immune pathology. *Nature Immunol.* **2**, 816–822 (2001).
8. Shevach, E. M. CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup> suppressor T cells: more questions than answers *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **2**, 389–400 (2002).
9. Blair, P. J. *et al.* CD4<sup>+</sup>CD8<sup>−</sup> T cells are the effector cells in disease pathogenesis in the scurfy (*sf*) mouse. *J. Immunol.* **153**, 3764–3774 (1994).
10. Godfrey, V. L., Wilkinson, J. E., Rinchik, E. M. & Russell, L. B. Fatal lymphoreticular disease in the scurfy (*sf*) mouse requires T cells that mature in a *sf* thymic environment: potential model for thymic education. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **88**, 5528–5532 (1991).
11. Brunkow, M. E. *et al.* Disruption of a new forkhead/winged-helix protein, scurfin, results in the fatal lymphoproliferative disorder of the scurfy mouse. *Nature Genet.* **27**, 68–73 (2001). This study identified the gene that is defective in scurfy mice by combining high-resolution genetic and physical mapping with large-scale sequence analysis.
12. Ramsdell, F. *Foxp3* and natural regulatory T cells: key to a cell lineage? *Immunity* **19**, 165–168 (2003).
13. Wildin, R. S. *et al.* X-linked neonatal diabetes mellitus, enteropathy and endocrinopathy syndrome is the human equivalent of mouse scurfy. *Nature Genet.* **27**, 18–20 (2001).
14. Bennett, C. L. *et al.* The immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked syndrome (IPEX) is caused by mutations of *FOXP3*. *Nature Genet.* **27**, 20–21 (2001).
15. Chatila, T. A. *et al.* *JM2*, encoding a fork head-related protein, is mutated in X-linked autoimmunity-allergic disregulation syndrome. *J. Clin. Invest.* **106**, R75–R81 (2000).
16. Fontenot, J. D., Gavin, M. A. & Rudensky, A. Y. *Foxp3* programs the development and function of CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup> regulatory T cells. *Nature Immunol.* **4**, 330–336 (2003).

Genetic complementation showed that the protein product of *Foxp3* is essential for normal immune homeostasis.

17. Hori, S., Nomura, T. & Sakaguchi, S. Control of regulatory T cell development by the transcription factor Foxp3. Science 299, 1057–1061 (2003). References 16 and 17 showed that FOXP3 is specifically expressed by CD4+CD25+ T<sub>Reg</sub> cells and is required for their development. Furthermore, expression of FOXP3 was found to confer suppressor function on peripheral CD4+CD25− T cells. In addition, reference 17 showed that FOXP3, which encodes a transcription factor that is genetically defective in an autoimmune and inflammatory syndrome in humans and mice, is specifically expressed by naturally arising CD4+ regulatory T cells.

18. Khattri, R. *et al.* The amount of scurfin protein determines peripheral T cell number and responsiveness. J. Immunol. 167, 6312–6320 (2001).

19. Asseman, C., Mauze, S., Leach, M. W., Coffman, R. L. & Powrie, F. An essential role for interleukin 10 in the function of regulatory T cells that inhibit intestinal inflammation. J. Exp. Med. 190, 995–1004 (1999).

20. Schubert, L. A., Jeffery, E., Zhang, Y., Ramsdell, F. & Ziegler, S. F. Scurfin (FOXP3) acts as a repressor of transcription and regulates T cell activation. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 37672–37679 (2001).

21. Walker, M. R. *et al.* Induction of FoxP3 and acquisition of T regulatory activity by stimulated human CD4+CD25− T cells. J. Clin. Invest. 112, 1437–1443 (2003).

22. Baecher-Allan, C., Brown, J. A., Freeman, G. J. & Hafler, D. A. CD4+CD25<sup>hi</sup> regulatory cells in human peripheral blood. J. Immunol. 167, 1245–1253 (2001).

23. Nakamura, K., Kitani, A. & Strober, W. Cell contact-dependent immunosuppression by CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells is mediated by cell surface-bound transforming growth factor β. J. Exp. Med. 194, 629–644 (2001).

24. Chen, W. *et al.* Conversion of peripheral CD4+CD25− naive T cells to CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells by TGF-β induction of transcription factor Foxp3. J. Exp. Med. 198, 1875–1886 (2003).

25. Fantini, M. C. *et al.* TGF-β induces a regulatory phenotype in CD4+CD25− T cells through Foxp3 induction and down-regulation of Smad7. J. Immunol. 172, 5149–5153 (2004). This study showed that TGF-β induces a regulatory phenotype in CD4+CD25− T cells through the induction of FOXP3 expression, which can subsequently inhibit SMAD7 and thereby activate a positive autoregulatory loop of TGF-β signalling.

26. Peng, Y., Laouar, Y., Li, M. O., Green, E. A. & Flavell, R. A. TGF-β regulates in vivo expansion of Foxp3-expressing CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells responsible for protection against diabetes. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 4572–4577 (2004).

27. Mamura, M. *et al.* CD28 disruption exacerbates inflammation in Tgf-β1<sup>−/−</sup> mice: in vivo suppression by CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells independent of autocrine TGF-β1. Blood 103, 4594–4601 (2004).

28. Polanczyk, M. J. *et al.* Estrogen drives expansion of the CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cell compartment. J. Immunol. 173, 2227–2230 (2004).

29. Blackburn, C. C. & Manley, N. R. Developing a new paradigm for thymus organogenesis. Nature Rev. Immunol. 4, 278–289 (2004).

30. Nehls, M., Pfeifer, D., Schorpp, M., Hedrich, H. & Boehm, T. New member of the winged-helix protein family disrupted in mouse and rat nude mutations. Nature 372, 103–107 (1994).

31. Bleul, C. C. & Boehm, T. Laser capture microdissection-based expression profiling identifies PD1-ligand as a target of the nude locus gene product. Eur. J. Immunol. 31, 2497–2503 (2001).

32. Nishimura, H., Honjo, T. & Minato, N. Facilitation of β selection and modification of positive selection in the thymus of PD-1-deficient mice. J. Exp. Med. 191, 891–898 (2000).

33. Balcıunaite, G. *et al.* Wnt glycoproteins regulate the expression of FoxN1, the gene defective in nude mice. Nature Immunol. 3, 1102–1108 (2002). This paper reported that secreted WNT glycoproteins expressed by TECs and thymocytes can regulate FOXN1 expression in the epithelium through both autocrine and paracrine mechanisms.

34. Tsai, P. T., Lee, R. A. & Wu, H. BMP4 acts upstream of FGF in modulating thymic stroma and regulating thymopoiesis. Blood 102, 3947–3953 (2003).

35. Staal, F. J. & Clevers, H. C. Wnt signaling in the thymus. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 15, 204–208 (2003).

36. Baxter, R. M. & Brissette, J. L. Role of the nude gene in epithelial terminal differentiation. J. Invest. Dermatol. 118, 303–309 (2002).

37. Su, D. M., Navarre, S., Oh, W. J., Condie, B. G. & Manley, N. R. A domain of Foxn1 required for crosstalk-dependent thymic epithelial cell differentiation. Nature Immunol. 4, 1128–1135 (2003).

38. Schlake, T., Schorpp, M. and Boehm, T. Formation of regulator/target gene relationships during evolution. Gene 256, 29–34 (2000).

39. Hackett, B. P. *et al.* Primary structure of hepatocyte nuclear factor/forkhead homologue 4 and characterization of gene expression in the developing respiratory and reproductive epithelium. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92, 4249–4253 (1995).

40. Clevidence, D. E. *et al.* Members of the HNF-3/forkhead family of transcription factors exhibit distinct cellular expression patterns in lung and regulate the surfactant protein B promoter. Dev. Biol. 166, 195–209 (1994).

41. Lim, L., Zhou, H. & Costa, R. H. The winged helix transcription factor HFH-4 is expressed during choroid plexus epithelial development in the mouse embryo. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 3094–3099 (1997).

42. Chen, J., Knowles, H. J., Hebert, J. L. & Hackett, B. P. Mutation of the mouse hepatocyte nuclear factor/forkhead homologue 4 gene results in an absence of cilia and random left-right asymmetry. J. Clin. Invest. 102, 1077–1082 (1998).

43. Brody, S. L., Yan, X. H., Wuerffel, M. K., Song, S. K. & Shapiro, S. D. Ciliogenesis and left-right axis defects in forkhead factor HFH-4-null mice. Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 23, 45–51 (2000).

44. Lin, L., Spoor, M. S., Gerth, A. J., Brody, S. L. & Peng, S. L. Modulation of T<sub>H</sub>1 activation and inflammation by the NF-κB repressor Foxj1. Science 303, 1017–1020 (2004). This study showed that FOXJ1 can inhibit NF-κB signalling through induction of IκB proteins. These results indicate that FOXJ1 might modulate inflammatory reactions and prevent autoimmunity by antagonizing the transcription of genes that encode pro-inflammatory cytokines.

45. Rao, A., Luo, C. & Hogan, P. G. Transcription factors of the NFAT family: regulation and function. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 15, 707–747 (1997).

46. Li, Q. & Verma, I. M. NF-κB regulation in the immune system. Nature Rev. Immunol. 2, 725–734 (2002).

47. Kojima, H. *et al.* An essential role for NF-κB in IL-18-induced IFN-γ expression in KG-1 cells. J. Immunol. 162, 5063–5069 (1999).

48. Brody, S. L., Hackett, B. P. & White, R. A. Structural characterization of the mouse *Hfh4* gene, a developmentally regulated forkhead family member. Genomics 45, 509–518 (1997).

49. Schade, A. E. & Levine, A. D. Extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1/2 function as integrators of TCR signal strength. J. Immunol. 172, 5828–5832 (2004).

50. Jorritsma, P. J., Brogdon, J. L. & Bottomly, K. Role of TCR-induced extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation in the regulation of early IL-4 expression in naive CD4+ T cells. J. Immunol. 170, 2427–2434 (2003).

51. Burgering, B. M. & Medema, R. H. Decisions on life and death: FOXO forkhead transcription factors are in command when PKB/Akt is off duty. J. Leukoc. Biol. 73, 689–701 (2003).

52. Birkenkamp, K. U. & Coffer, P. J. FOXO transcription factors as regulators of immune homeostasis: molecules to die for? J. Immunol. 171, 1623–1629 (2003).

53. Accili, D. & Arden, K. C. FoxOs at the crossroads of cellular metabolism, differentiation, and transformation. Cell 117, 421–426 (2004).

54. Lin, L., Hron, J. D. & Peng, S. L. Regulation of NF-κB, T<sub>H</sub> activation, and autoinflammation by the forkhead transcription factor Foxo3a. Immunity 21, 203–213 (2004). This was the first study that identified a role for FOXO transcription factors in immune homeostasis in vivo. FOXO3A can inhibit NF-κB activation and maintain T-cell tolerance through an undefined mechanism.

55. Castrillon, D. H., Miao, L., Kollipara, R., Horner, J. W. & DePinho, R. A. Suppression of ovarian follicle activation in mice by the transcription factor Foxo3a. Science 301, 215–218 (2003).

56. Medema, R. H., Kops, G. J., Bos, J. L. & Burgering, B. M. AFX-like forkhead transcription factors mediate cell-cycle regulation by Ras and PKB through p27<sup>Kip1</sup>. Nature 404, 782–787 (2000). This paper showed that FOXO transcription factors can directly modulate proliferation.

57. Kops, G. J. *et al.* Control of cell cycle exit and entry by protein kinase B-regulated forkhead transcription factors. Mol. Cell. Biol. 22, 2025–2036 (2002).

58. Dijkers, P. F. *et al.* Forkhead transcription factor FKHR-L1 modulates cytokine-dependent transcriptional regulation of p27<sup>KIP1</sup>. Mol. Cell. Biol. 20, 9138–9148 (2000).

59. Kops, G. J. *et al.* Forkhead transcription factor FOXO3a protects quiescent cells from oxidative stress. Nature 419, 316–321 (2002).

60. Schwartz, R. H. T cell anergy. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 21, 305–334 (2003).

61. Jackson, S. K., DeLoose, A. & Gilbert, K. M. Induction of anergy in T<sub>H</sub>1 cells associated with increased levels of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p21<sup>Cip1</sup> and p27<sup>Kip1</sup>. J. Immunol. 166, 952–958 (2001).

62. Stahl, M. *et al.* The forkhead transcription factor FoxO regulates transcription of p27<sup>Kip1</sup> and *Bim* in response to IL-2. J. Immunol. 168, 5024–5031 (2002).

63. Appelman, L. J., van Puijenbroek, A. A., Shu, K. M., Nadler, L. M. & Boussiotis, V. A. CD28 costimulation mediates down-regulation of p27<sup>Kip1</sup> and cell cycle progression by activation of the PI3K/PKB signaling pathway in primary human T cells. J. Immunol. 168, 2729–2736 (2002).

64. Okkenhaug, K., Bilancio, A., Emery, J. L. & Vanhaesebroeck, B. Phosphoinositide 3-kinase in T cell activation and survival. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 32, 332–335 (2004).

65. Martinez-Gac, L., Marques, M., Garcia, Z., Campanero, M. R. & Carrera, A. C. Control of cyclin G2 mRNA expression by forkhead transcription factors: mechanism for cell cycle control by phosphoinositide 3-kinase and forkhead. Mol. Cell. Biol. 24, 2181–2189 (2004).

66. Horne, M. C. *et al.* Cyclin G2 is up-regulated during growth inhibition and B cell antigen receptor-mediated cell cycle arrest. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 12650–12661 (1997).

67. Dijkers, P. F. *et al.* FKHR-L1 can act as a critical effector of cell death induced by cytokine withdrawal: protein kinase B-enhanced cell survival through maintenance of mitochondrial integrity. J. Cell Biol. 156, 531–542 (2002). This paper showed that activation of FOXO3A alone can recapitulate all known elements of the apoptotic programme that are normally induced in lymphocytes by cytokine withdrawal.

68. Pandiyan, P. *et al.* CD152 (CTLA-4) determines the unequal resistance of T<sub>H</sub>1 and T<sub>H</sub>2 cells against activation-induced cell death by a mechanism requiring PI3 kinase function. J. Exp. Med. 199, 831–842 (2004).

69. Jones, R. G. *et al.* Protein kinase B regulates T lymphocyte survival, nuclear factor κB activation, and Bcl-X<sub>L</sub> levels in vivo. J. Exp. Med. 191, 1721–1734 (2000).

70. Tang, T. T. *et al.* The forkhead transcription factor AFX activates apoptosis by induction of the BCL-6 transcriptional repressor. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 14255–14265 (2002).

71. Hu, M. C. *et al.* IkB kinase promotes tumorigenesis through inhibition of forkhead FOXO3a. Cell 117, 225–237 (2004).

72. Pasparakis, M., Schmidt-Supprian, M. & Rajewsky, K. IkB kinase signaling is essential for maintenance of mature B cells. J. Exp. Med. 196, 743–752 (2002).

73. Yusuf, I., Zhu, X., Kharas, M. G., Chen, J. & Fruman, D. A. Optimal B-cell proliferation requires phosphoinositide 3-kinase-dependent inactivation of FOXO transcription factor. Blood 104, 784–787 (2004).

74. Bakker, W. J. *et al.* FoxO3a regulates erythroid differentiation and induces BTG1, an activator of protein arginine methyl transferase 1. J. Cell Biol. 164, 175–184 (2004).

75. Frank, J. *et al.* Exposing the human nude phenotype. Nature 398, 473–474 (1999).

76. Scheijen, B., Ngo, H. T., Kang, H. & Griffin, J. D. FLT3 receptors with internal tandem duplications promote cell viability and proliferation by signaling through Foxo proteins. Oncogene 23, 3338–3349 (2004).

77. Komatsu, N. *et al.* A member of Forkhead transcription factor FKHLR1 is a downstream effector of STI571-induced cell cycle arrest in BCR-ABL-expressing cells. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 6411–6419 (2003).

78. Ramaswamy, S., Nakamura, N., Sansal, I., Bergeron, L. & Sellers, W. R. A novel mechanism of gene regulation and tumor suppression by the transcription factor FKHR. Cancer Cell 2, 81–91 (2002).

79. Carlsson, P. & Mahlapuu, M. Forkhead transcription factors: key players in development and metabolism. Dev. Biol. 250, 1–23 (2002).

Competing interests statement

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Online links

DATABASES

The following terms in this article are linked online to:

Entrez Gene:

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene

FOXJ1 | FOXN1 | FOXO3A | FOXP3 | IKK | PKB | PI3K | SMAD7 | TGF-β

FURTHER INFORMATION

Paul Coffer's laboratory: http://www.pulmoscience.org

Boudewijn Burgering's laboratory: http://www.ruummc.med.uu.nl/

Access to this interactive links box is free online.
