
NEWS AND VIEWS

# Doing more with less in bacterial DNA repair

Geoffrey R Weller, Vicky L Brandt & David B Roth

Organisms such as yeast and humans are capable of both nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ) and homologous recombination (HR), but bacteria have typically been assumed to be capable only of HR. A recent study shows that mycobacteria accomplish NHEJ using just two proteins (homologs of the eukaryotic Ku and DNA ligase IV), whereas eukaryotes require many factors.

> Everything is simpler than you think and at the same time more complex than you imagine.
>
> Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

It is almost an article of faith among scientists that, all things being equal, simpler theories are better. Perhaps this is because nature is thought to use Occam’s razor with as much zeal as theoreticians. But defining simplicity is not itself a simple matter. Prokaryotic cells, for instance, are typically said to be less complex than their eukaryotic counterparts, as they frequently use one protein where a eukaryote would use two or three. A recent study by Della *et al.*¹ in *Science* indicates that this is the case for DNA repair by nonhomologous end-joining in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Yet the prokaryotic proteins themselves take on an astonishing variety of tasks. Is this system simpler or more complex?

## The not-so-simple problem of DNA breaks

A DNA break in a chromosome of any organism must be repaired correctly if the cell is to survive. Improper repair can lead to malignancy or cell death; even one unrepaired double-strand break (DSB) in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* is sufficient to kill the cell². Given such danger, organisms have developed multiple DNA repair pathways. Two major pathways have evolved to deal with DSBs specifically: HR, which uses a region of DNA homologous to that surrounding the break site as a template for repair, and NHEJ, which ‘simply’ ligates the two broken ends back together. As NHEJ uses no template and the ends of a DSB are often noncomplementary, NHEJ can add or subtract nucleotides during end-processing, giving rise to the common perception that NHEJ is a mutagenic form of DNA repair. Despite the relative imprecision

The authors are at the Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine and Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, 540 First Avenue, New York, New York 10016, USA.  
e-mail: roth@saturn.med.nyu.edu

tain highly similar active sites⁷ and that changing key residues in the active site can alter the nucleotide preference of a primase-polymerase dramatically⁸. Della *et al.*¹ established that Mt-Lig is capable of adding NTPs and dNTPs in both a template-dependent and independent manner, indicating that the putative primase actually exhibits both primase and DNA polymerase activity. The authors then evaluated the ability of Mt-Lig to join oligonucleotide substrates *in vitro* in assays similar to those described by Chen *et al.*⁹ and showed that, on its own, Mt-Lig can both fill in gapped regions and join ends.

Mt-Lig also contains a putative nuclease domain much like *Escherichia coli* exonuclease III¹⁰. Della *et al.*¹ found that this exonuclease domain is indeed functional: Mt-Lig can remove an incompatible 3′ flap from an end. Thus, this single multifunctional enzyme can repair complex end structures—removing noncomplementary extensions, filling in gaps and repairing the nicks—a remarkable achievement considering the number of individual proteins required for these tasks in eukaryotic NHEJ. Della *et al.*¹ carried out *in vitro* plasmid repair assays using substrates digested with two restriction enzymes that would generate incompatible ends. In the majority of cases the junctions formed by Mt-Lig occurred with minimal nucleotide loss, as predicted. Thus it seems that one of the roles of Mt-Ku is to protect free DNA ends from excessive degradation before joining: addition of increasing amounts of Mt-Ku abrogated degradation of the oligonucleotide and plasmid substrates and enhanced joining, as previously observed⁶.

Doherty and co-workers⁶ had initially shown that the putative primase-polymerase domain of Mt-Lig bore the closest homology to the eukaryotic primase protein, which is responsible for generating the RNA primer on the lagging strand during DNA synthesis. This seems counterintuitive: why would a domain involved in DNA metabolism be best suited to generating RNA primers? The answer lies in the fact that primases and family X polymerases contain highly similar active sites⁷ and that changing key residues in the active site can alter the nucleotide preference of a primase-polymerase dramatically⁸. Della *et al.*¹ established that Mt-Lig is capable of adding NTPs and dNTPs in both a template-dependent and independent manner, indicating that the putative primase actually exhibits both primase and DNA polymerase activity. The authors then evaluated the ability of Mt-Lig to join oligonucleotide substrates *in vitro* in assays similar to those described by Chen *et al.*⁹ and showed that, on its own, Mt-Lig can both fill in gapped regions and join ends.

Della *et al.*¹ next moved their studies *in vivo* and showed that Mt-Lig and Mt-Ku could rescue the joining-deficient phenotype of NHEJ-deficient yeast cells. This result is remarkable for two reasons. First, it is unusual for bacterial proteins to efficiently replace the function of their eukaryotic homologs. This suggests that NHEJ is a truly ancient and fundamental mechanism of DNA repair. Second, these results show that a prokaryotic NHEJ system

NEWS AND VIEWS

bacteria identified as containing NHEJ machinery are either pathogenic or symbiotic.

The work by Della *et al.*<sup>1</sup> builds on previous studies<sup>6,14</sup> to form a cohesive picture of NHEJ in bacteria. It also provides an opportunity to elucidate the process of end-joining and assess the decisions that are made when two incompatible ends must be ligated. As we begin to understand how such decisions are made, we may begin to understand how the process can go awry. An understanding of this process may well provide insight into the cause of cancer.

We often consider bacteria to be simple because they are unicellular, but their evolutionary capacity far exceeds that of ‘more complex’ organisms such as ourselves<sup>15</sup>; they are, in a sense, greatly our evolutionary superiors. It is also compelling to consider the dexterity of the mycobacterial proteins in light of the apparently simpler (or at least more specialized) eukaryotic cousins—the mycobacterial NHEJ proteins act more like artisanal craftsmen than laborers on an assembly line. And perhaps that has been the flaw in our conception of NHEJ: further studies will probably reveal greater complexity than we have ever imagined.

1. Della, M. *et al.* Science **306**, 683–685 (2004).
2. Critchlow, S.E. & Jackson, S.P. Trends Biochem. Sci. **23**, 394–398 (1998).
3. Roth, D.B. Nat. Rev. Immunol. **3**, 656–666 (2003).
4. Aravind, L. & Koonin, E.V. Genome Res. **11**, 1365–1374 (2001).
5. Doherty, A.J., Jackson, S.P. & Weller, G.R. FEBS Lett. **500**, 186–188 (2001).
6. Weller, G.R. *et al.* Science **297**, 1686–1689 (2002).
7. Arezi, B. & Kuchta, R.D. Trends Biochem. Sci. **25**, 572–576 (2000).
8. Nick McElhinny, S.A. & Ramsden, D.A. Mol. Cell. Biol. **23**, 2309–2315 (2003).
9. Chen, S. *et al.* J. Biol. Chem. **276**, 24323–24330 (2001).
10. Weller, G.R. & Doherty, A.J. FEBS Lett. **505**, 340–342 (2001).
11. Downs, J.A., Lowndes, N.F. & Jackson, S.P. Nature **408**, 1001–1004 (2000).
12. Daniel, R. *et al.* J. Virol. **78**, 8573–8581 (2004).
13. Li, L. *et al.* EMBO J. **20**, 3272–3281 (2001).
14. Gong, C., Martins, A., Bongiorno, P., Glickman, M. & Shuman, S. J. Biol. Chem. **279**, 20594–20606 (2004).
15. Whitman, W.B., Coleman, D.C. & Wiebe, W.J. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **95**, 6578–6583 (1998).

Figure 1 The process of nonhomologous end-joining in eukaryotes and prokaryotes is similar, but remarkably, prokaryotes accomplish these multiple steps with only two proteins. The current working model for end-joining in eukaryotes holds that the Ku70–Ku80 heterodimer encircles a broken end, then recruits DNA-PKcs and perhaps other factors such as the end-modifying enzyme terminal transferase. Activated DNA-PKcs recruits Artemis and the Mre11 complex to process ends (for example, removing 3′ or 5′ flaps); once the DNA ends are trimmed, single-strand gaps resulting either directly from the initial breakage or from the trimming process need to be filled in by polymerases such as Pol Mu. XRCC4 may bind directly to DNA or be recruited by Ku; ligation is carried out by DNA ligase IV, which binds to XRCC4; additional unidentified factors also seem to be necessary for ligation. In contrast to this veritable army of factors for eukaryotic NHEJ, only two proteins—albeit with quite distinct functional domains—are needed for mycobacterial NHEJ.

can function in the context of chromatin. Eukaryotic DNA repair acts on chromatinized templates, and repair pathways such as NHEJ are thought to have evolved specialized mechanisms for dealing with chromatin structure<sup>11</sup>. The observation that a prokaryotic repair enzyme functions capably in yeast is therefore quite surprising.

### Clues to complexity

The presence of NHEJ in bacteria raises several basic questions about DNA repair. It is clearly essential to life, so it would seem reasonable for any organism to have a primary means of repair and at least one backup pathway. The assumption prior to 2002 was that eukaryotes, being more complex, developed NHEJ as a backup system. Now that we know

NATURE STRUCTURAL & MOLECULAR BIOLOGY VOLUME 11 NUMBER 12 DECEMBER 2004 1159
