
NETRIN-1 AND ITS RECEPTORS  
IN TUMORIGENESIS  

**Hirofumi Arakawa**

Abstract | Netrin-1 and its receptors DCC (deleted in colorectal cancer) and the UNC5 orthologues (human UNC5A–D and rodent UNC5H1–4) define a new mechanism for both the positive (induction) and negative (suppression) regulation of apoptosis. Accumulating evidence implies that for human cancers, this positive signalling pathway is frequently inactivated. Surprisingly, binding of netrin-1 to its receptors inhibits tumour suppressor p53-dependent apoptosis, and p53 is directly involved in transcriptional regulation of netrin-1 and its receptors. So, the netrin-1 receptor pathways probably play an important part in tumorigenesis.

The gene encoding the netrin-receptor **DCC** was originally isolated as a candidate tumour-suppressor gene on human chromosome 18q21 — one allele of **DCC** being frequently deleted in **colorectal** cancer¹. Subsequently, many studies challenged the candidacy of **DCC** as a tumour-suppressor gene because of its low mutation frequency in cancer, the absence of a cancer-predisposition phenotype in *Dcc*-heterozygous mice², and the existence of other tumour-suppressor genes at the 18q21 locus. Moreover, **DCC** was shown to be a netrin receptor, thereby implicating it in axon guidance in neural tissues³ (BOX 1). So, most studies of **DCC** focused on aspects of its involvement in neural development and differentiation⁴⁵. The debate seemed to have faded out⁶⁷, but interest in this issue has recently been revived as a result of a report by Mehlen and colleagues that shows the conditional regulation of apoptosis by **DCC**⁸. Emerging evidence strongly indicates new roles for **DCC** and its related axon guidance molecules in tumorigenesis. Furthermore, the tumour suppressor p53 seems to be involved in the regulation of the netrin-1 and netrin-receptor pathways.

secreted molecules, whereas ephrins and other semaphorins are expressed at the cell surface. Several transmembrane receptors have been identified for each of these ligands, including **DCC**, neogenin and UNC5H (rodent and human UNC5 proteins) for netrins; roundabout receptors for slits; neuropilin and plexin for semaphorins; and Eph receptors for ephrins. The following genes show genetic and epigenetic alterations in a number of cancers: **NTN1**, **DCC**, the UNC5H family of genes, **SEMA3B** (semaphorin 3B), **SEMA3F**, **SLIT2**, **ROBO1** (roundabout-1) and **EPHB2**. This implies that all four pathways involved in axon guidance can become inactivated in the tumorigenic process.

**Netrin-1. NTN1** encodes the laminin-related secreted protein netrin-1 (REF.9). Netrins were initially identified by the genetic analysis of nematode mutants with defects in the *unc-6* gene¹⁰,¹¹. These animals have defects in the guidance of COMMISSURAL and motor axons. Netrin-1 is the vertebrate homologue of UNC-6, implying that it functions as a chemotropic molecule that mediates axon outgrowth, axon orientation or neuronal migration in neuronal development⁹,¹²–¹⁴. Because of its association with **DCC**, the role of netrin-1 in tumorigenesis is also of interest. Two papers have addressed this and demonstrate alterations of **NTN1** in human cancers (TABLE 1). First, the expression of human **NTN1** is markedly reduced or absent in ~50% of brain tumours and neuroblastomas,

**COMMISSURAL AXONS**  
Neurons that cross from one side  
of the body to the other.

**Cancer Medicine and**  
**Biophysics Division,**  
**National Cancer Center,**  
**5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku,**  
**Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.**  
e-mail: harakawa@  
gan2.res.ncc.go.jp  
doi:10.1038/nrc1504

**Alterations of axon guidance molecules**  
The guidance of axons to their targets in the developing nervous system is mediated by the action of highly conserved families of attracting and repulsing guidance signals, including the netrins, slits, semaphorins and ephrins. Netrins, slits and some semaphorins are

Summary

- Axon guidance molecules are frequently inactivated in various human cancers. In particular, the netrin-1 receptors DCC and the UNC5H family are downregulated in more than half of all colorectal cancers.
- DCC and the UNC5H proteins regulate apoptosis; positively in the absence of netrin-1, or negatively in the presence of netrin-1. This is designated as the ‘dependence receptor’ concept.
- DCC-induced apoptosis defines a novel apoptotic pathway that is dependent on caspase activation, but independent of both the mitochondrial- and death-receptor-mediated apoptotic pathways.
- The netrin-1-mediated anti-apoptotic signal that inhibits p53-induced apoptosis implies that NTN1 (which encodes netrin-1) could function as an oncogene.
- A netrin-1 gradient is evident in normal colonic epithelium, with highest expression in the crypts and lowest expression in the upper portion of the villi, correlating with the pattern of cell survival and death in this tissue.
- NTN1-transgenic mice have reduced apoptosis of intestinal epithelial cells, leading to an increase in the spontaneous formation of hyperplasia and adenoma.
- The tumour suppressor p53 regulates the expression of netrin-1 and some of its receptors. Therefore, p53 might determine cell fate through regulation of the netrin-1 pathway.

been reported in colorectal cancer, raising doubts that $DCC$ is a tumour-suppressor gene. A small number of $DCC$ mutations have been identified in colorectal ${ }^{1,19}$, testicular ${ }^{20}$ and pancreatic ${ }^{21}$ cancers, including homozygous deletions and point mutations. One possible reason for low frequency of somatic mutations in $DCC$ is that most colorectal cancers fail to express an intact $DCC$ transcript, which might complicate $DCC$ mutational analysis — mutations leading to loss of expression are not necessarily limited to the coding portions of $DCC$. In colorectal cancer, the most common somatic mutation in $DCC$ is a 120–300-bp expansion in a dinucleotide repeat tract in the intron region immediately downstream of exon 7 (REF. 1). These expansions are seen in approximately 10–15% of all cases of colorectal cancer, and are probably restricted to the tumours with mismatch-repair deficiency ${ }^{22}$. Although the tumours with $DCC$ repeat expansions have reduced expression of $DCC$, there is no definitive evidence that the expansions actually cause the reduction in $DCC$ expression.

Another possible explanation for the low levels of somatic mutation in $DCC$ is that transcription of $DCC$ might be inactivated by an epigenetic mechanism. For example, aberrant splicing leading to the generation of transcripts encoding truncated or defective $DCC$ proteins has been observed in brain tumours ${ }^{23}$, and $DCC$ transcription was shown to be inactivated by methylation in gastric cancer ${ }^{24}$. In addition, several other reports demonstrated that $DCC$ is genetically and epigenetically inactivated in many types of cancers ${ }^{25-39}$ (TABLE 1).

However, studies of pancreatic cancer raised another issue; other tumour-suppressor gene candidates, $SMAD2$ AND $SMAD4$, are also localized within or near the minimal region affected by LOH of chromosome 18q in colorectal cancer ${ }^{19,40,41}$. Nonsense, frameshift and missense mutations of $SMAD2$ and $SMAD4$ have been found in a significant number of cancers ${ }^{19,40,41}$, although the mutation frequency of $SMAD2$ in colorectal cancer is much lower than that of $SMAD4$. However, recent reports indicate that $SMAD4$ is only mutated in approximately

and missense mutations were found in one neuroblastoma ${ }^{15}$. Second, netrin-1 expression is reduced in prostate cancer ${ }^{16}$ and, in addition, the expression of $DCC$, $\beta$-netrin and neogenin are also reduced. On the basis of these reports, inactivation of $NTN1$ would be proposed to contribute to cancer development.

$DCC$. $DCC$ encodes a netrin-1 receptor. The $DCC$ gene product is a 1,447-amino-acid transmembrane protein with an extracellular domain, a single transmembrane spanning region, and a cytoplasmic domain ${ }^{1,17,18}$ (FIG. 1). $DCC$ is extensively expressed in adult tissues ${ }^{17,18}$. LOSS OF HETEROZYGOSITY (LOH) of chromosome 18q has been found in a large fraction of colorectal cancer ${ }^{1}$. In more than 90% of primary colorectal cancer, $DCC$ is included in the region of allelic loss ${ }^{1}$ (TABLE 1). But few $DCC$ somatic mutations have

Box 1 | Axon guidance and its regulatory molecules

In the developing nervous system, migrating cells and axons are guided to their targets by chemotaxis. Members of four protein families — netrins, semaphorins, ephrins and slits — are involved in this process. The combination of the signals generated between these protein families can attract or repel advancing growth cones. In mammals, there are four members, netrin-1, netrin-2, netrin-3 and $\beta$-netrin, and six receptors, $DCC$, $UNC5A$, $UNC5B$, $UNC5C$, $UNC5D$, neogenin and the AA2B (adenosine A2b) receptor. Netrin-1 mediates an attractive signal when it binds to $DCC$ (part a in figure), but mediates a repulsive signal when it binds to a member of the $UNC5H$ (rodent and human $UNC5$ receptors) family of proteins (part b in figure). A number of studies in neural tissues have provided clear evidence that these molecules have important roles in neural development and differentiation.

a Attraction

![Diagram of attraction]

b Repulsion

![Diagram of repulsion]

Table 1 | Alterations of axon guidance molecules in cancer

| Gene    | Locus      | Alterations in cancers                                                                                          | References       |
|---------|------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|
| DCC     | 18q21      | LOH and homozygous deletions in colorectal cancer and pancreatic cancer. Gene product inactivated in many cancers. | 1,19,21,25–39     |
| UNC5A   | 5q35.3     | LOH in colorectal cancer. Downregulated expression in ovarian, breast, uterine, colorectal, stomach, lung and kidney cancers. | 46               |
| UNC5B   | 10q21–22   | LOH in colorectal cancer. Downregulated expression in ovarian, breast, uterine, colorectal, stomach, lung and kidney cancers. | 46               |
| UNC5C   | 4q21–23    | LOH and homozygous deletions in colorectal cancer. Downregulated expression in ovarian, breast, uterine, colorectal, stomach, lung and kidney cancers. | 46               |
| NTN1    | 17p12–13   | Downregulated expression in brain tumours and neuroblastomas, and in prostate cancer. Missense mutations in a neuroblastoma. | 15,16            |
| SEMA3B  | 3p21.3     | LOH and homozygous deletions in lung cancer. Downregulated expression in lung cancer.                              | 47–50            |
| SEMA3F  | 3p21.3     | LOH and homozygous deletions in lung cancer. Downregulated expression in lung cancer.                              | 47,51–54         |
| SLIT2   | 4p15.2     | LOH in lung, colorectal, cervical, head and neck, and bladder cancers. Downregulated expression in breast, colorectal and lung cancers. | 55,56            |
| ROBO1   | 3p12       | LOH and downregulated expression in breast, kidney and lung cancers. Homozygous deletions in lung and breast cancers. | 57–59            |
| EPHB2   | 1p36.1     | LOH in many cancers including neuroblastoma. Nonsense and missense mutations in prostate cancer.                   | 61               |

LOH, loss of heterozygosity.

one-third of colorectal cancers with LOH at the 18q locus<sup>19</sup>, and that there are homozygous deletions in a subset of pancreatic and bilary cancers with inactivated *DCC* but active *SMAD4* (REF. 21). Therefore, *DCC* remains a strong candidate for tumour suppression at 18q21.1.

Several lines of evidence have previously indicated that *DCC* can function as a tumour suppressor. Introduction of an intact copy of chromosome 18 into a colorectal cancer cell line lacking endogenous *DCC* expression yielded detectable levels of *DCC* transcripts, resulting in the suppression of growth in soft agar and the suppression of tumorigenicity in nude mice<sup>42</sup>. Moreover, inhibition of *DCC* expression in normal rat cells by antisense oligonucleotides resulted in anchorage-independent growth of the cells *in vitro* and tumour formation in nude mice<sup>43</sup>. Conversely, enforced expression of *DCC* in a tumorigenic keratinocyte cell line lacking endogenous *DCC* expression was shown to suppress tumorigenic growth of the cells in nude mice<sup>44</sup>. These observations are consistent with the idea that *DCC* is a tumour-suppressor gene whose loss through deletion of chromosome 18q21.1 is functionally relevant.

UNC5H receptors. There are three other receptors for netrin-1 in humans that are related to *DCC* — **UNC5A**, **UNC5B** and **UNC5C** — all are TYPE I TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEINS<sup>45</sup> (FIG. 1). Rodent *UNC5H1*, *UNC5H2* and *UNC5H3* and the human homologues were designated by sequence homology as orthologues of *Caenorhabditis elegans unc-5*, which has a role in axon guidance with *unc-6*, the orthologue of netrin-1 (REF. 4). Recently, the sequences of human and rodent *UNC5D* were identified and deposited in databases (DNA Data Bank of Japan, The European Molecular Biology Laboratory and GenBank), but nothing, as yet, is known about the function of these molecules.

Expression of the UNC5H receptors is reduced in a number of human cancers. *UNC5A–C* gene expression was examined in 240 tumours and the corresponding normal tissues using a messenger RNA dot blot array. The expression of *UNC5A–C* genes was markedly downregulated in most of the tested tumours<sup>46</sup>. A reduction in expression was observed in 93% of colorectal tumours, 88% of ovarian tumours, 81% of renal tumours, 74% of lung tumours, 68% of stomach tumours, 49% of breast tumours and 48% of uterine tumours. Moreover, it was reported that *UNC5A*, *UNC5B* and *UNC5C* displayed 52%, 26% and 39% LOH, respectively, in 31 colorectal tumours compared with the corresponding normal tissues. So, the human netrin-receptors *UNC5A*, *UNC5B* and *UNC5C* are putative tumour suppressors because of their frequent alteration in various human cancers<sup>46</sup> (TABLE 1).

Other axon-guidance-related genes. Semaphorins are a highly conserved family of molecules that contribute to axon guidance during neural development by repulsing axons and inhibiting growth cone extension. They are classified into seven subclasses (according to their structure) including transmembrane proteins (classes 1, 4, 5 and 6), secreted proteins (classes 2 and 3) and proteins associated with the cell surface through glycosylphosphatidylinositol linkage (class 7). *SEMA3B* and *SEMA3F* encode class 3 semaphorins that bind to neuropilin receptors. *SEMA3B* and *SEMA3F* were originally identified as candidate tumour-suppressor genes on chromosome some 3p21.3, owing to LOH at this region in ~80% of primary lung cancers and homozygous 3p21.3 deletions identified in several small cell lung cancer lines<sup>47</sup> (TABLE 1). *SEMA3B* is hypermethylated in lung cancer and several point mutations have been identified, in addition to LOH in this region<sup>48</sup>. Moreover, enforced expression of

SEMA3B induces growth suppression and apoptosis in lung cancers normally lacking SEMA3B expression^{49,50}. Expression of SEMA3F will suppress tumour formation in nude mice — an effect suggested to be due to the inhibition of tumour angiogenesis^{51–54}—probably through the cell signalling pathway generated as a result of SEMA3F binding its receptor neuropilin-2. This inhibits vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-induced and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF)-induced proliferation of vascular endothelial cells.

The SLIT protein was originally identified in *Drosophila melanogaster* as an extracellular cue to guide axon path finding and control neural cell migration. The receptor for SLIT is the transmembrane protein ROBO. In mammals, there are three SLIT (*SLIT1*, *SLIT2* and *SLIT3*) and four ROBO (*ROBO1*, *ROBO2*, *ROBO3* and *ROBO4*) genes. The SLIT–ROBO interaction mediates the repulsive cues on axons and growth cones during neural development. In addition, signalling mediated by the interaction of SLIT with ROBO is suggested to be involved in the migration of myoblasts and leukocytes. *SLIT2* was reported to be frequently inactivated in colorectal cancer by LOH and hypermethylation. In addition, ectopic expression of SLIT2 induces apoptosis in several cancer cell lines^{55,56} (TABLE 1). *ROBO1* is also thought to be a candidate tumour suppressor at chromosome 3p12, and is frequently inactivated in lung, kidney and breast cancers by LOH and hypermethylation^{57,58}. Moreover, both alleles in exon 2 of *ROBO1* were found to be deleted in two lung cancer cell lines and one breast cancer cell line^{59}. Although potentially an important interaction, the mechanism through which the SLIT–ROBO signalling pathway suppresses tumour growth is still largely unclear.

The Eph receptors can be divided into two groups based on sequence homology; eight EphA (*EPHA1–8*) and six EphB (*EPHB1–6*) receptors. The ligands for the Eph receptors are the ephrins, which include five ephrin-A (*EFNA1–5*) and three ephrin-B (*EFNB1–3*) ligands for EphA and EphB, respectively. The *EPHB2* gene encodes the ephrin receptor EPHB2, which was originally isolated from a human cancer cDNA expression library as an overexpressed kinase in human cancers^{60}. The ephrin and Eph-receptor signalling pathway is involved in neuronal developmental process including axon guidance and neural-crest migration, vascular modelling, and cell positioning in the intestinal epithelium. Recently, frameshift, splice site, missense and nonsense mutations of *EPHB2* have been found in human prostate cancer^{61}. Moreover, overexpression of wild-type *EPHB2*, but not mutant *EPHB2*, suppressed clonogenic growth of a prostate cancer cell line DU145 cells with biallelic inactivation (nonsense mutation and loss of the wild-type allele) of *EPHB2* (REF. 61). Interestingly, *EPHB2* is mapped to chromosome 1p36.1, where frequent deletions are observed in many cancers, including neuroblastomas. Although the mechanisms for tumour suppression through ephrin and Eph-receptor signalling remains to be elucidated, these data strongly support that *EPHB2* is a tumour-suppressor gene.

CASPACE SUBSTRATE

Caspases are cysteine proteases that become activated during the apoptotic process. A number of proteins are cleaved by caspases (caspase substrates) during apoptosis, a process that is required for apoptosis to proceed efficiently.

---

**Induction of apoptosis by netrin-1 receptors**

In 1998, Mehlen and colleagues discovered that DCC induces apoptosis in the absence of the netrin-1 ligand, but inhibits apoptosis when engaged by netrin-1 (REF. 8). Therefore, DCC functions as a ‘dependence receptor’⁶⁸,⁶⁹. Dependence receptors create survival dependence on their respective ligands by inducing apoptosis when uncoupled by the ligand, but inhibiting apoptosis in the presence of the ligand. DCC was also shown to be a CASPACE SUBSTRATE, cleaved at Asp1290 by **caspase-3**. A point mutation at this site suppresses the pro-apoptotic effect of DCC completely, indicating that DCC must be cleaved to induce apoptosis. Furthermore, a specific domain known as a dependence domain has been mapped to the intracellular region of DCC, which lies upstream of the caspase cleavage site. The deletion of this domain is sufficient to destroy the pro-apoptotic effect of DCC. Although the sequence of this domain is not related to a known DEATH DOMAIN or a caspase recruitment domain — domains that allow protein–protein interactions between a number of apoptosis-inducing proteins — it seems likely that the dependence domain functions as a scaffold to recruit and activate **caspase-9** and caspase-3 (REF.70). DCC-induced apoptosis seems to be independent of both the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway and the death receptor/**caspase-8** pathway⁷⁰. Instead, in the absence of netrin-1, DCC indirectly interacts with caspase-9 through an unknown adapter protein and promotes the formation of the caspase-activating complex, resulting in the activation of caspase-3 through caspase-9 without a requirement for the release of cytochrome c from the mitochondria or interaction with the scaffold protein apoptotic protease activating factor 1 (**APAF1**); formation of the complex commonly known as the apoptosome⁷⁰. The DCC caspase-activating complex includes an adaptor protein **APPL** (also known as DIP13α), which has a pleckstrin homology domain, a PTB domain and a leucine-zipper motif. APPL can bind DCC directly and might positively mediate DCC-induced apoptosis⁷¹. This implies that DCC regulates an additional, novel pathway for apoptosome-independent caspase activation (FIG.2).

Interestingly, the UNC5H family of netrin-1 receptors also contain death domains in their intracellular regions and function as dependence receptors⁷². This death domain is more closely related to the type II death domain of the common neurotrophin receptor **p75-NTR** than to the type I death domains of FAS and tumour-necrosis factor receptor 1. These proteins also contain a caspase cleavage site in the intracellular region but, unlike DCC, they have the classical caspase-3 cleavage sequence DXXD (where X is any amino acid). UNC5H1, UNC5H2 and UNC5H3 are all cleaved by caspase-3 *in vitro*, and mutation of the cleavage site strongly inhibits UNC5H2-induced cell death *in vivo*⁷². Moreover, the deletion of the UNC5H2 death domain abrogates its pro-apoptotic activity, indicating that the death domain is crucial for UNC5H-induced apoptosis⁷². Although the mechanism for UNC5H-induced apoptotic signalling is still largely unknown, death-associated protein kinase might mediate UNC5H2-induced apoptosis by interacting with the UNC5H2 death domain (REF. 73). The neurotrophin receptor-interacting melanoma-associated antigen (MAGE) homologue — **NRAGE** — was identified as an UNC5H1-interacting protein, and also interacts with UNC5H2 and UNC5H3. However, the binding affinity of NRAGE to UNC5H1 is much stronger than to UNC5H2 and UNC5H3. NRAGE was shown to mediate UNC5H1-induced apoptosis through two pathways. First, through the degradation of the caspase inhibitor X-chromosome-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP), and second, through the activation of the pro-apoptotic c-JUN N-terminal kinase (JNK) signalling pathway. Both cases are probably independent of the mitochondrial and death-receptor apoptotic pathways. APAF1, apoptotic protease activating factor 1; FASL, FAS ligand; FASR, FAS receptor.

binding could change the structure of the intracellular domain of DCC and/or UNC5H, leading to the recruitment of an activated caspase to the cleavage site. For this hypothesis to be correct, the concept that caspases are inactive in non-apoptotic cells would be wrong. In support of this are recent findings showing that caspase zymogens have protease activity prior to cell-death induction or exposure to apoptotic stimuli, and endogenous caspase inhibitors might regulate the activated caspase⁷⁵. The resulting cleavage of DCC and/or UNC5H would serve as a local amplifier of caspase activation, triggering further local caspase activation resulting in a caspase amplification loop and eventually cell death⁷⁶.

The other possibility is that another trigger is needed to activate an unknown protease or caspase. Even in the absence of netrin-1, the expression alone of DCC and/or UNC5H at the cellular membrane does not always induce apoptosis. Another trigger factor could detect various cellular stresses, leading to recruitment and activation of an unknown protease or caspase. One possible candidate for a trigger is p53 given that it activates the transcription of one of the netrin receptors UNC5B and netrin-1 itself.

### Netrin-1 suppression of apoptosis

The netrin-1-dependent anti-apoptotic signalling pathway is still largely unmapped. The process might involve two steps, the first event blocking the caspase-dependent cleavage of the intracellular region of the receptors, and the second triggering an anti-apoptotic signalling pathway. Binding of netrin-1 to one of its receptors induces receptor dimerization⁷⁷. For p75, the first identified dependence receptor, its dimerization blocks its pro-apoptotic effect⁷⁸. So, in the cases of DCC and the UNC5H family, the binding of netrin-1 might induce homo- or heterodimerization, resulting in structural changes in the intracellular region, including the death domain, which then blocks caspase cleavage.

Research addressing the second possibility of anti-apoptotic signalling pathways indicates that three pathways could be involved. The first involves the APPL-mediated AKT signalling pathway. APPL interacts with **AKT2** acting as an adapter protein for the p110α catalytic subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). The presence of APPL seems likely to contribute to the activation of AKT2 (REF. 79). AKT signalling pathways are known to be anti-apoptotic⁸⁰,⁸¹. When netrin-1 interacts with DCC, APPL dissociates from DCC and might then be able to activate AKT2 (FIG. 3). In theory this would produce an anti-apoptotic signal that inhibits mitochondrial pro-apoptotic proteins and activates NF-κB, leading to transcriptional activation of anti-apoptotic genes (FIG. 3).

The second pathway is the DCC-dependent trapping of caspase-3. In the presence of netrin-1, DCC was shown to interact with caspase-3 through the uncleaved carboxy (C)-terminal region of DCC⁷⁰. Therefore, the binding of DCC with netrin-1 blocks the cleavage of the intracellular domain by caspase-3, by directly binding and inhibiting caspase-3 (FIG. 3).

tumorigenic cells<sup>84</sup>. Indeed, p53 directly regulates a number of apoptotic genes.

Netrin-1 inhibits p53-induced apoptosis when binding to UNC5B, also identified as the p53 target gene *p53RDL1* (REF. 85) (FIG. 3). A p53-binding sequence is located at intron 1 of *UNC5B*. The expression of UNC5B in HCT116 — a colorectal cancer cell line — and MCF7 — a breast cancer cell line— both of which contain wild-type p53, was induced in response to genotoxic stress, indicating a role for UNC5B outside of neural tissue development. Interestingly, inhibition of *UNC5B* expression by antisense oligonucleotides markedly blocked p53-induced apoptosis. These data indicate that UNC5B mediates p53-dependent apoptosis as a direct transcriptional target of p53 in cells other than neural tissues, and that in cancers containing mutant p53 the induction of UNC5B after cellular stress might be impaired (FIG. 4).

For p53-dependent apoptosis, two apoptotic pathways have been characterized. One is the mitochondrial pathway, which is mediated by **BAX**, **p53AIP1**, **NOXA**, **PUMA** and other pro-apoptotic proteins, and the other is the death receptor pathway, which is mediated by FAS and the TRAIL receptor DR5 (REF. 84). As mentioned before, DCC- and UNC5H-induced apoptosis are thought to be independent of these two pathways<sup>70</sup>, and the discovery of *UNC5B* as a direct target of p53 potentially provides a third pathway for p53-dependent apoptosis.

Surprisingly, netrin-1 completely blocks p53-induced apoptosis. When netrin-1 is bound to UNC5B, p53 can be stably expressed and accumulated, but is functionally inactive<sup>85</sup>. This implies that netrin-UNC5B signalling inactivates p53 post-translationally. Moreover, the expression of p21 and BAX is also severely impaired, indicating that the transactivating activity of p53 is repressed<sup>85</sup>. On the basis of this evidence, *NTN1* might act as an oncogene in specific circumstances. If the expression of netrin-1 is increased in cancers, the p53-dependent apoptotic pathway would be inactivated through netrin-1-receptor signalling. There are, as yet, very few studies of the status of netrin-1 in human cancers, so we cannot evaluate the real role of netrin-1 in human tumorigenesis.

A third pathway might involve the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) extracellular signal-regulated kinase (*ERK1/ERK2*) mediated pathway. It has been reported that the interaction between netrin-1 and DCC, which induces the outgrowth of neural cells, activates the ERK1/ERK2 pathway<sup>82</sup>. ERK1/ERK2 can inhibit apoptosis by blocking caspase-9 and procaspase-3 activity probably through the regulation of caspase inhibitors<sup>83</sup>. Further evaluation of all three possible pathways is needed to clarify the mechanism of netrin-1 anti-apoptotic signalling.

### Netrin-1 and p53

The p53 gene (*TP53*) is mutated in more than half of all human cancers and encodes a transcription factor that is activated by various cellular stresses — including heat shock, hypoxia, osmotic shock and DNA damage — and exerts a tumour-suppressing function through a number of pathways mediated by its target genes. Although growth arrest, DNA repair and apoptosis probably constitute the core mechanisms of p53-dependent tumour suppression, p53-dependent apoptosis is perceived as a crucial function to eliminate potentially

Figure 4 | p53 transcriptional regulation of netrin-1 and UNC5B. p53 might determine cell fate through the transcriptional regulation of *NTN1* and *UNC5B* under physiological conditions. To eliminate a cell with DNA damage, p53 activates the transcription of *UNC5B*. UNC5B is then expressed and localized at the cell membrane, leading to the cleavage of the intracellular domain and induction of apoptosis. However, for the cell to survive, p53 activates the transcription of both *NTN1* and *UNC5B*. Netrin-1 is expressed and secreted, and binds to UNC5B, sending a survival signal. This signal blocks p53 post-translationally, resulting in inhibition of p53-dependent apoptosis. The signalling pathway that is generated by netrin-1 might act as a negative-feedback loop for the regulation of p53-dependent apoptosis.

response to DNA damage is less well characterized. Why and how does p53 send the survival signal? The reason is unclear, but p53 is probably needed in some long-lived cells primarily to protect them from various cellular stresses. So, p53 might enable the survival of damaged cells by inducing a survival signal, thereby allowing DNA repair by transcriptional induction of various repair-related genes. Consistent with this idea, p53 activates the transcription of many cell-survival-related genes including **RRM2B** (encoding ribonucleotide reductase M2 B), **XPC** (encoding xeroderma pigmentosum C), **DDB2** (encoding damage-specific DNA binding protein-2), **SCARA3** (encoding cellular stress response protein) and **ALDH4A1** (encoding aldehyde dehydrogenase 4). Activation of a long-lived survival signal is known to be mediated by soluble ligands binding to cell surface receptors (for example, various growth factors and their receptors) or by direct interactions with neighbouring cells or the extracellular matrix, leading to activation of the PI3K–AKT pathway^{80,81}. p53, through transcriptional induction of netrin-1 and its receptor UNC5B, might activate the PI3K–AKT pathway enabling the downregulation of all three pathways of p53-dependent apoptosis. Moreover, transcriptional activation of secreted netrin-1 by p53 could produce a survival signal for the surrounding cells, owing to paracrine signalling allowing the survival and protection of a group of cells after cellular stress. Although the detail of the mechanism and the biological need for such a pathway are largely unclear, it remains theoretically possible that using the PI3K–AKT pathway through transcriptional induction of netrin-1 and its receptor UNC5B is probably the most powerful way to block cell death. Further investigation of this potential control mechanism for UNC5B and netrin-1 by p53 is needed before a conclusive mechanism can be determined.

### Are DCC and UNC5H tumour suppressors?

As noted before, DCC and UNC5H proteins are frequently inactivated in a number of cancers. Therefore, in these cancers the apoptotic pathways of DCC and UNC5H are impaired. Conversely, in cancers in which DCC and UNC5H proteins are not inactivated, netrin-1 signalling, if present, blocks apoptosis. This raises the important question of whether *DCC* and *UNC5H* can be considered tumour-suppressor genes? One speculation is that DCC or UNC5H receptors might function as tumour suppressors through their pro-apoptotic function, in the absence of netrin-1. Alternatively, in the presence of netrin-1, DCC and UNC5H might function as oncoproteins through enhanced anti-apoptotic signalling or other oncogenic signalling pathways. Recent findings supported this notion because, in the presence of netrin-1, DCC activates the small GTPases CDC42–RAC1 pathway^{86} or the MAPK1/3 pathway^{82}, both of which are activated in cancer and participate directly in promoting tumour development. The netrin receptors DCC and UNC5H therefore seem to function as conditional tumour suppressors, which gain tumour suppressive activity only in the context of cell growth outside the region of high concentrations of netrin-1 ligand. In these circumstances, it is possible that DCC expression might be anti-metastatic^{68,69}. During metastasis, migration away from ligand sources would lead to apoptosis induced by unbound DCC. Loss of DCC expression might allow metastasis owing to the loss of requirement for ligand supply. Consistent with this idea, deletions of the *DCC* gene are frequently observed in the late stages of colorectal tumorigenesis^{87,88}, and have been reported to correlate with the occurrence of distant metastasis in relatively early stages of colorectal cancer in patients^{89}.

#### NTN1 as an oncogene

Netrin-1 negatively regulates DCC- and UNC5H-induced apoptosis and p53-dependent apoptosis. The role of *NTN1* in tumorigenesis would therefore seem to be that of an oncogene, and this is supported by recent data. *NTN1*-transgenic mice were generated and analyzed to evaluate the *in vivo* role of netrin-1 in apoptosis regulation and tumorigenesis^{90}. In these mice, *in vivo* overexpression of netrin-1 in the colon reduced apoptosis of intestinal epithelial cells, leading to an increase in the spontaneous formation of colonic hyperplasia and adenoma. Moreover, transgenic expression of netrin-1 in mice with a predisposition to developing colon cancer — the adenomatous polyposis coli *Apc*^+/1638N^ mouse^{91} — showed an increased rate in the development of high-grade adenoma with focal adenocarcinoma. Interestingly, Mehlen and colleagues found that netrin-1 mRNA and protein is detected mainly in crypts of the small intestine and at the bases of the colonic epithelial crypts, whereas DCC and UNC5H2 are constitutively

Figure 5 | Expression of netrin-1 and its receptors in colorectal epithelial cells. The colorectal epithelium consists of crypts and villi and is lined by a single layer of epithelial cells. Four to six stem cells at the base of each crypt give rise to proliferating cells. Division of these cells occurs in the lower third of the crypt, and the cells differentiate in the upper two-thirds. The movement from the base of the crypt to its apex takes 3 to 6 days, and eventually the differentiated epithelial cells are sloughed off into the gut lumen. Interestingly, the expression of DCC and UNC5H2 is evident throughout the intestinal epithelium, whereas netrin-1 is expressed mainly at the bases and in the lower third of the colonic epithelial crypt where the cells actively proliferate. So, the survival signal that results from netrin-1 binding to DCC and/or UNC5H2 is dominant in the stem cells and in the proliferating cells in the lower third of the crypt, but in the absence of netrin-1 in the upper portion of crypt, the death signal is activated in the well-differentiated epithelial cells, leading to apoptosis at the top of villus.
expressed throughout the intestinal epithelium (FIG. 5). This implies the existence of a netrin-1 gradient, with higher concentrations of netrin-1 at the proximal portion of the intestinal villus, a site of active cellular proliferation, than at the distal tip of the villus, a site of active cell death and shedding. Netrin-1 therefore seems to regulate DCC- or UNC5H2-induced apoptosis in the intestinal epithelium, and de-regulation of this system might promote the formation of hyperplasia and adenoma. The role of *NTN1* as an oncogene might be crucial at the early stages of the adenoma–carcinoma sequence of colorectal cancer.

Considering its role in apoptosis regulation and the phenotype of *NTN1*-transgenic mice, overexpression of netrin-1 would perhaps be expected in many human cancers. However, only two papers have reported the expression of netrin-1 in human cancers, and unexpectedly, netrin-1 was downregulated in these cancers ${ }^{15,16}$. Such a finding might be explained by the host of other pathways that might be disrupted in human tumours, thereby negating the need to select for overexpression of netrin-1. p53 is mutated in more than 50% of cancers in which UNC5B will not be inducible by p53 in response to stress, and DCC and the UNC5H proteins are frequently inactivated in human cancers. Therefore, the overexpression of netrin-1 would be infrequent in human cancer, if it occurs at all, and in human colorectal cancer alterations of DCC and UNC5B, rather than their ligand netrin-1, are the more likely occurrences. This hypothesis has yet to be confirmed.

### Implications and future directions

We have summarized the evidence that *DCC* and the *UNC5H* family genes are tumour suppressors. For both *DCC* and the *UNC5H* family this activity might be conditional, with tumour suppressive functions gained only when cells are outside high concentrations of their ligand, netrin-1. The ability of p53 to induce both the expression of netrin-1 and UNC5B has implications for future research. For example, adenovirus-mediated *UNC5B* expression induced marked apoptosis in human glioblastoma cell lines ${ }^{85}$, which are known to be resistant to p53-induced apoptosis. Interestingly, these cancers showed low levels of expression of endogenous netrin-1 and, importantly, UNC5B induced apoptosis in these cells. So, instead of TP53, *UNC5B* gene transfer could be a new strategy for gene therapy against p53-resistant cancers. Furthermore, in cancer chemotherapy, the p53 status of a tumour is an important determinant of its drug sensitivity. Cancers containing wild-type p53 usually respond to drug-induced apoptosis. However, if netrin-1 is overexpressed in these cancers, this could inhibit p53-dependent apoptosis, in which case the effective inhibition of netrin-1 might enhance the drug-induced killing of cancers by activating the p53-dependent apoptotic pathway.

*NTN1* could be considered an oncogene but a definitive answer remains elusive. Several aspects of the netrin-1 signalling pathways need to be assessed. First, evidence of whether *NTN1* is an oncogenic target in human cancers is required; this could be obtained using techniques to identify genomic amplification, overexpression or oncogenic point mutations within *NTN1*. Second, the effects of overexpression of netrin-1 on proliferation and transformation of normal cells in conventional cell assays remain to be determined. Finally, the relation of p53 to oncogenic transformation through activation of netrin-1 needs clarification.

In addition to netrin-1 and its receptors, *SEMA3B*, *SEMA3F*, *SLIT2*, *ROBO1* and *EPHB2* are frequently inactivated in human cancers ${ }^{47,48,55-59,61}$. Moreover, *SEMA3B* is also a direct target of p53 (REF. 92). *UNC5A*, *SEMA3B*, *SEMA3F*, *SLIT2* and *EPHB2* are also p53-inducible genes under certain conditions (M. Futamura, H. Kamino and H. A., unpublished data). *SEMA3B* and *SLIT2* might be involved in apoptosis, whereas *SEMA3F* is probably related to the regulation of angiogenesis through the growth inhibition of vascular epithelial cells.

Overall, the evidence for inactivation of these genes in cancer, together with their p53-dependent regulation, indicates that there are important common mechanisms involved in axon guidance and tumorigenesis. Further careful investigation must be undertaken to clarify the importance of these novel pathways in human cancer.

---

1. Fearon, E. R. *et al.* Identification of a chromosome 18q gene that is altered in colorectal cancers. *Science* **247**, 49–56 (1990).

   An important paper that reported cloning of *DCC* as a tumour-suppressor gene at chromosome 18q, where frequent deletions are observed in colorectal cancer.

2. Fazeli, A. *et al.* Phenotype of mice lacking functional Deleted in colorectal cancer (*Dcc*) gene. *Nature* **386**, 796–804 (1997).

   This was the first paper to report the knockout of *DCC*. *DCC*-knockout mice did not show increased tumour susceptibility.

3. Keino-Masu, K. *et al.* Deleted in Colorectal Cancer (*DCC*) encodes a netrin receptor. *Cell* **87**, 175–185 (1996).

   The first report that demonstrated the function of *DCC* as a netrin-1 receptor.

4. Tessier-Lavigne, M. & Goodman, C. S. The molecular biology of axon guidance. *Science* **274**, 1123–1133 (1996).

5. Yu, T. W. & Bargmann, C. I. Dynamic regulation of axon guidance. *Nature Neurosci.* **4**, 1169–1176 (2001).

6. Fearon, E. R. *DCC*: is there a connection between tumorigenesis and cell guidance molecules? *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1288**, M17–M23 (1996).

7. Roush, W. Putative cancer gene shows up in development instead. *Science* **276**, 534–535 (1997).

8. Mehlen, P. *et al.* The *DCC* gene product induces apoptosis by a mechanism requiring receptor proteolysis. *Nature* **395**, 801–804 (1998).

   This important paper provided clear evidence for the first time that *DCC* regulates apoptosis as a dependence receptor.

9. Serafini, T. *et al.* The netrins define a family of axon outgrowth-promoting proteins homologous to *C. elegans* UNC-6. *Cell* **78**, 409–424 (1994).

10. Hedgecock, E. M., Culotti, J. G. & Hall, D. H. The *unc-5* and *unc-6* genes guide circumferential migration of pioneer axons and mesodermal cells on the epidermis of *C. elegans*. *Neuron* **2**, 61–85 (1990).

11. Ishii, N., Wadsworth, W. G., Stern, B. D., Culotti, J. G. & Hedgecock, E. M. UNC-6, a laminin-related protein, guides cell and pioneer axon migrations in *C. elegans*. *Neuron* **9**, 873–881 (1992).

12. Kennedy, T. E., Serafini, T., de la Torre, J. R. & Tessier-Lavigne, M. Netrins are diffusible chemotropic factors for commissural axons in the embryonal spinal cord. *Cell* **78**, 425–435 (1994).

13. Chan, S. S. *et al.* UNC40, a *C. elegans* homolog of *DCC* (Deleted in Colorectal Cancer), is required in motile cells responding to UNC-6 netrin cues. *Cell* **87**, 187–195 (1996).

14. Serafini, T. *et al.* Netrin-1 is required for commissural axon guidance in the developing vertebrate nervous system. *Cell* **87**, 1001–1014 (1996).

15. Meyerhardt, J. A. *et al.* Netrin-1: interaction with deleted in colorectal cancer (*DCC*) and alterations in brain tumors and neuroblastomas. *Cell Growth Differ.* **10**, 35–42 (1999).

16. Latil, A. *et al.* Quantification of expression of netrins, slits and their receptors in human prostate tumors. *Int. J. Cancer* **103**, 306–315 (2003).

17. Hedrick, L. *et al.* The *DCC* gene product in cellular differentiation and colorectal tumorigenesis. *Genes Dev.* **8**, 1174–1183 (1994).

18. Reale, M. A. *et al.* Expression and alternative splicing of the deleted in colorectal cancer (*DCC*) gene in normal and malignant tissues. *Cancer Res.* **54**, 4493–4501 (1994).

19. Thiagalingam, S. *et al.* Evaluation of candidate tumor suppressor genes on chromosome 18 in colorectal cancers. *Nature Genet.* **13**, 343–346 (1996).
20. Murty, V.V. *et al.* Frequent allelic deletions and loss of expression characterize the DCC gene male germ cell tumors. *Oncogene* **9**, 3227–3231 (1994).

21. Hilgers, W. *et al.* Homozygous deletions inactivate DCC, but not MADH4/DPC4/SMAD4, in a subset of pancreatic and biliary cancers. *Genes Chromosomes Cancer* **27**, 353–357 (2000).

22. Marra, G. & Boland, C.R. Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: the syndrome, the genes, and historical perspectives. *J. Natl Cancer Inst.* **87**, 1114–1125 (1995).

23. Ekstrand, B.C. *et al.* DCC expression is altered by multiple mechanisms in brain tumours. *Oncogene* **11**, 2393–2402 (1995).

24. Sato, K. *et al.* Frequent loss of expression without sequence mutations of the DCC gene in primary gastric cancer. *Br. J. Cancer* **85**, 199–203 (2001).

25. Uchino, S. *et al.* Frequent loss of heterozygosity at the DCC locus in gastric cancer. *Cancer Res.* **52**, 3099–3102 (1992).

26. Hohne, M.W., Halatsch, M.E., Kahl, G.F. & Weinel, R.J. Frequent loss of expression of the potential tumor suppressor gene DCC in ductal pancreatic adenocarcinoma. *Cancer Res.* **52**, 2616–2619 (1992).

27. Seymour, A.B. *et al.* Allelotype of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. *Cancer Res.* **54**, 2761–2764 (1994).

28. Hahn, S.A. *et al.* Allelotype of pancreatic adenocarcinoma using xenograft enrichment. *Cancer Res.* **55**, 4670–4675 (1995).

29. Miyake, S. *et al.* Point mutations and allelic deletion of tumor suppressor gene DCC in human esophageal squamous cell carcinomas and their relation to metastasis. *Cancer Res.* **54**, 3007–3010 (1994).

30. Gao, X., Honn, K., Grignon, D., Sakr, W. & Chen, Y. Frequent loss of expression and loss of heterozygosity of the putative tumor suppressor gene DCC in prostatic tumors. *Cancer Res.* **53**, 2723–2727 (1993).

31. Latil, A. *et al.* Genetic alterations in localized prostate cancer: identification of a common region of deletion on chromosome arm 18q. *Genes Chromosomes Cancer* **11**, 119–125 (1994).

32. Brewster, S.F., Gingell, J.C., Browne, S. & Brown, K.W. Loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 18q is associated with muscle-invasive transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder. *Br. J. Cancer* **70**, 697–700 (1994).

33. Thompson, A.M. *et al.* Allele loss from 5q21 (APC/MCC) and 18q21 (DCC) and DCC mRNA expression in breast cancer. *Br. J. Cancer* **68**, 64–68 (1993).

34. Murty, V.V. *et al.* Frequent allelic deletions and loss of expression characterize the DCC gene in male germ cell tumors. *Oncogene* **9**, 3227–3231 (1994).

35. Reale, M.A. *et al.* Loss of DCC expression in neuroblastoma is associated with disease dissemination. *Clin. Cancer Res.* **2**, 1097–1102 (1996).

36. Ekstrand, B.C., Mansfield, T.A., Bigner, S.H. & Fearon, E.R. DCC expression is altered by multiple mechanism in brain tumors. *Oncogene* **11**, 2393–2402 (1995).

37. Miyake, K., Inokuchi, K., Dan, K. & Nomura, T. Alterations in the deleted in colorectal carcinoma gene in human primary leukemias. *Blood* **82**, 927–930 (1993).

38. Porfiri, E., Secker-Walker, L., Hoffbrand, A. & Hancock, J. DCC tumor suppressor gene is inactivated in hematologic malignancies showing monosomy 18. *Blood* **81**, 2696–2701 (1993).

39. Miyake, K., Inokuchi, K., Dan, K. & Nomura, T. Expression of the DCC gene in myelodysplastic syndromes and overt leukemia. *Leukemia Res.* **17**, 785–788 (1993).

40. Hahn, S.A. *et al.* DPC4, a candidate tumor suppressor gene at human chromosome 18q21.1. *Science* **271**, 350–353 (1996).

41. Riggins, G.J. *et al.* Mad-related genes in the human. *Nature Genet.* **13**, 347–349 (1996).

42. Tanaka, K. *et al.* Suppression of tumorigenicity in human colorectal carcinoma cells by introduction of normal chromosome 5 or 18. *Nature* **349**, 340–342 (1991).

43. Narayanan, R. *et al.* Antisense RNA to the putative tumor suppressor gene DCC transforms Rat-1 fibroblasts. *Oncogene* **7**, 553–561 (1992).

44. Klingelhutz, A.J., Hedrick, L., Cho, K.R. & McDougall, J.K. The DCC gene suppresses the malignant phenotype of transformed human epithelial cells. *Oncogene* **10**, 1581–1586 (1995).

45. Leonardo, E.D. *et al.* Vertebrate homologues of C. elegans UNC-5 are candidate netrin receptors. *Nature* **386**, 833–838 (1997).

46. Thiebault, K. *et al.* The netrin-1 receptors UNC5H are putative tumor suppressors controlling cell death commitment. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **100**, 4173–4178 (2003). The first paper to report the frequent alterations of the UNC5H family of proteins in human cancers and their roles as tumour suppressors.

47. Sekido, Y. *et al.* Human semaphorins A(V) and IV reside in the 3p21.3 small cell lung cancer deletion region and demonstrate distinct expression patterns. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **93**, 4120–4125 (1996).

48. Kuroki, T. *et al.* Allelic loss on chromosome 3p21.3 and promoter hypermethylation of semaphorin 3B in non-small cell lung cancer. *Cancer Res.* **63**, 3352–3355 (2003).

49. Tomizawa, Y. *et al.* Inhibition of lung cancer cell growth and induction of apoptosis after reexpression of 3p21.3 candidate tumor suppressor gene SEMA3B. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **98**, 13954–13959 (2001).

50. Tse, C., Xiang, R.H., Bracht, T. & Naylor, S.L. Human semaphorin 3B (SEMA3B) located at chromosome 3p21.3 suppresses tumor formation in an adenocarcinoma cell line. *Cancer Res.* **62**, 542–546 (2002).

51. Xiang, R. *et al.* Semaphorin 3F gene from human 3p21.3 suppresses tumor formation in nude mice. *Cancer Res.* **62**, 2637–2643 (2002).

52. Kessler, O. *et al.* Semaphorin-3F is an inhibitor of tumor angiogenesis. *Cancer Res.* **64**, 1008–1015 (2004).

53. Brambilla, E., Constantin, B., Drabkin, H. & Roche, J. Semaphorin SEMA3F localization in malignant human lung and cell lines: a suggested role in cell adhesion and cell migration. *Am. J. Pathol.* **156**, 939–950 (2000).

54. Lantuejoul, S. *et al.* Expression of VEGF, semaphoring SEMA3F, and their common receptors neuropilins NP1 and NP2 in preinvasive bronchial lesions, lung tumors, and cell lines. *J. Pathol.* **200**, 336–347 (2003).

55. Dallol, A., Morton, D., Maher, E.R. & Latif, F. SLIT2 axon guidance molecule is frequently inactivated in colorectal cancer and suppresses growth of colorectal carcinoma cells. *Cancer Res.* **63**, 1054–1058 (2003).

56. Dallol, A. *et al.* SLIT2, a human homologue of the Drosophila slit2 gene, has tumor suppressor activity and is frequently inactivated in lung and breast cancers. *Cancer Res.* **62**, 5874–5880 (2002).

57. Huebner, K. Tumor suppressors on 3p: a neoclassic quartet. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **98**, 14763–14765 (2001).

58. Dallol, A. *et al.* Tumour specific promoter region methylation of the human homologue of the Drosophila Roundabout gene DUTT1 (ROBO1) in human cancers. *Oncogene* **21**, 3020–3038 (2002).

59. Sundaresan, V. Homozygous deletions at 3p12 in breast and lung cancer. *Oncogene* **17**, 1723–1729 (1998).

60. Ikegaki, N. *et al.* Molecular characterization and chromosomal localization of DRT (EPHT3): a developmentally regulated human protein-tyrosine kinase gene of the EPH family. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* **4**, 2033–2045 (1995).

61. Huusko, P. *et al.* Nonsense-mediated decay microarray analysis identifies mutations of EPHB2 in human prostate cancer. *Nature Genet.* **36**, 979–983 (2004).

62. Trusolino, L. & Comoglio, P.M. Scatter-factor and semaphoring receptors: cell signaling for invasive growth. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **2**, 289–299 (2002).

63. Tamagnone, L. & Comoglio, P.M. To move or not to move? *EMBO Rep.* **5**, 356–361 (2004).

64. Nakada, M. *et al.* The phosphorylation of EphB2 receptor regulates migration and invasion of human glioma cells. *Cancer Res.* **64**, 3179–3185 (2004).

65. Roush, W. Receptor links blood vessels, axons. *Science* **279**, 2042 (1998).

66. Liu, Z.J. & Herlyn, M. Slit-Robo: neuronal guides signal in tumor angiogenesis. *Cancer Cell* **4**, 1–2 (2004).

67. Wang, B. *et al.* Induction of tumor angiogenesis by Slit-Robo signaling and inhibition of cancer growth by blocking Robo activity. *Cancer Cell* **4**, 19–29 (2004).

68. Bredesen, D.E., Mehlen, P. & Rabizaheh, S. Apoptosis and dependence receptors: a molecular basis for cellular addiction. *Physiol. Rev.* **84**, 411–430 (2004).

69. Mehlen, P. & Bredesen, D.E. The dependence receptor hypothesis. *Apoptosis* **9**, 37–49 (2004).

References 68 and 69 are excellent and important reviews that introduce a new concept ‘dependence receptor’ to the field of cell death and provide the mechanistic data to support the new roles of ‘dependence receptors’ in apoptosis regulation.

70. Forcet, C. *et al.* The dependence receptor DCC (deleted in colorectal cancer) defines an alternative mechanism for caspase activation. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **98**, 3416–3421 (2001). This paper clearly demonstrates that DCC-induced apoptosis is independent of both the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway and the death receptor/caspase-8 pathway.

71. Liu, J. *et al.* Mediation of the DCC apoptotic signal by DIP13α. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 26281–26285 (2002).

72. Llambi, F. *et al.* Netrin-1 acts as a survival factor via its receptors UNC5H and DCC. *EMBO J.* **20**, 2715–2722 (2001). This was the first paper to report the role of the UNC5H family as dependence receptors and their involvement in apoptosis regulation.

73. Mehlen, P. & Bredesen, D.E. Meeting report: cellular dependence — old concept, new mechanisms. *Sci. STKE* 2003, pe55 (2003).

74. Williams, M.E., Strickland, P., Watanabe, K. & Hinck, L. UNC5H1 induces apoptosis via its juxtamembrane region through an interaction with NARGE. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 17483–17490 (2003).

75. Salvesen, G.S. & Duckett, C.S. IAP proteins: blocking the road to death’s door. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **3**, 401–410 (2002).

76. Mehlen, P. & Thibert, C. Dependence receptors: between life and death. *Cell. Mol. Life Sci.* **61**, 1854–1866 (2004).

77. Hong, K. *et al.* A ligand-gated association between cytoplasmic domains of UNC5 and DCC family receptors converts netrin-induced growth cone attraction to repulsion. *Cell* **97**, 927–941 (1999).

78. Wang, J.J. *et al.* Dimerization-dependent block of the proapoptotic effect of p75/NTR. *J. Neurosci. Res.* **60**, 587–593 (2000).

79. Mitsuuchi, Y. *et al.* Identification of a chromosome 3p14.3–21.1 gene, APPL, encoding an adaptor molecule that interacts with the oncoprotein-serine/threonine kinase AKT2. *Oncogene* **18**, 4891–4898 (1999).

80. Dudek, H. *et al.* Regulation of neuronal survival by the serine-threonine protein kinase Akt. *Science* **275**, 661–665 (1997).

81. Hemmings, B.A. Akt signaling: linking membrane events to life and death decisions. *Science* **275**, 628–630 (1997).

82. Forcet, C. *et al.* Netrin-1-mediated axon outgrowth requires deleted in colorectal cancer-dependent MAPK activation. *Nature* **417**, 443–447 (2002).

83. Erhardt, P., Schremser, E.J. & Cooper, G.M. B-raf inhibits programmed cell death downstream of cytochrome c release from mitochondria by activating the MEK/Erk pathway. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **19**, 5308–5315 (1999).

84. Vousden, K.H. p53: death star. *Cell* **103**, 691–694 (2000).

85. Tanikawa, C., Matsuda, K., Fukuda, S., Nakamura, Y. & Arakawa, H. p53RDL1 regulates p53-dependent apoptosis. *Nature Cell Biol.* **5**, 216–223 (2003). Demonstrated the involvement of p53 in netrin-1 regulation and showed that UNC5B mediates p53-dependent apoptosis as a transcriptional target, but that UNC5B blocks p53-induced apoptosis in the presence of netrin-1.

86. Shekarabi, M. & Kennedy, T.E. The netrin-1 receptor DCC promotes filopodia formation and cell spreading by activating Cdc42 and Rac1. *Mol. Cell. Neurosci.* **19**, 1–17 (2002).

87. Vogelstein, B. *et al.* Genetic alterations during colorectal-tumor development. *N. Engl. J. Med.* **319**, 525–532 (1988).

88. Fearon, E.R. & Vogelstein, B. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. *Cell* **61**, 759–767 (1990).

89. Kern, S.E. *et al.* Clinical and pathological associations with allelic loss in colorectal carcinoma. *JAMA* **261**, 3099–3103 (1989).

90. Mazelin, L. *et al.* Netrin-1 controls colorectal tumorigenesis by regulating apoptosis. *Nature* **431**, 80–84 (2004).

91. Smits, R. *et al.* Apc1638N: a mouse model for familial adenomatous polyposis-associated desmoid tumors and cutaneous cysts. *Gastroenterology* **114**, 275–283 (1998).

92. Ochi, K., Mori, T., Toyama, Y., Nakamura, Y. & Arakawa, H. Identification of semaphorin3B as a direct target of p53. *Neoplasia* **4**, 82–87 (2002).

Acknowledgements

The author thanks P. Mehlen for helpful suggestions and discussions. This work was supported by grants from the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, Japan, and by grants from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan.

Competing interests statement

The author declares no competing financial interests.

Online links

DATABASES

The following terms in this article are linked online to:

Entrez Gene: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene

AKT2 | ALDH41 | APAF1 | BAX | caspase-3 | caspase-8 | caspase-9 | DCC | DDB2 | EPHB2 | ERK1 | ERK2 | NOXA | NRAGE | NTN1 | p53AlP1 | p75-NTR | PUMA | RRM2B | ROBO1 | SCARA3 | SEMA3B | SEMA3F | SLIT2 | SMAD2 | SMAD4 | TP53 | UNC5A | UNC5B | UNC5C | XPC

National Cancer Institute: http://www.cancer.gov colorectal cancer | gastric cancer | pancreatic cancer | prostate cancer | testicular cancer

Access to this interactive links box is free online.
