
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology 139 (2005) 107–116

**Trypanothione biosynthesis in Leishmania major**

Sandra L. Oza*, Matthew P. Shaw, Susan Wyllie, Alan H. Fairlamb

*Division of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Microbiology, School
DNA have been unsuccessful. Disruption of TryS by RNAi in *T. brucei* confirms that GspS is absent and that TryS is essential for viability [15], (M.R. Ariyanayagam, S.L. Oza, A.H. Fairlamb, unpublished data). All of these proteins have also been shown to have weak amidase activity and are capable of hydro
the NdeI/BamHI site of pET15b to generate plasmid pET15b-  
$LmTryS$. Typically, a 4.5 L culture of BL21 Star (DE3)pLysS/  
pET15b-$LmTryS$ was grown at $37^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ in LB media, containing
in a dark humid chamber. Following washing in PBS, slides were incubated for a further 1 h in fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated goat anti-rat secondary antibody diluted 1:50 in PBS. Slides were washed again in PBS before being mounted using the SlowFade Light Antifade Kit with 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DA
S.L. Oza et al./Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology 139 (2005) 107–116

LmTryS MSSLQRASVSFNKPGHIPFGAVQGYAPGGVPAYSNKHDHYFSGERNIEDNIFFGFKYQCVEFARRWLLVRKGLLLLPDVNWACHIFQL
Fig. 4. Enzymatic properties of trypanothione synthetase. (A) pH-profile. Coupled assay were carried out in a mixed buffer system (as described in Section 2). Activity is expressed as a percentage relative to the maximum activity obtained with TryS in the presence of spermidine and either GSH (closed squares) or glutathionylspermidine (open circles
S.L. Oza et al. / Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology 139 (2005) 107–116

Fig. 5. Subcellular distribution of trypanothione synthetase. (A) Western blot analysis of subcellular distribution of *L. major* TryS. The large granular (LG), cytosol (C
S.L. Oza et al. / Molecular & Biochemical Parasitology 139 (2005) 107–116

Fig. 7. Proposed evolution of TRYS from GSPS. The fragmented box indicates the GSPS pseudogene identified in *L. major* (Friedlin) and the grey box represents the TRYS gene.

5, 
The yield of recombinant protein from *L. major* expressed in *E. coli* is far superior to that obtained for either *T. brucei* or *T. cruzi* TryS by at least a factor of 10. Importantly, screening of large number of compounds is now made possible, as functional recombinant TryS from *L. major* can be readily produced
[7] Borst P, Ouellette M. New mechanisms of drug resistance in parasitic protozoa. Annu Rev Microbiol 1995;49:427–60.

[8] Mukhopadhyay R, Dey S, Xu N, et al. Trypanothione overproduction and resistance to antimonials and arsenicals in *Leishmania