
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

SCIENCE DIRECT®

ELSEVIER

Immunology Letters 97 (2005) 7–17

Review

Role of the adaptor proteins Bam32, TAPP1 and TAPP2 in lymphocyte activation

Atef Allam, Aaron J. Marshall*

Department of Immunology, University of Manitoba, 611
A. Allam, A.J. Marshall / Immunology Letters 97 (2005) 7–17

6. Bam32 phosphorylation at Y139 ..... 12
7. B cell activation and differentiation in Bam32-deficient mice ..... 12
8. Signaling pathways regulated by Bam32 ..... 12
   8.1.
The C-terminal PH domains of Bam32, TAPP1 and TAPP2 appear to function primarily in docking the proteins at the activated plasma membrane (see below), but it is very possible that these domains also participate in protein–protein interactions.

Through database searching, Bam32 genes can be identified in human, mouse, rat and chicken (Fig. 2). The Bam32 amino acid sequences are highly cons
A. Allam, A.J. Marshall / Immunology Letters 97 (2005) 7–17

HuT1 1:MPYVDRQNRICTGFLDIEENESGKFLRRYFILDTREDSEFWYMDNPQNLPSSRSRVGAIKLTYISKVSDAT.KLRPKAEFCFVMNAGMRKYFLQ
erotrimeric G proteins [33], PKC isoforms [34], or F-actin [35].

The PH domain motif is very divergent at the sequence level; the average pairwise identity is below 20%. Despite this, the three-dimensional domain structure is very conserved [36]. Thus, the PH domains of dynamin, spectrin, pleckstrin, phosphol
SHIP and PTEN, since PTEN is mutated in many tumors and commonly used laboratory cell lines [50–52] and SHIP expression is regulated during lymphocyte activation and differentiation [39,53]. The lipid substrate specificity of PTEN suggests that it should negatively regulate membrane recruitment of PI(3,4)P2-specific PH domain proteins [50,54] and there is some evidence
Bam32 can regulate several distinct signaling pathways as discussed below.

### 8.1. PLCγ2/Calcium/NF-AT

We initially reported that transient over-expression of Bam32 in BJAB cells inhibited BCR-induced transcriptional activation of NF-AT [6]. We also found that a small portion of cellular PLCγ2 co-immunoprecipitates with Bam32 and recom
A. Allam, A.J. Marshall / Immunology Letters 97 (2005) 7–17

Fig. 4. Model for Bam32 functions in B cell activation. Bam32 is recruited to the plasma membrane through binding to PI(3,4)P2 and then phosphorylated by a Src family kinase (most likely Lyn). Membrane-bound, phosphorylated Bam
While there is now a considerable amount of information on specific functions of Bam32 in B cell activation, the specific functions of TAPP1 and TAPP2 and the overall biological significance of the PI(3,4)P2 branch of PI3K signaling remains to be defined. Given the accumulating evidence for differential regulation of PI(3,4)P2 relative to PIP3 at several levels (Fig.
[35] Yao L, Janmey P, Frigeri LG, Han W, Fujita J, Kawakami Y, Ap-  
     gar JR, Kawakami T. Pleckstrin homology domains interact with  
     filamentous actin. J Biol Chem 1999;274:19752–61.  

[36] Lem
[70] Shuler RL, Owen CS. Initiation of antigen receptor endocytosis and B lymphocyte activation lie on independent biochemical pathways. Immunol Cell Biol 1993; 71(Pt 1): 1–11.

[71] Miletic AV, Swat M, Fujikawa K, Swat W. Cytoskeletal remodeling in lymphocyte