
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

**ELSEVIER**

**SCIENCE DIRECT®**

Protein Expression and Purification 39 (2005) 269–282

**Protein Expression & Purification**

www.elsevier.com/locate/yprep

---

# Expression, purification, and physical characterization of *Escherichia coli* lipoyl(octanoyl)transferase

Natasha M. Nesbitt${}^{a}$, Camelia Baleanu-Gogonea${}^{a}$, Robert M. Cicchillo${}^{a}$, Kathy Goodson${}^{a,1}$, David F. Iwig${}^{a}$, John A. Broadwater${}^{b}$, Jeffrey A. Haas${}^{b}$, Brian G. Fox${}^{b}$, Squire J. Booker${}^{a,*}$

${}^{a}$ Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA  
${}^{b}$ Department of Biochemistry, The University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA  

Received 13 September 2004, and in revised form 26 October 2004  
Available online 19 November 2004

---

## Abstract

Lipoic acid is a sulfur-containing 8-carbon fatty acid that functions as a central cofactor in multienzyme complexes that are involved in the oxidative decarboxylation of glycine and several α-keto acids. In its functional form, it is bound covalently in an amide linkage to the ε-amino group of a conserved lysine residue of the “lipoyl bearing subunit,” resulting in a long “swinging arm” that shuttles intermediates among the requisite active sites. In *Escherichia coli* and many other organisms, the lipoyl cofactor can be synthesized endogenously. The 8-carbon fatty-acyl chain is constructed via the type II fatty acid biosynthetic pathway as an appendage to the acyl carrier protein (ACP). Lipoyl(octanoyl)transferase (LipB) transfers the octanoyl chain from ACP to the target lysine acceptor, generating the substrate for lipoyl synthase (LS), which subsequently catalyzes insertion of both sulfur atoms into the C-6 and C-8 positions of the octanoyl chain. In this study, we present a three-step isolation procedure that results in a 14-fold purification of LipB to >95% homogeneity in an overall yield of 25%. We also show that the protein catalyzes the transfer of the octanoyl group from octanoyl-ACP to apo-H protein, which is the lipoyl bearing subunit of the glycine cleavage system. The specific activity of the purified protein is 0.541 U mg${}^{-1}$, indicating a turnover number of ~0.2 s${}^{-1}$, and the apparent $K_{\text{m}}$ values for octanoyl-ACP and apo-H protein are 10.2 ± 4.4 and 13.2 ± 2.9 μM, respectively.

© 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

**Keywords:** Lipoic acid; Lipoyl synthase; H protein; Glycine cleavage system; LipB; LipA; Octanoyl-ACP; Acyl carrier protein; Fatty acid biosynthesis; Lipoyl transferase

---

Lipoic acid (6,8-thioctic acid) is a sulfur-containing cofactor that is found in most prokaryotic and eukaryotic microorganisms, as well as plant and animal tissues [1–3]. Its most notable function is its role in multienzyme complexes that are involved in the oxidative decarboxylation of various α-keto acids and glycine. In *Escherichia coli*, three such complexes are known: the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC), the α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (KDC), and the glycine cleavage system (GCS) [4,5]. The PDC and the KDC are composed of multimers of three subunits, designated E1, E2, and E3. The E2 subunits contain conserved lysine residues on lipoyl bearing domains to which the lipoyl cofactor is covalently appended in an amide linkage, resulting in long 14 Å “swinging arms” that function to shuttle intermediates between successive active sites of

---

${}^{*}$ This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health to S.J.B. (GM-63847) and B.G.F. (GM-50853), and an NIH minority predoctoral fellowship to N.M.N. (GM-64033).

${}^{*}$ Corresponding author. Fax: +1 814 863 7024.

E-mail address: sjb14@psu.edu (S.J. Booker).

${}^{1}$ McNair Summer Research Fellow from Virginia State University, USA.

1046-5928/$-$ see front matter © 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

doi:10.1016/j.pep.2004.10.021

the complexes [4,6]. By contrast, the glycine cleavage system is composed of four components that only loosely associate: the P protein, the T protein, the L protein, and the lipoyl-bearing H protein. The P protein binds pyridoxal 5'-phosphate, which it uses to decarboxylate glycine, reductively transferring the resulting methylamine group to the lipoyl cofactor. The T protein catalyzes the cleavage of the methylamine group, transferring the carbon atom to tetrahydrofolate with concomitant production of $N^5,N^{10}$-methylenetetrahydrofolate and release of ammonia. The L protein is a flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)-containing lipoamide dehydrogenase, which oxidizes the dihydrolipoyl group back to the requisite cyclic disulfide after each turnover, generating NADH from NAD [7,8].

The lipoyl cofactor can be synthesized endogenously by organisms residing in each of the three kingdoms of life via the type II fatty acid biosynthetic pathway, which takes place on the acyl carrier protein (ACP) ${}^{2}$ [9–12]. Genetic and biochemical experiments in *E. coli* indicate that upon formation of an 8-carbon fatty acyl chain, lipoyl(octanoyl)-acyl carrier protein:protein transferase (LipB) catalyzes the transfer of the acyl chain to the relevant lysine acceptor, resulting in the octanoylation of lipoyl bearing domains [13,14]. A second protein, lipoyl synthase, then catalyzes insertion of sulfur atoms into the C-6 and C-8 positions of the

---

${}^{2}$ Abbreviations used: ACP, acyl carrier protein; BME, 2-mercaptoethanol; bp, base pair; DTNB, 5,5′-dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid); DTT, dithiothreitol; EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; EPPS, N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-piperazine-N'-(3-propanesulfonic acid); ESI-MS, electrospray ionization mass spectroscopy; GCS, glycine cleavage system; Hepes, 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid; HPLC, high-performance liquid chromatography; ICP, inductively coupled plasma; IMAC, immobilized metal affinity chromatography; IPTG, isopropyl-$\beta$-D-thiogalactopyranoside; KDC, $\alpha$-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex; KPB, potassium phosphate buffer; Mes, 4-morpholineethanesulfonic acid; OAc, acetate; PMSF, phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride; PDC, pyruvate dehydrogenase complex; SDS-PAGE, sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; Tris, tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane.

octanoyl group, resulting in formation of the lipoyl cofactor (Scheme 1) [15,16].

Hexahistidine tagged versions of LipB have been constructed and the proteins isolated by immobilized metal affinity chromatography; however, the enzyme has neither been purified in the absence of an affinity tag nor extensively characterized. The purified hexahistidine-tagged protein has been demonstrated to catalyze transfer of a C-8 fatty acyl chain from ACP to the lipoyl domains of the PDC, and a Michaelis constant ($1 \, \mu$M for lipoyl-ACP) has been reported for the transfer of a lipoyl group from lipoyl-ACP to the lipoyl domains of the PDC [14]. Herein, we describe a conventional purification of a non-tagged form of LipB, and show that the apo form of the H protein also acts as a substrate for the enzyme, validating the implicit hypothesis that LipB interacts with all known lipoyl-bearing proteins of *E. coli*. In addition, we describe the physical characterization of the enzyme and the development of assays that are suitable for its routine and detailed kinetic characterization. Last, we report kinetic constants for apo-H protein, as well as octanoyl-ACP, which is what we believe is the physiologically relevant acyl donor.

### Experimental procedures

#### Materials

Casein peptone (tryptone) was purchased from Marcor Development Corporation (Carlstadt, NJ). Yeast extract was obtained from BioSpringer USA (Pennsauken, NJ). Isopropyl-$\beta$-D-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) was purchased from Inalco Pharmaceutical (San Luis Obispo, CA). Restriction endonucleases, Vent polymerase, and T4 DNA ligase were purchased from New England Biolabs (Beverly, MA). Oligonucleotide primers were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies, (Coralville, IA) and are listed in Table 1. [$8^{-3}$H]Octanoic acid (specific radioactivity, $20 \, \text{Ci mmol}^{-1}$) and [$1^{-14}$C]octanoic acid (specific radioactivity, 53

Table 1  
Sequence of primers used in cloning and mutagenesis  

| Primer            | Sequence                                                                                   | Purpose                                      |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|
| lipBlongNdeI      | 5'-GCG GCG TCC ATA TGT ATC AGG ATA AAA TTC TTG TCC GCC-3'                                    | Forward primer for cloning $lipB^a$          |
| lipBHindIIIrev    | 5'-GCC GAA GCT TTT AAG CGG TAA TAT ATT CGA AGT C-3'                                          | Reverse primer for cloning $lipB^b$          |
| HproNdelfor      | 5'-GCG GCG TCC ATA TGA GCA ACG TAC CAG CAG AAC TGA AA-3'                                       | Forward primer for cloning $gcvH^a$          |
| HproEcoRIrev      | 5'-GCC GGA ATT CTT ACT CGT CTT CTA ACA ATG CTC-3'                                             | Reverse primer for cloning $gcvH^c$          |

$a$ Underlined bases represent NdeI restriction site.  
$b$ Underlined bases represent HindIII restriction site.  
$c$ Underlined bases represent EcoRI restriction site.

mCi mmol⁻¹) were obtained from American Radiola-  
beled Chemicals (St. Louis, MO). Standards for molecular sieve chromatography were purchased from Sigma  
(St. Louis, MO), as was *E. coli* (strain W3110) genomic  
DNA. Plasmids pET-26b and pET-28a were obtained  
from Novagen (Madison, WI), as was competent *E. coli*  
BL21(DE3). Phenyl Sepharose 6 Fast Flow (low sub),  
Sephacryl S-300 High Resolution, and Sephadex G-25  
chromatography resins were purchased from Amersham  
Biosciences (Piscataway, NJ), as were Nick pre-poured  
gel-filtration columns. Bio-gel HTP hydroxyapatite resin  
was purchased from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA) and What-  
man DE-52 anion exchange resin was purchased  
through VWR (West Chester, PA). Nickel-nitrilotriace-  
tic acid agarose (Ni–NTA) resin and Ni–NTA spin col-  
umns were obtained from QIAGEN (Valencia, CA).  
Bradford dye-binding reagent for protein quantification  
was obtained from Pierce (Rockford, IL). All buffers  
used were of the highest quality available and all other  
significant chemicals were obtained from Sigma or Al-  
drich (Milwaukee, WI).

*Escherichia coli* proteins, ACP and holo-ACP syn-  
thase, were produced from plasmids pBHF-5 and  
pACPS-1 [17], respectively, and were purified to homo-  
geneity as previously described [17,18]. The source of *E.*  
coli acyl ACP synthetase was plasmid pAasH [19].

General procedures

UV-visible spectra were recorded on a Cary 50 spec-  
trometer (Varian; Walnut Creek, CA) using the associ-  
ated WinUV software package. General high  
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was con-  
ducted on a Beckman System Gold unit (Fullerton,  
CA), which was fitted with a 128 diode-array detector  
and operated with the Gold Nouveau software package.  
Scintillation counting was carried out on an LS 6500  
scintillation counter (Beckman). Electrospray ionization  
(ESI) mass spectroscopy was conducted on a Micromass  
QUATTRO II mass spectrometer (Waters; Milford,  
MA) connected to a Shimadzu (Columbia, MD) LD-  
10ADvp HPLC system. A 1×10mm Thermo Hyper-  
sil-Keystone BetaBasic CN guard column (Bellefonte,  
PA) was used to desalt the samples with a fast gradient  
of increasing acetonitrile containing 0.15% formic acid.

Zero-charge-state transformed spectra were calculated  
from the raw electrospray mass spectra using the Mass-  
Lynx version 3.5 transform algorithm.

The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was carried out  
using a Robocycler thermocycler from Stratagene  
(La Jolla, CA). Each amplification reaction contained  
50 pmol of both primers, 20 nmol of each deoxynucleo-  
side triphosphate, 1–3 μg of *E. coli* genomic DNA, 1 U  
of Vent polymerase, and 10 μL of 10X Vent polymerase  
buffer in a final volume of 100 μL. After a 5 min dena-  
turation step at 95°C, 35 cycles of the following pro-  
gram were initiated: 1 min at 95°C, 1 min at 45°C,  
and 3 min at 72°C. DNA sequencing was carried out  
at The Pennsylvania State University Nucleic Acids  
Facility.

The large-scale expression of the *lipB* and *gcvH* (H  
protein) genes was conducted at the Shared Fermenta-  
tion Facility in the Biochemistry and Molecular Biology  
Department of The Pennsylvania State University.  
Metal analysis was performed by inductively coupled  
plasma spectrometry (ICPS) at The Pennsylvania State  
University Geosciences Facility. Proteins were first  
treated with 2% nitric acid before sample injection.  
Storage buffers also treated with 2% nitric acid, as well  
as 2% nitric acid itself were used as controls to establish  
the background metal content. Sonic disruption of  
*E. coli* cells was carried out with a 550 sonic dismembra-  
tor (Fisher Scientific; Fairlawn, NJ).

Cloning of the *lipB* gene and overexpression of the *lipB*  
gene product

The *lipB* gene was amplified from *E. coli* (strain  
W3110) genomic DNA by PCR using primers lipB-  
longNdeI and lipBHindIIIrev (Table 1). Primer lipB-  
longNdeI contained an NdeI restriction site flanked by  
an 8 base GC clamp and the first 28 bases of the *lipB*  
gene, and was designed to change the native TTG start  
codon to the more common ATG start codon. Primer  
lipBHindIIIrev contained a HindIII restriction site  
flanked by a 4 base GC clamp and the last 24 bases of  
the *lipB* gene, which included the stop codon. Subse-  
quent to amplification by PCR, the 640 bp fragment  
was purified and digested with NdeI and HindIII, and  
inserted into plasmid pET-26b that had been similarly

digested. All procedures were carried out by standard methods [20]. The identity and integrity of the *lipB* gene was confirmed by DNA-sequencing, and the resulting plasmid construct was designated pNESBITT.

A single colony of *E. coli* BL21(DE3) harboring plasmid pNESBITT was selected from a Luria–Bertani (LB) agar plate supplemented with 50 μg mL⁻¹ of kanamycin and used to inoculate 60 mL of rich media (per liter: 40 g of yeast extract, 20 g of tryptone, 30 g of glycerol, 8 g of monobasic sodium phosphate dihydrate, 7 g of dibasic potassium phosphate, and 0.5 mL of polypropylene glycol 2000 mer) containing 50 μg mL⁻¹ of kanamycin, and grown for 12 h at 37 °C with shaking (200 rpm). This culture was used to inoculate 20 L of rich media supplemented with 50 μg mL⁻¹ of kanamycin. When an OD₆₀₀ of ~8.0 was reached, expression of the *lipB* gene was induced by addition of IPTG to a final concentration of 500 μM and was allowed to take place at 37 °C for 4 h. Cells were harvested by continuous centrifugation using a Sharples Super-Centrifuger (Warminster, PA), frozen with liquid N₂, and stored at –80 °C.

### Purification of LipB

All steps were carried out at 4 °C unless specifically noted otherwise. In a typical purification, 30 g of frozen cells was resuspended at room temperature in 60 mL of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl buffer, pH 7.4, 1% 2-mercaptoethanol (BME)) containing 1 mM PMSF. Lysozyme was added to a final concentration of 0.2 mg mL⁻¹ and the mixture was incubated at room temperature for an additional 20 min. After allowing the bacterial suspension to cool to <8 °C, the cells were subjected to four 1 min bursts of sonic disruption at a setting of 7 while on ice and cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 50,000g for 30 min. A 2% solution of protamine sulfate dissolved in lysis buffer was added slowly to the cleared lysate to a final concentration of 0.3% and the mixture was stirred for an additional 20 min. The mixture was centrifuged at 15,000g for 10 min and EDTA was added to the supernatant to a final concentration of 5 mM. Solid (NH₄)₂SO₄ was added to the supernatant to 75% saturation over 15 min and the mixture was stirred for an additional 30 min. The solution was subjected to centrifugation at 10,000g for 20 min, and the pellet was dissolved in 100 mL of Buffer A (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, 10% glycerol, 5 mM EDTA, and 1% BME) containing 0.6 M (NH₄)₂SO₄, and loaded onto a Phenyl Sepharose 6 Fast Flow (low sub) column (4.5 × 13 cm) equilibrated in the same buffer. The column was eluted with a 1 L linear gradient of 0.6 M to 0 M (NH₄)₂SO₄ in Buffer A, and was washed further with an additional liter of 10 mM Tris–HCl buffer, pH 7.4, containing 10% glycerol, 5 mM EDTA, and 1% BME to remove tightly bound LipB. Fractions were pooled based on activity and purity as judged by SDS–

PAGE (12.5%), and were precipitated with (NH₄)₂SO₄ as described above and exchanged into Buffer B (20 mM potassium phosphate buffer (KPB), pH 6.8, 10% glycerol, and 1% BME) by gel-permeation chromatography (Sephadex G-25). The desalted protein was loaded onto a Bio-Gel HTP hydroxyapatite column (4.5 × 8.5 cm) equilibrated in Buffer B, and the column was washed with two column volumes of Buffer B and eluted with a 1 L linear gradient of Buffer B to Buffer C (200 mM KPB, pH 6.8, 10% glycerol, and 1% BME). Fractions containing LipB were pooled as described above. This step successfully removed a contaminant with an absorbance maximum at 260 nm. The protein was then concentrated to ~8 mL using an Amicon stirred cell (Millipore; Bedford, MA) with a YM-10 membrane (10,000 molecular mass cutoff) and loaded onto a Sephacryl S-300 High Resolution column (2.5 × 95 cm) equilibrated in Buffer D (50 mM KPB, pH 7.0, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, and 100 mM KCl). The column was developed in Buffer D, and fractions containing active protein were pooled and concentrated as described for previous steps. Glycerol was added to LipB to a final concentration of 25%, and the enzyme was frozen in liquid N₂ and stored at –80 °C.

#### Protein concentration determination

Protein concentrations were determined by the method of Bradford [21] using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a standard. Extinction coefficients for LipB and apo-H protein were determined using the method of Gill and von Hippel [22]. Protein purity was assessed by SDS-PAGE with a 12.5% gel as described by Laemmli [23].

#### Molecular sieve chromatography of LipB

LipB (6.7 mg) or molecular mass standards (1 mg of β-amylase, 1.25 mg of alcohol dehydrogenase, 5 mg of BSA, 0.75 mg of carbonic anhydrase, and 0.5 mg of cytochrome c, all dissolved in 50 mM KPB, pH 7.0, containing 5% glycerol) were subjected to gel filtration using an ÄKTA FPLC system (Amersham Biosciences) with a HiPrep 16/60 Sephacryl S-200 High Resolution column (Amersham Biosciences) equilibrated in 50 mM KPB, pH 7.0. Chromatograms were analyzed using the associated UNICORN software package. A standard curve was generated by plotting the logarithm of the molecular mass of each standard versus \(V_e V_0^{-1}\), where \(V_e\) is the elution volume of the standard and \(V_0\) is the void volume of the column. The molecular mass of LipB was then determined from its \(V_e V_0^{-1}\) ratio using the standard curve.

#### Determination of the isoelectric point of LipB

The isoelectric point of LipB was measured using the Criterion Precast Gel system from Bio-Rad.
(10 μg, diluted 2-fold in IEF sample buffer) was loaded onto a precast Criterion IEF gel (Bio-Rad), pH 3–10, along with a 5 μL solution of IEF standards (Bio-Rad). The gel was run in 1× IEF anode buffer (7 mM phosphoric acid) and 1× IEF cathode buffer (20 mM lysine, 20 mM arginine) for 1 h at 100 V, 1 h at 250 V, and 30 min at 500 V, sequentially. The gel was stained for 2 h with IEF stain containing Coomassie Blue R-250 and Crocein Scarlet (Bio-Rad) and then destained overnight in Coomassie blue destaining solution. The measured distance that LipB migrated in the gel was used to extrapolate the pI from a plot of the pI values of standards versus their distances migrated.

### Quantification of cysteines on LipB

LipB was exchanged into 50 mM KPB, pH 7.0, containing 10% glycerol and 100 mM KCl. The protein concentration was quantified by UV–visible spectroscopy, and then diluted to 1 mL. A 50 μL aliquot of a buffer (pH 8.1) containing 1 M Tris–HCl and 1 M potassium phosphate was added, and the solution was treated with 250 μL of a 2 mM solution of 5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB) in 10 mM KPB, pH 8.1. The reaction was monitored by UV–visible spectroscopy ($A_{412}$) as a function of time and the number of cysteines on LipB was calculated from the molar extinction coefficient ($1.14 \times 10^{4} \, \text{L mol}^{-1} \, \text{cm}^{-1}$) of the 3-carboxylato-4-nitrophenolate anion formed. Rate constants and amplitudes for each of the three cysteines reacting with DTNB were obtained from fits of the data to the following equation:

$$
y = A_1 \cdot (1 - e^{-k_1 t}) + A_2 \cdot (1 - e^{-k_2 t}) + A_3 \cdot (1 - e^{-k_3 t}).
$$

### Cloning, overexpression, and purification of N-terminal hexahistidine tagged H protein

The $gcvH$ gene encoding the *E. coli* (strain W3110) H protein was cloned by PCR using primers HproNdeIfor and HproEcoRIrev. Primer HproNdeIfor contained an NdeI restriction site that was flanked by an 8 base GC clamp and the first 27 bases of the $gcvH$ gene. Primer HproEcoRIrev contained an EcoRI restriction site flanked by a 4 base GC clamp and the last 24 bases of the $gcvH$ gene. Subsequent to amplification, the ~400 bp DNA fragment was purified and digested with NdeI and EcoRI, and ligated into plasmid pET-28a that had been similarly digested. The identity and integrity of the cloned gene were verified by sequencing, and the $gcvH$-pET-28a construct was designated pNMN108.

The H protein was overexpressed in *E. coli* BL21(DE3) cells as described for mature bovine H protein, with slight modifications [24]. A 50 mL starter culture containing *E. coli* harboring pNMN108 was grown overnight at 37°C without shaking in M9ZB medium (per liter: 1 g of NH₄Cl, 3 g of monobasic potassium phosphate, 6 g of dibasic sodium phosphate, 4 g of glucose, 1 ml of 1 M MgSO₄, 10 g of tryptone, and 5 g of NaCl). This culture was used to inoculate 20 L of M9ZB medium and was allowed to grow to an OD₆₀₀ of ~0.6 before induction of expression by addition of IPTG to a final concentration of 200 μM. After 4 h at 37°C, the cells were harvested by centrifugation, frozen in liquid N₂, and stored at –80°C.

All steps in the purification of the H protein were carried out at 4°C unless specifically noted otherwise. In a typical purification, 10 g of cells was resuspended at room temperature in 30 mL of lysis buffer (50 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, and 10 mM imidazole) and incubated with lysozyme (0.2 mg mL⁻¹ final concentration) for 20 min. Cells were disrupted and cleared as described for the purification of LipB, and the cleared lysate was loaded onto a Ni–NTA column (2.5 × 2 cm) equilibrated in lysis buffer. The column was washed with 5 column-volumes of wash buffer (50 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, and 20 mM imidazole) and apo-H protein was subsequently eluted with 200 mL of elution buffer (50 mM Hepes, pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, and 250 mM imidazole). Fractions containing apo-H protein were pooled based on absorbance at 280 nm and the protein was further purified as previously described [24]. Briefly, apo-H protein was diluted 10-fold in Buffer E (20 mM KPB, pH 7.2) and applied to a DE-52 column (2.5 × 10 cm) equilibrated in Buffer E containing 0.18 M NaCl. The column was washed with two column volumes of Buffer E containing 0.18 M NaCl and then eluted with an 800 mL linear gradient of 0.18–0.45 M NaCl in Buffer E. Fractions containing apo-H protein were pooled as previously described and exchanged into Buffer E (Sephadex G-25). The protein was concentrated by ultrafiltration using an Amicon stirred cell with a YM-3 membrane. Glycerol was added to a final concentration of 25%, and apo-H protein was frozen in liquid N₂ and stored at –80°C. The presence of homogeneous apo-H protein was confirmed using electrospray ionization mass spectroscopy (ESI-MS).

### Preparation of apo, holo, and acyl–acyl carrier protein

Apo-ACP was expressed from plasmid pBHF-5 as previously described [17], with the following modifications. Growth was carried out on 12 L of LB media evenly distributed among four 6 L Erlenmeyer flasks and expression was induced by the addition of IPTG to a final concentration of 500 μM. At induction, casamino acids and pantothenic acid were added to final concentrations of 2 and 0.5 g L⁻¹, respectively.

Apo-ACP was phosphopantetheinylated using *E. coli* holo-ACP synthase as previously described [18]. [8-³H]- or [1-¹⁴C]Octanoic acid was attached to holo-ACP using
crude *E. coli* acyl-ACP synthetase, which was expressed from *E. coli* strain BL21(DE3) harboring plasmid pAasH [19]. In a typical preparation of the enzyme, 3 g of frozen cells was thawed at room temperature in 9 mL of 50 mM Tris–HCl buffer, pH 8.0, containing 5 mM ATP. Lysozyme was added to a final concentration of 0.2 mg mL⁻¹ and the mixture was allowed to stir for 30 min. After equilibrating the cell suspension to < 8 °C, the cells were subjected to four 1 min bursts of sonic disruption as described above. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatant (10 mL) was subsequently used in the acylation reaction.

The acylation reaction included in a final volume of 100 mL: 50 mM EPPS buffer, pH 8.0, 3 mM DTT, 0.4 M LiCl, 10 mM MgCl₂, 5 mM ATP, 2% Triton X-100, 50 μM holo-ACP, and 50 μM [8-³H] or [1-¹⁴C] octanoic acid (specific radioactivity, 1–2 × 10⁷ cpm μmol⁻¹). The holo-ACP was incubated with 100 mM DTT for 30 min at 37 °C to reduce dimeric holo-ACP before adding it to the reaction mixture, and the reaction was initiated by addition of the entire crude acyl-ACP synthetase extract. The reaction was allowed to proceed for 5 h at 37 °C, and could be monitored by removing 100 μL aliquots and separating the product ([8-³H]- or [1-¹⁴C]octanoyl-ACP) from the reactant ([8-³H] or [1-¹⁴C] octanoic acid) on Nick pre-poured gel-filtration columns. Upon completion, the reaction was diluted 5-fold in 25 mM Mes buffer, pH 6.1, and applied to a DE-52 column (2.5 × 10 cm) equilibrated in the same buffer. The column was washed sequentially with 250 mL of 25 mM Mes buffer (pH 6.1), 80% isopropanol in 25 mM Mes buffer (pH 6.1), and again with 250 mL of 25 mM Mes buffer (pH 6.1). The column was eluted with 850 mM NaCl in 25 mM Mes buffer (pH 6.1). Fractions were analyzed by scintillation counting, and radioactive fractions that also reacted with the Bradford reagent were pooled and precipitated with (NH₄)₂SO₄ at 75% final saturation. After centrifugation, the supernatant was removed and titrated to pH 3.9 with glacial acetic acid. The solution was allowed to stand overnight in an ice-water bath and the precipitate was collected by centrifugation at 20,000g for 30 min. The pellet was dissolved in a minimal volume of 20 mM KPB, pH 7.2, and exchanged into the same buffer by gel-filtration chromatography (Sephadex G-25). The protein was concentrated using Centricon-3 (3000 Da molecular mass cutoff) ultrafiltration devices (Millipore), snap-frozen in liquid N₂, and stored at –80 °C until use. Protein purity was assessed by SDS–PAGE, native-PAGE [25], and HPLC using a Zorbax 300SB-C8 column (Agilent, Foster City, CA). The column was equilibrated in 80% Solvent A (0.1% TFA)–20% Solvent B (acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 1 mL min⁻¹ and detection was monitored at 220 nm. These initial conditions were maintained for 5 min after injection, after which a gradient of 20–

45% Solvent B was applied over the following 10 min. At 15 min, a gradient of 45–65% Solvent B was applied over 40 min and at 55 min a gradient of 65–95% Solvent B was applied over 5 min. Finally, at 65 min a gradient of 95–20% Solvent B was applied over 5 min to re-establish the initial conditions. Using this method, apo-ACP eluted at 20.05 min, holo-ACP eluted at 18.3 min, and octanoyl-ACP eluted at 20.2 min.

### LipB activity determinations

LipB activity determinations were carried out in glass vials in a final volume of 50 μL, and contained 100 μM apo-H protein, 50 μM [8-³H]octanoyl-ACP or [1-¹⁴C]octanoyl-ACP (specific radioactivity 1–4 × 10⁶ cpm μmol⁻¹), 10 mM KPB, pH 7.2, 100 mM KCl, and 3 mM DTT. Reactions were performed at 37 °C and were initiated by addition of LipB (100 nM) to the assay mix after a 3–5 min pre-incubation of all other components of the assay. After a 10 min incubation, the reactions were terminated by addition of a 6 M solution of guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) to a final concentration of 5.5 M. The samples were then applied to Ni-NTA spin columns equilibrated with wash buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 4 M urea, and 20 mM imidazole), and the columns were subjected to centrifugation according to the manufacturer’s suggestions using a Micro7 centrifuge (Fisher Scientific). The columns were washed twice with 600 μL aliquots of wash buffer to separate unreacted [8-³H]octanoyl-ACP from [8-³H]octanoyl-H protein, and both the apo and octanoyl forms of the H protein were eluted from the column using 400 μL of elution buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 4 M urea, and 500 mM imidazole). A 300 μL aliquot of the eluate was added to 700 μL of deionized water and subjected to liquid scintillation counting in 5 mL of Ecoscint (National Diagnostics, Atlanta, GA) scintillation cocktail.

An alternative assay was used for routine activity determinations when purifying LipB. Reactions were carried out as described above; however, the reactions were quenched by addition of a saturated solution of (NH₄)₂SO₄ to 80% saturation. The samples were allowed to sit on ice for 30 min to induce precipitation of proteins, conditions under which ACP remains soluble. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000g for 10 min at 4 °C and the resulting pellet was resuspended in 1 mL of water, of which a 950 μL aliquot was used for scintillation counting.

### Effect of pH and ionic strength on the LipB reaction

The effect of pH on the LipB reaction was determined at values of 4.5–9.0 using the following buffers: 10 mM Mes (pH 5.0–6.0), 10 mM potassium phosphate (pH 6.5–7.0), 10 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 10 mM Tris–HCl
(pH 8.0–8.5), and 10 mM glycine (pH 9.0). The final reaction mixtures contained 3 mM DTT, 100 mM KCl, 100 μM [8-³H]octanoyl-ACP, and 200 μM apo-H protein, and were initiated by addition of LipB to a final concentration of 1 μM. Data were fitted to Eq. (2) using the GraFit software package [26], which describes a double bell curve. In this equation, “limit” represents the maximal velocity (\(V_{\text{max}}\)) of the reaction. The effect of ionic strength on the LipB reaction was similarly measured at pH 7.2 in 10 mM KPB over the range of 0–0.5 M KCl.

$$
y = \frac{\text{limit} \cdot 10^{(\text{pH}-\text{p}K_a)}}{10^{(2 \cdot \text{pH}-\text{p}K_{a_1}-\text{p}K_{a_2})} + 10^{(\text{pH}-\text{p}K_{a_1})}}
$$

### Steady-state kinetic analysis of LipB

The steady-state kinetic parameters \(V_{\text{max}}\) and \(K_m\) were determined from fits of the data to Eq. (3) using the IgorPro software package (Wavemetrics; Lake Oswego, OR), wherein \(V_{\text{max}}\) is the maximal velocity and \(K_m\) is the apparent Michaelis constant for the varied substrate \(S\). Activity determinations were conducted using the Ni–NTA spin-column procedure as described above. When [8-³H]octanoyl-ACP was the varied substrate (0–100 μM), the concentration of apo-H protein was held fixed at 100 μM. When apo-H protein was the varied substrate (0–200 μM), the concentration of [8-³H]octanoyl-ACP was held fixed at 50 μM.

$$
v = \frac{V_{\text{max}} \cdot [S]}{K_m + [S]}
$$

### Results

#### Overexpression and purification of LipB

As previously described, the natural start codon of the *E. coli lipB* gene is TTG rather than the more commonly used ATG [14,27]. Therefore, the 639 bp gene was amplified by PCR with an N-terminal primer that converted the TTG start codon to ATG, and subsequently cloned into plasmid pET-26b for expression behind the strong T7 promoter. Upon induction of expression of the *lipB* gene by addition of IPTG to *E. coli* cells containing plasmid pNESBITT, a protein that migrated with a molecular mass of ~24 kDa was produced at high levels as judged by SDS–PAGE (data not shown). Typically, expression of the *lipB* gene was carried out in a fermentor using rich media in order to augment the total mass of cells obtained; however, similar results with respect to the degree of overexpression were obtained when growth was carried out in shake flasks using terrific broth. It must be noted, however, that induction of expression at OD₆₀₀ values of less than

Fig. 1. Coomassie blue stained SDS–PAGE gel of LipB purification. Lane 1, molecular weight markers; lane 2, crude lysate; lane 3, protamine sulfate treatment; lane 4, ammonium sulfate precipitation; lane 5, Phenyl Sepharose column; lane 6, Hydroxyapatite column; lane 7, Sephacryl S-300 column; and lane 8, final purified and concentrated protein.

1 led to low specific activities of LipB in the crude lysate. Therefore, when growths in shake flasks were conducted, expression of LipB was induced at an OD₆₀₀ of 1.2. The LipB protein was subsequently purified 14-fold in 25% final yield and to greater than 95% homogeneity in three column-based steps (Fig. 1 and Table 2). During chromatography on Phenyl Sepharose, LipB begins to elute toward the end of the gradient, and most of the protein elutes during the wash after completion of the gradient. Typical yields were ~130 mg of pure protein from 30 g (dry weight) of cells. In the isolation described in Table 2, the final specific activity of the purified protein was determined to be 0.54 U mg⁻¹ with the spin column assay when octanoyl-ACP and apo-H protein were used as substrates, which is typical of most purifications. The pI of LipB was estimated to be ~5.4 by isoelectric focusing, which is similar to the value obtained from its amino acid sequence using online servers from ExPASy (http://us.expasy.org/tools/pi_tool.html).

The UV–visible spectrum of purified LipB is displayed in Fig. 2 and contains no distinct features above 280 nm, suggesting that it is devoid of organic cofactors. The extinction coefficient of the protein was determined to be 23881 M⁻¹ cm⁻¹ at 280 nm using the method of Gill and von Hippel. This value closely matches the calculated value of 23745 M⁻¹ cm⁻¹ using Biopolymer Calculator (http://paris.chem.yale.edu/extinct.html). Additionally, when using this number it is determined that the Bradford reaction gives an accurate estimation of the protein concentration when BSA is used as the standard.

Results obtained from ICPS show that less than one part per billion of manganese and cobalt are associated
Table 2  
Purification scheme for LipB  

| Step             | Total protein (mg) $^{a}$ | Total activity (U) $^{b}$ | Yield (%) | Specific activity (U mg$^{-1}$) $^{b}$ | Purification (fold) |
|------------------|--------------------------|---------------------------|-----------|---------------------------------------|---------------------|
| Cell extract     | 6526                     | 281                       | 100       | 0.04                                  | 1                   |
| Protamine sulfate| 5659                     | 277                       | 98.6      | 0.05                                  | 1.2                 |
| Ammonium sulfate | 3053                     | 229                       | 81.5      | 0.08                                  | 2.0                 |
| Phenyl Sepharose | 521                      | 72                        | 25.6      | 0.14                                  | 3.5                 |
| Hydroxyapatite   | 312                      | 78                        | 27.7      | 0.25                                  | 6.2                 |
| S-300            | 133                      | 72                        | 25.6      | 0.54                                  | 14                  |

$a$ Protein concentration determined from Bradford reaction.  
$b$ Unit (U) defined as the amount of LipB that catalyzes formation of 1 μmol [8-$^3$H] octanoyl-H protein per min.

Fig. 2. UV-visible spectrum of purified LipB. The protein concentration was 11 μM in 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, containing 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, and 100 mM KCl. With LipB, which were the limits of detection of the instrument for these metals, while the protein contained 0.051, 0.002, 0.036, and 0.024 equivalents of iron, nickel, copper, and zinc, respectively.

Quaternary structure of LipB

Molecular sieve chromatography was carried out on Sephacryl S-200 resin to assess the quaternary structure of LipB. As shown in Fig. 3, two peaks are apparent, one that migrates with a molecular mass of ~10 kDa and one that migrates with a molecular mass of ~29 kDa, suggesting that the protein exists as a mixture of monomers and trimers under the conditions described in Experimental Procedures. Analysis of the protein by mass spectroscopy (ESI$^+$) before gel-filtration afforded only a molecular mass of 23880.45 ± 1.31 Da, which is consistent with the value deduced from its amino acid sequence (23,882 Da), suggesting that LipB migrates

Fig. 3. Molecular sieve chromatography of LipB. Elution profile of monomeric and trimeric LipB (6.7 mg total protein) on a HiPrep 16/60 Sephacryl S-200 High Resolution column developed in 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0. Standards (inset) are β-amylase from sweet potato (1), alcohol dehydrogenase from yeast (2), bovine serum albumin (3), carbonic anhydrase from bovine erythrocytes (4), and cytochrome c from horse heart (5).

anomalously on Sephacryl S-200. Proteins eluting from the column as the monomer or the trimer were collected independently and assayed; both forms were active, with the monomer displaying a specific activity of 0.46 U mg$^{-1}$ and the trimer displaying a specific activity of 0.33 U mg$^{-1}$. Gel-filtration in the presence of 100 mM KCl, added to reduce non-specific interactions between LipB and the column matrix, gave identical results.

Cysteines present on LipB

The amino acid sequence of LipB shows that it contains 3 cysteine residues. Therefore, to substantiate further the extinction coefficient established for the protein, LipB was treated with DTNB to quantify the number of

PAGE instead of the expected ~16 kDa band (data not shown); however, analysis of the protein by mass spectroscopy (ESI⁺) indicated a molecular mass of 15844.71 ± 2.75 Da (data not shown), which corresponds to the molecular mass of the apo-H protein—as deduced from its amino acid sequence—minus the N-terminal formyl methionine residue. No significant peak that would correspond to the octanoylated or lipoylated forms of the protein was detected. We ascribe the anomalous migration of the H protein by SDS-PAGE to the influence of the hexahistidine appendage, since non-tagged forms of the protein that have been similarly analyzed migrate according to their molecular masses [28]. The extinction coefficient of the apo-H protein was determined to be 19,167 M⁻¹ cm⁻¹ using the method of Gill and von Hippel.

### Effect of pH and ionic strength on the LipB reaction

A pH-rate profile of the LipB reaction was carried out and is displayed in Fig. 5. The data are consistent with a bell-shaped curve, which indicates the necessity of both the basic form of an amino acid and the acidic form of an amino acid in the rate-determining step of the reaction. The data were fitted to Eq. (2) using the GraFit software package, and pKa values of ~6.4 and ~8.4 were extracted. Given the complexity of the substrates involved and the uncertainty in the catalytic cysteines present. As shown in Fig. 4, 3.47 ± 0.45 cysteine residues on the protein react readily with DTNB in a kinetic process that is best fitted to a triple exponential. Under the conditions outlined in Experimental Procedures, the first cysteine reacts with a rate constant and amplitude of 18.95 ± 9.73 min⁻¹ and 1.27 ± 0.069, respectively, while the second and third react with rate constants and amplitudes of 0.36 ± 0.11 and 1.12 ± 0.28, and 0.041 ± 0.052 min⁻¹ and 1.08 ± 0.35, respectively. These data suggest that LipB contains one cysteine that is significantly more exposed than the other two, or that the other two cysteines have higher intrinsic pKa values, which must be greater than 8, which is the pH at which the DTNB procedure was carried out.

### Overexpression and purification of apo-H protein

The E. coli *gcvH* gene was cloned such that the corresponding protein would be produced with an N-terminal hexahistidine tag separated from the ATG start codon of the *gcvH* gene by a spacer of 10 amino acids. The H protein was purified by IMAC using a Ni–NTA matrix followed by DE-52 anion exchange chromatography. As previously described, the DE-52 column was employed to separate apo-H protein from post-translationally modified forms of H protein, such as the octanoylated or lipoylated forms. A single band corresponding to ~25 kDa was observed by SDS–

Fig. 5. pH-Rate profile of LipB reaction. Reactions were run as described under Experimental Procedures using 100 μM [8-³H]octanoyl-ACP and 200 μM apo-H protein and analyzed using the Ni–NTA spin column assay. Buffers used were Mes (pH 5.0–6.0), potassium phosphate (pH 6.5–7.0), Hepes (pH 7.5), Tris–HCl (pH 8.0–8.5), and glycine (pH 9.0). Data were fitted to Eq. (2), yielding pKa values of 6.4 ± 0.2 and 8.4 ± 0.2.

Table 3  
Effect of divalent metal ions on LipB activity  

| Additive   | Concentration (mM) | Relative activity$^a$ |
|------------|-------------------|-----------------------|
| KCl        | 100               | 1.0                   |
| EDTA       | 100               | 0.73 ± 0.02           |
| CaCl₂      | 100               | 0.14 ± 0.02$^b$       |
| CaCl₂      | 10                | 0.14 ± 0.03$^b$       |
| CaCl₂      | 1                 | 0.74 ± 0.07           |
| MgSO₄      | 10                | 0.80 ± 0.28           |
| CoCl₂      | 10                | 0.13 ± 0.03           |
| ZnSO₄      | 10                | 0.094 ± 0.046$^b$     |
| FeCl₃      | 10                | 0.18 ± 0.06           |
| MnSO₄      | 10                | 0.079 ± 0.016$^b$     |
| CuSO₄      | 10                | 0.062 ± 0.014$^b$     |
| NiSO₄      | 10                | 0.13 ± 0.03           |

$^a$ Activity relative to assay in the presence of 100 mM KCl.  
$^b$ These samples formed a precipitate upon addition to the assay mixture.

differentiating LipB from LplA, a protein that catalyzes the MgATP-dependent transfer of free lipoic acid or octanoic acid to target lysines residing on lipoyl domains [29]. Furthermore, the addition of divalent metals to the assay did not stimulate turnover and, in fact, appeared to be inhibitory when included in the assay at a final concentration of 10 mM. In several cases (10 mM or 100 mM CaCl₂, 10 mM ZnSO₄, 10 mM MnSO₄, and 10 mM CuSO₄), the addition of the metal to the assay mix caused a precipitate to form before the assay was initiated by addition of the enzyme (Table 3). The failure of some of the other sulfate-containing additives to inhibit activity suggests that the inhibitory effect of various metals is not a result of the counter ion.

Because the LipB reaction represents the first committed step in the biosynthesis of the lipoyl cofactor as an offshoot of the fatty acid biosynthetic pathway, we assessed whether its activity might be regulated by various metabolites that reflect the energy status of the cell. As shown in Table 4, neither glucose, pyruvate, nor acetyl-CoA had much effect on the activity of the protein. By contrast, the presence of 500 μM octanoyl-CoA resulted in a >50% reduction in activity, suggesting that the similarity in structure to the normal substrate results in inhibition, since acetyl-CoA was significantly less effective. Because LipB has been shown to be a negative regulator of dam methylase activity [27], we assessed whether the presence of DNA from *E. coli* would have an effect on the activity of the protein. At a concentration of 0.2 mg mL⁻¹, the activity of the protein was diminished by only about 1.2-fold.

---

**Effect of additives on LipB Activity**

The activity of LipB was measured in the presence of a number of additives, including monovalent and divalent metals, chelators, small molecules, and DNA. The addition of EDTA to the reaction mixture at a final concentration of 100 mM had only a minor effect on turnover, as did the addition of MgSO₄ (Table 3), clearly

---

**Activity assessment of LipB**

Two methods were devised to measure the activity of LipB, assessing the rate at which the protein catalyzes the transfer of the octanoyl group from [8-³H]octanoyl-ACP to apo-H protein. One method exploited the

Table 4  
Effect of additives on LipB activity  

| Additive       | Concentration (mM) | Relative activity$^a$ |
|----------------|--------------------|-----------------------|
| KCl            | 100                | 1.0                   |
| NaCl           | 100                | 0.87 ± 0.23           |
| NaOAc          | 100                | 1.10 ± 0.08           |
| Na₂SO₄         | 100                | 0.98 ± 0.14           |
| Na₂PO₄         | 100                | 0.93 ± 0.09           |
| K₂CO₃          | 100                | 0.65 ± 0.04           |
| NaCitrate      | 100                | 1.10 ± 0.20           |
| NH₄Cl          | 100                | 0.63 ± 0.18           |
| KHCO₃          | 100                | 1.10 ± 0.21           |
| Glucose        | 100                | 0.65 ± 0.15           |
| Pyruvate       | 10                 | 0.78 ± 0.05           |
| Acetyl-CoA     | 0.5                | 0.71 ± 0.09           |
| Octanoyl-CoA   | 0.5                | 0.43 ± 0.08           |
| AMP            | 10                 | 0.77 ± 0.08           |
| ATP            | 10                 | 0.68 ± 0.26           |
| Pyrophosphate  | 10                 | 0.86 ± 0.11           |
| DNA$^b$       | 0.2 mg mL⁻¹        | 0.84 ± 0.07           |

$^a$ Activity relative to assay in the presence of 100 mM KCl.  
$^b$ From *E. coli* strain W3110.

solubility of ACP, which is known to resist precipitation at up to 80% saturation of (NH₄)₂SO₄ [25], while the H protein precipitates at a much lower percent saturation. This assay was used as a means to choose fractions during the purification of LipB. The second method exploited the N-terminal hexahistidine tag of the apo-H protein, which allowed separation of the radioactive substrate ([8-³H]octanoyl-ACP or [1-¹⁴C]octanoyl-ACP) from the radioactive product ([8-³H]octanoyl-H protein or [1-¹⁴C]octanoyl-H protein) via IMAC. As shown in Fig. 7, the assay is linear with respect to time under the conditions described in Experimental Procedures (Fig. 7A), as well as LipB concentrations from 0 to 50 nM (Fig. 7B). Using this assay, both substrates obeyed hyperbolic kinetics (Figs. 8A and B), and fits to Eq. (3) allowed extraction of $k_{cat}$ values of 0.14 ± 0.02 and 0.18 ± 0.01 s⁻¹, and apparent $K_m$ values of 10.2 ± 4.4 and 13.2 ± 2.9 μM for octanoyl-ACP and apo-H protein, respectively.

Discussion

As a part of our ongoing studies on the biosynthesis and action of the lipoyl cofactor, we report the first purification of a non-tagged form of lipoyl(octanoyl)transferase, resulting in protein that is >95% pure. The 14-fold purification was carried out in an overall yield of 25%, affording active enzyme of the correct size, as judged by ESI-MS. The UV-visible spectrum of the purified protein is consistent with the absence of any bound organic cofactors, as is the mass spectrum of the protein, which matches the molecular mass of LipB as predicted from its amino acid sequence. Unexpectedly, however, LipB migrates on Sephacryl S-200 resin as a protein of a molecular mass of 10 kDa, suggesting that it may have an irregular shape. Additionally, the pI measured herein by isoelectric focusing is very similar to the pI predicted from the amino acid sequence of the protein.

A molar absorptivity for LipB at 280 nm was determined by the method of Gill and von Hippel, and its accuracy was confirmed by titration of the three cysteines on the protein with DTNB. One of the cysteines reacted rapidly with DTNB, exhibiting a pseudo-first order rate constant that was more than 50 times greater than that of another and almost 500 times

reaction. However, it must be stated that these values could also reflect ionization on one of the substrates rather than LipB, or could represent perturbed values of side chains from other amino acids on LipB. Moreover, it is important to note that these values were extracted from pH-rate profiles that were designed only to assess the pH at which maximum activity is obtained in a defined in vitro assay, and should be considered as preliminary.

There are several well-conserved amino acids in the primary structure of LipB, including His₇₈, Glu₁₀₆, His₁₅₀, Asp₁₅₉, and Cys₁₆₉, each of which has the capacity to serve as a metal-binding ligand, especially for zinc, which is a metal that is frequently used in carrying out similar types of reactions. Purified LipB did not contain significant amounts of bound divalent metals and was not significantly inhibited by EDTA. Furthermore, the addition of various divalent metals to the assay did not result in elevation of the activity of the protein, collectively suggesting that metal ions are not used structurally or catalytically in the LipB reaction. Presumably these amino acids, therefore, play other important roles, such as in general acid–general base or covalent catalysis, or in the maintenance of the structural integrity of the protein.

The isolation of a hexahistidine-tagged form of LipB has been described [14]. The protein catalyzed the transfer of the attached appendage from octanoyl-ACP or lipoyl-ACP to the apo form of the isolated lipoyl domain derived from the E2 subunit of the *E. coli* PDC. In the presence of lipoyl-ACP, this transfer was quantified by assessing the time-dependent extent to which apopyruvate dehydrogenase became “activated,” or competent to catalyze formation of acetyl-CoA from pyruvate and coenzyme A with concomitant reduction of 3-acetylpyridine adenine dinucleotide. The LipB reaction was reported to follow Michaelis–Menton kinetics, allowing estimation of a $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ value of ~1 μM for the lipoyl-ACP substrate; values for other substrates were not reported [14]. This low $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ value is interesting when compared to our value of 10.2 ± 4.4 μM obtained for octanoyl-ACP, since octanoyl-ACP is presumably the normal substrate. Very little is known about the mechanism of this reaction, and it is certainly possible that the nature of the acceptor protein could have an effect on the $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ value for the donor protein, especially if the reaction follows a sequential kinetic mechanism. Nevertheless, it is clear that LipB must be able to interact with all known lipoyl-bearing proteins in *E. coli*, since studies herein show that apo-H protein acts as an acceptor in the reaction; previous studies have shown that octanoyl or lipoyl groups could be transferred from the corresponding ACP to the lipoyl-accepting domains of the KDC and PDC [10,14].

The enzymatic transfer of an appendage from one protein to an internal lysine residue is uncommon, and when it occurs usually involves ACP. One well studied

Fig. 8. Steady-state analysis of the LipB reaction. The concentration of apo-H protein was varied from 0 to 200 μM in the presence of 50 μM octanoyl-ACP (A). The concentration of octanoyl-ACP was varied from 0 to 100 μM in the presence of 100 μM apo-H protein (B). Data were fitted to Eq. (3), resulting in apparent $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ values of 13.2 ± 2.9 μM and 10.2 ± 4.4 μM, and $k_{\mathrm{cat}}$ values of 0.18 ± 0.01 and 0.14 ± 0.01 s⁻¹ for apo-H protein and octanoyl-ACP, respectively.
example is the protein HlyC, which catalyzes the myristoylation of two internal lysine ε-amino groups on proHlyA, a toxic protein produced by pathogenic *E. coli*, converting the protein into its toxic form, termed HlyA [31]. The catalytic mechanism of this reaction is still open to debate. One group reported that the reaction proceeds via two partial reactions, the first of which involves formation of an acyl-HlyC intermediate on a conserved histidine residue, followed by transfer of the acyl group to the target lysine residue on HlyA [32]. By contrast, a second group reported that the reaction proceeds via an ordered sequential Bi–Bi mechanism, with binding of acyl-ACP preceding that of proHlyA [33]. At the very least, these contrasting results highlight the difficulties associated with studying enzymes that use two proteins as substrates in a Bi–Bi mechanism.

Despite the similarities between the two reactions, HlyC and LipB possess less than 15% sequence identity. LipB contains two stretches of conserved amino acids, a RGGXXTXHGXXQ motif and a HGXAXNXXXD motif [34]. Additionally, there is a conserved two amino acid CG motif [34]. It is tempting to speculate that the conserved cysteine might play a role in covalent catalysis. HlyC also contains a conserved cysteine residue; however, substitution of the cysteine with alanine results in a protein with wild-type activity, indicating its improbability of being involved intimately in catalysis [35]. Whether these two very similar reactions will operate by similar mechanisms remains to be seen. The successful purification and assay development for LipB reported herein, however, will enable detailed mechanistic analyses of the protein to be conducted, allowing characterization of the chemistry of another member of this interesting class of enzymes that catalyze the transfer of an appendage from one protein to another.

### Acknowledgments

We thank Mark Signs (Pennsylvania State University, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology) for carrying out large-scale fermentations of LipB and apo-H protein, and Dr. A. Daniel Jones (Pennsylvania State University, Department of Chemistry) for mass spectral analyses. We also thank Dr. John Kittleson (Pennsylvania State University Geosciences Facility) for help with metal analysis.

### References

[1] L.J. Reed, B.G.D. Busk, I.C. Gunsalus, G.H.F. Schnakenberg, Crystalline α-lipoic acid: a catalytic agent associated with pyruvate dehydrogenase, Science 114 (1951) 93–94.

[2] A.A. Herbert, J.R. Guest, Lipoic acid content of *Escherichia coli* and other microorganisms, Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 106 (1975) 257–266.

[3] G.P. Biewenga, G.R.M.M. Haenen, A. Bast, An overview of lipoate chemistry, in: J. Fuchs, G. Zimmerman (Eds.), Lipoic Acid in Health and Disease, Marcel Dekker, New York, 1997, pp. 1–32.

[4] L. Reed, Multienzyme complexes, Acc. Chem. Res. 7 (1974) 40–46.

[5] T.J. Vanden Boom, K.E. Reed, J.E. Cronan Jr., Lipoic acid metabolism in *Escherichia coli*: isolation of null mutants defective in lipoic acid biosynthesis, molecular cloning and characterization of the *E. coli lip* locus, and identification of the lipoylated protein of the glycine cleavage system, J. Bacteriol. 173 (1991) 6411–6420.

[6] R.N. Perham, Swinging arms and swinging domains in multifunctional enzymes: catalytic machines for multistep reactions, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69 (2000) 961–1004.

[7] C.H. Williams, Lipoamide dehydrogenase, glutathione reductase, thioredoxin reductase and mercuric reductase-family of flavoenzyme transhydrogenases, in: F. Müller (Ed.), Chemistry and Biochemistry of Flavoproteins, CRC Press, Boca Raton, 1992, pp. 121–211.

[8] R. Douce, J. Bourguignon, D. Macherel, M. Neuburger, The glycine decarboxylase system in higher plant mitochondria: structure, function and biogenesis, Biochem. Soc. Trans. 22 (1994) 184–188.

[9] S.W. Jordan, J.E. Cronan Jr., A new metabolic link. The acyl carrier protein of lipid synthesis donates lipoic acid to the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex in *Escherichia coli* and mitochondria, J. Biol. Chem. 272 (1997) 17903–17906.

[10] T.W. Morris, K.E. Reed, J.E. Cronan Jr., Lipoic acid metabolism in *Escherichia coli*: the *lplA* and *lipB* genes define redundant pathways for ligation of lipoyl groups to apoprotein, J. Bacteriol. 177 (1995) 1–10.

[11] S. Brody, C. Oh, U.H.E. Schweizer, Mitochondrial acyl carrier protein is involved in lipoic acid synthesis in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*, FEBS Lett. 408 (1997) 217–220.

[12] H. Wada, D. Shintani, J. Ohlrogge, Why do mitochondria synthesize fatty acids? Evidence for involvement in lipoic acid production, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94 (1997) 1591–1596.

[13] S. Zhao, J.R. Miller, Y. Jiang, M.A. Marletta, J.E. Cronan Jr., Assembly of the covalent linkage between lipoic acid and its cognate enzymes, Chem. Biol. 10 (2003) 1293–1302.

[14] S.W. Jordan, J.E. Cronan Jr., The *Escherichia coli lipB* gene encodes lipoyl (octanoyl-acyl carrier protein:protein transferase), J. Bacteriol. 185 (2003) 1582–1589.

[15] R.M. Cicchillo, D.F. Iwig, A.D. Jones, N.M. Nesbitt, C. Baleanu-Gogonea, M.G. Souder, L. Tu, S.J. Booker, Lipoyl synthase requires two equivalents of S-adenosyl-L-methionine to synthesize one equivalent of lipoic acid, Biochemistry 43 (2004) 6378–6386.

[16] J.R. Miller, R.W. Busby, S.W. Jordan, J. Cheek, T.F. Henshaw, G.W. Ashley, J.B. Broderick, J.E. Cronan Jr., M.A. Marletta, *Escherichia coli* LipA is a lipoyl synthase: in vitro biosynthesis of lipoylated pyruvate dehydrogenase complex from octanoyl-acyl carrier protein, Biochemistry 39 (2000) 15166–15178.

[17] J.A. Haas, M.A. Frederick, B.G. Fox, Chemical and posttranslational modification of *Escherichia coli* acyl carrier protein for preparation of dansyl-acyl carrier proteins, Protein Expr. Purif. 20 (2000) 274–284.

[18] R.H. Lambalot, C.T. Walsh, Holo-[acyl-carrier-protein] synthase of *Escherichia coli*, Methods Enzymol. 279 (1997) 254–262.

[19] J. Shanklin, Overexpression and purification of the *Escherichia coli* inner membrane enzyme acyl–acyl carrier protein synthase in an active form, Protein Expr. Purif. 18 (2000) 355–360.

[20] J. Sambrook, E.F. Fritsch, T. Maniatis, second ed.Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual, vol. 3, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Plainview, New York, 1989.

[21] M.M. Bradford, A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein–dye binding, Anal. Biochem. 72 (1976) 248–254.
[22] S.C. Gill, P.H. von Hippel, Calculations of protein extinction coefficients from amino acid sequence data, Anal. Biochem. 182 (1989) 319–326.

[23] U.K. Laemmli, Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of bacteriophage T4, Nature 227 (1970) 680–685.

[24] K. Fujiwara, K. Okamura-Ikeda, Y. Motokawa, Expression of mature bovine H-protein of the glycine cleavage system in *Escherichia coli* and in vitro lipoylation of the apoform, J. Biol. Chem. 267 (1992) 20011–20016.

[25] C.O. Rock, J.E. Cronan Jr., Acyl carrier protein from *Escherichia coli*, Methods Enzymol. 71 (1981) 341–351.

[26] R.J. Leatherbarrow, GraFit Version 5, Erithacus Software Ltd., Horley, UK, 2001.

[27] R. Vaisvila, L.J. Rasmussen, A. Löbner-Olesen, U. von Freiesleben, M.G. Marinus, The LipB protein is a negative regulator of *dam* gene expression in *Escherichia coli*, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1494 (2000) 43–53.

[28] K. Okamura-Ikeda, K. Fujiwara, Y. Motokawa, The amino-terminal region of the *Escherichia coli* T-protein of the glycine cleavage system is essential for proper association with H-protein, Eur. J. Biochem. 264 (1999) 446–452.

[29] D.E. Green, T.W. Morris, J. Green, J.E. Cronan Jr., J.R. Guest, Purification and properties of the lipoate protein ligase of *Escherichia coli*, Biochem. J. 309 (1995) 853–862.

[30] K. Brocklehurst, Acyl group transfer – cysteine proteinases, in: M.I. Page, A. Williams (Eds.), Enzyme Mechanisms, The Royal Society of Chemistry, London, 1987, pp. 140–158.

[31] P. Stanley, V. Koronakis, C. Hughes, Acylation of *Escherichia coli* hemolysin: a unique protein lipidation mechanism underlying toxin function, Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 62 (1998) 309–334.

[32] M.S. Trent, L.M.S. Worsham, M.L. Ernst-Fonberg, HlyC, the internal protein acyltransferase that activates hemolysin toxin: roles of various conserved residues in enzymatic activity as probed by site-directed mutagenesis, Biochemistry 38 (1999) 9541–9548.

[33] P. Stanley, C. Hyland, V. Koronakis, An ordered reaction mechanism for bacterial toxin acylation by the specialized acyltransferase HlyC: formation of a ternary complex with acylACP and protoxin substrates, Mol. Microbiol. 34 (1999) 887–901.

[34] K.E. Reed, J.E Cronan Jr., Lipoic acid metabolism in *Escherichia coli*: sequencing and functional characterization of the *lipA* and *lipB* genes, J. Bacteriol. 175 (1993) 1325–1336.

[35] M.S. Trent, L.M.S. Worsham, M.L. Ernst-Fonberg, HlyC, the internal protein acyltransferase that activates hemolysin toxin: role of conserved histidine, serine, and cysteine residues in enzymatic activity as probed by chemical modification and site-directed mutagenesis, Biochemistry 38 (1999) 3433–3439.
