
CUTANEOUS BIOLOGY

DOI 10.1111/J.1365-2133.2005.06353.X

# Somatic mutations in the PTCH, SMOH, SUFUH and TP53 genes in sporadic basal cell carcinomas

J. Reifenberger, M. Wolter,* C. B. Knobbe,* B. Köhler,* A. Schönicke,* C. Scharwächter,* K. Kumar,* B. Blaschke,* T. Ruzicka and G. Reifenberger*

Departments of Dermatology and *Neuropathology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Moorenstraße 5, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany

## Summary

### Correspondence
Julia Reifenberger.  
E-mail: reifenbergerj@med.uni-duesseldorf.de

### Accepted for publication
9 July 2004

### Key words:
basal cell carcinoma, mutation, PTCH, SMOH, SUFUH, TP53

### Conflict of interest:
None declared.

Background Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) of the skin is the most common human cancer. The genetic alterations underlying BCC development are only partly understood.

Objectives To investigate further the molecular genetics of sporadic BCCs, we performed mutation analyses of 10 skin cancer-associated genes in 42 tumours.

Methods Single-strand conformational polymorphism analysis followed by DNA sequencing was used to screen for mutations in the sonic hedgehog pathway genes PTCH, SMOH, SUFUH and GLI1, in the TP53 tumour suppressor gene, and in the proto-oncogenes NRAS, KRAS, HRAS, BRAF and CTNNB1. Microsatellite markers flanking the PTCH, SUFUH and TP53 loci at 9q22, 10q24 and 17p13, respectively, were studied for loss of heterozygosity (LOH).

Results PTCH mutations were found in 28 of 42 tumours (67%). Microsatellite analysis revealed LOH on 9q22 in 20 of 38 tumours investigated (53%), including 14 tumours with and six tumours without PTCH mutations. SMOH mutations were identified in four of the 42 BCCs (10%) while two tumours demonstrated mutations in SUFUH, including one missense mutation and one silent mutation. None of the BCCs showed LOH at markers flanking the SUFUH locus. Seventeen BCCs (40%) carried TP53 mutations, with only three tumours showing evidence of biallelic TP53 inactivation. TP53 mutations were present in BCCs with and without mutations in PTCH, SMOH or SUFUH. Interestingly, 72% of the TP53 alterations were presumably ultraviolet (UV)-induced transition mutations. In contrast, only 40% of the PTCH and SMOH alterations corresponded to UV signature mutations. No mutations were identified in GLI1, NRAS, KRAS, HRAS, BRAF or CTNNB1.

Conclusions Our data confirm the importance of PTCH, SMOH and TP53 mutations in the pathogenesis of sporadic BCCs. SUFUH alterations are restricted to individual cases while the other investigated genes do not appear to be important targets for mutations in BCCs.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) of the skin is the most common human cancer and shows a continuously increasing incidence. It has been estimated that every third white person born after 1994 will develop at least one BCC during their lifetime. BCCs occur predominantly on sun-exposed skin in elderly fair-skinned patients. The most important environmental risk factor for BCC is ultraviolet (UV) B irradiation. UVB may damage DNA by inducing cyclobutane dimers or 6-4 pyrimidine photoproducts at adjacent pyrimidines resulting in C → T transitions or CC → TT tandem mutations.

Several tumour suppressor genes and proto-oncogenes have been implicated in the pathogenesis of BCCs, including the human homologues of the Drosophila segment polarity genes patched (PTCH) and smoothened (SMOH), the TP53 tumour suppressor gene, and members of the RAS proto-oncogene family. PTCH encodes a transmembrane protein (Ptc) that together with the SMOH gene product (Smoh) builds up the receptor complex for the sonic hedgehog (Shh) signalling molecule. In the absence of Shh, Ptc represses Smoh activity, while Shh binding releases Smoh from the inhibition by Ptc, thereby causing intracellular signal transduction and activation of Shh target genes such as GLI1, HIP and PTCH. Loss of Ptc function by inactivating PTCH mutations as well as aberrant activation of Smoh by activating SMOH mutations both cause constitutive, ligand-independent signal transduction that may lead to neoplastic growth. Another Shh pathway

© 2005 British Association of Dermatologists • British Journal of Dermatology 2005 152, pp43–51

44 Mutation profiling of basal cell carcinomas, J. Reifenberger *et al.*

gene, the human homologue of the Drosophila gene suppressor of fused (SUFUH), has been reported to carry mutations in a subset of patients with cerebellar medulloblastoma.¹⁴ BCCs have not been investigated for SUFUH mutations to date.

TP53 mutations have been identified in up to 50% of sporadic BCCs.⁸ TP53 mutations are not restricted to BCCs but are also common in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the skin and may even be detected in normal, sun-exposed skin.⁸ UV signature mutations are common among the TP53 mutations found in normal skin, SCCs and BCCs.⁹

Mutation of genes related to the Ras signalling pathway plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of various human cancers, including cutaneous SCCs and malignant melanomas.¹²,¹⁶ In BCCs, the significance of RAS gene mutations is less clear. While some authors reported RAS gene mutations in about 30% of tumours,¹⁰ others detected mutations in only minor fractions of BCCs or did not find any mutations at all.⁹,¹⁷,¹⁸

BCCs morphologically resemble hair follicle structures and are thought to arise from the outer root sheath of the hair follicle.¹⁹ Signalling via the wingless (Wnt)/β-catenin pathway is important in the control of hair growth.²⁰ In BCCs, aberrant activation of this pathway has been suggested by the immunohistochemical finding of frequent nuclear accumulation of β-catenin in these tumours.²¹,²²

In the present study, we report the analysis of 42 sporadic BCCs for mutations in 10 genes known to be involved in the pathogenesis of cutaneous tumours. The investigated genes included four genes related to the Shh signalling pathway (PTCH, SMOH, SUFUH, GLI1), four genes related to Ras signalling (NRAS, KRAS, HRAS, BRAF), the TP53 tumour suppressor gene, and the gene for β-catenin (CTNNB1). Thirty-eight of the tumours were additionally investigated for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at microsatellite markers on chromosome arms 9q, 10q and 17p, where the PTCH, SUFUH and TP53 genes are located.

## Materials and methods

### Tumour samples

We investigated 42 sporadic BCCs from 41 adult caucasian patients (23 men and 18 women; median age 68 years, range 33–89). Two tumours (BCC29, BCC30) were two independent BCCs from a single patient. In total, the tumour series comprised 33 nodular BCCs, seven morphoeiform BCCs and two superficial BCCs. Parts of each tumour were frozen immediately after excision and stored at –80 °C. Each specimen subjected to molecular genetic analysis was histologically investigated to confirm a tumour cell content of at least 70%. Peripheral blood samples for the extraction of constitutive (leucocyte) DNA were available from 37 patients.

### DNA and RNA extraction

Extraction of high molecular weight DNA and RNA from frozen tumour samples was carried out by ultracentrifugation over caesium chloride as described elsewhere.²³ DNA extraction from peripheral blood leucocytes was performed according to a standard protocol.²⁴

### Mutation analyses

Mutation analyses of NRAS, HRAS and KRAS were carried out at the transcript level as reported before.¹⁶ From each tumour, 3 μg of total RNA were transcribed into cDNA in a volume of 50 μL using random hexanucleotide primers and SuperScript™ reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) fragments covering the coding sequences of NRAS and KRAS, as well as the known mutation hot-spot sites in HRAS, were amplified by PCR from cDNA using PCR primers reported elsewhere.¹⁶ Mutation analyses of PTCH (exons 2–23), SMOH (exons 1–12), SUFUH (exons 1–12), TP53 (exons 4–10) and BRAF (exon 15) were performed at the genomic level using PCR primers binding to intronic sequences flanking each exon. Mutation analysis of CTNNB1 (exon 3) was carried out as reported elsewhere.²⁵ GLI1 mutation analysis comprised the investigation of the promoter core region (nt 533–1197, GenBank AF026306) and parts of the coding sequence, including those encoding the zinc-finger regions and the putative protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylation sites (nt 753–1276 and nt 1655–2142, GenBank NM_005269). All PCR primer sequences are available on request. Each PCR product was screened for mutations by single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP)/heteroduplex analysis. In brief, the PCR products were heat denatured and then subjected to electrophoresis on nondenaturing polyacrylamide gels. Each fragment was evaluated under at least two different conditions with variations in temperature and polyacrylamide concentration. The SSCP/heteroduplex band patterns were visualized by silver staining of the gels. PCR products showing aberrant band patterns were sequenced in both directions using cycle sequencing (BigDye cycle sequencing kit; Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, U.S.A.) and an ABI PRISM 377 semiautomated DNA sequencer (Applied Biosystems). The somatic origin of a detected mutation was confirmed by sequencing of leucocyte DNA from the respective patient.

### Loss of heterozygosity analyses

Thirty-eight of the 42 tumours were studied for allelic loss at six microsatellite loci (D9S197, D9S196, D91816, D9S287, D9S1809 and D9S1851) encompassing the PTCH locus at 9q22.32, three microsatellite loci (D10S541, D10S587, D10S212) located close to the SUFUH locus on 10q24, and five microsatellite markers (D17S947, D17S578, D17S1844, D17S786 and D17S796) located on 17p either distal or proximal to TP53. PCR products amplified from tumour and corresponding blood DNA were separated by electrophoresis on denaturing 10% polyacrylamide gels, visualized by silver staining and assessed for allelic imbalance in the tumour DNA as reported.²⁶

© 2005 British Association of Dermatologists • British Journal of Dermatology 2005 152, pp43–51

# Results

SSCP/heteroduplex analysis followed by DNA sequencing identified 31 PTCH mutations in 28 of the 42 BCCs (67%). Thirteen of the PTCH mutations (42%) corresponded to UV-associated transitions (Table 1). The PTCH mutations were distributed over the entire coding sequence without evidence for a hot-spot region. In the majority of cases, the mutations predict a translation of truncated proteins (Table 1). LOH on 9q was identified in 20 of 38 BCCs investigated (53%). Sixteen of the 38 tumours screened for both PTCH mutation and LOH on 9q showed evidence of complete loss of wild-type PTCH, i.e. showed two different mutations or loss of one allele and mutation of the other (Table 1, Fig. 1a). One tumour (BCC10) demonstrated two different PTCH mutations and LOH on 9q, suggesting either that one allele carried two point mutations or that the tumour consisted of subpopulations of tumour cells with two distinct PTCH mutations.

Somatic SMOH mutations were found in four of 42 BCCs (10%), as reported before.³⁷ Three tumours carried identical somatic missense mutations affecting the hot-spot codon 535 (c.1604G → T: W535L). The fourth tumour (BCC33) exhibited a C → T transition mutation leading to an amino acid exchange at codon 199 (c.595C → T: R199W) (Table 1). One tumour (BCC45) demonstrated a heterozygous C → T transition mutation in SUFUH that results in a missense mutation at codon 187 (c.560C → T: P187L) (Fig. 1c). Another tumour (BCC17) was found to carry a silent SUFUH mutation (c.591C → T: F197F). In addition, two distinct polymorphisms were detected in tumour and blood DNA of one patient (c.441C → T: Y147Y) and four patients (c.1299T → C: I1433I), respectively. None of the 38 investigated BCCs showed LOH at any of the microsatellite markers studied on 10q (Table 1, Fig. 1c).

Analysis of TP53 demonstrated mutations in 17 of 42 BCCs (40%). In total, 18 mutations were identified, 13 of which (72%) corresponded to presumably UV-induced transitions (Table 1). UV signature mutations were significantly more frequent in TP53 than in PTCH and SMOH (χ²-test, P < 0·05). One tumour (BCC19) exhibited two distinct somatic TP53 mutations (Table 1). LOH on 17p was identified in only three of 38 tumours (BCC31, BCC44, BCC53) (Table 1, Fig. 1b). Ten of the 42 BCCs carried both PTCH and TP53 mutations. In three tumours (BCC17, BCC31, BCC53), UV-associated transition mutations were identified in one of these genes, while five tumours (BCC3, BCC10, BCC21, BCC22, BCC30) carried such mutations in both genes (Table 1). Two tumours (BCC4, BCC45) carried non-UV signature mutations in both TP53 and PTCH.

None of the BCCs showed somatic mutations affecting the known mutation hot-spots in NRAS, KRAS or HRAS. Mutations altering codon 599 of BRAF or exon 3 of CTNNB1 were also not detected. Mutation analysis of the GLI1 promoter core region as well as the gene segments coding for the zinc-finger regions and the putative PKA phosphorylation sites did not reveal any somatic mutations in BCCs. However, we found

## Discussion

We report the mutation profile of 10 skin cancer-related genes in 42 sporadic BCCs from caucasian patients. In line with our own results⁷,²⁷ and data from other groups,⁵,²⁸⁻³² our present study indicates that somatic mutations in the Shh receptor gene PTCH are of paramount importance in the pathogenesis of sporadic BCCs. Careful mutation screening, using newly designed primers and optimized conditions for SSCP/heteroduplex analysis, revealed somatic PTCH mutations in 67% of our tumours. This mutation frequency is considerably higher than reported in previous studies, among which the highest frequency of PTCH mutant tumours (54%) was detected in a series of early onset BCCs.³¹ This difference is probably due to the improvement of our SSCP/heteroduplex analysis of PTCH, which is reflected by the fact that reanalysis of 22 BCCs showing no mutations in our previous study⁷ now revealed somatic PTCH alterations in 11 tumours. To assess the PTCH allelic status in our BCC series, we performed LOH analysis at six microsatellite markers located proximal and distal to the PTCH locus on the long arm of chromosome 9. These analyses revealed LOH and thereby evidence for loss of one PTCH allele in 53% of the tumours investigated, which is in line with data from other groups reporting 9q LOH in 53–69% of sporadic BCCs.³²⁻³⁵ Altogether, our study revealed at least one PTCH alteration in 83% of the BCCs investigated, with 42% showing evidence of biallelic PTCH inactivation. Taking into account that the SSCP/heteroduplex analysis is likely to have missed a few PTCH mutations, our data strongly support the significance of PTCH as the prime target for mutations in sporadic BCCs.

Although UV exposure is regarded as the most important environmental risk factor for the development of BCCs, most PTCH mutations detected in our tumour series were not typical for UV-induced sequence changes. This finding is in line with PTCH mutation data reported by other groups,⁵,²⁸,³¹ as well as with the observation that LOH on 9q was not associated with sun exposure in a study of 58 patients with sporadic BCCs.³⁴ Collectively, these data indicate that in addition to UV-induced DNA damage, other factors are likely to contribute to the pathogenesis of sporadic BCCs. However, UV appears to be the major factor in BCCs in patients with xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), which are characterized by defects in the nucleotide excision system. Independent studies have shown that BCCs in patients with XP exhibit significantly higher rates of UV-associated C → T and CC → TT transitions at bipyrimidine sites in PTCH and SMOH, compared with sporadic BCCs.³⁶⁻³⁸ In contrast to caucasian patients, BCCs at sun-exposed skin regions of Korean patients were found to carry

| Case no. | Age (years) | Histological subtype | Sex | Localization | PTCH mutation | SMOH mutation | SUFUH mutation | LOH 9q | LOH 10q | LOH 17p | TP53 mutation |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| BCC1 | 74 | Nodular | M | Cheek | c.992C → T: S331F* | + | - | - | - | - | - |
| BCC2 | 89 | Nodular | M | Upper lip | - | + | - | - | - | - | - |
| BCC3 | 68 | Nodular | M | Lower leg | c.1093C → T: Q365X* | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| BCC4 | 68 | Nodular | M | Nose | c.1047delC | n.a. | - | - | n.a. | - | - |
| BCC5 | 77 | Superficial | M | Shoulder | c.2146delT | - | - | - | n.a. | - | - |
| BCC6 | 84 | Nodular | M | Cheek | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| BCC7 | 58 | Nodular | M | Nose | c.3944T → C: L1315P | - | c.1604G → T: W535L | - | - | - | - |
| BCC8 | 85 | Nodular | M | Chin | c.1434-1437del4 | n.a. | - | - | n.a. | - | - |
| BCC9 | 61 | Nodular | M | Cheek | - | - | - | - | c.586C → T: R196X* | - | - |
| BCC10 | 74 | Morphoeiform | M | Forehead | c.2985G → T: R995S | + | IVS3+1G → A* | - | - | - | - |
| BCC11 | 67 | Nodular | F | Upper lip | c.2560G → T: G854X | n.a. | - | - | n.a. | - | - |
| BCC12 | 75 | Nodular | F | Upper lip | - | n.a. | - | - | n.a. | - | - |
| BCC13 | 79 | Nodular | M | Nose | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| BCC14 | 59 | Nodular | M | Axilla | - | - | - | - | c.C832C → T: P278S* | - | - |
| BCC15 | 88 | Morphoeiform | M | Chin | - | - | - | - | IVS4-2T → C | - | - |
| BCC16 | 33 | Nodular | M | Cheek | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| BCC17 | 81 | Morphoeiform | F | Nose | IVS14+25T → C | - | c.591C → T: F197F* | - | - | - | - |
| BCC18 | 65 | Nodular | M | Nose | - | - | - | - | c.843-844CC → AT: D281E, R282W | - | - |
| BCC19 | 74 | Nodular | F | Chin | - | - | - | - | c.454C → T: P152S* | - | - |
| BCC20 | 33 | Nodular | M | Upper lip | IVS14+1G → A* | - | c.1604G → T: W535L | - | - | - | - |
| BCC21 | 84 | Morphoeiform | F | Forehead | c.3378-3379 CC → TT: V1126V, L1127L* | + | - | - | c.454C → T: P152S* | - | - |
| BCC22 | 68 | Nodular | F | Nose | c.1249C → T: Q413X* | + | IVS9+1G → A* | - | - | - | - |
| BCC23 | 75 | Nodular | M | Back | c.2287delG | - | - | - | c.743G → A: R248Q* | - | - |
| BCC24 | 86 | Nodular | F | Cheek | - | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| BCC25 | 85 | Nodular | F | Throat | c.2321G → A: G774E* | + | - | - | - | - | - |
| BCC27 | 87 | Morphoeiform | F | Forehead | c.3634G → A: G1212S* | + | - | - | - | - | - |
| BCC28 | 52 | Nodular | F | Capillitium | c.378delG | + | - | - | - | - | - |
| BCC29 | 52 | Nodular | F | Shoulder | c.3590C → T: S1197F* | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| BCC30 | 52 | Nodular | F | Shoulder | c.2778G → A: W926X* | - | - | - | c.843-44CC → TT: D281D, R282W* | - | - |

| Case no. | Age (years) | Histological subtype | Sex | Localization | PTCH mutation | SMOH mutation | SUFUH mutation | LOH 9q | LOH 10q | LOH 17p |
|----------|-------------|---------------------|-----|--------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------|---------|---------|
| BCC31    | 74          | Nodular             | M   | Cheek        | c.2873delA    | +             | -           | -       | -       | +       |
| BCC32    | 59          | Superficial         | M   | Back         | -             | +             | c.856G → A: E286K* | -       | -       | -       |
| BCC33    | 76          | Nodular             | F   | Nose         | c.291insT     | +             | c.586C → T: R196X* | -       | -       | -       |
| BCC34    | 87          | Nodular             | F   | Forehead     | -             | +             | T: R199W*    | -       | -       | -       |
| BCC40    | 70          | Nodular             | M   | Forehead     | c.1863-1864delAG | +             | IVS3-29C → A | -       | -       | -       |
| BCC42    | 81          | Morphoeiform        | M   | Retroauricular | -             | +             | -           | -       | -       | -       |
| BCC43    | 74          | Nodular             | F   | Retroauricular | c.2364T → A: Y788X | +             | -           | -       | -       | -       |
| BCC44    | 55          | Nodular             | M   | Nose         | c.758-776del19 | +             | -           | -       | -       | +       |
| BCC45    | 56          | Nodular             | F   | Cheek        | c.528-529AC → | +             | c.592G → T: E198X | -       | -       | -       |
| BCC46    | 65          | Nodular             | F   | Capillitium  | c.2778-2779GG → | +             | c.560C → | -       | -       | -       |
| BCC47    | 77          | Nodular             | M   | Retroauricular | AA: W926X*    | +             | T: P187L*    | -       | -       | -       |
| BCC50    | 39          | Nodular             | F   | Cheek        | c.1696-1697CC → | -             | TT: P566L, Q567X* | -       | -       | -       |
| BCC53    | 80          | Morphoeiform        | F   | Ear          | c.3236G → T: S10791 | +             | c.1804C → T: R602X* | -       | -       | -       |

M, male; F, female; LOH, loss of heterozygosity; n.a., not analysed. *Presumably ultraviolet-induced mutations.

48 Mutation profiling of basal cell carcinomas, J. Reifenberger et al.

sporadic BCCs. We identified four BCCs that carried mutations in the SMOH proto-oncogene. These mutations had been reported before in our study on 31 BCCs.⁷ The analysis of 11 new BCC cases did not reveal any additional SMOH mutations. Taylor et al. first reported somatic and germline mutation in the SUFUH gene on 10q24 in patients with medulloblastoma.¹⁴ SUFUH encodes a nuclear/cytoplasmic shuttle protein that functions as a negative regulator of Shh and Wnt signalling by exporting Gli1 and β-catenin from the nucleus to the cytoplasm.³⁹,⁴⁰ We report the first mutation analysis of SUFUH in sporadic BCCs. Our data indicate that SUFUH mutations are restricted to a small subset of these tumours. We found one BCC that carried a UV-associated transition mutation leading to an amino acid exchange from proline to leucine at position 187. However, the significance of this particular missense mutation is unclear as it exchanges a nonconserved amino acid and the respective tumour (BCC45) also carried a PTCH mutation. We additionally performed microsatellite analysis of five polymorphic markers located on 10q close to the SUFUH locus but did not detect any tumour with LOH at these loci.

The zinc-finger transcription factor Gli1 is a major mediator of Shh signalling to the nucleus and is highly overexpressed in BCCs.⁷,⁴¹⁻⁴³ Transgenic overexpression of Gli1 in basal keratinocytes has been shown to be sufficient for BCC formation.⁴¹,⁴⁴ To investigate whether activating mutations in GLI1 might play a role in sporadic BCCs, we screened our tumour series for mutations in the GLI1 promoter core region as well as those parts of the GLI1 coding region that encode functionally important domains. However, we found only rare sequence polymorphisms but no tumour-associated somatic mutations in the investigated gene regions, suggesting that GLI1 itself is unlikely to represent a major target for mutations in sporadic BCCs.

Previous studies have reported TP53 mutations in 33–50% of BCCs.³²,⁴⁵⁻⁴⁸ We identified somatic TP53 mutations in 17 of 42 BCCs investigated (40%). In contrast to the frequent TP53 mutation, LOH on 17p appears to be rare in BCCs. In line with data reported by other groups,³³,⁴⁶ we found only three BCCs with allelic losses on 17p (8%), including two tumours with a TP53 mutation. However, BCCs have been reported frequently to carry more than one TP53 point mutation, indicating alterations in both alleles.³⁵,⁴⁶,⁴⁹ We identified one BCC that harboured two distinct TP53 mutations. Thus, 8% of our BCCs demonstrated evidence of complete loss of wild-type TP53, which is less frequent than reported by other investigators.³¹,³⁵,⁴⁶,⁴⁹ This discrepancy may at least partly be due to different experimental strategies, such as direct sequencing³¹,⁴⁶ vs. SSCP/heteroduplex analysis (our study). Furthermore, Pontén et al.⁴⁹ and Ling et al.³⁵ microdissected different tumour parts from frozen sections, which enabled the identification of neoplastic subclones that carry distinct TP53 mutations. In contrast, we performed mutation analysis on DNA extracted from larger pieces of frozen tumour tissue and therefore may have missed detection of small subclones with different mutations. Our results and the available data from the literature agree on the finding that

Fig 1. Examples of genetic alterations detected in sporadic basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) using single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP)/heteroduplex analysis, DNA sequencing and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis. (a) Demonstration of aberrant SSCP bands (arrows) for PTCH exon 19 in the tumour DNA (T) of BCC53 compared with the corresponding blood DNA (B) (left panel). DNA sequencing of the tumour DNA revealed a point mutation (arrow) resulting in the exchange of one amino acid (c.3236G → T: S1079I) (middle panel). Tumour BCC53 additionally showed LOH at microsatellite markers on 9q (right panel). Arrows point to the alleles that are lost in the tumour DNA. (b) SSCP/heteroduplex analysis showed an aberrant band (arrow) for TP53 exon 6 in the same tumour (BCC53) (left panel). On DNA sequencing, this tumour carried a C → T transition mutation (arrow) introducing a premature stop codon (c.637C → T: R213X) (middle panel). In addition, microsatellite analysis detected LOH at markers from 17p (arrows) in this tumour (right panel). (c) Demonstration of a heterozygous somatic SUFUH mutation in tumour BCC45. The left panel shows aberrant SSCP bands for SUFUH exon 4 in the tumour DNA (arrow) compared with the corresponding blood DNA. These were due to a heterozygous point mutation (c.560C → T: P187L) as demonstrated by sequencing of the tumour DNA (arrow, middle panel). BCC45 did not show LOH at microsatellite loci on 10q (right panel).

predominantly UV signature mutations, suggesting the possibility that racial differences may also influence the type of PTCH mutations in BCCs.³²

In comparison with the frequent PTCH alterations, mutations in other Shh pathway genes are far less common in

© 2005 British Association of Dermatologists • British Journal of Dermatology 2005 152, pp43–51

more than two-thirds of the TP53 mutations in BCCs are presumably UV induced. Thus, the TP53 mutations in BCCs are more frequently UV signature mutations than the PTCH mutations in these tumours. The reason for this difference is unclear. Interestingly, TP53 and PTCH mutations coincided in 24% of the BCCs in our series and 37% of the BCCs investigated by other authors.³¹ These findings suggest that activation of the Shh pathway and impairment of p53 function are not complementary aberrations in BCCs but rather may act synergistically. This hypothesis is supported by experimental findings showing that loss of p53 accelerates the development of medulloblastoma in patched heterozygous knock-out mice.⁵⁰ Concerning the timing of PTCH and TP53 mutations, data reported by Ling et al.³⁵ suggest that TP53 mutation may either precede or follow PTCH in the pathogenesis of BCCs. Interestingly, recent studies provided first evidence that p53 signalling may be altered in BCCs through aberrations in p53 pathway genes other than TP53 itself. For example, about 30% of BCCs were found to show LOH on the long arm of chromosome 4, with a minimal deleted region including the putative tumour suppressor gene ING1L, a DNA damage-inducible gene that negatively regulates cell proliferation through acetylation of p53.⁵¹ Other authors reported that BCCs demonstrate frequent promoter hypermethylation and transcriptional downregulation of the 14-3-3sigma gene, which is regulated by p53 and encodes an inhibitor of cell cycle progression.⁵² However, it remains to be investigated whether these alterations represent additional or alternative changes to TP53 mutations in BCCs.

In addition to the Shh pathway genes and TP53, we screened our BCC series for mutations in five other skin cancer-related genes, i.e. the Ras pathway genes NRAS, HRAS, KRAS and BRAF, as well as the β-catenin gene CTNNB1. In line with Campbell et al.,¹⁷ who did not detect any HRAS mutation in a study of 40 BCCs, we found no evidence for activating mutations in HRAS or any other of the investigated Ras genes in our tumour series. Similarly, other authors reported that Ras gene mutations were restricted to a minor subset of BCCs.⁹,¹⁸ In contrast, one study found activating HRAS codon 12 mutations in five of 16 BCCs (31%).¹⁰ The reason for this discrepancy is unclear but could be due either to differences in the molecular epidemiology between areas of low and high sun exposure or to technical reasons.¹⁷ In any case, it appears that activating Ras gene mutations play a minor role in BCCs, which clearly distinguishes these tumours from cutaneous SCCs and malignant melanomas, both of which carry frequent Ras gene mutations.¹⁵,¹⁶ Somatic mutations in BRAF have been identified as a frequent genetic alteration in melanocytic tumours of the skin, including both benign naevi and malignant melanomas.¹⁶,⁵³,⁵⁴ Here we report the first analysis of BCCs for BRAF mutations. Our results indicate that BCCs do not carry BRAF mutations and thus support the conclusion that alteration of Ras pathway genes is of minor importance in these tumours.

Immunohistochemical studies showed nuclear localization of β-catenin in the majority of BCCs.²¹,²² According to El-Bahrawy et al.,²¹ nuclear β-catenin was invariably detected

Mutation profiling of basal cell carcinomas, J. Reifenberger *et al.* ⁴⁹

in the infiltrative and morphoeiform BCC variants. In nodular and superficial BCCs, nuclear β-catenin expression was present in 47% and 67% of cases, respectively, with tumour cell nuclei at the invasive tumour margins being predominantly stained.²¹ Translocation of β-catenin from the cytoplasm to the nucleus is an indicator of Wnt pathway activity and may be caused by mutations in the β-catenin gene CTNNB1. However, mutation analysis did not reveal any CTNNB1 mutations in our BCC series, indicating that the reported nuclear β-catenin localization in BCCs is not caused by mutation of β-catenin itself.

In summary, we investigated 10 skin cancer-related genes for genetic alterations in sporadic BCCs and detected mutations with decreasing frequency in PTCH, TP53, SMOH and SUFUH. No mutations were found in GLI1, NRAS, KRAS, HRAS, BRAF or CTNNB1. Mutations in PTCH and SMOH were significantly less common UV signature transitions compared with TP53 mutations. In addition, PTCH alterations in BCCs frequently inactivate both alleles while TP53 alterations are usually restricted to one allele. Thus, our mutation profiling indicates PTCH, TP53, SMOH and SUFUH as targets for genetic alterations in sporadic BCCs. The other six investigated genes do not appear to be commonly altered in these tumours. Furthermore, the different types of detected mutations are in line with the hypothesis that both UV-dependent and UV-independent mechanisms contribute to BCC development.

## Acknowledgments

The study was supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (SFB503, B7; to J.R. and G.R.) and the Deutsche Krebshilfe (10–1639-Re3 and 70–3088-Sa1; to G.R.). M.W. is supported by the Lise Meitner programme of the Ministry of Science and Research of North Rhine-Westphalia. J.R. and M.W. contributed equally to this work.

## References

1. Diepgen TL, Mahler V. The epidemiology of skin cancer. Br J Dermatol 2002; **61**:1–6.
2. Brash DE, Seetharam S, Kraemer KH et al. Photoproduct frequency is not the major determinant of UV base substitution hot-spots or cold spots in human cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987; **84**:3782–6.
3. Hahn H, Wicking C, Zaphiropoulos PG et al. Mutations of the human homolog of Drosophila patched in the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. Cell 1996; **85**:841–51.
4. Johnson RL, Rothman AL, Xie J et al. Human homolog of patched, a candidate gene for the basal cell nevus syndrome. Science 1996; **272**:1668–71.
5. Gailani MR, Stahle-Backdahl M, Leffell DJ et al. The role of the human homologue of Drosophila patched in sporadic basal cell carcinomas. Nat Genet 1996; **14**:78–81.
6. Xie J, Murone M, Luoh SM et al. Activating Smoothened mutations in sporadic basal-cell carcinoma. Nature 1998; **391**:90–2.
7. Reifenberger J, Wolter M, Weber RG et al. Missense mutations in SMOH in sporadic basal cell carcinomas of the skin and primitive

© 2005 British Association of Dermatologists • British Journal of Dermatology 2005 **152**, pp43–51

50 Mutation profiling of basal cell carcinomas, J. Reifenberger et al.

neuroectodermal tumours of the central nervous system. Cancer Res 1998; 58:1798–803.
8 Giglia-Mari G, Sarasin A. TP53 mutations in human skin cancers. Hum Mutat 2003; 21:217–28.
9 van der Schroeff JG, Evers LM, Boot AJ, Bos JL. Ras oncogene mutations in basal cell carcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas of human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1990; 94:423–5.
10 Pierceall WE, Goldberg LH, Tainsky MA et al. Ras gene mutation and amplification in human nonmelanoma skin cancers. Mol Carcinog 1991; 4:196–202.
11 Cohen MM Jr. The hedgehog signaling network. Am J Med Genet 2003; 123A:5–28.
12 Wetmore C. Sonic hedgehog in normal and neoplastic proliferation: insight gained from human tumours and animal models. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2003; 13:34–42.
13 Altaba AR, Sanchez P, Dahmane N. Gli and hedgehog in cancer: tumours, embryos and stem cells. Nat Rev Cancer 2002; 2:361–72.
14 Taylor MD, Liu L, Raffel C et al. Mutations in SUFU predispose to medulloblastoma. Nat Genet 2002; 31:306–10.
15 Dlugosz A, Merlino G, Yuspa SH. Progress in cutaneous cancer research. J Invest Dermatol Symp Proc 2002; 7:17–26.
16 Reifenberger J, Knobbe CB, Sterzinger AA et al. Frequent alterations of Ras signaling pathway genes in sporadic malignant melanomas. Int J Cancer 2004; 109:377–84.
17 Campbell C, Quinn AG, Rees JL. Codon 12 Harvey-ras mutations are rare events in non-melanoma human skin cancer. Br J Dermatol 1993; 128:111–14.
18 Wilke WW, Robinson RA, Kennard CD. H-ras-1 gene mutations in basal cell carcinoma: automated direct sequencing of clinical specimens. Mod Pathol 1993; 6:15–19.
19 Owens DM, Watt FM. Contribution of stem cells and differentiated cells to epidermal tumours. Nat Rev Cancer 2003; 3:444–51.
20 Stenn KS, Paus R. Controls of hair follicle cycling. Physiol Rev 2001; 81:449–94.
21 El-Bahrawy M, El-Masry N, Alison M et al. Expression of beta-catenin in basal cell carcinoma. Br J Dermatol 2003; 148:964–70.
22 Yamazaki F, Aragane Y, Kawada A, Tezuka T. Immunohistochemical detection for nuclear beta-catenin in sporadic basal cell carcinoma. Br J Dermatol 2001; 145:771–7.
23 van den Boom J, Wolter M, Kuick R et al. Characterization of gene expression profiles associated with glioma progression using oligonucleotide-based microarray analysis and real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Am J Pathol 2003; 163:1033–43.
24 Sambrook J, Fritsch EF, Maniatis T. Molecular Cloning: a Laboratory Manual, 2nd edn. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1989; 9.17–9.19.
25 Reifenberger J, Knobbe CB, Wolter M et al. Molecular genetic analysis of malignant melanomas for aberrations of the WNT signaling pathway genes CTNNB1, APC, ICAT and BTRC. Int J Cancer 2002; 100:549–56.
26 Boström J, Muhlbauer A, Reifenberger G. Deletion mapping of the short arm of chromosome 1 identifies a common region of deletion distal to D1S496 in human meningiomas. Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 1997; 94:479–85.
27 Wolter M, Reifenberger J, Sommer C et al. Mutations in the human homologue of the Drosophila segment polarity gene patched (PTCH) in sporadic basal cell carcinomas of the skin and primitive neuroectodermal tumours of the central nervous system. Cancer Res 1997; 57:2581–5.
28 Unden AB, Holmberg E, Lundh-Rozell B et al. Mutations in the human homologue of Drosophila patched (PTCH) in basal cell

carcinomas and the Gorlin syndrome: different in vivo mechanisms of PTCH inactivation. Cancer Res 1996; 56:4562–5.
29 Aszterbaum M, Rothman A, Johnson RL et al. Identification of mutations in the human PATCHED gene in sporadic basal cell carcinomas and in patients with the basal cell nevus syndrome. J Invest Dermatol 1998; 110:885–8.
30 Evans T, Boonchai W, Shanley S et al. The spectrum of patched mutations in a collection of Australian basal cell carcinomas. Hum Mutat 2000; 16:43–8.
31 Zhang H, Ping XL, Lee PK et al. Role of PTCH and p53 genes in early-onset basal cell carcinoma. Am J Pathol 2001; 158:381–5.
32 Kim MY, Park HJ, Baek SC et al. Mutations of the p53 and PTCH gene in basal cell carcinomas: UV mutation signature and strand bias. J Dermatol Sci 2002; 29:1–9.
33 van der Riet P, Karp D, Farmer E et al. Progression of basal cell carcinoma through loss of chromosome 9q and inactivation of a single p53 allele. Cancer Res 1994; 54:25–7.
34 Gailani MR, Leffell DJ, Ziegler A et al. Relationship between sunlight exposure and a key genetic alteration in basal cell carcinoma. J Natl Cancer Inst 1996; 88:349–54.
35 Ling G, Ahmadian A, Persson A et al. PATCHED and p53 gene alterations in sporadic and hereditary basal cell cancer. Oncogene 2001; 20:7770–8.
36 Bodak N, Queille S, Avril MF et al. High levels of patched gene mutations in basal-cell carcinomas from patients with xeroderma pigmentosum. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999; 96:5117–22.
37 D’Errico M, Calcagnile A, Canzona F et al. UV mutation signature in tumour suppressor genes involved in skin carcinogenesis in xeroderma pigmentosum patients. Oncogene 2000; 19:463–7.
38 Couve-Privat S, Bouadjar B, Avril MF et al. Significantly high levels of ultraviolet-specific mutations in the smoothened gene in basal cell carcinomas from DNA repair-deficient xeroderma pigmentosum patients. Cancer Res 2002; 62:7186–9.
39 Kogerman P, Grimm T, Kogerman L et al. Mammalian suppressor-of-fused modulates nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of Gli-1. Nat Cell Biol 1999; 1:312–19.
40 Taylor MD, Zhang X, Liu L et al. Failure of a medulloblastoma-derived mutant of SUFU to suppress WNT signaling. Oncogene 2004; 23:4577–83.
41 Dahmane N, Lee J, Robins P et al. Activation of the transcription factor Gli1 and the Sonic hedgehog signalling pathway in skin tumours. Nature 1997; 389:876–81.
42 Ghali L, Wong ST, Green J et al. Gli1 protein is expressed in basal cell carcinomas, outer root sheath keratinocytes and a subpopulation of mesenchymal cells in normal human skin. J Invest Dermatol 1999; 113:595–9.
43 Bonifas JM, Pennypacker S, Chuang PT et al. Activation of expression of hedgehog target genes in basal cell carcinomas. J Invest Dermatol 2001; 116:739–42.
44 Nilsson M, Unden AB, Krause D et al. Induction of basal cell carcinomas and trichoepitheliomas in mice overexpressing GLI-1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000; 97:3438–43.
45 Rady P, Scinicariello F, Wagner RF Jr, Tyring SK. p53 mutations in basal cell carcinomas. Cancer Res 1992; 52:3804–6.
46 Ziegler A, Leffell DJ, Kunala S et al. Mutation hotspots due to sunlight in the p53 gene of nonmelanoma skin cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1993; 90:4216–20.
47 Moles JP, Moyret C, Guillot B et al. p53 gene mutations in human epithelial skin cancers. Oncogene 1993; 8:583–8.
48 Bolshakov S, Walker CM, Strom SS et al. p53 mutations in human aggressive and nonaggressive basal and squamous cell carcinomas. Clin Cancer Res 2003; 9:228–34.


© 2005 British Association of Dermatologists • British Journal of Dermatology 2005 152, pp43–51

49  Pontén F, Williams C, Ling G et al. Genomic analysis of single cells from human basal cell cancer using laser-assisted capture microscopy. Mutat Res 1997; **382**:45–55.

50  Wetmore C, Eberhart DE, Curran T. Loss of p53 but not ARF accelerates medulloblastoma in mice heterozygous for patched. Cancer Res 2001; **61**:513–16.

51  Sironi E, Cerri A, Tomasini D, Sirchia SM et al. Loss of heterozygosity on chromosome 4q32–35 in sporadic basal cell carcinomas: evidence for the involvement of p33ING2/ING1L and SAP30 genes. J Cutan Pathol 2004; **31**:318–22.

52  Lodygin D, Yazdi AS, Sander CA et al. Analysis of 14-3-3sigma expression in hyperproliferative skin diseases reveals selective loss associated with CpG-methylation in basal cell carcinoma. Oncogene 2003; **22**:5519–24.

53  Davies H, Bignell GR, Cox C et al. Mutations of the BRAF gene in human cancer. Nature 2002; **417**:949–54.

54  Pollock PM, Harper UL, Hansen KS et al. High frequency of BRAF mutations in nevi. Nat Genet 2003; **33**:19–20.
