
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

PEPTIDES

Peptides 26 (2005) 339–350

Review

A walk-through of the yeast mating pheromone response pathway

Lee Bardwell*

Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, 2208 Natural Sciences I, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-
ding yeast for its mode of cell division. The study of the yeast
pheromone response pathway began with the isolation of sterile
mutants in the laboratories of Mackay and Hartwell in the
seventies [59, 94, 136]. The sterile, or STE, mutants were un-
able to mate, and those specifically defective in pheromone
response did not undergo
Fig. 1. Schematic cartoon of selected elements of the yeast mating pheromone response pathway (see text for details).

effectors: (1) a Ste5/Ste11 complex; (2) the Ste20 protein kinase, and; (3) a Far1/Cdc24 complex. It is Ste4<sup>Gβ</sup> that actually binds to each of the effect
GDP; Ste18<sup>Gγ</sup> anchors the Gβγ complex to the membrane via covalently attached lipid (farnesyl and palmitoyl) groups. A key result of Gβγ binding to these multiple effectors is that Ste20 and Ste11 are brought near each other; the initial signal is then transmitted further downstream when Ste20 phosphorylates, and
actin cytoskeleton, cholesterol and sphingolipid-rich lipid rafts, localized exocytosis, and rapid endocytosis to prevent diffusion to equilibrium [4,5,139].

Although the interaction of Gβγ with the Farl/Cdc24 complex is required for pheromone-induced changes in cell polarity, it is not required for initial signal transmission, as shown by
mapped by Errede’s lab, however, it was found to be downstream of the first ATG; therefore, translation must start at the second ATG, leading to a 717 residue product [120]. This conclusion is supported by comparison of Ste11 sequences in closely related yeasts [72].

### 3.5. $Ste7^{MEK}$ and MAPK phosphorylation

[L. Bardwell / Peptides 26 (2005) 339–350](#)

[29,135], are substrates of Fus3 and Kss1. Finally, Dig1 and Dig2 appear to bind Ste12 less tightly following pheromone stimulation [29,135]. These data collectively suggest that MAPK-dependent phosphorylation of Ste1
expression of Sst2 is potently induced by pheromone, and Sst2 stability may also be enhanced via phosphorylation by Fus3<sup>MAPK</sup> [51].

5. Following GTP hydrolysis, Gα rebinds to Gβγ, reforming inactive heterotrimer. The expression of Gα is induced by pheromone. Moreover, it has been
References

[1] Adams JA. Activation loop phosphorylation and catalysis in protein kinases: is there functional evidence for the autoinhibitor model? Biochemistry 2003;42:601–7.

[2] Apanovitch DM, Slep KC, Sigler PB, Dohlman HG. Sst2 is a GTPase-activating protein for G
the actin cytoskeleton during polarized morphogenesis. Science 1997;276:118–22.

[44] Farley FW, Satterberg B, Goldsmith EJ, Elion EA. Relative dependence of different outputs of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae pheromone response pathway on the MAP kinase Fus3p. Genetics 199
[86] Levchenko A, Bruck J, Sternberg P. Scaffold proteins may biphatically affect the levels of mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling and reduce its threshold properties. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:5818–23.

[87] Lew J. MAP kinases and CDKs: kinetic basis for catalytic activation.
[130] Shimada Y, Gulli MP, Peter M. Nuclear sequestration of the exchange factor Cdc24 by Far1 regulates cell polarity during yeast mating. Nat Cell Biol 2000; 2:117–24.

[131] Smith GR, Givan SA, Cullen P, Sprague Jr GF. GTPase-activating