
0013-7227/05/\$15.00/0  
Printed in U.S.A.

**Ga<sub>12</sub>/Ga<sub>13</sub> Subunits of Heterotrimeric G Proteins Mediate Parathyroid Hormone Activation of Phospholipase D in UMR-106 Osteoblastic Cells**

A. T. K. Singh, A. Gilchrist, T. Voyno-Yasenetskaya, J. M. Radeff-Huang, and P. H. Stern

Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry (A.T.K.S., A.G., J.M.R.-H., P.H.S.), Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611; Cue BIOTech (A.G.), Evanston, Illinois 60201; and Department of Pharmacology (T.V.-Y.), University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60612

PTH, a major regulator of bone remodeling and a therapeutically effective bone anabolic agent, stimulates several signaling pathways in osteoblastic cells. Our recent studies have revealed that PTH activates phospholipase D (PLD)-mediated phospholipid hydrolysis through a RhoA-dependent mechanism in osteoblastic cells, raising the question of the upstream link to the PTH receptor. In the current study, we investigated the role of heterotrimeric G proteins in mediating PTH-stimulated PLD activity in UMR-106 osteoblastic cells. Transfection with antagonist minigenes coding for small peptide antagonists to Ga<sub>12</sub> and Ga<sub>13</sub> subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins prevented PTH-stimulated activation of PLD, whereas an antagonist minigene to Gas failed to produce this effect. Effects of pharmacological inhibitors (protein kinase inhibitor, Clostridium botulinum exoenzyme C3) were consistent with a role of Rho small G proteins, but not of cAMP, in the effect of PTH on PLD. Expression of constitutively active Ga<sub>12</sub> and Ga<sub>13</sub> activated PLD, an effect that was inhibited by dominant-negative RhoA. The results identify Ga<sub>12</sub> and Ga<sub>13</sub> as upstream transducers of PTH effects on PLD, mediated through RhoA in osteoblastic cells. (*Endocrinology* 146: 2171–2175, 2005)

P TH INTERACTION with its receptor on osteoblasts initiates events leading to both the production of anabolic mediators that stimulate bone formation, and to the production of cytokines that activate osteoclastogenesis, osteoclast activity, and osteoclast survival. The receptors for PTH are heptahedral transmembrane proteins that transduce their effects through heterotrimeric GTPase-activating proteins (G proteins). The activation of adenylyl cyclase through Ga-containing G proteins is a major downstream effect of PTH (1). However, there is also activation of the membrane phospholipases, phospholipase C (2) and phospholipase D (PLD) (3, 4). Our previous studies have shown that PTH activation of PLD and subsequent phosphatidic acid phosphatase action leads to translocation of protein kinase Ca from the cytosol to plasma membranes (5). PLD-dependent signaling also contributes to PTH stimulation of IL-6 promoter activity in the osteoblastic cells (5). PTH activates the small G protein RhoA (6). The actions of PTH on PLD (4) and on protein kinase Ca translocation (6) are dependent on RhoA, and small GTPases of the Rho/Ras family are also involved in PTH stimulation of IL-6 promoter activity (6).

Activation of small G proteins of the Rho family and subsequently PLD by membrane receptors can be mediated through the Ga<sub>12</sub>/Ga<sub>13</sub> family of heterotrimeric GTPases (7–13), and these interactions are now recognized to play important roles in cell shape changes and cell survival (7,

---

First Published Online February 10, 2005  
Abbreviations: PE, Phosphatidylethanol; PKI, protein kinase inhibitor; PLD, phospholipase D.

*Endocrinology* is published monthly by The Endocrine Society (http://www.endo-society.org), the foremost professional society serving the endocrine community.

Materials and Methods

**Materials**

Bovine PTH 1–34 was from Bachem (Torrance, CA). RhoA19N was generously provided by Dr. Said Sebti (University of South Florida, Tampa, FL). *Clostridium botulinum* exotoxin C3 was from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). Constitutively active (GTPase-deficient) Ga<sub>12</sub> and Ga<sub>13</sub> were generated as described previously (18, 19). Minigenes that code for small peptides that act as antagonists of the endogenous G proteins, pcDNA-Gas, pcDNA-Ga<sub>12</sub>, and pcDNA-Ga<sub>13</sub>, were obtained from Cue BIOTech (Evanston, IL) and have been described previously (20, 21).

**Cell culture**

UMR-106 osteoblastic osteosarcoma cells were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD). The cells were cultured to confluence in DMEM supplemented with 15% heat-inactivated horse serum and 100 U/ml K-penicillin G at 37°C in a 5% CO<sub>2</sub> environment. Cells were passaged every 3–5 d in 75-cm² tissue culture flasks. Cells were then seeded on sterile culture dishes and used the following day. Cells from passages 12–18 were used for experiments.

**PLD activity/transphosphatidylation**

Cells were seeded at 500,000 cells per well in six-well cell culture dishes, allowed to attach overnight, and then prelabeled with \[^{14}C\] palmitic acid (0.25 μCi/ml) in DMEM containing 15% heat-inactivated horse serum and 100 U/ml K-penicillin G for 24 h at 37°C in a 5% CO<sub>2</sub> atmosphere. Cells were washed and then pretreated or treated with the indicated agonists or antagonists for the given times in DMEM containing 20 mm HEPES, 0.1% BSA, and 1% absolute ethanol. To terminate

the reaction, media were quickly removed, and 1 ml ice-cold methanol was added to cells. Cells were scraped into chloroform, and lipids were extracted using the method of Folch *et al.* (22). The extract containing lipids was dried under nitrogen, lipids were re-equilibrated in 100 μl chloroform-methanol (9:1 vol/vol), of which 50 μl was spotted on a thin-layer chromatography plate, and a 10-μl aliquot was used to determine total lipid radioactivity. Phosphatidylethanol (PE) was separated from the total lipid fraction by thin-layer chromatography using chloroform-methanol-acetic acid (70:10:2 vol/vol/vol) as the running solvent. A 1,2-dipalmitoyl-*sn*-glycero-3-phosphoethanol standard was run concurrently. Lipids were visualized by exposure to iodine vapor. For autoradiography, thin-layer chromatography plates were incubated at –70°C for 72 h. The PE bands were scraped and radioactivity determined by liquid scintillation counting. The ^14^C radioactivity recovered in PE at the end of the treatments was expressed as the percentage of total ^14^C lipid radioactivity and is presented as mean ± SE of three determinations.

### Constructs and transfections

UMR-106 cells were seeded at 400,000 cells per well in six-well cell culture dishes, and were transfected 16 h later. For experiments involving Gα C-terminal selective antagonist minigenes, 0.5 μg each of pcDNA3 (parental vector), pcDNA-Gα₁₂, pcDNA-Gα₁₃, pcDNAG-αs, or pcDNA-Gαq minigene DNAs were precomplexed with Lipofectamine Plus reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) in OPTI-MEM in the absence of antibiotics and serum. Cells were incubated with the constructs for 3 h at 37°C in a 5% CO₂ atmosphere, after which 1 ml OPTI-MEM medium containing 5% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin was added to each of the culture dishes. Medium was changed after 6 h, and incubation continued until 48 h. Cells were labeled with [^14^C] palmitic acid for the final 24 h of the incubation. For experiments with constitutively active (GTPase-deficient) Gα constructs, 0.4 μg each of pcDNA3 (control vector), *Gα₁₂* (Gα₁₂Q226L), or *Gα₁₃* (Gα₁₃Q223L) were precomplexed with Lipofectamine Plus reagent in OPTI-MEM medium in the absence of antibiotics and serum. Cells were incubated with the constructs for 3 h at 37°C in a 5% CO₂ atmosphere, after which 1 ml OPTI-MEM medium containing 5% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin was added to each of the culture dishes, which were then incubated overnight. Cells were labeled with [^14^C] palmitic acid and PLD activity measured as described. For experiments determining the effects of the dominant-negative mutant of RhoA (RhoA19N) on the actions of the constitutively active Gα₁₂ and Gα₁₃, 0.5 μg each of constitutively active mutants of Gα₁₂ and Gα₁₃ and dominant-negative mutant of RhoA (RhoA19N) were used, along with 0, 0.5, or 1 μg pcDNA3 (vector control), for a total of 1 μg DNA transfected.

### Statistics

For each experiment, triplicate treatments were used, and the mean ± SE was calculated. Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA and Tukey post test (GraphPad Prism Software; GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA). Treatment effects were confirmed in replicate experiments.

### Results

PLD activity was markedly increased when UMR-106 cells transfected with pcDNA3 were incubated with PTH 1–34 (10 nM) for 30 min (Fig. 1). This effect was prevented when the cells were transfected with minigene vectors that code for small peptide inhibitors of the Gα₁₂ or Gα₁₃ subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins, but was not prevented when the cells were transfected with minigene vectors that code for small peptide inhibitors of Gαs, Gαq, or with the pcDNA3 vector alone (Fig. 1). The lack of effect observed with transfection of the Gαs mutant vector is consistent with our findings using pharmacological agents. Specifically, a 30-min treatment with the protein kinase A antagonist protein kinase inhibitor (PKI) (Fig. 2A) failed to inhibit the PTH effect

FIG. 1. PTH-stimulated PLD activity in UMR-106 cells is inhibited by antagonistic minigene vectors pcDNA-Gα₁₂ and pcDNA-Gα₁₃ (pcDNA-Gα₁₂, pcDNA-Gα₁₃) but not by antagonist minigene vectors pcDNA-Gαs (pcDNA-Gαs) or pcDNAGαq (pcDNAGαq). Cells were transfected with 0.5 μg of the minigene vector for 24 h and then treated with PTH (10 nM) for 30 min. PLD activity was assayed as described in Materials and Methods. n = 3; ***, P < 0.001 vs. control (pcDNA alone); +++, P < 0.001 vs. PTH in pcDNA-transfected cells.

on PLD, and the adenylyl cyclase activator forskolin failed to activate PLD in the osteoblastic cells (Fig. 2A). The PKI was able to antagonize effect of PTH on the activation of the MAPK ERK (Fig. 2B).

The effect of PTH on PLD was antagonized by a 30-min treatment with *C. botulinum* exoenzyme C3 (Fig. 3), an inhibitor of Rho family small G proteins, consistent with our previous studies showing that the effects of PTH on PLD are inhibited by the more general Ras family small G protein inhibitor *Clostridium difficile* toxin B, by the geranylgeranyltransferase I inhibitor GGTI-2166 and by dominant-negative RhoA (4).

Consistent with the finding that the antagonistic pcDNA-Gα₁₂ and pcDNA-Gα₁₃ minigene vectors inhibited PTH-induced PLD activation, transfection of the UMR-106 cells with constitutively active Gα₁₂ and Gα₁₃, but not the control vector (pcDNA3), activated PLD independent of PTH stimulation (Fig. 4A). Dominant-negative RhoA, which inhibited the effect of PTH on PLD (Fig. 4B) prevented the observed stimulatory effects of constitutively active Gα₁₂ and Gα₁₃ constructs on PLD activity (Fig. 4C), suggesting that RhoA mediates the effects of Gα₁₂ and Gα₁₃ on PLD in the osteoblastic cells.

### Discussion

The present findings establish Gα₁₂ and Gα₁₃ subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins as upstream regulators of PLD in osteoblastic UMR-106 cells and as mediators of PTH stimulation of the phospholipase. Furthermore, the results show that the Rho small G proteins and specifically RhoA are intermediates in the Gα₁₂/Gα₁₃ regulation of the PTH-stimulated PLD response.

Studies in other tissues have shown that Gα₁₂ and Gα₁₃ activate Rho family small GTPases. In COS-7 cells, constitutively active Gα₁₂ and Gα₁₃ increase Rho-GTP. Constitu-

Singh et al. • G<sub>12</sub>/G<sub>13</sub> in PTH Action on Osteoblasts

Endocrinology, May 2005, 146(5):2171–2175 2173

FIG. 2. A, PTH-stimulated PLD activity is not inhibited by the protein kinase A inhibitor PKI, and the adenylyl cyclase activator forskolin (FSK) does not stimulate PLD activity in UMR-106 cells. Cells were treated with PTH (10 nM) or forskolin (10 μM) for 30 min. PKI (10 μM) was added 60 min before PTH or forskolin and was present throughout the incubation. n = 3; *, P < 0.05 vs. control; **, P < 0.01 vs. control. B, Activity of PKI was demonstrated by its effectiveness to inhibit PTH activation of p42/44 ERK. Cells were incubated for 5 min with 10 nM PTH. PKI (10 μM) was added 60 min before treatment with PTH.

tively active Ga<sub>12</sub> and Ga<sub>13</sub> stimulate formation of actin stress fibers and focal adhesions in Swiss 3T3 cells (7, 23). The effect is prevented by blocking Rho, indicating that Rho is a downstream effector of the actions of these heterotrimeric G protein subunits (7). Neither activated forms of other Ga subunits, nor βγ complexes have the cytoskeletal effects of the Ga<sub>12</sub> and Ga<sub>13</sub> subunits (7). In CCL39 fibroblasts, Ga<sub>13</sub> stimulates Na<sup>+</sup>-H<sup>+</sup> exchange through both RhoA-dependent

FIG. 3. The stimulatory effect of PTH 1–34 (10 nM) on PLD activity in UMR-106 cells is inhibited by C. botulinum C3 exotoxin, which inhibits the activity of Rho small G proteins by ADP ribosylation. PLD activity was measured after a 30-min incubation. n = 3; ***, P < 0.001 vs. control; +++, P < 0.001 vs. PTH alone.

FIG. 4. A, Constitutively active Ga<sub>12</sub> and Ga<sub>13</sub> (*Ga<sub>12</sub>, *Ga<sub>13</sub>) (0.5 μg) stimulate PLD activity similarly to PTH (10 nM) in UMR-106 cells. PLD activity was measured after a 30-min incubation. n = 3; *, P < 0.05 vs. control; **, P < 0.01 vs. control. B, The stimulatory effect of PTH (10 nM) on PLD activity is prevented by transfection with dominant-negative RhoA. Cells were transfected with 0.5 μg/ml of the dominant-negative RhoA as described in Materials and Methods, and then treated with PTH for 30 min. n = 3; ***, P < 0.001 vs. pcDNA control; ++, P < 0.01 vs. PTH. C, Stimulatory effects of constitutively active Ga<sub>12</sub> and Ga<sub>13</sub> on PLD activity in UMR-106 cells are prevented by transfection with dominant-negative RhoA. Cells were cotransfected with 0.5 μg/ml of the constructs as described in Materials and Methods. n = 3; ***, P < 0.001 vs. pcDNA control; +++, P < 0.001 vs. *Ga<sub>12</sub>; $$$, P < 0.001 vs. *Ga<sub>13</sub>.

and independent pathways (24). The interaction of the Ga subunits and RhoA appears to be through Rho-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factors, including p115 RhoGEF (25, 26), PDZ-RhoGEF (27) and Lbc RhoGEF (28).

Activation of several endogenous receptors leads to stim-

ulation of Ga<sub>12</sub>/Ga<sub>13</sub>-Rho signaling. In neuronal cells this leads to formation of a F-actin cortical structure that effects changes in cell shape (29, 30). α<sub>1</sub> Adrenergic receptor-induced cardiac hypertrophy is mediated in part by a Ga<sub>12</sub>/Ga<sub>13</sub>-Rho-JNK pathway (31). The Ga subunits can have independent effects. Serotonin 5-HT4(a) receptor activation of a serum response element, mediated through Rho activation, is potentiated by overexpression of Ga<sub>13</sub>, but not Ga<sub>12</sub> (32). Lysophosphatidic acid activation of Rho in Swiss 3T3 cells involves Ga<sub>13</sub>, but not Ga<sub>12</sub> (23).

Ga<sub>12</sub> and Ga<sub>13</sub> are involved in PLD activation in other tissues. Ga<sub>12</sub>/Ga<sub>13</sub> transduces signaling from the calcium sensing receptor in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells (12). Ga<sub>12</sub> is involved in angiotensin II receptor coupling to PLD in vascular smooth muscle cells (11), whereas Ga<sub>13</sub> mediates PLD activation by 5-hydroxytryptamine 2C receptors in rat choroid plexus epithelial cells (9). Expression of a constitutively active Ga<sub>13</sub> subunit in COS-7 cells stimulated rat brain PLD (8).

Bone remodeling requires the action of both osteoblasts and osteoclasts. RhoA is already known to play an important role in osteoclast activity (33, 34). C. botulinum C3 exoenzyme disrupts the actin ring and inhibits bone resorption by isolated osteoclasts (33). Expression of a constitutively active RhoA in avian osteoclasts results in increased podosome assembly, formation of stress fibers, increased motility, and bone resorbing activity (34). Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase is also increased. These effects are inhibited by C. botulinum C3 exoenzyme and by expression of dominant-negative RhoA. PTH action on osteoblasts leads to significant changes in bone, including therapeutically significant anabolic effects that may be mediated through changes in cell survival (35), as well as activation of osteoclastogenesis through production of IL-6 (36) and the membrane cytokine, receptor activator of nuclear factor κB ligand (37). The finding that the Ga<sub>12</sub>/Ga<sub>13</sub>-RhoA-PLD pathway, which is important in cell survival in other tissues, is activated by PTH in osteoblasts suggests that this PTH-stimulated, cAMP-independent pathway is likely to be important in bone biology.

# Acknowledgments

We thank Dr. Said Sebti for providing the dominant-negative RhoA.

Received September 29, 2004. Accepted February 2, 2005.

Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to: Paula H. Stern, Ph.D., Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, 303 East Chicago Avenue S-215, Chicago, Illinois 60611. E-mail: p-stern@northwestern.edu.

Present address for J.M.R.-H.: Department of Pharmacology, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093.

This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant AR11262 (to P.H.S.). Development of the constitutively active Ga constructs was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants GM56159 and GM65160 and a grant from the American Heart Association (to T.V.-Y.).

# References

1. Partridge NC, Bloch SR, Pearman AT 1994 Signal transduction pathways mediating parathyroid hormone regulation of osteoblastic gene expression. J Cell Biochem 55:321–327
2. Civitelli R, Reid IR, Westbrook S, Avari LV, Hruska KA 1988 PTH elevates

Singh et al. • G<sub>12</sub>/G<sub>13</sub> in PTH Action on Osteoblasts

inositol polyphosphates and diacylglycerol in a rat osteoblast-like cell line. Am J Physiol 255:E660–E667

3. Singh AT, Kunnel JG, Strieleman PJ, Stern PH 1999 Parathyroid hormone (PTH)-(1–34), [Nle(8,18),Tyr34]PTH-(3–34) amide, PTH-(1–31) amide, and PTH-related peptide-(1–34) stimulate phosphatidylcholine hydrolysis in UMR-106 osteoblastic cells: comparison with effects of phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate. Endocrinology 140:131–137

4. Singh AT, Bhattacharyya RS, Radeff JM, Stern PH 2003 Regulation of parathyroid hormone-stimulated phospholipase D in UMR-106 cells by calcium, MAP kinase, and small G proteins. J Bone Miner Res 18:1453–1460

5. Radeff JM, Singh ATK, Stern PH 2004 Role of protein kinase A, phospholipase C and phospholipase D in parathyroid hormone receptor regulation of protein kinase C α and interleukin-6 in UMR-106 osteoblastic cells. Cell Signal 16:105–114

6. Radeff JM, Nagy Z, Stern PH 2004 Rho and Rho kinase are involved in PTH-stimulated protein kinase C α translocation and IL-6 promoter activity in osteoblastic cells. J Bone Miner Res 19:1882–1891

7. Buhl AM, Johnson NL, Dhanasekaran N, Johnson GL 1995 Ga<sub>12</sub> and Ga<sub>13</sub> stimulate Rho-dependent stress fiber formation and focal adhesion assembly. J Biol Chem 270:24631–24634

8. Plank SG, Park SK, Exton JH 1998 The α-subunit of the heterotrimeric G protein G<sub>13</sub> activates a phospholipase D isozyme by a pathway requiring Rho family GTPases. J Biol Chem 273:4823–4826

9. McGrew L, Chang MS, Sanders-Bush E 2002 Phospholipase D activation by endogenous 5-hydroxytryptamine 2C receptors is mediated by Ga<sub>13</sub> and pertussis toxin-insensitive Gβγ subunits. Mol Pharmacol 62:1339–1343

10. Mitchell R, McCulloch D, Lutz E, Johnson M, MacKenzie C, Fennell M, Fink G, Zhou W, Sealon SC 1998 Rhodopsin-family receptors associate with small G proteins to activate phospholipase D. Nature 392:411–414

11. Ushio-Fukai M, Alexander RW, Akers M, Lyons PR, Lassegue B, Griendling KK 1999 Angiotensin II receptor coupling to phospholipase D is mediated by the βγ subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins in vascular smooth muscle cells. Mol Pharmacol 55:142–149

12. Huang C, Hujer KM, Wu Z, Miller RT 2004 The Ca<sup>2+</sup>-sensing receptor couples to Ga<sub>12/13</sub> to activate phospholipase D in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells. Am J Physiol 286:C22–C30

13. Kurose H 2003 Ga<sub>12</sub> and Ga<sub>13</sub> as key regulatory mediator in signal transduction. Life Sci 74:155–161

14. Ridley AJ, Hall A 1992 The small GTP-binding protein Rho regulates the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress fibers in response to growth factors. Cell 70:389–399

15. Stepan V, Ramamoorthy S, Pausawasdi N, Logsdon CD, Askari FK, Todisco A 2004 Role of small GTP binding proteins in the growth-promoting and antiapoptotic actions of gastrin. Am J Physiol 287:G715–G725

16. Nozawa Y 2002 Roles of phospholipase D in apoptosis and pro-survival. Biochim Biophys Acta 1585:77–86

17. Lee SY, Oh JY, Lee MJ, Jang MJ, Park HY, Kim JW, Min do S, Park YM, Chang YC, Bae YS, Kwak JY 2004 Anti-apoptotic mechanism and reduced expression of phospholipase D in spontaneous and Fas-stimulated apoptosis of human neutrophils. Eur J Immunol 34:2760–2770

18. Voyno-Yasenetskaya T, Conklin BR, Gilbert RL, Hooley R, Bourne HR, Barber DL 1994 Ga<sub>13</sub> stimulates Na-H exchange. J Biol Chem 269:4721–4724

19. Voyno-Yasenetskaya TA, Faure MP, Ahn NG, Bourne HR 1996 Ga<sub>12</sub> and Ga<sub>13</sub> regulate extracellular signal-regulated kinase and c-Jun kinase pathways by different mechanisms in COS-7 cells. J Biol Chem 271:21081–21087

20. Gilchrist A, Vanhauwe JF, Li A, Thomas TO, Voyno-Yasesnetskaya T, Hamm HE 2001 Ga minigenes expressing C-terminal peptides serve as specific inhibitors of thrombin-mediated endothelial activation. J Biol Chem 276:25672–25679

21. Gilchrist A, Li A, Hamm HE 2002 Ga COOH-terminal minigene vectors dissect heterotrimeric G protein signaling. Sci STKE 118:PL1

22. Folch L, Lees M, Stanley GHS 1957 A simple method for the isolation and purification of total lipids from animal tissues. J Biol Chem 226:497–509

23. Gohla A, Harhammer R, Schultz G 1998 The G-protein G<sub>13</sub> but not G<sub>12</sub> mediates signaling from lysophosphatidic acid receptor via epidermal growth factor receptor to Rho. J Biol Chem 273:4653–4659

24. Hooley R, Yu CY, Symons M, Barber DL 1996 Ga<sub>13</sub> stimulates Na+-H+ exchange through distinct Cdc42-dependent and RhoA-dependent pathways. J Biol Chem 271:6152–6158

25. Hart MJ, Jiang X, Kozasa T, Roscoe W, Singer WD, Gilman AG, Sternweis PC, Bollag G 1998 Direct stimulation of the guanine nucleotide exchange activity of p115 RhoGEF by Ga<sub>13</sub>. Science 280:2112–2114

26. Kozasa T, Jiang X, Hart MJ, Sternweis PM, Singer WD, Gilman AG, Bollag G, Sternweis PC 1998 p115 RhoGEF, a GTPase activating protein for Ga<sub>12</sub> and Ga<sub>13</sub>. Science 280:2109–2111

27. Oleksy A, Barton H, Devedjiev Y, Purdy M, Derewenda U, Otleswski J, Derewenda ZS 2004 Preliminary crystallographic analysis of the complex of the human GTPase RhoA with the DH/PH tandem of PDZ-RhoGEF. Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr 60:740–742

28. Dutt P, Nguyen N, Toksoz D 2004 Role of Lbc RhoGEF in Ga<sub>12/13</sub>-induced signals to Rho GTPase. Cell Signal 16:201–209

29. Kranenburg O, Poland M, Gebbink M, Oomen L, Moolenaar WH 1997
Singh *et al.* • G<sub>12</sub>/G<sub>13</sub> in PTH Action on Osteoblasts

Dissociation of LPA-induced cytoskeletal contraction from stress fiber formation by differential localization of RhoA. J Cell Sci 110(Pt 19):2417–2427

30. Kranenburg O, Poland M, van Horck FP, Drechsel D, Hall A, Moolenaar WH 1999 Activation of RhoA by lysosphatidic acid and Ga<sub>12/13</sub> subunits in neuronal cells: induction of neurite retraction. Mol Biol Cell 10:1851–1857

31. Maruyama Y, Nishida M, Sugimoto Y, Tanabe S, Turner JH, Kozasa T, Wada T, Nagao T, Kurose H 2002 Ga<sub>12/13</sub> mediates α<sub>1</sub>-adrenergic receptor-induced cardiac hypertrophy. Circ Res 91:961–969

32. Ponimaskin EG, Proﬁrovic J, Vaiskunaite R, Richter DW, Voyno- Yasenetskaya TA 2002 5-Hydroxytryptamine 4(a) receptor is coupled to the Ga subunit of heterotrimeric G<sub>13</sub> protein. J Biol Chem 277:20812–20819

33. Zhang D, Udagawa N, Nakamura I, Murakami H, Saito S, Yamasaki K, Shibasaki Y, Morii N, Narumiya S, Takahashi N, Suda T 1995 The small GTP-binding protein, Rho p21, is involved in bone resorption by regulating cytoskeletal organization in osteoclasts. J Cell Sci 108(Pt 6):2285–2292

34. Chellaiah MA, Soga N, Swanson S, McAllister S, Alvarez U, Wang D, Dowdy SF, Hruska KA 2000 Rho-A is critical for osteoclast podosome organization, motility, and bone resorption. J Biol Chem 275:11993–12002

35. Jilka RL, Weinstein RS, Bellido T, Roberson P, Parfitt AM, Manolagas SC 1999 Increased bone formation by prevention of osteoblast apoptosis with parathyroid hormone. J Clin Invest 104:439–446

36. Grey A, Mitnick MA, Masiukiewicz U, Sun BH, Rudikoff S, Jilka RL, Manolagas SC, Insogna K 1999 A role for interleukin-6 in parathyroid hormone-induced bone resorption in vivo. Endocrinology 140:4683–4690

37. Udagawa N, Takahashi N, Jimi E, Matsuzaki K, Tsurukai T, Itoh K, Nakagawa N, Yasuda H, Goto M, Tsuda E, Higashio K, Gillespie MT, Martin TJ, Suda T 1999 Osteoblasts/stromal cells stimulate osteoclast activation through expression of osteoclast differentiation factor/RANKL but not macrophage colony-stimulating factor: receptor activator of NF-κB ligand. Bone 25: 517–523

Endocrinology is published monthly by The Endocrine Society (http://www.endo-society.org), the foremost professional society serving the endocrine community.