
World J. Surg. 29, 306–311 (2005)  
DOI: 10.1007/s00268-004-7813-6  

---

**TGF-$\beta$ Signaling in Colon Cancer Cells**

Fazhi Li, M.D.,${}^{1}$ Yanna Cao, M.D.,${}^{1}$ Courtney M. Townsend Jr., M.D.,${}^{1}$ Tien C. Ko, M.D.${}^{1,2}$

${}^{1}$Department of Surgery, The University of Texas Medical Branch, 301 University Boulevard, Galveston, Texas, 77555-0737, USA  
${}^{2}$Department of Human Biological Chemistry & Genetics, Sealy Center for Cancer Cell Biology, University of Texas Medical Branch, 301 University Boulevard, Galveston, Texas, 77555-0737, USA  

Published Online: February 22, 2005  

---

**Abstract.** Transforming growth factor-betas (TGF-$\beta$s), cytokines expressed in the colon, play important roles as tumor suppressors and tumor promoters during colorectal carcinogenesis. TGF-$\beta$ signaling pathway involves activation of Smad2 and Smad3 by the type I receptor and formation of Smad2/3/4 heteromeric complexes that enter the nucleus to regulate transcription. Most human colorectal cancers are resistant to the tumor suppressor effects of TGF-$\beta$, and a subset of human colorectal cancers have mutations in Smad2 and Smad4. The purpose of this study was to determine whether Smads are required for TGF-$\beta$ signaling in colon cancer cells. First, we selected a colon cancer cell line (MC-26) that has a functional TGF-$\beta$ signaling pathway. We found that MC-26 cells expressed Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4 mRNAs by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and confirmed that the TGF-$\beta$ signaling pathway is functional using a transient transfection assay with 3TP-Lux reporter plasmid. TGF-$\beta$ also inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis in MC-26 cells. When MC-26 cells were transiently transfected with dominant-negative carboxyl-terminal truncation mutants of Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4, TGF-$\beta$-induced 3TP-Lux reporter activity was significantly reduced, suggesting that Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4 are attractive novel therapeutic targets for regulating TGF-$\beta$ signaling in colorectal cancers. Because MC-26 cells express TGF-$\beta$ activated Smads, have a functional TGF-$\beta$ signaling pathway, and are sensitive to the growth inhibitory and apoptotic effects of TGF-$\beta$, they can serve as an excellent model to examine TGF-$\beta$ signaling in colorectal cancers.

Colorectal cancer is the second most common fatal malignancy in the Western world, with approximately 150,000 new cases accounting for 55,000 deaths in the United States every year [1]. Surgical resection is still the only effective treatment for localized disease, achieving a 5-year survival rate of 90%. However, most colorectal cancer patients have regional or distant metastasis at the time of their initial presentation. Therapeutic options for metastatic diseases are mainly limited to the classic cytotoxic drug 5-fluorouracil in various schedules or in combination with irinotecan and oxaliplatin [2]. However, these cytotoxic drugs have not provided significantly prolonged survival in patients with distant metastasis. Recently, therapeutic strategies in the treatment of solid tumors have been focused on targeting specific cellular signaling pathways that regulate cell proliferation, apoptosis, and angiogenesis. One such important signaling pathway in colorectal cancer is the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-$\beta$) signaling pathway.

TGF-$\beta$s are 25-kDa proteins and belong to an important family of cytokines that regulate diverse biologic processes including proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and extracellular matrix formation [3, 4]. The normal colonic epithelium expresses three isoforms of TGF-$\beta$s (TGF-$\beta$1, 2, and 3) [5–7], and TGF-$\beta$ serves as a tumor suppressor pathway in the normal colon by inhibiting cell proliferation and inducing apoptosis [8–10]. During late stages of colorectal carcinogenesis, TGF-$\beta$ serves as a tumor promoter [11, 12] and is often overexpressed [13]. A high expression level of TGF-$\beta$ in the primary tumor is associated with advanced stages [14], tumor recurrence [15], and decreased survival [14]. Experimentally, chronic exposure to TGF-$\beta$ promotes neoplastic transformation of intestinal epithelial cells [16], and TGF-$\beta$ stimulates proliferation of poorly differentiated colon cancer cells [17]. These results suggest that TGF-$\beta$ promotes malignant transformation and tumor progression in colorectal cancer, and the TGF-$\beta$ signaling pathway may be an attractive target for novel therapeutic strategies.

All three isoforms of TGF-$\beta$ control cellular processes by signaling through cell surface receptor complexes composed of TGF-$\beta$ type I and type II receptors [3, 4] (Fig. 1). Both receptors are transmembrane serine/threonine kinases, and TGF-$\beta$ binding activates the type I receptor. Once activated, TGF-$\beta$ type I receptor phosphorylates the carboxyl-terminal serine amino acids of two important downstream targets, Smad2 and Smad3, allowing them to bind to Smad4 to form heteromeric complexes [18, 19]. Smad2/3/4 complexes are translocated into the nucleus to regulate transcription of target genes. The complexity of the TGF-$\beta$ response is related to the various Smads and their cooperativity with other transcription regulators [11].

This work was presented at the Surgical Forum, the 88th Annual Clinical Congress of the American College of Surgeons in San Francisco, CA, October 2002.

Correspondence to: Tien C. Ko, M.D., e-mail: tko@utmb.edu

Li et al.: TGF-$\beta$ Signaling in Colon Cells

Materials and Methods

### Cell Culture

MC-26 is a mouse colon cancer cell line derived from a chemically induced transplantable colon cancer (CT-26) in the mouse [27]. MC-26 cells were maintained in RPMI1640 (Mediatech, Mauas-sas, VA, USA) supplemented with 10% defined fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Invitrogen, Carlshad, CA, USA) grown in 5% CO₂ atmosphere at 37°C with 95% humidity.

### Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction

Total RNA was isolated from cultured cells using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) and 2 $\mu$g of RNA was converted to cDNA using Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). The following primers were used: Smad2 forward primer, 5'-CTTGCCATTCACACCAGCCAG-3', Smad2 reverse primer, 5'-CGGCAATATATAAACATGGGC-3'; Smad3 forward primer, 5'-AAGGCCATCACACGCAGAAACG-3', Smad3 reverse primer, 5'-TCCCCAGCCTTTGACGAAGCTC-3'; Smad4 forward primer, 5'-TGGCTGGTCGGAAAGGATTTC-3', Smad4 reverse primer, 5'-CCTTTGCCTATGTGCAACCT-3'. Smad primers were synthesized by Sigma-Genosys (St. Louis, MO, USA) and G3PDH primers were purchased from Clontech (Palo Alto, CA, USA). Each pair of primers was designed to be intron spanning to exclude interference with amplification from genomic DNA. Each PCR reaction was performed using 2 $\mu$l of cDNA in a total volume of 50 $\mu$l at 94°C for 5 minutes followed by 30 cycles of 94°C for 40 seconds, 55°C (except 53°C for Smad2 primers, 60°C for G3PDH primers) for 40 seconds, and 72°C for 2 minutes. A 1 kb plus DNA ladder (Invitrogen) was used to determine the relative size of the PCR products.

### Luciferase Reporter Assay

To measure TGF-$\beta$ signaling, the p3TP-Lux reporter plasmid containing the plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) promoter was used [28]. Cells were seeded at a density of $3 \times 10^5$ per well in six-well plates for 24 hours. The cells were then transiently transfected with 0.4 $\mu$g of p3TP-Lux reporter plasmid plus dominant-negative mutant forms of Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4 using FuGENE 6 Transfection Reagent according to manufacturer's instruction (Roche Molecular Biochemicals, Indianapolis, IN, USA). Total amount of transfected DNA was equalized by adding the pRK5 vector plasmid. At 16 hours later, cells were treated with TGF-$\beta$1 (Pharmingen, San Diego, CA, USA) in Dulbecco's modified eagle medium (DMEM) with 0.2% FBS for 12 hours. The same amounts of vehicle [0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSA), 4 mM HCl, the dilution buffer for TGF-$\beta$] were added to the control groups. Cell extracts were prepared and assayed for luciferase activity using an Enhanced Luciferase Assay kit (Pharmingen). Light emission was detected using a Monolight Luminometer (Pharmingen). Dominant-negative mutant forms of Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4 were gifts from R. Derynck.

### Growth Study

Cells were seeded at a density of $2 \times 10^4$ per well in 12-well plates and cultured for 24 hours followed by treatment with TGF-$\beta$1 (3 ng/ml). Cells were then trypsinized, stained with 0.4% trypan blue.

DNA. Cells were lysed at 5 x 10⁵ cells/ml of lysis buffer. The absorbance (A₄₀₅nm - A₄₉₀nm) of each sample was measured using a 96-well plate reader (Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA, USA).

### Statistical Analysis

Data were expressed as means ± SEM. Differences between groups were analyzed by analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey-Kramer multiple comparisons test; \( p < 0.05 \) is considered significant.

### Results

#### MC-26 Cells Express Smads and Has a Functional TGF-β Signaling Pathway

Because most human colorectal cancer cells are resistant to the tumor suppressor effects of TGF-β [31] and have a defective TGF-β signaling pathway [30], we selected a mouse colon cancer cell line (MC-26) to examine the role of Smads in TGF-β signaling. MC-26 cells were derived from a chemically induced transplantable colon cancer (CT-26) in the mouse [27]. First, we determine whether Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4 mRNA were expressed in MC-26 cells. Total RNA was harvested from MC-26 cells and analyzed for Smad expression by RT-PCR. Results were visualized by gel electrophoresis. The mRNAs of Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4 were all detected in MC-26 cells, as shown in Figure 2A. To determine whether MC-26 cells have a functional TGF-β signaling pathway, we performed transient transfection assay using the p3TP-Lux reporter plasmid [28]. This plasmid contains the PAI-1 promoter [31] fused to the firefly luciferase reporter gene and is strongly activated by TGF-β. The 3TP-Lux reporter activity has been used as a standard molecular assay for measuring TGF-β signaling in mammalian cells [30, 32]. In MC-26 cells transiently transfected with the p3TP-Lux plasmid, TGF-β1 induced luciferase activity in a dose-dependent fashion (Fig. 2B). At 1 ng/ml, TGF-β1 induced p3TP-Lux reporter activity 13-fold compared to the untreated control. These results demonstrate that MC-26 cells express Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4 and have a functional TGF-β signaling pathway.

#### TGF-β Inhibits Cell Growth and Induces Apoptosis in MC-26 Cells

In normal gut cells, TGF-β inhibits cell proliferation [8, 9] and induces apoptosis [10]. However, most human colorectal cancers are resistant to TGF-β-induced growth inhibition and apoptosis [11, 12]. Because MC-26 cells express Smads and have functional TGF-β signaling pathway, we determined whether MC-26 cells are sensitive to TGF-β-induced growth inhibition and apoptosis. As shown in Figure 3, TGF-β1 inhibited cell growth in MC-26 cells beginning 4 days after treatment. Cell number was reduced by 42% on day 4 and by 60% by day 6 in the TGF-β1-treated group compared to the untreated control. To evaluate the apoptotic effect of TGF-β on MC-26 cells, we treated the cells with TGF-β1 in serum-free medium for 48 hours and quantified DNA fragmentation, a hallmark of apoptosis [33]. TGF-β1 induced a three-fold increase in DNA fragmentation compared to the untreated control (Fig. 4). Taken together, these results indicate that a functional TGF-β signaling pathway in MC-26 cells leads to inhibition of cell growth and induction of apoptosis.

Li et al.: TGF-$\beta$ Signaling in Colon Cells

Fig. 4. TGF-$\beta$ induces apoptosis in MC-26 cells. Cells were seeded in 1 ml RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% FBS in 12-well plates. After 24 hours, cells were treated without or with TGF-$\beta$1 (3 ng/ml) in serum-free RPMI 1640. After 48 hours, DNA fragmentation was quantified by a cell death-detection enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The results were obtained from triplicate wells and expressed as the mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05 versus no TGF-$\beta$1 treatment.

Dominant-negative Mutant Forms of Smads Block TGF-$\beta$ Signaling in MC-26 Cells

Because Smad2 and Smad4 are targets of mutations in human colorectal cancers [22-26], we determined whether Smads are required for TGF-$\beta$ signaling in colon cancer cells. To block Smad function, we used truncation mutant forms of Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4 (Smad2$\Delta$C, Smad3$\Delta$C, and Smad4$\Delta$C), which have deletion of the last 41 to 43 carboxyl-terminal amino acids (Fig. 5A). These mutant Smads are not phosphorylated by the TGF-$\beta$ type I receptor and act as dominant-negative inhibitors of their respective full-length endogenous Smad proteins [34]. In the absence of dominant-negative Smads, TGF-$\beta$1 induced a fivefold increase in 3TP-Lux reporter activity compared to untreated cells (Fig. 5B). However, when the cells were transfected with Smad2$\Delta$C, Smad3$\Delta$C, and Smad4$\Delta$C plasmids, TGF-$\beta$1-induced 3TP-Lux reporter activity was significantly reduced (Fig. 5B). When cells were transfected with a combination of Smad2$\Delta$C and Smad4$\Delta$C or Smad3$\Delta$C and Smad4$\Delta$C, further reduction in TGF-$\beta$1-induced luciferase activity was observed. These results indicate that endogenous Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4 play important roles in TGF-$\beta$ signaling in MC-26 cells.

Discussion

The pathogenesis of colorectal cancer involves a series of genetic changes that lead to the sequential development of hyperplasia, adenoma, carcinoma, and finally metastasis [35]. These genetic alterations often result in inactivation of tumor suppressor genes and activation of oncogenes. The biologic consequences of these genetic changes are alterations in cell proliferation, apoptosis, migration, and invasion at the cellular level, culminating in the development of colorectal cancer. TGF-$\beta$ plays a unique role

Fig. 5. Dominant-negative mutant forms of Smads block TGF-$\beta$ signaling. A. Structures of full-length Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4 and their respective carboxyl-terminal deletion mutants. Numbers indicate amino acid residues. B. MC-26 cells were seeded in six-well plates and transiently transfected with 0.4 $\mu$g of the p3TP-Lux reporter plasmid and 0.5 $\mu$g of the indicated mutant Smad plasmids. Total amount of transfected DNA was equalized by adding the pRK5 vector plasmid. After 24 hours, cells were treated without or with TGF-$\beta$1 (1 ng/ml) for 12 hours. Luciferase activity was measured and results from duplicate wells were represented as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05 versus control group treated with TGF-$\beta$1.

during the pathogenesis of colorectal cancers: It serves as a tumor suppressor during early stages and a tumor promoter during late stages. As a major tumor suppressor in the normal colon, TGF-$\beta$ inhibits cellular proliferation and induces apoptosis; as a tumor promoter, TGF-$\beta$ stimulates invasion, angiogenesis, and immune suppression [11, 12].

Most colorectal cancers are resistant to the tumor suppressor effects of TGF-$\beta$ [11, 12], and this is due in part to alterations in the TGF-$\beta$ signaling pathway. Impairment of the TGF-$\beta$ signaling pathway contributes to carcinogenesis by promoting cell growth and survival through resistance to the growth inhibitory and apoptotic effects of TGF-$\beta$. Inactivating mutations of the TGF-$\beta$ type II receptor has been detected in 20% to 25% of all colon cancers [11]. Smad2 mutations [22, 23] have been observed in 4% and Smad4 mutations have been reported in up to 30% of human colorectal cancers [24-26]. Survey of a panel of human colorectal cancer cell lines has shown that 91% have an impaired TGF-$\beta$ signaling pathway [30]. Consequently, most of the in vitro studies of TGF-$\beta$ signaling in the gut have used nontransformed intestinal epithelial cell lines.

TGF-$\beta$ signaling in human colorectal cancers has not been well characterized owing to the high frequency of alterations in the TGF-$\beta$ signaling pathway in the human colon cancer cell lines [30]. To characterize the role of Smads in TGF-$\beta$ signaling in colorectal cancer cells, we used a mouse colon cancer cell line (MC-26) derived from a chemically induced transplantable colon cancer (CT-26) in the mouse [27]. We found that MC-26 cells express Smad2 and Smad3 (Fig. 2A), which are important direct downstream targets of TGF-$\beta$ type I receptor. MC-26 cells also express Smad4, which forms heteromeric complexes with Smad2 and Smad3 to enter the nucleus as transcription regulators. We also found that in MC-26 cells TGF-$\beta$ induces p3TP-Lux reporter activity (Fig. 2B), which is a standard molecular assay for measuring TGF-$\beta$ signaling in mammalian cells [30, 32]. Unlike most human colorectal cancer cells, MC-26 cells are sensitive to the tumor suppressor effects of TGF-$\beta$, as demonstrated by the ability of TGF-$\beta$ to inhibit cell growth and induce apoptosis (Figs. 3, 4). Taken together, these results suggest that, similar to normal intestinal epithelial cells, MC-26 cells have a functional TGF-$\beta$ signaling pathway and are a useful model for examining the tumor suppressor effects of TGF-$\beta$ in colorectal cancers.

Smads are a novel class of proteins that function as transcription regulators and either bind directly to specific *cis* regulatory elements of the promoters or interact with other transcription regulators [11, 12]. There are several classes of Smads. The receptor-activated Smads (i.e., Smad2 and Smad3) are phosphorylated at their carboxyl-terminal serines by the type I receptors. The co-Smads (i.e., Smad4) form heteromeric complexes with receptor-activator Smads to enter the nucleus. We have shown that TGF-$\beta$ signaling in MC-26 cells is inhibited by dominant-negative mutant forms of both receptor-activated Smads and co-Smad, suggesting that several classes of Smads play important roles in TGF-$\beta$ signaling in colorectal cancer cells.

Smad2 and Smad3 are two highly homologous molecules sharing 91% identity in their amino acid sequences and they are both activated by the TGF-$\beta$ signaling pathway. Although both Smad2 and Smad3 have transcription activity, only Smad3 binds directly to DNA. Smad2 regulates transcription indirectly through binding to other transcription factors [18, 19]. It has been suggested that the relative expression levels of Smad2 and Smad3 in a cell may determine the specific biologic responses to TGF-$\beta$ [36-38]. We have shown that Smad3, but not Smad2, is critical for TGF-$\beta$-induced apoptosis in nontransformed gut epithelial cells [10]. However, SmadS is not required for the effects of TGF-$\beta$ on proliferation and differentiation [39]. It remains to be determined whether Smad2 and Smad3 serve distinct functions in mediating the tumor suppressor and tumor promoter effects of TGF-$\beta$ in colorectal cancers.

### Conclusions

We have shown that a mouse colon cancer cell line expresses Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4 and has a functional TGF-$\beta$ signaling pathway. Furthermore, these cells are sensitive to the growth inhibitory and apoptotic effects of TGF-$\beta$, making them an excellent model for examining TGF-$\beta$ signaling in colorectal cancers. We have also shown that dominant-negative mutant forms of Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4 inhibit TGF-$\beta$ signaling in mouse colon cancer cells, suggesting that these Smads are attractive novel therapeutic targets for regulating TGF-$\beta$ signaling in colorectal cancers.

---

### Acknowledgments

F. Li and Y. Cao contributed equally to this manuscript. The authors thank Dr. D. Song for technical support and E. Figueroa and S. Schuenke for manuscript preparation. This work is supported by grants to T.C. Ko from the National Institutes of Health (RO1 DK060105 and PO1 DK35608) and a grant to C. M. Townsend, Jr. from the National Institutes of Health (PO1 DK35608).

---

### References

1. Greenlee RT, Murray T, Bolden S, et al. Cancer Statistics. CA Cancer J. Clin. 2000;50:7–33
2. Coutinho AK, Rocha Lima CM. Metastatic colorectal cancer: systemic treatment in the new millennium. Cancer Control 2003;10:224–238
3. Derynck R, Feng XH. TGF-beta receptor signaling. Biochim. Biophys.Acta 1997;1333:F105–F150
4. Massague J. TGF-beta signal transduction. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 1998;67:753–791
5. Barnard JA, Warwick GJ, Gold LI. Localization of transforming growth factor beta isoforms in the normal murine small intestine and colon. Gastroenterology 1993;105:67–73
6. Avery A, Paraskeva C, Hall P, et al. TGF-beta expression in the human colon: differential immunostaining along crypt epithelium. Br. J. Cancer 1993;68:137–139
7. Oshima H, Oshima M, Kobayashi M, et al. Morphological and molecular processes of polyp formation in Apc(delta 716) knockout mice. Cancer Res. 1997;57:1644–1649
8. Ko TC, Beauchamp RD, Townsend CMJ, et al. Transforming growth factor-beta inhibits rat intestinal cell growth by regulating cell cycle specific gene expression. Am. J. Surg. 1994;167:14–19
9. Ko TC, Sheng HM, Reisman D, et al. Transforming growth factor-beta 1 inhibits cyclin D1 expression in intestinal epithelial cells. Oncogene 1995;10:177–184
10. Conery AR, Cao Y, Thompson EA, et al. Akt interacts directly with Smad3 to regulate the sensitivity to TGF-beta induced apoptosis. Nat. Cell Biol. 2004;6:366–372
11. Derynck R, Akhurst RJ, Balmain A. TGF-beta signaling in tumor suppression and cancer progression. Nat. Genet. 2001;29:117–129
12. Akhurst RJ, Derynck R. TGF-beta signaling in cancer-a double-edged sword. Trends Cell Biol. 2001;11:S44–S51
13. Derynck R, Goeddel DV, Ullrich A, et al. Synthesis of messenger RNAs for transforming growth factors alpha and beta and the epidermal growth factor receptor by human tumors. Cancer Res. 1987;47:707–712
14. Robson H, Anderson E, James RD, et al. Transforming growth factor beta 1 expression in human colorectal tumours: an independent prognostic marker in a subgroup of poor prognosis patients. Br. J. Cancer 1996;74:753–758
15. Friedman E, Gold LI, Klimstra D, et al. High levels of transforming growth factor beta 1 correlate with disease progression in human colon cancer. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 1995;4:549–554
16. Sheng H, Shao J, O'Mahony CA, et al. Transformation of intestinal epithelial cells by chronic TGF-beta 1 treatment results in downregulation of the type II TGF-beta receptor and induction of cyclooxygenase-2. Oncogene 1999;18:855–867
17. Schroy P, Rifkin J, Coffey RJ, et al. Role of transforming growth factor beta 1 in induction of colon carcinoma differentiation by hexamethylene bisacetamide. Cancer Res. 1990;50:261–265
18. Derynck R, Zhang Y, Feng XH. Smads: transcriptional activators of TGF-beta responses. Cell 1998;95:737–740
19. Miyazono K, ten Dijke P, Heldin CH. TGF-beta signaling by Smad proteins. Adv. Immunol. 2000;75:115–157
20. Wang J, Han W, Zborowska E, et al. Reduced expression of transforming growth factor beta type I receptor contributes to the malignancy of human colon carcinoma cells. J. Biol. Chem. 1996;271:17366–17371
21. Matsushita M, Matsuzaki K, Date M, et al. Down-regulation of TGF-beta receptors in human colorectal cancer: implications for cancer development. Br. J. Cancer 1999;80:194–205

22. Riggins GJ, Thiagalingam S, Rozenblum E, et al. Mad-related genes in the human. Nat. Genet. 1996;13:347–349
23. Eppert K, Scherer SW, Ozcelik H, et al. MADR2 maps to 18q21 and encodes a TGFbeta-regulated MAD-related protein that is functionally mutated in colorectal carcinoma. Cell 1996;86:543–552
24. Thiagalingam S, Lengauer C, Leach FS, et al. Evaluation of candidate tumour suppressor genes on chromosome 18 in colorectal cancers. Nat. Genet. 1996;13:343–346
25. Takagi Y, Kohmura H, Futamura M, et al. Somatic alterations of the DPC4 gene in human colorectal cancers in vivo. Gastroenterology 1996;111:1369–1372
26. MacGrogan D, Pegram M, Slamon D, et al. Comparative mutational analysis of DPC4 (Smad4) in prostatic and colorectal carcinomas. Oncogene 1997;15:1111–1114
27. Singh P, Walker JP, Townsend CM Jr, et al. Role of gastrin and gastrin receptors on the growth of a transplantable mouse colon carcinoma (MC-26) in BALB/c mice. Cancer Res. 1986;46:1612–1616
28. Wrana JL, Attisano L, Carcamo J, et al. TGF beta signals through a heteromeric protein kinase receptor complex. Cell 1992;71:1003–1014
29. Papaconstantinou HT, Xie C, Zhang W, et al. The role of caspases in methotrexate-induced gastrointestinal toxicity. Surgery 2001;130:859–865
30. Ijichi H, Ikenoue T, Kato N, et al. Systematic analysis of the TGF-beta-Smady signaling pathway in gastrointestinal cancer cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2001;289:350–357
31. Keeton MR, Curriden SA, van Zonneveld AJ, et al. Identification of regulatory sequences in the type 1 plasminogen activator inhibitor

gene responsive to transforming growth factor beta. J.Biol. Chem. 1991;266:23048–23052
32. Zhou S, Buckhaults P, Zawel L, et al. Targeted deletion of Smad4 shows it is required for transforming growth factor beta and activin signaling in colorectal cancer cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1998;95:2412–2416
33. Papaconstantinou HT, Ko TC. Cell cycle and apoptosis regulation in GI cancers In: Evers, BM, Molecular Mechanisms of Gastrointestinal Cancers. Austin, TX,: Landes Bioscience, 1999, pp 49–78
34. Feng XH, Zhang Y, Wu RY, et al. The tumor suppressor Smad4/DPC4 and transcriptional adaptor CBP/p300 are coactivators for smad3 in TGF-beta-induced transcriptional activation. Genes Dev. 1998;12:2153–2163
35. Fearon ER, Vogelstein B. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. Cell 1990;61:759–767
36. Piek E, Heldin CH, ten Dijke P. Specificity, diversity, and regulation in TGF-beta superfamily signaling. FASEB J. 2000;13:2105–2124
37. Labbe E, Silvestri C, Hoodless PA, et al. Smad2 and Smad3 positively and negatively regulate TGF beta-dependent transcription through the forkhead DNA-binding protein FAST2. Mol. Cell 1998;2:109–120
38. Yanagisawa K, Osada H, Masuda A, et al. Induction of apoptosis by Smad3 and down-regulation of Smad3 expression in response to TGF-beta in human normal lung epithelial cells. Oncogene 1998;17:1743–1747
39. Yang YA, Tang B, Robinson G, et al. Smad3 in the mammary epithelium has a nonredundant role in the induction of apoptosis, but not in the regulation of proliferation or differentiation by transforming growth factor-beta. Cell Growth Differ. 2002;13:123–130
