
# Biology of the Troponin Complex in Cardiac Myocytes

**Michael S. Parmacek and R. John Solaro**

---

Troponin is the regulatory complex of the myofibrillar thin filament that plays a critical role in regulating excitation–contraction coupling in the heart. Troponin is composed of three distinct gene products: troponin C (cTnC), the 18-kD Ca²⁺-binding subunit; troponin I (cTnI), the ~23-kD inhibitory subunit that prevents contraction in the absence of Ca²⁺ binding to cTnC; and troponin T (cTnT), the ~35-kD subunit that attaches troponin to tropomyosin (Tm) and to the myofibrillar thin filament. Over the past 45 years, extensive biochemical, biophysical, and structural studies have helped to elucidate the molecular basis of troponin function and thin filament activation in the heart. At the onset of systole, Ca²⁺ binds to the N-terminal Ca²⁺ binding site of cTnC initiating a conformational change in cTnC, which catalyzes protein–protein associations activating the myofibrillar thin filament. Thin filament activation in turn facilitates crossbridge cycling, myofibrillar activation, and contraction of the heart. The intrinsic length–tension properties of cardiac myocytes as well as the Frank-Starling properties of the intact heart are mediated primarily through Ca²⁺-responsive thin filament activation. cTnC, cTnI, and cTnT are encoded by distinct single-copy genes in the human genome, each of which is expressed in a unique cardiac-restricted developmentally regulated fashion. Elucidation of the transcriptional programs that regulate troponin transcription and gene expression has provided insights into the molecular mechanisms that regulate and coordinate cardiac myocyte differentiation and provided unanticipated insights into the pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy. Autosomal dominant mutations in cTnI and cTnT have been identified and are associated with familial hypertrophic and restrictive cardiomyopathies.

© 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

The molecular basis of excitation–contraction coupling in the heart has been an area of intense investigation since Ringer recognized the influence of Ca²⁺ on contraction of the heart in 1883.¹ In 1940, Heilbrunn suggested that Ca²⁺ serves as the intracellular trigger for contractility.² In 1953, Huxley and Hanson used x-ray diffraction and electron microscopy and proposed the sliding filament model of sarcomere function.³⁴ In the 1960s, Ca²⁺ was identified as the physiologic activator of contractile proteins and the sarcoplasmic reticulum was shown to regulate intracellular release and reuptake of intracellular calcium in muscle.⁵⁻⁹ Katz¹⁰ biochemically purified and Ebashi et al¹¹ identified troponin as the Ca²⁺ binding site of the myofibrillar thin filament. Subsequently, Greaser et al¹²⁻¹⁴ demonstrated that the troponin complex comprises three distinct proteins which they named troponin C (TnC), for its ability to bind Ca²⁺ and regulate thin filament activation, TnI because of its ability to inhibit actin activated myosin ATPase activity, and troponin T (TnT) for its ability to bind to Tm.

Over the past 45 years, a large body of research has elucidated further the molecular basis of excitation–contraction coupling and highlighted the role that the troponin complex plays in regulating this process (for review see Ebashi¹⁵). Until the three genes encoding cTnC, cTnI, and cTnT were cloned and characterized in the late 1980s,¹⁶⁻²⁰ most of these studies relied on classic biochemical and biophysical techniques. However, over the past 15 years, these techniques have been complemented by molecular genetic approaches.

---

From the Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, and the Department of Physiology and Biophysics, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Address reprint requests to Michael S. Parmacek, MD, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 3400 Spruce St., 9123 Founders Pavilion, Philadelphia, PA 19104. E-mail: Michael.parmacek@uphs.upenn.edu

0033-0620/$ - see front matter

© 2004 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

doi:10.1016/j.pcad.2004.07.003

---

Progress in Cardiovascular Diseases, Vol. 47, No. 3, (November/December) 2004: pp 159-176

Fig 1. Schematic representation of the cardiac myofibrillar thin filament. Actin monomers polymerize into a double-helical structure that is longitudinally oriented around myosin. Tm is a double-stranded α-helical protein that sits near the groove of the actin double helix. There is one troponin complex bound to every seventh actin monomer. TnC is the Ca²⁺-binding subunit. Tnl is the inhibitory subunit. TnT binds the troponin complex to tropomyosin and the actin filament.

bined with modern molecular methods including transgenic technologies and genetic engineering to further refine understanding of cardiac contractility and excitation–contraction at the molecular level in the intact cardiac myocyte.

The purpose of this review is to summarize the current state of knowledge concerning the molecular biology, biophysics, and physiology of the cardiac troponin complex. This is not an exhaustive review of troponin biology and biochemistry, but rather a review intended to provide the reader with a basic understanding of the molecular and genetic basis of troponin function in the cardiac myocyte. We have chosen to highlight topics relevant to both cardiovascular scientists and practicing cardiologists. The role of troponin in skeletal muscle will be referenced primarily to highlight differences between heart and skeletal muscle and, when appropriate, to provide insights into the molecular basis of troponin function. Because of the tremendous amount of research in this area it is not possible to cite all relevant contributions to the field; we apologize for any unintended omissions of citations. For additional information in this area of research and medicine the reader is referred to several recent outstanding reviews. [21-30]

## Anatomy of the Sarcomere

The anatomy and organization of the cardiac myofibrillar apparatus provides the foundation for understanding the molecular basis of cardiac contractility. Genes encoding cardiac-restricted myofibrillar isoforms have evolved to regulate the unique contractile properties of the heart. The functional unit of the cardiac myocyte is the sarcomere. [31] Each sarcomere is composed of a precise geometric arrangement of myosin-containing thick filaments surrounded by a hexagonal array of thin filaments containing actin and the Tm/troponin regulatory complex. [3,13,14] The myofibrillar thin filament is depicted in Figure 1. Actin is a rather flat protein approximately 5 nm across with four major domains. Actin monomers polymerize into a double-helical structure that is longitudinally oriented around myosin. [32] Tm is a double-stranded α-helical protein that moves on the surface of the thin filament during activation to a position near the groove of the actin double helix. [33] Troponin is a heterotrimeric complex consisting of the following distinct gene products: TnC, the 18-kD Ca²⁺ binding subunit; Tnl, the ~23-kD subunit that inhibits actin–myosin contraction and shuttles between binding actin and TnC in response to intracellular calcium concentration; and, TnT, an asymmetric ~35-kD protein that binds troponin to Tm. [34] These three proteins are arranged in a 1:1:1 stoichiometric ratio and are distributed along the thin filament with 1 troponin complex bound to every 7 actin monomers. [13,14] Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) imaging and x-ray crystallographic analyses have shown that cTnC exists in solution as a dumbbell-shaped molecular comprising N- and C-terminal globular heads connected by an α-helical central

BIOLOGY OF THE TROPONIN COMPLEX

Fig 2. Schematic illustration of structural changes occurring in thin filament proteins during activation of the crossbridge cycle. The left panel shows a portion of the thin filament containing actin, TnC, Tnl, TnT and Tm and an edge of thick filament in diastole. In diastole, Ca²⁺ is not bound to a regulatory site at one lobe of the dumbbell-shaped TnC protein; Tm is in a blocking position and held there by the action of the tail of TnT and by the action of Tnl, which is tethered to the thin filament by an inhibitory peptide (Ip). In systole, Ca²⁺ binding to the regulatory lobe of TnC induces a release of the Tnl Ip from actin and a release of TnT from Tm resulting in a movement of Tm, which permits crossbridges to react with the thin filament. Crossbridges are held in register on the thick filament by the cytoskeletal protein, titin, which ultimately connects to the Z-disk. Titin and myosin binding protein C (MyBP-C) act to regulate movement of the crossbridges away from the thick filament as do the myosin light chains (MLC1 and MLC2).

linker.³⁵⁻³⁷ Each of the globular domains contains two EF hand helix–loop–helix motifs that bind divalent cations.³⁸ The EF hand Ca²⁺ binding motif has been conserved since ancient evolution and genes containing this motif compose the TnC supergene family.³⁸ In the C-terminus of cTnC there are 2 high-affinity Mg²⁺ and Ca²⁺ binding sites.³⁹,⁴⁰ These sites exchange metals slowly and primarily serve to anchor cTnC to the N-terminus of cTnl. In addition, cTnC contains 1 functional N-terminal EF hand domain (sTnC contains 2 functional domains) that favors Ca²⁺ binding over Mg²⁺ and is able to exchange Ca²⁺ fast enough to regulate systolic/diastolic transition in the intact heart.⁴¹,⁴² Both cTnl and cTnT contain N-terminal extensions that are not present in the fast skeletal protein isoforms, suggesting unique roles for Tnl and TnT in the heart. It is also noteworthy that physiologically important sites of phosphorylation have been identified in cTnl and cTnT that are not present in their skeletal isoforms.

Recent structural studies provide a detailed picture of transmission of the Ca²⁺ binding signal among the thin filament proteins, and indicate a rich array of potential points for regulation of the response to Ca²⁺ (reviewed in Metzger and Westfall,²⁷ Lehman et al,⁴³ Takeda et al,⁴⁴ and Solaro et al⁴⁵). Figure 2 depicts two states in the process—the relaxed state, and the Ca²⁺ bound/crossbridge bound state. Figure 3 depicts a more detailed view of the activation process. Extensive analyses aided by in vitro determination of protein–protein interactions, mutagenesis, and structures determined by fluorescence and NMR measurements have clarified the protein–protein interactions following Ca²⁺ binding to cTnC. A major advance in the understanding of thin filament activation oc-

Ca²⁺/Mg²⁺
Actin
TnC
+Ca²⁺
Ca²⁺
TnT
Tropomyosin
-TnI
Myosin HC
Myosin LC

Fig 3. Structural changes occurring in the Tn complex and thin filament during Ca²⁺ activation and crossbridge binding. The figure illustrates only the core structure of troponin as determined by Takeda et al.⁴⁴ The top left panel shows the troponin-tropomyosin complex in diastole. Metal binding sites at a C-terminal structural lobe of TnC contain Ca²⁺ or Mg²⁺, but the regulatory N-terminal lobe does not contain bound Ca²⁺. The thin filament proteins are positioned as indicated and described in the legend to Figure 2. As illustrated in the top right panel, with Ca²⁺ binding to TnC, a hydrophobic pocket is exposed and a C-terminal region of Tnl binds to this sticky patch releasing the Tnl from its binding sites on actin. This movement of Tnl and the lever-like action of TnT induce a movement of Tm promoting the reaction of crossbridges with actin. As crossbridges move into a strong binding state and generate force, it is apparent that Tm is pushed further from its position at outer domains of actin and closer to the groove formed by the double helical array. The cleft at the head of the myosin heavy chain (Myosin HC) closes with release of the products of ATP hydrolysis. Myosin light chains (Myosin LC) serve to regulate the rate of the cycling and the radial movement of crossbridges away from the thick filament. With removal of Ca²⁺ from the cytoplasm by membrane transporters and exchangers, the thin filament returns to the diastolic state as indicated.

curred with publication of the atomic structure of
the human cardiac troponin complex.⁴⁴ The
structure has been resolved by x-ray crystallo-
graphic analysis in the Ca²⁺-saturated state using
recombinant truncated cTnT (T2 region, residues
183-288), cTnl (residues 31-163 and 31-210),
and full-length cTnC (residues 1-161). In this
model, cTnl consists of 2 rigid helices. Helix 1
(H1) consists of residues 43-79 and Helix 2 (H2)
consists of residues 90-135 that wrap around TnT.
Immediately adjacent to H1 and H2 lies the cTnl
inhibitory region (residues 137-148), helix 3 (H3,
residues 150-159), helix 4 (H4, residues
164-188), and the C-terminal cTnl domain (resi-

ventricular volume. During diastole, as the left ventricular fills with blood to its end-diastolic volume, sarcomeres are stretched from short to longer lengths. In this diastolic period it is essential that the thick and thin filaments slide past each other freely so as to maintain low diastolic pressures. The diastolic state of the Tn complex is illustrated in left panel of Figure 2, and indicates that the crossbridge is physically blocked by Tm and perhaps Tn from entering into the crossbridge cycle. However, current theories indicate that about 50% of the crossbridges are blocked from interacting with the thin filament by steric effects of Tn–Tm. The rest of the crossbridges may bind weakly in a nonforce-generating reaction. The advantage of this pool of crossbridges is they are cocked and ready to make the transition to the systolic state. Interactions of Tn with Tm and actin are essential in diastole. The inhibitory region and an upstream second actin-binding region on cTnI bind tightly to actin and through the action of TnT pin down Tm in the blocking position (see Fig 2). The interactions of cTn–Tm with actin may also alter the structure of the outer domain of actin depressing its reactivity with myosin. The tail of Tn, which consists of the N-terminal region of cTnT, also impedes the movement of Tm away from its blocking position.

Systole begins with release of Ca²⁺ into the myofilament space; the sarcomeres develop tension isometrically (isovolumic pressure development), until the aortic and pulmonary valves open, and blood is ejected from the ventricle. Sarcomeres then shorten to their end-systolic length. During this trajectory on the P-V loop the disposition of cTn on the thin filament changes significantly. As illustrated in Figure 3, when Ca²⁺ binds to cTnC a hydrophobic region is exposed on the surface of its N-terminal lobe, and movements of the helices in the N-lobe form a new binding site for cTnI that is strong enough to pull it away from actin. The release of cTnI from sites of binding on actin sets into motion a series of protein-protein interactions that ultimately releases Tm, which in turn moves on the thin filament closer to the thin filament groove. The movement not only uncovers binding sites on actin, but also appears to alter actin structure, promoting the rate of reaction of the weakly bound crossbridges with actin. As shown in Figure 3, the full interaction of the crossbridge with the thin filament induces a fur-

other movement of Tm on the thin filament. This crossbridge-induced movement of Tm is likely to activate near-neighbor regions of the thin filament, which may or may not have a bound Ca²⁺ to Tn. This is one mode of positive cooperativity in the thin filament activation. The other mode is positive feedback of the bound crossbridge on the affinity of TnC for Ca²⁺. These positive cooperative effects are important in current concepts of Starling’s law as described below. Estimates of the amounts of Ca²⁺ released to the thin filament in basal states of contractility indicate that only 25% of the available Tn molecules bind Ca²⁺.⁴⁷ This reserve of crossbridges is the correlate of cardiac reserve defined from hemodynamic measurements. Presently, there is uncertainty as to whether these systolic events involve recruitment of blocked crossbridges or an increased rate of binding of crossbridges already reacting weakly with the thin filament.

The end-systolic pressure (ESP) when the aortic valve closes represents a point at which the sarcomeres are neither shortening nor lengthening and developing tension. The line drawn through the ESP point in Figure 4, thus reflects the sarcomere length-tension relation in the heart. Points on the line can be generated by systematically altering the venous return (see Solaro⁴⁶ for further explanation). The increase in ESP with increases in ventricular volume is the essence of Starling’s Law of the Heart. Below, we discuss the special role of Tn and myofilament response to Ca²⁺ as a determinant of the slope of the left ventricular ESP-volume relation. The return of left ventricular pressure to the point where diastolic filling begins is a critical time in relaxation. The rate of relaxation during this time depends on the rate of Ca²⁺ removal from the cytoplasm into the sarcoplasmic reticulum and extracellular space, the rate of Ca²⁺ release from cTnC, the reversal of thin filament activation, and on transition of crossbridges from strong force generating interactions to weak interactions with the thin filament (see Fig 3). It has also been proposed that interactions between sarcomeres induce strain-dependent release of strongly bound crossbridges. Afterload also affects the rate of relaxation such that with increases in afterload, relaxation slows. The rate-limiting steps in relaxation appear to be kinetics of the crossbridge cycle⁴⁸ as well as the rate of Ca²⁺ removal from the

myofilament by the sarcoplasmic reticulum.⁴⁹ Interactions among the Tn proteins appear too fast to delay relaxation, although effects of mutations may alter this. There is evidence, however, that phosphorylation of the Tn components is able to affect crossbridge cycling rate and therefore relaxation. One important mechanism is phosphorylation of the amino terminal extension of cTnI by cAMP-dependent protein kinase in a cascade activated by β-adrenergic stimulation. It is apparent that phosphorylation of this region alters the actin-myosin reaction by speeding up the overall cycle time. The phosphorylation of cTnI is likely to be an important mechanism for calling up a relaxation reserve in a mechanism coordinated with increased uptake by sarcoplasmic reticulum through phospholamban phosphorylation. This is especially important in the physiologic context where heart rate increases, as during exercise, and thus cycle time of filling and ejection must be reduced.

β-Adrenergic stimulation also induces alterations in the P-V loops that serve to identify important parameters that define the contractile reserve of the heart. Adrenergic stimulation involves a shift in the left ventricular ESP-volume relation (see Fig 4). The rotation of the curve defines a change in contractility inasmuch as there is increased developed pressure (tension) at each ventricular volume (~constant sarcomere length). There are important membrane-related control mechanisms that mobilize contraction and relaxation reserve by controlling Ca²⁺ fluxes.⁴⁹ However, as discussed below, altered myofilament response to Ca²⁺ is also a significant factor in determining contraction and relaxation reserve by extrinsic factors and in intrinsic control of cardiac function according to the Frank-Starling relation.

# A Role for Troponin in the Frank-Starling Relation

There is substantial evidence that the cellular basis for the Frank-Starling relation, which is rooted in the length-tension relation of the sarcomere, involves an effect of sarcomere length on Ca²⁺ activation.⁵⁰ That is, increases in sarcomere length not only increase maximum tension, but also increase myofilament Ca²⁺ sensitivity. In hearts, where myofilaments operate at submaximal levels

of Ca²⁺ activation, length dependent alterations in Ca²⁺ sensitivity would be expected to be a major determinant of the slope of the ESP relation. There is also emerging evidence that cardiac Tn plays a central role in the molecular basis of this major intrinsic regulator of cardiac function. An appealing theory for why Ca²⁺ activation increases with increases in sarcomere length is that the change in length is associated with a decrease of interfilament spacing between thin and thick filaments.⁵¹ Increases in the local concentration of crossbridges in the vicinity of a region of the thin filament will increase the probability of a force-generating interaction as well as the probability of cooperative activation of the thin filaments by strongly bound crossbridges. The cooperative activation could involve feedback effects of bound crossbridges on the affinity of cTnC for Ca²⁺ within a functional unit and/or the cooperative spread of activation along the thin filament.²³ Changes in the dependence of myofilament Ca²⁺ sensitivity on sarcomere length associated with isoform switching of cTnI and cTnT indicated a role for troponin in length-dependent activation.⁵²⁻⁵⁴ Exchange of cTnC in heart myofilaments with fsTnC does not appear to modify length-dependent activation.⁵⁵ Isoform switching of cTnI and cTnT may induce variations in cooperative activation independent of changes in interfilament spacing. Isoform switching may also alter the steric block of crossbridge reaction with the thin filament. Modifications in TnI and TnT, both of which are asymmetric molecules extending across 2-3 actin monomers (see Fig 2), could in fact contribute significantly to alterations in steric blocking of the actin-crossbridge reaction.²²,⁴³ Variations in cooperative activation and steric block could explain why alterations in interfilament spacing do not always correlate well with alterations of length dependence of activation.⁵¹ Effects of the state of Tn on length-dependent activation are likely to be an important factor in regulation of cardiac function in both physiologic and pathophysiologic states. Switching of cTnT with developmentally related isoforms⁵² or with mutant forms linked to familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (FHC)⁵⁴ alters length-dependent activation and therefore may be an important factor in alterations in the Frank-Starling relation of the failing heart. As described below, embryonic isoforms of cTnT may be reexpressed in some

forms of heart failure. Arteaga et al⁵³ also reported that specific exchange of cTnI with the embryonic/neonatal isoform, slow skeletal TnI (ssTnI), significantly blunted length-dependent activation. There is also evidence that protein kinase A (PKA)-dependent phosphorylation of cTnI in cardiac myofilaments enhanced length-dependent activation.⁵⁶ This effect has been shown in unpublished experiments to be reflected in the slope of the ESP-volume relation. Taken together, these relatively recent findings provide evidence that alterations in the thin filament may be important factors regulating intrinsic control of cardiac function by Starling’s Law.

Troponin and the Control of Cardiac Dynamics

Transgenic mouse models have greatly aided testing the hypothesis that specific alterations at the level of the Tn complex affect contraction and relaxation reserve.⁵⁷⁻⁵⁹ Although many such models have alterations in Ca²⁺ fluxes, heart size, fibrosis, and so on that make interpretation of experiments difficult, a particular useful model, with essentially no such changes, is one in which ssTnI, the embryonic, neonatal isoform completely replaced the adult isoform, cTnI.⁵⁸ Neonatal heart myofilaments are resistant to deactivation by acidic pH, and transgenic mice expressing ssTnI in their hearts exhibit remarkable resistance to hypercapnic acidosis.⁶⁰ ssTnI lacks the N-terminal extension that is present in cTnI, which contains serial serine residues that are substrates for PKA. Compared to controls, ssTnI transgenic mouse hearts beating in isolation or in situ also have a blunted response to β-adrenergic stimulation.⁵⁷ An important recent finding is the demonstration that this effect requires that the heart beat auxotonically.⁶¹,⁶² Non-ejecting isolated hearts beating at constant volume do not demonstrate these differences. These findings have added a new dimension to our perception of the role of cTnI phosphorylation as a factor determining the action of strained crossbridges. Although a detailed description is beyond the scope of this review, there is substantial evidence that phosphorylation of cTnI and cTnT may be important factors in the transition from compensated hypertrophy to failure (for review see Solaro et al⁴⁵).

cTnC
cTnl
ssTnl
TnT1
TnT2
TnT3
TnT4

Embryonic     Neonatal     Postnatal

Fig 5. Schematic representation of the developmentally regulated pattern of troponin isoform expression in the heart. During embryonic development, cTnC is expressed in the embryonic heart, the myotomal component of the somites, fast skeletal muscle, and slow skeletal muscle. During postnatal development, cTnC is expressed solely in the heart and slow skeletal muscle. During embryonic development, ssTnl is expressed in the heart and in slow skeletal muscle. However, by the 9th month of postnatal development, expression of ssTnl is extinguished in the heart (it continues to be expressed in slow skeletal muscle) and cTnl is the only Tnl isoform expressed in the heart. During embryonic development, TnT1 and TnT3 predominate. However, in the postnatal period, TnT3 and TnT4 are the predominant cTnT isoforms expressed, although TnT1 and TnT2 are also detectable.

# Expression of Troponin Isoforms in the Heart

The contractile properties of the heart are ultimately attributable to the expression of genes encoding cardiac-restricted myofibrillar protein isoforms. Expression of these gene products is precisely regulated during development and in response to myocardial injury and hemodynamic stress. The cTnC gene encodes a 160-amino acid polypeptide that is 70% identical to the fast skeletal troponin C (sTnC) protein isoform. Despite the relatively high degree of sequence conservation, three regions of divergence have been identified in the coding regions of the cTnC and sTnC genes. The first encodes the N-terminus of the protein (amino acids [aa] 1-18), an α-helical region of unknown function. The second encodes aa 28-39, which constitutes a low-affinity calcium-binding site in the N-terminus of the protein. As discussed, this potential low-affinity Ca²⁺ binding site is functional in sTnC and nonfunctional in cTnC. The third divergent region encodes aa 117-131, an α-helical region located between Ca²⁺ binding sites III and IV in the C-terminus of the protein, a region involved in the interaction between cTnC and cTnl. The human cTnC gene (designated TNNCl) is located on human chromosome 3 (3p21.3p14.3) and comprises 6 exons spanning 2.6-kb of genomic DNA.

Expression of the cTnC gene is developmentally regulated in a muscle-restricted fashion. In contrast to cTnl and cTnT, no embryonic-restricted isoforms of cTnC have been identified. Moreover, cTnC is the only TnC isoform expressed in the heart where it is expressed in all 4 chambers (Fig 5). During embryonic development, the cTnC gene is expressed in cardiac, slow skeletal muscle, and fast skeletal muscles. However, during the postnatal period, cTnC gene expression becomes restricted exclusively to cardiac and slow skeletal muscle. Perhaps because sTnC is not expressed in the embryonic heart, it is not surprising that sTnC gene and protein expression has not been detected in the diseased or failing human heart. Of note, the utility of cTnC as a cardiac-specific marker is potentially compromised because the gene is also expressed in slow skeletal muscle (i.e., the soleus). In this regard, it is noteworthy that the composition of muscle fibers (slow versus fast) varies greatly between species and results related to fiber-type distribution should not be extrapolated between species.

cTnl is a product of the TNNI3 gene located on

chromosome 19 (19p13.2). It encodes a 210- amino acid polypeptide. Three genes encoding TnI protein isoforms have been identified. As shown in Figure 5, the ssTnI gene is the predominant isoform expressed in the embryonic heart. In humans, expression of ssTnI declines rapidly after birth and is generally extinguished by 9 months of age.⁶⁶⁻⁶⁸ Structurally, cTnI is distinguished from ssTnI by an N-terminal extension that contains 2 serine residues (ser23 and ser24) that are substrates for PKA. Analysis of transgenic mice expressing ssTnI in the adult heart has helped to explain why fetal myofilaments have increased Ca²⁺ sensitivity, which in turn leads to reduced length dependence of Ca²⁺ activation and reduced sensitivity to acidosis.⁵³,⁵⁸,⁶⁰ The greater sensitivity to acidosis in cTnI has been attributed to a single amino acid difference between the two isoforms (His163Ala) in cTnI (equivalent to amino acid residue 132 in ssTnI). The biological significance of these differences is an area of active investigation. Of note, despite the fact the ssTnI gene is the predominant gene expressed in the fetal heart, ssTnI (and fast skeletal TnI) gene expression is not detectable in the diseased human heart and does not contribute the altered contractile properties of the failing heart.⁶⁸

In contrast to cTnC and cTnI, the human troponin T gene (TNNT2) located on chromosome 1 (1q32) is encoded by a relatively large gene that generates multiple alternatively spliced transcripts encoding distinct protein isoforms. Of note, in different animal species novel TnT isoforms have been identified and the temporal pattern of cTnT protein expression varies greatly from species to species. In humans, 4 distinct cTnT protein isoforms are generated via alternative splicing of exons 4 and 5 and they have been designated TnT1, TnT2, TnT3, and TnT4, respectively.⁶⁹⁻⁷¹ Each cTnT isoform is expressed in the fetal human heart, although expression of TnT1 and TnT3 predominate (see Fig 5). During postnatal development, TnT3 is the predominant isoform, although TnT4 is also readily detectable (see Fig 5). In addition, TnT1 and TnT2 are expressed at very low, but detectable, levels during postnatal development. TnT1 and TnT2 are more sensitive to Ca²⁺ than either TnT3 or TnT4 (the predominant adult isoforms).⁷² Charge differences introduced by the presence of fetal TnT isoforms in adult myofilaments have correlated

with enhanced myofilament Ca²⁺ sensitivity and diastolic abnormalities.⁷² This is an important finding in that increases in Ca²⁺ sensitivity and impaired relaxation occur with mutations of the cTnT gene identified in patients with autosomal-dominant FHC (see discussion below). Given its utility as a cardiac marker, it is noteworthy that expression of cTnT protein isoforms are not detectable in adult skeletal muscle. However, cTnT (but not cTnI) is expressed in regenerating skeletal muscle and has been detected by commercially available immunoassays in the serum of patients diagnosed with skeletal myopathies.⁶⁹

There remains some controversy regarding whether expression of cTnT protein isoforms is altered and/or plays a role in decreased contractile performance in the failing heart.⁶⁹,⁷¹,⁷³⁻⁷⁶ Recent studies have shown that the TnT3 isoform remains the predominant TnT isoform in the failing human heart with variable, but generally low (10% to 15%) levels of TnT4 and TnT1 (3% to 7%) also detectable.⁷⁴ Moreover, despite the consistent finding of increased Ca²⁺ sensitivity and reduced contractile indices in myocytes harvested from explanted, failed human hearts, no obvious correlation with the amount of expressed cTnT4 isoform has been demonstrated. Alternative mechanisms to explain the physiologic alterations in cardiac myocytes in the failing heart have focused primarily on posttranslational modifications (predominantly changes in phosphorylation) of the troponin complex and degradation of thin filament proteins.⁷⁷ This is an important area of active investigation.

## Transcriptional Control of Troponin Gene Expression: Insights Into the Molecular Basis of Cardiac Myocyte Differentiation and Cardiac Hypertrophy

Because of its cardiac-restricted pattern of expression, the cTnC gene has been utilized as a model system to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying cardiac myocyte-specific transcription and cardiac myocyte differentiation.¹⁶,⁶³,⁷⁸⁻⁸⁴ The 124-bp murine cTnC promoter and 308-bp intragenic transcriptional enhancer restricts transgene expression to cardiac myocytes and embryonic skeletal muscle cells (the myotomal component of the somites); a pattern of gene expression recapit-

ulating that of the endogenous cTnC gene. [80,82] The nucleotide sequence of both the cTnC promoter and intragenic enhancer are highly conserved from mice to humans. [63] Nuclear protein binding assays revealed a conserved nucleotide protein binding site, WGATAR, in both the cTnC promoter and intragenic enhancer that bound a novel cardiac-restricted nuclear protein. [84] Isolation and characterization of this cardiac-restricted nuclear protein revealed that it corresponds to GATA-4, a member of the GATA family of C2-H2 zinc finger transcription factors. [84] Related members of this family of transcription factors play critical roles in restricting the developmental potential of hematopoietic stem cells into specific blood cell lineages. Mutation of the GATA-4 binding site in the cTnC promoter abolished transcriptional activity in cardiac myocytes (for review see Orkin [85] and Weiss and Orkin [86]). Forced expression of GATA-4 in noncardiac muscle cells transactivated the cTnC promoter, strongly suggesting that GATA-4 (or related GATA factors) play a critical role in regulating cTnC gene expression. [84] More recently, GATA-4 binding sites have been identified in both the cTnI and cTnT promoters, suggesting that GATA-4 may coordinately regulate transcription of the troponin complex. [87,88] In addition, functionally important GATA-4 binding sites have been identified in the α-myosin heavy chain promoter, β-myosin heavy chain promoter, phospholamban promoter, muscle creatine kinase enhancer, the cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca-ATPase (SERCA2) promoter, atrial natriuretic peptide promoter, and B-type natriuretic peptide promoter. [89-97] Taken together, these data strongly suggest that GATA-4 plays a critical role in regulating differentiation of cardiac myocytes from mesodermal precursors.

Although expression of GATA-4 is necessary to activate cardiac-specific transcriptional regulatory elements in noncardiac muscle cells, it is not sufficient. [89-97] GATA-4 directs cardiac-specific transcription and gene expression in a combinatorial fashion with other lineage-restricted transcription factors (for a review see Parmacek et al [83]). This is not surprising; GATA-4 is expressed not only in cardiac myocytes, but also the embryonic visceral endoderm as well as the gut epithelium. [98,99] In this regard it is noteworthy that further characterization of the cTnC promoter and intragenic transcriptional enhancer identified additional binding sites for the muscle-restricted transcription factor MEF-2, MEF-3, which has recently been shown to bind members of the Eya family of transcription factors, members of the T-box family of transcription factors, and a kruppel factor binding site (for a review see Olsen [100] and Fishman and Chien [101]). Moreover, GATA-4 has been shown to physically associate with the cardiac-restricted homeobox factor Nkx-2.5 and cooperatively activate the atrial natriuretic factor. [105] Two closely related GATA family members, designated GATA-5 and GATA-6, have also been identified, each of which is coexpressed with GATA-4 in the embryonic heart (and other tissues). [100-102] The role of GATA-5 and GATA-6 in the heart remains to be determined (for a review see Parmacek and Leiden [83]).

Mice harboring a null mutation in GATA-4 exhibit a general defect in ventral morphogenesis, including failure of the precardiac mesoderm to migrate to the midline and fuse to form a heart tube. [106,107] Analyses of chimeric mice generated with GATA-4-deficient embryonic stem cells suggests that failure of cardiac myocytes in the lateral plate mesoderm to migrate resulted from a defect in signaling between the underlying visceral endoderm and the lateral mesoderm rather than an intrinsic defect in the cardiac myocyte. [106,108] Of note, these GATA-4-deficient embryos express cardiac markers in the precardiac mesoderm, which is thought to occur because of the continued expression of the related GATA factors, GATA-5 and GATA-6, in these cells. [100,101,106]

Several lines of evidence suggest that GATA-4 plays an important role in the pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy via its capacity to activate transcription of GATA-4-dependent cardiac genes (including cTnC, cTnI, and cTnT). [109-111] In a rat aortic constriction model of pressure overload and cardiac hypertrophy, β-myosin heavy chain (MyHC) gene expression and promoter activity increases 3-fold in response to pressure overload. However, the increase in β-MyHC promoter in response to pressure overload was markedly attenuated when GATA-4 binding sites in the β-MyHC promoter were mutated. [112] Similarly, mutation of the GATA-4 binding site in the angiotensin II type 1a (AT1aR) receptor promoter abolishes pressure overload-induced activation of AT1aR promoter. [113] Moreover, overexpression of GATA-4 in the hearts of transgenic mice leads to

slowly progressive cardiac hypertrophy.¹⁰⁹ Although the mechanism of GATA-4–induced cardiac hypertrophy has not been elucidated, it has been proposed that GATA-4 may be acting downstream of the Ca²⁺-activated phosphatase calcineurin via its capacity to physically associate with nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT), a transcription factor that is translocated from the cytoplasm to the nucleus in response to hemodynamic stress.¹¹¹ As such, in response to increases in intracellular Ca²⁺, calcineurin dephosphorylates NFAT, leading to its nuclear translocation where it physically associates with GATA-4 and they synergistically upregulate transcription of a set of cardiac-restricted genes including the troponins.

### Troponins and Stunned Myocardium

A recent controversy has centered around the hypothesis that proteolytic degradation products of cTnI may play a role in the pathogenesis of stunned and/or hibernating myocardium (for a review see Marston and Redwood³⁰). In rodent species, cTnI has a half-life of approximately 3 days.¹¹⁴ Like other contractile proteins, cTnI is constantly being synthesized and degraded in the heart. Degradation of troponin subunits (and their release into the circulation) increases in response to cardiac injury.¹¹⁵ Release of TnI and TnT subunits into the circulation has become the standard clinical measure of myocardial injury and acute myocardial infarction.¹¹⁶ Injury-induced myofibrillar degradation is thought to occur via activation of the Ca²⁺-responsive proteinase μ-calpain.¹¹⁷ The primary cleavage site of cTnI is at the C-terminus generating a 193-amino acid peptide.¹¹⁷ However, other cleavage sites have been identified in both the human and rodent heart and the proteinases responsible for cTnI cleavage in the intact heart are poorly understood.¹¹⁸

Several lines of evidence led to the hypothesis that a major degradation product of cTnI (TnI₁₋₁₉₃) causes myocardial stunning and/or hibernation.¹¹⁹⁻¹²³ In some rodent models of ischemia-reperfusion injury and myocardial stunning, expression of the cTnI₁₋₁₉₃ peptide in the heart correlates with indices of myocardial stunning.¹¹⁹⁻¹²² In addition, overexpression of the cTnI₁₋₁₉₃ fragment in the hearts of transgenic mice led to ventricular dilatation, reduced contractile indices, and reduced calcium responsiveness recapitulating a stunned phenotype.¹¹⁵ However, recovery from stunning is often not accompanied by reduction in cTnI degradation and cTnI degradation without stunning has been also been observed.¹²⁴ Moreover, accumulation of degraded cTnI has not been observed in several large animal models of reversible myocardial stunning.¹²⁵⁻¹²⁷ Most important, there is little evidence of cTnI breakdown or the cTnI₁₋₁₉₃ peptide in the stunned and/or reperfused human heart.⁷⁷ In patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting, there was no difference in the level of cTnI degradation before and after surgery. In a second study examining biopsy samples from patients undergoing coronary bypass surgery, a 22-kD cTnI subfragment was detected in the hearts of 25 of 68 patients preoperatively and in 26 of 70 patients postoperatively.¹²⁸

Although this remains an active area of investigation, the case for cTnI protein degradation causing stunned myocardium remains unproven. However, there is experimental evidence that calpain-mediated processes may play a role in reversible stunning. Calpain-mediated cleavage of cTnI (and other contractile proteins) is reproducibly observed in irreversibly injured cardiac myocytes and in the setting of acute myocardial infarction in humans. In fact, it is extremely likely that some or most of the cTnI detected by commercially available cTnI assays may represent the proteolytically cleaved and degraded cTnI peptide(s).

### Troponin Mutations and Familial Cardiomyopathy

FHC is an autosomal dominant disorder with a heterogeneous presentation including left ventricular hypertrophy, myofibrillar and myocyte disarray, and sudden cardiac death (for a review see Maron¹²⁹ and Roberts and Ulrich¹³⁰). FHC is estimated to have a prevalence of about 0.2% in young adults and is the most common cause of sudden death in adolescents and young adults.¹³¹ FHC is caused by mutations in genes encoding sarcomeric proteins including β-MyHC, myosin light chains 1 and 2, myosin-binding protein C, titin, actin, α-Tm, cTnT, and cTnI (for a review see Roberts and Ulrich¹³⁰ and Erdmann et al¹³²). Some mutations have been associated with espe-
cially malignant presentations and a poor prognosis. However, direct genotype to phenotype correlation has proven challenging in many cases and extreme caution is advised when counseling family members of patients presenting with FHC. \({ }^{133-136}\) This review focuses solely on human mutations in the cTnT and cTnI genes that cause cardiomyopathy.

Multiple mutations in cTnT have been associated with FHC. \({ }^{136-146}\) However, it remains unclear why these mutations in some cases cause cardiac hypertrophy and/or sudden cardiac death and in other cases the patient remains totally asymptomatic without evidence of hypertrophy, outflow tract obstruction, and/or arrhythmias. \({ }^{135}\) Several mutations in the cTnT gene (I179N, R92Q, R92W, R94L, Δ-E160, intron 16G to A) are associated with a particularly malignant course and high risk of sudden cardiac death before the age of 45. \({ }^{147,148}\) One of the most intensely studied mutants has been the cTnT (I179N) mutant, which is associated with a high risk of sudden cardiac death in young adults. \({ }^{146}\) Biophysical analysis of the effect of the I179N mutation on \(\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}\) sensitivity has generated conflicting results presumably related to the various methodologies employed. \({ }^{149-154}\) Cardiac myocytes isolated from I179N transgenic mouse hearts have altered electrophysiologic properties. \({ }^{155}\) It is also important to note that analyses of the I179N mutant in transgenic mice has shown that the phenotype observed is related to the strain of mouse, gender of the mouse, and perhaps most importantly to the amount of recombinant mutant protein expressed in the heart. \({ }^{156}\) When expressed at relatively high levels under the transcriptional control of the α-MyHC promoter, cTnT (I179N) mutant mice demonstrate no evidence of cardiac hypertrophy or sudden death. However, when analyzed ex vivo, I179N mutant hearts exhibit marked increases in \(\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}\) sensitivity of ATPase activity, force of contraction, rate of force activation, and reduced diastolic properties. \({ }^{156}\) Similarly, transgenic mice expressing relatively high levels of the cTnT R92Q mutant protein manifest increased systolic properties and diastolic dysfunction. \({ }^{157}\) Although there is some variability, analyses of the hearts from transgenic mice expressing cTnT mutants have generally shown the following: (1) reduced diastolic compliance, (2) impaired relaxation properties, (3) preserved systolic properties

with reduced reserve, and (4) accentuated cardiac dysfunction when exposed to inotropic stimulation (for review see Hernandez et al \({ }^{134}\) and Knollman and Potter \({ }^{158}\) ).

Mutations in the cTnI gene also cause FHC. \({ }^{136,159-162}\) Some, but not all, cTnI mutants observed in FHC patients demonstrate enhanced \(\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}\) sensitivity and maximum speed of filament sliding in vitro, which has been postulated to cause hypertrophic growth and sudden cardiac death. \({ }^{163-165}\) However, as with other myofibrillar gene mutations, it is not possible to draw direct genotype-to-phenotype correlations. For example, probands in a single family with the cTnI N190H mutation present clinically as both hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and classic restrictive cardiomyopathy (without signs of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy). \({ }^{166}\) In this regard, it is noteworthy that missense mutations in the cTnI gene have been identified in 6 unrelated patients presenting with idiopathic restrictive cardiomyopathy. \({ }^{166}\) These data suggest that mutations in cTnI may underlie a relatively large percentage of cases of idiopathic restrictive cardiomyopathy. Together with the finding that mutations in genes encoding Tm, cTnT, titin, and β-MyHC may present clinically as either dilated or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, these data strongly suggest that genetic background and/or other environmental factors impact on the clinical presentation of patients with mutations in sarcomeric proteins and FHC. Research into the functional consequences of these sarcomeric gene mutations in a defined genetic background (such as an inbred strain of genetically engineered mice) should provide additional understanding of the molecular basis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This is a very important area of research and further studies into the biology of cTnT and cTnI mutants observed in FHC patients should help to elucidate how the Tn complex regulates the systolic and diastolic properties of the intact heart and may provide insights into the pathogenesis of cardiomyopathy.

# Acknowledgment

This work was supported in part by NIH grant R37HL22231 and PO1 62426 to R.J.S. and a grant from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to M.S.P. We thank Lisa Gottschalk for expert preparation of the figures.
BIOLOGY OF THE TROPONIN COMPLEX

References

1. Ringer S: A further contribution regarding the influence of the blood on contraction of the heart. J Physiol 4:29-42, 1883
2. Heilbrunn L: The action of calcium on muscle protoplasm. Physiol Zool 13:88-94, 1940
3. Huxley HE: The contractile structure of cardiac and skeletal muscle. Circulation 24:328-335, 1961
4. Huxley HE: X-ray analysis and the problem of muscle. Proc R Soc B 141:59-66, 1953
5. Ebashi S: Third component participating in the superprecipitation of 'natural actomyosin'. Nature 200: 1010, 1963
6. Ebashi S: Excitation-contraction coupling in cardiac muscle. Jpn Circ J 31:1560-1561, 1967
7. Ebashi S: Calcium ions and muscle contraction. Nature 240:217-218, 1972
8. Hasselbach W, Makinose M: The calcium pump of the "relaxing granules" of muscle and its dependency on ATP-splitting. Biochem Z 333:518-528, 1961
9. Weber A, Winicur S: The role of calcium in the superprecipitation of actomyosin. J Biol Chem 236: 3198-3202, 1961
10. Katz AM: Purification and properties of tropomyosin-containing protein fraction that sensitizes reconstituted actomyosin to calcium-binding agents. J Biol Chem 241:1522-1529, 1966
11. Ebashi S, Ebashi F, Kodama A: Troponin as the Ca<sup>++</sup>-receptive protein in the contractile system. J Biochem (Tokyo) 62:137-138, 1967
12. Greaser ML, Gergely J, Han MH, et al: Lack of identity of tropocalcin with troponin components. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 48:358-361, 1972
13. Greaser ML, Gergely J: Purification and properties of the components from troponin. J Biol Chem 248: 2125-2133, 1973
14. Greaser ML, Gergely J: Reconstitution of troponin activity from three protein components. J Biol Chem 246:4226-4233, 1971
15. Ebashi S: Historical overview: Calcium ion and contractile proteins. Ann NY Acad Sci 522:51-59, 1988
16. Parmacek MS, Leiden JM: Structure and expression of the murine slow/cardiac troponin C gene. J Biol Chem 264:13217-13225, 1989
17. Breitbart RE, Nguyen HT, Medford RM, et al: Intricate combinatorial patterns of exon splicing generate multiple regulated troponin T isoforms from a single gene. Cell 41:67-82, 1985
18. Breitbart RE, Nadal-Ginard B: Complete nucleotide sequence of the fast skeletal troponin T gene: Alternatively spliced exons exhibit unusual interspecies divergence. J Mol Biol 188:313-324, 1986
19. Schreier T, Kedes L, Gahlmann R: Cloning, structural analysis, and expression of the human slow twitch skeletal muscle/cardiac troponin C gene. J Biol Chem 265:21247-2153, 1990
20. Murphy AM, Jones L 2nd, Sims HF, et al: Molecular cloning of rat cardiac troponin I and analysis of

troponin I isoform expression in developing rat heart. Biochemistry 30:707-712, 1991
21. Perry SV: Troponin I: Inhibitor or facilitator. Mol Cell Biochem 190:9-32, 1999
22. Squire JM, Morris EP: A new look at thin filament regulation in vertebrate skeletal muscle. FASEB J 12:761-771, 1998
23. Gordon AM, Homsher E, Regnier M: Regulation of contraction in striated muscle. Physiol Rev 80:853-924, 2000
24. Gomes AV, Potter JD, Szczesna-Cordary D: The role of troponins in muscle contraction. IUBMB Life 54: 323-333, 2002
25. Tobacman LS: Thin filament-mediated regulation of cardiac contraction. Annu Rev Physiol 58:447-481, 1996
26. Solaro RJ: Troponin C-troponin I interactions and molecular signalling in cardiac myofilaments. Adv Exp Med Biol 382:109-115, 1995
27. Metzger JM, Westfall MV: Covalent and noncovalent modification of thin filament action: The essential role of troponin in cardiac muscle regulation. Circ Res 94:146-158, 2004
28. Solaro RJ, Montgomery DM, Wang L, et al: Integration of pathways that signal cardiac growth with modulation of myofilament activity. J Nucl Cardiol 9:523-533, 2002
29. Solaro RJ, Rarick HM: Troponin and tropomyosin. Circ Res 83:471-480, 1998
30. Marston SB, Redwood CS: Modulation of thin filament activation by breakdown or isoform switching of thin filament proteins: Physiological and pathological implications. Circ Res 93:1170-1178, 2003
31. Leavis PC, Gergely J: Thin filament proteins and thin filament-linked regulation of vertebrate muscle contraction. Crit Rev Biochem 16:235-305, 1984
32. Holmes KC, Popp D, Gebhard W, et al: Atomic model of the actin filament. Nature 347:44-49, 1990
33. Milligan RA, Flicker PF: Structural relationships of actin, myosin, and tropomyosin revealed by cryoelectron microscopy. J Cell Biol 105:29-39, 1987
34. Flicker PF, Phillips GN, Cohen CJ: Troponin and its interactions with tropomyosin: An electron microscope study. J Mol Biol 162:495-501, 1982
35. Gagne SM, Tsuda S, Li MX, et al: Structures of the troponin C regulatory domains in the APO and calcium-saturated states. Nat Struct Biol 2:784-789, 1995
36. Spyropoulos L, Li MX, Sia SK, et al: Calcium-induced structural transition in the regulatory domain of human cardiac troponin C. Biochemistry 36:12138-12146, 1997
37. Kleerekoper Q, Howarth JW, Guo X, et al: Cardiac troponin I induced conformational changes in cardiac troponin C as monitored by NMR using site-directed spin and isotope labeling. Biochemistry 34: 13343-13352, 1995
38. Kretsinger RH: Structure and evolution of calcium-modulated proteins. CRC Critical Reviews in Biochemistry 8:119-174, 1980

39. Potter JD, Gergely J: The calcium and magnesium binding sites on troponin and their role in the regulation of myofibrillar adenosine triphosphatase. J Biol Chem 250:4628-46233, 1975

40. Holroyde MJ, Robertson SP, Johnson JD, et al: The calcium and magnesium binding sites on cardiac troponin and their role in the regulation of myofibrillar adenosine triphosphatase. J Biol Chem 255:11688-11693, 1980

41. Pan BS, Solaro RJ: Calcium-binding properties of troponin C in detergent-skinned heart muscle fibers. J Biol Chem 262:7839-7849, 1987

42. Robertson SP, Johnson JD, Holroyde MJ, et al: The effect of troponin I phosphorylation on the Ca²⁺-binding properties of the Ca²⁺-regulatory site of bovine cardiac troponin. J Biol Chem 257:260-263, 1982

43. Lehman W, Rosol M, Tobacman LS, et al: Troponin organization on relaxed and activated thin filaments revealed by electron microscopy and three-dimensional reconstruction. J Mol Biol 307:739-744, 2001

44. Takeda S, Yamashita A, Maeda K, et al: Structure of the core domain of human cardiac troponin in the Ca(2+)-saturated form. Nature 424:35-41, 2003

45. Solaro R, Wolska B, Arteaga GM, et al: Modulation of thin filament activity in long and short term regulation of cardiac function, in Solaro RJ, Moss RL (eds): Molecular Control Mechanisms in Striated Muscle Contraction. Boston, Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp 447-481, 2002

46. Solaro RJ: Integration of myofilament response to Ca²⁺ with cardiac pump regulation and pump dynamics. Am J Physiol 277:S155-S163, 1999

47. Solaro RJ: Modulation of cardiac myofilament activity by protein phosphorylation, in Page E, Fozzard H, Solaro RJ (eds): Handbook of Physiology, vol 2. New York, Oxford University Press, pp 264-300, 2001

48. Palmer S, Kentish JC: Roles of Ca²⁺ and cross-bridge kinetics in determining the maximum rates of Ca²⁺ activation and relaxation in rat and guinea pig skinned trabeculae. Circ Res 83:179-186, 1998

49. Bers DM: Cardiac excitation-contraction coupling. Nature 415:198-205, 2002

50. Allen DG, Kentish JC: The cellular basis of the length-tension relation in cardiac muscle. J Mol Cell Cardiol 17:821-840, 1985

51. Konhilas JP, Irving TC, de Tombe PP: Frank-Starling law of the heart and the cellular mechanisms of length-dependent activation. Pflugers Arch 445:305-310, 2002

52. Akella AB, Ding XL, Cheng R, et al: Diminished Ca²⁺ sensitivity of skinned cardiac muscle contractility coincident with troponin T-band shifts in the diabetic rat. Circ Res 76:600-606, 1995

53. Arteaga GM, Palmiter KA, Leiden JM, et al: Attenuation of length dependence of calcium activation in myofilaments of transgenic mouse hearts expressing slow skeletal troponin I. J Physiol 526:541-549, 2000

54. Chandra M, Rundell VL, Tariff JC, et al: Ca(2+) activation of myofilaments from transgenic mouse

hearts expressing R92Q mutant cardiac troponin T. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 280:H705-H713, 2001

55. McDonald KS, Field LJ, Parmacek MS, et al: Length dependence of Ca²⁺ sensitivity of tension in mouse cardiac myocytes expressing skeletal troponin C. J Physiol 483:131-139, 1995

56. Konhilas JP, Irving TC, Wolska BM, et al: Troponin I in the murine myocardium: Influence on length-dependent activation and interfilament spacing. J Physiol 547:951-961, 2003

57. Pena JR, Wolska BM: Troponin I phosphorylation plays an important role in the relaxant effect of beta-adrenergic stimulation in mouse hearts. Cardiovasc Res 61:756-763, 2004

58. Fentzke RC, Buck SH, Patel JR, et al: Impaired cardiomyocyte relaxation and diastolic function in transgenic mice expressing slow skeletal troponin I in the heart. J Physiol 517:143-157, 1999

59. Pi Y, Kemnitz KR, Zhang D, et al: Phosphorylation of troponin I controls cardiac twitch dynamics: Evidence from phosphorylation site mutants expressed on a troponin I-null background in mice. Circ Res 90:649-656, 2002

60. Wolska BM, Vijayan K, Arteaga GM, et al: Expression of slow skeletal troponin I in adult transgenic mouse heart muscle reduces the force decline observed during acidic conditions. J Physiol 536:863-870, 2001

61. Layland J, Grieve DJ, Cave AC, et al: Essential role of troponin I in the positive inotropic response to isoprenaline in mouse hearts contracting auxotonically. J Physiol 556:835-847, 2004

62. Takimoto E, Soergel DG, Janssen PM, et al: Frequency- and afterload-dependent cardiac modulation in vivo by troponin I with constitutively active protein kinase A phosphorylation sites. Circ Res 94:496-504, 2004

63. Gahlmann R, Kedes L: Cloning structural analysis, and expression of the human fast twitch skeletal muscle troponin C gene. J Biol Chem 265:12520-12528, 1990

64. Toyota N, Shimada Y: Differentiation of troponin in cardiac and skeletal muscles in chicken embryos as studied by immunofluorescence microscopy. J Cell Biol 91:497-504, 1981

65. Dhoot GK, Perry SV: Distribution of polymorphic forms of troponin components and tropomyosin in skeletal muscle. Nature 278:714-718, 1979

66. Bhavsar PK, Dhoot GK, Cumming DV, et al: Developmental expression of troponin I isoforms in fetal human heart. FEBS Lett 292:5-8, 1991

67. Hunkeler NM, Kullman J, Murphy AM: Troponin I isoform expression in human heart. Circ Res 69:1409-1414, 1991

68. Sasse S, Brand NJ, Kyprianou P, et al: Troponin I gene expression during human cardiac development and in end-stage heart failure. Circ Res 72:932-938, 1993

69. Anderson PA, Malouf NN, Oakeley AE, et al: Troponin T isoform expression in humans: A comparison

among normal and failing adult heart, fetal heart,  
and adult and fetal skeletal muscle. Circ Res 69:  
1226-1233, 1991  

70. Townsend PJ, Barton PJ, Yacoub MH, et al: Molecular cloning of human cardiac troponin T isoforms: Expression in developing and failing heart. J Mol Cell Cardiol 27:2223-2236, 1995  

71. Mesnard L, Logeart D, Taviaux S, et al: Human cardiac troponin T: Cloning and expression of new isoforms in the normal and failing heart. Circ Res 76:687-692, 1995  

72. Gomes AV, Guzman G, Zhao J, et al: Cardiac troponin T isoforms affect the Ca²⁺ sensitivity and inhibition of force development: Insights into the role of troponin T isoforms in the heart. J Biol Chem 277:35341-35349, 2002  

73. Anderson PA, Malouf NN, Oakeley AE, et al: Troponin T isoform expression in the normal and failing human left ventricle: A correlation with myofibrillar ATPase activity. Basic Res Cardiol 87:117-127, 1992 (Suppl 1)  

74. Mesnard-Rouiller L, Mercadier JJ, Butler-Browne G, et al: Troponin T mRNA and protein isoforms in the human left ventricle: Pattern of expression in failing and control hearts. J Mol Cell Cardiol 29:3043-3055, 1997  

75. Mesnard L, Samson F, Espinasse I, et al: Molecular cloning and developmental expression of human cardiac troponin T. FEBS Lett 328:139-144, 1993  

76. Anderson PA, Greig A, Mark TM, et al: Molecular basis of human cardiac troponin T isoforms expressed in the developing, adult, and failing heart. Circ Res 76:681-686, 1995  

77. van der Velden J, Papp Z, Zaremba R, et al: Increased Ca²⁺-sensitivity of the contractile apparatus in end-stage human heart failure results from altered phosphorylation of contractile proteins. Cardiovasc Res 57:37-47, 2003  

78. Parmacek MS, Leiden JM: Structure, function and regulation of troponin C. Circulation 84:991-1003, 1991  

79. Parmacek MS, Karpinski BA, Gottesdiener KM, et al: Structure, expression and regulation of the murine 4F2 heavy chain. Nucleic Acids Res 17:1915-1931, 1989  

80. Parmacek MS, Ip HS, Jung F, et al: A novel myogenic regulatory circuit controls slow/cardiac troponin C gene transcription in skeletal muscle. Mol Cell Biol 14:1870-1885, 1994  

81. Parmacek MS, Bengur AR, Vora AJ, et al: The structure and regulation of expression of the murine fast skeletal troponin C gene: Identification of a developmentally regulated, muscle-specific transcriptional enhancer. J Biol Chem 265:15970-15976, 1990  

82. Parmacek MS, Vora AJ, Shen T, et al: Identification and characterization of a cardiac-specific transcriptional regulatory element in the slow/cardiac troponin C gene. Mol Cell Biol 12:1967-1976, 1992  

83. Parmacek MS, Leiden JM: GATA transcription factors and cardiac development, in Harvey RP,  

Rosenthal N (eds): Heart Development. San Diego, CA, Academic Press, pp 291-303, 1999  

84. Ip HS, Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M, et al: The GATA-4 transcription factor transactivates the cardiac muscle-specific troponin C promoter-enhancer in non-muscle cells. Mol Cell Biol 14:7517-7526, 1994  

85. Orkin SH: GATA-binding transcription factors in hematopoietic cells. Blood 80:575-581, 1992  

86. Weiss MJ, Orkin SH: GATA transcription factors: Key regulators of hematopoiesis. Exp Hematol 23:99-107, 1995  

87. Ausoni S, Campione M, Picard A, et al: Structure and regulation of the mouse cardiac troponin I gene. J Biol Chem 269:339-346, 1994  

88. Martin AF, Ball K, Gao LZ, et al: Identification and functional significance of troponin I isoforms in neonatal rat heart myofibrils. Circ Res 69:1244-1252, 1991  

89. Amacher SL, Buskin JN, Hauschka SD: Multiple regulatory elements contribute differentially to muscle creatine kinase enhancer activity in skeletal and cardiac muscle. Mol Cell Biol 13:2753-2764, 1993  

90. Donoviel D, Shield MA, Buskin JN, et al: Analysis of muscle creatine kinase gene regulatory elements in skeletal and cardiac muscles of transgenic mice. Mol Cell Biol 16:1649-1658, 1996  

91. Grepin C, Dagnino L, Robitaille L, et al: A hormone-encoding gene identifies a pathway for cardiac but not skeletal muscle gene transcription. Mol Cell Biol 14:3115-3129, 1994  

92. Knotts S, Rindt H, Neumann J, et al: In vivo regulation of the mouse beta myosin heavy chain gene. J Biol Chem 269:31275-31282, 1994  

93. Molkentin JD, Kalvakolanu DV, Markham BE: Transcription factor GATA-4 regulates cardiac muscle-specific expression of the a-myosin heavy chain gene. Mol Cell Biol 14:4947-4957, 1994  

94. Molkentin JD, Jobe SM, Markham BE: a-Myosin heavy chain gene regulation: Delineation and characterization of the cardiac muscle-specific enhancer and muscle-specific promoter. J Mol Cell Cardiol 28:1211-1225, 1996  

95. Seidman CE, Wong DW, Jarcho JA, et al: Cis-acting sequences that modulate atrial natriuretic factor gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85:4104-4108, 1988  

96. Subramaniam A, Jones WK, Gulick J, et al: Tissue-specific regulation of the a-myosin heavy chain gene promoter in transgenic mice. J Biol Chem 266:24613-24620, 1991  

97. Wanker M, Boheler KR, Fiszman MY, et al: Molecular cloning and analysis of the human cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca-ATPase (SERCA2) gene promoter. J Mol Cell Cardiol 28:2139-50, 1996  

98. Arceci RJ, King AA, Simon MC, et al: Mouse GATA-4: A retinoic acid-inducible GATA-binding transcription factor expressed in endodermally derived tissues and heart. Mol Cell Biol 13:2235-2246, 1993  

99. Laverriere AC, MacNeill C, Mueller C, et al: GATA-4/5/6, a subfamily of three transcription factors tran-
scribed in developing heart and gut. J Biol Chem 269:23177-23184, 1994

100. Olson EN: Development. The path to the heart and the road not taken. Science 291:2327-2328, 2001

101. Fishman MC, Chien KR: Fashioning the vertebrate heart: Earliest embryonic decisions. Development 124:2099-2177, 1997

102. Morrisey EE, Ip HS, Tang Z, et al: GATA-5: A transcriptional activator expressed in a novel temporally and spatially-restricted pattern during embryonic development. Dev Biol 183:21-36, 1997

103. Morrisey EE, Ip HS, Lu MM, et al: GATA-6: A zinc finger transcription factor that is expressed in multiple cell lineages derived from lateral mesoderm. Dev Biol 177:309-322, 1996

104. Morrisey EE, Tang Z, Sigrist K, et al: GATA6 regulates HNF4 and is required for differentiation of visceral endoderm in the mouse embryo. Genes Dev 12:3579-3590, 1998

105. Sepulveda JL, Belaguli N, Nigam V, et al: GATA-4 and Nkx-2.5 coactivate Nkx-2 DNA binding targets: Role for regulating early cardiac gene expression. Mol Cell Biol 18:3405-3415, 1998

106. Kuo CT, Morrisey EE, Anandappa R, et al: GATA4 transcription factor is required for ventral morphogenesis and heart tube formation. Genes Dev 11: 1048-1060, 1997

107. Molkentin JD, Lin Q, Duncan SA, et al: Requirement of the transcription factor GATA4 for heart tube formation and ventral morphogenesis. Genes Dev 11:1061-1072, 1997

108. Narita N, Bielinska M, Wilson DB: Wild-type endoderm abrogates the ventral developmental defects associated with GATA-4 deficiency in the mouse. Dev Biol 189:270-274, 1997

109. Liang Q, De Windt LJ, Witt SA, et al: The transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6 regulate cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in vitro and in vivo. J Biol Chem 276:30245-30253, 2001

110. Molkentin JD, Olson EN: GATA4: A novel transcriptional regulator of cardiac hypertrophy? Circ 96: 3833-3835, 1997

111. Molkentin JD, Lu J-R, Antos CL, et al: A calcineurin-dependent transcriptional pathway to cardiac hypertrophy. Cell 93:215-228, 1998

112. Hasegawa K, Lee SJ, Jobe SM, et al: cis-Acting sequences that mediate induction of b-myosin heavy chain gene expression during left ventricular hypertrophy due to aortic constriction. Circulation 96:3943-3953, 1997

113. Herzig TC, Jobe SM, Aoki H, et al: Angiotensin II type la receptor gene expression in the heart: AP-1 and GATA-4 mediate response to pressure overload. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:7543-7548, 1997

114. Martin AF: Turnover of cardiac troponin subunits: Kinetic evidence for a precursor pool of troponin-I. J Biol Chem 256:964-968, 1981

115. Katrukha AG, Bereznikova AV, Filatov VL, et al: Degradation of cardiac troponin I: Implication for reliable immunodetection. Clin Chem 44:2433-2440, 1998

116. Alpert JS, Thygesen K, Antman E, et al: Myocardial infarction redefined—A consensus document of The Joint European Society of Cardiology/American College of Cardiology Committee for the redefinition of myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol 36:959-969, 2000

117. McDonough JL, Arrell DK, Van Eyk JE: Troponin I degradation and covalent complex formation accompanies myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury. Circ Res 84:9-20, 1999

118. Yu ZB, Zhang LF, Jin JP: A proteolytic NH2-terminal truncation of cardiac troponin I that is up-regulated in simulated microgravity. J Biol Chem 276:15753-15760, 2001

119. Westfall MV, Solaro RJ: Alterations in myofibrillar function and protein profiles after complete global ischemia in rat hearts. Circ Res 70:302-313, 1992

120. Gao WD, Liu Y, Mellgren R, et al: Intrinsic myofilament alterations underlying the decreased contractility of stunned myocardium: A consequence of Ca²⁺-dependent proteolysis? Circ Res 78:455-465, 1996

121. Gao WD, Atar D, Liu Y, et al: Role of troponin I proteolysis in the pathogenesis of stunned myocardium. Circ Res 80:393-399, 1997

122. Van Eyk JE, Powers F, Law W, et al: Breakdown and release of myofilament proteins during ischemia and ischemia/reperfusion in rat hearts: Identification of degradation products and effects on the pCa-force relation. Circ Res 82:261-271, 1998

123. Murphy AM, Kogler H, Georgakopoulos D, et al: Transgenic mouse model of stunned myocardium. Science 287:488-491, 2000

124. Cantry JM, Lee TC: Troponin I proteolysis and myocardial stunning: Now you see it-now you don't. J Mol Cell Cardiol 34:375-377, 2002

125. Thomas SA, Fallavollita JA, Lee TC, et al: Absence of troponin I degradation or altered sarcoplasmic reticulum uptake protein expression after reversible ischemia in swine. Circ Res 85:446-456, 1999

126. Kim SJ, Kudej RK, Yatani A, et al: A novel mechanism for myocardial stunning involving impaired Ca(2+) handling. Circ Res 89:831-837, 2001

127. Luss H, Meissner A, Rolf N, et al: Biochemical mechanism(s) of stunning in conscious dogs. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 279:H176-H184, 2000

128. McDonough JL, Labugger R, Pickett W, et al: Cardiac troponin I is modified in the myocardium of bypass patients. Circulation 103:58-64, 2001

129. Maron BJ: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Lancet 350:127, 1997

130. Roberts R, Ulrich S: New concepts in hypertrophic cardiomyopathies, part I. Circulation 104:2113-2116, 2001

131. Maron BJ, Gardin JM, Flack JM: Sudden death in young competitive athletes: Clinical, demographic and pathological profiles. JAMA 276:199-204, 1996

132. Erdmann J, Daehmlow S, Wischke S, et al: Mutation spectrum in a large cohort of unrelated consecutive patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Clin Genet 64:339-349, 2003
133. Marian A, Roberts R: Molecular genetic basis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: Genetic markers for sudden cardiac death. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 9:88-99, 1998
134. Hernandez OM, Housmans PR, Potter JD: Invited review: Pathophysiology of cardiac muscle contraction and relaxation as a result of alterations in thin filament regulation. J Appl Physiol 90:1125-1136, 2001
135. Chien KR: Genotype, phenotype: Upstairs, downstairs in the family of cardiomyopathies. J Clin Invest 111:175-178, 2003
136. Van Driest SL, Ellsworth EG, Ommen SR, et al: Prevalence and spectrum of thin filament mutations in an outpatient referral population with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation 108:445-451, 2003
137. Anan R, Shono H, Kisanuki A, et al: Patients with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by a Phe110Ile missense mutation in the cardiac troponin T gene have variable cardiac morphologies and a favorable prognosis. Circulation 98:391-397, 1998
138. Elliott K, Watkins H, Redwood CS: Altered regulatory properties of human cardiac troponin I mutants that cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Biol Chem 275:22069-22074, 2000
139. Koga Y, Toshima H, Kimura A, et al: Clinical manifestations of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with mutations in the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene or cardiac troponin T gene. J Card Fail 2:S97-S103, 1996
140. Lin T, Ichihara S, Yamada Y, et al: Phenotypic variation of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by the Phe(110)→Ile mutation in cardiac troponin T. Cardiology 93:155-162, 2000
141. Moolman JC, Corfield VA, Posen B, et al: Sudden death due to troponin T mutations. J Am Coll Cardiol 29:549-555, 1997
142. Solaro RJ: Troponin I, stunning, hypertrophy, and failure of the heart. Circ Res 84:122-124, 1999
143. Thierfelder L, Watkins H, MacRae C, et al: Alpha-tropomyosin and cardiac troponin T mutations cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: A disease of the sarcomere. Cell 77:701-712, 1994
144. Tobacman LS, Lin D, Butters C, et al: Functional consequences of troponin T mutations found in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Biol Chem 274: 28363-28370, 1999
145. Varnava A, Baboonian C, Davison F, et al: A new mutation of the cardiac troponin T gene causing familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy without left ventricular hypertrophy. Heart 82:621-624, 1999
146. Watkins H, McKenna WJ, Thierfelder L, et al: Mutations in the genes for cardiac troponin T and alpha-tropomyosin in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med 332:1058-1064, 1995
147. Watkins H, Seidman CE, Seidman JG, et al: Expression and functional assessment of a truncated cardiac troponin T that causes hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: Evidence for a dominant negative action. J Clin Invest 98:2456-2461, 1996

148. Mukherjea P, Tong L, Seidman JG, et al: Altered regulatory function of two familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy troponin T mutants. Biochemistry 38: 13296-13301, 1999
149. Sweeney HL, Feng HS, Yang Z, et al: Functional analyses of troponin T mutations that cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: Insights into disease pathogenesis and troponin function. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95:14406-14410, 1998
150. Rust EM, Albayya FP, Metzger JM: Identification of a contractile deficit in adult cardiac myocytes expressing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-associated mutant troponin T proteins. J Clin Invest 103:1459- 1467, 1999
151. Morimoto S, Yanaga F, Minakami R, et al: Ca²⁺-sensitizing effects of the mutations at Ile-79 and Arg-92 of troponin T in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am J Physiol 275:C200-C207, 1998
152. Marian AJ, Zhao G, Seta Y, et al: Expression of a mutant (Arg92Gln) human cardiac troponin T, known to cause hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, impairs adult cardiac myocyte contractility. Circ Res 81:76- 85, 1997
153. Lin D, Bobkova A, Homsher E, et al: Altered cardiac troponin T in vitro function in the presence of a mutation implicated in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Clin Invest 97:2842-2848, 1996
154. Homsher E, Lee DM, Morris C, et al: Regulation of force and unloaded sliding speed in single thin filaments: Effects of regulatory proteins and calcium. J Physiol 524:233-243, 2000
155. Knollmann BC, Kirchhof P, Sirenko SG, et al: Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-linked mutant troponin T causes stress-induced ventricular tachycardia and Ca²⁺-dependent action potential remodeling. Circ Res 92:428-436, 2003
156. Miller T, Szczesna D, Housmans PR, et al: Abnormal contractile function in transgenic mice expressing a familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-linked tropo- nin T (I79N) mutation. J Biol Chem 276:3743-3755, 2001
157. Oberst L, Zhao G, Park JT, et al: Dominant-negative effect of a mutant cardiac troponin T on cardiac structure and function in transgenic mice. J Clin Invest 102:1498-1505, 1998
158. Knollmann BC, Potter JD: Altered regulation of cardiac muscle contraction by troponin T mutations that cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Trends Cardiovasc Med 11:206-212, 2001
159. Kokado H, Shimizu M, Yoshi H, et al: Clinical features of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by a Lys183 deletion mutation in the cardiac troponin I gene. Circulation 102:663-669, 2000
160. Morner S, Richard P, Kazzam E, et al: Deletion in the cardiac troponin I gene in a family from northern Sweden with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Mol Cell Cardiol 32:521-525, 2000
161. Morner S, Richard P, Kazzam E, et al: Identification of the genotypes causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in northern Sweden. J Mol Cell Cardiol 35:841- 849, 2003

176

162. Kimura A, Harada H, Park JE, et al: Mutations in the cardiac troponin I gene associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Nat Genet 16:379-382, 1997
163. Kohler J, Chen Y, Brenner B, et al: Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy mutations in troponin I (K183D, G203S, K206Q) enhance filament sliding. Physiol Genomics 14:117-128, 2003
164. Deng Y, Schmidtmann A, Kruse S, et al: Phosphorylation of human cardiac troponin I G203S and K206Q linked to familial hypertrophic cardiomyopa-

thy affects actomyosin interaction in different ways. J Mol Cell Cardiol 35:1365-1374, 2003
165. Westfall MV, Borton AR, Albayya FP, et al: Myofilament calcium sensitivity and cardiac disease: Insights from troponin I isoforms and mutants. Circ Res 91:525-531, 2002
166. Mogensen J, Kubo T, Duque M, et al: Idiopathic restrictive cardiomyopathy is part of the clinical expression of cardiac troponin I mutations. J Clin Invest 111:209-216, 2003
