
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

SCIENCE DIRECT®

ELSEVIER

Immunology Letters 97 (2005) 171–179

Review

Complement: central to innate immunity and bridging to adaptive responses

B. Paul Morgan*, Kevin J. Marchbank, M. Paula Longhi, Claire L. Harris, Awen M. Gallimore
1. Introduction

   Complement (C), a central component of innate immunity, is one of the most ancient parts of the immune system, present in evolution long before the development of adaptive immunity. Given that adaptive immunity evolved in the presence of a functioning C system it is perhaps not surprising that there are considerable and important interactions between C and the adaptive responses. Much more surprising is that it took so long for such interactions to
B.P. Morgan et al. / Immunology Letters 97 (2005) 171–179

Fig. 2. The CR2–BCR complex. The cartoon illustrates the structure of the complex between CR2 and the B cell receptor (BCR), with recruitment of additional signalling components to generate a signalling competent complex. Binding of C fragment opsonised immune complex (
there are several distinct receptors binding C1q in different orientations and to different degrees [32,33]. B cells abundantly express receptors for the C1q collagen tail (cC1qR) and the globular head (gC1qR). Early studies demonstrated that C1q-coated chicken erythrocytes bound B cells via the cC1qR [34]. A direct
cells and other antigen presenting cells and thereby enhancing immune responses. T cell expression of CR2 is increased in a variety of pathological situations, including systemic lupus erythematosus, implying roles in the immune response [50]. Expression of CR1 and CR2 on cytotoxic T cells may directly aid killing by recognition of C3 fragments on opsonised targets.

It was shown 20 years ago that addition of
B.P. Morgan et al. / Immunology Letters 97 (2005) 171–179

**Fig. 4. Signalling through the GPI-anchored CReg DAF and CD59.** The schematic shows CD59 and DAF in lipid rafts associated with adaptor proteins and intracellular signalling molecules in the T cell membrane. Ligation of either
phenotype. Importantly, this study showed that dimeric C3b could substitute for anti-CD46 to provide a co-stimulatory signal. A recent study by Sanchez et al. demonstrated that CD46 cross-linking with antibody or C3b dimer also promotes production of IL-2 and IFNγ by CD4+ T cells [74]. Thus it is apparent that, depending
[8] Jondal M, Klein G, Oldstone MB, Bokish V, Yefenof E. Surface markers on human B and T lymphocytes VIII. Association between complement and Epstein-Barr virus receptors on human lymphoid cells. Scand J Immunol 1976;5:401–10.

[9] Yefenof E, Klein G, J
[47] Jiang K, Chen Y, Xu CS, Jarvis JN. T cell activation by soluble Clq-bearing immune complexes: implications for the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. Clin Exp Immunol 2003;131:61–7.

[48] Borron P, McCormack FX, Elhalwagi BM, Chronos ZC, Lewis JF,