
The Genetics of Heteromeric Amino Acid Transporters  
Manuel Palacín, Virginia Nunes, Mariona Font-Llitjós, Maite Jiménez-Vidal, Joana Fort, Emma Gasol, Marta Pineda, Lidia Feliubadaló, Josep Chillarón and Antonio Zorzano  
*Physiology* 20:112-124, 2005. doi:10.1152/physiol.00051.2004  

---

**You might find this additional info useful...**

This article cites 103 articles, 37 of which can be accessed free at:  
[http://physiologyonline.physiology.org/content/20/2/112.full.html#ref-list-1](http://physiologyonline.physiology.org/content/20/2/112.full.html#ref-list-1)

This article has been cited by 7 other HighWire hosted articles, the first 5 are:

- **The Ubiquitin E3 Ligase LOSS OF GDU2 Is Required for GLUTAMINE DUMPER1-Induced Amino Acid Secretion in Arabidopsis**  
  Réjane Pratelli, Damian D. Guerra, Shi Yu, Mark Wogulis, Edward Kraft, Wolf B. Frommer, Judy Callis and Guillaume Pilot  
  *Plant Physiol.*, April , 2012; 158 (4): 1628-1642.  
  [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]

- **Role of Transmembrane Domain 8 in Substrate Selectivity and Translocation of SteT, a Member of the l-Amino Acid Transporter (LAT) Family**  
  Paola Bartoccioni, César del Rio, Merce Ratera, Lukasz Kowalczyk, Jocelyn M. Baldwin, Antonio Zorzano, Matthias Quick, Stephen A. Baldwin, José Luis Vázquez-Ibar and Manuel Palacín  
  *J. Biol. Chem.*, September 10, 2010; 285 (37): 28764-28776.  
  [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]

- **Substrate Binding Tunes Conformational Flexibility and Kinetic Stability of an Amino Acid Antiporter**  
  Christian A. Bippes, Antra Zeltina, Fabio Casagrande, Merce Ratera, Manuel Palacin, Daniel J. Muller and Dimitrios Fotiadis  
  *J. Biol. Chem.*, July 10, 2009; 284 (28): 18651-18663.  
  [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]

- **Distinct classes of trafficking rBAT mutants cause the type I cystinuria phenotype**  
  Paola Bartoccioni, Mònica Rius, Antonio Zorzano, Manuel Palacín and Josep Chillarón  
  *Hum. Mol. Genet.*, June 15, 2008; 17 (12): 1845-1854.  
  [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]

- **Amino Acid Transport Across Mammalian Intestinal and Renal Epithelia**  
  Stefan Bröer  
  *Physiol Rev* 2008; 88 (1): 249-286.  
  [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]

Updated information and services including high resolution figures, can be found at:  
[http://physiologyonline.physiology.org/content/20/2/112.full.html](http://physiologyonline.physiology.org/content/20/2/112.full.html)

Additional material and information about *Physiology* can be found at:  
[http://www.the-aps.org/publications/physiol](http://www.the-aps.org/publications/physiol)

---

This information is current as of June 1, 2012.

---

*Physiology* (formerly published as News in Physiological Science) publishes brief review articles on major physiological developments. It is published bimonthly in February, April, June, August, October, and December by the American Physiological Society, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD 20814-3991. Copyright © 2005 by the American Physiological Society. ISSN: 1548-9213, ESSN: 1548-9221. Visit our website at http://www.the-aps.org/.

REVIEW

The Genetics of Heteromeric Amino Acid Transporters

Manuel Palacín,¹ Virginia Nunes,² Mariona Font-Llitjos,² Maite Jiménez-Vidal,¹ Joana Fort,¹ Emma Gasol,¹ Marta Pineda,¹ Lidia Feliubadalo,² Josep Chillarón,¹ and Antonio Zorzano¹

Heteromeric amino acid transporters (HATs) are composed of a heavy (SLC 3 family) and a light (SLC 7 family) subunit. Mutations in system b⁰⁺ (rBAT-b⁰⁺AT) and in system y⁺L (4F2hc-y⁺LAT1) cause the primary inherited aminoacidurias (PIAs) cystinuria and lysinuric protein intolerance, respectively. Recent developments [including the identification of the first Hartnup disorder gene (B0AT1; SLC6A19)] and knockout mouse models have begun to reveal the basis of renal and intestinal reabsorption of amino acids in mammals.

---

### Heteromeric Amino Acid Transporters

Heteromeric amino acid transporters (HATs) are composed of a heavy subunit and a light subunit (Table 1) (15, 21, 100–102). Two homologous heavy subunits (HS-HATs) from the SLC 3 family have been cloned and are called rBAT (i.e., related to b⁰⁺ amino acid transport) and 4F2hc [i.e., heavy chain of the surface antigen 4F2hc, also named CD98 or fusion regulatory protein 1 (FRP1)]. Nine light subunits (LS-HATs; SLC 7 family members from SLC7A 5 to SLC7A 13) have been identified. Six of them are partners of 4F2hc (LAT1, LAT2, y⁺LAT1, y⁺LAT2, ascl, and xCT); one forms a heterodimer with rBAT (b⁰⁺AT); and two (asc2 and AGT-1) seem to interact with as yet unknown heavy subunits (100). Members SLC7A1–SLC7A4 of family SLC 7 correspond to system y⁺ isoforms (i.e., cationic amino acid transporters; CATs) and related proteins, which on average show <25% amino acid identity to the light subunits of HATs.

The general features of HATs are as follows (reviewed in Refs. 15, 21, 61, and 100–102; only very recent references are cited):

- The heavy subunits (molecular mass of ~90 and ~80 kDa for rBAT and 4F2hc, respectively) are type II membrane N-glycoproteins with a single transmembrane domain, an intracellular NH₂ terminus, and an extracellular COOH terminus significantly homologous to insect and bacterial glucosidases (FIGURE 1). Recently, X-ray diffraction of the extracellular domain of human 4F2hc revealed a three-dimensional structure similar to that of bacterial glucosidases {a triose phosphate isomerase (TIM) barrel

---

### Table 1. Heteromeric amino acid transporters

| Heavy Chain (HS-HAT) | Light Chain (LS-HAT) | Gene       | Amino Acid Transport | Human Chromosome | Inherited Aminoaciduria |
|-----------------------|----------------------|------------|-----------------------|-------------------|--------------------------|
| 4F2hc                 | y⁺LAT1               | SLC7A7     | y⁺L                  | 14q11.2           | LPI                      |
|                       | y⁺LAT2               | SLC7A6     | y⁺L                  | 16q22.1           |                          |
|                       | LAT1                 | SLC7A5     | L                    | 16q24.3           |                          |
|                       | LAT2                 | SLC7A8     | L                    | 14q11.2           |                          |
|                       | asc1                 | SLC7A10    | asc                  | 19q12-13          |                          |
|                       | xCT                  | SLC7A11    | xc                   | 4q28-q32          |                          |
| rBAT                  | b⁰⁺AT                | SLC7A9     | b⁰⁺                  | 19q12-13          | cystinuria              |
| ?                     | AGT1                 | SLC7A13    | new                  | 8q21.
FIGURE 1. A heteromeric amino acid transporter

The heavy subunit (pink) and the light subunit (blue) are linked by a disulfide bridge (yellow) with conserved cysteine residues (cysteine 158 for the human xCT and cysteine 109 for human 4F2hc). The heavy subunits (4F2hc or rBAT) are type II membrane glycoproteins with an intracellular NH₂ terminus, a single transmembrane domain, and a bulky COOH terminal. This part of the protein shows homology with bacterial glycosidases. The membrane topology of the light subunit xCT, as model of the other light subunit, shows 12 transmembrane domains, with the NH₂ and COOH terminals located intracellularly and with a reentrant loop-like structure in the intracellular loop IL2-3 (His¹¹⁰ corresponds to the apex of the loop) (31). Residues with external (black) or internal (red) accessibility are shown.

[(αβ)8] and eight antiparallel β-strands;  
FIGURE 1} (unpublished observations).

- The light subunits (~50 kDa) are highly hydrophobic and not glycosylated. This results in anomalously high mobility in SDS-PAGE (35–40 kDa). Recent cysteine-scanning mutagenesis studies support a 12-transmembrane-domain topology, with the NH₂ and COOH terminals located inside the cell and with a reentrant-like structure in the intracellular loop IL2-3 for xCT, as a model for the light subunits of HATs (FIGURE 1) (31, 38).
- The light and the corresponding heavy subunit are linked by a disulfide bridge (FIGURE 1). For this reason, HATs are also named glycoprotein-associated amino acid transporters (21, 102). The intervening cysteine residues are located in the putative extracellular loop EL3-4 of the light subunit and a few residues away from the transmembrane domain of the heavy subunit (FIGURE 1).
- The light subunit cannot reach the plasma membrane unless it interacts with the heavy subunit.
- The light subunit confers specific amino acid transport activity to the heteromeric complex (LAT1 and LAT2 for system L isoforms, y⁺LAT1 and y⁺LAT2 for system y⁺L isoforms, ascl and asc2 for system asc isoforms, xCT for system x⁻ isoforms, b⁰⁺AT for system b⁰⁺ isoforms, and AGT-1 for a system serving aspartate and glutamate transport (Table 1). Moreover, reconstitution in liposomes shows that the light subunit b⁰⁺AT is fully functional in the absence of the heavy subunit rBAT (71).
- HAT transport activities are, with the exception of system asc isoforms, tightly coupled amino acid antiporters (67).

### Primary Inherited Aminoacidurias

Primary inherited aminoacidurias (PIAs) are caused by defective amino acid transport activities, which

Table 2. Primary inherited aminoacidurias

| Prevalence | Type of Inheritance | Gene | Chromosome | Mutations | Transport System |
|------------|---------------------|------|------------|-----------|------------------|
| Cystinuria* | 1/7,000             | AR   | SLC3A1     | 2p16.3    | 103              | b<sup>0</sup>,+ |
| Type I     |                     |      | SLC7A9     | 19q13.1   | 12               |                |
| Non-type I |                     | ADIP | SLC7A9     | 66        |                  |                |
|            |                     |      | SLC3A1     | 1         |                  |                |
| Isolated   | very rare           | AR?  | ?          | ?         | ?                | ?              |
| cystinuria |                     |      |            |           |                  |                |
| LPI        | > 100 cases         | AR   | SLC7A7     | 14q11     | 31               | y<sup>L</sup> |
| Hyperdibasic | very rare          | AD   | ?          | ?         | ?                | ?              |
| aminoaciduria type 1 |           |      |            |           |                  |                |
| Isolated   | very rare           | AR?  | ?          | ?         | ?                | ?              |
| lysinuria  |                     |      |            |           |                  |                |
| Hartnup    | 1/30,000            | AR   | SLC6A19    | 5p15      | 10               | B<sup>0</sup>  |
| disorder   |                     |      |            |           |                  |                |
| Renal familial | 1/15,000          | AR   | ?          | ?         | ?                | lmino(?)十     |
| iminoglycinuria |                 |      |            |           |                  |                |
| Dicarboxylic | very rare          | AR?  | SLC1A1     | 9p24      | KO null#        | X<sub>AG</sub> |
| aminoaciduria |                   |      | ?          | ?         |                  |                |

AR, autosomal recessive; ADIP, autosomal dominant with incomplete penetrance; AD, autosomal dominant;
AR?, familial studies in the very few cases described for these diseases suggest an autosomal recessive mode
of inheritance.*Among the 103SLC3A1and66SLC7A9 mutations described in cystinuria (which preferentially
associated with phenotypes I and non-I, respectively), 12SLC7A9 mutations associated to phenotype I in some
heterozygotes, and 1SLC3A1 mutation (dupE5-E9) associated in some heterozygotes with phenotype I (28).
† The amino acids hyperexcreted in renal familial iminoglycinuria (glycine and proline) suggest that the defective transport system corresponds to system lmino, but no experimental evidence or candidate gene is available.‡Slc1a1-null knockout mice present dicarboxylic aminoaciduria (62), suggesting this gene as a candidate
for the human disease.

affect renal reabsorption of amino acids and may
also affect intestinal absorption of amino acids and
transport function in other organs. Several PIA have
been described (Table 2). Reabsorption of dibasic
amino acids is defective in lysinuric protein intolerance
[LPI, also named hyperdibasic aminoaciduria
type 2 or familial protein intolerance (MIM 222700)
and first described by Perheentupa et al. in 1965
(63); reviewed in Ref. 86], autosomal dominant
hyperdibasic aminoaciduria type I (MIM 222690)
(106), and isolated lysinuria (56). Reabsorption of
cystine and dibasic amino acids is defective in
cystinuria (reviewed in Ref. 60). Hyperexcretion of
cystine occurs only in isolated cystinuria (MIM
238200) (8). Reabsorption of zwitterionic amino
acids (i.e., neutral amino acids at physiological pH)
is defective in Hartnup disorder (MIM 234500) (3)
and iminoglycinuria (MIM 242600) (72). Finally,
reabsorption of(80). This classification correlates poorly with molecular findings, and it has recently been revised to type I (MIM 220100) and non-type I (MIM 600918) cystinuria (with the latter corresponding to old types II and III). These two are distinguished on the basis of the cystine and dibasic aminoaciduria of the obligate heterozygotes (60): type I heterozygotes are silent, whereas non-type I heterozygotes present a variable degree of urinary hyperexcretion of cystine and dibasic amino acids that is higher in type II than in type III. This indicates that type I cystinuria is transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait, whereas non-type I is transmitted dominant-ly, with incomplete penetrance (27). Not surprisingly, urolithiasis has been described in a minority of non-type I heterozygotes (Table 3). Patients with a mixed type, inheriting type I and non-type I alleles from either parent, have also been described.

(33). Data on the relative proportion of the two types in specific populations are scarce. In 97 well-characterized families of the International Cystinuria Consortium (ICC) cohort of patients, mainly from Italy, Spain, and Israel, 38, 47, and 14% transmit type I, non-type I, and mixed cystinuria, respectively (Table 3) (28). This cohort is not a registry, and therefore it might not represent the whole population within those countries (20).

**LPI**

LPI is a PIA with an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance (reviewed in Ref. 86). LPI is predominantly reported in Finland, with a prevalence of 1/60,000. LPI also occurs in Southern Italy and Japan (prevalence of 1/50,000 in the northern part of Iwate) (see Ref. 46 and reviewed in Ref. 58).

In LPI there is massive excretion of dibasic amino acids, especially lysine, and the intestinal absorption of these amino acids is poor (reviewed in Ref.

57). As a result, plasma levels of dibasic amino acids are low. Arginine and ornithine are intermediates of the urea cycle that provide the carbon skeleton. Their reduced availability is thought to produce a functional deficiency of the urea cycle. Protein malnutrition and lysine deficiency contribute to the patient's failure to thrive.

Several organs are affected in LPI (reviewed in Ref. 86). Patients with LPI are usually asymptomatic while being breastfed, and symptoms (e.g., vomiting, diarrhea, and hyperammonemic coma when force-fed high-protein food) appear only after weaning. After infancy, patients with LPI reject a high-protein diet and show delay in bone growth, osteoporosis, hepatosplenomegaly, muscle hypotonia, and sparse hair. Most patients show normal mental development, but some may have moderate retardation. About two-thirds of the patients have interstitial changes in chest radiographs, sometimes with acute or chronic respiratory insufficiency that can lead to fatal pulmonary alveolar proteinosis and to multiple-organ dysfunction syndrome. Further symptoms, such as glomerulonephritis and erythroblastaphia, suggest that the immune system is affected in some patients.

Low-protein diet and citrulline (i.e., a urea cycle intermediate that is not a substrate of system y+L) are used to correct the functional deficiency of the urea cycle (reviewed in Ref. 57). The final height in treated patients is slightly subnormal. This treatment neither corrects hepatosplenomegaly nor delays bone age or osteoporosis, probably due to lysine deficiency.

The transport characteristics of two of the LSHAT-associated transport systems are relevant to the inherited aminoacidurias cystinuria and LPI (Table 1): system b<sup>0,+</sup> [due to the rBAT (SLC3A1) and b<sup>0,+</sup>AT (SLC7A9) heterodimer] is a tertiary active mechanism of renal reabsorption and intestinal absorption

### Table 3. Genotype and phenotype classification of cystinurial probands

| Genotype | Phenotype | Non-I Carriers | Mixed | Total Probands | % |
|----------|-----------|----------------|-------|----------------|---|
| AA       | 29        |                | 2     | 31             | 39.7 |
| AA(B)    |           | 1              |       | 1              | 1.3 |
| BB       | 1         | 34             | 7     | 42             | 53.8 |
| B<sup>+</sup> |           | 3              |       | 3             
REVIEW

FIGURE 2. Transporters involved in the renal and intestinal reabsorption of amino acids

Transporters with a probed role in renal reabsorption or intestinal absorption of amino acids are colored. Transporters present in the apical or basolateral plasma membrane of the epithelial cells of the proximal convoluted tubule or of the small intestine, but with no direct experimental evidence supporting their role in reabsorption, are shown uncolored. Fluxes of amino acids in the reabsorption direction are in red. PepT (H⁺-dependent peptide transporter PepT1 in small intestine and Pept2 in kidney) cotransports di- and tripeptides [(di,tri)-aa] with protons. Then, intracellular hydrolysis renders single amino acids. The high intracellular concentration of neutral amino acids (aa⁰) due to the transport activity of apical (B0AT1) and basolateral (y⁺LAT1-4F2hc, T) transporters drives the active reabsorption of dibasic amino acids (aa⁺) and cystine (CssC), together with the membrane potential and reduction of CssC to cysteine (CSH). Basolateral efflux transporters for dicarboxylic amino acids are unknown (Tₐₐ⁻). T represents basolateral Na⁺-dependent transporters with undefined roles in reabsorption (systems A and ASC).

of dibasic amino acid and cystine in the apical plasma membrane. It mediates the electronegenic exchange of dibasic amino acids (influx) for neutral amino acids (efflux) (reviewed in Ref. 59) (FIGURE 2). This exchange is favored by the membrane potential (negative inside the cell) and the high intracellular concentration of neutral amino acids, which is the result of the activity of sodium-dependent transport systems for neutral amino acids in the apical and basolateral domains of the epithelial cells. The influx of cystine through system b⁰⁺ is favored by the intracellular reduction of cystine to cysteine. System y⁺L (due to a 4F2hc-y⁺LAT1 heterodimer) mediates the electroneutral exchange of dibasic amino acids (efflux) for neutral amino acids plus sodium (influx) (10, 13, 39). It is assumed that this transport system allows the efflux of dibasic amino acids against the membrane potential at the basolateral domain of epithelial cells (FIGURE 2). The 4F2hc-y⁺LAT2 heterodimer mediates system y⁺L in many other cell types (39, 65, 96).

The Molecular Basis of Cystinuria

The above-mentioned characteristics of rBAT point-

and the other for efflux. This scenario is consistent
with two additional sets of results: 1) the chicken
intestinal system b<sup>0+</sup> has a sequential mechanism
of exchange, compatible with the formation of a
ternary complex (i.e., the transporter bound to its
intracellular and extracellular amino acid sub-
strates) (95); and 2) the analog aminoisobutyrate
(AIB) induces an unequal exchange with other sub-
strates through the rBAT-induced system b<sup>0+</sup> in
oocytes (i.e., using the endogenous b<sup>0+</sup>AT subunit)
(16). The oligomeric structure of system b<sup>0+</sup> (i.e.,
rBAT-b<sup>0+</sup>AT heteromer) is unknown. Functional
coordination of two rBAT-b<sup>0+</sup>AT heterodimers in a
heterotetrameric structure would explain these
results. If this is not the case, the transport defect
associated with mutation R365W would suggest
that a single b<sup>0+</sup>AT subunit contains two transloca-
tion pathways.

The gene causing non-type I cystinuria was
assigned to 19q12-13.1 by linkage analysis (5, 89,
103). In 1999 the non-type I cystinuria gene was
identified as SLC7A9 (24). SLC7A9 was a positional
candidate gene for non-type I cystinuria because it
has the appropriate chromosomal location, rBAT-
associated amino acid transport activity (system
b<sup>0+</sup>), and tissue expression (mainly in kidney and
small intestine). The protein product encoded by
SLC7A9 was termed b<sup>0+</sup>AT for b<sup>0+</sup> amino acid trans-
porter. Sixty-six SLC7A9 mutations causing cystin-
uria have been described (see Ref. 28 and refer-
ences therein). Mutation G105R is the most fre-
quent SLC7A9 mutation in the ICC cohort of
patients (27.4% of the identified SLC7A9 alleles).
Similarly to the human disease, the Slc7a9-knock-
out mouse presents non-type I cystinuria with
urolithiasis (23).

Several cystinuria-specific SLC7A9 missense
mutations have been reported to lead to a transport
function defect (27). Among these mutations,
reconstitution in proteoliposomes showed that
A182T-mutated b<sup>0+</sup>AT is active but with a trafficking
defect to the plasma membrane, whereas mutation
A354T renders the transporter inactive (71).

**Explained alleles in cystinuria**

Very recently, the ICC performed an exhaustive
mutational analysis on 164 probands (28): 86.8% of
the independent alleles were identified. The cover-
age of identified alleles was similar in all cystinuria
types (type I, 90.5%; non-type I, 87.6%; mixed,
89.3%; untyped patients, 83.6%).

The unidentified alleles (13.2%) may be due to
mutations in intronic or promoter regions (e.g.,
two cystinuria-specific sequence variants in the
promoter region of SLC3A1 have been reported in
Ref. 7), to SLC3A1 or SLC7A9 polymorphisms in
combination with cystinuria-specific mutations in
the other allele [as suggested by Schmidt et al. (76)].

or to unidentified genes. These three possibilities
have not been confirmed or ruled out. Functional
studies of promoter sequence variants have not
been reported, and cystinuria association studies
and functional analysis of candidate polymor-
phisms are required to demonstrate their role in
the disease. Of particular interest is the possibility
of a third cystinuria gene. In this sense, Goodyer's
group proposed SLC7A10 as a candidate (50).
SLC7A10 is in the vicinity of the cystinuria gene
SLC7A9 on chromosome 19q13.1 and codes for the
renal light subunit ascl, which, with 4F2hc, forms
the holotransporter asc with substrate specificity
for cysteine and other small neutral amino acids.
Moreover, these authors found the missense muta-
tion E112D associated with cystinuria. In contrast,
recent studies have ruled out this hypothesis: 1)
cystinuria-specific mutations are not found in
patients with alleles not explained by mutations in
the
REVIEWS

(mutations in SLC3A1 resulted in type I, and mutations in SLC7A9 resulted in non-type I) (12, 32). In contrast to this simple view, recent data show a more complex scenario. On the one hand, all SLC3A1 mutations in well-characterized families cause type I cystinuria, with the exception of mutation dupE5-E9, which shows the non-type I phenotype in four out of six heterozygotes studied (28). This mutation consists of a gene rearrangement c.(891+1524_1618-1600)dup (initially published in Ref. 77), which results in the duplication of exons 5–9 and the corresponding in-frame duplication of amino acid residues E298-D539ofrBAT, as shown by RNA studies (28, 77). Functional studies are necessary to explain the dominant negative effect of dupE5-E9 mutation on the rBAT/b0+AT heteromer-ic complex. On the other hand, most of the heterozygotes carrying a SLC7A9 mutation have a non-type I urine phenotype (i.e., hyperexcretion of dibasic amino acids and cystine), but heterozygotes carrying SLC7A9 mutations may also have a type I phenotype (i.e., silent heterozygotes). Approximately 14% of the SLC7A9 heterozygotes have phenotype I in the ICC cohort of patients and their relatives (20). SLC7A9 mutations that have been found associated with phenotype I in some families are I44T, G63R, G105R, T123M, A126T, V170M (the Libyan Jewish mutation), A182T, G195R, Y232C, P261L, W69X, and c.614dupA (28, 49). There is no clear explanation of why these mutations associate with phenotype I, since some proteins show residual transport activity when expressed in heterologous expression systems but others do not (27). A182T is the most frequent SLC7A9 mutation associated with phenotype I (i.e., 6outof11A182T heterozygotes in the ICC cohort), and this mutation leads to a protein with 50% residual transport activity at the plasma membrane (27, 71). Moreover, mixed cystinuria patients with two mutations in SLC7A9 presented a level of aminoaciduria in the lower range of non-type I patients with two mutations in this gene (28). This suggests that, in addition to individual and population variability, mild SLC7A9 mutations may be more prone to associate with silent phenotype in heterozygotes.

The lack of a direct relationship between the mutated cystinuria gene and the type of cystinuria led the ICC to propose two parallel classifications to describe cystinuria (20) that are I) based on the urine phenotype of the obligate heterozygotes (type I, non-type I, and mixed, as described above) and 2) based on the genotype of the patients (type A due to mutations in SLC3A1, type B due to mutations in SLC7A9, and type AB to define a possible digenic cystinuria). Table 3 summarizes the double classification for 78 cystinuria probands by the ICC (28) as follows: I) most type I patients have two mutations

in SLC3A1 (i.e., individuals AA); 2) all non-type I patients (including type non-type I heterozygotes with urolithiasis) have mutations in SLC7A9 (i.e., individuals BB and B+); 3) patients with mixed cystinuria carry mutations in SLC3A1 (2 probands AA) or in SLC7A9 (7 probands BB); and 4) 2 out of 126 fully genotyped probands carry mutations in both genes [probands AA(B) and BB(A)], suggesting a role for digenic inheritance in cystinuria (see below).

Urolithiasis shows a clear gender and individual variability among cystinuria patients (20). In the ICC cohort, the age of onset (first stone) ranges from 2–40 yr with a median of 12 and 15 yr for males and females, respectively. The incidence of onset before the age of 3 is lower in females than males. Similarly, the number of total stone events (i.e., spontaneously emitted stones plus those surgically removed) is higher in males than females (0.42 and 0.21 events per year in males and females, respectively). Of the 224 patients studied, ten with amino
none of the individuals AB presented urolithiasis. Given that the frequencies of type A and B alleles are similar in this cohort, if digenic inheritance was the rule in cystinuria, we would expect a quarter of patients to be AA, a quarter of patients to be BB, and half of patients to be AB. This indicates that digenic inheritance affecting phenotype is an exception in cystinuria. However, we cannot rule out the possibility that some combinations of mutations A and B might produce enough cystine hyperexcretion to cause urolithiasis.

A working hypothesis on the biogenesis of the rBAT-b<sup>0</sup>+AT heterodimer and the urine phenotypes in cystinuria may explain the apparent lack of full digenic inheritance in cystinuria: the rBAT protein is produced in excess in kidney, and therefore neither an rBAT mutation in heterozygosis [e.g., mouse cystinuria model with the SLC3A1mutationD140G (64)] nor any of the human cystinuria rBAT mutations except dupE5–E9 (28) lead to hyperexcretion of amino acids (phenotype I). Also, b<sup>0</sup>+AT controls the expression of the functional rBAT-b<sup>0</sup>+AT heterodimeric complex: interaction with b<sup>0</sup>+AT stabilizes rBAT, and the excess of rBAT is degraded, as shown in transfected cells (4, 71). As a result, a half dose of b<sup>0</sup>+AT [heterozygotes of severe human SLC7A9 mutations or of the SLC7A9 knockout mice (23, 28)] results in a significant decrease in the expression of rBAT-b<sup>0</sup>+AT heterodimer complex (system b<sup>0</sup>), which causes hyperexcretion of cystine and dibasic amino acids. In this scenario, the lack of a full phenotype because of digenic inheritance indicates that in double heterozygotes (AB), the mutated rBAT, with trafficking defects (14, 68, 74), does not interact and/or does not compromise the heterodimerization and trafficking to the plasma membrane of the half dose of wild-type b<sup>0</sup>+AT with the half dose of wild-type rBAT. Thus individuals AB behave as heterozygotes B with a variable degree of aminoaciduria, which could be greater than that of single heterozygotes within the family, depending on the particular combination of mutations. Demonstration of this hypothesis requires a deep study of both the impact of cystinuria-specific rBAT and b<sup>0</sup>+AT mutations (including the dominant negative rBAT mutation dupE5–E9) in the biogenesis and the functional and structural stoichiometry of subunits of the heteromeric complex rBAT/b<sup>0</sup>+AT both in cell culture studies and in vivo with the help of Slc3a1 and Slc7a9 double-mutant mice.

### The Molecular Basis of LPI

The gene responsible for LPI was localized to 14q11.2 in Finnish and non-Finnish populations (47, 48). The cloning of y<sup>t</sup>LAT1, encoded by SLC7A7 (96), revealed characteristics that made this gene an excellent candidate for LPI:

- y<sup>t</sup>LAT1 heterodimerizes with 4F2hc to express system y<sup>t</sup>L amino acid transport activity in the basolateral plasma membrane of the epithelial cells of the renal proximal tubule and the small intestine (see above).
- SLC7A7 is expressed in tissues affected in LPI (kidney, small intestine, lung, and white blood cells).
- SLC7A7 maps to the correct location for LPI.

Torrents and co-workers (97) performed mutational analysis of SLC7A7 in 1 Spanish and 31 Finnish LPI patients. A single Finnish mutant allele (1181-2A>T) was found, in which the splice site acceptor of intron 6 is inactivated and a cryptic acceptor 10bp downstream is activated, with the result that 10bp of the open reading frame are deleted and the reading frame is shifted. This mutation has been found in all Finnish LPI patients (i.e., “the Finnish mutation”) (54, 97). The Spanish patient with LPI was a genetic compound of two SLC7A7 mutations (a missense mutation, L334R, and a 4-bp deletion, 1291delCTTT). Simultaneously and independently, Borsani and coworkers (6) identified the Finnish mutation in four Finnish patients and found two additional SLC7A7 mutations (
cells showed that frameshift mutations (e.g., 1291delCTTT, 1548delC, and the Finnish mutation) produce a severe defect in trafficking to the plasma membrane (54, 94). In contrast, the missense mutations G54V and L334R inactivate the transporter (e.g., the mutated proteins reach the plasma membrane when coexpressed with 4F2hc, but no transport activity is elicited) (54, 94). Recently, functional studies in oocytes showed that the LPI-specific SLC7A7 mutations M1L, M50K, T188I, W242X, S386R, Y457X, and c.1471delTTCT lead to loss of transport function. In this last study, no attempt was made to elucidate whether these mutations affect trafficking or inactivate the transporter (Sperandeo MP and Sebastio G, personal communication).

**The Renal and Intestinal Reabsorption of Amino Acids**

The renal reabsorption of amino acids occurs in the proximal convoluted tubule (85), and the absorption of amino acids occurs in the small intestine (52). Most of the transporters responsible for these functions are the same in kidney and intestine (FIGURE 2). The most striking exception to this rule is the proton-dependent peptide transporters. PepT1 and PepT2 are expressed in small intestine and in kidney, respectively. The physiological role of PepT2 in kidney is unknown, and the quantitative contribution of PepT1 to assimilation of amino acids has not yet been evaluated in mammals or humans (17). A deeper study of the phenotype of the PepT2-knockout mice (73) and generation and study of the PepT1 may answer these questions.

The molecular basis of cystinuria and LPI teaches us about the molecular bases of cystine and dibasic amino acid reabsorption. Mutations of the apical exchanger b<sup>0,+ </sup>(heterodimer rBAT-b<sup>0,+ </sup>AT) lead to hyperexcretion of cystine and dibasic amino acids, as shown in human (11, 24), mouse (23, 64), and canine (37) cystinuria. Mutations of the basolateral exchanger y<sup>L</sup> (heterodimer 4F2hc-y<sup>L</sup>AT1) produce hyperexcretion of dibasic amino acids (6, 97). Similarly, there is intestinal malabsorption of cystine and dibasic amino acids in cystinuria and of dibasic amino acids in LPI (reviewed in Refs. 80 and 86). Thus the sequential transport activities of systems b<sup>0,+ </sup>(apical) and y<sup>L</sup> (basolateral) play a major role in renal and intestinal reabsorption of amino acids. Besides these two players, not much is known about other transporters with a role in dibasic amino acid reabsorption. Cystinuria patients may show almost null cystine reabsorption in kidney, whereas dibasic reabsorption in kidney remains significant (reviewed in Ref. 25). This suggests that system b<sup>0,+ </sup>is the main (if not the only) apical reabsorption system for cystine, but other apical transport systems in addition to system b<sup>0,+ </sup>contribute to the renal reabsorption of dibasic amino acids. The study of the dibasic amino acid transport activities in the Slc7a9-knockout mice should help to identify those transporters. Similar data are not available for LPI patients, but the experiments of the Finnish group (70) suggest that system y<sup>L</sup> is the main basolateral absorption system for dibasic amino acids in the small intestine: an oral load with the dipeptide lysyl-glycine increased glycine plasma concentrations, but plasma lysine remained almost unchanged in patients with LPI, whereas both amino acids increased in plasma of control subjects and in patients with cystinuria. This demonstrated the basolateral defect in LPI and points to a role of PepT1 in amino acid assimilation. Indeed, as a consequence of the renal and intestinal defects in LPI, plasma levels of dibasic amino acids are 1/2 to 1/3 of normal levels (reviewed in Ref. 86), whereas in human and mouse cystinuria cystine and dibasic amino acid levels in plasma are only moderately (20–30%) reduced (reviewed in Ref. 57). In all, these results suggest that system y<sup>L</sup> has a higher impact than system b<sup>0,+ </sup>on renal and intestinal reabsorption of dibasic
broad specificity for small and large zwitterionic
amino acids with characteristics of system L (66).
This suggests that 4F2hc-LAT2 may have a role in
reabsorption of zwitterionic amino acids. Indeed,
antisense experiments in the polarized opossum
kidney cell line OK, derived from proximal convo-
luted epithelial cells, demonstrated a role of LAT2
(SLC7A8) in the transepithelial flux of cystine, and
the basolateral efflux of cysteine and influx of ala-
nine, serine, and threonine (intracellular concen-
tration of cysteine increases, and that of alanine,
serine, and threonine decreases in LAT2-antisense
OK cells in polarized culture) (26). To our knowl-
edge, no inherited human disease has yet been
related to LAT2 mutations. A final demonstration of
the role of LAT2 in reabsorption would only be pos-
sible after the generation of LAT2-knockout mouse
models.

There is evidence for phenotypic variants of
Hartnup disorder, suggesting that 5p15.33
(SLC6A19) is not the only locus to affect or modify
the phenotype (79, 92). Two of the families with
Hartnup disorder apparently present no mutations
for SLC6A19, and linkage to 5p15 has been exclu-
ded in one of them (45). This suggests that a defect in
other amino acid transporters may result in
Hartnup disorder. Several candidates are already
available:

• Within the SLC6 family there are two
B0AT1 sequence-related orphan
transporters, XT2 (SLC6A18) and XT3 (SLC6A20).
These three genes belong to a branch of
amino acid transporters within the Na⁺-Cl⁻-
dependent neurotransmitter family (9).
SLC6A18 is located in the vicinity of
SLC6A19in5p15, and therefore it might be
excluded from linkage to Hartnup disorder
(45). Functional and tissue-expression stud-
ies are needed to ascertain the role of XT2
and XT3 in reabsorption of amino acids.

• The amino acid transporter ASCT2 (also
named ATB0) (SLC1A5) is expressed in the
apical plasma membrane of the renal proxi-
mal convoluted and small intestine epithe-
lial cells (1). This transporter exchanges
most of the zwitterionic amino acids in a
Na⁺-dependent manner (40, 42, 99). The
role of ASCT2 in amino acid reabsorption
has not been evaluated.

• The metabolic link between systems b⁰⁺,
B0, and y⁺L requires a basolateral transport
system to mediate the efflux of neutral
amino acids (FIGURE 2).

A defective amino acid transport system for
basolateral efflux of zwitterionic amino acids
would increase the intracellular concentration of

these amino acids, resulting in their hyperexcretion
in urine and intestinal malabsorption. Candidate
transporters for this function may be found within
families SLC16 and SLC43. Amino acid transporters
in these families mediate facilitated diffusion and
may therefore mediate the efflux of zwitterionic
amino acids from the high intracellular concentra-
tion to the interstitial space. T-type amino acid
transporter 1 (TAT1; SLC16A10) transports aromat-
ic amino acids in a Na⁺- and H⁺-independent man-
ner (43, 44). TAT1 is expressed in human kidney
and small intestine with a basolateral location. The
SLC16 family (also named MCT for monocarboxy-
late transporters) contains members transporting
monocarboxylates and thyroid hormones as well.
Eight transporters within this family are orphan
transporters (MCT5–7, MCT9, and MCT11–14) (34).
Knockout mouse models for TAT1, and their related
orphan transporters expressed in kidney cortex
and small intestine, may help to identify basolater-
al transporters involved in reabsorption of zwitteri-
onic amino acids. LAT3 (2) and LAT4 (5a) within
family SLC43 mediates facilitated diffusion of zwit-
terionic amino acids with characteristics of system
L. Neither of these two transporters is expressed in
epithelial cells of the renal proximal convoluted
tubule or the small intestine, but the SLC43 family
has a third member with
ular structure has not been identified. Another member of the SLC1 family, GLT1 [i.e., the glial high-affinity glutamate transporter (69), also named EAAT2; SLC1A2] is expressed in rat kidney cortex and porcine small intestine (22, 105). To our knowledge, the expression of GLT1 protein has not been studied in kidney or intestine. Slcla 2-knock-out mice show lethal spontaneous epileptic seizures (91). Reabsorption of acidic amino acids could be studied in these mice to ascertain the role of GLT1, although this is difficult because only 50% survive longer than 6 wk.

We thank Robin Rycroft for editorial help.

Studies in our laboratory referred to above were supported in part by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology (SAF 2003-08940-01/02), the European Union (EUGINDAT; LSHM-CT-2003-502852), the Spanish Instituto de Salud Carlos III (networks G03/054, C03/07 and C03/08), the Generalitat de Catalunya (2001 SGR 00399; 2001SGR00118), and the Comissionat per a Universitats i Recerca (Generalitat de Catalunya). M.Font-Llitjos was a recipient of a CIRIT fellowship. M. Jiménez-Vidal was supported by BIOMED BMH4C 798-3154. L. Feliubadaló was supported by EUGINDAT.

### References

1. Avissar NE, Ryan CK, Ganapathy V, and Sax HC. Na⁺-dependent neutral amino acid transporter ATB₀ is a rabbit epithelial cell brush-border protein. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 281: C963-C971, 2001.
2. Babu E, Kanai Y, Chairoungdua A, Kim DK, Iribe Y, Tangtrongsup S, Jutabha P, Li Y, Ahmed N, Sakamoto S, Anzai N, Nagamori S, and Endou H. Identification of a novel system L amino acid transporter structurally distinct from heterodimeric amino acid transporters. J Biol Chem 278: 43838-43845, 2003.
3. Baron DN, Dent CE, Harris H, Hart EW, and Jepson JB. Hereditary pellagra-like skin rash with temporary cerebellar ataxia, constant renal amino-aciduria, and other bizarre biochemical features. Lancet 271: 421-428, 1956.
4. Bauch C and Verrey F. Apical heterodimeric cystine and cationic amino acid transporter expressed in MDCK cells. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 283: F181-F189, 2002.
5. Bisceglia L, Calonge MJ, Totaro A, Feliubadaló L, Melchionda S, Garcia J, Testar X, Gallucci M, Ponzone A, Zelante L, Zorzano A, Estivill X, Gasparini P, Nunes V, and Palacin M. Localization, by linkage analysis, of the cystinuria type III gene to chromosome 19q13.1. Am J Hum Genet 60: 611-616, 1997.
5a. Bodoy S, Martin L, Zorzano A, Palacin M, Esteves R, and Bertran J. Identification of LAT4, a novel amino acid transporter with system L activity. J Biol Chem (January 19, 2005); doi:10.1074/jbc.M408638200.
6. Borsani G, Bassi MT, Sperandeo MP, De Grandi A, Buoninconti A, Riboni M, Manzoni M, Incerti B, Pepe A, Andria G, Ballabio A, and Sebastio G. SLC7A7, encoding a putative permease-related protein, is mutated in patients with lysinuric protein intolerance. Nat Genet 21: 297-301, 1999.
7. Boutros M, Ong P, Saadi I, Hiou-Tim F, Vicanek C, Rozen R, and Goodyer P. The human rBAT promoter mutations in cystinuria (Abstract). Am J Hum Genet 65, Suppl:
27. Font MA, Feliubadalo L, Estivill X, Nunes V, Golomb E, Kreiss Y, Pras E, Bisceglia L, d'Adamo AP, Zelante L, Gasparini P, Bassi MT, George AL Jr, Manzoni M, Riboni M, Ballabio A, Borsani G, Reig N, Fernandez E, Zorzano A, Bertran J, and Palacin M. Functional analysis of mutations in SLC7A9, and genotype-phenotype correlation in non-Type I cystinuria. International Cystinuria Consortium. Hum Mol Genet 10:305–316, 2001.

28. Font-Llitjos M, Jiménez-Vidal M, Bisceglia L, Di Perna M, de Sanctis L, Rousaud F, Zelante L, Palacin M, and Nunes V. New insights into cystinuria: 40 new mutations, genotype-phenotype correlation, and digenic inheritance causing partial phenotype. J Med Genet 42:58–68, 2005.

29. Furriols M, Chillaron J, Mora C, Castello A, Bertran J, Camps M, Testar X, Vilaro S, Zorzano A, and Palacin M. rBAT, related to L-cysteine transport, is localized to the microvilli of proximal straight tubules, and its expression is regulated in kidney by development. J Biol Chem 268: 27060–27068, 1993.

30. Garrod AE. Inborn errors of metabolism (lectures I–IV). Lancet 2:1–214, 1908.

31. Gasol E, Jimenez-Vidal M, Chillaron J, Zorzano A, and Palacin M. Membrane topology of system xc-light subunit reveals a re-entrant loop with substrate-restricted accessibility. J Biol Chem 279: 31228–31236, 2004.

32. Gasparini P, Calonge MJ, Bisceglia L, Purroy J, Dianzani I, Notarangelo A, Rousaud F, Gallucci M, Testar X, and Ponzone A. Molecular genetics of cystinuria: identification of four new mutations and seven polymorphisms, and evidence for genetic heterogeneity. Am J Hum Genet 57: 781–788, 1995.

33. Goodyer PR, Clow C, Reade T, and Girardin C. Prospective analysis and classification of patients with cystinuria identified in a newborn screening program. J Pediatr 122:568–572, 1993.

34. Halestrap AP and Meredith D. The SLC16 gene family—from monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs) to aromatic amino acid transporters and beyond. Pflügers Arch 447:619–628, 2004.

35. Harnevik L, Fjellstedt E, Molbaek A, Denneberg T, and Soderkvist P. Mutation analysis of SLC7A9 in cystinuria patients in Sweden. Genet Test 7: 13–20, 2003.

36. Hediger MA. Glutamate transporters in kidney and brain. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 277: F487–F492, 1999.

37. Henthorn PS, Liu J, Gidalevich T, Fang J, Casal ML, Patterson DF, and Giger U. Canine cystinuria: polymorphism in the canine SLC3A1 gene and identification of a nonsense mutation in cystinuric Newfoundland dogs. Hum Genet 107:295–303, 2000.

38. Jimenez-Vidal M, Gasol E, Zorzano A, Nunes V, Palacin M, and Chillaron J. Thiol modification of cysteine 327 in the eighth transmembrane domain of the light subunit xCT of the heteromeric cystine/glutamate antiporter suggests close proximity to the substrate binding site/permeation pathway. J Biol Chem 279: 11214–11221, 2004.

39. Kanai Y, Fukasawa Y, Cha SH, Segawa H, Chairoungdua A, Kim DK, Matsuo H, Kim JY, Miyamoto K, Taked
REVIEW S

74. Saadi I, Chen XZ, Hediger M, Ong P, Pereira P, Goodyer P, and Rozen R. Molecular genetics of cystinuria: mutation analysis of SLC3A1 and evidence for another gene in type I (silent) phenotype. Kidney Int 54:48-55, 1998.

75. Sacktor B, Rosenbloom IL, Liang CT, and Cheng L. Sodium gradient-and sodium plus potassium gradient-dependent L-glutamate uptake in renal basolateral membrane vesicles. J Membr Biol 60: 63-71, 1981.

76. Schmidt C, Tomiuk J, Botzenhart E, Vester U, Halber M, Hesse A, Wagner C, Lahme S, Lang F, Zerres K, Eggermann T, Bachmann H, Bokenkamp A, Fischbach M, Frund S, Pistor KG, and Zappel HF. Genetic variations of the SLC7A9 gene: allele distribution of 13 polymorphic sites in German cystinuria patients and controls. Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Padiatrische Nephrologie. Clin Nephrol 59:353-359, 2003.

77. Schmidt C, Vester U, Wagner CA, Lahme S, Hesse A, Hoyer P, Lang F, Zerres K, and Eggermann T. Significant contribution of genomic rearrangements in SLC3A1 and SLC7A9 to the etiology of cystinuria. Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Padiatrische Nephrologie. Kidney Int 64: 1564-1572, 2003.

78. Schmidt C, Vester U, Zerres K, and Eggermann T. No evidence for a role of SLC7A10 in 19q13 in the etiology of cystinuria. Clin Nephrol 62:71-73, 2004.

79. Scriver CR, Mahon B, Levy HL, Clow CL, Reade TM, Kronick J, Lemieux B, and Laberge C. The Hartnup phenotype: Mendelian transport disorder, multifactorial disease. Am J Hum Genet 40: 401-412, 1987.

80. Segal S and Thier SO. CHAPTER TITLE??? In: The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Diseases (7th ed.), edited by Scriver CH, Beaudet AL, Sly WS, and Valle D. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995, vol. III, chapt. 117, p. 3581-3601.

81. Seow HF, Broer S, Broer A, Bailey CG, Potter SJ, Cavanaugh JA, and Rasko JE. Hartnup disorder is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the neutral amino acid transporter SLC6A19. Nat Genet 36:1003-1007, 2004.

82. Shayakul C, Kanai Y, Lee WS, Brown D, Rothstein JD, and Hediger MA. Localization of the high-affinity glutamate transporter EAAC1 in rat kidney. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 273: F1023-F1029, 1997.

83. Silbernagl S and Volkl H. Molecular specificity of the tubular resorption of "acidic" amino acids. A continuous microperfusion study in rat kidney in vivo. Pflügers Arch 396: 225-230, 1983.

84. Silbernagl S. Kinetics and localization of tubular resorption of "acidic" amino acids. A microperfusion and free flow micropuncture study in rat kidney. Pflügers Arch 396: 218-224, 1983.

85. Silbernagl S. The renal handling of amino acids and oligopeptides. Physiol Rev 68:911-1007, 1988.

86. Simell O. Lysinuric protein intolerance and other cationic aminoacidurias. In: The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, edited by Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly SW, Valle D. New York: McGraw Hill, 2001, chapt. 192, p. 4933-4956. [Updated chapter