
Cell, Vol. 120, 789–801, March 25, 2005, Copyright ©2005 by Elsevier Inc. DOI 10.1016/j.cell.2005.01.017

# Mnd2, an Essential Antagonist of the Anaphase-Promoting Complex during Meiotic Prophase

**Alexandra M. Penkner, Susanne Prinz,**<sup>1</sup>  
**Stefan Ferscha, and Franz Klein***  
Vienna Biocenter II  
Max Perutz Laboratories  
Department of Chromosome Biology  
Dr. Bohr-Gasse 1  
A-1030 Vienna  
Austria

---

## Summary

Meiotic cohesin serves in sister chromatid linkage and DNA repair until its subunit Rec8 is cleaved by separase. Separase is activated when its inhibitor, securin, is polyubiquitinated by the Cdc20 regulated anaphase-promoting complex (APC<sup>Cdc20</sup>) and consequently degraded. Differently regulated APCs (APC<sup>Cdh1</sup>, APC<sup>Ama1</sup>) have not been implicated in securin degradation at meiosis I. We show that Mnd2, a factor known to associate with APC components, prevents premature securin degradation in meiosis by APC<sup>Ama1</sup>. *mnd2Δ* cells lack linear chromosome axes and exhibit precocious sister chromatid separation, but deletion of *AMA1* suppresses these defects. Besides securin, Sgo1, a protein essential for protection of centromeric cohesion during anaphase I, is also destabilized in *mnd2Δ* cells. Mnd2’s disappearance prior to anaphase II may activate APC<sup>Ama1</sup>. Human oocytes may spend many years in meiotic prophase before maturation. Inhibitors of meiotic APC variants could prevent loss of chiasmata also in these cells, thereby guarding against aberrant chromosome segregation.

---

## Introduction

Two modifications which distinguish chromosome segregation in meiosis from mitosis are relevant here. Firstly, physical links between homologous chromosomes, called chiasmata, are established; these links represent DNA crossovers held in place by arm cohesion and serve to identify the homologous kinetochores to the spindle forces. Secondly, since a single round of cohesion establishment needs to drive two consecutive nuclear divisions, some cohesin at kinetochores is protected from cleavage in metaphase I (MI) to serve again in chromosome alignment in metaphase II (MII). Consequently, sister kinetochores never separate in MI (reductional segregation) but do so in MII (equational segregation). Recently, shugoshin (Sgo1), which protects cohesin at kinetochores (Katis et al., 2004; Kitajima et al., 2004; Marston et al., 2004; Rabitsch et al., 2004), was identified in yeast. However, it is not understood how Sgo1 is removed after MI.

In yeast, biochemical characterization of the APC has so far revealed 13 subunits, one of which is the recently identified protein Mnd2 (Hall et al., 2003; Passmore et al., 2003; Schwickart et al., 2004; Yoon et al., 2002). Despite its association with the APC, deletion of *MND2* does not cause a detectable phenotype during vegetative growth. However, it causes an arrest during meiotic prophase through activation of the DNA damage checkpoint (Rabitsch et al., 2001). APC activity lasts from metaphase to the end of G1 phase. Only phosphorylation of the APC during M phase allows association with its coactivator Cdc20 (Fizzy), a WD40 repeat protein. APC<sup>Cdc20</sup> mediates destruction of securin and cyclin B, which in turn triggers sister chromatid separation and spindle elongation. Soon thereafter, another coactivator, Cdh1 (Fizzy related), is activated by dephosphorylation through the dual specificity phosphatase Cdc14. Cdh1 keeps B type cyclins, securin, and several other substrates unstable and in addition launches degradation of Cdc20. This allows disassembly of the spindle, and mitotic exit and prevents reaccumulation of B type cyclins during G1. In yeast, meiosis-specific relatives of Cdc20 have recently been identified, which are essential for exit from the second meiotic division. Ama1 in *S. cerevisiae* (Cooper et al., 1997) and Fzr1/Mfr1 in *S. pombe* (Asakawa et al., 2001; Blanco et al., 2001) are essential for spore formation. How the activity of these novel APC coactivators is regulated is presently unknown.

Inhibitors of the APC have also been identified. *Drosophila* Rca1 (Dong et al., 1997), its vertebrate homolog Emi1, and the conserved protein Mad2 antagonize APC<sup>Cdc20</sup> activity. Emi1 allows cyclin B accumulation and entry into mitosis (Reimann et al., 2001), while Mad2 prevents securin degradation and, thus, anaphase in the presence of unaligned chromosomes (Fang et al., 1998; Hwang et al., 1998). Both Rca1 and hEmi1 also act as negative regulators of APC<sup>Cdh1</sup> (Grosskortenhaus and Sprenger, 2002; Hsu et al., 2002).

In this study, we show that Mnd2 prevents APC<sup>Ama1</sup>-dependent securin and Sgo1 degradation in meiotic prophase. Lack of Mnd2, therefore, leads to severe de-

---

*Correspondence: franz.klein@univie.ac.at  
<sup>1</sup>Present Address: Institute for Systems Biology, 1441 N. 34th Street, Seattle, Washington 98103.

fects in chromosome structure, DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair, and chromosome segregation. The prophase defects could be largely suppressed by preventing separase activation, suggesting that in *mnd2Δ* mutants inappropriate separase activation by premature securin degradation is primarily responsible for these defects. Mnd2 disappears at metaphase II, suggesting concurrent activation of APC<sup>Ama1</sup>. In combination with the published association of Mnd2 with the APC in meiosis, our data suggest that Mnd2 is a direct and coactivator-specific inhibitor of meiotic APC<sup>Ama1</sup>.

### Results

#### Deletion of *MND2* Causes Loss of Sister Chromatid Cohesion (SCC) and a Defect in Chromatin Condensation and DSB Repair during Meiosis

*MND2* was identified in a yeast screen, in which genes that are upregulated in meiosis were systematically deleted and tested for chromosome segregation (Rabitsch et al., 2001). We showed in that analysis that *mnd2Δ* mutants arrest before the first meiotic division and by genetic analysis that the arrest can be bypassed by eliminating meiotic recombination, but that *MND2* has a vital role beyond DNA repair.

We therefore now analyzed *mnd2Δ* cells by meiotic chromosome spreading and immunolabeling of chromosomal axis proteins (Zip1 and Rec8). Zip1 localizes to synapsed regions of axial elements and is essential for synapsis (Sym et al., 1993; Sym and Roeder, 1995) and Rec8 decorates synapsed and unsynapsed chromosome axes in wild-type cells (Klein et al., 1999) (Figure 1A). In contrast to wild-type, *mnd2Δ* cells largely lacked chromatin condensation and Zip1 antibody detected only small foci and polycomplexes (PCs), documenting the complete absence of synapsis. Also, hemagglutinine-tagged Rec8 appeared as unconnected foci in the majority of cells. Short axial fragments (Figure 1A) were only observed in rare exceptions in about ~5% of spread nuclei. Rec8 label was strongly reduced and loss of sister chromatid cohesion (SCC) occurred at similar rates as in the *rec8Δ* mutant (Figures 1B and 1C) and (Klein et al., 1999), demonstrated by using a GFP-tagged chromosome V (Michaelis et al., 1997). In the *mnd2Δ spo11 spo13Δ* triple mutant, sister chromatid GFP dots segregated to opposite daughter

n = 300 lower line) and by *mnd2Δ spo11 spo13* mutants (n = 200; 3%). Other configurations: 1.6% and 3.6% double mutant and 3% for the triple mutant.
(E) Southern analysis of meiosis-specific DSBs at the YCR048W hotspot. DSBs are detected at four hotspot sites close to YCR048W and appear transiently in *MND2* cells but accumulate in *mnd2Δ* mutants. The downward trailing smear in the bands visible in *mnd2Δ* indicates hyperresection of DSBs. Bands in the *rad50S* control lane are shifted to a higher molecular weight because Spo11 is covalently attached to the DNA ends in *rad50S* but apparently not in *mnd2Δ*.
(F) Rec8-HA is cleaved prematurely in *mnd2Δ* cells. Western analysis of *ndt80Δ ubr1Δ* (left panel) and *mnd2Δ ndt80Δ ubr1Δ* (right panel). *mnd2Δ* mutants show accumulation of Rec8-HA3 cleavage products (41.4 kDa and 38.5 kDa) and a corresponding decrease in full-length protein (89.9 kDa).

---

**Figure 1. Deletion of *MND2* Causes Meiotic Defects Similar to *rec8Δ***

(A) Examples of spread meiotic nuclei showing maximal Rec8 axis formation in wild-type (i–ii; 4 hr in SPM) and *mnd2Δ* (iii–vi; 4 hr in SPM). The nuclei were stained with antibodies against Zip1 (iv, green) and Rec8-HA (v, red). Chromatin was visualized by DAPI (i and iii). (ii and vi) merged color pictures.

(B) Separation of sister URA3-GFP dots (full green circles) during a meiotic timecourse of wild-type and *mnd2Δ* cells. Only one homolog carried the tetO array. Black open circles represent cells past the first meiotic division and red open circles indicate four-nucleate cells in the same timecourse.

(C) Examples of *mnd2Δ* cells with heterozygous URA3-GFP dots (green). Upper panel: Separated sister dots in mononucleates (blue) at 8 hr in SPM. Lower panels: Examples of chromosome segregation types in rare binucleates with their frequencies (n = 38).

(D) Frequencies of configurations of heterozygous URA3-GFP dots in dyads formed by two *spo11 spo13* strains (n = 900 upper, and
cells 50% of the time, consistent with random segregation of prematurely separated sisters.

Physical analysis of DSBs at a natural, well-characterized hotspot for meiotic recombination (YCR048W) showed that DSBs were initiated and processed but not repaired. Instead, a smear appeared below the DSB fragments indicative of 5′-end hyperresection usually accompanying defective strand invasion ([Figure 1](#fig1)E). The observed defects are reminiscent of a *rec8Δ* defect, raising the possibility that *mnd2Δ* mutants suffer from Rec8 deficiency.

### Rec8 Is Cleaved Prematurely in *mnd2Δ* Mutants

A Rec8 deficiency could arise if Rec8 was cleaved in an untimely manner in *mnd2Δ* mutants. In order to visualize potential Rec8 cleavage products, we analyzed Rec8 in the absence of Ubr1, the E3 required for degradation of Rec8 cleavage products according to the N-end rule pathway (*Varshavsky*, 1997). We also deleted *NDT80*, a key transcription factor required for pachytene exit, to arrest cells in pachytene, during which Rec8 cleavage does not occur in wild-type. While in the *ndt80Δ ubr1Δ* double mutant Rec8-HA3 remained stable throughout the timecourse as assayed by Western blotting, an *mnd2Δ ndt80Δ ubr1Δ* triple mutant showed rapid accumulation of Rec8 cleavage fragments, which correspond to the known two cleavage sites (*Buonomo et al.*, 2000). This cleavage occurred before Ndt80 is normally activated, causing a premature decrease in the steady-state level of full-length Rec8 protein ([Figure 1](#fig1)F).

### Securin Turnover Is Increased in *mnd2Δ* Mutants during Meiotic Prophase

In wild-type cells, Rec8 cleavage is performed by separase (Esp1), which is kept inactive by securin until anaphase is initiated. We therefore wished to determine whether a premature drop in securin levels was responsible for Rec8 degradation.

We analyzed *mnd2Δ* and *MND2* strains carrying a functional, tagged version of securin (Pds1-MYC18) by Western blotting and by in situ staining in the absence of Ndt80 to prevent exit from prophase and, thus, scheduled Pds1 degradation. Western blotting revealed dramatically reduced Pds1 levels from 2 hr in sporulation medium (SPM) onward ([Figure 2](#fig2)A). Of the remaining Pds1, almost all appeared in the faster migrating non-phosphorylated Pds1 band, indicating that either the slower migrating, phosphorylated form was preferentially eliminated or that phosphorylation of Pds1 was affected by the *mnd2Δ* mutation in the *ndt80Δ* background ([Figure 2](#fig2)B). In situ staining confirmed the significant reduction in Pds1 levels at 4, 8, and 12 hr during the *ndt80Δ* arrest ([Figures 2](#fig2)C–2E). Absence of the activating phosphorylation from the surviving securin may exacerbate its inability to inhibit separase, as not a single nucleus with substantial Zip1 axis formation could be detected (*n* = 1000).

In order to investigate whether Pds1 protein is unstable during meiotic prophase in *mnd2Δ* mutants, we blocked synthesis of Pds1 by adding cycloheximide to the medium at t = 4 hr of a meiotic timecourse. Indeed, the low steady-state level of Pds1 observed in *mnd2Δ*

cells was further reduced in the presence of cycloheximide, while no decrease was apparent in *MND2* cells ([Figure 2](#fig2)F). We conclude that the turnover rate of securin is increased in *mnd2Δ* mutants. In the same experiment, we show that Rec8 protein, too, rapidly disappears upon the addition of cycloheximide in *mnd2Δ* cells as expected, if separase becomes ectopically activated during degradation of securin. When cycloheximide was added to vegetative *mnd2Δ* cells, Pds1 levels remained constant (data not shown), suggesting the involvement of a meiotic factor in premature securin degradation.

Meiotic Pds1 levels are also significantly reduced in *mnd2Δ spo11* double mutants, in which DNA lesions are bypassed and meiotic progression is partially restored ([Figure 2](#fig2)A). Within the first 8 hr, Pds1 levels remained very low; however, at late time points they partially recovered. [Figure 2](#fig2)E shows that this recovery occurs in cells with bipolar spindles, with the highest levels in uni-nucleate cells with long spindles, which are just about to undergo anaphase I. This suggests that Pds1 becomes resistant during prometaphase and metaphase, perhaps due to the activation of the spindle checkpoint in *spo11* cells.

### Attenuation of the APC Can Restore Spore Formation and Viability in *mnd2Δ* Mutants

In wild-type cells, securin is a substrate for APC<sup>Cdc20</sup> (*Cohen-Fix et al.*, 1996). To ask whether the APC is responsible for premature Pds1 degradation during prophase, we combined several conditional APC mutations with *mnd2Δ*. Unexpectedly, for *cdc23-1<sup>ts</sup>*, all segregants carrying both the APC mutation and *mnd2Δ* are inviable. This suggests that Mnd2 may confer stability to the mitotic APC, when Cdc23 is mutated. However, mutation of other subunits of the APC, *apc2-8<sup>ts</sup>*, *cdc27-663<sup>ts</sup>*, and *cdc16-1<sup>ts</sup>*, are compatible with viability in the *mnd2Δ* background.

As resolution of chiasmata by sister chromatid separation is predicted to depend on intact APC (*Buonomo et al.*, 2000; *Salah and Nasmyth*, 2000), we analyzed chromosome structure as a sensitive measure of the *mnd2Δ* defect. [Figure 3](#fig3) shows that all three APC alleles tested are epistatic to *mnd2Δ* with respect to Zip1 and Rec8 axis formation at the restrictive temperature of 35°C. Complete synapsis in *apc2-8<sup>ts</sup>* and *cdc27-663<sup>ts</sup>* cells was detected, though less frequently than in wild-type. Inactivating these alleles, therefore, may reduce the efficiency of some functions, such as DSB formation, condensation, or early steps in repair, essential for axis formation and synapsis. *cdc16-1<sup>ts</sup>* differed from the other two alleles because in these cells synapsis was never complete, with the majority of Rec8 axes only partially connected. Even when Rec8 axes were synapsed they appeared fuzzy and Zip1 axes were discontinuous ([Figure 3](#fig3)). Nevertheless, the *mnd2Δ* deletion did not further exacerbate the defect of the *cdc16-1<sup>ts</sup>* mutant.

Chromosome segregation was blocked at 35°C in all APC mutants, as expected, but they sporulated at 25°C, the permissive temperature for vegetative growth. This sporulation was independent of *MND2*. The *cdc16-1<sup>ts</sup>* single mutant did not sporulate very well at 25°C (37%)
Figure 2. Premature Destabilization of Pds1 in mnd2Δ Cells

(A) Western analysis of meiotic timecourses using antibodies against Pds1-MYC18 and Swi6 as a loading control. Right panels show a significant decrease of Pds1 levels in mnd2Δ cells compared to their isogenic MND2 variants. In mnd2Δ spo11 mutants, Pds1 levels rise slightly as cells progress through meiotic divisions. Two- and four-nucleate cells were determined by DAPI staining and are indicated below the Western panels.

(B) Analyzing MND2 and mnd2Δ extracts side by side demonstrates specific depletion of the phosphorylated form of Pds1 in mnd2Δ mutants. The mnd2Δ extract was 8-fold concentrated relative to the wild-type extract to compensate for low Pds1 levels.

(C) In situ staining of cells at 8 hr in SPM using antibodies against Pds1-MYC and tubulin reveals a reduction in nuclear Pds1 levels in mnd2Δ (lower right panel) compared to MND2 (upper right panel). Chromatin was visualized by DAPI (left panels). Anti-tubulin staining identified prophase spindles (middle panels) due to the ndt80Δ arrest.

(D) Signal intensities of nuclear Pds1 in in situ labeled unselected cells were collected (n > 50 per graph) using IPLab software and transformed into a density function using Excel. mnd2Δ ndt80Δ distributions at 4, 8, and 12 hr in SPM are shown in different shades of red, while the corresponding ndt80Δ distributions are in different shades of blue. Pds1 levels increased in ndt80Δ during the arrest but were constantly low in mnd2Δ ndt80Δ.

(E) Signal intensities of nuclear Pds1 in in situ labeled cells preselected for their spindle morphology were collected (8 hr in SPM; n = 140 for monopolar spindles; n = 46 for bipolar spindles; n = 28 for long bipolar spindles). Cells containing bipolar spindles (black and green) showed higher Pds1 levels than cells with monopolar spindles (red). Cells with elongated spindles showed the highest Pds1 levels.

(F) Cycloheximide shut-off experiment to demonstrate that Pds1 and Rec8 are unstable in mnd2Δ prophase cells. Protein synthesis was inhibited by cycloheximide added to the meiotic cultures (100 μg/ml) at the 4 hr time point. Samples were taken at 0, 10, 30, and 60 min after addition of cycloheximide. Western blots were stained using antibodies against Pds1-MYC18 and Rec8-HA3. Tubulin was used as a loading control. Protein was detected using ECL and quantified using the UVP AutoChemi System and LabWorks 4.5 software. Protein levels were normalized by their loading controls and are displayed below the Western panels (mnd2Δ bordeaux and MND2 blue). Scale units are arbitrary.

Premature Securin Degradation in mnd2Δ

793

| MND2 (35°C) | mnd2Δ (35°C) |
| --- | --- |
| apc2-8 | apc2-8 |
| DAPI | DAPI |
| cdc27-663 | cdc27-663 |
| Zip1 | Zip1 |
| Rec8-HA | Rec8-HA Zip1 |

Figure 3. Attenuation of the APC Can Restore Synapsis and Nuclear Divisions in mnd2Δ

Spread meiotic nuclei were stained with antibodies directed against Zip1 and Rec8-HA3. For each single and double mutant, one example showing the most progressed synapsis at 35°C is presented (all examples at 6 hr in SPM). The efficiency of nuclear divisions at 25°C (i–vi) and at 35°C (vii–xii) are documented in the graphs below. Open black circles: cells past MI, open red circles: cells past MII.

mutants can be rescued by inactivating the APC. This suggests that the mnd2Δ phenotype is caused by inappropriate activation of separase via the APC. Interestingly, a moderate reduction of the APC’s activity can suppress virtually all negative effects of the mnd2Δ deletion.

Deletion of the APC Regulatory Subunit Ama1 Restores Wild-Type Securin Levels in mnd2Δ Mutants

Activation of the APC requires one of three homologous WD40 repeat proteins in S. cerevisiae, Cdc20, Cdh1/ Hct1, or the meiosis-specific Ama1. During vegetative growth, Cdc20 is required to mediate ubiquitination of Pds1 in wild-type cells (Visintin et al., 1997). In order to test the role of these activators in premature securin degradation in meiotic prophase in mnd2Δ mutants, we inactivated them separately. While cdc20-3ts had no effect, ama1Δ restored wild-type Pds1 levels and kinetics to mnd2Δ cells (Figure 4A). Surprisingly, deletion of Cdh1 also caused a significant increase in Pds1 levels in mnd2Δ cells. To identify cells, which entered the meiotic program, we used the early expressed meiotic Zip1 protein. Only a small fraction of mnd2Δ cdh1Δ cells expressed Zip1 by 8 hr (15%–25%, t = 8 hr in SPM), suggesting that Pds1 was not destabilized in the mitotic majority of cells, explaining the Pds1 increase. Indeed pre-selection of Zip1-positive cells in a single-cell analysis revealed that in meiotic mnd2Δ cells nuclear

Pds1 levels were not restored by deletion of CDH1 (Figure 4B).

Suppression of the chromosome morphology defects of mnd2Δ cells correlated with the Pds1 levels. Deletion of AMA1 suppressed all defects, while inactivation of CDC20 or CDH1 had no effect (Figures 4C and 4E). In contrast to AMA1 and CDC20, CDH1 is required to complete synapsis in MND2 cells. cdh1Δ cells only established partially synapsed bivalents with continuous Rec8 axes connected at one or several sites (Figures 4C and 4E). This suggests that ubiquitination and degradation of a substrate of APC^cdh1 is essential to complete synapsis.

Deletion of Ama1 in mnd2Δ cells also restored the ability to repair meiotic DSBs (Figure 4D) and insured normal progression through nuclear divisions and correct segregation of chromosomes to daughter nuclei. In 96% of mnd2Δ ama1Δ cells, URA3-GFP segregated correctly to the four nuclei and the remaining 4% lacked just one of the four signals (Figure 4C). We conclude that Ama1 is essential for premature destabilization of Pds1 in mnd2Δ mutants.

Inactivation of Separase Partially Restores Synapsis and Condensation in mnd2Δ Mutants

The fact that securin becomes destabilized in mnd2Δ mutants can account for all of the described defects. If the key role of Mnd2 was to prevent premature separase activation via the APC^Ama1, inactivation of separase

Figure 4. mnd2Δ Prophase Defects Are Suppressed by Mutations in the APC/C

(A) Pds1 levels during meiotic timecourses of strains with defective APC/C coactivators. Left panels: Single coactivator mutations, right panels: double mutants. The Swi6 loading control is shown below each Pds1 panel. Pds1-MYC18 was detected using anti-MYC antibody, Swi6 using anti-Swi6 antibody.

(B) Each dot corresponds to a different in situ labeled cell. Nuclear Zip1 and Pds1 intensities are represented as x and y coordinates, respectively. cdh1Δ cells (green), mnd2Δ cells (blue), and double mutants (magenta) at 8 hr in SPM are shown. Cells were preselected for Zip1-positive staining.

(C) Examples of meiotic nuclear spreads showing maximum synapsis are presented (all examples at 8 hr in SPM except cdc20-3<sup>ts</sup> and mnd2Δ cdc20-3<sup>ts</sup> at 6 hr in SPM). Left columns: Single coactivator mutations, right columns: double mutants. The timecourses were performed at 30°C except cdc20-3<sup>ts</sup>, which was inactivated at 34°C. Nuclear spreads were stained with antibodies against Zip1 (green) and Rec8-HA (red). Chromatin was visualized by DAPI.

Bottom left four panels: Nuclear divisions of cdh1Δ and ama1Δ mutants and double mutants with mnd2Δ were followed by DAPI. Open gray circles: past MI, open red circles: past MII. Bottom right panel: Chromosome segregation in mnd2Δ ama1Δ was analyzed using homozygous

Premature Securin Degradation in mnd2Δ
795

Figure 5. Preventing Premature Esp1 Activation but Not Rec8 Cleavage Restores Synapsis in mnd2Δ Cells

(A) Examples of meiotic nuclear spreads displaying maximum synapsis are shown for PDS1N (first panel, 6 hr in SPM), mnd2Δ PDS1N (second panel, 8 hr in SPM), esp1-2<sup>ts</sup> (third panel, 6 hr in SPM), and mnd2Δ esp1-2<sup>ts</sup> (fourth panel, 6 hr in SPM) mutant cells. For esp1-2<sup>ts</sup>, a nucleus with aligned Rec8 axes and incomplete synapsis is shown in detail in addition to a fully synapsed nucleus to document both situations. Meiotic timecourses were performed at 30°C for PDS1N and at 34°C for esp1-2<sup>ts</sup> mutants. Spreads were stained with antibodies against Zip1 (green) and Rec8-HA (red). Chromatin was visualized by DAPI.

(B) Percentage of nuclei with separated sister chromatids analyzed during a meiotic timecourse. Black open circles: mnd2Δ REC8, red open circles: mnd2Δ REC8N.

(C) Examples of spread meiotic nuclei showing a maximum of axis formation are presented for REC8N single (8 hr in SPM) and mnd2Δ REC8N double mutants (10 hr in SPM). The meiotic spreads were stained with antibodies against Zip1 (green) and Rec8N-HA (red). Chromatin was visualized by DAPI.

should suppress the prophase defects. We inactivated separase either by a shift of an esp1-2<sup>ts</sup> mutant to 34°C or by expressing nondegradable securin, Pds1N, from the meiosis-specific SPO13 promoter. KEN and D boxes (Passmore et al., 2003) were deleted from Pds1N. Both strategies resulted in restoration of chromosome axis formation and synapsis (Figure 5A). We therefore conclude that neither Pds1 degradation nor Esp1 activation is essential for these processes. However, the frequency of synapsed nuclei in esp1-2<sup>ts</sup> was decreased and aberrant alignment of long unsynapsed Rec8 axes was observed, independently of the mnd2Δ mutation (Figures 4E and 5A). Slightly higher frequencies of complete synapsis were observed for the Pds1N mutation, perhaps because cleavage-independent roles of Esp1 (Buonomo et al., 2003; Stegmeier et al., 2002; Tinker-Kulberg and Morgan, 1999) are not affected by Pds1N. Taken together, our results suggest that the essential function of Mnd2 with respect to safeguarding cohesion, axis formation, DSB formation, and finally synapsis is to prevent premature separase activation during prophase.

Noncleavable Rec8 Restores SCC but Not Synapsis in mnd2Δ Mutants

Of the two known targets of separase in meiotic cells, Rec8 (Buonomo et al., 2000) and Slk19 (Sullivan et al., 2001), only Rec8 is relevant to the mnd2Δ prophase phenotype because Slk19 is not required for events in early prophase (Kamieniecki et al., 2000; Zeng et al., 1999). Thus, Rec8 stabilization is expected to reverse the early mnd2Δ defects, without allowing resolution of chiasmata or chromosome segregation. In order to stabilize Rec8 in the presence of activated separase, we introduced a series of mutations, which eliminate both Rec8 cleavage sites, resulting in the Rec8N allele (Buonomo et al., 2000).

As expected, the noncleavable cohesin prevented premature loss of cohesion in mnd2Δ cells (Figure 5B), demonstrating that establishment of cohesion is largely

URA3-GFP dots. URA3-GFP dots segregated correctly in 96% of the cells past MI (n = 100). Three such cells are presented.

(D) Southern analysis of meiosis-specific DSBs at the YCR048W hotspot. DSBs are formed and repaired with similar kinetics in ama1Δ cells independent of MND2.

(E) Column diagram displaying frequencies of nuclei classified by Zip1 morphology according to the following categories: No Zip1 (white), Zip1 foci (green), short Zip1 axes (pink), long Zip1 axes (red). Independently of their affiliation with the other categories, cells were assessed for the presence of bright Zip1 aggregates (polycomplexes) (gray bars). The bars are arranged according to the time points (left to right: 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 hr in SPM). Light gray lines mark t = 0 for each cluster.
normal in \( mnd2\Delta \) REC8N. However, surprisingly, REC8N was not epistatic to \( mnd2\Delta \) in affording synapsis. Homozygous REC8N confers a moderate defect during synapsis, in that synapsis is delayed, resulting in an accumulation of intermediate stages of synapsis, such as nuclei containing long axial elements, which are aligned or partially connected. Nevertheless, homozygous REC8N shows extensive synapsis. In contrast, synapsed fragments were rare and occurred with a strong delay in \( mnd2\Delta \) REC8N (7% [10 hr], 14% [12 hr]). The majority of nuclei had extensive Rec8N covered axial elements at 6–12 hr in SPM (Figure 5C). Zip1 frequently localized to only one of the paired axial elements but also sometimes to both or to none. While a temperature shift to \( 34^\circ \mathrm{C} \) partially improved synapsis in \( mnd2\Delta \) Rec8N cells (22%, 8 hr), it fully suppressed the synapsis defect in \( mnd2\Delta \) Rec8N esp1-2ts cells (78%, 8 hr). Therefore Esp1 is likely to be responsible for the deficit in synapsis observed in \( mnd2\Delta \) Rec8N cells.

Sgo1 Is Destabilized in the Absence of Functional Mnd2, but Other Known Targets of the Meiotic APC Are Not

We tested the dependence on Mnd2 of protein levels of APC key targets other than Pds1: Cdc20, Clb1, and Dbf4 (reviewed in Peters, 1999). Dbf4, a protein expressed early in meiosis, is present at similar levels in \( mnd2\Delta \) and wild-type cells (Figure 6A). Cdc20 and Clb1 are expressed late in meiosis, shortly before the meiotic division. In \( mnd2\Delta \) cells, these proteins are not expressed, due to the checkpoint arrest triggered by unrepaired DSBs. We therefore analyzed Cdc20 and Clb1 levels in \( mnd2\Delta \) spo11 double mutants, in which no DSBs are introduced and meiotic progression is largely restored. We did not observe a striking difference in Clb1 and Cdc20 protein levels in \( mnd2\Delta \) spo11 cells compared to MND2 spo11 cells (Figure 6A).

Sister centromere cohesion is expected to be resistant to separate before the second meiotic division through protection requiring shugoshin (Sgo1). Therefore cohesion near centromere V could be lost either because Rec8 gets cleaved before it is protected or because a component of the protection system is degraded prematurely. Therefore, we analyzed shugoshin levels, using a functional tagged version, Sgo1-MYC9, and found Sgo1 levels substantially decreased in \( mnd2\Delta \) strains (data not shown). In order to avoid an effect of the checkpoint arrest on expression of Sgo1, we repeated the analysis in the spo11 background, which confirmed the decrease in Sgo1 levels during early stages, while levels recovered after 8 hr (Figure 1S). An analysis of shugoshin on meiotic prophase chromosomes revealed a corresponding decrease of Sgo1 bound to chromosomes in \( mnd2\Delta \) cells. In order to determine whether Sgo1 half-life was reduced, we stopped protein synthesis with cycloheximide and followed Sgo1 levels by Western analysis. Figure 6B shows that Sgo1 levels rapidly disappear in the \( mnd2\Delta \) background, similar to the situation with Pds1. The decrease of Sgo1 levels upon cycloheximide addition also affected chromatin bound Sgo1, as exemplified in Figure 6B.

Figure 6. Shugoshin but Not Clb1, Cdc20, and Dbf4 Is Unstable in \( mnd2\Delta \)

(A) Western timecourse analysis of Clb1, Cdc20, and Dbf4 protein levels. Upper panel: Dbf4 is a protein expressed early in meiosis and was, therefore, analyzed in wild-type (left panel) and \( mnd2\Delta \) cells (right panel). Dbf4-HA6 was detected using anti-HA antibodies. Lower panel: Clb1 and Cdc20 are proteins expressed late in meiosis and were, therefore, analyzed in spo11 (left panel) and \( mnd2\Delta \) spo11 cells (right panel). Clb1-MYC9 and MYC18-Cdc20 were detected using anti-MYC antibodies. The Swi6 loading control is shown below each protein panel. Two- and four-nucleate cells were determined by DAPI staining for the experiments performed in the spo11 background and are displayed in diagrams to the left of the Western panels.

(B) Cycloheximide shut-off experiment to demonstrate that Sgo1 is unstable in \( mnd2\Delta \) spo11 prophase cells. Protein synthesis was inhibited by cycloheximide added to the meiotic cultures (100 μg/ml) at the 4 hr time point. Samples were taken at 0, 10, 30, and 90 min after addition of cycloheximide. Western blots were stained using antibodies to Sgo1-MYC9. Tubulin was used as a loading control. Protein was detected as described in Figure 2F. Protein levels were normalized by their loading controls and are displayed below the Western panels (\( mnd2\Delta \) spo11 bordeaux and MND2 spo11 blue). Examples of yeast nuclei spread before or after 90 min incubation with cycloheximide. Nuclei were preselected for bright Zip1 staining (data not shown) to ensure expression of Sgo1. First panel from the left: spo11 after 90 min cycloheximide incubation, second panel: no cycloheximide, third panel: \( mnd2\Delta \) spo11 after 90 min cycloheximide incubation, fourth panel: no cycloheximide. Intensities of Sgo1 foci were measured using Iplab software for 40 nuclei preselected for Zip1 staining and confirmed the decrease in intensity shown in these examples.

Mnd2 Protein Is Detected in Meiotic Nuclei until Anaphase II

Mnd2 is expressed in mitotic and meiotic cells (Rabitsch et al., 2001) and associates with APC compo-
Premature Securin Degradation in mnd2Δ
797

A 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 hours in SPM
Mnd2-HA6
Swi6
0 1 0 9 15 12 2 7 2N (%)
0 2 0 5 25 51 64 66 4N (%)

B
DAPI
tubulin
Mnd2-HA

C
% of cells
high Mnd2-HA levels
low Mnd2-HA levels
no Mnd2-HA

molecular weight, suggesting that Mnd2 becomes phosphorylated before its degradation. Mnd2-HA6 was not detected on meiotic chromosome spreads, suggesting that it does not stably associate with chromatin (data not shown). In situ staining revealed that Mnd2-HA6 is a nuclear protein present in all stages of mitosis and meiosis until anaphase II. Figures 7B and 7C show some example nuclei demonstrating that Mnd2 levels decrease as cells enter metaphase II and become undetectable by late anaphase II. Both modification and the apparent degradation of Mnd2 may contribute to full activation of APC<sup>Ama1</sup>. This activation is likely to be important for APC<sup>Ama1</sup>'s essential role after the second division.

Discussion

Securing the Securin: Mnd2 Antagonizes Meiosis-Specific APC<sup>Ama1</sup> to Allow Securin to Accumulate during Meiotic Prophase

In yeast, premeiotic DNA replication and meiotic prophase take much longer than the corresponding parts of the vegetative cell cycle. In many animals, including humans, arrested oocytes may spend months or years in a late prophase stage before maturation is induced by progesterone. In these cells, critical information for correct chromosome segregation exists preserved in the form of physical bridges between homologs, called chiasmata, which are held in place by distal sister chromatid cohesion mediated by cohesin complexes (Petrunkzi et al., 2003). In contrast to mitosis, where cohesion extends over the entire length of a chromosome, in meiosis, the amount of cohesion preserving all the information for a given chromosome, concerning which chromosome to disjoin from, can be contained within a tiny region. Thus, only a small reduction of cohesion could result in irreversible loss of such information, resulting in aneuploidy 50% of the time. In yeast, separase, a cysteine protease that cleaves the Rec8 subunit of cohesin, is present throughout the early stages of meiosis and is only separated from its main substrate by a chaperone-like inhibitor called securin. Securin must therefore remain well protected until all chromosomes are safely aligned on the metaphase spindle. We have discovered that in the absence of Mnd2 in S. cerevisiae, securin is strongly destabilized during meiotic prophase, which is dependent on the action of the meiosis-specific APC<sup>Ama1</sup> complex (Cooper et al., 2000). As a consequence, Rec8 is cleaved by prematurely activated separase, causing multiple lethal defects, effectively phenocopying the rec8Δ mutation (Klein et al., 1999).

Mnd2 was shown to be stably associated with APC subunits during vegetative growth and in meiosis. While the single mnd2Δ deletion lacks a strong phenotype, we found that mnd2Δ is synthetically lethal with cdc23-1<sup>ts</sup> at all temperatures. However, mnd2Δ is viable in combination with mutations in other core subunits, namely apc2-3<sup>ts</sup>, cdc27-663<sup>ts</sup>, and cdc16-1<sup>ts</sup>. To test for essential pathways redundant with Mnd2, we tested the Euroscarf yeast strain library for deletions synthetically lethal with mnd2Δ but failed to find any. Thus, the role of Mnd2 within the vegetative APC remains enigmatic.

Figure 7. Mnd2 Is Nuclear until Metaphase II and Disappears Thereafter

(A) Mnd2 levels during a meiotic timecourse in wild-type. Mnd2-HA6 was detected using anti-HA antibody, Swi6 using anti-Swi6 antibody. Two- and four-nucleate cells were determined by DAPI staining and are indicated below the Western panels. A slower migrating band accumulates before 64% of cells undergo MI and probably represents phosphorylation of Mnd2. Between 8 and 12 hr, as most cells undergo the second meiotic division, protein levels decrease and the higher molecular weight modification disappears.

(B) Gallery of in situ labeled cells representing different meiotic stages; left to right: meiotic prophase, late anaphase I, metaphase II, early anaphase II, and late anaphase II. Upper panels: (i–v) DNA labeled by DAPI, middle panels: (vi–x) meiotic spindles stained with antibodies against tubulin, and lower panels: (xi–xv) Mnd2-HA6 detected with antibodies against HA.

(C) Column diagram presenting the percentage of high (red), low (orange), and zero (white) Mnd2 intensities for different meiotic stages. Stages were classified according to spindle morphology: monopolar, comet-shaped spindle: prophase (n = 64), short bipolar spindle: metaphase I (n = 55), elongated bipolar spindle in single DNA mass: early anaphase I (n = 33), elongated bipolar spindle connecting two separate DNA masses: late anaphase I (n = 35), two short bipolar spindles: metaphase II (n = 52), two elongated bipolar spindles: anaphase II (n = 50), and elongated bipolar spindles in four-nucleate cells: cells after anaphase II (n = 50).

ents in both types of cell divisions (Hall et al., 2003; Schwickart et al., 2004). In a meiotic timecourse, Mnd2-HA6 was detected from t = 0 hr until the majority of cells entered the second meiotic division, when its signal decreased considerably (Figure 7A). Prior to this decrease, a fraction of the protein shifted to a higher
Mnd2 is upregulated in meiosis ([Primig et al., 2000](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0); [Rabitsch et al., 2001](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(01)00266-X)), and this correlates with expression of a meiosis-specific APC coactivator, Ama1/Spo70 ([Chu et al., 1998](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0); [Cooper et al., 2000](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0)). We show that in the absence of Mnd2, Pds1 is destabilized in meiotic prophase and that as a result, the delicate, multistep process of chromosome synapsis is completely aborted. Suppression analysis identifies the inappropriate APC activity as the major cause of the prophase defects because elimination of either of two APC core subunits (Cdc27 and Apc2) by heat inactivation restores a largely normal pattern of synapsis. More specifically, only one coactivator of the APC is responsible for the catastrophic prophase defects in *mnd2Δ* cells, namely Ama1. Deletion of Ama1 in *mnd2Δ* cells restores wild-type kinetics and wild-type levels of securin. Chromosome synapsis is normal, albeit with slightly reduced efficiency, nuclear divisions are rescued, and chromosomes segregate with close to wild-type fidelity in both meiotic divisions. We conclude that the lethal chromosome structure and repair defects in *mnd2Δ* cells are caused by premature activity of APC<sup>Ama1</sup>, which identifies Mnd2 as its essential antagonist. APC<sup>Ama1</sup> exerts its important functions around anaphase II, when Mnd2 has disappeared, suggesting that Mnd2 keeps APC<sup>Ama1</sup> inactive until metaphase II.

### mnd2Δ Mutant Meiotic Prophase Defects Can Be Explained by a Premature Drop in Securin Levels Releasing Active Separase

Securin lacking KEN and D box signatures (Pds1N) is invisible for the APC and its coactivators. Replacement of wild-type securin by Pds1N during meiosis suppresses the prophase defects observed in *mnd2Δ* mutants ([Figures 4E and 5](#fig:4e_5)) to a similar extent as *ama1Δ*, thus implying that Pds1 destruction is required for the observed prophase problems. This strongly suggests that Pds1 is a substrate of APC<sup>Ama1</sup> and that the APC requires either the KEN or the D box motive to recognize Pds1. It also suggests that premature liberation of separase is the major problem for these cells. Consistent with this idea, *esp1-2<sup>ts</sup>* is epistatic to *mnd2Δ* regarding the prophase defects. When shifted to the restrictive temperature at t = 0, *esp1-2<sup>ts</sup>* mutants are able to complete synapsis but with reduced efficiency independent of Mnd2. Notably, we observed nuclei containing long but completely unsynapsed Rec8 fragments ([Figure 5A](#fig:5a)), a defect also observed in the *cdh1Δ* mutant. A deficit in Cdh1 activity could also explain synapsis problems in *esp1-2<sup>ts</sup>* because Esp1 is required to fully activate APC<sup>Cdh1</sup> by releasing Cdc14 from the nucleolus ([Stegmeier et al., 2002](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0); [Visintin et al., 1998](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0)).

### Cdh1 Is Required for Proper Synapsis in S. cerevisiae

As predicted from earlier work ([Buonomo et al., 2000](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0); [Salah and Nasmyth, 2000](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0)), we observed metaphase I arrest in *cdc27-663<sup>ts</sup>*, *cdc16-1<sup>ts</sup>*, and *apc2-8<sup>ts</sup>* mutants at the restrictive temperature of 35°C (data not shown). Only one of these mutants conferred an additional defect in synapsis, in that continuous Zip1 axes were extremely rare in *cdc16-1<sup>ts</sup>* cells ([Figures 3 and 4C](#fig:3_4c)). In contrast, the deletion of *CDH1* caused a severe reduction in synapsis and an accumulation of precursors with long unsynapsed Rec8 axes and Zip1 polycomplexes. We did not observe any cells with completely synapsed chromosomes, suggesting that Cdh1 might be involved in the removal of a substrate, which critically interferes with synapsis and perhaps repair in meiotic prophase. Since the APC alleles do not cause the strong synapsis defect, when inactivated during meiosis, Cdh1 may be required during the cell cycle preceding meiosis. Alternatively, its role may not require all APC components.

#### Separase May Cleave a Substrate Other than Cohesin

Rec8 is cleaved and depleted early during prophase in *mnd2Δ* mutants, leading to a plethora of defects. The *REC8N* mutant has been shown to be completely resistant to separase ([Buonomo et al., 2000](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0)). It was, therefore, not surprising that cohesion and axis formation defects of *mnd2Δ* were suppressed by a *REC8N* mutation. However, unexpectedly, while the *REC8N* mutant itself showed extensive synapsis, rare and delayed synapsis was detected in the *mnd2Δ REC8N* double mutant, contrasting strongly with the complete synapsis observed in mutants in which separase activation is prevented (*mnd2Δ esp1-2<sup>ts</sup>* and *mnd2Δ PDS1N*). Since *esp1-2<sup>ts</sup>* (at 34°C) fully restores synapsis in *mnd2Δ Rec8N* cells, cleavage of an as yet unidentified substrate by Esp1 could be responsible for the synapsis defect in *mnd2Δ Rec8N* cells. However, as a temperature shift to 34°C partially improves synapsis in *Rec8N mnd2Δ ESP1* cells, alternative explanations are possible.

### Mnd2: A Regulator of the APC

Successive waves of ubiquitination activities exerted by the APC and SCF complexes play essential roles during the vegetative cell cycle ([Peters, 2002](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0)). In yeast meiosis, a third coactivator of the APC, Ama1, offers the possibility of yet another, independently regulated, wave of proteolysis. While Cdh1’s activity at mitotic exit and at the very beginning of the cell cycle clears residual cyclin B, securing, and Cdc20 to properly set the cell cycle clock to zero, Cdc20 triggers sister separation.

Besides the spindle checkpoint, which restricts APC<sup>Cdc20</sup> activity in prometaphase using Mad2, APC inhibitors are also known from higher organisms such as Rca1 from *Drosophila* ([Dong et al., 1997](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0)) and Emi1. Emi1 has been identified as an inhibitor of APC<sup>Cdc20</sup> and APC<sup>Cdh1</sup> in humans and *Xenopus* ([Hsu et al., 2002](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0); [Reimann et al., 2001](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0)). Shortly before mitotic cyclin destruction, Emi1 is targeted for degradation by the SCF following phosphorylation, using the SCF adaptor b-Trcp1 ([Guardavaccaro et al., 2003](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0); [Margottin-Goguet et al., 2003](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0)). There are obvious parallels between Emi1 and Mnd2, as both proteins interact directly with the APC and apparently both are degraded after being phosphorylated. Emi1 regulates both S phase entry, by inhibiting APC<sup>Cdh1</sup> thus allowing cyclin A to accumulate ([Hsu et al., 2002](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0)), and early mitosis, in which premature activation of APC<sup>Cdc20</sup> must be prevented, to allow proper cyclin B accumulation ([Guardavaccaro et al., 2003](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0); [Margottin-Goguet et al., 2003](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80350-0)). We have no evidence that Mnd2 is phosphorylated by CDKs, but it is tempting to speculate that Mnd2 is regulated in a similar way.Premature Securin Degradation in *mnd2Δ*

799

dence for an involvement of Mnd2 in inhibiting Cdh1- or Cdc20-activated APC activity. Mnd2 is present with similar abundance throughout the cell cycle, irrespective of Cdh1 or Cdc20 activity. How Mnd2 discriminates between Ama1 and the other coactivators or whether the SCF is involved in Mnd2’s degradation is presently unknown.

### Sgo1 Is Mnd2 and APC<sup>Ama1</sup> May Be Involved in Rec8 Deprotection at Kinetochores before Anaphase II

Meiosis consists of two very different divisions, a reductive one requiring protection of cohesion at kinetochores and an equational one in which all cohesion must be resolved. Meiosis-specific APC<sup>Ama1</sup>, which is activated around the time of the second division to control spore formation, would offer an elegant solution for this problem. It could remove protection of cohesin at kinetochores before anaphase II but not before anaphase I, when it is kept inactive by Mnd2. APC<sup>Cdc20</sup>, which is active in both meiotic divisions, is not expected to make that distinction. Indeed we found that chromatin bound Sgo1 protein was unstable in *mnd2Δ* cells, suggesting that Sgo1 might be a substrate of APC<sup>Ama1</sup>. Recently vertebrate shugoshin was shown to be an in vitro substrate for the APC (Salic et al., 2004). We therefore tested whether Sgo1 was detectable in *ama1Δ* and wild-type anaphase II cells. The analysis showed that in *ama1Δ* mutants, clearly more Sgo1 survived in anaphase II nuclei (Figures S2A and S2B). While this shows that APC<sup>Ama1</sup> could trigger centromere deprotection and therefore anaphase II, a second mechanism apparently allows anaphase in the presence of Sgo1 in *ama1Δ* mutants. We speculate that this mechanism could involve inactivation of Sgo1 or its dissociation from kinetochores.

A meiosis-specific, fizzy-related WD40 protein similar to Ama1 has been described in *S. pombe*, Fzr1/Mfr1. Mutation of this gene causes spore differentiation defects late in meiosis like *ama1Δ*, suggesting evolutionary conservation of Ama1.

In conclusion, this study has identified Mnd2 to be a negative regulator of APC<sup>Ama1</sup> in meiotic prophase. In the absence of Mnd2, securin levels, especially those of phosphorylated securin, are precociously and dramatically reduced during meiotic prophase. This leads to a series of events, which cause precocious loss of sister chromatid cohesion and catastrophic failure in chromosome synapsis, DSB repair, and chromosome segregation, similar to that observed in a *rec8Δ* mutant. Mechanisms preventing precocious loss of sister chromatid cohesion are critically important for the faithful segregation of chromosomes in meiosis in yeast. Human and animal oocytes may spend years in meiotic prophase before maturation. It is conceivable that inhibitors specific to meiotic APC variants help to guard against loss of chiasmata also in human oocytes to prevent aberrant chromosome segregation.

### Experimental Procedures

#### Yeast Strains and Meiotic Timecourses and Spore Viability

All strains used in this study (listed in Table S1) were derivatives of SK1 (Kane and Roth, 1974) or at least 6× backcrossed to SK1 if originally W303. Mnd2 and Dbf4 proteins were tagged at the C terminus with 6 HA epitopes at the original chromosomal locus by one step gene targeting (Zachariae et al., 1996). Sporulation and spore viability were comparable to the untagged parental strain. Tagging was confirmed by PCR, Southern, and Western analysis. *MND2*, *CDH1*, and *AMA1* were deleted using PCR-mediated gene replacement (Wach et al., 1994) and confirmed by PCR. The *PDS1N* allele carries the following mutations in the D box (R85 to A85, L88 to A88) as well as the KEN box (KEN8-10 to AAA8-10). It was fused to the *SPO13* promoter (amplified by primers: 5′CCATAGAG CTCTGGTTGACGAAGT TTTATTTTGGAG3′ and 5′CCATATCTAGAAA TTATTCTCGACTCAACTTCAATC3′) and cloned into YIplac204. The resulting plasmid was linearized and integrated at the *TRP1* locus of a strain carrying *pSCC1-PDS1::kanMX* as the sole source of *PDS1* in the cell. The *REC8N* construct (Buonomo et al., 2000) was cloned into a YIplac128 (*LEU2*) or YIplac204 (*TRP1*), linearized by Mlul within the *REC8* promoter and inserted into the genome at the *REC8* locus upstream of the deletion. Integration of both plasmids was checked by PCR, and expression of Rec8N and Pds1N was tested by phenotypic analysis and Western blotting.

Chromosome V was visualized by a tet repressor-GFP fusion protein (tetR-GFP) binding to an array of tet operators (tetOs) integrated at the *URA3* locus near the centromere (Michaelis et al., 1997).

Strains were grown and sporulated as previously described (Nairz and Klein, 1997). In short, for a meiotic timecourse, diploid cells were grown to a concentration of 4 × 10<sup>7</sup> cells/ml in yeast extract/peptone/acetate (YPA) medium and incubated at the same cell concentration in 2% potassium acetate at 25°C, 30°C, 34°C, or 35°C with vigorous shaking. Meiotic divisions were monitored by fluorescence microscopy after staining with 0.2 μg/ml of DAPI. To prevent protein synthesis by cycloheximide, meiotic cultures were split at time point 4 hr in SPM and cycloheximide was added to a final concentration of 100 μg/ml. Cells were again incubated at 30°C with vigorous shaking and samples were taken at the indicated time points.

Spore viability was assayed by tetrad dissection. Ascus frequencies were always determined to estimate spore yield.

#### Cytology and SCC Assay

Yeast meiotic spreads were performed as described (Loidl et al., 1998; Nairz and Klein, 1997). Rec8-HA was detected using 16B12 (mouse anti-HA, 1:1600) and CY3-conjugated goat anti-mouse antibody (1:200, Dianova). Rabbit anti-Zip1 antibody was raised against a purified Zip1-GST fusion protein and affinity purified against the same protein. The purified Zip1 antibody was used (1:50) and detected by fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated goat anti-rabbit serum (1:200, Sigma).

Whole cells were prepared for indirect immunofluorescence according to Piatti et al. (Piatti et al., 1996). MYC- and HA-tagged proteins were detected with mouse monoclonal antibodies 9E10 (1:30) and 16B12 (1:1600) and a CY3-conjugated secondary antibody. Spindles were visualized using rat antiserum to yeast tubulin and a FITC-conjugated secondary antibody (Sigma). Zip1 was detected using polyclonal rabbit anti-Zip1 antibody (1:50) and a FITC-conjugated secondary antibody (Sigma). To quantify signal intensities of in situ labeled proteins, pictures of the protein and the corresponding DAPI channel were taken. Importantly, cells of one experiment were labeled using the same antibody solution and pictures were taken under the same conditions. Nuclear signal intensities were finally measured with IPLab software and analyzed by Excel.

To analyze SCC, aliquots of sporulating cultures were fixed by addition of 1/10 volume 37% formaldehyde for 10 min, washed briefly in 96% ethanol, and resuspended in 0.2 μg/ml DAPI solution. Cells were inspected for chromatin and GFP in the same cells in a Zeiss fluorescence microscope.

#### DSB Assay

Physical analysis of DSBs at the YCR048W hotspot (Goldway et al., 1993) was performed on DNA prepared by alkaline lysis as described (Prielier et al., 2005). Following digest of the genomic DNA with BglII enzyme, the DNA was separated and transferred to a
Hybond-Nylon+ membrane (Amersham). The probe (888 bp HinDIII fragment) was PCR-amplified, purified by the MinElute PCR Purification Kit (50) of Qiagen, and labeled by random priming using α-32P dATP (Amersham). Hybridization was carried out at 65°C overnight. Direct quantification of the signal was performed on a phosphoimager (Bio-Rad Molecular Imager FX Pro Plus).

**Western Blotting**

Three milliliters of 4 × 10^7^ cells/ml were harvested, washed in 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA), and finally resuspended in 200 μl TCA 10%. Two hundred microliter glass beads were added, followed by 40 min breakage on a Vibrax. The supernatant plus three washes was removed, centrifuged (5 min, 3000 rpm), and the pellet resuspended in 200 μl 1 × GSD loading buffer and neutralized by adding 25 μl of unbuffered 1M Tris. Separation on PAGE and blotting were performed according to standard procedures. The MYC-epitope tag was detected by mouse 9E10 antibody (1:300) and HRP-conjugated goat anti-mouse antibody (1:80 000, Pierce). HA-tagged proteins were detected using the mouse 16B12 antibody (1:5000) and HRP-conjugated goat anti-mouse (1:80 000, Pierce) antibodies. The rabbit anti-Swi6 and the rat anti-tubulin antibodies were diluted 1:10 000 and 1:2000, respectively. Both primary antibodies were detected using HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies. Final detection was performed using the ECL plus or ECL advanced Western blotting detection system (Amersham). Signals were directly measured with an AutoChemi System (UVP, Bioimaging Systems) and evaluated using LabWorks 4.5 software.

**Supplemental Data**

Supplemental Data include two figures and two tables and can be found with this article online at [http://www.cell.com/cgi/content/full/120/6/789/DC1/](http://www.cell.com/cgi/content/full/120/6/789/DC1/).

**Acknowledgments**

We are grateful to Kim Nasmyth for advice and his lab for supplying strains and constructs as well as the 9E10 and Swi6 antibodies. Special thanks to Doris Schoffnegger who kindly shared her *PDS1N* construct. We are grateful to Marc Berlinger and Gregor Kohlmaier for performing the synthetic lethality screen with *mnd2Δ* and also to Isabel Raabe for help. We would also like to thank Angelika Amon, Nancy Kleckner, and Michael Lichten for supplying strains and plasmids and W. Zachariae for sharing unpublished results. Thanks to Jan M. Peters, as well as Maria Siomos and all lab members for critical remarks on the manuscript. This work was funded by the Austrian Science Foundation FWF, grant S8203, and by the Austrofan grant from the Austrian Ministry of Science.

Received: September 19, 2004  
Revised: November 19, 2004  
Accepted: January 18, 2005  
Published: March 24, 2005  

**References**

Asakawa, H., Kitamura, K., and Shimoda, C. (2001). A novel Cdc20-related WD-repeat protein, Fzr1, is required for spore formation in Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Mol. Genet. Genomics 265, 424–435.

Blanco, M.A., Pelloquin, L., and Moreno, S. (2001). Fission yeast mfr1 activates APC and coordinates meiotic nuclear division with sporulation. J. Cell Sci. 114, 2135–2143.

Buonomo, S.B., Clyne, R.K., Fuchs, J., Loidl, J., Uhlmann, F., and Nasmyth, K. (2000). Disjunction of homologous chromosomes in meiosis I depends on proteolytic cleavage of the meiotic cohesin Rec8 by separin. Cell 103, 387–398.

Buonomo, S.B., Rabitsch, K.P., Fuchs, J., Gruber, S., Sullivan, M., Uhlmann, F., Petronczki, M., Toth, A., and Nasmyth, K. (2003). Division of the nucleolus and its release of CDC14 during anaphase of

meiosis I depends on separase, SPO12, and SLK19. Dev. Cell 4, 727–739.

Chu, S., DeRisi, J., Eisen, M., Mulholland, J., Botstein, D., Brown, P.O., and Herskowitz, I. (1998). The transcriptional program of sporulation in budding yeast. Science 282, 699–705.

Cohen-Fix, O., Peters, J.M., Kirschner, M.W., and Koshland, D. (1996). Anaphase initiation in Saccharomyces cerevisiae is controlled by the APC-dependent degradation of the anaphase inhibitor Pds1p. Genes Dev. 10, 3081–3093.

Cooper, K.F., Mallory, M.J., Smith, J.B., and Strich, R. (1997). Stress and developmental regulation of the yeast C-type cyclin Ume3p (Srb11p/Ssn8p). EMBO J. 16, 4665–4675.

Cooper, K.F., Mallory, M.J., Egeland, D.B., Jarnik, M., and Strich, R. (2000). Ama1p is a meiosis-specific regulator of the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome in yeast. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 14548–14553.

Davis, E.S., Wille, L., Chestnut, B.A., Sadler, P.L., Shakes, D.C., and Golden, A. (2002). Multiple subunits of the Caenorhabditis elegans anaphase-promoting complex are required for chromosome segregation during meiosis I. Genetics 160, 805–813.

Dong, X., Zavitz, K.H., Thomas, B.J., Lin, M., Campbell, S., and Zipursky, S.L. (1997). Control of G1 in the developing Drosophila eye: rca1 regulates Cyclin A. Genes Dev. 11, 94–105.

Fang, G., Yu, H., and Kirschner, M.W. (1998). The checkpoint protein MAD2 and the mitotic regulator CDC20 form a ternary complex with the anaphase-promoting complex to control anaphase initiation. Genes Dev. 12, 1871–1883.

Golden, A., Sadler, P.L., Wallenfang, M.R., Schumacher, J.M., Hamill, D.R., Bates, G., Bowerman, B., Seydoux, G., and Shakes, D.C. (2000). Metaphase to anaphase (mat) transition-defective mutants in Caenorhabditis elegans. J. Cell Biol. 151, 1469–1482.

Goldway, M., Sherman, A., Zenvirth, D., Arbel, T., and Simchen, G. (1993). A short chromosomal region with major roles in yeast chromosome III meiotic disjunction, recombination and double strand breaks. Genetics 133, 159–169.

Grosskortenhaus, R., and Sprenger, F. (2002). Rca1 inhibits APC-Cdh1(Fzr) and is required to prevent cyclin degradation in G2. Dev. Cell 2, 29–40.

Guardavaccaro, D., Kudo, Y., Boulaire, J., Barchi, M., Busino, L., Donzelli, M., Margottin-Goguet, F., Jackson, P.K., Yamasaki, L., and Pagano, M. (2003). Control of meiotic and mitotic progression by the F box protein beta-Trcp1 in vivo. Dev. Cell 4, 799–812.

Hall, M.C., Torres, M.P., Schroeder, G.K., and Borchers, C.H. (2003). Mnd2 and Swm1 are core subunits of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae anaphase-promoting complex. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 16698–16705.

Hsu, J.Y., Reimann, J.D., Sorensen, C.S., Lukas, J., and Jackson, P.K. (2002). E2F-dependent accumulation of hEmi1 regulates S phase entry by inhibiting APC(Cdh1). Nat. Cell Biol. 4, 358–366.

Hwang, L.H., Lau, L.F., Smith, D.L., Mistrot, C.A., Hardwick, K.G., Hwang, E.S., Amon, A., and Murray, A.W. (1998). Budding yeast Cdc20: a target of the spindle checkpoint. Science 279, 1041–1044.

Kamieniecki, R.J., Shanks, R.M., and Dawson, D.S. (2000). Slk19p is necessary to prevent separation of sister chromatids in meiosis I. Curr. Biol. 10, 1182–1190.

Kane, S.M., and Roth, R. (1974). Carbohydrate metabolism during ascospore development in yeast. J. Bacteriol. 118, 8–14.

Katis, V.L., Galova, M., Rabitsch, K.P., Gregan, J., and Nasmyth, K. (2004). Maintenance of cohesion at centromeres after meiosis I in budding yeast requires a kinetochore-associated protein related to MEI-S332. Curr. Biol. 14, 560–572.

Kitajima, T.S., Kawashima, S.A., and Watanabe, Y. (2004). The conserved kinetochore protein shugoshin protects centromeric cohesion during meiosis. Nature 427, 510–517.

Klein, F., Mahr, P., Galova, M., Buonomo, S.B., Michaelis, C., Nairz, K., and Nasmyth, K. (1999). A central role for cohesins in sister chromatid cohesion, formation of axial elements, and recombination during yeast meiosis. Cell 98, 91–103.

Loidl, J., Klein, F., and Engebrecht, J. (1998). Genetic and morpho-

logical approaches for the analysis of meiotic chromosomes in yeast. In Nuclear Structure and Function, M. Berrios, ed. (San Diego: Academic Press), pp. 257–285.

Margottin-Goguet, F., Hsu, J.Y., Loktev, A., Hsieh, H.M., Reimann, J.D., and Jackson, P.K. (2003). Prophase destruction of Emi1 by the SCF (betaTrCP/Slimb) ubiquitin ligase activates the anaphase promoting complex to allow progression beyond prometaphase. Dev. Cell 4, 813–826.

Marston, A.L., Tham, W.H., Shah, H., and Amon, A. (2004). A genome-wide screen identifies genes required for centromeric cohesion. Science 303, 1367–1370.

Michaelis, C., Ciosk, R., and Nasmyth, K. (1997). Cohesins: chromosomal proteins that prevent premature separation of sister chromatids. Cell 91, 35–45.

Nairz, K., and Klein, F. (1997). mre11S - a yeast mutation that blocks double-strand-break processing and permits nonhomologous synapsis in meiosis. Genes Dev. 11, 2272–2290.

Passmore, L.A., McCormack, E.A., Au, S.W., Paul, A., Willison, K.R., Harper, J.W., and Barford, D. (2003). Doc1 mediates the activity of the anaphase-promoting complex by contributing to substrate recognition. EMBO J. 22, 786–796.

Peters, J.M. (1999). Subunits and substrates of the anaphase-promoting complex. Exp. Cell Res. 248, 339–349.

Peters, J.M. (2002). The anaphase-promoting complex: proteolysis in mitosis and beyond. Mol. Cell 9, 931–943.

Petronczki, M., Siomos, M.F., and Nasmyth, K. (2003). Un menage a quatre. The molecular biology of chromosome segregation in meiosis. Cell 112, 423–440.

Piatti, S., Bohm, T., Cocker, J.H., Diffley, J.F., and Nasmyth, K. (1996). Activation of S-phase-promoting CDKs in late G1 defines a “point of no return” after which Cdc6 synthesis cannot promote DNA replication in yeast. Genes Dev. 10, 1516–1531.

Prieler, S., Penkner, A., Borde, V., and Klein, F. (2005). The control of Spo11’s interaction with meiotic recombination hotspots. Genes Dev. 19, 1516–1531. in press.

Primig, M., Williams, R.M., Winzeler, E.A., Tevzadze, G.G., Conway, A.R., Hwang, S.Y., Davis, R.W., and Esposito, R.E. (2000). The core meiotic transcriptome in budding yeasts. Nat. Genet. 26, 415–423.

Rabitsch, K.P., Toth, A., Galova, M., Schleiffer, A., Schaffner, G., Aigner, E., Rupp, C., Penkner, A.M., Moreno-Borchart, A.C., Primig, M., et al. (2001). A screen for genes required for meiosis and spore formation based on whole-genome expression. Curr. Biol. 11, 1001–1009.

Rabitsch, K.P., Gregan, J., Schleiffer, A., Javerzat, J.P., Eisenhaber, F., and Nasmyth, K. (2004). Two fission yeast homologs of *Drosophila* Mei-S332 are required for chromosome segregation during meiosis I and II. Curr. Biol. 14, 287–301.

Reimann, J.D., Freed, E., Hsu, J.Y., Kramer, E.R., Peters, J.M., and Jackson, P.K. (2001). Emi1 is a mitotic regulator that interacts with Cdc20 and inhibits the anaphase promoting complex. Cell 105, 645–655.

Salah, S.M., and Nasmyth, K. (2000). Destruction of the securin Pds1p occurs at the onset of anaphase during both meiotic divisions in yeast. Chromosoma 109, 27–34.

Salic, A., Waters, J.C., and Mitchison, T.J. (2004). Vertebrate shugoshin links sister centromere cohesion and kinetochore microtubule stability in mitosis. Cell 118, 567–578.

Schwickart, M., Havlis, J., Habermann, B., Bogdanova, A., Ca-masses, A., Oelschlaegel, T., Shevchenko, A., and Zachariae, W. (2004). Swm1/Apc13 is an evolutionarily conserved subunit of the anaphase-promoting complex stabilizing the association of Cdc16 and Cdc27. Mol. Cell. Biol. 24, 3562–3576.

Siomos, M.F., Badrinath, A., Pasierbek, P., Livingstone, D., White, J., Glotzer, M., and Nasmyth, K. (2001). Separase is required for chromosome segregation during meiosis I in *Caenorhabditis elegans*. Curr. Biol. 11, 1825–1835.

Stegmeier, F., Visintin, R., and Amon, A. (2002). Separase, polo kinase, the kinetochore protein Slk19, and Spo12 function in a net-

work that controls Cdc14 localization during early anaphase. Cell 108, 207–220.

Sullivan, M., Lehane, C., and Uhlmann, F. (2001). Orchestrating anaphase and mitotic exit: separase cleavage and localization of Slk19. Nat. Cell Biol. 3, 771–777.

Sym, M., and Roeder, G.S. (1995). Zip1-induced changes in synaptonemal complex structure and polycomplex assembly. J. Cell Biol. 128, 455–466.

Sym, M., Engebrecht, J.A., and Roeder, G.S. (1993). ZIP1 is a synaptonemal complex protein required for meiotic chromosome synapsis. Cell 72, 365–378.

Taieb, F.E., Gross, S.D., Lewellyn, A.L., and Maller, J.L. (2001). Activation of the anaphase-promoting complex and degradation of cyclin B is not required for progression from Meiosis I to II in Xenopus oocytes. Curr. Biol. 11, 508–513.

Tinker-Kulberg, R.L., and Morgan, D.O. (1999). Pds1 and Esp1 control both anaphase and mitotic exit in normal cells and after DNA damage. Genes Dev. 13, 1936–1949.

Varshavsky, A. (1997). The N-end rule pathway of protein degradation. Genes Cells 2, 13–28.

Visintin, R., Prinz, S., and Amon, A. (1997). CDC20 and CDH1: a family of substrate-specific activators of APC-dependent proteolysis. Science 278, 460–463.

Visintin, R., Craig, K., Hwang, E.S., Prinz, S., Tyers, M., and Amon, A. (1998). The phosphatase Cdc14 triggers mitotic exit by reversal of Cdk-dependent phosphorylation. Mol. Cell 2, 709–718.

Wach, A., Brachat, A., Pohlmann, R., and Philippsen, P. (1994). New heterologous modules for classical or PCR-based gene disruptions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast 10, 1793–1808.

Yoon, H.J., Feoktistova, A., Wolfe, B.A., Jennings, J.L., Link, A.J., and Gould, K.L. (2002). Proteomics analysis identifies new components of the fission and budding yeast anaphase-promoting complexes. Curr. Biol. 12, 2048–2054.

Zachariae, W., Shin, T.H., Galova, M., Obermaier, B., and Nasmyth, K. (1996). Identification of subunits of the anaphase-promoting complex of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Science 274, 1201–1204.

Zeng, X., Kahana, J.A., Silver, P.A., Morpew, M.K., McIntosh, J.R., Fitch, I.T., Carbon, J., and Saunders, W.S. (1999). Slk19p is a centromere protein that functions to stabilize mitotic spindles. J. Cell Biol. 146, 415–425.
