
# TEC-FAMILY KINASES: REGULATORS OF T-HELPER-CELL DIFFERENTIATION

**Pamela L. Schwartzberg, Lisa D. Finkelstein and Julie A. Readinger**

Abstract | The TEC-family protein tyrosine kinases ITK, RLK and TEC have been identified as key components of T-cell-receptor signalling that contribute to the regulation of phospholipase C-γ, the mobilization of Ca²⁺ and the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases. Recent data also show that TEC kinases contribute to T-cell-receptor-driven actin reorganization and cell polarization, which are required for productive T-cell activation. Functional studies have implicated TEC kinases as important mediators of pathways that control the differentiation of CD4⁺ T helper cells. Here, we review studies of signalling pathways that involve TEC kinases and how these pathways might contribute to the regulation of T-helper-cell differentiation and function.

---

In 1993, several research groups discovered that mutations affecting a novel protein tyrosine kinase, **BTK** (Bruton’s tyrosine kinase), were associated with the severe B-cell immunodeficiency X-LINKED AGAMMAGLOBULINAEMIA (XLA) and the mouse X-linked immunodeficiency (XID)¹⁻⁵. It was subsequently recognized that BTK is a member of a related family of NON-RECEPTOR PROTEIN TYROSINE KINASES of which **TEC** was the first to be defined (FIG. 1A). The TEC family now consists of five members, which are expressed mainly by haematopoietic cells: TEC (tyrosine kinase expressed in hepatocellular carcinoma), BTK, **ITK** (interleukin-2 (IL-2)-inducible T-cell kinase; also known as EMT or TSK), **RLK** (resting lymphocyte kinase; also known as TXK) and **BMX** (bone-marrow tyrosine kinase gene on chromosome X; also known as ETK)⁶. T cells express three TEC kinases — ITK, RLK and TEC — all of which are activated downstream of the T-cell receptor (TCR)⁷ and have been shown to be involved in signalling through the TCR⁸⁻¹⁶. Although no human disease has been associated with mutations of the TEC kinases that are expressed by T cells, ITK-deficient mice have specific defects in T HELPER 2 (Tₕ₂)-CELL RESPONSES and reduced pathology in models of allergic asthma¹¹,¹⁵,¹⁷. Conversely, ITK expression is increased in T cells from patients with ATOPIC DERMATITIS, a Tₕ₂-cell-mediated disease¹⁸. These studies, combined with the recent finding that specific ITK inhibitors reduce disease in a mouse model of allergic asthma¹⁹, have increased interest in understanding the roles of TEC kinases in T-cell function. In this Review article, we discuss the biology of the T-cell-specific TEC kinases, new findings about the cellular pathways that they regulate and clues to how these signalling pathways might contribute to the control of Tₕ-cell function.

## TEC-family kinases

The TEC-family kinases are characterized by a common domain organization: they have an amino-terminal PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL-3,4,5-TRISPHOSPHATE (PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃)-binding PLECKSTRIN-HOMOLOGY DOMAIN, which is followed by a TEC-homology domain that contains one or two proline-rich regions (PRRs), then SRC homology 3 (SH3) and SH2 protein-interaction domains, and a carboxy-terminal kinase domain (FIG. 1A). The TEC kinases are the only tyrosine kinases that have pleckstrin-homology domains, which inducibly recruit TEC-family members to the plasma membrane by binding the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) product PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃, thereby promoting their activation. Membrane localization and activation of the pleckstrin-homology-domain-containing TEC kinases are therefore regulated by PI3K and the lipid phosphatases PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue) and SHIP (SH2-domain-containing inositol-5-phosphatase), which catalyse the breakdown of PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ (REFS 20–23) (FIG. 1B).

---

**X-LINKED AGAMMAGLOBULINAEMIA (XLA).** A human immunodeficiency that is caused by mutations in the gene encoding Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK), which is located on the X chromosome. These mutations result in a block in B-cell maturation and in poor antibody production. A naturally occurring mouse mutant of BTK, X-linked immunodeficiency (XID), is associated with less severe disease.

**National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 4A38/49 Convent Drive, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.**  
Correspondence to P.L.S.  
e-mail: pams@mail.nih.gov  
doi:10.1038/nri1591

NON-RECEPTOR PROTEIN
TYROSINE KINASES
Proteins that lack a
transmembrane or extracellular
domain, have no ligand, are
found intracellularly and add
a phosphate group to tyrosine
residues in proteins. Tyrosine
phosphorylation leads to a
change in the ability of the
phosphorylated protein to bind
and activate downstream
molecules.

The atypical TEC kinase RLK lacks a pleckstrin-homology
domain and, instead, has a palmitoylated string of cysteine residues, which leads to constitutive membrane
association of RLK, independent of PI3K activity²⁴,²⁵.

Activation of TEC-family kinases requires several
interrelated steps: first, recruitment to the plasma membrane through interactions between their pleckstrin-
homology domains and the products of PI3K and/or
other proteins; second, phosphorylation by SRC-family
kinases; and third, interactions with other proteins that
bring the TEC-family kinases into antigen-receptor-
signalling complexes⁷ (FIG. 1B). In addition, TEC-family
kinases are thought to be regulated by conformational
changes directed by intra- and intermolecular interactions
involving their SH2 domains, SH3 domains and

PRRs⁷. These have been best characterized for ITK, for
which nuclear-magnetic-resonance studies have shown
that the PRR binds the SH3 domain within the same
molecule²⁶. An additional interaction between the SH2
domain of one ITK molecule and the SH3 domain of
another ITK molecule can also be detected. These interactions are thought to be inhibitory and to prevent
interactions with other proteins. The PEPTIDYLPROLYL
ISOMERASE CYCLOPHILIN A contributes to ITK activation
through isomerization of a proline residue in the SH2
domain of ITK, which alters the specificity of the protein interactions of the SH2 domain so that the cis
form favours intramolecular interactions with the
SH3 domain and the trans form favours interactions
with other proteins in TCR-signalling complexes and
activation of its own kinase activity²⁷.

**Roles for TEC kinases in T cells**
Although ITK, RLK and TEC are all found in T cells,
they are expressed at different levels and by different
subpopulations. Evaluation of mRNA levels by real-
time reverse-transcriptase PCR showed that ITK is the
main TEC kinase expressed by naive mouse T cells,
with Rlk mRNA expressed at 3–10-fold lower levels
and Tec mRNA at ~100-fold lower levels²⁸,²⁹. On T-cell
activation, ITK expression is increased, particularly in
T_H₂ cells, whereas RLK expression rapidly drops and
is re-established only in T_H₁ cells³⁰. TEC expression
increases after several days of T-cell stimulation³¹.
There is evidence indicating that all three of these
kinases function downstream of TCR signalling.

**Phospholipase C-γ activation and gene transcription.**
Engagement of the TCR by peptide–MHC complexes,
in conjunction with interaction with co-stimulatory
molecules at the cell surface of antigen-presenting cells
(APCs), leads to rapid activation of the SRC-family
kinase LCK, phosphorylation of the ζ-chain of the TCR-
proximal signalling molecule CD3, and recruitment
and activation of the protein kinase ZAP70 (ζ-chain-
associated protein kinase of 70 kDa) and of PI3K³²,³³
(FIG. 2). ZAP70 then phosphorylates the adaptors LAT
(linker for activation of T cells) and SLP76 (SH2-
domain-containing leukocyte protein of 76 kDa),
which together function as a platform for the recruitment
of several key signalling molecules, including
the enzyme phospholipase C-γ (PLC-γ), the adaptors
GRB2 (growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2), NCK
(non-catalytic region of tyrosine kinase) and ADAP
(adhesion- and degranulation-promoting adaptor
protein), and the guanine nucleotide-exchange factor
VAV1. This TCR-signalling complex is crucial for
downstream effector functions, including mobilization
of Ca²⁺, activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPKs) and downstream transcription factors, and
regulation of the actin cytoskeleton³³ (FIGS 2,3).

TEC kinases are activated through phosphorylation by SRC-family kinases, such as LCK, and recruitment
to the plasma membrane through binding of
PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃, where they are brought into TCR-
signalling complexes through interactions with SLP76,

Figure 1 | **Structure and activation of TEC-family kinases.** A | The five TEC-family kinases are depicted by a schematic that shows their structural domains. TEC kinases expressed by T cells are indicated in bold. The proline residue at position 287 (P287) is unique to ITK (interleukin-2-inducible T-cell kinase) and is targeted by the peptidylprolyl isomerase cyclophilin A. B | After T-cell receptor (TCR) engagement, ITK and TEC are recruited to the plasma membrane through interaction of their pleckstrin homology (PH) domain with phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃), which is generated from phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P₂) by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). SHIP (SRC homology 2 (SH2)-domain-containing inositol-5-phosphatase) and PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homologue) can reduce the levels of PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃, thereby decreasing membrane association and activation of certain TEC kinases. RLK (resting lymphocyte kinase) is constitutively associated with membranes because it contains a palmitoylated cysteine-string motif (a). SRC-family kinases (such as LCK) phosphorylate a tyrosine residue in the kinase domain of ITK, RLK and TEC (b). Changes in the conformation of ITK promote the formation of a complex between LAT (linker for activation of T cells), SLP76 (SH2-domain-containing leukocyte protein of 76 kDa) and GADS (growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2 (GRB2)-related adaptor protein) that allows activation of downstream effectors (c). BH, BTK homology; BMX, bone-marrow tyrosine kinase gene on chromosome X; BTK, Bruton’s tyrosine kinase; Cys, cysteine-string motif; PRR, proline-rich region; TH, TEC homology.

LAT and other molecules<sup>34–37</sup>. Early data showed a role for TEC kinases in antigen-receptor-induced phosphorylation and activation of PLC-γ<sup>9,10,38,39</sup>. PLC-γ is an enzyme that catalyses phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P₂) catabolism to generate both inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (Ins(1,4,5)P₃), which is required for Ca²⁺ mobilization, and diacylglycerol, which activates diacylglycerol-binding proteins such as protein kinase C (PKC) and RASGRP (RAS guanyl-releasing protein), which are important for activating MAPKs, as well as the downstream transcription factor AP1 (activator protein 1) and other effectors. Together, these signalling intermediates are crucial for the production of cytokines and the expression of activation markers by T cells<sup>40</sup>. Accordingly, T cells from mice that are deficient in TEC kinases show defective phosphorylation of PLC-γ, production of Ins(1,4,5)P₃, influx of Ca²⁺ and activation of the Ca²⁺-sensitive transcription factors

NFATc1 (nuclear factor of activated T cells, cytoplasmic, calcineurin-dependent 1) and NFATc2 (REFS 9–11,15) (TABLE 1). Impaired activation of the MAPKs ERK (extracellular-signal-regulated kinase) and JNK (JUN amino-terminal kinase) and of the transcription factor AP1 are also observed in these T cells<sup>15,16</sup> (TABLE 1; FIG. 2).

Consistent with the expression patterns of TEC kinases, mice deficient in ITK show moderately severe defects in T-cell function, whereas relatively minor defects are observed in RLK-deficient mice; so far, there are no reported T-cell defects in TEC-deficient mice<sup>10,41</sup> (TABLE 1). Combined disruption of ITK and RLK leads to more severe biochemical and cellular defects than does ITK deficiency alone, indicating that there might be some degree of redundancy between these two kinases, despite their structural differences<sup>10,42</sup>. Stimulation through the TCR of ITK-deficient T cells or T cells deficient in both RLK and ITK leads to graded defects in

T-HELPER-2-CELL RESPONSES  
(Tₕ₂-cell responses). There are two main effector subsets of CD4⁺ T cells, which are characterized by distinct cytokine profiles and by functional activity. Tₕ₂ cells produce interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5, IL-9, IL-10 and IL-13, leading to activation of humoral immune responses. By contrast, Tₕ₁ cells produce interferon-γ, IL-2 and lymphotoxin, which support cell-mediated immunity. Appropriate differentiation of T cells into these subsets is important for mounting immune responses to different pathogens, whereas an imbalance between these subsets is associated with diseases, including asthma, hypersensitivity and autoimmune disorders.

ATOPIC DERMATITIS  
A disease that is characterized by a scaly, itchy rash that is caused by inflammation of the skin and by increased production of T-helper-2 cytokines.

PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL-3,4,5-TRISPHOSPHATE  
(PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃). A product of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, which adds a phosphate group to phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P₂) to yield PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃. PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ binds pleckstrin-homology-domain-containing proteins, resulting in membrane recruitment of these proteins and initiation of signalling cascades.

PLECKSTRIN-HOMOLOGY DOMAIN  
A protein-lipid interaction domain that usually consists of 100 amino-acid residues. Pleckstrin-homology domains have little overall sequence homology but have conserved motifs and tertiary structure. They are thought to be involved in anchoring of proteins to the membrane and have been found to bind the following: phospholipids (including phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate and phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate), proteins (including the β and γ subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins), phosphorylated serine or threonine residues, and membranes.

Figure 2 | **TEC-family kinases in T-cell-receptor-signalling pathways**. TEC-family kinases have a central role in the propagation of the signal induced by engagement of the T-cell receptor (TCR). ITK (interleukin-2-inducible T-cell kinase) forms a complex with several signalling molecules that are nucleated by the adaptors LAT (linker for activation of T cells) and SLP76 (SRC-homology-2-domain-containing leukocyte protein of 76 kDa). Activation of phospholipase C-γ (PLC-γ) by ITK leads to the generation of inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (Ins(1,4,5)P₃) (which is required for Ca²⁺ flux within the cell) and diacylglycerol (DAG) (which activates members of the protein kinase C (PKC) family and RAS guanyl-releasing protein, RASGRP). This results in the downstream activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases — such as JNK (JUN amino-terminal kinase), ERK1 (extracellular-signal-regulated kinase 1) and ERK2 — and other effectors that direct gene transcription. In addition to activation by DAG, PKC-θ is activated through a VAV1- and RAC-mediated pathway. The LAT-SLP76 complex also functions as a platform for the accumulation of molecules — including VAV1, RAC, CDC42 (cell-division cycle 42), WASP (Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein), ARP2 (actin-related protein 2 homologue) and ARP3 — that regulate the polymerization of F-actin. These molecules, together with other downstream effectors, control TCR-mediated T-cell polarization, adhesion and migration. ADAP, adhesion- and degranulation-promoting adaptor protein; AP1, activator protein 1; GADS, GRB2-related adaptor protein; GRB2, growth-factor-receptor-bound protein 2; IκB, inhibitor of NF-κB; NCK, non-catalytic region of tyrosine kinase; NFAT, nuclear factor of activated T cells; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃, phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate; PtdIns(4,5)P₂, phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate; SOS, son of sevenless homologue; ZAP70, ζ-chain-associated protein kinase of 70 kDa.

now indicate that TEC kinases also contribute to  
TCR-induced actin rearrangement. ITK-deficient  
T cells have reduced F-actin polarization after TCR  
stimulation^{12,13}. This phenotype is recapitulated in  
both human peripheral-blood T cells and cells of the  
Jurkat T-cell line that are treated with SMALL INTERFERING  
RNA (siRNA) directed against ITK^{50}. Intriguingly, regulation  
of the actin cytoskeleton might not require the  
kinase activity of ITK; kinase-dead mutants fail to  
block actin polarization and can rescue actin defects in  
cells treated with siRNA directed against ITK^{13,50,51}.  
Instead, defects in actin polarization in ITK-deficient  
cells correlate with defective recruitment of VAV1 to the  
site of TCR stimulation^{12,50} and with impaired association  
of VAV1 with SLP76 (REF. 50), despite relatively normal  
tyrosine phosphorylation of VAV1 (REF. 52). These  
results indicate that ITK might be required to stabilize  
the interactions of VAV1 in TCR-signalling complexes.  
Importantly, expression of a prenylated, constitutively  
membrane-targeted mutant of VAV1 rescues the actin-  
polarization defect in cells treated with siRNA directed  
against ITK^{50}, supporting the idea that VAV1 is an  
important contributor to this phenotype. However, it  
should be noted that ITK activation is also impaired in  
VAV1-deficient cells, owing to decreased PI3K activity^{53}, which underscores the extent of cross-regulation  
between molecules in these signalling complexes.

Consistent with these observations, many of the  
biochemical and cellular defects in *Itk*^−/−^ and *Rlk*^−/−^*Itk*^−/−^  
T cells, although less severe, resemble those of cells that  
lack VAV1 (TABLE 1). Both *Itk*^−/−^ and *Vav1*^−/−^ T cells show  
relatively normal gross patterns of early TCR-induced  
tyrosine phosphorylation, yet they have decreased  
activation of PLC-γ, ERK and downstream transcription  
factors^{9–11,15,46,54,55}. VAV1 deficiency prevents activation  
of the RHO-family GTPases RAC1 and CDC42 (REFS 53,56). Similarly, a defect in localized activation of  
CDC42 is observed in *Itk*^−/−^ and *Rlk*^−/−^*Itk*^−/−^ T cells stimulated with peptide-loaded APCs^{12}. *Vav1*^−/−^ T cells also show defective cell adhesion, which correlates with impaired clustering of the integrin LFA1 (lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1) to the site of TCR stimulation^{57}. Similarly, mutations that affect ITK block  
TCR-mediated activation of β~1~- and β~2~-integrin adhesion and recruitment of LFA1 to the site of TCR stimulation (REF. 14, and L.D.F. and P.L.S., unpublished observations). Finally, VAV1 and RAC1 are required for recruitment of PKC-θ, a key marker of the immunological synapse^{58}. Defective recruitment of PKC-θ is also observed in *Itk*^−/−^ and *Rlk*^−/−^*Itk*^−/−^ T cells stimulated with TCR-specific-antibody-coated beads (L.D.F. and P.L.S., unpublished observations), highlighting the similarities between the phenotypes of T cells deficient in TEC kinases and VAV1. ITK, therefore, seems to be a crucial component of pathways that are required for the reorganization of actin, the induction of cell polarization and the recruitment of molecules to the immunological synapse (including PKC-θ and LFA1, a key adhesion molecule that helps to stabilize contacts with the APC), leading to productive T-cell activation.


Figure 3 | T-cell receptors and chemokine receptors signal through TEC-family  
kinases. After engagement of the T-cell receptor (TCR) or chemokine receptors, TEC-family  
kinases are recruited to the membrane and become activated. Subsequently, many signalling  
molecules take part in downstream pathways that lead to actin reorganization, adhesion,  
migration, Ca^2+^ mobilization and gene expression. These downstream effects are interrelated  
in that migration, adhesion and gene expression all depend on VAV1 and on proper  
reorganization of actin in the cell. Similarly, Ca^2+^ mobilization regulates both adhesion and  
gene expression. DAG, diacylglycerol; Ins(1,4,5)P~3~, inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate; PKC, protein  
kinase C; PLC-γ, phospholipase C-γ; ZAP70, ζ-chain-associated protein kinase of 70 kDa.


TCR-induced proliferation and IL-2 production,  
impaired immunity to infection with *Toxoplasma gondii*  
and reduced ACTIVATION-INDUCED CELL DEATH (AICD), implicating these kinases in the regulation of immune  
responses^{8–10,16}.


SH3  
(SRC homology 3). A protein-  
interaction domain that is  
commonly found in signal-  
transduction molecules. It  
specifically interacts with  
certain proline-containing  
peptides (containing either  
(R/K)XXPXXP or PXXPR  
motifs, where X denotes any  
amino acid) to facilitate protein-  
protein interactions that are  
required for protein function  
or subcellular localization.


SH2  
(SRC homology 2). A protein-  
interaction domain that is  
commonly found in signal-  
transduction molecules.  
It specifically interacts with  
phosphotyrosine-containing  
peptides.


Actin reorganization. When T cells are stimulated by  
APCs, they become rapidly polarized, with recruitment  
of F-actin and signalling molecules to the site of TCR  
stimulation, where these molecules are organized into a  
structure known as the immunological synapse^{43,44}.  
Although the function of the immunological synapse is  
not well understood, one proposed function is to stabilize  
T-cell interactions with APCs through recruitment of  
signalling molecules, and integrins and other adhesion  
molecules. TCR-induced rearrangement of the  
actin cytoskeleton is controlled, in part, by the guanine  
nucleotide-exchange factor VAV1, which is tyrosine  
phosphorylated during signalling through the TCR  
and, in turn, activates the RHO family of small GTPases  
— RAC, RHO and CDC42 (cell-division cycle 42) —  
which are crucial for actin reorganization^{45–49}.


Although TEC kinases are best recognized for their  
roles in PLC-γ regulation and Ca^2+^ mobilization, data

REVIEW S

Table 1 | T-cell defects in mice deficient in T-cell signalling proteins*

| Genotype | Defects in PLC-$\gamma$ activation | Defects in Ca$^{2+}$ flux | Defects in ERK activation | Defects in NFAT activation | Defects in IL-2 production | Defects in proliferation | Defects in actin polymerization | Defects in adhesion | Defects in chemokine responses | References |
|----------|-----------------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------|----------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------|----------------|-----------------------------|--------------|
| $Tec^{-/-}$ | ND | ND | ND | ND | No | No | ND | ND | ND | 41 |
| $Rlk^{-/-}$ | No | No | No | No | Yes (mild) | No | No | No$^{\dagger}$ | No | 10,12,15,60 |
| $Itk^{-/-}$ | Yes | Yes (moderate) | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes (moderate) | Yes | Yes$^{\dagger}$ | Yes | 8–13,15–17, 59,60 |
| $Rlk^{-/-}Itk^{-/-}$ | Yes | Yes (severe) | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes (severe) | Yes | Yes$^{\dagger}$ | Yes | 10,12,15,60 |
| $Vav1^{-/-}$ | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | Yes | No | 46–49,55, 57,85 |
| $Pkc-\theta^{-/-}$ | Yes | Yes | No | Yes/No | Yes | Yes | Yes | ND | ND | 83,84 |
| $LAT^{Y136F}$ | Yes | Yes | No | ND | Yes | ND | ND | ND | ND | 102,103 |

*Modified with permission from REF. 7 © (2005) Annual Reviews. †L.D.F. and P.L.S., unpublished observations. ERK, extracellular-signal-regulated kinase; IL-2, interleukin-2; $Itk$, IL-2-inducible T-cell kinase; $LAT^{Y136F}$, linker for activation of T cells mutant in which tyrosine is replaced by phenylalanine at position 136; ND, not determined; NFAT, nuclear factor of activated T cells; $Pkc-\theta$, protein kinase C-$\theta$; PLC-$\gamma$, phospholipase C-$\gamma$; $Rlk$, resting lymphocyte kinase.

Chemokine-mediated signalling. Recent data from several cell types show that TEC kinases are also important for the actin reorganization that occurs after stimulation with CHEMOKINES, which interact with G-protein-coupled receptors to initiate cell polarization and migration. Treatment of several cell types with either the chemoattractant fMLP ($N$-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine) or chemokines, including CXC-chemokine ligand 12 (CXCL12; also known as SDF1$\alpha$), leads to membrane recruitment of multiple TEC kinases and to phosphorylation of ITK, TEC and RLK${}^{59-62}$. Moreover, T cells from $Itk^{-/-}$ and $Rlk^{-/-}Itk^{-/-}$ mice show defective actin polarization, adhesion and migration in response to many chemokines, including the widely expressed CXCL12 (REFS 59, 60). Importantly, $Itk^{-/-}$ mice have impaired T-cell recruitment to the lungs in response to inhaled CXCL12, confirming that these defects occur *in vivo*${}^{59}$. Furthermore, Jurkat T cells that express mutant versions of ITK show defective CXCL12-induced activation of CDC42 and RAC${}^{60}$. Therefore, TEC kinases influence actin reorganization and cell polarization downstream of both the TCR and chemokine receptors (FIG.3).

Consequences for T-cell function. As a result of these biochemical and cellular defects, T cells from $Itk^{-/-}$ and $Rlk^{-/-}Itk^{-/-}$ mice show multiple developmental and functional defects. These include impaired thymic selection (with decreased positive selection) ${}^{8,52,63}$, altered ratios of CD4$^{+}$ to CD8$^{+}$ T cells ${}^{10}$, and decreased proliferation of, and IL-2 production by, mature T cells ${}^{8,10,16}$. Many of these defects have previously been attributed to impaired TCR-mediated regulation of PLC-$\gamma$ and downstream transcription factors that are required for T-cell development and function. However, it should be noted that these phenotypes might also result from impaired actin polarization and integrin-mediated adhesion, which might decrease the duration of signalling in the immunological synapse.

Although ITK and RLK are important intermediates in T-cell signalling, it should also be noted that mutations of these TEC kinases do not completely block either TCR- or chemokine-receptor-mediated responses. Unlike mutations that affect the more proximal protein kinases LCK and ZAP70 or the adaptors LAT and SLP76 (REF. 33), mutations that affect TEC kinases do not prevent TCR signalling or T-cell development; instead, they alter functional outcomes. Whether these findings are solely a consequence of functional redundancy between the TEC kinases remains unclear. Nonetheless, these findings have given rise to the view that TEC kinases are modulators or amplifiers of T-cell signalling ${}^{42,64}$. The development of T cells in $Itk^{-/-}$ and $Rlk^{-/-}Itk^{-/-}$ mice has allowed the examination of mature T-cell function. Importantly, studies of T cells from these mice have revealed intriguing roles for TEC kinases in the regulation of T$_{H}$-cell differentiation.

RLK and ITK in T$_{H}$-cell differentiation After stimulation with antigen, naive CD4$^{+}$ T$_{H}$ cells differentiate into two distinct subsets — T$_{H}$1 and T$_{H}$2 cells — which are responsible for cell-mediated and humoral immune responses, respectively ${}^{65}$ (FIG. 4A). These subsets are defined mainly by their unique cytokine profiles. T$_{H}$1 cells express interferon-$\gamma$ (IFN-$\gamma$), IL-2 and lymphotoxin, whereas T$_{H}$2 cells produce IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, IL-10 and IL-13. The balance of these two subsets is crucial for proper immune responses to pathogens, and conversely, imbalances between these subsets have been associated with disease states, including autoimmunity (an excess of T$_{H}$1 cells) and hypersensitivity (an excess of T$_{H}$2 cells).

Two subset-specific transcription factors are known to be important for dictating T$_{H}$-cell lineage commitment ${}^{65}$. The transcription factor **T-bet** directs IFN-$\gamma$ expression by CD4$^{+}$ T cells and is required for differentiation into T$_{H}$1 cells. GATA-binding protein 3 (**GATA3**) is considered to be the master regulator of differentiation into T$_{H}$2 cells, as it is required to remodel chromatin at the locus that encodes IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13. Expression of these transcription factors is regulated by both cytokines and signals from the TCR.

How TCR signalling regulates T$_{H}$-cell differentiation remains poorly understood. Nonetheless, studies from many research groups have implicated several T-cell signalling molecules (including LCK, ERKs, JNKs and

A T-helper-cell development

Naive CD4<sup>+</sup>  
T<sub>H</sub> cell  

IL-12  
IFN-γ  
IL-18  
T-bet  

RLK  

T<sub>H</sub>1  

IFN-γ, IL-2  
and lymphotoxin  

IL-4  
GATA3  
MAF  

ITK  
NFATc1  
VAV1  
PKC-θ  

T<sub>H</sub>2  

IL-4, IL-5,  
IL-9, IL-10  
and IL-13  

B RLK overexpression

Naive CD4<sup>+</sup>  
T<sub>H</sub> cell  

IFN-γ↑  

RLK↑  

T<sub>H</sub>1  

ITK  

T<sub>H</sub>2  

C ITK deficiency

Naive CD4<sup>+</sup>  
T<sub>H</sub> cell  

T-bet↑  

RLK  

T<sub>H</sub>1  

T-bet?  

NFATc1↓  

T<sub>H</sub>2  

D RLK and ITK deficiency

Naive CD4<sup>+</sup>  
T<sub>H</sub> cell  

T-bet?  

NFATc1↓  

GATA3↑  
(Failure to  
repress)  

T<sub>H</sub>1  

T<sub>H</sub>2  

Figure 4 | RLK and ITK in T-helper-cell development. A | Multiple cytokines and transcription factors are involved in T helper (T<sub>H</sub>)-cell development. Polarizing cytokines are indicated in bold. RLK (resting lymphocyte kinase) and ITK (interleukin-2 (IL-2)-inducible T-cell kinase) have been implicated in differentiation into T<sub>H</sub>1 and T<sub>H</sub>2 cells, respectively. B | RLK overexpression increases interferon-γ (IFN-γ) production and shifts T cells towards T<sub>H</sub>1-cell development. C | ITK deficiency results in defective NFATc1 (nuclear factor of activated T cells, cytoplasmic, calcineurin-dependent 1) activation, increased T-bet expression and an inability to mount an effective T<sub>H</sub>2-cell response. D | Deficiency in both RLK and ITK leads not only to defective NFATc1 activation but also to increased GATA3 (GATA-binding protein 3) levels, owing to a failure to repress GATA3 expression transiently after signalling through the T-cell receptor. T<sub>H</sub>2-cell responses remain intact, but these mice fail to mount an effective T<sub>H</sub>1-cell response. The effect of this double mutation on T-bet expression is unknown at present. Dashed lines indicate a defective pathway. Bold lines indicate exaggerated differentiation. PKC-θ, protein kinase C-θ.

PKC-θ) and TCR-ligation-induced transcription factors (including NFATs and AP1) in the regulation of T<sub>H</sub>-cell-subset polarization<sup>66</sup>. Given the role of TEC kinases in TCR-signalling pathways, it is not surprising that TEC kinases are implicated in the regulation of T<sub>H</sub>1 and T<sub>H</sub>2 cells. Intriguingly, data indicate that RLK and ITK might have distinct roles in these pathways (FIG. 4).

**RLK and T<sub>H</sub>1 cells.** Initial studies of RLK in mice showed preferential expression of RLK by T<sub>H</sub>1-cell clones compared with T<sub>H</sub>2-cell clones<sup>67</sup>, findings that were later confirmed in primary CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells cultured under T<sub>H</sub>1- or T<sub>H</sub>2-cell-skewing conditions<sup>30</sup>. Although mRNA encoding RLK is rapidly downregulated after TCR stimulation, Rlk mRNA and RLK protein are re-expressed by T<sub>H</sub>1 cells but not by T<sub>H</sub>2 cells<sup>30</sup>. Furthermore, TXK, the human homologue of RLK, is found in human T<sub>H</sub>1 cells but not T<sub>H</sub>2 cells<sup>68</sup>.

The link between RLK and T<sub>H</sub>1-cell function was strengthened by a study showing that overexpression of human RLK by Jurkat T cells resulted in increased production of IFN-γ, whereas IL-2 and IL-4 levels remained unchanged<sup>68</sup> (FIG. 4B). Conversely, treatment

of human peripheral-blood T cells with ANTISENSE OLIGONUCLEOTIDES directed against RLK decreased IFN-γ expression without altering levels of IL-2 and IL-4.

Studies of RLK localization have shown that antigen-receptor stimulation leads to nuclear translocation of a high proportion of intracellular RLK molecules<sup>24</sup>. It is now recognized that a small proportion of ITK and BTK molecules also traffic to the nucleus, implying that TEC kinases might have direct nuclear effects<sup>69,70</sup>. Intriguingly, nuclear translocation of RLK was required for the induction of IFN-γ production<sup>68</sup>, indicating that RLK might be directly involved in transcriptional control of the gene encoding IFN-γ. Indeed, RLK binds a region (−53 to −39 base pairs) upstream of the transcriptional start site of the IFN-γ gene<sup>71</sup>. This DNA element is also found in the promoters of the CC-chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) gene and the tumour-necrosis-factor gene, two T<sub>H</sub>1-cell-associated genes, to which RLK also specifically binds.

As an extension of these studies, RLK was overexpressed in mice by intravenous administration of an RLK-encoding plasmid<sup>72</sup>. Splenic T cells from these mice showed increased antigen-specific IFN-γ production,

ANTISENSE OLIGONUCLEOTIDES  
Short, gene-specific sequences  
of nucleic acids that are of the  
opposite strand (complementary)  
to the targeted mRNA. Classical  
antisense oligonucleotides target  
specific strands of RNA within a  
cell, thereby preventing  
translation of these RNAs.

again without any change in IL-2 or IL-4 expression. In addition, reductions in the level of serum IgE and the ratio of the IL-4-induced immunoglobulin isotype IgG1 to the IFN-γ-induced isotype IgG2a were observed. So, *in vivo* overexpression of RLK led to a shift towards a T<sub>H</sub>1-cell profile (FIG. 4B).

Nonetheless, RLK-deficient mice show only minor defects in responses to *T. gondii*, a strong T<sub>H</sub>1-cell-inducing pathogen, and they have relatively normal T<sub>H</sub>1-cell cytokine production^{10,15}. These differences could result from compensatory mechanisms that might occur in *Rlk*<sup>−/−</sup> mice. Alternatively, results from the transfection studies discussed might not be specific, because the effects on overexpression or inhibition of other protein kinases were not examined in these experiments. The effects on RLK on T<sub>H</sub>-cell differentiation into T<sub>H</sub>1 cells therefore require further evaluation.

**ITK and T<sub>H</sub>2 cells.** In contrast to RLK, which is not expressed by T<sub>H</sub>2 cells, *Itk* mRNA and ITK protein expression are increased during differentiation into T<sub>H</sub>2 cells compared with the levels in naive T cells^{30}. Analysis of the *Itk* promoter region revealed several binding sites for the T<sub>H</sub>2-cell transcription factor GATA3, and these sites are absent in the *Rlk* promoter^{30}. These two TEC kinases therefore have distinct patterns of expression in T<sub>H</sub> cells.

A role for ITK in differentiation into T<sub>H</sub>2 cells is strongly supported by studies of ITK-deficient mice. Naive ITK-deficient CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells have decreased production of IL-4 (REFS 11,30). Indeed, under conditions of low antigen dose or stimulation with ALTERED PEPTIDE LIGANDS, which normally induce IL-4 production, *Itk*<sup>−/−</sup> T cells produce IFN-γ instead^{30} (FIG. 4C). IL-4 expression was restored by retroviral expression of ITK in ITK-deficient T cells, indicating that the defect in cytokine production is not secondary to altered development of ITK-deficient T cells^{11}.

Importantly, *Itk*<sup>−/−</sup> mice cannot mount effective T<sub>H</sub>2-cell responses to infection with many pathogens that are used to evaluate T<sub>H</sub>2-cell differentiation, including *Nippostrongylus brasiliensis*, *Schistosoma mansoni* and *Leishmania major*^{11,15}. For infection with *L. major*, the type of immune response generated depends on the genetic background of the mice^{73}. Wild-type C57BL/6 mice produce T<sub>H</sub>1 cytokines and heal *L. major* lesions, whereas wild-type BALB/c mice have non-healing responses to infection with *L. major* that are associated with T<sub>H</sub>2-cytokine production. For ITK-deficient mice on the C57BL/6 background, the development of T<sub>H</sub>1-cell responses to *L. major* remained intact^{11}. By contrast, on the BALB/c background, T cells from *Itk*<sup>−/−</sup> mice produced T<sub>H</sub>1 cytokines rather than T<sub>H</sub>2 cytokines in response to infection with *L. major*^{11}, which parallels findings in cell culture^{30}. Similar results were seen for infection with *S. mansoni*^{15}.

T<sub>H</sub>2-cell responses have been implicated in the pathology of allergic asthma, which is characterized by an increased number of T<sub>H</sub>2 cells in the lungs, increased T<sub>H</sub>2-cytokine production, increased mucus production in the lungs and inflammation of the airways^{74}. In a mouse model of allergic asthma, *Itk*<sup>−/−</sup> mice have decreased IL-5 and IL-13 production, as well as reduced mucus production and T-cell infiltration in the lungs^{17}. These findings indicate that ITK is a potential therapeutic target for asthma, an idea that has been supported by studies using two novel compounds that selectively inhibit the protein-kinase activity of ITK^{19}. These inhibitors recapitulate the signalling defects that are observed for ITK-deficient T cells, including decreased tyrosine phosphorylation of PLC-γ and decreased mobilization of Ca<sup>2+</sup>, and one of these inhibitors significantly decreases the inflammation of the lungs that is observed after induction of allergic asthma.

Consistent with a role for ITK in allergic responses, increased ITK expression has been seen in peripheral-blood T cells from humans with atopic dermatitis^{18}. Additional evidence that overactivation of ITK might be associated with increased T<sub>H</sub>2-cell responses comes from mice deficient in cyclophilin A (CYPA). These mice spontaneously develop allergic disease that is driven by T<sub>H</sub>2 cells, with concomitant increases in serum IgE levels and tissue infiltration by mast cells and eosinophils^{29}. CYPA catalyses the isomerization of the proline residue at position 287 of ITK, which alters the conformation of the SH2 domain, promoting ITK dimerization and effectively decreasing ITK protein-kinase activity^{27}. Although ITK activity was not examined in CYPA-deficient T cells, it would be predicted to be increased, leading to T<sub>H</sub>2-cell-subset polarization. Indeed, T<sub>H</sub>2 cells from these mice are hypersensitive to TCR stimulation, indicating that CYPA normally represses TCR signalling. CYPA-mediated regulation is unique to ITK, as other TEC kinases lack a homologous proline residue.

**How does ITK affect T<sub>H</sub>2-cell responses?** Despite strong evidence that ITK deficiency impairs T<sub>H</sub>2-cell responses, the mechanisms by which ITK controls these responses are poorly understood. The observation that transfer of ITK-deficient CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells to recombination-activating gene (RAG)-deficient hosts recapitulates the T<sub>H</sub>2-cell defects indicates that the functions of ITK are at least partially intrinsic to T cells^{11,15}. It is therefore notable that T cells from mice that lack other T-cell signalling proteins, including VAV1 and PKC-θ, also show markedly decreased levels of IL-4 production and diminished T<sub>H</sub>2-cell responses (REFS 75–77, and A. Altman, personal communication) (TABLE 2). Intriguingly, ITK, VAV1 and PKC-θ seem to be linked in TCR-signalling pathways. ITK and VAV1 regulate each other and are both required for cell polarization and recruitment of PKC-θ to the site of TCR stimulation (REFS 12,48–50,57,58, and I.D.F. and P.L.S., unpublished observations). Moreover, mature T cells that lack CD4, which also show defective T<sub>H</sub>2-cytokine production^{78–80}, have defective immunological-synapse formation and PKC-θ recruitment^{81,82}. Together, these phenotypic similarities raise the possibility that a pathway involving ITK, VAV1 and PKC-θ is crucial for T<sub>H</sub>2-cell development, in which recruitment of PKC-θ is a common requirement for T<sub>H</sub>2-cell responses.

ALTERED PEPTIDE LIGANDS

Analogues that are derived from the original antigenic peptide. They commonly have amino-acid substitutions at T-cell receptor (TCR)-contact residues. TCR engagement by these altered peptide ligands usually leads to partial or incomplete T-cell activation. Some of these altered peptide ligands (antagonists) can specifically antagonize and inhibit T-cell activation that is induced by the wild-type antigenic peptide.

Table 2 | Functional phenotypes of mice deficient in T-cell signalling proteins*

| Genotype       | Defects in thymocyte development* | Defects in T$_H$2-cell responses | Changes in cytokine production | Increase in serum IgG1 or IgE levels | Eosinophilia | Defects in NKT-cell development | CD4$^+$ T cells with activated phenotype | Defects in AICD | References |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|--------------|------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|----------------|------------|
| $Itk^{-/-}$     | Yes                               | Yes                              | ↓IL-2, IL-4 and possibly IFN-$\gamma$$^S$ | IgG1: small<br>IgE: 5-fold           | Yes (mild)   | Yes                                | Yes                                       | Yes            | 8,10,11,15–17,30,52,63,105 |
| $Rlk^{-/-}Itk^{-/-}$ | Yes                             | No                               | Many are defective                | IgG1: 5-fold<br>IgE: 20-fold          | ND           | ND                                 | Yes                                       | Yes            | 10,15,52   |
| $Vav1^{-/-}$    | Yes                               | Yes$^{II}$                       | ↓IL-2 and IL-4$^{II}$             | ND                                  | ND           | Yes                                | ND                                        | ND             | 46,107,119 |
| $Pkc-\theta^{-/-}$ | No                              | Yes                              | ↓IL-2 and IL-4                    | ND                                  | ND           | Yes                                | ND                                        | ND             | 75,77,83,84,106 |
| $Nfatc1^{-/-}$  | Yes                              | ND                               | ↓IL-4 and IL-6                    | No                                  | No           | ND                                 | No                                        | No             | 66,87,88   |
| $Nfatc2^{-/-}$  | No                               | No, increased                    | ↑IL-4                             | Both increased                      | Yes          | ND                                 | Yes                                       | Yes            | 66,98,99   |
| $Nfatc3^{-/-}$  | Yes                              | ND                               | No$^I$                            | No                                  | ND           | ND                                 | Yes                                       | No, increased   | 66,97      |
| $Nfatc1^{-/-}$<br>$Nfatc2^{-/-}$ | ND                  | ND                               | Many are defective                | IgG1: 10-fold<br>IgE: 500-fold        | ND           | ND                                 | Yes                                       | Yes            | 66,101     |
| $Nfatc2^{-/-}$<br>$Nfatc3^{-/-}$ | ND                  | No, increased                    | ↑T$_H$2 cytokines                 | IgG1: 400-fold<br>IgE: 5,000-fold     | Yes          | ND                                 | Yes                                       | Yes            | 66,97      |
| $LAT^{Y136F}$   | Yes                              | No, increased                    | ↓IL-2 and ↑IL-4                   | IgG1: 200-fold<br>IgE: 10,000-fold    | Yes          | ND                                 | Yes                                       | Yes            | 102,103    |

*Modified with permission from REF. 7 © (2005) Annual Reviews. †Defects in thymocyte cellularity and/or repertoire selection. $^S$Normal levels of interferon-$\gamma$ (IFN-$\gamma$) were observed in certain studies$^{11,30}$. $^{II}$A. Altmon, personal communication. $^I$Despite this, a constitutively active $Nfatc3$ (nuclear factor of activated T cells, cytoplasmic, calcineurin-dependent 3) transgene expressed by T cells blocks production of T helper 2 (T$_H$2) cytokines. AICD, activation-induced cell death; IL, interleukin; $Itk$, IL-2-inducible T-cell kinase; $LAT^{Y136F}$, linker for activation of T cells mutant in which tyrosine is replaced by phenylalanine at position 136; ND, not determined; NKT, natural killer T; $Pkc-\theta$, protein kinase C-$\theta$; $Rlk$, resting lymphocyte kinase.
background further confound this issue. When RLK is expressed under the control of the $Cd2$ promoter in T cells of $Itk^{-/-}$ mice, TCR-stimulated $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ mobilization is improved ${ }^{91}$, and defective responses to infection with S. mansoni are rescued (A. Venegas and P.L.S., unpublished observations). RLK therefore compensates for the lack of ITK in promoting an effective $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell response, contradicting the idea that RLK specifically drives $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 1$-cell development. Instead, this finding might support the idea that differential expression of RLK and ITK in $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}}$-cell lineages contributes to the requirement for ITK in $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell responses. In the context of ITK deficiency, perhaps any TEC kinase can restore the normal balance of $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}}$ cells if it is ectopically expressed at high enough levels in developing $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$ cells. Such data also raise the question of whether ITK is required for differentiation into the $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell lineage or for survival or clonal expansion of $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$ cells.

Signal strength dictates $T_{H}$-cell development: GATA3 regulation. Another explanation for the restoration of $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell responses in $R l k^{-/-} I t k^{-/-}$ mice derives from their more severe T-cell-signalling defects. Although correlations between signal strength and $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}}$-cell development remain controversial, studies based on the stimulation of T cells with low antigen doses or altered peptide ligands indicate that weak signals preferentially lead to $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell development ${ }^{92-94}$. $R l k^{-/-} I t k^{-/-}$ mice might mount a $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell response specifically because of the weak or decreased duration of signalling that occurs downstream of their TCR. But, how might this occur?

Wild-type naive T cells express a low level of GATA3, which is transiently downregulated after T-cell activation. Although the mechanism of GATA3 repression is unclear, such repression might allow activated T cells to develop into either $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}}$-cell lineage. Consistent with the idea that impaired TCR signalling leads to differentiation into $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$ cells, $R l k^{-/-} I t k^{-/-}$ T cells have defective TCR-stimulated repression of GATA3 (REF. 15), which might drive $R l k^{-/-} I t k^{-/-}$ T cells towards a $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell pathway. Intriguingly, repression of GATA3 in $R l k^{-/-} I t k^{-/-}$ T cells is restored by treatment with CD3-specific antibody together with PMA (phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate) ${ }^{15}$. Recent data show that the development of IL-4-producing cells in response to altered peptide ligands results from attenuated ERK activation and

altered AP1 complexes ${ }^{95}$. Because, in T cells, PMA activates ERK through RASGRP ${ }^{96}$, it is possible that reduced ERK activation contributes to the abnormal GATA3 regulation and the $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell development seen in $R l k^{-/-} I t k^{-/-}$ mice. The effects of PMA on cytokine production by $R l k^{-/-} I t k^{-/-}$ T cells have not yet been examined.

**Effects of impaired NFAT activation.** Altered NFAT activation might also contribute to the restoration of $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell responses in $R l k^{-/-} I t k^{-/-}$ mice. Whereas $N f a t c 1^{-/-}$ T cells fail to produce adequate levels of $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$ cytokines, T cells from mice that lack NFATc2 or both NFATc2 and NFATc3 show increased expression of cell-surface activation markers and increased $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell development, and these mice show eosinophilia and increased levels of IgE and IgG1 (REFS 97–99) (TABLE 2). Interestingly, excessive nuclear accumulation of NFATc1 occurs in T cells from mice that are deficient in both NFATc2 and NFATc3 (REF. 97). A recent study has shown that low-potency TCR signals induce higher nuclear levels of NFATc1 than NFATc2, indicating that this imbalance is the cause of polarization towards $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell development and transcription of $I l-4$ under these conditions ${ }^{100}$. Although this pattern of differential activation of NFAT-family members might not occur in $R l k^{-/-} I t k^{-/-}$ T cells ${ }^{15}$, these studies show the complex effects of NFAT-family members. Indeed, mice with haematopoietic cells deficient in NFATc1 and NFATc2 also show high levels of IgE and IgG1 in association with cell-surface markers of activated T cells, despite poor cytokine production by their T cells *in vitro* ${ }^{101}$ (TABLE 2).

The effects on $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}}$-cell development of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$-mobilization defects downstream of TCR signalling might therefore depend on the extent of the defect and the relative activation of distinct NFAT-family members, with more severe $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$-mobilization defects predisposing cells to a $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$ phenotype. Supporting this view, spontaneous T-cell activation associated with $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cytokine production and high levels of serum IgE were reported for mice homozygous for a mutation that affects the tyrosine residue at position 136 of LAT (LAT ${ }^{\mathrm{Y} 136 \mathrm{~F}}$) ${ }^{102,103}$ (TABLE 2). This mutation specifically affects PLC-$\gamma 1$ binding, and T cells from LAT ${ }^{\mathrm{Y} 136 \mathrm{~F}}$ mice have severely impaired TCR-stimulated $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ mobilization ${ }^{103}$.

Such results indicate that there might be a continuum of signals that helps to regulate $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}}$-cell development by contributing to the balance of activation and repression of multiple transcription factors, depending on the stimulus. Indeed, although ITK-deficient animals fail to mount effective $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell responses to infection, uninfected $I t k^{-/-}$ mice have increased IgE levels ${ }^{15}$, which implies a $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell bias. A recent report shows that ITK phosphorylates T-bet on the tyrosine residue at position 525, promoting an interaction between T-bet and GATA3 that reduces GATA3 DNA binding and represses $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell development ${ }^{104}$. Although these data are difficult to reconcile with the $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell defects in $I t k^{-/-}$ animals, they might account for the $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell bias of naive $I t k^{-/-}$ mice. Whether similar $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$-cell biases and altered cytokine patterns are present in naive $V a v 1^{-/-}$ and $P k c-\theta^{-/-}$ mice is unknown.

---

**Box 1 | Mechanisms for $\mathbf{T}_{\mathbf{H}} 2$-cell development in $R l k^{-/-} I t k^{-/-}$ mice**

- Absence of both polarizing kinases allows differentiation into T helper 2 ($\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$) cells
- Differential expression of RLK (resting lymphocyte kinase) and ITK (interleukin-2-inducible T-cell kinase) in $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 1$ and $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$ cells
- Very low signals through the T-cell receptor preferentially lead to differentiation into $\mathrm{T}_{\mathrm{H}} 2$ cells, by affecting the mobilization of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$, the expression of GATA-binding protein 3 and the activation of nuclear factor of activated T cells
- Effects of other cell types (such as natural killer T cells, mast cells, eosinophils and basophils)
- Influence of other factors that affect T-cell function, including altered development, migration defects and co-stimulation
Other factors influencing $T_{H}$-cell development. Taken together, these studies emphasize the high degree of complexity in the pathways that regulate T$_{H}$1- and T$_{H}$2-cell polarization. Although we have mainly addressed biochemical T-cell-intrinsic signalling defects, it is still possible that other defects or effects on other cell types might contribute to the phenotypes of $Rlk^{-/-}Itk^{-/-}$ mice (BOX 1). ITK-, VAV1- and PKC-$\theta$-deficient mice all have abnormal development of natural killer T cells, which are responsible for IL-4 production early after infection ${ }^{105-107}$ (TABLE 2). These molecules are also all expressed by mast cells ${ }^{108-110}$, another important cell type that is involved in the development of asthma. The role of TEC kinases and other signalling molecules in eosinophils and basophils remains another unexplored area.

Within the T-cell compartment, other factors might also contribute to the T$_{H}$-cell phenotypes of mice that are deficient in TEC kinases (BOX 1). Both $Itk^{-/-}$ and $Rlk^{-/-}Itk^{-/-}$ T cells show abnormal expression of cell-surface markers of activation and impaired AICD ${ }^{10,16,28,63}$ (TABLE 2), which is indicative of altered development or homeostasis. Both $Itk^{-/-}$ and $Rlk^{-/-}Itk^{-/-}$ mice have impaired positive selection in the thymus. $Rlk^{-/-}Itk^{-/-}$ mice also show defective negative selection, and they can positively select potentially self-reactive cells that would normally be deleted ${ }^{52}$. The involvement of these altered cell populations in T$_{H}$2-cell responses remains to be evaluated.

Finally, other signalling pathways might also contribute to these phenotypes. Both ITK and TEC bind, and are activated by, CD28, an important co-stimulatory molecule that is required for differentiation into T$_{H}$2 cells ${ }^{111,112}$. However, both positive and negative effects of ITK have been reported, confounding interpretations of the requirement for ITK in signalling through CD28 (REFS 113,114). Other pathways that might contribute to altered T$_{H}$-cell phenotypes are those downstream of chemokine receptors. Impaired migration of $Itk^{-/-}$ T cells to the lungs has been observed in response to allergens ${ }^{17}$, perhaps secondary to defective T-cell polarization of actin and responses to chemokines. Clearly, further studies are required to fully understand the mechanisms by which TEC kinases and the signalling molecules that they interact with help to regulate T$_{H}$-cell differentiation.

Potential roles for TEC in T cells

Although TEC is expressed at low levels by resting T cells, TEC expression is upregulated after T-cell activation and is higher in T$_{H}$2 cells than in T$_{H}$1 cells ${ }^{31}$. This observation indicates that TEC might participate in effector T-cell function, and it raises the question of whether its presence allows the development of T$_{H}$2 cells in $Rlk^{-/-}Itk^{-/-}$ mice. Interestingly, TEC seems to have distinct localization and signalling attributes compared with other TEC kinases: TEC is localized in distinct punctate structures near the immunological synapse; overexpression of TEC, but not other TEC kinases, induces activation of NFAT and AP1 reporter genes; and only TEC is regulated by the SH2-domain-containing inositol phosphatases, SHIP1 and SHIP2 (REFS 21,31,115,116). TEC is also required for regulation of PLC-$\gamma$ downstream of PKC-$\theta$, and it is constitutively associated with PKC-$\theta$ in pre-activated T cells ${ }^{115}$. Although these data indicate that TEC might have a unique role in T cells, it remains to be determined whether TEC is involved in T$_{H}$-cell development.

### Concluding remarks

Given the complex nature of T$_{H}$-cell differentiation, the question remains whether TEC kinases are good therapeutic targets for diseases that are associated with imbalances in T$_{H}$-cell subsets. For RLK, the answer is unclear — although overexpression studies or studies using antisense oligonucleotides indicate a role for RLK as a T$_{H}$1-cell-inducing protein kinase, $Rlk^{-/-}$ animals fail to support these conclusions. Further analyses of the potential effects of RLK inhibition are required.

For several reasons, ITK, however, might be an ideal therapeutic target for T$_{H}$2-cell-mediated diseases, provided that the inhibitor has a high degree of specificity. First, if ITK is the main TEC kinase that is expressed by T$_{H}$2 cells and if it is required for formation or maintenance of these cells, then selective inhibition of ITK would specifically affect this T$_{H}$-cell lineage. Moreover, although mutations that affect ITK have relatively severe effects on TCR signalling *in vitro*, ITK-deficient mice have only minor defects in response to infection with viruses and have variable responses to infection with T$_{H}$1-cell-inducing pathogens ${ }^{10,11,117}$. By contrast, inhibition of other molecules that are implicated in T$_{H}$-cell cytokine production might have more severe effects on T-cell function, as shown by the marked immunosuppression that results from the inhibition of NFATs by cyclosporin ${ }^{118}$ and the more profound effects on T-cell development that are seen in VAV1-deficient animals ${ }^{119}$. So, although the TEC-family kinases were first appreciated because of the crucial role of BTK in B-cell development and function, the T-cell-specific TEC kinases have now emerged as important modulators of T-cell function that have exciting therapeutic potential for the regulation of polarized T-cell responses.

---

1. Thomas, J. D. *et al.* Colocalization of X-linked agammaglobulinemia and X-linked immunodeficiency genes. *Science* **261**, 355–358 (1993).
2. Tsukada, S. *et al.* Deficient expression of a B cell cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase in human X-linked agammaglobulinemia. *Cell* **72**, 279–290 (1993).
3. Vetrie, D. *et al.* The gene involved in X-linked agammaglobulinaemia is a member of the src family of protein tyrosine kinases. *Nature* **361**, 226–232 (1993).
4. Rawlings, D. J. *et al.* Mutation of unique region of Bruton's tyrosine kinase in immunodeficient XID mice. *Science* **261**, 358–361 (1993).
5. de Weers, M., Mensink, R. G., Kraakman, M. E., Schuurman, R. K. & Hendriks, R. W. Mutation analysis of the Bruton's tyrosine kinase gene in X-linked agammaglobulinemia: identification of a mutation which affects the same codon as is altered in immunodeficient xid mice. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* **3**, 161–166 (1994).
6. Smith, C. I. *et al.* The Tec family of cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases: mammalian Btk, Bmx, Itk, Tec, Txk and homologs in other species. *Bioessays* **23**, 436–446 (2001).
7. Berg, L. J., Finkelstein, L. D., Lucas, J. A. & Schwartzberg, P. L. Tec family kinases in T lymphocyte development and function. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **23**, 549–600 (2005).
8. Liao, X. C. & Littman, D. R. Altered T cell receptor signaling and disrupted T cell development in mice lacking Itk. *Immunity* **3**, 757–769 (1995).

NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group
VOLUME 5 | APRIL 2005 | 293

REVIEWs

9. Liu, K. Q., Bunnell, S. C., Gurniak, C. B. & Berg, L. J. T cell receptor-initiated calcium release is uncoupled from capacitative calcium entry in Itk-deficient T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* **187**, 1721–1727 (1998).  
This paper was the first to describe the Ca²⁺-mobilization defect after TCR stimulation of T cells from *Itk⁻/⁻* mice.

10. Schaeffer, E. M. *et al.* Requirement for Tec kinases Rlk and Itk in T cell receptor signaling and immunity. *Science* **284**, 638–641 (1999).  
This study shows that T cells from mice that are deficient in both RLK and ITK have more severe cellular defects than do ITK-deficient T cells, indicating that there is genetic redundancy between the TEC-family kinases.

11. Fowell, D. J. *et al.* Impaired NFATc translocation and failure of T~H~2 development in Itk-deficient CD4⁺ T cells. *Immunity* **11**, 399–409 (1999).  
This paper presents the initial finding of the importance of ITK for T~H~2-cell development.

12. Labno, C. M. *et al.* Itk functions to control actin polymerization at the immune synapse through localized activation of Cdc42 and WASP. *Curr. Biol.* **13**, 1619–1624 (2003).

13. Grasis, J. A., Browne, C. D. & Tsoukas, C. D. Inducible T cell tyrosine kinase regulates actin-dependent cytoskeletal events induced by the T cell antigen receptor. *J. Immunol.* **170**, 3971–3976 (2003).

14. Woods, M. L. *et al.* A novel function for the Tec family tyrosine kinase Itk in activation of β₁ integrins by the T-cell receptor. *EMBO J.* **20**, 1232–1244 (2001).  
References 12–14 show that both T cells deficient in ITK and T cells that express mutant versions of ITK have actin-polarization defects after TCR engagement. In addition, reference 12, together with reference 50, provides evidence for the altered localization of VAV1 in ITK-deficient cells.

15. Schaeffer, E. *et al.* Mutation of Tec family kinases alters T helper cell differentiation. *Nature Immunol.* **2**, 1183–1188 (2001).  
This paper shows that elimination of RLK on an *Itk⁻/⁻* background rescues the T~H~2-cell defects observed in *Itk⁻/⁻* T cells, highlighting the complexity of the effects of TEC-family kinases on T~H~-cell differentiation.

16. Miller, A. & Berg, L. Defective Fas ligand expression and activation-induced cell death in the absence of IL-2-inducible T cell kinase. *J. Immunol.* **168**, 2163–2172 (2002).

17. Mueller, C. & August, A. Attenuation of immunological symptoms of allergic asthma in mice lacking the tyrosine kinase Itk. *J. Immunol.* **170**, 5056–5063 (2003).  
This study shows that ITK is important for the pathology of allergic asthma, a T~H~2-cell-mediated response.

18. Matsumoto, Y. *et al.* Identification of highly expressed genes in peripheral blood T cells from patients with atopic dermatitis. *Int. Arch. Allergy Immunol.* **129**, 327–340 (2002).

19. Lin, T.-A. *et al.* Selective Itk inhibitors block T-cell activation and murine lung inflammation. *Biochemistry* **43**, 11056–11062 (2004).

20. Scharenberg, A. M. & Kinet, J. P. PtdIns-3,4,5-P₃: a regulatory nexus between tyrosine kinases and sustained calcium signals. *Cell* **94**, 5–8 (1998).

21. Tomlinson, M. G., Heath, V. L., Turck, C. W., Watson, S. P. & Weiss, A. SHIP family inositol phosphatases interact with and negatively regulate the Tec tyrosine kinase. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 55089–55096 (2004).

22. Shan, X. *et al.* Deficiency of PTEN in Jurkat T cells causes constitutive localization of Itk to the plasma membrane and hyperresponsiveness to CD3 stimulation. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **20**, 6945–6957 (2000).

23. August, A., Sadra, A., Dupont, B. & Hanafusa, H. Src-induced activation of inducible T cell kinase (ITK) requires phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase activity and the Pleckstrin homology domain of inducible T cell kinase. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **94**, 11227–11232 (1997).

24. Debnath, J. *et al.* *rlk/TXK* encodes two forms of a novel cysteine string tyrosine kinase activated by Src family kinases. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **19**, 1498–1507 (1999).

25. Chamorro, M. *et al.* Requirements for activation and RAFT localization of the T-lymphocyte kinase Rlk/Txk. *BMC Immunol.* **2**, 3 (2001).

26. Andreotti, A. H., Bunnell, S. C., Feng, S., Berg, L. J. & Schreiber, S. L. Intramolecular association of two domains in a Tec family tyrosine kinase influences binding of signaling proteins. *Nature* **385**, 93–97 (1997).

27. Brazin, K. N., Mallis, R. J., Fulton, D. B. & Andreotti, A. H. Regulation of the tyrosine kinase Itk by the peptidyl-prolyl isomerase cyclophilin A. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **99**, 1899–1904 (2002).

28. Lucas, J. A., Miller, A. T., Atherly, L. O. & Berg, L. J. The role of Tec family kinases in T cell development and function. *Immunol. Rev.* **191**, 119–138 (2003).

29. Colgan, J. *et al.* Cyclophilin A regulates TCR signal strength in CD4⁺ T cells via a proline-directed conformational switch in Itk. *Immunity* **21**, 189–201 (2004).

30. Miller, A. T., Wilcox, H. M., Lai, Z. & Berg, L. J. Signaling through Itk promotes T helper 2 differentiation via negative regulation of T-bet. *Immunity* **21**, 67–80 (2004).

31. Tomlinson, M. G. *et al.* Expression and function of Tec, Itk, and Btk in lymphocytes: evidence for a unique role for Tec. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **24**, 2455–2466 (2004).

32. Kane, L., Lin, J. & Weiss, A. Signal transduction by the TCR for antigen. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* **12**, 242–249 (2000).

33. Samelson, L. E. Signal transduction mediated by the T cell antigen receptor: the role of adapter proteins. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **20**, 371–394 (2002).

34. Bunnell, S. C. *et al.* Biochemical interactions integrating Itk with the T cell receptor-initiated signaling cascade. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 2219–2230 (2000).

35. Su, Y. W. *et al.* Interaction of SLP adaptors with the SH2 domain of Tec family kinases. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **29**, 3702–3711 (1999).

36. Ching, K. A. *et al.* TCR/CD3-induced activation and binding of Emt/Itk to linker of activated T cell complexes: requirement for the Src homology 2 domain. *J. Immunol.* **165**, 256–262 (2000).

37. Shan, X. & Wang, R. L. Itk/Emt/Tsk activation in response to CD3 cross-linking in Jurkat T cells requires ZAP-70 and Lat and is independent of membrane recruitment. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 29323–29330 (1999).

38. Takata, M. & Kurosaki, T. A role for Bruton’s tyrosine kinase in B cell antigen receptor-mediated activation of phospholipase C-γ2. *J. Exp. Med.* **184**, 31–40 (1996).

39. Fluckiger, A. C. *et al.* Btk/Tec kinases regulate sustained increases in intracellular Ca²⁺ following B-cell receptor activation. *EMBO J.* **17**, 1973–1985 (1998).

40. Noh, D. Y., Shin, S. H. & Rhee, S. G. Phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C and mitogenic signaling. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1242**, 99–113 (1995).

41. Ellmeier, W. *et al.* Severe B cell deficiency in mice lacking the Tec kinase family members Tec and Btk. *J. Exp. Med.* **192**, 1611–1624 (2000).

42. Schaeffer, E. M. & Schwartzberg, P. L. Tec family kinases in lymphocyte signaling and function. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* **12**, 282–288 (2000).

43. Kupfer, A. & Kupfer, H. Imaging immune cell interactions and functions: SMACs and the immunological synapse. *Semin. Immunol.* **15**, 295–300 (2003).

44. Cannon, J. L. & Burkhardt, J. The regulation of actin remodeling during T-cell–APC conjugate formation. *Immunol. Rev.* **186**, 90–96 (2002).

45. Bustelo, X. R. Vav proteins, adaptors and cell signaling. *Oncogene* **20**, 6372–6381 (2001).

46. Tybulewicz, V. L., Ardouin, L., Prisco, A. & Reynolds, L. F. Vav1: a key signal transducer downstream of the TCR. *Immunol. Rev.* **192**, 42–52 (2003).  
This paper provides an excellent review of the phenotypes of *Vav1⁻/⁻* mice.

47. Holsinger, L. J. *et al.* Defects in actin-cap formation in Vav-deficient mice implicate an actin requirement for lymphocyte signal transduction. *Curr. Biol.* **8**, 563–572 (1998).

48. Wulfing, C., Bauch, A., Crabtree, G. R. & Davis, M. M. The vav exchange factor is an essential regulator in actin-dependent receptor translocation to the lymphocyte–antigen-presenting cell interface. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **97**, 10150–10155 (2000).

49. Fischer, K. D. *et al.* Vav is a regulator of cytoskeletal reorganization mediated by the T-cell receptor. *Curr. Biol.* **8**, 554–562 (1998).

50. Dombroski, D. *et al.* Kinase-independent functions for Itk in the TCR-induced regulation of Vav and the actin cytoskeleton. *J. Immunol.* **174**, 1385–1392 (2005).

51. Donnadieu, E. *et al.* Differential roles of Lck and Itk in T cell response to antigen recognition revealed by calcium imaging and electron microscopy. *J. Immunol.* **166**, 5540–5549 (2001).

52. Schaeffer, E. M. *et al.* Tec family kinases modulate thresholds for thymocyte development and selection. *J. Exp. Med.* **192**, 987–1000 (2000).

53. Reynolds, L. F. *et al.* Vav1 transduces T cell receptor signals to the activation of phospholipase C-γ1 via phosphoinositide 3-kinase-dependent and -independent pathways. *J. Exp. Med.* **195**, 1103–1114 (2002).

54. Finkelstein, L. D. & Schwartzberg, P. L. Tec kinases: shaping T-cell activation through actin. *Trends Cell Biol.* **14**, 443–451 (2004).

55. Costello, P. S. *et al.* The Rho-family GTP exchange factor Vav is a critical transducer of T cell receptor signals to the calcium, ERK, and NF-κB pathways. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **96**, 3035–3040 (1999).

56. Zeng, R. *et al.* SLP-76 coordinates Nck-dependent Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein recruitment with Vav1/Cdc42-dependent Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein activation at the T cell–APC contact site. *J. Immunol.* **171**, 1360–1368 (2003).

57. Krawczyk, C. *et al.* Vav1 controls integrin clustering and MHC/peptide-specific cell adhesion to antigen-presenting cells. *Immunity* **16**, 331–343 (2002).

58. Villalba, M. *et al.* A novel functional interaction between Vav and PKCθ is required for TCR-induced T cell activation. *Immunity* **12**, 151–160 (2000).

59. Fischer, A. M., Mercer, J. C., Iyer, A., Ragin, M. J. & August, A. Regulation of CXCR4 mediated migration by the Tec family tyrosine kinase ITK. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 29816–29820 (2004).

60. Takesono, A., Horai, R., Mandai, M., Dombroski, D. & Schwartzberg, P. L. Requirement for Tec kinases in chemokine-induced migration and activation of Cdc42 and Rac. *Curr. Biol.* **14**, 917–922 (2004).

61. Nore, B. F. *et al.* Redistribution of Bruton’s tyrosine kinase by activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and Rho-family GTPases. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **30**, 145–154 (2000).

62. Lachance, G., Levasseur, S. & Naccache, P. H. Chemotactic factor-induced recruitment and activation of Tec family kinases in human neutrophils. Implication of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinases. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 21537–21541 (2002).

63. Lucas, J. A., Atherly, L. O. & Berg, L. J. The absence of Itk inhibits positive selection without changing lineage commitment. *J. Immunol.* **168**, 6142–6151 (2002).

64. August, A., Fischer, A., Hao, S., Mueller, C. & Ragin, M. The Tec family of tyrosine kinases in T cells, amplifiers of T cell receptor signals. *Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol.* **34**, 1184–1189 (2002).

65. Glimcher, L. H. & Murphy, K. M. Lineage commitment in the immune system: the T helper lymphocyte grows up. *Genes Dev.* **14**, 1693–1711 (2000).

66. Mowen, K. A. & Glimcher, L. H. Signaling pathways in T~H~2 development. *Immunol. Rev.* **202**, 203–222 (2004).  
This paper provides a comprehensive review of the effects of signalling molecules and transcription factors on T~H~2-cell differentiation, including a description of the phenotypes of the various NFAT-deficient mice.

67. Hu, Q. *et al.* Identification of Rlk, a novel protein tyrosine kinase with predominant expression in the T cell lineage. *J. Biol. Chem.* **270**, 1928–1934 (1995).

68. Kashiwakura, J. *et al.* Txk, a nonreceptor tyrosine kinase of the Tec family, is expressed in T helper type 1 cells and regulates interferon γ production in human T lymphocytes. *J. Exp. Med.* **190**, 1147–1154 (1999).

69. Perez-Villar, J. J., O’Day, K., Hewgill, D. H., Nadler, S. G. & Kanner, S. B. Nuclear localization of the tyrosine kinase Itk and interaction of its SH3 domain with karyopherin α (Rch1α). *Int. Immunol.* **13**, 1265–1274 (2001).

70. Webb, C. F. *et al.* The transcription factor Bright associates with Bruton’s tyrosine kinase, the defective protein in immunodeficiency disease. *J. Immunol.* **165**, 6956–6965 (2000).

71. Takeba, Y., Nagafuchi, H., Takeno, M., Kashiwakura, J. & Suzuki, N. Txk, a member of nonreceptor tyrosine kinase of Tec family, acts as a T~H~1 cell-specific transcription factor and regulates IFN-γ gene transcription. *J. Immunol.* **168**, 2365–2370 (2002).

72. Takeno, M. *et al.* T~H~1-dominant shift of T cell cytokine production, and subsequent reduction of serum immunoglobulin E response by administration in vivo of plasmid expressing Txk/Rlk, a member of Tec family tyrosine kinases, in a mouse model. *Clin. Exp. Allergy* **34**, 965–970 (2004).

73. Reiner, S. L. & Locksley, R. M. The regulation of immunity to *Leishmania major*. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **13**, 151–177 (1995).

74. Cohn, L., Elias, J. A. & Chupp, G. L. Asthma: mechanisms of disease persistence and progression. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **22**, 789–815 (2004).

75. Salek-Ardakani, S., So, T., Halteman, B. S., Altman, A. & Croft, M. Differential regulation of T~H~2 and T~H~1 lung inflammatory responses by protein kinase C θ. *J. Immunol.* **173**, 6440–6447 (2004).  
This paper, together with reference 77, shows T~H~2-cell defects in *Pkc-θ⁻/⁻* mice.

76. Gulbranson-Judge, A. *et al.* Defective immunoglobulin class switching in Vav-deficient mice is attributable to compromised T cell help. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **29**, 477–487 (1999).

77. Marsland, B. J., Soos, T. J., Spath, G., Littman, D. R. & Kopf, M. Protein kinase Cθ is critical for the development of in vivo T helper (T~H~)2 cell but not T~H~1 cell responses. *J. Exp. Med.* **200**, 181–189 (2004).

78. Fowell, D. J., Magram, J., Turck, C. W., Killeen, N. & Locksley, R. M. Impaired T~H~2 subset development in the absence of CD4. *Immunity* **6**, 559–569 (1997).

79. Brown, D. R., Moskowitz, N. H., Killeen, N. & Reiner, S. L. A role for CD4 in peripheral T cell differentiation. *J. Exp. Med.* **186**, 101–107 (1997).

80. Leitenberg, D., Boutin, Y., Constant, S. & Bottomly, K. CD4 regulation of TCR signaling and T cell differentiation following stimulation with peptides of different affinities for the TCR. *J. Immunol.* **161**, 1194–1203 (1998).

81. Balamuth, F., Brogdon, J. L. & Bottomly, K. CD4 raft association and signaling regulate molecular clustering at the immunological synapse site. *J. Immunol.* **172**, 5887–5892 (2004).

82. Grakoui, A. *et al.* The immunological synapse: a molecular machine controlling T cell activation. *Science* **285**, 221–227 (1999).

83. Pfeiffer, C. *et al.* Protein kinase Cθ affects Ca²⁺ mobilization and NFAT cell activation in primary mouse T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* **197**, 1525–1535 (2003).

84. Sun, Z. *et al.* PKC-θ is required for TCR-induced NF-κB activation in mature but not immature thymocytes. *Nature* **404**, 402–407 (2000).

85. Tarakhovsky, A. *et al.* Defective antigen receptor-mediated proliferation of B and T cells in the absence of Vav. *Nature* **374**, 467–470 (1995).

86. Cote-Sierra, J. *et al.* Interleukin 2 plays a central role in T~H~2 differentiation. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 3880–3885 (2004).

87. Ranger, A. M. *et al.* Delayed lymphoid repopulation with defects in IL-4-driven responses produced by inactivation of NF-ATc. *Immunity* **8**, 125–134 (1998).

88. Yoshida, H. *et al.* The transcription factor NF-ATc1 regulates lymphocyte proliferation and T~H~2 cytokine production. *Immunity* **8**, 115–124 (1998).

89. Das, J. *et al.* A critical role for NF-κB in GATA3 expression and T~H~2 differentiation in allergic airway inflammation. *Nature Immunol.* **2**, 45–50 (2001).

90. Cannons, J. L. *et al.* SAP regulates T~H~2 differentiation and PKCθ-mediated activation of NF-κB1. *Immunity* **21**, 693–706 (2004).

91. Sommers, C. L. *et al.* A role for the Tec family tyrosine kinase Txk in T cell activation and thymocyte selection. *J. Exp. Med.* **190**, 1427–1438 (1999).

92. Leitenberg, D. & Bottomly, K. Regulation of naive T cell differentiation by varying the potency of TCR signal transduction. *Semin. Immunol.* **11**, 283–292 (1999).

93. Hosken, N. A., Shibuya, K., Heath, A. W., Murphy, K. M. & O’Garra, A. The effect of antigen dose on CD4⁺ T helper cell phenotype development in a T cell receptor-αβ-transgenic model. *J. Exp. Med.* **182**, 1579–1584 (1995).

94. Constant, S., Pfeiffer, C., Woodard, A., Pasqualini, T. & Bottomly, K. Extent of T cell receptor ligation can determine the functional differentiation of naive CD4⁺ T cells. *J. Exp. Med.* **182**, 1591–1596 (1995).

95. Jorritsma, P. J., Brogdon, J. L. & Bottomly, K. Role of TCR-induced extracellular signal-regulated kinase activation in the regulation of early IL-4 expression in naive CD4⁺ T cells. *J. Immunol.* **170**, 2427–2434 (2003).

96. Ebinu, J. O. *et al.* RasGRP links T-cell receptor signaling to Ras. *Blood* **95**, 3199–3203 (2000).

97. Ranger, A. M., Oukka, M., Rengarajan, J. & Glimcher, L. H. Inhibitory function of two NFAT family members in lymphoid homeostasis and T~H~2 development. *Immunity* **9**, 627–635 (1998).

98. Xanthoudakis, S. *et al.* An enhanced immune response in mice lacking the transcription factor NFAT1. *Science* **272**, 892–895 (1996).

99. Hodge, M. R. *et al.* Hyperproliferation and dysregulation of IL-4 expression in NF-ATp-deficient mice. *Immunity* **4**, 397–405 (1996).

100. Brogdon, J. L., Leitenberg, D. & Bottomly, K. The potency of TCR signaling differentially regulates NFATc/p activity and early IL-4 transcription in naive CD4⁺ T cells. *J. Immunol.* **168**, 3825–3832 (2002).

101. Peng, S. L., Gerth, A. J., Ranger, A. M. & Glimcher, L. H. NFATc1 and NFATc2 together control both T and B cell activation and differentiation. *Immunity* **14**, 13–20 (2001).

102. Aguado, E. *et al.* Induction of T helper type 2 immunity by a point mutation in the LAT adaptor. *Science* **296**, 2036–2040 (2002).

103. Sommers, C. L. *et al.* A LAT mutation that inhibits T cell development yet induces lymphoproliferation. *Science* **296**, 2040–2043 (2002).

104. Hwang, E. S., Szabo, S. J., Schwartzberg, P. L. & Glimcher, L. H. T helper cell fate specified by kinase-mediated interaction of T-bet with GATA-3. *Science* **307**, 430–433 (2005).

105. Gadue, P. & Stein, P. L. NK T cell precursors exhibit differential cytokine regulation and require Itk for efficient maturation. *J. Immunol.* **169**, 2397–2406 (2002).

106. Stanic, A. K. *et al.* The ontogeny and function of Vα14Jα18 natural T lymphocytes require signal processing by protein kinase C θ and NF-κB. *J. Immunol.* **172**, 4667–4671 (2004).

107. Chan, G., Hanke, T. & Fischer, K.-D. Vav-1 regulates NKT cell development and NK cell cytotoxicity. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **31**, 2403–2410 (2001).

108. Liu, Y. *et al.* Protein kinase C θ is expressed in mast cells and is functionally involved in Fcε receptor 1 signaling. *J. Leukoc. Biol.* **69**, 831–840 (2001).

109. Kawakami, Y. *et al.* Activation and interaction with protein kinase C of a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase, Itk/Tsk/Emt, on FcεRI cross-linking on mast cells. *J. Immunol.* **155**, 3556–3562 (1995).

110. Manetz, T. S. *et al.* Vav1 regulates phospholipase Cγ activation and calcium responses in mast cells. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **21**, 3763–3774 (2001).

111. August, A. *et al.* CD28 is associated with and induces the immediate tyrosine phosphorylation and activation of the Tec family kinase ITK/EMT in the human Jurkat leukemic T-cell line. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **91**, 9347–9351 (1994).

112. Yang, W. C. & Olive, D. Tec kinase is involved in transcriptional regulation of IL-2 and IL-4 in the CD28 pathway. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **29**, 1842–1849 (1999).

113. Liao, X. C. *et al.* Itk negatively regulates induction of T cell proliferation by CD28 costimulation. *J. Exp. Med.* **186**, 221–228 (1997).

114. Michel, F., Attal-Bonnefoy, G., Mangino, G., Mise-Omata, S. & Acuto, O. CD28 as a molecular amplifier extending TCR ligation and signaling capabilities. *Immunity* **15**, 935–945 (2001).

115. Altman, A. *et al.* Positive feedback regulation of PLCγ1/Ca²⁺ signaling by PKCθ in restimulated T cells via a Tec kinase-dependent pathway. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **34**, 2001–2011 (2004).

116. Garçon, F., Bismuth, G., Isnardon, D., Olive, D. & Nunes, J. A. Tec kinase migrates to the T cell–APC interface independently of its pleckstrin homology domain. *J. Immunol.* **173**, 770–775 (2004).

117. Bachmann, M. F., Littman, D. R. & Liao, X. C. Antiviral immune responses in Itk-deficient mice. *J. Virol.* **71**, 7253–7257 (1997).

118. Hollander, G. A., Bierer, B. E. & Burakoff, S. J. Molecular and biological actions of cyclosporin A and FK506 on T cell development and function. *Transfus. Sci.* **15**, 207–220 (1994).

119. Turner, M. *et al.* A requirement for the Rho-family GTP exchange factor Vav in positive and negative selection of thymocytes. *Immunity* **7**, 451–460 (1997).

Acknowledgements

The authors thank R. Houghtling and members of the Schwartzberg laboratory for helpful discussions, and A. Altman for permission to cite unpublished results.

Competing interests statement

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Online links

DATABASES

The following terms in this article are linked online to:

Entrez Gene:

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene

BMX | BTK | GATA3 | ITK | MAF | NFATc1 | PKC-θ | RLK | T-bet | TEC | VAV1

Access to this interactive links box is free online.
