
REVIEW

THE ROLE OF CALMODULIN AS  
A SIGNAL INTEGRATOR FOR  
SYNAPTIC PLASTICITY  

Zhengui Xia*† and Daniel R. Storm*

Abstract | Excitatory synapses in the brain show several forms of synaptic plasticity, including long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD), which are initiated by increases in intracellular Ca²⁺ that are generated through NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors or voltage-sensitive Ca²⁺ channels. LTP depends on the coordinated regulation of an ensemble of enzymes, including Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II, adenylyl cyclase 1 and 8, and calcineurin, all of which are stimulated by calmodulin, a Ca²⁺-binding protein. In this review, we discuss the hypothesis that calmodulin is a central integrator of synaptic plasticity and that its unique regulatory properties allow the integration of several forms of signal transduction that are required for LTP and LTD.

Synapses in the mammalian brain express several forms of synaptic plasticity, including long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD), which are useful electrophysiological models for the types of long-lasting adaptation that can occur at specific synapses (BOX 1). Consequently, studies of LTP and LTD provide important insights into the molecular and cellular events that might contribute to learning and memory¹,². Although there are many forms of synaptic plasticity, most are initiated by an increase in intracellular Ca²⁺, which functions as a second messenger for activity-dependent, synapse-specific changes. How are these increases in intracellular Ca²⁺ translated into enduring changes in synaptic efficacy? Ca²⁺ signalling is mediated through several Ca²⁺-binding proteins, including calmodulin (CaM) and protein kinase C (PKC). CaM is a regulatory protein that modulates the activity of, and confers Ca²⁺ sensitivity on, several key signalling molecules that are crucial for synaptic plasticity. This review focuses on the mechanisms by which intracellular Ca²⁺ signals cause long-term changes in synaptic efficacy, with an emphasis on the concerted activation of some important signalling molecules that are regulated by CaM. The central hypothesis is that LTP and LTD are complex phenomena that depend on the regulation of many signalling pathways at the right time and place in neurons. CaM, by virtue of its unique interactions with a family of target enzymes and proteins, mediates the activation of several signalling molecules in neurons at different concentrations of free Ca²⁺ (FIG. 1).

Calmodulin in the brain  
The importance of CaM for CNS function is reflected in the extraordinarily high concentrations of this protein in CNS neurons (from 10 to 100 μM in different areas of the brain)³. More than a hundred CaM-regulated proteins have been identified, including several that are directly implicated in synaptic plasticity in the CNS (BOX 2). CaM-regulated enzymes that are of interest for synaptic plasticity include adenylyl cyclases, protein kinases, calcineurin, nitric oxide synthase, Ca²⁺ channels and RasGRF1, a CaM-regulated Ras-guanine nucleotide releasing factor.  
The binding of Ca²⁺ enhances CaM’s affinity for most of its target proteins, with the exception of neuro-modulin and neurogranin, for which binding to CaM is decreased by Ca²⁺. These changes in affinity occur because Ca²⁺ binding induces a conformational change in CaM. This exposes a hydrophobic domain⁴, which is the principal site of interface between CaM and its target

*Department of Pharmacology and Program in Neuroscience, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.  
†Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle Washington 98195, USA.  
Correspondence to D.R.S.  
e-mail: dstorm@u.washington.edu  
doi:10.1038/nrn1647  
Published online 15 March 2005

Box 1 | Long-term potentiation and long-term depression

Long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) are usage-dependent changes in synaptic efficacy that reflect the types of long-term cellular and molecular changes that can occur at synapses. Although many types of LTP occur in the brain, they share some common features. NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptor-dependent LTP at the hippocampal Schaffer collateral–CA1 pyramidal neuron synapse is the most extensively studied form of LTP in the CNS. LTP at the hippocampal mossy fibre–CA3 pyramidal neuron synapse is an NMDA receptor-independent form of LTP that is related to parallel fibre–Purkinje cell LTP in the cerebellum, both of which are thought to be primarily presynaptic in origin.

In an interesting parallel to memory, LTP has short-term forms (early phase LTP; E-LTP), which last only a few hours, and long-term forms (late phase LTP; L-LTP), which can persist for days in an intact animal. L-LTP depends on *de novo* translation and transcription, in contrast to E-LTP, which does not depend on increased transcription or translation. E-LTP is generally induced by a single high-frequency tetanic stimulation (100 Hz, 1 s), whereas L-LTP is typically generated by multiple trains of high-frequency tetanus delivered homosynaptically by stimulation of a single input pathway<sup>71</sup>. Heterosynaptic L-LTP is induced by repeated stimulation of one pathway at low frequency (0.2 Hz) paired with a brief conditioning burst in an independent afferent pathway<sup>75</sup>.

The debate over the relationship between LTP and memory was resolved by transgenic mouse studies in which effects on LTP and memory are often disconnected. For example, G<sub>iα1</sub> mutant mice show a significant increase in CA1 L-LTP and severe memory loss<sup>82</sup>, whereas mice that overexpress AC1 show a significant increase in CA1 LTP and a gain in memory<sup>95</sup>. Disruption of the gene for G<sub>iα1</sub> or overexpression of AC1 both increased brain cAMP levels. It is generally agreed that LTP and memory share some common molecular and cellular events but LTP is not a direct model for memory. However, memory formation might depend on a balance between synaptic strengthening and weakening reflected by cellular and molecular events that occur during LTP and LTD.


pharmacological activities, phenothiazines have several other targets in the CNS. Nevertheless, the phenothiazines — and related drugs — have been useful pharmacological tools for investigating CaM-regulated processes in CNS function<sup>8</sup>.

Energetics of CaM–protein interactions. CaM has four Ca<sup>2+</sup>-binding sites, with an average DISSOCIATION CONSTANT (*K*<sub>d</sub>) of ~15 μM, an affinity for Ca<sup>2+</sup> that does not match the Ca<sup>2+</sup> sensitivity of its target enzymes, which are frequently activated by nanomolar concentrations of free Ca<sup>2+</sup> (REF.9). So, how can CaM-stimulated enzymes be activated at physiological concentrations of free Ca<sup>2+</sup> (0.1–10.0 μM) if the *K*<sub>d</sub> for CaM binding to Ca<sup>2+</sup> averages 15 μM? Furthermore, the Ca<sup>2+</sup> activation curves for different CaM-regulated enzymes vary, despite the fact that Ca<sup>2+</sup> stimulation is mediated by the same Ca<sup>2+</sup>-binding protein in each case. For example, CaM-regulated adenylyl cyclases and cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases have different Ca<sup>2+</sup> sensitivities, and the CaM-stimulated phosphatase calcineurin has greater sensitivity to Ca<sup>2+</sup> than do the CaM-dependent protein kinases. How can CaM-regulated enzymes have different Ca<sup>2+</sup> sensitivities? These questions were resolved when it was revealed that the affinity of CaM for Ca<sup>2+</sup> is greatly enhanced in the presence of CaM-binding proteins, made possible because CaM has four Ca<sup>2+</sup>-binding sites (BOX 3) — that is, CaM–protein complexes show heterotropic positive cooperativity for Ca<sup>2+</sup> binding<sup>10</sup>. This allows CaM-regulated proteins to be activated in the presence of normal physiological concentrations of free Ca<sup>2+</sup>. The free energy of coupling that is shown by each CaM–protein complex is unique to that complex; therefore, different enzymes can have different Ca<sup>2+</sup> sensitivities, despite being activated through the same Ca<sup>2+</sup>-binding protein. Moreover, Ca<sup>2+</sup> can activate CaM-regulated enzymes with varying degrees of heterotropic positive cooperativity, which allows enzymes to be activated over relatively narrow Ca<sup>2+</sup> concentration ranges.


proteins. This interaction has been confirmed by X-ray crystallographic structural studies<sup>5</sup> and FLUORESCENCE RESONANCE ENERGY TRANSFER (FRET) analyses of CaM–peptide complexes<sup>6</sup>. In the presence of Ca<sup>2+</sup>, several antipsychotic drugs, including the phenothiazines<sup>7</sup>, bind to the hydrophobic domain of CaM and antagonize the binding of CaM to its target proteins. Although this interaction was originally thought to account for their


Control of free CaM in neurons. In resting neurons, much of the CaM is associated with three proteins: neuromodulin, neurogranin and regulator of CaM signalling (RCS), which are thought to regulate the levels of free CaM or control the activity of CaM. Neuromodulin (also known as GAP43, B-50 and P-57) is a neural-specific CaM-binding protein that has unusual CaM-binding properties<sup>11</sup>. CaM–SEPHAROSE AFFINITY CHROMATOGRAPHY was used to show that neuromodulin binds to CaM in the absence of Ca<sup>2+</sup> and is eluted with buffers that contain free Ca<sup>2+</sup>, in contrast to other CaM-binding proteins, which bind to CaM in the presence of free Ca<sup>2+</sup>. Neuromodulin was the first CaM-binding protein discovered to have a higher affinity for CaM in the absence of Ca<sup>2+</sup>. Interestingly, the CaM-binding domain of neuromodulin, which was the first IQ DOMAIN to be identified in a protein<sup>12</sup>, contains a serine residue (Ser41) that is phosphorylated by PKC<sup>13</sup>. Phosphorylation of neuromodulin by PKC blocks CaM binding, thereby providing another mechanism by which activity-dependent Ca<sup>2+</sup> increases the release of CaM from neuromodulin.


Figure 1 | Overview of the effects of Ca<sup>2+</sup> and calmodulin on changes in synaptic plasticity. Many of the effects of intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup> on synaptic plasticity are mediated through calmodulin (CaM)-regulated proteins. Increases in intracellular Ca<sup>2+</sup>, generated through the activity of NMDA (N-methyl-D-aspartate) receptors or voltage-sensitive Ca<sup>2+</sup> channels, result in the release of CaM that is bound to neuromodulin or neurogranin. CaM mediates the Ca<sup>2+</sup> stimulation of several enzymes that are required for changes in synaptic plasticity.

Box 2 | Calmodulin-regulated proteins

### Enzymes
- Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases (for example, the PDE1 family)
- Adenylyl cyclases (AC1 and AC8)
- ATP-dependent Ca²⁺ pumps
- Myosin light chain kinase
- Calmodulin (CaM) kinase I, II and IV
- Phosphorylase kinase
- Calcineurin (a protein phosphatase)
- Nitric oxide synthase
- RasGRF1, a CaM-activated guanine nucleotide releasing factor

### Non-enzymatic proteins
- Tubulin
- Troponin I
- Spectrin, fodrin, caldesmon, calspectin and cytosynalin
- Microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) and Tau
- Neuromodulin and neurogranin
- Regulator of CaM signalling (RCS)
- Ca²⁺ channels

---

**FLUORESCENCE RESONANCE ENERGY TRANSFER (FRET).** A spectroscopic technique that is based on the transfer of energy from the excited state of a donor moiety to an acceptor. The transfer efficiency depends on the distance between the donor and the acceptor. FRET is often used to estimate distances between macromolecular sites in the 20–100-Å range, or to study interactions between macromolecules *in vivo*.

**DISSOCIATION CONSTANT**  
A measure to describe the strength of binding (or affinity) between receptors and their ligands.

**CaM–SEPHAROSE AFFINITY CHROMATOGRAPHY**  
An affinity column for the purification of CaM-binding proteins comprised of CaM covalently attached to Sepharose. Most CaM-binding proteins bind to CaM–Sepharose in the presence of Ca²⁺. Neuromodulin binds to the column in the absence of Ca²⁺ and is eluted from the column with buffers that contain Ca²⁺.

**IQ DOMAIN**  
A small structural domain, originally identified in neuromodulin, that mediates interactions with CaM. The motif only loosely defines the amino acid sequence at 5 of 11 possible residues. Different IQ domains bind CaM at varying intracellular Ca²⁺ concentrations or independently of Ca²⁺.

**TETANIC STIMULATION**  
A train of stimuli that causes brief, high-frequency activation of afferent axons. In LTP experiments, a 1-s train of pulses delivered at a frequency of 100 Hz is commonly used to potentiate transmission.

---

Neuromodulin is an abundant, presynaptic protein in the brain, where it is found at similar levels to CaM. It is tethered to the presynaptic membrane by two palmitoylated cysteine residues. It has been proposed that neuromodulin binds CaM at the membrane and releases it locally when there is an increase in intracellular Ca²⁺ and PKC is activated¹¹. Therefore, neuromodulin might serve as a Ca²⁺-regulated modulator of CaM activity in neurons. This idea is supported by data showing that neuromodulin interacts with CaM *in vivo*¹⁴ and regulates the activity of CaM-regulated proteins *in vitro* and *in vivo*¹⁵. Interestingly, neuromodulin is phosphorylated during LTP in hippocampal area CA1 (REF. 16) and a reduction in LTP is rescued by NMDA (*N*-methyl-*D*-aspartate) receptor blockade in mice that overexpress neuromodulin. Presumably, an increased level of neuromodulin elevates the amount of CaM concentrated on the membrane and increases the concentration of CaM released locally during TETANIC STIMULATION¹⁷. Furthermore, although neuromodulin is not required for LTP, the expression of a mutated neuromodulin that mimics the behaviour of neuromodulin that has been phosphorylated at Ser41 enhances LTP¹⁸. Collectively, these data support the idea that neuromodulin contributes to synaptic plasticity by controlling the levels of free CaM available presynaptically (FIG. 2).

Neurogranin (also known as RC3, BICKS and P17) is another neural-specific CaM-binding protein that is also a substrate for PKC¹⁹, although, in contrast to neuromodulin, neurogranin is postsynaptic. Neurogranin and neuromodulin share high sequence similarity within a 20-amino-acid region that contains an IQ motif. This sequence — AAAAKIQASFRGHMARKKIK in neurogranin — contains a binding domain for CaM and a PKC phosphorylation site²⁰. CaM binds to neurogranin with equivalent or higher affinity in the absence of Ca²⁺ compared with in the presence of Ca²⁺, and PKC phosphorylation within the IQ domain inhibits CaM binding. In addition, it has been shown that neurogranin binds CaM *in vivo*²¹. These observations led to the hypothesis that neurogranin is the postsynaptic counterpart of neuromodulin, and that increased Ca²⁺ and PKC activity

---

Box 3 | Calmodulin–Ca²⁺ affinity is increased by calmodulin-binding proteins

The binding of Ca²⁺ to calmodulin (CaM) in the absence and in the presence of stoichiometric or excess troponin I illustrates the effect of a CaM-binding protein on the affinity of CaM for Ca²⁺. As Ca²⁺ usually enhances the affinity of CaM-binding proteins for CaM, it follows from thermodynamics that CaM-binding proteins must increase the affinity of CaM for Ca²⁺ (REF. 140). This is made possible because CaM has four Ca²⁺-binding sites: as CaM binds to one, two or three of the Ca²⁺-binding sites, it associates with CaM-binding proteins. The binding of these proteins to CaM enhances its affinity for Ca²⁺ at the remaining unfilled Ca²⁺-binding sites, therefore leading to heterotropic positive cooperativity. The binding of Ca²⁺ to CaM in the presence of each CaM-binding protein is characterized by a unique free energy of coupling that can be determined either by measuring the dissociation constants for Ca²⁺ binding to CaM and the CaM–enzyme complex or from the dissociation constants for the enzyme interaction with CaM or the CaM–Ca²⁺ complex. Therefore, Ca²⁺ activation curves for CaM-regulated enzymes can show varying degrees of positive cooperativity and have different Ca²⁺ sensitivities. This is physiologically important because counteracting CaM-regulated enzymes (for example, adenylyl cyclases versus phosphodiesterases, or kinases versus phosphatases) often have different Ca²⁺ sensitivities. Panel reproduced, with permission, from REF. 140 © (1982) American Chemical Society.

RE VIEWS

Remodelling of the  
synapse?  

Cytoskeleton  

Synaptic vesicle  
mobilization?  

CaMKII  

CaM  

Ca²⁺  

Neuromodulin  

Neuromodulin  

Voltage-sensitive  
Ca²⁺ channel  

PKA  

RAB3A  

cAMP  

AC1  
AC8  

Glu  

Figure 2 | Calmodulin and presynaptic long-term potentiation. Increases in presynaptic Ca²⁺, initiated by the activation of voltage-sensitive Ca²⁺ channels and activation of protein kinase C (PKC), are thought to release bound calmodulin (CaM) from neuromodulin. CaM activates the CaM-stimulated adenylyl cyclases AC1 and AC8, which, through cyclic AMP (cAMP) signalling, leads to increased PKA activity, and, consequently, phosphorylation of the Ras-associated protein RAB3A and enhanced neurotransmitter release. Other events that might contribute to synaptic plasticity include the interaction of CaM with components of the cytoskeleton, which causes physical remodelling of the synapse, and the activation of Ca²⁺/CaM-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) and synaptic vesicle mobilization.

CaMKII is required for both LTP and mechanisms for the modulation of synaptic efficacy.

Activation of CaMKII by Ca²⁺ initiates autophosphorylation, which makes it independent of Ca²⁺ and renders it constitutively active²⁹. The Ca²⁺ dissociation constant for phosphorylated CaMKII is ~100 times lower than that for unphosphorylated CaMKII (REF. 30). Autophosphorylation of CaMKII causes it to dissociate from actin³¹, diffuse to the synapse and associate with NMDA receptors. CaMKII remains active even after dissociation from CaM, when it is bound to the NR2B subunit of NMDA receptors³². The unique regulatory features of CaMKII led to the proposal that it has a pivotal role in synaptic plasticity and memory³³.

CaMKII is required for CA1 LTP. CaMKII was originally implicated in LTP through the use of specific pharmacological enzyme inhibitors³⁴,³⁵. For example, the administration of peptide inhibitors of CaMKII into CA1 pyramidal cells blocks LTP induction at the SCHAFFER COLLATERAL-pyramidal neuron synapse, which indicates that postsynaptic CaMKII is required for LTP. In addition, activation of NMDA receptors during LTP activates CaMKII (REF. 36), and postsynaptic application of this enzyme produces an increase in synaptic efficacy that mimics LTP³⁷,³⁸.

Transgenic mice have been used extensively to study specific CaM-regulated enzymes in neuroplasticity. Indeed, the demonstration that α-CaMKII-knockout mice have defects in LTP and memory³⁹,⁴⁰ was one of the original studies that stimulated the use of transgenic mice to study neuroplasticity. Disruption of the α-CaMKII gene decreases total CaMKII activity by 45% and LTP at the Schaffer collateral-CA1 synapse by 50% (REF. 39). The residual activity is presumably attributable to β-CaMKII. Whole-cell recordings using hippocampal slices from α-CaMKII-knockout mice indicate normal postsynaptic mechanisms but deficient LTP. In a subsequent study, LTP was also tested in a mutant mouse strain in which there was a threonine-to-alanine substitution at position 286 of α-CaMKII (REF. 41). This mutant enzyme is still activated by Ca²⁺ but, unlike native enzymes, cannot be persistently activated by autophosphorylation. LTP in hippocampal slices from mutant mice, produced by a PAIRING PROTOCOL, was almost abolished. It seems likely that this mutant kinase functions in a dominant-negative manner by interfering with the phosphorylation of the wild-type enzyme. Collectively, pharmacological and transgenic mouse studies support the idea that α-CaMKII has a crucial role in LTP.

CaMKII and synaptic plasticity  
Ca²⁺/CaM-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) is a Ca²⁺-stimulated enzyme that is abundant in the CNS and was one of the first CaM-regulated enzymes to be implicated in synaptic plasticity. The CaMKII family comprises 28 related isozymes that are derived from four subunit genes: α, β, γ and δ. Each enzyme has a catalytic domain, an autoinhibitory domain, a variable segment and a domain for self-association²⁵. Electron microscopy studies indicate that 12 CaMKII subunits oligomerize into a double hexamer structure, thereby forming a double-layered petal-like structure. In adults, these oligomers are primarily composed of α subunits. The structure of the enzyme and mechanisms for stimulation of CaMKII by CaM have been reviewed elsewhere (for reviews, see REFS 26–28). Here, we focus on evidence that

SCHAFFER COLLATERALS  
Axons of the CA3 pyramidal cells of the hippocampus that form synapses with the apical dendrites of CA1 neurons.

PAIRING PROTOCOL  
If a cell is artificially depolarized while low-frequency stimulation is delivered, synaptic transmission will be potentiated because the depolarization relieves the Mg²⁺-dependent block of NMDA receptors.

Postsynaptic mechanisms. High concentrations of CaMKII are associated with the postsynaptic density (PSD), which indicates that the enzyme might modulate synaptic plasticity through postsynaptic mechanisms. Although there is compelling evidence that α-CaMKII contributes to LTP, the enzyme has more than 30 known substrates, making the identification of downstream targets that are involved in synaptic plasticity a challenging task. LTP at the Schaffer collateral synapse in the CA1 region of the hippocampus depends on the augmentation

SYNAPTIC TAGGING  
A mechanism by which activated synapses are tagged to distinguish them from other synapses on the same neuron that have not been activated. The mechanism for synaptic tagging is not known, but might be due to increases in dendritic translation.

of AMPA (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid) receptors through convergence of several signal transduction pathways^{42,43}. The augmentation of AMPA receptors during LTP might reflect enhanced unitary conductance or an increase in the number of synaptic AMPA receptors^{44,45}. One of the main mechanisms by which activation of α-CaMKII enhances synaptic plasticity is through the modulation of AMPA receptor activity and distribution (FIG. 3). Specifically, phosphorylation of Ser831 in the glutamate receptor (GluR1) subunits by α-CaMKII increases unitary conductance^{46,47}. Furthermore, α-CaMKII drives the insertion of new AMPA receptors into synapses^{48,49}. Transgenic mice with GluR1 subunits that lack both α-CaMKII and PKA phosphorylation sites (Ala831 and Ala845) show decreases in hippocampal synaptic plasticity and spatial memory^{50}. NMDA receptor activation also triggers CaM-stimulated adenylyl cyclases^{51}, thereby providing the necessary cyclic AMP (cAMP) signal for the phosphorylation of Ser845 in GluR1. The dual requirement for phosphorylation by α-CaMKII and PKA is a notable example of how CaM activation of two independent pathways converges on a common substrate to enhance synaptic efficacy.

It seems likely that α-CaMKII has several other downstream targets that also contribute to synaptic plasticity. For example, CaMKII activity is required for activity-dependent structural changes that are associated with LTP in the dendrites of cortical pyramidal neurons. Using two-photon release of caged glutamate, it was recently discovered that an enlargement of spines and the enhancement of AMPA receptor currents — caused by local photo-release of glutamate — depend on NMDA receptor activation and CaMKII activity^{52}. Although LTP and the expression of AMPA receptors in spines depend on dynamic actin filaments and scaffolding proteins^{53–55}, the mechanism by which CaMKII contributes to glutamate stimulation of spine enlargement is unknown.

Regulation of dendritic translation by CaMKII. Long-term synaptic plasticity, which lasts for hours or days, depends on *de novo* translation. Of particular interest is local protein synthesis in dendrites^{56,57}, which might be important for SYNAPTIC TAGGING^{58}. The mRNA for α-CaMKII is one of only a few mRNAs to be identified in dendrites. The α-CaMKII mRNA is targeted through elements in its 3′-untranslated region (UTR) to dendrites^{59}, where it accumulates^{60} and levels of the protein are elevated during LTP^{61}. In addition, transgenic mice in which the 3′ UTR of α-CaMKII has been modified show lower levels of dendritic α-CaMKII and late-phase LTP (L-LTP), as well as impaired hippocampus-dependent memory^{62}.

Interestingly, α-CaMKII also phosphorylates and stimulates the activity of cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein (CPEB), a factor that initiates mRNA polyadenylation and protein synthesis^{63}. This indicates that one of the mechanisms of increased protein synthesis in dendrites during LTP is the prolonged activation of α-CaMKII and phosphorylation of CPEB.

Presynaptic mechanisms. Although the emphasis has been on the role of postsynaptic CaMKII and the high concentrations of this enzyme that are associated with the postsynaptic density, CaMKII is also present presynaptically. Presynaptic inhibition of CaMKII blocks glutamate-stimulated increases in the number of functional presynaptic boutons and miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSC) in cultured hippocampal neurons^{64}. Although the mechanism by which CaMKII affects the number of presynaptic boutons is unknown, the rate of synapsin dissociation from vesicles regulates the rate of vesicle availability for exocytosis. Therefore, phosphorylation of synapsin I by CaMKII might control synapsin I dispersion and synaptic vesicle mobilization^{65,66}. Furthermore, synaptic plasticity induced by glutamate or tetanic stimulation is blocked by presynaptic inhibition of CaMKII, whereas the combination of a weak tetanus with presynaptic administration of CaMKII generates a long-term increase in the amplitude of the EPSC^{64}. These data emphasize that presynaptic CaMKII activity is required for the induction of synaptic plasticity in cultured hippocampal neurons and support the idea that the enzyme contributes to synaptic plasticity through presynaptic and postsynaptic mechanisms.

Figure 3 | **Long-term potentiation and long-term depression at the Schaffer collateral–CA1 synapse depend on a series of calmodulin-regulated events.** Activation of NMDA (*N*-methyl-*D*-aspartate) receptors increases postsynaptic free Ca²⁺, which is thought to stimulate the release of calmodulin (CaM) from neurogranin. When there is a low increase in Ca²⁺ concentrations, calcineurin is activated and long-term depression is induced by calcineurin activation of protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) and dephosphorylation of AMPA (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid) receptors. At higher Ca²⁺ concentrations, generated by the stimulus protocol that generates long-term potentiation, Ca²⁺/CaM-dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII) is activated and AMPA receptors are activated by phosphorylation of serine 831. CaMKII might also increase dendritic protein synthesis by phosphorylating cytoplasmic polyadenylation element-binding protein (CPEB). In addition, CaM activation of CAM-stimulated adenylyl cyclases AC1 and AC8 increases cyclic AMP (cAMP) and protein kinase A (PKA) activity, which leads to activation of AMPA receptors through phosphorylation at Ser845. The activity of calcineurin is decreased by PKA phosphorylation of inhibitor 1 (I-1) and activation of regulator of CaM signalling (RCS).

CaMKII as a sensor of Ca²⁺ oscillations. In neurons, Ca²⁺ signals are often organized in the form of repetitive spikes, the frequency of which increases with the level of stimulation. Although this raises the interesting possibility that Ca²⁺ oscillations might encode information, the molecular mechanism by which these signals are decoded is not known. One candidate for the processing and decoding of these Ca²⁺ oscillations is CaMKII. In vitro studies using immobilized CaMKII have shown that CaMKII can decode the frequency of Ca²⁺ transients into distinct amounts of kinase activity²⁹. The response of CaMKII depends on both the amplitude and the duration of individual spikes. These data indicate that the autonomous activity of CaMKII is sensitive to the temporal pattern of Ca²⁺, a property of the enzyme that might be important for synaptic plasticity.

**CaM-stimulated adenylyl cyclases and LTP**

cAMP signalling is required for some forms of LTP. The cAMP-dependent PKA regulates important aspects of neuronal function, including ion channel activity, gene expression, neurotransmitter synthesis and neurotransmitter release, all of which can affect synaptic efficiency. Furthermore, cAMP might modulate synaptic plasticity by activating EPACs, which are guanine nucleotide exchange factors for the Ras-related proteins 1 and 2 (RAP1 and 2)⁶⁷. Stimulation of RAP1 through cAMP activates the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signal transduction pathway, which is important for CA1 LTP⁶⁸,⁶⁹. Further evidence indicates that cAMP and PKA have important roles in several forms of LTP and LTD. For example, cAMP-mediated transcription contributes to L-LTP in area CA1, mossy fibre and medial perforant pathways⁷⁰⁻⁷⁹. A role for PKA in LTP is also supported by transgenic mouse studies. Ablation by gene targeting of the C1β or RIβ subunits of PKA leads to defects in mossy fibre LTP⁸⁰. A reduction in PKA activity in transgenic mice that express a dominant-negative R subunit, R(AB), causes defects in L-LTP⁷³, and mutant mice that lack the RIβ subunit of PKA show a severe defect in CA1 LTD⁸¹. Other evidence that cAMP signalling is involved in LTP comes from a study in which the expression of Gᵢα₁ (which couples inhibitory receptors to adenylyl cyclases) was depressed in mice by gene knockout or by administration of Gᵢα₁ antisense to area CA1 of the hippocampus⁸². Mice that lacked Gᵢα₁ showed elevated cAMP levels in the hippocampus and enhanced LTP. Interestingly, a single train of high-frequency stimulation, which generates early-phase LTP (E-LTP) in wild-type mice, elicited L-LTP in hippocampal slices from Gᵢα₁-knockout mice. There are several reasons why cAMP signalling might be required for LTP, including the augmentation of AMPA receptor activity (FIG. 3) and indirect activation of CaMKII (REF. 83).

CaM-stimulated adenylyl cyclases are necessary for L-LTP. What is the source of cAMP for LTP? In neurons, the most direct mechanism for stimulation of cAMP levels by Ca²⁺ is through the activation of the CaM-stimulated

adenylyl cyclases. Eight of the known adenylyl cyclases are expressed in the hippocampus⁵¹,⁸⁴. However, only the adenylyl cyclases 1 and 8 (AC1 and AC8) are stimulated by CaM. AC1 is neurospecific⁸⁵ and is expressed in the hippocampus (in the dentate gyrus and areas CA1–CA3), the neocortex, entorhinal cortex, cerebellar cortex and the olfactory system⁷⁶, whereas AC8 is expressed in various areas of the brain but is not neurospecific.

To evaluate the physiological functions of AC1 and AC8, their genes were disrupted in mice. AC1-mutant mice show depressed CA1 LTP⁸⁶,⁸⁷ and mossy fibre LTP⁸⁸, as well as a total loss of cerebellar LTP⁸⁹. AC8-mutant mice also show a significant reduction in mossy fibre LTP⁹⁰. It has been proposed that Ca²⁺-stimulated adenylyl cyclase activity is required for the full expression of mossy fibre and cerebellar LTP because it generates an activity-dependent cAMP signal that stimulates PKA presynaptically⁸⁹⁻⁹². PKA activation is thought to enhance glutamate release by catalysing the phosphorylation of RAB3A, a synaptic vesicle protein that regulates vesicle fusion and is essential for mossy fibre LTP⁹³ (FIG. 2).

Although L-LTP in area CA1 depends on cAMP signalling⁷¹, mutant mice that lack either AC1 or AC8 do show L-LTP, although this is lowered in AC1 mutant mice⁸⁶. However, transgenic mice that lack both AC1 and AC8 show no L-LTP or long-term memory (LTM)⁹⁴. This indicates that Ca²⁺-stimulated adenylyl cyclase activity is essential for L-LTP and that either AC1 or AC8 can generate the necessary cAMP signal. Activation of CaM-stimulated adenylyl cyclases might contribute to heterosynaptic and homosynaptic L-LTP by activating the ERK/MAPK/cAMP responsive element (CRE)-binding protein (CREB) transcription pathway, or through the phosphorylation of inhibitor 1 (I-1) by PKA and subsequent inhibition of calcineurin activity.

**Overexpression of AC1 enhances memory.** If AC1 has a pivotal role in L-LTP and LTM, what happens if the levels of this enzyme are genetically increased in the hippocampus? This question was addressed by overexpressing AC1 in the forebrains of mice using the α-CaMKII promoter⁹⁵. These mice showed a marked increase in memory for novel objects and enhanced L-LTP. Furthermore, a single train of high-frequency stimulation in hippocampal slices from wild-type mice evokes E-LTP, which decreases within an hour. By contrast, in mice that overexpress AC1 the same stimulus protocol produces sustained LTP in hippocampal slices. These data indicate that CaM-stimulated adenylyl cyclases are not only required for L-LTP, but that a genetic increase in AC1 expression enhances LTP.

**Calcineurin and synaptic plasticity**

The calcineurins (also known as P2B) are CaM-stimulated protein phosphatases that are enriched in neurons of the CNS⁹⁶,⁹⁷. In the brain, these enzymes are heterodimers that comprise a catalytic subunit (CNAα or CNAβ) and a regulatory subunit, CNB1 (REFS 98, 99). Calcineurin has several substrates in the brain that have
been indirectly implicated in synaptic plasticity, including neuromodulin<sup>100</sup>, neurogranin<sup>101</sup> and I-1, which inhibits protein phosphatase 1 (PP1)<sup>102</sup>. As calcineurin activates PP1, it can indirectly stimulate the dephosphorylation of several downstream targets, including AMPA receptors, transcription factors and Ca<sup>2+</sup> channels.

Calcineurin and LTD. LTD is a form of synaptic plasticity that results in the long-term depression of excitatory synaptic transmission. One school of thought asserts that synaptic weakening, as occurs in LTD, might have a negative effect on memory<sup>103</sup>, whereas others suggest that synaptic weakening and strengthening are both required for memory formation<sup>104</sup>. Experimentally, LTD is induced in area CA1 of the hippocampus by repetitive synaptic stimulation at 0.5–5.0 Hz and, similar to LTP, it depends on NMDA receptor activation<sup>105</sup>.

Pharmacological studies have implicated calcineurin in NMDA receptor-mediated LTD<sup>102,106</sup>. Furthermore, disruption of the calcineurin gene (*Cnb1*) in the forebrain of mice diminishes CA1 LTD and causes a shift in the LTD/LTP THRESHOLD<sup>105</sup>. Although *Cnb1*-mutant mice show normal contextual fear and spatial memory, they are deficient in hippocampal episodic memory and hippocampus-dependent reference memory.

How does the activation of calcineurin contribute to LTD? There is considerable evidence that dephosphorylation of PKA substrates by calcineurin is a key event for LTD. Specifically, it has been proposed that NMDA receptor activation and the subsequent increase in Ca<sup>2+</sup> activates calcineurin, which stimulates PP1 by inactivating I-1 (REF. 107). Activation of PP1 catalyses the dephosphorylation of several proteins, including AMPA receptors<sup>108</sup>. The dephosphorylation in AMPA receptors at Ser845 — a PKA phosphorylation site — seems to be particularly important because Ser845 is dephosphorylated during LTD<sup>109</sup>. Furthermore, mutant mice that have Ala-to-Ser substitutions at positions 831 and 845 in AMPA receptors lack NMDA-dependent LTD in area CA1 (REF. 50).

The fact that both LTP and LTD are generated through the activation of NMDA receptors and subsequent Ca<sup>2+</sup> increases might seem contradictory. However, the Ca<sup>2+</sup> sensitivity of calcineurin is greater than that of CaMKII, PKC and the CaM-stimulated adenylyl cyclases. Therefore, low-level Ca<sup>2+</sup> signals initially stimulate calcineurin preferentially over the kinases, leading to dephosphorylation of various proteins, including AMPA receptors. Stronger activation of NMDA receptors, as occurs in LTP, generates Ca<sup>2+</sup> signals that are sufficient to activate CaMKII, PKC and the CaM-stimulated adenylyl cyclases. The activation of CaM-stimulated adenylyl cyclases is thought to activate PKA, which, in turn, phosphorylates the inhibitor I-1, leading to the inhibition of PP1, which is necessary for LTP. On the other hand, calcineurin can decrease NMDA receptor open time, which reduces Ca<sup>2+</sup> levels and thereby contributes to LTD<sup>110</sup>. In addition, dephosphorylation of endocytic proteins by calcineurin might cause internalization of AMPA receptors and promote LTD<sup>111</sup>.

LTD/LTP THRESHOLD  
The frequency at which an LTD response is converted to LTP.

Another mechanism by which calcineurin might control synaptic plasticity that has been largely overlooked is its effect on the levels of free CaM available in neurons. Both phospho-neuromodulin<sup>100</sup> and phospho-neurogranin<sup>101</sup> are substrates for calcineurin. In fact, neuromodulin is one of the best substrates for calcineurin in the CNS. As the phosphorylated forms of neurogranin and neuromodulin do not bind CaM, activation of calcineurin by Ca<sup>2+</sup> during LTD would be expected to dephosphorylate neuromodulin and neurogranin, thereby causing increased binding of CaM to these proteins and lowering free CaM levels<sup>112</sup>. A reduction in available CaM presumably lowers CaM-stimulated adenylyl cyclase, PKA and CaMKII activities in neurons, thereby promoting LTD. This hypothesis is supported by evidence that the phosphorylation of neuromodulin and neurogranin is lowered during LTD<sup>113</sup>. Therefore, control of free CaM levels by calcineurin might be an important component of LTD.

### Control of CRE-mediated transcription

E-LTP at the Schaffer collateral–CA1 synapse is independent of transcription and translation, whereas L-LTP at this synapse depends on *de novo* translation<sup>114</sup>. Memory can also be divided into at least two temporally and mechanistically distinct forms: short-term memory (STM), which lasts no longer than several hours, and LTM, which lasts for days or longer and depends on increased transcription<sup>113</sup>. L-LTP and LTM depend on the activation of cAMP signalling<sup>90</sup> as well as *de novo* gene expression<sup>115–118</sup>. One of the transcriptional pathways implicated in LTM and L-LTP in the hippocampus is the CREB–CRE transcriptional pathway, which is co-regulated by ERK/MAPK and cAMP.

The CRE can integrate Ca<sup>2+</sup> and cAMP signals to enhance the expression of a family of genes regulated through CRE in their promoters that are required for L-LTP and LTM. In addition, CREB is thought to be an important regulator of LTM. CREB is essential for long-term facilitation in *Aplysia californica*<sup>119,120</sup>, as well as for LTM in *Drosophila melanogaster*<sup>121,122</sup> and mice<sup>123</sup>. Furthermore, CRE-mediated transcription is stimulated in the hippocampus during hippocampus-dependent memory formation<sup>124</sup>, and inhibition of CRE-mediated transcription by the application of CRE decoys to area CA1 of the hippocampus blocks contextual memory formation<sup>125</sup>. Although the role of CREB-mediated transcription in L-LTP is controversial because disruption of the CREB gene results in compensatory increases in related transcriptional factors<sup>126</sup>, high-frequency stimulation enhances the phosphorylation of CREB at Ser133 and stimulates CRE-mediated transcription in area CA1 (REF. 73). Furthermore, the expression of constitutively activated CREB facilitates a form of L-LTP in area CA1 that is independent of transcription, which indicates that stimulation of CRE-mediated transcription primes the synapse for subsequent capture of L-LTP generated by a weak stimulus<sup>127</sup>. Interestingly, heterosynaptic L-LTP depends on *de novo* protein synthesis, cAMP signalling and CREB
and transactivation of CREB in hippocampal neurons⁶⁹. High-frequency, but not low-frequency, stimulation causes phosphorylation and activation of ERK/MAPK in CA1 pyramidal cell bodies and dendrites. Furthermore, the MAPK/ERK kinase (MEK) inhibitor PD98059 blocks tetanus-induced phospho-ERK staining. Sweatt and co-workers have reported that MEK inhibitors block LTP⁶⁸,¹³². Furthermore, intraperitoneal administration of a MEK inhibitor, SL327, blocks fear conditioning¹³³, as does direct administration of PD98059 to area CA1 (REF. 125). CREB phosphorylation induced by synaptic activity does not always result in transcriptional activation⁷³,¹³⁴⁻¹³⁶, which indicates that full activation of CREB-dependent transcription depends on a second event. In this respect, it is interesting that NMDA activates the transcription of CREB-responsive genes in primary hippocampal neurons, with CaMKIV being responsible for phosphorylating the CREB co-activator, CBP, at Ser301 (REF. 137).

There are several mechanisms for stimulation of the ERK/MAPK pathway by Ca²⁺, which include activation of RasGRF1 or RasGRP1, a Ca²⁺-activated guanylyl nucleotide-releasing protein¹³⁸. Another obvious mechanism for the coupling of Ca²⁺ to ERK/MAPK is through Ca²⁺ stimulation of adenyl cyclase activity and activation of the ERK/MAPK pathway by cAMP through EPAC1 (RAP guanine nucleotide exchange factor 3)¹³⁹. Moreover, cAMP signalling is required for the nuclear translocation of ERK/MAPK, an event that is necessary for the activation of nuclear RSK2, a CREB kinase, and CREB phosphorylation⁶⁹. Collectively, these data support a model for stimulation of CRE-mediated transcription by Ca²⁺ that depends on three key CaM-stimulated enzymes: ERK/MAPK, adenyl cyclase and CaMKIV (FIG. 4).

### Summary

Many forms of synaptic plasticity that are expressed in the CNS depend on an initial Ca²⁺ signal that is generated through the activation of voltage-sensitive Ca²⁺ channels or NMDA receptors. CaM orchestrates the activation of a family of Ca²⁺-regulated proteins, presynaptically and postsynaptically, to produce long-term changes in synaptic activity. Like many signal transduction components in neurons, CaM is localized in sub-compartments of neurons and the levels of free CaM might be controlled by several CaM-binding proteins, including neuromodulin, neurogranin and RCS. CaM-regulated enzymes that are important for synaptic plasticity include CaMKII, CaMKIV, calcineurin, AC1 and AC8. Because of space constraints, it has not been possible to discuss all of the CaM-regulated proteins that have been implicated in synaptic plasticity, including components of the cytoskeleton, nitric oxide synthase and Ca²⁺ channels. An important challenge for future research is to understand the spatial and temporal coordination of the CaM-regulated signalling events that contribute to synaptic plasticity at specific synapses in the CNS.

Several kinases can activate CREB by catalysing its phosphorylation at Ser133. Synaptic activity and Ca²⁺ influx trigger an early and transient phase of CREB phosphorylation, which is mediated by CaMKIV (REFS 128,129), as well as a persistent phase of phosphorylation (>5 min) that is mediated by ERK/MAPK signalling⁶⁹. Although the identity of the ERK-activated CREB kinase (or kinases) is not clear, ribosomal protein S6 kinase (RSK/MSK) family members have been implicated in depolarization-mediated CREB phosphorylation⁷⁰,¹³⁰,¹³¹. Furthermore, sequential activation of ERK and RSK2 by Ca²⁺ leads to the phosphorylation

1. Malenka, R. C. & Bear, M. F. LTP and LTD; an embarrassment of riches. *Neuron* **44**, 5–21 (2004).
2. Matynia, A., Kushner, S. A. & Silva, A. J. Genetic approaches to molecular and cellular cognition: a focus on LTP and learning and memory. *Annu. Rev. Genet.* **36**, 687–720 (2002).
3. Cimler, B. M., Andreasen, T. J., Andreasen, K. I. & Storm, D. R. P-57 is a neural specific calmodulin-binding protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* **260**, 10784–10788 (1985).
4. LaPorte, D. C., Wierman, B. M. & Storm, D. R. Calcium-induced exposure of a hydrophobic surface on calmodulin. *Biochemistry* **19**, 3814–3819 (1980).
5. Babu, Y. S., Bugg, C. E. & Cook, W. J. Structure of calmodulin refined at 2.2 Å resolution. *J. Mol. Biol.* **204**, 191–204 (1988).
6. Chapman, E. R., Alexander, K., Vorher, T., Carafoli, E. & Stom, D. R. Fluorescence energy transfer analysis of calmodulin-peptide complexes. *Biochemistry* **31**, 12819–12825 (1992).
7. Levin, R. M. & Weiss, B. Specificity of the binding of trifluoperazine to the calcium-dependent activator of phosphodiesterase and to a series of other calcium-binding proteins. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **540**, 197–204 (1978).
8. Weiss, B., Prozialeck, W., Cimino, M., Barnette, M. S. & Wallace, T. L. Pharmacological regulation of calmodulin. *Ann. NY Acad. Sci.* **356**, 319–345 (1980).
9. Olwin, B. B., Edelman, A. M., Krebs, E. G. & Storm, D. R. Quantitation of energy coupling between Ca²⁺, calmodulin, skeletal muscle myosin light chain kinase, and kinase substrates. *J. Biol. Chem.* **259**, 10949–10955 (1984).
10. Olwin, B. B. & Storm, D. R. Binding of calcium to calmodulin-protein complexes. *Biochemistry* **24**, 8081–8086 (1985).
11. Andreasen, T. J., Luetje, C. W., Heideman, W. & Storm, D. R. Purification of a novel calmodulin binding protein from bovine cerebral cortex membranes. *Biochemistry* **22**, 4615–4618 (1983).
12. Alexander, K. A., Wakim, B. T., Doyle, G. S., Walsh, K. A. & Storm, D. R. Identification and characterization of the calmodulin-binding domain of neuromodulin, a neurospecific calmodulin-binding protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* **263**, 7544–7549 (1988).
References 11 and 12 were the first papers to report that neuromodulin is a CaM-binding protein with higher affinity for CaM in the absence of Ca²⁺ than in its presence.
13. Apel, E. D., Byford, M. F., Au, D., Walsh, K. A. & Storm, D. R. Identification of the protein kinase C phosphorylation site in neuromodulin. *Biochemistry* **29**, 2330–2335 (1990).
14. Chao, S., Benowitz, L. I., Krainc, D. & Irwin, N. Use of a two-hybrid system to investigate molecular interactions of GAP-43. *Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res.* **40**, 195–202 (1996).
15. Gamby, C., Waage, M. C., Allen, R. G. & Baizer, L. Analysis of the role of calmodulin binding and sequestration in neuromodulin (GAP-43) function. *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 26698–26705 (1996).
16. Nelson, R. B. & Routtenberg, A. Characterization of protein F1 (47 kDa, 4.5 pI): a kinase C substrate directly related to neural plasticity. *Exp. Neurol.* **89**, 213–224 (1985).
17. Kleschevnikov, A. M. & Routtenberg, A. PKC activation rescues LTP from NMDA receptor blockade. *Hippocampus* **11**, 168–175 (2001).
18. Hulo, S., Alberi, S., Laux, T., Muller, D. & Caroni, P. A point mutant of GAP-43 induces enhanced short-term and long-term hippocampal plasticity. *Eur. J. Neurosci.* **15**, 1976–1982 (2002). Showed that overexpression of a mutated form of neuromodulin that mimics the protein phosphorylated at Ser41 enhances CA1 LTP. This paper supports the hypothesis that phosphorylation of neuromodulin at Ser41 by PKC releases CaM and enhances synaptic efficacy.
19. Represa, A., Deloulme, J. C., Sensenbrenner, M., Ben-Ari, Y. & Baudier, J. Neurogranin: immunocytochemical localization of a brain-specific protein kinase C substrate.
20. Baudier, J., Deloulme, J. C., Van-Dorsselaer, A., Black, D. & Matthes, H. W. Identification of a consensus amino acid sequence between neurogranin and neuromodulin (GAP43) that corresponds to the protein kinase C phosphorylation site and the calmodulin binding domain. *J. Biol. Chem.* **266**, 229–237 (1991).
21. Prichard, L., Deloulme, J. C. & Storm, D. R. Interactions between neurogranin and calmodulin *in vivo*. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 7689–7694 (1999).
22. Krucker, T. *et al.* Targeted disruption of RC3 reveals a calmodulin-based mechanism for regulating metaplasticity in the hippocampus. *J. Neurosci.* **22**, 5525–5535 (2002).
23. Gerendasy, D. D. & Sutcliffe, J. G. RC3/neurogranin, a postsynaptic calpacitin for setting the response threshold to calcium influxes. *Mol. Neurobiol.* **15**, 131–163 (1997).
24. Rakhilin, S. V. *et al.* A network of control mediated by regulator of calcium/calmodulin-dependent signaling. *Science* **306**, 698–701 (2004).

25. Hudmon, A. & Schulman, H. Neuronal Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II: the role of structure and autoregulation in cellular function. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* **71**, 473–510 (2002).
26. Lisman, J., Schulman, H. & Cline, H. The molecular basis of CaMKII function in synaptic and behavioural memory. *Nature Rev. Neurosci.* **3**, 175–190 (2002).
27. Fink, C. C. & Meyer, T. Molecular mechanisms of CaMKII activation in neuronal plasticity. *Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.* **12**, 293–299 (2002).
28. Colbran, R. J. & Brown, A. M. Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II and synaptic plasticity. *Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.* **14**, 318–327 (2004).
29. DeKonick, P. & Schulman, H. Sensitivity of CaM kinase II to the frequency of Ca²⁺ oscillations. *Science* **279**, 227–230 (1998).
30. Torok, K., Tzortzopoulos, A., Grabarek, Z., Best, S. L. & Thorogate, R. Dual effect of ATP in the activation mechanism of brain Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II by Ca²⁺/calmodulin. *Biochemistry* **40**, 14878–14890 (2001).
31. Shen, K. & Meyer, T. Dynamic control of CaMKII translocation and localization in hippocampal neurons by NMDA receptor stimulation. *Science* **284**, 162–166 (1999).
32. Bayer, K. U., De Koninck, P., Leonard, A. S., Hell, J. W. & Schulman, H. Interaction with the NMDA receptor locks CaMKII in an active conformation. *Nature* **411**, 801–805 (2001). The first evidence that the interaction between NMDA receptors and CaMKII leads to the trapping of CaM, an interaction that might decrease the downregulation of NMDA receptor activity.
33. Miller, S. G. & Kennedy, M. B. Regulation of brain type II Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase by autophosphorylation: a Ca²⁺-triggered molecular switch. *Cell* **44**, 861–870 (1986).
34. Malinow, R., Schulman, H. & Tsien, R. W. Inhibition of postsynaptic PKC or CaMKII blocks induction but not expression of LTP. *Science* **245**, 862–866 (1989).
35. Malenka, R. C. *et al.* An essential role for postsynaptic calmodulin and protein kinase activity in long-term potentiation. *Nature* **340**, 554–557 (1989). References 34 and 35 were the first studies to use enzyme inhibitors to implicate CaMKII in LTP.
36. Fukunaga, K., Stoppini, L., Miyamoto, E. & Muller, D. Long-term potentiation is associated with an increased activity of Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. *J. Biol. Chem.* **268**, 7863–7867 (1993).
37. McGlade-McCulloh, E., Yamamoto, H., Tan, S. E., Brickey, D. A. & Soderling, T. R. Phosphorylation and regulation of glutamate receptors by calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. *Nature* **362**, 640–642 (1993).
38. Lledo, P. M. *et al.* Calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase II and long-term potentiation enhance synaptic transmission by the same mechanism. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **92**, 11175–11179 (1995).
39. Silva, A. J., Stevens, C. F., Tonegawa, S. & Wang, Y. Deficient hippocampal long-term potentiation in α-calmodulin kinase II mutant mice. *Science* **257**, 201–206 (1992). References 38 and 39 were the first studies to use gene disruption technology to implicate CaMKII in LTP and memory.
40. Silva, A. J., Paylor, R., Wehner, J. M. & Tonegawa, S. Impaired spatial learning in α-calcium-calmodulin kinase II mutant mice. *Science* **257**, 206–211 (1992).
41. Giese, K. P., Fedorov, N. B., Filipkowski, R. K. & Silva, A. J. Autophosphorylation at Thr(286) of the α calcium-calmodulin kinase II in LTP and learning. *Science* **279**, 870–873 (1998).
42. Kauer, J. A., Malenka, R. C. & Nicoll, R. A. A persistent postsynaptic modification mediates long-term potentiation in the hippocampus. *Neuron* **1**, 911–917 (1988).
43. Muller, D. & Lynch, G. Long-term potentiation differentially affects two components of synaptic responses in hippocampus. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **85**, 9346–9350 (1988).
44. Hayashi, Y. *et al.* Driving AMPA receptors into synapses by LTP and CaMKII: requirement for GluR1 and PDZ domain interaction. *Science* **287**, 2262–2267 (2000).
45. Nusser, Z. *et al.* Cell type and pathway dependence of synaptic AMPA receptor number and variability in the hippocampus. *Neuron* **21**, 545–559 (1998).
46. Barria, A., Muller, D., Derkach, V., Griffith, L. C. & Soderling, T. R. Regulatory phosphorylation of AMPA-type glutamate receptors by CaM-KII during long-term potentiation. *Science* **276**, 2042–2045 (1997).
47. Mammen, A. L., Kameyama, K., Roche, K. W. & Huganir, R. L. Phosphorylation of the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole4-propionic acid receptor GluR1 subunit by calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase II. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 32528–32533 (1997).
48. Wu, G. Y., Malinow, R. & Cline, H. T. Maturation of a central glutamatergic synapse. *Science* **274**, 972–976 (1996).
49. Lisman, J. E. & Zhabotinsky, A. M. A model of synaptic memory: a CaMKII/PP1 switch that potentiates transmission by organizing an AMPA receptor anchoring assembly. *Neuron* **31**, 191–201 (2001).

50. Lee, H. K. *et al.* Phosphorylation of the AMPA receptor GluR1 subunit is required for synaptic plasticity and retention of spatial memory. *Cell* **112**, 631–643 (2003). The first study to show that phosphorylation of AMPA receptors at both phosphorylation sites is required for LTP. Transgenic mice with knock-in mutations in the AMPA phosphorylation sites show defects in LTP and LTD.
51. Poser, S. & Storm, D. R. Role of Ca²⁺-stimulated adenyl cyclases in LTP and memory formation. *Int. J. Dev. Neurosci.* **19**, 387–394 (2001).
52. Matsuzaki, M., Honkura, N., Ellis-Davies, G. C. & Kasai, H. Structural basis of long-term potentiation in single dendritic spines. *Nature* **429**, 761–766 (2004). Evidence that CaMKII activity is required for the glutamate-induced enlargement of stimulated spines.
53. Kim, C. H. & Lisman, J. E. A role of actin filament in synaptic transmission and long-term potentiation. *J. Neurosci.* **19**, 4314–4424 (1999).
54. Krucker, T., Siggins, G. R. & Halpain, S. Dynamic actin filaments are required for stable long-term potentiation (LTP) in area CA1 of the hippocampus. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **97**, 6856–6861 (2000).
55. Schnell, E. *et al.* Direct interactions between PSD-95 and stargazin control synaptic AMPA receptor number. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **99**, 13902–13907 (2002).
56. Tiedge, H. & Brosius, J. Translational machinery in dendrites of hippocampal neurons in culture. *J. Neurosci.* **16**, 7171–7181 (1996).
57. Steward, O. & Schuman, E. M. Protein synthesis at synaptic sites on dendrites. *Annu. Rev. Neurosci.* **24**, 299–325 (2001).
58. Frey, U. & Morris, R. G. M. Synaptic tagging and long-term potentiation. *Nature* **385**, 533–536 (1997).
59. Mayford, M., Baranes, D., Podsypanina, K. & Kandel, E. R. The 3′-untranslated region of CaMKIIα is a cis-acting signal for the localization and translation of mRNA in dendrites. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **93**, 13250–13255 (1996).
60. Thomas, K. L., Laroche, S., Errington, M. L., Bliss, T. V. & Hunt, S. P. Spatial and temporal changes in signal transduction pathways during LTP. *Neuron* **13**, 737–745 (1994).
61. Ouyang, Y., Rosenstein, A., Kreiman, G., Schuman, E. M. & Kennedy, M. B. Tetanic stimulation leads to increased accumulation of Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II via dendritic protein synthesis in hippocampal neurons. *J. Neurosci.* **19**, 7823–7833 (1999).
62. Miller, S. *et al.* Disruption of dendritic translation of CaMKIIα impairs stabilization of synaptic plasticity and memory consolidation. *Neuron* **36**, 507–519 (2002). In this study, the CaMKII gene was mutated to disrupt the dendritic localization signal in the mRNA with the protein-coding region intact. Removal of dendritic mRNA reduced CaMKII in the PSDs and decreased L-LTP.
63. Atkins, C. M., Nozaki, N., Shigeri, Y. & Soderling, T. R. Cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding protein-dependent protein synthesis is regulated by calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. *J. Neurosci.* **24**, 5193–5201 (2004).
64. Ninan, I. & Arancio, O. Presynaptic CaMKII is necessary for synaptic plasticity in cultured hippocampal neurons. *Neuron* **42**, 129–141 (2004).
65. Greengard, P., Valtorta, F., Czernik, A. J. & Benfenati, F. Synaptic vesicle phosphoproteins and regulation of synaptic function. *Science* **259**, 780–785 (1993).
66. Chi, P., Greengard, P. & Ryan, T. A. Synaptic vesicle mobilization is regulated by distinct synapsin I phosphorylation pathways at different frequencies. *Neuron* **38**, 69–78 (2003).
67. Bos, J. L. Epac: a new cAMP target and new avenues in cAMP research. *Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.* **4**, 733–738 (2003).
68. English, J. D. & Sweatt, D. J. Activation of p42 MAP kinase in hippocampal long term potentiation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **271**, 24329–24332 (1996).
69. Impey, S. *et al.* Cross talk between ERK and PKA is required for Ca²⁺ stimulation of CREB-dependent transcription and ERK nuclear translocation. *Neuron* **21**, 869–883 (1998).
70. Frey, U., Reymann, K. G. & Matthies, H. The effect of dopaminergic D1 receptor blockade during tetanization on the expression of long-term potentiation in the rat CA1 region *in vitro*. *Neurosci. Lett.* **129**, 111–114 (1991).
71. Frey, U., Huang, Y. Y. & Kandel, E. R. Effects of cAMP simulate a late stage of LTP in hippocampal CA1 neurons. *Science* **260**, 1661–1664 (1993).
72. Impey, S. *et al.* Induction of CRE-mediated gene expression by stimuli that generate long-lasting LTP in area CA1 of the hippocampus. *Neuron* **16**, 973–982 (1996).
73. Abel, T., Nguyen, P. V., Barad, M., Deuel, T. A. S. & Kandel, E. R. Genetic demonstration of a role for PKA in the late phase of LTP and in hippocampus-based long-term memory. *Cell* **88**, 615–626 (1997).

RE VIEWS

74. Nguyen, P. V. & Kandel, E. R. A macromolecular synthesis-dependent late phase of long-term potentiation requiring cAMP in the medial perforant pathway of rat hippocampal slices. *J. Neurosci.* **16**, 3189–3198 (1996).

75. Huang, Y. Y., Pittenger, C. & Kandel, E. R. A form of long-lasting, learning-related synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus induced by heterosynaptic low-frequency pairing. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 859–864 (2004).  
This paper reports that heterosynaptically induced LTP requires PKA activity as well as protein synthesis. Transgenic mice that express a dominant-negative CREB inhibitor in the hippocampus have impaired heterosynaptic L-LTP.

76. Xia, Z. G., Refsdal, C. D., Merchant, K. M., Dorsa, D. M. & Storm, D. R. Distribution of mRNA for the calmodulin-sensitive adenylate cyclase in rat brain: expression in areas associated with learning and memory. *Neuron* **6**, 431–443 (1991).

77. Cali, J. J., Zwaagstra, C., Mons, N., Cooper, D. M. F. & Krupinski, J. Type VIII adenylyl cyclase: a Ca²⁺/calmodulin stimulated enzyme expressed in discrete regions of rat brain. *J. Biol. Chem.* **269**, 12190–12196 (1994).

78. Stanton, P. K. & Sarvey, J. M. The effect of high-frequency electrical stimulation and norepinephrine on cyclic AMP levels in normal versus norepinephrine-depleted rat hippocampal slices. *Brain Res.* **358**, 343–348 (1985).

79. Chetkovich, D. M. & Sweatt, J. D. NMDA receptor activation increases cAMP in area CA1 of the hippocampus via Ca²⁺/calmodulin stimulation of adenylyl cyclase. *J. Neurochem.* **61**, 1933–1942 (1993).

80. Huang, Y. Y. *et al.* A genetic test of the effects of mutations in PKA on mossy fiber LTP and its relation to spatial and contextual learning. *Cell* **83**, 1211–1222 (1995).

81. Brandon, E. P. *et al.* Hippocampal long-term depression and depotentiation are defective in mice carrying a targeted disruption of the gene encoding the RIβ subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **92**, 8851–8855 (1995).

82. Pineda, V. V. *et al.* Removal of G<sub>iα1</sub> constraints on adenylyl cyclase in the hippocampus enhances LTP and impairs memory formation. *Neuron* **41**, 153–163 (2004).

83. Blitzer, R. D. *et al.* Gating of CaMKII by cAMP-regulated protein phosphatase activity during LTP. *Science* **280**, 1940–1943 (1998).

84. Wang, H. & Storm, D. R. Calmodulin-regulated adenylyl cyclases: cross-talk and plasticity in the central nervous system. *Mol. Pharmacol.* **63**, 463–468 (2003).

85. Xia, Z., Choi, E. J., Wang, F., Blazynski, C. & Storm, D. R. Type I calmodulin-sensitive adenylyl cyclase is neural specific. *J. Neurochem.* **60**, 305–311 (1993).

86. Wu, Z. L. *et al.* Altered behavior and long-term potentiation in type I adenylyl cyclase mutant mice. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **92**, 220–224 (1995).

87. Otmakhova, N. A., Otmakhov, N., Mortenson, L. H. & Lisman, J. E. Inhibition of the cAMP pathway decreases early long-term potentiation at CA1 hippocampal synapses. *J. Neurosci.* **20**, 4446–4451 (2000).  
References 87 and 88 provide the first evidence that CaM-stimulated adenylyl cyclases and cAMP signalling are required for E-LTP.

88. Villacres, E. C., Wong, S. T., Chavkin, C. & Storm, D. R. Type I adenylyl cyclase mutant mice have impaired mossy fiber long-term potentiation. *J. Neurosci.* **18**, 3186–3194 (1998).

89. Storm, D. R., Hansel, C., Hacker, B., Parent, A. & Linden, D. J. Impaired cerebellar LTP in type I adenylyl cyclase mutant mice. *Neuron* **20**, 1199–1210 (1998).  
References 89 and 90 provide evidence that CaM-stimulated adenylyl cyclases are required for presynaptic LTP.

90. Wang, H. *et al.* Type 8 adenylyl cyclase is targeted to excitatory synapses and required for mossy fiber long-term potentiation. *J. Neurosci.* **23**, 9710–9718 (2003).

91. Weisskopf, M. G., Castillo, P. E., Zalutsky, R. A. & Nicoll, R. A. Mediation of hippocampal mossy fiber long-term potentiation by cyclic AMP. *Science* **265**, 1878–1882 (1994).

92. Salin, P. A., Malenka, R. C. & Nicoll, R. A. Cyclic AMP mediates a presynaptic form of LTP at cerebellar parallel fiber synapses. *Neuron* **16**, 797–803 (1996).

93. Castillo, P. E. *et al.* Rab3A is essential for mossy fibre long-term potentiation in the hippocampus. *Nature* **388**, 590–593 (1997).

94. Wong, S. T. *et al.* Calcium-stimulated adenylyl cyclase activity is critical for hippocampus dependent long-term memory and late-phase LTP. *Neuron* **23**, 787–798 (1999).  
The first evidence that CaM-stimulated adenylyl cyclases are required for L-LTP and LTM.

95. Wang, H., Ferguson, G. D., Pineda, V. V., Cundiff, P. E. & Storm, D. R. Overexpression of type-1 adenylyl cyclase in mouse forebrain enhances recognition memory and LTP. *Nature Neurosci.* **7**, 635–642 (2004).

96. Wang, J. H. & Desai, R. A brain protein and its effect on the Ca²⁺- and protein modulator-activated cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **72**, 926–937 (1976).

97. Klee, C. B., Crouch, T. H. & Krinks, M. H. Calcineurin: a calcium- and calmodulin-binding protein of the nervous system. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **76**, 6270–6273 (1979).

98. Takaiishi, T., Saito, N., Kuno, T. & Tanaka, C. Differential distribution of the mRNA encoding two isoforms of the catalytic subunit of calcineurin in the rat brain. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **174**, 393–398 (1991).

99. Kuno, T. *et al.* Distinct cellular expression of calcineurin A α and A β in rat brain. *J. Neurochem.* **58**, 1643–1651 (1992).

100. Liu, Y. C. & Storm, D. R. Dephosphorylation of neuromodulin by calcineurin. *J. Biol. Chem.* **264**, 12800–12804 (1989).

101. Seki, K., Chen, H. C. & Huang, K. P. Dephosphorylation of protein kinase C substrates, neurogranin, neuromodulin, and MARCKS, by calcineurin and protein phosphatases 1 and 2A. *Arch. Biochem. Biophys.* **316**, 673–679 (1995).

102. Mulkey, R. M., Endo, S., Shenolikar, S. & Malenka, R. C. Involvement of a calcineurin/inhibitor-1 phosphatase cascade in hippocampal long-term depression. *Nature* **369**, 486–488 (1994).

103. Malleret, G. *et al.* Inducible and reversible enhancement of learning, memory, and long-term potentiation by genetic inhibition of calcineurin. *Cell* **104**, 675–686 (2001).  
Using a doxycycline-dependent rtTA system to express a calcineurin inhibitor in the mouse brain, the authors showed that a reduction in calcineurin activity enhances LTP.

104. Migaud, M. *et al.* Enhanced long-term potentiation and impaired learning in mice with mutant postsynaptic density-95 protein. *Nature* **396**, 433–439 (1998).

105. Dudek, S. M. & Bear, M. F. Homosynaptic long-term depression in area CA1 of hippocampus and effects of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor blockade. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **89**, 4363–4367 (1992).

106. Mulkey, R. M., Herron, C. E. & Malenka, R. C. An essential role for protein phosphatases in hippocampal long-term depression. *Science* **261**, 1051–1055 (1993).

107. Lisman, J. A mechanism for the Hebb and the anti-Hebb processes underlying learning and memory. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **86**, 9574–9578 (1989).

108. Banke, T. G. *et al.* Control of GluR1 AMPA receptor function by cAMP-dependent protein kinase. *J. Neurosci.* **20**, 89–102 (2000).

109. Lee, H. K., Barbarosie, M., Kameyama, K., Bear, M. F. & Huganir, R. L. Regulation of distinct AMPA receptor phosphorylation sites during bidirectional synaptic plasticity. *Nature* **405**, 955–959 (2000).

110. Shi, J., Townsend, M. & Constantine-Paton, M. Activity-dependent induction of tonic calcineurin activity mediates a rapid developmental downregulation of NMDA receptor currents. *Neuron* **28**, 103–114 (2000).

111. Beattie, E. C. *et al.* Regulation of AMPA receptor endocytosis by a signaling mechanism shared with LTD. *Nature Neurosci.* **3**, 1291–1300 (2000).

112. Liu, Y. C. & Storm, D. R. Regulation of free calmodulin levels by neuromodulin: neuron growth and regeneration. *Trends Pharmacol. Sci.* **11**, 107–111 (1990).

113. Ramakers, G. M., Heinen, K., Gispen, W. H. & de Graan, P. N. Long term depression in the CA1 field is associated with a transient decrease in pre- and postsynaptic PKC substrate phosphorylation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 28682–28687 (2000).

114. Frey, U., Krug, M., Reymann, K. G. & Matthies, H. Anisomycin, an inhibitor of protein synthesis, blocks late phases of LTP phenomena in the hippocampal CA1 region *in vitro*. *Brain Res.* **452**, 57–65 (1988).

115. Tully, T., Preat, T., Boynton, S. C. & Del Vecchio, M. Genetic dissection of consolidated memory in *Drosophila*. *Cell* **79**, 35–47 (1994).

116. Flexner, L. B. & Flexner, J. B. Effect of acetoxycycloheximide and of an acetoxycycloheximide-puromycin mixture on cerebral protein synthesis and memory in mice. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **55**, 369–374 (1966).

117. Squire, L. R. & Barondes, S. H. Memory impairment during prolonged training in mice given inhibitors of cerebral protein synthesis. *Brain Res.* **56**, 215–225 (1973).

118. Crow, T. & Forrester, J. Inhibition of protein synthesis blocks long-term enhancement of generator potentials produced by one-trial *in vivo* conditioning in *Hermisseuda*. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **87**, 4490–4494 (1990).

119. Dash, P. K., Hochner, B. & Kandel, E. R. Injection of the cAMP-responsive element into the nucleus of *Aplysia* sensory neurons blocks long-term facilitation. *Nature* **345**, 718–721 (1990).

120. Martin, K. C. *et al.* Synapse-specific, long-form facilitation of *Aplysia* sensory to motor synapses: a function for local protein synthesis in memory storage. *Cell* **91**, 927–938 (1997).

121. Yin, J. C. P. *et al.* Induction of a dominant negative CREB transgene specifically blocks long-term memory in *Drosophila*. *Cell* **79**, 49–58 (1994).

122. Yin, J. C., Del Vecchio, M., Zhou, H. & Tully, T. CREB as a memory modulator: induced expression of a dCREB2 activator isoform enhances long-term memory in *Drosophila*. *Cell* **81**, 107–115 (1995).

123. Bourchuladze, R. *et al.* Deficient long-term memory in mice with a targeted mutation of the cAMP-responsive element-binding protein. *Cell* **79**, 59–68 (1994).

124. Impey, S. *et al.* Stimulation of cAMP response element (CRE)-mediated transcription during contextual learning. *Nature Neurosci.* **1**, 595–601 (1998).

125. Athos, J., Impey, S., Pineda, V. V., Chen, X. & Storm, D. R. Hippocampal CRE-mediated gene expression is required for contextual memory formation. *Nature Neurosci.* **5**, 1119–1120 (2002).

126. Pittenger, C. *et al.* Reversible inhibition of CREB/ATF transcription factors in region CA1 of the dorsal hippocampus disrupts hippocampus-dependent spatial memory. *Neuron* **34**, 447–462 (2002).

127. Barco, A., Alarcon, J. M. & Kandel, E. R. Expression of constitutively active CREB protein facilitates the late phase of long-term potentiation by enhancing synaptic capture. *Cell* **108**, 689–703 (2002).  
Direct evidence using transgenic mouse technology that CREB can regulate L-LTP.

128. Bito, H., Deisseroth, K. & Tsien, R. W. CREB phosphorylation and dephosphorylation: a Ca²⁺- and stimulus duration-dependent switch for hippocampal gene expression. *Cell* **87**, 1203–1214 (1996).

129. Wu, G. Y., Deisseroth, K. & Tsien, R. W. Activity-dependent CREB phosphorylation: convergence of a fast, sensitive calmodulin kinase pathway and a slow, less sensitive mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **98**, 2808–2813 (2001).

130. Xing, J., Ginty, D. D. & Greenberg, M. E. Coupling of the RAS-MAPK pathway to gene activation by RSK2, a growth factor-regulated CREB kinase. *Science* **273**, 959–963 (1996).

131. Deak, M., Clifton, A. D., Lucocq, J. M. & Alessi, D. R. Mitogen- and stress-activated protein kinase-1 (MSK1) is directly activated by MAPK and SAPK2/p38, and may mediate activation of CREB. *EMBO J.* **17**, 4426–4441 (1998).

132. English, J. D. & Sweatt, J. D. A requirement for the mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade in hippocampal long term potentiation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **272**, 19103–19106 (1997).  
The first evidence that signalling through the ERK/MAPK pathway is required for LTP.

133. Atkins, C. M., Selcher, J. C., Petraitis, J. J., Trzaskos, J. M. & Sweatt, J. D. The MAPK cascade is required for mammalian associative learning. *Nature Neurosci.* **1**, 602–609 (1998).

134. Deisseroth, K., Bito, H. & Tsien, R. W. Signaling from synapse to nucleus: postsynaptic CREB phosphorylation during multiple forms of hippocampal synaptic plasticity. *Neuron* **16**, 89–101 (1996).

135. Fields, R. D., Eshete, F., Stevens, B. & Itoh, K. Action potential-dependent regulation of gene expression: temporal specificity in Ca²⁺ cAMP-responsive element binding proteins, and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling. *J. Neurosci.* **17**, 7252–7266 (1997).

136. Liu, F. C. & Graybiel, A. M. Spatiotemporal dynamics of CREB phosphorylation: transient versus sustained phosphorylation in the developing striatum. *Neuron* **17**, 1133–1144 (1996).

137. Impey, S. *et al.* Phosphorylation of CBP mediates transcriptional activation by neural activity and CaM kinase IV. *Neuron* **34**, 235–244 (2002).

138. Ebinu, J. O. *et al.* RasGRP, a Ras guanyl nucleotide-releasing protein with calcium- and diacylglycerol-binding motifs. *Science* **280**, 1082–1086 (1998).

139. de Rooij, J. *et al.* Epac is a Rap1 guanine-nucleotide exchange factor directly activated by cAMP. *Nature* **396**, 474–477 (1998).

140. Keller, C. H., Olwin, B. B., LaPorte, D. C. & Storm, D. R. Determination of the free-energy coupling for binding of calcium ions and troponin I to calmodulin. *Biochemistry* **21**, 156–162 (1982).

Acknowledgements  
Both authors are supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health.

Competing interests statement  
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Online links

DATABASES  
The following terms in this article are linked online to:  
Entrez Gene:  
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene  
ACI | α-CaMKII | CPEB | CREB | MAPK | neurogranin | neuromodulin | PP1 | RasGRF1 | RasGRP1 | RSK  

FURTHER INFORMATION  
Storm’s laboratory:  
http://depts.washington.edu/phcol/faculty/storm/storm.html  
Xia’s faculty page: http://depts.washington.edu/envhlth/about/facultypage/xia_page.html  
Access to this interactive links box is free online.
