
Molecular Microbiology (2005) 56(2), 492–508

doi:10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04553.x

# Co-regulation of Salmonella enterica genes required for virulence and resistance to antimicrobial peptides by SlyA and PhoP/PhoQ

William Wiley Navarre,$^{1}$ Thomas A. Halsey,$^{2}$ Don Walthers,$^{3}$ Jonathan Frye,$^{4}$ Michael McClelland,$^{4}$ Jennifer L. Potter,$^{2}$ Linda J. Kenney,$^{3}$ John S. Gunn,$^{5}$ Ferric C. Fang$^{1}$ and Stephen J. Libby$^{1,2,*}$

$^{1}$ Departments of Microbiology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

$^{2}$ Department of Microbiology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA.

$^{3}$ University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

$^{4}$ Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

$^{5}$ Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics; Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases; and The Center for Microbial Interface Biology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

## Summary

Analysis of the transcriptome of *slyA* mutant *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium revealed that many SlyA-dependent genes, including *pagC*, *pagD*, *ugtL*, *mig-14*, *virK*, *phoN*, *pgtE*, *pipB2*, *sopD2*, *pagJ* and *pagK*, are also controlled by the PhoP/PhoQ regulatory system. Many SlyA- and PhoP/PhoQ-co-regulated genes have functions associated with the bacterial envelope, and some have been directly implicated in virulence and resistance to antimicrobial peptides. Purified His-tagged SlyA binds to the *pagC* and *mig-14* promoters in regions homologous to a previously proposed ‘SlyA-box’. The *pagC* promoter lacks a consensus PhoP binding site and does not bind PhoP *in vitro*, suggesting that the effect of PhoP on *pagC* transcription is indirect. Stimulation of *pagC* expression by PhoP requires SlyA. Levels of SlyA protein and mRNA are not significantly changed under low-magnesium PhoP-inducing conditions in which *pagC* expression is profoundly elevated, however, indicating that the PhoP/PhoQ system does not activate *pagC* expression by altering SlyA protein concentration. Models are proposed in which PhoP may control SlyA activity via a soluble ligand or SlyA may function as an anti-repressor to allow PhoP activation. The absence of almost all SlyA-activated genes from the *Escherichia coli* K12 genome suggests that the functional linkage between the SlyA and PhoP/PhoQ regulatory systems arose as *Salmonella* evolved its distinctive pathogenic lifestyle.

## Introduction

*Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium (*S.* Typhimurium) encodes multiple regulatory systems that are critical for intramacrophage survival and pathogenicity. The PhoP/PhoQ two-component regulatory system controls the expression of more than 40 genes required for virulence, growth at low Mg²⁺ concentrations, and resistance to antimicrobial peptides, bile salts and acid pH (Soncini and Groisman, 1996; Groisman *et al.*, 1997; van Velkinburgh and Gunn, 1999; Groisman, 2001). PhoP regulates the expression of some genes indirectly by stimulating the activity of other transcriptional regulators such as the PmrA/PmrB two-component regulatory system (Gunn and Miller, 1996; Kox *et al.*, 2000; Wosten *et al.*, 2000). The PmrA/PmrB system directly controls the expression of a set of genes that mediate resistance to polymyxin B by adding 4-aminoarabinose to the lipid A portion of lipopolysaccharide (Gunn *et al.*, 1998). A direct repeat sequence (T/G)GTTA(A/T) is present in the promoter regions of a subset of genes dependent on PhoP for expression (Yamamoto *et al.*, 2002; Lejona *et al.*, 2003; Minagawa *et al.*, 2003). The promoter regions of these PhoP-dependent genes (including *phoPQ*, *mgtA*, *slyB*, *pmrD* and *pcgL*) interact directly with the PhoP protein, whereas promoter sequences from PhoP-regulated loci lacking canonical PhoP binding sites (such as *pagC*, *phoN* and *mgtCB*) do not (Lejona *et al.*, 2003). This suggests that PhoP/PhoQ may indirectly control the expression of genes such as *pagC*, *phoN* and *mgtCB* by altering the expression or activity of additional transcriptional regulators. One such regulator has been proposed to be SlyA, a DNA-binding protein whose expression can be modulated by PhoP (Norte *et al.*, 2003; Shi *et al.*, 2004a).

Accepted 24 December, 2004. *For correspondence. E-mail slibby@u.washington.edu; Tel. (+1) 206 616 4941; Fax (+1) 206 616 1575. †Present address: Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-7110, USA.*

© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Ltd

SlyA appears to influence expression of a number of *Salmonella* genes, but few SlyA-dependent loci have been identified (Buchmeier et al., 1997; Spory et al., 2002; Stapleton et al., 2002). The importance of SlyA for *Salmonella* pathogenesis has been demonstrated by studies showing that a *slyA* mutant is profoundly attenuated for virulence, unable to replicate in host phagocytes and sensitive to oxidative stress (Libby et al., 1994; Daniels et al., 1996; Buchmeier et al., 1997; Watson et al., 1999; Kaneko et al., 2002). SlyA is a member of the MarR family of transcription factors which includes the MarR, EmrR, HpaR and HpcR proteins of *Escherichia coli*, RovA of *Yersinia* and PecS of *Erwinia carotovora*, and SlyA-Ef of *Enterococcus faecalis* (Ariza et al., 1994; Reverchon et al., 1994; Seoane and Levy, 1995; Praillet et al., 1997; Revell and Miller, 2000; Xiong et al., 2000; Nagel et al., 2001; Grkovic et al., 2002; Nasser and Reverchon, 2002; Galan et al., 2003; Wu et al., 2003; Martin and Rosner, 2004; Rouanet et al., 2004). Members of the MarR family have been shown to act as transcriptional activators, repressors, or both. These homodimeric, winged-helix transcription factors are believed to modulate their DNA-binding activity by binding small molecules within a cleft formed at the surface between the subunits (Grkovic et al., 2002). MarR, which represses expression of the *marAB* operon, is the best-studied member of this family. Upon interaction with salicylate or deoxycholate, MarR dissociates from the *marAB* promoter, thereby enabling transcription to occur (Alekskhun and Levy, 1999; Prouty et al., 2004a). To date no ligand for SlyA has been identified, although DNA binding by SlyA has been demonstrated with purified polyhistidine-tagged protein (Stapleton et al., 2002). In Stapleton et al. (2002), a putative consensus SlyA-binding motif TTAGCAAGCTAA was proposed, with five full or partial copies of this motif demonstrated within the *slyA* promoter. These putative SlyA binding sites may be involved in the autoregulation of *slyA* expression (Stapleton et al., 2002).

Two proteomic analyses of the SlyA regulon in *Salmonella* have been reported. Stapleton et al. (2002) found that *slyA* mutant S. Typhimurium exhibits altered levels of outer membrane proteins and reduced levels of the FliC flagellin protein. Spory et al. (2002) overexpressed SlyA in both EIEC *E. coli* and S. Typhimurium to identify proteins with altered abundance by 2D-gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry. In agreement with Stapleton et al., Spory and colleagues found levels of FliC flagellin to be enhanced by SlyA overexpression.

In the present study we report the use of cDNA microarrays to identify S. Typhimurium genes under the control of SlyA. Unexpectedly, expression levels of a large number of loci previously identified to be controlled by PhoP/PhoQ were found also to be regulated by SlyA, including genes required for virulence and resistance to antimicrobial peptides. The ability of purified SlyA to interact with the pro-

motor regions of two SlyA- and PhoP/PhoQ-co-regulated genes, *pagC* and *mig-14*, was determined *in vitro*. Analysis of mRNA and protein in *slyA* and *phoP* mutant strains revealed an unusual mechanism of interaction between PhoP/PhoQ and SlyA, and has suggested novel models for further study.

### Results

#### Microarray analysis of SlyA-dependent gene expression

To identify genes under the control of SlyA, cDNA microarray analysis was performed using total RNA isolated from wild-type S. Typhimurium ATCC 14028s and an isogenic *slyA* mutant grown to early stationary phase (*OD*~600~ = 2.0, see Experimental procedures). The expression of a *slyA::lacZ* fusion is nearly maximal at this growth phase (Buchmeier et al., 1997). Cy3- or Cy5-labelled cDNA was synthesized from total RNA and hybridized to *Salmonella* LT2 microarrays (Porwollik et al., 2004) (see Experimental procedures). A locus was considered to be SlyA dependent if hybridization intensity showed twofold or greater difference between the wild-type and *slyA* mutant strain and also displayed statistical significance by the method of Ideker et al. (2000; 2001) (see Experimental procedures and Supplementary material, Table S1). Only genes in which intensity was SlyA dependent in at least two of three biological replicates are included in Table 1. Of the 4530 S. Typhimurium transcripts covered in the array [≈ 96% of the open reading frames (ORFs) in the LT2 genome], the expression of 31 loci were consistently altered in the *slyA* mutant including 23 that were present in greater abundance in wild type compared with the *slyA* mutant (Table 1). Surprisingly, several of these SlyA-activated transcripts were previously identified as being positively regulated by the PhoP/PhoQ two-component regulatory system, including *pagC*, *phoN*, *pagJ*, *pgtE*, *sopD2*, *mig-14*, *virK*, *envE* and *ugtL* (Miller et al., 1989; Belden and Miller, 1994; Guina et al., 2000; Brodsky et al., 2002; Brumell et al., 2003; Detweiler et al., 2003; Shi et al., 2004b). The *pagC* locus was the most profoundly SlyA dependent, demonstrating a 40- to 100-fold reduction in expression as compared with wild-type under these conditions.

To specifically determine whether regulation of these loci by SlyA requires PhoP/PhoQ, microarray analysis was used to compare gene expression in *phoP* mutant and *slyA phoP* double mutant strains. This analysis revealed that SlyA-dependent upregulation of 19 genes (*pagC*, *sseAB*, *envE*, *ugtL*, *mig-14*, *virK*, *pgtE*, *phoN*, *pipB2*, *sopD2*, *pagJ*, *ybcY*, *STM0306*, *STM1055*, *STM1254*, *STM1330*, *STM1940* and *STM2287*) was abolished in the absence of *phoP*. The effect of PhoP on the SlyA regulation of two genes (*ssrA* and *STM1328*) was difficult to determine solely from our array analysis due to a relatively

Table 1. SlyA regulated genes in LB media, OD<sub>600</sub> = 2.0.

| Gene number | Gene symbol | Wild-type versus slyA<sup>e</sup> | phoP versus phoP slyA<sup>e</sup> | Description |
|-------------|-------------|---------------------------------|----------------------------------|-------------|
| SlyA-activated genes dependent on PhoP |  |  |  |  |
| STM1246<sup>a</sup> | pagC | 54.3 ± 0.88 | 1.0 ± 0.67 | Outer membrane protein. |
| STM1397<sup>b</sup> | sseA | 20.9 ± 1.8 | 1.0 ± 0.76 | SPI2 type three secretion system (TTSS) chaperone. |
| STM2782<sup>a</sup> | mig-14 | 10.5 ± 1.2 | 1.0 ± 0.91 | Required for virulence and resistance to antimicrobial peptides. |
| STM1638<sup>d</sup> | ybcY | 8.2 ± 1.5 | 1.4 ± 1.3 | Putative SAM-dependent methyltransferase. |
| STM2781<sup>a</sup> | virK | 8.0 ± 0.63 | 1.0 ± 0.69 | Virulence protein homologous to virK in Shigella. |
| STM1254<sup>a</sup> |  | 6.7 ± 0.84 | 1.0 ± 0.92 | Putative outer membrane lipoprotein. Unknown function. |
| STM1330<sup>a</sup> |  | 5.7 ± 0.58 | 1.0 ± 0.67 | Putative inner membrane DNA/RNA non-specific nuclease. Unknown function. |
| STM1601<sup>c</sup> | ugtL | 5.0 ± 1.4 | 1.0 ± 0.78 | Putative membrane phosphatase. Involved in antimicrobial peptide resistance. |
| STM1055<sup>b</sup> |  | 4.2 ± 0.75 | 1.4 ± 0.96 | Gifsy-2 prophage protein. Unknown function. |
| STM2395<sup>a</sup> | pgtE (prtA) | 4.0 ± 0.61 | 1.0 ± 0.68 | Outer membrane protease, OmpT/Pla family. Resistance to antimicrobial peptides. |
| STM1398<sup>a</sup> | sseB | 3.9 ± 0.84 | 1.0 ± 0.68 | SPI2 TTSS effector protein |
| STM2287<sup>c</sup> |  | 3.9 ± 1.2 | 1.0 ± 1.1 | Cytoplasmic protein. Unknown function. |
| STM0306 |  | 3.4 ± 0.70 | 1.0 ± 0.81 | Putative outer membrane adhesin. Homologue of kek from uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC). |
| STM1940<sup>a</sup> |  | 3.5 ± 0.49 | 1.0 ± 0.86 | Putative cell wall-associated hydrolase. Putative lipoprotein/outer membrane location. |
| STM2585<sup>b</sup> | pagJ | 3.4 ± 0.32 | 1.0 ± 0.45 | Gifsy-1 prophage protein. Unknown function. |
| STM0972<sup>a</sup> | sopD2 | 3.1 ± 0.84 | 1.0 ± 0.61 | SopD homologue. Translocated into eukaryotic cells. Associates with endosomes. |
| STM1328<sup>a</sup> |  | 3.2 ± 0.85 | 1.9 ± 0.65 | Putative outer membrane protein. Unknown function. |
| STM1392<sup>a</sup> | ssrA (spiR) | 3.1 ± 1.3 | 1.7 ± 0.76 | Two-component sensor kinase. Regulates SPI2 TTSS. |
| STM4319<sup>a</sup> | phoN | 2.7 ± 0.70 | 1.0 ± 0.55 | Non-specific acid phosphatase |
| STM2780<sup>a</sup> | pipB2 | 2.3 ± 0.61 | 1.1 ± 0.32 | Secreted virulence protein homologous to PipB. |
| STM1242<sup>a</sup> | envE | 2.0 ± 1.2 | 1.0 ± 0.75 | Putative outer membrane protein. |
|  |  | (17.1 ± 1.4)<sup>f</sup> |  |  |
| STM1867<sup>b</sup> | pagK | 1.4 ± 1.1 | 1.0 ± 0.77 | Predicted periplasmic location. Unknown function. |
|  |  | (4.9 ± 0.54)<sup>f</sup> |  |  |
| STM1244<sup>c</sup> | pagD | 1.1 ± 2.0 | –1.3 ± 0.61 | Putative outer membrane virulence protein. |
|  |  | (180 ± 0.16)<sup>f</sup> |  |  |
| STM1572<sup>d</sup> | nmpC | 1.9 ± 0.32 | 3.7 ± 0.38 | Predicted outer membrane porin. Unknown function. |
| SlyA-activated genes independent of PhoP |  |  |  |  |
| STM1391<sup>a</sup> | ssrB | 4.3 ± 0.56 | 2.3 ± 1.1 | Two-component response regulator transcriptional activator. Activates SPI2 TTSS. |
| STM1249<sup>a</sup> |  | 2.6 ± 0.22 | 2.8 ± 0.36 | Putative periplasmic/secreted protein. Unknown function. |
| SlyA-repressed genes |  |  |  |  |
| STM3361 | yhcN | –10.1 ± 3.0 | –2.9 ± 1.3 | Putative outer membrane protein. |
| STM1442 | ydhJ | –6.4 ± 0.74 | –1.4 ± 0.74 | Putative multidrug resistance efflux pump. Transcribed divergently from slyA. |
| STM3105 | yggM | –6.1 ± 0.75 | –1.3 ± 1.3 | Putative periplasmic protein. |
| STM1443 | ydhI | –5.8 ± 0.85 | 1.0 ± 1.2 | Putative inner membrane protein. Unknown function. Transcribed divergently from slyA. |
| STM1530 |  | –5.2 ± 0.69 | –2.6 ± 0.79 | Putative outer membrane porin. OmpC homologue. |
| STM1498 |  | –3.9 ± 0.72 | –1.4 ± 0.99 | Putative dimethyl sulphoxide reductase. |
| STM1499 |  | –3.8 ± 0.44 | –3.4 ± 1.0 | Putative anaerobic DMSO/TMAO reductase, chain A1. |
| STM1519 | marA | –3.5 ± 0.62 | –1.6 ± 0.51 | Transcriptional activator of defence/antibiotic resistance systems (AraC/XylS family) |

a. Not found in E. coli strain K12, may be found in other bacterial species.  
b. Unique to Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.  
c. Unique to Salmonella sp.  
d. On a prophage in E. coli K12 but found on unrelated islet-like sequences in S. Typhimurium.  
e. Average of three biological replicates (18 total replicates) reported as fold difference ± SD.  
f. Fold difference ± SD comparing the effect of the slyA mutation in the phoQ24 background.

low degree of SlyA dependence and wide confidence intervals (see Supplementary material). SlyA regulation of nmpC, which was difficult to observe in the wild-type background, was found to be more strongly SlyA dependent in the phoP background. The stimulatory effects of SlyA on two loci (ssrB and STM1249) remained largely unaffected by a phoP mutation, demonstrating that SlyA can upregulate some genes independently of PhoP, and implying that slyA expression is not completely PhoP dependent. Of the SlyA-repressed loci (ydhIJ, yggM, STM1498/1499, STM1530 and ychN), all but one (STM1499) were observed to be repressed more strongly in the wild-type

© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 56, 492–508

than in the *phoP* mutant background. These data indicate that the ability of SlyA to influence the expression of most genes we have identified here requires the presence of a functional PhoP/PhoQ system.

To further characterize the influence of the PhoP/PhoQ regulon on SlyA-dependent gene expression, transcript levels in a *phoQ24* mutant were compared with a *phoQ24 slyA* double mutant. The *phoQ24* allele encodes an altered PhoQ sensor kinase with a single amino acid substitution that leads to constitutively high levels of phosphorylated (active) PhoP response regulator protein (Miller and Mekalanos, 1990; Gunn et al., 1996). Thus, the *phoQ24* strain is useful for examining the effects of PhoP activation without a requirement for magnesium limitation. Most of the differentially expressed genes identified in arrays comparing *slyA* mutant Salmonella with wild type were confirmed when comparing the effects of a *slyA* mutation in a *phoQ24* background. However, two additional genes (*pagD* and *pagK*) were identified as *slyA* dependent only in the *phoQ24* mutant. Also, the weakly SlyA-dependent *envE* gene showed nearly 10-fold greater dependence on SlyA in this background. Like the other SlyA/PhoP-activated genes, the SlyA dependence of both *pagD* and *pagK* was abolished in a *phoP* background. This suggests that SlyA has little effect on basal levels of expression of these genes but plays a role under conditions where the PhoP/PhoQ system is strongly activated.

Examination of the SlyA-regulated loci revealed a surprisingly large proportion to be monocistronic. Remarkably, only two SlyA-activated genes, *ybcY* and *nmpC*, have clear homologues present in the *E. coli* K12 genome. However, both *ybcY* and *nmpC* map to different locations on the Salmonella and *E. coli* chromosomes and reside on islet-like sequences or prophages that differ substantially between the two species (Blattner et al., 1997; McClelland et al., 2001). This indicates that *nmpC* and *ybcY* were acquired by separate horizontal transfer events at some point after *E. coli* and Salmonella diverged. Most SlyA-activated genes are located on regions of chromosomal DNA that bear the hallmarks of having been acquired by horizontal gene transfer, carried on prophages (STM1055), pathogenicity islands (*ssrAB*) or islets (*pagC*, *mig-14*). A substantial proportion of the SlyA-regulated genes are predicted to encode membrane, periplasmic or secreted proteins, including all of the SlyA-repressed proteins. Several of the genes identified are known to be required for Salmonella virulence, including *sopD2*, *pipB2*, *mig-14*, *pgtE* and *ssrAB* (Deiwick et al., 1999; Valdivia et al., 2000; Brumell et al., 2003; Detweiler et al., 2003; Knodler et al., 2003). In addition, *ugtL*, *virK*, *mig-14* and *pgtE* have been shown to play a role in resistance against polymyxin B and/or other cationic antimicrobial peptides (Guina et al., 2000; Brodsky et al., 2002; Detweiler et al., 2003; Shi et al., 2004a).

Co-regulation by SlyA and PhoP/PhoQ in S. Typhimurium 495

Quantitative polymerase chain reaction confirmation of *pagC* and *mig-14* regulation by SlyA

As an independent confirmation of the microarray results, real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (Q-PCR) was used to measure levels of *pagC* and *mig-14* mRNA in *slyA* and *phoP* mutant backgrounds (Fig. 1). These transcripts were selected for analysis as two of the most strongly SlyA-dependent loci identified by our array analysis. Levels of *pagC* transcript were reduced at least 200-fold in the *slyA*, *phoP* and *slyA phoP* double mutant strains indicating that the *pagC* gene requires both PhoP and SlyA for expression. Our results indicate that the effects of SlyA and PhoP on *pagC* transcript levels are not additive but rather strongly synergistic. These results were independently confirmed by measuring expression of a *pagC::lacZ* fusion in wild-type, *phoP* and *slyA* mutant backgrounds (Fig. 2).

The expression of *mig-14* was reduced 45-fold in a *phoP* mutant whereas expression was reduced eightfold in a *slyA* mutant (Fig. 1), suggesting that the regulation of *mig-14* has a stronger dependence on PhoP than on SlyA under these conditions. Although there is no consensus ‘PhoP box’ upstream of *mig-14*, there appears to be a PhoP binding site in the promoter of the *virK* gene immediately upstream (Fig. 1A). It is possible that SlyA-independent/PhoP-dependent *mig-14* transcription observed reflects readthrough from the *virK* promoter. To address this possibility we performed reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) on RNA isolated from the *phoQ24* and *phoP* mutant strains using a primer set that overlaps the *virK* and *mig-14* coding sequence. A fragment corresponding to the intergenic region between the two open reading frames was amplified from RNA isolated from the *phoQ24* mutant. This product could not be amplified from either RNA isolated from our *phoP* mutant strain or from controls in which no reverse transcriptase was added (Fig. 1A, inset). This finding suggests that a PhoP-dependent transcript encompasses both the *virK* and *mig-14* open reading frames. Together, these data indicate that both *mig-14* and *pagC* require SlyA and PhoP for full expression, but there are major differences in the regulatory mechanisms.

The microarray data suggests that SlyA had no influence over the expression or activity of the *phoPQ* locus. Given the broad overlap of these two regulons this idea was tested further by measuring the expression levels of the PhoP-regulated genes *phoP*, *mgtC*, *sodCI* and *mig-5* by Q-PCR. The expression of each of these genes was not affected by a mutation in *slyA* but all were found to be upregulated in the *phoQ24* mutant and lowered in a *phoP* mutant background (data not shown). This confirms that SlyA has no influence on the expression of *phoPQ* and

© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **56**, 492–508

co-regulates only a subset of the Salmonella PhoP/PhoQ regulon.

The effect of PhoP/PhoQ on levels of SlyA mRNA or protein

Transcription of the slyA gene has been shown to involve at least three distinct promoters (Stapleton et al., 2002; Norte et al., 2003). Two groups have reported that PhoP is able to activate transcription of the slyA gene via the most distal (P3) promoter and have postulated that this is the mechanism by which PhoP influences the expression of SlyA-regulated genes (Norte et al., 2003; Shi et al., 2004a). We therefore sought to determine whether the effect of PhoP on SlyA-dependent genes occurs simply

Fig. 1. Q-PCR analysis of the effects of mutations in the phoP and slyA genes on pagC, mig-14 and pagD transcript levels.
A. Map of the pagC and pipB2/virK/mig-14 regions of the Salmonella Typhimurium LT2 chromosome. Hollow arrows designate open reading frames with each vertical hash mark representing 100 nucleotides. The thin grey arrow represents a pseudogene (STM1245) in the pagC–pagD intergenic region. The transcription start site for pagC (Pulkkinen and Miller, 1991; Gunn et al., 1995) is indicated by a bent arrow, and the region demonstrated to be sufficient for response to low Mg²⁺ is designated with a framed double-headed arrow. Transcript start sites of pipB2, virK and mig-14 have not been mapped. Experimentally verified SlyA binding sites are designated by grey boxes marked with an 'S'. The putative PhoP binding site near virK (sequence: CATTGATAAACTGTTTAA) is designated with a white box marked (P). Inset. Ethidium bromide stained agarose gel showing the results of RT-PCR to determine whether virK and mig-14 are encoded on a single, phoP-dependent transcript. RNA samples isolated from phoQ24 (phoPQ 'constitutive') and a phoP mutant strain of Salmonella were reverse transcribed using the primer WNP325 (approximate position in the mig-14 region designated by a half-arrow). Presence of the transcript was verified by subsequent PCR on isolated cDNA with primers WNP324 and WNP325 (half-arrows), predicted to yield a 614-nucleotide product. To eliminate the possibility of chromosomal DNA contamination PCR was also performed on control RNA samples treated identically but without reverse transcriptase as indicated. A 100 bp marker is shown in the lane marked 'M' with the 600 bp band indicated by the black arrowhead.
B. Q-PCR results of pagC and mig-14 expression levels in wild-type Salmonella 14028s and phoP and slyA mutant strains. To control for variability in the recovery of RNA, transcript levels are normalized to mRNA for gyrB, a housekeeping gene used as an internal control with relatively constant expression in the wild-type and mutant strains. Expression levels are arbitrarily set at 1 for wild type.

Fig. 2. Overexpression of SlyA is not alone sufficient to enhance pagC expression. Strains harbouring a chromosomal pagC::lacZ translational fusion and a low-copy plasmid with or without the SlyA open reading frame under the control of an arabinose-inducible promoter were grown in LB media supplemented with 0.2% arabinose to an OD₆₀₀ of 2.0.
A. Anti-SlyA immunoblot of one of two independent experiments. Equal amounts of total protein were loaded from pagC-lacZ strains corresponding to wild-type 14028s (strain WN255, lanes 1 and 2), phoQ24 (strain WN256, lanes 3 and 4), slyA (strain WN312, lanes 5 and 6), phoQ24 slyA double mutant (strain WN313, lanes 7 and 8) and phoP (strain WN318, lanes 9 and 10) backgrounds. Strains contained either the control plasmid pSL2570 (odd lanes) or plasmid pSL2571 with slyA under the control of an arabinose-inducible promoter (even lanes). An asterisk designates an irrelevant cross-reactive protein.
B. β-Galactosidase activity was measured as an indicator of pagC promoter activity. Strains containing the empty control vector (pSL2570) are designated with a '−', while strains harbouring the slyA encoding vector (pSL2571) are designated with a '+'. Results are aligned with their corresponding immunoblot from (A). The results presented in (B) are the averages of two independent experiments each performed in triplicate.

© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 56, 492–508

by direct activation of slyA transcription, leading to increased levels of SlyA protein. To test this hypothesis, levels of slyA transcript were compared using Q-PCR in wild-type, phoQ24 and phoP mutant strains. Unexpectedly, levels of slyA mRNA in phoP and phoQ24 mutants normalized to either gyrB or rpoD housekeeping genes were found to differ by less than twofold from wild-type levels (data not shown). Similarly, Western blot analysis of total protein from these strains at different growth stages revealed that SlyA protein levels are essentially equivalent between wild-type and phoP strains, and slightly elevated in a phoQ24 mutant (Fig. 3A). We conclude that under our growth conditions [early stationary phase in Luria–Bertani (LB) media], the influence of PhoP on the expression of SlyA mRNA and protein is minimal, and SlyA expression is primarily driven by one of the PhoP-independent promoters.

We also determined whether activation of PhoP/PhoQ by low magnesium alters the level of SlyA mRNA (Fig. 3B). Wild-type and phoP mutant Salmonella were grown to mid-logarithmic growth phase in N-minimal medium containing 10 mM MgSO₄. Cultures were washed and resuspended in N-minimal medium containing either high (10 mM) or low (10 μM) levels of MgSO₄ for 30 min before harvesting RNA for analysis by Q-PCR. Levels of pagC mRNA were observed to increase approximately 180-fold within 30 min exposure to low magnesium (Fig. 3B), whereas levels of slyA mRNA increased less than twofold during the same time period. Western blot analysis of these samples also demonstrated no significant alteration in SlyA protein under low magnesium conditions over this interval (Fig. 3B, inset).

These findings suggest that levels of slyA mRNA or SlyA protein do not correlate with activation of the pagC

Fig. 3. Effect of phoP mutations and Mg²⁺ on expression of slyA.
A. Immunoblot (Western) analysis was used to measure SlyA protein levels in wild-type or phoP, phoQ24 (phoPQ constitutive), slyA and slyA-pSlyA mutant strains of Salmonella grown to late logarithmic phase, early stationary phase or stationary phase in LB medium. * designates an irrelevant cross-reactive protein.
B. Wild-type and phoP mutant Salmonella were grown to mid-log phase (OD₆₀₀ = 0.60) in N-minimal medium containing 10 mM MgSO₄. Cells were washed three times in N-minimal medium containing either 10 μM (low) or 10 mM (high) Mg²⁺ and incubated for 30 min before harvesting RNA. Levels of slyA (top) and pagC (bottom) transcript were assessed using Q-PCR as described in Experimental procedures. An immunoblot analysis of the same cultures used for Q-PCR analysis (B, inset) shows that SlyA protein levels are comparable in wild-type (lanes 1 and 2) and phoP mutant (lanes 3 and 4) Salmonella in N-minimal medium containing either 10 mM (lanes 1 and 3) or 10 μM (lanes 2 and 4) MgSO₄.

© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 56, 492–508

promoter. To further test this hypothesis, expression of a chromosomally encoded pagC–lacZ fusion was measured in phoP and slyA mutant strain backgrounds in which SlyA was overexpressed from an arabinose-inducible plasmid (Fig. 2). In this assay, expression of pagC–lacZ was not directly related to levels of SlyA protein. Massive overexpression of SlyA in a phoP background modestly increased expression of a pagC–lacZ fusion but to nowhere near the levels observed in wild-type and phoQ24 backgrounds in the absence of SlyA overexpression (compare lanes 1, 3 and 10). In agreement with the Q-PCR results (Fig. 1B), expression of pagC–lacZ was higher in a phoQ24 slyA mutant than in phoP or slyA mutant strains (Fig. 2, compare lanes 5 and 7), indicating that PhoP can exert a modest influence on pagC expression in the absence of SlyA. However, PhoP does not promote the expression of pagC and other co-regulated genes simply by enhancing SlyA expression. Two novel models to accommodate these observations are therefore proposed and discussed below (see Discussion).

SlyA binds to the promoter regions of pagC and mig-14

In order to determine whether SlyA physically associates with the pagC promoter, EMSA (electrophoretic mobility shift assay) analysis was performed with purified polyhistidine-tagged SlyA (His-SlyA, see Experimental procedures) and a 294 bp fragment containing the pagC promoter region (728–435 bp upstream of the pagC start codon) that encompasses a region sufficient to enable Mg²⁺-dependent transcription (Chen and Schifferli, 2001). This fragment contains a putative SlyA binding site (TTTGGAAATGTA, –85) and the pagC transcriptional start site (Fig. 4). The ability of His-tagged SlyA to interact with a 337 bp fragment containing a putative SlyA binding site (TTAGCATGTTAA, Fig. 4) located immediately upstream of the mig-14 open reading frame was also determined. In these experiments His-SlyA was able to shift both the pagC and mig-14 promoter fragments in a concentration-dependent manner. The specificity of His-SlyA binding was demonstrated by inhibition of binding to the mig-14 and pagC promoter regions by the addition of excess unbiotinylated promoter fragment or by a double-stranded unlabelled oligonucleotide containing a consensus SlyA binding site (TTAGCATGTTAA), but not by a similarly sized unlabelled fragment of the rpoD gene or a non-specific unlabelled oligonucleotide.

To more precisely determine the sequences recognized by SlyA on the pagC and mig-14 promoter fragments, DNase I protection assays were performed using increasing amounts of His-SlyA protein added to biotinylated DNA fragments shown to contain SlyA binding sites by EMSA (Fig. 5). His-SlyA protected a region approximately 109 to 79 bp upstream of the pagC transcriptional start site. A second putative SlyA binding site (TTAGCAT-TCAA) lies 327 bp downstream of the pagC transcription start site, within the unusually long (559 bp) pagC 5′-

Fig. 4. His-SlyA specific binding to the pagC and mig-14 promoter regions. 0.3 pg of pagC (top, lanes 1–15) or mig-14 (bottom, lanes 1–15) biotinylated promoter fragment was incubated without His-SlyA (lane 1), or with His-SlyA at a final concentration of 10 nM, 20 nM, 41 nM, 83 nM or 166 nM (lanes 2–6, respectively). To demonstrate His-SlyA binding specificity, 41 nM of His-SlyA were incubated with 0.3 pg of either pagC or mig-14 biotinylated promoter fragment in the presence of 0.135 pg, 1.35 pg, 13.5 pg, 135 pg or 270 pg of non-biotinylated promoter fragment (lanes 7–11, respectively). Addition of 0.22 pg, 2.2 pg, 22 pg or 220 pg of an internal fragment of rpoD to a reaction containing either 0.3 pg of labelled pagC or mig-14 promoter with 41 nM His-SlyA was used to demonstrate specific binding of His-SlyA (lanes 12–15, respectively). In the PpagC binding experiments, specificity was further demonstrated by the inability of a non-specific, double-stranded oligonucleotide (oligo 1, see Experimental procedures) to compete away His-SlyA binding at either 6.6 ng or 66 ng (lanes 16 and 17). Incubation of the SlyA–PpagC complex with 0.6 ng, 6.6 ng and 66 ng of an unlabelled double-stranded oligo (oligo 2; lanes 18–20) corresponding to the previously defined consensus SlyA binding site (Stapleton et al., 2002) was able to compete with His-SlyA binding to the labelled PpagC fragment.

Co-regulation by SlyA and PhoP/PhoQ in S. Typhimurium 499

Fig. 5. His-SlyA protects regions of pagC and mig-14 DNA. The left and right panels represent His-SlyA DNase I protection footprints of pagC and mig-14 DNA, respectively. The first lane in each panel contains a DNase I-only ladder. The SlyA concentrations used with pagC are 2.41, 3.62, 5.43, 8.15, 12.2 and 18.3 nM from left to right. The SlyA concentrations used with mig-14 are 1.81, 2.72, 4.07, 6.11, 9.17 and 13.75 nM from left to right. The indicated co-ordinates of protection are 109 to 73 bp upstream of the pagC transcriptional start site and 115 to 94 bp upstream of the predicted mig-14 translational start site.

untranslated region. This site lies outside the region of the pagC promoter that is sufficient to confer Mg²⁺-dependent activation of reporter genes (Chen and Schifferli, 2001). Both EMSA (data not shown) and DNase I footprint analysis of this downstream site demonstrate that purified His-SlyA also interacts with affinity similar to that of to the upstream site. On the mig-14 promoter fragment, His-SlyA protected a region approximately 115 to 95 bp upstream of the mig-14 open reading frame. The regions protected by His-SlyA overlap the predicted SlyA-binding motif as defined by Stapleton et al. (2002) confirming their earlier findings regarding the DNA binding specificity of purified SlyA protein.

A slyA mutant displays increased sensitivity to polymyxin B

Salmonella mutants lacking either phoP or phoQ exhibit dramatically increased sensitivity to polymyxin B and cationic antimicrobial peptides. Detailed studies have shown that PhoP/PhoQ promotes resistance to these peptides by regulating lipopolysaccharide (LPS) modifications to make the outer membrane more positively charged. As we found that SlyA regulates expression of mig-14 and ugtL, two genes known to be required for polymyxin B resistance, we hypothesized that SlyA would be required for inducible resistance to polymyxin B (Table 2). Wild-type, slyA, phoP and slyA phoP double mutant Salmonella strains were adapted in low (10 μM) magnesium for 3 h before exposure to 1 μM polymyxin B for 1 h at 37°C. Pre-adaptation in low magnesium has been shown to induce high levels of polymyxin B resistance in wild-type Salmonella but not in phoP mutant strains (Groisman et al., 1997). A slyA mutant strain was found to be approximately 60–70 times more sensitive to polymyxin B than its isogenic wild-type parent (*P* = 0.012, see Table 2). Resistance to polymyxin B in the slyA mutant was almost completely restored by complementation with the slyA gene on a low-copy plasmid, confirming that the slyA mutation was responsible for the loss of resistance to polymyxin B. Cultures of the phoP and slyA phoP double mutant strains were completely killed under these conditions (survival of less than 0.0001%, *P* = 0.011), indicating that resistance to polymyxin B is more impaired in a phoP than in a slyA mutant. This is consistent with the observation that SlyA controls only a subset of the PhoP-activated genes required for resistance to polymyxin B (e.g. ugtL and mig-14 but not pmrAB). It is also consistent with the observation that a slyA mutation has a less profound effect than a phoP mutation.

Table 2. Polymyxin survival defect of slyA and phoP mutant strains.

| Strain     | % Survival |
|------------|------------|
| 14028s     | 46 ± 8.7   |
| slyA       | 0.7 ± 0.2  |
| phoP       | <0.0001    |
| phoP slyA  | <0.0001    |
| slyA pSlyA | 37 ± 3     |

For per cent survival, approximately 3 × 10⁶ wild-type, phoP mutant or slyA- mutant Salmonella were grown in low magnesium (10 μM) minimal medium for 3 h. Cells were then treated with 1 μg ml⁻¹ polymyxin B for 1 h and plated to determine viability (see Experimental procedures).

© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 56, 492–508

a phoP mutation on the expression of some genes associated with polymyxin resistance (e.g. mig-14). A similar finding regarding the polymyxin sensitivity of slyA mutant S. Typhimurium has been recently reported by Shi et al. (2004a) and attributed to reduced expression of ugtL. It remains to be determined whether reduced virK and mig-14 expression also contributes to the polymyxin B sensitivity of a slyA mutant strain.

### Discussion

The regulatory proteins SlyA and PhoP/PhoQ play major roles in Salmonella virulence and stress resistance. In the present study, we have used cDNA microarrays to demonstrate overlap between the PhoP/PhoQ and SlyA regulons and have identified more than 25 genes regulated by both PhoP and SlyA (Table 1). A substantial proportion of the SlyA-regulated loci, including all SlyA-repressed genes, are predicted to encode membrane, periplasmic, or secreted proteins. This suggests that a major role of SlyA is to alter the cell surface in order to protect the cell from toxic compounds produced by the host. Indeed, ugtL, virK, mig-14 and pgtE were previously identified as PhoP/PhoQ-regulated genes that play a role in resistance against polymyxin B and/or cationic antimicrobial peptides (Guina et al., 2000; Brodsky et al., 2002; Detweiler et al., 2003; Shi et al., 2004a). S. Typhimurium carrying a slyA mutation is highly sensitive to polymyxin B, but to a lesser degree than a phoP mutant strain. The difference in the degree of polymyxin sensitivity of slyA and phoP mutants may be explained, in part, by the SlyA-independent regulation of the pmr locus by PhoP/PhoQ.

The profoundly attenuated virulence of slyA mutant Salmonella can be rationalized by the large number of virulence-associated genes identified as SlyA regulated by microarray. In addition to the many PhoP-dependent genes discussed above, SlyA also regulates expression of the OmpR-dependent ssrAB locus (Lee et al., 2000; Feng et al., 2003; Kim et al., 2003). SsrAB controls expression of genes carried by Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 (SPI2), which is required for intracellular survival of Salmonella and remodelling of the Salmonella-containing vacuole to inhibit vacuolar maturation and oxidative killing by the NADPH phagocyte oxidase (Vazquez-Torres et al., 2000; Waterman and Holden, 2003). Although an earlier report suggested that PhoP regulates SPI2 gene expression (Deiwick et al., 1999), other investigators have not observed a role for PhoP in ssrAB regulation under PhoP/PhoQ-inducing conditions (Lee et al., 2000; Miao et al., 2002; Kim and Falkow, 2004). SlyA regulation of ssrAB may be a primary explanation for the inability of slyA mutant Salmonella to replicate in phagocytes and host tissues (Libby et al., 1994; Daniels et al., 1996).

The results of our cDNA microarray analysis differ from published proteomic analyses of the SlyA regulon. In one of these studies, SlyA was reported to repress the expression of several outer membrane proteins, including PagC (Stapleton et al., 2002). PagC was recognized solely by size on a Coomassie brilliant blue-stained 1D-SDS polyacrylamide gel, and it is therefore possible that the observed SlyA-repressed protein was misidentified. The other study (Spory et al., 2002) examined differences in protein abundance resulting from SlyA overexpression. Overexpression of SlyA has been shown to activate the expression of the HlyE haemolysin in E. coli by antagonizing repressive effects of H-NS on the hlyE promoter (Wyborn et al., 2004), even though SlyA does not appear to play a role in hlyE regulation under normal circumstances. It is therefore possible that overexpression of SlyA resulted in the artifactual activation or repression of genes not differentially expressed between wild-type and slyA mutant bacteria. Subtle variation in growth conditions and the relative insensitivity of proteomic methods may also account for differences between previously published results and the present study.

Using DNase I footprinting and EMSA, a direct interaction between purified SlyA protein and the pagC and mig-14 promoters was demonstrated (Figs 4 and 5). Published studies employing slyA::lacZ fusions have provided evidence that PhoP is able to enhance transcription of slyA (Norte et al., 2003; Eguchi et al., 2004), suggesting that PhoP might interact with SlyA in a transcriptional regulatory cascade somewhat analogous to PhoP and PmrD (Kox et al., 2000). However, in our experiments little, if any, influence of PhoP/PhoQ on slyA expression was observed. During a shift to low-magnesium medium we observed a nearly 200-fold PhoP-dependent increase in pagC mRNA unaccompanied by significant increases in slyA mRNA or SlyA protein (Fig. 3B). Furthermore, we observed a broad influence of the phoP mutation on nearly all SlyA-regulated loci despite no apparent variation in the quantity of SlyA protein. Although it remains possible that PhoP activation of slyA expression may be important under circumstances where Salmonella needs to respond rapidly to certain stresses (e.g. antimicrobial peptides or low magnesium) and SlyA is otherwise not expressed (e.g. log phase), our observations clearly indicate that PhoP/PhoQ influences expression of a large number of SlyA-co-regulated loci without significantly altering levels of SlyA protein *per se*.

It is therefore necessary to propose novel mechanisms to account for the co-ordinate regulation of a large number of genes by SlyA and PhoP/PhoQ. Our observations are consistent with at least two possible models (Fig. 6). In the first model PhoP/PhoQ may exert a regulatory effect by altering the ability of SlyA to act as a transcriptional activator. Because SlyA belongs to the MarR family

Co-regulation by SlyA and PhoP/PhoQ in S. Typhimurium 501

Fig. 6. Models of PhoP–SlyA co-regulatory interactions. In the ligand induction model (top), activation of the PhoP/PhoQ system by low magnesium concentrations is proposed to lead indirectly to a change in the concentration in a small molecule ligand (dark oval) that interacts with SlyA as a co-activator. This model posits that a SlyA–ligand interaction promotes a conformational change allowing SlyA to activate transcription from a subset of promoters including *pagC*. In the overlapping regulon model (bottom), SlyA interacts cooperatively with different regulators at different promoters (e.g. PhoP at *pagC* and OmpR at *ssrAB*), perhaps by acting as an anti-repressor by antagonizing the activity of H-NS or a similar factor (Heroven et al., 2004; Wyborn et al., 2004). The two proposed models are not mutually exclusive, and it is conceivable that PhoP interacts with SlyA directly at some loci (e.g. *ugtL*) while also modulating SlyA functionality.

of DNA-binding proteins, at least some of which are known to interact with small molecules (Grkovic et al., 2002), it is possible that activation of PhoP/PhoQ results in a change in the concentration of a cognate ligand for SlyA. It is not likely that SlyA requires the ligand for DNA-binding activity, because purified SlyA binds to SlyA-regulated promoters *in vitro*. Rather, binding or release of a ligand may enable bound SlyA to promote formation of an open transcriptional complex. This situation would be in some ways analogous to the redox-responsive transcriptional activator OxyR, which binds to target promoters but can only activate transcription when a specific cysteine residue is oxidized, promoting a conformational change (Choi et al., 2001). It is possible that the binding of SlyA to its cognate ligand alters its affinity for promoters, which may explain the observations that overexpression of SlyA increases the expression of a *pagC–lacZ* fusion even in the absence of *phoP* (Fig. 2, compare lanes 9 and 10). We suggest that artificially high concentrations of SlyA partially compensates for the decreased affinity or activity of SlyA in a *phoP* mutant strain. Although the activation of SlyA by PhoP/PhoQ could in theory occur via some other type of post-translational modification (e.g. phosphorylation), no such modification has previously been described for members of the MarR family.

The scenario suggested above assumes that SlyA, not PhoP, is the proximal regulator of many PhoP/SlyA-co-regulated genes such as *pagC*. The absence of a canonical PhoP-box in the promoter region of *pagC* is consistent with this model (Lejona et al., 2003). In addition, attempts to demonstrate a direct interaction between PhoP and the *pagC* promoter either with or without SlyA by EMSA or DNase I footprinting have been unsuccessful (data not shown). This model is also consistent with the observations that purified (and presumably ligand-free) SlyA protein acts as a repressor of its own promoter *in vitro*, but *slyA* appears to be activated by PhoP *in vivo* (Stapleton et al., 2002; Norte et al., 2003). Ligand-free SlyA might repress *slyA* transcription but, upon binding of its cognate ligand, either dissociate from the promoter or activate its own transcription. A definitive test of this model awaits the identification of a putative SlyA-activating ligand.

A second model posits that each locus displaying dependence on both PhoP and SlyA possesses binding sites for both transcription factors, as has recently been reported for the *ugtL* promoter. Two recent reports have suggested that SlyA and its homologue, RovA from Yersinia, function as anti-repressors that compete with the nucleoid-like H-NS protein for binding sites within certain promoter sequences (Heroven et al., 2004; Wyborn et al., 2004). SlyA might remodel the local nucleoprotein structure of the bacterial chromosome by competing with repressors like H-NS. In this scenario, activation of many SlyA-regulated genes would require the participation of additional activators such as PhoP or, in the case of *ssrAB*, OmpR (Lee et al., 2000). This second model is less parsimonious than the first because it requires that at least 10 different loci would each contain both PhoP and SlyA binding sites and does not easily explain the effect of the *phoP* mutation on SlyA-repressed genes. This

© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **56**, 492–508

model is supported, however, by the finding that the *phoQ24* mutation can affect levels of *pagC* transcript even in the absence of SlyA (Figs 1 and 2), although the effect of PhoP on *pagC* expression in the absence of SlyA may be indirect. In addition, the nucleoprotein restructuring model would more easily account for binding of SlyA downstream of the *ugtL* and *pagC* transcriptional start sites, unusual locations for binding by transcriptional activators that interact directly with RNA polymerase (Shi *et al.*, 2004a). Local nucleoprotein restructuring by SlyA could also explain mild effects observed on the expression of genes in the proximity of more strongly activated genes (e.g. *pagD*, *envE* and STM1254 near *pagC*; *virK* and *pipB2* near *mig-14*; *ssrA* near *ssrB*). According to the classification scheme of Shen-Orr *et al.* (2002), the overlapping regulon model would be considered as a standard ‘dense overlapping regulon’. The ligand-induction model we propose represents a modification of the standard ‘feedforward loop’ mechanism as recently proposed for the interaction of PhoP and SlyA (Shi *et al.*, 2004a) because PhoP would influence the activity rather than the abundance of SlyA protein. However, these two models are not mutually exclusive and it is possible or even likely that PhoP both alters SlyA activity and interacts directly with SlyA at selected promoters.

Our findings indicate that SlyA has evolved to serve a function in *Salmonella* that is significantly different from its counterpart in *E. coli*, despite the 89% identity and 95% similarity between SlyA proteins of the two bacterial species. A large number of the SlyA-activated genes identified by microarray analysis are unique to *Salmonella*, and only two of these genes, *ybcY* and *nmpC*, have a close homologue in the *E. coli* K12 genome. We suggest that overlap between the PhoP/PhoQ and SlyA regulons evolved at some point after the divergence of *S*. *enterica* and *E. coli* from a common ancestor. Given the large number of SlyA/PhoP-co-regulated genes that are involved in virulence and survival within the host, the progressive specialization of SlyA to promote resistance to exogenous membrane-damaging stresses may have been a critical step in the evolution of *Salmonella* as a unique pathogenic species.

### Experimental procedures

#### Strains and growth conditions

Wild-type S. Typhimurium 14028s and the isogenic *phoQ24* and *phoP::Tn10dCm* mutant strains were obtained from the laboratory of Samuel Miller at the University of Washington. A strain containing the *phoP7953:Tn10Tet* mutant was obtained from Eduardo Groisman at Washington University, St. Louis. Construction of the *putA::pagC-lacZ* allele was described previously (Prouty *et al.*, 2004b). Each of these alleles was moved into the same strain backgrounds used for our array analysis by transduction using phage P22 HT105/1 *int-201* (Schmieger, 1971). A null mutation in *slyA* was constructed by the protocol of Datsenko and Wanner (2000) using the *red-gam* recombinase as described. The *tetRA* tetracycline resistance genes were amplified from plasmid pBR322 (Watson, 1988). Complementation of *slyA* mutants was accomplished by cloning the 680 bp PCR-amplified *slyA* fragment from pSL2237 (Libby *et al.*, 1994) into vector pRB3 (Berggren *et al.*, 1995). Strains were grown in LB or N-minimal medium, pH 7.4, supplemented with 10 μM or 10 mM MgSO₄ as described (Hmiel *et al.*, 1986; Soncini *et al.*, 1996).

#### cDNA microarray analysis

The *Salmonella* whole ORF PCR product microarray was constructed as previously described (Porwollik *et al.*, 2003). Microarray analysis comparing transcript levels in wild-type 14028s with *slyA*, *phoP* or *slyA phoP* double mutant *Salmonella* were each performed three times under identical conditions (three biological replicates). The array comparing *phoQ24* with *phoQ24 slyA* mutant *Salmonella* was performed once with RNA harvested from early stationary phase and once with RNA harvested from mid-log phase cells. Cells were subcultured 1:100 from an overnight culture grown in LB broth with vigorous aeration at 37°C into 50 ml of fresh LB broth. After growth to approximately OD~600~ = 2.0, cells were harvested by diluting into two volumes of RNAProtect Bacteria Reagent (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and using the RNeasy midi kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

Fluorescently labelled cDNA was synthesized from total RNA using SuperScript-II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) primed with random hexanucleotides in a biased mixture of nucleotides (25 mM dCTP, dGTP, dATP and 10 mM dTTP) supplemented with either Cy5- or Cy3-labelled dUTP (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ). After labelling, RNA was removed by hot-alkali treatment and labelled cDNA was purified using a Qiaquick PCR Purification kit. Equal amounts of oppositely labelled cDNA were mixed together and hybridized to the *Salmonella* array. Dye switching was employed in which one array with Cy5-labelled control cDNA and Cy3-labelled mutant cDNA was compared with a second array with Cy3-labelled control cDNA and Cy5-labelled mutant cDNA. Arrays were scanned at the Institute for Systems Biology (Seattle, WA) using a Packard Biosciences ScanArray 5000 and quantified using DigitalGENOME (Molecularware) spot finding software. Smoothed background intensity was estimated and subtracted from the mean intensity in each spot boundary, followed by normalization to the median intensities in Cy3 and Cy5. Statistical analysis was performed by combining six replicates for each experiment and determining significant differential expression using software as described (Ideker *et al.*, 2000; 2001).

#### Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of gene expression

Expression levels of selected genes were analysed by one-step real-time RT-PCR analysis using a Rotor-Gene thermal cycler (Corbett Research, Mortlake, Australia). *Salmonella*

© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **56**, 492–508
RNA was prepared essentially as described above, except that in most cases the RNeasy mini kit (Qiagen) was used. All reagents were from the Qiagen QuantiTect SYBR Green RT-PCR system. First strand cDNA synthesis and PCR were carried out according to the manufacturer's instructions. Each 20 μl of PCR reaction contained 10 μl of SYBR Green master mix and 0.2 μl of reverse transcriptase (RT mix). Total Salmonella RNA (7.8 μl) at a concentration of 5 μg ml⁻¹ was added to each reaction. Forward and reverse primers for each gene were added to a final concentration of 1 μM each in a total volume of 2 μl. The amount of product generated after each cycle was quantified by measuring fluorescence of SYBR Green dye. Melting curve analysis verified that the reactions contained a single PCR product. Reported gene expression levels are normalized to levels of *gyrB* transcript, a housekeeping gene used as an internal control because it exhibits relatively constant levels of

expression between the mutant strains under these conditions. Standard curves were generated during every run for each gene tested and established by comparing transcript levels in serial dilutions of total RNA from a control sample. Primer sets listed in Table 3 correspond to the following genes: *pagC*, WNp163 and WNp164; *gyrB*, WNp233 and WNp234; *mig-14*, WNp250 and WNp251; *slyA*, WNp252 and WNp253.

**RT-PCR analysis of the virK/mig-14 intergenic region**

Four micrograms of total RNA (in 60 μl) isolated from strains WN151 (*phoQ24*) and WN152 (*phoP::Tn10dCm*) were mixed with 4 pmol of primer WNp325 (in 4 μl) and heated to 70°C for 10 min before being placed on ice to allow the primer to anneal. After centrifugation the sample was split in two equal

---

**Table 3. Strains, plasmids and primers used in this study.**

| Strain or plasmid | Genotype or relevant characteristics | Source or reference |
|--------------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------|
| **Strains**        |                                      |                     |
| 14028s             | 'Wild-type' *Salmonella enterica* serovar Typhimurium | ATCC                |
| WN151              | 14028s *phoQ24* ('PhoP constitutive', also known as CS022) | Miller and Mekalanos (1990) |
| WN152              | 14028s *phoP::Tn10dCm* (also known as CS015) | Miller and Mekalanos (1990) |
| WN228              | 14028s *slyA::tetRA*                  | This work           |
| WN229              | 14028s *phoQ24 slyA::tetRA*            | This work           |
| WN230              | 14028s *phoP::Tn10d-Cm slyA::tetRA*    | This work           |
| WN255              | 14028s *putA::pagC-lacZ*               | Prouty *et al.* (2004b) |
| WN256              | WN151 *putA::pagC-lacZ*                | This work           |
| WN260              | WN228 *pRB3-slyA*                      | This work           |
| WN312              | WN228 *putA::pagC-lacZ*                | This work           |
| WN313              | WN229 *putA::pagC-lacZ*                | This work           |
| WN318              | 14028s *putA::pagC-lacZ phoP7953::Tn10(tet)* | Fields *et al.* (1989) |
| WN053              | 14028s pTP233                          | Schapiro *et al.* (2003) |
| **Plasmids**       |                                      |                     |
| pRB3-*slyA*        | RK2-based plasmid with a 680 bp PCR fragment with the *slyA* coding region and upstream region. | Libby *et al.* (1994); Berggren *et al.* (1995) |
| pTP233             | Lambda red recombinase                | Poteete and Fenton (1984) |
| pSL2570            | A low-copy pSC101 origin vector derived from pSX34-lacZ containing the arabinose promoter and multiple cloning site of pBAD-18. | Buchmeier *et al.* (1997) |
| pSL2571            | pSL2570 with the *slyA* open reading frame. | Buchmeier *et al.* (1997) |
| **Primers**        |                                      |                     |
| SL156              | 5'-CTAATTATAAGCATATGAAATTGGAATC-3'     |                     |
| SL157              | 5'-CTTTACGTGTGGATCCATGGCCACAC-3'       |                     |
| SL212              | 5'-GCTTTAGTTTTTAGCCAAAACTG-3'          |                     |
| SL213              | 5'-ACCGTCTCTCCACGCTAAAC-3'             |                     |
| SL658              | 5'-CGCTTCATGAAATAATCCACAATATC-3'       |                     |
| SL660              | 5'-GGCTTGCGAGTGAATAGCGCG-3'            |                     |
| SL6370             | 5'-GTTAACCACTCTTAATAATAATG-3'          |                     |
| SL6371             | 5'-CGTCTAGACGTGACGCTCCATCCGCAATAC-3'   |                     |
| SL8147             | 5'-GACATCGCTAAACGTATCGAAGAC-3'         |                     |
| SL8148             | 5'-CACTGCTCGACGCAGAGCTTCATG-3'         |                     |
| WNp163             | 5'-GGGTCTGTTGAGCCTGAAGG-3'             |                     |
| WNp164             | 5'-GCCATCCTGAGTGGAAATGTTC-3'           |                     |
| WNp233             | 5'-GATGGGTTTTCCAGCAGGTATTC-3'          |                     |
| WNp234             | 5'-AGGTCTGATTGCGGTTGGTTTC-3'           |                     |
| WNp249             | 5'-GGCGGTAGTATCAATATGCACCCA-3'         |                     |
| WNp250             | 5'-GGCGCCATCGGAATAAGTATCTCA-3'         |                     |
| WNp251             | 5'-AATCGCCACTAGGTTCTGATCTGG-3'         |                     |
| WNp252             | 5'-GACCCAATGTGTCTGCGTCAATTC-3'         |                     |
| WNp324             | 5'-CGACGAGATTTATGCGGTCA GTG-3'         |                     |
| WNp325             | 5'-GGAAAAGGAAGACGGTTGCC-3'             |                     |
| slycons1           | 5'-TTAGCATGTTAA-3'                     |                     |
| slycons2           | 5'-TTAACATGCTAA-3'                     |                     |
| non-spec1          | 5'-GAGAGAGAGAGAT-3'                    |                     |
| non-spec2          | 5'-ATCTCTCTCTCTC-3'                    |                     |

© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **56**, 492–508
samples and mixed with 10 μl of Superscript II buffer, 5 μl of 0.1 M dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 μl of dNTP mix (10 mM each dGTP, dCTP, dATP and dTTP) and 1 μl of RNAsin (Promega) for a final volume of 50 μl. One microlitre of Superscript II reverse transcriptase was added to one tube from each RNA sample while the other tube was incubated without reverse transcriptase to control for chromosomal DNA contamination. Samples were incubated for 2 h at 42°C before the addition of 10 μl of TE containing 100 U of RNase A (Qiagen). DNA from each sample was purified using the Qiaquick PCR purification kit according to manufacturer's instructions. Amplification of the *virK/mig-14* intergenic region was accomplished by PCR using primers WNP324 and WNP325.

### Purification of His-SlyA

An N-terminal 6-His SlyA fusion protein was constructed in pET16B (Novogene, WI). The *slyA* coding region was amplified by PCR using *Pfu* (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) and primers SL156 and SL157 (see Table 3) incorporating an engineered *Ndel* site at the ATG start codon, and the purified PCR product was cloned into the *Smal* site of pSK (Stratagene). Plasmids containing the PCR fragment were restricted with *Ndel/BamHI*, and the *slyA* fragment was directionally cloned into the *Ndel/BamHI* site of pET16B. The pET16B::slyA containing plasmid DNA was used to transform BL21 (DE3) pLysS. To induce production of His-SlyA, cells were grown to mid-log phase before IPTG was added to 2 mM. Cells were harvested by centrifugation after 5 h incubation. His-SlyA was purified by nickel-affinity chromatography (Ni-NTA, Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Fractions containing His-SlyA were pooled and dialysed in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 0.1 mM EDTA and 5 mM DTT, before concentration and storage at –20°C in 50% glycerol. The His-SlyA concentration was determined by measuring the absorbance at 280 nm using an extinction coefficient of 11 080 M⁻¹ cm⁻¹.

### Western blot detection of SlyA

Bacteria were grown overnight in LB containing appropriate antibiotics. One millilitre of cells was collected by centrifugation and washed twice in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, 1 mM DTT, 0.1 mM EDTA and 5% glycerol (TGED), resuspended in 500 μl of TGED, and lysed using 0.1 mm cubic zirconium beads in a mini-bead beater. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation and the protein concentration determined using a Pierce BCA Microtiter plate assay. Approximately 6 μg of total protein was mixed with SDS-PAGE sample buffer and loaded onto a 4–20% Tris-HCl SDS-PAGE Redi-Gel (Bio-Rad, CA). Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose (Pall Membrane, East Hills, NY), blocked in PBS containing 0.5% Tween 20 and 5% non-fat milk, reacted with column-purified anti-His-SlyA, and detected with Pierce Super Signal according to manufacturer’s instructions.

### β-Galactosidase assay

For β-galactosidase measurements, *pagC-lacZ* fusion strains overnight cultures were grown at 37°C in LB media supplemented with chloramphenicol (10 μg ml⁻¹) to maintain plasmids pSL2570 or pSL2571. Subcultures (1:500) were made in LB medium without chloramphenicol and supplemented with 0.2% arabinose to induce expression of SlyA. β-Galactosidase activity was measured when the cultures reached early stationary phase (*OD*~600~ = 2.0) using standard methodology (Miller, 1972). Samples were taken from each culture for Western blot analysis of SlyA at the same time the enzyme assay was performed (see above).

### EMSA assays

Promoter fragments were isolated by PCR amplification using primer sets SL658 and SL650 (*mig-14* promoter) and SL6370 and SL6371 (*pagC* promoter, see Table 3). The 5-prime oligonucleotide was biotinylated (MWG Biosciences, High Point, NC). PCR products were gel-purified using a Qiagen Gel extraction kit and quantified by spectrophotometry. A 1× stock of Reaction-Storage buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 0.1 mM EDTA, 5 mM MgCl₂, 1 mM DTT, 5% glycerol) containing 10 μg ml⁻¹ acetylated BSA was used for His-SlyA and promoter fragment dilution. Binding assays were performed in a total volume of 15 ml containing the following: 1 μg of poly[IC], 0.1–0.6 pg of biotinylated DNA, various dilutions of His-SlyA and unlabelled competitor DNA as required. Competitor DNA included in some reactions was a non-

specific PCR-amplified fragment of the *rpoD* gene (using oligos SL8147 and SL8148), a double-stranded non-sense oligonucleotide (non-spec1 and non-spec2), or a double-stranded oligo corresponding to the consensus SlyA binding sequence (slycons1 and slycons2). Binding reactions were allowed to proceed for 20 min at room temperature, then loaded onto pre-run 5% acrylamide gels in 1× Tris-Borate EDTA (Bio-Rad Precast Gels). The gels were run at 4°C, 100 V until the bromophenol blue dye reached the bottom of the gel, and DNA–protein complexes were transferred to a nylon membrane (Biodyne B, Pall Corporation) using a semi-dry blotter (CBS Plastics, CA) at 180 mA for 20 min. The DNA was UV cross-linked to the membrane, and biotinylated DNA on the membrane was detected using the LightShiftTM Chemiluminescent EMSA Kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL) according to manufacturer’s protocol.

### DNase I protection assay

DNA footprinting reactions were performed as described previously (Feng *et al.*, 2004). The 5′ *pagC* and *mig-14* regulatory regions were amplified by PCR using ^32^P-labelled oligonucleotides. Each assay contained 3 × 10⁵ c.p.m. labelled template. For the binding reaction, SlyA was incubated for 20 min at room temperature in a buffer containing 40 mM KCl, 4 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.9, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 3 μg poly(d[I-C]) and 12% (v/v) glycerol. DNase I was added, and the reaction was stopped after 30 s by the addition of 20 mM EDTA, 360 mM Na acetate, pH 5.5 (final concentration). The final products were precipitated with isopropanol, washed with 70% ethanol, dried and resuspended in sequencing stop buffer. The products were separated by electrophoresis on a sequencing gel along with a sequencing ladder generated using the same primers and plasmid templates.

### Polymyxin B survival assays

The polymyxin sensitivity assay was performed essentially as described (Gunn *et al.*, 1998) with incubation for 1 h at 37°C. Survival was determined by plating serial dilutions on LB agar and comparing colony-forming units (cfu) in the polymyxin-treated and untreated samples.

### Acknowledgements

W.W.N. was funded in part by a post-doctoral training fellowship from the Damon Runyon Cancer Research Foundation (DRG 1588). The National Institutes of Health provided support to M.M. (AI034829 and AI052237), J.S.G. (AI43521), F.C.F. (AI39557) and S.J.L. (AI48622). We thank Bruz Marzlof and Krassen Dimitrov of the Institute for Systems Biology for their technical assistance with the analysis of the cDNA microarrays. We thank Joyce Karlinsey for assistance with purification of the anti-SlyA antisera. We thank Eduardo Groisman and Samuel Miller for the gifts of *Salmonella* strains. We thank Dr Steffen Porwollik at the Sidney Kimmel Cancer Institute for his role in constructing the *Salmonella* arrays.

---

### Supplementary material

The following material is available from http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/products/journals/suppmat/mmi/mmi4553/mmi4553sm.htm

**Table S1.** Complete results of expression analysis of *slyA* and *phoP* mutants by microarray analysis of labelled cDNA.

---

### References

Alekshun, M.N., and Levy, S.B. (1999) Alteration of the repressor activity of MarR, the negative regulator of the *Escherichia coli marRAB* locus, by multiple chemicals *in vitro*. *J Bacteriol* **181**: 4669–4672.

Ariza, R.R., Cohen, S.P., Bachhawat, N., Levy, S.B., and Demple, B. (1994) Repressor mutations in the *marRAB* operon that activate oxidative stress genes and multiple antibiotic resistance in *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* **176**: 143–148.

Belden, W.J., and Miller, S.I. (1994) Further characterization of the PhoP regulon: identification of new PhoP-activated virulence loci. *Infect Immun* **62**: 5095–5101.

Berggren, R.E., Wunderlich, A., Ziegler, E., Schleicher, M., Duke, R.C., Looney, D., and Fang, F.C. (1995) HIV gp120-specific cell-mediated immune responses in mice after oral immunization with recombinant *Salmonella*. *J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr* **10**: 489–495.

Blattner, F.R., Plunkett, G., 3rd, Bloch, C.A., Perna, N.T., Burland, V., Riley, M., *et al.* (1997) The complete genome sequence of *Escherichia coli* K-12. *Science* **277**: 1453–1474.

Brodsky, I.E., Ernst, R.K., Miller, S.I., and Falkow, S. (2002) *mig-14* is a *Salmonella* gene that plays a role in bacterial resistance to antimicrobial peptides. *J Bacteriol* **184**: 3203–3213.

Brumell, J.H., Kujat-Choy, S., Brown, N.F., Vallance, B.A., Knodler, L.A., and Finlay, B.B. (2003) SopD2 is a novel type III secreted effector of *Salmonella typhimurium* that targets late endocytic compartments upon delivery into host cells. *Traffic* **4**: 36–48.

Buchmeier, N., Bossie, S., Chen, C.Y., Fang, F.C., Guiney, D.G., and Libby, S.J. (1997) SlyA, a transcriptional regulator of *Salmonella typhimurium*, is required for resistance to oxidative stress and is expressed in the intracellular environment of macrophages. *Infect Immun* **65**: 3725–3730.

Chen, H., and Schifferli, D.M. (2001) Enhanced immune responses to viral epitopes by combining macrophage-inducible expression with multimeric display on a *Salmonella* vector. *Vaccine* **19**: 3009–3018.

Choi, H., Kim, S., Mukhopadhyay, P., Cho, S., Woo, J., Storz, G., and Ryu, S. (2001) Structural basis of the redox switch in the OxyR transcription factor. *Cell* **105**: 103–113.

Daniels, J.J., Autenrieth, I.B., Ludwig, A., and Goebel, W. (1996) The gene *slyA* of *Salmonella typhimurium* is required for destruction of M cells and intracellular survival but not for invasion or colonization of the murine small intestine. *Infect Immun* **64**: 5075–5084.

Datsenko, K.A., and Wanner, B.L. (2000) One-step inactivation of chromosomal genes in *Escherichia coli* K-12 using PCR products. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* **97**: 6640–6645.

Deiwick, J., Nikolaus, T., Erdogan, S., and Hensel, M. (1999) Environmental regulation of Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 gene expression. Mol Microbiol 31: 1759–1773.

Detweiler, C.S., Monack, D.M., Brodsky, I.E., Mathew, H., and Falkow, S. (2003) virK, somA and rcsC are important for systemic Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium infection and cationic peptide resistance. Mol Microbiol 48: 385–400.

Eguchi, Y., Okada, T., Minagawa, S., Oshima, T., Mori, H., Yamamoto, K., et al. (2004) Signal transduction cascade between EvgA/EvgS and PhoP/PhoQ two-component systems of Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 186: 3006–3014.

Feng, X., Oropeza, R., and Kenney, L.J. (2003) Dual regulation by phospho-OmpR of ssrA/B gene expression in Salmonella pathogenicity island 2. Mol Microbiol 48: 1131–1143.

Feng, X., Walthers, D., Oropeza, R., and Kenney, L.J. (2004) The response regulator SsrB activates transcription and binds to a region overlapping OmpR binding sites at Salmonella pathogenicity island 2. Mol Microbiol 54: 823–835.

Fields, P.I., Groisman, E.A., and Heffron, F. (1989) A Salmonella locus that controls resistance to microbicidal proteins from phagocytic cells. Science 243: 1059–1062.

Galan, B., Kolb, A., Sanz, J.M., Garcia, J.L., and Prieto, M.A. (2003) Molecular determinants of the hpa regulatory system of Escherichia coli: the HpaR repressor. Nucleic Acids Res 31: 6598–6609.

Grkovic, S., Brown, M.H., and Skurray, R.A. (2002) Regulation of bacterial drug export systems. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 66: 671–701.

Groisman, E.A. (2001) The pleiotropic two-component regulatory system PhoP–PhoQ. J Bacteriol 183: 1835–1842.

Groisman, E.A., Kayser, J., and Soncini, F.C. (1997) Regulation of polymyxin resistance and adaptation to low-Mg2+ environments. J Bacteriol 179: 7040–7045.

Guina, T., Yi, E.C., Wang, H., Hackett, M., and Miller, S.I. (2000) A PhoP-regulated outer membrane protease of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium promotes resistance to alpha-helical antimicrobial peptides. J Bacteriol 182: 4077–4086.

Gunn, J.S., and Miller, S.I. (1996) PhoP–PhoQ activates transcription of pmrAB, encoding a two-component regulatory system involved in Salmonella typhimurium antimicrobial peptide resistance. J Bacteriol 178: 6857–6864.

Gunn, J.S., Alpuche-Aranda, C.M., Loomis, W.P., Belden, W.J., and Miller, S.I. (1995) Characterization of the Salmonella typhimurium pagC/pagD chromosomal region. J Bacteriol 177: 5040–5047.

Gunn, J.S., Hohmann, E.L., and Miller, S.I. (1996) Transcriptional regulation of Salmonella virulence: a PhoQ periplasmic domain mutation results in increased net phosphotransfer to PhoP. J Bacteriol 178: 6369–6373.

Gunn, J.S., Lim, K.B., Krueger, J., Kim, K., Guo, L., Hackett, M., and Miller, S.I. (1998) PmrA–PmrB-regulated genes necessary for 4-aminoarabinose lipid A modification and polymyxin resistance. Mol Microbiol 27: 1171–1182.

Heroven, A.K., Nagel, G., Tran, H.J., Parr, S., and Dersch, P. (2004) RovA is autoregulated and antagonizes H-NS-mediated silencing of invasin and rovA expression in Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. Mol Microbiol 53: 871–888.

Hmiel, S.P., Snavely, M.D., Miller, C.G., and Maguire, M.E. (1986) Magnesium transport in Salmonella typhimurium: characterization of magnesium influx and cloning of a transport gene. J Bacteriol 168: 1444–1450.

Ideker, T., Thorsson, V., Siegel, A.F., and Hood, L.E. (2000) Testing for differentially-expressed genes by maximum-likelihood analysis of microarray data. J Comput Biol 7: 805–817.

Ideker, T., Galitski, T., and Hood, L. (2001) A new approach to decoding life: systems biology. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet 2: 343–372.

Kaneko, A., Mita, M., Sekiya, K., Matsui, H., Kawahara, K., and Danbara, H. (2002) Association of a regulatory gene, slyA with a mouse virulence of Salmonella serovar Choleraesuis. Microbio Immunol 46: 109–113.

Kim, C.C., and Falkow, S. (2004) Delineation of upstream signaling events in the salmonella pathogenicity island 2 transcriptional activation pathway. J Bacteriol 186: 4694–4704.

Kim, C.C., Monack, D., and Falkow, S. (2003) Modulation of virulence by two acidified nitrite-responsive loci of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. Infect Immun 71: 3196–3205.

Knodler, L.A., Vallance, B.A., Hensel, M., Jackel, D., Finlay, B.B., and Steele-Mortimer, O. (2003) Salmonella type III effectors PipB and PipB2 are targeted to detergent-resistant microdomains on internal host cell membranes. Mol Microbiol 49: 685–704.

Kox, L.F., Wosten, M.M., and Groisman, E.A. (2000) A small protein that mediates the activation of a two-component system by another two-component system. EMBO J 19: 1861–1872.

Lee, A.K., Detweiler, C.S., and Falkow, S. (2000) OmpR regulates the two-component system SsrA–ssrB in Salmonella pathogenicity island 2. J Bacteriol 182: 771–781.

Lejona, S., Aguirre, A., Cabeza, M.L., Garcia Vescovi, E., and Soncini, F.C. (2003) Molecular characterization of the Mg2+-responsive PhoP–PhoQ regulon in Salmonella enterica. J Bacteriol 185: 6287–6294.

Libby, S.J., Goebel, W., Ludwig, A., Buchmeier, N., Bowe, F., Fang, F.C., et al. (1994) A cytotoxin encoded by Salmonella is required for survival within macrophages. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 91: 489–493.

McClelland, M., Sanderson, K.E., Spieth, J., Clifton, S.W., Latreille, P., Courtney, L., et al. (2001) Complete genome sequence of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium LT2. Nature 413: 852–856.

Martin, R.G., and Rosner, J.L. (2004) Transcriptional and translational regulation of the marRAB multiple antibiotic resistance operon in Escherichia coli. Mol Microbiol 53: 183–191.

Miao, E.A., Freeman, J.A., and Miller, S.I. (2002) Transcription of the SsrAB regulon is repressed by alkaline pH and is independent of PhoPQ and magnesium concentration. J Bacteriol 184: 1493–1497.

Miller, J. (1972) Experiments in Molecular Genetics. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

Miller, S.I., and Mekalanos, J.J. (1990) Constitutive expression of the phoP regulon attenuates Salmonella virulence and survival within macrophages. J Bacteriol 172: 2485–2490.

Miller, S.I., Kukral, A.M., and Mekalanos, J.J. (1989) A two-component regulatory system (phoP phoQ) controls Salmonella typhimurium virulence. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86: 5054–5058.

Minagawa, S., Ogasawara, H., Kato, A., Yamamoto, K., Eguchi, Y., Oshima, T., et al. (2003) Identification and molecular characterization of the Mg2+ stimulon of Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 185: 3696–3702.

Nagel, G., Lahrz, A., and Dersch, P. (2001) Environmental control of invasin expression in Yersinia pseudotuberculosis is mediated by regulation of RovA, a transcriptional activator of the SlyA/Hor family. Mol Microbiol 41: 1249–1269.

Nasser, W., and Reverchon, S. (2002) H-NS-dependent activation of pectate lyases synthesis in the phytopathogenic bacterium Erwinia chrysanthemi is mediated by the PecT repressor. Mol Microbiol 43: 733–748.

Norte, V.A., Stapleton, M.R., and Green, J. (2003) PhoP-responsive expression of the Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium slyA gene. J Bacteriol 185: 3508–3514.

Porwollik, S., Frye, J., Florea, L.D., Blackmer, F., and McClelland, M. (2003) A non-redundant microarray of genes for two related bacteria. Nucleic Acids Res 31: 1869–1876.

Porwollik, S., Boyd, E.F., Choy, C., Cheng, P., Florea, L., Proctor, E., and McClelland, M. (2004) Characterization of Salmonella enterica subspecies I genovars using microarrays. J Bacteriol 186: 5883–5898.

Poteete, A.R., and Fenton, A.C. (1984) Lambda red-dependent growth and recombination of phage P22. Virology 134: 161–167.

Praillet, T., Reverchon, S., and Nasser, W. (1997) Mutual control of the PecS/PecM couple, two proteins regulating virulence-factor synthesis in Erwinia chrysanthemi. Mol Microbiol 24: 803–814.

Prouty, A.M., Brodsky, I.E., Falkow, S., and Gunn, J.S. (2004a) Bile-salt-mediated induction of antimicrobial and bile resistance in Salmonella typhimurium. Microbiology 150: 775–783.

Prouty, A.M., Brodsky, I.E., Manos, J., Belas, R., Falkow, S., and Gunn, J.S. (2004b) Transcriptional regulation of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium genes by bile. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol 41: 177–185.

Pulkkinen, W.S., and Miller, S.I. (1991) A Salmonella typhimurium virulence protein is similar to a Yersinia enterocolitica invasion protein and a bacteriophage lambda outer membrane protein. J Bacteriol 173: 86–93.

Revell, P.A., and Miller, V.L. (2000) A chromosomally encoded regulator is required for expression of the Yersinia enterocolitica inv gene and for virulence. Mol Microbiol 35: 677–685.

Reverchon, S., Nasser, W., and Robert-Baudouy, J. (1994) pecS: a locus controlling pectinase, cellulase and blue pigment production in Erwinia chrysanthemi. Mol Microbiol 11: 1127–1139.

Rouanet, C., Reverchon, S., Rodionov, D.A., and Nasser, W. (2004) Definition of a consensus DNA-binding site for PecS, a global regulator of virulence gene expression in Erwinia chrysanthemi and identification of new members of the PecS regulon. J Biol Chem 279: 30158–30167.

Schapiro, J.M., Libby, S.J., and Fang, F.C. (2003) Inhibition of bacterial DNA replication by zinc mobilization during nitrosative stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100: 8496–8501.

Schmieger, H. (1971) A method for detection of phage mutants with altered transducing ability. Mol Gen Genet 110: 378–381.

Seoane, A.S., and Levy, S.B. (1995) Characterization of MarR, the repressor of the multiple antibiotic resistance (mar) operon in Escherichia coli. J Bacteriol 177: 3414–3419.

Shen-Orr, S.S., Milo, R., Mangan, S., and Alon, U. (2002) Network motifs in the transcriptional regulation network of Escherichia coli. Nat Genet 31: 64–68.

Shi, Y., Latifi, T., Cromie, M.J., and Groisman, E.A. (2004a) Transcriptional control of the antimicrobial peptide resistance ugtL gene by the Salmonella PhoP and SlyA regulatory proteins. J Biol Chem 279: 38618–38625.

Shi, Y., Cromie, M.J., Hsu, F.F., Turk, J., and Groisman, E.A. (2004b) PhoP-regulated Salmonella resistance to the antimicrobial peptides magainin 2 and polymyxin B. Mol Microbiol 53: 229–241.

Soncini, F.C., and Groisman, E.A. (1996) Two-component regulatory systems can interact to process multiple environmental signals. J Bacteriol 178: 6796–6801.

Soncini, F.C., Garcia Vescovi, E., Solomon, F., and Groisman, E.A. (1996) Molecular basis of the magnesium deprivation response in Salmonella typhimurium: identification of PhoP-regulated genes. J Bacteriol 178: 5092–5099.

Spory, A., Bosserhoff, A., von Rhein, C., Goebel, W., and Ludwig, A. (2002) Differential regulation of multiple proteins of Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium by the transcriptional regulator SlyA. J Bacteriol 184: 3549–3559.

Stapleton, M.R., Norte, V.A., Read, R.C., and Green, J. (2002) Interaction of the Salmonella typhimurium transcription and virulence factor SlyA with target DNA and identification of members of the SlyA regulon. J Biol Chem 277: 17630–17637.

Valdivia, R.H., Cirillo, D.M., Lee, A.K., Bouley, D.M., and Falkow, S. (2000) mig-14 is a horizontally acquired, host-induced gene required for Salmonella enterica lethal infection in the murine model of typhoid fever. Infect Immun 68: 7126–7131.

Vazquez-Torres, A., Xu, Y., Jones-Carson, J., Holden, D.W., Lucia, S.M., Dinauer, M.C., et al. (2000) Salmonella pathogenicity island 2-dependent evasion of the phagocyte NADPH oxidase. Science 287: 1655–1658.

van Velkinburgh, J.C., and Gunn, J.S. (1999) PhoP–PhoQ-regulated loci are required for enhanced bile resistance in Salmonella spp. Infect Immun 67: 1614–1622.

Waterman, S.R., and Holden, D.W. (2003) Functions and effectors of the Salmonella pathogenicity island 2 type III secretion system. Cell Microbiol 5: 501–511.

Watson, N. (1988) A new revision of the sequence of plasmid pBR322. Gene 70: 399–403.

Watson, P.R., Paulin, S.M., Bland, A.P., Libby, S.J., Jones, P.W., and Wallis, T.S. (1999) Differential regulation of enteric and systemic salmonellosis by. Slya Infect Immun 67: 4950–4954.

Wosten, M.M., Kox, L.F., Chamnongpol, S., Soncini, F.C., and Groisman, E.A. (2000) A signal transduction system that responds to extracellular iron. Cell 103: 113–125.

Wu, R.Y., Zhang, R.G., Zagnitko, O., Dementieva, I., Maltzev, N., Watson, J.D., *et al.* (2003) Crystal structure of *Enterococcus faecalis* SlyA-like transcriptional factor. *J Biol Chem* 278: 20240–20244.

Wyborn, N.R., Stapleton, M.R., Norte, V.A., Roberts, R.E., Grafton, J., and Green, J. (2004) Regulation of *Escherichia coli* hemolysin E expression by H-NS and *Salmonella* SlyA. *J Bacteriol* 186: 1620–1628.

Xiong, A., Gottman, A., Park, C., Baetens, M., Pandza, S., and Matin, A. (2000) The EmrR protein represses the *Escherichia coli emrRAB* multidrug resistance operon by directly binding to its promoter region. *Antimicrob Agents Chemother* 44: 2905–2907.

Yamamoto, K., Ogasawara, H., Fujita, N., Utsumi, R., and Ishihama, A. (2002) Novel mode of transcription regulation of divergently overlapping promoters by PhoP, the regulator of two-component system sensing external magnesium availability. *Mol Microbiol* 45: 423–438.
