
Progress in
Hematology

International Journal of
HEMATOLOGY

Antigen Recognition and Presentation by Dendritic Cells

Kayo Inaba${}^{a}$ Muneo Inaba${}^{b}$

${}^{a}$Laboratory of Immunobiology, Department of Animal Development and Physiology, Division of Systemic Life Science, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto;

${}^{b}$First Department of Pathology, Kansai Medical University, Osaka, Japan

Received December 20, 2004; accepted December 27, 2004

---

### Abstract

In this article we review the following important points in the antigen-presenting system: (1) the regulation of the expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, (2) the mechanism of cross-presentation, and (3) the interaction of antigen-presenting cells (APC) and T-cells.

1. The expression of MHC class I or class II molecules is regulated by the interaction of the MHC enhanceosome and the class II transactivator (CIITA). CIITA also regulates the gene expression of *plexna-1*, which encodes a semaphorin receptor, plexin-A1, that might be involved in the interaction with T-cells through an unknown ligand for plexin-A1.
2. Two pathways, a proteasome/TAP-independent pathway and a proteasome/TAP-dependent pathway, have now been identified in the cross-presentation. In the proteasome/TAP-dependent pathway, the translocon/Sec61 protein channel is an important element for the transport of antigenic peptides in phagosomes to the cytoplasm.
3. The integration of adhesion/costimulatory molecules and peptide-MHC complexes at the surface of APC creates the “immunological synapse” region, which potentiates the efficiency of APC–T-cell interactions. The peptide-MHC complexes preferentially reside in the “raft” structure or associate with tetraspanin family molecules.

*Int J Hematol.* 2005;81:181-187. doi: 10.1532/IJH97.04200  
© 2005 The Japanese Society of Hematology

Key words: Dendritic cells; Antigen presentation; Cross-presentation; MHC molecules; Immunological synapse

---

### 1. Introduction

Dendritic cells (DC) are the only antigen-presenting cells (APC) that can prime naive T-cells and initiate immune responses. DC must pass through a number of maturation stages to become competent for activating naive T-cells, and only mature DC prime naive T-cells effectively. In a series of immune responses, immature DC serve as sentinels for invading antigens at the periphery. The DC then migrate out of the peripheral tissue to regional lymph nodes via afferent lymph and thus serve as migratory cells. DC mature during this process, and antigens endocytosed by DC are processed. Finally, DC present antigenic peptides on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules to

---

Correspondence and reprint requests: Kayo Inaba, Laboratory of Immunobiology, Department of Animal Development and Physiology, Division of Systemic Life Science, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kitashirakawaoiwake-cho, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan; 81-75-753-4088; fax: 81-75-753-4112 (e-mail: kayo@zoo.zool.kyoto-u.ac.jp).

T-cells (ie, they serve as APC) (Figure 1). DC also migrate out of peripheral tissue in the absence of strong maturation signals. Under steady-state conditions, peripheral DC reach the lymph nodes and contribute to maintaining peripheral tolerance.

Antigen recognition by T-cells is dependent on the expression of MHC molecules or MHC-like molecules, such as CD1, on APC. T-cells recognize via T-cell receptors (TCR) peptides on MHC molecules or breakdown products derived from glycolipids on CD1 molecules. MHC class I molecules are expressed on all nucleated cells, whereas MHC class II molecules are expressed on the surface of specialized cells, professional APC (such as DC, macrophages, and B-cells). CD8⁺ T-cells are well known to usually recognize peptides (generally intrinsically generated) on MHC class I molecules, whereas CD4⁺ T-cells recognize peptides (exogenous antigens endocytosed by APC and digested to antigenic peptides in phagosomes/lysosomes) on MHC class II molecules. In this review article, we focus on the molecular mechanisms of (1) antigen-processing pathways, including the regulatory mechanism of MHC molecule expression, (2) the generation of antigenic peptides and their transport system, and (3) the interaction between APC and T-cells.

Exogenous Ag (pathogen)

Peripheral tissue

Sentinel cell  
: endocytosis of Ag  

Immature DC  
(Interstitial cell, Langerhans cell)  

Antigen-presenting cell  
: Presentation of peptide-MHC molecule complex  
: Cross-presentation  
: Immunological synapse/raft microdomain  

Veiled cell  

Afferent lymph  
(maturation)  

Migratory cell : Ag processing  

Regional lymph node  

Naïve T-cell  

Mature DC  
(Interdigitating cell)  

Effector T-cell  

Figure 1. Initiation of immune responses by dendritic cells (DC). Immature DC in the peripheral tissue (interstitial cells, Langerhans cells) take up exogenous (invading) antigens (Ag) by endocytosis (sentinel cells). DC migrate out of the peripheral tissue to the regional lymph node via afferent lymph (veiled cells). During this process, DC mature and process antigens into immunogenic peptides. Finally, DC present peptides on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules to naïve T-cells (ie, they serve as antigen-presenting cells).

2. Transcriptional Regulation of MHC Molecules

Activation of $MHC$ class I or $\beta 2m$ genes is regulated by the binding of transcriptional factors to specific gene regions, named regulatory elements, located –220 to –95 bp upstream of the transcription-initiation point. Three major regulatory elements are known in the $MHC$ class I and $\beta 2m$ genes: enhancer A, the interferon (IFN)-stimulated response element (ISRE), and the SXY module. Enhancer A contains the binding site for nuclear factor $\kappa B$ (NF-$\kappa B$), and ISRE contains the binding site for IFN regulatory factor 1. Therefore, the $MHC$ class I or $\beta 2m$ genes are under the regulation of these transcriptional factors, NF-$\kappa B$, and ISRE. Thus, signals are transmitted via tumor necrosis factor $\alpha$ (TNF-$\alpha$) and IFN through JAK/STAT pathways. Furthermore, there is another important regulatory element in the $HLA-B$ gene, the E-box, to which upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF-1) or USF-2 bind. Nucleotide changes in these regulatory elements affect the binding of transcriptional factors to these regions, modulating $MHC$ class I expression [1].

The SXY module consists of 4 regulatory elements (the S or W box, the X1 box, the X2 box, and the Y box), and the $MHC$ enhanceosome (a complex of transcriptional factors consisting of regulatory factor X [RFX], cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element-binding protein, and nuclear factor Y) then binds to these regions to initiate the activation of the $HLA-A$, $HLA-B$, and $\beta 2m$ genes. The SXY module is also located in $MHC$ class II, invariant chain ($Ii$), $HLA-DM$, and $HLA-DO$ genes. Furthermore, the class II transactivator (CIITA), which is a known important factor regulating $MHC$ class II gene expression, also interacts with the $MHC$ enhanceosome, contributing to the activation of the $MHC$ class I and $\beta 2m$ genes (Figure 2).

Recently, a new factor, Monarch-1, that regulates $MHC$ class I genes was discovered. This factor is expressed in myeloid/monocyte lineage cells, but not in lymphoid cells, and up-regulates the expression of $MHC$ class I molecules. In contrast, note that TNF-$\alpha$ and IFN-$\gamma$, known as inducers of $MHC$ class I molecules, reduce the expression of Monarch-1 [2].

As discussed above, the activation of the $MHC$ class II gene promoter is strictly controlled by CIITA, and RFX is also an important factor that regulates $MHC$ class II genes. This conclusion is confirmed by the findings of studies using cell lines established from patients with bare lymphocyte syndrome, one of the severe combined immunodeficiencies in which mutation(s) are observed in 1 of the RFX subunits (RFX consists of RFX5, RFXB/ANK, and RFXAP subunits) or in CIITA. The clinical and immunologic phenotypes of patients with bare lymphocyte syndrome could be accounted for by the defects in $MHC$ expression [3]. Deficiency in RFX or CIITA affects the functions of the $MHC$ enhanceosome or the assembly of $MHC$ enhanceosome component proteins, and this deficiency leads to the inhibition of the transcription of $MHC$ class II genes or even $MHC$ class I genes [4].

As for the expression of the CIITA gene ($MHC2TA$ in humans and $C2ta$ in mice), 3 kinds of $C2ta$ promoters have been reported. The pI promoter site is used in macrophages and myeloid lineage cells, the pIII site is used in B-cells and lymphoid DC, and the pIV site is used in non-hematopoietic cells [5].

Antigen Recognition and Presentation by DC

MHC class I/class II genes

| NF-κB | IRF-1 | "Enhanceosome" |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | (RFX/CREB/NFY) |

Enhancer A ISRE S X1 X2 Y

Regulatory elements

Plxna1 gene

Regulatory element ?

CIITA

CIITA

APC

T-cell

<Immunological synapse / raft microdomain>

Peptide-MHC molecule complex

Costimulatory molecule

TCR

1st signal

2nd signal

"Activation of T-cells"

Plexin-A1

Semaphorin 6D ?

signal ?

Activation signal ?

Figure 2. Regulatory elements in major histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes. The enhancer A, interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE), and SXY modules are known major regulatory elements. Enhancer A contains the binding site for nuclear factor κB (NF-κB), and ISRE contains the binding site for interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1). The SXY module consists of 4 regulatory elements: the S or W box, the X1 box, the X2 box, and the Y box. The MHC enhanceosome (regulatory factor X [RFX], cyclic adenosine monophosphate response element–binding protein [CREB], nuclear factor Y [NFY]) binds to these regions. The class II transactivator (CIITA) interacts with the MHC enhanceosome and activates the expression of non-MHC genes. The Plxnal promoter can be transactivated by CIITA, resulting in the expression of plexin-A1, although the mechanism through which CIITA drives plexin-A1 expression in mature DC remains to be clarified. Semaphorin 6D has recently been reported to be a ligand for plexin-A1 and is expressed on T-cells. APC indicates antigen-presenting cell; TCR, T-cell receptor.

3. Antigen Presentation by MHC Class I Molecules and Proteasomes

Proteasomes and cytosolic/endoplasmic reticulum (ER) aminopeptidases are important elements for the binding of antigenic peptides to MHC class I molecules. Proteasomes consist of 2 subunits: the 20S subunit, which has proteolytic activity, and the 19S (PA700) or 11S (PA28) regulatory subunit. The activity of proteasomes is regulated by IFN-γ, and the conversion of “constitutive proteasomes (19S-20S-19S)” to “immunoproteasomes (11S-20S-11S)” occurs at this time. In general, constitutive proteasomes take charge of the proteolysis of ubiquitin-binding proteins in an adenosine triphosphate–dependent manner, whereas immunoproteasomes are in charge of the proteolysis of proteins without ubiquitin binding. Furthermore, immunoproteasomes are known to efficiently generate the peptide presented to CD8⁺ cells. The ratio of constitutive proteasomes to immunoproteasomes (or the hybrid type of constitutive proteasomes and immunoproteasomes) is dependent on the cell type, and therefore there are variations among various cell types in the generation of MHC class I–binding peptides. Immunoproteasomes are notably rich in DC, even when they are in the immature stage, and the conversion of constitutive proteasomes to immunoproteasomes is significantly enhanced after the stimulation by maturation-induced “danger signals,” such as bacteria or their products, lipopolysaccharides, CpG, viruses, inflammatory cytokines, the uptake of necrotic cells, or CD40 ligand.

Translocon, which consists of the Sec 61 heterotrimer (α, β, and γ) in the ER membrane, is a protein-conducting channel that transports peptides translated in ribosomes to the ER. Defective ribosomal products (DRiP) in the ER are countertransported to the cytoplasm, ubiquitinated, and then degraded by proteasomes (ER-associated degradation [ERAD]). Translocon is involved in ERAD in that DRiP are transported from the ER to the cytoplasm via translocon. Peptides generated in the cytoplasm (by proteasomes) are transported to the ER via the transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) and bind to MHC class I molecules. MHC class I molecules are constitutively synthesized in DC irrespective of the DC maturational stage, and the peptides binding to MHC class I molecules are mainly derived from DRiP, which have been calculated to be 30% to 80% of all proteins synthesized. However, the frequency of peptide binding to MHC class I molecules is estimated to be approximately 0.01% (1 peptide/10⁴ proteins), and peptides in the cytoplasm are not fully transported to the ER via TAP [6]. These findings clearly indicate that many peptides generated in the cytoplasm might be degraded after proteolysis by proteasomes.

The existence of another proteolysis pathway, a proteasome-independent pathway, in the cytoplasm is evidenced
by the finding that the presentation of the epitope residing in the N-terminal region, but not that in the C-terminal region, is not inhibited by a proteasome inhibitor. Actually, the processing of peptides binding to MHC class I molecules is carried out, at least in part, by an aminopeptidase, such as tripeptidyl peptidase II, leucine peptidase, and thimet oligopeptidase [7].

# 4. Antigen Presentation by MHC Class II Molecules

The presentation of peptide–MHC class II molecule complexes is generally enhanced by danger signals (bacteria or their products, lipopolysaccharides, CpG, viruses, inflammatory cytokines, necrotic cells, CD40 ligand, and so on). The binding of pathogen/pathogen products to “pattern recognition” receptors, such as Toll-like receptors (TLR), or to receptors related to endocytosis (such as scavenger receptors or C-type lectin receptors) up-regulate endocytosis and antigen-presenting activity [8]. By these maturation-inducing signals, the formation of a CLIP (class II–associated invariant chain peptide) from Ii by a cysteine protease (cathepsin-S) is enhanced, and peptides are loaded onto MHC class II molecules with the assistance of a chaperone, HLA-DM, in late endosomes (peptide-loading MHC class II compartment [MIIC]).

As has been reported, although immature DC efficiently endocytose antigens and microorganisms, the formation of peptide–MHC class II molecule complexes remains at a low level, possibly because of low proteolytic activity in the endosomes with a relatively high pH. After exposure to microbial products or inflammatory mediators (danger signals), endocytosis in DC is down-regulated, the pH in the endosomes is reduced via the activation of a proton pump, and proteolytic activity and the synthesis of MHC class II molecules then increase. Concomitantly, the expression of costimulatory molecules is enhanced, and MHC class II molecules are transported to late endosomes (MIIC), where peptide–MHC class II molecule complexes are efficiently generated. Finally, newly formed immunogenic peptide–MHC class II molecule complexes are transported to the cell surface of APC. The machinery transporting peptide–MHC class II molecule complexes has been reported to be tubular endosomes extending intracellularly and polarizing toward the interacting T-cell [9]. This mechanism has been demonstrated with assays using green fluorescent protein–tagged MHC class II molecules in live DC, in which stimulated DC generate tubules from lysosomal compartments that go on to fuse directly with the plasma membrane. These findings indicate that peptide–MHC class II molecule complexes are transported via such tubules, and tubulation serves to facilitate the interaction with T-cells via an efficient transfer of peptide–MHC class II molecule complexes [10].

# 5. Cross-Presentation

Cross-presentation is the pathway by which exogenous antigens are routed for presentation on MHC class I molecules for the activation of CD8⁺ T-cells. This pathway is important for the development of CD8⁺ cytotoxic T-cell responses against tumors and infectious pathogens that do not directly infect APC, and it is also critical for the induction of tolerance. Two pathways of cross-presentation are now known: the proteasome/TAP-independent pathway and the proteasome/TAP-dependent pathway.

MHC class I molecules have been confirmed to be present in endosomes and lysosomes of B-cells and DC, and these MHC class I molecules recycle along the loop illustrated in Figure 3 (at i, the TAP-independent pathway). Endocytosed exogenous antigens are degraded by proteolytic enzymes, and the resulting peptides bind to MHC class I molecules in late endosomes (multivesicular body) in the recycling loop. This process is not inhibited by a proteasome inhibitor, thereby indicating a proteasome/TAP-independent pathway.

In the case of proteasome/TAP-dependent pathways (Figure 3, at ii), the internalized exogenous antigens are transferred from the endocytic pathway to the cytosol and are degraded by proteasomes; the resulting peptides are then transported to the ER via TAP. The fusion of an ER membrane component, translocon/Sec 61, to phagosomes has recently been reported to be important in this process. Along with the endocytosis of particulate antigens, a “phagocytic cap” consisting of ER membrane and plasma membrane is generated. This cap thereafter becomes a phagosome with fused membranes derived from ER and plasma membranes. The protein channel (Sec 61) derived from the ER membrane participates in the transfer of the antigens internalized in phagosomes to the cytosol. Therefore, translocon/Sec 61 in ERAD is also involved in this transfer process, as mentioned above [11,12]. Aminopeptidases derived from the ER are also detected in phagosomes, indicating that the fusion of ER and plasma membranes is an important step for cross-presentation [13]. Such transfer was demonstrated when murine DC line DC2.4 was examined: exogenously added ovalbumin accumulated in the ER and late endosomes and then moved by retrograde transport to the cytoplasm through the translocon/Sec61 transporter [14]. Furthermore, signals through TLR can enhance endocytosis/phagocytosis and the maturation of phagosomes with increased lysosomal enzyme activity. This enhancement was confirmed in studies using TLR2-, TLR4-, or MyD88-deficient mice, which had these activities significantly reduced in macrophages or DC. Of note is that the phagocytosis of apoptotic cells cannot induce these maturation steps in DC [15].

Another important element in the cross-presentation pathway is heat shock protein (hsp). hsp70, hsp90, and hsp110 are observed in the cytoplasm, and peptides degraded by proteasomes are bound to these hsps for transport to TAP. Thus, hsps serve as “chaperones.” Peptide-hsp complexes are released from necrotic cells, and these complexes are captured by DC via the hsp receptor, CD91, and then transported to TAP. Furthermore, hsps themselves activate DC to increase the expression of adhesion/costimulatory molecules [16]. Scavenger receptors are also reported to be hsp receptors on human DC, and LOX-1 has been identified as one of these receptors. The binding of human hsp70 to DC and hsp70-mediated antigen cross-presentation in vitro are inhibited by an anti–LOX-1 monoclonal antibody.
Antigen Recognition and Presentation by DC

CD8⁺ T-Cell
MHC class I molecule
+ peptide
TCR
Exogenous antigen
Phagocytosis
ER-phagosome
Hydrolase
Late endosome/lysosome
i) TAP-independent pathway
Endogenous antigen
Pathogen
Proteasome
Golgi apparatus
TAP1
Tapasin
TAP2
ER
MHC class I α chain
Calnexin/Calreticulin
β2m
ii) TAP-dependent pathway
Aminopeptidase
Translocon / Sec 61
ER

Figure 3. Transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP)-dependent and TAP-independent pathways of cross-presentation. In TAP-independent pathways (i), major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules are present in endosomes and lysosomes, and these MHC class I molecules recycle along the loop illustrated in this figure. Exogenous antigens that have been endocytosed are degraded by proteolytic enzymes, and the resulting peptides bind in late endosomes (multivesicular body) to MHC class I molecules in the recycling loop. In the case of proteasome/TAP-dependent pathways (ii), the internalized exogenous antigens are transferred from the endocytic pathway to the cytosol and degraded by proteasomes; the resulting peptides are then transported to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) via TAP. The fusion of an ER membrane component, translocon/Sec 61, to phagosomes is important. Sec 61, the protein channel derived from the ER membrane, participates in the transfer of the internalized antigens in phagosomes to the cytosol. The original proteasome antigen-processing pathway and the presentation by MHC class I molecules are illustrated on the right side of this figure.

## 6. Antigen Presentation by CD1 Molecules

MHC class I–like CD1 molecules bind antigens in endosomes or lysosomes and are therefore important in the immune responses to mycobacteria, such as *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*, proliferating in target cells. CD1 molecules bind lipids and enable TCR recognition of fatty acids, glycolipids, and lipopeptide antigens of endogenous or exogenous origin. Note that foreign microbial antigens are presented by CD1 isoforms CD1a, CD1b, and CD1c. Human CD1 molecules consist of these 3 isoforms and CD1d, and these CD1 isoforms bind peptides at different stages of the endocytic pathway: early endosome, late endosome, or lysosome. This difference in binding might be attributable to the specific tyrosine-based motif in the cytoplasmic tail of each isoform and the interaction of adaptor molecules (AP-2 or AP-3) in endosomes. Furthermore, the sphingolipid activator proteins are essential in the binding of lipid antigens to CD1 molecules in the endocytic pathway [17].

## 7. The Immunological Synapse and Interaction with T-Cells

The initiation of adaptive immune responses requires the direct interaction of DC with naive T-cells. Peptides bound to MHC molecules on the surfaces of APC interact with TCR, and the binding of adhesion/costimulatory molecules to their counterparts results in the activation of T-cells. After initial signaling through the TCR, the peptide-MHC-TCR complexes segregate into discrete areas of the membrane, forming a structure known as the immunological synapse. At these sites, clusters of “lipid rafts” serve as platforms for signal transduction. In the immunological synapse or at the interface between T-cells and APC, the TCR on T-cells or the peptide–MHC molecule complex on APC resides in the central area, and adhesion/costimulatory molecules are in the peripheral area, thus forming concentric rings defined as supramolecular activation clusters (SMAC) [18]. Molecules involved in T-cell activation, such
as protein kinase C and linker for activation of T-cells, are also recruited to SMAC [19].

DC maturation has been reported to determine the stability and duration of the initial contacts between DC and naive T-cells and to determine the formation of the immunological synapse. Mature DC form stable high-avidity conjugates with T-cells, a mature immunological synapse, and effective T-cell activation, whereas immature DC establish multiple short low-affinity contacts with T-cells (and thus no effective TCR clustering) and very inefficient calcium signaling, resulting in abortive proliferations.

Peptide-MHC class II molecule complexes or immunological synapses are located in the cholesterol-rich plasma membrane microdomain termed the *lipid raft*. Depletion of cholesterol from the lipid raft inhibits APC activity. Therefore, the immunological synapse distributed in the raft microdomain is critically important for the activation of T-cells by concentrating peptide-MHC molecule complexes in the restricted area to increase the efficiency of TCR engagement.

The recently described molecule DOCK2 is an essential element for lipid rafts. DOCK2 is a mammalian homolog of *Caenorhabditis elegans* CED-5, which is known to regulate the actin cytoskeleton. DOCK2 is critical for lymphocyte migration and for the formation of the immunological synapse. The importance of DOCK2 has been confirmed by experiments with DOCK2-deficient T-cells, in which antigen-induced translocation of TCR and lipid rafts to the APC interface is severely impaired, resulting in a significant reduction in antigen-specific T-cell proliferation [20]. Furthermore, the immunological synapse has been reported to determine lineage commitment of helper T-cells (Th cells). Rapid copolarization of IFN-γ receptor with TCR occurs within the developing immunological synapse on engagement of TCR, and Th cells from the Th1-prone C57BL/6 mouse have significantly greater receptor copolarization than Th2-prone BALB/c Th cells [21].

MHC class II molecules have also been reported to associate on the plasma membrane with tetraspanins. The tetraspanin family (also known as the transmembrane-4 superfamily) of proteins was first identified in leukocytes, and this family of proteins is now known to be expressed on DC. This family of proteins—including CD63, CD9, CD81, CD82, and CD151—are present in immature DC. CD9 and CD81 are mostly expressed at the cell surface, and CD63 and CD82 are located in intracellular organelles [22]. In DC and B-cells, considerable amounts of MHC class II molecules are observed in tetraspan microdomains, and HLA-DM and the costimulatory molecule CD86 are colocalized in this region [23]. Furthermore, CD9, CD63, CD81, and CD82 can modulate the interactions between immature DC and their environment, slowing their migratory ability, and CD63 can intervene in the internalization of complex antigens [22].

As has been described, CIITA is a transcription factor that controls the expression of MHC class II molecules. However, CIITA not only activates the expression of genes encoding Ii, HLA-DM, and HLA-DO and contributes to a lesser degree to MHC class I expression but also can modulate the expression of non-MHC genes. Actually, CIITA affects the expression of more than 40 genes in human

B-cells. Interestingly, the expression of the gene encoding plexin-A1 (*Plxna1*) has been reported to also be under the control of CIITA [24]. Plexin-A1 is a receptor for semaphorins, and semaphorins are known as extracellular signals that guide neuronal axons to appropriate target cells. The expression of plexin-A1 is restricted mainly to mature DC; it is not expressed by other immune cells or APC. The *Plxna1* promoter can be transactivated by CIITA, resulting in the expression of plexin-A1. Depletion of plexin-A1 in DC by RNA interference was found to lead to a substantial reduction in T-cell stimulation in vitro and in vivo, and this reduction was not attributable to decreased antigen processing, MHC expression, or peptide loading, indicating that plexin-A1 is one of the regulatory elements controlling DC-T-cell interactions, although the mechanism through which CIITA drives plexin-A1 expression in mature DC remains to be clarified (Figure 2). Several semaphorins and their receptors have been reported to also be expressed in the immune system, where they play a role in the reciprocal stimulation of APC and T-cells. Semaphorin 4A is expressed on DC and interacts with Tim-2, which enhances T-cell activation, and semaphorin 4D (CD100) is expressed on T-cells and prolongs B-cell activation through the binding of the B-cell surface receptor CD72 or plexin-B1. These findings indicate that plexin-A1 expression on DC is required for optimal stimulation of T-cells. Semaphorin 6D has recently been reported to be a ligand for plexin-A1, and the interaction with plexin-A1 is necessary for the stimulation of T-cells.

## 8. Conclusions

DC comprise several subsets that induce and regulate the immune responses against foreign and self-antigens and can therefore function as initiators of protective immunity and inducers of central or peripheral tolerance. The different DC subpopulations interact with and also influence other cell populations of the immune system, such as T-cells, B-cells, and natural killer cells. The factors that determine given DC functions depend on the state of maturation and the local microenvironment. Accumulating evidence has added to our understanding of these interactions. Furthermore, the function of DC has been associated with a variety of immunologic disorders. Because of the relevance of DC to human disease, extensive efforts have been made to gain a better understanding of their biology. The identification of pertinent molecules expressed in related cells, including DC, through gene profiling experiments and proteomics is critically important for basic studies and clinical applications of DC.

## References

1. Johnson DR. Locus-specific constitutive and cytokine-induced HLA class I gene expression. *J Immunol.* 2003;170:1894-1902.
2. Williams KL, Taxman DJ, Linhoff MW, Reed W, Ting JP. Cutting edge: Monarch-1: a pyrin/nucleotide-binding domain/leucine-rich repeat protein that controls classical and nonclassical MHC class I genes. *J Immunol.* 2003;170:5354-5358.
3. DeSandro A, Nagarajan UM, Boss JM. The bare lymphocyte syndrome: molecular clues to the transcriptional regulation of major histocompatibility complex class II genes. *Am J Hum Genet.* 1999; 65:279-286.
4. Reith W, Mach B. The bare lymphocyte syndrome and the regulation of MHC expression. *Annu Rev Immunol*. 2001;19:331-373.
5. LeibundGut-Landmann S, Waldburger J-M, Reis e Sousa C, Acha-Orbea H, Reith W. MHC class II expression is differentially regulated in plasmacytoid and conventional dendritic cells. *Nat Immunol*. 2004;5:899-908.
6. Yewdell JW. Not such a dismal science: the economics of protein synthesis, folding, degradation and antigen processing. *Trends Cell Biol*. 2001;11:294-297.
7. Kloetzel P-M, Ossendorp F. Proteasome and peptidase function in MHC-class-I-mediated antigen presentation. *Curr Opin Immunol*. 2004;16:76-81.
8. Boes M, Bertho N, Cerny J, Op den Brouw M, Kirchhausen T, Ploegh H. T cells induce extended class II MHC compartments in dendritic cells in a toll-like receptor-dependent manner. *J Immunol*. 2004;171:4081-4088.
9. Boes M, Cerny J, Massol R, et al. T-cell engagement of dendritic cells rapidly rearranges MHC class II transport. *Nature*. 2002;418: 983-988.
10. Chow A, Toomre D, Garrett W, Mellman I. Dendritic cell maturation triggers retrograde MHC class II transport from lysosomes to the plasma membrane. *Nature*. 2002;418:988-994.
11. Guermonprez P, Saveanu L, Kleijmeer M, Davoust J, van Endert P, Amigorena S. ER-phagosome fusion defines an MHC class I cross-presentation compartment in dendritic cells. *Nature*. 2003;425: 397-402.
12. Houde M, Bertholet S, Gagnon E, et al. Phagosomes are competent organelles for antigen cross-presentation. *Nature*. 2003;425: 402-406.
13. Ackerman AL, Kyritsis C, Tampe R, Cresswell P. Early phagosomes in dendritic cells form cellular compartment sufficient for cross presentation of exogenous antigens. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA*. 2003;100:12889-12894.
14. Imai J, Hasegawa H, Maruya M, Koyasu S, Yahara I. Exogenous antigens are processed through the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) in cross-presentation by dendritic cells. *Int Immunol*. 2005;17:45-53.
15. Blander JM, Medzhitov R. Regulation of phagosome maturation by signals from Toll-like receptors. *Science*. 2004;304:1014-1018.
16. Li Z, Menoret A, Srivastava P. Roles of heat-shock proteins in antigen presentation and cross-presentation. *Curr Opin Immunol*. 2002;14:45-51.
17. Kronenberg M. Presenting fats with SAPs. *Nat Immunol*. 2004;5: 126-127.
18. Monks CR, Freiberg BA, Kupfer H, Sciaky N, Kupfer A. Three-dimensional segregation of supramolecular activation clusters in T cells. *Nature*. 1998;395:82-86.
19. Montoya MC, Sancho D, Bonello G, et al. Role of ICAM-3 in the initial interaction of T lymphocytes and APCs. *Nat Immunol*. 2002; 3:159-164.
20. Sanui T, Inayoshi A, Noda M, et al. DOCK2 is essential for antigen-induced translocation of TCR and lipid rafts, but not PKC-θ and LFA-1, in T cells. *Immunity*. 2003;19:119-129.
21. Maldonado RA, Irvine DJ, Schreiber R, Glimcher LH. A role for the immunological synapse in lineage commitment of CD4 lymphocytes. *Nature*. 2004;431:527-532.
22. Mantegazza AR, Barrio MM, Moutel S, et al. CD63 tetraspanin slows down cell migration and translocates to the endosomal-lysosomal-MIICs route after extracellular stimuli in human immature dendritic cells. *Blood*. 2004;104:1183-1190.
23. Kropshofer H, Spindeldreher S, Röhn TA, et al. Tetraspan microdomains distinct from lipid rafts select peptide-MHC class II complexes. *Nat Immunol*. 2002;3:61-68.
24. Wong AW, Brickey WJ, Taxman DJ, et al. CIITA-regulated plexin-A1 affects T-cell-dendritic cell interactions. *Nat Immunol*. 2003;4: 891-898.
