
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS AND CHEMOTHERAPY, May 2005, p. 1782–1786
0066-4804/05/$08.00+0 doi:10.1128/AAC.49.5.1782–1786.2005
Copyright © 2005, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

# Mutations in PA3574 (nalD) Lead to Increased MexAB-OprM Expression and Multidrug Resistance in Laboratory and Clinical Isolates of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*

**Mara L. Sobel,**¹ **Didier Hocquet,**² **Lily Cao,**¹ **Patrick Plesiat,**² **and Keith Poole**¹*

*Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada K7L 3N6,*¹ *and Laboratoire de Bacteriologie, Hopital Jean Minjoz, F-25030 Besançon, France*²

Received 6 December 2004/Returned for modification 12 January 2005/Accepted 19 January 2005

Mutations in genes *mexR* and *nalC* have previously been shown to drive overexpression of the MexAB-OprM multidrug efflux system in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. A transposon insertion multidrug-resistant mutant of *P. aeruginosa* overproducing MexAB-OprM was disrupted in yet a third gene, PA3574, encoding a probable repressor of the TetR/AcrR family that we have dubbed NalD. Clinical strains overexpressing MexAB-OprM but lacking mutations in *mexR* or *nalC* were also shown to carry mutations in *nalD*. Moreover, the cloned *nalD* gene reduced the multidrug resistance and MexAB-OprM expression of the transposon mutant and clinical isolates, highlighting the significance of the *nalD* mutations vis-à-vis MexAB-OprM overexpression in these isolates.

---

*Pseudomonas aeruginosa* is an opportunistic human pathogen characterized by an innate resistance to multiple classes of antimicrobials (11), attributable in part to a family of broadly specific, so-called multidrug efflux systems (23, 24) that work synergistically with low outer membrane permeability (9, 19) to limit antimicrobial accumulation in this organism. Several multidrug efflux systems in *P. aeruginosa* have been described to date (23), although the major system contributing to intrinsic multidrug resistance is encoded by the *mexAB-oprM* operon (10, 18, 26). MexAB-OprM exports a wide variety of antimicrobials, including most classes of antibiotics, biocides, dyes, detergents, organic solvents (i.e., aromatic hydrocarbons; reviewed in reference 23]), and homoserine lactones associated with quorum sensing (8, 22). The last play a role in cell density-dependent expression of a number of virulence factors in *P. aeruginosa*, and thus, the activity of this efflux system can influence virulence (30). Indeed, a recent study suggests that the MexAB-OprM efflux system of *P. aeruginosa* promotes the release of a molecule(s) ultimately important for the virulence of this organism (12). The observation that MexAB-OprM hyperexpression in *nalB* strains impairs fitness and virulence (30) also suggests that this efflux system has a physiological role in *P. aeruginosa* independent of antimicrobial efflux and resistance. Consistent with this, mutants hyperexpressing MexAB-OprM were readily selected in vivo in a rat model of acute *P. aeruginosa* pneumonia in the absence of any antibiotic selection (16). The specific nature of the selective in vivo growth advantage provided by this efflux system is, however, unknown. Hyperproduction of MexAB-OprM has been documented in lab and clinical multidrug-resistant isolates carrying lesions in the *mexR* gene (4, 15, 20, 28, 35, 37) (so-called *nalB* mutants [21]), encoding a repressor of *mexAB-oprM* expression (27, 35).

MexAB-OprM hyperexpression also occurs independently of mutations in *mexR* or the *mexR* and *mexAB-oprM* promoter regions (35, 37). These so-called *nalC* mutants (5, 20, 35) carry a mutation in a recently identified gene (PA3721, also known as *nalC*) that encodes a TetR family repressor of an adjacent two-gene operon, PA3720-PA3719 (5). It is, in fact, the increased expression of PA3719 that results from disruption of the *nalC* repressor gene that promotes *mexAB-oprM* hyperexpression (5), apparently as a result of a direct interaction between the PA3719 gene product and the MexR repressor (S. Fraud, unpublished data). Intriguingly, MexR levels are greatly increased in *nalC* strains (L. Cao, R. Srikumar, and K. Poole, unpublished data), suggesting that MexR repressor activity is modulated in such mutants, perhaps in response to the increase in PA3720-PA3719 expression. In the present report, mutations in yet a third gene, PA3574 (*nalD*), are shown to enhance *mexAB-oprM* expression, producing a multidrug-resistant phenotype in lab and clinical isolates of *P. aeruginosa*.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

### Bacterial strains and growth conditions.
The bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table 1. Bacterial cells were cultivated in/on Luria broth and agar (L-agar) (5) with antibiotics, as necessary, at 37°C. Plasmid pDSK519 and its derivatives were maintained with 50 (in *Escherichia coli*), 500 (in *P. aeruginosa* K870 and its derivatives), or 2,000 (in *P. aeruginosa* clinical isolates) μg of kanamycin per ml, while plasmid pUT-mini-Tn5-tet was maintained in *E. coli* with either ampicillin (100 μg/ml) or tetracycline (10 μg/ml). Plasmid pK18MobSacB was maintained in *E. coli* with 30 to 50 μg per ml of kanamycin.

### DNA manipulations.
Standard protocols were used for restriction endonuclease digestions, ligations, transformation, plasmid isolation, and agarose gel electrophoresis, as described by Sambrook and Russell (29). Genomic DNA of *P. aeruginosa* was extracted by following the protocol of Barcak et al. (3). *E. coli* cells were made competent using the CaCl₂ method (29) or that of Inoue et al. (14). Electroporation of pDSK519 and pMLS003 into clinical *P. aeruginosa* isolates was carried out as described previously (32). Chromosomal DNA flanking the mini-Tn5-tet element in putative *nalD* insertion mutants was sequenced using primer mini-Tn5-Right (5′-GCTTGCTCAATCAATCACCC-3′). Oligonucleotide synthesis and nucleotide sequencing was carried out by Cortec DNA Services Inc., Kingston, Ontario, Canada. Once the flanking DNA sequences were obtained, disrupted genes were identified by BLASTN (http://www.ncbi

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rm. 737, Botterell Hall, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada. Phone: (613) 533-6677. Fax: (613) 533-6796. E-mail: poolek@post.queensu.ca.

TABLE 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids

| Strain or plasmid | Relevant characteristic(s) | Reference |
|-------------------|--------------------------|-----------|
| **Strains**       |                          |           |
| $E. coli$         |                          |           |
| DH5$\alpha$       | $\phi 80d \, lacZ\Delta M15 \, endA1 \, recA1 \, hsdR17(r_{K}^{-}m_{K}^{+}) \, supE44 \, thi-1 \, gyrA96 \, relA1 \, F^{-}$ | 2 |
| S17-1            | $\Delta(lacZYA-argF)U169 \, thi \, pro \, hsdR \, recA \, Tra^{+}$ | 31 |
| $P. aeruginosa$   |                          |           |
| K767             | PAO1 prototroph          | 21        |
| K870             | Sm$^{r}$ derivative of K767 | 27        |
| K2346            | K870$nalD::mini-Tn5-tet$ | This study |
| K2347            | K2346$\Delta PA3719$     | This study |
| 2085             | Clinical $nalB$ isolate  | 20        |
| 2151             | Clinical $nalB$ isolate  | 20        |
| 1250             | Clinical $nalC$ isolate  | 20        |
| 1738             | Clinical $nalC$ isolate  | 20        |
| 1217             | Clinical $nalD$ isolate  | 20        |
| 1562             | Clinical $nalD$ isolate  | 20        |
| 1113             | Clinical $nalD$ isolate  | 20        |
| WL24             | Clinical $nalD$ isolate  | 20        |
| **Plasmids**      |                          |           |
| pDSK519          | Broad-host-range cloning vector; IncQ Km$^{r}$ | 17 |
| pMLS003          | pDSK519::$nalD$          | This study |
| pK18MobSacB      | Broad-host-range gene replacement vector; sacB Km$^{r}$ | 31 |
| pMLS004          | pK18MobSacB::$\Delta PA3719$ | This study |
| pUT::$mini-Tn5-tet$ | mini-Tn5-tet delivery vector: Ap$^{r}$Tc$^{r}$ | 6 |
| pEX18Tc          | Broad-host-range gene replacement vector; sacB Tc$^{r}$ | 13 |
| pLC8             | pEX18Tc::$\Delta PA3719$ | 5 |

TABLE 2. Antimicrobial susceptibility of *nalD P. aeruginosa*

| Strain                | nalD status$^a$ | CAM | NAL | TET | NOV    | CAR   | TIC | ATM | mexA expression$^c$ |
|-----------------------|-----------------|-----|-----|-----|--------|-------|-----|-----|----------------------|
| K870                  | WT              | 16  | 64  | 8   | 512    | 128   |     |     |                      |
| K2346                 | Null            | 64  | 256 | 256 | 1,024  | 512   |     |     |                      |
| K2346(pDSK519)$^d$    | Null            | 64  | 256 | 256 | 1,024  | 512   |     |     |                      |
| K2346(pMLS003)$^d$    | WT              | 8   | 64  | 64  | 256    | 64    |     |     |                      |
| K2347                 | Null            | 64  | 256 | 256 | 1,024  | 512   |     |     |                      |
| PAO1                  | WT              | 32  | 64  | 32  |        |       | 16  | 8   | 1.00                 |
| 1113(pDSK519)$^e$     | ΔT$_{410}$-G$_{433}$ | 64 | 256 | 64  |        |       | 64  | 32  | 1.69                 |
| 1113(pMLS003)$^e$     | WT              | 32  | 32  | 16  |        |       | 8   | 2   | 0.34                 |
| WL24(pDSK519)$^e$     | ?               | 128 |     | >1,028 |      |       | 64  | 16  | 2.41                 |
| WL24(pMLS003)$^e$     | WT              | 32  |     | >1,028$^f$ |      |       | 16  | 2   | 0.25                 |

$a$ The indicated strains expressed wild type (WT), *nalD::mini-Tn5-tet*-disrupted (Null), or mutant *nalD* genes (specific mutations are highlighted as base changes in the gene itself). Mutations in *nalD* were verified following PCR amplification of the gene and nucleotide sequencing of the PCR product obtained. ?, the *nalD* gene could not be amplified by PCR, suggesting a possible deletion of the gene in this strain.

$b$ CAM, chloramphenicol; NAL, nalidixic acid; TET, tetracycline; NOV, novobiocin; CAR, carbenicillin; TIC, ticarcillin; ATM, aztreonam.

$c$ *mexA* expression (as a measure of *mexAB-oprM* expression) was quantitated using real-time RT-PCR and normalized to expression levels seen in wild-type strain PAO1.

$d$ pDSK519 is the vector without *nalD*; pMLS003 is pDSK519::*nalD*.

$e$ Clinical isolate.

$f$ The apparent lack of an impact of the cloned *nalD* gene on the nalidixic acid MIC likely reflects the presence of another determinant(s) of resistance to this agent in strain WL24, which may be masking any impact of *mexAB-oprM* expression on resistance.

carried only silent mutations in this gene (strain 2085: C<sub>276</sub>T, TGC<sub>Cys</sub>→TGT<sub>Cys</sub>; T<sub>295</sub>C, TTG<sub>Leu</sub>→CTG<sub>Leu</sub>; C<sub>333</sub>T, ATC<sub>Ile</sub>→ ATT<sub>Ile</sub>; C<sub>540</sub>T, GAC<sub>Asp</sub>→GAT<sub>Asp</sub>; strain 1250: T<sub>450</sub>C, CGT<sub>Arg</sub>→ CGC<sub>Arg</sub>; G<sub>477</sub>A, CCG<sub>Pro</sub>→CCA<sub>Pro</sub>; T<sub>555</sub>C, GAT<sub>Asp</sub>→GAC<sub>Asp</sub>; strain 1738: T<sub>555</sub>C, GAT<sub>Asp</sub>→GAC<sub>Asp</sub>). In contrast, strains 1217, 1562, and 1113 all carried mutations in *nalD* (strains 1217 and 1562 had a substitution leading to a Ser<sub>32</sub>Asn change in NalD; strain 1113 had a 24-bp deletion [Table 2]), with strain 1113 also harboring two silent mutations in this gene (C<sub>276</sub>T, TGC<sub>Cys</sub> TGT<sub>Cys</sub>; T<sub>295</sub>C, TTG<sub>Leu</sub> CTG<sub>Leu</sub>). The *nalD* gene could not be amplified from strain WL24, indicating its lack in this strain, possibly due to deletion. Nonetheless, introduction of the cloned, wild-type *nalD* gene into WL24 as well as 1113 (the high kanamycin MICs for strains 1217 and 1562 precluded introduction of the *nalD* vector pMLS003 into these isolates) reduced resistance levels and *mexAB-oprM* expression (Table 2), indicating that like the *nalD*::mini-Tn5-tet mutation of K2346, the *nalD* mutations of these clinical strains were responsible for elevated MexAB-OprM production and multidrug resistance. Despite our inability to assess complementation of the *nalD* mutant strains 1217 and 1562 with cloned *nalD*, the fact that these strains lack other mutations that might explain enhanced *mexAB-oprM* expression and that *nalD* mutations do provide for elevated *mexAB-oprM* expression and multidrug resistance in other mutants argue strongly that the *nalD* mutations in 1217 and 1562 do contribute to the resistance and efflux phenotypes of these isolates.

**Conclusions.** Mutations in at least three different genes (*mexR*, *nalC*, and *nalD*) can provide for increased expression of MexAB-OprM, highlighting the complexity of *mexAB-oprM* regulation in *P. aeruginosa*. While the increase in PA3719 seen in *nalC* strains provides for elevated *mexAB-oprM* expression, owing to an apparent impact on MexR repressor activity (Cao et al., unpublished), mutations in *nalD* appear to work independently of PA3719, indicating that yet a second pathway exists in *P. aeruginosa* by which *mexAB-oprM* expression is influenced. Whether this relates to different environmental or cell-associated signals capable of impacting *mexAB-oprM* expression (i.e., a variety of conditions require MexAB-OprM export activity) is at present unknown. Intended DNA array studies may, however, provide insights vis-à-vis the gene(s) that is the immediate target(s) for the putative NalD repressor by identifying genes that are coregulated with *mexAB-oprM* in *nalD* mutants. This will also, hopefully, address the issue of the intended function(s) of this broadly specific antimicrobial efflux system, since the function (if known) of genes coregulated with *mexAB-oprM* may provide clues as to MexAB-OprM function in *P. aeruginosa*. Clearly, MexAB-OprM exports multiple substrates and its expression is associated with multiple phenotypes (increased antimicrobial resistance, reduced fitness, improved in vivo survival, changes in virulence), suggesting that it has multiple roles in *P. aeruginosa* and is not limited to antimicrobial export and resistance.

**ACKNOWLEDGMENTS**

This work was supported by operating grants from the Canadian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CCFF) to K.P. and the French Cystic Fibrosis Association (Vaincre la mucoviscidose) to P.P. L.C. holds an Ontario Graduate Scholarship.

**REFERENCES**

1. Adewoye, L., A. Sutherland, R. Srikumar, and K. Poole. 2002. The MexR repressor of the *mexAB-oprM* multidrug efflux operon in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: characterization of mutations compromising activity. J. Bacteriol. 184:4308–4312.
2. Ausubel, F. M., R. Brent, R. E. Kingston, D. D. Moore, J. G. Seidman, J. A. Smith, and K. Struhl. 1992. Short protocols in molecular biology, 2nd ed. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, N.Y.
3. Barcak, G. J., M. S. Chandler, R. J. Redfield, and J. F. Tomb. 1991. Genetic systems in *Haemophilus influenzae*. Methods Enzymol. 204:321–342.
4. Boutoille, D., S. Corvec, N. Caroff, C. Giraudeau, E. Espaze, J. Caillon, P. Plesiat, and A. Reynaud. 2004. Detection of an IS21 insertion sequence in the *mexR* gene of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* increasing β-lactam resistance. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 230:143–146.
5. Cao, L., R. Srikumar, and K. Poole. 2004. MexAB-OprM hyperexpression in NaIC type multidrug resistant *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: identification and characterization of the *nalC* gene encoding a repressor of PA3720-PA3719. Mol. Microbiol. 53:1423–1436.
6. de Lorenzo, V., M. Herrero, U. Jakubzik, and K. N. Timmis. 1990. Mini-Tn5 transposon derivatives for insertion mutagenesis, promoter probing, and chromosomal insertion of cloned DNA in gram-negative eubacteria. J. Bacteriol. 172:6567–6572.
7. Evans, K., L. Adewoye, and K. Poole. 2001. MexR repressor of the *mexAB-oprM* multidrug efflux operon of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: identification of MexR binding sites in the *mexA-mexR* intergenic region. J. Bacteriol. 183:807–812.
8. Evans, K., L. Passador, R. Srikumar, E. Tsang, J. Nezezon, and K. Poole. 1998. Influence of the MexAB-OprM multidrug efflux system on quorum-sensing in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Bacteriol. 180:5443–5447.
9. Germ, M., E. Yoshihara, H. Yoneyama, and T. Nakae. 1999. Interplay between the efflux pump and the outer membrane permeability barrier in fluorescent dye accumulation in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 261:452–455.
10. Gotoh, N., H. Tsujimoto, K. Poole, J.-I. Yamagishi, and T. Nishino. 1995. The outer membrane protein OprM of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* is encoded by *oprK* of the *mexA-mexB-oprK* multidrug resistance operon. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 39:2567–2569.
11. Hancock, R. E. W., and D. P. Speert. 2000. Antibiotic resistance in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: mechanisms and impact on treatment. Drug Res. Updat. 3:247–255.
12. Hirakata, Y., R. Srikumar, K. Poole, N. Gotoh, T. Suematsu, S. Kohno, S. Kamihira, R. E. Hancock, and D. P. Speert. 2002. Multidrug efflux systems play an important role in the invasiveness of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Exp. Med. 196:109–118.
13. Hoang, T. T., R. R. Karkhoff-Schweizer, A. J. Kutchma, and H. P. Schweizer. 1998. A broad-host-range Flp-FRT recombination system for site-specific excision of chromosomally located DNA sequences: application for isolation of unmarked *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* mutants. Gene 212:77–86.
14. Inoue, H., H. Nojima, and H. Okayama. 1991. High efficiency transformation of *Escherichia coli* with plasmids. Gene 96:23–28.
15. Jalal, S., and B. Wretlind. 1998. Mechanisms of quinolone resistance in clinical strains of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Microbiol. Drug Resist. 4:257–261.
16. Join-Lambert, O. F., M. Michea-Hamzehpour, T. Kohler, F. Chau, F. Faussirson, S. Dautrey, C. Vissuzaine, C. Carbon, and J. C. Pechere. 2001. Differential selection of multidrug efflux mutants by trovafloxacin and ciprofloxacin in an experimental model of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* acute pneumonia in rats. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 45:571–576.
17. Keen, N. T., S. Tamaki, D. Kobayashi, and D. Trollinger. 1988. Improved broad-host-range plasmids for DNA cloning in Gram-negative bacteria. Gene 70:191–197.
18. Li, X.-Z., H. Nikaido, and K. Poole. 1995. Role of MexA-MexB-OprM in antibiotic efflux in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 39:1948–1953.
19. Li, X.-Z., L. Zhang, and K. Poole. 2000. Interplay between the MexAB-OprM multidrug efflux system and the outer membrane barrier in the multiple antibiotic resistance of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 45:433–436.
20. Llanes, C., D. Hocquet, C. Vogne, D. Benali-Baitich, C. Neuwirth, and P. Plesiat. 2004. Clinical strains of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* overproducing MexAB-OprM and MexXY efflux pumps simultaneously. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 48:1797–1802.
21. Masuda, N., and S. Ohya. 1992. Cross-resistance to meropenem, cephalosporins, and quinolones in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 36:1847–1851.
22. Pearson, J. P., C. Van Delden, and B. H. Iglewski. 1999. Active efflux and diffusion are involved in transport of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* cell-to-cell signals. J. Bacteriol. 181:1203–1210.
23. Poole, K. 2004. Efflux-mediated multiresistance in Gram-negative bacteria. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 10:12–26.
24. Poole, K. 2004. Efflux pumps, p. 635–674. In J.-L. Ramos (ed.), *Pseudomonas*.

nas, vol. I. Genomics, life style and molecular architecture. Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, N.Y.

25. Poole, K., D. E. Heinrichs, and S. Neshat. 1993. Cloning and sequence analysis of an EnvCD homologue in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: regulation by iron and possible involvement in the secretion of the siderophore pyoverdine. Mol. Microbiol. **10**:529–544.

26. Poole, K., K. Krebes, C. McNally, and S. Neshat. 1993. Multiple antibiotic resistance in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: evidence for involvement of an efflux operon. J. Bacteriol. **175**:7363–7372.

27. Poole, K., K. Tetro, Q. Zhao, S. Neshat, D. Heinrichs, and N. Bianco. 1996. Expression of the multidrug resistance operon *mexA-mexB-oprM* in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*: *mexR* encodes a regulator of operon expression. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **40**:2021–2028.

28. Saito, K., H. Yoneyama, and T. Nakae. 1999. *nalB*-type mutations causing the overexpression of the MexAB-OprM efflux pump are located in the *mexR* gene of the *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* chromosome. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. **179**:67–72.

29. Sambrook, J., and D. W. Russell. 2001. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual, 3rd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

30. Sanchez, P., J. F. Linares, B. Ruiz-Diez, E. Campanario, A. Navas, F. Baquero, and J. L. Martinez. 2002. Fitness of *in vitro* selected *Pseudomonas aeruginosa nalB* and *nfxB* multidrug resistant mutants. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. **50**:657–664.

31. Simon, R., U. Priefer, and A. Pühler. 1983. A broad host range mobilization system for *in vivo* genetic engineering: transposon mutagenesis in Gram-negative bacteria. Bio/Technology **1**:784–791.

32. Smith, A. W., and B. H. Iglewski. 1989. Transformation of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* by electroporation. Nucleic Acids Res. **17**:10509.

33. Sobel, M. L., G. A. McKay, and K. Poole. 2003. Contribution of the MexXY multidrug transporter to aminoglycoside resistance in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* clinical isolates. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **47**:3202–3207.

34. Srikumar, R., T. Kon, N. Gotoh, and K. Poole. 1998. Expression of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* multidrug efflux pumps MexA-MexB-OprM and MexC-MexD-OprJ in a multidrug-sensitive *Escherichia coli* strain. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **42**:65–71.

35. Srikumar, R., C. J. Paul, and K. Poole. 2000. Influence of mutations in the *mexR* repressor gene on expression of the MexA-MexB-OprM multidrug efflux system of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Bacteriol. **182**:1410–1414.

36. Zhao, Q., X.-Z. Li, A. Mistry, R. Srikumar, L. Zhang, O. Lomovskaya, and K. Poole. 1998. Influence of the TonB energy-coupling protein on efflux-mediated multidrug resistance in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **42**:2225–2231.

37. Ziha-Zarifi, I., C. Llanes, T. Koehler, J.-C. Pechere, and P. Plesiat. 1999. In vivo emergence of multidrug-resistant mutants of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* overexpressing the active efflux system MexA-MexB-OprM. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **43**:287–291.
