
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ELSEVIER

SCIENCE DIRECT®

Steroids

www.elsevier.com/locate/steroids

**Estrogen modulation of hypothalamic neurons: Activation of multiple signaling pathways and gene expression changes**

Anna Malyala*, Martin J. Kelly, Oline K. Rønnekleiv

*Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, L33
can function as a first messenger by activating an estrogen receptor that couples directly to K⁺ and Ca²⁺ channels by way of a pertussis toxin-sensitive G protein [10,11]. While a clearer picture of the rapid signaling actions by estrogen is emerging, it is well established that E₂ modulates neurotransmission via genomic mechanisms. This well characterized mechanism of transactivation involves ligand binding, nuclear receptor dimer
There is considerable evidence for crosstalk between various intracellular protein kinase pathways such as protein kinase C (PKC), PKA and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) in regulating effector systems [71]. PKA activators such as Sp-cAMP and forskolin and PKC activators such as phorbol esters mimic the effect of chronic morphine treatment in
inhibition of the GABA<sub>B</sub> (and μ-opioid) response appears to be mediated via a plasma membrane receptor that is Gα<sub>q</sub> coupled to activation of phospholipase C, protein kinase C and protein kinase A (Fig. 1).

### 4. Estrogen modulation of hypothalamic neuronal activity via transcriptional regulation

As mentioned earlier,
to the GABA<sub>A</sub> receptor-associated protein (GABARAP) and was originally identified as an early estrogen-regulated gene in primary endometrial epithelial cells [54]. GABARAP is a tubulin-binding protein that participates in clustering GABA<sub>A</sub> receptors by its association with the γ2 subunit, but it has also been shown to bind a number
Fig. 4. PI3K p55γ and p85α subunit expression. Brightfield view of autoradiograms taken from in situ hybridization film images which illustrate the densities of the p55γ and p85α regulatory subunits of PI3K in the guinea pig brain. p55γ expression is low in most brain regions except in hypothalamic areas, certain th
modulates the coupling of the $\mu$-opioid and/or GABA$_B$ receptors to their effector K$^+$ channel in $\beta$-endorphin, dopamine and GABAergic neurons. This uncoupling requires the activation of a hierarchical, intracellular phosphorylation cascade involving phospholipase C, PKC, PI3K and PKA pathways (Fig. 1). It is
releasing hormone and tyrosine hydroxylase. Neuroendocrinology 1995;61:1–10.

[26] Sullivan KA, Witkin JW, Ferin M, Silverman AJ. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone neurons in the rhesus macaque are not immunoreactive for the estrogen receptor. Brain Res 1995;68
[63] Aronica SM, Kraus WL, Katzenellenbogen BS. Estrogen action via the cAMP signaling pathway: stimulation of adenylate cyclase and cAMP-regulated gene transcription. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 1994;91:8517–21.

[64] Nakhla AM, Khan MS, Romas NP, Rosner W
ing and sexual receptivity in ovariectomized rats. Horm Behav 2002;42:461–71.

[102] Jones MEE, Thorburn AW, Britt KL, Hewitt KN, Wreford NG, Proietto J, et al. Aromatase-deficient (ArKO) mice have a phenotype of increased adiposity. Proc