
DDT • Volume 10, Number 9 • May 2005

---

### cGMP-dependent protein kinases in drug discovery

Jens Schlossmann and Franz Hofmann

Cyclic guanosine-3′,5′-monophosphate (cGMP)-dependent protein kinases (cGKs) are key enzymes of nitric oxide–cGMP and natriuretic peptide signalling cascades. These kinases mediate most of the effects of cGMP-elevating drugs, such as nitrates and phosphodiesterase inhibitors. cGKs modulate smooth muscle relaxation (e.g. the vasculature, gastrointestinal tract, bladder and penile), platelet aggregation, renin release, intestinal secretion, learning and memory. Furthermore, several cGK substrates have been identified. Isozyme-specific inhibitors and activators of cGK and its downstream substrates might act more specifically than upstream signalling activators, such as organic nitrates and phosphodiesterase inhibitors.

---

#### Modulation of nitric oxide (NO) and cyclic guanosine-3′,5′-monophosphate (cGMP) concentration is an established therapy for cardiovascular diseases, including the treatment of angina pectoris using NO-releasing nitrates and pulmonary hypertension with gaseous NO, as well as erectile dysfunction with phosphodiesterase (PDE) 5 inhibitors. NO–cGMP signalling is mainly mediated by cGMP-dependent protein kinases (cGKs), which regulate various physiological functions including smooth muscle tone, platelet aggregation, intestinal secretion and hippocampal and cerebellar learning (Figure 1). The diverse functions of cGK have been highlighted by analysis of conventional and conditional murine knockout models. Activators and inhibitors have been developed to interfere with cGK activity and function. In addition, cGK is involved in various signalling pathways with distinct physiological importance in different tissues (e.g. in mediating vascular and intestinal smooth muscle relaxation). Modulation of cGK, its isozymes and its organ-specific downstream signalling targets could open the way for more specific pharmacological treatment of diseases related to NO–cGMP signalling dysfunction.

#### Application of NO–cGMP-elevating drugs

Drug therapy of erectile dysfunction and cardiovascular and pulmonary diseases involves the modulation of NO–cGMP signalling pathways. Classic compounds are the NO-releasing organic nitrates nitroglycerine, isosorbide-mono-nitrate and isosorbide-di-nitrate, which are used mainly to alleviate the symptoms of acute and chronic angina pectoris. These substances release NO and thereby relax vascular smooth muscle. However, continuous application eventually leads to nitrate tolerance, the development of which depends on the activity of mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase [1,2]. The NO-donor molsidomine releases NO in an enzyme-independent manner and its continuous use is not associated with the development of nitrate tolerance.

Inhibitors of the cGMP-dependent cGMP-specific PDE5 (sildenafil, vardenafil, tadalafil) are used for the treatment of erectile dysfunction [3]. These compounds raise the intracellular cGMP concentration and activate cGMP kinase, which results in relaxation of the penile corpus cavernosum, thus facilitating penile erection. These inhibitors could also be beneficial for the treatment of pulmonary hypertension

---

Jens Schlossmann  
Franz Hofmann  
Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie der Technischen Universität,  
Biedersteiner Straße 29,  
80802 München,  
Germany  

e-mail:  
* schlossmann@ipt.med.tu-muenchen.de

1359-6446/05/$ – see front matter ©2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. PII: S1359-6446(05)03406-9

www.drugdiscoverytoday.com 627

REVIEWs

treatment and prevention of thrombosis) [14] and induces penile erection *in vivo*. A novel class of sGC activators, which are anthranil acid derivatives (e.g. S3448, HMR1766), acts on haem-oxidized sGC [15]. HMR1766, for example, induces vasorelaxation, lowers mean arterial blood pressure and inhibits platelet aggregation, and could therefore represent a novel approach for the therapy of coronary heart disease.

### cGK signalling and function

Major mediators of cGMP signalling are the cGKs cGKI and cGKII [16, 17]. cGKs are serine/threonine specific kinases that phosphorylate proteins at the RKRKXST structural motif. These proteins exhibit common structural features: (i) an N-terminal domain containing a leucine-isoleucine (Leu-Ile) zipper, which is required for homodimerization and for intracellular localization; (ii) an autoinhibitory domain; (iii) a regulatory domain containing two allosteric cGMP-binding sites; (iv) an ATP-binding domain; and (v) a catalytic domain.

Two isoforms of cGKI exist, cGKIα and cGKIβ, which differ in their N-terminal Leu-Ile domains. cGKIα is activated at tenfold lower cGMP concentrations than cGKIβ. cGKIα and cGKIβ might exhibit different physiological functions because they interact with different substrates, vary in their subcellular localization [18, 19] and are expressed in different tissues [20, 21]. cGKIα is highly expressed in the cerebellum, dorsal root ganglia and lung, whereas cGKIβ is found predominantly in smooth muscle, platelets, the hippocampus and the olfactory bulb. cGKII is localized at the plasma membrane through its myristoylated Gly2 residue and is expressed in the intestinal mucosa, kidney, chondrocytes and several brain nuclei.

### cGKI in smooth muscle tissues

The NO-cGMP-cGKI signal relaxes all smooth muscle types. The mechanisms of cGKI that induce relaxation of smooth muscle are well characterized. In principle, relaxation requires Ca²⁺-dependent and/or -independent mechanisms [22] (*Figure* 2). An important Ca²⁺-dependent mechanism of cGKI is the inhibition of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate \[Ins(1,4,5)P₃\]-dependent calcium release. This inhibition is mediated by phosphorylation of the Ins(1,4,5)P₃-receptor-associated cGMP kinase substrate (IRAG), a substrate of the β-isoform of cGKI [18, 23]. Deletion of the Ins(1,4,5)P₃-receptor-binding site of IRAG in mice stops the inhibition of intracellular calcium release by cGKI and hinders the cGMP-dependent relaxation of vascular and colonic smooth muscle [24]. Another Ca²⁺-dependent mechanism is the activation of the big calcium-activated potassium channel (BK<sub>Ca</sub>) through phosphorylation by cGKI, leading to hyperpolarization and reduced calcium influx [17, 25]. In addition, cGKI might reduce the synthesis of Ins(1,4,5)P₃ via the regulator of G-protein signalling 2 (RGS2) protein and potentially phospholipase Cβ3 (PLCβ3) [26–28]. Ca²⁺-independent relaxation by cGKI

FIGURE 1

Physiological functions of cGK in diverse tissues. The cGK enzymes exert pleiotropic effects on a variety of organs and cells, underlining the physiological importance of cGK signalling.

[4] that is, at present, effectively treated by NO inhalation. In addition, PDE5 inhibition suppressed cardiac myocyte hypertrophy in heart cells from mice exposed to chronic pressure overload and could provide a new principle to treat cardiac hypertrophy and remodelling [5]. At higher concentrations, these substances can further increase cGMP levels by inhibiting Ca²⁺/calmodulin-dependent cGMP-specific PDE1, which can lead to vasodilation (headache, flush) and gastrointestinal disturbances, and by precluding activity of the retinal photoreceptor-activated cGMP-specific PDE6, which can result in transient visual blurring [6, 7].

Recently, activators of soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC) have been introduced as a new approach to the modulation of NO-cGMP signalling pathways [8]. These drugs induce smooth muscle relaxation and inhibit platelet aggregation and could therefore reduce the risk of thrombosis. One of the most advanced sGC activators is the benzylindazole YC1 \[3-(5′-hydroxymethyl-2′furyl)-1-benzylindazole\] [9], which activates sGC independently of NO but is dependent on haem (the NO-binding moiety of sGC). Interestingly, a superadditive stimulation of sGC was observed on combination of YC1 and NO [10]. In addition to activation of sGC, YC1 can also inhibit PDE5, which explains the unexpectedly large increase of intracellular cGMP produced on administration of YC1. Bay412272 is a YC1 analogue that also activates sGC in a NO-independent manner and enhances sGC stimulation in the presence of NO [11]: Bay412272 also inhibits PDE5 [12]. The recently developed NO-independent activator Bay418563 is highly specific for sGC [13] and is approximately 100-fold more potent than YC1 in activating sGC, yet it has no detectable PDE inhibitory activity. Bay418543 and NO act synergistically at a wide range of concentrations (0.01–10.00 μM). This compound relaxes arteries and veins at nM concentrations, inhibits platelet function (which could be useful in the

involves phosphorylation of the myosin-binding subunit [e.g. myosin phosphatase targeting subunit 1 (MYPT1)] [29]. Furthermore, cGKI might phosphorylate, and thereby inhibit, the small GTP-binding protein Rho, leading to an increased activity of myosin light chain phosphatase (MLCP) [30]. cGKI also induces a feedback mechanism (which lowers the intracellular cGMP concentration) by the phosphorylation and activation of PDE5 [31].

Other substrates of cGKI that might be involved in smooth muscle relaxation and other smooth muscle functions have been identified (Table 1). The phosphorylation of phospholamban is known to stimulate the sarcoplasmic reticulum pump Ca²⁺ ATPase (SERCA), which decreases intracellular calcium levels. However, it has been shown that ablation of phospholamban does not alter cyclic-nucleotide-mediated relaxation [32,33]. The reduction of the intracellular calcium concentration might also be mediated by phosphorylation, and thus inhibition, of the capacitative transient receptor potential channel 3 (a calcium channel) [34]. Furthermore, the cGKI-dependent phosphorylation of telokin, a C-terminal fragment of MLCK, inhibits MLCK activity and might lead to Ca²⁺-desensitization [35]. Vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) is abundant in smooth muscle tissues and contains two phosphorylation sites for cyclic-nucleotide-dependent protein kinases: one phosphoacceptor site, Ser239, is specific for cGKI [36]. VASP is involved in focal adhesion sites, but is dispensable for cyclic-nucleotide-mediated smooth

muscle relaxation [37]. The cysteine rich protein 2 (CRP2) is phosphorylated by cGKI and cGKII and is found in smooth muscle and enteric neurons [38]. This protein, which contains a LIM-domain (a common zinc finger ion motif shared by the homeodomain proteins Lin11, Isl-1 and Mec-3), might have a role in smooth muscle differentiation.

Many studies have shown that cGKI is essential for the function of smooth muscle tissues. In the vascular system, cGKI relaxes aortic rings and small arteries. Accordingly, a deficiency of cGKI might be involved in the development of hypertension [39]. Furthermore, cGKI might be important in the vascular remodelling that induces angiogenesis and the development of atherosclerosis [40]. The importance of cGKI for the function of the gastrointestinal tract was shown by deleting cGKI in mice, which induced gastrointestinal dysfunction, including dilation of the stomach and caecum, pyloric contraction and severely disturbed gastrointestinal motility [41]. A similar phenotype was observed in mice with a mutation in the cGKI substrate, IRAG [24]. Deletion of cGKI in mice reduced rhythmic bladder contractility and increased bladder volume, showing that cGKI is also involved in micturition. Moreover, hyperactive voiding and diminished NO–cGMP-dependent relaxation of the urinary duct were observed on deletion of cGKI [42]. Interestingly, deletion of the BKCa channel also altered micturition and could therefore be a main target of cGKI in bladder smooth muscle [43]. The importance of cGMP for the induction of penile erection is underlined by the finding that inhibition of PDE5 leads to relaxation of the corpus cavernosum [44]. These effects might be mediated by cGKI because male cGKI-null mutants failed to relax the corpus cavernosum on NO–cGMP activation and exhibited strongly reduced reproduction [45].

### cGKI in platelets

NO–cGMP–cGKI inhibits platelet aggregation and granule secretion. Correspondingly, cGKI deletion in mice abolishes the antiaggregation activity of cGMP and enhances thrombosis in an ischemia–reperfusion model system [46]. However, there is evidence that cGKI is initially able to promote aggregation of platelets and then subsequently inhibit their aggregatory response [47]. The reduction of intracellular calcium concentration could be the main mechanism for the cGKI-dependent inhibition of platelet function [48]. There is evidence that cGKI decreases intracellular calcium release by the phosphorylation of IRAG, which then inhibits the Ins(1,4,5)P₃ receptor [17,18]. In addition, cGKI might phosphorylate the thromboxane receptor α (TPα) in platelets and thereby lead to TPα desensitization [49]. Other proteins that are phosphorylated by cGKI and could therefore modulate platelet function are VASP, heat shock protein 27 (Hsp27) and PDE5. The NO–cGMP-stimulated phosphorylation of VASP is important in preventing the adhesion of platelets to the vascular wall. [50]. Furthermore, phosphorylation of Hsp27 by

---

**FIGURE 2**

**Mechanisms affected by cGKI.** Hormones induce smooth muscle contraction via the G-proteins Gq and G11 (raise intracellular calcium) or via G12 and G13 (activate calcium-sensitizing mechanisms). NO–cGMP signalling activates cGKI, which then inhibits Ca²⁺-elevating and/or Ca²⁺-sensitizing mechanisms. Abbreviations: Cav, voltage-activated calcium channel; GPCR, G-protein-coupled receptor; RGS, regulators of G-protein signalling.

TABLE 1

Substrates of cGK

| Substrate                     | Molecular weight | cGK isoform | Tissue or cells               | Function of phosphorylation                                                                 | Refs     |
|------------------------------|-----------------|-------------|-------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|
| BK<sub>Ca</sub>               | 130             | cGKI        | Smooth muscle                | Hyperpolarization                                                                         | [25]     |
| G-substrate                  | 32              | cGKI        | Cerebellum                   | Potential protein phosphatase inhibitor                                                   | [58]     |
| Hsp27                        | 27              | cGKI        | Platelets                    | Decrease of actin polymerisation in vitro                                                | [51]     |
| Ins(1,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> receptor type I | 230             | cGKI        | Cerebellum                   | Stimulation of calcium release from intracellular stores                                   | [57]     |
| IRAG                         | 125             | cGKIβ       | Smooth muscle                | Reduced calcium release from intracellular stores                                         | [18,23,24] |
| MYPT1                        | 130             | cGKIα       | Smooth muscle                | Calcium desensitization                                                                  | [29]     |
| PDE5                         | 100             | cGKI        | Smooth muscle and platelets   | Enhanced cGMP degradation                                                                | [31]     |
| Phospholamban                | 6               | cGKI        | Vascular smooth muscle       | Enhanced calcium uptake by the calcium ATPase SERCA, potentially no effect on relaxation? | [32,33]  |
| RGS2                         | 24              | cGKI        | Smooth muscle                | Inhibition of Ins(1,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> generation                                           | [26,27]  |
| RhoA                         | 22              | cGKI        | Smooth muscle and hippocampus | Reduced MLC phosphorylation and vesicle trafficking                                       | [30,54]  |
| Sox9                         | 56              | cGKII       | Chondrocytes                 | Bone development                                                                         | [64]     |
| Telokin                      | 17              | cGKI        | Smooth muscle                | Inhibition of MLCK activity                                                              | [35]     |
| VASP                         | 46              | cGKI        | Smooth muscle, platelets and hippocampus | Regulation of the actin cytoskeleton and vesicle trafficking                              | [36,37,50,54] |

Potential cGK substrates (in heterologous systems or with unidentified function of phosphorylation)

| Substrate | Molecular weight | cGK isoform | Tissue or cells                          | Function of phosphorylation                                                                 | Refs     |
|-----------|-----------------|-------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|
| CFTR      | 200             | cGKII       | IEC-CF7 cells (rat intestinal cell line) | Stimulation of chloride channel                                                            | [61]     |
| CRP2      | 23              | cGKI and cGKII | Intestinal smooth muscle and enteric neurons | Unknown                                                                                 | [38]     |
| PLCβ3     | 140             | cGKI        | Aortic smooth muscle cells and COS       | Potential inhibition of phospholipase C activity                                          | [28]     |
| Septin 3  | 40              | cGKI        | Brain                                    | Potential vesicle trafficking                                                             | [55]     |
| TRPC3     | 97              | cGKI        | HEK293                                   | Inhibition of store operated calcium influx                                               | [34]     |
| TPlα      | 40              | cGKI        | HEK293                                   | Desensitization of TPlα signalling                                                       | [49]     |

Abbreviations: TP, thromboxane receptor; TRPC3, transient receptor potential channel 3.

cGKI might be involved in platelet aggregation through the regulation of microfilament organization [51].

cGKI in the nervous system

The sites of highest expression of cGKI in the central nervous system (CNS) are the hippocampus, cerebellum and the olfactory bulb [52]. cGKIβ expressed in the hippocampus might be involved in long-term potentiation (LTP), and could therefore be important for spatial learning and memory. Hippocampus-specific cGKI knockout mice showed reduced LTP but no defect in spatial learning and memory tests [53]. Therefore, cGKI might be involved in more subtle types of learning in the hippocampus. Vesicle trafficking regulated by VASP and RhoA (and possibly by Septin 3) mediates hippocampal cGKI signalling [54, 55].

Cerebellar Purkinje cells, which are important for motor learning by long-term depression (LTD), contain high concentrations of cGKIα. Purkinje-cell-specific cGKI-deletion abolishes cerebellar LTD, suggesting that cerebellar activity is regulated by cGKI [56]. These cGKI mutants showed an altered vestibulo-ocular reflex, whereas the general motor coordination remained unchanged. Phosphorylation of the Ins(1,4,5)P<sub>3</sub> receptor type I in the cerebellum stimulates intracellular calcium release and might therefore regulate neuronal activity [57]. Furthermore, the G-substrate, which is an inhibitor of protein phosphatase 1 and 2, is phosphorylated and thus activated by cGKI in cerebellar Purkinje cells, and might contribute to the role of NO-cGMP in LTD [58].

There are several indications that NO-cGMP-cGKI signalling is involved in nociception. The inhibition of cGKI in the spinal cord reduced hyperalgesia induced by formalin [59]. Furthermore, cGKI-deficient mice showed reduced nociception in inflammation assays [60]. The cGKI signalling pathway leading to nociception has yet to be fully elucidated, but could involve substance P, which is downregulated in spinal cord neurons and the fibres of cGKI-deficient mice.

TABLE 2  
$K_{a}$ and specificity of cGKI$\alpha$ and cGKII activation  

| Activators | cGKI$\alpha$ $K_{a}$ ($\mu$M) | Specificity${}^{a}$ | CGKII $K_{a}$ ($\mu$M) |
|------------|---------------------------------|---------------------|-------------------------|
| cGMP       | 0.110                           | ND                  | 0.8000                 |
| 8-Br-cGMP  | 0.010–0.026                     | 100                 | 0.0250                 |
| PET-cGMP   | 0.016–0.026                     | 200                 | 4.7000                 |
| 8-Br-PET-cGMP | 0.013                          | ND                  | 1.6000                 |
| 8-pCPT-cGMP | 0.050                           | 10–2000             | 0.0035–0.0800          |

${}^{a}$ Specificity is defined as the ratio of $K_{a}$ of cGKI$\alpha$ to $K_{a}$ of cGKII.  
Abbreviation: ND, not determined.

---

cGMP binding sites and can be used as tools for the investigation of physiological functions and signalling of cGK [70,71] (Table 2). The widely used analogue, 8-bromo-cGMP, activates cGKI and cGKII ($K_{a}$ of 0.010–0.026 $\mu$M) but is sensitive to hydrolysis by PDEs. The analogues $\beta$-phenyl-1,$N^{2}$-etheno (PET)-cGMP and 8-Br-PET-cGMP are specific cGKI activators at low concentrations ($K_{a}$ of 0.016–0.026 $\mu$M and 0.013 $\mu$M, respectively) but can also activate cGKII in the $\mu$M range. These PET analogues are also sensitive to PDE hydrolysis. By contrast, the analogue 8-$para$-chlorophenylthio-cGMP (8-pCPT-cGMP) is resistant to hydrolysis by PDE and is selective for activation of cGKI ($K_{a}$ of 0.0500 $\mu$M) and cGKII ($K_{a}$ of 0.0035–0.0800 $\mu$M). 8-pCPT-cGMP is the most potent cGKII activator known to date. All these cGMP analogues crossactivate the cAMP-dependent protein kinase at high concentrations. Furthermore, at high concentrations, these compounds interfere with other cellular cGMP receptors by activating cyclic-nucleotide-gated ion channels (e.g. 8-Br-cGMP has a $K_{a}$ of 1.6 $\mu$M) [72] and inhibiting PDE3 (8-Br-cGMP has a $K_{i}$ of 8.0 $\mu$M) [73].

The (Rp)-diastereomers of cGMP, which contain a thio-phosphate group in the cyclic phosphate moiety, are competitive *in vivo* inhibitors of cGKI and cGKII: these inhibitors are membrane-permeable and are resistant to degradation by PDEs [(Rp)-8-Br-PET-cGMP-S has a $K_{i}$ of 0.035 $\mu$M (cGKI), 0.900 $\mu$M (cGKII); (Rp)-8-Br-pCPT-cGMP-S has a $K_{i}$ of 0.500 $\mu$M (cGKI) 0.230–0.500 $\mu$M (cGKII) (Table 3)]. (Rp)-8-Br-PET-cGMP-S is the most specific cGKI inhibitor known to date [74,75]. The staurosporine analogue KT5823 inhibits cGK *in vitro* and selectively inactivates ATP binding (Table 3) [76]. Several studies show that there is a lack of *in vivo* inhibition of cGK in several cell types, including platelets [77]. A peptide library was screened for peptide–cGKI interaction using the SPOT method (peptide array on paper) to identify selective inhibitors that compete with the peptide binding site [78]. This peptide-based assay enabled the identification of several highly specific *in vitro* cGKI inhibitor peptides, for example, W7, W21 and W45 (Table 3) [79]. The cellular internalization of W45 occurs via the N-terminal fusion of membrane-translocation signal sequences from HIV tyrosine aminotransferase protein (fusion peptide DT-2) or from *Drosophila antennapedia* homeodomain (fusion peptide DT-3). The $K_{i}$ values of DT-2 and DT-3 for inhibition of the purified cGKI$\alpha$ enzyme were comparable to that of the cGMP analogue (Rp)-8-Br-PET-cGMP-S [$K_{i}$ of 0.0125 $\mu$M (DT-2) and 0.0250 $\mu$M (DT-3)] (Table 3). The peptides DT-2 and DT-3 inhibit vasodilation, and might be useful tools for the analysis of cGKI-specific functions [80,81].

To improve the development of cGKI activators and inhibitors, a HTS assay, based on fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), was developed [82]. In this assay, the enzymatic phosphorylation of a VASP-derived peptide, which is biotinylated and binds to allophycocyanin-strep-tavidin, can be detected by a phospho-VASP-specific

---

Functions of cGKII  

Investigations using cGKII-deficient mice showed that cGKII modulates intestinal secretion, bone growth, renin secretion and circadian rhythmicity. cGKII stimulates chloride and water secretion in the small intestine, probably by phosphorylation of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), and leads to Na${}^{+}$-absorption [61]. Interestingly, cGKII-deficient mice are resistant to *Escherichia coli* heat-stable enterotoxin (STa)-induced diarrhoea [62]. Mice with a cGKII deletion are dwarfs with altered endochondral ossification at the endochondral plate [62]. Studies using animals overexpressing C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) show that cGKII is essential for normal endochondral bone development [63]. Deletion of cGKII in rat led to an expanded growth plate, impaired bone healing and the accumulation of postmitotic, but nonhypertrophic, cells. These effects are related to enhanced signalling of the transcription factor Sox9, which impairs hypertrophic differentiation of chondrocytes [64]. In the kidney, cGKII inhibits renin secretion, possibly by altering exocytosis of renin from juxtaglomerular cells [65]. cGKII is expressed in the zona glomerulosa and might be related to aldosterone homeostasis. Although overexpression of cGKII in zona glomerulosa cells enhanced aldosterone production, cGKII expression is upregulated by activation of the aldosterone system by a low salt diet containing 0.02% NaCl [66]. However, the deletion of cGKII does not alter blood pressure and aldosterone secretion, which could be explained by the effect of cGMP on cAMP-specific PDEs because the cGMP-stimulated PDE2 decreases cAMP concentrations and aldosterone production in adrenal glomerulosa cells [67]. Furthermore, cGKII is involved in regulation of the circadian clock, which is located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), and influences a phase shift related to the expression of the clock genes $mPer1$ and $mPer2$ [68] that is required for night-to-day clock progression [69].

---

Activators and inhibitors of cGMP kinase  

Several strategies have been used to develop cGK-specific activators or inhibitors that interfere with the binding sites for cGMP, ATP or cGK substrate peptides. Membrane-permeable analogues of cGMP interact with cGK at the

REVIEWs

DDT • Volume 10, Number 9 • May 2005

TABLE 3  
**Ki and specificity of cGKIα and cGKII inhibition in vitro**

| Inhibitors          | cGKIα Ki (μM) | Specificitya | CGKII Ki (μM) | Refs |
|---------------------|---------------|--------------|----------------|------|
| (Rp)-8-Br-PET-cGMP-S | 0.0350        | 300          | 0.90           | [74] |
| (Rp)-8-pCPT-cGMP-S   | 0.5000        | 15–30        | 0.23–0.50      | [75] |
| KT5823              | 0.2340        | >42          | ND             | [79] |
| W7                  | 15.0000       | 46           | ND             | [80] |
| W21                 | 7.5000        | 100          | ND             | [80] |
| W45                 | 0.8000        | 680          | ND             | [80] |
| DT-2                | 0.0125        | 19700        | ND             | [81] |
| DT-3                | 0.0250        | 1320         | ND             | [81] |

a Specificity is defined as the ratio of Ki of cGKIα to Ki of cGKII.  
Abbreviation: ND, not determined.

antibody and a Europium-labelled secondary (anti-immunoglobulin) antibody. Energy transfer from europium to allophycocyanin can be detected only when the peptide has been phosphorylated and all four components of the assay interact appropriately. The activation and inhibition constants obtained with this assay are comparable to the values obtained with conventional radioactive cGK kinase assays that measure the transfer of radioactive phosphate from γ[32P]-ATP to substrates. This sensitive assay can be used for screening new compounds using purified enzymes and cell extracts such as platelet lysates.

### Possible applications of cGMP kinase and its targets in drug development

The well known NO-cGMP-elevating drugs are associated with adverse effects, such as the generation of toxic NO radicals during treatment with NO donors, or the additional inhibition of PDE1 or PDE6 with inhibitors of PDE5. Therefore, specific activators and inhibitors of cGKI and its targets could probably improve the specificity and availability of treatment for several diseases related to NO-cGMP signalling (e.g. asthma, thrombosis, angina pectoris, penile erectile dysfunction, gastrointestinal dysmotility, graft transplantation and diarrhoea). Until now, studies with cGMP analogues were mostly performed with animal models. Inhaled 8-Br-cGMP lowers pulmonary hypertension in a time- and dose-dependent manner [83] and might be used for the treatment of asthma. The activators 8-Br-cGMP and 8-pCPT-cGMP showed beneficial effects on graft survival after liver transplantation [84] and lung transplantation [85]. Lower pulmonary vascular resistance, increased blood flow, improved arterial oxygenation, decreased neutrophil infiltration and improved recipient survival has been observed. The application of 8-Br-cGMP improves posttransplant lung edema and is superior to the clinically used prostaglandin E1 [86]. However, all known cGK activators and inhibitors also show cGK-independent effects [87,88]. Therefore, it could be important to interfere more specifically with cGK signalling pathways using cGKIα-, cGKIβ- or cGKII-specific activators or inhibitors. Selectivity could be achieved by manipulation of the different localization signals of cGK enzymes or specific interference with their distinct target proteins. Selective activation of cGKIα and cGKIβ signalling could be beneficial for cerebellar and hippocampal learning, respectively. Inhibitors of cGKIα could reduce nociception and therefore have application in the treatment of pain [89]. Furthermore, inhibition of cGKI might be useful for the prevention of cardiovascular diseases and atherosclerosis. The specific activation of cGKI or its signalling pathways could also be beneficial for the treatment of intestinal dysmotility disorders. Alternatively, the specific inactivation of cGKII might prevent diarrhoea (the deletion of cGKII in mice prevented STa-induced diarrhoea – this is particularly significant given that STa causes traveller’s diarrhoea and is responsible for 50% of infant mortality in developing countries) [62]. In addition, it has been demonstrated that cGKs are important for habituation in insects [90] and that the deletion of cGKII is specifically associated with increased alcohol consumption [91]. Therefore, interference with cGKII signalling in the CNS could be a possible approach to the treatment of alcoholism.

### Conclusion

Recent studies have highlighted the importance of cGKs in the cardiovascular system, the gastrointestinal tract, kidney and bladder, penile erection, bone growth and the nervous system. Furthermore, the analysis of cGK signalling cascades has extended the understanding of tissue-specific cGK functions. Several activators and inhibitors of cGK that are specific in vitro have been developed based on structural and functional analyses. However, many of them lack specificity in vivo. Therefore, the analysis of specific cGK signalling pathways and the development of specific modulators of cGKI, and its isoforms, or cGKII is still an important issue. These cGK-specific drugs could be useful for the treatment of diseases related to the cardiovascular system, gastrointestinal motility, asthma, penile erection and addiction.

### Acknowledgements

We thank Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Graduate Program 438, Wilhelm Sander-Stiftung and Fonds der Chemischen Industrie for funding.

---

References  

1 Zhang, J. *et al.* (2004) Role of mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase in nitroglycerin-induced vasodilation of coronary and systemic vessels: an intact canine model. *Circulation* 110, 750–755  
2 Chen, Z. *et al.* (2002) Identification of the enzymatic mechanism of nitroglycerin bioactivation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 99, 8306–8311  
3 Corbin, J.D. and Francis, S.H. (2002) Pharmacology of phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors. *Int. J. Clin. Pract.* 56, 453–459  
4 Kang, K.K. *et al.* (2003) DA-8159, a potent cGMP phosphodiesterase inhibitor, attenuates monocrotaline-induced pulmonary hypertension in rats. *Arch. Pharm. Res.* 26, 612–619  
5 Takimoto, E. *et al.* (2005) Chronic inhibition of

www.drugdiscoverytoday.com

cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase 5A prevents and  
reverses cardiac hypertrophy. Nat. Med. 11,  
214–222  

6 Laties, A. and Zrenner, E. (2002) Viagra  
(sildenafil citrate) and ophthalmology. Prog.  
Retin. Eye Res. 21, 485–506  

7 Rosen, R.C. and Kostis, J.B. (2003) Overview of  
phosphodiesterase 5 inhibition in erectile  
dysfunction. Am. J. Cardiol. 92, 9M–18M  

8 Friebe, A. and Koesling, D. (2003) Regulation of  
nitric oxide-sensitive guanylyl cyclase. Circ. Res.  
93, 96–105  

9 Galle, J. *et al.* (1999) Effects of the soluble  
guanylyl cyclase activator, YC-1, on vascular  
tone, cyclic GMP levels and phosphodiesterase  
activity. Br. J. Pharmacol. 127, 195–203  

10 Nakane, M. *et al.* (2002) Activation of soluble  
guanylate cyclase causes relaxation of corpus  
cavernosum tissue: synergism of nitric oxide  
and YC-1. Int. J. Impot. Res. 14, 121–127  

11 Bischoff, E. *et al.* (2003) BAY 41-2272: a  
stimulator of soluble guanylyl cyclase induces  
nitric oxide-dependent penile erection *in vivo*.  
Urology 61, 464–467  

12 Mullershausen, F. *et al.* (2004) Inhibition of  
phosphodiesterase type 5 by the activator of  
nitric oxide-sensitive guanylyl cyclase BAY  
41-2272. Circulation 109, 1711–1713  

13 Stasch, J.P. *et al.* (2002) Cardiovascular actions  
of a novel NO-independent guanylyl cyclase  
stimulator, BAY 41-8543: *in vivo* studies.  
Br. J. Pharmacol. 135, 344–355  

14 Stasch, J.P. *et al.* (2002) NO- and haem-  
independent activation of soluble guanylyl  
cyclase: molecular basis and cardiovascular  
implications of a new pharmacological  
principle. Br. J. Pharmacol. 136, 773–783  

15 Witte, K. *et al.* (2004) Nitric oxide-sensitive  
soluble guanylyl cyclase activity is preserved in  
internal mammary artery of type 2 diabetic  
patients. Diabetes 53, 2640–2644  

16 Hofmann, F. *et al.* (2000) Rising behind NO:  
cGMP-dependent protein kinases. J. Cell Sci.  
113, 1671–1676  

17 Hofmann, F. (2005) The biology of cyclic GMP-  
dependent protein kinases. J. Biol. Chem. 280,  
1–4  

18 Schlossmann, J. *et al.* (2000) Regulation of  
intracellular calcium by a signalling complex of  
IRAG, IP3 receptor and cGMP kinase Ibeta.  
Nature 404, 197–201  

19 Surks, H.K. *et al.* (1999) Regulation of myosin  
phosphatase by a specific interaction with  
cGMP-dependent protein kinase I. Science 286,  
1583–1587  

20 Geiselhöringer, A. *et al.* (2004) Distribution of  
IRAG and cGKI-isoforms in murine tissues. FEBS  
Lett. 575, 19–22  

21 Schlossmann, J. *et al.* (2005) Insights into cGMP  
signalling derived from cGMP Kinase knockout  
mice. Frontiers in Bioscience 10, 1279–1289  

22 Schlossmann, J. *et al.* (2003) Signaling through  
NO and cGMP-dependent protein kinases. Ann.  
Med. 35, 21–27  

23 Ammendola, A. *et al.* (2001) Molecular  
determinants of the interaction between the  
inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor-associated  
cGMP kinase substrate (IRAG) and cGMP kinase  
Ibeta. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 24153–24159  

24 Geiselhöringer, A. *et al.* (2004) IRAG is essential  
for relaxation of receptor-triggered smooth  
muscle contraction by cGMP Kinase. EMBO J. 23,  
4222–4231  

25 Sausbier, M. *et al.* (2000) Mechanisms of  
NO/cGMP-dependent vasorelaxation. Circ. Res.  
87, 825–830  

26 Tang, M.K. *et al.* (2003) Regulator of G-protein  
signaling-2 mediates vascular smooth muscle  
relaxation and blood pressure. Nat. Med. 9,  
1506–1515  

27 Sun, X. *et al.* (2005) RGS2 is a mediator of nitric  
oxide action on blood pressure and  
vasoconstrictor signaling. Mol. Pharmacol. 67,  
631–639  

28 Xia, C. *et al.* (2001) Phosphorylation and  
regulation of G-protein-activated phospholipase  
C-beta 3 by cGMP-dependent protein kinases.  
J. Biol. Chem. 276, 19770–19777  

29 Wooldridge, A.A. *et al.* (2004) Smooth muscle  
phosphatase is regulated *in vivo* by exclusion of  
phosphorylation of threonine 696 of MYPT1 by  
phosphorylation of Serine 695 in response to  
cyclic nucleotides. J. Biol. Chem. 279,  
34496–34504  

30 Ellerbroek, S.M. *et al.* (2003) Serine  
phosphorylation negatively regulates RhoA  
*in vivo*. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 19023–19031  

31 Mullershausen, F. *et al.* (2004) *In vivo*  
reconstitution of the negative feedback in nitric  
oxide/cGMP signaling: role of  
phosphodiesterase type 5 phosphorylation. Mol.  
Biol. Cell 15, 4023–4030  

32 Cornwell, T.L. *et al.* (1991) Regulation of  
sarcoplasmic reticulum protein  
phosphorylation by localized cyclic GMP-  
dependent protein kinase in vascular smooth  
muscle cells. Mol. Pharmacol. 40, 923–931  

33 Lalli, M.J. *et al.* (1999) [Ca2+]i homeostasis and  
cyclic nucleotide relaxation in aorta of  
phospholamban-deficient mice. Am. J. Physiol.  
277, H963–H970  

34 Kwan, H.Y. *et al.* (2004) Regulation of canonical  
transient receptor potential isoform 3 (TRPC3)  
channel by protein kinase G. Proc. Natl. Acad.  
Sci. U. S. A. 101, 2625–2630  

35 Walker, L.A. *et al.* (2001) Site-specific  
phosphorylation and point mutations of  
telokin modulate its Ca2+-desensitizing effect in  
smooth muscle. J. Biol. Chem. 276,  
24519–24524  

36 Schulz, E. *et al.* (2002) Functional and  
biochemical analysis of endothelial  
(dys)function and NO/cGMP signaling in  
human blood vessels with and without  
nitroglycerin pretreatment. Circulation 105,  
1170–1175  

37 Aszodi, A. *et al.* (1999) The vasodilator-  
stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP) is involved  
in cGMP- and cAMP-mediated inhibition of  
agonist-induced platelet aggregation, but is  
dispensable for smooth muscle function. EMBO  
J. 18, 37–48  

38 Huber, A. *et al.* (2000) Cysteine-rich protein 2, a  
novel substrate for cGMP kinase I in enteric  
neurons and intestinal smooth muscle. J. Biol.  
Chem. 275, 5504–5511  

39 Pfeifer, A. *et al.* (1998) Defective smooth muscle  
regulation in cGMP kinase I-deficient mice.  
EMBO J. 17, 3045–3051  

40 Wolfsgruber, W. *et al.* (2003) A proatherogenic  
role for cGMP-dependent protein kinase in  
vascular smooth muscle cells. Proc. Natl. Acad.  
Sci. U. S. A. 100, 13519–13524  

41 Ny, L. *et al.* (2000) Impaired relaxation of  
stomach smooth muscle in mice lacking cyclic  
GMP-dependent protein kinase I. Br.  

42 Persson, K. *et al.* (2000) Functional  
characteristics of urinary tract smooth muscles  
in mice lacking cGMP protein kinase type I.  
Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 279,  
R1112–R1120  

43 Meredith, A.L. *et al.* (2004) Overactive bladder  
and incontinence in the absence of the BK large  
conductance Ca2+-activated K+ channel. J. Biol.  
Chem. 279, 36746–36752  

44 Corbin, J.D. and Francis, S.H. (2002)  
Pharmacology of phosphodiesterase-5  
inhibitors. Int. J. Clin. Pract. 56, 453–459  

45 Hedlund, P. *et al.* (2000) Erectile dysfunction in  
cyclic GMP-dependent kinase I-deficient mice.  
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97, 2349–2354  

46 Massberg, S. *et al.* (1999) Increased adhesion  
and aggregation of platelets lacking cyclic  
guanosine 3′,5′-monophosphate kinase I. J. Exp.  
Med. 189, 1255–1264  

47 Li, Z. *et al.* (2003) A stimulatory role for cGMP-  
dependent protein kinase in platelet activation.  
Cell 112, 77–86  

48 Tertyshnikova, S. *et al.* (1998) cGMP inhibits  
IP3-induced Ca2+ release in intact rat  
megakaryocytes via cGMP- and cAMP-  
dependent protein kinases. J. Physiol. 512,  
89–96  

49 Reid, H.M. and Kinsella, B.T. (2003) The alpha,  
but not the beta, isoform of the human  
thromboxane A2 receptor is a target for nitric  
oxide-mediated desensitization. Independent  
modulation of Tp alpha signaling by nitric  
oxide and prostacyclin. J. Biol. Chem. 278,  
51190–51202  

50 Massberg, S. *et al.* (2004) Enhanced *in vivo*  
platelet adhesion in vasodilator-stimulated  
phosphoprotein (VASP)-deficient mice. Blood  
103, 136–142  

51 Butt, E. *et al.* (2001) Heat shock protein 27 is a  
substrate of cGMP-dependent protein kinase in  
intact human platelets: phosphorylation-  
induced actin polymerization caused by HSP27  
mutants. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 7108–7113  

52 Feil, R. *et al.* (2005) Function of cGK in the  
nervous system. Rev. Neurosci 16, 23–42  

53 Kleppisch, T. *et al.* (2003) Hippocampal cGMP-  
dependent protein kinase I supports an age- and  
protein synthesis-dependent component of  
long-term potentiation but is not essential for  
spatial reference and contextual memory.  
J. Neurosci. 23, 6005–6012  

54 Wang, H.G. *et al.* (2005) Presynaptic and  
postsynaptic roles of NO, cGK, and RhoA in  
long-lasting potentiation and aggregation of  
synaptic proteins. Neuron 45, 389–403  

55 Xue, J. *et al.* (2004) Phosphorylation of septin 3  
on Ser-91 by cGMP-dependent protein kinase-I  
in nerve terminals. Biochem. J. 381, 753–760  

56 Feil, R. *et al.* (2003) Impairment of LTD and  
cerebellar learning by Purkinje cell-specific  
ablation of cGMP-dependent protein kinase I.  
J. Cell Biol. 163, 295–302  

57 Wagner, L.E. *et al.* (2003) Phosphorylation of  
type-1 inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors by  
cyclic nucleotide-dependent protein kinases: a  
mutational analysis of the functionally  
important sites in the S2+ and S2- splice  
variants. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 45811–45817  

58 Endo, S. *et al.* (2003) Thr123 of rat G-substrate  
contributes to its action as a protein  
phosphatase inhibitor. Neurosci. Res. 45, 79–89  

59 Schmidtko, A. *et al.* (2003) Inhibition of cyclic  

guanosine 5′-monophosphate-dependent
protein kinase I (PKG-I) in lumbar spinal cord
reduces formalin-induced hyperalgesia and PKG
upregulation. *Nitric Oxide* 8, 89–94

60 Tegeder, I. *et al.* (2004) Reduced inflammatory
hyperalgesia with preservation of acute thermal
nociception in mice lacking cGMP-dependent
protein kinase I. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.*
101, 3253–3257

61 Vaandrager, A.B. *et al.* (1998) Membrane
targeting of cGMP-dependent protein kinase is
required for cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator Cl- channel activation.
*Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 95, 1466–1471

62 Pfeifer, A. *et al.* (1996) Intestinal secretory
defects and dwarfism in mice lacking cGMP-
dependent protein kinase II. *Science* 274,
2082–2086

63 Miyazawa, T. *et al.* (2002) Cyclic GMP-
dependent protein kinase II plays a critical role
in C-type natriuretic peptide-mediated
endochondral ossification. *Endocrinology* 143,
3604–3610

64 Chikuda, H. *et al.* (2004) Cyclic GMP-dependent
protein kinase II is a molecular switch from
proliferation to hypertrophic differentiation of
chondrocytes. *Genes Dev.* 18, 2418–2429

65 Schricker, K. and Kurtz, A. (1993) Liberators of
NO exert a dual effect on renin secretion from
isolated mouse renal juxtaglomerular cells. *Am.*
J. Physiol. 265, F180–F186

66 Gambaryan, S. *et al.* (2003) cGMP-dependent
protein kinase type II regulates basal level of
aldosterone production by zona glomerulosa
cells without increasing expression of the
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene.
*J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 29640–29648

67 Nikolaev, V.O. *et al.* (2005) Real-time
monitoring of the PDE2 activity of live cells:
hormone-stimulated cAMP hydrolysis is faster
than hormone-stimulated cAMP synthesis.
*J. Biol. Chem.* 280, 1716–1719

68 Oster, H. *et al.* (2003) cGMP-dependent protein
kinase II modulates mPer1 and mPer2 gene
induction and influences phase shifts of the
circadian clock. *Curr. Biol.* 13, 725–733

69 Tischkau, S.A. *et al.* (2004) Protein kinase G type

II is required for night-to-day progression of the
mammalian circadian clock. *Neuron* 43,
539–549

70 Schwede, F. *et al.* (2000) Cyclic nucleotide
analogs as biochemical tools and prospective
drugs. *Pharmacol. Ther.* 87, 199–226

71 Gamm, D.M. *et al.* (1995) The type II isoform of
cGMP-dependent protein kinase is dimeric and
possesses regulatory and catalytic properties
distinct from the type I isoforms. *J. Biol. Chem.*
270, 27380–27388

72 Wei, J.Y. *et al.* (1998) Substituted cGMP analogs
can act as selective agonists of the rod
photoreceptor cGMP-gated cation channel.
*J. Mol. Neurosci.* 10, 53–64

73 Butt, E. *et al.* (1992) Analysis of the functional
role of cGMP-dependent protein kinase in
intact human platelets using a specific activator
8-para-chlorophenylthio-cGMP. *Biochem.*
Pharmacol. 43, 2591–2600

74 Butt, E. *et al.* (1995) Inhibition of cyclic GMP-
dependent protein kinase-mediated effects by
(Rp)-8-bromo-PET-cyclic GMPS. *Br. J. Pharmacol.*
116, 3110–3116

75 Butt, E. *et al.* (1994) (Rp)-8-pCPT-cGMPS, a
novel cGMP-dependent protein kinase
inhibitor. *Eur. J. Pharmacol.* 269, 265–268

76 Kase, H. *et al.* (1987) K-252 compounds, novel
and potent inhibitors of protein kinase C and
cyclic nucleotide-dependent protein kinases.
*Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 142, 436–440

77 Burkhardt, M. *et al.* (2000) KT5823 inhibits
cGMP-dependent protein kinase activity *in vitro*
but not in intact human platelets and rat
mesangial cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 33536–33541

78 Tegge, W.J. and Frank, R. (1998) Analysis of
protein kinase substrate specificity by the use of
peptide libraries on cellulose paper
(SPOT-method). *Methods Mol. Biol.* 87, 99–106

79 Dostmann, W.R. *et al.* (1999) Delineation of
selective cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase
Ialpha substrate and inhibitor peptides based on
combinatorial peptide libraries on paper.
*Pharmacol. Ther.* 82, 373–387

80 Dostmann, W.R. *et al.* (2000) Highly specific,
membrane-permeant peptide blockers of cGMP-
dependent protein kinase Ialpha inhibit NO-

induced cerebral dilation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.*
U. S. A. 97, 14772–14777

81 Taylor, M.S. *et al.* (2004) Inhibition of cGMP-
dependent protein kinase by the cell-permeable
peptide DT-2 reveals a novel mechanism of
vasoregulation. *Mol. Pharmacol.* 65, 1111–1119

82 Bader, B. *et al.* (2001) A cGMP-dependent
protein kinase assay for high throughput
screening based on time-resolved fluorescence
resonance energy transfer. *J. Biomol. Screen.* 6,
255–264

83 Lawson, C.A. *et al.* (1995) Selective reduction of
PVR by inhalation of a cGMP analogue in a
porcine model of pulmonary hypertension. *Am.*
J. Physiol. 268, H2056–H2062

84 Maeda, T. *et al.* (1998) Analogs of cyclic
nucleotides in rat liver preservation.
*Transplantation* 66, 844–851

85 Pinsky, D.J. *et al.* (1994) The nitric oxide/cyclic
GMP pathway in organ transplantation: critical
role in successful lung preservation. *Proc. Natl.*
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 91, 12086–12090

86 Hillinger, S. *et al.* (1999) 8-Br-cGMP is superior
to prostaglandin E1 for lung preservation. *Ann.*
Thorac. Surg. 68, 1138–1142

87 Gambaryan, S. *et al.* (2004) Potent inhibition of
human platelets by cGMP analogs independent
of cGMP-dependent protein kinase. *Blood* 103,
2593–2600

88 Marshall, S.J. *et al.* (2004) GPIb-dependent
platelet activation is dependent on Src kinases
but not MAP kinase or cGMP-dependent kinase.
*Blood* 103, 2601–2609

89 Sung, Y.J. *et al.* (2004) A neuronal isoform of
protein kinase G couples mitogen-activated
protein kinase nuclear import to axotomy-
induced long-term hyperexcitability in *Aplysia*
sensory neurons. *J. Neurosci.* 24, 7583–7595

90 Scheiner, R. *et al.* (2004) Activity of cGMP-
dependent protein kinase (PKG) affects sucrose
responsiveness and habituation in *Drosophila*
melanogaster. *Learn. Mem.* 11, 303–311

91 Werner, C. *et al.* (2004) Importance of
NO/cGMP signalling via cGMP-dependent
protein kinase II for controlling emotionality
and neurobehavioural effects of alcohol. *Eur.*
J. Neurosci. 20, 3498–3506

---

**Related articles in other Elsevier journals**

**A heretical view on the role of NO and cGMP in vascular proliferative diseases**
Feil, R. *et al.* (2005) *Trends Mol. Med.* 11, 71–75

**Protein kinases in drug discovery and development**
Gill, A. (2004) *Drug Discov. Today* 9, 16–17

**cGMP-dependent protein kinase II modulates mPer1 and mPer2 gene induction and influences phase shifts of the circadian clock**
Oster, H. *et al.* (2003) *Curr. Biol.* 13, 725–733

**A stimulatory role for cGMP-dependent protein kinase in platelet activation**
Li, Z. *et al.* (2003) *Cell* 112, 77–86

634 www.drugdiscoverytoday.com
