
J Comp Physiol B (2005) 175: 221–230  
DOI 10.1007/s00360-005-0483-3  

---

**REVIEW**

Prabir K. Mandal

# Dioxin: a review of its environmental effects and its aryl hydrocarbon receptor biology

Received: 22 October 2004 / Revised: 27 January 2005 / Accepted: 8 March 2005 / Published online: 8 April 2005  
© Springer-Verlag 2005

## Abstract
A highly persistent trace environmental contaminant and one of the most potent toxicants known is dioxin (2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-para-dioxin or TCDD). TCDD induces a broad spectrum of biological responses, including induction of cytochrome P-450 1A1 (CYP1A1), disruption of normal hormone signaling pathways, reproductive and developmental defects, immunotoxicity, liver damage, wasting syndrome, and cancer. Its classification was upgraded from “possible human carcinogen” (group 2B) to “human carcinogen” (group 1) by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) in 1997. Exposure to TCDD may also cause changes in sex ratio, and tumor promotion in other animals. Because of the growing public and scientific concern, toxicological studies have been initiated to analyze the short- and long-term effects of dioxin. TCDD brings about a wide variety of toxic and biochemical effects via aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-mediated signaling pathways. Essential steps in this adaptive mechanism include AhR binding of ligand in the cytoplasm of cells associated with two molecules of chaperone heatshock protein (Hsp90) and AhR interactive protein, translocation of the receptor to the nucleus, dimerization with the Ah receptor nuclear translocator, and binding of this heterodimeric transcription factor (present in CYP1A) to dioxin-responsive elements upstream of promoters that regulate the expression of genes involved in xenobiotic metabolism.

## Keywords
Dioxin · TCDD · Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) · CYP1A1

---

Communicated by I.D. Hume

P. K. Mandal  
Department of Biology, University of North Florida,  
4567 St. John’s Bluff Road (South),  
Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA  
E-mail: pmandal@unf.edu

---

## Introduction

The term Dioxin is commonly used to refer to a family of toxic chemicals that all share a similar chemical structure and a common mechanism of toxic action. This family includes 7 of the polychlorinated dibenzo dioxins, 10 of the polychlorinated dibenzo furans and 12 of the polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). Polychlorinated dibenzo dioxins (PCDDs) have been known to be a class of highly toxic and persistent environmental contaminants since the early 1900s. Effects from dioxin exposure have been the subject of intensive investigations in laboratory animals during the last 30 years. The term “dioxins” is used for members of the polyhalogenated aromatic hydrocarbons that are structurally related, are persistent and bioaccumulative, and have a common spectrum of biologic responses mediated via binding to a specific high-affinity cellular protein (Van den Berg et al. 1998). The prototype chemical for this class is dioxin, or 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-para-dioxin (TCDD; Fig. 1), which is the most intensively studied, was classified as a “human carcinogen” (IARC 1997; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2000; Paustenbach 2002; Cole et al. 2003) and has the potential to disrupt multiple endocrine pathways (Grassman et al. 1998; Safe 1995). Humans are generally exposed to such compounds, which are incorporated into food, drinking water, soil, dust, smoke and air. The biochemical pathway for TCDD synthesis is shown in Fig. 2.

---

## Mechanisms of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) toxicity

In the case of certain aromatic hydrocarbons, the mechanism of toxicity is well-defined. Benzo(a)pyrene, for example, is metabolically activated to become a DNA-binding carcinogen. This is an example of a genotoxic mechanism. Although TCDD induces expression of particular enzymes in the same manner that benzo(a)pyrene induces enzyme expression, the

receptor nuclear translocator (Arnt) proteins, and the molecular mechanism of AhR action is associated with binding of the heterodimer to dioxin-responsive elements (DREs) in regulatory regions of Ah-responsive genes. The AhR was first identified in mouse liver by Poland et al. (1976) who showed specific binding to radiolabeled TCDD. Subsequent studies with \[^3\][H]-TCDD showed that the AhR was widely expressed in mammalian tissues, and it was hypothesized that initial binding to the AhR was linked to the broad spectrum of biochemical and toxic responses observed in laboratory animals and cells exposed to TCDD and other halogenated aromatic contaminants that bind the AhR (Poland and Knutson 1982). TCDD is mutagenic in vivo, but is not directly genotoxic. In other words, even though genetic mutation can occur as a result of TCDD exposure, TCDD is not metabolized into a DNA-binding compound. Instead of reacting directly with cellular macromolecules, it is believed that the toxicity associated with TCDD is achieved through disruption of signaling pathways or production of a secondary toxicant capable of reacting with macromolecules like DNA. Most of the effects of TCDDs require activation of the AhR, which results in transcriptional activation or the repression of a diverse array of genes (Nebert et al. 2000; Puga et al. 2000).

As for the initial actions of dioxin, it is well established that its binding to the AhR (Bradfield et al. 1991) as a ligand and AhR signaling are the first steps of the major toxic action of dioxin. In the absence of ligand, AhR is present in the cytosol in the form of a complex with two chaperone Hsp90s (Perdew 1988), a small protein (p23), and an immunophilin-like protein (XAP2) (Petrulis et al. 2000). Upon dioxin binding, the complex dissociates, the AhR subunit translocates into the nucleus to form a heterodimer with its partner molecule, Arnt (Hankinson 1994), and eventually acts as a nuclear transcription factor by binding to the DRE, which has a core sequence of 5′-TNGCGGTG-3′ located in the promoter region of CYP1A1 gene that are directly controlled by the AhR (Denison et al. 1988).

The mechanism of AhR-mediated responses was initially investigated using CYP1A1 as a model, and early studies showed that induction of CYP1A1 by TCDD was preceded by rapid formation of a 180–220 kD nuclear AhR complex. Subsequent studies showed that this complex was a heterodimer containing the AhR and Arnt protein, and both AhR and Arnt genes were cloned

Fig. 2 Simple chemical reaction pathway of TCDD synthesis

Fig. 3 Simple mechanistic model for TCDD toxicity using the AhR pathway. ER endoplasmic reticulum, CYP1A1 cytochrome P450 1A1, AhR aryl hydrocarbon receptor, Hsp heat shock protein, Arnt Ah receptor nuclear translocator, mRNA messenger ribonucleic acid

and extensively characterized (Quattrochi et al. 1994; Safe 1986; Swanson and Bradfield 1993; Whitlock 1990; Wilson and Safe 1998). The nuclear AhR complex interacts with consensus DREs in the CYP1A1 gene promoter and in promoters of other Ah-responsive genes, and subsequent recruitment of coactivators and general transcription factors results in transactivation (Safe 2001). The model (Fig. 3) indicates that the binding of TCDD (ligand) to the AhR in the cytosol, translocation of the receptor to the nucleus, dimerization of the AhR with the Arnt protein, binding of this heterodimeric transcription factor complex to specific DNA sequences present in the 5'-promoter regions (upstream) of responsive genes, and inappropriate modulation of gene expression represent the initial steps in a series of biochemical, cellular, and tissue changes that result in the toxicity observed.

Much of our recent understanding of the mechanism of TCDD action is based on the analysis of the induction of particular genes (e.g., CYP1A1) by TCDD. This hypothesis is supported by numerous studies evaluating structure-activity relationships of various AhR ligands, the genetics of mutant AhR genes, AhR-deficient mice, and the molecular events contributing to and regulating expression of the AhR and its activity. Both AhR and Arnt are members of the basic helix-loop-helix family of transcription factors. AhR is the only ligand-activated member of this family and Arnt is also known as hypoxia inducible factor-1β (HIF-1β) (Hankinson 1995). Arnt plays a critical role in the cellular response to hypoxia, and their binding to hypoxia response elements (HRE) results in the induction of hypoxia-responsive genes. TCDD does cause a few cellular effects that are independent of the AhR (Puga et al. 1990; Tan et al. 2002), but these are expected to represent only a minor component of the mechanisms by which TCDD exerts toxicity, if at all.

The effects of TCDD were observed in various animal models, including rodents. Since TCDD is not genotoxic, it is likely that the carcinogenic responses are associated with the action of TCDD as a tumor promoter. A TCDD dose of < 100 ng/kg causes permanent adverse developmental effects in piscine (Walker et al. 1991), avian (Walker et al. 1997), and mammalian embryos (Gray et al. 1997). TCDD acts via an AhR in humans and other animals;

Dioxin (e.g., TCDD) exposure  
↓  
Free Dioxin in tissues  
↓  
Dioxin binding to the AhR in tissues  
↓  
AhR-Dioxin complex binding with DNA  
↓  
Gene regulation  
↓  
mRNA regulation  
↓  
Protein synthesis  
↓  
Biochemical alterations  
↓  
Early cellular responses (e.g., cell growth stimulation)  
↓  
Delayed tissue response (e.g., cancer)

Fig. 4 Schematic representation of the complex sequence of events involved in TCDD-mediated toxicants

binding somehow alters gene expression. The AhR is present in many tissues in humans and other animals. A number of investigations define the suitability of CYP1B1 for use as a mechanistically based biomarker in molecular epidemiology studies of human populations exposed to dioxins and related chemicals that bind AhR (Halperin et al. 1995; Spencer et al. 1999; Landi et al. 2003; Baccarelli et al. 2004). Animal carcinogenesis is correlated with the affinity of the dioxin for the AhR. A schematic representation of the complex sequence of events involved in TCDD-mediated toxicants is presented in Fig. 4.

---

### Reproductive toxicity

The reproductive toxicity of TCDD and related compounds has been studied extensively (Petroff et al. 2001). In rodents, perinatal exposure to fetal germ cell toxicants reduced the reproductive potential of female, and permanently reduced sperm production in male progeny. Effects such as hypospadias, ectopic testes, vaginal pouches, agenesis of the ventral prostate, and nipple retention in male rats were observed. Caudal epididymal sperm numbers were permanently reduced in TCDD-exposed male rat and hamster progeny, and female progeny displayed malformations of the external genitalia (Gray and Kelce 1996).

Endometriosis is a common gynecologic problem of unknown etiology. Estrogen-dependence and immune modulation are the established features of this disease, and environmental contaminants were suggested to play a role in the pathobiology of this disease as well. Previous work in nonhuman primates has shown that exposure to TCDD is associated with an increased prevalence and severity of endometriosis (Rier and Foster 2003).

Chemical compounds mimicking estrogen effects are largely considered to be endocrine disruptors, and their adverse effects on reproductive biology were observed. Dioxins were recognized as endocrine disruptors and their influence on thyroid hormone metabolism was demonstrated in various studies. Thyroid hormone is essential for brain development and mothers with lower levels of thyroid hormone in the first trimester of pregnancy have less intelligent children (Pop et al. 1999; Vulsma 2000). Dioxins interfere with hormonal signaling, and anti-estrogenic effects, vitamin A inhibition and thyroxin mimicry were reported. TCDD was shown to block estrogen receptor action (Safe 2001), and the antiestrogenic properties of TCDD have led to the development of experimental drugs to treat estrogen-dependent breast cancer (Wong et al. 1997). Wildlife from ecosystems contaminated with endocrine disrupting chemicals display a variety of reproductive alterations including cryptorchidism in the Florida panther, small baculum in young male otters, small penises in alligators, sex reversal in fish, and altered social behavior in birds (Gray 1998).

Our data confirmed a lack of an in vitro effect of TCDD on gonadal function and indicated that the decreased serum testosterone levels in TCDD-treated rats may not be a direct result of decreased capacity of the Leydig cell to synthesize steroids. The CYP1A1 induction by TCDD confirmed that this agent elicited an AhR-dependent response. CYP1B1, a member of the cytochrome P450 superfamily, is expressed constitutively in the steroidogenic tissues of mammals and is inducible by peptide hormones, cAMP and AhR ligands. The mechanism of induction of this cytochrome P450 is similar to that for CYP1A1, i.e. through the AhR-signaling pathway. We showed for the first time that CYP1B1 mRNA is expressed in the Leydig cells of the testis using mouse MA-10 Leydig cell line (Mandal et al. 2001). The anti-estrogenic effects of TCDD are particularly well-characterized, and evidence for disruption of estrogen-mediated functions includes inhibition of estrogen-induced uterine growth and breast cancer cell proliferation, and reduced levels of progesterone and prolactin receptors in MCF-7 cells (Safe 1995, 2001). The AhR and its partner Arnt are present in mammary tissues, and there is evidence that inactivation of these proteins results in impaired mammary development and lactation (Abbott et al. 1999; Hushka et al. 1998; Le Provost et al. 2002; Birnbaum and Fenton 2003; Warner et al. 2002). Timing of exposure to hormonally active chemicals can predetermine susceptibility for mammary cancer. TCDD, the most potent man-made xenobiotic, when given to pregnant rats resulted in the offspring being more susceptible to chemically induced mammary cancer as adults (Lamartiniere 2002). Embryotoxicity or effects on embryo survival have been shown in gulls, eagles, terns, cormorants, falcons and herons (Bosveld and van den Berg 2002). TCDD has been shown to form a stable complex with α-fetoprotein in a 2:1 ratio. The apparent solubility of TCDD in water increases 10⁵-fold after complex formation. α-fetoprotein may facilitate TCDD transport in embryonic tissues and enhance its embryotoxic and teratogenic effects (Sotnichenko et al. 1999). Larval zebrafish exposed to waterborne TCDD at 0.5 μg/l expressed AhR2 mRNA in the caudal fin at 24 h post fertilization. Follow-up studies of the exposed population in Seveso, Italy, indicate that an increase in TCDD exposure during pregnancy was associated with a substantially lowered male:female ratio (0.38) at birth in the offspring (Mocarelli et al. 2000); worldwide, the usual sex ratio at birth is 0.514 (James 1996). Among men, after 20 years of follow-up, both all-cancer (166 deaths) and lung cancer mortality (57 deaths) tended to be higher than expected. Furthermore, some specific cancer sites were significantly elevated. For lymphopoietic neoplasms, significant increases in mortality (20 years) and morbidity (15-year latency) were observed, consistent in both sexes. There was an increase in rectal cancer incidence and mortality in men. Among women, liver cancer incidence was elevated in the 15-year postaccident period. Finally, in a separate analysis of 981 women in zone A who had stored serum, breast
cancer incidence was significantly related to serum TCDD levels (a two-fold increase for a ten-fold increase in serum TCDD), based on a limited number of cases ($n=15$) (Warner et al. 2002; Steenland et al. 2004). A second example of alteration of the sex ratio was recently reported among the offspring of men exposed occupationally to TCDD in a pesticide manufacturing plant in Ufa, Bashkortostan, Russia. The median level of TCDD in the worker was $240 \mathrm{ng} / \mathrm{kg}$, a level 30 times background. The major finding was that the ratio of boys to girls at birth was 0.40; this effect was seen only in relation to parental exposures (Ryan et al. 2002).

---

### Neurotoxicity

During development dioxin and related compounds affect a broad range of brain functions from advanced brain function to reproduction-controlling functions, even at low doses. Hanneman et al. (1996) reported that dioxin at $10-100 \mathrm{nM}$ stimulates $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ uptake in rat hippocampal neurons in culture within $40 \mathrm{~s}$. The dioxin-evoked increase in $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ uptake was antagonized by the calcium channel blocker nifedipine but not by cycloheximide, indicating that it is likely to involve plasma membrane changes that are associated with altered gene transcription. The zebrafish is an important model organism for studying the developmental toxicity caused by TCDD, and a functional AhR signaling pathway was identified in the zebrafish. Two distinct zebrafish AhR genes were identified: $z f a h r l$ and $z f a h r 2$, and a single Arnt gene with multiple splice variants, $z f a r n t 2$, has also been cloned. In the nervous system, TCDD-induced effects may be exerted through a ligand-activated transcription factor AhR together with the Arnt, since increased expression of AhR2 (Andreasen et al. 2002) and Arnt2 (Tanguay et al. 2000) were found in the zebrafish brain after dioxin exposure. In addition to zebrafish, AhR and Arnt were identified in the olfactory bulb, cerebral and cerebellar cortices, and the hippocampus of exposed rats (Huang et al. 2000). This suggests that TCDD could have significant effects on discrete neuronal populations of the vertebrate brain, though how this relates to disturbed development of the brain or its subsequent function is not known. It is suggested that dioxins exhibit endocrine-disrupting actions on the gonadal and thyroid hormone axes, as well as “neural-disrupting action” on neural transmission and neural network formation (Kakeyama and Tohyama 2003). The Han-Wistar rat is among the most resistant of all mammals to TCDD toxicity (Dalton et al. 2002; Pohjanvirta et al. 1998). The reason for resistance is due, at least in part, to a mutation in the $A h r$ gene that alters and truncates the C-terminal transactivation domain of the AhR protein. Interestingly, these rats show normal acute induction of the CYP1 family genes (Nittyenen et al. 2003). TCDD-mediated toxicity in rats develops over weeks of exposure time. Thus, it is reasonable to surmise that not only acute, but also the

---

chronic, activity of the AhR is necessary for the TCDD-induced toxicity. How mutations in the $A h r$ gene of the Han-Wistar rat affect chronic AhR signaling has not been determined yet.

---

### Immunotoxicity

TCDD is a highly immunosuppressive chemical that induces potent suppression of immune responses in laboratory animals. TCDD and structurally similar halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons cause a broad range of immunologic effects in experimental animals including decreased host resistance to infectious disease and suppressed humoral and cell-mediated immune responses. In addition to immune suppression, TCDD promotes inflammatory responses. This effect may result from an upregulation of the production of inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF-$\alpha$) (Kerkvliet 1995). CYP1A2, which is responsible for the hepatic sequestration of TCDD, does not play a critical role in TCDD-induced immunosuppression of the antibody response to sheep red blood cells (Smialowicz et al. 2004). Studies in TCDD-sensitive mice revealed that TCDD may affect polymorphonuclear cells at the level of haematopoiesis, via a direct interaction with granulocyte precursor cells, or modulate polymorphonuclear cells at different stages of maturation (Ackermann et al. 1989).

---

### Tumor promotion

TCDD has been found to cause several tumor types in rodents, and was proven carcinogenic to humans (IARC 1997). The molecular mechanisms underlying tumor promotion are poorly understood. Analysis of the tumor promotion data for TCDD suggests that the AhR/xenobiotic responsive element (XRE) pathway may not be the only relevant mechanism for the promoting action of these agents. Tumorigenicity by TCDD in rodents was linked to cellular necrosis, enhanced cell proliferation and tumor promotion. A number of agonists of the aryl hydrocarbon or dioxin receptor (AhR) are potent tumor promoters in rodent liver. Dioxin and certain structurally related compounds increase the incidence of liver neoplasms in rodents upon chronic bioassay. Tumor promoters may affect the rate of division, terminal differentiation or death (apoptosis) of tumor precursor cells (Whysner and Williams 1996; Dragan and Schrenk 2000; Schwarz et al. 2000). TCDD has been shown to promote tumors at $1 / 100 \mathrm{th}$ the dose rate of phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate, which is a known tumor promoter, in the skin of hairless mice (Nebert et al. 1993). TCDD has also been shown to induce protein kinase C (PKC$\delta$) expression and phosphotransferase activity, and its membrane translocation, indicating a potential intracellular role for PKC$\delta$ as an effector molecule for TCDD-mediated biological events in this ovarian cancer
cell line (Williams et al. 2004). Studies on liver tumor promotion in the female rat liver support a non-genotoxic mechanism for the induction of neoplasms by TCDD. The ability of TCDD to enhance proliferation and inhibit apoptotic processes in focal hepatic lesions further supports an indirect mechanism of carcinogenicity (Dragan and Schrenk 2000).

---

### Genetic polymorphism

It is well known that there are marked strain and species differences in sensitivity to TCDD. LD₅₀ value of TCDD varies over a 5000-fold range among different species of animals. Polymorphism in the AhR loci is found in the rat and mouse. In laboratory animals, genetic variations in the AhR lead to substantial differences in sensitivity to biochemical and toxic effects of TCDD and related compounds. The functional effects of amino acid variations in mice were studied for only a few sites within the AhR protein, notably the codon 375 polymorphism due to a single nucleotide change that causes valine to be substituted for alanine in the ligand-binding domain of the receptor (Ema et al. 1994; Poland et al. 1994).

Relatively few polymorphisms have been discovered in the human AhR gene; these occur predominantly in exon 10, a region that encodes a major portion of the transactivation domain of the receptor that is responsible for regulating expression of other genes (Harper et al. 2002). Polymorphisms at Lys⁵⁵⁴Leu, Val⁵⁷⁰Ile and Pro⁵⁷¹Ser do not seem to be related to any phenotype of TCDD toxicity, if they occur independently. Two distinct AhR genes (AhR1 and AhR2) have been characterized in fish. These two forms may have arisen from a process of gene duplication (Hahn et al. 1997; Karchner et al. 2002). However, no AhR2 gene has been identified in humans. The recent cloning and characterization of the AhR-repressor (AhRR) in mice identified a novel autoregulatory loop involving the basic helix-loop-helix-Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) homology proteins AhR, Arnt, and AhRR. This regulatory mechanism is evolutionarily conserved and that it can also involve a fourth bHLH-PAS protein, AhR2. The AhRR appears to be the gene, most closely related to the AhR in mice and in humans (Mimura et al. 1999; Watanabe et al. 2001; Baba et al. 2001; Fujita et al. 2002). In Caucasians, for example, about one-tenth of the population exhibits the highly inducing AhR phenotype such that expression levels of genes under its control differ. Human CYP1A2 expression levels, for one, may vary by 15- to 60-fold (Tang et al. 1994; Ikeya et al. 1989; Butler et al. 1992). The AhR is firmly established as the regulator of three members of the CYP1 family CYP1A1, CYP1A2 and CYP1B1. Prolonged expression of CYP1A1 may increase the likelihood of deleterious DNA lesions, due to an increase in the generation of genotoxic metabolites and reactive oxygen species. Very recently, it was discovered that CYP2S1, a non-CYP1 family member, also is induced via

the AhR in humans and rodent cells (Rivera et al. 2002). This finding illustrates that even within the cytochrome P450 superfamily, new genes continue to be discovered that are under AhR control. However, the functional toxicological, pharmacological and pathological consequences of CYP polymorphisms are largely unknown.

---

### Conclusion

The most unusual aspect of the toxic action of dioxin is that it affects many organs. Its effects vary greatly, depending on the type of cell, tissue, age and sex, species, and the timing and duration of exposure. Even within the same cell line, its toxicity can vary greatly, depending on the culture conditions and stage of growth. Thus, there has been a tremendous amount of research on many aspects of the action of dioxin in many cell types revealing, in depth, molecular biological mechanisms of its specific action in each specific target cell type. Exposure to TCDD results in numerous pathophysiological abnormalities which appear to be species as well as organ or cell type specific. These abnormalities include chloracne, thymic atrophy and immune dysfunction, hepatic damage and steatosis, gastric epithelial hyperplasia, embryonic teratogenesis, and several types of cancer. TCDD is known to cause fatty degeneration of the liver (Poland and Knutson 1982), which involves increases in the accumulation of lipids in the hepatocyte. TCDD causes oxidative stress, which is known to inhibit hepatocyte proliferation and increase the number of hepatic progenitors, oval cells.

Many compounds that activate the AhR are ubiquitous and persistent environmental contaminants, to which humans and other animals are routinely exposed. Besides its physiological role in the detoxification of polycyclic aromatic compounds, the activity of this enzyme can be deleterious since it generates mutagenic metabolites and active oxygen. Since the publication of the Times Beach risk assessment in 1984, which suggested that residential soils were of concern when the level of TCDD was in excess of 1 ppb, there has been continued interest in dioxins. The health effects of dioxins are a public concern. TCDD and dioxin-like compounds are environmentally and biologically stable and, as a result, human exposure is chronic and widespread. Toxicity among dioxin congeners can vary significantly. Congeners containing four to six chlorine atoms possess the greatest potential for biological activity, as well as the highest acute toxicity. TCDD has the highest known binding affinity to AhR and is most often used as the prototypical agonist when studying AhR-controlled enzyme induction. TCDD is a potent multi-site animal carcinogen. It poses a challenge to regulators, similar to other recent environmental exposures (e.g., arsenic in drinking water, diesel fumes). Large numbers of people are exposed to levels not much above background (human levels are around 5 ng/kg, ppt), but such levels may appreciably increase cancer
risk (Steenland and Deddens 2003). TCDD is not directly genotoxic, but appears to be both a promoter and initiator of cancer in animals. Dioxins promote carcinogenesis and have immunotoxic, embryotoxic, teratogenic and neurotoxic activities. These compounds can also produce atrophic changes in lymphoid organs (thymus, spleen, lymph nodes) and influence the function of adrenal, thyroid, mammary and sex gland differentiation. Vorderstrasse et al. (2004) reported the novel finding that AhR activation during pregnancy disrupts mammary gland differentiation. This raises questions about the susceptibility of mammary tissue to direct injury by endocrine disrupting agents and the potential for AhR-mediated signaling to adversely affect lactation and breast tissue development in humans. Given the prevalence of AhR agonists in the environment and the fact that the AhR is present in mammary tissue, it is possible that exposure to these chemicals leads to defects in mammary differentiation in humans.

Although a great deal is known about AhR-driven transcriptional regulation, much less is known about the mechanisms by which TCDD causes toxicity and disease. The AhR mediates the toxicological responses of TCDD and related compounds. Receptor-deficient animals were shown to be resistant to the toxic effects of dioxin, although there is also evidence for the existence of a receptor-independent pathway for dioxin-induced toxicity (Poellinger 2000). In the cytosol, the receptor is present in a non-activated ligand-binding conformation. Association with Arnt in the nucleus turns the receptor complex into a ligand-activated form. The physiological role of the receptor is not yet understood; however, the conservation of the receptor in a wide range of animal species suggests a fundamental role in cellular physiology (Poellinger 2000). An increasing number of chemoprotective phytochemicals exhibit both AhR agonist and antagonist activities. Research has shown that both TCDD and AhR modulators can activate inhibitory AhR-ERα crosstalk in the uterus and breast and endometrial cancer cells/tumors, suggesting that the AhR can be an important target for development of drugs for treating breast and endometrial cancer (Safe 2001). Various signaling pathways involved in the regulation of cell homeostasis are modulated by TCDD and other AhR agonists.

Cytochrome P-450 1A1 is a substrate inducible-microsomal enzyme that oxygenates PAH, such as the carcinogen benzo(a)pyrene. Enzyme induction reflects increased transcription of the cognate CYP1A1 gene. Two regulatory proteins (AhR and Arnt) mediate CYP1A1 induction (Whitlock 1999). AhR is downregulated while Arnt increased. The nuclear heterodimer interacts with cognate XREs in promoter/enhancer regions of multiple Ah-responsive genes (Wilson and Safe 1998). TCDD induces intracellular Ca²⁺ changes, accumulation of FOS and JUN mRNAs, and large increases in AP-1 transcription factor activity (Nebert et al. 1993). CYP1B1, a member of the cytochrome P450 superfamily, is expressed constitutively in the steroidogenic tissues of mammals and is inducible by peptide hormones, cAMP and aromatic hydrocarbon receptor ligands. Recently, it has been reported that CYP1B1, but not CYP1A1, is expressed in rat granulose cells in the absence of any external stimulus. The induction of CYP1B1 mRNA in rat granulose cells by TCDD in vitro was followed by an increase in AhR and estrogen receptor (ER-) RNA levels (Dasmahapatra et al. 2002). Therefore, the measurement of CYP1B1 induction in humans should be useful in future studies to assess the relationship between exposure and response in dioxin-exposed human populations and comparison with responses in rodent models commonly used in risk assessment.

The characteristic property of TCDD which sets it apart from the majority of toxic compounds is that the life span of experimental animals in acute toxicity studies only weakly depends on its dose; animal death occurs as a result of the so-called wasting syndrome manifested as progressive and irreversible loss of body weight. The phenomenon of TCDD-induced wasting in chickens and rodents has been known for more than four decades (Poland and Knutson 1982) but remains poorly understood. Glycogen depletion and the downregulation of phosphor-enol-pyruvate carboxykinase, combined with Src oncogene action, were suggested to play a role in TCDD-induced wasting (Dunlap et al. 2002; Matsumur 2003). Specific examples of non-carcinogenic effects include thymic involution, altered male reproductive function, impaired prostate growth, disrupted ovarian follicle development, immune suppression, embryonic toxicity, simian endometriosis, and cleft palate. Although animals in laboratory studies are commonly exposed to a higher concentration of test compound compared to environmental concentrations that threaten humans, animal studies are performed on a short-term basis.

Over the past 30 years, there has been a shift in the major sources of dioxins, in large part due to the success of the regulatory agenda and focused, voluntary efforts. Production of pesticides used to be associated with relatively high levels of contaminations with dioxins and furans. Many of these products, such as 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid and hexachlorophene, have been banned. Bleaching of paper and pulp products using free chlorine in kraft mills led to the production of dioxins. The use of alternative bleaching processes reduced or eliminated dioxin production. The major known sources of dioxins and dioxin-like compounds today involve combustion processes. The fact that natural events such as volcano eruptions and forest fires can produce trace amounts of dioxins has been known for a decade or more, but it is generally thought that this source accounted for only a relatively small amount of the new emissions in recent years. However, as best available technologies are implemented, the amount of emissions from industrial sources decreases. Although municipal and medical waste incineration were once major sources, their contributions to current emission inventories have de-
creased by over 90%. Uncontrolled burning and a collection of small sources are the most significant sources of new dioxin emissions today. The emissions of barrel burning of trash are several orders of magnitude higher than for combustion in modern incinerators. Certain metal refining and iron sintering processes also appear to lead to generation of dioxins (Birnbaum and Farland 2003; USEPA 2002).

In recent years, several natural formulations to reducing or eliminating TCDD toxicity have been in focus. Olestra, a non-digestible lipophilic dietary fat substitute, accelerates intestinal excretion of TCDD by eight to tenfold (Geusau et al. 1999).

---

### References

Abbott BD, Schmid JE, Pitt JA, Buckalew AR, Wood CR, Held GA, Diliberto JJ (1999) Adverse reproductive outcomes in the transgenic Ah receptor-deficient mouse. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 155:62–70

Ackermann MF, Gasiewicz TA, Lamm KR, Germolec DR, Luster MI (1989) Selective inhibition of polymorphonuclear neutrophil activity by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 101:470–480

Andreasen EA, Spitsbergen JM, Tanguay RL, Stegeman JJ, Heideman W, Peterson RE (2002) Tissue-specific expression of AHR2, ARNT2, and CYP1A in zebrafish embryo and larvae: effects of developmental stage and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin exposure. Toxicol Sci 68:403–419

Baba T, Mimura J, Gradin K, Kuroiwa A, Watanabe T, Matsuda Y, Inazawa J, Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y (2001) Structure and expression of the Ah receptor repressor gene. J Biol Chem 276:33101–33110

Baccarelli A, Pesatori AC, Masten SA, Patterson DG Jr, Needham LL, Mocarelli P, Caporaso NE, Consonni D, Grassman JA, Bertazzi PA, Landi MT (2004) Aryl-hydrocarbon receptor-dependent pathway and toxic effects of TCDD in humans: a population-based study in Seveso, Italy. Toxicol Lett 149:287–293

Birnbaum LS, Farland WH (2003) Health risk characterization of dioxins and related compounds. In: Schecter A, Gasiewicz TA (eds) Dioxins and health. Wiley-Interscience, New York, pp 159–189

Birnbaum LS, Fenton SE (2003) Cancer and developmental exposure to endocrine disruptors. Environ Health Perspect 111:389–394

Bosveld ATC, van den Berg M (2002) Reproductive failure and endocrine disruption by organohalogens in fish-eating birds. Toxicology 181–182:155–159

Bradfield CA, Glover E, Poland A (1991) Purification and N-terminal amino acid sequence of the Ah receptor from the C57BL/6J mouse. Mol Pharmacol 39:13–19

Butler MA, Lang NP, Young JF, Caporaso NE, Vineis P, Hayes RB, Teitel CH, Massengill JP, Lawsen MF, Kadlubar FF (1992) Determination of CYP1A2 and NAT2 phenotypes in human populations by analysis of caffeine urinary metabolites. Pharmacogenetics 2:116–127

Cole P, Trichopoulos D, Pastides H, Starr T, Mandel J (2003) Dioxin and cancer: a critical review. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 38:378–388

Dalton TP, Puga A, Shertzer HG (2002) Induction of cellular oxidative stress by aryl hydrocarbon receptor activation. Chem Biol Interact 141:77–95

Dasmahapatra AK, Trewin AL, Hutz RJ (2002) Estrous cycle-regulated expression of CYP1B1 mRNA in the rat ovary. Comp Biochem Physiol B 133:127–134

Denison MS, Fisher JM, Whitlock JP (1988) The DNA recognition site for the dioxin-Ah receptor complex:nucleotide sequence and functional analysis. J Biol Chem 263:17221–17224

Dragan YP, Chrenk D (2000) Animal studies addressing the carcinogenicity of TCDD (or related compounds) with an emphasis on tumour promotion. Food Addit Contam 17:289–302

Dunlap DY, Ikeda I, Nagashima H, Vogel CF, Matsumura F (2002) Effects of src-deficiency on the expression of in vivo toxicity of TCDD in a strain of c-Src knockout mice procured through six generations of backcrossings to C57BL/6 mice. Toxicology 172:125–141

Ema M, Ohe N, Suzuki M, Mimura J, Sogawa K, Ikawa Y, Fujii-Kuriyama Y (1994) Dioxin binding activities of polymorphic forms of mouse and human arylhydrocarbon receptors. J Biol Chem 269:27337–27343

Fernandez-Salguero PM, Hilbert DM, Rudikoff S, Ward JM, Gonzalez FJ (1996) Aryl-hydrocarbon receptor-deficient mice are resistant to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-induced toxicity. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 140:173–179

Fujita H, Kosaki R, Yoshihashi H, Ogata T, Tomita M, Hasegawa T, Takahashi T, Matsuo N, Kosaki K (2002) Characterization of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor gene and association of its Pro185Ala polymorphism with micropenis. Teratology 65:10–18

Geusau A, Tschachler E, Meixner M (1999) Olestra increases faecal excretion of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Lancet 354:1266–1267

Goodman DG, Sauer RM (1992) Hepatotoxicity and carcinogenicity in female Sprague-Dawley rats treated with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD): a pathology working group reevaluation. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 15:245–252

Grassman JA, Masten SA, Walker NJ, Lucier GW (1998) Animal models of human response to dioxins. Environ Health Perspect 106:761–775

Gray LE Jr, Kelce WR (1996) Latent effects of pesticides and toxic substances on sexual differentiation of rodents. Toxicol Ind Health 12:515–531

Gray LE Jr, Wolf C, Mann P, Ostby JS (1997) In utero exposure to low doses of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin alters reproductive development of female Long Evans hooded rat offspring. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 146:237–244

Gray LE Jr (1998) Xenoendocrine disrupters: laboratory studies on male reproductive effects. Toxicol Lett 102–103:331–335

Hahn ME, Karchner SI, Shapiro MA, Perera SA (1997) Molecular evolution of two vertebrate aryl hydrocarbon (dioxin) receptors (AHR1 and AHR2) and the PAS family. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:13743–13748

Halperin W, Kalow W, Sweeney MH, Tang BK, Fingerhut M, Timpkins B, Wille K (1995) Induction of P-450 in workers exposed to dioxin. Occup Environ Med 52:86–91

Hankinson O (1994) The role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator protein in aryl hydrocarbon receptor action. Trends Endocrinol Metab 5:240–244

Hankinson O (1995) The aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 35:307–340

Hanneman WH, Legare ME, Barhoumi R, Burghardt RC, Safe S, Tiffany-Castiglioni E (1996) Stimulation of calcium uptake in cultured rat hippocampal neurons by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Toxicology 112:19–2

Harper PA, Wong JY, Lam MS, Okey AB (2002) Polymorphisms in the human AH receptor. Chem Biol Interact 141:161–187

Huang P, Rannug A, Ahlbom E, Hakansson H, Ceccatelli S (2000) Effect of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin on the expression of cytochrome P4501A1, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator, in rat brain and pituitary. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 169:159–167

Hushka LJ, Williams JS, Greenlee WF (1998) Characterization of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran-dependent suppression and AH receptor pathway gene expression in the developing mouse mammary gland. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 152:200–210

IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans (1997) Polychlorinated dibenzo-para-dioxins and polychlorinated dibenzofurans. IARC Scientific Publ. No. 69, Lyon, France

Ikeya K, Jaiswal AK, Owens RA, Jones JE, Nebert DW, Kimura S (1989) Human CYP1A2: sequence, gene structure, comparison with the mouse and rat orthologous gene, and differences in liver 1A2 mRNA expression. Mol Endocrinol 3:1399–1408

James WH (1996) Evidence that mammalian sex ratio at birth are partially controlled by parental hormone levels at the time of conception. J Theor Biol 180:271–286

Kakeyama M, Tohyama C (2003) Developmental neurotoxicity of dioxin and its related compounds. Ind Health 41:215–230

Karchner SI, Franks DG, Powell WH, Hahn ME (2002) Regulatory interactions among three members of the vertebrate aryl hydrocarbon receptor family: AHR repressor, AHR1, and AHR2. J Biol Chem 277:6949–6959

Kerkvliet NI (1995) Immunological effects of chlorinated dibenzop-dioxins. Environ Health Perspect 103:47–53

Landi MT, Bertazzi PA, Baccarelli A, Consonni D, Masten S, Lucier G, Mocarelli P, Needham L, Caporaso N, Grassman J (2003) TCDD-mediated alterations in the AhR-dependent pathway in Seveso, Italy, 20 years after the accident. Carcinogenesis 24:673–680

Lamartiniere CA (2002) Timing of exposure and mammary cancer risk. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 7:67–76

Le Provost F, Riedlinger G, Yim SH, Benedict J, Gonzalez FJ, Flaws J, Henninghausen L (2002) The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and its nuclear translocator (Arnt) are dispensable for normal mammary gland development but are required for fertility. Genesis 32:231–239

Mandal PK, McDaniel LR, Prough RA, Clark BJ (2001) 7,12-Dimethylbenz[a]anthracene inhibition of steroid production in MA-10 mouse Leydig tumor cells is not directly linked to induction of CYP1B1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 175:200–208

Matsumura F (2003) On the significance of the role of cellular stress response reactions in the toxic actions of dioxin. Biochem Pharmacol 66:527–540

Mimura J, Ema M, Sogawa K, Fujii-Kuriyama Y (1999) Identification of a novel mechanism of regulation of Ah (dioxin) receptor function. Genes Dev 13:20–25

Mimura J, Fujii-Kuriyama Y (2003) Functional role of AhR in the expression of toxic effects by TCDD. Biochim Biophys Acta 1619:263–268

Mocarelli P, Gerthoux PM, Ferrari E, Patterson DG Jr, Kieszak SM, Brambilla P, Vincoli N, Signorini S, Tramacere P, Carreri V, Sampson EJ, Turner WE, Needham, L.L. (2000) Paternal concentrations of dioxin and sex ratio of offspring. Lancet 355:1858–1863

Nebert DW, Puga A, Vasiliou V (1993) Role of the Ah receptor and the dioxin-inducible [Ah] gene battery in toxicity, cancer, and signal transduction. Ann N Y Acad Sci 685:624–640

Nebert DW, Roe AL, Dieter MZ, Solis WA, Yang Y, Dalton TP (2000) Role of the aromatic hydrocarbon receptor and [Ah] gene battery in the oxidative stress response, cell cycle control, and apoptosis. Biochem Pharmacol 59:65–85

Niittynen M, Tuomisto JT, Auriola S, Pohjanvirta R, Syrjala P, Simanainen U, Viluksela M, Tuomisto J (2003) 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-induced accumulation of biliverdin and hepatic peliosis in rats. Toxicol Sci 71:112–123

Paustenbach DJ (2002) The U.S. EPA Science Advisory Board Evaluation (2001) of the EPA dioxin reassessment. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 36:211–219

Perdew GH (1988) Association of the Ah receptor with 90-kDa heat shock protein. J Biol Chem 263:13802–13805

Petroff BK, Roby KF, Gao X, Son D, Williams S, Johnson D, Rozman KK, Terranova PF (2001) A review of mechanisms controlling ovulation with implications for the anovulatory effects of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins. Toxicology 158:91–107

Petrulis JR, Hord NG, Perdew GH (2000) Subcellular localization of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor is modulated by the immunophilin homolog hepatitis B virus X-associated protein 2. J Biol Chem 275:37448–37453

Poellinger L (2000) Mechanistic aspects—the dioxin (aryl hydrocarbon) receptor. Food Addit Contam 17:261–266

Pohjanvirta R, Wong JM, Li W, Harper PA, Tuomisto J, Okey AB (1998) Point mutation in intron sequence causes altered carboxyl-terminal structure in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor of the most 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-resistant rat strain. Mol Pharmacol 54:86–93

Pohjanvirta R, Viluksela M, Tuomisto JT, Unkila M, Karasinska J, Franc MA, Holowenko M, Giannone JV, Harper PA, Tuomisto J, Okey AB (1999) Physicochemical differences in the AH receptors of the most TCDD-susceptible and the most TCDD-resistant rat strains. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 155:82–95

Poland A, Glover E, Kende AS (1976) Stereospecific, high affinity binding of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin by hepatic cytosol: evidence that the binding species is receptor for induction of aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase. J Biol Chem 251:4936–4946

Poland A, Knutson JC (1982) 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and related halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons. Examinations of the mechanism of toxicity. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 22:517–554

Poland A, Palen D, Glover E (1994) Analysis of the four alleles of the murine aryl hydrocarbon receptor. Mol Pharmacol 46:915–921

Pop VJ, Kuipens JL, van Baar AL, Verkerk G, van Son MM, de Vijlder JJ, Vulsma T, Wiersinga WM, Drexhage HA, Vader HL (1999) Low maternal free thyroxine concentrations during early pregnancy are associated with impaired psychomotor development in infancy. Clin Endocrinol 50:149–155

Puga A, Raychaudhuri B, Salata K, Zhang YH, Nebert DW (1990) Stable expression of mouse CYP1A1 and human CYP1A2 cDNAs transfected into mouse hepatoma cells lacking detectable P450 enzyme activity. DNA Cell Biol 9:425–436

Puga A, Maier A, Medvedovic M (2000) The transcriptional signature of dioxin in human hepatoma HepG2 cells. Biochem Pharmacol 60:1129–1142

Quattrochi LC, Vu T, Tukey RH (1994) The human CYP1A2 gene supports Ah-receptor binding and promoter-specific induction. FASEB J 8:A1250

Rier S, Foster WG (2003) Environmental dioxins and endometriosis. Semin Reprod Med 21:145–154

Rivera SP, Saarikoshi O, Hankinson O (2002) Identification of a novel dioxin-inducible cytochrome P450. Mol Pharmacol 61:255–259

Ryan JJ, Zarema A, Carrier G (2002) Sex ratios of children of Russian pesticide producers exposed to dioxin. Environ Health Perspect 110:699–701

Safe SH (1986) Comparative toxicology and mechanism of action of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 26:371–399

Safe SH (1995) Modulation of gene expression and endocrine response pathways by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and related compounds. Pharmacol Ther 67:247–281

Safe S (2001) Molecular biology of the Ah receptor and its role in carcinogenesis. Toxicol Lett 120:1–7

Schwarz M, Buchmann A, Stinchcombe S, Kalkuhl A, Bock K (2000) Ah receptor ligands and tumor promotions: survival of neoplastic cells. Toxicol Lett 112–113:5–14

Smialowicz RJ, Burgin DE, Williams WC, Diliberto JJ, Setzer RW, Birnbaum LS (2004) CYP1A2 is not required for 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-induced immunosuppression. Toxicol 197:15–22

Sotnichenko AI, Severin SE, Posypanova GA, Feldman NB, Grigor'ev MI, Severin ES, Petrov RV (1999) Water-soluble 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin complex with human α-fetoprotein: properties, toxicity in vivo and antitumor activity in vitro. FEBS Lett 450:49–51

Spencer DL, Masten SA, Lanier KM, Yang X, Grassman JA, Miller CR, Sutter TR, Lucier GW, Walker NJ (1999) Quantitative analysis of constitutive and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-induced cytochrome P450 1B1 expression in human lymphocytes. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 8:139–146

Steenland K, Deddens J (2003) Dioxin: exposure-response analyses and risk assessment. Industr Hlth 41:175–180

Steenland K, Bertazzi P, Baccarelli A, Kogevinas M (2004) Dioxin revisited: developments since the 1997 IARC classification of dioxin as a human carcinogen. Environ Health Perspect 112:1265–1268

Swanson HI, Bradfield CA (1993) The Ah-receptor: genetics, structure and function. Pharmacogenetics 3:213–223

Tan Z, Chang X, Puga A, Xia Y (2002) Activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) by aromatic hydrocarbons: role in the regulation of aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) function. Biochem Pharmacol 64:771–780

Tang BK, Zhou Y, Kadar D, Kalow W (1994) Caffeine as a probe for CYP1A2 activity: potential influence of renal factors on urinary phenotypic trait measurements. Pharmacogenetics 4:117–124

Tanguay RL, Andreasen E, Heideman W, Peterson RE (2000) Identification and expression of alternatively spliced aryl hydrocarbon nuclear translocator 2 (ARNT) cDNA from zebrafish with distinct functions. Biochem Biophys Acta 1494:117–128

Tuomisto JT, Viluksela M, Pohjanvirta R, Tuomisto J (1999) The AH receptor and a novel gene determine acute toxic responses to TCDD: segregation of the resistant alleles to different rat lines. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 155:71–81

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, National Toxicology Program (2000) 9th report on Carcinogens

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (2002) Exposure and human health reassessment of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related compounds. National Center for Environmental Assessment, Office of Research and Development, Washington, DC

Van den Berg M, Birnbaum L, Bosveld AT, Brunstrom B, Cook P, Feeley M, Giesy JP, Hanberg A, Hasegawa R, Kennedy SW, Kubiak T, Larsen JC, van Leeuwen FX, Liem AK, Nolt C, Peterson RE, Poellinger L, Safe S, Schrenk D, Tillitt D, Tysklind M, Younes M, Waern F, Zacharewski T (1998) Toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) for PCBs, PCDDs for humans and wildlife. Environ Health Perspect 103:775–792

Vorderstrasse BA, Fenton SE, Bohn AA, Cundiff JA, Lawrence BP (2004) A novel effect of dioxin: exposure during pregnancy severely impairs mammary gland differentiation. Toxicol Sci 78:248–257

Vulsma T (2000) Impact of exposure to maternal PCBs and dioxins on the neonate's thyroid hormone status. Epidemiology 11:239–241

Walker MK, Spitsbergen JM, Olson JR, Peterson RE (1991) 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) toxicity during early life stage development of lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush). Can J Fish Aquat Sci 48:875–883

Walker MK, Pollenz RS, Smith SM (1997) Expression of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and AhR nuclear translocator during chick cardiogenesis is consistent with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-induced heart defects. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 143:407–419

Warner M, Eskenazi B, Mocarelli P, Gerthoux PM, Samuels S, Needham L, Patterson D, Brambilla P (2002) Serum dioxin concentrations and breast cancer risk in the Seveso Women’s Health Study. Environ Health Perspect 110:625–628

Watanabe T, Imoto I, Kosugi Y, Fukuda Y, Mimura J, Fujii Y, Isaka K, Takayama M, Sato A, Inazawa J (2001) Human arylhydrocarbon receptor repressor (AHRR) gene: genomic structure and analysis of polymorphism in endometriosis. J Hum Genet 46:342–346

Whilock JPJ (1990) Genetic and molecular aspects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin action. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 30:251–277

Whitlock JP (1999) Induction of cytochrome P4501A1. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 39:103–125

Whysner J, Williams GM (1996) 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin mechanistic data and risk assessment: gene regulation, cytotoxicity, enhanced cell proliferation, and tumor promotion. Pharmacol Ther 71:193–223

Wilson CL, Safe S (1998) Mechanisms of ligand-induced aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated biochemical and toxic responses. Toxicol Pathol 26:657–671

Williams SR, Son D-S, Terranova PF (2004) Protein kinase C δ is activated in mouse ovarian surface epithelial cancer cells by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Toxicol 195:1–17

Wong GY, Bradlow L, Sepkovic D, Mehl S, Mailman J, Osborne MP (1997) Dose-ranging study of indole-3-carbinol for breast cancer prevention. J Cell Biochem Suppl 28–29:111–116
