
seminars in
CANCER BIOLOGY

ELSEVIER Seminars in Cancer Biology 15 (2005) 254–266 www.elsevier.com/locate/semcancer

Review

Amino acid transporters ASCT2 and LAT1 in cancer: Partners in crime?

Bryan C. Fuchs, Barrie P. Bode*

Department of Biology,
of angiogenesis and the prodigious expression of nutrient transporters in the plasma membranes of constituent cells. In fact, the recent surge in the molecular identification of many nutrient transporters has led to a newly found interest in the “transportome” and its role in cancer chemosensitivity and chemoresistance [2]. As a recent report has addressed glucose transporters in cancer [3], this review will focus on amino acid transport
placed in solute carrier family 1 (SLC1, the high-affinity glutamate and neutral amino acid transporter family) [20], while the System A and N transporters belong to SLC38 (the System A and N, sodium-coupled neutral amino acid transporter family) [18]. The transporters responsible for System L activity are divided between two families: LAT1 and LAT2 belong
matic cell hybrid analysis using Southern hybridization and
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) located hATB⁰ to
chromosome 19q13.3 [34]. In fact, the hATB⁰ gene was pre-
viously identified as a 19 kb genomic clone called SLC1A5
in 1994, although the function of the
Fig. 1. Relationship of ASCT2, LAT1 and mTOR in the growth and survival of cancer cells. ASCT2 high affinity substrates are small neutral amino acids, including glutamine, which is avidly consumed by tumors. Both glutamine and ASCT2 have been shown to repress apoptosis through independent but overlapping pathways. Intermediate affinity ASCT2 substrates include several LAT1 essential amino acids (
Table 1  
Relative expression levels of amino acid transporter mRNA (ESTs) in normal and cancerous human tissues  

| System A | Normal ESTs (2, 267, 112) | Cancer ESTs (2, 083, 497) | Cancer: normal ratio | P-value |
|----------|---------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------|---------|
|
in 19 of 20 primary colorectal carcinoma samples with no expression in normal colon or specimens from patients with inflammatory bowel disease [66]. E16 was also expressed in adenocarcinomas from breast, endometrium, salivary gland and esophagus. Later, the human E16 cDNA was used as a probe to initially isolate human LAT1 [28].

The TA
In summary, LAT1 appears to have opposing roles in cancer and therapy. It is a potential target per se because it supplies tumor cells with essential amino acids necessary for protein synthesis and cell growth. Conversely, its upregulation in a variety of cancers might be exploited for anti-tumor drugs like melphalan.

### 4.4. ASCT2 expression in human cancers and cell lines

As illustrated in Fig.
atoms (including PLC/PRF/5, HepG2, Hep3B and HuH-7) [98]. Since the growth of human hepatoma cells is glutamine-dependent [83,100], we hypothesized that ASCT2 may be necessary for hepatoma growth. Similar to the studies in human colon carcinoma cells, competitive inhibition of ASCT2 glutamine transport by a combined 
B.C. Fuchs, B.P. Bode / Seminars in Cancer Biology 15 (2005) 254–266

tivity, and cogent to this review, TOR in yeast is most responsive to glutamine [110] whereas in mammals, mTOR appears more responsive to branch-chain amino acids like leucine [8]. A microarray analysis study
[8] Beugnet A, Tee AR, Taylor PM, Proud CG. Regulation of targets of mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) signalling by intracellular amino acid availability. Biochem J 2003;372:555–66.

[9] Meijer AJ. Amino acids as regulators and components of nonpro- teinogenic pathways.
[47] Potter SJ, Lu A, Wilcken B, Green K, Rasko JE. Hartnup disorder: polymorphisms identified in the neutral amino acid transporter SLC1A5. J Inherit Metab Dis 2002;25:437–48.

[48] Mailliard ME, Stevens BR, Mann GE. Amino acid transport by
[86] Younes M, Pathak M, Finnie D, Sifers RN, Liu Y, Schwartz MR. Expression of the neutral amino acids transporter ASCT1 in esophageal carcinomas. Anticancer Res 2000;20:3775–9.

[87] Garcia-Espinosa MA, Rodrigues TB, Sierra A, Benito M, Fon