
Full text provided by www.sciencedirect.com

ELSEVIER

**Plants and animals: a different taste for microbes?**

Cyril Zipfel* and Georg Felix

---

Plants and animals can recognize potential pathogens by detecting pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). Significant advances over the past few years have begun to unveil the molecular basis of PAMP perception by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). Although these discoveries highlight common recognition strategies among higher eukaryotes, they also show differences with respect to the nature of the receptors involved and the exact molecular patterns recognized. This suggests a convergent evolution of microbe sensing by the innate immune systems of these various organisms.

**Addresses**

Botanical Institute, Zurich-Basel Plant Science Centre, University of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland  
*Present address: The Sainsbury Laboratory, John Innes Centre, Colney Lane, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK  

Corresponding author: Felix, Georg (georg.felix@unibas.ch)

---

**Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2005, 8:353–360**

This review comes from a themed issue on Biotic interactions  
Edited by Paul Schulze-Lefert and Edward Farmer  

Available online 25th May 2005  
1369-5266/$ – see front matter  
© 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.  
DOI 10.1016/j.pbi.2005.05.004

---

**Introduction**

A key aspect of active defence mechanisms is a prompt and efficient detection of microbial invaders. In higher eukaryotes, this is achieved by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), either directly by detecting pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMPs) [1] or indirectly by sensing wound- and injury-related structures that signal danger [2]. With the exception of antiviral RNA silencing, which exhibits features of adaptive recognition [3], plants seem to rely on ‘innate’ mechanisms for their defence against pathogens. The cases of plant innate immunity that have been studied most thoroughly involve a ‘gene-for-gene’ interaction in which dominant resistance (*R*) genes in the host plant are responsible for the recognition of pathogen-derived signals that are encoded by the corresponding avirulence (*Avr*) genes in the pathogens [4,5]. In addition to recognition of these *Avr*-products, plants have perception systems for patterns that are characteristic of entire groups or classes of microorganisms, so-called general elicitors. It is now clear that general elicitors are conceptually equivalent to PAMPs [6]. In this review, with a special emphasis on some classical bacterial PAMPs, we compare the pattern-perception systems of plants with those of insects and mammals. In our opinion, these comparisons indicate that plants, insects and mammals share common strategies of recognition but that the molecular patterns that are recognized and the receptor molecules involved differ among these three groups.

---

### Conserved inner structure and variable surface: prototypic bacterial PAMPs

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is the principal component of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. It contains a long-chain polysaccharide, which is highly variable with respect to composition, length and the branching of its carbohydrate subunits (Figure 1a). This variable part of LPS, termed the O-antigen, is responsible for the enormous inter- and even intra-strain diversity of bacterial surfaces. It acts as a strong antigen for the antibody-based adaptive immune system of vertebrate animals. By contrast, the oligosaccharide core and the lipid A, which form the sheet of the membrane, are highly conserved in different bacteria. This invariant part of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria is the most potent stimulator of innate immunity in mammals and is considered as a prototypic model PAMP [7]. Several reports suggest that LPS also acts as a PAMP in plants [8,9,10]. However, doses more than 1000-fold greater than those that induce defence responses in animals are commonly required to induce responses in plants, leaving concerns about the potential presence of minor, highly-active contaminants in the LPS preparations used. Contamination with a highly active peptidoglycan (PGN) has recently been proposed to explain earlier reports of the effects of LPS-preparations in *Drosophila* [11]. According to this report, *Drosophila* has no PRR that recognises LPS. Support for LPS recognition in *Arabidopsis*, however, originates from the finding that the lipid A part of LPS is as effective as intact LPS in inducing a defence response [8]. An interesting recent report also shows that synthetic oligorhamnans, which are common components of the otherwise highly variable O-chain in LPS, can trigger defence responses in *Arabidopsis* [12], indicating that this plant species might have more than one perception system for LPS.

Flagellum-based motility is important for the virulence of bacterial pathogens [13]. Flagellin is a protein subunit that builds up the flagellar filament. The terminal regions of this polypeptide are embedded in the flagellum inner core and build the filament architecture. The central part

(a) LPS:

Internal  
Conserved  

Core  
glycosyl  
part  

Lipid A  

Surface exposed  
Highly variable  

O-antigen  
Major antigen for adaptive  
immune system in mammals  

Oligorhamnan  
as stimulator of defence  
responses in Arabidopsis?  

Binding to LPS binding protein and activation of  
innate immune response via TLR4 in humans  

Activation of defence responses in plants  

(b) Flagellin monomer:  

Internal  
Conserved  

Surface exposed  
Highly variable, carrying modifications such as glycosylation  

D1  
Spike  
D0  
N-terminal  
C-terminal  

D2  
D3  

Antigenic for adaptive  
immune system in humans  

Recognition determinant for race-  
specific perception in plant  
(modification by glycosylation?)  

TLR5 in human innate  
immune system  

FLS2 in Arabidopsis defence system  

Current Opinion in Plant Biology

Structure of lipopolysaccharide and flagellin. (a) Schematic representation of bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which forms the sheet of the outer membrane in Gram-negative bacteria. Boxes on the right indicate recognition systems for LPS that have been found in mammals [7] and plants [8**,9,10,12**]. (b) Structure of a flagellin monomer from Salmonella typhimurium [14], based on structural data deposited in PubMed (MMDB: 24173 and PDB: 1UCU) and visualized by the CN3D program (version 4.1). Red-shaded areas and boxes indicate domains for which recognition systems have been described in mammals [13*,20**,21] and plants [15–19,22].

of the polypeptide, which is highly variable in sequence and length (Figure 1b), forms the surface of the flagellum [14]. These hypervariable surface are prime antigens for the adaptive immune system of mammals and, as recent work suggests, might also allow some plants to recognize specific strains of pathogenic bacteria [15–19]. In these

Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2005, 8:353–360
www.sciencedirect.com

cases, glycosylation (an uncommon modification of pro-
karyotic proteins) of flagellin seems to allow or prevent
recognition by the plant defence system. By contrast, the
conserved part of the flagellin polypeptide, which faces
the inside of the flagellar tube, is recognized as PAMP by
the innate immune systems of plants and animals. Inter-
estingly, mammals detect a specific part of flagellin
domain D1 [13**,20**,21], whereas many plant species
recognize the flg22-domain [22], which spans a part of
the flagellin polypeptide termed ‘spike’ (Figure 1b).

Peptidoglycans build the cell wall of Gram-positive bac-
teria and are also present as a thin layer in the periplasmic
space of Gram-negative bacteria. PGN is formed by
polymer strands of muramyl dipeptide (MDP) that are
cross-linked by short peptides that can vary considerably
between different bacterial strains. In *Drosophila*, PRRs
for PGN-fragments discriminate Gram-positive and
Gram-negative bacteria and trigger different sets of
defence responses [11**]. Mammals, but not *Drosophila*,
are responsive to the minimal motif MDP [11**,23],
indicating that insects and mammals have evolved dif-
ferent perception systems for this complex bacterial
structure. In plants, a single report suggests that PGN
might be active as an elicitor of defence responses [24].
This activity was not characterized in detail, however, and
in analogy to the problem of contaminants discussed
above, might be due to a minor highly active component
present in the PGN preparation used. Indeed, the most-
active component identified in a crude PGN preparation
from *Staphylococcus aureus* was a bacterial cold-shock
protein (CSP) [24]. Despite their name, CSP proteins
are universal constitutive bacterial proteins. The epitope
that is active as a PAMP in tobacco and other *Solanaceae* is
the RNA-binding motif that is conserved in all of these
proteins.

*Arabidopsis* and other *Brassicaceae*, by contrast, have a
perception system for the amino-terminus of elongation
factor Tu (EF-Tu), the most abundant protein in the
bacterial cytoplasm [25**]. EF-Tu is essential for protein
translation and is one of the most-conserved proteins
known in bacteria.

As illustrated above, molecular structures that are essen-
tial for the architecture and function of microbial cells are
often not freely exposed to the cell surface. Nevertheless,
plants and animals have evolved systems that are able to
recognise such hidden or embedded structures, and per-
ception systems also exist for structures that are known to
reside within the cytoplasm of the microbes. Examples
include the detection of EF-Tu [25**] and CSP [24] by
plants and the perception of heat shock proteins and non-
methylated bacterial DNA by mammals [26]. While
greatly extending the repertoire of structures that might
serve as PAMPs, these studies accentuate the question of
how hidden or embedded PAMPs are exposed to the

corresponding receptors of the innate immune systems.
At present, these mechanisms are not fully understood
but lytic enzymes of the hosts and, at least in animals,
phagocytosis appear to play important roles in releasing
PAMPs from their ‘hidden’ locations.

### PAMPs that are characteristic of fungi and
oomycetes

Oomycetes and fungi are major classes of plant patho-
gens. Structures that are hallmarks of fungi include
ergosterol, fungal-specific glycosylated proteins, and
the wall components chitin and β-glucan. Although the
activity of these structures has not been studied in mole-
cular detail in animals, they have all been found to act as
PAMPs in plants [6*]. Similarly, cell-wall components
that are characteristic of phytopathogenic oomycetes have
long been known as potent inducers of plant defence [6*].
The best-studied examples are heptaglucoside, the classic
general-elicitor that induces a defence response in soy-
bean, and the conserved Pep13-domain of the cell-wall
transglutaminase, which activates resistance responses in
*Solanaceae* [27]. Apparently, some of these fungal- and
oomycetes-derived patterns are recognized by only a
few plant species whereas others, notably chitin, are recog-
nized by all of the higher plant species tested [6*,28].

### Pattern recognition receptors in the spotlight

Mammalian innate immunity relies on several groups of
structurally different transmembrane pattern recognition
receptors (PRRs) for the detection of PAMPs [29*,30].
The most prominent group of PRRs comprises the Toll-
like receptors (TLRs), a family of a dozen transmembrane
proteins containing leucine-rich repeat (LRR) ectodo-
mains that sense bacteria, fungi, protozoa and viruses
([29*]; Figure 2).

*Drosophila* Toll, the namesake of the TLR family, is a
receptor involved in larvae development that responds to
the endogenous cytokine Spaetzle ([31,32*]; Figure 2). In
the adult fly, however, Toll is essential for defence
responses mediated by soluble PRRs that recognize
Gram-positive bacteria and fungi [31,32*]. An indirect
mechanism is also involved in LPS recognition in mam-
mals in which the soluble LPS-binding protein interacts
first with LPS, allowing subsequent interaction of this
complex with CD14 and MD-2, and then with TLR4 [7*].
Cooperative interaction with other TLR or non-TLR
pattern recognition proteins explains the observation that
some TLRs are involved in sensing several structurally
different PAMPs [26].

The first PRR protein to be identified in plants is a
soluble, cell-wall located protein that specifically binds
the classic heptaglucoside elicitor from oomycetes ([33];
Figure 2). Recent data show that this glucan-binding
protein has an intrinsic endo-β-glucanase activity [34**].
Astonishingly, homologs of this glucanase seem

(a) Drosophila

| Fungi | Gram+ bacteria | Gram- bacteria |
| --- | --- | --- |
| ? | Lys-PGN | DAP-PGN |
| ? | PGRP-SA/-SD |  |
| Persephone | Proteolytic activation of Spaetzle |  |
| Toll |  |  |
|  | PGRP-LC | PGRP-LE |
| Toll pathway | Imd pathway |  |

Domains

|  | LRR |
| --- | --- |
|  | PGRP recognition |
|  | TIR |
|  | NOD/NBS |
|  | CARD |
|  | Kinase |
|  | CC |
|  | LysM |

(b) Mammals

| Diverse ligands | LPS | Bacterial or viral RNA and DNA | PGN |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| TLR1 | LPS-binding protein |  |  |
| TLR2 | MD-2 |  |  |
| TLR5 |  |  |  |
| TLR6 | CD14 |  |  |
| TLR10 | TLR4 |  |  |
| TLR11 |  |  |  |
| TLR12 |  |  |  |
| TLR13 |  |  |  |
|  |  | Endosomes |  |
| TLR3 |  | NOD1 |  |
| TLR7 |  | NOD2 |  |
| TLR8 |  |  |  |
| TLR9 |  |  |  |

(c) Plants

| PAMP recognition | Avr recognition | Symbiosis recognition |
| --- | --- | --- |
| flg22 | Xa21 | Nod factors |
| EIX | Cf-9 | NRF1/5 |
| HG |  | SYMRK |
| FLS2 | GBP |  |
| EIX1/2 | RPM1 |  |
| ? | RPS4 |  |

Current Opinion in Plant Biology

www.sciencedirect.com
to be present in diverse plant species, but high-affinity binding and elicitor response to the heptaglucoside is restricted to a few species of the *Fabaceae*. Thus, the receptor component that is involved in transmembrane signalling remains to be identified.

Some TLRs of mammals directly interact with their PAMP-ligands. A well-studied example is TLR5, which binds flagellin [20**,35**]. In *Arabidopsis* plants, flagellin is perceived through its direct interaction with the transmembrane LRR-receptor kinase FLAGELLIN-SENSING 2 (FLS2) ([36,37]; D Chinchilla, Z Bauer, M Regenass, T Boller, G Felix, unpublished; Figure 2). Mutation of the FLS2 protein of *Arabidopsis* leads to loss of flagellin perception and enhanced susceptibility to bacterial infection [38*]. Similarly, a polymorphism that causes a translational stop in one of the TLR5 alleles in humans correlates with increased susceptibility to Legionellosis [39**]. However, other than sharing the common feature of an extracellular LRR domain, there is no obvious sequence similarity between FLS2 and TLR5.

Plants seem to have no clear homologs of TLRs but they have large gene-families that encode receptor-like kinases (RLKs) [40,41] and receptor-like proteins (RLPs) [42]. RLKs are transmembrane proteins that have versatile amino-terminal ectodomains, which are thought to act as recognition sites for extracellular signals, a transmembrane domain and an intracellular kinase domain. RLPs can be defined as RLKs that lack the intracellular kinase domain. Relative to the total number of genes in these families, more than 600 in *Arabidopsis* and more than 1000 in rice, only a few RLKs and RLPs have been assigned specific roles in development, growth, symbiosis and defence [40,41]. Most of the RLPs characterized to date have roles in defence, as exemplified by the *Cf* genes of tomato (Figure 2) and *RPP27* of *Arabidopsis* [40]. Recent work on the tomato receptor for the fungal elicitor xylanase has provided a first example of an RLP that functions

as a PRR [43**]. In *Arabidopsis*, the FLS2 protein represents the only RLK currently known to be involved in PAMP perception, but other members of this large family are likely to play similar functions.

### Co-evolution of hosts and pathogens: a never-ending play of hide and seek

PAMPs are essential microbial structures that are intrinsically difficult to modify without loss of functionality. Plants and animals recognize multiple PAMPs that signal the same class of microbes. This redundancy probably ensures and potentiates the efficiency of recognition by the hosts and, on the side of pathogens, sets multiple hurdles for strategies to avoid PAMP-based recognition. Nevertheless, as observed for flagellin, a strategy of recognition-avoidance seems to be important for bacterial pathogens of animals [13*]. Similarly, peculiar variations in the sequence of flagellins from some plant-associated bacteria might reflect selection pressure for a non-detectable flg22-domain [22,44].

Apart from hiding or masking their PAMPs, microbial pathogens have evolved other strategies to overcome the ancient forms of PAMP-based defence systems. Suppression of defence by the pathogens is one of these strategies. Microbial secretion systems that directly inject effectors into their host cells are currently a hot topic in the field of plant–pathogen interactions [45,46**,47**]. In turn, some plant species or cultivars have evolved R proteins to detect these effectors, or rather the modifications triggered by them, as summarized by the guard hypothesis [4,5*]. Conceptually, R proteins are related to PRRs. Recent data suggest that cytoplasmic proteins that have a nucleotide oligomerisation domain (NOD) act as receptors for PGN within mammalian cells [23]. Cytoplasmic R proteins of plants, some of which also carrying NOD domains (Figure 2), have long been known to be involved in the detection of Avr products [4,5*]. One can wonder whether some members of the large and rapidly

(Figure 2 Legend) Schematic representation of proteins that are involved in microbe sensing in *Drosophila*, mammals and plants. (a) In adult *Drosophila* flies, infection by fungi or Gram-positive bacteria leads to activation of the Toll pathway (as reviewed in [31,32*]). PAMPs from these microorganisms do not directly interact with Toll; rather, PGN from Gram-positive bacteria (Lys-PGN) interacts with PGN-recognition proteins (PGRPs). These complexes activate an as-yet-unknown circulating protease that cleaves Spaetzle. The cleavage product finally triggers Toll signalling. Similarly, Spaetzle can be cleaved by the serine protease Persephone after activation by a process that is triggered in the presence of unknown fungal PAMPs. PGN from Gram-negative bacteria (diaminopimelic acid [DAP]-PGN) binds to different PGN-recognition proteins that trigger the immune deficiency (Imd) pathway. (b) Toll-like receptors are the main sensors of PAMPs in mammals. TLR1 recognizes bacterial triacyl lipopeptides. TLR2, in cooperation with TLR1 and TLR6, senses diverse ligands such as lipoteichoic acid and fungal zymosan. TLR5 directly interacts with flagellin, whereas TLR4 requires the formation of a complex with CD14 and MD-2 to perceive LPS that is bound to LPS-binding protein. TLR3, TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9 are present in endosomes and are involved in the perception of single- and double-stranded viral RNA and non-methylated bacterial DNA. The PAMPs that are recognized by TLR10, TLR11, TLR12 and TLR13 are still unknown. Bacterial peptidoglycans are served by the cytoplasmic proteins NOD1 and NOD2 (reviewed in [26]). (c) In plants, only a few receptors or binding proteins for PAMP perception have been identified to date (left panel): FLS2 of *Arabidopsis* binds flagellin [36], EIX1 and EIX2 bind fungal ethylene-inducing xylanase (EIX) and the soybean β-glucan-binding protein (GBP) interacts with the *Phytophthora*-derived heptaglucoside (HG) [33,34**]. Many R proteins that are involved in recognizing different Avr-products are known, and the figure (middle panel) illustrates only a few representative examples: the rice RLK Xa21, which recognizes an unknown Avr product from *Xanthomonas oryzae* pv. *oryzae*; the tomato RLP Cf-9, which is required for perception of the fungal Avr9 from *Cladosporium fulvum*; and RPM1 and RPS4 of *Arabidopsis*, which mediate recognition of AvrRpm1 and AvrRps4 from *Pseudomonas syringae* (reviewed in [4,5*]). For the establishment of symbiosis with *Rhizobiaceae* (right panel), legumes such as *Lotus* require the LysM-type RLKs NFR1 and NFR5, prime candidates for receptors that perceive Nod-factor signals. Interestingly, symbiosis receptor kinase (SYMRK) is required for association with both bacterial and fungal symbionts, but its ligand is still unknown (reviewed in [49*]).

www.sciencedirect.com Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2005, 8:353–360
evolving families of $R$ genes [48] might encode receptors that sense more-general microbial patterns.

# Conclusions

The structural and functional similarities of proteins that are involved in innate immune recognition in animals and plants have been interpreted as evidence for evolutionary conservation. However, this conservation refers to modules that are required for the perception of extracellular signals in general. The RLKs of plants use common elements of signal perception and transmembrane signaling to perceive endogenous signals that regulate growth, development and reproduction as well as non-self signals that are important for symbiosis and defence. Thus, the flagellin receptor FLS2 is more closely related to CLA-VATA1, which regulates meristem maintenance, than to any of the known animal PRRs.

Recent data point towards the evolution of a convergent repertoire of PAMPs that are detected by different organisms. For example, conserved abundant surface structures of the microbes represent well-suited targets for detection of non-self. The PAMPs that are perceived by different plant species highlight overlapping but non-congruent repertoires, indicating a rather rapid evolution of the corresponding PRRs. It is therefore not surprising that the PAMPs that are recognized by organisms belonging to different kingdoms also differ. In animals, studies on innate immunity have been focused on only a few model organisms, notably humans, mice and *Drosophila*. One can anticipate that a bigger, more diverse, repertoire will emerge from studies with animals from different phyla.

Plants possess a big array of potential receptors, most of them orphan with respect to their functions or ligands. The combination of forward and reverse genetics with biochemistry should allow us to identify new receptors and to understand the molecular basis of receptor activation. Finally, the position of PAMP-based recognition in the disease resistance of plants is not fully established, but future work might further loosen boundaries between Avr and PAMP perception.

# Acknowledgements

The work in the authors’ laboratory is supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation. The authors apologize to colleagues whose work could not be cited because of space limitations.

# References and recommended reading

Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

- of special interest
- of outstanding interest

1. Janeway CA Jr, Medzhitov R: Innate immune recognition. Annu Rev Immunol 2002, 20:197-216.
2. Matzinger P: The danger model: a renewed sense of self. Science 2002, 296:301-305.

3. Lecellier CH, Voinnet O: RNA silencing: no mercy for viruses? Immunol Rev 2004, 198:285-303.
4. Nimchuk Z, Eulgem T, Holt BF III, Dangl JL: Recognition and response in the plant immune system. Annu Rev Genet 2003, 37:579-609.
5. Jones DA, Takemoto D: Plant innate immunity – direct and indirect recognition of general and specific pathogen-associated molecules. Curr Opin Immunol 2004, 16:48-62. An updated review on different aspects of plant innate immunity with a particular focus on $R$-gene-mediated perception and signalling.
6. Nürnberger T, Brunner F, Kemmerling B, Piater L: Innate immunity in plants and animals: striking similarities and obvious differences. Immunol Rev 2004, 198:249-266. A comprehensive review that compares innate immune recognition and signalling in plants and animals. Although the review focuses mainly on PAMP-based events it also discusses Avr-dependent mechanisms and addresses the evolution of the protein domains that are involved in perception and signalling in different kingdoms. In addition, the authors present some stimulating thoughts on the role of PAMP perception in disease resistance.
7. Miyake K: Innate recognition of lipopolysaccharide by Toll-like receptor 4-MD-2. Trends Microbiol 2004, 12:186-192. A comprehensive review on LPS sensing by TLR4 in mammals.
8. Zeidler D, Zahringer U, Gerber I, Dubery I, Hartung T, Bors W, Hutzler P, Durner J: Innate immunity in *Arabidopsis thaliana*: lipopolysaccharides activate nitric oxide synthase (NOS) and induce defense genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004, 101:15811-15816. NO-production is a hallmark of signalling in innate immunity of animals. Here, LPS preparations from diverse bacteria are shown to induce NO synthesis in *Arabidopsis*. Interestingly, LPS does not activate the pathogen-inducible varP NOS but AtNOS1, a distinct NOS previously associated with hormonal signalling in plants. Importantly, *Atnos1* mutants were more susceptible than wildtype plants to *P. syringae* infection, thus providing evidence for a biological role for NO in plant defence.
9. Gerber IB, Zeidler D, Durner J, Dubery IA: Early perception responses of *Nicotiana tabacum* cells in response to lipopolysaccharides from *Burkholderia cepacia*. Planta 2004, 218:647-657.
10. Dow M, Newman MA, von Roepenack E: The induction and modulation of plant defense responses by bacterial lipopolysaccharides. Annu Rev Phytopathol 2000, 38:241-261.
11. Leulier F, Parquet C, Pili-Floury S, Ryu JH, Caroff M, Lee WJ, Mengin-Lecreulx D, Lemaitre B: The *Drosophila* immune system detects bacteria through specific peptidoglycan recognition. Nat Immunol 2003, 4:478-484. This paper shows that the ability of *Drosophila* to discriminate between Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria relies on recognition of Lys-PGN, which is indicative of Gram-positive bacteria, or DAP-PGN, which is characteristic of Gram-negative bacteria. On the basis of the results in this paper, the authors also claim that previous reports on responses to LPS-preparations were probably due to contaminations by PGN.
12. Bedini E, De Castro C, Erbs G, Mangoni L, Dow JM, Newman MA, Parrilli M, Unverzagt C: Structure-dependent modulation of a pathogen response in plants by synthetic O-antigen polysaccharides. J Am Chem Soc 2005, 127:2414-2416. The authors show that synthetic oligorhammans, a common component of the otherwise highly variable O-chain in LPS, can trigger defence responses in *Arabidopsis*. This indicates that *Arabidopsis* might recognize LPS by their oligorhammans and lipid A [8**].
13. Ramos HC, Rumbo M, Sirard JC: Bacterial flagellins: mediators of pathogenicity and host immune responses in mucosa. Trends Microbiol 2004, 12:509-517. A comprehensive review of the role of flagellin as a virulence factor for bacteria, and as a PAMP recognized by mammals.
14. Yonekura K, Maki-Yonekura S, Namba K: Complete atomic model of the bacterial flagellar filament by electron cryomicroscopy. Nature 2003, 424:643-650.
15. Shimizu R, Taguchi F, Marutani M, Mukaihara T, Inagaki Y, Toyoda K, Shiraishi T, Ichinose Y: The DeltafliD mutant of *Pseudomonas syringae pv. tabaci*, which secretes flagellin monomers, induces a strong hypersensitive reaction (HR) in non-host tomato cells. Mol Genet Genomics 2003, 269:21-30.

16. Tanaka N, Che FS, Watanabe N, Fujiwara S, Takayama S, Isogai A: Flagellin from an incompatible strain of *Acidovorax avenae* mediates H₂O₂ generation accompanying hypersensitive cell death and expression of PAL, Cht-1, and PBZ1, but not of Lox in rice. *Mol Plant Microbe Interact* 2003, **16**:422-428.

17. Takeuchi K, Taguchi F, Inagaki Y, Toyoda K, Shiraishi T, Ichinose Y: Flagellin glycosylation island in *Pseudomonas syringae* pv. *glycinea* and its role in host specificity. *J Bacteriol* 2003, **185**:6658-6665.

18. Taguchi F, Shimizu R, Inagaki Y, Toyoda K, Shiraishi T, Ichinose Y: Post-translational modification of flagellin determines the specificity of HR induction. *Plant Cell Physiol* 2003, **44**:342-349.

19. Fujiwara S, Tanaka N, Kaneda T, Takayama S, Isogai A, Che FS: Rice cDNA microarray-based gene expression profiling of the response to flagellin perception in cultured rice cells. *Mol Plant Microbe Interact* 2004, **17**:986-998.

20. Smith KD, Andersen-Nissen E, Hayashi F, Strobe K, Bergman MA, Barrett SL, Cookson BT, Aderem A: Toll-like receptor 5 recognizes a conserved site on flagellin required for protofilament formation and bacterial motility. *Nat Immunol* 2003, **4**:1247-1253.
   - The authors map the domain of flagellin recognized by TLR5 to a conserved domain that is buried in the inner part of the flagellar filament. Flagellin and TLR5 co-precipitate, indicating physical interaction between the molecules.

21. Donnelly MA, Steiner TS: Two nonadjacent regions in enteropathogenic *Escherichia coli* flagellin are required for activation of toll-like receptor 5. *J Biol Chem* 2002, **277**:40456-40461.

22. Felix G, Duran JD, Volko S, Boller T: Plants have a sensitive perception system for the most conserved domain of bacterial flagellin. *Plant J* 1999, **18**:265-276.

23. Philpott DJ, Girardin SE: The role of Toll-like receptors and Nod proteins in bacterial infection. *Mol Immunol* 2004, **41**:1099-1108.

24. Felix G, Boller T: Molecular sensing of bacteria in plants. The highly conserved RNA-binding motif RNP-1 of bacterial cold shock proteins is recognized as an elicitor signal in tobacco. *J Biol Chem* 2003, **278**:6201-6208.

25. Kunze G, Zipfel C, Robatzek S, Niehaus K, Boller T, Felix G: The N terminus of bacterial elongation factor Tu elicits innate immunity in *Arabidopsis* plants. *Plant Cell* 2004, **16**:3496-3507.
   - This study identifies the most abundant bacterial protein, EF-Tu, as a PAMP recognized by *Arabidopsis* and other Brassicaceae. Intriguingly, this perception system recognizes a protein that is genuinely located in the cytoplasm of bacteria.

26. Akira S, Takeda K: Toll-like receptor signalling. *Nat Rev Immunol* 2004, **4**:499-511.

27. Brunner F, Rosahl S, Lee J, Rudd JJ, Geiler C, Kauppinen S, Rasmussen G, Scheel D, Nürnberger T: Pep-13, a plant defense-inducing pathogen-associated pattern from *Phytophthora* transglutaminases. *EMBO J* 2002, **21**:6681-6688.

28. Yamaguchi T, Yamada A, Hong N, Ogawa T, Ishii T, Shibuya N: Differences in the recognition of glucan elicitor signals between rice and soybean: beta-glucan fragments from the rice blast disease fungus *Pyricularia oryzae* that elicit phytoalexin biosynthesis in suspension-cultured rice cells. *Plant Cell* 2000, **12**:817-826.

29. O'Neill LA: TLRs: Professor Mechnikov, sit on your hat. *Trends Immunol* 2004, **25**:687-693.
   - A historical point of view on TLR discoveries that highlights the importance of TLRs for the immune system of mammals. Evolutionary questions on protein domains that are involved in innate and adaptive immunity are also addressed.

30. Fraser IP, Stuart L, Ezekowitz RA: TLR-independent pattern recognition receptors and anti-inflammatory mechanisms. *J Endotoxin Res* 2004, **10**:120-124.

31. Lemaitre B: The road to Toll. *Nat Rev Immunol* 2004, **4**:521-527.

32. Royet J, Reichhart JM, Hoffmann JA: Sensing and signaling during infection in *Drosophila*. *Curr Opin Immunol* 2005, **17**:11-17.
   - A recent review that summarizes current knowledge on PAMP perception in *Drosophila*.

33. Umemoto N, Kakitani M, Iwamatsu A, Yoshikawa M, Yamaoka N, Ishida I: The structure and function of a soybean beta-glucan-elicitor-binding protein. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 1997, **94**:1029-1034.

34. Fliegmann J, Mithofer A, Wanner G, Ebel J: An ancient enzyme domain hidden in the putative beta-glucan elicitor receptor of soybean may play an active part in the perception of pathogen-associated molecular patterns during broad host resistance. *J Biol Chem* 2004, **279**:1132-1140.
   - A soluble protein was previously identified as receptor-binding site for the heptaglucan elicitor [33]. Here, this glucan-binding protein is shown to have an intrinsic endoglucosidase activity that might be involved in the release of β-glucan fragments during initial contact with *Phytophthora*.

35. Mizel SB, West AP, Hantgan RR: Identification of a sequence in human toll-like receptor 5 required for the binding of Gram-negative flagellin. *J Biol Chem* 2003, **278**:23624-23629.
   - Together with [20**], this study shows direct interaction between flagellin and TLR5.

36. Gómez-Gómez L, Boller T: FLS2: an LRR receptor-like kinase involved in the perception of the bacterial elicitor flagellin in *Arabidopsis*. *Mol Cell* 2000, **5**:1003-1011.

37. Bauer Z, Gómez-Gómez L, Boller T, Felix G: Sensitivity of different ecotypes and mutants of *Arabidopsis thaliana* toward the bacterial elicitor flagellin correlates with the presence of receptor-binding sites. *J Biol Chem* 2001, **276**:45669-45676.

38. Zipfel C, Robatzek S, Navarro L, Oakeley EJ, Jones JD, Felix G, Boller T: Bacterial disease resistance in *Arabidopsis* through flagellin perception. *Nature* 2004, **428**:764-767.
   - This paper describes the rapid induction of about 1000 genes and induced disease resistance in *Arabidopsis* plants treated with flagellin. The biological importance of this PAMP perception is demonstrated by the finding that *Arabidopsis* mutants that lack the flagellin receptor FLS2 show enhanced susceptibility to bacterial pathogens.

39. Hawn TR, Verbon A, Lettinga KD, Zhao LP, Li SS, Laws RJ, Skerrett SJ, Beutler B, Schroeder L, Nachman A et al.: A common dominant TLR5 stop codon polymorphism abolishes flagellin signaling and is associated with susceptibility to legionnaires' disease. *J Exp Med* 2003, **198**:1563-1572.
   - This paper provides evidence that flagellin perception by TLR5 plays a role in disease resistance in humans. Individuals with only one of their TLR5 alleles affected by a stop codon polymorphism apparently suffer from higher susceptibility to Legionnaire's disease.

40. Shiu SH, Bleecker AB: Expansion of the receptor-like kinase/Pelle gene family and receptor-like proteins in *Arabidopsis*. *Plant Physiol* 2003, **132**:530-543.

41. Shiu SH, Karlowski WM, Pan R, Tzeng YH, Mayer KF, Li WH: Comparative analysis of the receptor-like kinase family in *Arabidopsis* and rice. *Plant Cell* 2004, **16**:1220-1234.

42. Tor M, Brown D, Cooper A, Woods-Tor A, Sjolander K, Jones JD, Holub EB: *Arabidopsis* downy mildew resistance gene RPP27 encodes a receptor-like protein similar to CLAVATA2 and tomato Cf-9. *Plant Physiol* 2004, **135**:1100-1112.

43. Ron M, Avni A: The receptor for the fungal elicitor ethylene-inducing xylanase is a member of a resistance-like gene family in tomato. *Plant Cell* 2004, **16**:1604-1615.
   - ELIX is a potent elicitor only in certain cultivars of tomato. By map-based cloning the authors identified the two closely related RLPs LeEIX1 and LeEIX2 as essential for ELIX perception. Silencing of the LeEIX genes leads to loss of ELIX binding in tomato, whereas heterologous expression leads to gain of ELIX binding in tobacco or mammalian cells. Tobacco cells that express LeEIX2 but not LeEIX1 also respond to ELIX with a hypersensitive response. Finally, a mutation in the putative endocytosis signal of LeEIX2 abolishes this responsiveness, suggesting that internalization plays a key role in activation of the ELIX receptor.

44. Pfund C, Tans-Kersten J, Dunning FM, Alonso JM, Ecker JR, Allen C, Bent AF: Flagellin is not a major defense elicitor in *Ralstonia solanacearum* cells or extracts applied to *Arabidopsis thaliana*. *Mol Plant Microbe Interact* 2004, **17**:696-706.

360 Biotic interactions

45. Espinosa A, Alfano JR: Disabling surveillance: bacterial type III secretion system effectors that suppress innate immunity. Cell Microbiol 2004, 6:1027-1040.

Elegant work characterizing a first Avr gene of the oomycete *Peronospora parasitica*. Both, the Avr gene and the corresponding resistance gene RPP13, exhibit extraordinary polymorphism, suggesting a coevolutionary process involving attempts to evade host resistance by the pathogen and the development of new detection capabilities by the plant host. As found for the Avr products of *M. lini* [46**], it appears that this Avr product is recognized within the cytoplasm of the plant cells, suggesting a protein transport process from the pathogen to the host.

46. Dodds PN, Lawrence GJ, Catanzariti AM, Ayliffe MA, Ellis JG: The *Melampsora lini* AvrL567 avirulence genes are expressed in haustoria and their products are recognized inside plant cells. Plant Cell 2004, 16:755-768.

This paper describes the isolation of three Avr genes from *Melanospora lini* that are recognized by the *L5*, *L6* and *L7* resistance genes. These Avr genes are expressed in haustoria and encode small secreted proteins. Recognition of these proteins apparently occurs inside plant cells, suggesting that they are delivered into host cells during rust infection by a yet unknown mechanism (see also [47**]).

47. Allen RL, Bittner-Eddy PD, Grenville-Briggs LJ, Meitz JC, Rehmany AP, Rose LE, Beynon JL: Host-parasite coevolutionary conflict between *Arabidopsis* and downy mildew. Science 2004, 306:1957-1960.

48. Kuang H, Woo SS, Meyers BC, Nevo E, Michelmore RW: Multiple genetic processes result in heterogeneous rates of evolution within the major cluster disease resistance genes in lettuce. Plant Cell 2004, 16:2870-2894.

49. Riely BK, Ane JM, Pennmetsa RV, Cook DR: Genetic and genomic analysis in model legumes bring Nod-factor signaling to center stage. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2004, 7:408-413.

A comprehensive and informative review of the recent findings on the symbiosis of legumes with rhizobial bacteria and mycorrhizal fungi.


---

### Reuse of Current Opinion and Trends journal figures in multimedia presentations

It’s easy to incorporate figures published in *Trends* or *Current Opinion* journals into your PowerPoint presentations or other image-display programs. Simply follow the steps below to augment your presentations or teaching materials with our fine figures!

1. Locate the article with the required figure in the ScienceDirect journal collection.
2. Click on the ‘Full text + links’ hyperlink.
3. Scroll down to the thumbnail of the required figure.
4. Place the cursor over the image and click to engage the ‘Enlarge Image’ option.
5. On a PC, right-click over the expanded image and select ‘Copy’ from pull-down menu (Mac users: hold left button down and then select the ‘Copy image’ option).
6. Open a blank slide in PowerPoint or other image-display program.
7. Right-click over the slide and select ‘paste’ (Mac users hit ‘Apple-V’ or select the ‘Edit-Paste’ pull-down option).

Permission of the publisher, Elsevier, is required to re-use any materials in *Trends* or *Current Opinion* journals or any other works published by Elsevier. Elsevier authors can obtain permission by completing the online form available through the Copyright Information section of Elsevier’s Author Gateway at http://authors.elsevier.com/. Alternatively, readers can access the request form through Elsevier’s main web site at http://www.elsevier.com/locate/permissions.


---

Current Opinion in Plant Biology 2005, 8:353–360 www.sciencedirect.com
