
SPHINGOSINE 1-PHOSPHATE AND ITS RECEPTORS: AN AUTOCRINE AND PARACRINE NETWORK

**Hugh Rosen* and Edward J. Goetzl†**

Abstract | Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) is a biologically active lysosphospholipid that transmits signals through a family of G-protein-coupled receptors to control cellular differentiation and survival, as well as the vital functions of several types of immune cell. In this Review article, we discuss recent results that indicate that S1P and its receptors are required for the emigration of thymocytes from the thymus, the trafficking of lymphocytes in secondary lymphoid organs and the migration of B cells into splenic follicles. In an autocrine manner, through interactions with different G-protein-coupled receptors, S1P also enhances optimal mast-cell migration and release of pro-inflammatory mediators in allergic reactions. S1P–S1P-receptor regulatory systems might therefore be novel targets for the therapy of diverse immunological diseases.

---

**LYSOPHOSPHOLIPID**
A phospholipid with a free hydroxyl group that is not conjugated to a fatty acid. Examples of lysosphospholipids are lysosphingophospholipids, such as sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), and lysoglycerophospholipids, such as lysophosphatidic acid (LPA).

The biologically active LYSOPHOSPHOLIPIDS sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) and lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) regulate diverse biological functions of many cell types, from proliferation and survival to migration and secretion ${}^{1-7}$. They are generated by multistep enzymatic pathways, which are similar in many types of cell ${}^{8,9}$. Most LPA is synthesized extracellularly in microvesicles that are shed from cell membranes, whereas S1P is produced intracellularly in organelles and the plasma membrane, and is then secreted ${}^{10,11}$. Similar to most small lipids in extracellular spaces, the newly generated and secreted lysosphospholipids are bound extensively by albumin and other plasma proteins. This provides both a stable reservoir in extracellular fluids, presumably at higher total concentrations than in tissues, and efficient delivery to high-affinity cell-surface receptors ${}^{1,12}$. Coordinated activities of biosynthetic and biodegradative enzymes stringently maintain the concentrations of each of these lysosphospholipids in the ranges that are required for optimal physiological activities ${}^{11,13-15}$ (FIG. 1).

In the immune system, the principal cellular sources of lysosphospholipids are mast cells, platelets and some types of mononuclear phagocyte. All of these cell types upregulate their generation of LPA or S1P following immune stimulation ${}^{11,16}$ (FIG. 1b). The expression and activity of some of the enzymes that are involved in the S1P and LPA synthetic pathways are also controlled by immune mediators. For example, expression of the first enzyme in the sphingolipid *de novo* biosynthetic pathway (which leads to production of S1P), serine palmitoyltransferase, is upregulated by endotoxin, interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumour-necrosis factor (TNF) ${}^{17}$. Ceramide is then produced from serine palmitoyltransferase-generated sphingomyelins by sphingomyelinases and is converted to sphingosine by ceramidase (FIG. 1b). Then, two SPHINGOSINE KINASES phosphorylate sphingosine to form S1P, thereby functioning as important controllers of the acute reactive generation of S1P. The activity of these kinases is also increased by TNF, as well as by crosslinking of the high-affinity receptor for IgG (FcγRI) ${}^{11,18}$. In addition, IgE-dependent activation of mast cells through crosslinking of the high-affinity receptor for IgE (FcεRI) also stimulates S1P production by increasing the activity of sphingosine kinases and possibly other intracellular enzymes of the synthetic pathway ${}^{19,20}$ (FIG. 1b). Similarly, the exposure of platelets to immune

*Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.
†Departments of Medicine and Microbiology—Immunology, University of California, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.
Correspondence to E.J.G.
e-mail: egoetzl@itsa.ucsf.edu
doi:10.1038/nri1650


FOCUS ON IMMUNE-CELL COMMUNICATION

Figure 1 | Sources of lysophospholipids in the immune system. **a** | Structures of lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) and the drug FTY720 (with and without phosphorylation of one hydroxyl group) are shown. Each is an amphipathic lipid with a fatty-acid chain and a phosphate-containing polar head group. These complex lipid structures would be predicted to undergo extensive protein binding in physiological fluids and to have multiple points of interaction with different components of cellular receptors. **b** | A schema of the immune-cell pathways of S1P and LPA generation is shown. Immunological activation of the main cellular sources of S1P production leads to enhanced activity of one or more of the crucial enzymes that are involved, of which sphingosine kinases and various phospholipases are most responsive to immune stimuli. LPC, lysoPC; LPLP, lysophospholipid phosphatase; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; LysoPLD, lysophospholipase D; MAG, monoacylglycerol; PAF, platelet-activating factor; PC, phosphatidylcholine; PLA, phospholipase A; SPP, sphingophospholipid phosphatase.

stimuli, such as IgG specific for cell-surface proteins or platelet-activating factor, augments the activities of the synthetic enzymatic pathways and thereby stimulates their production of S1P (REF. 21) (FIG. 1b).

The main immune sources of LPA are macrophages and platelets, and the LPA biosynthetic pathways of these cells are also enhanced by immune stimuli¹. Biosynthesis of LPA occurs through the immunological activation of macrophages and platelets, which leads to the formation and shedding of membrane microvesicles, in which sphingomyelinase prepares phosphatidylcholine (PC) for cleavage by either phospholipase D (PLD) to yield phosphatidic acid (PA) or PLA₁ and PLA₂ to produce lysoPC (LPC)²² (FIG. 1b). Then, PLA₁ and PLA₂ convert PA to LPA, and lysoPLD converts LPC to LPA, which is released into extracellular fluids (FIG. 1b).

SPHINGOSINE KINASE  
An enzyme that phosphorylates sphingosine to generate sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P). This is the rate-limiting step in the synthesis of S1P.

G-PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR (GPCR). A receptor that is composed of seven membrane-spanning helical segments, which are connected by extracellular and intracellular loops. These receptors associate with G proteins, which are a family of trimeric intracellular-signalling proteins with common β- and γ-chains, and one of several α-chains. The α-chain determines the nature of the signal that is transmitted from a ligand-occupied GPCR to downstream effector systems.

We also discuss the role of S1P-induced endothelial-cell responses in immunoregulation, and we comment on the emerging range of pharmacological agents that can selectively alter immunity through their effects on S1P and its receptors.

Regulated expression of S1P and LPA receptors  
Each of the lysophospholipid mediators is recognized with high-affinity by a family of G-PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTORS (GPCRs). These receptors transduce signals following lysophospholipid binding by associating with one or more G proteins, thereby allowing a broad range of possible downstream targets. The distribution and properties of receptors for LPA and GPCRs for other structurally related lysoglycerophospholipids in rodent and human immune cells have been reviewed recently⁷,²³, so we only briefly discuss these here. LPA₁, LPA₂ and LPA₄ are the main LPA receptors that are expressed by B cells and T cells. Lymphocytes also express the GPCRs TDAG8 (T-cell death-associated gene 8), G2A (GPCR G2A) and OGR1 (ovarian cancer GPCR1), which bind other related lysophospholipids⁷. The expression of the various LPA receptors is regulated by the state of immune-cell activation, as is the case for S1P receptors. For example, LPA₂ and LPA₄ are the main receptor types expressed by naive T cells, whereas LPA₁ is expressed only by activated effector T cells²⁴,²⁵. Here, we focus on the functional roles of S1P receptors in the immune system, because at present, they are better understood than the roles of receptors for LPA and other lipids.

The enzymatic degradation of S1P and LPA is also tightly controlled. Free S1P is rapidly biodegraded by a pyridoxal-dependent S1P lyase, which cleaves S1P into precursors of glycerophospholipids. LPA is inactivated by re-acylation and conversion back to PA, and both S1P and LPA are inactivated by abundant cell-surface lipid-phosphate phosphohydrolases¹⁵.

As discussed in this article, S1P functions in both paracrine and autocrine manners and elicits many functional responses in immune cells, the pattern of which differs according to the cellular expression profile of members of the S1P-receptor family (TABLE 1). The specialized paracrine effects of S1P include control of thymocyte emigration, as well as lymphocyte trafficking and distribution within lymphoid-organ compartments⁷,²³. In addition, mast-cell-derived S1P functions in an autocrine manner to regulate the migration of mast cells and their secretion of a range of allergy-inducing and pro-inflammatory mediators¹⁶.

T cells, B cells and thymocytes at late developmental stages express the S1P receptors **S1P₁** (also known as EDG1) and **S1P₄**, as well as low levels of S1P₃ (REF. 7) (TABLE 1). Of the five receptors in the S1P-receptor family, the expression of S1P₁ is upregulated

first, during development, by CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ (single positive) thymocytes, and it is the quantitatively dominant S1P receptor for most lymphocyte subsets²³,²⁶,²⁷. S1P₁ expression levels and signal transduction differ among lymphocytes and vary according to the state of immunological activation. Importantly, the expression and function of S1P₁, unlike most other GPCRs, is maintained by lymphocytes and several other cell types, such as endothelial cells, following binding of S1P at a fixed nanomolar to micromolar concentration²⁸. This resilient expression by endothelial cells is explained, in part, by a substantial reserve of intracellular S1P₁. By contrast, persistent expression of S1P₁ by lymphocytes is mainly attributable to efficient recycling and re-expression through a protein kinase C-ε- and activator protein 1 (AP1)-dependent pathway²⁸ (FIG. 2a). The expression of S1P₁ by lymphocytes is transiently reduced after re-exposure of S1P-starved cells to S1P or after increases in the concentration of S1P, but it is suppressed for up to days by immune activation of these lymphocytes. Because the ex vivo processes of isolation

of thymocytes and lymphocytes might result in their activation and exposure to concentrations of S1P that are different than those in vivo, it is not surprising that there are discrepancies in the levels of S1P₁ expression that have been reported. The mechanisms by which immune activation reduces expression of S1P₁ have not yet been elucidated.

Full expression of S1P₁ protein by lymphocytes and other cells does not always result in normal signalling function. There could be several reasons for a dissociation between S1P₁ expression and function: for example, lack of crucial amino (N)-terminal modifications, or incomplete coupling to signalling pathways. However, single-positive thymocytes and lymphocytes that have recently been isolated from blood or lymphoid tissues, where the concentrations of S1P can be as high as 300 nM, express at least minimally functional levels of S1P₁, which often increase after culture in vitro. A recent description of differences in expression of S1P₁ by lymphocytes indicates that their S1P₁ expression levels are low when they are in the blood and

---

**Table 1 | S1P receptors and their effects on immune cells**

| Receptor          | Survival           | Chemotaxis                                      | Proliferation       | Cytokine production                                                                 |
|-------------------|--------------------|-------------------------------------------------|---------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| **T cells**       |                    |                                                 |                     |                                                                                      |
| S1P₁              | Increased          | Stimulated at low S1P concentration; decreased at high S1P concentration | Decreased            | Decreased (IFN-γ affected more than IL-4)                                           |
| S1P₄              | Increased          | No effect                                       | Decreased           | Decreased IFN-γ and increased IL-10                                                |
| **B cells**       |                    |                                                 |                     |                                                                                      |
| S1P₁              | Increased          | Stimulated at low S1P concentration; decreased at high S1P concentration | ND                   | ND                                                                                 |
| S1P₄              | Increased          | No effect                                       | ND                   | ND                                                                                 |
| **Mast cells**    |                    |                                                 |                     |                                                                                      |
| S1P₁              | Increased          | Stimulated                                      | ND                   | No effect                                                                           |
| S1P₂              | ND                 | Inhibited                                       | ND                   | Increased degranulation and secretion of allergic mediators                          |
| **Macrophages**   |                    |                                                 |                     |                                                                                      |
| S1P₁              | Increased          | Increased at low S1P concentration               | ND                   | ND                                                                                 |
| S1P₂              | ND                 | Stimulated                                      | ND                   | ND                                                                                 |
| **Dendritic cells** |                  |                                                 |                     |                                                                                      |
| S1P₁              | ND                 | Stimulated, for immature cells                   | ND                   | ND                                                                                 |
| S1P₂              | ND                 | ND                                              | ND                   | Decreased IL-12 and TNF, and increased IL-10, by mature cells; induction of Tₕ₂-cell responses increased, and Tₕ₁-cell responses reduced; effect on antigen presentation unknown |
| **Natural killer cells** |             |                                                 |                     |                                                                                      |
| S1P₁              | ND                 | Stimulated                                      | ND                   | ND                                                                                 |
| **Eosinophils**   |                    |                                                 |                     |                                                                                      |
| S1P₁              | ND                 | Stimulated                                      | ND                   | ND                                                                                 |

In addition to the data presented, the following patterns of sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P)-receptor expression have been shown: S1P₂ is expressed by eosinophils; S1P₃ is expressed by eosinophils, some B cells and some dendritic cells; S1P₄ is expressed by macrophages, natural killer cells and dendritic cells; and S1P₅ is expressed by monocytes and natural killer cells. However, no distinctive signalling patterns or functions have been directly shown for these receptors. Recent data indicate that S1P₃ is required for the proper organization of macrophages and endothelial cells in the splenic marginal sinus and for the regulation of entry to splenic follicles of immature and marginal-zone B cells. However, defects in the splenic marginal sinus and immune responses of S1P₃-deficient mice were not attributable to B-cell or T-cell abnormalities.

IFN-γ, interferon-γ; IL, interleukin; ND, not determined; Tₕ, T helper; TNF, tumour-necrosis factor.

AMPHIPATHIC  
A biophysical term that can be used to describe phospholipids because they have a hydrophobic (fatty acid) end and a charged or polar (phosphate) end.

lymph, and high when in the lymph nodes²⁹. Although this might help to explain the predicted differences in chemotactic responsiveness to S1P of lymphocytes from these sites, the conclusions are based on several assumptions. These include the following: that S1P concentrations in the lymph nodes are similar to those of other tissues (5–20 nM); that chemotactic responses of lymphocytes that have been altered genetically or pharmacologically ex vivo to attain high or low levels

of S1P₁ expression are equivalent to the responses of lymphocytes that have the same levels of S1P₁ expression *in vivo*; and that the level of S1P₁ expression is an indicator of functional responses. The validity of these assumptions will be known only after differences in other determinants of S1P₁ affinity and signalling efficiency have been defined for lymphocytes from the blood, lymph and lymphoid tissues, then correlated with differences in the migratory responses of these cells to S1P.

Although S1P₁ is the main S1P receptor expressed by T and B cells, these cells also express substantial amounts of S1P₄. The profile of S1P-receptor expression is similar for CD4⁺ and CD8⁺ T-cell subsets and for CD4⁺CD25⁺ regulatory T cells³⁰,³¹. In some lymphoid organs, B cells also express higher levels of S1P₃ than T cells³². By contrast, mononuclear phagocytes mainly express S1P₁, S1P₂ and S1P₄, with low levels of S1P₅ also expressed by human blood monocytes³³. Dendritic cells (DCs) that are derived by *in vitro* differentiation of human blood leukocytes in the presence of **IL-4** and granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor express S1P₁, S1P₂, S1P₃ and S1P₄, which are coupled to the regulation of migration of, and cytokine generation by, these cells³⁴. IL-2-activated human natural killer (NK) cells express S1P₁, S1P₄ and S1P₅, which are required for these cells to respond to S1P chemotactically³⁵. However, the effects of S1P on antigen presentation by DCs and on cytotoxic killing by NK cells have not been examined. Mast cells and eosinophils mainly express S1P₁ constitutively and low levels of S1P₂; eosinophils also express S1P₃ (REFS 20,36). Only in a few cases, such as the control of lymphocyte and mast-cell migration by signals from S1P₁, have clear and direct contributions of individual S1P receptors been linked to the effects of S1P on immune-cell functions¹⁶,³⁰,³⁷,³⁸.

### Characteristics of S1P binding to its receptors

Continuing investigations are now beginning to shed light on the structural determinants of S1P-receptor binding of S1P. Identification of the AMPHIPATHIC structure of S1P, which consists of a hydrophobic acyl chain and an amino-phosphate head group, led to the development of a two-site binding model for S1P₁, on the basis of comparisons with the structure of rhodopsin³⁹,⁴⁰. Interactions of the acyl chain of S1P with as-yet-undefined hydrophobic domains within a transmembrane binding pocket of S1P₁ constitute the first binding site. Polar interactions of the head group of S1P with charged amino-acid side chains at the extracellular face of the receptor, possibly through the formation of salt bridges or more probably through hydrogen bonds, constitute the second binding site.

The amino acids that are involved in determining complementarity between the S1P₁ binding site and S1P, and therefore in determining ligand specificity, have been identified by computational modelling. Such predictions have now been confirmed, partly by analysing the properties of a series of mutant S1P₁ molecules that each has a single substitution of an amino acid that is considered to be crucial for ligand-binding

Figure 2 | **S1P₁ pathways of intracellular trafficking and signalling.**  
a | One of the main pathways of internalization and re-insertion of the sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) receptor S1P₁ into the membrane is shown. G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) kinase 2 phosphorylates S1P₁, which initiates movement to, and association with, a plasma-membrane caveola-type lipid raft. S1P₁ then associates with caveolin-1 and moves into the cell to localize in the nuclear membrane, in a process that is facilitated by N-linked glycosylation of S1P₁. Modification of S1P₁ with a second phosphate group, mediated by protein kinase C-ε (PKC-ε), elicits movement from the nuclear membrane into a re-insertion pathway, which requires the involvement of FOS and phosphorylated JUN (the activator protein 1 (AP1) complex) for re-expression at the cell surface.  
b | Gαᵢ- and Gαₒ-coupled signalling mechanisms are depicted for S1P₁ expressed by a lymphocyte. G proteins that contain Gαᵢ or Gαₒ can link to, and activate, numerous effector pathways, each of which elicits specific cellular responses, such as secretion, proliferation, survival and migration. AC, adenyl cyclase; cAMP, cyclic AMP; ERK, extracellular-signal-regulated kinase; PI3K, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PLC, phospholipase C.

ZWITTERION  
A molecule or ion that has physically separate positively and negatively charged groups.

specificity<sup>41</sup>. That there are charge interactions between the head group of S1P and polar residues of the second binding site of S1P<sub>1</sub> was supported by the finding that the arginine residues at positions 120 and 292 of S1P<sub>1</sub> coordinate with the phosphate group of S1P and that the glutamic-acid residue at position 121 (Glu121) forms a putative salt bridge or hydrogen bond with the amine group of S1P. The crucial role of these head-group interactions in receptor selectivity was further shown by the finding that mutation of Glu121 to a glutamine residue (Gln121) altered the specificity of S1P<sub>1</sub> binding from the ZWITTERIONIC ligand S1P to the anionic ligand LPA<sup>41,42</sup>. The combination of hydrophobic interactions and charge interactions endows S1P with extremely high potency, so it is an optimal agonist at picomolar to low nanomolar concentrations of the free molecule. Experimental systems that are optimized for studying the effects of S1P have allowed the pharmacological identification of synthetic agonists of similar potency<sup>43</sup>. Several of these synthetic ligands for S1P receptors have already proven to be useful biological tools for the elucidation of receptor functions.

Structural studies also indicated that synthetic ligands that are mainly hydrophobic might be selective agonists and/or antagonists of S1P receptors, and this has now been confirmed experimentally<sup>44,45</sup>. In addition, simple bio-isosteric replacement of the quaternized amine and phosphate moieties of S1P had little effect on the affinity and selectivity of binding to S1P<sub>1</sub>, and this allowed the discovery and synthesis of non-phospholipid ligands for S1P<sub>1</sub> that have lipid-like properties of solubility and, often, oral bioavailability<sup>45</sup>.

Similar to S1P<sub>1</sub>, replacement of Glu122 with Gln in the third transmembrane domain of S1P<sub>4</sub> alters the ligand specificity and size of the first S1P<sub>4</sub> binding site<sup>42</sup>. When ligand-induced binding of radiolabelled GTP-γS to the S1P<sub>4</sub>-G-protein complex was used to determine functional affinity of S1P<sub>4</sub> for a range of lysophospholipid ligands, the sole preference of wild-type S1P<sub>4</sub> for S1P was altered by the Glu122-to-Gln122 mutation so that the affinity for binding most natural forms of LPA was higher than that for S1P<sup>42,45</sup>. These data indicate that ligand interactions with the two binding sites of S1P<sub>4</sub> are controlled by polar domains and fatty-acid-chain length of the ligand, which together contribute to ligand affinity and selectivity.

There has been further delineation of the polar domains of the extracellular N terminus of S1P<sub>1</sub>, and this part of the second binding site is thought to function as a ‘lid’ that covers the intramembranous hydrophobic pocket of the first binding site to constitute the complete binding configuration<sup>39–41</sup>. Recent findings indicate that, similar to the extracellular N terminus of some chemokine GPCRs, the N terminus of S1P<sub>1</sub>, but not of other types of S1P receptor, contains two tyrosine residues that are accessible to post-translational modification with sulphate groups<sup>46,47</sup>. This is consistent with the prediction that the generation of domains that are more polar is crucial for binding-site affinity. Accordingly, a mutant S1P<sub>1</sub> molecule that contains two phenylalanine residues, which cannot be sulphated, in place of the two tyrosine residues failed to bind S1P with high affinity or to transduce biochemical signals or functions in transfected Jurkat T cells cultured with physiological concentrations of S1P<sup>48</sup>. A functional role for the post-translational sulphation of the N terminus of S1P<sub>1</sub> *in vivo* is supported by the finding that inhibition of this process, using sodium chlorate, markedly suppressed the chemotactic responses of mouse splenic T cells to S1P<sup>48</sup>.

### Functions of S1P receptors on immune cells

Each set of receptors that is specific for S1P or other lysophospholipid mediators transduces signals in immune cells by associating with one or more different G proteins. G proteins are classified according to their α-subunit, which determines the distinctive pattern of biochemical and functional responses<sup>49</sup>. The G proteins for the S1P receptors of immune cells include the following: Gα<sub>i</sub> and Gα<sub>o</sub>, which modulate cellular survival, proliferation and motility; Gα<sub>12</sub> and Gα<sub>13</sub>, which modulate cytoskeletal remodelling and cell-shape changes; and Gα<sub>q</sub>, which modulates a range of cellular effector functions.

The intracellular signalling that is induced by S1P binding to S1P<sub>1</sub> occurs entirely through interactions with Gα<sub>i</sub> and/or Gα<sub>o</sub>, which recruit a series of systems for downstream amplification of the signal (FIG. 2b). The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and lipid-dependent AKT (also known as PKB) signalling pathway increases the survival of lymphocytes and other immune cells by inhibiting apoptosis, whereas the pathway involving PI3K and the RHO (RAS homologue)-family GTPase RAC is required for the migration of lymphocytes and for their interactions with other cells and with connective-tissue surfaces. The small GTPase RAS and extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) are crucial for a pathway that transduces S1P-mediated signals to modulate the proliferation of immune cells, and PLC-induced increases in intracellular calcium levels allow the secretion of cytokines and other immune mediators. The many downstream signals that are generated by ligand occupancy of S1P receptors in several cell types have also been reviewed by others<sup>50</sup>. So far, there is no evidence of a direct causal relationship between any individual component of the signalling cascades and a specific alteration in lymphocyte trafficking<sup>50</sup>. By contrast, each specific effect of S1P-receptor signalling in endothelial cells seems to be directly associated with a distinct component in the signal-transduction pathways. For example, signals from S1P<sub>1</sub> maintain endothelial-cell integrity by eliciting RAC-dependent reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton, which is essential for normal barrier function of endothelial cells<sup>51–53</sup>.

### Lymphocyte migration and in vivo trafficking

The binding of S1P to several types of S1P receptor can modulate the migration of immune cells *in vitro*, but the *in vivo* effects of S1P on lymphocyte migration, tissue homing and recirculation are mediated exclusively

by S1P<sub>1</sub>. By contrast, the binding of S1P to S1P<sub>4</sub> (the other S1P receptor that is expressed at a high level by lymphocytes) has no detectable effect on migration. Moreover, the responses of recirculating lymphocytes to the S1P–S1P<sub>1</sub> axis are now known to be central controlling events in normal immune function and possibly in some immune diseases (FIG. 3). The specificity and efficiency of the control of lymphocyte migration by S1P are therefore determined by the concentration of S1P and by the level of expression of S1P<sub>1</sub>. Gradients of total S1P concentration (including free and protein-bound S1P) with means of 3–30 nM *in vitro* are optimally chemotactic for T and B cells, and concentrations of S1P in the range of 10–100 nM increase the chemotaxis of lymphocytes to chemokines and to some other cytokines<sup>30,32,37,38</sup>. At higher total concentrations in the blood, S1P inhibits lymphocyte chemotaxis to chemokines and other cytokines

in vitro and in vivo<sup>37</sup>. The total concentration of S1P is 100–1,000 nM in blood and 30–300 nM in lymph, but concentrations in tissues have not been reliably quantified, although they are generally assumed to be lower than in biological fluids<sup>5,12</sup>. In current models (FIG. 3), the concentration of S1P in the blood is therefore thought to suppress the chemokine-driven movement of T cells from high endothelial venules (HEVs) into secondary lymphoid organs. The positive gradient of S1P concentration from secondary lymphoid organs to the lymph presumably promotes S1P<sub>1</sub>-dependent movement of T cells from secondary lymphoid organs back to the lymph and then the blood. The most complex and least understood aspect of the role of S1P and S1P<sub>1</sub> in T-cell migration is the series of events that occurs within the lymph nodes. There is some agreement that the chemotactic responsiveness of T cells to S1P increases between the time of entry and exit from secondary lymphoid organs<sup>23,29</sup>. However, there is less evidence concerning changes in the levels of S1P<sub>1</sub> expression by different subsets of lymphocytes trafficking through secondary lymphoid organs, and it is still unclear which mechanisms regulate S1P<sub>1</sub> expression and signalling activity in this setting. One recent report indicates that expression of S1P<sub>1</sub> by lymphocytes is required for integrin-mediated firm arrest of lymphocytes in the HEVs of peripheral lymph nodes, but further investigations are required to define the relative role of S1P<sub>1</sub>-mediated amplification of integrin function in lymphocyte homing<sup>54</sup>.

**Migration-independent activities of lymphocytes.** *In vitro* concentrations of S1P between 10 and 100 nM protect T cells from apoptosis, by inhibiting some caspases and by suppressing the expression of BAX (B-cell-lymphoma-2-associated X protein), and they support the effective function of both cytotoxic T lymphocytes and CD4<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>+</sup> regulatory T cells<sup>31,55</sup>. The requirement for such support of regulatory T-cell function is clear, because the optimal suppressive activity of these cells declines in the absence of S1P and returns after the re-introduction of physiological concentrations of S1P<sup>31</sup>. Multiple mechanisms are implicated in this control of regulatory T-cell function, including increased generation of IL-10 and expression of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA4)<sup>31</sup>. Similar to the inhibition of T-cell chemotaxis, the suppression of T-cell proliferation and the regulation of cytokine production also require high physiological concentrations of S1P<sup>38</sup> (TABLE 1). However, the effects of S1P on cytokine production are different when S1P binds S1P<sub>4</sub>, instead of S1P<sub>1</sub> (REF. 56). Signals transduced by S1P<sub>4</sub> inhibit production of the immunostimulatory cytokines IL-4 and interferon-γ (IFN-γ) to a similar extent, whereas production of the immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10 is increased<sup>56</sup>. By contrast, signalling through S1P<sub>1</sub> induces a more marked suppression of IFN-γ production than IL-4 production, and IL-10 production is not markedly affected<sup>37,38</sup>. Because, in Thelper (T<sub>H</sub>) cells, signals from S1P<sub>1</sub> seem to be dominant compared with those from S1P<sub>4</sub>, the integrated

Figure 3 | Effects of S1P<sub>1</sub> signalling on lymphocyte trafficking and tissue distribution. The axis that involves sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) and the S1P receptor S1P<sub>1</sub> is required for the emigration of mature thymocytes from the thymus. There are several points of control of lymphocyte trafficking by the S1P–S1P<sub>1</sub> axis, and these begin with suppression of entry of T and B cells from the blood, through high endothelial venules (HEVs), into the lymph nodes, in response to stimulation by chemokines. After interaction with antigen-bearing dendritic cells (DCs) and cytokine-driven differentiation events in the lymph nodes, the S1P<sub>1</sub> molecules at the surface of T and B cells return to high functional levels, and the positive gradient of S1P from lymph nodes to lymphatic vessels elicits the chemotactic return of lymphocytes to the lymph and, subsequently, to the blood. Antigen-activated lymphocytes escape S1P–S1P<sub>1</sub> controls and can migrate into tissues under the influence of chemokine gradients. In addition, from the marginal zone of splenic white pulp, B cells migrate to follicles in response to chemokines in a process that is negatively regulated by the S1P–S1P<sub>1</sub> axis. The structural integrity of splenic marginal sinuses is maintained independently of lymphocytes by subsets of macrophages and endothelial cells that express S1P<sub>3</sub> (not shown).

activities of the S1P–S1P-receptor axes on these cells have a net effect of increasing the number of T<sub>H</sub>2 cells compared with the number of T<sub>H</sub>1 cells (FIG. 4a). Moreover, signalling through S1P<sub>1</sub> might suppress the production of IL-12 by mature DCs, which would result in reduced differentiation of T<sub>H</sub>0 cells into T<sub>H</sub>1 cells. Unlike the important roles of S1P–S1P-receptor axes in naive and memory T and B cells, their influence on the immune functions of effector lymphocytes is transient or is limited to cells in particular areas of the immune system, because S1P-receptor expression is downregulated by T cells and B cells after they are activated.

**Autocrine effects on mast cells.** As a result of the bias towards T<sub>H</sub>2-cell responses that is induced by S1P<sub>1</sub> signalling, IgE levels increase. This increased production of IgE can lead to enhanced IgE-mediated activation of mast cells and, consequently, to amplified mast-cell degranulation and secretion of allergic mediators. Because mast cells are one of the principal sources of S1P and because they increase their generation and secretion of S1P after IgE-dependent stimulation, as well as express functional S1P<sub>1</sub> and S1P<sub>2</sub>, it has been postulated that S1P and these GPCRs function in an autocrine manner to sequentially regulate mast-cell responses<sup>20,57,58</sup>. It should be noted that LPA, but not S1P, augments mast-cell development<sup>59</sup>. The mast-cell responses that can be enhanced by autocrine signalling through S1P<sub>1</sub> or S1P<sub>2</sub> include chemotaxis to low concentrations of antigen, which depends on S1P<sub>1</sub> (FIG. 4b), and IgE-induced degranulation, which requires S1P<sub>2</sub> (REFS 16,20) (FIG. 4c). Signals from S1P<sub>2</sub> concurrently suppress mast-cell chemotaxis to low concentrations of antigen, by activating RHO and downregulating RAC, without altering the expression of S1P<sub>1</sub>. In addition to the effects of S1P on mast cells, S1P promotes chemotaxis and selective recruitment of eosinophils, which are also important in allergic reactions<sup>36</sup>.

**Lessons from animal models**

Of all of the effects of S1P on immune-cell migration and other immune-cell functions (TABLE 1), its main activity seems to be the regulation of lymphocyte trafficking and distribution in lymphoid tissues through binding to S1P<sub>1</sub> (FIG. 3). The identification of S1P<sub>1</sub> as the lymphocyte chemotactic receptor for S1P and the finding that the immunosuppressive effects of the compound FTY720 are attributable to effects on S1P receptors directed researchers to this paracrine axis. So, studies using mouse models that are designed to elucidate the roles of S1P in immunobiology have focused on the effects of deletion or overexpression of lymphocyte S1P<sub>1</sub> on the homing and migration of lymphocytes in tissues.

Because deletion of S1P<sub>1</sub> results in embryonic lethality, the basic genetic approaches to study its role in lymphocyte migration include reconstitution of lethally irradiated wild-type mice with hepatic precursors of lymphocytes from S1P<sub>1</sub>-deficient mice<sup>27</sup> and the selective deletion of S1P<sub>1</sub><sup>+</sup> early thymocytes

FTY720  
A sphingosine-like drug that is phosphorylated intracellularly by sphingosine kinases to become a sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P)-receptor agonist and has immunosuppressive activity. Both non-agonist FTY720 and agonist phospho-FTY720 function as downregulators of the S1P receptor S1P<sub>1</sub> and other S1P receptors.

Figure 4 | **S1P–S1P-receptor systems in the regulation of IgE production and mast-cell activation.**  
**a** | Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P)-mediated signalling through one or more types of S1P receptor results in an increase in the ratio of Thelper 2 (T<sub>H</sub>2)-cell cytokines to T<sub>H</sub>1-cell cytokines, and this occurs by several mechanisms. First, S1P enhances the differentiation of T<sub>H</sub>0 cells into T<sub>H</sub>2 cells, which leads to greater production of interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-6. Second, these cytokines promote the conversion of B cells into IgE-producing plasma cells. Third, signalling through one or more of the S1P receptors that are expressed by mature dendritic cells (DCs) inhibits the generation of IL-12 by DCs, which reduces the differentiation of T<sub>H</sub>0 cells into T<sub>H</sub>1 cells. Fourth, S1P-occupied S1P<sub>1</sub> molecules suppress the generation of interferon-γ (IFN-γ), which further increases the ratio of T<sub>H</sub>2 cytokines to T<sub>H</sub>1 cytokines.  
**b** | After crosslinking of cell-surface-bound IgE with antigen, the production of S1P by mast cells increases through activation of sphingosine kinase (SK), which decreases the intracellular level of sphingosine (S) and increases the release of S1P. At first, S1P mainly binds the highly expressed S1P<sub>1</sub> molecules. This leads to increased chemotaxis of mast cells to antigen and inhibition of the generation and secretion of allergic mediators.  
**c** | At later stages, there is upregulation of expression of S1P<sub>2</sub>, which becomes the main binding site for mast-cell-derived S1P. In contrast to S1P<sub>1</sub>, signals from S1P<sub>2</sub> lead to decreased chemotaxis to antigen and increased release of allergic mediators. FcεRI, high-affinity receptor for IgE.
and all subsequent T-cell stages using LCK-CRE CONDITIONAL-  
KNOCKOUT TECHNOLOGY${}^{60}$. Both of these models show  
that S1P${}_{1}$ has an important role in T-cell development:  
S1P${}_{1}$-deficient thymocytes do not emigrate from the  
thymus, which results in increased numbers of mature  
thymocytes in the thymus and in medullary hyper-  
plasia, and few S1P${}_{1}$-deficient T cells can be detected  
in the blood, lymph nodes, spleen or non-lymphoid  
organs in these mouse models${}^{27,60}$. S1P${}_{1}$-deficient T cells  
also have an abnormal cell-surface phenotype, includ-  
ing anomalous expression of early activation markers,  
such as CD69. Moreover, labelled S1P${}_{1}$-deficient T cells  
that are adoptively transferred to irradiated wild-type  
mice show strikingly diminished egress from second-  
ary lymphoid organs. Although the total number of  
S1P${}_{1}$-deficient B cells in secondary lymphoid organs  
was found to be normal, there are systemic defects in  
their distribution, including decreased numbers of  
mature B cells in the bone marrow, an abnormally low  
percentage of B cells in the blood and reduced egress  
from secondary lymphoid organs, indicating impaired  
recirculation similar to that of S1P${}_{1}$-deficient T cells${}^{60}$.

The distribution of B cells in the spleen also involves  
the S1P–S1P${}_{1}$ axis${}^{32}$. In the spleen, movement of B cells  
from the marginal zones to the follicles is driven by  
chemokine-mediated chemotaxis and is inhibited  
by the S1P–S1P${}_{1}$ axis${}^{32}$ (FIG. 3). S1P${}_{3}$ also seems to be  
required for the migration of B cells in the spleen  
and for the development of normal B-cell numbers and  
marginal sinus architecture${}^{61}$. Normal marginal-zone-  
to-follicle traffic of B cells was lost in mice when the  
required CXC-chemokine ligand 13 (CXCL13) and  
CXC-chemokine receptor 5 (CXCR5) chemokine sys-  
tem was disrupted, and it was enhanced, with greater  
movement of B cells into the follicles, when S1P${}_{1}$ was  
genetically deleted, downregulated by B-cell activation  
or antagonized pharmacologically${}^{32}$.

Recently identified synthetic S1P${}_{1}$ agonists with high  
S1P${}_{1}$ selectivity induce sequestration of lymphocytes in  
secondary lymphoid organs, with patterns resembling  
those in mice that lack S1P${}_{1}$ (REF. 62). Sustained presence  
of these selective S1P${}_{1}$ agonists maintains activation of  
the downstream signalling molecules AKT and ERK  
for more than 4 hours. However, such S1P${}_{1}$ agonists  
do not elicit sustained downregulation or degradation  
of S1P${}_{1}$. These data indicate that neither functional  
antagonism of S1P${}_{1}$ nor degradation of S1P${}_{1}$ is a pre-  
requisite for S1P${}_{1}$-dependent lymphocyte sequestration  
in secondary lymphoid organs. So, there are unresolved  
discrepancies between the results of studies in which  
the gene encoding S1P${}_{1}$ was deleted and the results of  
studies of the effects of pharmacological agonists and  
antagonists, as discussed elsewhere${}^{7}$.

A recently described transgenic mouse model in  
which T cells preferentially overexpressed S1P${}_{1}$ and  
were relatively resistant to its activation-induced  
downregulation shows a complex immune phenotype${}^{63}$.  
In the cells that express Cre, the loxP sites  
are recognized, and the DNA  
between them is excised, leading  
to tissue-specific deletion of the  
gene of interest.

of T cells from the transgenic mice expressing high  
levels of S1P${}_{1}$, there was up to 30-fold more transgenic  
S1P${}_{1}$ present than endogenous S1P${}_{1}$ at the surface of  
wild-type cells${}^{63}$. T cells from these and other $S1p1$-  
transgenic mice have both altered trafficking (a pattern  
that differs from that observed for the S1P${}_{1}$-deficient  
mice) and modifications of other immune functions,  
such as proliferation and cytokine generation${}^{63,64}$. As  
expected, naive and activated $S1p1$-transgenic CD4${}^{+}$  
T cells showed higher chemotactic responses to S1P  
than wild-type CD4${}^{+}$ T cells. The absolute and relative  
numbers of the main lymphocyte subsets in the spleen  
and lymph nodes were the same in $S1p1$-transgenic and  
wild-type mice, but the total number of CD3${}^{+}$ T cells in  
the blood was markedly increased in transgenic mice  
that expressed high levels of S1P${}_{1}$ (REF. 63). The hom-  
ing of labelled $S1p1$-transgenic CD4${}^{+}$ T cells to lymph  
nodes and Peyer’s patches was reduced by 60–70%  
compared with wild-type CD4${}^{+}$ T cells${}^{63}$. In addition,  
the proliferation of $S1p1$-transgenic, splenic CD4${}^{+}$ and  
CD8${}^{+}$ T cells stimulated either through their TCR or in  
a mixed lymphocyte reaction was only 10–30% of that  
of the corresponding T cells from wild-type mice. The  
integrated effects of altered trafficking and functional  
activities of T cells in $S1p1$-transgenic mice also resulted  
in reduced delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions, an  
increased serum concentration of IgE, decreased pro-  
duction of IgG2 and increased production of IgE${}^{63,64}$.  
Together, these findings indicate that control of the  
levels of S1P${}_{1}$ expression is an important mechanism  
of immune regulation${}^{63,64}$. Alterations in these immune  
responses would also be expected in S1P${}_{1}$-deficient  
mice, but this has not yet been examined.

### Roles of endothelial cells and lymphocytes

Important roles for the S1P–S1P${}_{1}$ axis in the develop-  
ment of lymphocytes and in the regulation of lympho-  
cyte trafficking are now well established${}^{27,44,60,63}$.  
However, the relative importance and interactions of  
different mechanisms and types of cell that contribute  
to S1P–S1P${}_{1}$ control of lymphocyte trafficking *in vivo*  
remain controversial${}^{7}$. In particular, it has not been pos-  
sible to delineate with confidence the respective roles of  
S1P${}_{1}$ expression by endothelial cells and lymphocytes.  
The observation that endothelial cells express high  
levels of functional S1P${}_{1}$, and that S1P${}_{1}$-deficient mice  
have a marked endothelial-cell defect that diminishes  
the structural integrity of their blood vessels and results  
in embryonic lethality, is consistent with an important  
role for endothelial-cell S1P${}_{1}$ in development, which pre-  
cedes the role of S1P${}_{1}$ in the adaptive immune system${}^{65,66}$.  
To a lesser extent, S1P${}_{3}$ also contributes to lymphoid  
endothelial-cell development and transduces signals that  
lead to important endothelial-cell-dependent vascular  
responses, including eNOS (endothelial-cell nitric-oxide  
synthase)-mediated vasodilation${}^{61,67}$.

The stringent physiological controls that maintain  
up to low nanomolar concentrations of free S1P in the  
blood and extracellular fluid normally allow occupancy  
of only a fraction of cellular receptors, which alone  
does not elicit cellular immune responses but, instead,  
in a low nanomolar range and thereby results in low levels of S1P₁ occupancy. Nonetheless, such low levels of S1P–S1P₁ signalling have been shown to tighten VASCULAR-ENDOTHELIAL-CADHERIN junctions and promote the resistance of rodents to lipopolysaccharide- and thrombin-induced pulmonary endothelial leakage⁵³,⁶⁹,⁷⁰. Although the threshold level of occupancy that is required for cellular activation seems to be higher for lymphocytes than for endothelial cells, S1P₁ and S1P₄ also signal constitutively in lymphocytes when they are occupied at low levels by S1P or synthetic agonists. However, constitutive S1P₁ and S1P₄ signalling in lymphocytes is suppressive and stabilizing, rather than associated with cell survival and effector mechanisms. Second, endothelial cells, but not lymphocytes, have a substantial intracellular reserve of functional S1P₁ in caveolae, which allows continuous signalling through pathways that are distinct from those mediated by cell-surface S1P₁ (P. Gonzalez-Cabrera and H.R., unpublished observations). Differences in the regulation of S1P₁ expression by endothelial cells and lymphocytes are also, in part, attributable to this intracellular reserve in endothelial cells. Last, lymphocytes show greater tissue-specific differences than endothelial cells in the regional expression and responsiveness of their S1P₁ molecules. Compared with a subset of optimally S1P-responsive lymphocytes isolated from lymphoid tissues, many lymphocytes that have been freshly isolated from the blood show reduced binding to S1P, decreased S1P-induced calcium flux and activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases, and decreased chemotaxis to S1P²⁹. These observations emphasize the need for more measurements of the plasma-membrane content of S1P₁ in lymphocytes from all sources, together with correlative analyses of S1P₁ signalling in those lymphocytes, to determine the principal mechanisms of functional regulation other than ligand occupancy and S1P-induced downregulation. Although the chemotaxis of some lymphocytes to S1P might be suppressed *in vitro* by exposure to high concentrations of S1P and/or immune activation with several types of stimulus, it is not clear whether these mechanisms account for the observed decreases in functional responsiveness of S1P₁ molecules *in vivo*. The most probable mechanisms now seem to be reversible structural alterations of the S1P-binding sites that change the affinity of S1P₁ for S1P and reversible uncoupling of S1P₁ from signalling pathways.

suppresses lymphocyte chemotaxis to chemokines and diminishes proliferation and cytokine production in response to diverse immunological stimuli. In this basal setting, a 1.5-fold increase in the plasma concentration of S1P in rodents promotes lymphoid-organ sequestration of lymphocytes and inhibits lymphocyte recirculation, and this response is rapidly reversed after cessation of the infusion of S1P⁶⁸. In addition to using downregulatory mechanisms that provide highly sensitive control of the S1P–S1P₁ axis in immune cells, the low threshold of this system avoids a requirement for high *in vivo* concentrations of S1P, which could be toxic to non-immune cells. The physiological range of concentrations of S1P lies on the steep portion of the agonist response curve, so only a several-fold increase in the plasma concentration of S1P is sufficient to induce death from S1P₃-mediated cardiac arrhythmias⁴³,⁴⁴.

The S1P₁ molecules of endothelial cells and lymphocytes differ in the regulation of their expression and in their activation by S1P. First, endothelial-cell S1P₁ molecules adapt their constitutive signalling capability to allow maintenance of endothelial-cell integrity at the level of free S1P in the blood, which is normally

**VASCULAR ENDOTHELIAL CADHERIN**

An endothelial-cell-specific cadherin (that is, a type of adhesion protein) that is present in adherens junctions, which are located between endothelial cells.

**Figure 5 | Postulated contributions of lymphocytes and endothelial cells to control of lymphocyte trafficking by the S1P–S1P₁ system.**  
a | In the stromal-gate control model, lymphocytes pass through constitutively open endothelial-cell junctions (left panel). Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) or synthetic agonists of the S1P receptor S1P₁, such as phospho-FTY720, ligate S1P₁ at the surface of endothelial cells, which stimulates RAC GTPase-dependent tightening of the endothelial-cell junctions. Lymphocytes cannot pass through these closed junctions (closed gates) of sinus-lining endothelial cells, and they accumulate in the lymph node (right panel).  
b | In the S1P–S1P₁ control-of-lymphocytes model, S1P normally stimulates T-cell migration from the lymph node to the sinus in a concentration-dependent manner (left panel). High concentrations of S1P, FTY720 or synthetic S1P₁ agonists might downregulate S1P₁ expression by T cells and thereby block the chemotaxis of T cells in response to S1P, which would promote retention of T cells in the lymph nodes (right panel). Both mechanisms could simultaneously contribute to the control of T-cell trafficking. Gaᵢ, αᵢ subunit of G protein.

---

**S1P–S1P₁ control of lymphocyte trafficking**

There are two models for the control of lymphocyte trafficking by the S1P–S1P₁ axis that can be envisaged on the basis of a tentative integration of the existing evidence (FIG. 5). In the first model, which is known as the stromal-gate control model, lymphocytes are passive bystanders, and their egress from the lymph nodes is altered by S1P-induced changes in the permeability of the endothelium in blood vessels and lymphoid vascular sinuses, without considerable changes in the motility of the lymphocytes themselves. In the second model, which is known as S1P–S1P₁ control-of-lymphocytes
model, site-specific variable suppression of S1P-mediated lymphocyte chemotaxis is the principal mechanism for the reduced egress of lymphocytes from the lymph nodes, with little or no contribution from changes in the endothelium. The best pieces of evidence in favour of the stromal-gate control model are the following: the important role of S1P<sub>1</sub> in the maintenance of endothelial-cell integrity and barrier function; the higher signalling sensitivity and greater resistance to S1P-induced downregulation of S1P<sub>1</sub> at the surface of endothelial cells compared with lymphocytes; and the very rapid sequestration of most blood lymphocytes after *in vivo* exposure to S1P<sub>1</sub>-binding agents, despite the *in vitro* heterogeneity in responses of lymphocytes isolated from different sites (FIG. 5). There is also microanatomical evidence of widespread arrest of lymphocytes immediately adjacent to the sinus-lining endothelium in lymph nodes after stimulation through S1P<sub>1</sub> (REF. 68). The most important pieces of evidence in favour of the S1P–S1P<sub>1</sub> control-of-lymphocytes model are the following: that S1P<sub>1</sub>-deficient lymphocytes are retained in the thymus and migrate anomalously in the periphery; that lymphocytes that overexpress S1P<sub>1</sub> are present in the blood in a higher proportion and have a lower distribution to lymph nodes than those with normal levels of S1P<sub>1</sub> expression; and that the chemotactic responses to S1P of lymphocytes from different lymphoid tissues and fluids vary, partly according to their expression of functional S1P<sub>1</sub> (FIG. 5). However, the observations that S1P<sub>1</sub>-dependent inhibition of lymphocyte egress from lymphoid organs by FTY720 is limited to the thymus and lymph nodes (and does not occur in the spleen)<sup>71–74</sup>, and that antigen-experienced effector cells are sequestered only in the lymph nodes (and not in the spleen)<sup>75,76</sup> indicates that there might be a specific stromal component to S1P<sub>1</sub>-mediated control of lymphocyte trafficking, as well as the intrinsic contributions of lymphocytes. It seems probable

that information provided by additional studies will support a contribution for both components, with different relative importance of these contributions in specific primary and secondary lymphoid settings. Such experiments might be facilitated by the development of high potency antagonists of S1P<sub>1</sub>, which would allow testing of the effects of reversible loss of S1P<sub>1</sub> function in endothelial cells alone or in both lymphocytes and endothelial cells, at low or high concentrations of antagonist, respectively.

### Summary and future directions

It is now well established that the S1P–S1P<sub>1</sub> axis is integral in thymocyte and lymphocyte development, and in the regulation of lymphocyte trafficking in lymphoid organs and other tissues. S1P-mediated signalling through S1P<sub>1</sub> and S1P<sub>4</sub> also affects lymphocyte proliferation and cytokine production. The pleiotropic effects of S1P on both immune cells and stromal cells make it a challenge to precisely determine the cellular basis of S1P action. Genetic approaches using either deletion or overexpression of the gene that encodes S1P<sub>1</sub> in lymphocytes have allowed us to delineate direct phenotypic and functional changes in lymphocyte biology. However, because deletion of the gene that encodes S1P<sub>1</sub> results in a series of vascular and lymphatic abnormalities, as well as lymphoid-cell defects, receptor-deficient and wild-type mice are no longer adequate controls for immunological studies. The availability of high-potency, S1P<sub>1</sub>-selective agonists but not antagonists limits some analyses of the relative contributions of lymphocyte and endothelial-cell S1P<sub>1</sub>. The next important chapter that is relevant to human biology and diseases will involve applying molecular pharmacology to define the effects of potential drugs that target the S1P receptors, to determine the cellular and molecular mechanisms of action of these drugs, and to establish what roles they could have in therapeutic programmes.

1. Tigi, G. & Goetzl, E. J. Lysolipid mediators in cell signaling and disease. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1582**, vii (2002).
   - This was the first study to show the pathway in which lysosphosphatidic acid is generated extracellularly by leukocytes and platelets.
2. Hla, T. Signaling and biological actions of sphingosine 1-phosphate. *Pharmacol. Res.* **47**, 401–407 (2003).
3. Mills, G. B. & Moolenaar, W. H. The emerging role of lysosphosphatidic acid in cancer. *Nature Rev. Cancer* **3**, 582–591 (2003).
4. Anliker, B. & Chun, J. Lysosphospholipid G protein-coupled receptors. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 20555–20558 (2004).
5. Siess, W. & Tigi, G. Thrombogenic and atherogenic activities of lysosphosphatidic acid. *J. Cell. Biochem.* **92**, 1086–1094 (2004).
6. Karliner, J. S. Mechanisms of cardioprotection by lysosphospholipids. *J. Cell. Biochem.* **92**, 1095–1103 (2004).
7. Goetzl, E. J. & Rosen, H. Regulation of immunity by lysosphingolipids and their G protein-coupled receptors. *J. Clin. Invest.* **114**, 1531–1537 (2004).
8. Eichholtz, T., Jalink, K., Fahrenfort, I. & Moolenaar, W. H. The bioactive phospholipid lysosphosphatidic acid is released from activated platelets. *Biochem. J.* **291**, 677–680 (1993).
9. Spiegel, S. & Milstien, S. Sphingolipid metabolites: members of a new class of lipid second messengers. *J. Membr. Biol.* **146**, 225–237 (1995).
10. Fourcade, O. *et al.* Secretory phospholipase A<sub>2</sub> generates the novel lipid mediator lysosphosphatidic acid in membrane microvesicles shed from activated cells. *Cell* **80**, 919–927 (1995).
11. Stunff, H. L., Milstien, S. & Spiegel, S. Generation and metabolism of bioactive sphingosine-1-phosphate. *J. Cell. Biochem.* **92**, 882–899 (2004).
    - This is the best recent summary of the cellular biochemistry of the generation and degradation of lysosphingolipids.
12. Goetzl, E. J. & Tigi, G. Lysosphospholipids and their G protein-coupled receptors in biology and diseases. *J. Cell. Biochem.* **92**, 867–868 (2004).
13. Nava, V. E. *et al.* Functional characterization of human sphingosine kinase-1. *FEBS Lett.* **473**, 81–84 (2000).
14. Mandala, S. M. *et al.* Sphingoid base 1-phosphate phosphatase: a key regulator of sphingolipid metabolism and stress response. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **95**, 150–155 (1998).
15. Brindley, D. N., English, D., Pilquil, C., Buri, K. & Ling, Z.-C. Lipid phosphate phosphatases regulate signal transduction through glycerolipids and sphingolipids. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1582**, 33–44 (2002).
16. Olivera, A. & Rivera, J. Sphingolipids and the balancing of immune cell function: lessons from the mast cell.
    - This is a brief, recent summary of the role of lysosphingolipids in mast-cell biology and immunology.
17. Memon, R. A. *et al.* Endotoxin and cytokines increase hepatic sphingolipid biosynthesis and produce lipoproteins enriched in ceramides and sphingomyelin. *Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.* **18**, 1257–1265 (1998).
18. Delon, C. *et al.* Sphingosine kinase 1 is an intracellular effector of phosphatidic acid. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 44763–44774 (2004).
19. Choi, O. H., Kim, J. H. & Kinet, J. P. Calcium mobilization via sphingosine kinase in signalling by the FcεRI antigen receptor. *Nature* **380**, 634–636 (1996).
20. Jolly, P. S. *et al.* Transactivation of sphingosine-1-phosphate receptors by FcεRI triggering is required for normal mast cell degranulation and chemotaxis. *J. Exp. Med.* **199**, 959–970 (2004).
21. Olivera, A. & Spiegel, S. Sphingosine kinase: a mediator of vital cellular functions. *Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat.* **64**, 123–134 (2001).
22. Gaits, F. *et al.* Lysosphosphatidic acid as a phospholipid mediator: pathways of synthesis. *FEBS Lett.* **410**, 54–58 (1997).
23. Goetzl, E. J., Wang, W., McGiffert, C., Huang, M. C. & Graier, M. H. Sphingosine 1-phosphate and its G protein-coupled receptors constitute a multifunctional immunoregulatory system. *J. Cell. Biochem.* **92**, 1104–1114 (2004).
24. Goetzl, E. J., Kong, Y. & Voice, J. K. Differential constitutive expression of functional receptors for lysosphosphatidic acid by human blood lymphocytes. *J. Immunol.* **164**, 4996–4999 (2000).

NATURE REVIEWS | IMMUNOLOGY

© 2005 Nature Publishing Group
25. Zheng, Y., Voice, J. K., Kong, Y. & Goetzl, E. J. Altered expression and functional profile of lysosphosphatidic acid receptors in mitogen-activated human blood T lymphocytes. *FASEB J.* **14**, 2387–2389 (2000).

26. Rosen, H., Alfonso, C., Surh, C. D. & McHeyzer-Williams, M. G. Rapid induction of medullary thymocyte phenotypic maturation and egress inhibition by nanomolar sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor agonist. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **100**, 10907–10912 (2003). This was the first pharmacological study to show the capacity of an S1P-receptor agonist to facilitate terminal differentiation of thymocytes and to regulate their emigration.

27. Allende, M. L., Dreier, J. L., Mandala, S. & Proia, R. L. Expression of the sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor, S1P₁, on T-cells controls thymic emigration. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 15396–15401 (2004). This paper, together with reference 60, reports the discovery of the requirement for S1P₁ in the emigration of thymocytes.

28. Graeler, M. H., Kong, Y., Karliner, J. S. & Goetzl, E. J. Protein kinase Cε dependence of the recovery from down-regulation of S1P₁ G protein-coupled receptors of T lymphocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 27737–27741 (2003).

29. Lo, C. G., Xu, Y., Proia, R. L. & Cyster, J. G. Cyclical modulation of sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 surface expression during lymphocyte recirculation and relationship to lymphoid organ transit. *J. Exp. Med.* **201**, 291–301 (2005).

30. Graeler, M. & Goetzl, E. J. Activation-regulated expression and chemotactic function of sphingosine 1-phosphate receptors in mouse splenic T cells. *FASEB J.* **16**, 1874–1878 (2002). This paper and reference 37 were the first papers to describe S1P receptors at the surface of lymphocytes, showing that S1P₁ and S1P₄ are the most abundant. They also provided the initial proof that S1P₁ mediates inhibition of lymphocyte chemotaxis to chemokines, as well as stimulation of chemotaxis.

31. Wang, W., Graeler, M. H. & Goetzl, E. J. Physiological sphingosine 1-phosphate requirement for optimal activity of mouse CD4⁺ regulatory T cells. *FASEB J.* **18**, 1043–1045 (2004).

32. Cinamon, G. *et al.* Sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 1 promotes B cell localization in the splenic marginal zone. *Nature Immunol.* **5**, 713–720 (2004).

33. Kaneider, N. C. *et al.* The immune modulator FTY720 targets sphingosine-kinase-dependent migration of human monocytes in response to amyloid β-protein and its precursor. *FASEB J.* **18**, 1309–1311 (2004).

34. Idzko, M. *et al.* Sphingosine 1-phosphate induces chemotaxis of immature and modulates cytokine-release in mature human dendritic cells for emergence of T₂ immune responses. *FASEB J.* **16**, 625–627 (2002).

35. Kveberg, L., Bryceson, Y., Inngjerdingen, M., Rolstad, B. & Maghazachi, A. A. Sphingosine 1 phosphate induces the chemotaxis of human natural killer cells. Role for heterotrimeric G proteins and phosphoinositide 3 kinases. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **32**, 1856–1864 (2002).

36. Roviezzo, F. *et al.* Human eosinophil chemotaxis and selective in vivo recruitment by sphingosine 1-phosphate. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **101**, 11170–11175 (2004).

37. Graeler, M., Shankar, G. & Goetzl, E. Suppression of T cell chemotaxis by sphingosine 1-phosphate. *J. Immunol.* **169**, 4084–4087 (2002).

38. Dorsam, G. *et al.* Transduction of multiple effects of sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) on T cell functions by the S1P₁ G protein-coupled receptor. *J. Immunol.* **171**, 3500–3507 (2003). This is the initial proof that S1P₁ transduces most of the immune effects of S1P on T-cell function.

39. Bautista, D. L. *et al.* Dynamic modeling of EDG1 receptor structural changes induced by site-directed mutations. *J. Mol. Struct.* **529**, 219–224 (2000).

40. Parrill, A. L. W. *et al.* Identification of EDG1 receptor residues that recognize sphingosine 1-phosphate. *J. Biol. Chem.* **275**, 39379–39384 (2000).

41. Wang, D. A. *et al.* A single amino acid determines lysosphospholipid specificity of the S1P₁ (EDG1) and LPA₁ (EDG2) phospholipid growth factor receptors. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 49213–49220 (2001).

42. Sardar, V. M. *et al.* Molecular basis for the lysosphatidic acid receptor agonist selectivity. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1582**, 309–317 (2002).

43. Forrest, M. *et al.* Immune cell regulation and cardiovascular effects of sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor agonists in rodents are mediated via distinct receptor subtypes. *J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.* **309**, 758–768 (2004).

44. Sanna, M. G. *et al.* Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) receptor subtypes S1P₁ and S1P₃, respectively, regulate lymphocyte recirculation and heart rate. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 13839–13848 (2004).

45. Hale, J. J. *et al.* Potent S1P receptor agonists replicate the pharmacologic actions of the novel immune modulator FTY720. *Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett.* **14**, 3351–3355 (2004).

46. Bannert, N. *et al.* Sialylated O-glycans and sulfated tyrosines in the NH₂-terminal domain of CC chemokine receptor 5 contribute to high affinity binding of chemokines. *J. Exp. Med.* **194**, 1661–1673 (2001).

47. Farzan, M. *et al.* The role of post-translational modifications of the CXCR4 amino terminus in stromal-derived factor 1α association and HIV-1 entry. *J. Biol. Chem.* **277**, 29484–29489 (2002).

48. Feiger, C. B., Huang, M. C., Van Brocklyn, J. R. & Goetzl, E. J. Type 1 sphingosine 1-phosphate G protein-coupled receptor signaling of lymphocyte functions requires sulfation of its extracellular amino-terminal tyrosines. *FASEB J.* (in the press).

49. Dohlman, H. G., Caron, M. G. & Lefkowitz, R. J. A family of receptors coupled to guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins. *Biochemistry* **26**, 2657–2664 (1987).

50. Ishii, I., Fukushima, N., Ye, X. & Chun, J. Lysosphospholipid receptors: signaling and biology. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* **73**, 321–354 (2004).

51. Peng, X. *et al.* Protective effects of sphingosine 1-phosphate in murine endotoxin-induced inflammatory lung injury. *Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med.* **169**, 1245–1251 (2004).

52. McVerry, B. J. *et al.* Sphingosine 1-phosphate reduces vascular leak in murine and canine models of acute lung injury. *Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med.* **170**, 987–993 (2004).

53. McVerry, B. J. & Garcia, J. G. *In vitro* and *in vivo* modulation of vascular barrier integrity by sphingosine 1-phosphate: mechanistic insights. *Cell Signal.* **17**, 131–139 (2005).

54. Halin, C. *et al.* The S1P-analog FTY720 differentially modulates T cell homing via HEV: T cell-expressed S1P₁ amplifies integrin activation in peripheral lymph nodes but not in Peyer's patches. *Blood* 3 May 2005 (doi:10.1182/blood-2004-09-3687).

55. Goetzl, E. J., Kong, Y. & Mei, B. Lysosphosphatidic acid and sphingosine 1-phosphate protection of T cells from apoptosis in association with suppression of Bax. *J. Immunol.* **162**, 2049–2056 (1999).

56. Wang, W., Graeler, M. H. & Goetzl, E. J. Type 4 sphingosine 1-phosphate G protein-coupled receptor (S1P₄) transduces S1P effects on T cell proliferation and cytokine secretion without signaling migration. *FASEB J.* (in the press).

57. Baumruker, T. & Prieschl, E. E. The role of sphingosine kinase in the signaling initiated at the high-affinity receptor for IgE (FcεRI) in mast cells. *Int. Arch. Allergy Immunol.* **122**, 85–90 (2000).

58. Prieschl, E. E., Csonga, R., Novotny, V., Kikuchi, G. E. & Baumruker, T. The balance between sphingosine and sphingosine-1-phosphate is decisive for mast cell activation after Fcε receptor I triggering. *J. Exp. Med.* **190**, 1–8 (1999).

59. Bagga, S. *et al.* Lysosphosphatidic acid accelerates the development of human mast cells. *Blood* **104**, 4080–4087 (2004).

60. Matloubian, M. *et al.* Lymphocyte egress from thymus and peripheral lymphoid organs is dependent on S1P receptor 1. *Nature* **427**, 355–360 (2004). This report of the discovery of the requirement for S1P₁ in the emigration of thymocytes shows that it is required for lymphocyte transmigration and egress from lymph nodes.

61. Girkontaite, I. *et al.* The sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) lysosphospholipid receptor S1P₃ regulates MAdCAM-1⁺ endothelial cells in splenic marginal sinus organization. *J. Exp. Med.* **200**, 1491–1501 (2004).

62. Jo, E. *et al.* S1P₁-selective *in vivo*-active agonists from high throughput screening: off-the-shelf chemical probes

of receptor interactions, signaling and fate. *Chem. Biol.* (in the press).

63. Graeber, M. H., Huang, M. C., Watson, S. & Goetzl, E. J. Immunological effects of transgenic constitutive expression of the type 1 sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor by mouse lymphocytes. *J. Immunol.* **174**, 1997–2003 (2005). This study shows the defects in cellular immune responses and antibody responses, as well as in lymphocyte trafficking, in mice with S1p1-transgenic T cells.

64. Chi, H. & Flavell, R. A. Regulation of T cell trafficking and primary immune responses by sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor 1. *J. Immunol.* **174**, 2485–2488 (2005).

65. Liu, Y. *et al.* Edg-1, the G protein-coupled receptor for sphingosine-1-phosphate, is essential for vascular maturation. *J. Clin. Invest.* **106**, 951–961 (2000).

66. Allende, M. L., Yamashita, T. & Proia, R. L. G-protein coupled receptor S1P₁ acts within endothelial cells to regulate vascular maturation. *Blood* **102**, 3665–3667 (2003).

67. Tolle, M. *et al.* Immunomodulator FTY720 induces eNOS-dependent arterial vasodilatation via the lysosphospholipid receptor S1P₃. *Circ. Res.* **96**, 913–920 (2005).

68. Mandala, S. *et al.* Alteration of lymphocyte trafficking by sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor agonists. *Science* **296**, 346–349 (2002).

69. Garcia, J. G. N. *et al.* Sphingosine 1-phosphate promotes endothelial cell barrier integrity by Edg-dependent cytoskeletal rearrangement. *J. Clin. Invest.* **108**, 689–701 (2001).

70. Sanchez, T. *et al.* Phosphorylation and action of the immunomodulator FTY720 inhibits vascular endothelial cell growth factor-induced vascular permeability. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 47281–47290 (2003). References 69 and 70 are the definitive studies of the involvement of S1P and the effects of phospho-FTY720 in endothelial barrier integrity.

71. Chiba, K. *et al.* FTY720, a novel immunosuppressant possessing unique mechanisms. I. Prolongation of skin allograft survival and synergistic effect in combination with cyclosporine in rats. *Transplant. Proc.* **28**, 1056–1059 (1996). This report and reference 73 were the first to show the immunosuppressive effects of the S1P₁-receptor-binding compound FTY720.

72. Chiba, K. *et al.* FTY720, a novel immunosuppressant, induces sequestration of circulating lymphocytes by acceleration of lymphocyte homing. *Transplant. Proc.* **31**, 1230–1233 (1999).

73. Fujita, T. *et al.* Potent immunosuppressants, 2-alkyl-2-aminopropane-1,3-diols. *J. Med. Chem.* **39**, 4451–4459 (1996).

74. Fujita, T. *et al.* 2-Substituted 2-aminoethanol: minimum essential structure for immunosuppressive activity of ISP-I (myriocin). *Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett.* **5**, 1857–1860 (1995).

75. Pinscherer, D. D. *et al.* FTY720 immunosuppression impairs effector T-cell peripheral homing without affecting induction, expansion, and memory. *J. Immunol.* **164**, 5761–5770 (2000).

76. Arnold, C. N., Butcher, E. C. & Campbell, D. J. Antigen-specific lymphocyte sequestration in lymphoid organs: lack of essential roles for α₄ and α₅ integrin-dependent adhesion or Gα₄ protein-coupled receptor signaling. *J. Immunol.* **173**, 866–873 (2004).

Acknowledgements  
This research was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health (United States) to H.R. and E.J.G. and from Kyorin Pharmaceutical Company, Ltd (Japan) to H.R.

Competing interests statement  
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

### Online links

**DATABASES**

The following terms in this article are linked online to:

Entrez Gene: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene  

AKT | AP1 | ERK | IFN-γ | IL-4 | IL-10 | IL-12 | protein kinase C-ε | S1P₁ | S1P₄  

Access to this interactive links box is free online.
