
IUBMB Life, 57(2): 83–91, February 2005

**Critical Review**

**Mechanisms of Persistent NF-κB Activation by HTLV-I Tax**

Edward W. Harhaj and Nicole S. Harhaj  
Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA

---

### Summary

Human T cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) is the causative agent of a fatal malignancy known as adult T cell leukemia (ATL). The HTLV-I Tax protein is thought to play a significant role in the initiation and pathogenesis of HTLV-I-mediated disease. Tax is a potent oncogene that deregulates cellular gene expression by persistently activating signaling pathways such as NF-κB. Tax activation of NF-κB is critical for the immortalization and survival of HTLV-I-infected T cells. In this review, we describe recent insights into the mechanisms employed by Tax to activate the canonical and noncanonical NF-κB signaling pathways. The adaptor function of Tax appears to be a common and important mechanism for the pathological activation of both NF-κB pathways.

---

### Keywords

Human T cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I); ATL; HAM/TSP; NF-κB; Tax; IKK; p100; NIK; signal transduction; gene expression.

---

### INTRODUCTION

The human T cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) is a type C retrovirus that is etiologically linked to adult T cell leukemia (ATL) as well as an inflammatory neurological disorder known as HTLV-I-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (HAM/TSP) (1). Between 10 and 20 million people worldwide are infected with HTLV-I. The majority of HTLV-I-infected individuals remain asymptomatic, and only 5–10% develop either ATL or HAM/TSP after a long latent period (2). HTLV-I is transmitted by multiple routes: (1) vertical from mother-to-infant (in breast milk or transplacental), (2) horizontal via sexual transmission, and (3) parenteral (blood transfusions or intravenous drug use) (1). HTLV-I preferentially infects CD4⁺ T cells *in vivo*, although a small number of CD8⁺ T cells may also be infected. In ATL patients, CD4⁺CD25⁺ leukemic cells are thought to arise by monoclonal or oligoclonal expansion of infected cells (1). Transformation of HTLV-I-infected lymphocytes is likely a long, multi-step process that commences with viral-induced clonal proliferation of infected CD4⁺ T cells, and in later stages progresses to malignant disease after the accumulation of genetic lesions (3).

HTLV-I infects cells either by transmission of virions between cells (infectious transmission) or by transmission of a provirus to the two daughter cells of a dividing infected cell (mitotic transmission) (4). Infected cells that express viral antigens are rapidly targeted by cytotoxic T cells (CTLs), thus the proviral load is maintained predominantly by cells harboring silent provirus spread by mitotic transmission. Cell-free HTLV-I virions are poorly infectious, and cell-cell contact is required for efficient *de novo* infection (5). The mechanism of cell–cell spread of HTLV-I has recently been established. Cell–cell contact between an infected lymphocyte and an uninfected target cell results in dynamic cytoskeletal changes in the infected cell characterized by polarization of the cytoskeleton to the cell–cell junction (5). The viral core proteins and genome then accumulate at the cell–cell junction and are transferred into the uninfected cell to establish a new infection (5). The identity of the HTLV-I receptor(s) has been the focus of intense research for many years. Recently, glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1) has been identified as an HTLV-I receptor, however the expression of GLUT1 is fairly ubiquitous and is therefore unlikely to determine HTLV-I cellular tropism (6). Nevertheless, various metabolic abnormalities, including decreased glucose uptake and consumption, and decreased extracellular lactate production, occur in cells expressing HTLV envelopes (6). These intriguing results imply that alterations in glucose metabolism may play a role in HTLV-I-mediated disease pathogenesis. An additional putative HTLV-I receptor has been reported to be expressed in

---

Received 22 November 2004; accepted 16 December 2004  

Address correspondence to: Edward W. Harhaj, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of Miami School of Medicine, Room 503, Papanicolaou Building, 1550 NW 10th Avenue, Miami, FL 33136, USA. Tel: 1305 243 7893. Fax: 1305 243 6410. E-mail: eharhaj@med.miami.edu

ISSN 1521-6543 print/ISSN 1521-6551 online © 2005 IUBMB  
DOI: 10.1080/15216540500078715

activated T cells, however this protein has not yet been identified (7).

The HTLV-I genome is 9032 nucleotides in length and encodes enzymatic and structural proteins common to other retroviruses including gag, protease, pol, env and is flanked on both ends by long terminal repeats (LTR) that contain cis-elements that regulate viral gene expression (8). The HTLV-I genome also encodes several regulatory proteins in the pX region, located between env and the 3' LTR, derived from four partially overlapping open reading frames (ORF) including p12I (ORF-I), p13II (ORF-II), p30II (ORF-II), Rex (ORF-III), and Tax (ORF-IV) (9). Tax is a potent transactivating protein that is required for the expression of viral genes. Tax activates the viral LTR by activating and recruiting cellular transcription factors, including members of the CRE-binding/activating transcription factor (CREB/ATF) family, to three imperfectly conserved 21 base pair repeats, or Tax responsive elements (TxRE), in the LTR (9). In addition, Tax activates other cellular transcription factors such as NF-κB, AP-1, NFAT and SRF resulting in global changes in gene expression that favor cell growth and survival. In this review, we will focus on recent insights into the mechanisms of Tax-mediated transactivation of NF-κB and its role in oncogenesis.

ONCOGENIC MECHANISMS OF TAX

Tax is a 40kDa phosphoprotein that is predominantly nuclear by virtue of an N-terminal nuclear localization sequence (NLS) although it also contains a nuclear export sequence (NES) and can shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm (10). Tax is a key viral protein in HTLV-I-mediated oncogenesis, and expression of Tax is necessary and sufficient for transformation in a variety of experimental systems. Tax expression is sufficient to immortalize primary human T lymphocytes (11). Tax, in combination with Ras, transforms primary rat fibroblasts *in vitro*, and Tax alone transforms Rat-1 cells (12). Transgenic mice expressing Tax under the control of a variety of promoters develop tumors with the nature of the malignancy dependent on the tissue targeted for expression of Tax (13). Mice expressing the Tax gene under the control of the HTLV-I LTR promoter develop neurofibromas and mesenchymal tumors (13). Transgenic mice expressing Tax under the control of the granzyme B promoter develop large granular lymphocytic leukemia consisting of CD8+ T cells and natural killer (NK) cells (13). Unfortunately, none of the current Tax transgenic mouse lines display clinical features characteristic of ATL, thus the use of mouse models to study Tax-mediated oncogenesis may be fairly limited.

It is likely that the oncogenic properties of Tax are attributed, at least in part, to Tax-induced deregulation of cellular gene expression. Indeed, a subset of cellular genes regulated by Tax are regulators of T-cell growth, activation, and survival. The genes transactivated by Tax include the T-cell growth factor IL-2 and its high affinity receptor IL-2Rα (14). During initial stages of HTLV-I infection, infected cells are dependent on IL-2 for proliferation, thus constitutive expression of both IL-2 and IL-2Rα by Tax may create an autocrine loop that contributes to polyclonal proliferation of HTLV-I-infected T cells in the early stages of immortalization. In later stages of infection which may take months to years *in vitro*, infected T cells become IL-2 independent which is concomitant with constitutively activated JAK/STAT signaling (15).

Tax affects the expression of a large number of cellular genes. For example, in a cDNA microarray analysis, the levels of approximately 300 out of 2000 mRNAs were altered by Tax expression (16). Many of the cellular genes deregulated by Tax are involved in the cell cycle, apoptosis, and DNA repair. The major effect of Tax on the cell cycle is to promote G1 progression and S phase entry (17). Tax overrides normal cell cycle control of the G1 to S phase transition by multiple mechanisms including transcriptional activation and repression, and direct binding to cell cycle regulators. Tax upregulates expression of E2F, cyclins C, D2, E and the CDK inhibitors CDK2, CDK4, and p21Waf1/Cip1 (17). Tax also interacts with and modulates the function of multiple cell cycle regulators such as cyclin D2, cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4), and p16INK4a (18). Tax interacts with and functionally inactivates the CDK4 inhibitor p16INK4a leading to activation of CDK4/6, phosphorylation of Rb, and entry into S phase (19). In addition, Tax suppresses DNA repair by downregulating the expression of various genes involved in DNA repair such as β-polymerase, Rad21, Rad54, ERCC5, and XRCC5 (16). Tax also inhibits the transactivating function of the tumor suppressor p53 as a mechanism to avoid growth arrest and/or apoptosis (18). Collectively, Tax utilizes multiple mechanisms to subvert cell-cycle controls that ultimately results in the accumulation of genetic lesions in HTLV-I-infected cells.

NF-κB PATHWAYS

The NF-κB/Rel family of transcription factors plays an important role in cell growth, activation, differentiation, and survival (20). NF-κB proteins all contain a 300 amino acid domain known as the Rel homology domain (RHD) that confers DNA binding, dimerization, and nuclear localization properties. In mammals, the NF-κB family consists of RelA (p65), RelB, c-Rel, p50 and p52 that may form transcriptionally active complexes in various combinations (Fig. 1). RelA, RelB, and c-Rel contain transactivation domains and are strong activators of transcription of genes bearing NF-κB sites. In contrast, p50 and p52 homodimers may bind to NF-κB sites and act as repressors of transcription due to lack of transactivation domains.

NF-κB serves as a model for how a latent, cytoplasmic transcription factor can be rapidly activated and mobilized to the nucleus to activate target genes in response to specific signals. There are a family of inhibitory proteins, or IκBs, which bind to NF-κB and prevent nuclear localization and

MECHANISMS OF PERSISTENT NF-κB ACTIVATION

**NF-κB/Rel Family Members**

| A | RHD | TAD |
|---|-----|-----|
| RelA/p65 |  |  | 551 aa |
| c-Rel |  |  | 619 aa |
| RelB | LZ |  | 579 aa |
| p105/p50 | GRR↓ |  | 969 aa |
| p100/p52 | ↓ |  | 899 aa |

Ankyrin Repeats

**IkB Family Members**

| B |  |
|---|---|
| IkBα | PS32 PS36 | 317 aa |
| IkBβ | PS19 PS23 | 359 aa |
| IkBε | PS18 PS22 | 500 aa |
| BCL-3 |  | 446 aa |

**IKK Family Members**

| C | Kinase domain |
|---|---------------|
| IKKα | LZ | HLH | 745 aa |
| IKKβ | LZ | HLH | 756 aa |
| IKKγ/NEMO | α | CC | CC | ZF | 419 aa |

Figure 1. Schematic representation of human NF-κB and IkB family members. (A) All NF-κB family members possess the Rel Homology Domain (RHD) that provides DNA binding, dimerization, and nuclear localization functions. The IkB family members p105 and p100 are processed by the proteasome (processing site is indicated by arrow) to give rise to the NF-κB proteins p50 and p52 respectively. (B) IkB family members contain a series of ankyrin repeat domains that mediate the interaction with the RHD of NF-κB. The IKK phosphorylation sites are indicated. (C) IKKα (IKK1) and IKKβ (IKK2) contain N-terminal catalytic domains, central leucine zippers, and C-terminal helix-loop-helix domains. IKKγ/NEMO contains an α-helix (α), coiled-coil domains, and a C-terminal zinc finger domain. Abbreviations: transactivation domain (TAD), leucine zipper (LZ), glycine rich region (GRR), leucine zipper (LZ), helix-loop-helix (HLH), coiled-coil (CC), and zinc finger (ZF).
DNA binding. The IkB family consists of IkBa, IkBβ, IkBe, p100 (nfkb2), p105 (nfkb1) and Bcl3, and all IkB proteins contain a series of ankyrin repeats that mediate their interaction with the RHD of NF-κB proteins (Fig. 1) (20). NF-κB1 and NF-κB2 are synthesized as precursor proteins that yield p50 and p52 respectively upon limited degradation, or processing, by the proteasome. The prototypic NF-κB complex, a heterodimer of p65 and p50, is most abundant in different cell types and is mainly regulated by IkBa. In response to cytokines, virus or bacterial infection, antigen receptor engagement, or stress signals, IkBa is phosphorylated by a multisubunit IkB kinase complex, or IKK, on two regulatory serine residues (S32 and S36 for IkBa; S19 and S23 for IkBβ) leading to ubiquitination and degradation by the 26S proteasome. The liberated NF-κB dimers then translocate to the nucleus and activate expression of target genes bearing NF-κB binding sites. The consensus binding site for NF-κB is 5′-GGGRNYYYCC-3′ (R is a purine, Y is a pyrimidine, and N is any nucleic acid), although the affinities vary depending on the exact composition of the dimeric NF-κB complexes (21). One of the NF-κB target genes is IkBa which enters the nucleus and removes NF-κB from DNA, a mechanism ensuring transient NF-κB responses (22).

The IKK complex consists of at least three different proteins, IKKa, IKKβ and IKKy (also known as NEMO). IKKa and IKKβ are both catalytic subunits that share 52% amino acid identity and exhibit a similar domain structure consisting of an N-terminal kinase domain, a central leucine zipper, and a C-terminal helix-loop-helix domain (Fig. 1) (23). IKKy is a regulatory subunit devoid of catalytic activity, but is indispensable for activation of IKK (23). Proinflammatory cytokines, such as TNFα or IL-1, trigger the activation of a high molecular weight (700–900 kDa) multi-subunit IKK complex (20). The composition of this complex is likely to consist of dimers of IKKa and IKKβ, and either trimers or tetramers of IKKy (24). A recent report indicates that an additional protein, ELKS, may also be a component of the IKK complex. ELKS may not be a direct regulator of IKK catalytic activity, but may instead serve as an adaptor linking IKKβ to its substrate IkBa (25).

NF-κB activation consisting of IKK-mediated IkB phosphorylation and degradation, and nuclear localization of RelA or c-Rel containing heterodimers is known as the canonical or classical pathway. A second NF-κB signaling pathway that regulates the processing of p100 to p52 is known as the noncanonical or alternative pathway. The MAP3K, NF-κB inducing kinase (NIK) and IKKa are both critical regulators of the noncanonical pathway (26, 27). Mice lacking NIK or harboring a natural mutation in the nik gene, alymphoplasia (aly/aly) mice, exhibit profound defects in p100 processing (26). Mice deficient in IKKa, NIK or LTβR exhibit phenotypes similar to nfkb2 knockout mice suggesting that these proteins are components of a common signaling pathway regulating p100 processing in stromal cells (28). Engagement of LTβR stimulates p100 processing to p52 in fibroblasts and regulates expression of chemokine genes that control lymphoid organogenesis (29). Other agonists of p100 processing are all TNF superfamily members and include CD40 Ligand, CD70, B-cell activating factor (BAFF), and RANK Ligand. NIK and IKKa are both essential components of the p100 processing pathway in response to all of these agonists. Collectively, the non-canonical pathway is restricted to a subset of TNF/TNFR family members in different cell types but use common signaling proteins such as NIK and IKKa.

p100 functions as an IkB molecule preventing nuclear translocation of RelB-containing dimers, thus p100 processing not only results in a loss of IkB function but also generates active RelB/52 complexes. RelB/p52 heterodimers recognize a novel NF-κB sequence (5′-RGGAGAYTTR-3′ where R is a purine, Y is a pyrimidine) present in the promoters of genes regulated by the noncanonical pathway such as the chemokines BLC, ELC, and SDF-1 (30). The canonical pathway is important for the generation of inflammatory and adaptive immune responses, whereas the noncanonical pathway regulates lymphoid organogenesis and B cell maturation (20). Indeed, nfkb2 knockout mice exhibit defects in B cell maturation and lymphoid organogenesis, including an absence of lymph nodes and Peyer's Patches, and disorganized splenic microarchitecture with lack of germinal centers (31). Mice lacking p100 but expressing p52 exhibit abnormal lymphocyte proliferation and gastric hyperplasia, suggesting that constitutive expression of p52 coupled with the loss of p100IkB function may lead to oncogenesis (32). It is noteworthy that several human lymphomas have been found to express rearranged p100 genes encoding truncated forms of p100 that are constitutively processed to p52 (33). Therefore, either the overexpression or the loss of p52 leads to severe defects in the immune system.

Many strides have been made recently regarding the regulation and function of NIK in the noncanonical pathway. The kinase activity of NIK is required for p100 processing, and it is likely that NIK phosphorylates IKKa within its activation loop leading to activation of kinase activity (26). In addition to its role as a kinase, NIK may also function as an adaptor molecule that enhances the binding of IKKa and p100 (34). NIK is expressed at very low levels in most cell types, likely as a mechanism to prevent inappropriate activation of the noncanonical pathway. The TRAF family member TRAF3 binds to NIK and induces its degradation by the proteasome (35). In response to stimuli that activate p100 processing, such as CD40L or BAFF, TRAF3 is degraded resulting in NIK stabilization and derepression (35). In addition to TRAF3, TRAF2 also appears to be a negative regulator of p100 processing in B cells, however it is unclear if TRAF2 acts directly on NIK or if TRAF2 is required for TRAF3 degradation (36). Another negative regulator of p100 processing, TRAFs and NIK-associated protein (TNAP), has been identified recently (37). TNAP binds to both TRAF3 and
NIK and negatively regulates p100 processing through an unknown mechanism.

TAX ACTIVATION OF THE CANONICAL NF-κB PATHWAY

Tax is a potent activator of IκB degradation and nuclear accumulation of NF-κB. HTLV-I transformed cell lines and primary leukemic cells from ATL patients exhibit persistent nuclear NF-κB expression. NF-κB is required for immortalization and also the survival of HTLV-I transformed cells. Immortalization of primary T cells by Tax requires NF-κB since Tax mutants that cannot activate NF-κB are unable to immortalize T cells (38). NF-κB activation is also required for the survival of HTLV-I-infected cells. Antisense inhibition of NF-κB leads to reduced growth of Tax-transformed fibroblasts and regression of tumors in Tax transgenic mice (39). Furthermore, pharmacological inhibition of NF-κB by BAY 11-7082 treatment induces programmed cell death of HTLV-I transformed cell lines and ATL leukemic cells (40). One of the NF-κB target genes is the antiapoptotic gene Bcl-xL which is downregulated after treatment of infected cells with BAY 11-7082 (40). In transformed cell lines, Tax is responsible for the constitutive NF-κB activation, however in cells from ATL patients NF-κB is activated despite low or absent expression of Tax in many of these patient isolates suggesting alternative mechanisms for NF-κB activation (41).

Several models have been proposed to explain how Tax activates the canonical NF-κB pathway. Several studies in the 1990s demonstrated that Tax interacts with multiple NF-κB and IκB proteins including p65, c-Rel, p50, p52 and IκBα (42). It was hypothesized that Tax directly interacts with and dissociates latent NF-κB/IκBα complexes as a mechanism to activate NF-κB (42). An additional hypothesis put forth was that Tax binds to and recruits IκBα to the proteasome for degradation, an event facilitated by Tax interaction with the proteasomal subunits HsN3 and HC9 (43). However, in the late 1990s with the cloning of the IKKs and the identification of the IKK phosphorylation target sites in IκBα, it was clear that Tax was subverting cellular signaling pathways to activate NF-κB. The expression of Tax is sufficient for the phosphorylation and degradation of both IκBα and IκBβ that can be abrogated by mutagenesis of the IKK phosphoacceptor sites in either IκBα or IκBβ (42). Furthermore, Tax is unable to activate NF-κB in a mutant Jurkat T cell line that lacks IKKγ indicating that Tax activation of NF-κB is contingent on the expression of IKKγ (44). Tax interacts with IKKγ and stimulates the catalytic activity of IKKα and IKKβ. There are at least three possibilities to explain the mechanisms of Tax-mediated IKK activation, and these are not mutually exclusive (Fig. 2). First, Tax may be promoting oligomerization and/or a conformational change of the IKK subunits that triggers autophosphoryla-

---

**Figure 2. Models of Tax-mediated IKK activation.**

(A) The Tax/IKK model. Tax binds to IKKγ and mediates the activation of IKKα and IKKβ by oligomerization and/or a conformational change which triggers activation and autophosphorylation of IKK.

(B) The Tax upstream activator (UA) model. Tax recruits an upstream IKK activator such as a kinase, adaptor protein, or ubiquitin ligase to the IKK complex via IKKγ. The upstream activator may act directly on IKKγ or IKKα and IKKβ.

(C) The Tax/IKK negative regulator model. A negative regulator of IKK, such as phosphatase 2A (PP2A), prevents autophosphorylation and activation of IKKα and IKKβ. Tax binds to IKKγ and either inactivates or displaces the negative regulator triggering IKK activation.

Tax physically interacts with IKKγ in transfected cells and in HTLV-I-infected T cell lines (45). Interestingly, IKKγ is unable to interact with the Tax point mutant M22 (T130A, L131S) which is defective in NF-κB activation (45). When Tax M22 is physically fused to IKKγ, the NF-κB activating function of Tax M22 is restored suggesting that interaction of Tax with IKKγ is an essential step in Tax-mediated NF-κB

activation (46). Tax interacts with IKKγ via two putative leucine zipper (LZ) motifs in IKKγ located between amino acid residues 100–140 and 312–340 (46). The region of Tax important for IKKγ binding is localized to a leucine rich repeat (105–141) that partially overlaps with the dimerization domain (46). Since dimerization of Tax is required for activation of NF-κB, it is unclear if the leucine rich repeat provides a direct interface for binding to IKKγ or if dimerization of Tax is compromised by mutation of residues within the domain. It appears that distinct domains of IKKγ mediate activation of NF-κB in response to proinflammatory cytokines or Tax. Activation of NF-κB by TNFα requires a C-terminal zinc finger domain in IKKγ which is largely dispensable for Tax-mediated NF-κB activation (47). However, further deletions within the C-terminal region of IKKγ (1–312 or 1–305) compromise Tax-mediated activation of NF-κB in IKKγ-deficient cells possibly by interfering with Tax/IKKγ interaction (47, 48). Fusion of Tax with either IKKα or IKKβ results in constitutive IKK kinase activity (48). However, it is unclear if Tax is directly promoting activation of IKK by a conformational change and/or oligomerization, or if Tax is recruiting an upstream activator. There is currently no definitive evidence linking Tax with upstream kinases to activate NF-κB. Although dominant-negative forms of the MAP3Ks NIK, MEKK1, and MLK3 all inhibited Tax-mediated NF-κB activation, these results should be interpreted with caution since overexpression studies with MAP3Ks can be misleading and inconsistent with genetic studies (20). Alternative approaches, including siRNA-mediated knockdown of the expression of putative upstream IKK activators, are essential to identify potential targets of Tax.

There is some evidence in the literature that Tax may also be displacing negative regulators of IKK. The phosphatase PP2A is a known negative regulator of IKK catalytic activity, consistent with several studies showing that treatment of cells with phosphatase inhibitors, such as calyculin A or okadaic acid, activates IKK (49). PP2A interacts directly with IKKγ, and Tax, PP2A, and IKKγ together form a ternary complex (50). Interestingly, Tax diminishes PP2A-mediated down-regulation of IKK activity in vitro. This appears to be an important mechanism for Tax-mediated NF-κB activation, since Tax mutants unable to bind to either IKKγ or PP2A were unable to activate IKK (50). For instance, the Tax point mutants, Tax H43Q and K85N, were able to bind IKKγ but not PP2A, yet were defective in NF-κB activation. The Tax mutant M22, defective for NF-κB activation, was unable to interact with both IKKγ and PP2A (50). Thus, it appears that Tax must counteract the inhibition of IKK exerted by PP2A in order to sustain NF-κB activation.

An additional regulatory mechanism for NF-κB activation is provided by phosphorylation of p65 in response to proinflammatory cytokines. Although the nature of the

kinases that phosphorylate p65 as well as the phosphorylation sites are controversial, there is significant evidence that IKK phosphorylates p65 on S529 and S536 in response to TNFα treatment. Phosphorylation of p65 likely triggers a conformational change that enhances transactivation. Tax expression is associated with IKKα-mediated p65 phosphorylation on S529 and S536, with S536 playing a more critical role for transactivation of NF-κB target genes (51). Therefore, Tax not only modulates IkB degradation, but also facilitates post-translational modifications of p65 to ensure maximal activation of NF-κB target genes.

TAX ACTIVATION OF THE NONCANONICAL NF-κB PATHWAY

The processing of p100 to p52 is a tightly regulated event and plays an essential role in B cell development and lymphoid organogenesis. Interestingly, deregulation of p100 processing has been linked to various human malignancies including lymphomas and leukemias. A variety of chromosomal translocations have been described in lymphomas where the nfkb2 gene is rearranged resulting in loss of C-terminal regions, including the processing inhibitory domain (PID) (33). In these lymphomas, p100 is constitutively processed and may take part in oncogenic transformation. Furthermore, stable coexpression of p100 together with Tax blocked Tax-mediated NF-κB activation and transformation of rat fibroblasts (12).

HTLV-I transformed T cell lines and Tax-expressing cells express copious amounts of p100 and p52 indicating that p100 processing is constitutively activated. Tax interacts with p100 and stimulates the processing of p100 to p52 (52). Tax directly interacts with p100 via two small alpha-helices in the N-terminus of p100 and this interaction is essential for Tax-mediated p100 processing (52). Interestingly, Tax-mediated p100 processing requires IKKα and IKKγ but not NIK or IKKβ, thus Tax clearly acts downstream of NIK in the noncanonical NF-κB pathway.

In the presence of Tax, IKKα strongly interacts with p100 suggesting that Tax acts as an adaptor protein that assembles IKKα/p100 complexes (34). The adaptor function of Tax is highly analogous to that of NIK which also assembles IKKα/p100 complexes. Either Tax or NIK-mediated IKKα binding to p100 requires serines 866 and 870 of p100 (34). Interestingly, it appears that these serines are not direct targets of phosphorylation, but rather act as a docking site or recognition sequence for IKKα. The binding of IKKα to p100 is necessary but not sufficient for p100 processing. Once IKKα forms a complex with p100 in response to either Tax or NIK expression, IKKα phosphorylates several serine residues in both the N- and C-terminal domains of p100 including serines 99, 108, 115, 123 and 872 (34). Phosphorylation of p100 by IKKα serves as a trigger for binding by β-transducin repeat-containing protein (β-TRCP), a component of the SCF

MECHANISMS OF PERSISTENT NF-κB ACTIVATION

ubiquitin ligase complex, that mediates K-48 linked poly-
ubiquitination and processing of p100 by the 26S proteasome. The ubiquitin anchoring residue of p100 has been identified as K855, and mutation of this lysine abolishes NIK-mediated p100 processing (53). Although β-TRCP is the only E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in NIK-mediated p100 processing,

genetic ablation of β-TRCP does not completely abolish Tax-
mediated p100 processing suggesting the involvement of either additional E3 ubiquitin ligases or alternative mechanisms (54). One such mechanism may include nuclear shuttling of p100 which is associated with the constitutive processing of p100 C-terminal deletion mutants (55).

Noncanonical Canonical
RANK, CD27, CD40, LTβR, BAFFR TNFR, IL-1R, TCR

TRAF2/3
↑
TNAP
↑
NIK
↑
IKKα IKKα
↑
IKKγ Tax
↑
RelB p100
↑
RelB p52
↑
Nucleus
RelB p52
↑
Tax
↑
Upstream
Activators
↑
IKK
α β γ
↑
ELKS
↑
IkBα
↑
RelA p50
↑
P
IkBα
↑
RelA p50
↑
P
IKK
α β γ
↑
P
RelA p50
↑
RelA p50

Figure 3. Mechanisms of Tax activation of the canonical and noncanonical NF-κB pathways. The noncanonical pathway consists of NIK and IKKα-mediated p100 processing and nuclear mobilization of RelB/p52 heterodimers. Tax triggers activation of this pathway downstream of NIK by activating IKKα via IKKγ and recruiting IKKα to p100 stimulating phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and processing to p52. The canonical pathway consists of IKK-mediated phosphorylation, ubiquitination and degradation of IkB proteins leading to ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome, and the nuclear translocation of RelA and c-rel-containing heterodimers. Tax activates the canonical pathway by interacting with IKKγ and stimulating the catalytic activity of IKKα and IKKβ. Tax may recruit upstream activators to trigger IKK activation.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

HTLV-I Tax has devised multiple strategies to activate NF-κB and IKK. It is interesting that only a subset of TNF superfamily members such as CD40L, CD70, LTβ, and RANKL are efficient inducers of both the canonical and noncanonical NF-κB pathways. Tax is also an efficient activator of both pathways, yet appears to use distinct mechanisms to activate each pathway. In both cases, Tax likely acts as an adaptor molecule or a molecular bridge that facilitates the interaction of proteins necessary for activation of NF-κB (Fig. 3). In the canonical pathway, we hypothesize that Tax recruits an upstream activator to IKKγ that promotes activation of IKK. The identification of the putative upstream activator and its mechanism of action will be a focus of future studies. In the noncanonical pathway, Tax enhances the interaction of p100 and IKKγ leading to phosphorylation of p100 and processing to p52. Future studies will be necessary to define the mechanism of Tax-mediated β-TRCP-independent p100 processing and to identify other cellular proteins that regulate p100 processing. Although Tax is a potent activator of both the canonical and noncanonical NF-κB pathways, there are clearly mechanisms that mediate persistent activation of NF-κB in the absence of Tax in ATL cells. Elucidating these mechanisms will be an important area of future research in HTLV-I-mediated leukemogenesis.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Work in this laboratory is supported by a grant from the United States Public Health Service/National Institutes of Health (CA99926). We apologize to all investigators we were unable to cite due to space constraints.

REFERENCES

1. Matsuoka, M. (2003). Human T-cell leukemia virus type I and adult T-cell leukemia. *Oncogene* **22**, 5131–5140.
2. Barmak, K., Harhaj, E., Grant, C., Alefantis, T., and Wigdahl, B. (2003). Human T cell leukemia virus type I-induced disease: pathways to cancer and neurodegeneration. *Virology* **308**, 1–12.
3. Yoshida, M. (2001). Multiple viral strategies of HTLV-1 for dysregulation of cell growth control. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **19**, 475–496.
4. Bangham, C. R. (2000). The immune response to HTLV-I. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* **12**, 397–402.
5. Igakura, T., Stinchcombe, J. C., Goon, P. K., Taylor, G. P., Weber, J. N., Griffiths, G. M., Tanaka, Y., Osame, M., and Bangham, C. R.. (2003). Spread of HTLV-I between lymphocytes by virus-induced polarization of the cytoskeleton. *Science* **299**, 1713–1716.
6. Manel, N., Kim, F. J., Kinet, S., Taylor, N., Sitbon, M., and Battini, J. L. (2003). The ubiquitous glucose transporter GLUT-1 is a receptor for HTLV. *Cell* **115**, 449–459.
7. Manel, N., Kinet, S., Battini, J. L., Kim, F. J., Taylor, N., and Sitbon, M. (2003). The HTLV receptor is an early T-cell activation marker whose expression requires de novo protein synthesis. *Blood* **101**, 1913–1918.
8. Azran, I., Schavinsky-Khrapunsky, Y., and Aboud, M. (2004). Role of Tax protein in human T-cell leukemia virus type-I leukemogenicity. *Retrovirology* **1**, 20.
9. Grant, C., Barmak, K., Alefantis, T., Yao, J., Jacobson, S., and Wigdahl, B. (2002). Human T cell leukemia virus type I and neurologic disease: Events in bone marrow, peripheral blood, and central nervous system during normal immune surveillance and neuroinflammation. *J. Cell Physiol.* **190**, 133–159.
10. Alefantis, T., Barmak, K., Harhaj, E. W., Grant, C., and Wigdahl, B. (2003). Characterization of a nuclear export signal within the human T cell leukemia virus type I transactivator protein Tax. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 21814–21822.
11. Akagi, T., Ono, H., Nyunoya, H., and Shimotohno, K. (1997). Characterization of peripheral blood T-lymphocytes transduced with HTLV-I Tax mutants with different trans-activating phenotypes. *Oncogene* **14**, 2071–2078.
12. Yamaoka, S., Inoue, H., Sakurai, M., Sugiyama, T., Hazama, M., Yamada, T., and Hatanaka, M. (1996). Constitutive activation of NF-κB is essential for transformation of rat fibroblasts by the human T-cell leukemia virus type I Tax protein. *EMBO J.* **15**, 873–887.
13. Grossman, W.J., and Ratner, L. (1996). Transgenic mouse models for HTLV-I infection. *J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr. Hum. Retrovirol.* **13 Suppl 1**, S162–169.
14. Ballard, D. W., Bohnlein, E., Lowenthal, J. W., Wano, Y., Franzà, B. R., and Greene, W. C. (1988). HTLV-I tax induces cellular proteins that activate the κB element in the IL-2 receptor α gene. *Science* **241**, 1652–1655.
15. Migone, T.S., Lin, J. X., Cereseto, A., Mulloy, J. C., O’Shea, J. J., Franchini, G., and Leonard, W. J. (1995). Constitutively activated JAK-STAT pathway in T cells transformed with HTLV-I. *Science* **269**, 79–81.
16. Ng, P.W., Iha, H., Iwanaga, Y., Bittner, M., Chen, Y., Jiang, Y., Gooden, G., Trent, J. M., Meltzer, P., Jeang, K. T., and Zeichner, S. L. (2001). Genome-wide expression changes induced by HTLV-1 Tax: evidence for MLK-3 mixed lineage kinase involvement in Tax-mediated NF-κB activation. *Oncogene* **20**, 4484–4496.
17. Jeang, K.T., Giam, C. Z., Majone, F., and Aboud, M. (2004). Life, death, and tax: role of HTLV-I oncoprotein in genetic instability and cellular transformation. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 31991–31994.
18. Gatza, M.L., Watt, J. C., and Marriott, S. J. (2003). Cellular transformation by the HTLV-I Tax protein, a jack-of-all-trades. *Oncogene* **22**, 5141–5149.
19. Suzuki, T., Kitao, S., Matsushime, H., and Yoshida, M. (1996). HTLV-1 Tax protein interacts with cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p16INK4A and counteracts its inhibitory activity towards CDK4. *EMBO J.* **15**, 1607–1614.
20. Hayden, M.S., and Ghosh, S. (2004). Signaling to NF-κB. *Genes Dev.* **18**, 2195–2224.
21. Kunsch, C., and Rosen, C. A. (1993). NF-κB subunit-specific regulation of the interleukin-8 promoter. *Mol. Cell Biol.* **13**, 6137–6146.
22. Sun, S.C., Ganchi, P. A., Ballard, D. W., and Greene, W. C. (1993). NF-κB controls expression of inhibitor IkBα: evidence for an inducible autoregulatory pathway. *Science* **259**, 1912–1915.
23. Karin, M. (1999). How NF-κB is activated: the role of the IkB kinase (IKK) complex. *Oncogene* **18**, 6867–6874.
24. Tegethoff, S., Behlke, J., and Scheidereit, C. (2003). Tetrameric oligomerization of IkB kinase gamma (IKKγ) is obligatory for IKK complex activity and NF-κB activation. *Mol. Cell Biol.* **23**, 2029–2041.
25. Ducut Sigala, J.L., Bottero, V., Young, D. B., Shevchenko, A., Mercurio, F., and Verma, I. M. (2004). Activation of transcription factor NF-κB requires ELKS, an IkB kinase regulatory subunit. *Science* **304**, 1963–1967.

26. Xiao, G., Harhaj, E. W., and Sun, S. C. (2001). NF-κB-inducing kinase regulates the processing of NF-κB2 p100. *Mol. Cell* 7, 401–409.

27. Senftleben, U., Cao, Y., Xiao, G., Greten, F. R., Krahn, G., Bonizzi, G., Chen, Y., Hu, Y., Fong, A., Sun, S. C., and Karin, M. (2001). Activation by IKKα of a second, evolutionary conserved, NF-κB signaling pathway. *Science* 293, 1495–1499.

28. Beinke, S., and Ley, S. C. (2004). Functions of NF-κB1 and NF-κB2 in immune cell biology. *Biochem J.* 382, 393–409.

29. Dejardin, E., Droin, N. M., Delhase, M., Haas, E., Cao, Y., Makris, C., Li, Y. W., Karin, M., Ware, C. F., and Green, D. R. (2002). The lymphotoxin-β receptor induces different patterns of gene expression via two NF-κB pathways. *Immunity* 17, 525–535.

30. Bonizzi, G., Bebien, M., Otero, D. C., Johnson-Vroom, K. E., Cao, Y., Vu, D., Jegga, A. G., Aronow, B. J., Ghosh, G., Rickert, R. C., and Karin, M. (2004). Activation of IKKα target genes depends on recognition of specific κB binding sites by RelB:p52 dimers. *EMBO J.* 23, 4202–4210.

31. Franzoso, G., Carlson, L., Poljak, L., Shores, E. W., Epstein, S., Leonardi, A., Grinberg, A., Tran, T., Scharton-Kersten, T., Anver, M., Love, P., Brown, K., and Siebenlist, U. (1998). Mice deficient in nuclear factor (NF)-κB/p52 present with defects in humoral responses, germinal center reactions, and splenic microarchitecture. *J. Exp. Med.* 187, 147–159.

32. Ishikawa, H., Carrasco, D., Claudio, E., Ryseck, R. P., and Bravo, R. (1997). Gastric hyperplasia and increased proliferative responses of lymphocytes in mice lacking the COOH-terminal ankyrin domain of NF-κB2. *J. Exp. Med.* 186, 999–1014.

33. Rayet, B., and Gelinas, C. (1999). Aberrant rel/nfkb genes and activity in human cancer. *Oncogene* 18, 6938–6947.

34. Xiao, G., Fong, A., and Sun, S. C. (2004). Induction of p100 processing by NF-κB-inducing kinase involves docking IkB kinase alpha (IKKα) to p100 and IKKα-mediated phosphorylation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 30099–30105.

35. Liao, G., Zhang, M., Harhaj, E. W., and Sun, S. C. (2004). Regulation of the NF-κB-inducing kinase by tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 3-induced degradation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 26243–26250.

36. Grech, A. P., Amesbury, M., Chan, T., Gardam, S., Basten, A., and Brink, R. (2004). TRAF2 differentially regulates the canonical and noncanonical pathways of NF-κB activation in mature B cells. *Immunity* 21, 629–642.

37. Hu, W.H., Mo, X. M., Walters, W. M., Brambilla, R., and Bethea, J. R. (2004). TNAP, a novel repressor of NF-κB-inducing kinase, suppresses NF-κB activation. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 35975–35983.

38. Robek, M.D., and Ratner, L. (1999). Immortalization of CD4(+) and CD8(+) T lymphocytes by human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 Tax mutants expressed in a functional molecular clone. *J. Virol.* 73, 4856–4865.

39. Kitajima, I., Shinohara, T., Bilakovics, J., Brown, D. A., Xu, X., and Nerenberg, M. (1993). Ablation of transplanted HTLV-I tax-transformed tumors in mice by antisense inhibition of NF-κB. *Science* 259, 1523.

40. Mori, N., Yamada, Y., Ikeda, S., Yamasaki, Y., Tsukasaki, K., Tanaka, Y., Tomonaga, M., Yamamoto, N., and Fujii, M. (2002). Bay 11-7082 inhibits transcription factor NF-κB and induces apoptosis of HTLV-I-infected T-cell lines and primary adult T-cell leukemia cells. *Blood* 100, 1828–1834.

41. Tamiya, S., Matsuoka, M., Etoh, K., Watanabe, T., Kamihira, S., Yamaguchi, K., and Takatsuki, K. (1996). Two types of defective human T-lymphotropic virus type I provirus in adult T-cell leukemia. *Blood* 88, 3065–3073.

42. Sun, S.C., and Ballard, D. W. (1999). Persistent activation of NF-κB by the Tax transforming protein of HTLV-1: hijacking cellular IkB kinases. *Oncogene* 18, 6948–6958.

43. Rousset, R., Desbois, C., Bantignies, F., and Jalinot, P. (1996). Effects on NF-κB1/p105 processing of the interaction between the HTLV-1 transactivator Tax and the proteasome. *Nature* 381, 328–331.

44. Harhaj, E.W., Good, L., Xiao, G., Uhlik, M., Cvijic, M. E., Rivera-Walsh, I., and Sun, S. C. (2000). Somatic mutagenesis studies of NF-κB signaling in human T cells: evidence for an essential role of IKKγ in NF-κB activation by T-cell costimulatory signals and HTLV-I Tax protein. *Oncogene* 19, 1448–1456.

45. Harhaj, E.W., and Sun, S. C. (1999). IKKγ serves as a docking subunit of the IkB kinase (IKK) and mediates interaction of IKK with the human T-cell leukemia virus Tax protein. *J. Biol. Chem.* 274, 22911–22914.

46. Xiao, G., Harhaj, E. W., and Sun, S. C. (2000). Domain-specific interaction with the IkB kinase (IKK) regulatory subunit IKKγ is an essential step in Tax-mediated activation of IKK. *J. Biol. Chem.* 275, 34060–34067.

47. Iha, H., Kibler, K. V., Yedavalli, V. R., Peloponese, J. M., Haller, K., Miyazato, A., Kasai, T., and Jeang, K. T. (2003). Segregation of NF-κB activation through NEMO/IKKγ by Tax and TNFα: implications for stimulus-specific interruption of oncogenic signaling. *Oncogene* 22, 8912–8923.

48. Xiao, G., and Sun, S. C. (2000). Activation of IKKα and IKKβ through their fusion with HTLV-I tax protein. *Oncogene* 19, 5198–5203.

49. Harhaj, E. W., and Sun, S. C. (1997). The serine/threonine phosphatase inhibitor calyculin A induces rapid degradation of IkBβ. Requirement of both the N- and C-terminal sequences. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 5409–5412.

50. Fu, D.X., Kuo, Y. L., Liu, B. Y., Jeang, K. T., and Giam, C. Z. (2003). Human T-lymphotropic virus type I tax activates IkB kinase by inhibiting IkB kinase-associated serine/threonine protein phosphatase 2A. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 1487–1493.

51. O'Mahony, A.M., Montano, M., Van Beneden, K. Chen, L. F., and Greene, W. C. (2004). Human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 tax induction of biologically active NF-κB requires IkB kinase-1-mediated phosphorylation of RelA/p65. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 18137–18145.

52. Xiao, G., Cvijic, M. E., Fong, A., Harhaj, E. W., Uhlik, M. T., Waterfield, M., and Sun, S. C. (2001). Retroviral oncoprotein Tax induces processing of NF-κB2/p100 in T cells: evidence for the involvement of IKKα. *EMBO J.* 20, 6805–6815.

53. Amir, R.E., Haecker, H., Karin, M., and Ciechanover, A. (2004). Mechanism of processing of the NF-κB2 p100 precursor: identification of the specific polyubiquitin chain-anchoring lysine residue and analysis of the role of NEDD8-modification on the SCF(β-TrCP) ubiquitin ligase. *Oncogene* 23, 2540–2547.

54. Qu, Z., Qing, G., Rabson, A., and Xiao, G. (2004). Tax deregulation of NF-κB2 p100 processing involves both β-TrCP-dependent and -independent mechanisms. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 44563–44572.

55. Liao, G., and Sun, S. C. (2003). Regulation of NF-κB2/p100 processing by its nuclear shuttling. *Oncogene* 22, 4868–4874.
