
Microbiological Research 160 (2005) 233–242

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

**Salt stress induction of glutamyl endopeptidase biosynthesis in *Bacillus intermedius***

Leila Gabdrakhmanova${}^{a,*}$, Innokentii Vishniakov${}^{b}$, Margarita Sharipova${}^{a}$, Nelly Balaban${}^{a}$, Sergey Kostrov${}^{b}$, Inna Leshchinskaya${}^{a}$

${}^{a}$Department of Microbiology, Kazan State University, Kazan, Russia  
${}^{b}$Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russia  

Accepted 21 May 2004

---

### KEYWORDS
Biosynthesis;  
DegS–DegU;  
Glutamyl endopeptidase;  
Salt stress;  
Serine protease  

---

### Summary
Bacteria from the genus *Bacillus* have evolved complicated regulatory networks to be protected from various environmental stresses, including sudden increase in salinity. Among these regulatory mechanisms is the DegS–DegU signal transduction system, which controls degradative enzyme synthesis and is involved in sensing salt stress in *Bacillus subtilis*. We report the study of biosynthesis regulation of *Bacillus intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase under salt stress conditions. Salt stress during growth in medium containing 1–2.5 M NaCl, KCl or disodium succinate leads to the induction of glutamyl endopeptidase. Analysis of the regulatory region of the gene for *B.* *intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase revealed the presence of a tentative target sequence for DegU control, AGATN${}_{10}$TTGAG. For the expression of the glutamyl endopeptidase gene, functional DegU protein is required. Thus, we suggest that expression of the gene for *B.* *intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase may be controlled by a regulatory system analogous to DegS–DegU two-component system in *B.* *subtilis*.

© 2005 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

---

### Introduction
Bacteria from the genera *Bacillus* have evolved highly sophisticated regulatory networks for protection against sudden unfavourable environmental changes, including nutrient starvation, changes in temperature and humidity, oxidative stress, sudden elevation in medium salinity and others. *Bacillus*

*Corresponding author.  
E-mail address: Leila.Gabdrakhmanova@ksu.ru (L. Gabdrakhmanova).

0944-5013/$ - see front matter © 2005 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.  
doi:10.1016/j.micres.2004.05.005
to cope with salt stress conditions among other environmental stresses. These regulatory mechanisms involve global changes in expression of a large number of genes. At least three distinct mechanisms of salt stress induction have been reported for *B. subtilis*. Transcriptional activation by alternative sigma factor $\sigma^{\mathrm{B}}$ of the class II heat shock genes, coding for general stress proteins, is the first type of regulation (Volker et al., 1999).

Class II heat shock genes encode also a $\sigma^{\mathrm{B}}$-independent group of general stress proteins including FtsH, ClpC and ClpP proteases (Deuerling et al., 1995; Fedhila et al., 2002). Among them, ClpC was proved to be required for the response to salt stress (Fedhila et al., 2002). Notably, these two mechanisms provide non-specific stress resistance. The synthesis of degradative enzymes together with the expression of genetic competence in *B. subtilis* are controlled by a complex regulatory cascade including the ComP–ComA and DegS–DegU two-component systems (Klier et al., 1992; Mader et al., 2002). Recently, expression of several genes that are controlled by the DegS–DegU regulatory pair, including the genes coding for degradative enzymes, was shown to be affected under salt stress conditions (Kunst and Rapoport, 1995; Dartois et al., 1998). In contrast to the first two mechanisms, salt stress response mediated by DegS–DegU two-component system seems to be subjected to salt-specific induction. Besides, the DegS–DegU signal transduction system is known to play a key role in the complex network that governs transition from the exponential to the stationary growth phase under growth-limiting conditions (Mader et al., 2002).

*Bacillus intermedius*, a gram-positive spore-forming soil bacterium, is known to produce during the stationary phase a wide range of extracellular proteases (Balaban et al., 1993, 1994). Recently, we have isolated and characterized the novel Glu, Asp-specific protease (glutamyl endopeptidase) from *B. intermedius*, strain 3-19 (Leshchinskaya et al., 1997). Glutamyl endopeptidases (EC 3.4.21.19) constitute a newly discovered subfamily within chymotrypsin family of serine proteases. These enzymes possess narrow substrate specificity and split only the peptide bonds formed by $\alpha$-carboxyl groups of glutamyl and aspartic acid (Rudenskaya, 1998). Glutamyl endopeptidases have been isolated from Staphylococcus, streptomycetes and Bacilli (Drapeau et al., 1972; Yokoi et al., 2001; Ohara-Nemoto et al., 2002; Yoshida et al., 1988; Khaidarova et al., 1989; Kitadokoro et al., 1993; Niidome et al., 1990; Svendsen and Breddam, 1992). Structure and enzymatic properties of glutamyl endopeptidases are thoroughly studied,

and the genes for these enzymes in many cases are cloned and sequenced (Demidyuk and Kostrov, 1999). However, their biological role is still unclear, and data available in literature describing the mechanisms that control biosynthesis of glutamyl endopeptidases are very scanty.

We have described earlier the pathways of biosynthesis and the location of glutamyl endopeptidase in *B. intermedius* cells (Gabdrakhmanova et al., 1999). The gene encoding for *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase was cloned in *B. subtilis* and expression of the gene was analyzed in recombinant strains (Rebrikov et al., 1999; Gabdrakhmanova et al., 2002).

Here we report the study of the regulation of biosynthesis of *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase under salt stress conditions, underlying the suggestion that expression of the gene coding for this enzyme is controlled by DegU protein.

## Materials and methods

### Bacterial strains, plasmids and transformation

Streptomycin-resistant *B. intermedius* strain 3-19, obtained from The All-Russia Collection of Industrial Microorganisms (B-3833), was used throughout this study. *B. subtilis* strain AJ73 (amyE4, npr512, apr73) and *B. subtilis* strain QB4883 (*trpC2 amyE::(wapA′-lacZ aphA3) ΔdegU::erm*) were used as the plasmid hosts for expression studies. Strain *B. subtilis* AJ73 was kindly supplied by Dr. J. Jomantas (Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russia), strain *B. subtilis* QB4883 – by Prof. M. Debarbouille (Institut Pasteur, Paris, France). Plasmid Δ58.21 was constructed by using the pCB22 vector and contained the complete gene for glutamyl endopeptidase from *B. intermedius* conferring resistance to chloramphenicol in *B. subtilis* hosts (Rebrikov et al., 1999). Plasmid isolation was performed as described by Sambrook et al. (1989). Transformation of *B. subtilis* competent cells with plasmid DNA was carried out using standard technique (Sambrook et al., 1989). Transformants were selected by using the chloramphenicol resistance gene linked to the gene construct.

### Culture conditions

Initially, *B. intermedius* cells were cultivated in a medium containing (%): peptone, 2.0; CaCl₂·2H₂O, 0.055; MgSO₄·7H₂O, 0.05; NaCl, 0.3; MnSO₄, 0.01;
Salt stress induction of glutamyl endopeptidase biosynthesis in *Bacillus intermedius* 235

Na₂HPO₄, 0.02; NH₄Cl, 0.02. The medium was supplemented with 500 μg/ml streptomycin, since *B.* *intermedius* strain 3-19 is streptomycin-resistant [Leshchinskaya et al., 1997]. The medium for cultivation of *B.* *subtilis*AJ73 Δ58.21 and *B.* *subtilis* QB4883 Δ58.21 contained (%): peptone, 2.0; yeast extract, 1.0; CaCl₂·2H₂O, 0.01; MgSO₄·7H₂O, 0.03; NaCl, 0.3; MnSO₄, 0.01; Na₂HPO₄, 0.03, and was supplemented with 20 μg/ml chloramphenicol. The media were adjusted at pH 8.5 before autoclaving. The cells were grown at 30 °C in 100 ml Erlenmeyer flasks with a culture volume of 20 ml on a rotary shaker set at 200 rpm for 18–20 h. Inorganic phosphate (as Na₂HPO₄) and nitrogen source (as NH₄Cl) were added at the indicated concentrations before the inoculation. Peptone from Vinnitski factory, yeast extract from Difco, chloramphenicol and streptomycin from Sigma were used in the study.

The salinity of bacterial cultures was raised by adding appropriate volumes of sodium chloride, potassium chloride or disodium succinate from their concentrated stock solutions prior to the inoculation. Salt stress was imposed by adding NaCl or KCl to exponentially growing cells to a final concentration of 1.5M.

The growth of bacterial cultures was monitored spectrophotometrically at a wavelength of 590 nm (OD₅₉₀).

### Glutamyl endopeptidase activity

Determination of the enzyme activity was carried out using Z-Glu-pNA as a substrate. One ml substrate (0.5 mg/ml) in 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) was incubated with 50 μl of the enzyme for 50 min at 37 °C. After termination of the reaction by adding 0.5 ml 1 M sodium acetate buffer (pH 4.7), the absorbance was measured at 410 nm. The activity unit was defined as the amount of the enzyme capable to produce 1 μmole of p-nitroaniline (pNA) per min from Z-Glu-pNA under specific conditions ([Leshchinskaya et al., 1997]). The result was multiplied on the coefficient 1000. Productivity of the cells (specific activity) was calculated as the ratio of glutamyl endopeptidase activity to the value of biomass. Specific rate of growth µ and specific rate of protease accumulation ε were calculated: µ = d(ln D)/dt; ε = d(ln A)/dt.

### Statistical analysis

The data are shown as the calculated mean values of the results of five independent experiments. Statistical analysis of the data obtained was carried out using the standard deviation calculation taking σ < 10% as a difference which was not significant.

The DNA sequence preceding the gene for *B.* *intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase was inspected for the occurrence of the characteristic –35 and –10 boxes of SigA-type promoters ([Helmann, 1995]) by using the Softberry Prediction of Bacterial Promoters (PROM) network server. Potential DegU target regions were identified after visual inspection of the DNA sequence.

### Results

#### Biosynthesis of *B.* *intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase is induced in conditions of high salinity

To determine whether the regulation of *B.* *intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase biosynthesis could be categorized as the salt stress induction mechanism, synthesis of the enzyme in low-salt and high-salt media was studied. *B.* *intermedius* cells were grown in the liquid culture media supplemented with various concentrations of NaCl (from 0.5 to 2.5M). Law-salt medium containing 0.05 M NaCl (see Materials and methods) was taken as a control medium. **Figure 1** displays the results of this experiment. The growth of *B.* *intermedius* was significantly reduced on all the media tested. Concentrations of sodium chloride exceeding 2.5M were growth-preventing. At the same time, synthesis of glutamyl endopeptidase was strongly induced in conditions of high salinity (**Fig. 1**). Sodium chloride, being present in the medium at concentration of 1 M, caused an increase of 40% in the enzyme production. When *B.* *intermedius* was grown in liquid medium containing 2M NaCl, the level of glutamyl endopeptidase biosynthesis was three-fold higher than that in control. And, finally, salt stress during the growth in the medium supplemented with 2.5 sodium chloride led to an approximately four-fold increase in glutamyl endopeptidase production.

In medium containing the corresponding concentrations of potassium chloride, the same increase in glutamyl endopeptidase production was observed (**Fig. 2**). It should be noted that a similar stimulating effect was also obtained when NaCl was replaced with disodium succinate, suggesting that chloride anions were not involved in the salt-mediated regulation (result not shown).

In case of the expression of *B.* *subtilis* proteases the DegS kinase was assumed to detect stress signal

at the end of the exponential growth phase (Kunst and Rapoport, 1995). Therefore, the level of synthesis of degradative enzymes that are controlled by DegS–DegU two-component system might be influenced by salt stress both in conditions of periodical cultivation in high-salt media and after the addition of a stress factor to the exponentially growing cells. Since an active biosynthesis of glutamyl endopeptidase occurs at the stage of slowing down of the growth of B. intermedius culture (Gabdrakhmanova et al., 1999), we wished to examine whether the synthesis of the enzyme would be induced when the cells were subjected to the salt stress at this stage. We assumed that in this case modulating of salt stress may affect regulatory mechanisms directing the enzyme synthesis. NaCl was added to bacterial culture at the 14th and 16th hours of growth to the final concentration of 1.5M. As shown in Fig. 3, 2h after the addition of the sodium chloride the level of glutamyl endopeptidase production in both cases increased approximately two-fold if compared with that in control medium, maximal effect being obtained at the 16th hour of cultivation, when biosynthesis of glutamyl endopeptidase was more active, and the rate of accumulation of the enzyme in culture liquid was shown to be the highest (Gabdrakhmanova et al., 1999).

To address the question of whether the described increase in glutamyl endopeptidase activity was due to the induction of biosynthesis or to the possible conformational modification of the protein molecule, we assessed the activity of the purified enzyme preparation in the presence of various concentrations of NaCl or KCl. The protease activity did not change when the enzyme preparation was exposed to high salt concentrations, suggesting that the elevated levels of glutamyl endopeptidase in culture liquid are attributed to the regulatory changes in the enzyme biosynthesis.

A putative DegU target sequence is present upstream of the gene coding for B. intermedius glutamyl endopeptidase

In order to support the assumption that expression of B. intermedius glutamyl endopeptidase may be controlled by the DegS–DegU regulatory pair, we performed the analysis of the nucleotide sequence located upstream of the gene coding for glutamyl endopeptidase tempting to detect the potential target sequence for DegU control. A putative DegU target sequence has been described recently by Dartois et al.: the promoter regions of the genes known to be regulated by DegS and DegU were

Salt stress induction of glutamyl endopeptidase biosynthesis in Bacillus intermedius 237

A                                                                 B
14                                                                 1.6
12                                                                 1.4
10                                                                 1.2
8                                                                  1
6                                                                  0.8
4                                                                  0.6
2                                                                  0.4
0                                                                  0.2
14 16 18 20 22 24                                                14 16 18 20 22 24
Time, hours                                                       Time, hours

Figure 3. Effect of salt stress on *B. intermedius* growth (A) and glutamyl endopeptidase production (B) if NaCl was added to exponentially growing cells. Specific glutamyl endopeptidase activity (productivity) was calculated as the ratio of glutamyl endopeptidase activity to the value of biomass, and taken as an index of effectiveness of the biosynthesis process. Arrows indicate the time of NaCl addition. Closed squares: cells were grown in control culture medium containing 0.05 NaCl; closed triangles: 1.5M NaCl was added at the 14th hour of cultivation; closed diamonds: 1.5M NaCl was added at the 16th hour of cultivation.

30                                                                 60
CAGCTGCCAC CTTCATCTGA AGTACC GATG ATCATGATCG GACCGGGTAC AGGAATCGCT
90                                                                 20
CCATT TAGAG GGTTT GTTCA GGCAAGAGAA GTGTGGCAGA AGGAAGGAAA ACCACTAGGC
150                                                                180
GAAGCTCACC TGTATTTTGG CTGTCGTCAC CCTCTTGA[AG AT]GATCTGTA TT[TTGAG]GAA
210                                                                240
ATGCAGCTTG CAGCGCAAAA AGGAGTTGTT CACATCCACC GGGCTTATTC TC GTCACAAA A
270                                                                300
GAGCAAAAAG TATATGTCCA GCATT TGTTG AAAGAAGACG GGGCATGCT GATCAAGTTA
330                                                                360
CTTGACCAAG GTGGGTATCT TTACGTGTGC GGGGACGGAA AAGTTATGGC ACCAGACGTA
390                                                                420
GAGGCTACGC TTATCGACCT CTATCAAAAC GAGAAACATT GCTCGAAGGA AACAGCTGAA
450                                                                480
AATTGGCTGA CAACCCTTGC AAATGACAAT AGATATGTA A AAGATGTGTG GAGCTGAAAA
510                                                                540
ATTAGGAAGA CCGCCAATTA GGCGGTTTTT TCTAT TTCAT AGAGAGAGAT CAATAGAATG
570                                                                600
AAGGTTGGAA AGATACAAAA CACCTAATTT AAAATGAAA TATTTTGA A AAAATAAGAA
-35 630 -10 SD
TATTCTCTCA TTTACTCCAA TATGAAACAA TCGTATGATT TTTGATATAG GACATAAAGG
AGGAAT

Figure 4. Promoter sequence of the gene for glutamyl endopeptidase of *B. intermedius*. The putative Shine-Dalgarno sequence and the -35 and -10 regions are underlined. Nucleotide sequence sharing 78% identity with the potential DegU target sequence is boxed. Nucleotide sequences with less similarity to the proposed DegU binding determinant are shown in bold.

aligned, and the consensus sequence was inferred (Dartois et al., 1998). The promoter region of glutamyl endopeptidase gene is shown in Fig. 4. Potential -10 and -35 regions recognized by sigma A identified by using Softberry BPROM network server are underlined. In the regulatory region of the gene

for glutamyl endopeptidase the nucleotide sequence sharing 78% identity with consensus sequence typical for DegU-regulated promoters was found: AGAT N<sub>10</sub> TTGAG. Besides, several more nucleotide sequences similar to the proposed DegU binding determinant (with less percent of identity)

| wapA | -41 | AAAA | ATAT | TGTAATGATAT | TTCAG | TCT |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| sacB | -128 | GAAA | AGAA | ACAGATAGATTTT | TTTAG | TTC |
| sacXY | +245 | ATGA | ACAA | GCCGACTTTTC | TTCAG | CAA |
| aprE | -188 | ACCT | AAAA | AAGCATGACAT | TTCAG | CAT |
| degU | (214) | GAGA | AGAA | AAACAAATCA | TTCGG | CTT |
| degR | -286 | ATCG | AGAG | CTGCCAGCTC | TTCAG | ATT |
| degQ | -173 | ATTA | AGAA | TCTTTCTCAAT | TTCAG | CAC |
| srfAB | (168) | TGAA | AAAA | CAGTACAAACA | TTCAG | CCC |
| yxjJl | (347) | AAAA | AGAA | ATCCAGCCCCAT | TTCAA | AAA |
| comG | -94 | TGCC | AGAA | AGAATTGGTTT | TTCAG | CAT |
| comC | -100 | CGGC | AGAA | TCAAAAAAGA | TTCTG | CCG |
| comEA | (284) | AAAT | AAAA | ATCATCTCGTT | TTCAG | AAA |
| mecA | -85 | AAAT | AGAA | ATACAAAGGAA | TTCAC | ACT |

consensus:  
AGAA  
N₁₁  
TTCAG  

gse B.intermedius: -487  
TTGA  
AGAT  
GATCTGTATT  
TTGAG  
GAA

Figure 5. Comparison of the nucleotide sequence upstream of the gene for *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase (*gse*) with nucleotide sequences located upstream of genes regulated by DegS and DegU and the consensus DegU target sequence inferred by Dartois et al. Numbers preceding the sequences indicate positions of the leftmost nucleotide relative to the transcriptional site; those in parentheses correspond to positions relative to the translational start site (Dartois et al., 1998).

were detected in the control region of the analysed gene (Fig. 4). Figure 5 shows the putative DegU target site identified in the promoter of glutamyl endopeptidase gene in comparison with nucleotide sequences located upstream of genes known to be controlled by DegU together with the deduced consensus sequence.

Expression of *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase gene in *degU* deletion mutant

The *degU* gene was reported recently to be involved in sensing salt stress and to affect degradative enzyme synthesis and competence gene expression (Kunst and Rapoport, 1995). Inactivation or deletion of *degU* abolishes the salt stress response of *B. subtilis* (Dartois et al., 1998). As the next step of our study, expression of *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase gene in low-salt and high-salt media was tested in *B. subtilis* *degU* deletion mutant. Plasmid Δ58.21, carrying the complete gene for *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase, was introduced into *B. subtilis* strain QB4883 (Dartois et al., 1998), and the obtained strain was assessed for glutamyl endopeptidase synthesis with respect to high salt concentrations. *B. subtilis* strain AJ73 with a functional *degS-degU* operon was transformed with Δ58.21 plasmid and served as the control. Table 1 describes the level of glutamyl endopeptidase gene expression in both *B. subtilis* strains in conditions of low and high salinity. *B. subtilis* QB4883 Δ58.21 displayed a very low, hardly detectable level of glutamyl endopeptidase expression both in low- and high-salt medium. On the contrary, *B. subtilis*

Table 1. Expression of the *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase gene in a *B. subtilis* DegU deletion mutant (*B. subtilis* QB4883) and a *B. subtilis* strain with the functional DegU regulatory protein (*B. subtilis* AJ73)

| NaCl (M) | Glutamyl endopeptidase activity (units/ml) |
| --- | --- |
|  | *B. subtilis* QB4883 | *B. subtilis* AJ73 |
| 0.05 | 0.15 | 6.5 |
| 1 | 0.085 | 5.9 |
| 1.5 | 0.08 | 6.5 |
| 2 | 0.08 | 5.1 |

AJ73 Δ58.21 produced normal amounts of the enzyme in high-salt as well as in low-salt medium, although, surprisingly, production of glutamyl endopeptidase by recombinant strain was not increased in the presence of high salt concentrations. It thus appears that *degU* regulatory gene is required for the high level of glutamyl endopeptidase gene expression in the liquid culture media.

Discussion

Soil bacteria from the genera *Bacillus* often experience fluctuations in the osmolarity and salinity due to the frequent drought and flooding of their natural habitat – the upper layers of soil. In these conditions the cells must be able to adapt to transient or permanent high salt concentrations in their environment. When *B. subtilis* encounters a variety of growth-limiting stresses, including salt stress, the general stress response is induced

causing expression of a set of stress-specific proteins, or general stress proteins (Petersohn et al., 2001). However, this molecular mechanism provides non-specific stress resistance only. Recently, a number of authors documented the DegS–DegU signal transduction system to be involved in salt stress-specific regulation (Kunst and Rapoport, 1995; Dartois et al., 1998). In *B. subtilis*, the DegS–DegU and ComP–ComA two-component systems control the expression of competence genes as well as the synthesis of degradative enzymes, including an intracellular protease and several extracellular enzymes, such as levan sucrase, β-glucanases, α-amylase, xylanase, and proteases (Kunst and Rapoport, 1995). DegS–DegU regulatory system is known also to play a special role in saving of vitally important cell functions during the transition from the exponential to the stationary growth phase, when the supply of rapidly metabolizable compounds is depleted and the cells face multiple stresses (Mader et al., 2002).

In this work, we studied the biosynthesis of glutamyl endopeptidase from *B. intermedius*, the spore-forming soil bacterium evolutionary close to *B. subtilis* (Leshchinskaya et al., 1997), under salt stress conditions. In addition, in order to determine if the regulation of the synthesis of this enzyme could be categorized as the salt stress induction mechanism, we undertook the analysis of the promoter region of the gene encoding for glutamyl endopeptidase together with the study of glutamyl endopeptidase gene expression in *B. subtilis* DegU deletion mutant. Glutamyl endopeptidase is the enzyme of a stationary phase, and maximum rate of its synthesis was recorded at 16th hour of growth (Gabdrakhmanova et al., 1999). Catalytic and physico-chemical properties of *B. intermedius* proteinase, the structure of the enzyme as well as the pathways of its biosynthesis were studied in great detail and described previously (Leshchinskaya et al., 1997; Rebrikov et al., 1999; Gabdrakhmanova et al., 2002). However, the biological role of glutamyl endopeptidase and molecular mechanisms that govern its biosynthesis remain to be fully elucidated.

Alignment of typical DegU regulated promoters allowed Dartois et al. (1998) to identify the conserved nucleotide sequence AGAAN<sub>11</sub>TTCAG. The presence of this sequence in control region of the gene is likely to be necessary for the binding with DegU regulatory protein. With this in mind, we performed the analysis of the promoter region of *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase gene and found the nucleotide sequence sharing 78% identity with consensus DegU target sequence: AGATN<sub>10</sub>TTGAG. Several more regions sharing less identity

with the potential DegU binding determinant were identified in the regulatory region of glutamyl endopeptidase gene as well (Fig. 4). The finding of the potential target sequence for DegU control in the promoter of *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase gene allowed us to suggest that glutamyl endopeptidase synthesis might undergo positive regulation by the DegS–DegU regulatory pair in conditions of high salinity, since the DegS–DegU two-component system is known to have a positive regulatory effect on degradative enzyme synthesis under salt stress conditions (Klier et al., 1992). To support this assumption, we examined biosynthesis of glutamyl endopeptidase in low-salt and high-salt liquid culture media. Significant increase in the level of the enzyme synthesis in high-salt liquid medium was recorded: salt stress in the medium containing 2 and 2.5 M sodium chloride led to an approximately three- and four-fold increase in glutamyl endopeptidase production, respectively. Analogous enhancement of the proteinase production was observed when *B. intermedius* cells were grown in the medium supplemented with the same concentrations of potassium chloride. When NaCl was replaced with disodium chloride, similar stimulating effect was obtained, suggesting that chloride anions were not involved in the salt-mediated regulation. Earlier, in the work of Kunst and Rapoport expression of *B. subtilis* genes coding for degradative enzymes and controlled by the DegS–DegU two-component system was shown to be affected under salt stress conditions, such as 1 M NaCl, 1 M KCl or disodium succinate. The authors proved the stimulatory or inhibitory effect to be DegS–DegU dependent as well as salt specific, since it could not be obtained during the growth at high osmolarity such as 0.5 M lactose (Kunst and Rapoport, 1995). In our study, we demonstrated that glutamyl endopeptidase synthesis is induced under conditions of high salinity, inorganic and organic salts causing stimulatory effect of the same range. The glutamyl endopeptidase activity of the purified enzyme preparation did not change at high salt concentrations, proving that the described increase in the enzyme activity in *B. intermedius* culture liquid was due to the stimulation of certain biosynthetic processes but not to the conformational changes in the protein molecule. Besides, in our previous study the level of *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase production in another medium of high osmolarity, culture medium containing 0.5 or 1 M of glucose, lactose or sucrose, was shown to be lower than that in control medium, thus indicating indirectly the salt specificity of stimulatory effect obtained in this work (Gabdrakhmanova et al., 1999). When high salt
concentrations were added to the exponentially growing *B. intermedius* cells, during the active synthesis of the enzyme, the significant enhancement in glutamyl endopeptidase biosynthesis was observed as well (after 2h delay), supporting the suggestion that the synthesis of this enzyme is specifically induced under conditions of high salinity. Thus, in our study the finding of the tentative target sequence for DegU control in the promoter region of *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase gene is in accord with the results of experiments investigating the effect of salt stress conditions on the production of this enzyme by growing *B. intermedius* cells, suggesting that expression of the gene coding for glutamyl endopeptidase might be under the control of DegS–DegU two-component system.

To obtain an additional confirmation that salt stress stimulation of *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase production is DegS–DegU dependent, we examined expression of the glutamyl endopeptidase gene in *B. subtilis* DegU deletion mutant, strain QB4883. Deleting DegU regulatory protein or replacing it with the degU146 allele, which produces a form of DegU that cannot be phosphorylated, is known to suppress the synthesis of degradative enzymes and affect ability of the cells for genetic competence in *B. subtilis* (Klier et al., 1992; Dartois et al., 1998). In our study, expression of *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase gene in *B. subtilis* DegU deletion mutant was strongly suppressed both in conditions of high and low salinity, indicating that for effective expression of this gene functionally active DegU regulatory protein is required.

However, our results regarding regulatory effect of the DegS–DegU two-component system on the synthesis of glutamyl endopeptidase are not in accord with data published by other authors. So, for *B. subtilis* Kunst and Rapoport demonstrated that salt stress strongly stimulated the expression of the gene for levansucrase, but, on the contrary, down regulated the expression of the alkaline protease gene (Kunst and Rapoport, 1995). Nekolny and Chaloupka reported the extracellular protease production in growing *B. megaterium* cells to be strongly repressed by salt stress (Nekolny and Chaloupka, 2000). In contrast, we showed that biosynthesis of *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase, an extracellular proteinase belonging to the family of serine proteases (Rudenskaya, 1998), was significantly stimulated under high salt conditions and was likely to undergo positive control by the DegS–DegU regulatory pair. These conflicting results may be potentially due to the fact that during evolution *B. intermedius* developed regulatory systems analogous to those in *B. subtilis* but varying in details, thus causing distinct physiological responses. In general, it appears rather clearly that in both microorganisms certain regulatory genes affect the expression of target genes under different growth conditions. It must be emphasized, however, that the regulatory network affecting extracellular alkaline protease expression in *B. subtilis* is particularly complex (Strauch and Hoch, 1993; Kunst and Rapoport, 1995). It is possible that a salt stress signal is transduced by the DegS–DegU system, leading to positive or negative effects, depending on the involvement of additional regulatory genes.

Furthermore, positive DegS–DegU-mediated regulation of glutamyl endopeptidase synthesis may be due to the potential role of this enzyme in the adaptive responses of *B. intermedius* during the stationary phase. It is well known that, in contrast with digestive extracellular proteases in *Bacillus*, glutamyl endopeptidases are characterized with a very low level of expression (Shevelev et al., 2000). Taking into account their narrow substrate specificity, it is tempting to suppose the unique role of these enzymes in the bacterial cells. Nevertheless, the biological role of glutamyl endopeptidases is still unclear. These proteases probably are not just the scavenging enzymes, but are essential for either growth (Shevelev et al., 2000) or sporulation (Sharipova et al., 2002). At the increases in the salt concentrations (and under hyper-osmotic conditions in general) *B. subtilis* is shown to benefit from the accumulation of neutral low-molecular osmoprotective compounds including a large amino acid pool, of which a significant proportion are glutamate and proline. Proteases are suggested to play an essential role in this kind of osmoadaptation (Sleator and Hill, 2001). Therefore, one could surmise that glutamyl endopeptidase may promote the accumulation of glutamate in *B. intermedius* cells under salt stress conditions, playing an important role in the adaptation of this bacterium to environmental elevations in salinity, but to indicate more precisely biological role of this enzyme, further, more detailed study is necessary.

In conclusion, in this study we established that salt stress leads to the induction of *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase synthesis, and promoter region of the gene for glutamyl endopeptidase contains the potential DegU target nucleotide sequence, suggesting that expression of the gene for *B. intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase is controlled by regulatory system analogous to DegS–DegU two-component signal transduction system in *B. subtilis*.
Salt stress induction of glutamyl endopeptidase biosynthesis in *Bacillus intermedius* 241

### Acknowledgements

This work was partly financially supported by Russian Foundation of Basic Research Grant No. 03-04-48755.

### References

Balaban, N.P., Sharipova, M.R., Usmanova, A.M., Itskovitch, E.L., Leshchinskaya, I.B., 1993. Extracellular alkaline proteinase from *Bacillus intermedius*. Isolation, purification and some properties of the enzyme. Biochemistry (Moscow) 58, 1923–1928.

Balaban, N.P., Sharipova, M.R., Itskovitch, E.L., Leshchinskaya, I.B., Rudenskaya, G.N., 1994. Secreted serine proteinase of spore-forming bacteria *Bacillus intermedius* 3-19. Biochemistry (Moscow) 59, 1393–1400.

Dartois, V., Debarbouille, M., Kunst, F., Rapoport, G., 1998. Characterization of a novel member of the DegS-DegU regulon affected by salt stress in *Bacillus subtilis*. J. Bacteriol. 180, 1855–1861.

Demidyuk, I.V., Kostrov, S.V., 1999. On the functional organization of glutamyl endopeptidases. Mol. Biol. (Moscow) 33, 84–88.

Deuerling, E., Paeslack, B., Schuman, W., 1995. The *ftsH* gene of *Bacillus subtilis* is transiently induced after osmotic and temperature upshift. J. Bacteriol. 177, 4105–4112.

Drapeau, G., Boily, Y., Houmard, J., 1972. Purification and properties of an extracellular protease of *Staphylococcus aureus*. J. Biol. Chem. 247, 6720–6726.

Fedhila, S., Msadek, T., Nel, P., Lereclus, D., 2002. Distinct *clpC* genes control specific adaptive responses in *Bacillus thuringiensis*. J. Bacteriol. 184, 5554–5562.

Gabdrakhmanova, L.A., Shakirov, E.V., Balaban, N.P., Sharipova, M.R., Rudenskaya, G.N., Leshchinskaya, I.B., 1999. Biosynthesis and localization of glutamylendopeptidase from *Bacillus intermedius* 3-19. Microbios 100, 97–108.

Gabdrakhmanova, L.A., Balaban, N.P., Sharipova, M.R., Kostrov, S.V., Akimkina, T.V., Rudenskaya, G.N., Leshchinskaya, I.B., 2002. Optimization of *Bacillus intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase production by recombinant strain of *Bacillus subtilis* and localization of glutamyl endopeptidase in *Bacillus subtilis* cells. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 31, 256–263.

Hecker, M., Volker, U., 2001. General stress response of *Bacillus subtilis* and other bacteria. Adv. Microb. Physiol. 44, 35–91.

Helmann, J.D., 1995. Compilation and analysis of *Bacillus subtilis σA*-dependent promoter sequences: evidence for extended contact between RNA polymerase and upstream promoter DNA. Nucl. Acids Res. 23, 2351–2360.

Khaidarova, N.V., Rudenskaya, G.N., Revina, L.P., Stepanov, V.M., Egorov, N.S., 1989. Glu, Asp-specific

proteinase from *Streptomyces thermovulgaris*. Biochemistry (Moscow) 54, 46–52.

Kitadokoro, K., Nakamura, E., Tamaki, M., Horii, T., Okamoto, H., Shin, M., Sato, T., Fujiwara, T., Tsuzuki, H., Yoshida, N., Teraoka, H., 1993. Purification, characterization and molecular cloning of an acidic amino acid-specific proteinase from *Streptomyces fradiae* ATCC 14544. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1163, 149–157.

Klier, A., Msadek, T., Rapoport, G., 1992. Positive regulation in the gram-positive bacterium *Bacillus subtilis*. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 46, 429–459.

Kunst, F., Rapoport, G., 1995. Salt stress is an environmental signal affecting degradative enzyme synthesis in *Bacillus subtilis*. J. Bacteriol. 177, 2403–2407.

Leshchinskaya, I.B., Shakirov, E.V., Itskovitch, E.L., Balaban, N.P., Mardanova, A.M., Sharipova, M.R., Viryasov, M.B., Rudenskaya, G.N., Stepanov, V.M., 1997. Glutamyl endopeptidase of *Bacillus intermedius*, strain 3-19. FEBS Lett. 404, 241–244.

Mader, U., Antelmann, H., Buder, T., Dahl, M.K., Hecker, M., Homuth, G., 2002. *Bacillus subtilis* functional genomics: genome-wide analysis of the DegS-DegU regulon by transcriptomics and proteomics. Mol. Genet. Genomics 268, 455–467.

Nekolny, D., Chaloupka, J., 2000. Protein catabolism in growing *Bacillus megaterium* during adaptation to salt stress. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 184, 173–177.

Niidome, T., Yoshida, N., Ogata, F., Ido, A., Noda, K., 1990. Purification and characterization of an acidic amino acid-specific endopeptidase of *Bacillus subtilis* obtained from a commercial preparation (Protease Type XVI, Sigma). J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 108, 965–970.

Ohara-Nemoto, Y., Ikeda, Y., Kobayashi, M., Sasaki, M., Tajika, S., Kimura, S., 2002. Characterization and molecular cloning of a glutamyl endopeptidase from *Staphylococcus epidermidis*. Microb. Pathogen. 33, 33–41.

Petersohn, A., Brigulla, M., Haas, S., Hoheisel, J.D., Volker, U., Hecker, M., 2001. Global analysis of the general stress response of *Bacillus subtilis*. J. Bacteriol. 183, 5617–5631.

Rebrikov, D.V., Akimkina, T.V., Shevelev, A.B., Demidyuk, I.V., Bushueva, A.M., Kostrov, S.V., Chestukhina, G.G., Stepanov, V.M., 1999. Molecular cloning and nucleotide sequence of the *Bacillus intermedius* glutamyl endopeptidase gene. J. Protein Chem. 18, 21–27.

Rudenskaya, G.N., 1998. Glutamylendopeptidases from microorganisms, a new subfamily of chymotrypsin proteases. Bioorg. Khim. (Moscow) 24, 256–261.

Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E.F., Maniatis, T., 1989. Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual, second ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York.

Sharipova, M.R., Balaban, N.P., Gabdrakhmanova, L.A., Shilova, M.A., Kadyrova, Ju.M., Rudenskaya, G.N., Leshchinskaya, I.B., 2002. Hydrolytic enzymes and sporulation in *Bacillus intermedius*. Microbiologiya (Moscow) 71, 494–499.

Shevelev, A.B., Aleoshin, V.V., Trachuk, L.A., Granovsky, A.E., Kogan, Y.N., Rumer, L.M., Serkina, A.V., Semenova, E.V., Bushueva, A.M., Livshits, V.A., Kostrov,

S.V., Shcheglov, A.S., Novikova, S.I., Chestukhina, G.G., 2000. Expression of Bacillar glutamyl endopeptidase genes in *Bacillus subtilis* by a new mobilizable single-replicon vector pLF. Plasmid 43, 190–199.

Sleator, R.D., Hill, C., 2001. Bacterial osmoadaptation: the role of osmolytes in bacterial stress and virulence. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 26, 49–71.

Sonensein, A.L., 2000. Control of sporulation initiation in *Bacillus subtilis*. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 3, 561–566.

Strauch, M.A., Hoch, J.A., 1993. Transition-state regulators: sentinels of *Bacillus subtilis* post-exponential gene expression. Mol. Microbiol. 7, 337–342.

Svendsen, I., Breddam, K., 1992. Isolation and amino acid sequence of a glutamic acid specific endopeptidase from *Bacillus licheniformis*. Eur. J. Biochem. 204, 165–171.

Volker, U., Maul, B., Hecker, M., 1999. Expression of the $\sigma^B$-dependent general stress regulon confers multiple stress resistance in *Bacillus subtilis*. J. Bacteriol. 181, 3942–3948.

Yokoi, K., Kakikawa, M., Kimoto, H., Watanabe, K., Yasukawa, H., Yamakawa, A., Taketo, A., Kodiara, K.I., 2001. Genetic and biochemical characterization of glutamyl endopeptidase of *Staphylococcus warneri* M. Gene 281, 115–122.

Yoshida, N., Tsuruyama, S., Nagata, K., Hirayama, K., Noda, K., Makisumi, S., 1988. Purification and characterization of an acidic amino acid specific endopeptidase of *Streptomyces griseus* obtained from a commercial preparation (Pronase). J. Biochem. (Tokyo) 104, 451–456.
