
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Aug. 2005, p. 5166–5178
0021-9193/05/$08.00+0 doi:10.1128/JB.187.15.5166–5178.2005
Copyright © 2005, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

**Bacillus subtilis Phosphorylated PhoP: Direct Activation of the Eσ<sup>A</sup>- and Repression of the Eσ<sup>E</sup>-Responsive phoB-P<sub>S+V</sub> Promoters during Pho Response**

Wael R. Abdel-Fattah, Yinghua Chen,<sup>†</sup> Amr Eldakak, and F. Marion Hulett*

Laboratory for Molecular Biology, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607

Received 6 January 2005/Accepted 25 April 2005

The *phoB* gene of *Bacillus subtilis* encodes an alkaline phosphatase (PhoB, formerly alkaline phosphatase III) that is expressed from separate promoters during phosphate deprivation in a PhoP-PhoR-dependent manner and at stage two of sporulation under phosphate-sufficient conditions independent of PhoP-PhoR. Isogenic strains containing either the complete *phoB* promoter or individual *phoB* promoter fusions were used to assess expression from each promoter under both induction conditions. The *phoB* promoter responsible for expression during sporulation, *phoB*-P<sub>S</sub>, was expressed in a wild-type strain during phosphate deprivation, but induction occurred >3 h later than induction of Pho regulon genes and the levels were approximately 50-fold lower than that observed for the PhoPR-dependent promoter, *phoB*-P<sub>V</sub>. Eσ<sup>E</sup> was necessary and sufficient for P<sub>S</sub> expression in vitro. P<sub>S</sub> expression in a *phoPR* mutant strain was delayed 2 to 3 h compared to the expression in a wild-type strain, suggesting that expression or activation of σ<sup>E</sup> is delayed in a *phoPR* mutant under phosphate-deficient conditions, an observation consistent with a role for PhoPR in spore development under these conditions. Phosphorylated PhoP (PhoP~P) repressed P<sub>S</sub> in vitro via direct binding to the promoter, the first example of an Eσ<sup>E</sup>-responsive promoter that is repressed by PhoP~P. Whereas either PhoP or PhoP~P in the presence of Eσ<sup>A</sup> was sufficient to stimulate transcription from the *phoB*-P<sub>V</sub> promoter in vitro, roughly 10- and 17-fold-higher concentrations of PhoP than of PhoP~P were required for P<sub>V</sub> promoter activation and maximal promoter activity, respectively. The promoter for a second gene in the Pho regulon, *ykoL*, was also activated by elevated concentrations of unphosphorylated PhoP in vitro. However, because no Pho regulon gene expression was observed in vivo during P<sub>i</sub>-replete growth and PhoP concentrations increased only threefold in vivo during *phoPR* autoinduction, a role for unphosphorylated PhoP in Pho regulon activation in vivo is not likely.

---

*Bacillus subtilis* is a gram-positive bacterium that normally resides in soil in which inorganic phosphate is present at very low concentrations (approximately 2 to 3 orders of magnitude lower than the concentrations of other required ions) (34). *B. subtilis* has a two-gene operon encoding the two-component PhoP-PhoR signal transduction system (42, 43). The histidine kinase, PhoR, is an autokinase that serves as a phosphodonor to the response regulator, PhoP. During phosphate starvation, when external inorganic phosphate (P<sub>i</sub>) concentrations decrease to less than 0.1 mM (40), PhoP is required to activate or repress transcription of a set of genes, including the genes involved in alkaline phosphatase (APase) production, cell wall biosynthesis, inorganic phosphate transport, and cytochrome biogenesis (21).

Different patterns of PhoP binding are observed at PhoP-activated and -repressed promoters (for details see references 3 and 21). Activated promoters contain a core binding region positioned on the coding strand roughly between positions −20 and −60 relative to the transcription start site that contains four repeated 6-bp consensus PhoP-binding sequences that form two-dimer binding sites where PhoP dimers bind cooperatively (13). Activated promoters often have secondary PhoP dimer binding sites either 3′ or 5′ of the core binding region that are required for full promoter activity (13, 31). At repressed promoters phosphorylated PhoP (PhoP~P) binds to regions that overlap the transcription initiation site, and in some cases PhoP~P oligomerizes along the DNA as far as 168 bp into the coding region. Repressed promoters with only one PhoP dimer binding site, not two PhoP dimer binding sites, require phosphorylation for PhoP binding (4, 28).

Alkaline phosphatases in *B. subtilis* are encoded by members of a multiple-gene family that is expressed differentially under phosphate starvation conditions and sporulation conditions (14, 22). Phosphate starvation-inducible (PSI) alkaline phosphatases require the *phoPR* gene products, whereas sporulation-inducible alkaline phosphatases are expressed independent of the P<sub>i</sub> concentration or *phoP* and/or *phoR* gene products but rather require the products of at least three stage II sporulation genes, including *spoIIAC* (encoding the forespore-specific sigma factor, σ<sup>F</sup>, which regulates the σ<sup>E</sup> activation), *spoIIE* (a PP2C phosphatase required for the activation of σ<sup>F</sup>), and *spoIIGB* (encoding the mother cell specific sigma factor, σ<sup>E</sup>) (5, 9). Two major alkaline phosphatases, PhoB (formerly APase III) and PhoA (formerly APase IV) (19), account for approximately 98% of total alkaline phosphatase

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Laboratory for Molecular Biology, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago, 900 S. Ashland Avenue (M/C 567), Chicago, IL 60607. Phone: (312) 996-5460. Fax: (312) 413-2691. E-mail: Hulett@uic.edu.
† Present address: Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Ill.

specific activity in response to phosphate starvation (6, 24). Other alkaline phosphatases account for less than 2% of the total alkaline phosphatase specific activity induced during phosphate starvation, including that of PhoD phosphodiesterase (13, 14).

phoB is among the members of both the σE-controlled genes and the Pho regulon genes that have recently been identified using DNA microarray analysis (15, 32), reporter gene technology screening (37), and transcriptional profiling (16). These genes include phoB-ydhF (2, 15, 32), phoPR (15, 32), yhaX (15, 37), yhbH (15, 37), yycP (15, 32), and glnQ (15, 32), all of which were reported to be PSI in a phoPR-dependent manner and are potentially transcribed from σE-dependent promoters, at least during sporulation induction. Inclusion of the phoPR promoter among these genes and operons is explained by evidence indicating that three of the six phoPR operon promoters (35; A. Puri and F. M. Hulett, unpublished data) require PhoP~P for enhanced transcription. One of these promoters is an EσE-responsive promoter, and two are EσA promoters (35).

phoB promoter deletion analysis was previously performed using a number of nonisogenic B. subtilis strains that contained mutations in important regulatory genes, including abrB, spo0A, sigF, spoIIE, sigE, phoR, phoP, and phoS (9, 20). These studies established that phoB gene transcription is initiated from two transcription start sites at two different promoters. A strong vegetative cell promoter (PV) was phosphate starvation inducible only in a phoP- and/or phoR-dependent manner and accounted for approximately 40% of the total alkaline phosphatase activity during phosphate starvation. A 50-fold-weaker sporulation promoter (PS) was expressed at stage II during phosphate-replete growth on modified Schaffer's sporulation medium; its expression accounted for approximately 45% of the total alkaline phosphatase specific activity during sporulation induction (6, 22, 24).

Sequence analysis of the phoB promoter region (see Fig. 4A) revealed the presence of a consensus -10 region (TATAAT) for σA-dependent promoters upstream of the PV transcription start site, but no consensus -35 region (TTGACA) for σA-dependent promoters was observed (9). A moderately conserved consensus -10 region (AATAACCA) and a -35 region (TTCTAAA) for σE-dependent promoters (15) were observed upstream of the PS promoter transcription start site. The response regulator PhoP was reported to bind to the phoB promoter exclusively between the PV and PS transcriptional initiation sites (29), a region which contains four direct repeats (TT[C/A/T]A[C/T]A) of the conserved sequence for PhoP binding (13, 30).

In this study, we used isogenic B. subtilis strains, descendants of parental strain JH642, to study the effect of a phoPR or sigE mutation on the temporal and differential transcription from either the PV or PS promoter during phosphate starvation or sporulation induction. Our studies indicated that the PS promoter was expressed during phosphate starvation but was expressed later than Pho regulon genes. PS promoter expression was further delayed in a phoPR mutant strain. We used in vitro transcription to explore the relative contributions of PhoP, PhoP~P, σA, and/or σE in transcriptional activation from the phoB promoters.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Bacterial strains and growth conditions. All strains, plasmids, and primers used in this study are listed in Table 1. Bacterial stocks maintained at -80°C were used to inoculate LB agar plates for Escherichia coli strains or tryptose blood agar base containing 0.5% glucose for B. subtilis strains. The media were supplemented with selective antibiotics at the following concentrations: tetracycline, 10 mg/liter; erythromycin, 0.25 mg/liter; chloramphenicol, 5 mg/liter; and ampicillin, 200 mg/liter. To obtain isogenic wild-type and mutant B. subtilis strains harboring the required phoB promoter-lacZ reporter fusion, three pDH32 derivatives, pRC695, pRC696, and pPS2, containing the phoB promoter regions (Fig. 1) (relative to the translation start codon at position 1) at positions -178 to 34 (PS+V), -118 to 34 (PV), and -432 to -87 (PS), respectively, were constructed (9) and used for transformation of wild-type (JH642), phoPR (MH5913), and sigE (EU8701) strains. Before transformation, plasmids pRC695 and pRC696 were linearized by ScaI digestion, and plasmid pPS2 was linearized by NruI digestion. Transformants were selected for chloramphenicol resistance and amyE phenotypes. The resultant nine strains were grown in low-phosphate defined medium (LPDM) for Pi starvation conditions or in modified Schaffer sporulation medium (43 mM Pi) amended with 0.1% glucose (SSG medium) for sporulation induction in Pi-replete conditions.

To construct a plasmid for overexpression of the mature active form lacking the transcription-inhibiting prosequence (25) of the σE protein (*σE), the sigE gene lacking the region encoding the prosequence was PCR amplified using JH642 chromosomal DNA with primers FMH490 and FMH491 containing cleavage sites for NdeI and BamHI, respectively. The PCR-amplified fragments were cloned into plasmid pCR2.1, resulting in plasmid pCH201. The mutant sigE gene was then released from pCH201 by digestion with NdeI and BamHI and cloned into plasmid pET16b at the same sites to generate plasmid pCH202. The accuracy of all plasmid constructs was confirmed by DNA sequencing. Plasmid pCH202 was used for transformation of E. coli BL21(DE3)/pLysS, and representative transformants were selected for the chloramphenicol resistance phenotype.

Enzyme assays. For determination of total alkaline phosphatase specific activity, 250 μl of an LPDM culture was added directly to 1 ml of the substrate, 0.1 M p-nitrophenyl phosphate in 1 M CHES (N-cyclohexyl-2-aminoethanesulfonic acid; pH 9.5), and the reaction rates were measured at an optical density at 420 nm (OD420). One unit of APase activity was equivalent to 1 μmol of p-nitrophenol released per min at 37°C. The APase specific activity was expressed in units per unit of OD540.

The β-galactosidase (β-Gal) specific activity was measured by the method of Ferrari et al. (17) using o-nitrophenyl-β-D-galactopyranoside as the substrate. One unit of β-Gal activity was equivalent to 0.33 nmol of o-nitrophenol released per min at 37°C. The β-Gal specific activity was expressed in units per milligram of total cellular protein. The amount of B. subtilis JH642 total cellular protein was calculated as previously described by Eder et al. (14).

Overexpression and purification of proteins. For overexpression of His10PhoP, His10*σE, GST*PhoR, and His6σA proteins, E. coli BL21(DE3)/pLysS was used as a host for plasmids pCH128, pCH201, pLS21, and pLC2, respectively (Table 1). Overexpression and purification of His-tagged and glutathione S-transferase (GST)-tagged proteins were performed as described previously (29). *PhoR is the soluble cytoplasmic portion of the PhoR protein. The His tags were cleaved by factor Xa treatment, whereas the GST tag was removed by thrombin cleavage (29). For preparation of the B. subtilis His6-tagged RNA polymerase (His6RNAP) core enzyme (E), B. subtilis strain MH5636 (38) was grown in 12 1-liter portions of LB medium. Cells were collected at the end of the exponential phase of growth. Cell lysis and RNAP core enzyme purification were performed as previously described (38).

Gel mobility shift assay. For preparation of probes, the phoB-PS+V promoter fragment was amplified by PCR using B. subtilis JH642 genomic DNA as the template and primers FMH745 and FMH746, whereas the phoB-PS promoter fragment was PCR amplified using plasmid pPS2 as the template and primers FMH124 and FMH128 (FMH124 and FMH128 are homologous to DNA in pDH32 adjacent to the EcoRI and BamHI cloning sites, respectively.). 32P labeling was performed during PCR by incorporating [α-32P]dATP and/or [α-32P]dGTP (0.2 μCi/μl) into the newly synthesized DNA strand in the presence of limited dATP and/or dGTP concentrations (20 μM, usually one-tenth the concentration of dCTP and dTTP). The 32P-labeled probes were ethanol precipitated and extracted from a 1.2% agarose gel using a gel extraction kit (QIAGEN), and the final concentration was adjusted to 0.1 μM in nuclease-free transcription buffer (NFTB) (see below). The binding reactions (8 μl) were performed in NFTB containing, in order of addition, 12 nM 32P-labeled DNA (~15,000 cpm), 180 μM ATP, 0.18 μM *PhoR, and PhoP at concentrations

TABLE 1. Bacterial strains, plasmids, and primers

| Strain, plasmid, or primer | Genotype or characteristics | Source or reference |
|---------------------------|----------------------------|---------------------|
| **E. coli strains**       |                            |                     |
| DH5α                      |                            | Invitrogen          |
| BL21(DE3)/pLysS           |                            | Novagen             |
| **B. subtilis strains**   |                            |                     |
| JH642                     | pheA1trpC2                 | J.A. Hoch           |
| MH5636                    | pheA1trpC2 rpoCΩpYQ52 (Cm') | 38                  |
| MH5913                    | pheA1trpC2 ΔphoPR::tet (Tet') | 8                   |
| EU8701                    | pheA1trpC2 ΔsigE::erm (Erm') | C.P. Moran          |
| MH6141                    | pheA1trpC2 amyE::pRC695 (Cm') | This study         |
| MH6142                    | pheA1trpC2 amyE::pRC696 (Cm') | This study         |
| MH6143                    | pheA1trpC2 amyE::pPS2 (Cm') | This study         |
| MH6144                    | pheA1trpC2 ΔphoPR::tet amyE::pRC695 (Tet' Cm') | This study |
| MH6145                    | pheA1trpC2 ΔphoPR::tet amyE::pRC696 (Tet' Cm') | This study |
| MH6146                    | pheA1trpC2 ΔphoPR::tet amyE::pPS2 (Tet' Cm') | This study |
| MH6147                    | pheA1trpC2 ΔsigE::erm amyE::pRC695 (Erm' Cm') | This study |
| MH6148                    | pheA1trpC2 ΔsigE::erm amyE::pRC696 (Erm' Cm') | This study |
| MH6149                    | pheA1trpC2 ΔsigE::erm amyE::pPS2 (Erm' Cm') | This study |
| **Plasmids**              |                            |                     |
| pRC695                    | pDH32::-178 to 34 of phoB promoter region (P<sub>s+v</sub>) | 9 |
| pRC696                    | pDH32::-119 to 34 of phoB promoter region (P<sub>v</sub>) | 9 |
| pPS2                      | pDH32::-432 to -78 of phoB promoter region (P<sub>s</sub>) | 5 |
| pCH128                    | pSKB3::phoP (Cm') | 8 |
| pCR2.1                    | oriEc (Amp') | Invitrogen |
| pCH201                    | pCR2.1::*sigE (Amp') | This study |
| pET16b                    | Vector for N-terminal fusion to factor Xa-cleavable His tag sequence; transcription is controlled from T7lac promoter (Cm') | Novagen |
| pCH202                    | pET16b::*sigE (Cm') | This study |
| pLC2                      | E. coli overexpression plasmid for B. subtilis σ<sup>A</sup> (Amp') | J.D. Helmann |
| pLS21                     | pEGEX-2T::*phoR (Amp') | 45 |
| **Primers**               |                            |                     |
| FMH745                    | 5'-CAGTCCG CCTATCCACGGCCAGTATCT-3' | This study |
| FMH746                    | 5'-CTTTTCCTGGGCGCTGGCTTCAGGCACAC-3' | This study |
| FMH490                    | 5'-TGCA TATGGGCGGGAGTGAAGCCCTGCCGCCTCCAT-3' | This study |
| FMH491                    | 5'-CTGG ATCCTTACACCATTGTGTGAACTC-3' | This study |
| FMH769                    | 5'-AAGA ATT CGATCGGTTCAAAACGGACAATAC-3' | This study |
| FMH768                    | 5'-AAGG ATCCGCTCAGAAATCGTCATTTTGTTCATG-3' | This study |
| FMH124                    | 5'-GTTC ACCACCTTTTCCC-3' | R. Chesnut |
| FMH128                    | 5'-GGTA ACTATTGCCGATG-3' | R. Chesnut |

* The underlined restriction endonuclease sequences were added to the 5' ends of the primers for subsequent cloning applications. These sequences are NdeI, BamHI, EcoRI, and BamHI sites in primers FMH490, FMH491, FMH769, and FMH768, respectively.

ranging from 0.35 to 2.8 μM. The reaction mixtures were incubated at 37°C for 30 min and were subsequently loaded onto 5% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gels (acrylamide/bisacrylamide, 29:1), which had been prerun in Tris-borate-EDTA buffer at 100 V/10°C for 30 min, and electrophoresed for 2 h at 100 V/10°C. The free probe and shifted PhoP~P-DNA complex on dried gels were visualized using a PhosphorImager (Molecular Dynamics).

In vitro transcription analysis. All components used for in vitro transcription reactions were adjusted to the required concentrations by dilution in NFTB (Tris-HCl [pH 7.8], 10 mM; KCl, 50 mM; MgCl<sub>2</sub>, 5 mM; CaCl<sub>2</sub>, 1 mM; EDTA-Na<sub>2</sub>, 0.1 mM) containing 5% glycerol, unless indicated otherwise. To obtain the template DNA for in vitro transcription analysis, the full-length phoB-P<sub>s+v</sub> promoter region (positions –222 to 106 relative to the translation start codon at position 1 [see Fig. 4A]) was PCR amplified using JH642 chromosomal DNA and primers FMH745 and FMH746 (Table 1), and the ykoL promoter region (positions –106 to 151 relative to the transcription start site at position 1 [see Fig. 6A]) was PCR amplified using primers FMH769 and FMH768. The phoB-P<sub>s</sub> promoter region was obtained by PCR using plasmid pPS2 as the template and primers FMH124 and FMH128. Promoter DNA was extracted from a 1.2% agarose gel using a gel extraction kit (QIAGEN), ethanol precipitated, and resuspended in NFTB to a final concentration of 100 nM. To prepare RNAP holoenzyme, core RNAP was incubated with each σ factor on ice for 30 min. For each transcription reaction (final volume, 15 μl), template DNA (33 nM) was mixed with ATP (180 μM), *PhoR protein (0.18 μM), and PhoP protein at different concentrations (0.02 to 10 μM in twofold increments) and incubated at 37°C for 20 min. *PhoR and PhoP dilutions were prepared in phosphorylation buffer (HEPES [pH 8.0], 50 mM; KCl, 50 mM; MgCl<sub>2</sub>, 50 mM; 7% glycerol) prior to addition to the reaction mixtures. To produce various concentrations of PhoP~P in the in vitro transcription reaction mixtures, PhoP phosphorylation was performed during the initial DNA binding step using *PhoR at a fixed concentration, 0.18 μM. After the binding reaction, the reconstituted RNAP holoenzyme (core enzyme concentration, 0.09 μM; σ factor concentration, 0.7 μM) was added to the reaction mixture; this was followed by addition of a nucleoside triphosphate mixture (180 μM each of ATP, GTP, and CTP, 18 μM UTP, 0.1 μM [α-<sup>32</sup>P]UTP [3,000 Ci/mmol; 10 μCi/μl], and 1 U/μl RNasin RNase inhibitor in NFTB) and incubation at 37°C for another 30 min. In vitro transcription reactions were stopped by addition of 7.5 μl stop buffer (7 M urea, 100 mM EDTA-Na<sub>2</sub>, 0.05% xylene cyanol, 0.05% bromophenol blue, 5% glycerol), and the mixtures were heated at 75°C for 5 min. Ten microliters of each reaction mixture was loaded onto a sequencing gel (6% polyacrylamide [19:1], 8 M urea) and electrophoresed at 350 V for 1 h. The RNA transcripts on dried gels were visualized with a PhosphorImager (Molecular Dynamics) and subjected to quantitative analysis using the volume report function of the ImageQuant software, version 5.1, with corrections for background by subtraction of intensities below

Determination of inorganic phosphate concentration. The extracellular inorganic phosphate concentrations were determined for LPDM cultures using the method of Ames and Dubin (1). For analysis, 300 μl of properly diluted culture supernatant (usually 10% in deionized H₂O for an LPDM culture) was mixed with 700 μl of ascorbic acid reagent (10% ascorbic acid in H₂O and 0.4 g of ammonium molybdate liter in 1 N H₂SO₄, mixed at a ratio of 1:6 [vol/vol]), and the reaction mixtures were incubated at 45°C for 20 min. The inorganic phosphate concentration (μM) was equivalent to the OD₈₀ of the reaction mixture divided by the slope obtained from a Pᵢ standard curve. Under our experimental conditions the slope of the Pᵢ standard curve was ~0.008 OD₈₀ unit/μM.

**RESULTS**

For in vivo transcriptional analysis of the *phoB* promoter, three DNA fragments representing the full-length *phoB* promoter (*P*ₛ₊ᵥ), the vegetative promoter (*P*ᵥ), or the sporulation promoter (*P*ₛ) were inserted upstream of the promoterless *lacZ* reporter gene in the pDH32 plasmid, yielding plasmids pRC695, pRC696, and pPS2, respectively (Fig. 1). A single copy of each promoter-*lacZ* fusion was inserted into the *amyE* locus of a set of isogenic strains, including the parental *B. subtilis* strain (JH642) and *phoPR* (MH5913) and *sigE* (EU8701) derivatives of it. The β-galactosidase specific activity was monitored for all nine strains during growth in LPDM for Pᵢ starvation induction or during growth in SSG medium for sporulation induction (Fig. 2). The growth kinetics of all promoter derivative mutants were similar to those of the parental wild-type, *phoPR*, and *sigE* mutant strains.

Both *P*ᵥ and *P*ₛ are expressed during phosphate starvation, and a *phoPR* mutation or a *sigE* mutation affects both promoters, although differently. During growth in LPDM, the parental wild-type strains containing each of the three *phoB* promoter fusions induced expression from both the *P*ᵥ and *P*ₛ promoters (Fig. 2A). Expression from the *P*ᵥ or *P*ₛ₊ᵥ promoter fusions was induced at T₀, when the Pᵢ concentration was limiting (≤100 μM), and peaked at T₅, when maximum expression levels of ~6,000 β-Gal units were detected. Expression from the *P*ₛ promoter fusion was induced at T₄, and the levels were >50-fold lower than the levels from the *P*ᵥ promoter; however, they failed to reach the maximum levels in the first 12 h of growth. No expression from the *P*ᵥ promoter fusion was observed in the *phoPR* mutant grown in LPDM (Fig. 2B), indicating that the PSI expression from the strong *P*ᵥ promoter is *phoPR* dependent. In addition, *phoPR* deletion affected the timing of induction from the weak *P*ₛ promoter. Expression from the *P*ₛ promoter in *phoPR* mutants, from either the *P*ₛ or *P*ₛ₊ᵥ promoter fusions, exhibited a further 2- to 3-h lag compared to the wild-type strain. During growth of the three *sigE* mutant strains in LPDM (Fig. 2C), no expression was observed from the *P*ₛ promoter fusion, indicating that the PSI expression from the *P*ₛ promoter is *sigE* dependent. Like expression in the wild-type strains, expression from the *P*ᵥ promoter in the *sigE* mutants, from either the *P*ᵥ or *P*ₛ₊ᵥ promoter fusions, exhibited the strong induction pattern that was induced at T₀ and peaked at T₅ during phosphate starvation. This expression was ~40% higher than that in the parental strains.

Sporulation-inducible *phoB* expression is solely from the *sigE*-dependent *P*ₛ promoter. During growth of wild-type, *phoPR*, or *sigE* mutant strains in SSG medium (Pᵢ-replete conditions), no expression was observed from the strong *P*ᵥ promoter fusion (Fig. 2D through F), indicating that the sporula-

(A)  
(B)  
(C)  

(D)  
(E)  
(F)  

FIG. 2. Expression of *phoB* promoter-*lacZ* reporters from different *phoB* promoter deletions in wild-type, *phoPR*, and *sigE* mutant *B. subtilis* strains during 12 h of growth in LPDM and SSG medium. Plasmids pRC695, pRC696, and pPS2 containing the *lacZ* reporter fused to the P<sub>S+V</sub> (circles), P<sub>V</sub> (squares), and P<sub>S</sub> (triangles) promoters, respectively, were linearized and used to transform wild-type (WT) (JH642), *phoPR* (MH5913), and *sigE* (EU8701) parental strains. The resulting isogenic strains (Table 1) were grown under phosphate-limiting conditions in LPDM (A, B, and C) or SSG medium (D, E, and F). Growth (solid symbols) and β-galactosidase specific activity (open symbols) were determined at the times indicated. Time zero was the transition from the exponential to the stationary phase of growth. The outer right ordinate in panel A corresponds to the high expression level from the P<sub>S+V</sub> (circles) and P<sub>V</sub> (squares) promoter derivatives, while the inner right ordinate corresponds to expression from the P<sub>S</sub> promoter derivatives (triangles).

tion-inducible expression of *phoB* is from the weak P<sub>S</sub> promoter only. Both the wild-type and *phoPR* mutant strains (Fig. 2D and E, respectively) induced expression from the P<sub>S</sub> promoter, either from the P<sub>S+V</sub> or the P<sub>S</sub> promoter fusions, at T<sub>4</sub> and peaked at T<sub>6</sub>, when the maximum expression levels (<80 β-Gal units) were detected. No expression from the P<sub>S</sub> promoter fusion was observed during growth of the *sigE* mutant strains in either SSG medium (Fig. 2F) or LPDM (Fig. 2C).

*phoPR* mutation affects the level and timing of expression from the P<sub>S</sub> promoter during phosphate limitation. To determine the extent to which a mutation in *phoPR* affected the timing and inducing strength of the P<sub>S</sub> promoter under phosphate deficiency stress conditions, we compared the parental and *phoPR* mutant strains for growth and expression from the P<sub>S</sub> promoter fusion for 24 h in LPDM (Fig. 3). In the parental strain, expression from the P<sub>S</sub> promoter fusion was induced at T<sub>4</sub> and peaked at T<sub>8</sub> with a maximum expression of ~110 β-Gal units. Expression from the P<sub>S</sub> promoter fusion was delayed 2 to 3 h in the *phoPR* mutant strain, and the maximum expression level was reduced about 25%. In addition, the maximum expression levels detected from the P<sub>S</sub> promoter in

FIG. 3. Expression of *phoB-P<sub>S</sub>* *lacZ* in wild-type and *phoPR* mutant *B. subtilis* strains during 24 h of growth in LPDM. Expression of P<sub>S</sub>-*lacZ* was determined in wild-type strain MH6143 (squares) and *phoPR* MH6146 (triangles) grown under phosphate-limiting conditions in LPDM. Solid symbols, growth; open symbols, β-galactosidase specific activity. Time zero was the transition from the exponential to the stationary phase of growth.

Vol. 187, 2005 TRANSCRIPTIONAL ANALYSIS OF B. SUBTILIS phoB PROMOTER 5171

(A)


-81 -70 FMH745 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 +1
5'-CAGTCCG CCTATCCACGGCCAGTATCTATTCCTCCAATT TATTTCTTTAGTACTATCGCTCTTTCC HisTam ACTTCTCAT AAAAG MATAexx TTATTTAAG
GGTGCCAGT TCATATICTTGGAAATCAATCIIAMAATCGAIIAAIACTAGCIIACAGTTAAAAA TAIAAT TGGGT TGTCATTGAGAATT CATCTATATTT
AGGAGGTT ATCCAGTIGAAAAAATCCCCGAAGAAAATTACTGCCTATCGGGTTTTATCATCAA TTGCGTT CAGCAGCTTAGCCAGGGCAGT
SD
+1
Met
GTGCC TGAAGCCAGCGCCCAGGAAAA G-3'
FMH746
+106

(B)

Core RNAP (E)
Sigma factor (σ)
His10σ<sup>E</sup>
His6σ<sup>A</sup>

M
PhoP
*PhoR<sub>[0 18]</sub>
P<sub>S</sub><sup>223 nts</sup>
P<sub>V</sub><sup>142 nts</sup>

FIG. 4. In vitro transcription analysis of the phoB promoter. (A) Nucleotide sequence of the phoB promoter coding strand. Regulatory elements are indicated as follows: arrows, transcription start sites for P<sub>S</sub> and P<sub>V</sub>; subscripts, –10 sequences for both promoters and –35 sequence for the P<sub>S</sub> promoter; superscripts, consensus PhoP tandem binding sequences; SD, Shine-Dalgarno sequence; Met, methionine (translational start codon). The lowercase letters indicate mismatches with the consensus sequence. The thick line and the dashed line indicate the DNase I-protected regions for PhoP(~P) on the coding and noncoding strands, respectively, and the arrowheads indicate the previously identified hypersensitive sites in the footprints. Primers FMH746 and FMH745, used to amplify the phoB promoter, are indicated by arrows (5' to 3' direction) for the coding and noncoding strands, respectively. The numbers below the sequences indicate positions relative to the phoB translational start site (position 1). The numbers above the sequences indicate positions relative to the transcription start site of the P<sub>S</sub> or P<sub>V</sub> promoter. (B) In vitro transcription analysis of phoB promoter using various concentrations of the core (E) and sigma factor (σ) (lanes 1 through 8) in the reconstituted RNAP. (Upper panel) Eσ<sup>E</sup>; (lower panel) Eσ<sup>A</sup>. Linearly increasing concentrations of unphosphorylated PhoP (in twofold increments) were used in both the Eσ<sup>E</sup>- and Eσ<sup>A</sup>-driven transcription reactions in the absence of *PhoR (lanes 9 through 16) or in the presence of *PhoR at a final concentration of 0.18 μM (lanes 17 through 24). The protein concentrations (μM) are indicated above the lanes. Lane M contained a radiolabeled RNA marker. nts, nucleotides.

LPDM (Fig. 3) were approximately twofold greater than the level detected in SSG medium (Fig. 2D), suggesting that medium composition also influences the strength of expression from the sigE-dependent P<sub>S</sub> promoter.

phoB-P<sub>S</sub> promoter is an Eσ<sup>E</sup>-responsive promoter whose transcription in vitro is inhibited by high PhoP~P concentrations. To determine if the role of PhoP-PhoR and the mother cell specific sigma factor (σ<sup>E</sup>) in transcription of the phoB-ydhF operon was direct or indirect, an in vitro transcription analysis was performed using a 325-bp linear DNA fragment containing the full-length phoB promoter (102 bp upstream of P<sub>S</sub> [position 1] and 142 bp downstream of P<sub>V</sub> [position 1]) (Fig. 4A). The expected transcript initiating from the P<sub>S</sub> transcription start site was 223 nucleotides long. As shown in Fig. 4B, when PhoP was not present in the in vitro transcription reaction mixtures (lanes 1 through 8), σ<sup>E</sup>-containing RNA polymerase (Eσ<sup>E</sup>) was sufficient for transcription initiation from the phoB-P<sub>S</sub> promoter. No detectable P<sub>S</sub> transcripts were observed when either core RNA polymerase or σ<sup>E</sup> was not present in the in vitro transcription reaction mixtures (data not shown). Eight reaction mixtures (lanes 1 to 8) containing decreasing concentrations of core RNAP (0.18 to 0.01 μM) and increasing concentrations of σ<sup>E</sup> (0.09 to 0.18 μM) yielded similar concentrations of transcript (lanes 1 to 4). Eσ<sup>E</sup> (molar ratio, 0.09:0.7) was used in the following studies. When PhoP was present in the in vitro transcription reaction mixtures at concentrations ranging from 0.02 μM to 2.8 μM (Fig. 4B, lanes 9 through 16), no significant effect on transcription from the σ<sup>E</sup>-dependent P<sub>S</sub> promoter was observed at PhoP concentrations of ≤0.35 μM (lanes 9 through 13), but concentrations of >0.7 μM resulted in a reduction in transcription. In the presence of *PhoR, PhoP concentrations from 0.02 μM to 2.8 μM (lanes 17 through 24)

5172 ABDEL-FATTAH ET AL. J. BACTERIOL.

(A)  
(B)  
(C)

FIG. 5. Effect of deleting the downstream direct repeats on PhoP~P-mediated repression of transcription from the $\sigma^{\mathrm{E}}$-dependent $phoB-P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter in vitro. (A) The upper panel shows in vitro transcription of the $phoB-P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter lacking the downstream direct repeats, using E$\sigma^{\mathrm{E}}$ alone (lane 1) and various concentrations of PhoP~P (lanes 2 through 6) or unphosphorylated PhoP (2.8 $\mu$M) (lane 7). The histogram in the lower panel shows the relative amounts of $phoB-P_{\mathrm{s}}$ transcripts in vitro (in PhosphorImager output units) obtained using the $P_{\mathrm{s+v}}$ promoter with unphosphorylated PhoP (open bars) or PhoP~P (solid bars) and using the $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter with PhoP~P (shaded bars). For comparison, the maximum transcript output obtained from the $P_{\mathrm{s+v}}$ or $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter with E$\sigma^{\mathrm{E}}$ alone was normalized to 100%. (B) Specificity of the PhoP~P-mediated repression of transcription from the $phoB-P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter. The $phoB-P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter and the $spoIIID$ promoter (a PhoP~P-insensitive, $\sigma^{\mathrm{E}}$-dependent promoter) were used as templates for in vitro transcription reactions using E$\sigma^{\mathrm{E}}$ alone (lane 1), E$\sigma^{\mathrm{E}}$ with unphosphorylated PhoP (lane 2), and E$\sigma^{\mathrm{E}}$ with PhoP in the presence of a low *PhoR concentration (0.18 $\mu$M) (lane 3) or a high *PhoR concentration (0.35 $\mu$M) (lane 4). (C) PhoP~P binds to the $phoB-P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter independent of the downstream direct repeats. Gel mobility shift assays were performed using a 325-bp $^{32}$P-labeled $phoB-P_{\mathrm{s+v}}$ or 500-bp $^{32}$P-labeled $phoB-P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter fragment in the absence of PhoP~P (lane 1) or in presence of various PhoP~P concentrations (lanes 2 through 8). The positions of the free DNA probe (Fp) and shifted PhoP~P-DNA complex ($C_{\text {PhoP-P }}$) are indicated on the right. The protein concentrations ($\mu$M) are indicated above the lanes. nts, nucleotides.

resulted in greatly reduced transcription from the $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter. Thus, PhoP was not required for transcription initiation from the $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter, but the presence of low concentrations of PhoP~P or high concentrations of PhoP repressed transcription from the $\sigma^{\mathrm{E}}$-dependent $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter.

PhoP~P and E$\sigma^{\mathrm{A}}$ requirement for transcription from the $phoB-P_{\mathrm{v}}$ promoter in vitro. For in vitro transcription analysis of the $P_{\mathrm{v}}$ promoter, we used the reaction conditions described above, except that we initiated transcription with $\sigma^{\mathrm{A}}$-saturated RNAP (E$\sigma^{\mathrm{A}}$). The expected transcript initiating from the $P_{\mathrm{v}}$ transcription start site (position 1) was 142 nucleotides long. As shown in Fig. 4B (lower panel), in the absence of PhoP, $\sigma^{\mathrm{A}}$-containing RNA polymerase (E$\sigma^{\mathrm{A}}$) failed to stimulate transcription from the $phoB$ promoter (lanes 1 through 8) at any concentration used. Addition of PhoP at concentrations ranging from 0.02 to 2.8 $\mu$M (lanes 9 through 16) stimulated a dose-dependent increase in transcription from the $P_{\mathrm{v}}$ promoter only when the unphosphorylated PhoP concentration was $\geqslant 0.18 \mu \mathrm{M}$ (lanes 12 through 16). When *PhoR was present in the in vitro transcription reaction mixtures (lanes 17 through 24), PhoP concentrations ranging from 0.02 to 0.18 $\mu$M (lanes 17 through 20) stimulated a dose-dependent increase in transcription from the $P_{\mathrm{v}}$ promoter, and the maximal yield was obtained at a PhoP concentration of 0.18 $\mu$M (lane 21). Further increases in PhoP concentrations (lanes 21 through 24) resulted in reduced transcription. The use of PhoP at concentrations of $\geqslant 1.4 \mu \mathrm{M}$ significantly inhibited transcription activation from the $P_{\mathrm{v}}$ promoter (lanes 23 and 24).

PhoP inhibition of $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter transcription is specific and involves PhoP binding to the $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter in addition to the $P_{\mathrm{v}}$

promoter. A $phoB$ promoter fragment containing only the $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter (from pPS2 [Fig. 1]) was used as a template for in vitro transcription to determine if reduction of the $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ transcript from the $phoB-P_{\mathrm{s+v}}$ promoter in the presence of phosphorylated PhoP was exclusively the result of PhoP binding to the $P_{\mathrm{v}}$ promoter core binding region, which blocked RNAP passage (Fig. 5A, top panel). Lane 1 contained the transcript from the E$\sigma^{\mathrm{E}}$-dependent $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter without PhoP or *PhoR. Lanes 2 through 6 contained increasing concentrations of PhoP (0.09 to 1.4 $\mu$M) plus *PhoR, which were shown to increasingly inhibit $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ transcription from the $phoB-P_{\mathrm{s+v}}$ promoter in the presence of *PhoR (0.18 $\mu$M) and ATP (Fig. 4B, upper panel). Under these conditions higher concentrations of PhoP increasingly inhibited the $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ promoter, although not as strongly as identical concentrations did when the $phoB-P_{\mathrm{s+v}}$ promoter was used as the template. A dominant role for PhoP~P in $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ inhibition was suggested by the strong transcript in the reaction with 2.8 $\mu$M PhoP in the absence of *PhoR (lane7). Quantitation of the $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ transcript with increasing concentrations of PhoP plus *PhoR from the $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ template alone is compared in Fig. 5A (bottom panel) to quantitation of the transcripts from the $phoB-P_{\mathrm{s+v}}$ promoter fragment (Fig. 4B) with the same concentrations of PhoP or PhoP and *PhoR or with E$\sigma^{\mathrm{E}}$ alone. Note the difference in $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ transcription in the reaction mixture containing 1.4 $\mu$M PhoP with the full-length $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ template in the presence of *PhoR.

To determine if inhibition of $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ transcription by high concentrations of PhoP and *PhoR was specific, we compared $P_{\mathrm{s}}$ transcription to transcription with another E$\sigma^{\mathrm{E}}$-dependent promoter, $spoIIID$, under conditions described above (Fig. 5A,

bottom panel) that inhibited the *phoB-P*<sub>S+V</sub> promoter. Lane 1 in Fig. 5B shows the level of transcript from the *phoB-P*<sub>S</sub> (top panel) or *spoIIID* (lower panel) template with Eσ<sup>E</sup> alone. Eσ<sup>E</sup> with PhoP (2.8 μM) resulted in some decrease in the P<sub>S</sub> promoter transcript, but in the presence of *PhoR* (0.18 μM) and PhoP the transcript was completely inhibited, similar to the results obtained for the *phoB-P*<sub>S+V</sub> promoter (Fig. 4B, top panel, lane 24). Under the same conditions and when the *PhoR* concentration was increased from 0.18 to 0.35 μM, the level of the *spoIIID* transcript (lanes 3 and 4, respectively) was similar to the level observed with Eσ<sup>E</sup> without PhoP and *PhoR* (lane 1), indicating that the role of PhoP and *PhoR* in inhibition of the *phoB* promoter is specific.

Because transcription from the P<sub>S</sub> promoter was reduced in the presence of PhoP~P, we asked if PhoP directly bound to the P<sub>S</sub> promoter fragment in a gel mobility shift assay and how the binding compared to PhoP binding to the full-length *phoB* promoter (Fig. 5C). Lane 1 in Fig. 5C contained the full-length *phoB-P*<sub>S+V</sub> free probe in the top panel and the P<sub>S</sub> free probe in the bottom panel. Lanes 2 to 8 in each panel contained increasing concentrations of PhoP in the presence of ATP and 0.18 μM *PhoR*. Both probes revealed a partial shift at the lowest concentration of PhoP (lane 2), although the percentage of the *phoB-P*<sub>S+V</sub> probe shifted was significantly greater than the percentage of the P<sub>S</sub> probe shifted. Roughly twofold-higher concentrations of PhoP were required for a complete shift of the *phoB-P*<sub>S</sub> probe (1.4 μM PhoP) (Fig. 5C, bottom panel, lane 6) than for a complete shift of the *phoB-P*<sub>S+V</sub> probe (0.7 μM PhoP) (Fig. 5C, top panel, lane 4). These data indicate that PhoP binds directly to the P<sub>S</sub> promoter independent of the core binding region in the P<sub>V</sub> promoter previously reported. In light of the current data, we reexamined the PhoP footprinting protection on the *phoB-P*<sub>S+V</sub> promoter (29). While nearly complete protection of the large core binding region of the P<sub>V</sub> promoter was observed even at the lowest PhoP~P concentration (55 nM), there was also a previously unnoticed, smaller protected region upstream of the P<sub>S</sub> transcription start site on the noncoding strand. Partial protection was observed starting at 110 nM PhoP~P, and there was increasing protection at PhoP~P concentrations of 220 and 440 nM. The protected region in the promoter sequence is indicated in Fig. 4A. Interestingly, the protected region on the noncoding strand contains two putative consensus repeats for a PhoP dimer-binding sequence on either side of the −10 element of the Eσ<sup>E</sup>-responsive P<sub>S</sub> promoter (−<sup>2</sup>TAAATAAT GGTATTCTTT<sup>−19</sup>), with a conservation match of 5/6 and 4/6, respectively. PhoP protection at this P<sub>S</sub> promoter site required PhoR and ATP for PhoP phosphorylation, just as retardation of the P<sub>S</sub> promoter probe in the studies described above did (data not shown).

PhoP activates in vitro transcription from the *phoB-P*<sub>V</sub> promoter in a phosphorylation- and/or concentration-dependent manner. The concentration range of PhoP used was expanded up to ~10 μM to compare the maximum transcription of P<sub>V</sub> with PhoP compared to that with PhoP~P and to determine if high concentrations of PhoP inhibited transcription from the P<sub>V</sub> promoter (Fig. 6A). Because these experiments were designed to investigate the effects of various unphosphorylated PhoP and PhoP~P concentrations on transcription from the P<sub>V</sub> promoter, the only experimental variable was the PhoP

FIG. 6. Effects of various concentrations of unphosphorylated PhoP, PhoP~P, and σ<sup>A</sup> on transcription activation from the *phoB-P*<sub>V</sub> promoter in vitro. (A) The upper panels show the results of an in vitro transcription analysis of the *phoB* promoter using reconstituted Eσ<sup>A</sup> in the presence of various concentrations of unphosphorylated PhoP (Un) or phosphorylated PhoP (~P). The graph in the lower panel shows the amounts of the *phoB-P*<sub>V</sub> transcripts (in PhosphorImager output units) plotted as a function of the unphosphorylated PhoP (open circles) or PhoP~P (solid circles) concentration. The PhoP-to-PhoR molar ratios (plus signs) are plotted as a function of the various PhoP concentrations used in the in vitro transcription reactions. (B) Dependence of unphosphorylated PhoP-driven transcription reactions on σ<sup>A</sup> concentration: in vitro transcription of the *phoB* promoter using various concentrations of σ<sup>A</sup> in reconstituted RNAP in the presence of the optimum concentration of either unphosphorylated PhoP (Un*) (2.8 μM) or PhoP~P (~P*) (0.18 μM). The protein concentrations (μM) are indicated above the lanes.

concentration, and all other reaction components were unchanged. This strategy resulted in three changes in the ratio of PhoP to PhoR. In the first case, the concentration of PhoP (0.02 to 0.09 μM) was less than that of PhoR (0.18 μM). Consistent with the data shown in Fig. 4B, this concentration range of PhoP stimulated transcription from the P<sub>V</sub> promoter only when PhoR was present (Fig. 6A). In the second case, PhoP and PhoR were present at equimolar concentrations or nearly equimolar concentrations. The concentration of PhoP~P (0.18 μM) was the optimum concentration for maximum transcriptional yield from the P<sub>V</sub> promoter. In the last case, PhoP concentrations between 0.35 and 10 μM were higher than the PhoR concentration. In contrast to the other cases, PhoP at concentrations of >0.18 μM in the presence of PhoR resulted in linearly decreasing transcriptional yields, and complete repression was detected at concentrations of ≥1.4 μM. Interestingly, the same range of PhoP concentrations was able to stimulate transcription from the P<sub>V</sub> promoter in the absence of PhoR. The optimum unphosphorylated PhoP concentration that stimulated the maximum transcriptional yield from the P<sub>V</sub> promoter was 2.8 μM or near 2.8 μM, a repressing concentration in the case of PhoP~P. Decreased transcription from the P<sub>V</sub> promoter was also observed at higher concentra-

5174 ABDEL-FATTAH ET AL.

nonspecific start site (P<sub>X</sub>), which produced an RNA transcript that was ~100 nucleotides long (Fig. 7B, lanes 2 through 8), no P<sub>V</sub> transcript was observed. Addition of PhoP in the absence of *PhoR (lanes 9 through 16) or in the presence of *PhoR (lanes 17 through 23) switched transcription initiation to a site that yielded a transcript that was ~150 nucleotides long, consistent with the P<sub>V</sub> transcription start site that was identified previously by primer extension analysis of the ykoL mRNA during growth of a wild-type strain in phosphate starvation medium (41) (Fig. 7A). Similar to the maximum transcriptional yield with the phoB promoter, the maximum transcriptional yield observed with the ykoL-P<sub>V</sub> promoter in the presence of unphosphorylated PhoP was ~75% that observed in the presence of PhoP~P. Higher concentrations of unphosphorylated PhoP decreased transcription activation from the ykoL-P<sub>V</sub> promoter start site, and there was a 10% reduction in the transcription yield from the ykoL-P<sub>V</sub> start site at a PhoP concentration of 10 μM (lane 16). PhoP~P (0.35 μM) showed maximal transcription activation. Figure 7C shows quantitation of the ykoL-P<sub>V</sub> transcript with PhoP alone (lanes 9 to 16) and with PhoP plus *PhoR (lanes 17 to 23).

Cellular concentrations of PhoP increase threefold during phosphate-limited growth. To determine the fold increase in the cellular PhoP concentration induced upon P<sub>i</sub> depletion, we carried out a quantitative Western blot analysis of PhoP synthesis during growth in LPDM. Figure 8A shows the detectable concentrations of PhoP in the linear range under the conditions used. PhoP exhibited steady-state levels of ~1 μM (Fig. 8B) during the pre-Pho induction period (from T<sub>-2</sub> to T<sub>0</sub>). When the P<sub>i</sub> concentration in the medium decreased below 100 μM, alkaline phosphatases were induced and PhoP concentrations began to increase. Total APase specific activity increased rapidly until T<sub>2</sub>, while the PhoP concentrations continued to increase until T<sub>4</sub>. At T<sub>4</sub>, the PhoP concentration was approximately threefold higher than the concentration detected at T<sub>0</sub>. These data are consistent with our understanding of the two APase promoters and the complex phoPR promoter. It is likely that production of PhoP continues into the stationary phase because the phoPR operon has equally strong, PhoP~P-enhanced Eσ<sup>A</sup> and Eσ<sup>E</sup> promoters. In contrast, the APase genes each have a strong, PhoP-dependent Eσ<sup>A</sup> promoter (phoA and phoB-P<sub>V</sub>), but the Eσ<sup>E</sup> promoter of phoB-P<sub>S</sub> is very weak (roughly 2% the strength of the Eσ<sup>A</sup> promoter) and it appears to be inhibited by PhoP~P at high concentrations. Thus, the contribution of the weak Eσ<sup>E</sup> phoB-P<sub>S</sub> promoter to total APase activity should be negligible, like its contribution to phoB expression from the phoB-P<sub>S+V</sub> promoters during phosphate starvation (Fig. 2A).

In general, this in vitro transcription analysis illustrated two different conditions for PhoP-dependent transcription activation from the Eσ<sup>A</sup>-responsive phoB-P<sub>V</sub> promoter. The first condition is phosphorylation dependent, which allows a relatively low PhoP~P concentration compared to the PhoP concentration to stimulate transcription even at limiting σ<sup>A</sup> concentrations. The second condition is concentration dependent, requiring considerably higher concentrations of both PhoP and σ<sup>A</sup> in order to stimulate transcription in vitro.

Unphosphorylated PhoP or PhoP~P is essential for transcriptional activation of a second PhoP-regulated promoter, ykoL. Because the ability of unphosphorylated PhoP to activate transcription in vitro was observed for the first time during the course of this study, we explored the use of a second PhoP-regulated promoter. The ykoL promoter exhibits significant similarity to the phoB promoter (Fig. 7A). First, it is transcribed from a potential σ<sup>A</sup>-dependent promoter which also lacks a consensus –35 sequence essential for Eσ<sup>A</sup> recognition. Second, it contains the four TT(C/A/T)A(C/T)A repeats characteristic of PhoP-activated promoters, which are quite similar to the phoB promoter in terms of conservation, relative distances between tandem sequences, and position upstream of the transcription start site (41). Recently, DNase I footprint analysis of the ykoL promoter region with PhoP indicated that the levels of protection afforded by the phosphorylated and unphosphorylated forms of PhoP were similar (36), a situation that we observed for the phoB-P<sub>V</sub> promoter. The in vitro transcription analysis of the ykoL promoter (Fig. 7B) showed that despite the ability of Eσ<sup>A</sup> alone to direct transcription from a

DISCUSSION

PhoPR plays a dual role in regulation of the Eσ<sup>E</sup>-responsive phoB-P<sub>S</sub> promoter. In vitro transcription data reported here established that Eσ<sup>E</sup> was necessary and sufficient for phoB-P<sub>S</sub> promoter function. A direct role for Eσ<sup>E</sup> in phoB-P<sub>S</sub> promoter expression was corroborated by phoB-P<sub>S</sub> promoter fusion data obtained with a sigE mutant strain during phosphate-limited growth in LPDM and during sporulation in SSG medium (Fig. 2). Previous phoB-lacZ fusion data (9) failed to identify P<sub>S</sub> promoter expression during phosphate-limited growth because

(A)


-97 -90 -80 -70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 +1
5'-AAGAATTCGATCGGTTCAAAACGGACAATACCGAAAATCTTTCGTA**CAT_AAAATTC**TTIAC_A**TTAGA**ICAIACCACG**ICAI_TAAAAAGAG_TAT_TTGTATA
FMH769

GGATACCTCAAATGAAGGAGGACGCTΔTGAGTAATTATTGAAATCCGCTTTTAGAAAAAAGAACGACGCCATTATTCTGAAAAAACTCTATCAGATA
SD
+1
Met

GGGGTTTTATAATAAAGAGGTCATGAACAAAATGACGATTTCTGAGCGGATCCTT-3'
FMH768
+122

(B)

Core RNAP (E)
σ^A
PhoP
E : σ^A
[0 09 0 7]
+
*PhoR_[0 1 μM]
P_V^151 nts
P_X^100 nts

(C)

ykoL-P_v transcript, arbitrary unit
Log [PhoP] μM

FIG. 7. In vitro transcription analysis of a second PhoP-regulated promoter, ykoL. (A) Nucleotide sequence of the ykoL promoter coding strand. Regulatory elements are indicated as follows: arrows, transcription start site for P_v; subscripts, –10 sequences for P_v promoter; superscripts, consensus PhoP tandem binding sequences; SD, Shine-Dalgarno sequence; Met, methionine (translational start codon). The lowercase letters indicate mismatches with the consensus sequence. Primers FMH768 and FMH769 used to prepare the ykoL promoter are indicated by arrows under the coding and noncoding strands, respectively. The numbers below the sequences indicate the positions relative to the ykoL translational start site (position 1). The numbers above the sequences indicate the positions relative the transcription start sites of P_v. (B) Runoff in vitro transcription analysis of ykoL promoter using various concentrations of purified B. subtilis sigma factor (σ^A) and core RNAP (E) (lanes 1 through 8). Linearly increasing concentrations of unphosphorylated PhoP (in twofold increments) were used in the Eσ^A-driven transcription reactions in the absence of *PhoR (lanes 9 through 16) or in the presence of *PhoR at a final concentration of 0.18 μM (lanes 17 to 23). The protein concentrations (μM) are indicated above the lanes. Lane M contained a radiolabeled RNA marker. (C) Amount of ykoL-P_v transcript (in PhosphorImager output units) plotted as a function of the unphosphorylated PhoP concentration (open circles) or the PhoP~P concentration (solid circles). nts, nucleotides.

the promoter fusion contained the 50-fold-stronger P_v promoter in addition to the P_s promoter, which masked the contribution of the P_s promoter. P_s promoter expression during phosphate-limited growth was delayed ~2 h in the phoPR mutant (Fig. 3), suggesting that either synthesis or maturation of σ^E is delayed under the P_i deficiency stress conditions in the absence of PhoPR. This implies that PhoPR or another Pho regulon gene is needed for efficient sporulation, which may be especially important in nature as inorganic phosphate is often the most limiting nutrient in the soil (34). P_s promoter expression from the P_s+v promoter fusion was not observed previously in phoP or phoR mutant strains grown in LPDM because

experiments were terminated before delayed P_s promoter activation at T_5 to T_6 (9).

PhoP and PhoR have two roles in transcription from the phoB-P_s promoter. As stated above, the positive role for phoPR affects the timely expression from the Eσ^E-responsive promoter, P_s, during phosphate starvation. At the same time, our in vitro data suggest that PhoP~P represses transcription from the P_s promoter by binding directly to the P_s promoter. These results suggest that PhoPR has dual roles in development affecting the timing of at least one Eσ^E promoter by positively affecting when Eσ^E is available during phosphate starvation and also preventing early expression via PhoP~P

been explained by PhoP~P amplification of σ<sup>A</sup>- and σ<sup>E</sup>-responsive *phoPR* operon promoters (35). Here we showed that the PhoP-regulated *phoB* promoter, P<sub>V</sub>, is a σ<sup>A</sup> promoter and that transcription from the second promoter, P<sub>S</sub>, requires only Eσ<sup>E</sup>, although the P<sub>S</sub> transcription was delayed in a *phoPR* mutant (Fig. 2B and 3) and was negatively regulated by PhoP~P. *yhaX* and *yhbH* are similar to the *phoB*-P<sub>S</sub> promoter in three ways. Both these genes were expressed during P<sub>i</sub>-limiting growth in a wild-type *phoPR* strain at a time later than the time that other Pho-regulated genes were expressed, neither gene was transcribed in a *sigE* mutant strain, and like the P<sub>S</sub> promoter, neither *yhaX* nor *yhbH* has consensus tandem repeats for PhoP binding on the coding strand upstream of the putative Eσ<sup>E</sup> promoter (37). Because the Pho regulon assignment for *yhaX* and *yhbH* was based solely on the absence of promoter expression in a *phoR* mutant strain, it seems that the possible delay of Eσ<sup>E</sup>-dependent gene expression in that strain, not the lack of direct PhoPR promoter regulation, may have caused the negative results. Consistent with this idea, PhoP does not bind to the *yhaX* promoter (36). No further information is available on the mechanism of Pho regulation and σ<sup>E</sup>-dependent regulation of *ycp* or *glnQ*. The putative *ycpOP* and *glnQ* promoters are interesting in that both contain two putative consensus repeats for a PhoP dimer binding site on the coding strand on either side of the –35 element of the putative σ<sup>E</sup> promoter. It should be interesting to determine if Eσ<sup>E</sup>-responsive PhoP-activated genes exist (in addition to autoregulation) and if their requirement for PhoP binding is different than the requirement for all PhoP-activated σ<sup>A</sup> promoters studied (13) or for the PhoP-enhanced autoregulation Eσ<sup>E</sup> promoter (35).

PhoP or PhoP~P plus Eσ<sup>A</sup> is sufficient for *phoB*-P<sub>V</sub> or *ykoL* promoter transcription in vitro, and the PhoP concentration is the key. The failure of Eσ<sup>A</sup> to activate in vitro transcription of *phoB*-P<sub>V</sub> (Fig. 4) or *ykoL* (Fig. 7) is likely due to the absence of a –35 σ<sup>A</sup> consensus binding region in either promoter, as is true for other Eσ<sup>A</sup> PhoP-activated promoters which absolutely require PhoP~P for activation, including the *phoA*, *pstS*, and *tuaA* promoters (30, 40). Previous studies indicated that unphosphorylated PhoP was unable to activate transcription in vitro. The maximum concentrations of unphosphorylated PhoP and σ<sup>A</sup> used in the previous studies were ~0.25 μM and 0.02 μM, respectively. Consistent with the data presented here (Fig. 5B), these concentrations of unphosphorylated PhoP plus Eσ<sup>A</sup> were not sufficient to activate transcription in vitro. Here, we showed that unphosphorylated PhoP stimulated transcription from the *phoB*-P<sub>V</sub> promoter in vitro. However, the concentration of unphosphorylated PhoP required for maximum transcription was much higher than that required for PhoP~P with either promoter (17-fold higher for *phoB* and 10-fold higher for *ykoL*), indicating that phosphorylation has an important role.

While it is possible that PhoP isolated from *E. coli* is phosphorylated, the activity of equimolar concentrations of PhoP compared to the activity of PhoP in the presence of PhoR plus ATP suggests that the percentages of PhoP phosphorylated in the two cases differ considerably. Furthermore, a PhoPN structural analysis (3) for crystals formed in 1 day at 4°C showed no phosphorylation. However, a number of *E. coli*-expressed unphosphorylated response regulators have been shown to acti

FIG. 8. Western immunoblot detection of cellular PhoP levels during the phosphate starvation response. (A) Dilutions of purified standard PhoP were prepared in *phoPR* cell lysates and used for Western immunoblot detection using PhoP-specific antibody (left panel). The standard curve in the graph on the right was prepared as described in Materials and Methods. (B) For Western immunoblot detection of intracellular PhoP concentrations, the wild-type strain (MH6143) was allowed to grow in LPDM, and samples were collected at the times indicated. Enzymatic cell lysis was performed as described in Materials and Methods. Microscopic cell counting was performed, and samples were calibrated in *phoPR* cell lysates to a final concentration equivalent to 2 × 10<sup>7</sup> cells/μl. From the calibrated samples, 4 μl (equivalent to lysate from 8 × 10<sup>7</sup> cells) and 10 μl (equivalent to lysate from 2 × 10<sup>8</sup> cells) were electrophoresed on 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gels and subjected to immunoblot detection using PhoP<sub>CTD</sub>-specific antibody. Growth (OD<sub>540</sub>), microscopic cell counts, APase specific activities, and extracellular inorganic phosphate concentrations were determined at the times indicated. Time zero was the transition from the exponential to the stationary phase of growth.

before Pho regulation is turned off. The fact that the latter role was not detected during previous induction studies of P<sub>S</sub> in phosphate-replete sporulation media when the P<sub>V</sub> promoter was silent is understandable because there would have been no signal for PhoP phosphorylation and thus no repression of P<sub>S</sub> (9).

Although the binding site in the *phoB*-P<sub>S</sub> promoter, upstream of the P<sub>V</sub> promoter, is positioned like other secondary binding sites for PhoP-activated promoters, it is clear that it has no role in P<sub>V</sub> activation because expression from the *phoB*-P<sub>S+V</sub> promoter fusion and expression from the P<sub>V</sub> promoter are the same (Fig. 2A and C). A requirement for phosphorylation of PhoP for binding at P<sub>S</sub> was observed for two other PhoP repressed promoters, *resD* and *tagA* (4, 28), that contain a single consensus PhoP dimer binding site.

Different mechanisms control genes and operons that have been classified as both Pho and Eσ<sup>E</sup> regulon members. For genes classified as both Pho and Eσ<sup>E</sup> regulon genes, the mechanism responsible for inclusion of the *phoPR* promoter has

ivate transcription in vitro (PrrA [10], Spo0A [27], and DesR [11]), only to lose this ability in the variant with a mutation at the phosphorylatable aspartate residue and in strains containing this variant (PrrA [10] and DesR [11]). Spo0A (26) and DesR (11) were proven to be phosphorylated when they were isolated. UhpA or the UhpA D54N variant is constitutively active for expression of the sugar phosphate transporter UhpT in *E. coli* when it is overexpressed, but the variant is totally inactive as a single copy, suggesting that phosphorylation of UhpA is required for a single copy but not when UhpA is overexpressed (12, 33, 47). In the case of the PhoP/PhoQ two-component system of *Salmonella*, overexpression of the response regulator PhoP or the D52A variant activated regulon genes in vivo, albeit in a signal-independent manner, reportedly due to concentration-dependent activation of PhoP via dimerization. Further studies indicated that signal-dependent (low-Mg²⁺) PhoP DNA binding is phosphorylation dependent in vivo (46). In contrast to the examples described above, ResD D57A was shown to induce transcription of the ResDE regulon in response to oxygen limitation, suggesting that ResD senses oxygen-limiting conditions via an unknown mechanism in addition to being activated by phosphorylation by ResE (18).

Because of the high concentrations of unphosphorylated PhoP required for Pho regulon promoter activation in vitro and the modest threefold autoinduction of PhoP in vivo, we believe that a physiological role for unphosphorylated PhoP in a wild-type strain is unlikely. However, activation of Pho regulon genes has been reported in a *phoR* deletion strain. The ability to induce low-level expression from both *tuaA* and *pstS* promoters was retained in a *phoR* mutant strain during phosphate-deficient growth (30, 40). In the latter study (40), the authors proposed that PhoP was likely phosphorylated in a PhoR-independent manner (i.e., by unknown phosphodonors). In a second case, Ogura and colleagues (32) reported that overproduction of PhoP in vivo in a *phoR* deletion strain activated expression of *phoB* and a number of Pho regulon genes in a signal-independent manner; these genes are not normally activated in a *phoR* mutant during phosphate starvation. Although a number of possibilities may explain this observation, during PhoP overproduction under nonphysiological conditions concentration-dependent activation of PhoP is a potential factor.

Phosphorylation of PhoP minimizes the Eσ^A^ levels required for maximum transcription activation in vitro, consistent with in vivo conditions during Pho induction. Because both unphosphorylated PhoP and PhoP~P are dimers in solution (29) and both forms of PhoP bind to *phoB* (29) or *ykoL* (36) promoters with similar affinity, we asked if phosphorylation of PhoP had an effect on its interaction with the transcriptional machinery (7). Consistent with this notion, when PhoP or PhoP~P was used at the concentration determined to be optimal for *phoB*-P_V_ transcription (Fig. 5A), concentrations of σ^A^ (≤0.09 μM) required for PhoP~P-stimulated transcription activity were significantly lower than the concentrations required by unphosphorylated PhoP (Fig. 5B). Analysis of the in vivo concentration of PhoP showed that autoinduction of PhoP synthesis and APase expression initiated in parallel, when PhoP levels were the lowest, at T₀. During the following transition period (T₁ and T₂), PhoP concentrations increased moderately, roughly onefold, while the abundance of Eσ^A^ is known to decrease due to sigma factor displacement (23). Taken together, these data suggest that the phosphorylated form of PhoP is probably responsible for in vivo activation of Pho regulon genes, including genes encoding APases.

Elevated concentrations of PhoP~P inhibited transcription in vitro, providing a possible explanation for previous in vivo data. PhoP~P is known to function not only as a transcription activator but also as a transcription repressor of at least three Eσ^A^-responsive promoters, including *tagA/D* (30, 39) and *resD* (4). One difference observed in vitro between repressed and activated promoters is the customary requirement for PhoP phosphorylation for promoter binding at PhoP-repressed promoters (4, 30) compared to activated promoters, where either PhoP or PhoP~P binds. Also, it appears that similar levels of PhoP~P are required for activation and repression in vivo because repression of one set of genes and activation of another set by PhoP~P occur simultaneously. For example, upon phosphate starvation the genes responsible for synthesis of teichoic acid (the *tagA/D* operons) are repressed (30), while the *tuaA* operon encoding proteins for the synthesis of teichuronic acid is activated (30), both in a *phoPR*-dependent manner. Thus, it seems unlikely that elevated levels of PhoP~P have a physiologically relevant role in Pho gene repression in a wild-type strain. However, when overexpression studies are conducted, PhoP~P may play a role. Data consistent with in vivo repression of Pho regulon genes by elevated PhoP~P concentrations come from two in vivo studies, both involving nonphysiological overexpression of PhoP. It was observed that expression of PhoP from its own promoter on a multicopy plasmid in a *phoPR* wild-type background resulted in a reduced growth rate and repression of Pho regulon genes even under P_i_-deficient conditions (W. Liu and F. M. Hulett, unpublished). In an independent study (32), overproduction of any one of three response regulators (PhoP, DegU, and ComA) in a wild-type background failed to result in expression of target genes, and in each case deletion of a cognate histidine kinase gene was required for expression. Our in vitro data are consistent with the hypothesis that repression by elevated concentrations of PhoP~P is one possible explanation for the previously observed in vivo repression of Pho regulon genes.

In summary, data presented here show that *phoB*-P_S_ is an Eσ^E^-responsive promoter that is expressed under phosphate-deficient conditions and that the timing of this expression is delayed in a *phoPR* mutant strain. These observations suggest that workers should be cautious when analyzing promoters believed to depend on both Eσ^E^ and *phoPR*. While a role for PhoP~P in activation of an Eσ^E^ promoter has been reported previously (35), repression of the P_S_ promoter by PhoP~P is the first example of a repressor role for PhoP~P at Eσ^E^-responsive promoters. Two Eσ^A^ promoters that require PhoP for expression in vivo and in vitro, *phoB*-P_V_ and *ykoL*, were shown to be activated at a high concentration of PhoP and to be repressed by high concentrations of PhoP~P in vitro, thereby providing a possible explanation for previous in vivo observations (32, 39). Phosphorylation of PhoP resulted in decreased concentration requirements for both PhoP~P and Eσ^A^ for stimulation of Pho regulon promoters in vitro.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Salbi Paul for providing the purified *spoIID* promoter preparation.

This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grant GM-33471 to F.M.H.

REFERENCES

1. Ames, B. N., and D. T. Dubin. 1960. The role of polyamines in the neutralization of bacteriophage deoxyribonucleic acid. J. Biol. Chem. **235**:769–775.
2. Antelmann, H., C. Scharf, and M. Hecker. 2000. Phosphate starvation-inducible proteins of *Bacillus subtilis*: proteomics approach and transcriptional analysis. J. Bacteriol. **182**:4478–4490.
3. Birck, C., Y. Chen, F. M. Hulett, and J.-P. Samama. 2003. The crystal structure of the phosphorylation domain in PhoP reveals a functional tandem association mediated by an asymmetric interface. J. Bacteriol. **185**:254–261.
4. Birkey, S. M., W. Liu, X. Zhang, M. F. Duggan, and F. M. Hulett. 1998. Pho signal transduction network reveals direct transcriptional regulation of one two-component system by another two-component regulator: *Bacillus subtilis* PhoP directly regulates production of ResD. Mol. Microbiol. **30**:943–953.
5. Birkey, S. M., G. Sun, P. J. Piggot, and F. M. Hulett. 1994. A *pho* regulon promoter induced under sporulation conditions. Gene **147**:95–100.
6. Bookstein, C., C. W. Edwards, N. V. Kapp, and F. M. Hulett. 1990. The *Bacillus subtilis* 168 alkaline phosphatase III gene: impact of a *phoAIII* mutation on total alkaline phosphatase synthesis. J. Bacteriol. **172**:3730–3737.
7. Chen, Y., W. R. Abdel-Fattah, and F. M. Hulett. 2004. Residues required for *Bacillus subtilis* PhoP DNA binding or RNA polymerase interaction: alanine scanning of PhoP effector domain transactivation loop and α helix 3. J. Bacteriol. **186**:1493–1502.
8. Chen, Y., C. Birck, J.-P. Samama, and F. M. Hulett. 2003. Residue R113 is essential for PhoP dimerization and function: a residue buried in the asymmetric PhoP dimer interface determined in the PhoPN three-dimensional crystal structure. J. Bacteriol. **185**:262–273.
9. Chesnut, R. S., C. Bookstein, and F. M. Hulett. 1991. Separate promoters direct expression of *phoAIII*, a member of the *Bacillus subtilis* alkaline phosphatase multigene family, during phosphate starvation and sporulation. Mol. Microbiol. **5**:2181–2190.
10. Comolli, J. C., A. J. Carl, C. Hall, and T. Donohue. 2002. Transcriptional activation of the *Rhodobacter sphaeroides* cytochrome *c*₂ gene P2 promoter by the response regulator PrrA. J. Bacteriol. **184**:390–399.
11. Cybulski, L. E., G. del Solar, P. O. Craig, M. Espinosa, and D. de Mendoza. 2004. *Bacillus subtilis* DesR functions as a phosphorylation-activated switch to control membrane lipid fluidity. J. Biol. Chem. **279**:39340–39347.
12. Dahl, J. L., B. Y. Wei, and R. J. Kadner. 1997. Protein phosphorylation affects binding of the *Escherichia coli* transcription activator UhpA to the *uhpT* promoter. J. Biol. Chem. **272**:1910–1919.
13. Eder, S., W. Liu, and F. M. Hulett. 1999. Mutational analysis of the *phoD* promoter in *Bacillus subtilis*: implications for PhoP binding and promoter activation of Pho regulon promoters. J. Bacteriol. **181**:2017–2025.
14. Eder, S., L. Shi, K. Jensen, K. Yamane, and F. Hulett. 1996. A *Bacillus subtilis* secreted phosphodiesterase/alkaline phosphatase is the product of a Pho regulon gene, *phoD*. Microbiology **142**:2041–2047.
15. Eichenberger, P., S. T. Jensen, E. M. Conlon, C. van Ooij, J. Silvaggi, J. E. Gonzalez-Pastor, M. Fujita, S. Ben-Yehuda, P. Stragier, J. S. Liu, and R. Losick. 2003. The σᴱ regulon and the identification of additional sporulation genes in *Bacillus subtilis*. J. Mol. Biol. **327**:945–972.
16. Eymann, C., H. Mach, C. R. Harwood, and M. Hecker. 1996. Phosphate-starvation-inducible proteins in *Bacillus subtilis*: a two-dimensional gel electrophoresis study. Microbiology **142**:3163–3170.
17. Ferrari, E., D. J. Henner, M. Perego, and J. A. Hoch. 1988. Transcription of *Bacillus subtilis* subtilisin and expression of subtilisin in sporulation mutants. J. Bacteriol. **170**:289–295.
18. Geng, H., S. Nakano, and M. M. Nakano. 2004. Transcriptional activation by *Bacillus subtilis* ResD: tandem binding to target elements and phosphorylation-dependent and -independent transcriptional activation. J. Bacteriol. **186**:2028–2037.
19. Hulett, F., E. Kim, C. Bookstein, N. Kapp, C. Edwards, and H. Wyckoff. 1991. *Bacillus subtilis* alkaline phosphatases III and IV. Cloning, sequencing, and comparisons of deduced amino acid sequence with *Escherichia coli* alkaline phosphatase three-dimensional structure. J. Biol. Chem. **266**:1077–1084.
20. Hulett, F., J. Lee, L. Shi, G. Sun, R. Chesnut, E. Sharkova, M. Duggan, and N. Kapp. 1994. Sequential action of two-component genetic switches regulates the PHO regulon in *Bacillus subtilis*. J. Bacteriol. **176**:1348–1358.
21. Hulett, F. M. 2002. The Pho regulon, p. 193–203. In A. L. Sonenshein, J. A. Hoch, and R. Losick (ed.), *Bacillus subtilis* and its closest relatives: from genes to cells. ASM Press, Washington, D.C.
22. Hulett, F. M., C. Bookstein, and K. Jensen. 1990. Evidence for two structural genes for alkaline phosphatase in *Bacillus subtilis*. J. Bacteriol. **172**:735–740.
23. Ju, J., T. Mitchell, H. Peters III, and W. G. Haldenwang. 1999. Sigma factor displacement from RNA polymerase during *Bacillus subtilis* sporulation. J. Bacteriol. **181**:4969–4977.
24. Kapp, N. V., C. W. Edwards, R. S. Chesnut, and F. M. Hulett. 1990. The *Bacillus subtilis phoAIV* gene: effects of in vitro inactivation on total alkaline phosphatase production. Gene **96**:95–100.
25. LaBell, T. L., J. E. Trempy, and W. G. Haldenwang. 1987. Sporulation-specific σ-factor σ²⁹ of *Bacillus subtilis* is synthesized from a precursor protein, P31. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **84**:1784–1788.
26. Ladds, J. C., K. Muchova, D. Blaskovic, R. J. Lewis, J. A. Brannigan, A. J. Wilkinson, and I. Barak. 2003. The response regulator Spo0A from *Bacillus subtilis* is efficiently phosphorylated in *Escherichia coli*. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. **223**:153–157.
27. Lewis, R. J., D. J. Scott, J. A. Brannigan, J. C. Ladds, M. A. Cervin, G. B. Spiegelman, J. G. Hoggett, I. Barak, and A. J. Wilkinson. 2002. Dimer formation and transcription activation in the sporulation response regulator Spo0A. J. Mol. Biol. **316**:235–245.
28. Liu, W., S. Eder, and F. M. Hulett. 1998. Analysis of *Bacillus subtilis tagAB* and *tagDEF* expression during phosphate starvation identifies a repressor role for PhoP~P. J. Bacteriol. **180**:753–758.
29. Liu, W., and F. Hulett. 1997. *Bacillus subtilis* PhoP binds to the *phoB* tandem promoter exclusively within the phosphate starvation-inducible promoter. J. Bacteriol. **179**:6302–6310.
30. Liu, W., and F. Hulett. 1998. Comparison of PhoP binding to the *tuaA* promoter with PhoP binding to other Pho-regulon promoters establishes a *Bacillus subtilis* Pho core binding site. Microbiology **144**:1443–1450.
31. Liu, W., Y. Qi, and F. M. Hulett. 1998. Sites internal to the coding regions of *phoA* and *pstS* bind PhoP and are required for full promoter activity. Mol. Microbiol. **28**:119–130.
32. Ogura, M., H. Yamaguchi, K.-I. Yoshida, Y. Fujita, and T. Tanaka. 2001. DNA microarray analysis of *Bacillus subtilis* DegU, ComA and PhoP regulons: an approach to comprehensive analysis of *B.* subtilis two-component regulatory systems. Nucleic Acids Res. **29**:3804–3813.
33. Olekhovich, I. N., J. L. Dahl, and R. J. Kadner. 1999. Separate contributions of UhpA and CAP to activation of transcription of the *uhpT* promoter of *Escherichia coli*. J. Mol. Biol. **292**:973–986.
34. Ozanne, P. G. 1980. Phosphate nutrition of plants—a general treatise, p. 559–585. In E. Khasswenh (ed.), The role of phosphorus in agriculture. American Society of Agronomy, Madison, Wis.
35. Paul, S., S. Birkey, W. Liu, and F. M. Hulett. 2004. Autoinduction of *Bacillus subtilis phoPR* operon transcription results from enhanced transcription from Eσᴬ- and Eσᴱ-responsive promoters by phosphorylated PhoP. J. Bacteriol. **186**:4262–4275.
36. Pragai, Z., N. E. Allenby, N. O'Connor, S. Dubrac, G. Rapoport, T. Msadek, and C. R. Harwood. 2004. Transcriptional regulation of the *phoPR* operon in *Bacillus subtilis*. J. Bacteriol. **186**:1182–1190.
37. Pragai, Z., and C. R. Harwood. 2002. Regulatory interactions between the Pho and σᴮ-dependent general stress regulons of *Bacillus subtilis*. Microbiology **148**:1593–1602.
38. Qi, Y., and F. M. Hulett. 1998. PhoP-P and RNA polymerase σᴬ holoenzyme are sufficient for transcription of Pho regulon promoters in *Bacillus subtilis*: PhoP-P activator sites within the coding region stimulate transcription in vitro. Mol. Microbiol. **28**:1187–1197.
39. Qi, Y., and F. M. Hulett. 1998. Role of PhoP~P in transcriptional regulation of genes involved in cell wall anionic polymer biosynthesis in *Bacillus subtilis*. J. Bacteriol. **180**:4007–4010.
40. Qi, Y., Y. Kobayashi, and F. Hulett. 1997. The *pst* operon of *Bacillus subtilis* has a phosphate-regulated promoter and is involved in phosphate transport but not in regulation of the *pho* regulon. J. Bacteriol. **179**:2534–2539.
41. Robichon, D., M. Arnaud, R. Gardan, Z. Pragai, O. R. M., G. Rapoport, and M. Debarbouille. 2000. Expression of a new operon from *Bacillus subtilis*, *yzkB-ykoL*, under the control of the TnrA and PhoP-PhoR global regulators. J. Bacteriol. **182**:1226–1231.
42. Seki, T., H. Yoshikawa, H. Takahashi, and H. Saito. 1987. Cloning and nucleotide sequence of *phoP*, the regulatory gene for alkaline phosphatase and phosphodiesterase in *Bacillus subtilis*. J. Bacteriol. **169**:2913–2916.
43. Seki, T., H. Yoshikawa, H. Takahashi, and H. Saito. 1988. Nucleotide sequence of the *Bacillus subtilis phoR* gene. J. Bacteriol. **170**:5935–5938.
44. Sharpe, M. E., P. M. Hauser, R. G. Sharpe, and J. Errington. 1998. *Bacillus subtilis* cell cycle as studied by fluorescence microscopy: constancy of cell length at initiation of DNA replication and evidence for active nucleoid partitioning. J. Bacteriol. **180**:547–555.
45. Shi, L., and F. M. Hulett. 1999. The cytoplasmic kinase domain of PhoR is sufficient for the low phosphate-inducible expression of Pho regulon genes in *Bacillus subtilis*. Mol. Microbiol. **31**:211–222.
46. Shin, D., and E. A. Groisman. 2005. Signal-dependent binding of the response regulators PhoP and PmrA to their target promoters in vivo. J. Biol. Chem. **280**:4089–4094.
47. Webber, C. A., and R. J. Kadner. 1997. Involvement of the amino-terminal phosphorylation module of UhpA in activation of *uhpT* transcription in *Escherichia coli*. Mol. Microbiol. **24**:1039–1048.
