
INFECTION AND IMMUNITY, Aug. 2005, p. 4982–4992
0019-9567/05/$08.00+0 doi:10.1128/IAI.73.8.4982–4992.2005
Copyright © 2005, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

# Characterization of the cciIR Quorum-Sensing System in Burkholderia cenocepacia

Rebecca J. Malott,$^{1}$ Adam Baldwin,$^{2}$ Eshwar Mahenthiralingam,$^{2}$ and Pamela A. Sokol$^{1*}$

**Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary Health Sciences Center, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1,$^{1}$ and Cardiff School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3TL, Wales$^{2}$**

Received 17 November 2004/Returned for modification 4 January 2005/Accepted 9 March 2005

Several transmissible *Burkholderia cenocepacia* strains that infect multiple cystic fibrosis patients contain a genomic island designated as the cenocepacia island (cci). The cci contains a predicted *N*-acylhomoserine lactone (AHL) synthase gene, *cciI*, and a predicted response regulator gene, *cciR*. AHL production profiles indicated that CciI catalyzes the synthesis of *N*-hexanoyl-*L*-homoserine lactone and minor amounts of *N*-octanoyl-*L*-homoserine lactone. The *cciI* and *cciR* genes were found to be cotranscribed by reverse transcription-PCR analysis, and the expression of a *cciIR::luxCDABE* fusion in a *cciR* mutant suggested that the *cciIR* system negatively regulates its own expression. *B.* *cenocepacia* strains also have a *cepIR* quorum-sensing system. Expression of *cepI::luxCDABE* or *cepR::luxCDABE* fusions in a *cciR* mutant showed that CciR negatively regulates *cepI* but does not regulate *cepR*. Expression of the *cciIR::luxCDABE* fusion in a *cepR* mutant indicated that functional CepR is required for *cciIR* expression. Phylogenetic analysis suggested that the *cciIR* system was acquired by horizontal gene transfer from a distantly related organism and subsequently incorporated into the ancestral *cepIR* regulatory network. Mutations in *cciI*, *cciR*, *cepI cciI*, and *cepR cciR* were constructed in *B.* *cenocepacia* K56-2. The *cciI* mutant had greater protease activity and less swarming motility than the parent strain. The *cciR* mutant had less protease activity than the parent strain. The phenotypes of the *cepI cciI* and *cepR cciR* mutants were similar to *cepI* or *cepR* mutants, with less protease activity and swarming motility than the parent strain.

Over the past 20 years a group of closely related *Burkholderia* species termed the *B.* *cepacia* complex (Bcc) have emerged as opportunistic pathogens of particular importance in people with cystic fibrosis (CF) and chronic granulomatous disease (31, 33). Bcc infections are a major concern in CF because some of the Bcc strains have high patient-to-patient transmissibility, multidrug resistance, and the potential to cause inflammation and fatal invasive disease (47). Bcc bacteremia has been documented in CF and non-CF patients (59). The Bcc is currently comprised of nine species, each of which has been isolated from CF patients; however, they vary in their frequency of colonization, transmissibility, and geographic distribution. *B.* *cenocepacia* is the most commonly reported Bcc species isolated from patients with CF (26, 48). The majority of transmissible or epidemic Bcc strains are *B.* *cenocepacia* (26, 31, 48, 59), and epidemiological studies have shown this species is highly virulent, causing significant mortality among CF patients (28, 30).

*N*-Acylhomoserine lactone (AHL)-mediated quorum-sensing systems are comprised of a *luxI* homologue that encodes an AHL synthase that catalyzes the synthesis of AHL signal molecule(s) and a *luxR* homologue that encodes a sensor/response regulator, which binds its cognate AHL and alters gene expression at the level of transcription. Some organisms have multiple AHL quorum-sensing systems which may be integrated with each other as well as with other bacterial control circuitry (13). For example, *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* possesses two quorum-sensing systems, *lasIR* and *rhlIR*. These two systems are responsible for the regulation of a large number of genes, including many that play a role in virulence (39, 56). LasR and RhlR regulate some genes in a hierarchical manner (34).

The *cepIR* AHL-mediated quorum-sensing system is widely distributed among Bcc strains (15, 27). CepI directs the synthesis of *N*-octanoyl-*L*-homoserine lactone (OHL) and of *N*-hexanoyl-*L*-homoserine lactone (HHL) (23, 24). Recent proteomic and transcriptional analysis studies have indicated that the *cepIR* system is involved in the regulation of numerous target genes (2, 36). In *B.* *cenocepacia* CepR positively regulates *cepI* and negatively controls its own expression (24). The *cepIR* quorum-sensing system in *B.* *cenocepacia* is involved in the regulation of swarming motility, mature biofilm development, chitinase production, extracellular protease production, and the biosynthesis of the siderophore ornibactin (18, 23–25). Transcriptional analysis was used to demonstrate that a zinc metalloprotease gene, *zmpA*, is positively regulated by *cepIR* (46) and that the *cepIR* system is involved in the negative regulation of the ornibactin biosynthesis gene, *pvdA* (24). Ornibactin is a hydroxamate siderophore which has been shown to play a role in virulence in both chronic and acute models of respiratory infection (44). The *cepIR* quorum-sensing system positively regulates swarming motility in *B.* *cenocepacia*, possibly by controlling biosurfactant production (18, 25).

---

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Department of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of Calgary Health Sciences Centre, 3330 Hospital Dr. N.W., Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1. Phone: (403) 220-6037. Fax: (403) 270-2772. E-mail: psokol@ucalgary.ca.

Animal, nematode, and plant infection models have shown that the *cepIR* quorum-sensing system contributes to virulence in *B. cenocepacia* and *B. cepacia* (1, 20, 46). Using a rat chronic respiratory infection model, Sokol et al. (46) demonstrated that infections with *cepIR* mutants caused significantly less lung histopathological changes despite similar lung bacterial counts compared to the wild type. A *cepI* mutant was less virulent in both wild-type and *Cftr⁻/⁻* mice. The *cepI* mutant was recovered from the lungs in significantly lower numbers than the parent strain and was not invasive in the *Cftr⁻/⁻* mice (46).

The *cepIR* system has also been shown to be required for efficient killing of *Caenorhabditis elegans* by *B. cenocepacia* H111 (20). A *B. cepacia cepI* mutant was attenuated in its ability to macerate onion tissue (1). Thus, a role for the *cepIR* system in the regulation of Bcc virulence traits in a wide range of infection models has been established.

A novel set of *luxIR* homologues was identified during characterization of the genomic region surrounding the *Burkholderia cepacia* epidemic strain marker (BCESM) (4). The BCESM was originally identified as a 1.4-kb DNA fragment amplified from transmissible Bcc strains during random amplified polymorphic DNA typing (29), and the marker has been widely applied in infection control as an indicator of clinical risk (28, 30, 48). Baldwin et al. (4) recently demonstrated that the BCESM was a part of a 31.7-kb low-GC content genomic island termed the cenocepacia island (*cci*), which contained 37 open reading frames involved in both virulence and metabolism. The *luxIR* homologues identified within the island and, therefore, associated with epidemic strains of *B. cenocepacia* were designated *cciIR*. A *cciI* mutant was shown to have attenuated virulence in a rat chronic respiratory infection model (4). The objectives of the current study were to determine if *cciIR* is a functional quorum-sensing system, if it is involved in the regulation of virulence-associated phenotypes, and if a regulatory hierarchy exists between the *cepIR* and *cciIR* quorum-sensing systems in epidemic strains of *B. cenocepacia*.

The nucleotide sequence for the *cciIR* locus was obtained from the *B. cenocepacia* sequencing project (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Projects/B_cenocepacia/).

**Cloning of *cciI***. The *cciI* gene was PCR amplified from K56-2 using the oligonucleotide primers CCIF (5′-GCCTCATTTGTGCACTCGTG-3′) and CCIR (5′-GGTGGCACTGACATCGAAAG-3′), and the 850-bp PCR fragment was cloned into pCR2.1Topo (Invitrogen). The nucleotide sequence was determined to confirm the absence of PCR errors. The resulting *cciI* clone was designated pRM1T4.

**Construction of *cciR*, *cepI cciI*, and *cepR cciR* mutants by allelic exchange**. The 2.0-kb fragment containing the *cciR* gene and flanking region was amplified from K56-2 using the oligonucleotide primers CCRBam (5′-CATCGCGGATCCCG CCAT-3′) with a BamHI site (underlined) and CCRHin (5′-ATGTGGCTAAGC TTGATCGACC-3′) with a HindIII site and cloned into the BamHI/HindIII sites of pEX18Tc (17). The *cciR* gene was disrupted by incorporation of the Tp cassette from p34E-Tp (10) into the MluI site of *cciR*, resulting in pRM186Tp. The vector was transferred into K56-2 using pRK2013 as the mobilizing plasmid (12). Transconjugants were plated onto *Pseudomonas* isolation agar (Difco) containing Tp to select for single-crossover events. The *cciR::Tp* mutant (K56-2*cciR*) was identified by screening for Tc sensitivity.

To construct an unmarked Δ*cciI* Δ*cciR* mutant, a 4.3-kb DNA fragment containing *cciIR* was shotgun cloned from XhoI fragments separated by sucrose gradient fractionation. The fraction containing the *cciIR* fragment was identified by Southern hybridization with a 449-bp *cciR* probe and a 450-bp *cciI* probe and cloned into the XhoI site of pCR2.1Topo (Invitrogen). The *cciI* and *cciR* probes were PCR amplified using the oligonucleotide primers IN*cciIF* (5′-CATCTTC GCTGGCAGTTTCG-3′) with IN*cciIR* (5′-AACGCTGGTAAAGCCGTGC-3′) and IN*cciRF* (5′-TTACGCGCAACGAGACTACG-3′) with IN*cciRR* (5′-ATCTTCATCGCTTCGGCG-3′), respectively. Positive clones were identified using colony hybridization assays (60). The 4.3-kb *cciIR* fragment was cloned into pEX18Tc, and *cciR* was disrupted by deleting a 637-bp NcoI-to-MluI fragment, resulting in pRM187-KO. This deletion removed the 5′ end of *cciR* and the *cciIR* promoter region. Allelic exchange was conducted as described above, resulting in a Δ*cciI* Δ*cciR* double mutant (K56-2*cciIR*). A *cepR::Tp* Δ*cciI* Δ*cciR* mutant (K56-2*cepR cciIR*) was constructed in K56-2*cciIR* with pEXCEPR (24). A Δ*cepI cciI::Tp* mutant (K56-2*cepI cciI*) was constructed in K56-dI2 by using pCciI-Tp (4). K56-dI2 is a *cepI* allelic exchange mutant with a 290-bp NruI fragment deletion in *cepI* (C. E. Chambers, P. Law, M. B. Visser, E. I. Lutter, and P. A. Sokol, Abstr. 2nd ASM Conf. Cell-Cell Commun. Bacteria, abstr. 119B, 2004). Two independent Δ*cepI cciI::Tp* mutants, designated K56-2*cepI cciIa* and K56-2*cepI cciIb*, were isolated. K56-2*cepI cciIa* appeared to have a spontaneous mutation that affected ornibactin biosynthesis. Allelic exchange was confirmed in all mutants by PCR and Southern hybridization.

**AHL extraction and TLC-AHL bioassays**. AHLs were extracted from culture supernatants twice with equal volumes of acidified ethyl acetate as described elsewhere (24). Thin-layer chromatography (TLC)-AHL bioassays were performed as described previously using *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* A136 (pCF218) (pCF372) as a reporter strain (24). This reporter strain is able to identify AHLs with 3-oxo-, 3-hydroxy-, and 3-unsubstituted side chains ranging from 6 to 16 carbons in length (42). Synthetic HHL and OHL (Sigma-Aldrich) were used as reference standards.

**Construction of *luxCDABE* transcriptional fusions**. A *cepR::luxCDABE* transcriptional fusion, pRM432, was constructed by amplifying the *cepR* promoter region as described by Lewenza et al. (24) by PCR with the oligonucleotide primers CPRxho (5′-GTCCGGCTCGAGCGGCG-3′) and CPRbam (5′-CAT GAAGCGGATCCTCAGCG-3′). These primers were designed with incorporated XhoI and BamHI sites, respectively. The 1.8-kb *cepR* promoter fragment was subsequently cloned into the XhoI/BamHI cloning site of pMS402 (11). The *cepI::luxCDABE* transcriptional fusion, pCP300, contains a 300-bp fragment containing the *cepI* promoter region (Chambers et al., Abstr. 2nd ASM Conf. Cell-Cell Commun. Bacteria, 2004). The promoter regions for *cciI* and *cciR* were predicted in silico using SoftBerry BPROM (http://www.softberry.com). For construction of the *cciI* and *cciR* promoter fusions, a 391-bp SalI/SacII fragment and an 813-bp ClaI fragment from pRM4.3 containing the respective predicted promoter regions were subcloned into the EcoRV site of pCR2.1Topo (Invitrogen). A XhoI/BamHI fragment containing the *cciI* or *cciR* promoter region was subsequently cloned into pMS402 (11) and designated pRM446 or pRM445, respectively.

**Luminescence assays**. Overnight cultures were subcultured to an initial absorbance at 600 nm of 0.02 in 20 ml medium. At selected times, 200-μl aliquots were removed and the luminescence in counts per second (cps) and turbidity at an absorbance of 600 nm were measured using a Wallac Victor² Multi-label counter (Perkin-Elmer Life Sciences, Woodbridge, Ontario, Canada). The samples were read in black, clear-bottom 96-well microtiter plates (Corning Inc., Corning,

**MATERIALS AND METHODS**

**Bacterial strains and growth conditions**. The bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study are listed in Table 1. For genetic manipulations, including RNA isolation, cultures were routinely grown at 37°C in Luria broth (Invitrogen, Burlington, Ontario, Canada) with shaking (200 rpm) or on 1.5% LB agar plates. When appropriate, the following concentrations of antibiotics were used: 100 μg/ml of trimethoprim (Tp) and 200 μg/ml of tetracycline (Tc) for *B. cenocepacia* and 1.5 mg/ml Tp, 15 μg/ml of Tc, and 50 μg/ml of kanamycin (Km) for *Escherichia coli*. Antibiotics were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Canada Ltd. (Oakville, Ontario, Canada). For protease, β-galactosidase, and luminescence assays, cultures were grown in 0.25% Trypticase soy broth (TSB; Difco, Franklin Lakes, NJ) with 5% Bacto-Peptone (Difco) (PTSB) at 37°C. For chrome azurol S (CAS) assays, cultures were grown at 32°C in succinate medium supplemented with ornithine (10 mM) (32). For examination of swarming motility, cultures were grown in nutrient broth (Difco) supplemented with 0.5% glucose. For AHL extractions, cultures were grown in 100% TSB at 37°C.

**DNA manipulations**. DNA manipulations were performed using standard techniques as described by Sambrook et al. (38). Genomic DNA was isolated as described by Ausubel et al. (3). Restriction endonucleases and T4 DNA polymerase were purchased from Invitrogen. T4 DNA ligase was purchased from New England Biolabs (Mississauga, Ontario, Canada). Oligonucleotide primers were purchased from Invitrogen or from University of Calgary Core DNA and Protein Services (Calgary, Alberta, Canada). Plasmids were introduced into *B. cenocepacia* by electroporation using a Gene Pulser (Bio-Rad, Richmond, CA) as previously described (8). Nucleotide sequencing was performed by Macrogen Inc. (Seoul, Korea) or by University of Calgary Core DNA and Protein Services.

TABLE 1. Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this study

| Strain or plasmid | Description | Reference or source |
|-------------------|-------------|---------------------|
| **E. coli strains** |             |                     |
| DH5α              | F⁻ φ80lacZΔM15 Δ(lacZYA-argF) recA1 endA gyrA96 thi-1 hsdR17 supE44 relA1 deoR U169 | Invitrogen |
| TOP10             | F⁻ mcrA Δ(mrr-hsdRMS-mcrBC) φ80lacZΔM15 ΔlacX74 deoR recA1 araD139 Δ(ara-leu) 7697 galU galK rpsL (Str) endA1 nupG supE44 hsdS20 (rB mB) recA13 ara-14 proA2 lacY1 galK2 rpsL20 xyl-5 mtl-1 | Invitrogen |
| HB101             |             | 38                  |
| **A. tumefaciens strain** |             |                     |
| A136              | Ti plasmidless host | C. Fuqua |
| **B. cenocepacia strains** |             |                     |
| K56-2             | Cystic fibrosis respiratory isolate that contains the cci, BCESMª, and the cable pilus gene | 7 |
| K56-R2            | cepR::Tn5-OT182 derivative of K56-2 | 23 |
| K56-I2            | cepI::Tp derivative of K56-2 | 23 |
| K56-dI2           | ΔcepI derivative of K56-2 | C. Chambers |
| K56-2cciI         | cciI::Tp derivative of K56-2 | 4 |
| K56-2cciR         | cciR::Tp derivative of K56-2 | This study |
| K56-2cciIR        | ΔPcciIR derivative of K56-2 | This study |
| K56-2cepIcciIa    | ΔcepIcciI::Tp derivative of K56-2 with a spontaneous mutation affecting ornibactin biosynthesis | This study |
| K56-2cepIcciIb    | ΔcepIcciI::Tp derivative of K56-2 | This study |
| K56-2cepRcciIR    | cepR::Tp ΔPcciIR derivative of K56-2 | This study |
| **Plasmids**      |             |                     |
| pEX18Tc           | Suicide vector, sacB, Tcʳ | 17 |
| pUCP26            | Broad-host-range vector, Tcʳ | 57 |
| pUCP28T           | Broad-host-range vector, Tpʳ | 40 |
| pCR2.1Topo        | Cloning vector for PCR products, Apʳ Kmʳ | Invitrogen |
| pRK2013           | ColEl Tra(RK2)⁺, Kmʳ | 12 |
| p34E-Tp           | Source of trimethoprim cassette, Tpʳ | 10 |
| pSLS225           | pUCP26 with 1.5-kb SphI-KpnI fragment containing cepI, Tcʳ | 25 |
| pEXCEPI           | pEX18Tc containing the cepI gene disrupted by the Tp cassette, TpʳTcʳ | 23 |
| pEXCEPR           | pEX18Tc containing the cepR gene disrupted by the Tp cassette, TpʳTcʳ | 24 |
| pRM186-Tp         | pEX18Tc containing the cciR gene disrupted by the Tp cassette at the MluI site, TpʳTcʳ | This study |
| pRM4.3            | pCR2.1TOPO with the 4.3-kb XhoI fragment containing cciIR, KmʳApʳ | This study |
| pRM1T4            | pCR2.1TOPO with the 850-bp PCR-amplified cciI fragment, ApʳKmʳ | This study |
| pRM164            | pUCP26 with the 850-bp PCR-amplified cciI fragment, Tcʳ | This study |
| pRM187-KO         | pEX18Tc with 4.3-kb EcoRI/XbaI fragment from pRM4.3 containing cciIR with a 637-bp MluI/NcoI deletion removing the cciIR promoter region and 5′end of cciR, TpʳTcʳ | This study |
| pCciI-Tp          | pEGM105-Tc suicide vector containing the cciI gene disrupted by the Tp cassette, TpʳTcʳ | 4 |
| pMS402            | lux-based promoter reporter plasmid, KmʳTpʳ | 11 |
| pRM432            | pMS402 containing the 1.8-kb PCR-amplified cepR promoter fragment from K56-2, KmʳTpʳ | This study |
| pCP300            | pMS402 containing the 300-bp PCR-amplified cepI promoter fragment from K56-2, KmʳTpʳ | C. Chambers |
| pRM445            | pMS402 containing the 813-bp ClaI cciIR promoter fragment, KmʳTpʳ | This study |
| pRM446            | pMS402 containing the 391-bp SacII/SalI predicted cciI promoter fragment, KmʳTpʳ | This study |
| pCF218            | IncP plasmid expressing TraR, Tcʳ | 61 |
| pCF372            | pUCD2 with a traI-lacZ fusion, Spʳ | 14 |
| pSG206            | pUCP26 with azmpA-lacZ fusion, Tcʳ | 46 |
| pSG208            | pUCP28T with azmpA-lacZ fusion, Tpʳ | 46 |

ª BCESM, Burkholderia cepacia epidemic strain marker.

NY). The level of promoter expression is reported as the ratio of luminescence to turbidity or relative luminescence.

RT-PCR. Overnight K56-2 cultures were subcultured into 20 ml medium at an initial optical density at 600 nm (OD₆₀₀) of 0.02 and grown for 10 h. Total RNA was isolated from approximately 1 × 10⁹ cells with a QIAGEN RNeasy mini kit (QIAGEN, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada). RNA was treated with amplification-grade DNase I (Invitrogen) before use. Reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) was performed using a Titan One-tube RT-PCR kit (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For each reaction mixture, 75 ng of RNA was used. cDNA was synthesized by reverse transcription at 50°C for 40 min. Denaturation was performed for 2 min at 96°C followed by 35 cycles of PCR as suggested by the manufacturer. A final elongation step at 68°C for 7 min was conducted. The primers and annealing temperatures used were as follows: cciI (64°C), cciIRTF (5′-TCGCGGTGCTACGATTCAC-3′) and cci-IRTR (5′-TTGCACCGATCAGGTAGGC-3′); cciR (58°C), cciRRTF (5′-ACGCGGCCACTCTTGTTG-3′) and cciRRTR (5′-GCCGACATCAGAGGCTTGAA-3′); cciIR intergenic region (58°C), irBRRTF (5′-ATTGATCCCATTCGGTCAGG-3′) and irBRRTR (5′-CGCCTCCATTGTTGGGCATA-3′). To ensure

that there was no DNA contamination in the RNA samples, Platinum Taq polymerase (Invitrogen) was used instead of the reverse transcriptase enzyme mixture under the same reaction conditions.

**Phylogenetic analysis of quorum-sensing systems.** The AHL synthase and response regulator protein sequences from *B. cenocepacia* strain K56-2 (CepI, CciI, CepR, and CciR) were used to search the protein databases with the PHI-BLAST search tool at NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/). The 100 matches with greatest identity were collected for each synthase and response regulator protein. These were combined with the recently described quorum-sensing genes in *B. pseudomallei* (51) (obtained from the Sanger Institute [http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Projects/B_pseudomallei/]) and subjected to phylogenetic analysis as follows. Multiple amino acid alignments were constructed using CLUSTAL W (50), and phylogenetic trees were drawn using genetic distance-based neighbor-joining algorithms within Treecon for Windows version 1.3 (55). The following parameters were used for each tree: sequence input order was randomized, the Poisson correction algorithm was applied, 1,000 data sets were examined by bootstrapping resampling statistics, and each tree was rooted with the appropriate synthase or response regulator sequence originally described in *Vibrio fischeri*. Sequences representative of each major phylogenetic cluster were then selected for final analysis. Corresponding synthase and response regulator protein sequences for each individual quorum-sensing system were concatenated, and their combined sequences were used to construct a final phylogenetic tree as described above.

**β-Galactosidase assays.** β-Galactosidase activity was measured as previously described (35). Overnight cultures were subcultured to an initial absorbance at 600 nm of 0.02 in 20 ml of PTSB. Throughout the time course, 1-ml aliquots were removed and assayed for β-galactosidase activity, and this activity was expressed as Miller units (35).

**Siderophore, protease, and swarming motility assays.** Siderophore activities present in the culture supernatant fluid were measured by CAS assays (23). Overnight cultures were subcultured (1/100) into fresh medium. The cultures were grown for 40 h at 32°C, and CAS assays were performed on 100 μl of supernatant fluid. The absorbance at 630 nm was measured and divided by the culture turbidity (absorbance at 600 nm) to normalize for cell density, and this ratio was reported as CAS activity (41).

Protease activity was determined using skim milk as a substrate. Overnight cultures were grown and subcultured (1/100) into fresh medium. At the mid-log phase of growth, the cultures were normalized to an optical density of 0.3 at 600 nm and spot inoculated (3 μl) in triplicate onto dialyzed 1.5% brain heart infusion agar (Difco) containing 1.5% skim milk (45). The plates were incubated at 37°C for 24 h, and the zone of clearing around the growth was measured. For AHL add-back assays, 2.5 nM and 10.0 nM concentrations of synthetic HHL and 2.5 nM of synthetic OHL dissolved in 20% acetonitrile were spread on the agar prior to spot inoculation.

Swarming motility was evaluated using semisolid agar (0.5%) motility assays as previously described (25). Briefly, overnight cultures were normalized, and a 1-μl was spot inoculated in the center of the nutrient broth (Difco), 0.5% glucose, and 0.5% agar surface. The plates were incubated at 37°C for 24 or 48 h, and the diameter of the swarming zone was measured.

---

**RESULTS**

**Characterization of AHL production by CciI.** K56-2 has previously been reported to produce OHL and HHL. K56-I2 (*cepI*) produces small amounts of HHL but no detectable OHL (24). To determine if *cciI* encodes an AHL synthase that is responsible for the production of HHL in K56-I2 (*cepI*), the *cciI* gene was cloned and expressed in *E. coli* DH5α. The AHLs present in the culture supernatant of *E. coli* DH5α(pRM1T4), which contains *cciI*, were analyzed using the *A. tumefaciens* TLC-AHL bioassay. *E. coli* DH5α containing *cciI* produced AHLs that comigrated with synthetic HHL (Fig. 1A). An AHL that comigrated with synthetic OHL was weakly detectable only after the plate was allowed to develop for more than 72 h. *E. coli* DH5α(pSLS225), which contains *cepI*, produced AHLs that comigrated on the TLC plate with both HHL and OHL (Fig. 1A).

To confirm that *cciI* directs the synthesis of HHL and minor amounts of OHL, extracts of K56-2*cciI* and K56-2*cepI cciIa*

FIG. 1. TLC-AHL bioassay. Ethyl acetate extracts were chromatographed on C<sub>18</sub> reverse-phase TLC plates developed with methanol-water (70:30, vol/vol). The spots were visualized using the *A. tumefaciens* reporter strain. (A) Heterologous expression of *cciI* in *E. coli*. Lane 1, *E. coli* DH5α(pUCP26); lane 2, *E. coli* DH5α(pSLS225) containing the *cepI* gene from K56-2; lane 3, *E. coli* TOP10 (pCR2.1TOPO); lane 4, *E. coli* TOP10(pRM1T4) containing the *cciI* gene from K56-2; lane 5, synthetic AHL standards. (B) AHL production profile of K56-2*cciI* and the complemented mutant. Lane 1, K56-2(pUCP26); lane 2, K56-2*cciI*(pUCP26); lane 3, K56-2*cciI*(pRM164), containing the *cciI* gene; lane 4, synthetic AHL standards. (C) AHL production profile of K56-2*cepI cciIa* and the complemented mutant. Lane 1, K56-2*cepI cciIa*(pUCP26); lane 2, K56-2*cepI cciIa*(pRM164) containing the *cciI* gene; lane 3, K56-2*cepI cciIa*(pSLS225) containing the *cepI* gene; lane 5, synthetic standards. (D) AHL production profiles of the transcriptional regulator mutants. Lane 1, K56-2; lane 2, K56-R2 (*cepR*); lane 3, K56-2*cciR*; lane 4, K56-2*cciIR*; lane 5, K56-2*cepR cciIR*; lane 6, synthetic standards.

were analyzed using the *A. tumefaciens* TLC-AHL bioassay. K56-2*cciI* produced slightly less HHL than the parent strain. HHL production was restored to parental levels when *cciI* was present in trans (Fig. 1B). There were no detectable AHLs in

4986 MALOTT ET AL.

A)
X S C Sa Sa SMC SNC S Sa X
pRM4.3
400bp
ccil cciR

B)
pRM445

C)
cciI (380 bp)
cciR (280 bp)
intergenic (532 bp)

D)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
600
300

FIG. 2. Physical and genetic map of the XhoI *cciIR* locus of epidemic strains of *B. cenocepacia*. (A) Map of the 4.3-kb insert of pRM4.3 containing *cciIR*. The arrows indicate the location and orientation of the genes. The Tp cassette was incorporated into the MluI site of *cciR* to construct K56-2*cciR*. A MluI-NcoI fragment was deleted to construct K56-2*cciIR*. Abbreviations: C, ClaI; N, NcoI; M, MluI; Sa, SalI; S, SacII; X, XhoI. (B) The *cciI* and *cciR* promoter regions used in the fusion constructs pRM446 and pRM445. (C) Locations of the RT-PCR products for *cciI*, *cciR*, and the *cciIR* intergenic region. (D) RT-PCR analysis of the *cciIR* transcript. Products were electrophoresed on a 1.0% agarose gel. Lane 1, 100-bp ladder; lane 2, *cciI* RT-PCR product with *cciIRTF* and *cciIRTR* primers; lane 3, water control with *cciIRTF* and *cciIRTR* primers; lane 4, Taq polymerase control with *cciIRTF* and *cciIRTR* primers; lane 5, *cciR* RT-PCR product with *cciRRTF* and *cciRRTR* primers; lane 6, water control with *cciRRTF* and *cciRRTR* primers; lane 7, Taq polymerase control with *cciRRTF* and *cciRRTR* primers; lane 8, *cciIR* intergenic RT-PCR product with *irBRRTF* and *irBRRTR* primers; lane 9, water control with *irBRRTF* and *irBRRTR* primers; lane 10, Taq polymerase control with *irBRRTF* and *irBRRTR* primers.

dictions (Fig. 2B). The expression of *cciI::luxCDABE* (pRM446) and *cciR::luxCDABE* (pRM445) was compared in K56-2 (data not shown), and expression was only observed for the *cciR::luxCDABE* transcriptional fusion, pRM445. Additional *cciI* transcriptional fusion constructs were made by cloning various lengths of the region upstream of *cciI* in front of the promoterless *luxCDABE* operon. None of these constructs resulted in the expression of the *luxCDABE* operon (data not shown).

RT-PCR was used to determine if *cciI* and *cciR* are cotranscribed. Three primer sets were designed to internally amplify *cciI*, *cciR*, and the intergenic region between *cciR* and *cciI* (Fig. 2C). A product was amplified for each gene as well as the intergenic region, indicating that *cciI* and *cciR* are on the same transcript (Fig. 2D). Therefore, *cciI* is transcribed from a promoter located upstream of *cciR*.

The expression of *cciIR::luxCDABE* was compared in K56-2 and K56-2*cciIR* over a 24-h time course. The expression of *cciIR::luxCDABE* was significantly greater in K56-2*cciIR* than in K56-2 from 12 to 16 h (*P* < 0.05, analysis of variance [ANOVA]). The twofold increase in expression indicates that the *cciIR* system negatively regulates its own expression (Fig. 3A).

Regulatory relationship between *cciIR* and *cepIR* quorum-sensing systems. To determine if there is a regulatory relationship between the *cepIR* and the *cciIR* genes, expression levels of the *cepI::luxCDABE*(pCP300) and *cepR::luxCDABE*(pRM432) transcriptional fusions were compared in K56-2 and K56-2*cciIR*. There was a significant increase in *cepI::luxCDABE* expression in K56-2*cciIR* compared to K56-2 (*P* < 0.02; *t* test), indicating that *cciIR* is involved in the negative regulation of *cepI* (Fig. 3B). The expression of *cepR::luxCDABE* in K56-2*cciIR* was the same as K56-2, demonstrating that *cciIR* does not regulate *cepR* expression (Fig. 3C). Expression of *cciIR::luxCDABE* (pRM445) was compared in K56-2 and K56-R2 (*cepR*) (Fig. 3A). The expression of *cciIR::luxCDABE* was reduced to almost background levels in K56-R2 (*cepR*), indicating that *cepR* is required for *cciIR* expression.

Evolutionary analysis of *B. cepacia* complex quorum-sensing systems. Phylogenetic analysis of the CepIR and CciIR systems of *B. cenocepacia* was carried out to determine if the evolutionary origins of each system could be traced. Construction of separate trees for synthase or response regulator proteins demonstrated that there was significant congruence in the phylogeny of proteins belonging to a single quorum-sensing system (data not shown). The overlapping tree topology of AHL synthase and response regulator proteins showed that coevolution occurs for each given system and that phylogenetic relationships between strains could be inferred from the analysis. Therefore, corresponding synthase and response regulator protein sequences were concatenated and analyzed to produce a tree consisting of 28 systems that was representative of the phylogenetic diversity observed during analysis of the 100 most closely related sequences (Fig. 4). The *B. cenocepacia* CepIR proteins clustered closely with other *B. cepacia* complex and *B. pseudomallei* group quorum-sensing systems, indicating that this type of quorum-sensing system may be ancestral to the Burkholderia genus. From an evolutionary perspective, the pathogenicity island system CciIR was highly distinct from CepIR, and phylogenetic analysis did not specifically locate its

extracts from K56-2*cepI cciIa*, indicating that *cepI* and *cciI* are collectively responsible for AHL synthesis in K56-2 (Fig. 1C). HHL or OHL production was restored in K56-2*cepI cciIa* by complementation with *cepI* or *cciI*, confirming the results obtained by heterologous expression in *E. coli* (Fig. 1A). K56-R2 (*cepR*) has previously been shown to produce small amounts of HHL (24). The K56-2*cciR* and the K56-2*cciIR* AHL production profiles were similar to K56-2 (Fig. 1D), indicating that *cciR* is not required for AHL production. K56-2*cepR cciIR* produced very small amounts of HHL and OHL that were weakly detectable only when the plate was overdeveloped (Fig. 2D), confirming that *cepR* is required for optimum production of both HHL and OHL.

Transcriptional analysis of *cciIR*. Transcriptional analysis of *cciIR* was performed to determine if these genes regulate their own transcription. The promoter regions of *cciI* and *cciR* were predicted in silico, and *cciI::luxCDABE* and *cciR::luxCDABE* transcriptional fusions were constructed based on these pre-

potential origin to bacterial sequences currently available in the genetic databases (Fig. 4). CciIR was most closely related to one of two novel systems present in the draft genome of *B. xenovorans* strain LB400; neither of the *B. xenovorans* quorum-sensing systems was associated with a genomic island (data not shown). One of the multiple systems in *B. pseudomallei*, Bp-mIR3 (51) also clustered on the same evolutionary arm as CciIR. The *B. vietnamiensis* BviIR quorum-sensing system (27) was distantly related to CepIR, CciIR, and all other *Burkholderia* genus quorum-sensing systems. This phenomenon of two evolutionary distinct quorum-sensing systems being present in a single strain was also observed for other genera, such as *P. aeruginosa* (RhlIR and LasIR) (Fig. 4).

**Characterization of *cciI* and *cciR* mutants.** Previously, *cepI* and *cepR* mutants were shown to be protease deficient (23). To evaluate the effect of mutations in the *cciI* and *cciR* quorum-sensing genes on the protease activity of K56-2, skim milk assays were performed (Table 2). K56-2*cciI* produced significantly greater protease activity than the parent strain (*P* < 0.01). This phenotype is opposite to that observed for K56-I2 (*cepI*) and K56-2*cepI cciIa*, which do not produce detectable protease activity. K56-2*cciR* produces less protease activity than the wild type but more protease activity than K56-R2 (*cepR*) or K56-2*cepR cciIR*.

The *cepIR* system was previously shown to positively regulate the expression of the zinc metalloprotease gene *zmpA* (46). To determine if *zmpA* is also regulated by the *cciIR* system, the expression of a *zmpA::lacZ* transcriptional fusion was examined in K56-2, K56-I2 (*cepI*), K56-2*cciI*, and K56-2*cciR* (Fig. 5). The expression of *zmpA::lacZ* in K56-2*cciR* was significantly less than in the parent strain in stationary phase at 24 and 32 h, and the expression of *zmpA::lacZ* in K56-2*cciI* was significantly less than in the parent strain during the entire growth curve (*P* < 0.01; ANOVA). The respective twofold and fivefold differences in *zmpA* expression indicate that the *cciIR* system is involved in the positive regulation of *zmpA*.

The abilities of the *cciI* gene to complement a mutation in *cepI* and of the *cepI* gene to complement a mutation in *cciI* were investigated with respect to protease activity. Plasmids containing *cciI* or *cepI* were introduced into the heterologous AHL synthase mutant, and the protease activity of each strain was determined on skim milk agar (Table 3). Introduction of *cciI* into K56-I2 (*cepI*) or *cepI* into K56-2*cciI* did not restore protease activity to parental levels. Plasmids containing either *cciI* or *cepI* were introduced into K56-2*cepI cciIa*. The protease activity of the mutant was restored when a plasmid containing *cepI* was introduced, but not upon the introduction of a plasmid containing *cciI*. These experiments indicate that *cepI* is unable to compensate for the mutation in *cciI*, and *cciI* is unable to compensate for the mutation in *cepI*. Complementation in K56-2*cepR cciIR* from 12 to 16 h and significantly greater than the expression in K56-R2 (*cepR*) from 6 to 16 h during the time course (*P* < 0.05, ANOVA). (B) Effect of *cciR* on *cepI* expression. The expression of *cepI::luxCDABE*(pCP300) in K56-2*cepR cciIR* is significantly greater than the expression in K56-2 at all of the time points (*P* < 0.02; *t* test). (C) Effect of *cciR* on *cepR* expression. The expression of *cepR::luxCDABE*(pRM432) in K56-2 is not significantly different than the expression observed in K56-2*cepR cciIR*.

CepIR B. cenocepacia
B. vietnamiensis (AAK70355.1)
B. stabilis (AAG61126.1)
B. ambifaria (AAK27305.1)
B. multivorans (AAK703555.1)
B. thailandensis (AAS65457.1)
PmlIR B. pseudomallei (AAQ90168.1)
SollR Ralstonia solanacearum
BpmlR2 B. pseudomallei (BPSS1180)
BvilR B. vietnamiensis
RhllR Pseudomonas aeruginosa
PhzlR Pseudomonas chlororaphis
BpmlR3 B. pseudomallei (BPSS1570)
CcilR B. cenocepacia
B. xenovorans LB400 (ZP_00278544.1)
CinIR Rhizobium leguminosarum
Rhodospirillum rubrum (ZP_00268558.1)
Rhodopseudomonas palustris (NP_945673.1)
Bradyrhizobium japonicum (NP_767703.1)
CvilR Chromobacterium violaceum
TralR Agrobacterium tumefaciens
B. xenovorans LB400 (ZP_00284687.1)
MuplR Pseudomonas fluorescens
PpulR Pseudomonas putida
LaslR Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Microbulbifer degradans (ZP_00315457.1)
VanlR Listonella anguillarum
LuxIR Vibrio fischeri

FIG. 4. Phylogenetic analysis of the *B. cenocepacia* cepIR and cciIR quorum-sensing systems. A phylogenetic tree of concatenated AHL synthase and receptor protein sequences related to the *B. cenocepacia* quorum-sensing systems is shown. The tree was rooted with the *Vibrio fischeri* system, and the published names of each system followed by the bacterial species are given. The *B. cenocepacia* sequences are shaded. For sequences drawn from recently completed genomes, the protein sequence accession number for the corresponding AHL synthase is shown in brackets. Bootstrap values greater than 70% and genetic distance as a percentage are shown.

tation of K56-I2 (*cepI*) or K56-2*cciI* with *cepI* or *cciI* in trans, respectively, restored protease activity to the parental phenotype.

The effects of exogenous HHL and OHL concentrations on the protease activities of K56-I2 (*cepI*), K56-2*cciI*, and K56-2*cepI cciIa* were examined by adding 2.5 to 10.0 nM synthetic HHL or 2.5 nM synthetic OHL to the skim milk agar prior to inoculation. The protease zones of K56-I2 (*cepI*) and K56-2*cepI cciIa* were restored to wild-type size when 2.5 nM OHL

TABLE 2. Extracellular protease activity and swarming motility of *B. cenocepacia* quorum-sensing mutants

| Strain          | Zone of clearing<sup>a</sup> (mm) | Zone of swarming<sup>b</sup> (cm) |
|-----------------|------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|
| K56-2           | 2.23 ± 0.35                        | 4.50 ± 0.20                      |
| K56-12          | 0.00 ± 0.00                        | 2.67 ± 0.15                      |
| K56-R2          | 0.00 ± 0.00                        | 1.13 ± 0.12                      |
| K56-2*cciI*     | 3.88 ± 0.28                        | 2.33 ± 0.15                      |
| K56-2*cciR*     | 1.25 ± 0.27                        | 4.16 ± 0.76                      |
| K56-2*cepI cciIa* | 0.00 ± 0.00                        | 1.23 ± 0.06                      |
| K56-2*cepR cciIR* | 0.00 ± 0.00                        | 1.50 ± 0.26                      |

<sup>a</sup> Values are the average zone of clearing ± SD for six replicates. The data shown are representative of two independent experiments. All of the mutants had significantly different protease activity than K56-2 (ANOVA, *P* < 0.01).

<sup>b</sup> Values are the average swarming zone ± SD at 24 h of three replicates and are representative of three independent experiments. All of the mutants, except for K56-2*cciR*, had significantly smaller swarming zones than the parent strain, K56-2 (ANOVA, *P* < 0.01).

FIG. 5. Effect of *cepI cciI* and *cciR* on *zmpA* expression in K56-2. β-Galactosidase activity was monitored throughout growth in PTSB and is reported in Miller units. ■, K56-2(pSG208); ▲, K56-2*cciR* (pSG206); ●, K56-2*cciI*(pSG206); ×, K56-I2 (*cepI*)(pSG206). Values shown are the means ± SD of triplicate cultures. The difference in *zmpA* expression between K56-2 and K56-2*cciR* is significantly different at time points 3 h to 12 h and 24 h to 32 h, the difference between K56-2 and K56-2*cciI* or K56-I2 (*cepI*) was significantly different at all time points between 3 h and 32 h, and the difference between K56-2*cciI* and K56-I2 (*cepI*) was significantly different at 32 h (*P* < 0.01, ANOVA).

TABLE 3. Complementation of the extracellular protease activity and swarming motility of the AHL synthase mutants with *cepI* or *cciI* in trans

| Strain                     | Gene present in trans | Zone of clearing<sup>a</sup> (mm) | Zone of swarming<sup>b</sup> (cm) |
|----------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------------------|
| K56-2(pUCP26)              | None                  | 3.13 ± 0.28                      | 2.77 ± 0.06                      |
| K56-12(pUCP26)             | None                  | 0.50 ± 0.52                      | 1.77 ± 0.15                      |
| K56-12(pRM164)             | *cciI*                | 0.00 ± 0.00                      | 1.90 ± 0.00                      |
| K56-12(pSLS225)            | *cepI*                | 4.67 ± 0.52<sup>c</sup>          | 2.30 ± 0.10<sup>c</sup>          |
| K56-2*cciI*(pUCP26)        | None                  | 4.46 ± 0.40                      | 1.90 ± 0.1                       |
| K56-2*cciI*(pRM164)        | *cciI*                | 2.33 ± 0.41<sup>c</sup>          | 3.57 ± 0.57<sup>c</sup>          |
| K56-2*cciI*(pSLS225)       | *cepI*                | 4.42 ± 0.38                      | 3.30 ± 0.35<sup>c</sup>          |
| K56-2*cepI cciIa*(pUCP26)  | None                  | 0.00 ± 0.00                      | 0.48 ± 0.03                      |
| K56-2*cepI cciIa*(pRM164)  | *cciI*                | 0.00 ± 0.00                      | 0.97 ± 0.57<sup>c</sup>          |
| K56-2*cepI cciIa*(pSLS225) | *cepI*                | 4.17 ± 0.26<sup>c</sup>          | 2.90 ± 0.20<sup>c</sup>          |

<sup>a</sup> Values are the average zone of clearing ± SD for a minimum of six replicates and are representative of three independent experiments.

<sup>b</sup> Values are the average swarming zone ± SD after 24 hours of three replicates and are representative of three independent experiments.

<sup>c</sup> Significantly different from the mutant with the vector alone (ANOVA, *P* < 0.01).

FIG. 6. Effect of *cepIR* and *cciIR* mutations on ornibactin biosynthesis in *B. cenocepacia* K56-2. Cultures were grown in succinate medium supplemented with 10 mM ornithine for 40 h. Spent supernatants were added to the CAS dye complex, and the activity was evaluated by absorbance at 630 nm. The readings were normalized by culture turbidity (absorbance at 600 nm). The values shown are the average ± SD for three replicate cultures and are representative of three independent experiments. K56-I2(*cepI*) and K56-2*cepI cciIa* had significantly different CAS activity than the parent K56-2 (*P* < 0.01, ANOVA).

K56-2*cepR cciIR* do not produce significant amounts of AHLs, whereas K56-2*cciR* produces parental AHL levels (Fig. 1D).

The role of *cciIR* in the regulation of ornibactin production was monitored using a quantitative CAS assay (Fig. 6). There was little difference in the amount of CAS activity present in culture supernatants with the exception of K56-I2(*cepI*), which has previously been shown to produce more ornibactin (23), and K56-2*cepI cciIa*, which had no CAS activity. Attempts to complement CAS activity in K56-2*cepI cciIa* with either *cciI* or *cepI* in trans were unsuccessful (data not shown). Therefore a second *cepI cciI* mutant was constructed (designated K56-2*cepI cciIb*). This mutant had parental levels of CAS activity (Fig. 6), suggesting that K56-2*cepI cciIa* has a secondary mutation that affects ornibactin biosynthesis. K56-2*cepI cciIb* and *cepI cciIa* have the same protease and swarming phenotypes (data not shown). These data, together with the complementation data in Table 3, confirm that both *cepI* and *cciI* influence protease production and swarming motility, but only *cepI* influences ornibactin biosynthesis.

TABLE 4. Effect of various concentrations of exogenous AHL on extracellular protease activity

| Strain           | No addition | Acetonitrile | 2.5 nM HHL      | 10.0 nM HHL    | 2.5 nM OHL       |
|------------------|-------------|--------------|-----------------|----------------|------------------|
| K56-2            | 2.25 ± 0.42 | 2.33 ± 0.41  | 1.83 ± 0.75     | 2.17 ± 0.52    | 4.00 ± 0.00<sup>b</sup> |
| K56-12           | 0.00 ± 0.00<sup>c</sup> | 0.00 ± 0.00<sup>c</sup> | 3.83 ± 0.29<sup>b,c</sup> | 4.16 ± 0.29<sup>c</sup> | 4.83 ± 0.29<sup>b</sup> |
| K56-2*cciI*      | 3.91 ± 0.14<sup>c</sup> | 3.83 ± 0.29<sup>c</sup> | 2.33 ± 0.57<sup>b</sup> | 3.33 ± 0.29 | 4.33 ± 0.29 |
| K56-2*cepI cciIa* | 0.00 ± 0.00<sup>c</sup> | 0.00 ± 0.00<sup>c</sup> | 0.83 ± 0.76     | 3.17 ± 0.29<sup>b</sup> | 4.00 ± 0.00<sup>b</sup> |

<sup>a</sup> Values are the average zone of clearing ± SD for three replicates and are representative of two independent experiments.

<sup>b</sup> Significantly different from the acetonitrile control for the same strain (*P* < 0.01, ANOVA).

<sup>c</sup> Significantly different from K56-2 on the same medium (*P* < 0.01, ANOVA).

The *cciIR* quorum-sensing system associated with epidemic strains of *B. cenocepacia* is involved in the regulation of known virulence factors and is a part of a regulatory network with the *cepIR* quorum-sensing system, since CepR is required for *cciIR* expression. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that the *cepIR* and *cciIR* systems are highly distinct. The *cepIR* system that is widely distributed among the Bcc was predicted to be the ancestral system, whereas the *cciIR* system was likely acquired by horizontal gene transfer when cci was incorporated into the *B. cenocepacia* genome. The presence of an ancestral and a more-recently acquired AHL-dependent quorum-sensing system has been observed in other species. The *P. aeruginosa lasIR* system is considered to be the ancestral system, and the *rhlIR* system is considered to be more recently acquired (22). The *rhlIR* system has been incorporated into the regulatory pathway of the *lasIR* system and is dependent on the *lasIR* system for expression (21, 34). Both of these pathways have been shown to be involved in the virulence of the organism in a variety of infection models (43), and it is believed that the acquisition of the *rhlIR* system has aided *P. aeruginosa* in honing regulation of virulence traits during evolution (22).

In the current study, transcriptional analysis of *cciIR* in the presence and absence of functional CepR and phenotypic characterization of double AHL synthase and response regulator mutants demonstrated that the *B. cenocepacia cciIR* system has been incorporated into the *cepIR* regulatory network. The predicted *cciIR* promoter region does not contain a *cepR* binding box similar to the *lux*-type consensus sequence identified upstream of *cepI* by Lewenza et al. (23). The delayed initiation of *cciIR* expression compared to the expression observed for *cepI* and *cepR* in the wild type (Fig. 4) is consistent with the observation that active CepR is required for expression of *cciIR*. The lack of AHL production by K56-R2 (*cepR*) (Fig. 1D) also confirms that CepR is required for the expression of *cciIR*. Since both the *cepIR* and *cciIR* systems have been shown to be involved in the virulence of *B. cenocepacia* (4, 46) and *B. cenocepacia* strains that possess the cci are often associated with transmissibility and increased severity of clinical outcome (4), the evolution of the *cepIR* and *cciIR* quorum-sensing regulatory network may contribute to the invasiveness and transmissibility observed with *B. cenocepacia*.

Pathogenicity islands tend to contain genes encoding regulatory elements (16). These regulatory elements can be specific for genes encoded on the pathogenicity island and may also regulate genes in the rest of the genome. As well, regulatory systems encoded on pathogenicity islands may be regulated by systems encoded outside of the genomic region. Each of these regulatory arrangements is observed with the *cciIR* quorum-sensing system. The *cciIR* system was shown to be involved in negative self-regulation as well as positive regulation of the *zmpA* gene, which is not located within the cci. The *cepIR* quorum-sensing system is involved in the positive regulation of the *cciIR* quorum-sensing system. There are most likely additional regulatory genes involved in the *cepIR* hierarchy in epidemic strains of *B. cenocepacia*. Three regulators of the H111 *cepIR* quorum-sensing system (*yciR*, *suhB*, and *yciL*) have been identified and are postulated to influence *cepIR* by posttranscriptional control of *cepR* expression or by affecting the activity status of the response regulator (19). It is yet to be determined if these regulatory elements are also involved in the quorum-sensing cascade of K56-2.

The *B. cenocepacia* genome sequence (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/Projects/B_cenocepacia/) contains one other open reading frame with homology to *luxR* response regulators that may also be involved in the quorum-sensing cascade of K56-2. This *luxR* homologue is without a proximal *luxI* homologue. The LuxR homologue contains both a predicted AHL binding domain and a DNA binding motif typical of LuxR response regulators (data not shown) and is 38% identical to SolR of *Ralstonia solanacearum* (accession no. NP-521406) (37), 37% identical to BviR of *B. vietnamiensis* (accession no. AAK35156) (27), and 36% identical to *B. cenocepacia* CepR (accession no. AF019654.1) (23). This LuxR homologue could be involved in gene regulation employing the AHLs produced by CepI and CciI. *B. pseudomallei* possesses at least three sets of *luxIR* homologues, *pmlIR*, *bpmIR2*, and *bpmIR3*, and two additional *luxR* homologues, *bpmR4* and *bpmR5* (51, 54). Ulrich et al. (51) demonstrated that each gene of the *B. pseudomallei* quorum-sensing network is involved in animal pathogenicity. Although the AHL specificity of each of the LuxR homologues has yet to be determined, it is conceivable that BpmR4 and BpmR5 employ the AHLs produced by the three AHL synthases in order to regulate virulence gene expression.

The *cciIR* system regulates protease production and swarming motility. The hyperproduction of protease by K56-2*cciI* was surprising, since *cciI* positively influences *zmpA* expression. Corbett et al. (6) showed that a *zmpA* mutant of K56-2 produce very little protease activity in the skim milk agar assay. The decrease in protease production observed for K56-2*cciR* is most likely due to the decrease in *zmpA* expression in this mutant. The predicted result for the absence of functional CciI would also be a decrease in protease production. The most plausible explanation for the observed increase in protease production is that *cciI* is involved in the negative regulation of an additional, uncharacterized protease, or that *cciI* is involved in the regulation of a regulator of a protease gene and the disruption of *cciI* affected downstream events in a regulatory cascade resulting in the unexpected phenotype.

Our data demonstrate that *cciIR* is involved in the positive regulation of swarming motility through the production of AHLs by CciI. The regulation of swarming motility by quorum-sensing systems is believed to allow optimal dissemination of the bacteria when the population is saturating a particular niche and may allow bacteria to progress from local infection sites to other organs (49, 58).

The phenotypes of the *cciI* and *cciR* mutants differed with respect to AHL production, protease activity, and swarming motility, although transcriptional analysis of *zmpA* suggests that the *cciIR* system operates as a unit to positively regulate the expression of *zmpA* (Fig. 5). Presumably, both CepR and CciR respond to HHL and OHL, as their cognate AHL synthases produce these signaling molecules. The difference in phenotypes of K56-2*cciR* and K56-2*cciI* could be due to the parental levels of AHLs produced by K56-2*cciR* (Fig. 1D) compared to K56-2*cciI*, which produces less HHL (Fig. 1B). The expected decrease in HHL production in K56-2*cciIR* is likely compensated by the absence of negative regulation of *cepI* by CciR.

Both CciI and CepI are responsible for production of the same AHLs; however, the ratios of HHL to OHL production by the two synthases are different. The quantity of each AHL present appears to be critical, as K56-2cepI cciIa required more HHL to restore protease production to parental levels than K56-I2 (cepI), which produces minor amounts of HHL (Table 4). Protease activity in the K56-2cciI mutant was only reduced by the addition of HHL to the medium and not OHL. The AHL synthases cepI and cciI are not redundant, since cciI did not restore protease activity or the swarming phenotype in the cepI mutant (Table 3), and both cepI and cciI mutants are reduced in virulence (4, 46).

B. thailandensis, B. mallei, B. pseudomallei, and B. vietnamiensis possess multiple luxIR quorum-sensing systems (27, 51–53). The regulatory relationships, if any, between these systems have yet to be described. There is a diversity of signals produced by Burkholderia AHL synthases. B. pseudomallei PmlI, BpmI2, and BpmI3 have been shown to direct the synthesis of OHL, N-decanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (DHL), N-(3-hydroxyoctanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (3-hydroxy-OHL), and N-(3-hydroxydecanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (3-hydroxy-DHL) (51, 54). B. pseudomallei BpmI2 and BpmI3 direct the synthesis of N-(3-oxotetradecanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (51). B. thailandensis BtaI1, BtaI2, and BtaI3 are responsible for the production of OHL, DHL, and HHL, respectively (53). B. mallei BmaI1 and BmaI3 produce OHL, DHL, and 3-hydroxy-OHL and OHL, DHL, and 3-hydroxy-DHL, respectively (52). B. vietnamiensis possesses the cepIR and bviIR systems (9). BviI synthesizes HHL, OHL, DHL, and N-dodecanoyl-homoserine lactone (5, 27). The phenotypes regulated by the AHL-mediated quorum-sensing systems vary among different Burkholderia species, but in the pathogenic species, B. cenocepacia, B. mallei, and B. pseudomallei, these systems have been shown to contribute to virulence (46, 51, 52, 54). Further studies are needed to determine the specific role of these quorum-sensing systems in the regulation of virulence factors.

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank M. B. Visser for her excellent technical assistance. This study was supported by a grant from the Canadian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation to P.A.S. R.J.M. is the recipient of an Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research studentship. E.M. acknowledges the support of the UK Cystic Fibrosis Trust (grant PJ501) and Wellcome Trust (grant 075586).

### REFERENCES

1. Aguilar, C., I. Bertani, and V. Venturi. 2003. Quorum-sensing system and stationary-phase sigma factor (*rpoS*) of the onion pathogen *Burkholderia cepacia* genomovar I type strain, ATCC 25416. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 69:1739–1747.
2. Aguilar, C., A. Friscina, G. Devescovi, M. Kojic, and V. Venturi. 2003. Identification of quorum-sensing-regulated genes of *Burkholderia cepacia*. J. Bacteriol. 185:6456–6462.
3. Ausubel, F., R. Brent, R. Kingston, D. Moore, J. Seidman, J. Smith, and K. Struhl. 1989. Current protocols in molecular biology, vol. 1. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, N.Y.
4. Baldwin, A., P. A. Sokol, J. Parkhill, and E. Mahenthiralingam. 2004. The *Burkholderia cepacia* epidemic strain marker is part of a novel genomic island encoding both virulence and metabolism-associated genes in *Burkholderia cenocepacia*. Infect. Immun. 72:1537–1547.
5. Conway, B. A., and E. P. Greenberg. 2002. Quorum-sensing signals and quorum-sensing genes in *Burkholderia vietnamiensis*. J. Bacteriol. 184:1187–1191.
6. Corbett, C. R., M. N. Burtnick, C. Kooi, D. E. Woods, and P. A. Sokol. 2003. An extracellular zinc metalloprotease gene of *Burkholderia cepacia*. Microbiology 149:2263–2271.
7. Darling, P., M. Chan, A. D. Cox, and P. A. Sokol. 1998. Siderophore production by cystic fibrosis isolates of *Burkholderia cepacia*. Infect. Immun. 66:874–877.
8. Dennis, J. J., and P. A. Sokol. 1995. Electrottransformation of *Pseudomonas*. Methods Mol. Biol. 47:125–133.
9. Dennis, J. J., and G. J. Zylstra. 1998. Plasposons: modular self-cloning minitransposon derivatives for rapid genetic analysis of gram-negative bacterial genomes. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64:2710–2715.
10. DeShazer, D., and D. E. Woods. 1996. Broad-host-range cloning and cassette vectors based on the R388 trimethoprim resistance gene. BioTechniques 20:762–764.
11. Duan, K., C. Dammel, J. Stein, H. Rabin, and M. G. Surette. 2003. Modulation of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* gene expression by host microflora through interspecies communication. Mol. Microbiol. 50:1477–1491.
12. Figurski, D. H., and D. R. Helinski. 1979. Replication of an origin-containing derivative of plasmid RK2 dependent on a plasmid function provided in trans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76:1648–1652.
13. Fuqua, C., and E. P. Greenberg. 2002. Listening in on bacteria: acyl-homoserine lactone signalling. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3:685–695.
14. Fuqua, C., and S. C. Winans. 1996. Conserved *cis*-acting promoter elements are required for density-dependent transcription of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens* conjugal transfer genes. J. Bacteriol. 178:435–440.
15. Gotschlich, A., B. Huber, O. Geisenberger, A. Togl, A. Steidle, K. Riedel, P. Hill, B. Tummler, P. Vandamme, B. Middleton, M. Camara, P. Williams, A. Hardman, and L. Eberl. 2001. Synthesis of multiple *N*-acylhomoserine lactones is wide-spread among the members of the *Burkholderia cepacia* complex. Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 24:1–14.
16. Hacker, J., and J. B. Kaper. 2000. Pathogenicity islands and the evolution of microbes. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 54:641–679.
17. Hoang, T. T., R. R. Karkhoff-Schweizer, A. J. Kutchma, and H. P. Schweizer. 1998. A broad-host-range Flp-FRT recombination system for site-specific excision of chromosomally-located DNA sequences: application for isolation of unmarked *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* mutants. Gene 212:77–86.
18. Huber, B., K. Riedel, M. Hentzer, A. Heydorn, A. Gotschlich, M. Givskov, S. Molin, and L. Eberl. 2001. The *cep* quorum-sensing system of *Burkholderia cepacia* H111 controls biofilm formation and swarming motility. Microbiology 147:2517–2528.
19. Huber, B., K. Riedel, M. Kothe, M. Givskov, S. Molin, and L. Eberl. 2002. Genetic analysis of functions involved in the late stages of biofilm development in *Burkholderia cepacia* H111. Mol. Microbiol. 46:411–426.
20. Kothe, M., M. Antl, B. Huber, K. Stoecker, D. Ebrecht, I. Steinmetz, and L. Eberl. 2003. Killing of *Caenorhabditis elegans* by *Burkholderia cepacia* is controlled by the *cep* quorum-sensing system. Cell. Microbiol. 5:343–351.
21. Latifi, A., M. Foglino, K. Tanaka, P. Williams, and A. Lazdunski. 1996. A hierarchical quorum-sensing cascade in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* links the transcriptional activators LasR and RhIR (VsmR) to expression of the stationary-phase sigma factor RpoS. Mol. Microbiol. 21:1137–1146.
22. Lerat, E., and N. A. Moran. 2004. The evolutionary history of quorum-sensing systems in bacteria. Mol. Biol. Evol. 21:903–913.
23. Lewenza, S., B. Conway, E. P. Greenberg, and P. A. Sokol. 1999. Quorum sensing in *Burkholderia cepacia*: identification of the LuxRI homologs CepRI. J. Bacteriol. 181:748–756.
24. Lewenza, S., and P. A. Sokol. 2001. Regulation of ornibactin biosynthesis and *N*-acyl-L-homoserine lactone production by CepR in *Burkholderia cepacia*. J. Bacteriol. 183:2212–2218.
25. Lewenza, S., M. B. Visser, and P. A. Sokol. 2002. Interspecies communication between *Burkholderia cepacia* and *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Can. J. Microbiol. 48:707–716.
26. LiPuma, J. J., T. Spilker, L. H. Gill, P. W. Campbell III, L. Liu, and E. Mahenthiralingam. 2001. Disproportionate distribution of *Burkholderia cepacia* complex species and transmissibility markers in cystic fibrosis. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 164:92–96.
27. Lutter, E., S. Lewenza, J. J. Dennis, M. B. Visser, and P. A. Sokol. 2001. Distribution of quorum-sensing genes in the *Burkholderia cepacia* complex. Infect. Immun. 69:4661–4666.
28. Mahenthiralingam, E., A. Baldwin, and P. Vandamme. 2002. *Burkholderia cepacia* complex infection in patients with cystic fibrosis. J. Med. Microbiol. 51:533–538.
29. Mahenthiralingam, E., D. A. Simpson, and D. P. Speert. 1997. Identification and characterization of a novel DNA marker associated with epidemic *Burkholderia cepacia* strains recovered from patients with cystic fibrosis. J. Clin. Microbiol. 35:808–816.
30. Mahenthiralingam, E., P. Vandamme, M. E. Campbell, D. A. Henry, A. M. Gravelle, L. T. Wong, A. G. Davidson, P. G. Wilcox, B. Nakielna, and D. P. Speert. 2001. Infection with *Burkholderia cepacia* complex genomovars in patients with cystic fibrosis: virulent transmissible strains of genomovar III can replace *Burkholderia multivorans*. Clin. Infect. Dis. 33:1469–1475.
31. McDowell, A., E. Mahenthiralingam, K. E. Dunbar, J. E. Moore, M. Crowe, and J. S. Elborn. 2004. Epidemiology of *Burkholderia cepacia* complex species recovered from cystic fibrosis patients: issues related to patient segregation. J. Med. Microbiol. 53:663–668.
32. Meyer, J. M., and M. A. Abdallah. 1978. The fluorescent pigment of *Pseudo-

monas fluorescens: biosynthesis, purification and physico-chemical properties. J. Gen. Microbiol. 107:319–328.

33. Mohr, C. D., M. Tomich, and C. A. Herfst. 2001. Cellular aspects of *Burkholderia cepacia* infection. Microbes Infect. 3:425–435.

34. Pesci, E. C., J. P. Pearson, P. C. Seed, and B. H. Iglewski. 1997. Regulation of *las* and *rhl* quorum sensing in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Bacteriol. 179:3127–3132.

35. Platt, T. B., B. Muller-Hill, and J. H. Miller. 1972. Analysis of the *lac* operon enzymes, p. 352–355. In J. H. Miller (ed.), Experiments in molecular genetics. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

36. Riedel, K., C. Arevalo-Ferro, G. Reil, A. Gorg, F. Lottspeich, and L. Eberl. 2003. Analysis of the quorum-sensing regulon of the opportunistic pathogen *Burkholderia cepacia* H111 by proteomics. Electrophoresis 24:740–750.

37. Salanoubat, M., S. Genin, F. Artiguenave, J. Gouzy, S. Mangenot, M. Arlat, A. Billault, P. Brottier, J. C. Camus, L. Cattolico, M. Chandler, N. Choisne, C. Claudel-Renard, S. Cunnac, N. Demange, C. Gaspin, M. Lavie, A. Moisan, C. Robert, W. Saurin, T. Schiex, P. Siguier, P. Thebault, M. Whalen, P. Wincker, M. Levy, J. Weissenbach, and C. A. Boucher. 2002. Genome sequence of the plant pathogen *Ralstonia solanacearum*. Nature 415:497–502.

38. Sambrook, J., E. F. Fritsch, and T. Maniatis. 1989. Molecular cloning: a laboratory manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

39. Schuster, M., C. P. Lostroh, T. Ogi, and E. P. Greenberg. 2003. Identification, timing, and signal specificity of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* quorum-controlled genes: a transcriptome analysis. J. Bacteriol. 185:2066–2079.

40. Schweizer, H. P. 1992. Allelic exchange in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* using novel ColE1-type vectors and a family of cassettes containing a portable *oriT* and the counter-selectable *Bacillus subtilis sacB* marker. Mol. Microbiol. 6:1195–1204.

41. Schwyn, B., and J. B. Neilands. 1987. Universal chemical assay for the detection and determination of siderophores. Anal. Biochem. 160:47–56.

42. Shaw, P. D., G. Ping, S. L. Daly, C. Cha, J. E. Cronan, Jr., K. L. Rinehart, and S. K. Farrand. 1997. Detecting and characterizing *N*-acyl-homoserine lactone signal molecules by thin-layer chromatography. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94:6036–6041.

43. Smith, R. S., and B. H. Iglewski. 2003. *P. aeruginosa* quorum-sensing systems and virulence. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 6:56–60.

44. Sokol, P. A., P. Darling, D. E. Woods, E. Mahenthiralingam, and C. Kooi. 1999. Role of ornibactin biosynthesis in the virulence of *Burkholderia cepacia*: characterization of *pvdA*, the gene encoding L-ornithine *N*<sup>5</sup>-oxygenase. Infect. Immun. 67:4443–4455.

45. Sokol, P. A., D. E. Ohman, and B. H. Iglewski. 1979. A more sensitive plate assay for detection of protease production by *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. J. Clin. Microbiol. 9:538–540.

46. Sokol, P. A., U. Sajjan, M. B. Visser, S. Gingues, J. Forstner, and C. Kooi. 2003. The CepIR quorum-sensing system contributes to the virulence of *Burkholderia cenocepacia* respiratory infections. Microbiology 149:3649–3658.

47. Speert, D. P. 2002. Advances in *Burkholderia cepacia* complex. Paediatr. Respir. Rev. 3:230–235.

48. Speert, D. P., D. Henry, P. Vandamme, M. Corey, and E. Mahenthiralingam. 2002. Epidemiology of *Burkholderia cepacia* complex in patients with cystic fibrosis, Canada. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 8:181–187.

49. Swift, S., J. A. Downie, N. A. Whitehead, A. M. Barnard, G. P. Salmond, and P. Williams. 2001. Quorum sensing as a population-density-dependent determinant of bacterial physiology. Adv. Microb. Physiol. 45:199–270.

50. Thompson, J. D., D. G. Higgins, and T. J. Gibson. 1994. CLUSTAL W: improving the sensitivity of progressive multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting, position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice. Nucleic Acids Res. 22:4673–4680.

51. Ulrich, R. L., D. Deshazer, E. E. Brueggemann, H. B. Hines, P. C. Oyston, and J. A. Jeddeloh. 2004. Role of quorum sensing in the pathogenicity of *Burkholderia pseudomallei*. J. Med. Microbiol. 53:1053–1064.

52. Ulrich, R. L., D. Deshazer, H. B. Hines, and J. A. Jeddeloh. 2004. Quorum sensing: a transcriptional regulatory system involved in the pathogenicity of *Burkholderia mallei*. Infect. Immun. 72:6589–6596.

53. Ulrich, R. L., H. B. Hines, N. Parthasarathy, and J. A. Jeddeloh. 2004. Mutational analysis and biochemical characterization of the *Burkholderia thailandensis* DW503 quorum-sensing network. J. Bacteriol. 186:4350–4360.

54. Valade, E., F. M. Thibault, Y. P. Gauthier, M. Palencia, M. Y. Popoff, and D. R. Vidal. 2004. The PmlI-PmlR quorum-sensing system in *Burkholderia pseudomallei* plays a key role in virulence and modulates production of the MprA protease. J. Bacteriol. 186:2288–2294.

55. Van de Peer, Y., and R. De Wachter. 1994. TREECON for Windows: a software package for the construction and drawing of evolutionary trees for the Microsoft Windows environment. Comput. Appl. Biosci. 10:569–570.

56. Wagner, V. E., D. Bushnell, L. Passador, A. I. Brooks, and B. H. Iglewski. 2003. Microarray analysis of *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* quorum-sensing regulons: effects of growth phase and environment. J. Bacteriol. 185:2080–2095.

57. West, S. E., H. P. Schweizer, C. Dall, A. K. Sample, and L. J. Runyen-Janecky. 1994. Construction of improved *Escherichia-Pseudomonas* shuttle vectors derived from pUC18/19 and sequence of the region required for their replication in *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*. Gene 148:81–86.

58. Whitehead, N. A., A. M. Barnard, H. Slater, N. J. Simpson, and G. P. Salmond. 2001. Quorum-sensing in gram-negative bacteria. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 25:365–404.

59. Woods, C. W., A. M. Bressler, J. J. LiPuma, B. D. Alexander, D. A. Clements, D. J. Weber, C. M. Moore, L. B. Reller, and K. S. Kaye. 2004. Virulence associated with outbreak-related strains of *Burkholderia cepacia* complex among a cohort of patients with bacteremia. Clin. Infect. Dis. 38:1243–1250.

60. Woods, D. 1984. Oligonucleotide screening of cDNA libraries. Focus 6:1–2.

61. Zhu, J., J. W. Beaber, M. I. More, C. Fuqua, A. Eberhard, and S. C. Winans. 1998. Analogs of the autoinducer 3-oxo-octanoyl-homoserine lactone strongly inhibit activity of the TraR protein of *Agrobacterium tumefaciens*. J. Bacteriol. 180:5398–5405.
