
# Immune evasion by a staphylococcal complement inhibitor that acts on C3 convertases

Suzan H M Rooijakkers¹, Maartje Ruyken¹, Anja Roos², Mohamed R Daha², Julia S Presanis³, Robert B Sim³, Willem J B van Wamel¹, Kok P M van Kessel¹ & Jos A G van Strijp¹

The complement system is pivotal in host defense but also contributes to tissue injury in several diseases. The assembly of C3 convertases (C4b2a and C3bBb) is a prerequisite for complement activation. The convertases catalyze C3b deposition on activator surfaces. Here we describe the identification of staphylococcal complement inhibitor, an excreted 9.8-kilodalton protein that blocks human complement by specific interaction with C4b2a and C3bBb. Staphylococcal complement inhibitor bound and stabilized C3 convertases, interfering with additional C3b deposition through the classical, lectin and alternative complement pathways. This led to a substantial decrease in phagocytosis and killing of *Staphylococcus aureus* by human neutrophils. As a highly active and small soluble protein that acts exclusively on surfaces, staphylococcal complement inhibitor may represent a promising anti-inflammatory molecule.

The complement system is a chief component of the innate immune system and is also involved in initiation of the adaptive immune response¹,². The complement system acts via three separate pathways that differ in their mode of recognition but converge in the generation of C3 convertases that cleave the central component C3 (ref. 3). The C3 convertases mediate almost all biological activities of the complement system. Cleavage of C3 results in release of the anaphylactic agent C3a and in the covalent attachment of C3b to the microbial surface, a process called opsonization⁴. Opsonization is a crucial step in immunity, because surface-bound C3b and its degradation products facilitate the recognition of foreign substances by phagocytic cells. Later, the C3 convertase is changed into a C5 convertase by the inclusion of another C3b molecule with the C3 convertase⁵. This C5 convertase cleaves C5, resulting in release of the potent chemoattractant C5a and formation of the lytic C5b-9 complex.

The assembly of C3 convertases proceeds through sequential steps involving protein-protein interactions and proteolytic cleavage by highly specific serine proteases⁶. The C3 convertase of the classical and lectin pathways, C4b2a, is generated through cleavage of C4 and C2 by Cls or mannose-binding lectin (MBL)-associated serine protease 2 (MASP-2; ref. 7). The protease Cls circulates in complex with the recognition molecule of the classical pathway, Clq, which binds antigen-bound immunoglobulin G (IgG) or IgM. MASP-2 is in complex with MBL or ficolin that recognizes conserved sugars patterns on microbes. First, Cls and MASP-2 catalyze the covalent binding of C4b to the surface of the activator. Then, C2 binds to surface-bound C4b and is cleaved by Cls or MASP-2, generating C4b2a⁸,⁹. The alternative pathway lacks a specific recognition molecule. In this pathway, the assembly of C3 convertases is initiated by covalent attachment of C3b to the activator surface. In the next step, factor B binds to surface-bound C3b and is subsequently cleaved by factor D, generating C3bBb⁶. In this way, C3 activation also amplifies the process by recruiting more C3b deposition.

The proteins that form the classical and lectin pathway C3 convertases are structurally and functionally similar to those forming the alternative pathway convertase. C4 and C2 have considerable sequence similarity to C3 and factor B, respectively; they are derived from common ancestors¹⁰,¹¹. Although C3 convertase activity resides in one molecule (C2a or Bb), the capacity to cleave C3 is acquired only through complex formation. Amplification of convertases is regulated in several ways, including intrinsic decay of the inherently labile C4b2a and C3bBb complexes¹². The decay of C3bBb can be delayed by binding of the glycoprotein properdin. Dissociated C2a and Bb are inactive and cannot reassociate with C4b and C3b to form new convertases.

*Staphylococcus aureus* is an important human pathogen that causes a wide range of diseases by production of various cell wall-associated and excreted proteins. Many of these proteins contribute to the escape of the bacterium from the immune system¹³. A new genetic cluster in *S. aureus*, *S. aureus* pathogenicity island 5 (SaPI5), has been identified. SaPI5 carries four genes that encode excreted proteins, of which three interact with the human immune system (W.J.B.v.W. *et al.*, unpublished data): 'CHIPS' is a chemotaxis inhibitory protein of staphylococci¹⁴; staphylokinase is antiphagocytic and is able to inhibit bactericidal activity of α-defensins¹⁵,¹⁶; and staphylococcal enterotoxin

1 Eijkman Winkler Institute, University Medical Center Utrecht, G04.614, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands. 2 Department of Nephrology, C3P, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC, Leiden, The Netherlands. 3 Medical Research Council Immunochemistry Unit, Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QU, UK. Correspondence should be addressed to S.H.M.R. (s.h.m.rooijakkers@azu.nl).

Published online 7 August 2005; doi:10.1038/ni1235

Figure 1 SCIN inhibits phagocytosis and killing of S. aureus by interfering with human complement. (a–c) The effect of recombinant SCIN on phagocytosis of S. aureus by human neutrophils in various concentrations of human serum with 3 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN (a), in 10% human serum with various concentrations of recombinant SCIN (b) or in the presence of purified human IgG and 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN (c). (d) C3b deposition on S. aureus in 10% human serum with 3 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN. (e) Neutrophil bacterial killing in 40% human serum with 10 μg/ml recombinant SCIN. (f) Phagocytosis of S. aureus by human neutrophils in 30% mouse or human serum with 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN. (g) C3b deposition on S. aureus in 10% serum in the presence of supernatants of SaPI5-positive S. aureus (+) or isogenic SaPI5-negative S. aureus (−). Supernatants were preincubated with mouse anti-SCIN. Control, buffer; mean fl, mean fluorescence. Data represent mean ± s.e.m. of three separate experiments. *, P < 0.05, versus control; **, P < 0.005, versus control.

A is known as a ‘superantigen’ but is also involved in the down-modulation of chemokine receptors on monocytes¹⁷. All the proteins encoded by this pathogenicity island are specific to humans. The human specificity of CHIPS was demonstrated by a 30-fold greater activity toward human cells than toward cells from mouse, rat, dog, guinea pig, pig and rabbit¹⁴. Moreover, the response of mouse T cells to the ‘superantigen’ staphylococcal enterotoxin A requires 1,000-fold higher concentrations than does the response of human T cells¹⁸. Staphylokinase activates plasminogen only of humans, dogs and baboons¹⁹.

SaPI5 is transferred among staphylococci by bacteriophages that specifically integrate into the gene encoding β-hemolysin. Of the clinical and laboratory S. aureus strains, 90% carry SaPI5, and seven different types have been identified (W.J.B.v.W. et al., unpublished data). Because of the unique interaction of SaPI5-encoded proteins with the human immune system, we explored the possible involvement of the fourth, uncharacterized protein encoded by SaPI5 in immune evasion. Here we identify this protein, named SCIN, as a strongly antiphagocytic molecule that modulates all complement pathways. We also describe the unique interaction of SCIN with C3 convertases.

### RESULTS

#### Identification of SCIN

The gene encoding SCIN (*scn*) is located on the ‘bacteriophage-associated’ SaPI5 and was present in 90% of S. aureus strains (W.J.B.v.W. et al., unpublished data). Because of its unique location on an immune evasion cluster, we prepared recombinant SCIN to study its involvement in immune evasion. We used *Escherichia coli* for cloning and expression, as described for CHIPS¹⁴. The *scn* gene consists of 348 base pairs that encode a ‘hypothetical’ protein of 116 amino acids. After cleavage of a typical secretion signal peptide, the excreted protein would have a predicted molecular mass of 9.8 kilodaltons.

### SCIN inhibits phagocytosis and C3b deposition

Phagocytes recognize foreign particles most efficiently after opsonization with serum-derived opsonins such as IgG and C3b or inactive C3b. In an *in vitro* phagocytosis assay, we noted that recombinant SCIN efficiently blocked bacterial uptake by human neutrophils. We incubated neutrophils with S. aureus in the presence of human serum and recombinant SCIN (Fig. 1a,b). Confocal microscopy confirmed that bacteria were inside neutrophils (data not shown). Recombinant SCIN at a concentration of 3 μg/ml strongly inhibited phagocytosis at serum concentrations of 3% and higher (Fig. 1a). In 10% serum, recombinant SCIN reduced phagocytosis in a dose-dependent way, with 50% inhibition at a concentration of 0.3 μg/ml (Fig. 1b). We noted this inhibition for all staphylococcal strains tested. Preincubation of neutrophils with recombinant SCIN did not alter phagocytosis, indicating that SCIN did not interact with neutrophils but affected opsonization (data not shown). Furthermore, 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN did not influence phagocytosis in 40% complement-inactivated serum (data not shown) and also failed to interfere with IgG-mediated phagocytosis (Fig. 1c), indicating that SCIN prevents complement-mediated phagocytosis. Experiments using antibody to C3 (anti-C3) showed that 3 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN prevented deposition of C3b on S. aureus (Fig. 1d). Moreover, 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN reduced neutrophil bacterial killing (Fig. 1e). In the presence of mouse serum, recombinant SCIN did not inhibit phagocytosis, suggesting that SCIN is human specific, like the other molecules encoded by SaPI5 (Fig. 1f). When we did bacterial opsonization in the presence of supernatants of SaPI5-positive S. aureus strains, we noted fewer C3b molecules on the bacterial surface than with supernatants of isogenic SaPI5-negative S. aureus strains. Experiments using neutralizing antibodies to SCIN showed that excretion of SCIN by S. aureus led to efficient reduction of bacterial opsonization (Fig. 1g). The specificity of these antibodies for SCIN was demonstrated by enzyme-linked

ARTICLES

Figure 2 SCIN inhibits all three complement pathways. (a–c) C5b-9 deposition via the classical (a; 1% serum), lectin (b; 1% serum) and alternative (c; 20% serum) pathways. (d–f) C3b deposition via the classical (d; 2% serum), lectin (e; 1% serum) and alternative (f; 20% serum) pathways. (g,h) C4b deposition mediated by the classical (g) and lectin (h) pathways (0.5% and 2% serum, respectively). Horizontal dotted lines indicate the background signal in the absence of serum. Data (a–h) are mean ± s.d. from one representative of three separate experiments. rCHIPS, recombinant CHIPS (control); A₄₁₅, absorbance at 415 nm. *, P < 0.05, versus control; **, P < 0.005, versus control.

immunosorbent assay (ELISA; Supplementary Fig. 1 online). These data collectively demonstrate that SCIN efficiently inhibits phagocytosis, killing and opsonization of S. aureus in human serum. Thus, staphylococci can prevent opsonization and complement-mediated phagocytosis by excreting SCIN.

### SCIN inhibits all complement pathways

All complement pathways are involved in the host defense against S. aureus²⁰⁻²². To evaluate the effects of SCIN on each pathway separately, we tested SCIN using an ELISA-based system in which each pathway is analyzed without cross-interaction²³,²⁴. The assays are based on specific coatings for each pathway in combination with specific buffer systems²³. We evaluated complement activation by detecting deposited C4b, C3b and C5b-9. Anti-C1q and anti-MBL inhibit C4b deposition in the classical and lectin pathways (data not shown). Recombinant SCIN interfered with the activation of all three pathways as shown by decreased C5b-9 and C3b deposition (Fig. 2a–f). In the classical and lectin pathways, recombinant SCIN inhibited C5b-9 and C3b deposition by 50% at a concentration of 10 μg/ml (Fig. 2a,b,d,e). We found no inhibition of C4b deposition by the classical and lectin pathways (Fig. 2g,h). In the alternative pathway, C5b-9 and C3b deposition were almost completely blocked with concentrations of recombinant SCIN of 0.3 μg/ml and higher (Fig. 2c,f). Factor D-deficient serum demonstrated 50% inhibition by recombinant SCIN (data not shown), excluding the possibility of involvement of the alternative pathway in the classical and lectin pathways. All pathways were also inhibited at other serum concentrations tested with recombinant SCIN at a concentration of 10 μg/ml (data not shown). Thus, SCIN prevents proper activation of all complement pathways. C3b deposition through the classical and lectin pathways was inhibited by 50%, whereas the alternative pathway was blocked by almost 100%.

SCIN is a human-specific complement inhibitor

Our data indicated that SCIN inhibits all three complement pathways. To evaluate whether SCIN is human specific, we tested SCIN in an alternative pathway assay analyzing C5b-9-mediated lysis of rabbit erythrocytes²⁵. In the presence of 2–30% human serum, 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN strongly inhibited alternative pathway hemolytic activity (Fig. 3a). However, in the presence of mouse serum, recombinant SCIN-mediated inhibition of hemolysis did not occur. Moreover, in the presence of rat, dog, sheep, guinea pig, goat and cow sera, 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN was unable to inhibit the alternative pathway at all serum concentrations tested (Fig. 3b). These data show that SCIN exclusively inhibited alternative pathway activation in humans and therefore is a human-specific complement inhibitor. That and the finding that the gene encoding SCIN is found only in staphylococci isolated from humans (data not shown) strongly indicate that SCIN particularly evolved in staphylococci that infect humans. To study whether SCIN is produced during staphylococcal infection, we obtained sera from 80 healthy people and 20 individuals who experience recurrent staphylococcal infections and tested the sera for antibodies to SCIN by ELISA. All produced antibodies to SCIN, indicating that staphylococci actively produce SCIN in humans (Fig. 3c). The finding that antibody concentrations were similar in patients and healthy donors was not unexpected, as all healthy donors and patients tested also produced antibodies to staphylococcal crude cell walls, indicating that all these people had encountered staphylococci during their lives. Although the human specificity of SCIN limits the study of this immune evasion molecule in animal models, these findings indicate that SCIN is important for staphylococcal survival in the human host. Experiments using an *ex vivo* inflammation model showed that SCIN also blocked phagocytosis of S. aureus in human whole blood (Fig. 3d).

Figure 3 SCIN is a human-specific complement inhibitor. (a,b) Alternative pathway-mediated hemolysis of rabbit erythrocytes with 10 μg/ml of concentrations recombinant SCIN plus various concentrations of mouse and human serum (a) or 20% mouse, rat, dog, sheep, guinea pig, goat and cow serum (b; lysis mediated by 20% serum is presented as being representative of all serum concentrations; Control, buffer). A₄₀₅, absorbance at 405 nm. Data represent mean ± s.e.m. of three separate experiments. *, P < 0.05, versus control; **, P < 0.005, versus control. (c) Anti-SCIN titers in sera of healthy people and patients. Each symbol represents an individual person's result; horizontal line, titer of pooled normal human serum. (d) Phagocytosis of S. aureus in human whole blood. For c and d, data are representative of three separate experiments.

C3b, respectively, they are cleaved by specific proteases. The C2b and Ba 'split products' are released immediately after cleavage. The active convertase components C2a and Bb initially stay bound to the surface, but are released eventually as a result of convertase instability²⁸. When we incubated zymosan with 10% serum, we detected both released C2a and C2b after 20 min of incubation (Fig. 5a,b). For the alternative pathway, we detected Ba and Bb in 5%, 10% or 20% serum after 20 min of incubation with S. aureus (Fig. 5c). With 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN, we noted no C2 (Fig. 5a,b) and factor B (Fig. 5c) cleavage products. These data show that SCIN prevents efficient cleavage of C2 and factor B and thus affects the formation of C4b2a and C3bBb.

The formation of C4b2a and C3bBb is dependent on two steps: first, C2 and factor B bind the surface-bound cofactors C4b and C3b; then, C2 and factor B are cleaved by Cls or MASP-2 and by factor D, respectively. To examine the precise effect of SCIN on C3 convertase formation, we studied whether the inhibitory actions of SCIN were dependent on surface-bound cofactors. In the absence of surface-bound C4b, the cleavage of purified C2 by Cls or recombinant MASP-2 was not affected by recombinant SCIN at a concentration of 10 μg/ml (Fig. 5d,e). Also, the cleavage of factor B in the absence of surface-bound C3b was not affected by 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN (Fig. 5f). Because factor D cleavage of factor B occurs only in the presence of a cofactor, we used fluid-phase C3H₂O, the hydrolyzed form of C3 that also acts as a cofactor²⁹. However, in the presence of preopsonized particles that contain C3b, 3 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN efficiently prevented factor B cleavage by factor

### SCIN is surface dependent

To elucidate how SCIN interferes with human complement, we studied whether SCIN could directly bind complement components. Recombinant SCIN did not directly bind purified Cls, recombinant MASP-1, recombinant MASP-2, C2, C3, C4, factor D, factor B or properdin, as determined by ELISA, immunoprecipitation, size-exclusion chromatography²⁶ and BIACORE²⁷ (data not shown). Analysis of the binding of recombinant SCIN to foreign particles showed that recombinant SCIN also failed to bind zymosan or S. aureus directly (Fig. 4a). However, in the presence of human sera, recombinant SCIN bound to zymosan and S. aureus. Because binding occurred only at 37 °C (Fig. 4), SCIN probably binds particles during complement activation. Also, SCIN molecules present in staphylococal supernatants bound to the bacterial surface during opsonization (Fig. 4b). In the presence of 10% serum, this binding reached a maximum within 5 min. Thus, as an excreted protein, SCIN binds to the bacterial surface during complement activation. These data suggest that SCIN is a surface-dependent complement inhibitor.

### SCIN acts on C3 convertases

Our experiments suggested that SCIN, as a relatively small protein, could inhibit all complement routes. We thus hypothesized that SCIN acts either on C3, which functions in all complement pathways, or on separate molecules that have a similar function. We excluded the possibility of an interaction with C3 or C3b, as SCIN did not directly bind purified C3, C3b or surface-bound C3b (data not shown). The finding that C4b deposition in the classical pathway and lectin pathway was not inhibited by SCIN proved that Cl and MBL-MASP complexes retained their activity (Fig. 2g,h). Thus, SCIN affects the classical and lectin pathways 'downstream' of C4b but 'upstream' of C3b deposition. This indicates that SCIN may interfere with the formation and/or the activity of the C4b2a convertase. As C3 convertases of the classical and lectin pathways are functionally and structurally similar to those of the alternative pathway, a similar mechanism could apply for the alternative pathway.

To study the formation of the classical, lectin and alternative pathway C3 convertases, we analyzed the cleavage of C2 and factor B. When C2 and factor B are in complex with particle-bound C4b and

Figure 4 SCIN binds to particles in a serum- and temperature-dependent way. (a) Binding of FITC–recombinant SCIN to zymosan in 10% serum at 37 °C (■). Binding in the absence of serum at 37 °C (▲) or in the presence of serum at 0 °C (○). (b) SCIN from staphylococcal supernatants binds to S. aureus during opsonization in 10% serum. SCIN is detected with mouse anti-SCIN. Binding occurs only with supernatants of SaPI5-positive strains but not with supernatants of their isogenic SaPI5-negative variants. ◇, recombinant SCIN (2 μg/ml); ▲, UMCU65; Δ, UMCU65 plus SaPI5; ●, UMCU74; ○, UMCU74 plus SaPI5; ■, R5; □, R5 plus SaPI5. Data represent mean ± s.e.m. of three separate experiments.

ARTICLES

Figure 5 SCIN interferes with formation of C3 convertases. Immunoblots are of C3 convertase components detected by polyclonal anti-C2 (a,b,d,e) or polyclonal anti-factor B (c,f,g). (a,b) C2 cleavage products in serum after incubation with zymosan plus 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN. In b, a different batch of polyclonal anti-C2 was used (relative to that in a) for better visualization of C2a in controls. (c) Detection of factor B (fB) cleavage products in serum after incubation with S. aureus. (d,e) C1s-mediated or recombinant MASP-2–mediated cleavage of C2 in the absence of an activator surface, with 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN. (f) Factor D–mediated cleavage of factor B in the presence of C3(H₂O) plus 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN. (g) Factor D–mediated cleavage of factor B in the presence of preopsonized zymosan plus 3 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN. Right margins, cleavage products. Immunoblots (a–g) are all representative of three separate experiments.

D (Fig. 5g). Thus, SCIN inhibits the generation of C3 convertases in the presence of an activator surface.

The surface specificity of SCIN triggered our analysis of C2 and factor B molecules on the surface of opsonized particles. In the absence of SCIN, zymosan and bacteria did not contain detectable surface-bound C2 or factor B or one of their split products after 20 min of opsonization (Fig. 6a,b). However, when opsonization was done in the presence of 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN, large numbers of surface-bound C2a and Bb molecules but not the smaller C2b or Ba molecules were detected (Fig. 6a,b). When zymosan was incubated in 20% serum, maximum binding of C2a by SCIN was reached within 10 min, whereas Bb binding was maximal within 20 min (Fig. 6c,d). Thus, SCIN stabilizes surface-bound C4b2a and C3bBb. Because C2a and Bb continuously dissociate from the convertase complex, surface detection of C2a and Bb underestimates the total amount of generated convertases. For quantitative analysis of surface-bound C3 convertases, we stabilized C3bBb complexes on zymosan by adding properdin and NiCl₂ to 5% human serum³⁰. In these conditions, we detected less Bb on zymosan in the presence of SCIN than in the absence of SCIN (Fig. 6e), indicating that SCIN indeed prevents convertase formation.

Thus, SCIN acts on both C4b2a and C3bBb, which explains why SCIN inhibits all complement pathways. On the surface of zymosan or S. aureus, SCIN caused stabilization of C3 convertases and prevented their dissociation (Fig. 6). Moreover, in supernatants of opsonized zymosan or S. aureus, SCIN prevented cleavage of C2 and factor B (Fig. 5a–c), indicating that the observed stabilization of C3 convertases hindered the formation of additional convertases (Supplementary Fig. 2 online).

SCIN binds and inactivates C3bBb

Next we studied how SCIN interacts with activator-bound C3 convertases. We specifically studied interactions with the alternative pathway molecules, as C3bBb has been studied much more extensively than C4b2a. This is mainly because C3bBb is present on activator surfaces at much higher concentrations than C4b2a³¹. Furthermore,

Figure 6 SCIN prevents the dissociation of C3 convertases. (a) Surface detection of C2 split products on zymosan after opsonization in serum plus 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN. (b) Surface detection of factor B split products on S. aureus after opsonization in serum plus 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN. fB, factor B. (c,d) Surface detection of C2a (c) or Bb (d) on zymosan after incubation with 20% serum plus 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN. (e) Surface detection of Bb on zymosan after incubation with 20% serum in the presence of properdin and Ni²⁺ to stabilize C3bBb in controls, plus 10 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN. Blots (a,b) were prepared with polyclonal anti-C2 and polyclonal anti-factor B and are representative of three separate experiments. For flow cytometry (c–e), monoclonal anti-C2a and monoclonal anti-Bb were used; data represent mean ± s.e.m. of three separate experiments. *, P < 0.05, versus control.

Figure 7 SCIN binds and inactivates C3bBb. (a) Binding of FITC–recombinant SCIN (3 μg/ml) to preopsonized zymosan in the presence of buffer alone (−), factor B (B; 40 μg/ml), factor D (D; 0.6 μg/ml) or both factors (B + D). (b) Binding of FITC–recombinant SCIN (3 μg/ml) to preopsonized zymosan in the presence of factor B (40 μg/ml) and increasing concentrations of factor D. (c) Stabilization of C3bB and C3bBb on zymosan in the presence (+) of 4 μg/ml of properdin and 2 mM NiCl₂ (P + Ni²⁺) but not with PBS alone (−). fB, factor B. Representative of three separate experiments. (d) Binding of FITC–recombinant SCIN (3 μg/ml) to C3bBbP on zymosan. (e) C3b deposition on zymosan by C3bBbP in the presence of 3 μg/ml of recombinant SCIN. Data in a,b,d,e represent mean ± s.e.m. of three separate experiments. *, P < 0.05, versus control.

The location of the gene encoding CHIPS on SaPI5 (W.J.B.v.W. et al., unpublished data) led to the identification of SCIN, the last unknown protein encoded by this immune evasion cluster. We have shown here that SCIN, present in 90% of S. aureus strains tested, is a complement modulator that efficiently prevented the opsonization, phagocytosis and killing of S. aureus. Like all other proteins encoded by SaPI5, SCIN is very specific to humans. Thus, S. aureus has evolved a complete phage-encoded pathogenicity island expressing solely human-specific immune evasion molecules. Although this human specificity limits the study of these molecules in animal models, the existence of such an island is an intriguing finding by itself and could be related to the host specificity of the particular bacterium. Furthermore, this human specificity makes these proteins even more promising candidates for treatment of inflammatory diseases in humans.

We have shown that SCIN functions as an inhibitor of all complement pathways. Because SCIN acts on the homologous C3 convertases, its inhibitory actions are not restricted to one activation route. SCIN seems to protect C3 convertases from decay dissociation. C3 convertases on foreign particles are subject to decay only by their intrinsic instability and not by extrinsic regulators such as factor H, factor I or decay-accelerating factor²⁸. The observed stabilization of C3 convertases on zymosan and S. aureus promoted by SCIN was therefore a result of altered intrinsic decay. By stabilizing C3 convertases, SCIN affects the complement cascade at three different steps. SCIN efficiently prevented reassembly of C3 convertases. The cleavage of factor B and C2, a crucial step in convertase formation, cannot take place in the presence of SCIN. Because this inhibition of cleavage occurred solely in the presence of an activator surface, we believe that the decreased convertase assembly is an indirect result of convertase stabilization at the surface. When complexes are stabilized by SCIN, surface-bound C3b and C4b are no longer available to generate additional convertases. The binding of SCIN to C3bBb impaired the enzymatic activity of the convertase. Thus, SCIN binds to C3bBb in such a way that the convertase is no longer able to cleave C3. SCIN binds activator bound C3bBb but not C3bB or C3b. That and the finding that SCIN inactivated the convertase suggest that SCIN binds the active pocket of Bb. However, published studies have indicated that the conformation of Bb induced by its cofactor C3b is crucial for Bb activity³⁸. Thus, the possibility that SCIN may induce a conformational change within C3bBb cannot be excluded. Finally, as SCIN prevents further C3b deposition, it greatly interferes with the amplification loop of the alternative pathway. This mechanism explains why SCIN most efficiently modulates this pathway.

The interactions of SCIN with surface-bound C3 convertases proved to be a highly efficient mechanism for preventing the proper functioning of the complement system in several ways. Both in an ELISA-based system and on S. aureus, SCIN efficiently prevented C3b

DISCUSSION

Complement is one of the key components of the innate immune defense that promotes phagocytosis and supports local inflammatory responses against pathogens. The complement system is also involved in several diseases in which host cells are erroneously recognized as non-self and are damaged by complement activation³³⁻³⁶. Study of the interactions between the human pathogen S. aureus and innate immunity led to the identification of several staphylococcal molecules that specifically prevent complement-mediated defense mechanisms¹⁴,¹⁵,³⁷. One of these is CHIPS, a C5a receptor antagonist.

deposition. Because SCIN acts very early in the complement pathways, it can also prevent generation of C5b-9 and the membrane attack complex, as shown by ELISA and alternative pathway hemolytic activity. Thus, by very early inhibition of complement, SCIN can modulate all biological functions of complement that occur after C3 convertase formation. The surface specificity and robust action of SCIN are ideal to efficiently prevent complement activation, not only from a bacterial perspective but also in the context of therapeutics. The findings that SCIN itself stayed bound to the surface and that it modulated all activation routes make SCIN a promising molecule for targeting complement-related diseases.

### METHODS

#### SCIN. Cloning and expression of *scn* was done as described for CHIPS mutants³⁹ with use of the following primers: 5′-GAGCACAAGCTTGCCAACAT CG-3′ (forward) and 5′GGAATTCCTTAATATTTACTTTT-3′ (reverse; EcoRI site underlined). Recombinant SCIN and CHIPS were purified as described¹⁴.

#### Anti-SCIN. Mouse anti-SCIN and rabbit anti-SCIN were prepared as described earlier³⁹. Four different mouse monoclonal antibodies to SCIN were used. Three blocking antibodies (2F4, 2B12 and 3F1) completely inhibited SCIN activity in all complement pathways and did not recognize SCIN bound to an opsonized particle. One antibody (3G3) did recognize SCIN when bound to an opsonized particle, partially blocked activity and was used for detection of SCIN at the bacterial surface.

#### S. aureus strains. Laboratory S. aureus strains Cowan, Cowan EMS, COL, Wood 46 and R5 were used, along with two blood isolates (UMCU65 and UMCU74) obtained at the University Medical Center Utrecht (Utrecht, The Netherlands). S. aureus SaPI5-negative strains R5, UMCU65 and UMCU 74 were infected with the SaPI5-carrying bacteriophage Phi13 as described (W.J.B.v.W. et al., unpublished data). Bacteriophages from clinical S. aureus strains were induced and isolated as described⁴⁰. The bacteriophages obtained were serially diluted and mixed with S. aureus R5, UMCU65 or UMCU 74 and soft Luria agar. Mixtures were plated on Luria agar containing 0.5 mM CaCl₂ and were incubated overnight at 37 °C. Loose plaques were picked and used to inoculate fresh S. aureus strains in media. After overnight incubation at 37 °C, bacteria were plated on Luria agar and single colonies were tested for lysogeny by PCR and Southern blot analysis⁴¹. PCR and Southern blot analysis demonstrated the successful integration of SaPI5 type E (*scn-sak*) in R5 and UMCU74 and of SaPI5 type B (*scn-chp-sak*) in UMCU65 (ref. 41). Culture supernatants of UMCU65 plus SaPI5, UMCU74 plus SaPI5 and R5 plus SaPI5 contained 2.3 μg/ml, 1.7 μg/ml and 3.5 μg/ml of SCIN, respectively, as determined by ELISA¹⁴.

#### Phagocytosis, killing and C3b deposition on S. aureus. Informed consent was obtained from all subjects. The study protocol was approved by the medical ethics committee of the University Medical Center Utrecht (Utrecht, The Netherlands). Phagocytosis experiments were done as described¹⁵ by incubation of 2.5 × 10⁵ human neutrophils and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled S. aureus strain Cowan EMS, Cowan, COL, Wood 46, UMCU65 or UMCU74 (2.5 × 10⁶) for 15 min at 37 °C with human serum or IgG, plus recombinant SCIN. Phagocytosis in human whole blood was done as described⁴². For killing, S. aureus strain Cowan EMS (5 × 10⁴) was preopsonized for 15 min with 40% human serum followed by incubation for 1 h at 37 °C with 1 × 10⁶ neutrophils. Killing was analyzed on Luria agar: [(CFUt₆₀ – CFUt₀) / CFUt₀] × 100, where CFU is colony-forming units and t₆₀ and t₀ indicate the time of incubation (60 or 0 min, respectively). For C3b deposition, 3 × 10⁶ S. aureus Cowan EMS were incubated at 37 °C with serum and recombinant SCIN or bacterial supernatants in 20 mM HEPES and 140 mM NaCl (HEPES-buffered saline) plus 5 mM CaCl₂, 2.5 mM MgCl₂ and 0.1% (volume/volume) Tween-20, pH 7.4 (HBS⁺⁺). Supernatants were preincubated with 65 μg/ml of monoclonal anti-SCIN (2B12). Surface-bound C3b and inactive C3b were detected with FITC-conjugated goat F(ab')₂ anti-human C3 (Protos Immunoresearch). The binding of antibody to 1 × 10⁴ bacteria was measured by flow cytometry.

#### Complement assays. Functional activity of the classical, lectin and alternative pathways was ‘screened’ as described²³ (E. Hack, Sanquin Research, CLB, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Sera were preincubated with recombinant SCIN for 15 min at 25 °C. The alternative pathway hemolytic assay was accomplished by incubation of 2 × 10⁷ rabbit erythrocytes (Biotrading) for 1 h at 37 °C with serum in veronal-buffered saline containing 5 mM MgCl₂ and 10 mM EGTA. Cells were ‘spun down’ and the absorbance of supernatants at 450 nm was measured.

#### Distribution of anti-SCIN. The distribution of anti-SCIN in human sera was determined as described earlier for anti-staphylokinase¹⁵. Sera were obtained from 70 blood bank donors, 10 lab donors and 20 people experiencing recurrent staphylococcal infections (treated at the University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands) after informed consent was obtained.

#### Analysis of C2 and factor B. Zymosan (5 mg; Sigma) or 5 × 10⁶ S. aureus Cowan EMS were incubated with serum for 20 min at 37 °C in HBS⁺⁺ or in HEPES buffered saline, pH 7.4, plus 2 mM MgCl₂ and 2 mM EGTA, respectively. Then, after centrifugation, both the supernatant and particle-associated proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, followed by immunoblot¹⁵. Human C2 and factor B were detected with goat anti-human C2 (Quidel Corporation) or goat anti-human factor B (Merck), followed by peroxidase-conjugated anti-goat IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Alternatively, 250 μg zymosan was incubated at 37 °C with 10% serum in veronal-buffered saline, pH 7.4, containing Ca²⁺ and Mg²⁺ plus 0.05% BSA, and surface-bound C2a and Bb were detected with mouse anti-C2a (Antibodyshop) or mouse anti-Bb (Quidel) and FITC-labeled goat anti-mouse (Dako). For stabilization of C3bBb, zymosan was mixed with 5% serum in the presence of 2 mM NiCl₂ and 10 μg/ml of properdin (Merck). Human C2 (50 ng; Merck) was incubated for 30 min at 37 °C with human Cls⁴³ or recombinant human MASP-2 (consisting of the CCP₁, CCP₂ and SP domains⁴⁴; P. Gal, Institute of Enzymology, Budapest, Hungary) in HBS⁺⁺. For fluid-phase cleavage of factor B, C3 (250 μg/ml), factor B (40 μg/ml) (both purified as described⁴⁵) and factor D (0–1 μg/ml; Merck) were mixed for 30 min at 37 °C in MgCl₂ in PBS. For the preparation of preopsonized zymosan, 250 μg zymosan was incubated for 30 min at 37 °C with 20% serum in PBS. After washing, zymosan was incubated for 30 min at 37 °C with factor B (40 μg/ml), factor D (0–0.6 μg/ml) and recombinant SCIN.

#### Binding of SCIN to particles. Zymosan (250 μg) or 3 × 10⁷ S. aureus Cowan EMS were incubated with FITC-labeled SCIN¹⁴ or bacterial supernatants and 10% serum for 20 min in veronal-buffered saline containing Ca²⁺ and Mg²⁺ plus 0.05% BSA. Alternatively, SCIN was detected with mouse anti-SCIN (3G3) and FITC-labeled goat anti-mouse. Preopsonized zymosan was incubated with FITC-recombinant SCIN (3 μg/ml) and purified factor B (40 μg/ml) and factor D (0–0.6 μg/ml). Zymosan-bound C3bBbP was prepared by incubation of zymosan-bound C3b with factor B (40 μg/ml), factor D (0–0.6 μg/ml) and properdin (4 μg/ml) in 2 mM NiCl₂, 25 mM NaCl and 1% BSA in PBS⁴⁴ or in the absence of properdin with 1% BSA in PBS. Zymosan-bound C3bBbP was washed with 2 mM NiCl₂, 25 mM NaCl and 1% BSA in PBS and was incubated for 30 min at 37 °C with FITC-recombinant SCIN (3 μg/ml) in the same buffer with 4 μg/ml of properdin. Alternatively, zymosan-bound C3bBbP was incubated for 5 min at 37 °C with unlabeled recombinant SCIN (3 μg/ml) followed by incubation for 25 min at 37 °C with FITC-labeled C3 (20 μg/ml). Finally, particles were washed and the mean fluorescence of 1 × 10⁴ particles was determined by flow cytometry.

#### Statistical analysis. Statistics were analyzed with Student’s *t*-test; *P* values less than 0.05 were considered significant.

#### Accession codes. National Center for Biotechnology Information (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov): SCIN, gi|14247715|dbj|BAB58104.1| and gi|13701735|dbj|BAB43028.1|; SCIN homolog in S. aureus, SCIN-like B, gi|13700958|dbj|BAB42254.1|; SCIN homolog in S. aureus, SCIN-like D, gi|21203369|dbj|BAB94070.1|. Sanger database (http://www.sanger.ac.uk): SCIN homolog in S. aureus, SCIN-like C, gnl|Sanger 159288|Staphylococcus (S. aureus 252 (MRSA 16)). BIND (http://bind.ca): 315472.

#### Note: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Immunology website.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank W. Jansen for reviewing the manuscript, and L. de Graaf-Miltenburg for purification of factor B and C3. Supported by the European Union (LSHM-CT-2004-512093 and QLG1-CT-2001-01039).

COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT

The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.

Received 24 March; accepted 23 June 2005  
Published online at http://www.nature.com/natureimmunology/

1. Carroll, M.C. The complement system in regulation of adaptive immunity. *Nat. Immunol.* **5**, 981–986 (2004).
2. Song, W.C., Sarrias, M.R. & Lambris, J.D. Complement and innate immunity. *Immunopharmacology* **49**, 187–198 (2000).
3. Fujita, T. Evolution of the lectin-complement pathway and its role in innate immunity. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* **2**, 346–353 (2002).
4. Gasque, P. Complement: a unique innate immune sensor for danger signals. *Mol. Immunol.* **41**, 1089–1098 (2004).
5. Rawal, N. & Pangburn, M.K. Formation of high affinity C5 convertase of the classical pathway of complement. *J. Biol. Chem.* **278**, 38476–38483 (2003).
6. Xu, Y., Narayana, S.V. & Volanakis, J.E. Structural biology of the alternative pathway convertase. *Immunol. Rev.* **180**, 123–135 (2001).
7. Holmskov, U., Thiel, S. & Jensenius, J.C. Collectins and ficolins: Humoral Lectins of the Innate Immune Defense. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **21**, 547–578 (2003).
8. Moller-Kristensen, M., Thiel, S., Hansen, A.G. & Jensenius, J.C. On the site of C4 deposition upon complement activation via the mannan-binding lectin pathway or the classical pathway. *Scand. J. Immunol.* **57**, 556–561 (2003).
9. Chen, C.B. & Wallis, R. Two mechanisms for mannose-binding protein modulation of the activity of its associated serine proteases. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 26058–26065 (2004).
10. De Bruijn, M.H. & Fey, G.H. Human complement component C3: cDNA coding sequence and derived primary structure. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **82**, 708–712 (1985).
11. Nakao, M., Matsumoto, M., Nakazawa, M., Fujiki, K. & Yano, T. Diversity of complement factor B/C2 in the common carp (*Cyprinus carpio*): three isotypes of B/C2-A expressed in different tissues. *Dev. Comp. Immunol.* **26**, 533–541 (2002).
12. Ponnuraj, K. *et al.* Structural analysis of engineered Bb fragment of complement factor B: insights into the activation mechanism of the alternative pathway C3-convertase. *Mol. Cell* **14**, 17–28 (2004).
13. Foster, T.J. The *Staphylococcus aureus* “superbug”. *J. Clin. Invest.* **114**, 1693–1696 (2004).
14. De Haas, C.J. *et al.* Chemotaxis inhibitory protein of *Staphylococcus aureus*, a bacterial anti-inflammatory agent. *J. Exp. Med.* **199**, 687–695 (2004).
15. Rooijakkers, S.H.M., van Wamel, W.J.B., Ruyken, M., van Kessel, K.P.M. & van Strijp, J.A.G. Anti-opsonic properties of staphylokinase. *Microbes Infect.* **7**, 476–484 (2005).
16. Jin, T. *et al.* *Staphylococcus aureus* resists human defensins by production of staphylokinase, a novel bacterial evasion mechanism. *J. Immunol.* **172**, 1169–1176 (2004).
17. Rahimpour, R. *et al.* Bacterial superantigens induce down-modulation of CC chemokine responsiveness in human monocytes via an alternative chemokine ligand-independent mechanism. *J. Immunol.* **162**, 2299–2307 (1999).
18. Dohlsten, M. *et al.* Immunopharmacology of the superantigen staphylococcal enterotoxin A in T-cell receptor Vβ3 transgenic mice. *Immunology* **79**, 520–527 (1993).
19. Gladysheva, I.P., Turner, R.B., Sazonova, I.Y., Liu, L. & Reed, G.L. Coevolutionary patterns in plasminogen activation. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **100**, 9168–9172 (2003).
20. Leijh, P.C., van den Barselaar, M.T., Daha, M.R. & van Furth, R. Participation of immunoglobulins and complement components in the intracellular killing of *Staphylococcus aureus* and *Escherichia coli* by human granulocytes. *Infect. Immun.* **33**, 714–724 (1981).
21. Neth, O., Jack, D.L., Johnson, M., Klein, N.J. & Turner, M.W. Enhancement of complement activation and opsonophagocytosis by complexes of mannose-binding lectin with mannose-binding lectin-associated serine protease after binding to *Staphylococcus aureus*. *J. Immunol.* **169**, 4430–4436 (2002).
22. Cunnion, K.M., Lee, J.C. & Frank, M.M. Capsule production and growth phase influence binding of complement to *Staphylococcus aureus*. *Infect. Immun.* **69**, 6796–6803 (2001).
23. Roos, A. *et al.* Functional characterization of the lectin pathway of complement in human serum. *Mol. Immunol.* **39**, 655–668 (2003).
24. Seelen, M.A. *et al.* Functional analysis of the classical, alternative, and MBL pathways of the complement system: standardization and validation of a simple ELISA. *J. Immunol. Methods* **296**, 187–198 (2005).
25. Servais, G., Walmagh, J. & Duchateau, J. Simple quantitative haemolytic microassay for determination of complement alternative pathway activation (AP50). *J. Immunol. Methods* **140**, 93–100 (1991).
26. De Haas, C.J., van Leeuwen, H.J., Verhoef, J., Van Kessel, K.P.M. & Van Strijp, J.A.G. Analysis of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-binding characteristics of serum components using gel filtration of FITC-labeled LPS. *J. Immunol. Methods* **242**, 79–89 (2000).
27. De Haas, C.J., Haas, P.J., Van Kessel, K.P.M. & Van Strijp, J.A.G. Affinities of different proteins and peptides for lipopolysaccharide as determined by biosensor technology. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **252**, 492–496 (1998).
28. Fearon, D.T. & Austen, K.F. Activation of the alternative complement pathway due to resistance of zymosan-bound. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **74**, 1683–1687 (1977).
29. Sahu, A. & Lambris, J.D. Structure and biology of complement protein C3, a connecting link between innate and acquired immunity. *Immunol. Rev.* **180**, 35–48 (2001).
30. Fishelson, Z. & Muller-Eberhard, H.J. C3 convertase of human complement: enhanced formation and stability of the enzyme generated with nickel instead of magnesium. *J. Immunol.* **129**, 2603–2607 (1982).
31. Laich, A. & Sim, R.B. Complement C4bC2 complex formation: an investigation by surface plasmon resonance. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* **1544**, 96–112 (2001).
32. Fearon, D.T. & Austen, K.F. Properdin: binding to C3b and stabilization of the C3b-dependent C3 convertase. *J. Exp. Med.* **142**, 856–863 (1975).
33. Riedemann, N.C. & Ward, P.A. Complement in ischemia reperfusion injury. *Am. J. Pathol.* **162**, 363–367 (2003).
34. Sahu, A. & Lambris, J.D. Complement inhibitors: a resurgent concept in anti-inflammatory therapeutics. *Immunopharmacology* **49**, 133–148 (2000).
35. Nilsson, B. *et al.* Compstatin inhibits complement and cellular activation in whole blood in two models of extracorporeal circulation. *Blood* **92**, 1661–1667 (1998).
36. Kaya, Z. *et al.* Contribution of the innate immune system to autoimmune myocarditis: a role for complement. *Nat. Immunol.* **2**, 739–745 (2001).
37. Veldkamp, K.E., Heezius, H.C., Verhoef, J., van Strijp, J.A.G. & van Kessel, K.P.M. Modulation of neutrophil chemokine receptors by *Staphylococcus aureus* supernate. *Infect. Immun.* **68**, 5908–5913 (2000).
38. Ponnuraj, K. *et al.* Structural analysis of engineered Bb fragment of complement factor B: insights into the activation mechanism of the alternative pathway C3-convertase. *Mol. Cell* **14**, 17–28 (2004).
39. Haas, P.J. *et al.* N-terminal residues of the chemotaxis inhibitory protein of *Staphylococcus aureus* are essential for blocking formylated peptide receptor but not C5a receptor. *J. Immunol.* **173**, 5704–5711 (2004).
40. Kaneko, J., Kimura, T., Narita, S., Tomita, T. & Kamio, Y. Complete nucleotide sequence and molecular characterization of the temperate staphylococcal bacteriophage phi PVL carrying Panton-Valentine leukocidin genes. *Gene* **215**, 57–67 (1998).
41. Van Wamel, W.J.B., Van Rossum, G., Verhoef, J., Vandenbroucke-Grauls, C.M. & Fluit, A.C. Cloning and characterization of an accessory gene regulator (agr)-like locus from *Staphylococcus epidermidis*. *FEMS Microbiol Lett.* **163**, 1–9 (1998).
42. Mollnes, T.E. *et al.* Essential role of the C5a receptor in *E. coli*-induced oxidative burst and phagocytosis revealed by a novel lepirudin-based human whole blood model of inflammation. *Blood* **100**, 1869–1877 (2002).
43. He, S., Yang, J.C., Tsang, S., Sim, R.B. & Whaley, K. Role of the distal hinge region of C1-inhibitor in the regulation of C1s activity. *FEBS Lett.* **412**, 506–510 (1997).
44. Ambrus, G. *et al.* Natural substrates and inhibitors of mannan-binding lectin-associated serine protease-1 and -2: a study on recombinant catalytic fragments. *J. Immunol.* **170**, 1374–1382 (2003).
45. Schreiber, R.D., Pangburn, M.K., Lesavre, P.H. & Muller-Eberhard, H.J. Initiation of the alternative pathway of complement: recognition of activators by bound C3b and assembly of the entire pathway from six isolated proteins. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA* **75**, 3948–3952 (1978).
