
Biosynthesis of the $\beta$-Amino Acid Moiety of the Enediyne Antitumor Antibiotic C-1027 Featuring $\beta$-Amino Acyl-S-carrier Protein Intermediates

Steven G. Van Lanen,$^{\dagger}$ Pieter C. Dorrestein,$^{\S}$ Steve D. Christenson,$^{\dagger}$ Wen Liu,$^{\dagger}$ Jianhua Ju,$^{\dagger}$ Neil L. Kelleher,$^{\S}$ and Ben Shen*,$^{\dagger,\S}$

**Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, and Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801**

Received May 2, 2005; E-mail: bshen@pharmacy.wisc.edu

C-1027, a chromoprotein natural product produced by *Streptomyces globisporus* and composed of an apoprotein and the C-1027 chromophore (1), belongs to the enediyne family of antitumor antibiotics that have been considered as some of the most potent, highly active anticancer agents ever discovered. We have previously cloned and characterized the C-1027 biosynthetic gene cluster from *S. globisporus* and proposed that the biosynthesis of the $(S)$-3-chloro-4,5-dihydroxy-$\beta$-phenylalanine moiety (2) from L-tyrosine (3) and its incorporation into 1 are catalyzed by six enzymes: SgcC, SgcC1, SgcC2, SgcC3, SgcC4, and SgcC5.$^{1}$ We now report the delineation of this pathway by in vivo and in vitro studies of five of the six enzymes. Our findings unveil a novel strategy for $\beta$-amino acid modification, featuring $\beta$-amino acyl-S-carrier protein intermediates, and shed new light into engineering the C-1027 biosynthetic machinery for the production of novel analogues as exemplified by 20-deschloro-C-1027 (4) and 20-deschloro-22-deshydroxy-C-1027 (5) (Figure 1).

Functional assignments to SgcC (hydroxylase), SgcC1 (adenylation enzyme), SgcC2 [peptidyl carrier protein, (PCP)], SgcC3 (halogenase), and SgcC4 (aminomutase) for their roles in the biosynthesis of 2 from 3 and to SgcC5 (condensation enzyme) for its role in incorporating 2 into 1 were initially made on the basis of bioinformatics analysis.$^{1}$ We subsequently confirmed SgcC4 as a novel L-tyrosine aminomutase in vitro,$^{2}$ demonstrated SgcC1 to be essential for the biosynthesis of 1 in vivo,$^{1}$ and verified SgcC as the C-5 hydroxylase, inactivation of which resulted in the production of 22-deshydroxy-C-1027 (6).$^{1}$ While these studies (a) established 3 as the biosynthetic precursor for 2, (b) indicated 2 to be most likely activated as an aminoacyl-S-carrier protein prior to its incorporation into 1, and (c) revealed the substrate promiscuity of SgcC5 in incorporating analogues of 2 into 1, they, however, fell short of establishing the precise timing of each biosynthetic step. In contrast, they presented a dilemma for the nature of substrate for SgcC1—SgcC1 exhibits the signature nonribosomal code of “DPAQLMLIAK”, characteristic of activating an $\alpha$-amino acid according to the current nonribosomal peptide synthetase paradigm,$^{3}$ yet SgcC4 is an L-tyrosine aminomutase catalyzing the first step for the biosynthesis of 2 from 3, a fact that precludes any $\alpha$-amino acid as possible intermediates beyond $(S)$-$\beta$-tyrosine (7).$^{2}$

To delineate the biosynthetic pathway for 2 from 3 with the ultimate goal of producing novel C-1027 analogues by rational engineering of the C-1027 biosynthetic machinery, we set out to characterize the substrate specificity of SgcC1 and the timing of tethering the biosynthetic intermediate to the SgcC2 carrier protein by both in vivo and in vitro experiments. Inspired by the fact that inactivation of $sgcC$ resulted in the production of 6,$^{1}$ we reasoned

---

$^{\dagger}$ Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison.  
$^{\ddagger}$ Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison.  
$^{\S}$ University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.

11594 ■ J. AM. CHEM. SOC. 2005, 127, 11594–11595

Covalent tethering of an amino acid onto a carrier protein has been speculated previously as a general strategy for diverting a fraction of a proteinogenic amino acid into secondary metabolism.⁷ Since 7 is a nonproteinogenic acid, competition for 7 as a substrate by other metabolic pathways might not be a major concern. However, tethering of 7 to SgcC2 could be advantageous in optimizing molecular recognition between downstream enzymes and the β-amino acid intermediates by providing structural features from the SgcC2 carrier protein. The downstream enzymes therefore present an outstanding opportunity for metabolic pathway engineering since these enzymes most likely will tolerate the substrate variants as long as they are tethered to SgcC2, hence leading to novel C-1027 analogue production. This is consistent with the findings that inactivation of *sgcC* results in the production of 6 while that of *sgcCl* only abolishes C-1027 production. To further exploit SgcC2-tethered intermediates in engineering novel C-1027 analogues, we finally inactivated *sgcC3*.⁴ The resultant Δ*sgcC3* mutant produced two new compounds, the identity of which as 4 and 5 were confirmed by MALDI-MS analyses: 4 showed an [M + H]⁺ ion at *m/z* = 810.3, consistent with the molecular formula C₄₃H₄₃N₃O₁₃, and 5 showed an [M + H]⁺ ion at *m/z* = 794.3, consistent with the molecular formula C₄₃H₄₃N₃O₁₂.⁴ The fact that the Δ*sgcC* mutant produced exclusively 6¹ while the Δ*sgcC3* mutant produced both 4 and 5 supports the proposal that SgcC3 acts prior to SgcC. Thus, hydroxylation of (*S*)-β-tyrosyl-S-SgcC2 by SgcC followed by incorporation of the resultant hydroxylated intermediate into the C-1027 chromophore by SgcC5 afforded 4, but direct incorporation of the (*S*)-β-tyrosyl-S-SgcC2 by SgcC5 yielded 5 (Figure 1).

Acknowledgment. We thank the Analytical Instrumentation Center of the School of Pharmacy, UW-Madison, for support in obtaining some of the MS data. This work is supported in part by NIH Grants GM067725 (N.L.K.) and CA78747 (B.S.). SVL (CA1059845) and P.C.D. (GM073323) are recipients of NIH postdoctoral fellowships, and B.S. (AI51689) is the recipient of an NIH Independent Scientist Award.

Supporting Information Available: Full experimental details and FTMS data and assignment for SgcC2 and its tethered intermediate. This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

---

**References**

(1) (a) Liu, W.; Christenson, S. D.; Standage, S.; Shen, B.; Nakae, K. *Science* **2002**, 297, 1170–1173. (b) Takemoto, Y.; Nakae, K.; Kawatani, M.; Takahashi, Y.; Naganawa, H.; Imoto, M. *J. Antibiot.* **2001**, 54, 1104–1107.

(2) (a) Christenson, S. D.; Liu, W.; Toney, M. D.; Shen, B. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **2003**, 125, 6062–6063. (b) Christenson, S. D.; Wu, W.; Spies, M. A.; Shen, B.; Toney, M. D. *Biochemistry* **2003**, 42, 112708–112718.

(3) (a) Stachelhaus, T.; Mootz, H. D.; Marahiel, M. A. *Chem. Biol.* **1999**, 6, 493–505. (b) Challis, G. L.; Ravel, J.; Townsend, C. A. *Chem. Biol.* **2000**, 7, 211–224.

(4) See Supporting Information for full experimental details.

(5) (a) McLoughlin, S. M.; Kelleher, N. L. *J. Am. Chem. Soc.* **2004**, 126, 13265–13275. (b) Gatto, G. J.; McLoughlin, S. M.; Kelleher, N. L.; Walsh, C. T. *Biochemistry* **2005**, 44, 2770–2780.

(6) Sanchez, C.; Du, L.; Edwards, D. J.; Toney, M. D.; Shen, B. *Chem. Biol.* **2001**, 8, 725–738.

(7) Chen, H.; Hubbard, B. K.; O’Connor, S. E.; Walsh, C. T. *Chem. Biol.* **2002**, 9, 103–112.
