
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

ELSEVIER SCIENCE DIRECT® IJBCB
The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 38 (2006) 504–509
www.elsevier.com/locate/biocel

Pathogens in focus

**Staphylococcus aureus: Staphylokinase**

Maria I. B
and bacteriophages (Wagner & Waldor, 2002), and the transcription of these genes may be transcendental and regulated by the host milieu. The aim of the present review is to summarize the knowledge about staphylokinase, one of staphylococcal proteases encoded by bacteriophages, and its role in the interaction of *S. aureus* with
Jin et al., 2004). Binding of HNPs to staphylokinase occurs on solid phase and in solution and results in changes of the functional properties of both molecules. HNPs in complex with staphylokinase lose their bactericidal properties, while for the abrogation of plasminogen activating capacity of staphylokinase a significant excess of
absorber of HNPs, even in the presence of excess HNPs. This suggests that plasminogen-staphylokinase complexes bound to the staphylococcal surface may form a protective zone around bacteria preventing defensin-mediated bacteriolysis.

## 4. Impact of staphylokinase expression during staphylococcal infection

The frequency of staph
could be a signal for bacterial migration from the bloodstream to the tissues. Bearing in mind that the majority of patients with staphylococcal bacteraemia and sepsis are infected with strains identical to their nasal isolates (von Eiff et al., 2001), staphylokinase expression may act as an important factor for bacterial persistence in susceptible groups of immunocompromised and
Sakharov, D. V., Lijnen, H. R., & Rijken, D. C. (1996). Interactions between staphylokinase, plasmin(ogen), and fibrin. Staphylokinase discriminates between free plasminogen and plasminogen bound to partially degraded fibrin. *Journal of Biological Chemistry*, 2