
# Pathogenesis of Rheumatoid Arthritis: Targeting Cytokines

JOCHEN ZWERINA, KURT REDLICH, GEORG SCHETT, AND JOSEF S. SMOLEN  
Division of Rheumatology, Internal Medicine III,  
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria  

**ABSTRACT:** Although considerable progress has been made by adequate treatment with traditional disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs), therapy of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) still remains difficult. The discovery of the importance of cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin-1 (IL-1), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and interleukin-15 (IL-15), which are also stimulated by consequences of autoimmune responses, has led to the development of anticytokine therapies (“biologics”). Blocking TNF or also, to some extent, IL-1 has proved beneficial in DMARD-resistant RA patients in multiple clinical trials. Along with clinical improvement, TNF blockade has been shown to halt radiographic disease progression, a major risk factor for disability. Recently, clinical trials have shown a significant therapeutic benefit of biological inhibitors of IL-6, and also of IL-15, with an efficacy comparable to that of TNF blockers. All these agents are particularly efficacious when combined with methotrexate. Although clinical remission is difficult to achieve even with anticytokine treatment, these drugs offer the potential to decrease disease activity and improve quality of life in a majority of RA patients, and it is conceivable that combinations of biological therapies may pave the path to even better success, which ultimately is remission or even cure.

**KEYWORDS:** rheumatoid arthritis; cytokines; TNF; IL-1; IL-6; IL-15; disease activity; joint damage; osteoclasts; therapy; anti-TNF; IL-1ra; anti–IL-6R (MRA)

## INTRODUCTION

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic and symmetric polyarthritis most commonly involving the joints of the hands, feet, and knees. RA is two to three times more frequent in women than in men, and the peak incidence is between the fourth and sixth decade, although it may start at any time. Its prevalence is 0.5% to 1%, and it often leads to disablement and, subsequently, reduced quality of life. Clinically, RA is characterized by joint swelling, pain, and morning stiffness. In addition, extrarticular involvement ranging from rheumatoid nodules to life-threatening vasculitis indicates the systemic nature of the disease. The inflamed synovial tissue transforms into a tumor-like tissue (“pannus”) that invades bone and degrades cartilage. This

Address for correspondence: Josef S. Smolen, M.D., Division of Rheumatology, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria. Voice: +43-1-40400-4300; fax: +43-1-40400-4306. josef.smolen@wienkav.at

Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1051: 716–729 (2005). © 2005 New York Academy of Sciences. doi: 10.1196/annals.1361.116

was first described over 120 years ago and was termed “caries of the joint ends;”<sup>1</sup> the invading synovial tissue was called “tumor albus” or “fungoid synovitis.” The radiologic occurrence of bone erosions inversely correlates to quality of life and in the long term leads to severe loss of functional capacity of RA patients.

# PATHOGENETIC ASPECTS OF RA

The etiology of RA is unclear, although a genetic basis involving the MHC II complex has been proposed. Subjects with the HLA-DR4 haplotype are more susceptible to development of RA, and patients with a “shared epitope” allele more often have extra-articular involvement and a more severe course of the disease.<sup>2</sup> Furthermore, a link between bacterial and viral infections leading to polyarthritis in susceptible subjects has been proposed.<sup>3</sup> Indeed, viral infections (parvovirus, rubella) are able to trigger an RA-like arthritis. Chronic bacterial infection can also lead to arthritis, as in lyme disease, and bacterial cell wall fragments can induce chronic arthritis in animal models. However, no causative infectious agent has ever been isolated from RA patients. Although the ultimate link between the immune system and synovial inflammation has not been found, significant progress has been made in identifying pathogenic aspects by studying animal models of RA.

After the initiating event of RA, an injury to the synovial vasculature is seen, followed by an influx of T cells, mainly of the CD4 memory type.<sup>4</sup> These cells infiltrate the synovium and are activated further by antigen-presenting cells in connection with (unknown) (auto)antigens. These CD4<sup>+</sup> cells are clearly of the Th1 subtype, produce interferon-γ (IFN-γ), interleukin-2 (IL-2), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin-17 (IL-17), and, in turn, through cell–cell contact and the production of these cytokines, activate monocytes, macrophages, and fibroblasts. The latter cells attract and activate neutrophil granulocytes through production of IL-8. Neutrophils are seen at the site of the cartilage junction zone, but far more cells accumulate in the synovial exudate and produce various cartilage-degrading enzymes such as metalloproteases. B cells, dendritic cells, T cells, and macrophages form lymphoid follicle-like structures within the synovial membrane and produce various autoantibodies,<sup>5</sup> such as rheumatoid factor, autoantibodies directed against the Fc fragment of IgG. These autoantibodies may form immune complexes, and are deposited in the cartilage of RA patients.<sup>6</sup> Whether development of autoimmunity is a sole primary, a coprimary, or a secondary event is enigmatic, but it is at least thought to influence the perpetuation of the inflammatory cascade, because immune complexes can induce secretion of proinflammatory cytokines by macrophages.<sup>7</sup>

In the course of the disease, the normal relatively avascular synovium then becomes heavily infiltrated by a wide variety of cells, including B cells, macrophages, fibroblasts, neutrophil granulocytes, dendritic cells, and many other cells.<sup>8</sup> The synovial lining increases to a thickness of up to 30 cell layers, presumably through influx of macrophages, and by expansion of synovial fibroblasts. The latter produce high amounts of proinflammatory cytokines, mainly TNF, IL-1, and IL-6. Furthermore, many other cytokines—such as IL-17, IL-18, and IL-15—chemokines, and angiogenic molecules are present in the inflamed synovial membrane and drive the disease. Subsequently, these proinflammatory cytokines activate signal transduction pathways and transcription factors, which, in turn, control the transcription of cytokines.<sup>9</sup>
The hallmark of RA is the production of a tumor-like inflammatory tissue that invades bone. Early after the clinical onset of RA, mostly within the first year, synoviocytes become hyperplastic and, in a tumor-like manner, invade the subchondral bone at the cartilage junction zone (“pannus”). In contrast with enzyme-mediated cartilage degradation, bone destruction ultimately depends on the presence of bone-resorbing cells, the osteoclasts. ${}^{10}$ These cells are not present in the inflamed synovial membrane of nondestructive arthritides. Osteoclasts are formed, upon various stimuli, by fusion of monocytes, ultimately depending on the recently discovered cytokine, receptor activator of NFkB ligand (RANKL). TNF, IL-1, and IL-6 are known to play significant roles in osteoclast development and function, cartilage destruction, and synovial hyperplasia. Inhibition of each of the three latter cytokines by so-called biologicals has been found to be beneficial in clinical trials and in clinical practice.

# THE ROLE OF CYTOKINES IN RA

## TNF

TNF, discovered in the 1970s, binds to two receptors, the type 1 TNF receptor (p55) and the type 2 TNF receptor (p75). ${}^{11,12}$ TNF can be produced by mesenchymal cells (fibroblasts, osteoblasts), monocytes, and T and B cells, whereas both receptors are commonly expressed in many cells. TNF expression is induced by cytokines, endotoxin, heat stress, neoplastic transformation, viral agents, and other stimuli. TNF itself induces proinflammatory cytokines, activates polymorphonuclear leukocytes, natural killer cells, and cytotoxic T cells, drives osteoclastogenesis, inhibits collagen synthesis, and enhances cartilage breakdown. ${}^{13}$ The proinflammatory effects of TNF are mostly mediated via the p55 receptor (TNF-RI), whereas its proapoptotic effects are exerted mainly via the p75 receptor (TNF-RII). In RA, TNF is highly expressed in the rheumatoid synovium and synovial fluid. ${}^{14-17}$ It is highly efficient in inducing the differentiation of monocytes to osteoclasts in the presence of RANKL, a critical factor in osteoclastogenesis. ${}^{18}$ Furthermore, TNF increases the synthesis of proinflammatory cytokines and metalloproteases by synovial fibroblasts and decreases the synthesis of proteoglycans by chondrocytes. ${}^{19,20}$ Animal studies have shown the importance of TNF in joint inflammation. Mice that overexpress TNF systemically develop an erosive polyarticular symmetric arthritis. ${}^{21}$ Moreover, these mice develop systemic bone loss similar to that seen in RA patients. ${}^{22}$ Consistent with these findings, TNF blockade is highly effective in animals and inhibits synovial inflammation, cartilage degradation, and bone erosion. ${}^{23-25}$

Currently, three TNF blockers are approved for treatment of RA: infliximab (a chimeric monoclonal antibody to TNF), adalimumab (a human monoclonal antibody to TNF), and etanercept (a fusion protein of the p75 TNF receptor). All three agents are efficacious in patients who have previously failed methotrexate (MTX) treatment. Typically, American College of Rheumatology 20% improvement criteria (ACR20) responses between ~50% to 70% and ACR50 responses between ~30% to 50% have been achieved. ${}^{26-31}$ In terms of radiographic progression of RA, the Trial of Etanercept and Methotrexate with Radiographic Patient Outcomes (TEMPO) showed superiority of etanercept plus MTX versus etanercept or MTX alone. ${}^{32}$ Patients who received etanercept alone showed some progression, whereas patients
ZWERINA et al.: PATHOGENESIS OF RA

TABLE 1. Biologicals approved or in clinical development for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis

| Agent           | Description                                                                 | Status            | Company       |
|-----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|---------------|
| Anti-TNF therapy |                                                                                     |                    |               |
| Infliximab      | Chimeric monoclonal antibody to TNF                                           | Approved (1999)    |               |
| Etanercept      | Construct of TNF-RII and Fc portion of IgG1                                    | Approved (1998)    | Centocor      |
| Adalimumab      | Human monoclonal antibody to TNF                                              | Approved (2002)    | Amgen/Wyeth   |
| CDP870          | PEGylated humanized anti-TNF antibody Fab' fragment                            | Phase II           | Abbott        |
| Pegsunercept    | PEGylated TNF-RI                                                            | Phase II           | Celltech      |
| Anti-IL-1 therapy |                                                                                   |                    |               |
| Anakinra        | Recombinant human (rh)IL-1ra                                                 | Approved (2001)    | Amgen         |
| Pralnacasan     | Interleukin-converting enzyme (ICE) inhibitor                                 | Phase II           | Aventis       |
| IL-1 trap       | Construct of two IL-1 receptor chains with an IgG-Fc domain                    | Phase II           | Novartis      |
| Anti-IL-1       | Monoclonal antibody                                                          | Phase I/II         |               |
| Anti-IL-6 therapy |                                                                                 |                    |               |
| MRA             | Humanized anti-IL-6 receptor antibody                                        | Phase III          | Chugai/Roche  |
| Anti-IL-15 therapy |                                                                                 |                    |               |
| HuMax IL-15     | Human monoclonal anti-IL-15 antibody                                         | Phase II           | Genmab/Amgen  |

who received combination therapy showed a slight reduction in total Sharp scores. Interestingly, anti-TNF treatment appears to halt radiographic progression even in patients not achieving clinically significant reduction of disease activity.³³ Moreover, a trial in patients with early RA (disease duration ≤ 3 years) showed that combined treatment with infliximab plus MTX or etanercept plus MTX reduced disease activity and halted bone damage.³⁴ Recently, a small 1-year trial with very early RA patients (disease duration ≤ 1 year) investigated the combination of infliximab plus MTX versus MTX alone, followed by another year of therapy with MTX only.³⁵ After 1 year, the combination therapy showed better ACR20 responses and radiographs. Even after discontinuation of infliximab after 12 months, a sustained benefit in quality of life and functional capacity was observed; however, ACR responses, radiologic progression, and DAS28 scores were similar in both groups. Currently, forms of humanized anti-TNF antibodies that have been PEGylated to obtain a pro-

longed plasma half-life are in clinical development (see TABLE 1). Another question is whether patients who did not respond to one TNF blocker respond to another. Data from a registry in Sweden suggest that a switch from etanercept to infliximab or vice versa could be of benefit.³⁶

# IL-1

Originally discovered as a fever-inducing humoral factor, two forms of IL-1 are now known: IL-1α is a nonsecreted locally acting form, whereas IL-1β is secreted and is measurable in the serum of patients with an activated immune system.³⁷ IL-1 acts via the type I IL-1 receptor (IL-1R1), whereas binding of IL-1 to the type II IL-1 receptor (IL-1R2) does not transduce signaling. Interleukin-converting enzyme (ICE) sheds IL-1 from the membranes of cells. IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra) is a naturally occurring counterregulatory cytokine.³⁸ Binding of IL-1ra to IL-1 receptor blocks activation and signal transduction. Intracellularly, IL-1RI engagement by IL-1 activates Myd88, then TRAF-6, and subsequently leads to phosphorylation of IkB and to release of NFκB, a proinflammatory transcription factor. IL-1, like TNF, is produced by many cells, although monocytes and macrophages produce the highest amounts of it under inflammatory conditions.³⁹ IL-1 induces production of TNF, IL-1, IL-6, and other cytokines, stimulates osteoclastogenesis, drives the expression of cartilage- and matrix-degrading metalloproteases, enhances chemokine production, and plays a role in neoangiogenesis.⁴⁰⁻⁴⁴ Animal models of joint inflammation suggested the importance of IL-1. Injection of IL-1 in knee joints induces joint inflammation,⁴⁵ and inhibition of IL-1 by administration of either IL-1ra or antibodies against IL-1 leads to significant reduction of joint inflammation, cartilage destruction, and bone erosion in the collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model.⁴⁶⁻⁴⁹ Furthermore, IL-1ra knockout mice develop an RA-like disease with an erosive polyarthritis.⁵⁰ However, in TNF-driven RA models such as adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) and the TNF transgenic mice, inhibition of IL-1 is much less efficacious.²³,⁵¹ In RA patients, IL-1 is detectable in synovial fluid specimens and occasionally in serum, and its levels correlate with disease activity.⁵² Increased expression of IL-1 and decreased production of IL-1ra has been detected in RA synovial tissues, suggesting a disturbed IL-1/IL-1ra balance.⁵³ *Ex vivo* studies with synovial fibroblasts demonstrated the cartilage-degrading potency of IL-1.⁵⁴

Anakinra, a recombinant nonglycosylated form of human IL-1ra produced in *Escherichia coli*, is successful in preventing joint inflammation in animal models of RA. After a dose-finding and frequency study,⁵⁵ a large, randomized, placebo-controlled trial with 472 patients was conducted.⁵⁶ Active RA patients, who had failed no more than two DMARDs and had stopped treatment for 6 weeks, received either placebo or one of three doses of anakinra (30 mg, 75 mg, 150 mg) by daily subcutaneous injections. The primary end point was the ACR20 response. After 24 weeks, 27% of the placebo-treated patients and 43% of the patients in the 150-mg-dose group reached an ACR20 response (*P* < 0.014); the lower two anakinra doses did not result in significant efficacy. Anakinra at the 150-mg dose also reduced swollen and tender joint counts, HAQ score, pain, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and serum C-reactive protein statistically more than placebo. A combined analysis of all three doses showed a 45% reduction in the progression of bone erosions as determined by the Larsen score method. A second trial compared MTX plus placebo versus MTX

plus anakinra at five different doses (0.04, 0.1, 0.4, 1.0, and 2.0 mg/kg/day s.c.).<sup>57</sup> Patients had to be active despite stable MTX treatment. After 12 weeks, increasing anakinra doses led to improvement of patients, with 46% of patients receiving 1 mg/ kg and 38% of patients receiving 2 mg/kg reaching an ACR20 response, compared with 19% of placebo-treated patients. This effect was sustained after 24 weeks of treatment. Also, more treated patients reached an ACR50 and ACR70 response. This was accompanied by significant reduction in secondary end points, as in the above- described study. Radiographic data of these patients showed a 36% lower joint damage progression as determined by the Sharp score method.<sup>58</sup> A third study compared the currently approved dose of daily subcutaneous 100 mg anakinra plus MTX with placebo plus MTX.<sup>59</sup> Confirming the former two studies, significantly more patients reached ACR responses when treated with anakinra in addition to MTX versus placebo plus MTX (ACR20: 38% vs. 22%; ACR50: 17% vs. 8%; ACR70: 6% vs. 2%, respectively). A large, placebo-controlled trial evaluated the safety of adding anakinra to traditionally used DMARDs. Although serious adverse events were slightly higher in the anakinra-treated group (2.1% vs. 0.4%), mortality was similar, suggesting an acceptable safety profile. Thus, IL-1 antagonism by IL-1ra is safe and effective and slows joint damage, although to a lesser degree than observed in clinical trials of TNF blockers. Another IL-1 inhibitor developed is IL-1 trap, which binds to IL-1 and inhibits ligation of the latter to IL-1RI. Although a phase Ib study showed positive results, a phase II study revealed no superiority to placebo.<sup>60</sup> Pralnacasan, an orally available ICE inhibitor, also did not achieve significant ACR20 responses compared with placebo, and serious liver enzyme elevations in mice led to discontinuation of another phase II trial.<sup>61</sup>

# IL-6

IL-6 was originally described in 1982 as a B cell differentiation marker.<sup>62,63</sup> It belongs to a family of cytokines with a helical structure, such as leukemia inhibitory factor, IL-11, oncostatin M, cardiotrophin-1, and ciliary neurotrophic factor.<sup>64</sup> IL-6 binds the membrane-bound IL-6 receptor (gp80) and then subsequently binds to gp130, the common signal transducer for the IL-6 family cytokines. Alternatively, IL-6 can bind to soluble IL-6R and then generate signal transduction by binding of membrane-bound gp130. IL-6 is produced by a wide variety of cells, including T cells, B cells, macrophages, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and tumor cells. It also induces terminal differentiation of macrophages, and acts as a growth factor for both T and B cells.<sup>65,66</sup> Furthermore, it enhances differentiation of megakaryocytes to produce platelets,<sup>67</sup> and is a stem cell growth factor.<sup>68</sup> More evidence of the physiological importance of IL-6 *in vivo* comes from IL-6 transgenic mice. These mice develop multiple complications: (1) polyclonal plasmacytosis with autoantibody production, (2) increased levels of fibrinogen and a reduction of serum albumin, (3) increased megakaryopoiesis, and (4) eventual development of mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis and lymphocytic interstitial lung disease.<sup>69–72</sup> Treatment of these mice with anti–IL-6R antibodies ameliorates disease.<sup>73</sup>

Because RA is characterized at least partially by events also induced by IL-6, synovial fluid (SF) IL-6 levels of RA patients were first assessed. Indeed, high levels of IL-6 in SF were observed.<sup>74</sup> Moreover, serum IL-6 levels were increased and correlated with levels of acute-phase proteins. IL-6 may contribute to autoantibody pro-
duction by enhancing B cell proliferation, ${ }^{75}$ Locally, IL-6 can be produced by many cells in the inflamed synovium but predominantly is found in mononuclear leukocytes. Its production by synovial fibroblasts is driven by TNF, IL-1, and IL-17 in vitro, and it may induce pannus formation itself. ${ }^{76}$ With respect to bone turnover, IL-6 inhibits bone formation and stimulates bone resorption. IL-6 knockout mice are protected from estrogen- or androgen-deficiency-driven bone loss, ${ }^{77,78}$ and IL-6 administration enhances osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption in vitro. ${ }^{79,80}$

Animal studies with CIA in mice ${ }^{81}$ and cynomolgus monkeys ${ }^{82}$ showed a benefit of inhibition of IL-6 by murine-derived and by humanized anti–IL-6R antibodies (the latter termed MRA), respectively. Additionally, IL-6 receptor knockout mice challenged with collagen develop arthritis less often and with less severity; ${ }^{83}$ in another report, CIA development ultimately depends on IL-6. ${ }^{84}$

The first evidence of the beneficial effects of IL-6 inhibition in humans came from an open trial of a murine monoclonal antibody to IL-6 in patients with RA. ${ }^{85}$ Subsequently, application of MRA was shown to be efficacious in the treatment of Castleman’s disease, which is based on IL-6 overproduction. ${ }^{86}$ MRA administration led to improvement in clinical signs as well as acute-phase parameters. ${ }^{87}$ In 2002, a phase I/II study of MRA in 45 active RA patients showed significant ACR20 responses compared with placebo after 8 weeks. ${ }^{88}$ Moreover, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein levels were significantly reduced. Consequently, phase II dose-finding trials, with or without methotrexate, were initiated. In the Charisma trial, treatment with MRA plus MTX was superior over MTX plus placebo, with the highest efficacy shown by combining MTX and the highest MRA dose (ACR20 response 74%). A second trial of MRA without MTX was published in 2004, ${ }^{89}$ in which patients received placebo, $4 \mathrm{mg} / \mathrm{kg}$ MRA, or $8 \mathrm{mg} / \mathrm{kg}$ MRA. Again, MRA ($8 \mathrm{mg} / \mathrm{kg}$) was superior to placebo, with an ACR20 response of 78%. The ACR20, 50, and 70 response rates were comparable to other available biological drugs, such as TNF blockers. Adverse events included elevated lipid and liver enzyme levels, likely caused by withdrawal of IL-6 action on hepatocytes. Few serious infections occurred, but no cases of tuberculosis were observed. Overall, IL-6 inhibition seems to be safe and effective. Phase III trials are now needed to determine long-term safety and efficacy, as well as the effects of MRA on bone erosion and cartilage damage.

## IL-15

IL-15 was first described in 1994, with functional similarities to IL-2. ${ }^{90}$ IL-15 uses components of the IL-2 receptor but also requires its own $\alpha$ receptor chain. IL-15 is primarily produced by macrophages. ${ }^{91}$ Infectious agents (BCG), TNF, IL-1, and cell–cell contacts (T cell–macrophage) induce IL-15 production. IL-15 is tightly regulated, because many human tissues express IL15 mRNA but not protein. The regulation is on both a transcriptional and a post-transcriptional level. IL-15 stimulates T cell proliferation and migration in vitro and in vivo. ${ }^{92}$ IL-15 drives naive T cells in the Th1-type direction by inducing IFN-$\gamma$ production. Additionally, a single intradermal injection of recombinant human (rh)IL-15 is sufficient to induce a local inflammatory infiltrate. These cell aggregates mainly consist of CD3+ T cells. ${ }^{93}$ Moreover, IL-15 induces natural killer cell toxicity. ${ }^{94}$ IL-15 also binds to macrophages and induces TNF, IL-1, and IL-6 production. ${ }^{95}$ IL-15 induces the differentiation
of bone marrow mononuclear cells into osteoclast precursors and enhances the expression of calcitonin receptor and TRAP, two osteoclast lineage markers. 96

The proinflammatory actions of IL-15 led to the investigation of the expression of this cytokine in RA. It was first noted in 1996 that IL-15 is present in RA synovial tissue but is detectable far less often in synovial samples from reactive arthritis or osteoarthritis (OA). 93 IL-15–positive cells were detected in the synovial lining layer, sublining layer, and perivascular aggregates, and the majority of these cells were macrophages and fibroblasts. 97 Furthermore, soluble (s)IL-15 was detected in RA synovial fluid specimens, but not in specimens from OA patients, and levels of sIL-15 correlated with synovial fluid TNF levels.

Synovial T cells produced significant amounts of TNF upon incubation with IL-15, but not with IL-2. 98 IL-15–stimulated T cells also elicit TNF production of synovial fluid macrophages in a cell–cell contact–dependent fashion. In turn, TNF and IL-1 are able to induce IL-15 production in synovial fibroblasts and therefore might perpetuate local T cell proliferation. 99 As it has been shown for many other cytokines, IL-15 potently synergizes with other cytokines to enhance T cell growth as well as proliferation and macrophage activation. IL-12 and IL-18 in combination with IL-15 promote macrophage activation at low concentrations. 100 Hence, IL-15 is likely to play a role in RA.

Consequently, therapeutic inhibition of IL-15 has been investigated in animal models of RA. Administration of a soluble fragment of the IL-15R α-chain was tested in the collagen-induced arthritis model in mice. 101 Daily treatment after collagen challenge diminished incidence and severity of disease. Histologically, infiltration of polymorphonuclear cells, cartilage destruction, and bone erosion were prevented. Serologically, antibody levels raised against collagen were significantly reduced. Moreover, levels of IFN-γ and IL-6 in sera of treated CIA mice were lower compared with levels in untreated mice. Discontinuation of treatment, however, exacerbated disease immediately. Another study evaluated the efficacy of a mutant fusion protein (CRB-15) that binds to the IL-15 receptor but does not trigger intracellular signal transduction in CIA mice. 102 Again, incidence and severity of disease were reduced when CRB-15 was administered after collagen challenge, and CRB-15 also alleviated disease when given after clinical onset.

In 2003, a first report of an anti–IL-15–targeted therapy in RA patients was presented. 103 In a phase I study, 30 active RA patients received either a human monoclonal anti–IL-15 antibody (HuMax-IL15) at various doses (0.15 mg/kg up to 8 mg/kg) or placebo. Administration was safe, and patients did not have an increase of antibodies against HuMax-IL15. A combined analysis of the anti–IL-15–treated patients showed an ACR20 response in 63%, an ACR50 response in 38%, and 25% achieved an ACR70 response. Recently, these data were confirmed by a phase II study with comparable ACR responses. 104 This suggests that targeting IL-15 in RA may be beneficial.

## CONCLUSION

Although many proinflammatory cytokines are expressed in RA synovium, and many of their actions appear to be additive or even synergistic, or in any case redundant, inhibition of each of them is efficient in preventing signs and symptoms of RA,

at least to a certain (and sometimes greater) degree. Why some patients benefit from TNF blockade whereas others do not is unclear but points to different dominance of cytokine pathways in different patients. We have proposed an “inflammatory house of cards model,” where more than one molecule has to be targeted for optimal treatment of RA.¹⁰⁵ This is underlined by the fact that combining biologicals with traditional DMARDs such as MTX is superior to treatment with a single agent, especially in terms of radiological and clinical response. Furthermore, animal studies suggest a synergistic action of cytokines, and combined inhibition of TNF and IL-1 is highly efficacious in treating TNF-mediated arthritis and the AIA model.²³ Moreover, some combination therapies lead to healing phenomena in mice.¹⁰⁶

In summary, the novel and expanding insights into cellular and molecular events governing the evolution of RA, in conjunction with results of therapeutic trials, suggest that multiple cell systems and cytokines are involved in the generation of the joint damage characteristic of the disease. Targeting these events has already improved the fate of patients refractory to other treatment modalities and has led to shifts in treatment paradigms. Further progress is to be expected, with the ultimate aim of remission and cure of the disease.

---

**REFERENCES**

1. WEICHSELBAUM, A. 1878. Die feineren Veränderungen des Gelenkknorpels bei fungöser Synovitis und Caries der Gelenkenden. Arch. Pathol. Anat. Physiol. Klin. Med. 461–475.
2. WINCHESTER, R.J. 1981. Genetic aspects of rheumatoid arthritis. Springer Semin. Immunopathol. 4: 89–102.
3. HYRICH, K.L. & R.D. INMAN. 2001. Infectious agents in chronic rheumatic diseases. Curr. Opin. Rheumatol. 13: 300–304.
4. GORONZY, J.J. & C.M. WEYAND. 1995. T cells in rheumatoid arthritis. Paradigms and facts. Rheum. Dis. Clin. North Am. 21: 655–674.
5. STEINER, G. & J. SMOLEN. 2002. Autoantibodies in rheumatoid arthritis and their clinical significance. Arthritis Res. 4 (Suppl 2): S1–S5.
6. COOKE, T.D., E.R. HURD, H.E. JASIN, *et al.* 1975. Identification of immunoglobulins and complement in rheumatoid articular collagenous tissues. Arthritis Rheum. 18: 541–551.
7. DEBETS, J.M., C.J. VAN DER LINDEN, I.E. DIETEREN, *et al.* 1988. Fc-receptor cross-linking induces rapid secretion of tumor necrosis factor (cachectin) by human peripheral blood monocytes. J. Immunol. 141: 1197–1201.
8. HARAOUI, B., J.P. PELLETIER, J.M. CLOUTIER, *et al.* 1991. Synovial membrane histology and immunopathology in rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis. In vivo effects of antirheumatic drugs. Arthritis Rheum. 34: 153–163.
9. SWEENEY, S.E. & G.S. FIRESTEIN. 2004. Rheumatoid arthritis: regulation of synovial inflammation. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 36: 372–378.
10. GRAVALLESE, E.M. 2002. Bone destruction in arthritis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 61 (Suppl 2): ii84–ii86.
11. PERLMUTTER, D.H., C.A. DINARELLO, P.I. PUNSAL & H.R. COLTEN. 1986. Cachectin/ tumor necrosis factor regulates hepatic acute-phase gene expression. J. Clin. Invest. 78: 1349–1354.
12. TARTAGLIA, L.A. & D.V. GOEDDEL. 1992. Two TNF receptors. Immunol. Today 13: 151–153.
13. DINARELLO, C.A., J.G. CANNON, S.M. WOLFF, *et al.* 1986. Tumor necrosis factor (cachectin) is an endogenous pyrogen and induces production of interleukin 1. J. Exp. Med. 163: 1433–1450.

14. CHU, C.Q., M. FIELD, S. ALLARD, *et al.* 1992. Detection of cytokines at the cartilage/ pannus junction in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: implications for the role of cytokines in cartilage destruction and repair. Br. J. Rheumatol. **31**: 653–661.

15. STEINER, G., M. TOHIDAST-AKRAD, G. WITZMANN, *et al.* 1999. Cytokine production by synovial T cells in rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatology (Oxford) **38**: 202–213.

16. PARTSCH, G., G. STEINER, B.F. LEEB, *et al.* 1997. Highly increased levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha and other proinflammatory cytokines in psoriatic arthritis synovial fluid. J. Rheumatol. **24**: 518–523.

17. CHU, C.Q., M. FIELD, M. FELDMANN & R.N. MAINI. 1991. Localization of tumor necrosis factor alpha in synovial tissues and at the cartilage-pannus junction in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. **34**: 1125–1132.

18. LAM, J., S. TAKESHITA, J.E. BARKER, *et al.* 2000. TNF-alpha induces osteoclastogenesis by direct stimulation of macrophages exposed to permissive levels of RANK ligand. J. Clin. Invest. **106**: 1481–1488.

19. JORGENSEN, C., I. COURET, F. CANOVAS, *et al.* 1996. Mononuclear cell retention in rheumatoid synovial tissue engrafted in severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice is up-regulated by tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and mediated through intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1). Clin. Exp. Immunol. **106**: 20–25.

20. FIRESTEIN, G.S. & M.M. PAINE. 1992. Stromelysin and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases gene expression in rheumatoid arthritis synovium. Am. J. Pathol. **140**: 1309–1314.

21. KEFFER, J., L. PROBERT, H. CAZLARIS, *et al.* 1991. Transgenic mice expressing human tumour necrosis factor: a predictive genetic model of arthritis. EMBO J. **10**: 4025–4031.

22. SCHETT, G., K. REDLICH, S. HAYER, *et al.* 2003. Osteoprotegerin protects against generalized bone loss in tumor necrosis factor-transgenic mice. Arthritis Rheum. **48**: 2042–2051.

23. ZWERINA, J., S. HAYER, M. TOHIDAST-AKRAD, *et al.* 2004. Single and combined inhibition of tumor necrosis factor, interleukin-1, and RANKL pathways in tumor necrosis factor-induced arthritis: effects on synovial inflammation, bone erosion, and cartilage destruction. Arthritis Rheum. **50**: 277–290.

24. LEWTHWAITE, J., S. BLAKE, T. HARDINGHAM, *et al.* 1995. Role of TNF alpha in the induction of antigen induced arthritis in the rabbit and the anti-arthritis effect of species specific TNF alpha neutralising monoclonal antibodies. Ann. Rheum. Dis. **54**: 366–374.

25. THORBECKE, G.J., R. SHAH, C.H. LEU, *et al.* 1992. Involvement of endogenous tumor necrosis factor alpha and transforming growth factor beta during induction of collagen type II arthritis in mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **89**: 7375–7379.

26. LIPSKY, P.E., D.M. VAN DER HEIJDE, E.W. ST. CLAIR, *et al.* 2000. Infliximab and methotrexate in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Anti-Tumor Necrosis Factor Trial in Rheumatoid Arthritis with Concomitant Therapy Study Group. N. Engl. J. Med. **343**: 1594–1602.

27. MAINI, R., E.W. ST. CLAIR, F. BREEDVELD, *et al.* 1999. Infliximab (chimeric anti-tumour necrosis factor alpha monoclonal antibody) versus placebo in rheumatoid arthritis patients receiving concomitant methotrexate: a randomised phase III trial. ATTRACT Study Group. Lancet **354**: 1932–1939.

28. MAINI, R.N., F.C. BREEDVELD, J.R. KALDEN, *et al.* 1998. Therapeutic efficacy of multiple intravenous infusions of anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha monoclonal antibody combined with low-dose weekly methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. **41**: 1552–1563.

29. MORELAND, L.W., M.H. SCHIFF, S.W. BAUMGARTNER, *et al.* 1999. Etanercept therapy in rheumatoid arthritis. A randomized, controlled trial. Ann. Intern. Med. **130**: 478–486.

30. VAN DE PUTTE, L.B., C. ATKINS, M. MALAISE, *et al.* 2004. Efficacy and safety of adalimumab as monotherapy in patients with rheumatoid arthritis for whom previous disease modifying antirheumatic drug treatment has failed. Ann. Rheum. Dis. **63**: 508–516.

31. WEINBLATT, M.E., E.C. KEYSTONE, D.E. FURST, *et al.* 2003. Adalimumab, a fully human anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha monoclonal antibody, for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in patients taking concomitant methotrexate: the ARMADA trial. Arthritis Rheum. **48**: 35–45.

32. GENOVESE, M.C., J.M. BATHON, R.W. MARTIN, *et al.* 2002. Etanercept versus methotrexate in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis: two-year radiographic and clinical outcomes. Arthritis Rheum. **46**: 1443–1450.

33. SMOLEN, J.S., C. HAN, M. BALA, *et al.* 2005. Evidence of radiographic benefit of infliximab plus methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis patients who had no clinical improvement: a detailed subanalysis of the ATTRACT trial. Arthritis Rheum. **52**: 1020–1030.

34. ST. CLAIR, E.W., D.M. VAN DER HEIJDE, J.S. SMOLEN, *et al.* 2004. Combination of infliximab and methotrexate therapy for early rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized, controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum. **50**: 3432–3443.

35. QUINN, M.A., P.G. CONAGHAN, P.J. O’CONNOR, *et al.* 2005. Very early treatment with infliximab in addition to methotrexate in early, poor-prognosis rheumatoid arthritis reduces magnetic resonance imaging evidence of synovitis and damage, with sustained benefit after infliximab withdrawal: results from a twelve-month randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum. **52**: 27–35.

36. VAN VOLLENHOVEN, R., A. HARJU, S. BRANNEMARK & L. KLARESKOG. 2003. Treatment with infliximab (Remicade) when etanercept (Enbrel) has failed or vice versa: data from the STURE registry showing that switching tumour necrosis factor alpha blockers can make sense. Ann. Rheum. Dis. **62**: 1195–1198.

37. DINARELLO, C.A. 1991. Interleukin-1 and interleukin-1 antagonism. Blood **77**: 1627–1652.

38. AREND, W.P., H.G. WELGUS, R.C. THOMPSON & S.P. EISENBERG. 1990. Biological properties of recombinant human monocyte-derived interleukin 1 receptor antagonist. J. Clin. Invest. **85**: 1694–1697.

39. DINARELLO, C.A. 2002. The IL-1 family and inflammatory diseases. Clin. Exp. Rheumatol. **20**: S1–S13.

40. FOX, S.W., K. FULLER & T.J. CHAMBERS. 2000. Activation of osteoclasts by interleukin-1: divergent responsiveness in osteoclasts formed in vivo and in vitro. J. Cell Physiol. **184**: 334–340.

41. LORENZO, J.A., A. NAPRTA, Y. RAO, *et al.* 1998. Mice lacking the type I interleukin-1 receptor do not lose bone mass after ovariectomy. Endocrinology **139**: 3022–3025.

42. KOBAYASHI, M., G.R. SQUIRES, A. MOUSA, *et al.* 2005. Role of interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor alpha in matrix degradation of human osteoarthritic cartilage. Arthritis Rheum. **52**: 128–135.

43. RATHANASWAMI, P., M. HACHICHA, W.L. WONG, *et al.* 1993. Synergistic effect of interleukin-1 beta and tumor necrosis factor alpha on interleukin-8 gene expression in synovial fibroblasts. Evidence that interleukin-8 is the major neutrophil-activating chemokine released in response to monokine activation. Arthritis Rheum. **36**: 1295–1304.

44. COXON, A., B. BOLON, J. ESTRADA, *et al.* 2002. Inhibition of interleukin-1 but not tumor necrosis factor suppresses neovascularization in rat models of corneal angiogenesis and adjuvant arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. **46**: 2604–2612.

45. PETTIPHER, E.R., G.A. HIGGS & B. HENDERSON. 1986. Interleukin 1 induces leukocyte infiltration and cartilage proteoglycan degradation in the synovial joint. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **83**: 8749–8753.

46. KIM, J.M., J.G. JEONG, S.H. HO, *et al.* 2003. Protection against collagen-induced arthritis by intramuscular gene therapy with an expression plasmid for the interleukin-1 receptor antagonist. Gene Ther. **10**: 1543–1550.

47. PALMER, G., D. TALABOT-AYER, L. SZALAY-QUINODOZ, *et al.* 2003. Mice transgenic for intracellular interleukin-1 receptor antagonist type 1 are protected from collagen-induced arthritis. Eur. J. Immunol. **33**: 434–440.

48. JOOSTEN, L.A., M.M. HELSEN, T. SAXNE, *et al.* 1999. IL-1 alpha beta blockade prevents cartilage and bone destruction in murine type II collagen-induced arthritis, whereas TNF-alpha blockade only ameliorates joint inflammation. J. Immunol. **163**: 5049–5055.

49. VAN DEN BERG, W.B., L.A. JOOSTEN, M. HELSEN & F.A. VAN DE Loo. 1994. Amelioration of established murine collagen-induced arthritis with anti-IL-1 treatment. Clin. Exp. Immunol. **95**: 237–243.

50. HORAI, R., S. SAJO, H. TANIOKA, *et al.* 2000. Development of chronic inflammatory arthropathy resembling rheumatoid arthritis in interleukin 1 receptor antagonist-deficient mice. J. Exp. Med. **191**: 313–320.

51. WOOLEY, P.H., J.D. WHALEN, D.L. CHAPMAN, *et al.* 1993. The effect of an interleukin-1 receptor antagonist protein on type II collagen-induced arthritis and antigen-induced arthritis in mice. Arthritis Rheum. **36**: 1305–1314.

52. FONTANA, A., H. HENGARTNER, E. WEBER, *et al.* 1982. Interleukin 1 activity in the synovial fluid of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Rheumatol. Int. **2**: 49–53.

53. DELEURAN, B.W., C.Q. CHU, M. FIELD, *et al.* 1992. Localization of interleukin-1 alpha, type 1 interleukin-1 receptor and interleukin-1 receptor antagonist in the synovial membrane and cartilage/pannus junction in rheumatoid arthritis. Br. J. Rheumatol. **31**: 801–809.

54. MULLER-LADNER, U., C.R. ROBERTS, B.N. FRANKLIN, *et al.* 1997. Human IL-1Ra gene transfer into human synovial fibroblasts is chondroprotective. J. Immunol. **158**: 3492–3498.

55. CAMPION, G.V., M.E. LEBSACK, J. LOOKABAUGH, *et al.* 1996. Dose-range and dose-frequency study of recombinant human interleukin-1 receptor antagonist in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. The IL-1Ra Arthritis Study Group. Arthritis Rheum. **39**: 1092–1101.

56. BRESNIHAN, B., J.M. ALVARO-GRACIA, M. COBBY, *et al.* 1998. Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis with recombinant human interleukin-1 receptor antagonist. Arthritis Rheum. **41**: 2196–2204.

57. COHEN, S., E. HURD, J. CUSH, *et al.* 2002. Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis with anakinra, a recombinant human interleukin-1 receptor antagonist, in combination with methotrexate: results of a twenty-four-week, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum. **46**: 614–624.

58. SHERGY, W.J., S. COHEN, M.W. GREENWALD, *et al.* 2003. Anakinra (Kineret) inhibits the progression of radiographically measured joint destruction in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann. Rheum. Dis. **62**: 273.

59. COHEN, S.B., L.W. MORELAND, J.J. CUSH, *et al.* 2004. A multicentre, double blind, randomised, placebo controlled trial of anakinra (Kineret), a recombinant interleukin 1 receptor antagonist, in patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with background methotrexate. Ann. Rheum. Dis. **63**: 1062–1068.

60. GULER, H.P. *et al.* 2001. A phase I, single dose escalation study of IL-1 trap in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. **44**: 370.

61. PAVELKA, K. *et al.* 2002. Clinical effects of pralnacasan (PRAL), an orally active interleukin-1beta converting enzyme (ICE) inhibitor in a 285-patient phase II trial in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Arthritis Rheum. **48**: 281.

62. TOSATO, G., K.B. SEAMON, N.D. GOLDMAN, *et al.* 1988. Monocyte-derived human B cell growth factor identified as interferon-beta 2 (BSF-2, IL-6). Science **239**: 502–504.

63. OKADA, M., N. SAKAGUCHI, N. YOSHIMURA, *et al.* 1983. B cell growth factors and B cell differentiation factor from human T hybridomas. Two distinct kinds of B cell growth factor and their synergism in B cell proliferation. J. Exp. Med. **157**: 583–590.

64. HIBI, M., K. NAKAJIMA & T. HIRANO. 1996. IL-6 cytokine family and signal transduction: a model of the cytokine system. J. Mol. Med. **74**: 1–12.

65. YOSHIZAKI, K., T. NAKAGAWA, T. KAIEDA, *et al.* 1982. Induction of proliferation and Ig production in human B leukemic cells by anti-immunoglobulins and T cell factors. J. Immunol **128**: 1296–1301.

66. NISHIMOTO, N., A. OGATA, Y. SHIMA, *et al.* 1994. Oncostatin M, leukemia inhibitory factor, and interleukin 6 induce the proliferation of human plasmacytoma cells via the common signal transducer, gp130. J. Exp. Med. **179**: 1343–1347.

67. ISHIBASHI, T., H. KIMURA, T. UCHIDA, *et al.* 1989. Human interleukin 6 is a direct promoter of maturation of megakaryocytes in vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **86**: 5953–5957.

68. IKEBUCHI, K., G.G. WONG, S.C. CLARK, *et al.* 1987. Interleukin 6 enhancement of interleukin 3-dependent proliferation of multipotential hemopoietic progenitors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **84**: 9035–9039.

69. GOYA, S., H. MATSUOKA, M. MORI, *et al.* 2003. Sustained interleukin-6 signalling leads to the development of lymphoid organ-like structures in the lung. J. Pathol. **200**: 82–87.

70. HILL, R.J., M.K. WARREN, P. STENBERG, *et al.* 1991. Stimulation of megakaryocytopoiesis in mice by human recombinant interleukin-6. Blood **77**: 42–48.

71. SUEMATSU, S., T. MATSUDA, K. AOZASA, *et al.* 1989. IgG1 plasmacytosis in interleukin 6 transgenic mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **86**: 7547–7551.

72. FATTORI, E., R.C. DELLA, P. COSTA, *et al.* 1994. Development of progressive kidney damage and myeloma kidney in interleukin-6 transgenic mice. Blood **83**: 2570–2579.

73. KATSUME, A., H. SAITO, Y. YAMADA, *et al.* 2002. Anti-interleukin 6 (IL-6) receptor antibody suppresses Castleman’s disease like symptoms emerged in IL-6 transgenic mice. Cytokine **20**: 304–311.

74. HOUSIAU, F.A., J.P. DEVOGELAER, J. VAN DAMME, *et al.* 1988. Interleukin-6 in synovial fluid and serum of patients with rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory arthritides. Arthritis Rheum. **31**: 784–788.

75. GUERNE, P.A., B.L. ZURAW, J.H. VAUGHAN, *et al.* 1989. Synovium as a source of interleukin 6 in vitro. Contribution to local and systemic manifestations of arthritis. J. Clin. Invest. **83**: 585–592.

76. OKAMOTO, H., M. YAMAMURA, Y. MORITA, *et al.* 1997. The synovial expression and serum levels of interleukin-6, interleukin-11, leukemia inhibitory factor, and oncostatin M in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. **40**: 1096–1105.

77. POLI, V., R. BALENA, E. FATTORI, *et al.* 1994. Interleukin-6 deficient mice are protected from bone loss caused by estrogen depletion. EMBO J. **13**: 1189–1196.

78. BELLIDO, T., R.L. JILKA, B.F. BOYCE, *et al.* 1995. Regulation of interleukin-6, osteoclastogenesis, and bone mass by androgens. The role of the androgen receptor. J. Clin. Invest. **95**: 2886–2895.

79. KUDO, O., A. SABOKBAR, A. POCK, *et al.* 2003. Interleukin-6 and interleukin-11 support human osteoclast formation by a RANKL-independent mechanism. Bone **32**: 1–7.

80. KURIHARA, N., D. BERTOLINI, T. SUDA, *et al.* 1990. IL-6 stimulates osteoclast-like multinucleated cell formation in long term human marrow cultures by inducing IL-1 release. J. Immunol. **144**: 4226–4230.

81. TAKAGI, N., M. MIHARA, Y. MORIYA, *et al.* 1998. Blockage of interleukin-6 receptor ameliorates joint disease in murine collagen-induced arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. **41**: 2117–2121.

82. MIHARA, M., M. KOTOH, N. NISHIMOTO, *et al.* 2001. Humanized antibody to human interleukin-6 receptor inhibits the development of collagen arthritis in cynomolgus monkeys. Clin. Immunol. **98**: 319–326.

83. SASAI, M., Y. SAEKI, S. OHSHIMA, *et al.* 1999. Delayed onset and reduced severity of collagen-induced arthritis in interleukin-6-deficient mice. Arthritis Rheum. **42**: 1635–1643.

84. ALONZI, T., E. FATTORI, D. LAZZARO, *et al.* 1998. Interleukin 6 is required for the development of collagen-induced arthritis. J. Exp. Med. **187**: 461–468.

85. WENDLING, D., E. RACADOT & J. WIJDENES. 1993. Treatment of severe rheumatoid arthritis by anti-interleukin 6 monoclonal antibody. J. Rheumatol. **20**: 259–262.

86. YOSHIZAKI, K., T. MATSUDA, N. NISHIMOTO, *et al.* 1989. Pathogenic significance of interleukin-6 (IL-6/BSF-2) in Castleman’s disease. Blood **74**: 1360–1367.

87. NISHIMOTO, N., M. SASAI, Y. SHIMA, *et al.* 2000. Improvement in Castleman’s disease by humanized anti-interleukin-6 receptor antibody therapy. Blood **95**: 56–61.

88. CHOY, E.H., D.A. ISENBERG, T. GARROOD, *et al.* 2002. Therapeutic benefit of blocking interleukin-6 activity with an anti-interleukin-6 receptor monoclonal antibody in rheumatoid arthritis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-escalation trial. Arthritis Rheum. **46**: 3143–3150.

89. NISHIMOTO, N., K. YOSHIZAKI, N. MIYASAKA, *et al.* 2004. Treatment of rheumatoid arthritis with humanized anti-interleukin-6 receptor antibody: a multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arthritis Rheum. **50**: 1761–1769.

90. GRABSTEIN, K.H., J. EISENMAN, K. SHANEBECK, *et al.* 1994. Cloning of a T cell growth factor that interacts with the beta chain of the interleukin-2 receptor. Science **264**: 965–968.

91. DOHERTY, T.M., R.A. SEDER & A. SHER. 1996. Induction and regulation of IL-15 expression in murine macrophages. J. Immunol. **156**: 735–741.

92. KANEGANE, H. & G. TOSATO. 1996. Activation of naive and memory T cells by interleukin-15. Blood **88**: 230–235.

93. MCINNES, I.B., J. AL MUGHALES, M. FIELD, *et al.* 1996. The role of interleukin-15 in T-cell migration and activation in rheumatoid arthritis. Nat. Med. **2**: 175–182.

94. CARSON, W.E., J.G. GIRI, M.J. LINDEMANN, *et al.* 1994. Interleukin (IL) 15 is a novel cytokine that activates human natural killer cells via components of the IL-2 receptor. J. Exp. Med. **180**: 1395–1403.

95. ALLEVA, D.G., S.B. KASER, M.A. MONROY, *et al.* 1997. IL-15 functions as a potent autocrine regulator of macrophage proinflammatory cytokine production: evidence for differential receptor subunit utilization associated with stimulation or inhibition. J. Immunol. **159**: 2941–2951.

96. OGATA, Y., A. KUKITA, T. KUKITA, *et al.* 1999. A novel role of IL-15 in the development of osteoclasts: inability to replace its activity with IL-2. J. Immunol. **162**: 2754–2760.

97. THURKOW, E.W., I.M. VAN DER HEIJDEN, F.C. BREEDVELD, *et al.* 1997. Increased expression of IL-15 in the synovium of patients with rheumatoid arthritis compared with patients with Yersinia-induced arthritis and osteoarthritis. J. Pathol. **181**: 444–450.

98. MCINNES, I.B., B.P. LEUNG, R.D. STURROCK, *et al.* 1997. Interleukin-15 mediates T cell-dependent regulation of tumor necrosis factor-alpha production in rheumatoid arthritis. Nat. Med. **3**: 189–195.

99. MIRANDA-CARUS, M.E., A. BALSA, M. BENITO-MIGUEL, *et al.* 2004. IL-15 and the initiation of cell contact-dependent synovial fibroblast-T lymphocyte cross-talk in rheumatoid arthritis: effect of methotrexate. J. Immunol. **173**: 1463–1476.

100. GRACIE, J.A., R.J. FORSEY, W.L. CHAN, *et al.* 1999. A proinflammatory role for IL-18 in rheumatoid arthritis. J. Clin. Invest. **104**: 1393–1401.

101. RUCHATZ, H., B.P. LEUNG, X.Q. WEI, *et al.* 1998. Soluble IL-15 receptor alpha-chain administration prevents murine collagen-induced arthritis: a role for IL-15 in development of antigen-induced immunopathology. J. Immunol. **160**: 5654–5660.

102. FERRARI-LACRAZ, S., E. ZANELLI, M. NEUBERG, *et al.* 2004. Targeting IL-15 receptor-bearing cells with an antagonist mutant IL-15/Fc protein prevents disease development and progression in murine collagen-induced arthritis. J. Immunol. **173**: 5818–5826.

103. MCINNES, I.B. & J.A. GRACIE. 2004. Interleukin-15: a new cytokine target for the treatment of inflammatory diseases. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. **4**: 392–397.

104. MCINNES, I., R. MARTIN, I. ZIMMERMAN-GORSKA, *et al.* 2004. Safety and efficacy of a human monoclonal antibody to IL-15 (AMG 714) in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA): results from a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Presented at the Annual Meeting of the American College of Rheumatology. San Antonio, TX, Oct 18.

105. SMOLEN, J.S. & G. STEINER. 2003. Therapeutic strategies for rheumatoid arthritis. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. **2**: 473–488.

106. REDLICH, K., B. GORTZ, S. HAYER, *et al.* 2004. Repair of local bone erosions and reversal of systemic bone loss upon therapy with anti-tumor necrosis factor in combination with osteoprotegerin or parathyroid hormone in tumor necrosis factor-mediated arthritis. Am. J. Pathol. **164**: 543–555.
