
Molecular Microbiology (2005) 57(6), 1582–1592

doi:10.1111/j.1365-2958.2005.04791.x

# ABC-type neutral amino acid permease N-I is required for optimal diazotrophic growth and is repressed in the heterocysts of Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120

Silvia Picossi,$^{1}$ María Luz Montesinos,$^{1}$ Rafael Pernil,$^{1}$ Christiane Lichtlé,$^{2}$ Antonia Herrero$^{1}$ and Enrique Flores$^{1*}$

$^{1}$Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis, CSIC-Universidad de Sevilla, Avda. Américo Vespucio 49, E-41092 Seville, Spain.

$^{2}$Signalisation et Morphogénèse des Diatomées, CNRS FRE 2910, École Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d’Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

## Summary

Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 is a filamentous cyanobacterium that can fix $\mathrm{N}_{2}$ in differentiated cells called heterocysts. The products of Anabaena open reading frames (ORFs) all1046, all1047, all1284, alr1834 and all2912 were identified as putative elements of a neutral amino acid permease. Anabaena mutants of these ORFs were strongly affected (1–12% of the wild-type activity) in the transport of Pro, Phe, Leu and Gly and also impaired (17–30% of the wild-type activity) in the transport of Ala and Ser. These results identified those ORFs as the nat genes encoding the N-I neutral amino acid permease. According to amino acid sequence homologies, natA (all1046) and natE (all2912) encode ATPases, natC (all1047) and natD (all1284) encode transmembrane proteins, and natB (alr1834) encodes a periplasmic substrate-binding protein of an ABC-type uptake transporter. The natA, natC, natD and natE mutants showed defects in Gln and His uptake that were not observed in the natB mutant suggesting that NatB is not a binding protein for Gln or His. The nat mutants released hydrophobic amino acids to the medium, and amino acid release took place at higher levels in cultures incubated in the absence of combined N than in the presence of nitrate. Alanine was the amino acid released at highest levels, and its release was impaired in a mutant unable to develop heterocysts. The nat mutants were also impaired in diazotrophic growth, with natA, natC,

natD and natE mutants showing more severe defects than the natB mutant. Expression of natA and natC, which constitute an operon, natCA, as well as of natB was studied and found to take place in vegetative cells but not in the heterocysts. These results indicate that the N-I permease is necessary for normal growth of Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 on $\mathrm{N}_{2}$, and that this permease has a role in the diazotrophic filament specifically in the vegetative cells.

## Introduction

Some filamentous cyanobacteria fix $\mathrm{N}_{2}$ in specialized cells called heterocysts, which are unable to perform oxygenic photosynthesis and concomitant $\mathrm{CO}_{2}$ fixation (Wolk et al., 1994). In some strains, heterocysts are arrayed at semi-regular intervals along the filament. The nitrogen fixed in the heterocyst is transferred to the neighbouring vegetative cells in the filament likely in the form of amino acids (Wolk et al., 1974; 1976). Whereas a wealth of molecular data on the developmental process that leads from a vegetative cell to a mature heterocyst is becoming available (Wolk, 1996; 2000; Golden and Yoon, 2003; Herrero et al., 2004), the issue of the intercellular transfer of metabolites in heterocystous cyanobacteria remains virtually unexplored. Structures called microplasmodesmata, detected by electron microscopy and seemingly joining adjacent cells (Lang and Fay, 1971; Giddings and Stae-helin, 1981), have been presumed to permit the diffusion of metabolites between cells in the filaments of heterocystous cyanobacteria, but no experimental data supporting this view are hitherto available (Wolk et al., 1994).

Some spontaneous amino acid transport mutants of the heterocyst-forming cyanobacterium Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 are impaired specifically in diazotrophic growth suggesting a role of some amino acid permeases in heterocyst development or function (Montesinos et al., 1995). Physiological characterization of spontaneous amino acid transport mutants has shown that Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 expresses at least five different amino acid permeases: two active transporters with overlapping, but not identical, specificity for neutral amino acids; one high-affinity, active transporter for basic amino acids; one low-affinity, passive system for basic amino acids; and a trans-

Accepted 24 June, 2005. *For correspondence. E-mail eflores@ibvf.csic.es; Tel. (+34) 95 448 9523; Fax (+34) 95 446 0065.

© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Ltd
porter for acidic amino acids (Herrero and Flores, 1990; Montesinos et al., 1995). The neutral amino acid permease N-I transports a wide set of neutral amino acids (both polar and hydrophobic) and represents the almost exclusive path of uptake (> 99% of the total transport activity) of Pro, the main path of uptake (> 90% of the total transport activity) of Gly, Phe and Leu (and, based on inhibition studies, also probably of Ile and Val), and an important way of uptake (> 70% of the total transport activity) of Thr, Ala and Ser (Montesinos et al., 1995). Genes encoding amino acid permeases in cyanobacteria have however been identified only in the unicellular, non-N₂ fixing cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. strain PCC 6803, which expresses one transport system for neutral amino acids, one for basic amino acids and glutamine, and two systems that mediate a Na⁺-dependent uptake of glutamate (Montesinos et al., 1997; Quintero et al., 2001). The Synechocystis neutral amino acid transporter is an ABC-type uptake permease that is the product of genes natA and natE encoding ATP-binding subunits, natC and natD encoding transmembrane subunits, and natB encoding a periplasmic substrate-binding subunit (Quintero et al., 2001).

Because of the putative role of some amino acid permeases in the diazotrophic physiology of Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120, we sought the molecular identification of amino acid transport genes in this cyanobacterium. In this work, we identified, inactivated and studied the expression of the nat genes encoding the neutral amino acid permease N-I. The nat genes are differentially expressed in vegetative cells and heterocysts, and the mutants are impaired in diazotrophic growth.

### Results

#### Identification of nat genes

Using the Synechocystis natA gene as a hybridization probe, a region of the genome of Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 that contains two genes, natC and natA, was cloned (Fig. 1A). The sequence of natCA is available under Accession no. AJ133704 and in the CYANOBASE web page (http://www.kazusa.or.jp/cyano/cyano.html). The length of the DNA fragment covering the two genes is 1906 bp, and the two genes show an 8 bp overlap. The natA gene corresponds to open reading frame (ORF) all1046 of the Anabaena genomic sequence and encodes an ABC-type transporter ATPase subunit that shares 70% identity with the Synechocystis NatA protein. The natC gene corresponds to ORF all1047 and encodes an ABC-type transporter transmembrane subunit that shares 57% identity with Synechocystis NatC. No gene encoding a putative periplasmic substrate binding protein or other possible ATPase or transmembrane subunit is clustered

Neutral amino acid permease in Anabaena 1583 together with the Anabaena natCA genes. However, in the Anabaena genomic sequence (Kaneko et al., 2001), ORFs encoding proteins with high identity to Synechocystis NatB (alr1834, 60% identity), NatD (all1284, 69% identity), and NatE (all2912, 72% identity) are found that can represent the corresponding Anabaena transporter subunits. We cloned fragments of these ORFs by standard polymerase chain reaction (PCR) procedures.

The natA gene was inactivated by insertion of gene-cassette C.S3 (Elhai and Wolk, 1988), with concomitant deletion of an about 0.5 kb DNA fragment (Fig. 1), pro-

![Diagram]

Fig. 1. Structure of the Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 genomic regions carrying the natCA gene cluster (A), the natB gene (B), the natD gene (C), and the natE gene (D). The sites of insertion of gene-cassettes (A and B), the location of oligonucleotides used for cloning by PCR of DNA fragments carrying part of natB, natD, natE and gluR0 (black arrowheads), and the probes used for Northern analysis (double horizontal lines) are indicated. The plasmid vectors inserted into natD, natE and gluR0 (C and D) are also indicated. The names of the Anabaena strains carrying the indicated gene-cassette or inserted plasmid are also shown. Except for natA and natC, the nat genes are scattered in the Anabaena chromosome, and their specific position is indicated by the ORF alr or all number.

© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, Molecular Microbiology, 57, 1582–1592
1584 S. Picossi et al.

Table 1. Amino acid transport activities in Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 and mutant strains.

| Substrate amino acid | Transport activity in strain PCC 7120 | Strain (inactivated ORF, gene name): |
|----------------------|-------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|
|                      |                                     | CSS6 $(alr1834)$                     |
|                      |                                     | CSX62 $(natB)$                       |
|                      |                                     | CSR11 $(all1047)$                    |
|                      |                                     | CSX60 $(natC)$                       |
|                      |                                     | CSR5 $(all1284)$                     |
|                      |                                     | CSX60 $(natD)$                       |
|                      |                                     | CSR5 $(all1046)$                     |
|                      |                                     | CSX60 $(natA)$                       |
|                      |                                     | CSR4 $(all2912)$                     |
|                      |                                     | CSX60 $(natE)$                       |
|                      |                                     | CSR4 $(all2911)$                     |
|                      |                                     | CSX60 $(gluR0)$                      |

| Basic               |                                      |                                      |                                      |                                      |                                      |                                      |
|---------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Arg                 | $135 \pm 16$                        | $93$                                | $100$                               | $92$                                | $86$                                | $95$                                | $92$                                |
| His                 | $88 \pm 5$                          | $106$                               | $84$                                | $88$                                | $79$                                | $75$                                | $87$                                |
| Lys                 | $157 \pm 16$                        | $95$                                | $97$                                | $95$                                | $90$                                | $92$                                | $95$                                |

| Neutral             |                                      |                                      |                                      |                                      |                                      |                                      |
|---------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Ala                 | $187 \pm 12$                        | $21$                                | $17$                                | $23$                                | $23$                                | $18$                                | $101$                               |
| Gln                 | $100 \pm 5$                         | $124$                               | $80$                                | $81$                                | $67$                                | $74$                                | $93$                                |
| Gly                 | $190 \pm 17$                        | $12$                                | $4$                                 | $8$                                 | $8$                                 | $6$                                 | $103$                               |
| Leu                 | $105 \pm 7$                         | $6$                                 | $6$                                 | $7$                                 | $5$                                 | $6$                                 | $95$                                |
| Phe                 | $118 \pm 9$                         | $3$                                 | $4$                                 | $4$                                 | $4$                                 | $4$                                 | $99$                                |
| Pro                 | $116 \pm 7$                         | $1$                                 | $1$                                 | $2$                                 | $1$                                 | $1$                                 | $96$                                |
| Ser                 | $225 \pm 15$                        | $26$                                | $27$                                | $30$                                | $21$                                | $28$                                | $88$                                |

| Acidic              |                                      |                                      |                                      |                                      |                                      |                                      |
|---------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Asp                 | $46 \pm 4$                          | $151$                               | $144$                               | $129$                               | $116$                               | $88$                                | $91$                                |
| Glu                 | $11 \pm 1.3$                        | $185$                               | $116$                               | $125$                               | $132$                               | $82$                                | $96$                                |

BG11-grown cells were used in 10 min transport assays with $10 \mu M$ ${}^{14}$C]amino acid substrate as described in Experimental procedures. Activities of the wild-type strain are given in nmol per 10 min per milligram of Chl; the mean $\pm$ standard deviation of the mean from 6 to 11 measurements is presented. Three to six determinations were performed, with similar results (within 25% of the mean), for each mutant, and for simplicity the results are presented as mean % of the wild-type activity.

Neutral amino acid permease in Anabaena 1585

type, about 6–7% of the cells, and exhibited nitrogenase activity levels similar to those of the wild type, about 3 μmol ethylene produced per milligram of Chl per hour for shaken cultures and 7 μmol ethylene produced per milligram of Chl per hour for bubbled cultures.

Leakage of hydrophobic amino acids is a general feature of cyanobacterial strains mutated in neutral amino acid transport systems (Labarre et al., 1987; Montesinos et al., 1995; 1997). To test amino acid release in the *Anabaena nat* mutants, samples from the medium of shaken cultures of the wild type and mutant strains CSX60 and CSS6 were analysed by HPLC. Cultures of the mutants incubated in the absence or presence of nitrate were found to accumulate in the medium a set of amino acids that included Ala, Ile, Leu, Phe, Pro, Tyr and Val (Table 3; in some experiments, Gly was also detected among the released amino acids), which are among those amino acids that are transported mainly by the N-I permease. Whereas Ala, the amino acid found at highest levels, is present in the cells at a concentration of about 0.4 mM (Labarre et al., 1987; Coronil and Lara, 1991; our unpubl. results), no accumulation of Glu, the most abundant amino acid in the cyanobacterial cytoplasm (about 5–20 mM), was detected in any case. These data indicate that amino acid accumulation in the medium did not result from cell lysis. All the amino acids that were detected were found at higher levels in the N₂-fixing cell suspensions than in the presence of nitrate (Table 3). Released amino acids in the diazotrophic cultures accounted for only 0.65% of the total protein amino acid residues in strain CSX60 and 0.82% in strain CSS6.

To test whether the increased release of hydrophobic amino acids in combined N-free medium was dependent on N₂ fixation, the *natA* inactivation construct (pCSX60) was transferred to *Anabaena* sp. strain 216, a mutant of the *hetR* gene that does not develop heterocysts (Buikema and Haselkorn, 1991). Because the *hetR* mutant cannot be incubated for a long time in N-free medium, filtrates from bubbled cultures of strains PCC 7120, 216 (*hetR*), CSX60 (*natA*) and CSS18 (*hetR natA*)

Fig. 2. Impaired diazotrophic growth of *natA*, *natB*, *natC*, *natD*, and *natE* mutants (WT, wild-type strain PCC 7120; CSR4, *gluR0::pRL424*). Samples of nitrate-grown cells were spotted on BG11 (NO₃⁻) or BG11₀ (N₂) solid medium, incubated for 10 days under culture conditions, and photographed. In both panels, spots in the top line were inoculated with 0.07 μg of Chl per spot, and spots in the bottom line were inoculated with 0.007 μg of Chl per spot.

rate constants were similar for these mutants and the wild type in nitrate-containing media, under diazotrophic conditions the growth rate constants were about 50% that of the wild type for the mutants of the *natCA* gene cluster and 76% for the *natB* mutant (Table 2). To corroborate that the impairment in diazotrophic growth was a phenotype related to the *nat* mutations, a wild-type copy of the *natCA* genomic region was transferred in a replicative plasmid to the *natA* and *natC* mutants. The complemented strains, CSX60-C and CSX62-C, respectively, exhibited normal amino acid transport activities, as checked with Pro and Gly (not shown), and their growth rates on N₂ were similar to that of strain PCC 7120 (Table 2). These results indicated that the N-I transporter is required for normal growth of *Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120 on N₂.

Diazotrophically grown cultures of the *nat* mutants contained heterocysts in a proportion similar to that of the wild

Table 2. Growth rate constants of *Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120 and mutant strains using nitrate or N₂ as the nitrogen source.

| Strain   | Genotype                  | NO₃⁻           | N₂             |
|----------|---------------------------|----------------|----------------|
| PCC 7120 | wild type                 | 0.87 ± 0.05 (15) | 0.50 ± 0.02 (59) |
| CSX60    | *natA::C.S3*              | 0.87 (1)       | 0.25 ± 0.02 (2) |
| CSX60C   | *natA::C.S3* complemented | 0.84 ± 0.04 (2) | 0.50 ± 0.03 (5) |
| CSX62    | *natC::C.S3*              | 0.86 ± 0.01 (2) | 0.23 ± 0.02 (3) |
| CSX62C   | *natC::C.S3* complemented | 0.82 ± 0.01 (2) | 0.50 ± 0.03 (8) |
| CSS6     | *natB::C.S3*              | 0.86 ± 0.02 (3) | 0.38 ± 0.03 (15) |

Cells grown, in the presence of antibiotics for the mutants, in BG11 or BG11₀ medium were washed and resuspended at 0.2 μg of Chl ml⁻¹ in the same medium (without antibiotics) for the determination of their growth rates as described in Experimental procedures. Under the conditions used, growth was exponential for about 80–100 h. Figures are the mean and standard deviation of the mean (number of experiments indicated in parenthesis).

© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **57**, 1582–1592

1586 S. Picossi et al.

Table 3. Amino acids accumulated in the growth medium of shaken cultures of strains CSX60 and CSS6.

| Identified amino acid | CSX60 (natA::C.S3) | CSS6 (natB::C.S3) |
|-----------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
|                       | NO₃⁻              | N₂                | NO₃⁻              | N₂                |
| Ala                   | 7.63              | 34.93             | 9.79              | 48.29             |
| Phe                   | 2.92              | 6.44              | 3.18              | 7.69              |
| Ile                   | 1.12              | 5.95              | 1.11              | 5.69              |
| Val                   | 1.80              | 3.13              | 1.53              | 3.69              |
| Leu                   | 0.13              | 3.45              | 0.22              | 3.15              |
| Pro                   | 0.11              | 1.52              | 0.12              | 1.61              |
| Tyr                   | 0.15              | 1.37              | 0.18              | 1.46              |

Cells of strains PCC 7120, CSX60 and CSS6 were incubated in BG11 or BG11₀ media for 14 days, the cultures were then filtered, and the amino acids present in the filtrates were analysed by HPLC as described in Experimental procedures. The figures are the results from a single experiment (CSX60) or the mean of the results from two independent experiments (CSS6). Data were normalized for the total protein content of the samples. Only those amino acids whose level in the diazotrophic cultures was above 1 nmol per milligram of protein are shown. For strain PCC 7120 all amino acid levels were < 0.1 nmol per milligram of protein.

incubated for 48 h in the absence of combined N were analysed. For strains CSX60 and CSS18, accumulation of the same set of amino acids described above was observed in the medium of these bubbled cultures, although this accumulation occurred at higher levels than in shaken cultures. In an experiment that included a control with nitrate, it was observed that also in these bubbled cultures amino acid release was higher in the absence of combined nitrogen (not shown). Alanine was the only amino acid whose release was notably impaired by the hetR mutation, its accumulation in the medium being 50% lower for strain CSS18 than for strain CSX60 (Table 4). On the other hand, accumulation of Pro in the medium was 2.2-fold higher for strain CSS18 than for strain CSX60, suggesting that Pro release may be stimulated by the stress resulting from N starvation. In strain CSX60, total amino acid release accounted for about 2% of the total protein amino acid residues.

Expression of natCA and natB

RNA-DNA hybridization analysis with a DNA probe carrying part of natC and natA detected a transcript of about 2.2 kb in RNA isolated from filaments of Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 grown with N₂, nitrate or ammonium as the nitrogen source (Fig. 3). The size of this transcript suggests that the natCA gene cluster (1906 bp in size) is transcribed as an operon. An RNA preparation from isolated heterocysts, which showed hybridization with a nifH probe but not with an rbcL probe, did not hybridize with the natCA probe (Fig. 3). Similar results, expression in whole filaments grown with N₂, nitrate or ammonium as the nitrogen source and repression in heterocysts, were found for the natB gene. The natB probe detected a transcript of 1.8 kb in size. As the natB gene is 1326 bp in length, we do not know whether the natB transcript is monocistronic or whether it includes a tRNA-Ser (GCT) gene that lies immediately upstream of natB (Fig. 1B).

To further characterize expression of the natCA operon, a strain, CSX64, which carries a transcriptional fusion of lacZ to the natC gene was constructed. After being transferred to Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 by conjugation, the natC::lacZ-Nm' construct (Fig. 1A) was incorporated into the genome through a single recombination event and therefore did not generate a natCA mutant. Strain CSX64 exhibited similar β-galactosidase activities, about 5 U per milligram of Chl, as determined in whole filaments made permeable with chloroform, when grown with N₂, nitrate or ammonium. The β-galactosidase activity in heterocyst extracts was, however, lower than in extracts of vegetative cells, 7.9 and 79.0 mU per milligram of protein respectively. (β-Galactosidase activity in extracts of the wild type strain PCC 7120 was < 0.25 mU per milligram of protein.) The presence of the β-galactosidase protein in filaments of Anabaena sp. strain CSX64 (natC::lacZ-Nm') was also analysed through immuno-gold localization. As shown in Fig. 4, gold particles indicative of the presence of β-galactosidase protein were about one order of magnitude more abundant in vegetative cells than in heterocysts, thus confirming repression of natC in these differentiated cells.

Table 4. Amino acids accumulated in the growth medium of bubbled, diazotrophic cultures of strains PCC 7120, 216, CSX60 and CSS18.

| Identified amino acid | Strain          |
|-----------------------|-----------------|
|                       | PCC 7120        | 216            | CSX60           | CSS18          |
|                       | (wild type)     | (hetR)         | (natA)          | (hetR natA)    |
| Ala                   | 0.62            | 1.07           | 109.49          | 54.88          |
| Gly                   | 0.82            | 1.31           | 13.96           | 13.26          |
| Phe                   | 0.12            | 0.34           | 13.83           | 16.37          |
| Ile                   | 0.14            | 0.00           | 11.34           | 14.01          |
| Val                   | 0.02            | 0.06           | 7.98            | 6.14           |
| Leu                   | 0.21            | 0.62           | 6.43            | 4.64           |
| Pro                   | 0.10            | 0.40           | 4.71            | 10.35          |
| Tyr                   | 0.17            | 0.11           | 4.14            | 4.18           |

Bubbled cultures were inoculated with cells of strains PCC 7120, 216, CSX60 and CSS18 grown with nitrate (in the presence of antibiotics for CSX60 and CSS18) and incubated in the absence of combined N (and without antibiotics) for 48 h. Samples were then filtered, and the amino acids present in the filtrates were analysed by HPLC as described in Experimental procedures. Data, normalized for the total protein content of the samples, are the mean of the results from two independent experiments. While growth of strains 216 and CSS18 was arrested, increase of cell protein during the incubation was 2.6-fold for the wild type and 1.6-fold for CSX60 indicating that N₂-fixing heterocysts had developed.

also mediate the release of amino acids (Hosie et al., 2001).

Results of this work and previous studies where competition assays were included (Xu and McAuley, 1990; Montesinos et al., 1995) indicate that the N-I (NatABCDE) permease of Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 transports mainly hydrophobic amino acids including Gly, Pro, Met, aliphatic (Ala, Ile, Leu, Val) and aromatic (Phe, Trp, Tyr) amino acids, although it can also accept neutral polar amino acids such as Ser, Thr, Cys and, to a lesser extent, Asn, Gln and (in its neutral form) His. In the transporter classification of Busch and Saier (2002), this permease belongs to the hydrophobic amino acid uptake porter family (HAAT; TC number 3.A.1.4), which includes the Leu/Ile/Val porter of Escherichia coli (for a recent reference, see Koyanagi et al., 2004), the Nat permease of Synechocystis sp. strain PCC 6803 (Quintero et al., 2001), the general amino acid permease Bra of Rhizobium leguminosarum (Hosie et al., 2002), and the Urt urea permease

Fig. 3. Expression analysis of *natCA* and *natB* in Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120. Preparations of RNA from cells grown with dinitrogen (Ø), nitrate (N) or ammonium (A) as the nitrogen source and from isolated heterocysts (H) were used in Northern analysis with the probes of *natCA* and *natB* shown in Fig. 1. Transcript sizes in kb are indicated. Hybridization with *nifH* and *rbcl* probes was used as control of the quality and specificity of the heterocyst RNA, and hybridization with a probe of the *rnpB* gene as a loading and transference control (see Experimental procedures).

Discussion

The *natA*, *natB*, *natC*, *natD* and *natE* genes encoding elements of the Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 neutral amino acid transport system N-I have been identified in this work. According to protein sequence homologies, NatA and NatE are ATPase subunits, NatC and NatD transmembrane polypeptides, and NatB a periplasmic substrate-binding protein of an ABC-type permease. Consistent with the known substrates for the N-I permease (Montesinos et al., 1995), the five *nat* mutants analysed in this work are strongly affected in the activity of transport of Pro, Phe, Leu, Gly, Ala and Ser. However, the transport of Gln and His is impaired in the *natA*, *natC*, *natD* and *natE* mutants but not in the *natB* mutant, which shows an appreciably higher glutamine uptake activity than the wild type. These results suggest that NatB is not an efficient binding protein for Gln or His. In ABC-type uptake permeases, the complex formed by the two transmembrane polypeptides and the two ATPases can interact with one or several different periplasmic substrate-binding proteins. It is therefore possible that other periplasmic binding protein(s) are involved in the transport of Gln and His by the N-I permease, and that they function more efficiently in the absence of NatB. With the exception of the *natE* mutant, strain CSR5, *nat* mutants show higher activities of uptake of acidic amino acids than the wild type. It is possible that other transporters function more efficiently in the absence of the N-I permease. Alternatively, the N-I system could mediate or influence release of acidic amino acids. Accordingly, it has been shown that ABC-type uptake transporters can

© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **57**, 1582–1592

Fig. 4. Immuno-gold localization of β-galactosidase in Anabaena sp. strain CSX64 (*natC::lacZ-Nm'*) Samples of BG11<sub>o</sub>-grown filaments were analysed by electron microscopy after treatment with an anti-β-galactosidase antibody and a secondary antibody, GAM 15 nm. The presence of β-galactosidase is visualized as black dots corresponding to gold particles (vegetative cell, upper micrograph; heterocyst, lower micrograph). Scale bars, 0.5 μm. c, carboxysome; hw, heterocyst wall; pg, heterocyst polar granule; t, thylakoid.

1588 S. Picossi et al.

of cyanobacteria (Valladares *et al.*, 2002) and *Corynebacterium glutamicum* (Beckers *et al.*, 2004). Thus, this family includes from permeases with broad substrate specificity like *R. leguminosarum* Bra to permeases with a narrower specificity like Urt. Genes encoding proteins highly similar to the N-I permease proteins are found in several other cyanobacteria whose genomes have been sequenced, including the heterocyst-formers *Anabaena variabilis* and *Nostoc punctiforme*.

Mutants of the neutral amino acid permeases of cyanobacteria typically release hydrophobic amino acids to the culture medium (Labarre *et al.*, 1987; Montesinos *et al.*, 1995; 1997). In the *nat* mutants analysed in this work, the set of released amino acids includes Ala, Gly, Ile, Leu, Phe, Pro, Tyr and Val, which are transported mainly by the N-I permease. Because the released amino acids are all hydrophobic, they may leak out of the cells by diffusion, and a function of the N-I permease may be recapture of these leaked amino acids (Labarre *et al.*, 1987; Montesinos *et al.*, 1995; 1997). The amino acids are found at higher levels in filtrates of diazotrophic cultures than of nitrate-containing cultures (Table 3). The increased release of some amino acids under diazotrophic conditions might reflect an increased protein turnover in the cells incubated without combined nitrogen.

The *nat* mutants are impaired specifically in diazotrophic growth. Thus, the capability to transport amino acids that are substrates of the N-I permease appears necessary for optimal growth of *Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120 on N₂. Interestingly, however, expression of the *nat* genes (studied with *natB* and the *natCA* operon at the mRNA level and corroborated with a transcriptional *natC::lacZ* fusion) appears to be constitutive in vegetative cells, independently of the nitrogen source used for growth, but repressed in heterocysts. This suggests that amino acid transport system N-I has a physiological role specifically in vegetative cells, and that this role is particularly relevant in the diazotrophic filament. Impairment in diazotrophic growth could result from the cells being unable to cope with a general loss of N under these conditions, although the relatively low percentage of N lost (0.65–2% of total protein amino acid residues) makes this possibility unlikely. In contrast, the specific release of Ala (4.5–14% of total protein Ala residues) may be relevant. The highest observed release of Ala requires the presence of heterocysts, because release is decreased in the *hetR natA* double mutant. Release of Ala in the *nat* mutants could consist of two components: release from vegetative cells, observed in nitrate-grown cells and at an increased level in the absence of combined nitrogen, and release from heterocysts, impaired in the *hetR* background.

A model for the transference of nitrogen in the diazotrophic cyanobacterial filament suggests that hetero-

cysts export amino acids to the periplasmic space, in which they would diffuse before being taken up by the vegetative cells (Montesinos *et al.*, 1995). The periplasmic space appears to be continuous in the cyanobacterial filament (see, e.g. Ris and Singh, 1961; Hoiczyk and Baumeister, 1995), and amino acid permeases normally expressed in the vegetative cells would mediate uptake of the transferred amino acids. The N-I transport system might be one of these permeases, because its inactivation specifically impairs diazotrophic growth and the differential expression of the *nat* genes in vegetative cells and heterocysts is consistent with a vectorial role of the permease in the diazotrophic filament. Using N₂ as the nitrogen source, the *natB* mutant (strain CSS6) exhibits a growth rate that is about 75% that of the wild type, whereas the *natCA* mutants (strains CSX60 and CSX62) exhibit lower growth rates, about 50% that of the wild type. As stated above, the *natCA* mutants exhibit lower activities of uptake of Gln (and His) than the *natB* mutant. Thus, whereas the growth defect of CSS6 might be related to its impairment in the uptake of one (e.g. Ala) or several amino acids that are substrates of the N-I permease using the NatB binding protein, impairment in uptake of Gln and/or His might contribute to the growth defect of the *natCA* strains. This notion is consistent with the results of a previous study in which Gln (as well as His, Orn and Glu) were observed to be transported at appreciable rates by every amino acid transport mutant of *Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120 that exhibited some ability to grow on N₂ (Montesinos *et al.*, 1995). Whereas Gln is a recognized candidate vehicle for N transferred from heterocysts to vegetative cells (Wolk *et al.*, 1976; Thomas *et al.*, 1977), synthesis of Ala in the diazotrophic filament that can correspond to synthesis in the heterocyst has been detected (Lawrie *et al.*, 1976; Wolk *et al.*, 1976; Jüttner, 1983; see Discussion by Wolk *et al.*, 1994). Alanine can be a substrate or product of a number of *Anabaena* enzymes, including alanine dehydrogenase and several transaminases (Flores and Hérero, 1994; Kaneko *et al.*, 2001), and a putative role of Ala in the diazotrophic metabolism of *Anabaena* sp. would merit further research.


### Experimental procedures

#### Bacterial strains and growth conditions

*Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120 was grown in BG11 (containing NaNO₃), BG11₀ (combined nitrogen-free) or BG11₀ + ammonium (BG11₀ containing 3–5 mM NH₄Cl and 6–10 mM TES-NaOH buffer, pH 7.5) medium at 30°C in the light (75 μE m⁻² s⁻¹), in shaken (80–90 r.p.m.) liquid cultures or in medium solidified with 1% Difco agar (Montesinos *et al.*, 1995). Alternatively, cultures (referred to as bubbled cultures) were supplemented with 10 mM of NaHCO₃ and bubbled with a mixture of CO₂ and air (1% v/v). In this case, the
ammonium-containing medium was supplemented with 8 mM NH₄Cl and 16 mM TES-NaOH buffer (pH 7.5). The *hetR* mutant, *Anabaena* sp. strain 216 (Buikema and Haselkorn, 1991), was grown in BG11 medium. For the mutants described below, antibiotics were used at the following concentration: Sm, 2–5 μg ml⁻¹; Sp, 2–5 μg ml⁻¹ and Nm, 5 μg ml⁻¹ for liquid cultures, and Sm, 2 μg ml⁻¹; Sp, 2 μg ml⁻¹ and Nm, 25 μg ml⁻¹ for solid cultures.

Escherichia coli DH5α used for plasmid constructions, and HB101 and ED8654, used for conjugations with *Anabaena* sp., were grown in LB medium, supplemented when necessary with antibiotics at standard concentrations (Ausubel *et al.*, 2004).

### Plasmids

A DNA fragment from strain PCC 7120 carrying *natCA* was isolated using heterologous hybridization by previously reported procedures (Montesinos *et al.*, 1997; Ausubel *et al.*, 2004). Genomic DNA was isolated from *Anabaena* sp. as described by Cai and Wolk (1990). The probe used was an internal fragment of the *Synechocystis* sp. strain PCC 6803 *natA* gene (Montesinos *et al.*, 1997). Plasmid pCSX50 carries an Xbal DNA fragment of about 6.5 kb from strain PCC 7120 including the *natCA* genes. A length of 3.22 kb of this fragment, carrying the *natCA* genes, was sequenced in both strands. Further partial sequencing and hybridization with a probe of the strain PCC 6803 *natB* gene provided no evidence for the presence of other amino acid transport genes in the Xbal fragment. HindIII-ended gene-cassette C.S3 (Elhai and Wolk, 1988) was inserted between the two HindIII sites in the 3′ region of *natA*, carried in the insert of pCSX50, and the resulting construct was cloned in the Xbal site of the positive-selection vector pRL278 (Black *et al.*, 1993) to render pCSX60 (see Fig. 1A). Plasmid pCSX36 carries a 2.7 kb, HindIII fragment bearing the complete *natC* and most of the *natA* sequence. HincII-ended C.S3 was inserted into the Klenow filled-in *natC* EcoNI site, carried in the insert of pCSX36, and the resulting construct (isolated as an Xhol–Sall fragment) was cloned in the Xhol site of pRL278 to render pCSX62. Smal-ended *lacZ-Nm* gene-cassette (Thiel *et al.*, 1995) was inserted into the Klenow filled-in *natC* EcoNI site, and a HindIII fragment carrying this construct was transferred to HindIII-digested pRL500 (Elhai and Wolk, 1988) to render pCSX64. For complementation of strains CSX60 and CSX62, a BamHI fragment carrying the insert of pCSX50 was cloned in BamHI-digested pRL25 (Elhai *et al.*, 1997) to render pCSX50B.

Plasmid pCSS7 was generated to inactivate the *natB* gene. This plasmid contains a 1.63 kb DNA fragment from the *alr1834* region of *Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120 amplified by PCR using oligonucleotides NB1 (5′-CTG AGC CAC CCC CGT GGC-3′) and NB2 (5′-GTC TTA ATC TTG CCA TCG-3′) and genomic DNA from strain PCC 7120 as template. PCR products were cloned in vector pGEM-T (Promega). Xbal-ended C.S3 was inserted into the Nhel site of pCSS7 to generate plasmid pCSS8. The Ncol–PstI fragment from pCSS8, filled in with the Klenow enzyme, was ligated to NruI-digested pRL278 rendering plasmid pCSS10.

For inactivation of *all1284*, an internal fragment of 518 bp

---

was amplified by PCR with oligonucleotides natD-3 (5′-GGA TCC GGT TAT CGA TGA TAG TGG CAG-3′) and natD-4 (5′-GGA TCC CAG AAG CGA ATA GCG GCA G-3′), which included BamHI sites in their 5′ ends, and genomic DNA from *Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120. The amplified fragment was cloned into pGEM-T Easy and transferred as a BamHI-ended fragment to BamHI-digested pCSV3 [which is pRL500 in which the Ap gene has been substituted by an Sm/Sm gene cassette (Elhai and Wolk, 1988)], rendering pCSR44. For inactivation of *all2912*, an internal fragment of 466 bp was amplified by PCR with oligonucleotides natE-1 (5′-GGA TCC GGA CTT TTG ACA CCC CAT AC-3′) and natE-2 (5′-GGA TCC GCC ATT TCT AAA GCT TTA CGG-3′), which included BamHI sites in their 5′ ends. The amplified fragment was cloned into pGEM-T and transferred as a BamHI-ended fragment to BamHI-digested pRL424 (Elhai and Wolk, 1988), rendering pCSR15. For inactivation of *all2911*, an internal fragment of 578 bp was amplified by PCR with oligonucleotides gluR0-1 (5′-GGA TCC CCA AGC GTT CCT GAT TTG C-3′) and gluR0-2 (5′-GGA TCC GTA TGT TGC AGC TGT GTA C-3′), which included BamHI sites in their 5′ ends. The amplified fragment was cloned into pGEM-T Easy and transferred as a BamHI-ended fragment to BamHI-digested pRL424 (Elhai and Wolk, 1988), rendering pCSR24.

### Genetic procedures

Conjugation of *Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120 with *E. coli* HB101 carrying pCSX60, pCSX62, pCSX64, or pCSS10 together with helper and methylation plasmids pRL528 and pRL591-W45, of *Anabaena* sp. strain 216 with HB101 carrying pCSX60 and helper and methylation plasmid pRL623, of *Anabaena* sp. strains CSX60 and CSX62 with HB101 carrying pCSX50B and pRL623, and of *Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120 with HB101 carrying pCSR44, pCSR15 or pCSR24 and pRL623 was promoted by the conjugative plasmid pRL443, carried in *E. coli* ED8654, and performed as described (Elhai *et al.*, 1997). For the generation of strains CSX60, CSX62, CSS6 and CSS18 double recombinants were selected as described (Cai and Wolk, 1990). The genetic structure and segregation of mutant chromosomes was tested by Southern hybridization using standard protocols in the case of strains CSX60, CSX62 and CSS6 (Montesinos *et al.*, 1997; Ausubel *et al.*, 2004) and by PCR in the case of strain CSS18. For Southern analysis of CSX60 and CSX62, an Nhel DNA fragment from plasmid pCSX50 or a HindIII–Nhel DNA fragment from plasmid pCSX36, respectively, was used as a probe. Oligonucleotides used for generation of probes for Southern analysis of *natB* mutants were NB1 and NB2, and for PCR analysis of CSS18, natA-9 (5′-GGC AGG TAC AGT AAC C-3′) and natA-10 (5′-CAG ACC GAT TAT TTC CG-3′). Segregation of mutant chromosomes in strains CSR4 and CSR5 was tested by Southern analysis using as probes the cloned fragments described above and by PCR analysis using oligonucleotides gluR0-3 (5′-CCT AGT TGT TCA TCC AGT GC-3′) and gluR0-4 (5′-GAC ACT GCC CAC AAC CTC-3′), and natE-3 (5′-CGT CCA TGC AGG ATA CAT C-3′) and natE-4 (5′-CTT TCC CTG CGC CTA AG-3′) respectively. Segregation of strain CSR11 was checked by PCR with oligonucleotides natD-5 (5′-CTT GCA

© 2005 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, *Molecular Microbiology*, **57**, 1582–1592
1590 S. Picossi et al.

GCT GTG GGA CTG AC-3′) and natD-6 (5′-GGA CGA ATG AGC AAC ACC-3′). Strains CSX60, CSS18, CSX62, and CSS6 had substituted the corresponding wild-type genomic region by the C.S3-bearing DNA fragments carried in pCSX60, pCSX60, pCSX62, and pCSS10 respectively. Strains CSX64, CSR4, CSR5, and CSR11 had incorporated into the chromosome through a single recombination event the whole transferred plasmid, pCSX64, pCSR24, pCSR15, and pCSR44 respectively. All these strains contained only mutant chromosomes.

**Growth rates, enzyme activities, and amino acid uptake and release**

The growth rate constant (μ = ln2/t<sub>d</sub>, where t<sub>d</sub> is the doubling time) was calculated from the increase of protein content, determined in 0.2 ml samples, of shaken liquid cultures (Montesinos *et al.*, 1995). β-Galactosidase was determined, using o-nitrophenyl-β-D-galactopyranoside as substrate (Miller, 1972), in filaments of shaken cultures made permeable with chloroform or in extracts of heterocysts isolated as described previously (Golden *et al.*, 1991) or of nitrate-grown cells from bubbled cultures; one U corresponds to the formation of 1 μmol of o-nitrophenol per min. Nitrogenase activity was determined in BG11<sub>o</sub>-grown bubbled or shaken cultures using the acetylene reduction technique, as described (Montesinos *et al.*, 1995). Amino acid uptake was determined in BG11-grown cells (supplemented with the appropriate antibiotic in the case of the mutants) suspended in 25 mM N-tris(hydroxymethyl)-methylglycine (Tricine)-NaOH buffer (pH 8.1). The assays were carried out at 30°C in the light with 10 μM L-[U-<sup>14</sup>C]amino acids as described previously (Montesinos *et al.*, 1995; 1997). Chlorophyll a (Chl) content was determined by the method of Mackinney (1941). Protein concentration was determined by a modified Lowry procedure (Markwell *et al.*, 1978).

Extracellular amino acids were determined by HPLC in samples of filtered culture medium that were lyophilized and dissolved in a small volume of 0.1 M HCl. The method used for the analysis of amino acids involves a derivatization of amino acids with phenylisothiocyanate (PITC) (Heinrikson and Meredith, 1984), which binds to primary or secondary amines rendering a derivative, phenylthiocarbamyl, which is detected by measuring the absorbance at 254 nm. Sample (40 μl) was mixed with 60 μl of the derivatizing solution (ethanol:H<sub>2</sub>O:triethanolamine:PITC, 7:1:1:1), incubated at room temperature for 30 min and dried under a N<sub>2</sub> gas flux. Finally, the pellet was re-suspended in 40 μl of 4 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.4) and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile and was injected in a HPLC, LC Module I plus (Waters, USA) system. The separation was performed in a reverse phase LiChroCART® C<sub>18</sub> (3.9 mm × 15 cm) column preceded by a 3.9 mm × 4.0 cm precolumn of the same material. A gradient of two solvent mixtures was used. Solvent A contained 70 mM sodium phosphate (pH 6.55) and 2% acetonitrile (v/v); solvent B contained 50% (v/v) acetonitrile. The gradient program used was the type 7 program (Waters). The flux was 1.5 ml min<sup>−1</sup> and temperature was 46°C. An amino acid standard solution, AA-S-18 (from Sigma) was used for calibrating the apparatus. The amino acids detected with this method were: Asp, Glu, Gln, Asn, Ser,

Gly, His, Thr, Ala, Arg, Pro, Tyr, Val, Met, Cys, Ile, Leu, Phe, Trp, Orn and Lys.

**RNA isolation and analysis**

For isolation of heterocysts bubbled cultures grown in ammonium-containing media until they reached a Chl concentration of 3–5 μg ml<sup>−1</sup> were used. Filaments were then washed with, and resuspended in, nitrogen-free medium (BG11<sub>o</sub>) and further incubated until mature heterocysts were observed (19 h). Heterocysts were isolated as described (Golden *et al.*, 1991). RNA from whole filaments of bubbled cultures growing exponentially with N<sub>2</sub>, ammonium or nitrate or from isolated heterocysts was isolated in the presence of ribonucleoside-vanadyl complex as previously described (Muro-Pastor *et al.*, 2002).

For Northern analysis, 40–70 μg RNA were loaded per lane and subjected to electrophoresis in 1% agarose denaturing formaldehyde gels. Transfer and fixation to Hybond-N<sup>+</sup> membranes (Amershan Biosciences) were carried out using 0.1 M NaOH. Hybridization was performed at 65°C according to the recommendations of the manufacturer of the membranes. The probes were internal fragments of the investigated genes amplified by PCR, using plasmid pCSX36 as a template and oligonucleotides NZ-4 (5′-GAT TCG GAA CGC GCA GAA AT-3′) and M13 phage Universal in the case of natCA probe, and plasmid pCSS6 as template and oligonucleotides NB2 and NB3 (5′-GTG TGA ATG GTC AAC CTG-3′) for the natB probe. As a control of heterocyst RNA quality, the filters were also hybridized with a nifH probe (nifH is a nitrogenase structural gene expressed only in heterocysts (Elhai and Wolk, 1990) and an rbcL probe (rbcL encodes the large subunit of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase expressed only in vegetative cells (Elhai and Wolk, 1990). The nifH probe was obtained by PCR, using oligonucleotides NH1 (5′-GTA CTG CAA GGG GCG TGT GGC-3′) and NH5 (5′-GCA GGA AGC TTT GGA AGC TGC TAT C-3′) and plasmid pCSAV60 (which contains a DNA fragment amplified by PCR with the same oligonucleotides and Anabaena genomic DNA as template cloned in vector pGEM-T) as template. The rbcL probe was obtained by PCR, using oligonucleotides RBC1 (5′-CTG GGT ATA AAG CGG GGG TTC-3′) and RBC2 (5′-GCT GGG TTT GTG AAC GAT GAA GCT C-3′) and plasmid pCSAV61 (which contains a DNA fragment amplified by PCR with the same oligonucleotides and Anabaena genomic DNA as template cloned in vector pGEM-T) as template. Hybridization to an mpB probe (Vioque, 1997) was used as an RNA loading and transfer control. All probes were <sup>32</sup>P-labelled with a Ready to Go™ DNA labelling kit (Amersham Biosciences) using [α-<sup>32</sup>P]-dCTP. Images of radioactive filters and gels were obtained with a Cyclone storage phosphor system and OptiQuant image analysis software (Packard).

**Electron microscopy**

Cells of Anabaena sp. strain CSX64 grown in shaken BG11<sub>o</sub> medium were collected by filtration, washed with 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) containing 0.04 M sucrose and fixed at 4°C for 2 h in 2% glutaraldehyde (Merck, electron microscopy quality) in the same buffer. After dehydration,

filaments were embedded in LRWhite medium grade resin and immuno-reactions were performed as described previously (Lichtlé *et al.*, 1992) with a 1:500 dilution of an anti-β-galactosidase monoclonal antibody (GAL 40, from Sigma) for 90 min. The secondary antibody (goat anti-mouse 15 nm gold particles) was used at a dilution of 1:50 for 1 h. Membrane contrast was enhanced by exposure to osmium tetroxide vapours followed by uranyl acetate staining. Sections were observed with a Jeol CX2 electron microscope at 80 kV.

**Acknowledgements**

We thank José Enrique Frías and Ana Valladares for their participation in some of the experiments described, and Alicia M. Muro-Pastor for helpful advice. This work was supported by Grants no. BMC2001-0509 and BMC2002-03902 from Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnología (Spain).

**References**

Ausubel, F.M., Brent, R., Kingston, R.E., Moore, D.D., Seidman, J.G., Smith, J.A., and Struhl, K. (2004) *Current Protocols in Molecular Biology*. New York: Greene Publishing & Wiley-Interscience.

Beckers, G., Bendt, A.K., Kramer, R., and Burkovski, A. (2004) Molecular identification of the urea uptake system and transcriptional analysis of urea transporter- and urease-encoding genes in *Corynebacterium glutamicum*. *J Bacteriol* **186**: 7645–7652.

Black, T.A., Cai, Y., and Wolk, C.P. (1993) Spatial expression and autoregulation of *hetR*, a gene involved in the control of heterocyst development in *Anabaena*. *Mol Microbiol* **9**: 77–84.

Buikema, W.J., and Haselkorn, R. (1991) Characterization of a gene controlling heterocyst differentiation in the cyanobacterium *Anabaena* 7120. *Genes Dev* **5**: 321–330.

Busch, W., and Saier, M.H., Jr (2002) The transporter classification (TC) system, 2002. *Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol* **37**: 287–337.

Cai, Y., and Wolk, C.P. (1990) Use of a conditionally lethal gene in *Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120 to select for double recombinants and to entrap insertion sequence. *J Bacteriol* **172**: 3138–3145.

Chen, G.Q., Cui, C., Mayer, M.L., and Gouaux, E. (1999) Functional characterization of a potassium-selective prokaryotic glutamate receptor. *Nature* **402**: 817–821.

Coronil, T., and Lara, C. (1991) Amino acid levels and expression of the nitrate assimilation system in *Anacystis nidulans* cells. *Plant Physiol Biochem* **29**: 651–655.

Elhai, J., and Wolk, C.P. (1988) A versatile class of positive-selection vectors based on the nonviability of palindrome-containing plasmids that allows cloning into long polylinkers. *Gene* **68**: 119–138.

Elhai, J., and Wolk, C.P. (1990) Developmental regulation and spatial pattern of expression of the structural genes for nitrogenase in the cyanobacterium *Anabaena*. *EMBO J* **9**: 3379–3388.

Elhai, J., Vepritskiy, A., Muro-Pastor, A.M., Flores, E., and

Wolk, C.P. (1997) Reduction of conjugal transfer efficiency by three restriction activities of *Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120. *J Bacteriol* **179**: 1998–2005.

Flores, E., and Herrero, A. (1994) Assimilatory nitrogen metabolism and its regulation. In *The Molecular Biology of Cyanobacteria*. Bryant, D.A. (ed.). Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 487–517.

Giddings, T.H., and Staehelin, L.A. (1981) Observation of microplasmodesmata in both heterocyst-forming and non-heterocyst forming filamentous cyanobacteria by freeze-fracture electron microscopy. *Arch Microbiol* **129**: 295–298.

Golden, J.W., and Yoon, H.S. (2003) Heterocyst development in *Anabaena*. *Curr Opin Microbiol* **6**: 557–563.

Golden, J.W., Whorff, L.L., and Wiest, D.R. (1991) Independent regulation of *nifHDK* operon transcription and DNA rearrangement during heterocyst differentiation in the cyanobacterium *Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120. *J Bacteriol* **173**: 7098–7105.

Heinrikson, R.L., and Meredith, S.C. (1984) Amino acid analysis by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography: precolumn derivatization with phenylisothiocyanate. *Anal Biochem* **136**: 65–74.

Herrero, A., and Flores, E. (1990) Transport of basic amino acids by the dinitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium *Anabaena* PCC 7120. *J Biol Chem* **265**: 3931–3935.

Herrero, A., Muro-Pastor, A.M., Valladares, A., and Flores, E. (2004) Cellular differentiation and the NtcA transcription factor in filamentous cyanobacteria. *FEMS Microbiol Rev* **28**: 469–487.

Hoiczyk, E., and Baumeister, W. (1995) Envelope structure of four gliding filamentous cyanobacteria. *J Bacteriol* **177**: 2387–2395.

Hosie, A.H., Allaway, D., Jones, M.A., Walshaw, D.L., Johnston, A.W., and Poole, P.S. (2001) Solute-binding protein-dependent ABC transporters are responsible for solute efflux in addition to solute uptake. *Mol Microbiol* **40**: 1449–1459.

Hosie, A.H., Allaway, D., Galloway, C.S., Dunsby, H.A., and Poole, P.S. (2002) *Rhizobium leguminosarum* has a second general amino acid permease with unusually broad substrate specificity and high similarity to branched-chain amino acid transporters (Bra/LIV) of the ABC family. *J Bacteriol* **184**: 4071–4080.

Jüttnner, F. (1983) ¹⁴C-Labeled metabolites in heterocysts and vegetative cells of *Anabaena cylindrica* filaments and their presumptive function as transport vehicles of organic carbon and nitrogen. *J Bacteriol* **155**: 628–633.

Kaneko, T., Nakamura, Y., Wolk, C.P., Kuritz, T., Sasamoto, S., Watanabe, A., *et al.* (2001) Complete genomic sequence of the filamentous nitrogen-fixing cyanobacterium *Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120. *DNA Res* **8**: 205–213.

Koyanagi, T., Katayama, T., Suzuki, H., and Kumagai, H. (2004) Identification of the LIV-I/LS system as the third phenylalanine transporter in *Escherichia coli* K-12. *J Bacteriol* **186**: 343–350.

Labarre, J., Thuriaux, P., and Chauvat, F. (1987) Genetic analysis of amino acid transport in the facultatively heterotrophic cyanobacterium *Synechocystis* sp. strain 6803. *J Bacteriol* **169**: 4668–4673.

Lang, N.J., and Fay, P. (1971) The heterocysts of blue-green algae II. Details of ultrastructure. *Proc Roy Soc Lond B* 178: 193–203.

Lawrie, A.C., Codd, G.A., and Stewart, W.D.P. (1976) The incorporation of nitrogen into products of recent photosynthesis in *Anabaena cylindrical Lemm*. *Arch Microbiol* 107: 15–24.

Lichtlé, C., McKay, R.M.L., and Gibbs, S.P. (1992) Immunogold localization of photosystem I and photosystem II light-harvesting complexes in cryptomonad thylakoids. *Biol Cell* 74: 187–194.

Mackinney, G. (1941) Absorption of light by chlorophyll solutions. *J Biol Chem* 140: 315–322.

Markwell, M.A.K., Hass, S.M., Bieber, L.L., and Tolbert, N.E. (1978) A modification of the Lowry procedure to simplify protein determination in membrane and lipoprotein samples. *Anal Biochem* 87: 206–210.

Miller, J.H. (1972) *Experiments in Molecular Genetics*. Cold Spring Harbor, New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory.

Montesinos, M.L., Herrero, A., and Flores, E. (1995) Amino acid transport systems required for diazotrophic growth in the cyanobacterium *Anabaena* sp. strain PCC 7120. *J Bacteriol* 177: 3150–3157.

Montesinos, M.L., Herrero, A., and Flores, E. (1997) Amino acid transport in taxonomically diverse cyanobacteria and identification of two genes encoding elements of a neutral amino acid permease putatively involved in recapture of leaked hydrophobic amino acids. *J Bacteriol* 179: 853–862.

Muro-Pastor, A.M., Valladares, A., Flores, E., and Herrero, A. (2002) Mutual dependence of the expression of the cell differentiation regulatory protein HetR and the global nitrogen regulator NtcA during heterocyst development. *Mol Microbiol* 44: 1377–1385.

Quintero, M.J., Montesinos, M.L., Herrero, A., and Flores, E. (2001) Identification of genes encoding amino acid permeases by inactivation of selected ORFs from the *Synechocystis* genomic sequence. *Genome Res* 11: 2034–2040.

Ris, H., and Singh, R.N. (1961) Electron microscope studies on blue-green algae. *J Biophys Biochem Cytol* 9: 63–80.

Thiel, T., Lyons, E.M., Erker, J.C., and Ernst, A. (1995) A second nitrogenase in vegetative cells of a heterocyst-forming cyanobacterium. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 92: 9358–9362.

Thomas, J., Meeks, J.C., Wolk, C.P., Shaffer, P.W., Austin, S.M., and Chien, W.-S. (1977) Formation of glutamine from \[^{13}N\]ammonia, \[^{13}N\]dinitrogen, and \[^{14}C\]glutamate by heterocysts isolated from *Anabaena cylindrica*. *J Bacteriol* 129: 1545–1555.

Valladares, A., Montesinos, M.L., Herrero, A., and Flores, E. (2002) An ABC-type, high-affinity urea permease identified in cyanobacteria. *Mol Microbiol* 43: 703–715.

Viogue, A. (1997) The RNase P from cyanobacteria: short tandemly repeated repetitive (STRR) sequences are present within the RNase P RNA gene in heterocyst-forming cyanobacteria. *Nucleic Acids Res* 25: 3471–3477.

Wolk, C.P. (1996) Heterocyst formation. *Annu Rev Genet* 30: 59–78.

Wolk, C.P. (2000) Heterocyst formation in *Anabaena*. In *Prokaryotic Development*. Brun, Y.V., and Shimkets, L.J. (eds). Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology, pp. 83–104.

Wolk, C.P., Austin, S.M., Bortins, J., and Galonsky, A. (1974) Autoradiographic localization of \[^{13}N\) after fixation of \[^{13}N\]-labeled nitrogen gas by a heterocyst-forming blue-green alga. *J Cell Biol* 61: 440–453.

Wolk, C.P., Thomas, J., Shaffer, P.W., Austin, S.M., and Galonsky, A. (1976) Pathway of nitrogen metabolism after fixation of \[^{13}N\]-labeled nitrogen gas by the cyanobacterium, *Anabaena cylindrica*. *J Biol Chem* 251: 5027–5034.

Wolk, C.P., Ernst, A., and Elhai, J. (1994) Heterocyst metabolism and development. In *The Molecular Biology of Cyanobacteria*. Bryant, D.A. (ed.). Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 769–823.

Xu, P., and McAuley, P.J. (1990) Uptake of amino acids by the cyanobacterium *Anabaena* ATCC 27893. *New Phytol* 115: 581–585.
