
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 62 (2005) 2617–2633  
1420-682X/05/222617-17  
DOI 10.1007/s00018-005-5148-6  
© Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 2005  

---

**Review**

**β-Lactam resistance in Staphylococcus aureus: the adaptive resistance of a plastic genome**

C. C. S. Fuda, J. F. Fisher and S. Mobashery*

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana 46556-5670 (USA),  
Fax: +1 574 631 6652, e-mail: mobashery@nd.edu

Received 2 April 2005; received after revision 15 July 2005; accepted 25 July 2005  
Online First 7 September 2005

---

**Abstract.** Staphylococci have two mechanisms for resistance to β-lactam antibiotics. One is the production of β-lactamases, enzymes that hydrolytically destroy β-lactams. The other is the expression of penicillin-binding protein 2a (PBP 2a), which is not susceptible to inhibition by β-lactam antibiotics. Strains of *S. aureus* exhibiting either β-lactamase or PBP 2a-directed resistance (or both) have established a considerable ecological niche among human pathogens. The emergence and subsequent spread of bacterial strains designated as methicillin-resistant *S. aureus* (MRSA), from the 1960s to the present, has created clinical difficulties for nosocomial treatment on a global scale. The recent variants of MRSA that are resistant to glycopeptide antibiotics (such as vancomycin) have ushered in a new and disconcerting chapter in the evolution of this organism.

**Key words.** *Staphylococcus aureus*; beta-lactamase; *blaZ*; *blaI*; *blaR*; *mecR*; *mecI*; *mecA*; PBP 2a; MRSA; VRSA.

---

**Introduction**

The timeline for bacterial evolution stretches far beyond the current era of antimicrobial therapy. During the past 60 years, humans have become the driving force behind the accelerated evolution of bacterial antimicrobial resistance [1]. Many chemotherapeutic treatments have been used during this brief time. Some are incredibly successful and offer life-saving chemotherapy, while others were used briefly and have since ceded into obsolescence. Nonetheless, the value of even the most effective of these treatments is threatened by bacterial acquisition and evolutionary perfection of resistance mechanisms. *Staphylococcus aureus*, the paradigm among the bacteria of this natural phenomenon, has always been a challenge for anti-microbial chemotherapy [2]. By virtue of its ability to overcome chemotherapy through acquisition of drug resistance, *S. aureus* continuously expands its ecological niche. Prior to the antibiotic era, the mortality of patients infected with pathogenic *S. aureus* exceeded 80%, and over 70% developed metastatic infections [3]. Survival was decidedly an uncertain outcome. The advent of penicillin in the 1940s immediately improved this prognosis, with over 94% of strains exhibiting susceptibility [4]. This was short-lived. The use of penicillin quickly selected *S. aureus* that were resistant as a result of β-lactamase expression [5]. Penicillin-resistant *S. aureus* emerged in hospitals around 1942, with ultimate proliferation in the community [6, 7]. By 1950, more than 50% of all staphylococcal isolates were resistant to penicillin. The pattern of resistance – first hospitals and then the community – is the common pattern for each new antibacterial [2, 8]. A semi-synthetic penicillin, methicillin, was introduced in 1959 in response to the challenge of β-lactamase-producing *S. aureus*. Shortly thereafter reports emerged (first from the United Kingdom, and then from elsewhere around the globe) of *S. aureus* with acquired methicillin

* Corresponding author.

resistance [9]. This new *S. aureus*, referred to as methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (MRSA), has since become one of the leading causes of bacterial infections and a global scourge [10, 11]. An irony of this trend toward escalating bacterial resistance is that it coincides with a period wherein the understanding of the mechanisms of resistance is increasing. The recent emergence of variants of MRSA resistant to vancomycin (the preferred agent for treatment of severe MRSA infections), due to the acquisition of the *vanA* gene from Enterococci, has created an unparalleled challenge in the evolution of this organism [12–14]. These isolates, referred to as vancomycin-intermediately-susceptible *Staphylococcus aureus* (VISA) and vancomycin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (VRSA), portend a chemotherapeutic era in which the antibacterials of today may become ineffective. For this reason an important objective is to expand – or extend – the value of existing antibacterials. This review identifies the frontiers of our understanding of the mechanisms that underlie the gene regulation of β-lactam resistance, and the basis for the loss of β-lactam antibacterial efficacy in methicillin-resistant *S. aureus*, with emphasis on the past and present genomic determinants that have enabled the survival of this pathogen.

## The advent of staphylococcal resistance: β-lactamases

Antimicrobial resistance is associated with the perpetual change of a highly flexible bacterial genome that under pressure moves inexorably to further mechanistic perfection. *S. aureus* thrives as a result of its considerable genomic plasticity with respect to antibacterial resistance mechanisms. The Staphylococci have two primary resistance mechanisms with respect to the β-lactam antibiotics. One is the expression of β-lactamase enzymes (for *S. aureus*, the PC1 β-lactamase). β-Lactamases destroy β-lactams by hydrolysis, and are expressed by activation of the *blaZ* gene. Higher-level β-lactam resistance (MRSA) results from the acquisition of the *mecA* gene, which encodes the penicillin-binding protein 2a (PBP 2a). Strains of *S. aureus* exhibiting either β-lactamase- or PBP 2a-directed resistance (or both) have established a considerable presence in the exotic world of human pathogens [15]. β-Lactamase-dependent resistance is found currently in >95% of staphylococcal isolates [16], while MRSA constitutes 25–50% of clinical isolates in the North America, Europe and Asia [17]. Transcription of the β-lactamase and PBP 2a genes is controlled by the BlaR-BlaI-BlaZ and MecR-MecI-MecA regulatory systems, respectively. The two systems are remarkably similar in structure and function [18–21], yet still retain distinct identities [22, 23]. Of the two systems, the *S. aureus bla* regulatory system is the better characterized, as our understanding is complemented by that of a homologous system for β-lactamase expression found in the non-pathogenic Gram-positive bacterium *Bacillus licheniformis* [24–28]. The *mec* system is believed to parallel the better-characterized *bla* gene regulatory system, and therefore the *bla* system forms the working model for regulation of both components of resistant *Staphylococci*.

Kirby’s discovery in the mid-1940s that penicillin was destroyed by penicillin-resistant strains of *S. aureus* [7] was followed by the identification of penicillases – β-lactamases with high catalytic activity against penicillins – that mediate this resistance [29]. The resistance determinant was linked to β-lactamase expression, encoded by the *blaZ* gene maintained on a transposable element of a large plasmid [30–32]. The *bla* gene is linked to two adjacent regulatory genes, those of the antirepressor signal sensor/transducer *blaR1* (585 amino acids, *M<sub>r</sub>* = 69,246) and the repressor *blaI* (126 amino acids, *M<sub>r</sub>* = 14,876) [31, 33, 34]. The gene product of *blaZ* is the staphylococcal class A β-lactamase PC1 (281 amino acids, *M<sub>r</sub>* = 31,349) [35], which uses an active-site serine to hydrolyze the four-membered β-lactam ring. As is generally accepted with all serine β-lactamases, the β-lactamase has ancient origins, likely having evolved from the PBP enzymes [36, 37]. Expression of this β-lactamase is not constitutive but is induced following encounter of the *S. aureus* (possessing penicillinase plasmids) with β-lactams [38]. The initiating event for β-lactamase expression is an irreversible acylation, with concomitant opening of the β-lactam, of an active site serine in the sensor domain of cell surface BlaR1 protein (BlaR1 represents the transmembrane spanning and signal transducer domains; BlaR1<sup>S</sup> represents the truncated C-terminal sensor domain of signal transducer). This acylation is the first event in signal transduction. The second event of signal transduction is a discrete (zinc metalloprotease-dependent) autoproteolytic cleavage within the cytoplasmic domain of BlaR1/MecR1 [39, 40]. Autocleavage of the signal transducer is followed by proteolytic propagation, ultimately with proteolysis of the dimeric protein repressor, BlaI. Following this proteolysis, the repressor dissociates from its divergon binding site, enabling transcription of the *blaZ/blaR/blaI* (and in the case of MecR, the *mecA/mecR/mecI* genes). While structural [35, 41, 42] and kinetic [43, 44] studies have extensively characterized the *blaZ* β-lactamase, efforts to understand the regulatory system controlling its expression continue. Among the important questions concerning the operation of this gene system are the mechanism of BlaR1 acylation, the events of the signal transduction pathway, the proteolytic cleavage event of the BlaI repressor and the mechanism for re-repression once the threat of the β-lactam has passed.

Cell. Mol. Life Sci. Vol. 62, 2005

The origin of deregulation

The starting point for discussion of the regulatory systems controlling expression of the β-lactamase and PBP 2a is their respective signal-transducer proteins, BlaR1 and MecR1. After contentious debate [15, 22, 39, 40] several key mechanistic aspects have been settled. Both BlaR1 and MecR1 are transmembrane receptor proteins [45–47]. BlaR1 of *S. aureus* is a high molecular weight (HMW) penicillin-binding protein. The protein sequence from the gene [25, 46], and the crystal structure of the solubilized C-terminal domain, are known [25, 27, 48]. BlaR1 consists of two domains [37]. The first is an N-terminus domain of approximately 38 kDa, with α-helices crossing the membrane four times via four transmembrane segments (TM1, TM2, TM3, TM4) [45]. The transmembrane segments are interconnected by three loops (L1, L2, L3), where L1 and L3 are exposed to the cytoplasm and L2 is positioned on the outside of the cell (as shown in fig. 1). The second approximately 27-kDa domain consists of the C-terminal sensor of the plasma membrane surface. β-Lactams in the extracellular medium react with the active site serine of the C-terminal domain in the acylation event. The nucleophilic serine is Ser³⁸⁹ for the *S. aureus* BlaR1 protein and Ser⁴⁰² for the *B. licheniformis* BlaR1 protein [27]. Acylation of this serine by a β-lactam initiates a signaling cascade, ultimately resulting in derepression of the β-lactamase-encoding gene. Both the 186-amino acid cytoplasmic segment (L3) and the 56-amino acid extracellular segment (L2) of the BlaR1 N-terminal domain are believed to be integral components of the signal cascade. The L3 segment is suggested to regulate, by responding to acylation of the C-terminal sensor domain, the autolytic zinc-metalloprotease activity of the N-terminal domain [45, 47]. The L2 loop and the BlaR1<sup>S</sup> bind non-covalently, and this interaction is altered by β-lactam acylation [25, 47]. While this proteolytic activity is surmised to play a fundamental role in signal transduction, the basis for the activation mechanism (such as might occur by conformational alteration of the L2 loop following β-lactam acylation of the serine) is not known with certainty.

The MecR1 protein is homologous to BlaR1. The similarities extend to mechanism, size and sequence (identity of sensor domains is 43%; of the protease domains is 33%; and of the full-length proteins is 34%) [25]. It is therefore highly probable that their tertiary structures and mechanism for gene derepression are similar. Nonetheless, there is currently no evidence to support overlap in the signal transduction: BlaR1 activation derepresses only the β-lactamase gene for β-lactamase expression, and MecR1 derepresses only the PBP 2a gene for PBP 2a expression. BlaR activation does not result in PBP 2a expression, nor does MecR activation result in β-lacta-

---

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the BlaR1 membrane protein that is involved in regulation of PBP 2a, where BlaR1<sup>S</sup> represents the sensor domain.

mase expression [21, 22, 49–51]. Thus, the present understanding of BlaR1 activation and signal transduction is a cascade with a minimum of four events. The first is Ser³⁸⁹ acyl-enzyme formation in the sensor domain [25, 52]. The second event is the alteration of protein conformation in response to stable acyl-enzyme formation, correlated to cross-membrane signal transduction. The third – and least well-understood event – is the cytoplasmic propagation of the signal. The fourth is the signal culmination resulting in gene derepression by the repressor proteolysis. The present understanding for each event is discussed.

A broad spectrum of β-lactam structures is capable of successful acylation of staphylococcal BlaR1<sup>S</sup>. Typical kinetic data ranges for staphylococcal BlaR1<sup>S</sup> are acylation rate constants (*k*₂) of 1–26 s⁻¹, *k*₂/*K*ₛ values of 0.3–11 × 10⁵ M⁻¹s⁻¹ and deacylation constants (*k*₃) of 4–100 × 10⁻⁵ s⁻¹. The observed deacylation rate constants correspond to *t*₁/₂ values of 10 to greater than 290 min. Complete deacylation exceeds the doubling time for *S. aureus* (20–30 min), indicating that acylation must be an irreversible event [52]. The rate constants determined for the sensor domain from *B. licheniformis* are similar [53]. Three conserved sequence motifs define the active site of all β-lactam serine transferases/hydrolases, including the class A, C and D β-lactamases and the cell wall transpeptidases [36]. These are an SXXK tetrad (that includes the nucleophilic serine), an SXN triad and a KTG triad. All are present in the BlaR1 and MecR1 sensor do-

main active sites. In BlaR1 of *S. aureus*, these motifs are found as Ser<sup>389</sup>-X-X-Lys<sup>392</sup> (with Ser<sup>389</sup> as the nucleophile in acylation), Ser<sup>437</sup>-X-Asn<sup>439</sup> (the sequence is Ser<sup>450</sup>-X-Thr<sup>452</sup> in *B. licheniformis* [27]), and Lys<sup>526</sup>-Thr-Gly<sup>528</sup>. Moreover, Ser<sup>389</sup> is located at the *N*-terminus of a helix, which likely modulates its p*K*<sub>a</sub> to facilitate its activation as a nucleophile [26]. Lysine<sup>392</sup> is the general base that activates the serine for acylation in this motif [36, 52].

The serine β-lactam transferase/hydrolases have common mechanistic features to facilitate serine acylation by the β-lactam. Two of the most important are Lewis acid activation of the β-lactam carbonyl electrophilicity (the oxyanion hole), and the use of a general base for activation (by deprotonation) of the serine. Both features are in BlaR1<sup>S</sup>. The BlaR1<sup>S</sup> oxyanion hole comprises the main-chain amide nitrogens of Ser<sup>289</sup> and Thr<sup>529</sup>, and is organized similarly to that of the serine β-lactamases. While the general base used for serine activation varies among the three serine β-lactamase classes (A, C and D), the substantial spatial overlay of BlaR1 and the OXA-10 class D β-lactamase active sites suggest a shared mechanism for serine activation [36, 52, 54]. The activation of class D β-lactamases involves lysine carboxylation (that is, a lysine with a carbamate anion functional group obtained by reaction of the lysine ε-amino group with CO<sub>2</sub>) as the serine base catalyst [52, 55]. The carboxylated lysine is the base for serine in both the acylation half-reaction [48, 52], and for water in the deacylation half-reaction [56]. The lysine in the OXA-10 β-lactamase is sequestered in an unusually hydrophobic environment (side chains of Phe<sup>69</sup>, Val<sup>117</sup>, Phe<sup>120</sup>, Trp<sup>154</sup> and Leu<sup>155</sup>) that is expected to lower the p*K*<sub>a</sub> of the lysine amino group such that it is in the free amine form necessary for reaction with CO<sub>2</sub> [55]. The existence of a similar hydrophobic environment has yet to be identified for Lys<sup>392</sup> of BlaR1<sup>S</sup> or *B. licheniformis*. In BlaR the position of this lysine with respect to Ser<sup>437</sup> is also appropriate for the carboxylated lysine acting as the requisite base for BlaR acylation [36, 52]. The participation of a Lys<sup>392</sup> CO<sub>2</sub>-derived carbamate in the BlaR1<sup>S</sup> acylation is consistent with the observation that the acylation rate of the sensor domain increases in the presence of added bicarbonate [48, 52]. Moreover, the <sup>13</sup>C nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrum of the BlaR1<sup>S</sup> protein in the presence of <sup>13</sup>CO<sub>2</sub> shows lysine carboxylation as evidenced by the diagnostic <sup>13</sup>C NMR resonance [52]. Therefore, BlaR1<sup>S</sup> is proposed to undergo carboxylation at Lys<sup>392</sup> (homologous to the Lys<sup>70</sup> for OXA-10) as a prerequisite for serine activation and for promoting acylation by β-lactams [48, 52, 55, 57, 58].

Kinetic study of the reaction of BlaR1<sup>S</sup> with β-lactams indicates that a small number of turnovers (with ceftazidime, six) are accomplished before the protein arrests as a stable acyl-enzyme [48]. The abrupt transition from hydrolytic turnover to stable BlaR1<sup>S</sup> acyl-enzyme is presumed to correlate with decisive alteration of protein structure. An observation may be relevant to this presumed alteration. A similar event occurs during OXA-10 β-lactamase catalysis, where the lysine carbamate can undergo spontaneous decarboxylation to arrest catalysis at the acyl-enzyme stage. Resumption of catalytic activity requires restoration of the lysine carbamate, by re-reaction with CO<sub>2</sub> [55, 59, 60]. It is not known whether the exceedingly slow deacylation of the BlaR1<sup>S</sup> acyl-enzyme involves a slow CO<sub>2</sub> reactivation step, followed by fast hydrolysis of the acyl-enzyme, or is simple bimolecular hydrolysis of the acyl-enzyme (which remains in the oxyanion hole and hence retains a portion of the active site activation for nucleophile addition). The lysine carbamate is absent in the X-ray structures for the apo-BlaR1<sup>S</sup> protein and for the β-lactam acylated-BlaR1<sup>S</sup> (both *S. aureus* and *B. licheniformis*) sensor domains [25, 27, 48]. The fundamental distinction between BlaR1<sup>S</sup> and class D β-lactamases is the inability of BlaR1<sup>S</sup> to accomplish deacylation. Structural evidence suggests a different role for the Ser<sup>115</sup> of the class D β-lactamases that is separate from the role of the homologous Ser<sup>437</sup> in BlaR1<sup>S</sup>, as possibly accounting for this divergence. In class D β-lactamase catalysis the Ser<sup>115</sup> hydroxyl is believed to shuttle a proton to the tetrahedral intermediate on the acylation pathway, transferring the proton from the carboxylated lysine to the leaving group nitrogen of the tetrahedral intermediate and enabling productive collapse to the acyl-enzyme [55, 58]. In the case of BlaR1<sup>S</sup>, a similar decarboxylation of Lys<sup>392</sup> would indeed entrap the acylated receptor species. This entrapment could coincide with the creation of an activated sensor state to initiate signal transduction [48].

### Signal transduction

The intermediate step between β-lactam acylation of BlaR1<sup>S</sup> and the ultimate derepression of the *bla* operon is that of signal transduction. Since β-lactams cannot permeate the cytoplasmic membrane, the presumption must be that sensor acylation is the initiating extracellular event. The current hypothesis proposes that signal propagation is mediated by an altered non-covalent interaction between the BlaR1<sup>S</sup> sensor domain and the L2 extracellular loop [25, 47]. The extracellular loop L2 (connecting the TM2-TM3 helices) has positively charged amino acids in non-covalent contact with the penicillin sensor domain. Phage display experiments with the *B. licheniformis* BlaR1<sup>S</sup> sensor domain implicate interruption of a non-covalent L2 loop interaction upon β-lactam acylation [47]. In both *B. licheniformis* and *S. aureus* this change is suggested to propagate through the transmembrane α-helices to alter, and thereby enable, activation of the metalloprotease cytoplasmic domain [25, 45, 47, 61].

Cell. Mol. Life Sci. Vol. 62, 2005

An altered interaction could induce the conformational change presumed necessary for signal transduction [45, 61]. In the case of BlaR1 of *S. aureus*, a paired proline PXXP motif in the L2 loop is believed to be involved in the non-covalent interaction between this loop and the sensor domain [25]. Mutagenesis of these prolines, or the deletion of a 35 C-terminal amino acid segment in *S. aureus* BlaR1<sup>S</sup>, results in constitutive β-lactamase synthesis [25, 62]. This observation does not reveal the proteolytic activation mechanism.

The *bla/mec* systems are distinctively different from all other bacterial signal transduction pathways [39, 40], which use a two-component, kinase-based system for signal transduction [63, 64]. If not this pathway, then what is the cytoplasmic signal transduction in BlaR1? One proposal is changed modality of integral membrane proteins, which exist either in anti-parallel β-barrel or α-helix bundle states [45]. This type of signal transduction involves realignment of the transmembrane helices. Circular dichroism (CD) analysis reveals a significant conformational change in the α-helices of the *S. aureus* BlaR1<sup>S</sup> domain upon β-lactam acylation [52]. However, direct evidence of a change in the transmembrane region upon acylation is lacking. Nor do the currently available X-ray structures for the apo- and penicillin-acylated BlaR1<sup>S</sup> sensor domains of *S. aureus* and *B. licheniformis* suggest where a conformational change might occur [25, 27, 48]. A second signal transduction hypothesis is proteolytic cleavage of key signaling components [39]. This method is supported by the evidence for autocleavage of the cytoplasmic metalloprotease on the N-terminal of BlaR1. However, it does not address the events that occur in between the acylation of BlaR1 and the induction of metalloprotease cleavage [39]. All mechanisms should account for the observation that β-lactam acylation of BlaR1 initiates β-lactamase expression (minutes) significantly faster than MecR1 acylation initiates PBP 2a expression (hours) [22, 23]. While it is certain that the two signaling systems are fundamentally the same, what accounts for this difference? There is currently no answer.

---

**Repressor cleavage**

The final steps leading to β-lactamase (and PBP 2a) expression are very similar. Intracellular metalloproteases, activated by the acylation event of the sensor domain, proteolytically cleave the dimeric repressor proteins, thus releasing them from their repressor sequence and allowing *blaZ* (or *mecA*) transcription. *S. aureus* BlaR1 and MecR1 (and BlaR1 of *B. licheniformis*) have (in their 186-amino acid cytoplasmic L3 domain) the sequence signature of a zinc metallopeptidase [39, 45, 65]. The signature is defined by a histidine sequence

[as the Zn(II) ligands] and a glutamic acid, which is also required as the catalytic base for hydrolysis [66]. As zinc metalloproteases commonly autocatalytically self-activate by intramolecular cleavage, the same process is assumed here [67]. Although direct evidence for autocleavage within the BlaR1/MecR1 domains is lacking, one cleavage site is identified that upon proteolysis leaves the putative cytoplasmic protease tethered to the cytoplasmic membrane [39, 40]. The relationship of this tethered domain to the metalloprotease accomplishing the sequence-specific cleavage of the repressors is not known. An alternate theory suggests the inactivation of BlaI results from a non-covalent modification by a co-activator and the subsequent proteolysis may be a secondary phenomenon [68].

The 14-kDa BlaI and MecI repressor proteins consist of an 11-kDa DNA binding domain and a 3-kDa dimerization domain [49]. Deregulation involves three discrete events: cleavage of the repressor blocking gene transcription, divergent transcription of the genes encoding the regulated proteins and their cognate regulatory proteins, and re-repression of the gene (upon absence in the extracellular medium of β-lactam antibiotics). The metalloprotease cleaves, at a specific sequence, the two 14-kDa repressors into the DNA binding domain and dimerization domains. X-ray structure confirms a bound homodimeric repressor (fig. 2) [28, 69]. The N-terminal domain of each binds to the DNA with winged helix-turn-helix topology, independently binding to the DNA from its counterpart on the other monomer. The C-terminal dimerization domain has a spiral helical topology that intertwines its counterpart on the other monomer, giving stability to the dimer [28, 49, 69–71]. The structure of the repressor was determined with and without their cognate DNA substrate [28, 51]. The repressors in complex with their target DNA reveal a conserved protein-DNA interface between both *mec* and *bla* targets. Both recognize and specifically bind, by an α3 recognition helix on the N-terminal domain, to a conserved TACA/TGTA DNA motif [28]. Each repressor adopts a slightly different con-

formation when bound to either the *mec* or *bla* binding sites due to slight spatial differences between the DNA motifs [28]. MecI binds to either operon, and therefore blocks transcription of both the *mec* and *bla* operators. BlaI likewise binds to both the *mec* and *bla* operators [20, 50]. The interchangeability of BlaI and MecI is a consequence of their similarity. The *S.* aureus BlaI and MecI repressors have 125 amino acid residues with 61% identity to each other, and respectively 31 and 41% identity with *B.* licheniformis BlaI [51]. Nearly all of the residues that interact directly with DNA are conserved in the two repressors (the exception is Asn⁶⁵ in BlaI, which is replaced by Lys⁶⁵ in MecI). The repressor binds to the DNA with the C-terminal dimer domain oriented cytosolically, away from the N-terminal DNA binding region. The poorly accessible cleavage site is buried within the C-terminal domain. Proteolytic cleavage (at the Asn¹⁰¹-Phe¹⁰² for both BlaI and MecI) disrupts the dimer interface, causing the dimer to dissociate and release itself from the DNA. Gene transcription follows. It is also suggested that the metalloprotease works with another (currently unidentified) factor, involved in unraveling of the repressor structure to allow access of the metalloprotease to the cleavage site [27, 38]. Such a relationship remains unproven.

The operon encoding the regulated protein (*β*-lactamase or PBP 2a) and the regulatory proteins (BlaI/BlaR1 or MecI/MecR) overlap partially with the operator region to which the repressor binds. Binding of the repressor to the *bla* system results in repression of *blaZ*, *blaR1* and *blaI*, along with autorepression of the operator region as well. Hence, removing the repressor results in both sets of genes being divergently transcribed with simultaneous expression of the *β*-lactamase (or PBP 2a) repressor and signal transducer. The repressors constrain transcription by binding two specific regions of dyad symmetry in the *bla* (or *mec*) operator, namely, the Z and R1 dyads in the intergenic region between the *blaZ* gene (or *mecA*) and the regulatory operon genes for *blaR1-blaI* (or *mecR1-mecI*). Cleavage of BlaI dissociates the dimer. Displacing the repressor from its intergenic operator site enables transcription of *blaZ*. Because BlaR1 is presumed to activate and signal transduce once, intact BlaR1 must be made continuously for sensing of the environmental *β*-lactam concentration. BlaI, BlaR1 (presumably including the metalloproteinase) and the *β*-lactamase are all expressed. BlaI increases its intracellular concentration about five-fold upon penicillin induction [70, 72]. Once the extracellular *β*-lactam antibiotic concentration diminishes, BlaR1 is no longer autoactivated. Proteolytic cleavage of MecI/BlaI ceases, and the intramolecular concentration of the repressor molecule increases. The repressors dimerize, bind DNA and re-suppress *mecA* and *blaZ* synthesis [22, 39].

Methicillin resistance: PBP 2a as an enigma wrapped in a riddle

One strategy by which bacterial pathogens develop resistance to antibiotics is mutation of key residues within the target. This evolutionary adaptation of the target renders the antibiotic ineffective. While *S.* aureus has chosen, even after 50 years of selective pressure, not to acquire modified or new *β*-lactamases, it has acquired another (and highly successful) resistance mechanism. Methicillin, introduced in 1959 as the first semisynthetic penicillinase-resistant penicillin, was followed by the appearance in 1961 of the first MRSA strain [9]. By the 1980s MRSA was global [9]. The basis for the transformation to MRSA was the genomic acquisition of the *mecA* gene, encoding the PBP 2a enzyme. With the outbreak came clonal dissemination, leading to the divergence of MRSA into several dominant classes throughout the 1960s [11, 73–75]. MRSA is now a global scourge [76–80] causing a broad spectrum of infections such as superficial abscesses, septicemia, osteomyelitis, bacteremia, necrotizing pneumonia and endocarditis [16], refractory to almost all *β*-lactams [2]. Enright [81] has reviewed the path to clinical isolates from both hospital- and community-acquired infections. MRSA now appears in over 50% of the clinical strains in U.S. hospitals and is fatal in 20–40% of these cases [82]. The complex pathogenesis of *S.* aureus involves the strongly coordinated synthesis of cell wall-associated proteins and extracellular toxins. Vastly different from the highly disseminated strains of methicillin-susceptible *S.* aureus that cause infection, there are only a small number of clones responsible for the epidemic spread of MRSA [8]. Major MRSA clones repeatedly arise from successful epidemic MSSA strains. More distressing is the presence of isolates with decreased susceptibility to vancoymcin disseminating from MRSA. The trend toward increasing drug resistance reflects the ongoing pursuit of mechanistic perfection by a small number of successful *S.* aureus genotypes. Although some diversity exists, each clone preserves the *mecA* gene, often complemented by its regulatory genes *mecR1-mecI*. All are found on a mobile genomic island designated staphylococcal cassette chromosome *mec* (SCC*mec*) [83]. This chromosomal cassette combines the entire *mec* operon (approximately 28 kb) with the *ccr* gene, a complex encoding the site-specific recombinases responsible for SCC*mec* mobility [84]. This mobility is imperative for resistance, as MSSA must acquire SCC*mec* to form MRSA. However, introduction of SCC*mec* into MSSA is met with substantial cost, and many strains of MSSA select against it [85, 86]. Although SCC*mec* is found in many staphylococcal species, little is known about its origin. The atypical codon usage pattern and its GC content suggest acquisition from another bacterial species [87]. The closest possibility is a PBP from

Staphylococcus sciuri, a species that is considered to be taxonomically primitive among staphylococci and found predominantly in rodents and primitive mammals [88]. While the PBP of *S.* sciuri shares 88% amino acid homology with PBP 2a [89, 90], a definitive relationship is not proven. It is certain the SCCmec gene is transferred horizontally among staphylococcal species within its own genus, leading to significant clonal dissemination [83, 91, 92]. Different combinations of the mec gene complex and the ccr gene complex have led to five separate SCCmec lineages for *S.* aureus, each differing in size and composition [84, 91, 93]. It is believed that both the mec and ccr gene complexes continuously recombine and rearrange in the genomes of coagulase-negative staphylococci, perpetually forming new SCCmec elements. However, only a small fraction transfer to *S.* aureus strains isolated from the community [84]. Despite the continuous genomic reorganization, several genes are always preserved in each SCCmec element. The mecA gene (encoding PBP 2a) and its cadre of regulatory genes (mecI and mecRI) are found in each of the five SCCmec classes. Each component has been cloned and sequenced (MecI: 125 amino acids, $M_{r}$ = 14,790, MecR1: 585 amino acids, $M_{r}$ = 68,503 [94, 95]. As discussed previously, the regulatory system controlling transcription of the mec operon is remarkably similar to the bla system. There are, however, noteworthy differences [96]. Despite similar recognition sequences, the bla system induces blaZ transcription within minutes, while induction of mecA takes several hours [22, 23]. This difference may result from the difficulty that MecR1 has in sensing penicillins (such as methicillin and oxacillin) [97]. Additionally, MecR1 and BlaR1 are specific for their cognate repressors and cannot be functionally interchanged [22]. Furthermore, a chromosomally encoded factor (BlaR2) of unknown function is believed to have a role in BlaI cleavage and bla derepression [28, 38], while a similar factor has yet to be implicated for mec.

The resistance of MSSA to virtually all β-lactam antibiotics stems from the expression of penicillin-binding protein 2a (PBP 2a). PBP 2a is a high molecular weight (668 amino acids, $M_{r}$ = 76,102) membrane-bound transpeptidase belonging to the subclass B1 [95, 98, 99] family. In addition to its transpeptidase domain it also has a non-penicillin-binding domain of unknown function [59]. Methicillin-sensitive strains of *S.* aureus MSSA produce four PBPs that assemble and regulate the final stages of cell wall biosynthesis [100, 101]. As mentioned, acquisition of the mec operon by MSSA transforms it to the MRSA phenotype. In most (non-clinical) organisms, PBP 2a supplements the other PBPs rather than replacing their function. In other phenotypes, PBP 2a takes over transpeptidation [102, 103]. When the MRSA organism is subjected to β-lactam stress, PBP 2a confers resistance by contributing its transpeptidase activity (cell-wall cross-linking) to the transglycosylase

function of native PBPs during cell wall synthesis [102, 104]. The following sections explore the important integral relationship PBP 2a has to staphylococcal resistance, from its response to β-lactam pressure to its role in cell wall synthesis.

### Basis of resistance to β-lactam antibiotics

An essential objective to the understanding of this pathogen is the precise role PBP 2a confers to the enigmatic ability of MRSA to circumvent the antibacterial effect of β-lactams. The many reviews [8, 81, 87, 96, 97, 105, 106] on this topic concur that the survival advantage of MRSA under β-lactam pressure correlates to the ability of PBP 2a to provide compensatory function. The PBPs are streamlined into a limited number of functions. Some exist in increased copy number, while other PBPs are altered by selection of mutant variants so as to diminish recognition of the β-lactam without compromise of the peptidoglycan role [106]. PBP 2a is the most abundant PBP of the MRSA microorganism at a copy number of 450–1200 per MRSA cell [107]. However, studies of heterogeneous populations of MRSA (in which the majority of cells are resistant to relatively low concentration of methicillin, while a much smaller proportion – 10⁻⁸ to 10⁻² of the cells – are able to grow at higher methicillin concentrations) suggest that the PBP 2a abundance does not necessarily correlate with the level of resistance [108, 109].

The topology and mechanism (serine-derived acyl-enzyme) of the transpeptidase domain of PBP are similar to the serine β-lactamases (classes A, C and D) [36, 37], including the three active site signature sequences [SXXK, (S/Y)XN and KTS/KTG] [110]. Nonetheless, despite this similarity PBP 2a is different [85, 111–113]. Less is known about the PBP 2a reaction with β-lactams, and especially how it continues cell wall biosynthesis under conditions where the catalytic activity of the other *S.* aureus PBPs are compromised by β-lactam encounter [114, 115]. The antibiotic activity of the β-lactams is imputed to mimicry of an essential peptide motif of the bacterial cell wall, and to engage in confounding acylation of their PBP targets. The Tipper-Strominger hypothesis emphasizes the similarity between the β-lactam and the acyl-d-Ala-d-Ala moiety of the peptidoglycan, allowing irreversible β-lactam acylation resulting in loss of the transpeptidase and carboxypeptidase activities required for cell wall assembly [103, 116]. The resemblance of the β-lactam moiety to a dipeptide extends only to recognition. There can be no more certain a point of distinction than the contrast between the stable β-lactam-derived acyl enzyme, and the transient acyl-enzyme derived from d-Ala-d-Ala that effortlessly participates in cell wall construction. Thus, while transpeptidases turn over

multiple strands of peptidoglycan to accomplish cell wall synthesis, the β-lactam gives a stable acyl-enzyme that undergoes a very slow hydrolysis (a time scale greater than 30 min) [101]. The longevity of this acyl-enzyme corresponds to inactivation of the PBP enzyme, depriving the bacterium of the catalysts it needs to maintain its cell wall integrity. This deprivation ultimately results in cell death.

Kinetics powerfully describe the interaction between an enzyme and its substrate. The kinetic mechanism of PBP 2a is well approximated by the same three-step pathway that characterizes the other PBPs [98, 111, 117, 118]. From the non-covalent enzyme-β-lactam complex (described by dissociation constant \( K_d \)), a covalent acyl-enzyme forms (with rate constant \( k_2 \)), and is followed by a slow hydrolytic deacylation step (\( k_3 \)) releasing the deactivated β-lactam and regenerating the active enzyme. Recently published kinetics for PBP 2a, obtained using a chromogenic cephalosporin (nitrocefin) as a reporter substrate [117], correlate these kinetic values to relative β-lactam (penicillins, cephalosporins and a carbapenem) resistance [98]. The non-covalent PBP 2a pre-acylation complex \( K_d \) values are in the millimolar range (ranging between 0.2 and 13 mM) for the spectrum of β-lactam structures that was evaluated [98, 119]. These values seemingly contrast with PBP 2, where significantly lower \( K_d \) values are surmised [119–122]. A possible explanation for the higher \( K_d \) values found with PBP 2a is diminished accessibility of the β-lactams to the PBP 2a active site. Indeed, even single mutations at the active site of the *Streptococcus pneumoniae* PBP 2x alter the topology (or change the polarity) such that entry to the active site is greatly affected [121, 123–127]. A no less important manifestation of resistance is the PBP 2a acylation rate constant (\( k_2 \)), which attenuates three to four orders of magnitude over the corresponding rate constants for penicillin-sensitive PBPs [119, 120, 122]. The result is a 10,000-fold smaller \( k_2/K_d \) ratio for PBP 2a (1–20 M⁻¹s⁻¹) compared with susceptible PBPs (200,000 M⁻¹s⁻¹) for many β-lactams. Another characteristic of PBP 2a is the extremely slow rate constants (\( t_{1/2} \) of 26–77 h) for the deacylation (\( k_3 \)) of the acyl-enzyme. However, most PBPs are notorious for their slow deacylation [98, 112, 122, 128], with PBP 5 of *Escherichia coli* as an exception (\( t_{1/2} \) of < 10 min) [129]. Therefore, this does not explain the dramatically attenuated values for \( k_2 \), \( K_d \) or \( k_2/K_d \). Rather, these extraordinary differences evoke the image of a mechanistic or structural hindrance within PBP 2a that renders acylation problematic. Many early attempts were made to rationalize differential PBP 2a activity by sequence comparison with other PBPs [130–137], but always leading to the conclusion that PBP 2a was distinctively different. At last, some of the mystique enshrouding PBP 2a was removed with the disclosure of its soluble domain structure (determined by X-ray at 1.8 Å resolution) by Lim and Strynadka [138]. The soluble PBP 2a (644 amino acids, \( M_r = 74,000 \)) has three domains. The domains are an N-terminal lobe (corresponding to an N-terminal extension or anchor, characteristic of the class B1 HMW PBP structural archetype) [59], a centralized non-penicillin binding domain of unknown function and a C-terminal transpeptidase domain. Of particular interest is the C-terminal transpeptidase domain, which has a folding pattern that is typical of the PBP transpeptidases and the serine β-lactamases [36, 139]. Nonetheless, PBP 2a possesses subtle structural deviations that contribute to its uniqueness [138]. The prominent difference is the active site motif of the nucleophilic serine (Ser⁴⁰³-Thr-Gln-Lys⁴⁰⁶) located on an α-helix sequestered within an extended narrow groove. Unlike typical PBPs, the groove impairs the accessibility of the active site serine to approaching β-lactams. A sense of this impairment is given by comparison (fig. 3A, C) of the apo-forms of PBP 2a (Ser⁴⁰³) and PBP 5 (Ser⁴⁴). The groove is surmised to differentially limit access to β-lactams as compared with the cell wall substrate. Moreover, within the groove Ser⁴⁰³ is less capable of nucleophilic approach to bound β-lactams (and quite possibly, also the peptidoglycan substrate). The implication that active site conformational change is needed, for both inactivation by β-lactam antibiotics and catalytic turnover of peptidoglycan substrates, was substantiated by comparison of the apo-PBP 2a and acyl-PBP 2a structures for three PBP 2a acyl-enzyme crystal structures (derived from nitrocefin, penicillin-G and methicillin) [138]. The conformational difference between the apo- and benzylpenicillin PBP 2a acyl-enzyme species is shown in fig. 3A and B. The implication is that PBP 2a conforms individually to each β-lactam (and substrate). Among the noticeable differences are the Ser⁴⁰³ Ca, Cβ and Oγ locations. The difference in the location of these atoms between the acyl-enzyme and apo-structures is respectively 1.1, 1.4 and 1.8 Å. This suggests a Ser⁴⁰³ conformational change preceding acylation [138]. Evidence supporting this conformational change is also provided by the PBP 2a CD spectra in the presence of oxacillin (a penicillin) and ceftazidime (a cephalosporin) [98]. The relatively slow kinetics for the interactions of β-lactam antibiotics with PBP 2a reveal decreased α-helix content (observed at minima 208 and 222 nm) upon exposure to the antibiotic, among a set of conformational changes seen within the first \( t_{1/2} \) values for acylation (progressing to virtually complete protein acylation). These conformational changes continued for the duration of the monitoring over 3 days. In essence, the CD spectra indicate substantial conformational flexibility within the protein [98]. More important, this supports the suggestion from the X-ray data that PBP 2a undergoes conformational change in order to accommodate β-lactam binding. It remains unknown whether these changes are attributable

Cell. Mol. Life Sci. Vol. 62, 2005 Review Article 2625

osmotic pressure of the cell [141] and withstands the restructuring that must accompany cell division [142, 143]. Within the stress-bearing Gram-positive peptidoglycan protective layer [144] are embedded teichoic acids [145] and many bacterial surface proteins [146, 147]. The peptidoglycan consists of a repeating β-1,4-linked N-acetyl-glucosamine-N-acetyl-muramic acid (NAG-NAM) disaccharide, where the NAM-pentapeptide stem (in *S. aureus*, NAM-L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys-D-Ala-D-Ala) cross-links (with loss of the terminal D-Ala) to the adjacent peptidoglycan strand. In Gram-positive bacteria (such as *Enterococcus*, *Streptococcus* and *Staphylococcus*) this cross-link occurs to a peptic chain attached to the ε-amine of the L-Lys [148]. In *S. aureus* the chain is a pentaglycyl (scheme 1). The cross-linking bridges the glycan and confers strength to the cell wall. The inside (newly synthesized) *S. aureus* peptidoglycan is highly cross-linked (estimated as 90%), whereas the outside (as a result of autolysin-controlled maturation) is less cross-linked [104, 149]. The penicillin-binding proteins are located on the extracellular surface of the cytoplasmic membrane, where they accomplish the final steps of cell wall assembly [36, 100, 150]. These steps include glycosyltransferase-catalyzed formation of the linear glycan chains and transpeptidase-catalyzed formation of the peptide cross-bridges. The transglycosylase and transpeptidase reactions are each catalyzed separately by the two domains of bifunctional penicillin-binding proteins (such as PBP 2). Thus, the MRSA PBP 2a transpeptidase activity complements the PBP 2 transglycosylase activity (which remains unaffected by the β-lactam inactivation of the PBP 2 transpeptidase). The *S. aureus* cell wall obtained from the cooperative PBP 2 and 2a catalysis is only very slightly different from the peptidoglycan made by PBP 2 (in the absence of β-lactams) [104]. Nonetheless, the assignment of a three-dimensional structure to the peptidoglycan remains elusive despite much effort over the past 30 years. Among the difficulties are the sacculus size (a single molecule per bacterium) and structural variability (as a result of autolysin maturation of the cell wall), and the extensive cross-linking. Substantial degradation is necessary to provide segments amenable to structural study. Moreover, continual cell wall synthesis and turnover present additional variability [149, 151, 152]. A recent model integrates the known data into a proposed scaffold structure for the *S. aureus* cell wall murein [149, 153]. Its notable departure from earlier proposals is a perpendicular — not parallel — orientation of the glycan to the membrane. In this model chains of glycan and oligopeptide both run in a plane perpendicular to the plasma membrane, with the oligopeptides maintaining a zigzag conformation and zipping adjacent glycan strands along their lengths [149]. This model accounts well for the high degree of peptidoglycan cross-linking. The transpeptidase and transglycosylase interaction

Figure 3. (A) Stereoview of the active site of the apo form of PBP 2a; (B) benzylpenicillin/PBP 2a acyl-enzyme species; (C) apo form of PBP5 from *E. coli*. Important residues are shown in capped-stick representation and colored according to atom type (white, blue and red representing carbon, nitrogen and oxygen, respectively). A Connolly solvent accessible blue surface is constructed around the residues. The protein backbone is shown in yellow ribbon representation.

to formation of the initial, non-covalent Michaelis complex or to the acylation.

PBP 2a manifests resistance to β-lactams in two ways: a sterically encumbered approach to the active site, quite possibly slowing non-covalent Michaelis-complex formation (as evidenced by the millimolar $K_{\mathrm{d}}$ values for many β-lactams). Nucleophilic attack by the active site serine (Ser<sup>403</sup>) on the β-lactam ring may also be impeded, with the slow acylation rate perhaps implicating a requirement for conformational change to expose the serine. Both factors make the formation of a PBP 2a acyl-enzyme difficult.

The role of PBP 2a in cell wall synthesis

Not only is the bacterial cell wall indispensable for survival, it also contributes to infectivity and pathogenicity [140]. The cross-linked peptidoglycan (also referred to as the cell wall or sacculus) is a continuous elastic polymer surrounding the cytoplasm of virtually all bacteria. The peptidoglycan provides structural integrity to the cell, offers mechanical protection with respect to the high

strong, highly cross-linked peptidoglycan [155]. In the presence of β-lactams, the primary difference between MRSA and MSSA is the loss of the PBP 2 transpeptidase activity. MRSA peptidoglycan biosynthesis depends on the cooperative action of the transglycosylase domain of the native PBP 2 and the transpeptidase domain of PBP 2a [102]. The MRSA cell wall is less cross-linked (unlinked muropeptides with fewer dimers and trimers) [108, 114]. In studies where the PBP 2 transglycosylase is inactivated, *S. aureus* is unable to build the peptidoglycan and exhibits β-lactam sensitivity, even though the PBP 2a transpeptidase may be present [102, 156].

Both VISA and VRSA are characterized by irregular cell walls. VISA strains induce increased cell wall biosynthesis and decreased cross-linking, accumulating intact acyl-D-Ala-D-Ala termini, which result in non-productive vancomycin binding. Resistance is the outcome of thickened cell wall and changes to both the composition of peptidoglycan and expression of penicillin-binding proteins [157-163]. Recently emerged VRSA strains, having both the β-lactam resistance gene *mecA* and the vancomycin resistance gene *vanA* [164], synthesize a cell wall of unusual chemical composition with irregular cell wall precursors (i.e., muropeptide oligomers deficient of pentaglycine branches) [165, 166]. The *vanA* operon from enterococcus allows synthesis of a cell wall precursor that ends in D-Ala-D-Lac rather than D-Ala-D-Ala. The D-Ala-D-Lac terminus has dramatically reduced affinity for vancomycin. When challenged by vancomycin, this depsipeptide is synthesized and incorporated into the peptidoglycan [165, 166]. Inactivation of the *mec* gene does not reduce the vancomycin MIC for strain COLVA, indicating PBP 2a is not needed for biosynthesis of cell wall in VRSA. Rather, it was demonstrated that the native staphylococcal PBP 2 is essential for vancomycin resistance and for synthesis of the abnormally structured cell walls [165]. As demonstrated, both transpeptidases PBP 2 and PBP 2a exert considerable influence over the phenotypes of cell wall found in the four principal isolates of staphylococci. These interactions are complex and in most cases poorly characterized. What insight exists into the molecular events that transpeptidases accomplish when forming the cell wall?

The previous section introduced an important aspect of the of PBP 2a active site groove. While hindering β-lactam approach, it also may direct how the PBP interacts with the cell wall. This interaction is surmised to be dramatically different than in the native PBP 2 with its more exposed active site. Recently a model was proposed for the activation of catalysis in the transpeptidase PBP 2a, which reasoned that surface interactions between PBP 2a and a series of compounds mimicking its polymeric substrate would facilitate opening of the active site to facilitate entry of the peptidoglycan (or as in this case, the β-lactam) [167]. The experiment was simple: by use

Scheme 1. The components in *S. aureus* cell wall biosynthesis. The undecaprenylpyrophosphate segment of lipid II inserts into the outer membrane leaflet, exposing the NAG-NAM disaccharide. Attached to the lactyl carboxylate of the NAM saccharide is the L-Ala-D-γ-glutamyl-L-Lys-D-Ala-D-Ala pentapeptide stem segment. The sequential action of three enzymes (FmhB, a gly cyl transferase; and FemA and FemB, both digly cyl transferases) give the pentagly cyl peptide branch segment. The transglycosylase domain of PBP 2 polymerizes the NAG-NAM pair to give the repeating [NAG-NAM]$_x$ glycan strand. The arrows indicate the directionality of the glycan strands, suggested by Dmitriev et al. to have an orthogonal orientation relative to the membrane surface. The dashed box (center right) summarizes the reaction catalyzed by the transpeptidase domain of PBP 2 (and also by PBP 2a). In the first transpeptidase step, the active site serine is acylated by the D-Ala-D-Ala segment, with loss of the terminal D-Ala. In the second step the D-alanyl group is transferred to the pentaglycyl amine giving the cross-link. A second dashed box (upper right) shows a completed cross-link. The arrows to the right indicate approximately an orthogonal plane of cross-links (relative to the glycan). The bending of the pentaglycyl branches is for legibility. The stem-branch cross-link will be stretched to its full length by the internal osmotic pressure of the bacterium. Dmitriev et al. propose a bifurcated interglycan and interlayer-linked Gram-positive scaffold [149].

determines the peptidoglycan structure. The *S. aureus* peptidoglycan is found in four important incarnations. These are MSSA, MRSA, VISA, and VRSA. Each has a different transpeptidase/transglycosylase interaction yielding a unique cell wall phenotype.

Cell wall synthesis in MSSA is accomplished by four native staphylococcal PBPs (PBP1, PBP 2, PBP 3, PBP 4). Of particular interest is PBP 2, the only bifunctional (with separate transpeptidase and transglycosylase domains) PBP [59, 154]. Under ideal growth conditions (without β-lactam stress) the transpeptidase activities of PBP 2 and PBP 4 coordinate cell wall synthesis [104]. It is suggested that the transpeptidase activity of PBP 2 produces dimers, trimers, and tetrameric muropeptides that are further cross-linked by PBP 4. The result is a

of a nitrocefin-based chromogenic assay, the kinetics ($k_2$, $K_s$, $k_2/K_s$) of these compounds with PBP 2a were evaluated. The compounds mimic the $N$-acetylglucosamine (NAG)-$N$-acetylmuramic acid (NAM) disaccharide with the NAM pentapeptide (NAM-L-Ala-$\gamma$-D-Glu-L-Lys-D-Ala-D-Ala) appendage (but without the pentaglycyl segment, thus preventing turnover by PBP 2a). The outcome was surprising. As the concentration of the peptidoglycan fragment increased, the rate constant for PBP 2a acylation ($k_2$) by nitrocefin increased (by approximately 10–25-fold), and the dissociation constant ($K_s$) decreased (by approximately 2–4-fold). Bacterial cell wall also increased the deacylation rate constant ($k_3$) by approximately 3-fold. The binding of the cell wall surrogates was saturable, indicating the presence of a unique binding site. From these data the dissociation constants ($K_d$) for each fragment with PBP 2a (1–3 mM) were determined. It was previously argued that the effective concentrations of the cell wall components that the PBPs experience on the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane might be high [168]. Therefore, the millimolar $K_d$ values for the interactions between PBP 2a and the peptidoglycan fragments would seem reasonable. As such, there may not have been a compelling reason for evolutionary improvement of the cell wall affinity for the PBP. An assertion can also be made that real cell wall would have higher affinity, making the process more efficient in vivo, such that the many cross-linking events of the cell wall could proceed unencumbered within the 20–30 min required for doubling (under favorable conditions) of *S. aureus*. These findings imply a greater availability of the PBP 2a active site to the $\beta$-lactam antibiotic in the presence of increasing concentrations of the peptidoglycan fragments (as a result of a more stable non-covalent PBP 2a $\beta$-lactam-preacylation complex that shows more rapid enzyme acylation). X-ray structural evidence for other PBPs bound to peptidoglycan (pentapeptide) mimetics points to a new subsite that may function as a high-affinity anchor for the cell wall component [169–171]. A similar allosteric binding site for PBP 2a that facilitates access (for both substrate and $\beta$-lactam) to the active site may be implied. Although a binding site for cell wall has been documented, which interacts with PBP 2a in a saturable manner, the location of this binding site and how this binding event alters the protein structure is presently lacking.

bacteremia proved lethal in more than 80% of cases [3]. To all good things must come an end. After MRSA was established as a significant nosocomial pathogen, vancomycin became the cornerstone of therapy [172–175]. Until the mid-1990s, clinical isolates of *S. aureus* remained fully susceptible to vancomycin treatment, with minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) values around 1 $\mu$g/ml [176]. An exponential increase in the usage of vancomycin for treating infections caused by methicillin-resistant staphylococci (both coagulase-positive and -negative), *Clostridium difficile*, and enterococcal infections preceded the emergence of vancomycin-resistant staphylococci [175]. The first clinical strain (VISA) of *S. aureus* resistant to vancomycin (Mu50) was reported in 1997 from Japan [177]. As VISA is not clonal, most strains were initially characterized as containing a small number of vancomycin-intermediately resistant subpopulations (such as Mu50, with a vancomycin MIC of >8 $\mu$g/ml) at a frequency of 1 per 1,000,000. Heteroresistant strains of VISA exist and are susceptible to vancomycin. As such, it is hypothesized that VISA isolates can be selected among vancomycin-resistant subpopulations, similar to the way MRSA isolates can be selected from heterogeneous MRSA [8, 177]. From this beginning, VISA has proliferated as measured by its frequency among worldwide clinical isolates [177–180]. Resistance in MRSA is manifested in the form of increased cell wall biosynthesis and decreased cross-linking of peptidoglycan [157]. The decreased cross-linking of peptidoglycan leads to the accumulation of D-Ala-D-Ala peptidoglycan termini. These bind vancomycin non-productively. The appearance of VISA in clinical isolates led to the growing concern that the enterococcal *vanA* gene could transfer to MRSA and work in conjunction with *mecA*. Such an event would render current antibiotics nearly impotent. And this has happened. MRSA carrying the enterococcal *vanA* gene complex, and expressing high-level resistance to vancomycin (MIC over 32 $\mu$g/ml), emerged in clinical strains from Michigan, Pennsylvania and New York [12–14]. These VRSA isolates demonstrate complete vancomycin resistance (MIC of >128 $\mu$g/ml). VISA resistance is chromosomally mediated, and VRSA acquires resistance by conjugal transfer of the *vanA* operon from *Enterococcus faecalis*. As MRSA, and moreover as VRSA, *S. aureus* has returned as a serious infectious agent. The need for novel antibiotics to treat this organism is as genuine today as at anytime in the past. This clinical urgency has been addressed in recent years by the introduction of Synercid (a combination of quinupristin and dalfopristin) [181], daptomycin [182] and linezolid (an oxazolidinone) [183] for the treatment of MRSA. However, resistance to all these agents exists, and the recent emergence of variants of MRSA resistant to linezolid [184] and glycopeptide antibiotics [12–14, 185] has created a situation in which certain strains of *S. aureus* are either treatable only

MSSA, glancing back ... VRSA, looking ahead

Reflecting on the diverse events that have selected the highly resistant and pathogenic *S. aureus*, one appreciates the challenges it has overcome. *S. aureus* was exquisitely sensitive to penicillins in the early years of $\beta$-lactam use in the clinic, heralding what we now recognize as a temporary end to the era where *S. aureus*
with a single class of antibiotics or simply not treatable. With respect to β-lactams, new structures (especially as fourth-generation cephalosporins) that are more capable of PBP 2a inactivation have been identified. A handful have advanced into clinical trial for MRSA treatment. Similar to other organisms that must adapt to selective pressure, *S. aureus* has survived the eons of time. The development of new genetic capabilities occurs slowly or rapidly, and *S. aureus* exemplifies both. Its β-lactamase is an evolutionarily ancient response to β-lactams that was uncommon but is now common. The recent successive alterations to its cell wall – the phenotypic transition from MSSA to that of the pathogenically sublime vancomycin- and methicillin-resistant *S. aureus* – exemplifies extraordinary change over an incredibly short period of time. The future of this organism cannot be foretold. We can be certain, however, that the future will deliver surprise, and that the surprise may be unpleasant. The selection pressure that has driven these recent changes is fundamentally unchanged, and the remarkable facility with which *S. aureus* has adopted to this pressure leaves us at a loss to foretell its future phenotypic evolution.

This is not to imply that antibacterial drug design is bereft of direction, or that future antibacterial chemotherapy is bereft of hope. Our appreciation of the evolutionary genetics of the PBPs [186], of their cooperative participation in cell wall biosynthesis, [104] of their structures [130, 137, 138, 170] and of their basis for substrate recognition and catalysis [170, 187] is immeasurably better today than even 5 years ago. The realization that the catalytic activity of PBP 2 (and 2A) is influenced – indeed, likely even regulated – by the cell wall structure opens new opportunity for drug design. Pinho and Errington [188] have shown that only active PBP 2 is recruited to the *S. aureus* division site; Fuda et al. [167] have shown that the catalytic activity of PBP 2a is allosterically responsive to the cell wall structure; and Macheboeuf et al. [189] have visualized PBP active site restructuring (of the *S. pneumoniae* class A PBP1a) in response to substrate. Adversarial regulation of PBP 2 (whose transglycosylase activity remains essential to *S. aureus* [104]) differentiates glycopeptides effective against MRSA from those that are not [190, 191]. Moreover, a correlation between bacterial membrane depolarization and bacteriocidal activity has been demonstrated for both Telavancin and Daptomycin (respectively, a new lipid II-interacting semi-synthetic vancomycin glycopeptide and a lipopeptide) [192, 193]. All of these new correlations represent new hypotheses to guide discovery of new antibacterial leads, and to guide the development of new antibacterial synergies (as exemplified by the ability of gallate esters [194] and daptomycin [195, 196] to synergize β-lactams against MRSA). While the chemotherapy that will effectively counter the *S. aureus* phenotype of

the future cannot be predicted, the truest sense of scientific optimism remains. *S. aureus* will always be a challenging pathogen, with the chemotherapy to vanquish it remaining for us to discover.

**Acknowledgements.** Dr. Samy Meroueh is thanked for his assistance with the figures. The research of this laboratory is supported by the U.S. National Institutes of Health.

1. Palumbi S. (2001) Humans as the world’s greatest evolutionary force. Science **293**: 1786–1790
2. Chambers H. F. (2001) The changing epidemiology of Staphylococcus aureus? Emerg. Infect. Dis. **7**: 178–182
3. Skinner D. and Keefer C. S. (1941) Significance of bacteremia caused by Staphylococcus aureus. Arch. Intern. Med. **68**: 851–875
4. Medeiros A. A. (1997) Evolution and dissemination of β-lactamases accelerated by generations of beta-lactam antibiotics. Clin. Infect. Dis. Suppl. **1**: S19–S45
5. Barber M. and Rozwadoska-Dowzenko M. (1948) Infection by penicillin-resistant staphylococci. Lancet **ii**: 641–644
6. Rammelkamp C. H. and Maxon T. (1942) Resistance of Staphylococcus aureus to the action of penicillin. Proc. Royal. Soc. Exper. Biol. Med. **51**: 386–389
7. Kirby W. M. M. (1944) Extraction of a highly potent penicillin inactivator from penicillin resistant staphylococci. Science **99**: 452–453
8. Lowy F. D. (2003) Antimicrobial resistance: the example of Staphylococcus aureus. J. Clin. Invest. **111**: 1265–1273
9. Jevons M. (1961) Celbenin resistant staphylococci. Br. Med. J. **i**: 124–125
10. Chambers H. F. (1997) Methicillin resistance in staphylococci: molecular and biochemical basis and clinical implications. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. **10**: 781–791
11. Enright M. C., Robinson D. A., Randle G., Feil E. J., Grundmann H. and Spratt B. G. (2002) The evolutionary history of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **99**: 7687–7692
12. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2004) Vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus – New York, 2004. Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. **53**: 322–323
13. Bartley J. (2002) First case of VRSA identified in Michigan. Infect. Control. Hosp. Epidemiol. **23**: 480
14. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2002) Staphylococcus aureus resistant to vancomycin – United States, 2002. Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. **51**: 931
15. Rosato A. E., Kreiswirth B. N., Craig W. A., Eisner W., Climo M. W. and Archer G. L. (2003) *mecA-blaZ* corepressors in clinical Staphylococcus aureus isolates. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **47**: 1460–1463
16. Lowy F. D. (1998) Staphylococcus aureus infections. N. Engl. J. Med. **339**: 520–532
17. Diekema D. J., Pfaller M. A., Schmitz F. J., Smayevsky J., Bell J., Jones R. N. et al. (2001) Survey of infections due to Staphylococcus species: frequency of occurrence and antimicrobial susceptibility of isolates collected in the United States, Canada, Latin America, Europe, and the Western Pacific region for the SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program, 1997–1999. Clin. Infect. Dis. **15**: S114–S132
18. Hiramatsu K., Asada K., Suzuki E., Okonogi K. and Yokota T. (1992) Molecular cloning and nucleotide sequence determination of the regulator region of *mecA* gene in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). FEBS Lett. **298**: 133–136
19. Geronimus L. H. and Cohen S. (1957) Induction of staphylococcal penicillinase. J. Bacteriol. **73**: 28–34
20. Clarke S. R. and Dyke K. G. (2001) Studies of the operator region of the Staphylococcus aureus β-lactamase operon. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. **47**: 377–389
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. Vol. 62, 2005

Review Article 2629

21 Lewis R. A. and Dyke K. G. (2000) MecI represses synthesis from the beta-lactamase operon of Staphylococcus aureus. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. **45**: 139–144

22 McKinney T. K., Sharma V. K., Craig W. A. and Archer G. L. (2001) Transcription of the gene mediating methicillin resistance in Staphylococcus aureus (mecA) is corepressed but not coinduced by cognate mecA and β-lactamase regulators. J. Bacteriol. **183**: 6862–6868

23 Ryffel C., Kayser F. H. and Berger-Bachi B. (1992) Correlation between regulation of mecA transcription and expression of methicillin resistance in staphylococci. Antimicrob. Agents. Chemother. **36**: 25–31

24 Melckebeke H. V., Vreuls C., Gans P., Filee P., Llabres G., Joris B. et al. (2003) Solution structural study of BlaI: implications for the repression of genes involved in β-lactam antibiotic resistance. J. Mol. Biol. **333**: 711–720

25 Wilke M. S., Hills T. L., Zhang H. Z., Chambers H. F. and Strynadka N. C. (2004) Crystal structures of the Apo and penicillin-acylated forms of the BlaR1 β-lactam sensor of Staphylococcus aureus. J. Biol. Chem. **279**: 47278–47287

26 Moews P. C., Knox J. R., Dideberg O., Charlier P. and Frere J. M. (1990) Beta-lactamase of Bacillus licheniformis 749/C at 2 Å resolution. Proteins **7**: 156–171

27 Kerff F., Charlier P., Colombo M. L., Sauvage E., Brans A., Frere J. M. et al. (2003) Crystal structure of the sensor domain of the BlaR penicillin receptor from Bacillus licheniformis. Biochemistry **42**: 12835–12843

28 Safo M. K., Zhao Q., Ko T. P., Musayev F. N., Robinson H., Scarsdale N. et al. (2005) Crystal structures of the BlaI repressor from Staphylococcus aureus and its complex with DNA: insights into transcriptional regulation of the bla and mec Operons. J. Bacteriol. **187**: 1833–1844

29 Bondi J. A. and Dietz C. C. (1945) Penicillin resistant staphylococci. Proc. Royal. Soc. Exper. Biol. Med. **60**: 55–58

30 Rowland S. J. and Dyke K. G. (1989) Characterization of the staphylococcal β-lactamase transposon Tn552. EMBO J. **8**: 2761–2773

31 Rowland S. J. and Dyke K. G. (1990) Tn552, a novel transposable element from Staphylococcus aureus. Mol. Microbiol. **4**: 961–975

32 Hackbarth C. J. and Chambers H. F. (1993) blaI and blaR1 regulate beta-lactamase and PBP 2a production in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrob. Agents. Chemother. **37**: 1144–1149

33 Novick R. P. and Richmond M. H. (1965) Nature and interactions of the genetic elements governing penicillinase synthesis in Staphylococcus aureus. J. Bacteriol. **90**: 467–480

34 Wang P. Z., Projan S. J. and Novick R. P. (1991) Nucleotide sequence of β-lactamase regulatory genes from staphylococcal plasmid pI258. Nucleic Acids Res. **19**: 4000

35 Herzberg O. (1991) Refined crystal structure of beta-lactamase from Staphylococcus aureus PC1 at 2.0 Å resolution. J. Mol. Biol. **217**: 701–719

36 Massova I. and Mobashery S. (1998) Kinship and diversification of bacterial penicillin-binding proteins and β-lactamases. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **42**: 1–17

37 Ghuysen J. M. (1994) Molecular structures of penicillin-binding proteins and β-lactamases. Trends Microbiol. **2**: 372–380

38 Cohen S. and Sweeney H. M. (1968) Constitutive penicillinase formation in Staphylococcus aureus owing to a mutation unrelated to the penicillinase plasmid. J. Bacteriol. **95**: 1368–1374

39 Zhang H. Z., Hackbarth C. J., Chansky K. M. and Chambers H. F. (2001) A proteolytic transmembrane signaling pathway and resistance to beta-lactams in staphylococci. Science **291**: 1962–1965

40 Archer G. L. and Bosilevac J. M. (2001) Signaling antibiotic resistance in staphylococci. Science. **291**: 1915–1916

41 Herzberg O. and Moult J. (1987) Bacterial resistance to β-lactam antibiotics: crystal structure of beta-lactamase from

42 Chen C. C. and Herzberg O. (1999) Relocation of the catalytic carboxylate group in class A β-lactamase: the structure and function of the mutant enzyme Glu166→Gln:Asn170→Asp. Protein Eng. **12**: 573–579

43 Craig S., Hollecker M., Creighton T. E. and Pain R. H. (1985) Single amino acid mutations block a late step in the folding of β-lactamase from Staphylococcus aureus. J. Mol. Biol. **185**: 681–687

44 Christensen H., Martin M. T. and Waley S. G. (1990) β-Lactamases as fully efficient enzymes. Determination of all the rate constants in the acyl-enzyme mechanism. Biochem. J. **266**: 853–861

45 Hardt K., Joris B., Lepage S., Brasseur R., Lampen J. O., Frere J. M. et al. (1997) The penicillin sensory transducer, BlaR, involved in the inducibility of beta-lactamase synthesis in Bacillus licheniformis is embedded in the plasma membrane via a four-alpha-helix bundle. Mol. Microbiol. **23**: 935–944

46 Kobayashi T., Zhu Y. F., Nicholls N. J. and Lampen J. O. (1987) A second regulatory gene, blaR1, encoding a potential penicillin-binding protein required for induction of β-lactamase in Bacillus licheniformis. J. Bacteriol. **169**: 3873–3878

47 Hanique S., Colombo M. L., Goormaghtigh E., Soumillion P., Frere J. M. and Joris B. (2004) Evidence of an intramolecular interaction between the two domains of the BlaR1 penicillin receptor during the signal transduction. J. Biol. Chem. **279**: 14264–14272

48 Birck C., Cha J. Y., Cross J., Schulze-Briese C., Meroueh S. O., Schlegel H. B. et al. (2004) X-ray crystal structure of the acylated β-lactam sensor domain of BlaR1 from Staphylococcus aureus and the mechanism of receptor activation for signal transduction. J. Am. Chem. Soc. **126**: 13945–13947

49 Gregory P. D., Lewis R. A., Curnock S. P. and Dyke K. G. (1997) Studies of the repressor (BlaI) of β-lactamase synthesis in Staphylococcus aureus. Mol. Microbiol. **24**: 1025–1037

50 Sharma V. K., Hackbarth C. J., Dickinson T. M. and Archer G. L. (1998) Interaction of native and mutant MecI repressors with sequences that regulate mecA, the gene encoding penicillin binding protein 2a in methicillin-resistant staphylococci. J. Bacteriol. **180**: 2160–2166

51 Garcia-Castellanos R., Mallorqui-Fernandez G., Marrero A., Potempa J., Coll M. and Gomis-Ruth F. X. (2004) On the transcriptional regulation of methicillin resistance: MecI repressor in complex with its operator. J. Biol. Chem. **279**: 17888–17896

52 Golomi-Kotra D., Cha J. Y., Meroueh S. O., Vakulenko S. B. and Mobashery S. (2003) Resistance to β-lactam antibiotics and its mediation by the sensor domain of the transmembrane BlaR signaling pathway in Staphylococcus aureus. J. Biol. Chem. **278**: 18419–18425.

53 Duval V., Swinnen M., Lepage S., Brans A., Granier B., Fransen C. et al. (2003) The kinetic properties of the carboxy terminal domain of the Bacillus licheniformis 749/I BlaR penicillin-receptor shed a new light on the derepression of β-lactamase synthesis. Mol. Microbiol. **48**: 1553–1564

54 Zhu Y. F., Curran I. H., Joris B., Ghuyse J. M. and Lampen J. O. (1990) Identification of BlaR, the signal transducer for beta-lactamase production in Bacillus licheniformis, as a penicillin-binding protein with strong homology to the OXA-2 β-lactamase (class D) of Salmonella typhimurium. J. Bacteriol. **172**: 1137–1141

55 Golomi D., Maveyraud L., Vakulenko S., Samama J. P. and Mobashery S. (2001) Critical involvement of a carbamylated lysine in catalytic function of class D β-lactamases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **98**: 14280–14285

56 Maveyraud L., Golomi-Kotra D., Ishiwata A., Meroueh O., Mobashery S. and Samama J. P. (2002) High-resolution X-ray structure of an acyl-enzyme species for the class D OXA-10 β-lactamase. J. Am. Chem. Soc. **124**: 2461–2465

57 Sun T., Nukaga M., Mayama K., Braswell E. H. and Knox J. R. (2003) Comparison of beta-lactamases of classes A and D: 1.5-

2630 C. C. S. Fuda, J. F. Fisher and S. Mobashery

A crystallographic structure of the class D OXA-1 oxacillinase. Protein Sci. 12: 82–91

58 Pernot L., Frenois F., Rybkine T., L’Hermite G., Petrella S., Delette J. et al. (2001) Crystal structures of the class D β-lactamase OXA-13 in the native form and in complex with meropenem. J. Mol. Biol. 310: 859–874

59 Goffin C. and Ghuysen J. M. (1998) Multimodular penicillin-binding proteins: an enigmatic family of orthologs and paralogs. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 62: 1079–1093

60 Golemi D., Maveyraud L., Vakulenko S., Tranier S., Ishiwata A., Kotra L. P. et al. (2000) The first structural and mechanistic insights for class D β-lactamases: Evidence for a novel catalytic process for turnover of beta-lactam antibiotics. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122: 6132–6133

61 Gierasch L. M. (1989) Signal sequences. Biochemistry 28: 923–930

62 Lewis R. A., Curnock S. P. and Dyke K. G. (1999) Proteolytic cleavage of the repressor (BlaI) of β-lactamase synthesis in Staphylococcus aureus. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 178: 271–275

63 Bijlsma J. J. and Groisman E. A. (2003) Making informed decisions: regulatory interactions between two-component systems. Trends Microbiol. 11: 359–366

64 Eguchi Y. and Utsumi R. (2005) A novel mechanism for connecting bacterial two-component signal-transduction systems. Trends Biochem. Sci. 30: 70–72

65 Vallee B. L. and Auld D. S. (1992) Functional zinc-binding motifs in enzymes and DNA-binding proteins. Faraday Discuss. 93: 47–65

66 Jiang W. and Bond J. S. (1992) Families of metalloendopeptidases and their relationships. FEBS Lett. 12: 110–114

67 Marie-Claire C., Roques B. P. and Beaumont A. (1998) Intramolecular processing of prothermolysin. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 5697–5701

68 Filee P., Benlafya K., Delmarcelle M., Moutzourelis G., Frere J. M., Brans A. et al. (2002) The fate of the BlaI repressor during the induction of the Bacillus licheniformis BlaP β-lactamase. Mol. Microbiol. 44: 685–694

69 Garcia-Castellanos R., Marrero A., Mallorqui-Fernandez G., Potempa J., Coll M. and Gomis-Ruth F. X. (2003) Three-dimensional structure of MecI. Molecular basis for transcriptional regulation of staphylococcal methicillin resistance. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 39897–39905

70 Wittman V., Lin H. C. and Wong H. C. (1993) Functional domains of the penicillinase repressor of Bacillus licheniformis. J. Bacteriol. 175: 7383–7390

71 Filee P., Vreuls C., Herman R., Thamm I., Aerts T., De Deyn P. P. et al. (2003) Dimerization and DNA binding properties of the Bacillus licheniformis 749/I BlaI repressor. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 16482–16487

72 Dubnau D. A. and Pollock M. R. (1965) The genetics of Bacillus licheniformis penicillinase: a preliminary analysis from studies on mutation and inter-strain and intra-strain transformations. J. Gen. Microbiol. 41: 7–21

73 Jessen O., Rosendal K., Bulow P., Faber V. and Eriksen K. R. (1969) Changing staphylococci and staphylococcal infections. A ten-year study of bacteria and cases of bacteremia: a meta-analysis. N. Engl. J. Med. 281: 627–635

74 Parker M. T. and Hewitt J. H. (1970) Methicillin resistance in Staphylococcus aureus. Lancet 1: 800–804

75 Feil E. J., Cooper J. E., Grundmann H., Robinson D. A., Enright M. C., Berendt T. et al. (2003) How clonal is Staphylococcus aureus? J. Bacteriol. 185: 3307–3316

76 Ko K. S., Lee J. Y., Suh J. Y., Oh W. S., Peck K. R., Lee N. Y. et al. (2005) Distribution of major genotypes among methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus clones in Asian countries. J. Clin. Microbiol. 43: 421–426

77 Ayliffe G. A. (1997) The progressive intercontinental spread of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Clin. Infect. Dis. 24: S74–S79

Staphylococcus aureus β-lactam resistance

78 Aires de Sousa M., Sanches I. S., Ferro M. L., Vaz M. J., Saraiva Z., Tendeiro T. et al. (1998) Intercontinental spread of a multidrug-resistant methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus clone. J. Clin. Microbiol. 36: 2590–2596

79 Galdbart J. O., Morvan A. and El Solh N. (2000) Phenotypic and molecular typing of nosocomial methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus strains susceptible to gentamicin isolated in france from 1995 to 1997. J. Clin. Microbiol. 38: 185–190

80 Hartstein A. I., Denny M. A., Morthland V. H., LeMonte A. M. and Pfaller M. A. (1995) Control of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in a hospital and an intensive care unit. Infect. Control. Hosp. Epidemiol. 16: 405–411

81 Enright M. C. (2003) The evolution of a resistant pathogen – the case of MRSA. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 3: 474–479

82 Mylotte J. M., McDermott C. and Spooner J. A. (1987) Prospective study of 114 consecutive episodes of Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. Rev. Infect. Dis. 9: 891–907

83 Katayama Y., Ito T. and Hiramatsu K. (2000) A new class of genetic element, staphylococcus cassette chromosome mec, encodes methicillin resistance in Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 44: 1549–1555

84 Ito T., Ma X. X., Takeuchi F., Okuma K., Yuzawa H. and Hiramatsu K. (2004) Novel type V staphylococcal cassette chromosome some mec driven by a novel cassette chromosome recombinase, ccrC. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 48: 2637–2651

85 Katayama Y., Zhang H. Z., Hong D. and Chambers H. F. (2003) Jumping the barrier to β-lactam resistance in Staphylococcus aureus. J. Bacteriol. 185: 5465–5472

86 Ender M., McCallum N., Adhikari R. and Berger-Bachi B. (2004) Fitness cost of SCCmec and methicillin resistance levels in Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 48: 2295–2297

87 Hiramatsu K., Watanabe S., Takeuchi F., Ito T. and Baba T. (2004) Genetic characterization of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Vaccine 22: S5–S8

88 Couto I., de Lencastre H., Severina E., Kloos W., Webster J. A., Hubner R. J. et al. (1996) Ubiquitous presence of a mecA homologue in natural isolates of Staphylococcus sciuri. Microb. Drug. Resist. 2: 377–391

89 Couto I., Wu S. W., Tomasz A. and de Lencastre H. (2003) Development of methicillin resistance in clinical isolates of Staphylococcus sciuri by transcriptional activation of the mecA homologue native to the species. J. Bacteriol. 185: 645–653

90 Wu S. W., de Lencastre H. and Tomasz A. (2001) Recruitment of the mecA gene homologue of Staphylococcus sciuri into a resistance determinant and expression of the resistant phenotype in Staphylococcus aureus. J. Bacteriol. 183: 2417–2424

91 Ito T., Katayama Y., Asada K., Mori N., Tsutsumimoto K., Tien-sasitorn C. et al. (2001) Structural comparison of three types of staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec integrated in the chromosome in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 45: 1323–1336

92 Ito T., Katayama Y. and Hiramatsu K. (1999) Cloning and nucleotide sequence determination of the entire mec DNA of pre-methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus N315. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 43: 1449–1458

93 Ma X. X., Ito T., Tiensasitorn C., Jamklang M., Chongtrakool P., Boyle-Vavra S. et al. (2002) Novel type of staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec identified in community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus strains. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 46: 1147–1152

94 Matsushashi M., Song M. D., Ishino F., Wachi M., Doi M., Inoue M. et al. (1986) Molecular cloning of the gene of a penicillin-binding protein supposed to cause high resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics in Staphylococcus aureus. J. Bacteriol. 167: 975–980

95 Song M. D., Wachi M., Doi M., Ishino F. and Matsushashi M. (1987) Evolution of an inducible penicillin-target protein in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus by gene fusion. FEBS Lett. 221: 167–171

96  Mallorqui-Fernandez G., Marrero A., Garcia-Pique S., Garcia-Castellanos R. and Gomis-Ruth F. X. (2004) Staphylococcal methicillin resistance: fine focus on folds and functions. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. **235**: 1–8

97  Berger-Bachi B. and Rohrer S. (2002) Factors influencing methicillin resistance in staphylococci. Arch. Microbiol. **178**: 165–171

98  Fuda C., Suvorov M., Vakulenko S. B. and Mobashery S. (2004) The basis for resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics by penicillin-binding protein 2a of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. J. Biol. Chem. **279**: 40802–40806

99  Hartman B. J. and Tomasz A. (1984) Low-affinity penicillin-binding protein associated with beta-lactam resistance in Staphylococcus aureus. J. Bacteriol. **158**: 513–516

100 Goffin C. and Ghuysen J. M. (2002) Biochemistry and comparative genomics of SxxK superfamily acyltransferases offer a clue to the mycobacterial paradox: presence of penicillin-susceptible target proteins versus lack of efficiency of penicillin as therapeutic agent. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. **66**: 702–738

101 Bush K. and Mobashery S. (1998) How β-lactamases have driven pharmaceutical drug discovery. From mechanistic knowledge to clinical circumvention. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. **456**: 71–98

102 Pinho M. G., de Lencastre H. and Tomasz A. (2001) An acquired and a native penicillin-binding protein cooperate in building the cell wall of drug-resistant staphylococci. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **98**: 10886–10891

103 Koch A. L. (2003) Bacterial wall as target for attack: past, present and future research. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. **16**: 673–687

104 Leski T. A. and Tomasz A. (2005) Role of penicillin-binding protein 2 (PBP2) in the antibiotic susceptibility and cell wall cross-linking of Staphylococcus aureus: evidence for the cooperative functioning of PBP2, PBP4, and PBP2A. J. Bacteriol. **187**: 1815–1824

105 Chambers H. F. (2003) Solving staphylococcal resistance to beta-lactams. Trends Microbiol. **11**: 145–148

106 Fisher J. F., Meroueh S. O. and Mobashery S. (2005) Bacterial resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics: compelling opportunism, compelling opportunity. Chem. Rev. **105**: 395–424

107 Pucci M. J. and Dougherty T. J. (2002) Direct quantitation of the numbers of individual penicillin-binding proteins per cell in Staphylococcus aureus. J. Bacteriol. **184**: 588–591

108 Rohrer S. and Berger-Bachi B. (2003) FemABX peptidyl transferases: a link between branched-chain cell wall peptide formation and beta-lactam resistance in gram-positive cocci. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **47**: 837–846

109 Ryffel C., Strassle A., Kayser F. H. and Berger-Bachi B. (1994) Mechanisms of heteroresistance in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **38**: 724–728

110 Wu C. Y., Alborn W. E. J., Flokowitsch J. E., Hoskins J., Unal S., Blaszczak L. C. et al. (1994) Site-directed mutagenesis of the mecA gene from a methicillin-resistant strain of Staphylococcus aureus. J. Bacteriol. **176**: 443–449

111 Roychoudhury S., Dotzlaf J. E., Ghag S. and Yeh W. K. (1994) Purification, properties, and kinetics of enzymatic acylation with beta-lactams of soluble penicillin-binding protein 2a. A major factor in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. J. Biol. Chem. **269**: 12067–12073.

112 Sun Y., Bauer M. D. and Lu W. P. (1998) Identification of the active site serine of penicillin-binding protein 2a from methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus by electrospray mass spectrometry. J. Mass. Spec. **33**: 1009–1016

113 Pinho M. G., Ludovice A. M., Wu S. and De Lencastre H. (1997) Massive reduction in methicillin resistance by transposon inactivation of the normal PBP2 in a methicillin-resistant strain of Staphylococcus aureus. Microb. Drug Resist. **3**: 409–413

114 de Jonge B. L., Chang Y. S., Gage D. and Tomasz A. (1992) Peptidoglycan composition of a highly methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus strain. The role of penicillin binding protein 2A. J. Biol. Chem. **267**: 11248–11254

115 Chambers H. F., Sachdeva M. J. and Hackbarth C. J. (1994) Kinetics of penicillin binding to penicillin-binding proteins of Staphylococcus aureus. Biochem. J. **301**: 139–144

116 Waxman D. J. and Strominger J. L. (1983) Penicillin-binding proteins and the mechanism of action of beta-lactam antibiotics. Annu. Rev. Biochem. **52**: 825–869

117 Graves-Woodward K. and Pratt R. F. (1998) Reaction of soluble penicillin-binding protein 2a of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus with β-lactams and acyclic substrates: kinetics in homogeneous solution. Biochem. J. **332**: 755–761

118 Lu W. P., Sun Y., Bauer M. D., Paule S., Koenigs P. M. and Kraft W. G. (1999) Penicillin-binding protein 2a from methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus: kinetic characterization of its interactions with beta-lactams using electrospray mass spectrometry. Biochemistry **38**: 6537–6546

119 Lu W. P., Kincaid E., Sun Y. and Bauer M. D. (2001) Kinetics of beta-lactam interactions with penicillin-susceptible and -resistant penicillin-binding protein 2x proteins from Streptococcus pneumoniae. Involvement of acylation and deacylation in beta-lactam resistance. J. Biol. Chem. **276**: 31494–31501

120 Jamin M., Hakenbeck R. and Frere J. M. (1993) Penicillin binding protein 2x as a major contributor to intrinsic beta-lactam resistance of Streptococcus pneumoniae. FEBS Lett. **331**: 101–104

121 Pagliero E., Chesnel L., Hopkins J., Croize J., Dideberg O., Vernet T. et al. (2004) Biochemical characterization of Streptococcus pneumoniae penicillin-binding protein 2b and its implication in beta-lactam resistance. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. **48**: 1848–1855

122 Di Guilmi A. M., Mouz N., Petillot Y., Forest E., Dideberg O. and Vernet T. (2000) Deacylation kinetics analysis of Streptococcus pneumoniae penicillin-binding protein 2x mutants resistant to beta-lactam antibiotics using electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry. Anal. Biochem. **284**: 240–246

123 Strynadka N. C., Adachi H., Jensen S. E., Johns K., Sielecki A., Betzel C. et al. (1992) Molecular structure of the acyl-enzyme intermediate in beta-lactam hydrolysis at 1.7 Å resolution. Nature **359**: 700–705

124 Jelsch C., Mourey L., Masson J. M. and Samama J. P. (1993) Crystal structure of Escherichia coli TEM1 beta-lactamase at 1.8 Å resolution. Proteins **16**: 364–383

125 Lamotte-Brasseur J., Dive G., Dideberg O., Charlier P., Frere J. M. and Ghuy森 J. M. (1991) Mechanism of acyl transfer by the class A serine beta-lactamase of Streptomyces albus G. Biochem. J. **279**: 213–221

126 Pernot L., Chesnel L., Le Gouellec A., Croize J., Vernet T., Dideberg O. et al. (2004) A PBP2x from a clinical isolate of Streptococcus pneumoniae exhibits an alternative mechanism for reduction of susceptibility to beta-lactam antibiotics. J. Biol. Chem. **279**: 16463–14670

127 Chesnel L., Pernot L., Lemaire D., Champelovier D., Croize J., Dideberg O. et al. (2003) The structural modifications induced by the M339F substitution in PBP2x from Streptococcus pneumoniae further decreases the susceptibility to beta-lactams of resistant strains. J. Biol. Chem. **278**: 44448–44456

128 Mouz N., Gordon E., Di Guilmi A. M., Petit I., Petillot Y., Dupont Y. et al. (1998) Identification of a structural determinant for resistance to beta-lactam antibiotics in Gram-positive bacteria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **95**: 13403–13406

129 Amanuma H. and Strominger J. L. (1984) Purification and properties of penicillin-binding proteins 5 and 6 from the dacA mutant strain of Escherichia coli (JE 11191). J. Biol. Chem. **259**: 1294–1298

130 Pares S., Mouz N., Petillot Y., Hakenbeck R. and Dideberg O. (1996) X-ray structure of Streptococcus pneumoniae PBP2x,

a primary penicillin target enzyme. Nat. Struct. Biol. 3: 284–289

131 Dideberg O., Charlier P., Dupont L., Vermeire M., Frere J. M. and Ghuysen J. M. (1980) The 4.5 Å resolution structure analysis of the extracellular DD-carboxypeptidase of Streptomyces albus G. FEBS Lett. 117: 212–214

132 Kelly J. A., Moews P. C., Knox J. R., Frere J. M. and Ghuysen J. M. (1982) Penicillin target enzyme and the antibiotic binding site. Science 218: 479–481

133 Knox J. R., DeLucia M. L., Murthy N. S., Kelly J. A., Moews P. C., Frere J. M. et al. (1979) Crystallographic data for a penicillin receptor: extracellular DD-carboxypeptidase-transpeptidase from Streptomyces R61. J. Mol. Biol. 127: 217–218

134 Kelly J. A. and Kuzin A. P. (1995) The refined crystallographic structure of a DD-peptidase penicillin-target enzyme at 1.6 Å resolution. J. Mol. Biol. 254: 223–236

135 Rhazi N., Charlier P., Dehareng D., Engher D., Vermeire M., Frere J. M. et al. (2003) Catalytic mechanism of the Streptomyces K15 DD-transpeptidase/penicillin-binding protein probed by site-directed mutagenesis and structural analysis. Biochemistry 42: 2895–2906

136 Fonze E., Vermeire M., Nguyen-Disteche M., Brasseur R. and Charlier P. (1999) The crystal structure of a penicilloylserine transferase of intermediate penicillin sensitivity. The DD-transpeptidase of streptomycetes K15. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 21853–21860

137 Nicholas R. A., Krings S., Tomberg J., Nicola G. and Davies C. (2003) Crystal structure of wild-type penicillin-binding protein 5 from Escherichia coli: implications for deacylation of the acyl-enzyme complex. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 52826–52833

138 Lim D. and Strynadka N. C. (2002) Structural basis for the beta-lactam resistance of PBP2a from methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Nat. Struct. Biol. 9: 870–876

139 Paetzel M., Danel F., de Castro L., Mosimann S. C., Page M. G. and Strynadka N. C. (2000) Crystal structure of the class D beta-lactamase OXA-10. Nat. Struct. Biol. 7: 918–925

140 van Heijenoort J. and Gutmann L. (2000) Correlation between the structure of the bacterial peptidoglycan monomer unit, the specificity of transpeptidation, and susceptibility to beta-lactams. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 5028–5030

141 Holtje J. V. (1998) Growth of the stress-bearing and shape-maintaining murein sacculus of Escherichia coli. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 62: 181–203

142 Touhami A., Jericho M. H. and Beveridge T. J. (2004) Atomic force microscopy of cell growth and division in Staphylococcus aureus. J. Bacteriol. 186: 3286–3295

143 Nanninga N. (1998) Morphogenesis of Escherichia coli. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 62: 110–129

144 Weidel W. and Pelzer H. (1964) Bag-shaped macromolecules – a new outlook on bacterial cell walls. Adv. Enzymol. Relat. Areas Mol. Biol. 26: 193–232

145 Baddiley J. (1989) Bacterial cell walls and membranes. Discovery of the teichoic acids. Bioessays 10: 207–210

146 Schneewind O., Fowler A. and Faull K. F. (1995) Structure of the cell wall anchor of surface proteins in Staphylococcus aureus. Science 268: 103–106

147 Perry A. M., Ton-That H., Mazmanian S. K. and Schneewind O. (2002) Anchoring of surface proteins to the cell wall of Staphylococcus aureus. III. Lipid II is an in vivo peptidoglycan substrate for sortase-catalyzed surface protein anchoring. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 16241–16248

148 Schleifer K. H. and Kandler O. (1972) Peptidoglycan types of bacterial cell walls and their taxonomic implications. Bacteriol. Rev. 36: 407–477

149 Dmitriev B. A., Toukach F. V., Holst O., Rietschel E. T. and Ehlers S. (2004) Tertiary structure of Staphylococcus aureus cell wall murein. J. Bacteriol. 186: 7141–7148

150 van Heijenoort J. (2001) Formation of the glycan chains in the synthesis of bacterial peptidoglycan. Glycobiology 11: 25R–36R

151 Di Guilmi A. M., Dessen A., Dideberg O. and Vernet T. (2002) Bifunctional penicillin-binding proteins: focus on the glycosyltransferase domain and its specific inhibitor moenomycin. Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 3: 63–75

152 Di Guilmi A. M., Mouz N., Andrieu J. P., Hoskins J., Jaskunas S. R., Gagnon J. et al. (1998) Identification, purification and characterization of transpeptidase and glycosyltransferase domains of Streptococcus pneumoniae penicillin-binding protein 1a. J. Bacteriol. 180: 5652–5659

153 Dmitriev B. A., Toukach F. V., Schaper K. J., Holst O., Rietschel E. T. and Ehlers S. (2003) Tertiary structure of bacterial murein: the scaffold model. J. Bacteriol. 185: 3458–3468

154 Murakami K., Fujimura T. and Doi M. (1994) Nucleotide sequence of the structural gene for the penicillin-binding protein 2 of Staphylococcus aureus and the presence of a homologous gene in other staphylococci. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 117: 131–136

155 de Jonge B. L. and Tomasz A. (1993) Abnormal peptidoglycan produced in a methicillin-resistant strain of Staphylococcus aureus grown in the presence of methicillin: functional role for penicillin-binding protein 2A in cell wall synthesis. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 37: 342–346

156 Pinho M. G., Filipe S. R., de Lencastre H. and Tomasz A. (2001) Complementation of the essential peptidoglycan transpeptidase function of penicillin-binding protein 2 (PBP2) by the drug resistance protein PBP2A in Staphylococcus aureus. J. Bacteriol. 183: 6525–6531

157 Reipert A., Ehlert K., Kast T. and Bierbaum G. (2003) Morphological and genetic differences in two isogenic Staphylococcus aureus strains with decreased susceptibilities to vancomycin. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 47: 568–576

158 Boyle-Vavra S., Labischinski H., Ebert C. C., Ehlert K. and Daum R. S. (2001) A spectrum of changes occurs in peptidoglycan composition of glycopeptide-intermediate clinical Staphylococcus aureus isolates. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 45: 280–287

159 Cui L., Murakami H., Kuwahara-Arai K., Hanaki H. and Hiramatsu K. (2000) Contribution of a thickened cell wall and its glutamine nonamidated component to the vancomycin resistance expressed by Staphylococcus aureus Mu50. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 44: 2276–2285

160 Hanaki H., Labischinski H., Inaba Y., Kondo N., Murakami H. and Hiramatsu K. (1998) Increase in glutamine-non-amidated muropeptides in the peptidoglycan of vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus strain Mu50. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 42: 315–320

161 Komatsuzawa H., Ohta K., Yamada S., Ehlert K., Labischinski H., Kajimura J. et al. (2002) Increased glycan chain length distribution and decreased susceptibility to moenomycin in a vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus mutant. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 46: 75–81

162 Moreira B., Boyle-Vavra S., deJonge B. L. and Daum R. S. (1997) Increased production of penicillin-binding protein 2, increased detection of other penicillin-binding proteins and decreased coagulase activity associated with glycopeptide resistance in Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 41: 1788–1793

163 Sieradzki K. and Tomasz A. (1997) Inhibition of cell wall turnover and autolysis by vancomycin in a highly vancomycin-resistant mutant of Staphylococcus aureus. J. Bacteriol. 179: 2557–2566

164 Chang S., Sievert D. M., Hageman J. C., Boulton M. L., Tenover F. C., Downes F. P. et al. (2003) Infection with vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus containing the vanA resistance gene. N. Engl. J. Med. 348: 1342–1347

165 Severin A., Wu S. W., Tabei K. and Tomasz A. (2004) Penicillin-binding protein 2 is essential for expression of high-level vancomycin resistance and cell wall synthesis in vancomycin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus carrying the enterococcal vanA gene complex. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 48: 4566–4573

166 Severin A., Tabei K., Tenover F., Chung M., Clarke N. and Tomasz A. (2004) High level oxacillin and vancomycin resistance and altered cell wall composition in Staphylococcus aureus carrying the staphylococcal mecA and the enterococcal vanA gene complex. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 3398–3407

167 Fuda C., Hesek D., Lee M., Morio K., Nowak T. and Mobashery S. (2005) Activation for catalysis of penicillin-binding protein 2a from methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus by bacterial cell wall. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127: 2056–2057

168 Lee M., Hesek D., Suvorov M., Lee W., Vakulenko S. and Mobashery S. (2003) A mechanism-based inhibitor targeting the DD-transpeptidase activity of bacterial penicillin-binding proteins. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125: 16322–16326

169 McDonough M. A., Anderson J. W., Silvaggi N. R., Pratt R. F., Knox J. R. and Kelly J. A. (2002) Structures of two kinetic intermediates reveal species specificity of penicillin-binding proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 322: 111–122

170 Silvaggi N. R., Josephine H. R., Kuzin A. P., Nagarajan R., Pratt R. F. and Kelly J. A. (2005) Crystal structures of complexes between the R61 DD-peptidase and peptidoglycan-mimetic beta-lactams: a non-covalent complex with a perfect penicillin. J. Mol. Biol. 345: 521–533

171 Lee W., McDonough M. A., Kotra L., Li Z. H., Silvaggi N. R., Takeda Y. et al. (2001) A 1.2-A snapshot of the final step of bacterial cell wall biosynthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98: 1427–1431

172 Prevention Center for Disease Control and Prevention (1996) National Nosocomial Infection Surveillance (NNIS) report, data summary from October 1986 to April 1996, issued May 1996. Am. J. Infect. Control 24: 380–388

173 Karchmer A. W. (1991) Staphylococcus aureus and vancomycin: the sequel. Ann. Intern. Med. 115: 739–741

174 Richards M. J., Edwards J. R., Culver D. H. and Gaynes R. P. (27) Nosocomial infections in medical intensive care units in the United States. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance System. Crit. Care Med. 27: 887–892

175 Kirst H. A., Thompson D. G. and Nicas T. I. (1998) Historical yearly usage of vancomycin. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 42: 1303–1304

176 Walsh T. R. and Howe R. A. (2002) The prevalence and mechanisms of vancomycin resistance in Staphylococcus aureus. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 56: 657–675

177 Hiramatsu K., Hanaki H., Ino T., Yabuta K., Oguri T. and Tenover F. C. (1997) Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus clinical strain with reduced vancomycin susceptibility. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 40: 135–136

178 Kim M. N., Pai C. H., Woo J. H., Ryu J. S. and Hiramatsu K. (2000) Vancomycin-intermediate Staphylococcus aureus in Korea. J. Clin. Microbiol. 38: 3879–3881

179 Sieradzki K., Roberts R. B., Haber S. W. and Tomasz A. (1999) The development of vancomycin resistance in a patient with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infection. N. Engl. J. Med. 340: 517–523

180 Fridkin S. K., Hageman J., McDougal L. K., Mohammed J., Jarvis W. R., Perl T. M. et al. (2003) Epidemiological and microbiological characterization of infections caused by Staphylococcus aureus with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin, United States, 1997–2001. Clin. Infect. Dis. 36: 429–439

181 Drew R. H., Perfect J. R., Srinath L., Kurkimilis E., Dowzicky M. and Talbot G. H. (2000) Treatment of methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus infections with quinupristin-dalfopristin in patients intolerant of or failing prior therapy. For the

182 Richter S. S., Kealey D. E., Murray C. T., Heilmann K. P., Coffman S. L. and Doern G. V. (2003) The in vitro activity of daptomycin against Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococcus species. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 52: 123–127

183 Dailey C. F., Dileto-Fang C. L., Buchanan L. V., Oramas-Shirey M. P., Batts D. H., Ford C. W. et al. (2001) Efficacy of linezolid in treatment of experimental endocarditis caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 45: 2304–2308

184 Tsiodras S., Gold H. S., Sakoulas G., Eliopoulos G. M., Wennersten C., Venkataraman L. et al. (2001) Linezolid resistance in a clinical isolate of Staphylococcus aureus. Lancet. 358: 207–208

185 Walsh T. R., Bolmstrom A., Qwarnstrom A., Ho P., Wootton M., Howe R. A. et al. (2001) Evaluation of current methods for detection of staphylococci with reduced susceptibility to glycopeptides. J. Clin. Microbiol. 39: 2439–2444

186 Gill S. R., Fouts D. E., Archer G. L., Mongodin E. F., Deboy R. T., Ravel J. et al. (2005) Insights on evolution of virulence and resistance from the complete genome analysis of an early methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus strain and a biofilm-producing methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis strain. J. Bacteriol. 187: 2426–2438

187 Josephine H. R., Kumar I. and Pratt R. F. (2004) The perfect penicillin? Inhibition of a bacterial DD-peptidase by peptidoglycan-mimetic beta-lactams. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 126: 8122–8123

188 Pinho M. G. and Errington J. (2005) Recruitment of penicillin-binding protein PBP2 to the division site of Staphylococcus aureus is dependent on its transpeptidation substrates. Mol. Microbiol. 55: 799–807

189 Macheboeuf P., Di Guilmi A. M., Job V., Vernet T., Dideberg O. and Dessen A. (2005) Active site restructuring regulates ligand recognition in class A penicillin-binding proteins. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102: 577–582

190 Leimkuhler C., Chen L., Barrett D., Panzone G., Sun B., Falcone B. et al. (2005) Differential Inhibition of Staphylococcus aureus PBP2 by glycopeptide antibiotics. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127: 3250–3251

191 Kahne D., Leimkuhler C., Lu W. and Walsh C. (2005) Glycopeptide and lipoglycopeptide antibiotics. Chem. Rev. 105: 425–448

192 Higgins D. L., Chang R., Debabov D. V., Leung J., Wu T., Krause K. M. et al. (2005) Telavancin, a multifunctional lipoglycopeptide, disrupts both cell wall synthesis and cell membrane integrity in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49: 1127–1134

193 Steenbergen J. N., Alder J., Thorne G. M. and Tally F. P. (2005) Daptomycin: a lipopeptide antibiotic for the treatment of serious Gram-positive infections. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 55: 283–288

194 Shibata H., Kondo K., Katsuyama R., Kawazoe K., Sato Y., Murakami K. et al. (2005) Alkyl gallates, intensifiers of beta-lactam susceptibility in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 49: 549–555

195 Rand K. H. and Houck H. J. (2004) Synergy of daptomycin with oxacillin and other beta-lactams against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 48: 2871–2875

196 Scheetz M., Reddy P., Postelnick M. and Flaherty J. (2005) In vivo synergy of daptomycin plus a penicillin agent for MRSA? J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 55: 398–399
