
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

**Gene 360 (2005) 1–19**

Review

**Gene deregulation in gastric cancer**

Michael Stock, Florian Otto*

Department of Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Freiburg, Hugstetter Strasse 55, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany

Received 31 January 2005; received in revised form 26 May 2005; accepted 13 June 2005

Available online 9 September 2005

Received by A.J. van Wijnen

---

### Abstract

Despite its decreasing frequency in the Western world during recent decades, gastric cancer is still one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths worldwide. Due to the oligosymptomatic course of early gastric cancer, most cases are diagnosed in the advanced stages of the disease. The curative potential of current standard treatment continues to be unsatisfactory, despite multimodal approaches involving surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Novel therapeutics including small molecules and monoclonal antibodies are being developed and have been partially introduced into clinical use in connection with neoplastic diseases such as chronic myeloid leukemia, non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and colorectal cancer. Thorough understanding of the changes in gene expression occurring during gastric carcinogenesis may help to develop targeted therapies and improve the treatment of this disease. Novel molecular biology techniques have generated a wealth of data on up- and down-regulation, activation and inhibition of specific pathways in gastric cancer. Here, we provide an overview of the different aspects of aberrant gene expression patterns in gastric cancer.

© 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Gastric carcinogenesis; Tumor marker; Gene expression; Cell signaling; Cell adhesion; Microarray

---

### 1. Introduction

Gastric cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths worldwide. When diagnosed at an advanced stage, the disease is usually incurable. However, if the tumor is resected before it has invaded the gastric wall, the prognosis can be relatively favorable. While the 5-year survival of patients with advanced gastric cancer is only approximately 20%, early tumor resection can achieve 5-year survival rates of around 90% (Karpeh et al., 2001). The overall number of gastric cancer cases has been decreasing over the past few decades. This is particularly the case with sporadic cancers which mainly affect older people. However, there are no changes in the incidence of gastric cancer with respect to younger individuals or familial clusters (Ekstrom et al., 2000).

The earliest classification of gastric cancer was established by Lauren (Lauren, 1965). It distinguishes two main types of gastric carcinoma based on histological appearance: the better differentiated intestinal-type and the poorly differentiated diffuse-type. Depending on the classification criteria used and the population surveyed, the ratio of diffuse and intestinal cancer varies (Stemmermann et al., 2002). A more recent classification is based on mucin expression and distinguishes 4 types of gastric cancer: the gastric or foveolar type (G-type), the intestinal type (I-type), the gastric and intestinal mixed type (GI-type) and the neither gastric nor intestinal phenotypes (N-type) - (Fiocca et al., 1987; Tatenuma et al., 1990, 2003). Distinct genetic changes appear to be associated with distinct phenotypes, which is particularly the case with the I-type and the G-type. In I-type gastric cancer, p53 mutations and allelic deletions of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene are observed more frequently than in G-type gastric carcinoma (Uchino et

* Corresponding author. Tel./fax: +49 761 270 3602.
E-mail address: otto@mmll.ukl.uni-freiburg.de (F. Otto).

0378-1119/$ - see front matter © 2005 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.gene.2005.06.026

al., 1993a; Kushima et al., 1996; Wu et al., 1998; Endoh et al., 2000). In contrast, microsatellite instability (MSI) is found more often in G-type than in I-type gastric cancer (Endoh et al., 2000; Shibata et al., 2003). Furthermore, alterations of p73 appear to be predominantly associated with G-type gastric cancer (Yokozaki et al., 1999).

In 1994, the World Health Organization has classified the Gram-negative spiral-shaped bacterium *Helicobacter pylori* as a class 1 carcinogen. Since then, it has become clear that one of the most prominent risk factors for spontaneous gastric carcinogenesis is infection with *H. pylori* (Ekstrom et al., 2001; Uemura et al., 2001; Kavermann et al., 2003).

The vast majority of gastric cancers occurs sporadically. However, approximately 1–3% of all cases of gastric cancer are related to hereditary gastric cancer predisposition syndromes (Inberg et al., 1965). Germline mutations in the *CDH1* gene (E-cadherin) are responsible for about one third of hereditary diffuse gastric cancers (HDGC). Other cancer syndromes that are associated with a propensity to develop gastric cancer are the Lynch syndrome II (hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer), adenomatous polyposis coli (APC), mutations in the BRCA2 gene and the Li–Fraumeni syndrome (p53 mutations) (Watanabe et al., 1978; Lynch et al., 1993; Jakubowska et al., 2002; Oliveira et al., 2004). However, the molecular nature of a major proportion of familial gastric cancer cases is yet unsolved (Oliveira et al., 2003).

Since Fearon and Weinberg established a multi-step adenoma–carcinoma sequence for colorectal cancer, researchers have attempted to identify an analogous multi-step sequence in the development of all types of cancer (Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990). In relation to gastric cancer, the search has so far been only partially successful. This is particularly the case with poorly differentiated diffuse-type gastric cancer which usually remains unrecognized until the more advanced stages of the disease. As regards the development of the more differentiated intestinal-type gastric cancer, Tahara et al. recently introduced a stepwise model consisting of 3 possible subpathways: an intestinal

intestinal metaplasia:
- hTERT (↑)
- RAR-β (↓)
- p53 (mut)
- CD44 (AT)

A: metaplasia-adenoma-carcinoma sequence

mucous layer
mucosa
submucosal layer

B: metaplasia-carcinoma sequence

C: de novo

gastric adenoma:
- p27 (↓)
- cyclin E (↑)
- APC (mut)

gastric carcinoma:
- TβRI (↓)
- c-erbB2 (↑)

Fig. 1. The multi-step processes of intestinal-type gastric carcinogenesis. The development of intestinal-type gastric cancer can be divided into three distinct subpathways: A) an intestinal metaplasia – adenoma – carcinoma sequence, B) an intestinal metaplasia – carcinoma sequence and C) de novo. The steps in these processes are frequently characterized by the indicated molecular aberrations. ↑: overexpression; ↓: repression; mut: mutation; AT: abnormal transcripts.

metaplasia – adenoma – carcinoma sequence, an intestinal metaplasia – carcinoma sequence and de novo (Tahara, 2004). On a molecular level, the intestinal metaplasia is characterized by hTERT expression, loss of retinoic acid receptor β (RAR-β) expression, p53 expression and abnormal CD44 transcripts. Gastric adenomas furthermore display reduced p27 expression, cyclin E expression and mutations in the APC gene. In addition, reduced TGF-β receptor type I (TβRI) expression, amplification and over-expression of c-ErbB2 and complete loss of p27 expression are commonly observed in more advanced gastric cancer (Fig. 1).

### 2. Mechanisms of gene deregulation in human gastric carcinoma

Due to novel techniques in biological research, gene deregulation can now be studied in great detail. Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) provides high-resolution detection of amplifications and deletions of chromosomal segments. The use of microarrays in transcriptome analysis has increased over the past few years providing expression profiles for a large number of genes in a short time. Transgenic and knock-out mouse models make it possible to study the in vivo function of genes and their products.

There is a multitude of causes for aberrant gene regulation in gastric cancer. Gene deregulation can occur at different levels – the genome level, the level of signaling and transcription and even the post-translational level. Here, we discuss the main molecular mechanisms of altered gene regulation in gastric cancer.

One of the alterations occurring at genome level are cytogenetic changes. Macroscopic cytogenetic changes such as polysomy, chromosomal translocation, inversions or large deletions are found in the majority of gastric carcinomas and may lead to increased or decreased gene expression and/or the formation of chimeric proteins. However, it is not yet clear whether these abnormalities are the cause or a consequence of the malignant phenotype of gastric carcinoma. Polysomy of the chromosomes 2 and 20 are the most frequently observed numerical chromosome aberrations. In more than 50% of analyzed gastric carcinomas, chromosome rearrangements involving the chromosomes 1, 3, 7 and 13 have been detected. Partial deletion of chromosome 6q is also frequently observed. Inversions have been identified on 8q and 17q. Furthermore, the chromosome segment 11p13-p15 is involved in structural abnormalities (Seruca et al., 1993). Statistical analyses have shown gastric cancer to be associated with gains at 17q24-qter (53%), 20q13-qter (48%), 1p32-p36 (42%), 22q12-qter (27%), 17p13-pter (24%), 16p13-pter (21%), 6p21-pter (19%), 20p12-pter (19%), 7p21-pter (18%), 3q28-qter (8%) and losses at 18q12-qter (11%), 3p12 (8%), 3p25-pter (8%), 5q14-q23 (8%) and 9p21-p23 (5%) (Wu et al., 2002). After mutation of one allele of a tumor suppressor gene, loss of the wild-type allele often leads to a homozygously mutated gene—a phenomenon termed loss of heterozygosity (LOH). In gastric cancers, LOH is frequently observed at loci of the chromosomes 1p, 5q, 7p, 12q, 13q, 17p, 18q, and Y (Hesketh, 1997).

Microsatellite instability (MSI) is a symptom of defective DNA repair processes which leads to genetic instability. The major reason for MSI in gastric cancer is the silencing of the mismatch repair gene human MutL homologue 1 (hMLH1) by promoter hypermethylation (Fang et al., 2003). However, loss of hMSH2 expression has also been observed (Halling et al., 1999). As mentioned above, the loss of one allele of a mismatch repair gene can be inherited in an autosomal-dominant fashion causing the Lynch syndrome.

More local genetic events that can lead to altered gene expression include gene amplification, deletions and mutations in coding or regulatory regions. In gastric tumors, gene amplification and subsequent over-expression has been observed in several oncogenes such as c-erbB2, c-Met or K-sam (Ponzetto et al., 1991; Mizutani et al., 1993; Nessling et al., 1998; Tahara, 2004). Gene deletions have been observed in tumor suppressor genes such as CDH1 (Becker et al., 1994). Both, somatic mutations activating oncogenes (e.g. β-catenin) and inactivating tumor suppressor genes (e.g. CDH1, p53) are frequently observed in gastric carcinoma (Tsukamoto et al., 2003).

A frequent mechanism of gene inactivation in gastric cancer is epigenetic silencing by DNA methylation. In mammals, DNA methylation is predominantly observed in CpG dinucleotides that occur at a higher frequency than expected in stretches of DNA known as CpG islands. The latter are commonly found in promoters or other cis-regulatory regions. At these locations, methyltransferases can methylate the cytidine residue 5, while under normal conditions, methylation of these cytidines is restricted to particular physiologic situations such as embryogenesis and cell differentiation (Santini et al., 2001; Goffin and Eisenhauer, 2002). So far, three enzymes have been identified that are responsible for CpG methylation in mammals: DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1), DNMT3a and DNMT3b (Bestor et al., 1988; Okano et al., 1998). Recent studies have found aberrant CpG methylation – and subsequent gene silencing – of several carcinogenesis related genes in different types of tumors (Baylin et al., 2000). In these cases, up-regulation of methyltransferases (e.g. DNMT1) was frequently, although not always, detected, and over-expression of DNMT1 was shown to correlate with poorer tumor differentiation (Kanai et al., 2001; Herman and Baylin, 2003; Etoh et al., 2004). In human gastric cancers, over-expression of DNMT1 has been shown to be associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infections. EBV-related DNMT1 over-expression results in hypermethylation of the CpG islands within the genes for hMLH1, thrombospondin 1 and E-cadherin (CDH1). CDH1 hypermethylation is correlated with silencing of E-cadherin expression (Etoh et al., 2004). Further examples of DNA

methylation mediated gene silencing in gastric cancer involve the genes encoding the TGF-β receptor type I (TβRI) and RUNX3 (Kang et al., 1999a; Li et al., 2002). However, it is unclear whether a change in the gene methylation status is a general or a gene-specific phenomenon and whether hypermethylation is a cause or a consequence of the malignant phenotype. Theoretically, DNA methylation represents a reversible epigenetic change. Thus, it may be feasible to use pharmacological inhibitors of DNA methylation in the treatment of these types of malignancy (Karpf and Jones, 2002). However, first studies with demethylating agents have shown disappointing results in relation to solid tumors (Goffin and Eisenhauer, 2002).

Infections with microorganisms or viruses can lead to aberrant gene expression, and there is evidence that in some cases, this has implications for tumor development and progression. The role of *Helicobacter pylori* infections in the development of gastric cancer has been thoroughly characterized. A comprehensive overview of the implications of *H. pylori* for the molecular biology of gastric cancer has recently been published in this journal (Stoicov et al., 2004). *H. pylori* is a spiral gram-negative rod that attaches specifically to the gastric epithelial cells lining the gastric antrum (Athmann et al., 2000). Infections with this bacterium have been associated with a significantly increased risk of chronic gastritis and gastric cancer (Stoicov et al., 2004). Increased serum levels of gastrin, a peptide hormone involved in cell proliferation, have been associated with *H. pylori* infection (Smith et al., 1990; Seva et al., 1994; Konturek et al., 2000; Singh et al., 2000). Furthermore, up-regulation of annexin II, S100 A7, Rho-GTP and IQGAP-1 and down-regulation of SSTR-1 has been observed in primary human gastric epithelial cells and gastric epithelial cell lines in connection with *H. pylori* infections (Conlin et al., 2004). Up-regulation of annexin II was also detected in clinical samples of advanced gastric carcinoma (Emoto et al., 2001). Following *H. pylori* infection, over-expression of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is frequently observed (Konturek et al., 2000). COX-2 is one of the rate limiting enzymes in prostaglandine synthesis. First evidence of the implications of COX-2 for gastric carcinoma was revealed by a prognostic study that showed a prophylactic effect of the COX-2 inhibitor acetylsalicylic acid (Thun et al., 1993). Up-regulation of COX-2 is thought to be a frequently occurring early event in gastric tumors (van Rees et al., 2002; Scartozzi et al., 2004). COX-2 overexpression has been more frequently found in intestinal than in diffuse gastric cancer and correlates with the differentiation state of the tumor. While COX-2 over-expression as detected by immunohistochemistry does not appear to correlate with lymph node metastases or tumor aggressiveness, COX-2 mRNA levels have been shown to be higher in patients with lymph node metastases than in those without metastatic lymph node involvement (Joo et al., 2002; Scartozzi et al., 2004).

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infections have also been associated with gastric carcinomas (Shibata and Weiss, 1992). EBV is present in 7–20% of patients with gastric cancer. Infections with EBV have been shown to extend cell generations in gastric epithelial cells. However, EBV cannot immortalize these cells (Takada, 2000). On a molecular level, a correlation between EBV infection and CpG hypermethylation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p16 gene has been identified (Kang et al., 2002). This may be the result of an overexpression of the DNA methylase DNMT1 which has also been shown to be associated with EBV infection in gastric cancer (Etoh et al., 2004). As a consequence, EBV infected gastric tumors show a loss of gene expression of p16, Smad4, FHIT and KAI-1. Moreover, infection with EBV has been shown to be negatively associated with p53, MUC1, MUC2, MUC5AC, CEA, c-Erb B2 and Smad7 gene expression (Lee et al., 2004).

Finally, altered signaling pathways or deregulated transcription factors represent an important category of molecular events leading to aberrant gene regulation in human gastric tumors. While in the case of colorectal cancer, the molecular events occurring during the development from normal epithelium to adenoma and finally overt cancer have been well established, the molecular mechanisms of gastric carcinogenesis are less well understood. In most cases of colorectal cancer, the initial step is a constitutive activation of the Wnt-Frizzled-β-catenin signaling pathway. About 70% to 80% of colorectal cancers carry mutations in this pathway, predominantly in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. This leads to constitutive stabilization of β-catenin which can in turn translocate at a high rate to the nucleus to activate Tcf/Lef-dependent gene expression. This results in overexpression of c-Myc, cyclin D1, MMP7, fibronectin, gastrin and ITF-2 with subsequent cell proliferation (Kolligs et al., 2002; Gradl et al., 1999). In gastric carcinogenesis, however, no such predominantly altered signaling pathway has yet been identified. The search for evidence that APC/β-catenin signaling is involved in the development of gastric cancer has so far yielded conflicting results. While one study could identify mutations in the β-catenin gene in patients with gastric cancer, another analysis could not verify the finding (Candidus et al., 1996; Woo et al., 2001). Likewise, views differ on the relevance of mutations of the APC gene in the development of gastric cancer (Maesawa et al., 1995; Lee et al., 2002; Abraham et al., 2003). Yet, a number of important signaling pathways have been identified that lead to aberrant gene expression and tumor progression in gastric carcinogenesis. Amongst others, these include the TGF-β signaling pathway, the hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/c-Met pathway, the epidermal growth factor (EGF) pathway and the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) pathway (Tahara et al., 1986, 1996; Yasui et al., 1988; Ponzetto et al., 1991; Park et al., 1994; Kang et al., 1999a; Hasegawa et al., 2002). Gene deregulation in gastric cancer can also result from aberrant

expression of transcription factors such as RUNX3, Snail, Twist, and SIP1(Li et al., 2002; Rosivatz et al., 2002).

## 3. Molecular systems frequently affected by gene deregulation in human gastric cancer

Like any solid tumors, gastric cancer has to overcome several physiological control mechanisms that would otherwise block tumorigenesis. In this section, we are going to discuss the most important pathways that become altered during gastric carcinogenesis (Fig. 2).

### 3.1. Control of cell growth and proliferation

Under physiologic conditions, cellular growth and proliferation are tightly regulated. Loss of this control and subsequent abnormal proliferation frequently are among the first steps in tumor development. For gastric cancer, a number of control mechanisms which become affected have been identified.

As mentioned above, early events in the carcinogenesis of colorectal tumors include the mutation of the genes encoding APC or β-catenin leading to constitutive Tcf/Lef-dependent gene expression and subsequent uncontrolled proliferation (Kolligs et al., 2002; Gradl et al., 1999). Constitutive Tcf transcription activity has also been found in 2 out of 4 gastric cancer cell lines assayed by Caca et al. The cause for constitutive Tcf activity was in one case shown to be a nonsense mutation in β-catenin disrupting a GSK3β phosphorylation site, while in another case, γ-catenin—a related protein—was mutated. (Caca et al., 1999). Clements et al. found somatic mutations in the β-catenin gene activating the Wnt pathway in gastric cancer (Clements et al., 2002). Other investigators, however, did not find evidence for β-catenin mutations in gastric cancers (Candidus et al., 1996). Activation of mutations of β-catenin does not seem to be the only mechanism leading to increased β-catenin-dependent Tcf/Lef trans-activation. Ebert et al. reported increased levels of β-catenin gene expression in intestinal-type gastric cancer (Ebert et al., 2002). Besides serving as a signal transducer in Wnt signaling, β-catenin is also involved in cell adhesion: E-cadherin-bound β-catenin mediates cell adhesion while cytoplasmic β-catenin can be translocated to the nucleus to activate Tcf/LEF-dependent gene expression (Jawhari et al., 1997; Hirohashi, 1998; Willert and Nusse, 1998). This leads to the assumption that relocation of membrane-bound β-catenin to the cytoplasm and eventually to the nucleus might result in the activation of Tcf/LEF-dependent gene expression. This hypothesis is supported by experiments showing that expression of cadherin can interfere with β-catenin signaling by recruiting cytoplasmic β-catenin to the cell membrane (Sadot et al., 1998). Moreover, it has been shown that inhibition of β-catenin signaling by cadherin overexpression suppresses β-catenin dependent transcription of pro-proliferative genes

and inhibits cellular proliferation and transformation (Gotardi et al., 2001; Stockinger et al., 2001). Ramesh et al. investigated the intracellular distribution of β-catenin in clinical gastric cancer samples. Reduced membranous expression of β-catenin was observed in 10/12 (83%) diffuse and 8/28 (29%) intestinal-type tumors. This was associated with poor differentiation and shorter survival of the patients. However, while cytoplasmic expression was observed in 13/40 cases (33%), nuclear expression of β-catenin was uncommon (Ramesh et al., 1999). In a different study, nuclear translocation of β-catenin was observed in N-methyl-N-nitrosourea (MNU) and *H. pylori* induced gastric cancer in Mongolian gerbils. This was accompanied by mutation of the β-catenin gene (Cao et al., 2004). In another study, intracellular redistribution of membranous β-catenin to the cytoplasm and nucleus was frequently observed even in the absence of β-catenin mutations. Translocation to the nucleus was shown to be associated with tumor invasion, and intracellular redistribution was not accompanied with a change in β-catenin gene expression rates (Cheng et al., 2004).

Although views differ on the relevance of β-catenin mutations in gastric cancer, the Wnt-frizzled-β-catenin signaling pathway seems to be frequently activated by aberrations in other factors of this pathway. Wnt2 gene expression was found to be frequently up-regulated in gastric cancer. This might partly be a consequence of tumor-stroma interactions (Katoh, 2001). Moreover, Nessling et al. identified amplification in the chromosomal region 7q31-q32, including the Wnt2 gene, in a gastric cancer patient (Nessling et al., 1998). Microarray analysis showed that Wnt5a is also overexpressed in gastric carcinoma (Bousisiotas et al., 2003). Furthermore, expression of genes for Wnt ligand receptors were found to be up-regulated in gastric cancers. Microarray analysis showed overexpression of the secreted frizzled-related protein 4 and frizzled homologue 1 (FDZ1) in diffuse-type gastric cancer (Bousisiotas et al., 2003). Other factors, further downstream in the canonical Wnt signaling pathway, have also been found to be altered in terms of their expression or function. Reports of mutations in the APC gene range from between 0 and 5% in diffuse-type to between 4% and 20% in intestinal-type gastric cancer (Ebert et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2002). However, views differ on the significance of these mutations in gastric carcinogenesis (Maesawa et al., 1995; Lee et al., 2002; Abraham et al., 2003). Activation of the β-catenin pathway by histamine, as shown in HeLa and colon cancer cells, might represent a link between chronic gastritis and gastric cancer (Diks et al., 2003). Wnt/β-catenin dependent gene expression can also be enhanced by Rac1 GTPase through interaction with β-catenin, thus promoting β-catenin accumulation in the nucleus (Esufali and Bapat, 2004). Rac1 is frequently overexpressed in primary gastric carcinoma and gastric cancer cell lines (Pan et al., 2004). Nevertheless, negative regulation of the Wnt signaling pathway has also been found, especially in diffuse-type

gastric cancers. Immunohistochemical analyses revealed frequent absence of α- and β-catenin gene expression in early diffuse-type gastric carcinoma (Song et al., 2004). Furthermore, dickkopf3 (DKK3), a putative negative regulator of the Wnt-β catenin pathway, was found to be up-regulated in diffuse-type gastric cancers (Boussioutas et al., 2003). These data lead to the conclusion that deregulation of the Wnt-Frizzled-β-catenin pathway is an important feature of gastric cancer. However, the molecular events leading to this deregulation are not as homogenous as those leading to the constitutive activation of this signaling pathway in colorectal carcinoma.

Ras-dependent MAPK signaling which eventually results in increased proliferation can also be observed in gastric cancer. This is mainly caused by aberrations of K-ras which is frequently activated in gastric cancer, predominantly in the intestinal-type (Ushijima and Sasako, 2004). Furthermore, IL-1α signaling has been associated with gastric cancer (Tahara et al., 1996). For normal gastric epithelial homeostasis, IL-6 signaling via the ERK/Apl pathway seems to be of pivotal importance. Mutation of the IL6 family co-receptor gp130 abrogating SHP2 binding, results in the inhibition of the ERK/Apl pathway and in the activation of the STAT3 pathway. This results in down-regulation of trefoil factor 1 (TFF1) and gastrin and in the up-regulation of TGF-α, heparin-binding EGF and Reg I. Interestingly, mice carrying a homozygous gp130 mutation, rapidly develop gastric cancer (Judd et al., 2004).

Another important signaling pathway which is frequently altered in human gastric cancer is the TGF-β pathway. TGF-β signaling is mediated by binding of TGFβ to TβRII that subsequently dimerizes with TβRI. The ensuing signal transduction is mediated by binding and phosphorylation of pathway-restricted SMADs (SMAD2 and 3), interaction of SMAD2/3 with SMAD4, translocation of the SMAD2/3-SMAD4 dimer to the nucleus and eventually transactivation of target genes by direct binding to the promoters or interaction with other transcription factors. Heldin et al. have reviewed this pathway in detail (Heldin et al., 1997). In cancer, TGF-β plays a complicated biphasic role. In the early stages of carcinogenesis, TGF-β acts as a tumor suppressor through its ability to suppress proliferation (Wakefield and Roberts, 2002). Yet, later on, TGF-β appears to enhance tumor progression. This might be mediated by TGF-β-dependent production of extracellular matrix, suppression of immune system function or promotion of angiogenesis (Han et al., 2004). In TGF-β responsive human gastric cancer cells, the inhibitory effect of TGF-β on the cell cycle and proliferation is mediated by induction of genes encoding cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors such as p15 or p21 and repression of cyclin D1 (Kang et al., 1999b; Han et al., 2004). One mechanism by which gastric cancer cells can lose their susceptibility to TGFβ is the mutation or repression of both type I and type II receptors (TβRI, TβRII). Reduced TβRI expression has been observed in advanced intestinal-type gastric cancer (Tahara,

2004). Repression of TβRI in gastric cancer cell lines and primary gastric cancers (5 out of 40 = 12.5%) has been found to be associated with hypermethylation of a CpG island in the 5′ region of the TβRI gene (Kang et al., 1999a). In addition, loss of TβRII expression is observed in various types of cancer including gastric cancer (Park et al., 1994; Markowitz et al., 1995; Hahm, 1999). In gastric cancer cell lines, genetic truncation of TβRII leading to inactivation of TGFβ signaling has been observed (Yang et al., 1999a). Molecules acting downstream of TGFβ are commonly affected in gastric cancer. Yet, while in colorectal and lung cancers, SMAD2 is infrequently affected by mutations, in gastric cancer no such mutations have been detected (Riggins et al., 1997; Takagi et al., 1998; Takenoshita et al., 1998; Shitara et al., 1999; Yanagisawa et al., 2000). However, in gastric cancer, SMAD3 is frequently altered. A study performed by Han et al. 37.5% on human gastric cancer samples showed low or undetectable levels of SMAD3 expression. Re-expression of SMAD3 in human gastric cancer cells was shown to restore growth inhibition in response to TGF-β. Furthermore, it was shown that ectopic SMAD3 expression in SNU484 cells (WT: SMAD3 neg.; TβRII pos.) decreases VEGF expression, enhances E-cadherin expression and restores TGFβ-induced p15 and p21 expression as well as TGF-β-dependent repression of cyclin D1 (Han et al., 2004). The importance of intact SMAD3 mediated TGF-β signaling for physiologic homeostasis of gastrointestinal epithelia is also supported by knockout mouse experiments. Depending on their genetic background, Smad3 KO mice can develop high rates of colorectal cancer (Zhu et al., 1998; Datto et al., 1999; Yang et al., 1999b). The mechanism of SMAD3 inactivation in gastric cancer is thus far unsolved. No SMAD3 mutations could be identified. SMAD4 expression was found in 87.5% of gastric tumor samples and appears to correlate with a more favorable clinical outcome (Kim et al., 2004c). In other gastrointestinal (e.g. pancreatic and colorectal) tumors, SMAD4 is frequently deleted or mutated (Hahn et al., 1996; Powell et al., 1997; Calonge and Massague, 1999). Xiangming et al. found that tumors with reduced SMAD4 expression are associated with a poorer prognosis (Xiangming et al., 2001). Further evidence of the relevance of SMAD4 was provided by studies with Smad4 KO mice which develop gastric and duodenal polyps and signet ring cell carcinoma of the stomach (Takaku et al., 1999). SMAD7, the negative regulator of SMAD dependent signaling, is expressed in about one third of the analyzed gastric cancers. Expression of SMAD7 was shown to constitute a poor prognosis (Kim et al., 2004c). The transcription factor RUNX3 interacts with SMAD3, thereby enhancing the transcriptional activity of RUNX3 (Hanai et al., 1999). Views differ regarding the expression of Runx3 in normal gastric mucosa and the hyperplasia of gastric mucosa in Runx3 deficient mice (Levanon et al., 2002; Li et al., 2002). Yet, as was shown by RT-PCR, 45% to 60% of human gastric cancers exhibit low or undetectable levels of

RUNX3 expression. This is correlated with hypermethylation of the RUNX3 promoter (Li et al., 2002). Absence of RUNX3 expression and promoter hypermethylation has also been detected in human colorectal cancer and lung cancer (Ku et al., 2004; Li et al., 2004). In gastric cancer — especially in peritoneal metastases — overexpression of Galectin-3 (LGALS3) has been observed (Baldus et al., 2000; Sakakura et al., 2002). This may be a consequence of deregulated RUNX3 expression: in skeletal tissues gene expression of Galectin-3 is regulated by RUNX2 (Stock et al., 2003). It is not yet clear how specifically the 3 mammalian RUNX paralogues control the expression of their target genes. Since all three RUNX factors bind to the same consensus binding sequence and can act as transcriptional activators as well as repressors, RUNX factors other than RUNX2 may regulate Galectin-3 in non-skeletal tissues. In normal gastric mucosa, RUNX3 might suppress Galectin-3 expression (Otto et al., 2003).

The role of gastrin in the development of gastric carcinoma has been the subject of lively and controversial discussions (Varro et al., 2002; Song et al., 2003). A comprehensive overview of the biological implications of gastrin and its derivatives for the development and progression of gastric cancer is provided by a recent review by Aly et al. (Aly et al., 2004). Here, we are going to summarize only a few data which support that gastrin plays a role in the development of gastric cancer. Transgenic mice overexpressing gastrin showed increased rates of proliferation and hypertrophy of gastric mucosa and were more susceptible to *H. pylori* infection related gastric cancer (Wang et al., 1996, 2000). Furthermore, different investigators found both antral gastrin and tumor-derived gastrin to be capable to stimulate cell proliferation (Seva et al., 1994; Singh et al., 2000). On a molecular level, gastrin-induced growth of gastric carcinoma has been reported to be mediated by induction of β-catenin and cyclin D1 mRNA and protein (Song et al., 2003). Furthermore, increased gastrin levels can lead to overexpression of matrix metalloproteinase 9 in gastric cancer cell lines (Wroblewski et al., 2002). Up-regulation of gastrin expression can be caused by infection with *H. pylori* (Smith et al., 1990; Konturek et al., 2000). This could be a consequence of the decrease in acid output caused by *H. pylori* (Chowers et al., 1999). Another cause for excessive gastrin expression is the administration of proton pump inhibitors (Lind et al., 1988).

A number of other growth factors and their receptors have also been reported to be altered in connection with gastric cancer. Activation of the growth factor receptor c-erb B-2, a trans-membrane tyrosine kinase receptor, is frequently (in approx. 10–15% of all cases) observed in gastric tumors (Ushijima and Sasako, 2004). This activation has been reported to be most frequent in advanced gastric carcinoma and indicates a poor prognosis (Yonemura et al., 1991). However, views differ regarding the use of c-erb B-2 as a prognostic factor (Yonemura et al., 1991; Uchino et al., 1993b).

Another growth factor signaling pathway commonly affected in gastric cancer is the HGF/c-Met pathway. c-Met is the receptor for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) (Bottaro et al., 1991). It is composed of an extracellular α-subunit and a trans-membrane β-subunit with tyrosine phosphatase activity (Park et al., 1987).

HGF/c-Met signaling results in proliferation, angiogenesis, migration and morphogenesis (Birchmeier et al., 2003). HGF binding to c-Met activates the Grb2-SOS-Ras-MAPK pathway eventually leading to accelerated proliferation, activation of the Ras and Rac pathways for tubuli reorganization, cell morphological and actin filament changes and other processes (Zhang et al., 2002). Both c-Met and HGF are overexpressed in gastric cancer, and in gastric cancer cell lines, c-Met is amplified (Ponzetto et al., 1991; Hasegawa et al., 2002). Furthermore, overexpression of c-Met is correlated with its activation in human gastric cancer tissue (Inoue et al., 2004).

Epidermal growth factor (EGF) signaling is another frequently affected target in gastric carcinoma. EGF and its receptor (EGFR) have been reported to be frequently up-regulated in gastric cancer. EGF expression has been detected in 50–60% of advanced gastric carcinomas (Tahara et al., 1986; Onda et al., 1990). EGFR overexpression has been observed in about 34% of advanced gastric cancers (Friess et al., 1999; Yasui et al., 1988). This seems to be only rarely caused by amplification of the EGFR gene (Yoshida et al., 1989). The expression of EGFR, however, may serve as a therapeutic target of novel antineoplastic agents such as the anti-EGFR antibody cetuximab which was recently licensed for use in the treatment of colorectal cancer.

In approximately 60–70% of gastric cancers, expression of basic fibroblast growth factor and its receptor has been detected, frequently accompanied by low differentiation and high tumor invasiveness (Tahara et al., 1996).

Elevated protein levels of platelet derived growth factor-α (PDGF-α) have also been detected in gastric cancer and are correlated with poor survival (Tahara et al., 1996). Furthermore, RAR-β promoter hypermethylation has been frequently observed (24/45=53%) in gastric cancer, particularly in diffuse gastric cancer (Oue et al., 2002). Aberrations in other signaling molecules which have been associated with gastric cancer include TGF-α, amphiregulin, K-sam, GRO1, growth factor receptor-bound 7, insulin-like growth factor, midkine and prostate differentiation factor (Tahara et al., 1996; Hippo et al., 2002).

In gastric cancer, cell cycle control is affected both directly and indirectly. The indirect modulation by activation or inhibition of the expression of cell cycle modulators such as cyclins, cyclin dependent kinases (CDK) or their inhibitors due to aberrations in signaling pathways has already been discussed above. In detail, activation of the Wnt pathway leads to the induction of cyclin D1 expression, and abrogation of TGF-β signaling results in p15 and p21 repression and de-repression of cyclin D1 (Kang et al.,

Fig. 2. Gastric cancer related alterations in major signaling pathways. (A) Wnt signaling. The Wnt signaling pathway, which controls cell cycle and proliferation rate, can be affected at various levels in connection with gastric cancer. Gastric cancer related perturbations of Wnt signaling lead to constitutive activation of Wnt-dependent gene expression, thus promoting cell cycle turnover and proliferation. (B) TGF-β signaling. Susceptibility to TGF-β-induced apoptosis is commonly lost in gastric cancer due to abrogation of TGF-β signaling. (C) Small GTPases and MAPK cascade. Several signaling pathways mediated by receptor tyrosine kinases, small GTPases and MAPK cascades are frequently affected in gastric cancer. Besides increased proliferation rates as a result of activated MAPK-dependent gene expression, such alterations can lead to higher cell motility and migration mediated by Rho GTPases. Molecules altered in association with gastric cancer are indicated by bold letters. The type of perturbation is indicated in brackets: overexpression (+), repression (-); mutation (M); intracellular redistribution (iR). Flashes indicate activation. A: other FGF-R substrates; α: α-catenin; β: β-catenin; γ: γ-catenin; P: phosphate; TF: MAPK activated transcription factor; U: ubiquitin; X: Smad-interacting transcription factor (e.g. RUNX3). Other abbreviations are explained in Sections 3.1 and 3.5.

1999b; Kolligs et al., 2002; Han et al., 2004). Cyclin D supports the proliferation by regulating CDK4 and CDK6 activity and thereby inducing G1/S transition (Pestell et al., 1999). In gastric cancer, cyclin D1 is induced by gastrin via β-catenin and CREB pathways (Pradeep et al., 2004). Cyclin E expression is frequently observed in especially intestinal-type gastric cancer (Tahara, 2004). On the other hand, inhibitors of CDKs such as p15, p21 and p27 have been reported to be commonly down-regulated in gastric cancer (Kang et al., 1999b; Han et al., 2004; Tahara, 2004) which also is the case with p16 which is frequently down-regulated (25–42%) by hypermethylation (Oue et al., 2002;

Table 1  
Deregulated genes associated with gastric cancer  

| Physiologic role                     | Gene       | Aberration                                                                 |
|--------------------------------------|------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Control of cell growth and proliferation | Wnt2      | amplification, overexpression                                             |
|                                      | APC        | mutation                                                                |
|                                      | β-catenin  | mutation; overexpression; intracellular redistribution; loss of expression |
|                                      | TβRI       | silencing; mutation                                                     |
|                                      | TβRII      | silencing; mutation                                                     |
|                                      | Smad3      | silencing; loss of expression                                            |
|                                      | Smad4      | silencing; loss of expression                                            |
|                                      | Smad7      | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | RUNX3      | silencing                                                               |
|                                      | K-ras      | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | IL1-α      | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | gp130      | mutation                                                               |
|                                      | EGF        | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | EGFR       | amplification; overexpression                                            |
|                                      | b-FGF      | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | FGFR       | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | c-Met      | amplification; overexpression                                            |
|                                      | HGF        | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | c-erbB2    | amplification; overexpression                                            |
|                                      | gastrin    | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | K-sam      | amplification; overexpression                                            |
|                                      | annexin II | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | FHIT       | silencing/loss of expression                                             |
|                                      | KAI-1      | silencing/loss of expression                                             |
|                                      | PDGF-α     | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | RAR-β      | silencing                                                               |
| Cell cycle and susceptibility to apoptosis | cyclin D1 | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | cyclin E   | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | p15        | repression                                                              |
|                                      | p16        | silencing; loss of expression                                            |
|                                      | p21        | repression                                                              |
|                                      | p27        | repression                                                              |
|                                      | p53        | mutation                                                               |
|                                      | Siah-1     | mutation                                                               |
|                                      | c-myc      | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | TS         | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | BCL-2      | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | Caspase-10 | mutation                                                               |
|                                      | Galectin-3 | overexpression                                                          |
| Immortalisation                      | hTERT      | overexpression                                                          |
| Angiogenesis                         | VEGF       | overexpression                                                          |
| Cell adhesion and migration          | γ-catenin  | mutation                                                               |
|                                      | α-catenin  | loss of expression                                                      |
|                                      | dysadherin | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | CDH3       | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | CDH13      | silencing; loss of expression                                            |
|                                      | CDH1       | deletion; silencing/loss of expression; mutation; intracellular redistribution |
|                                      | S100A7     | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | RhoA       | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | IQGAP-1    | overexpression; intracellular redistribution                              |
|                                      | Rac1       | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | SSTR-1     | repression                                                              |
|                                      | CD44       | aberrant splice variants                                                |
|                                      | RHAMM      | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | MMP7       | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | MMP9       | overexpression                                                          |
|                                      | MUC1       | overexpression                                                          |

Table 1 (continued)  

| Physiologic role                     | Gene   | Aberration     |
|--------------------------------------|--------|----------------|
| Prostaglandine synthesis             | COX-2  | overexpression |
| Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions  | Snail  | overexpression |
|                                      | Twist  | overexpression |
|                                      | SIP1   | overexpression |
| Genetic and epigenetic stability      | hMLH1  | silencing      |
|                                      | hMSH2  | loss of expression |
|                                      | DNMT1  | overexpression |

For explanation of the abbreviations and for references please refer to the text. The list only includes genes for which association with gastric cancer has not only been shown by microarray data but by more detailed in vitro and/or in vivo experiments.

Ding et al., 2003). Alterations of p53, the central regulator of cell cycle and apoptosis, have been frequently detected in gastric cancer. These alterations include point mutations, LOH and protein accumulation (Fenoglio-Preiser et al., 2003; Sarbia et al., 2004). Siah-1, a homologue of Drosophila seven in absentia (sina), is induced by p53. Overexpression of Siah1 inhibits proliferation and promotes apoptosis (Nemani et al., 1996). Kim et al. found rare mutations (2 in 95) of Siah-1 in gastric cancer which promoted cytoplasmic and nuclear localization of β-catenin with subsequent induction of cyclin D1 and failure to promote apoptosis. The authors propose that Siah-1 plays a role in cell cycle regulation by mediating proteosome-dependant β-catenin degradation (Kim et al., 2004a).

Further deregulated genes (Table 1) associated with aberrations in cell cycle in gastric cancer include cyclin B2, cyclin C, CDC2, CDC25B (a CDK activating phosphatase), Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A (CDKN1A), B-myb, CDC28 protein kinase 1, CDC 28 protein kinase 2, CDK4, Ets2, G1 to S transition 1, Mitotin (Galaktionov et al., 1995; Hasegawa et al., 2002; Hippo et al., 2002; Boussioutas et al., 2003; Kang et al., 2004).

According to the proliferative nature of gastric cancer, genes associated with DNA replication, spindle assembly and chromosome segregation have been identified to be up-regulated in this type of tumor, especially in intestinal-type gastric carcinoma. The list comprises the genes for protein kinase DNA-activated, chromosome condensation 1, kinesin-like 6, thymidylate kinase, v-myb, B-myb, replication protein A3 (RPA3), DNA polymerize δ, GMP synthetase, Ruv B-like 1, melanoma inhibitory activity (MIA), BCL2, DNA topoisomerases and thymidylate kinase and others (Hasegawa et al., 2002; Hippo et al., 2002; Boussioutas et al., 2003). Overexpression of thymidylate synthase (TS) has also been reported in gastric cancer. As one of the key enzymes controlling DNA replication, TS is the target of 5-fluoro uracil (5-FU). TS overexpression confers relative resistance to 5-FU. This property makes the level of TS expression an important prognostic factor and may help to guide therapeutic decisions (Kang et al., 2004; Scartozzi et al., 2004).

Overexpression of c-myc has also been found in gastric cancer, associated with cell proliferation and poor clinical outcome (Han et al., 1999).

### 3.2. Susceptibility to apoptosis

An important feature of all tumors is their loss of susceptibility to apoptosis. In gastric cancer, significant deregulation of the BAX/BCL2 system has been observed. This is predominantly characterized by a marked overexpression of BCL2 (Konturek et al., 2001). Moreover, in sporadic gastric cancer, caspase 10, an initiator caspase that mediates signaling from death receptors to effector caspases, is affected by inactivating mutations (15%) or LOH (3%) (Park et al., 2002). Non-metastatic gastric tumors show higher levels of apoptotic markers such as the ssDNA protein, which correlates with higher apoptosis rates. Bcl-2 and p53 expression was shown to be lower in non-metastatic tumors as compared to metastatic tumors. Mutations in p53, resulting in a loss of function regarding its pro-apoptotic effect, could explain the elevated expression in metastatic tumors (Uchino et al., 1993a; Scartozzi et al., 2004). As already discussed above, Siah-1 is induced by p53 and promotes apoptosis. Mutations of Siah-1 in gastric cancer have been shown to result in failure to promote apoptosis (Kim et al., 2004a).

### 3.3. Senescence

In order to become immortalized, a tumor has to acquire the ability to overcome cellular senescence which, under physiological conditions, would limit the number of cell generations. One of the main reasons for senescence is the shortening of telomeres which occurs in somatic cells with each cell division. Hiyama et al. found that in 85% of 66 primary gastric cancers analyzed, this obstacle had been overcome by activation of telomerase. Tumors without telomerase were predominantly early-stage tumors, and telomerase activity was found to be associated with a poor prognosis (Hiyama et al., 1995). Further evidence for the up-regulation of telomerase activity being a crucial step in the immortalization of gastrointestinal cancer cells arises from a study that found telomerase activity not only in 17/20 primary gastric carcinomas, but also in 3/13 gastric intestinal metaplasias and 1/2 gastric adenomas. The induction of telomerase activity in gastric cancer is mediated by overexpression of human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT), a catalytic subunit of human telomerase (Yasui et al., 1998). High expression of hTERT was found in 86% (36 out of 42 samples) to 93% (25 out of 27 samples) of gastric carcinomas, but was absent in normal gastric mucosa (Jong et al., 1999; Yao et al., 2002). Nevertheless, views differ on whether there is an association between tumor progression and telomerase activity. While Hiyama et al. observed a correlation between telomerase activity and poor prognosis, Ahn et al. did not observe such association (Hiyama et al., 1995; Ahn et al., 1997).

### 3.4. Angiogenesis

A prerequisite for the expansion of a solid tumor beyond microscopic size is neovascularization through the induction of angiogenesis (Bouck et al., 1996; Hanahan and Folkman, 1996). Tumors have to perform an “angiogenic switch” to gain size and metastatic potential. This is usually achieved by perturbing the local balance of pro-angiogenic and anti-angiogenic factors. Tumors frequently overexpress pro-angiogenic factors such as VEGF which allows them to make this angiogenic switch (Hanahan and Folkman, 1996). For a comprehensive overview of this subject, please refer to the review article by Hanahan and Folkman (Hanahan and Folkman, 1996). In gastric carcinoma, expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is frequently increased. Moreover, VEGF over-expression is associated with lymph node metastasis (Kabashima et al., 2001). This may be a consequence of p53 mutations occurring in gastric carcinoma, as under physiological conditions, p53 down-regulates VEGF expression, thus suppressing angiogenesis (Scartozzi et al., 2004). Overexpression of Rac1, as observed in primary gastric carcinoma, may also contribute to a pro-angiogenic switch (Pan et al., 2004). Thus, knock-down of Rac1 in a gastric cancer cell line results in down-regulation of VEGF and HIF-Iα (both angiogenesis promoters) and up-regulation of p53 and VHL (both angiogenesis inhibitors and tumor suppressors) gene expression (Xue et al., 2004).

Other genes frequently up-regulated in gastric cancer and associated with angiogenesis include interleukin-8, osteonectin (SPARC) and thrombospondin (Hippo et al., 2002).

### 3.5. Cell adhesion and migration

A serious problem in cancer treatment is the metastatic spread. In order for a tumor to metastasize it has to gain the ability to modify its adhesion properties, its extra-cellular environment and its cell motility.

The most comprehensively researched property of gastric cancer is the loss of E-cadherin expression. Though not located in the tight junction complex, E-cadherin is indispensable for the initiation and maintenance of tight junction formation in epithelia (Gumbiner et al., 1988; Cereijido et al., 2000). The formation of tight junctions seems to be a prerequisite for the polarity of epithelial cells (Cereijido et al., 1978; Salas et al., 1987). Furthermore E-cadherin is a central component of the adherens junction and indispensable for cell–cell adhesion (Suriano et al., 2003). Inactivation of E-cadherin is an important step in the development of most, if not all, epithelial-derived tumor

types (Birchmeier and Behrens, 1994). In gastric cancer, E-cadherin expression is frequently lost due to mutation or deletion of the E-cadherin gene CDH1 (Becker et al., 1994; Becker and Hofler, 1995). In many sporadic cancers, E-cadherin is also commonly down-regulated by hypermethylation of the promoter of CDH1 (Scartozzi et al., 2004). The correlation of down-regulation and promoter hypermethylation of the CDH1 gene has been studied by several investigators. Frequent hypermethylation of the CDH1 promoter in human gastric cancer has been detected by Tamura et al. (Tamura et al., 2000). Graziano et al. observed CDH1 promoter hypermethylation in 20 out of 70 gastric cancers. 24 of 70 analyzed tumor samples did not show E-cadherin expression, and 19 of these exhibited hypermethylation in the CDH1 promoter (Graziano et al., 2004). Detection of promoter hypermethylation as a mechanism of CDH1 gene silencing resulted in the development to a two hit model for E-cadherin silencing in gastric carcinomas: The inactivation of the first CDH1 allele occurs through mutation or deletion, while the second allele is silenced by promoter methylation (Grady et al., 2000; Machado et al., 2001). An additional mechanism of E-cadherin repression in gastric tumors might be mediated by overexpression of the transcription factors SIP1 or Snail (Rosivatz et al., 2002). Becker et al. reported E-cadherin inactivation in gastric cancer induced by exon skipping (Becker et al., 1993). Furthermore, overexpression of the cell membrane glycoprotein dysadherin leads to down-regulation of E-cadherin protein levels (Ino et al., 2002). Dysadherin overexpression has been found in about one third of the gastric tumors analyzed (90 out of 276) and has been associated with hematogenous metastasis (Shimada et al., 2004). Biological function of E-cadherin can also be attenuated post-translationally. Thus, following H. pylori infection, E-cadherin protein can be relocated from the plasma membrane in the area of adherens junctions to intracellular vesicles. A resulting increased cell migration after infection has been reported (Conlin et al., 2004). In intestinal- and diffuse-type gastric carcinomas, E-cadherin inactivation does not occur to the same extent. Blok et al. found that down-regulation of E-cadherin is more frequent in diffuse-subtype than intestinal-type early gastric carcinoma (Blok et al., 1999). Moreover, tumors with CDH1 promoter hypermethylation were predominantly of the diffuse histotype (Graziano et al., 2004). Furthermore, a connection was found between E-cadherin expression and the degree of malignancy of gastric tumors in that the degree of E-cadherin repression correlates with the migratory behavior and hence the metastatic potential of the tumor cell (Jawhari et al., 1999). However, another study could not detect any correlation between E-cadherin expression and lymph node metastasis or 5-year survival rates (Blok et al., 1999).

Approximately 1–3% of diffuse gastric cancers arise due to an autosomal dominantly inherited susceptibility to gastric cancer. In such cases, germline CDH1 mutations have been frequently detected (Guilford et al., 1998; Stone et al., 1999; Brooks-Wilson et al., 2004).

Concolino et al. found six somatic CDH1 mutations in 5 out of 7 patients with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC). 2 of these mutations were located within the β-catenin interacting domain (Concolino et al., 2004). Polymorphism in the CDH1 promoter and coding region are also correlated with an increased risk (Humar et al., 2002). As discussed earlier, E-cadherin sequesters β-catenin to the cell membrane to support cell adhesion, while cytoplasmic β-catenin can be translocated to the nucleus to activate Tcf/LEF-dependent gene expression (Jawhari et al., 1997; Hirohashi, 1998; Willert and Nusse, 1998). Thus, relocation of β-catenin to the nucleus and subsequent activation of TCF/Lef-dependent transcription and proliferation may represent a secondary effect of E-cadherin silencing. However, further studies are needed in this field to clarify this issue.

Another cadherin which has been reported to be deregulated in gastric cancer is T-cadherin (H-cadherin, CDH13). CDH13 promoter methylation correlates with repression of T-cadherin expression in gastric and colon cancer cell lines (Hibi et al., 2004). Furthermore, P-cadherin, which is usually not (or very weakly) expressed in gastric mucosa, is frequently expressed in gastric adenocarcinoma (Shimoyama and Hirohashi, 1991). Also, overexpression of LI-cadherin (CDH17) and OB-cadherin (CDH11) have been found in gastric tumors (Hippo et al., 2002).

Rho GTPases constitute a group of molecules involved in the regulation of cell adhesion and are frequently altered in gastric cancers. They represent switches in several signaling pathways including those controlling the formation of lamellipodia and the establishment of new adhesions in migrating cells (Nobes and Hall, 1995; Mackay and Hall, 1998). Rac1 and RhoA are overexpressed in primary gastric carcinoma and gastric cancer cell lines (Pan et al., 2004). Furthermore, *H. pylori* has been reported to increase Rho-GTP levels and cell migration, possibly via repression of SSTR-1 (Conlin et al., 2004). SST, acting at its receptor SSTR-1, inhibits the GTP binding of Rho, thus perturbing the assembly of actin stress fibers and focal adhesions and eventually attenuating cell migration (Hotchin et al., 2000; Buchan et al., 2002). The effect of Rac1 deregulation on cell adhesion might be mediated by IQGAP1. This protein regulates cell–cell adhesion via E-cadherin/β-catenin (Kuroda et al., 1998). Aberrant intracellular localization of IQGAP1 correlates with down-regulation of E-cadherin (Takemoto et al., 2001). It has also been shown that increased IQGAP expression can lead to reduced E-cadherin levels in the plasma membrane and to increased cell migration (Kuroda et al., 1998; Li et al., 1999). Speculations that IQGAP1 might play a role in the development of gastric cancer are based on results obtained in knockout mouse experiments. Older IQGAP1-deficient mice exhibit a higher

rate of gastric hyperplasia than wild-type mice. However, an increase in the rate of gastric cancer has not been observed (Li et al., 2000b). *H. pylori* infection results in overexpression of IQGAP mRNA. Protein levels, however, were not increased, but protein was relocated from the plasma membrane to intracellular vesicles (Conlin et al., 2004).

Other factors involved in cell adhesion in gastric cancer include the hyaluronan receptors CD44 and RHAMM (Li et al., 2000a). Several splice variants of the transmembrane glycoprotein CD44 that participates in cell–cell and cell-matrix interaction have been reported to be differentially expressed in gastric cancer (Dammrich et al., 1995). Furthermore, overexpression of mesothelin, von Willebrand factor, laminin γ2 and others have been reported in gastric cancer (Hasegawa et al., 2002; Hippo et al., 2002).

To facilitate tumor invasion and metastasis, solid carcinomas commonly alter their surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM). In gastric cancer, changes in the expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) that mediate ECM modulations are commonly observed. MMP 7 (matrilysin) expression is frequently strongly increased in gastric cancer (Yamashita et al., 1998). MMP 7 expression might be a consequence of deregulated β-catenin signaling, since MMP 7 is a target of Tcf and has been shown to be over-expressed predominantly in intestinal tumors with high β-catenin signaling (Crawford et al., 1999). Increased gastrin levels can lead to increased matrix metalloproteinase 9 expression in gastric cancer cell lines (Wroblewski et al., 2002). Other matrix metalloproteinases such as MMP1, MMP2, MMP 3, MMP 11, MMP 12, and MMP19 and ECM remodeling enzymes such as cathepsin K and arylsulfatase E have also commonly been found to be up-regulated in gastric cancer (Hasegawa et al., 2002; Hippo et al., 2002; Boussioutas et al., 2003).

In addition, changes in the production of ECM proteins is a common feature of gastric tumors. Biglycan, osteonectin, fibronectin, osteopontin and different types of collagen are frequently overexpressed in these carcinomas (Hippo et al., 2002; Boussioutas et al., 2003).

Gastric cancer is frequently characterized by an altered composition of the mucous gel layer covering the epithelium. Mucins, high molecular weight proteins with oligosaccharides, are major constituents of this mucous gel (Corfield et al., 2000). Under physiological conditions, MUC1 and MUC2 are not expressed in gastric epithelia, but MUC1 is expressed in lactating mammary glands and MUC2 in the intestine. (Gendler et al., 1990; Ho et al., 1995). However, in some gastric cancers, MUC1 and MUC2 are aberrantly expressed (Tanaka et al., 2003; Scartozzi et al., 2004). MUC5AC is normally expressed in gastric mucosa. In gastric cancer it is commonly down-regulated (Guyonnet Duperat et al., 1995). This is predominantly the case for advanced gastric cancer as compared to early gastric cancer (Zhang et al., 2004). Murine Muc5ac expression is induced by Smad4-mediated TGF-β signaling. Smad2 or 3 do not seem to be involved in signal transduction. Instead the TGF-β signal might be mediated by Sp1 (Jonckheere et al., 2004). Is the inactivation of the TGFβ signaling pathway a potential mechanism of MUC5AC down-regulation? A recent study investigating 94 gastric cancer cases reported MUC1 expression in 82% and MUC2 expression in 86% of all cases. MUC5AC was rarely expressed (Zhang et al., 2004). It has been proposed that MUC1 and MUC2 may interfere with the E-cadherin function, thus promoting tumor progression (Zhang et al., 2004). Nonetheless, views differ on the prognostic value of mucin expression in gastric cancer (Reis et al., 1998; Utsunomiya et al., 1998; Zhang et al., 2004).

## 4. Global gene expression profiling

In recent years, methods allowing global expression profiling have enormously facilitated the study of gene deregulation. To date, there are many studies which are based on serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) or array techniques. SAGE has been successfully used to identify a large amount of genes that are either up- or down-regulated in gastric cancer compared to normal gastric mucosa (Velculescu et al., 1995; El-Rifai et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2003b; Oien et al., 2003). El-Rifai et al. used cDNA macroarrays to identify a set of genes deregulated in gastric adenocarcinoma (El-Rifai et al., 2001). However, most importantly, microarray techniques have recently also been successfully used for global expression profiling in gastric carcinoma (Ji et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2003a; Haraguchi et al., 2004).

The number of studies concerned with gene expression in gastric cancer is ever increasing. These studies have revealed that although gastric cancer can have different etiologies, certain gene expression patterns remain surprisingly stable. In recent years, more and more investigators have focused their research on defining different subgroups of gastric cancer in relation to their malignant potential and their ability to develop resistance to antineoplastic agents.

Oue et al. used the SAGE technique to compare the gene expression in primary gastric tumors and tumors with lymph node metastasis. They identified a set of genes potentially involved in invasion, metastasis and carcinogenesis. 27 of the identified genes have been confirmed by real-time RT-PCR analysis of further gastric cancer samples. Among the identified genes, apolipoprotein E (APOE), cadherin 17 (CDH17) and “Fusion, derived from t(12;16) malignant liposarcoma” (FUS) were found to be associated with depth of tumor invasion and/or lymph node metastasis. Furthermore, the authors could make a connection between FUS, COL1A1, COL1A2 and APOE expression and tumor stage (Oue et al., 2004).

Boussioutas et al. investigated distinctive gene expression patterns in diffuse-type and intestinal-type gastric cancer applying microarray techniques (Boussioutas et al., 2003).

Trefoil factor 1 (TFF1), a stabilizer of the mucous gel layer of the gastrointestinal mucosa, was frequently decreased in both intestinal-type and diffuse-type gastric cancer. TFF1 KO mice develop gastric cancer, and somatic mutations in the TFF1 gene have been identified in gastric carcinomas (Lefebvre et al., 1996; Park et al., 2000).

PSGs (PREGNANCY-SPECIFIC BETA-1-GLYCO-PROTEINS), usually involved in placental development and known to interact with Krueppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), were frequently up-regulated in intestinal-type gastric cancer and intestinal metaplasia. This was also the case with KLF4 itself. TGF-α, which has been reported to have a mitogenic role, was also persistently up-regulated in intestinal gastric cancer and intestinal metaplasia (Konturek et al., 2001).

Intestinal-type gastric cancer has been mainly characterized by overexpression of genes associated with proliferation. Amongst others, this list comprises genes associated with G2/M cell-cycle transition, DNA replication spindle assembly and chromosome segregation such as PRKDC (protein kinase DNA activated), CHC1 (chromosome condensation 1), KNSL6 (kinesin-like 6), thymidylate kinase, v-myb, CDC2 and cyclin B2. Furthermore, it includes genes that had previously been shown to be overexpressed in gastric cancer such as topoisomerase 2A, and CDC25B (CDK activating phosphatase) (Galaktionov et al., 1995; Kim et al., 1999).

Interestingly, in diffuse-type gastric cancer, up-regulation of the proliferation marker cluster cannot be observed. In contrast to intestinal-type, diffuse-type gastric cancer is characterized by high expression of genes associated with ECM deposition and remodeling as well as signaling regulators of cell growth. The infiltrating nature of diffuse gastric cancer is reflected by the high expression of genes encoding components of the extracellular matrix such as collagens, biglycan, osteoglycin, proteoglycan, cadherin11, Thy-1, SERPINS and fibrillin. Overexpressed ECM genes which are also associated with controlling cell proliferation include Wnt5a, secreted frizzled-related protein 4, FDZ1, DKK3, NMB, SPARC, Discs large homologue 5 (DLG5) and IGFBP7. E-cadherin is down-regulated in diffuse gastric cancer. Likewise, the genes encoding the actin related protein 2/3 and the major tight junction protein occludin have been found to be down-regulated.

Hasegawa et al. performed a genome-wide expression analysis of intestinal-type gastric carcinoma (Hasegawa et al., 2002). They used laser capture microdissection to obtain tumor cells from 20 patients. Microarray analysis of the samples revealed about 60 genes which were consistently either up- or down-regulated.

Up-regulated genes included those associated with cell division and proliferation, such as replication protein A3 (RPA3), cyclin C, Ruv B-like 1, melanoma inhibitory activity (MIA), protein kinase DNA activated and BCL2,

as well as signaling genes such as hepatocyte growth factor HGF and its receptor c-Met and transcription factors such as SOX9 and HOXB7.

One of the down-regulated genes was TFF1 which has already been reported to be attenuated in gastric cancer (Lefebvre et al., 1996; Park et al., 2000). Notably and in contrast to Boussioutas et al., KLF7 was found to be down-regulated rather than up-regulated.

12 genes were shown to correlate with lymph node metastases. The expression level of 5 of those genes proved to be a suitable parameter to predict the development of lymph node metastasis in intestinal gastric cancer: dolichyl-diphosphooligosaccharide-protein glycosyltransferase (DDOST), glucosamine (N-acetyl)-6-sulfatase (Sanfilippo disease IID; GNS), neural precursor cell expressed, developmentally down-regulated 8 (NEDD8), CGI-48 protein and absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2).

Hippo et al. analyzed samples of primary tumors using oligonucleotide microarrays. The investigators found 162 up-regulated genes and 129 down-regulated genes. It was possible to group the identified up-regulated genes into physiological clusters related to either proliferation and cell cycle, cell adhesion and motility or ECM remodeling. Furthermore, 9 genes were identified which proved to be associated with lymph node metastases: RBP4, Oct-2, IGF2, PFN2, KIAA1093, FN1, PCOLCE, MUC4, LYZ (Hippo et al., 2002).

Inoue et al. analyzed primary tumor expression profiles with respect to their prognostic value, resulting in the definition of a prognostic score and the identification of a hierarchy of malignancy markers. The following genes were found to be associated with a poor prognosis in gastric cancer: MMP7, SPARC (Osteonectin), TGF-β3 and Thrombospondin 2 (Inoue et al., 2002).

Kang et al. analyzed drug-resistant (5-FU, Cisplatin, Doxorubicin) gastric cancer with respect to differentially expressed genes and identified a set of 8 potential drug resistance genes: Midkine (MDK), Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A (CDKN1A), Splicing factor 3b, subunit 3 (SF3B3), Leucin Zipper Transcription Factor-Like 1 (LZTFL1), NAD(P)H dehydrogenase Quinone 1 (NQO1), Thymidylate synthetase (TS), Insulin-like growth factor binding protein 2 (IGFBP2) and Calbindin 2 (CALB2) (Kang et al., 2004).

A similar approach was taken by H.K. Kim et al. In relation to 5-FU/Cisplatin resistant gastric tumors. 119 genes were identified which were differentially expressed in resistant and sensitive tumors. In resistant tumors, 110 of those genes were up-regulated while only 9 were down-regulated. Interestingly, the gene lists of Kang and Kim (Kim et al., 2004b) did not overlap.

B. Kim et al. used global expression profiling with microarray analysis to identify molecularly distinct subgroups of gastric cancer. 22 tumor samples were divided into two major groups of either high or low inflammatory infiltration (Kim et al., 2003).

Mori et al. used microarray based expression profiling to identify marker genes for minimal invasion of gastric cancer cells in peritoneal washings. Since advanced gastric cancer is usually incurable by the time peritoneal metastases become cytologically detectable, detection of minimal metastasis in peritoneal washings by screening for marker genes could help to guide treatment into the right direction at an early stage. The study identified a set of 5 genes (TFF1, TFF2, MUC2, CK20 and FABP1) that could be detected by RT-PCR specifically in peritoneal washes of patients with cytologically diagnosed peritoneal metastases. Furthermore, these genes could be detected in 6 out of 20 (30%) patients with early relapse who displayed no cytological abnormalities (Mori et al., 2004).

Sakakura et al. took a similar approach in an earlier study. However, for gene expression profiling, the authors did not use primary clinical samples, but cell lines derived from primary tumors and ascites. 24 genes were found to be up-regulated and 17 down-regulated in cell lines derived from peritoneal metastases compared to primary gastric cancer cell lines. For three of those, specific overexpression in primary clinical samples of malignant ascites was confirmed by RT-PCR: Keratin-7, Aldehyde dehydrogenase and Inositol triphosphate receptor. Interestingly, the sets of genes differentially expressed in primary tumors and malignant ascites identified by Mori et al. and Sakakura et al. showed no overlap (Sakakura et al., 2002).

### 5. Prospects

In recent years, gene deregulation in gastric cancer has been studied extensively making use of modern laboratory techniques such as microarrays. Analysis of gene expression has been correlated with histological type, metastatic potential, prognosis and resistance to chemotherapeutic agents. A number of signaling pathways, such as those providing Wnt, TGF or E-cadherin signals, have been identified to be important players in gastric carcinogenesis. This knowledge not only provides molecular data as a guideline for clinical oncologists regarding prognosis and treatment. It also provides interesting molecular targets for the development of new antineoplastic agents.

### Acknowledgements

We gratefully thank Cathleen McSharry for helpful discussion and proof reading of the manuscript.

### References

Abraham, S.C., Park, S.J., Lee, J.H., Mugartegui, L., Wu, T.T., 2003. Genetic alterations in gastric adenomas of intestinal and foveolar phenotypes. Mod. Path. 16, 786–795.

Ahn, M.J., et al., 1997. Telomerase activity and its clinicopathological significance in gastric cancer. Eur. J. Cancer 33, 1309–1313.

Aly, A., Shulkes, A., Baldwin, G.S., 2004. Gastrins, cholecystokinin and gastrointestinal cancer. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1704, 1–10.

Athmann, C., et al., 2000. Local pH elevation mediated by the intrabacterial urease of *Helicobacter pylori* cocultured with gastric cells. J Clin Invest. 106, 339–347.

Baldus, S.E., et al., 2000. Increased galectin-3 expression in gastric cancer: correlations with histopathological subtypes, galactosylated antigens and tumor cell proliferation. Tumour Biol. 21, 258–266.

Baylin, S.B., Belinsky, S.A., Herman, J.G., 2000. Aberrant methylation of gene promoters in cancer—concepts, misconceptions, and promise. J Natl Cancer Inst. 92, 1460–1461.

Becker, K.F., Hofler, H., 1995. Frequent somatic allelic inactivation of the E-cadherin gene in gastric carcinomas. J Natl Cancer Inst. 87, 1082–1084.

Becker, K.F., et al., 1993. Exon skipping in the E-cadherin gene transcript in metastatic human gastric carcinomas. Hum Mol Genet. 2, 803–804.

Becker, K.F., et al., 1994. E-cadherin gene mutations provide clues to diffuse type gastric carcinomas. Cancer Res. 54, 3845–3852.

Bestor, T., Laudano, A., Mattaliano, R., Ingram, V., 1988. Cloning and sequencing of a cDNA encoding DNA methyltransferase of mouse cells. The carboxyl-terminal domain of the mammalian enzymes is related to bacterial restriction methyltransferases. J Mol Biol. 203, 971–983.

Birchmeier, W., Behrens, J., 1994. Cadherin expression in carcinomas: role in the formation of cell junctions and the prevention of invasiveness. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1198, 11–26.

Birchmeier, C., Birchmeier, W., Gherardi, E., Vande Woude, G.F., 2003. Met, metastasis, motility and more. Nat. Rev., Mol. Cell Biol. 4, 915–925.

Blok, P., Craanen, M.E., Dekker, W., Tytgat, G.N., 1999. Loss of E-cadherin expression in early gastric cancer. Histopathology 34, 410–415.

Bottaro, D.P., et al., 1991. Identification of the hepatocyte growth factor receptor as the c-met proto-oncogene product. Science 251, 802–804.

Bouck, N., Stellmach, V., Hsu, S.C., 1996. How tumors become angiogenic. Adv Cancer Res. 69, 135–174.

Boussioutas, A., et al., 2003. Distinctive patterns of gene expression in premalignant gastric mucosa and gastric cancer. Cancer Res. 63, 2569–2577.

Brooks-Wilson, A.R., et al., 2004. Germline E-cadherin mutations in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer: assessment of 42 new families and review of genetic screening criteria. J. Med. Genet. 41, 508–517.

Buchan, A.M., Lin, C.Y., Choi, J., Barber, D.L., 2002. Somatostatin, acting at receptor subtype 1, inhibits Rho activity, the assembly of actin stress fibers, and cell migration. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 28431–28438.

Caca, K., et al., 1999. Beta- and gamma-catenin mutations, but not E-cadherin inactivation, underlie T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor transcriptional deregulation in gastric and pancreatic cancer. Cell Growth Differ. 10, 369–376.

Calonge, M.J., Massague, J., 1999. Smad4/DPC4 silencing and hyperactive Ras jointly disrupt transforming growth factor-beta antiproliferative responses in colon cancer cells. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 33637–33643.

Candidus, S., Bischoff, P., Becker, K.F., Hofler, H., 1996. No evidence for mutations in the alpha- and beta-catenin genes in human gastric and breast carcinomas. Cancer Res. 56, 49–52.

Cao, X., et al., 2004. Beta-catenin gene alteration in glandular stomach adenocarcinomas in *N*-methyl-*N*-nitrosourea-treated and *Helicobacter pylori*-infected Mongolian gerbils. Cancer Sci. 95, 487–490.

Cereijido, M., Robbins, E.S., Dolan, W.J., Rotunno, C.A., Sabatini, D.D., 1978. Polarized monolayers formed by epithelial cells on a permeable and translucent support. J. Cell Biol. 77, 853–880.

Cereijido, M., Shoshani, L., Contreras, R.G., 2000. Molecular physiology and pathophysiology of tight junctions. I. Biogenesis of tight junctions and epithelial polarity. Am. J. Physiol.: Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 279, G477–G482.

Cheng, X.X., et al., 2004. Frequent translocalization of beta-catenin in gastric cancers and its relevance to tumor progression. Oncol. Rep. 11, 1201–1207.

Chowers, M.Y., et al., 1999. Human gastrin: a *Helicobacter pylori*-specific growth factor. Gastroenterology 117, 1113–1118.

Clements, W.M., et al., 2002. beta-Catenin mutation is a frequent cause of Wnt pathway activation in gastric cancer. Cancer Res. 62, 3503–3506.

Concolino, P., et al., 2004. The unsolved enigma of CDH1 down-regulation in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. J. Surg. Res. 121, 50–55.

Conlin, V.S., et al., 2004. Helicobacter pylori infection targets adherens junction regulatory proteins and results in increased rates of migration in human gastric epithelial cells. Infect. Immun. 72, 5181–5192.

Corfield, A.P., Myerscough, N., Longman, R., Sylvester, P., Arul, S., Pignatelli, M., 2000. Mucins and mucosal protection in the gastrointestinal tract: new prospects for mucins in the pathology of gastrointestinal disease. Gut 47, 589–594.

Crawford, H.C., et al., 1999. The metalloproteinase matrilysin is a target of beta-catenin transactivation in intestinal tumors. Oncogene 18, 2883–2891.

Dammrich, J., Vollmers, H.P., Heider, K.H., Muller-Hermelink, H.K., 1995. Importance of different CD44v6 expression in human gastric intestinal and diffuse type cancers for metastatic lymphogenic spreading. J. Mol. Med. 73, 395–401.

Datto, M.B., Frederick, J.P., Pan, L., Borton, A.J., Zhuang, Y., Wang, X.F., 1999. Targeted disruption of Smad3 reveals an essential role in transforming growth factor beta-mediated signal transduction. Mol. Cell Biol. 19, 2495–2504.

Diks, S.H., et al., 2003. Activation of the canonical beta-catenin pathway by histamine. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 52491–52496.

Ding, Y., Le, X.P., Zhang, Q.X., Du, P., 2003. Methylation and mutation analysis of p16 gene in gastric cancer. World J. Gastroenterol. 9, 423–426.

Ebert, M.P., et al., 2002. Increased beta-catenin mRNA levels and mutational alterations of the APC and beta-catenin gene are present in intestinal-type gastric cancer. Carcinogenesis 23, 87–91.

Ekstrom, A.M., Hansson, L.E., Signorello, L.B., Lindgren, A., Bergstrom, R., Nyren, O., 2002. Decreasing incidence of both major histologic subtypes of gastric adenocarcinoma—a population-based study in Sweden. Br. J. Cancer 83, 391–396.

Ekstrom, A.M., Held, M., Hansson, L.E., Engstrand, L., Nyren, O., 2001. Helicobacter pylori in gastric cancer established by CagA immunoblot as a marker of past infection. Gastroenterology 121, 784–791.

El-Rifai, W., Frierson Jr., H.F., Harper, J.C., Powell, S.M., Knuutila, S., 2001. Expression profiling of gastric adenocarcinoma using cDNA array. Int. J. Cancer 92, 832–838.

El-Rifai, W., et al., 2002. Gastric cancers overexpress S100A calcium-binding proteins. Cancer Res. 62, 6823–6826.

Emoto, K., et al., 2001. Annexin II overexpression is correlated with poor prognosis in human gastric carcinoma. Anticancer Res. 21, 1339–1345.

Endoh, Y., et al., 2000. Cellular phenotypes of differentiated-type adenocarcinomas and precancerous lesions of the stomach are dependent on the genetic pathways. J. Pathol. 191, 257–263.

Esufali, S., Bapat, B., 2004. Cross-talk between Rac1 GTPase and dysregulated Wnt signaling pathway leads to cellular redistribution of beta-catenin and TCF/LEF-mediated transcriptional activation. Oncogene.

Etoh, T., et al., 2004. Increased DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) protein expression correlates significantly with poorer tumor differentiation and frequent DNA hypermethylation of multiple CpG islands in gastric cancers. Am. J. Pathol. 164, 689–699.

Fang, D.C., et al., 2003. Mutation and methylation of hMLH1 in gastric carcinomas with microsatellite instability. World J. Gastroenterol. 9, 655–659.

Fearon, E.R., Vogelstein, B., 1990. A genetic model for colorectal tumorigenesis. Cell 61, 759–767.

Fenoglio-Preiser, C.M., Wang, J., Stemmermann, G.N., Noffsinger, A., 2003. TP53 and gastric carcinoma: a review. Human Mutat. 21, 258–270.

Fiocca, R., et al., 1987. Characterization of four main cell types in gastric cancer: foveolar, mucopeptic, intestinal columnar and goblet cells. An

histopathologic, histochemical and ultrastructural study of “early” and “advanced” tumours. Pathol. Res. Pract. 182, 308–325.

Friess, H., et al., 1999. Concomitant analysis of the epidermal growth factor receptor family in esophageal cancer: overexpression of epidermal growth factor receptor mRNA but not of c-erbB-2 and c-erbB-3. World J. Surg. 23, 1010–1018.

Galaktionov, K., et al., 1995. CDC25 phosphatases as potential human oncogenes. Science 269, 1575–1577.

Gendler, S.J., et al., 1990. Molecular cloning and expression of human tumor-associated polymorphic epithelial mucin. J. Biol. Chem. 265, 15286–15293.

Goffin, J., Eisenhauer, E., 2002. DNA methyltransferase inhibitors—state of the art. Ann. Oncol. 13, 1699–1716.

Gottardi, C.J., Wong, E., Gumbiner, B.M., 2001. E-cadherin suppresses cellular transformation by inhibiting beta-catenin signaling in an adhesion-independent manner. J. Cell Biol. 153, 1049–1060.

Gradl, D., Kuhl, M., Wedlich, D., 1999. The Wnt/Wg signal transducer beta-catenin controls fibronectin expression. Mol. Cell Biol. 19, 5576–5587.

Grady, W.M., et al., 2000. Methylation of the CDH1 promoter as the second genetic hit in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Nat. Genet. 26, 16–17.

Graziano, F., et al., 2004. Combined analysis of E-cadherin gene (CDH1) promoter hypermethylation and E-cadherin protein expression in patients with gastric cancer: implications for treatment with demethylating drugs. Ann. Oncol. 15, 489–492.

Guilford, P., et al., 1998. E-cadherin germline mutations in familial gastric cancer. Nature 392, 402–405.

Gumbiner, B., Stevenson, B., Grimaldi, A., 1988. The role of the cell adhesion molecule uvomorulin in the formation and maintenance of the epithelial junctional complex. J. Cell Biol. 107, 1575–1587.

Guyonnet Duperat, V., et al., 1995. Characterization of the human mucin gene MUC5AC: a consensus cysteine-rich domain for 11p15 mucin genes? Biochem. J. 305 (Pt 1), 211–219.

Hahn, K.B., 1999. Repression of the gene encoding the TGF-beta type II receptor is a major target of the EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein. Nat. Genet. 23, 481.

Hahn, S.A., et al., 1996. DPC4, a candidate tumor suppressor gene at human chromosome 18q21.1. Science 271, 350–353.

Halling, K.C., et al., 1999. Origin of microsatellite instability in gastric cancer. Am. J. Pathol. 155, 205–211.

Han, S., et al., 1999. c-Myc expression is related with cell proliferation and associated with poor clinical outcome in human gastric cancer. J. Korean Med. Sci. 14, 526–530.

Han, S.U., et al., 2004. Loss of the Smad3 expression increases susceptibility to tumorigenicity in human gastric cancer. Oncogene 23, 1333–1341.

Hanahan, D., Folkman, J., 1996. Patterns and emerging mechanisms of the angiogenic switch during tumorigenesis. Cell 86, 353–364.

Hanai, J., et al., 1999. Interaction and functional cooperation of PEBP2/CBF with Smads. Synergistic induction of the immunoglobulin germline Calpha promoter. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 31577–31582.

Haraguchi, N., et al., 2004. Analysis of gastric cancer with cDNA microarray. Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol.

Hasegawa, S., et al., 2002. Genome-wide analysis of gene expression in intestinal-type gastric cancers using a complementary DNA microarray representing 23,040 genes. Cancer Res. 62, 7012–7017.

Heldin, C.H., Miyazono, K., ten Dijke, P., 1997. TGF-beta signalling from cell membrane to nucleus through SMAD proteins. Nature 390, 465–471.

Herman, J.G., Baylin, S.B., 2003. Gene silencing in cancer in association with promoter hypermethylation. N. Engl. J. Med. 349, 2042–2054.

Hesketh, R., 1997. The Oncogene and Tumor Suppressor Gene Facts Book. Academic Press, San Diego.

Hibi, K., Kodera, Y., Ito, K., Akiyama, S., Nakao, A., 2004. Methylation pattern of CDH13 gene in digestive tract cancers. Br. J. Cancer.

Hippo, Y., et al., 2002. Global gene expression analysis of gastric cancer by oligonucleotide microarrays. Cancer Res. 62, 233–240.

Hirohashi, S., 1998. Inactivation of the E-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion system in human cancers. Am. J. Pathol. 153, 333–339.

Hiyama, E., et al., 1995. Telomerase activity in gastric cancer. Cancer Res. 55, 3258–3262.

Ho, S.B., et al., 1995. Mucin gene expression in normal, preneoplastic, and neoplastic human gastric epithelium. Cancer Res. 55, 2681–2690.

Hotchin, N.A., Cover, T.L., Akhtar, N., 2000. Cell vacuolation induced by the VacA cytotoxin of *Helicobacter pylori* is regulated by the Rac1 GTPase. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 14009–14012.

Humar, B., et al., 2002. Association of CDH1 haplotypes with susceptibility to sporadic diffuse gastric cancer. Oncogene 21, 8192–8195.

Inberg, M., Lauren, P., Viikari, S., 1965. Factors influencing survival after radical operation for gastric cancer. J. Int. Coll. Surg. 44, 682–686.

Ino, Y., Gotoh, M., Sakamoto, M., Tsukagoshi, K., Hirohashi, S., 2002. Dysadherin, a cancer-associated cell membrane glycoprotein, down-regulates E-cadherin and promotes metastasis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 365–370.

Inoue, H., Matsuyama, A., Mimori, K., Ueo, H., Mori, M., 2002. Prognostic score of gastric cancer determined by cDNA microarray. Clin. Cancer Res. 8, 3475–3479.

Inoue, T., et al., 2004. Activation of c-Met (hepatocyte growth factor receptor) in human gastric cancer tissue. Cancer Sci. 95, 803–808.

Jakubowska, A., Nej, K., Huzarski, T., Scott, R.J., Lubinski, J., 2002. BRCA2 gene mutations in families with aggregations of breast and stomach cancers. Br. J. Cancer 87, 888–891.

Jawhari, A., Jordan, S., Poole, S., Browne, P., Pignatelli, M., Farthing, M.J., 1997. Abnormal immunoreactivity of the E-cadherin-catenin complex in gastric carcinoma: relationship with patient survival. Gastroenterology 112, 46–54.

Jawhari, A.U., Noda, M., Farthing, M.J., Pignatelli, M., 1999. Abnormal expression and function of the E-cadherin-catenin complex in gastric carcinoma cell lines. Br. J. Cancer 80, 322–330.

Ji, J., et al., 2002. Comprehensive analysis of the gene expression profiles in human gastric cancer cell lines. Oncogene 21, 6549–6556.

Jonckheere, N., et al., 2004. Transcriptional activation of the murine Muc5ac mucin gene in epithelial cancer cells by TGF-beta/Smad4 signalling pathway is potentiated by Sp1. Biochem. J. 377, 797–808.

Jong, H.S., et al., 1999. Up-regulation of human telomerase catalytic subunit during gastric carcinogenesis. Cancer 86, 559–565.

Joo, Y.E., Oh, W.T., Rew, J.S., Park, C.S., Choi, S.K., Kim, S.J., 2002. Cyclooxygenase-2 expression is associated with well-differentiated and intestinal-type pathways in gastric carcinogenesis. Digestion 66, 222–229.

Judd, L.M., et al., 2004. Gastric cancer development in mice lacking the SHP2 binding site on the IL-6 family co-receptor gp130. Gastroenterology 126, 196–207.

Kabashima, A., Maehara, Y., Kakeji, Y., Sugimachi, K., 2001. Over-expression of vascular endothelial growth factor C is related to lymphogenous metastasis in early gastric carcinoma. Oncology 60, 146–150.

Kanai, Y., Ushijima, S., Kondo, Y., Nakanishi, Y., Hirohashi, S., 2001. DNA methyltransferase expression and DNA methylation of CpG islands and peri-centromeric satellite regions in human colorectal and stomach cancers. Int. J. Cancer 91, 205–212.

Kang, S.H., et al., 1999a. Transcriptional repression of the transforming growth factor-beta type I receptor gene by DNA methylation results in the development of TGF-beta resistance in human gastric cancer. Oncogene 18, 7280–7286.

Kang, S.H., Bang, Y.J., Jong, H.S., Seo, J.Y., Kim, N.K., Kim, S.J., 1999b. Rapid induction of p21WAF1 but delayed down-regulation of Cdc25A in the TGF-beta-induced cell cycle arrest of gastric carcinoma cells. Br. J. Cancer 80, 1144–1149.

Kang, G.H., et al., 2002. Epstein-barr virus-positive gastric carcinoma demonstrates frequent aberrant methylation of multiple genes and constitutes CpG island methylator phenotype-positive gastric carcinoma. Am. J. Pathol. 160, 787–794.


Kang, H.C., et al., 2004. Identification of genes with differential expression in acquired drug-resistant gastric cancer cells using high-density oligonucleotide microarrays. Clin. Cancer Res. 10, 272–284.

Karpeh, M., Kelsen, D., Tepper, J., 2001. Cancer of the stomach. In: DeVita, V., Hellman, S., Rosenberg, S. (Eds.), Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology. Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 1092–1126.

Karpf, A.R., Jones, D.A., 2002. Reactivating the expression of methylation silenced genes in human cancer. Oncogene 21, 5496–5503.

Katoh, M., 2001. Frequent up-regulation of WNT2 in primary gastric cancer and colorectal cancer. Int. J. Oncol. 19, 1003–1007.

Kavermann, H., et al., 2003. Identification and characterization of Helicobacter pylori genes essential for gastric colonization. J. Exp. Med. 197, 813–822.

Kim, R., Ohi, Y., Inoue, H., Toge, T., 1999. Expression and relationship between topoisomerase I and II alpha genes in tumor and normal tissues in esophageal, gastric and colon cancers. Anticancer Res. 19, 5393–5398.

Kim, B., et al., 2003. Expression profiling and subtype-specific expression of stomach cancer. Cancer Res. 63, 8248–8255.

Kim, C.J., et al., 2004a. Inactivating mutations of the Siah-1 gene in gastric cancer. Oncogene 23, 8591–8596.

Kim, H.K., et al., 2004b. DNA microarray analysis of the correlation between gene expression patterns and acquired resistance to 5-FU/cisplatin in gastric cancer. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 316, 781–789.

Kim, Y.H., et al., 2004c. Prognostic significance of the expression of Smad4 and Smad7 in human gastric carcinomas. Ann. Oncol. 15, 574–580.

Kolligs, F.T., Bommer, G., Goke, B., 2002. Wnt/beta-catenin/tcf signaling: a critical pathway in gastrointestinal tumorigenesis. Digestion 66, 131–144.

Konturek, S.J., Konturek, P.C., Hartwich, A., Hahn, E.G., 2000. *Helicobacter pylori* infection and gastrin and cyclooxygenase expression in gastric and colorectal malignancies. Regul. Pept. 93, 13–19.

Konturek, P.C., et al., 2000. Expression of hepatocyte growth factor, transforming growth factor alpha, apoptosis related proteins Bax and Bcl-2, and gastrin in human gastric cancer. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther. 15, 989–999.

Ku, J.L., et al., 2004. Promoter hypermethylation downregulates RUNX3 gene expression in colorectal cancer cell lines. Oncogene 23, 6736–6742.

Kuroda, S., et al., 1998. Role of IQGAP1, a target of the small GTPases Cdc42 and Rac1, in regulation of E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion. Science 281, 832–835.

Kushima, R., Muller, W., Stolte, M., Borchard, F., 1996. Differential p53 protein expression in stomach adenomas of gastric and intestinal phenotypes: possible sequences of p53 alteration in stomach carcinogenesis. Virchows Arch. 428, 223–227.

Lauren, P., 1965. The two histological main types of gastric carcinomas: diffuse and so-called intestinal-type carcinoma. Cancer 70, 50–55.

Lee, H.S., Chang, M.S., Yang, H.K., Lee, B.L., Kim, W.H., 2004. Epstein-barr virus-positive gastric carcinoma has a distinct protein expression profile in comparison with epstein-barr virus-negative carcinoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 10, 1698–1705.

Lee, J.H., et al., 2002. Inverse relationship between APC gene mutation in gastric adenomas and development of adenocarcinoma. Am. J. Pathol. 161, 611–618.

Lee, J.H., et al., 2003a. A gene expression in study human gastric adenocarcinoma using a cDNA microarray. Korean J. Gastroenterol. 42, 484–495.

Lee, J.Y., Eom, E.M., Kim, D.S., Ha-Lee, Y.M., Lee, D.H., 2003b. Analysis of gene expression profiles of gastric normal and cancer tissues by SAGE. Genomics 82, 78–85.

Lefebvre, O., et al., 1996. Gastric mucosa abnormalities and tumorigenesis in mice lacking the pS2 trefoil protein. Science 274, 259–262.

Levanon, D., et al., 2002. The Runx3 transcription factor regulates development and survival of TrkC dorsal root ganglia neurons. EMBO J. 21, 3454–3463.

Li, Z., Kim, S.H., Higgins, J.M., Brenner, M.B., Sacks, D.B., 1999. IQGAP1 and calmodulin modulate E-cadherin function. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 37885–37892.

Li, H., Guo, L., Li, J.W., Liu, N., Qi, R., Liu, J., 2000a. Expression of hyaluronan receptors CD44 and RHAMM in stomach cancers: relevance with tumor progression. Int. J. Oncol. 17, 927–932.

Li, S., Wang, Q., Chakladar, A., Bronson, R.T., Bernards, A., 2000b. Gastric hyperplasia in mice lacking the putative Cdc42 effector IQGAP1. Mol. Cell Biol. 20, 697–701.

Li, Q.L., et al., 2002. Causal relationship between the loss of RUNX3 expression and gastric cancer. Cell 109, 113–124.

Li, Q.L., et al., 2004. Transcriptional silencing of the RUNX3 gene by CpG hypermethylation is associated with lung cancer. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 314, 223–228.

Lind, T., Cederberg, C., Forssell, H., Olausson, M., Olbe, L., 1988. Relationship between reduction of gastric acid secretion and plasma gastrin concentration during omeprazole treatment. Scand. J. Gastroenterol. 23, 1259–1266.

Lynch, H.T., et al., 1993. Genetics, natural history, tumor spectrum, and pathology of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: an updated review. Gastroenterology 104, 1535–1549.

Machado, J.C., et al., 2001. E-cadherin gene (CDH1) promoter methylation as the second hit in sporadic diffuse gastric carcinoma. Oncogene 20, 1525–1528.

Mackay, D.J., Hall, D.J., 1998. Rho GTPases. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 20685–20688.

Maesawa, C., et al., 1995. The sequential accumulation of genetic alterations characteristic of the colorectal adenoma–carcinoma sequence does not occur between gastric adenoma and adenocarcinoma. J. Pathol. 176, 249–258.

Markowitz, S., et al., 1995. Inactivation of the type II TGF-beta receptor in colon cancer cells with microsatellite instability. Science 268, 1336–1338.

Mizutani, T., Onda, M., Tokunaga, A., Yamanaka, N., Sugisaki, Y., 1993. Relationship of C-erbB-2 protein expression and gene amplification to invasion and metastasis in human gastric cancer. Cancer 72, 2083–2088.

Mori, K., et al., 2004. Highly specific marker genes for detecting minimal gastric cancer cells in cytology negative peritoneal washings. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 313, 931–937.

Nemani, M., et al., 1996. Activation of the human homologue of the Drosophila sina gene in apoptosis and tumor suppression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93, 9039–9042.

Nessling, M., Solinas-Toldo, S., Wilgenbus, K.K., Borchard, F., Lichter, P., 1998. Mapping of chromosomal imbalances in gastric adenocarcinoma revealed amplified protooncogenes MYCN, MET, WNT2, and ERBB2. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 23, 307–316.

Nobes, C.D., Hall, A., 1995. Rho, rac, and cdc42 GTPases regulate the assembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers, lamellipodia, and filopodia. Cell 81, 53–62.

Oien, K.A., Vass, J.K., Downie, I., Fullarton, G., Keith, W.N., 2003. Profiling, comparison and validation of gene expression in gastric carcinoma and normal stomach. Oncogene 22, 4287–4300.

Okano, M., Xie, S., Li, E., 1998. Cloning and characterization of a family of novel mammalian DNA (cytosine-5) methyltransferases. Nat. Genet. 19, 219–220.

Oliveira, C., Seruca, R., Caldas, C., 2003. Genetic screening for hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn. 3, 201–215.

Oliveira, C., et al., 2004. E-Cadherin (CDH1) and p53 rather than SMAD4 and Caspase-10 germline mutations contribute to genetic predisposition in Portuguese gastric cancer patients. Eur. J. Cancer 40, 1897–1903.

Onda, M., et al., 1990. The correlation of epidermal growth factor with invasion and metastasis in human gastric cancer. Jpn. J. Surg. 20, 269–274.

Otto, F., Lubbert, M., Stock, M., 2003. Upstream and downstream targets of RUNX proteins. J. Cell Biochem. 89, 9–18.

Oue, N., et al., 2004. Gene expression profile of gastric carcinoma: identification of genes and tags potentially involved in invasion, metastasis, and carcinogenesis by serial analysis of gene expression. Cancer Res. 64, 2397–2405.

Oue, N., et al., 2002. Distinct promoter hypermethylation of p16INK4a, CDH1, and RAR-beta in intestinal, diffuse-adherent, and diffuse-scattered type gastric carcinomas. J. Pathol. 198, 55–59.

Pan, Y., et al., 2004. Expression of seven main Rho family members in gastric carcinoma. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 315, 686–691.

Park, M., Dean, M., Kaul, K., Braun, M.J., Gonda, M.A., Vande Woude, G., 1987. Sequence of MET protooncogene cDNA has features characteristic of the tyrosine kinase family of growth-factor receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 84, 6379–6383.

Park, K., et al., 1994. Genetic changes in the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) type II receptor gene in human gastric cancer cells: correlation with sensitivity to growth inhibition by TGF-beta. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 91, 8772–8776.

Park, W.S., et al., 2000. Somatic mutations of the trefoil factor family 1 gene in gastric cancer. Gastroenterology 119, 691–698.

Park, W.S., et al., 2002. Inactivating mutations of the caspase-10 gene in gastric cancer. Oncogene 21, 2919–2925.

Pestell, R.G., Albanese, C., Reutens, A.T., Segall, J.E., Lee, R.J., Arnold, A., 1999. The cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors in hormonal regulation of proliferation and differentiation. Endocr. Rev. 20, 501–534.

Ponzetto, C., et al., 1991. C-met is amplified but not mutated in a cell line with an activated met tyrosine kinase. Oncogene 6, 553–559.

Powell, S.M., Harper, J.C., Hamilton, S.R., Robinson, C.R., Cummings, O.W., 1997. Inactivation of Smad4 in gastric carcinomas. Cancer Res. 57, 4221–4224.

Pradeep, A., et al., 2004. Gastrin-mediated activation of cyclin D1 transcription involves beta-catenin and CREB pathways in gastric cancer cells. Oncogene 23, 3689–3699.

Ramesh, S., Nash, J., McCulloch, P.G., 1999. Reduction in membranous expression of beta-catenin and increased cytoplasmic E-cadherin expression predict poor survival in gastric cancer. Br. J. Cancer 81, 1392–1397.

Reis, C.A., David, L., Seixas, M., Burchell, J., Sobrinho-Simoes, M., 1998. Expression of fully and under-glycosylated forms of MUC1 mucin in gastric carcinoma. Int. J. Cancer 79, 402–410.

Riggins, G.J., Kinzler, K.W., Vogelstein, B., Thiagalingam, S., 1997. Frequency of Smad gene mutations in human cancers. Cancer Res. 57, 2578–2580.

Rosivatz, E., et al., 2002. Differential expression of the epithelial–mesenchymal transition regulators snail, SIP1, and twist in gastric cancer. Am. J. Pathol. 161, 1881–1891.

Sadot, E., Simcha, I., Shtutman, M., Ben-Ze’ev, A., Geiger, B., 1998. Inhibition of beta-catenin-mediated transactivation by cadherin derivatives. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95, 15339–15344.

Sakakura, C., et al., 2002. Differential gene expression profiles of gastric cancer cells established from primary tumour and malignant ascites. Br. J. Cancer 87, 1153–1161.

Salas, P.J., Vega-Salas, D.E., Rodriguez-Boulan, E., 1987. Collagen receptors mediate early events in the attachment of epithelial (MDCK) cells. J. Membr. Biol. 98, 223–236.

Santini, V., Kantarjian, H.M., Issa, J.P., 2001. Changes in DNA methylation in neoplasia: pathophysiology and therapeutic implications. Ann. Intern. Med. 134, 573–586.

Sarbia, M., Becker, K.F., Hofler, H., 2004. Pathology of upper gastrointestinal malignancies. Semin. Oncol. 31, 465–475.

Scartozzi, M., Galizia, E., Freddari, F., Berardi, R., Cellerino, R., Cascinu, S., 2004. Molecular biology of sporadic gastric cancer: prognostic indicators and novel therapeutic approaches. Cancer Treat. Rev. 30, 451–459.

Seruca, R., et al., 1993. Cytogenetic findings in eleven gastric carcinomas. Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 68, 42–48.

Seva, C., Dickinson, C.J., Yamada, T., 1994. Growth-promoting effects of glycine-extended progastrin. Science 265, 410–412.

Shibata, D., Weiss, L.M., 1992. Epstein-Barr virus-associated gastric adenocarcinoma. Am. J. Pathol. 140, 769–774.

Shibata, N., Watari, J., Fujiya, M., Tanno, S., Saitoh, Y., Kohgo, Y., 2003. Cell kinetics and genetic instabilities in differentiated type early gastric cancers with different mucin phenotype. Human Pathol. 34, 32–40.

Shimada, Y., et al., 2004. Clinical significance of dysadherin expression in gastric cancer patients. Clin. Cancer Res. 10, 2818–2823.

Shimoyama, Y., Hirohashi, S., 1991. Expression of E- and P-cadherin in gastric carcinomas. Cancer Res. 51, 2185–2192.

Shitara, Y., et al., 1999. No mutations of the Smad2 gene in human sporadic gastric carcinomas. Jpn. J. Clin. Oncol. 29, 3–7.

Singh, P., Velasco, M., Given, R., Varro, A., Wang, T.C., 2000. Progastrin expression predisposes mice to colon carcinomas and adenomas in response to a chemical carcinogen. Gastroenterology 119, 162–171.

Smith, J.T., et al., 1990. Inappropriate hypergastrinaemia in asymptomatic healthy subjects infected with *Helicobacter pylori*. Gut 31, 522–525.

Song, D.H., et al., 2003. Gastrin-induced gastric adenocarcinoma growth is mediated through cyclin D1. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 285, G217–G222.

Song, S.Y., Kim, S., Kim, D.S., Son, H.J., Rhee, J.C., Kim, Y.I., 2004. Abnormal expression of E-cadherin in early gastric carcinoma: its relationship with macroscopic growth patterns and catenin alpha and beta. J. Clin. Gastroenterol. 38, 252–259.

Stemmermann, G.N., Nomura, A.M., Kolonel, L.N., Goodman, M.T., Wilkens, L.R., 2002. Gastric carcinoma: pathology findings in a multiethnic population. Cancer 95, 744–750.

Stock, M., Schafer, H., Stricker, S., Gross, G., Mundlos, S., Otto, F., 2003. Expression of galectin-3 in skeletal tissues is controlled by Runx2. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 17360–17367.

Stockinger, A., Eger, A., Wolf, J., Beug, H., Foisner, R., 2001. E-cadherin regulates cell growth by modulating proliferation-dependent beta-catenin transcriptional activity. J. Cell Biol. 154, 1185–1196.

Stoicov, C., Saffari, R., Cai, X., Hasyagar, C., Houghton, J., 2004. Molecular biology of gastric cancer: Helicobacter infection and gastric adenocarcinoma: bacterial and host factors responsible for altered growth signaling. Gene 341, 1–17.

Stone, J., et al., 1999. Low frequency of germline E-cadherin mutations in familial and nonfamilial gastric cancer. Br. J. Cancer 79, 1935–1937.

Suriano, G., et al., 2003. The intracellular E-cadherin germline mutation V832 M lacks the ability to mediate cell–cell adhesion and to suppress invasion. Oncogene 22, 5716–5719.

Tahara, E., 2004. Genetic pathways of two types of gastric cancer. IARC Sci. Publ., 327–349.

Tahara, E., et al., 1986. Human epidermal growth factor in gastric carcinoma as a biologic marker of high malignancy. Jpn. J. Cancer Res. 77, 145–152.

Tahara, E., Semba, S., Tahara, H., 1996. Molecular biological observations in gastric cancer. Semin. Oncol. 23, 307–315.

Takada, K., 2000. Epstein-Barr virus and gastric carcinoma. Mol. Pathol. 53, 255–261.

Takagi, Y., et al., 1998. Somatic alterations of the SMAD-2 gene in human colorectal cancers. Br. J. Cancer 78, 1152–1155.

Takaku, K., Miyoshi, H., Matsunaga, A., Oshima, M., Sasaki, N., Taketo, M.M., 1999. Gastric and duodenal polyps in Smad4 (Dpc4) knockout mice. Cancer Res. 59, 6113–6117.

Takemoto, H., et al., 2001. Localization of IQGAP1 is inversely correlated with intercellular adhesion mediated by e-cadherin in gastric cancers. Int. J. Cancer 91, 783–788.

Takenoshita, S., et al., 1998. Mutation analysis of the Smad2 gene in human colon cancers using genomic DNA and intron primers. Carcinogenesis 19, 803–807.

Tamura, G., et al., 2000. E-Cadherin gene promoter hypermethylation in primary human gastric carcinomas. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 92, 569–573.

Tanaka, M., Kitajima, Y., Sato, S., Miyazaki, K., 2003. Combined evaluation of mucin antigen and E-cadherin expression may help select patients with gastric cancer suitable for minimally invasive therapy. Br. J. Surg. 90, 95–101.

Tatematsu, M., Ichinose, M., Miki, K., Hasegawa, R., Kato, T., Ito, N., 1990. Gastric and intestinal phenotypic expression of human stomach cancers as revealed by pepsinogen immunohistochemistry and mucin histochemistry. Acta Pathol. Jpn. 40, 494–504.

Tatematsu, M., Tsukamoto, T., Inada, K., 2003. Stem cells and gastric cancer: role of gastric and intestinal mixed intestinal metaplasia. Cancer Sci. 94, 135–141.

Thun, M.J., Namboodiri, M.M., Calle, E.E., Flanders, W.D., Heath Jr., C.W., 1993. Aspirin use and risk of fatal cancer. Cancer Res. 53, 1322–1327.

Tsukamoto, T., et al., 2003. Beta-catenin mutations and nuclear accumulation during progression of rat stomach adenocarcinomas. Cancer Sci. 94, 1046–1051.

Uchino, S., Noguchi, M., Ochiai, A., Saito, T., Kobayashi, M., Hirohashi, S., 1993a. p53 mutation in gastric cancer: a genetic model for carcinogenesis is common to gastric and colorectal cancer. Int. J. Cancer 54, 759–764.

Uchino, S., et al., 1993b. Overexpression of c-erbB-2 protein in gastric cancer. Its correlation with long-term survival of patients. Cancer 72, 3179–3184.

Uemura, N., et al., 2001. *Helicobacter pylori* infection and the development of gastric cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 345, 784–789.

Ushijima, T., Sasako, M., 2004. Focus on gastric cancer. Cancer Cell 5, 121–125.

Utsunomiya, T., et al., 1998. Expression of MUC1 and MUC2 mucins in gastric carcinomas: its relationship with the prognosis of the patients. Clin. Cancer Res. 4, 2605–2614.

van Rees, B.P., et al., 2002. Cyclooxygenase-2 expression during carcinogenesis in the human stomach. J. Pathol. 196, 171–179.

Varro, A., Noble, P.J., Wroblewski, L.E., Bishop, L., Dockray, G.J., 2002. Gastrin-cholecystokinin(B) receptor expression in AGS cells is associated with direct inhibition and indirect stimulation of cell proliferation via paracrine activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor. Gut 50, 827–833.

Velculescu, V.E., Zhang, L., Vogelstein, B., Kinzler, K.W., 1995. Serial analysis of gene expression. Science 270, 484–487.

Wakefield, L.M., Roberts, A.B., 2002. TGF-beta signaling: positive and negative effects on tumorigenesis. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 12, 22–29.

Wang, T.C., et al., 1996. Processing and proliferative effects of human progastrin in transgenic mice. J. Clin. Invest. 98, 1918–1929.

Wang, T.C., et al., 2000. Synergistic interaction between hypergastrinemia and *Helicobacter* infection in a mouse model of gastric cancer. Gastroenterology 118, 36–47.

Watanabe, H., Enjoji, M., Yao, T., Ohsato, K., 1978. Gastric lesions in familial adenomatosis coli: their incidence and histologic analysis. Human Pathol. 9, 269–283.

Willert, K., Nusse, R., 1998. Beta-catenin: a key mediator of Wnt signaling. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 8, 95–102.

Woo, D.K., Kim, H.S., Lee, H.S., Kang, Y.H., Yang, H.K., Kim, W.H., 2001. Altered expression and mutation of beta-catenin gene in gastric carcinomas and cell lines. Int. J. Cancer 95, 108–113.

Wroblewski, L.E., Pritchard, D.M., Carter, S., Varro, A., 2002. Gastrin-stimulated gastric epithelial cell invasion: the role and mechanism of increased matrix metalloproteinase 9 expression. Biochem. J. 365, 873–879.

Wu, L.B., Kushima, R., Borchard, F., Molsberger, G., Hattori, T., 1998. Intramucosal carcinomas of the stomach: phenotypic expression and loss of heterozygosity at microsatellites linked to the APC gene. Pathol. Res. Pract. 194, 405–411.

Wu, C.W., et al., 2002. Clinical implications of chromosomal abnormalities in gastric adenocarcinomas. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 35, 219–231.

Xiangming, C., et al., 2001. Preserved Smad4 expression in the transforming growth factor beta signaling pathway is a favorable prognostic factor in patients with advanced gastric cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 7, 277–282.

Xue, Y., et al., 2004. Inhibition of endothelial cell proliferation by targeting Rac1 GTPase with small interference RNA in tumor cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 320, 1309–1315.

Yamashita, K., Azumano, I., Mai, M., Okada, Y., 1998. Expression and tissue localization of matrix metalloproteinase 7 (matrilysin) in human gastric carcinomas. Implications for vessel invasion and metastasis. Int. J. Cancer 79, 187–194.

Yanagisawa, K., et al., 2000. Heterogeneities in the biological and biochemical functions of Smad2 and Smad4 mutants naturally occurring in human lung cancers. Oncogene 19, 2305–2311.

Yang, H.K., Kang, S.H., Kim, Y.S., Won, K., Bang, Y.J., Kim, S.J., 1999a. Truncation of the TGF-beta type II receptor gene results in insensitivity to TGF-beta in human gastric cancer cells. Oncogene 18, 2213–2219.

Yang, X., et al., 1999b. Targeted disruption of SMAD3 results in impaired mucosal immunity and diminished T cell responsiveness to TGF-beta. EMBO J. 18, 1280–1291.

Yao, X.X., Yin, L., Sun, Z.C., 2002. The expression of hTERT mRNA and cellular immunity in gastric cancer and precancerosis. World J. Gastroenterol. 8, 586–590.

Yasui, W., et al., 1988. Expression of epidermal growth factor receptor in human gastric and colonic carcinomas. Cancer Res. 48, 137–141.

Yasui, W., et al., 1998. Expression of telomerase catalytic component, telomerase reverse transcriptase, in human gastric carcinomas. Jpn. J. Cancer Res. 89, 1099–1103.

Yokozaki, H., Shitara, Y., Fujimoto, J., Hiyama, T., Yasui, W., Tahara, E., 1999. Alterations of p73 preferentially occur in gastric adenocarcinomas with foveolar epithelial phenotype. Int. J. Cancer 83, 192–196.

Yonemura, Y., et al., 1991. Expression of c-erbB-2 oncoprotein in gastric carcinoma. Immunoreactivity for c-erbB-2 protein is an independent indicator of poor short-term prognosis in patients with gastric carcinoma. Cancer 67, 2914–2919.

Yoshida, K., et al., 1989. Amplification of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene and oncogenes in human gastric carcinomas. Virchows Arch. B Cell Pathol. Incl. Mol. Pathol. 57, 285–290.

Zhang, Y.W., Wang, L.M., Jove, R., Vande Woude, G.F., 2002. Requirement of Stat3 signaling for HGF/SF-Met mediated tumorigenesis. Oncogene 21, 217–226.

Zhang, H.K., Zhang, Q.M., Zhao, T.H., Li, Y.Y., Yi, Y.F., 2004. Expression of mucins and E-cadherin in gastric carcinoma and their clinical significance. World J. Gastroenterol. 10, 3044–3047.

Zhu, Y., Richardson, J.A., Parada, L.F., Graff, J.M., 1998. Smad3 mutant mice develop metastatic colorectal cancer. Cell 94, 703–714.
