
Journal of Medical Virology 77:374–381 (2005)

# Hepatitis B Virus X Protein Upregulates Survivin Expression in Hepatoma Tissues

Xiaodong Zhang,${}^{1*}$ Nan Dong,${}^{1}$ Lihui Yin,${}^{1}$ Na Cai,${}^{1}$ Hongtao Ma,${}^{1}$ Jiacong You,${}^{2}$ Hang Zhang,${}^{1}$ Honghui Wang,${}^{2}$ Ran He,${}^{2}$ and Lihong Ye${}^{2**}$

${}^{1}$Department of Cancer Research, Institute for Molecular Biology, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Microbial Functional Genomics, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, P.R.China  
${}^{2}$Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, P.R.China  

The hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) plays an important role in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The relationship was examined between HBV antigens and IAP (inhibitor of apoptosis) family in development of HCC. The expression levels of HBV antigens (HBsAg, HBcAg, and HBxAg) and members of the IAP family (survivin, XIAP, cIAP-1, and cIAP-2) were detected immunohistochemically in tissues from 34 cases of HCC and 30 cases of liver cirrhosis. The positive rate of survivin was higher than these three molecules in all three tissue types ($P < 0.05$). The positive rates of HBxAg and survivin were high in HCC (76.5% and 88.2%), paratumor (85.3% and 91.2%), and liver cirrhosis (100% and 93.3%) tissues, with no significant differences between the survivin- and HBxAg-positive rates (each $P > 0.05$). To examine the effect of HBx on survivin expression, plasmid pCMV-X (encoding the HBx gene) was transfected transiently with or without plasmid pcDNA3-sur (encoding the survivin gene) into H7402 hepatoma cells and L-O2 human normal liver cells. Cells over-expressing HBx alone showed increased apoptosis along with a dose-dependent increase in survivin levels. However, co-expression of survivin inhibited the HBx-induced apoptosis. To examine the effect of HBx on survivin in hepatoma cells without apoptosis, plasmid pCMV-X was transfected stably into human hepatoma H7402 cells and L-O2 cells. These H7402-X and L-O2-X cells showed high-level expression of both HBx and survivin, but did not show apoptosis. The addition of pSilencer 3.0-X, an RNAi vector targeting the HBx gene, reduced the expression levels of survivin protein in H7402-X cells. Collectively, these data demonstrate that HBx upregulates survivin expression in hepatoma tissues, suggesting that HBx and survivin may both be involved in carcinogenesis of HCC.

J. Med. Virol. 77:374–381, 2005.

© 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

---

KEY WORDS: hepatoma; HBx; survivin; carcinogenesis; normal liver cells

## INTRODUCTION

The hepatitis B virus (HBV), a member of the family hepadnaviridae, replicates its genome by reverse transcription and causes both acute and chronic infection of the liver [Beasley et al., 1981]. The HBV gene is highly conserved among all mammalian hepadnaviruses and encodes a small peptide expressed at low levels during the natural course of HBV infection [Spandu and Lee, 1988]. It has been reported that the HBV X protein (HBx) transactivates several cellular genes that modulate cell growth and cell cycle checkpoints [Spandu and Lee, 1988; Benn and Schneider, 1995]. Previous studies have shown that the multifunctional HBx has a close relationship with Bid and p53, and is capable of trans-activating many cellular factors, including c-Myc, c-fos, and c-jun [Chen and Lai, 2001; Huo and Wang, 2001; Nijhara et al., 2001; Su et al., 2001]. Notably, HBx can bind to HVDAC3, a human voltage-dependent anion channel localized on mitochondria [Rahmani et al., 2000], inhibit caspase-3 [Gottlob, 1998], and induce expression of FasL [Shin et al., 1999]. It seems that the fate of HBx-expressing infected cells is likely to be determined by the balance between apoptotic and anti-apoptotic signals of viral, cellular, and environmental origin [Gergametti et al., 1999; Diao et al., 2001].

Grant sponsor: Tianjin Natural Science Foundation, China; Grant number: 043113411.

*Correspondence to: Xiaodong Zhang, Department of Cancer Research, Institute for Molecular Biology, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Microbial Functional Genomics. E-mail: zhangxd@nankai.edu.cn

**Correspondence to: Lihong Ye, Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, 94 Weijin Road, Tianjin, 300071, P.R.China. E-mail: yelihong@nankai.edu.cn

Accepted 14 June 2005  
DOI 10.1002/jmv.20466  
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com)

Survivin Expression in Hepatoma Tissues

has been demonstrated that HBx upregulates the expression and activity of human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) in hepatoma cells, suggesting that hTERT may be associated with tumor development [Zhang et al., 2005]. However, the actual impact of HBx in liver carcinogenesis and its precise mechanisms of action remain largely obscure.

The inhibitors of apoptosis (IAPs), which are crucial regulators in the molecular mechanisms of cancer and apoptosis [Nachmias et al., 2004], are characterized by functionally important RING finger and BIR domains [Takahashi et al., 1998]. Seven IAPs have been identified to date, including survivin, XIAP, cIAP-1, cIAP-2, apollon, DIAP-1, and DIAP-2 [Chen et al., 1999]. Gene (mRNA) expression of cIAP-1, cIAP-2, and XIAP has been detected in most tissues. Moreover, studies have shown that the expression of XIAP is a prognostic index for lung cancer [Liston et al., 1996; Olie and Simoes-Wust, 2000]. Most of the IAPs are expressed broadly in normal adult tissues, with the exception of survivin, which is undetectable in normal adult tissues, but is expressed abundantly in transformed cells and a variety of human cancers [Ambrosini et al., 1997]. Antisense knock-down of survivin expression and/or function was found to cause aberrant mitotic progression and spontaneous apoptosis [Guo and Hay, 1999; Olie and Simoes-Wust, 2000]. In addition, survivin expression in tumors has been associated with increased aggressiveness and decreased patient survival [Olie and Simoes-Wust, 2000; Trieb et al., 2003]. Inhibition of apoptosis by survivin appears to occur via three pathways. First, survivin suppresses apoptosis by inhibiting directly the activities of caspase 3 and caspase 7 [Sohn et al., 2003]. Second, survivin can bind with the cyclin kinases, cdk4 and p34cdc2, perhaps leading to abrogation of pro-apoptotic cell signal transduction. And third, survivin can suppress apoptosis by binding the smac/DIABLO complex [Song et al., 2003].

According to recent studies, survivin forms complexes with the hepatitis B X-interacting protein (HBXIP), a cellular protein recognized originally for its association with HBx. The survivin-HBXIP complex, but not survivin or HBXIP alone, binds pro-caspase-9, preventing its recruitment to Apaf1 and suppressing selectively apoptosis initiated via the mitochondria/cytochrome-c pathway. HBx also interacts with the survivin-HBXIP complex and suppresses caspase activation in a survivin-dependent manner. Thus, HBXIP functions as a cofactor for survivin, forming a link between the cellular apoptotic machinery and a viral pathogen involved in hepatocellular carcinogenesis [Marusawa et al., 2003]. However, the in vivo relationships in the hepatoma tissue, hepatoma cell, and gene expression levels of HBx have not been reported previously.

The relationships between HBx and the IAPs were investigated by examining the expression patterns of three HBV antigens (HBsAg, HBcAg, and HBxAg) and four members of the IAP family (survivin, XIAP, cIAP-1, and cIAP-2) in HBV-infected HCC and liver cirrhosis tissues. The effect of HBx on survivin expression was also studied by co-transfecting transiently plasmids pCMV-X (encoding the HBx gene) and/or pcDNA3-survivin (encoding the survivin gene) into human hepatoma H7402 cells or L-O2 human normal liver cells, by transfecting stably HBx into H7402 cells and L-O2 cells, and by expressing transiently an HBx-targeting RNAi in the stably transfected H7402 cells. The findings indicate collectively that HBx induces upregulation of survivin expression, suggesting that HBx and survivin may be involved coordinately in carcinogenesis of hepatocellular Carcinoma.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Immunohistochemical Detection of HBV X in Hepatoma and Liver Cirrhosis Tissues

Samples were taken from 34 hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues and adjacent tumortissues, 30 cases of liver cirrhosis, and 6 normal livers without HBV infection obtained at autopsy (Tianjin First Center Hospital, Tianjin, China). The mean age of patients was 47.9 ± 9.4. All had undergone total or subtotal hepatectomies, and all patients had a history of HBV infection according to the hospital data. Five micrometer-thick sections of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples from each case were studied by immunohistochemistry, using the Strept Avidin-Biotin Complex method (SABC Immunohistochemistry Kit, Boster, Wuhan, China). The primary antibodies included mouse anti-HBsAg (Santa Cruz, CA), rabbit anti-HBcAg (Santa Cruz, CA), rabbit anti-HBxAg (provided by Dr. Wang, Fourth Military Medical University, China, Wang et al., 1991; dilution ×400), mouse anti-survivin (NeoMarkers, CA; dilution ×400), rabbit anti-XIAP (R & D Systems, Inc., St. Paul, MN, dilution ×1000), rabbit anti-cIAP-1 (R & D Systems, Inc., 1.0 μg/ml), and rabbit anti-cIAP-2 (R & D Systems, Inc., 1.5 μg/ml), respectively. Tissue sections were blocked and incubated with the appropriate primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. The sections were then washed three times with PBS, incubated with a biotin-labeled secondary antibody for 1 hr at 37°C, washed three times with PBS, and incubated with the strept-avidin-labeled tertiary antibody for 30 min at 37°C. Finally, samples were washed three times with PBS and positive staining was detected using the DAB substrate. For negative controls, PBS and normal rabbit IgG were used in place of the primary antibody. The normal liver tissues were used as an additional negative control. The study was approved by the hospital’s Ethics Committee.

Positive signals in the cell nuclei or cytoplasm in the HCC and liver cirrhosis tissues were defined according to standard immunohistochemistry criteria [Marusawa et al., 2003]. The expression levels in the various samples were quantitated using a modification of the method described previously for measuring survivin expression [Marusawa et al., 2003]. Briefly, a mean percentage of positive cells was determined at a minimum X400 magnification and assigned to one of the following five categories: 0, <5%; 1, 5–25%; 2, 25–50%;

3, 50–70%; and 4, >75%. The intensity of immunostaining was scored as follows: weak, 0.5+; moderate, 1+; and intense, 2+. For tissues that showed heterogeneous staining, the predominant pattern was scored. The percentage of positive cells and the staining intensity were multiplied to produce weighted scores for each case. Cases with weighted scores of less than 1 were defined as negative, those with scores greater than 1 were defined as positive.

The χ² test was used to examine the relationships between the immunohistochemical and histopathological findings.

### Constructs and Transfections

A human survivin cDNA was obtained by reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) of RNA derived from H7402 cells, using primers based on the known survivin sequence (GenBank accession number U75285; forward, 5′-GGGAATTCATGGGGTGCCCCGACGTTGCC-3′; reverse, 5′-CTGGTACCTCAATCCATGGGCAGCCA-GCT-3′). The resulting PCR product was inserted into the pUCm-T vector (Takara, Japan) to yield pUCm-T-sur. This construct was digested with EcoRI and XhoI, and the survivin gene fragment was ligated into the pcDNA3 vector (Invitrogen, CA) to generate pcDNA3-sur, which was confirmed by sequencing.

The HBV-free H7402 human hepatoma cell line was obtained from the People’s Hospital of Beijing University [Liu et al., 2002]. In order to confirm that the cell line was hepatoma cells, RT-PCR was used to show that the cells were capable of expressing α-feto proteins (data not shown). Human normal liver cell line L-O2 [Li et al., 2003] was purchased from Nanjing KeyGen Biotech Co., Ltd. (Nanjing, China) The H7402 and L-O2 cells were maintained in RPMI Medium 1640 (Gibco, CA) supplemented with heat-inactivated 10% fetal calf serum (FCS), 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 mg/ml streptomycin in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO₂ and 95% air.

For transient transfections, H7402 cells were transfected in 6-wells plates using Lipofectamine (Gibco) with 3 μg of pCMV-X (encoding the HBx gene in the pcDNA3 vector; kindly provided by Dr. A. Graessmann, Freie University, Germany), 3 μg pcDNA3-sur, 3 μg pcDNA3 or with 3 μg each of pcDNA3-sur and pCMV-X. The transfection efficiency was measured by co-transfection with 0.1 μg of the GFP marker plasmid, pEGFP (Clontech). The cells were cultured for 36 hr post-transfection, and then both floating and attached cells were harvested and used for flow cytometry and Western blot analyses. For examining the dose-dependency of HBx-induced apoptosis in hepatoma cells, 1, 2, and 3 μg of pCMV-X were transfected as above. The transient transfection of 2 μg of pCMV-X was performed in L-O2 cells as above.

For stable transfection of the HBx gene, H7402 and L-O2 cells were transfected with Lipofectamine, according to the manufacturer's protocol (Invitrogen). In brief, 3 μg of pCMV-X plasmid was mixed with 18 μl of Lipofectamine in serum-free medium and incubated at 37°C for 6 hr. The medium was then replaced with RPMI 1640 containing 10% FCS. After 48 hr, the transfected cells were incubated in selection medium containing 600 μg/ml G418 (Genview, Carlsbad, CA), and selection was maintained for 3–4 weeks. For control purposes, empty pcDNA3 vector plasmids were transfected into H7402 cells as above. The successful stable transfection of the HBx gene was confirmed by RT-PCR and Western blot analyses.

Using plasmid pSilencer 3.0 (Promega, Madison, WI), we used sequences 5′GATCCCGGTCTTACATAAGA-GGACTTTCAAGAGAAGTCCTCTTATGTAAGACCTT-TTTGGAAA-3′ (sense) and 5′AGCTTTTCCA AAAA-AGGTCTTACATAAGAGGACTTCTCTTGGAAAGTCCT-CCTTATGTAAGACC GGG-3′ (antisense) from the HBx gene to create the RNAi vector of HBx gene [Shlomai and Shaul, 2003]. The purified vector of pSilencer 3.0-X (3 μg) was transfected into H7402-X cells by Lipofectamine as described above. Cells were harvested and lysed at 24, 36, and 48 hr post-transfection, respectively, and the expression levels of HBx and survivin proteins were assessed by Western blot analysis.

### Flow Cytometry

The medium containing detached cells was aspirated and the attached cells were harvested using trypsin. The two fractions were pooled, washed with PBS, fixed in ice-cold 70% ethanol, and washed with Ca²⁺/Mg²⁺-free HBSS containing 1% BSA. The cells were then incubated in 50 μg/ml propidium iodide containing 1 mg/ml sodium citrate, 100 μg/ml RNase I, and 0.1% triton X-100 for 30 min at 37°C, and analyzed by flow cytometry in a fluorescence-activated cell sorter (Epics XL.MCL, Beckman Coulter) using the EXPO 32 software.

### Examination of HBV x mRNA and X Protein and Survivin Protein

Total cellular RNA was isolated from H7402, H7402-X, L-O2, and L-O2-X cells using the Uniq-10 column total RNA isolation kit (Sangon, China), according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For RT-PCR analysis, 2 μg of total cellular RNA was reverse transcribed with SuperScript™ III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen), per the manufacturer’s instructions. The reactions were stopped by heat inactivation for 5 min at 90°C. The generated cDNA (2 μl) was then amplified in a DNA thermocycler (Geneamp PCR system, Perkin Elmer 2400, USA) with 2U rTaq DNA polymerase (Takara, Japan) and 5 pM of each HBx gene primer (forward, 5′-GGCTCGAGATGGGCTG CTAGGCTGTGTC-3′, reverse, 5′-GGCGAATTCAGAAGTCGTCGTGTC-3′; 510 bp amplified fragment) and each human GAPDH gene primer (forward, 5′-GGTCATCCCTGAGCTGAACG-3′; reverse, 5′-TCCGTTGTCATACCAGGAAAT-3′; 298 bp amplified fragment) in a volume of 50 μl. The cycling conditions consisted of 30 cycles of 94°C for 30 sec, 60°C for 30 sec, and 72°C for 45 sec. The resultant PCR product was analyzed on a 1% TBE agarose gel.

Survivin Expression in Hepatoma Tissues

TABLE I. Expression of HBV Antigens and IAPs in HCC and Cirrhosis Tissues

| HBV antigens | Hepatoma (%) | Paratumor (%) | Cirrhosis (%) |
|--------------|--------------|---------------|---------------|
| HBsAg        | 20/34 (58.8) | 22/34 (64.7%) | 23/30 (76.7%) |
| HBcAg        | 9/34 (26.5)  | 14/34 (41.2%) | 20/30 (66.7%) |
| HBxAg        | 26/34 (76.5)$^a$ | 30/34 (85.3%)$^a$ | 30/30 (100%)$^a$ |
| Survivin     | 30/34 (88.2)$^b$ | 31/34 (91.2)$^b$ | 28/30 (93.3)$^b$ |
| XIAP         | 19/34 (55.9) | 18/34 (53.0) | 18/30 (60.0) |
| cIAP-1       | 9/34 (26.5)  | 4/34 (11.8)  | 2/30 (6.7)   |
| cIAP-2       | 10/34 (29.4) | 8/34 (23.5)  | 0/30 (0)     |

$\chi^2$ test.

$^aP > 0.05$ (vs. survivin).

$^bP < 0.05$ (vs. XIAP, cIAP-1, and cIAP-2, respectively).

For the examination of HBx and survivin, H7402 cells with transient transfections of H7402-X cells were harvested and lysed in lysis buffer (62.5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 5% 2-mercaptoethanol, 10% glycerol). Equal amounts of protein (30 μg) were separated by 15% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane for 1 hr. The membrane was blocked in blocking buffer (PBS, 5% skim milk, 0.1% Tween 20) at room temperature for 2 hr, and then incubated with the appropriate primary antibody (diluted in blocking buffer). The primary antibodies included rabbit anti-HBx (1:50,000 dilution), mouse anti-survivin (1:1000 dilution), and mouse anti-β-tubulin (1:500 dilution, Sigma, MI). The membranes were then washed three times in PBS with 0.1% Tween 20 and incubated for 1 hr in the secondary antibody (peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG). The membranes were then washed three times and the bands were visualized by ECL (Amersham, NJ). Survivin levels in H7402-X and L-O2-X cells expressing stably the $HBx$ gene were examined by Western blot analysis as above.

Fig. 1. Immunohistochemical examination of HBV antigens and IAP family proteins. HBxAg-positive signals were detected in tumor tissue (A) and paratumor tissue (B), whereas the negative control was not detected in tumor tissue (C). Survivin-positive signals were detected in tumor tissue (D), paratumor tissue (E), and cirrhosis tissue (F). XIAP-positive signals were detected in tumor tissue (G). cIAP-1-positive signals (H) and cIAP-2 positive signals (I) were detected in tumor tissue. SABC × 100.

Fig. 2. Flow cytometric analysis of apoptosis in H7402 cells transiently expressing HBX and survivin. A: Flow cytometric analysis. O, mock negative control; V, pcDNA3 empty vector; S, pcDNA3-sur; X, pCMV-X; X/S, both pCMV-X and pcDNA3-sur. B: The percentage of apoptotic cells was 6.18% (O), 4.53% (V), 4.06% (S), 62.82% (X), and 6.83% (X/S), respectively, in the transiently transfected H7402 cells. Each bar corresponds to the average ± SD for at least three independent experiments $\chi^2$ test **$P < 0.01$** (x/v vs. x).

RESULTS

High-level Expression of HBxAg and Survivin in Hepatoma Tissues

Immunohistochemistry showed that HBxAg and survivin were highly expressed in hepatoma samples, corresponding paratumor and liver cirrhosis tissues (Table I). The positive rate of survivin was higher than these three molecules in all three tissue types ($P < 0.05$). The positive rates of HBxAg and survivin were high, with no significant differences between them (each $P > 0.05$) in HCC (76.5% and 88.2%), paratumor (85.3% and 91.2%), and liver cirrhosis (100% and 93.3%) tissues, respectively. The HBxAg- or survivin-positive cells were generally distributed in a diffuse pattern. Only a few survivin-positive signals were observed in the nuclei of hepatoma cells; the majority of positive signals were found in the cytoplasm (Fig. 1). Survivin expression was noted in 58 out of 60 HBxAg-positive staining hepatoma, paratumor, and liver cirrhosis tissues. Signals were not detected in the negative controls.

Survivin Inhibits HBx-induced Apoptosis

The eukaryotic expression vector pcDNA3-sur was constructed and used to express survivin in cultured hepatoma cells. Co-transfection of pCMV-X and pcDNA3-sur yielded transient expression of HBx and survivin in H7402 hepatoma cells. Flow cytometry revealed varying percentages of apoptotic cells in cultures transfected transiently with the various vectors (Fig. 2): 6.18% (mock, without transfection), 4.53% (empty pcDNA3 vector), 4.06% (pcDNA3-sur), 62.82% (pCMV-X), and 6.83% (pCMV-X/pcDNA3-sur). Thus, our results indicate that HBx expression induced apoptosis in H7402 cells, while survivin expression inhibited HBX-induced apoptosis.

HBx Protein Upregulates Survivin Expression in H7402 and L-O2 cells

In transiently transfected cells expressing HBx, the endogenous expression level of survivin protein was dose-dependent and increased in parallel with the level of HBx (Fig. 3). Stably HBx-transfected H7402 and L-O2 cells (designated H7402-X and L-O2-X) were selected with G418 and confirmed by RT-PCR (Fig. 4) and Western blot analysis (Fig. 5A,B). Control cells transfected stably with empty pcDNA3 vector were designated H7402-P cells. Western blot analysis revealed that H7402-X and L-O2-X cells showed increased survivin expression (Fig. 5A,B). To investigate the effect of HBx on survivin expression, $HBx$ gene expression was generated by HBx-specific siRNA in H7402-X cells. Transfection of the pSilencer 3.0-X into H7402-X cells led to decreased HBx expression over time, as shown by immunoblotting (Fig. 5C). Western blot analysis revealed further that the expression level of survivin decreased in parallel with that of HBx.

DISCUSSION

Hepatitis B virus infection is closely related to the development of HCC. However, no previous study has examined the relationship between HBV antigens and IAP family. In order to demonstrate the effect of HBV antigens on IAP family proteins, the expression levels

Fig. 3. Western blot analysis for HBx and survivin protein expression in H7402 cells. A: Western blot analysis. pCMV-X plasmid (1, 2, and 3 μg) was transiently transfected into H7402 cells to test the dose-response relationship between the expression levels of HBx and endogenous survivin. Transfection of pcDNA3 empty vector and Mock (untransfected) cells were used as the negative controls. B: The density of bands was analyzed with the Glyco BandScan software (PROZyme®, San Leandro, CA) for Western blot analysis. Each bar corresponds to the average ± SD for at least three independent experiments.

Fig. 4. RT-PCR analysis of HBx mRNA in H7402-X cells and L-O2-X cells. Marker was DL 2000. H7402-X and L-O2-X cells were stable transfected with $HBx$ gene. H7402 and L-O2 cells were not transfected with $HBx$ gene. GAPDH mRNA was a house-keeping gene, which was used as internal reference.

Survivin Expression in Hepatoma Tissues

Fig. 5. Examination of HBx and survivin proteins by Western blot analysis. I: Western blot analysis of HBx and survivin protein levels in HBx-expressing H7402-X and L-O2-X cells. A: Survivin protein levels were upregulated by HBx protein expression in H7402 cells. Lane 1: H7402-X, H7402 cells stably transfected with the $HBx$ gene; (Lane 2) H7402-P, H7402 cells stably transfected with empty pcDNA3; (Lane 3) H7402, mock. B: Survivin protein levels were upregulated by HBx protein expression in L-O2 cells. Lane 1: L-O2-X, L-O2 cells stably transfected with the $HBx$ gene; (Lane 2) L-O2 cells transiently transfected with $HBx$ gene; (Lane 3) II-O2 cells, mock. C: Survivin protein levels were downregulated by the pSilencer 3.0-X $HBx$-targeting RNAi vector. Lane 1: H7402-X without treatment; (Lane 2) 24 hr after addition of RNAi; (Lane 3) 36 hr after addition of RNAi; (Lane 4) 48 hr after addition of RNAi. II: The bands were analyzed by GlycoBandScan software (PROZYMЕ® , San Leandro, CA) for Western blot. (A) refers to I A, (B) to I B and (C) to I C. Each bar corresponds to the average ± SD for at least three independent experiments.

and distributions of HBV antigens (HBsAg, HBcAg, and HBxAg) and IAP members (survivin, XIAP, cIAP-1, and cIAP-2) were examined by immunohistochemistry. It was found that the positive rates of HBxAg and survivin were the highest among the seven proteins in both HCC and liver cirrhosis samples (Table I). There was no significant difference between the two positive rates ($P > 0.05$), suggesting that there is likely a close relationship between HBxAg and survivin. Previously, serological examination and immunohistochemical tests indicated that the existence and active replication of HBV in HCC and cirrhosis tissues can cause liver tissue injury [Nakamoto and Kaneko, 2003]. Our data suggest that the abnormally high expression of survivin protein

in these tissues may act to suppress the HBV-induced apoptosis of liver cells, leading to retention of injured cells and subsequent malignant transformations. Thus, the observed high-level expression of HBxAg and survivin in the examined liver tissues may play a role in the development of HCC.

We examined further the relationship between HBx and survivin at the molecular level by transient and stable transfection experiments in hepatoma and normal human liver cells. Flow cytometric measurement of apoptotic cells revealed that the apoptotic rate in cells expressing transiently HBx was much higher than that in cells expressing both HBx and survivin (Fig. 2), as detected by Western blot analysis (Fig. 3). These results suggest that HBx induced apoptosis in the tested HCC cells, and that this induction was suppressed by survivin. In addition, we observed that endogenous survivin levels increased in a dose-dependent manner in H7402 cells transiently expressing HBx alone (Fig. 3), although the expression levels of survivin protein decreased over time due to apoptosis of the expressing cells. The results in stably HBx-expressing cells suggest that HBx promotes survivin expression in non-apoptotic hepatoma and normal liver cells (Fig. 5A,B). Furthermore, the experiments with HBx-targeted RNAi demonstrated that survivin expression decreased in stably HBx-expressing cells in which HBx expression was depressed (Fig. 5C), suggesting that expression of HBx protein promotes that of survivin.

A previous report showed that survivin-transfected 293 cells grew larger, with more numerous colonies when compared with control cells, indicating that the anti-apoptotic gene, survivin, could promote cell transformation [Zhu et al., 2002]. Survivin form complexes with HBXIP, which is able to bind with HBx. Survivin-HBXIP complexes, but not survivin or HBXIP alone, bind pro-caspase-9 and prevent its recruitment to Apaf-1, thereby suppressing selectively apoptosis initiated via the mitochondria/cytochrome c pathway. The viral HBX protein also interacts with the Survivin-HBXIP complex and suppresses caspase activation in a survivin-dependent manner [Gottlob et al., 1998], thus blocking additionally apoptosis initiated via the mitochondria/cytochrome-c pathway. Our findings are consistent with these results.

In summary, it was shown that HBx promotes the upregulation of survivin expression in hepatoma and normal liver cells, regardless of apoptosis. These findings suggest that survivin and HBx may play important roles in carcinogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by a grant from the Tianjin Natural Scientific Foundation (No. 043113411). We thank Dr. A Graessmann from Freie University, Germany, for providing the pCMV-X plasmid containing the $HBx$ gene. We further thank Dr. RZ QI from Hong Kong University of Science and Technology for discussing the manuscript.

---

### REFERENCES

Ambrosini G, Adida C, Altieri DC. 1997. A novel anti-apoptosis gene, survivin, expressed in cancer and lymphoma. Nat Med 3:917–921.

Beasley RP, Lin CC, Hwang LY, Dhien CS. 1981. Hepatocellular carcinoma and hepatitis B virus: A prospective study of 22,707 men in Taiwan. Lancet 2:1129–1133.

Benn J, Schneider R. 1995. Hepatitis B virus HBx protein deregulates cell cycle checkpoint controls. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92:11215–11219.

Chen GG, Lai PB. 2001. Decreased expression of Bid in human hepatocellular carcinoma is related to hepatitis B virus X protein. Eur J Cancer 37:1695–1702.

Chen Z, Naito M, Hori S, Mashima T, Yamori T, Tsuruo T. 1999. A human IAP-family gene, apollon, expressed in human brain cancer cells. Biochem Biophy Res Comm 264:847–854.

Diao J, Khine AA, Sarangi F, Hsu E, Iorio C, Tibbles LA, Woodgett JR, Penninger J, Richardson CD. 2001. X protein of hepatitis B virus inhibits Fas-mediated apoptosis and is associated with up-regulation of the SAPK/JNK pathway. J Biol Chem 276:8328–8340.

Gergametti F, Prigent S, Luber B, Benoit A, Tiollais P, Sarasin A, Transy C. 1999. The proapoptotic effect of hepatitis B virus HBx protein correlates with its transactivation activity in stably transfected cell lines. Oncogene 18:2860–2871.

Gottlob K. 1998. The hepatitis B virus HBx protein inhibits caspase 3 activity. J Biol Chem 273:33347–33353.

Guo M, Hay BA. 1999. Cell proliferation and apoptosis. Curr Opin Cell Biol 11:745–752.

Huo TI, Wang XW. 2001. Hepatitis B Virus X mutants derived from human hepatocellular carcinoma retain the ability to abrogate p53-induced apoptosis. Oncogene 20:3620–3928.

Li YY, Wang L, Lu CD. 2003. An E2F site in the 5′-promoter region contributes to serum-dependent up-regulation of the human proliferating cell nuclear antigen gene. FEBS Lett 544:112–118.

Liston P, Roy N, Tamai K, Lefebvre C, Baird S, Cherton-Horvat G, Farahani R, McLean M, Ikeda JE, MacKenzie A, Korneluk RG. 1996. Suppression of apoptosis in mammalian cells by NAIP and a related family of IAP genes. Nature 379:349–353.

Liu B, Liu Y, Chen J, Wei Z, Yu H, Zhen Y, Lu L, Hui R. 2002. CARP is a novel caspase recruitment domain containing pro-apoptotic protein. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 293:1396–1404.

Marusawa H, Matsuzawa S, Welsh K, Zou H, Armstrong R, Tamm I, Reed JC. 2003. HBXIP functions as a cofactor of survivin in apoptosis suppression. EMBO 22:2729–2740.

Nachmias B, Ashhab Y, Ben-Yehuda D. 2004. The inhibitor of apoptosis protein family (IAPs): An emerging therapeutic target in cancer. Semin Cancer Biol 14:231–243.

Nakamoto Y, Kaneko S. 2003. Mechanisms of viral hepatitis induced liver injury. Curr Mol Med 3:537–544.

Nijhara R, Jana SS, Goswami SK, Rana A, Majumdar SS, Kumar V, Sarkar DP. 2001. Sustained activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases and activator protein 1 by the hepatitis B virus X protein in mouse hepatocytes in vivo. J Virol 75:10348–10358.

Olie RA, Simoes-Wust AP. 2000. A novel antisense oligonucleotide targeting survivin expression induces apoptosis and sensitizes lung cancer cells to chemotherapy. Cancer Res 60:2805–2809.

Rahmani Z, Huh KW, Lasher R, Siddiqui A. 2000. Hepatitis B virus X protein colocalizes to mitochondria with a human voltage-dependent anion channel, HVDAC3, and alters its transmembrane potential. J Virol 74:2840–2846.

Shin EC, Shin JS, Park JH, Kim H, Kim SJ. 1999. Expression of fas ligand in human hepatoma cell lines: Role of hepatitis-B virus X (HBX) in induction of Fas ligand. Int J Cancer 82:587–591.

Shlomai A, Shaul Y. 2003. Inhibition of hepatitis B virus expression and replication by RNA interference. Hepatology 37:764–770.

Sohn J, Khaoustov VI, Xie Q, Chung CC, Krishnan B, Yoffe B. 2003. The effect of ursodeoxycholic acid on the survivin in thapsigargin-induced apoptosis. Cancer Lett 191:83–92.

Song Z, Yao X, Wu M. 2003. Direct interaction between survivin and Smac is essential for the anti-apoptotic activity of survivin during Taxol-induced apoptosis. J Biol Chem 278:23130–23140.

Spandu DF, Lee DH. 1988. Trans-activation of viral enhancers by the hepatitis B virus X protein. J Virol 62:427–435.

Su F, Theodosis CN, Schneider RJ. 2001. Role of NF-kappaB and myc proteins in apoptosis induced by hepatitis B virus HBx protein. J Virol 75:215–225.

Takahashi R, Deveraux Q, Tamm I, Welsh K, Assa-Munt N, Salvesen GS, Reed JC. 1998. A single BIR domain of XIAP sufficient for inhibiting caspases. J Biol Chem 273:7787–7790.

Trieb K, Lehner R, Stulnig T, Sulzbacher I, Shroyer KR. 2003. Survivin expression in human osteosarcoma is a marker for survival. Eur J Surg Oncol 29:379–382.

Wang W, London WT, Feitelson MA. 1991. Hepatitis B x antigen in hepatitis B virus carrier patients with liver cancer. Cancer Res 51:4971–4977.

Zhang X, Dong N, Zhang H, You JC, Wang HH, Ye LH. 2005. Effects of Hepatitis B Virus X Protein on hTERT Expression and Activity in Hepatoma Cells. J Lab Clin Med 145s:98–104.

Zhu H, Liu S, Zhou C, Zhou X, Zhang F, Jin L, Xu N. 2002. Anti-apoptosis gene survivin promotes cell growth and transformation. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi 82:338–340.
