
Arch Microbiol (2005) 184: 158–167  
DOI 10.1007/s00203-005-0036-x  

**ORIGINAL PAPER**

Razia Kutty · George N. Bennett

**Biochemical characterization of trinitrotoluene transforming oxygen-insensitive nitroreductases from *Clostridium acetobutylicum* ATCC 824**

Received: 1 July 2005 / Revised: 15 August 2005 / Accepted: 25 August 2005 / Published online: 27 September 2005  
© Springer-Verlag 2005  

---

### Abstract  
The genes that encode oxygen-insensitive nitroreductases from *Clostridium acetobutylicum* possessing 2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene (TNT) transformation activity were cloned, sequenced and characterized. The gene products NitA (MW 31 kDa) and NitB (MW 23 kDa) were purified to homogeneity. The NitA and NitB are oxygen-insensitive nitroreductases comprised of a single nitroreductase domain. NitA and NitB enzymes show spectral characteristics similar to flavoproteins. The biochemical characteristics of NitA and NitB are highly similar to those of NfsA, the major nitroreductase from *E. coli*. NitA exhibited broad specificity similar to that of *E. coli* NfsA and displayed no flavin reductase activity. NitB showed broad substrate specificity toward nitrocompounds in a pattern similar to NfsA and NfsB of *Escherichia coli*. NitB has high sequence similarity to NAD(P)H nitroreductase from *Archaeoglobus fulgidus*. NitA could utilize only NADH as an electron donor, whereas NitB utilized both NADH and NADPH as electron donors with a preference for NADH. The activity of both nitroreductases was high toward 2,4-Dinitrotoluene (2,4-DNT) as a substrate. Both the nitroreductases were inhibited by dicoumarol and salicyl hydroxamate. The nitroreductases showed higher relative expression on induction with TNT, nitrofurazone and nitrofurantoin compared to the uninduced control.

### Keywords  
Oxygen-insensitive nitroreductase · Trinitrotoluene biotransformation · Flavoprotein

---

### Introduction  
Nitroaromatics are used in multiple applications viz. synthesis of pharmaceuticals, pesticides and explosives. Explosives and many nitro-substituted aromatics are widely distributed as environmental contaminants. TNT represents a major contaminant at the Department of Defense sites (Noyes, 1996). The toxic effects of nitro-substituted aromatics have been well established (Padda et al. 2003; Tan et al. 1992; Won et al. 1976). Bioremediation (using either bacteria or plants) is inherently cost effective and holds promise for addressing explosive contamination problems (Fiorenza et al. 1991). Research on nitroreductases has been of significant interest because of their role in the bioremediation of nitroaromatic compounds (Nishino et al. 1993; Somerville et al. 1995; Basran et al. 1998; Groenewegen et al. 1992; French et al. 1998; Kitts et al. 2000; Fiorella et al. 1997).

The aerobic and anaerobic metabolism of TNT has been previously described in various bacteria viz. *Pseudomonas* consortium, *Methanococcus* sp. (strain B), *Clostridium thermoaceticum* and *Clostridium acetobutylicum* (Boopathy et al. 1994; Boopathy 1994; Huang et al. 2000; Hughes et al. 1998). Earlier studies have investigated the role of nitroreductases towards a variety of nitrocompounds (Spain 1995). These enzymes are categorized as oxygen-sensitive nitroreductases reported in *Pseudomonas* and *Desulfovibrio* sp (Boopathy et al. 1994; Boopathy et al. 1993) and oxygen-insensitive nitroreductases in *E. coli* and *Enterobacter cloacae* (Kitts et al. 2000). Extensive studies have analyzed the oxygen-insensitive (type I nitroreductases) group which reduces nitroaromatic compounds through successive two-electron reductions of the nitro group to nitroso which is reduced to hydroxylamino and ultimately to amino substituents. The oxygen sensitive group of enzymes such as NADPH cytochrome P-450 oxidoreductase and NADPH b5 oxidoreductase catalyzes one electron reduction of nitro moiety leading to the formation of anionic-free radicals (Boopathy et al. 1994; Boopathy et al. 1993).

---

R. Kutty · G. N. Bennett (✉)  
Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology MS-140,  
Rice University, Houston, TX 77005-1892, USA  
E-mail: gbennett@rice.edu  
Tel.: +1-713-3484920  
Fax: +1-713-3485154

Previous studies have demonstrated the nitrocompound-reducing capability of nitroreductases from different bacteria. *Escherichia coli* resting cells have been demonstrated to transform TNT reductively (Yin et al. 2004). NfsA, the major oxygen-insensitive nitroreductase from *E. coli* has been purified and biochemically characterized. It can reduce nitrofurazone generating a two-electron transfer product and has a tightly associated flavin mononucleotide (Zenno et al. 1996a). Purification and characterization of NfsB, a minor oxygen-insensitive nitroreductase from *E. coli* has been reported (Zenno et al. 1996b). The NfsA and NfsB nitroreductases have also been shown to function as lawsone (2-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone)-dependent azo reductases under anaerobic conditions (Rau and Stolz 2003).

The type I nitroreductases are either monomeric or homodimeric flavin mononucleotide (FMN)-containing proteins with a subunit size of approximately 25 kDa and use NAD(P)H as a reductant (Blehert et al. 1999). Flavoproteins containing FMN are able to transform glycerol trinitrate and pentaerythritol tetranitrate and catalyze the NAD(P)H-dependent cleavage of nitro groups releasing nitrite (Blehert et al. 1999). Although the nitrate ester reductases have been isolated on the basis of their potential to release nitrite from nitrate esters, they also have the ability to transform TNT.

An oxygen-insensitive, type I nitroreductase purified from *Enterobacter cloacae* strain 96-3 shows a broad substrate specificity, reducing nitro groups on such diverse nitroaromatic compounds as TNT, 4-nitrophenol, 4-nitroacetophenone and 4-nitrobenzene methyl sulfonate (Bryant and DeLuca 1991). The most extensively studied FMN-containing protein catalyzing the reduction of quinones, as well as the reduction of the olefinic bond of α,β-unsaturated aldehydes and ketones and sharing sequence similarity with bacterial xenobiotic reductases is old yellow enzyme (OYE) identified in several species of yeast (Karplus et al. 1995; Kohli and Massey 1998; Schopfer and Massey 1991). The nitrate ester reductases form a part of the OYE family (Rieger and Knackmuss 1995).

There are rare reports on the oxygen-insensitive nitroreductases from Clostridium species. NADH-dependent nitroaryl reductase activity has been partially purified and characterized from *Clostridium kluyveri*, *Clostridium spec.* La 1 and *Clostridium sporogenes* (Angermaier and Simon 1983). Flavoprotein from *Clostridium perfringens* has been demonstrated to possess both the azoreductase and nitroreductase activity (Rafii and Cerniglia 1993). Characterization of oxygen-insensitive nitroreductases from *Clostridium acetobutylicum* will allow the identification of nitroaromatic transforming potential of these enzymes which is of biotechnological importance and allow insight into their potential role in Clostridial metabolism.

Our previous reports have demonstrated rapid transformation of TNT by *C. acetobutylicum* ATCC 824 (Hughes et al. 1998; Khan et al. 1997). The clostridial enzymes conclusively associated with nitroreductase activity, namely hydrogenase (Watrous et al. 2003) and carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (Huang et al. 2000), are different from the classical Type I (oxygen insensitive) and Type II (oxygen sensitive) nitroreductases purified from aerobic and facultative bacteria. However, the sequence of the *Clostridium acetobutylicum* ATCC 824 genome (http://jura.ebi.ac.uk:8765/ext-genequiz/genomes/ca0108/) indicates the presence of genes encoding nitroreductase family proteins, which have sequence homology to oxygen-insensitive nitroreductases purified from aerobic and facultative bacteria. This work represents the first report on cloning, purification and characterization of nitroreductases from *Clostridium acetobutylicum* ATCC 824. Nitroreductase enzymes NitA (MW 31 kDa) and NitB (MW 23 kDa) are encoded by the nitroreductase genes (CAC 0718) and (CAC 3555) respectively, from the *Clostridium acetobutylicum* ATCC 824 chromosome. These are FMN-containing flavoproteins catalyzing the NAD(P)H-dependent transformation of TNT. The enzymes were further characterized biochemically to determine the substrate specificity and effect of inhibitors. The relative expression and inducibility of the nitroreductase genes NitA and NitB of *Clostridium acetobutylicum* with nitrocompounds as inducers were examined by real-time quantitative PCR (Q-PCR) analysis.

---

### Materials and methods

#### Restriction enzymes were obtained from New England Biolabs, Inc. (Beverly, MA, USA). Solid chemicals: 2,4,6 Trinitrotoluene (99% purity) was procured from Chem Service (West Chester, PA, USA). FMN, FAD, NADH, NADPH and other nitrosubstrates were obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA). All these and other chemicals used were of the highest grade commercially available. All reagents required for reverse transcription PCR and Q-PCR were from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA, USA).

#### Bacterial strain and plasmids

*C. acetobutylicum* ATCC 824 DNA, prepared as previously described (Green et al. 1996), was used as a template for PCR. The expression constructs in pTrcHis2-TOPO vector were transformed into *E. coli* TOPO 10F' cells from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA) and verified by sequence analysis.

#### Cloning, purification and characterization of nitroreductases NitA and NitB

The nitroreductase genes (CAC 0718) and (CAC 3555) were amplified by PCR using a combination of forward and reverse synthetic oligonucleotide primers. NitA-Forward: ATG AAT AAT ACA ATA GAT ACA ATG

AAA AAT CAT AG; Reverse: TTT AGT TTT TAG
TCC TTG TTT ATT AAT AGC GCC and NitB-Forward: ATG ATA GAT TTA AAA ACT AGA AGA
AGC ATA AG; Reverse: TTT AGA ATA TTT GTC
GTA ATG AAG TTT ATT TAA AG. Genomic DNA
(80–100 ng) was used as template and the PCR products
were cloned into the pTrcHis2 TOPO expression vector
with a C-terminal His-tag (Invitrogen) producing pTrcHis2-NitA and pTrcHis2-NitB.TOP10 F′ E. coli strain
was transformed with the recombinant plasmids following the supplier’s protocol. The recombinant strains
were grown in Luria-Bertani medium at 37°C and the
expression was induced with 1 mM isopropyl-β-D-
galactoside. Purification was carried out by probond
nickel column (Invitrogen) according to the supplier’s
protocol. The cell pellet from 25 ml of culture which
expressed the His-tag fusion protein was suspended in
2 ml lysis buffer (50 mM potassium phosphate buffer
pH 7.0, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM DTT and 0.1 mM
phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride), lysed by sonication for
15 min at 4°C and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 20 min
at 4°C. The supernatant was used for probond nickel
chromatography. The purified NitA was dialyzed
against 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 7.0 and
NitB against 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 7.0
with 150 mM NaCl.

Enzyme assays and inhibition studies

The protein concentration was determined by the
Bradford method (Bradford 1976) using a protein assay kit from Biorad, and employing bovine serum
albumin as a standard. TNT reductase activity was
assayed under reaction conditions described below.
The reaction was carried out at 25°C. A typical
reaction mixture (1.0 ml) contained 50 mM Tris-HCl
buffer (pH 7.0), 0.16 mM NADH or NADPH,
0.05 mM of a given electron acceptor and a suitable
amount of enzyme. The reaction was initiated by
addition of NADH or NADPH. The rate of nitroreductase catalyzed oxidation of NADH/NADPH by
various nitroaromatics was determined by monitoring
absorbance at 340 nm spectrophotometrically. The
molar extinction coefficient of NADH/NADPH
6.22 × 10³ M⁻¹·cm⁻¹ was used for the calculation of
enzyme activity. Enzyme was incubated in buffer in the
presence of a specific concentration of inhibitor for
5 min for the inhibition studies, subsequently nitroreductase activity was determined.

Kinetic parameters

Kinetic parameters were determined by varying the
concentration under standard conditions while holding
the concentration of NADH fixed at 0.16 mM. Conversely kinetic parameters for NADH were determined
by varying the concentration under standard conditions

with the concentration of TNT fixed at 0.05 mM. The
$K_{\mathrm{m}}$ and $V_{\max }$ values were calculated using Lineweaver-
Burk plots.

Real-time quantitative PCR

RNA was isolated from the culture of *C. acetobutylicum*
by using the manufacturers protocol for SV total RNA
isolation system from Promega (Madison, WI, USA). The RNA content was determined spectrophotometrically and up to 1 μg per reaction was reverse
transcribed with random hexamer primers in a final
volume of 20 μl by using the reverse transcription system
from Promega following the supplier’s protocol. The
resulting cDNA was stored at –80°C.
mRNA levels were quantified by subjecting cDNA to
Q-PCR analysis in triplicate using ABI prism 7000 sequence detection system (Applied Biosystems). The
forward and reverse specific primers designed are listed
in Table 1 All the reactions were performed in 20 μl
reaction volumes that contained 1X SYBR green PCR
master mix (Applied Biosystems), 1.25 pmol each of
forward and reverse primers and 40 ng of cDNA.
Amplification began with 10-min incubation at 95°C
to activate AmpliTaq Gold DNA polymerase followed
by 40 Cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 15 s with 60 s
of annealing and extension at 60°C. Standards and
samples were assayed in triplicates. Analyses of data
were accomplished using the ABI PRISM 7000 Sequence Detection Software. The calculations for relative
gene expression were done by the relative quantification
method (Livak and Schmittgen 2001).

---

Results

Expression of recombinant NitA and NitB in *E. coli*

SDS-PAGE analysis indicated that recombinant proteins NitA and NitB of monomeric molecular weights 31
and 23 kDa respectively, were over expressed in *E. coli*
with the C-terminal His-tag contributing 3–4 kDa to the
size of the protein (Fig. 1). Cell extracts of *E. coli*
bearing the NitA and NitB constructs exhibit prominent
bands that comigrated with purified recombinant nitroreductase proteins. In contrast, lysates from control
*E. coli* harboring the plasmid pTrcHis2-TOPO lacking
the DNA insert did not exhibit protein bands that comigrated with NitA or NitB. In vitro activity assays
conducted with cell extracts confirmed that the expressed proteins NitA and NitB had catalytic activity
and exhibited 89 and 17-fold greater specific activity
respectively with TNT as acceptor substrate and NADH
as source of reducing equivalent than cell extracts from
*E. coli* harboring the control plasmid (Table 2). The
NitB protein showed migration corresponding to a
higher molecular mass than would be estimated from the
DNA sequence.

Table 1 Forward and reverse specific Q-PCR primers designed for NitA and NitB

| Primer pair | Source                | PCR (bp) | Direction | Sequence                     |
|-------------|-----------------------|----------|-----------|-------------------------------|
| Nit A       | C. acetobutylicum      |          | Forward   | ACTGCTCACTCCATGGGGTCT         |
|             | ATCC 824              | 134 bp   | Reverse   | TTTCTTTCTTCGTCCGGGTA          |
| Nit B       | C. acetobutylicum      |          | Forward   | TCTGTTGTTGCTGCCGAAT           |
|             | ATCC 824              | 188 bp   | Reverse   | TGTGATTCATCAGCCGGATA          |

and 276 nm. The absorbance spectra of NitA and NitB in the upper part of the spectrum matched to that of free FMN but were shifted slightly (Fig. 2). As with NfsA from E. coli the solution of NitA and NitB was yellow and this coloration was still present after dialysis.

Substrate specificity of the nitroreductase

Both enzymes exhibit the greatest rates of NADH oxidation when 2,4-DNT was provided as an electron acceptor. However NitA nitroreductase exhibited 17-fold greater activity with TNT than the NitB nitroreductase. 2,4-DNT and 2,6-Dinitrotoluene (2,6-DNT) were reduced to various degrees by NitA enzyme (Table 3), whereas NitB enzyme exhibited essentially no activity toward 2,6-DNT (Table 3). However, NitB enzyme catalyzes reduction of nitrofurazone, hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triazine (RDX) and octahydro-1,3,5,7-tetranitro-1,3,5,7-tetrazocine (HMX) with oxidation of NADH, whereas the NitA enzyme has an activity less than 0.1 U/mg for NADH oxidation during reduction of these compounds (Table 3). The analysis of the metabolites formed by the transformation of TNT by these nitroreductases will be reported separately. NitA and NitB nitroreductases transformed TNT into 2-hydroxylamino-4,6-dinitrotoluene and 2-amino-4,6-dinitrotoluene as identified by LC-MS. NitA can utilize NADH as an electron donor for TNT reduction, whereas NitB can use either NADH or NADPH with preference for NADH. The TNT reduction activity of NitB was 2.8-fold higher with NADH as electron donor compared to that with NADPH. Insignificant activity was observed when FMN (0.06 mM), FAD (0.025 mM) or riboflavin (0.05 mM) was used as electron acceptors with NADH as electron donor (data not shown).

The pH optimum for enzyme activity was determined in 50 mM sodium acetate buffer in the pH range of 4.0–5.5, 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer in the pH range of 6.0–7.5 and in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer in the pH range of 7.5–9.0. The optimum pH was estimated to be 6.5 for NitA and 6.0 for NitB enzymes. The temperature optimum measured in 50 mM phosphate buffer pH 7.0 was estimated to be 30°C, for both NitA and NitB.

The free FMN spectrum has peaks at 443, 372, 265 and 222 nm, while peaks in the NitA spectrum are 441, 344 and 267 nm. NitB spectrum has peaks at 440, 360

Table 2 In vitro activity assays conducted with E. coli cell extracts. The assay confirmed that the expressed proteins NitA and NitB had catalytic activity and exhibited 89 and 17 fold greater specific activity respectively than cell extracts from E. coli harboring the control plasmid

| Cell extract                  | Specific activity (U/mg) |
|-------------------------------|--------------------------|
| E. coli TOPO 10/pTrcHis2NitA clone | 2.68                    |
| E. coli TOPO 10/pTrcHis2NitB clone | 0.51                    |
| E. coli TOPO 10/pTrcHis2 control    | 0.03                    |

One unit of activity is defined as the oxidation of 1 μmol of NADH per min in the presence of 50 μmol TNT in 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) at room temperature

Kinetic properties of nitroreductase NitA

The $K_m$ and $V_{max}$ values of purified NitA from E. coli for TNT, 2,4-DNT and 2,6-DNT have been shown in Table 4. The NitA nitroreductase had $K_m$ values of 8.51 μM and 555 μM for TNT and NADH, respectively. The NitA enzyme had the highest efficiency towards 2,4-DNT compared to that toward TNT and 2,6-DNT as determined by the $V_{max}/K_m$ values. NADH could not be substituted with NADPH with NitA nitroreductase.

Table 4 Kinetic parameters for nitroreductase NitA

| Substrates | $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ ($\mu \mathrm{M}$) | $V_{\max }$ ($\mu \mathrm{mol} \min ^{-1} \mathrm{mg}^{-1}$) | $V_{\max } / K_{\mathrm{m}}$ |
|------------|----------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|
| TNT        | 8.51                             | 44                                                | 5.1                      |
| 2,4 DNT    | 3.75                             | 50                                                | 13.3                     |
| 2,6 DNT    | 657                              | 70                                                | 0.1                      |
| NADH       | 555                              | 210                                               | 0.378                    |

The values were determined by varying the concentration of substrates under standard conditions while holding the concentration of NADH fixed at $0.16 \mathrm{mM}$. Conversely, kinetic parameters for NADH were determined by varying the concentration under standard conditions with the concentration of TNT fixed at $0.05 \mathrm{mM}$. The $K_{\mathrm{m}}$ and $V_{\max }$ were calculated using a Lineweaver-Burk plot.

domain. The members of this family utilize FMN as a cofactor. The amino acid segment from 11–15 has been shown to be involved in FMN binding in flavin reductase P of *Vibrio harveyi* (Tanner et al. 1996). The corresponding residues in NitA and NitB are conserved (Fig. 3). Site-directed mutagenesis of the Arg²⁰³ and Arg²⁰⁸ residues in NfsA from *E. coli* resulted in a low catalytic activity demonstrating the involvement of these residues in NADPH binding, however, the mutants showed low but similar relative activities with NADH as electron donor due to difference in the structure of NADPH and NADH. Arg²⁰³ is a completely conserved residue in the active site of NfsA and the flavin reductase P of *Vibrio Harveyi*, whereas Arg²⁰⁸ in NfsA corresponds to Lys²⁰⁸ in flavin reductase P (Kobori et al. 2001). The corresponding residues in NitA which does not utilize NADPH are replaced by Ile and Lys, respectively. NitB utilizing both NADH and NADPH has Ala and His residues corresponding to Arg²⁰³ and Arg²⁰⁸ of NfsA.

Real-time quantitative PCR

The relative expression of the nitroreductase genes NitA and NitB of *C. acetobutylicum* in cultures with nitrocompounds as inducers was examined by Q-PCR analysis. Total RNA was extracted from the *C. acetobutylicum* cultures induced with $100 \mu \mathrm{M}$ of TNT, metronidazole, nitrofurazone and nitrofurantoin as inducing compounds. The relative expression is compared to the uninduced control. The level of NitA increased by 8.1, 1.4, 9.2 and 5.3-fold on induction with TNT, metronidazole, nitrofurazone and nitrofurantoin, respectively, compared to control. The relative expression of NitB was higher by 7.4, 11 and 5.3-fold on induction with TNT, nitrofurazone and nitrofurantoin. The expression level remained stable on induction with metronidazole (Fig 4a,b).

Discussion

This paper reports characterization of trinitrotoluene transforming oxygen-insensitive nitroreductases.

Table 5 Effects of specific inhibitors on nitroreductase activity of expressed recombinant NitA and NitB

| Inhibitors                     | Concentration (mM) | Percentage of Activity remaining ± SD<sup>a</sup> |
|--------------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
|                                |                   | NitA                                           | NitB                                           |
| Chelating agents               |                   |                                                |                                                |
| EDTA (buffer only)             | 5.0               | 102 ± 5                                        | 100 ± 2                                        |
| 1,10-Phenanthroline (buffer only) | 5.0               | 100 ± 2                                        | 103 ± 2                                        |
| Salicyl hydroxamate            | 0.1               | 48 ± 0                                         | 76 ± 1                                         |
|                                | 0.01              | 100 ± 1                                        | 100 ± 1                                        |
| Sulfhydryl inhibitors          |                   |                                                |                                                |
| N-ethylmaleimide               | 1.0               | 26 ± 3                                         | 40 ± 3                                         |
| Iodoacetamide                  | 1.0               | 100 ± 2                                        | 100 ± 2                                        |
| Electron transport inhibitors   |                   |                                                |                                                |
| Dicoumarol                     | 0.01              | 36 ± 1                                         | 10 ± 1                                         |
| Sodium azide                   | 1.0               | 39 ± 2                                         | 50 ± 3                                         |
| Reducing agent                 |                   |                                                |                                                |
| Dithiothreitol                 | 1.0               | 88 ± 1                                         | 81 ± 1                                         |
| Glutathione                    | 1.0               | 70 ± 3                                         | 80 ± 3                                         |

<sup>a</sup>The rate of oxidation of NADH (micromoles per minute per milligram of protein) in the presence of inhibitor expressed as a percentage of the rate observed in the absence of inhibitor

Substrate specificity

Similar to NfsB, a concentrated solution of NitB and NitA was yellow and this coloration was resistant to dialysis (Zenno et al. 1996b). NitA and NitB exhibited no reductase activity toward flavins FMN, FAD and riboflavin suggesting that possibly the artificial electron acceptors do not bind the protein moiety. NfsA from *E. coli* has been demonstrated to exhibit low level of flavin reductase activity (Zenno et al. 1996a). NitA has a specific activity of reducing TNT over eightfold more effectively than NitB. NitB is less effective towards reduction of RDX, HMX and nitrofurazone compared to its activity on TNT, whereas NitA showed a specific activity of NADH oxidation less than 0.1 U/mg during reduction of these compounds. 2,4 DNT reduction was higher than that of 2,6 DNT in NitA which implies that the enzyme has high affinity toward para-substituted compounds. The 4-position of TNT has also been shown to be preferentially reduced (Lenke et al. 2000).

Significant preference for reduction in the *para* versus *ortho* position of TNT by *E. coli* cultures has been reported (Yin et al. 2004). The K<sub>m</sub> of NitA for TNT is lower than that of *Enterobacter* nitroreductase (144 μM) (Anlezark et al. 1992) and higher than that of *E. coli* (6 μM) (Bryant and Deluca 1991). The kinetic parameters indicate that 2,4-DNT is the preferred substrate of nitroreductase NitB. The metabolites of TNT transformation identified were 2-hydroxylamino-4,6-dinitrotoluene and 2-amino-4,6-dinitrotoluene which is similar to the result obtained during TNT transformation by NAD(P)H nitroreductase I from *Klebsiella sp.* Cl (Kim et al. 2005).

Comparison with other flavoproteins

The examination of amino acid sequences of the two nitroreductases showed significant similarity to the aminoacid sequence of *E. coli* NfsA nitroreductase. The biochemical characteristics were also found to be similar with that of NfsA (Zenno et al. 1996c). The two nitroreductases showed insignificant similarity to the OYE class of flavoproteins which reduce a variety of electrophilic substrates and are extensively characterized. The transformation of TNT has been investigated in five members of old yellow family of flavin-dependent oxidoreductases which show a high degree of conservation of regions of primary and secondary structures but followed different pathways involving reduction of the aromatic ring or the nitrogroup (Williams et al. 2004).

The *P. putida* and *P. fluorescens* xenobiotic reductases and the oxygen-insensitive type I nitroreductases are broad-specificity, FMN-containing flavoproteins that reduce nitro-substituted compounds by using NAD(P)H as a reductant (Kitts et al. 2000; Blehert et al. 1999). However, amino acid sequence alignments comparing these nitroreductases and the NitA and NitB nitroreductases do not reveal sequence similarities between these enzymes.

The X-ray structures of FMN-containing flavin reductases, FRP of *Vibrio harveyi* and flavin reductase (FRase) I of *V. fischeri* that possess a common protein fold have been reported (Koike et al. 1998; Tanner et al. 1996). NfsA of *E. coli* shows similarity in sequence and biochemical properties to FRP and FRase (Zenno et al. 1998; Zenno et al. 1996b). The crystal structure of the major oxygen-insensitive nitroreductase from *E. coli* NfsA indicates that it is a homodimeric flavoprotein with one FMN as a cofactor per monomer using NADPH for the reduction of nitroaromatic compounds (Kobori et al. 2001).

Native PAGE analysis of NitA and NitB indicated that they existed as oligomers (data not shown). NitA shows similarity to *E. coli* NfsA major nitroreductase and Frp, a luminescent bacterium flavin reductase not only in amino acid sequence but also in many biochemical properties strongly suggesting a close evolutionary relationship between the *E. coli*-related

1 10 20 30 40 50 60 
NitA_CA ----------------MNNTIDTMKNHRSIRQYLDKEVPNDLIDEIVKSAQAMPN 
NitB_CA ----------------MIDLLKTRRSIRKYKNKEIEKEKVDTLLKAALLAPT 
YM67_ARCFU -------------MEECLKMIYRRSIRVYSDRQISDEDIEKILKAAMLAPS 
Y120_METTH MKLLWTSQHIKVTVHIDGKVSKMDVLEAIKTRRSIRKYQDREVPEELIDKILDAAMCGPS 
ycnD_BACSU --------------MNEVIKSLTDHRSIRSYTDEPVAQEQLDQIIEA VQSAPS 
NFRA_BACSU -------------MNNTIETILNHRSIRSFTDQLLTAEEIDTLVKSAQAAST 
CHRR_PSEUG -------------MVKELLRNHSSVRIYDGNPISKEIIELIATAQMAAT 
NFSA_ECOLI -------------MTPTIELICGHRSIRHFTDEPISEAQREAIINSARATSS 
Y226_ARCFU -------------MECLDLLFRRVSIRKFTQDDVDDEILMKILEAGNAAPS 
: : *:* : :: : .. 
61 70 80 90 100 110 120 
NitA_CA SINGQQTSVIVVRDKKKREKLAELVGNQEYVAKAPVFLVFVMDFYRTYLAGEKTG-LKQV 
NitB_CA SMGKRSWEFIAVTNKNLISELSTARKMGSQFLKGAPLVIVVVENPEATDAY-------- 
YM67_ARCFU AGNEQPWHFIVVRDREMLKKMSEAFTFGQMLPNASAAIVVCADPKLSKYPYD-------- 
Y120_METTH AVDERPWHFIVVRNREMLEKIPEVHPYGAMVKDAPVAIIVCCDS SLEKIP-G-------- 
ycnD_BACSU SINGQQVTVITVQDKERKKKISELAGGQPWIDQAPVFLFCADFNRAKIALEDLHDFKME 
NFRA_BACSU SSYVQAYSIIIGVSDPEKKRELSVLAGNQPYVEKNGHFFVFCADLYRHQQLAEEKGEHISE 
CHRR_PSEUG SHFVQAYSVIWVTDEEKKEKLGLMSGNPRQYETSGGAFVFCVDFKRLQSAGKLEG--VDI 
NFSA_ECOLI SSFLQCSSIIRITDKALREELVTLTGGQKHVAQAAEFWVFCADFNRHLQICP-------DA 
Y226_ARCFU AGNLQARDFVVIRNPETKKRLAMAALKQMFIAEAPVVIVVCANYPRSMRVYGERG------- 
: : .::: : : 
121 130 140 150 160 170 180 
NitA_CA IHEDIEGILAGSVDVGIALGASVVAAESLGLGTVPIGGIR---------KNPEEVIEILGLP 
NitB_CA ----------IEDGIAASTLIQVTAHSMGLGSCWCHVRNRDRIDYDTTEAFIKTLLNIP 
YM67_ARCFU ----------MWVQDCSAATENILLAARCLGIGSVWLGVYPRE------ERMKALRELLGIP 
Y120_METTH ----------FWVQDCSIASQNILLAAHSLGLGAVWTGVYPE------DRVEGIRRLFSIP 
ycnD_BACSU ITNGLESVLVGAVDAGIALGTATAAAESLGLGTVPIGAVR---------GNPQELIELLELP 
NFRA_BACSU LLENTEMFMVSLIDAALAANMSIAAESMGLGICYIGGIR---------NELDKVTEVLQTP 
CHRR_PSEUG VADSAENVLVGVADVSLFAQN FVAAESMGYGICYIGGVR---------NKPEEISELFNLP 
NFSA_ECOLI QLGLAEQLLLGVVDTAMMAQNALIAAESLGLGGVYIGGLR---------NNIEAVTKLLKLP 
Y226_ARCFU ----------RLYAEQDATAAIENILLAVTALNLGAWVGAFD---------EEQVSEILELP 
* :...* : :: * 
181 190 200 210 220 230 240 
NitA_CA KYTFPMVGLVVGYPADESHKKPRVPFESFRHNESY--DIKAVEDSINVYDEQMNKYLKEI 
NitB_CA ENLKVECMLGIGYPDEER-------------------KAYTEDDLA 
YM67_ARCFU ENIVVFSVVSLGYPKDEKD-----------------FYEADDRFNPDR 
Y120_METTH EHVIPFSVIPLGYPAENP-------------------GTRDLFDPDR 
ycnD_BACSU KYVFPLSGLVIGHPADRSAKKPRLPQEAVNHQETYL-NQDELTS HIQAYDEQMSEYMNKR 
NFRA_BACSU DHVLPLFGLAVGHPANLSGKKPRLPKQAVYHENTYNVNTDDFRHTMNTYDKTISDYYRER 
CHRR_PSEUG EYVFPLFGLTIGVPARRNEVKPRLPVAAVLHENEY--NTEKYEELLPAYNDTMEAYYNNR 
NFSA_ECOLI QHVLPLFGLCLGWPADNPDLKPRLPASILVHENSY---QPLDKGALAQYDEQLAEYYLTR 
Y226_ARCFU EYVRPMAIIPIGHPAEN---------------------PSPRNRYPV 
: :* * 
241 250 260 270 277 
NitA_CA GRAEKEINWSTFTSTIYQSVYYPKVKGAINKQGLKTK- 
NitB_CA LNKLHYDKYSK-------------------------- 
YM67_ARCFU ---IHREKW-------------------------- 
Y120_METTH ---IHLEKW-------------------------- 
ycnD_BACSU TNGKETRNWSQSIASYERLYYPHIREMLEKQGFKVEK 
NFRA_BACSU TNGKREETWSDQILNFMKQKPRTYLNDYVKEKGFNKN- 
CHRR_PSEUG SSNRKIDNWTKQMADFLIEQRRPHIKDFLAKKGFNWK- 
NFSA_ECOLI GSNNRDTWSDHIRRTIIKESRPFILDYLHKQGWATR- 
Y226_ARCFU SMLTHEEKW-------------------------- 
.. 

Fig. 3 ClustalW alignment of amino acid residues of NitA and NitB with the amino acid sequences of other nitroreductases. NitB showed 23% identity and 42% similarity to NfsA nitroreductase from E.coli (Accession BA 07425). NitA showed 35% identity and 51% similarity to NfsA nitroreductase. The similar proteins identified included NAD(P)H nitroreductase (Accession AAB88993) from A.fulgidus showing 32% identity to NitB and 59% similarity, NADPH nitroreductase from Methanothermobacterthermautotrophicus showing 31% identity to NitB and 58% similarity, hypothetical oxidoreductase YcnD from Bacillus subtilis (Accession P94424) showing 26% identity to NitB and 50% similarity, whereas NitA showed 46% identity and 68% similarity. NitB showed 27% identity and 47% similarity to nitro/flavin reductase from Bacillus subtilis (Accession P39605), whereas NitA showed 40% identity and 58% similarity. NitB showed 25% identity and 40% similarity to Cr(VI) reductase (Accession P96977) from Pseudomonas sp.G-1, whereas NitA showed 33% identity and 51% similarity. Putative NADH dehydrogenase/NAD(P)H nitroreductase from A.fulgidus (Accession 030013) showed 27% identity to NitB and 49% similarity, whereas NitA showed 25% identity and 51% similarity to NitB and 24% identity and 43% similarity to NitB. Asterisks indicate the residues which are fully conserved. Two dots indicate the conservation of strong groups and single dot indicate the conservation of weak groups. The shaded residues comprise the putative FMN binding site, amino acids corresponding to Arg^203 and Arg^208 of E.coli NfsA.

genes encoding enzymes (oxidoreductases, hydroxylaminobenzene mutase or aminomuconate deaminase) with a putative role in the detoxification mechanism of nitroaromatics according to the identification and functional assignment from the sequence (Nolling et al. 2001). *nitA* gene is flanked by epoxide hydrolase and glycosyl hydrolase proteins, whereas *nitB* gene is flanked by siderophore/surfactin synthetase-related protein and S-layer protein.

Inhibitors of nitroreductases

Dicoumarol inhibited both the nitroreductases which is consistent with the report of inhibition of flavin reductase from *Vibrio fischeri* and NfsA from *E. coli* (Zenno et al. 1996a, 1996c;). Dicoumarol has also been shown to be an inhibitor of diaphorase (Anlezark et al. 1992) and menadione reductase (Tatsumi et al. 1982). The inhibitor dicoumarol has been demonstrated to bind *E. coli* nitroreductase NTR by π-stacking and hydrophobic interactions. One of the hydroxycoumarin subunits of dicoumarol stacks above the plane of the FMN via π-overlap with the alloxazine ring penetrating deep into the groove. (Johansson et al. 2003). Chelating agents EDTA and 1,10-phenanthroline caused no inhibition suggesting that purified nitroreductases have no essential metal cofactor. N-ethyl maleimide which is a sulfhydryl agent caused inhibition of both nitroreductases. The lack of inhibition by iodoacetamide, however, does not support the presence of sulfhydryl groups at the active site in both the enzymes. The inhibition caused by salicyl hydroxamate, a nonheme iron reagent can be attributed due to its interaction with the active site of the enzymes (Somerville et al. 1995).

Real-time quantitative PCR

The increase in expression of the nitroreductases on induction indicates the substrate specificity of *C. acetobutylicum* toward these compounds. The oxygen-insensitive NAD(P)H nitroreductase from *Enterobacter cloacae* and nitroreductases NfsA and NfsB of *E. coli* have been reported to reduce nitrofurazone and nitrofurantoin under aerobic conditions (Bryant and DeLuca 1991; Zenno et al. 1996c). The oxygen-insensitive nitroreductase A of *E. coli* catalyzing the divalent reduction of nitrocompounds, quinones and dyes by NADPH has been demonstrated to be inducible by paraquat and is a member of the SoxRS regulon (Liochev et al. 1999) suggesting its physiological role in defense against oxidative stress. The mRNA levels of the gene *xenA* encoding xenobiotic reductase in *Pseudomonas putida* were constant on the addition of 0.9 mM glycerol trinitrate (Bleher et al. 1999).

In this study the nitroreductases NitA and NitB from *C. acetobutylicum* were cloned, overexpressed in *E. coli* and characterized. Both the nitroreductases possess the

Fig. 4 The relative expression (filled square) of the nitroreductase genes NitA (a) and NitB (b) of *C. acetobutylicum* with nitrocompounds as inducers. The gene expression was examined by Q-PCR analysis. Total RNA was extracted from the *C. acetobutylicum* cultures grown to O.D.~600 of 0.4 in triplicates, induced with 100 μM of inducer compounds TNT, metronidazole (MT), nitrofurazone (NF) and nitrofurantoin (NT). The relative expression is compared to uninduced control. The error bars indicate the standard deviation

oxygen-insensitive nitroreductase family and the flavin reductase family in luminescent bacterium (Koike et al. 1998). The sequence homology between the FRP/NfsA pair is insignificant, however, there is a structural similarity in overall protein folds. The GC content of NitA and NitB is found to be 31.8 and 36 %, respectively, which is comparable to 36.2% of *E. coli* NfsA indicating that NitA and NitB genes might have originated in *E. coli* or *C. acetobutylicum*.

Physiological role of the nitroreductases

The physiological role of nitroreductase has not been well established. The genes involved in similar metabolic activities are often arranged together on the bacterial chromosome. The genes encoding *P. putida* II-B and *P. fluorescens* I-C xenobiotic reductases *xenA* and *xenB* are flanked by enzymes and/or regulatory proteins that may function in detoxification reactions (Bleher et al. 1999). However, the *C. acetobutylicum* nitroreductase *nitA* and *nitB* genes are not flanked by

potential to transform TNT and are members of nitro-
reductase family proteins.

Acknowledgement This material is based upon work supported by
the U.S. Army Research Office DOD ARMY W911NF-04-1-0179.

Reference

Anlezark GM, Melton RG, Sherwood RF, Coles B, Friedlos F,
Knox RJ (1992) The bioactivation of a 5-(aziridin-1-yl)-2,4-di-
nitrobenzamide (CB1954)-I. Purification and properties of a
nitroreductase enzyme from *Echerichia coli*-a potential enzyme
for antibody-directed enzyme prodrug therapy (ADEPT). Bio-
chem Pharmacol 44:2289–2295

Angermaier L, Simon H (1983) On nitroaryl reductase activities in
several Clostridia. Hoppe Seylers Z Physiol Chem 364:1653–1663

Basran A, French CE, Williams RE, Nicklin S, Bruce NC (1998)
Degradation of nitrate ester and nitroaromatic explosives by
*Enterobacter cloacae* PB2. Biochem Soc Trans 26:680–685

Bleher DS, Fox BG, Chambliss GH (1999) Cloning and sequence
analysis of two *Pseudomonas* flavoprotein xenobiotic reducta-
ses. J Bacteriol 181:6254–6263

Boopathy R (1994) Transformation of nitroaromatic compounds
by a methanogenic bacterium, *Methanococcus* sp.(strain B)
Arch Microbiol 162:167–172

Boopathy R, Manning J, Montemagno C (1994) Metabolism of
trinitrobenzene by a *Pseudomonas* consortium. Can J Microbiol
40:787–790

Boopathy R, Kulpa CF, Wilson M (1993) Metabolism of 2,4,6-
trinitrotoluene (TNT) by *Desulfovibrio* sp. (B strain). Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol 39:270–275

Bradford MM (1976) A rapid and sensitive method for the quan-
titation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the prin-
ciple of protein-dye binding. Anal Biochem 72:248–254

Bryant C, DeLuca M (1991) Purification and characterization of an
oxygen-insensitive NAD(P)H nitroreductase from *Enterobacter*
*cloacae*. J Biol Chem 266:4119–4125

Bustin SA (2000) Absolute quantification of mRNA using real-time
reverse transcription polymerase. J Mol Endocrinol 25:169–193

Fiorenza S, Dunston KL, Ward CH (1991) Decision making - is
bioremediation a viable option. J Hazard Mater 28:171–283

Fiorella P, Spain J (1997) Transformation of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene
by *Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes* JS52. Appl Environ Micro-
biol 63:2007–2201

Fox KM, Karplus PA (1994) Old yellow enzyme at 2 Å resolution:
overall structure, ligand binding, and comparison with related
flavoproteins. Structure 2:1089–1105

French CE, Nicklin S, Bruce NC (1998) Aerobic degradation of
2,4,6-trinitrotoluene by *Enterobacter cloacae* PB2 and by pen-
taerythritol tetranitrate reductase. Appl Environ Microbiol
64:2864–2868

Green EM, Boynton ZL, Harris LM, Rudolph FB, Papoutsakis
ET, Bennett GN (1996) Genetic manipulation of acid formation
pathways by gene inactivation in *Clostridium acetobutylicum*
ATCC 824. Microbiology 142:2079–2086

Groenewegen PE, Breeuwer P, van Helvoort JM, Langenhoff AA,
de Vries FP, de Bont JA (1992) Novel degradative pathway of
4-nitrobenzoate in *Comamonas acidovorans* NBA-10. J Gen
Microbiol 138:1599–1605

Higuchi R, Dollinger G, Walsh PS, Griffith R (1992) Simultaneous
amplification and detection of specific DNA sequences. Bio-
technol (NY) 10:413–417

Huang S, Lindahl PA, Wang C, Bennett GN, Rudolph FB, Hughes
JB (2000) 2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene reduction by carbon monoxide
dehydrogenase from *Clostridium thermoaceticum*. Appl Environ
Microbiol 66:1474–1478

Hughes JB, Wang CY, Bhadra R, Richardson A, Bennett GN,
Rudolph F (1998) Reduction of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene by Clo-
stridium acetobutylicum through hydroxylamino intermediates.
Environ Toxicol Chem 17:343–348

Johansson E, Parkinson GN, Denny WA, Neidle S (2003) Studies
on the nitroreductase prodrug-activating system. Crystal
structures of complexes with the inhibitor dicoumarol and di-
nitrobenzamide prodrugs and of the enzyme active form. J Med
Chem 11:4009–4020

Kalafut T, Wales ME, Rastogi VK, Naumova RP, Zaripova SK,
Wild JR (1998) Biotransformation patterns of 2,4,6-trinitro-
toluene by aerobic bacteria. Curr Microbiol 36:45–54

Karplus AP, Fox KM, Massey V (1995) Structure-function rela-
tions for old yellow enzyme. FASEB J. 9:1518–1526

Khan TA, Bhadra R, Hughes JB (1997) Anaerobic transformation
of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene and related nitroaromatic compounds
by *Clostridium acetobutylicum*. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol
18:198–203

Kim HY, Song HG (2005) Purification and characterization of
NAD(P)H-dependent nitroreductase I from *Klebsiella* sp. Cl
and enzymatic transformation of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene. Appl
Microbiol Biotechnol Mar 24 [Epub ahead of print]

Kitts CL, Green CE, Otley RA, Alvarez MA, Unkefer PJ (2000).
Type I nitroreductases in soil enterobacteria reduce TNT
(2,4,6,-trinitrotoluene) and RDX (hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-
1,3,5-triazine). Can J Microbiol 46:278–282

Kobori T, Sasaki H, Lee WC, Zenno S, Saigo K, Murphy ME,
Tanokura M (2001) Structure and site-directed mutagenesis of a
flavoprotein from *Escherichia coli* that reduces nitrocom-
pounds: alteration of pyridine nucleotide binding by a single
amino acid substitution. J Biol Chem 276:2816–2823

Kohli RM, Massey V (1998) The oxidative half-reaction of old
yellow enzyme. J Biol Chem 273:32763–32770

Koike H, Sasaki H, Kobori T, Zenno S, Saigo K, Murphy ME,
Adman ET, Tanokura M (1998) 1.8 Å crystal structure of the
major NAD(P)H:FMN oxidoreductase of a bioluminescent
bacterium, *Vibrio fischeri*: overall structure, cofactor and sub-
strate-analog binding, and comparison with related flavopro-
teins. J Mol Biol 280:259–273

Lenke H, Achtnich C, Knackmuss HJ (2000) Perspectives of bio-
elimination of polynitroaromatic compounds. In: Spain JC,
Hughes JB, Knackmuss HJ (eds) Biodegradation of nitroaro-
matic compounds and explosives. CRC Press, Boca Raton Fla,
pp 91–126

Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD (2001) Analysis of Relative gene
expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and the
22DDCT method. Methods 25:402–408

Liochev SI, Hausladen A, Fridovich I (1999) Nitroreductase A is
regulated as a member of the soxRS regulon of *Escherichia coli*.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:3537–3539

Matthews RG, Massey V, Sweeley CC (1975) Identification of p-
hydroxybenzaldehyde as the ligand in the green form of old
yellow enzyme. J Biol Chem 250:9294–9298

Noyes R (1996) Chemical weapons destruction and explosive
waste/unexploded ordinance remediation. Noyes Publications,
New Jersey, pp 102–141

Nishino SF, Spain JC (1993) Degradation of nitrobenzene by a
*Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes*. Appl Environ Microbiology
59:2520–2525

Nolling J, Breton G, Omelchenko MV, Makarova KS, Zeng Q,
Gibson R, Lee HM, Dubois J, Qiu D, Hitti J, Wolf YI,
Tatusov RL, Sabathe F, Doucette-Stamm L, Soucaille P,
Daly MJ, Bennett GN, Koonin EV, Smith DR (2001) Gen-
ome sequence and comparative analysis of the solvent-pro-
ducing bacterium *Clostridium acetobutylicum*. J Bacteriol
183:4823–4838

Padda RS, Wang C, Hughes JB, Kutty R, Bennett GN (2003)
Mutagenicity of nitroaromatic degradation compounds. Envi-
ron Toxicol Chem 22:2293–2297

Rau J, Stolz A (2003) Oxygen-insensitive nitroreductases NfsA and
NfsB of *Escherichia coli* function under anaerobic conditions as
lawsone-dependent Azo reductases. Appl Environ Microbiol
69:3448–3455

Raffi F, Cerniglia CE (1993) Comparison of the azoreductase and
nitroreductase from *Clostridium perfringens*. Appl Environ
Microbiol 59:1731–1734

Rieger PG, Knackmuss HJ (1995) Basic knowledge and perspectives on biodegradation of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene and related nitroaromatic compounds in contaminated soil. In: Spain JC (ed) Biodegradation of nitroaromatic compounds. vol 49. Plenum, New York, pp 1–18

Schopfer LM, Massey V (1991) A study of enzymes, mechanisms of enzyme action. In: Kuby SA (ed) Old yellow enzyme. CRC, Boca Raton, pp 247–269

Somerville CC, Nishino SF, Spain JC (1995) Purification and characterization of nitrobenzene nitroreductase from *Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes* JS45. J Bacteriol 177:3837–3842

Spain JC (1995) Biodegradation of nitroaromatic compounds Annu Rev Microbiol 49:523–555

Spain JC, Hughes JB, Knackmuss HJ (ed) (2000) Biodegradation of nitroaromatic compounds and explosives. Lewis Publishers, Boca Raton, pp 91–126

Tan EL, Ho CH, Griest WH, Tyndall RL (1992) Mutagenicity of trinitrotoluene and its metabolites formed during composting. J Toxicol Environ Health 36:165–175

Tanner JJ, Lei B, Tu SC, Krause KL (1996) Flavin reductase P: structure of a dimeric enzyme that reduces flavin. Biochemistry 35:13531–13539

Tatsumi K, Doi T, Yoshimura H, Koga H, Horiuchi T (1982) Oxygen-insensitive nitrofuran reductases in *Salmonella typhimurium* TA 100. J. Pharm Dyn 5:423–429

Watrous MW, Clark S, Kutty R, Huang S, Rudolph FB, Hughes JB, Bennett GN (2003) 2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene reduction by an Fe-only hydrogenase in *Clostridium acetobutylicum*. Appl Environ Microbiol 69:1542–1547

Won WD, DiSalvo LH, Ng J (1976) Toxicity and mutagenicity of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene and its microbial metabolites. Appl Environ Microbiol 31:576–580

Williams RE, Rathbone DA, Scrutton NS, Bruce NC (2004) Bio-transformation of explosives by the old yellow enzyme family of flavoproteins. Appl Environ Microbiol 70:3566–357

Yin H, Wood TK, Smet BF (2005) Reductive transformation of TNT by *Escherichia coli*: pathway description. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 67:397–404

Zenno ST, Kobori T, Tanokura M, Saigo K (1998) Conversion of NfsA, the major *Escherichia coli* nitroreductase, to a flavin reductase with an activity similar to that of Frp, a flavin reductase in *Vibrio harveyi*, by a single amino acid substitution. J Bacteriol 180:422–425

Zenno S, Koike H, Kumar AN, Jayaraman R, Tanokura M, Saigo K (1996a) Biochemical characterization of NfsA, the *Escherichia coli* major nitroreductase exhibiting a high amino acid sequence homology to Frp, a *Vibrio harveyi* flavin oxidoreductase. J Bacteriol 178:4508–4514

Zenno S, Koike H, Tanokura M, Saigo K (1996b) Gene cloning, purification, and characterization of NfsB, a minor oxygen-insensitive nitroreductase from *Escherichia coli*, similar in biochemical properties to FRase I, the major flavin reductase in *Vibrio fischeri*. J Biochem (Tokyo) 120:736–744

Zenno S, Koike H, Tanokura M, Saigo K (1996c) Conversion of NfsB, a minor *Escherichia coli* nitroreductase, to a flavin reductase similar in biochemical properties to FRase I, the major flavin reductase in *Vibrio fischeri*, by a single amino acid substitution. J Bacteriol 178:4731–4733
