
REGULATION OF MHC CLASS II GENE EXPRESSION BY THE CLASS II TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVATOR

**Walter Reith**, Salomé LeibundGut-Landmann and Jean-Marc Waldburger

Abstract | MHC class II molecules are pivotal for the adaptive immune system, because they guide the development and activation of CD4+ T helper cells. Fulfilling these functions requires that the genes encoding MHC class II molecules are transcribed according to a strict cell-type-specific and quantitatively modulated pattern. This complex gene-expression profile is controlled almost exclusively by a single master regulatory factor, which is known as the class II transactivator. As we discuss here, differential activation of the three independent promoters that drive expression of the gene encoding the class II transactivator ultimately determines the exquisitely regulated pattern of MHC class II gene expression.

In the past decade, there has been an explosion in our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms that regulate transcription of the genes encoding MHC class II molecules in health and disease. Of prime importance has been an unusually detailed genetic dissection of this system. This was achieved by the study of a severe immunodeficiency disease that is known as **bare lymphocyte syndrome** (BLS) (BOX 1) and by the generation of several informative gene-knockout mice. This genetic dissection, combined with a wealth of information that has been derived from biochemical and cell-culture-based studies, has placed the regulation of MHC class II genes among the best understood transcription-control systems in mammals. It has, in many respects, also turned out to be one of the most atypical systems. As discussed here, the task of regulating MHC class II expression, which is exquisitely controlled at a cell-type-specific level and precisely fine tuned, is shouldered almost entirely by the class II transactivator (CIITA), a highly regulated non-DNA-binding co-activator that has a remarkable degree of specificity for MHC class II genes. It is the only known system in which a complex pattern of gene expression is imparted by a single dedicated co-activator rather than by combinatorial control exerted by several DNA-binding transcription factors. In this Review, we summarise our current knowledge of the role of CIITA as the master regulator of MHC class II genes. We concentrate on novel insights from recent gene-targeting experiments in mice that have allowed us to integrate a profusion of results from numerous *in vitro* studies into a single coherent model of how the differential usage of three independent promoters of the gene encoding CIITA determines the tightly regulated pattern of cell-type-specific and inducible MHC class II expression *in vivo*.

**Expression of MHC class II molecules**

MHC class II molecules are cell-surface glycoproteins that are of central importance to the adaptive immune system because they present peptides — derived mainly from extracellular proteins — to the antigen receptor of CD4+ T cells. MHC-class-II-mediated peptide presentation is essential for the following: the positive and negative selection processes that shape the specificity of the T-cell-receptor repertoire of the CD4+ T-cell population during its development in the thymus; the homeostasis of the mature CD4+ T-cell population in the periphery; and the initiation, amplification and regulation of protective immune responses

Box 1 | Bare lymphocyte syndrome

Bare lymphocyte syndrome (BLS) — also known as MHC class II deficiency${}^{1,2}$— is a rare autosomal recessive immunodeficiency${}^{1,2}$. In this disease, failure to express MHC class II molecules at the surface of all cells that would usually express them — including thymic epithelial cells, B cells, macrophages, dendritic cells and interferon-γ-stimulated cells — leads to the reduced positive selection of CD4⁺ T cells in the thymus and to the inability of mature CD4⁺ T cells to respond to antigens in the periphery. A combined deficiency in cellular and antibody-mediated immune responses ensues. As a result, patients suffer from severe and recurrent bacterial, viral, fungal and protozoan infections, mainly of the gastrointestinal, pulmonary, respiratory and urinary tracts. These infections lead to chronic diarrhoea, malabsorption, growth retardation, and death in early childhood. Bone-marrow transplantation remains the only curative therapy.

The genetic lesions that are responsible for BLS do not lie in the MHC class II genes themselves but in the genes encoding trans-acting factors that are required for their transcription. Patients have been assigned to four complementation groups (A, B, C and D), using cell-fusion experiments. The regulatory genes that are mutated in these groups encode the class II transactivator (CIITA), RFXANK (regulatory factor X (RFX)-associated ankyrin-containing protein), RFX5 and RFXAP (RFX associated protein), respectively${}^{2,15–19}$. Despite this genetic heterogeneity, BLS is phenotypically homogeneous in the sense that phenotypes that are restricted to a particular complementation group have not been identified${}^{1,2}$. Moreover, all clinical and immunological abnormalities can be accounted for by the absence of MHC class II expression, and no obvious perturbations of other biological systems have been documented. The same is true for mouse models of BLS that are generated by disruption of $C2ta$ (the gene encoding CIITA) or $Rfx5$ (REFS 3–5). Taken together, these observations imply that CIITA and the three RFX factors are, to a large extent, dedicated to the regulation of MHC class II genes.


of their MHC class II genes in response to stimulation with IFN-γ². This IFN-γ-induced expression of MHC class II molecules can be further modulated by various secondary stimuli, including transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), IFN-β, tumour-necrosis factor, IL-1, IL-10, infection with various pathogens, and certain drugs.

**Regulation of MHC class II expression**

MHC class II expression is controlled mainly at the level of transcription, by a highly conserved regulatory module that is situated 150–300 base pairs (bp) upstream of the transcription-initiation site in all MHC class II genes${}^{2,8,9}$ (FIG. 1). This MHC-class-II-specific regulatory module, known as the SXY module, consists of four sequences — the S, X, X2 and Y boxes — that are present in a tightly constrained order, orientation and spacing (FIG. 1). Characteristic SXY modules are found in the promoters of the genes encoding the α-chain and β-chain of all MHC class II molecules in all vertebrate species that have been examined, including the genes encoding the three human MHC class II isotypes (HLA-DP, HLA-DQ and HLA-DR) and the two mouse MHC class II isotypes (H2-A and H2-E). Typical SXY modules are also found in the promoters of the genes encoding invariant chain (Ii) and the non-classical MHC class II molecules HLA-DM (known as H2-M in mice) and HLA-DO (known as H2-O in mice), which are accessory proteins that are required for intracellular trafficking and peptide loading of MHC class II molecules. More recently, additional SXY modules that function as ENHANCERS and control MHC class II genes from a distance have been identified at distal positions throughout the MHC class II locus and in the first intron of the gene encoding Ii${}^{11,12}$. Sequences that resemble SXY modules also contribute to the function of MHC class I promoters${}^{2,8,9}$.

Four key trans-acting factors that regulate the transcription of MHC class II genes by interacting with the SXY module were identified by studying B-cell lines with regulatory defects in MHC class II expression${}^{13,14}$ and by isolating the genes that are mutated in individuals with BLS, a hereditary immunodeficiency disease that results from an almost complete absence of MHC class II expression${}^{1,2}$ (BOX 1). BLS is a genetically heterogeneous disease that is caused by mutations in the genes encoding the regulatory factors CIITA, REGULATORY FACTOR X (RFX5), RFX-associated protein (RFXAP) and RFX-associated ankyrin-containing protein (RFXANK)${}^{15–19}$. All four are dedicated to the transcription of MHC class II genes and related genes. They are, to a large extent, essential for this function, because only weak, residual MHC class II expression is retained in patients with BLS and in mice that lack RFX5 or CIITA${}^{1–5}$.

RFX5, RFXAP and RFXANK form the heterotrimeric RFX complex, which specifically binds the X box of the SXY module${}^{16–20}$. RFX nucleates the assembly of a higher-order nucleoprotein complex through cooperative-binding interactions with the X2-box-specific cyclic-AMP-responsive-element-binding


ASTROCYTE
A star-shaped glial cell of the central-nervous system that forms a structural and functional interface between non-nervous tissues and neurons.

TROPHOBLAST
A cell of the outer layer of the mammalian blastocyst that gives rise to the embryonic portion of the placenta.

ENHANCER
A composite regulatory region that is composed of several distinct sequence elements that are bound by sequence-specific transcription factors that act positively or negatively on the transcription of an adjacent gene.

REGULATORY-FACTOR-X FAMILY (RFX family). A family of evolutionarily related DNA-binding proteins that has diverse functions in eukaryotic organisms, ranging from yeast to man. There are five family members (RFX1, RFX2, RFX3, RFX4 and RFX5) in mammals.

protein (CREB), the Y-box-specific nuclear transcription factor Y (NFY) and a factor that binds the S box^{21-23} (FIG. 1). Although the S box can be bound by RFX in *in vitro*-binding assays, its function in enhancing the activity of MHC class II promoters is mediated by an as-yet-unidentified factor^{23}. The multiprotein complex that is assembled at the SXY module — which is known as the MHC class II enhanceosome — is a platform to which CIITA is recruited by multiple synergistic protein–protein interactions^{2,8,9,24}. The enhanceosome and CIITA then cooperate to activate transcription of MHC class II genes^{2,8,9}.

### The MHC class II transactivator

Because several comprehensive reviews have addressed the structure and mode of action of CIITA^{2,8,9,25}, we limit ourselves to summarizing the most salient points. Important features in the primary sequence of CIITA include an amino (N)-terminal region that is rich in acidic amino acids, three segments that are rich in proline, serine and threonine, a centrally placed GTP-binding domain, and a carboxy (C)-terminal region that consists of leucine-rich repeats (LRRs) (BOX 2). The association of a central nucleotide-binding domain with a C-terminal LRR region is characteristic of the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD) family of proteins, which is also known as the CATERPILLER family (caspase-recruitment domain (CARD), transcription enhancer, R (purine)-binding, pyrin, lots of LRRs family)^{26,27} (BOX 2). The N-terminal moiety of CIITA contains transcription-activation domains that are thought to mediate interactions with effector proteins that are implicated in promoting transcription, including components of the GENERAL TRANSCRIPTION MACHINERY, factors that are involved in CHROMATIN REMODELLING and other co-activators. The C-terminal two-thirds of the protein is implicated in self-association, localization to the nucleus and recruitment to the enhanceosome^{2,8,9}.

CIITA functions as a non-DNA-binding co-activator that coordinates multiple events that are required for the activation of transcription (FIG. 1). It has been implicated in promoting transcription by various mechanisms: first, recruiting components such as transcription factor IID (TFIID) and TFIIB of the general transcription-initiation machinery^{28,29}; second, inducing phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II (REF. 30); third, interacting with the positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb)^{31}; fourth, recruiting co-activators that alter chromatin accessibility by inducing histone acetylation or methylation^{25}; and last, recruiting the chromatin-remodelling factor BRAHMA-RELATED GENE 1 (BRG1)^{32}. CIITA has also been reported to have an endogenous histone-acetylase activity^{33}. The relative importance of these effector functions and the precise order in which they are enlisted during the activation of MHC class II genes remain to be established.

The function of CIITA can be modulated by post-translational modifications. For example, phosphorylation of certain residues in CIITA can increase its oligomerization, its interactions with other key

REVIEW S

Box 2 | CIITA is a member of a family of structurally related proteins

The class II transactivator (CIITA) is a member of a family of cytosolic proteins that is known by several names, including the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD)-protein family and the CATERPILLER (caspase-recruitment domain (CARD)), transcription enhancer, R (purine)-binding, pyrin, lots of leucine-rich repeats (LRRs))-protein family²⁶,²⁷. Family members have a conserved tripartite structure that consists of a variable amino (N)-terminal effector-binding domain (EBD), a centrally located NOD and a carboxy-terminal region that contains a variable number of LRRs. The family is evolutionarily ancient, because this tripartite-domain arrangement is conserved in certain disease-resistance proteins (R proteins) that mediate immune responses in plants. In most mammalian family members, the N-terminal EBD is either a CARD or pyrin domain (PYD). The EBD in many R proteins is a Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain. CIITA is the only member that has an N-terminal transcription-activation domain (AD) and that has a documented role as a transcription factor. The N-terminal extension that is specific to the CIITA isoform derived from use of promoter I (pI) of the CIITA gene has weak CARD homology.

NOD proteins have diverse roles in inflammation, apoptosis and immunoregulation. NOD1 protein and NOD2 protein function as intracellular receptors for specific motifs in bacterial peptidoglycan. Mutations that affect the genes encoding several important family members are associated with immunological or inflammatory disorders: the CIITA gene in bare lymphocyte syndrome (BOX 1); the NOD2 gene in Crohn’s disease and Blau syndrome; and the cold autoinflammatory syndrome 1 (CIASI) gene (which encodes cryopyrin) in familial cold urticaria syndrome, Muckle–Wells syndrome and neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease.

expression — including TGF-β, IL-1, IL-4, IL-10, various pathogens and certain drugs — generally achieve this by interfering with induction of expression of the CIITA or C2ta gene³¹,⁵¹⁻⁶⁶.

The classical and non-classical MHC class II genes and the *I* gene are the best-documented targets of CIITA. Although several other potential targets have been proposed, the influence of CIITA on their expression is minor, is not observed in an *in vivo* setting, is a result of indirect mechanisms that are distinct from those operating at MHC class II genes or is a subject of controversy¹⁰ (BOX 3). CIITA is therefore remarkably specific for MHC class II expression. Because of its restricted target-gene specificity and decisive regulatory role, CIITA is known as the master control factor or master regulator of MHC class II genes and related genes.

Regulation of the gene encoding CIITA

The role of CIITA as the master regulator of MHC class II expression has motivated a considerable amount of interest in the molecular mechanisms that control its expression. CIITA expression is regulated mainly at the level of transcription, although it can be further modulated by changes in mRNA and protein stability⁶⁷,⁶⁸. Transcription of CIITA is driven by a large regulatory region that contains four distinct promoters, which are known as pI, pII, pIII and pIV (REF. 42) (FIG. 2). Three of these promoters — pI, pIII and pIV — are strongly conserved in the mouse C2ta gene. A mouse equivalent of pII has not been identified, and the function of pII is not known; therefore, pII is not discussed further here.

Promoters pI, pIII and pIV precede alternative first exons that are spliced to the shared downstream exons, and this gives rise to three types of CIITA or C2ta mRNA, which differ at their 5′ ends (FIG. 2). All three mRNAs have a translation-initiation codon in the common second exon. However, the alternative 5′ exons that follow pI and pIII contain additional upstream initiation codons and therefore encode specific N-terminal extensions of 101 and 24 amino acids, respectively. As a consequence, three CIITA isoforms that differ at their N termini are produced (FIG. 2). All three restore MHC class II expression when produced in CIITA-deficient B cells, and they all activate MHC class II genes to equivalent levels when expressed in cells of non-haematopoietic origin. Whether these isoforms have different functions is therefore not clear. The isoform that is derived from pI is, however, slightly more efficient than the others at activating MHC class II promoters (REF. 69, and S.L.L. and W.R., unpublished observations). This increased efficiency has been attributed to the N-terminal sequence that is encoded by the alternative first exon that follows pI, which contains a weak homology to CARDs⁶⁹. This CARD-like sequence strengthens the similarity between CIITA and other NOD-family proteins, several of which contain an N-terminal CARD(s)²⁶,²⁷ (BOX 2).

Cell-type-specific, cytokine-induced and developmentally modulated MHC class II expression is

CHROMATIN MODIFICATION

Alterations that are induced in chromatin by enzymes that modify the extent of acetylation, methylation or other covalent modifications of histones.

GENERAL TRANSCRIPTION MACHINERY

Factors that are required for the initiation of transcription of all genes that are transcribed by RNA polymerase II. They include RNA polymerase II itself and numerous general transcription factors that assemble at the core promoter (that is, the DNA sequence that surrounds the transcription-initiation site) of these genes.

CHROMATIN REMODELLING

Alterations that are induced in chromatin through the displacement of nucleosomes by ATP-dependent multiprotein complexes.

determined by transcriptional control of the CIITA or C2ta gene through the differential usage of pI, pIII and pIV. Initial experiments with established cell lines and several primary-cell populations indicated that pI is used mainly in DCs, that pIII is activated specifically in B cells and that pIV is induced by IFN-γ<sup>41,42</sup>. Subsequent *in vitro* studies, however, challenged this relatively simple picture. For example, all three promoters were reported to be inducible by IFN-γ, and both pI and pIII were found to be active in DCs. In addition, pIII was shown to be used in certain tumours of non-haematopoietic origin<sup>47,66,70–74</sup>. Therefore, to define the true specificity of these promoters, mice carrying targeted deletions of the regulatory region of the C2ta gene were generated. The mice lack pIV carry a deletion that excises pIV and its associated first exon but leaves pI and pIII intact<sup>7</sup>. The mice that lack pIII and pIV (denoted p(III+IV)-deficient mice) carry a deletion that excises pIII, pIV and their associated first exons such that only pI remains intact<sup>6</sup>. The analysis of MHC class II expression in several cell types from these mice has led to an unambiguous and accurate definition of the functions of the three C2ta promoters *in vivo*. The ‘division of labour’ between these promoters is remarkably strict and is much more precise *in vivo* than was anticipated from earlier *in vitro* studies. Moreover, the promoters function independently of one another without any significant crosstalk.

**Box 3 | Target-gene specificity of CIITA**

By far the most well-established target genes of the class II transactivator (CIITA) remain those encoding MHC class II molecules and invariant chain, HLA-DM and HLA-DO proteins that are required for MHC-class-II-mediated antigen presentation<sup>2,8–10</sup>. CIITA also has a more limited role in the activation of MHC class I genes<sup>132,133</sup>. This high specificity of CIITA was recently challenged by reports indicating that it can influence — albeit, in most cases, relatively modestly — the expression of a surprising variety of genes that are involved in numerous distinct functions within and outside the immune system<sup>10</sup>. The plexin-A1 gene was found to be stimulated by CIITA in mouse dendritic cells<sup>134</sup>. DNA-microarray experiments identified more than 40 genes that were proposed to be upregulated by CIITA in human B cells and in interferon-γ-stimulated cells<sup>135</sup>. Genes that were proposed to be repressed by CIITA in specific cell types include those encoding interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-10, CD95 ligand (also known as FAS ligand), cathepsin E, collagen type I α2, cyclin D1 and 16 additional proteins of diverse function<sup>135–139</sup>. Repression of the genes encoding IL-4, CD95 ligand, collagen type I α2, cyclin D1 and cathepsin E was proposed to be mediated by sequestration of the co-activator CBP (cyclic-AMP-responsive-element-binding protein (CREB))-binding protein) by CIITA<sup>136–139</sup>. The mechanisms that mediate activation or repression of the other candidate target genes have not been defined; however, they are likely to be distinct from those operating at MHC class II genes, because none of these genes contains the characteristic SXY module to which CIITA is recruited at MHC class II promoters. For most of the potential new target genes, the biological importance of their regulation by CIITA has not been evaluated *in vivo*. It remains to be determined whether their altered expression leads to a clear-cut phenotype in CIITA-deficient mice or patients with BLS. Furthermore, conflicting results have been reported for certain target genes, such as *Il4* (REFS 97,139,140). Consequently, until further studies have been carried out, CIITA should not be regarded as a pleiotropic factor having widespread functions that extend beyond its role in the control of MHC class II expression.

Lessons from pIV-deficient mice. *In vitro* studies initially led to the suggestion that pIV is activated by IFN-γ in cells of the macrophage lineage, as well as numerous non-haematopoietic cells, including astrocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells and epithelial cells<sup>40–42,52,72</sup>. A key role for pIV in IFN-γ-mediated MHC class II gene induction was confirmed by the phenotype of pIV-deficient mice, which show selective abrogation of IFN-γ-induced MHC class II expression by a wide variety of cells of non-haematopoietic origin, including glandular, respiratory and intestinal epithelial cells, endothelial cells, astrocytes and fibroblasts<sup>7</sup>. In the absence of pIV, pI and pIII are not sufficient to support IFN-γ-induced MHC class II expression in these cell types, despite the fact that both promoters have been reported to be activated by IFN-γ in certain freshly isolated cells and in cell lines<sup>6,7,66,72–74</sup>. So, pIV is essential for driving IFN-γ-induced CIITA expression in cells of non-haematopoietic origin (FIG. 3).

In contrast to non-haematopoietic cells, IFN-γ-stimulated macrophages from pIV-deficient mice have normal levels of MHC class II expression<sup>7</sup>. This is true for peritoneal macrophages, as well as tissue-resident macrophages, such as MICROGLIA in the central-nervous system. Therefore, although transcription from pIV is activated in macrophages by IFN-γ<sup>66,73–76</sup>, this does not markedly contribute to IFN-γ-induced MHC class II expression by these cells.

Another key role of pIV was uncovered by the finding that pIV-deficient mice have a marked reduction in CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cell numbers<sup>7,38</sup>. This results from a severe defect in the positive selection of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells in the thymus, which is normally driven by MHC class II<sup>+</sup> epithelial cells in the thymic cortex (cTECs)<sup>77</sup>. Positive selection of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells is abolished in pIV-deficient mice, because MHC class II expression by cTECs is eliminated<sup>7,38</sup>. CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cell numbers are as low as those in mice that are deficient in MHC class II molecules, indicating that the defect in MHC class II expression by cTECs in pIV-deficient mice is complete. Owing to the absence of CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells, protective immune responses are severely hampered<sup>7,38</sup>, and pIV-deficient mice succumb to infection with pathogens that are commonly found in non-barrier housing facilities (J.-M.W. and W.R., unpublished observations). Nevertheless, weak T-cell-dependent immune responses are observed, perhaps as a consequence of the positive selection of some CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells by MHC class II<sup>+</sup> bone-marrow-derived APCs<sup>78</sup>.

Induction of pIV by IFN-γ. A conserved 300 bp promoter-proximal region is sufficient for the activation of pIV by IFN-γ. This region contains three regulatory elements — an IFN-γ-activated site (GAS), an E box and an IFN-regulatory factor (IRF-E) element (IRF-E) — all of which are required for the induction of pIV (REFS 40–42,72,75) (FIG. 4). The GAS and E box are bound cooperatively by signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1)<sup>41</sup>. The IRF-E is co-occupied by **IRF1** (REFS 40,41) and **IRF2** (REFS 79,80). Binding of STAT1 is induced by

the classical IFN-γ-mediated signal-transduction pathway. On binding of IFN-γ to its receptor, activation of the receptor-associated protein tyrosine kinases Janus kinase 1 (JAK1) and JAK2 leads to the phosphorylation of STAT1, which then dimerizes, translocates to the nucleus and activates its target promoters, including pIV. IRF1 is encoded by a gene that is also controlled by STAT1, so its expression is also induced by IFN-γ. The dependence on IRF1 explains the delayed kinetics of IFN-γ-induced CIITA expression relative to the rapid induction of expression of genes that are controlled only by STAT1 (REFS 39,81). The relative importance of STAT1 and IRF1 for the activation of pIV varies as a function of cell type<sup>40,41,72,76,82</sup>. For example, the GAS and the IRF-E are equally crucial in certain melanoma and FIBROSARCOMA cell lines<sup>41,72</sup>, whereas the IRF-E is more important than the GAS in astrocytes<sup>40,76</sup>.

Activation of pIV by IFN-γ depends on remodelling of the local chromatin structure. This requires BRG1, which is the ATPase subunit of some nucleosome-remodelling complexes<sup>83</sup>. Moreover, binding of STAT1 to pIV increases chromatin accessibility by inducing histone acetylation<sup>81</sup>.

Several cytokines suppress IFN-γ-induced expression of CIITA. For example, TGF-β inhibits IFN-γ-induced activation of pIV (REFS 51,53–55,72). The inhibitory effect of TGF-β is mediated by SMAD3 (mothers against decapentaplegic homologue 3)<sup>55</sup>. Several interleukins also inhibit the induction of CIITA expression in human astrocytes (IL-1) and mouse microglia (IL-4 or IL-10), but the molecular mechanisms that are implicated remain undefined<sup>52,53</sup>.

Trophoblasts are unique in that they cannot activate MHC class II genes in response to IFN-γ. The absence of MHC class II molecules at the cell surface of trophoblasts is thought to have a crucial role in preventing rejection of the fetus by the maternal immune system. The inability of trophoblasts to express MHC class II genes is a consequence of epigenetic silencing of the gene encoding CIITA<sup>43,44</sup>. Most studies have indicated that DNA methylation is responsible for silencing<sup>43,44,50</sup>, but alternative mechanisms have also been proposed<sup>84,85</sup>.

**Regulation of pIV in TECs.** TECs retain MHC class II expression and the ability to drive positive selection of CD4⁺ T cells when cultured in three-dimensional REAGGREGATE THYMIC ORGAN CULTURES<sup>86</sup>. By contrast, they dedifferentiate and lose expression of MHC class II molecules when they are maintained in monolayer cultures<sup>87,88</sup>. This indicates that pIV activity depends on signals that are provided by the thymic microenvironment. However, the nature of these signals and the transcription factors on which they converge remain elusive<sup>38,89</sup>. Although CIITA and MHC class II expression can be induced by IFN-γ in ex vivo TEC lines and thymic stromal cell lines<sup>90,91</sup>, the mechanism operating in vivo is independent of the IFN-γ-mediated signalling pathway (FIG. 4). Indeed, positive selection of CD4⁺ T cells is normal in mice that lack essential components of the IFN-γ-mediated signalling pathway — including IFN-γ, the IFN-γ receptor, STAT1 and IRF1 (REFS 92,93) — indicating that MHC class II expression by TECs is not perturbed in these mice. Moreover, a defect in CD4⁺ T-cell selection that results from the absence of MHC class II expression in the thymus has not been described in any other mouse that lacks a specific cytokine, cytokine receptor, STAT or IRF<sup>38,89</sup>. Other signalling pathways that are involved in the development and function of the thymus (such as the WNT-, fibroblast-growth-factor-, TGF-β and sonic-hedgehog-homologue-mediated pathways)<sup>94</sup> have also not been implicated in driving MHC class II expression by TECs. Elucidation of the mechanism that mediates pIV activation in TECs therefore remains an important challenge.

**Lessons from p(III+IV)-deficient mice.** Several lines of evidence initially indicated that pIII is active in B cells. The first CIITA cDNA clone to be isolated was derived from a B-cell line and corresponded to a type III CIITA mRNA<sup>15</sup>. Moreover, transcripts that are derived from pIII are the most abundant of the three transcript types in B-cell lines, and pIII has B-cell specificity in

Figure 2 | **Modular structure of the regulatory region of the gene encoding CIITA.** The gene encoding the class II transactivator (CIITA) is controlled by three independent promoters (pl, plll and pIV) that precede alternative first exons that are spliced to the shared downstream exons (exons 2–19). A fourth promoter (pll) is present in the human gene but is not conserved in the mouse gene. The three types of mRNA encoding CIITA (type I, III and IV) are derived from pl, plll and pIV, and they encode protein isoforms of 132, 124 and 121 kDa, respectively. These isoforms differ only at their amino (N) termini. The region shared by all three isoforms contains an acidic domain (DE), three segments that are rich in proline, serine and threonine (PST), a centrally placed GTP-binding domain (GTP), a series of leucine-rich repeats (LRRs) and at least three nuclear-localization signals (NLS1, NLS2 and NLS3). The N-terminal one-third of the protein functions as a transcription-activation domain, whereas the central and carboxy-terminal regions are implicated in self-association and recruitment to the MHC class II enhanceosome. Effector proteins that have been shown to interact with the transcription-activation domain include cyclic-AMP-responsive-element-binding protein (CREB)-binding protein (CBP), p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF), transcription factor IID (TFIID), TFIIB and positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). The type-I-specific N-terminal extension contains a sequence that shows a weak caspase-recruitment domain (CARD) homology. aa, amino acids.

Normal CIITA or C2ta promoter specificities

| Cells of myeloid origin | Cells of lymphoid origin | Cells of non-haematopoietic origin |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Conventional DCs<br>Macrophages<br>(+/- IFN-γ) | B cells<br>T cells (human)<br>pDCs | TECs<br>IFN-γ-stimulated cells |

CIITA or C2TA

pl

pIII

pIV

Exons 2–19

Some melanomas, myelomas and gliomas

Many tumours

Various pathogens

Statins

Dysregulated expression in disease

Figure 3 | Regulation of CIITA expression in health and disease. The three regulatory modules (pl, pIII and pIV) of the class II transactivator gene (CIITA in humans and C2ta in mice) have distinct functions. The promoter pl is a myeloid-cell-specific promoter that is sufficient to drive CIITA expression by conventional dendritic cells (DCs) and interferon-γ (IFN-γ)-activated macrophages. The promoter pIII is a lymphoid-cell-specific promoter that is essential for CIITA expression by B cells and activated human T cells. It is also required for CIITA expression by plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs). The promoter pIV is essential for driving CIITA expression by thymic epithelial cells (TECs) and for mediating induction by IFN-γ in cells of non-haematopoietic origin, such as endothelial cells, epithelial cells, fibroblasts and astrocytes. Various pathogens have developed ways of interfering with the expression of CIITA, often by attenuating the activation of pIV in response to IFN-γ. Statins have been proposed to interfere with the activation of pIV by IFN-γ, but this mechanism is controversial. Many tumours tend to lose MHC class II expression as a result of epigenetic silencing of pIII or pIV. Conversely, certain melanomas, myelomas and gliomas acquire abnormal expression of MHC class II as a result of the constitutive activation of pIII or pIV.

---

reporter-gene assays<sup>42,95</sup>. That pIII is indeed crucial for B cells *in vivo* was shown by the finding that p(III+IV)-deficient mice lack CIITA and MHC class II expression in all B-cell subsets, including B2 cells in the spleen, lymph nodes, thymus, peritoneum and blood, B1 cells in the peritoneum and blood, and marginal-zone B cells in the spleen<sup>6</sup>. The functional consequence of the loss of expression of MHC class II molecules by B cells is exemplified by the failure of p(III+IV)-deficient mice to produce antibodies that are specific for T-CELL-DEPENDENT ANTIGENS<sup>6</sup>.

PLASMACYTOID DCs (pDCs) are a unique and highly specialized type of DC. They have also been referred to as IFN-producing cells, because their most remarkable characteristic is that they are the main source of type I IFNs during viral infection<sup>96</sup>. Surprisingly, pDCs from p(III+IV)-deficient mice are MHC class II⁻ and lack CIITA<sup>6</sup>. This sets pDCs apart from all other DC subsets, which do not show altered CIITA or MHC class II expression in p(III+IV)-deficient mice. Defective MHC class II expression by pDCs results from the deletion of pIII rather than pIV, because CIITA and MHC class II expression are normal in pDCs from pIV-deficient mice<sup>6</sup>. The dependence of pDCs on pIII is consistent with the finding that most C2ta transcripts synthesized by wild-type mouse pDCs<sup>6</sup> and human pDCs (S.L.L. and W.R., unpublished observations) are derived from pIII.

T-CELL-DEPENDENT ANTIGEN CD4⁺ T-cell help is required for the production of high-affinity antibodies specific for this type of antigen.

PLASMACYTOID DC (pDC). A unique type of dendritic cell (DC). These cells are also known as interferon (IFN)-producing cells because they are the main source of type I IFNs (that is, IFN-α and IFN-β) during viral infections.

GLIOBLASTOMA A malignant tumour that is derived from glial cells.

features are directly relevant to their dependence on pIII for driving MHC class II expression. First, compared with other DCs, pDCs have low antigen-presentation and T-cell-stimulatory activity<sup>96</sup>. This is, at least in part, a consequence of the reduced abundance of cell-surface MHC class II molecules, which is likely to result from their use of pIII rather than pI (which is used in conventional DCs). A second difference is associated with the origin of pDCs. Several lines of evidence indicate that, unlike conventional DCs, pDCs could be more closely related to lymphoid cells than myeloid cells<sup>96</sup>. Because pIII is highly specific to B cells, as well as to activated T cells in humans (discussed later), the use of pIII in pDCs could stem from their heritage.

Differences in pIII function between humans and mice. IFN-γ can induce pIII of the CIITA gene in human fibrosarcoma and GLIOBLASTOMA cells<sup>72</sup>. This induction is mediated by a STAT1-dependent enhancer that is situated 5 kilobases (kb) upstream of the transcription-initiation site<sup>72</sup> (FIG. 4). Surprisingly, this IFN-γ responsiveness of pIII is not observed in rodents: pIII is not induced by IFN-γ in primary rat astrocytes<sup>76</sup> or mouse macrophages<sup>7,74</sup>. Moreover, pIII is not sufficient to drive IFN-γ-induced CIITA expression in non-haematopoietic cells of pIV-deficient mice<sup>7</sup>. There is therefore a species-specific difference in the induction of pIII by IFN-γ, probably because the IFN-γ-responsive enhancer that is found upstream of human pIII is not present in the mouse gene.

It is well established that activated human T cells are MHC class II⁺, whereas activated mouse T cells have low or undetectable levels of MHC class II molecules⁹⁷. This results from a difference in the function of pIII, which is activated strongly in human T cells⁹⁸,⁹⁹ but not in mouse T cells⁹⁷. The molecular basis of this differential activation of pIII is not known.

**Regulation of pIII.** The molecular mechanisms that control the B-cell-specific activity of pIII have been studied in human cell lines (FIG. 4). A 320 bp promoter-proximal regulatory region is sufficient to confer B-cell specificity⁴²,⁹⁵. This region contains five sequences that are shown by genomic footprinting to be occupied *in vivo*¹⁰⁰. At least two of these sequences — activation response element 1 (ARE1) and ARE2 — are key regulatory elements in B-cell lines¹⁰⁰,¹⁰¹. CREB1 and activating transcription factor 1 (ATF1) have been proposed to bind ARE2 (REF. 101). However, these factors are expressed widely, by many cell types, and are therefore unlikely to confer B-cell specificity. More recently, an E-box motif, as well as an ETS–IRSE motif (that is, a composite ETS-binding site and IFN-stimulated response element), has been described upstream of the ARE motifs¹⁰². The E-box-binding factor **E47**, the ETS-family member **PU.1** (also known as SPI1) and **IRF4** were found to bind these elements *in vivo* and to function synergistically to promote B-cell-specific activation of pIII (REF. 102). All three factors have previously been shown to control the expression of genes that are required for the development or function of B cells. Notably, synergy between E47, PU.1 and IRF4 has been implicated in the activation of several B-cell-specific genes. Interestingly, a polymorphism that is located adjacent to the ISRE was recently found to be associated with reduced expression of CIITA and increased susceptibility to autoimmune disease¹⁰³.

The pattern of transcription-factor occupation that is observed at pIII *in vivo* differs slightly between activated human T cells and B cells⁹⁸. In addition, the factors that bind the ARE1 and ETS–ISRE motifs in activated T cells differ from those that bind these motifs in B cells⁹⁸,⁹⁹. These differences are likely to reflect that constitutive expression in B cells and induced expression in T cells are mediated by distinct mechanisms.

MHC class II expression is lost during terminal differentiation of B cells into plasma cells, because the CIITA or C2ta gene is switched off⁴⁵,⁴⁶. This repression has been proposed to be mediated by binding of B-lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1 (BLIMP1) to a site in pIII (REFS 104,105). BLIMP1 is a transcriptional repressor that participates in plasma-cell differentiation by repressing B-cell gene-expression programmes. The BLIMP1-binding site in pIII overlaps with the ISRE, indicating that it might repress pIII by interfering with activation of pIII by IRF4 (REF. 102) (FIG. 4).

**Function of pI.** Transcripts encoding CIITA are derived mainly from pI in most DC subsets, including mouse splenic DCs, mouse bone-marrow-derived DCs and

Figure 4 | Molecular regulation of pIII and pIV.  
a | Promoter IV (pIV) is activated in response to the classical interferon-γ (IFN-γ)-mediated signalling pathway. Binding of IFN-γ to its receptor induces the activation of Janus kinase 1 (JAK1) and JAK2, which leads to the phosphorylation, dimerization and nuclear translocation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1). STAT1 binds cooperatively with upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) to an IFN-γ-activated site (GAS)–E-box motif. STAT1 also activates expression of the gene encoding IFN-regulatory factor 1 (IRF1), which then binds (together with IRF2) its cognate IRF element (IRF-E) in pIV. The mechanisms that activate pIV in thymic epithelial cells (TECs) in response to signals from the thymic microenvironment are unknown, but these signals must be distinct from the IFN-γ-mediated induction pathway.  
b | Several regulatory elements have been defined in pIII, and factors that can recognize these elements have been identified in B and T cells by *in vitro*- and *in vivo*-binding studies. A member of the cyclic-AMP-responsive-element-binding protein (CREB) and activating transcription factor (ATF) family binds activation response element 2 (ARE2) in B and T cells. ARE1 is bound by acute myeloid leukaemia 2 (AML2) in B cells and by AML2 and AML3 in T cells. The E-box motif and the ETS–IRSE motif (that is, a composite ETS-binding site and IFN-stimulated response element) are bound by E47, and PU.1 and IRF4, respectively, in B cells. Silencing of pIII in plasma cells is thought to be mediated by binding of B-lymphocyte-induced maturation protein 1 (BLIMP1) to a site that coincides with the ISRE. Site A and site B are potential binding sites for octamer-binding transcription factors (OCTs) and nuclear factor 1 (NF1). The human gene contains an additional distal enhancer that is activated by STAT1 in response to the classical IFN-γ-mediated induction pathway. This distal IFN-γ-inducible enhancer is not conserved in the mouse gene.  
bp, base pairs; kb, kilobases.
human monocyte-derived DCs<sup>7,42,47,73</sup>. This DC specificity was confirmed by the analysis of p(III+IV)-deficient mice, in which only pI remains functional<sup>6</sup>. With the exception of pDCs, MHC class II expression is normal in all DC subsets in p(III+IV)-deficient mice, including bone-marrow-derived DCs, epidermal Langerhans cells and conventional DCs in the spleen, thymus and lymph nodes<sup>6</sup>. So, pI is sufficient to sustain CIITA and MHC class II expression in all conventional DC subsets.

As observed for pIV-deficient mice, macrophages from the p(III+IV)-deficient mice express normal levels of basal and IFN-γ-induced MHC class II expression, indicating that pI is sufficient for maintaining CIITA expression by these cells<sup>6,7</sup>. This was a surprising finding in view of earlier reports showing that IFN-γ induces pIV in macrophage cell lines, peritoneal macrophages and tissue-resident macrophages, such as microglia<sup>66,73–76</sup>. To reconcile these findings, we<sup>6</sup> and others<sup>74</sup> compared the induction of transcription from pI and pIV in macrophages that were stimulated with IFN-γ. The abundance of mRNAs that were derived from each promoter was found to increase rapidly. However, the levels of mRNA that were derived from pIV increased only transiently, whereas mRNA derived from pI reached a level that was tenfold higher (S.L.L. and W.R., unpublished observations), and its expression was sustained for long periods<sup>6,74</sup>. It is therefore the robust activation of pI that is crucial for maintaining CIITA and MHC class II expression in IFN-γ-stimulated macrophages. This observation, together with the finding that pI is the key promoter in all conventional DC subsets, led us to redefine pI as a myeloid-cell-specific promoter.

**Regulation of pI.** The molecular mechanisms that underlie the activation of transcription from pI in DCs remain largely unknown. A 400 bp promoter-proximal region is sufficient to confer specificity for cells of myeloid origin (S.L.L. and W.R., unpublished observations). This region contains several sequence motifs that are potential binding sites for known transcription factors, and footprints in or near some of these motifs have been observed *in vivo* in human monocyte-derived DCs<sup>47</sup>. However, these observations have not yet been reinforced by functional studies. Even less is known about the mechanisms that drive IFN-γ-mediated induction of pI in macrophages. In contrast to pIV, IFN-γ-responsive sequences have not been identified near pI, raising the possibility that pI is not controlled directly by the factors that mediate the classical IFN-γ-mediated signalling pathway. A likely alternative is that enhanced pI function is an indirect consequence of IFN-γ-induced macrophage activation, which could lead to an increase in the concentration or activity of transcription factors that are required for the expression of pI.

The activity of pI is markedly decreased in DCs when their maturation is induced by inflammatory or pathogenic stimuli<sup>47</sup>. Changes in the synthesis, peptide loading and cellular localization of MHC class II molecules are key aspects of DC maturation. The density of cell-surface MHC class II molecules is increased as a result of changes in the intracellular localization and an increase in the stability of pre-existing MHC class II proteins. By contrast, *de novo* MHC class II synthesis is shut down. This is a consequence of transcriptional inactivation of the CIITA or C2ta gene by a global repression mechanism that involves histone deacetylation of a large domain that spans the entire regulatory region of the gene<sup>47</sup>.

**Expression of CIITA in disease**

Pathogens use various strategies to avoid protective immune responses that are mounted by the host. To inhibit the expression of MHC class II molecules and the establishment of CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cell-dependent immune responses, many pathogens have developed ways of interfering with the function or expression of CIITA (TABLE 1). The transcriptional transactivator (Tat) protein of HIV interferes with the function of CIITA by competing for binding to cyclin T1, a component of the transcription elongation factor P-TEFb<sup>31,56</sup>. Varicella-zoster virus<sup>57</sup>, human cytomegalovirus<sup>58,59</sup>, human parainfluenza virus type 3 (REF. 60), *Chlamydia trachomatis*<sup>61</sup>, *Toxoplasma gondii*<sup>62</sup>, *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*<sup>63</sup> and *Mycobacterium bovis*<sup>64</sup> interfere at various known or unknown steps of the pathway that mediates the induction of CIITA expression by IFN-γ. For example, *M. tuberculosis* produces a 19 kDa lipoprotein that inhibits IFN-γ-induced expression of IRF1 and CIITA<sup>63</sup>.

In contrast to pathogens that target CIITA to evade the immune response, another emerging concept is that CIITA might interfere with the activity of certain pathogen-derived products (TABLE 1). For example, CIITA can inhibit the replication of HIV and human T-cell leukaemia virus type 2 (HTLV-2) by blocking the function of the viral transactivators Tat and transcriptional activator X 2 (Tax-2), respectively<sup>106,107</sup>.

The loss of MHC expression contributes to the ability of cancers to escape host immune surveillance<sup>108</sup>. Because malignant cells are eliminated mainly by cytotoxic CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells, the loss of MHC class I expression is observed most frequently. However, because efficient rejection requires CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cell help during both the priming and the effector phases of antitumour responses<sup>109</sup>, silencing of MHC class II expression is also commonly observed. This is particularly relevant for cancers of haematopoietic origin<sup>48,110,111</sup>. For example, the loss of MHC class II expression is a negative prognostic marker in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma<sup>112</sup>. Similarly, the MHC class II expression level in certain mouse B-cell lymphomas correlates with increased immunogenicity and reduced tumorigenicity<sup>113</sup>. There is no clear relationship between MHC class II expression and prognosis for malignancies of non-haematopoietic origin<sup>114</sup>. Nevertheless, non-haematopoietic tumour cells also frequently lose their ability to activate MHC class II genes in response to IFN-γ. The main cause for the loss of constitutive or inducible MHC class II expression by tumour cells
Table 1 | CIITA and host–pathogen interactions

| Pathogen | Effect observed | References |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Inhibition of CIITA and MHC class II expression** |  |  |
| HIV | HIV Tat protein interferes with the function of CIITA by competing with CIITA for binding to cyclin T1, a subunit of the transcription elongation factor P-TEFb | 31,56 |
| Varicella-zoster virus | Inhibits IFN-γ-induced CIITA expression by downregulating the expression of STAT1 and JAK2 | 57 |
| Human cytomegalovirus | Inhibits IFN-γ-induced CIITA expression at a step downstream of STAT1 phosphorylation and nuclear translocation<br>Inhibits IFN-γ-induced CIITA expression by enhancing proteasome mediated degradation of JAK1 | 58<br>59 |
| Human parainfluenza virus type 3 | Inhibits IFN-γ-induced MHC class II expression directly, by interfering with the induction of CIITA expression at a step downstream of STAT1 activation, and indirectly, by inducing type I IFN expression, which targets a step downstream of CIITA | 60 |
| Chlamydia trachomatis | Inhibits IFN-γ-induced CIITA expression by inducing the degradation of USF1 | 61 |
| Toxoplasma gondii | Inhibits IFN-γ-induced CIITA expression by an unknown mechanism | 62 |
| Mycobacterium tuberculosis | Produces a 19 kDa lipoprotein that inhibits IFN-γ-induced IRF1 and CIITA expression | 63 |
| Mycobacterium bovis BCG | Inhibits IFN-γ-induced CIITA expression by a mechanism that depends on NRAMP1 | 64 |
| **Inhibition of viral products by CIITA** |  |  |
| HIV | CIITA inhibits viral replication by blocking the function of the viral transactivator Tat | 106 |
| HTLV-2 | CIITA inhibits viral replication by blocking the function of the viral transactivator Tax-2 | 107 |

BCG, bacillus Calmette–Guérin; CIITA, class II transactivator; HTLV-2, human T-cell leukaemia virus type 2; IFN, interferon; IRF1, IFN-regulatory factor 1; JAK, Janus kinase; NRAMP1, natural resistance-associated macrophage protein 1; P-TEFb, positive transcription elongation factor b; STAT1, signal transducer and activator of transcription 1; Tat, transcriptional transactivator; Tax-2, transcriptional activator X 2; USF1, upstream transcription factor 1.

of haematopoietic or non-haematopoietic origin is epigenetic silencing of the gene encoding CIITA^{48–50}. The mechanism that is implicated most frequently is DNA methylation at pIII or pIV.

By contrast, several tumours acquire abnormal MHC class II expression. Myeloma cells — the malignant counterpart of plasma cells — tend to reactivate MHC class II genes as a result of constitutive activation of transcription from pIV (REF. 115). MHC class II⁺ myelomas might escape immune surveillance in vivo by various mechanisms, including induction of T-cell anergy through a lack of co-stimulatory molecule expression^{116}. Certain melanomas and gliomas acquire MHC class II molecules as a result of constitutive activation of pIII (REFS 70,117) or both pIII and pIV (REF. 71). The existence of these highly malignant MHC class II⁺ tumours indicates that the loss of MHC class II expression is not always essential for immune escape.

The induction of MHC class II expression by non-haematopoietic cells is closely associated with pathological immune responses^{118}. It is typically observed at the surface of the parenchyma and endothelia of various organs during allograft rejection, as well as in many autoimmune and inflammatory disorders. Although it has not been shown in most situations, this aberrant MHC class II expression is thought to contribute to disease pathology. A good example is provided by a mouse model of GLOMERULONEPHRITIS in which disease development strictly depends on MHC class II expression by renal parenchymal cells^{119}. This is probably mediated by pIV, which is induced by most inflammatory stimuli in the kidney^{82}. Given its key role in driving CIITA expression in non-haematopoietic cells, pIV is likely to be implicated in most pathological situations that involve upregulation of MHC class II expression by non-bone-marrow-derived cells.

### Therapeutic modulation of CIITA expression

Detailed knowledge of the regulation of CIITA expression paves the way for the development of novel therapeutic strategies aimed at the modulation of MHC-class-II-mediated antigen presentation. Inhibition of CIITA expression might be an advantage in situations in which upregulation of MHC class II expression is detrimental, such as after transplantation or in autoimmune disease. Conversely, increasing CIITA expression could be beneficial for promoting tumour immunogenicity or bolstering protective immune responses to certain pathogens, particularly those that downregulate MHC class II expression.

STATINS (which are hydroxymethylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA)-reductase inhibitors) have recently received considerable attention because they

EXPERIMENTAL AUTOIMMUNE ENCEPHALOMYELITIS (EAE). An experimental model of multiple sclerosis that is induced by immunization of susceptible animals with myelin-derived antigens, such as myelin basic protein, proteolipid protein or myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein.

COLLAGEN-INDUCED ARTHRITIS (CIA). An experimental model of rheumatoid arthritis that is induced by immunization of susceptible animals with collagen type II.

DNA-ALKYLATING AGENT An anticancer drug that is cytotoxic to rapidly proliferating cells because it leads to the alkylation of bases in DNA.

have anti-inflammatory properties that might be beneficial for the treatment of autoimmune diseases. They were found to protect against EXPERIMENTAL AUTOIMMUNE ENCEPHALOMYELITIS<sup>66</sup>. A protective effect was also documented for COLLAGEN-INDUCED ARTHRITIS<sup>120</sup>, although discordant results were reported by others<sup>121</sup>. Furthermore, a recent clinical trial in patients with rheumatoid arthritis showed a weak anti-inflammatory trend in treated individuals<sup>122</sup>. The favourable outcome for individuals with autoimmune disorders was proposed to result, among other effects, from an inhibition of MHC class II expression. However, the mechanism that has been proposed to be responsible for this inhibition is controversial; the initial hypothesis that statins attenuate IFN-γ-induced CIITA expression<sup>65,66</sup> was recently challenged by evidence indicating that another mechanism — namely, an impairment of cell-surface MHC class II expression levels — is likely to be responsible<sup>123</sup>.

The idea that MHC class II expression by tumour cells can increase their immunogenicity has fostered hopes that it might be possible to boost antitumour immune responses using tumour cells that have been rendered MHC class II<sup>+</sup> using CIITA expression vectors. Although this was not successful in a model of lung carcinoma<sup>124</sup>, this strategy increased tumour immunogenicity and rejection, and elicited tumour-antigen-specific immune memory, in a mouse model of mammary adenocarcinoma<sup>125</sup>. Promising results were also obtained by combining overexpression of CIITA with downregulation of Ii expression<sup>126</sup>. Such MHC class II<sup>+</sup>Ii<sup>-</sup> tumour cells have been shown to be both prophylactic and therapeutic in studies of primary and metastatic cancers in mice<sup>127</sup>. Downregulation of Ii expression was proposed to increase the potency of antitumour vaccines by favouring the presentation of endogenous antigens over exogenous antigens. However, the precise pathway that is involved in the presentation of endogenous antigens by MHC class II<sup>+</sup>Ii<sup>-</sup> tumour cells remains unclear<sup>128</sup>. The efficacy of such approaches can be increased by combining them with adjuvant therapies, such as radiotherapy and administration of cytokines, to strengthen the antitumour response<sup>129</sup>.

Another promising anticancer strategy relies on therapeutic monoclonal antibodies specific for MHC class II molecules. Although encouraging preclinical results have been obtained using this approach<sup>130</sup>, clinical trials (mainly for the treatment of B-cell

malignancies) have not lived up to expectations so far<sup>131</sup>. However, the efficacy of this new treatment might benefit from an improved understanding of the regulation of MHC class II expression in cancer cells. One could, for example, envisage coupling MHC-class-II-specific antibodies with drugs, such as DNA-ALKYLATING AGENTS, that prevent silencing of the CIITA gene, and this could prevent methylation-dependent silencing of pIII in lymphomas<sup>49</sup>.

### Concluding remarks

We have acquired a remarkably detailed understanding of how CIITA expression is regulated *in vivo* by multiple promoters that have different cell-type-specific and inducible activities. However, several important gaps in our knowledge remain. What are the signal-transduction pathways and transcription factors that activate pIV in TECs? Is pIII activated through the same pathways or distinct pathways in B cells and pDCs? What is responsible for the activation of pI in DCs? How is pI turned on in IFN-γ-activated macrophages? What mechanisms trigger silencing of the gene encoding CIITA when B cells differentiate into plasma cells and when DCs mature? And last, which features of the CIITA or C2ta gene confer its high propensity to undergo epigenetic silencing in tumour cells? Answering many of these questions will be particularly challenging, because we are hampered by the absence of suitable TEC, DC and pDC lines that accurately reproduce the pattern of MHC class II gene regulation that is shown by the corresponding primary cells *in vivo*. Consequently, studying the regulation of CIITA expression in these cells will require time-consuming *in vivo* approaches or sophisticated *in vitro* experiments with small numbers of primary cells. Nevertheless, we can expect active progress in these areas, because research into the molecular mechanisms that regulate MHC class II expression is driven by the combined interests of both fundamental biologists and clinicians who are studying the function of the adaptive immune system in health and its dysregulation in disease. We anticipate that this research will set the stage for the development of novel therapeutic interventions based on the modulation of MHC class II expression, including strategies that are aimed at boosting protective immune responses to pathogens and tumours or at attenuating unwanted immune responses during transplantation, and autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.

1. Klein, C., Lisowska-Grospierre, B., LeDeist, F., Fischer, A. & Griscelli, C. Major histocompatibility complex class II deficiency: clinical manifestations, immunologic features, and outcome. *J. Pediatr.* **123**, 921–928 (1993).
2. Reith, W. & Mach, B. The bare lymphocyte syndrome and the regulation of MHC expression. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **19**, 331–373 (2001).
3. Chang, C. H., Guerder, S., Hong, S. C., van Ewijk, W. & Flavell, R. A. Mice lacking the MHC class II transactivator (CIITA) show tissue-specific impairment of MHC class II expression. *Immunity* **4**, 167–178 (1996). This paper, together with reference 5, describes the generation of C2ta-knockout mice, which have a global loss of MHC class II expression, thereby reproducing the phenotype of patients with BLS.
4. Clausen, B. E. *et al.* Residual MHC class II expression on mature dendritic cells and activated B cells in RFX5-deficient mice. *Immunity* **8**, 143–155 (1998).
5. Itoh-Lindstrom, Y. *et al.* Reduced IL-4-, lipopolysaccharide-, and IFN-γ-induced MHC class II expression in mice lacking class II transactivator due to targeted deletion of the GTP-binding domain. *J. Immunol.* **163**, 2425–2431 (1999).
6. LeibundGut-Landmann, S., Walburger, J. M., Reis e Sousa, C., Acha-Orbea, H. & Reith, W. MHC class II expression is differentially regulated in plasmacytoid and conventional dendritic cells. *Nature Immunol.* **5**, 899–908 (2004). This paper describes the generation of mice that lack pIII and pIV of the C2ta gene and shows that pDCs differ from all other DC subsets with respect to C2ta promoter usage. The results define pI as a myeloid-cell-specific promoter and pIII as a lymphoid-cell-specific promoter.
7. Waldburger, J. M., Suter, T., Fontana, A., Acha-Orbea, H. & Reith, W. Selective abrogation of major histocompatibility complex class II expression on extrahematopoietic cells in mice lacking promoter IV of the class II transactivator gene. *J. Exp. Med.* **194**, 393–406 (2001). This paper describes the generation of mice that lack pIV of the C2ta gene. It shows that this promoter is essential for driving IFN-γ-induced CIITA and MHC class II expression by non-haematopoietic cells but is dispensable for this function in macrophages.

REVIEWs

1. Ting, J. P. & Trowsdale, J. Genetic control of MHC class II expression. *Cell* **109**, S21–S33 (2002).
2. Boss, J. M. & Jensen, P. E. Transcriptional regulation of the MHC class II antigen presentation pathway. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* **15**, 105–111 (2003).
3. LeibundGut-Landmann, S. *et al.* Specificity and expression of CIITA, the master regulator of MHCII genes. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **34**, 1513–1525 (2004).
4. Krawczyk, M. *et al.* Long distance control of MHC class II expression by multiple distal enhancers regulated by regulatory factor X complex and CIITA. *J. Immunol.* **173**, 6200–6210 (2004).
5. Masternak, K., Peyraud, N., Krawczyk, M., Barras, E. & Reith, W. Chromatin remodeling and extragenic transcription at the MHC class II locus control region. *Nature Immunol.* **4**, 132–137 (2003).

References 11 and 12 show that CIITA is recruited not only to MHC class II promoters but also to multiple distant enhancers that are scattered throughout the MHC class II locus. One of these is situated in a locus control region that is found upstream of the HLA-DRA gene.

6. Accolla, R. S. Human B cell variants immunoselected against a single la antigen subset have lost expression in several la antigen subsets. *J. Exp. Med.* **157**, 1053–1058 (1983).
7. Accolla, R. S. *et al.* *air-1*, a newly found locus on mouse chromosome 16 encoding a trans-acting activator factor for MHC class II gene expression. *J. Exp. Med.* **164**, 369–374 (1986).
8. Steimle, V., Otten, L. A., Zufferey, M. & Mach, B. Complementation cloning of an MHC class II transactivator mutated in hereditary MHC class II deficiency. *Cell* **75**, 135–146 (1993).

This seminal work describes isolation of the gene encoding CIITA and shows that it is mutated in certain in vitro-generated MHC class II− cell lines and in patients with BLS who are classified in complementation group A.

9. Steimle, V. *et al.* A novel DNA binding regulatory factor is mutated in primary MHC class II deficiency (bare lymphocyte syndrome). *Genes Dev.* **9**, 1021–1032 (1995).
10. Masternak, K. *et al.* A gene encoding a novel RFX-associated transactivator is mutated in the majority of MHC class II deficiency patients. *Nature Genet.* **20**, 273–277 (1998).
11. Durand, B. *et al.* RFXAP, a novel subunit of the RFX DNA binding complex is mutated in MHC class II deficiency. *EMBO J.* **16**, 1045–1055 (1997).
12. Nagarajan, U. M. *et al.* RFX-B is the gene responsible for the most common cause of the bare lymphocyte syndrome, an MHC class II immunodeficiency. *Immunity* **10**, 153–162 (1999).

References 16–19 describe isolation of the genes encoding the RFXANK, RFX5 and RFXAP subunits of the RFX complex. They also show that these genes are mutated in patients with BLS who are classified in complementation group B, C and D, respectively.

13. Reith, W. *et al.* Congenital immunodeficiency with a regulatory defect in MHC class II gene expression lacks a specific HLA-DR promoter binding protein, RF-X. *Cell* **53**, 897–906 (1988).
14. Moreno, C. S., Beresford, G. W., Louis-Plence, P., Morris, A. C. & Boss, J. M. CREB regulates MHC class II expression in a CIITA-dependent manner. *Immunity* **10**, 143–151 (1999).
15. Mantovani, R. The molecular biology of the CCAAT-binding factor NF-Y. *Gene* **239**, 15–27 (1999).
16. Muhlethaler-Mottet, A. *et al.* The S box of major histocompatibility complex class II promoters is a key determinant for recruitment of the transcriptional co-activator CIITA. *J. Biol. Chem.* **279**, 40529–40535 (2004).
17. Masternak, K. *et al.* CIITA is a transcriptional coactivator that is recruited to MHC class II promoters by multiple synergistic interactions with an enhanceosome complex. *Genes Dev.* **14**, 1156–1166 (2000).

This paper was the first to show that CIITA is physically recruited to the promoters of its target genes *in vivo* and *in vitro* through multiple protein–protein interactions with an enhanceosome complex formed by DNA-bound transcription factors.

18. Zika, E. & Ting, J. P. Epigenetic control of MHC class II: interplay between CIITA and histone-modifying enzymes. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* **17**, 58–64 (2005).
19. Ting, J. P. & Davis, B. K. CATERPILLER: a novel gene family important in immunity, cell death, and diseases. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **23**, 387–414 (2005).

20. Inohara, N., Chamaillard, M., McDonald, C. & Nunez, G. NOD-LRR proteins: role in host–microbial interactions and inflammatory disease. *Annu. Rev. Biochem.* **74**, 355–383 (2005).
21. Fontes, J. D., Jiang, B. & Peterlin, B. M. The class II transactivator CIITA interacts with the TBP-associated factor TAFII32. *Nucleic Acids Res.* **25**, 2522–2528 (1997).
22. Mahanta, S. K., Scholl, T., Yang, F. C. & Strominger, J. L. Transactivation by CIITA, the type II bare lymphocyte syndrome-associated factor, requires participation of multiple regions of the TATA box binding protein. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **94**, 6324–6329 (1997).
23. Spilianakis, C. *et al.* CIITA regulates transcription onset via Ser5-phosphorylation of RNA Pol II. *EMBO J.* **22**, 5125–5136 (2003).
24. Kanazawa, S., Okamoto, T. & Peterlin, B. M. Tat competes with CIITA for the binding to P-TEFb and blocks the expression of MHC class II genes in HIV infection. *Immunity* **12**, 61–70 (2000).
25. Mudhasani, R. & Fontes, J. D. The class II transactivator requires brahma-related gene 1 to activate transcription of major histocompatibility complex class II genes. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **22**, 5019–5026 (2002).
26. Raval, A. *et al.* Transcriptional coactivator, CIITA, is an acetyltransferase that bypasses a promoter requirement for TAFII250. *Mol. Cell* **7**, 105–115 (2001).
27. Tosi, G., Jabrane-Ferrat, N. & Peterlin, B. M. Phosphorylation of CIITA directs its oligomerization, accumulation and increased activity on MHCII promoters. *EMBO J.* **21**, 5467–5476 (2002).
28. Sisk, T. J., Nickerson, K., Kwok, R. P. & Chang, C. H. Phosphorylation of class II transactivator regulates its interaction ability and transactivation function. *Int. Immunol.* **15**, 1195–1205 (2003).
29. Greer, S. F. *et al.* Serine residues 286, 288, and 293 within the CIITA: a mechanism for down-regulating CIITA activity through phosphorylation. *J. Immunol.* **173**, 376–383 (2004).
30. Greer, S. F., Zika, E., Conti, B., Zhu, X. S. & Ting, J. P. Enhancement of CIITA transcriptional function by ubiquitin. *Nature Immunol.* **4**, 1074–1082 (2003).
31. Waldburger, J. M. *et al.* Promoter IV of the class II transactivator gene is essential for positive selection of CD4+ T cells. *Blood* **101**, 3550–3559 (2003).

This paper shows that pIV of the *C2ta* gene is essential for driving positive selection of CD4+ T cells, because it is required for the induction of CIITA and MHC class II expression in TECs.

32. Steimle, V., Siegrist, C.-A., Mottet, A., Lisowska-Grospierre, B. & Mach, B. Regulation of MHC class II expression by interferon-γ mediated by the transactivator gene CIITA. *Science* **265**, 106–109 (1994).

This seminal paper was the first to show that IFN-γ-induced MHC class II expression is mediated by the induction of CIITA expression.

33. Dong, Y., Rohn, W. M. & Benveniste, E. N. IFN-γ regulation of the type IV class II transactivator promoter in astrocytes. *J. Immunol.* **162**, 4731–4739 (1999).
34. Muhlethaler-Mottet, A., Di Berardino, W., Otten, L. A. & Mach, B. Activation of the MHC class II transactivator CIITA by interferon-γ requires cooperative interaction between Stat1 and USF-1. *Immunity* **8**, 157–166 (1998).

This paper was the first detailed description of the molecular mechanisms that mediate the IFN-γ induction of pIV of CIITA.

35. Muhlethaler-Mottet, A., Otten, L. A., Steimle, V. & Mach, B. Expression of MHC class II molecules in different cellular and functional compartments is controlled by differential usage of multiple promoters of the transactivator CIITA. *EMBO J.* **16**, 2851–2860 (1997).

This key paper was the first to describe how multiple promoters with different functions drive transcription of the gene encoding CIITA.

36. van den Elsen, P. J. *et al.* Lack of CIITA expression is central to the absence of antigen presentation functions of trophoblast cells and is caused by methylation of the IFN-γ inducible promoter (PIV) of CIITA. *Hum. Immunol.* **61**, 850–862 (2000).
37. Morris, A. C., Spangler, W. E. & Boss, J. M. Methylation of class II trans-activator promoter IV: a novel mechanism of MHC class II gene control. *J. Immunol.* **164**, 4143–4149 (2000).

References 43 and 44 report that the gene encoding CIITA is irreversibly silenced in trophoblasts by DNA methylation of pIV.

38. Silacci, P., Mottet, A., Steimle, V., Reith, W. & Mach, B. Developmental extinction of major histocompatibility class II gene expression in plasmocytes is mediated by silencing of the transactivator gene CIITA. *J. Exp. Med.* **180**, 1329–1336 (1994).

46. Sartoris, S., Tosi, G., De Lerma, B., Cestari, T. & Accolla, R. S. Active suppression of the class II transactivator-encoding AIR-1 locus is responsible for the lack of major histocompatibility complex class II gene expression observed during differentiation from B cells to plasma cells. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **26**, 2456–2460 (1996).
47. Landmann, S. *et al.* Maturation of dendritic cells is accompanied by rapid transcriptional silencing of class II transactivator (CIITA) expression. *J. Exp. Med.* **194**, 379–392 (2001).
48. Holling, T. M., Schooten, E., Langerak, A. W. & van den Elsen, P. J. Regulation of MHC class II expression in human T-cell malignancies. *Blood* **103**, 1438–1444 (2004).
49. Murphy, S. P., Holtz, R., Lewandowski, N., Tomasi, T. B. & Fuji, H. DNA alkylating agents alleviate silencing of class II transactivator gene expression in L1210 lymphoma cells. *J. Immunol.* **169**, 3085–3093 (2002).
50. van der Stoep, N., Biesta, P., Quinten, E. & van den Elsen, P. J. Lack of IFN-γ-mediated induction of the class II transactivator (CIITA) through promoter methylation is predominantly found in developmental tumor cell lines. *Int. J. Cancer* **97**, 501–507 (2002).
51. Lee, Y. J. *et al.* TGF-β suppresses IFN-γ induction of class II MHC gene expression by inhibiting class II transactivator messenger RNA expression. *J. Immunol.* **158**, 2065–2075 (1997).
52. Rohn, W., Tang, L. P., Dong, Y. & Benveniste, E. N. IL-1β inhibits IFN-γ-induced class II MHC expression by suppressing transcription of the class II transactivator gene. *J. Immunol.* **162**, 886–896 (1999).
53. O'Keefe, G. M., Nguyen, V. T. & Benveniste, E. N. Class II transactivator and class II MHC gene expression in microglia: modulation by the cytokines TGF-β, IL-4, IL-13 and IL-10. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **29**, 1275–1285 (1999).
54. Navarrete, S. A., Kehlen, A., Schutte, W., Langner, J. & Riemann, D. Regulation by transforming growth factor-β1 of class II mRNA and protein expression in fibroblast-like synoviocytes from patients with rheumatoid arthritis. *Int. Immunol.* **10**, 601–607 (1998).
55. Dong, Y., Tang, L., Letterio, J. J. & Benveniste, E. N. The Smad3 protein is involved in TGF-β inhibition of class II transactivator and class II MHC expression. *J. Immunol.* **167**, 311–319 (2001).
56. Okamoto, H., Asamitsu, K., Nishimura, H., Kamatani, N. & Okamoto, T. Reciprocal modulation of transcriptional activities between HIV-1 Tat and MHC class II transactivator CIITA. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* **279**, 494–499 (2000).
57. Abendroth, A. *et al.* Modulation of major histocompatibility class II protein expression by varicella-zoster virus. *J. Virol.* **74**, 1900–1907 (2000).
58. Le Roy, E., Muhlethaler-Mottet, A., Davrinche, C., Mach, B. & Davignon, J. L. Escape of human cytomegalovirus from HLA-DR-restricted CD4+ T-cell response is mediated by repression of γ interferon-induced class II transactivator expression. *J. Virol.* **73**, 6582–6589 (1999).
59. Miller, D. M. *et al.* Human cytomegalovirus inhibits major histocompatibility complex class II expression by disruption of the Jak/Stat pathway. *J. Exp. Med.* **187**, 675–683 (1998).
60. Gao, J. *et al.* Human parainfluenza virus type 3 inhibits γ interferon-induced major histocompatibility complex class II expression directly and by inducing α/β interferon. *J. Virol.* **75**, 1124–1131 (2001).
61. Zhong, G., Fan, T. & Liu, L. *Chlamydia* inhibits interferon γ-inducible major histocompatibility complex class II expression by degradation of upstream stimulatory factor 1. *J. Exp. Med.* **189**, 1931–1938 (1999).
62. Luder, C. G. *et al.* *Toxoplasma gondii* inhibits MHC class II expression in neural antigen-presenting cells by down-regulating the class II transactivator CIITA. *J. Neuroimmunol.* **134**, 12–24 (2003).
63. Pai, R. K., Convery, M., Hamilton, T. A., Boom, W. H. & Harding, C. V. Inhibition of IFN-γ-induced class II transactivator expression by a 19-kDa lipoprotein from *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*: a potential mechanism for immune evasion. *J. Immunol.* **171**, 175–184 (2003).
64. Wojciechowski, W., DeSanctis, J., Skamene, E. & Radzioch, D. Attenuation of MHC class II expression in macrophages infected with *Mycobacterium bovis* bacillus Calmette–Guerin involves class II transactivator and depends on the *Nramp1* gene. *J. Immunol.* **163**, 2688–2696 (1999).
65. Kwak, B., Mulhaupt, F., Myit, S. & Mach, F. Statins as a newly recognized type of immunomodulator. *Nature Med.* **6**, 1399–1402 (2000).
66. Youssef, S. *et al.* The HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor, atorvastatin, promotes a Th2 bias and reverses paralysis in central nervous system autoimmune disease. *Nature* **420**, 78–84 (2002).

67. De Lerma, B. A., Procopio, F. A., Mortara, L., Tosi, G. & Accolla, R. S. The MHC class II transactivator (CIITA) mRNA stability is critical for the HLA class II gene expression in myelomonocytic cells. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **35**, 603–611 (2005).

68. Schnappauf, F. *et al.* N-terminal destruction signals lead to rapid degradation of the major histocompatibility complex class II transactivator CIITA. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **33**, 2337–2347 (2003).

69. Nickerson, K. *et al.* Dendritic cell-specific MHC class II transactivator contains a caspase recruitment domain that confers potent transactivation activity. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 19089–19093 (2001).

70. Deffrennes, V. *et al.* Constitutive expression of MHC class II genes in melanoma cell lines results from the transcription of class II transactivator abnormally initiated from its B cell-specific promoter. *J. Immunol.* **167**, 98–106 (2001).

71. Goodwin, B. L. *et al.* Varying functions of specific major histocompatibility class II transactivator promoter III and IV elements in melanoma cell lines. *Cell Growth Differ.* **12**, 327–335 (2001).

72. Piskurich, J. F., Linhoff, M. W., Wang, Y. & Ting, J. P. Two distinct γ interferon-inducible promoters of the major histocompatibility complex class II transactivator gene are differentially regulated by STAT1, interferon regulatory factor 1, and transforming growth factor β. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **19**, 431–440 (1999). This paper shows that plll of the human CIITA gene can be induced by IFN-γ through a STAT1-dependent enhancer that is situated 5 kb upstream.

73. Suter, T. *et al.* Dendritic cells and differential usage of the MHC class II transactivator promoters in the central nervous system in experimental autoimmune encephalitis. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **30**, 794–802 (2000).

74. Pai, R. K., Askew, D., Boom, W. H. & Harding, C. V. Regulation of class II MHC expression in APCs: roles of types I, III, and IV class II transactivator. *J. Immunol.* **169**, 1326–1333 (2002). Together with reference 6, this detailed kinetic study of CIITA expression shows that transcription from pl is sustained in IFN-γ-stimulated macrophages, whereas plV is induced only transiently.

75. O’Keefe, G. M., Nguyen, V. T., Ping Tang, L. L. & Benveniste, E. N. IFN-γ regulation of class II transactivator promoter IV in macrophages and microglia: involvement of the suppressors of cytokine signaling-1 protein. *J. Immunol.* **166**, 2260–2269 (2001).

76. Nikcevich, K. M., Piskurich, J. F., Hellendall, R. P., Wang, Y. & Ting, J. P. Differential selectivity of CIITA promoter activation by IFN-γ and IRF-1 in astrocytes and macrophages: CIITA promoter activation is not affected by TNF-α. *J. Neuroimmunol.* **99**, 195–204 (1999).

77. Starr, T. K., Jameson, S. C. & Hogquist, K. A. Positive and negative selection of T cells. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* **21**, 139–176 (2003).

78. Martinic, M. M. *et al.* Efficient T cell repertoire selection in tetraparental chimeric mice independent of thymic epithelial MHC. *Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA* **100**, 1861–1866 (2003).

79. Xi, H. *et al.* Co-occupancy of the interferon regulatory element of the class II transactivator (CIITA) type IV promoter by interferon regulatory factors 1 and 2. *Oncogene* **18**, 5889–5903 (1999).

80. Xi, H., Goodwin, B., Shepherd, A. T. & Blanck, G. Impaired class II transactivator expression in mice lacking interferon regulatory factor-2. *Oncogene* **20**, 4219–4227 (2001).

81. Morris, A. C., Beresford, G. W., Mooney, M. R. & Boss, J. M. Kinetics of a γ interferon response: expression and assembly of CIITA promoter IV and inhibition by methylation. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **22**, 4781–4791 (2002). This paper reports a detailed time course of the events that lead to the activation of plV by IFN-γ.

82. Takeuchi, O. *et al.* Differential usage of class II transactivator promoters Pl and PIV during inflammation and injury in kidney. *J. Am. Soc. Nephrol.* **14**, 2823–2832 (2003).

83. Pattenden, S. G., Klose, R., Karaskov, E. & Bremner, R. Interferon-γ-induced chromatin remodeling at the CIITA locus is BRG1 dependent. *EMBO J.* **21**, 1978–1986 (2002).

84. Holtz, R., Choi, J. C., Petroff, M. G., Piskurich, J. F. & Murphy, S. P. Class II transactivator (CIITA) promoter methylation does not correlate with silencing of CIITA transcription in trophoblasts. *Biol. Reprod.* **69**, 915–924 (2003).

85. Murphy, S. P., Choi, J. C. & Holtz, R. Regulation of major histocompatibility complex class II gene expression in trophoblast cells. *Reprod. Biol. Endocrinol.* **2**, 52 (2004).

86. Anderson, G., Jenkinson, E. J., Moore, N. C. & Owen, J. J. MHC class II-positive epithelium and mesenchyme cells are both required for T-cell development in the thymus. *Nature* **362**, 70–73 (1993).

87. Anderson, G. & Jenkinson, E. J. Lymphostromal interactions in thymic development and function. *Nature Rev. Immunol.* **1**, 31–40 (2001).

88. Anderson, G., Hare, K. J., Platt, N. & Jenkinson, E. J. Discrimination between maintenance- and differentiation-inducing signals during initial and intermediate stages of positive selection. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **27**, 1838–1842 (1997).

89. Honey, K. & Rudensky, A. The plV-otal class II transactivator promoter regulates major histocompatibility complex class II expression in the thymus. *J. Exp. Med.* **194**, F15–F18 (2001).

90. Rigaud, G. *et al.* Induction of CIITA and modification of in vivo HLA-DR promoter occupancy in normal thymic epithelial cells treated with IFN-γ: similarities and distinctions with respect to HLA-DR-constitutive B cells. *J. Immunol.* **156**, 4254–4258 (1996).

91. Hare, K. J., Jenkinson, E. J. & Anderson, G. *In vitro* models of T cell development. *Semin. Immunol.* **11**, 3–12 (1999).

92. Dalton, D. K. *et al.* Multiple defects of immune cell function in mice with disrupted interferon-γ genes. *Science* **259**, 1739–1742 (1993).

93. Huang, S. *et al.* Immune response in mice that lack the interferon-γ receptor. *Science* **259**, 1742–1745 (1993).

94. Gill, J. *et al.* Thymic generation and regeneration. *Immunol. Rev.* **195**, 28–50 (2003).

95. Lennon, A. M. *et al.* Isolation of a B-cell-specific promoter for the human class II transactivator. *Immunogenetics* **45**, 266–273 (1997).

96. Colonna, M., Trinchieri, G. & Liu, Y. J. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells in immunity. *Nature Immunol.* **5**, 1219–1226 (2004).

97. Otten, L. A. *et al.* Deregulated MHC class II transactivator expression leads to a strong T<sub>H</sub>2 bias in CD4<sup>+</sup> T lymphocytes. *J. Immunol.* **170**, 1150–1157 (2003).

98. Holling, T. M., van der Stoep, N., Quinten, E. & van den Elsen, P. J. Activated human T cells accomplish MHC class II expression through T cell-specific occupation of class II transactivator promoter III. *J. Immunol.* **168**, 763–770 (2002).

99. Wong, A. W. *et al.* Regulation and specificity of MHC2TA promoter usage in human primary T lymphocytes and cell line. *J. Immunol.* **169**, 3112–3119 (2002). References 98 and 99 establish that plll of the CIITA gene drives CIITA and MHC class II expression by human T cells.

100. Ghosh, N. *et al.* A novel element and a TEF-2-like element activate the major histocompatibility complex class II transactivator in B-lymphocytes. *J. Biol. Chem.* **274**, 32342–32350 (1999).

101. van der Stoep, N., Quinten, E. & van den Elsen, P. J. Transcriptional regulation of the MHC class II transactivator (CIITA) promoter III: identification of a novel regulatory region in the 5′-untranslated region and an important role for cAMP-responsive element binding protein 1 and activating transcription factor-1 in CIITA-promoter III transcriptional activation in B lymphocytes. *J. Immunol.* **169**, 5061–5071 (2002).

102. van der Stoep, N., Quinten, E., Marcondes, R. M. & van den Elsen, P. J. E47, IRF-4, and PU.1 synergize to induce B-cell-specific activation of the class II transactivator promoter III (CIITA-PIII). *Blood* **104**, 2849–2857 (2004). This paper shows that the B-cell-specific activity of plll of the CIITA gene can be attributed to binding of the transcription factors E47, IRF4 and PU.1.

103. Swanberg, M. *et al.* MHC2TA is associated with differential MHC molecule expression and susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis and myocardial infarction. *Nature Genet.* **37**, 486–494 (2005).

104. Piskurich, J. F. *et al.* BLIMP-1 mediates extinction of major histocompatibility class II transactivator expression in plasma cells. *Nature Immunol.* **1**, 526–532 (2000).

105. Ghosh, N., Gyory, I., Wright, G., Wood, J. & Wright, K. L. Positive regulatory domain I binding factor 1 silences class II transactivator expression in multiple myeloma cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* **276**, 15264–15268 (2001).

106. Accolla, R. S., Mazza, S., De Lerma, B. A., De, M. A. & Tosi, G. The HLA class II transcriptional activator blocks the function of HIV-1 Tat and inhibits viral replication. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **32**, 2783–2791 (2002).

107. Casoli, C. *et al.* The MHC class II transcriptional activator (CIITA) inhibits HTLV-2 viral replication by blocking the function of the viral transactivator Tax-2. *Blood* **103**, 995–1001 (2004).

108. Garcia-Lora, A., Algarra, I., Collado, A. & Garrido, F. Tumour immunology, vaccination and escape strategies. *Eur. J. Immunogenet.* **30**, 177–183 (2003).

109. Toes, R. E., Schoenberger, S. P., van der Voort, E. I., Offringa, R. & Melief, C. J. CD40–CD40Ligand interactions and their role in cytotoxic T lymphocyte priming and anti-tumor immunity. *Semin. Immunol.* **10**, 443–448 (1998).

110. Liu, A. *et al.* Regulation of the expression of MHC class I and II by class II transactivator (CIITA) in hematopoietic cells. *Hematol. Oncol.* **17**, 149–160 (1999).

111. Momburg, F., Herrmann, B., Moldenhauer, G. & Moller, P. B-cell lymphomas of high-grade malignancy frequently lack HLA-DR, -DP and -DQ antigens and associated invariant chain. *Int. J. Cancer* **40**, 598–603 (1987).

112. Rimsza, L. M. *et al.* Loss of MHC class II gene and protein expression in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma is related to decreased tumor immunosurveillance and poor patient survival regardless of other prognostic factors: a follow-up study from the Leukemia and Lymphoma Molecular Profiling Project. *Blood* **103**, 4251–4258 (2004).

113. Fuji, H. & Iribe, H. Clonal variation in tumorigenicity of L1210 lymphoma cells: nontumorigenic variants with an enhanced expression of tumor-associated antigen and la antigens. *Cancer Res.* **46**, 5541–5547 (1986).

114. Altomonte, M., Fonsatti, E., Visintin, A. & Maio, M. Targeted therapy of solid malignancies via HLA class II antigens: a new biotherapeutic approach? *Oncogene* **22**, 6564–6569 (2003).

115. Morimoto, Y. *et al.* Inactivation of class II transactivator by DNA methylation and histone deacetylation associated with absence of HLA-DR induction by interferon-γ in haematopoietic tumour cells. *Br. J. Cancer* **90**, 844–852 (2004).

116. Cook, G. & Campbell, J. D. Immune regulation in multiple myeloma: the host–tumour conflict. *Blood Rev.* **13**, 151–162 (1999).

117. Takamura, Y. *et al.* Regulation of MHC class II expression in glioma cells by class II transactivator (CIITA). *Glia* **45**, 392–405 (2004).

118. Guardiola, J. & Maffei, A. Control of MHC class II gene expression in autoimmune, infectious, and neoplastic diseases. *Crit. Rev. Immunol.* **13**, 247–268 (1993).

119. Li, S., Kurts, C., Kontgen, F., Holdsworth, S. R. & Tipping, P. G. Major histocompatibility complex class II expression by intrinsic renal cells is required for crescentic glomerulonephritis. *J. Exp. Med.* **188**, 597–602 (1998). This paper provides convincing evidence that MHC class II expression in renal tissues is required for the development of experimental glomerulonephritis in mice.

120. Leung, B. P. *et al.* A novel anti-inflammatory role for simvastatin in inflammatory arthritis. *J. Immunol.* **170**, 1524–1530 (2003).

121. Palmer, G. *et al.* Assessment of the efficacy of different statins in murine collagen-induced arthritis. *Arthritis Rheum.* **50**, 4051–4059 (2004).

122. McCarey, D. W. *et al.* Trial of Atorvastatin in Rheumatoid Arthritis (TARA): double-blind, randomised placebo-controlled trial. *Lancet* **363**, 2015–2021 (2004).

123. Kuipers, H. F. & van den Elsen, P. J. Statins and control of MHC2TA gene transcription. *Nature Med.* **11**, 365–366 (2005).

124. Martin, B. K., Frelinger, J. G. & Ting, J. P. Combination gene therapy with CD86 and the MHC class II transactivator in the control of lung tumor growth. *J. Immunol.* **162**, 6663–6670 (1999).

125. Meazza, R., Comes, A., Orengo, A. M., Ferrini, S. & Accolla, R. S. Tumor rejection by gene transfer of the MHC class II transactivator in murine mammary adenocarcinoma cells. *Eur. J. Immunol.* **33**, 1183–1192 (2003).

126. Hillman, G. G. *et al.* Generating MHC class II<sup>+</sup>/I<sup>-</sup> phenotype after adenoviral delivery of both an expressible gene for MHC class II inducer and an antisense Ii-RNA construct in tumor cells. *Gene Ther.* **10**, 1512–1518 (2003).

127. Clements, V. K., Baskar, S., Armstrong, T. D. & Ostrand-Rosenberg, S. Invariant chain alters the malignant phenotype of MHC class II<sup>+</sup> tumor cells. *J. Immunol.* **149**, 2391–2396 (1992).

128. Dissanayake, S. K., Tuera, N. & Ostrand-Rosenberg, S. Presentation of endogenously synthesized MHC class II-restricted epitopes by MHC class II cancer vaccines is independent of transporter associated with Ag processing and the proteasome. *J. Immunol.* **174**, 1811–1819 (2005).

REVIEW S

129. Wang, Y. *et al.* Curative antitumor immune response is optimal with tumor irradiation followed by genetic induction of major histocompatibility complex class I and class II molecules and suppression of li protein. *Hum. Gene Ther.* **16**, 187–199 (2005).

This paper describes a mouse model of prostate cancer in which 50% of the mice were cured by combining radiotherapy with gene therapy using CIITA, IFN-γ and IL-2 expression vectors, together with an antisense construct directed towards *li* mRNA. Moreover, 100% of cured animals were resistant to rechallenge with tumour cells.

130. Nagy, Z. A. *et al.* Fully human, HLA-DR-specific monoclonal antibodies efficiently induce programmed death of malignant lymphoid cells. *Nature Med.* **8**, 801–807 (2002).

131. Dechant, M., Bruenke, J. & Valerius, T. HLA class II antibodies in the treatment of hematologic malignancies. *Semin. Oncol.* **30**, 465–475 (2003).

132. Martin, B. K. *et al.* Induction of MHC class I expression by the MHC class II transactivator CIITA. *Immunity* **6**, 591–600 (1997).

133. Gobin, S. J., Peijnenburg, A., Keijsers, V. & van den Elsen, P. J. Site α is crucial for two routes of IFN γ-induced MHC class I transactivation: the ISRE-mediated route and a novel pathway involving CIITA. *Immunity* **6**, 601–611 (1997).

134. Wong, A. W. *et al.* CIITA-regulated plexin-A1 affects T-cell–dendritic cell interactions. *Nature Immunol.* **4**, 891–898 (2003).

135. Nagarajan, U. M., Bushey, A. & Boss, J. M. Modulation of gene expression by the MHC class II transactivator. *J. Immunol.* **169**, 5078–5088 (2002).

136. Zhu, X. S. & Ting, J. P. A 36-amino-acid region of CIITA is an effective inhibitor of CBP: novel mechanism of γ interferon-mediated suppression of collagen α₂(I) and other promoters. *Mol. Cell. Biol.* **21**, 7078–7088 (2001).

137. Yee, C. S. *et al.* Cathepsin E: a novel target for regulation by class II transactivator. *J. Immunol.* **132**, 5528–5534 (2004).

138. Gourley, T. S., Patel, D. R., Nickerson, K., Hong, S. C. & Chang, C. H. Aberrant expression of Fas ligand in mice deficient for the MHC class II transactivator. *J. Immunol.* **168**, 4414–4419 (2002).

139. Sisk, T. J., Gourley, T., Roys, S. & Chang, C. H. MHC class II transactivator inhibits *IL-4* gene transcription by competing with NF-AT to bind the coactivator CREB binding protein (CBP)/p300. *J. Immunol.* **165**, 2511–2517 (2000).

140. Park, W. S. *et al.* T cell expression of CIITA represses Tₕ1 immunity. *Int. Immunol.* **16**, 1355–1364 (2004).

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to B. Mach, in whose laboratory this subject was first initiated. We are also grateful to all current and past members of our laboratories, particularly B. Durand, M. Krawczyk, K. Masternak, A. Muhlethaler-Mottet, L. Otten and V. Steimle, who made pivotal contributions to the field. We thank H. Acha-Orbea, A. Fontana and C. Reis e Sousa for important collaborations. Work in our laboratory was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation, the Roche Research Foundation (Switzerland), the Gabriella Giorgi-Cavaglieri Foundation (Switzerland), the Ernst and Lucie Schmidheiny Foundation (Switzerland), the Swiss Multiple Sclerosis Society and the National Center of Competence in Research on Neural Plasticity and Repair (Switzerland).

Competing interests statement

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Online links

DATABASES

The following terms in this article are linked online to:

Entrez Gene: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=gene

CIITA | CREB | E47 | IFN-γ | IRF1 | IRF2 | IRF4 | NFY | P-TEFb | PU.1 | RFX5 | RFXANK | RFXAP | TFIIIB | TFIID | USF1

OMIM: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=OMIM bare lymphocyte syndrome

FURTHER INFORMATION

Walter Reith’s homepage: http://pathology.unige.ch/patim/group-reith.html

Access to this interactive links box is free online.
