
Review
TRENDS in Microbiology Vol.13 No.12 December 2005
Full text provided by www.sciencedirect.com

**Staphylococcal innate immune evasion**

Suzan H.M. Rooijakkers, Kok P.M. van Kessel and Jos A.G. van Strijp

Eijkman Winkler Institute, UMC Utrecht G04-614, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX Utrecht, the Netherlands

Upon entering the human body, bacteria are confronted with the sophisticated innate defense mechanisms of the human host. From work in recent years it has become obvious that a new and growing family of small and excreted proteins can counteract the antibacterial effects of innate immunity. These highly selective proteins pick out crucial elements of our immune system and inhibit their function. In *Staphylococcus aureus* these proteins act on specific cellular receptors, on antimicrobial peptides and especially on the complement system. The combined action of this growing group of essential virulence factors ascertains efficient innate immune evasion.

The human pathogen *Staphylococcus aureus* is a Gram-positive bacterium that is responsible for a wide variety of community- and hospital-acquired infections. *S. aureus* can exist innocently as a commensal, inhabiting the skin and mucous membranes, but it can also survive in various tissue sites and the blood causing various diseases, including minor skin infections, toxinoses or other systemic, life-threatening illnesses [1,2].

To become a pathogen a bacterium has to be able to survive within its host. This can be achieved by the acquisition of specific adhesion factors, adaptation to intracellular survival or the development of a thick capsule. Recently, an additional mechanism of adaptation and increased virulence has emerged in several bacteria. The acquisition of specific innate immune evasion molecules turns out to be a smart and easily transferable system for a bacterium to obtain these specific advantages. Here, we focus on Staphylococci because a lot of progress has recently been made for this bacterium in understanding the factors that are involved in immune evasion. However, similar proteins and strategies have also been described within other bacterial species. Of the described immune evasion proteins to date, a vast majority appear to have evolved to avoid complement attack [3–6]. Therefore, this article has a strong focus on that part of the innate immune system. First, we describe all elements of the innate immune system that have importance to staphylococci. Thereafter, the mechanisms and molecules that *S. aureus* has acquired to fight this innate immune system are highlighted.

### Innate immunity

Innate immune recognition has been designed to discriminate non-self from self with a limited number of recognition molecules. In this way, virtually all bacteria, viruses, fungi and protozoa are recognized. Importantly, and often overlooked, innate immune recognition is not limited to pathogens. All foreign invaders, probably millions of species, are recognized. The ones that persist for some time and have the capability to divide and cause disease, even for short periods, can become pathogens. In the past decade, many new innate immune recognition molecules have been identified, including the Toll-like receptor family (TLRs), DC-SIGN, mannose binding lectin (MBL) and ficolins, all recognizing evolutionary conserved microbial structures [7,8].

The innate immune system consists of three important effector mechanisms that enable rapid and efficient killing of bacteria: antimicrobial peptides, the complement system and phagocytes. Antimicrobial peptides, such as defensins, directly recognize microbial structures and lyse the bacterial membrane, thereby killing the microbe in seconds to minutes. However, to be effective the concentrations of these peptides have to reach relatively high concentrations. Local high concentrations are found in the gut and inside neutrophilic granules. Related molecules (in function) are amidases and lysozyme [9–11].

The complement system can be activated via three separate pathways that differ in their mode of recognition but all converge at one central step: the cleavage of C3 (Figure 1). Activation of C3 results in the release of the small chemo-attractant molecule C3a and also in the deposition of C3b molecules on the microbial surface. C3b deposition is crucial for the eradication of microbes because C3b and the C3b degradation product iC3b mark the microbe for efficient uptake by phagocytes. The three complement pathways result in the generation of the C3 convertases, surface-associated enzyme complexes that cleave C3. The classical or lectin pathway C3 convertases consist of a C4b molecule that is covalently attached to the microbial surface and a protease C2a, which is weakly bound to C4b. The alternative pathway C3 convertase consists of a surface-bound C3b molecule bound to the protease subunit of factor B (Bb). C4b2a and C3bBb share high structural and functional similarities and are unstable complexes that fall apart after a few minutes. The binding of one C3b molecule to C4b2a or C3bBb changes convertase specificity and generates a C5 convertase. With the cleavage of C5, the important chemo-attractant C5a is released. Together with C3a and bacterial formylated peptides, C5a attracts phagocytes to the site of infection. Furthermore, C5b is needed for the generation of membrane lysing complexes that destroy certain bacteria directly [12,13].

Phagocytes are able to ingest, kill and digest bacteria in minutes. Of these cells, neutrophils are most numerous

Corresponding author: van Strijp, J.A.G. (j.vanstrijp@azu.nl).
Available online 19 October 2005

www.sciencedirect.com 0966-842X/$ - see front matter © 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.tim.2005.10.002
and best equipped to fight bacteria and these are the first cells to arrive at the site of infection. Killing is achieved by a vast array of proteases, lipases, antimicrobial peptides and amidases, by a complete arsenal of highly reactive oxygen radicals and, usually, by the deadly combination of all of these factors working synergistically [14,15].

Innate immune defenses against *S. aureus* are highly dependent on both complement activation and neutrophil-mediated killing. All Gram-positive bacteria and fungi resist the direct complement attack because their cell membrane is shielded by a thick cell wall. Only Gram-negative bacteria, lacking a protective capsule, and virus-infected cells are sensitive to direct complement mediated lysis. Moreover, Gram-positive microorganisms are more resistant to antimicrobial peptides than Gram-negatives. Therefore, killing of *S. aureus* is dependent on reactive oxygen species in neutrophils. For this reason, neutrophils are the main enemy for *S. aureus* within the human host. In comparison to other Gram-positive bacteria that cause serious invasive diseases, staphylococci lack a thick protective capsule to shield off the extreme inflammatory capacity of the cell wall. Recognition of staphylococci by neutrophils is partially direct: TLR2 specifically recognizes lipoteichoic acid (LTA) [16] and formylated peptides are recognized by formylated peptide receptors (FPR) [17]. However, in the absence of antibodies staphylococcal innate recognition is mainly mediated by the complement system. MBL and ficolins recognize peptidoglycan and LTA [18], which results in lectin pathway mediated C3b deposition on staphylococci and the generation of C5a [19]. Moreover, peptidoglycan is a direct activator of the alternative pathway. Deposited C3b is recognized by the complement receptor CR1 and converted into C3bi, which is in turn recognized by CR3; CR3, in particular, contributes strongly to ingestion of *S. aureus*. However, next to C3 fragments, additional signals are needed to achieve sufficient uptake. Both TLR2 signaling and FPR and C5a-receptor (C5aR) signaling are sufficient to provide this extra signal [20,21]. Furthermore, fMet-Leu-Phe and C5a are important triggers for neutrophil recruitment from the blood.

### Innate immune evasion

To cause disease a microbe should in some way be able to divert the effectiveness of the innate immune system. In the past couple of years, it has become evident that staphylococci defend themselves with the aid of a large array of specific and excreted immune-modulating proteins. These proteins act in concert to counteract what the innate immune system tries to achieve. In this way, staphylococci can either stop or delay the detrimental effects of an innate immune attack, creating a window of opportunity to divide and create a microenvironment that enables even better survival. This next section will highlight some elements of the recently discovered strategies for staphylococci.

#### Defensin evasion

Alpha-defensins are peptides that are present in, and secreted by, neutrophils and provide antimicrobial protection mediated by disruption of the integrity of bacterial cell membranes. Staphylokinase (SAK) (16 kDa) is excreted by *S. aureus* and is well-known to activate human plasminogen. Recently, Tarkowski *et al.* showed that binding of defensins by SAK inhibits the bactericidal effect of α-defensins. Notably, the site within staphylokinase that binds α-defensins is different from its plasminogen-binding site. *In vivo*, staphylococcal strains producing SAK were protected against the bactericidal effect of α-defensins. Therefore, SAK-mediated inhibition of α-defensins is considered to be an important defense mechanism of *S. aureus* [22].

Cathelicidin LL-37 is one of the few human bactericidal peptides with potent anti-staphylococcal activity. A major metalloproteinase in *S. aureus*, aureolysin, was found to inactivate LL-37 in a time- and concentration-dependent manner [15,23]. Aureolysin A cleaves LL-37 at positions 19–20, 23–24 and 31–32, thereby destroying the antibacterial activity of LL-37. The authors conclude that aureolysin production by *S. aureus* contributes to the resistance of this pathogen to the human innate immune system of mediated by LL-37. By contrast, the V8 proteinase of *S. aureus* also cleaves LL-37 but the resulting LL-17–37 fragment retained the antibacterial activity against *S. aureus*.

Staphylococci are completely lysozyme resistant and recently the responsible gene, *oatA*, which encodes an integral membrane protein, was identified. The *oatA* deletion mutant had an increased sensitivity to lysozyme. The muramic acid of peptidoglycan of the wild-type strain was O-acetylated at C6-OH, whereas the muramic acid of the *oatA* mutant lacked this modification [24].

An additional way in which staphylococci can modulate their sensitivity to defensins and a broad range of antimicrobial peptides is mediated by altering the composition and net charge of lipoteichoic acid (LTA), wall teichoic acid (WTA) and phospholipids (recently reviewed by Peschel [11]).

#### Evasion of reactive oxygen species attack

Resistance to the metabolic burst of neutrophils can help to gain advantage within the host. All *S. aureus* species are catalase positive. Catalase inactivates toxic hydrogen peroxide and free radicals produced within phagocytic cells following ingestion of microbes [1]. A recently described novel evasion factor is the very molecule that is responsible for the golden appearance of *S. aureus*. Carotenoid pigments have an important role in virulence. Compared with the wild-type (WT) bacterium, a *S. aureus* mutant with disrupted carotenoid biosynthesis is more susceptible to oxidant killing, has impaired neutrophil survival and is less pathogenic in a mouse subcutaneous abscess model. Furthermore, the authors were able to elegantly transfer *S. aureus* carotenoid into *Streptococcus pyogenes* and thereby transfer enhanced oxidant and neutrophil resistance and increased animal virulence [25].

#### Complement evasion

Recently, a vast number of staphylococcal complement evading strategies have been described. In fact, the majority of recently described staphylococcal immune evasion molecules are directed against this element of
Classical
pathway

Lectin
pathway

Alternative
pathway

C1q
SAK
Prot A

C1r
C1s

MBL
Fic
M-2

C4-C2

SCIN

fB-fD

C4b2a

SCIN

C3bBb

C3

Efb

SAK

C3a

C3b

Phagocytosis
Killing
Ag presentation

C4b2a3b

C3bBb3b

Chemotaxis
Phagocyte
activation

C5

SSL-7

C5a

CHIPS

C5b

Membrane
attack
complex

TRENDS in Microbiology

Figure 1. Evasion of complement attack by staphylococci. The complement system (in gray): three activation pathways (TOP) converge in formation of surface-bound C3 convertases that cleave the central complement protein C3, resulting in C3b deposition and formation of C5 convertases. Indicated are the recognition [C1q, MBL (mannose binding lectin) and ficolins (Fic)] and protease components [C1r, C1s, M-2 (MASP-2)] of the classical and lectin pathway. Complement component C2 and C4 and factor B (fB) and factor D (fD) form the two C3 convertases (C4b2a and C3bBb) and these convertases split C3 into microbe-bound C3b (opsonization), liberating C3a. With an extra C3b molecule, C5 convertases are formed (C4b2a3b and C3bBb3b), which initiate the terminal pathway, which in turn causes C5b-9-mediated lysis and generation of C5a. Complement evasion by S. aureus (green boxes): staphylokinase (SAK), staphylococcal protein A (Prot A), staphylococcal complement inhibitor (SCIN), extracellular fibrinogen binding protein (EfB), staphylococcal superantigen like protein 7 (SSL-7) and chemotaxis inhibitory protein of staphylococci (CHIPS) are indicated at the positions at which they interfere with the complement system.

the innate immune system. Figure 1 illustrates the highly diverse strategies of staphylococcal complement inhibitors.
Protein A is well known for its capacity to bind the Fc part of IgG. Through this binding, protein A blocks Fc-receptor mediated phagocytosis and also complement activation via C1q [1]. Recently, it was shown that protein A also recognizes the TNF-receptor 1, a receptor for tumor-necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). The authors also show that the protein A-TNFR1 signaling pathway has a central role in the pathogenesis of staphylococcal pneumonia [26].
Another way by which staphylococci hinder IgG-mediated effector functions is by the excretion of SAK. S. aureus expresses several plasminogen (PLG)-binding receptors at their surface. Surface-bound plasminogen (PLG) can be activated into plasmin (PL) by SAK. Surface-bound plasmin has the ability to cleave both IgG and C3b. Recently, we showed that PL, formed by the conversion of PLG by SAK at physiological concentrations, leads to the removal of important opsonic molecules necessary for recognition by immune cells [27]. PL cleaves human IgG, as well as human C3b and C3bi, from the bacterial cell wall leading to impaired phagocytosis by human neutrophils. PL cleaves IgG at position Lys 222 and thus removes the entire Fc fragment, including the glycosylation site

(Asn 297) that is necessary for recognition by C1q, thereby inhibiting the activation of the classical pathway of complement. In addition, PL-activity created by PLG and SAK led to a decrease of the C3b and C3bi molecules at the staphylococcal surface. PLG+rSAK cleaved C3b in both the α-chain as well as the β-chain. The decrease of C3b molecules will indirectly diminish C3 convertases as well as C5 convertases.
A similar mechanism is employed by the extracellular fibrinogen binding molecule (EfB). EfB is a 15.6 kDa excreted molecule that was described earlier to bind fibrinogen. Recently, Brown and colleagues [28,29] found that EfB binds the C3d region of C3 with an affinity of 240 nM. EfB blocks classical pathway dependent opsonization and subsequent phagocytosis. However, for inhibition of the classical and alternative pathway and phagocytosis, high (microgram) concentrations of EfB were required. Although the present data on EfB do not demonstrate EfB binding to bacterium-bound C3d, a role for EfB in the modulation of C3d-mediated recognition by CR2onB-cells cannot be excluded. The C3b-binding site of EfB is distinct from its fibrinogen binding site, in fact, EfB can bind both molecules simultaneously [28,29].
Factor H is a human complement regulator that accelerates the dissociation of C3 convertases but also

acts as a cofactor for factor I-mediated cleavage of C3b into  
C3bi. Several bacteria are known to bind factor H to their  
surface and, in this way, protect themselves against  
complement attack [6,30]. Such an activity has also been  
reported recently for *S. aureus*, however, the responsible  
protein remains to be identified [31].

The early signs of bacterial invasion, C5a and  
formylated peptides (e.g. fMet-Leu-Phe), are recognized  
by the innate immune system through two related  
receptors on neutrophils, the C5aR and FPR. The excreted  
chemotaxis inhibitory protein of *S. aureus* (CHIPS) is a  
14.1 kDa protein that specifically impairs the response of  
neutrophils and monocytes to formylated peptides and  
C5a. CHIPS inhibits neutrophil recruitment efficiently  
in vitro, whereas in a murine model, high CHIPS  
concentrations were required. In addition, cellular activation by C5a is completely blocked by CHIPS. The CHIPS  
gene is present in 62% of *S. aureus* isolates and the protein  
binds specifically and directly to the C5aR and FPR and  
thereby totally blocks ligand binding and signal transduction. The apparent K<sub>D</sub> values of CHIPS for the C5aR and  
FPR were 1.1 nM and 35.4 nM, respectively [17,32].

The anaphylatoxin C5a has an important role in host  
immunity and pathological inflammatory processes. For  
C5a, a two-site binding model was proposed, in which  
initial binding of C5a to the C5aR N-terminus is followed  
by interaction of its C-terminal tail with an effector  
domain on the receptor. We found that CHIPS exclusively  
binds the C5aR N-terminus. Deletion and mutation  
experiments of the C5aR N-terminus revealed that the  
binding site of CHIPS is contained in a short stretch of 9  
amino acids, of which the aspartic acid residues at position  
10, 15 and 18, plus the glycine at position 12, are crucial  
[33–35].

Staphylococcal complement inhibitor (SCIN) is the  
most efficient complement inhibitor [36]. SCIN is a  
10 kDa, excreted protein that blocks all complement  
pathways: the lectin, classical and alternative pathway.  
SCIN efficiently prevents phagocytosis and killing of  
staphylococci and C5a production. We found SCIN to act  
specifically on surface-bound C3 convertases, which has  
two major consequences. First, SCIN stabilizes both  
C3bBb as well as C4b2a at the surface of the bacterium.  
The convertases are normally unstable, therefore, the  
stabilization of SCIN prevents generation of additional  
convertases. Second, the binding of SCIN to C3bBb and  
C4b2a impairs the enzymatic activity of the convertases.  
SCIN binds activator-bound C3bBb but not C3bB or C3b.  
This, and the fact that SCIN inactivates the convertase,  
suggests that SCIN binds the active pocket of Bb.  
However, earlier studies have clearly indicated that the  
conformation of Bb induced by its cofactor C3b, is crucial  
for displaying activity of the protease subunit Bb. Therefore, a conformational change within C3bBb by SCIN  
cannot be excluded.

The staphylococcal superantigen-like proteins (SSLs)  
are close relatives of the superantigens but are located on  
a separate gene cluster within a 19-kb region of the  
pathogenicity island SaPIn2. Staphylococcal superantigen-like 7 (SSL-7, 23.2 kDa) binds human IgA1 and IgA2  
resulting in an impaired IgA binding to cell surface FcαRI

(CD89). In addition, SSL7 binds complement factor C5  
from human (K<sub>D</sub> = 18 nM), primate, sheep, pig and rabbit  
serum, and inhibits complement-mediated hemolysis and  
serum killing of a Gram-negative organism, *Escherichia coli* [37].

SCIN and SAK have one important element in common:  
both are excreted proteins that act on the surface of the  
bacterium [27,36]. In complement evasion, this is a crucial  
event because complement activation is by itself a surface  
phenomenon. For the bacterium to interfere with this, a  
molecule has to act on the surface. Local depletion of  
soluble complement factors or inhibition of fluid-phase  
activation simply does not help the bacterium to evade  
complement attack efficiently. Moreover, by exclusively  
binding the relatively low amount of surface-bound  
complement proteins, these inhibitors markedly increase  
their efficiency. C5a inhibitors or peptidases are an  
exception to this rule because this is a fluid-phase acting  
molecule (CHIPS, SSL-7) [17,37].

Neutrophil migration evasion  
Leukocyte migration is a key event, both in host defense  
against invading pathogens and in inflammation. Here,  
we discuss two proteins that specifically interfere with  
this aspect of the innate immune system; Eap and CHIPS.  

Recently, extracellular adherence protein (Eap) of *S. aureus* was reported to inhibit leukocyte chemotaxis. Due  
to its direct interactions with the host adhesive proteins  
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), fibrinogen or  
vitronectin, Eap disrupted β(2)-integrin and urokinase  
receptor mediated leukocyte adhesion in vitro. In addition,  
in a mouse model of bacterial peritonitis, Eap-expressing  
*S. aureus* elicited lower neutrophil numbers compared to  
an Eap-negative strain and the isolated protein showed  
similar results in a peritonitis model [38–40].

In addition to its action on the C5aR, CHIPS also blocks  
the action of the formylated peptide receptor (FPR) [17,32].  
N-formyl peptides, such as fMet-Leu-Phe, are some of the  
first identified and most potent chemoattractants for  
phagocytic leukocytes. In contrast to Eukarya and  
Archaea, bacteria start their protein translation with a  
formyl-methionine instead of a normal methionine. After  
protein processing, formylated peptides are formed, which  
are partially degraded by deformylases, but a vast amount  
is released in the bacterial surroundings.

Both the C5aR and FPR belong to the superfamily of  
seven-transmembrane, heterotrimeric G-protein-coupled  
receptors (GPCRs). Although their ligands are highly  
diverse and receptor-specific, all GPCRs have a comparable architecture and share 20–30% amino acid homology,  
mainly in the transmembrane regions. Small molecules,  
such as fMet-Leu-Phe, bind to their GPCR in the  
interhelical region, whereas larger molecules, such as  
C5a, use a two-site motif for binding their GPCR.

Using different monoclonal antibodies, a set of CHIPS-  
spanning peptides and truncated rCHIPS molecules, the  
two activities of CHIPS could be separated on the  
molecule. The C5aR modulating capacity was assigned  
to a not yet completely defined region in the C-terminus of  
CHIPS. The FPR modulating capacity of CHIPS is located  
at the far N-terminal region of the molecule [34]. The two

Box 1. Questions for future research

It is now obvious that *S. aureus* defends itself against innate immune attack by highly specific, small, soluble, excreted, non-toxic proteins that have one or two innate-immune-modulating functions.

As yet, no function has been assigned to most of the open reading frames in *S. aureus* encoding low molecular weight excreted proteins (10–25 kDa). All of the described proteins in this overview fall within this group. How many evasion molecules will be identified in the near future?

Structural analysis of these proteins needs to be performed to reveal their close relationship and to start the identification of homologs and similar families in other species of bacteria.

phenylalanines at position one and three are crucial for FPR-blocking activity.

Surprisingly, three of the molecules described in this review, SCIN, CHIPS and SAK, are genetically clustered on SaPI5, a novel pathogenicity island that is carried by bacteriophages [17,36] (W.J.B. van Wamel *et al.*, unpublished). SaPI5 also carries the gene for staphylococcal enterotoxin A (SEA), a well-known superantigen but also described to inhibit CCR1 and CCR2 [41]. Therefore, SaPI5 carries four innate immune evasion molecules and is considered to be the first innate immune evasion cluster in *S. aureus*. Strikingly, all proteins on SaPI5 are human-specific. Whether infection by this phage determines species specificity of *S. aureus* strains remains to be resolved. The other speculative element of the existence of these human-specific factors is that the relative importance of animal models in bacterial infection with human-specific pathogens has to be considered.

### Conclusion

Here we have summarized a new group of immune evasion molecules in *S. aureus*. Besides being important in staphylococcal pathogenicity, these factors can teach us to recognize crucial steps in innate immunity pathways. Evolution seems to have tuned these factors to act on essential steps in our innate immune system and that specific element is useful in the understanding of fundamentally crucial steps of the innate immune system. It is not only staphylococci that possess such advanced innate immune evasion molecules; other bacterial species have also developed similar strategies to avoid the innate immune system. In particular, several streptococcal species and also meningococci, gonococci, and *Yersinia*, *Bordetella* and *Borrelia* species have evolved strategies that act on similar immunologically important components as the molecules described in this review [3–6]. In analogy to staphylococci we must conclude that, again, the major target molecules for those immune evasion strategies are found within the complement system. Innate immune evasion is by no means restricted to bacteria alone, but similar strategies and molecules have also been described for viruses [42,43].

From a therapeutic point of view, the proteins described in this review have a high potential in anti-inflammatory therapy. By definition, molecules that help to evade acute innate immune mechanism are anti-inflammatory compounds. Their high specificity partially explains their non-toxic nature. Being soluble molecules, it is tempting to speculate that they could be used as injectables in severe acute inflammatory disorders. Pre-existing antibodies against all these proteins will complicate this approach but the targets that are attacked by all of these factors might prove to be essential targets in anti-inflammatory therapy.

In a relatively short period of time we and others have identified an impressive amount of highly specific innate immune evasion molecules in a single microorganism. This is probably just the tip of the iceberg (Box 1). If we can document the complete armory of innate immune evasion mechanisms in *S. aureus*, this will indirectly provide an increasing insight into the fundamentals of bacterial pathophysiology in general. Furthermore, it will provide insight into our own innate immune system and open the way to develop smart and specific anti-inflammatory compounds.

### References

1. Verhoef, J. *et al.* (2004) Staphylococci and other micrococci. In *Infectious Disease* (Cohen, J. and Powderly, W.G., eds), pp. 2119–2132, Elsevier (Mosby)
2. Projan, J. and Novick, R. (1997) The molecular basis of pathogenicity. In *The Staphylococci in Human Disease* (Grossley, K.B. and Archer, G.L., eds), pp. 55–81, Churchill Livingstone
3. Ram, S. *et al.* (1999) The contrasting mechanisms of serum resistance of *Neisseria gonorrhoeae* and group B *Neisseria meningitidis*. *Mol. Immunol.* 36, 915–928
4. Wurzner, R. (1999) Evasion of pathogens by avoiding recognition or eradication by complement, in part via molecular mimicry. *Mol. Immunol.* 36, 249–260
5. Jarva, H. *et al.* (2003) Complement resistance mechanisms of streptococci. *Mol. Immunol.* 40, 95–107
6. Kraiczy, P. and Wurzner, R. (2006) Complement escape of human pathogenic bacteria by acquisition of complement regulators. *Mol. Immunol.* 43, 31–44
7. Beutler, B. (2004) Innate immunity: an overview. *Mol. Immunol.* 40, 845–859
8. Takeda, K. and Akira, S. (2005) Toll-like receptors in innate immunity. *Int. Immunol.* 17, 1–14
9. Steiner, H. (2004) Peptidoglycan recognition proteins: on and off switches for innate immunity. *Immunol. Rev.* 198, 83–96
10. Muller, C.A. *et al.* (2005) Intestinal epithelial barrier and mucosal immunity innate defenses of the intestinal epithelial barrier. *Cell. Mol. Life Sci.* 62, 1297–1307
11. Peschel, A. (2002) How do bacteria resist human antimicrobial peptides? *Trends Microbiol.* 10, 179–186
12. Sahu, A. and Lambris, J.D. (2001) Structure and biology of complement protein C3, a connecting link between innate and acquired immunity. *Immunol. Rev.* 180, 35–48
13. Gasque, P. (2004) Complement: a unique innate immune sensor for danger signals. *Mol. Immunol.* 41, 1089–1098
14. Roos, D. *et al.* (2003) Oxidative killing of microbes by neutrophils. *Microbes Infect.* 5, 1307–1315
15. Mayer-Scholl, A. *et al.* (2004) How do neutrophils and pathogens interact? *Curr. Opin. Microbiol.* 7, 62–66
16. Schroder, N.W. *et al.* (2003) Lipoteichoic acid (LTA) of *Streptococcus pneumoniae* and *Staphylococcus aureus* activates immune cells via Toll-like receptor (TLR)-2, lipopolysaccharide-binding protein (LBP), and CD14, whereas TLR-4 and MD-2 are not involved. *J. Biol. Chem.* 278, 15587–15594
17. De Haas, C.J. *et al.* (2004) Chemotaxis inhibitory protein of *Staphylococcus aureus*, a bacterial antiinflammatory agent. *J. Exp. Med.* 199, 687–695
18. Lynch, N.J. *et al.* (2004) L-Ficolin specifically binds to lipoteichoic acid, a cell wall constituent of Gram-positive bacteria, and activates the lectin pathway of complement. *J. Immunol.* 172, 1198–1202

Review TRENDS in Microbiology Vol.13 No. 12 December 2005 601

19 Neth, O. *et al.* (2002) Enhancement of complement activation and opsonophagocytosis by complexes of mannose-binding lectin with mannose-binding lectin-associated serine protease after binding to Staphylococcus aureus. *J. Immunol.* 169, 4430–4436

20 Wirthmueller, U. *et al.* (1991) Receptor-operated activation of polymorphonuclear leukocytes: different effects of NAP-1/IL-8 and fMet-Leu-Phe or C5a. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 176, 972–978

21 Zimmerli, W. *et al.* (1990) The role of formylpeptide receptors, C5a receptors and cytosolic-free calcium in neutrophil priming. *J. Infect. Dis.* 161, 242–249

22 Jin, T. *et al.* (2004) *Staphylococcus aureus* resists human defensins by production of staphylokinase, a novel bacterial evasion mechanism. *J. Immunol.* 172, 1169–1176

23 Sieprawska-Lupa, M. *et al.* (2004) Degradation of human antimicrobial peptide LL-37 by *Staphylococcus aureus*-derived proteinases. *Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.* 48, 4673–4679

24 Bera, A. *et al.* (2005) Why are pathogenic staphylococci so lysozyme resistant? The peptidoglycan O-acetyltransferase OatA is the major determinant for lysozyme resistance of *Staphylococcus aureus*. *Mol. Microbiol.* 55, 778–787

25 Liu, G.Y. *et al.* (2005) *Staphylococcus aureus* golden pigment impairs neutrophil killing and promotes virulence through its antioxidant activity. *J. Exp. Med.* 202, 209–215

26 Gomez, M.I. *et al.* (2004) *Staphylococcus aureus* protein A induces airway epithelial inflammatory responses by activating TNFR1. *Nat. Med.* 10, 842–848

27 Rooijakkers, S.H.M. *et al.* (2005) Anti-opsonic properties of staphylokinase. *Microbes Infect.* 7, 476–484

28 Lee, L.Y. *et al.* (2004) Inhibition of complement activation by a secreted *Staphylococcus aureus* protein. *J. Infect. Dis.* 190, 571–579

29 Lee, L.Y. *et al.* (2004) Identification and characterization of the C3 binding domain of the *Staphylococcus aureus* extracellular fibrinogen-binding protein (Efb). *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 50710–50716

30 Zipfel, P.F. (2002) Factor H family proteins: on complement, microbes and human diseases. *Biochem. Soc. Trans.* 30, 971–978

31 Jiang, H. and Frank, M.M. (2004) *Staphylococcus* binds to factor H and H-related proteins. *Molecular Immunol.* 41, 252 (Abstract 112)

32 Veldkamp, K.E. *et al.* (2000) Modulation of neutrophil chemokine receptors by *Staphylococcus aureus* supernate. *Infect. Immun.* 68, 5908–5913

33 Postma, B. *et al.* (2004) Chemotaxis inhibitory protein of *Staphylococcus aureus* binds specifically to the C5a and formylated peptide receptor. *J. Immunol.* 172, 6994–7001

34 Haas, P.J. *et al.* (2004) N-terminal residues of the chemotaxis inhibitory protein of *Staphylococcus aureus* are essential for blocking formylated peptide receptor but not C5a receptor. *J. Immunol.* 173, 5704–5711

35 Postma, B. *et al.* (2005) Residues 10–18 within the C5a receptor N terminus compose a binding domain for chemotaxis inhibitory protein of *Staphylococcus aureus*. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280, 2020–2027

36 Rooijakkers, S.H.M. *et al.* (2005) Immune evasion by a staphylococcal complement inhibitor that acts on C3 convertases. *Nat. Immunol.* 6, 920–927

37 Langley, R. *et al.* (2005) The staphylococcal superantigen-like protein 7 binds IgA and complement C5 and inhibits IgA-Fc alpha RI binding and serum killing of bacteria. *J. Immunol.* 174, 2926–2933

38 Chavakis, T. *et al.* (2002) *Staphylococcus aureus* extracellular adherence protein serves as anti-inflammatory factor by inhibiting the recruitment of host leukocytes. *Nat. Med.* 8, 687–693

39 Haggar, A. *et al.* (2004) The extracellular adherence protein from *Staphylococcus aureus* inhibits neutrophil binding to endothelial cells. *Infect. Immun.* 72, 6164–6167

40 Geisbrecht, B.V. *et al.* (2005) The crystal structures of EAP domains from *Staphylococcus aureus* reveal an unexpected homology to bacterial superantigens. *J. Biol. Chem.* 280, 17243–17250

41 Rahimpour, R. *et al.* (1999) Bacterial superantigens induce down-modulation of CC chemokine responsiveness in human monocytes via an alternative chemokine ligand-independent mechanism. *J. Immunol.* 162, 2299–2307

42 Alcami, A. (2003) Viral mimicry of cytokines, chemokines and their receptors. *Nat. Rev. Immunol.* 3, 36–50

43 Stevenson, P.G. (2004) Immune evasion by gamma-herpesviruses. *Curr. Opin. Immunol.* 16, 456–462

---

Elsevier joins major health information initiative

Elsevier has joined with scientific publishers and leading voluntary health organizations to create patientINFORM, a groundbreaking initiative to help patients and caregivers close a crucial information gap. patientINFORM is a free online service dedicated to disseminating medical research and is scheduled to launch in 2005.

Elsevier will provide the voluntary health organizations with increased online access to our peer-reviewed biomedical journals immediately upon publication, together with content from back issues. The voluntary health organizations will integrate the information into materials for patients and link to the full text of selected research articles on their websites.

patientINFORM has been created to allow patients seeking the latest information about treatment options online access to the most up-to-date, reliable research available for specific diseases.

‘Not only will patientINFORM connect patients and their caregivers with the latest research, it will help them to put it into context. By making it easier to understand research findings, patientINFORM will empower patients to have a more productive dialogue with their physicians and make well-informed decisions about care’, said Harmon Eyre, M.D., national chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society.

For more information, visit www.patientinform.org

www.sciencedirect.com
