
Characterization of solanesyl and decaprenyl diphosphate synthases in mice and humans

Ryoichi Saiki, Ai Nagata, Tomohiro Kainou, Hideyuki Matsuda and Makoto Kawamukai

Faculty of Life and Environmental Science, Shimane University, Matsue, Japan

Keywords
coenzyme Q; isoprenoids; prenyl transferase; ubiquinone

Correspondence
Makoto Kawamukai, Faculty of Life and Environmental Science, Shimane University, 1060 Nishikawatsu, Matsue 690-8504, Japan
Fax: +81 852 32 6092
Tel: +81 852 32 6587
E-mail: kawamuka@life.shimane-u.ac.jp

(Received 12 July 2005, revised 23 August 2005, accepted 5 September 2005)
doi:10.1111/j.1742-4658.2005.04956.x

The isoprenoid chain of ubiquinone (Q) is determined by trans-polyprenyl diphosphate synthase in micro-organisms and presumably in mammals. Because mice and humans produce Q₉ and Q₁₀, they are expected to possess solanesyl and decaprenyl diphosphate synthases as the determining enzyme for a type of ubiquinone. Here we show that murine and human solanesyl and decaprenyl diphosphate synthases are heterotetramers composed of newly characterized hDPS1 (mSPS1) and hDLP1 (mDLP1), which have been identified as orthologs of Schizosaccharomyces pombe Dps1 and Dlp1, respectively. Whereas hDPS1 or mSPS1 can complement the S. pombe dps1 disruptant, neither hDLP1 nor mDLP1 could complement the S. pombe dLp1 disruptant. Thus, only hDPS1 and mSPS1 are functional orthologs of SpDps1. Escherichia coli was engineered to express murine and human SpDps1 and/or SpDlp1 homologs and their ubiquinone types were determined. Whereas transformants expressing a single component produced only Q₈ of E. coli origin, double transformants expressing mSPS1 and mDLP1 or hDPS1 and hDLP1 produced Q₉ or Q₁₀, respectively, and an in vitro activity of solanesyl or decaprenyl diphosphate synthase was verified. The complex size of the human and murine long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases, as estimated by gel-filtration chromatography, indicates that they consist of heterotetramers. Expression in E. coli of heterologous combinations, namely, mSPS1 and hDLP1 or hDPS1 and mDLP1, generated both Q₉ and Q₁₀, indicating both components are involved in determining the ubiquinone side chain. Thus, we identified the components of the enzymes that determine the side chain of ubiquinone in mammals and they resemble the S. pombe, but not plant or Saccharomyces cerevisiae, type of enzyme.

Ubiquinone (coenzyme Q) functions as an electron transporter in aerobic respiration and oxidative phosphorylation in the respiratory chain [1]. In addition, many reports suggest that ubiquinone also functions as a lipid-soluble antioxidant in cellular biomembranes, scavenging reactive oxygen species [2–5]. Indeed, several studies using yeast strains that do not produce ubiquinone suggest that an in vitro function of ubiquinone is to protect against oxidants [6,7]. Another phenotype of such ubiquinone-deficient fission yeast is that they generate high levels of hydrogen sulfide [8–10]. As Schizosaccharomyces pombe and other eukaryotes are known to carry sulfide-ubiquinone reductase, an enzyme that oxidizes sulfide via ubiquinone [11], it has been suggested that ubiquinone is linked to sulfide metabolism in many organisms. In addition, it was

Abbreviations
DLP, D-less polyprenyl diphosphate synthase; DPS, decaprenyl diphosphate synthase; FPP, farnesyl diphosphate; GGPP, geranylgeranyl diphosphate; GST, glutathione S-transferase; IPP, isopentenyl diphosphate; PHB, 4-hydroxybenzoate; Q, ubiquinone; SPS, solanesyl diphosphate synthase.

R. Saiki *et al.*

reported that ubiquinone (and menaquinone) functions as an electron transporter in the DsbA–DsbB system of *Escherichia coli* to generate protein disulfide bonds [12]. Furthermore, the *clk-1/coq7* mutant, which is unable to synthesize ubiquinone in *Caenorhabditis elegans*, has a prolonged lifespan [13], which has introduced an interesting topic into the field of ubiquinone research. In addition to the prolonged lifespan, the *clk-1* mutant shows developmental delay and low egg production, suggesting further novel roles for ubiquinone [14–16]. Thus, it appears that ubiquinone has various roles in different organisms.

The ubiquinone molecule bears an isoprenoid side chain whose length varies between organisms. For example, in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* and *E. coli* the side chains are comprised of six and eight isoprene units, respectively, whereas the side chain in mice and *C. elegans* has nine units and that in *S. pombe* and humans has ten isoprene units [17]. One type of ubiquinone is dominant in each organism but a minor type(s) is also occasionally detected. The length of the ubiquinone side chain is precisely defined by trans-polyprenyl diphosphate synthases rather than by the 4-hydroxybenzoate (PHB)-polyprenyl diphosphate transferases that catalyze the condensation of PHB and polyprenyl diphosphate [8,18,19]. The heterologous expression in *E. coli* and *S. cerevisiae* of trans-polyprenyl diphosphate synthase genes from other organisms generated the same type of ubiquinone as is expressed in the donor organisms [20–22]. These results also suggested that carrying a different type of ubiquinone (varying from Q₆ to Q₁₀) does not affect the survival of *S. cerevisiae* or *E. coli*. Recently, however, it was shown that the various ubiquinones do have type-specific biological effects, as exogenous Q₇ was not as efficient as Q₉ in restoring the growth of the *C. elegans clk-1* mutant [23]. Q₁₀ (CoQ₁₀) has been used as a medicine in humans and has recently been employed as a food supplement [24]. Q₁₀ is the only endogenously

synthesized lipid-soluble antioxidant in humans; therefore, it is important to know the biosynthetic pathway of Q₁₀ in humans. It is also important to know, from a clinical point of view, because disease related to human muscle Q₁₀ deficiency has been reported [25]. Despite its importance, to date, only three types of genes for ubiquinone biosynthesis from mammals have been reported [26–28].

The biosynthetic pathway that converts PHB to ubiquinone consists of nine steps. These include condensation and transfer of the isoprenoid side chain to PHB [17], followed by methylations, decarboxylation, and hydroxylations. Elucidation of this pathway has mostly come from studies of respiratory-deficient mutants of *E. coli* and *S. cerevisiae* [17,29]. It is believed that all eukaryotic enzymes involved in ubiquinone biosynthesis are very similar to those in *S. cerevisiae* except for trans-polyprenyl diphosphate synthase, which synthesizes the isoprenoid side chain.

Long-chain trans-polyprenyl diphosphate (C40, C45, C50) synthases catalyze the condensation of farnesyl diphosphate (FPP) or geranylgeranyl diphosphate (GGPP), which acts as a primer, and isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) to produce prenyl diphosphates of varying chain lengths. These enzymes possess seven conserved regions, including two DDXXD motifs that are binding sites for substrates in association with Mg²⁺ [30]. The structure of octaprenyl diphosphate synthase was recently solved and was found to be very similar to that of FPP synthase [31]. Although short-chain polyprenyl diphosphate (C15, C20) synthases such as FPP synthase and GGPP synthase have been identified in organisms ranging from bacteria through to plants and mammals [32–38], analysis of the long-chain trans-polyprenyl diphosphate synthases has been limited to those in several bacteria, two yeasts, and one plant [9,17,39,40]. Only the activity and some characterization of solanesyl diphosphate synthase in rat has been reported among animals [41,42]. Analysis of

Fig. 1. Alignment of the amino acid sequences of known long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases. (A) Alignment of the amino acid sequences of known long-chain-producing trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases. (B) Alignment of the amino acid sequences of a partner protein present in the long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases of some organisms. Residues conserved in more than three sequences are boxed. Conserved regions (I–VII) are underlined. The typical aspartate-rich DDXXD motifs in regions II and VI were present in (A) but absent in (B). Numbers on the right indicate amino acid residue positions. (1) One of the two components of solanesyl diphosphate synthase in the mouse, encoded by *mSPS1* (NCBI Accession no. AB210841). (2) One of the two components of decaprenyl diphosphate synthase in humans, encoded by *hDPS1* (accession no. AB210838). (3) One of the two components of decaprenyl diphosphate synthase in *S. pombe*, encoded by *SpDps1* (accession no. D84311). (4) The octaprenyl diphosphate synthase in *E. coli* encoded by *ispB* (accession no. U18997). (5) The solanesyl diphosphate synthase in *A. thaliana* encoded by *AtSPS1* (accession no. AB188497). (6) The other component of solanesyl diphosphate synthase in the mouse, the *SpDlp1* homolog *mDLP1* (accession no. AB210840). (7) The other component of decaprenyl diphosphate synthase in humans, the *SpDlp1* homolog *hDLP1* (accession no. AB210839). (8) A splicing variant of *hDLP1*, *hDLP2* (accession no. AI742294). (9) The *Xenopus SpDlp1* homolog *xDLP1* (Accession no. BC082488). (10) The *Drosophila SpDlp1* homolog *dDLP1* (accession no. AY05159). (11) The *S. pombe SpDlp1* gene (accession no. AB118853).

FEBS Journal **272** (2005) 5606–5622 © 2005 FEBS

Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

hexaprenyl diphosphate synthase from *S. cerevisiae* and solanesyl diphosphate synthase from the plant *Arabidopsis thaliana* suggest that the long-chain trans-polyprenyl diphosphate synthases that synthesize the ubiquinone side chain tend to be monomeric enzymes

[40, 43, 44]. However, decaprenyl diphosphate synthase from *S. pombe* is a heterotetramer of two proteins, SpDps1 (*S. pombe* Decaprenyl diphosphate synthase) and SpDlp1 (*S. pombe* D-less polyprenyl diphosphate synthase) [9]. Given this disparity, it is of interest to

A

(1)mSPS1 MAMRWSCWRRGCSWRPTAVGSPRERPGCVEPLGTRAASDTRA----------------QIPYFS 49  
(2)hDPS1 MASRWWRWRRGCSSWKPAAR-SPPGPGSPGRAGPLGPSAAAEVRAQVHRRKGLDLSQIPYIN 59  
(3)SpDps1 MIQYVYLK 8  
(4)IspB  
(5)AtSPS1 MMTSCRNIDLGTMMMACGCGRRQFPSLAKTVCKFTSSNRSYGGLVGS 47  

(1) LMKILMSASPTMHSISQFHQRTPAMCSCRQTQSGEKYSDPFKLIGWRDLKGLYEDIRKE LHISTRELKDM S 119  
(2) LVKHLTSACPNVCRISRFHHTTPDSK----THSGEKYTDPFKLIGWRDLKGLYEDIRKELLISTSELKEMS 125  
(3) HMRKLWSLGKVRSTVLRF----------------STTNRNASHLIKNELEQISPGIRQMLNSSEFLEECS 63  
(4) MNLEKINEITAQDMAGVNAAILLEQLNSDVQLINQLG 36  
(5) CKAVPTKSKEISLLNGIGQSOTVSFDLKQESKQPISLVTLFELVAVDLQTLNDNLLSIVGAENPVLISAA 117  

(1) EYYFDGKGKAFRPIIVVLMARACNIHHNNAR----------------EMQASQRSIALVAEMIHTAT 170  
(2) EYYFDGKGKAFRPIIVALMARACNIHHNNSR----------------HVQASQRAIALIAEMIHTAS 176  
(3) KYYTIAQGKOMRPSLVLLMSKATSCLCHGIDRSVVGDKYIDDDDLRSFSTGQILPSQLRLAQITEMIHIAS 133  
(4) YYIVSGGKRIRPMIAVLAAARAVGYEGNAHVT----------------IAALIEFIHTAT 80  
(5) EQIFGAGGKRMRPGGLVFLVSHATAELAGLKELT----------------TEHRRLAETIEMIHTAS 167  

I

(1) LVHDDVIDDASSRRGKHTVNKIWGEKKAVLAGDLILSAASVALARIGNTAIVSMILAQVIEDLVRGEFLOL 240  
(2) LVHDDVIDDVSSRRGKHTVNKIWGEKKAVLAGDLILSAASTALARIGNTTVISILTQVIEDLVRGEFLOL 246  
(3) LIHDDVIDHANVRRGSPSSNVAFGNRRSILAGNFILARASTAMARLRNPQVTELATVIADLVRGEFLOL 203  
(4) LIHDDVVDESDMRRGKATANAAFGNAAASVLVGDFIYTRAFQMMTSLSLKYLEVMSEAVNVIAEGEVLOL 150  
(5) LIHDDVLDDESDMRRGKEETVHELFGTRVAVLAGDFMFAQASWYLANLENLEVIKLISQVIKDFASGEIKQA 237  

II III IV

(1) --------GSKENENERFAHYLEKTFKKTASLIANSCKAVSVLGCPDPVVHEIAYQYGKNVGIAFQLIDDVL 304  
(2) --------GSKENENERFAHYLEKTFKKTASLIANSCKAVSVLGCPDPVVHEIAYQYGKDVGIAFQLIDDVL 310  
(3) KNTMDPSSLEIKQSNFDYYIEKSELFKTASLISKSCAASSTILGQCSPTVATAAGEYGRCI GTA FQLMDDVL 273  
(4) --------MNVNDPDITEENYM RVIYSKTARLFEEAAAQCSGILAGCTPEEEKGLQDYGRYL GTA FQLIDDLL 214  
(5) --------SSLFDCDTKLDEYLLKSFYKTASLVAASTKGAAIFSRVEPDVTEQMYEFGKNLGLSFQIVDDIL 301  

V

(1) DFTSCSDQMGKPTSADLKLGATGPVLFACQQFP EMNAMIMRREFSLPGDVDRARQYVLQSD-----GVQQT 370  
(2) DFTSCSDQMGKPTSADLKLGATGPVLFACQQFP EMNAMIMRREFSLPGDVDRARQYVLQSD-----GVQQT 376  
(3) DYTSKDDTLGKAAGADLKLGATAPVLFAWKKYPELGAMIVNRFNHPSDIQRARSLVECTD-----AIEQT 339  
(4) DYNADGEOLGKNVGDDLNECKPTILPLLHAMHHG TPEQAQMIRTAIEQGNGRHLLLEPVLEAMNACGSLEWT 284  
(5) DFTQSTEOLGKPAGSDLAKGNLTAPVIFALEREPRLREITESEFCEAGSLEEAIEAVTKGG-----GIKRA 367  

VI

(1) TYLAQQYCHKAVREIRKLRPSTERDALIQLSESVLTRDK* 409  
(2) TYLAQQYCHEAI REISKLRPSPERDALIQLSEIVLTRDK* 415  
(3) ITWAKEYIKKAKDSLLCLLPDSPARKALFALADKVITRKK* 378  
(4) RQRAEEEEADKAAALQVLPDTPWREALIGLAHIAVQRDR* 323  
(5) QELAREKADDAIKNLQCLPRSGFRSALEDMVLYNLERID* 406  

VII

R. Saiki et al. Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

B

(6) mDLP1 MSIRQLLLRLSGYLGASGPPSRHWWYFRSLDSISSAGSWGRS 43
(7) hDLP1 MNFRQLLLHILPRYLGASGSPRRLWWSLSDTISSVGWRGRS 42
(8) hDLP2 MNFRQLLLHILPRYLGASGSPRRLWWSLSDTISSVGWRGRS 42
(9) xDLP1 MALICQCLRRTWLSRGSTTSYSALREISLF-SG----- 32
(10)dDLP1 MAMYRASGLRIMQQMRRRIPVELQPLQVAKAAPALQTFTSQRWTTTTTSGKHASPQVTT 60
(11)SpDlp1 MSFPFASLLKRPSAISLLS------ 20

(6) SRSPAHWNOVVSEAEKIVGYPA SFMSLRCLLSDELSNIAMQVRKLVGTGHPLLTTARA LVHDSSRHN LQLR 113
(7) SKSPAHWNOVVSEAEKIVGYPTSFMSLRCLLSDELSNIAMQVRKLVGTQHPLLTTARG LVHDSSWNSLQLR 112
(8) SKSPAHWNOVVSEAEKIVGYPTSFMSLRCLLSDELSNIAMQVRKLVGTQHPLLTTARG LVHDSSWNSLQLR 112
(9) ATAASHWNKVVSDAEKIVGYPTSFMSLRCLLSDELNNIAIQVRKLVGTKHPLLNTARTF VNEKGNNRQMR 102
(10) PPPRHDWNRAVSEAERIVGYPTSFLSLRWLLSDEIANVALHLRKLVGSAHPLMKTAKHLLYNGKN TMQAW 130
(11) LKKPGSWSILLKAVGVLSRDSRWHSDLLKMLTEEMDSLNGQINTWTDNNPILLDEITKPYRK SSTRFFHP 90

(6) GLVVLLISKAAGPSTRNAACQNYDMVSGV YSCQRS LAEITELIHTALLVHRGIVNL SELQSSDGPL----- 179
(7) GLVVLLISKAAGPSSVNTSCQNYDMVSGIYSCQRS LAEITELIHIALLVHRGOVNLINELOSSDGPL----- 178
(8) GLVVLLISKAAGPSSVNTSCQNYDMVSGIYSCQRS LAEITELIHIALLVHRGIVNLINELOSSDGPL----- 178
(9) GLVVLLISKAAGLSKSADHMFQPDLASGISARQRS LAEITELIHTAFLVHRGIVNINELKTCDGPI----- 168
(10) GLIVLLVSKAAGHAPSVPDVEQ-DKSAGVLHSQRALAEVTEMIRISHLVHNSVVNL---Q SSTQAGQDVD 196
(11)-LLVLLMSRASVNGDP---------PSQQLFQRYKOLARVT ELIHAANIIH---INIGEEQSN---------- 140

I
II
(6) --KDMQFGNKIAILSGDFLLANACNGLALLQNTKVVELLSSAL------------------ 220
(7) --KDMQFGNKIAILSGDFLLANACNGLALLQNTKVVELLSSAL------------------ 219
(8) --KDMQFGNKIAILSGDFLLANACNGLALLQNTKSFSFNGPIA------------------ 219
(9) --KDMQFGNKMAILSGDFLLANACIGLADLQNAKVVEIVSSAI------------------ 209
(10) TYDDMSFGNKIGLLTG DYLLGHSSAELANLRNQEVELISSAVRDFSESEFIGERDEQNNPLPYKPGTFQ 266
(11) --------EQIKLATLVGDYLLLGKASVDLAHENNAITEIMASVI---------------- 177

III
(6) --MDLVHG VYQENSASTKEN SIPDDIGISTWKEQTF-LSHCALLAKSCQAAMELAKHDAAVQDMAFQYGK 287
(7) --MDLVQGVYHENST-SKESYITDDIGISTWKEQTF-LYHGALLAKSCQAAMELAKHDAEVQNMAFQYGK 285
(8) ---------------------------------IYQMGDCESAWILSKHPRALS* 240
(9) --GDMVKGVYYENSY-MPENTFTDVNGISNWMENIF-LSHGSLLAKSCQSAMLLAHHDSEISSRAFQYGK 275
(10) RPSLSVGVDFNEHDVMTPMPIAQVLGNPEEEWECRNILNAGSLLGKSCQA SLKLAGQSEEELQRHAYRFGK 336
(11) --ANLVEGHFGSRQN---------GSVGLSNERTILLQSAFMPAKACLCA SIINNSSQYINDACFNYGK 235

IV
V
(6) HMAMSHKINADLQPFIKD KASDSKTFN LNSAPVVLHQEFLGRDLWIKQIGEAQEKGSL-NYSKLRETIKA 356
(7) HMAMSHKINSDVQPFIKEKTSDSMTFN LNSAPVVLHQEFLGRDLWIKQIGEAQEKGRL-DYAKLERERIKA 354
(9) HMSISYKLSSDLQPFINRKYSDS-LFSLNSAPVVLHQEFIGTEAWMEQIKEAQLKDNLIDRIKLQKA IKA 344
(10) HLALAWQACLDAEPFQCPQLPLDVTFSLVSAPVLFHLEHDPGMYSQLEAG-KOSVDNI-DYDKIHKATLA 404
(11) FLGLSLQ-----------------LAHKPVSPDAQVLQNN------------------ 259

VI
(6) GKGVTSAIDLCRYHGNKALEALESFPP SEARSALENIVF AVTRFS* 401
(7) GKGVTSAIDLCRYHGNKALEALESFPP SEARSALENIVF AVTRFS* 399
(9) GKGVTSAIDLCCYHGDKALEALQCFA SEARSALENIY AVTRFS* 389
(10) GPALAKTELO RKHTAAALAVLQHF PATDARQALENI ILAMQDL* 448
(11) --------DILKTYVEN-AKSSLSVFB DIEAKQALMETANSVSK* 294

VII

Fig. 1. (Continued).

FEBS Journal 272 (2005) 5606–5622 © 2005 FEBS
Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

investigate mammalian long-chain *trans*-prenyl diphosphate synthases.

Here we describe the identification and characterization of solanesyl and decaprenyl diphosphate synthases in mice and humans. We show that these enzymes are heterotetramers, like the decaprenyl diphosphate synthase from *S. pombe*. The murine enzyme is a solanesyl diphosphate synthase (mSPS1) and mouse D-less poly-prenyl pyrophosphate synthase (mDLP1), whereas the human enzyme is a decaprenyl diphosphate synthase composed of human decaprenyl diphosphate synthase (hDPS1) and human D-less poly-prenyl diphosphate synthase (hDLP1). We found that mSPS1 and hDPS1 bear all the conserved regions found in the homo-dimeric prenyl diphosphate synthases and SpDps1, whereas mDLP1 and hDLP1 are homologs of SpDlp1. We also showed that both components are involved in determination of the isoprenoid chain length of ubiquinone.

### Results

#### Isolation and sequence analysis of genes encoding murine and human long-chain *trans*-prenyl diphosphate synthases

The only eukaryotic *trans*-prenyl diphosphate synthases that synthesize the ubiquinone side chains studied to date are those from *S. cerevisiae*, *S. pombe* and *A. thaliana* [9, 40, 43]. Solanesyl diphosphate synthase in rat liver was studied enzymatically but its primary structure and protein composition are not known [41]. Whereas the *S. cerevisiae* and *A. thaliana* enzymes are monomeric, the decaprenyl diphosphate synthase of *S. pombe* is a heterotetramer consisting of SpDps1 and SpDlp1 [9]. To determine which enzyme structure predominates in eukaryotes, we analyzed mammalian long-chain *trans*-prenyl diphosphate synthases. The BLAST program was used to search for SpDps1 and SpDlp1 homologs in the EST database collected at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Many highly homologous sequences were found in both the murine and human EST databases. We purchased many of the candidate clones from Genome Systems Inc. and sequenced them. Eventually, murine and human cDNA clones that showed the greatest homology to SpDps1 (Accession nos BF180140 for the murine homolog and AI590245 and AI261617 for the human homolog) were selected. We also cloned the cDNAs with the highest homology to SpDlp1 (Accession nos BE283879 and AI097731 for the murine homolog and AI742294 and BI551760 for

the human homolog). In cases in which the full-length cDNA was not included in a single clone, we combined two cDNA clones into one and determined the resulting complete cDNA sequence. The murine and human SpDps1 homologs were denoted as mSPS1 and hDPS1, respectively. The murine and human SpDlp1 homologs were denoted as mDLP1 and hDLP1, respectively. The open reading frames of mSPS1 and hDPS1 were 1230 and 1245 bp, respectively, whereas those of mDLP1 and hDLP1 were 1206 and 1200 bp, respectively. The mSPS1 and hDPS1 genes were 83.0% identical, and their translated products were 82.1% identical. The mDLP1 and hDLP1 genes were 87.2% identical, and their translated products were 88.3% identical. The mSPS1 and hDPS1 proteins were also highly similar to the *S. pombe* homolog SpDps1 (48.7 and 46.0%, respectively), whereas mDLP1 and hDLP1 showed considerably less similarity to the *S. pombe* homolog SpDlp1 (31.3 and 27.4%, respectively). mSPS1 and hDPS1 also showed higher similarity to the *A. thaliana* homolog At-SPS1 (35.8 and 36%, respectively) [40] than to the *E. coli* homolog IspB (30.0 and 30.7%, respectively) [50].

Both mSPS1 and hDPS1 possess the conserved domains I–VII and contain DDXXD sequence motifs that are typically found in all known *trans*-prenyl diphosphate synthases (Fig. 1A). In mDLP1 and hDLP1, domains I–VII are also conserved but neither protein contains the typical aspartate-rich DDXXD motifs normally found in domains II and VI (Fig. 1B). As a result, mDLP1 and hDLP1 were given the name DLP (D[aspartate]-less poly-prenyl pyrophosphate synthase). hDPS1 and hDLP1 are located at the 10p12.1 locus in chromosome 10 and at the 6q21 locus in chromosome 6 and have the tentative gene names *TPRT* and *C6orf210*, respectively. We were able to find SpDlp1 homologs in the rat, Xenopus and Drosophila but not in *C. elegans* (Fig. 1B). There is also another *dlp1*-like transcript in humans and mice that we called hDLP2 and mDLP2, respectively, as they are splicing variants of hDLP1 and mDLP1. The hDLP1 gene is split into eight exons, whereas the hDLP2 gene is split into four exons. The first three exons of hDLP1 and hDLP2 are equivalent but the latter exons differ. The same is true for the mDLP2 murine gene.

#### Expression of human and murine long-chain *trans*-prenyl diphosphate synthases in *E. coli*

We expressed the murine or human homologs of SpDps1 and SpDlp1 in *E. coli* to determine whether both genes are needed to form a functional prenyl diphosphate synthase. To do so, we constructed the
R. Saiki et al.

Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

Fig. 2. Plasmid constructs used in this study. pBmSPS1, pSTVmDLP1, pUhDPS1 and pSTVhDLP1 express the entire length of the *mSPS1*, *mDLP1*, *hDPS1* and *hDLP1* genes, respectively, under the control of the *lac* promoter. pRmSPS1, pRmDLP1, pRhDPS1 and pRhDLP1 contain the same full-length genes, respectively, under the control of the strong *nmt1* promoter for expression in *S. pombe*. pGEX-mSPS1 contains the full-length *mSPS1* gene fused to the GST gene, whereas pGEX-mSPS1-mDLP1 contains the full-length *mSPS1* and *mDLP1* genes fused to the GST-tag and His6-tag, respectively. The latter was used to express the GST-mSPS1 and His-mDLP1 fusion proteins in *E. coli*. pGEX-hDPS1-hDLP1 contains the full-length *hDPS1* and *hDLP1* genes fused with the GST and His6 tag, respectively, and was used to express the GST-hDPS1 and His-hDLP1 fusion proteins in *E. coli*. B, BamHI; EI, EcoRI; H, HindIII; Nd, Ndel; No, NotI; Sa, SalI; Sm, SmaI; Xb, Xbal; Xh, Xhol.

pBmSPS1, pSTVmDLP1, pUhDPS1 and pSTVhDLP1 plasmids that express the *mSPS1*, *mDLP1*, *hDPS1* and *hDLP1* genes, respectively (Fig. 2). *E. coli* DH5α cells expressing both mSPS1 and mDLP1 synthesized Q₉, whereas the same strain carrying hDPS1 and hDLP1 produced Q₁₀ (Fig. 3D,G). In contrast, when the host strain bore only one of the four plasmids, it produced only Q₈, which is the product of the endogenous *E. coli* octaprenyl diphosphate synthase (Fig. 3B,C,E,F). Thus, both of the murine or human genes (i.e. *mSPS1* and *mDLP1*, or *hDPS1* and *hDLP1*) are necessary and sufficient for producing an extra ubiquinone type in *E. coli*. When *hDLP2* was coexpressed with *hDPS1* in *E. coli*, Q₁₀ was not produced (data not shown). Thus, *hDLP2* cannot partner *hDPS1* in producing a long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthase.

We further tested whether the *E. coli* cells that coexpress mSPS1 and mDLP1 or hDPS1 and hDLP1 possess solanesyl and decaprenyl diphosphate synthase activity by measuring the *in vitro* activity of these enzymes. Consistent with the above observations, cells that expressed both *mSPS1* and *mDLP1* could produce solanesol; in contrast, cells transformed with only

pGEX-mSPS1 or pET-mDLP1 did not possess solanesyl diphosphate synthase activity (Fig. 4A). Similarly, cells harboring both pFhDPS1 and pSTVHISHDLPI could produce decaprenol, unlike cells harboring either plasmid on its own (Fig. 4B). Background bands observed at the position around solanesol in Fig. 4 are presumably by-products from *E. coli*. The above results further support the notion that the long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases in mice and humans need two proteins (i.e. both *mSPS1* and *mDLP1* or both *hDPS1* and *hDLP1*, respectively) to be active. The success of reconstitution of solanesyl and decaprenyl diphosphate synthases in *E. coli* unravelled the components of mammalian long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthase, whose activity was clearly detected at least in rat [41].

Heteromeric complex formation by the murine and human homologs of SpDps1 and SpDlp1

The above results suggest that, like the decaprenyl diphosphate synthase of *S. pombe*, *mSPS1* and *mDLP1* form a heteromeric complex that can then act as a

Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

R. Saiki et al.

Fig. 3. HPLC analysis of the ubiquinone extracted from *E. coli* expressing murine or human long chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthase genes. Ubiquinone was extracted from wild-type DH5α and DH5α expressing the *SpDps1* homolog and/or the *SpDlp1* homolog from mice or humans, as follows: (A) wild-type (WT) *E. coli*; (B–G) *E. coli* harboring pBmSPS1 (B), pSTVmDLP1 (C), pBmSPS1 and pSTVmDLP1 (D), pUhDPS1 (E), pSTVhDLP1 (F), pUhDPS1 and pSTVhDLP1 (G). Ubiquinone was first separated from cell extracts by TLC and further analyzed by HPLC.

long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthase. The same appears to be true for hDPS1 and hDLP1. To test this notion, we determined the sizes of the murine and human long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases produced by *E. coli* JM109 expressing mSPS1 plus mDLP1 or hDPS1 plus hDLP1. The plasmids used for this were pGEX-mSPS1-mDLP1 and pGEX-hDPS1-hDLP1 (Fig. 2), which express both the *SpDps1* and *SpDlp1* homolog under the same promoter, thus enhancing the efficiency and evenness of expression. The *SpDps1* homolog is expressed as a glutathione S-transferase (GST)-fusion protein, whereas the *SpDlp1* homolog is expressed as a His-fusion protein.

The *E. coli ispB* disruptant KO229 harboring pKA3(*ispB*) [22] was successfully swapped with pGEX-hDPS1-hDLP1 or pGEX-mSPS1-mDLP1, to generate only Q₁₀ or Q₉, respectively, without *E. coli* Q₈ was generated (data not shown). The success of swapping indicates that the enzymatic activity is sufficiently high and heterologous *SpDps1* and *SpDlp1* proteins are together sufficient to produce their own ubiquinone type in *E. coli* KO229 (*ispB*) harboring pGEX-hDPS1-hDLP1 or pGEX-mSPS1-mDLP1.

We extracted the crude proteins from the pGEX-hDPS1-hDLP1- or pGEX-mSPS1-mDLP1-recombinant *E. coli* JM109 cells and measured the size of the

R. Saiki et al.

Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

A
1 2 3 4
—— S.F.
—— GGOH
—— SOH
—— Ori.

B
1 5 6 7
—— S.F.
—— GGOH
—— SOH
—— Ori.

Fig. 4. Thin-layer chromatogram of the product of the solanesyl diphosphate or decaprenyl diphosphate synthase produced by recombinant *E. coli*. (A) Solanesyl diphosphate synthase activity in BL21 (wild-type, lane 1) and BL21 harboring pGEX–mSPS1 (lane 2), pET–mDLP1 (lane 3), or pGEX–mSPS1–mDLP1 (lane 4) was measured using [1–¹⁴C]IPP and FPP as substrates. (B) Decaprenyl diphosphate synthase activity in BL21 harboring pFhDPS1 (lane 5), pSTVHIShDLP1 (lane 6), or pFhDPS1 and pSTVHIShDLP1 (lane 7) was measured by using the same substrates as in (A). The products were hydrolyzed with phosphatase and the resulting alcohols were analyzed by reverse-phase TLC. Equivalent amounts of the radiolabeled products (5000 d.p.m) were applied onto the TLC plate. Products of the incubation were visualized by means of autoradiography. The arrowhead indicates the position of the synthesized decaprenols. The standard alcohols, whose positions are indicated on the right, are GGOH (*all-E*-geranylgeraniol) and SOH (*all-E*-solanesol). Ori., origin; S.F., solvent front.

solanesyl/decaprenyl diphosphate synthases in the extracts. To do this, we first performed gel-filtration chromatography with the crude proteins and obtained a number of fractions containing GST–mSPS1 and His–mDLP1 or GST–hDPS1 and His–hDLP1. We then analyzed the separated fractions by Western blot analysis using both GST- and His-specific antibodies. Note the intensity of the bands does not reflect the molar ratio of the proteins because it is dependent on the specificity of the antibodies. The murine solanesyl diphosphate synthase detected at fractions 3–4 in Fig. 5 was estimated to be ≈230 kDa in size. This corresponds to the calculated complex size of the postulated murine heterotetramer because GST–mSPS1 and His–mDLP1 are 73 and 45 kDa in size, respectively. The postulated heterotetrameric human decaprenyl diphosphate synthase was also of the appropriate size relative to calculations. To ensure that the chromatography

FEBS Journal 272 (2005) 5606–5622 © 2005 FEBS

Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

Fig. 5. Size determination of the long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases from mice and humans by gel-filtration chromatography and western blot analysis. Crude proteins from *E. coli* harboring pGEX-mSPS1–mDLP1 or pGEX-hDPS1–hDLP1 were partially separated by gel-filtration chromatography on Superdex 200. (Upper) Elution behavior of the thyroglobulin (670 kDa), γ-globulin (158 kDa), ovalbumin (44 kDa), myoglobin (17 kDa) and vitamin B12 (1.35 kDa) standards. (Lower) Fractions containing standards and analyzed proteins of (1) GST–mSPS1 and (2) His–mDLP1, or (3) GST–hDPS1 and (4) His–hDLP1, or (5) GST–mSPS1 purified by glutathione Sepharose 4B and (6) His–IspB were detected by western blot analysis using His or GST antibodies.

was operating properly, we loaded an extract containing homodimeric His–IspB and purified monomeric GST–mSPS1: both were detected at around 70 kDa (fraction 7, Fig. 5) under the same conditions, as expected from their calculated molecular sizes. The result also indicates GST–mSPS1 alone did not form a dimer. Thus, we conclude that the solanesyl and decaprenyl diphosphate synthase from mice and humans form a heterotetramer, like the enzyme from *S. pombe* [9].

Effect of coexpressing long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthase components from different eukaryotic species

The observations above indicate that the long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthase of mice and humans, like that from *S. pombe*, consists of two heterologous components. We next asked whether the components from the three species are interchangeable by expressing (a) *mSPS1* or *hDPS1* in the KS10 *S. pombe dps1* disruptant (*Δdps1::ura4*) or (b) *mDLP1* or *hDLPI* in the *S. pombe dlp1* disruptant (*Δdlp1::ura4*). We assessed whether these heterologous proteins caused the disruptants to produce ubiquinone and to grow on minimal medium, as the two disruptants cannot grow on minimal medium without the supplementation of cysteine or glutathione [9]. The expression of *mSPS1* in KS10 (*Δdps1::ura4*) caused its growth on minimal medium to recover, as did the expression of *hDPS1*; moreover, the former generated small amounts of Q₉ and Q₁₀, whereas the latter generated small amounts of Q₁₀ (Fig. 6). These cells, unlike typical ubiquinone less fission yeast [8–10], did not produce sulfide and were not oxidative stress sensitive (data not shown), indicating that small amounts of Q₁₀ are sufficient for preventing sulfide production and stress sensitivity. In contrast, expression of both *mDLP1* and *hDLPI* failed to restore growth of the RS312 *dlp1* disruptant (*Δdlp1::ura4*) on minimal medium (data not shown). Thus, although mSPS1 and hDPS1 can form functional complexes with SpDpl1 in *S. pombe*, mDLP1 and hDLPI cannot form functional complexes with SpDps1.

Because we identified the components of the solanesyl/decaprenyl diphosphate synthases in mice and humans, we can ask which component is more important in determining the chain length of ubiquinone by replacing either component with homologs from other species and analyzing the type of ubiquinone produced.

R. Saiki et al.

Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

A                                                                 B
![Image A]                                                                 ![Image B]
PM + ade                                                                 PM + ade + cys

C

![Graph C]

Fig. 6. Effect of expressing mSPS1 or hDPS1 in the *dps1* disruptant KS10 on its growth on minimal medium and ubiquinone production. (A) The KS10 (*Δdps1::ura4*) disruptant harboring pREP1 (*LEU2* marker) together with pRDPS1, pRmSPS1, or pRhDPS1 were grown on PM medium supplemented with 75 μg·mL⁻¹ adenine. (B) The same strains were grown on PM medium supplemented with adenine and 200 μg·mL⁻¹ cysteine. KS10 harboring pRmSPS1 or pRhDPS1 grow on PM medium lacking cysteine (A). (C) Ubiquinone was extracted from untransfected KS10 cells and KS10 cells harboring pREP1, pRDPS1, pRmSPS1 and pRhDPS1. Ubiquinone was first separated by TLC and then further analyzed by HPLC.

Thus, the murine, human and *S. pombe* homologs were coexpressed in heterologous combinations in *E. coli* (Fig. 7). The combination of *mDPS1-hDLP1* and *hDPS1-mDLP1* generated both Q₉ and Q₁₀ (Fig. 7D,F). Thus, both components of the mammalian long-chain prenyl diphosphate synthases contribute to determining the side chain of ubiquinone. However, the combination of *SpDps1-hDLP1* or *SpDps1-mDLP1* did not produce an extra ubiquinone type (Fig. 7C,E). Thus, the *S. pombe SpDps1* protein cannot form a complex with SpDlp1 homologs from mice and humans. This is consistent with expression of *mDLP1*

or *hDLP1* in the *dlp1* disruptant RS312 failing to restore growth on minimal medium, whereas *mSPS1* or *hDPS1* expression in the *dps1* disruptant KS10 enabled growth on minimal medium (Fig. 6 and data not shown). Table 1 summarizes the results obtained by heterologous expression of prenyl diphosphate synthase in *E. coli* and *S. pombe*; this is discussed later.

### Discussion

In this study, we characterized the solanesyl and decaprenyl diphosphate synthase responsible for the side

FEBS Journal 272 (2005) 5606–5622 © 2005 FEBS

Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

R. Saiki et al.

A
B
C
D
Q-8
Q-10
Retention time (min)
Retention time (min)
Retention time (min)
Retention time (min)
Q-10 standard
W.T. (DH5α)
pBSDPS1 + pSTVhDLP1
pBmSPS1 + pSTVhDLP1
DH5α/
/DH5α

E
F
G
H
Q-8
Q-9
Q-8
Q-8
Q-8
Q-10
Q-9
Q-10
Retention time (min)
Retention time (min)
Retention time (min)
Retention time (min)
pBSDPS1 + pSTVmDLP1
pUhDPS1 + pSTVmDLP1
pBmSPS1 + pSTVDLP1
pUhDPS1 + pSTVDLP1
/DH5α
/DH5α
/DH5α
/DH5α

Fig. 7. Effect on ubiquinone type of expressing heterologous combinations of SpDps1 and SpDlp1 homologs from various eukaryotes in *E. coli*. Ubiquinone was extracted from wild-type DH5α and DH5α harboring various heterologous combinations of the SpDps1 and SpDlp1 homologs from mice, humans and *S. pombe*. (A) Q₁₀ standard, (B) wild-type (WT), (C) *E. coli* harboring pBSDPS1 and pSTVhDLP1, (D) pBmSPS1 and pSTVhDLP1, (E) pBSDPS1 and pSTVmDLP1, (F) pUhDPS1 and pSTVmDLP1, (G) pBmSPS1 and pSTVDLP1 (H) pUhDPS1 and pSTVDLP1.

chain of ubiquinone in mice and humans, respectively. Both are heterotetrameric enzymes composed of SpDps1 and SpDlp1 homologs. This heterotetrameric composition has been found only in *S. pombe* previously [9] as the long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases from other organisms, including bacteria, plants and another yeast (*S. cerevisiae*) are composed of only one type of protein. The murine and human homologs of SpDps1 (mSPS1 and hDPS1, respectively)

show high similarity (30–49.0%) to the typical long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases from other organisms such as IspB [45], SdsA [20], DdsA [39], and AtSPS1 [40]. They also possess all seven conserved regions (domains I–VII) found in long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases from other organisms. In contrast, the murine and human SpDlp1 homologs (mDLP1 and hDLP1, respectively) show limited similarity to SpDps1 (23%) and lack the aspartate-rich

FEBS Journal 272 (2005) 5606–5622 © 2005 FEBS

R. Saiki *et al.*

Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

Table 1. Heterologous combination of polyprenyl diphosphate synthases. Underline indicates the major type of ubiquinone. ND, Ubiquinone not detected.

| Combinations       | E. coli (W.T.) | S. pombe     |
|--------------------|----------------|--------------|
|                    |                | Δdps1        |
|                    |                | Δdlp1        |
| mSPS1             | Q₈             | Q₉ + Q₁₀     | ND         |
| mDLP1             | Q₈             | ND           | ND         |
| hDPS1             | Q₈             | Q₁₀          | ND         |
| hDLP1             | Q₈             | ND           | ND         |
| SpDps1            | Q₈             | Q₁₀          | ND         |
| SpDlp1            | Q₈             | ND           | Q₁₀        |
| mSPS1 + mDLP1     | Q₈ + Q₉        |              |            |
| hDPS1 + hDLP1     | Q₈ + Q₁₀       |              |            |
| SpDps1 + SpDlp1   | Q₈ + Q₉ + Q₁₀  |              |            |
| SpDps1 + hDLP1    | Q₈             |              |            |
| mSPS1 + hDLP1     | Q₈ + Q₉ + Q₁₀  |              |            |
| SpDps1 + mDLP1    | Q₈             |              |            |
| hDPS1 + mDLP1     | Q₈ + Q₉ + Q₁₀  |              |            |
| mSPS1 + SpDlp1    | Q₈ + Q₉        |              |            |
| hDPS1 + SpDlp1    | Q₈ + Q₉ + Q₁₀  |              |            |

that humans also carry another Dlp1-like protein, which we denoted hDLP2. However, we found that hDLP2 cannot form a functional decaprenyl diphosphate synthase with hDPS1. It is possible that hDLP2 may function as a regulator or associate with another partner.

Our observations, and those of others [39,40], suggest that the long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases responsible for ubiquinone biosynthesis are either homodimers or heterotetramers (Fig. 8). Intriguingly, because the hexaprenyl diphosphate synthase from *S. cerevisiae* and the solanesyl diphosphate synthase from the plant *A. thaliana* are homomeric enzymes, it appears that the eukaryotic enzymes are not always heteromeric. Moreover, heteromeric enzymes have been observed in prokaryotes. For example, heteromeric enzymes have been found in *Bacillus subtilis* and *Micrococcus luteus* [46,47], although these enzymes are responsible for the side chain of menaquinone. In addition, GPP synthase from spearmint, which synthesizes short-chain isoprenoids, is a heterotetramer [48]. Moreover, we were able to detect a Dlp1 homolog in the rat, *Drosophila* and *Xenopus*, but not in *C. elegans*. Thus, the trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases cannot be classified according to the different kingdoms with regard to their composition. Rather, it appears that composition of the enzyme in each species is variable and has evolved in this way for unknown reasons.

We asked whether the two components of the heteromeric long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases in *S. pombe*, mice and humans are interchangeable in forming a functional enzyme. To address this question, we first sought to restore long-chain trans-prenyl

## Classification of long-chain prenyl diphosphate synthases

### Homodimer
**E. coli**
- IspB IspB
- ↓
- Octaprenyl diphosphate
- ↓
- MK-8 & Q-8

### Heterodimer
**B. subtilis**
- I II
- ↓
- Heptaprenyl diphosphate
- ↓
- MK-7

### Heterotetramer
**S. pombe, mouse, human**
- Dps1 (Sps1)
- Dlp1
- ↓
- Solanesyl or decaprenyl diphosphate
- ↓
- Q-9 or Q-10

Fig. 8. Classification of trans-polyprenyl diphosphate synthases. The various types of trans-polyprenyl diphosphate synthases are schematically depicted. The trans-polyprenyl diphosphate synthases synthesize ubiquinone in bacteria and plants are homodimeric, while bacterial trans-polyprenyl diphosphate synthases synthesize menaquinone are heterodimeric. The trans-polyprenyl diphosphate synthases synthesize ubiquinone in *S. pombe*, mice and humans are heterotetrameric, whereas the equivalent enzyme in *S. cerevisiae* is believed to be homomeric. The circular components show the primary structures of the typical prenyl diphosphate synthases.

FEBS Journal **272** (2005) 5606–5622 © 2005 FEBS

Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

diphosphate synthase activity in *S. pombe* cells with a disrupted *SpDps1* or *SpDlp1* gene by introducing the murine or human homolog of the disrupted gene (Table 1). The mutant phenotypes of the *dps1* mutant were complemented by mSPS1 or hDPS1, but mDLP1 or hDLP1 failed to suppress the mutant phenotypes of the *dlp1* mutant. Moreover, when we expressed heterologous combinations of the murine, human and *S. pombe* enzyme components in *E. coli* and examined the ubiquinone types generated (Table 1), we found again that hDLP1 and mDLP1 could not complex with SpDps1 to produce a functional enzyme. In contrast, *E. coli* cells expressing the mSPS1-hDLP1 or hDPS1-mDLP1 heterologous combinations produced both Q₁₀ and Q₉. These observations together indicate two points. First, although *S. pombe* SpDlp1 cannot be substituted by murine or human homologs, the remaining combinations produce viable enzymes. Second, it appears that both components contribute to determining the side chain of ubiquinone, although the hDPS1 or mSPS1 protein appears to have a stronger effect because more Q₉ is produced when mSPS1-hDLP1 is expressed than when hDPS1-mDLP1 is expressed.

We found that even when the complemented *S. pombe dps1* or *dlp1* disruptants described above produced just one-thirtieth of the wild-type levels of ubiquinone, these levels were sufficient to induce growth recovery, prevent sulfide production, and stress sensitivity in fission yeast. This suggests that wild-type cells generally contain considerably more ubiquinone than is required for basic cell metabolism.

Why did a heteromeric structure of trans-prenyl diphosphate synthase evolve in mammals? It is possible that these heteromeric prenyl diphosphate synthases may have evolved from the homodimeric prokaryotic synthases. Supporting this notion is our previous study with the homodimeric octaprenyl diphosphate synthase from *E. coli*. We previously showed that when *E. coli* is transformed with a construct encoding an octaprenyl diphosphate synthase molecule that is functionally inactive due to a mutation, an active enzyme is nonetheless formed when the mutant is paired with the wild-type enzyme [49]. This observation suggests that the components of the homodimeric enzyme could be subjected to evolutionary alteration, wherein they act in a heteromeric form with another molecule.

The finding that the mammalian long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases are heterotetrameric enzymes like that in *S. pombe* suggests that the ubiquinone biosynthetic pathway may not be as conserved as is currently believed. It may thus be necessary to examine this possibility by further characterizing the *S. pombe* genes and comparing them with mammalian genes responsible for ubiquinone biosynthesis. It would be also important to take these approaches for understanding the genetic diseases caused by Q₁₀ deficiency in human [25].

### Experimental procedures

#### Materials

Restriction enzymes and other DNA-modifying enzymes were purchased from Takara Shuzo Co. Ltd. (Kyoto, Japan) and New England Biolabs, Inc. (Beverly, MA, USA) [1-¹⁴C]IPP (1.96 TBq·mol⁻¹) was purchased from Amersham Biosciences (Piscataway, NJ, USA). IPP, all-E-farnesyl diphosphate (FPP), geranylgeraniol (GGOH), solanesol (all-E-nonaprenol), and polyterpenols (C40–C60) from *Ailanthus altissima* were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co (St Louis, MO, USA). Kiesel gel 60 F₂₅₄ TLC plates were purchased from Merck (Rahway, NJ, USA). Reverse-phase LKC-18 TLC plates were purchased from Whatman Chemical Separation (Middlesex, UK). The mSPS1 clone (GenBank accession no. BF180140) from mouse muscles, the mDLP1 clone (GenBank accession nos BE283879 and AI097731) from mouse liver, the hDPS1 clone (GenBank accession nos AI1590245 and AI261617) from human kidney and the hDLP1 clone (GenBank accession nos AI1742294 and BI551760) from human brain were purchased from Genome Systems Inc. (Wilmington, DE, USA).

#### Strains and plasmids

*E. coli* strains DH10B, DH5α and BL21(DE3) were used for general plasmid construction [50]. The pBluescript II SK⁺-, pBluescript II KS⁺-, pT7Blue-T (Novagen, Madison, WI, USA), pSTV28 (Takara Shuzo), pSTVK28 (Km' marker harboring pSTV28), pQE31 (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA), pGEX-KG (Amersham Biosciences), pET-28c (Novagen, Madison, WI, USA), pREP1 [51] and pREP2 (the LEU2 marker of pREP1 was exchanged with the *ura4* marker) plasmids served as vectors. pRDPS1, pBSDPS1 and pSTVDLP1 have been described previously [9]. The *S. pombe* strain SP870 (*h⁹⁰leu1-32 ade6-M210 ura4-D18*) [52] served as the homothallic haploid wild-type. KS10 (*h⁺leu1-32 ade6-M210 ura4-D18Δdps1::ura4*) and RS312 (*h⁺leu1-32 ade6-M210 ura4-D18Δdlp1::ura4*) were used as host strains to express human or murine long-chain trans-prenyl diphosphate synthase components [7,9]. Yeast cells were grown in YE (0.5% yeast extract, 3% glucose) or PM minimal medium with appropriate supplements as described [53]. YEA and PMA consist of YE and PM, respectively, which contain 75 μg of adenine per mL. The concentration of the supplemented amino acids was 100 μg·mL⁻¹.

R. Saiki et al.                                                                 Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

Plasmid construction

Cloning, restriction enzyme analysis, and preparation of plasmid DNAs were performed essentially as described previously [50]. Primers used for construction of plasmids are shown in Table 2. The maps of constructed plasmid are shown in Fig. 2.

To express the mSPS1 gene in E. coli and S. pombe, two oligonucleotides mouseSPS1-N and mouseSPS1-C were used to amplify the 1.2 kb fragment containing the mSPS1 gene. The resulting DNA was digested with EcoRI and SalI and cloned into the same sites of pBluescript II SK+ to yield pBmSPS1. The amplified mSPS1 fragment was also digested with NdeI and SalI and cloned into the same sites of pREP1 to yield pRmSPS1. To construct pGEX-mSPS1, two other oligonucleotides mSPS1-Ntag and mSPS1-Ctag were used to amplify the mSPS1 gene. The amplified fragment was cloned into the BamHI and XbaI sites of pGEX-KG to yield pGEX-mSPS1. To express the mDLP1 gene, two oligonucleotides mDLP1-N and mDLP1-C were used to amplify the 1.2 kb fragment containing the mDLP1 gene. The resulting DNA was digested with EcoRI and BamHI and cloned into the same sites of pSTVK28 to yield pSTVmDLP1. The amplified mDLP1 fragment was also digested with SalI and BamHI and cloned into the same sites of pREP2 and pBluescript KS+ to yield pRmDLP1 and pBmDLP1, respectively. To make pET-mDLP1, pBmDLP1 was digested with SalI and NotI and then cloned into the same sites of pET-28c. To construct pGEX-mSPS1-mDLP1, pET-mDLP1 was digested with XbaI-XhoI and cloned into the same sites of pGEX-mSPS1.

To express the hDPS1 gene in E. coli and S. pombe, two oligonucleotides hDPS1-N and hDPS1-C were used to amplify the 1.2 kb fragment containing the hDPS1 gene.

The amplified DNA was cloned into SalI and BamHI sites of pUC119 and pREP1 to yield pUhDPS1 and pRhDPS1, respectively. To make pFhDPS1, two other oligonucleotides hDPS1-N2tag and hDPS1-C2tag were used to amplify the hDPS1 gene and the amplified DNA was cloned into HindIII and EcoRI sites of pFLAG-ATS. To construct pGEX-hDPS1, two oligonucleotides hDPS1-Ntag and hDPS1-Ctag were used to amplify the hDPS1 gene. The amplified fragment was cloned into the BamHI and XbaI sites of pGEX-KG to yield pGEX-hDPS1. To express the hDLP1 gene, the oligonucleotides hDLP1-N and hDLP1-C were used to amplify a 1.2 kb fragment containing the hDLP1 gene. The amplified DNA was cloned into the BamHI and Smal sites of pREP2 and pBluescript SK+ to yield pRhDLP1 and pBhDLP1, respectively. To make pSTVhDLP1, pBhDLP1 was digested with BamHI and HindIII and then cloned into the same sites of pSTVK28. pSTVhDLP1 was digested with pQE31 to yield pQhDLP1, which was in turn digested with XhoI and HindIII and cloned into the SalI and HindIII sites of pSTV28 to yield pSTVHIShDLP1. To make pET-hDLP1, hDLP1-Ntag and hDLP1-Ctag were used to amplify the hDLP1 gene. The amplified fragment was cloned into SalI and NotI sites of pET-28c to yield pET-hDLP1. To construct pGEX-hDLPS1-hDLP1, pET-hDLP1 was digested with XbaI-XhoI and then cloned into the same sites of pGEX-hDPS1 to yield pGEX-hDPS1-hDLP1.

DNA sequences

DNA sequences for murine solanesyl diphosphate synthase encoded by mSPS1 (Accession no. AB210841) and mDLP1 (Accession no. AB210840), and for human decaprenyl diphosphate synthase encoded by hDPS1 (Accession no.

Table 2. Oligonucleotide primers used in this study.

| Name           | Sequence                                                                 | Created sites   |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|
| mouseSPS1-N    | 5'-GCCATATGGCGAATTCGATGCGCTGGTCGT-3'                                      | (Ndel, EcoRI)   |
| mouseSPS1-C    | 5'-GCGTGCACTCATTTATCTCTGGTGT-3'                                           | (SalI)          |
| mSPS1-Ntag     | 5'-GCGGATCCATGGCTATGCGCTGGTCGTG-3'                                        | (BamHI)         |
| mSPS1-Ctag     | 5'-TATCTAGATCATTATCTCTGGTGAGCAC-3'                                        | (Xbal)          |
| mDLP1-N        | 5'-GCGTCGACGAATTCTATGAGCCTCCGGCAG-3'                                      | (SalI, EcoRI)   |
| mDLP1-C        | 5'-CCGGATCCTCAAGAAAATCTGGTCACAGC-3'                                       | (BamHI)         |
| hDPS1-N        | 5'-AAGTCGACAATGGCCTCGCGCTGGTGGCGGTG-3'                                    | (SalI)          |
| hDPS1-C        | 5'-GGCGGATCCTCATTTATCTCTGTGAGTACAATTTTC-3'                                | (BamHI)         |
| hDPS1-N2tag    | 5'-ACAAAGCTTATGGCCTCGCGCTGGTGGCGGTG-3'                                    | (HindIII)       |
| hDPS1-C2tag    | 5'-CCGGAATTCTCATTTATCTCTTTGTGAGTACAATTTTC-3'                              | (EcoRI)         |
| hDPS1-Ntag     | 5'-GCGGATCCATGGCCTCGCGCTGGTGGCGGTG-3'                                     | (BamHI)         |
| hDPS1-Ctag     | 5'-TATCTAGATCATTATCTCTTGTGAGTACAATTTTC-3'                                 | (Xbal)          |
| hDLP1-N        | 5'-CTGGATCCATGAACCTTCGGCAGCTGCTGT-3'                                      | (BamHI)         |
| hDLP1-C        | 5'-TTCCCCGGGTCATGAAAATCTGGTCACAGC-3'                                      | (Smal)          |
| hDLP1-Ntag     | 5'-GCGTCGACAATGAACCTTCCGGCAGCTGCTG-3'                                     | (SalI)          |
| hDLP1-Ctag     | 5'-GTGCGGCCCCTCATGAAAATCTGGTCACAGC-3'                                     | (NotI)          |

FEBS Journal 272 (2005) 5606–5622 © 2005 FEBS
Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

AB210838) and hDLP1 (Accession no. AB210839) were deposited on DDBJ/GenBank.

### Ubiquinone extraction and measurement

Ubiquinone was extracted as described previously [8]. The crude ubiquinone extract was analyzed by normal-phase TLC using authentic Q₁₀ as the standard. Normal-phase TLC was carried out on a Kieselgel 60 F₂₅₄ plate with benzene/acetone (97:3, v/v). The ubiquinone band was collected from the TLC plate following UV visualization and extracted with chloroform/methanol (1:1, v/v). Samples were dried and redissolved in ethanol. The purified ubiquinone was further analyzed by HPLC on a C₁₈ reverse-phase column (YMC-Pack ODS-A; 150 × 60 mm) using ethanol as the solvent at a flow rate of 1 mL·min⁻¹.

### Prenyl-diphosphate synthase assay and product analysis

Prenyl diphosphate synthase activity was measured as described previously [54]. BL21 (DE3) cells harboring plasmids expressing mammalian long-chain trans-polyprenyl diphosphate synthases were ruptured by sonication with an ultrasonic disintegrator as described previously [45]. The incubation mixture consisted of 2.0 μmol MgCl₂, 0.2% (v/v) Triton X-100, 50 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.5), 5 mM KF, 10 mM iodoacetamide, 20 μmol [1-¹⁴C]IPP (specific activity 0.92 MBq·mol⁻¹), 100 μmol FPP and 1.5 mg·mL⁻¹ of the enzyme-bearing extract in a final volume of 0.5 mL. The sample mixtures were incubated for 30 min at 30 °C. Reaction products, such as prenyl diphosphates, were extracted with water-saturated 1-butanol and hydrolyzed with acid phosphatases [55]. The hydrolysis products were extracted with hexane and analyzed by reversed-phase TLC with acetone/water (19:1, v/v). Radioactivity on the plate was detected with a BAS1500-Mac imaging analyzer (Fuji Film Co., Tokyo, Japan). The plate was exposed to iodine vapor to detect the spots of the marker prenols.

### Determination of mSPS1–mDLP1 and hDPS1–hDLP1 complex sizes by gel-filtration chromatography

To measure the size of the mSPS1–mDLP1 complex by gel-filtration chromatography, *E. coli* strain JM109 was transformed with pGEX–mSPS1–mDLP1, which expresses GST-fused mSPS1 protein and His-fused mDLP1. Similarly, pGEX–hDPS1–hDLP1 was used to estimate the size of the hDPS1–hDLP1 complex. Transformants were grown to the stationary phase in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium containing ampicillin, and 0.5 mL of the culture was then inoculated into 50 mL of the same medium. A crude protein extract containing GST–mSPS1 and His–mDLP1 (or hDPS1 and hDLP1) was then prepared from the transformant by six times sonication (30 s, interval on ice for 10 s). The sample protein was then subjected to gel-filtration chromatography by being loaded onto a packed and calibrated Superdex 200 pg column (Amersham Biosciences) and being allowed to flow at 0.4 mL·min⁻¹ while monitoring at A₂₈₀ with 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) containing 300 mM NaCl, 5% (w/v) sucrose, 1% (v/v) glycerol and 0.3% (v/v) Triton X-100. Column equilibrium, gel-filtration chromatography of the prepared samples, and distribution of the total fractions were performed by employing the BioLogic LP system (BioRad) at 4 °C. The separated fractions were subjected to western blotting by using anti-GST sera (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) and anti-His sera (Qiagen), and the fraction containing the prenyl diphosphate synthase fusion proteins was determined. Molecular mass was calculated by comparison with the absorbance pattern of the Gel Filtration Standard (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA).

### Acknowledgements

This work is supported by a Grant-in-Aid from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan.

### References

1. Turunen M, Olsson J & Dallner G (2004) Metabolism and function of coenzyme Q. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 1660, 171–199.
2. Frei B, Kim MC & Ames BN (1990) Ubiquinol-10 is an effective lipid-soluble antioxidant at physiological concentrations. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 87, 4879–4883.
3. Ernster L & Dallner G (1995) Biochemical, physiological and medical aspects of ubiquinone function. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 1271, 195–204.
4. Witting P, Pettersson K, Letters J & Stocker R (2000) Anti-atherogenic effect of coenzyme Q10 in apolipoprotein E gene knockout mice. *Free Radical Biol Med* 29, 295–305.
5. Crane FL (2001) Biochemical functions of coenzyme Q. *J Am Coll Nutr* 20, 591–598.
6. Do TQ, Schultz JR & Clarke CF (1996) Enhanced sensitivity of ubiquinone-deficient mutants of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* to products of autoxidized polyunsaturated fatty acids. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 93, 7534–7539.
7. Suzuki K, Okada K, Kamiya Y, Zhu X, Tanaka K, Nakagawa T, Kawamukai M & Matsuda H (1997) Analysis of the decaprenyl diphosphate synthase (*dps*) gene in fission yeast suggests a role of ubiquinone as an antioxidant. *J Biochem (Tokyo)* 121, 496–505.
R. Saiki *et al.*

Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

8 Uchida N, Suzuki K, Saiki R, Kainou T, Tanaka K, Matsuda H & Kawamukai M (2000) Phenotypes of fission yeast defective in ubiquinone production due to disruption of the gene for p-hydroxybenzoate polyprenyl diphosphate transferase. *J Bacteriol* 182, 6933–6939.

9 Saiki R, Nagata A, Uchida N, Kainou T, Matsuda H & Kawamukai M (2003) Fission yeast decaprenyl diphosphate synthase consists of Dps1 and the newly characterized Dlp1 protein in a novel heterotetrameric structure. *Eur J Biochem* 270, 4113–4121.

10 Saiki R, Ogiyama Y, Kainou T, Nishi T, Matsuda H & Kawamukai M (2003) Pleiotropic phenotypes of fission yeast defective in ubiquinone-10 production. A study from the *abc1Sp* (*coq8Sp*) mutant. *Biofactors* 18, 229–235.

11 Weghe VJ & Ow D (1999) A fission yeast gene for mitochondrial sulfide oxidation. *J Biol Chem* 274, 13250–13257.

12 Bader M, Muse W, Ballou DP, Gassner C & Bardwell JCA (1999) Oxidative protein folding is driven by the electron transport system. *Cell* 98, 217–227.

13 Ewbank JJ, Barnes TM, Lakowski B, Lussier M, Bussey H & Hekimi S (1997) Structural and functional conservation of the *Caenorhabditis elegans* timing gene *clk-1*. *Science* 275, 980–983.

14 Jonassen T, Marbois BN, Faull KF, Clarke CF & Larsen PL (2002) Development and fertility in *Caenorhabditis elegans clk-1* mutants depend upon transport of dietary coenzyme Q8 to mitochondria. *J Biol Chem* 277, 45020–45027.

15 Larsen PL & Clarke CF (2002) Extension of life-span in *Caenorhabditis elegans* by a diet lacking coenzyme Q. *Science* 295, 120–123.

16 Rodriguez-Aguilera JC, Gavilan A, Asencio C & Navas P (2005) The role of ubiquinone in *Caenorhabditis elegans* longevity. *Ageing Res Rev* 4, 41–53.

17 Kawamukai M (2002) Biosynthesis, bioproduction and novel roles of ubiquinone. *J Biosci Bioeng* 94, 511–517.

18 Suzuki K, Ueda M, Yuasa M, Nakagawa T, Kawamukai M & Matsuda H (1994) Evidence that *Escherichia coli ubiA* product is a functional homolog of yeast COQ2, and the regulation of *ubiA* gene expression. *Biosci Biotech Biochem* 58, 1814–1819.

19 Okada K, Ohara K, Yazaki K, Nozaki K, Uchida N, Kawamukai M, Nojiri H & Yamane H (2004) The *AtPPT1* gene encoding 4-hydroxybenzoate polyprenyl diphosphate transferase in ubiquinone biosynthesis is required for embryo development in *Arabidopsis thaliana*. *Plant Mol Biol* 55, 567–577.

20 Okada K, Kamiya Y, Zhu X, Suzuki K, Tanaka K, Nakagawa T, Matsuda H & Kawamukai M (1997) Cloning of the *sdsA* gene encoding solanesyl diphosphate synthase from *Rhodobacter capsulatus* and its functional expression in *Escherichia coli* and *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *J Bacteriol* 179, 5992–5998.

21 Okada K, Kainou T, Matsuda H & Kawamukai M (1998) Biological significance of the side chain length of ubiquinone in *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *FEBS Lett* 431, 241–244.

22 Okada K, Minehira M, Zhu X, Suzuki K, Nakagawa T, Matsuda H & Kawamukai M (1997) The *ispB* gene encoding octaprenyl diphosphate synthase is essential for growth of *Escherichia coli*. *J Bacteriol* 179, 3058–3060.

23 Jonassen T, Davis DE, Larsen PL & Clarke CF (2003) Reproductive fitness and quinone content of *Caenorhabditis elegans clk-1* mutants fed coenzyme Q isoforms of varying length. *J Biol Chem* 278, 51735–51742.

24 Kawamukai M (1998) Recent advance of the biosynthesis and the function of ubiquinone. *Seikagaku* 70, 1344–1349.

25 Ogasahara S, Engel AG, Frens D & Mack D (1989) Muscle coenzyme Q deficiency in familial mitochondrial encephalomyopathy. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 86, 2379–2382.

26 Forsgren M, Attersand A, Lake S, Grunler J, Swiezenska E, Dallner G & Climent I (2004) Isolation and functional expression of human *COQ2*, a gene encoding a polyprenyl transferase involved in the synthesis of CoQ. *Biochem J* 382, 519–526.

27 Jonassen T & Clarke CF (2000) Isolation and functional expression of human *COQ3*, a gene encoding a methyltransferase required for ubiquinone biosynthesis. *J Biol Chem* 275, 12381–12387.

28 Asaumi S, Kuroyanagi H, Seki N & Shirasawa T (1999) Orthologues of the *Caenorhabditis elegans* longevity gene *clk-1* in mouse and human. *Genomics* 58, 293–301.

29 Tzagoloff A & Dieckmann CL (1990) *PET* genes of *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. *Microbiol Rev* 54, 211–225.

30 Koyama T (1999) Molecular analysis of prenyl chain elongating enzymes. *Biosci Biotechnol Biochem* 63, 1671–1676.

31 Guo RT, Kuo CJ, Chou CC, Ko TP, Shr HL, Liang PH & Wang AH (2004) Crystal structure of octaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase from hyperthermophilic *Thermotoga maritima* and mechanism of product chain length determination. *J Biol Chem* 279, 4903–4912.

32 Liang PH, Ko T & Wang AH (2002) Structure, mechanism and function of prenyltransferases. *Eur J Biochem* 269, 3339–3354.

33 Zhu X, Suzuki K, Okada K, Tanaka K, Nakagawa T, Kawamukai M & Matsuda H (1997) Cloning and functional expression of a novel geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase gene from *Arabidopsis thaliana* in *Escherichia coli*. *Plant Cell Physiol* 38, 357–361.

34 Kainou T, Kawamura K, Tanaka K, Matsuda H & Kawamukai M (1999) Identification of the *GGPS1* genes encoding geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthases from mouse and human. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 1437, 333–340.

Mammalian prenyl diphosphate synthases

35 Okada K, Saito T, Nakagawa T, Kawamukai M & Kamiya Y (2000) Five geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthases expressed in different organs are localized into three subcellular compartments in *Arabidopsis*. *Plant Physiol* 122, 1045–1056.

36 Zhu X, Suzuki K, Saito T, Okada K, Tanaka K, Nakanaga T, Matsuda H & Kawamukai M (1997) Geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase encoded by the newly isolated gene GGPS6 from *Arabidopsis thaliana* is localized in mitochondria. *Plant Mol Biol* 35, 331–341.

37 Wilkin DJ, Kutsunai SY & Edwards PA (1990) Isolation and sequence of the human farnesyl pyrophosphate synthetase cDNA. Coordinate regulation of the mRNAs for farnesyl pyrophosphate synthetase, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase, and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A synthase by phorbol ester. *J Biol Chem* 265, 4607–4614.

38 Engprasert S, Taura F, Kawamukai M & Shoyama Y (2004) Molecular cloning and functional expression of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate synthase from *Coleus forskohlii* Briq. *BMC Plant Biol* 4, 18.

39 Okada K, Kainou T, Tanaka K, Nakagawa T, Matsuda H & Kawamukai M (1998) Molecular cloning and mutational analysis of the *ddsA* gene encoding decaprenyl diphosphate synthase from *Gluconobacter suboxydans*. *Eur J Biochem* 255, 52–59.

40 Jun L, Saiki R, Tatsumi K, Nakagawa T & Kawamukai M (2004) Identification and subcellular localization of two solanesyl diphosphate synthases from *Arabidopsis thaliana*. *Plant Cell Physiol* 45, 1882–1888.

41 Teclebrhan H, Olsson J, Swiezewska E & Dallner G (1993) Biosynthesis of the side chain of ubiquinone: trans-prenyltransferase in rat liver microsomes. *J Biol Chem* 268, 23081–23086.

42 Runquist M, Ericsson J, Thelin A, Chojnacki T & Dallner G (1994) Isoprenoid biosynthesis in rat liver mitochondria. Studies on farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase and trans-prenyltransferase. *J Biol Chem* 269, 5804–5809.

43 Ashby MN & Edwards PA (1990) Elucidation of the deficiency in two yeast coenzyme Q mutants. Characterization of the structural gene encoding hexaprenyl pyrophosphate synthetase. *J Biol Chem* 265, 13157–13164.

44 Hirooka K, Bamba T, Fukusaki E-i & Kobayashi A (2003) Cloning and kinetic characterization of *Arabidopsis thaliana* solanesyl diphosphate synthase. *Biochem J* 370, 679–686.

45 Asai K-i, Fujisaki S, Nishimura Y, Nishino T, Okada K, Nakagawa T, Kawamukai M & Matsuda H (1994) The identification of *Escherichia coli ispB* (*cel*) gene encoding the octaprenyl diphosphate synthase. *Biochem Biophys Res Commun* 202, 340–345.

46 Shimizu N, Koyama T & Ogura K (1998) Molecular cloning, expression, and characterization of the genes encoding the two essential protein components of *Micrococcus luteus* B-P 26 hexaprenyl diphosphate synthase. *J Bacteriol* 180, 1578–1581.

47 Zhang Y-W, Koyama T & Ogura K (1997) Two cis-trons of the *gerC* operon of *Bacillus subtilis* encode the two subunits of heptaprenyl diphosphate synthase. *J Bacteriol* 179, 1417–1419.

48 Burke CC, Wildung MR & Croteau R (1999) Geranyl diphosphate synthase: cloning, expression, and characterization of this prenyltransferase as a heterodimer. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 96, 13062–13067.

49 Kainou T, Okada K, Suzuki K, Nakagawa T, Matsuda H & Kawamukai M (2001) Dimer formation of octaprenyl diphosphate synthase (IspB) is essential for chain length determination of ubiquinone. *J Biol Chem* 276, 7876–7883.

50 Sambrook J, Fritsch EF & Maniatis T (1989) *Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual*, 2nd edn. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.

51 Maundrell K (1993) Thiamine-repressible expression vectors pREP and pRIP for fission yeast. *Gene* 123, 127–130.

52 Kawamukai M, Gerst J, Field J, Riggs M, Rodgers L, Wigler M & Young D (1992) Genetic and biochemical analysis of the adenylyl cyclase-associated protein, cap. *Schizosaccharomyces pombe*. *Mol Biol Cell* 3, 167–180.

53 Kawamukai M, Ferguson K, Wigler M & Young D (1991) Genetic and biochemical analysis of the adenylyl cyclase of *Schizosaccharomyces pombe*. *Cell Regul* 2, 155–164.

54 Okada K, Suzuki K, Kamiya Y, Zhu X, Fujisaki S, Nishimura Y, Nishino T, Nakagawa T, Kawamukai M & Matsuda H (1996) Polyprenyl diphosphate synthase essentially defines the length of the side chain of ubiquinone. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 1302, 217–223.

55 Fujii H, Koyama T & Ogura K (1982) Efficient enzymatic hydrolysis of polyprenyl pyrophosphates. *Biochim Biophys Acta* 712, 716–718.
