
Vancomycin Resistance in Gram-Positive Cocci

**Patrice Courvalin**

Unité des Agents Antibactériens, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France

---

The first vancomycin-resistant clinical isolates of *Enterococcus* species were reported in Europe in 1988. Similar strains were later detected in hospitals on the East Coast of the United States. Since then, vancomycin-resistant enterococci have spread with unexpected rapidity and are now encountered in hospitals in most countries. This article reviews the mode of action and the mechanism of bacterial resistance to glycopeptides, as exemplified by the VanA type, which is mediated by transposon Tn1546 and is widely spread in enterococci. The diversity, regulation, evolution, and recent dissemination of methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* are then discussed.

The first vancomycin-resistant clinical isolates of *Enterococcus* species were reported in Europe in 1988 [1, 2]. Similar strains were later detected in hospitals on the East Coast of the United States [3]. Since then, vancomycin-resistant enterococci have spread with unexpected rapidity and are now encountered in hospitals in most countries [4].

### MODE OF ACTION OF VANCOMYCIN

The synthesis of peptidoglycan in the production of bacterial cell walls requires several steps. In the cytoplasm, a racemase converts L-alanine to D-alanine (D-Ala), and then 2 molecules of D-Ala are joined by a ligase, creating the dipeptide D-Ala-D-Ala, which is then added to uracil diphosphate–N-acetylmuramyl-tripeptide to form uracil diphosphate–N-acetylmuramyl-pentapeptide. Uracil diphosphate–N-acetylmuramyl-pentapeptide is bound to the undecaprenol lipid carrier, which, after the addition of GlcNAc from uracil diphosphate–GlcNAc, allows translocation of the precursors to the outer surface of the cytoplasmic membrane. N-acetylmuramyl-pentapeptide is then incorporated into nascent peptidoglycan by transglycosylation and allows the formation of cross-bridges by transpeptidation [5].

Vancomycin binds with high affinity to the D-Ala-D-Ala C-terminus of the pentapeptide, thus blocking the addition of late precursors by transglycosylation to the nascent peptidoglycan chain and preventing subsequent cross-linking by transpeptidation (figure 1) [5]. Vancomycin does not penetrate into the cytoplasm; therefore, interaction with its target can take place only after translocation of the precursors to the outer surface of the membrane.

### MECHANISM OF RESISTANCE TO VANCOMYCIN

Because vancomycin does not interact with cell wall biosynthetic enzymes but forms complexes with peptidoglycan precursors, its activity is not determined by the affinity for a target enzyme but by the substrate specificity of the enzymes that determine the structure of peptidoglycan precursors. Resistance to vancomycin is due to the presence of operons that encode enzymes (1) for synthesis of low-affinity precursors, in which the C-terminal D-Ala residue is replaced by D-lactate (D-Lac) or D-serine (D-Ser), thus modifying the vancomycin-binding target; and (2) for elimination of the high-affinity precursors that are normally produced by the host, thus removing the vancomycin-binding target [6].

#### Target modification

VanA-type resistance, which is characterized by inducible high levels of resistance to vancomycin and teicoplanin (table 1), was the first type of resistance described and is mediated by transposon Tn1546 and elements closely related to it. The transposon encodes a dehydrogenase (VanH), which

---

Reprints or correspondence: Dr. Patrice Courvalin, Unité des Agents Antibactériens, Institut Pasteur, 25, rue du Docteur Roux, 75724 Paris, Cedex 15, France (pcourval@pasteur.fr).

Clinical Infectious Diseases 2006;42:S25–34  
© 2005 by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved.  
1058-4838/2006/4201S1-0005$15.00

Vancomycin-Resistant Gram-Positive Cocci • CID 2006:42 (Suppl 1) • S25

Cell wall
- carboxypeptidase
- transpeptidase
- transglycosylase

Membrane
- glycopeptide

Cytoplasm
- L-Ala
  - racemase
    - D-Ala
      - Ddl ligase
        - D-Ala-D-Ala
          - UDP - tripeptide
            - L-Ala-D-Glu-L-Lys
              - MurF
                - UDP - pentapeptide
                  - Lipid carrier
                    - N-acetylmuramic acid
                      - N-acetylglucosamine

Figure 1. Peptidoglycan biosynthesis and mechanism of action of vancomycin. Binding of the antibiotic to the C-terminal D-Ala-D-Ala of late peptidoglycan precursors prevents reactions catalyzed by transglycosylases, transpeptidases, and the D,D-carboxypeptidases. Ddl, D-Ala:D-Ala ligase; MurF, a synthetase protein; UDP, uracil diphosphate.

reduces pyruvate to D-Lac, and the VanA ligase, which catalyzes the formation of an ester bond between D-Ala and D-Lac (figure 2) [6]. The resulting D-Ala-D-Lac depsipeptide replaces the D-Ala-D-Ala dipeptide in peptidoglycan synthesis, a substitution that decreases the affinity of the molecule for glycopeptides considerably [7].

The VanC resistance phenotype was described first in Enterococcus gallinarum [8] and then in the Enterococcus casseliflavus–Enterococcus flavescens [9] species, which possess intrinsic low levels of resistance to vancomycin and are susceptible to teicoplanin (table 1). Three genes are required for VanC-type resistance (figure 3): *vanT* encodes the VanT membrane-bound serine racemase, which produces D-Ser; the *vanC* gene product VanC synthesizes D-Ala-D-Ser, which replaces D-Ala-D-Ala in late peptidoglycan precursors; and *vanXYc* encodes the VanXY<sub>C</sub> protein, which possesses both D,D-dipeptidase and D,D-carboxypeptidase activities and allows hydrolysis of precursors ending in D-Ala [10]. Substitution of the ultimate D-Ala by a D-Ser results in steric hindrance that reduces its affinity for vancomycin [11].

**Removal of the susceptible target.** The simultaneous production of precursors ending in D-Ala or D-Lac does not lead

Table 1. Level and type of resistance to vancomycin in enterococci.

| Strain characteristic | Acquired resistance level, type | Intrinsic resistance, low level, type VanC 1/C2/C3 |
|-----------------------|---------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
|                       | High, VanA                     | Variable, VanB                               | Moderate, VanD                                | Low, VanG                                     | VanE                                           |
| MIC, mg/L             | 64–100                         | 4–1000                                       | 64–128                                        | 16                                            | 8–32                                           | 2–32                                           |
| Teicoplanin           | 16–512                         | 0.5–1                                        | 4–64                                          | 0.5                                           | 0.5                                            | 0.5–1                                          |
| Conjugation           | Positive                       | Positive                                     | Negative                                      | Positive                                      | Negative                                       | Negative                                       |
| Mobile element        | Tn1546                         | Tn1547 or Tn1549                             | ...                                           | ...                                           | ...                                            | ...                                            |
| Expression            | Inducible                      | Inducible                                    | Constitutive                                  | Inducible                                     | Inducible                                      | Constitutive Inducible                          |
| Location              | Plasmid chromosome             | Plasmid chromosome                           | Chromosome                                    | Chromosome                                    | Chromosome                                     | Chromosome                                     |
| Modified target       | D-Ala-D-Lac                    | D-Ala-D-Lac                                  | D-Ala-D-Lac                                   | D-Ala-D-Ser                                   | D-Ala-D-Ser                                    | D-Ala-D-Ser                                    |

NOTE. D-Ala-D-Lac, D-alanine-D-lactate; D-Ala-D-Ser, D-alanine-D-serine.

Ddl

L-Ala ——> D-Ala
racemase

futile
cycle

VanX

Pyruvate ——> D-Lac
VanH

D-Ala-D-Ala

Penta

Tri
adding
enzyme

VanY

D-Ala-D-Lac ——> Pentadepsi ——> Pentadepsi

regulation required for glycopeptide resistance accessory proteins

$P_{R}$ vanR ——> vanS $P_{H}$ vanH ——> vanA ——> vanX ——> vanY ——> vanZ
regulator sensor dehydrogenase ligase D,D-dipeptidase D,D-carboxypeptidase unknown Te${}^{R}$

Figure 2. VanA-type glycopeptide resistance. Top, Synthesis of peptidoglycan precursors in a VanA-type resistant strain. Ddl, D-Ala:D-Ala ligase; penta, L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys-D-Ala-D-Ala; Pentadepsi, L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys-D-Ala-D-Lac; Tetra, L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys-D-Ala; Tri, L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys. Bottom, Organization of the vanA operon. Open arrows represent coding sequences and indicate the direction of transcription. The regulatory and resistance genes are cotranscribed from promoters $P_{R}$ and $P_{H}$, respectively.

to resistance [12]. Under these conditions, binding of glycopeptides to precursors that contain D-Ala-D-Ala inhibits peptidoglycan synthesis. The interaction of vancomycin with its target is prevented by the removal of the susceptible precursors that terminate in D-Ala [13]. Two enzymes are involved in this process (figure 2): the VanX D,D-dipeptidase, which hydrolyzes the D-Ala-D-Ala dipeptide synthesized by the host D-Ala:D-Ala ligase (Ddl) [14], and the VanY D,D-carboxypeptidase, which removes the C-terminal D-Ala residue of late peptidoglycan precursors when elimination of D-Ala-D-Ala by VanX is incomplete [15]. As opposed to VanA-type resistance, in which the VanX and VanY activities are catalyzed by 2 enzymes (figure 2) [15], VanXY${}_{C}$ has both D,D-dipeptidase and D,D-carboxypeptidase activity (figure 3) [16].

**Types of resistance.** Six types of vancomycin resistance have been characterized on both a phenotypic and a genotypic basis in enterococci (table 1). Five of these types (VanA, B, D, E, and G) correspond to acquired resistance; one type (VanC) is an intrinsic property of *E. gallinarum* and *E. casseliflavus-E. flavescens*. Classification of glycopeptide resistance is currently based on the primary sequence of the structural genes for the resistance ligases rather than on the levels of resistance to glycopeptides, because the MIC ranges of vancomycin and teicoplanin against the various types overlap (table 1). VanA-type strains display high levels of inducible resistance to both vancomycin and teicoplanin, whereas VanB-type strains have variable levels of inducible resistance to vancomycin only [12].

VanD-type strains are characterized by constitutive resistance to moderate levels of the 2 glycopeptides [17]. VanC-, VanE-, and VanG-type strains are resistant to low levels of vancomycin but remain susceptible to teicoplanin [10].

Although the 6 types of resistance involve related enzymatic functions, they can be distinguished by the location of the corresponding genes and by the mode of regulation of gene expression. The vanA and vanB operons are located on plasmids or in the chromosome [6], whereas the vanD [17], vanC [18], vanE [19], and vanG [20] operons have, thus far, been found only in the chromosome.

**VanA.** VanA is the most frequently encountered type of glycopeptide resistance in enterococci and, to date, is the only one detected in *Staphylococcus aureus* (table 1; figure 2). The prototype Tn1546 VanA-type resistance element, which was originally detected on a plasmid in an *Enterococcus faecium* clinical isolate, is an 11-kb transposon. It encodes 9 polypeptides that can be assigned to various functional groups: transposition (ORF1 and ORF2), regulation of resistance gene expression (VanR and VanS), synthesis of the D-Ala-D-Lac depsipeptide (VanH and VanA), and hydrolysis of peptidoglycan precursors (VanX and VanY); the function of VanZ remains unknown.

The VanR and VanS proteins are part of a 2-component regulatory system that modulates transcription of the resistance gene cluster [21]. This system is composed of a cytoplasmic VanR response regulator, which acts as a transcriptional activator, and a membrane-bound VanS histidine kinase (figure 4).

L-Ala
racemase
D-Ala
Ddl
futile
cycle
D-Ala-D-Ala
VanXYC
L-Ser
VanT
D-Ser
VanC
D-Ala-D-Ser
Tetra D-Ala
VanXYC
Tri
adding
enzyme
Tetra
Tetra D-Ala
Tetra-D-Ser
resistance
regulation
vanC
ligase
vanXYc
D,D-peptidase
vanT
serine
racemase
vanRc
regulator
vanSc
sensor

Figure 3. VanC-type glycopeptide resistance. Top, Synthesis of peptidoglycan precursors in a VanC-type strain. Ddl, D-Ala:D-Ala ligase; penta, L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys-D-Ala-D-Ala; Pentadepsi, L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys-D-Ala-D-Lac; Tetra, L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys-D-Ala; Tri, L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys. Bottom, Organization of the vanC operon. Open arrows represent coding sequences and indicate the direction of transcription.

The vanA gene cluster has been found mainly in E. faecium and Enterococcus faecalis but also in Enterococcus avium, Enterococcus durans, Enterococcus raffinosus, and atypical isolates of E. gallinarum and E. casseliflavus, which are highly resistant to both vancomycin and teicoplanin.

VanB. As in VanA-type strains, acquired VanB-type resistance is due to synthesis of peptidoglycan precursors ending in the depsipeptide D-Ala-D-Lac instead of the dipeptide D-Ala-D-Ala [12]. The organization and functionality of the vanB cluster is similar to that of vanA but differs in its regulation, because vancomycin, but not teicoplanin, is an inducer of the vanB cluster (table 1). The vanB operon contains genes encoding a dehydrogenase, a ligase, and a dipeptidase, all of which have a high level of sequence identity (67%–76% identity) with

Signal
NH₂
VanS
Membrane
Cytoplasm
Kinase
COOH
His ← P — ATP
P
Asp
VanR
NH₂
Receptor
Effector
(DNA binding domain)
COOH

Figure 4. VanRS 2-component regulatory system. Asp, aspartate; His, histidine; P, phosphate.

L-Ala → D-Ala
racemase

Ddl

Tri
adding
enzyme

Pyruvate → D-Lac
VanH<sub>D</sub>

VanD → D-Ala-D-Lac

Pentadepsi → Pentadepsi

---

regulation

resistance

$P_{RD}$ → vanR<sub>D</sub> → vanS<sub>D</sub> → $P_{YD}$ → vanY<sub>D</sub> → vanH<sub>D</sub> → vanD → vanX<sub>D</sub>

regulator
sensor
D,D-carboxypeptidase
dehydrogenase
ligase
D,D-dipeptidase

---

Figure 5. VanD-type glycopeptide resistance. Top, Synthesis of peptidoglycan precursors in a VanD-type resistant strain. Bottom, Organization of the vanD operon. Open arrows represent coding sequences and indicate the direction of transcription. The regulatory and resistance genes are cotranscribed from promoters $P_{RD}$ and $P_{YD}$, respectively. Ddl, D-alanine:D-alanine ligase; pentadepsi, L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys-D-Ala-D-Lac; Tri, L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys; X, mutated vanS<sub>D</sub> nonfunctional gene.

the corresponding deduced proteins of the vanA operon and the vanR<sub>B</sub>S<sub>B</sub> regulatory genes that encode a 2-component system only distantly related to VanRS (34% and 24% identity) [22]. The function of the additional VanW protein found only in the vanB cluster is unknown, and there is no gene related to vanZ. On the basis of sequence differences, the vanB gene cluster can be divided into 3 subtypes: vanB1, vanB2, and vanB3 [23, 24]. There is no correlation between the vanB subtype and the level of resistance to vancomycin.

VanD. Acquired VanD-type resistance is due to constitutive production of peptidoglycan precursors ending in D-Ala-D-Lac (table 1) [17]. The organization of the vanD operon, which is located exclusively in the chromosome in strains that have been studied, is similar to that of vanA and vanB [17]. However, no genes homologous to vanZ or vanW from the vanA and vanB operons, respectively, are present. VanD-type strains share other characteristics that distinguish them from VanA- and VanB-type enterococci. Resistance is constitutive and is not transferable by conjugation to other enterococci [17]. VanD-type strains have negligible D,D-dipeptidase activity, which should result in a susceptible phenotype, because these bacteria are unable to eliminate peptidoglycan precursors ending in D-Ala-D-Ala, which is the target for glycopeptides. However, in VanD-type strains, the susceptible pathway does not function, because the Ddl is inactive as the result of various mutations in the chromosomal ddl gene (figure 5) [17, 25]. The gene can be disrupted by a 5-bp insertion, insertion of the IS19 element, or a point mutation. Consequently, the strains should grow only in the presence of vancomycin, because they rely on the

inducible resistance pathway for peptidoglycan synthesis. However, this is not the case because the vanD clusters are expressed constitutively as a result of mutations (frameshift or point mutation or insertion-inactivation) in the VanS<sub>D</sub> sensor or a point mutation in the VanR<sub>D</sub> regulator [17, 25].

Another unusual feature of VanD-type strains is their only slightly diminished susceptibility to teicoplanin (MIC, 4 μg/mL) (table 1) despite their constitutive production of peptidoglycan precursors that terminate mainly in D-Ala-D-Lac. VanD-type strains that constantly activate the vanD operon, by mutation in the 2-component regulatory system, and that have eliminated the susceptible pathway, by inactivation of the Ddl, provide a remarkable example of “tinkering” in both intrinsic and acquired genes to achieve higher levels of antibiotic resistance.

VanC. E. gallinarum and E. casseliflavus–E. flavescens are intrinsically resistant to low levels of vancomycin but remain susceptible to teicoplanin (table 1). The VanC phenotype is expressed constitutively or inducibly as a result of the production of peptidoglycan precursors ending in D-Ser [10]. Three vanC genes encoding D-Ala:D-Ser ligases have been described: vanC-1 in E. gallinarum, vanC-2 in E. casseliflavus, and vanC-3 in E. flavescens. The organization of the vanC operon (figure 3), which is chromosomally located and is not transferable, is distinct from those of vanA, vanB, and vanD. Three proteins are required for VanC-type resistance: VanT, a membrane-bound serine racemase, which produces D-Ser; VanC, a ligase that catalyzes synthesis of D-Ala-D-Ser; and VanXY<sub>C</sub>, which possesses both D,D-dipeptidase and D,D-carboxypeptidase activities and allows hydrolysis of precursors ending in D-Ala (figure

L-Ala → D-Ala → Ddl → D-Ala-D-Lac → Pentadepsi

pyruvate → VanH<sub>B</sub> → D-Lac → VanB → D-Ala-D-Lac → Pentadepsi

Tri
adding
enzyme

regulation
resistance

vanR<sub>B</sub> → vanS<sub>B</sub> → vanY<sub>B</sub> → vanW → vanH<sub>B</sub> → vanB → vanX<sub>B</sub>

regulator
sensor
D,D-carboxypeptidase
unknown dehydrogenase
ligase
D,D-dipeptidase

Figure 6. Synthesis of peptidoglycan precursors in a vancomycin-dependent strain. Because of inactivation of the host chromosomal D-Ala:D-Ala ligase (Ddl), the presence of vancomycin in the culture medium is required to induce expression of the resistance pathway, thus allowing cell wall synthesis. Pentadepsi, L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys-D-Ala-D-Lac; Tri, L-Ala-γ-D-Glu-L-Lys.

3). In the vanA, vanB, and vanD clusters, the genes encoding the 2-component regulatory systems (i.e., VanRS, VanR<sub>B</sub>S<sub>B</sub>, or VanR<sub>D</sub>S<sub>D</sub>) are located upstream from the resistance genes (figure 2), whereas, in the vanC cluster, these genes are downstream from vanT (figure 3). The deduced proteins of the vanC-2 operon from E. casseliflavus display high degrees of identity (71%–91% identity) with those encoded by the vanC operon, and those of the vanC-3 gene cluster from E. faecalis display extensive identity with vanC-2 (97%–100% identity), including the intergenic regions [26]. It is, therefore, difficult to distinguish between E. casseliflavus and E. faecalis as 2 different species [26].

VanE. The VanE phenotype corresponds to low-level resistance to vancomycin and susceptibility to teicoplanin due to synthesis of peptidoglycan precursors terminating in D-Ala-D-Ser as in intrinsically resistant Enterococcus species (table 1). The vanE cluster has an organization identical to that of the vanC operon [19].

VanG. Acquired VanG type is characterized by resistance to low levels of vancomycin (MIC, 16 μg/mL) but susceptibility to teicoplanin (MIC, 0.5 μg/mL) [27] and by inducible synthesis of peptidoglycan precursors ending in D-Ala-D-Ser (table 1). The chromosomal vanG cluster is composed of 7 genes recruited from various van operons [20]. In contrast to the other van operons, the cluster contains 3 genes (vanU<sub>G</sub>, vanR<sub>G</sub>, and vanS<sub>G</sub>) encoding a putative regulatory system. vanR<sub>G</sub> and vanS<sub>G</sub> have the highest similarity to vanR<sub>D</sub> and vanS<sub>D</sub>, and the additional vanU<sub>G</sub> gene encodes a predicted transcriptional activator. A protein of this type has not previously been associated with glycopeptide resistance.

Glycopeptide-dependent strains. An intriguing and clinically important phenomenon that has developed in some VanA- and VanB-type enterococci is vancomycin dependence (figure 6). These strains are not only resistant to vancomycin or to both vancomycin and teicoplanin, but also require their presence for growth. Variants of glycopeptide-resistant E. faecalis and E. faecium that grow only in the presence of glycopeptides have been isolated in vitro, in animal models, and from patients treated with vancomycin for long periods [28, 29]. In the presence of vancomycin, the vanA- or vanB-encoded D-Ala:D-Lac ligase is induced, which overcomes the defect in synthesis of peptidoglycan precursors ending in D-Ala-D-Ala because of the lack of a functional Ddl following various mutations in the ddl gene and, thus, permits growth of the bacteria [29]. Because these strains require particular growth conditions, their prevalence is probably underestimated and not easily detected by routine laboratory testing. Reversion to vancomycin independence has been observed and occurs as a result of a mutation in either the VanS or VanS<sub>B</sub> sensor, which leads to constitutive production of D-Ala-D-Lac and, thus, to teicoplanin resistance, or in the ddl gene, which restores synthesis of D-Ala-D-Ala and leads to a VanB phenotype inducible by vancomycin [29].

Regulation of resistance. Expression of glycopeptide resistance is regulated by a VanS/VanR-type 2-component signal-transduction system composed of a membrane-bound histidine kinase and a cytoplasmic response regulator that acts as a tran-

Figure 7. Positive phosphorylation and negative dephosphorylation of the VanR regulator by the VanS<sub>B</sub> sensor. Open arrows represent coding sequences and indicate the direction of transcription. The regulatory and resistance genes are cotranscribed from promoters $P_{RB}$ and $P_{YB}$, respectively. ADP, adenosine diphosphate.

scriptional activator (figure 4) [21]. VanS-type sensors comprise an N-terminal glycopeptide sensor domain with 2 membrane-spanning segments and a C-terminal cytoplasmic kinase domain (figure 4). After a signal associated with the presence of a glycopeptide in the culture medium, the cytoplasmic domain of VanS catalyzes ATP-dependent autophosphorylation on a specific histidine residue and transfers the phosphate group to an aspartate residue of VanR present in the effector domain (figure 7) [21]. VanS also stimulates dephosphorylation of VanR in the absence of glycopeptide [30]. The VanS sensor therefore modulates the phosphorylation level of the VanR regulator: it acts as a phosphatase under noninducing conditions and as a

MI-VRSA  
PA-VRSA  

Figure 8. Vancomycin susceptibility determination, by disk diffusion and by E-test, of the Michigan vancomycin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (MI-VRSA) isolate and the Pennsylvania vancomycin-resistant *S. aureus* (PA-VRSA) isolate. In both panels, the upper disk denotes vancomycin, the lower disk denotes teicoplanin, the left strip denotes vancomycin (VA), and the right strip denotes teicoplanin (TP).

clusters carried on Tn916-like conjugative transposons. Two related elements, Tn5382 (27 kb in size) [35] and Tn1549 (34 kb in size) [36], have been identified widely in the United States and in Europe.

**vanG Operon.** Transfer of VanG-type resistance is associated with the movement, from chromosome to chromosome, of genetic elements of ~240 kb that also carry *ermB*-encoded erythromycin resistance [20].

**Glycopeptide resistance in S. aureus.** The transfer of *van* resistance genes from *Enterococcus* species to *S. aureus*, which results in high levels of resistance to vancomycin, was obtained in vitro and in an animal model [37]. Most important, this transfer also occurs in vivo. Recently, 3 methicillin-resistant *S.* aureus (MRSA) isolates with high or moderate levels of resistance to vancomycin and teicoplanin have been isolated from patients in Michigan (MI-VRSA), Pennsylvania (PA-VRSA), and New York after acquisition of the *vanA* gene cluster [38–40].

Clinical isolate MI-VRSA is highly resistant to both glycopeptides [40], whereas PA-VRSA [39] and the New York VRSA strain [38] are moderately resistant to vancomycin and have reduced susceptibility to teicoplanin (figure 8). The 3 isolates harbor a plasmidborne Tn1546 element [41–43]. A vancomycin-resistant *E. faecalis* strain and a vancomycin-susceptible MRSA strain (MI-MRSA) were isolated from the same patient as MI-VRSA and are considered to be the Tn1546 donor and recipient, respectively [40]. The vancomycin-resistant *E. faecalis* strain from Michigan harbors a broad-host-range plasmid that contains a copy of Tn1546 [44], and strain MI-MRSA also contains a resident plasmid. In MI-VRSA, the Tn1546 element is borne by a plasmid that is identical to the resident plasmid in MI-MRSA except for a copy of Tn1546. Therefore, the *Enterococcus* plasmid apparently behaved as a suicide Tn1546 delivery vector to the plasmid in MI-MRSA [43]. Analysis of the nucleotide sequences flanking Tn1546 indicated that the transposon was flanked by 5-bp duplications of target DNA [45] typical of the Tn3 family of elements [46] to which Tn1546 belongs [31]. This observation confirms that Tn1546 has transposed into the plasmid of MI-MRSA. Comparative analysis of peptidoglycan precursors and of D,D-dipeptidase (VanX) and D,D-carboxypeptidase (VanY) activities indicated high similar levels of expression of the *vanA* gene clusters in the MI-VRSA and PA-VRSA strains. Thus, the difference in glycopeptide resistance between the 2 isolates is not due to a difference in *van* gene expression.

The stability of the *vanA* operon was studied in MI-VRSA and PA-VRSA by replica plating. No vancomycin-susceptible clones of MI-VRSA were obtained, whereas ~50% of the PA-VRSA derivatives were susceptible after overnight growth in the absence of vancomycin. In MI-VRSA, transposition of Tn1546 from the enterococcal to the resident plasmid rescued the incoming genetic information, whereas, in PA-VRSA, gly-

**Figure 9.** Effect of pregrowth without vancomycin (Vm0) or with 6 μg/mL vancomycin (Vm6) in the culture medium on subsequent growth of the Michigan vancomycin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (MI-VRSA) isolate (*top*) and the Pennsylvania vancomycin-resistant *S. aureus* (PA-VRSA) isolate (*bottom*). The key to the right of each panel shows the vancomycin concentration in the overnight culture/the concentration in the culture medium.

kinase in the presence of glycopeptides, leading to phosphorylation of the response regulator and activation of the resistance genes (figure 7) [30].

## GENETICS OF THE VAN OPERONS

**vanA Operon.** The *vanA* gene cluster was detected originally on the nonconjugative Tn1546 transposon [31]. VanA-type resistance in clinical isolates of enterococci is mediated by genetic elements, identical or closely related to Tn1546, that are generally carried by self-transferable plasmids [1] and, occasionally, by the host chromosome as part of larger conjugative elements [32]. Tn1546-like elements are highly conserved, except for the presence of insertion sequences that have transposed into intergenic regions that are not essential for expression of glycopeptide resistance. Conjugal transfer of plasmids that have acquired Tn1546-like elements by transposition appears to be responsible for the spread of glycopeptide resistance in enterococci.

**vanB Operon.** Gene clusters related to *vanB* are generally carried by large (90–250-kb) elements that are transferable by conjugation from chromosome to chromosome [33]. Plasmid-borne *vanB* clusters have also been detected in clinical isolates of enterococci [34]. Much of the dissemination of VanB-type resistance appears to have resulted from the spread of *vanB2*

copeptide resistance is due to the acquisition of a large plasmid, presumably also from *Enterococcus* species, that probably does not replicate efficiently in the new host.

The effect of prior induction by vancomycin on growth of the MI-VRSA and PA-VRSA isolates indicated that, as opposed to MI-VRSA, when PA-VRSA was grown overnight in the absence or presence of antibiotic and was subcultured with vancomycin, growth was delayed for a minimum of 8 h (figure 9). Taken together, these data suggest that low-level vancomycin resistance of the PA-VRSA strain, and maybe also of the New York VRSA strain, could be due to a longer delay in induction of resistance associated with a high rate of spontaneous loss of the vancomycin resistance determinant or to a low rate of loss of a resistance trait with high biological cost [45].

## CONCLUSIONS

Major advances in the understanding of the biochemical mechanisms and genetics of vancomycin resistance in enterococci have been achieved. However, the origin of the resistance genes remains unclear. The glycopeptide-producing organisms, which have to protect themselves against the products of their secondary metabolism, represent a potential source for resistance because they harbor genes encoding homologues of VanS, VanR, VanH, VanA, and VanX [47]. Alternately, the vancomycin-resistant biopesticide *Paenibacillus popilliae*, which contains the *vanF* operon related to the *vanA* cluster, could be the progenitor of the resistance genes acquired by enterococci [48].

Glycopeptides, alone or in combination, often constitute the only therapy for infection with multiresistant strains of staphylococci, streptococci, and enterococci. The emergence and dissemination of high-level resistance to vancomycin in enterococci can lead to clinical isolates resistant to all antibiotics. Although enterococci are not highly pathogenic, the incidence of vancomycin resistance among clinical isolates is steadily increasing, and such isolates have become important as nosocomial pathogens and as a reservoir of resistance genes. Dissemination of glycopeptide resistance to more pathogenic bacteria, such as staphylococci and streptococci, has occurred, because there is no barrier to heterospecific expression or gene transfer among gram-positive cocci. Such a transfer in nature may be underestimated because of low-level phenotypic expression in the new host. The 16-year delay in detection of VanA-type resistance in *S. aureus* and its apparent rarity could be due to inefficient replication of enterococcal plasmids in staphylococci. Thus, the efficacy of glycopeptide resistance transfer from *Enterococcus* species to *Staphylococcus* species, similar to the transfer to gram-negative bacteria [49], results from the combined multiplicative probabilities of the transfer process and of the mechanism of stabilization of exogenous DNA. The frequency of the second event is very low, because

transposons of the Tn3 family, Tn1546 in particular [31], are very stable genetic elements.

# Acknowledgments

I thank Florence Depardieu and Bruno Périchon for critical reading of the manuscript.

**Potential conflict of interest.** P.C. is a consultant for Sanofi-Synthelabo.

# References

1. Leclercq R, Derlot E, Duval J, Courvalin P. Plasmid-mediated resistance to vancomycin and teicoplanin in *Enterococcus faecium*. N Engl J Med 1988; 319:157–61.
2. Uttley AH, Collins CH, Naidoo J, George RC. Vancomycin-resistant enterococci. Lancet 1988; 1:57–8.
3. Frieden TR, Munsiff SS, Low DE, et al. Emergence of vancomycin-resistant enterococci in New York City. Lancet 1993; 342:76–9.
4. Bell JM, Paton JC, Turnidge J. Emergence of vancomycin-resistant enterococci in Australia: phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of isolates. J Clin Microbiol 1998; 36:2187–90.
5. Reynolds PE. Structure, biochemistry and mechanism of action of glycopeptide antibiotics. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1989; 8:943–50.
6. Arthur M, Reynolds P, Courvalin P. Glycopeptide resistance in enterococci. Trends Microbiol 1996; 4:401–7.
7. Bugg TD, Wright GD, Dutka-Malen S, Arthur M, Courvalin P, Walsh CT. Molecular basis for vancomycin resistance in *Enterococcus faecium* BM4147: biosynthesis of a depsipeptide peptidoglycan precursor by vancomycin resistance proteins VanH and VanA. Biochemistry 1991; 30:10408–15.
8. Leclercq R, Dutka-Malen S, Duval J, Courvalin P. Vancomycin resistance gene *vanC* is specific to *Enterococcus gallinarum*. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1992; 36:2005–8.
9. Navarro F, Courvalin P. Analysis of genes encoding D-alanine-D-alanine ligase-related enzymes in *Enterococcus casseliflavus* and *Enterococcus flavescens*. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1994; 38:1788–93.
10. Reynolds PE, Courvalin P. Vancomycin resistance by synthesis of precursors terminating in D-alanyl-D-alanine. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2005; 49:21–5.
11. Billot-Klein D, Gutmann L, Sable S, Guittet E, van Heijenoort J. Modification of peptidoglycan precursors is a common feature of the low-level vancomycin-resistant VANB-type *Enterococcus* D366 and of the naturally glycopeptide-resistant species *Lactobacillus casei*, *Pediococcus pentosaceus*, *Leuconostoc mesenteroides*, and *Enterococcus gallinarum*. J Bacteriol 1994; 176:2398–405.
12. Arthur M, Depardieu F, Reynolds P, Courvalin P. Quantitative analysis of the metabolism of soluble cytoplasmic peptidoglycan precursors of glycopeptide-resistant enterococci. Mol Microbiol 1996; 21:33–44.
13. Reynolds PE. Control of peptidoglycan synthesis in vancomycin-resistant enterococci: D,d-peptidases and D,d-carboxypeptidases. Cell Mol Life Sci 1998; 54:325–31.
14. Reynolds PE, Depardieu F, Dutka-Malen S, Arthur M, Courvalin P. Glycopeptide resistance mediated by enterococcal transposon Tn1546 requires production of VanX for hydrolysis of D-alanyl-D-alanine. Mol Microbiol 1994; 13:1065–70.
15. Arthur M, Depardieu F, Cabanie L, Reynolds P, Courvalin P. Requirement of the VanY and VanX D,D-peptidases for glycopeptide resistance in enterococci. Mol Microbiol 1998; 30:819–30.
16. Reynolds PE, Arias CA, Courvalin P. Gene *vanXY<sub>C</sub>* encodes D,D-dipeptidase (VanX) and D,D-carboxypeptidase (VanY) activities in vancomycin-resistant *Enterococcus gallinarum* BM4174. Mol Microbiol 1999; 34:341–9.
17. Depardieu F, Reynolds PE, Courvalin P. VanD-type vancomycin-resistant *Enterococcus faecium* 10/96A. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2003; 47:7–18.
18. Arias CA, Courvalin P, Reynolds PE. *vanC* cluster of vancomycin-

resistant *Enterococcus gallinarum* BM4174. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000; 44:1660–6.

19. Abadia Patino L, Courvalin P, Perichon B. *vanE* gene cluster of vancomycin-resistant *Enterococcus faecalis* BM4405. J Bacteriol 2002; 184: 6457–64.

20. Depardieu F, Bonora MG, Reynolds PE, Courvalin P. The *vanG* glycopeptide resistance operon from *Enterococcus faecalis* revisited. Mol Microbiol 2003; 50:931–48.

21. Arthur M, Molinas C, Courvalin P. The VanS-VanR two-component regulatory system controls synthesis of depsipeptide peptidoglycan precursors in *Enterococcus faecium* BM4147. J Bacteriol 1992; 174:2582–91.

22. Evers S, Courvalin P. Regulation of VanB-type vancomycin resistance gene expression by the VanS(B)-VanR(B) two-component regulatory system in *Enterococcus faecalis* V583. J Bacteriol 1996; 178:1302–9.

23. Dahl KH, Simonsen GS, Olsvik O, Sundsfjord A. Heterogeneity in the *vanB* gene cluster of genomically diverse clinical strains of vancomycin-resistant enterococci. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999; 43:1105–10.

24. Patel R, Uhl JR, Kohner P, et al. DNA sequence variation within *vanA*, *vanB*, *vanC-1*, and *vanC-2/3* genes of clinical *Enterococcus* isolates. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1998; 42:202–5.

25. Depardieu F, Kolbert M, Pruul H, Bell J, Courvalin P. VanD-type vancomycin-resistant *Enterococcus faecium* and *Enterococcus faecalis*. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2004; 48:3892–904.

26. Dutta I, Reynolds PE. The *vanC-3* vancomycin resistance gene cluster of *Enterococcus faecalis* CCM 439. J Antimicrob Chemother 2003; 51:703–6.

27. McKessar SJ, Berry AM, Bell JM, Turnidge JD, Paton JC. Genetic characterization of *vanG*, a novel vancomycin resistance locus of *Enterococcus faecalis*. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000; 44:3224–8.

28. Fraimow HS, Jungkind DL, Lander DW, Delso DR, Dean JL. Urinary tract infection with an *Enterococcus faecalis* isolate that requires vancomycin for growth. Ann Intern Med 1994; 121:22–6.

29. Van Bambeke F, Chauvel M, Reynolds PE, Fraimow HS, Courvalin P. Vancomycin-dependent *Enterococcus faecalis* clinical isolates and revertant mutants. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999; 43:41–7.

30. Arthur M, Depardieu F, Gerbaud G, Galimand M, Leclercq R, Courvalin P. The VanS sensor negatively controls VanR-mediated transcriptional activation of glycopeptide resistance genes of Tn1546 and related elements in the absence of induction. J Bacteriol 1997; 179:97–106.

31. Arthur M, Molinas C, Depardieu F, Courvalin P. Characterization of Tn1546, a Tn3-related transposon conferring glycopeptide resistance by synthesis of depsipeptide peptidoglycan precursors in *Enterococcus faecium*. J Bacteriol 1993; 175:117–27.

32. Handwerger S, Skoble J. Identification of chromosomal mobile element conferring high-level vancomycin resistance in *Enterococcus faecium*. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1995; 39:2446–53.

33. Quintiliani RJr, Courvalin P. Conjugal transfer of the vancomycin resistance determinant *vanB* between enterococci involves the movement of large genetic elements from chromosome to chromosome. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1994; 119:359–63.

34. Rice LB, Carias LL, Donskey CL, Rudin SD. Transferable, plasmid-mediated *vanB*-type glycopeptide resistance in *Enterococcus faecium*. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1998; 42:963–4.

35. Carias LL, Rudin SD, Donskey CJ, Rice LB. Genetic linkage and co-transfer of a novel, *vanB*-containing transposon (Tn5382) and a low-affinity penicillin-binding protein 5 gene in a clinical vancomycin-resistant *Enterococcus faecium* isolate. J Bacteriol 1998; 180:4426–34.

36. Garnier F, Taourit S, Glaser P, Courvalin P, Galimand M. Characterization of transposon Tn1549, conferring VanB-type resistance in *Enterococcus* spp. Microbiology 2000; 146(Pt 6):1481–9.

37. Noble WC, Virani Z, Cree RG. Co-transfer of vancomycin and other resistance genes from *Enterococcus faecalis* NCTC 12201 to *Staphylococcus aureus*. FEMS Microbiol Lett 1992; 72:195–8.

38. Kacica M, McDonald LC. Vancomycin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus*—New York, 2004. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2004; 53: 322–3.

39. Miller D, Urdaneta V, Weltman A. Vancomycin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus*—Pennsylvania, 2002. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2002; 51:902.

40. Sievert DM, Boulton ML, Stolzmann G, et al. *Staphylococcus aureus* resistant to vancomycin—United States, 2002. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2002; 51:565–7.

41. Tenover FC, Weigel LM, Appelbaum PC, et al. Vancomycin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* isolate from a patient in Pennsylvania. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2004; 48:275–80.

42. Weigel LM, Musser K, Thompson J, Limberger R, Clark NC, Patel JB. Genetic analysis of vancomycin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus* (VRSA) isolate from New-York [abstract C1–941]. In: Program and abstracts of the 44th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy (Washington, DC). Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology, 2004: 69.

43. Weigel LM, Clewell DB, Gill SR, et al. Genetic analysis of a high-level vancomycin-resistant isolate of *Staphylococcus aureus*. Science 2003; 302:1569–71.

44. Flannagan SE, Chow JW, Donabedian SM, et al. Plasmid content of a vancomycin-resistant *Enterococcus faecalis* isolate from a patient also colonized by *Staphylococcus aureus* with a VanA phenotype. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2003; 47:3954–9.

45. Perichon B, Courvalin P. Heterologous expression of the enterococcal *vanA* operon in methicillin-resistant *Staphylococcus aureus*. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2004; 48:4281–5.

46. Berg CM, Berg DE. Transposable elements as tools for molecular analysis in bacteria. In: Sherratt DJ, ed. Mobile genetic elements. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995: 38–68.

47. Marshall CG, Lessard IA, Park I, Wright GD. Glycopeptide antibiotic resistance genes in glycopeptide-producing organisms. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1998; 42:2215–20.

48. Patel R, Piper K, Cockerill FR 3rd, Steckelberg JM, Yousten AA. The biopesticide *Paenibacillus popilliae* has a vancomycin resistance gene cluster homologous to the enterococcal VanA vancomycin resistance gene cluster. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2000; 44:705–9.

49. Courvalin P. Transfer of antibiotic resistance genes between Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1994; 38:1447–51.
