
Review
TRENDS in Molecular Medicine Vol.12 No.1 January 2006
Full text provided by www.sciencedirect.com

**RANKL–RANK signaling in osteoclastogenesis and bone disease**

Teiji Wada¹,², Tomoki Nakashima¹, Nishina Hiroshi² and Josef M Penninger¹

¹Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences (IMBA), Dr. Bohrgasse 3, A-1030 Vienna, Austria  
²Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan

Hundreds of millions of people worldwide are affected by bone-related diseases, such as osteoporosis and rheumatoid arthritis. Understanding the molecular mechanisms of bone metabolism is crucial for developing novel drugs for treating such diseases. In particular, genetic experiments showing that the receptor activator of NF-κB (RANK), its ligand RANKL, and the decoy receptor OPG are essential, central regulators of osteoclast development and osteoclast function were significant turning points in our understanding of bone diseases. RANKL–RANK signaling activates a variety of downstream signaling pathways required for osteoclast development. Moreover, molecular cross-talk between RANKL–RANK and other ligand–receptor systems fine-tunes bone homeostasis in normal physiology and disease. Designing novel drugs that target RANKL–RANK and their signaling pathways in osteoclasts could potentially revolutionize the treatment of many diseases associated with bone loss such as arthritis, tooth loss, cancer metastases or osteoporosis.

### Overview

Bones are constantly remodeled through the synthesis of bone matrix by osteoblasts and the resorption of bone by osteoclasts [1–3]. Perturbations in inflammatory cytokines, growth factors and hormones cause an imbalance between osteoclast and osteoblast activities and can result in skeletal abnormalities, such as osteoporosis and osteopetrosis [1–3]. Osteoporosis is a devastating disease characterized by lower bone density, frequently found in older people (especially women [1–3]), immobilized patients, or even astronauts as a result of experiencing zero gravity [2,4], and ultimately results in bone fractures. By contrast, osteopetrosis or abnormally increased bone density occurs mainly as a result of rare hereditary disorders.

The discovery of the factors involved in the control of osteoclasts, and hence osteoporosis, has moved bone research into a new era. These factors are the receptor activator of NF-κB (RANK) [5], its ligand RANKL [5–7] and the decoy receptor for RANKL, osteoprotegerin (OPG; see Glossary) [8–10]. Binding of RANKL to its receptor RANK provides the crucial signal to drive osteoclast development from haematopoietic progenitor cells as well as to activate mature osteoclasts. OPG negatively regulates RANKL binding to RANK and therefore inhibits bone turnover by osteoclasts. As increased osteoclast activity is observed in patients with osteoporosis, metastases or rheumatoid arthritis, the RANK–RANKL–OPG axis appears to be the most relevant therapeutic target for all bone diseases. The next milestone after the identification of RANK and RANKL was the elucidation of downstream molecules that relay RANK–RANKL stimulation to osteoclast-specific developmental programs. Importantly, in these osteoclast studies, novel cross-talks between RANK–RANKL signaling and other pathways were revealed. Here we discuss the important role of RANK–RANKL signaling pathways in bone metabolism.

#### Basic characteristics of RANK, RANKL and OPG

The identification of the factors involved in osteoclast development began with OPG, which was first cloned as a potential inhibitor of osteoclastogenesis [9,10]. OPG is a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor superfamily, and is highly expressed in adult lung, heart, kidney, liver, spleen, thymus, prostate, ovary, small intestine, thyroid, lymph node, trachea, adrenal gland, testis, and bone marrow (GeneCards; http://www.genecards.org). Molecular binding experiments showed that OPG associates with RANKL and functions as a decoy receptor [7]. The receptor for RANKL is RANK, a type I transmembrane protein originally cloned from dendritic cells [5]. Although OPG functions as a dimer, RANK, like

---

**Glossary**

- **RANK**: receptor activator of NF-κB, also called osteoclast differentiation factor receptor (ODFR), tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor superfamily member 11A (TNFRSF11A), and TNF-related activation induced cytokine receptor (TRANCE-R).
- **RANKL**: RANK ligand, also termed osteoclast differentiation factor (ODF), TNF ligand superfamily member 11 (TNFSF11), TNF-related activation induced cytokine (TRANCE), and osteoprotegerin ligand (OPGL).
- **OPG**: also called osteoprotegerin, TNFRSF11B, osteoclastogenesis inhibitory factor (OCIF). OPG is the decoy receptor for RANKL and inhibits RANKL binding to its receptor RANK.
- **Osteoclasts**: multinucleated osteoclasts differentiate from haematopoietic monocyte/macrophage precursors and coordinate resorption of bone.
- **Osteoblasts**: arise from mesenchymal stem cells and are responsible for the synthesis of bone matrix.
- **Osteoporosis and osteopetrosis**: skeletal abnormalities characterized by decreased and increased bone mass, respectively.
- **Paget disease**: a metabolic bone disease characterized by excessive bone resorption as a result of activated osteoclasts.

Corresponding author: Penninger, J.M. (josef.penninger@imba.oeaw.ac.at).  
Available online 13 December 2005

www.sciencedirect.com 1471-4914/$ - see front matter © 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2005.11.007

other members of the tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) superfamily, assembles into functional trimers. RANK is ubiquitously expressed in skeletal muscle, thymus, liver, colon, small intestine, adrenal gland, osteoclast, mammary gland epithelial cells, prostate and pancreas (http://www.genecards.org) [1,2,5,11].

Four groups independently cloned RANKL as an apoptosis regulatory gene, a ligand for RANK, and a binding partner of OPG [2,5–7]. The RANKL gene gives rise to splice variants that encode two forms of type II transmembrane proteins and one form of a secreted protein [12]. Although high RANKL expression can be found in lymph nodes, thymus and lung, only low levels of RANKL can be detected in spleen, bone marrow, peripheral blood, leukocytes, heart, placenta, skeletal muscle, stomach or the thyroid (http://www.genecards.org) [1,2,5–7]. In addition, RANKL expression is induced in mammary gland epithelial cells in pregnancy [11], activated T cells [5,13,14], and malignant tumor cells [15].

The roles of RANK, RANKL and OPG in vivo

One of the essential, albeit not exclusive, roles of RANK and RANKL in vivo is the regulation of bone turnover via osteoclasts. Recombinant RANKL and activating antibodies against the RANK extracellular domain can stimulate RANK and, hence, promote osteoclastogenesis [16]. Mice with a disruption in either rankl or rank show severe osteopetrosis and defective tooth eruption resulting from a complete lack of osteoclasts [13,17–20]. These genetic experiments for the first time proved that RANK and RANKL are essential for osteoclastogenesis. By contrast, mice lacking OPG, the decoy receptor for RANKL, show osteoporosis resulting from increased numbers and activities of osteoclasts [21,22]. In line with mouse models, mutations in RANK and OPG have been identified in patients that have bone disorders [23]. For instance, two heterozygous insertion mutations were found in exon 1 of RANK in affected members of four families with familial osteolysis or familial Paget disease. One mutation was a duplication of 18 bases and the other was a duplication of 27 bases, and both affected the signal peptide region of the RANK molecule, as well as causing an increase in RANK-mediated NF-κB signaling, resulting in increased osteolysis and bone remodeling [23].

Juvenile Paget disease, an autosomal recessive osteopathy, is characterized by rapid remodeling of woven bone, osteopenia, fractures and progressive skeletal deformity. Causative homozygous deletions of ~100 kb in OPG were identified in two patients with juvenile Paget disease [24]. The patients had elevated alkaline phosphatase activity, one of the indications of deregulated bone turnover. OPG also has crucial roles in idiopathic hyperphosphatasia, which is an autosomal recessive bone disease characterized by deformities of long bones, kyphosis and acetabular protrusion, progressing in severity as affected children pass through adolescence. Three affected siblings were homozygous for a three base pair in-frame deletion in exon 3 of OPG, resulting in the loss of an aspartate residue and inactivation of OPG function [25]. Thus, the roles of RANKL-RANK and OPG in bone metabolism, initially defined by mouse genetics, have direct relevance to human disease.

In addition to the local regulation of osteoclasts, one surprising finding was that RANKL is upregulated on T cells upon activation [13,14]. It has, therefore, been speculated that RANK-RANKL might be an important regulator of interactions between T and dendritic cells and might have a role in the regulation of the T-cell-dependent immune response [5]. However, dendritic cells, where RANK was initially identified, appear normal in their function to induce T cell proliferation [20]. Moreover, RANK stimulation is not essential for experimental autoimmune myocarditis in mice [26]. Intriguingly, RANKL deficient mice lack all lymph nodes [20], and the administration of RANK-Fc (a fusion protein consisted of the extracellular domain of RANK and the Fc portion of immunoglobulin) to block RANKL activity protected mice from death induced by sepsis [27]. These data indicate that RANKL has a crucial role in lymph node organogenesis [20] and that RANKL has a role in monocyte function and in mediating inflammatory response [27].

Unpredictably, genetic inactivation of RANKL and RANK revealed surprising novel functions. Mice lacking RANKL or its receptor RANK had impaired lobulo-alveolar mammary structures during pregnancy, resulting in death of newborns [11]. RANKL expression in mammary gland epithelial cells is induced in pregnancy in response to sex and/or pregnancy hormones and stimulates proliferation of mammary epithelial cells constitutively expressing RANK [11]. Thus, RANKL and RANK, the master regulators of skeletal calcium release, are also essential for the sex and/or pregnancy hormone induced formation of the lactating mammary gland. The link between RANKL and RANK and sex and/or pregnancy hormones provides a rationale for hormonal regulation of bone metabolism and gender bias in osteoporosis. Interestingly, RANKL and RANK could also affect the cardiovascular system, probably because of increased bone turnover and resultant changes in calcium homeostasis. For instance, some, though not all, OPG-deficient mice show medial calcification of the aorta and renal arteries [22]. Moreover, a patient carrying an OPG mutation had heart failure [24]. These mouse and human data suggest that deregulation of OPG or its ligand RANKL could explain the long observed interplay between osteoporosis and cardiovascular defects.

Regulation of RANKL expression

As RANKL is the only known ligand for RANK, and RANK and RANKL are crucial in bone metabolism, lymph node formation in the immune system, and mammary gland development in pregnancy, it is important to understand how the expression levels of RANKL are regulated under normal and disease conditions. The functions of many factors that stimulate RANKL expression have been summarized in previous reviews [1,28,29]. Briefly, parathyroid hormone, prostaglandin E2, dexamethason, inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα), or 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D3 can stimulate RANKL expression. By contrast, estrogen or transforming growth factor β (TGFβ)

attenuate RANKL expression. Notably, expressions of OPG and RANKL are often oppositely regulated by these factors [1, 28, 29]. RANKL expression is also upregulated in malignant tumor cells and RANKL is involved in bone destruction in cancer [15]. Thus, cancer and deregulation of many cytokines and hormones can modulate bone turnover via RANKL expression.

It has been proposed that soluble forms of RANKL (sRANKL) have more potent activity [30] and have important roles in osteolysis induced by tumors [31]. sRANKL derives from the membrane form as a result of either proteolytic cleavage or alternative splicing [12]. The proteolytic cleavage of RANKL requires a disintegrin and metalloprotease domain (ADAM) family members and matrix metalloproteases (MMP). For example, ADAM 17 (also called TACE) and ADAM 19 have been shown to cleave RANKL in vitro [32, 33]. MMP-3 expressed by osteoblasts and MMP-7 produced by osteoclasts at the tumor-bone interface process RANKL to a soluble form that promotes osteoclast activation [31]. Recent work in vivo proved the importance and specificity of shedding enzymes for RANKL. MMP-7-deficient mice demonstrate reduced RANKL processing accompanied by prostate-tumor-induced osteolysis [31]. By contrast, neither MMP-9 nor MMP-13 can process RANKL to a soluble form in vivo [31]. Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteases (TIMP) bind to MMPs and thereby interfere with MMP activity. TIMP-2 but not TIMP-1 has been reported to control shedding activity towards RANKL [32]. Further studies in mouse models and human Sorsby's fundus dystrophy caused by mutation in the gene encoding TIMP3 [34] might address the in vivo importance of TIMPs in bone metabolism. Moreover, the question of whether membrane-bound or soluble RANKL is the crucial regulator in osteoclast development in normal physiology and/or in diseased states needs to be further addressed.

**RANK signaling**

Binding of RANKL to RANK triggers intricate and distinct signaling cascades that control lineage commitment and activation of osteoclasts. As RANKL and RANK have pleiotropic effects in vivo, efforts have been made to understand RANK signaling to possibly identify osteoclast specific signaling pathways. Representative RANK-induced signaling cascades are summarized in Figure 1.

**NF-κB**

Stimulation of RANK results in strong NF-κB activation. Various TNF-receptor (TNFR) associated factor (TRAF) proteins associate with the cytoplasmic domain of RANK and relay RANK stimulation to NF-κB. In particular, genetic experiments have shown that TRAF6 is required for osteoclast formation and osteoclast activation [35]. Mice lacking both the NF-κB p50 and p52 proteins are osteopetrotic [36]. The upstream subunits that mediate NF-κB activation, comprising the catalytic subunits IkB kinase α (IKKα) and IKKβ and the non-catalytic subunit IKKγ (also called NEMO), are also important for RANK-RANKL signaling and osteoclastogenesis. In mice, IKKβ is required for RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis both in vitro and in vivo, whereas IKKα appears to

be required only in vitro but not in vivo [37]. Importantly, patients with X-linked osteopetrosis, lymphedema, anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia and immunodeficiency (OL-EDA-ID syndrome) carry a X420W point mutation in IKKγ and have osteopetrosis [38]. Thus, the NF-κB pathway is relevant for RANKL-RANK-regulated osteoclast development and osteoclast function not only in mice, but also in humans.

**MAPKs**

Mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) family members consist of p38-MAPKs (p38-MAPKα, β, γ and δ), c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK1, 2 and 3), extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK1 and ERK2), and big the MAPKs ERK5, ERK7 and ERK8 [39, 40]. Many of these kinases are activated downstream of RANK and can relay RANK stimulation to the cellular response. For instance, using the p38-MAPKα and p38-MAPKβ specific inhibitor SB 203580, it has been suggested that these two kinases (or at least one of them) are involved in osteoclastogenesis mediated by RANKL [41]. Little is known about the in vivo functions of the other p38-MAPK isoforms, p38-MAPKγ and p38-MAPKδ. Activated p38-MAPKs downstream of RANK can directly phosphorylate signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and hence control expression of a variety of target genes [42]. A primary function of p38-MAPKs is to control mRNA stability [40]; it would thus be interesting to find other posttranscriptional p38-MAPK targets.

In addition to p38-MAPKs, JNKs (also called SAPKs: stress activated protein kinases) and their direct upstream kinase MKK7 have been shown to be involved in osteoclastogenesis in vitro cell culture [43, 44]. Neither JNK1-nor JNK2-deficient mice show substantial bone defects in vivo, however [43]. This could be explained by compensation of JNK1 with JNK2 and vice versa. As mice lacking both JNK1 and JNK2 show embryonic lethality during midgestation [40], conditional gene deletion systems could be used to address the in vivo roles of JNKs in osteoclastogenesis. AP-1 transcription factors that are under the control of JNKs are also involved in RANK-regulated osteoclastogenesis. The AP-1 family members c-Jun, JunB, c-Fos and Fra but not JunD are essential for efficient osteoclastogenesis [43, 45, 46]. ERK is also activated upon RANK stimulation. Inhibition of MEKs (ERK kinases) by PD98059 or U0126 does not, however, attenuate osteoclast differentiation [41], but rather increases osteoclastogenesis [47]. The possible involvement of other ERKs, ERK5, ERK7 and ERK8, in osteoclastogenesis remains to be tested. As NF-κB and MAPK pathways are common to many distinct receptor systems in many organs, these signaling molecules might not be suitable targets for long-term therapies to treat bone loss.

**NFATc1**

Stimulation of RANK induces the expression of a variety of genes via AP-1 and NF-κB transcription factors. Using DNA microarray technology, nuclear factor of activated T cells, calcineurin-dependent 1 (NFATc1, also called NFAT2) was identified as one of the downstream targets

TIMP
MMPs
ADAMs

Anti-RANKL Ab
Fc
RANK
OPG

Extracellular

PI(3,4)P₂
SHIP
PI5K
Cbls
TRAF6
PTEN
PI(3,4,5)P₃
PI3K
c-Src
Gab2
aPKC
p62
(λ/tPKC?)
PLCs
PIP2
PI(4,5)P₂
PIP2
PI(5)P
PI(4)P
DC
IP3
Ca²⁺
MKK4/7
JNK
MKK3/6
p38-MAPK
MEK1/2
ERK
STAT1
mRNA
stability
?
Tab1
NIK
Tak1
Nemo
IKKα
IKKβ
NF-κB2 (p100)
Ub
RelB
NF-κB2 (p50)
RelB
NF-κB (p52)
RelA

FOS
JUN(s)
FRA1
JUN
AP-1
AP-1-NFAT
TRAP, CALCR
NFATc1
NFATc1
AP-1-NF-κB-NFAT

Nucleus

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the known RANKL-RANK-induced signaling cascades that control lineage commitment and activation of osteoclasts. Membrane-bound RANKL or soluble RANKL (sRANKL) cleaved by MMPs or ADAMs binds and activates the receptor RANK. RANK stimulation induces the NF-κB, MAPK, and phosphatidylinositol pathways to control osteoclastogenesis through adaptor molecules such as TRAFs and Gab2. NF-κB-Rel activation can occur via the canonical TAK1-IKKβ or the non-canonical NIK-IKKα pathways, resulting in transcriptional regulation of target genes that contain κB binding sites in their promoter regions. MAPK family members control AP1 family members, such as JUN, FOS, and FRA, which regulate expression of important genes required for osteoclastogenesis. The phosphatidylinositol pathway is regulated by the coordinated actions of a variety of lipid kinases and phosphatases, resulting in activation of Akt and PKC. Molecules in blue boxes and blue lines indicate inhibitory pathways to osteoclastogenesis. The molecules in gray boxes and letters are predicted to be involved in RANK signaling, but further experimental elucidation is required. IP3, inositol (1,4,5)-trisphosphate; PI5K, PtdIns4P 5-kinase; RelA/B, rel avian reticuloendotheliosis viral oncogene homolog A/B.

of RANK [48]. The expression of NFATc1 is increased in the presence of RANKL and leads to terminal differentiation of osteoclasts. NFATc1 promotes expression of osteoclast-specific genes such as TRAP and calcitonin receptors in cooperation with c-Fos. In in vitro osteoclast differentiation assays using embryonic stem cells, NFATc1 deficient cells exhibit a defect in osteoclastogenesis [48]. Moreover, an active form of NFAT restores the impaired osteoclastogenesis observed in Fos deficient cells [49]. Thus, NFATc1 is an essential effector molecule that couples RANK signaling to osteoclast differentiation. As NFATs are also important for osteoblasts and bone formation [50] and control lymphocyte activation

and heart valve development, they might not be an ideal target to design specific drugs to block excessive bone resorption.

Src kinase

Before the identification of RANK, it had been known that targeted disruption of the c-src proto-oncogene leads to osteopetrosis in mice [51]. Much later, it was discovered that c-Src is important in RANK induced activation of the anti-apoptotic serine/threonine kinase Akt/PKB [30]. c-Src and TRAF6 interact with each other and with RANK following receptor engagement. TRAF6, in turn, enhances the kinase activity of c-Src, leading to tyrosine

phosphorylation of downstream signaling molecules, such as Cbl [29]. Src does not act exclusively in RANK signaling and is also essential for osteoclast function after adhesion-induced stimulation of integrins. Src forms a complex with Pyk2, Cbl and ADAP and promotes their phosphorylation as a requirement for integrin-regulated osteoclast function [52, 53]. Although no other Src family members can functionally compensate for loss of c-Src function in osteoclasts, such compensation occurs in other tissues. The essential c-Src function in osteoclasts might therefore make c-Src a suitable target for specific inhibitors for the future treatment of osteoporosis and increased bone resorption in arthritis.

**Adaptor proteins**

TRAFs are cytoplasmic adaptor proteins that bind to the intracellular domains of various receptors of the TNFR superfamily. The TNFR superfamily member RANK contains three putative TRAF-binding domains. Results from studies using deletion mutants of the intracellular domain of RANK suggest that each TRAF-binding domain has a different affinity for TRAF2, 5 and 6 [29, 54]. One of the important roles of TRAFs in RANK–RANKL signaling is NF-κB activation. It has been proposed that TRAF6 mediates only the activation of the canonical NF-κB pathway. To activate downstream molecules, TRAF6 forms a signaling complex containing RANK and transforming growth factor-β-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) binding protein 2 (TAB2), which then results in TAK1 activation [55]. By contrast, TRAF2 and TRAF5 can activate both canonical and non-canonical NF-κB pathways [56]. TRAF3 has a distinct role and serves as a negative regulator of TNFR-family-mediated NF-κB activation [56].

Among TRAFs, TRAF6 is the most important adaptor for RANK–RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis. The TRAF6 binding region in RANK was shown to be necessary for RANK-induced NF-κB activation and in vitro osteoclastogenesis [54]. Importantly, TRAF6 deficient mice develop severe osteopetrosis [35]. By contrast, the contributions of TRAF2 and TRAF5 to osteoclastogenesis are minor. For instance, fetal liver derived TRAF2 deficient progenitor cells show only slightly (20%) reduced multinuclear osteoclasts, and activation of NF-κB and JNK by RANKL was comparable [57]. TRAF5 deficient cells also show mildly reduced osteoclastogenesis; again neither NF-κB nor JNK activation were apparently affected upon RANK stimulation [58]. Thus, TRAF6 seems to be the main adaptor molecule for RANK signaling.

Recently, another molecular adaptor was found to be important for RANK signaling. Grb2 associated binder 2 (Gab2) mediates RANK-induced NF-κB, Akt, and JNK activation. Genetic inactivation of Gab2 in mice results in osteopetrosis and decreased bone resorption resulting from defective osteoclast differentiation [59]. Using siRNA inactivation of Gab2 in human peripheral blood derived progenitor cells showed that the contribution of Gab2 to osteoclastogenesis is relevant not only to mice but also to humans [59]. Although it might be difficult to develop small molecule inhibitors against adaptor proteins, such adaptor molecules should be strongly considered as targets for osteoclast-specific treatment of bone loss.

---

Phosphatidylinositol metabolism

The importance of inositol lipid metabolism in RANK signaling cannot be overlooked. Activation of Akt by Src requires the lipid kinase phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) that generates phosphatidylinositol-(3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃), and phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1 (PDK1) [60]. Experiments using the PI 3-kinase blocker Wortmannin demonstrated that PI 3-kinase inhibition results in impaired osteoclastic bone resorption [61]. By contrast, the involvement of PDK1 in RANK–RANKL signaling has not been reported yet.

PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ production is negatively regulated by two lipid phosphatases, phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) and SH2-containing inositol phosphatase 1 (SHIP1). PTEN and SHIP1 are phosphoinositide 3′- and 5′-phosphatases that remove a phosphor-residue from PtdIns(3,4,5)P₃ to produce PtdIns(4,5)P₂ and PtdIns(3,4)P₂, respectively. PTEN overexpression suppresses RANKL-mediated osteoclast differentiation, and overexpression of the dominant-negative form of PTEN constitutively induced osteoclast differentiation in vitro [62]. There is no genetic evidence, however, that PTEN has an important role in osteoclastogenesis in vivo. For instance, it is not clear whether RANK–RANKL signaling and bone metabolism are affected in Cowden disease, which is caused by germline mutation in the *pten* gene [63]. By contrast, the importance of SHIP1 in osteoclastogenesis has been shown in vitro and in vivo. In vitro osteoclast cultures showed increased osteoclastogenesis in SHIP1 deficient cells as a result of hypersensitivity to stimulation with RANKL and colony stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1, M-CSF) [64]. Importantly, SHIP1 deficient mice have osteoporosis [64]. Moreover, similar to Paget disease, serum levels of interleukin-6 are markedly increased in SHIP1 deficient mice [64]. Thus, the 5′ lipid phosphatase SHIP1 seems to be a crucial negative regulator for RANK–RANKL induced osteoclast differentiation.

Phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C (PLC) is another phosphatidylinositol-related enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of PtdIns(4,5)P₂ to produce the second messenger molecules inositol (1,4,5)-trisphosphate (Ins(1,4,5)P₃) and diacylglycerol. RANKL acts through PLC to release Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores [65]. Subsequently, the increased Ca²⁺ levels activate the essential transcription factor NFATc1 via calcineurin [48, 66]. Importantly, the activation of PLCγ by RANK requires the protein tyrosine kinase Syk and immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) bearing molecules such as DNAX-activating protein (DAP12) and the Fc receptor common gamma chain (FcRγ) [66]. Although excellent work has been done in lipid signaling, this field is a largely unexplored territory in RANK–RANKL signaling. For instance, it would be interesting to examine mutant mouse models that lack lipid kinases such as PtdIns4P 5-kinase (PIP5KI) and PtdIns5P 4-kinase (PIP4KII), lipid phosphatases, or lipid-related molecules in terms of RANK signaling and osteoclastogenesis (Figure 1).

www.sciencedirect.com

Protein kinase C (PKC)
RANK stimulation and RANK-regulated bone metabolism essentially depend on calcium signaling. As well as activating the calcineurin-NFATc1 pathway, Ca²⁺ activates protein kinase C (PKC) proteins. It has been shown that the atypical PKC (aPKC)-interacting protein p62 is upregulated during RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis and forms a ternary complex involving TRAF6 and the aPKCs. Genetic inactivation of p62 in mice leads to impaired osteoclastogenesis in vitro and in vivo [67]. Importantly, mutations in the gene coding for p62 in humans are the cause of the 5q35-linked Paget's disease, a genetic disorder characterized by aberrant osteoclastic activity [68]. Among aPKCs, ηPKC could be the kinase involved in osteoclastogenesis because mice deficient for another aPKC, PKCζ, did not show an overt phenotype in osteoclastogenesis in vitro [67]. Further analysis of ηPKC conditional knockout mice [69] could address this question.

Molecular cross-talk with other pathways
Although RANK-RANKL signaling is essential for osteoclastogenesis, cross-talk with other signaling molecules fine-tunes osteoclastogenesis and hence bone turnover (Figure 2). For instance, RANKL is expressed on activated T cells, but T cells also generate a factor that interferes with RANK signaling. One such T cell derived molecule was identified as interferon γ (IFNγ) [70]. At the molecular level, IFNγ promotes accelerated degradation of TRAF6 via the ubiquitin-proteasome system

Negative cross-talk signals                                                                 Positive cross-talk signals
IFN-β                                                                                          Osteoblast
↓                                                                                             ↓
IFN-α/βR                                                                                      M-CSF
↓                                                                                             ↓
STAT1                                                                                         Extracellular
STAT1                                                                                         Intracellular
STAT2                                                                                         FcRγ ITAM
TRAF6                                                                                         DAP12 ITAM
Proteasome activator                                                                          Syk
Ub                                                                                             PLCγ
TRAF6                                                                                         Ca²⁺
Ub                                                                                             CaM
Calcineurin
NFATc1
NF-κB — NFAT
FOS
IFN-β
FRA
RANK
Osteoclastogenesis

TRENDS in Molecular Medicine

Figure 2. Molecular cross-talk of RANK with other signaling pathways. For the fine-tuning of RANKL-RANK mediated osteoclastogenesis and osteoclast functions, many molecules positively and negatively communicate with the RANKL-RANK signaling/activation pathways. Molecules in blue boxes and blue lines indicate pathways that have an inhibitory effect on RANK signaling. CaM, calmodulin; c-FMS, CSF-1 receptor; Ub, ubiquitin.
www.sciencedirect.com

and therefore IFNγ leads to reduced RANK signaling [70]. This pathway is clinically relevant in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) seropositive patients. AIDS patients show accelerated bone resorption, and the incidence of bone resorption is greatly increased in those receiving highly active anti-retroviral therapies that incorporate certain protease inhibitors. Some of these protease inhibitors block TRAF 6 degradation leading to attenuated cross-talk between RANK and the IFNγ receptor, and thus increased RANK signaling [71]. In addition, HIV protein also transcriptionally induces RANKL expression [71] and T cell-derived RANKL is important for bone destruction in rheumatoid arthritis [13]. Interestingly, the T cells infiltrating an arthritic area express only very low levels of IFNγ, which might explain why T cells in rheumatoid arthritis can trigger local osteoclastogenesis and bone loss [66]. In addition to IFNγ receptor signaling, IFNβ is also involved in cross-talk with RANKL-RANK mediated osteoclastogenesis [72]. RANKL-RANK induces IFNβ via c-Fos, a crucial transcription factor for osteoclast formation. The secreted IFNβ then shuts down c-Fos protein expression acting as negative feedback regulation [72]. Thus, modulation of interferon systems and interferon-regulated signaling pathways could be utilized to treat bone diseases.

Sex hormones are tightly linked to bone disease. Postmenopausal women, for instance, stop producing estrogen in their ovaries, resulting in loss of bone mass and old-age osteoporosis. In fact, sex hormones such as estrogens and androgens suppress RANKL-induced osteoclast differentiation by down-regulating the JNK-c-Jun pathway [73]. Moreover, estrogens and androgens can control expression of the decoy receptor OPG [73], thereby shifting the balance of RANKL-RANK signaling. Indeed, OPG treatment can revert increased osteoclast numbers and bone loss after ovariectomy in female rats [10]. Whether JNK-c-Jun regulation is an additional pathway for sex-hormone-regulated bone metabolism *in vivo* needs to be demonstrated in genetic rescue experiments.

Osteoclastogenesis is affected by many cytokines, including CSF-1, IL-1, TGF-α, TGF-β, TNFα, TNFβ, IL-4, IL-6 and IL-11 [1–3,29]. For instance, IL-1 and TNFα stimulation synergizes with RANK and promotes osteoclastogenesis [1–3,29]. Mechanistically, TNFR, IL-1R and RANK might share common downstream signaling pathways, for example, NF-κB or JNK activation, that result in molecular synergy. In rheumatoid arthritis patients, TNFα inhibition, for instance, interferes with bone loss at the affected joints indirectly via reduced inflammation and/or by directly affecting RANK signaling [1,74].

The ITAM-bearing molecules DAP12 and FcRγ are crucial for RANK mediated Ca²⁺ induction and osteoclastogenesis. Importantly, RANK activates PLCγ, subsequent calcium signaling, and NFATc1 via ITAM harboring molecules [66]. Mice lacking both DAP12 and FcRγ have reduced RANK-triggered NFATc1 induction, resulting in severely defective differentiation of osteoclasts [66]. Mechanistically, FcRγ associates with PIR-A and OSCAR, whereas DAP12 associates with TREM-2 and SIRPβ1, and these receptors via FcRγ and DAP12 then mediate costimulatory signals from osteoblasts, leading to

enhanced Ca²⁺ signaling and NFATc1 activation in cooperation with RANK signaling [66]. Whether osteoblasts are indeed essential for activation of TREM-2 and SIRPβ1 expressed on osteoclasts is, however, not yet known.

Mutations in the α subunit of the heterotrimer G-protein (GNAS1) in humans are the cause of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia of bone [75]. The bone defect is presumably caused by increased adenylate cyclase activity and subsequently increased expression of c-Fos. As c-Fos expression is controlled by RANK signaling, c-Fos appears to integrate stimulation via G-protein coupled receptors and RANK. Moreover, histone modifications could also be involved in RANK signaling. Two histone deacetylase inhibitors, trichostatin A and sodium butyrate, suppress RANK-mediated activation of NF-κB and p38-MAPK [76]. These results indicate that epigenetic histone modifications contribute to RANKL-RANK-regulated osteoclast lineage commitments and possibly osteoclast activation.

Although RANKL-RANK stimulation is crucial for the induction of osteoclastogenesis, many additional receptors and signaling pathways can positively and negatively modulate RANK-regulated bone metabolism. Further analysis of these parallel and cross-talk pathways might provide novel strategies to control RANKL-RANK signaling specifically in osteoclasts.

### Potential therapeutic targets

Bone-related diseases, such as osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, or cancer metastases, affect millions of people worldwide. The discovery of RANKL and RANK and, in particular, genetic proof that RANKL and RANK are essential for osteoclastogenesis and osteoclast activation *in vivo* opened up a new avenue for bone research and drug development. Although cytokines such as IL-1 and TNFα have also been proposed as potential therapeutic targets to control bone loss in arthritis, IL-1 and TNFα, alone, or in combination are much less potent than RANKL in terms of the induction of active osteoclasts [77]. Thus, controlling RANKL and RANK at the receptor level as well as RANK-RANKL signaling would be a remarkable feat in the treatment of systemic or local bone loss. In particular, inhibition of RANKL is a rational therapeutic strategy to develop novel drugs for inadequately increased bone resorption. Recombinant OPG [8,10], fully human anti-RANKL blocking antibodies, and RANK-Fc [15,16,27] all block RANKL efficiently and bone resorption *in vivo*. Interestingly, in a mouse parathyroid hormone-regulated protein (PTHrP)-mediated bone resorption model, inhibition of RANKL using OPG causes a greater suppression of bone resorption and hyper-calcaemia than that by bisphosphonates [77], the current standard therapy for the treatment of bone loss. Moreover, a fully human anti-RANKL antibody has been developed that inhibits RANKL function and has an increased *in vivo* half-life compared with OPG-Fc protein. One ongoing strategy is therefore the development of this human monoclonal anti-RANKL antibody, Denosumab (former name, AMG 162), as a novel therapy for osteoporosis [77]. On the basis of successful Phase 1

and Phase 2 clinical data in postmenopausal, osteoporotic women, Phase 3 clinical studies with Denosumab have already been initiated.

Apart from the crucial roles of RANK and RANKL in osteoporosis, RANK and RANKL might also be a target for the treatment of bone loss caused by cancer, bone metastases, sepsis, rheumatoid arthritis or periodontitis. For instance, RANKL is highly expressed in malignant tumor cells such as adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) and is involved in bone destruction [15]. The ratio of RANKL to OPG is altered in malignant osteolytic pathogenesis in multiple myeloma or bone metastases in prostate and breast cancer [15]. Inhibition of RANKL is therefore a promising new therapy for controlling bone loss and pain in bone tumors and associated osteolysis [15]. In human periodontitis, microorganism-triggered induction of RANKL expression on CD4+ T cells and the consequent activation of osteoclasts have been observed. Indeed, inhibition of RANKL using OPG markedly reduced alveolar bone loss in a humanized mouse model of periodontitis [1,29]. Furthermore, selectively blocking Kv1.3, a potassium channel involved in T-cell receptor activation, reduces the ratio of RANKL to OPG protein expression associated with reduced inflammatory bone resorption in experimental periodontal disease [78]. Inhibition of RANKL might therefore have therapeutic value for preventing alveolar bone and/or tooth loss in human periodontitis [1].

Another RANK-related target has been recently postulated for therapy: MMP-7, which is produced by osteoclasts at the tumor-bone interface, can process RANKL to a soluble form that promotes osteoclast activation. Inhibition of MMP-7 could therefore have therapeutic benefits in the treatment of cancer-induced osteolysis [31]. Although there are other potential targets such as kinases, adaptor molecules and transcription factors to interfere with osteoclast maturation and activity, targeting extracellular soluble factors (RANKL) and cell surface receptors (RANK) are currently the most promising avenues to design drugs for bone loss.

### Concluding remarks

The identification of RANKL, RANK, and OPG and the elucidation of RANK-regulated osteoclast development and activation have created new possibilities for designing highly effective and rational drugs to treat bone loss in millions of patients. Although targeting RANKL appears to be the most efficient and relevant approach for the treatment of bone loss, other strategies might be required to minimize potential side effects on other organs such as the innate and adaptive immune systems. The elucidation of RANK signaling pathways that are specific to osteoclasts might also identify potential new drug targets for the treatment of osteoporosis or local bone loss in diseases such as periodontitis or rheumatoid arthritis.

### References

1. Theill, L.E. *et al.* (2002) RANK-L and RANK: T cells, bone loss, and mammalian evolution. *Annu. Rev. Immunol.* 20, 795–823
2. Boyle, W.J. *et al.* (2003) Osteoclast differentiation and activation. *Nature* 423, 337–342

www.sciencedirect.com

3. Karsenty, G. and Wagner, E.F. (2002) Reaching a genetic and molecular understanding of skeletal development. *Dev. Cell* 2, 389–406
4. Wronski, T.J. and Morey, E.R. (1983) Alterations in calcium homeostasis and bone during actual and simulated space flight. *Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.* 15, 410–414
5. Anderson, D.M. *et al.* (1997) A homologue of the TNF receptor and its ligand enhance T-cell growth and dendritic-cell function. *Nature* 390, 175–179
6. Wong, B.R. *et al.* (1997) TRANCE is a novel ligand of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family that activates c-Jun N-terminal kinase in T cells. *J. Biol. Chem.* 272, 25190–25194
7. Yasuda, H. *et al.* (1998) Osteoclast differentiation factor is a ligand for osteoprotegerin/osteoclastogenesis-inhibitory factor and is identical to TRANCE/RANKL. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 95, 3597–3602
8. Yasuda, H. *et al.* (1998) Identity of osteoclastogenesis inhibitory factor (OCIF) and osteoprotegerin (OPG): a mechanism by which OPG/OCIF inhibits osteoclastogenesis in vitro. *Endocrinology* 139, 1329–1337
9. Tsuda, E. *et al.* (1997) Isolation of a novel cytokine from human fibroblasts that specifically inhibits osteoclastogenesis. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 234, 137–142
10. Simonet, W.S. *et al.* (1997) Osteoprotegerin: a novel secreted protein involved in the regulation of bone density. *Cell* 89, 309–319
11. Fata, J.E. *et al.* (2000) The osteoclast differentiation factor osteoprotegerin-ligand is essential for mammary gland development. *Cell* 103, 41–50
12. Ikeda, T. *et al.* (2001) Determination of three isoforms of the receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand and their differential expression in bone and thymus. *Endocrinology* 142, 1419–1426
13. Kong, Y.Y. *et al.* (1999) Activated T cells regulate bone loss and joint destruction in adjuvant arthritis through osteoprotegerin ligand. *Nature* 402, 304–309
14. Horwood, N.J. *et al.* (1999) Activated T lymphocytes support osteoclast formation in vitro. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 265, 144–150
15. Wittrant, Y. *et al.* (2004) RANKL/RANK/OPG: new therapeutic targets in bone tumours and associated osteolysis. *Biochim. Biophys. Acta* 1704, 49–57
16. Hsu, H. *et al.* (1999) Tumor necrosis factor receptor family member RANK mediates osteoclast differentiation and activation induced by osteoprotegerin ligand. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 96, 3540–3545
17. Kim, N. *et al.* (2000) Diverse roles of the tumor necrosis factor family member TRANCE in skeletal physiology revealed by TRANCE deficiency and partial rescue by a lymphocyte-expressed TRANCE transgene. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 97, 10905–10910
18. Dougall, W.C. *et al.* (1999) RANK is essential for osteoclast and lymph node development. *Genes Dev.* 13, 2412–2424
19. Li, J. *et al.* (2000) RANK is the intrinsic hematopoietic cell surface receptor that controls osteoclastogenesis and regulation of bone mass and calcium metabolism. *Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.* 97, 1566–1571
20. Kong, Y.Y. *et al.* (1999) OPGL is a key regulator of osteoclastogenesis, lymphocyte development and lymph-node organogenesis. *Nature* 397, 315–323
21. Mizuno, A. *et al.* (1998) Severe osteoporosis in mice lacking osteoclastogenesis inhibitory factor/osteoprotegerin. *Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.* 247, 610–615
22. Bucay, N. *et al.* (1998) osteoprotegerin-deficient mice develop early onset osteoporosis and arterial calcification. *Genes Dev.* 12, 1260–1268
23. Hughes, A.E. *et al.* (2000) Mutations in TNFRSF11A, affecting the signal peptide of RANK, cause familial expansile osteolysis. *Nat. Genet.* 24, 45–48
24. Whyte, M.P. *et al.* (2002) Osteoprotegerin deficiency and juvenile Paget’s disease. *N. Engl. J. Med.* 347, 175–184
25. Cundy, T. *et al.* (2002) A mutation in the gene TNFRSF11B encoding osteoprotegerin causes an idiopathic hyperphosphatasia phenotype. *Hum. Mol. Genet.* 11, 2119–2127
26. Eriksson, U. *et al.* (2003) Dendritic cell-induced autoimmune heart failure requires cooperation between adaptive and innate immunity. *Nat. Med.* 9, 1484–1490
27. Seshasayee, D. *et al.* (2004) A novel in vivo role for osteoprotegerin ligand in activation of monocyte effector function and inflammatory response. *J. Biol. Chem.* 279, 30202–30209
28. Suda, T. *et al.* (2003) Vitamin D and bone. *J. Cell. Biochem.* 88, 259–266

Review
TRENDS in Molecular Medicine Vol.12 No.1 January 2006

29 Walsh, M.C. and Choi, Y. (2003) Biology of the TRANCE axis. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 14, 251–263
30 Nakashima, T. *et al.* (2000) Protein expression and functional difference of membrane-bound and soluble receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand: modulation of the expression by osteotropic factors and cytokines. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 275, 768–775
31 Lynch, C.C. *et al.* (2005) MMP-7 promotes prostate cancer-induced osteolysis via the solubilization of RANKL. Cancer Cell 7, 485–496
32 Schlondorff, J. *et al.* (2001) Biochemical and pharmacological criteria define two shedding activities for TRANCE/OPGL that are distinct from the tumor necrosis factor alpha convertase. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 14665–14674
33 Chesneau, V. *et al.* (2003) Catalytic properties of ADAM19. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 22331–22340
34 Weber, B.H. *et al.* (1994) Mutations in the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-3 (TIMP3) in patients with Sorsby's fundus dystrophy. Nat. Genet. 8, 352–356
35 Lomaga, M.A. *et al.* (1999) TRAF6 deficiency results in osteopetrosis and defective interleukin-1, CD40, and LPS signaling. Genes Dev. 13, 1015–1024
36 Iotsova, V. *et al.* (1997) Osteopetrosis in mice lacking NF-kappaB1 and NF-kappaB2. Nat. Med. 3, 1285–1289
37 Ruocco, M.G. *et al.* (2005) I{kappa}B kinase (IKK){beta}, but not IKK{alpha}, is a critical mediator of osteoclast survival and is required for inflammation-induced bone loss. J. Exp. Med. 201, 1677–1687
38 Doffinger, R. *et al.* (2001) X-linked anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency is caused by impaired NF-kappaB signaling. Nat. Genet. 27, 277–285
39 Wada, T. and Penninger, J.M. (2004) Mitogen-activated protein kinases in apoptosis regulation. Oncogene 23, 2838–2849
40 Chang, L. and Karin, M. (2001) Mammalian MAP kinase signalling cascades. Nature 410, 37–40
41 Matsumoto, M. *et al.* (2000) Involvement of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway in osteoclastogenesis mediated by receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL). J. Biol. Chem. 275, 31155–31161
42 Kwak, H.B. *et al.* (2005) Monokine induced by interferon-gamma is induced by receptor activator of nuclear factor kappaB ligand and is involved in osteoclast adhesion and migration. Blood 105, 2963–2969
43 David, J.P. *et al.* (2002) JNK1 modulates osteoclastogenesis through both c-Jun phosphorylation-dependent and -independent mechanisms. J. Cell Sci. 115, 4317–4325
44 Yamamoto, A. *et al.* (2002) Possible involvement of IkappaB kinase 2 and MKK7 in osteoclastogenesis induced by receptor activator of nuclear factor kappaB ligand. J. Bone Miner. Res. 17, 612–621
45 Kenner, L. *et al.* (2004) Mice lacking JunB are osteopenic due to cell-autonomous osteoblast and osteoclast defects. J. Cell Biol. 164, 613–623
46 Wagner, E.F. (2002) Functions of AP1 (Fos/Jun) in bone development. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 61(Suppl 2), ii40–ii42
47 Hotokezaka, H. *et al.* (2002) U0126 and PD98059, specific inhibitors of MEK, accelerate differentiation of RAW264.7 cells into osteoclast-like cells. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 47366–47372
48 Takayanagi, H. *et al.* (2002) Induction and activation of the transcription factor NFATc1 (NFAT2) integrate RANKL signaling in terminal differentiation of osteoclasts. Dev. Cell 3, 889–901
49 Matsuo, K. *et al.* (2004) Nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) rescues osteoclastogenesis in precursors lacking c-Fos. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 26475–26480
50 Koga, T. *et al.* (2005) NFAT and Osterix cooperatively regulate bone formation. Nat. Med. 11, 880–885
51 Soriano, P. *et al.* (1991) Targeted disruption of the c-src proto-oncogene leads to osteopetrosis in mice. Cell 64, 693–702
52 Miyazaki, T. *et al.* (2004) Src kinase activity is essential for osteoclast function. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 17660–17666
53 Koga, S. *et al.* (2005) Physical and functional association of c-Src and degranulation-promoting adaptor protein (ADAP) in osteoclastogenesis in vitro. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 31564–31571
54 Darnay, B.G. *et al.* (1998) Characterization of the intracellular domain of receptor activator of NF-kappaB (RANK). Interaction with tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factors and activation of NF-kappab and c-Jun N-terminal kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 20551–20555

55 Mizukami, J. *et al.* (2002) Receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL) activates TAK1 mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase through a signaling complex containing RANK, TAB2, and TRAF6. Mol. Cell. Biol. 22, 992–1000
56 Hauer, J. *et al.* (2005) TNF receptor (TNFR)-associated factor (TRAF) 3 serves as an inhibitor of TRAF2/5-mediated activation of the noncanonical NF-kappaB pathway by TRAF-binding TNFRs. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 2874–2879
57 Kanazawa, K. and Kudo, A. (2005) TRAF2 is essential for TNF-alpha-induced osteoclastogenesis. J. Bone Miner. Res. 20, 840–847
58 Kanazawa, K. *et al.* (2003) TRAF5 functions in both RANKL- and TNFalpha-induced osteoclastogenesis. J. Bone Miner. Res. 18, 443–450
59 Wada, T. *et al.* (2005) The molecular scaffold Gab2 is a crucial component of RANK signaling and osteoclastogenesis. Nat. Med. 11, 394–399
60 Vanhaesebroeck, B. and Alessi, D.R. (2000) The PI3K-PDK1 connection: more than just a road to PKB. Biochem. J. 346, 561–576
61 Nakamura, I. *et al.* (1995) Wortmannin, a specific inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase, blocks osteoclastic bone resorption. FEBS Lett. 361, 79–84
62 Sugatani, T. *et al.* (2003) PTEN regulates RANKL- and osteopontin-stimulated signal transduction during osteoclast differentiation and cell motility. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 5001–5008
63 Fackenthal, J.D. *et al.* (2001) Male breast cancer in Cowden syndrome patients with germline PTEN mutations. J. Med. Genet. 38, 159–164
64 Takeshita, S. *et al.* (2002) SHIP-deficient mice are severely osteoporotic due to increased numbers of hyper-resorptive osteoclasts. Nat. Med. 8, 943–949
65 Komarova, S.V. *et al.* (2003) RANK ligand-induced elevation of cytosolic Ca2+ accelerates nuclear translocation of nuclear factor kappaB in osteoclasts. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 8286–8293
66 Takayanagi, H. (2005) Mechanistic insight into osteoclast differentiation in osteoimmunology. J. Mol. Med. 83, 170–179
67 Duran, A. *et al.* (2004) The atypical PKC-interacting protein p62 is an important mediator of RANK-activated osteoclastogenesis. Dev. Cell 6, 303–309
68 Laurin, N. *et al.* (2002) Recurrent mutation of the gene encoding sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1/p62) in Paget disease of bone. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 70, 1582–1588
69 Hashimoto, N. *et al.* (2005) PKClambda regulates glucose-induced insulin secretion through modulation of gene expression in pancreatic beta cells. J. Clin. Invest. 115, 138–145
70 Takayanagi, H. *et al.* (2000) T-cell-mediated regulation of osteoclastogenesis by signalling cross-talk between RANKL and IFN-gamma. Nature 408, 600–605
71 Fakruddin, J.M. and Laurence, J. (2003) HIV envelope gp120-mediated regulation of osteoclastogenesis via receptor activator of nuclear factor kappaB ligand (RANKL) secretion and its modulation by certain HIV protease inhibitors through interferon-gamma/R-ANKL cross-talk. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 48251–48258
72 Takayanagi, H. *et al.* (2002) RANKL maintains bone homeostasis through c-Fos-dependent induction of interferon-beta. Nature 416, 744–749
73 Syed, F. and Khosla, S. (2005) Mechanisms of sex steroid effects on bone. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 328, 688–696
74 Maini, R.N. *et al.* (1995) Monoclonal anti-TNF alpha antibody as a probe of pathogenesis and therapy of rheumatoid disease. Immunol. Rev. 144, 195–223
75 Candeliere, G.A. *et al.* (1995) Increased expression of the c-fos proto-oncogene in bone from patients with fibrous dysplasia. N. Engl. J. Med. 332, 1546–1551
76 Rahman, M.M. *et al.* (2003) Two histone deacetylase inhibitors, trichostatin A and sodium butyrate, suppress differentiation into osteoclasts but not into macrophages. Blood 101, 3451–3459
77 Kostenuik, P.J. (2005) Osteoprotegerin and RANKL regulate bone resorption, density, geometry and strength. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 5, 618–625
78 Valverde, P. *et al.* (2004) Selective blockade of voltage-gated potassium channels reduces inflammatory bone resorption in experimental periodontal disease. J. Bone Miner. Res. 19, 155–164
