INVITED REVIEW

ABSTRACT: The causes of motor neuron death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are still unknown. Several lines of evidence suggest that mitochondrial dysfunction may be involved in the pathogenesis of ALS. Biochemical and morphological mitochondrial abnormalities have been demonstrated in postmortem spinal cords of ALS patients. Furthermore, in transgenic mice expressing mutant Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1), the antioxidant enzyme associated with familial ALS (FALS), mitochondrial abnormalities precede the disease onset, suggesting that mitochondrial dysfunction is causally involved in the pathogenesis of SOD1-FALS. Despite this evidence, it is not yet fully understood how mutant SOD1 damages mitochondria. Recent work has demonstrated that a portion of mutant SOD1 is localized in mitochondria, both in transgenic mice and in FALS patients, where it forms proteinaceous aggregates. These findings have opened new avenues of investigation addressing the hypothesis that mutant SOD1 may directly damage mitochondria. Major future challenges will be to better understand the mechanisms and the consequences of mitochondrial dysfunction in ALS. If mitochondrial dysfunction is convincingly involved in ALS pathogenesis, either as a primary cause or as contributing factor, it is likely to become a novel target for therapeutic intervention.

Muscle Nerve 33: 598–608, 2006

---

# MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTION AND AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS

ISABEL HERVIAS, PhD, M. FLINT BEAL, MD, and GIOVANNI MANFREDI, MD, PhD

Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 525 East 68th Street, A-505, New York, New York 10021, USA

Accepted 27 October 2005

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common adult form of motor neuron disease. The clinical hallmarks of ALS are progressive muscle weakness, atrophy, and spasticity, which reflect the degeneration and death of upper and lower motor neurons in the cortex, brainstem, and spinal cord. Generally fatal within 1–5 years of onset, ALS has a prevalence of 1 or 2 per 100,000 people. In 90% of cases there is no apparent genetic linkage (sporadic ALS; SALS), but in the remaining 10% the disease is inherited (familial ALS; FALS), often in an autosomal-dominant manner. Among the familial cases of ALS, approximately 20% are caused by mutations in the gene encoding Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase (SOD1).

The symptoms and pathology of SOD1-FALS patients closely resemble those of SALS patients. This has sparked considerable enthusiasm for the transgenic animal models expressing SOD1 mutations, in the hope that they could provide not only insight into the pathogenic mechanisms of both FALS and SALS, but also valuable tools to develop and test therapeutic approaches.

In the last decade, mitochondria have increasingly gained popularity in the field of neurodegenerative diseases. This is not surprising because mitochondria have many fundamental functions. They are one of the main sources of energy, providing the bulk adenosine triphosphate (ATP) required for most cellular functions. They also play a pivotal role in intermediate metabolism and in maintaining cellular calcium homeostasis. However, mitochondria are also the main source of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and central players in the intrinsic pathway of apoptotic cell death. Because these various functions are strictly linked with each other, mitochondrial dysfunction may easily shift this deli

---

Abbreviations: ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; CCS, copper chaperone for superoxide dismutase; CoQ, coenzyme Q; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; FALS, familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; IMS, intermembrane space; ROS, reactive oxygen species; SALS, sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; SOD1, Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase; TIM, translocase of the inner mitochondrial membrane; TOM, translocase of the outer mitochondrial membrane; XIAP, X-chromosome-linked inhibitor of apoptosis

Key words: aggregation; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS); apoptosis; mitochondria; motor neuron disease; SOD1

Correspondence to: G. Manfredi; e-mail: gim2004@mail.med.cornell.edu

© 2005 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Published online 21 December 2005 in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI 10.1002/mus.20489

598 Mitochondria and ALS MUSCLE & NERVE May 2006cate balance between life and death and lead to cell degeneration.

In this review, we discuss the evidence supporting the role of mitochondria in motor neuron death in ALS.

**Sporadic ALS and Mitochondria.** A number of studies, mostly in human postmortem and biopsy samples, have suggested a potential involvement of mitochondria in the pathogenesis of SALS. Hirano and colleagues described mitochondrial abnormalities in proximal axons,^{36} and Sasaki and Iwata reported similar abnormalities in the anterior horns of SALS spinal cords.^{71} Subsarcolemmal aggregates of abnormal mitochondria were found in intramuscular nerves and skeletal muscle,^{1,4} which also showed increased mitochondrial volume and calcium levels.^{73}

The respiratory chain provides the energy necessary for mitochondrial ATP synthesis and calcium handling. Defects in the activities of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes have been detected in muscle and spinal cord of SALS patients,^{10,81,86,87} suggesting that respiratory chain impairment may participate in the pathogenesis of SALS.

The mitochondrial respiratory chain is under the genetic control of both nuclear and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). mtDNA mutations are frequently associated with mitochondrial diseases in humans,^{19} and these, in some cases, result in neurodegeneration. It has been suggested that maternally inherited or acquired mtDNA mutations are related to SALS pathogenesis. Studies of cytoplasmic hybrids (mtDNA-less cells repopulated with mtDNA from a donor source) obtained from mitochondria of SALS patients have been shown to have respiratory chain impairment, increased free radical production, and defective calcium homeostasis.^{76} These findings were obtained in cytoplasmic hybrids generated with neuroblastoma mtDNA-less cells as mtDNA acceptors, but were not replicated in non-neuronal cells,^{28} suggesting that the effect of SALS-related mtDNA abnormalities may only occur in cells that express neuronal phenotypes.

Despite the evidence of mitochondrial abnormalities, studies of postmortem tissues and biological samples obtained from already symptomatic subjects are of limited use in understanding the significance of the involvement of mitochondria in SALS. In the absence of a faithful disease model of SALS, in which mitochondrial changes can be followed from before the onset of the disease and during its progression, it is virtually impossible to establish whether mitochondria are causally involved or simply innocent bystanders in SALS.

As mentioned earlier, SALS and FALS patients share similar clinical and pathological features. Furthermore, the clinical progression and the pathological alterations in motor neurons of transgenic mutant SOD1 mice are similar to those of human SOD1-FALS. For this reason, research efforts on the mitochondrial involvement in ALS have increasingly focused on animal and cellular models expressing mutant SOD1.

In the following sections of this review, we discuss the evidence implicating mitochondria in motor neuron death in models of SOD1-FALS. However, we must be aware of the fact that forms of SALS are likely to be different disease entities than FALS and, although sharing many clinical and pathological characteristics, they may have completely different disease causes and mechanisms. Therefore, we have to be cautious in extrapolating the findings obtained from FALS models to all forms of SALS, especially when dealing with therapeutic approaches that target pathological events that may be specific for one form of ALS but not others.

## SOD1 MUTATIONS AND FALS

To date, 117 mutations in the *SOD1* gene (chromosome 21q22.11) have been linked to FALS (http://www.alsod.org). The vast majority of these mutations are amino acid substitutions that result in a genetically dominant disease.

*SOD1* is an antioxidant metalloprotein expressed ubiquitously that catalyzes the dismutation of superoxide to molecular oxygen and hydrogen peroxide.^{45} Early measurements of SOD1 activity in blood of FALS patients suggested that a loss of enzymatic activity is central to the pathogenesis of the disease.^{18,61} However, it is now clear that the effect of *SOD1* mutations results from a “toxic gain-of-function” rather than from a lack of antioxidant activity. This concept is substantiated by experimental evidence showing that: (1) when *SOD1* is genetically deleted in knockout mice, the lifespan of these animals is normal and they do not develop motor neuron disease;^{67} (2) many disease-linked *SOD1* mutants retain normal levels of superoxide dismutase activity,^{8} and transgenic mice develop motor neuron degeneration despite an overall increase in their *SOD1* activity;^{92} and (3) neither the age of onset nor the speed of disease progression in humans correlate with *SOD1* activity levels.^{11}

Many different hypotheses have been formulated to explain the pathogenic mechanisms in *SOD1*FALS. Among the most widely held ones are glutamate excitotoxicity,70 aberrant protein aggregates containing mutant SOD1,90 mislocalization and aggregation of neurofilaments,49 enhanced free radical formation,2 loss of protein chaperone function,59,79 proteasome dysfunction,41,80,95 and mitochondrial dysfunction93 and apoptosis.65 However, none of these specific mechanisms has been firmly demonstrated to be the sole cause of FALS, and it is completely possible that mutant SOD1 toxicity has multiple cellular targets and mechanisms of action that cooperate in causing motor neuron degeneration.

Another unanswered question regarding mutant SOD1 toxicity is the apparent selectivity for motor neurons. Mutant SOD1 expression is ubiquitous, both in humans and in transgenic animals, but only certain populations of neurons degenerate. To address directly the issue of cell type specificity, mutant SOD1 has been selectively expressed in astrocytes31 or in neurons51 of transgenic mice, using cell-specific promoters. In both cases, these mice did not develop disease or pathological phenotypes. These results suggest that mutant SOD1 needs to be expressed in multiple cell types in order to cause motor neuron death. These findings have recently been challenged by the observation that the expression of mutant SOD1 in the neuronal model may have been too low to cause a clinical phenotype.52 Clement and colleagues suggested that the interaction among different cell types is a critical determinant of SOD1 toxicity. Using chimeric mice containing a mixture of SOD1 mutant and wild-type cells in spinal cords, these investigators found that wild-type motor neurons surrounded by SOD1 mutant cells developed signs of degeneration, and, vice versa, wild-type non-neuronal cells attenuated the degeneration of mutant SOD1 motor neurons.15

As discussed later, it is possible that mitochondria are involved in the determination of tissue-specific cell death in SOD1-FALS. The damage inflicted on mitochondria by mutant SOD1 may be greater in tissues with high metabolic demands, which produce abundant free radicals and are likely to be sensitive to mitochondrial dysfunction. Mutant SOD1 may have a higher tropism toward neural mitochondria than toward mitochondria from unaffected tissues. In addition, the downstream consequences of mitochondrial dysfunction, such as impairment of calcium handling and apoptosis, may be more pronounced in motor neurons than in other cell types.

---

MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTION IN SOD1-FALS

Mitochondria can be involved in the pathogenesis of SOD1-FALS and in the determination of mutant SOD1 cell type–specific toxicity in a number of ways, because most of the proposed pathogenic mechanisms mentioned earlier may affect mitochondria directly or indirectly (schematically represented in Fig. 1). In addition, it was recently shown that a proportion of SOD1 abandons the cytosol and ends up inside the mitochondrial intermembrane space53,75 and matrix.82 These findings support the hypothesis that mutant SOD1 may damage mitochondrial function and integrity directly, from inside the mitochondria.

Motor neurons from mice with the G93A and the G37R SOD1 mutations contain large, membrane-bound vacuoles derived from degenerating mitochondria.16,17,89 In G93A mice, at the onset of the disease there is a transient explosive increase in vacuoles derived from mitochondria, which precedes motor neuron death.46 This suggests that mitochondrial alterations trigger the functional decline of motor neurons. Jaarsma and colleagues showed by electron microscopy that mutant SOD1 immunoreactivity is concentrated inside the vacuolated mitochondria.38 It needs to be mentioned that neural mitochondria from transgenic mice expressing high levels of wild-type human SOD1 also show mitochondrial vacuoles containing SOD1,96 suggesting that mitochondrial vacuolization is not exclusively caused by mutant SOD1. However, vacuoles appeared at a much older age in wild-type SOD1 than in G93A mutant SOD1 mice.

Xu and colleagues provided some insight into the mechanisms whereby mitochondria become vacuolated in the motor neurons of mutant SOD1 transgenic mice. They showed that the mitochondrial outer membrane expands and forms large vacuoles, possibly by fusing with membranes of other subcellular organelles, such as peroxisomes that congregate around mitochondria, and the mitochondrial cristae collapse to become inner membrane remnants inside the vacuoles.35

SOD1 mutations not only cause mitochondrial morphological alterations, but also result in mitochondrial dysfunction, both in animal and cellular models of FALS. In neuroblastoma cells expressing mutant G93A SOD1, Carri and colleagues reported a significant loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, which is an indicator of mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction.12 Along the same lines, a decrease of ATP levels, impaired respiratory chain enzymes, and increased production of reactive oxy-
FIGURE 1. Potential pathways of mitochondrial involvement in SOD1-FALS. SOD1 may affect mitochondria by several mechanisms that act in concert to contribute to motor neuron degeneration. Mutant SOD1 forms aggregates both in the cytosol and in mitochondria (1), which may lead to mitochondrial damage and loss of oxidative phosphorylation capacity, and result in decreased ATP synthesis (2). Mitochondria take up calcium from the cytosol and from the ER, one of the major calcium storage sites. In SOD1-FALS, calcium entering the motor neurons in response to the activation of glutamate receptors (GluR) may be increased because of loss of glial glutamate transporters (EAAT1, 3). Mitochondrial dysfunction may cause impaired calcium handling (3) and activation of the intrinsic apoptotic pathway with cytochrome c release and caspase activation (4). In addition, mitochondrial dysfunction and mutant SOD1 may promote the production of noxious reactive oxygen species (5).

gen species have been demonstrated in motor neuron-like cells and neuronal cell lines expressing mutant SOD1.6,55

In transgenic mouse models of SOD1-FALS, several groups have reported mitochondrial dysfunction using a variety of approaches. In G93A mice at an early disease stage, the activities of various mitochondrial electron transfer chain complexes were decreased in the spinal cord. This decrease persisted throughout the course of disease progression.39 In isolated mitochondria from brain and spinal cord of G93A mice, Matti-

azzi and colleagues found both a decrease in several respiratory chain complexes and in the capacity to consume oxygen and synthesize ATP.53 Additionally, the concept that mitochondrial energy metabolism is impaired by mutant SOD1 is indirectly supported by the fact that administration of creatine, a molecule involved in energy storage, increases the lifespan of G93A mice.44 Other compounds with the potential of improving mitochondrial energy transduction,97 such as coenzyme Q (CoQ), are currently under evaluation in transgenic models of FALS.

Recently, Kirkinezos and co-workers reported a decrease in complex IV-driven respiration beginning prior to disease onset in spinal cord mitochondria from G93A mice, and showed that this decrease persisted throughout the course of disease progression. Using isolated mitochondria from presymptomatic and symptomatic G93A mice, they demonstrated that G93A mitochondria suffer from a loss of cytochrome *c* associated with the inner mitochondrial membrane. By administering exogenous cytochrome *c* they were able to restore mitochondrial respiration in mutant isolated mitochondria.⁴³ They suggested that the loss of cytochrome *c* may be due to progressive “leakage” through an excessively porous mitochondrial outer membrane and by oxidative damage to cardiolipin, one of the fundamental lipid constituents of the inner membrane necessary for cytochrome *c* maintenance.³⁰

## MITOCHONDRIAL APOPTOSIS IN SOD1-FALS

Mitochondria play a central role in the process of programmed cell death, because they can initiate an intrinsic (intracellular) apoptotic pathway. This intrinsic apoptosis occurs when cytochrome *c* is released in the cytosol either because pro-apoptotic proteins such as Bax and t-Bid translocate to mitochondria or because of membrane permeability transition. In the cytosol, cytochrome *c* interacts with Apaf1 and cleaves caspase-9, which, in turn, activates executioner caspases leading to cell death.³²

Studies in cellular and animal models of FALS have proposed that apoptosis plays a role in motor neuron death. Rabizadeh and colleagues showed that immortalized rat nigral neuronal cells transfected with SOD1 mutants are prone to apoptosis.⁶⁶ These observations were also confirmed in PC12 cells²⁹ and in primary neurons from transgenic mice expressing mutant SOD1. Additional evidence for a role of caspase activation in ALS came from crossing a dominant-negative caspase-1 mouse with the G93A SOD1 mouse. The double transgenic mouse lived significantly longer than the single G93A SOD1 transgenic one.²⁷ Furthermore, it was shown that caspase-1 activation is an early event in SOD1 mutants, occurring prior to neuronal cell death and disease onset.⁶³,⁸³ Cytochrome *c* release from mitochondria and activation of caspase-9 have been demonstrated in G93A SOD1 mutant SOD1 mice and neuronal cell lines.³³,⁶⁴,⁸³

Bcl-2 and the protein caspase inhibitor XIAP (X-chromosome-linked inhibitor of apoptosis) can inhibit the intrinsic apoptotic pathway. Using a transgenic approach, overexpression of Bcl-2 prevented cell death in PC12 cells²⁹ and prolonged survival in mice expressing mutant SOD1.⁴⁷ Inoue and colleagues showed that XIAP expression slowed disease progression in a double transgenic (G93A/XIAP) mouse.³⁷ The role of caspase activation in SOD1 transgenic mice is also supported by pharmacological approaches, in which intraventricular administration of a pan-caspase inhibitor (zVAD-fmk) prolonged the lifespan of G93A SOD1 mice.⁵⁰ In addition, it has been shown that administration of minocycline, an aminoglycosidic antibiotic thought to inhibit mitochondrial cytochrome *c* release, delays the onset of the disease and extends the survival of G93A SOD1 mice.⁹⁴

Finally, the localization of a portion of mutant SOD1 in mitochondria, as discussed in what follows, can be important for apoptosis. First, it has been reported that targeting mutant SOD1 to the mitochondrial matrix triggers the release of cytochrome *c* followed by the activation of the caspase cascade and cell death in cultured neuronal cells.⁷⁷ Furthermore, Pasinelli and co-workers showed that mutant SOD1 binds Bcl-2 in the mitochondria of human subjects and transgenic mice.⁶² It is possible that, in motor neurons, aberrant interactions between mutant SOD1 and Bcl-2 impair the function of Bcl-2 and predispose to apoptosis.

All this evidence apparently links apoptosis to ALS, but caution should be used to avoid overemphasizing its role in motor neuron death. There are data suggesting that apoptosis in motor neurons may follow an atypical course. For example, mutant SOD1 mice lacking caspase-11 (an upstream regulator of caspase-1 and -3) did not improve the phenotype of the disease.⁴² Moreover, in ALS patients and transgenic mice it is difficult to detect morphological and biochemical markers of apoptosis.⁵⁷ At any time-point in the course of the disease, there are probably small numbers of motor neurons that may actually be dying of apoptosis, but in many cells the process of apoptosis may start without proceeding to completion. It may be hypothesized that the apoptotic process occurring in motor neurons is not due to a widespread acute mitochondrial release of pro-apoptotic factors, but rather to partial release of pro-apoptotic factors caused by local toxic effects in populations of mitochondria residing in specific subcellular compartments, such as in subsynaptic areas subject to high calcium influx.⁴⁸ This process may be insufficient to induce cell death immediately, but it may eventually spread to the cell bodies. This idea is supported by the fact that in ALS there is “dying back” degeneration, and the axons become atrophic before motor neuron bodies.²⁵ However, it
must be mentioned that localization of mutant SOD1 aggregates in the axonal processes may not always be required for the development of motor neuron loss. Borchelt and colleagues recently demonstrated that small amounts of a truncated form of SOD1, which does not aggregate in the axons, can still cause a typical FALS phenotype in transgenic mice.⁸⁴ Finally, mitochondria may act in concert with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in initiating intrinsic apoptotic pathways, because oxidative and ER-induced stress, causing caspase-12 activation, have been implicated in FALS pathogenesis in SOD1 mutant mice.⁹⁸

## MITOCHONDRIA AND CALCIUM HOMEOSTASIS IN SOD1-FALS

Elevation of intracellular calcium has been implicated in neuronal cell death. One of the functions of mitochondria is buffering the calcium released into the cytosol of excitable cells.⁷ Thus, disruption in calcium homeostasis may cause cell death. This may be a particularly important factor in lower motor neurons, because some reports showed low levels of calcium-binding proteins, which are thought to be alternative buffering calcium systems, such as parvalbumin, calretinin, and calbindin, in the motor neuronal populations vulnerable to ALS degeneration (reviewed elsewhere³,²²). Carrì and co-workers showed that neuroblastoma cells transfected with mutant SOD1 displayed increased cytoplasmic calcium levels, indicating a reduced calcium-buffering capacity.¹² These changes could elevate oxidative potential in these cells, leading to inactivation of the calcium/calcineurin system.²³ The same group has shown that calcineurin is inactivated by free radicals produced in the presence of mutant SOD1 in vitro, and that calcineurin inactivation can be prevented by reducing agents. Instead, wild-type SOD1 is protective against oxidative inactivation of calcineurin.²³ Disturbed intracellular calcium homeostasis has also been reported in cultured primary motor neurons from G93A transgenic mice.⁴⁸

Glutamate is an excitatory amino acid that mediates excitotoxicity caused by repetitive firing and/or elevation of intracellular calcium. Glutamate excitotoxicity has been proposed as one of the potential mechanisms for the motor neuron–selective toxicity in ALS.⁷⁰ An impairment of mitochondrial calcium buffering could precipitate excitotoxic events in motor neurons. This hypothesis is consistent with the finding that overexpression of GLUR2, the calcium-impermeable subunit of the glutamate receptor, in

motor neurons, improves the lifespan of G93A mice.⁷⁸

Mitochondria produce free radicals as a byproduct of oxidative phosphorylation, and oxidative stress is related to neurodegeneration.⁵ The elevation in cytosolic calcium levels in neurons induces enhanced production of free radicals from mitochondria,⁶⁸ and compromises mitochondrial integrity, although the mechanism underlying this damage is still unclear. Therefore, calcium homeostasis imbalance may also trigger cell death mediated by free radical species. Accordingly, antioxidant agents have been shown to extend the survival of mutant SOD1 transgenic mice.⁴⁰,⁹¹ In support of the free radical damage hypothesis, cultured neuronal cells expressing mutant SOD1 display abnormal amounts of reactive oxygen species and mitochondrial dysfunction, which are exacerbated by depletion of the natural cellular antioxidant defenses.⁹⁹,¹⁰⁰

### MITOCHONDRIAL LOCALIZATION OF SOD1 IN FALS

How mutant SOD1 causes motor neuron death is still not known, but several non-mutually exclusive mechanisms have been proposed. Among them, the one that is gaining solid footing involves the aberrant aggregation of mutant SOD1 polymers, which presumably implicates other proteins as well. The mechanisms underlying the morphological changes and biochemical abnormalities in mitochondria of mice expressing mutant SOD1 are still the object of intense investigation, but it is likely that one mechanism may be attributed, at least in part, to protein aggregation of mutant SOD1 and presumably other mitochondrial proteins.

SOD1 was originally found to be a cytosolic enzyme.⁸⁵ However, after its intracellular localization was thoroughly investigated, it was also detected in other cell compartments, including mitochondria. The mitochondrial localization of SOD1 was demonstrated in different organisms, including *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*,⁷⁵ rat,⁶⁰ and mouse.³⁴,³⁸,⁵³,⁸² Recently, Liu and colleagues reported that mutant SOD1 associates preferentially with mitochondria in the spinal cord, providing a potential clue on the tissue specificity of the neurodegenerative process.⁵² They proposed that mutant SOD1 progressively accumulates and aggregates in the outer mitochondrial membrane, causing clogging of the protein translocation machinery, and eventually resulting in mitochondrial dysfunction. This is an intriguing hypothesis, which deserves further exploration to demonstrate the association of mutant SOD1 with the outer-membrane protein translocation machine.ery (TOM). In addition, large-molecular-weight aggregates containing mutant SOD1 have been found to associate with the inner mitochondrial membrane, both on the cytoplasm and on the matrix side, suggesting that mutant SOD1 penetrates inside mitochondria, where it may find an environment favorable for aggregation.82

In SOD1 transgenic mice, SOD1 colocalizes with cytochrome *c* in the intermembrane space of mitochondria during the early stages of mitochondrial vacuolization. Large aggregates of SOD1 immunoreactive material within mitochondrial vacuoles have been demonstrated by immunoelectron microscopy.35 The process leading to outer-membrane expansion and vacuolization is still unclear, but it may involve the fusion of mitochondrial membranes with peroxisomes that surround mitochondria containing mutant SOD1.35 The expanded outer membrane could become porous and facilitate the leakage of cytochrome *c* and other mitochondrial pro-apoptotic molecules into the cytosol, triggering the apoptotic cascade.93

With respect to their mitochondrial import mechanisms, there are two major classes of proteins.14 Proteins belonging to the first class that are directed to the mitochondrial matrix are synthesized with N-terminal import sequences, which are cleaved upon entry into the mitochondrial matrix. These targeting sequences contain basic amino acids and form amphipathic α-helices that bind to receptors of the translocase of the TOM complex. Proteins are unfolded and sequentially imported through the general import pore (GIP, Tom40) and the translocase of the inner-membrane complex (TIM). The second class of proteins lacks the N-terminal import sequence, but often contains internal import motifs that occur throughout their length. Usually, these are either transmembrane proteins or proteins of the intermembrane space (IMS). Within this class, some proteins, such as apo-cytochrome *c*, are imported in a TOM receptor-independent but Tom40-dependent manner.88 The mechanism by which SOD1 is imported into mitochondria is still largely unknown. The SOD1 apoprotein does not contain a cleavable N-terminal import sequence.9 Therefore, it is likely that SOD1 falls into the second class of mitochondrial proteins with internal import sequences.

To date, most of the knowledge on mitochondrial import of SOD1 comes from the work of Culotta and colleagues in yeast. They demonstrated that SOD1 enters mitochondria as an unfolded and unmetallated apoprotein, and that posttranslational modifications, such as the interaction with its copper chaperone, CCS, and the formation of the intramolecular disulfide bond, are important in mitochondrial import and retention of SOD1.24,75

Based on these findings we could hypothesize an import model (Fig. 2) whereby a portion of SOD1, having mRNA that is abundantly expressed in all cells, is translated by ribosomes localized in the proximity of the mitochondrial outer membranes. A fraction of this perimitochondrial SOD1 may be recognized by the receptor-like chaperones of the TOM machinery, perhaps thanks to short hydrophobic intramolecular amino acid domains. Some SOD1 may be imported into the mitochondrial IMS, either in a linear or a loop conformation,26,74 before it is completely folded and the disulfide bond formed. Then, the SOD1 that has penetrated the mitochondria may become folded, metallated, and enzymatically active (when it is a wild-type–like form of the protein), and become virtually “trapped” inside. CCS has been found in yeast mitochondria,75 but its presence in mammalian cells has not yet been demonstrated. In any case, it has been shown that copper can be loaded in SOD1 even in the absence of CCS.13 In addition, proteins involved in maintaining thiol groups in the oxidized state, thereby allowing disulfide bonds to form in a reducing environment, have been described recently in the mitochondrial IMS.56 It is likely that, when imported SOD1 fails to fold and form the intramolecular disulfide bond, it will not be retained and will exit from mitochondria.20 Similarly, if SOD1 is only partially imported and a portion of the protein folds on the cytosolic side of the TOM channel, its import may become arrested, resulting in redirection of the protein toward the cytosol or “clogging” of the import machinery. Finally, because in brain mitochondria of transgenic SOD1 mice a portion of SOD1 is detected in association with the matrix side of the inner mitochondrial membrane,82 it is possible that this SOD1 remains unfolded in the intermembrane space and enters the matrix through the TIM import machinery.

Clearly, much more needs to be done to understand the determinant factors of SOD1 mitochondrial import. The next fundamental steps will be to better characterize the mechanism whereby SOD1 gains access into mitochondria, especially in mammalian cells, and the nature and composition of intramitochondrial SOD1 aggregates, and to determine whether and how they cause mitochondrial dysfunction.

Although the presence of SOD1 in mitochondria may suggest a direct role of mitochondrial SOD1 in the pathogenesis of FALS, other explanations must also be considered. It is also possible that mutant
FIGURE 2. Putative mechanisms of SOD1 mitochondrial import. A portion of SOD1 is translated by cytosolic ribosomes and resides in the cytosol, where it interacts with the copper chaperone, CCS, and forms the intramolecular disulfide bond (1). A portion of SOD1 is translated by perimitochondrial ribosomes (2). A fraction of the perimitochondrial SOD1 is recognized by the TOM machinery (3). Some SOD1 may be imported into the mitochondrial IMS, either in a linear or in a loop conformation (3 or 4), before it is folded. If SOD1 is only partially imported and a portion of the protein folds on the cytosolic side of the TOM, the protein may be redirected toward the cytosol or may “clog” the import machinery (5). SOD1 inside the mitochondria may become folded, metallated, and enzymatically active (6). CCS may be present in mammalian mitochondria. Putative proteins involved in importing SOD1 in the intermembrane space maintaining thiol groups in the oxidized state are indicated by “?.” A portion of SOD1 may remain unfolded in the IMS and enter the matrix through the TIM import machinery (7, 8).

SOD1 in the cytosol may indirectly affect mitochondrial functions. For example, mutant SOD1 has been proposed to promote aberrant production of reactive oxygen species,²¹ which may secondarily damage mitochondrial components. Cytosolic mutant SOD1 may also sequester protective factors, such as cytosolic heat shock proteins, which are involved in anti-apoptotic defense mechanisms.⁵⁹

### CONCLUSIONS

Several lines of evidence discussed in this review support the role of mitochondrial dysfunction in motor neuron degeneration, as occurs in ALS. Mitochondria are fundamental organelles in almost all cell types due to their central role in intermediate metabolism, energy production, and apoptosis. Thus, mitochondrial dysfunction can result in cell death, either by metabolic impairment or by apoptosis.

Despite the fact that mutations in SOD1 account only for a small fraction of all ALS cases, the cellular and transgenic animal models available provide an ideal setting for studying the mitochondrial involvement in this form of FALS. Still, many problems
need to be addressed. We would like to know more about the mechanisms whereby SOD1 is imported in mitochondria, the molecular mechanism of aggregate formation, and the nature of other mitochondrial proteins that may be involved in the formation of aggregates. Answering these questions will likely provide important clues to the origin of mitochondrial dysfunction in SOD1-FALS.

Although research efforts are directed mostly toward the understanding of mitochondrial dysfunction in SOD1-FALS, we hope that it will be possible to better address the involvement of mitochondria in the pathogenesis of sporadic ALS, and determine whether it may become a potential therapeutic target. Clearly, care is required in extending the findings in SOD1-FALS to other forms of familial or sporadic ALS, which may have different pathogenic causes. Further studies are necessary to correlate mitochondrial involvement in the various forms of ALS.

This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Education and Culture (I.H.), the Robert Packard ALS Research Center, the New York Community Trust (G.M.), and NIH/NINDS grant P01 NS011766-27 (G.M.).

---

**REFERENCES**

1. Affifi AK, Aleu FP, Goodgold J, MacKay B. Ultrastructure of atrophic muscle in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurology 1966;16:475–481.
2. Agar J, Durham H. Relevance of oxidative injury in the pathogenesis of motor neuron diseases. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 2003;4:232–242.
3. Appel SH, Beers D, Siklos L, Engelhardt JI, Mosier DR. Calcium: the Darth Vader of ALS. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 2001;2(suppl 1):S47–54.
4. Atsumi T, Miyatake T. Morphometry of the degenerative process in the hypoglossal nerves in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 1987;73:25–31.
5. Beal MF. Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative damage in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases and coenzyme Q10 as a potential treatment. J Bioenerg Biomembr 2004;36:381–386.
6. Beretta S, Sala G, Mattavelli L, Ceresa C, Casciati A, Ferri A, et al. Mitochondrial dysfunction due to mutant copper/zinc superoxide dismutase associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is reversed by N-acetylcysteine. Neurobiol Dis 2003;13:213–221.
7. Bianchi K, Rimessi A, Prandini A, Szabadkai G, Rizzuto R. Calcium and mitochondria: mechanisms and functions of a troubled relationship. Biochim Biophys Acta 2004;1742:119–131.
8. Borchelt DR, Lee MK, Slunt HS, Guarnieri M, Xu ZS, Wong PC, et al. Superoxide dismutase 1 with mutations linked to familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis possesses significant activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1994;91:8292–8296.
9. Bordo D, Djinovic K, Bolognesi M. Conserved patterns in the Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase family. J Mol Biol 1994;238:366–386.
10. Borthwick GM, Johnson MA, Ince PG, Shaw PJ, Turnbull DM. Mitochondrial enzyme activity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: implications for the role of mitochondria in neuronal cell death. Ann Neurol 1999;46:787–790.
11. Bowling AC, Barkowski EE, McKenna-Yasek D, Sapp P, Horvitz HR, Beal MF, et al. Superoxide dismutase concentration and activity in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 1995;64:2366–2369.
12. Carri MT, Ferri A, Battistoni A, Famhy L, Gabbianelli R, Poccia F, et al. Expression of a Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase typical of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis induces mitochondrial alteration and increase of cytosolic Ca²⁺ concentration in transfected neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. FEBS Lett 1997;414:365–368.
13. Carroll MC, Girouard JB, Ulloa JL, Subramaniam JR, Wong PC, Valentine JS, et al. Mechanisms for activating Cu- and Zn-containing superoxide dismutase in the absence of the CCS Cu chaperone. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2004;101:5964–5969.
14. Chacinska A, Pfanner N, Meisinger C. How mitochondria import hydrophilic and hydrophobic proteins. Trends Cell Biol 2002;12:299–303.
15. Clement AM, Nguyen MD, Roberts EA, Garcia ML, Boillee S, Rule M, et al. Wild-type nonneuronal cells extend survival of SOD1 mutant motor neurons in ALS mice. Science 2003;302:113–117.
16. Dal Canto MC. Comparison of pathological alterations in ALS and a murine transgenic model: pathogenic implications. Clin Neurosci 1995;3:332–337.
17. Dal Canto MC, Gurney ME. Development of central nervous system pathology in a murine transgenic model of human amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Am J Pathol 1994;145:1271–1279.
18. Deng HX, Hentati A, Tainer JA, Iqbal Z, Cayabyab A, Hung WY, et al. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and structural defects in Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase. Science 1993;261:1047–1051.
19. DiMauro S. Mitochondrial diseases. Biochim Biophys Acta 2004;1658:80–88.
20. Esaki M, Kanamori T, Nishikawa S, Endo T. Two distinct mechanisms drive protein translocation across the mitochondrial outer membrane in the late step of the cytochrome b(2) import pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1999;96:11770–11775.
21. Estevez AG, Crow JP, Sampson JB, Reiter C, Zhuang Y, Richardson GJ, et al. Induction of nitric oxide-dependent apoptosis in motor neurons by zinc-deficient superoxide dismutase. Science 1999;286:2498–2500.
22. Fahandejsaadi A, Leung E, Rahaii R, Bu J, Geula C. Calbindin-D28K, parvalbumin and calretinin in primate lower motor neurons. Neuroreport 2004;15:443–448.
23. Ferri A, Gabbianelli R, Casciati A, Celsi F, Rotilio G, Carri MT. Oxidative inactivation of calcineurin by Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase G93A, a mutant typical of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 2001;79:531–538.
24. Field LS, Furukawa Y, O’Halloran TV, Culotta VC. Factors controlling the uptake of yeast copper/zinc superoxide dismutase into mitochondria. J Biol Chem 2003;278:28052–28059.
25. Fischer LR, Culver DG, Tennant P, Davis AA, Wang M, Castellano-Sanchez A, et al. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a distal axonopathy: evidence in mice and man. Exp Neurol 2004;185:232–240.
26. Folsch H, Guiard B, Neupert W, Stuart RA. Internal targeting signal of the BCS1 protein: a novel mechanism of import into mitochondria. EMBO J 1996;15:479–487.
27. Friedlander RM, Brown RH, Gagliardi V, Wang J, Yuan J. Inhibition of ICE slows ALS in mice. Nature 1997;388:31.
28. Gajewski CD, Lin MT, Cudkowicz ME, Beal MF, Manfredi G. Mitochondrial DNA from platelets of sporadic ALS patients restores normal respiratory functions in rho(0) cells. Exp Neurol 2003;179:229–235.
29. Ghadge GD, Lee JP, Bindokas VP, Jordan J, Ma L, Miller RJ, et al. Mutant superoxide dismutase-1-linked familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: molecular mechanisms of neuronal death and protection. J Neurosci 1997;17:8756–8766.
30. Gohil VM, Hayes P, Matsuyama S, Schagger H, Schlame M, Greenberg ML. Cardiolipin biosynthesis and mitochondrial respiratory chain function are interdependent. J Biol Chem 2004;279:42612–42618.
31. Gong YH, Parsadanian AS, Andreeva A, Snider WD, Elliott JL. Restricted expression of G86R Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase in astrocytes results in astrocytosis but does not cause motoneuron degeneration. J Neurosci 2000;20:660–665.
32. Green DR, Kroemer G. The pathophysiology of mitochondrial cell death. Science 2004;305:626–629.
33. Guegan C, Vila M, Rosoklija G, Hays AP, Przedborski S. Recruitment of the mitochondrial-dependent apoptotic pathway in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurosci 2001;21:6569–6576.
34. Higgins CM, Jung C, Ding H, Xu Z. Mutant Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase that causes motoneuron degeneration is present in mitochondria in the CNS. J Neurosci 2002;22:RC215.
35. Higgins CM, Jung C, Xu Z. ALS-associated mutant SOD1G93A causes mitochondrial vacuolation by expansion of the intermembrane space and by involvement of SOD1 aggregation and peroxisomes. BMC Neurosci 2003;4:16.
36. Hirano A, Nakano I, Kurland LT, Mulder DW, Holley PW, Saccomanno G. Fine structural study of neurofibrillary changes in a family with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1984;43:471–480.
37. Inoue H, Tsukita K, Iwasato T, Suzuki Y, Tomioka M, Tateno M, et al. The crucial role of caspase-9 in the disease progression of a transgenic ALS mouse model. EMBO J 2003;22:6665–6674.
38. Jaarsma D, Rognoni F, van Duijn W, Verspaget HW, Haasdijk ED, Holstege JC. CuZn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) accumulates in vacuolated mitochondria in transgenic mice expressing amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked SOD1 mutations. Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 2001;102:293–305.
39. Jung C, Higgins CMJ, Xu Z. Mitochondrial electron transport chain dysfunction in a transgenic mouse model for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 2002;83:535–545.
40. Jung C, Rong Y, Doctrow S, Baudry M, Malfroy B, Xu Z. Synthetic superoxide dismutase/catalase mimetics reduce oxidative stress and prolong survival in a mouse amyotrophic lateral sclerosis model. Neurosci Lett 2001;304:157–160.
41. Kabashi E, Agar JN, Taylor DM, Minotti S, Durham HD. Focal dysfunction of the proteasome: a pathogenic factor in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 2004;89:1325–1335.
42. Kang SJ, Sanchez I, Jing N, Yuan J. Dissociation between neurodegeneration and caspase-11-mediated activation of caspase-1 and caspase-3 in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurosci 2003;23:5455–5460.
43. Kirkinezos IG, Bacman SR, Hernandez D, Oca-Cossio J, Arias LJ, Perez-Pinzon MA, et al. Cytochrome c association with the inner mitochondrial membrane is impaired in the CNS of G93A-SOD1 mice. J Neurosci 2005;25:164–172.
44. Klivenyi P, Ferrante RJ, Matthews RT, Bogdanov MB, Klein AM, Andreassen OA, et al. Neuroprotective effects of creatine in a transgenic animal model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Nat Med 1999;5:347–350.
45. Klug D, Rabani J, Fridovich I. A direct demonstration of the catalytic action of superoxide dismutase through the use of pulse radiolysis. J Biol Chem 1972;247:4839–4842.
46. Kong J, Xu Z. Massive mitochondrial degeneration in motor neurons triggers the onset of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in mice expressing a mutant SOD1. J Neurosci 1998;18:3241–3250.
47. Kostic V, Jackson-Lewis V, de Bilbao F, Dubois-Dauphin M, Przedborski S. Bcl-2: prolonging life in a transgenic mouse model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Science 1997;277:559–562.
48. Kruman II, Pedersen WA, Springer JE, Mattson MP. ALS-linked Cu/Zn-SOD mutation increases vulnerability of motor neurons to excitotoxicity by a mechanism involving increased oxidative stress and perturbed calcium homeostasis. Exp Neurol 1999;160:28–39.
49. Lariviere RC, Julien JP. Functions of intermediate filaments in neuronal development and disease. J Neurobiol 2004;58:131–148.
50. Li M, Ona VO, Guegan C, Chen M, Jackson-Lewis V, Andrews LJ, et al. Functional role of caspase-1 and caspase-3 in an ALS transgenic mouse model. Science 2000;288:335–339.
51. Lino MM, Schneider C, Caroni P. Accumulation of SOD1 mutants in postnatal motoneurons does not cause motoneuron pathology or motoneuron disease. J Neurosci 2002;22:4825–4832.
52. Liu J, Lillo C, Jonsson PA, Vande Velde C, Ward CM, Miller TM, et al. Toxicity of familial ALS-linked SOD1 mutants from selective recruitment to spinal mitochondria. Neuron 2004;43:5–17.
53. Mattiazzi M, D’Aurelio M, Gajewski CD, Martushova K, Kiaei M, Beal MF, et al. Mutated human SOD1 causes dysfunction of oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria of transgenic mice. J Biol Chem 2002;5:5.
54. Mena MA, Khan U, Togasaki DM, Sulzer D, Epstein CJ, Przedborski S. Effects of wild-type and mutated copper/zinc superoxide dismutase on neuronal survival and L-DOPA-induced toxicity in postnatal midbrain culture. J Neurochem 1997;69:21–33.
55. Menzies FM, Cookson MR, Taylor RW, Turnbull DM, Chrzanoska-Lightowlers ZM, et al. Mitochondrial dysfunction in a cell culture model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain 2002;125:1522–1533.
56. Mesecke N, Terziyska N, Kozany C, Baumann F, Neupert W, Hell K, et al. A disulfide relay system in the intermembrane space of mitochondria that mediates protein import. Cell 2005;121:1059–1069.
57. Migheli A, Atzori C, Piva R, Tortarolo M, Girelli M, Schiffer D, et al. Lack of apoptosis in mice with ALS. Nat Med 1999;5:966–967.
58. Mulder DW, Kurland LT. Motor neuron disease: epidemiologic studies. Adv Exp Med Biol 1987;209:325–332.
59. Okado-Matsumoto A, Fridovich I. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a proposed mechanism. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002;99:9010–9014.
60. Okado-Matsumoto A, Fridovich I. Subcellular distribution of superoxide dismutases (SOD) in rat liver: Cu,Zn-SOD in mitochondria. J Biol Chem 2001;276:38388–38393.
61. Orrell R, de Belloche J, Marklund S, Bowe F, Hallewell R. A novel SOD mutant and ALS. Nature 1995;374:504–505.
62. Pasinelli P, Belford ME, Lennon N, Bacskai BJ, Hyman BT, Trotti D, et al. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-associated SOD1 mutant proteins bind and aggregate with Bcl-2 in spinal cord mitochondria. Neuron 2004;43:19–30.
63. Pasinelli P, Borchelt DR, Houseweart MK, Cleveland DW, Brown RH Jr. Caspase-1 is activated in neural cells and tissue with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-associated mutations in copper-zinc superoxide dismutase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998;95:15763–15768.
64. Pasinelli P, Houseweart MK, Brown RH Jr, Cleveland DW. Caspase-1 and -3 are sequentially activated in motor neuron death in Cu,Zn superoxide dismutase-mediated familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:13901–13906.
65. Przedborski S. Programmed cell death in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a mechanism of pathogenic and therapeutic importance. Neurologist 2004;10:1–7.
66. Rabizadeh S, Gralla EB, Borchelt DR, Gwinn R, Valentine JS, Sisodia S, et al. Mutations associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis convert superoxide dismutase from an anti-apoptotic gene to a proapoptotic gene: studies in yeast and neural cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1995;92:3024–3028.
67. Reaume AG, Elliott JL, Hoffman EK, Kowall NW, Ferrante RJ, Siwek DF, et al. Motor neurons in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase-deficient mice develop normally but exhibit en-

hanced cell death after axonal injury. Nat Genet 1996;13: 43–47.

68. Reynolds IJ. Mitochondrial membrane potential and the permeability transition in excitotoxicity. Ann NY Acad Sci 1999;893:33–41.

69. Roman GC. Neuroepidemiology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: clues to aetiology and pathogenesis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1996;61:131–137.

70. Rothstein JD. Excitotoxicity hypothesis. Neurology 1996; 47(suppl):S19–25.

71. Sasaki S, Iwata M. Impairment of fast axonal transport in the proximal axons of anterior horn neurons in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurology 1996;47:535–540.

72. Schon EA, Grossman MH. Mitochondrial diseases: genetics. Biofactors 1998;7:191–195.

73. Siklos L, Engelhardt J, Harati Y, Smith RG, Joo F, Appel SH. Ultrastructural evidence for altered calcium in motor nerve terminals in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 1996; 39:203–216.

74. Stan T, Brix J, Schneider-Mergener J, Pfanner N, Neupert W, Rapaport D. Mitochondrial protein import: recognition of internal import signals of BCS1 by the TOM complex. Mol Cell Biol 2003;23:2239–2250.

75. Sturtz LA, Diekert K, Jensen LT, Lill R, Culotta VC. A fraction of yeast Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase and its metallochaperone, CCS, localize to the intermembrane space of mitochondria. a physiological role for sodl in guarding against mitochondrial oxidative damage. J Biol Chem 2001; 276:38084–38089.

76. Swerdlow RH, Parks JK, Cassarino DS, Trimmer PA, Miller SW, Maguire DJ, et al. Mitochondria in sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Exp Neurol 1998;153:135–142.

77. Takeuchi H, Kobayashi Y, Ishigaki S, Doyu M, Sobue G. Mitochondrial localization of mutant superoxide dismutase l triggers caspase-dependent cell death in a cellular model of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Biol Chem 2002; 277:50966–50972.

78. Tateno M, Sadakata H, Tanaka M, Itohara S, Shin RM, Miura M, et al. Calcium-permeable AMPA receptors promote misfolding of mutant SOD1 protein and development of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in a transgenic mouse model. Hum Mol Genet 2004;13:2183–2196.

79. Tummala H, Jung C, Tiwari A, Higgins CM, Hayward LJ, Xu Z. Inhibition of chaperone activity is a shared property of several Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase mutants that cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Biol Chem 2005;280:17725– 17731.

80. Urushitani M, Kurisu J, Tsukita K, Takahashi R. Proteasomal inhibition by misfolded mutant superoxide dismutase 1 induces selective motor neuron death in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 2002;83:1030–1042.

81. Vielhaber S, Kunz D, Winkler K, Wiedemann FR, Kirches E, Feistner H, et al. Mitochondrial DNA abnormalities in skeletal muscle of patients with sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain 2000;123:1339–1348.

82. Vijayvergiya C, Beal MF, Buck J, Manfredi G. Mutant superoxide dismutase 1 forms aggregates in the brain mitochondrial matrix of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mice. J Neurosci 2005;25:2463–2470.

83. Vukosavic S, Stefanis L, Jackson-Lewis V, Guegan C, Romero N, Chen C, et al. Delaying caspase activation by Bcl-2: a clue to disease retardation in a transgenic mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurosci 2000;20:9119–9125.

84. Wang J, Xu G, Li H, Gonzales V, Fromholt D, Karch C, et al. Somatodendritic accumulation of misfolded SOD1–L126Z in motor neurons mediates degeneration: alpha B-crystallin modulates aggregation. Hum Mol Genet 2005;14:2335–2347.

85. Weisiger RA, Fridovich I. Mitochondrial superoxide simutase. Site of synthesis and intramitochondrial localization. J Biol Chem 1973;248:4793–4796.

86. Wiedemann FR, Manfredi G, Mawrin C, Beal MF, Schon EA. Mitochondrial DNA and respiratory chain function in spinal cords of ALS patients. J Neurochem 2002;80:616–625.

87. Wiedemann FR, Winkler K, Kuznetsov AV, Bartels C, Vielhaber S, Feistner H, et al. Impairment of mitochondrial function in skeletal muscle of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurol Sci 1998;156:65–72.

88. Wiedemann N, Kozjak V, Prinz T, Ryan MT, Meisinger C, Pfanner N, et al. Biogenesis of yeast mitochondrial cytochrome c: a unique relationship to the TOM machinery. J Mol Biol 2003;327:465–474.

89. Wong PC, Pardo CA, Borchelt DR, Lee MK, Copeland NG, Jenkins N, et al. An adverse property of a familial ALS-linked SOD1 mutation causes motor neuron disease characterized by vacuolar degeneration of mitochondria. Neuron 1995;14: 1105–1116.

90. Wood JD, Beaujeux TP, Shaw PJ. Protein aggregation in motor neurone disorders. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2003;29:529–545.

91. Wu AS, Kiaei M, Aguirre N, Crow JP, Calingasan NY, Browne SE, et al. Iron porphyrin treatment extends survival in a transgenic animal model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Neurochem 2003;85:142–150.

92. Xu Z. Mechanism and treatment of motoneuron degeneration in ALS: what have SOD1 mutants told us? Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord 2000;1:225–234.

93. Xu Z, Jung C, Higgins C, Levine J, Kong J. Mitochondrial degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. J Bioenerg Biomembr 2004;36:395–399.

94. Zhu S, Stavrovskaya IG, Drozda M, Kim BY, Ona V, Li M, et al. Minocycline inhibits cytochrome c release and delays progression of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in mice. Nature 2002;417:74–78.

95. Urushitani M, Kurisu J, Tateno M, Hatakeyama S, Nakayama K, Kato S, et al. CHIP promotes proteasomal degradation of familial ALS-linked mutant SOD1 by ubiquitinating Hsp/Hsc70. J Neurochem 2004;90:231–244.

96. Jaarsma D, Haasdijk ED, Grashorn JA, Hawkins R, van Duijn W, Verspaget HW, et al. Human Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) overexpression in mice causes mitochondrial vacuolation, axonal degeneration, and premature motoneuron death and accelerates motoneuron disease in mice expressing a familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mutant SOD1. Neurobiol Dis 2000;7:623–643.

97. Shults CW, Oakes D, Kieburtz K, Beal MF, Haas R, Plumb S, et al. Effects of coenzyme Q10 in early Parkinson disease: evidence of slowing of the functional decline. Arch Neurol 2002;59:1541–1550.

98. Wootz H, Hansson I, Korhonen L, Napankangas U, Lindholm D. Caspase-12 cleavage and increased oxidative stress during motoneuron degeneration in transgenic mouse model of ALS. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2004;322: 281–286.

99. Rizzardini M, Lupi M, Bernasconi S, Mangolini A, Cantoni L. Mitochondrial dysfunction and death in motor neurons exposed to the glutathione-depleting agent ethacrynic acid. J Neurol Sci 2003;207:51–58.

100. Rizzardini M, Mangolini A, Lupi M, Ubezio P, Bendotti C, Cantoni L. Low levels of ALS-linked Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase increase the production of reactive oxygen species and cause mitochondrial damage and death in motor neuron-like cells. J Neurol Sci 2005;232:95–103.
