
JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY, Jan. 2006, p. 642–658  
0021-9193/06/$08.00+0 doi:10.1128/JB.188.2.642–658.2006  
Copyright © 2006, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

# The Genome Sequence of *Methanosphaera stadtmanae* Reveals Why This Human Intestinal Archaeon Is Restricted to Methanol and H₂ for Methane Formation and ATP Synthesis†

Wolfgang F. Fricke,¹‡ Henning Seedorf,²‡ Anke Henne,¹§ Markus Krüer,² Heiko Liesegang,¹ Reiner Hedderich,³ Gerhard Gottschalk,¹* and Rudolf K. Thauer²

**Göttingen Genomics Laboratory, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Georg August University, 37077 Göttingen, Germany¹; and Department of Biochemistry² and Department of Ecophysiology,³ Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology, 35043 Marburg, Germany**

Received 23 August 2005/Accepted 20 October 2005

*Methanosphaera stadtmanae* has the most restricted energy metabolism of all methanogenic archaea. This human intestinal inhabitant can generate methane only by reduction of methanol with H₂ and is dependent on acetate as a carbon source. We report here the genome sequence of *M. stadtmanae*, which was found to be composed of 1,767,403 bp with an average G+C content of 28% and to harbor only 1,534 protein-encoding sequences (CDS). The genome lacks 37 CDS present in the genomes of all other methanogens. Among these are the CDS for synthesis of molybdopterin and for synthesis of the carbon monoxide dehydrogenase/acetyl-coenzyme A synthase complex, which explains why *M. stadtmanae* cannot reduce CO₂ to methane or oxidize methanol to CO₂ and why this archaeon is dependent on acetate for biosynthesis of cell components. Four sets of *mtaABC* genes coding for methanol:coenzyme M methyltransferases were found in the genome of *M. stadtmanae*. These genes exhibit homology to *mta* genes previously identified in *Methanosarcina* species. The *M. stadtmanae* genome also contains at least 323 CDS not present in the genomes of all other archaea. Seventy-three of these CDS exhibit high levels of homology to CDS in genomes of bacteria and eukaryotes. These 73 CDS include 12 CDS which are unusually long (>2,400 bp) with conspicuous repetitive sequence elements, 13 CDS which exhibit sequence similarity on the protein level to CDS encoding enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of cell surface antigens in bacteria, and 5 CDS which exhibit sequence similarity to the subunits of bacterial type I and III restriction-modification systems.

There are two types of methanogenic archaea, those belonging to the order *Methanosarcinales*, which contain cytochromes and which can use methanol, methyl amines, acetate, and/or CO₂ plus H₂ as methanogenic substrates, and those belonging to the orders *Methanobacteriales*, *Methanomicrobiales*, *Methanococcales*, and *Methanopyrales*, which are devoid of cytochromes and which can use CO₂ plus H₂ and/or formate only to fuel anaerobic growth (95, 102). The energy metabolism of both types of methanogens has been investigated in detail (17). However, there are still a few pertinent questions. For example, why is the growth yield on H₂ and CO₂ of methanogens lacking cytochromes considerably lower (<50%) than that of cytochrome-containing methanogens? The growth yield on H₂ and CO₂ of *Methanobrevibacter arboriphilus* is 1.3 g/mol methane, whereas that of *Methanosarcina barkeri* is 7.3 g/mol (101). Could the reason for this be that in cytochrome-containing methanogens two steps in the reduction of CO₂ to methane, methyl transfer from methyl-tetrahydromethanopterin (methyl-H₄MPT) to coenzyme M and reduction of the heterodisulfide coenzyme M-S-S-coenzyme B (CoM-S-S-CoB) with H₂, are coupled with energy conservation, whereas in methanogens without cytochromes only one step, the methyltransfer reaction, is coupled? Indeed, methanogens with cytochromes contain a heterodisulfide reductase (HdrDE) that is anchored via a cytochrome *b* (HdrE) in the cytoplasmic membrane (35) and is electronically linked via methanophenazine to a cytochrome *b* (VhoC)-containing hydrogenase complex (VhoACG), whose active site faces toward the periplasm (14, 16), whereas in methanogens without cytochromes, the corresponding hydrogenase (MvhADG) is a cytoplasmic enzyme (74, 82) and the HdrABC complex is recovered mainly in the cytoplasmic fraction (35). There is, however, evidence that HdrABC could be anchored via its HdrB subunit in the cytoplasmic membrane (36, 50). Since HdrB lacks recognizable transmembrane helices, this question is still a matter of dispute.

There is only one indication that the Hdr-catalyzed reaction in methanogens without cytochromes is coupled to energy conservation. It comes from the finding that there is one methanogen belonging to the order *Methanobacteriales* that can grow on methanol and H₂. This organism, *Methanosphaera stadtmanae* (64, 65), thrives in the human intestine, where methanol is a product of pectin degradation by *Bacteroides* species and other anaerobic bacteria (18, 40). With cell suspensions of *M. stadtmanae* it has been shown that the reduction of methanol with H₂ to methane is coupled to ADP phosphorylation via the electrochemical proton potential (87). However, correct interpretation of this finding will not be possible as long as the enzymes involved are not known.

* Corresponding author. Mailing address: Göttingen Genomics Laboratory, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Georg August University, Grisebachstr. 8, D-37077 Göttingen, Germany. Phone: 49-551-394041. Fax: 49-551-394195. E-mail: ggottsc@gwdg.de.
† Dedicated to Terry Miller.
‡ W.F.F. and H.S. contributed equally to this work.
§ Present address: Qiagen AG, Hilden, Germany.

M. stadtmanae, a member of the Methanobacteriales, is unusual because it is able to grow on methanol and H₂ as energy substrates, a property otherwise restricted to members of the Methanosarcinales. It is also remarkable that M. stadtmanae can neither oxidize methanol to CO₂ nor reduce CO₂ to methane. This organism is also not capable of autotrophic growth on CO₂, requiring acetate and CO₂ as main carbon sources. Labeling studies have revealed that acetate and CO₂ are assimilated via reductive carboxylation of acetyl-CoA to pyruvate, from which most cell compounds are formed (4, 10, 11, 51, 62). Interestingly, Methanobrevibacter smithii, the only other human methanogenic commensal, is also dependent on acetate for biosyntheses. However, this organism grows on H₂ and CO₂ rather than on methanol and H₂ as energy sources (5, 66). These two archaea, both belonging to the order Methanobacteriales, also differ significantly in lipid composition (89).

M. stadtmanae has attracted additional interest because it is the first human archaeal commensal whose genome has been sequenced. Such commensals not only are able to survive in the human gastrointestinal tract, which is protected by a highly active immune system, but also stimulate the development of a healthy intestinal epithelium and immune system (58). In Western countries the increasing number of chronic inflammatory diseases of the intestine (referred to as inflammatory bowel disease) indicates that there is perturbation of the precarious commensal relationship in the human intestine. However, the molecular mechanisms of commensalism are still not fully understood. Studying the genetic information encoded in the small genome of M. stadtmanae may provide clues that will increase our understanding of adaptations of this organism that allow it to live as a commensal (2, 25, 55).

We describe here the complete genome sequence of M. stadtmanae and compare it with the genome sequences of all other methanogenic archaea sequenced so far. The comparison revealed not only why this archaeon is dependent on H₂, methanol, acetate, and CO₂ for growth but also that the archaeon has several unique features that probably reflect its adaptation to the human intestinal environment.

### Gene prediction and annotation

The initial gene prediction was accomplished using YACOP (93). The output was verified and edited manually using criteria such as the presence of a ribosome binding site, GC frame plot analysis, and similarity to known protein-encoding sequences (CDS). Annotation was done using the ERGO tool (Integrated Genomics) (www.integratedgenomics.com) with a two-step approach. Initially, all proteins were searched against a nonredundant database consisting of all publicly available sequence data by using FASTA3, which resulted in automatic annotation. All predictions were verified and modified manually by comparing the protein sequences with the Swiss-Prot, GenBank, ProDom, COG, and Prosite public databases. All coding sequences were searched for similarities to protein families and domains using CD-search (57). TMPred was used to predict transmembrane helices within the CDS (39). The SIGI tool (59) was used for score-based identification of genomic islands, referred to as alien CDS, and for identification of potentially highly expressed CDS.

### Comparative genomics

For comparative analysis, each CDS of one genome was searched against all CDS of another genome by using the BLAST program (1). For these unidirectional BLAST comparisons a strict cutoff value between e⁻¹⁵ and e⁻²⁰ was used. BLAST hits were considered an indication of homology. For identification of CDS specific for all methanogens but missing in M. stadtmanae, BLAST comparisons (e⁻¹⁵) with the genomes of Methanocaldococcus jannaschii (9), Methanococcus maripaludis (38), Methanopyrus kandleri (85), Methanosarcina acetivorans (27), and Methanosarcina mazei (15) were carried out using all CDS of Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum (86) as query sequences. CDS of M. stadtmanae not present in the genomes of other archaea were identified by searching each CDS encoding more than 100 amino acids against the genomes mentioned above plus those of Aeropyrum pernix (44), Archaeoglobus fulgidus (48), Haloarcula marismortui (3), Halobacterium sp. strain NRC-1 (70), Picrophilus torridus (26), Pyrobaculum aerophilum (24), Pyrococcus abyssi (12), Pyrococcus furiosus (76), Pyrococcus horikoshii (45), Sulfolobus solfataricus (83), Sulfolobus tokodaii (43), Thermoplasma acidophilum (77), and Thermoplasma volcanium (46). The CDS without significant BLAST hits (e⁻²⁰) were searched with the same cutoff against the NCBI protein database (ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/BLAST/db/nr.tar.gz).

### Purification of enzymes

Frozen cells (10 g [wet weight]) of M. stadtmanae were routinely suspended in 10 ml potassium phosphate (pH 7.0), and the suspension was then passed through a French pressure cell at 10⁸ Pa. After removal of cell debris and the membrane fraction by ultracentrifugation, a supernatant was obtained, from which MtaA and the MtaBC complex (methanol:coenzyme M methyltransferase), the HdrABC complex (heterodisulfide reductase), and the MvhADG complex (non-F₄₂₀-reducing hydrogenase) were purified. Protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford method using bovine serum albumin as the standard.

#### (i) Methanol:coenzyme M methyltransferase

The MtaBC complex was purified by chromatography on DEAE-Sepharose, Q-Sepharose, and hydroxyapatite (49). Purification was monitored by determining the characteristic absorption spectrum of the corrinoid protein using dicyanocobalamin as the standard (ε₅₈₀₋₆₄₀ = 7.3 mM⁻¹ cm⁻¹). Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) revealed the presence of two polypeptides with apparent molecular masses of 50 kDa and 30 kDa. The N-terminal amino acid sequences of the 50- and 30-kDa subunits were determined by Edman degradation to be SCKYFTKMENASADEMVFG and MD(or S)S(or P)P(or L)L(or E)E(or K)K(or Y)YGKLTL(or A or H)Y, respectively.

MtaA was purified by ammonium sulfate (70%) precipitation, hydrophobic chromatography on Phenyl-Sepharose, gel filtration on Superdex 200, and anion-exchange chromatography on MonoQ (49). The N-terminal amino acid sequence was MDLIENLKAALNGEXVXKVPAISATAAAVEEAFPAANVS.

#### (ii) Heterodisulfide reductase

The HdrABC complex was purified 40-fold by chromatography on DEAE-Sepharose, Q-Sepharose, Phenyl-Sepharose, and Superdex 200 (75). Purification was monitored by measuring the specific rate of heterodisulfide reduction with reduced methyl viologen. SDS-PAGE revealed the presence of three polypeptides with apparent molecular masses of 71 kDa, 33 kDa, and 21 kDa; the N-terminal amino acid sequences of these subunits were determined by Edman degradation to be XNNEXVVIGVYTHXXXXNV, XAYAYFLGCIMN NXYPGIEKS, and XTLLNESEYITDKDVDPTFK, respectively (75).

#### (iii) Non-F₄₂₀-reducing hydrogenase

The MvhADG complex was purified by chromatography on DEAE-Sepharose, hydroxyapatite, and Superdex 200 (75). Purification was monitored by measuring the specific activity of methyl viologen reduction with H₂ at pH 7.6. SDS-PAGE revealed the presence of three polypeptides with apparent molecular masses of 55 kDa, 38 kDa, and 30 kDa. The N-terminal amino acid sequence of the 55 kDa subunit was determined by Edman degradation to be VELTLEPXTXIE (75).

### Quantification of corrinoids

Corrinoids were extracted from enzyme and cell samples with KCN as described by Fischer et al. (23). After centrifugation of the

### MATERIALS AND METHODS

M. stadtmanae strain DSZM 3091 was obtained from the Deutsche Sammlung von Zellkulturen und Mikroorganismen, Braunschweig, Germany. This methanogenic archaeon was grown on the medium described by Sparling et al. (87, 88), which also contained 0.5 g/liter sodium formate and 10% rumen fluid. The medium was prepared in an anaerobic chamber (95% N₂–5% H₂) and was reduced prior to autoclaving with 0.28 g Na₂S · 9H₂O per liter and 0.14 g L-cysteine-HCl per liter. Methanol was added after autoclaving to a concentration of 0.4% (vol/vol). Cells were routinely grown in 2-liter bottles containing 1 liter of medium and H₂-CO₂ (80:20) at a pressure of 2 × 10⁵ Pa as the gas phase with continuous shaking at 37°C. When an optical density at 578 nm of approximately 2.5 was reached, the cells were harvested by centrifugation.

#### Sequencing strategy

Total genomic DNA of M. stadtmanae was extracted and sheared. Several shotgun libraries were constructed using 3- to 5-kb size fractions. The fragments were cloned into vector pCR4-TOPO (Invitrogen). Insert ends of the recombinant plasmids were sequenced using dye terminator chemistry with MegaBACE 1000 and 4000 (GE Healthcare) and ABI Prism 377 (Applied Biosystems) automated DNA sequencers. Sequences were processed with Phred and assembled into contigs using the Phrap assembly tool (http://www.phrap.org). Sequence editing was done using GAP4, which is part of the Staden software package (90); 8.7-fold coverage was obtained after assembly of 21,555 sequences. In order to solve problems with misassembled regions caused by repetitive sequences and to close remaining sequence gaps, PCR-based techniques and primer walking with recombinant plasmids were used.

extract, 20 to 80 μl of the supernatant was analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography using a Phenomenex phenyl-hexyl reverse-phase column. Dicyanocobalamin was used as the standard (ε<sub>580-640</sub> = 7.3 mM<sup>-1</sup> cm<sup>-1</sup>) The corrinoid was identified as hydroxybenzimidazolyl cobamide (factor III) by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization—time of flight mass spectrometry (49). Nucleotide sequence accession number. The *M. stadtmanae* genome sequence has been deposited in the EMBL/GenBank/DDBJ database under accession number CP000102.

# RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

*M. stadtmanae* contains one circular chromosome (Fig. 1), and plasmids were not found. After a short description of the general features, the genome of *M. stadtmanae* is analyzed below mainly with respect to energy metabolism, carbon assimilation into C<sub>1</sub> units, and the genes unique to this human intestinal archaeon. The results of the analysis of the carbon and energy metabolism of the C<sub>1</sub> units are summarized in Fig. 2.

**General features.** The circular chromosome consists of 1,767,403 bp and has the lowest G+C content of all archaeal genomes sequenced so far. Other features of the genome are shown in Table 1. The number of protein-encoding sequences (1,534 CDS) is the lowest number obtained for all methanogens (*M. kandleri* has 1,687 CDS). The genome contains open reading frames for 40 tRNAs. One of these, coding for a Met-tRNA, contains a putative intron that is 34 bp long (Msp0230). Selenocysteyl-tRNAs were not found. Four rRNA operons are present in the genome of *M. stadtmanae*, the highest number found in archaeal genomes (*rrnA* to *rrnD*). Three rRNA operons contain a gene for an alanyl-tRNA between the 16S rRNA and 23S rRNA genes (*rrnB* to *rrnD*). A cumulative GC skew analysis revealed the presence of only one origin of replication in the neighborhood of one of two CDS for Cdc6 (involved in replication initiation) (Msp0001), for the small subunit of DNA polymerase II (Msp1584), for two helicases (Msp0005 and Msp0007), and for two genes for B<sub>12</sub> biosynthesis (Msp1587 and Msp1588). The genome of *M. stadtmanae* contains four 1,528-bp insertion elements, all of which include either one of three highly homologous CDS (Msp0017, Msp0233, and Msp0471) or a pseudogene (Msp1439). The CDS show up to 29% identity to a CDS identified in an insertion sequence of *Methanobrevibacter smithii* (31), a close relative of *M. stadtmanae*. Additionally, a complete CDS (Msp1478) and a pseudogene (Msp1400) for two putative transposases and a putative integrase gene (Msp1355) were detected, but there is no evidence for the presence of a prophage. A 4.8-kbp genome segment in which a 30-bp sequence is repeated 59 times is noteworthy. This segment includes 10 short CDS (Msp0948 to Msp0957), which may not code for functional proteins.

**FIG. 1.** Circular map of the chromosome of *M. stadtmanae*. Rings from the outside to the inside: scale (in base pairs), protein-encoding sequences (blue or yellow), CDS with gene homologues in *M. thermautotrophicus* (magenta), putative highly expressed CDS (green), G+C content variation (higher values on the outside), rRNA and tRNA coding sequences (red), and *cdc6* genes (black).

**(i) CDS shared with Methanothermobacter.** *M. thermautotrophicus* is the closest relative of *M. stadtmanae* whose genome sequence has been published. A direct BLAST comparison identified gene homologues in *M. thermautotrophicus* for 1,002 CDS of the *M. stadtmanae* genome. Detailed analysis of the shared CDS indicated that the two organisms have very similar machinery for DNA repair, replication, transcription, translation, cell division, and protein folding. The two archaea also have related pathways for biosynthesis of isoprenoid lipids, amino acids, carbohydrates, nucleotides, and cofactors starting from acetyl-CoA. The two archaea do not contain CDS for selenoproteins, for cytochromes, for flagellar proteins, for tetrahydrofolate-specific enzymes, and for citrate synthase, aconitase, and isocitrate dehydrogenase. Consistently, archaea belonging to the *Methanobacteriales* are not dependent on selenium for growth, do not contain cytochromes, are nonmotile, do not contain folate, and synthesize 2-oxoglutarate from oxaloacetate via malate, fumarate, and succinate and not via citrate, aconitate, and isocitrate.

**(ii) Absence of CDS found in all other methanogens.** BLAST comparisons revealed that 37 CDS present in the genomes of all methanogens sequenced so far are absent in *M. stadtmanae*. These CDS include genes for molybdenum cofactor synthesis and CO dehydrogenase/acetyl-CoA synthase (Table 2). Also absent are genes for superoxide dismutase and catalase, which are present in some but not all methanogenic archaea. The two enzymes involved in oxygen detoxification are mentioned since they were shown to be present in *Methanobrevibacter* species (7, 84), which are phylogenetically closely related to *M. stadtmanae* and which thrive in the intestinal tracts of animals and insects (63).

**(iii) CDS for membrane-spanning proteins.** Approximately 29% (448 CDS) of the 1,534 CDS are predicted to code for transmembrane proteins based on the presence of at least one transmembrane helix. Among these CDS are genes for more than 10 different ABC transporters. They are annotated to be involved in the transport of cobalt, phosphate, other inorganic ions, amino acids, peptides, and polyols. The genome appears to lack a CDS for a molybdate ABC transporter gene, which is consistent with the absence of homologues for molybdopterin biosynthesis genes (Table 2). Examples of genes encoding

CH₃COO-
↓ Acyl-CoA
synthase
Acetyl-CoA
H₂ → Fd por CO₂
Pyruvate
↓ ppsA
PEP
↓ eno
2-PGA
↓ apg
3-PGA
serA
FBP
↓
F6P → Hu6P hps CH₂O
Ru5P

Ribonucleotide
reductase III
CHOOH
↑ fwd
CHO-MFR
↑ ftr
CHO-H₄MPT
↑ mch
CH=H₄MPT
mtd
Glycine
glyA Serine
fae
CH₂=H₄MPT thyA
↑ mer
CH₃-H₄MPT
↓ mtr

C2 of purines
C8 of purines

O₂
fprA
F₄₂₀H₂ fn o NADPH
Thymidylate
F₄₂₀H₂ frh H₂
Methionine

CH₃-S-CoM ← CH₃OH
mtaA mtaBC
H₂ mvh hdr
ADG ABC
CH₄
mrtABG

FIG. 2. Metabolic pathways involved in methanol reduction to methane with H₂ and in C-2 unit biosynthesis from C-2 of acetate in M. stadtmanae. The genes encode the following enzymes (see text): ehb, energy-converting hydrogenase; por, pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase; ppsA, phosphoenolpyruvate synthase; eno, enolase; apg, phosphoglycerate mutase; serA, phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase; glyA, serine:H₄MPT hydroxymethyl transferase; hps, hexulose phosphate synthase; fae, formaldehyde-activating enzyme; fwd, formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase; ftr, formylmethanofuran:H₄MPT formyltransferase; mch, methenyl-H₄MPT cyclohydrolase; fprA, F₄₂₀H₂ oxidase; fno, F₄₂₀H₂:NADP oxidoreductase; mtd, methylene-H₄MPT dehydrogenase; thyA, thymidylate synthase; frh, F₄₂₀-reducing hydrogenase; mer, methylene-H₄MPT reductase; metE, methionine synthase; mtr, methyl-H₄MPT:coenzyme M methyltransferase; mta, methanol:coenzyme M methyltransferase; mvh, non-F₄₂₀-reducing hydrogenase; hdr, heterodisulfide reductase; and mrt, methyl-coenzyme M reductase. PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; 2-PGA, 2-phosphoglycerate; 3-PGA, 3-phosphoglycerate; FBP, fructose bisphosphate; F6P, fructose-6-phosphate; Hu6P, 3-hexulose-6-phosphate; CHO-MFR, formylmethanofuran; Ru5P, ribulose-5-phosphate.

non-ABC transporters found in the genome of M. stadtmanae are CDS for putative subunits of a potassium transport system (Msp0250, Msp0723, Msp0830, Msp1223, Msp1489, and Msp1504), as well as a Co/Zn/Cd transporter (Msp0519), an Mn/Fe transporter (Msp1554), an ammonium transporter (Msp0663), and a ferrous iron transporter (Msp1441 and Msp1440). A sodium-dependent transport system for leucine that has been characterized in M. stadtmanae (88) is probably among the six predicted sodium-dependent transporters (Msp0148, Msp0513, Msp0691, Msp0738, Msp0824, and Msp1417). Genes for sodium-proton antiporters found in other methanogens (37) appear to be absent. M. barkeri has been shown to grow like M. stadtmanae on methanol plus H₂ with acetate as the carbon source and requires sodium ions under these conditions (68). It would be surprising if M. stadtmanae could not regulate the intracellular sodium ion concentration by employing a sodium-proton antiporter or a related system.

(iv) CDS predicted to be highly expressed. Codon usage analysis with the SIGI tool (59) revealed a group of 116 CDS which are predicted to be highly expressed (Table 3). Among the putative highly expressed CDS are most of the genes for the enzymes involved in energy metabolism in M. stadtmanae.

Energy metabolism. The genome of M. stadtmanae contains CDS for the following enzymes that are predicted based on their functions in other methanogens to be involved in methanol reduction with H₂ to methane and ATP synthesis: methanol:coenzyme M methyltransferase (MtaABC)(reaction 1), methyl-coenzyme M reductase (MrtABG) (reaction 2), heterodisulfide reductase (HdrABC) (reaction 3), non-F₄₂₀-reducing hydrogenase (MvhADG) (reaction 4), and proton-translocating ATPase (AhaABCDEFHIK) (reaction 5). Consistent with the proposed catabolic function, the codon usage of most of the genes was that of highly expressed genes (Table 3).

CH₃OH + HS-CoM → CH₃-S-CoM + H₂O
(ΔG°' = −27 kJ/mol)

CH₃-S-CoM + HS-CoB → CH₄ + CoM-S-S-CoB
(ΔG°' = −30 kJ/mol)

CoM-S-S-CoB + 2e⁻ + 2H⁺ → HS-CoM + HS-CoB
(ΔG°' = −55 kJ/mol)

TABLE 1. General features of the *M. stadtmanae* genome

| Characteristic | Value |
|----------------|-------|
| Genome length (bp) | 1,767,403 |
| % Coding regions | 84 |
| G+C content (%) | 28 |
| No. of rRNA operons | 4 |
| No. of tRNAs | 40 |
| No. of tRNAs with introns | 1 |
| No. of protein-encoding sequences | 1,534 |
| No. of CDS encoding hypothetical proteins | 287 |
| No. of CDS encoding conserved hypothetical proteins | 281 |
| No. of CDS encoding proteins with functional assignments | 966 |
| No. of CDS encoding predicted membrane-spanning proteins | 448 |
| No. of highly expressed CDS$^a$ | 116 |
| No. of alien CDS | 18 |
| No. of CDS encoding proteins with a twin-arginine motif | 0 |
| No. of CDS encoding aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases | 19 |
| No. of CDS encoding histones | 6 |
| No. of CDS encoding proteins with inteins | 0 |
| No. of insertion sequences | 4 |
| No. of putative transposases (fragments) | 1(2) |
| No. of putative recombinases | 1 |
| No. of CDS with gene homologues in the genome of *M. thermautotrophicus* ($e^{-15}$) | 1,002 |
| No. of CDS in the genome of *M. thermautotrophicus* with gene homologues in the genomes of all other methanogens except *M. stadtmanae* ($e^{-15}$)$^b$ | 37 |
| No. of CDS (>100 amino acids) without gene homologues in the genomes of other archaea ($e^{-20}$) | 323 |
| No. of CDS (>100 amino acids) with gene homologues only in nonarchaeal genomes ($\leq e^{-20}$)$^c$ | 73 |

$a$ See Table 3.  
$b$ See Table 2.  
$c$ See Table 4.

---

TABLE 2. Thirty-seven protein-encoding sequences found in the genome of *M. thermautotrophicus* and all other methanogens except *M. stadtmanae*

| CDS or locus | Function according to Smith et al. (function according to our annotations)$^a$ |
|--------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| NP_276663 | Molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis protein MoaA |
| NP_276967 | Molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis protein MoaB |
| NP_275948 | Molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis protein MoaC |
| NP_276138 | Molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis protein MoeA |
| NP_276820 | Carbon monoxide dehydrogenase, alpha subunit (CO dehydrogenase/acetyl-CoA synthase, subunit alpha) |
| NP_276822 | Carbon monoxide dehydrogenase, alpha subunit (CO dehydrogenase/acetyl-CoA synthase, subunit beta) |
| NP_276825 | Corrinoid/iron-sulfur protein, large subunit (CO dehydrogenase/acetyl-CoA synthase, subunit gamma) |
| NP_276824 | Corrinoid/iron-sulfur protein, small subunit (CO dehydrogenase/acetyl-CoA synthase, subunit delta) |
| NP_276823 | Nitrogenase reductase-related protein (CO dehydrogenase/acetyl-CoA synthase, accessory protein) |
| NP_276732 | Thiamine biosynthetic enzyme |
| NP_276299 | Phosphonoacetaldehyde methylase |
| NP_277018 | Possible protein methyltransferase (predicted RNA methylase) |
| NP_276283 | Na⁺/Ca⁺ exchanging protein related |
| NP_276665 | Formate dehydrogenase, alpha subunit homologue |
| NP_276615 | Phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase alpha subunit |
| NP_276113 | NADP-dependent glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (predicted NAD-dependent aldehyde dehydrogenase) |
| NP_275964 | L-Isoaspartyl protein carboxyl methyltransferase$^b$ |
| NP_277015 | Hypothetical protein (putative RNA 3'-terminal phosphate cyclase) |
| NP_275838 | Hypothetical protein (predicted ABC-type transport system, permease protein) |
| NP_276300 | Possible cation transporter |
| NP_276301 | Cell division inhibitor-related protein |
| NP_276195 | Acetyltransferase |
| NP_276886 | Stomatin-like protein |
| NP_275744 | Conserved protein (contains ferredoxin domain) |
| NP_276442 | Hypothetical protein$^b$ |

$a$ All CDS of *M. thermautotrophicus* (86) were searched with the BLAST program against the genomes of all other methanogenic archaea sequenced so far. CDS of *M. thermautotrophicus* with BLAST hits better than $e^{-15}$ in all other genomes except that of *M. stadtmanae* are listed. Only the first CDS is listed when there was more than one hit resulting from different CDS with high levels of sequence similarity in the *M. thermautotrophicus* genome.  

$b$ Additional hypothetical proteins are encoded by NP_276192, NP_275386, NP_276747, NP_276390, NP_276421, NP_276472, NP_275703, NP_276239, NP_276433, NP_275838, NP_276973, NP_276349, NP_275612, NP_277013, and NP_275894.

---

H₂ → 2e⁻ + 2H⁺ ($\Delta G^\circ = 0 \, \text{kJ/mol}$)  
ADP + Pᵢ → ATP + H₂O  
($\Delta G^\circ = 32 \, \text{kJ/mol}$)

where HS-CoM is coenzyme M, CH₃-S-CoM is methyl-coenzyme M, HS-CoB is coenzyme B, and Pᵢ is inorganic phosphate. The $E^\circ$ of the CoM-S-S-CoB/HS-CoM + HS-CoB couple has recently been determined to be $-140 \, \text{mV}$ rather than $-200 \, \text{mV}$ (97). The $\Delta G^\circ$ of methanol reduction with H₂ to methane and H₂O is $-112 \, \text{kJ/mol}$ (96).

(i) Formation of methyl-coenzyme M from methanol and coenzyme M. In *Methanosarcina* species, the only other methanogens known to grow on methanol and H₂, the initial step in methanol reduction to methane has been shown to be the formation of methyl-coenzyme M from methanol and coenzyme M (reaction 1). This reaction is catalyzed by three cytoplasmic proteins, a corrinoid protein (MtaC), a methyltransferase (MtaB) that catalyzes the methylation of MtaC with methanol, and a methyltransferase (MtaA) that catalyzes methyl transfer from MtaC to coenzyme M. The corrinoid protein has to be reduced to the cob(I)alamin oxidation state to become active. This reduction is catalyzed by a methyltransferase that activates the MapAB protein (13). MtaC and MtaB form a tight complex, and the genes that encode them form a transcription unit, *mtaBC*. MtaA is isolated separately and is translated from a monocistronic mRNA (78). The genomes of *M. barkeri*, *M. acetivorans*, and *M. mazei* each contain three sets of *mtaBC* genes and two sets of *mtaA* genes, which are transcribed under different growth conditions (73).

Four *mtaA*, *mtaB*, and *mtaC* homologues were found in the genome of *M. stadtmanae*: *mtaB1C1* (Msp0188 and Msp0189), *mtaB2C2* (Msp0186 and Msp0187), *mtaB3C3* (Msp0184 and Msp0185), *mtaB4C4* (Msp0819 and Msp0818), *mtaA1* (Msp0761), *mtaA2* (Msp0112), *mtaA3* (Msp0774), and *mtaA4* (Msp0182). At the 3' end of the *mtaB4C4* cluster, the genome harbors a

CDS                      Function                                                                                     Gene     CDS       Function                                                                                     Gene
Msp0010                  30S ribosomal protein S15P                                                                    rps15p   Msp0769   Archaeal histone                                                                           
Msp0017                  Conserved hypothetical protein, encoded in insertion element                                                                                                  
Msp0022                  Ketol-acid reductoisomerase                                                                                                    Msp0789   Rubrerythrin                                                                                
Msp0072                  Pyridoxine biosynthesis protein Pdx1                                                          pdx1     Msp0818   Methanol corrinoid protein 4                                                                mtaC4
Msp0079                  Hypothetical protein                                                                                                           Msp0819   Methanol: cobalamin methyltransferase 4                                                       mtaB4
Msp0106                  30S ribosomal protein S17e                                                                     rps17e   Msp0865   30S ribosomal protein S9P                                                                   rps9p
Msp0114                  Thermosome, subunit beta                                                                      thsB     Msp0866   50S ribosomal protein L13P                                                                  rpl13p
Msp0117                  Predicted 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase                                                                                   Msp0869   30S ribosomal protein S11P                                                                   rps11p
Msp0122                  Archaeal histone                                                                                                              Msp0870   30S ribosomal protein S4P                                                                    rps4p
Msp0130                  Thermosome, subunit alpha                                                                     thsA     Msp0871   30S ribosomal protein S13P                                                                   rps13p
Msp0147                  Ferredoxin                                                                                                                   Msp0880   50S ribosomal protein L14e                                                                   rpl14e
Msp0182                  Methylcobalamin: coenzyme M methyltransferase 4                                                                                   Msp0882   50S ribosomal protein L34e                                                                   rpl34e
                                                                                                                                                    Msp0886   50S ribosomal protein L15P                                                                  rpl15p
                                                                                                                                                    Msp0887   50S ribosomal protein L30P                                                                  rpl30p
                                                                                                                                                    Msp0888   30S ribosomal protein S5P                                                                   rps5p
                                                                                                                                                    Msp0894   30S ribosomal protein S14P                                                                  rps14p
                                                                                                                                                    Msp0895   50S ribosomal protein L5P                                                                   rpl5p
                                                                                                                                                    Msp0896   30S ribosomal protein S4e                                                                    rps4e
                                                                                                                                                    Msp0898   50S ribosomal protein L14P                                                                  rpl14p
                                                                                                                                                    Msp0903   30S ribosomal protein S3P                                                                    rps3p
                                                                                                                                                    Msp0906   50S ribosomal protein L2P                                                                    rpl2p
                                                                                                                                                    Msp0908   50S ribosomal protein L1e                                                                    rpl1e
                                                                                                                                                    Msp0960   Predicted ABC-type polar amino acid transport system, periplasmic substrate-binding protein
                                                                                                                                                    Msp0233   Conserved hypothetical protein, encoded in insertion element                                     
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1002   Cysteine desulfurase                                                                        iscS
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1013   Heterodisulfide reductase, subunit B1                                                        hdrB1
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1014   Heterodisulfide reductase, subunit C1                                                        hdrC1
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1061   Hypothetical protein, related to ferredoxin                                                  
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1134   A1Ao ATPase, subunit B                                                                      ahaB
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1135   A1Ao ATPase, subunit A                                                                      ahaA
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1136   A1Ao ATPase, subunit F                                                                      ahaF
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1139   A1Ao ATPase, subunit K                                                                      ahaK
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1141   A1Ao ATPase, subunit H                                                                      ahaH
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1145   D-3-Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase                                                          serA
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1158   Predicted Zn ribbon RNA-binding protein                                                    
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1174   50S ribosomal protein L37e                                                                   rpl37e
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1243   50S ribosomal protein L15e                                                                   rpl15e
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1253   50S ribosomal protein L37Ae                                                                  rpl37ae
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1256   Partially conserved hypothetical protein, related to prefoldin, subunit beta                      
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1263   50S ribosomal protein L12P                                                                   rpl12p
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1280   30S ribosomal protein S8                                                                     rps8e
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1292   50S ribosomal protein L40e                                                                   rpl41e
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1297   30S ribosomal protein S3Ae                                                                   rps30ae
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1352   Translation initiation factor 5A (aIF-5A)                                                    eif5a
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1366   Translation elongation factor 1-alpha (EF-Tu)                                                tuf
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1368   30S ribosomal protein S7P                                                                    rps7p
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1369   30S ribosomal protein S12P                                                                   rps12p
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1416   Glutamate dehydrogenase                                                                     gdhA
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1449   Energy-converting hydrogenase B, subunit I                                                   ehbI
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1450   Energy-converting hydrogenase B, subunit H                                                   ehbH
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1457   Energy-converting hydrogenase B, subunit A                                                   ehbA
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1476   Heterodisulfide reductase, subunit A1                                                        hdrA1
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1517   Chaperone protein DnaK                                                                       dnaK
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1528   30S ribosomal protein S27e                                                                   rps27e
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1529   50S ribosomal protein L44e                                                                   rpl44e
                                                                                                                                                    Msp1542   50S ribosomal protein L21e                                                                   rpl21e

* Putative highly expressed CDS were obtained by codon usage analysis with the SIGI tool (59).
* Additional hypothetical proteins are encoded by Msp0238, Msp0330, Msp0464, Msp0707, Msp0827, Msp1081, Msp1422, and Msp1498.
* Additional conserved hypothetical proteins are encoded by Msp0425, Msp0677, and Msp1566.

gene, Msp0190, that codes for a protein with sequence similarity with RamA. The iron-sulfur protein RamA has been shown to be involved in ATP-dependent reductive activation of the methyamine methyltransferase corrinoid protein in *M.* barkeri (T. Ferguson, T. Lienard, G. Gottschalk, and J. Krzycki, unpublished results). There is no indication that any of these polypeptides are membrane associated and could therefore be involved in proton or sodium ion translocation. Cells of

M. stadtmanae grown on methanol and H₂ in the laboratory were found to contain relatively high concentrations (5%) of MtaBC isoenzymes 2 and 3 and of MtaA isoenzyme 4, as revealed by the N-terminal sequences of purified MtaBC and MtaA (see Materials and Methods). Consistently, the codon usage of the corresponding genes was that of highly expressed genes (Table 3). The MtaBC complex contained 1 mol of 5-hydroxybenzimidazolyl cobamide (factor III) per mol MtaC.

Alignments of the four deduced amino acid sequences encoded by *mtaBC* revealed that the isoenzymes MtaB3C3 and MtaB4C4 are more closely related (>99% sequence identity) than the other isoenzymes (<96%). All four isoenzymes are more closely related to each other than to any of the MtaBC isoenzymes in *Methanosarcina* species (<50%). This relationship indicates that the four MtaBC isoenzymes in *M. stadtmanae* are the result of three gene duplications, two of which occurred more recently. The finding that of the cytochrome-free methanogens only *M. stadtmanae* contains *mtaBC* homologues suggests that a set of *mtaBC* genes was acquired by lateral gene transfer from *Methanosarcina* species. However, this must have occurred a long time ago, as indicated by the low level of sequence identity of MtaBC from *M. stadtmanae* with MtaBC from *Methanosarcina* and by the different order of the genes in the *mta* operons of *M. stadtmanae* (*mtaBC*) and *Methanosarcina* (*mtaCB*). Alignment of the deduced amino acid sequences encoded by *mtaA* revealed a different picture. The four MtaA isoenzymes of *M. stadtmanae* are related to each other (<60%) almost as closely as they are related to the MtaA isoenzymes of *Methanosarcina* (<54%).

The possibility that in *M. stadtmanae* methyl-coenzyme M formation from methanol and coenzyme M could also proceed via methyl-H₄MPT as an intermediate involving a methanol: H₄MPT methyltransferase (MtxXAH) and a methyl-H₄MPT: coenzyme M methyltransferase (MtrABCDEFGH) was considered. The genomes of *Methanosarcina* species harbor the *mtxXAH* genes, which have been proposed to code for a corrinoid-containing enzyme complex that catalyzes the formation of methyl-H₄MPT from methanol and H₄MPT and to be involved in methanol oxidation to CO₂ (32). However, *mtxXAH* homologues are not found in the genome of *M. stadtmanae*. Consistently, in *M. stadtmanae* only 10% of the methyl group of methionine, which is biosynthetically derived from the methyl group of methyl-H₄MPT, is synthesized from methanol. The other 90% is derived from C-2 of acetate via the hydroxymethyl group of serine or from C-1 of 3-hexulose-6-phosphate, as revealed by labeling experiments (62) (Fig. 2). The 10% labeling of the methyl group of methionine by methanol can be explained by the presence of a methyl-H₄MPT:coenzyme M methyltransferase (MtrA-H). The genome of *M. stadtmanae* contains the *mtrEDCBAFGH* gene cluster (Msp0300 to Msp0307), which is predicted to code for the sodium ion-translocating methyl-tetrahydromethanopterin:coenzyme M methyltransferase complex, which like MtaABC is a corrinoid protein. So far, the *mtr* genes have been found in every methanogenic archaeon investigated but not in any other organism. During growth of methanogens on H₂ and CO₂ the Mtr complex catalyzes the exergonic transfer of the methyl group of methyl-H₄MPT to coenzyme M (ΔG°' = –30 kJ/mol), a step in CO₂ reduction to methane, which is coupled to energy conservation. During growth of *Methanosarcina* on methanol the Mtr com-

plex is involved in methanol oxidation to CO₂, and the methyl transfer from methyl-coenzyme M to H₄MPT is driven by the electrochemical sodium ion potential (29). Since *M. stadtmanae* cannot reduce CO₂ to methane or oxidize methanol to CO₂ and synthesizes the methyl group of methionine mainly from C-2 of acetate (Fig. 2), this methanogen probably does not really require the enzyme. Consistently, the specific activity of the Mtr complex in cell extracts of *M. stadtmanae* was found to be below the detection limit (98). However, there is evidence that in *M. stadtmanae* formaldehyde can be reduced with H₂ to methane, which probably proceeds via methylene-H₄MPT, methyl-H₄MPT, and methyl-CoM as intermediates (51), indicating the presence of Mtr complex activity. Mtr complex might not be essential in *M. stadtmanae*. This is indicated by the recent finding that *mtrABCDEFGH* deletion mutants of *M. barkeri* can grow on methanol and H₂ when the medium is supplemented with acetate (100).

Another pathway from methanol to methyl-coenzyme M that was considered starts with the oxidation of methanol to formaldehyde, which spontaneously reacts with H₄MPT to form methylene-H₄MPT. The latter compound is then reduced to methyl-H₄MPT, from which the methyl group is transferred to coenzyme M. In the genome of *M. stadtmanae*, genes for F₄₂₀-dependent methylene-H₄MPT reductase (Mer) (Msp1128) and (as mentioned above) for methyl-H₄MPT:coenzyme M methyltransferase (Mtr) are found. A gene for a formaldehyde-activating enzyme (Fae) (Msp1498) that catalyzes the formation of methylene-H₄MPT from formaldehyde and H₄MPT (Fig. 2) is also present in the genome. However, a CDS for a formaldehyde dehydrogenase is not apparent. The finding from labeling experiments that only 10% of the methyl group of methionine (62) is synthesized from methanol again indicates that, if present, this pathway has only minor importance. This is even more true as methanol is always contaminated by small amounts of formaldehyde generated from methanol by autoxidation, which could also explain the 10% labeling by methanol.

(ii) Methyl-coenzyme M reduction with coenzyme B to CH₄ and CoM-S-S-CoB. In all methanogens that have been investigated for this characteristic methane is generated by reduction of methyl-coenzyme M with coenzyme B (reaction 2). The reaction is catalyzed by methyl-coenzyme M reductase (Mcr or Mrt), which is composed of three subunits, subunits A, B, and G, each of which is present twice. Two moles of nickel porphyrinoid F₄₃₀ per mol of heterohexamer is tightly but noncovalently bound. Five of the amino acid residues in McrA are post- or cotranslationally modified, and these amino acid positions are highly conserved. Some methanogens contain two methyl-coenzyme M isoenzymes, McrABG and MrtABG, which are formed under different growth conditions. The CDS for the three Mcr or Mrt subunits A, B, and G are organized in transcription units, which generally contain one or two additional open reading frames, subunits C and D, whose functions are unknown (95).

The genome of *M. stadtmanae* was found to harbor a transcription unit, *mrtBDGA* (Msp0318 to Msp0321), and separately an *mcrC* homologue (Msp0299). The *mvhDGA* cluster encoding the non-F₄₂₀-reducing hydrogenase involved in reduction of methanol to methane with H₂ is located directly upstream of the *mrtBDGA* cluster (see below). The sequence

of *mrtA* is conserved with respect to five posttranslationally modified amino acids, glycine 447, glutamine 402, arginine 274, cysteine 454, and histidine 260. Genes encoding a second methyl-coenzyme M reductase were not found. Based on the deduced amino acid sequence, one of the three subunits (MrtB) is predicted to contain at least one hydrophobic segment that could form a transmembrane helix. Similar predictions have been made for the β subunits (McrB or MrtB) of methyl-coenzyme M reductases from other methanogens. The crystal structures of methyl-coenzyme M reductases from several methanogens have revealed that the hydrophobic segment of the β subunit is buried within the α₂β₂γ₂ complex and that the surface of the complex is completely hydrophilic (22, 30). There is no indication from the biochemical properties of methyl-coenzyme M reductases that the enzyme could be membrane associated and involved in proton or sodium ion translocation.

(iii) CoM-S-S-CoB reduction to coenzyme M and coenzyme B. In methanogens without cytochromes the heterodisulfide reductase complex is generally composed of the subunits HdrA, HdrB, and HdrC. HdrA is an iron-sulfur flavoprotein, and HdrB and HdrC are iron-sulfur proteins. The enzyme contains an active site iron-sulfur cluster located on subunit HdrB (19, 56). The genes coding for the three subunits are organized into two transcription units, *hdrA* and *hdrCB* (36). The physiological electron donor of HdrABC appears to be the iron-sulfur protein MvhD of the MvhADG complex (non-F₄₂₀-reducing hydrogenase) (see below). HdrB exhibits sequence similarity to subunit GlpC of glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase from *Escherichia coli* (36) and to subunit SdhC of succinate dehydrogenases from archaea belonging to the order *Sulfolobales* (50), which are integral membrane proteins.

The genome of *M. stadtmanae* was found to contain two sets of *hdrA*, *hdrB*, and *hdrC* genes, one set organized in an *hdrC2B2A2* transcription unit (Msp0125 to Msp0127) and the other set organized in two transcription units, *hdrC1B1* (Msp1014 and Msp1013) and *hdrA1* (Msp1476). The HdrABC complex purified from *M. stadtmanae* grown under laboratory conditions is the product of the *hdrC1B1* and *hdrA1* genes, as revealed by the N-terminal sequences (see Materials and Methods). The genome of *M. stadtmanae* lacks a CDS for HdrE (cytochrome b), which until now has been found only in *Methanosarcina* species. The *hdrA2* gene in the *hdrA2C2B2* cluster in *M. stadtmanae* is similar to an *hdrA* homologue found in the genome of *Methanosarcina* species since it is extended at the 3′ end by a sequence with similarity to *mvhD* on the protein level. The fusion of the two genes is considered an indication that HdrA and MvhD are also functionally associated in electron transfer from H₂ to CoM-S-S-CoB (91). Another interesting aspect is that in *Methanosarcina* the order of the genes in the putative transcription unit is *hdrACB*, whereas in *M. stadtmanae* it is *hdrC2B2A2*.

(iv) Hydrogen activation for the reduction of CoM-S-S-CoB. Methanogens without cytochromes, which with the exception of *M. stadtmanae* can grow on H₂ and CO₂ as sole energy sources, generally contain three different [NiFe] hydrogenases: a cytoplasmic F₄₂₀-reducing hydrogenase (FrhABG), a cytoplasmic non-F₄₂₀-reducing hydrogenase (MvhADG) (92), and a membrane-associated energy-converting hydrogenase (Eha and/or Ehb), which uses ferredoxin as an electron acceptor (33). So far, the

energy-converting hydrogenase has been studied only in *M. barkeri*, in which the homologous enzyme (designated Ech) was shown to be involved in CO₂ reduction to formylmethanofuran (energy metabolism), in reductive carboxylation reactions (e.g., pyruvate synthesis from acetyl-CoA), and in CO₂ reduction to CO (CO₂ assimilation) (60).

FrhABG is involved in methenyl-H₄MPT reduction to methylene-H₄MPT and in methylene-H₄MPT reduction to methyl-H₄MPT (CO₂ reduction to methane), as well as in NADP reduction (biosynthesis). MvhADG appears to be involved only in CoM-S-S-CoB reduction. Some of the methanogens without cytochromes also contain an H₂-forming methylene-H₄MPT dehydrogenase (Hmd), which is a nickel- and iron-sulfur-cluster-free hydrogenase with a function in CO₂ reduction to methane (54).

In the genome of *M. stadtmanae* CDS for three different hydrogenases are found: *frhADGB* (Msp1302 to Msp1305), *mvhDGA* (Msp0314 to Msp0316), and *ehbABCDEFGHIJKLM-NOPQ* (Msp1457 to Msp1442 and Msp1436). There is also a second *mvhD* homologue (Msp0638), which is located at the 3′ end of two genes encoding a formate dehydrogenase (*fdhAB*; Msp0640 and Msp0639) and a third gene fused at the 5′ end to *hdrA2* in the *hdrB2C2A2* cluster. The genome lacks CDS for Eha and the nickel-free hydrogenase Hmd. As indicated below, in *M. stadtmanae* the Ehb and Frh hydrogenases probably have a purely anabolic function, Ehb in pyruvate synthesis from acetyl-CoA and Frh in NADP reduction (Fig. 2). Therefore, only the non-F₄₂₀-reducing hydrogenase Mvh can be involved in methanol reduction to methane. Consistent with a function of Mvh in energy metabolism is the finding that the codon usage of the *mvhDGA* genes rather than that of the *frhADGB* and *ehbA-Q* genes is the codon usage of other highly expressed genes (Table 3).

The non-F₄₂₀-reducing hydrogenase was purified from *M. stadtmanae* and identified as the *mvhDGA* gene product by N-terminal sequence comparisons (75). From the sequence of the *mvhDGA* genes it was deduced that MvhA is the [NiFe] center-harboring subunit and MvhD and MvhG are iron-sulfur proteins. There is no indication that in *M. stadtmanae* the non-F₄₂₀-reducing hydrogenase is a membrane-associated enzyme (no predicted transmembrane helices) or is an extracytoplasmic enzyme (no 5′ twin-arginine motif).

In the genomes of most methanogens without cytochromes a *mvhB* gene is present at the 3′ end of the *mvhDGA* transcription unit. MvhB was shown to code for a polyferredoxin whose function is still not known (34, 74). A homologue of *mvhB* was not found in the genome of *M. stadtmanae*. An *mvhB* homologue is also not present in the genome of *M. kandleri*.

(v) ATP synthesis. Methanogenic archaea generally contain a proton-translocating ATPase of the A₁A₀ type composed of 9 or 10 different subunits and encoded by an *ahaHIKECFABD* transcription unit (67). Such a gene cluster is also found in the genome of *M. stadtmanae* (Msp1141 to Msp1133). Based on codon usage the AhaA, AhaB, AhaF, AhaH, and AhaK subunits are predicted to be highly expressed (Table 3), which is consistent with a function of the ATPase in energy metabolism. From the primary structure it was deduced that AhaK is the hydrophobic proteolipid directly involved in proton translocation. AhaK is predicted to contain four transmembrane helices.

(vi) Energy conservation. The genome analysis and biochemical studies revealed that in *M. stadtmanae* only five enzyme complexes are involved in methanol reduction to methane with H₂, a reaction that is coupled to ADP phosphorylation, as shown by growth of the methanogen on H₂ and methanol as sole energy sources. The five complexes are MtaABC, MrtABG, HdrABC, MvhADG, and AhaABCDEFGH. Transmembrane prediction methods predict that three of these complexes (the Mta, Mvh, and Hdr complexes) are located in the cytoplasm, that the AhaCKI subunits of the A₁A₀ complex are membrane integrated, and that the MrtABG complex could be membrane associated via the MrtB subunit. However, as outlined above, the hydrophobic part of MrtB is buried within the enzyme complex rather than exposed to its surface, which is completely hydrophilic. Therefore, methyl-coenzyme M reductases have to be considered cytoplasmic enzymes. Conversely, HdrABC is most probably a membrane-associated enzyme, although none of its three subunits are predicted to contain transmembrane helices. The complex is proposed to be anchored via its HdrB subunit to the membrane, a conclusion based mainly on the observation that SdhC (CAA06782) (50), a protein with 31% sequence identity to HdrB, is a membrane protein and that transmembrane helices are not unequivocally predicted for this protein. In *Methanothermobacter marburgensis* HdrABC and MvhADG have been shown to form a tight complex partially associated with the cytoplasmic membrane (82, 92). In the complex HdrB harbors the active site for CoM-S-CoB reduction and MvhA harbors the active site for H₂ oxidation. Electron transfer has been proposed to occur between the MvhD and HdrA subunits (89) based on the finding that in the genomes of *Methanosarcina* and *M. stadtmanae* there is an *hdrA* homologue that is fused to an *mvhD* homologue (see above). The proposed electron transfer from MvhD to HdrA remains to be shown experimentally. With cell suspensions of *M. stadtmanae* it has been shown that methanol reduction with H₂ is coupled to the buildup of an electrochemical proton potential which drives the phosphorylation of ADP (87), most probably via the Aha complex. All the results together suggest that in *M. stadtmanae* the reduction of CoM-S-S-CoB with H₂ is coupled principally with proton translocation, as shown in Fig. 3. In the topology model of the HdrABC/MvhADG complex the anchor function of HdrB is speculative.

The growth yield of *M. stadtmanae* on H₂ and methanol in complex media was found to be approximately 4 g/mol methane (64), and the yield of *M. barkeri* on H₂ and methanol was found to be 4.6 g/mol methane (68). Coupling of methanol reduction to methane with energy conservation thus proceeds in these two organisms with almost identical efficiencies.

(vii) 5-Hydroxybenzimidazolyl cobamide biosynthesis. The corrinoid group is the prosthetic group of the methyltransferase (MtaABC) that catalyzes reaction 1. *M. stadtmanae* has an unusually high 5-hydroxybenzimidazolyl cobamide content, 4 nmol/mg protein; for comparison, *M. marburgensis* has a cobamide content of 0.3 nmol/mg protein. In the genome of *M. stadtmanae* all the genes required for synthesis of the corrin ring from eight glutamate residues (79) were found, which is consistent with the report that growth of the organism is not dependent on vitamin B₁₂ (64). The finding that the genome of *M. stadtmanae* appears to lack a gene for a cobalamin-dependent ribonucleotide reductase was unexpected. Only a CDS for a glyceryl ribonucleotide reductase (ribonucleotide re-

biosynthesis of molybdopterin (Table 2), indicating that *M. stadtmanae* cannot synthesize active formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase. Cell suspensions of the organism were shown to slowly oxidize \[^{14}C\]formaldehyde to \[^{14}\]CO₂, most probably via methylene-H₄MPT and formate (51), which is consistent with the absence of formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase activity. However, low specific activities (40 mU/mg) of this enzyme have been reported to be present in cell extracts of *M. stadtmanae* (80). Therefore, the possibility that *M. stadtmanae* might be able to take up molybdopterin present at trace levels in the yeast extract and/or rumen fluid, which is generally a component of the complex growth medium, has to be considered. It has been reported that methanofuran is absent in *M. stadtmanae* (98); however, the method employed was not sensitive enough to completely exclude the possibility that this coenzyme was present. In this respect it is of interest that in the genome of *M. stadtmanae* a CDS for a tyrosine decarboxylase (*mfnA*; Msp0329) involved in methanofuran biosynthesis (47) has been found. Nonetheless, together the findings can explain why the methanogen cannot reduce CO₂ to methane or oxidize methanol to CO₂.

It is interesting with respect to the function of formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase that the enzyme from *Methylobacterium extorquens* AM1, which lacks a molybdopterin binding site, catalyzes the hydrolysis rather than the dehydrogenation of formylmethanofuran (72). The function of formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase in *M. stadtmanae* could therefore be to catalyze the formation of formate, which is required for the synthesis of C-2 of purines and as an electron donor for ribonucleotide reduction (Fig. 2). It is also noteworthy that the sequences of the subunits of formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase from *M. stadtmanae* are most similar to those of the tungsten-containing isoenzyme present in many methanogens (95). There is one peculiarity: subunits A and G are most closely related to FwdA and FwdG from *M. thermoautotrophicus*, subunits C and D are most closely related to FwdC and FwdD from *M. jannaschii* and *M. maripaludis*, respectively, and subunit B, which harbors the molybdopterin binding site, is most closely related to FwdB from *M. kandleri* (99). The reason for this phylogenetic mixture is not apparent.

As mentioned above, the genome of *M. stadtmanae* lacks genes required for the synthesis of the nickel-containing carbon monoxide dehydrogenase/acetyl-CoA decarbonylase complex (Table 2), which in methanogens is either involved in methanogenesis from acetate or in acetyl-CoA synthesis from CO₂ and a methyl group (95). This finding could explain why *M. stadtmanae* cannot use acetate as a methanogenic substrate and why this archaeon is dependent on acetate as a carbon source for growth.

Carbon assimilation. *M. stadtmanae* is dependent on acetate and CO₂ as main carbon sources for growth. Also, this organism appears to be auxotrophic for isoleucine or leucine and for thiamine (64). Labeling studies have revealed that the methyl group of methionine and positions 2 and 8 of the purines are mainly derived from C-2 of acetate (4, 10, 11, 51, 62) (Fig. 2). The labeling pattern in amino acids is consistent with assimilation of acetate via pyruvate involving reactions 6 to 9.

Acetate + CoA + ATP → acetyl-CoA + AMP + PPᵢ   (6)

PPᵢ + H₂O → 2Pᵢ   (7)

Acetyl-CoA + CO₂ + Fd_red²⁻ + H⁺ →  
pyruvate⁻ + CoA + Fd_ox   (8)

H₂ + Fd_ox → Fd_red²⁻ + 2H⁺   (9)

where Fd is a [4Fe-4S]₂-containing ferredoxin assumed to have a redox potential identical to that of the acetyl-CoA + CO₂/pyruvate couple (*E°' = –500 mV*). All other cell compounds are synthesized from acetyl-CoA and pyruvate.

(i) Pyruvate synthesis from acetate. The genome of *M. stadtmanae* harbors CDS for two predicted acyl-CoA synthetases (AMP forming) (Msp0266 and Msp0447), one inorganic pyrophosphatase (*ppa*; Msp0625), one predicted acyl-CoA synthetase (ADP forming) (Msp0919), one pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PorABCD) (Msp0334 to Msp0337), five ferredoxins with [4Fe-4S]₂ (Msp0147, Msp0236, Msp0237, Msp0768, and Msp0861), and one energy-converting hydrogenase (Ehb) (see above). The presence of these gene homologues is consistent with the hypothesis that reactions 6 to 9 are involved in pyruvate synthesis from acetate and CO₂. Gene homologues for acetate kinase and phosphotransacetylase were not found.

The reductive carboxylation of acetyl-CoA to pyruvate (*E°' = –500 mV*) with H₂ (*E°' = –420 mV*) as the electron donor (reactions 8 and 9) is an endergonic process, which can proceed only when it is pushed by the proton motive force or the sodium motive force. In some methanogens the reductive carboxylation of acetyl-CoA to pyruvate can be coupled to the exergonic oxidation of formylmethanofuran to CO₂ (*E°' = –530 mV*) or the exergonic oxidation of CO to CO₂ (*E°' = –520 mV*) (91). In *M. stadtmanae* this is not possible since the organism lacks an active formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase (Fmd) and a CO dehydrogenase (Cdh). However, the genome does contain CDS for an energy-converting hydrogenase, Ehb, which therefore is proposed to catalyze reaction 9. As deduced from the sequence, subunit N (Msp1444) of Ehb harbors the active site [NiFe] center. Interestingly, the *ehbABCDEFGHJKLMNOPQ* cluster is interrupted between *ehbP* and *ehbQ* by two short open reading frames predicted to encode the iron transport proteins FeoA and FeoB (Msp1441 and Msp1440).

The energy-converting hydrogenase Ehb in *M. stadtmanae* is also required for other reductive carboxylations. The genome contains genes for the synthesis of 2-oxoglutarate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (Kor) (*korDABC*; Msp1390 to Msp1387) in a conserved cluster together with the gene encoding subunit beta of succinyl-CoA synthetase (*succC*; Msp1386), indicating that *M. stadtmanae* can generate 2-oxoglutarate by reductive carboxylation of succinyl-CoA. This organism also contains indolepyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (Ior) (*iorAB*; Msp1043 and Msp1042), indicating that it can assimilate indolacetate and phenylacetate by reductive carboxylation. Genes for 2-oxoisovalerate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (Vor) present in the genomes of other methanogens were not found (94). Vor is involved in the assimilation of branched-chain fatty acids. Consistent with the absence of *vor* genes in the genome of *M. stadtmanae* is the finding that growth of this intestinal organism appears not to be dependent on the presence of branched-chain fatty acids (64).

(ii) Serine biosynthesis from pyruvate. In the genome of *M. stadtmanae* CDS for pyruvate carboxylase (*pycB*; Msp1173), phosphoenolpyruvate synthase (*ppsA*; Msp0328), enolase (*eno*; Msp0862), two phosphoglycerate mutases (*apgM1* or Msp0485 and *apgM2* or Msp1299), phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (*serA*; Msp1145), and phosphoserine phosphatase (Msp1096) were found, indicating that serine is synthesized from pyruvate via phosphoenolpyruvate, 2-phosphoglycerate, 3-phosphoglycerate, 3-phosphohydroxypyruvate, and 3-phosphoserine as intermediates (Fig. 2). A CDS for a phosphoserine transaminase appears to be absent. The phosphoserine phosphatase gene, however, contains a long 3′ extension, indicating that in *M. stadtmanae* phosphoserine phosphatase could be a bifunctional enzyme. CDS for pyruvate kinase, pyruvate phosphate dikinase, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase were not detected.

(iii) C₁ unit biosynthesis from serine. A CDS for serine: H₄MPT hydroxymethyl transferase (*glyA*; Msp1475) is present in the genome of *M. stadtmanae*, indicating that serine reacts with H₄MPT, generating methylene-H₄MPT and glycine (Fig. 2). H₄MPT-dependent hydroxymethyltransferase activity was found in cell extracts of *M. stadtmanae* (52). Methylene-H₄MPT is required for thymidylate synthesis, for synthesis of the methyl group of methionine via methyl-H₄MPT, and for generation of formate. The latter compound could be formed via methenyl-H₄MPT, formyl-H₄MPT, and formylmethanofuran, as described previously for formate synthesis in *M. exotorquens* (72). In *M. stadtmanae* formate is required for synthesis of C-2 of purines (10) and as an electron donor for the glycy radical enzyme ribonucleotide reductase (20, 53). C-8 of purines is labeled by C-2 of acetate even in the presence of formate via an unknown pathway (10). The genome harbors genes for thymidylate synthase (*thyA*; Msp1237) and methionine synthase (*metE*; Msp1236), but a convincing CDS for the enzyme PurT, which in other methanogens catalyzes the ATP-dependent incorporation of formate into C-2 and C-8 of purines, was not found. The only possible homologue present is carbamoyl phosphate synthetase (*carAB*; Msp1201 and Msp1200). The genome also does not contain gene homologues for PurN and PurH, which could catalyze the transfer of the formyl group of N¹⁰-formyltetrahydrofolate to positions 2 and 8 of purines. This is in agreement with the findings that *M. stadtmanae* does not contain tetrahydrofolate and that for thermodynamic reasons N⁵-formyl-H₄MPT cannot substitute for N¹⁰-formyltetrahydrofolate in the two formyltransferase reactions (8). The genome contains a CDS for a molybdopterin-dependent formate dehydrogenase. However, because of the lack of molybdopterin biosynthetic genes, this enzyme should not be functional, although low NAD(P)-dependent formate dehydrogenase activity has been reported for cell extracts of *M. stadtmanae* (51). Also, cell suspensions of the organism were shown to slowly oxidize [¹⁴C]formate to ¹⁴CO₂ (51). This is another indication that *M. stadtmanae* might be able to take up molybdopterin present at trace levels in the yeast extract and/or rumen fluid present in the complex growth medium (see above). Growth of *M. stadtmanae* is not dependent on the presence of formate (64), indicating that this archaeon must somehow be able to synthesize this C₁ unit.

Synthesis of C₁ units from C-2 of acetate, as indicated by the labeling studies, does not necessarily have to proceed via C-3

of serine (Fig. 2). In methanogenic archaea 3-hexulose-6-phosphate is the precursor of pentose phosphates required for RNA and DNA biosynthesis (28). From hexulose-6-phosphate ribulose-5-phosphate and formaldehyde are formed in a reaction catalyzed by hexulose phosphate synthase (Hps). The formaldehyde is derived from C-1 of the hexulose phosphate, which in turn is derived from C-2 of acetate via C-3 of pyruvate, C-3 of dihydroxyacetone phosphate, C-1 of fructose bisphosphate, and C-1 of fructose-6-phosphate. The formaldehyde reacts with H₄MPT to form methylene-H₄MPT, a reaction catalyzed by the formaldehyde-activating enzyme (Fae) (Fig. 2). All the genes required for operation of this pathway are present in the genome of *M. stadtmanae*. Interestingly, as in other methanogens, the *fae* gene and the *hps* gene encoding hexulose phosphate synthase are fused (Msp1498).

(iv) F₄₂₀-dependent enzymes. In the genome of *M. stadtmanae* CDS for the following F₄₂₀-dependent enzymes are present: F₄₂₀-reducing hydrogenase (FrhABG); F₄₂₀-dependent methylene-H₄MPT dehydrogenase (Mtd); F₄₂₀-dependent methylene-H₄MPT reductase (Mer) (see above); F₄₂₀H₂:NADP oxidoreductase (Fno) (Msp0665); and F₄₂₀H₂ oxidase (FprA) (Msp0787) (Fig. 2). F₄₂₀-reducing hydrogenase activity was not detectable in cell extracts of *M. stadtmanae*, indicating that the *frhADB G* genes were not expressed or were expressed at only low levels in the organism. The *frhD* gene is predicted to code for a protease involved in hydrogenase maturation. *M. stadtmanae* contains relatively low concentrations of F₄₂₀ (0.16 nmol/mg protein, compared to 6 nmol/mg in *M. marburgensis*) (103), indicating that F₄₂₀-dependent reactions are of minor importance quantitatively, which is in agreement with the finding that F₄₂₀-dependent methylene-H₄MPT dehydrogenase (Mtd) and F₄₂₀-dependent methylene-H₄MPT reductase (Mer) are required only for biosynthetic purposes. Likewise, F₄₂₀H₂:NADP oxidoreductase has only an anabolic function, the regeneration of NADPH (Fno) and F₄₂₀H₂ oxidase (FprA), and a function in the detoxification of O₂, the reduction of O₂ to 2H₂O (81). Fno from *M. stadtmanae* has been purified and characterized (21).

(v) Thiamine and isoleucine/leucine auxotrophy. In the genome of *M. stadtmanae* at least one CDS required for thiamine biosynthesis appears to be missing (Table 2). However, all of the genes for biosynthesis of leucine and isoleucine were found. The amino acid auxotrophy of this organism is not understood at this time. With respect to the dependence of growth on leucine or isoleucine, it is interesting that *M. stadtmanae* appears to lack a CDS for 2-oxoisovalerate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (Vor), which in *M. marburgensis* has been shown to exhibit 2-oxoisohexanoate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase activity (94). Therefore, the organism should not be able (as a back-up) to synthesize the two branched-chain amino acids from 2-methylbutyrate and 3-methylbutyrate present in the volatile fatty acid fraction of the rumen fluid generally added to the growth medium of this intestinal inhabitant.

*M. stadtmanae*-specific genes. Comparisons of whole-genome protein sequences revealed that the genome of *M. stadtmanae* contains 323 CDS without genes in the genomes of other archaea (data not shown). Of these, 73 CDS exhibit high levels of overall homology to genes encoding proteins of bacteria and eukaryotes (Table 4). These 73 CDS include 12 CDS which are predicted to code for a group of large proteins with a conserved N-terminal leader sequence and a repetitive structure

TABLE 4. CDS in the genome of M. stadtmanae with close gene homologues only in nonarchaeal genomes

| CDS<sup>b</sup> | Function | Length (bp) | Accession no. | Organism |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Large CDS with a repetitive structure |
| Msp 0043 | Member of Asn/Thr-rich large protein family | 2,451 | ZP_00356360 | Chloroflexus aurantiacus |
| Msp 0046 | Member of Asn/Thr-rich large protein family | 2,646 | CAF 23662 | Parachlamydia sp. strain UWE 25 |
| Msp 0141 | Member of Asn/Thr-rich large protein family | 6,363 | BAB 33965 | Escherichia coli O157:H7 |
|  |  |  | YP_189939 | Staphylococcus epidermidis RP62A |
| Msp 0432 | Member of Asn/Thr-rich large protein family | 6,135 | NP_703779 | Plasmodium falciparum 3D 7 (E)<sup>c</sup> |
| Msp 0590 | Member of Asn/Thr-rich large protein family | 8,940 | CAF 23662 | Parachlamydia sp. strain UWE 25 |
|  |  |  | CAG 36249 | Desulfotalea psychrophila LSv 54 |
| Msp 0713 | Member of Asn/Thr-rich large protein family | 6,456 | ZP_00356360 | Chloroflexus aurantiacus |
| Msp 0762 | Member of Asn/Thr-rich large protein family | 10,071 | CAF 23662 | Parachlamydia sp. strain UWE 25 |
|  |  |  | NP_522741 | Ralstonia solanacearum GMI 1000 |
| Msp 0765 | Member of Asn/Thr-rich large protein family | 3,669 | ZP_00519573 | Solibacter usitatus Ellin 6076 |
|  |  |  | CAF 23662 | Parachlamydia sp. strain UWE 25 |
| Msp 0983 | Member of Asn/Thr-rich large protein family | 3,936 | ZP_00356360 | Chloroflexus aurantiacus |
|  |  |  | CAD 71661 | Rhodopirellula baltica SH 1 |
| Msp 1103 | Member of Asn/Thr-rich large protein family | 2,574 | ZP_00356360 | Chloroflexus aurantiacus |
| Msp 1108 | Member of Asn/Thr-rich large protein family | 5,766 | CAF 23662 | Parachlamydia sp. strain UWE 25 |
|  |  |  | ZP_00525480 | Solibacter usitatus Ellin 6076 |
| Msp 1465 | Member of Asn/Thr-rich large protein family | 6,645 | AAG 54838 | Escherichia coli O157:H7 strain EDL 933 |
|  |  |  | CAG 76164 | Erwinia carotovora subsp. atroseptica SCRI 1043 |

| CDS involved in bacterial surface antigen biosynthesis |
| Msp 0039 | Predicted glycosyltransferase | 1,098 | AAK 80269 | Clostridium acetobutylicum ATCC 824 |
| Msp 0203 | Predicted glycosyltransferase | 1,959 | ZP_00327237 | Trichodesmium erythraeum IMS 101 |
|  |  |  | ZP_00270340 | Rhodospirillum rubrum |
| Msp 0207 | Predicted glycosyltransferase | 870 | AAR 99614 | Geobacillus stearothermophilus |
|  |  |  | AAK 80277 | Clostridium acetobutylicum ATCC 824 |
| Msp 0212 | Predicted glycosyltransferase | 2,667 | AAP 76661 | Helicobacter hepaticus ATCC 51449 |
|  |  |  | YP_130861 | Photobacterium profundum SS 9 |
| Msp 0215 | Predicted glycosyltransferase | 2,589 | YP_086549 | Bacillus cereus E33L |
|  |  |  | YP_022183 | Bacillus anthracis Ames Ancestor |
| Msp 0220 | Predicted glycosyltransferase | 2,748 | NP_964416 | Lactobacillus johnsonii NCC 533 |
|  |  |  | NP_391310 | Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis 168 |
| Msp 0441 | Predicted glycosyltransferase | 1,185 | ZP_00388322 | Streptococcus thermophilus LMD-9 |
|  |  |  | BAB 80207 | Clostridium perfringens 13 |
| Msp 0442 | Predicted glycosyltransferase | 1,077 | NP_816137 | Enterococcus faecalis V 583 |
|  |  |  | BAB 80207 | Clostridium perfringens 13 |
| Msp 0495 | Predicted glycosyltransferase | 2,628 | CAB 73858 | Campylobacter jejuni subsp. jejuni NCTC 11168 |
|  |  |  | ZP_00143779 | Fusobacterium nucleatum subsp. vincentii ATCC 49256 |
| Msp 0500 | Predicted glycosyltransferase | 2,211 | ZP_00327237 | Trichodesmium erythraeum IMS 101 |
|  |  |  | ZP_00270340 | Rhodospirillum rubrum |
| Msp 0581 | Predicted UDP-N-acetylmuramyl tripeptide synthase | 1,344 | ZP_00504800 | Clostridium thermocellum ATCC 27405 |
|  |  |  | AAO 35161 | Clostridium tetani E 88 |
| Msp 0921 | Putative poly(gamma-glutamate) biosynthesis protein, involved in capsule formation | 1,215 | YP_080918 | Bacillus licheniformis ATCC 14580 |
|  |  |  | NP_391469 | Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis 168 |
| Msp 1540 | Partially conserved hypothetical protein, related to glycosyltransferase | 2,910 | ZP_00327237 | Trichodesmium erythraeum IMS 101 |
|  |  |  | ZP_00270340 | Rhodospirillum rubrum |

| CDS for restriction-modification systems |
| Msp 0454 | Partially conserved hypothetical protein, related to type I restriction-modification system, restriction subunit | 1,350 | CAE 10219 | Wolinella succinogenes |
|  |  |  | CAH 07535 | Bacteroides fragilis NCTC 9343 |
| Msp 0470 | Partially conserved hypothetical protein, related to type III restriction-modification system, methylation subunit | 1,182 | ZP_00504330 | Clostridium thermocellum ATCC 27405 |
|  |  |  | ZP_00531584 | Chlorobium phaeobacteroides BS 1 |
| Msp 0472 | Partially conserved hypothetical protein, related to type III restriction-modification system, methylation subunit | 768 | ZP_00504330 | Clostridium thermocellum ATCC 27405 |
|  |  |  | AAL 94619 | Fusobacterium nucleatum subsp. nucleatum ATCC 25586 |
| Msp 0473 | Type III restriction-modification system, restriction subunit | 2,988 | ZP_00504329 | Clostridium thermocellum ATCC 27405 |
|  |  |  | ZP_00143311 | Fusobacterium nucleatum subsp. vincentii ATCC 49256 |

| CDS<sup>b</sup> | Function | Length (bp) | Accession no. | Organism |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Msp 0480 | Putative type I restriction-modification subunit, specificity subunit | 1,218 | YP_185367<br>AAP 11371 | Staphylococcus aureus subsp. aureus COL<br>Bacillus cereus ATCC 14579 |
| Remaining CDS |  |  |  |  |
| Msp 0059 | Conserved hypothetical protein<sup>b</sup> | 618 | ZP_00288946 | Magnetococcus sp. strain MC-1 |
| Msp 0064 | Predicted acetyltransferase | 609 | AAO 75579<br>ZP_00423781 | Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron VPI-5482<br>Burkholderia vietnamiensis G4 |
| Msp 0093 | Predicted flavoprotein | 1,242 | AAO 35881<br>ZP_00510807 | Clostridium tetani E88<br>Clostridium thermocellum ATCC 27405 |
| Msp 0128 | Predicted helicase | 2,196 | ZP_00357761 | Chloroflexus aurantiacus |
| Msp 0140 | Predicted 3'-5' exonuclease | 1,338 | BAB 81107<br>NP_691978 | Clostridium perfringens 13<br>Oceanobacillus iheyensis HTE 831 |
| Msp 0408 | Putative nitroreductase protein | 507 | CAH 08994<br>NP_661026 | Bacteroides fragilis NCTC 9343<br>Chlorobium tepidum TLS |
| Msp 0528 | Putative gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase | 1,404 | YP_015348<br>NP_466292 | Listeria monocytogenes 4bF2365<br>Listeria monocytogenes EGD-e |
| Msp 0551 | Putative RNase III | 930 | NP_078232 | Ureaplasma parvum serovar 3 strain ATCC 700970 |
| Msp 0580 | Predicted glutamine amidotransferase | 723 | AAO 35160<br>NP_621720 | Clostridium tetani E88<br>Thermoanaerobacter tengcongensis MB4 |
| Msp 0591 | Predicted carbonic anhydrase | 468 | AAT 41924<br>YP_113395 | Fremyella diplosiphon<br>Methylococcus capsulatus Bath |
| Msp 0688 | Putative secreted RNase barnase | 450 | AAB 29635<br>YP_080806 | Bacillus circulans<br>Bacillus licheniformis ATCC 14580 |
| Msp 0697 | Predicted methyladenine glycosylase | 555 | CAB 44429<br>YP_053518 | Bifidobacterium-longum biovar Longum<br>Mesoplasma florum L1 |
| Msp 0700 | Predicted phosphatase | 609 | CAH 06545<br>AAO 79289 | Bacteroides fragilis NCTC 9343<br>Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron VPI-5482 |
| Msp 0760 | Predicted penicillin V acylase, cholyglycine hydrolase family | 981 | AAP 20760<br>NP_465591 | Enterococcus faecium<br>Listeria monocytogenes EGD-e |
| Msp 0764 | Predicted nicotinate phosphoribosyltransferase | 1,416 | CAB 65409<br>AAH 89296 | Subteris domuncula (E)<br>Xenopus laevis (E) |
| Msp 0781 | D-Tyrosyl-tRNA(Tyr) deacylase (EC 3.1.-.-) | 447 | AAL 94553 | Fusobacterium nucleatum subsp. nucleatum ATCC 25586 |
| Msp 0797 | Predicted nitroreductase | 558 | AAL 95419 | Fusobacterium nucleatum subsp. nucleatum ATCC 25586 |
| Msp 0837 | Predicted glutamylcysteine synthetase | 1,413 | ZP_00404497<br>AAN 59602 | Streptococcus pneumoniae TIGR4<br>Streptococcus mutans UA159 |
| Msp 1165 | Predicted hydrolase | 891 | AAB 68787<br>NP_952175 | Fervidobacterium islandicum<br>Geobacter sulfurreducens PCA |

<sup>a</sup> All CDS of *M. stadtmanae* encoding more than 100 amino acids were compared by BLAST analysis with all CDS of the genomes of all other archaea sequenced so far (<e^-20>). CDS without BLAST hits in this group were compared with the NCBI protein database (<e^-20>) (ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/blast/db/nr.tar.gz). All CDS with significant hits in this database are listed.

<sup>b</sup> Additional conserved hypothetical proteins are encoded by Msp 0219, Msp 0332, Msp 0419, Msp 0421, Msp 0465, Msp 0467, Msp 0468, Msp 0469, Msp 0529, Msp 0530, Msp 0534, Msp 0679, Msp 0681, Msp 0734, Msp 0803, Msp 0845, Msp 0941, Msp 1113, Msp 1235, Msp 1344, Msp 1385, Msp 1474, Msp 1489, and Msp 1555.

<sup>c</sup> E, eukaryote.

a)

| N- | Leader | TM- | Variable repetitive peptide sequences, | Conserved sequence pattern, |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | helix | with rather CDS-specific composition | within repetitive peptides |
| 3-8 aa | 18-21 aa | ~100 aa | ~100 aa |
|  |  | (repetitive peptides) | (repetitive peptides) |

b)


N- [ ] -C
N- [ ] -C
N- [ ] -C


Typically:  
MKNK

Consensus:  
[K/R]xxxKxNGRT

FIG. 4. Schematic representation of the 37 putative proteins encoded by the group of large CDS with a repetitive structure in *M. stadtmanae*.  
(a) General composition shared by all proteins of this group, including an N-terminal leader sequence (yellow) followed by a predicted transmembrane (TM) helix (blue) and by a variable number of repeated peptide sequences (green and red).  
(b) Schematic composition of the three largest proteins of this group (Msp0762 protein, 3,357 amino acids [aa]; Msp0568 protein, 2,980 aa; Msp0597 protein, 2,469 aa). Two of these, the Msp0568 and Msp0597 proteins, are unique to *M. stadtmanae*; only the Msp0762 protein exhibits homology to bacterial proteins (Table 4). The short leader sequence is Lys and Asn rich, typically having the form MKNK. At least one copy of a short sequence motif is found at the C terminus of all proteins in this group [G(K/R)XXXKXNGRT]. Sequence variations of repetitive peptide sequences are indicated by green. Repetitive peptides of different large CDS do not necessarily have the same sequence.

nome contains one CDS encoding a predicted protein composed of 91 amino acids with 14 tandem repeats having the form Asn-Asn-Ser-Ser (Msp0474).

(ii) CDS involved in bacterial surface antigen biosynthesis. The genome of *M. stadtmanae* codes for 38 putative glycosyltransferases involved in the biosynthesis of glycosylated cell wall components. Among these glycosyltransferases are 11 proteins that exhibit high levels of homology to bacterial enzymes predicted to be involved in surface antigen biosynthesis. Furthermore, a predicted UDP-N-acetylmuramyl tripeptide synthase (Msp0581) and a putative poly(gamma-glutamate) biosynthesis protein involved in capsule formation in *Bacillus* species (Msp0921) indicate that many CDS identified as specific for *M. stadtmanae* among archaea have functions in the biosynthesis of glycosylated cell wall components. These components could represent an adaptation of this organism to the immunologically highly active intestinal growth habitat. The cell wall of *M. stadtmanae* is composed of pseudomurein as the major polymer. The pseudomurein appears to be unique with respect to the presence of serine. An S-layer was not found (42).

(iii) CDS for restriction-modification systems. Quite unusual for archaea, the genome of *M. stadtmanae* harbors CDS for three putative subunits of a type III restriction-modification system (Msp0470, Msp0472, and Msp0473), which are widely distributed among bacteria, and two additional putative subunits of a type I R-M system (Msp0454 and Msp0480). The function of the R-M systems is to protect the organism from nonhost DNA. Additionally, an effect of DNA methylation on gene regulation in bacterial pathogens has been established (41).

Conclusion. Analysis of the genome of *M. stadtmanae* in relation to the well-studied physiology and biochemistry of this organism allowed us to correlate the genotype with the phenotype of this methanogenic archaeon. Thus, the genetic data can explain why *M. stadtmanae* is restricted to H₂ and methanol as energy sources and is dependent on acetate as a carbon source. Both the CDS found and the CDS not found compared to other methanogenic archaea helped to identify the proteins involved in methanol reduction to methane with H₂, to predict how these proteins topologically interact, and to locate the site of energy conservation in subunit B of the HdrABC complex. For methanogens without cytochromes this has not been possible previously. In this respect our decision to determine the genome sequence of *M. stadtmanae* was rewarding. However, this was also true in other respects. The genome of the organism was found to harbor a number of CDS not present in the genome of any other archaeon sequenced so far. Many of these CDS are predicted to be involved in cell surface antigen synthesis. It is tempting to speculate that specific components of the archaeal cell wall are part of the adaptation of *M. stadtmanae* to its special habitat, the human large intestine. Lateral gene transfer between this archaeon and bacteria could be involved, as has been suggested for *M. mazei* and bacteria for another habitat (15). Such adaptations could result in phenotypic variability due to expression and glycosylation of special cell wall components. Similar mechanisms have been found in pathogenic bacteria that use them to avoid the human innate immune response. Large, tandem repeating units of surface proteins have been identified in group B streptococci and other gram-negative pathogens (61, 69). In the gram-negative bacterial pathogen *Anaplasma marginale* variation of cell wall struct-

tures is achieved by recombinatorial gene conversions between whole pseudogenes and between small segments within these genes (6). In analogy to *A. marginale*, short repetitive sequences within the large CDS of the *M. stadtmanae* genome could serve as homologous sites for segmental recombination. In *M. stadtmanae* proteins analogous to enzymes for the biosynthesis of cell wall components in gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria could serve as the machinery to glycosylate proteins encoded by the group of large CDS.

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Max Planck Society and by the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie (grants to R.K.T.) and by a grant from the Niedersächsisches Ministerium für Wissenschaft und Kultur (to G.G.).

We thank Rainer Merkl, Universität Regensburg, for providing the SIGI tool and for advice about using it and Mechthild Pohlschröder, University of Pennsylvania, for providing the TATFIND 1.2 search program.

# REFERENCES

1. Altschul, S. F., W. Gish, W. Miller, E. W. Myers, and D. J. Lipman. 1990. Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol. 215:403–410.
2. Backhed, F., R. E. Ley, J. L. Sonnenburg, D. A. Peterson, and J. I. Gordon. 2005. Host-bacterial mutualism in the human intestine. Science 307:1915–1920.
3. Baliga, N. S., R. Bonneau, M. T. Facciotti, M. Pan, G. Glusman, E. W. Deutsch, P. Shannon, Y. L. Chiu, R. R. Gan, P. L. Hung, S. V. Date, E. Marcotte, L. Hood, and W. V. Ng. 2004. Genome sequence of *Haloarcula marismortui*: a halophilic archaeon from the Dead Sea. Genome Res. 14:2221–2234.
4. Bank, S., B. Yan, and T. L. Miller. 1996. Solid C<sup>13</sup> CPMAS NMR spectroscopy studies of biosynthesis in whole cells of *Methanosphaera stadtmanae*. Solid State Nucl. Mag. Reson. 7:253–261.
5. Bott, M. H., B. Eikmanns, and R. K. Thauer. 1985. Defective formation and/or utilization of carbon-monoxide in H<sub>2</sub>Co<sub>2</sub> fermenting methanogens dependent on acetate as carbon source. Arch. Microbiol. 143:266–269.
6. Brayton, K. A., G. H. Palmer, A. Lundgren, J. Yi, and A. F. Barbet. 2002. Antigenic variation of *Anaplasma marginale* msp2 occurs by combinatorial gene conversion. Mol. Microbiol. 43:1151–1159.
7. Brioukhanov, A., A. Netrusov, M. Sordel, R. K. Thauer, and S. Shima. 2000. Protection of *Methanosarcina barkeri* against oxidative stress: identification and characterization of an iron superoxide dismutase. Arch. Microbiol. 174:213–216.
8. Buchenau, B., and R. K. Thauer. 2004. Tetrahydrofolate-specific enzymes in *Methanosarcina barkeri* and growth dependence of this methanogenic archaeon on folic acid or p-aminobenzoic acid. Arch. Microbiol. 182:313–325.
9. Bult, C. J., O. White, G. J. Olsen, L. Zhou, R. D. Fleischmann, G. G. Sutton, J. A. Blake, L. M. FitzGerald, R. A. Clayton, J. D. Gocayne, A. R. Kerlavage, B. A. Dougherty, J. F. Tomb, M. D. Adams, C. I. Reich, R. Overbeek, E. F. Kirkness, K. G. Weinstock, J. M. Merrick, A. Glodek, J. L. Scott, N. S. M. Geoghagen, and J. C. Venter. 1996. Complete genome sequence of the methanogenic archaeon, *Methanococcus jannaschii*. Science 273:1058–1073.
10. Choquet, C. G., J. C. Richards, G. B. Patel, and G. D. Sprott. 1994. Purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis in methanogenic bacteria. Arch. Microbiol. 161:471–480.
11. Choquet, C. G., J. C. Richards, G. B. Patel, and G. D. Sprott. 1994. Ribose biosynthesis in methanogenic bacteria. Arch. Microbiol. 161:481–488.
12. Cohen, G. N., V. Barbe, D. Flament, M. Galperin, R. Heilig, O. Lecompte, O. Poch, D. Prieur, J. Querellou, R. Ripp, J. C. Thierry, J. Van der Oost, J. Weissenbach, Y. Zivanovic, and P. Forterre. 2003. An integrated analysis of the genome of the hyperthermophilic archaeon *Pyrococcus abyssi*. Mol. Microbiol. 47:1495–1512.
13. Daas, P. J. H., R. W. Wassenaar, P. Willemsen, R. J. Theunissen, J. T. Keltjens, C. vanderDrift, and G. D. Vogels. 1996. Purification and properties of an enzyme involved in the ATP-dependent activation of the methanol:2-mercaptoethanesulfonic acid methyltransferase reaction in *Methanosarcina barkeri*. J. Biol. Chem. 271:22339–22345.
14. Deppenmeier, U. 2004. The membrane-bound electron transport system of *Methanosarcina* species. J. Bioenerg. Biomembr. 36:55–64.
15. Deppenmeier, U., A. Johann, T. Hartsch, R. Merkl, R. A. Schmitz, R. Martinez-Arias, A. Henne, A. Wiezer, S. Baumer, C. Jacobi, H. Bruggemann, T. Lienard, A. Christmann, M. Bomeke, S. Steckel, A. Bhattacharya, A. Lykidis, R. Overbeek, H. P. Klenc, R. P. Gunsalus, H. J. Fritz, and G. Gottschalk. 2002. The genome of *Methanosarcina mazei*: evidence for lateral gene transfer between bacteria and archaea. J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 4:453–461.
16. Deppenmeier, U., T. Lienard, and G. Gottschalk. 1999. Novel reactions involved in energy conservation by methanogenic archaea. FEBS Lett. 457:291–297.
17. Deppenmeier, U., V. Müller, and G. Gottschalk. 1996. Pathways of energy conservation in methanogenic archaea. Arch. Microbiol. 165:149–163.
18. Dongowski, G., A. Lorenz, and H. Anger. 2000. Degradation of pectins with different degrees of esterification by *Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron* isolated from human gut flora. Appl. Environ Microbiol. 66:1321–1327.
19. Duin, E. C., C. Bauer, B. Jaun, and R. Hedderich. 2003. Coenzyme M binds to a [4Fe-4S] cluster in the active site of heterodisulfide reductase as deduced from EPR studies with the [33S]coenzyme M-treated enzyme. FEBS Lett. 538:81–84.
20. Eklund, H., U. Uhlin, M. Farnegårdh, D. T. Logan, and P. Nordlund. 2001. Structure and function of the radical enzyme ribonucleotide reductase. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 77:177–268.
21. Elias, D. A., D. F. Juck, K. A. Berry, and R. Sparling. 2000. Purification of the NADP<sup>+</sup>:F<sub>420</sub> oxidoreductase of *Methanosphaera stadtmanae*. Can. J. Microbiol. 46:998–1003.
22. Ermler, U., W. Grabarse, S. Shima, M. Goubeaud, and R. K. Thauer. 1997. Crystal structure of methyl coenzyme M reductase: the key enzyme of biological methane formation. Science 278:1457–1462.
23. Fischer, R., P. Gartner, A. Yeliseev, and R. K. Thauer. 1992. *N*<sub>5</sub>-Methyltetrahydromethanopterin-coenzyme-M methyltransferase in methanogenic archaebacteria is a membrane-protein. Arch. Microbiol. 158:208–217.
24. Fitz-Gibbon, S. T., H. Ladner, U. J. Kim, K. O. Stetter, M. I. Simon, and J. H. Miller. 2002. Genome sequence of the hyperthermophilic crenarchaeon *Pyrobaculum aerophilum*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99:984–989.
25. Florin, T. H. J., G. Zhu, K. M. Kirk, and N. G. Martin. 2000. Shared and unique environmental factors determine the ecology of methanogens in humans and rats. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 95:2872–2879.
26. Fütterer, O., A. Angelov, H. Liesegang, G. Gottschalk, C. Schleper, B. Schepers, C. Dock, G. Antranikian, and W. Liebl. 2004. Genome sequence of *Picrophilus torridus* and its implications for life around pH 0. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 101:9091–9096.
27. Galagan, J. E., C. Nusbaum, A. Roy, M. G. Endrizzi, P. Macdonald, W. FitzHugh, S. Calvo, R. Engels, S. Smirnov, D. Atwood, A. Brown, N. Allen, J. Naylor, N. Stange-Thomann, K. DeArellano, R. Johnson, L. Linton, P. McEwan, K. McKernan, J. Talamas, A. Tirrell, W. Ye, A. Zimmer, R. D. Barber, I. Cann, D. E. Graham, D. A. Grahame, A. M. Guss, R. Hedderich, C. Ingram-Smith, H. C. Kuettner, J. A. Krzycki, J. A. Leigh, W. Li, J. Liu, B. Mukhopadhyay, J. N. Reeve, K. Smith, T. A. Springer, L. A. Umeyam, O. White, R. H. White, E. Conway de Macario, J. G. Ferry, K. F. Jarrell, H. Jing, A. J. Macario, I. Paulsen, M. Pritchett, K. R. Sowers, R. V. Swanson, S. H. Zinder, E. Lander, W. W. Metcalf, and B. Birren. 2002. The genome of *M. acetivorans* reveals extensive metabolic and physiological diversity. Genome Res. 12:532–542.
28. Goenrich, M., R. K. Thauer, H. Yurimoto, and N. Kato. 2005. Formaldehyde activating enzyme (Fae) and hexulose-6-phosphate synthase (Hps) in *Methanosarcina barkeri*: a possible function in ribose-5-phosphate biosynthesis. Arch. Microbiol. 184:41–48.
29. Gottschalk, G., and R. K. Thauer. 2001. The Na<sup>+</sup>-translocating methyltransferase complex from methanogenic archaea. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1505:28–36.
30. Grabarse, W. G., F. Mahlert, S. Shima, R. K. Thauer, and U. Ermler. 2000. Comparison of three methyl-coenzyme M reductases from phylogenetically distant organisms: unusual amino acid modification, conservation and adaptation. J. Mol. Biol. 303:329–344.
31. Hamilton, P. T., and J. N. Reeve. 1985. Structure of genes and an insertion element in the methane producing archaebacterium *Methanobrevibacter smithii*. Mol. Gen. Genet. 200:47–59.
32. Harms, U., and R. K. Thauer. 1997. Identification of the active site histidine in the corrinoid protein MtrA of the energy-conserving methyltransferase complex from *Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum*. Eur. J. Biochem. 250:783–788.
33. Hedderich, R. 2004. Energy-converting [NiFe] hydrogenases from archaea and extremophiles: ancestors of complex I. J. Bioenerg. Biomembr. 36:65–75.
34. Hedderich, R., S. P. Albracht, D. Linder, J. Koch, and R. K. Thauer. 1992. Isolation and characterization of polyferredoxin from *Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum*. The *mvhB* gene product of the methylviologen-reducing hydrogenase operon. FEBS Lett. 298:65–68.
35. Hedderich, R., O. Klimmek, A. Kröger, R. Dirmeier, M. Keller, and K. O. Stetter. 1998. Anaerobic respiration with elemental sulfur and with disulfides. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 22:353–381.
36. Hedderich, R., J. Koch, D. Linder, and R. K. Thauer. 1994. The heterodisulfide reductase from *Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum* contains sequence motifs characteristic of pyridine nucleotide-dependent thioredoxin reductases. Eur. J. Biochem. 225:253–261.
37. Hellmer, J., R. Patzold, and C. Zeilinger. 2002. Identification of a pH regulated Na<sup>+</sup>/H<sup>+</sup> antiporter of *Methanococcus jannaschii*. FEBS Lett. 527:245–249.

38. Hendrickson, E. L., R. Kaul, Y. Zhou, D. Bovee, P. Chapman, J. Chung, E. Conway de Macario, J. A. Dodsworth, W. Gillett, D. E. Graham, M. Hackett, A. K. Haydock, A. Kang, M. L. Land, R. Levy, T. J. Lie, T. A. Major, B. C. Moore, I. Porat, A. Palmeiri, G. Rouse, C. Saenphimmachak, D. Soll, S. Van Dien, T. Wang, W. B. Whitman, Q. Xia, Y. Zhang, F. W. Larimer, M. V. Olson, and J. A. Leigh. 2004. Complete genome sequence of the genetically tractable hydrogenotrophic methanogen *Methanococcus maripaludis*. J. Bacteriol. **186**:6956–6969.

39. Hofmann, K., and W. Stoffel. 1993. TMbase—a database of membrane spanning protein segments. Biol Chem. Hoppe-Seyler **374**:166.

40. Jensen, N. S., and E. Canale-Parola. 1986. *Bacteroides pectinophilus* sp. nov. and *Bacteroides galacturonicus* sp. nov.: two pectinolytic bacteria from the human intestinal tract. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **52**:880–887.

41. Julio, S. M., D. M. Heithoff, D. Provenzano, K. E. Klose, R. L. Sinsheimer, D. A. Low, and M. J. Mahan. 2001. DNA adenine methylase is essential for viability and plays a role in the pathogenesis of *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis* and *Vibrio cholerae*. Infect. Immun. **69**:7610–7615.

42. Kandler, O., and H. König. 1998. Cell wall polymers in Archaea (Archaeabacteria). Cell. Mol. Life Sci. **54**:305–308.

43. Kawarabayasi, Y., Y. Hino, H. Horikawa, K. Jin-no, M. Takahashi, M. Sekine, S. Baba, A. Ankai, H. Kosugi, A. Hosoyama, S. Fukui, Y. Nagai, K. Nishijima, R. Otsuka, H. Nakazawa, M. Takamiya, Y. Kato, T. Yoshizawa, T. Tanaka, Y. Kudoh, J. Yamazaki, N. Kushida, A. Oguchi, K. Aoki, S. Masuda, M. Yanagii, M. Nishimura, A. Yamagishi, T. Oshima, and H. Kikuchi. 2001. Complete genome sequence of an aerobic thermoacidophilic crenarchaeon, *Sulfolobus tokodaii* strain 7. DNA Res. **8**:123–140.

44. Kawarabayasi, Y., Y. Hino, H. Horikawa, S. Yamazaki, Y. Haikawa, K. Jin-no, M. Takahashi, M. Sekine, S. Baba, A. Ankai, H. Kosugi, A. Hosoyama, S. Fukui, Y. Nagai, K. Nishijima, H. Nakazawa, M. Takamiya, S. Masuda, T. Funahashi, T. Tanaka, Y. Kudoh, J. Yamazaki, N. Kushida, A. Oguchi, H. Kikuchi, et al. 1999. Complete genome sequence of an aerobic hyper-thermophilic crenarcheon, *Aeropyrum pernix* K1. DNA Res. **6**:83–101.

45. Kawarabayasi, Y., M. Sawada, H. Horikawa, Y. Haikawa, Y. Hino, S. Yamamoto, M. Sekine, S. Baba, H. Kosugi, A. Hosoyama, Y. Nagai, M. Sakai, K. Ogura, R. Otsuka, H. Nakazawa, M. Takamiya, Y. Ohfuku, T. Funahashi, T. Tanaka, Y. Kudoh, J. Yamazaki, N. Kushida, A. Oguchi, K. Aoki, and H. Kikuchi. 1998. Complete sequence and gene organization of the genome of a hyper-thermophilic archaeabacterium, *Pyrococcus horikoshii* OT3. DNA Res. **5**:55–76.

46. Kawashima, T., N. Amano, H. Koike, S. Makino, S. Higuchi, Y. Kawashima-Ohya, K. Watanabe, M. Yamazaki, K. Kanehori, T. Kawamoto, T. Nunoshiba, Y. Yamamoto, H. Aramaki, K. Makino, and M. Suzuki. 2000. Archaeal adaptation to higher temperatures revealed by genomic sequence of *Thermoplasma volcanium*. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **97**:14257–14262.

47. Kezmarsky, N. D., H. Xu, D. E. Graham, and R. H. White. 2005. Identification and characterization of a L-tyrosine decarboxylase in *Methanocaldococcus jannaschii*. Biochim. Biophys. Acta **1722**:175–182.

48. Klenc, H. P., R. A. Clayton, J. F. Tomb, O. White, K. E. Nelson, K. A. Ketchum, R. J. Dodson, M. Gwinn, E. K. Hickey, J. D. Peterson, D. L. Richardson, A. R. Kerlavage, D. E. Graham, N. C. Kyrpides, R. D. Fleischmann, J. Quackenbush, N. H. Lee, G. G. Sutton, S. Gill, E. F. Kirkness, B. A. Dougherty, K. McKenney, M. D. Adams, B. Loftus, and J. C. Venter. 1997. The complete genome sequence of the hyperthermophilic, sulphate-reducing archaeon *Archaeoglobus fulgidus*. Nature **390**:364–370.

49. Krüer, M. 2003. Methanol:Coenzym-M-Methyltransferase: Zum Mechanismus der Substrativierung und zur Funktion in *Methanosphaera stadtmaniae*. Ph.D dissertation. Philipps-Universität, Marburg, Germany.

50. Lemos, R. S., C. M. Gomes, and M. Teixeira. 2001. *Acidianus ambivalens* complex II typifies a novel family of succinate dehydrogenases. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. **281**:141–150.

51. Lin, Z., and R. Sparling. 1995. Oxidation-reduction of methanol, formaldehyde, serine, and formate in *Methanosphaera stadtmaniae* using C<sup>14</sup> short-term and long-term labeling. Can. J. Microbiol. **41**:1048–1053.

52. Lin, Z. S., and R. Sparling. 1998. Investigation of serine hydroxymethyltransferase in methanogens. Can. J. Microbiol. **44**:652–656.

53. Logan, D. T., E. Mulliez, K. M. Larsson, S. Bodevin, M. Atta, P. E. Garnaud, B. M. Sjöberg, and M. Fontecave. 2003. A metal-binding site in the catalytic subunit of anaerobic ribonucleotide reductase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **100**:3826–3831.

54. Lyon, E. J., S. Shima, G. Buurman, S. Chowdhuri, A. Batschauer, K. Steinbach, and R. K. Thauer. 2004. UV-A/blue-light inactivation of the ‘metal-free’ hydrogenase (Hmd) from methanogenic archaea. Eur. J. Biochem. **271**:195–204.

55. MacDonald, T. T., and G. Monteleone. 2005. Immunity, inflammation, and allergy in the gut. Science **307**:1920–1925.

56. Madadi-Kahkesh, S., E. C. Duin, S. Heim, S. P. Albracht, M. K. Johnson, and R. Hedderich. 2001. A paramagnetic species with unique EPR characteristics in the active site of heterodisulfide reductase from methanogenic archaea. Eur. J. Biochem. **268**:2566–2577.

57. Marchler-Bauer, A., and S. H. Bryant. 2004. CD-Search: protein domain annotations on the fly. Nucleic Acids Res. **32**:W327–W331.

58. Mazmanian, S. K., C. H. Liu, A. O. Tzianabos, and D. L. Kasper. 2005. An immunomodulatory molecule of symbiotic bacteria directs maturation of the host immune system. Cell **122**:107–118.

59. Merkl, R. 2004. SIGI: score-based identification of genomic islands. BMC Bioinformatics **5**:22.

60. Meuer, J., H. C. Kuettner, J. K. Zhang, R. Hedderich, and W. W. Metcalf. 2002. Genetic analysis of the archaeon *Methanosarcina barkeri* Fusaro reveals a central role for Ech hydrogenase and ferredoxin in methanogenesis and carbon fixation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **99**:5632–5637.

61. Michel, J. L., L. C. Madoff, K. Olson, D. E. Kling, D. L. Kasper, and F. M. Ausubel. 1992. Large, identical, tandem repeating units in the C protein alpha antigen gene, *bca*, of group B streptococci. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **89**:10060–10064.

62. Miller, T. L., X. Chen, B. Yan, and S. Bank. 1995. Solution <sup>13</sup>C nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopic analysis of the amino acids of *Methanosphaera stadtmaniae*: biosynthesis and origin of one-carbon units from acetate and carbon dioxide. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **61**:1180–1186.

63. Miller, T. L., and C. Z. Lin. 2002. Description of *Methanobrevibacter gottschalkii* sp. nov., *Methanobrevibacter thaueri* sp. nov., *Methanobrevibacter woesei* sp. nov. and *Methanobrevibacter wolinii* sp. nov. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. **52**:819–822.

64. Miller, T. L., and M. J. Wolin. 1985. *Methanosphaera stadtmaniae* gen. nov., sp. nov.—a species that forms methane by reducing methanol with hydrogen. Arch. Microbiol. **141**:116–122.

65. Miller, T. L., and M. J. Wolin. 1983. Oxidation of hydrogen and reduction of methanol to methane is the sole energy source for a methanogen isolated from human feces. J. Bacteriol. **153**:1051–1055.

66. Miller, T. L., M. J. Wolin, E. C. Demacario, and A. J. L. Macario. 1982. Isolation of *Methanobrevibacter smithii* from human feces. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **43**:227–232.

67. Müller, V. 2004. An exceptional variability in the motor of archael A1A0 ATPases: from multimeric to monomeric rotors comprising 6–13 ion binding sites. J. Bioenerg. Biomembr. **36**:115–125.

68. Müller, V., M. Blaut, and G. Gottschalk. 1986. Utilization of methanol plus hydrogen by *Methanosarcina barkeri* for methanogenesis and growth. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. **52**:269–274.

69. Navarre, W. W., and O. Schneewind. 1999. Surface proteins of gram-positive bacteria and mechanisms of their targeting to the cell wall envelope. Microbiol. Mol. Biol Rev. **63**:174–229.

70. Ng, W. V., S. P. Kennedy, G. G. Mahairas, B. Berquist, M. Pan, H. D. Shukla, S. R. Lasky, N. S. Baliga, V. Thorsson, J. Sbrogna, S. Swartzell, D. Weir, J. Hall, T. A. Dahl, R. Welti, Y. A. Goo, B. Leithauser, K. Keller, R. Cruz, M. J. Danson, D. W. Hough, D. G. Maddocks, P. E. Jablonski, M. P. Krebs, C. M. Angevine, H. Dale, T. A. Isenbarger, R. F. Peck, M. Pohlschroder, J. L. Spudich, K. W. Jung, M. Alam, T. Freitas, S. Hou, C. J. Daniels, P. P. Dennis, A. D. Omer, H. Ebhardt, T. M. Lowe, P. Liang, M. Riley, L. Hood, and S. DasSarma. 2000. Genome sequence of *Halobacterium* species NRC-1. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **97**:12176–12181.

71. Pfaltz, A., A. Kobelt, R. Hüster, and R. K. Thauer. 1987. Biosynthesis of coenzyme F430 in methanogenic bacteria. Identification of 15,17<sup>3</sup>-seco-F430-17<sup>3</sup>-acid as an intermediate. Eur. J. Biochem. **170**:459–467.

72. Pomper, B. K., O. Saurel, A. Milon, and J. A. Vorholt. 2002. Generation of formate by the formyltransferase/hydrolase complex (Fhc) from *Methylobacterium extorquens* AM1. FEBS Lett. **523**:133–137.

73. Pritchett, M. A., and W. W. Metcalf. 2005. Genetic, physiological and biochemical characterization of multiple methanol methyltransferase isozymes in *Methanosarcina acetivorans* C2A. Mol. Microbiol. **56**:1183–1194.

74. Reeve, J. N., G. S. Beckler, D. S. Cram, P. T. Hamilton, J. W. Brown, J. A. Krzycki, A. F. Kolodziej, L. Alex, W. H. Orme-Johnson, and C. T. Walsh. 1989. A hydrogenase-linked gene in *Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum* strain ΔH encodes a polyferredoxin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA **86**:3031–3035.

75. Reiß, R. 2002. Zum Verständnis des Energiestoffwechsels von *Methanosphaera stadtmaniae*: Reinigung und biochemische Charakterisierung von Heterodisulfid-Reduktase und Hydrogenase. Diploma thesis. Phillips-Universität, Marburg, Germany.

76. Robb, F. T., D. L. Maeder, J. R. Brown, J. DiRuggiero, M. D. Stump, R. K. Yeh, R. B. Weiss, and D. M. Dunn. 2001. Genomic sequence of a hyperthermophile, *Pyrococcus furiosus*: implications for physiology and enzymology. Methods Enzymol. **330**:134–157.

77. Ruepp, A., W. Graml, M. L. Santos-Martinez, K. K. Koretle, C. Volker, H. W. Mewes, D. Frishman, S. Stocker, A. N. Lupas, and W. Baumeister. 2000. The genome sequence of the thermoacidophilic scavenger *Thermoplasma acidophilum*. Nature **407**:508–513.

78. Sauer, K., and R. K. Thauer. 1999. Methanol:coenzyme M methyltransferase from *Methanosarcina barkeri*—substitution of the corrinoid harbouring subunit MtaC by free cob(I)alamin. Eur. J. Biochem. **261**:674–681.

79. Sauer, K., and R. K. Thauer. 1999. The role of corrinoids in methanogenesis, p. 655–679. In R. Banerjee (ed.), Chemistry and biochemistry of B<sub>12</sub>. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, N.Y.

80. Schwörer, B., and R. K. Thauer. 1991. Activities of formylmethanofuran

dehydrogenase, methylenetetrahydromethanopterin dehydrogenase, methylenetetrahydromethanopterin reductase, and heterodisulfide reductase in methanogenic bacteria. Arch. Microbiol. 155:459–465.

81. Seedorf, H., A. Dreisbach, R. Hedderich, S. Shima, and R. K. Thauer. 2004. F<sub>420</sub>H<sub>2</sub> oxidase (FprA) from *Methanobrevibacter arboriphilus*, a coenzyme F<sub>420</sub>-dependent enzyme involved in O<sub>2</sub> detoxification. Arch. Microbiol. 182:126–137.

82. Setzke, E., R. Hedderich, S. Heiden, and R. K. Thauer. 1994. H<sub>2</sub>:heterodisulfide oxidoreductase complex from *Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum*: composition and properties. Eur. J. Biochem. 220:139–148.

83. She, Q., R. K. Singh, F. Confalonieri, Y. Zivanovic, G. Allard, M. J. Awayez, C. C. Y. Chan-Weiher, I. G. Clausen, B. A. Curtis, A. De Moors, G. Erauso, C. Fletcher, P. M. K. Gordon, I. Heikamp-de Jong, A. C. Jeffries, C. J. Kozera, N. Medina, X. Peng, H. P. Thi-Ngoc, P. Redder, M. E. Schenk, C. Theriault, N. Tolstrup, R. L. Charlebois, W. F. Doolittle, M. Duguet, T. Gaasterland, R. A. Garrett, M. A. Ragan, C. W. Sensen, and J. Van der Oost. 2001. The complete genome of the crenarchaeon *Sulfolobus solfataricus* P2. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98:7835–7840.

84. Shima, S., M. Sordel-Klippert, A. Brioukhhanov, A. Netrusov, D. Linder, and R. K. Thauer. 2001. Characterization of a heme-dependent catalase from *Methanobrevibacter arboriphilus*. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67:3041–3045.

85. Slesarev, A. I., K. V. Mezhevaya, K. S. Makarova, N. N. Polushin, O. V. Shcherbinina, V. V. Shakhova, G. I. Belova, L. Aravind, D. A. Natale, I. B. Rogozin, R. L. Tatusov, Y. I. Wolf, K. O. Stetter, A. G. Malykh, E. V. Koonin, and S. A. Kozyavkin. 2002. The complete genome of hyperthermophile *Methanopyrus kandleri* AV19 and monophyly of archaeal methanogens. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99:4644–4649.

86. Smith, D. R., L. A. Doucette-Stamm, C. Deloughery, H. Lee, J. Dubois, T. Aldredge, R. Bashirzadeh, D. Blakely, R. Cook, K. Gilbert, D. Harrison, L. Hoang, P. Keagle, W. Lumm, B. Pothier, D. Qiu, R. Spadafora, R. Vicaire, Y. Wang, J. Wierzbowski, R. Gibson, N. Jiwani, A. Caruso, D. Bush, and J. N. Reeve. 1997. Complete genome sequence of *Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum* ΔH: functional analysis and comparative genomics. J. Bacteriol. 179:7135–7155.

87. Sparling, R., M. Blaut, and G. Gottschalk. 1993. Bioenergetic studies of *Methanosphaera stadtmanae*, an obligate H<sub>2</sub>-methanol utilizing methanogen. Can. J. Microbiol. 39:742–748.

88. Sparling, R., L. T. Holth, and Z. S. Lin. 1993. Sodium-ion dependent active-transport of leucine in *Methanosphaera stadtmanae*. Can. J. Microbiol. 39:749–753.

89. Sprott, G. D., J. R. Brisson, C. J. Dicaire, A. K. Pelletier, L. A. Deschatelets, L. Krishnan, and G. B. Patel. 1999. A structural comparison of the total polar lipids from the human archaea *Methanobrevibacter smithii* and Meth

90. Staden, R., K. F. Beal, and J. K. Bonfield. 2000. The Staden package, 1998. Methods Mol. Biol 132:115–130.

91. Stojanovic, A., and R. Hedderich. 2004. CO<sub>2</sub> reduction to the level of formylmethanofuran in *Methanosarcina barkeri* is non-energy driven when CO is the electron donor. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 235:163–167.

92. Stojanovic, A., G. J. Mander, E. C. Duin, and R. Hedderich. 2003. Physiological role of the F<sub>420</sub>-non-reducing hydrogenase (Mvh) from *Methanothermobacter marburgensis*. Arch. Microbiol. 180:194–203.

93. Tech, M., and R. Merkl. 2003. YACOP: enhanced gene prediction obtained by a combination of existing methods. In Silico Biol. 3:441–451.

94. Tersteegen, A., D. Linder, R. K. Thauer, and R. Hedderich. 1997. Structures and functions of four anabolic 2-oxoacid oxidoreductases in *Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum*. Eur. J. Biochem. 244:862–868.

95. Thauer, R. K. 1998. Biochemistry of methanogenesis: a tribute to Marjory Stephenson. Microbiology 144:2377–2406.

96. Thauer, R. K., K. Jungermann, and K. Decker. 1977. Energy conservation in chemotrophic anaerobic bacteria. Bacteriol. Rev. 41:100–180.

97. Tietze, M., A. Beuchle, I. Lamla, N. Orth, M. Dehler, G. Greiner, and U. Beifuss. 2003. Redox potentials of methanophenazine and CoB-S-S-CoM, factors involved in electron transport in methanogenic archaea. Chembiochem 4:333–335.

98. van de Wijngaard, W. M., J. Creemers, G. D. Vogels, and C. van der Drift. 1991. Methanogenic pathways in *Methanosphaera stadtmanae*. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 64:207–211.

99. Vorholt, J. A., M. Vaupel, and R. K. Thauer. 1997. A selenium-dependent and a selenium-independent formylmethanofuran dehydrogenase and their transcriptional regulation in the hyperthermophilic *Methanopyrus kandleri*. Mol. Microbiol. 23:1033–1042.

100. Welander, P. V., and W. W. Metcalf. 2005. Loss of the *mtr* operon in *Methanosarcina* blocks growth on methanol, but not methanogenesis, and reveals an unknown methanogenic pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102:10664–10669.

101. Wennerhold, J. 2004. Heterodisulfid-Reduktasen des *Methanothermobacter*-Typs in *Methanosarcina barkeri* und Untersuchungen zur Rolle des H<sub>2</sub>:Heterodisulfid-Oxidoreduktase-Komplex bei der Energiekonservierung in *Methanothermobacter marburgensis*. Diploma thesis. Philipps-Universität, Marburg, Germany.

102. Wolfe, R. S. 1996. 1776–1996: Alessandro Volta’s combustible air. 220 years after Volta’s experiments, the microbial formation of methane approaches an understanding. ASM News 62:529–534.

103. Wong, D., Z. S. Lin, D. F. Juck, K. A. Terrick, and R. Sparling. 1994. Electron-transfer reactions for the reduction of NADP<sup>+</sup> in *Methanosphaera stadtmanae*. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 120:285–290.
