
Archives of Medical Research 37 (2006) 234–243

**REVIEW ARTICLE**

**The Cytoskeleton of Entamoeba histolytica: Structure, Function, and Regulation by Signaling Pathways**

Isaura Meza,$^{a}$ Patricia Talamás-Rohana,$^{b}$ and Miguel A. Vargas$^{a}$

$^{a}$Departamentos de Biomedicina Molecular and $^{b}$Patología Experimental, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del IPN, México D.F., México

Received for publication September 23, 2005; accepted September 26, 2005 (ARCMED-D-05-00387).

Pathogenesis in the parasite *Entamoeba histolytica* has been related to motility of the trophozoites. Motility is an important feature in amebas as they perform multiple motile functions during invasion of host tissues. As motility depends on the organization and regulation of the cytoskeleton elements, in particular of the actin cytoskeleton, the study of the molecular components of the machinery responsible for movement has been a key aspect to study in this parasite. Although many of the components have high homology in amino acid sequence and function to those characterized in higher eukaryotic cells, there are important differences to suggest that parasitic organisms may have developed adaptive differences that could be useful as targets to stop invasion. The purpose of this review is to evaluate current knowledge about the cytoskeleton of *E. histolytica* and the ways in which the parasite controls motility. © 2006 IMSS. Published by Elsevier Inc.

Key Words: *Entamoeba histolytica*, Cytoskeleton, Cell signaling, Motility, Invasion.

---

### Introduction

A striking feature of *Entamoeba histolytica* trophozoites is their high motility manifested by fast locomotion, pleiomorphism, and continuous movement of intracellular components. In culture, amebas form surface projections that allow pinocytosis, phagocytosis, adhesion, and displacement. During infection of the human host, motility is thought to be a main determinant for the invasive behavior of trophozoites, as they become avid phagocytes ingesting damaged cells, extracellular matrix, and erythrocytes. Responses to chemotactic cues are thought to induce directed migration and tissue penetration.

The intense motility of amebas would require a very dynamic cytoskeleton making difficult the visualization of cytoskeletal polymers. It was only after introduction of modified microscopic techniques and specific markers, such as fluorescent compounds and antibodies directed to cytoskeleton proteins, that identification of filaments corresponding to actin polymers and nuclear microtubules in cultured trophozoites was achieved. Molecular approaches allowed identification of genes encoding several cytoskeletal proteins and the inference of their amino acid sequences and functional domains. These advances, together with elucidation of signaling pathways that regulate actin turnover and interactions and the use of specific drugs to block cytoskeleton functions, have provided important but still incomplete information about amebic functions in which the cytoskeleton could play a role. Monitoring cytoskeletal rearrangements occurring during cellular activities still represents a technical challenge and there is much to explore about the mechanisms that induce and regulate motility in the parasite. As motility has been implicated in pathogenicity, it will be very important to discern how the machinery for cell movement supports survival of the parasite as commensal in the human host but, at the same time, permits cell and tissue damage during invasion.

#### Actin

Actin was first identified in trophozoites by immunostaining utilizing heterologous antibodies prepared against human and rabbit muscle actins (1,2). Expression of the protein was confirmed when a protein with similar molecular and functional characteristics to typical actins was

Address reprint requests to: Dr. Isaura Meza, Departamento de Biomedicina Molecular, Cinvestav-IPN, Apartado 14-740, México, D.F., 07360, Mexico; E-mail: imeza@cinvestav.mx

0188-4409/06 $—see front matter. Copyright © 2006 IMSS. Published by Elsevier Inc.
doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2005.09.008

purified from trophozoites. Amebic actin showed the capacity to form filaments *in vitro* that could be decorated with heavy meromyosin and to induce myosin ATPase activity with similar kinetics to that induced by rabbit skeletal muscle actin (3). Although this actin did not bind to DNase I or polymerized at low temperature as other actins do (3,4), antibodies to the purified protein recognized actin from several eukaryotes, including other protozoa, suggesting a certain degree of homology between species and its possible involvement in cell motility (5,6). Availability of a specific marker for polymerized actin (rhodamine phalloidin) allowed localization and quantification of polymerized actin in phagocytic cups of trophozoites formed during the process of ingestion of complete erythrocytes and after stimulation with erythrocyte-derived liposomes (7,8). At the same time, polymerized actin was identified in pinocytic invaginations, the uroid in the posterior part of the cell, and in the cortical region of cultured trophozoites (9,10). A possible correlation between actin polymerization and phagocytosis, endocytosis and virulence was drawn from observations where the specific inhibitor of actin polymerization, cytochalasin D, blocked these processes and from mutants in phagocytosis that were hindered in their ability to cause cellular damage (11,12).

Later experiments showed that actin could be induced to organize transient but complex structures such as adhesion plates and focal adhesions that can function as signal transduction organelles when trophozoites interacted with and degraded extracellular matrix proteins (13,14). It was found that interaction with fibronectin activates trimeric G-protein receptor-coupled signaling pathways that promote actin polymerization and interaction with other proteins at specific sites to carry processes such as adhesion, secretion of proteases and directed locomotion. This cytoskeleton organization was stable as long as the inducer was present but easily reversed to the unorganized state once the stimulus was removed or the signaling pathways were blocked (15–18). Description of other signaling pathways recently identified in *E. histolytica* indicates that actin organization is regulated by a complex network of signals responding to different cues that could be promoting pathogenic behavior (18–21).

The first nucleotide sequence analyses of actin cDNA clones and a genomic clone in *Entamoeba histolytica* revealed multiple genomic copies of the actin gene and the absence of intervening sequences (22,23). The inferred actin sequence showed 89 and 86% amino acid homology to human cytoplasmic and skeletal muscle actins, respectively, but the nucleotide sequence homologies were significantly lower at 69 and 67%. Moreover, distribution of variable nucleotide residues throughout the sequence showed strong preference for the placement of an adenine or thymine residue in the third position of a codon (22). Discovery of this unusual codon usage for amebic actin that displays a greater degree of similarity to lower eukaryotic than to higher

eukaryotic codon usage was successfully utilized to pursue the identification and characterization of other genes of *E. histolytica*. It was also reported that actin mRNA transcription was controlled by the trophozoite growth conditions and presence of inducers of actin polymerization and its direct effect on actin organization (24).

Actin needs the concourse of other proteins to form the complex structures responsible for cellular movements. Organization of these structures is accomplished by interaction between actin and multiple actin-binding proteins of which some connect actin filaments into extensive networks that can bind to other proteins in the cytoplasm or to proteins and lipids in plasmatic and vesicular membranes, while others have a function in nucleation and stabilization/destabilization cycles of the actin polymers (25). In *E. histolytica* trophozoites several actin-binding proteins have been identified by their association with actin-containing structures or by their direct binding to monomeric and polymerized actin. In adhesion plates formed during interaction to extracellular matrix proteins actin filament bundles were found associated with the cell membrane. In addition to actin, actin-binding proteins such as vinculin, α-actinin, and myosins I and II were identified as components of the plates (14). These actin-binding proteins are known to participate in the organization of adhesive structures in higher eukaryotic cells (26). Two kinases were also identified as constituents of the adhesion plates, one was PKC, a serine/threonine kinase, and the other the specific kinase of adhesion plates called FAK<sup>125</sup> that phosphorylates tyrosines in several of the proteins associated with the plates (26). These two kinases were later identified as important elements in phosphorylation cascades that regulate reorganization of actin (15–17,27).

Cell locomotion requires dynamic turnover of actin for the extension of the cell leading edge, attachment to the surface, and pulling forward the cell body. Profilin is a protein that sequesters actin monomers and could then inhibit or promote actin polymerization in a precise site within the cell. Profilin, together with other proteins like cofilin and actin depolymerizing factor (ADF), both of which facilitate actin filament depolymerization, regulate actin turnover. Only profilin has been identified so far in *E. histolytica* trophozoites where two isoforms are expressed. In the basic isoform, only 4 of the 21 residues that make contact with actin are present. However, the recombinant protein was capable of binding to plant and mammalian actin (28). ABP-120, another actin-binding protein present in trophozoites, could be an important factor in the stabilization/destabilization of actin filaments necessary for assembly/disassembly of transient structures. *EhABP-120* has been localized at the sites where actin is concentrated during processes such as pseudopod extension and cap formation (29). The cloned *EhABP-120* gene is a single copy and codes for a protein of approximate molecular weight of 93.6 kDa. It has an actin-binding site and similarities to the family of

actin-binding proteins called filamins, which are regulated by phosphoinositides. The interaction of membrane lipids and actin-binding proteins forms a molecular bridge between the plasma membrane and the actin cytoskeleton and favors the recruitment of special types of lipids to form membrane domains or lipid rafts involved in functions such as intracellular traffic, apical sorting, regulation of membrane proteases, and signal transduction (30). EhABP-120 can interact with phosphatidic acid and with Gal-ceramide (31). Therefore, this protein could be a key element in functions relevant to the pathogenic behavior of trophozoites. One of the regulatory factors in the function of cytoskeletal proteins is the complex Ca/calmodulin. Calmodulin is a Ca²⁺ regulator in eukaryotic cells where it activates a diversity of proteins. Calmodulin is present in *E. histolytica* trophozoites where it has a role in several of the signaling pathways conducive to actin organization and promotion of motility functions, in particular secretion of proteinases (32–34). Two other Ca-binding proteins have recently been characterized, one of which interacts with actin filaments (35). Although these results suggest an important role of Ca-binding proteins in ameba motility, blocking expression of EhCaBP1 was shown to have a negative effect in unrelated functions such as cellular proliferation, endocytosis and phagocytosis that could result from secondary effects due to the wide range of proteins that depend on Ca²⁺ activation.

Myosins

Myosins are proteins that function as molecular motors being essential for cellular movement. Myosins move on actin filaments converting chemical energy into mechanical work by ATP hydrolysis, producing contraction of the filaments. In eukaryotic cells there are at least 18 different classes of myosins and specific functions have been assigned to only a few of them. In *Entamoeba histolytica*, only two myosins have been identified. Characterization of a myosin II heavy chain gene (Myo II) showed that the globular head domain contains the specific amino acid regions involved in ATP and actin binding, as well as the sites for interaction with myosin light chains. The tail domain is organized as an α-helical coiled coil structure interrupted by 2 prolines, indicating that the tail folds twice on itself as occurs in other myosins. In addition, this myosin amino acid sequence presented similarities in its phosphorylation sites with those found in the heavy chains of smooth and non-muscle vertebrate myosin II (36). Immunolocalization of myosin II in trophozoites indicated the highest density of the protein in the uroid and low density along the cell membranes and the frontal part of the cell, suggesting its participation in cell locomotion (37). Later, myosin II together with actin were reported as components of ligand-receptor complexes or caps formed in the surface of trophozoites (38). The use of cytochalasin D and of specific drugs to block kinases such as PKC and caseine kinase II, found as components of the caps, suggested that phosphorylated myosin II was involved in the capping and that this process could depend on actomyosin contraction. Overexpression of the light meromyosin domain of myosin II rendered a dominant negative mutant characterized by abnormal movement, failure to form the uroid and failure to induce capping in the presence of concanavalin A. These defective trophozoites were unable to achieve proper contact with target cells and did not show the subsequent cellular damage inflicted by control cells (39). Very recently, identification of Rho proteins in trophozoites and the use of inhibitors of Rho signaling to block actin-myosin interactions have provided additional evidence to support that contractility could be the driving force in several motile activities of trophozoites (40).

The other form of myosin partially characterized in trophozoites is myosin IB. This myosin form shows several similarities to other non-conventional myosins in higher eukaryotic cells (41). It was found that this myosin interacts with actin and α actinin and that it has the ATP or GTP binding site, a putative domain for interaction with calmodulin and a SH3 domain to mediate interaction with cell membranes. Overexpression of MyoIB indicated that this protein could be involved in phagocytosis, as a strain expressing three-fold more myosin IB than the wild-type strain was deficient in erythrocyte uptake, a characteristic feature of invasive trophozoites (42).

The availability of the *E. histolytica* genome data (TIGR Institute database at [http://www.tigr.org/tdb/e2k/ehal](http://www.tigr.org/tdb/e2k/ehal)) permitted identification of several putative genes for possible myosin light chains, important elements for myosin activity, but none of these has been identified in the parasite. Several kinases and phosphatases that in other cellular systems are known to activate or inhibit proteins that participate in the assembly of the complex machinery required for movement are also waiting for identification. At the moment, only through putative gene identification can we infer the possible ways in which actin and myosin functions are regulated. Experimental data are necessary to identify all the components and characterize their associations and requirements.

Tubulins

Cytoplasmic microtubules have not been observed in trophozoites of *E. histolytica*, in contrast with microtubules inside dividing nuclei that could be identified utilizing several microscopy techniques. The intranuclear mitotic spindle is formed by a bundle of microtubules that do not converge at the poles in well-defined asters, although what could be a single microtubule organizing center (MTOC) has been described in one of the poles in the nucleus of dividing cells (43). Gicquaud described for the first time in 1979 what could be considered the phases of mitosis in

E. histolytica trophozoites (44). Mitosis started with a prophase where several dense bodies, possibly chromosomes, and microtubules interacted, followed by a very fast movement of the chromosomes to the center and then to the poles of the nucleus that became elongated, followed by the formation of two separate nuclei. The latter, which are not typical phases of mitosis, could correspond to metaphase and anaphase. The nuclei formed remained together for some time and slowly became separated. In all stages the nuclear membrane was conserved intact. Phase contrast microscopy images have shown the high refingence of microtubule bundles inside dividing nuclei, and recent results obtained with antibodies to amebic β-tubulin depict microtubule-like structures in one of the two nuclei undergoing mitosis in a trophozoite (Figure 1). Furthermore, microtubules that could be present in the cytoplasm have not been revealed using antibodies to different types of tubulins, which only depict fluorescence in the nucleus (45,46).

By genetic approaches α, β, and γ tubulin encoding genes have been identified. E. histolytica α tubulin-deduced amino acid sequence showed approximately 50% identity to α tubulins from other protozoa and to human α tubulin (47). Alpha tubulin in amebas lacks a polyacidic motif in the C terminus that is involved in polymerization and binding to microtubule-associated (MAPS) proteins and a Tyr residue that participates in microtubule stabilization. These differences with other eukaryotic tubulins could explain variations in assembly of amebic microtubules and their apparent lability.

Beta tubulin encoding genes showed 54 and 58% identity to β tubulins from several organisms and apparently a single gene copy is present in E. histolytica and other Entamoeba species in contrast with α-tubulin genes that are present as several copies (47,48).

Gamma tubulin is the third type of major tubulins present in eukaryotic cells and it is exclusively associated with MTOC. Microscopy studies with trophozoites detected association of dense DNA-containing material with clusters of microtubules that could correspond to MTOC (43). The presence of a gene encoding for γ tubulin and the staining of a region in the central part of the nucleus with antibodies to recombinant γ tubulin strongly suggested that these organelles could be present in trophozoites. Additionally, it was shown that the maximum γ-tubulin expression was reached during the S/G2 phase of the parasite’s cellular cycle (49,50). Reduction of expression of γ tubulin in trophozoites by the use of RNAi techniques has shown disarray of the nuclear fluorescence detected by antibodies to amebic γ tubulin, supporting the possible disorganization of organelles required for chromosome separation (45).

Experiments with flow cytometry utilizing E. invadens and E. histolytica trophozoites have shown that DNA synthesis occurs in defined phases of the nuclear division cycle and that several rounds of genome duplication occur before cytokinesis takes place so it is plausible that well-defined

mechanisms control the cell cycle and nuclear division (51). However, trophozoites in culture, which can contain several nuclei, show asynchrony in the stages of mitosis, and it is also a well-known fact that cytokinesis, even when well advanced, can be halted, originating multinucleated cells. The low identity of amino acid sequences of amebic tubulins with other tubulins could explain the low response of microtubules to different drugs known to alter microtubule integrity in other eukaryotic cells (52,53). Differences in the amino acid sequences required for polymerization and stabilization of formed microtubules between amebas and other eukaryotic cells could be a factor in the high sensitivity of amebic microtubules to temperature and fixatives, making their visualization so difficult. A structural model of tubulin dimers proposed that the carboxyl terminals of amebic tubulins interfere with the linkage of the molecules and their polymerization (54). It will be important to perform biochemical studies focused on polymerization of the tubulins to validate these possibilities.

From the above data it is easy to conclude that microtubule functions are also poorly defined in E. histolytica trophozoites, in addition to their participation in mitosis. This is an area that needs to be explored, particularly when microtubules are described nowadays as important elements in adhesive, secretory and endocytic activities in many cells.

The third major element in the cytoskeleton of eukaryotic cells, intermediate filaments, has not been described in trophozoites. As these types of filaments are more stable and contribute to cell rigidity, it is possible that in a cell as highly motile as E. histolytica these organelles do not form and, therefore, the proteins that constitute them are not expressed. This possibility will have to be proven not only searching for the corresponding genes but also by detecting the proteins.

Cell Signaling

E. histolytica, either as a commensal or as an invasive cell, requires constant interaction with its extracellular environment and with other cells to survive. These interactions lead to changes in cell physiology, cellular architecture, and gene expression. External signals are perceived by membrane-bound receptors, resulting in changes in their biochemical or physical states that initiate a cascade of signaling events within the cell (55). One of the main functions of the cytoskeleton is to mediate cell motility and cell shape in response to extracellular stimuli. Organization and function of the cytoskeleton are regulated by signaling cascades (56).

Activation by different stimuli induce trophozoites to perform specialized functions that include adhesion, pinocytosis, phagocytosis, chemotaxis, capping, secretion, and cytokinesis (18,57). For all these biological functions,

Adhesion
Actin, myosin II, receptors to FN, collagen, Galactose, GalNAc, lectin, myosin I, vinculin, α-actinin, PKC, pp125FAK, KERP1

Phagocytosis
Receptors, Actin, myosin IB, myosin II, EhRho and EhRac, signaling components, EhABP120, EhPAK, V-ATPase, phosphatases

Endocytosis
Actin, myosin IB, EhRabs, V-ATPase, PI(3)K

Locomotion and Chemotaxis
Actin, myosin II, profilin Ca/caM and Ca2+ - binding proteins, EhPAK, EhABP-120, EhCaBP1, PI(3)K, ECM proteins

Capping
Actin, myosin II, EhRho, signaling MLCK, Tyr Kinases, EhABP-120, EhRacG, EhGEF1

Secretion
CaM, Actin, MAPK, cysteine proteinases

Mitosis
Tubulin α, β, γ

Cytokinesis
CaM, myosin II, actin, EhRac

Figure 1. Proteins in *E. histolytica* identified as possible participants in motility-related functions. Photographs on the left side show rhodamine-phalloidin staining of trophozoite actin adhesion plates (adhesion), polymerized actin during chemotaxis, and actin filaments during cytokinesis. Anti-β tubulin staining depicts microtubules in dividing nuclei (mitosis). Anti-ConA staining reveals a well-formed cap (capping). Endocytosis is illustrated in a trophozoite ingesting two-color fluorescently labeled fluid-phase markers. Secretion is shown in a transmission electron microscopy image of secreted collagenase-containing granules, seen outside the ameba surface on the collagen substrate. Micrography was kindly donated by Dr. J.L. Rosales-Encina. On the right side, proteins identified as possible participants in the corresponding function are indicated.
organization of the actin cytoskeleton must be tightly regulated both temporally and spatially.

In higher eukaryotes, actin cytoskeleton assembly is regulated at multiple levels. One level downstream of surface receptors is the activation of complex networks of interactive intracellular signals that in turn activate several pathways that induce actin monomers to form actin polymers and the superorganization of actin polymers into filamentous structures. A large number of actin-binding proteins regulate actin assembly by controlling nucleation of monomers, elongation and stabilization/destabilization of the filaments, and cross-linking of the actin network (58). Filament association with other proteins to form particular structures is also a regulatory step in actin superorganization (58).

Many proteins associated with the actin cytoskeleton are likely targets of signaling pathways that modulate actin assembly at different levels. The activities of these proteins are often regulated by signaling molecules such as Ca²⁺, phosphoinositides, and different types of kinases (59). As mentioned above, some actin-binding proteins have been identified in *E. histolytica*, of these, profilin is known to interact with monomeric actin (28). Others like vinculin, α-actinin, ABP-120, and myosins I and II interact with polymerized or F-actin-containing structures (14,29,37,42). Knowledge about the regulation of trophozoite functions through signaling pathways is incipient, as many of the proteins known to be components of conventional pathways in other eukaryotic cells have not been characterized in *E. histolytica*. Some advances have been achieved for functions in which actin and myosin participate, so we will refer only to these as practically nothing is known about regulation of microtubule organization or microtubule-dependent functions.

### Integrin-Type Mediated Signaling

During tissue invasion, amebas bind to and destroy different types of cells and extracellular matrix components. In eukaryotic cells, actin is nucleated and polymerized at multimolecular complexes formed at the cell membrane at sites of contact. These complexes facilitate attachment of cells to the substrate and consist of integrin-type receptors that can interact with the extracellular matrix and intracellularly associate with protein complexes containing actin, talin, vinculin, α-actinin, paxillin, tensin, zyxin, and focal adhesion kinase (pp125<sup>FAK</sup>) (56). In *E. histolytica*, at least two surface proteins, one of 37 kDa (13) and one of 140 kDa, this last one with antigenic and functional similarities to β1 integrin (60), have been reported to have fibronectin (FN)-binding capacity (61,62). Additionally, a multimolecular complex consisting of phosphorylated paxillin, vinculin, pp125<sup>FAK</sup>, and the 140-kDa molecule has been described (63). A monoclonal antibody produced against the 140-kDa molecule was able to inhibit trophozoite adhesion to FN and collagen (COL) but not to laminin (64), suggesting that this putative receptor may have the ability to bind not only FN but also COL, possibly in addition to 30-kDa collagen-binding proteins also present in trophozoites (65).

The initial demonstration that binding of trophozoites to FN induced formation of actin adhesion plates (13) provided an *in vitro* model to discern a series of events occurring during remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton. Analysis of the composition of adhesion plates after stabilization of actin filaments with phalloidin revealed the presence of F-actin, the 37-kDa FN-binding molecule, several actin-binding proteins, at least one cysteine proteinase, and signaling proteins such as PKC and pp125<sup>FAK</sup>, suggesting that these adhesion plates may function as signal transduction organelles (14). Signaling events such as elevation of intracellular pH, Ca²⁺ transients, and protein tyrosine phosphorylation occurring during the interaction with FN supported the idea that signaling events triggered by integrins or other receptors could be taking place (19,33). Interaction of trophozoites with collagen substrates, which involves cell adherence and formation and release of electron-dense granules containing collagenase activity, could also trigger signal transduction (32). The process is Ca²⁺/CaM dependent and proteins such as pp125<sup>FAK</sup> and p42MAPK were identified as components of the collagen-induced response (66).

Using the FN interaction model, the search for signaling pathways was started in *E. histolytica*. A rise in inositol triphosphate (IP₃), intracellular Ca²⁺ (Ca<sub>i</sub>²⁺), and cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), all second messengers in the phosphoinositide and adenyl cyclase signaling pathways that lead to PKC- and PKA-mediated protein phosphorylation, were described during formation of adhesion plates (15,16,33). In addition, participation of functional trimeric G-proteins as important elements in the activation of enzymes such as phospholipase C that generates IP₃ and DAG, and adenyl cyclase that catalyzes the production of cAMP from ATP was demonstrated (15–17). Furthermore, in the same works increases in PKC and PKA activities were also reported, as well as increased phosphorylation of proteins associated with cytoskeleton-membrane fractions.

Serine/threonine kinases of the PKC family are important in the intracellular transduction of many receptor-mediated calcium-dependent signals (67). Ravdin et al. (68) and Weikel et al. (69) reported a stimulatory effect of phorbol esters (that directly activate PKC) on the pathogenic capacity of *E. histolytica* toxicity and suggested a role for Ca²⁺ and PKC in the adhesion and killing of target cells. Additionally, PKC activity, a protein of 68,000 kDa that cross-reacts with anti-PKC heterologous antibodies and gene segments of PKC, as well as the complete gene sequence for a serine/threonine kinase have been described in *E. histolytica* (70,71). The use of phorbol esters, sphingosine, and a specificinhibitor of phospholipase C, as probes to modulate the activity of PKC, indicated the participation of amebic PKC in adhesion to FN, organization of actin into adhesive structures, and the cytolytic activity of *E. histolytica* trophozoites (15–17).

Additional receptors have been proposed to participate in the host–parasite interphase. Among them, an alcohol dehydrogenase of 97 kDa able to bind to FN, COL, and laminin (72), the 170-kDa heavy subunit of the Gal/GalNAc lectin which shares an epitope with human β2 integrin (73), and an immunodominant variable surface antigen of 125 kDa that has a small region of the inferred amino acid sequence that presents similarity to the β chain of the human FN receptor, the band 3 precursor of the chick integrin, and the β chain of the mouse integrin (74), although none has been shown to directly induce or regulate actin rearrangement. An interesting point to highlight is the fact that even though no integrin-like sequences have yet been identified in the *E. histolytica* genome (75), several reports have shown evidence that the FN-binding function is present, i.e., amebas respond to extracellular matrix components as if having those type of receptors (13,61,63,66,76).

Integrin activation of signaling pathways also occurs in some cells by direct stimulation of phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns) phosphate metabolism, activation of Ras proteins, mitogen-activated protein kinases activation, and tyrosine kinases, as signaling pathways communicate among themselves and activate additional routes (77). Some of these signaling routes have been explored in *E. histolytica*, finding some evidence to support their participation in receptor-mediated responses to extracellular matrix components. Specific tyrosine phosphorylation activity triggered by FN through the 140-kDa molecule was demonstrated when comparing the activation of tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and the pattern of tyrosine phosphorylated proteins in cells that interacted with FN, glass, and concanavalin A (19).

### Rho Protein-Mediated Signaling

Signaling pathways involving the participation of Rho family monomeric GTPases in actin organization have been extensively studied in higher eukaryotic cells (78). The first identified *rho* gene homologue in *E. histolytica* was cloned from parasite genomic DNA using PCR and degenerate oligonucleotide primers to GTP-binding sequences I and II that are conserved in *ras* family proteins. It was postulated that EhRho1 protein could participate as a factor controlling growth and differentiation (79). EhRho1 is not a substrate for Rho-specific C3 exoenzyme, making it an unusual member of the Ras family. Since then, another six genes encoding proteins belonging to the Rho subfamily have been identified in *E. histolytica* that also lack the amino acid sequences to bind C3 exoenzyme and share 97% amino acid identity among them (40). Antibodies to recombinant EhRhoA1 indicated that Rho proteins are expressed in trophozoites and that activation by lysophosphatidic acid, possibly through a membrane receptor coupled to Gα12/13 proteins, induces their participation in Rho signaling pathways leading to reorganization of actin and its interaction with myosin to form actomyosin structures. It has been suggested that actomyosin structures could have a role in functions requiring contractile force such as capping, phagocytosis of erythrocytes, chemotaxis, and adhesion to the substrate (38–40). Rac proteins have also been described in *E. histolytica* and their participation in actin organization has been inferred from experiments with mutants constitutively expressing activated Rac that were affected in phagocytosis and cap formation (80).

A Rho/Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor (*EhGEF*) has been recently characterized as a protein with specificity for activation of Rac proteins, although it can also activate Rho1 to a certain extent (21). Overexpression of this activator causes alterations in functions such as phagocytosis and chemotaxis. A kinase with homology to murine p21-activated kinase and yeast Ste20 was recently identified in *E. histolytica* (*EhPAK*). This protein can phosphorylate in vitro the regulatory chain of myosin II, myosin light-chain kinase, and myosin 1B, suggesting a link with other signaling pathways that regulate myosin–actin interactions (81). Presence of monomeric GTPases, their regulator proteins and diverse kinases in trophozoites in addition to the two main classical signaling routes suggest that regulation of actin organization is a complex process in which participation and collaboration between diverse signaling cascades is necessary.

#### Ca²⁺ Regulation

Intracellular calcium plays a crucial role as a second messenger for the control of a variety of cell functions in eukaryotes, including contraction, secretion, cell division, differentiation, and sodium and potassium permeability (82). The uptake and release of the calcium ion (Ca²⁺) across the plasma membrane and intracellular organelles by the concerted operation of distinct calcium transporting systems control intracellular Ca²⁺ concentration. In *E. histolytica* a partial sequence for a plasma membrane Ca²⁺-ATPase, (PMCA)-type Ca²⁺ ATPase has been reported (reviewed in Reference 82). The presence of calmodulin has been documented by biochemical inhibition assays using CaM antagonists and further purification of the molecule (32). Elevation of internal calcium levels is a necessary event associated with cellular functions such as secretion, contraction, and movement (33). The largest store for Ca²⁺ in cells is usually found in the endoplasmic reticulum. In amebic trophozoites, InsP₃ releases Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores, suggesting the involvement of an endoplasmic reticulum-like structure (83). Inositol
1,3,4,5-tetraphosphate (InsP₄) was also shown to release Ca²⁺ from intracellular stores of *E. histolytica* (84). Transient increases of intracellular Ca²⁺ and activation of several kinases and Ca²⁺-binding proteins, which in turn modify the actin cytoskeleton and cell motility, are major events triggered by cell binding to ECM proteins. In *E. histolytica*, external Ca²⁺ influx is an important mechanism in the FN-stimulated signal, and cells depleted of internal calcium cannot respond to FN (33).

Regarding Ca²⁺-binding proteins, a number of CaBPs have been identified in *E. histolytica* (85), in addition to calmodulin. Among these, two isoforms of EhCaBP have been described: EhCaBP1, which can bind directly to actin (13) and EhCaBP2, a 15-kDa monomeric protein containing four canonical EF-hand Ca²⁺-binding loops (85). Comparison between the two genes showed an overall identity of 79% and both genes are single copy. EhCaBP1 and EhCaBP2 are functionally different and bind different sets of *E. histolytica* proteins in a Ca²⁺-dependent manner. Definition of the signaling pathways involving these proteins will help elucidate the role of these two proteins *in vivo*.

Functions such as phagocytosis, chemotaxis, adhesion and degradation of extracellular matrix proteins, and capping, which are exacerbated during the invasive process of *E. histolytica* trophozoites, are processes that can also be accomplished by trophozoites in culture medium once they encounter the adequate stimulus. As seen in this review, the present evidence indicates that the machinery for motility-dependent processes is ready, but its activation obeys different signals. What triggers the activation and function of signaling pathways that would result in increased motility rendering an aggressive organism is still an unanswered question related to the pathogenicity of this parasite.

Despite the impressive progress made with the identification of several genes and proteins related to cytoskeleton functions, there is still scarce knowledge about the protein structures, interactions, and mechanisms of regulation. Completion of the *E. histolytica* genome will make the molecular identification of proteins much easier and faster, but we still will need to characterize the physiological role of the identified proteins. The two most common approaches used to explore the function of cytoskeleton proteins have been, on one side, overexpression or its total depletion in dominant negative mutants. However, one must keep in mind that an excess of one protein could change homeostasis of the cell and the balance between polymerized/unpolymerized forms. These situations could perturb the stoichiometry of the polymerization reaction and the interaction of soluble monomers or polymers with other proteins to perform a determined function. Depletion, on the other hand, may require severe reductions in concentration or losses in affinity for physiological defects to manifest, so false negatives are likely. Approaches such as partial depletion of a protein by RNAi or inducible expression could be closer

to physiological conditions. The pharmacological approach that was successful to establish key processes such as the dynamic turnover of cytoskeletal proteins and to infer their participation in several processes has the problem of drug specificity and unrelated effects. However, if reversibility takes place in a biologically relevant time scale, small molecule inhibitors could be of particular value considering the differences between human and *E. histolytica* cytoskeletal structures. Partial depletion of a particular protein with RNAi or induced expression at a particular stage that would cause little perturbation of the physiological conditions could be excellent tools to study a protein function and its interactions. Microscopy of live cells expressing fluorescently labeled cytoskeletal proteins could provide direct assessment of protein localization and interactions. Finally, biochemical characterization of the proteins, from their activity to 3D structure, will also be necessary to unravel the mystery that still represents the cytoskeleton of *E. histolytica*.

### Acknowledgments

We thank enthusiastic collaborators and members in our laboratories for their important contributions at different stages of our research with *Entamoeba histolytica*, as they have made possible the current view on the parasite’s cytoskeleton and its functions. This work was supported by grants from Conacyt, Mexico #42724 to IM, #37270 and #28077-M to PTR, and #39511-A1 to MV.

### References

1. Aus Kettis A, Lindman K, Fagraeus A. Actin in *Entamoeba histolytica* trophozoites revealed by human actin antibodies. J Parasitol 1977;63: 581–583.
2. Sabanero M, Meza I. Localización de actina en trofozoítos de *Entamoeba histolytica* HM1. Arch Invest Med (Mex) 1982;13:37–42.
3. Meza I, Sabanero M, Cázares F, Bryan J. Isolation and characterization of actin from *Entamoeba histolytica*. J Biol Chem 1983;258: 3936–3941.
4. Gadasi H. Isolated *Entamoeba histolytica* actin does not inhibit DNase-I activity. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1982;104:158–164.
5. De Souza W, Meza I, Martínez-Palomo A, Sabanero M, Souto-Padrón T, Meirelles MNI. *Trypanosoma cruzi*: distribution of fluorescently labeled tubulin and actin in epimastigotes. J Parasitol 1983;69: 138–142.
6. Meza I, Hwo S, Bryan J. Properties of monoclonal antibodies against actin from a lower eukaryote. Int Congress on Cell Biology, Tokyo, Japan;1984.
7. Bailey GB, Day DB, Gasque JW. Rapid polymerization of *Entamoeba histolytica* actin induced by interaction with target cells. J Exp Med 1985;162:546–558.
8. Bailey GB, Day DB, Nokkaew C, Harper CC. Stimulation by target cell membrane lipid of actin polymerization and phagocytosis by *Entamoeba histolytica*. Infect Immun 1987;55:1848–1853.
9. De la Garza M, Gallegos B, Meza I. Characterization of a cytochalasin resistant mutant of *Entamoeba histolytica*. J Protozool 1989;36:556–560.
10. Bailey GB. *Entamoeba* motility: dynamic of cytoplasmic streaming, locomotion and translocation of surface bound particles and
organization of the actin cytoskeleton in *Entamoeba invadens*. J Protozool 1992;39:267–272.

11. Orozco E, Guarneros G, Martínez-Palomo A, Sánchez T. *Entamoeba histolytica* phagocytosis as a virulence factor. J Exp Med 1983;158: 1511–1521.

12. Ravidin JI, Guerrant RL, Sperelakis N. *Entamoeba histolytica* impedance measurements and cytotoxicity in the presence of bepridil, verapamil and cytochalasin D. Exp Parasitol 1985;60:63–72.

13. Talamás-Rohana P, Meza I. Interaction between pathogenic amebas and fibronectin: substrate degradation and changes in cytoskeleton organization. J Cell Biol 1988;106:1787–1794.

14. Vásquez J, Franco E, Reyes G, Meza I. Characterization of adhesion plates induced by the interaction of *Entamoeba histolytica* trophozoites with fibronectin. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 1995;32:37–45.

15. Santiago A, Carbajal ME, Benitez-King G, Meza I. *Entamoeba histolytica*: PKC transduction pathway activation in the trophozoite-fibronectin interaction. Exp Parasitol 1994;79:436–444.

16. Soid-Raggi LG, Torres-Márquez ME, Meza I. *Entamoeba histolytica*: identification of functional Gs and Gi proteins as possible signal transduction elements in the interaction of trophozoites with fibronectin. Exp Parasitol 1998;90:262–269.

17. Franco E, Manning-Cela R, Meza I. Signal transduction in *Entamoeba histolytica* induced by interaction with fibronectin: presence and activation of phosphokinase A and its possible relation to invasiveness. Arch Med Res 2002;33:389–397.

18. Meza I. Extracellular matrix induced signaling in *Entamoeba histolytica*: its role in invasiveness. Parasitol Today 2000;16:23–28.

19. Hernández-Ramírez VI, Anaya-Ruiz M, Ríos A, Talamás-Rohana P. *Entamoeba histolytica*: tyrosine kinase activity induced by fibronectin through the β1-integrin-like molecule. Exp Parasitol 2000;95:85–95.

20. Batista EJO, de Souza W. Involvement of protein kinases on the process of erythrophagocytosis by *Entamoeba histolytica*. Cell Biol Int 2004;28:243–248.

21. Aguilar-Rojas A, Almaraz-Barrera MJ, Krzeminski M, Robles-Flores M, Hernández-Rivas R, Guillen N, Maroun RC, Vargas M. *Entamoeba histolytica*: inhibition of cellular functions by overexpression of EhGEF, a novel Rho/Rac guanine nucleotide exchange factor. Exp Parasitol 2005;109:150–162.

22. Edman U, Meza I, Agabian N. Genomic and cDNA actin sequences from a virulent strain of *Entamoeba histolytica*. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1987;84:3024–3028.

23. Huber M, Garfinkel L, Gitler C, Mirelman D, Revel M, Rosenblatt S. *Entamoeba histolytica*: cloning and characterization of actin cDNA. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1987;34:227–235.

24. Manning-Cela R, Meza I. Up-regulation of actin mRNA and reorganization of the cytoskeleton in *Entamoeba histolytica* trophozoites. J Eukaryot Microbiol 1997;44:18–24.

25. Cunningham CC, Gorlin JB, Kwiatkowski D, Hartwig J, Janney P, Stossel T. Requirement for actin-binding proteins for cortical stability and efficient locomotion. Science 1992;255:325–327.

26. Sastry SK, Burridge K. Focal adhesions: a nexus for intercellular signaling and cytoskeleton dynamics. Exp Cell Res 2000;261:20–35.

27. Robledo T, Cruz-Vera J, Reyes M, Ortega A, Pérez-Salazar E. *Entamoeba histolytica*: focal adhesion kinase and ErK phosphorylation are altered in the cytoskeleton mutant BG3. Parasitol Res 2005; 95:231–235.

28. Binder M, Ortner S, Erben H, Scheiner O, Wiedermann G, Valenta R, Duchéne M. The basic isoform of profilin in pathogenic *Entamoeba histolytica* cDNA cloning, heterologous expression, and actin-binding proteins. Eur J Biochem 1995;233:976–981.

29. Vargas M, Sansonetti P, Guillén N. Identification and cellular localization of the actin-binding proteins ABP-120 from *Entamoeba histolytica*. Mol Microbiol 1996;22:849–857.

30. Jacobson K, Dietrich C. Looking at lipid rafts? Trends Cell Biol 1999; 9:87–91.

31. Diaz-Valencia JD, Almaraz-Barrera MJ, Arias-Romero LE, Domínguez A, Guillén N, Vargas M. The EhABP-120 C-end region of *Entamoeba histolytica* interacts with sulfatide, a new target. Biochem Biophys Res Commun in press.

32. Muñoz L, Moreno MA, Pérez-García JN, Tovar RG, Hernández VI. Possible role of calmodulin in the secretion of *Entamoeba histolytica* electron-dense granules containing collagenase. Mol Microbiol 1991; 5:1707–1714.

33. Carbajal ME, Manning-Cela R, Piña A, Franco E, Meza I. Fibronectin-induced intracellular calcium rise in *Entamoeba histolytica* trophozoites: effect on adhesion and the actin cytoskeleton. Exp Parasitol 1996;82:11–20.

34. Ravidin JI, Sperelakis N, Guerrant RL. Effect of ion channel inhibitors in the cytopathogenicity of *Entamoeba histolytica*. J Infect Dis 1982; 146:335–340.

35. Sahoo N, Labruyère E, Bhattacharya S, Sen P, Guillén N, Bhattacharya A. Calcium-binding protein 1 of the protozoan parasite *Entamoeba histolytica* interacts with actin and is involved in cytoskeleton dynamics. J Cell Sci 2004;117:3625–3634.

36. Raymond-Denise A, Sansonetti P, Guillen N. Identification and characterization of a myosin heavy chain gene (mhcA) from the human pathogen *Entamoeba histolytica*. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1993;59: 123–132.

37. Rahim Z, Raymond-Denise, Sansonetti P, Guillen N. Localization of myosin heavy chain A in the human pathogen *Entamoeba histolytica*. Infect Immun 1993;61:1048–1054.

38. Arhets P, Gounon P, Sansonetti P, Guillen N. Myosin II is involved in capping and uroid formation in the human pathogen *Entamoeba histolytica*. Infect Immun 1995;63:4358–4367.

39. Arhets P, Olivo JC, Gounon P, Sansonetti P, Guillen N. Virulence and functions of myosin II are inhibited by overexpression of light meromyosin in *Entamoeba histolytica*. Mol Biol Cell 1998;8:1537–1547.

40. Franco-Barraza J, Zamudio-Meza H, Franco E, Domínguez Robles MC, Villegas-Sepúlveda N. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton (in revision).

41. Vargas M, Voigt H, Sansonetti P, Guillén N. Molecular characterization of myosin 1B from the lower eukaryotic *Entamoeba histolytica*, a human parasite. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1997;86:61–73.

42. Voigt H, Olivo JC, Sansonetti P, Guillén N. Myosin IB from *Entamoeba histolytica* is involved in phagocytosis of human erythrocytes. J Cell Sci 1999;112:1191–1201.

43. Argüello C, Valenzuela B, Rangel E. Structural organization of chromatin during the cell cycle of *Entamoeba histolytica* trophozoites. Arch Med Res 1992;23:77–80.

44. Gicquaud CR. Etude de l’ultrastructure du noyau et de la mitose de *Entamoeba histolytica*. Biol Cell 1979;35:305–312.

45. Vayssiè L, Vargas M, Weber C, Guillén N. Double-stranded RNA mediates homology-dependent gene silencing of γ-tubulin in the human parasite *Entamoeba histolytica*. Mol Biochem Parasitol 2004;138:21–28.

46. Gómez-Conde E, López-Robles MC, Hernández-Rivas R, Hernández-Jaúregui P, Vargas-Mejía M. Structural organization of gamma tubulin in the microtubule organizing center (MTOC) during nuclear division of *Entamoeba histolytica* trophozoites. Arch Med Res 2000;31:S205–S206.

47. Sánchez MA, Peattie DA, Wirth D, Orozco E. Cloning, genomic organization and transcription of *Entamoeba histolytica α*-tubulin-encoding gene. Gene 1994;146:239–244.

48. Katiyar SK, Edlind TD. *Entamoeba histolytica* encodes a highly divergent β-tubulin. J Eukaryot Microbiol 1996;43:31–34.

49. Ray SS, Gangopadhyay SS, Pande G, Samuelson J, Lohia A. Primary structure of *Entamoeba histolytica γ*-tubulin and localisation of amoeobic microtubule organising center. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1997;90: 331–336.

50. Lohia A. The cell cycle of *Entamoeba histolytica*. Mol Cell Biochem 2003;253:217–222.
51. Gonguly A, Lohia A. The cell cycle of *Entamoeba invadens* during vegetative growth and differentiation. Mol Biochem Parasitol 2001; 112:277–285.
52. Chávez B, Espinosa-Cantellano M, Cedillo-Rivera R, Ramírez A, Martínez-Palom o A. Effects of albendazole on *Entamoeba histolytica* and *Giardia lamblia* trophozoites. Arch Med Res 1992;23:63–67.
53. Makioka A, Kumagai M, Kobayashi S, Takeuchi T. Effect of the antitubulin drug orzalin on the encystations of *Entamoeba invadens*. Parasitol Res 2000;86:625–629.
54. Roy D, Lohia A. Sequence of *Entamoeba histolytica* tubulin is responsible for its altered tertiary structure. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2004;319:1010–1016.
55. Forgacs G, Yook SH, Janmey PA, Jeong H, Burd CG. Role of the cytoskeleton in signaling networks. J Cell Sci 2004;117:2769–2775.
56. Schmidt A, Hall MN. Signaling to the actin cytoskeleton. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 1998;14:305–338.
57. Guillén N. Role of signalling and cytoskeletal rearrangements in the pathogenesis of *Entamoeba histolytica*. Trends Microbiol 1996;4: 191–197.
58. Pollard TD, Blanchoin L, Mullins RD. Molecular mechanisms controlling actin filament dynamics in nonmuscle cells. Annu Rev Biophys Struct 2000;29:545–576.
59. Janmey PA. Phosphoinositides and calcium as regulators of cellular actin assembly and disassembly. Annu Rev Physiol 1994;56:169–191.
60. Talamás-Rohana P, Hernández-Ramírez VI, Pérez-García JN, Ventura-Juárez J. *Entamoeba histolytica* contains a β1 integrin-like molecule similar to fibronectin receptors from eukaryotic cells. J Eukaryot Microbiol 1998;45:356–360.
61. Vázquez-Prado J, Meza I. Fibronectin “receptor” in *Entamoeba histolytica*: purification and association with the cytoskeleton. Arch Med Res 1992;23:125–128.
62. Talamás-Rohana P, Rosales-Encina JL, Gutiérrez MC, Hernández VI. Identification and partial purification of an *Entamoeba histolytica* membrane protein that binds fibronectin. Arch Med Res 1992;23:119–123.
63. Flores-Robles D, Rosales C, Rosales-Encina JL, Talamás-Rohana P. *Entamoeba histolytica*: a β1 integrin-like fibronectin receptor assembles a signaling complex similar to those of mammalian cells. Exp Parasitol 2003;103:8–15.
64. Sengupta K, Hernández-Ramírez VI, Rios A, Mondragón R, Talamás-Rohana P. *Entamoeba histolytica*: monoclonal antibody against the β1 integrin-like molecule (140 kDa) inhibits cell adhesion to extracellular matrix components. Exp Parasitol 2001;98:83–89.
65. Jiménez-Delgadillo B, Chaudhuri PP, Baylón-Pacheco L, López-Monteon A, Talamás-Rohana P, Rosales-Encina JL. *Entamoeba histolytica*: cDNAs cloned as 30 kDa collagen-binding proteins (CBP) belong to an antioxidant molecule family. Protection of hamsters from amoebic liver abscess by immunization with recombinant CBP. Exp Parasitol 2004;108:7–17.
66. Pérez E, Muñoz ML, Ortega A. *Entamoeba histolytica*: involvement of pp125<sup>FAK</sup> in collagen-induced signal transduction. Exp Parasitol 1996; 82:164–170.
67. Toker A. Signaling through protein kinase C. Front Biosci 1998;3: 1134–1147.
68. Ravdin JI, Murphy CF, Guerrant RL, Long-Krug SA. Effect of antagonists of calcium and phospholipase A on the cytopathogenicity of *Entamoeba histolytica*. J Infect Dis 1985;152:542–549.
69. Weikel C, Murphy C, Orozco E, Ravdin J. Phorbol esters specifically enhance the cytolytic activity of *Entamoeba histolytica*. Infect Immun 1988;56:1485–1491.
70. De Meester F, Mirelman D, Stolarsky T, Lester DS. Identification of protein kinase C and its potential substrate in *Entamoeba histolytica*. Comp Biochem Physiol 1990;97B:707–711.
71. Que X, Samuelson J, Reed S. Molecular cloning of a *rac* family protein kinase and identification of a serine/threonine protein kinase gene family of *Entamoeba histolytica*. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1993;60: 161–170.
72. Yang W, Li E, Kairong T, Stanley SJr. *Entamoeba histolytica* has an alcohol dehydrogenase homologous to the multifunctional *adhE* gene product of *Escherichia coli*. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1994;64:253–260.
73. Adams SA, Robson SC, Gathiram V, Jackson TFHG, Pillay TS, Kirsch RE, Makgoba MW. Immunological similarity between the 170 kD amoebic adherence glycoprotein and human β2 integrins. Lancet 1993;341:17–19.
74. Edman U, Meraz M, Rausser S, Agabian N, Meza I. Characterization of an immuno-dominant variable surface antigen from pathogenic and nonpathogenic *Entamoeba histolytica*. J Exp Med 1990;172:879–888.
75. Loftus B, Anderson I, Davies R, Alsmark UCM, Samuelson J, Amedeo P, Roncaglia P, Berriman M, Hirt RP, Mann BJ, Nozaki T, Suh B, Pop M, Duchene M, Ackers J, Tannich E, Leippe M, Hofer M, Bruchhaus I, Willhoeft U, Bhattacharya A, Chillingworth T, Churcher C, Hance Z, Harris B, Harris D, Jagels K, Moule S, Mungall K, Ormond D, Squares R, Whitehead S, Quail MA, Rabbinowitsch E, Norbertczak H, Price C, Wang Z, Guillen N, Gilchrist C, Stroup SE, Bhattacharya S, Lohia A, Foster PG, Sicheritz-Ponten T, Weber C, Singh U, Mukherjee C, El-Sayed NM, Petri WA Jr, Clark CG, Embley TM, Barrell B, Fraser CM, Hall N. The genome of the protist parasite *Entamoeba histolytica*. Nature 2005;433:865–868.
76. Pillai DR, Kain KC. *Entamoeba histolytica*: identification of a distinct β2 integrin-like molecule with a potential role in cellular adherence. Exp Parasitol 2005;109:135–142.
77. Schoenwaelder SM, Burridge K. Bidirectional signaling between the cytoskeleton and integrins. Curr Opin Cell Biol 1999;11:274–286.
78. Hall A. Small GTP-binding proteins and the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton. Annu Rev Cell Biol 1994;10:31–54.
79. Lohia A, Samuelson J. Molecular cloning of a *rho* family gene of *Entamoeba histolytica*. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1993;58:177–180.
80. Ghosh SK, Samuelson J. Involvement of p21<sup>rca</sup>, phosphoinositide 3-kinase, and vacuolar ATPase in phagocytosis of bacteria and erythrocytes by *Entamoeba histolytica*: suggestive evidence for coincidental evolution of amebic invasiveness. Infect Immun 1997;65:4243–4249.
81. Labruyère E, Zimmer C, Galy V, Olivo-Marin JC, Guillén N. EhPAK, a member of the p21-activated kinase family, is involved in the control of *Entamoeba histolytica* migration and phagocytosis. J Cell Sci 2002; 116:61–71.
82. Moreno SNJ, Docampo R. Calcium regulation in protozoan parasites. Curr Opin Microbiol 2003;6:359–364.
83. Raha S, Dalal B, Biswas S, Biswas B. Myo-inositol trisphosphate-mediated calcium release from internal stores of *Entamoeba histolytica*. Mol Biochem Parasitol 1994;65:63–71.
84. Raha S, Giri B, Bhattacharya B, Biswas BB. Inositol(1,3,4,5) tetra-kisphosphate plays an important role in calcium mobilization from *Entamoeba histolytica*. FEBS Lett 1995;362:316–318.
85. Chakrabarty P, Sethi DK, Padhan N, Kaur KJ, Salunke DM, Bhattacharya S, Bhattacharya A. Identification and characterization of EhCaBP2. A second member of the calcium-binding protein family of the protozoan parasite *Entamoeba histolytica*. J Biol Chem 2004; 279:12898–12908.
