
Seminars in
HEMATOLOGY

Pathophysiology of Graft-Versus-Host Disease

James L.M. Ferrara and Pavan Reddy

Complications of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) remain barriers to its wider application for a variety of diseases. Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) is the major cause of morbidity and mortality following allogeneic HSCT. GVHD can be considered an exaggerated, undesirable manifestation of a normal inflammatory mechanism, in which donor lymphocytes encounter foreign antigens in a milieu that fosters inflammation. Recent advances in the study of cytokine networks, chemokine gradients, and the direct mediators of cellular cytotoxicity have led to improved understanding of this complex syndrome. The pathophysiology of acute GVHD can be considered as a three-step process in which the innate and adaptive immune systems interact: (1) tissue damage to the recipient by the radiation/chemotherapy pretransplant conditioning regimen; (2) donor T-cell activation and clonal expansion; and (3) cellular and inflammatory factors. Here we review the immunologic interactions that cause clinical GVHD and discuss the risk factors and prophylactic strategies for acute GVHD according to this model.

Semin Hematol 43:3-10 © 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) is the major cause of morbidity and mortality after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). GVHD has traditionally been classified by the time of its clinical manifestations: acute GVHD occurs within the first 100 days after HSCT; chronic GVHD occurs after day 100. This simple classification is increasingly unsatisfactory, particularly as reduced intensity conditioning regimens gain wider acceptance. The clinical manifestations of acute GVHD after such conditioning often occur much later, blurring the sharp day 100 demarcation between acute and chronic. Nevertheless, extensive clinical data has been codified according to this classification and it will be used throughout this article.

In 1966, Billingham formulated the three requirements necessary for GVHD. First, the transplanted graft must contain immunologically competent cells; second, the recipient must be incapable of rejecting the transplanted cells; and third, the recipient must express tissue antigens that are not present in the transplant donor that could thus be recognized as foreign. [1]

Mature T lymphocytes are the immunocompetent cells in the graft that fulfill the first precondition for GVHD. [2] After allogeneic HSCT, the severity of GVHD correlates with the number of donor T cells transfused. [3] Because experimental models have shown that the ability of marrow T cells to induce GVHD is much less potent than for mature circulating T cells, [4] contamination of bone marrow with peripheral blood at the time of marrow harvest may significantly contribute to the development of GVHD.

The second precondition for GVHD stipulates that the recipient must be immuno-compromised; a normal immune system will usually reject T cells from a foreign donor. Immuno-compromise commonly follows allogeneic HSCT, as patients historically have received immuno-ablative doses of chemotherapy and/or radiation before stem cell infusion. During solid organ allografts and with blood transfusion, recipients are often immuno-suppressed. There are, however, exceptions for this requirement. GVHD can occur in an immuno-competent recipient of tissues from a donor who is homozygous for one haplotype of the recipient (as with transfusion of blood from a human leukocyte antigen [HLA] homozygous parent to a heterozygous child). This genetic situation prevents the recipient from rejecting the donor cells despite immune competence. [5]

The third precondition for GVHD, the expression of recipient tissue antigens not present in the donor, became the focus of intensive research with the discovery of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). HLAs are the gene products of the MHC. HLAs are expressed on the cell surfaces of all nucleated cells in the human body and are essential to the

University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI.
Supported by National Institutes of Health Grants No. K08 AI052863-01 (P.R.) and PO1 CA 49542 (J.L.M.F.). P.R. is the recipient of the Alaina J. Enlow Scholar Award from Amy Strelzer Manasevit-National Marrow Donor Program and the New Investigator Award from American Society of Blood and Marrow Transplantation. J.L.M.F. is the recipient of the Doris Duke Distinguished Clinical Scientist Award.
Address correspondence to James L.M. Ferrara, MD, Professor of Pediatrics and Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, 1500 E Medical Center Dr, 6308 CCGC, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0942. E-mail: ferrara@umich.edu

0037-1963/06/$-see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1053/j.seminhematol.2005.09.001

GVHD
Pathophysiology

(I) Conditioning
Tissue Damage

(II)
Donor
T cell
activation

(III)
Cellular and
inflammatory
effects

Figure 1 The pathophysiology of acute GVHD. GVHD pathophysiology can be summarized in a three-step process. In step I, the conditioning regimen (irradiation, chemotherapy, or both) leads to the damage and activation of host tissues, especially the intestinal mucosa. This allows the translocation of LPS from the intestinal lumen to the circulation, stimulating the secretion of the inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-1 from host tissues, particularly macrophages. These cytokines increase the expression of MHC antigens and adhesion molecules on host tissues, enhancing the recognition of MHC and mHags by mature donor T cells. Donor T-cell activation in step II is characterized by the predominance of Th1 cells and the secretion of IFN-γ, which activates mononuclear phagocytes. In step III, effector functions of activated mononuclear phagocytes are triggered by the secondary signal provided by LPS and other stimulatory molecules that leak through the intestinal mucosa damaged during steps I and II. Activated macrophages, along with CTL, secrete inflammatory cytokines that cause target cell apoptosis. CD8+ CTL also lyse target cells directly. Damage to the GI tract in this phase, principally by inflammatory cytokines, amplifies LPS release and leads to the “cytokine storm” characteristic of severe acute GVHD. This damage results in the amplification of local tissue injury, and it further promotes an inflammatory response.

activation of allogeneic T cells.⁶ During lymphocyte development, T cells are selected in the thymus to recognize self-MHC molecules, but when confronted with allogeneic (non-self) MHC molecules, the activated T cells mount a formidable attack that culminates in the destruction of the allogeneic tissues. MHC differences between donor and recipient are the most important risk factor for the induction of GVHD. In addition, there are minor histocompatibility antigens (mHag) derived from the expression of polymorphic genes.

The pathophysiology of acute GVHD after HSCT can be considered as a three-step process in which the innate and adaptive immune systems interact (Fig 1): (I) tissue damage to the recipient by the radiation/chemotherapy pretransplant conditioning regimen; (II) donor T-cell activation and clonal expansion; and (III) cellular and inflammatory factors. In step I, the conditioning regimen leads to damage and activation of host antigen-presenting cells (APCs) by inflammatory cytokines. In step II, host APCs present alloantigen to the resting T cells and activate them. Donor T-cell activation is characterized by cellular proliferation and the secretion of cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-2 and interferon (IFN)-γ. In step III, mononuclear phagocytes and neutrophils cause inflammation, triggered by mediators such as lipopolysaccharides (LPS) that leak through the intestinal mucosa damaged during step I. Inflammation recruits effector cells into target organs, amplifying local tissue injury with further secretion of inflammatory cytokines which, together with cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL), lead to target tissue destruction.⁷,⁸

### Step I: Effects of HSCT Conditioning

The first step of acute GVHD begins before donor cells are infused. Prior to HSCT, a patient’s tissues have been damaged by a number of factors, including the underlying disease and its treatment, infection, and drugs and radiation used in the conditioning regimen. High-intensity chemoradiotherapy, characteristic of many HSCT conditioning regimens, activates host APCs that are critical to the stimulation of donor T
cells infused in the stem cell inoculum. Total body irradiation (TBI) is particularly important because it activates host tissues to secrete inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and IL-1, and induces endothelial apoptosis that leads to epithelial cell damage in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract.⁹,¹⁰ GVHD damage to the GI tract amplifies GVHD by allowing the translocation of microbial products such as LPS into the systemic circulation. This model helps to explain the increased risk of GVHD associated with intensive conditioning regimens.¹¹,¹²

# Step II: Donor T-Cell Activation and Cytokine Secretion

Murine studies have demonstrated that host APCs alone are both necessary and sufficient to stimulate donor T cells to proliferate as early as day 3, 12 hours after HSCT, preceding the engraftment of donor stem cells.¹³–¹⁵ Inflammatory cytokines and microbial products such as LPS may all be considered “danger signals”¹⁶ that help to activate T cells, and they may make the difference between an immune response and tolerance.¹⁷ When T cells are exposed to antigens in the presence of an adjuvant such as LPS, the migration and survival of T cells are dramatically enhanced in vivo.¹⁸ The effect of advanced age in enhancing allo-stimulatory activity of host APCs may also contribute to the increased incidence of acute GVHD in older recipients.¹⁹ The elimination of host APCs by activated natural killer (NK) cells can prevent GVHD in experimental models.²⁰ This suppressive effect of NK cells on GVHD has been confirmed in humans: HLA class I differences driving donor NK-mediated alloreactions in the GVHD direction mediate potent graft-versus-leukemia (GVL) effects and produce higher engraftment rates without causing severe, acute GVHD.²⁰,²¹

CD4 and CD8 proteins are co-receptors for constant portions of MHC class II and MHC class I molecules, respectively. MHC class I (HLA-A, -B, -C) differences stimulate CD8⁺ T cells and MHC class II (HLA-DR, -DP, -DQ) differences stimulate CD4⁺ T cells.²² After HLA-identical HSCT, GVHD is induced by mHAg, peptides derived from polymorphic cellular proteins presented on the cell surface by MHC molecules.²³ Because the genes for these proteins are located outside of the MHC, two siblings often will have many different peptides in the same MHC that can be recognized by donor T cells and lead to GVHD. How many of these peptides behave as mHAg remains unclear, although more than 50 different minor histocompatibility genetic loci have been defined among inbred strains of mice.²⁴ In humans, of five previously characterized mHAg (HA-1, -2, -3, -4, -5) recognized by T cells in association with HLA-A1 and -A2, only mismatching of HA-1 significantly correlated with acute grade II to IV GVHD.²³ Several mHags are encoded on the male-specific Y chromosome and there is an increased risk of GVHD when male recipients are transplanted from female donors.²⁵

Cytokines secreted by activated T cells are generally classified as Th1 (secreting IL-2 and IFN-α) or Th2 (secreting

IL-4, IL-5, IL-10, and IL-13).²⁶ Dendritic cells (DC) can modulate the function of T cells which, in turn, have multiple effects, including: (1) amplification of cytokine secretion, (2) lysis of target cells by Fas/FasL interactions, (3) activation of macrophages, (4) activation of endothelium to induce macrophage binding and extravasation, and (5) recruitment of macrophages by secreting monocyte chemo-attractant protein-1 (MCP-1).¹⁸,²⁰

Monoclonal antibodies (mAb) against IL-2 or its receptor prevent GVHD when administered shortly after the infusion of T cells,²⁷,²⁸ but this strategy was only moderately successful in reducing established GVHD.²⁹ Cyclosporine (CSP) and FK506 dramatically reduce IL-2 production and effectively prevent GVHD. IL-15 is another critical cytokine in initiating allogeneic T-cell division in vivo, and elevated serum levels of IL-15 are associated with acute GVHD in humans.³⁰ IFN-γ increases the expression of numerous molecules involved in GVHD, including adhesion molecules, chemokines, MHC antigens, and Fas, resulting in enhanced antigen presentation and the recruitment of effector cells into target organs.³¹,³² IFN-γ also alters target cells in the GI tract and skin so that they are more vulnerable to damage during GVHD; the administration of anti–IFN-α mAbs prevents GI GVHD³³ and high levels of both IFN-γ and TNF-α correlate with the most intense cellular damage in skin.³⁴ IFN-γ mediates GVHD-associated immunosuppression in several experimental HSCT systems, in part by the induction of nitric oxide (NO),³⁵,³⁶ and primes macrophages to produce pro-inflammatory cytokines and NO in response to LPS.³⁷ Paradoxically, at early time points after HSCT, IFN-γ can reduce GVHD by enhancing Fas-mediated apoptosis of activated donor T cells.¹³,³⁸

Subpopulations of regulatory donor T cells can prevent GVHD. Repeated in vitro stimulation of donor CD4⁺ T cells with alloantigens results in the emergence of a population of regulatory T-cell (Treg) clones that secretes high amounts of IL-10 and tissue growth factor-β (TGF-β). The immunosuppressive properties of these cytokines are explained by their ability to inhibit APC function and to suppress proliferation of responding T cells directly. Natural suppressor (NS) cells and NK1.1⁺ T cells (NKT) also prevent GVHD in experimental models.⁴,³⁹

# Step III: Cellular and Inflammatory Effects

The pathophysiology of acute GVHD culminates in the generation of multiple cytotoxic effectors of target tissue injury, including several inflammatory cytokines, specific anti-host CTLs, NK cells, and NO. Experimental and clinical data suggest that soluble inflammatory mediators act in conjunction with direct cell-mediated cytolysis by CTL and NK cells to cause the full spectrum of deleterious effects observed in acute GVHD. As such, the effector phase of GVHD involves aspects of both the innate and adaptive immune responses and the synergistic interactions of components generated during step I and step II.The Fas/Fas ligand (FasL) and the perforin/granzyme (or granule exocytosis) pathways are the principal effector mechanisms used by CTLs and NK cells to lyse their target cells. ${}^{40,41}$ Perforin is stored together with granzymes and other proteins in cytotoxic granules of CTLs and NK cells; perforin inserts itself into the target cell membrane forming “perforin pores” that allow granzymes to enter the cell and induce apoptosis through various downstream effector pathways. FasL binds Fas, which results in the formation of the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) and the subsequent activation of caspases. ${}^{42}$ A number of T-cell surface proteins also possess the capability to trimerize TNF receptor-like death receptors (DR) that also induce apoptosis in their targets. ${}^{43}$ CD4${}^{+}$ CTLs preferentially use the Fas/FasL pathway during acute GVHD, while CD8${}^{+}$ CTLs primarily use the perforin/granzyme pathway, consistent with other conditions involving cell-mediated cytolysis. FasL-defective donor T cells markedly reduce experimental GVHD in liver, skin, and lymphoid organs. The Fas/FasL pathway is particularly important in hepatic GVHD, consistent with the marked sensitivity of hepatocytes to Fas-mediated cytotoxicity in models of murine hepatitis. ${}^{44}$

In the effector phase of acute GVHD, inflammatory cytokines synergize with CTLs, resulting in amplification of local tissue injury and development of target organ dysfunction in the transplant recipient. A central role for inflammatory cytokines in acute GVHD was confirmed by recent murine experiments using bone marrow chimeras; GVHD-target organ injury was induced, even in the absence of epithelial alloantigens, and mortality and organ injury were prevented by the neutralization of TNF-$\alpha$ and IL-1. ${}^{45}$ TNF-$\alpha$ plays a central role in intestinal GVHD in murine and human studies. ${}^{46-48}$ Experimentally, neutralization of TNF-$\alpha$ alone or in combination with IL-1 resulted in a significant reduction of GVHD. ${}^{45,49}$ However, while neutralization of IL-1 with an IL-1 receptor antagonist was able to prevent GVHD in mice, its use in a randomized clinical trial did not prevent GVHD. ${}^{50}$

Macrophages secrete cytokines after ligation of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) by LPS and other microbial products that have leaked though a damaged intestinal mucosa. Since the GI tract is particularly sensitive to the injurious effects of cytokines, ${}^{46,51}$ organ damage incurred during the effector phase can lead to a positive feedback loop, wherein increased translocation of LPS results in further cytokine production and progressive intestinal injury. Thus, the GI tract may be critical to propagating the “cytokine storm” characteristic of acute GVHD. ${}^{52}$ Elevated serum levels of LPS correlate directly with the degree of intestinal histopathology occurring after allogeneic HSCT, ${}^{51,53}$ and gram-negative gut decontamination during HSCT reduces GVHD. ${}^{54,55}$

LPS can stimulate inflammatory chemokine expression in inflamed tissues; these tendencies are specialized to recruit effector cells, such as T cells, neutrophils, and monocytes. ${}^{56}$ Chemokine receptors that are differentially expressed on activated T cells can rapidly switch chemokine receptor expression to acquire new migratory capacity. ${}^{18,57}$ CCR5${}^{+}$ CD8${}^{+}$ T cells migrate into the liver, lung, and spleen during GVHD, ${}^{58}$ and levels of several chemokines are elevated in GVHD-associated lung injury. ${}^{59}$ The expression of chemokines and their receptors may help to explain the unusual cluster of GVHD target organs (skin, gut, and liver).

### Risk Factors and Prevention

GVHD can thus be considered an exaggerated and dysregulated response of a normal immune system (that of the donor) to tissue damage that is intrinsic to transplantation. The donor’s immune system reacts as if there is a massive and uncontrolled infection, and its efforts to deal with this injury result in the clinical manifestations of GVHD. Tissue injury intrinsic to the administration of high-dose chemo-radiotherapy initiates the breakdown of mucosal barriers, allowing endotoxin into tissues. TLRs on DCs bind to endotoxin and activate signal transduction pathways that lead to DC maturation and induce inflammation. ${}^{60}$ The upregulation of costimulatory molecules, MHC molecules, adhesion molecules, cytokines, chemokines, prostaglandins, and other inflammatory mediators prime and trigger attack on target tissues, fueling the fire. Likely danger signals ${}^{16}$ contribute to the “cytokine storm,” making GVHD a disorder of dysregulated innate and adaptive immune responses. Risk factors and prophylactic strategies for acute GVHD can be considered according to this three-step model.

### Reduced Intensity Conditioning Regimens

The three cardinal organs affected by GVHD are skin, intestinal tract, and liver (Fig 2). One common link among them is exposure to the environment. Skin and gut have very obvious barrier functions and a well-developed reticulo-endothelial system; the liver is the first line of defense downstream of the gut. The lung would be a similar target by this criterion, and elsewhere in this volume an argument is forwarded for its involvement in GVHD; less intense exposure to organisms, particularly gram-negative rods, may reduce pulmonary

**Figure 2** Skin, grade 2 acute GVHD (histopathology): interface vacuolar change, lymphocytic infiltrate, and dyskeratotic cells in the epidermis. Damaged epithelial cells occasionally surrounded by two or more lymphocytes in a process known as “satellite cell necrosis.”
manifestations of acute GVHD. All of these organs are rich in DC, a probable prerequisite for antigen presentation and the generation of injurious cytokines. They are all subject to injury from conditioning, and breaches of the barrier would allow organisms or endotoxin into the circulation.

One prediction of the model is that less intense conditioning regimens would be associated with less GVHD. When donor lymphocyte infusions were administered without pharmacologic GVHD prophylaxis, the resultant GVHD has been less frequent and severe than would be expected in the absence of immunosuppressive drugs. Similarly, the GVHD after reduced intensity conditioning regimens should be less severe, as a result of diminished cellular injury from reduced endotoxin exposure due to less mucosal injury. Although clinical data on reducing colonization with bacteria after less intense regimens are suggestive and support the basic concepts described above, the effect is insufficient to control GVHD adequately in human transplantation.

## Modulation of Donor T Cells

Histocompatibility differences between donor and recipient are major determinants of donor T cell activation, and increased HLA disparity is one of the most important risk factors for acute GVHD. Female donors, particularly those with multiple pregnancies, cause greater GVHD in male recipients because proteins encoded on the Y chromosome serve as mHags.

The number of T cells in donor marrow is directly associated with the severity of acute GVHD, and T-cell depletion is one of the most effective forms of GVHD prophylaxis. A T-cell dose ≤10<sup>5</sup> per kg was associated with complete control of GVHD if an HLA-identical sibling served as the donor.<sup>3</sup> The combination of very high stem cell numbers and CD3 T-cell numbers less than 3 × 10<sup>4</sup> per kg allowed haploidentical transplantation without GVHD.<sup>61</sup> Unfortunately, the nonspecific removal or clearance of T cells results in increased fatal opportunistic infections, and equivalent overall survival.<sup>62,63</sup>

The first generally prescribed GVHD preventive regimen was the administration of intermittent low-dose methotrexate (MTX) immediately after HSCT, when T cells start to divide on exposure to allogeneic antigens.<sup>64</sup> The introduction of cyclosporine (CSP) in the late 1970s was a significant advance in GVHD prevention. As a single agent, CSP is about as effective as MTX alone, but in combination with MTX, CSP significantly reduces GVHD and improves survival.<sup>65</sup> A similar agent, tacrolimus, shows comparable control of GVHD. More recently, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), an inhibitor of the de novo pathway of guanosine nucleotide synthesis, has been studied. MMF does not inhibit the activation of T cells but blocks the coupling of activation to DNA synthesis and proliferation.<sup>66</sup>

and macrophages, thus reducing activation of APCs. The first indication that elimination of exposure to microorganisms could prevent GVHD was in germ-free experiments in mice; GVHD was not observed until the animals were colonized with gram-negative organisms.<sup>67</sup> Later, gut decontamination and use of a laminar air flow environment was associated with less GVHD and better survival in patients with severe aplastic anemia.<sup>54</sup>

An important role for TNF-α in clinical acute GVHD was suggested by the elevated levels of TNF-α in serum during acute GVHD and other endothelial complications such as veno-occlusive disease.<sup>68,69</sup> Time of first appearance of increased levels predicted the severity of complications and overall survival; patients with higher serum TNF-α levels during the conditioning regimen had a 90% incidence of grade II or greater acute GVHD and an overall mortality of 70%, compared with a mortality of 20% in patients without TNF-α elevations.<sup>68</sup> Murine monoclonal antibodies or F(ab)<sub>2</sub> fragments directed at TNF-α have been studied either as therapy for steroid-resistant GVHD (47) or as prophylaxis,<sup>70</sup> and some partial responses were observed. Therapy of GVHD with humanized anti-TNF-α (infliximab)<sup>71</sup> or a dimeric fusion protein consisting of the extracellular ligand-binding portion of the human TNF-α receptor (TNFR) linked to the constant (Fc) portion of human IgG1 (etanercept) have shown promise.

The second major pro-inflammatory cytokine with an important role in the effector phase of acute GVHD is IL-1. This cytokine is produced mainly by activated mononuclear phagocytes, and it shares with TNF-α a wide variety of biological activities.<sup>72</sup> In a murine model, secretion of IL-1 occurred predominantly during the effector phase of GVHD in the spleen and skin, two major GVHD target organs.<sup>73</sup> IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) is a naturally occurring pure competitive inhibitor of IL-1 that is produced by monocytes/macrophages and keratinocytes. The IL-1RA gene is polymorphic, and the presence in the donor of the allele that is linked to higher secretion of IL-1RA was associated with less acute GVHD.<sup>74</sup> In a murine model of GVHD to multiple mHags, intraperitoneal administration of recombinant IL-1RA for 10 days after HSCT prevented the development of GVHD in the majority of animals.<sup>75</sup> Although clinical trials of IL-1RA were promising, a subsequent randomized trial of the addition of IL-1RA or placebo to cyclosporine and methotrexate beginning at the time of conditioning and continuing through day 14 after stem cell infusion failed to demonstrate any protective effect of the drug.<sup>64</sup> Thus, at least as administered in that study, IL-1 inhibition by IL-1RA was insufficient to prevent GVHD in humans. IL-11 was also able to protect the GI tract in animal models and prevent GVHD,<sup>76,77</sup> but it did not prevent clinical GVHD in humans. Not all preclinical results successfully translate to effective therapies.

IL-6 might be expected to play a role in the pathophysiology of GVHD, particularly since it has inflammatory properties and is induced in monocytes after stimulation by IFN-γ and TNF-α. Little experimental work has been done in animal models, but serum IL-6 levels are elevated in patients with acute GVHD and hepato renal syndrome<sup>78</sup> and with

## Blockade of Inflammatory Stimuli and Effectors

Elimination of intestinal colonization with bacteria reduces GVHD by minimizing the triggering signal for monocytes

transplant-related toxicities after autologous HSCT. 79 However, IL-6 levels may respond to many stimuli, and lack of specificity may limit the utility of blood measurements. IL-8, also called neutrophil-activating peptide (NAP-1), may also figure in GVHD. IL-8 is produced in response to inflammatory mediators such as endotoxin, IL-1, and TNF-α, and its systemic administration inhibits the adhesion of leukocytes to endothelial surfaces. In a recent study of patients receiving HSCT for β-thalassemia, those with GVHD showed significantly elevated IL-8 blood levels compared to cases without GVHD. 80 One interesting implication is that granulocytes and macrophages may contribute to GVHD pathology, and most GVHD does occur after leukocyte recovery. These kinetics are typically interpreted as a reflection of the time necessary for lymphocytes to expand to a critical mass; they might equally suggest that the inflammatory cytokine network also activates and recruits neutrophils, and that these newly produced myeloid cells follow chemotactic signals to injured epithelium where they contribute to tissue injury by releasing activated oxygen metabolites as well as cytotoxic and proteolytic enzymes.

**Conclusion**

Complications of HSCT, particularly GVHD, remain major barriers to the wider application of allogeneic HSCT for a variety of diseases. Recent advances in the study of cytokine networks as well as the direct mediators of cellular cytotoxicity have led to improved understanding of this complex disease process. GVHD can be considered an exaggerated, undesirable manifestation of a normal inflammatory mechanism, in which donor lymphocytes encounter foreign antigens in an environment that fosters inflammation. Tissue injury related to the conditioning regimen or infection is then amplified by direct cytotoxicity via perforin-granzyme and Fas-FasL pathways, through direct cytokine-induced damage, and by recruitment of secondary effectors such as granulocytes and monocytes. Cytokine dysregulation may further result in the production of secondary mediators such as NO. The net effects of this complex system are the severe inflammatory manifestations that we recognize as clinical GVHD.

**References**

1. Billingham RE: The biology of graft-versus-host reactions. Harvey Lecture 62:21-78, 1966
2. Korngold R, Sprent J: T cell subsets in graft-vs.-host disease, in Burakoff SJ, Deeg HJ, Ferrara J (eds): Graft-vs.-Host Disease: Immunology, Pathophysiology, and Treatment. New York, NY, Dekker, 1990, pp 31-50
3. Kernan NA, Collins NH, Juliano L, Cartagena T, Dupont B, O'Reilly RJ: Clonable T lymphocytes in T cell-depleted bone marrow transplants correlate with development of graft-v-host disease. Blood 68:770-773, 1986
4. Zeng D, Lewis D, Dejbakhsh-Jones S, Lan F, Garcia-Ojeda M, Sibley R, et al: Bone marrow NK1.1(-) and NK1.1(+) T cells reciprocally regulate acute graft versus host disease. J Exp Med 189:1073-1081, 1999
5. Anderson KC.: Transfusion-associated graft-versus-host disease, in Ferrara JLM, Deeg HJ, Burakoff SJ (eds): Graft-vs.-Host Disease. New York, NY, Dekker, 1997, pp 587-605
6. Krensky AM, Weiss A, Crabtree G, Davis MM, Parham P: T-lympho-
cyte-antigen interactions in transplant rejection. N Engl J Med 322:510-517, 1990
7. Antin JH, Ferrara JLM: Cytokine dysregulation and acute graft-versus-host disease. Blood 80:2964-2968, 1992
8. Wang H, Clouthier S, Galchev V, Misek DE, Duffner U, Min CK, et al: Intact-protein based high-resolution three-dimensional quantitative analysis system for proteome profiling of biological fluids. Mol Cell Proteomics 4:618-625, 2005
9. Shlomchik WD, Couzens MS, Tang CB, McNiff J, Robert ME, Liu J, et al: Prevention of graft versus host disease by inactivation of host antigen-presenting cells. Science 285:412-415, 1999
10. Korngold R, Sprent J: Negative selection of T cells causing lethal graft-versus-host disease across minor histocompatibility barriers. Role of the H-2 complex. J Exp Med 151:1114-1124, 1980
11. Clift RA, Buckner CD, Appelbaum FR, Bearman SI, Petersen FB, Fisher LD, et al: Allogeneic marrow transplantation in patients with acute myeloid leukemia in first remission: A randomized trial of two irradiation regimens. Blood 76:1867-1871, 1990
12. Hill GR, Crawford JM, Cooke KR, Brinson YS, Pan L, Ferrara JL: Total body irradiation and acute graft-versus-host disease: The role of gastrointestinal damage and inflammatory cytokines. Blood 90:3204-3213, 1997
13. Dey BR, Yang YG, Szot GL, Pearson DA, Sykes M: Interleukin-12 inhibits graft-versus-host disease through an Fas-mediated mechanism associated with alterations in donor T-cell activation and expansion. Blood 91:3315-3322, 1998
14. Reddy P, Teshima T, Kukuruga M, Ordemann R, Liu C, Lowler K, et al: Interleukin-18 regulates acute graft-versus-host disease by enhancing Fas-mediated donor T cell apoptosis. J Exp Med 194:1433-1440, 2001
15. Teshima T, Reddy P, Lowler KP, KuKuruga MA, Liu C, Cooke KR, et al: Flt3 ligand therapy for recipients of allogeneic bone marrow transplants expands host CD8 alpha(+) dendritic cells and reduces experimental acute graft-versus-host disease. Blood 99:1825-1832, 2002
16. Matzinger P: The danger model: A renewed sense of self. Science 296: 301-305, 2002
17. Roncarolo MG, Levings MK, Traversari C: Differentiation of T regulatory cells by immature dendritic cells. J Exp Med 193:F5-F9, 2001
18. Reinhardt RL, Khoruts A, Merica R, Zell T, Jenkins MK: Visualizing the generation of memory CD4 T cells in the whole body. Nature 410:101-105, 2001
19. Ordemann R, Hutchinson R, Friedman J, Burakoff SJ, Reddy P, Duffner U: Enhanced allostimulatory activity of host antigen-presenting cells in old mice intensifies acute graft-versus-host disease. J Clin Invest 109: 1249-1256, 2002
20. Ruggeri L, Capanni M, Urbani E, Perruccio K, Shlomchik WD, Tosti A, et al: Effectiveness of donor natural killer cell alloreactivity in mismatched hematopoietic transplants. Science 295:2097-2100, 2002
21. Ruggeri L, Capanni M, Martelli MF, Velardi A: Cellular therapy: Exploiting NK cell alloreactivity in transplantation. Curr Opin Hematol 8:355-359, 2001
22. Sprent J, Schaefer M, Gao EK, Korngold R: Role of T cell subsets in lethal graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) directed to class I versus class II H-2 differences. I. L3T4+ cells can either augment or retard GVHD elicited by Lyt-2+ cells in class I different hosts. J Exp Med 167:556-569, 1988
23. Goulmy E, Schipper R, Pool J, Blokland E, Falkenburg JH, Vossen J, et al: Mismatches of minor histocompatibility antigens between HLA-identical donors and recipients and the development of graft-versus-host disease after bone marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med 334:281-285, 1996
24. Doolittle DP, Davisson MT, Guidi JN, Green MC: Catalog of mutant genes and polymorphic loci, in Lyon MF, Rastan S, Brown SDM (eds): Genetic Variants and Strains of the Laboratory Mouse (ed 3). Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press, 1996, pp 12-403
25. Hansen JA, Gooley TA, Martin PJ, Appelbaum F, Chauncey TR, Clift RA, et al: Bone marrow transplants from unrelated donors for patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med 338:962-968, 1998
26. Mosmann TR, Cherwinski H, Bond MW, Giedlin MA, Coffman RL: Two types of murine helper T cell clone. I. Definition according to

profiles of lymphokine activities and secreted proteins. J Immunol 136:2348-2357, 1986

27. Ferrara JLM, Cooke KR, Pan L, Krenger W: The immunopathophysiology of acute graft-versus-host disease. Stem Cells 14:473-489, 1996

28. Herve P, Wijdenes J, Bergerat JP, Bordigoni P, Milpied N, Cahn JY, et al: Treatment of corticosteroid-resistant acute graft-versus-host disease by in vivo administration of anti-interleukin-2 receptor monoclonal antibody (B-B10). Blood 75:1017-1023, 1990

29. Belanger C, Esperou-Bourdeau H, Bordigoni P, Jouet JP, Souillet G, Milpied N, et al: Use of an anti-interleukin-2 receptor monoclonal antibody for GVHD prophylaxis in unrelated donor BMT. Bone Marrow Transplant 11:293-297, 1993

30. Kumaki S, Minegishi M, Fujie H, Sasahara Y, Ohashi Y, Tsuchiya S, et al: Prolonged secretion of IL-15 in patients with severe forms of acute graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation in children. Int J Hematol 67:307-312, 1998

31. Dufour JH, Dziejman M, Liu MT, Leung JH, Lane TE, Luster AD: IFN-gamma-inducible protein 10 (IP-10; CXCL10)-deficient mice reveal a role for IP-10 in effector T cell generation and trafficking. J Immunol 168:3195-3204, 2002

32. Mohan K, Ding Z, Hanly J, Issekutz TB: IFN-gamma-inducible T cell alpha chemoattractant is a potent stimulator of normal human blood T lymphocyte transendothelial migration: Differential regulation by IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha. J Immunol 168:6420-6428, 2002

33. Mowat A: Antibodies to IFN-gamma prevent immunological mediated intestinal damage in murine graft-versus-host reactions. Immunology 68:18-24, 1989

34. Dickinson AM, Sviland L, Dunn J, Carey P, Proctor SJ: Demonstration of direct involvement of cytokines in graft-versus-host reactions using an in vitro skin explant model. Bone Marrow Transplant 7:209-216, 1991

35. Klimpel GR, Annable CR, Cleveland MG, Jerrells TR, Patterson JC: Immunosuppression and lymphoid hypoplasia associated with chronic graft-versus-host disease is dependent upon IFN-g production. J Immunol 144:84-93, 1990

36. Krenger W, Falzarano G, Delmonte JJr, Snyder KM, Byon JC, Ferrara JL: Interferon-g suppresses T-cell proliferation to mitogen via the nitric oxide pathway during experimental acute graft-versus-host disease. Blood 88:1113-1121, 1996

37. Nestel FP, Price KS, Seemayer TA, Lapp WS: Macrophage priming and lipopolysaccharide-triggered release of tumor necrosis factor alpha during graft-versus-host disease. J Exp Med 175:405-413, 1992

38. Haskill S, Martin G, Van Le L, Morris J, Peace A, Bigler CF: cDNA cloning of an intracellular form of the human interleukin-1 receptor antagonist associated with epithelium. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:3681-3685, 1991

39. Eberl G, MacDonald HR: Rapid death and regeneration of NKT cells in anti-CD3epsilon- or IL-12-treated mice: A major role for bone marrow in NKT cell homeostasis. Immunity 9:345-353, 1998

40. Kagi D, Vignaux F, Ledermann B, Burki K, Depraetere V, Nagata S, et al: Fas and perforin pathways as major mechanisms of T cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Science 265:528-530, 1994

41. Lowin B, Hahne M, Mattmann C, Tschopp J: Cytolytic T-cell cytotoxicity is mediated through perforin and Fas lytic pathways. Nature 370:650-652, 1994

42. Krammer PH: CD95's deadly mission in the immune system. Nature 407:789-795, 2000

43. Aggarwal BB: Signalling pathways of the TNF superfamily: A double-edged sword. Nat Rev Immunol 3:745-756, 2003

44. Kondo T, Suda T, Fukuyama H, Adachi M, Nagata S: Essential roles of the Fas ligand in the development of hepatitis. Nat Med 4:409-413, 1997

45. Teshima T, Ordemann R, Reddy P, Gagin S, Liu C, Cooke KR, et al: Acute graft-versus-host disease does not require alloantigen expression on host epithelium. Nat Med 8:575-581, 2002

46. Piguet PF, Grau GE, Allet B, Vassalli P: Tumor necrosis factor/cachectin is an effector of skin and gut lesions of the acute phase of graft-versus-host disease. J Exp Med 166:1280-1289, 1987

47. Herve P, Flesch M, Tiberghien P, Wijdenes J, Racadot E, Bordigoni P, et

al: Phase I-II trial of a monoclonal anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha antibody for the treatment of refractory severe acute graft-versus-host disease. Blood 79:3362-3368, 1992

48. Hattori K, Hirano T, Miyajima H, Yamakawa N, Tateno M, Oshimi K, et al: Differential effects of anti-Fas ligand and anti-tumor necrosis factor-alpha antibodies on acute graft-versus-host disease pathologies. Blood 91:4051-4055, 1998

49. Cooke KR, Hill GR, Gerbitz A, Kobzik L, Martin TR, Crawford JM, et al: Tumor necrosis factor-alpha neutralization reduces lung injury after experimental allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Transplantation 70:272-279, 2000

50. Pan G, O'Rourke K, Chinnaiyan AM, Gentz R, Ebner R, Ni J, et al: The receptor for the cytotoxic ligand TRAIL. Science 276:111-113, 1997

51. Cooke KR, Hill G, Crawford JM, Bungard D, Brinson YS, Delmonte JJr, et al: Tumor necrosis factor-a production to lipopolysaccharide stimulation by donor cells predicts the severity of experimental acute graft versus host disease. J Clin Invest 102:1882-1891, 1998

52. Hill G, Ferrara J: The primacy of the gastrointestinal tract as a target organ of acute graft-versus-host disease: Rationale for the use of cytokine shields in allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Blood 95:2754-2759, 2000

53. Fegan C, Poynton CH, Whittaker JA: The gut mucosal barrier in bone marrow transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 5:373-377, 1990

54. Storb R, Prentice RL, Buckner CD, Clift RA, Appelbaum F, Deeg J, et al: Graft-versus-host disease and survival in patients with aplastic anemia treated by marrow grafts from HLA-identical siblings. Beneficial effect of a protective environment. N Engl J Med 308:302-307, 1983

55. Beelen DW, Elmaagacli A, Muller KD, Hirche H, Schaefer UW: Influence of intestinal bacterial decontamination using metronidazole and ciprofloxacin or ciprofloxacin alone on the development of acute graft-versus-host disease after marrow transplantation in patients with hematologic malignancies: Final results and long term follow-up of an open-label prospective randomized trial. Blood 93:3267-3275, 1999

56. Moser B, Loetscher P: Lymphocyte traffic control by chemokines. Nat Immunol 2:123-128, 2001

57. Sallusto F, Lenig D, Forster R, Lipp M, Lanzavecchia A: Two subsets of memory T lymphocytes with distinct homing potentials and effector functions. Nature 401:708-712, 1999

58. Murai M, Yoneyama H, Harada A, Yi Z, Vestergaard C, Guo B, et al: Active participation of CCR5(+)CD8(+) T lymphocytes in the pathogenesis of liver injury in graft-versus-host disease. J Clin Invest 104:49-57, 1999

59. Panoskaltsis-Mortari A, Strieter RM, Hermanson JR, Fegeding KV, Murphy WJ, Farrell CL, et al: Induction of monocyte- and T-cell-attracting chemokines in the lung during the generation of idiopathic pneumonia syndrome following allogeneic murine bone marrow transplantation. Blood 96:834-839, 2000

60. Schnare M, Barton GM, Holt AC, Takeda K, Akira S, Medzhitov R: Toll-like receptors control activation of adaptive immune responses. Nat Immunol 2:947-950, 2001

61. Aversa F, Tabilio A, Velardi A, Cunningham I, Terenzi A, Falzette F, et al: Treatment of high-risk acute leukemia with T-cell-depleted stem cells from related donors with one fully mismatched HLA haplotype. N Engl J Med 339:1186-1193, 1998

62. Martin P, Schoch G, Fisher L, Byers V, Anasetti C, Appelbaum FR, et al: A retrospective analysis of therapy for acute graft-versus-host disease: Initial Treatment. Blood 76:1464-1472, 1990

63. Cragg L, Blazar BR, Defor T, Kolatker N, Miller W, Kersey J, et al: A randomized trial comparing prednisone with antithymocyte globulin/prednisone as an initial systemic therapy for moderately severe acute graft-versus-host disease. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 6:441-447, 2000

64. Antin J.H, Weisdorf D, Neuberg D, Nixklow R, Clouthier S, Lee SJ, et al: Interleukin-1 blockade does not prevent acute graft-versus-host disease: results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of interleukin-1 receptor antagonist in allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Blood 100:3479-3482, 2002

65. Storb R, Deeg HJ, Pepe M, Appelbaum F, Anasetti C, Beatty P, et al: Methotrexate and cyclosporine versus cyclosporine alone for prophy-

laxis of graft-versus-host disease in patients given HLA-identical
marrow grafts for leukemia: Long-term follow-up of a controlled trial.
Blood 73:1729-1734, 1989

66. Allison AC, Eugui EM: Mycophenolate mofetil and its mechanisms of
action. Immunopharmacology 47:85-118, 2000

67. van Bekkum DW, Roodenburg J, Heidt PJ, van der Waaij D: Mitigation
of secondary disease of allogeneic mouse radiation chimeras by modi-
fication of the intestinal microflora. J Natl Cancer Inst 52:401-404,
1974

68. Holler E, Kolb HJ, Moller A, Kempeni J, Liesenfeld S, Pechumer H, et al:
Increased serum levels of tumor necrosis factor alpha precede major
complications of bone marrow transplantation. Blood 75:1011-1016,
1990

69. Huang XJ, Wan J, Lu DP: Serum TNF alpha levels in patients with acute
graft-versus-host disease after bone marrow transplantation. Leukemia
15:1089-1091, 2001

70. Holler E, Kolb HJ, Mittermueller J, Kaul M, Ledderose G, Duell T, et al:
Modulation of acute graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic bone
marrow transplantation by tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha)
release in the course of pretransplant conditioning: Role of condition-
ing regimens and prophylactic application of a monoclonal antibody
neutralizing human TNFalpha (MAK195F). Blood 86:890-899, 1995

71. Kobbe G, Schneider P, Rohr U, Fenk R, Neumann F, Aivado M, et al:
Treatment of severe steroid refractory acute graft-versus-host disease
with infliximab, a chimeric human/mouse antiTNFalpha antibody.
Bone Marrow Transplant 28:47-49, 2001

72. Dinarello CA: Interleukin-1 and interleukin-1 antagonism. Blood 77:
1627-1652, 1991

73. Abhyankar S, Gilliland DG, Ferrara JLM: Interleukin 1 is a critical
effector molecule during cytokine dysregulation in graft-versus-host
disease to minor histocompatibility antigens. Transplantation 56:1518-
1523, 1993

74. Cullup H, Dickinson AM, Jackson GH, Taylor PR, Cavet J, Middleton
PG: Donor interleukin 1 receptor antagonist genotype associated with
acute graft-versus-host disease in human leucocyte antigen-matched
sibling allogeneic transplants. Br J Haematol 113:807-813, 2001

75. McCarthy PL Jr, Abhyankar S, Neben S, Newman G, Sieff C, Thompson
RC, et al: Inhibition of interleukin-1 by an interleukin-1 receptor an-
tagonist prevents graft-versus-host disease. Blood 78:1915-1918, 1991

76. Hill GR, Cooke KR, Teshima T, Crawford JM, Keith JC Jr, Brinson YS,
et al: Interleukin-11 promotes T cell polarization and prevents acute
graft-versus-host disease after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.
J Clin Invest 102:115-123, 1998

77. Antin JH, Lee SJ, Neuberg D, Alyea E, Soiffer RJ, Sonis S, et al: A phase
I/II double-blind, placebo-controlled study of recombinant human in-
terleukin-11 for mucositis and acute GVHD prevention in allogeneic
stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant 29:373-377, 2002

78. Symington FW, Symington BE, Liu PY, Viguet H, Santhanam U, Sehgal
PB: The relationship of serum IL-6 levels to acute graft-versus-host
disease and hepatorenal disease after human bone marrow transplan-
tation. Transplantation 54:457-462, 1992

79. Rabinowitz J, Petros WP, Stuart AR, Peters WP: Characterization of
endogenous cytokine concentrations after high-dose chemotherapy
with autologous bone marrow support. Blood 81:2452-2459, 1993

80. Uguccioni M, Meliconi R, Nesci S, Lucarelli G, Ceska M, Gasbarrini G,
et al: Elevated interleukin-8 serum concentrations in beta-thalassemia
and graft-versus-host disease. Blood 81:2252-2256, 1993
