
Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 248 (2006) 61–71

**Structure and function of human 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases**

Petra Lukacik\*, Kathryn L. Kavanagh, Udo Oppermann

*Structural Genomics Consortium, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LD, United Kingdom*


Table 1  
Properties of human 17β-HSDs  

| Human protein | Type | Chromosomal localization | Function | Human genetic disease | PDB code | Cofactor preference | Substrates | Subcellular localization | Expression pattern |
|---------------|------|-------------------------|----------|-----------------------|-----------|---------------------|------------|------------------------|--------------------|
| 17HSD1       
P. Lukacik et al. / Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 248 (2006) 61–71

DHEA-S
↓
DHEA
$\xleftrightarrow{1,5}$
5A-diol
↓
4-Adione
$\xleftrightarrow{2,5}$
T
$\xrightarrow{}$
5α-DHT

P. Lukacik et al. / Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 248 (2006) 61–71

members also display isomerase or lyase activities ([Jornvall et al., 1995](https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-4165(95)000
of an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) localization, further supported by a C-terminal KDEL ER retention sequence ([Wu et al., 1993](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.268.15.11221)). The highly hydrophobic nature has thus far prevented structure determination of the enzyme despite identification of soluble deletion
androstenedione to testosterone. 17β-HSD5 displays additional activities such as 3α-HSD, 20α-HSD, dihydrodiol dehydrogenase and prostaglandin synthase activities (Penning et al., 2001). The structure of human 17β-HSD5 has been determined in complex with different substrates and inhibitors and provides an
lesions from patients with Alzheimer’s disease ([Yan et al., 1997](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.94.25.13948)). Although initially believed to localize to the ER (initially termed ERAB = ER amyloid binding protein), the protein is localized to mitochondria through a N-terminal non-cleavable targeting
Importantly, 40% of all human cancers, namely, breast, prostate, ovarian and uterine cancer, are steroid hormone sensitive, and hence are possible targets for modulation of intracrine activities (Labrie et al., 2000a,b). Successful proof of concept for the modulation of intracrine systems has been achieved through the development of potent aromatase inhibitors for breast cancer treatment (
Breton, R., Housset, D., Mazza, C., Fontecilla-Camps, J.C., 1996. The structure of a complex of human 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase with estradiol and NADP⁺ identifies two principal targets for the design of inhibitors. Structure 4, 905–915.

Chai
Leenders, F., Dolez, V., Begue, A., Moller, G., Gloeckner, J.C., de Launoit, Y., Adamski, J., 1998. Structure of the gene for the human 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type IV. Mamm. Genome 9, 1036–10
Torn, S., Nokelainen, P., Kurkela, R., Pulkka, A., Menjivar, M., Ghosh, S., Coca-Prados, M., Peltoketo, H., Isomaa, V., Vihko, P., 2003. Production, purification, and functional analysis of recombinant human and mouse 17beta